4 


i 


i 


My GOETHE if 
‘i by RAR ta ipepeawta PAHS 3 iN 


i 
italy { 


ay 
it i 


tity 
if tpt 
Ath fy i 
t di 
iat 
isles 
an 

Ga 


i 
ete 
Att 


i 


he 


He 


it i 


i 


Lk 


ss 


eR ee ie es oe oe Se hme ee oe ee Oe oF ined 


Title Hindu-—Javanese musical instruments 


Acc. No, = 201,040 
Clasetimack: MA 4005.15 


LIBRARY 


OF THE 


UNIVERSITY 
OF KENT 

AT 
CANTERBURY 


709 2 


IOAN 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2023 with funding from 
Kahle/Austin Foundation 


https://archive.org/details/hindujavanesemusOO000jaap 


HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


KONINKLIJK INSTITUUT 
VOOR TAAL-, LAND- EN VOLKENKUNDE 
TRANSLATION SERIES 12 


CX 


JAAP KUNST 


HINDU-JAVANESE 
MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


SECOND REVISED AND ENLARGED EDITION 


THE HAGUE - MARTINUS NIJHOFF - 1968 


This book is published under a grant from the 
Netherlands Ministry of Education and Sciences 


First edition in Dutch: 


HINDOE-JAVAANSCHE MUZIEK-INSTRUMENTEN, 
speciaal die van Oost-Java 
door Mr. J. Kunst 
met medewerking van Dr. R. Goris 


Uitgegeven door het Koninklijk Bataviaasch Genootschap 
van Kunsten en Wetenschappen - Weltevreden 1927 


PREFACE 


At this moment, when the publication of the revised, English edition 
of my late husband’s book on Hindu-Javanese musical instruments is 
near at hand, I wish to express my sincere thanks to all the friends 
and colleagues who have contributed towards the completion of the 
work which was left unfinished at the time of his death. 


I am especially grateful to the Royal Institute of Linguistics and 
Anthropology in Leiden for publishing the book in its Translation 
Series. 


It is my sincere hope that the results of my husband’s work on a 
subject which claimed his love ever since the years which he spent 
working in Indonesia, may be of some use to all those who are interested 
in this and related fields of study. 


C. J. A. KUNST-VAN WELY 


EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 


The Editorial Board of the Royal Institute of Linguistics and 
Anthropology has pleasure in introducing the present volume in the 
Translation Series as a tribute to the memory of the author, Dr. Jaap 
Kunst, the well-known pioneer and expert in the field of ethnomusic- 
ology, who died in 1960. 

The first edition of the present book was published in Dutch in 1927 
as an adaptation of a lecture which the author gave on the opening 
night of the Congress of the Java Instituut in Surabaya on 23rd Sep- 
tember, 1926. In the preface to the first edition the author explained 
to what extent the printed text had been expanded in comparison with 
the text of the lecture. He mentioned the invaluable assistance given 
him by Dr. R. Goris, who provided him with much new material, both 
from Old Javanese literature and from inscriptions. As his main sources 
for references to literature and charters the author mentioned the Old 
Javanese dictionaries by H. N. van der Tuuk and H. H. Juynboll, and 
the editions of charters by A. B. Cohen Stuart, J. L. A. Brandes, 
N. J. Krom and P. V. van Stein Callenfels. These sources have been 
mentioned in detail in the bibliography appended to the present volume. 
The great majority of the photographs published in the first edition 
was made available to the author by the then Netherlands Indies 
Archaeological Service. 


When a new edition, in English, of the book was planned, it was 
obvious that the text would have to be expanded in view of the 
abundant material, literary and epigraphical as well as archaeological, 
which had become available since 1927 in the field of Hindu-Javanese 
culture. Dr. Kunst himself had completed a large portion of this work 
of checking and expanding the material and adapting the text. Many 
data on Central Java were added, so that the specification “especially 
those of East Java” could justifiably be omitted from the title. Epi- 
graphical research, especially that by Dr. R. Goris and Mr. L.-C. Damais, 
turned out to be very valuable for the study of the musical instruments 
of Hindu-Java. In particular the ingenious techniques developed by 


VIII HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


the latter for the precise dating of manuscripts and charters provided 
the author with a great deal of information, enabling him to draw up 
a more detailed chronology of the epigraphic material. 

The publication of many Old Javanese texts, often with translations, 
in the period since 1927 provided the author with a wealth of inform- 
ation which could be incorporated in the present book. On the other 
hand, it was possible to omit a small part of the introduction from this 
edition as these pages had been incorporated in the author’s publication 
entitled Music in Java (1949), 

When Jaap Kunst died the preparation of the manuscript of the 
present edition, the English translation of which was initially under- 
taken by his son Mr. Jaap Kunst, Jr., had not yet been completed. 
The editorial board of the Royal Institute wishes to express its gratitude 
to the many friends and colleagues of the author who so generously 
offered their co-operation in finishing the book. It wishes to thank 
especially the late Dr. Arnold A. Bake, Reader in Sanskrit in the School 
of Oriental and African Studies of the University of London and a 
close friend of the author, who, together with Mr. Nazir Jairazbhoy, 
Lecturer in Indian music in the same School, and Mr. Jack Dobbs, 
at the time Lecturer in the Institute of Education of the University of 
London and now Director of Musical Studies, Dartington College of 
Arts, undertook to check the presentation as to correct form and content 
of important sections of the text. Mr. Walter IJzerdraat for assisting 
in the preparation of the typescript. Dr. C. Hooykaas, Reader in Old 
Javanese in the School of Oriental and African Studies, who paid 
special attention to the bibliography. Dr. P. Voorhoeve, former General 
Secretary of the Royal Institute of Linguistics and Anthropology, who, 
after the musicologists in London had assisted the editors with their 
specialist knowledge, checked through the manuscript and gave direc- 
tions as to the best way of reproducing the photographic material. 

A special debt of gratitude is owed to Dr. A. A. Cense, who, after 
the retirement of Dr. Voorhoeve, undertook the arduous task of editing 
the text and preparing it for the press. He took the philological aspects 
of the book in hand and checked all the linguistic material incorporated 
in the text as well as the bibliographical notes, tables, indexes and 
captions for the photographs, completing these where necessary. During 
this work help was received from many sides. On the meaning of 
some terms Professor P. J. Zoetmulder of Gadjah Mada University, 
Jogjakarta, kindly procured information: based on his vast Old Javanese 
lexicographical collection. Dr. P. H. Pott, Director of the National 


EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION IX 


Museum of Ethnology, provided new photographs of the Bhairawa 
statue in this Museum and supervised the preparation of new repro- 
ductions of some of the photographs of the former Netherlands Indies 
Archaeological Survey which are preserved in the collections of the 
Kern Institute in Leiden. Mr. S. O. Robson, M.A., was always willing 
to help when difficulties of translation arose. 

We are also very grateful to Drs. F. baron van Lamsweerde, once 
Dr. Kunst’s assistant and at present a curator of the Royal Tropical 
Institute, who not only in the first stage of the completion of the 
manuscript but also afterwards at any time readily placed his know- 
ledge of musicology at the editors’ disposal when specialist advice was 
needed. Drs. Van Lamsweerde also kindly undertook to read through 
the proofs and check the text once more in respect of musicological 
information. 

In the final stages of the editorial work the editors were fortunate 
in having the invaluable assistance of Mrs. W. E. Haver Droeze, whose 
painstaking accuracy is largely responsible for the book’s consistency 
in the technical arrangement and presentation of the material. 

The Editorial Board wishes to express its sincere thanks to Mrs. 
C. J. A. Kunst-van Wely for helping the editors in every possible way 
to achieve the form which her late husband intended for this book. 


In conclusion a few remarks should be made about the lay-out of 
the present edition of the book. 

In checking the names of instruments included in Tables A and B 
special attention has been paid to the names taken from Van der Tuuk’s 
Kawi-Balineesch-Nederlandsch W oordenboek, a great number of which 
were contributed to the first edition of the present book by the late 
Dr. R. Goris. In this new edition the exact dictionary references have 
been added in footnotes. 

Moreover, in addition to those editions of Old Javanese texts which 
were available to the author in translation, Dr. Cense consulted several 
text editions which were not accompanied by a translation. In the 
search for names of musical instruments in these Old Javanese texts 
many relevant references were found, which were added to Tables A 
and B and inserted in the text or in the footnotes of the different para- 
graphs. In a few cases, when names of instruments which the author had 
not discussed in his work were found, the editors merely added these 
names, refraining from expressing views on or venturing suppositions 
about the character of the instruments to which they referred. 


xX HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


When it was deemed necessary to refer to recent works this has 
been done, but only on a very moderate scale. 

Throughout the book the charters and literary works which contain 
names of musical instruments are referred to in abbreviated form. In 
the List of Abbreviations at the end of the book ample bibliographical 
information is given. Moreover these abbreviations are arranged in an 
index (pp. 118-119) to Tables A and B, with a reference to the pages 
in the tables where the charters and works indicated by them are 
mentioned. 

The spelling of words from Indonesian languages follows the system 
which in recent years has been adopted for use in scientific works. 
This implies that c always stands for English ch. For Sanskrit words 
the traditional method of transcription of Devanagari characters 1s 
followed; some slight variations will be met with, e.g. palatal s is 
sometimes written as ¢, sometimes as S. 

The names of instruments are given in the form in which they are 
found in the text editions. This explains the differences in spelling of 
loanwords which occur in Tables A and B, e.g. the word for shell- 
trumpet one will find written as cangkha, cangka and sangka. In the 
Tables in the alphabetical order of words the combination ¢a comes 
after sa. 

Indigenous place-names are mostly written in the generally used 
presentday spelling; the editors apologize for slight deviations from 
what has been adopted as a general rule, e.g. the rendering of Indo- 
nesian j by y in some cases. 

Wherever proper names are printed in small capitals they refer to 
the List of Abbreviations and of Bibliographical Notes at the end of 
this book ; the same applies to spaced proper names in the notes. 


THE EDITORIAL BOARD 


Mil 


VMI 


IV. 


VI. 


CONTENTS 


Preface . : 
Editorial teudnction ; 
Contents 


» INTRODUCTION . 


CHORDOPHONES 


A. Harps . 
B. Lutes 

c. Bar-zithers 
Celempung 
Guntang 


Se 


AEROPHONES 


A. Flutes . ; 
B. Glottophones . 
€,. Erumpets 


MEM BRANOPHONES 


A. Representations of Drums . 
B. Names of Drums . 


. IDIOPHONES 


. Scraping sticks . . 

. Goblet-shaped cymbals ; kemanak . ; 

. Kakhara-tops; begging bowls with tnkting- bars 
Bells with and without ee 

Kulkul . : ; 

. Taluktak Fe ia eee ee ee 

. Réyong; kangsi; kajar; trompong; bonang . 

Types of Gong . Se Oe er 

Cymbals 

Gambang . . 

. Salunding ; gender wayan g. 

. Saron : 


sl ish ae el tel @y toh lel ie) fol ish f= 


UNIDENTIFIED NAMES OF INSTRUMENTS AND ORCHESTRAS . 


XII 


VII. TABLES : 


TABLE A. 


TABLE B. 


HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


Chronological order of Old Javanese and Old Bali- 
nese manuscripts and charters in which instruments 
and orchestras are mentioned and which are either 
dated or of which the dates can be determined . 


Alphabetical list of Old Javanese and Old Balinese 
manuscripts and charters in which instruments and 
orchestras are mentioned and which are not dated 
or as yet datable . 


INDEX OF MANUSCRIPTS AND CHARTERS WHICH ARE MENTIONED 
IN TABLES A AND B , 


TABLE C. 


Chronological list of preserved Old Javanese and 
Old Balinese musical instruments, and of reliefs 
and statuettes on which such instruments are 
represented . 


LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS AND OF BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTES 


GENERAL INDEX OF MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS AND MUSICAL TERMS 


ACKNOWLEDGEMENT FOR THE REPRODUCTIONS 


REPRODUCTIONS, FIGURES 1—121 ...... . . after 


page 


118 


120 
124 
142 
155 
156 


INTRODUCTION 


When I first came into contact with the music of Java, more especially 
with that of the Sunda districts, at the beginning of the twenties, it 
soon became clear to me that the music of the highlands of West Java 
had virtually no “history”. The Sunda country appeared to have a rather 
primitive but — perhaps precisely for that reason — highly interesting 
range of musical instruments, of which those made of bamboo featured 
most prominently. To mention a few: the gamelan celempung1 and 
ketuk awi,2 kendang awi? and gumbang;3 the calung 4 and the ang- 
klung,5 the réngkong 6 and the hatong.? There was a great number of 
local differences and theoretical knowledge was sketchy and very diffuse. 

Later I found that in contrast the music of Java proper showed 
a much more uniform pattern. There were complete bronze orchestras 
in large numbers (apart from various bamboo instruments), and gradu- 
ally a picture emerged of a many centuries old history, and of a well- 
founded musical system and theory. 

It must of course be realized that communications may have been 
difficult in mountainous West Java, and that the princedoms that 
existed there in various periods were never very powerful, 

In contrast, the central and eastern parts of the island were areas 
of lowland cultures and proud dynasties, where great power, sometimes 
controlling the entire Archipelago, had its seat, and Wore from at 
least the 8th century to the beginning of the 16th century — i.e. over 
a period of 800 years — Javanese cultural life had its centre. 


x, * 


1 An orchestra of which the principal instruments are bamboo idiochords. Cf. 
Kunst IX vol. I p. 382. 

Bamboo idiochords. Cf. Kunst lc. p. 369 sub IIIa. 

Bamboo aerophone. Cf. Kunst l.c. p. 240. 

See hereafter pp. 71, 72 and 74. Cf. Kunst lc. pp. 364 ff. 

See hereafter pp. 59 and 85. Cf. Kunst lc. pp. 361 ff. 

A combination of a carrying-pole and a scraping instrument. Cf. Kunst 
lc. pp. 365 ff. 

Pan-pipe. Cf. Kunst l.c. pp. 376 ff. 


an Pk WN 


a 


2 HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


The sources from which we have drawn our knowledge of the music 
of the Hindu period are by no means prolific. However they are suf- 
ficient to get a reasonable picture. 

What are these sources ? 

First of all the temple reliefs. Then a number of excavated bronze 
and terra-cotta images, and a fairly extensive number of key-series and 
gong-chimes, single gongs, bells and other instruments. Furthermore 
a great number of foundation charters on bronze and stone slabs, some- 
times passages in old Chinese chronicles and, with regard to Eastern 
Java,8 the Old Javanese and Old Balinese literatures. On a large scale, 
finally, the comparison of the old and the present Javanese and Balinese 
instruments with those of other peoples, and also — and this by no 
means in the last instance — the study of the cultural-historical and 
political development of the Archipelago, more specifically in Sumatra, 
Java and Bali, in connection with that of India, Indochina and China.? 


oe Pe! 


It may be assumed on acceptable grounds that the peoples who settled 
in Java coming from South East Asia (Yunnan ?, via Indochina) many 
centuries B.C., and who subjugated or exterminated the original popu- 
lation, knew the pélog scale. Sléndro — the other modern Javanese 
tonal system — was presumably still unknown to them. This was 
possibly introduced by the latest arrivals, the ancestors of the present 
Javanese. Not until the middle of the 8th century, when the Cailéndra 
dynasty 19 took possession of a part of Central Java, did it (possibly 
together with the wayang purwa) become the dominant system in Java, 
originally only in Central Java, but later in the larger part of Eastern 


8 The Old Javanese version of the Ramayana may be an exception. In an article 
in the Jubilee Volume published in 1926 by the Royal Institute of Linguistics 
and Anthropology (pp. 265ff.), Poerbatjaraka introduces philological 
arguments in favour of an older, Central Javanese origin of this epic, 
which would suggest that it dates back to the so-called Restoration Period 
(i.e. after the Cailéndra rule and before the end of the Central Javanese period), 
in other words between 850 and 915. The nature of some of the instruments 
named in this poem makes this early date not unacceptable. I am thinking 
here of the instruments or instrument-names known from the oldest dated 
charters and of those that can be placed in that period for other reasons 
(kinnara, mahdasara, regang, tuwung, wind). 

For the history of the whole of the Hindu-Javanese period see Krom II 
which, however, according to articles by Berg and De Casparis, is apparently 
already somewhat dated. 

10 Gamelan s(a)léndro = gamelan Cailéndra? Cf. Kunst IX vol.I pp. 18 and 19. 


© 


INTRODUCTION 3 


Java as well (as a result of political events in Central Java). Subsequently 
it reached Bali, still inseparably linked with the wayang purwa.11 

Consequently it may be permissable to say that when Java enters 
history proper, both tonal systems exist side by side: sléndro used for 
the wayang purwa, at first performed mainly on stringed instruments 
and later on bronze gendérs;12 pélog on various bamboo instruments 
and xylophones. The flutes of that period may have been tuned according 
to either system. Gradually the stringed instruments disappear, bamboo 
instruments are pushed into the background, and steadily increasing 
and versatile bronze ensembles come into being, known to us as the 
gamelan, tuned either to pélog or to sléndro. 


* * 
* 


The gamelan as we know it is a comparatively recent phenomenon. 
In PoeRBATJARAKA’s resumé of an 18th century work, the Serat 
Kanda (in PorrBATJARAKA II), which contains a story of Pafiji, one 
reads about Dangdang-gendis (p. 69), ruler of Koripan, who has an 
orchestra which is still not quite the gamelan as it is known today ; in 
addition it comes from outside Java and is therefore foreign. It consists 
of gong, kendang, ketuk and kecapi. Of course this does not mean 
that the constituent parts of the gamelan as we know it today are 
also of comparatively recent date. The contrary is true as will be 
demonstrated in the next chapters.13 

Even if there had not been clear literary or sculptural proof con- 
cerning certain instruments, such words as tabeh-tabehan 14 (orchestra), 
derived from tabeh (to strike, modern Jav.: tabuh) and tatabuhan 15 


11 For an extensive discussion I may refer to Kunst IX vol. I pp. 15-24. 

IZAGhappa/ 1 72 /Osande7 3: 

13 For a comprehensive table of the earliest dates see Table A (pp. 90ff.). It 
may perhaps become possible at some future date, by comparing the instruments 
of the non-dated manuscripts and charters (Table B, pp. 103 ff. hereafter) 
with those of the dated ones, to find clues as to the age of the first-mentioned, 
a group nowadays still deplorably large. 

TE QIK, ILDOOMIL AOS IBY 2OsOKID Ao (CU, IDG SOM OQUUS Teh I 7S IU 
4la, 41b, IV 40a, V 45b, 53b, 62a, 76b, 94b, 114b, 123a, VI 35b, 70b; K.O. VII 
Dare Ke Seller 4m OX TTI Gin eee Vall 5562-1 1045 Xo) 141255152 « 
Sih, WAN] Gos Suri, Anes Be Me Ave WW Oh IUNTS AWW DOCWANUL aii. Wate. 
68, 96; Wrh. 33. 

15 BB. 9, 25, 26, 57; Hrsw. II 25a, 25b, 44b, V 33b, 61a, 75a, 89a, 99a, 131b; 
KOK 735 KeSa) 42a)" 1 48-9091375 2008 TL 68-) KoSnd5 1 33,°11L 10; Pam. 
el ON /2 220 24 124 Si 322329 Se Pare Nes LO woo oe Re. 1) 49; 
III 2, VI 29, VII 31, 36, 66, 82, IX 77, 101, XI 99, 140, 169; Sor. III 13, 47, 
59, 63, 65; S.T. V 68. 


4 HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


seem to suggest a fairly old age in Java of at least part of the idiophones 
played with a hammer (tabuh), in other words, of a kind of gamelan, 
largely consisting of these instruments (cf. Chapter V). The word gamel 
(original meaning: to handle), of which gamelan is a derivation, also 
appears as a musical term as early as the 12th century.1® 

However, some other words also meaning ‘to strike’, used in con- 
nection with certain instruments, cannot be used as an argument in 
favour of the existence of gamelan instruments. These are the words 
anapuk17 (from tapuk) and those derived from the word pukul: 
apukul,18 pamukul,19 and amukul,29 all of which were known at the 
beginning of the 10th century. 

In the cases known to me, anapuk does not occur in the sense of ‘to 
strike’ as regards a gamelan instrument. According to a so-called awig- 
awig (an Old Balinese collection of injunctions) anapuk was used to 
indicate the beating of the kulkul or titir, 1.e. the kentongan or tongtong, 
the alarm-log or slit-drum: 21 apukul kadi anapuka titir, 1.e. “they struck 
(the instruments) as though they were giving the alarm”.22 This explains 
some secondary meanings: ‘to hold a meeting’ and even ‘to stage a 
wayang-show’. For in Old Javanese society, as in present-day Java 
and particularly in Bali, the beating of the kulkul served and serves 
to call people together for meetings and festivities. It is possibly in 
this connection that the words atapukan, matapukan appear in some 
of the charters.23 There they are used to indicate an action forbidden 
in the sanctified precincts of a temple or cloister and it is always placed 
just before or between the words of the “wayang-group’, and never 
among those of the “music-group”’.24 Presumably matapukan 25 and 
atapukan 26 which will be mentioned again presently, have the same 


16 B.Y. V 7. Also K.K. 73. See for gamelan Table B at B.T.; Hrsw.; Mal.; 
leivens IPevaiit INS Gice Sos Suir. 

17 KBwb. II 724. 

18 Buwahan A III 8; Br. I pp. 615 ff. 2a. 

19 Sukawana A I, IIa 2; Trufian A I, Ila 1 and Trufian B Ib 5; Br. I 
pp. 615 ff. 2a. 

20 Pandak-bandung (E.B. pp. 14ff.) IIIb 5 and Vb 1; Br. I pp. 607 ff. 5b, 
ts 613 ff. 2a, 2b and pp. 619 ff. 5b; Br. II pp. 49 ff. 9; Batur P. Abang A, 

wy % 

21 See hereafter pp. 56-58 ff. 

223 Wie, MUL 15S). 

23 Pandak-bandung (E.B. pp. 14 ff.) Vb 1; Br. I pp. 607 ff. be Bireelleppa.4> ff 
9b; O.J.O. LIX verso 16; O.J.O. LXIV recto 29. 

24 Cf. hereafter p. 33. 

29 (0) JO}, (ONUUE Joy ah 

AS OL) (C1! Tp. 


INTRODUCTION 5 


meaning in the references where they stand for certain functionaries. 

Concerning the word pukul and its derivations, in some Old Balinese 
charters 27 the words agending (pagending, paganding) and amukul 
(pamukul) appear next to each other, which also shows that the gending- 
playing and the pukul of certain instruments were not identical. The 
first-mentioned word probably referred to the playing of real musical 
instruments (whatever they were) and the latter to the striking of 
signalling devices. 

Other proofs for the existence of bronze idiophones are, on one 
hand, the reliefs of the Dieng temples (before 750 A.D.), Candi Sari 
(c. 750), Barabudur (824) and Prambanan (c. 850), and on the other 
hand the term pandat gangsa, the earliest mention of which known to 
me is dated 862.28 Pandai (or pandé) means ‘smith’; gangsa (Sanskrit : 
kamsa) is, as is generally known, the usual name for the alloy of which 
the keys and kettles of the bronze gamelan instruments are made 
(usually three parts of tin and ten parts of red copper).29 

However, as for the words gending or ganding 3° and their deriva- 
tions appearing in literature in the sense of orchestra, nothing can be 
found about the nature of the ensemble meant — in that respect they 
have no specific meaning. 


27 Pandak-bandung (E.B. pp. 14ff.) IIb 5; Trufian A I, Ila 1; Trufian B Ib 
5; Buwahan A III 8. 

28 O.J.O. VII verso 12; furthermore O.J.O. XXX recto 19. 

29 In modern Bali the word is also used for certain idiophones, namely those 
with bronze keys lying on a wooden frame. In Prijono’s translation of the 
Sri Tafijung gangsa is rendered by gamelan (V 176). Other references for 
gangsa: Smar. XXIX 8 and R. XXVI 13. Gong gangsa is rendered by 
Poerbatjaraka by ‘copper gong’. 

30 Charter Frankfurt N.S. 21319 recto 8; Br. I pp. 607 ff. 5b; Br. I pp. 619 ff. 
5b; Br. II pp. 49ff. 9b; Bebetin A I, IIb 5; Batur P. Abang A VIb 2; 
O.J.O. XLVIII verso 46; O.J.O. LXXXIII 8a, 8b; O.J.O. CVIII b 4; Gobleg 
(Pura Batur) B (E.B. pp. 8 ff.) Vla 6; Pandak-bandung (E.B. pp. 14 ff.) IIIb 
5, Va 5; Trufian A I, Ila 1; Trufian B Ib 5; Buwahan A III 8; K.O. I 3, 
IZ OM Val lied beste Adipe 202-5 B ken LE XOX XD 1S Clie Ss Biya Vi 8, 
YOQORWIL Be OMILIUL UG Ik, Be Sin, BOORIDC YH, (OMNI G8 IIe, IL 22 NWI AIGp 
WY 79594, 132, [X 404.11 15; RI XXVIP7, 24; KK. 73:-E.W. XXVIII 7, 
XXXII 7, XXXVI 7; Smar. XXIX 8, XXXIII 3; C.A. VIII, IX, XII, XIII; 
Hrsw. II 144a, IV 25b, 30a, 41a, 47b, 53b, V 33b, 45a, 61a, 71a, 75a, 81b, VI 
33b, 91a; Pam. II 46; B.B. 50, 62; Sut. LX XIII 15b, LXXX 4b, XCIX 7c, 
@xde Vilied2e-sGaturaormebaleo s batuanell bes. NV. ,uOneb era. 

The word now usually means gamelan-composition. However, bear in mind 
the term tukang gending, gamelan smith (synonymous therefore with pandé 
gong and pandé gangsa) and the name of the kampong where the principal 
gamelan smiths of Semarang used to live: kampong Gendingan (Jacobson, 
p. 3) and the Balinese gamelan name gending lwwang (see hereafter pp. 72 and 73). 


6 HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


The same applies to the term gupi (agupyan), when it means ‘play’.31 

Taking all these things into consideration, I do not wish, however, 
to express a definite opinion about the origin and the real age of the 
gamelan instruments. Research in that direction is beyond the scope 
of this treatise.32 

The large orchestras in the princely palaces (kraton) of our day 
which in the last three centuries have played such an indispensable 
part in ceremonies and festivities, appear to have had their origin in 
the late Hindu period through what could perhaps be called a marriage 
of the gentle “feminine” instruments of the chamber orchestra (gambang, 
gendér, rebab, suling, etc.) and the “masculine” war music (gongs, 
bonangs, drums, etc.). In any case, from the fact that Prapafica in his 
detailed description of the Majapahit kraton 33 does not mention large 
orchestras, one gets the impression that as late as the 14th century 
orchestral music had in no way attained the position it has today 
in the Central Javanese kratons. For instance, these orchestras now 
have special storage places set aside for them; every Thursday evening 
incense is burnt before their drums and large gongs; each of them is 
played exclusively in one place which has its own name, and many 
of them serve a highly specialized function in the court ceremonies.34 
With regard to the kraton of Majapahit, STuTTERHEIM 35 supposes 
that the sacred part reserved for the caiwaboddha priests is identical 
with the place in the kraton of Jogjakarta where the archaic gamelan 
monggang 36 is played at certain ceremonies.37 

Although an orchestra such as the present large gamelan had not 
yet been born, it is certain that music traditionally occupied a most 
important place in Hindu-Javanese society. The large number of 
musicians amongst the lower officials mentioned in the charters makes 
this abundantly clear. Such officials (usually indicated in each case by 
their own personal name: Si Kresni, Si Nafija, Si Mandal, Si Barubuh 
etc.) in the 9th and the beginning of the 10th century are for instance: 


¢ (608 
pare 


IR, WUE AOS 1B. IEOIAY 

32 See, however, Kunst IX vol. I pp. 142 ff. (for the gong) and Kunst XI 
(for the kemanak). 

53S Nave Cantosmvilll= <li 

34 Kunst IX vol. I pp. 246, 259, 262, 265. 

35 Stutterheim II pp. 40/41, 51 and the footnote on p. 68 note 168. 

36 Cf. Kunst IX vol. I pp. 257 ff. 

SSO jwicumnisitel-cappe cools 


INTRODUCTION i 


pimuraba (O.J.O. VI 18) 
juru padahi (O.J.O. XXX recto 13, CVIII b 4) 


tuha padahi (OO is: 3, XO, XV 
11, XXXVI verso 5, LIV verso 
iZ2K.O; X1V b 1, Vea; XVII 
6; E. 46) 
the chief drum- 


mer (cf. pp. 38- 
40) 


mapadahi (KAS tae20 On (Oo 1X Ib Za; 
XVI recto 21. KO) XXII a = 
pay vengotn A, To tib 1: 
verso 13) 


apadahi (OnGO7 CxcTigita) 
padaht manggala (O.J.O. VI 24) 


samgat mapadahi (Br. I pp. 613 ff. 2b) 


eee ee OG ee chief kulkul- 
striker (some- 


matapukan (O.J.O. CVIII b 4) thing like chief 
of the public in- 

atapukan (OC J-OCCXIT 1a) formation serv- 
ice (cf. pp. 56- 
58) 

anuling Batur P. Abang Charter A VIb 2) re Sha atone CharieoA Vib?) lifautish | 

maganding (O.J.O. CVIII b 4) leader Tien OLOUCVIIL ban lender of the or- the or- 
chestra (modern 
Javanese: lurah 
gending) 

rawanahasta (O.J.0. CVIII b 4) the principal 
lute player (cf. 

arawanasta (O.J.O. XXXVI verso 6, 22) pp. 15 and 17) 


leader of the 
cymbal corps 
(cf. pp. 50 and 
70) 


mareg(g)ang (K.A. IIIa 20; K.T. verso 14) 


8 HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


widu mangidung (O.J.O. XXXV 11, XLVI recto 
21, XLVIII recto 24; K.O. XVII | kidung 38 
6, XXII 3b 1), see also K.O. XV _ | singer 
aad: 


mabrekuk (Kaci lita <2) presumably the 
kemong-striker 
and leader of 
the cock-fights 
(cf. pp. 62 and 
63). If so, then 
= modern Bal. : 
juru kemong. 


This clearly constitutes an impressive list of kraton and temple 
officials in musical positions. 


38 Kidung = Middle Javanese poem using one of the indigenous Javanese 
metres. This in contrast to kakawin = Old Javanese poem using one of the 
classical Indian metres. 


II 


CHORDOPHONES 


A. Harps 


Harps present a curious case. German musicologists distinguish two 
main forms: the angular harp (“Winkelharfe”) and the arched harp 
(“Bogenharfe’”) which were found in the larger part of the Old World, 
from West Africa to North Korea. Often they existed side by side, 
for instance in Ancient Egypt, in Mesopotamia and in Turkestan. 

The angular harp, characterized by a resonance-chamber making 
a 90-degree angle with the base to which the strings are attached, is 
virtually extinct nowadays. Similarly the arched harp, which has a 
small slender boat-shaped resonance-chamber attached to the markedly 
curved part to which the strings are fixed, has become rarer. Whereas 
formerly it appeared nearly everywhere from West Africa to the east 
coast of Asia, now it is only found in Africa in Mali, in part of the 
Congo and Uganda, in Europe only in the western Caucasus amongst 
the Abkhasians, in Asia only amongst some west Siberian peoples 
(Ostyak, Vogul), in Kafiristan (7.e. the S.E. slopes of the Hindu Kush) 
and in Burma and Thailand. It is noteworthy, however, that according 
to many pictures that have come down to us, the strings of the old 
arched harps were stretched by means of cords: only part of the 
western (the African) forms had — and still have — tuning pegs! or 
at least tuning plugs. As far as is known, only the tuning device using 
cords appears, or appeared, in India, Turkestan and in Thailand. Now 
in Burma and Java the pegs (or plugs) suddenly appear again, although 
the tuning by means of cords has also been in vogue there. I do not 
know how this phenomenon can be explained. Would it be correct to 
think of a Central Asiatic origin producing arched harps of both types ? 2 


1 Sometimes with a most ingenious adjustment mechanism (Cf. Chauvet, 
fig. 6). 

2 The above had been written when Nazir Ali Jairazbhoy gave me a picture 
of an Indian arched harp with seven plugs or pegs, thus far the only one 
known from that territory. It is an illustration of an (apparently bronze) 
statuette of Cri in a publication by P. Kotantaraman, Tamilicai Kkaru- 
vikal (1945). This does not of course affect our supposition, or at least not 
in a negative sense. 


10 HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


Of the five Old Javanese pictures of arched harps known (three on 
the Barabudur,? one on the Jalatunda reliefs, and one in bronze at 
Negandjuk), three show clearly the pegs (or plugs) (figs. 16, 45 and 46), 
and two (both on the Barabudur) are presumably stretched by means 
of cords (fig. 24), since no pegs are visible. All date from the period of 
c. 800 to c. 1000 4 and two of them, those of Ngandjuk and Jalatunda, 
are from East Java. They show differences not only in the way they are 
strung, but also in the number of strings, of which — according to 
the number of pegs — the Barabudur harp ® has ten, the Ngandjuk 
harp seven (fig. 45) and the Jalatunda harp four (fig. 46).6 

Apart from the differences mentioned, there are some others per- 
taining to the shape of the resonance-chamber. The two “cord”’ harps 
(Bar. Ia 1 and II 1) — identical in shape — and the Jalatunda “peg” 
harp have no exact continental counterpart as far as I know. The “peg” 
harp of the Barabudur Ia 52 (our fig. 16) and that of Ngandjuk, 
disregarding the makara (see below), look like the saucer-shaped Bur- 
mese tsaung (fig. 86). However as a rule the strings of this tsaung 
are stretched by means of cords.7 

I doubt whether these harps have ever been popular in Java. They 
may have been confined to the ruling castes and may never have been 
in vogue among the lower classes. I am inclined to think the same 
about the different kinds of lutes and bar-zithers (which will be dis- 
cussed later), otherwise they would not have disappeared without a 
trace from the Javanese and Balinese ranges of instruments.§ 

A remarkable demonstration of this assumption is provided by the 
Ngandjuk harp. 

The ancient Egyptian name for the arched harp (as early as the 
fourth dynasty, t.e. the dynasty of the pyramid builders of about 2500 


3 Bar. Ia 1 (right side), 52 and II 1. 

Here and elsewhere the Christian calendar, which is 78 years ahead of the 
Old Javanese ¢aka calendar, has been used. 

Krom, who had had no musicological training, referred to the harp as ‘‘a 
cither with tassels’ (Krom III vol. I p. 156 and Bar. relief Ia 52). 

8 The harp-player depicted on this Jalatunda relief, dated 977 A.D., according 
to Bosch must be the legendary Udayana, King of Vatsa and a widely 
acclaimed vind-player. The text illustrated by the relief runs: “Sweet is the 
sounding of its strings, divided according to the division of the ¢rutis’. (See 
Cultureel Indié, VII (1945), pp. 15, 17; epitomized in Bosch, pp. 63, 65). 
The “peg” harps of the Burmese province of Tenasserim (fig. 87) are, as 
regards the shape of their resonance-chambers, markedly different from the 
more widely known tsaung. 

On the periphery of the Archipelago, however, some related types exist (cf. 
pp. 16ff. with the notes 46, 47, 54-56 and p. 21 with the notes 80 and 81. 


ol 


CHORDOPHONES 11 


B.C.) is bjn.t or b.n, Coptic: vini, corresponding in India with Sanskrit : 
vind; Hindustani: bin; Thai: p’in.2 This word was also used later in 
Hindustan for other stringed instruments using one or two gourds 
as resonance-chambers. However, in Ancient India the term vind is 
usually linked with a specifying word, for instance: vipaiici-vind, citra- 
vind, kacchapi-vina, etc. Most probably there has also existed a makara- 
vind, a vind displaying the makara, the mythical fish-elephant, as 
decoration. In South India, an instrument did occur which in Tamil 
was called makara-jal, jal being another name for vind.19 The Jalatunda 
harp shows us how the makara ought to be fashioned on an arched harp, 
that is on the lower end of the resonance-chamber, where it forms the 
richly decorated “poop” of the instrument. However, the Ngandjuk 
bronze-caster, who must have been ordered to cast a statuette of the 
goddess Saraswati playing a makara-vind,11 had obviously never seen 
such an instrument and his surroundings could not provide one. Other- 
wise he would never have been able to do what he did: putting the 
makara (as Boscu was the first to realize) on top of the resonance- 
chamber, just where the strings should be. If the harp had been 
commonly known amongst the people, as is the case with the tsaung 
in Burma, such a mistake would not have been made. 

It has been assumed that in Java, as well as in India, the name vind 
(wind) also referred to the arched harp. This word, found repeatedly 


9 See Sachs III p. 29. This similarity in name shows an unmistakable rela- 
tionship which could either indicate a common origin in a still older culture, 
or a later import from Egypt to India. 

10 Communication by N. A. Jairazbhoy. 

11 The fact that the only harp-playing (and also — see p. 14 — the only lute- 
playing) bronze statuette represents Saraswati, is explained by the magical 
affinity between this goddess of music and the wooden stringed instruments 
in particular. ‘Die Gotter’, sagt Vac [1.e. Sarasvati] im Rigveda (X 125, 3, 
6), ‘haben mich vielfach zerlegt; ...ich bin in Himmel und Erde einge- 
gangen’. So gibt es denn nicht allein menschliche Rede; die ist nur ein Viertel 
aller Rede. Die andern Viertel sind die Rede der vierftissigen Tiere, der Vogel, 
des kleinen Gewtirms (Catapathabrahmana IV 1, 3, 16). Auch in den Baumen 
wohnt Vac; das ist der Klang der aus dem Holz der Baume gemachten 
Instrumente, der Trommel, der Flote, der Laute (Taittiriyasamhita VI 1, 
4, 1).” (“<The Gods’, says Vac [i.c. Sarasvati] in the Rigveda (X 125, 3, 6), 
‘have divided me up several times; ...I have entered into heaven and earth’. 
Hence there is not only human speech; that speech is only a quarter of all 
speech. The other quarters are the speech of quadruped animals, of the birds, 
of the vermin (Catapathabrahmana IV 1, 3, 16). Vac also resides in the 
trees; it is the sound of the instruments which are made of wood of the trees, 
of the drum, of the flute, of the lute (Taittiriyasamhita VI 1, 4, 1).”) 
(Oldenbereg, p. 81). 


WZ HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


in Old Javanese literature,12 was however also used for stringed in- 
struments in general. This is demonstrated by such combinations as 
makinnara malawu-wind and wind-rawanahasta (wind-rawanasta, wind- 
rawana), which I believe refer to a bar-zither and a lute, to be discussed 
later, Therefore, if the author fails to add a determining word, as in 
the cases mentioned, it seems impossible to determine whether wind 
refers to an arched harp, lute, bar-zither or perhaps yet another 
stringed instrument. 

Finally, as for the instrument-names ma(n)deli 13 and winipanca,'4 
I may refer resp. to pp. 20 and 15 hereafter. 

To give an idea of the points of agreement and difference between 
the Javanese arched harps and others, some pictures have been included, 
four of Indochinese harps — i.e. of the forms mentioned previously 
(figs. 86 and 87), of a Thai p’in (fig. 83) and of the instrument (fig. 84) 
appearing on one of the reliefs of the Bayon temple (Cambodia) — and 
two of an ancient harp from Chinese Turkestan (fig. 85) and of the 
recently found specimen from Kafiristan (fig. 85a).15 


B. Lutes 


A characteristic of nearly all the lute-shaped plucked stringed 
instruments which we shall now examine, is that they do not possess 
a real neck in the sense that a European mandoline or guitar has a neck. 
The neck of the lute is formed by a narrowing of the body of the 
instrument so that this may be called pear-shaped. Furthermore, the 
back is only slightly arched. 

Two main types and many intermediate forms of this lute are found 
in South and South East Asia: a broad, more or less squat type and 
a slender one. Apparently both forms existed side by side in Turkestan. 
In India, where in olden times the instrument seems to have been fairly 
general, it would appear that a more or less broad type prevailed, as 
in North China and Japan (figs. 89 and 90). In South China (fig. 88) 


12 Wir: 30, 52,.53,.855 R. IIL 39, VIII 167, XII 23; XVI 10; Ae: 371> Kors 128 
Simic, IY M08 Sys, OS Wis SOO ile Lotte Wels Sie iQ ine a, We Oe 

13 Mal. (version a); T.K. 17; Smarw. 14, 15. 

tes TYNE, WAL Ik 

15 Examples of Indian harps can be found in Griinwedel II p. 16; Havell 
pl. VIII (our fig. 120); Burgess pls. 16 and 116; Coomaraswamy 
(our fig. 119); Marcel-Dubois pp. 80ff. — From Turkestan there are 
pictures in Stein I; Griinwedel I p. 261 fig. 264 (our fig. 85); from 
Kafiristan in Alvad (our fig. 85a); from Burma in Sachs II p. 140; 
Knosp I p. 3095 b, and Courant p. 176 fig. 214; from Cambodia in 


CHORDOPHONES 13 


and Further India, the slender type was used mainly, and possibly 
exclusively. This suggests that the Old Javanese lutes, which, with 
one late exception,!® are all slender, were brought by a cultural wave 
from Further India. This ties in with other data, musical and philological 
as well as ethnological.17 A further clue as to the origin of the lutes 
in Java is the presence of many thr ee-stringed instruments (figs. 3, 
10, 22, 23, 35 and 44): lutes with that number of strings are, apart from 
Hindu-Java, only known from Further India.18 At the end of the 
8th century A.D., the ruler of Burma presented the Chinese Emperor 
with two kinds of three-stringed lutes.19 

The Barabudur lutes 29 (figs. 8, 10, 13, 14, 15, 16, 22, 23, 26, 27 
and 30), although all of the slender type, show many variations. Most 
are played with a plectrum; 21 some are very narrow; 22 sometimes 
they have frets,23 sometimes not; they appear with two,24 three 25 or 
four 26 strings; an occasional one has a real neck; 27 sometimes the 
top-section is depicted sideways; 28 and there is a great variety of 
sizes.29 In short, everything points at a remarkable multiformity. 

All these lute-forms presumably reached Java in the Cailéndra period 
(c. 725 - c. 850) where they existed, mainly, perhaps exclusively, amongst 
the ruling castes, and also survived in the following so-called Restora- 
tion Period (c. 850 - c. 915). 

Apart from the numerous representations of lutes on Barabudur 


Dufour and Carpeaux (our fig. 84 at 2). — Montandon pp. 56/57 
and Wachsmann pp. 393ff. provide pictures of Uganda harps, Hick- 
mann of many kinds of Ancient Egyptian harps, Stauder of Sumerian 
harp forms and Lehmann (plate XIX) gives sketches of harps from 
Ancient Egypt, Central Africa, from the Mandingo, the Fan, from Togo and 
from the Caucasian Abkhasians. — About harps in general, see Sachs I 
sv. “Harfe” (pp. 177 ff.) and Sachs VII pp. 144 ff. 

16 See p. 14 and figs. 65 and 66 at 1. 

17 Kunst II pp. 149-154. 

18 The Chinese lutes (f'1-p’a) always have four strings. 

19 Courant p. 177. 

20 Bar. O 102, 125, 143, 151, Ia 1 (left side), 52, II 1, 
122, 128, IIIB 40, IV 29 and others. 

21 Very clear: Bar. O 102 and Ia 52. 


22 Bar. O 102 and specially II 128. For reproductions of 
23 Bar. O 125, II 1, 128. the reliefs mentioned 
24 Bar. O 102. in these notes the 
vio Tete (0) WMA IE Wh ieee reader may consult 
26 Bar. O 151. Table C, pp. 120 ff. 
27 Bar. O 102. 


28 Bar. IIIB 40. 
29 Cf. Bar. O 102 with II 128. 


14 HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


very few have been found. Two, one from Candi Sari (fig. 3) 3° and 
one from Prambanan (fig. 35),31 are sure to have come from this 
Central Javanese period. Another, representing the goddess Saraswati 
with a three-stringed lute in bronze (fig. 44),32 is also presumed to be 
from that period. 

At first no other representations of Old Javanese lutes were known. 
This fact seemed to suggest — and this also applies to the harps 
mentioned previously and to the bar-zithers to be examined later — 
that these instruments had not survived the Central Javanese period, 
or at least not for long. However the subsequent finding of a number 
of terra-cotta statuettes of lute-players at Majapahit by H. Maclaine 
Pont forced us to take another look at the problem. 

Surprisingly, some of those terra-cotta lutes (figs. 65 and 66 at 1) 
are of the squat type, predominant in North China and Japan (figs. 90 
and 89 respectively). The extensive commercial and political contacts 
between China and East Java in the 14th and 15th centuries 33 prompt 
me to believe that this squat Majapahit type represents a fresh import. 

This conviction is strengthened by the fact that the other lutes of 
the slender type 34 also show a shape rather far removed from the 
Barabudur instruments. Without any doubt they are less archaic, with 
their modern-looking scrolls. It seems that these slender Majapahit 
lutes cannot be attributed, like their 9th and 10th century Central 
Javanese predecessors, to an Indochinese-Sumatran influence, nor, like 
their squat contemporaries, to a Chinese cultural influence: the remark- 
able, western-like scrolls point, presumably, to totally different in- 
fluences. According to Prof. E. M. von Hornbostel they seem to 
indicate that these instruments are not direct descendants of the p’i-p’a 
nor of the Indian vind, but can be traced back to the Turkish gopuz. 
The gopuz seems therefore to have been diffused at the same time in 
a south-eastern and in a north-western direction, as it is known that 
the instrument was used in Europe, also in the 14th century.35 


* * 
* 


30 Candi Sari, also from the Cailéndra period, is some decades older than 

Barabudur. Prambanan, at least the main temple, dates from the so-called 

Restoration Period. 

Ciwa temple, lst basement, balustrade southside No. a. 

Now in Vienna. After Heine-Geldern I plate 14. See also p. 11 note 11. 

See Schrieke English ed. passim and specially pp. 24 ff. 

S42 RioaOOnatec: 

85 Illustrations of the gopuz in Sachs IV p. 210, Kunst IX vol. II p. 447 and 
Norlind pl. 98 Nos. 11 and 12. 


CHORDOPHONES 15 


Turning to the question of names, we have mentioned that vind 
often means lute. It indicates a lute when it is specified by the addition 
of rawanahasta,?® rawanasta 37 or rawana.38 It may be remembered 
that the ra@vanahasta (Ravana’s hand) is a lute known from India, the 
scroll of which is in the shape of a hand.39 Side by side with wind- 
rawan(ah)asta we find the word rdwan(ah)asta also used by itself in 
the Old Javanese charters.49 However none of the Barabudur lutes, 
nor those from Candi Sari and Candi Prambanan, nor the Indian lutes 
in the Ajanta frescoes and the Amaravati reliefs show such a hand! 41 42 

The word winipaica43 probably refers to a lute as well. It is a 
Javanization of the Sanskrit vipasici-vind which, according to Sacus, 
stands for a vind with a resonance-chamber consisting of a peculiarly 
narrow-waisted 8-shaped gourd.44 In the Bharatayuddha its sound is 
compared to the crowing of roosters. 

Furthermore I believe the word kacapi (Sanskrit: kacchapi), ap- 


BS Wists KYA, hk 

He, WARM 3ey/ 

EES AWW DOO ke 

39 See fig. 75 in Sachs II p. 112. According to A. A. Bake ravanahasta now 
usually refers to a two-stringed fiddle without any scroll at all. 

40 O.J.0. XXXVI verso 6 and 22; O.J.O. XLVIII verso 46; O.J.O. CVIII 

b 4; K.O. I 3, 12; R. XXVI 24. For the name ra@wanahasra which occurs only 

once, see nt. 42. 

Juynboll! II 537 gives us the form windrawa, translates this as “tone of 

the lute” (Sanskrit Grawa = sound, shouting) and gives as references R. VIII 

167 and Wir. 52. However, in the first reference there is mentioned a wina- 

rawanasta and in the second a wind-rawanahasta. If one divides this word- 

combination the way Juynboll has done, it is not clear how the syllables 
n(ah)asta should be translated. 

42 According to Goloubew, the author of a work on the Ajanta cave pain- 
tings (Goloubew I), the name of the lutes depicted — reminiscent of those 
on the Barabudur — was ravaja. However, neither Apte’s Sanskrit dic- 
tionary nor the Petersburg dictionary contain this word. Neither do these 
dictionaries contain the word rdvanahasta. They do have the word ravana- 
hasra which also appears in the Old Javanese Agastyaparwa (text edition 
Gonda p. 371). There seems to be a great variety of names and it is difficult 
to decide which is the correct one. Apart from those already mentioned, 
F étis attributes the names (as Sonnerat did also) rovana and ravanas- 
tron to certain Indian lutes (Sachs II p. 111). See further Grosset 
pp. 348bff. s.v. ravanastra and ravana (= ruana) and Sachs I p. 3l3a 
s.v. rabanastra and p. 316b s.v. ravanastron. 

ee BN, AD IEE 

44 Sachs II p. 125. — But how is this to be reconciled with a passage in the 
Natyacastra (transl Ghosh 1961, Ch. XXIX, 120), telling us that the 
vipanci-vind is a nine-stringed instrument? That clearly suggests a harp! 
Grosset p. 341 mentions this instrument and refers to his ed. of the text 
(Edition Critique du Traité de Bharata sur le Théatre, 1898), XXIX 121. 


41 


16 HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


pearing a number of times in literature,45 may be considered as the 
name (a more recent name?) of a lute. It is true that in present-day 
Java a Sundanese plucked stringed instrument of a totally different 
shape — a prow-shaped zither — is called kacapt. However, it is 
known that, as with the vind, the name kacapi46 has been applied 
to a variety of stringed instruments and — with the exception of the 
Sundanese instrument — in Indonesia mostly to instruments of the 
lute type.47 


a 
oO 


Mal. IV 9 (KBwb. II 51 s.v. kacapi); Mal. LXIX (Poerbatjaraka II 
io, GUIS BR, GxSeSion (2) WM Aeie VAI, MOVANNL Bie Sol, Cakaie Gy4i)S lal, I 
74a, II 38b, 143b, IV 54a. 

46 Malay: kecapi; Ngaju-Dayak: kasapi; Karo-Batak kucapi, kulcapi; Toba- 
Batak: hasapi, hapétan; Tagalog: kudydépi; Bisaya: kodyapi; South Celebes 
(Macassarese) : kacaping. 

47 Pictures of old and modern Asiatic lutes, with or without commentary, are 

to be found as follows: 

TOT avar Bar. passim; 

Heine-GeldernI p. 22 and plate 14; 
Kunst II pp. 154-160, 164, 166, 241 and 243; 


for Sumatra: 


Toba region: Huyser pp. 239 and 249; 
M.G.G. vol. VI plate 53 fig. 2; 
Karo region: Huyser pp. 234 and 239 ff.; 
M.G.G. vol. VI col. 1187, fig. 3; 
for Borneo: Huyser pp. 244 ff.; 
M.G.G. vol. VI plate 53 fig. 10; 
for Celebes: Kaudern p. 189; 


iti vaste pp ae oomi 
for the Lesser Sunda 


Islands: Huyser p. 272; 
for Vietnam: Knosp II p. 3112 fig. 591 and 592; 
for Burma: Sachs III pp. 26 and 27, and plate 13 figs. 35 and 
36; 
for China: Soulié pp. 47-49; 


Cobian: qo, Way wee, Zale 
SEEING IW poy SWC 
Sachs VII pl. 41 figs. 278 and 280; 
Kimmel pp. 137-139; 
Scientific American, May 1914; 
Reinhard pp. 136ff.; 
Line IL je, AAs 
Schneerson pp. 36ff.; 
Jena Iie ltl eg, Zeer 

for Japan: Ruth-Sommer p. 35 fig. 26; 
SOaCins WAU wil G4 ties, Bays 
Pe coitsteppy loonie: 
Malm pp. 134 ff.; 


CHORDOPHONES WA 


Of the Old Javanese lute-names discussed, it seems that (wind)- 
rawan(ah)asta is the oldest and certainly has been by far the most 
usual. The word raéwanahasta was already in use before 907 A.D.48 
and therefore dates from the Central Javanese period. Consequently 
it is unlikely that the rdwanahasta is not present among the many lutes 
on Candi Sari, Candi Barabudur and Candi Prambanan. It is remark- 
able, although understandable, that among all those Central Javanese 
lutes there is not a single bowed lute. The ravanahasta, known in India 
exclusively as a bowed lute,49 must have been, as was theoretically 
to be expected, a plucked instrument at an earlier period. 

However an even more important conclusion can be drawn from 
evidence I shall now discuss. The Old Javanese lutes as depicted are 
not merely representations of the instruments mentioned in the Sanskrit 
texts. They represent types in actual use in Java itself.59 Another 
indication of this is the Javanization of their names, which is noticeable 
in the shifting of their component parts. The determining part is no 
longer (as in the Sanskrit examples) before the main component 
but after it in true Javanese style: winipaica for vipanci-vinda; 
wind-rawan(ah)asta, wind-radwana as against Sanskrit forms as bharata- 
vind, rudra-vind. This points to a certain familiarity with the concept 
and then almost certainly with the instrumental form as well. Further- 
more, O.J.O. XXXVI verso 6 and O.J.O. CVIII b 4, as I have said, 
mention a rdwana(ha)sta (arawanasta)-player as a court official. Still, 
even this fact leaves room for doubt, because it is not quite certain 
that title and function correspond, as for instance with our present-day 
title of Marshal. However, O.J.O. XXXVI verso 22 gives panday 
arawanasta, ‘lute makers’ (living and working in Java itself, of course!) 
as an unassailable proof that at the beginning of the 10th century the 
lute was indigenous to Java. 


for Turkestan: Grinwedel I p. 47 fig. 94 and p. 333 fig. 664; 
z Stein I pl. II, VI, VII, VIII and XXX; 
for India: Griffiths vol. I p. 11 fig. 19 and p. 17 fig. 46; 


Howl Gatiecmp..oUr 
Marcel-Dubois pl. XIV, XXXIX, XLIII 
(center) ; 
for the whole of India 
and Indonesia: Sachs II pp. 106 ff. 
as TOV IAO), ENUM ite ok 
49 Sachs II pp. 111 and 112. 
50 For another reason — the naturalness of the players’ attitudes depicted — 
this was also asserted in Kunst II p. 155. 


18 HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


C. Bar-zithers 


With very few exceptions, it is only on the Barabudur reliefs that 
we can study the form and the way of handling bar-zithers in Java — 
as in the case of lutes. A great many representations of them are found 
in the stupa-sanctum 51 (figs. 7, 10, 12, 13, 14, 22 and 30). The in- 
strument is still of a rather primitive construction. A more or less 
flexible wooden shaft, slightly bent forward at the lower end, is fitted 
with one string. Near the upper end of the shaft, on the side opposite 
the string, is one half of a gourd (Sanskrit: alabu ; Old Javanese: laww). 
For the playing, the gourd is pressed against the chest 5? (fig. 10), 
thus forming a closed resonance-chamber and giving more power and 
body to the otherwise feeble and meagre tone. The identical instrument 
is still known in Further India (Thailand and Cambodia) as p’im nam 
tao (= gourd-vina) and sadiu (fig. 91) respectively.53 In the Archipelago 
the instrument has survived in a slightly modified shape in Celebes 
(North East Celebes: talindo; Central Celebes: dunde, santu(ng)),54 
West Toraja: santung, Sumba (jungga) 55 and Halmaheira (sulépé).56 

In contrast to the variety of lutes just mentioned, the bar-zithers 
depicted on the Barabudur all appear to represent the same type, apart 
from the fact that some of them have a tuning-peg, but the majority 
seem to be without any. The position of that peg is different from that 
of the pegs on a European violin or a Hindu-Javanese lute: it lies in 
the imaginary plane through the string and bar with the knob behind 
the bar when the instrument is held in playing position, in other words, 
it is “hinterstandig” (at the back). This makes the reproduction of 
that small part of the instrument very difficult: moreover, in contrast 
to the lutes, this instrument is often somewhat sketchily depicted on 
the reliefs.57 This being so, it is remarkable that after eleven centuries 
this tiny peg is still discernible on a few of the instruments depicted 
(fig. 13).58 

The only other occurrences of this instrument, apart from those on 
the Barabudur reliefs, are a bronze statuette in the Regency of Tegal 


SE Bary Ou20, 101; 125, 137,.143,01478 1496 151157 a1 Bb os) LL Teco eliemi24: 
126, IIIB 40, IV 70, IVB 42 ao. 

ZS See iki, ikyr, () 1H. 

53 About the sadiu see also Knosp II pp. 3140b and 3141. 

*4 Kaudern pp. 146ff.; M.G.G. vol. VI plate 54 fig. 25. 

SD 1A Se WINBE ip, 10). 

56 Tbid. p. 14. 

57 See fi. Bar. IBb 65. 

58 Bar, © 151vand! 157. 


CHORDOPHONES 19 


(fig. 43),59 a beautiful and clear representation on Candi Sari (fig. 2) 6° 
and perhaps one on the Prambanan reliefs.61 

Perhaps the name of this instrument was kinnara. In South Indian 
Mysore and South Kannara, this is still the name for this very bar- 
zither (generally kinnar7). 

My assumption that this name was also used in Hindu-Java is, in 
the first place, based on the fact that the bar-zither players, the one 
on the Tegal bronze as well as the many on the Barabudur,S? are 
kinnaras. Moreover it is known that the Hindus, tempted by the 
homonymy, have always linked those mythological creatures with the 
bar-zither. This, however, is not quite justified. On the one hand the 
name of those heavenly beings is really kimnara (not-quite man, what 
a little man!) and on the other hand the origin of the name of this 
instrument must presumably be found in the West (Hebrew: kinndr ; 
Ancient Greek: kinyra; Old Arabic: kinnadra and kanndra).63 

The Ramayana has also handed down kinnara as the name of an 
instrument,64 and gives twice,®5 as if to remove all doubt, the com- 
bination: makinnara malawu-wind, i.e. “they played the kinnara and 
the gourd-wind.66 Lawu-wind by itself also appears several times.67 
Yet another name for this instrument is cantung,®8 which has survived 
to the present day in another part of the Archipelago, namely Celebes.®9 


59 On the bank of the Pagerayu, désa Djatimerta, district Balapulang. At present 
in the Djak. Mus. (Museum No. 767b). 

60 This one has no peg. — The broadened lower part of the bar has the shape 
of a lotus bud. Also, among others, the instrument on Bar. O 125 (our fig. 10). 

61 Ciwa temple, Ist basement, balustrade eastside No. h, at the top left. 

62 Quite clear: Bar. O 101 (our fig. 7), 147 and 149 to the left (our fig. 12), 
IV 70 left-hand top. 

63 Sachs Il p. 90, 

64 R. III 39, VIII 152, XVI 10, XVII 111, XXVI 23. The Balinese interlinear 
translation always gives rebab for kinnara. — See KBwb. II 18 s.v. kinnara, 
where a different numbering of songs and strophes for the Ramayana is given. 

65 Mabangsi, mangidung, makinnara, malawuwind (R. III 39, XVI 10). 

66 According to N. A. Jairazbhoy the instrument is called kinnari in the 
Sangitadarpana (17th century) V, 17-19 and likewise in the Sangitaratnakara 
VI, 255-264. It has three gourds, the middle one sideways. In Hyderabad the 
kinnari even nowadays has three gourds. The Indian kinnari-vind, (now 
usually with seven strings) derived by Sachs (II pp. 123/124) from the 
sitdry, cannot be considered here as it is a rather late form. 

67 Wir. 30; T. V 102; Sw. 10b; Kor. 128. In Wir. 30 the lawuzzind is said 
to produce one of the seven notes of music called the gandhdra note. See 
Fokker pp. 30, 70, 104 (note 133). 

68 Ww. I 45, IV 50; A.P. IX 9; R.L. I 1, where we find cacantungan; Dpt. 1; 
Mal. (version c) 13. 

69 In the form santung; cf. Kaudern p. 150. 


20 HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


In other countries the kinnara has reached a very advanced stage 
of development. The most beautiful Hindu instruments, the present 
North Indian bin (fig. 93) and the South Indian vind (fig. 94) are in 
fact such perfected bar-zithers. 

Originally we thought that these highly developed forms had not 
found their way to Java. In any case, they were not represented on 
the reliefs known at the time of the first edition of this book. However, 
in 1935 (see O.V. 1936 p. 9), W. F. Stutterheim and A. Gall found 
a relief depicting a North Indian bin (fig. 64) on the slopes of the 
Penanggungan, Majapahit’s holy mountain. And possibly we even 
know the Old Javanese name of this instrument. I refer to three rather 
late poems in which an instrument by the name of ma(n)deli is men- 
tioned: the Malat,79 the Tantri Kamandaka,71 and the Smarawédana.72 
In the first edition of this book the ma(n)deli was listed among the 
unidentified instruments. However, the Indian musicologist K. V. 
Ramachandran, who read my essay although it was written in Dutch, 
has since told me that he had encountered the word mandali in Sanskrit 
texts many times, denoting apparently some kind of vind.73 Therefore, 
as long as no arguments to the contrary are found, I am inclined to 
think of ma(n)deli as the name of the North Indian form of the bar- 
zither used in East Java in the 13th century. 


tae Es 


Yet another form of instrument that has most likely developed out 
of the bar-zither must be mentioned here. It is found on one of the 
reliefs of Candi Jago of c. 1260.74 

At first sight one might feel justified in seeing a close kinship with 
the long necked lute known from Near Eastern75 and Egyptian 76 


70 Mal. (version a). 

ES INI, IVE 

72 Smarw. 14, 15. 

73 In modern India a multi-stringed board-zither resembling the Arabian ganian 
is called svaramandala or surmandal. Cf. Grosset p. 352 and Sachs I 
p. 203a. 
N. A. Jairazbhoy gives the following information: the Sangitadarpana V, 
15 describes the svaramandala, also called mattakokila and the commentary 
of Sloka 110 of the sixth chapter of the Sangitaratnakara says: “In this 
world the mattakokila is called svaramandala’. 

eo 1s SI, 

7 Cf. Sachs V p. 91; id. VII pp. 163 and 164. 

76 Sachs VI plate I (15th century IBC). 


CHORDOPHONES 2) 


antiquity, usually called pandura (later form: tambura) which sub- 
sequently found its way to India as tumburu-vind or tamburi (nowadays 
usually called tanpira) (fig. 92); see the illustrations in Grosset 77 
and in Sacus VII.78 A closer inspection, however, reveals a peculiarity 
which the latter does not show: near the end of the neck where the 
tuning-pegs might be expected a semi-spherical object looking like 
a half gourd or coconut shell is fastened on the side by means of a 
clearly visible link as is the case with the Old Javanese bar-zithers, 
and with the present instruments of this type found in Further India 
(Thailand, Cambodia),79 Celebes and adjacent islands 8° and some of 
the Lesser Sunda Islands (Sumba).81 

But whereas, at the time of playing, the gourds of all those instru- 
ments are pressed against the musician’s chest, making his whole body 
an extension of ithe resonator, the gourd of the instrument on the Jago 
relief is approximately in the position of the uppermost of the two 
whole gourds of the North Indian bin, and of the single gourd of the 
South Indian vind. Therefore the instrument seems to be an inter- 
mediate form between pandura (tumburu-vind, tamburi, tanpira) and 
vind, in the manner of the South Indian vind (fig. 94), a development 
of a two-gourd form (as the North Indian bin) (fig. 93), in which the 
original lower gourd has been replaced by a resonance-chamber reminis- 
cent of the lute-family. 

Nevertheless it must be pointed out that, although there is no doubt 
that the half gourd-shaped object is part of the long necked lute, the 
same relief shows another object of the sanie shape, a little to the left 
(fig. 50), but it is not clear whether this is attached to an instrument. 
It is probable, however, as the person next to it is flanked on the left 
by a person blowing an instrument and on the right by one playing the 
gourded stringed instrument just mentioned. Therefore it seems safe to 
assume that the person in question is also a member of the orchestra. 


D. Celempung 


One of the reliefs of Candi Jago (fig. 51) shows that an instrument, 
closely akin to the modern celempung, was in vogue late in the Hindu- 
Javanese period. It is true that the instrument shown is not identical 


77 Grosset p. 346 fig. 243. 

78 Sachs VII p. 252. 

79 Kunst IV p. 81 fig. 2; Bernatzik. 
80 Kaudern pp. 146ff. 

81 id. p. 53 fig. 84. 


22 HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


with the present-day celempung in all its details (fig. 96).8? It lacks the 
narrowing shape towards the player and probably the resonance-chamber 
as well — the relief not being quite clear. However, neither of these 
characteristics is essential. A drawing in Crawrurp’s 83 book seems 
to suggest that in his time (1820) there were still celempungs without 
resonance-chambers in Java (fig. 95). In addition, the method of putting 
tension on the strings seems to have evolved during the past century 
under European influence. The drawing shows the strings disappearing 
into the instrument at the top, and kept at the proper tension by pegs 
set into the side, as examplified by the present-day Sundanese kacapt. 
On the modern celempung, however, the string tension is brought about 
by means of tuning-pegs located on the upper side of the resonance- 
chamber or on a wrest-board and manipulated by a tuning-key. These 
pegs, the wrest-board and the tuning-key are of Western make or at 
least of Western design. 

Because we are dealing with a type of instrument which apparently 
had not yet reached its final form even in 1820, the fact that the 
instrument on the relief is not identical in all details with what we see 
now should not prevent us from classifying it as a celempung. 


eh ts 

In fact little is known about the history of the four stringed instru- 
ments (rebab, celempung, kacapi, tarawangsa) of modern Java. With 
the exception perhaps of the celempung, which we discussed above, they 
seem to be rather young. Codex 2283 of the Leyden University Library 
contains a part of a version of the Malay “Hikayat Cékélwanéngpati”’, 
the story of the hero Raden Pafiji. This undoubtedly reached its final 
form in Hindu-Javanese surroundings but it mentions the rebab and 
the celempung.84 Possibly this is an interpolation of later date.85 The 
mere fact that three Balinese writings: Cupak, Kidung Adiparwa and 
Malat (version c) all mention the tarawangsa8® as trewasa87 or 


82 R. Trop. Inst., Amsterdam, No. 474/1. 

83 Crawfurd vol. I opposite p. 326. The same drawing in T. S. Raffles, 
The History of Java, London 1817, Vol. I opp. p. 470. 

In a summary of the contents of this manuscript, given by Rassers in 
his thesis, rebab and celempung are mentioned as well as saron and gambang 
(Rassers pp. 56 and 73). The word rebab is of Persian-Arabic origin ; 
the onomatopoeic name celempung is purely Indonesian. 

Cf., however, hereafter p. 86 where the samépa is discussed. 

BCS TCs tulexavole Laparg72. 

87 C.; Kid. Adip. (KBwb. II 607 s.v, trawangsa). 


84 


CHORDOPHONES 25 


trawasa,88 and that the Balinese Bagus Turunan mentions the tra- 
wangsah as well as the rebab 89 does not prove a great age for these 
instruments, since none of these writings themselves are very old. 


E. Guntang 


An instrument of this name is mentioned in the Rangga Lawé,90 
the Kidung Sunda,91 the Malat 92 and the Kidung Harsawijaya.93 The 
same name is still in vogue in Bali where it refers to a one-stringed 
bamboo idiochord which is part of the gamelan gambuh and gamelan 
arja. A picture and discussion of this are to be found in Kunst II 
pp 23l> 232 eandi1 17 £. 


88 Mal. (version c) 13 (KBwb. II 607 s.v. trawangsa). 

89 B.T. 164 (KBwb. II 259 s.v. kalilit). The rebab is also mentioned in the 
Panji K.S. and in the Panji K.N. XLII, LXI (cf. Poerbatjaraka II 
pp. 8, 239, 248). 

BU TRL, WUE Tia) 22k aby 

oP 1KCS, IIL 40: 

®2 Mal. canto 2 and CII (Poerbatjaraka II p. 331). Poerbatjaraka 
suggests, in my opinion wrongly, that angguntang could be translated by 
“singing”. 


83 Hrsw. VI 9la. 


II 


AEROPHONES 


A. Flutes 


In the 489th Book of Chronicles of the second Sung Dynasty (906- 
1279) GrorNnEvELDT found a description of what Chinese travellers 
saw in Java about 1150. It is a sober but nevertheless colourful account 
of Hindu-Javanese society, of the form of government, of agriculture 
and trade, of fashions, royal activities (the King at the time was 
Jayabhaya) and the way of life of the people. Music is also mentioned 
briefly. According to GROENEVELDT’s translation,! the Chinese author 
says that people made music on transverse flutes, drums and wooden 
slabs.2 So it would appear that transverse flutes were in use in East 
Java in the 12th century. But were they? Today they certainly can be 
found in other parts of the Archipelago, but no longer in Java proper, 
apart from the prajurit instruments in the kratons which are copies 
of the 18th-century European military flutes, and some specimens made 
of bamboo in the Sunda districts (in the former residencies of Banten 
and Batavia). The question therefore is: was the account in the Sung 
annals translated correctly? Generally speaking, there is reason for 
doubt in view of the nonchalance with which non-musicologists usually 
treat musical instruments in their records.3 They call all wooden or 
bamboo wind instruments flutes, with the exception of those with a 
prominent bell: then they are called trumpets. Similarly they classify 
as percussion instruments, without discrimination, all instruments which 
are struck: gongs, cymbals, xylophones, metallophones and drums. 

There was, however, a special reason for doubt in this case. The 
word GROENEVELDT read in the Sung chronicles was presumably ti, 


1 Groeneveldt p. 17. 

2 At that time many bronze instruments were used in the kraton, and also one 
or more stringed instruments. This is substantiated by contemporary and 
slightly earlier written sources. See our Table A on pp. 90 ff. 

3 Even Van Stein Callenfels in his Sudamala-edition, Dawllses “the 
absence of cymbals (sarons and the like)”. Saron is, however, the name of an 
instrument with bronze keys, and not of a cymbal. 


AEROPHONES 25 


and in China this usually (but by no means exclusively) refers to the 
transverse flute. In some periods the end-blown flute, too, was called 
tt, although its usual name was siao (h’siao).4 

On tthe other hand, the Barabudur shows many images of people 
playing transverse flutes 5 (figs. 7, 15, 16, 17, 20 and 30), and only 
very few end-blown instruments 6 (figs. 9 and 32), which moreover 
may well be shawms, not flutes. But this in itself does not prove that 
in Java the transverse flute was ever a popular instrument. 

Fortunately it so happened that the former official for Chinese 
Affairs in Batavia (now Djakarta), J. Th. Moll, had an edition of the 
original text of the Chronicles mentioned. At my request he made a 
check and it appeared that the author had, indeed, used the ambiguous 
word tt, but being aware, apparently, of its double meaning, had added 
the adjective wang, and that word can only mean ‘side’ in this context. 
So now we know with certainty that at the time of Jayabhaya the trans- 
verse flute must have been the popular wind instrument in East Java. 

Probably one should see in the word wangsi7 or bangsi 8 (Sanskrit: 
vamsa = reed, bamboo, flute; vamst = flute) the Old Javanese name 
for this transverse flute. In the Charters it sometimes appears together 
with the word suling.9 So one may assume that bangsi (wangsi) and 
suling refer to two different kinds of bamboo flutes. And whereas 
in present-day Java and Bali the word suling is used exclusively for 
the end-blown flute, it seems admissible to regard bangsi (wangst) as 
the name for the side-blown flute. Besides, this tallies with the Indian 
“mother-word” which, according to the Sangitaratnakara 19 was applied 
to transverse flutes exclusively. 

In the Archipelago, bangsi or bangsing were later used for other wind 
instruments as well: for bamboo end-blown flutes, and even for clarinet- 
like instruments made of other materials.11 


nN 


See, for instance, Courant p. 152b. 

5 Bar. O 101, Ia 1 (left-side), 52, Ib 19, IBa 46, 300, 318, IBb 43b, II 10, 

IIB 44, III 65, IIIB 40, IVB 42 a0. 

ibn, ©) 244, IU, IW Ze 

Re Ony 1513: 

8 Bebetin A I, IIb 5; Trufian A I, Ila 1; Trufian B, Ib 5; R. III 39, VIII 28, 
GHA, OWAL TIGL, WATE NGS Nats 25 

9 Trufian A I, Ila 1; Trufian B, Ib 5; Batur P. Abang A VIb 2; Batuan IIb 3, 
IVb 3; Pandak-bandung, E.B. pp. 14ff. pl. IIIb 5 and Vb 1; Buwahan A 
Ill 7; Br. I pp. 607 ff. pl. 5b; zbid. pp. 619 ff. pl. 5b; Br. II pp. 49 ff. pl. 9b; 
ReeaVvilecs se Smare DV lcceD Ke DVal4es Wine? sorte li 75) Ve 98; Bo. 164. 

10 VI 424-451 (cf. Grosset p. 353 col. 1). 

11 Sachs II pp. 143, 144, 160 and 161. 


fo) 


26 HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


Synonymous with bangsi (of which the Sanskrit original with its 
meaning of reed, bamboo and flute is given above) is wénu 1? which 
is found in the same form and meaning in the Vedic scriptures.!% 

There is yet another word for flute: tudung(an).14 The kind of flute 
to which it refers cannot be established. From the way the Bharatayuddha 
and the Wrtta-saficaya refer to this instrument we can conclude — 
although not with certainty — that this is a kind of flute, or at any 
rate a soft-sounding wind instrument, as in both poems its sound is 
compared to that of the wind in the bamboo leaves.15 

It should also be mentioned that in 1935 A. Gall excavated a terra- 
cotta ocarina on the slopes of the Penanggungan, the Majapahit holy 
mountain. This ocarina is presumed to date back to the Hindu period. 
It has three finger holes (fig. 81) and its name is unknown. 

Another instrument belonging to this group is sounded not by the 
human breath but by the wind. It consists of a piece of bamboo with 
holes of various shapes cut in its internodes, and usually placed high 
up in a tree. The wind striking these holes produces pleasing sounds 
at different pitches which can be heard from a considerable distance. 
In other words, it is an Aeolian flute. In the wayang stories the sound 
of these flutes is usually compared to the weeping of princesses. It is 
called sendarén in modern Javanese, sondari in Sundanese. In Old 
Javanese literature sundari is repeatedly mentioned as an element 
of the scenery in a wood.16 According to the Balinese versions it is a 
bird, and PoERBATJARAKA takes it to be an insect,17 but it seems quite 
possible that in Old Javanese it was already used for an Aeolian flute.18 


12 S'S 0: 

138 Sachs II pp. 146 and 147. 

I IB Ib Ss \WoS. S82 Mie, (Gyuseatem @) ae 

15 See hereafter pp. 66 and 67 and notes 183 and 184. — In B.Y. and Mal. Van 
der Tuuk (KBwb. II 650 s.v. tudung) proposes to read tuwung for tudung 
and for the reference in W.S. tuwongan for tudungan. However he must have 
written this in a careless moment. Neither could the sound of the tuzvuwng (which, 
if I am right, is a set of bronze goblet-shaped cymbals — see p. 50) have inspired 
the poetic comparison mentioned above, nor could it be assumed that the 
Old Javanese poets themselves, or the later copyists were in the habit of 
writing tudung when they meant tuzwung. 

16 W. 1 15; and (according to KBwb. III 28 s.v. sundari): Sut. XLIII 9d, LV 

Id, CXXXVIMI -7ds LL. XXV 1; Smar cx XD 6; XU 8 AN XT GS: 

Siete, IDC aks Gyan, Ih ee 

Poerbatjaraka on p. 251 of his Arjunawiwaha-translation (p. 71 of 

the separate edition) : = Mod. Javanese kifijeng-tangis (a kind of dragon-fly). 

L. C. Heyting reminded me of the existence of two Balinese tracts dealing 

with the wariga (Balinese astrological calendar), called Sundari terus and 

Sundari bungkah (cf. H. H. Juynboll in “De letterkunde van Bali” in 


17 


18 


AEROPHONES OT 


B. Glottophones 


In this group the mouth organ deserves our attention in the first 
place. Several of these instruments are shown in two reliefs on the 
buried basement of the Barabudur 19 in which the mouth organ appears 
to be one of the instruments played by a group of musicians (fig. 5 
at 1). As far as I am aware its Old Javanese name is not known. 

In Java the instrument is now extinct but in Borneo it is still one 
of the more popular instruments of the Dayak tribes in the centre of 
the island (fig. 99). It is believed to have originated in South China. 
The oldest known representations come from North Vietnam. They 
appear on a bronze kettle-drum the date of which was given as the 
middle of the first century A.D. by Gotousew II, (fig. 98).20 Perhaps 
these instruments originated in the Dong-so’n-culture that reached 
China by the middle of the first millennium B.C. and spread from 
there to the Archipelago some centuries later. One may assume that 
the Kayan and Kenya tribes, when they settled in Central Borneo, 
brought with them these k(e)/edi (in Borneo also called: kediré, keluri, 
(eng )kerurai, garudé, gerdi, etc.). 

This instrument, which has a surprisingly beautiful organlike tone, 
consists of a number of bamboo tubes of various lengths (six in 
Borneo generally, but sometimes eight in Sarawak) with one hole each 
and sealed in a specially grown tapered gourd. Each of tthese tubes 
has a vibrating tongue made of palm wood (therefore, heteroglottal) 
which can sound only when the player, blowing the narrow end of the 
gourd, closes the hole in the tube he wants to hear. The lowest note 
is sounded continuously in the manner of the drone of the bagpipe or 
of the Indian instrumental music. With the other five (or seven) notes 
the player produces necessarily simple melodies. 

For comparison some pictures of South-East Asian mouth organs 


B.K.I. LXXI pp. 566 ff.). Terus here means: pierced, penetrating (J uyn- 
boll II p. 249a); bungkah means: bottom-end, but bubungkahan is a kind 
of reed (ibid. p. 407a). This seems to refer to a bamboo rather than to a 
bird or an insect. An Aeolian flute is a requisite in the description of lovely 
forest scenery in Sanskrit literature (information supplied by A. A. Bake). 
F. van Lamsweerde found in N.W. India a small type of shawm called sundari. 
In the Balinese Wiratantra and Layon Sari two references are found, in 
which sundari obviously has the meaning of Aeolian flute; see KBwb. I 359 
s.v. anth: kadi sundari (k)anginan, and KBwb. I 278 s.v. alih: lwir sundart 
kaanginan; both comparisons having the meaning of “like a sundart exposed 
to the wind”. 

BoP OnsQrand tos: 

20 Goloubew II p. 20 fig. 15. 


28 HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


have been included. One is a Chinese sheng (fig. 102) and the other 
two are from North Assam (fig. 100) and Laos (fig. 101), respect- 
ively.21 

No mouth organs have been excavated in Java. This is not surprising 
as the materials of which they were made were too perishable. 


* * 
* 


The same applies to the other glottophones which remain to be dealt 
with. Their materials were also too perishable. The clarinets (c.g. 
“pannier’”’-oboes; see p. 29 end of paragraph) which are still widespread 
in Java and the adjacent islands were and are made of rice stalk, and 
the shawms of wood. 

We probably know four or five representations of the shawm. One 
or two from the Barabudur (figs. 9 and 32),22 one from the Prambanan 
(Ciwa temple) (fig. 40) and two from East Java on a Panataran relief 
(fig. 55) and from Candi Jago (fig. 50).28 

We cannot be quite sure that the instruments shown are shawms. 
They could be flutes. Nevertheless for the Panataran instruments at 
least, the balance is in favour of the shawm on account of its character- 
istically small bell. Indonesian flutes, usually made of bamboo, have no 
bell at all.24 The clue is provided by the whole scene. It represents a 
detail of the fight between Hanuman, the white monkey general (to 
be imagined high up in a tree above the heads of the group of fleeing 
demons) and Indrajit, Rawana’s son. A sweet-voiced flute would be 
the very last thing to be expected as an instrument of war. The shawm 
with its wild exciting character is much more suitable.25 Besides, we 


21 For other pictures see Sachs II p. 164; Oedaya II No. 6 (issue of Nov. 
1924); Tropische Natuur XVI p. 171 fig. 3; Kunst II p. 244 fig. 49; 
M.G.G. vol. VI col. 1191 fig. 5. — Various forms from the Asian mainland 
can be found a.o. in Sachs I p. 369b; Sachs II p. 164; Soulié p. 55; 
Knosp II pp. 3122 and 3145; Courant p. 162; Ruth-Sommer 
p. 121; Stein I pl. V, VI, VII and VIII; GriinwedelI p. 333 fig. 664, 
é.t.g. 

22S Batre @ml mance vaess 

23 O.D. and Br. III photo No. 28. 

24 Buginese flutes are sometimes an exception when they show a bell made of 

buffalo horn. This is, however, quite a different shape from the slightly 

curved “bell” of the Panataran instrument. 

Anyone who has ever attended a kuda képang (Sund.: kuda lumping) per- 

formance knows how exciting a shawm can be. Cf. Staugaard pp. 421 ff. 

and Kunst I pp. 30 and 31. 


2 


o 


AEROPHONES 29 


know from the Usana Bali that the shawm (gem/(p)rét) was popular 
as a war instrument in the Hindu-Javanese period.26 

There is, however, a slight possibility that a trumpet-like instrument 
resembling the equally narrow Chinese /a-pa was meant,27 but the la-pa 
is usually much longer.28 

The Old Javanese names of shawms which have come down to us 
are still used in Java today: prérét (parérét, pérérét),29 p(é)lérét,3° 
and gem(p)rét.31 In the Hikayat Pafiji Kuda Semirang the shawm 
is mentioned under its Malay name serunai (from Persian surnay).32 


Finally we come to the rice-stalk aerophones (Old Javanese: 
damyadamyan,?3 modern Javanese: de(r)mén(an) ,34 Sundanese: dami 
or jarami, empét-empéetan or olé-oléan) .35 

Such a rice-stalk instrument is often a small clarinet. It then consists 
of a rice-stalk segment closed at the top by a node. The other end is 
open. Immediately under the closed end a vibrating tongue has been 
cut into the wall with the fixed end nearest to the node. The player 
puts the instrument into his mouth so far that the tongue can vibrate 
freely inside the cavity of the mouth. Sometimes it has two or three 
finger holes and sometimes a funnel-shaped bell made of coconut 
palm leaf wound around. 

The rice-stalk may be turned into a musical instrument in another 
way. Just below the closed top end a number of lengthwise cuts are 
made. The ends of the stalk are cautiously pushed inwards a little, so 
that the cut sections bulge slightly outward This bulge is placed right 
inside the mouth; the instrument is then capable of producing a remark- 
ably powerful shawm-like sound. In fact it is a kind of multiple oboe 
as the sound is created by the intermittent opening and closing of the 
slits of the bulging part (fig. 103).6 


26 U.B. 25, 29 (see KBwh. IV 793 s.v. gemret). 

27 Also called h’siao thong kyo. See the picture in Courant p. 158 fig. 197. 

28 See Sachs I p. 238a; Soulié p. 61 and N.G.M. Vol. XLIX (1926) pp. 215 
and 216. : 

29 T.K. 17; Smarw. 14, 15; Mal.; C.A. IX, XII, XIII; H. XXIV 5; Nawar. 63. 
For modern Java see Kunst IX vol. I p. 238. 

30 S.T. (see KBwb. IV 235 s.v. plerét); Hrsw. V 75a; R.L. VII 79, XI 113. 

31 See note 26. 

32 Poerbatjaraka II p. 8. 

33 Gh. XXXVI 7; in the Malat: dadamén (KBwb. II 514 s.v. dam). 

34 Brandts Buys III p. 318b; Kunst IX vol. I pp. 241 ff. 

35 Kunst IX vol. I p. 376. 

36 For clarity’s sake the apertures between the cut strips have been exaggerated 
in the drawing. In reality they are hardly visible. 


30 HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


C. Trumpets 


The shell-trumpet has been an important Hindu-Javanese instrument 
in temple services as well as in the business of war. It has come down 
to us in Old Javanese literature under three names: cangka,37 mara- 
cangka 38 and sungu.39 Of these names sangka and sungu are still in 
use in Bali 49 to-day. 

The instrument is also found in several other places in the Archipel- 
ago, mainly amongst fishermen (e.g. in Madura and Kangean). The 
sound of the shell-trumpet carries far across the water, making it 
singularly suitable for signalling. However it is no longer made, as in 
Hindu-Java and India, from the species of shell called Turbinella rapa. 
It is now made from Tritonium variegatum (Charoma tritonis),41 and 
the hole for blowing is no longer (as it was) at the apex but some- 
where along the side. 

Very few Old Javanese representations of it have come down to us. 
Some occur on the Barabudur, e.g. on reliefs Ib 70 (fig. 18) and IV 7, 
others are found on the Prambanan (Brahma temple, fig. 42), on the 
Panataran (in one of the rear hands of the image of the goddess Cri 
found in the precincts) ,42 on one of the reliefs of Candi Jawi (fig. 53 
extreme left), and on a Candi Sukuh relief of the closing years of the 
Hindu period (fig. 68). 


tai wiiPas 


87 Either by itself or in composita (see page 31): Sukawana A JI, Ila 2; 
Sembiran A I, IIb 4; Babi A VIa 2-6; Wir. 70, 77, 78, 80, 85, 96; Ud. 90, 
Ins Vektey, ON, Gs, CO We, CS UMS Te ID I, OK 6, iG, DOW 3G, NOW BE. 
OVAL IV, OXIDE AVE VOOVAL T, WOSOOVAL G MOKOMIBSC 2, ILI We IR, IDK 112) 
5S 2, VOMUE 3 SOM Was Care, Se Sim W Se Sim, SOX 5, IL G@ (2)s 
Wey, ILI 76, IDOW Ih IOOCIY Ze Stireray, J ie (8.2 Wee (Cal, IDKe 
Buwahan A III 7; Pandak-bandung, E.B. pp. 14ff. pl. Vb 1; T.K. 12, 
16, 17; Nawar. 63, 64; Swarg. 40; S.T. III 32; J.D. 71; Kor. 20; T. (version 
b) I 79, 81; Hrsw. II 41b, V 6la, 75a; B.K. XX XIX 12; Brh. 46; Smar. VI 
IG, NOMIDC GF OO ZE VOOMNL Ba Ten, SOOKWAL 7/2 WW, ROX ©, WOXIDK G. 

88 Wir. 64, 69. The latter gives a proper name as well: Dewadatta. It is 
Arjuna’s instrument on which he blows so vigorously that the foliage of the 
trees stands on end — a kind of oriental parallel to Roland and _ his 
“Elephant”. It is not unusual that ¢angkas are given a proper name, c.g. 
in the Mausalaparwa (J.D. 71), a magic ¢angka which sounds without being 
blown is called Lord Paicajanya. 

BD AMIR, 17/3 EEN, OK 

So Guiisitel lpm coontio oO: 

41 oe further Sachs II pp. 167, 168; Kleen pl. 58; Kunst II pp. 124 and 

ae (Ci, Wie@san Il Bitel Gal, fy BS 


AEROPHONES 31 


According to Sacus II, pp. 169 ff. in India three types of metal 
trumpets were known. For the straight trumpet and for the single- 
looped trumpet Sacus gives the Sanskrit names karand and tarya 
respectively. For the curved trumpets, besides the Sanskrit name 
ranacrnga, a variety of names in South Indian languages is given, 
most of which remind us of a Sanskrit word kahala or kahala, which 
in Monier Williams’ Sanskrit dictionary is said to have two different 
meanings: a. cow’s horn or an instrument of that shape; b. a great drum. 

In Old Javanese literature the name karan@ does not occur, and the 
name tiurya4> is only found in one text. Instruments indicated by 
names which all seem to be related to the Sanskrit word ka@hala (or 
kahala) are frequently mentioned: ka@hala,44 kahala,44 kala,45 kala — 
when linked with or in combination with cangka 46 —, kala,47 kalaha,48 
kalaha 48 and kala.4950 Often kahala, or one of its variants, and 
cangka are linked together either as kahalacangka,5! or kalacangka,®2 
cangkakahala,®3 cangkakahala,5+ cangkakalaha 5> and cangkakalaha,>® 
cangkakala,5® cangkakala 56 and cangkakala.5® 57 


43 Although I think that the original meaning may have been “trumpet”, from 
Old Javanese literature we only know the combination tiryawdditra (J.D. 
76/77) which seems to have the meaning of musical instruments in general. 
Similarly in the Sinhalese Mahavamsa (Geiger p. 63), all kinds of music 
together are called turiyavadita, and a combination of five different musical 
instruments (sankha, tala, and presumably vind, venuw and drum) is called 
paficanga-turiya or paica-turivaiga. — The text from the Lalitavistara 
represented on relief Ia 1 of the Barabudur mentions the euphonious sound 
of 84,000 taryas, but there are no trumpets depicted, merely two kinds of 
drums, large cymbals, a small lute, an arched harp and a transverse flute 
(fig. 15 only gives the left side). See Krom III pp. 101 and 102. 

ce? IE. OMINE CHS IBIS, ILROSOOW IBS Aware: ZN ING eID OY ils bok Wale Gite (CO. 
6d COCK Ib) GXOXTIT Se: 

45 Brh. 46; T.K. 17. 

4@ Nee, LIDS 7/2 Stir, W be WW BOX , WORT A DOD BE 12)4, ROOD. 45 
IR, MOXIME 3h VOGAL ZL MORAN YS Sieve, NOOR Alo Grits Ovi hey, (20.0.6 
4B), 1 Noy. 

47 Nawar. 63, 64. 

AS Nir, ¥85) 96; B.K. XXeXDXe 12% DT) 1279.81 (version 6); A.W. XEVI 5, 
MIDS 7h : 

2) Syyes WBE 

50 See, however, also pp. 41 ff. 

51 Nag. LXV 1. 

32 INeys, ILIDK 7/2 IBY, MOSOWAL 1b ROOKIE HS 1X, DOIDE 6 SOIUM ZAR NU, O:6% 6) 
XN 55) Smarr. XX XI 4, 

SEF LOG inlih 

54 Wir. 70. 

55 Wir. 85, 96; B.K. XXXIX 12; T. I 79, 81 (version 5). 

OARS, Moy 1/8 Teka 2%. 

57 See pp. 41 ff., where the confusion in nomenclature is pointed out. 


Sy HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


However the texts give no indication as to the form of these trumpets. 

Representations are scarce. Only some straight trumpets seem to 
occur on the Barabudur.58 There may be a representation of a curved 
trumpet as well, but the relief is damaged and therefore somewhat in- 
distinct. This could also be a horn, an instrument which is mentioned 
in Old Javanese literature — be it only once — under its Sanskrit 
name srnga.59 

In addition there are the remarkable instruments with two tubes on 
the Candi Jawi reliefs (fig. 53). In appearance they are identical with 
the straight trumpets still used in Nepal (fig. 97) [and perhaps also 
in India], called kaha. On the Indian subcontinent they have always 
been used exclusively in the religious sphere; they are typically ritual 
instruments, and appear with one or with two tubes (fig. 104).6° 

Although at first, before we learned of the existence of these double- 
trumpets in India, J. S. Brandts Buys and I were somewhat unsure 
whether these Candi Jawi instruments were trumpets or shawms, I 
now feel that we may safely assume them to be identical with the 
Indian double-kahdas. 

Sacus VIII pp. 153/4 gives their present Tamil name: tiruchinnam. 

Furthermore the texts give some other words, which might possibly 
have the meaning of trumpets. First there is the word tarayan which 
occurs in the Nagarakrtagama and in the Sumanasantaka.61 For the 
word in the latter reference JuynBoLL II gives the translation: “sound 
imitating word for the trumpet” ; indeed a striking instance of onomato- 
poeia. I am, however, rather inclined to think that tarayan stands for 
the trumpet itself, whatever the form of this trumpet may have been. 

Another word occurring only once in the Nagarakrtagama is trut,®2 
which JuyNnBo tt II translates with “trumpet”. 

A third word deserves our attention, namely busya.63 In the first 
of the two references known to me it appears linked with cangka, the 
shell-trumpet (asangka-busya). The consideration which led to the 
assumption that kahala was a wind instrument because it was linked 


Sl 1ekere IW 71, 

ee ar it al, 

60 After Buschan vol. II p. 96 fig. 118. 

IN ERS IDOORDY 2e Sivan, IL © 

MEH INI ILO 2 

63 Pandak-bandung, (E.B. pp. 14 ff.) Vb 1 and Br. I pp. 619 ff. 5b. In Nepal 
A. A. Bake found two kinds of cymbals one large about ten inches in diameter 
called bhusiah, and one small, not more than three inches in diameter and very 
much like the Indian kartal, called chusiah. 


AEROPHONES 33 


with sangka (strengthened, however, in that case, by the Indian 
meaning of kaha and kahala), could also perhaps apply to busya. 

The fact, however, that in the second reference the word busya 
appears in the enumeration of actions prohibited in the cloister precincts 
makes it difficult to be positive about the meaning of wind instrument. 
Such a list of actions usually starts with the mention of various ways 
of music-making (anuling, amukul, agending, etc.). This is usually 
followed by a group of kinds of wayang and stage performances (mén- 
men, aringgit, abanwal, etc.), and in the reference in question we find 
busya in this wayang-group. 

There is one more word which has to be discussed in this section, 
viz. pirus, which on account of JUYNBOLL’s translation (in his Wordlist) 
of the word pipirusa as “whistling?” possibly could be supposed to 
belong to the category of aerophones. 

For this word VAN DER TuUK gives one reference from Old Javanese 
literature 64 (KBwb. IV 96 s.v. pirus) and two references from charters 
found in Bali (KBwb. IV 265 s.v. pipirusa), which were published 
previously by Branpes.®5 It seems to me from the context that pirus 
has no instrumental meaning, because again it belongs to the “wayang- 
group” of forbidden actions and not to the “music-group”’. The idea 
that purus denotes some kind of stage act is supported by the fact that 
VAN DER TUUK s.v. pipirusa, which he considers to be related to pirus 
and which occurs in the Ramayana,®® gives femarin, t.e. “taking the 
part of Semar’’, as a Balinese translation of the word. 

This opinion is confirmed by information given by F. H. van 
NAERSSEN in his article “T'wee koperen oorkonden van Balitung” (Two 
copperplate charters from Balitung) 67 where he quotes a passage in 
a manuscript of the Candakarana (Ms. Or. 4570, Leyden Univ. Libr.) 
from which it is evident that pirus, being a translation of Sanskrit 
kucilava, means actor; on etymological grounds C. C. Berg had come 
to the same conclusion. VAN NAERSSEN is inclined to consider pipirusa 
to be a derivation of pirus, with the meaning of “wishing or intending to 
act as a pirus’”’. ; 


64 Sut. CXIII 6. 

65 Br, I pp. 607 ff. 5b; ibid. pp. 619 ff. Sb. See also Br. II pp. 49ff 9b and 
E.B. pp. 14ff Vb 1. 

66 R. XXIV 106. 

67 B.K.I. XCV (1937) pp. 459/460. 


IV 


MEMBRANOPHONES 


The discussion of what is known of the Old Javanese drums takes 
us to a field full of uncertainties as regards details. A dozen names of 
drums have come down to us from literary sources, and several types 
of drums have been found on the reliefs. In most cases it is, however, 
difficult to correlate names and types correctly. 

The oldest literary references to drums known to me (padahi and 
muraba) are found in two Old Javanese charters of A.D. 821 and 850 
respectively.1 Even without these there should be no doubt as to the 
existence of drums in that period. For drums in any form are a very 
ancient cultural feature. They are absent only in the most primitive 
communities: the Australian tribes, Wedda, Semang, Sakai, Fuegians 
and several South American Indian tribes. Drums were part of the 
cultural heritage of India and China even in prehistoric times. 


A. Representations of Drums 


Drums of many types appear in great numbers on the Barabudur 
and on the Prambanan-complex, dating from 824 and the latter half 
of the 9th century respectively : principally two-headed truncated conical, 
cylindrical and barrel-shaped drums 2 (figs. 15, 25, 27, 31, 33, 37, 38 
and 39; for a schematic representation of some basic drum forms see 
fig. 121), often carried in a sléndang, a shoulder scarf, or by means 
of a shoulder strap. They are played either with bare hands on both 
sides, or with a stick (figs. 15 and 33),4 which is sometimes hooked 5 


1 Stone of Kuburan Candi verso 13 (see List of Abbreviations: K.T.) and 
OLIKOS WAL 10h 

* Bar. O 1, 52, Ia 1, IBa 42, 266, Ib 83, IBb 30, 436,751.66, 90, 11-18 25, 
Sf, 105, 118, 128, IIB 53b, III 50, IV 7, 10, 37, IVB 42, 75, a.o.; Prambanan, 
Ciwa temple, Ist basement, balustrade eastside Nos. b, c, e, g, m and n; south- 
side No. ; northside Nos. / and n. See also Kunst II pp. 81 and 82. 
Very clear: Bar. O 1, II 105 and 128 (top left) and the majority of the Pram- 
banan drums. 

4 See also Bar. IBa 42. 
5 Bar. IBb 66. 


i) 


MEMBRANOPHONES SS 


on one side or — though rarely — on both sides, The barrel-shaped 
drums can be divided into symmetrical and asymmetrical forms — the 
former is common on the Ciwa temple at Prambanan, the latter on the 
Barabudur — and into squat and long types (figs. 15, 37, 38, 39). 

In addition to these, some slightly “waisted” drums ® (figs. 14, 26, 
31 and 32) and earthenware drums? (figs. 6, 12 and 20) can be seen 
on the Barabudur. A Prambanan relief (fig. 41) also seems to show 
two earthenware (?) drums, decorated with skins and festoons. Earthen- 
ware drums are very old. If the names of two of the Sanskrit and 
Old Javanese types of drums: mrdangga and mardala are derivations 
of the Sanskrit substantive mrd = mud, the original meaning could 
possibly be: vessel of clay, earthen pot. Apart from such earthenware 
drums, Barabudur also shows an object that could be qualified as 
“sound pot”. It is an earthenware vessel — presumably half-filled with 
water — above which hands are clapped. The sound pot acts as a 
resonator (fig. 17).8 

The truncated conical, the cylindrical and the barrel-shaped drums 
on the Central Javanese reliefs all show the Indian way of skin- 
stretching — 1.e. by means of straps — but without the so-called 
guiding rings. In addition, the barrel-shaped drums sometimes have 
a hoop close to each rim, which functions as an “interim station” for 
the straps (figs. 15, 25, 31 and 37). In present-day Java this method 
of skin-stretching with straps is still used, and always with guiding rings. 

At present there are also two other methods in use in Java, namely 
the Chinese (and old Assyrian) way, which uses flat-headed nails or 
wooden plugs 9 and the typical Indonesian method which uses a rattan 
hoop to keep the skin stretched, sometimes with wedges between hoop 
and drum. Although as far as I know not found on the Central Java- 
nese temples, this latter method must have been in vogue among the 
people at the time, as it was in later centuries in Majapahit, and still 
is in the whole of Java. For the Majapahit period (end of the 13th 
to the beginning of the 16th century) its presence in East Java has 
been made plausible by one representation on Candi Panataran (fig. 56) 
and a few terra-cotta statuettes (fig. 65 at 3) excavated by H. Maclaine 


Bara© (Sie Barolo allelS 55 el2ZvandalV 07. 

Bar. O 72, 149, IBa 46, 300, IBb 10, IIB 44, IV 10. 

Bar. Ib 19, also IBb 1. 

This is the method used on the bedug and teteg in the mosques and the 
kraton gamelans and sometimes on the West Javanese (ba)jidor. 


omnnNn 


36 HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


Pont; at present it can be observed on the various kinds of dogdog 1° 
(East Java: réog) and many frame-drums (terbang). 

The above-mentioned Indian-way of stretching the skin was also 
known in East Java. This is borne out by a relief on Candi Tégawangi 
(near Paré, res. of Kediri) (fig. 63) which shows a cylindrical drum 
of that kind. 

Returning one moment to the waisted drums, I may draw attention 
to East Java, for this part of the island adds some specimens to the 
ones known from Central Java: a Bhairawa statue from the middle of 
the 13th century found at Candi Singasari near Malang holds such an 
instrument, presumably a clapper-drum (Sanskrit: damaru), in its 
left rear hand (fig. 48). One clearly sees the knob, or rather one of the 
knobs, which are attached to the body of the drum by a cord (fig. 48a) ; 
by shaking the drum to and fro, the knobs strike the drum heads. An- 
other one, a bronze clapper-drum about 6 in. long, originally mounted 
on a stick, was excavated in Kediri Residency (District of Gandusari, 
désa Salumbung) in 1930.11 It is the bronze equivalent of the modern 
Balinese ketipluk, also mounted on a stick (although this instrument 
has no waist).12 On one of the other priestly attributes found together 
with this instrument, the Caka-date 1209, i.e. A.D. 1287, was inscribed. 
Consequently this find dates back to the end of the Singasari period. 

Finally, it is not impossible that the terra-cotta objects excavated by 
H. Maclaine Pont in the Majapahit precincts (fig. 67) are waisted 
drums, although I must admit that they resemble the pedestals of those 
large flower pots used to adorn (or mar) old tropical residences. How- 
ever the waist of these pedestals is not in the middle as is the case 
with the Majapahit objects; moreover the lower part of the former 
always has a larger diameter and is more solid than the upper part. 
The possibility that in this case we are dealing with drum bodies is 
made more acceptable by the presence of grooves, close to the rims, 
which may have served to fasten the skins by means of cords. Prof. 
E. M. von Hornbostel, to whom I sent a copy of fig. 67, also pointed 
this out. Furthermore he suggested that the twisted figure near the 
waist of two of the objects could be a rudimentary representation of a 


10 According to Grosset the Indian damarw is also called dugduga or dugdugi 
(Grosset p. 360b). A. A. Bake considers the names given by Grosset 
to be questionable. N. A. Jairazbhoy remarks that dugduga seems to point 
to dubduba, a kind of friction drum known in Bengal. 

11 Djak. Mus. No. 5960. Cf. O.V. 1928 pp. 97 and 98. 

120 Cf) Kunst lV ppele>eande2ss: 


MEMBRANOPHONES 37 


snake. This, too, would point in the direction of a waisted drum, be- 
cause the other type of waisted drum, the mythological damaru, an 
attribute of Bhadrakali, Ciwa and other heavenly beings, is also 
usually depicted in India with snakes wound around it.13 


If Van Stein Callenfels’ dating of the Ghatotkacacraya (c. 1190) is 
correct and if JuynBoxt II is right in considering the tabang-tabang 
(first mentioned in this Old Javanese work) as equivalent to the terbang, 
this type of frame-drum — which we are inclined to connect with 
Islam. — occurred as early as the 12th century and would therefore 
be pre-Islamic. It may well be that we find representations of these 
frame-drums in the hands of some of the terra-cotta statuettes found 
in the soil of Majapahit (figs. 65 at 2, 65a and 65b at 1), although the 
possibility remains that these are not musical instruments but betel 
bags. However an argument in favour of the terbang is the double rim 
shown by the figure at the right in fig. 65a, which might indicate the 
Indonesian method of drum-skin stretching by means of a rattan hoop. 


For the famous bronze kettle-drums — not membranophones — 
see p. 47. 


B. Names of Drums 


The above sums up all Old Javanese drum forms known tto me both 
in representation and as actual objects.14 The difficult task remains 
of allocating the various names of drums from charters and literature 
to the above-mentioned forms. The reader will find that it amounts 
to no more than a well-meant attempt. This is not really surprising. 
In a similar attempt with Indian drums — and in that case it merely 
concerned names and instruments from the same area — Curt Sachs, 
organologist without peer, felt compelled to preface his pages with the 
statement: ‘Alle Versuche, bestimmte Trommeln mit den einzelnen 
Namen in Gleichung zu setzen, miissen an dem wilden Durcheinander 
der indischen Trommel-Nomenklatur scheitern.” 15 It will, therefore, be 


13 According to Sachs II pp. 74 and 75. There is no trace of snakes on the 
bronze Old Javanese clapper-drum mentioned above. 

14 “The orchestra of drummers” referred to in Krom I (vol. II Ist ed. p. 180, 
2nd ed. p. 278), on a relief of the pendapa terrace of the Panataran complex, 
does not have to be mentioned in this connection; the musical instruments 
on that relief not being drums at all. They are réyongs and therefore idio- 
phones; see pp. 59 ff. 

15 “All endeavours to associate particular drums with the different names must 
fail because of the confusion created by the instability of the Indian nomen- 
clature”’ (Sachs II p. 58). 


38 HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


quite understandable that the allocation of Sanskrit names to Old 
Javanese drums will often meet with great difficulties. 

The word mrdangga,!6 which appears fairly frequently and is some- 
times wrongly translated as gamelan,17 most likely refers to a barrel- 
shaped drum, as it does in India itself. There since ancient times it 
has featured prominently at such solemn functions as processions, 
receptions and durbars.18 On the Barabudur it usually appears in 
celestial scenes.19 The truncated conical form, on the other hand, seems 
generally to be more terrestrial in character,20 although it is by no 
means entirely absent in scenes of the hereafter.21 Ciwa’s dance, 
depicted in such irresistibly rhythmical fashion on the first tier of the 
main Prambanan temple, is also accompanied by barrel-shaped drums, 
with only a few exceptions.?? 23 

Like the Indian type of that shape, the truncated conical instrument 
was presumably called mardala.24 However, of all names of drums, 
the name padahi (sometimes written: padahi; var.: badahi) 25 — as 
a single word or in compounds — appears most frequently. The trun- 
cated conical form of drum is still the most popular type in Java and 


MS 1 e1e% a, 1A I, Wy SS RWS Wises CISA 7i/@ Syovee, TW Ul, O;OSCUT 28a VW, DXOXG 
OMIM ZA ORY S SOOKIL ile TRIE, DOSOMID ZAls IIb, OI SIS, Gil, byes TEL 
HOVE BO, 1b, Be Wel, GOs Wits WAS IBhAy. I< WO) OX & OAID Ah RORWIT Ib 
OOLOD.G 2, DALIDS Gye Sierras JEN  (C2)S WI. II/B INieee DOSOKI Ss ILD OOS (6. 
IDDOOMOWY ZS dale WL Zille Wee IOS, INE Se Neier, Clo Berm, IW 70; 
237; B.B. 24; Sor. III 95. In C.K. 7, 8 yet a Prakrit form madangi = 
Sanskrit mrdangin, a mrdangga-player. 

17 See Poerbatjaraka’s translation of the references W. XX 6, XXIII 2, 
BORW. Ee 

18 Grosset p. 359b. 

wD) Bere, Wer Tb IE OG, IY 7%, ees 

BD let, (0) ih, GA leks, Aefe, JUE BS}, JIB Zieh 

21 For instance Bara lasleand lVie7. 

22 Hastside No. 0. 

23 For a possibly more general meaning of mrdangga, i.e. drum as a generic 
name, see p. 67 the remarks on mrdangga bhéri and bhéri (bhahiri) mrdangga. 

2] REX DX 13) Brhy 46>) KoySnds Ill 10: 

25 Stone of Kuburan Candi (K.T.) verso 13; O.J.O. VI 24, IX 1b, 2a, XII b 3, 
XV, XXIII 6, XXX recto 13, XXXV 11, XXXVI verso 5, XLVI recto 21, 
LIV verso 12, LIX verso 15, verso 19, LXV 1b 14, CIII b, CIV 1b 7, 2a 7, 
CVIII b 4, CXII 1la; Batuan IVb 2; Batur P. Abang A IXb 3; Pengotan 
A I, IIb 1; Batunya A I, IIIa 5; Sibang Kadja Va 1/2; K.O. I, 3, AN Bs 
5, XIV b 1, XV a7, XVII 6, XXII 3 a/b; Br. I pp. 613 ff. 2b, E 46 recto 
4; K.A. I 5, III a 20; Charter Klampenborg (Van Naerssen No. VIII-3) 
verso 3; Wir. 55; Adip. 121, 202; W. XVI 7; H.W. XXXII 10; B.Y. X 3; 
Nag. LXXXIV-2;5BiP.065, 1303: B.Ki XK RIX12 230, LX MIVe Ge XO 
15 Djsipur-pcR.11/ 62) 1114, NAIL 47.6 XI Ke 10x Te 4 oak > 
XXVI 7; T. (version b) I; T.K. 17; Ww. IV 99. 


MEMBRANOPHONES 39 


Bali. In Central Java it is a member of the older ensembles in the 
kratons and dalems (although at present the barrel-shaped type is more 
prominent), while in Bali 26 it enjoys the status of hegemony. I there- 
fore venture to suggest that padahi (Kern’s “festive music drum’) 
also refers to the truncated conical form. In any case the reference in 
the Tantri Kamandaka27 shows that mrdangga and padahi are 
different instruments because they are both mentioned in the same 
passage.28 

Juynspoti II (see above) probably quite rightly equates tabang- 
tabang 29 with terbang (frame-drum). Redep 39 is a synonym for it; 
the frame-drum is still called redap in Bencoolen. 

Kern translates padaha as kettle-drum (drum would have been 
better, as padaha 31 is surely akin to pada), and pataha 32 as drum 
in general. Since the beginning of the Christian era, or perhaps even 
two centuries earlier, pataha has-been the name of a drum in India,33 
as has been panava.34 The latter name is also found in Old Javanese 
literature (panawa).35 

Then there is the word murawa (var.: muraba) (Sanskrit: muraja) 
which appears several times.36 The Ramayana-codex 3455f of Leyden 


26 The small, asymmetrical, barrel-shaped drums which can sometimes be found 
in the gamelan angklung and in the purwa and wayang wong ensembles (see 
p. 77 nt. 185) and which are called gupek(an), form the only, presumably 
rather modern, exception. 

BE STIR, WG 

28 Poerbatjaraka (W. XVI 7) translates padahi as ‘merely music’. With- 
out doubt this can be read as drum-orchestra; not without reason the 
poet used in his verse the onomatopoeic gumuruh. 

2IR Ghee OOO a7 eSinatee ll VlOe Sums lax leer Vi 108, 

30 Ww. III 69; Mal. XXXIV, LXIX, 116; Hrsw. I 74a, II 38b, 143b, IV 54a; 
Was. II 102. Cf. Sachs II p. 65. Other modern names are: rebana, rabana, 
robana, ravana, and (in the Kai Archipelago) even gong. See also p. 82 
S.U. gérong. 

31 Sukawana A I, Ila 2; Bebetin A I, IIb 5; Buwahan A III 7; Nag. XXXI 3, 
LV 3, LXV 1. [See Pigeaud’s text-edition and translation of the Naga- 
rakrtagama. In canto XXXI 3 he translates padaha as “common conical 
drums”. For the combination padaha-ganjuran the translation “drums” is 
given. | 

32 R. XIX 13 (the Balinese interlinear translation here gives kemuk, i.e. a small 
gong!); Nag. LXXXIV 4; B.P. 140. 

33 Cf. Natyacastra. See Grosset p. 359a. 

34 According to Grosset lc. in the Natyacastra and the Amarakoca (7th 
century A.D.). 

35 W.S. 43 (as the name of a poetical rhythmic pattern); Utt. 104; Wir. 85. 

Be Wel iblle JR MO Aly, BOON Bh Zh MOOW SUL DOLOWIE ZA Weis ReijR) Ieee 
LXXXIII 1, LXXXV 12, LXXXVIII 35; Kor. 20; Brh. 46; Sip. V 5; Mal. 
ANI7/2 \WE, 2OMMIUL 2, PODS Be Ie, NOK IS OKO WAL iiese Site, (OWI, Top 


40 HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


University Library, containing a Balinese interlinear translation, gives 
the Balinese equivalent of this word sometimes as kendang,?7 some- 
times as réyong,38 sometimes as tarompong °9 and once as cymbals 
(kencék (?)).49 In other words, in the period when this particular 
translation was written, the author did not know to which instrument 
the name murawa referred. The context, however, suggested that it was 
an instrument which was beaten. As far as I can see it seems quite 
safe always to read drum for murawa. The context also suggests that 
it was a drum which could be used in war.41 

What the waisted drums were called in ancient Java we do not 
know. The Indian names damaru, dugduga, dugdugi or budbudtka 42 
have not as yet been found in Old Javanese literature. Possibly some 
name indicating an instrument of this kind may be found among the 
list of names of uncertain or unknown meaning on pp. 82 ff., although 
I think this is unlikely. 

Furthermore there is the Indonesian word kendang, the present-day 
general name for drums with tuning straps in Java and Bali 4% (else- 
where in the Archipelago: gendang, gondrang, ganrang). This name 
possibly existed side by side with the special terms (mostly of Sanskrit 
origin) as a name for drums in general.44 Apparently, however, it 
sometimes seems to refer to a special kind of drum, as when the 
kendang is mentioned together with another drum. We find an example 
in the Wiradtaparwa 45 where kendang and padahi together make a 
sound like the ocean at the time of the destruction of the world. And 
here the word kendang is certainly not used for metrical reasons, as 
the Old Javanese Wirataparwa-version is in prose. 


STE RE xox 207. 

SED 18, DOGHL Sh Zh 

SED TR, ROLE TUL. 

AY TR. OXWAL 25: 

44 Poerbatjaraka, however, translates murawa sometimes as kentongan 
(W. XXIII 2, XXIX 5). 

42 Grosset p. 360b. 

43 Sachs II p. 74. Some other modern names for drums of this type, but of 
smaller dimensions, are in Bali, gupek(an); in Java proper, ketipung and 
penuntung; in the Sunda Districts, kolantér. 

44 R. VII 3, XIX 13, 15, XXII 3, XXVI 7; Bebetin A I, Ila 4 (gendang) ; 
Wir. 55; KS. II 98; T.K. 29: Panji K.S. (see Pioembia tijaallcae lL 
p+ 8) 5VHW. OXX XVI. 73>) Sinats XK ies) SOCIE SO BP, 130 Bake 
LXXXII 11, LXXXIII 1; S.K. 320; S.T. VII 51; Pam. IV Th), (ax. AY) 
312; Hrsw. II 39b; Sor. III 70; R.L. III 16, IV TR eS ERT 2S j 

SDS Wire 55, 


MEM BRANOPHONES 4] 


Yet another word not to be forgotten in this connection is bhéri or 
b(h)a(h)ii.46 Nowadays in Java beri refers to a small kind of gong, 
but in ancient India it meant a small kettle-drum,47 so it is not always 
certain whether in Old Javanese literature we have to translate bhéri 
as kettle-drum or as small gong.48 

Another name for the kettle-drum, dundubhi, also originally Sanskrit, 
was in vogue in the 10th century, as is shown by another reference in the 
Wirataparwa.49 This word hails from Vedic times ;59 its meaning is 
considered to be synonymous with that of bhéri (in its Indian meaning 
of course) .51 

Finally the word kahala (1) and other terms of similar form — 
apparently all instrument names — must now be examined. 

JuynBoLu (I and II) translates kahala (1) 52 as big drum. He 
refers, in his “Glossarium” as well as in the “Woordenlijst”, to kala 
(II),58 but does not attach it to: an instrument there. This he does, 
however, with kala (III), the word which he presumably intended in 
place of kala (II). For this kala (III),54 however, he gives: kind 


SORNViit m4 n/ 7 Ooi Bee 10% 1263572, 130 Baye xcs) RaiVill 100) xox 2075 
Revel 2s Ee Vion Ode OOl™ Witte: 104 BK xXx e eAdip. 3203) 
Nii, WL LS WW, MONG ZA ROW a Sie Wy Wee Sears WAN GB 7Al/e WWiels}§ 
Ww. II; K.S. II 98; T.K. 17; Nawar. 63, 64; Hrsw. II 41b, V 53b, 6la; 
Sor llin7Om S50 kKeeSndserll Ose Sut. Cx Xe 1 bs CXSXV TI Ibs) RES XT 104; 
Gatur.5: 

For another word bahiri with the meaning “bark cloth’ or “a piece of 
garment” see Table B note 31. 

47 With regard to the Indian kettle-drums see Sachs II pp. 57ff. and 
Grosset p. 36la. 

48 Compare, however, pp. 66-67. 

49° Wir. 77. 

50 See Grosset p. 277a. 

51 And with that of the modern term nagara (Grosset p. 36la). See the 
picture on that page and comp. further Sachs I pp. 123a and 267a, and 
Sachs II pp. 58 and 59, 

52 For kahala and kahala see R. XII 65; Nag. LXV 1; B.K. LXXXV 12; 
Ud: 111: Wir. 70; Sut. ©XX 6d, CXXI Tb, CXXIII Se Gn Sut. vor, lect. 
kalaha). 

53 Which word, according to Van der Tuuk, is also to be found in H.W. 
XL 6 and Sut. XCIX 7 (Juynboll II reads here kala [III]). In 
Teeuw’s text-edition of the Hariwangca, however, the word kaladan (XL 6) 
is translated as ‘“‘when the flames were licking them” from the root alad. The 
Sutasoma-text used by J. Ensink (see Table A note 22) gives XCIX 7c: 
kahala. 

ES 1 ONL ah i OXON 742 Syetis TER OQVA, tiles, (ODO2O;¢ Shi, Mls AGE; BO.Corey 
OMIM 72, XORID SS INI IID 7/5 1B O.O.O0D6 725) Syitekes 2.0.0.4 Pasi 
WWiaebs 


hy 


42 HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


of musical instrument (in his “Glossarium”’), and name 
of a wind instrument (in his “Woordenlijst’), and as a 
Sanskrit equivalent he mentions only kahald, although, as mentioned 
above, he had translated the word kahala (1) as big drum. Further- 
more he translates kdla-kala (IV) 55 as cy mbals but adds a question 
mark, and finally he gives this same meaning to kalaha (V), not 
indicating whether he means gong — which I suppose he does — or 
real (clashing) cymbals. 

In the Nagarakrtagama, Kern translates kahala (1) (in kahala- 
cangka) 56 as well as kala (III) (in kalacangka) 57 as cymbals. 

Following the example of the Balinese interlinear translation of the 
version of the Ramayana found in the Leyden Codex 3455f, Van DER 
TuuK attaches to kala (III) the meaning bendé (a kind of small gong) 
and gives for kdla (II) which he considers to be the same as kalaha 
(kalaha V) — unlike JuynBoLt and Kern who think kala (II) to be 
a variant of kahala (1) — a reference, viz. Sut. XCIX 7,58 which was 
given by JuynBott for kala (III). Finally KBwb. II 225 gives a 
quotation s.v. kala (VI) 59: anabeh murawa gubar sangka mwang 
kala, 1.e. “they sounded the murawas, the gubars, the cangkas and 
the kalas’, in which presumably kala (III) is a typographical error 
for kala (VI). 

In tthe Balinese interlinear translation just mentioned, kala (III) as 
well as kdla-kala (IV) and kahala (1) are rendered as bendé. 

From this state of affairs (and I hope I have not deluded myself, 
the sources of information being so erratic) it is more than clear that 
assessing the meaning of any of these words is often very difficult. 

It appears to me — and R. Goris agrees on linguistic grounds — 
that the best translation of the word-forms kahala (kahala) (1), 
kala (II), kalaha (kalaha) (V) should follow the meaning of the 
Sanskrit word kahala,6° that is, a kind of trumpet. Wir. 70 supplies 
another good proof for ka@hala (kahala) in that sense, because there the 
passage manyup cangkakahala means “they blew the cangka and the 


55 R. XIX 13; Krsn. IX 3 (KBwb. II 225 s.v. kala II: kalakala). 

SOM Nagw le xaven Le 

Oe IN ee, IDIDSC 76 

58 See, however, Table A where for Sut. XCIX 7c is given: kahala. 

boa Sipavaeos 

60 Sangitaratnakara VI, in verses 11 and 792-3 (comp. Grosset p. 353b). 
The same holds good for the modern “offspring”: Tamil: kalam, Gujarati: 
gala, Kannar.: kahale, and others. Comp. Sachs II p. 171. 


MEM BRANOPHONES 43 


kahala’. This would apply to all cases of kala (III) when this word 
is linked with cangka.61 

However, kala-kala (IV), kala-kala (V11) 6? and also kala (III) when 
not linked with ¢angka, presumably refer to drums, cymbals or a kind 
of gong. As regards kala (III) and kala-kala (VII), this interpretation 
is not suggested by the Balinese interlinear translation of the Ramayana 
which, as we have already shown, must be regarded very critically,63 
but such an interpretation is probable because of a passage in the 
Ramawijaya ®4 which runs: ginwal tang bhéri lawan kala-kala gumuruh 
ghurnnitadres gumenter, i.e. “the bhéris and the kala-kalas were 
struck; played at a fast pace, they echoed, roared and thundered”. The 
words used undoubtedly give the impression that by kalas (kala-kala) 
are meant instruments which are beaten or struck against each other. 
The same impression is gleaned from a passage in the Ramayana 65 
which, referring to kalas, says: tulya gelap, 1.e. “like thunder’’. In this 
connection I may mention that in Thailand the bamboo kentongan 
(slit-drum) — also an instrument that is beaten — is called kalah.66 67 

Concerning the cause of the confusion mentioned above R. Goris 
was kind enough ‘to tell me this: “The Old Javanese ‘classic’ poems 
such as Bharatayuddha, Ramayana (first Cantos), Nagarakrtagama, 
were rather precise with the quantity of the vowels. In other words, 
where the metrical pattern asked for it, a word was chosen, a synonym, 
which fitted into that pattern. This does not apply to the more recent 
poems nor to the more recent parts of the older poems. I don’t venture 


BY TY, SOK G, MOXIDC Ho Whee, IID 7/3 IIAY, DOOD We IN, MONE Sie Gyre. 
XXXII 4. 

CZ Wd l0/ Re ol X13) SO 207 REM) NEI 2 Ut 104) Kron 1X 3: 

63 In the Preface to his “Glossarium”’, Juynboll (1) pointed out already 
how cautious one should be with this translation: ‘““Our main source,” he says, 
“was the interlinear translation of Cod. 3455f. We have always indicated 
where this was definitely wrong, often by putting an exclamation mark 
following the word. However, one should not think that in all other cases 
the translation is correct. Often the Balinese word has only been translated 
because the meaning of the Old Javanese word was uncertain. This does not 
necessarily imply that the Balinese interpretation is right. Seeing how strangely 
Sanskrit words have been rendered in Balinese, the translation must be treated 
circumspectly.” 

6! RM. XLII 2. 

65 R. XXII 4. 

66 Sachs I p. 20la. According to Sachs II p. 23 kalah is a Malay name 
for a wooden drum. 

6? Ranggawarsita renders kala by kendang. Comp. also Brandts 
Buys IV p. 20 note 1 col. 1 at top. 


44 HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


to draw a hard and fast line here. The real reason is that the Javanese 
language does not possess long vowels (4, i, 7). If they do appear, it 
is under the still strongly felt influence of Sanskrit and then either 
as a contraction (@ for aha) or as a substitution (# for uh). However, 
this ‘historical’ way of spelling is soon dropped and a plain a, u or 7 is 
used. In later Old Javanese ‘long’ and ‘short’ are used in an incredible 
confusion, e.g. ‘long’ vowels are frequently used to make the word 
appear beautiful and to give it an air of importance, in the way we 
use capitals’. 

There is no evidence that the bedug already existed in Java during 
the Hindu period. As far as I know it is not mentioned in the litera- 
ture.68 It only appears in some of the more recent but traditional 
warigas (Balinese astrological calendars) which VAN DER TUUK ex- 
cerpted in his KBwb., where it is referred to as bedug titir, alarm 
drum (see p. 56 note 53). 

However when the Dutch first reached Java in 1596, the bedug was 
widespread and popular. A quotation from “D’Eerste Boeck” (p. 107) 
referring to the town of Banten (West Java) says: “In every quarter 
of the town a big drum hangs — as big as three wine casks — which 
they beat with a hammer resembling a weaver’s shuttle, which hangs 
from it, when they hear that danger threatens (either a fire or a brawl). 
It is also beaten at noon, early in the morning when the day begins, 
and in the evening at the end of the day”. 

In the Hariwangca the word tepakan is twice mentioned, which 
the editor of the text, TEEUWw, translates with “instruments which are 
beaten”. It is not clear what kind of instruments are meant exactly, 
but as the word tepak in modern Javanese refers to a specific way of 
beating the drum, we may assume that tepakans are drums, either 
drums in general or a special kind of drum, which as yet we cannot 
determine. 

This is the extent of my knowledge of Old Javanese drums. To the 
question whether the drums have shared the fate of all the old stringed 
instruments and many of the wind instruments, the answer must be 
in the negative. It can be said of the genus drum that it has not only 
fully weathered the passage of time, but that it is represented in a still 
greater variety of forms today in Java and Bali than ever before. It is 
true that the “waisted” drums and kettle-drums have disappeared. But 


88 In three texts (R.L. XI 101; B.B. 25, 62; Mal. 159) we find teteg which has 
now the same meaning as bedug (see Kunst IX pp. 15, 214). Possibly in 
older times teteg indicated another type of signalling instrument. 


MEM BRANOPHONES 45 


this is largely compensated for by a multitude of other forms: long and 
short, large and small dogdog and réog; large and small terbang and 
gembyung with or without tinkling discs; large, medium and small 
truncated conical and barrel-shaped kendang and gupek(an); single- 
headed bajidor, jidor or jédor; two-headed bedug. 

Since the Hindu period, the technique of drum-making seems to 
have improved. The ingenious sliding ‘knots with which the skin tension 
can be adjusted merely by moving them along the rattan straps, and 
which are an essential part of all two-headed Javanese or Balinese 
kendang today, do not appear in any of the temple reliefs. Yet the 
ancient Javanese could have known them, such adjusting knots being 
already in use in 8th-century Chinese Turkestan (Tunhuang), which 
was strongly influenced by Indian culture.69 

With regard to the tuning of drums: although Javanese and Balinese 
musicians, thanks to the perfection of the techniques of stretching 
drum-skins and their highly developed musical ear, would have no 
trouble in tuning their drums to a fixed pitch, say, lima or nem, they 
are more concerned with nuances of sound than accuracy of pitch (that 
is, if my observations were correct and if I was not misinformed). The 
drum-skins are stretched in such a manner that they produce either a 
rather dull and deep sound (kendo), or a pithy, dry and clear sound 
(kemrampyang). Further differences of nuance are produced by varying 
the place and manner of contact in striking the skin.7° 

This is, and was, different in India and Further India, where drums 
are mostly tuned to a definite pitch. In Burma there is even an instru- 
ment consisting of 16 differently tuned small drums — a kind of drum- 
chime (the chaingvaing). Their precise pitch is not merely obtained by 
tightening or slackening the straps, aided sometimes by forcing little 
wooden cylinders or wedges between the straps and the body of the 
drum, but also by other means: e.g. some primitive peoples warm the 
skin over a fire kept burning during the performance especially for this 
purpose. In other cases a tuning paste is used. This is a mixture of 
resin, wax, flour, oil-and other ingredients which is generally applied 
in the middle of the skin to be treated. We do not know whether this 
tuning paste method was used by the ancient Javanese. If so, it has 
since been forgotten, and this is understandable, since no value is any 
longer attached to an exact pitch (which can better be attained by 


69 See Stein I pl. XXX (c). 
70 See Kunst IX vol. I pp. 204 ff. 


46 HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


straps and sliding adjustment knots). Yet on occasions I found 
kendangs with a circular layer of paint or some kind of sticky substance 
on the larger of the two skins. According to the players it made the 
tone more sonorous.71 In Java these substances should, where they 
occur, perhaps be called timbre pastes, because, even should they 
influence the pitch, they are never applied for that purpose, but to 
improve the quality of the sound. I found an example of this in the 
kabupatéen (Regent’s residence) at Pasuruan (East Java) (fig. 105), 
and another in the désa Tjitjadas, north of Bandung (West Java). 


71 As a matter of fact in India the paste is applied for much the same reason 
(information given by A. A. Bake). 


IDIOPHONES 


One group of Old Javanese instruments remains to be discussed: the 
group of idiophones, literally, self-sounding instruments, 7.e. instruments 
of which no component part has to be stretched or prepared in any way 
before they can sound, as is the case with chordophones and membrano- 
phones. The aerophones do not come into this category because the 
sound is not produced directly by their bodies but by the column of air 
vibrating inside the instrument. 

Before beginning tthe discussion of the idiophones from the Hindu 
period in Java and Bali, I should point out that bronze kettle-drums, 
“self-sounders” which have been excavated, fall outside the scope of this 
discussion. It may be remembered that these instruments reached Java 
and Bali many centuries before Hindu influence began to make itself 
felt in this region. They belong to the Dong-so‘n culture, the products 
of which, it is assumed, entered Indonesia some centuries B.C.1 

As for Java and Bali, we know a number of these kettle-drums — 
or the remnants of them — in natura; we have in addition a mould in 
Bali, and finally a small facsimile excavated in the district of Tjibadak 
near Sukabumi, West Java, apparently a burial gift.? 

In later times, until the beginning of the 19th century, there were 
foundries for kettle-drums (in the latest stage of their development) in 
Gresik (East Java). These instruments, however, were apparently made 
only for export to Alor, one of the Lesser Sunda Islands, and not for 
home use. 


1 See Heine-Geldern II]; Heine-Geldern III; Kunst XII. 

2 O.D. photograph No. 9513. 

3 For literature on bronze kettle-drums see Kunst II pp. 26 and 27, and 
id. X p. 236 s.v. brass (bronze) drums. See also Heins pp. 128-131 
(bibliography). 


48 HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


A. Scraping sticks 


The scraping stick (fig. 5 at 2) is found once or twice on the Bara- 
budur.4 It appears to be of the same type as the one on the relief of 
the Bayon of Angkor Thom, Cambodia (fig. 106) dating from the 
11th century, and seems to have disappeared from present-day Java. 
In the collection of the Brussels Musée du Conservatoire, however, 
there is a bronze scraping instrument hailing from Central Java. It is 
mounted on a frame very similar to that of a saron (fig. 114). At my 
request, His Highness Mangku Nagara VII made enquiries to find 
out whether such bronze (or wooden) scraping instruments were still 
played anywhere in Java. The result was negative. We may con- 
sequently assume that this instrument does not exist in present-day 
Java, nor did I find it in Bali. Elsewhere it is still found in many 
forms, for instance in New Guinea, in China (the rasp-tiger “yw”) and 
in the Caribbean (wiri-wirt, guiro).® 


B. Goblet-shaped cymbals; kemanak 


I shall have to treat the goblet-shaped cymbals § (figs. 6, 8, 12, 17, 
20, 22, 24, 27 and 34) more extensively because I consider them as the 
bearers of one, or perhaps two, names appearing a number of times in 
Old Javanese literature. Moreover, I regard them as descendants (or 
successors) of the kemanak which, from a cultural-historical point of 
view, is so extremely important. 

Krom, in his Barabudur monograph, calls these instruments “little 
bells”. However close examination shows that these and the ones on 
some of the Prambanan reliefs are not, in fact, little bells but small 
goblet-shaped cymbals (fig. 34). On the reliefs they are always used 
in pairs. A number of times (figs. 6 and 27) they are held together 
by a cord, and they are always handled in a way which suggests a 
striking against each other with the rims (figs. 17 at 1 and 24).7 Where 
the instrument is shown with the open end towards the viewer (fig. 20 
at 1) 8 there is never a suggestion of a clapper. 


# Bar. O 39, 48, 151 (our fig. 14 at 4 ?). 

5 See further Sachs II pp. 47-49. 

6 Bar. O 72, 102, 149, Ia 95, Ib 19, IBa 46, 233a, 300, IBb 43b, II 1 (bottom, 
right), IIB 44 a.o.; Prambanan, Ciwa temple, first basement, balustrade east- 
side Nos. a and I, southside Nos. d and i, westside No. d. 

Bar. Ib 19 and especially II 1 and IBa 233a (at the bottom); Prambanan, 

Ciwa temple, first basement, balustrade southside Nos. d and i. 

8 For instance: Bar. IBa 46 and 300 (fig. 20 at 1). 


a 


IDIOPHONES 49 


Furthermore, among the objects which Sir Auret STErn during his 
investigations into the remains of Central Asian Buddhist town cultures 
found in Chinese Turkestan,9 there is a terra-cotta slab on which 
identical instruments are depicted; a description of those “bells” written 
by the expert hand of Miss Kathleen Schlesinger runs: “a pair of 
bell-shaped cymbals held together by a ribbon or thong. These cymbals 

. give a sound of definite musical pitch, and with this object are 
sounded by striking one against the other, not by clashing them with 
a sweeping frictional movement, as is the case with the modern plate- 
shaped cymbals”. When she wrote “These cymbals give a sound of 
definite musical pitch”, Miss Schlesinger presumably had in mind similar 
instruments from Laos and Burma, pictured and described by Knosp. 
This author treats the instruments found in Laos as though they were 
ordinary cymbals, and their position in the drawing suggests that they 
are simply struck one against the other.19 However, he says emphati- 
cally that the Burmese ye-gwin, attached to each other by a cord and 
closely resembling the Barabudur instruments, appear in their orchestra 
in four different pitches.11 This means that they are not clashed flatly 
with a frictional movement, because this would result in an indefinite 
crashing sound. When they produce a definite pitch (as they do indeed: 
one can hear this on recent tape-recordings of Burmese orchestral 
music), it seems logical that it can only be achieved by bringing the 
rims delicately into contact with each other. 

Hence the situation with the goblet-shaped cymbals is again exactly 
the same as with so many other instruments (lutes, bar-zithers, harps, 
mouth organs, scrapers) on the Central Javanese reliefs: their nearest 
relative appears in South China and Further India. The assumption 
that these instrument forms have reached Java from Further India 
becomes more and more plausible with the finding of new parallels.12 

If my supposition is correct, the name of the Old Javanese goblet- 
shaped cymbals was tuwung. As the name of an instrument this word 
appears several times, in two charters dated respectively 91913 and 
943 14 and in the Ramayana and the Kidung Harsawijaya.15 KBwb. I 

® Stein II, vol. IV (plates), pl. 1 (bottom left) (Yo. 02.); Vol. I, Ch. IV 
sec. iii p. 103; Vol. III, appendix H. Notes on musical instruments represented 

in the Stein collection by Katharine Schlesinger, p. 1468. 

10 Knosp II p. 3145b. 

11 Knosp I p. 3095b. 

12 See also above, pp. 12-13, 27-28. 
SP IKKOY IG IA. 


14 O.J.0. XLVIII verso 46. 
5 R. XXII 3; Hrsw. V 6la. 


a 
o 


50 HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


810 s.v. regang, it is true, renders tuwung by céngcéng (a kind of 
medium-sized flat cymbals in Bali), in accordance with the Balinese 
interlinear translation in Cod. 3455f in the Leyden University Library, 
but JuynBoLL, thinking of the modern Javanese meaning of the word 
(tuwung = earthen bowl) suggests, in my opinion, a better although 
much more vague translation: bowl-shaped musical instrument. 

As for the céngcéng,16 the bowl-shape (one of the main character- 
istics of the goblet-shaped cymbals) is totally absent. But there is more. 
In two of the four references where the word tuwung appears, it is 
followed by the word regang, an onomatopoeic name which undoubtedly 
belongs to a bronze instrument. Furthermore, in K.O. I tuwung is 
preceded by padahi, and in the Ramayana by murawa, both of which, 
as has been pointed out in Chapter IV,17 stand for a kind of drum. 
It so happens that in nearly all the Barabudur reliefs showing goblet- 
shaped cymbals, they form part of a small orchestra which in addition 
includes cymbals of various sizes and a barrel-shaped drum with 
tension straps, an earthenware drum or sound pot. Occasionally there 
are one or two transverse flutes. When one observes that on the one 
hand these orchestras and the goblet-shaped cymbals of the Prambanan 
reliefs accompany dancing, and that on the other hand two out 
of the four tuwung references describe merrymaking (inevitably 
characterized by dancing), it may be clear why I feel justified in 
allotting the name tuwung to these special cymbals and regang 18 to 
the ordinary kind. The fact that the Balinese interlinear translation of 
the Ramayana represents the triad murawa-tuwung-regang as réyong- 
céngceng-gangsa is no proof that my assumption is wrong. The above- 
mentioned uncertainty of the Balinese translator as regards the word 
murawa 19 shows clearly that his translation of Old Javanese names 
of instruments is sometimes pure guesswork. 

The tuwuwng exists in Java to the present day in the shape of the 
celuring, a rare instrument which is found only in the Central Javanese 
Principalities. This also has the shape of a goblet or cup (perhaps one 
could say “half a coconut’), is made of bronze, and is struck with a 
small iron bar. I am convinced that in it we see the descendant of the 
old goblet-shaped cymbals. 


16 See a picture of this in Kunst III p. 474. 
17 See pp. 34 and 38-40. 

18 About the regang, see p. 70. 

19 See above, pp. 39-40 and 42-43. 


IDIOPHONES Sil 


At present as far as I know these instruments have been found only 
in the Jogja kraton (a set of 7 cups) and in the Paku Alaman (a set 
of 2 cups). In both cases they are mounted together on a frame, with 
their open ends turned upwards, The frame of the Paku Alaman set has 
the appearance of that of the saron, but it is massive and not trough- 
shaped. One immediately notices (fig. 109) that the cups and the frame 
do not belong together — the balance, so characteristic of the structure 
of all other gamelan instruments being clearly absent; one gets the 
impression that the frame is the most important item, and that the cups 
are of secondary importance. The celuring (fig. 108 a and b) used in the 
Jogja kraton have been similarly mounted on a massive gambang 
gangsa frame. 

Apart from tthe fact that the celuring cups are mounted, and the Old 
Javanese ones are not, the two instruments show another difference: 
the celuring cups do not have the slightly convex rim of the instruments 
on the reliefs; this may have something to do with the different method 
of sound production. This difference, however, is outweighed by the 
following fact, viz. that the tuwungs in the reliefs nearly always accom- 
pany a dancer.29 They are typical instruments for dance accompani- 
ment, presumably maintaining the rhythm with their melodious and far- 
carrying tone. The same applies — or rather applied since they are now 
out of use — to the Paku Alaman celuring, as well as to the kemanak 
(fig. 109). At the Central Javanese courts where dancing traditions 
have survived better than anywhere else, the kemanak is used only 
to accompany the bedaya dances. 

Because the seven celuring in the Jogja kraton cover the complete 
tone series, they have been given a more general usage. When the 
gamelan, the Kangjeng Kyahi Kajficil Belih (i.e. Lord Bleating Mouse- 
deer) to which they belong, is played, the celwring are used in the more 
softly intoned parts of a gending. In this connection it may be remem- 
bered that the bedaya dances and also the serimpi dances as well as 
the ordinary tayuban are performed to pélog music (the very few 
exceptions, undoubtedly from a later period, confirm the rule).21 Pélog 
is the typical tonal system for dancing, whilst s/éndro is, in the first 
place, indissolubly linked with the wayang purwa. 

Finally, the kraton celuring-set represents a more recent phase than 


20 Exceptions are Bar. O 102 and II 1 (figs. 8 and 22). 

21 J mention a few sléndro-gong phrases in the music of the bedaya ketawang 
(which for the rest is pélog music) in the Solonese kraton. Cf. for that dance: 
Hadiwidjojo pp. 87 ff. 


52 HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


the one from the Paku Alaman. The same relationship may be observed 
between kangsi (brekuk, etc.) and bonang, between ketuk awi and the 
gamelan gumbeng of Tulungagung, the tongtong or kentongan and the 
slit-drum ensembles of Madura, the gong and the Sundanese degung.?? 

The above had been written when L. C. Heyting pointed out to me 
the connection between the word celuring and the frequently occurring 
Old Javanese instrument-name curing,?? a connection which VAN DER 
Tuux had already mentioned.?4 R. Goris kindly enlightened me further 
and told me that the infix eJ means a multiple or a repetition, Thus 
celuring would mean: multiple “curing”, or repeated “curing”. If the 
identification of the Jogja celuring with the Old Javanese goblet- 
shaped cymbals is valid, the name curing should not — at least, not 
exclusively — be translated as “bell” (foot bell, prayer bell, elephant 
bell, cattle bell), as has so far been the case. It would stand — some- 
times at least, or perhaps usually — for these goblet-shaped cymbals. 
Therefore with this last-mentioned interpretation, curing and tuwung 
would be synonymous. 

Yet another point of agreement between the goblet-shaped cymbals 
and the kemanak can be observed: originally the two parts of the 
cymbals as well as those of the kemanak-set were struck one against 
the other,25 but later they were made to sound separately with a 
stick, 26 

If the kemanak has indeed replaced the goblet-shaped cymbals as the 
instrument for dance rhythms — or rather, if it has resumed its former 
rights 27 — this process certainly did not begin later than the 12th 
century A.D. because the word kemanak (kamanak) as an instrument- 
name appears as early as the Bharatayuddha,?8 dating from 1157; it is 


22° Cy. Sachs. Ilyp..24and Brandts Buy s<llups 24. 

23° 0.J.0. III 10, L 5b, LXXVII recto 17, LX XXIII 8a; Charters Frankfurt 
N.S. No. 21315 recto 2, No. 21319 recto 8, No. 21320 verso 3; K.O. II 6a, 
4 Vi Oa syaV LiliSba 4 GOs Vibe lit Bake Exec 1a Yan livanl 4) VaQu xoxcl Ind OF 
ReMexCATY LH Vill 4s 01652 Ber Rap Vilego mise. kl see S, 
III 40; H.W. XXI 2, XXVII 6; Smar. IV 18; Hrsw. VI 49a; Pam. II 46; 
B Ba 50m62 Paws 

24 KBwb. I 600 s.v. curing. 

25 This is still the method of playing the kemanak in Bali, East Java and 
Tjirebon. 

26 This applies to all kemanak-sets in the Central Javanese Courts. 

27 See last alinea of this paragraph. 

28 BY. L 5. From the translation of this passage by Hazeu it appears that 
he considers the word kamanak to have the meaning of an instrument; 
according to KBwb. II 333 s.v. it is an insect. See page 77 and note 31 below. 


IDIOPHONES 53 


also found in the Old Javanese Calon Arang.29 One of the Panataran 
reliefs, dating from the second half of the 14th century, provides yet 
another proof (fig. 57 top right). In addition, some kemanak-sets were 
excavated in East Java (fig. 80).30 31 
The kemanak is still fairly widespread today in Bali. Its local name is 
gumanak (fig. 115 at 1).32 It is more rare in Java; some specimens are 
found in the Central Javanese kratons and dalems and in the Residency 
of Kediri. In East Java it is also known as kenawak, nawek, tewek, 
keté or calapita.33 

I have tried to show in an article on “The Origin of tthe Kemanak” 
(see our fig. 110) that the kemanak is a most important instrument 
from the viewpoint of cultural history.34 In this article I hope I have 
made it plausible that this remarkable kind of cymbal came into being 
not later than the beginning of the second millennium B.C, somewhere 
in the Eastern Mediterranean area, and that in the course of the 
centuries it found its way not only to South East Asia, but also to 
South West Africa as early as 1600-1200 B.C. 


C. Kakhara-tops; begging bowls with tinkling-bars 


Buddhist monks are not allowed to speak while begging for food. 
To announce their approach they use a kakhara (begging staff) with a 


EY TEIN Als TI 

30 See Kunst IX vol. I pp. 180 ff. and II p. 429, fig. 85; Malang Museum, 
Nos. H.R.L. A 209-212; R. Trop. Inst., Amsterdam, Nos. 1637/1 and 2; 
Djak. Mus., No. 7083 a.o. — There was also a kemanak among the bronze 
objects excavated in 1928 in the désa Slumbung, sub-district of Semen, north 
of Wlingi, East Java, representing a set of upacara (= regalia), one of them 
a quiver with the date 1185 Caka (= 1263 A.D.). 

31 The word kemanak (kamanak, komanak) appears more frequently. However 
it then refers not to a musical instrument but to a grasshopper. Would the 
similarity of the names have led to an association of the sound of the 
instruments and of the insect (according to KBwb. II 333 s.v. kamanak, e.g. in 
Mal.; L.S.; A.N.) (Kunst IV p. 113), or would the sound have been the 
reason for the homophony? To the Javanese, the sound of an animal is one 
of its most characteristic and determining properties. Or would, in this special 
case, the form of the instrument be the tertiwm comparationis? 

32 Kunst II pp. 113 ff. and 221. 

33 As in the case of kemanak, the name calapita does not refer to a musical 
instrument only, but also to a species of grasshopper which chirps at night 
and is said to spell disaster. In Panji K.S. (Poerbatjaraka II p. 8) 
calapita refers to an instrument, presumably a kemanak. But yet another 
instrument is sometimes called calapita: a magic clapper used by witches. 
Cf. Kunst IX vol. I pp. 190/191. 

3! Kunst XI. 


54 HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


number of tinkling rings attached to its bronze top. A number of these 
kakhara-tops have been found in the soil of Java. One of these (fig. Zk, 
left) was in the collection of the late Theo van Erp, the well-known 
Barabudur expert and restorer. 

Another piece of equipment used by the mendicant monks to make 
noise and attract attention is the begging bowl with tinkling-bars. This 
“instrument” has come to our knowledge from one of the reliefs on the 
buried basement of the Barabudur (fig 5 at 4).35 As far as I know 
none have been found in the soil. 


D. Bells with and without clapper 


As we have seen, many bronze instruments on the Barabudur and 
Prambanan reliefs, usually called bells, are in reality goblet-shaped 
cymbals. Nevertheless there are many real bells of a variety of sizes 
to be found on those reliefs. They are not all handled in the same way ; 
this depends partly on the size, partly on the presence or absence of a 
clapper, and partly on the purpose for which they are used. 

One finds a very large bell, played with a hammer and suspended 
from a stand (fig. 11) 36 and also smaller and very small bells 37 
(figs. 18, 21, 29, 30, 31 and 33). Bells of this smaller kind are also 
to be seen on one of the Diéng reliefs (fig. 1) in the hands of little 
beings and elephant bells are found on a relief of Candi Nagasari.38 

In the central as well as in the eastern part of Java many of these 
instruments have been excavated, some of them beautifully decorated 
with garlands and human heads 39 (fig. 72). 


Hs iskere, (0) 6) 

Be iBeve, (0) iS. 

37 For instance: Bar. Ia 16 (elephant bell), 55 (id.), IBb 89, Ib 70 (elephant 
bell), Ib 83 (at the corners of a balé), II 32, 36, 63, 97, III 21, 22, 26, IIIB 
40, IV 7 (to the left under the principal figure), 36, IVB 75; Prambanan, 
Ciwa temple, first basement, balustrade eastside No. c. 

38 Picture in Stutterheim I p. 12, fig. 16. 

39 Djak. Mus., Cat. I pp. 245-252; Korte Gids pp. 70-71: Nos. 945-948, 958a, 

al, c, d, f and i, 973-1013b, 1014-1036a; Korte Gids p. 77: No. 5585. 
In the collection of the National Museum of Ethnology at Leyden, the Nos. 
1403-1662, 1403-1663, 1403-1664, 1403-2051, 1403-2104, 1403-2341, 1403-2374, 
1403-2402, 1403-2876, 1403-3011, 1403-3115, 1403-3116, 1403-3354 (described 
in the Catalogus van ’s Rijks Ethnographisch Museum, Leiden, 1909, Vol. Ve 
pp. 151-153). The bell No. 1191/1 has been published in Album Veth pp. 239- 
240. R. Trop. Inst., Amsterdam, Nos. 1448/1, 1615/10, 1770/1, 2, 73 (our 
fig. 75), 1772/296 (our fig. 76), 1772/305 (our fig. 78) seems to be a horse 
or elephant bell, Nos. 1772/303 and /385 (our fig. 79) are cattle bells. Our 
fig. 77 represents a bronze temple bell from Central Java. 


IDIOPHONES 55 


Some are of the kind called pellet-bell (Fr. grelot), a more or less 
pouch-shaped bell with a slit and inside a metal pellet, too large to fall 
out through the slit (figs. 49 and 74). The Barabudur also shows us 
such pellet-bells (fig. 28).40 In India these bells were (and are ?) 
called kimkani, kimkini, kimkiniké and kimkanika. Whether or not 
Hindu-Java called them by these names is not known. To my know- 
ledge they are not to be found with a name of their own in the old 
literature and the charters. 

With rare exceptions, the East Javanese reliefs and images show 
no bells. One of these exceptions is the well-known Naga temple of 
the Panataran complex in Kediri, the surrounding naga of which is 
borne by a number of genta (prayer-bell)-carrying priests (fig. 59). 

Furthermore, a number of representations of Nandi, Ciwa’s mount, 
have been preserved in Central as well as East Java. Some of these 
are adorned with bell-studded necklaces 41 (fig. 49). Usually a large 
cattle bell, of the kind still widely used in Java, Madura and Bali, made 
of brass or wood, hangs from them. In a sixteenth century text such 
bells are called okokan (S.T. V 58). 

Often these cattle bells have more ithan one clapper. On a relief 
of Barabudur (fig. 29) 42 (temple) bells are depicted which remind 
one of such cattle bells. 

The Old Javanese name for the large suspended bell is ghantda, as 
can be seen from instructions for the sculptors chiselled above the image 
of such a bell on a relief (O 131, see fig. 11) of the Barabudur.42 
The name ghanta (ghenta) is also given to prayer-bells.44 Ait the same 
time (or perhaps somewhat later) the name gantang 45 was in use. 
Juynsott II gives for curing 46 the meanings bell and little ankle 


40 Bar. III 21. Also, for instance, Bar. DB II 5, Ia 27, 34, 56-59, 100, IBa 91, 
93, 294, Ib 2, 28, 35, 91, 92, 100, 103, 114, IBb 111. 

41 The most beautiful and best-known in Central Java is the one from the 
Prambanan Nandi temple (named after it) of c. 850 A.D.; in East Java the 
Nandi from Singasari-of c. 1250 A.D. (at present in the Djak. Mus., Korte 
Gids p. 24: No. 324d). The former has no necklace. 

42 Bar. III 21. 

43 In Old Javanese literature g(h)anta (ganta) or g(h)enta is also used for 
prayer-bells. The word occurs: B.Y. V 8, XXI 18, L 7; B.K. XI 1; K.S. III 
52: Smar. XXXII 4; S.7. III 32; Hrsw. 1V 33a, 9la, V 71b, VI 33b, 89a; 
BEBO a Ser KeraoaeciebeZ0! 

44 A beautiful specimen in Stutterheim I p. 43. Sometimes they are very 
small: see our fig. 71 at 2, where such a bell is mounted on a finger-ring. 

ety JENS AL, (or 

46 See above note 23. 


56 HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


bells. An instrument of the same name is mentioned more than once 
in literature in the descriptions of the ritual used at the solemn 
consecration of charters.47 However, as has been suggested before, 
curing may also have been used on occasion as a name for the goblet- 
shaped cymbals on the Barabudur and Prambanan reliefs. 

In present-day Bali, the only place where the word still exists, 
curing or coring refers to an instrument like the Javanese gambang 
gangsa, in other words to a multi-octave metallophone.4§ 

Of all these various bells, only the long-stemmed prayer-bells 
(genta), crowned with a symbol of some kind, are still used by the 
Balinese pedandas and the Tenggerese dukuns.49 They play an in- 
dispensable part in the ritual. Furthermore one finds a number of small 
bells mounted on a wooden frame more or less in the form of a small 
tree. In Bali they occur rather frequently (gentorag) ;5° at the Central 
Javanese courts there are only three specimens left, called genta and 
klinting in the Solonese kraton, and byong or kembang dalima in the 
Jogjanese kraton.51 In some old gamelans, (for instance in the Sultan 
of Banten’s gamelan Suka Ramé,52 there is a long row of small bells 
mounted on a wooden stand. Finally, as has been pointed out already, 
wooden and brass cattle bells are still widespread in Java as well as in 
Madura and Bali. 

This is enough about these instruments which nowadays are no 
longer important. 


E. Kulkul 


I can be brief about the slit-drum kulkul(an), kukulan or titir 53 
(modern Javanese kentong(an) 54 or tongtong, Balinese kulkul, Madu- 


47 Along with the curing an important role in that ritual is played by a white 
umbrella. Compare K.O. II 6a 4; K.O. V 6a 3; G.O. Vb 1. 

48 For some particulars about the Balinese curing see Kunst II pp. 75 and 
209 and tables VI and VII. 

49 Kleen passim; Scholte opposite p. 68; Kunst II pp. 123 and 232. 

50 Kunst II pp. 13, 82/83, 124, 233; id. III p. 474 fig. 12. 

51 Kunst IX vol. I p. 184. In the Bs. we find the word k(a)lénéng, which 
Van der Tuuk translates as bell (Dutch: schel; see KBwb. II 237 sv. 
klénéng). 

52 Now in the Djak. Mus. (Cat. II p. 61: Nos. 1243-1250, 1252-1256). 

53 The original meaning of titir is alarm. Sometimes we find the word coupled 
with other names of signalling instruments, for instance: bedug titir (KBwb. 
IV 931 s.v. bedug), in some of the warigas (Balinese astrological calendars) 
parts of which have been incorporated by Van der Tuuk in his dictionary. 


4 See, with regard to kentongan, also p. 4. The instrument-name gendongan 


IDIOPHONES 57 


rese tongtong or tungtung), mentioned a few times in ancient litera- 
ture.55 In 1917 Merjer in his treatise “De spleettrom” (‘‘The slit-drum’’) 
and in 1925 Branpts Buys II in “Oude klanken” (“Ancient Sounds”) 
have given us a great number of details about the Javanese forms of 
this well-known and ancient signalling instrument.56 

Whereas in Java and Bali these instruments, in bamboo or wood — 
the large ones suspended, the smaller ones held in the left hand — are 
always handled “individually”, in Madura small slit-drum-ensembles 
(tongtong dhukdhuk) are to be found for musical purposes.57 In Bali, 
as in Java, they are used exclusively for signalling. On this Hindu 
island the instruments are suspended in groups of three or four in a 
graceful structure not unlike a little temple (balé kulkul) in one of the 
corners of the village compound 58 or under a small awning high up 
in a large waringin tree. The people know the pitch of each of the 
instruments and can tell by the rhythm what has happened or what is 
to happen. Each désa and also each sekaha (club) has its own kulkul(s) 
and uses a different code. There are also kulkuls of enormous dimen- 
sions, mounted on low four-wheeled carts.59 

It is certain that the kulkul was also used as an instrument for 
signalling in the Hindu period (and in the pre-Hindu period as well) .6° 
Furthermore, the Bharatayuddha ©! tells us that the kukulan used to be 
attached to an animal trap. The struggling of the animal sounded the 
kukulan,®2 thereby informing the hunters. 

At that time there were not only wooden and bamboo slit-drums, 
as is the case today, but also beautifully decorated bronze ones. The 
Museum at Djakarta has several of those bronze kentongan (fig. 73) — 
one from the Tjirebon area,°3 two from Bali,64 and the others from 


occurring in the Babad Bla-Batuh (29, 64) has according to Van der 
Tuuk the same meaning (KBwb. IV 643 s.v. gendong). 

55 Kulkulan: Sud. II 17; kukulan: B.Y. L 6; B.K. VII 5, XL 2; Smar. XXVI 
9; titir: Ww. III 153; Smar. XXXI 3. 

56 Meyer; Brandts Buys II pp. 20-26; Kunst IX vol. I pp. 192 ff. 

57 Brandts Buys IV pp. 72 ff. 

58 See the picture in Heyting opposite p. 136. 

59 See the picture in Heyting opposite p. 137 (photo J. J. de Vink, photo- 
grapher O.D.). 

CONC pe 4. 

CTS BAL, 

62 Compare the bamboo spring clappers fastened to the vertical posts of Buginese 
looms (see Kunst V pp. 49/50). 

63 Cat. I pp. 247-248: No. 970. 

64 Korte Gids p. 70: Nos. 972a and b. 


58 HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


East Java, chiefly from Kediri.65 Museums in The Netherlands also 
have some beautiful specimens.®6 

Finally I draw attention to a peculiar globe-shaped slit-drum with a 
handle, found on relief O 39 on the buried basement of the Barabudur 
(fig. 5, bottom left, at 3). A similar instrument named mo is still used 
today in Vietnamese temples (fig. 107) 67 and in Western jazz bands 
under a different name. 


F. Taluktak 


The taluktak, the bamboo water-clatterer or tilting bamboo, is 
mentioned several times in the surviving Old Javanese literature.68 
The instrument, which in Java is now mostly called bluntak, consists 
of a bamboo tube with a node about halfway down, which swivels: 
vertically in a bamboo frame, with its mouth pointing upwards. This 
is effected by placing the axis slightly above the node. The heavier 
lower part of the tube rests on a stone. The device is placed with its 
mouth in falling water. When the top-end is filled with water, it be- 
comes heavier than the bottom-end and the tube swivels over, thereby 
emptying itself and promptly swivelling back to its previous position, 
hitting the stone. In this way an intermittent sound like that of a 
stamping drum is created. 

This is not primarily a musical instrument. In the first place it serves 
to let the sawah owner know at night or when he is inside his house 
that his ricefields are still receiving water — in other words, that his 
neighbours, higher up the slope, have not cut off his water supply. In 
the second place however, the Javanese peasant with his innate feeling 
for sound and fancy has tried to serve beauty as well. He often installs, 
quite superfluously, a whole series of such taluktak, each of a different 
size and consequently of different pitch. The result is an intriguing 
and capricious series of notes. 

Without any doubt, the taluktak was known in Java before the Hindu 
era. This may be concluded from the fact that primitive tribes closely 


85 Cat. I pp. 247-248 and Korte Gids p. 70: Nos. 968, 969, 971; and Museum 
Nos. 5967 (1287 A.D.) and 5968. 

66 R. Trop. Inst. No. 1289/26. The kulkul of the kentongan type in the collec- 
tion of the National Museum of Ethnology No. 1630-16 has been described 
in the Catalogus van ’s Rijks Ethnographisch Museum, Leyden, 1909, Vol. V, 
pa 153: 

67 See also Knosp II p. 3119, figs. 615-616. 

88 BK. XL2,°R.Y. L$; We XX 167 S.T. 1 ip S82 War, IID 20 Mates: 
417; Gh. VII 5; Smar. XXI 5 (acc. to KBwh. II 699 s.v. taluktak). 


IDIOPHONES 59 


akin to the peoples of the Archipelago, such as several Moi tribes in 
Vietnam, also know those musical contraptions, often of an even more 
complicated construction.69 


G. Réyong; kangsi; kajar; trompong; bonang 


The instrument shaped like a dumb-bell and called réyong appears 
four times on the Candi Panataran reliefs (fig. 62), once on the reliefs 
of Candi Ngrimbi (fig. 52), both of which sites are in Kediri Residency, 
and three times on an Old Javanese sculpture (fig. 47) found by J. L. 
Moens, also in Kediri, in 1931. All these images date back to the 13th 
and 14th centuries.7° 

In Old Javanese literature the réyong is mentioned in the Para- 
raton 71 and in the Malat;72 in the Rama Sasak the instrument is 
calléd kaléntang.73 

Today in Bali there are still many réyongs (also riyong, bebonangan 
and kléntangan [fig. 115 at 2]), sometimes played in the gamelan 
gong,74 often in the gamelan angklung,*5 and invariably in the gamelan 
bebonangan which is named after it.76 It is uncertain whether it still 
exists in present-day Java. However, it is certain that it was used until 
the beginning of this century in the Regency of Bandjarnegara (Resi- 
dency of Banyumas).77 It is noteworthy that the bar which connects 


69 De Gironcourt pp. 56ff. 

70 In addition, one more image of a réyvong has come to our knowledge, namely 
on a relief on a shrine discovered by Schnitger at Si Djoreng Belangah 
in Padang Lawas (Tapanuli, North-western Sumatra). Cf. Schnitger 
pl. VI, ill. bottom left, right-hand relief. The same picture in F. M. Schnit- 
ger, The Archaeology of Hindoo Sumatra (Int. Arch. f. Ethn., Suppl. to 
Vol. XXXV) pl. XXV, ill. middle left, right-hand relief. The author himself 
took it to be a drum instead of an idiophone (Schnitger p. 12 at a). But 
then he was not a musicologist. 

3 Par, XXX 6: 

72 Malat 1. Sometimes the Balinese interlinear translation of the Old Javanese 
Ramayana, as has been pointed out (pp. 39-40), renders the drum name murawa 
as réyong (see KBwhb. IV 541 s.v. murawa). It probably is this (in my 
opinion) incorrect representation of m#rawa which is to blame for the fact 
that (KBwb. I 776) the réyong is said to appear also in the Arjunawiwaha 
(XXIX 5). In that reference, however, only the murawa is mentioned. 

73 RS. XI; cf. KBwb. II 236 s.v. kaléntang. 

74 Kunst II pp. 69ff. (esp. p. 78). 

75 Tbid. pp. 95ff. When the gamelan angklung accompanies the war-dance 
cumangkirang, it is called gong cumangkirang (comp. Kunst II p. 107). 
It is found in the Malat (303, see KBwhb. I 679) under the same name. See 
for the word cumangkirang also B.B. 50, 62. 

7 Kunst II p. 46 note 11 and p. 223 fig. 24. 

7 Kunst III p. 451. 


60 HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


the two kettles, in Bandjarnegara as well as on the Old Javanese reliefs, 
was rather thick and unwieldy, whereas the modern Balinese instru- 
ments have a more slender connecting bar. Consequently it seems that 
after the Old Javanese period this thick variant existed in Banyumas 
and apparently nowhere else. This can possibly be explained by the 
fact that in 1615 Sultan Agung of Mataram transplanted that part of 
the population of Wirasaba (previously called Majapahit and today 
Madjaagung), which had not fallen a victim to his atrocious regime, to 
Banyumas under the rule of a son of the slain Regent. It would be 
interesting to see whether more Majapahit cultural remnants could be 
found in Banyumas. 

If I say that the réyong presumably no longer exists in present-day 
Java, I do not present an entirely correct picture, for it is not the 
réyong itself which has disappeared but only the special way of mount- 
ing its kettles. I presume that at some time or other this way of mount- 
ing was considered less efficient and was therefore replaced by another 
one resembling the present set-up of the bonangs. A similar transition 
is at present taking place in Bali. There, apart from the dumb-bell 
shaped réyongs in one piece, one finds others, of which the bar is 
removable so that each kettle can be placed on the ground by itself. 

In the next — the third — stage, the bar has disappeared altogether 
and tthe widened bar-ends have been replaced by a twin pedestal in the 
manner of that of the Javanese kempyang.78 But there is a difference: 
the kettles do not rest on two crossed cords as in the case of the 
kempyang (and, for that matter, of most modern kettles supported in 
this manner: kenong, ketuk, etc.): they do not belie their réyong- 
descent, as the four little holes in the edge of the kettles, which origin- 
ally served for mounting the kettles on the bar, are still used, although 
in another way. The cords now run parallel to each other through these 
holes, so that the kettles hang from them and at the same time rest on 
them as they cross below.79 These twin kettles, usually in sets of four, 
are as a rule placed in a row and give the impression of being a single 
instrument. 

One further step — the fourth stage — is the placing of the four 
sets of two kettles on one long pedestal like the single bonang series of 
the Javanese gamelan carabalén. Even so they are still played by four 
players. 


78 See Kunst IX vol. II p. 425 fig. 68 in the centre. 
79 See the pen-drawing on p. 101 in Kunst II. 


IDIOPHONES 61 


It is not certain whether another arrangement, at present used in 
Burma and Thailand, in which the kettles are placed around the player 
in a 34 circular frame, was ever used in Java or Bali. A pointer in this 
direction is however provided by a photograph showing a semicircular 
arrangement 8° of the bonang series of the gamelan Kyahi Bremara in 
the Jogja kraton, a similar arrangement of the kettles of the ponggang 
of the gamelan talu in the Malang kabupatén,8! and the instrument of 
the same name from the gamelan carabalén in the Prabalingga kabu- 
paten.82 

In the fifth stage — and in Bali the final one — the four players 
have been replaced by one single player. At the same time the fifth 
tone of the normal five-tone pélog — which was not present in the 
previous phases — has been added. This makes it a different instrument 
which is called trompong in Bali.83 

In Java, where we may surmise a similar evolution, a sixth stage 
has followed in which the somewhat impracticable length of the row 
of kettles has been halved and these halves have been placed one in 
front of the other in the manner of the bonang-sets of the modern 
gamelans. There was more reason for this change in arrangement in 
Java than in Bali. On the Hindu island of Bali the five-tone pélog 
series are predominant up to this day, so that a two-octave trompong 
comprises only ten kettles just within the reach of the sticks of the 
player. In Java, however, the seven- tone pélog series are predomi- 
nant and the extremities of a row of twice seven kettles — fourteen 
kettles ! — are almost certainly beyond tthe span of one player, especially 
with the older Javanese “‘pélog” bonang kettles 84 which are a good deal 
larger than both the modern ones and the “sléndro” bonangs. 

It may be assumed that the single kettle is older than, for instance, 
the ingeniously constructed dumb-bell shaped réyong. Until the present 
day it has existed as an independent instrument under the names of 


80 Not suspended, however, but lying loose on two parallel cords (although the 
four holes are present). For the photograph showing the semicircular arran- 
gement see Kunst IX vol. II p. 434 (ill. 108). 

81 Kunst IX vol. II p. 437 fig. 114. 

82 I do not know whether the semicircular arrangement (which is of recent 
date) of the five excavated bonang kettles in the Sriwedari Museum at Solo 
is derived from older, similar constructions. 

83 According to McPhee II p. 75, the four tones of the réyong are dong, 
déng, dung, dang. Consequently, in the trompong the note ding would have 
been added as first note of the scale. 

84 T refer to the older ensembles such as the gamelans carabalén and munggang. 


62 HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


ketuk 85 and kenong 86 in Java, and of kempli, kenuk, petuk, kajar,87 
celuluk, kangsi, kenong and kemong meplawah 88 in Bali. That such 
single kettles were already known in Java in the Central Javanese 
period is certain. There seems to be one of these on the Barabudur 
reliefs: the object on a supporting structure, rounded in shape and 
played with a stick (relief IBb 89) could be a ketuk (fig. 21 at 2). If so, 
it forms part of a strange little band, its partners being a xylophone 
(to be discussed later) and a bell suspended from a stand. 

The kettles excavated in Central Java cannot be dated exactly but 
are presumed to be of a later date despite the fact that they have the 
four ‘“‘réyong-holes”’. 

However under the name of kangsi this instrument can in any case 
be traced back to about 1000 A.D., because it is mentioned in the 
Pirwadhigama. If the Old Javanese version of the Ramayana, in 
which it also occurs, really dates back to the 10th or 9th century,89 
it can be ttraced back even further. 

Two other names of instruments make the existence of the single 
kettle of the bonang or kenong type a certainty as early as the Central 
Javanese Hindu period. I refer to the mames brekuk and bungkuk. 
Brekuk occurs in two charters, one dated 902 A.D.99 and tthe other 
919 A.D.91 Bungkuk appears but once and that in a charter of 943 
A.D.92 

My conviction that these words were used for single kettles is based 


85 See Kunst IX vol. I p. 163. The word appears in the Serat Kanda 320. 

86 [bid. pp. 160 ff. 

87 This instrument-name appears in an Old Javanese charter, viz. in Charter 
Frankfurt N.S. No. 21320 verso 4. This charter — dating from the Maja- 
pahit period — is a copy of an undatable older original. For a reference in 
Old Javanese literature see S.T. VII 33. 

8 See Kunst I] pp. .36,.62,.74,.79,. 80), 109 112, 155, 117, 126,0127.. 183-5227. 
235, 236, 245, tables VI and VII. 

89 Pg. 4; R. XIX 13, XXVI 23. — See p. 111 note 60. — Further kangsi is 
mentioned as a simple word or in words derived from it: Smar. XXIX 8, 
XXXIT SW IV 2, XXII 15 BKe X12: BVI 5 Wes 293-Sut 
IX 4c3-C AR, ID; HWOXxIXk OCXXVIL 75) Gh gli) 5; Mal Dex xv: 
Was. XX 29; LS. XXIV 1; Panji K.S. (see Poerbatjaraka II p. 8). 
However in some of these references the word possibly does not have the 
meaning of an instrument-name. The derived form angangsyani might be 
translated as ‘to play (together with)’ and the form kinangsyan as ‘played 
(together with)’. In Prijono’s translation of the Sri Tafijung angangsént 
is rendered by ‘to accompany on the gamelan’ (V 93). 

UD CIN, IMU ey AAD) 

BBE ICO), Ul Bh 

82 0.J.0. XLVIII verso 46. 


IDIOPHONES 63 


on the fact that, as far as I know, in Java and Bali all the other instru- 
ments with names ending in wk are, without exception, single instru- 
ments of this type: celuluk, engkuk, kenuk, ketuk and petuk. 

Seemingly in contrast with this is the mention of a functionary called 
mabrekuk in the oldest of the charters quoted above. Why should the 
player of one of tthe ensemble’s less prominent instruments be classed 
amongst the court officials? It is precisely this fact which constitutes an 
argument in favour of the hypothesis “brekuk and bungkuk = kenong”. 
The great importance of the tradition of cock-fighting in ancient Hindu- 
Java as well as at the present-day Balinese courts and in village life 
is well-known. The number of well cared for fighting cocks which can 
still be seen under their rattan cages around houses in North and South 
Bali is legion. No wonder! These fights were, and still are, a ritual 
act with a religious background.93 At the same time they satisfy 
in no uncertain manner the innate desire of the people to gamble.94 
An indispensable element in these cock-fights is the use of just such 
a kettle of the kenong type. In Bali this instrument, when so used, is 
now called kemong meplawah.95 In the edicts (awig-awig) of the 
rulers, however, the instrument is always called kenong when there is 
reference to cock-fights.9° It is this instrument — and only this 
instrument — that is sounded at the start and the finish of each “round” 
by the juru kemong (or saya), an official expressly appointed for this 
function by the ruling prince. This juru kemong is also the final referee 
in all the fight’s disputes.97 Since the Old Javanese and the Balinese 
societies run parallel in so many respects (in spite of some typical differ- 
ences), I feel justified in translating brekuk and bungkuk as kenong or 
kemong, and mabrekuk as juru kemong. 

In addition the instrument-name mongmong 98 may be identified 
with kenong. 

That the fully evolved bonang series (perhaps better trompong 
series because the bonang must have been mounted in a single row) 
was frequently used in the late Hindu period, side by side with the 
single kettle of the 7éyong, is a fact borne out by the many excavated 


9% Van Bloemen Waanders p. 128. 

94 Ibid. pp. 128-133. 

95 Meplawah — lying on a (wooden) support (plawah), in contrast to (kemong) 
gantung = suspended in a frame (gayor). 

96 Liefrinck p. 482. 

7 Van Bloemen Waanders p. 132; Liefrinck pp. 482 and 483. 

MST Suni GX xe 4: 


64 HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


items from East Java.99 A set of twelve such kettles, which according 
to their appearance and tuning belong together, is now in the Museum 
at Djakarta.100 The series comprises two seven-tone pélog octaves of 
which only the nem and barang of the lower octave are missing.101 
As is the case with nearly all excavated kettles of this type, these also 
have the four holes which indicate, as we have seen, an older method 
of mounting. An old name for this instrument seems to have been 
k(e)romong.102 This is still the name for such a series in West Java, 
South and Central Sumatra and South Borneo (Bandjarmasin). 
Many other excavated kettles show a characteristic absent in the 
ones mentioned above: the upper surface around the central knob 
protrudes slightly unlike that of the modern instruments. They seem 
to have been made according to an entirely different process. The 
modern kettles are forged from a piece of saucer-shaped cast metal, but 
the older ones seem to have been directly cast, since there are no 
hammer marks. Fig. 70, from a photograph taken in the palace of the 
Mangku Nagara in Solo, shows two such kettles with protrusions. 
SAcHS compares them to the biretta of a Roman Catholic priest.13 
Finally, what are we to think of those remarkable bonang-shaped 
stones which have been found here and there in the soil of Central 
and East Java? Should we really regard these as imitations of bonangs, 
and if so, placed in the forest for the comfort and recreation of demons 
and sylvan deities? The Majapahit Field Museum at Trawulan poss- 
esses several of these, hailing from the north-western slopes of the 
Andjasmara mountain (District of Madjakerta) ; the Museum at Dja- 
karta has about a dozen, one of which (Korte Gids, p. 34: No. 449a) 
was found in East Semarang, and the eleven others (Korte Gids, 
p. 34: No. 449b) in the Klatén area (fig. 82). The Museum catalogue 
(Cat. I, p. 132), however, calls these objects “‘neuten’’ (i.e. stones used 


99 Apart from those in the Djak. Mus. (Cat. I pp. 253-254 and Korte Gids 
p. 71: Nos. 1055, 1056, 1059a, 1060, 1061, 1068, 1068b, c and f£; and Museum 
Nos. 5984a-j), they can be found in the museums of Solo and Madjakerta 
and in the possession of the Central Javanese princes. The same applies to 
the gong in a more limited sense, as discussed later. These finds, especially 
the gongs in private possession, are kept with great care and treasured as 
valuable “pusaka’’. 

100 Cat. I p. 254, Korte Gids p. 71: No. 1068f. 

101 The interval-measurements are to be found in Kunst III p. 489 Tab. XI 
iINGw2e 

102" Panji S.(see Poerbatjaraka ll p.@) 

103 For more particulars about the bonang c.s. I may refer to Kunst IX vol. I 
oy Mesine Ci, Sakeins I jy seb 


IDIOPHONES 65 


as house-foundations) and H. Maclaine Pont, the founder of the Museum 
at Trawulan, also believes that several of them, at any rate, were 
intended as such. The knob on the top would then have served to 
prevent any beams or bamboo posts erected upon them from sliding 
off. I am not convinced. The modern foundation stones which have to 
carry the weight of a house structure are — quite understandably — 
broadest where they rest on the soil, and then taper slightly towards 
the top; these stone bonangs, on the contrary, are broader half-way 
up than where they rest on the soil,.104 


H. Types of gong 


The other instruments in our fig. 70 are gongs in the more limited 
sense of the word. Broadly speaking the bonang-shaped instruments 
also come under that name. In fact they are small gongs with a com- 
paratively wide rim. However the word gong primarily suggests an 
instrument with a rim narrow in comparison to its size, suspended, 
generally in a frame, by a string.195 

The 8th and 9th century Central Javanese reliefs show neither large 
nor small gongs of the suspended type. It is true that some gongs have 
been excavated in tthe Principalities of Central Java, but there is no 
way of determining to which period they belong. The same applies to 
those excavated in East Java.106 

There are, however, indications that they were known in 9th century 
Java, for we learn from the 222nd book cf the annals of the T’ang 
Dynasty (618-906 A.D.) that the Buddhist ruler of Poli, when riding 
in his elephant-drawn state coach, was surrounded by vassals beating 
gongs and drums and blowing conch-shells.1°7 Irrespective of whether 
Poli can be identified with Atjéh (as by Rourrarr) 198 or with Bali 
(to which Krom is inclined),1°9 we may assume that, in either case, 
Java must also have been acquainted with them at that time. For, if 


104 Cf also Steinmetz p. 29; Van Heekeren p. 14 and fig. 10; Van 
der Hoop pp. 121 ff. and O.V. 1938 (Batavia 1939), p. 10. 

105 Particulars about the gong 7.2. in Simbriger and in Kunst IX vol. I 
pp. 136 ff. 

106 In the Djak. Mus. gongs are catalogued in Cat. I pp. 253-254 and Korte 
Gids p. 71 under Nos. 1052a, 1052b, 1053, 1061b, and under Museum Nos. 
5892 etc. 

107 Groeneveldt p. 84. 

108 Rouffaer III vol. I p. 72b. 

109 Krom II p. 93: “de Balische Kaundinya” and also ibid. p. 87. 


66 HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


Poli is the modern Atjéh, it is obvious that Crivijaya which dominated 
the trade from China to India during that period, knew and used gongs, 
and it is likely that it also imported gongs into Central Java. And if 
Poli is the modern Bali, the close contact of this island with Java 
makes it equally certain that the Javanese courts at least must have 
known and played gongs. And if the Old Javanese version of the 
Ramayana indeed dates from the 9th century, we have direct evidence 
of the existence of the gong during the Central Javanese period, as it 
is mentioned in Canto XXV verse 66. 

It appears that these royal instruments had little attraction for con- 
temporary sculptors. They are found on only three temples: four on 
the 14th century East Javanese Candi Kedaton and Candi Panataran, 
and one on the early 15th century Central Javanese Candi Sukuh 
(Residency of Solo). 

Of the three on Panataran, one is unmistakably a gong ageng. It is 
carried on a pole in the marching army by two soldiers of Sugriwa 
and Hanuman (fig. 58). The other two (figs. 55 and 57) and the one 
on Sukuh (fig. 69) are small signal gongs held in ithe hands. The 
gong on the Kedaton relief (fig. 54) is somewhere in between ; it looks 
like a gong of the kempul 110 type. All these five gongs are depicted 
with a protuberance for striking (Javanese pevicu, Balinese bentuk or 
mofnicol). Some of the excavated ones are without this (fig. 70 at 1) 
and unlike ithe others, which are a matt black, are shiny brass. 

In Old Javanese and Old Balinese literature one occasionally finds 
the gong mentioned either under the name gong 111 or under that of 
bhért, bhairi or bahiri 112 (Sanskrit: bhéri, Balinese: béri). The fact, 
however, that in Sanskrit documents the bhéri is classified amongst 
the group of the avanaddha, membranophones,113 makes it likely (and 


110 See note 120. 

thf BAY. XXXVILS XEN 1s OR XXYV 66: Nae LXV 1-8 kK Cll .@ a0; 
Srl. Vil Shy: Mal. 175417. COAL VIly, UX XT ees el i Or S60, 
98, IIT 695"Panji KS: (see Poerbatjaraka Il pS): Smar XXIx 3 
XXXIII 3; Hrsw. IL 39b, 144a, IV 25b, 30a, 41a, 47b, 53b, V 33b, 45a, 
6la,.7la, 73a, 8lb,. VI 9lay Pam. 1V 79, 213, 2536257) 262, 312-2 BB. 50, 
o/, 623 Sore TIE 59570; 853) Ke Snd- 110) 134 RL 2 ie aly 7a 43, 
VIT_79,, 94, 1X 69, 77,104, X31) XI 25, 99: Sut) UXSGK 4b LX XXVIII 
3c, XCIX 7c, CXX 6d, CXXVII 1b; S.K. 320; Sum. CXIII 3; Ww. II 
(gong bhéeri); Was. II 3. For war-gong sometimes is used pangarah (from 
arah, to call up, to summon), alone or in combination with gong. (See KBwb. 
I 94 sv. argh Il; K.S. 11 372 B.B. 25: Dpt. Ill 3-, Sut. DXXX VII 3c 
Was. II 3; Sor. II 127, III 60; Pam. I 109; Mal. 417). 

112 Cf. above p. 41 note 46. 

113 See above p. 41 note 47. 


IDIOPHONES 67 


this applies particularly to the older literature) that here the word 
bhért sometimes means drum or kettle-drum as well. That this assump- 
tion is valid even as late as the 11th century is borne out by some 
references from the Udyogaparwa and the Bhismaparwa. The manu- 
script of the Bhismaparwa used by Van DER Tuuk (KBwb. IV 871 s.v. 
bhert), fol. 4 reads “bhairt mrdangga’, for which the Sanskrit original 
gives dundubi; Ud. 90 uses the words mrdangga bhéri, while the 
Sanskrit original gives only bhéri.114 If we are allowed to consider 
these two words as a compound, then in the first case the drum of 
the Indian poem (for as mentioned earlier dundubhi is the name of a 
kettle-drum already known in the Vedic period) is a bhéri qualified 
as “mrdangga’, in other words, a bhéri in the shape of a mrdangga; 
in the other case a bhéri-shaped mrdangga is meant.115 But it is also 
possible that in both cases we are dealing with two different kinds of 
drums or with drums and gongs. In Gonpa’s text edition of the 
Bhismaparwa (p. 130) the words bhéri and mrdangga occur in a 
Sanskrit verse “bherisu mrdangesu”; here the Old Javanese text has 
kendang and padali, both names of drums. 

In the Adiparwa version, dating from the same period, the name 
bhért was presumably used for gong. This version says: tinabeh tang 
bheéri,116 t.e. “the bhéri was struck”; and tabeh, to strike, of which 
tinabeh is a derivative, is in musical context primarily used for the 
striking of gong, saron, bonang, gambang and other metal and wooden 
idiophones, but not for the striking of membranophones. On the 
strength of tthe available references, we could perhaps say that in the 
11th century also, the word bhéri, where it stands on its own, already 
refers to a gong. When the word is used in combination with mrdangga 
we must bear in mind that it might mean a kind of drum. 

But even if bhéri had meant gong in all instances, which is not the 
case, one might wonder why Old Javanese literature has not mentioned 
such an important instrument as the gong more often. The answer 
probably is that gongs are not only referred to by the names gong and 
bhért but also by other names. 

In a passage such as the following, which enumerates a series of war 
instruments, the gong, war-instrument par excellence, could hardly be 
omitted: humung tang tabehtabehan makadi cangkakahala murawa(n) 


114 Calcutta edition strophe 4852. 
1145 For the combination bhéri mrdangga see e.g. W. XXV 5; Wir. 49. 
116 Adip. 203. 


68 HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


munda mahacara lawan barebet,117 i.e.: “the instruments sounded, 
especially the cangkakahala, the murawa, the munda, the mahadsara and 
the barebet’”. Assuming therefore that it is hidden under another name 
amongst these instruments, we must look for it amongst the three 
unidentified names: munda, mahdsara and barebet. 

Barebet originally means noise, din,118 so this is a most suitable 
name for small, incessantly struck cymbals, now called céngcéng, 
kecék or rificik (arranged in diminishing size) in Bali. They sometimes 
carry a proper name which is also in keeping with their noisy nature, 
e.g. Glagah ketunon, (the crackling of) a burning glagah field. How- 
ever, even if one does not share this assumption about barebet, the 
word could hardly apply to the gong with its powerful and steady note. 

On the other hand, mahdsara means great power, firmness and 
strength. In my opinion a better name for the gong could not have been 
devised as its all-dominating sound echoes far across the country and 
“splits the kraton walls” (Bentar kedaton).119 The person who: has 
made the Balinese interlinear translation of the Ramayana has trans- 
lated mahadsara as kempul,120 possibly following the same train of 
thought or still knowing the meaning of the word. 

If we see in mahdsara121 (also written: mahasara and mahda¢ara) 
the gong ageng or at least a fairly large kind of gong, we may also 
speculate about the name munda (also written: munda).122 The Ud. 
reference is not the only instance where munda and mahdsara are men- 
tioned in one breath. The combination appears elsewhere,!23 and I 
think we can assume that we are dealing with related instruments, as 
is the case with combinations like kad(ha)lagangka or cangkakahala, two 
kinds of wind instruments,!24 and mrdangga and padahi, two kinds 


U7 Ud. 111; see KBwhb. IV 900 s.v. barebet. Cf. note 142 below. 

LISS Wie Xen Xe 5: 

119 The proper name of the gong in a famous North Balinese gamelan. (Cf. 
Kunst II pp. 183 ff.). See for the Bentar kedaton in A.P. and Ww.: KBwb. 
IV 854 s.v. bentar. 

120 About the kempul see Kunst IX vol. I p. 149. 

421 Wir. 52; Ud. 111; R. XIX 13, XXII 3, XXVI 23; Hrsw. V 61a; B.P. 83, 
140; K. Snd. III 10. A mhdsar is also found among the instruments men- 
tioned in the Mon inscriptions coupled with a verb meaning “to make to 
rumble’. Twitchett and Christie pp. 179 and 182. 

122 Utt. 137" Ude il BR. Pees 140, 

Uda lice abr oouel 40: 

124 For references see above p. 31. 


IDIOPHONES 69 


of drums.125 If my assumption is justified, then munda also refers to 
a kind of gong, probably a smaller one such as the bhéri or the bendé. 

Another instrument-name to be mentioned here is garantung, which 
appears several times.126 In present-day Borneo it is still the name for 
a signal-gong.127 

Yet another name is déngdéngkuk,128 probably applying to a small 
kind of gong, in view of the fact that the word engkuk is the name of 
one of the two smallest suspended gongs in the gamelan sléndro 129 
in Central Java. 

Gubar 130 is presumably another name for a medium size gong. 
This word, which occurs as early as the beginning of the 11th century, 
indicates an instrument the sound of which is described as matempur.131 
The only connection this word seems to have is with the kempur 
(modern Javanese: kempul; Balinese: kempur and kempul).132 I think 
JUYNBOLL was quite near the truth when he translated gubar as ‘ 
cymbal’ .133 

Finally I must mention the word saragi. It is true that in Old 
Javanese literature a kind of bird is known by this name as well,134 
but apparently this is a homonym. The original meaning of saragi 135 
is a brass pot. Hence JUYNBOLL gives as a translation: “brass musical 
instrument”, where the context suggests a musical instrument.136 And 


‘war 


125 Cf. above pp. 38-39. 

B2OSBaVew mom Sriti all o2 ella VWim Oey ll Ob Kee GV ly 162° Sut. Vill albe 
O.J.O. CXVIII 17; K. Snd. III 10. Sometimes a homonym is found, 
indicating a kind of pigeon (titiran): Smar. IX 3; Sut. IX 4 (KBwb. IV 
668 s.v. garantung). 

1227 Sachs I p. 153a; Sachs II p. 175. See hereafter note 161. 

25° UB: 

129 Its inseparable twin brother is called kemong. Cf. Kunst IX vol. I p. 151. 

EID (Cu1ey, (0) PAR IBY NZ, CD), TIC, DRONE TE OOO IL Re GUINEAN Sita, MY) (Canaries 
Bee Ree eV ls 794 excl 104) Sut @hXe ces KES. LIT 55-7 Smarr. XOXT xX 8, 
XXX 13, XXXII 4, XXXIII 3; B.K. LXXXII 39, LXXXV 12, LXXXVIII 
ai (CHUL Be IERIE DOOD 7, IVA TIS ROO 7S. dabiiiig WW Shin, esis (lee 
B.B. 50; Kor. 20; K. Snd. III 10. An equivalent seems to be bubar (R.L. XI 
IMIS Nee ILOWAL ale 

181 CP, 223; see KBwhb. II 762 s.v. tempur (“kadi gubar matempur’). 

132 (Ke)tempur (KBwb. II 175 s.v. ketempur) and kempur are both derived 
from the root pur (KBwb. IV 51 s.v. pur). 

183 Juynboll II p. 177 s.v. gubar. Likewise Jansz. — For gubar as a 
“bendé without central knob” see Kunst IX vol. I pp. 15, 16 and 142. — 
Cf. about the bendé ibid. p. 150. 

1384 KBwb. III 96 s.v. saragi: T. V 89; H.W. XXI 2 (ed. Teeuw: manuk 
saragt). 

ESO @a|.O we xXoellg see Ox-Ow Cllvay 27K ON ts) 15; 

136 BLY. X 16: gubar saragi; see Juynboll II s.v. saragi. 


70 HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


as the word saragi still stands for a large gong in Ternate,137 it seems 
that we can safely add this name to those used for the various kinds 


of gong in the Hindu period.138 


I. Cymbals 


The reliefs from the Central Javanese period, particularly those on 
the Barabudur, that rich mine of instrument representations, show 
many of the percussive idiophones generally referred to as cymbals in 
various sizes 139 (figs. 12, 15, 16, 17, 25, 26, 27 and 31). They also 
appear on the reliefs of Candi Sari (fig. 4) and Candi Prambanan 140 
(fig. 36). One of them seems to be mounted on a stick (fig. 25). If the 
view can be discounted that the instruments handled on one of the 
Panataran reliefs (fig. 62) by the person at the top of the relief are 
cymbals, it can be said that East Java offers no reliefs of this type of 
instrument. Its literature, however, amply fills this gap, if I may be 
permitted to see cymbals behind the names regang 141 and barebet.142 
Furthermore, we possess many excavated finds from the Centre as well 
as from the East of the island.143 

To the two names mentioned we must add the name rojéh,144 the 
name of a cymbal still popular in Central Java,145 tala (also tala 
in Sanskrit) 146 — “bald plattrandig mit starkem Buckel, bald leicht- 
gewolbt mit zentraler Spitze” 147 — and perhaps one or more of the 
names kala (if used independently), kala-kala and kala-kala.148 

In the Bali of today cymbals generally enjoy great popularity and 
are sometimes used in large numbers, especially in the gamelan gong.149 


187 Encycl. Ned.-Indié vol. II p. 833. 

188 For the origin and prehistory of the gong see my article in Ethnos 1947 
pp. 79 ff. and 147; the same in Kunst IX vol. I pp. 142 ff. 

£89) Bara Onl 49s lan 1 52.895.0 lbe lo Basdon ZOOm mo Sam OSs I 22am Zo les () 
IV 7 and others. 

140 Ciwa temple, first basement, balustrade southside No. / and eastside No. n. 

EOE NCIS, Cm JES VefO), Il Sh Is KN. lille, ADs IR, MOK Ge OzIO), SI ty Se 
O.J.O. XV marga = mar(e)ga(ng). 

I NN, BROMIDE Ge Wal iilile Tehe, Sul ie, 

143 Djak. Mus. Cat. I pp. 252-253 and Korte Gids p. 71: Nos. 1038-1045c. 

ee! Syor, (UU Sie IL, DAVIN TIC. 

145 Cf. Groneman pp. 41 and 42. 


LCN OD: 
147 “Sometimes with a flat rim and a pronounced protuberance, and sometimes 
only slightly convex and pointed in the centre’. — Sachs II p. 19. 


148 See above p. 31. 
149 Kunst II pp. 82, 83, 108, 109, 112, 117, 218, 227 and 229; Kunst III 
pp. 441-443 and 474 fig. 12. 


IDIOPHONES FE 


In Java, where they are used more sparingly — if they are used in an 
ensemble at all — they are mainly confined to the archaic gamelan 
munggang and gamelan kodok ngorék, where they are called kecér or 
kecicér. In some places in the Sunda Districts (West Java) this in- 
strument is known by the name cecémprés.150 


J. Gambang 


In the 91st Canto of the Nagarakrtagama the poet describes a kraton 
festivity saying: “Krtawardhana (the King’s father) began to play the 
gamelan as a dilettante”.151 At present when it is said of a prominent 
nobleman that he plays the gamelan, it means almost certainly that he 
plays either the gambang kayu or the gendér.152 I therefore feel that 
we must see His Highness Krtawardhana as playing one of these two. 

It is certain that both ithe gambang and the gendér have for centuries 
belonged ito the accepted instruments of the Javanese musical world. 

The gambang — or rather an intermediate form between gambang 
(fig. 111) and calung (figs. 112 and 113) — already appears on the 
Barabudur (fig. 21).158 During the earlier discussion of the flutes, 
mention was made of the Chinese report about the “wooden slabs” on 
which Jayabhaya’s subjects played. In addition, we have a few images 
on the reliefs of Candi Panataran, and, thanks to the excavations of 
the civil engineer H. Maclaine Pont, a terra-cotta gambang from 
Majapahit. 

Old Javanese literature also lends us support, as the calung is men- 
tioned in the Sumanasantaka 154 and in two Old Balinese charters of 
1181 and 1204 A.D.155 
Although in Bali today the word calung refers to one of the bronze 
single-octave species of gendeér, still the fact that it appears in both 
charters next to salunding (wsi) which refers to a metal gendér without 
tubular resonators (as will be shown later) makes it plausible that, if it 


150 For the different kinds of cymbals in Java and Bali see further Kunst IX 
vol. I pp. 183/184. 

151 Nag. XCI 5. The word mamafijaki which Kern translates as “began to 
play the gamelan as a dilettante” is rendered by Pigeaud as “is pafijak 
(initiator) for” (see List of Abbreviations s.v. Nag.). 

152 One exception to this rule was the Jogjanese Secretary of State (Rijks- 
bestuurder) Danuredja VIII who was an accomplished rebab-player. 

153 Bar. IBb 89. See also Kunst I p. 28, second column. 

154 Sum. XXVII 8 (Juynboll II s.v.: bamboo musical instrument). 

155 Buwahan E IIIa 3; Pura Kehen C IIb 3. 


72 HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


is not qualified further, one may see the calung as a bamboo instrument. 

The mention of the gendér calung 156 in the Séwagati, a fairly 
recent Balinese poem, refers undoubtedly to a bronze instrument. 
Apparently, in order to indicate the metal calung, and to avoid con- 
fusion with the “rope-ladder-like” bamboo instrument, the word gender 
was added. 

As is generally known, the bamboo calung in Java has been pushed 
back ito the Sunda Districts (fig. 113) and the Regency of Panaraga 
in East Java. However in times past it must have been more widespread 
and a popular Indonesian instrument. In totally different and widely 
divergent parts of the Archipelago, including Flores,157 Amboina 
(tatabuhan kayu),158 Nias (doli-dolt) 159 and the Batak country,160 
similar instruments justify this conclusion. The Batak instrument takes 
us directly back to the gambang. It may be mentioned that the Batak 
name for their calung-shaped xylophone is garantung.161 The same 
word appears several times in Old Javanese literature,162 and a 
gambang-like instrument (but with suspended bamboo keys) which in 
Java still exists in the Regencies of Madjakerta and Banyuwangi, is 
named garantang in Bali, where old forms and old names have a so 
much greater chance of continuous existence.163 

The form g(a)rantang itself can also be found here and there in 
Old Javanese documents.164 

The xylophone called galunggang 165 will be discussed shortly. 

VAN DER TuuK translates gending luwang 166 as “a kind of gambang 
used at Klungkung’’. This is probably a misinterpretation. I believe 
that VAN DER TUUK was not personally acquainted with South Bali; 


HID: Sree NL WG. 

157 Kunst VI pp. 120ff. and figs. 21 and 58. 

158 M.G.G. vol. VI col. 1197. 

DISKeuns tVe ppwce tivands Plates IVa tic 7) 

160 M.G.G vol. VI col. 1187. 

161 According to Sachs (see above p. 69) this word designates a type of 
signal-gong in South Borneo. Could it be that the link between a bamboo- 
key instrument and a bronze gong was a single suspended bamboo slab 
— in other words: a kentongan ? One argument in favour of this possibility 
is the name kentongan itself, which in Java denotes a bamboo slit-drum but 
in Bali refers to a small gong. 

162 See p. 69 note 126. 

163 Tn the Madjakerta region it is called a kecruk, in Banyuwangi an angklung. 

164 aa LXXXI 49, XCVI 16 (according to Teeuw: garantung); Kr. B. 69; 

165 Bulihan 10b; Buwahan E IIIa 3. 

166 KBwb. III 720 s.v. luwang. 


IDIOPHONES 7S 


therefore his information must have been second-hand. As it is, the 
rather rare gending luwang 167 is not a gambang but a gamelan in 
which an important function is performed by a gambang-like instrument, 
consisting of two separate parts with bamboo keys, and called saron.168 
Another name for this orchestra is gamelan saron. Presumably the 
same orchestra is also called gong gambang,169 as this term cannot 
be used for the gamelan gambang. To think of the gamelan gambang 
might seem plausible enough but, as far as I know, the name gong 
can be used only for a whole gamelan when a gong gedé or a kempur 
is used at the close of the larger melodic periods. In the gamelan 
gambang a gong or kempur has never been used.170 

In addition, the name gambang itself has come down to us through 
Old Javanese literature, e.g. several times in the Malat,171 the earliest 
date of which is late Majapahit (14th century). 

There is no representation of the actual gambang kayu — the most 
important representative of the Javanese group of xylophones today 
(fig. 117) — belonging to the Hindu period. Bearing in mind the 
“wooden slabs” of the ancient Chinese reports, we may safely assume 
that this instrument was popular during the whole period of the Java- 
nese Middle Ages, as it still is today among both rich and poor. 

The xylophone of which we have a number of representations from 
the Majapahit period is of the unequal-key type, as still used in Bali 
in the gambang or gamelan gambang. This ensemble usually consists 
of four of these instruments together with two metallophones of the 
kind called saron (sometimes demung) in Java. From an Old Balinese 
charter dated 1181172 we may possibly deduce that these bamboo 
gambangs were then called galunggang. In this charter, a galunggang 
petung is coupled with another instrument, the salunding wst, as taxable 


CO Males. Lot sUeR. 

168 Cf. Kunst III pp. 386ff. According to Heyting the gending luwang 
is also mentioned in the Wargasari. It should be noted that Van Bloemen 
W aanders (p. 238) described the gending Iuwang as an orchestra as 
early as 1859: “The gending luwang is played by ten persons and consists 
of a large gong, three small kromongs (set of horizontally arranged brass 
cymbals), a tambourine and a few lesser instruments. It is usually played 
at the ‘hembukur’ festivities which are held some time after the cremation 
ceremonies, in honour of the deceased”. 

169 B.T. 164. 

170 Cf. Kunst II pp. 129 ff. 

LT Vial exoxe Lg 1 XOU ee XOX Ie XOX XG CUBBY 5057622)" Panj1 KON® EX, 
LXXI. 

172 The Bulihan Charter. See hereafter note 180. 


74 HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


objects. Petung is a kind of bamboo and the unequal-key gambang iS 
certainly the most prominent Balinese bamboo instrument. This word 
galunggang appears in another Old Balinese charter — also dated 
1181 — again in the company of other musical instruments, this same 
salunding wsi and the calung discussed above. The fact that the word 
now refers to a bamboo gendér with coconut shell resonators 173 
shows that we are indeed dealing with a type of gambang, at any rate 
with a bamboo key instrument. 

Furthermore, Branpts Buys IV reports a primitive gambang in 
West Madura, which has five keys and is called ghalundhang. According 
to R. Goris, this word, although not a legitimate derivation from the 
Old Javanese galunggang, is nevertheless a parallel form, as happens 
not infrequently with onomatopoeic Javanese words of more than 
two syllables. 

The unequal-key gambang is struck with two-pronged sticks (tabuh), 
sounding two keys at a time. The fourteen keys are arranged in such 
a way that those V-shaped sticks always strike a note and its octave. 
Since the angle of the striking sticks does not permit the spanning 
of an octave arranged in sequence, this can, of course, be done only 
by arranging the keys in a special order which at first sight seems some- 
what fantastic. Figs. 60, 65 (at 4) and 111 illustrate this feature. Figs. 
60 and 61 represent the instruments on the Panataran reliefs.174 In 
the terra-cotta statuette, (fig. 65), the player himself is missing, only 
the xylophone, the sticks and his gracefully shaped hands having 
survived. In comparison, fig. 111 shows a number of modern Balinese 
gambangs. 

The unequal-key bamboo gambang is no longer in existence in 
present-day Java.175 In Bali it is used mainly in cremation ceremonies 
and if this was the case in Hindu-Java, which seems plausible, it is 
understandable that this instrument did not manage ito survive the 
coming of Islam.176 


173 Cf. Korn p. 18 (in the English transl. pp. 315-316). 

174 The story represented by the three scenes on this relief has been discussed 
by several writers, initially by Brandts Buys (Brandts Buys I 
p. 34). 

175 Though there are other types of bamboo gambangs. The author found some 
at Tulungagung in the gamelan bumbung (buwmbung means bamboo) and in 
the Priangan Regencies. See also Kunst 1X vol. I p. 231. 

176 For particulars see Kunst II pp. 129ff. and Z3/ uns tl llappead oat 
— For Javanese and Balinese gambang types in general see Kunst IX 
vol. I pp. 185 ff. 


IDIOPHONES 75 


K. Salunding; gendér wayang 


As mentioned previously, the existence of gambang- and calung-like 
instruments in Java and Bali since the 9th century can be proved. 
Although the gender is not as old as that, it still goes back a long way, 
as will be shown shortly. 

When B. J. O. Schrieke returned from a trip to Bali in 1924, he 
brought back some interesting data. He spoke of a gamelan selondéng, 
a very holy gamelan at Bungaya, a Bali aga (original Balinese) village 
near Karangasem, permitted to be played once every three years. 

This information came just in time to be incorporated in our book 
“De Toonkunst van Bali’, which in its turn elicited various remarks 
and additions from the civil service officer L. C. Heyting, then stationed 
in Bali. Among them was a query about the possible connection between 
selondéng and salunding which appears in the Wrtta-saficaya (before 
1222),177 the Hariwangcga (c. 1150) and Bharatayuddha (1157),178 
the Ghatotkacagraya (c. 1190) 179 and in five Old Balinese charters, 
three of them dated 1181 18° and the other two 1204 and 1324,181 
The word (a)nalunding, used in the Ramawijaya,!82 is derived from 
salunding. 

Kern translated salunding as saron, and there was no apparent 
reason to doubt tthe accuracy of this translation, although it is not quite 
clear how he arrived at it. 

Meanwhile J. Kats, who spent some time in Bali after Schrieke, was 
kind enough to gather some more information about the Bungaya 


LTV SHS: 

TES TBI, O26 UGS 1B IU, 4: 

178 Gh. VII 5. 

180 One of these three was found by Heyting in désa Bulihan. Like the other 
charters from this period, the charter in question was enacted by (Cri 
Maharaja Haji Jayapangus [1181 A.D.]. In this document (10b) it is laid 
down, among other things, that two “kw” (small Hindu coins) shall be paid 
by way of “tikasan” (tax) if a galunggang petung (probably a bamboo 
gambang, as pointed out on pp. 73-74) and a salunding wsi (an iron salunding) 
are in the same precincts. 

181 These charters and two charters dated 1181 contain, among other things, 
an enumeration of the obligations from which certain désas were exonerated. 
One of these is again tikasan salunding. Obviously there were levies on 
gamelans, and in fact it would hardly be possible to find a more promising 
object for taxation in an island so rich in gamelans. — For the four 
references where salunding is mentioned see Buwahan E IIla 3; Campaga A 
Ila 6; Campaga C IIb 6; and Pura Kehen C IIb 2/3, respectively. 

182 RM. VI 15, XII. 


76 HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


ensemble which suggested that this orchestra consisted exclusively of 
gendér-like instruments. 

When in August 1925 I was able to gather much important musico- 
logical material during a short period — thanks to the help of the 
well-known Tjokorda Gdé Raka Sukawati, who was at the time 
punggawa (head of the District) of Ubud — it appeared that there 
was a second gamelan of that kind at Kéngetan (District of Ubud), 
held in equal veneration and awe. The Kéngetan gamelan, however, 
was not called selondéng but selunding, and like the Bungaya ensemble 
it consisted exclusively of gendérs (but without tubular resonators). 

Heyting’s query about the connection between the word selondéng 
and the Old Javanese and Old Balinese salunding should consequently 
be answered in the affirmative. In as far as the link exists, the Old 
Javanese salunding must be seen not as a saron (with supported keys) 
but as a gendér with suspended keys. 

This conclusion is not based solely on the fact that the gamelan 
salunding (to use its apparently correct name) still existing in Bali 
consists exclusively of gendérs. A close examination in the relevant 
Old Javanese literature also gives strength to this argument. 

In the Wrtta-saficaya the poet, Mpu Tanakung, tries to create an 
image of supreme loveliness. KERN translates as follows: “At that 
moment the mountains gave the impression that the trees were their 
actors and the fine transparent mist was their screen; the hollow 
bamboos, caressed by the wind, seemed to be the softly murmuring 
tudungans (flutes); the calling quails were the sarons, alternating har- 
moniously with the soft echo of the deer; the love-calls of the peacocks 
were the singing of the madraka.” 183 

The mild murmur of the gendér, it seems to me, fits better into the 
atmosphere of this image than the broad, clearly defined and full sound 
of the saron. Possibly this is just a personal opinion, inspired by the 
desire to prove the correctness of my supposition. 

But it seems to me that the Bharatayuddha leaves no doubt. There 
the word salunding is followed by the word wayang. Salunding wayang 
appears here as if salunding were the exclusive wayang instrument. 
In Hazev’s thesis the translation of this passage of the B.Y. text 
(pp. 11 and 12) reads: “And in the river the frogs were croaking; 


183 Lwir mawayang tahen gati nikang wukir kineliran himarang anipis/ bung- 
bung ikang petung kapawanan, ya téka tudunganya muny angarangin/ 
paksi ketur salundingan ika kinangsyani pamangsul ing kidang alon/ madraka 
cabda ning mrak alangd sawang pangidungnya mangrasi hati. 


IDIOPHONES Hd 


they seemed to represent the sarons (sic) of the wayang play (as heard 
in the wayang play). The hollow bamboos sounded as the wind played 
through them; they were like the flutes (twdungs) accompanying (the 
play). The kungkang concert heard in the mountain ravines was like 
the songs of the women; the unceasing accompaniment of the grass- 
hoppers seemed like the sound of the kamanaks.” 184 

The only instrument accompanying the shadow wayang in Bali is, 
in fact, the gendér (usually in sets of two or four), producing the most 
beautiful music. This ensemble’s name is gendér wayang (fig. 116).185 
These genders, contrary to all other gendérs in Bali and Java, have 
ten keys,186 and such series of ten keys have often been excavated in 
East Java.187 This cumulative evidence induces me to assume that 


184 Tekwan ri lwah ikang taluktak atarik saksat salunding wayang/ pring 
bungbang muni kanginan manguluwung, yékan tudungnyangiring/ gending 
stri nya pabandung i prasamaning kungkang karengwing jurang/ cenggeret 
nya walangkrik atri kamanak tanpantarangangsyani. 

185 The verses in the Wrtta-saficaya clearly refer to the wayang kulit, the 
shadow wayang. If this wayang kulit took its material from the Hindu epics 
— in other words, if it was wayang purzwa — the instruments are not used 
in quite the same way as in modern Bali. In Bali only the gendér wayang 
— four in South Bali and two in North Bali —- is used in this context. 
It is said that in ancient Kadiri flute music and women’s voices were used 
as well (compare Hadiwidjojo’s remarks about mandraka). 

The Bharatayuddha verses do not necessarily refer to a wayang purwa 
orchestra. Gendérs may have been used formerly, as they are now, in other 
wayang performances, and possibly even without wayang. However, as it is 
likely that gendérs were used primarily for the accompaniment of every kind 
of wayang, the name of gendér (or salunding) wayang is quite under- 
standable. 

The mention of kamanak in the B.Y. verses unmistakably implies dance 
accompaniment. If these verses do refer to the wayang, which is likely, then 
the poet must have envisaged an ensemble not identical with, but similar to 
the one which in Bali today accompanies the parwa (in Javanese: wayang 
zwong when representing the B.Y. legends), and the wayang wong in Bali 
restricted to the Ramayana stories. At present this ensemble consists of some 
gendérs, two small drums (gupek(an)), a small gong (kajar), small cymbals 
(rincik), a Rempur, a set of kemanak (gumanak) and voices. 

186 Pictures of gendérs — in this case apparently with seven keys — are again 
provided by some of the statuettes found in the Majapahit soil (fig. 65 b in 
the foreground). 

The other kinds of gendér have either 5, 6 or 7 keys, or 13, 14 or 15 keys. 
(The gendér at the kabupatén of Madjakerta with 16 keys is a rare 
exception). 

187 Tnterval-measurements of four of these ‘‘fossil” gendér-key series are given 
in Kunst III pp. 476 and 477. The scales belong exclusively to the 
sléndro series, as might be expected from instruments accompanying the 
wayang purwa. These key-series were registered under Nos. 1051, 1051b, 
1051c (Cat. I p. 253 and Korte Gids p. 71) and 5829a-j. The same applies 


78 HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


salunding wayang must have been synonymous with gender wayany 
and makes it probable that the gendér was well-known as early as 
1157,188 

In Bali today gendér wayang sets are fairly numerous. On the 
other hand, the gamelan salunding is almost exclusively confined to 
the villages of the Bali aga (the original Balinese), a community which 
has tried to stay aloof from both the Hindu and the subsequent Old 
Javanese influence. 

Thanks to the late Walter Spies we know of a few more salunding 
orchestras in addition to those already mentioned. In a letter dated 
April 22, 1928, this painter-musician told me that in the Bali aga 
village of Tnganan he had found three gamelan salunding, designated 
locally as the northern, the central and the southern. Their keys were 
made of iron (ws?) and were suspended as in a gendér. There were, 
however, no tubular resonators. Later, Spies found some more 
salunding orchestras in other Bali aga villages, namely in Bungaya, 
Bugbug and Selat. About the Tnganan salunding he writes: “Aus- 
sehen tut er alsob er vom Nilpferd oder einem Karbau abstammt, so 
klobig und plump — aber klingen tut es wie die tiefsten schonsten 
Kirchenglocken.” (“It looks as if it were a descendant of a hippo- 
potamus or of a buffalo, so lumpish and unwieldy is it; but its sound 
is like that of the deepest and finest church-bells.” 


L. Saron 


Finally the saron. As proof of its presence in the Kadiri realm of 
Jayabhaya, W. S. and B. Y. are eliminated because salunding is iden- 
tified as gendér. However, its appearance on a Barabudur relief (fig. 
19) 189 proves that it existed as early as 824 A.D. Moreover, a 


to a gendér series excavated near kampong Widjang, désa Karangtalun, 
District of Karangdjati, Regency of Blora which was registered under No. 
554, Djak. Mus. musicological department. 

R. Ng. Ranggawarsita apparently knew of the existence of the word 
salunding through traditional channels. According to Groneman (p. 49), 
this Solo pujangga (chronicler and expert in Javanese tradition [adat]) 
mentions in the second volume of the manuscript (p. 37) of his ‘‘Pustaka 
Raja Purwa” (The History of the Ancient Kings, about 1850) a salundi 
which, according to him (or is this Groneman’s opinion ?) should be 
identified with kempul. (At the same time he talks about the instrument 
garantang, which is identified — and this time correctly — with gambang.) 
Sachs I p. 329b gives salunding as a Dayak signal flute without finger 
holes and he quotes as his source Grabowski p. 105. 

189 Bar. Ib 98. 


188 


IDIOPHONES 79 


solidly built saron demung key series has been excavated in désa 
Bebet,19° District of Pelem, Badjanegara Division, Residency of 
Rembang. 

Furthermore in the Sriwedari Museum at Solo there are three one- 
octave saron sets (demung, saron barung and saron panerus) which 
have been excavated there. Judged by their tuning they belonged to the 
same gamelan as a gambang gangsa which is also in this museum. 
These instruments which are remarkably well preserved (in contrast 
to the Rembang saron key series mentioned earlier) do not give the 
impression of being very old. 

The word saron appears in literature, as far as I know, only rarely 
and at a fairly late date.191 There is also a fair chance that it refers 
to a gambang with bamboo keys (see p. 73). It should be kept in mind 
that present-day Bali, to a greater extent than Java, has successfully 
preserved the old forms and refers to these metallophones not as 
saron 192 but as gangsa jongkok.193 

It seems clear that the instrument with the horizontal metal keys 
formerly had other names. We can be certain about only one of them, 
salukat,194 which slightly modified as selokat 195 still refers to a 


190 Djak. Mus. Cat. I p. 253: No. 105la. This series consists of a complete 
seven-tone pélog octave and the next higher, but incomplete octave from 
which the pélog and barang keys are missing. For the intervals see Kunst 
III p. 489, Table XI under No. 1. A modern saron is shown on our fig. 118. 

191 BB. 50, 62; Dj. pur. and U.P. In the latter poem the saron appears in the 
enigmatic combination of caruk saron. For the word caruk which occurs 
in the Rangga Lawé (VIII 29) Juynboll II gives (with a question 
mark) the meaning of ‘‘changing”. Therefore caruk saron could possibly 
suggest a kind of composition in which the saron-part is treated in a special 
way. In the KBwb. I 591 s.v. caruk II this word is translated as “name of a 
composition”. At this place the word gérong is referred to (KBwb. IV 702), 
where the word anggérong is translated as “to sing”. In a quotation of a 
reference from the Undakan Pangrus we find besides the word caruk saron 
the words gending luwang, turas pagérong, semar pegulingan and sakati, 
three of which are the names of gamelans in Bali. Van der Tuuk 
(KBwb. IV 770 s.v. guling) considers semar pegulingan to be a special 
composition. It is not clear whether in his opinion the other names also 
indicate compositions. I for my part am not quite convinced that caruk saron 
refers to a composition. 

192 There is one exception in northern Bali called sesaron, a multi-octave variety 
which in southern Bali is usually called coring or curing (in Java gambang 
gangsa). 

193 Cf. Kunst II pp. 74/75. 

194 Sum. XXIV 7; A.N. XXX 1; Mal. XC; 36 (version b); Panji K.S. (see 
IPO@ir DEM aiircliical IN fy, GY)S INES WINE TEE IRIN >.<ID.€ (op 

195 See also Sachs I p. 342a. 


a 


80 HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


saron, vig. the soprano saron in the Principalities, usually called saron 
panerus or peking. Both selokat and peking are also the names of a 
species of bird which is otherwise known in Java as petingan or 
glatik and in Bali as prit — the Munia oryzivora. The high-pitched 
sound produced by both the instrument and the bird is the obvious 
connection between the two. 

We have already seen above (see pp. 52, 55-56) that the word 
curing,196 which in present-day Bali is used for a saron-like instrument, 
in Hindu-Java had other meanings. 

There are possibly more names for saron among the series of words 
referring ‘to musical instruments which have not yet been identified.197 
In this connection the word sangghani is perhaps of interest (pp. 86-87). 

In Juynzpott II p. 401 s.v. barung, the word ambarung 198 is trans- 
lated by “playing the saron’”. It is true that in Java the combination 
saron barung 199 is very common as a name of one of the four 
single-octave forms of the saron-group, but the word barung by itself 
does not indicate a musical instrument. Probably in Old Javanese 
literature barung did not have that meaning either. The occurrence of 
ambarung in the A.P.299 seems to suggest a different interpretation : 
“munya kekéloran, lawan gong sakati ambarung’, t.e. “the kekéloran 
sounds, and the gong sakati ‘ambarung’”’. The word kekéloran, to be 
discussed shortly (p. 84) probably refers to some gamelan or other. 
Keeping in mind Kern’s translation of mabarung in the Nagarakrta- 
gama (LIX 7) as “accompanying” 291 and JuynBoLL’s translation 
(JuynBo.t II p. 401) for the derived forms binarungan 292 and maba- 
rungan 203 as “accompanied”, I suppose that ambarung, like the other 
derivations of barung, not only in the A.P. but also in the C.P. and 
other texts indicates some kind of accompaniment or of playing 
together.294 


196 Cf. above p. 52 note 23. 

197 See Chapter VI. 

198 For which he gives the reference C.P. 14. 

199 See Kunst IX vol. I pp. 165 ff. 

200 A.P. XIV 3 (KBwb. II 240 s.v. kélor). 

201 According to R. L. Mellema, the same interpretation applies to Dpt. II 
(KBwb. III 336): kinon anamépa mangkyambarung, i.c. “he was ordered 
to play the samépa, and on this instrument he accompanied”. 

EN WIIG Sorin, SOW Zh 

20S AV We Vie 

204 Derivations of the word barung occurring several times in the Sutasoma in 
J. Ensink’s opinion all have the meaning of “together with” or “‘vieing, 
competing with’. (See Table A note 22). 


IDIOPHONES 81 


One should not be surprised that the poet in the A.P. allows two 
gamelans, probably different in composition as well as in tuning, to 
play together. Until World War II, many orchestras of different tuning 
played simultaneously at big festivities in the kratons. In the large 
arenas surrounded by walls, the effect was by no means cacophonous ; 
on the contrary, it was joyful and impressive. 


VI 


UNIDENTIFIED NAMES OF 
INSTRUMENTS AND ORCHESTRAS 


In the previous chapters it has been shown that the majority of the 
Old Javanese instruments on the temple reliefs were identifiable, and 
that a fairly large number of names of instruments and orchestras 
could be placed in their correct context. This was done by means of 
comparison, in part with Sanskrit names and with Indian and Indo- 
chinese instruments, and in part with names existing in the Archipel- 
ago. This proved impossible with regard to a number of words, and 
these are listed here in alphabetical order, with their references in 
literature. 


Angkup OyOm ETS: 
bangbang Hrsw. I 66 b; Mal. 305, 412; Was. VI; Kr. (bong- 
(bongbong) bong). 
bonjing Sut. LX XIII 15b; Batuan IIb 3. 
see hereafter 

burjing Bebetin An tilb 5. under ronji(ng) 
nonin ene: LCG 
burancah Keo: 
gérong R.L. VII 132; U.P. (turas pagérong) ; Mal. LXXXI1; 

26 (version b), 13 (version c); Was. II 102; P.A. I. 
kekéloran ALP. XIV 3; B.T. 164; Wargasari. 
ketur Dj. pur.) Hrew. 1V 102a, V1 49a. Th, Vi 1051106, 
middhama Wir. 85. 
ronji(ng ) BK. LXXXV 12. 


salangsang RK. XXVI 24, 


UNIDENTIFIED NAMES 83 


samépa Ppt. Whe Wiwa lsles2 LV S03. bavi 132. 
sangghani Bus; SOWIE Zo Reva 12 X72: 
sarb Sembiran A I, IIb 4. 

sarungan Sembiran A I, IIb 4. 

taronyjt Beles EXOT EL ot, 

waditra War. Jie 96:_) 57/6/77; B.P. 140, 


The above words will now be discussed in order. 

It is not certain that angkup and salangsang refer to musical instru- 
ments. In present-day Javanese the word salangsang means “funnel- 
shaped object” and has no musical meaning. 


Bangbang (bongbong) can be said to be a typical example of an 
onomatopoeic Indonesian word, possibly referring to a gong or a 
bonang-shaped instrument, but more likely to a gambang- or calung- 
like instrument with round bamboo keys. In any case it was an in- 
strument which was struck, as indicated by the words anabuh bongbong 
(bangbang) kalih-kalihan.1 In connection with this R. Goris says 
that kalth-kalihan could be either a further qualification of the general 
name of the bangbang species, or — and this seems more likely to me 
— an explanation of how the bangbang should be played. It possibly 
means “taking turns; alternately” or “on both sides”. In the latter 
case, however, ithe bangbang would have to be a drum, which is not 
very likely. 

According to R. L. Mellema, kalih-kalihan (in ngoko speechstyle : 
keloron) 2 should be translated “as a pair”, which could point to the 
custom of playing two bangbangs simultaneously. As further references 
for kalih-kalihan, VAN DER TuuK gives Malat 160, 161, 259 and 260 3 
and he says “of a musical instrument’. So the key to the interpretation 
of bangbang may well lie in the Malat.4 


The word burafcah which is found only once, is left untranslated 
by Kern and in KBwb. IV 895 s.v. 


1 Kr, 

2 Cf. Pigeaud, Woordenboek, p. 181. 
3 KBwb. II 231 s.v. kalih II. 

4 


Van der Tuuk (KBwb. IV 1084) apparently puts bangbang on a level 
with gendér, for reasons unknown to me (possibly on grounds of some 
Balinese interlinear translation). In any case this author, too, considers it to 
be a key instrument. 


84 HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


In his summary of the contents of a Malat manuscript PorRBATJA- 
RAKA 5 equates — with a question-mark — gérong with terbang, the 
tambourine, presumably on the grounds that it accompanies singing 
and is subsequently flung down. Further it may be noted that in the 
Undakan Pangrus® the name gérong is contained in the as yet un- 
explained term turas pagérong. 

The term gérongan refers to choral singing with gamelan accom- 
paniment in the Javanese Principalities. Van DER Tuuk (KBwb. IV 
702 s.v. gérong) translates anggérong with ‘to sing ?’. 


Kekéloran or kakéloran appears to be the name of an ensemble, since 
in the Bagus Turunan, the Wargasari and in the Arjuna Pralabda 7 
the word is used in the same category as two other names which both 
indicate orchestras, viz. gending luwang and gong sakati.8 It should be 
noted that kélor, from which the word is derived, is the name of a 
plant. 


In the Jayapurana the ketur is mentioned along with the saron and 
the badahi (padahi), in other words, along with a melodic and an 
agogic instrument. It is therefore very likely that it is a punctuating 
instrument, in which case it would be a single sounding kettle (see 
pp. 61 ff.). In the smaller and less sophisticated ensembles, for in- 
stance in the Balinese gamelan arja and gamelan gambuh, the East 
Javanese (or is it Madurese?) gamelan saronén and others, this in- 
strument nearly always has the task of determining the phrasing. The 
Balinese equivalents of this word in another sense — pupuh, gending 9 — 
point in the same direction. Originally ketwr seems to have referred 
to this phrasing instrument. From this function developed, via the 
melodic phrase, colon and verse, the meaning of pupuh as gending, song 
or (nuclear) melody. 

An analogous confusion of the concepts phrase and phrasing-element 
often occurs. The Greek terms “komma” and “kolon”, originally 
meaning “smallest phrase” and “part of a sentence” (or “line of a 
stanza’”’) respectively, are used by grammarians for the separation signs 
dividing the sentence into its component parts. Later “semi-colon” is 


IP CEST IDEME ESPEN eey IN joy, GA 

See our Table B p. 116. 

Wargasari; B.T. 164; A.P. XIV 3. 

Cf. above pp. 72-73 and notes 166-168, pp. 79-80 and note 191. 

T. V 105, 106 (KBwb. II 158 s.v. ketur and IV 263 sv. pupuh) ; cf. also 
Hrsw. IV 102a, VI 49a. 


oMmnr oan 


UNIDENTIFIED NAMES 85 


used as the technical term indicating the intermediate break in a 
sentence. In the same way the 17th-century Dutch language uses 
“zinsnede” (= cut of a sentence) in the sense of “colon”, and “‘snee” 
(= cut) in the sense in which we use “comma” nowadays. During the 
same century the terms periodus and punctum are used indiscriminately 
to denote the sentence as a whole.1° The same happens in the Javanese 
language. Pada means metrical foot and strophe as well as the 
punctuating sign which indicates the end of the stanza. 


The fact that middhama — in its one solitary reference — appears 
as part of a small orchestra consisting of bangsi (bamboo transverse 
flute), tala (cymbals) and panawa (a drum), does not get us much 
further. The ensembles on the Barabudur reliefs, in which these three 
instruments are found, have as their fourth member the small goblet- 
shaped cymbals. As I have tried to establish, however (p. 50), these 
would have been called tuwung (and presumably curing too; see p. 52). 
Could we see in middhama a third name for these cymbals? This is 
certainly not an impossibility considering the large number of names 
(in the same place and at the same period) sometimes given to a 
widespread and popular instrument throughout these islands — e.g. 
the many names for the highest-pitched saron and for the single kettle 
(see pp. 78 ff. and 61 ff.). 


Rovijt and taronji, appearing in the Bhomakawya, probably both 
refer to the same instrument. For ro’j1 KBwb. I p. 780 reads ronjing. 
Goris 11 suggests identification of these instrument-names with the 
name bonjing 12 or bunjing, which appears in an Old Balinese charter 
and which, according to the context, refers to an instrument. He links 
them with the present-day Balinese word gonjing which means “to 
shake”. He wonders whether these instrument-names perhaps refer 
to the angklung, which is shaken, and which is also found in various 
places in Bali as part of the gamelan angklung 13 — the ensemble named 
after it. As long as no other name for the angklung is found in Old 
Balinese or Old Javanese literature, it seems to me that Goris’ assump- 
tion is an excellent working hypothesis. The name bwajing in the 


10 Greidanus p. 72 note 3 and passim; Encyclopaedia Britannica s.vv. comma 
and colon. 

11 Goris II vol. II p. 226. 

12 This form also in Sut. LXXIII 15b (KBwb. IV 1040); but Juynboll II 
p. 410 translates it as “name of a manner of singing”. 

fens t Lee pp, 103 ti.-2M cP reel. 


86 HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


Kufijarakarna may possibly be identified with the names bonjing 


and buijing. 


It is not possible to determine with any certainty which instrument 
is meant by samépa. On the basis of translations of passages of Old 
Javanese literature procured by R. L. Mellema the following con- 
clusions may be drawn: 

1. That sometimes an ensemble contained more than one samépa.14 

2. That one of the uses of the instrument was to accompany the reci- 
tation of kidungs and kakawins.15 

3. That samépa could well refer to a bowed stringed instrument (most 
likely a rebab).16 There is a passage which reads: tumulyanamépa 
sikepipun angrawit, i.e. “after that he played the samépa; his touch 
was delicate (exquisite). This phrase calls to mind a passage in 
the Centini (Canto 276, str. 5 ff.), in which a courtier’s accomplished 
performance on the rebab is described in full detail.17 

4. That the samépa was not at that time an integral part of the gamelan, 
otherwise the Rangga Lawé passage 14 just quoted would not have 
mentioned the samépa-players separately from the gamelan-players 
(niyaga). 

The fact that it is almost certain that in those days a gamelan con- 
sisted of powerful sounding instruments only, 7.e. metallophones of the 
gamelan munggang type, is another reason why the identification of 
samépa with rebab must not be rejected out of hand. However, it cannot 
be denied that this conclusion is somewhat weakened by the fact that 
the panalukat, i.e. the salukat-players, are placed in a third category, 
because one would suppose that the salukat 18 was already at that time 
one of the accepted instruments of the gamelan. 


The instrument to which sangghani refers cannot be deduced from 
the three references in which it is mentioned. The name, however, 


14 Ww. I 31: asanding samépa kakalih, i.e. “having next to him two samépa”. 


Perhaps one for the pélog- and one for the sléndro-music ? — R.L. VII 132: 
punang paniyaga, panamépanalukat, i.e. “the gamelan-players, the samépa- 
players and the salukat-players”. 

Dpt. Il: kinon anamépa mangkyambarung, sinamipéng kidung kakawin, i.e. 
“they were ordered to play the samépa in accompaniment of the kidungs 
and the kakawins”’. 

16 Ww. I 32. (See KBwb. III 336 s.v. samépa). 

17 Kunst IX vol. I pp. 224 ff. 

18 Cf. above p. 79. 


15 


UNIDENTIFIED NAMES 87 


indicates that it must have been a “glass-instrument”, and one might 
consequently take it to be a glass idiophone. 

Nowadays one finds in various places in Java small ensembles called 
gamelan sengganén,19 mainly consisting of saron-shaped instruments 
with glass keys. Apparently people were equally amused by that kind 
of fanciful invention a thousand years ago. 


In his “Prasasti Bali’ 2° Goris mentions another two previously 
unknown. instrument-names — sarb and sarungan — which are found 
in one single instance in the Sembiran Charter A I (IIb 4) dated 
922 A.D.21 It is not clear to which instruments they refer. 


The large Petersburg Sanskrit dictionary gives for the meaning of 
vaditra (O.J.: waditra) : musical instrument. Whether this is meant as 
an accurate equivalent or whether further details were not known is 
left to conjecture. The Sanskrit “vad” means “to speak’, but also “to 
sound”, Vaddya is the general designation for instrumental music, and 
vaditra is consequently a normal term to designate an instrument. 

None of the Old Javanese references available gives any clue to a 
more clearly defined meaning of the word. In the Old Javanese version 
of the Mausalaparwa 22 the sound of rushing water is compared with 
that of turya and waditra. In the Wirataparwa the word wdéditra (in 
sarwawaditra: all waditras) is once linked with cangkhakalaha 23 and 
another time 24 it is said of women of noble birth that they received 
instruction in gita-nrta-waditra, 1.e. song, dance and waditra. 

If in the passage of the Mausalaparwa wdditra can refer to a musical 
instrument, then the same must hold true for tarya.25 If, however, the 
interpretation of tarya is “a trumpet with one loop”, then wdditra 
should also be given a more precise and definite meaning. 

Because of the comparison with the sound of rushing water and of 
its position next to tarya one should also take it in the sense of a wind 
instrument. This interpretation is supported by Wirataparwa 96 where 
waditra is again found next to wind instruments (cangkhakalaha). The 


19 Cf. Kunst IX vol. I pp. 278 and 281. 
20 Goris II vol. II p. 305. 

21 See our Table A. 

22 J.D. 76/77. 

23 Wir. 96. 

24 Wir. 11. 

25 Cf. above p. 31 note 43. 


88 HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


etymological sense is in no way opposed to its identification with a 
wind instrument. 

The passage Wirataparwa 11 does not seem to agree with this inter- 
pretation. How could a wind instrument be suitable for noble ladies 
to play? And this leads me to propose that waditra 26 could perhaps 
be explained as “instrument accompanying recitation”. This is also in 
agreement with an example given in the Bhismaparwa (referred to in 
the present book as B.P.) p. 140, which runs: inuwywyu ring gitawddatra 
(KBwb. I 343 s.v. ayu: gita waditra) pataha munda mahasara, 1.e. 
“gently rocked by the sweet tones of song, wdditra and the drums 
called pataha, munda and mahasara’. For voices, strings and drums 
form the most popular combination in both ancient and modern India. 
It seems reasonable to assume that this was also the case at the courts 
of the Central and the early East Javanese periods which were still 
fairly close to the culture of India. 

According to K. V. Ramachandran, however, vdditra is synonymous 
with vddya which should sometimes be translated as instrumentation. 


Undoubtedly, and of necessity, the picture of the world of Old Javanese 
music as conveyed by these pages is one-sided and incomplete, but I 
believe that it nevertheless shows how important music was to the 
people of that period, even from the earliest times. In the Javanese 
version of the Wiradtaparwa, dated 996, we already read for instance: 
“... others accompanied on the bangsi, tala, panawa and middhama. 
Some brought a windrawanahasta, and to assist them they had girl 
dancers who were skilled at their occupation. According to each person’s 
taste there was a great variety of performances: the bhéri and murawa 
sounded incessantly, mixing with the sound of the cangkha and kdlaha 


26 In A. A. Bake’s opinion vaditra should be taken in the sense of “instru- 

ments”. It is true that the Sanskrit root “vad” means “to speak”, “to sound”, 
but, as he points out, the causative form also means “to play an instrument”. 
The usual word for instrumental music is vadya. The compound gita nrtya- 
vadya designates the art of sangita, viz. vocal music, dance and instrumental 
music, and the passage in the Wirataparwa certainly means that the noble 
ladies were instructed in the different varieties of the art of music, The 
meaning of the other Wiradtaparwa passage he sees as: “The sound of an 
instrument like the trumpet, and the sound of ‘instruments’ such as conches 
and trumpets”. (Perhaps in contrast to the shouts of victory). 
If the word wdditra means musical instruments in general than it is synony- 
mous with the words unén-unén, unyan-unyan, monyonyan (all derivations of 
um = sound; KBwb. I 22/23 s.v. uni) and tontonan (see KBwb. II 578 s.v. 
tonton). See Kor. 86; Hrsw. VI 91a; L. XXXVII 5; S.S. 205; B.B. 50. 


UNIDENTIFIED NAMES 89 


(or of the cangkhakdlaha).” 27 And by the end of the Hindu period it is 
still the same: time and again we read in the Hikayat Cékélwanéngpati 
about music in army camps, about war music, or music during a journey 
or dance music. In one place we read of a vocal imitation of gamelan 
music by a number of people (still a very popular skill among young 
people in Bali).28 

In addition, old Chinese travellers and their chroniclers often speak 
about the music they found in Java. In CuEnc Ho’s travel stories as 
recorded by Ma Huan in the Ming period (about 1405 A.D.) 29 we 
find a statement to the effect that “the gamelan consisted of a set of 
copper drums (of course bonangs) and a large brass gong; the wind 
instruments were made of coconut shells”’,39 and that the tournaments 
took place to the sound of rolls on the drums. And in the “Ying-yai 
Shéng-lan” 31 (1416) we again read of the occurrence in Java of brass 
drums and gongs, the blowing on coconut shells, and the beating of 


bamboo drums.32 


x“ 


With this the present treatise has come to its close. I shall refrain 
from afterthoughts: I have made do with whatever material was 
available. The expert will no doubt see where this book succeeds and 
where it fails. 

I would like to express my thanks again to those who have assisted 
me so generously with help and information, and who have favoured 
me with constructive remarks and suggested improvements. Without 
them this work would never have come to anything like a satisfactory 
conclusion — the ground it had to cover was too wide and too diverse. 


27 Wir. 85 (translation by R. Goris). 

28 Cf. Rassers pp. 61, 63, 73, 101, 103, 105, 107, 112, 123, 356 and 357. 

29 “De reisbeschrijving van Ma-Huan over de buitenlandsche reizen van Cheng- 
Ho gedurende de Ming dynastie (+ 1405 A.D.).” Nagezien en uitgegeven 
door Feng Cheng-chun. (Med. Chin. Inst. I pp. 164 ff.). Batavia 1937. 

30 Ocarinas ? Cf. the terra-cotta ocarina found by A. Gall and W. F. Stutterheim 
on the slopes of the Penanggungan (see above p. 26). Coconut ocarinas are 
still to be found e.g. in New Guinea. 

31 Groeneveldt pp. 45ff. (esp. p. 51). 

32 Bamboo zithers ? Cf. above p. 23 s.v. guntang. Such bamboo idiochords are 
often called “drums”; the Nias instrument, for instance, is called géndra hao 
= bamboo drum, being played with a small stick. 


vil 


TABLES 


TABLE A’ CHRONOLOGICAL ORDER OF OLD JAVANESE AND OLD BALINESE 


MANUSCRIPTS AND CHARTERS IN WHICH INSTRUMENTS AND 
ORCHESTRAS ARE MENTIONED AND WHICH ARE EITHER DATED 
OR OF WHICH THE DATES CAN BE DETERMINED 12 


Day NWieatae Awl). Tl Manuscript or Name of Reference 
Charter (Inscription) Instrument 
30/4 821 Stone of Kuburan padahi verso 13 
Candi 3 (K.T.) regang verso 14 
824 4 Barabudur ghanta OF rot 
es 827 OLOxit curing 10 
18/7 840 KA ih curing 6a 4 
842 2nd Cri Kahulunan 
Charter: 5a(G:K3) mrdangga fies 
15/6 850 OLOn 1 muraba 18 
padahi 24 
Gedangan Charter curing Vb 1 
31/10 860 (? : o 
/ ©) (GOs 
1 This table was revised on March 28, 1948, according to the latest information 
available at the time — given by the epigraphist Damais — and afterwards 
again supplemented with information taken from Goris II]. — The dates 


are given in years A.D. [Again revised with the help of Damais I and II, 
ed.] The abbreviations which have been added to the names of literary works 
and charters are explained in the bibliographical notes where text-editions 
are also mentioned. 

When using this table one should remember that we find many of these 
instruments already represented on reliefs dating from an earlier period, that 
is on the Candis Sari, Barabudur and Prambanan (dating from c. 750, 824 
and the middle of the 9th century A.D., respectively). 

This inscription has been published by R. Goris in his article “De inscriptie 
van Koeboeran Tjandi” in T.B.G. LXX (1930), pp. 157 ff. 

sec Die Gasparis p. 182. 

See De Casparis pp. 82, 86 and 91. The text has madangi, a Prakrit 
form for Sanskrit mrdangin, a mrdangga-player. 


ay Al 862 
20/4 873 
3/10 878 
Gs 879 
10/10 880 
14/7 881 
29/3 882 
882 
19/10 890 (?) 
21/4 896 
before 898 
898-928 (?) 
898-928 ( ?) 
8/4 901 
ZF 7 902 (?) 


TABLE A 


O.J.O. VII 
O.J.0.4X 
Ox 

O.J.O. XII 


OTOPKV 


KO. XIV 
K.O. XV 


Sukawana Charter A I 


E 466 


Bebetin Charter A I 


Oqoecly 
OOuLiv 
OmOeClil 
Os Or XXIII 


Original of Charter 7 
Klampenborg 
(Denmark) 


gangsa 
padahi 
padahi 


padahi 
regang 


marga = 


mar(e)ga(ng) 
padahi 


padahi 
padahi 


padaha 
cangka 
padahi 
bangsi 
bufjing 
gendang 


gending 


padaha 
padahi 
padahi 
padahi 


angkup 
padahi 


padahi 


91 
verso 12 
Uc 


’ 


5 
3 
3 


lap tem 8) 


b 1 
a7 


Ila 
itaeZ 


recto 4 


Tips 
IIb 5 
Ila 4 
Eibzs 
Lipa 


TRA cae 


verso 12 


verso 3 


6 An as yet unpublished document on copperplate in the collection of the Djak. 
Mus. from Balak (Magelang) mentioned by N. J. Krom in Nt.B.G. XLIX 


(GRAND) jue ae) 


7 Van Naerssen p. 84 No. VIII-3. See O.J.O. XXIV and Damais II, 
B.E.F.E.O. XLVI, p. 45. 


27/12 


11/4 


21/12 


4/6 


4/6 


11/2 
13/9 


12/7 


24/1 


29/1 


OZ 


902 


907 


910 


910-919 
oi 


911 


913° 
O15 


919 


923 


925 


929-947 (?) 


HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


Kembang Arum Charter 
(K.A.) 


O.J.O. CVIII (and also 
O.J.O. X XVII) 8 


OyO. 2 XXVI 


IK (Oy DOVAN 
Trufian Charter A I 


Trufan Charter B 


On Om 
OW One 6.0% 


KO! 


Sembiran Charter A I 


Pengotan Charter A I 
KO] VII 


brekuk 
padahi 
regang 


ganding 
padahi 
rawanahasta 


arawanasta 
padahi 


padahi 


bhangsi 
ganding 
suling 


bhang¢i 
gending 
suling 


padahi 


gangsa 
padahi 


brekuk 
ganding 
padahi 
rawanahasta 
regang 
tuwung 


cangka 
sarb 
sarungan 


padahi 


curing 
gending 


IIIa 20 
T Sellia 20 
IITa. 20 


b 4 
b 4 
b 4 


verso 6, 22 
verso 5 


recto 19 
recto 13 


SZ 
S012 
3, 12 
op LZ 
roe 4 
3, 12 


IIb 4 
IIb 4 
IIb 4 


ibe 


3b, 4 
4b, 3 


8 See W. F. Stutterheim’s article on a charter from Kedu in T.B.G. LXVII 
(1927), pp. 172 ff. (esp. p. 209 with the text of the Kedu Charter plate IN. FAS) 


9 See Goris I. 


13/7 (2) 
or 


12/8 (2) 
22/12 
10/4 
2/5 
10/7 


23/2 
7/2 


14/10 - 
12/11 


c. 930 (?) 


931 


933 
937 (?) 
939 
943 


948 (?) 
995 


996 


TABLE A 


Original of O.J.0.10 
xl 


Oy Vil 
Batunya Charter A I 
Or .On XLVI 


KOmx II 
OJ.OXLVIII 


OL2ORIs 
Buwahan Charter A 


Wirataparwa (Wir.) 


10 The copy we have dates from c. 1350. 


93 


padahi lla 
tabeh-tabehan 2a, 3 
padahi IIIa 5 
padahi recto 21 
padahi 3a 6/b 1 
bungkuk verso 46 
ganding verso 46 
rawanahasta verso 46 
tuwung verso 46 
curing Sb 
ganding III 8 
padaha Lez. 
sangkha TLTe7, 
suling Lit 7 
bangsi 85 
bheri 49, 77, 85 
dundubhi ti, 
kendang 55 
lawuwina 30 
mahasara 52 
maracangkha 64, 69 
mrdangga 49, 77 
middhama 85 
murawa 85 
padahi 55 
panawa 85 
cangkha 

(sangka) 77, 78, 80, 85 
cangkhakahala 70 
cangkhakalaha 85 
cangkhakalaha 96 


94 


between 991 


6/4 


26/12 


26/9 


and 999 
c. 1000 


c. 1010 


1011 


1015 


1022 


1023 
c. 1040 
c. 1040 


HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


Babi Charter A 


Parwadhigama (Pg.) 10 


Adiparwa (Adip.) 


Batur P. Abang 
Charter A 


Charter Frankfurt 
IN Soe Ne, ZASHIS 
Batuan Charter 


AOmay, 
OOLCX VII 


Arjunawiwaha (W.) 


102 See KBwb. III 601 s.v. wajana. 
11 See Van Naerssen p. 78 No. VII-3. 


suling 

tabeh-tabehan 

tala 

waditra 

wina 

wihnarawana- 
hasta 


cangkha 


curing 
gending 
kangsi 


bheri 
gending 
padahi 


gending 
padahi 
suling 
tambang 


curing 


bonjing 

ganding 
(gending) 

padahi 


suling 
curing 
garantung 


barebet 
bheri 

kala 
kalacangka 
kangsi 


52 
68, 96 
85 
11, 96 
D3 


PES) 


t215 202 


Vib 2 
IXb' 3 
VIb 2 
IXb 2 


recto 2 
IIb 3 


L311 VpeS a6 
IVb 2 


Lbs, Vibes 

Om), 

U7, 

YOMIDK § 

XM 2, XX VES 
OCIA Z 

XO 
[Ve2 


18/1 


10/8 


5/5 


c. 1050 


1059 


1065 


1065 
1071 


The end of the 
11th century 


1100 
c. 1150 12 


TABLE A 


Gobleg Charter 
(Pura Batur) B 


Br. I pp. 607 ff. 
Br. II pp. 49 ff. 
Beep. O13. 


Pandak-bandung 
Charter 


Br. I pp: 619 ff. 


@OVOREXV 
Hariwangga (H.W.) 


mredangga 


murawa 
padahi 
sundari 
tabe-tabehan 
winarawana 


gending 


gending 
suling 


gending 
suling 


padahi 


busya 
gending 
sangka 
suling 


busya 
gending 
suling 


padahi 


curing 
garantung 
(garantang) 


gending 
gubar 


kendang 
kangsi 


D5 


XX 6, XXIII 2, 
Vis kl) 
XXIII 2, XXIX 5 
XVI 7 

els 

MV lileis 
XXXI 1 


WARVIE 


5b 
Sb 


9b 
9b 


2b 


Vb 1 
IIIb 5, Va 5 
Vb 1 
IIIb 5, Vb 1 


5b 
5b 
5b 


Ib 14 
x XIe2, SX VIl6 


XXVII 6 
RAVIT 7; 
XXXII 7, 
DO ©. ON A 
ROO 75 12; 15; 
XXXVI 7 
XXXVI 7 
XIX 6, XXVIL7 


12 Date given by Van Stein Callenfels (see Sud. p. 167). 


6/9 


96 HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


1157 18 Bharatayuddha (B.Y.) 


16 *See: Damaise ll, -BE.F-E.O7 XLiX pe 54. 


mrdangga 
padahi 
salukat 
salunding 
cangkha 
taluktak 
tepakan 


bheri 
curing 


gamel 


gantang 
garantung 


gending 


g(h)anta 
gubar 


gong 


kalagangk(h)a 


kangsi 
kamanak 
kukulan 
mrdangga 


padahi 
salunding 
cangk(h)a 


saragi 


RVI 10; U8 
XXXII 10 

XIX 6 

XX 16 

XXXVI 7 

XX 16 

XIX 6, XXVII 7 


x3 
IV 14, V8, 
XXII 10 

V7 

L 6 

II 6 

V 8, XXXVI 8, 
WT bes 

V 8 Xk1 18) oe 
X9.46 XXVIA- 
CVI a. 
ee abal 
SXXVL& 
XEN 1 
Sv 
XKxIK 2 

iets 

Cs 

L 6 

T0238: 
NIX 201K 
ee. ai, cya 
XIX 6 

X 3 

L 5 

TIX 16, 
XIV 16, XV 26, 
MVD 7 Le 20) 
XXXVE SOLIS 
a6 


TABLE A 97 


sungu 2 ae 
tabe-tabehan XXXIX 2 
taluktak reo 
tudung pe) 
winipafica Viol 
a2] 7 1181 Campaga Charter A salunding IIa 6 
22/7 1181 Buwahan Charter E calung IIIa 3 


galunggang IIIa 3 
salunding wsi IIIa 3 


22/7. 1181 Bulihan Charter 14 galunggang 
petung 10b 
salunding wsi 10b 
c. 1190 Ghatotkacac¢raya 15 damyadamyan XXXVI 7 
(Gh.) kangsi iiss 


salunding Viti 
tabang-tabang XXXVI 7 


taluktak VII 5 
between 1050 
and 1200 Sibang Kadja Charter padahi Val /z 
10/5 1204 Pura Kehen Charter C  calung IIb 3 
salunding IIb 2/3 
18/11 1205 (?) OJOFLXXVII curing recto 17 
é- 1210 Smaradahana (Smar.)16 curing IV 18 
gangsa XXIX 8 
gending XXIX 8, 
XXXII 3 
ghenta XXXII 4 
gong XXIX 8, 
XXXIII 3 
gubar XXIX 8, 
BOOK WSS, 


14 See p. 75 notes 180 and 181. 

15 See KBwb. II 379 s.v. kangsi, II 814 s.v. tabang, II 514 s.v. dami, II 250 
s.v. kulutak. 

16 See Damais I p. 10. 


98 


before 1222 17 


between 1248 


and 


1268 


c. 1290 


Wrtta-saficaya (W.S.) 


Charter Frankfurt 
N.S. No. 21319 
(VAN NAERSSEN, 
p. 46 No. III) 


Wargasari 18 


1 According to Krom II p. 295. 
18 According to L. C. Heyting, who found a Balinese candra sengkala (chro- 
nogram) giving 1212 Caka. Heyting adds, however, in his letter: ‘““Majapahit 
is mentioned in the poem, and this state was not founded until 1216 Caka.” 
Further he mentions: “Under purwa one finds in Van der Tuuk (KBwb. 
IV 107a): Empu Purwa, the proper name of a Buddhist priest who is said 
to have written the Wargasari. In the Pararaton, however, another Empu 


HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


kangsi 
(kangci) 
kala 
kalagangka 
kendang 


kukulan 
mrdangga 


cangka 


suling 
sundari 
tabang-tabang 
taluktak 


titir 

wina 

kangsi 
panawa 
salundingan 
tudungan 
gending 
curing 


gending 
luwang 
kekéloran 


XXXII 4, 
XXXIII 3 
XXIX 8, 
XXXIII 3 
XXXII 4 
XXXII 4 

XXIX 8, 
XXXIII 3 
XXVI9 

LV; 

XXXII 4 
MTGE oc eecse 
XXXII 4, 

XX XITS 

IV 18 

XXL 6, sls 
TV 10 

XXI 5 (KBwb. II 
699 s.v. taluktak) 
XXXI 3 

IV 10 


recto 8 
recto 8 


TABLE A 99 


£3712 1323 On OAL XX Xalt curing 8a 
gending 8a, 8b 

30/9 1324 Campaga Charter C salunding IIb 6 

24/11 1334 19 Rangga Lawé (R.L.) 29  bendé VII 44 
bhéri XI 104 
bubar Xolislels 
cantung 
(cacantungan) I 1 
curing Vile/O a SZ. 

ATL 

gending TD 2 Viels, 


VII 79, 94, 132, 
IX 104, XII 15 
gérong VilsisZ. x IDs 
gong i226 LV: 
V113, VIL79;-94, 
IX 69, 77, 104, 
XS), XT 25. 99 


gubar VII 79, 94, 

XI 104 
guntang Vilet32,, S115 
kendang Iii lor TV7, 

Xess] 25 
mrdangga XI 36261, 158 
peleret Vilg/9oe x43 
salukat Naar 
samepa Villers 2 
cangkha XI 104 


tabe-tabehan VII 55, 62 


Purwa is mentioned, the father of the princess Kén Dedes. But he lived 
about 1144 Caka = 1222 A.D., and he also was a Buddhist priest. There is 
a possibility that 1222 was only the year of the copying of the poem and 
Majapahit an error of the copyist, just as in the Usana Bali, where Empu 
Kuturan is said to have come to Bali from Majapahit in c. 964 Caka, 
instead of from Daha or Kadiri.” 

19 See Damais II, B.E.F.E.O. XLIX pp. 55-57. 

20 Numbering of the cantos and verses in Berg’s text-edition. For VII 132 
KBwb. gives: VII 129 (see KBwb. III 336 s.v. samépa and IV 702 sv. 


gérong). 


100 HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


tabeh-tabehan IX 104, 
KPa, 125, 1 5e 
tabu-tabuhan VI 13 
tatabuhan I 49, III 2, VI 29, 
VII 31, 36, 66, 82, 


E70 
XI 99, 140, 169 
teteg XI 101 
30/9 1365 Nagarakrtagama bubar LXVI 1 
(Nag.) 20° gafijuran LXV 1 
gong LXVI 1 


kahalacangka LXV 1 
kalagangka LIX 7 
mrdangga », ©, OG Ee, 


LXXXIII 6, 
LXXXIV 2 
padaha RAKES Wess 
LXV 1 
padahi 
(padaha) LXXXIV 2 
pataha LXXXIV 4 
cangka Lx, EXValy 
LXXXIV 2 
tarayan LXXXIV 2 
trut LXXXIV 2 
1375 Arjunawijaya (A.W.)21 — kalaha XLVI So, AL 
13/5 Sutasoma (Sut.) 22 bhéri CXXI 1b, 
CXAVIITo tb, 
CXXX 3a 


208 [Before the conclusion of the editorial work Pigeaud’s text-edition and 
translation of the Nag. became available for use. See List of Abbreviations 
etc. sub Nag., ed.]. 

21 See KBwb. II 233 s.v. kalaha. 

22 Professor J. Ensink of Groningen University who is working on the Sutasoma 
kindly traced the names of instruments, which in the KBwb. are said to be 
found in this Old Javanese kakawin. The numbering of cantos and verses is 
according to his text. Where the word sundari occurs in this Sutasoma-text 
Ensink assumes it to be a bird’s name, i.e. the cucculus melanoleucus. See 
also pp. 26 and 80 note 204. 


End of the 
14th century 


TABLE A 


Kidung Sunda (K.S.) 


bofjing 
garantung 
gending 


gong 


gong 
pangarah 
gubar 
kahala var. 
lect.: kalaha 


kala 


kangsi 
murawa 


cangkha 


sundari 


bheéri 
curing 
ghenta 
gong 


gubar 
guntang 
kendang 
mrdangga 
pangarah 


101 


LXXIII 15b 
VII 1b 
LXXIII 15b, 
Ex 4h, 
XCI7e 
CXLVII 12c 


LXXX 4b, 
AGI 7G 
CXX 6d, 
CXXVII 1b 


LXXXVIII 3c 
XCIX 7c 


XCIX 7c, 
CXX 6d, 
CXL 

CX MIS aoc 
CXXVII 1b, 
CXXX 3a, Tib 
IX 4c 
CXXVII 1b 
LXXX 4b, 
XCIX ‘7c, 
Cx aa, 
CXXXVIII 7d 
SEIT Od Vets 
CXXXVIII 7d 


Tiss 
III 40 
Eile 52 
II 67, 86, 98, 
III 69 
1M BBs) 
III 40 
II 98 
II 128 
11337, 


102 HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


tabeh-tabehan II 44 
tatabuhan I 42a, 
II 48, 90, 137, 200, 


III 68 
Kidung Sundayana or 
Kidung SundaversionC  bendé Piet s 
(K. Snd.) bheri III 10 
garantung III 10 
gong 19 figs COs Re: 
gubar LEO 
mahasara III 10 
mardala IT 10 


tatabuhan [33,11 tet0 


PABLEE 


Agastyaparwa (Ag.) 28 


Afiang Nilartha (A.N.) 24 


Arjuna Pralabda (A.P.) 25 


Babad Bla-Batuh (B.B.) 26 


ALPHABETICAL LIST OF OLD JAVANESE AND OLD BALINESE 


MANUSCRIPTS AND CHARTERS, IN WHICH INSTRUMENTS AND 
ORCHESTRAS ARE MENTIONED AND WHICH ARE NOT DATED OR 


AS YET DATABLE 


(15th century) 


rawanahasra 
wina 


salukat 
sundari 


cantung 
gong sakati 
kacapi 
kekeloran 


cumangkirang 
curing 
gambang 
gending 
gendongan 
ghanta 
gong 
gubar 
mradangga 
pangarah 
saron 


smara pagulingan 50 


teteg 
tatabuhan 
tontonan 


Kel 
XLS 


IX 9 
XIV 3 
DOVE SD 
XIV 3 


62 
62 
62 
62 
64 


DF,202 


62 


62 


ORs cOy, 


Ed. by J. Gonda, B.K.I. XC (1933). The text has wind rawanahasradi, “the 
lute and other chordophones like the rawanahasra’. 


See KBwb. III 248 s.v. salukat, and III 28 s.v. sundari. 


See KBwb. I 576 s.v. cantung, II 51 s.v. kacapi, II 240 s.v. kélor. wt 
Ed. by C. C. Berg, Santpoort 1932. Rather late chronicle with Balinisms. 


104 


Bagus Turunan (B.T.) 27 
(rather late Balinese) 


Bhimaswarga (Bs.) 28 
(rather late Balinese) 


Bhismaparwa (B.P.) 
(presumably early 11th century) 


Bhomakawya (B.K.) 3° 


27 See KBwb. II 259 s.v. kalilit and also I 359 s.v. anih. 

28 See KBwb. II 236 s.v. klenting and II 237 s.v. klénéng. 

Given is the word gitawddatra (= gitawdaditra, see KBwh. I 343 s.v. ayn). 
According to Van der Tuuk probably dating from c. 1100; according 
to H. Kern (V.G.K. X, 1922, p. 8) dating from the 14th century (see 
A. Teeuw in his thesis, pp. 4ff. and p. 59 note 8). 

31 The word bahiri occurring in this text (IV 19) is translated by Teeuw, 


29 
30 


gamelan 


gending luwang 
gong gambang 


kakeloran 
rebab 
suling 
trawangsah 


curing 
k(a)léneng 
sangka 


bhéri 


kendang 

mahagara 
(mahasara) 

mrdangga 


munda (munda) 


padahi 
pataha 
cangkha 


wadatra 29 
bheéri 31 
curing 
ganta 
garantang 


HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


10-12, 33; 
72, 130 
130 

83, 140 


10, 12, 35, 
72,83, 130 
83, 140 
65, 130 
140 

10, 35, 40, 
72, 83, 130 


140 

EVO O48 
LXX 1 

XI 1 
UXXX1 49, 
XCVI 16 


(acc. to TEEUW 


garantung) 


however, with “bark cloth”. See also Kor. p. 30, 126, 164, 223, 224, 317. 


Brahmanda-purana (Brh.) 


Calon Arang (C.A.). 
(Old Javanese prose, 


16th century) 


TABLE B 


gending 


gong 
gubar 


kahala 
kangsi 
kendang 


kukulan 
mrdangga 
murawa 


padahi 


rofiji 
sangghani 
cangkhakalaha 
suling 
tabeh-tabehan 
taluktak 
taronji 


mardala 
murawa 
cangkha-kala 


gending 


gong 


kamanak 
kangsi 
pereret 
sangka 
tabeh-tabehan 


105 


EX exlietial 1, 
CII 8 

CII 8, 10 
LXXXIT 30 
PRX Vere, 
LXXX VIL 35; 
CII 8 


1X VID 
xe 

EXO MIIT 
Lie 
Wille scl 
BOOK IX a2] 
(OO ON 
LOE ysio: 
DRC Ess 
SOI 1220, 
LEXOLVeS 
PORT t 
iOO Vay 
XCVILI 2 
DOONEY 
IV 14 
LXXXI 26 
Rie 2 
Toil) 
46 

46 

46 

VIL Sl, 
Stu 

VILE Cue 
XII 

Tr it 

felt 
POO NAT 
IX 

oe 1X LiL 


106 HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


Cantakaparwa (C.P.) 3? gubar 80, 223 
(11th century °) 
Caturyuga (Catur.) 33 bheri 5 
(Old Javanese prose) gending 5 
gubar 5 
sangka 5 
Chronicle of Bayu (Kr.B.) 34 grantang 69 
(after 1520) 
Cupak (C.) 35 trewasa 
Dangdang petak (Dpt.) 3° cantung I 
(rather late Balinese) pangarah Hi 
samépa II 
Frankfurt N.S. No. 21320 37 curing verso 3 
(charter) kajar verso 4 
Harigraya Kakawin (H.) 38 bheri LVS 
curing VIII 4 (ina 
different version) 
preret POX ENT AS 
Hariwijaya (Hr.) 39 barebet XI 13 
Jayapurana (Dj.pur.) 4° badahi 
(rather late Balinese) ketur 
saron 


Kidung Adiparwa (Kid.Adip.) 41. trewasa 


32 
33 


34 
35 
36 
37 


38 


39 


40 
41 


See KBwb. II 762 s.v. tempur and IV 816 s.v. gubar. 

See KBwb. III 755 s.v. lyab. The numbers of the pages refer to cod. Leyden 
3898. 

See KBwb. IV 668 s.v. garantang. 

See KBwb. II 607 s.v. trawangsa. 

See KBwb. I 576 s.v. cantung, I 94 s.v. arah and III 336 s.v. samépa. 

Copy dating from the Majapahit period, from an earlier original (Van 
Naerssen pp. 58ff. No. IV). 

For the meaning of kakawin and kidung see p. 8 note 38. The names of 
instruments occurring in this text are mentioned in KBwb. IV 871 s.v. bhéri, 
II 102 s.v. kryvang and IV 72 s.v. prérét. 

See KBwb. IV 900 s.v. barebet. 

See KBwb. IV 923 s.v. badahi. 

See p. 22 and KBwb. II 607 s.v. trawangsa. 


TABLE B 


Kidung Harsawijaya (Hrsw.) 42 


bangbang 
bhéri 


curing 
gamelan 
ghanta 


ghanta-ghanti 
gending 


gong 


gubar 
guntang 
kacchapi 


kendang 
ketur 
mahasara 
mrdangga 
peleret 
redep 


cangkha 


tabe(h)-tabehan 


tatabuhan 


107 


I 66b 

II 41b, V 53b, 
6la 

VI 94a 

Wo2/a, 72a. 

TV la, V 7 1b, 
VI 89a 

IV 33a, V1 -33b 
II 144a, IV 25b, 
30a, 41a, 47b, 53b, 
Vi 35D, 40a; 61a; 
714,07 5a, OLD; 
VI 33b, 9la 

II 39b, 144a, 

IV 25b, 30a, 41a, 
47b, 53b, V 33b, 
45a, 61a, 7 lay/oa, 
8lb, VI 9la 

V 33b, 53b, 6la 
VI Qla 

I 74a, II 38b, 
143b, IV 54a 

II 39b 

IV 102a, VI 49a 
V 6la 

II 41b 

V 75a 

I 74a, II 38b, 
143b, IV 54a 

II 41b, V 6la, 
Loa 

I 79b, II 41a, 41b, 
IV 40a, V 45b, 
53b, 62a, 76b, 94b, 
114b, 123a, 

VI 35b, 70b 

II 25a, 25b, 44b, 
ssi Olam oa; 


s2ePoeby. CC} Berg cB. KI EXXXxVIL (193))) pp. 49 it. 


108 HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


89a, 99a, 131b 
teteg V 2a 
tuwung V 6la 
unyan-unyan Wile la 
Kidung Pamaficangah (Pam.) 43 curing II 46 
gamelan IV 218 
gending II 46 
gong IV 79213) 253; 
257, 202,312 
kendang LV 79 253.5297; 
SIZ 
mrdangga IV 79, 237 
pangarah I 109 
tatabuhan TO TV 725220; 
241, 245, 322, 329 
Korawacrama (Kor.) 44 gubar 20 
lawuwina 128 
murawa 20 
cangkha 20 
unen-unen 86 
Krsnantaka (Krsn.) 45 kala-kala IX 3 
Krtabasa (Kr.) 46 bongbong 
(bangbang) 
Kufijarakarna (K.K.) 47 buraficah 7G 
bwajing 73 
(bofijing) 
gamel 75 
gending 73 
tatabuhan 73 
Lambang Salukat (L.S.) 48 kangsi XXIV 1 


43 Ed. by C. C. Berg, Santpoort 1929. 

44 Ed. and transl. by J. L. Swellengrebel (1936). To be dated probably 
before 1635. 

45 See KBwb. II 225 s.v. kala Il. 

46 See KBwb. II 231 s.v. kalih II. 

47 According to Krom II dating from c. 1350. The numbering of the references 
Matas tue WICK, < (IZ). 

48 See KBwb. II 379 s.v. kangsi. 


TABLE B 109 


Lubdhaka (L.) 49 rojeh XVIII 10 
sundari AV I 
unyan-unyan XXXVII 5 
Malat (Mal.) 50 bangbang 305, 412 
bedug XLIX 
cantung 13 (version c) 
cumangkirang 303 
dadamén 
gambang ALEX 
LXXITITI, 
LXXIX, XCI 
gamelan 51 XAUXS XXL 
XXXIV, 
>. @ ONS Tike. @ bAiA t 
XEIX YL EXT, 


EXVIII, CXIX, 
LAX, LXXIVv, 
LAX VI, 
LXXVII, 
LXXX; 
LXXXIV, 
LXXXVI, 
LXXXVIII, 
XG eis Gl 

gending luwang 

gerong LXXXI 13 


49 See KBwb. I 768 s.v. rojéh, III 28 s.v. sundari and I 22/23 s.v. un. 
50 Of the undoubtedly Old Javanese Malat there are an unlimited number of 


5 


me 


earlier and later copies extant. These show considerable variations in text. 
The passages indicated by Roman numbers, refer to Poerbatjaraka II 
pp. 259 ff. The copy summarized by this author dates from 1759. The other 
references are taken from Juynboll II and from KBwb. IV 1084 sv. 
bangbang, I 679 s.v. cangkirang, II 514 s.v. dami, III 720 s.v. luwang, 1V 702 
s.v. gérong, 1V 822 s.v. gong, IV 652 s.v. guntang, 1V 511 s.v. mandeh, IV 
541 s.v. murawa, IV 72 s.v. prérét, 1 733 s.v. redep, I 776 s.v. réyong, II 
248 s.v. salukat, II 699 s.v. taluktak, I1 666 s.v. teteg, Il 607 s.v. trawangsa, 
II 650 s.v. tudung. 

It is not clear from Poerbatjaraka’s translation which word(s) he 
translated with the word gamelan. In Canto LXXXVI this ‘gamelan’ consists 
of only two instruments and the translation of ‘gamelan’ in Canto LXIX 
seems questionable to me, since in the reference in question the redep (= 
terbang, see p. 39) and the kecapi are used. 


110 HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


(version c), 
26 (version b) 


gong 117 
gong pangarah 417 
guntang Cli; canto’ Z 
(guntang) 
kangsi LXXXIV 
kecapt LxXIXx 
mandeli 
murawa 417 
preret 
redep ON ed View lone: 
116 
reyong 1 
salukat XC; 36(version b) 
taluktak 38, 417 
teteg 159 
trawasa 13 (version c) 
tudung(an) 38 (version c) 
Mausalaparwa (see J.D.) cangka 71 
(11th century ?) tiiryya waditra 76/77 
Nawaruci (Nawar.) 52 bheri 63, 64 
kala 63, 64 
mrdangga 64 
pereret 63 
cangkha 63, 64 
Nitigastra (Ntg.) 53 bhahiri Tw 
O.J-O7 LIX (charter) padahi verso 15, verso 19 
Pafiji Angron Akung (P.A.) 54 gérong I 
Pafiji Kuda Narawangsa 55 gambang LX, UxXX!i 
(Panji K.N.) gamelan ILE VS XVI 


XVI, SEV, 


“2 According to Prijohoetomo, editor of the text, to be dated between 
1500 and 1619. 

53 Ed. by Poerbatjaraka, (B.J. 4), Bandung 1933. According to the 
editor the original text is to be dated “late Majapahit”. 

TS IPOCrinatyarelke, Il jy, C2 

> Poerbatjaraka II pp. 215ff. See also note 51 above. 


ii 


TABLE B 111 
EXIT, LXXi1 
rebab MEV 
Pafiji Kuda Semirang 56 calapita 
(Panji K.S.) gong 
kangsi 
kendang 
k(e)romong 
rebab 
salukat 
Pararaton (Par.) réyong XXIX 6 
(text-ed. Krom) 
tatabuhan MIDK &, ey 
XXII 35 
(text-ed. Krom) 
Rama Kling (R.K.) 57 garantang 
Rama Sasak (R.S.) 58 kalentang XI 
Ramawijaya kakawin (R.M.) 59 _ bheri XLieZ 
curing XXXIV 1 
kala-kala XII 
salunding Vie SSX TE 
Ramayana (R.) 60 bahir1 VIII 100 
bangsi III 39; VILE 28, 
152-25. Vi 10; 
VIL 
bheri XXI 207 
gangsa XXVI 135 
56 Poerbatjaraka II pp. 1ff. — The manuscript this author summarizes 


is written in the. Malay language, but is derived from a very old Javanese 


version. 


57 See KBwb. IV 668 s.v. garantang. 
58 See KBwb. II 236 s.v. kaléntang. 


59 See KBwb. II 224 s.v. kala III, II 102 s.v. kryang, III 242 s.v. salunding. 

60 According to Kern dating from the beginning of the 13th century, according 
to Brandes from the 10th, according to Poerbatjaraka I from the 
end of the 9th or at the latest from the early 10th century. See De Cas- 
paris (in Prasasti Indonesia II, p. 287), who is inclined to agree with 
Poerbatjaraka and adds new arguments in favour of an early date. 
(Cf. p. 2 note 8). Instead of mahasara, XXII 3 has mahdswara. 


gending 
gong 
kahala 
kala 


kala-kala 
kala-kala 
kalagangka 
kangsi 
kendang 
kinnara 


lawu-wina 
mahasara 


(mahaswara) 


mardala 
murawa 


padahi 


pataha 
rawanasta 
regang 
salangsang 
sangghani 


cangka 


suling 
tabe-tabehan 
tuwung 
wangsi 


HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


Kevlar eed 
XXV 66 

XII 65 

XX 
72 

xX 207 

SIC His 

XXII 3 
Seok 

Sev in2s 

VIIa) XL 13) 15) 
NK MOV, 
III 39, VIII 152, 
XVieie) x Vi 
fit Xv 23 
III 39, XVI 10 
SIX 13 SOdIas: 
SocVieZ3 
XPS 

XN 207, SOs: 
AX Ve ie 
XXVI 25 

I 62, Il 14 
WIll47, XIX 19, 
SO 4a. 
SON 72 
KVIEZ 
x13 

xx VI24 
NTisg 

XXVI 24 

XVI 12; 

SIT 72 

XIX 124 15,19. 
MXIT 3 

Ohl D 
XVI 
NII 6 

SOc 3 

Oe tai 


TABLE B 


Ratnawijaya (Rt.) 61 
(14th century) 


Sang Hyang Kamahayanikan 
(S.HK;) 


Sarasamuccaya (S.S.) 62 


Serat Kanda (S.K.) 63 


Séwagati (Swg.) 64 


Sipat iman akung 65 


(Sip.) 


Smarawédana (Smarw.) 66 
(the end of the 15th century ?) 


Sorandaka (Sor.) 67 


61 See KBwb. IV 121 s.v. privarana. 


62 See KBwb. IV 644 s.v. ganta, I 23 s.v. uni. Pages of 


68 Poerbatjaraka II pp. 68 ff. 
64 See KBwb. I 646 s.v. calung I. 


wina 
wina-rawanasta 


murawa 
cangka 


ghanta 


monyonyan 
wenu 
wina 


gamelan 
gong 
kecapi 
kendang 
ketuk 


gagamelan 

gender calung 

semar paguli- 
ngan 


gubar 

kala (kala) 
murawa 
sangka 


mandeli 
pereéret 
cangka 
bheri 
gamelan 
gong 
kendang 


113 


li 23 
VIII 167 


XX 19 
XX 19 


as l3, a 21, b 20 


320; 321, 333 
320 
320 
320 
320 


Lts16 
II 16 


II 16 


NMS 
WAC 
Wes 
Vis 


14, 15 
14,215 
14, 15 


III 70, 85 
III 148 

III 59, 70, 85 
£IE-70 


text-edition. 


65 Fairly recent Balinese, with a sprinkling of Dutch, Arabic and East Java- 
nese words. In KBwb. III 289 s.v. sipat IV a few remarks about this work 
are made. See for the names of instruments KBwb. II 225 s.v. kala III. 


66 See KBwb. IV 511 s.v. mandeli. 


67 Ed. by E. J. van den Berg, V.K.I. II (1939). 


114 HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


mrdangga HIPs 
pangarah 1212771 e600 
tatabuhan Higign47 52, 
OS505 
Sci Tafijung (S.T.) 68 beri VII 33,70 
gamelan Tl oZa ly, 
Wes 3 
gangsa V 176 
genta 132 
gong VTi 
kajar VII 33 
kendang ViE.sl 
okokan V 58 
sangka HIT 32 
suling 17, Vv 3s 
sundari I 14 
tabe-tabehan VII 85 
taluktak I 11, 58 
tatabuhan V 68 
Sudamala (Sud.) 69 bhéri IV 98 
kulkulan FENI7. 
Sumanasantaka (Sum.) 79 calung XXVII 8 
ganding XXXII Z; 
(gending) CXS 


68 Prijono the editor of the Sri Tafijung supposes that the text has been 


69 


recorded between + 1500 and += 1600. 
From a letter from L. C. Heyting: “If Sidapaksa is the same as Sri Tafijung 
(because S. is S.T.’s husband), then we should date the S.T. differently. For 
in the Gita Presida-paksa (cf. Kunst Il Table IV sub XI 11) I found, 
while I was living in Bali, the candra sengkala (chronogram) 1476 
Caka: rasa muni niwara wédaning rat 

6 7 4 1 
In that case the S.T. would date from the 16th century, namely 1476 + 78 = 
1554 A.D.” 
The text published by Van Stein Callenfels probably dates from 
the 17th or 18th century. As appears from the reliefs inspired by the story 
of Sudamala on Candi Tégawangi which dates from 1358, however, this text 
goes back to a much earlier one, which was already known and popular in 
the year mentioned. L.-C. Damais found as date of composition of one of 
the Sudamala texts July 13th, 1559. 


70 Kakawin from the Kadiri-period (c. 1050-1222). See Juynboll II and 


TABLE B 115 
garantung Lil? 
gong CXTIMT=3 
mongmong CXLIX 4 
mredangga Ell 62@) 
padahi CXTN 3 
rojeh GATIIES 
salukat XXIV 7 
cangka Dd ll 6 Ce) 
sundari Det 
tabang-tabang LX 1 
tabeh-tabehan Cx LTS 
tarayan LNG G) 
Swarawyafijana (Sw.) 71 lawuwina 10b 
Swargarohanaparwa (Swarg.) cangka 40 (Juyngott IT 
5/9) 
Tantri (T.) 72 badahi I (version b) 
curing Te 
gending thle) 
kacapi II 43 (version b) 
ketur V 105, 106 
lawuwina V 102 
cangkakalaha [79 OL 
(version b) 
crngga II 11 
tabang-tabang V 108 


71 
72 


KBwb. I 646 s.v. calung II (without transl.), II 613 s.v. tarayan, IV 668 
s.v. garantung, I 768 s.v. rojéh, II 814 s.v. tabang, III 28 s.v. sundari, III 405 
s.uv. cangka. Some names of instruments (gending, gong, rojéh, tabeh-tabehan, 
padahit) are mentioned in F. H. Van Naerssen’s article: “Twee koperen 
oorkonden van Balitung in het Koloniaal Instituut te Amsterdam”, B.K.1I. 
XCV (1937), pp. 441'ff., where (pp. 458-459) he gives a few lines of the 
Sumanasantaka. The canto which is referred to in KBwb. as CXIII is here 
said to be CVI or CVII. 

See KBwb. III 709 s.v. lazeu II. 

Tantri are called collections of tales in various versions (see KBwb. II 578- 
579 s.v. tantri). For the words mentioned here reference is made to Van 
der Tuuk in his KBwb. IV 159 s.v. padahi, II 233 s.v. kalaha, III 107 
s.v. ¢rngga, I 600 s.v. curing, I1 51 s.v. kacapi, II 158 s.v. ketur, II1 709 s.v. 
lawu II, II 814 s.v. tabang. 


116 HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


Tantri Kamandaka (T.K.) 78 beri 7, 
kendang 29 
madeli 1 
mredangga 17 
padahi 17 
pareret 17 
cangkha NV 
cangkhakala 16; 17 
(gangkhakala) 
sungu 17 
tabeh-tabehan 29 
Udyogaparwa (Ud.) 74 barebet it 
(presumably 11th century) bheri 90 
kala-kala 107 
mahagara 111 
mredangga 90 
munda 111 
murawa 111 
cangk(h)a 90 


cangkakahala 111 
tabe(h)-tabehan 90, 111 


Undakan Pangrus (U.P.) 75 gending luwang 
(kidung) saron 
(caruk saron) 
sakati 


73 


74 


15 


semar peguli- 
ngan 
turas pagérong 


Ed. Hooykaas (B.J. 2), Bandung 1931. Page-numbers in square brackets 
in the edition refer to the pages of the manuscript. 
See KBwb. IV 900 s.v. barebet, I 22/23 s.v. uni, II 606 s.v. triwikrama, 
II 245 s.v. kalakala, IV 541 s.v. murawa. 
This poem seems to have been written in 1361 Caka = 1439 A.D., according 
to the dating discovered by L. C. Heyting in Singaradja (North Bali) in a 
privately owned collection of candra sengkala. The chronogram in question ran: 
Kidung Undakan Pangrus rupa rasa guna jala 

; 1 6 3 1 
The quotations in KBwb. IV 702 s.v. gérong most probably refer to an 
Undakan Pangrus manuscript, p. 89. 


TABLE B uy 
Usana Bali (U.B.) 76 bhéri 
dengdéngkuk 
gem(p)rét 25, 29 
mredangga 
sangka 
Uttarakanda (Utt.) 77 bheri 104 
kala-kala 104 
mredangga 104 
munda 137 
panawa 104 
wind 104 
Wangbang Widéha (Ww.,) 78 badahi IV 99 
(17th or 18th century) bhéri II 
(gong bhéri) 
cantung I 45, IV 50 
redep III 69 
samépa Poleroe avo 
taluktak L329 
titir Pi153 
Waseng (Was.) 79 bangbang VI 
(17th or 18th century ?) gérong II 102 
gong LS 
kangsi XX 29 
pangarah i 8} 
redep II 102 
tabeh-tabehan 33 


Wrhaspati-tattwa (Wrh.) 8° 


76 


TT 


78 


79 


80 


The contents of the Usana Bali have been summarized and parts of the work 
have been edited by Friederich in T.N.I. IX, 3 (Batavia 1847). See for 
names of instruments esp. /.c. p. 290 and further KBwb. IV 793 s.v. gemrét, 
IV 535 s.v. mredangga (where we find also paksi or manuk mredangga = 
mrdangga bird), II 543 s.v. déngdéngkuk. In the manuscript used by Frie- 
derich the work is dated 1335 Caka (= 1413 A.D.). L. C. Heyting told 
me: “The Usana Bali, according to Pedanda Ngurah of Blayu, dates from 
1411 Caka = 1489 A.D.”. 

See Juynboll II and KBwb. IV 825 s.v. gangga, IV 38 s.v. panawa, III 
452 s.v. wind. 

See KBwb. IV 159 s.v. padahi, 1V 871 s.v. bhéri, 1 576 s.v. cantung, III 336 
s.v. samépa, II 699 s.v. taluktak, 1 733 s.v. redep, II 723 s.v. tapuk. 

See KBwhb. IV 1084 s.v. bangbang, IV 702 s.v. gérong, II 379 s.v. kangsi, 
I 94 s.v. arah II, I 733 s.v. redep. 

Ed. and ann. by Sudarshana Devi, [New Delhi], 1957. 


INDEX OF MANUSCRIPTS AND CHARTERS WHICH 
ARE MENTIONED IN- TABLES A AND Bt 


Adip. — Adiparwa . 

Ag. — Agastyaparwa . 
A.N. — Afiang Nilartha . 
A.P. — Arjuna Pralabda 
A.W. — Arjunawijaya 


Babia@hyenwe 

Barabudur (inscription) 
Batuan Ch, : 

Benmore, Cla, AX dts a 6 
Batur PP. Abang Che A 
B.B. — Babad Bla-Batuh 
Bebetin Ch. A I . ; 
B.K. — Bhomakawya . 


B.P. — Bhismaparwa . 
Bie ep pa OO etiam 
joy, CUB iah, 
pp. 619 ff. . 
Br. II pp. 49 ff. . 
Brh. — Brahmanda-purana . 
Bs. — Bhimaswarga 


B.T. — Bagus Turunan . 
BulihanyC@ hee eee 
Buwahan Ch. A 

Buwalharin@ lise 
B.Y. — Bharatayuddha 


Cc. — Cupak Ap id 
C.A. — Calon Arang . 
Campaca Ch Ay 
Campaga Ch. C 
Catur. — Caturyuga 
Charter Frankfurt N.S. 
No. 21315 
Charter Frankfurt N.S. 
No. 21319 : 
Charter Frankfurt N.S. 
No. 21320 
Charter Klampenborg 
C.P. — Cantakaparwa . 


Page 
94 
103 
103 
103 
100 


Dj.pur. — Jayapurana . 
Dpt. — Dangdang petak . 


E 46 


Gh. — Ghatotkacagraya . 
GOs — GedangansChyess 
Gobleg Ch. (Pura Batur) B . 


H. — Haricraya Kakawin 

Hr. — Hariwijaya . ; 
Hrsw. — Kidung Hemavievae 
ERWi —— Llariwanccame 


J.D. — Mausalaparwa . 


K.A. — Kembang Arum Ch. 
Kid. Adip. — Kidung Ppaseite 
K.K. — Kufjarakarna . 
IO se ee 

II 


Kor. — Korawacrama . 

Kr. — Krtabasa . : 
Kr.B. — Chronicle of Baa j 
Krsn. — Krsnantaka 

K.S. — Kidung Sunda . : 
K.Snd. — Kidung Sundayana . 
K.T. — Stone of Kuburan Candi 


L. — Lubdhaka . . 
L.S. — Lambang ahi 


Maly Malat® 


1 Ch, stands in the following lines for Charter. 


INDEX TABLES A AND B 


Nag. — Nagarakrtagama 
Nawar. — Nawaruci 
Ntc. — Niticastra 


CPIKOS 100 


XLVIII 
Waa, 
ILI 
LIDGE 
ILO 
ILDOMWGEL 
IEO;O-GU0L 5 
CUiie: 
GIW = 
CVIII 
Cxti a: 
CXVIII 


P.A. — Pafiji Angron Akung 
Pam. — Kidung Pamaficangah 
Pandak-bandung Ch. . . 

Panji K.N. — Pafiji Kuda oo 


wangsa . 
Panji K.S. — Pafiji Kuda Cente 

rang : 
Par. — Pararaton 


Pengotan Ch. A I 
Pg. — Pirwadhigama . 
Pura Kehen Ch. C . 


R. — Ramayana . ; 
R.K. — Rama Kling” 


R.L. — Rangga Lawé . 

R.M. — Ramawijaya kakawin 
R.S. — Rama Sasak 

Rt. — Ratnawijaya . 


Sembiran Ch, AI .. 

S.H.K. — Sang Hyang Koma 
hayanikan : 

Sibang Kadja Ch. 

Sip. — Sipat iman akung . 

S.K. — Serat Kanda . 


Smar. — Smaradahana 
Smarw. — Smarawédana . 
Sor. — Sorandaka 

S.S. — Sarasamuccaya 


S.T. — Sri Tafijung 
Sud. — Sudamala 
Sukawana Ch. AI. 


Sum. — Sumanasantaka . 

Sut. — Sutasoma 

Sw. — Swarawyafijana 

Swarg. — Swargarohanaparwa 
Swe. — Séwagati 


C.K. — 2nd Cri Kahulunan Ch. 


qe == Were . 
TAK. — Tantri amatdale ; 
Trunan (Chy A 1 2 

Pare Om 1B. 


U.B. — Usana Bali . 
Ud. — Udyogaparwa . , 
U.P. — Undakan Pangrus . 
Utt. — Uttarakanda 


Ww. — eee yas é 
Wargasari 

Was. — Waseng . 

Wir. — Wirataparwa . 


Wrh. — Wrhaspati-tattwa . 
W.S. — Wrtta-saficaya : 
Ww. — Wangbang Widéha . 


Le ‘92 BCI “OZT “yZI “ter 
CE)TEL @ Oct 811 orl 
GZ ‘GOT ‘26 “€9 “SS “bs 
PC-€C-C2 OEE EGE tel Ole lee LL 
IZ IIT ‘06 ‘68 ‘99 
BOWES Ie ye SOTO Te Sa 
(2)@ze 
0z ‘BI€ ‘00S “b6z “f6z ‘992 
re ‘eeez “€6 ‘16 ‘Or ‘Th PAT 
2 61 PIT ‘COT ‘OOT ‘86 ‘26 
2 81 6. €8: OL B66 SE 82 
pA ral 0c. OL W901 “via I 
2 oe) 
P ‘C6 ‘C6 “6S ‘8S ‘ZS ‘9S 
S OT ‘ST CG ucGhyenvc OV =I 
Ww 
= viel cA LST ‘IST ‘6bT ‘ZbT 
- Lar ‘Srl 7 col 1ele Cel 
a RES EeS) ‘LIT ‘COL ‘TOT ‘ZL “es 
4 S ‘ZS ‘8b ‘6E ‘bz ‘OZ ‘I O 
< 611) ad 
=) 
2 inpnqereg $73 
: (sjfeq queydoye) LreseseN rpued pt 
Veta les ipued "99 IQ HY PUoses pottod-erpugyres) 
I sopdure}-SusIq ‘yUSO IQ ey Is4L] essul[ey JO 9}e}S 
Q Se Wiepeatioo dan yz punofy 9q 0} DINU MA oyeqd 


powog ssouvaef [emus 


GHLNUSAadaa AUV SLNAWNAULSNI HONS HOIHM NO SHLLYNLVLIS GNV SHHITHA 
30 GNV ‘SINAWOULSNI IVOISAW ASANITVa GIO GNV ASANVAV( GIO GHAYaSAYd AO LSIIT TVOINOIONOYHO Yd WIFVL 


121 


TABLE C 


‘odA} pjoq ul poqyurid ore “yooq sty} ut psonpoida ‘sforjet oy} Jo ssoquinu sy, _ 


vy reid Be 
emseres jo ojjonye}s ozu0I1g “pt 
ey (sJoyyz-1eq) 
[eso], Wor o}JeNWeIs 9ZUO0IG (é) Amnyusd YIG 
lar (sjores-euekewey oy} Jo 


ysed puz) sjduie} emyeig ‘9d 


Iv (syoqfos 
-euvkeuey oy} Jo Ved 4s7) 
apeysnyeq oy} jo 
IPISIOUUT sy} “Ustaseq 3ST 

Or (uaals 
uoT}VO] OU) TUMPeYS 


:ojduia} emi4y) “Gg 


6£ ‘SE uy] ‘SON =: episyyON 
[‘f‘p‘e ‘son : 9pis}so A 
Lee uy 
ce ‘p 99 “B@ “SON: apisyynos 
u “UW 
re | ‘Y SF Tay 


cS ‘2 “q “eS “SON : IpIs|sey 
:opesysnyeq 294} jo 
opisjno sy} ‘JWoteseq 3ST 

:opduo} eaIy “Y 


xojdwios-9,dwse} ueuequieig OSs ‘2 POllag UOT}eIO}SOYY pay[ed-0S 


CLucv SAL 
Cole OL ELE CORN GZRON LG FAT 
o¢ OF alll 


HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


122 


CC (sjodum.yq-9]qnop) mmef ipues “pr 
ZS (Suokg4) 1qtut4sN ipued Oost yyedeleyy JO 2781S 


¢ winip-joddea szu0i1g 


z WNIp-}I[s 9zu01g L871 
Tera bundwmajas 
0s (¢) ummeys 
IS ‘Os IN] pexseu-suo0T 
i. (SOZT 24039q) 
ose ipue) o9zI 9 
6P (Qe yoou 
Peppms-[]9q YM IpueN) “prq] 
eQp ‘Qp (winip-soddejs 
YUM eMeIeyg) lesesuls ipury OS7T- 2 LIesesulS JO 978}S 
LY Lipsy wor buokay Ainjyued YE] 243 
jo suluulseq oy} 10 
Cee) (phe zeL HIPe yy JO 9381S 
poisg ssoueaef seq 
OF diey & yoy uo 
epunqeef WoIy Joroy LL6 
oY daey yam 
ynf{puesN woly oyonyeys ozu01g Ainquso YO] 


poliag asouevaef ysey —— osouvarf [eau 


:‘ON Jopun yooq 


su} ut poonposday punof oq 0} 2194 


123 


TABLE C 


096S “ON ‘SPIN “NPI g 2965 “ON “SOW APC 


z8 (2) semex-bunuog 
Suey spelqo au0}js Ig CULIEIO DIVMUDY}Iv9 
08 younusa a solos Aoy-sapuab adAy buokas oy} JO soy12> 
62-SZ SP V81e] pue jews $/ s]}oq-qe]]od ¢/ unbuojuae 
ZI syjeq-1a 401d IZ Ddiuayb-Sul1 pue vavyypy OZ Su0s JO SpuLy SNorseA 


13M 0} ‘Teg ul se earl 
UL ][aM SB ‘Spaq-JOALI UT JO ]IOS dy} UI puNo} ‘ajqeyep Jou ‘poyep jou ‘syUstUMIYsUT 9zZU0Iq Jo Joquinu asiey e ATpeuLy 


69 suos 
89 yeduin.13j-]Joys 
Ynys rpued Armyuso YAS] 
eaef [erjUay) 
£9 (2) sump poysrem “prq] 
99 ‘qs9 “egg ‘SO (soqyjonyzeys Ainyuss 
e]}00-e.119} ‘AIp) wyedeleypy Jo sIS Up 2} Jo pues sy L 
v9 (mq uvipuy "N) (eae[ seq) 
uevsunssurusg oy} Jo sadojs Ainqusd YIP 
e9 (tunip) 1sueavess | ipued ssel 9 
ZO (2) spequida. ‘shuokas 
19 ‘O09 shunqupb ooqureq 
(S/E]) Ve1J0}-Ddnpuag 
6S (njunyb) ({reyep) adurey eseN 
pybuns YUM LID Mod 
QC 8U0S IS8IP] 
is younwmay “suos 
oe unIp Pepeey-Iuo 
GG suos ‘WMeYyS 


:apduua} pediourig 


pe a ee Ee me ee DT a Ne, Rea Bey 


LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 
AND OF BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTES! 


A 


A dip. — Adiparwa, ed. by H. H. Juynboll. The Hague, 1906. 

A g. — Agastyaparwa, ed., ann. and transl. into Dutch by J. Gonda in 
B.K.L., text: XC, parts 2 and 3 (1933), notes: XCII, part 3 (1935), 
transl.: XCIV, parts 1 and 2 (1936). 

Album Veth — Feestbundel van Taal-, Letter-, Geschied- en 
Aardrijkskundige bijdragen ter gelegenheid van zijn tachtigsten ge- 
boortedag aan Dr. P. J. Veth ... aangeboden. Leyden, 1894. 

Alvad — Thomas Alvad, The Kafir Harp (Man LIV No. 233, 
pp. 151-154), 1954. 

Amarakocga — Sanskrit dictionary of Amara(sinha). (6th or 7th 
century A.D.). 

A.N. — Afiang Nilartha, see Juynboll III, pp. 173 ff. In Poer- 
batjaraka’s text-edition (B.K.I. CVII, 1951, pp. 201 ff.) the work 
is called Anfang Nirartha. 

A. P. — Arjuna Pralabda, see Juynbol! III, pp. 221 ff. 

Apte — V. S. Apte, The student’s Sanskrit-English dictionary. 
Poona, 1890. 

The practical Sanskrit-English dictionary. Poona, 1890. 2nd ed. rev. 
and enlarged. Bombay, 1912. 

Artis Thesaurus — See Heine-Geldern I. 

Ars Asiatica— Etudes et documents publiés par Victor Goloubew 
sous le patronage de l’Ecole Frangaise d’Extréme-Orient. Vols. 
I-XVIII. Paris, 1914-1935. 

Asia Major — New Series, London, 1949 — in progress. 

Atlantis — Lander - Volker - Reisen, Vols. 1-36. Berlin etc., 
1929-1964. 

A.W. — Arjunawijaya, see Juynboll III, pp. 135 ff. 


B 


Babi A — Babi Charter A (see Goris II, Vol. I, sub 447 and 
Vol. II p. 303 s.v. gangkha). 

Bar. — N. J. Krom and T. van Erp, Beschrijving van Barabudur, 
2 vols. and 3 portfolios with plates. (Archaeologisch Onderzoek in 
Ned.-Indié IIT). The Hague, 1920-1931. (See Krom III). 

Batuan — Batuan Charter (see Goris II, Vol. II, sub 352). 


1 In the alphabetical order the ¢ comes after the s. 


LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS LAS 


Batunya A I — Batunya Charter A I (see Goris II, Vol. I, 
sub 106). 

Batur P. Abang A — Batur P. Abang Charter A (see Goris 
II, Vol. II, sub 305). 

B. B. — Babad Bla-Batuh, ed. by C. C. Berg in the series: Uitgaven 
van de Kirtya Liefrinck-Van der Tuuk te Singaradja, Javaansch- 
Balische historische geschriften II (publ. of the Kirtya Liefrinck- 
Van der Tuuk at Singaradja, Jav.-Bal. historical writings). Sant- 


poort, 1932. 

Bebetin A I — Bebetin Charter A I (see Goris II, Vol. I, 
sub 002). 

B. E. F.E.O. — Bulletin de l’Ecole Frangaise d’Extréme-Orient. 


Hanoi, 1901-1952; Saigon, 1954-1956; Paris, 1956 — in progress. 
Bere. © Cy cee-b, bo: Hrew.) Ki So ke Sad.?Pam.; KK; Ie. 
Bernatzik — H. A. Bernatzik, Musikinstrumente der Berg- 

volker Hinterindiens (Atlantis fasc. V), May 1940. 

B. J. — Bibliotheca Javanica, Vols. 1-9, publ. by the Kon. Bataviaasch 
Genootschap van Kunsten en Wetenschappen ((R.) Bat. Soc.). 
Weltevreden-Bandung, 1930-1940. 

B. K. — Bhomakawya, ed. by R. Friederich (V.B.G. XXIV), 1852; 
transl. into Dutch by A. Teeuw (thesis Utrecht). Groningen-Batavia, 
1946. 

B. K. I. — Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde (van Neder- 
landsch-Indié), publ. by the Kon. Inst. voor (de) Taal-, Land- en 
Volkenkunde (van Ned.-Indié). The Hague, 1852 — in progress. 

Bloemen Waanders, P. L. van, see: Van Bloemen 
Waanders. 

Bosch — F. D. K. Bosch, Selected Studies in Indonesian Ar- 
chaeology. The Hague, 1961. 

Bosch, F. D. K. — See K. A. 

B. P. — Bhismaparwa, ed. and ann. by J. Gonda (B.J. 7 and 7a). 
Bandung, 1936, 1937. 

Br. I — H. N. van der Tuuk and J. [L. A.] Brandes, Transcriptie 
van vier Oud-Javaansche oorkonden op koper, gevonden op het 
eiland Bali (T.B.G. XXX, pp. 603 ff.), 1885. 

Br. II — J. [L. A.] Brandes, De koperen platen van Sémbiran 
(Boeleleng, Bali), oorkonden in het Oud-Javaansch en het Oud-Bali- 
neesch (T.B.G. XXXIII, pp. 16 ff.), 1890. 

Br. III — J. [L. A.] Brandes, Beschrijving van de ruine bij de desa 
Toempang, genaamd Tjandi Djago, in de residentie Pasoeroean. 
The Hague-Batavia, 1904. 

Brandes, J: L. A. — See Nag: ;-Par: 

Brandts Buys I — J. S. Brandts Buys, Aanteekeningen betref- 
fende enkele Indonesische muziekinstrumenten (Djawa II, pp. 34 ff.), 
1922. 

Brandts Buys II — J. S. and A. Brandts Buys-Van Zijp, Oude 
Klanken (Djawa V, pp. 16 ff.), 1925. 


126 HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


Brandts Buys III — J. S. and A. Brandts Buys-Van Zijp, 
Toeters en Piepers (Djawa V, pp. 311 ff.), 1925. i 

Brandts Buys IV — J. S. and A. Brandts Buys-Van Zijp, De 
toonkunst bij de Madoereezen (Djawa VIII, pp. 1 (= 59) — 296 
(2354) 31927, 

Brh. — Brahmanda-purana, ed., ann. and transl. into Dutch by 
J. Gonda (B.J. 5 and 6). Bandung, 1932-1933. 

Bs. — Bhimaswarga, see Juynboll III, pp. 267 ff. 

B.S. E.1.C. — Bulletin de la Société des Btudes Indochinoises (de 
Saigon). Saigon, 1883 — in progress. 

B. T. — Bagus Turunan. Balinese poem, see Juynboll V, pp. 100- 
101. 

Bulihan — Bulihan Charter. See O.V. 1922, p. 52; Indonesie I, 
p. 200: Goris II, Vol. 1. p36: 

Burgess — Jas. Burgess, The ancient monuments, temples and 
sculptures of India, Part I. London, 1897. 

Buschan — Georg Buschan, Die Sitten der Volker. Vols. I-IV. 
Stuttgart-Berlin-Leipzig, 1922. 

Buwahan A — Buwahan Charter A (see Goris II, Vol. I, 
sub 303 and E.B. p. 27). 

Buwahan E— Buwahan Charter E (see E.B. pp. 40 ff. and Goris 
II, Vol. I, sub 602). 

B. Y. — Bharatayuddha, ed. by J. G. H. Gunning. The Hague, 1903. 
Dutch translation by Poerbatjaraka and C. Hooykaas in: Djawa 
XIV, 1934. 


GC 


C. — Cupak. Balinese poem, see Juynboll V, pp. 84 ff. and pp. 
128-129. 

C. A. — Calon Arang, ed. and transl. into Dutch by R. Ng. Poerbatja- 
raka (B.K.I. LXXXII, pp. 110 ff.), 1926. 

Campaga A — Campaga Charter A (see E.B. pp. 46ff. and 
Goris II, Vol. I, sub 631). 

Campaga C — Campaga Charter C (see E.B. pp. 50ff. and 
Goris II, Vol. I, sub 804). 

Carpeaux, Ch, see: Dufour and Carpeaux. 

Casparis, |] Gudersses De Casparis 

Cat. I — W. P. Groeneveldt. Catalogus der Archeologische Ver- 
zameling van het Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten en Weten- 
schappen. Batavia, 1887. 

Cat. II — J. A. van der Chijs. Catalogus der Ethnologische Ver- 
zameling van het Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten en Weten- 
schappen. 4th ed. Batavia-The Hague, 1885. 

Catur. — Caturyuga, quoted in KBwb. as fr. bpl. See: J u ynboll 
IV, p. 301; G. W. J. Drewes, Drie Javaansche goeroe’s. (Thesis 
Leyden). Leyden, 1925, pp. 147 and 211. 

Centini — Serat Tjentini. Babon asli saking kita Leiden ing 


negari Nederland. Vols. I-VIII. Batawi, 1912-1915. 


LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 27 


Charters Frankfurt I-VII — See Van Naerssen, 
pp. 29-81. 

Charters Klampenborg (Denmark) VIII-XI — See Van 
Naerssen, pp. 82-117. 

Chauvet — S. Chauvet, Musique Negre. Paris, 1929. 

Christie AH. seex-lwitchett and-Christie. 

Chronicle of Bayu — See Kr. B. 

Cohen Stuart, A. B. — See K.O. 

Coomaraswamy — Ananda K. Coomaraswamy, The parts of a 
vina (J-A.0.5.,:L, pp. 238 ff.), 1930. 

Courant — Maurice Courant, Chine et Corée. Essai historique 
sur la musique classique des Chinois, avec un appendice relatif a la 
musique coréenne (1912) (Encycl. de la Musique, Ire partie, vol. I, 
pole7 7. th.) 1921 

C. P. — Cantakaparwa, see Juynboll IV, pp. 219 ff. 

Crawfurd — J. Crawfurd, History of the Indian Archipelago. 
3 Vols. Edinburgh-London, 1820. 

Cultureel Indié — Cultureel Indié. Vols. I-VIJI. Leyden, 
1939-1946, 


D 


Damais I — L.-C. Damais, Epigrafische aantekeningen (T.B.G. 
LXXXIII, pp. 1 ff.), 1949. 

Damais II — L.-C. Damais, Etudes d’épigraphie indonésienne 
(BEB OD XIEV pp. ae XV I pp: 1th XLVIL? ppaZ fhovand 
il Xe ppl th.)-A1951, °52,555-and 58-tesp. 

De Casparis— J. G. de Casparis, Inscripties uit de Cailéndratijd 
(Prasasti Indonesia I), Bandung, 1950. See Prasasti Indo- 
nesia. 

De Casparis, J. G. — See Prasasti Indonesia. 

D’Eerste Boeck — De Eerste Schipvaart der Nederlanders naar 
Oost-Indié onder Cornelis de Houtman, 1595-1597. I. D’Eerste 
Boeck, van Willem Lodewijckz (published by the “Linschoten- 
Vereeniging’). The Hague, 1915. 

De Gironcourt — Georges de Gironcourt, Recherches de Géo- 
graphie Musicale en Indochine (B.S.E.I.C., Nouvelle Série, Tome 
XVII, No. 4, pp. 1-174, 1942). (Saigon, 1943). 

Djak. Mus. — Djakarta Museum. Originally Museum of the (R.) 
Bat. Soc., Weltevreden; now: Museum of the Institute for Indo- 
nesian Culture, Djakarta. 

Djawa — Djawa. Quarterly, ed. by the Java-Instituut. Weltevreden, 
1920-1941. 

Djayadipura — R. M. Djayadipura, Gegevens met betrekking 
tot den gamelan (Pre-advice to the Java-Congress of 1921) (Djawa 
I, Prae-adviezen II, pp. 91 ff.), 1921. 

Dj. pur. — Jayapurana. Balinese poem, see Juynboll V, p. 82. 


128 HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


D pt. — Dangdang petak, see Juynbol1 II, pp. 216 ff. 
Tey and Carpeaux — H. Dufour et Ch. Carpeaux, Le 
Bayon a Angkor Thom. Paris, 1914. 


E 


E. — Copperplates in the collection of the Djak. Mus. 

E. B. — Epigraphia balica I, by P. V. van Stein Callenfels. (V2B.G. 
LXVI, part 3). Weltevreden, 1926. 

Encycl. de la Musique — Encyclopédie de la Musique et 
Dictionnaire du Conservatoire, fondé par Albert Lavignac. 11 Vols. 
Paris, 1913-1931. 

Encycl. Ned.-Indié — Encyclopaedie van Nederlandsch Oost- 
Indié, 1st ed. vols. I-IV. The Hague, Leyden, 1896-1905; 2nd ed. 
vols. I-IV. The Hague, Leyden, 1917-1921, with four supplements. 
The Hague, Leyden, 1927-1939. 

Erp, Th. van — See Bar. 

Ethnos — Ethnos. Bimonthly publ. by the Ethnographical Museum 
of Sweden. Stockholm I (1936) — in progress. 


F 


Feestbundel Kon. Bat. Gen. — Feestbundel uitgeg. door 
het Kon. Bat. Gen. bij gelegenheid van zijn 150 jarig bestaan 1778- 
1928. (Jubilee Volume of the (R.) Bat. Soc. on the occasion of the 
150th anniversary of the foundation of the Society). 2 Vols. Wel- 
tevreden, 1929. 

Fétis — F. J. Fétis, Histoire générale de la musique depuis les 
temps les plus anciens jusqu’a nos jours. 5 Vols. Paris, 1869-1876. 

Fokker — A. A. Fokker, Wiradtaparwa I. (Thesis Leyden). The 
Hague, 1938. [Four chapters re-edited and transl. into Dutch. ] 
[See Wir.] 

Foucaux — Ph. Ed. Foucaux, Le Lalita Vistara (Annales du 
Musée Guimet vol. IV, lre partie). Paris, 1884. 

Frankfurt — See Charters Frankfurt. 

Friederich, R. — See B.K.; U.B. 


G 


Gedenkschrift K.I. — Gedenkschrift [van het] Koninklijk 
Instituut voor de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch- 
Indie. Uitgegeven ter gelegenheid van het 75-jarig bestaan op 4 Juni 
1926. The Hague, 1926. 

Geiger — Wilhelm Geiger +, Culture of Ceylon in mediaeval times, 
ed. by Heinz Bechert. Wiesbaden, 1960. 

Gh. — Ghatotkacagraya, see Juynboll III, pp. 149 ff. 

G hosh — Manomohan Ghosh, see Natyacastra. 

Gironcourt, Georges de,see: De Gironcourt. 


LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 129 


Globus — Globus. Illustrierte Zeitschrift fiir Lander- und Volker- 
kunde. Braunschweig, since 1862. 

G.O. — H. Kern, Over eene Oudjavaansche oorkonde [gevonden te 
Gédangan, Surabaya] van Caka 782 [of 872] ((V).M.K.A.W.L., 
2nd Series, part X, pp. 77-115. Amsterdam, 1881). Reprinted in: 
VG. Kes VAlsC1917), por b7aKE. 

Gobleg B — Gobleg (Pura Batur) Charter B — (See E.B. pp. 8 ff. 
and Goris II, Vol. I, sub 1011). 

Goloubew I — Victor Goloubew, Documents pour servir a l’étude 
d’Ajanta. Les peintures de la premiere grotte (Ars Asiatica X), 
1927. 

Goloubew II — Victor Goloubew, L’age du bronze au Tonkin 
et dans le Nord-Annam (B.E.F.E.O. XXIX [1929], pp. 1 ff.). 
Hanoi, 1930. 

Gonda, J. — See Ag.; B.P.; Brh. 

Goris I—R. Goris, De eenheid der Mataramsche Dynastie (Feest- 
bundel Kon. Bat. Gen. vol. II, pp. 202-206). Weltevreden, 1929. 

Goris II — R. Goris, Prasasti Bali (2 vols.). Bandung, 1954. 

Goris, R. — See K.T. ; 

Grabowsky — F. Grabowsky, Musikinstrumente der Dajaken 
Sudost-Borneos (Globus LXXXVII, No. 7, pp. 102-105). Braun- 
schweig, 1905 

Greidanus — J. Greidanus, Beginselen en ontwikkeling van de 
interpunctie, in ’t biezonder in de Nederlanden. (Thesis Utrecht). 
Zeist, 1926. 

Griffiths — John Griffiths, The paintings in the Buddhist cave- 
temples of Ajanta, vol. I. London, 1896. 

Groeneveldt — W. P. Groeneveldt, Notes on the Malay Ar- 
chipelago and Malacca, compiled from Chinese sources (V.B.G. 
XXXIX), 1876. 

Groeneveldt, W. P. — See Cat. I. 

Groneman — J. Groneman, De gamélan te Jogjakarta (in: Verh. 
K.A.W.L., XIX, pp. 25-125), 1890. 

Grosset — Joanny Grosset, Inde. Histoire de la musique depuis 
lorigine jusqu’a nos jours (Encycl. de la Musique, Ire partie, vol. I, 
pp. 257 ff.), 1921. 

Grttnwedel I — Albert Griinwedel, Alt-Buddhistische Kultstatten 
in Chinesisch-Turkestan. Berlin, 1912. 

Griinwedel II — Albert Gmrinwedel, Buddhistische Kunst in 
Indien, 2nd ed. Berlin, 1920. 

Gunning, JAG. He — See Bu Y. 


H 


H. — Haricraya, see Juynboll III, pp. 151 ff. 

Hadiwidjojo—P.A. Hadiwidjojo, De bedojo ketawang (Hand. 
Java-Congres 1919, pp. 87 ff.). Weltevreden, 1921. 

Hand. Java-Congres 1919 — Handelingen van het Eerste 


130 HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


Congres voor de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde van Java, Solo 1919, 
Weltevreden, 1921. 

Havell — E. B. Havell, Indian Sculpture and Painting. London, 
1908. 

Hazeu—G.A. J. Hazeu, Bijdrage tot de kennis van het Javaansche 
tooneel. (Thesis Leyden). Leyden, 1897. 

Heekeren, H. R. van, see: Van Heekeren. 


Heine-Geldern I — Robert Heine-Geldern, Altjavanische 
Bronzen (Artis Thesaurus, vol. 1). Vienna-Leipzig, 1925. 
Heine-Geldern II — Robert Heine-Geldern, Prehistoric 


Research in the Netherlands Indies, in: Science and Scientists in 
the Netherlands Indies, ed. by P. Honig and F. Verdoorn (pp. 
129-167). New York, 1945. 

Heine-Geldern III — Robert Heine-Geldern, Das Tocharer- 
problem und die Pontische Wanderung (Saeculum II No. 2, pp. 
225 fl OS ls 

Heins — E. L. Heins, Muzikale exotica (in: Kultuurpatronen I, 
pp. 112 ff.). Delft, 1959. 

Heyting—L.C. Heyting, Over Balische houten trommen op wielen 
(koelkoel) (Djawa VI, pp. 136 ff.), 1926. 

HickmannW— Hans Hickmann, Les harpes de l Egypte pharaonique 
(essai d’une nouvelle classification) (Bulletin de I’Institut d’Egypte, 
XXXV, pp. 309 ff.). Cairo, 1954. 

Hikayat Cékélwanéngpati — See Rassers, 

Hoop, Ay Ny J. Dh a Dh vwanider seeV aneder ike op: 

Hooykaas, Co — see BY. TK, 

Hr. — Hariwijaya, see Juynboll! III, pp. 152 ff. 

Hrsw. — Kidung Harsawijaya, ed. by C. C. Berg (in: B.K.I. 
LXXXVITI, pp. 49 ff.), 1931. 

Huyser — J. G. Huyser, Indonesische muziekinstrumenten (N.-I. 
Oud & Nieuw XIII, pp. 235 ff. and 266 ff.), 1928/1929. 

H. W. — Hariwangca (Harivanga), ed. and translated into Dutch by 
A. Teeuw (V.K.I. IX). The Hague, 1950. 


I 


I ndische Bodem — De Indische Bodem, ed. by Th. Ligthart, 
na Hovig and D. A. Rinkes. Weltevreden, 1926. 

ee esié — Indonesié. Bimonthly. Vols. I-X. The Hague, 1947- 

Te A rch. f. Ethn, — Internationales Archiv fiir Ethnographi 
Leyden, 1888 — in progress. Seas 


J 


Jacob son — Edw. Jacobson and J. H. van Hasselt, De gong- 
fabricatie te Semarang (Publication of ’s Riyks Ethnographisch 
Museum, Ser. II No. 15). Leyden, 1907. 


LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 131 


Jan In-Lu— Jan In-Lu, Muzykalniye instrumenti Kitaya (= The 
musical instruments of China) (Russian transl. by: Swi I and E.G. 
Chaverdian, ed. by I.Z. Alender). Moscow, 1958. 

Jansz— P. Jansz., Practisch Javaansch-Nederlandsch Woordenboek. 
3rd ed. (rev. by P. A. Jansz). Semarang, Surabaya, Bandung, The 
Hague, [1932]. 

J. A.O.S. — Journal of the American Oriental Society. New Haven 
later Baltimore, 1849 — in progress. 

Jayapurana — See Dj. pur. 

J.D. — H. H. Juynboll, Drie boeken van het Oud-Javaansche Ma- 
habharata, Leyden, 1893. [With text of Mausalaparwa|]. 

Juynboll I — H. H. Juynboll, Kawi-Balineesch-Nederlandsch 
Glossarium op het Oud-Javaansche Ramayana. The Hague, 1902. 
In this Glossary the Old Javanese words are followed by the 
equivalent words of the Balinese interlinear translation of the 
Ramayana codex 3455f of the Leyden University Library. 

Juynboll Il — H. H. Juynboll, Oud-Javaansch—Nederlandsche 
Woordenliyst. Leyden, 1923. 

Juynboll II — H. H. Juynboll, Supplement op den Catalogus van 
de Javaansche en Madoereesche handschriften der Leidsche Uni- 
versiteitsbibliotheek. Deel I. Madoereesche handschriften, Oud- 
javaansche inscripties en Oud- en Middeljavaansche gedichten. 
Leyden, 1907. 

Juynboll IV — H. H. Juynboll, Supplement op den Catalogus van 
de Javaansche en Madoereesche handschriften der Leidsche Uni- 
versiteitsbibliotheek. Deel II. Nieuwjavaansche gedichten en Oud-, 
Middel- en Nieuwjavaansche prozageschriften. Leyden, 1911. 

Juynboll V — H. H. Juynboll, Supplement op den Catalogus van 
de Soendaneesche handschriften en Catalogus van de Balineesche en 
Sasaksche handschriften der Leidsche Universiteits-bibliotheek. 
Leyden, 1912. 

Jayrbolivl: Hy See Adip.;’ J.D’; Kid=Adips: Wir. 


K 


K. A. — Kembang Arum Charter, ed. by F. D. K. Bosch (O.V. 
1925, pp. 41 ff.). 

Kats — J. Kats, Het Javaansche Tooneel I, Wajang Poerwa. 
Weltevreden, 1923. 

Kats, J. — See S.H.K. 

Kaudern — Walter Kaudern, Musical instruments in Celebes 
(Ethnographical studies in Celebes III). The Hague, [1927]. 

KBwb. — H. Neubronner van der Tuuk, Kawi-Balineesch-Neder- 
landsch woordenboek (ed., after the death of the author, by J. L. A. 
Brandes and D. Rinkes). Batavia, 1897-1912. 

Kern— J.H.C. Kern, Het Oud-Javaansche lofdicht Nagarakrtagama 
van Prapafica (1365 A.D.). Text and Dutch translation re-edited 


132 HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


in the Verspreide Geschriften VII-VIII of this author (V.G.K.), 
with annotations by N. J. Krom. The Hague, 1919. 

Kern, (J.] H. [Ci] .—See.G.0,;.K.K.; Nag; K.; V.GK., WS. 

Kid. Adip — Kidung Adiparwa, see Juynboll III, pp. 218 ff. 

K. K. — H. Kern, De legende van Kufijarakarna volgens het oudst 
bekende handschrift (V.K.A.W.L., New Series III, No. 3, 1901); 
repr. in V.G.K. X (1922), pp. 1 ff. with Old Javanese text, transl. 
into Dutch and notes. 

Kleen — Tyra de Kleen and P. de Kat Angelino, Mudras auf Bali 
(Handhaltungen der Priester). Hagen i/W. and Darmstadt, 1923. 

Knosp I — Gaston Knosp, La Birmanie. La Musique en Birmanie 
(1906), (Encycl. de la Musique, Ire partie, vol. V, pp. 3094 ff.), 1922. 

Knosp II — Gaston Knosp, Histoire de la musique dans |’Indochine 
(1907), (Encycl. de la Musique, Ire partie, vol. V, pp. 3100 ff.), 1922. 

K. O. — Kawi-oorkonden [Texts in transcription], ed. by A. B. Cohen 
Stuart. Leyden, 1875. 

(Kon.) Bat. Gen. — (Koninklijk) Bataviaasch Genootschap van 
Kunsten en Wetenschappen. ((Royal) Bat. Soc. of Arts and Scien- 
ces). Batavia, 1778-1950. 

Kon. Inst. — Koninklijk Instituut voor Taal-, Land- en Volken- 
kunde. (Royal Institute of Linguistics and Anthropology). The 
Hague, since 1851. 

Kon. Inst. Trop. — Koninkliyk Instituut voor de Tropen. (Royal 
Tropical Institute). Amsterdam. Previous names: Koloniaal Instituut, 
Koninklijk Koloniaal Instituut, Koninklijk Indisch Instituut. 

K or. — Korawacrama, ed. and transl. into Dutch by J. L. Swellen- 
grebel. (Thesis Leyden). Santpoort, 1936. 

Korn — V. E. Korn, De dorpsrepubliek Tnganan Pagringsingan. 
Santpoort, 1933. Abridged translation of some parts of this work 
with the title “The Village Republic of Tenganan Pegeringsingan” 
in: Selected Studies on Indonesia by Dutch Scholars, Vol. V. (Bali. 
oe in Life, Thought, and Ritual). The Hague and Bandung, 

Korte Gids — [F. D. K. Bosch]. Korte Gids voor de Archeolo- 
gische Verzameling van het Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten 
en Wetenschappen. Weltevreden, 1919. 

Kotantaraman — P. Kotantaraman, Tamilicai Kkaruvikal, 
Annemalai U(niversity), 1945. 

K r. — Krtabasa, see Juynboll IV, pp. 207 ff. 

Kr. B. — Chronicle of Bayu, a petty state revolting against Blam- 
bangan, See List of Abbreviations in KBwb. I, p. 10. 

Krom I —N. J. Krom, Inleiding tot de Hindoe-Javaansche kunst. 
The Hague, 1920; 2nd ed. 1923. 

Krom Il — N. J. Krom, Hindoe-Javaansche geschiedenis. The 
Hague, 1926; 2nd ed. 1931. 

Krom HI — N. J. Krom, Barabudur. Archaeological description. 
2 Vols. The Hague, 1927. (See also Bar.). 

Krom, N. J. — See O.J.0.; Par. 


LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 133 


Krsn. — Krsnantaka, see Juynboll III, pp. 155 ff. 

K.S. — Kidung Sunda, ed. and transl. into Dutch by C. C. Berg 
(B.K.I. LXXXIII, pp. 1-161). The Hague, 1927. 

K.S nd, — Kidung Sundayana (Kidung Sunda C), ed. and ann. by 
C. C. Berg in his: Inleiding tot de studie van het Oud-Javaansch 
(Introduction to the study of Old Javanese). Surakarta, 1928. 

K. T. — Kuburan Candi Inscription, publ. and transl. into Dutch by 
ReGors (1.B.G, LXUX, pp-157 if.) 1930. 

Kuburan Candi — See K.T. 

Kultuurpatronen — Kultuurpatronen. (Patterns of Culture). 
Bulletin of the Ethnographical Museum in Delft. Delft, I, (1959) — 
in progress. 

Kimmel — Otto Ktimmel, Ostasiatisches Gerat (Die Kunst des 
Ostens, ed. by William Cohn, Vol. X). Berlin, 1925. 

Kunst I — J. Kunst and C. J. A. Kunst-van Wely, Over toon- 
schalen en muziekinstrumenten van West-Java (Djawa III, pp. 
2641; ), 1923. 

Kunst II — J. Kunst and C. J. A. Kunst-van Wely, De toonkunst 
van Bali. Weltevreden, 1925. 

Kunst III — J. Kunst and C. J. A. Kunst-van Wely, De toonkunst 
van Bali II (T.B.G. LXV, pp. 369 ff.), 1925. 


Kunst IV — J. Kunst, Een overwalsche bloedverwant van den 
Javaanschen gamelan (N.-I. Oud & Nieuw XIV, pp. 79-96), 1929. 
Kunst V — J. Kunst, Music in Nias (Int. Arch. f. Ethnogr. 


XXXVIII, pp. 1 ff.). Leyden, 1938. 

Kunst VI — J. Kunst, Music in Flores (Int. Arch. f. Ethnogr. 
XLII Suppl.). Leyden, 1942. 

Kunst VII — J. Kunst, Een en ander over de muziek en den dans 
op de Kei-eilanden. (Publ. R. Trop. Inst. LXIV). Amsterdam, 
1945. 

Kunst VIII — J. Kunst, Muziek en dans in de Buitengewesten. 
(Publ. R. Trop. Inst. LX VII). Leyden, 1946. 

Kunst IX — J. Kunst, Music in Java (2 vols.). The Hague, 1949. 

Kunst X — J. Kunst, Ethnomusicology. The Hague, 1950; 2nd ed. 
1955; 3rd ed. 1959. 

Kunst XI — J. Kunst, The Origin of the Kemanak (B.K.I. CXVI, 
pp. 263 ff.). The Hague, 1960. 

Kunst XII — J. Kunst, Cultural Relations between the Balkans and 
Indonesia. (Publ. R. Trop. Inst. CVII). Amsterdam, 1954 (German 
text); 2nd ed. 1960, 


LG 


L. — Lubdhaka, see Juynbol1 III, pp. 157 ff. 

Lehmann — J. Lehmann, Beitrage zur Musikinstrumenten-For- 
schung (Abhandlungen zur Anthropologie, Ethnologie und Urge- 
schichte. Vol. II, Festschrift). Frankfurt am Main, 1925. 


134 HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


Liefrinck — F. A. Liefrinck, Nog eenige verordeningen en over- 
eenkomsten van Balische vorsten. The Hague, 1921. 
L. S. — Lambang Salukat, see Juynbol1 III, pp. 176 ff. 


M 


Mahabharata — See J.D. 

Mal. — Malat, see Juynboll III, pp. 182 ff.; KBwb. I, List of 
Abbr. pp. 10 ff. and KBwb. III 581 ff. s.v. walat. 

Malm — William P. Malm, Japanese music and musical instruments. 
Rutland/Vermont and Tokyo, 1959. 

Man — Man. A (Monthly) Record of Anthropological Science. 
London, since 1901; after 1966: Man. The Journal of the Royal 
Anthropological Institute. 

Marcel-Dubois — _ Claudie Marcel-Dubois, Instruments de 
musique de l’Inde ancienne (Thesis). Paris, 1941. 

Mausalaparwa — See J.D. 

McPhee I — Colin McPhee, Angkloeng gamelans in Bali (Djawa 
XVII, pp. 322 4£:), 1937. 

McPhee II — Colin McPhee, Music in Bali. New Haven and 
London, 1966. 

Med. China Inst. — Mededeelingen van het China Instituut. 
Batavia, 1936 ff. 

Med. Encycl. Bur. — Mededeelingen van het Bureau (Kantoor) 
voor de Bestuurszaken der Buitenbezittingen (Buitengewesten), be- 
werkt door het Encyclopaedisch Bureau, I (1911) — XXX (1923). 
Batavia-Weltevreden. (Communications of the Office for govern- 
mental affairs of the colonies (districts) outside Java, made ready 
for publication by the Encyclopaedical Office). 

M eas r— D. H. Meyer, De spleettrom (T.B.G. LX XIX, pp. 415 ff.), 

uh 

M. G. G. — Die Musik in Geschichte und Gegenwart, ed. by Friedrich 
Blume. Kassel/Basel, 1951 — in progress. 

M ontandon— Georges Montandon, La généalogie des instruments 
de musique et les cycles de civilisation. Genéve, 1919. 


N 


Naerssen, F. H. van, see: Van Naerssen. 

Nag. — Nagarakrtagama, Ist ed. by J. L. A. Brandes COZE GELEIVe 
Ist part, 1902); 2nd ed. and transl. see Ke rn; 3rd ed. and transl. 
by Th. Pigeaud in his work: Java in the fourteenth century, 5 Vols. 
The Hague, 1960-1963. 

Nigt yacus ttac— Bharata-Natyagastra, Indian work by Bharata 
on dramaturgy and music. Several editions and translations exist, 
e.g. by M. Ghosh. Calcutta, 1951-1961. 


LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 135 


Nawar. — Nawaruci, ed. and transl. into Dutch by Prijohoetomo. 
(Thesis Utrecht). Groningen/Batavia, 1934. 

N.G.M. — The National Geographic Magazine (ed. by the Nat. 
Geogr. Soc.). Washington, 1899 — in progress. 

N.I. Oud & Nieuw — Nederlandsch Indié Oud & Nieuw (lIllustr. 
Monthly). Amsterdam-The Hague, 1916-1934. Continued as a year- 
book: Netherlands India Old & New (in English). The Hague, 
1935-1937, 


Norlind — Tobias Norlind, Musikinstrumentens Historia. Stock- 
holm, 1941. 
Nt. B.G. — Notulen van de Algemeene en Bestuurs(Directie) ver- 


gaderingen van het Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten en Weten- 
schappen. Vols. I-LIX. (Batavia-)Weltevreden-The Hague, 1862- 
1921/22. (Minutes of the Proceedings of the General Meetings and 
of the Meetings of the Board of the (R.) Bat. Soc.). 

Ntg¢. — Niticastra, ed. and transl. into Dutch by Poerbatjaraka 
(B.J. 4). Bandung, 1933. 


28) 


O. D. — Oudheidkundige Dienst in Nederlandsch-Indié, 1913-1949. 
(Netherlands Indies Archaeological Survey). After 1950 continued 
as: Dinas Purbakala Republik Indonesia. 

Oedaya — Oedaya (Opgang). Illustr. Monthly in Dutch. The 
Hague, I (1923) - VIII (1931). 

O. J.O. — Oud-Javaansche oorkonden. Nagelaten transcripties van 
wiylen J. L. A. Brandes, ed. by N. J. Krom (V.B.G. LX), 1913. 

Oldenberg — Hermann Oldenberg, Vorwissenschaftliche Wissen- 
schaft. Die Weltanschauung der Brahmana-Texte. Gottingen, 1919. 

O. V. — Oudheidkundig Verslag (Archaeological Report) publ. by 
the O.D.. Weltevreden-Bandung, 1912-1949. 


P 


P. A. — Pafiji Angron Akung (in: Poerbatjaraka II, pp. 92 ff.). 

Pam. — Kidung Pamaficangah, ed. by C. C. Berg. Santpoort, 1929. 

Pandak-bandung — Pandak-bandung Charter (see E.B. pp. 
14 ff. and Goris II, Vol. I, sub 436). 

Panji K.N. — Paftji Kuda Narawangsa (in: Poerbatjaraka 
depen lodis). 2 

Panji K.S. — Panji Kuda Semirang (in: Poerbatjaraka II, 

pli.) 

Pane Ee Pararaton (Ken Arok) of Het Boek der Koningen van 
Tumapél en van Majapahit, ed. and transl. into Dutch by J. L. A. 
Brandes (V.B.G. XLIX, 1897); 2nd ed. revised, transl. and ann. 
by N. J. Krom in collaboration with J. C. G. Jonker, H. Kraemer 
and R. Ng. Poerbatjaraka (V.B.G. LXII). The Hague-Batavia, 
1920. 


136 HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


Pengotan A I — Pengotan Charter A I (see Goris II, Vol. I, 
sub 105). 

Pg. — Parwadhigama, see Juynboll IV, pp. LOL i: 

Pigeaud Woordenboek — Th. G. Th.) Pigeaud, Javaans- 
Nederlands Handwoordenboek. Groningen-Batavia, 1938. 

Pigeaud, Th, G. Th. — See Nag. 

Piggott — F. T. Piggott, The music and musical instruments of 
Japan. London, 1909. 

Poerbatjaraka I — R. Ng. Poerbatjaraka, De dateering van 
het Oud-Jav. Ramayana. (Gedenkschrift K.I. pp. 265 ff). The 
Hague, 1926. 

Poerbatjaraka II —R. M. Ng. Poerbatjaraka, Pandji-verhalen 
onderling vergeleken. (B.J. 9). Bandung, 1940. 

Poerbatjaraka — See A.N.; B.Y.; C.A.; Nec; PA; Panji 
K.N.; Panji K.S.; Smar.; W. 

Prasasti Bali — See Goris II. 

Prasasti Indonesia — Prasasti Indonesia. 2 Vols. [by J. G. 
de Casparis]. Bandung, 1950-1956. 

I. Inscripties uit de Cailéndra-tiyd. 

II. Selected inscriptions from the 7th to the 9th century A.D. 
Published by the Dinas Purbakala R.I. (Archaeological Survey of 
Indonesia). 

Prijohoetomo — See Nawar. 

Prijono — See S.T. 

Pura Kehen C — Pura Kehen Charter C (see E.B. pp. 56 ff and 
Goris J), Vole, sve 705): 


R 


R. — Ramayana, ed. by [J.] H.[C.] Kern. The Hague, 1900. 
Translation into Dutch: Cantos I-VI by H. Kern in B.K.I. LX XIII 
(1917) pp. 1 ff., 155 ff., 472 ff.; Cantos VII-XXVI by H. H. Juyn- 
boll in B.K.I. LXXVITI (1922) pp. 373 ff, LXXIX (1923) 
pp. 569 ff., LX XX (1924) pp. 11 ff., LXXXI (1925) pp. 1 ff., 121 ff., 
LXXXII (1926) pp. 95 ff., LX XXIII (1927) pp. 481 ff., LXXXIV 
(1928) pp. 610ff., LXXXV (1929) pp. 29ff., LXXXVI (1930) 
pp. 537 ff, LXXXVITI (1931) pp. 451 ff., XC (1933) pp. 301 ff., 
XCII (1935) pp. 122 ff., XCIV (1936) pp. 409 ff. Moreover trans- 
lation into English by C. Hooykaas: Cantos XXIV 87-126, XXV 
and part of XXVI in B.K.I. CXIV (1958) pp. 265-285, 364-380. 

Raffles — T. S. Raffles, History of Java, 2 Vols. London, 1817. 

Ranggawarsita — R. Ng. Ranggawarsita, Poestaka Radja 
Poerwa, 9 Vols. Jogjakarta, 1884-1906. 

Rassers — W. H. Rassers, De Pandji-roman. (Thesis Leyden). 
Antwerp, 1922. 

(R.) Bat. Soc. — See (Kon.) Bat. Gen. 


LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 137 


Reinhard — Kurt Reinhard, Chinesische Musik. Eisenach/Kassel, 
1956. 

R. Inst. — See Kon, Inst. 

R. K. — Rama Kling, see Juynboll IV, pp. 67 ff. 

R. L. — Rangga Lawe, ed. by C. C. Berg. (B.J. 1). Weltevreden, 1930. 

R. M. — Ramawijaya, see Juynboll III, pp. 159 ff. 
Rouffaer I — G. P. Rouffaer, Sumatra (geschiedenis) I. Oudste 
periode. (Encycl. Ned.-Indié, lst ed. vol. IV, pp. 199 ff.), 1905. 
Rouffaer II —G. P. Rouffaer, Keteltrommen (bronzen). (Encycl. 
Ned.-Indié, 2nd ed. vol. II, pp. 305 ff.), 1918. 

Rouffaer III — G. P. Rouffaer, Atjéh (geschiedenis). (Encyel. 
Ned.-Indié, 2nd ed. vol. I, pp. 72 ff.), 1917. 

R.S. — Rama Sasak, see Juynboll IV, pp. 65 ff. 

Rt. — Ratnawijaya, see Juynboll III, pp. 160 ff. 

Ry hiro pelnst.— Seevhon- Instr op, 


Ruth-Sommer — Hermann Ruth-Sommer, Alte Musikinstru- 
mente. Berlin, 1916. 
Riyks Ethnographisch Museum, ’s = Ryksmuseum voor 


Volkenkunde, Leyden (National Museum of Ethnology). 


S 


Sachs I — Curt Sachs, Reallexikon der Musikinstrumente. Berlin, 
1913. Reprographical reprint, Hildesheim, 1964. 

Sachs II — Curt Sachs, Die Musikinstrumente Indiens und Indo- 
nesiens. Berlin, 1915; 2nd ed. 1923. 

Sachs III — Curt Sachs, Die Musikinstrumente Birmas und As- 
sams im Kgl. Ethnographischen Museum zu Munchen. (Sitzungs- 
ber. d. Kgl. Bayer. Akad. d. Wiss., Phil.-phil. u. Hist. Klasse). 
Miinchen, 1917. 

Sachs IV — Curt Sachs, Handbuch der Musikinstrumentenkunde. 
Leipzig, 1920. 

Sachs V — Curt Sachs, Musik des Altertums. Leipzig, 1924. 

Sachs VI — Curt Sachs, Die Musik der Antike (in: Ernst Biicken, 
Handbuch der Musikwissenschaft vol. I). Berlin, 1929. 

Sachs VII — Curt Sachs, Geist und Werden der Musikinstrumente. 
Berlin, 1929. Reprographical reprint, Hilversum, 1965. 


Sachs VIII — Curt Sachs, The history of musical instruments. 
New York, 1940. 
Saeculum — Saeculum. Jahrbuch ftir Universalgeschichte. Frei- 


burg im Breisgau - Mtinchen, I (1950) — in progress. 
Sangitadarpana — Indian work on music and dance by Damo- 
dara. Several editions exist. In A. A. Bake’s thesis, Bijdrage tot de 
kennis der Voor-Indische muziek, Paris, 1930, a translation is given. 
Sangitaratnakara — Indian work on music by Carngadeva 
(1210-1247). Two editions and two translations exist. 


138 HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


Schneerson — G. Schneerson, Die Musikkultur Chinas. Leipzig, 
1955. 

Schnitger — F. M. Schnitger, Oudheidkundige vondsten in Pa- 
dang Lawas. Leyden, 1936. 

Scholte — Joh. Scholte, De Slametan Entas-Entas der Tenggeree- 
zen en de Memukur-Ceremonie op Bali. (Hand. Java-Congres 
1919, pp. 47 ff.). Weltevreden, 1921. 

Schrieke —B. J. O. Schrieke, Prolegomena. tot eene sociologische 
studie over de volken van Sumatra. I. (A. Historisch gedeelte). 
(T.B.G. LXV pp. 90-207), 1925. Translated in: B. (J. O.) Schrieke, 
Indonesian Sociological Studies. Selected writings of —, Vol. I 
(= Selected Studies on Indonesia by Dutch Scholars, Vol. IT). 
Esp. pp. 1-82 (The shifts in Political and Economic Power in the 
Indonesian Archipelago in the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Century). 
The Hague-Bandung, 1955. 

Scientific American, periodical appearing in New York, 
1879 — in progress. 

Sembiran A I — Sembiran Charter A I (see Goris II, Vol. I, 
sub 104). 

S.H. K. — Sang Hyang Kamahayanikan, ed., transl. into Dutch and 
ann. by J. Kats. The Hague, 1910. 

Sibang Kadja— Sibang Kadja Charter (see Goris II, Vol. I, 
p. 47 sub 1002; Vol. II, p. 280 s.v. padaht). 

Simbriger — Heinrich Simbriger, Gong und Gongspiele (Intern. 
Arch i Ethno? XXXVI) Leyden, 1939. 

Sip. — Sipat iman akung. Rather late Balinese poem, see KBwb. III 
289 s.v. sipat TV and Juynboll V, pp. 134-135. 

S.K. — Serat Kanda, see Juynboll IV, pp. 52 ff. and pp. 92 ff. 

S mar. — Smaradahana, ed. and transl. into Dutch by Poerbatjaraka 
(B.J. 3). Bandung, 1931. 

Smarw. — Smarawédana, see Juynboll III, pp. 199 ff. 

Sonnerat — [P.] Sonnerat, Voyage aux Indes Orientales et a 
la Chine, fait par ordre du Roi, depuis 1774 jusqu’en 1781, etc., 
2 tomes. Paris, 1782. 

Sor. — Sorandaka, ed. and transl. into Dutch by E. J. van den Berg 
(V.K.I. Il). The Hague, 1939. 

Soulié— Georges Soulié, La musique en Chine (Extrait du Bulletin 
de l’Association Franco-Chinoise). Paris, 1911. 

Sy s. — Sara-samuccaya, a classical Indonesian compendium of high 
ideals [by Vararuci], ed. by Raghu Vira [with the collaboration of 
C. Hooykaas, Lokesh Chandra a.o.]. New Delhi, 1962. (Sata-pitaka 
Series, vol. 24; Dvipantara-Pitaka, vol. 7). In KBwb. referred to 
as tut, 

S.T. — Sri Tafijung, ed. and transl. into Dutch by Prijono. (Thesis 
Leyden). The Hague, 1938. 


Stauder — Wilhelm Stauder, Die Harfen und Leiern der Sumerer. 
Frankfurt a/M., 1957. 


LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 139 


Staugaard — W. Staugaard, Koeda-Képang (Hand. Java-Con- 
gres 1919, pp. 421 ff.). Weltevreden, 1921. 

Stein I — Aurel Stein, The Thousand Buddhas. Ancient Buddhist 
paintings from the cave-temples of Tun-huang on the Western 
frontier of China, recovered and described by —, with an introductory 
essay by Laurence Binyon. London, 1921. 

Stein II — Aurel Stein, Serindia. Detailed report of explorations 
in Central Asia and Westernmost China. 5 Vols. Oxford, 1921. 
Steinmetz — M. E. Steinmetz, Oudheidkundige beschrijving van 
de afdeeling Bandawasa (residentie Bésoeki) (T.B.G. XL, pp. 1-60), 

1898. 

Stutterheim I — W. F. Stutterheim, Cultuurgeschiedenis van 
Java in beeld. Weltevreden, 1926. 

Stutterheim II — W. F. Stutterheim, De kraton van Majapahit 
(V.K.I. VII). The Hague, 1948. 

Suchtelen, B.C.C.M.M: van, see: Van Suchtelen. 

Sud. — Sudamala, ed. and transl. into Dutch by P. V. van Stein 
Callenfels. (V.B.G. vol. LXVI part 1), 1925. 

Sudarshana Dévi — See Wrh. 

Sukawana A I — Sukawana Charter A I (see Goris II, Vol. I, 
sub 001). 

Sum. — Sumanasantaka, see Juynboll III, pp. 144 ff. 

Sut. — Sutasoma, see Juynboll III, pp. 140 ff. 

Sw. — Swarawyafijana, see Juynboll IV, pp. 216 ff. 

Swarg. — Swargarohanaparwa, see Juynboll IV, pp. 163 ff. 

Swellengrebel, J. L. — See Kor. 

Swg. — Séwagati. Balinese poem, see KBwb. III 226 s.v. séwagati, 
and Juynboll V, pp. 132-134. 


C 


¢. K. — Cri Kahulunan Charter II, see Prasasti Indonesia, 
Volsl, pp. 79-95. 


f8 


T. — Tantri. Middle-Javanese poem, see KBwb. II 538-539 s.v. 
Tantri, and Juynboll III, pp. 239-248, Juynboll IV, pp. 
500-501. ‘ 

T. B. G. — Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde, ed. 
by the (R.) Bat. Soc. Weltevreden (Batavia), 1853-1950. 

Teeuw, A. — See B.K.; H.W. 

T. K. — Tantri Kamandaka, ed. and transl. into Dutch by C. Hooy- 
kaas. (B.J. 2). Bandung, 1931. 

T. N.I. — Tijdschrift voor Nederlandsch(-)Indié. (Before 1848: 

. Neérland’s Indié). Batavia, Groningen, Zaltbommel, 1838-1902. 

Tropische Natuur — De Tropische Natuur. Orgaan van de 


140 HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


Nederlandsch-Indische Natuurhistorische Vereeniging.  (Illustr. 
Monthly in Dutch). Weltevreden (Batavia-C), 1912-1939. 
Trufian A I — Trufian Charter A I (see Goris II, Vol. 1, 
sub 003 and E.B. pp. 20 ff.). 
Trufan B — Trufan Charter B (see Goris II, Vol. 1, sub 004 
and E.B. pp. 24 ff.). 
Tuuk, H. Neubronner van der, see: KBwhb. 
Twitchettand Christie—D. C. Twitchett and A. H. Christie, 
A Medieval Burmese Orchestra (Asia Major, New Series, Vol. VII, 
parts hand 24 JO59 |, 
U 


U.B. — Usana Bali, summarized and partly ed. by R. Friederich 
(T.N.I. IX, part 3, pp. 245 ff.). Batavia, 1847. See also Juynboll 
Lipps i 72. 

Ud. — Udyogaparwa, see Juynboll IV, pp. 153 ff. 

U. P. — Undakan Pangrus, see Juynbol! III, pp. 203 ff. 

Utt. — Uttarakanda, see Juynboll IV, pp. 178 ff. 


V 


Van Bloemen Waanders — P. L. van Bloemen Waanders, 
Aanteekeningen omtrent de zeden en gebruiken der Balinezen, 
inzonderheid die van Boeleleng (T.B.G. VIII, pp. 105 ff.). Batavia, 
1859. 

Van den Berg, E. J. — See Sor. 

Van der Chis, J. A. — See Cat. II. 

Vander Hoop—A.N. J. Th. a Th. van der Hoop, Megalithic 
remains in South-Sumatra. (Thesis Utrecht). Zutphen, [1932]. 

Van der Tuuk, see: KBwb. 

Van Erp, Th. — See Bar. 

Van Heekeren H. R. van Heekeren, Megalithische oudheden 
in Besoeki (Djawa XI, pp. 1-18), 1931. 

Van Naerssen — F. H. van Naerssen, Oudjavaansche oorkonden 
in Duitsche en Deensche verzamelingen. (Thesis Leyden). (Sten- 
cilled). [Amsterdam], 1941. 

Van Stein Callentels, Py V. — See E.B.: Sud. 

Van Suchtelen — B.C.C.M.M. van Suchtelen, Endeh (Flores) 
(Med. Encycl. Bur. vol. XXVI). Batavia-Weltevreden, 1921. 

V.B.G. — Verhandelingen van het [Koninklijk] Bataviaasch Ge- 
nootschap van Kunsten en Wetenschappen. (Transactions of the 
ee Bat. Soc.). Batavia (later Weltevreden, later Bandung), 1779- 


Verh. K. A. W. L. — Verhandelingen der Koninklijke Akademie 
van Wetenschappen, Afdeeling Letterkunde. (Transactions of the 
Royal Netherlands Academy of Sciences and Letters. Section for 
Philology, Literature, History and Philosophy). Amsterdam, Vol. I 
1858 — in progress. 


LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 141 


V.G. K. — Verspreide Geschriften van Prof. Dr. H. Kern. Vols. I-XV, 
register and bibliography. (Collected Papers of Prof. Dr. H. Kern, 
published by Kon. Inst.). The Hague, 1913-1929. 

V.K.I. — Verhandelingen van het Koninklijk Instituut voor Taal-, 
Land- en Volkenkunde. (Before 1949: ... voor de Taal-, Land- en 
Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indié). (Transactions of the Royal 
Inst. of Linguistics and Anthropology), The Hague, I (1938) — 
in progress. 

V. (M.) K. A. W. L. — (Verslagen en) Mededeelingen der Konink- 
lijke Akademie van Wetenschappen, Afd. Letterkunde. (Reports 
and Communications of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Sciences 
and Letters. Section for Philology, Literature, History and Philo- 
sophy). Amsterdam, 1856 — in progress. 


W 


W. — Arjunawiwaha, ed. by R. Ng. Poerbatjaraka (B.K.I. LXXXII, 
pp. 181 ff.). The Hague, 1926. 

Wachsmann — Margaret Trowell and K. P. Wachsmann, Tribal 
crafts of Uganda. Pp. 309 ff., Part II, Sound instruments. London, 
1953. 

Wargasari — See Juynboll III, pp. 250ff. 

Was. — Waséng, see Juynboll! III, pp. 209 ff. 

Wir. — Wirataparwa, ed. by H. H. Juynboll. The Hague, 1912. 
(See Fokker). 

W rh. — Wrhaspati-tattwa, an Old Javanese philosophical text, critic- 
ally edited and annotated by Sudarshana Devi. (Thesis Utrecht) 
[New Delhi], 1957. 

W.S. — Wrtta-saficaya, ed. and transl. into Dutch by [J.] H. [C.] 
Kern. Leyden, 1875. Reprinted in V.G.K. IX (1920) with the text 
transcribed in Rom. char. 

W w. — Wangbang Widéha, see Juynboll III, pp. 205 ff. 


GENERAL INDEX OF MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 
AND MUSICAL TERMS 1 


abafiwal, 33. 
Abkhasians, 9, 13. 
Aeolian flute, 26, 27. 
aerophones, 1, 24-33, 47. 
Africa(n), 9. 


Central —, 13. 
South West —, 53. 
West —, 9. 


agending, 5, 33. See gending. 
agupyan, 6. See gupi. 

Ajanta, 15. 

alabu, 18. 

Alor, 47. 

Amaravati, 15. 

ambarung, 80. See barung. 
Amboina, 72. 

amukul, 4, 5, 33. See pukul. 
anabuh, 83. See tabuh. 


(a)nalunding, 75. See salunding. 


anapuk, 4. See tapuk. 
Andjasmara mountain, 64. 
angangséni, angangsyani, 62. 
See kangsi. 
anggérong, 79, 84. See gérong. 
angguntang, 23. See guntang. 
angklung, 1, 72, 85. 
Angkor Thom, figs. 84, 106. 
angkup, 82, 83, 91. 
Annam, North —, fig. 98. 
anuling, 7, 33. See suling. 
apadahi, 7. See padahi. 
apukul, 4. See pukul. 
Arabia(n), Arabic, 19, 20, 113. 


they are connected. 


Indonesian words are not only recorded in the spelling used in this book but 
also in the traditional way as was the case in the first edition in Dutch. 


atawaselos 
arawanasta, 7, 17, 92. See rawanasta. 
aringgit, 33. 
Arjuna, 30. 
asangka-busya, 32. See sangk(h)a. 
Asia(n), Asiatic, 9, 16, 28. 
Central —, 9, 49. 
Sertde, Wace —, 2, WB, 27, BS. 
Assam, fig. 100. 
North —, 28. 
Assyrian, 35. 
atapukan, 4, 7. See tapuk. 
Atjéh, 65, 66. 
Australia(n), 34. 
avanaddha, 66. 
awig-awig, 4, 63. 


B 


badahi, 38, 84, 106, 115, 117. 
Badjanegara, 79. 
badjidor, see bajidor. 
bagpipe, 27. 
bahiri, 41, 66, 104, 111. 
(ba)jidor (badjidor), 35, 45. 
Balak (Magelang), 91. 
Balapulang, 19. 
balé kulkul, 57. 
Bali, Balinese, passim. 
South — 63), 72: 
North —, 63, 68, 116. 
Balivacay/5.97o. 
Balitung, 33, 115. 
Bandjarmasin, 64. 


1 In this index also are registered the names of areas and places where the 
instruments are found, the temples and statue(tte)s on which they are depicted 
and the names of deities and historical and legendary persons with whom 


In the alphabetical order the ¢ comes after the sv. 


GENERAL INDEX 


Bandjarnegara, 59, 60. 

Bandung, 46. 

bangbang, 82, 83, 107-109, 117. 

bangsi, 25, 26, 85, 88, 91, 93, 111. 

bangsing, 25. 

Banten, 24, 44, 56. 

Banyumas, 59, 60. 

Banyuwangi, 72. 

Barabudur, 5, 10, 13-15, 17, 18, 19, 
25, 27, 28, 30-32, 34, 35, 38, 48-50, 
54-56, 58, 62, 70, 71, 78, 85, 90, 120; 
figs. 5-32. 

barang, 64, 79. 

barebet, 68, 70, 94, 106, 116. 

Barhut temple, fig. 119. 

Barubuh, 6. 

barung, 80. 

bar-zithers, 10, 12, 14, 18-21, 49, 121; 
figs. 2, 7, 10, 12-14, 22, 30, 43, 91. 

Batak, 72. ; 


Karo —, 16. 
Toba —, 16. 
Batavia, 24. 


Bayon temple, 12, 48; figs. 84, 106. 

Bebet (désa), 79. 

bedaya, 51. 

bedaya ketawang, 51. 

bedug, 35, 44, 45, 109. 

bedug titir, 44, 56. 

begging bowls, 53, 54; fig. 5. 

bells, 2, 24, 48, 49, 52, 54-56, 62, 120, 
IZ3-eeslnls ele 28-3 poseidon 59: 
ankle —, 55, 56. 
cattle —, 52, 54-56; fig. 79. 
elephant —, 52, 54, 120; figs. 18, 78. 
foot —, 52. 
horse — 4s ties 78: 
pellet- —, 55, 123; figs. 28, 74: 
prayer- —, 52,-55, 56, 123; figs. 59, 

ie 

temple —, 54, 55; figs. 29, 74-77. 

Bencoolen (Bangkahulu), 39. 

bendé, 42, 69, 99, 102. 

Bengal, 36. 

Bentar kedaton, 68. 

bentuk, 66. 

béri, see bhéri. 

Bhadrakali, 37. 

b(h)a(h)iri, 41, 110. See bahiri. 

Bhairawa, 36, 122; fig. 48. 

bhairi, 66. See bhéri and bahiri. 

bhairi mrdangga, 67. 

bhangsi, bhangci, 92. See bangsi. 


143 


bharata-vina, 17. 

bhéri, 41, 43, 66, 67, 69, 88, 93, 94, 96, 
99, 100-102, 104, 106, 107, 110, 111, 
iG TER NG IPE 

bhéri (bhahiri) mrdangga, 38, 67. 

bhusiah, 32. 

bin, -11, 20, 21, 123; figs. 64, 84, 93. 

binarungan, 80. See barung. 

Bisaya, 16. 

biwa, fig. 89. 

bjnt, 11. 

Blayu, 117. 

Blora, 78. 

bluntak, 58. 

b.n, 11. 

bonang, 6, 52, 59-65, 67, 83, 89, 123; 
fig. 70. 
— -shaped stones, 64; fig. 82. 

bondjing, see bofijing. 

bongbong, 82, 83, 108. 

bofijing (bondjing), 82, 85, 86, 94, 101, 
108. 

Borneo, 16, 27, 69. 
Central —, 27; fig. 99. 
South —, 64, 72. 

Brahma temple, 30, 121; fig. 42. 

brekuk, 52, 63, 92. 

bubar, 69, 99, 100. 

budbudika, 40. 

Bugbug, 78. 

Buginese, 28, 57. 

Bulihan (désa), 75. 

bundjing, see bufijing. 

Bungaya, 75, 76, 78. 

bungkuk, 63, 93. 

bufijing (bundjing), see bofijing. 

buraficah (burantjah), 82, 83, 108. 

Burma, Burmese, 9-13, 16, 45, 49, 61, 
68; figs. 86, 87. 

busya, 32, 33, 95. 

bwajing (bwadjing), 82, 85, 108. 

byong, 56. 


€ 


cacantungan (tjatjantungan), 19, 99, 
calapita (tjalapita), 53, 111. 
calung (tjalung), 1, 71, 72, 74, 75, 83, 
oy, Miho sive Zab, Taye ake 
bamboo —, 72. 
metal —= 72. 
Cambodia(n), 12, 18, 21, 48; figs. 84, 
91, 106. 


144 


Candi (tjandi) Barabudur, see Bara- 


budur. 


— Jago (Djago), 20, 21, 28, 122; 


figs. 50, 51. 


Kedaton, 66, 122; fig. 54. 
Nagasari, 54, 120. 
Nerimbi, 59, 122; fig. 52. 


Prambanan, 15, 17, 70, 90. 


figs. 2-4. 


= Sineasarts) G0, 122 =) figss 485649: 
— Sukuh, 30, 66, 123; figs. 68, 69. 
— Tégawangi, 36, 114, 123; fig. 63. 
cantung, cantung (tjantung, tjantung), 


19, 99, 103, 106, 109, 117. 
Caribbean, 48. 
caruk (tjaruk), 79. 
caruk (tjaruk) saron, 79, 116. 
Caucasus, Caucasian, 9, 13. 
cecémprés (tjetjémprés), 71. 
Celebes, 16, 18, 19, 21. 


Central —, 18. 
North East —, 18. 
South —, 16. 


celempung (tjelempung), 21-23, 
ike lle WEE Wor 
celuluk (tjeluluk), 62, 63. 


celuring (tjeluring), 50-52; figs. 108, 
109. 


céngcéng (tjéngtjéng), 50, 68. 
chaingvaing, 45. 


China, Chinese, 2, 12-14, 16, 24, 25, 
27-29, 34, 35, 48, 66, 71, 73, 89; 


fig. 102. 

North —, fig. 90. 

South —, 27, 49; fig. 88. 
chordophones, 9-23, 47, 103. 
chusiah, 32. 
cither, 10. 
citra-vina, 11. 
clapper, 48, 53, 57. 

magic —, 53. 
clarinets, 25, 28, 29. 
coconut shells, 21, 74, 89. 
conches, 88. 

conch-shells, 65. 

See trumpets, shell —. 
Congo, 9. 

Coptic, 11. 
coring (tjoring), 56, 79. 


Jawi (Djawi), 30, 32, 122; fig. 53. 


Panataran, 35, 59, 66, 71, 123; 
figs. 55-62. See also Panataran. 


Sami, & Wek iS, i, Ss 70, GY, a0 


WAZA © 


HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


cumangkirang (tjumangkirang), 59, 


103, 109. 


curing (tjuring), 52, 55, 56, 79, 80, 
106-108, 


90, 92-99, 
iG lls. 
cymbals, 7, 24, 26, 31, 32, 40, 42, 
48-50, 52-54, 56, 68, 70, 71, 73, 
85, 86, 123; figs. 4, 6, 8, 12, 15, 
17, 20, 22, 24-27, 31, 34, 35, 62. 

bell-shaped —, 49. 

goblet-shaped —, 26, 48-50, 52, 
Mo, ie taka (1 Al, 2 
27, 34. 

large —, 
fags, UB, ls, Sill, Stes, 


war —, 69. 


101, 103, 104, 


D 


dadamén, 29, 109. 
Daha, 99. 
dalem, 39, 53. 
damaru, 36, 37, 40; fig. 121. 
damyadamyan, 29, 97. 
dang, 61. 
Dangdang-gendis, 3. 
Danuredja VIII, 71. 
Dayak, 27, 78; fig. 99. 
Kayan —, 27. 
Kenyas— 27. 
Negaju (Ngadju) —, 16. 
degung, 52. 
demén(an), see de(r)mén(an). 
demung, 73, 79. 
déng, 61. 
déngdéngkuk, 69, 117. 
de(r)mén(an), 29. 
Dewadatta, 30. 
Déwi Cri, 123. 
Diéng, 
— plateau, fig. 1. 
— reliefs, 54. 
— temples, 5. 
ding, 61. 
Djajabaja, see Jayabhaya. 
Djakarta, 25, 57, 64. 
Djalatunda, see Jalatunda. 
djarami, see jarami. 
Djatimerta (désa), 19. 
djédor, see jédor. 
djidor, see jidor. 
djungga, see jungga. 
djuru kemong, see juru kemong. 
djuru padahi, see juru padahi. 


85, 


54, 


24, 


17, 220, 2; 24, B27 ots 


GENERAL INDEX 


dogdog, 36, 45; figs. 56, 65. 
doli-doli, 72. 
dong, 61. 
Dong-so'n-culture, 27 47; fig. 98. 
drums, 6, 11, 24, 31, 34-45, 47, 50, 52, 
59, 65, 67, 69, 76, 83, 85, 88, 89, 123; 
figs. 5, 6, 12, 14, 15, 20, 25-27, 31-33, 
37-39, 41, 63, 65-65b, 67, 73, 98, 103, 
121. 
alarm —, 44. 
asymmetrical barrel-shaped —, 35; 
aga US) NIZA. 
bamboo —, 72, 89. 
barrel-shaped —, 34, 35, 38, 39, 45, 
SUS ines. “Ay, ZI, Gil, aif. 
brass —, 47, 48. 
clapper- —, 36, 122; fig. 48. 
conical —, 39. 


copper —, 89. 

cylindrical —, 34, 35; figs. 15, 33, 
OdmIZL 

earthenware —, 35, 50; figs. 6, 12, 
20, 41. 


frame- —, 36, 37, 39; figs. 65-65b. 
friction —, 36. 
globe-shaped slit- — 58; figs. 5, 107. 
kettle- —, 27, 37, 39, 40, 41, 44, 47, 67. 
longdrawn symmetrical barrel- 
shaped —, fig. 38. 
slit-- —, 4, 43, 52, 56-58, 72, 122; 
figs. 73, 107. 
stamping —, 58. 
symmetrical barrel-shaped 
Tike. SY%, oi, ail. 
truncated conical —, 34, 35, 38, 45; 
ieee, Sil. IVA 
waisted —, 35-37, 40, 44; figs. 14, 
oy, Sil BY, Uyh WAL. 
— orchestra, 39. 
drummers, 7, 37. 
dubduba, 36. 
dugduga, 36, 40. 
dugdugi, 36, 40. 
dukun, Tenggerese —, 56. 
dunde, 18. 
dundubhi, 41, 67, 93. 
dung, 61. 
Dutch, 44, 85, 113. 


E 


Egypt, Egyptian, 9-11, 13, 20. 
empét-empétan, 29. 


145 


Empu Kuturan, 99. 
— Purwa, 98, 99. 

(eng)kerurai, 27. 

engkuk, 63, 69. 


Europe, European, 9, 12, 14, 18, 24. 
F 
Fan, 13. 
fiddle, 15. 
three-stringed —, 15. 
flautist, 7. 
Flores, 72. 


flutes; 3) 6, 115924-26,5 28,731, 50) 71; 
76-78, 85, 93-95, 98, 104, 105, 112-114; 
figs. 7, 9, 15-17, 20, 30-32, 40. 
Aeolian —, 26, 27. 
end-blown —, 25; figs. 9, 31, 32, 40. 
military —, 24. 
side-blown —, 25. 
transverse —, 24 25, 31, 50, 85; 

tees 7 Gen, AU, iO. 

Fuegians, 34. 

Further India, 13, 18, 21, 45, 49. 


G 


gagamelan, 113. 
gala, 42. 
galunggang, 72-74, 97. 
— petung, 73, 75, 97. 
gambang, 6, 22, 67, 71-75, 78, 79, 83, 
103) 109 1ORH23 satisn Zl: 
bamboo —, 73-75; fig. 111. 
terra-cotta —, 71. 
== ganesa, 51s) 500 49: 
= eng, ZA, W638 saree, TUL: 
gamel, 4, 96, 108. 
gamelan, 3-6, 38, 51, 56, 61, 62, 68, 71, 
73, 75, 79, 80, 81, 84, 86, 89, 104, 
107-110, 113, 114; fig. 114. 
— angklung, 39, 59, 85. 
—=arja (ardja), 23, 4. 
— bebonangan, 59. 
bumbung, 74. 
carabalén (tjarabalén), 60, 61. 
celempung (tjelempung), 1. 
gambang, 73. 
gambuh, 84. 
gong, 59, 70. 
gumbeng, 52. 
Kyahi Bremara, 61. 


146 HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


— Kyahi Kaficil Belih, 51; fig. 108. gita nrtya-vadya, 88. 


— kodok ngorék, 71. gitawaditra, gitawadatra, gita waditra, 
— monggang (munggang), 6, 61, 71, 88, 104. 
86. Glagah ketunon, 68. 
— s(a)léndro, 2, 69. glatik, 80. 
— salunding, 76, 78. glottophones, 27-29. 
— saronén, 84. gondjing, see gofijing. 
— selondéng, 75. gondra hao, 89. 
— sengganeén, 87. gondrang, 40. 
— Suka Ramé, 56. gong, 2, 3, 6, 24, 39, 41-43, 51,- 52, 
== @ailéndra, 2. Ey, (2, Ue, TH, &s, 2, Se, ST, 
= talieole 99-103, 105, 107-115, 117, 122, 123; 
gandhara note, 19. figs. 54, 55, 57, 58, 69, 70. 
Gandhara relief, fig. 120. — ageng, 66, 68. 
ganding, 5, 92-94, 114. See gending. — bhéri, 66, 117. 
Gandusari, 36. — -chimes, 2. 
gangsa, 5, 50, 91, 92, 97, 111, 114. — cumangkirang (tjumangkirang), 59. 
— jongkok (djongkok), 79. — gambang, 73, 104. 
gafijuran (gandjuran), 100. == SRN, O, 
ganrang, 40. — gedé, 73. 
ganta, see g(h)anta. — pangarah, 101, 110. 
gantang, 55, 96. — sakati, 80, 84, 103. 
g(a)rantang, 72, 106. brass —, 89. 
garantang, 78, 95, 104, 111. bronze —, 72. 
garantung, 69, 72, 94-96, 101, 102, 115. copper —, 5. 
garudé, 27. signal —, 66, 69, 72. 
gembyung, 45. war —, 66. 
gem(p)rét, 29, 117. gofijing (gondjing), 85. 
gemrét, 117. grantang, see g(a)rantang. 
gendang, gendang, 40, 91. Greek, 84. 
gender, 3; 6, 71) 72, 74-78, 83.. 123% Ancient —, 19. 
fig. 65b. Gresik, 47. 
— calung (tjalung), 72, 113. gubar, 42, 69, 95-97, 99, 101-103, 105- 
— wayang, 75, 77, 78; fig. 116. 108, 113. 
gending, gending, 5, 51, 84, 91, 92, 94- — saragi, 69. 
99, 101, 103, 105-108, 112, 114, 115. guiro, 48. 
Gendingan, 5. guitar, 12. 
gending (gending) luwang, 5, 72, 73, Gujarati, 42. 
79, 84, 98, 104, 109, 116. gumanak, 53, 77; fig. 115. 
gendongan, 56, 103. gumbang, 1. 


genta, 55, 56, 114; fig. 59. See ghanta. guntang, guntang, 23, 89, 99, 101, 107, 
gentorag, 56. 110. 

gerdi, 27. gupek(an), 39, 40, 45, 77. 

gérong, 39, 79, 82, 84, 99, 109, 110, 117. gupi, 6. 

gérongan, 84. 

ghalundhang, 74. 


g(h)anta, 55, 90, 96, 103, 104, 107, Ss 
Nig, IA sees ali. 
ghanta-ghanti, 107. Halmaheira, 18. 
ghenta, 55, 97, 123. Hanuman, 28, 66. 
finger-ring —, fig. 71, hapétan, 16. 
ghenta, 101. harps, 9-15, 49, 122; fig. 86, 87. 


gita-nrta-waditra, 87. angular —, 9. 


GENERAL INDEX 


arched —, 9-12, 31; figs. 16, 22, 24, 
45, 46, 83, 84, 85, 85a, 87, 119, 120. 
“cord” —, 10. 
“peg” —, 10. 
hasapi, 16. 
hatong, 1. 
Hebrew, 19. 


Hindu(s), 2, 6, 19, 20, 26, 30, 44, 45, 
47, 57, 58, 61-63, 70, 73, 75, 77, 89, 98. 
Hindu-Java(nese), 2, 6, 13, 21, 22, 24, 


29, 30, 55, 63, 74, 80. 
Hindu Kush, 9. 
Hindustan(i), 11. 
horn, 31. 
h’siao, 25. 
h’siao thong hyo, 29, 
Hyderabad, 19. 


Idiocords, 
bamboo —, 1, 23, 89. 
idiophones, 4, 5, 37, 47-81, 87. 
bronze —, 5. 


glass —, 87. 
metal O7- 
wooden —, 67. 


India(n), 2, 8, OP 12 aS 1 7n 19: 
AQ. Al 25, 27, 30-41, 45, 55, 66, 67, 
82, 8g, 

Ancient —, 11. 


North —, 20, 21, 123; figs. 64, 84, 93. 


North West —, 27. 
South(ern) —, 11, 20, 21, 31; 
figs. 94, 104. 


Indochina, Indochinese, 2, 12, 14, 82. 


Indonesia(n), 16, 17, 22, 35, 37, 40, 47, 


72, 83. 

Indrajit, 28. 

instruments, passim. 
bowl-shaped musical —, 50. 
glass —, 87. 
eregarit —, 24. 
signalling —, 44, 56, 57. 
war —, 67. 


i damtic). S¥h, Tek 


J 
jal, 11. 
Jalatunda (Djalatunda), 10, 11, 122; 
fig. 46. 
Japan, Japanese, 12, 14, 16; fig. 89. 


147 


jarami (djarami), 29. 
Java(nese), passim. 
Central —, passim. 
East —, passim. 
Old —, passim. 
West —, passim. 
Jayabhaya (Djajabaja), 24, 71, 78. 
jéedor (djédor), 45. 
jidor (djidor), 45. 
Jogja (Jogjakarta), Jogjanese 6, 51, 
56, 61, 71; figs. 108, 109, 117. 
jungga (djungga), 18. 
juru kemong (djuru kemong), 8, 63. 
juru padahi (djuru padahi), 7. 


K 
kabupateén, 
Madjakerta —, 77. 
Malang —, 61. 


Pasuruan —, 46; fig. 105. 
Prabalingga —, 61. 

kacapi (katjapi), 15, 16, 22, 103, 115. 
See kecapi. 

kacaping (katjaping), 16. 

kacchapi, 15, 107. 

kacchapi-vina, 11. 

Kadiri 77, 78, 99. 
— period, 114, 122; fig. 73. 

kadjar, see kajar. 

Kafiristan, 9, 12; fig. 85a. 

Kaha, $2;e335 tig. 97. 

kahala, kahala, kahala, 31-33, 41-43, 
101, 105, 112. 

kahalacangka, 31, 42, 68, 100. 

kahale, 42. 

Kai, 39. 

kajar (kadjar), 59, 62, 77, 106, 114. 

kakawin, 8, 86, 100, 106, 114. 

kakéloran, 84, 104. See kekéloran. 

kakhara, 53, 123: 
== siossy Ooh, bebe ake VAL 

kala, kala, kala, kala, 31, 41-43, 70, 94, 
98, 101, 110, 112, 113. 

kalah, 43. 

kalaha, kalaha, kalaha, 31, 41, 42, 88, 
100, 101. 

kala-kala, kala-kala, kala-kala, kalakala, 
ADMAS SOLOS alltel L2atil OZ. 

kalam, 42. 

kalacangk(h)a, 31, 42, 94, 96, 98, 100, 
112. 

k(a)lénéng, 56, 104. 


148 HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


kaléntang, 59, 111. kending awi, 1. 
kalih-kalihan, 83. kendo, 45. 
Kalingga, 120. Kéngetan, 76. 


kamanak, kemanak, 6, 48, 51-53, 77, kenong, 60, 62, 63. 
96, 105, 123; figs. 57, 80, 109, 110. kentjék, see keficék. 


kamsa, 5. kentongan, 4, 43, 52, 54, 57, 58, 72, 123; 
Kangean, 30. rates (BE 
kangsi, kangci, 52, 59, 62, 94-98, 101, kenuk, 62, 63. 

105, 108, 110-112, 117. Kenya, 27. See Dayak. 
Kannara, Kannarese, 19, 42. k(e)romong, 64, 73, 111. 
kannara, 19. keté, 53. 
karana, 31. ketempur, 69. 

Karangasem, 75. ketipluk, 36. 
Karangdjati, 78. ketipung, 40. 
Karangtalun (désa), 78. ketjapi, see kecapi. 
Karo region, 16. See Batak. ketjék, see kecék. 
kartal, 32. ketjér, see kecér. 
kasapi, 16. ketjitjér, see kecicér. 
katjapi, see kacapi. ketjruk, see kecruk. 
katjaping, see kacaping. kettle-drums, see drums. 
Kayan, 27. See Dayak. kettles, 5, 60-64, 84, 85. 
kecapi (ketjapi), 3, 16, 109, 110, 113. ketuk, 3, 60, 62, 63, 113. 

See kacapi. ketuk awi, 1, 52. 
kecék (ketjék), 68. ketur, 82, 84, 106, 107, 115. 
kecér (ketjér), 71. khén, fig. 100. 
kecicér (ketjitjér), 71. kidung, 8, 86, 106, 116. 
kecruk (ketjruk), 72. kimkani, kimkanika, 55. 
Kedaton, 66. See Candi. kimkini, kimkinika, 55. 
kediré, 27. kimnara, 19. 

Kediri, 36, 53, 55, 58, 59, 120; fig. 47. kinangsyan, 62. 
Kedu, 92. kifjeng-tangis (kindjeng-tangis), 26. 
kekéloran, 80, 82, 84, 98, 103. See kinnara, 2, 19, 20, 112; figs. 7, 12, 43. 

kakéloran. kinnara, 19. 
k(e)ledi, 27; fig. 99. kinnari, 19. 
kélor, 84. kinnari-vina, 19. 
keluri, 27. kinnor, 19. 
kemanak, see kamanak. kinyra, 19. 
kembang dalima, 56. Klatén 64; fig. 82. 
kemong, 8, 63, 69. kledi, see k(e)ledi. 

— gantung, 63. klénéng, see k(a)lénéng. 

— meplawah, 62, 63. kléntangan, 59. 
kempli, 62. klinting, 56. 
kempul, 66, 68, 69, 78. Klungkung, 72. 
kempur, 69, 73, 77. kodyapi, 16. 
kempyang, 60. kolantér, 40. 
kemrampyang, 45. komanak, 53. 
kemuk, 39. Korea, North —, 9. 
kenawak, 53. Koripan, 3. 
keficék (kentjék), 40. kraton, 6, 8, 24, 39, 53, 68, 71, 81; 


kendang, kendang, 3, 40, 43, 45, 46, 67, figs. 65, 65a, 65b, 66, 67, 108. 
93, 95, 98, 99, 101, 104, 105, 107, 108, | Central Javanese —, 53. 
111-114, 116; fig. 105. Jogja(mese) —, 51, 56, 61. 

Kén Dedes, 99. Majapahit —, 6. 


GENERAL INDEX 


Solonese (= Surakarta) —, 51, 56. 
— gamelans, 35. 

Kresni, 6. 

kromong, see k(e)romong. 

Krtawardhana, 71. 

kucapi (kutjapi), 16. 

kuda képang, 28. 

kuda lumping, 28. 

kudyapi, 16. 

kukulan, 56, 57, 96, 98, 105. See kulkul- 
(an). 

kulcapi (kultjapi), 16. 

kulkul, 4, 7, 56-58. 

kulkul(an), 56, 57, 114. 

kultjapi, see kulcapi. 

kucilava, 33. 

kutjapi, see kucapi. 


L 


Laos, 28, 49; fig. 101. 

la-pa, 29. 

lawu, 18. 

lawu-wina, lawuwina, lawuwina, lawu- 
wina, 19, 93, 108, 112, 115. 

Lesser Sunda Islands, 16, 21, 47. 

lima, 45. 

lurah gending, 7. 

Lushan tribe, fig. 100. 

lutes, 7, 10-18, 20, 31, 49, 103, 121, 
Wes aise BE TDS IG), Be ss BG 2 
23, 26, 27, 30, 35, 44, 50, 51, 65, 66. 


bowed —, 17. 

long-necked —, 20, 21; figs. 50, 51, 
92. 

slender Majapahit —, 14. 

terra-cotta —, 14. 


— of slender type, 12-14. 
— of squat type, 12. 


M. 


mabangsi, 19. 
mabarung(an), 80. 
mabrekuk, 8. 
Macassarese, 16. 
madangi, 38, 90. 
madeli, see ma(n)deli. 
Madiun, fig. 45. 
Madjaagung, 60. 
Madjakerta, 64, 72, 77. 


149 


Madjapahit, see Majapahit. 

madraka, see ma(n)draka. 

Madura, Madurese, 30, 52, 55-57, 84. 
West —, 74. 

maganding, 7. See ganding. 

Magelang, 91. 

mahasara, mahasara, mahasara, maha- 
cara, mahacara, 2, 68, 88, 93, 102, 
104, 107, 111, 112, 116. 

mahaswara, 111, 112. 

Majapahit (Madjapahit), 6, 14, 20, 26, 
35-37, 60, 62, 64, 71, 73, 77, 98, 99, 
106, 110, 122, 123; figs. 65, 65a, 65b, 
66, 67. 

makara, 10, 11; fig. 46. 

makara-jal, 11. 

makara-vina, 11. 

makinnara, 12, 19. 

Malang, 36, 53, 61; fig. 80. 

malawu-wina, 12, 19. 

Malay, 16, 22, 29, 43, 111. 

Mali, 9. 

mamafijaki (mamandjaki), 71. 

Mandal, 6. 

mandali, 20. 

ma(n)deli, 12, 20, 110, 113, 116. 

Mandingo, 13. 

mandoline, 12. 

ma(n)draka, 76, 77. 

mangidung, 19. 

Mangku Nagara(n), 64; fig. 70. 

manuk mredangga, 117. 

mapadahi, 7. 

maracangk(h)ja, 30, 93. 

mardala, 35, 38, 102, 105, 112. 

mar(e)ga(ng), 70, 91. 

mareg(g)ang, 7 

matapukan, 4, 7. 

Mataram, 60. 

matempur, 69. 

mattakokila, 20. 

Mediterranean, Eastern —, 53. 

membranophones, 34, 37, 47, 66, 67. 

mén-men, 33. 

meplawah, 63. 

Mesopotamia, 9. 

metallophones, 24, 66, 73, 79, 86. 
multi-octave —, 56. 

mhasar, 68. 

Ming period, 89. 

mo, 58. 

Moi tribes, 59. 

Mon (inscriptions), 68. 


150 


mojficol (montjol), 66. 

mongmong, 63, 115. 

montjol, see mojficol. 

monyonyan, 88, 113. 

mouth organs, 27, 28, 49; figs. 5, 98, 
100-102. 

mradangga, 103. 

mrdangga, mrdangga, mredangga, 35, 
38, 39, 67, 68, 90, 93, 95, 96, 98, 99, 100, 
101, 104, 105, 107, 108, 110, 114-117. 

mrdangga bhéri, 38, 67. 

mrdangin, 38, 90. 

miiddhama, 82, 85, 88, 93. 

munda, munda, 68, 69, 88, 104, 116, 117. 

muraba, 34, 39, 90. See murawa. 

muraja (muradja), 39. 

murawa, 39, 40, 42, 50, 68, 88, 93, 95, 
LOL OS S108 TOM IZ 113116: 

Mysore, 19. 


N 


naga, 55. 
nagara, 41. 
Naga temple, 55, 123; fig. 59. 
Nandi, 55, 122; fig. 49. 

— temple (Prambanan), 55. 
Nafija, 6. 
nawek, 53. 
Near East(ern), 20. 
nem, 45, 64. 
fiemarin (njemarin), 33. 
epal(ese), 32; fig. 97. 
etherlands, The, 58. 
ew Guinea, 48, 89. 
gandjuk, 10, 11, 122; fig. 45. 
Nias, 72, 89. 
niyaga, 86. 
njemarin, see fiemarin. 


AAA Z 


O 
oboe, 28, 29. 
“pannier” —, 28, 
ocarina, 26, 89. 
coconut —, 89. 
earthenware —, 123. 


terra-cotta —, 26, 89; fig. 81. 
okokan, 55, 114. 
olé-oléan, 29, 
orchestras, 1, 3, 6, 39, 49, 50, 73, 76-78, 
81, 82, 84, 85; fig. 104. 
Ostyak, 9. 


HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


1? 


pada, 85. 

padaha, 39, 91, 93, 100. 

padaha-gafijuran (gandjuran), 39. 

padahi, padahi, padahi, 34, 38-40, 50, 
67, 68, 84, 90-97, 100, 104, 105, 110, 
112, 115, 116. See badahi. 

padahi mangegala, 7. 

Padang Lawas, 59. 

paganding, pagending, 5. 

Pagerayu, 19. 

paksi mredangga, 117. 

Paku Alaman, 51, 52; fig. 109. 

pamukul, 4, 5. 

panalukat, 86. See salukat. 

panamépa, 86. See samépa. 

Panaraga, 72. 

Ranataran, 28.3037, 53905, .001 70874 
fig. 59. See also Candi Panataran. 

panava, 39. 

panawa, panawa, 39, 85, 88, 93, 98, 117. 

Paficajanya, 30. 

paficanga-turiya, 31. 

pafica-turiyanga, 31. 

pandai, 5. 

pandai gangsa, 5. 

panday arawanasta, 17. 

pandé, 5. 
== een), 2 
== rains, S, 

pandjak, see pafijak. 

Pandji, see Pafiji. 

pandura, 21. 

pangarah, 66, 101, 103, 106, 108, 114, 
117. See gong pangarah. 

paniyaga, 86. 

pafijak (pandjak), 71. 

Pafiji (Pandji), 3, 22, 29. 

pan-pipe, 1. 

Paré, 36. 

paréret, 29, 116. See pérérét, prérét. 

parwa, 77. 

Pasuruan, 46; fig. 105. 

pataha, 39, 88, 100, 104, 112. 

pedanda, Balinese —, 56. 

peking, 80. 

Pelem, 79. 

p(é)lérét, 29, 99, 107. 

pellet-bell, see bells. 

pélog, 2, 3, 51, 61, 64, 79, 86. 

Penanggungan, 20, 26, 89, 123; figs. 
64, 81. 


GENERAL INDEX 151 


peficu (pentju), 66. 
penuntung, 40. 


pérérét, 29, 105, 110, 113. See parérét, 


préret. 
Persian-Arabic, 22. 
petingan, 80. 
petuk, 62, 63. 
pimuraba, 7. 
jake UL WS eg, se 
pin nam tao, 18; fig. 91. 
pi-p’a, 13, 14; figs. 88, 90. 
pipirusa, 33. 
pirus, 33. 
plérét, see pélérét. 
Poli, 65, 66. 
ponggang, 61. 
Prabalingga, 61. 
prajurit (pradjurit), 24. 
Prakrit, 38, 90. 


Prambanan, 5, 14, 19, 28, 30, 34, 35, 
38, 48, 50, 54, 56, 121; figs. 33-42. 


See Candi Prambanan. 
Prapafica (Prapantja), 6. 
prérét, 29, 106, 110. See paréret, 

peréret. 
Priangan, 74. 
prit, 80. 
pukul, 4, 5. 
pupuh, 84. 


qanin, 20. 
qopuz, 14. 


rabana, 39. 

ranacrnga, 31. 

ravaja, 15. 

ravana, 39. 

FAVaiiae (== Tlic) lO 

Ravana, Rawana, 15, 28. 
ravanahasra, rawanahasra, 15, 103. 
ravanastra, 15. 

ravanastron, 15. 

rawana, 15. 

rawan(ah)asta, 7, 15, 17, 92, 93. 


rawanasta, rawanasta, 15, 112. 


rebab, 6, 19, 21, 23, 71, 86, 104, 111. 


rebana, 39. 
redap, 39. 
redep, redep, 39, 107, 109, 110, 117. 


regang, 2, 50, 70, 90-92, 112. 

Rembang, 79. 

réngkong, 1. 

réog, 36, 45; figs. 56, 65. 

Restoration Period, 2, 13, 14, 121. 

réyong, 37, 40, 50, 59, 60-63, 110, 111, 
122, 123% figs. 47, 52, 62, 115. 

rice-stalk instrument, 29; fig. 103. 

rificik (rintjik), 68, 77. 

riyong, 59. 

robana, 39. 

rojéh, 70, 109, 115. 

rofiji (rondji), rofiji(ng) (rondji(ng)), 
82, 85, 105. 

rovana, 15. 

rudra-vina, 17. 


sadiu, 18; fig. 91. 

Sakai, 34. 

sakati, 79, 116. 

salangsang, 82, 83, 112. 

salukat, 79, 86, 96, 99, 103, 110, 111, 115. 

Salumbung (désa), 36. 

salundi, 78. 

salunding, 75, 76, 78, 96, 97, 99, 111. 
— wayang, 76-78. 
— (wsi), 71, 73-75, 97. 
tikasan —, 75. 

salundingan, 98. 

samépa, 22, 80, 83, 86, 99, 106, 117. 

samgat mapadahi, 7. 

sangghani, sangghani, 80, 83, 86, 105, 
112. 

sangita, 88. 

sangk(h)a, 30, 33, 93, 95, 104-106, 113, 
114, 117. See cangk(h)a. 

sankha, 31. 

Sanskrit, passim. 

santu(ng), 18, 19. 

saragi, 69, 70, 96. 

Sarasvati, Saraswati, 11, 14, 121; 
figs. 44, 45. 

Sarawak, 27. 

Ghd), eS), Gye OH, 

saron, 22, 24, 48, 51, 67, 73, 75-80, 84, 
85, 87, 103, 106, 116; figs. 19, 118. 
— barung, 79, 80. 
— demung, 79. 
— panerus, 79, 80. 

sarungan, 83, 87, 92. 

saya, 63. 


152 


scrapers, 49. 

scraping sticks (instruments), 1, 48; 
figs. 5, 14, 106, 114. 

sekaha, 57. 

Selat, 78. 

selokat, 79, 80. 

selondéng, 75, 76. 

selunding, 76. See salunding. 

Semang, 34. 

Semarang, 5. 

semar pagulingan (pegulingan), 79, 
Wikg, Wakes 
Bast) 64 

Semen, 53. 

sendarén, 26. 

serimpi, 51. 

serunai, 29. 

sesaron, 79. 

shawins) 25) 2/29) 32, 122) 123); 
figs. 9, 31, 32, 40, 50, 55. 

sheng, 28; fig. 102. 

siao, 25. 

Siberian, 9. 

Si Djoreng Belangah, 59. 

Singaradja, 116. 

Singasari, 36, 55, 122. 

Sinhalese, 31. 

sitar, 19. 

slabs, 24, 71. 
bamboo —, 72. 
wooden —, 24, 71, 73. 

sléndro, 2, 3, 51, 61, 77, 86. 

Slumbung (désa), 53. 

smara pagulingan, 103. 

Solo (= Surakarta), 61, 64, 66, 78, 
79; figs. 114, 118. 

sondari, 26. 

sound pot, 35, 50; fig. 17. 

South American Indian tribes, 34. 

statuettes, 77; figs. 43, 65-65b, 66. 
bronze —, fig. 43. 
terra-cotta —, 14, 35, 37, 74, 123. 

Sugriwa, 66; fig. 58. 

Sukabumi, 47. 

sulépé, 18. 

suling, 6, 25, 93-95, 98, 104, 105, 112, 
114. 

Sultan Agung, 60. 

Sumatra(n), 2, 14, 16. 
Central —, 64. 
North-western —, 59. 
South —, 64. 

Sumba, 18, 21. 


HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


Sumerian, 13. 

Sunda, Sundanese, 1, 16, 22, 24, 26, 28, 
ZOVANN S272 ties LZ, Se 

sundari, sundari, 26, 27, 95, 98, 100, 
101, 103, 109, 114, 115. 

Sung, Annals, 24. 
— Dynasty, 24. 

sungu, 30, 97, 116. 

Surakarta, see Solo, fig. 118. 

surmandal, 20. 

surnay, 29. 

svaramandala, 20. 


¢ 


Cailéndra, 2, 13, 14, 120. 

caivaboddha priests, 6. 

cangka, cangkha, 30-32, 42, 43, 88, 91, 
93, 94, 96, 98-101, 104, 107, 108, 110, 
112, 113, 115, 116, 123. See sangk(h)a. 

cangkakahala, cangkakahala, 31, 68, 
TS SG: 

cangk(h)akala, cangk(h)akala, cangka- 
kala, 31, 105, 116. 

cangk(h)akalaha, cangk(h)akalaha, 
ClCH Oo moo mms: 

Ciwa, 37, 38, 55; fig. 49. 
— temple (Prambanan), 14, 19, 28, 

34, 35, 48, 54, 70, 121; 
figs. 33-41. 

(Cit, ©), Si. 

Cri Maharaja Haji Jayapangus, 75. 

Crivijaya, 66. 

¢rnga (Srnga), 32. 

c¢rngga, 115. 


re 


tabang-tabang, 37, 39, 97, 98, 115. 

tabeh, 3, 67. 

tabe(h)-tabehan, 3, 93-95, 97, 99, 
1027, 105107 IZ ea eS 172 

tabuh, 4, 74. 

tabu-tabuhan, 100. 

Tagalog, 16. 

tala, 31, 70, 85, 88, 94. 

talindo, 18. 

taluktak, 58, 96-98, 105, 110, 114, 

tambang, 94. 

tambourine, 73, 84. 

tambura, 21. 

tamburi, 21. 

‘Wersanll, Ny 672, AB 


100, 


GENERAL INDEX 


Tanakung, Mpu, 76. 

T’ang Dynasty, 65. 

tanpura, 21. 

Catitiiello, 

Tapanuli, 59. 

tapuk, 4. 

tarawangsa, 22. 

tarayann oc, 100} 115; 
tarompong, 40. 

tarofiji (tarondji), 83, 85, 105. 
tatabuhan, 3, 100, 102, 103, 107, 108, 

111, 114. 

— kayu, 72. 
tayuban, 51. 

Tegal, 18, 19, 121; fig. 43. 
Tenasserim, 10; fig. 87. 

Tenggerese, 56. 

tepak, 44. 

tepakan, 44, 96. 

terbang, 36, 37, 39, 45, 84, 109. 

teteg, 35, 44, 100, 103, 108, 110. 
téwek, 53. 

Thai(land), 9, 11, 12, 18, 21, 43, 61; 

figs. 83, 91. 
ti, 24, 25. 
timbre paste, 46; fig. 105. 
tinabeh, 67. 
tinkling bars, 53, 54. 

— discs, 45: 

= Hines, 4 tie / 1 
tiruchinnam, 32. 
titir, 4, 56, 57, 98, 117. 
titiran, 69. 
tjalapita, see calapita. 
tjalung, see calung. 
tjandi, see candi. 
tjantung, see cantung. 
tjaruk, see caruk. 

— saron, see caruk saron. 
tjatjantungan, see cacantungan. 
tjelempung, see celempung. 
tjeluluk, see celuluk. 
tjeluring, see celuring. . 
tjéngtjéng, see céngcéng. 
tjetjémprés, see cecémpreés. 
Tjibadak, 47. 

Tjirebon, 52, 57. 

Tjitjadas (désa), 46. 

tjoring, see coring. 
tjumangkirang, see cumangkirang. 
tjuring, see curing. 

Tnganan, 78. 

Toba region, 16. See Batak. 


Togo, 13. 

tongtong, 4, 52, 56, 57. 

tongtong dhukdhuk, 57. 
tontonan, 88, 103. 

Toraja (Toradja), West —, 18. 
trawangsah, 23, 104. 


_ trawasa, 23, 110. 


Trawulan, 64, 65. 
trewasa, 22, 106. 
trompong, 59, 61. 
trumpets, 24, 29-32, 42, 87, 88; figs. 18, 
Zoo NRO2, AZ 15S. 108, 
curved —, 31, 32. 
double- —, 32, 122; figs. 53, 103, 
104. 
shell- —, 30, 32, 65, 123; figs. 18, 22, 
SIS2 AZ OS a OS. 
single-looped —, 31, 87. 
straight —, 31, 32; figs. 31, 32. 
trut, 32, 100. 
tsaung, 10, 11; fig. 86. 
tudung(an), 26, 76, 77, 97, 98, 110. 
tuha padahi, 7. 
tukang gending, 5. 
Tulungagung, 52, 74. 
tumburu-vina, 21; fig. 92. 
tungtung, 57. 
Tunhuang, 45; fig. 85. 
turas pagérong, 79, 82, 84, 116. 
turiyavadita, 31. 
Turkestan, 9, 12, 17. 
Chinese —, 12, 45, 49; fig. 85. 
Turkish, 14. 
turya, 31, 87. 
tury(y)a waditra, 31, 110. 
tuwongan, 26. 
tuwung, 2, 26, 49-52, 85, 92, 93, 108, 
(122 


wi 


Ubud, 76. 

Udayana, 10. 

Uganda, 13. 

unén-unén, 88, 108. 
unyan-unyan, 88, 108, 109. 
upacara (upatjara), 53. 


V 
Wacelle 
vaditra, 87, 88. 
vadya, 87, 88. 


133 


154 HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


vaméa, 25. widu mangidung, 8. 
vamsi, 25. Wine lle 19 O4 OR Os ielel 3m 177 
Vatsa, 10. winarawa, 15. 
venu, 31. wina(-)rawana, 12, 17, 95. 
Vienna, 14. wina-rawan(ah)asta, 12, 15, 17, 88, 94. 
Vietnam, Vietnamese, 16, 58, 59; fig. 107. wina-rawanasta, 12, 113. 

North —, 27. winipafica (winipantja), 12, 15, 17, 97. 
vahata, IL, WE ily ite, ale, Aad), zal, Sil Wirasaba, 60. 

fig. 94. wiri-wiri, 48. 
vini, 11. 
violin, 18. x 
vipafici-vina, 11, 15, 17. 
Vogul, 9. xylophones, 3, 24, 62, 72-74; figs. 60, 

61, 65. 
W calung (tjalung)-shaped —, 72. 

wadatra, 104. Y 
waditra, 83, 87, 88, 94. 
wangsi, 25, 112. ye-gwin, 49, 
wariga, 26, 44, 56. yu, 48. 


water-clatterer, 58, 59. See taluktak. Yunnan, 2. 
wayang, 4, 26, 33, 76, 77. 


— kulit, 77. 1b, 

— purwa, 2, 3, 39, 51, 77. 

— wong, 39, 77. zithers, 16, 89. 
Wedda, 34. board- —, 20. 
wénu, 26, 113. prow-shaped —, 16. 


Widjang (Karangtalun), 78. See bar-zithers. 


ACKNOWLEDGEMENT FOR THE REPRODUCTIONS 


Dre le Adan. 

Dr. A. A. Bake 

British Museum 

Dr. Th. van Erp . 

ie, OF Eerz <. 

Mr. Kusnadi pagers ae 
Drs. F. P. C. M. baron van Lamsweerde 
Ir. H. Maclaine Pont 

Dr. Mantle Hood . 

Ir, J. L. Moens 

Musée du Conservatoire, Brussels . 
National Museum of Ethnology, Leyden 
The Netherlands Embassy, Bangkok . 
1. 


Royal Tropical Institute, Amsterdam . 


Dr. W. F. Stutterheim . 
Tjok. Gdé Raka Sukawati . 
Unknown to the author . 


Own photo’s 


65 


. 65a, 65b 


47 
114 


. 48, 48a 
oo. ol 
. 2—43, 45, 46, 52—57, 


59—63, 68, 69, 73, 74, 
(ieee S| 


ed Ith Dad On Op De IOs 


HO. 1139 147 
. 64, 81 
Sloe 16 
_ 86, 87, 99, 107 


z= 007,07,, 70,80, 8Z, 109, 


112 


From publications (see List of Abbreviations and of Bibliographical 


Notes) by: 
Alvad . 
Bernatzik 
Brandes . 


Buschan . 


No. 
No. 


85a 
101 


Nos. 50, 51 


No. 


104 


156 HINDU-JAVANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 


Coomaraswamy 
Dufour & Carpeaux . 
Goloubew II 

Grosset 

Grtinwedel I 

Havell F 
Heine Geldern I . 
Kats 

Kummel . aes 2 
Raffles and Crawfurd 
Sachs . 

Stutterheim I . 


119 


s. 84, 106 


98 
92 
85 
120 
44 


So, 11s 


90 
95 


. 88, 89, 93, 94, 102, 103 


49 


Rik Oa GlON's 


emapyges: hil 


e 


ji 


me 


ZS 


Fig. 1. Relief from the Diéng-plateau (1st half 8th century) 
Gana with bells (Photo O. Herz) 


ie 
oe 
Oe 


Fig. 2. Relief on Candi Sari (2nd _ half Fig. 3. Relief on Candi Sari (2nd _ halt 
8th century) 8th century) 
Bodhisattwa with bar-zither (Photo O.D.) Bodhisattwa with three-stringed lute 


C2otomO PD») 


Fig. 4. Relief on Candi Sari (2nd half 8th century) 
Bodhisattwa with small cymbals (Photo O.D.) 


el be 
3 1 2 4 
Fig. 5. Barabudur O 39 
1. Mouth organ; 2. Scraping stick; 3. Globe-shaped slit-drum; 4. Begging bowl with 
tinkling-bars (Photo O.D.) 


Fig. 6. Barabudur O 72 Fig. 7. Barabudur O 101 centre 
1. Goblet-shaped cymbals; 2. Earthenware 1. Kinnara with bar-zither; 2. Transverse 
drum (Photo O.D.) flute (Photo O.D.) 


Fig. 8. Barabudur O 102 
1. Goblet-shaped cymbals; 2. Two-stringed lute, played 
with plectrum (Photo O.D.) 


Fig. 9. Barabudur O 117 (left) 
Shawm (?) or end-blown flute (?) (Photo O.D.) 


aor a 


Fig. 10. Barabudur O 125 Fig. 11. Barabudur O 131 (right) 
1. Bar-zither ; 2. Three-stringed lute Ghanta (Photo O.D.) 


(Photo O.D.) 


Fig. 12. Barabudur O 149 
1. Kinnara with bar-zither; 2. Goblet-shaped cymbals; 3. Ordinary 
cymbals; 4. Earthenware drum (Photo O.D.) 


Fig. 13. Barabudur O 151 (centre) 
1. Bar-zither with visible tuning-peg; 2. Four- 
stringed lute (Photo O.D.) 


CMO 904d) APS 
SuIdeINS “p :94n'T “¢ {suinip poysteAA “Z + (é) Stoyyz-ieg ‘T 
GPP) IS. O Apaqeieg “r] “Oly 


CORO 040Y q) 
oyN[F IStoAsueIT, “CS fadA} Jopusys oy} J 
-[or1eq jeormowmumAsy “¢ ispequiAa o61e7 


& 


OR a] eay: : SUINADP podeys 
ve > SUINLIp jeotipulyAy ‘T 
I 


el inpnqeied CT (Oly 


5 ee Pa. a » A 

Fig. 17. Barabudur Ib 19 

1. Goblet-shaped cymbals; 2. Large cymbals; 

3. Sound pot; 4. Transverse flutes (Photo OD.) 


Fig. 16. Barabudur Ia 52 

1. Lute, played with plectrum; 

2. Arched harp with tuning-pegs; 

3. Transverse flute; 4. Cymbals (?) 
(Photo OD.) 


ee 
IRR OTT ea ih SOY RY OY es 8 Bi Wa oa RSA," 21 YB eS 8A 
1 1 2 


Fig. 18. Barabudur Ib 70 
1. Shell-trumpets; 2. Elephant bell (Photo O.D.) 


Fig. 19. Barabudur Ib 98 Fig. 20. Barabudur IBa 300 


- B) 
Saron (Photo O.D.) 1. Goblet-shaped cymbals; 2. Earthenware 
drum; 3. Transverse flute (Photo O.D.) 


Fig. 21. Barabudur IBb 89 
1. Calung—gambang hybrid; 2. Musical instrument played with sticks (?); 3. Bell with 


stand (Photo O.D.) 


Fig. 22. Barabudur II 1 A 96 
1. Bar-zithers; 2. Shell-trumpet; 3. Three-stringed lutes (one with frets) ; 4. Arched harp ; 
5. Goblet-shaped cymbals (Photo O.D.) 


Fig. 24. Barabudur II 1 
Detail of fig. 22, showing 1. the arched harp 
and 2, the goblet-shaped cymbals 

(Photo O.D.) 


Fig. 23. Barabudur II 1 
Detail of fig. 22, showing the three-stringed 
lute with frets (Photo O.D.) 


Fags ~ 2 a *‘< 
ie = iY 


ws ee : 2 ee 
TRA a i US 


Fig. 25. Barabudur II 105 
Barrel-shaped drum in shoulder strap; 2. Cymbals (Photo O.D.) 


Fig. 26. Barabudur II 122 
1. Waisted drum; 2. Cymbals; 3. Two-stringed lute (Photo O.D.) 


Fig. 27. Barabudur I] 128 
1. Cymbals; 2. Barrel-shaped drum; 3. Lute of the slender type with frets; 4. Goblet- 
shaped cymbals (Photo O.D.) 


Au 


Fig. 28. Barabudur III 21 
Heavenly tree with pellet-bells (Photo O.D.) 


Fig. 29. Barabudur III 21 
Temple bells (Photo O.D.) 


Fig. 30. Barabudur IIIB 40 
1. Bell; 2. Lute with top-section depicted sideways; 3. Transverse flute; 4. Bar-zither 
(Photo O.D.) 


ORO Ojoyd) wap poysteM °g ‘yodumnajz-yjoyS “7 + pueys YUM TJPEg “9 ‘!(2) soN]}] UMOTq-pus TO (7) suIMeYysS “¢ 
:Spodumnay yysresyS “p ssyequiAd a8ieqT “¢ ‘!umup podeys-joriegq °Z {(aseajo jou duo joy 94}) SwWNIp [eoIUOD pa}eouNIT ‘| 


Z AI Anpnqeseg “[¢ “Stop 


NERS SLRER ES PSO I OM 


Fig. 32. Barabudur IV 7 
Detail of fig. 31 with 1. Shell-trumpet; 2. Straight trumpets; 3. Shawms (?) or end-blown 
flutes (?); 4. Waisted drum (Photo O.D.) 


igure ae relief Ciwa temple 

a EE ee Se ea eee. . (southside No. a) 

ae a cua relief Ciwa temple ances ea tie Clete CD) 

eastside No. c 

1. Cylindrical drums; 2. Bells with stands 
(Photo O.D.) 


S1C 
st 


Fig. 34. Prambanan, relief 
(eastside No. /) (southside No. /) 
Goblet-shaped cymbals (Photo O.D.) Large cymbals (Photo O.D.) 


Ciwa_ temple Fig. 36. Prambanan, relief Ciwa temple 


Fig. 37. Prambanan, relief Ciwa temple Fig. 38. Prambanan, relief Ciwa temple 

(southside No. n) (northside No. /) 

Symmetrical barrel-shaped drum Longdrawn symmetrical barrel-shaped drum 
(Photo OD.) (Photo O.D.) 


Fig. 39. Prambanan, relief Ciwa temple 
(northside No. n) 
Symmetrical barrel-shaped drum 

(Photo OD.) 


Fig. 40. Prambanan, relief Ciwa temple 
Shawm (?) or end-blown flute (?) (Photo O.D.) 


Fig. 41. Prambanan, relief Ciwa temple (innerside balustrade) 
Earthenware drums (?) decorated with skins and festoons (?) (Photo O.D.) 


Fig. 42. Prambanan, relief Brahma temple 
Shell-trumpet (Photo O.D.) 


S) 


Fig. 43. Bronze statuette 
found in the Regency of 
Tegal (9th century ?) 
Kinnara with bar-zither 
(Photo O.D.) 


lig. 44. Bronze Saraswati with three- 
stringed lute (9th century ?) 
Three-stringed lute (After Heine-Geldern 1) 


* —_— 
altel 


Fig. 45. Bronze Saraswati, part of the fa- 
mous Ngandjuk-finds (Residency of Ma- 
diun), (10th century) 

Arched harp with 7 tuning-pegs 


(Photo O.D.) 


Fig. 46. Relief on the burialground bathing place at Jalatunda (East Java) A.D. 977 
Arched harp with tuning-pegs and makara front-side (Photo O.D.) 


Fig. 47. Stone-sculpture (I<ediri, about 1200 A.D. ¢) 
Réyong (Photo J. L. Moens) 


Fig. 48. Bhairawa-statue (Candi Singasari, about 1250 A.D.) 
Clapper-drum (Photo Nat. Museum of Ethnology, Leyden) 


2a 


Fig. 48a. Detail of fig. 48 (Photo Nat. Museum of Ethnology, Leyden) 


Fig. 49. Statue of Nandi, the mount of Ciwa (Candi Singasari, about 1250 A.D.) 
Bell-studded necklace (Photo Stutterheim I) 


Fig. 50. Relief on Candi Jago (about 1260 A.D.) 
1. Shawm (?); 2. Long-necked lutes with gourd resonators (After Brandes; sec Br. III) 


Fig. 51. Relief on Candi Jago (about 1260 A.D.) 
1. Long-necked lute, and 2. Instrument resembling the modern celempung 
(After Brandes; see Br. IIT) 


Fig. 52. Relief on Candi Negrimbi (about 1300 A.D.) 
Réyong (Photo OD.) 


ig. 53. Relief on Candi Jawi (about 1300 A.D.) 


| 
1. Shell-trumpet (?); 2. Double-trumpets (Photo O.D.) 


Fig. 54. Relief on Candi Kedaton (about 1370 A.D.) 
Gong (Photo O.D.) 


Fig. 55. Relief on Candi Panataran (14th 


century ) aire, 1s By OeNle = TD eet etioneee ' 
1. Shawm; 2. Small gong (Photo O.D.) Ree Seite eu 2a ERC! Este 


1. Small gong; 2. Kemanak (Photo O.D.) 


Fig. 56. Relief on Candi Panataran (14th Fig. 58. Relief on Candi Panataran (14th 
century ) century ) 
Small buta with dogdog or réog The war-music of Sugriwa’s monkey-army : 


(Photo O.D.) large gong (After J. Kats) 


ts 


Fig. 59. Pilaster of the Naga temple Fig. 60. Relief on Candi Panataran (the so-called 
(Panataran) (beginning 14th century) pendapa-terrace, 1375 A.D.) 
Priest with prayer-bell (genta) ; A priest teaching the playing of the xylophone 
(Photo OD.) to a young lady (Photo O.D.) 
1 2 1 


Fig. 61. Relief on Candi Panataran (the Fig. 62. Relief on Candi Panataran (the 
so-called pendapa-terrace, 1375 A.D.) so-called pendapa-terrace, 1375 A.D.) 
The sequel of the xylophone-teaching 1. Réyongs; 2. Cymbals (?) (Photo OD.) 


(Photo OD.) 


Fig. 63. Relief on Candi Tégawangi 
(1358 A.D.) 
Cylindrical drum (Photo O.D.) 


Fig. 64. Relief found on the slopes of the Penanggungan (East Java, 14th century ) 
Instrument resembling N.-Indian bin (Photo W. F. Stutterheim) 


3 
Fig. 65. Terra-cotta statuettes found in the soil of the kraton of 
Majapahit (14th century) 
1. Lute of the squat type; 2. Frame-drums (7?) or betel-bags (7?) ; 
3. Dogdog or 


réog; 4. Xylophone played with V-shaped sticks 


(Photo H. Maclaine Pont) 


SD 


Fig. 
I 


‘rame-drums (7) or betel-bags (?) (Photo Mantle Hood) 


65a. Terra-cotta statuettes found in the soil of the kraton of Majapahit (14th century) 


oe - 


Fig. 65b. Terra-cotta statuettes found in the soil of the kraton of Majapahit (14th century) 
1. Frame-drums (?) or betel-bags (?); 2. Gendérs with 7 keys (Photo Mantle Hood) 


g 
Ky 


2 
— 


g > 


y 
wy & 


l 2 
Fig. 66. Terra-cotta statuettes found in the soil of the kraton of Majapahit (14th century) 
1. Lute of the squat type; 2. Lute of the slender type with a ‘cello’ scroll. 


Fig. 67. Found in the soil of the kraton of 
Majapahit (14th century) 


Terra-cotta objects, perhaps bodies of waist- Fig. 68. Relief on Candi Sukuh (Central 
ed drums Java, 15th century) 


Shell-trumpet (Photo O.D.) 


1 2 3 3 


Fig. 70. Musical instruments found in the soil of 
the Mangku Nagaran princedom (Central Java) 


Fig. 69. Relief on Candi Sukuh 1. Gong without central knob; 
(Central Java, 15th century) 2. Gong with damaged knob; 


c 


Small gong (Photo O.D.) 3. Bonangs, cast only (not hammered out) 


Fig. 


71, 


1 2 
. Kakhara-top with tinkling rings; 2. Fingerring-ghenta (Photo Th. 


ve 


. Erp) 


Fig. 73. Bronze slit-drum of the ken- Fig. 74. Bronze temple pellet-bell (Cen- 
tongan-type (Kadiri-period, about 1050- tral Java, 9th century) (Photo O.D.) 
1222 A.D.)-(Photo O.D.) 


a, 


"Wei spear xorg wet 


Fig. 75. Temple bell (East Java, 14th century) (Photo R. Trop. Inst. No. 1770/73) 


Fig. 76. Temple bell (?) Fig. 77. Bronze temple bell (Central Java, 
(Photo R. Trop. Inst. No. 1772/296) 9th century) (Photo O.D.) 


wes sanen ewes 


tone : 
S Aeteen een eatees 


= Scoecssasr 
thy 
See 


Fig. 79. Cattle bells 
(Photo R. Trop. Inst. Nos. 1772/303 and 1772/385) 


Fig. 78. Horse or elephant bell 
(Photo R. Trop. Inst. 
No. 1772/305) 


ig. 80. 


Old Javanese kemanak found in 


soil, near Malang (East Java) 


Fig. 81. Terra-cotta ocarina found on the 
slopes of mount Penanggungan (East Java) 
(Photo W. F. Stutterheim) 


Fig. 82. Bonang-shaped stones from the Klatén area 


Fig. 83. Thai p’in (arched harp) (Photo Neth. Emb. Bangkok) 


Fig. 84. Relief on Bayon temple at Angkor Thom (Cambodia, 11th century) 
1. Bin of the North Indian type; 2. Arched harp. (After Dufour and Carpeai.x) 


la 


Fig. 85. Fresco from Tunhuang (Chinese Turkestan, 8th 
century ) 
Arched harp (After Griinwedel 1) 


Coes 


L.Edelberg 1959 


Fig. 85a. Arched harp from Kafiristan (After Alvad) 


Fig. 86. Burmese harp (tsaung) 


Fig. 88. Modern South 
Chinese p'l-p’a 

(After Sachs VII; 

PI. 41; fig. 280) 


Fig. 87. Burmese arched harp from the 
Southern province of Tenasserim 


(Jamuny 49}{f7) 
(Ainjuso yig ‘opis yoeq) v.d-1.d asautyy YON “06 ‘31Y (Fee Pun see “SPY SZ Id “ITA SYIVS 49fP) 
spn2rig osouedef ‘68 “317 


Fig. 91. Bar-zither (fin nam tao) from Thailand (= the 
Cambodian sadin) (Photo Neth. Emb. Bangkok) 


Fig. 92. Long- 
necked lute 
(tumburu-vind) 


(After Grosset) 


Fig. 93. North Indian bin 
(After Sachs VII; Pl. 26; fig. 185) 


Fig. 94. South Indian vind 
(After Sachs II) 


Fig. 95. Javanese celempung 
(After Raffles and Crawfurd) 


Fig. 96. Modern Central Javanese celempung (Photo R. Trop. Inst. No. 474/1) 


Fig. 97. Nepalese kaha (After A. A. Bake) 


(Kr 


J 


? 


AS >) 
\fe 


) 


Annam and on a hatchet from Dong-son (middle of Ist 


98. Mouth organs engraved on a bronze drum from North 


Fie. 


century A.D.) (After Goloubew IT) 


sn sh bape LORS Z 


Fig. 99. Dayak kledi (Central Borneo) Fig. 100. Mouth organ (khén) 
(Lushan tribe, Assam) (Photo British Museum) 


Fig. 101. Mouth organs from Laos (After Bernatzik) Fig. 102. Chinese mouth 
organ (sheng) 
(After Sachs VIII; 
fig. 40) 


Fig. 103. Rice-stalk instrument (After Sachs VIII; fig. 12) 


Fig. 104. Southern Indian orchestra with double-trumpet (After Buschan) 


Fig. 105. Javanese barrel-shaped 
drum (kendang) with timbre paste 
(kabupaten of Pasuruan) 

(Photo Kusnadi) 


6 Seer. 


Fig. 106. Relief on Bayon temple at Angkor Thom (Cambodia, 11th century) 
Scraping stick (After Dufour and Carpeau.r) 


Fig. 107. Globe-shaped wooden slit-drum from Vietnam 


Fig. 108. Celuring of the gamelan Kyahi Kancil Belih (Kraton Jogjakarta) (Photo L. Adam) 


Fig. 109. Celuring in the Paku Alaman. In front a set of 
kemanak (Jogjakarta) 


Fig. 110. Old Javanese 
kemanak 
(Photo R. Trop. Inst.) 


Fig. 111. Modern Balinese bamboo gambangs played with V-shaped sticks (Photo O.D.) 


Fig. 112. Sundanese calung 


Fig. 113. Sundanese calung (Photo R. Trop. Inst.) 


Fig. 114. Bronze scraping instrument from a Solonese gamelan 
‘ ping 
(Photo Mus. du Conservatoire, Brussels) 


Fig. 115. Modern ene Fig. 116. Modern Balinese gendér wayang 
1. Gwmanak and 2. Réyvong z (Photo Sukawatt) 
(Photo Sukawatt) 


Fig. 117. Modern Javanese gambang kayu (Jogjakarta) (Photo R. Trop. Inst.) 


Fig. 119. Relief on Barhut 
temple (2nd century B.C.) 
Arched harps 

(After Coomaraswamy) 


Zi 


Fig. 120. Arched harp on a Gandhara relief (1st century B.C.) (After Havell) 


BASIC FORMS OF TWO-HEADED DRUMS 


MENTIONED IN THE TEXT 


cylindrical 
symmetrical barrel-shaped 


waisted 


asymmetrical barrel-shaped 


damaru type truncated-conical 


Fig. 121. After sketches by F. van Lamsweerde 


7 eee 
an t ; 


pees 


pesk bree 


settle 


a 
yeah 


es 
A aetyt 


pees He 


b te 


es SicaMieReSOEEEERSE ERMA taneaas at RHR : Lease Hee ee oa iste ; f ise 
i ; Ah HERR | i { ; § FRSA STEER Y Y pie tt 
: x + : HS Bok + ; ti i Reet i paths thane ihe ritare Ty it 


eles 
pee 
at + 


BBs ea 
i 

He ; se 
i 


RSUET Ca ai 
srt x ; it tt iy iy : 
as aM aC 


he 


ity aT UMD ih ut ste teh vi 4 sets Het 
ie : : cuniaipe ; ( au 
Bera i { FSH a 
Hea t Ha tet Hpenit ; it i ae 
i a 

ine 


fees 
ee 


Sascnees 


fe 
Reena Senses 
eine : ie ey 
“ SURRY 
i i He ‘i if i 
iy RY re et ; eH 
7 Minty 7 ae vy Hhy Fh Foust 
i i aa tH HME i bee HN! th i 
Ha Ha HRA ot UU a OC ; 
nthe SHUR une GER RUB MME Pa Pun EET ERN REND Hontcat run eae at Cay 
aus SER Hane sean AEE i HURT Piet elias th tit AGE 
i oo H bets i retry Hea y avi 
ete Bitty tee Hit 
‘a Phi i Pe HTH 
a ise rset tH f } thy Ht Hat 
iteteity ny US aa Titty f aie Hit 
ee He i SE 
HH DRA ana H Kite tet Pilea : High i 
CHE ae dantiie He ereant pea ete ide he : 
i 


ss 
us 


sits 
‘H 


eer 


Bel i i te 
; oe 


a 
oS 


i 
rE 
i! tit 


; iit 

i hick 

ie ui bt 
on 

‘ 

ts i i 
i : 
hy 

Hin 


i] 
BO Rt if 


Hn 
Srapetesatas tit 
RUARH SNE RY 
di Ht 


iy it 
sah 
y pit 


AnH 
a Ht 


HHH 


A 


: HAH i i Hh ie i iH 
: i 
AMER ie 1 


a f 
eit i pH if 
HS HA 
jay 
Bit, mt 
Co a can Hb ei SPDR AEE Se 
NaH Ea ae itis it i ; , : ay iy ite it 


a AR i i 
He 


i 


i) 
att 
a 
sete 
: 


RARIRTEE tata HH} 
a i 

i 
i 
ih 


ty ; sh 
Ag H 
Hy f He Ait f 
iG CUM 

: i 
! a RL tite tty : GHUNi Aone 
ryt ae rt pete ay / ui CAM Tet 
LE NRT HOON eH Ba HREM UA) Rea 4 Fa HUT 


3 th 


¥) 
Hi 
i 


