Smithsonian  Institution 
Libraries 


Gift  of 

Frank  Rett enter g 


w 

Smithsonian  Libraries 


Adopted  for  Conservation 
By 

Dr.  Robin  Davisson  and 
Smithsonian  Secretary 
David  Skorton 


February  17,  2016 


* 


’) 


i 


i- 


' 


o 


( 


V ' 

. * i? 


SLAVE  SONGS 


OF  THE 


UNITED  STATES 


Entered  according  to  Act  of  Congress,  in  the  year  1867,  by  A.  Simpson  & Co. 
in  the  Clerk’s  Office  of  the  District  Court  of  the  United  States 
for  the  Southern  District  of  New  York. 


Agathynian  Press,  60  Duane  Street,  New  York. 


The  musical  capacity  of  tlie  negro  race  lias  been  recog- 
nized for  so  many  years  that  it  is  hard  to  explain  why 
no  systematic  effort  has  hitherto  been  made  to  collect 
and  preserve  their  melodies.  More  than  thirty  years 
ago  those  plantation  songs  made  their  appearance  which 
were  so  extraordinarily  popular  for  a while  ; and  if 
“ Coal-black  Rose,”  “ Zip  Coon”  and  u Ole  Virginny 
nebber  tire”  have  been  succeeded  by  spurious  imita- 
tions, manufactured  to  suit  the  somewhat  sentimental 
taste  of  our  community,  the  fact  that  these  were  called 
“negro  melodies”  was  itself  a tribute  to  the  musical 
genius  of  the  race.  * 

The  public  had  well-nigh  forgotten  these  genuine  slave 
songs,  and  with  them  the  creative  power  from  which 
they  sprung,  when  a fresh  interest  was  excited  through 
the  educational  mission  to  the  Port  Royal  islands,  in 
1861.  The  agents  of  this  mission  were  not  long  in  dis- 

O O 


* It  is  not  generally  known  that  the  beautiful  air  “Long  time  ago,”  or 
“Near  the  lake  where  drooped  the  willow,”  was  borrowed  from  the  negroes, 
by  whom  it  was  sung  to  words  beginning,  “ Way  down  in  Raccoon  Hollow.’* 


11 


SLAVE  SONGS  OF  THE 


covering  the  rich  vein  of  music  that  existed  in  these  half- 
barbarous  people,  and  when  visitors  from  the  North 
were  on  the  islands,  there  was  nothing  that  seemed  bet- 
ter worth  their  while  than  to  see  a “ shout”  or  hear  the 
“ people”  sing  their  “ sperichils.”  A few  of  these  last, 
of  special  merit,*  soon  became  established  favorites 
among  the  whites,  and  hardly  a Sunday  passed  at  the 
church  on  St.  Helena  without  “ Gabriel’s  Trumpet,”  CL  I 
hear  from  Heaven  to-day,”  or  “ Jehovah  Hallelujah.” 
The  last  time  I myself  heard  these  was  at  the  Fourth  of 
July  celebration,  at  the  church,  in  1864.  All  of  them 
were  sung,  and  then  the  glorious  shout,  “ I can’t  stay 
behind,  my  Lord,”  was  struck  up,  and  sung  by  the  en- 
tire multitude  with  a zest  and  spirit,  a swaying  of  the 
bodies  and  nodding  of  the  heads  and  lighting  of  the 
countenances  and  rhythmical  movement  of  the  hands, 
which  I think  no  one  present  will  ever  forget. 

Attention  was,  I believe,  first  publicly  directed  to 
these  songs  in  a letter  from  Miss  McKim,  of  Philadelphia, 
to  Dwight s Journal  of  Music,  Nov.  8,  1862,  from  which 
some  extracts  will  presently  be  given.  At  about  the 
same  time,  Miss  McKim  arranged  and  published  two  ot 
them,  “ Roll,  Jordan”  (No.  1)  and  “Poor  Rosy”  (No.  8) 
—probably  on  all  accounts  the  two  best  specimens  that 
could  be  selected.  Mr.  H.  G.  Spaulding  not  long  after 
gave  some  well-chosen  specimens  of  the  music  in  an  ar- 
ticle entitled  “ Under  the  Palmetto,”  in  the  Continental 


* The  first  seven  spirituals  in  this  collection,  v.Tiich  were  regularly  sung  at  the 

“•  OSS 


UNITED  STATES. 


Ill 


Monthly  for  August,  1863,  among  them,  “ O Lord,  re- 
member me”  (No.  15),  and  “The  Lonesome  Valley” 
(No.  7).  Many  other  persons  interested  themselves  in 
the  collection  of  words  and  tunes,  and  it  seems  time  at 
last  that  the  partial  collections  in  the  possession  of  the 
editors,  and  known  by  them  to  be  in  the  possession  of 
others,  should  not  be  forgotten  and  lost,  but  that  these 
relics  of  a state  of  society  which  has  passed  away  should 
be  preserved  while  it  is  still  possible.* 

The  greater  part  of  the  music  here  presented  has  been 
taken  down  by  the  editors  from  the  lips  of  the  colored 
people  themselves  ; when  we  have  obtained  it  from  other 
sources,  we  have  given  credit  in  the  table  of  contents. 
The  largest  and  most  accurate  single  collection  in  exist- 
ence is  probably  that  made  by  Mr.  Charles  P.  Ware, 
chiefly  at  Coffin’s  Point,  St.  Helena  Island.  We  have 
thought  it  best  to  give  this  collection  in  its  entirety,  as 
the  basis  of  the  present  work  ; it  includes  all  the  hymns 
as  far  as  No.  43.  Those  which  follow,  as  far  as  No.  55, 
were  collected  by  myself  on  the  Capt.  John  Fripp  and 
neighboring  plantations,  on  the  same  island.  In  all 
cases  we  have  added  words  from  other  sources  and  othei 
localities,  when  they  could  be  obtained,  as  well  as  varia 
tions  of  the  tunes  wherever  they  were  of  sufficient  im 
portance  to  warrant  it.  Of  the  other  hymns  and  songp 


* Only  tills  last  spring  a valuable  collection  of  songs  made  at  Richmond,  Va., 
was  lost  in  the  Wagner.  No  copy  had  been  made  from  the  original  manuscript 
so  that  the  labor  of  their  collection  was  lost.  We  had  hoped  to  have  the  use  o i 
them  in  preparing  the  present  work. 


IV 


SLAVE  SOHGS  OF  THE 


we  liave  given  the  locality  whenever  it  could  he  ascer- 
tained. 

The  difficulty  experienced  in  attaining  absolute  cor- 
rectness is  greater  than  might  be  supposed  by  those  who 
have  never  tried  the  experiment,  and  we  are  far  from 
claiming  that  we  have  made  no  mistakes.  I have  never 
felt  quite  sure  of  my  notation  without  a fresh  compari- 
son with  the  singing,  and  have  then  often  found  that  I 
had  made  some  errors.  I feel  confident,  however,  that 
there  are  no  mistakes  of  importance.  What  may  appear 
to  some  to  be  an  incorrect  rendering,  is  very  likely  to 
be  a variation;  for  these  variations  are  endless,  and 
very  entertaining  and  instructive. 

Neither  should  any  one  be  repelled  by  any  difficulty 
in  adapting  the  words  to  the  tunes.  The  negroes  keep 
exquisite  time  in  singing,  and  do  not  suffer  themselves 
to  be  daunted  by  any  obstacle  in  the  words.  The  most 
obstinate  Scripture  phrases  or  snatches  from  hymns  they 
will  force  to  do  duty  with  any  tune  they  please,  and 
will  dash  heroically  through  a trochaic  tune  at  the  head 
of  a column  of  iambs  with  wonderful  skill.  We  have  in 
all  cases  arranged  one  set  of  words  carefully  to  each 
melody ; for  the  rest,  one  must  make  them  fit  the  best 
he  can,  as  the  negroes  themselves  do. 

The  best  that  we  can  do,  however,  with  paper  and 
types,  or  even  with  voices,  will  convey  but  a faint  sha- 
dow of  the  original.  The  voices  of  the  colored  people 
have  a peculiar  quality  that  nothing  can  imitate ; and 
the  intonations  and  delicate  variations  of  even  one 


UNITED  STATES. 


V 


singer  cannot  be  reproduced  on  paper.  And  I despair 
of  conveying  any  notion  of  the  effect  of  a number  singing 
together,  especially  in  a complicated  shout,  like  “ I can’t 
stay  behind,  my  Lord”  (No.  8),  or  “ Turn,  sinner,  turn 
O !”  (No.  48).  There  is  no  singing  in  parts*  as  we  un- 
derstand it,  and  yet  no  two  appear  to  be  singing  the 
same  thing — the  leading  singer  starts  the  words  of  each 
verse,  often  improvising,  and  the  others,  who  “base” 
him,  as  it  is  called,  strike  in  with  the  refrain,  or  even 
join  in  the  solo,  when  the  words  are  familiar.  When 
the  “ base”  begins,  the  leader  often  stops,  leaving  the 
rest  of  his  words  to  be  guessed  at,  or  it  may  be  they  are 
taken  up  by  one  of  the  other  singers.  And  the  “ basers” 
themselves  seem  to  follow  their  own  whims,  beginning 
when  they  please  and  leaving  off  when  they  please, 
striking  an  octave  above  or  below  (in  case  they  have 
pitched  the  tune  too  low  or  too  high),  or  hitting  some 
other  note  that  chords,  so  as  to  produce  the  effect  of  a 
marvellous  complication  and  variety,  and  yet  with  the 
most  perfect  time,  and  rarely  with  any  discord.  And 
what  makes  it  all  the  harder  to  unravel  a thread  of  mel- 
ody out  of  this  strange  network  is  that,  like  birds,  they 
seem  not  infrequently  to  strike  sounds  that  cannot  be 
precisely  represented  by  the  gamut,  and  abound  in 


* “The  high  voices,  all  in  unison,  and  the  admirable  time  and  true  accent 
with  which  their  responses  are  made,  always  make  me  wish  that  some  great 
musical  composer  could  hear  these  semi -savage  performances.  With  a very- 
little  skilful  adaptation  and  instrumentation,  I think  one  or  two  barbaric  chants 
and  choruses  might  be  evoked  from  them  that  would  make  the  fortune  of  an 
opera.” — Mrs.  Kemble's  “ Life  on  a Georgian  Plantation ,”  p.  218. 


VI 


SLAVE  SONGS  OF  THE 


“slides  from  one  note  to  another,  and  turns  and  cadences 
not  in  articulated  notes.”  “ It  is  difficult,”  writes  Miss 
McKim,  “ to  express  the  entire  character  of  these  negro 
ballads  by  mere  musical  notes  and  signs.  The  odd  turns 
made  in  the  throat,  and  the  curious  rhythmic  effect  pro- 
duced by  single  voices  chiming  in  at  different  irregular 
intervals,  seem  almost  as  impossible  to  place  on  the 
score  as  the  singing  of  birds  or  the  tones  of  an  JEolian 
Harp.”  There  are  also  apparent  irregularities  in  the 
time,  which  it  is  no  less  difficult  to  express  accurately, 
and  of  which  Nos.  10,  130, 131,  and  (eminently)  128,  are 
examples. 

Still,  the  chief  part  of  the  negro  music  is  civilized  in 
its  character — partly  composed  under  the  influence  of 
association  with  the  whites,  partly  actually  imitated 
from  their  music.  In  the  main  it  appears  to  be  original 
in  the  best  sense  of  the  word,  and  the  more  we  examine 
the  subject, 'the  more  genuine  it  appears  to  us  to  be.  In 
a very  few  songs,  as  Nos.  19,  23,  and  25,  strains  of  familiar 
tunes  are  readily  traced ; and  it  may  easily  be  that  others 
contain  strains  of  less  familiar  music,  which  the  slaves 
heard  their  masters  sing  or  play.* 

On  the  other  hand  there  are  very  few  which  are  of  an 
intrinsically  barbaric  character,  and  where  this  character 
does  appear,  it  is  chiefly  in  short  passages,  intermingled 


* We  liave  rejected  as  spurious  ‘‘Give  me  Jesus,”  “ Climb  Jacob’s  Ladder," 
(both  sung  at  Port  Royal),  and  “ I’ll  take  the  wings  of  the  morning,”  which 
we  find  in  Methodist  hymn-books.  A few  others,  the  character  of  which 
seemed  somewhat  suspicious,  we  have  not  felt  at  liberty  to  reject  without  direct 
evidence 


UNITED  STATES.  Vll 

with  others  of  a different  character.  Such  passages  may 
be  found  perhaps  in  Nos.  10,  12,  and  18  ; and  “ Becky 
Lawton,”  for  instance  (No.  29),  “ Shall  I die?”  (No.  52) 
“ Bound  the  corn,  Sally”  (No.  87),  and  “ O’er  the 
crossing”  (No.  93)  may  very  well  be  purely  African  in 
origin.  Indeed,  it  is  very  likely  that  if  we  had  found  it 
possible  to  get  at  more  of  their  secular  music,  we  should 
have  come  to  another  conclusion  as  to  the  proportion  ot 
the  barbaric  element.  A gentleman  in  Delaware  writes  :i 
“We  must  look  among  their  non-religious  songs  for 
the  purest  specimens  of  negro  minstrelsy.  It  is  remark- 
able that  they  have  themselves  transferred  the  best  or 
these  to  the  uses  of  their  churches — I suppose  on  Mi. 
Wesley’s  principle  that  ‘it  is  not  right  the  Devil  should! 
have  all  the  good  tunes.’  Their  leaders  and  preachers 
have  not  found  this  change  difficult  to  effect ; or  at  least 
they  have  taken  so  little  pains  about  it  that  one  often 
detects  the  profane  cropping  out , and  revealing  the  ori- 
gin of  their  most  solemn  ‘ hymns,’  in  spite  of  the  best  in- 
tentions of  the  poet  and  artist.  Some  of  the  best  pure 
negro  songs  I have  ever  heard  were  those  that  used  to 
be  sung  by  the  black  stevedores,  or  perhaps  the  crews 
themselves,  of  the  West  India  vessels,  loading  and  un- 
loading at  the  wharves  in  Philadelphia  and  Baltimore., 
I have  stood  for  more  than  an  hour,  often,  listening  to 
them,  as  they  hoisted  and  lowered  the  hogsheads  and 
boxes  of  their  ’cargoes ; one  man  taking  the  burden  of 
the  song  (and  the  slack  of  the  rope)  and  the  others 
striking  in  with  the  chorus.  They  would  sing  in  this 


SLAVE  SONGS  OF  THE 


• • • 

Vlll  • 

way  more  than  a dozen  different  songs  in  an  hour ; most 
of  which  might  indeed  be  warranted  to  contain  4 nothing 
religious’ — a few  of  them,  1 on  the  contrary,  quite  the 
reverse’ — but  generally  rather  innocent  and  proper  in 
their  language,  and  strangely  attractive  in  their  music; 
and  with  a volume  of  voice  that  reached  a square  or  two 
away.  That  plan  of  labor  has  now  passed  away,  in  Phil- 
adelphia at  least,  and  the  songs,  I suppose,  with  it.  So 
that  these  performances  are  to  be  heard  only  among 
black  sailors  on  their  vessels,  or  ’long-shore  men  in  out- 
of-the-way  places,  where  opportunities  for  respectable 
persons  to  hear  them  are  rather  few.” 

These  are  the  songs  that  are  still  heard  upon  the  Mis- 
sissippi steamboats — wild  and  strangely  fascinating — ■ 
one  of  which  we  have  been  so  fortunate  as  to  secure  for 
this  collection.  This,  too,  is  no  doubt  the  music  of  the 
colored  firemen  of  Savannah,  graphically  described  by 
Mr.  Kane  O’Donnel,  in  a letter  to  the  Philadelphia 
P,  ‘ess,  and  one  of  which  he  was  able  to  contribute  for  our 
use.  Mr.  E.  S.  Philbrick  was  struck  with  the  resem- 
blance of  some  of  the  rowing  tunes  at  Port-Royal  to  the 
boatmen’s  songs  he  had  heard  upon  the  Nile. 

The  greater  number  of  the  songs  which  have  come  into 
our  possession  seem  to  be  the  natural  and  original  pro- 
duction of  a race  of  remarkable  musical  capacity  and 
very  teachable,  which  has  been  long  enough  associated 
with  the  more  cultivated  race  to  have  become  imbued 
with  the  mode  and  spirit  of  European  music — often, 
nevertheless,  retaining  a distinct  tinge  of  their  native 
Africa- 


UNITED  STATES. 


IX 


The  words  are,  of  course,  in  a large  measure  taken 
from  Scripture,  and  from  the  hymns  heard  at  church  • 
and  for  this  reason  these  religious  songs  do  not  by  any 
means  illustrate  the  full  extent  of  the  debasement  of  the 
dialect.  Such  expressions  as  “ Cross  Jordan,”  “ O Lord, 
remember  me,”  “ I’m  going  home,”  “ There’s  room 
enough  in  Heaven  for  you,”  we  find  abundantly  in  Metho- 
dist hymn-books;  but  with  much  searching  I have 
been  able  to  find  hardly  a trace  of  the  tunes.  The 
words  of  the  fine  hymn,  “ Praise,  member”  (No.  5),  are 
found,  with  very  little  variation,  in  “ Choral  Hymns” 
(No.  138).  The  editor  of  this  collection  informs  us, 
however,  that  many  of  his  songs  were  learned  from  ne- 
groes in  Philadelphia,  and  Lt.-Col.  Trowbridge  tells  us 
that  he  heard  this  hymn,  before  the  war,  among  the  col- 
ored people  of  Brooklyn.*  For  some  very  comical  speci- 
mens of  the  way  in  which  half-understood  words  and 
phrases  are  distorted  by  them,  see  Nos.  22,  23.  Another 
illustration  is  given  by  Col.  Higginson  :f 

“The  popular  camp-song  of  ‘Marching  Along’  was 
entirely  new  to  them  until  our  quartermaster  taught  it 
to  them  at  my  request.  The  words  ‘ Gird  on  the  armor’ 
were  to  them  a stumbling-block,  and  no  wonder,  until 


* We  have  generally  preserved  the  words  as  sung,  even  where  clearly  nonsen- 
sical, as  in  No.  89;  so  “Why  don’t  you  move  so  slow?”  (No.  22).  We  will 
add  that  “Paul  and  Silas,  bound  in  jail”  (No.  4),  is  often  sung  “Bounden 
Cyrus  born  in  jail,”  and  the  words  of  No.  II  would  appear  as  “I  take  my  tex 
in  Matchew  and  by  de  Revolutions — I know  you  by  your  gammon,”  &c.;  so 
il  Kingy  Rosy  Land”  for  “Ring  Jerusalem.” 
t Atlantic  Monthly , June,  1867. 


X 


SLAVE  SONGS  OF  THE 


some  ingenious  ear  substituted  4 Guide  on  de  army,5 
which  was  at  once  accepted  and  became  universal. 
‘ We’ll  guide  on  de  army,  and  be  marching  along,’  is 
now  the  established  version  on  the  Sea  Islands.” 

I never  fairly  heard  a secular  song  among  the  Port 
Royal  freedmen,  and  never  saw  a musical  instrument 
among  them.  The  last  violin,  owned  by  a “worldly 
man,”  disappeared  from  Coffin’s  Point  “ de  year  gun 
shoot  at  Bay  Pint.”*  In  other  parts  of  the  South, 
“fiddle-sings,”  “devil-songs,”  “corn-songs,”  “jig-tunes,” 
and  what  not,  are  common ; all  the  world  knows  the 
banjo,  and  the  “ Jim  Crow”  songs  of  thirty  years 
ago.  We  have  succeeded  in  obtaining  only  a very  few 
songs  of  this  character.  Our  intercourse  with  the 
colored  people  has  been  chiefly  through  the  work  of 
the  Freedmen’s  Commission,  which  deals  with  the 
serious  and  earnest  side  of  the  negro  character.  It  is 
often,  indeed,  no  easy  matter  to  persuade  them  to  sing 
fcheir  old  songs,  even  as  a curiosity,  such  is  the  sense  of 
dignity  that  has  come  with  freedom.  It  is  earnestly  to 
be  desired  that  some  person,  who  has  the  opportunity, 
should  make  a collection  of  these  now,  before  it  is  too  late. 

In  making  the  present  collection,  we  have  only  gleaned 
upon  the  surface,  and  in  a very  narrow  field.  The  wealth 
of  material  still  awaiting  the  collector  can  be  guessed 
from  a glance  at  the  localities  of  those  wo*  have,  and  from 


* i.  e November,  1861,  when  Hilton  Head  was  taken  by  Admiral  Dupont — 
a great  date  on  the  islands. 


DOITED  STATES. 


XI 


the  fact,  mentioned  above,  that  of  the  first  forty-three  of 
the  collection  most  were  sung  upon  a single  plantation, 
and  that  it  is  very  certain  that  the  stores  of  this  planta- 
tion were  by  no  means  exhausted.  Of  course  there  was 
constant  intercourse  between  neighboring  plantations ; 
also  between  different  States,  by  the  sale  of  slaves  from 
one  to  another.  But  it  is  surprising  how  little  this  seems 
to  have  affected  local  songs,  which  are  different  even  upon 
adjoining  plantations.  The  favorite  of  them  all,  “ Roll, 
Jordan  ” (No.  1),  is  sung  in  Florida,  but  not,  I believe, 
in  North  Carolina.  “Gabriel’s  Trumpet”  (No.  4)  and 
“Wrestle  on,  Jacob”  (No  6)  probably  came  from  Vir- 
ginia, where  they  are  sung  without  much  variation  from 
the  form  usual  at  Port  Royal ; No.  6 is  also  sung  in 
Maryland.*  “John,  John  of  the  Holy  Order”  (No.  22) 
is  traced  in  Georgia  and  North  Carolina,  and  “ O’er  the 
Crossing  ” (No.  93)  appears  to  be  the  Virginia  original, 
variations  of  which  are  found  in  South  Carolina,  Georgia, 
and  Tennessee.  As  illustrations  of  the  slowness  with 
which  these  songs  travel,  it  may  be  mentioned  that  the 
“Graveyard”  (No.  21),  which  was  frequently  sung  on 
Capt.  John  Fripp’s  plantation  in  the  winter  of  1863-4, 
did  not  reach  Coffin’s  Point  (five  miles  distant)  until 
the  following  Spring.  I heard  it  myself  at  Pine  Grove, 
two  miles  from  the  latter  place,  in  March.  Somewhere 


* It  is  worthy  of  notice  that  a song  much  resembling  “Poor  Rosy”  was 
heard  last  Spring  from  the  boat  hands  of  an  Ohio  River  steamboat — the  only 
Words  caught  being  “ Poor  Molly,  poor  gal.” 


Xll 


SLAVE  SONGS  OF  THE 


upon  this  journey  this  tune  was  strikingly  altered,  as 
will  be  seen  from  the  variation  given,  which  is  the  form 
in  which  I was  accustomed  to  hear  it.  Nos.  38,  41,  42,  43, 
118,  119,  122,  123,  were  brought  to  Coffin’s  Point  after 
Mr.  Ware  left,  by  refugees  returning  to  the  plantation 
from  “town”  and  the  Main.  No.  74,  likewise,  “Nobody 
knows  the  troubl  e I see,”  which  was  common  in  Charles- 
ton in  1865,  has  since  been  carried  to  Coffin’s  Point,  very 
little  altered. 

These  hymns  will  be  found  peculiarly  interesting  in 
illustrating  the  feelings,  opinions  and  habits  of  the  slaves. 
Of  the  dialect  I shall  presently  speak  at  some  length. 
One  of  their  customs,  often  alluded  to  in  the  songs  (as 
in  No.  19),  is  that  of  wandering  through  the  woods 
and  swamps,  when  under  religious  excitement,  like  the 
ancient  bacchantes.  To  get  religion  is  with  them  to 
“ fin’  dat  ting.”  Molsy  described  thus  her  sister’s  expe- 
rience in  searching  for  religion : “ Couldn’t  fin’  dat  leetle 
ting — hunt  for  ’em — huntin’  for  ’em  all  de  time — las’ 
foun’  ’em.”  And  one  day,  on  our  way  to  see  a “ shout,' ’* 
we  asked  Bristol  whether  he  was  going  : — “ No,  ma’am, 
wouldn’t  let  me  in — hain’t  foun’  dat  ting  yet — hain’t 
been  on  my  knees  in  de  swamp.”  Of  technical  religious 
expressions,  “ seeker,”  “ believer,”  “ member,”  &c.,  the 
songs  are  full. 

The  most  peculiar  and  interesting  of  their  customs  is 
the  “ shout,”  an  excellent  description  of  which  we  are  per- 
mitted to  copy  from  the  N.  Y.  Nation  of  May  30,  1867 : 

“ This  is  a ceremony  which  the  white  clergymen  are 
inclined  to  discountenance,  and  even  of  the  colored  elders 


UNITED  STATES. 


Xlll 

some  of  the  more  discreet  try  sometimes  to  put  on  a face 
of  discouragement ; and  although,  if  pressed  for  Bibli- 
cal warrant  for  the  shout,  they  generally  seem  to  think 
4 he  in  de  Book,’  or  4 he  dere-da  in  Matchew,’  still  it  is 
not  considered  blasphemous  or  improper  if  4de  chillen’ 
and  4 dem  young  gal’  carry  it  on  in  the  evening  for  amuse- 
ment’s sake,  and  with  no  well-defined  intention  of  4 praise.’ 
But  the  true  4 shout  ’ takes  place  on  Sundays  or  on 
4 praise  ’-nights  through  the  week,  and  either  in  the 
praise-house  or  in  some  cabin  in  which  a regular  religious 
meeting  has  been  held.  Very  likely  more  than  half  the 
population  of  the  plantation  is  gathered  together.  Let  it 
be  the  evening,  and  a light-wood  fire  burns  red  before 
the  door  of  the  house  and  on  the  hearth.  For  some 
time  one  can  hear,  though  at  a good  distance,  the  voci- 
ferous exhortation  or  prayer  of  the  presiding  elder  or  of 
the  brother  who  has  a gift  that  way,  and  who  is  not  4 on 
the  back  seat,’ — a phrase,  the  interpretation  of  which  is, 

4 under  the  censure  of  the  church  authorities  for  bad 
behavior;’ — and  at  regular  intervals  one  hears  the  elder 
4 deaconing'  a hymn-book  hymn,  which  is  sung  two  lines 
at  a time,  and  whose  wailing  cadences,  borne  on  the 
night  air,  are  indescribably  melancholy.  But  the 
benches  are  pushed  back  to  the  wall  when  the  formal 
meeting  is  over,  and  old  and  young,  men  and  women, 
sprucely-dressed  young  men,  grotesquely  half-clad  field- 
hands — the  women  generally  with  gay  handkerchiefs 
twisted  about  their  heads  and  with  short  skirts — boys 
with  tattered  shirts  and  men’s  trousers,  young  girls  bare- 


XIV 


SLAVE  SONGS  OF  THE 


footed,  all  stand  up  in  the  middle  of  the  floor,  and 
when  the  4 sperichil  ’ is  struck  up,  begin  first  walking 
and  by-and-by  shuffling  round,  one  after  the  other,  in  a 
ring.  The  foot  is  hardly  taken  from  the  floor,  and  the 
progression  is  mainly  due  to  a jerking,  hitching  motion, 
which  agitates  the  entire  shouter,  and  soon  brings  out 
streams  of  perspiration.  Sometimes  they  dance  silently, 
sometimes  as  they  shuffle  they  sing  the  chorus  of  the  spir- 
itual, and  sometimes  the  song  itself  is  also  sung  by  the 
dancers.  But  more  frequently  a band,  composed  or 
some  of  the  best  singers  and  of  tired  shouters,  stand  at 
the  side  of  the  room  to  4 base  7 the  others,  singing  the 
body  of  the  song  and  clapping  their  hands  together  or 
on  the  knees.  Song  and  dance  are  alike  extremely  ener- 
getic, and  often,  when  the  shout  lasts  into  the  middle  of 
the  night,  the  monotonous  thud,  thud  of  the  feet  pre- 
vents sleep  within  half  a mile  of  the  praise-house.” 

In  the  form  here  described,  the  44  shout  ” is  probably 
confined  to  South  Carolina  and  the  States  south  of  it.  It 
appears  to  be  found  in  Florida,  but  not  in  North  Caro- 
lina or  Virginia.  It  is,  however,  an  interesting  fact  that 
the  term  44  shouting  ” is  used  in  Virginia  in  reference  to 
a peculiar  motion  of  the  body  not  wholly*  unlike  the 
Carolina  shouting.  It  is  not  unlikely  that  this  remark- 
able religious  ceremony  is  a relic  of  some  native  African 
dance,  as  the  Romaika  is  of  the  classical  Pyrrhic. 
Dancing  in  the  usual  way  is  regarded  with  great  horror 
by  the  people  of  Port  Royal,  but  they  enter  with  infinite 
zest  into  the  movements  of  the  44shout.”  It  has  its 


UNITED  STATES. 


XV 


connoisseurs,  too.  “Jimmy  great  shouter,’'  I was  told; 
and  Jimmy  himself  remarked  to  me,  as  he  looked  pa- 
tronizingly on  a ring  of  young  people,  “Dese  yero 
worry  deyseff- — we  don’t  worry  weseff.”  And  indeed, 
although  the  perspiration  streamed  copiously  down  hi$ 
shiny  face,  he  shuffled  round  the  circle  with  great  eas^ 
and  grace. 

The  shouting  may  be  to  any  tune,  and  perhaps  all  the 
Port  Royal  hymns  here  given  are  occasionally  used  for 
this  purpose ; so  that  our  cook’s  classification  into 
“ sperichils  ” and  “ runnin’  sperichils  ” (shouts),  or  the 
designation  of  certain  ones  as  sung  “just  sittin’  round, 
you  know,”  will  hardly  hold  in  strictness.  In  practice, 
however,  a distinction  is  generally  observed.  The  first 
seven,  for  instance,  favorite  hymns  in  the  St.  Helena 
church,  would  rarely,  if  ever,  be  used  for  shouting ; 
while  probably  on  each  plantation  there  is  a special  set 
in  common  use.  On  my  plantation  I often est  heard 
“Pray  all  de member”  (No.  47),  “Bell da  ring”  (No.  46)> 
“ Shall  I die  ? ” (No.  52),  and  “ I can’t  stay  behind,  my 
Lord”  (No.  8).  The  shouting  step  varied  with  the 
tune ; one  could  hardly  dance  with  the  same  spirit  to 
u Turn,  sinner,”  or  “ My  body  rock  ’long  fever,”  as  to 
“ Rock  o’ Jubilee,”  or  “ O Jerusalem,  early  in  de  morn- 
ing.” So  far  as  I can  learn,  the  shouting  is  confined  to 
the  Baptists ; and  it  is,  no  doubt,  to  the  overwhelming 
preponderance  of  this  denomination  on  the  Sea  Islands 
that  we  owe  the  peculiar  richness  and  originality  of  the 
music  there 


XVI 


SLAVE  SONGS  OF  THE 


The  same  songs  are  used  for  rowing  as  for  snouting. 
I know  only  one  pure  boat-song,  the  fine  lyric,  “ Mi- 
chael row  the  boat  ashore”  (No.  31)  ; and  this  I have 
no  doubt  is  a real  spiritual — it  being  the  archangel 
Michael  that  is  addressed.  Among  the  most  common 
rowing  tunes  were  Nos.  5,  14,  17,  27,  28,  29,  30,  31, 
32,  33,  36,  46.  “ As  I have  written  these  tunes,”  says 

Mr.  W are,  “ two  measures  are  to  be  sung  to  each  stroke, 
the  first  measure  being  accented  by  the  beginning  of  the 
stroke,  the  second  by  the  rattle  of  the  oars  in  the  row- 
locks.  On  the  passenger  boat  at  the  [Beaufort]  ferry, 
they  rowed  from  sixteen  to  thirty  strokes  a minute; 
twenty-four  was  the  average.  Of  the  tunes  I have  heard, 
I should  say  that  the  most  lively  were  ‘ Heaven  bell  a- 
ring’  (No.27),  ‘Jine’em’  (No.  28),  ‘Rainfall’  (No.  29), 
‘No  man’  (No.  14),  ‘ Bell  da  ring’  (No.  46),  and  ‘Can’t 
stay  behind;’  and  that  ‘Lay  this  body  down’  (No.  26), 
‘Religion  so  sweet’ (No.  17),  and  ‘Michaelrow’  (No.  31), 
were  used  when  the  load  was  heavy  or  the  tide  was 
against  us.  I think  that  the  long  hold  on  ‘Oh,’ in  ‘ Rain 
fall,’  was  only  used  in  rowing.  When  used  as  a ‘ shout  ’ 
I am  quite  sure  that  it  occupied  only  one  measure,  as  in 
the  last  part  of  the  verse.  One  noticeable  thing  about 
their  boat-songs  was  that  they  seemed  often  to  be  sung 
just  a trifle  behind  time ; in  ‘ Rain  fall,’  for  instance, 

‘ Believer  cry  holy  ’ would  seem  to  occupy  more  than  its 
share  of  the  stroke,  the  ‘holy’  being  prolonged  till  the 
very  beginning  of  the  next  stroke ; indeed,  1 think  Jerry 


UNITED  STATES. 


XVII 


often  hung  on  his  oar  a little  just  there  before  dipping 
it  again.”-55. 

As  to  the  composition  of  these  songs,  “ I always  won- 
dered,” says  Col.  Higginson,  “whether  they  had  always 
a conscious  and  definite  origin  in  some  leading  mind,  or 
whether  they  grew  by  gradual  accretion,  in  an  almost 
unconscious  way.  On  this  point  I could  get  no  infor- 
mation, though  I asked  many  questions,  until  at  last,  one 
day  when  I was  being  rowed  across  from  Beaufort  to 
Ladies*  Island,  I found  myself,  with  delight,  on  the  ac- 
tual trail  of  a song.  One  of  the  oarsmen,  a brisk  young 
fellow,  not  a soldier,  on  being  asked  for  his  theory  of  the 
matter,  dropped  out  a coy  confession.  ‘Some  good 
sperituals,*  he  said,  ‘ are  start  jess  out  o’  curiosity.  I 
been  a-raise  a sing,  myself,  once.* 

“My  dream  was  fulfilled,  and  I had  traced  out,  not 
the  poem  alone,  but  the  poet.  I implored  him  to  pro- 
ceed. 

“ ‘ Once  we  boys,’  he  said,  ‘ went  for  tote  some  rice, 
and  de  nigger-driver,  he  keep  a-callin*  on  us ; and  I say, 

‘ O,  de  ole  nigger-driver  ! * Den  anudder  said,  ‘ Fust 
ting  my  mammy  told  me  was,  notin’  so  bad  as  nigger- 
drivers/  Den  I made  a sing,  just  puttin’  a word,  and 
den  anudder  word/ 

“ Then  he  began  singing,  and  the  men,  after  listening 
a moment,  joined  in  the  chorus  as  if  it  were  an  old  ac- 

* For  another  curious  circumstance  in  rowing,  see  note  to  “ Rain  fall,”  No.  29. 


I 


XV111 


SLAVE  SONGS  OF  THE 


quaintance,  though  they  evidently  had  never  heard  it 
before.  I saw  how  easily  a new  c sing  ’ took  root  among 
them.” 

A not  inconsistent  explanation  is  that  given  on  page 
12  of  an  “ Address  delivered  by  J.  Miller  McKim,  in 
Sansom  Hall,  Philadelphia,  July  9,  1862.” 

“ I asked  one  of  these  blacks — one  of  the  most  intelli- 
gent of  them  [Prince  Rivers,  Sergeant  1st  Reg.  S.  C.  V.] 
— where  they  got  these  songs.  4 Dey  make  ’em,  sah.’ 
1 How  do  they  make  them  ? ’ After  a pause,  evidently 
casting  about  for  an  explanation,  he  said  : ‘ I’ll  tell  you, 
it’s  dis  way.  My  master  call  me  up,  and  order  me  a 
short  peck  of  corn  and  a hundred  lash.  My  friends  see 
it,  and  is  sorry  for  me.  When  dey  come  to  de  praise- 
meeting dat  night  dey  sing  about  it.  Some’s  very  good 
singers  and  know  how ; and  dey  work  it  in — work  it  in, 
you  know,  till  they  get  it  right;  and  dat’s  de  way.’  A 
very  satisfactory  explanation ; at  least  so  it  seemed  to  me.” 

We  were  not  so  fortunate  as  Col.  Higginson  in  our 
search  for  a poet.  Cuffee  at  Pine  Grove  did,  to  be  sure, 
confess  himself  the  author  of  u Climb  Jacob’s  Ladder — 
unfortunately,  we  afterwards  found  it  in  a Northern 
hymn  book.  And  if  you  try  to  trace  out  a new  song, 
and  ask,  “ Where  did  you  hear  that  ? ” the  answer  will 
be,  “ One  strange  man  come  from  Eding’s  las’  praise- 
night  and  sing  ’em  in  praise-house,  and  de  people  catch 
’em;”  or  “ Titty  ’Mitta  [sister  Amaritta]  fetch  ’em  from 
Polawana,  where  she  tuk  her  walk  gone  spend  Sunday. 
Some  of  her  fahmly  sing  ’em  yonder.”  “ But  what  does 


UNITED  STATES. 


XIX 


‘Eingy  rosy  land’  [Eing  Jerusalem,  No.  21]  mean  ?” 
“Me  dunno.” 

Our  title,  “ Slave  Songs,”  was  selected  because  it 
best  described  the  contents  of  the  book.  A few  of 
those  here  given  (Nos.  64,  59)  were,  to  be  sure,  composed 
since  the  proclamation  of  emancipation,  but  even  these 
were  inspired  by  slavery.  “All,  indeed,  are  valuable  as 
an  expression  of  the  character  and  life  of  the  race 
which  is  playing  such  a conspicuous  part  in  our  history. 
The  wild,  sad  strains  tell,  as  the  sufferers  themselves 
could,  of  crushed  hopes,  keen  sorrow,  and  a dull,  daily 
misery,  which  covered  them  as  hopelessly  as  the  fog  from 
the  rice  swamps.  On  the  other  hand,  the  words  breathe 
<a  trusting  faith  in  rest  for  the  future — in  1 Canaan’s  air 
and  happy  land,’  to  which  their  eyes  seem  constantly 
turned.” 

Our  original  plan  hardly  contemplated  more  than  the 
publication  of  the  Port  Eoyal  spirituals,  some  sixty  in 
all,  which  we  had  supposed  we  could  obtain,  with  per- 
haps a few  others  in  an  appendix.  As  new  materials 
came  into  our  hands,  we  enlarged  our  plan  to  the  present 
dimensions.  Next  to  South  Carolina,  we  have  the 
largest  number  from  Virginia;  from  the  other  States 
comparatively  few.  Few  as  they  are,  however,  they  ap- 
pear to  indicate  a very  distinct  character  in  different 
States.  Contrary  to  what  might  be  expected,  the  songs 
from  Virginia  are  the  most  wild  and  strange.  “ O’er  the 
Crossing”  (No.  93)  is  peculiarly  so;  but  “ Sabbath  has 
no  end  ” (No.  89),  “Hypocrite  and  Concubine  ” (No.  91), 


XX 


SLAVE  SONGS  OF  THE 


“O  sliout  away”  (No.  92)/ and  “Let  God’s  saints  come 
in”  (No.  99),  are  all  distinguished  by  odd  intervals  and 
a frequent  use  of  chromatics.  The  songs  from  North 
Carolina  are  also  very  peculiar,  although  in  a different 
way,  and  make  one  wish  for  more  specimens  from  that 
region.  Those  from  Tennessee  and  Florida  are  most 
like  the  music  of  the  whites. 

We  had  hoped  to  obtain  enough  secular  songs  to 
make  a division  by  themselves ; there  are,  however,  so 
few  of  these  that  it  has  been  decided  to  intersperse  them 
with  the  spirituals  under  their  respective  States.  They 
are  highly  characteristic,  and  will  be  found  not  the 
least  interesting  of  the  contents  of  this  work. 

It  is,  we  repeat,  already  becoming  difficult  to  obtain 
these  songs.  Even  the  “ spirituals  ” are  going  out  of  use 
on  the  plantations,  superseded  by  the  new  style  of  religious 
music,  “ closely  imitated  from  the  white  people,  which  is 
solemn,  dull  and  Hasal,  consisting  in  repeating  two  lines 
of  a hymn  and  then  singing  it,  and  then  two  more,  ad 
infinitum . They  use  for  this  sort  of  worship  that  one 
everlasting  melody,  which  may  be  remembered  by  all 
persons  familiar  with  Western  and  Southern  camp-meet- 
ings, as  applying  equally  well  to  long,  short  or  common 
metre.  This  style  of  proceeding  they  evidently  consider 
the  more  dignified  style  of  the  two,  as  being  a closer 
imitation  of  white,  genteel  worship — having  in  it  about 
as  little  soul  as  most  stereotyped  religious  forms  of  well 
instructed  congregations.”* 


♦ Mrs.  H.  B.  Stowe,  in  Watchman  and  Reflector , April,  1867. 


UNITED  STATES. 


XXI 


It  remains  to  speak  of  points  connected  with  the  ty- 
pography of  the  songs. 

We  have  aimed  to  give  all  the  characteristic  variations 
which  have  come  into  our  hands,  whether  as  single  note3 
or  whole  lines,  or  even  longer  passages ; and  of  words 
as  well  as  tunes.  Many  of  these  will  be  found  very  in- 
teresting and  instructive.  The  variations  in  words  are 
given  as  foot-notes — the  word  or  group  of  words  in  the 
note,  to  be  generally  substituted  for  that  which  precedes 
the  mark:  and  it  may  be  observed,  although  it  seems 
hardly  necessary,  that  these  variations  are  endless ; such 
words  as  “ member,”  “ believer,”  “ seeker,”  and  all 
names,  male  and  female,  may  be  brought  in  wherever 
appropriate.  We  have  not  always  given  all  the  sets  of 
words  that  we  have  received  often  they  are  improvised 
to  such  an  extent  that  this  would  be  almost  imprac- 
ticable. In  Nos.  16,  17,  19,  eta,  we  have  given  them 
very  copiously,  for  illustration;  in  others  we  have  omit- 
ted the  least  interesting  ones.  In  spelling,  we  proposed 
to  ourselves  the  rule  well  stated  by  Col.  Higginson  at 
the  commencement  of  his  collection : “ The  words  will 

be  here  given,  as  nearly  as  possible,  in  the  original  dia- 
lect ; and  if  the  spelling  seems  sometimes  inconsistent, 
or  the  misspelling  insufficient,  it  is  because  I could  get 
no  nearer.” 

As  the  negroes  have  no  part-singing,  we  have  thought 
it  best  to  print  only  the  melody ; what  appears  in  some 
places  as  harmony  is  really  variations  in  single  notes. 
And,  in  general,  a succession  of  such  notes  turned  in  the 


xxn 


SLAVE  SONGS  OF  THE 


same  direction  indicates  a single  longer  variation* 
Words  in  a parenthesis,  with  small  notes,  (as  “ Brudder 
Sammy”  in  No.  21),  are  interjaculatory ; it  has  not,  how- 
ever, been  possible  to  maintain  entire  consistency  in 
this  matter.  Sometimes,  as  “no  man”  and  “O  no 
man,”  in  No.  14,  interchangeable  forms  are  put,  for  con- 
venience sake,  in  different  parts  of  the  tune. 

It  may  sometimes  be  a little  difficult,  for  instance  in 
Nos.  9,  10,  20  and  27,  to  determine  precisely  which  part 
of  the  tune  each  verse  belongs  to  ; in  these  cases  we  have 
endeavored  to  indicate  it  as  clearly  as  is  in  our  power. 
However  much  latitude  the  reader  may  take  in  all 
such  matters,  he  will  hardly  take  more  than  the  negroes 
themselves  do.  In  repeating,  it  may  be  observed  that 
the  custom  at  Port  Royal  is  to  repeat  the  first  part  of 
the  tune  over  and  over,  it  may  be  a dozen  times,  before 
passing  to  the  “ turn,”  and  then  to  do  the  same  with 
that.  In  the  Virginia  songs,  on  the  other  hand,  the 
chorus  is  usually  sung  twice  after  each  verse — often  the 
second  time  with  some  such  interjaculatory  expression 
as  “ I say  now,”  “ God  say  you  must,”  as  given  in 
No.  99. 

W e had  some  thought  of  indicating  with  each  the 

* 

tempo  of  the  different  songs,  but  have  concluded  to  print 
special  directions  for  singing  by  themselves.  It  should 
be  remarked,  however,  that  the  same  tune  varied  in 
quickness  on  different  occasions.  “As  the  same  songs,” 
writes  Miss  McKim,  “ are  sung  at  every  sort  of  work,  ot 
course  the  tempo  is  not  always  alike.  On  the  water,  the 


UNITED  STATES. 


XXlll 


oars  dip  1 Poor  Rosy’  to  an  even  andcmte;  a stout  boy 
and  girl  at  the  hominy  mill  will  make  the  same  ‘ Poor 
Rosy  ’ fly,  to  keep  up  with  the  whirling  stone ; and  in 
the  evening,  after  the  day’s  work  is  done,  ‘Heab’n 
shall-a  be  my  home’  peals  up  slowly  and  mournfully 
from  the  distant  quarters.  One  woman,  a respectable 
house-servant,  who  had  lost  all  but  one  of  her  twenty- 
two  children,  said  to  me  : ‘Pshaw!  don't  har  to  dose 
yer  chil’en,  missee.  Dey  just  rattles  it  off — dey  don’t 
know  how  for  sing  it.  I likes  4 Poor  Rosy  ’ better  dan 
all  de  songs,  but  it  can’t  be  sung  widont  a full  heart  and 
a troubled  sperrit . 

The  rests,  by  the  way,  do  not  indicate  a cessation  in 
the  music,  but  only  in  part  of  the  singers.  They  over- 
lap in  singing,  as  already  described,  in  such  a degree  that 
at  no  time  is  there  any  complete  pause.  In  11 A House 
in  Paradise  ” (No.  40)  this  overlapping  is  most  marked. 

s 

It  will  be  noticed  that  we  have  spoken  chiefly  of  the 
negroes  of  the  Port  Royal  islands,  where  most  oi  our 
observations  were  made,  and  most  of  our  materials  col- 
lected. The  remarks  upon  the  dialect  which  follow  have 
reference  solely  to  these  islands,  and  indeed  almost  exclu- 
sively to  a few  plantations  at  the  northern  end  of  St.  Hel- 
ena Island.  They  will,  no  doubt,  apply  in  a greater  or 
less  degree  to  the  entire  region  of  the  southeasterly  slave 
States, but  not  to  other  portions  of  the  South.  It  should 
also  be  understood  that  the  corruptions  and  peculiarities 
here  described  are  not  universal,  even  here.  There  are 


XXIV 


SLAVE  SONGS  OF  THE 


all  grades,  from  the  rudest  field-hands  to  mechanics  and 
house-servants,  who  speak  with  a considerable  degree  of 
correctness,  and  perhaps  few  would  be  found  so  illiterate 
as  to  be  guilty  of  them  all. 

Ordinary  negro  talk,  such  as  we  find  in  books,  has 
very  little  resemblance  to  that  of  the  negroes  of  Port 
Royal,  who  have  been  so  isolated  heretofore  that  they 
have  almost  formed  a dialect  of  their  own.  Indeed,  the 
different  plantations  have  their  own  peculiarities,  and 

adepts  profess  to  be  able  to  determine  by  the  speech  of 
a negro  what  part  of  an  island  he  belongs  to,  or  even,  in 

some  cases,  his  plantation.  I can  myself  vouch  for  the 
marked  peculiarities  of  speech  of  one  plantation  from 
which  I had  scholars,  and  which  was  hardly  more  than 
a mile  distant  from  another  which  lacked  these  peculiari- 
ties. Songs,  too,  and,  I suppose,  customs,  vary  in  the 
same  way. 

A stranger,  upon  first  hearing  these  people  talk,  espe- 
cially if  there  is  a group  of  them  in  animated  conversa- 
tion, can  hardly  understand  them  better  than  if  they 
spoke  a foreign  language,  and  might,  indeed,  easily 
suppose  this  to  be  the  case.  The  strange  words  and 
pronunciations,  and  frequent  abbreviations,  disguise  the 
familiar  features  of  one’s  native  tongue,  while  the  rhyth- 
mical modulations,  so  characteristic  of  certain  Euro- 
pean languages,  give  it  an  utterly  un-English  sound. 
After  six  months’  residence  among  them,  there  were 
scholars  in  my  school,  among  the  most  constant  in  at- 
tendance, whom  I could  not  understand  at  all,  unless 
they  happened  to  speak  very  slowly. 


UNITED  STATES. 


XXV 


With  these  people  the  process  of  “ phonetic  decay” 
appears  to  have  gone  as  far,  perhaps,  as  is  possible,  and 
with  it  an  extreme  simplification  of  etymology  and  syntax. 
There  is,  of  course,  the  usual  softening  of  th  and  v,  or 
f,  into  d and  b ; likewise  a frequent  interchange  of  v and 
w,  as  veeds  and  veil  for  weeds  and  well ; woices  and  pun- 
kin  wine , for  voices  and  pumpkin  vine . “ De  wile’ 
( vilest ) sinner  may  return”  (No.  48).  This  last  example 
illustrates  also  their  constant  habit  of  clipping  words  and 
syllables,  as  led  bro ,’  for  little  brother ; plant' shun,  for 
plantation . The  lengthening  of  short  vowels  is  illus- 
trated in  both  these  ( a , for  instance,  rarely  has  its  short 
English  sound).  “Een  (in)  datmornin’  all  day”  (No.  56). 

Strange  words  are  less  numerous  in  their  patois  than 
one  would  suppose,  and,  few  as  they  are,  most  of  them 
may  be  readily  derived  from  English  words.  Besides  the 
familiar  buckra , and  a few  proper  names,  as  Cuffy,  Quash, 
and  perhaps  Cudjo,  I only  know  of  churray  (spill) , which 
may  be  “ throw  ’way ;”  oona  or  ona , “you”  (both  singular 
and  plural,  and  used  only  for  friends),  as  “Ona  build  a 
house  in  Paradise”  ( No.  40)  ; and  aw,  a kind  of  expletive, 
equivalent  to  “ to  be  sure,”  as,  “ Dat  clot’  cheap.”  “ Cheap 
aw.”  “ Dat  Monday  one  lazy  boy.”  “ Lazy  aw — I ’bleege 
to  lick  ’em.” 

Corruptions  are  more  abundant^  The  most  common 
of  them  are  these:  Yearde  (hear),  as  in  Nos.  3,  etc. 
“ Flora,  did  you  see  that  cat  ? ” “No  ma’am,  but  I 
yearde  him  holler.”  “ Sh'um ,”  a corruption  of  see  'em , 
applied  (as  'em  is)  to  all  genders  and  both  numbers. 


XXVI 


SLAVE  SONGS  OF  THE 


“Wan’  to  see  how  Beefut  (Beaufort)  stan’ — nebber 
sh’um  since  my  name  Adam.”  Huddy  (bow-do?),  pro- 
nounced how-dy  by  purists,  is  the  common  term  of  greet- 
ing, as  in  the  song  No.  20,  “ Tell  my  Jesus  huddy  O.” 
“ Bro’  (brother)  Quash  sen’  heap  o’  howdy.”  Studdy , 
(steady)  is  used  to  denote  any  continued  or  cus- 
tomary action.  “ He  studdy  ’buse  an’  cuss  we,”  was 
the  complaint  entered  by  some  little  children  against  a 
large  girl.  “ I studdy  talk  hard,  but  you  no  yearde  me,” 
was  Hina’s  defence  when  I reproved  her  for  not  speaking 
loud  enough.  When  we  left,  we  were  told  that  we  must 
“ studdy  come  back.”  Here,  however,  it  seems  to  mean 
steady . Titty  is  used  for  mother  or  oldest  sister ; thus, 
Titty  Ann  was  the  name  by  which  the  children  of  our 
man-of-all  work  knew  their  mother,  Ann.  Sic-a  or 
sake-a , possibly  a condensation  of  same  and  like.  “ Him 
an’  me  grow  up  sic-a  brudder  an’  sister.”  Enty  is  a 
curious  corruption,  I suppose  of  airit  he , used  like  our 
“ Is  that  so  ? ” in  reply  to  a statement  that  surprises  one. 
“ Robert,  you  have  n’t  written  that  very  well.”  “ Enty, 
sir?”  John,  it’s  going  to  rain  to-day.”  “Enty,  sir?” 
Day-clean  is  used  for  day-break.  “ Do,  day-clean,  for  let 
me  go  see  Miss  Ha’yet ; and  de  day  wouldn’t  clean.”  Sun- 
up is  also  common.  Chu  for  “this”  or  “that  there;”  as 
“ Wha’  chu  ? ” “ See  one  knife  chu  ? ” Say  is  used  very 
often,  especially  in  singing,  as  a kind  of  expletive; 
“ (Say)  when  you  get  to  heaven  (say)  you  ’member  me.” 
(No.  27.)  “Ain’t  you  know  say  cotton  de-de?”  In  the 
last  sentence  “ de-de  ” (accent  on  first  syllable)  means 


UNITED  STATES. 


XXV11 


I 

*■  is  there — the  first  de,  a corruption  of  does  for  is,  will 
be  explained  presently ; the  other  is  a very  common  form 
for  dere , there. 

I do  not  remember  any  other  peculiar  words,  but 
several  w'ords  used  peculiarly.  Cuss  is  used  with  great 
latitude,  to  denote  any  offensive  language.  “ Him  cuss 
me  ’git  out.”  “ Ahvy  (Abby)  do  cuss  me,”  was  the 
serious-sounding,  but  trifling  accusation  made  by  a little 
girl  against  her  seat-mate.  Stan’  is  a very  common 
word,  in  the  sense  of  look.  “ My  back  stan’  like  white 
man,”  was  a boast  which  meant  that  it  was  not  scarred 
with  the  lash.  “ Him  stan’  splendid,  ma'am,”  of  the 
sitting  of  a dress.  I asked  a group  of  boys  one  day 
the  color  of  the  sky.  Nobody  could  tell  me.  Presently 
the  father  of  one  of  them  came  by,  and  I told  him  their 
ignorance,  repeating  my  question  with  the  same  re- 
sult as  before.  He  grinned:  “Tom,  how  sky  stan’?” 
“ Blue,”  promptly  shouted  Tom.  Both  they  seldom  use ; 
generally  “all-two,”  or  emphatically,  “ all-t wo  boff  to- 
gedder.”  One  for  alone.  “ Me  one,  and  God,”  answered 
an  old  man  in  Charleston  to  the  question  whether  he  es- 
caped alone  from  his  plantation.  “ Gone  home  one  in 
de  dark,”  for  alone.  “ Heab’n  ’nuff  for  me  one  ” ( i.e .,  I 
suppose,  “for  my  part”),  says  one  of  their  songs  (No.  46.) 
Talk  is  one  of  their  most  common  words,  where  we 
should  use  speak  or  mean.  “Talk  me,  sir  asks  a boy 
who  is  not  sure  whether  you  mean  him  or  his  comrade. 
“Talk  lick,  sir?  nuffin  but  lick,”  was  the  answer 
when  I asked  whether  a particular  master  used  to 


XXV111 


SLAVE  SONGS  OF  THE 


whip  his  slaves.  Call  is  used  to  express  relationship'; 
as,  “he  call  him  aunt.”  Draw , for  receiving  in  any 
way  — derived  from  the  usage  of  drawing  a speci- 
fic amount  of  supplies  at  stated  times.  “ Dey  draw 
letter,”  was  the  remark  when  a mail  arrived  and 
was  distributed  among  us  whites.  Meet  is  used  in  the 
sense  of  find.  “ I meet  him  here  an’  he  remain  wid  me,” 
was  the  cook’s  explanation  when  a missing  chair  was 
found  in  the  kitchen.  When  I remarked  upon  the 
absurdity  of  some  agricultural  process — “ I meet  ’em  so, 
an’  my  fader  meet  ’em  so,”  was  the  sufficient  answer.  A 
grown  man,  laboring  over  the  mysteries  of  simple  addi- 
tion, explained  the  gigantic  answer  he  had  got  by  “ I 
meet  two  row,  and  I set  down  two.”  “I  meet  you  dere, 
sir,”  said  Miller  frankly,  when  convinced  in  an  argument. 
Too  much  is  the  common  adverb  for  a high  degree  of  a 
quality ; “he  bad  too  much  ” was  the  description  of  a hard 
master.  Gang , for  any  large  number  ; “a  whole  gang  of 
slate-pencils.”  Mash  in  the  sense  of  crush  ; “ mammy 
mash  'em,”  when  the  goat  had  killed  one  of  her  kids  by 
lying  on  it.  Sensibble  and  liab  sense  are  favorite  expres- 
sions. A scholar  would  ask  me  to  make  him  c<  sensibble” 
of  a thing.  “ Nebber  sh’um  since  I hab  sense”  ( i.e .,  since 
I was  old  enough  to  know).  Stantion  (substantial)  was 
a favorite  adjective  at  Coffin’s  Point.  Strain  is  also  a 
favorite  word>  (i  Dem  boy  strain  me,”  explained  Billy, 
when  some  younger  boys  were  attempting  to  base  him. 
“ I don’t  want  to  give  more  nor  fifty-five  dollar  for  a 
horse,”  said  Quash,  “ but  if  dey  strain  you,  you  may 
give  fifty-six.”  “ Dat  tune  so  strainful,”  said  Rose. 


UNITED  STATES. 


XXIX 


The  letters  n , r and  y are  used  euphonically.  “ He 
de  baddes’  little  gal  from  y’ere  to  n’Europe,”  said  Bris- 
tol of  his  troublesome  niece  Venus;  “ought to  put  him 
on  a bar’l,  an’  den  he  fall  ’sleep  an’  fall  down  an’  hut 
heself,  an’  dat  make  him  more  sensibble.”  “ He  n’a 
cornin’,  sir,”  was  often  said  of  a missing  scholar.  At  first 
I took  the  n for  a negative.  I set  Gib  one  day  to  pick- 
ing out  E's  from  a box  of  letters.  He  could  not  distin- 
guish E from  Fy  and  at  last,  discouraged  with  his  re- 
peated failures,  explained,  holding  out  an  Fy  “ dis  y’ere 
stan’  sic-a-r-wm.”  (This  looks  like  that.)  It  is  sug- 
gested also  that  d is  used  in  the  same  way,  in  “ He  d’a 
cornin’ ; ” and  sy  in  singing,  for  instance,  “ ’Tis  wells  and 
good”  (No.  25).  So  the  vowel  a\  “ De  foxes  have-a 
hole”  (No.  2),  “Heaven bell  a-ring”  (No.  27). 

The  most  curious  of  all  their  linguistic  peculiarities 
is  perhaps  the  following.  It  is  well  known  that  the 
negroes  in  all  parts  of  the  South  speak  of  their  elders  as 
li  uncle”  and  “aunt, — ■”*  from  a feeling  of  politeness, 
I do  not  doubt;  it  seemed  disrespectful  to  use  the  bare 
name,  and  from  Mr.  and  Mrs.  they  were  debarred.  On 
the  Sea  Islands  a similar  feeling  has  led  to  the  use  of 
cousin  towards  their  equals.  Abbreviating  this,  after 
their  fashion*  they  get  co'n  or  <%>’  (the  vowel  sound  u as 
in  cousin ) as  the  common  title  when  they  speak  of  one 
another ; as,  C’ Abram,  Co’  Robin,  Co’n  Emma,  C’Isaac, 
Co’ Bob.  Brd  (brother)  and  SH  (sister)  and  even  rF  (Tit- 


* In  South  Carolina  “ daddy”  and  “maum”  are  more  common. 


XXX 


SLAVE  SONGS  OF  THE 


ty)  are  also  often  used  in  the  same  way ; as,  Bro’  Paris 
Si’  Rachel,  T’  Jane.  A friend  insists  that  Cudjo  is 
nothing  but  Co’  Joe. 

Where  and  when  are  [hardly  used,  at  least  by  the 
common  class  of  negroes.  The  question  “ Where  did 
you  spill  the  milk  ? ” was  answered  only  with  a stare ; 
but  “ which  way  milk  churray  ? ” brought  a ready  re- 
sponse. “ What  side  you  stayin’,  sir  ? ” was  one  of  the 
first  questions  put  to  me.  Luckily  I had  been  initiated, 
and  was  able  to  answer  it  correctly. 

There  is  probably  no  speech  that  has  less  inflection, 
or  indeed  less  power  of  expressing  grammatical  relation 
in  any  way.  It  is  perhaps  not  too  strong  to  say  that  the 
field-hands  make  no  distinction  of  gender,  case,  number, 
tense,  or  voice.  The  pronouns  are  to  be  sure  distin- 
guished more  or  less  by  the  more  intelligent  among 
them,  and  all  of  these,  unless  perhaps  us,  are  occasion- 
ally heard.  She  is  rare;  her  still  more  so;  him  being 
commonly  used  for  the  third  person  singular  of  all  cases 
and  genders ; "'em,  if  my  memory  serves  me  rightly,  only 
for  the  objective  case,  but  for  all  genders  and  both  num- 
bers. lie,  or  'e,  is,  I should  think,  most  common  as 
possessive.  “ Him  lick  we”  might  mean  a girl  as  well 
as  a boy.  Thus  we  is  distinguished  from  I or  me,  and 
dey  or  dem  from  him  or  dat  / and  these  are,  I think,  the 
only  distinctions  made  in  number.  “ Dat  cow,”  is  singu- 
lar, “dem  cow”  plural;  “Sandy  hat”  would  mean  in- 
differently Sandy’s  hat  or  hats  ; “ nigger-house  ” means 
the  collection  of  negro-houses,  and  is,  I suppose, [really  a 
plural. 


UNITED  STATES. 


xxxi 


I do  not  know  that  I ever  heard  a real  possessive  case, 
"but  they  have  begun  to  develop  one  of  their  own,  which 
is  a very  curious  illustration  of  the  way  inflectional  forms 
grow  up.  If  they  wish  to  make  the  fact  of  possession 
at  all  emphatic  or  distinct,  they  use  the  word  “ own.” 
Thus,  they  will  say  “ Mosey  house,”  but  if  asked  whose 
house  that  is,  the  answer  is  “ Mosey  own.”  “ Co’  Molsy 
y’own  ” was  the  odd  reply  made  by  Mylie  to  the  ques- 
tion whose  child  she  was  carrying.  Literally  translated, 
this  is  “ Molsy’s ;”  Gd  is  title,  y euphonic.  An  officer 
of  a colored  regiment  standing  by  me  when  the  answer 
was  made — himself  born  a slave — confessed  that  it  was 
mere  gibberish  to  him.  No  doubt  this  custom  would  in 
time  develop  a regular  inflectional  possessive ; but  the 
establishment  of  schools  will  soon  root  up  all  these  orig- 
inal growths. 

Very  commonly,  in  verbs  which  have  strong  conjuga- 
tions, the  forms  of  the  past  tense  are  used  for  the  pres- 
ent ; “ What  make  you  leff  we ? ” “I  tuk  dem  brud- 
der”  (No.  30).  Past  time  is  expressed  by  been , and  less 
commonly  done . “ I been  kep  him  home  two  day,”  was 

the  explanation  given  for  a daughter’s  absence  from 
school.  “ I done  pit  my  crap  in  de  groun’.  ” Present 
time  is  made  definite  by  the  auxiliary  do  or  da,  as  in  the 
refrains  u Bell  da  ring,”  “ Jericho  da  worry  me.”  (Nos. 
46,  47).  “ Bubber  (brother)  da  hoe  he  tater.”  So  did 

occasionally : u Nat  did  cuss  me,”  complained  one  boy  of 
another.  It  is  too  much  to  say  that  the  verbs  have  no 
inflections,  but  it  is  true  that  these  have  nearly  disap- 


XXXIX 


SLAVE  SOHGS  OF  THE 


peared.  Ask  a boy  where  he  is  going,  and  the  answer 
is  “ gwine  crick  for  ketch  crab  ” (going  into  the  creek 
to  catch  crabs) ; ask  another  where  the  missing  boy  is, 
and  the  answer  is  the  same,  with  gone  instead  of  gwine . 
The  hopeless  confusion  between  auxiliaries  is  sometimes 
very  entertaining:  as  ude-de,”  “ ain’t  you  know  ? ” “I 
didn’t  been.”  “ De  Lord  is  perwide  ” (No.  2).  “You’d 
better  pray,  de  work  da  [is]  gwine”  (No.  14).  “My 
stomach  been-a  da  hut  me.” 

Some  of  these  sentences  illustrate  two  other  peculiari- 
ties— the  omission  of  auxiliaries  and  other  small  words, 
and  the  use  of  for  as  the  sign  of  the  infinitive.  “ Unky 
Taff  call  Co’  Flora  for  drop  tater.”  “ Good  for  hold  comb” 
was  the  wisest  answer  found  to  the  teacher’s  question 
what  their  ears  were  good  for.  “ Co’  Benah  wan’  Mr. — 
for  tuk  ’em  down,”  was  Gib’s  whispered  comment  when 
the  stubborn  Venus  refused  to  step  down  from  a bench. 
After  school  the  two  were  discovered  at  fisticuffs,  and  on 
being  called  to  account— “ dat  same  Benah  dah  knock  me,” 
said  Gib,  while  Venus  retorted  with  “ Gib  cuss  me  in 
school.” 

It  owing  to  this  habit  of  dropping  auxiliaries  that 
the  passive  is  rarely  if  ever  indicated.  You  ask  a man’s 

name,  and  are  answered,  “ Olehnan  call  John.”  “Him 

+ 

mix  wid  him  own  fat,”  was  the  description  given  of  a 
paste  made  of  bruised  ground-nuts,  the  oil  of  the  nut 
furnishing  moisture.  “ I can’t  certain,”  “ The  door  didn’t 
fasten,”  “The  bag  won’t  full,”  “ Dey  frighten  in  de  dark,” 
areffllustrations  of  every-day  usage. 


UNITED  STATES. 


XXXUl 


Proper  names  furnish  many  curious  illustrations  of 
the  corruption  in  pronunciation.  Many  of  them  are  im- 
possible to  explain,  and  it  is  still  only  a surmise  that 
Finnick  is  derived  from  Phoenix , and  Wyna  from  Mal- 
vina (the  first  syllable  being  dropped,  as  in  ’ Nelius  for 
Cornelius , and  Fullus  for  Marullus.)  Hacless  is  un- 
questionably  Hercules,  and  Sack  no  doubt  Psyche ; Strap- 
pan  is  supposed  to  be  Strephon.  All  these  are  common 
names  on  the  Sea  Islands.  Names  of  trades,  as  Miller , 
Butcher , are  not  uncommon.  One  name  that  I heard  of, 
but  did  not  myself  meet  with,  was  After -dark,  so  called 
because  he  was  so  black  that  “ you  can’t  sh’um  ’fo’  day- 
ulean.” 

In  conclusion,  some  actual  specimens  of  talk,  illus- 

/ 

trating  the  various  points  spoken  of,  may  not  be  without 
interest.  A scene  at  the  opening  of  school 

“ Charles,  why  did  n’t  you  come  to  school  earlier?” 

A-could  n’t  come  soon  to-day,  sir  ; de  boss  he  sheer  out 
clo’  dis  mornin’.  ” “ What  did  he  give  you  ? ” “ Me,  sir  ? 

I ain’t  git  / de  boss  he  de  baddest  buckra  ebber  a-see. 
De  morest  part  ob  de  mens  dey  git  heaps  o’  clo’ — more’n 
9 nuff ; ’n  I ain’t  git  nuffin.”  “Were  any  other  children 
there  ? ” “ Plenty  chil’n,  sir.  All  de  chil’n  dah  fo9  sun- 
up.” “January,  you  have  n't  brought  your  book.”  “ I 
is,  sir ; sh’um  here,  sir  ? ” “Where  is  Juno  ? ” “I  ain’t 


* It  is  proper  to  state  that  most  of  the  materials  for  this  scene  were  furnished 
by  Mr.  Arthur  Sumner,  which  accounts  for  the  similarity  of  certain  of  the  ex- 
pressions to  those  in  the  dialogue  given  in  the  September  number  of  the  Boston 
Freedman's  Record . 


XXXIV 


SLAVE  SOXGS  OF  THE 


know  where  lie  gone,  sir.”  “ Where  is  Sam  ? ” “ Ho 

didn’t  been  here.”  “ Where  is  the  little  boy,  John?  ” 
“He  pick  np  he  foot  and  run.”  A new  scholar  is 
brought : “Good  mornin',  manssa  ; I bring  dis  same  chile 
to  school,  sir : do  don't  let  'em  stay  arter  school  done- 
Here  you,  gal,  stan'  up  an'  say  howdy  to  de  genlmn.  Da 
maussa  lash  'em  well  ef  he  don’t  larn  he  lesson.”  “Where's 
your  book,  Tom  ?”  “ Dunno,  sir.  Somebody  mus'  a tief 

'em.”  “ Where’s  your  brother?”  “ Sh'um  dar  ? wid 

bof  he  han’  in  he  pocket  ? ” “Billy,  have  you  done  your 
sum?”  “Yes,  sir,  I out  'em.”  “Where's  Polly?”’ 
“Polly  de-de.”  Taffy  comes  up.  “Please,  sir,  make  me 
sensibble  of  dat  word — I want  to  ketch  'em  werry  bad,, 
sir,  werry  bad.”  Hacless  begins  to  read.  He  spells 
in  a loud  whisper,  “g-o;  g-o  ; g-o — can't  fetch  dat  word, 
sir,  nohow.” 

The  first  day  Gib  appeared  in  school  I asked  him 
whether  he  could  read,  and  received  a prompt  answer  in 
the  affirmative.  So,  turning  to  the  first  page  of  Willson's 
Primer,  I told  him  to  read.  The  sentence  was  “I  am 
on,”  or  something  of  that  sort,  opposite  a picture  of  a 
boy  on  a rocking-horse.  Gib  attacked  it  with  great 
volubility,  “ h-r-s-e,  horse.  De  boy  is  on  top  ob  de 
horse  ” — adding  some  remarks  about  a chair  in  the 
background.  His  eye  then  fell  on  a picture  of  an  eagle, 
and  without  pausing  he  went  on,  “ De  raben  is  big  bird.” 
Next  he  passed  to  a lion  on  the  opposite  page,  “D-o-g, 
dog;”  but  just  then  a cut  above,  representing  a man 
and  an  ox,  proved  too  strong  for  him,  and  he  proceeded 


UNITED  STATES. 


XXXV 


to  give  a detailed  history  of  the  man  and  the  cow. 
When  this  was  completed,  he  took  up  a picture  of  a boy 
with  a paper  soldiers’ -cap  and  a sword.  “ Dis  man  hab 
sword;  he  tuk’  e sword  an’  cut’  e troat.”  Here  I checked 
him,  and  found,  as  may  be  expected,  that  he  did  not 
know  a single  letter. 

A scene  at  a government  auction : Henry  and  Titus 
are  rivals,  bidding  for  a piece  of  “ secesh  ” furniture. 
Titus  begins  with  six  dollars.  “ Well,  Titus,  I won’t 
strain  you — eight.”  “ Seven,”  says  Titus.  “Ten,”  says 
Henry.  “ Twelve,”  says  Titus.  “ And  den,”  said  our 
informant,  “ Henry  bid  fourteen  an’  tuk  ’em  for  fifteen.” 

One  day  when  we  returned  from  a row  on  the  creek, 
to  make  a call,  Dick  met  us  with  his  face  on  a grin : 
u You  seen  him  ? you  seen  Miss  T?  I seen  him.  I tole 
him  you  gone  wid  intention  call  on  she,  but  de  boat 
didn’t  ready  in  time.  He  cotch  you  at  Mr.  H.,  on’y  de 
horse  bodder  him  at  de  gate.”  One  of  the  boys  came 
to  me  one  day  with  the  complaint,’  “ Dem  Ma’  B.  Fripp 
chil’n  fin’  one  we  book,”  i.  e .,  those  children  from  Mr.  T. 
B.  Fripp’s  have  found  one  of  our  books.  “ ’E  nebber 
orack  ’e  bret,”  i.  e.,  say  a word.  “What  make  you 
don’t  ? ” “ Mr.  P.  didn’t  must.”  “ I don’t  know  what 

make  I didn’t  answer.”  “ How  do  you  do  to-day  ? ” 
“Stirrin,  “spared,”  “standin’;”  “out  o’  bed,” 
(never  “ very  well.”)  Or,  of  a friend,  “ He  feel  a lee  bet- 
ter’n  he  been,  ma’am.” 

“ Arter  we  done  chaw  all  de  hard  bones  and  swallow 
all  de  bitter  pills,”  was  part  of  a benediction ; and  the 


XXXVI 


SLAVE  SONG-S  OF  THE 


i 

prayer  at  a “praise-meeting”  asked  “dat  all  de  white 
bredren  an"  sister  what  jine  praise  wid  we  to-night  might 
be  bound  np  in  de  belly-band  ob  faith.”  At  a funeral 
in  a colored  regiment : “ One  box  o’  dead  meat  gone  to 
de  grave  to-day — who  gwine  to-morrow?  Young  man^ 
who  walk  so  stiff — ebery  step  he  take  seem  like  he  say,. 

‘ Look  out  dah,  ground  I da  cornin’.”  The  following  is 
Strappan’s  view  of  Love.  “ Arter  you  lub,  you  lub,  you 
know,  boss.  You  can’t  broke  lub.  Man  can’t  broke  lub. 
Lub  stan’ — ’e  ain’t  gwine  broke.  Man  hab  to  be  berry 
smart  for  broke  lub.  Lub  is  a ting  stan’  jus’  like  tar ; 
arter  he  stick,  he  stick,  he  ain’t  gwine  move.  He  can’t 
move  less  dan  you  burn  him.  Hab  to  kill  all  two  arter 
he  lub  ’fo’  you  broke  lub.” 

It  would  be  an  interesting,  and  perhaps  not  very  diffi- 
cult inquiry,  t6  determine  how  far  the  peculiarities  of 
speech  of  the  South  Carolina  negroes  result  from  the 
large  Huguenot  element  in  the  settlement  of  that  State. 

It  would  require,  however,  a more  exact  acquaintance 

$ 

than  I possess  with  the  dialects  of  other  portions  of  the 
South,  to  form  a j udgment  of  any  value  upon  this  point. 
Meanwhile,  I will  say  only  that  two  usages  have  struck  me 
as  possibly  arising  from  this  source,  the  habitual  length- 
ening of  vowel  sounds,  and  the  pronunciation  of  Maussa y 
which  may  easily  have  been  derived  from  Monsieur. 
After  all,  traces  of  Huguenot  influence  should  by  right 
be  found  among  the  whites,  even  more  than  the  blacks, 

[W.  F.  A.] 


UNITED  STATES. 


XXXV11 


It  remains  for  tlie  Editors  to  acknowledge  the  aid  they 
have  received  in  making  this  compilation.  To  Col.  T. 
W.  Higginson,  above  all  others,  they  are  indebted  for 
friendly  encouragement  and  for  direct  and  indirect  con- 
tributions to  their  original  stock  of  songs.  From  first 
to  last  he  has  manifested  the  kindest  interest  in  their 
undertaking,  constantly  suggesting  the  names  of  persons 
likely  to  afford  them  information,  and  improving  every 
opportunity  to  procure  them  material.  As  soon  as  his 
own  valuable  collection  had  appeared  in  the  Atlantic 
Monthly , he  freely  made  it  over  to  them  with  a liberality 
which  was  promptly  confirmed  by  his  publishers,  Messrs. 
Ticknor  & Fields.  It  is  but  little  to  say  that  without 
his  co-operation  this  Lyra  Africana  would  have  lacked 
greatly  of  its  present  completeness  and  worth.  Through 
him  we  have  profited  by  the  cheerful  assistance  of  Mrs. 
Charles  J.  Bowen,  Lieut.-Colonel  C.  T.  Trowbridge, 
Capt.  James  S.  Rogers,  Rev.  Horace  James,  Capt.  Geo. 
S.  Barton,  Miss  Lucy  Gibbons,  Mr.  William  A.  Baker, 
Mr.  T.  E.  Ruggles,  and  Mr.  James  Schouler.  Our 
thanks  are  also  due  for  contributions,  of  which  we  have 
availed  ourselves,  to  Dr.  William  A.  Hammond,  Mr. 
Geo.  H.  Allan,  Lt.-Col.  Wm.  Lee  Apthorp,  Mr.  Kane 
O’Donnel,  Mr.  E.  J.  Snow,  Miss  Charlotte  L.  Forten, 
Miss  Laura  M.  Towne,  and  Miss  Ellen  Murray;  and  for 
criticisms,  suggestions,  communications,  and  unused  but 
not  unappreciated  contributions,  to  Mr.  John  R.  Dennett, 
Miss  Annie  Mitchell,  Mr.  Reuben  Tomlinson,  Mr.  Ar- 
thcjr]  Sumner,  Mr.  N.  C.^Dennett,  Miss  Mary  Ellen 


XXXV111 


SLAVE  SONGS. 


Peirce,  Maj-Gen.  Wager  Swayne,  Miss  Maria  W.  Ben- 
ton, Prof.  J.  Silsby,  Rev.  John  L.  McKim,  Mr.  Albert 
Griffin,  Mr.  A.  S.  Jenks,  Mr.  E.  H.  Hawkes,  Rev.  H.  C. 
Trumbull,  Rev.  J.  K.  Hosmer,  Rev.  F.  N.  Knapp,  Brev. 
Maj  .-Gen.  Truman  Seymour,  Maj. -Gen.  James  H.  Wil- 
son, Mr.  J.  H.  Palmer,  and  others ; and,  finally,  to  the 
editors  of  various  newspapers  who  gratuitously  an- 
nounced the  forthcoming  volume. 

Conscious  of  many  imperfections  in  this,  the  result  of 
not  inconsiderable  joint  labor  for  nearly  a year,  the  Edi- 
tors submit  it,  nevertheless,  to  the  public  judgment,  in 
the  belief  that  it  will  be  pronounced  deserving  of  even 
greater  pains  and  of  permanent  preservation. 

William  Francis  Allen, 
Charles  Pickard  Ware, 
Lucy  McKim  Garrison. 


CONTENTS. 


PAGE* 

.1 — XXXViil 

Directions  for  Singing . 

PART  I. 

South-Eastern  Slave  States,  including  South  Carolina,  Georgia  and  the  Sea  Islands 1 — 61 

1 Roll,  Jordan,  roll.  Port  Royal  Islands , South  Carolina.  C.  P.  W.  Variation,  L.  McK.  G.  1 

2 Jehovah,  Hallelujah.  Port  Royal  Islands.  C.  P.  W 2 

3 I hear  from  Heaven  to-day.  Port  Royal  Islands.  C.  P.  W 2 

4 Blow  your  trumpet,  Gabriel.  Port  Royal  Islands.  C.  P.  W.  Variation,  Mr.  Reuben 

Tomlinson.  Second  version,  Charleston.  Mrs.  C.  J.  Bowen 3 

5 Praise,  member.  Port  Royal  Islands.  C.  P.  W 4 

6 Wrestle  on,  Jacob.  Port  Royal  Islands.  C.  P.  W 4 

7 The  Lonesome  Valley.  Port  Royal  Islands.  C.  P.  W 5 

8 I can’t  stay  behind.  Port  Royal  Islands.  C.  P.  W. 6 

9 Poor  Rosy.  Port  Royal  Islands.  C.  P.  W.  Variation,  L.  McK.  G % 

10  The  Trouble  of  the  World.  Port\Royal  Islands.  C.  P.  W.  Variation,  Savannah.  Mr. 

Arthur  L.  Ware 8 

11  There’s  a meeting  here  to-night.  Port  Royal  Islands.  C.  P.  W.  Second  version, 

Charleston.  Mrs.  Bowen 9 

12  Hold  your  light.  Port  Royal  Islands.  C.  P.  W 10 

13  Happy  Morning.  Port  Royal  Islands.  C.  P.  W. 10 

14  No  man  can  hinder  me.  Port  Royal  Islands.  L.  McK.  G.  Second  version,  C.  P.  W. . . 10 

15  Lord,  remember  me.*  Port  Royal  Islands.  C.  P.  W 12 

16  Not  weary  yet.  Port  Royal  Is' ands.  C.  P.  W 12 

17  Religion  so  sweet.  Port  Royal  Islands.  C.  P.  W 13 

18  Hunting  for  the  Lord.  Port  Royal  Islands.  C.  P.  W. 13 

19  Go  in  the  wilderness.  Port  Royal  Islands.  C.  P.  W 14 

20  Tell  my  Jesus  “Morning.”  Port  Royal  Islands.  C.  P.  W 15 

21  The  Graveyard.  Port  Royal  Islands.  C.  P.  W.  Variation,  W.  F.  A 15 

22  John,  John,  of  the  Holy  Order.  Port  Royal  Islands.  C.  P.  W 16 

23  I saw  the  beam  in  my  sister’s  eye.  Port  Royal  Islands.  C.  P.  W 17 

24  Hunting  for  a city.  Port  Royal  Islands.  C.  P.  W. 18 

25  Gwine  follow.  Port  Royal  Islands.  C.  P,  W 18 

26  Lay  this  body  down.  Port  Royal  Islands.  C.  P.  W.  Variation,  Lt,-Col.  C.  T.  Trow- 

bridge]  19 

27  Heaven  bell  a-ring.  Port  Royal  Islands.  C.  P.  W 20 

28  Jine  ’em.  Port  Royal  Islands.  C.  P.  W 21 

29  Rain  fall  and  wet  Becca  Lawton.  Port  Royal  Islands.  C.  P.  W 21 


CONTENTS. 


xl 

PAGE. 

30  Bound  to  go.  Port  Royal  Islands.  C.  P.  W.  Second  version,  W.  F.  A 22 

31  Michael  row  the  boat  ashore.  Port  Royal  Islands.  C.  P.  W 23 

32  Sail,  O believer.  Port  Royal  Islands.  C.  P.  W ! 24 

33  Rock  o’  Jubilee.  Port  Royal  Islands.  C.  P,  W 25 

34  Stars  begin  to  fall.  Probably  from  Edisto  Island.  C.  P.  W.... 25 

35  King  Emanuel.  Port  Royal  Islands.  C.  P.  W 26 

36  Satan’s  Camp  A-fire.  Port  Royal  Islands,  C.  P.  W 2T 

3T  Give  up  the  world.  Port  Royal  Islands.  C.  P.  W. 21 

38  Jesus  on  the  Waterside.  Port  Royal  Islands.  C.  P.  W 28 

39  I wish  I been  dere.  Port  Royal  Islands.  C.  P.  W 29 

40  Build  a house  in  Paradise.  Port  Royal  Islands.  C.  P.  W 29 

41  I know  when  I’m  going  home.  Port  Royal  Islands.  C.  P.  W 30 

42  I’m  a trouble  in  de  mind.  Port  Royal  Islands.  C.  P.  W 30 

43  Travel  on.  Port  Royal  Islands.  C.  P.  W 31 

44  Archangel,  open  the  door.  Port  Royal  Islands.  W.  F.  A 32 

45  My  body  rock  ’long  fever.  Port  Royal  Islands.  W.  F.  A.  Second  Version,  L.  Me.  K.  G 32 

46  Bell  da  ring.  Port  Royal  Islands.  W.  F.  A 34 

47  Pray  all  de  member.  Port  Royal  Islands.  W.  F.  A 35 

48  Turn  sinner,  turn  O.  Port  Royal  Islands.  W.  F.  A 36 

49  My  army  cross  over.  Port  Royal  Islands.  W.  F.  A.  Second  Version,  Col.  Higginson's 

regiment.  Lt.-Col.  Trowbridge 38 

50  Join  the  angel  band.  Port  Royal  Islands.  W.  F.  A.  Variation,  Charleston.  Mrs. 

Bowen 39 

51  I and  Satan  had  a race.  Port  Royal  Islands.  W.  F.  A 40 

62  Shall  I die  ? Port  Royal  Islands.  W.  F.  A 41 

53  When  we  do  meet  again.  Port  Royal  Islands.  W.  F.  A 41 

54  The  White  Marble  Stone.  Port  Royal  Islands.  W.  F.  A.  Second  Version,  C.  P.  W. . . 42 

55  I can’t  stand  the  fire.  Port  Royal  Islands.  W.  F.  A.  Second  Version,  C.  P.  W 42 

56  Meet,  O Lord.  Port  Royal  Islands.  W.  F.  A 43 

57  Wai’,  Mr.  Mackright.  Port  Royal  Islands.  W.  F.  A 43 

58  Early  in  the  morning.  Col.  Higginson's  regiment.  Capt.  J.  S.  Rogers.  Variation,  Lt.-Col. 

Trowbridge 44 

59  Hail,  Mary.  Col.  Higginson's  regiment.  Capt.  J.  S.  Rogers.  Second  Version,  Mr.  H.  G. 

Spaulding 45 

60  No  more  rain  fall  for  wet  you.  Col.  Higginson's  regiment.  Capt.  J.  S.  Rogers 46 

61  I want  to  go  home.  Col.  Higginson's  regiment.  Lt.-Col  Trowbridge.... 46 

62  Good-bye,  brother.  Col.  Higginson's  regiment.  Capt.  Rogers 47 

63  Fare  ye  well.  Col.  Higginson's  regiment.  Capt.  Rogers.  Chorus,  Lt.-Col.  Trowbridge.  47 

64  Many  thousand  go.  Col.  Higginson's  regiment.  Lt.-Col.  Trowbridge 48 

65  Brother  Moses  gone.  Col.  Higginson's  regiment.  Lt.-Col.  Trowbridge 49 

66  The  Sin-sick  Soul.  Mr.  Kane  O’Donnel 49 

67  Some  Valiant  Soldier.  Port  Royal  Islands.  C.  P.  W 50 

68  Hallelu,  Hallelu.  Port  Royal.  Islands.  C.  P.  W 50 

69  Children  do  linger.  Port  Royal  Islands.  C.  P.  W 51 

70  Good-bye.  Charleston,  S.  C.  Mrs.  Bowen 52 

71  Lord,  make  me  more  patient.  Charleston.  Mrs.  Bowen 52 

72  The  Day  of  Judgment.  Charleston.  Mrs.  Bowen 53 

73  The  Resurrection  Morn.  Charleston.  Mrs.  Bowen 54 

74  Nobody  knows  the  trouble  I’ve  had.  Charleston.  W.  F.  A 55 

75  Who  is  on  the  Lord’s  side.  Augusta,  Georgia.  W.  F.  A 56 

76  Hold  out  to  the  end.  Augusta.  W.  F.  A 57 

77  Come  go  with  me.  Augusta.  W.  F.  A 57 

78  Every  hour  in  the  day.  Augusta.  W.  F.  A 58 

79  In  the  mansions  above.  Augusta.  W.  F.  A 59 

80  Shout  on,  children.  Augusta.  W.  F.  A 60 

81  Jesus,  won’t  you  come  by-and-by  ? Savannah,  Georgia.  Mr.  A.  L.  Ware 60 

82  Heave  away.  Savannah.  Mr.  Kane  O’Donnel 61 


CONTENTS.  Xli 

PART  n. 

PAGE, 

Northern  Seaboard  Slave  States,  including  Delaware,  Maryland, Virginia,  and  North 
Carolina 65 — 79 

83  Wake  up,  Jacob.  Delaware.  Miss  Mary  McKim 65 

84  On  to  Glory.  Maryland.  Dr.  W.  A.  Hammond 66 

85  Just  Now.  Maryland.  Dr.  W.  A.  Hammond 61 

86  Shock  along,  John.  Maryland.  Dr.  W.  A.  Hammond 6T 

87  Round  the  com,  Sally.  Virginia.  W.  F.  A 68 

88  Jordan’s  Mills.  Virginia.  W.  F.  A 68 

89  Sabbath  has  no  end.  Virginia.  W.  F.  A 69 

90  I don’t  feel  weary.  Virginia.  W.  F.  A.* 70 

91  The  Hypocrite  and  the  Concubine.  Virginia.  W.  F.  A 70 

92  O shout  away.  Virginia.  W.  F.  A 71 

93  O’er  the  Crossing.  Virginia.  Capt.  Rogers.  Variation,  Augusta , Georgia 72 

94  Rock  o’  my  Soul.  Virginia.  W.  F.  A 73 

95  We  will  march  thro’  the  valley.  Virginia.  W.  F.  A 73 

96  What  a trying  time.  Virginia.  W.  F.  A 74 

97  Almost  Over.  Virginia.  W.  F.  A 74 

98  Don’t  be  weary,  traveller.  Virginia.  W.  F.  A 75 

99  Let  God’s  saints  come  in.  Virginia.  W.  F.  A 76 

180  The  Golden  Altar.  North  Carolina.  Capt.  G.  S.  Barton 77 

101  The  Winter.  North  Carolina.  Capt.  G.  S.  Barton 78 

102  The  Heaven  Bells.  North  Carolina.  Capt.  G.  S.  Barton 79 


PART  IH. 

Inland  Slave  States,  including  Tennessee,  Arkansas,  and  the  Mississippi  River 83—89 

103  The  Gold  Band,  Nashville,  Tennessee.  Mr.  G.  H.  Allan 83 

104  The  Good  Old  Way.  Nashville.  Mr.  G.  H.  Allan 84 

105  I’m  going  home.  Nashville.  Mr.  G.  H.  Allan 84 

106  Sinner  won’t  die  no  more.  Nashville.  Mr.  G.  H,  Allan 85- 

107  Brother,  guide  me  home.  Memphis,  Tennessee.  W.  F.  A. 86 

108  Little  children,  then  won’t  you  be  glad  ? Helena,  Arkansas.  W.  F.  A ST 

109  Charleston  Gals.  Pine  Bluff,  Arkansas.  Mr.  E.  J.  Snow 88 

110  Run,  nigger,  run.  Pine  Bluff.  Mr.  E.  J.  Snow 89 

111  I’m  gwine  to  Alabamy.  Mississippi  River.  Dr.  W.  A.  Hammond 89- 


PART  IV. 

Gulf  States,  including  Florida  and  Louisiana:  Miscellaneous 93-118 

112  My  Father,  how  long  ? Florida.  Mr.  G.  H.  Allan 93 

113  I’m  in  trouble.  Florida.  Lt.-Col.  W.  L.  Apthorp 94 

114  O Daniel.  Florida.  Lt.-Col.  W.  L.  Apthorp 94 

115  O brother,  don’t  get  weary.  Florida.  Lt.-Col.  W.  L.  Apthorp 95 

116  I want  to  join  the  band.  Florida.  Lt.-Col.  W.  L.  Apthorp  95 

117  Jacob’s  Ladder.  Florida.  Lt.-Col.  W.  L.  Apthorp 96 

118  Pray  on.  Port  Royal  Islands.  C.  P.  W. 9T 

119  Good  news,  Member.  Port  Royal  Islands.  C.  P.  W. 97 


CONTENTS 


xlii 

PAGE. 

120  I want  to  die  like-a  Lazarus  die.  Port  Royal  Islands.  Mrs.  T.  E.  Ruggles 98 

121  Away  down  in  Sunbury.  Georgia.  Lt.-Col.  Trowbridge 99 

122  This  is  the  trouble  of  the  world.  Port  Royal  Islands.  C.  P.  W 99 

123  Lean  on  the  Lord’s  side.  Port  Royal  Islands.  C.  P.  W 100 

124  These  are  all  my  Father’s  children.  North  Carolina.  C.  P.  W 101 

125  The  Old  Ship  of  Zion.  Maryland.  Dr.  Hammond.  (Second  version.)  North  Carolina. 

Mrs.  Horace  James 102 

126  Come  along,  Moses.  North  Carolina.  Mrs.  Horace  James 104 

127  The  Social  Band.  North  Carolina.  Mrs.  Horace  James 105 

128  God  got  plenty  o’  room.  North  Carolina.  C.  P.  W 106 

129  You  must  be  pure  and  holy.  Auburn,  New  York.  Mr.  W.  A.  Baker 107 

130  Belle  Layotte.  Louisiana 109 

131  Remon.  Louisiana 110 

132  Aurore  Bradaire.  Louisiana 110 

133  Caroline.  Louisiana Ill 

134  Oalinda.  Louisiana Ill 

135  Lolotte.  Louisiana 112 

136  Musieu  Bainjo.  Louisiana 113 

Editobs’ Note 114 


DIRECTIONS  FOR  SINGING. 


In  addition  to  those  already  given  in  the  Introduction,  the  following  explana- 
tions may  be  of  assistance  : 

Where  all  the  words  are  printed  with  the  music,  there  will  probably  be  little 
difficulty  in  reading  the  songs ; but  where  there  are  other  words  printed  below 
the  music,  it  will  often  be  a question  to  which  part  of  the  tune  these  words  be- 
long, and  how  the  refrain  and  the  chorus  are  to  be  brought  in. 

It  will  be  noticed  that  the  words  of  most  of  the  songs  arrange  themselves  into 
stanzas  of  four  lines  each.  Of  these  some  are  refrain , and  some  are  verse  proper. 
The  most  common  arrangement  gives  the  second  and  fourth  lines  to  the  refrain, 
and  the  first  and  third  to  the  verse ; and  in  this  case  the  third  line  may  be  a 
repetition  of  the  first,  or  may  have  different  words.  Often,  however,  the  refrain 
occupies  only  one  line,  the  verse  occupying  the  other  three  ; while  in  one  or 
two  songs  the  verse  is  only  one  line,  while  the  refrain  is  three  lines  in.  length. 
The  refrain  is  repeated  with  each  stanza  : the  words  of  the  verse  are  changed  at 
the  pleasure  of  the  leader,  or  fugleman,  who  sings  either  well-known  words,  or, 
if  he  is  gifted  that  way,  invents  verses  as  the  song  goes  on. 

In  addition  to  the  stanza,  some  of  the  songs  have  a chorus,  which  usually 
consists  of  a fixed  set  of  wTords,  though  in  some  of  the  songs  the  chorus  is  a good 
deal  varied.  The  refrain  of  the  main  stanza  often  appears  in  the  chorus.  The 
stanza  can  always  be  distinguished  from  the  chorus,  in  those  songs  which  have 
more  than  one  stanza,  by  the  figure  “ 1”  placed  before  the  stanza  which  is  print- 
ed with  the  music ; the  verses  below  being  numbered  on“2,”  “ 3,”  “ 4,”  &c.  In 
a few  cases  the  first  verse  below  the  music  is  numbered  “ 3 this  occurs  when 
two  verses  have  been  printed  above  in  the  music,  instead  of  the  first  verse  being 
repeated . When  the  chorus  has  a variety  of  words,  the  additional  verses  are 
printed  below  without  numbers. 

In  the  following  list  the  first  fifty  tunes  in  the  collection  are  classified  according 


xliv 


DIRECTIONS  FOR  SINGING. 


to  the  peculiarity  of  their  division  into  verse  and  refrain.  It  is  hoped  that  this 
will  help  to  remove  all  obscurities  with  which  the  reader  may  be  embarrassed. 

No  explanation  is  needed  for  Nos.  2,  12,  13,  18,  22-26,  34,  36,  38-43. 

Single  line  and  refrain,  27,  35. 

“ “ “ with  chorus,  6,  29. 

Stanza  of  4 lines  : 

No  refrain ; chorus,  11. 

4th  line  refrain  ; introduction,  7. 

“ “ chorus,  8,  9,  10,  15,  37,  45. 

1st  and  2d  lines  verse,  3d  and  4th  refrain  ; chorus,  1,  4. 

1st  and  3d  “ “2d  and  4th  refrain,  14,  17,  20,  28,  31,  32,  33,  47,  48, 

49,  50. 

1st  and  3d  lines  verse,  2d  and  4th  refrain ; double,  21. 

“ “ “ “ “ chorus,  3, 30,  44. 

“ “ “ “ “ introduction,  46. 

1st  line  verse  ; chorus,  5. 

“ “ (double) ; chorus,  19. 

3d  “ “ , 16. 

As  regards  the  tempo , most  of  the  tunes  are  in  2-4  time,  and  in  most  of  these 
J = 100 — (say)  100-120.  The  spirit  of  the  music  will  determine  the  tempo  within 
these  limits.  The  slower  tunes  are  1,  3,  9,  17,  21,  etc.  No.  2 is  about  J = 160- 
180,  and  perhaps  had  better  have  been  written  in  3-8.  So  No.  13  would  be 
better  in  2-4  ; as  it  is,  the  J = 160-170.  No.  24  should  be  read  as  if  divided  in 
2-4,  with  J ==  100.  The  tempo  of  the  rowing  tunes  has  been  already  indicated. 

The  pitch  has  generally  been  accommodated  to  voices  of  medium  range. 


Slave  Songs  of  the  United  States. 


I. 

SOUTH-EASTERN  SLAVE  STATES: 

Including  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  the  Sea 
Islands. 


SLAVE  SONGS  OF  THE  UNITED  STATES. 


1.  ROLL?  JORDAN^  ROLL. 


Fm*i 

: (?  P‘  f £ : 

: p.  g.-g-  ^ j>  w !: 

:=P=S^.  M=. 

1.  My  brudder*  sit-tin’  on  de  tree  of  life,  An’ he  yearde  when  Jor-dan 


2 Little  chiren,  learn  to  fear  de  Lord, 

And  let  your  days  be  long; 

Roll,  Jordan,  frc. 

3 0,  let  no  false  nor  spiteful  word 

Be  found  upon  your  tongue ; 

Roll,  Jordan,  &c. 

* Parson  Fuller,  Deacon  Henshaw,  Brudder  Mosey,  Massa  Linkum,  &c. 


[This  spiritual  probably  extends  from  South  Carolina  to  Florida,  and  is  on© 
of  the  best  known  and  noblest  of  the  songs.] 


2 


2. 


JEHOYAH,  HALLELUJAH. 


birdies  have-a  nest,  De  Son  of  Man  he  dunnot  where  to  lay  de  weary  head. 
* Will  provide.  t Hanno. 


1 HEAR  EROM  HEATEN  TO-DAY. 


9 


jV 


¥- 


~l — ® — @ g ® ® — - 


Hur-ry*  on,  my  wea  - ry  soul,  And  I yearde  from  heaven  to- 


=1fc 


E 


V 


y- 


— m — — ^ 


S 


N— IS- 


- day,  Hur  ry  on,  my  wearyf  soul,  And  I yearde  from  heaven  to-day. 


9 


s -~s 


--P 


S — R- 


~w 


HUT 


1.  My  sin  is  for  - giv  - en  and  my  soul  set  free,  And  I 


2 A baby  born  in  Bethlehem, 

And  I yearde,  &c. 

8 De  trumpet  sound  in  de  oder  bright  land.  | 

4 My  name  is  called  and  1 must  go. 

5 De  bell  is  a-ringin’  in  de  oder  bright  world. 

* Travel.  t My  brudder,  Brudder  Jacob,  Sister  Mary.  t World. 


4 


BIOW  YOUR  TRUMPET,  GABRIEL. 


2d  time. 

-fc 


-w- 


$5— 


9 <9  - 


Vr N~ 


d 


1.  De  tall  - es’  tree  in  Pa  - ra  - dise,  De  Chris-tian  call  de 


m 9 * 9 — ®-  • 


* — « — * — *- 


-9 — 

tree  of  life ; And  I hope  dat  trump  might  blow  me  home  To  de 


X 2- X lU-L—Ly & — \-j4 — Ud— \-\d *- (/ 


*~WI®ZZ 

g-g-- 


tj 


¥-¥- 


w— v-y— v- 

new  Je  - ru  - sa-lem.  Blow  your  trumpet,  Gabriel,  Blow  louder,  louder ; And  I 


u 

zw~. ~p  ~r  rs — ns 

1- 

/ 

99  . .1  i . _J 

L 

1 9 9 w w 

v 

± 

-9 


-P-:- 


fj 


hope  dat  trump  might  blow  me  home  To  de  new  Je-ru  - sa  - lem. 

2 Paul  and  Silas,  bound  in  jail, 

Sing  God’s  praise  both  night  and  day; 

And  I hope,  &c. 

[This  hymn  is  sung  in  Virginia  in  nearly  the  same  form.  The  following 
minor  variation  is  given  by  Mrs.  Bowen,  as  heard  by  her  in  Charleston,  some 
twenty-five  years  ago :] 


r_ 

By:-  -S — N— s -fy 

— N -N  s 

Js  -js 

\—A 

,,  j Zi.  a A J J . 

fiM  ft  J •’1 

J J ! ~ 

L L 

h ■ -At  9 9 9 9 

9 9 Mi  1 

- 9 9 & -j 

1 V 

1 1 dt 

9 

Paul  and  Si  - las,  bound  in  jail,  Christians  pray  both 


nfrb — 

V y is — ~N— N 

~ -NzrN — IS  -Nr 

\ rr 

-S  42 J JS  JS 

40  0 J J 

' V . V S 

J & 9 ...  9.  W 

9 9 9 & 

\ m O S O a ,\  1 

lir- — r 

night  and  day,  And  I hope  dat  trump  might  blow  me  home  To  my 


Ff 

Hr- 

rb-' 

& zJ -aJ  — 

9 f M 

* - 

EB 

tj 

i=-f 

• 9 9 

- 9 1 * 9 S P 

-1 ^_l 

-y-F3- 

JL 

\ 

i 

new  Je  - ru  - sa  - lem.  So  blow  de  trumpet,  Gabriel,  Blow  de  trumpet 


1 

tiz 

44 4 * 

S fk.  (V  ^ 

hi 

td 

V * - V 

. tt.  & nr 

'louder,  And  I hope  dat  trump  might  blow  me  home  To  my  new  Jeru-sa  - lem. 


4 


5. 


PRAISE,  MEMBER. 


rrfffn— i 5-1 

^ M 4ft 

. V — c Ni — 

- i-  \ P-  • * - 

— T T 

- -/fiS  (to-  42  ■ 

S ,S  T— 

^ r . 

v k- 

& 

• d 

Praise,  member,*  praise  God,  I praise  my  Lord  un  - til  I die; 


ill 


~r~ 

rx: 


£ 


-v- 


v- 


a- 


:pt 


— — p 

tr^isEf 

tzp==i 


Praise,  member,  praise  God,  fAnd  reach  de  heaven -ly  home.  J 1.  O 


5 


■s- 


T 


— “N  - 


IjV 


nV=4 


JL 


_af' 


-9 


Jor-dan’s  bank  § is  a good  old  bank,  And  I hain’t  but  one  more 

BIt  . . r^-i^-N — - 


riv-er  to  cross ; I want  some  valiant  sol-dier  To  help  me  bear  the  cross. 

2 0 soldier’s  tight  is  a good  old  fight, 

And  I hain’t,  &c. 

3 0 1 look  to  de  East,  and  I look  to  de  West. 


4  0 1 wheel  to  de  right,  and  I wheel  to  de  left. 

* Believer.  t Religion  so  sweet.  t Shore.  § Stream,  Fight. 

[The  last  verse  is  varied  in  several  different  ways ; Col.  Higginson  gives, 
« There’s  a hill  on  my  leff,  an’  he  catch  on  my  right,”  and  says,  “ I could  get 
no  explanation  of  this  last  riddle,  except,  ‘ Dat  mean,  if  you  go  on  de  leff,  you 
go  to  ’struction,  and  if  you  go  on  de  right,  go  to  God,  for  sure.'  ” Miss  Forten 
gives,  “ I hop  on  my  right  an’  I catch  on  my  leff,”  and  supposes  “ that  some 
peculiar  motion  of  the  body  formed  the  original  accompaniment  of  the  song, 
but  has  now  fallen  into  disuse.”  Lt.  Col.  Trowbridge  heard  this  hymn  sung 
among  the  colored  people  of  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  several  years  ago.] 


6.  WRESTLE  ON,  JACOB. 


~-s  j- 

« ■ P w m 

=X==I 

9 • 

p I& I 

$ 

— r—1 

a P— 

-b 

-A — & 9 

—A L 

1.  I hold  my  brudder  * wid  a tremblin’  han’,  De  Lord  will 


l_^£k=dS  ->  J ; 

’ M * ^ o a 

7 

• d-—&  & p-U- 

b — A- 

U ^ 

-v — f—  - 

bless  my  soul,  f Wrastl’  on,  Ja-cob,  Ja  - cob,  day  is  a - breakin’, 
* My  sister,  Brudder  Jacky,  All  de  member.  t 1 would  not  let  him  go. 


5 


-| — ,v 

. \ 

gzm? 

- f f p . . p 

r • 

a 42  * . - 

rW_:zL_:zadz_jd 

[ s \ 

=-£  * * £ 

Wrastr  on,  Ja  - cob,  Oh  he*  would  not  let  him  go. 


2 I will  not  let  you  go,  my  Lord. 

3 Fisherman  Peter  out  at  sea. 

4 He  cast  f all  night  and  he  cast  f all  day. 

5 He  t catch  no  fish,  but  he  f catch  some  soul. 

6 Jacob  hang  from  a tremblin’  limb. 


* Lord  I.  t Fish.  $ I. 


[This  is  also  sung  in  Maryland  and  Virginia,  in  a slightly  modified  form.  A 
Virginia  verse  is,  — 

I  looked  to  the  East  at  the  breaking  of  the  day, 

The  old  ship  of  Zion  went  sailing  away.] 


* 


7. 


THE  LONESOME  VALLEY. 


My  brudder,  *want  to  get  re-li-gion?  Go  down  in  de  lonesome  valley,  etc. 


SI — V 


H 


N~N 


i 


£ 


1.  Go  down  in  de  lonesome  val-ley,  Go  down  in  de  lonesome 


*-*=3 


3=53 

I • 


valley,  my  Lord;  Go  down  in  de  lonesome  valley, To  meet  my  Je-sus  dere. 

2 0 feed  oh  milk  and  honey. 

3 0 John  he  write  de  letter. 

4 And  Mary  and  Marta  read  ’em. 


* Sister  Katy,  etc. 

[“‘De  valley,’  and  ‘ de  lonesome  valley’  were  familiar  words  in  their  reli- 
gious experience.  To  descend  into  that  region  implied  the  same  process  with 
the  ‘ anxious- seat  ’ of  the  camp-meeting.  When  a young  girl  was  supposed  to 
enter  it,  she  bound  a handkerchief  by  a peculiar  knot  over  her  head,  and  made 
it  a point  of  honor  not  to  change  a single  garment  till  the  day  of  her  baptism, 
so  that  she  was  sure  of  being  in  physical  readiness  for  the  cleansing  rite,  what- 
ever her  spiritual  mood  might  be.  More  than  once,  in  noticing  a damsel  thus 
mystically  kerchiefed,  I have  asked  some  dusky  attendant  its  meaning,  and 
have  received  the  unfailing  answer,  - framed  with  their  usual  indifference  to  the 
genders  of  pronouns, — ‘ He  in  de  lonesome  valley,  sa.’  ” — Col.  Higginson.] 


e 


8.  I CAN’T  STAY  BEHIND. 


h 

W=f-: 

.»  y'iN-y  :E 

# -V  & - 

• 

ok . _ • . 

EE 

: 

, * •«  * • 

y $ 

re'  i . 

H — 

Chor.  I can’t  stay  be-hind,  my  Lord,  I can’t  stay  be  - hind  ! 


1.  Dere’s  room  e-nough,  Room  e - nough,  Boom  e - nough  in  de 


heaven,  my  Lord;*  Room  enough,  Boom  enough,  I can’t  stay  be-hind. 


2 I been  all  around,  I been  all  around, 

Been  all  around  de  Heaven,  my  Lord. 

3 I’ve  searched  every  room — in  de  Heaven,  my  Lord,  f 

4 De  angels  singin’  X — all  round  de  trone. 

5 My  Fader  call — and  I must  go. 

6 Sto-back,  § member;  sto-back,  member. 


* For  you.  t And  Heaven  all  around,  t Crowned.  § “Sto-back”  means  “Shout  backwards.’ » 

[This  “ shout”  is  very  widely  spread,  and  variously  sung.  In  Charleston  it 
is  simpler  in  its  movement,  and  the  refrain  is  “ I can’t  stay  away.”  In  Edge- 
field  it  is  expostulating : “ Don't  stay  away,  my  mudder.”  Col.  Higginson  gives 
the  following  version,  as  sung  in  his  regiment : 

“O,  my  mudder  is  gone!  my  mudder  is  gone! 

My  mudder  is  gone  into  heaven,  my  Lord ! 

I can’t  stay  behind ! 

Dere  ’s  room  in  dar,  room  in  dar. 

Boom  in  dar,  in  de  heaven,  my  Lord ! 

I can’t  stay  behind. 

Can’t  stay  behind,  my  dear, 

I can’t  stay  behind ! 

‘ * O,  my  fader  is  gone  ! &c. 

“0,  de  angels  are  gone!  &c 

“O,  I ’se  been  on  de  road!  I ’se  been  on  de  road! 

I ’se  been  on  de  road  into  heaven,  my  Lord! 

I can’t  stay  behind ! 

O,  room  in  dar,  room  in  dar, 

Boom  in  dar,  in  de  heaven,  my  Lord! 

I can’t  stay  behind !” 


7 


Lt.  Col.  Trowbridge  is  of  opinion  that  it  was  brought  from  Florida,  as  he 
first  heard  it  in  Dec  , 1862.  from  a boat-load  of  Florida  soldiers  brought  up  by 
Lt.  Col.  Billings.  It  was  not  heard  by  Mr.  Ware  at  Coffin’s  Point  until  that 
winter.  It  seems  hardly  likely,  however,  that  it  could  have  made  its  way  to 
Charleston  and  Edgefield  since  that  time.  The  air  became  u immensely  pop- 
ular” in  the  regiment,  and  was  soon  adopted  for  military  purposes,  so  that  the 
class  leaders  indignantly  complained  of  “ th§  drum  corps  using  de  Lord’s 
chune.”] 


9. 


POOR  ROSY. 


Ef 


8— t 


4r 


M- 


— I- 


*- 


& — -g- 


> y- 

1.  Poor  Ro  - sy,  poor  gal;*  Poor  Ro  - sy,  poor  gal; 


~K 


dvp ® 


T~ 


m t 


Ro  - sy  break  my  poor  heart,  Heav’n  shall-a  be  my  home. 


-4- 


33a 


-4 


tE 


4 


iV 


~w 


can  - not  stay  in  hell  one  day,  Heav’n  shall-a  be  my  home I’ll 


: V 


V 


A 


-H- 


W 

smg  and  pray  my  soul  a- way,  Heav’n  sball-a  be  my  home. 

2 Got  hard  trial  in  my  way,  {ter) 

Heav’n  shall-a  be  my  home. 

0 when  I talk,  f I talk  f wid  God,  \ {bis) 

Heav’n  shall-a  be  my  home.  j 

3 I dunno  what  de  people  t want  of  me,  {ter) 

Heav’n  shall-a  be  my  home. 


* Poor  Csesar,  poor  boy. 


t Walk. 


t Massa. 


[This  song  ranks  with  “ Roll,  Jordan,”  in  dignity  and  favor.  The  following 
variation  of  the  second  part  was  heard  at  “ The  Oaks  :”] 


— S — N — S — — \ 


S-A — S — % - 

■&- — 0- 


A-f- 


Be  - fore  I stay  in  hell  one  day,  Heaven  shall-a  be  my  home; 
I sing  and  pray  my  soul  a - way,  Heaven  shall-a  be  my  home. 


8 

10.  THE  TROUBLE  OF  THE  WORLD. 


1,  I want  to  be*  my  Fa  - der’s  chil’-en,  I want  to  be 


Foil,  Jor-dan,  roll.  O say, f ain’t  you  done  wid  de 


/ T*  fck  taw  — tak  

N -S  S S % 

1 

— & — v 

S — — 

\ 

j & @ — e — g 8 — & — 

— G — 

1 

trou  - ble  ob  de  world,  Ah ! trou  -ble  ob  de  world,  Ah  ! 


if 

K 

— is — s — 

. 

u 

*r  ap— J 

m 

— K--N — 

—e — @ — © 

S—iVff — W- 

— 0 — b b- 

/■ — 

- d J 

a 

—a 

^-r  - 

Say  ain’t  you  done  wid  de  trou-ble  ob  de  world,  Ah  Roll,  Jor-dan,  roll. 

2 I ask  de  Lord  how  long  I hold  ’em,  {ter) 

Hold  ’em  to  de  end. 

3 My  sins  so  heavy  I can’t  get  along,  Ah ! &c. 

4 I cast  my  sins  in  de  middle  of  de  sea,  Ah!  &c. 

* 0 you  ought  to  be.  t My  sister,  My  mudder,  etc. 


[This  is  perhaps  as  good  a rendering  of  this  strange  song  as  can  be  given. 
The  difficulty  is  in  the  time,  which  is  rapid,  hurried  and  irregular  to  a degree 
which  is  very  hard  to  imitate  and  impossible  to  represent  in  notes.  The  fol- 
lowing is  sung  in  Savannah,  with  the  same  refrain,  “ Trouble  of  the  world :”] 


W j-r  s>— > -S  :.\j  s-_ 's 

<3  <d  — ~~d — 


i 


■&- 


N- 


— w 


wish  I was  in  ju  - bi  - lee,  Ha,  ju  - bi  - lee  ; I 


* 


wish  I was  in 


9 


11.  THERE’S  A MEETING  HERE  TO-NIGHT. 


t — 9 9 ■ 


:w  ' 

» — 

= 

1.  I take  my  text  in  Mattew,  and  by  de  Re-ve  - la  - tion,  I 


U r- $ -J— 


fJ 


-K~ V 

!z=*v 


:?=3^- 


S' 


IeIS 


know  you  by  your  gar-men t,  Dere’s  a meet-ing  here  to  - night.  Dere’sa 

Oh  ! 

^ 


{(T)Z_lZ — 9 & 9 9- 


-9- 


-0 0 


9 -9 


meet.-ing  here  to-  night,  (Brudder  Tony,)  Dere’s  a meet-ing  here  to  - 
Oh  l 


fc=|V 


qs 


-9, 


:mzzd 


-9  — 0-  ~ “ 


I- 

—9- 


9-—-S 


- night,  (Sister  Rina,)  Dere’s  a meeting  here  to-night,  I hope  to  meet  a - gain. 

2 Brudder  John  was  a writer,  he  write  de  laws  of  God; 

Sister  Mary  say  to  brudder  John,  “Brudder  John,  don’t  write  no  more.*' 
Dere’s  a meeting  here  to-night,  Oh!  (Brudder  Sandy,)  {bis) 

Dere’s  a meeting  here  to-night, 

I hope  to  meet  again. 

[Mrs.  Bowen  gives  us  the  following  beautiful  variation,  as  sung  in  Charles- 
ton: ] 


ilM 


m 


:w 


V-V  “y- 


I see  brudder  Mo  - ses  yon  - der,  And  I think  I ought  to 


F-/7fY-tf  — 1 9 — Sl-l 

; av-iv«4  J 

1 fill-)  11  <££  1 M. - 

V & * | ®--ah  1 -®r 

: a -grT-  d_ : 

know  him,  For  I know  him  by  his  gar-ment,  He’s  a blessing  here  to 


J" 

> ■H’j, 

. _]  ^ 

Ij  / 

1 

. 1 M V.  Si 

..  J *4  ..  C _JN 

^ \ 

\ 

\(l 

\ T 

J 1 JS  v 

1 ! V 

9 n J*  jS 

r r 

S ” 

<s>  ; 

V <p  sP  ^ 

.-M  0 

—9— 

° ST H 

— @ — — @ @ 

• £j) 

- night ; He’s  a bless-ing  here  to  - night,  He’s  a bless-ing  here  to  - 


- night,  And  I think  I ought  to  know  him,  He’s  a bless-ing  here  to  - night. 


10 


12. 


HOLD  TOUR  LIGHT. 


wm 


& 


— 

9 

6— 

~ W & ' 

* 0 g 

=1 

gs p— f- 

9 & — 

L- [-  . 

— !-  — F — &— 

. 1 ___  I 

4 

& 1 1 

-4— — k- 

V i 

L 

h V 

What  make  ole  Sa-  tan  da  fol-low  me  so  ? Sa-tan  hain’t  nottin’  at 


all  .for  to  do  wid*  me.  (Run  seeker.)  Hold  your  light,  (Sister  Ma-ry,f) 


0 


FHp= 


I 


=E 


4 


4 


i 


ho 


Hold  your  light,  (Seeker  turn  back,)  Hold  your  light  on  Ca  - naan  shore. 
* Long  o’.  t All  de  member,  Turn  seeker. 


13. 


HAPPY  MORNING. 


* 


1 

1 

I 

-® &- 


=t 


NF 


BE® 


i ■ i 

I i 


-& -*>  - 


Weep  no  more,  Marta,  Weep  no  more,  Ma  ry,*  Je  - sus  rise  from  de 


dead,  Hap-pyf  morn  - ing.  Glo  - rioust  morn  - ing,  Glo  - rious 




1 ' 

4 


uizzg-bS 


morn  - ing,  My  Sa-viour  rise  from  de  dead,  Happy  morn  - ing. 

* Doubt  no  more,  Thomas.  t Glorious,  Sunday.  t 0 what  a happy  Sunday. 


14. 


:W. 


t±=jL 


NO  MAN  CAN  HINDER  ME. 


— hr 


y — ^ — r- 


1 


Walk  in,  kind  Sa  - viour,  No  man  can  hin- der  me!  Walk  in,  sweet 


11 


Fh 

7- — 

m 

±_* 

1 

1 

— , — 

& 

r 


£ 


3: 


P=*=pff—f — | — |- 

|-y-  -t— E— F 


-hi- 


f® P 

-I— 

v— k 


■^s  - * » 

Je  - sus,  No  man  can  liin-der  me  !2.  See  what  won -der  Je  - sus  done, 


O no  man  can  hin  - der  me!  See  wrhatwon-der  Je  - sus  done, 


* — pq 

=r^ 

S 

— i — 1 

■ -* — i 

IZ—t 


4 


t— 

'jl— j|— H—C — A 


t= 


O no  man  can  hin-der  me  ! O no  man,  no  man,  no  man  can 

-N  • - . . 


1 


I 


t 


H j- 

V — /- 


:w: 


=4 


-V 


4—& 


tj 


hin  * der  me  1 O no  man,  no  man,  no  man  can  hin-der  me ! 

3 Jesus  make  de  dumb  to  speaK. 

4 Jesus  make  de  cripple  walk.  >■ 

5 Jesus  give  de  blind  his  sight. 

6 Jesus  do  most  any  ting. 

7 Rise,  poor  Lajarush,  from  de  tomb. 

8 Satan  ride  an  iron-gray  horse. 

9 King  Jesus  ride  a milk-white  horse. 


Variation. 


it 


1 


P !- 


:P=P4=J 

y 


=t 


"i  r 


-\~a‘ 


t—v- 


y — / 

You’d  bet -ter  pray,  de  world  da  gwine,  No  man  can  hinder  me  ! De 


12 

15.  LORD,  REMEMBER  ME. 


=£ = 

fc— fc- 

v—  * 

:d w ._a 

— d-d-- 

9 <0  4S 

J i 

TV'S  ' 

- - 

1.  Oh  Deat’  he  is  a lit  - tie  man,  And  he  goes  from  do*  to 


. » 

— r— r i— N— — 

- 0 . 

9 

•— 1 

I / 

r F 

•J 

0^0 

({ 

r - i 

J ,\  m 

r 

V 

r 

1 r 

1 V 

1 • — d 

dl 

- * V— 

* — 

— V — 

Oh*  Lord,  re- mem-ber  me,  Do,  Lord,  re -mem-ber  me;  lie  - 


. 

J 

^ \ s 

**■* *•** : 

~ 

- — 

• 

/ 

r* 

9 

b 

V v 

V 

*1  • 

:S 

• i 

a 

^ J\ 

G . 4fi  & ftd  i j 

1 o 

1 

* 

/ ~ r_ 

9 9 d J 

3 s J a 

__s 

• 

- mem-ber  mef  as  de  year  roll  round,  Lord,  re  - member  me. 


2  I want  to  die  like-a  Jesus  die, 

And  he  die  wid  a free  good  will, 

I lay  out  in  de  grave  and  1 stretchee  out  e arms, 
Do,  Lord,  remember  me. 

• Do.  1 1 pray  (cry)  to  de  Lord. 


16.  NOT  WEARY  YET. 


£ 

u 

X-VWa  — 

-0 — 0— 

—0 — f 

-0 

Z — p- 

0 

S -0  ■ 

1 

=T=3  : 

tv 

fj 

EES=£r. 

r 

t 

/ — k- 

h~  * M 

O me  no  wea-ry  yet,  O me  no  wea- ry  yeti.  I 


prfer2 — p. — * — _ — 

“Nv=hwV=^: 

Jr^y^:  ? — p % f>r: 

— 4 « % 

— 0 — 0— 0~ — 9— 

—d -P — I2 3 4 5 6 7- 

*-•  4 xz 

tf -a -4 4— j-  - 

— M -2^ - 

*~'ty ^ j/  p j/ 

have  a wit-ness 

in  my  heart,  0 

me  no  weary 

V J 

yet.  (Brudder  Tony  *) 

2 Since  I been  in  de  field  to  f fight. 

3 I have  a heaven  to  maintain. 

4 De  bond  of  faith  are  on  my  soul. 

5 Ole  Satan  toss  a ball  at  me. 

6 Him  tink  de  ball  would  hit  my  soul. 

7 De  ball  for  hell  and  I for  heaven. 


• Sister  Mary. 


t Been-a. 


13 


17.  RELIGION  SO  SWEET. 


:fe 


T 


=g=J 


ft 


V — ^ 


=P 


B333 


/ — /- 


1.  O walk  Jor  - dan  long  road,  Andre  - li-gion  so  sweet ; O re- 


: ;•  m \ m M 


9-v- 


£□£=! 


-=M 


11  - gion  is  good  for  a - ny-ting,  And  re  - li  - gion  so  sweet. 


3 Religion  make  you  happy.* 

4 Religion  gib  me  patience.f 

5 0 member,  get  religion. 

6 I long  time  been  a-huntin’. 

7 I seekin’  for  my  fortune. 

8 01  gwine  to  meet  my  Savior. 

9 Gwine  to  tell  him  ’bout  my  trials. 

10  Dey  call  me  boastin’  member. 

11  Dey  call  me  turnback  t Christian. 

12  Dey  call  me  ’struction  maker. 

13  But  1 don  t care  what  dey  call  me. 

14  Lord,  trial  ’longs  to  a Christian. 

15  0 tell  me  ’bout  religion. 

16  I weep  for  Mary  and  Marta. 

17  I seek  my  Lord  and  I find  him 


• Humble.  t Honor,  Comfort.  t Lyin’,  ’ceitfuL 


18.  HUNTING  FOR  THE  LORD. 


E 

sss=i 

S 3_ _ 

fj 

9 & — & q 

< g=f_: 

/— v L 

Hunt  till  you  find  him,  Halle  - lu-jah,  And  a - huntin’  for  de 


EyOjL_L  *4  *4 .S,  ^ 

HV-*- 

£ k 

R(|I— ^ 

* 9 -i  9 9 9 =| 

— 1 — 5 

•9— & 

0 

^ — 2* 

~i — 

~nz= 

da 

Lord ; Till  you  find  him,  Halle  - lu  - jah,  And  a - huntin’  for  de  Lord* 


14 


19. 


GO  IN  THE  WILDERNESS. 


:Vz=jy 


. <2> 

l 9 

/- 


V- 


© — 


I wait  up  - on  de  Lord,  I wait  up  - on  do  Lord, 


-+  £=£=£  £=£ -- 5=3  -* 

— ’A  * *.  -Hi— A =» 


1>~V 


-*1-4 


-y-jL.y- — & v-y- 

wait  up-  on  de  Lord,  my  God,  who  take  a - way  de  sin  of  the  world. 


£ 


■K 


-0 © 


S— ft 


4 — 4' 

1.  If  you  want  to  find  Je  - sus,  go  in  the  wil  - aer  - ness, 


S3 


Go  in  de  wilder-ness,  go  in  de  wilder-ness,  Mournin’  hrudder, 


b==£=fe  =£==ftj=3=£ 

r 3 3 3 S'  f*  3 


M 


0 


-*|-4 


go  in  de  wil  - der  - ness,  I * wait  up  - on  de  Lord. 

3 You  want  to  be  a Christian. 

4 You  want  to  get  religion. 

5 If  you  spec’  to  be  converted. 

6 0 weepin’  Mary. 

7 Tlicted  sister. 

8 Say,  ain’t  you  a member  ? 

9 Half-done  Christian. 

10  Come,  backslider. 

11  Baptist  member. 

12  0 seek,  brudder  Bristol. 

13  Jesus  a waitin’  to  meet  you  in  de  wilderness. 

To. 


[The  second  part  of  this  spiritual  is  the  familiar  Methodist  hymn  “ Ain't  I 
glad  I got  out  of  the  wilderness ! ” and  may  be  the  original.  The  first  part  is 
very  beautiful,  and  appears  tobe  peculiar  to  the  Sea  Islands.] 


15 


20.  TELL  MY  JESUS  “MORNING.” 


:=^ 

w ^ 

: N 

::  al  @ aj  ^ gr 

~z 

I Vy  it  9 

L & ^ ® 

1.  In  de  mornin’  when  I rise,  Tell  my  Je  - sus  huddy,  oh  ;*  I 


F#i — — 7 


wash  my  hands  in  de  morn-in’  glo  - ry,  Tell  my  Je  - sus  huddy,  oh. 


Variation  to  first  line. 


—Pi f* N . s h \ 

71  77  J \ v _ J 7 

J v - v \ r 

<0?  ^ 1 

VvU  w ® 

W 1 OF 

0 L. 

Pray  To  - ny,  pray  boy,  you  got  de  or  - der  j 


2 Mornin’,  Hester,  mornin’,  gal, 

Tell  my  Jesus,  &c. 

(To  the  Variation.) 

2 Say,  brudder  Sammy,  you  got  de  order, 

Tell  my  Jesus,  &c. 

3 You  got  de  order,  and  I got  de  order. 

* Morning. 


21.  THE  GBAYEYAKB. 


pp  -^-7 

-* * 

_ 

e&j-jt3L= 

: w p m 9 4 : 

^ 

* * : 

(Brudder  Sammy)  \ . Who  gwiue  to  lay  dis  bo  - dy,  Member,  O,  shout 


fj  ' 


glo-ry.*  And-a  whogwineto  lay  dis  bo-dy,  Oh  ring  Je-ru  - sa  - lem. 


V- 

.. 

S — N ^ ^ 

S “N- 

- “v r N S 

r / 

5 

S \ 

C \ I 3 

Lix 

ir  « 

L g & " ~ g _g.  . 

* m I /gA  W p 

V 

U _ 

— Lf 

w • — J 

2.  O call  all  de  member  to  de  graveyard.  Mem  - ber,  &c. 

3 0 graveyard,  ought  to  know  me. 

4:  0 grass  grow  in  de  graveyard. 

5 0 1 reelf  and  I rock  in  de  graveyard. 

* Sing  glory,  Graveyard.  f Shout,  Wheel. 


16 


6 0 1 walk  and  I toss  wid  Jesus. 

7 My  mudder  reel  and-a  toss  wid  de  fever. 

8 I have  a grandmudder  in  de  graveyard. 

9 0 where  d’ye  tink  I find  ’em?'4* 

10  I find  ’em,  Lord,  in  de  graveyard. 

11  (Member,)  J wheel,  and  I rock,  and  I gwine  homo. 

12  (Brudder  Sammy)  Q 'peat  dat  story  over. 

Variation  to  Verse  3. 


n - 

& • 

6 

M ' 

ray*- 

-U— 

: b 

■a 

It 

Id 

ty- 


-hs- 


Grave  - yard,  you  ought  to  know  me. 
* i.  e.,  religion;  see  Preface. 


I 


22.  JOHN,  JOHN,  OF  THE  HOLY  ORDER. 


± 


, 2_3X__ 


-A-W- 


-N — s 


SJ— N— 

— aT  d 9- 


±n Ji-i 


S — s 


p— 


/ r 

John,  John,  wid  de  ho  - ly  or  - der,*  Sit  - tin’  on  de  gol  - den 


bW^-2-^  • "1- 

9 & — I v — L _ 

or  - der  ; John,  John,  wTidde  ho  - ly  or  - der,  Sit-tin’  on  de  gol  - den 


-V- 


\ — lV=^=^-Jv 


5—| 


£»— h r 


r V 

or -der;  John,  John,  wid  de  ho  - ly  or  - der,  Sit-tin’  on  de  gol  - den 


-JLJ? 


1^— 

— — ~jvr  ^ — b — ^ & ■■■  ■ &- — [- 


trg— g<= 


or  - der,  To  view  do  pro -mised  land.  O Lord,  I weep, 


guard  - ian  an  - gel  Gone  a - long  be  - fore. 

* John,  John,  de  holy  Baptist. 


c 


Ma-ry  and  Mar-ta, 


TTTi 


17 


■ 1 f 

- X 

^ Ik 

% IS  N 

:=F=F=Ft: 

if  1?  * — 

-{( 

— y ^ ** — p — I 

I # — — # — #- — -t- 

“ri  1 “1 

i ' d— 

-0 & ® - 

r r r 

feed  my  lamb,*  feed  my  lamb,  feed  my  lamb ; Si  - mon  Peter, 


i — 

"Orh — __r — — — ~ — - — -fr v-- 

f / 

lb 

v k k vi  . 

v a 

r{( 

y fs — n • Ci 

^ IS  N IS  & 2 

p i 

1 V 

r; 2 ■ 2-  2 : m m m a 

i ■■  HJr  Wf  « w1 

feed  my  lamb,  a - sit  - tin’  on  de  gol  - den  or  - der. 

• Paul  and  Silas,  bound  in  jail. 


[These  words  were  sung  at  Hilton  Head  to  the  second  and  third  parts  i 

I went  down  sing  polka,  and  I ax  him  for  my  Saviour ; 

I wonder  de  angel  told  me  Jesus  gone  along  before, 

I mourn,  I pray,  although  you  move  so  slow; 

I wonder,  &c. 

The  regularity  and  elaborateness  of  this  hymn  lead  one  at  first  to  suspect 
its  genuineness.  The  question  seems,  however,  to  be  settled  by  two  very  inter- 
esting and  undoubted  variations  from  North  Carolina  and  Georgia.  The  follow- 
ing words  were  sung  at  Augusta,  but  we  have  not  been  able  to  obtain  the  tune, 
which  is  entirely  unlike  that  given  above.  For  the  North  Carolina  variation, 
see  No.  100.  Both,  as  will  be  seen,  omit  the  second  part,  and  a comparison 
of  the  two  shows  that  the  enigmatical  word  “order”  should  undoubtedly  be 
“ altar.”  The  North  Carolina  tune  has  the  first  part  quite  different  from  the 
Port  Royal  tune,  the  last  very  similiar  to  it. 

Oh  John,  John,  de  holy  member, 

Siftin'  on  de  golden  ban'. 

0 worldy,  worldy,  let  him  be, 

Let  him  be,  let  him  be  ; 

Worldy,  worldy,  let  him  be, 

Sittin’  on  de  golden  ban’.] 


23.  I SAW  THE  BEAM  IN  MY  SISTER’S  EYE. 


i — 0-ft-n ^ — b — b — ^ ^ — fS 

— k — k: — sr 

Nr 

— # — 0— 0 -0—~0 — 0— 
ri<V)— 4--r — : 

. ji  B . 

~p  p 

— & — D — !~ 

9 — . 

- -i  ^ 9 

1.  I saw  de  beam  in  my  sister’s  * eye,  Can’t  saw  de  beam  in  mine;  You’d 


i — ■ fe  2 • 2 

~W~» B 

V 

k xa  • m, 

V 

\ A f r J 

L L 

- 

. ® E_ 

y y ® 

. ■r  ^ y wr 

, 

LvU  „ £-  / 

— F 

y r 

bet  - ter  lef’  your  sis  - ter  door,  Go  keep  your  own  door  clean. 


2 And  I had  a mighty  battle  like-a  Jacob  and  de  angel, 
Jacob,  time  of  old ; 

1 didn't  'tend  to  lef’  'em  go 
Till  Jesus  bless  my  soul. 


* Titty  Peggy,  Brudder  Mosey,  &C, 


18 


3 And  blessed  me,  and  blessed  my, 

And  blessed  all  my  soul ; 

I didn’t  ’tend  to  lef’  ’em  go 
Till  Jesus  bless  my  soul. 

[This  tune  appears  to  be  borrowed  from  “ And  are  ye  sure  the  news  is  true  ? w 
—but  it  is  so  much  changed,  and  the  words  are  so  characteristic,  that  it  seemed 
undoubtedly  best  to  reta  n it.] 


24.  HUNTING  FOR  A CITY. 


- 

rHr-k  \ 

— -V-S  S s— fr- 

-1  —S 

Sr - 

zz 

-II  1 1 1 

1 ^ 

11  I 

T( 

y*  v in  n @ 

d a 0 a)  a a 

& 0 • \ an 

a 

V1 

wrj 

®_  Q — L. 

i 

I am  huntin’  foi  a ci  - ty,  to  stay  a - while,  I am 


Hi 


« « 


S: 


_p_s_ 


s: 


huntin’  for  a ci  - ty,  to  stay  awhile,  I am  huntin’  for  a ci  - ty,  to 


— 

9"rb  ^rw 

V :J''" 

— 1 

- / 

1 & V . m 9 • m 

J |S  \ .0  J ^ 

77 

V 1 ! J*  p C 

i 

V 

r 1 r^z t a b - 

ft  dsa 1 L 

o 

stay  a - while,  O be  - lie-ver  got  a home  at  las 


25.  GWINE  FOLLOW. 


Tit-ty  Ma-ry,  you  know  I gwine  fol  low,  I gwine  fol-low,  gwine 


n 

P s — p ^ 

— IS  , 

/ 

j r ^ ijf  V V, 

. Jb  fi?  p v >* . 

v v.  F r 

IT 

'i 

tt  w & • n p p 

W 

• 

2_ 

Q ^ \ \ 

■ > e • ^ : 

fol-low,  Brudder  William,  you  know  I gwine  to  fol-low,  For  to 


r- 0#,J r 

i— k— N ~ ■ 

— 1^— 1 — -0 — ®- 

-0—0 — F — b— b- 

P-S-t  = 

fcsfl):- 6 — C=S=: 

• 

do  my  Fa-der  will.  ’Tis  well  and  good  I’m  a-comin’  here  tpnight,  I’m  a- 


- com  - in’  here  to  - night,  I’m  a - com  - in’  here  to  - night,  ’Tis 


well  and  good,  I’m  a-comin’  here  tonight,  For  to  do  my  Fader  will. 


[The  second  part  of  this  tune  is  evidently  “ Buffalo  ” (variously  known  also  as 
“ Charleston  ” or  “ Baltimore”)  “ Grals ; ” the  first  part,  however,  is  excellent  and 
characteristic.] 


19 


26. 


LAY  THIS  BODY  DOWN. 


E 


ISIHC 


-=1- 


-9 


-9 


-i/- 


1.  o 


grave  - yard, 


O grave  - yard, 


I’m 


" ' -w- 

walk  - in’  troo  de  grave  - yard  ; Lay  dis  bo  - dy  down. 

2 *1  know  moonlight,  I know  starlight, 

I'm  walkin’  troo  do  starlight ; 

Lay  dis  body  down. 

* 0 moonlight  (or  moonrise) ; 0 my  soul,  0 your  soul. 


[This  is  probably  the  song  heard  by  W.  H.  Russell,  of  the  London  Times,  as 
described  in  chapter  xviii.  of  “ My  Diary  North  and  South.”  The  writer  was 
on  his  way  from  Pocotaligo  to  Mr.  Trescot’s  estate  on  Barnwell  Island,  and  of 
the  midnight  row  thither  he  says : 

“ The  oarsmen,  as  they  bent  to  their  task,  beguiled  the  way  by  singing  in 
nnison  a real  negro  melody,  which  was  unlike  the  works  of  the  Ethiopian 
Serenaders  as  anything  in  song  could  be  unlike  another.  It  was  a barbario 
sort  of  madrigal,  in  which  one  singer  beginning  was  followed  by  the  others  in 
unison,  repeating  the  refrain  in  chorus,  and  full  of  quaint  expression  and  me- 
lancholy : — 

‘ Oh  your  soul ! oh  my  sonl ! I’m  going  to  the  churchyard 
To  lay  this  body  down  ; 

Oh  my  soul ! oh  your  soul  ! we’re  going  to  the  churchyard 
To  lay  this  nigger  down.’ 

And  then  some  appeal  to  the  difficulty  of  passing  the  ' Jawdam  ’ constituted 
the  whole  of  the  song,  which  continued  with  unabated  energy  during  the  whole 
of  the  little  voyage.  To  me  it  was  a strange  scene.  The  stream,  dark  as 
Lethe,  flowing  between  the  silent,  houseless,  rugged  banks,  lighted  up  near 
the  landing  by  the  fire  in  the  woods,  which  reddened  the  sky — the  wild  strain, 
and  the  unearthly  adjurations  to  the  singers’  souls,  as  though  they  were  palpable, 
put  me  in  mind  of  the  fancied  voyage  across  the  Styx.” 

We  append  with  some  hesitation  the  following  as  a variation  ; the  words  of 
which  we  borrow  from  Col,  Higginson.  Lt.  Col.  Trowbridge  says  of  it  that  it 
was  sung  at  funerals  in  the  night  time — one  of  the  most  solemn  and  character- 
istic of  the  customs  of  the  negroes.  He  attributes  its  origin  to  St.  Simon’s  Island, 
Georgia : ] 


ri 

— FI 

W * ' & IZU 

m • a a • 

rr— f 

r r r r 

1 - 1 

P 0 J 

y b ] . 

U y 

1 Le  \j 

r i 9 ® 

& r 

rv 

l V i r 

-p  p 

t J 


I know  moonlight,  I know  starlight ; I lay  dis  bo  - dy  down. 


2 I walk  in  de  moonlight,  I walk  in  de  starlight ; 

I lay  dis  body  down. 

3 I know  de  graveyard,  I know  de  graveyard, 

When  I lay  dis  body  down. 


20 


4 I walk  in  de  graveyard,  I walk  troo  de  graveyard, 

To  lay,  &c. 

5 I lay  in  de  grave  an’  stretch  out  my  arms  ; 

I  lay,  &c. 

6 I go  to  de  judgment  in  de  evenin'  of  de  day 

When  I lay,  &c. 

7 And  my  soul  an’  your  soul  will  meet  in  de  day 

When  we  lay,  &c. 

[“  * I’ll  lie  in  de  grave  and  stretch  out  my  arms.’  Never,  it  seems  to  me,  since 
man  first  lived  and  suffered,  was  his  infinite  longing  for  peace  uttered  more 
plaintively  than  in  that  line.” — Col.  Higginson.] 


HEAYEN  BELL  A-BING. 


aLe 


<$ ff- 


1 . My  Lord,  my  Lord,  what  shall  Ido?  And  a heav’n  bell  a-ring  and  praise  God. 

N — N — Si 


-@——9 — 


Variation  second. 


=f 

n . 

- ts—\  ^ 

. >-==*£. 

^=r  s 

- 

ll 

- -s  e ® 

sc  S~*  . 

© 

® -i 

s 

'S  s 

Timmy*,  Timmy,  or  - phan  boy.  Kobert,  Kobert,  or  - phan  child. 


2 What  shall  I do  for  a hiding  place  ? And  a heav’n,  &c. 

3 I run  to  de  sea,  but  de  sea  run  drv. 

4 4 I run  to  de  gate,  but  de  gate  shut  fast. 

5 No  hiding  place  for  sinner  dere. 

6 Say  you  when  you  get  to  heaven  say  you  ’member  me. 

7 Kemember  me,  poor  fallen  soul/* 

8 Say  when  you  get  to  heaven  say  your  work  shall  prove. 

9 Your  righteous  Lord  shall  prove  ’em  well. 

10  Your  righteous  Lord  shall  find  you  out. 

11  He  cast  out  none  dat,  corne  byr  faith. 

12  You  look  to  de  Lord  wid  a tender  heart. 

13  I wonder  where  poor  Monday  dere. 

14  For  I am  gone  and  sent  to  hell. 

15  We  must  harkee  what  de  worldy  say. 

16  Say  Christmas  come  but  once  a year. 

17  Say  Sunday  come  but  once  a week. 


* When  I am  gone,  For  Jesus’  sake. 


21 


28. 


JINE  ’EM. 


••  I ; it " <•  •'.* 


v- 


P=tZ= 

V 


js--! Krj^S  dV  r 


-9 — 9- 


* 


On  Sunday  mornin’ I seek  my  Lord;  Jine ’em,  jine  ’em  oh!  Oh 

-|S — — ^ ] 


-h- 


y- 


J^^zzqriijSri^ 


* — ' s)-  - 


1*3; 


jine  ’em,  be  - lie  - ver,  jine  ’em  so;  Jine  ’em,  jine  ’em  oh! 


[For  other  words  see  “ Heaven  bell  a-ring,”  No.  27.  The  following  were  sung 
at  Hilton  Head,  probably  to  the  same  tune : 

Join,  brethren,  join  us  0, 

Join  us,  join  us  0. 

We  meet  to-night  to  sing  ana  pray  ; 

In  Jesus’  name  we’ll  sing  and  pray. 

A favorite  rowing  tune : apparently  a variation  of  “ Turn  sinner,”  No.  48.] 


29.  RAIN  FALL  AND  WET  BECCA  LAWTON. 


Rain  fall  and  wet*  Becca  Lawton,  f Oh Rain  fall  and 


\ V \ • 

17  J N IS  n J 

1 

\ V j*  \ v 

i /( 

\ 9 9 & $ 9 

49  fQ  I |S  • 

II  V 

& & sn  j • 

fj 

r & 

wet 

Bee  - ca 

Law  - 

ton, 

Oh! 

Brudder  t cry  ho 

- lyl 

8 V ft  * 

-a  Is 

n 

S 

- -J  - 

. ZX  _x 

• 

| . /J  . • 9 

& j 

am 

~ 1 

- -X  _v 

1 f(T\  . • 

- © 

✓ 

i/ 

& 

9 ‘ 

- 

*3  AU  A* 

V. 

LAh — L^_ 

1 jA 

-y 

-y 

-y 

m 

• ^ 

-9 a 

• 

1.  Been  § back  ho  - ly,  I must  come  slow  - ly  ; Oh!  Brudder  cry  ho  - lyl 


2 Do,  Becoa  Lawton,  come  to  me  yonder. 

3 Say,  brudder  Tony,  what  shall  I do  now? 

4 Beat  back  holy,  and  rock  salvation. 

* Sun  come  and  dry.  t All  de  member,  &c.  t We  all,  Believer,  &c.  § Beat,  Bent,  Rack. 

[“Who,”  says  Col.  Higginson,  “ Becky  Martin  was,  and  why  she.should  or 
should  not  be  wet,  and  whether  the  dryness  was  a reward  or  a penalty,  none 
could  say.  I got  the  impression  that,  in  either  case,  the  event  was  posthumous, 
and  that  there  was  some  tradition  of  grass  not  growing  over  the  grave  of  a 
sinner  ; but  even  this  was  vague,  and  all  else  vaguer.” 

Lt.  Col.  Trowbridge  heard  a story  that  “Peggy  Norton  was  an  old  prophetess, 
who  said  that  it  would  not  do  to  be  baptized  except  when  it  rained  ; if  the  Lord 


22 


was  pleased  with  those  who  had  been  ‘ in  the  wilderness,’  he  would  send  rain." 
Mr.  Tomlinson  says  that  the  song  always  ends  with  a laugh,  and  appears  there- 
fore to  be  regarded  by  the  negroes  as  mere  nonsense.  He  adds  that  when  it  is 
used  as  a rowing  tune,  at  the  words  “ Rack  back  hoi}  1 ” one  rower  reaches  over 
back  and  slaps  the  man  behind  him,  who  in  turn  does  the  same,  and  so  on.] 


80.  BOUND  TO  00. 


:=p. 

9 & @ m 9 9 » — s— 

—9 ® — 

=j — “ 

_ ^ 

-y— y — y — y-  ~y — y — y — -- 

— i — 

i 

' i 

~ 4 .vl  "a 

- - 

1.  I build  my  house  up  - on  de  rock,  O yes,  Lord!  No 


2-5# — 9 9 9 9 — 

=* s „ 

“) 

• 1 

i 

Y ft H p r~ 

1 v v v v 

==1-4 

L * ^ 

wind,  no  storm  can  blow  ’em  down,  O yes,  Lord ! 


March  on,  member,  Bound  to  go  ; Been  to  de  fer  - ry,  Bound  to  go  ; 


X [S  w 

• 

bSr  a aP4S  HS  -N- 

- ^ - 

- ^ a. — !S  & 

r — r— f 

I — i-i-S-L  Si?  H?  -Sa?  — 1 -1 

■ & 

#--eL  ^ 

1 * ^ 

Left  St.  He  - le  - na,  Bound  to  go  ; Brudder,  fare  you  well. 


2 I build  my  house  on  shiftin’  sand, 

De  first  wind  come  he  blow  him  down. 

3 I am  not  like  de  foolish  man, 

He  build  his  house  upon  de  sand. 

4 One  mornin’  as  I was  a walkin’  along, 
I saw  de  berries  a-hanging  down. 

5 I pick  de  berries  and  I suck  de  juice, 
He  sweeter  dan  de  honey  comb. 

I tuk  dejn  brudder,  two  by  two, 

I tuk  dem  sister,  tree  by  tree. 


Variation. 


23 


wind  nor  storm  shall  blow  dem  down,  O yes,  Lord ! 


r-Pfir — 

— 

iS — S 

— IS — h S — N 

J— ! 

0 ( 

C d . 

a 

— 1 — j ~ {— ? — H— 

<59 ah 

Lj 

March  on,  member,  Bound  to  go  ; March  on,  member,  Bound  to  go  ; 


=m 

;S 

— r — : \ 

m 

-=izr— 9 

S — S H r 

March  on,  mem-ber,  Bound  to  go ; Bid  ’em  fare  you  well. 


31.  MICHAEL  HOW  THE  BOAT  ASHOBE. 


— f 

— T ST — r~l  r~  \ — r 

? -jzr  \ n 

49  (tfff  fS  ■ J-  4B  I - .. 

£2  . 

-f — * 

TL 

a h 4 

a ©j  Sr  E Or  | i V 

A? 

L A.  q 

0 /.  I 0 

L_y U 

1.  Michael  row  de  boat  a - shore,  Hal  - le  - lu  - jah ! 


3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 
9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 


I wonder  where  my  mudder  deh  (there). 
See  my  mudder  on  de  rock  gwine  home. 
On  de  rock  gwine  home  in  Jesus'  name. 
Michael  boat  a music  boat. 

Gabriel  blow  de  trumpet  horn. 

0 you  mind  your  boastin’  talk. 

Boastin’  talk  will  sink  your  soul. 
Brudder,  lend  a helpin’  hand. 

Sister,  help  for  trim  dat  boat. 

Jordan  stream  is  wide  and  deep. 

Jesus  stand  on  t’  oder  side. 

1 wonder  if  my  maussa  deh. 

My  fader  gone  to  unknown  land. 

0 de  Lord  he  plant  his  garden  deh. 


24 


17  He  raise  de  fruit  for  you  to  eat. 

18  He  dat  eat  shall  neber  die. 

19  When  de  riber  overflow^ 

20  0 poor  sinner,  how  you  land? 

21  Riber  run  and  darkness  comm*. 

22  Sinner  row  to  save  your  soul. 

Words  from  Hilton  Head. 

Michael  haul  the  boat  ashore. 

Then  you'll  hear  the  horn  they  blow. 
Then  you’ll  hear  the  trumpet  sound. 
Trumpet  sound  the  world  around. 
Trumpet  sound  for  rich  and  poor. 
Trumpet  sound  the  jubilee. 

Trumpet  sound  for  you  and  me. 


32.  SAIL,  0 BELIEYER. 


Sail,  O my  brudder,  sail,  Sail  o - ver  yon  - der. 


[Col.  Higginson  gives  the  following  stanzas,  of  which  the  above  seems  to  be  a 
part ; but  unfortunately  he  is  unable  to  identify  the  music,  which  is  well  de- 
scribed by  the  terms  in  which  he  speaks  of  the  words — ■“  very  graceful  and 
lyrical,  and  with  more  variety  of  rhythm  than  usual : ” 

“ Bow  low,  Mary,  bow  low,  Martha, 

For  Jesus  come  and  lock  de  door, 

And  carry  de  keys  away. 

Sail,  sa  1,  over  yonder, 

And  view  de  promised  land, 

For  Jesus  come,  &c. 

Weep,  O Mary,  bow  low,  Martha, 

For  Jesus  come,  &c. 

Sail,  sail,  my  true  believer  ; 

Sail,  sail,  over  yonder ; 

Mary,  bow  low,  Martha,  bow  low, 

< For  Jesus  come  and  lock  de  door, 

And  carry  de  keys  away.”  ] 


25 


1.  O rock  o’  ju  - bi  - lee,  poor  fal  - len  soul,*  O Lord,  fde 


rock  o’  ju  - bi  - lee ! 2.  O rock  o’  ju  - bi  - lee,  and  I 


y 

s 

S v 

— 

/ 

% H 

^ c ^ 

- 

p 

— 

IT? 

V ® • 3 S 

A 1 

& M nv 

v v . !S  JS  \ 

V 

1 * * e 

& • $ 

■ &- — & Jh  J* P- 

rock  ’em  all  a - bout,  O Lord,  de  rock  o’  ju  - bi  - lee ! 


3 Stand  back,  Satan,  let  me  come  by. 

4 0 come,  titty  Katy,  let  me  go. 

5 I have  no  time  for  stay  at  home. 

6 My  Fader  door  wide  open  now. 

7 Mary,  girl,  you  know  my  name. 

8 Look  dis  way  an’  you  look  dat  way. 

9 Do  wind  blow  East,  he  blow  from  Jesus. 

* To  mercy  seat,  To  de  corner  o’  de  world.  f Yes. 


34.  STABS  BEGIN  TO  FALL. 


I 

tink 

I hear  my  brud 

-der 

.*  say, 

Call 

de  na 

- tion 

P- 

=fsz 

0 

0 

0 

JS 

— p. \Z 

py^  - 

d 

— M 

P 

% 

V- 

-$ 

— ^ 

— * 

UL 

great 

and 

small ; I 

look 

- ee 

on 

de 

God’s 

right  . 

26 


m. 


a — »- 


S S \ 

£ 3=r  s 


d 


a 


-N--K 


-& — #- 


"P= 


-b 


*— M—\ * 


hand, When  de  stars  be-  gin  to  fall. 


Oh  what  a mournin’  (sis-  ter), 


aS 


jL 


-V 


s>- 


-& 


N—  - 


Oh 


what  a mourn  - in’  (brud  - der),  Oh  what  a 


£ 


i — -JS- 


-N- 


-9- 


-N- 


mourn  - in’,  When  de  stars  be  - gin 

* Titty  Nelly,  De  member,  &c. 


to 


fall. 


35. 


ifSEjp zn_  . . 


KING  EMANUEL. 

N Nt-h ~r r*r — \ 


a)  • '& 


N~: 


1.  O my  King  E - ma  - nu  - el,  my  E - ma  - nu  - el  a - 


^S=!N 


:V 


VF 


=f 


A 




- bove,  Sing  glo  - ry  to  my  King  E - ma  - nu  - el.  2.  If  you 


3 If  you  touch  one  string,  den  de  whole  heaven  ring. 

4 0 the  great  cherubim,  0 de  cherubim  above. 

5 0 believer,  ain’t  you  glad  dat  your  soul  is  converted? 

[This  hymn — words  and  melody — bears  all  the  marks  of  white  origin.  Wo 
have  not,  however,  been  able  to  find  it  in  any  hymn-book,  and  therefore  retain 
it,  as  being  a favorite  at  Port  Royal.] 


27 


36.  SATAN’S  CAMP  A-FIRE. 


De  sun  give  a light*  in  de  heaven  all  round,  De 


[/  K \ k 

\ p n r — 

A j n $ S v \ Jk  . 

m $ m 

<*  -J>  ' V V . 

sun  give  a light  in  de  heaven  all  round,  De 


sun  give  a light  in  de  heaven  all  round,  Why 


-Nr 


ja=( 


Jt 


1 


■v- 


V 


don’t  you  give  up  de  world?  My  brud-der,  don’t  you 


rTT ft  - \ 

\ \ 

■ *1 

ib  5 - r » ^ 

C p \ \ 

\V  r \j  / $ i 

a s r 

L ii 

: @ @ L, 

give  up  de  world  ? My  brud  - der,  don’t  you 


28 


j=£ 


5 


give  up  de  world  ? My  brud  - der,  don’t  you 


<i 


E 


3 


give  up  de  world?  We  must  leave  de  world  be  • bind. 
* De  moon  give  a light,  De  starry  crown. 

[The  first  movement  of  this  air  is  often  sung  in  the  minor  key.j 


38. 


JESUS  ON  THE  WATER-SIDE. 


TOE 


0 ® — 0 


-1-3 


3: 


g4^~h — b ~ 5~F — \? 

r v r v ? 

Heaven  bell  a - ring,  I know  de  road,  Heaven  bell  a-ring,  I know  de  road  ; 


fe 


-hs S — ! ® & 0 \ 


^ — 0 

-0 0 

-0  0 *■» 


-0 & 


Heaven  bell  a - ring,  I know  de  road,  Je  - sus  sit  - tin’  on  de 


Ui. 


jslLzjsl 


■S-=-  - 


'/■ \/- 


wa  - ter  - side. 


Do  come  a - long,  do  let  us  go, 


Nzzfcisz 


HO 


=V 


fc=fc=nv=:£=:: 

1^— — £ 


Ifl.— 


Do  come  a - long,  do  let  us  go,  Do  come  a - long,  do 


29 


39. 


I WISH  I BEEN  HEBE. 


sis- ter,  you  fol  - low  Je  - sus,  My  brudder,  you  fol  - low  Je  - sus,  To 

£ 


535 


a.  e 


5 


4 - — 0 


4 


v— 


y- 


v- 


-&  / . 

I wish  I been  dere,  To  climb  Ja  - cob’s 
yonder, 


fight  un  - til  I die. 


i 


s 


r* 


=S-=* 


4 


* 


lad  - der,  I wish  I been  dere,  To  wear  de  star  - ry  crown. 

yonder, 


40. 


BUILD  A HOUSE  IN  PARADISE. 


m 


fader  build  a house 


/ i 

11  & a a 

J 

1st 


2d 


y- 


N- 


iS: 


=4 




0 . na  build  a bouse.  in  Pa  - ra  - dise,  Pa  - ra  - dise. 


X- 


3 


m=¥=3- 


■*i- 


Build  it  wid  - out 


a 


ham  - mer  or 


nail, 

jS— ; 


X 


s=f§- 


;V 


JBL 


4-v 


Build  it  wid  - out 


a 


ham  - mer  or  a nail. 


30 


41. 


I KNOW  WHEN  I’M  GOING  HOME. 


fc 


2 


-O 9 


£ 


v-v—v—v- 


•y-y- 


•— =1- 


£ 


Old  Satan  told  me  to  my  face, 


O yes,  Lord,  De 


V-N 


ffi-  - }/ ^ 


3=^ 


N— N- 


azziiz: 


God  I seek  I nev-er  find, 


O yes.  Lord.  True  be- 


g a g <i s ? 


la 


jv 


:* 


- liev  - er,  I know  when  I gwine  home, 


True  be- 


r-m- 

^ v JS 

!S— S — r 

• 

? j IN  - S'  a 

^ ni  j " 

JS  S \ 

-*1  • 

@ @ ® e 

J 1 a 

« 9 • C 

1 . 

M 

s_!_ d* 

# 

• 

- liev-er,  I know  when  I gwine  home,  I been  a - fraid  to  die. 


42. 


I’M  A-TEOUBLE  IN  BE  MINE. 


t 


2 


A — A — A — A — 9 — 9— 


V- 


9- 


¥-¥~7-¥- 


I am  a-trou-ble  in  de  mind,  O I am  a -trouble  in  de 


@ — 

- f—w  m 

-X— 

i&E 

• 1 

1L— 4- 

/ 

_4—  W 1 

- * *-•  i 

mind;  I ask  my  Lord  what  shall  I do,  I am  a -trouble  in  de 


31 


F- 

4. 

• 

— p — 

-p—‘ 

—p—p— 

- p— 

—p — 

— £ p — 

p—  jp 

r'vri  ^ 

-v— 5 — 

jL 

V- 

y 

y. . / ~ 

“pr— t 

p — W ' 

mind. 

V - 

I’m 

V 

a - 

V V 

trou  - bio 

V 

in 

V 

de 

V 

mind,  What 

you 

1 — 9~b — m — © 

M 

- - JB  . • 

r7r;  |,  r r h a m 

m m m $ j 

. p_ 

p_ p p p L 

G H “1 

V)  f r _ L* 

■JL  \JL  U. 

r • 

'/  / . / / V V 

doubt  for?*  I’m  a - trou-ble  in  do  mind. 


• Titty  Rosy,  Brudder  Johnny,  Come  along  dere. 


43.  TRAVEL  ON. 


1 — frrhn — y — y 

V V 

\ 3T  iNl. 

r/fn  ^ r ■ 

® us  |V.  fs  p 

| 

e P'ff 

jt. p p J - 

1 r d»  ' /a 

1 

BP 

1 fifcl— 

1— 0 W - .* 

rTvti  4^®*  ® 



L| ^ 

L/ L 

Sister  Ro-sy,  you  get  to  heaven  be  - fore  I go,  Sis  - ter,  you 


r | 

9- 

b~. — p— 1 -r- 

- \ * 

_ Ik 

• 

” 0 

m 

nn  <h  m p 

P & 

lit 

rd 

<9?  -j — - — ~1 

— 1 

w 

WTT 

m 1 1 i 

__  r __  r 

p u 

saasj 

- 

- - \/  V 

L-r 

look  out  for  me,  I’m  on  de  way.  Trabel  on,  tra-bel 


on,  you  heaven-bom  * , soldier,  Tra  - bel  on,  tra-belj 


on,  Go  hear  - de  what  my  Je  - sus  say. 


• Heaven-bound, 


32 


44. 


i 


SEE. 


ARCHANGEL  OPEN  THE  BOOK. 

t 


•fiP- 


£ 


e: 


g»* 


ax  all  dem  brud  - der*  roun’,  Brudder,  * why 


- 

— rj. f- "" 

_ ....  m...  .pp 

in 

^ ^ m.  . 

. ti  tr  1= 

Eli 


oJ 


can’t  yon  pray  for  me  ? 


s 

-f0 — 0~ 


ax  all  dem 


_C2_ 


brudder  ronn’,  Brudder,  why  can’t  you  pray  for  me  ? 


1.  I’m 


il 


:®TTL 


=]^=!v 


gwine  to  my  heaven,  I’m  gwine  home,  Arch-an-gel  o - pen  de  door;  I’m 


fit 


( — H- 

— <gg- 


£21 


H h 


I I 


k©- 


£21 


gwine  to  my  heaven,  I’m  gwine  home;  Arch-an  - gel  o pen  de  door. 

2 Brudder,  tuk  off  your  knapsack,  I’m  gwine  home; 

Archangel  open  de  door. 

* Sister. 


45. 


MY  BODY  BOCK  ’LONG  FEYER. 


1 T 

z&z  pzzdznzi 

A.  i — fg? <2? 


^ — S — i- 


«/ 


*P- 


j-— $3*  — aSP- 


^ 


fc-- 


-«S*— «©>- 


la"*' 


1.  Wai’,  my  brudder,  * bet-ter  true  believe,  f Better  true  be  long  time 


T7 


-<3> fiJT- 


get  o - ver  cros-ces  ; Wai’,  my  sis  - ter,  bet-ter  true  be-lievc,  An’  ’e 


33 


get  up  to  heaven  at  last. 


0 my  bo- dy  rock  long  fev-er,  01 


1“ 

~ — | —i 

U'Z 

0* — - — — — — 

tE:  — 

— — ■ — 1 

. 1'  - ■ - — . " "Sap  J‘  1 

<4  n*  - h iV 

r\V 

& & \ . 

o 

>&>  r wr  & 

wid  a pain  in  ’e  head ! I wish  I been  to  de 

n- — , — — t- 

■*>  -* s' - K- 

r: 

_ l '»  • 

\z 

A 2 

m 

1 IbP-  IB?  .1  -1 

\—S- — * 

±1 

king-dom,  to  sit  a - long  side  o’  my  Lord  l 


2 By  de  help  ob  de  Lord  we  rise  up  again, 
0 de  Lord  he  comfort  de  sinner ; 

By  de  help  ob  de  Lord  we  rise  up  again, 
An’  well  get  to  heaven  at  last. 


• All  de  member,  t Long  time  seeker  ’gin  to  believe. 


O my  body’s  racked  wid  de  fe-ve-er,  My  head  rack’d  wid  de 


[This  is  one  of  the  most  striking  of  the  Port  Royal  spirituals,  and  is 
shown  by  a comparison  with  No.  93  to  be  one  of  the  most  widely  spread 
of  all  the  African  hymns.  It  is  hard  to  explain  every  word  of  tie  intro- 
duction, but  “ long  time  get  over  crosses”  is  ot  course  the  “ long  time  waggin* 
o’  er  de  crossin’  " of  the  Virginia  hymn.] 


46, 


BELL  BA  BING, 


4 

P^=\ 

j 

- — yEP  r~ 

Li 1 1 — 

_ 42 

<£? 

— 

M • ai  m a*  : 

I know  member,  know  Lord,  I know  I yed  - de  de 


s 

: 1 , 41 

• 

<9 — 

— 1 , : 

. ! • I 

4 — ( & — 

-aa# ffl* 1— - 

V 

1 — T. & 

. 1 i 1 | 1 

& k 1 

& — u 

bell  da  ring.  1.  Want  to  go  to  meet-ing,  Bell  da  ring, 


f*  ~T* 

-*r-\  “i— 

1 

■ — i p-“ 

-J 

t at  m 

m & 

-a 

■J  =1  : 

r P 

-jj— J — ® 

_v 

u ■ 

• 1 

ZT 

Want  to  go  to  meet-ing,  Bell  da  ring.  2.  (Say)  Road  so  storm -y,* 


n — i 

-=]  1 1-. 

jF 

F 

^ ^ — 

— — rfgsi  ■■■ ^gg— — — 4$ 

vt 

* 

L r-  i-  h 1 — 

Bell  da  ring,  (Say)  Road  so  storm  - y,  Bell  da  ring. 


0 

3 I can;t  get  to  meetin’.  f 

4 De  church  raos’  ober. 

5 De  heaven-bell  a heaven-bell. 

6 De  heaven-bell  I gwine  home. 

7 I shout  for  de  heaven-bell. 

8 Heaven  ’nough  for  me  one. 

9 (Brudder)  liain’t  you  a member? 

* Boggy,  Tedious.  t ’ciety,  Lecter,  Praise-house. 

* [The  following  words  were  sung  in  Col.  Higginson’s  regiment* 

Do  my  brudder,  0 yes,  yes,  member, 

De  bell  done  ring. 

You  can’t  get  to  heaben 

When  de  bell  done  ring. 

If  you  want  to  get  to  heaven, 

Fo’  de  bell,  etc 

You.  had  better  follow  Jesus, 

Fo'  de  bell,  etc. 

0 yes,  my  Jesus,  yes,  I member, 

De  bell  etc. 

0 come  in,  Christians, 

Fo’  de  bell,  etc. 

For  the  gates  are  all  shut, 

When  de  bell,  etc. 

And  you  can’t  get  to  heaben 
When  de  bell,  etc. 


35 


Col.  Higginson  suggests  that  this  refrain  may  have  originated  in  Virginia, 
and  gone  South  with  our  army,  because  “ * done’  is  a Virginia  shibboleth,  quite 
distinct  from  the  * been'  which  replaces  it  in  South  Carolina.  In  the  proper 
South  Carolina  dialect,  would  have  been  substituted  ‘ De  bell  been-a-ring.’ 
We  have,  however,  shown  in  the  preface,  that  “ done”  is  used  on  St.  Helena; 
and  at  any  rate  the  very  general  use  of  this  refrain  there  in  the  present  tense  > 
Bell  da  ring,”  would  indicate  that  it  was  of  local  origin,  while  we  have  never 
met  with  anything  at  all  like  it  in  any  other  part  of  the  country.  As  given 
above,  it  is  one  of  the  most  characteristic  “ shouting”  tunes. 

In  singing  “ Heaven-bell  a heaven-bell,”  the  v and  n were  so  run  together 
that  the  words  sounded  like  “ hum-bell  a hum-bell,”  with  a strong  emphasis  and 
dwelling  upon  the  m.] 


47. 


PRAY  AIL  DE  MEMBER. 


*-  e- 


22 


1.  Pray  all  de  mem-ber,*  O Lord!  Pray  all  de  mem-ber, 


IP 


± 


-C2_  _ 


Yes,  my  Lord ! 2.  Pray  a lit  - tie  Ion  - ger,  O 


Lord! 


- r-*  r , ^ 

H m P 7 

f -M''  f«  * — 

W ^ h-  P 

* 


O 


Lord!  Je  - ri  - cho  da  wor  - ry  me,  Yes,  my  Lord  1 


4 J ericho,  Jericho. 

5 I been  to  Jerusalem. 

6 Patrol  aroun*  me. 

7 Tank  God  he  no  ketch  me. 

8 Went  to  de  meetin\ 

9 Met  brudder  Hacless  [Hercules], 

10  Wha’  d’ye  tink  he  tell  me? 

11  Tell  me  for  to  turn  back. 

12  Jump  along  Jericho. 

* True  believer. 

[This  also  is  a very  characteristic  shouting  tune.] 


36 


/ 

/ 


48.  TURN,  SINNER,  TURN  0 ! 


n — 

_ — > — s — i — 

A* 

* / 4 

/sea  i@ 

I P 

— 

r • p p » 9 ^1 

Ip$j ip#) 

; V ¥ ^ 1 

1.  Turn,  sin  - ner,  turn  to  - day,  Turn,  sin  - ner,  turn  0 ! 

2.  Turn,  0 sin  - ner,  de  worT  da  gwine,  Turn,  sin  - ner,  turn  0 ! 


Turn,  sin  - ner,  turn  to  - day,  Turn,  sin  - ner,  turn  0 ! 
Turn,  0 sin  - ner,  de  worl’  da  gwine,  Turn,  sin  - ner,  turn  0 ! 




9-# — — = 

s 

^ 

JUV 

I 

w* fast'  ^ 

aar  fasy  i p'  —i 

v.- 

) 

¥ 

¥ 

m l. 

-M  IjiJ  1 

—n 

¥ ¥ w l 

3.  W ait  not  for  to  - morrow’s  sun,  Turn,  sin  - ner,  turn  0 ! 

4.  To-morrow’s  sun  will  sure  to  shine,  Turn,  sin  - ner,  turn  0! 


p 

r — i 

s 

N ^ 

* 

*5 

=3s=^'s==£— 

fr-n 

-jc 

A. gm 

4SB 

ost Of ® 

9 

si 

~~W 

' d * — -& 

t 

Wait  not  for  to  - morrow’s  sun,  Turn,  sin  - ner,  turn  0! 
To-morrow’s  sun  will  sure  to  shine,  Turn,  sin  - ner,  turn  0 ! 


5.  The  sun  may  shine,  but  on  your  grave,  Turn,  sinner,  turn  0 ! The 


N- 


3E 


sun  may  shine,  but  on  your  grave,  Turn,  sin- ner,  turn  0! 


3d  var. 


6.  Hark!  I hear  dem  sin  - ner  say,  Turn,  sin  - ner,  turn  0! 

7.  If  you  get  to  heaven  I’ll  get  there  too,  Turn,  sin  - ner,  turn  01 


37 


Hark!  I hear  dein  sin  - ner  say,  Turn,  sin  - ner,  turn  0! 
If  you  get  to  heaven  I’ll  get  there  too,  Turn,  sin  - ner,  turn  0 ! 


8.  0 sin  - ner,  you  make  mis  - take,  Turn,  sin  - ner,  turn  0! 

9.  While  de  lamp  hold  out  to  burn,  Turn,  sin  - ner,  turn  0! 

10.  De  wile’  sin  - ner  may  re  - turn,  Turn,  sin  - ner,  turn  0 ! 


n — i 

K is; 

s; N— 

^ 

.. 

s — 

* 1 

K s 

t 

.fJ  >*> 

ft 

m # 

W w 

M 

fj 

0  sin  - ner,  you  make  mis  - take,  Turn,  sin  - ner,  turn  0 ! 

While  de  lamp  hold  out  to  burn,  Turn,  sin  - ner,  turn  0 ! 

De  wile’  sin  - ner  may  re  - turn,  Turn,  sin  - ner,  turn  0 ! 


The  following  words  are  sung  to  the  same  tune  : 

1 Bro’  Joe,  you  ought  to  know  my  name — Hallelujah. 

2 My  name  is  written  in  de  book  ob  life. 

3 If  you  look  in  de  book  you’ll  fin’  ’em  dar. 

4 One  mornin’  I was  a walkin’  down. 

5 I saw  de  berry  a-hinging  down. 

6 (Lord)  I pick  de  berry,  an’  I suck  de  juice. 

7 Jes’  as  sweet  as  de  honey  in  de  comb. 

8 I wonder  where  fader  Jimmy  gone. 

9 My  fader  gone  to  de  yonder  worl’. 

10  You  dig  de  spring  dat  nebber  dry. 

11  De  more  I dig  ’em,  de  water  spring. 

12  De  water  spring  dat  nebber  dry. 

[This  is  the  most  dramatic  of  all  the  shouts ; the  tune  varies  with  the  words, 
commonly  about  as  given  above,  and  the  general  effect  is  very  pathetic.  The 
words  and  tunes  are  constantly  interchanged  : thus,  for  instance,  the  6th  verse 
might  be  sung  to  the  second  variation,  and  the  8th,  9th  and  10th,  to  the  third.] 


) 


38 


49. 


MY  ARMY  CROSS  OYER. 


~ir#~ — -1 

A _.l± 

— 

9 



~r 

i 

' — 

— i 



-9 

gj) — 

-9 

— & 

C- s 

9 

— ^ — m 

F# 

m. 


± 


3 


d ' . 

brud  - der,  tik  keer  Sa  - tan,  My  ar  - my  cross  o - ber. 

2 Satan  bery  busy. 

3 Wash  ’e  face  in  ashes. 

4 Put  on  de  leder  apron. 

5 Jordan  riber  rollin’. 

6 Cross  ’em,  I tell  ye,  cross  ’em. 

7 Cross  Jordan  (danger)  riber. 

[The  following  version,  probably  from  Sapelo  Id.,  Georgia,  was  sung  in 
Col.  Higginson’s  regiment : 

i 


T 


E 


I.  My  ar  - my  cross  o - ber,  My  ar  - my  cross  o - ber,  0 


& 

il 


m 


&S> — -gjgjf 


w 1 — w 


Pharaoh’s  ar  - my  drownded,  My  ar  - my  cross  o - ber.  My 




1 — 

1 — 

r 

!® 

jam 

sd 

j&a 

*emt 



L $k 

i_4£ 

<a!> 

«8» 

t J 


ar  - my,  my  ar  - my,  my  ar  - my  cross  o - ber. 


2 We’ll  cross  de  riber  Jordan. 

3 We’ll  cross  de  danger  water, 

4 We’ll  cross  de  mighty  Myo. 

[On  the  word  “ Myo,”  Col.  Higginson  makes  the  following  note  : “I  could  get 
no  explanation  of  the  ‘mighty  Myo,’  except  that  one  of  the  old  men  thought  it 
meant  the  river  of  death.  Perhaps  it  is  an  African  word.  In  the  Cameroon 
dialect,  ‘ Mawa  ’ signifies  ‘ to  die.’  ” Lt.  Col.  Trowbridge  feels  very  confident 
that  it  is  merely  a corruption  of  “ bayou.”] 


39 


50. 

4* 


JOIN  THE  ANGEL  BAND. 


r=¥ 


^ ^ . j^. 


1.  If  you  look  up  de  road  you  see  fa  - der  Mose  - y, 


-& — <& 1&- 


t_ 

Join  de  an  - gel  band,  If  you  look  up  de  road  you 


— 

/£ fu*  ^ K 

— N— 

p" ~ • 

i ^ — * 5= 

\ i . ...  « ” -i  — 

' § 

V 

1 E E <d & J 

— w — u — 

see 


fa  - der  Mose  - y,  Join  de  an  - gel  band. 


2 Do,  fader  Mosey,  gader  your  army. 

3 0 do  mo’  soul  gader  togeder. 

4 0 do  join  ’em,  join  ’em  for  Jesus. 

5 0 do  join  ’em,  join  ’em  archangel. 

The  following  variation  of  the  first  line,  with  the  words  that  follow,  was  sung 
in  Charleston  : 


r-m 

m — — 

* 

% 

1 

i , 

m 

-V 

— 

m 

0 join  ’em  all,  join  for  Je  - sus. 


0 join  ’em  all,  join  for  Jesus,  Join  Jerusalem  Band. 

Sister  Mary,  stan’  up  for  Jesus. 

Sixteen  souls  set  out  for  Heaven. 

0 brudder  an’  sister,  come  up  for  Heaven. 

Daddy  Peter  set  out  for  Jesus. 

Ole  Maum  Nancy  set  out  for  Heaven. 

[“  The  South  Carolina  negroes  never  say  Aunty  and  Uncle  to  old  persons,  but 
Daddy  and  Maumer,  and  all  the  white  people  say  Daddy  and  Maumer  to  old 
black  men  and  women  ” — A.  M.  B. 

This  is  no  doubt  correct  as  regards  South  Carolina  in  general.  I am 
sure  that  I heard  “ Uncle  ” and  “Aunty  ” at  Port  Royal,  and  I do  not  remember 
hearing  “ Daddy  ” and  “ Maumer.” — W.  F.  A.] 


40 


• 61.  I AW  SATAN  HAD  A BACE. 


-xf* 

m . . 

w 

kt 

• m 

■ 1^  ' 

V 

) 

— 

* — 

n =» 

c / 

1.  I an’  Sa  - tan  had  a race,  Hal  - le  - In,  hal  - le  - lu, 


I an’  Sa  - tan  had  a race,  Hal  - le  - In,  hal  - le  - lu 


2 Win  de  race  agin  de  course. 

3 Satan  tell  me  to  my  face 

4 He  will  break  my  kingdom  down. 

5 Jesus  whisper  in  my  heart 

6 He  will  build  ’em  up  again. 

7 Satan  mount  de  iron  grey  ; 

8 Ride  half  way  to  Pilot-Bar. 

9 Jesus  mount  de  milk-white  horse. 

10  Say  you  cheat  my  fader  children, 

11  Say  you  cheat  ’em  out  of  glory. 

12  Trouble  like  a gloomy  cloud 

13  Gader  dick  an’  tunder  loud. 


41 


52.  SHALL  I DIE? 


I ■ 

? 

m — 

- s?  - — r ■> — i — 

/T 

zm  w 22 

- r'  " 

TX  7 p 

i 

-j ( | 

V . L 

j 1 - \ /Q 

| v: 

J 



1.  Be  - liev- 

1 l 

er,  0 shall  I die  ? 0 my  ar  - my,  shall  I die  ? 

7 

* l T 

i_  t*! ® ^ ^ 

<s©  , 

asr  i i 

d 

I r**  ~Z]  " TZj  r 

J K&r 

! L_4__ 

i 

u 

2.  Je  - sus  die,  shall  I die  ? Die  on  the  cross,  shall  I die  ? 


3 Die,  die,  die,  shall  I die  ? 

Jesus  da  coming,  shall  I die  ? 

4 Run  for  to  meet  him,  shall  I die  ? 

Weep  like  a weeper,  shall  I die? 

5 Mourn  like  a mourner,  shall  I die  ? 

Cry  like  a crier,  shall  I die  ? 

[This  shout  was  a great  favorite  on  the  Capt.  John  Fripp  plantation;  its  sim- 
plicity, wildness  and  minor  character  suggest  a native  African  origin.  Some- 
times the  leading  singer  would  simply  repeat  the  words,  mournfully:  “ Die,  die, 
die,”— sometimes  he  would  interpolate  such  an  inappropriate  line  as  “Jump 
along,  jump  along  dere.”] 


58. 


WHEN  WE  HO  MEET  AGAIN. 


ft 


9^^ 


When  we  do  meet  a - gain,  When  we  do  meet  a - gain,  When  we 

fr — 


W- 


W- 


* 


do  meet  a - gain,  ’Twill  be  no  more  to  part. 


*=> fa 


tF 


"" 


Broth -er  Bil  - ly,  fare  you  well,  Broth- er  Bil  - ly, 


n- 





Ik. 

m j® 

kj 

4 

N 

\=t= 



0 

^ 

&P 



— m 

4 ■■ 

if* ■ ■*?'  • <0 

4- 

L— ® — j- 

fare  you  well,  We’ll  sing  hal  - le  - lu  - jah,  when  we  do  meet  a - gain. 


42 


2 0 the  city  light  the  lamp,  the  white  man  he  will  sold, 
And  I wish  I been  there,  etc. 

3 0 the  white  marble  stone,  and  the  white  marble  stone. 

* Believer,  Patty,  etc. 


[This  song  was  described  to  ns  as  “ too  pretty.”  The  following  minor  varia- 
tion might  be  called  “ too  much  prettier.” 


* — N" 

— 

— 

s — s: — 

V 

^ 

^ 

f 

V Q 

£ T* 

IT 

* Tj  j 

m 

v 

udl 

SB? • 



0 my  sis  - ter  light  de  lamp,  and  de  lamp  light  de  road ; I 


ri 

h- 

. 

* 

A 

fee, 

^ IT  w 

I E 

^ 

V 

) 

L„.  y 

^ aJ 

k— J5-1 

jM. M 

& 

• I3S 

wish  1 been  dere  for  to  hear  - de  Jor  - dan  roll. 


I can’t  stan’  de  fire,  (dear  sister)  I can’t  stan’  de  fire,  (°  Lord)  I 


H> — | 

gSQ 

*, 

— ft  — 

s — 

— 

xn 

" f-  ns  p r r 

& 

— i m ~ i m 

P* P» w 

\N  ' 

can’t  stan’ de  fire,  While  Jordan  da  roll  so  swif’.  (Tiddy  ’Rinah.) 


[Probably  only  a fragment  of  a longer  piece.  The  following  variation  was 
snng  at  Coffin’s  Point : 


Can’t  stand  the  fire,  Can’t  stand  the  fire,  Can’t,  etc.  (0  Lord,  I)  Can’t  stand  the  fire. 


56. 


MEET,  0 LORD ! 


43 


9 m—  - 

•=■*-  -_L 

.w  ',*■ 

ifei. \ 

— m 

L:  Ij  . II: 

In  dat  mornin’  all  day,  When  Je  - sus  de  Chris’  been  born. 


2 Moon  went  into  de  poplar  tree, 

An’  star  went  into  blood  ; 

In  dat  mornin’,  etc. 

* i.  e.  the  anointing  vial. 

[This  was  taught  me  by  a boy  from  Hilton  Head  Island,  whom  the  rebel  Gen. 
Drayton  left  holding  his  horse  “when  gun  shoot  at  Bay  Pint.”  The  General 
never  returned  to  reclaim  his  horse,  which  afterwards  came  into  the  possession 
of  a friend  of  mine,  and  was  famed  for  swiftness.  I had  several  fine  rides  upon 
“ milk-white  ” Drayton. — W.  F.  A.] 


57.  WAIT,  MR.  MACKRIGHT. 


44 


58. 

Variation. 


EARLY  IN  THE  MORNING. 


1 


fer 


IIeLJe 

eJ 


>- 


fa- 

fa fa 

fa 

fa K- 



as s as tev 

m 

*r=rm 

* 

m 



K 

s* — 

E5 

*= 

^ & 1® P 

j I meet  lit  - tie  Ro  - sa 
'*  ( An’  I ax  her,  how  you  do 


ear  - ly  iu 
my 


de 


morimi, 
dar  - ter  ? 


0 Je  - ru  - sa  - lem,  ear  - ly  in  de  morn  - in’; 
0 Je  - ru  - sa  - lem,  ear  - ly  in  de  morn  - in’. 


j 9 

fe — 

r— ==fe==fe===: 

m~r- 

w 

-j® . . . a® 

m — sy 

$9  • 

"tpK- 

T 

$ 

4 

2 

¥■ 

-I4 

B- 

-U — 

4— 

4— 

* — 

Walk  ’em  eas-y  round  de  heaben,  Walk  ’em  easy  round  de  heaben, 


r=f 

> — 

OB  'a® ' 

m-  .-  ^ 

S ■ S'-  fa 

y 

* 



-p25- w? & ^ — 

V- -j-r-J 

! P*  4R&  • 

^ id — as* — 

Walk  ’em  easy  round  de  heaben,  Till  all  living  may  join  dat  band.* 


2 I meet  my  mudder  early  in  de  mornin’, 

An’  I ax  her,  how  you  do  my  mudder  ? 

Walk  ’em  easy,  etc. 

3 I meet  brudder  Robert  early  in  de  mornin’; 

I ax  brudder  Robert,  how  you  do,  my  sonny? 

4 I meet  titta-Wisaf  early  in  de  mornin’; 

I ax  titta-Wisa,  how  you  do,  my  darter  ? 

* 0 shout  glory  till  ’em  join  dat  ban’,  f i.  e.  sister  Louisa. 

[“  This  shout  is  accompanied  by  the  peculiar  shuffling  dance,  except  in  the 
chorus,  where  they  walk  around  in  slow  time,  keeping  step  to  their  song.”— 
J.  S.  R.] 


* 


59. 


HAIL,  MARY 


45 


— 

9^5 

' ' | ' 



fW 

— 

53 

Tr 

■\  * t ; 

& 

J® 

IS 

2. ^ — 

Sat 

6& 

r~  '<®J 

L m 

I want  some  valiant  soldier  here,  I want  some  valiant 


fj 


-g=E=£ 


mu. 


soldier  here,  I want  some  valiant  sol  - dier  here,  To 


m 


Ml 


£= 


m(T3  f & -~m 


Z-Z 


22 


£t 


help  me  bear  de  cross.  0 hail,  Mary,  hail ! 0 hail,  Mary, 


*5~ 

^ • _ Mk 

l 

« 1 — 



W 2 2 

f j 


hail ! 0 hail,  Ma  - ry,  hail ! To  help  me  bear  de  cross. 


[“  T fancied,”  says  Col.  Higginson,  “that  the  original  reading  might  have  been 
‘soul,’  instead  of  ‘ soldier,’ — with  some  other  syllable  inserted,  to  fill  out  the 
metre, — and  that  the  ‘ Hail,  Mary,’  might  denote  a Roman  Catholic  origin,  as  I 
had  several  men  from  St.  Augustine  who  held  in  a dim  way  to  that  faith.” 

In  Mr.  Spaulding’s  article  in  the  Continental  Monthly,  a tune  nearly  identical 
with  this  is  given  with  words  almost  the  same  as  those  of  “ No  more  peck  of 
corn,”  No.  64,  the  whole  as  an  introduction  to  the  second  part  of  ‘’Trouble  of 
the  World,”  No.  10 — a curious  illustration  of  the  way  in  which  the  colored  peo- 
ple make  different  combinations  of  their  own  tunes  at  different  times  :] 


* 


dv 


'9r 


-K= 


1.  Done  wid  dri  - ber’s  dri  - bin’,  Done  wid  dri  - ber’s 


Mr- i 

— rassS 

* 

— i 

^ 

hs 

m — 

% 

— pj$> — 



-d — P— 

1 & 

I^I is> 

=g?-T— - j—' 

4= 



dri  - bin’,  Done  wid  driber’s  dri  - bin’,  Roll,  Jordan,  roll. 


2 Done  wid  massa’s  hollerin’, 

3 Done  wid  missus’  scoldin’. 


46 


60. 


NO  MORE  RAIN  FALL  FOR  WET  YOU. 


& 


1.  No  more  rain  fall  for  wet  you,  Hal  - le  - lu,  hal  - le  - 


- lu,  No  more  rain  fall  for  wet  you,  Hal  - le  - lu  - jah. 


2 No  more  sun  shine  for  burn  you. 

3 No  more  parting  in  de  kingdom. 

4 No  more  backbiting  in  de  kingdom. 

5 Every  day  shall  be  Sunday. 


61.  I WANT  TO  GO  HOME. 

In  chanting  style. 


IzE 


1221 


1221 


-ZZFZi 


1.  Dere’s  no  rain  to  | wet  you.||  0|  yes,  I want  to  go  | home, ||  Want  to  go  jhome.jj 


2 Dere’s  no  sun  to  burn  you, — 0 yes,  etc. 

3 Dere’s  no  hard  trials. 

4 Dere’s  no  whips  a-crackin\ 

5 Dere’s  no  stormy  weather. 

6 Dere’s  no  tribulation. 

7 No  more  slavery  in  de  kingdom. 

8 No  evil-doers  in  de  kingdom. 

9 All  is  gladness  in  de  kingdom. 


[YerBe  7 was  added  after  the  Emancipation  Proclamation. — J.  S.  R.] 


47 

62.  GOOD-BYE,  BROTHER. 


. 

SHJ 

1C 



—Z 

7T 

BP' 

.. 

— Gsa — 

TP 

v-H — - 

— id — 

-t~- 

jSS 

_®L p 

i 

^ t — ^ 

4—  h — t — 

^ 1.  Good-bye,  brother,  good-bye,  brother,  If  I don’t  see  you  more ; 


08 

/gP & 



__i — -- 

1 — E8 — . 

^ j—r  ^ ^ f . 

1= — 

s 

Now  God  bless  you,  now  God  bless  you,  If  I don’t  see  you  more. 


2 We  part  in  de  body  but  we  meet  in  de  spirit, 

We’ll  meet  in  de  heaben  in  de  blessed*  kingdom. 

3 So  good-bye,  brother,  good-bye,  sister  ; 

Now  God  bless  you,  now  God  bless  you. 

* Glorious. 

[“Sung  at  the  breaking  up  of  a midnight  meeting  after  the  death  of  a soldier. 
These  midnight  wails  are  very  solemn  to  me,  and  exhibit  the  sadness  of  the 
present  mingled  with  the  joyful  hope  of  the  future.  I have  known  the  negroes 
to  get  together  in  groups  of  six  or  eight  around  a small  fire,  and  sing  and  pray 
alternately  from  nine  o’clock  till  three  the  next  morning,  after  the  death  of  one 
of  their  number.” — J.  S.  R.] 


63.  FARE  YE  WELL. 


— 

— 

s s 

k : 

- - AUk 

& 

-/f 

25 

AM f 

- — 

^ A 

am 

S Nl 

V 

— 

= - 

■2—V-  1 

~ iff 

0 fare  you  well,  my  brudder,  fare  you  well  by  de 


7“S 

! 

p 

v- 

k.  

tkii 

J >* 

■ 

r7  W W 

A. 

—Am 

J L. 

grace  of  God,  For  Fse  gwin  - en  home ; I’se  gwin  - en 


^ - i 

N — - 

i ^ 

HP  n 

“ISP  — ■ — ffljy  •— egr  — 

IE 

1 

. « 

I*-” 

. L 

,v 

— 

12^ 

* 

^ 

^ tip  & yf 

nJ 

home,  my  Lord,  I’se  gwinen  homo.  Mas  - sa  Je  - sus  gib  me  a 


/ 


48 


■ lit  - tie  broom,  For  to  sweep  my  heart  clean; 


r- 

n >■  m 

“f5 

* , . . z: 

% 

h 

— 1 

| 

yt 

k f— f— 

— d 

P — a) — sod 

1 

— H 

Hk 

i— t/-rk.".  ■ C:__6=Jb 

ljme*. £ HE 

& 

' 0 



— 

Sweep  ’em  clean  by  de  grace  of  God,  An’  glo  - ry  in  my  soul. 


64. 


MANY  THOUSAND  GO. 

/Tv 


/TV 


/Tv 


p* ^ 

> 

' 7T  P* 

r jgr 

r * U0> 

at 

r 

Aam 

7~  1 

1 ! — 

■ 1 U — 

Z — 

& . 

1.  No  more  peck  o’  corn  for  me,  No  more,  no  more; 


No  more  peck  o’  corn  for  me,.  Man-y  tousand  go. 


2 No  more  driver’s  lash  for  me. 

3 No  more  pint  o’  salt  for  me. 

4 No  more  hundred  lash  for  me. 

5 No  more  mistress’  call  for  me. 


[A  song  “ to  which  the  Rebellion  had  actually  given  rise.  This  was  composed 
by  nobody  knows  whom — though  it  was  the  most  recent  doubtless  of  all  these 
‘spirituals,’ — and  had  been  sung  in  secret  to  avoid  detection.  It  is  certainly 
plaintive  enough.  The  peck  of  corn  and  pint  of  salt  were  slavery’s  rations.” — 
T.  W.  H.  Id..  Col.  Trowbridge  learned  that  it  was  first  sung  when  Beauregard 
took  the  slaves  of  the  islands  to  build  the  fortifications  at  Hilton  Head  and 
Bay  Point.] 


49 


65. 


BROTHER  MOSES  GONE. 


“7 ftAr* h 

0 

w — 

pt " ..  . 

— jSP 

-0d-  ' ■■■  J • "~g>z= 



— 

_i 

cl 

Brud-der  Mo  - ses  gone  to  de  promised  land, 


66. 


THE  SIN-SICK  SOUL. 


^t¥=. 

h* t 3 (A 

SSL 

E£EE|_... 

& 

...  t a J 

Brudder  George  is  a - gwine  to  glo  - ry, 


Take 


~-f9 


m- 


mr 

w 


It 


— tz 


car’  de  sin  - sick  soul,  Brudder  George  is  a - gwine  to 


_ — * 

V- 

!_  |5 

-fW* 0 — p 3 — 4— 

— I 3B5 (BP 2® 

—4 — - 12- 

2 — 

AM)  L 

^ 5= 

glo  - ry,  Take*  car*  de  sin  - sick  soul.  Brudder 


-f-b — f — 

0 

— k fc f* V-r-i — 

-an  . • 4m  - 

:p 

«,  p- 

1 if*/  _i  j » ** 

Artsy  * 

gri  • gt*1  ^ l.ggl- 

LAtL  k 2 

-U 

Stephen’s  gwine  to  glo  - ry,  Take  car’  de  sin  - sick  soul. 


67 


SOME  YALXANT  SOLDIER 


* 


0> 0>- 


%r 


is 

u 


-4 — & 


40 


-i&P 


Oh  Lord,  I want  some  va  - li  - ant  sol  - dier,  I 


** Nr 


SE 


tr 


3$. 


szzjs 


*r 


3E 


— — jgn — ph 

want  some  va  - li  - ant  sol  - dier,  I want  some  valiant 


* 


wzrw: 

4- 


f-=l- 


~w 


soldier,  To  help  me  bear  de  cross.  For  I weep,  I weep,  I 


w. 


£ 


-yt- — 


W- 


£ 


can’t  hold  out ; If  a - ny  mer  - cy,  Lord,  0 pit  - y poor  me. 
[The  words  are  in  part  the  same  as  those  of  “ Hail  Mary,”  No.  59.] 


68. 


HALLELU,  HALLELU. 

— =hr 


-K  -- K- 


-N K 


rH2 


tfl- 


■4= 


3E 


1.  Oh  one  day  as  an  - od  - er,  Hal  - le  - lu,  hal  - le 


* 



& — — 

-of i^)— 

& — - 

h 

* 

r * 

1 

: jsJ'  1 ? ~ 

=p(t 

2E 

1 ^ 

t. 

pi 

1 •|| 

- lu!  2.  Whende  ship  is  out  a - sail  - in’,  Hal  - le  - lu  - jahl 

3 Member  walk  and  never  tire. 

4 Member  wralk  Jordan  long  road. 

5 Member  walk  tribulation. 

6 You  go  home  to  Wappoo. 

7 Member  seek  new  repentance. 

8 I go  to  seek  my  fortune. 

9 I go  to  seek  my  dying  Saviour. 

10  You  want  to  die  like  Jesus. 

[For  other  words,  see  “ Children  do  linger,”  No.  69.] 


61 


69.  CHILDREN  DO  LINGER. 


) lip?  9 

- S N m — 



p m « 

fej..-. ...  frb ^ fish  I 

fw  7 a ^ 

0 f 9 \aT~ 

. r* . . p 2 p k 

0 J 



LU — 

Hggj — p — 1 

1.  0 member,  will  you  lin  - ger  ? See  de  cliil  - ’en  do 


3 

y-fc — 

p 

39$  ~~?%S — — i 

*=J= 

=s— rr 

4 

IS 



Is- 

— ^ — 



i^A 

&A 

& 

J 

— <®i— 

lin  - ger  here.  2. 1 go  to  glo  - ry  wid  you,  Member,  join. 

3 0 Jesus  is  our  Captain. 

4 He  lead  us  on  to  glory. 

5 We’ll  meet  at  Zion  gateway.* 

6 We’ll  talk  dis  story  over, 

7 We’ll  enter  into  glory. 

8 When  we  done  wid  dis  world  trials. 

9 We  done  wid  all  our  crosses. 

10  0 brudder,  will  you  meet  us  ? 

11  When  de  ship  is  out  a-sailiu’. 

12  0 Jesus  got  de  helium. 

13  Fader,  gader  in  }rour  chil’en. 

14  0 gader  dem  for  Zion. 

15  Twas  a beauteous  Sunday  mornin’. 

16  When  he  rose  from  de  dead. 

17  He  will  bring  you  milk  and  honey. 

* Heaven  portal. 


53 


70. 


GOOD-BYE. 


Good-bye,  my  brudder,  good-bye,  Hal-  le  - lu  - jab!  Good-bye,  sister 


t= 

V- 

1 v ' "1 

m 

m- 

j 

^ hw K fo— ] ! J— (S) — j 

5— > 

Sal  - ly,  good-bye,  Hal  - le  - lu  - jah!  Go  - ing  home,  Hal  - le 




kfc  hr 

-tf- 

rc 15 fe 

te 

fe— 

h 

A 

4 

& 

& 

&& 

— < — - 

- lu  - jah!  Je  - sus  call  me,  Hal  - le  - lu  - ja 


1 ! Lin  - ger  no 


§E 


-fr K 


5 




longer,  Hal  - le  - lu  - jail ! Tar  - ry  no  longer,  Hal  - le  - lu  - jah  ! 

[“  This  is  sung  at  the  breaking  up  of  a meeting,  with  a general  shaking  of 
hands,  and  the  name  of  him  or  her  pronounced,  whose  hand  is  shaken  ; of 
course  there  is  seeming  confusion.” — Mrs.  C.  J.  B.] 


71.  LORD,  MAKE  ME  MORE  PATIENT. 


♦“Any  adjective  expressive  of  the  virtues  is  inserted  here:  holy,  loving, 
peaceful,  etc.”—  3£rs.  C.  J.  B. 


/ 


63 


72. 


THE  HAY  OF  JUDGMENT. 


W- 


:*r. 


Isa: 


y* — «y— 

1.  And  de  moon  will  turn  to  blood,  And  do  moon  will  turn  to 


ZT~ ““ST— ~ E“ 

\ h H 

— r 



J 

«L 

ftiF — — — — — — ; — pfr- 

— — i — 

* 

7 H » 

H — 1 

1 1 

blood,  And  de  moon  will  turn  to  blood  In  dat  day— 0 - yoy,*  my 


soul!  And  de  moon  will  turn  to  blood  in  dat  day. 


2 And  you’ll  see  de  stars  a-fallin’. 

3 And  de  world  will  be  on  fire. 

4 And  you’ll  bear  de  saints  a-singin  : 

5 And  de  Lord  will  say  to  de  sheep. 

6 For  to  go  to  Him  right  hand  ; 

7 But  de  goats  must  go  to  de  left, 

* “ A sort  of  prolonged  wail.” — Mrs.  C.  J.  B. 


54 


73. 

=bi 


THE  RESURRECTION  MORN. 


C& 


3zzz4—.9f 


1.  0 run,  Ma  - ry,  run,  Hal  - le  - lu,  hal  - le  - lu!  0 


d?: 


>4- 


is 


=^=  j. 


I- 


run,  Ma  - ry,  run,  Hal  - le  - lu  - jah ! 2.  It  was 


^ |v 


-<s>- 


N h 


ear  - ly  in  de  morn  - in’,  Hal  - le  - lu,  . hal  - le  - 


nrrfr - — 

fey  . ffey 

* 

1 

3ra! 

J ^ 

fe, ^ P 

-Kan)— — 

:y  J£ 

/SSL S2 

& ■ 

sS— s— * 

1/ 

- lu ! It  was  ear  - ly  in  de  mornin’,  Hal  - le  - lu  - jah ! 


3 That  she  went  to  de  sepulchre, 

4 And  de  Lord  he  wasn’t  da. 

5 But  she  see  a man  a-comin’, 

6 And  she  thought  it  was  de  gardener. 

7 But  he  say,  “ 0 touch  me  not, 

8 “ For  I am  not  yet  ascended. 

9 “ But  tell  to  my  disciples 

10  “ Dat  de  Lord  he  is  arisen.” 

11  So  run,  Mary,  run,  etc. 


/ 


55 


74.  NOBODY  KNOWS  THE  TROUBLE  I’VE  HAD. 


2 I pick  de  berry  and  I suck  de  juice,  0 yes,  Lord  ! 

Just  as  sweet  as  the  honey  in  de  comb,  0 yes,  Lord  1 

3 Sometimes  I’m  up,  sometimes  I’m  down, 

Sometimes  Fin  almost  on  de  groun’. 

4 What  make  ole  Satan  hate  me  so  ? 

Because  he  got  me  once  and  he  let  me  go. 

* I see. 

[This  song  was  a favorite  in  the  colored  schools  of  Charleston  in  1865  ; it  has 
since  that  time  spread  to  the  Sea  Islands,  where  it  is  now  sung  with  the  varia- 
tion noted  above.  An  independent  transcription  of  this  melody,  sent  from  Florida 
by  Lt.  Col.  Apthorp,  differed  only  in  the  ictus  of  certain  measures,  as  has  also 
been  noted  above.  The  third  verse  was  furnished  by  Lt.  Col.  Apthorp.  Once 
when  there  had  been  a good  deal  of  ill  feeling  excited,  and  trouble  was  appre- 
hended, owing  to  the  uncertain  action  of  Government  in  regard  to  the  confis- 
cated lands  on  the  Sea  Islands,  Gen.  Howard  was  called  upon  to  address  the 
colored  people  earnestly  and  even  severely.  Sympathizing  with  them,  however, 
he  could  not  speak  to  his  own  satisfaction  ; and  to  relieve  their  minds  of  the 
ever-present  sense  of  injustice,  and  prepare  them  to  listen,  he  asked  them  to 
sing.  Immediately  an  old  woman  on  the  outskirts  of  the  meeting  began 
“Nobody  knows  the  trouble  I’ve  had,”  and  the  whole  audience  joined  in.  The 
General  was  so  affected  by  the  plaintive  words  and  melody,  that  he  found  him- 
self melting  into  tears  and  quite  unable  to  maintain  his  official  sternness.] 


66 


75.  WHO  IS  ON  THE  LORD’S  SIDE. 


1 1 ^ 

1 

^ 

-r-f4 d J J d 



feH — 

_j & p 

•S'  — N» 

1 

A — i &s? (0 — - — - — & <25 

& 1 ^ 

& !— F- 

^ ^ 

E&gggj - 

Let  me  tell  you  what,  is  nat’  - ral  - ly  de  fac* 


T# 

1 

V 

_ Xfll 

J0U. 

V 

7 «r  BJ'  lO' 

r-  ^ ' 

^ 

r V 

Who  is  on  de  Lord’s  side,  None  o’  God’s  chil  - ’n 


F5 

""" — .!■■--  = 

<** 

■ 1 'l-=: 

bp 

) 

1= 

^ ^ as 

- 

^ 

__________ 

— 

i 

p> 



9 

neb  - ber  look  back,  Who  is  on  de  Lord’s  side. 


£ 


5E 


& 


m 


t 


t 


1.  Way  in  de  wal  - ley,  Who  is  on  de  Lord’s  side, 


=8= 


'•&  <d- 


1 (Sf 


Way  in  de  wal  - ley,  Who  is  on  de  Lord’s  side. 


2 Weepin’  Mary. 

3 Mournin’  Marta. 


4  Risen  Jesus. 


76. 


HOLD  OUT  TO  THE  END. 


57 


All  dem  Mount  Zion  member,  dey  have  many  ups  and  downs;  But 


n — r — , 

£ Is*- 

— © 

[W  

— ta * 

& 

sS 

1 K W 

k#  1 

nr 

-m ^ 

■Hi 

4S9 

V 

» air  • 



_I K _ 

~ s*1  '& 

cross  come  or  no  come,  for  to  hold  out  to  the  end. 


(flL 


=£==fcz 


Imiiii. 


m: 


Hold  out  to  the  end, 


hold  out  to  the  end, 


It 


77.  COME  GO  WITH  ME. 


4 

5* ^ |k- 

=V 

— N 

v- 

=b~— 

u 

-ycf €& }-<SP 

— — — i — &s> — 

H ^ — 9~ 

— — 

— 

J J 

—ts) 

1.  Ole  Satan 

is  a 

bus-  y 

ole 

man,  He 

roll  stones  in 

my 

way  ; Mass’ Jesus  is  my  bo  - som  friend,  He  roll  ’em  out  o’  my 


58 


0 come-e  go  wid  me,  A - walkin’  in  de  heaven  I roam. 


2 I did  not  come  here  myself,  ray  Lord, 

It  was  my  Lord  who  brought  me  here  ; 
And  I really  do  believe  I’m  a child  of  God, 
A-walkin’  in  de  heaven  I roam. 

0 come-e  go  wid  me,  etc. 


78.  EYERY  HOUR  IN  THE  HAY. 


3 

"'t 

r§ 

($»• 

m 

* 

(If? 

-& — — 



-p  -"i-  — ft® — 

m 

"1  <SS^ 



“1 k-tr — 

One  cold  freezing  morn  - ing  I lay  dis  bod  - y down ; I will 


— m 

p — 

— Si — 

— 

Hr:  — 

-t- 

\ — bar  ■ ■ 

SS2 

— ® — 

H 

— d-^ — 

H 

- . 

-%■ 

* — 

— ^ 

— aj) (£& 

V 

at> 

s 

L-HK 

— ■■  ■ 

^ 

pick  up  my  cross  an’  follow  my  Lord  All  roun’  my  Fader’s  throne. 


1.  Every  hour  in 


is: 


- 


de  day  cry  ho  - ly,  Cry  ho  - Iy,  my  Lord ! Every 


2 Every  hour  in  de  night  cry  Jesus,  etc. 


79. 


IN  THE  MANSIONS  ABO  YE. 


F FF=^ 

^ 



fs 

6_ P K : — 4 

HPTVYT m 

1 ^ 

W. ~/f& [S.  foh  1 2 3 1 

— -as! 

e a a s 

UP  o y W 

-J?  -J-* 

* Good  Lord,  in  de  manshans  a - bove,  Good  Lord,  in  do 


— 

/ 

— 

* *5 MB« K — 

j 

.. 

_ iA  r* 

zn 

y~ — 

^ — 

^ “ — 

*5 

* J 

• ~tZ 

v 

— J 

• ^ 

& 



l' ■ J*  > 1 

manshans  above,  My  Lord,  I hope  to  meet  my  Je  - bus  In  de 


=2 

f==F= 

" r"  i®' 

fd»  " 

— 

4k 

4v- 

4 

h — gj — jN- 

i 1 — 

— i 

H r 

-40 

— ** — & — 

manshans  above.  1.  If  you  get  to  heaven  before  I do,  Lord,  tell  my 


Jv 


~~~~j iS? l—4Zf 


w— 


-& — ^ 

Je  - bus  I'm  a - cornin’  too,  To  de  mau-shaus  a -bove. 


2 My  Lord,  I’ve  had  many  crosses  an’  trials  here  below ; 
My  Lord,  I hope  to  meet  you 
In  de  manshans  above. 


3 Fight  on,  my  brudder,  for  de  manshans  above. 
For  I hope  to  meet  my  Jesus  dere 
In  de  manshans  above. 


60 


80. 


SHOUT  ON,  CHILDREN. 


2 Shout  an’  pray  both  night  an’  day ; 
How  can  you  die,  you  in  de  Lord? 

3 Come  on,  chil’en,  let’s  go  home ; 

0 I’m  so  glad  you’re  in  de  Lord. 


81.  JESUS,  WON’T  YOU  COME  BY-AND-BYE  ? 


$ — k — r 

— * 

• 

re 

^ el-: 

— & 

S 

s — <0 

■■  J 

• 

pH 

t j 


ride  him  in  de  evenin’,  Je  - sus,  won’t  you  come  bumby  ? De 


Li 

h- 

fD (D-~ 

<D— 

J*  Js  ’ 

fc=fc=jz  = 

k 

H 

\ j"- j’- 

• 

m • 

• dj 

• J 

Ire 

\? 

^ s 

_ at±~=  : 

& 

-fe  m 

£ 

: .& 

jzmzzmh 

m ls. 

m 

«*> 

Lord  knows  de  world’s  gwine  to  end  up,  Jesus,  won’t  you  come  bumby? 


61 


82. 


HEAVE  AWAY. 


E£Eg i 


i L..^pr 

k — 4- 


~(g^: 


Heave  a-  way,  heave  a- way!  I’d  rather  court  a yellow  gal  than 


£ 


=P= 


221 


-<gi  K 


tJ 


work  for  Hen  - ry  Clay.  Heave  a - way,  heave  a - 


-ft 

f. — 

0— 

V 

ii=?z: 

_j A 

® 0— ; — 

' 40 

0 

..... 

4 

i= 

m 

& 

m 

— - b* 6 ’ 

S* 

1 

— ^ 

tJ 


way!....  Yel  - low  gal,  I want  to  go,  I’d 


9 0 ^ ■ - -N- 

:--7r-y 

e#~ 

■>— g— 

- L? J 

— & 0 

- — ~T=“- 

• W -J. 

rath  - er  court  a yel  - low  gal  than  work  for  Hen  - ry  Clay. 


1 kt 

k 

1 M /n  • 

- 

A 

K_ 

! if® 

& 

jn 

\ s 

Si 

— - --  -\ 

^ .J 

V 

^ — ZJ-  9 

la**  u* 

1 

Heave  a - way!  Yel  - low  gal,  I want  to  go! 


| This  is  one  of  the  Savannah  firemen’s  songs  of  which  Mr.  Kane  O’Donnel 
gave  a graphic  account  in  a letter  to  the  Philadelphia  Press.  “ Each  company.’* 
he  says,  “ has  its  own  set  of  tunes,  its  own  leader,  and  doubtless  in  the  growth 
of  time,  necessity  and  invention,  its  own  composer.”] 


0 


II. 

NORTHERN  SEABOARD  SLAVE  STATES: 
Including  Delaware,  Maryland,  Virginia,  and  North 
Carolina. 


SLAVE  SONGS  OF  THE  UNITED  STATES. 


83.  WAKE  UP,  JACOB. 


m 

m 

K= 

\ fe  - 

{w 

— 

Be 



— & 

— d 

Szz 

0 

st= 

1.  Wake  up,  J a - cob,  day  is  a - breaking,  I’m  on  my  way  ; 0, 


W 

~ ' W " V 

-J- 

— s — s>_rn 

1 

'o' 

IA 

LZ !_ feu 

. pjfcl 

"■J”  ' • | | 

V 

1 

& 

^ — U—  t— j 

L=: — & gp-gpJ 

-v, W 

«7 


wake  up,  Ja  - cob,  day  is  a - breaking,  I’m  on  my  way.  0 ! 


way.  I want  to  go  to  heaven  when  I die,  Do  love  de  Lord  ! I 


H 


1st.  D C | 2(1.  | 


-4&i- 


-g~r- 


I 


want  to  go  to  heaven  when  I die,  Do  love  de  Lord ! 0 ! Lord. 


2 Got  some  friends  on  de  oder  shore, 
Do  love  de  Lord ! 

I want  to  see  ’em  more  an’  more, 
Do  love  de  Lord! 

Wake  up,  Jacob,  &c. 


66 

84.  ON  TO  GLORY. 


2*5*  - 

* 



» 

*5S 

— 

— r ft 



V* 2 3 * * * * * 9-J 

** — j 

■ 

pz 

5S2 w 

■ & m 





— 

2 — tfc — gpj 

— 

"J 


)0  come  my  breth-ren  and  sis  - ters  too,  We’re  gwine  to 

To  Christ  our  Sav  - iour  let  us  sing,  And  make  our 


— 

— . 

% 

rHs ZB F — 

zz — 7m 

m 

^H.-r — R—  bar- 

~F  r . 

. is — 

U 

— 

_!_Lf  * ^ r 

& .....  - 

^ — 

join  the  heavenly  crew ; ) 

loud  ho  - san  - nas  ring,  j 0 hal  - le  - lu,  0 hal  - le  - 


- iu, 


0 hal  - le  - lu  - jah  to  the  Lord.  (Repeat.) 


2 Oh,  there’s  Bill  Thomas,  I know  him  well, 
He’s  got  to  work  to  keep  from  hell ; 

He’s  got  to  pray  by  night  and  day, 

If  he  wants  to  go  by  the  narrow  way. 


3 There’s  Chloe  Williams,  she  makes  me  mad. 

For  you  see  I know  she’s  going  on  bad; 

She  told  me,  a lie  this  arternoon, 

And  the  devil  will  get  her  very  soon. 


[We  should  be  tempted,  from  the  character  of  this  tune,  to  doubt  its  genu- 
ineness as  a pure  negro  song.  We  are  informed,  however,  that  it  was  sung 

twenty-five  years  ago  in  negro  camp-meetings,  and  not  in  those  of  the  whites. 

The  words,  at  any  rate,  are  worth  preserving,  as  illustrating  the  kind  of  influ- 
ence brought  to  bear  upon  the  wavering.] 


67 


86.  JUST  NOW. 


— Q-  v> 

ite 

[>s — 

g- fes 

m 

— r — 

0 — 

• ... 'I 

& 

7X1 

-Al_ 

— 

ftiP 

^ 3 

fc=! 

& 

— f— 

t 

f— 

t 

& 

1.  Sane  - to  - fy  me,  sane  - to  - fy  me,  Sane  - to  - 


— 

n — -c— 

— 

w 

Of  * 

» A i 

__ 

V } P 

<3 

9? 

} r-^ 

^ ^ 

** 

«s> 

fy  me,  sane  - to  - fy  me,  Sane  - to  - fy  me,  just 


now;  Just  now;  just  now;  Sancto  - fy  me  just  now. 


2 Good  religion,  good  religion,  etc. 

3 Come  to  Jesus,  come  to  Jesus,  etc. 

[This,  which  is  now,  in  a somewhat  different  form,  a Methodist  hymn,  was 
sung  as  given  above,  by  the  colored  people  of  Ann  Arundel  Co.,  Md.,  twenty- 
five  years  ago. — W.  A.  H.] 


86.  SHOCK  ALONG,  JOHN. 


Shock  along,  John,  shock  along. 


±D>  jff- 

— 0>- 

j£ 

V- 

— f- — 

p— 

B= 

-r® (fiS? — fef 

& [ 

Shock  along,  John,  shock  along. 
[A  corn-song,  of  which  only  the  burden  is  remembered.] 


68 

87.  ROUND  THE  CORN,  SALLY. 


1.  Five  can’t  ketch  me  and  ten  can’t  hold  me,'  Ho, 


f? 

Sr 

-JL- 

Si /CS6 ttxffP 

0 fS» 

gp jgB 

±=z 

=fc= 

— =1 

round  the  corn,  Sal  - ly ! Round  the  corn,  round  the  corn, 


round  the  corn,  Sal- lyl  Ho,  ho,  ho,  round  the  corn,  Sal- ly  ! 


2 Here’s  your  igglo-quarter  and  here’s  your  couut-aquils. 

3 I can  bank,  ’ginny  bank,  ’ginny  bank  the  weaver. 

[“Iggle”  is  of  course  “eagle;”  for  the  rest  of  the  enigmatical  words  and  ex- 
pressions in  this  corn-song,  we  must  leave  readers  to  guess  at  the  interpretation.] 


88.  JORDAN’S  MILLS. 




"i — i — 

*0 

j ® F 

Vs» 

rJ 

its  *■  ■■  U"  L— 

1.  Jer  - dan’s  mills  a - grinding,  Jer  - dan’s  a - hay ; 


rr 

— 

* f* 

M 

i ^ 

_v 

_|L. 

Ail M. 

• && 

T3T 

V 

$0  v 

Jer  - dan’s  mills  a - grinding,  Jer  - dan’s  a - hay. 


2 Built  without  nail  or  hammer. 

3 Runs  without  wind  or  water. 


69 

89.  SABBATH  HAS  NO  END. 


A 

— 

& V 

Si 



m 

-M ^ .(#—  a 

~~MTI 

HP  9 

t= 

S ± — 

Sl_ 

C 

1.  Gwine  to  walk  a - bout  Zi  - on,  I real  - ly  do  be  - lieve  ; 




S 

Atm  

<> 

r, 



m 

m 

TP 

9- m 

w 

& 

& 

ft  . 

A. 

2E 

t ■■  ■ ■■■— 

t*  

% — 

£ 

2 

Walk  a - bout  Zi  - on,  I real  - ly  do  be  - lieve ; • 


± 

N — - - 

^ 

g — 

->  N j 

MW 

ffi-  . . 

SB 

-&C 

r 

J 

A> 

& 

j i 

V 





2 

£ ^ 

tJ 


Walk  a - bout  Zi  - on,  I real  - ly  do  be  - lieve ; 


W- 


■hi 


(p- 


■g-— g 


n- : 


--W- 


Sabbath  lias  no  end. 


I did  view  one  an  - gel 


h — i 

Nr— 

m 

r1 

— 

* 

S— — Vw 

m j m 

**  • 

& i m m 

x 

\lJ: & 

~ La  r 

m 

1 ^ . ---  . - 

— 

fj 

In  one  an  - gel  stand  ; Let’s  mark  him  right  down  with  the 


j— — Vm-zz 

. 

N te,.  ~ 

or 

| 7 A.  <B3> 

4P 

m 

V2 3 4 5 6 7  S*asl  ” 

/A 

m 

JL 

1 *■»-! / 

% 

V— 

— 

* 

& 

fore  - half,  With  the  har  - pess  in  his  hand. 


2 Gwine  to  follow  King  Jesus,  I really  do  believe. 

3 I love  God  certain. 

4 My  sister’s  got  religion. 

5 Set  down  in  the  kingdom. 

6 Religion  is  a fortune. 

[This  chorus  was  written  down  as  exactly  as  possible  from  the  lips  of  the 
singer,  and  illustrates  the  odd  transformations  which  words  undergo  in  their 
mouths.  It  is  a verse  of  a familiar  hymn  : “ fore-half”  is  “forehead  “harpess” 
is  “ harp.”] 


70 


90. 


I DON’T  FEEL  WEARY. 


1 sesj^  ^ 

I  don’t  feel  weary  and  noways  tired,  0 glo-ry  hal-le- 


0- 

• » 

[— j.— — — 

-m — — — 

0 $3L i_ 

ggp ... 

6®^  -t= 

«y 

- lu 

n u 

— — — A 

jah. 

1.  Jest  let 

— k*2 gp 

me  in 

k»  '$=- 

the  kingdom  While  the 

^ h- — fe- 

**  ~ 

W- 


w 


world  is  all  on  fire.  0 glo  - ry  hal  - le  - lu 


jah. 


2 Gwine  to  live  with  God  forever,  While,  etc. 

3 And  keep  the  ark  a-moving,  While,  etc. 


91.  THE  HYPOCRITE  AND  THE  CONCUBINE. 


1.  Hypo- crite  and  the  concu  - bine,  Liv  - in’ among  the  swine,  They 


fei.  &» 

— 1 

ip-ip  j: p. 

-__g  ^ 

dr 0 — 0— 

— ■ — 

Avj)  ■""& ■ 

&} — & — p — p — 

-1 J — 1 — 

^ 

run  to  G od  with  the  lips  and  tongue,  And  leave  all  the  heart  behind. 


Aunty,  did  you  hear  when  Jesus  rose?  He  rose  and  he  ’scend  on  high. 


71 


92. 


0 SHOUT  AWAY. 


r-Ojt K1 

a n ^ 

m P " 

— — — r~a® & — igs  - — — 

• r rr  T & as 

— at- 

■~Z K- 

. .zfszz 

-(A) — d — 

— p-F- — 

T 

> 

£1 

vi 

* r... 

— ssa 

0 shout,  0 shout,  0 shout  a - way,  And  don’t  you  mind,  And 


* 


3 


— |^- 


~a^~ 


& 


glo  ry,  glo  - ry,  glo  - ry  in  my  soul ! 1.  And 


when  ’twas  night  I thought  ’twas  day,  I thought  I’d  pray  my 


soul  a - way,  And  glo  - ry,  glo  - ry,  glo  - ry  in  my  soul ! 


2 0 Satan  told  me  not  to  pray, 

He  want  my  soul  at  judgment  day. 

3 And  every  where  I went  to  pray, 
There  some  thing  was  in  my  way. 


72 


O’ER  THE  CROSSING. 

i fc 


"gi g>~ 


at 


1.  Bendin’  knees  a - ack  - in’,  Body  racked  wid  pain, 


at 


M 


~h^88T 

J/  ml 


:5sF 

wish  I was  a child  of  God,  I’d  git  home  bime  - by. 


r- 

g=rp— y 

TB= 

— 

-ns; — 

gg ^ 

i 

* f ' p f— aF- 

LKLL — — — 

5 

t L— 

Keep  prayin,’  I do  believe  We’re  a longtime  waggin’  o’  do 


crossin’ ; Keep  prayin’,  I do  believe  We’ll  git  home  to  heaven  bime- 


2 0 yonder’s  my  ole  mudder,  Been  a waggin’  at  de  hill  so  long; 

It’s  about  time  she  cross  over,  Git  home  bime-by. 

Keep  prayin’,  I do  believe,  etc. 

3 0 hear  dat  lumberin’  thunder  A-roll  from  do’  to  do’, 

A-callin’  de  people  home  to  God;  Dey’ll  git  home  bime-by. 

Little  chil’n,  1 do  believe,  etc. 

4 0 see  dat  forked  lightnin’  A -jump  from  cloud  to  cloud, 

A-pickin’  up  God’s  chil’n  ; Dey’ll  git  home  bime-by. 

Pray  mourner,  I do  believe,  etc. 

[This  “infinitely  quaint  description  of  the  length  of  the  heavenly  road,”  as 
Col.  Higginson  styles  it,  is  one  of  the  most  peculiar  and  wide-spread  of  the 
spirituals.  It  was  sung  as  given  above  in  Caroline  Co.,  Virginia,  and  probably 
spread  southward  from  this  State,  variously  modified  in  different,  localities. 
“ My  body  rock  ’long  fever,”  (No.  45.)  would  hardly  be  recognised  as  the  same, 
either  by  words  or  tune,  and  yet  it  is  almost  certainly  the  same,  as  is  shown  by 
the  following,  sung  in  Augusta,  Georgia,  which  has  some  of  the  words  of  the 
present  song,  adapted  to  a tune  which  is  unmistakably  identical  with  No.  45.] 


1®- 

9 4& 

.A 

* 

ar 

~m~w^  m 

m & 

i 

tpirtdj 

1 — &—{ 

0 yonde 

:r’s  my  ole  mother,  Been  a-waggin’  at  de  hill  so 

LW 

Ion 

g;  I 

m — 

ft — 

-m — 

g — 

— i 

-F 

-{&#-  - - 

1# 

' i 

t*L 

* * 

A Z7~m- 

L[__lL 

[We  regret  we  have  not  the  air  of  the  Nashville  variation,  “ My  Lord  called 
Daniel.”] 


91. 


ROCK  O’  MY  SOUL. 


73 


%2zm. 


N 5 


EH 


P-P-^-rr^ 


1,  Rock  o’ my  soul  in  de  bosom  of  Abraham,  Rock  o’  my  soul  in  de 


II 


!r 


N--  h 


mr m 


K 


v 


-|gy- 


V ■ ¥ 


W—& 


-ty- 

bo  - som  of  A - brahain,  Rock  o’  my  soul  in  de 


“ 

— 

V- 

-1  - . 

413 

m j v 

& m a*  ... 

s 

\ 

V 

— r- 

V 

— — 

£ — 

* 

K ?L_ 

& — jp — — — 

^5* 

> — 

& ^ ■■ 

■L 

bosom  of  A - braham,  Lord,  Rock  o’  my  soul.  (King  Jesus) 

2  He  toted  the  young  lambs  in  his  bosom,  (ter) 

And  leave  the  old  sheep  alone. 


95.  WE  WILL  MARCH  THROUGH  THE  TALLEY. 


}®®si -j- — 

: * -■  _ ..  J ~v  • zjf 

=> — p 

lead  - er,  We  will  march  thro’  the  val  - ley  in  peace. 


2 We  will  march,  etc. 

Behold  I give  myself  away,  and 
We  will  march,  etc. 

3 We  will  march,  etc. 

This  track  I’ll  see  and  I’ll  pursue  ; 

We  will  march,  etc. 

4 We  will  march,  etc. 

When  I’m  dead  and  buried  in  the  cold  silent  tomb, 
I don’t  want  you  to  grieve  for  me. 


74 

96.  WHAT  A TRYING  TIME. 


r=fr%— : = 

rTgr-fciq 

— rm mr^~ 

IF 

& — 

W~ 

:W~~  ' -Ja=M- 

-#1 J 

m. 

— i — [4 Us H — 

U — 

p- — 

sat 



1.0  A - dam,  where  are  you  ? A - dam,  where  are  you  ? A- 


p ~i 

■ h -th 

t N>- fe 

-4 

r ^ 

J g 

- dam,  where  are  you?  0 what  a try  - ing  time! 


2 Lord,  I am  in  the  garden. 

3 Adam,  you  ate  that  apple. 

4 Lord,  Eve  she  gave  it  to  me. 

5 Adam,  it  was  forbidden. 

6 Lord  said,  walk  out  de  garden. 
[A  most  compendious  account  of  the  fall.] 


97..  ALMOST  OYER. 


— 

rj — -tcrfe- 

-1— 

nn=r 

: !_ M-  ~~r 

^ 

— 

"v 

7 “t 

IP jgg  ™ \ 

1.  Some  seek  de  Lord  and  they  don’t  seek  him  right,  Pra}r  all  day  and  sleep  all 


j 

K — I 

r (9 

— 1 g— 

4 

— U— 

s ■ ■ — 

: -4^ 

night ; And  I’ll  thank  God,  almost  o - ver,  almost  o - ver,  almost 


r- i — *r 

rrl — 

1~ 

7 i i ' 

r 

- 

I 

\ • u 

t 1 

Is- 

e,$ 

M 

# 

— - — — 

-Cj. .... 

o - ver,  (My  Lord)  And  I’ll  thank  God,  almost  o - ver. 


2 Sister,  if  your  heart  is  warm, 

Snow  and  ice  will  do  you  no  harm. 

3 I done  been  down,  and  I done  been  tried, 

I been  through  the  water,  and  I been  baptized. 

4 0 sister,  you  must  mind  how  you  step  on  the  cross, 

Your  foot  might  slip,  and  yonr  soul  get  lost. 

5 And  when  you  get  to  heaven,  you’ll  be  able  for  to  tell 
How  you  shunned  the  gates  of  hell. 

6 Wrestle  with  Satan  and  wrestle  with  sin, 

Stepped  over  hell  and  come  back  agin. 

[A  baptismal  song,  as  the  chattering  “ almost  o-ver”  so  forcibly  suggests.] 


75 


98.  DON’T  BE  WEARY,  TRAVELLER. 


— 

& -m 

— ! “ 

—? 

i/» 

— f7~ 

SEW 

m ... 

t 

V 

r ! 

£ 

U— 

IS 

7~  i 1 

U — 

^ 

%-A 

^ — 

C/ 


Don’t  be  wear  - y,  trav  - el  - ler,  Come  a - long  home  to 


— 

i 1 

w~ 

. J? 

i ...  j .. 

. . . -K?B 

up 

a* 

t 

is 

:czzzzgf- 

_J 

LJ 

j* — — 

Je  - bus  ; Don’t  be  wear  - y,  trav  - el  - ler, 


SEE 


»=St 


5 


3E 


Come  a - long  home  to  Je  - bus.  1 My  head  got  wet  with  the 


T 

1 

“T— 

1 — 

k 

1 

N* 

$$  • 

i(S© 

Si! 

• ifiy 

om 

■ i 

A. 

7 m 

m 

1 

& 

Jk 

Z_A_ 

^ 

■ r 

—$m 

*4£r 

cy 


midnight  dew,  Come  a-longhometo  Je  - bus  ; Angels  bear  me 


(V.  - - 

/ 

? .j 

S 

a 

pf 

JL 

A 

*53 

30 

-j£s? 

i © 

■ 

■ 

V 

40* 

r @0 

wit  - ness  too,  Come  a - long  home  to  Je  - bus. 

2 Where  to  go  I did  not  know 
Ever  since  he  freed  my  soul, 

3 I look  at  de  work  and  de  work  look  new, 

I look  at  de  work  and  de  work  look  new. 


& 


76 


99.  LET  GOD’S  SAINTS  COME  IN. 


— 

& 

PS — <$» 

-0 0 0 

0 — 

1 

0 — 

— 

M 

d 

rfrE 

1— 

p & 

-g—g— r- 

lie. ppir 

g— 

S— * 

V 

) •‘4-  w 

^ 

ft  V? 

* 1 

— U — 

* 

*■ 

Come  down,  angel,  and  trouble  the  wa-ter,  Come  down,  angel,  and 


- trouble  the  water,  Come  down,  angel,  and  trouble  the  water,  And 


land  for  me,  And  let  God’s  saints  come  in.  Canaan  land  is  the 


—tt# ^ ^ : 

># 

|(T\  \-g 

^ r r j 

' 

Ivj/  . . . ■ rP 

*■ ^ 

U3> Lj ^ 

. 

land  for  me,  And  let  God’s  saints  come  in. 


2 There  was  a wicked  man, 

He  kept  them  children  in  Egypt  land. 

3 God  did  say  to  Moses  one  day, 

Say,  Moses  go  to  Egypt  land, 

4 And  tell  him  to  let  my  people  go. 

And  Pharaoh  would  not  let  ’em  go. 

5 God  did  go  to  Moses’  house, 

And  God  did  tell  him  who  he  was, 

6 God  and  Moses  walked  and  talked, 
And  God  did  show  him  who  he  was. 


77 


THE  GOLDEN  ALTAE. 


John  saw-r  - 0,  John  saw-r-0 . . . John  saw  de  ho  - ly  number 


— ■ 



m 

\n=&=M 

— P 

— — • — 4 

n 

A.u 

1 — . — ^ 

m 

set  - tin*  on  de  gold  - en 


al  - tar ! 1.  It’s  a 


3 

lit-tle  while  longer  yere  below,  yere  below,  yere  be -low,  It’s  a 


—JL.  h".  S*. 

ik, .. . 

- - 

— fv 

1 ** 

«a» 

zr.T>'  - ' 

j . 1 

ST 

L 

Lrr— — • 

— a* 

J™ 

w 

€0 

L*si — 

lit -tie  while  longer  yere  be  - low,  Be -fore  de  Lamb  of  God  I 


2 And  home  to  Jesus  we  will  go,  we  will  go,  etc.; 
We  are  do  people  of  de  Lord. 

John  sawr-O,  etc. 

3 Dere’e  a golden  slipper  in  de  heavens  for  you,  etc., 
Before  de  Lamb  of  God. 

4 I wish  I’d  been  dere  when  prayer  begun,  etc. 

5 To  see  my  Jesus  about  my  sins,  etc. 


6  Then  home  to  glory  we  will  go,  etc. 

[This  is  interesting  as  an  undoubted  variation  of  “John,  John  of  tho  holy 
order.”  No.  22.  A comparison  of  the  words  shows  that  the  word  “ number  * 
should  be  “member.”] 


101.*  THE  WINTER. 


0 de  vinter,  0 de  vinter,  0 de  vinter  ’ll  soon  be  ober,*chilen,  De 


— Q — W_i 1 

T 

K h 

-& — a. H ^ 

yy—  array.- 

~ay  » r J 

— Ip — p — p — 

•! ff  ^rJ 

vinter,  0 de  vinter,  0 do  vinter  ’ll  soon  be  ober,  cbilen,  De 


>5 

- — ST 

-ta 

■ ,"1'  1 <a> — is® — m r~ 

-m 'r_ ' 

P 

y*-? w — w ^ 

1 — . — — 

I?"  y~V~ 

9J 

vinter,  0 de  vinter,  0 de  vinter  ’ll  soon  be  ober,  cbilen, 


Yes,  my  Lord  1 1. ’Tis  Paul  and  Silas  bound  in  chains,  chains,  And 


ono  did  weep, f and  de  o - der  one  did  pray,  o - der  one  did  pray! 

2 You  bend  your  knees  X on  holy  ground,  ground, 

And  ask  de  Lord,  Lord,  for  to  turn  you  around. 

For  de  vinter,  etc. 

3 I turn  my  eyes  towards  the  sky,  sky, 

And  ask  de  Lord,  Lord,  for  wings  to  fly. 

4 For  you  see  me  gwine  ’long  so,  so, 

I has  my  tri-trials  yer  below. 

* Am  a-comin’.  f Sii\g.  J I bend  my  knees,  etc. 


n 


/ 


THE  HEAVEN  BELLS. 


1.0  mother  I be  - li  - eve. . . . 0 mother!  be-li-eve. 


gS 


$=E 


K- 


— S 


& G~ 


3- 


- fied!  0 don't  you  hear  the  Heaven  bells  a - 


fv 


lu- 


ring - ing  0 - ver  me  ? a - ring  - ing  o - ver  me  ? a - 


' J_ J 

N 

^ — h — SF 

^ <25? — p_l 

3.^ 

Ni ®! 

V * 

-ringing  o-  ver  me?  0 don’t  you  hear  the  Heaven  bells  a 


jr. 


c J 


-m- 


- ring  - ing  o-  ver  me?  It  sounds  like  the  judgment  day  I 


III. 


INLAND  SLAVE  STATES: 

Including  Tennessee,  Arkansas,  and  the  Mississippi 
River. 


a 


SLAVE  SONGS  OE  THE  UNITED  STATES 


hi. 


103.  THE  GOLD  BAND. 


i' 



6% 

h.  - . 

.fcrgz: 

i-i  i 

"r  't& 

J 

— j^— u 

-W-g-J 

1.  Gwine  to  march  a - way  in  de  gold  band,  In  de  army,  bye-and- 


9-g — 

— 

Nn 

7F- 

pr~ 

P S 

th.  *1 b. __k 

N rz> 

r 

P ■ ? - 

V 

1 

Ll 

b=&— 

& 

$ . — 

bye ; Gwine  to  march  a - way  in  de  gold  band,  In  de 


l 


A 


£ 


:£=t- 


~ti& 


tJ 


ar  - my,  bye  - and  - bye. 


Sinner,  what  you  gwine  to  do  dat 


* * b 

* 1 j— , 

To 

-7 

'■* 

l 

8 f ) gtm  • 

yr 

A p1 

r 

SP 051 8 — 7^3 

I /fl  _ . 

Si#1 

V 

1 

^ L. 

w " ■ 

day?  Sinner,  what  you  gwine  to  do  dat  day?  When  de 


^#-75 1 

r-R- " :■  J—~Y  j 

1— 

J 

m. 

:f==p±is& 

^ — 1 teM- 

u J 

^ ggJ  .-gP'1 

fire’s  a - roll  - ing  be  - hind  you,  In  de  ar  - my,  bye-and-bye. 


2 Sister  Mary  gwine  to  hand  down  the  robe, 

In  the  array,  bye-and-bye  ; 

Gwine  to  hand  down  the  robe  and  the  gold  band, 
In  the  army,  bye-and-bye. 


84 


104. 

-b~ — 


THE  GOOD  OLD  WAY. 


L'lr. , i 

— M _ 

N— 1 

— igs> — 

jse 

®-^> — 

— F— 

jff ..  m- : 

As  I went  down  in  de  valley  to  pray,  Studying  about  dat 


* Sister,  etc. 


105.  I’M  GOING  HOME. 


wil  - der  - ness  ; I sought  my  Lord  in  de  wil  - der  - ness,  For 


2 I found  free  grace  in  the  wilderness, 

3 My  father  preaches  in  the  wilderness. 


85 


i 


106.  SINNER  WON’T  DIE  NO  MORE. 


M 


m 


EH 


0 de  Lamb  done  been  down  here  an’  died,  De 


t — ; — — GSS- 


M m * 


:^TZZ^2 


— t- 

Lamb  done  been  down  here  an’  died,  0 de  Lamb  done  been  down 


— W-S-# 

dc-tt— 

& 0 — f= — 

— — 

-J — m 



— T — - 

J 

— E— — J 

^ UP=  1 

— J — 

here  an’  died,  Sin  - ner  won’t  die  no  mo’.  1.  I 


£ 4R — 

k.  i 1 

J 

i “ 

— 

BUT 1 

1 

: 1 ...4=d 

£ 

1 

d 

won -der  what  bright  an  - gels,  an  - gels,  an  - gels,  I 


- a 


W- 


22 


wonder  what  bright  an  - gels,  De  robes  all  ready  now. 


2 0 see  dem  ships  come  a-sailing,  sailing,  sailing, 
0 see  dem  ships  come  a-sailing, 

De  robes  all  ready  now. 


86 


107.  BROTHER,  GUIDE  ME  HOME. 


St®  5 — 

— ! i 

m : v ~ zz — 

H — 

-A 

I | 

|0 

J . 

<&>  <£» 

1 — ; - 

w 

V 

1 

LJ _ 1 

Brudder,  guide  mo  liome  an’  I am  glad,  Bright 


W 

W R 

F* r* 

m 

Jj 

’ w 

m. 

&L 



i — — 

2.  ^ 

u — 

1 1 

9J 


an  - gels  bid  - dy  mo  to  come  ; Brudder,  guide  me  home  an* 


I am  glad,  Bright  an  - gels  bid  - dy  me  to  come. 


— 

K 

— 

T~ 

M 1 

} — 

• gtn 

r_3 

- j 

[v— 

*- 

TI  • I 

EP 

Y * • w 

• _ 

OS?- p* n* — 

1 1 

W'  w 

IS 

Z 

4-&- 

I w 

9J 


1.  What  a hap -py  time,  chil’n,  What  a happy  time,  chil’n,  What  a 


hap-  py  time,  cliil  - ’n,  Bright  an  - gels  biddy  me  to  come. 


2 Let’s  go  to  God,  chil’n,  (ter) 

Bright  angels  biddy  me  to  come. 


[I  heard  this  in  a praise-house  at  the  “Contraband  Camp  ” on  President’s 
Island  near  Memphis,  in  September,  1864.  I will  not  vouch  for  the  absolute  ac- 
curacy of  my  memory. — W.  F.  A.] 


87 

108.  LITTLE  CHILDREN,  THEN  WON’T  YOU  BE  GLAD  ? 


J- 

Wt- 

N — 

<*- 

^ 

— . — — 

— 1&> — 

— <3? 

¥ 

\ ^ — m 

~~m — 

— M 

•'  sar — af 



— | 

— V— 

3s 

) 

.... . yp 

W* 

1.  Lit  - tie  children,  then  won’t  yon  be  glad,  Lit  - tie 


Hh — ■ 

f£» 

p— m 

dtuk  Mm 

® — S ^ 

‘I 

* if« 

~ ^ - E 

— ^ 

-fr  n— * ___ 

ir  w 

1 

IT  W. 

..  • B*  “ JBt 

£ 

tr 

fJ 


children,  then  won’t  you  be  glad,  That  you  have  been  to  heav’n,  an’  you’re 


ri 

7K—0— 

49 

g ■]  

* 

— 

— -j 

fc k- 

¥ 

T~* — r — 



~ m 

— 49 

- 

V 

1 

r u 

m 

V am 

ami 

gwine  to  go  a - gain,  For  to  try  on  the  long  white 


-S 

FF= 



2HJ r-  2SSE 

*5 

am! as® 

M 

— — — 

— 

qn 

i__>* 

i m 

K ! HE 

ME SE 

-aE w 

m gjs 

<pl — 

1 

— 

robe,  children,  For  to  try  on  the  long  white  robe. 


2 King  Jesus,  he  was  so  strong  {ter),  my  Lord, 

That  he  jarred  down  the  walls  of  hell. 

3 Don’t  you  hear  what  de  chariot  say  ? (bis) 

De  fore  wheels  run  by  de  grace  ob  God, 

An’  de  hind  wheels  dey  run  by  faith. 

4 Don’t  you  ’member  what  you  promise  de  Lord  ? (bis) 
You  promise  de  Lord  that  you  would  feed  his  sheep, 

An’  gather  his  lambs  so  well. 

[Often  sung  in  the  colored  schools  at  Helena,  Arkansas.] 


i 


88 


CHARLESTON  GALS 


n — - — — i 

= h— 

V- 

* 

& 

h — 

m 

-V— i 

P — & 

tv- 

then  the  toad ; The  toad  commenced  to  whistle  and  sing,  And  the 


— 

n — 

h 

-d 

fa 

h 

*4- 

^ 

' — 

fte — 

h — 

h 

41 

& 

@ 

t~ 



1 W - 

«B> 

* IS — 

— ©p— <® 

.V.  # 

— s 

possum  cut  tho  pigeon  - wing.  A - long  como  an  old  man 


■" 

pf 

^ 

K_ 

E 

^ 

s — r 

1 H 

.. 

MB  . . 

, p » 

uuA  ** 

nr 

\ M 

m 

^ At* 

® ^ 

. 

w 

32 

J Jg 

mar  mmr 

9 U 

rid  - ing  by : Old  man,  if  you  don’t  mind,  your  horse  will  die  ; 


r—tf-Z— : sn 

— Jr - — ~ — t ^ 

~ f»  f»  ' , -5 

4* — hi vr ^ 

y [!* fcs 5T — — - 

s~  S mi  ^ <5* 

<r  • 

..jg1-.  ^ J • m 

. j!.  ,bl.  J—..  J . 

If  he  dies  I’ll  tan  his  skin,  And  if  he  lives  I’ll  ride  him  a - gin. 


Hi  ho,  for  Charleston  gals ! Charleston  gals  are  tho  gals  for  me. 


2 As  I went  a-walking  down  the  street, 

Up  steps  Charleston  gals  to  take  a walk  with  me. 
I kep’  a walking  and  they  kep’  a talking, 

I danced  with  a gal  with  a hole  in  her  stocking. 


89 


110. 


RUN,  NIGGER,  RUN ! 


P 


yr  p " .ft 


Oil 


f— f— 


12=32: 


0 some  tell  me  that  a nig  - ger  won’t  steal,  But 


—XT*— 

— 0> 

LL 



fg> 

if 

ft 

— 

- — — - 

— - 

H 

1 P - 

\ 

W 1 1 wr 

US*' 

/SI 

J 

I’ve  seen  a nigger  in  my  corn-field ; 0 run,  nigger,  run,  for  the 


— 

-m 

|9 

HBfc 



-4— 

i 



*■- — p* — 

2=2 Z= 

— ::T! 

patrol  will  catch  you,  0 run,  nigger,  run,  for  ’tis  al  - most  day. 


1.  I’m  gwine  to  A - la  - ba-my,  Oh 


j 

-E£-=— :E 

4 

1 

ad  ' ’ ■■ 

& 

SJJ ...  ' Z 

For  to  see  my  mammy,  Ah 


2 She  went  from  Ole  Virginny, — Oh, 

And  I’m  her  pickaninny, — Ah. 

3 She  lives  on  the  Tombigbee, — Oh, 

I wish  I had  her  wid  me. — Ah. 

4 Now  I’m  a good  big  nigger, — Oh, 

I reckon  I won’t  git  bigger, — Ah. 

5 But  I’d  like  to  see  my  mammy, — Oh, 

Who  lives  in  Alabamy, — Ah.  ' 

[A  very  good  specimen,  so  far  as  notes  can  give  one,  of  the  strange  barbaric 
songs  that  one  hears  upon  the  W estern  steamboats.] 


\ 


SLATE  SONGS  OE  THE  UNITED  STATES 


IV. 


112.  MY  FATHER,  HOW  LONG? 


F? 

~4  ' 1 ^ 



... 

h""  r H*  ^ ■ i 

j r m 

My  father,*  how  long,  My  father,  how  long,  My  father,  how 


— f?.  r - ~ 

**  aaJ- v-asl -. — H— — 

~1-4=  • Jv.Zfr  J*-' 

cJ 

L{~  \?  Ip*™* 

long,’  Poor  sinner  suf-fer  here?  1.  And  it  won’t  be  long,  And  it 


-UP — s • 

1 

— — — 

k 

L * 

lllBj 

r-w m 

~ ’~3~ M 

i 

1 *C>  • 

• 

& 

1 m 

• & 

' • 

w — w 

1 

_] _Jfg 

won’t  be  long,  And  it  won’t  be  long,  Poor  sinner  suffer  here. 


2 We’ll  soon  be  free,  [ter) 

De  Lord  will  call  us  home. 

3 We’ll  walk  de  miry  road 

Where  pleasure  never  dies. 

4 We’ll  walk  de  golden  streets 

Of  de  New  Jerusalem. 

5 My  brudders  do  sing 

De  praises  of  de  Lord. 

6 We’ll  fight  for  liberty 

When  de  Lord  will  call  us  home. 

* Mother,  etc. 

[For  singing  this  “ the  negroes  had  been  put  in  jail  at  Georgetown,  S.  C.,  at 
the  outbreak  of  the  Rebellion.  ‘ We’ll  soon  be  free  ’ was  too  dangerous  an 
assertion,  and  though  the  chant  was  an  old  one,  it  was  no  doubt  sung  with  re 
doubled  emphasis  during  the  new  events.  ‘ De  Lord  will  call  us  home,’  was 
evidently  thought  to  be  a symbolical  verse  ; for,  as  a little  drummer  boy  ex- 
plained it  to  me,  showing  all  his  white  teeth  as  he  sat  in  the  moonlight  by  the 
door  of  my  tent, 1 Dey  tink  de  Lord  mean  for  say  de  Yankees'  ” — T.  W.  H.] 


94 


113. 


I’M  IS  TROUBLE. 


fee: 


& . a 


~m 


I’m  in  trouble,  Lord,  I’m  in  trouble,  I’m  in  trouble,  Lord, 
1 st.  • Fine.  I 2d. 


* 

*1 

* K 1 

<83 

fa  C-3 

— f® isa ins 

g~jg~T  » •»" ~ M ' 1 

trouble  about  my  grave,  trouble  a - bout  my  grave.  Sometimes  I 

£56 


weep,  sometimes  I mourn,  I’m  in  trouble  a - bout  my  grave ; Sometimes  I 

DO. 

— ^ 


*■ 


-gzzzp. 


can’t  do  neither  one,  I’m  in  trouble  a - bout  my  grave. 


114. 


0 DANIEL. 

3 


21 


f 


9J 


You  call  yourself  church-member,  You  hold  your  head  so  high,  You 


>5- 


I 


fer 


js. 


& flBl 


& 

praise  God  with  your  glitt’ring  tongue,  But  you  leave  all  your  heart  be- 


K 


~9 


«r 


C J 


hind.  0 my  Lord  de  - li  - vered  Dan  - iel,  0 


fa 

^ HSf: 


h k 


goe!= 


ggL ' 


ll 


Dan  - iel,  0 
— N— 


Dan  - iel,  0 


my  Lord  de  - li  - vered 

^ ■ B ■ 


Dan  - iel,  0 


& — — ^ 

why  not  de  - li  - ver  me  too  ? 


95 

115.  0 BROTHERS,  DON’T  GET  WEARY. 


r-jHh, 1 

~i  i -j— 3= 

1 

— i* — f® — ^ — i®~hI 

1 

1 3 

tT  ■s' 

0 

brothers,  don’t  get 

wea  - ry,  0 

l 

brothers,  don’t  get 

th — 1 

[- 

- 

jBtL 

.-■■■■  ,T  • 

h'. 

r ms 

iP 

m 

V 

7 

' & 

— mk 

1 

wea  - ry,  0 brothers,  don’t  get  wea  - ry,  We’re  waiting  for  tho 


Lord.  We’ll  land  on  Canaan’s  shore,  We’ll  land  on  Canaan’s 


T#Z7- 

■ 

A* 

n - 

1 

— 

j 

JZ- 

vA 

• | 

1 

1 

As 

Z ^ M <53 

— jmt 

?as 

i 



_4fe 

• 

— sst 

-^1 

d 

j 

shore,  When  we  land  on  Canaan’s  shore,  We’ll  meet  forev  - er  more. 


116.  I WANT  TO  JOIN  THE  BAND. 


=^=i 

jm 

m — 

pp 

^ — iT 

—&> 

0) — 



-V — t — F— 

— I 

— i 

— 1 u — U- — 

What  is  that  up 

— g.  « 

yonder  I 

see  ? 

Two 

lit  - tie  an  - g 

els 

want  to  jine  the  band,  (Sing  togeth-er)  I want  to  jin©  the  band. 


117 


JACOB’S  LADDER. 


J ~ 

& f9  1: 

mr~. 

^ M 

9 ■ m 

LLi_ 

—VI/. 

AS 

“ 9 

^=E== 

I want  to  climb  up  Jacob’s  lad 


der,  Jacob’s 


zz 

?$f—j — i 

h. 4. 

—\ 

S — 1 

i 

.if  jfrfJ 

' te,  r- 

42 

~ jl  1 

Ife. 1 . 

w 

i i ^ 

&)  ! 

/ ... 

*— 

P 



4* 

4 — 

<U 


lad  - der,  0 Jacob’s  lad  - der,  I want  to  climb  up  Jacob’s 


p-si^.4 

— ; -x  1 (& (S> — (g$ 

» 

Y-&\ 

r1 r---p- 

— — F - & 1 r : fes? — 

P p M—— -y— — 

^ — 

» — : 

^ 1 

lad  - der,  But  I can’t  climb  it  till  I make  my 


— 

nj — — — - — =— i 

— 1 1— I" 

-ft 

Z2, 

u 

m 

* • 

w 

w 

frj 

f 

**  * <P 

* K 

i 

1— H 

— 

4 

sag 

W — 11 

L-=N 

peace  with  the  Lord.  0 praise  ye  the  Lord, I’ll  praise  Him  till  I 

O praise  the  Lord,  0 praise  ye  the 


die.  I’ll  praise  Him  till  I die,  And  sing  Je  - ru  - sa  - lem. 


Lord. 


118.  PRAY  ON. 


1 i 

zm ~ — 

^ 

s r 

am  - 

JL 

"A  yt  - 

..  . E— — Uwi_ — 

JdL 





... L_ 

L — «= 

E ' 



Pray  on,  pray  on ; Pray  on  dem  light  us  o - ver  ; Pray 


J «? 

lv 

IZjS 

& 

# 

• 

K.  C 

£ — hn, 

/j 

i _ ___ 

S>) 

1 * 

"*  i8*®, 

2 !S : 

^ Is  1 

(n 

r.  1 A 

Vi 

— 1 * 

J i 



. — t 

IE 

J 

4 

gfi) 

<sj> 

LJ — J 

v - — csr ” — 

dp 

on,  Pray  on,  De  u - nion  break  of  day.  My  sister,  you  come  to 


see  bap  - tize,  In  de  u - nion  break  of  day ; My  ’loved 


sister,  you  come  to  see  baptize,  In  de  un  - ion  break  of  day. 


[As  an  interpretation  of  “ dem  light  us  over,”  I suggest  “ de  night  is  over 
and  “union”  should  probably  have  a capital  U.  “ De  night  is  over;  de  Union 
break  of  day  (da  cornin’)”  The  interchange  of  l and  n is  not  uncommon,  and  is 
illustrated  again  in  this  song  in  the  word  “Union,”  which  was  pronounced 
“yuliul”  by  the  person  who  sang  it  to  me.  This  song  and  Nos.  38,  41,  42,  43„ 
119,  122,  and  123,  came  on  to  the  plantation  after  I left. — C.  P.  W.] 


119.  GOOD  NEWS,  MEMBER. 


^ 

is — M 

S — S — ; 

BiK 

1 

. m 

TZ  T*  » Kp  w 

vf/ 

sii*  | ^ I, 

L— 

Good  news,  member,  good  news,  member,  Don’t  you  mind  what  Satan  say ; 


2%—, 1 

iv N 

Sr 

IS — iSn 

s 



v | •]][ 

"(t? 

% tf-y — i 

S 3 as. 

-(59 

^ mu 

4si  & & 

' 

Z g&l ■& 

nr — 





— t-J  ■— :D 

Good  news,  member,  good  news,  And  I hearde  from  heav’n  to  - day. 


98 


• 1 

f— h h 

% 

% 

it, 

h.  P 

! 

AL  ^ * ! □ 

2 

8 

2 

2 p*  i 

m & 

J • 

— &> 

5 — J.7.— 1 ..#! — 



1.  My  brud  - der  have  a seat  and  I so  glad, 


~2 

— m — 

— IN 

Ne N 

fe e 

P3 

k:i=$=S 

pV- 

ds 

& P* 

Good  news,  mem  - ber,  good  news ; My  brudder  have  a seat  and 


I so  glad,  And  I hearde  from  heav’n  to  - day. 


2 Mr.  Hawley  have  . ?a£adise, 

3 Archangel  bring  baptizing  doWil. 


120.  I WANT  TO  DIE  LIKE-A  LAZARUS  DIE. 


* 


In  is 


9J 


- ty  ’Rit  - ta  ) die  like  - a Lazarus  die, 


want  to 


N N 

\ ^ 

— 

* s 

— iSP dff* jg* 

S? 

% — 

& 4& 

<¥» 

h J K 

& 



Die  like -a  Lazarus  die;  I want  to  die  like -a  Lazarus 


a fit 


V ■ 


die,  like  - a Lazarus  die,  like  - a Lazarus  die. 


AWAY  DOWN  IN  SUNBURY 


121, 


99 


Pi 


a 

L-g 


massa  take  dat  new  bran  coat  And  bang  it  on  de  wall 

Dat  darkee  take  dat  same  ole  coat  And  wear  ’em  to  de  ball 


:} 


i-m — j 

M 

— f* — 

s~~ 

Nr — Nr 

V- 

s 

«K,  ^ fc. 

% 

tz m 

ft 

-W <Sf 

<0 

m — 

p ^ p p 

Tt-r—d -m—d 

0 don’t  you  hear  my  true  lub  sing?  0 don’t  you  hear  ’em 


r~i 

H-. ,Vr 

- 

taT" T~i 

— 

N fc— 

N 

Nr 

jt  V- 

«1  | 

's 

— 1 ^ 

4 

>- — « 

— ~<j— 

-ijfc — <0 

p d 

j® 

• .#■ 41 

tuns 

~**—r~* 

-JgtzA 

1 

Hffll 

sigh  ? A - way  down  in  Sun  - bur-y  I’m  bound  to  live  and  die. 


122.  THIS  IS  THE  TROUBLE  OF  THE  WORLD. 


fiS5r-i 



N~  N 

2r 

KZ h 

gm 

% 

■mm 

IN  <m 

-r 

3 U\A  & & 

P 

£5  SS  r# 

r* aw : 1 

52= 

* 

?=P= 

~0r ”r"  ■■.■■■ 

t7 


I ax  Fa  - der  Georgy  for  re  - li  - gion,  Fa  - der 


f” 

K -4 

”»=5,5L 

^ 

~m— — lap N — m — 

■”  M 

^ — ! 

S=*“ 

At 

i 

give  me  re  - li  - gion  for  to  run  to  my  el  - der ; 0 


100 


dis  is  de  trouble  of  de  world.  Dis  is  de  trouble  of  de 


world,  0,*  Dis  is  de  trouble  of  de  world. 


(what  you  ( doubt  j for?) 
} shame  j 

( take  it  ea  - ay  ) 

( Tit  - ty  ’Me  - lia  ) 


* (What  you  doubt  for  ?)  etc. 


1,  Wai’,  poor  Dan  - iel,  He  lean  on  de  Lord’s  side;  (Say) 


ac 


ee  el  «u  fig 


Lord’s  side.  2.  (Say)  De  gold  - en  chain  f to  ease  him  down. 

3 De  silver  spade  to  dig  his  grave ; 

He  lean,  etc. 

* i.  e.  Daniel  (as  if  Samson)  racked  the  lion’s  jaw . f Band. 

A Port  Royal  variation  of  “ Who  is  on  the  Lord’s  side”  (No.  75.) 


101 


124.  THESE  ARE  ALL  MY  FATHER’S  CHILDREN. 


fjj 



P m — 

-m — (9 ^ P- 

Nr— 

~~ — urn 

V 

i 

^=^=3 SL- 

Dese  all  my  fader’s  children,  Dese  all  my  fader’s  children, 


r-  Q — \) — 

• 

—m p p p — 

__p m 

— m ^ - 

m e „ &=& 

=p===^===^===z^=: 

* — 



4- — * 

Dese  all  my  fa  - der’s  children,  Out  - shine  de  sun. 


h •»-. 1 

is  ^ 

fc — 

Jr 

a 

k 

N 1 s 

b 

:i{ 

( 

y*  i m m 

Id  Hi  Cj  P 

% 

) • .....  . p 

Lp- — — -p — p — ® 



My  fader’s  done  wid  de  trouble  o’  de  world,  wid  de 


~P  m — P 

• 

Or  ■ . * » 

SSL . 

-p~ — ^ — P — $ — 

it 

W 

0*  « 

4 — 

fader’s  done  wid  de  trouble  o’  de  world,  Outshine  de  sun. 


[This  is  interesting  as  being  probably  the  original  of  “ Trouble  of  the  world  ” 
(No.  10.)  and  peculiarly  so  from  the  following  custom,  which  is  described  by  a 
North  Carolina  negro  as  existing  in  South  Carolina.  When  a pater-familias 
dies,  his  family  assemble  in  the  room  where  the  coffin  is,  and,  ranging  them- 
selves round  the  body  in  the  order  of  age  and  relationship,  sing  this  hymn, 
marching  round  and  round.  They  also  take  the  youngest  and  pass  him  first 
over  and  then  under  the  coffin.  Then  two  men  take  the  coffin  on  their  shoulders 
and  carry  it  on  the  run  to  the  grave.] 


102 


125.  THE  OLD  SHIP  OF  ZION. 

[We  have  received  two  versions  of  the  “ Old  Ship  of  Zion,”  quite  different 
from  each  other  and  from  those  given  by  Col.  Higginson.  The  first  was  sung 
twenty-five  years  ago  by  the  colored  people  of  Ann  Arundel  Co.,  Maryland. 
The  words  may  be  found  in  “The  Chorus”  (Philadelphia:  A.  S.  Jenks,  I860,) 
p.  170.  (Compare,  also,  p.  167.) 


It 

i J J 

J® (iff . ♦ ..j 

fc=7"  - h,  • fc 

/grp  ^ 

\ * > 

— 

frr  gP ZZZ g 

cp 

1.  Wliat  ship  is  that  you’re  en-  list  - ed  up  - on  ? 0 glo  - ry  lial  - le  - 


1 

i — » 

^ 

^ 

A 

• 

US' 

SS  1 

* 

i 

ir 

v— cJ  a 

U 

< 

a? 

V 

j • 

L & ^ 

& 

Cy 

- lu  - jah ! ’Tis  the 

old  ship 

up  

of  Zi  - on,  hal 

- le 

- 

<P  <59 

f®  . • . ^ . 

J 

> m * 

^ “j 

III 

P 

u! 

r • 

Z>  M 

— 

v 

7 r — 1 — ^ 

cr  1 

- lu  - jah ! ’Tis  the  old  ship  of  Zi  - on,  hal  - le  - lu  - jalil 


2 And  who  is  the  Captain  of  the  ship  that  you’re  on?— 0 glory,  etc. 
My  Saviour  is  the  Captain,  hallelujah  ! 


[The  other  is  from  North  Carolina :] 


pf-% 



-At — 4 # 

— — — 

- fcff — 

-pRV 

^ 

g gUl 

h?"  ^ b*  "Iff*- ' 

■■■  t ” 

L-t“ 

iff ^ — 

1.  Don’t  you  see  that  ship  a - sail  * in’,  a - sail  - in’,  a - 


sail 


in’,  Don’t  you  see  that  ship 


a - sail 


in’,  Gwina 


y w 

— * n 

'1.  1 1 ...» 

JIZZ3  23  . ! 

“ ! -1 

xSP  Mr  C&r  a iiP 

-p*— 


o - ver  to  the  Prom  - ised  Land  ? I asked  my  Lord,  shall  I 


♦ 


ev  - er  be  the  one,  shall  I ev  - er  be  the  one,  shall  I 


B 

2-%  get  b ^ 

-era  [-2 

-.Bll 

(f 

\ K r?  w ,J  Z*  u 

Sir 

. 4»>  , 

L!L 

7 & S> W m L* 

■ 

12 

a 

^ tr  ' ^ ^ 

ev  - er  be  the  one,  To  go  sail  - in’,  sail  - in’, 


sail  - in’,  sail  - in’,  Gwine  o - ver  to  the  Promised  Land? 


2 She  sails  like  she  is  heavy  loaded. 

3 King  Jesns  is  the  Captain. 


4  The  Holy  Ghost  is  the  Pilot. 


104 

126.  COME  ALONG,  MOSES. 


— 

" "h*.  '"1* 

! I^J  1 1 N K 

uZ) 

sfc  ! ! /cW 

j j H r 

L-<&P 

f&i*  ■*** 

-tfA 

V J i 

- - - 

— 

®  2 3 * *  & r®  ® ® 

V— H — i 

Come  a - long,  Mo-ses,*  don’t  get  lost,  don’t  get  lost,  don’t  get  lost, 


Come  a - long,  Mo- ses,  don’t  get  lost,  We  are  the  people  f of 


God.  1.  We  have  a just  God  to  plead-a  our  cause,  to 


plead-a  our  cause,  to  plead-a  our  cause,  We  have  a just  God  to 


plead-a  our  cause,  We  are  the  peo-ple  of  God, 


2 He  sits  in  the  Heaven  and  he  answers  prayer. 

3 Stretch  out  your  rod  and  come  across. 


* Judy,  Aaron.  f Children. 


[This  air  has  in  parts  a suspicious  resemblance  to  the  Sunday-school  hymn 
“’Tis  religion  that  can  give,”  which  has  become  very  wide-spread  in  the  South 
since  the  war.  Mrs.  James,  however,  heard  it  from  an  old  woman  in  North 

Carolina,  early  in  1862,  which  would  seem  to  vouch  for  its  genuineness.] 


127 


THE  SOCIAL  BAND 


s s 

Nr 

...... 

M 

s — 

m.  :L..g_ 

Tv,/)  -J 

1 I 

J 

S m 

...  . vL 

r 

“V+T 

.M m s 

m 

Jit 

' 

& 

-J u> — 

d 


Bright  an  - gels  on  the  wa  - ter,  Hovering  by  the  light ; Poor 


sin  - ner  stand  in  the  dark  ness,  And  can  - not  see  the  light. 


jA 1 

m 

m 

w ~ 

m 

m — 

— 

|0 

itt “ 

si> 

^ F S 

LAD ^ — 

— 

^ 

y — 

«= 

2 — 

12 — 

2 — 

: — 

* ■■  k — =g£= 

I want  Aunty  Ma  - ry  * for  to  go  with  me,  I 


fe-  N K 


& — 


want  Aunty  Mary  for  to  go  with  me,  To  join  the  social  band. 


* Brother  David. 


106 


128.  GOD  GOT  PLENTY  O’  ROOM. 


r-HH 

5s 

55) 

' 

A 

s 

* 8 

. 

<5$ 

<3^ 

• 

^ — w 

zsjz^ 

Hjss — tj# — ' — & — — f* — y» — ^ — 

3 — 

— 1 

God  got  plenty  o’  room,  got  plenty  o’  room,  ’Way  in  de 


f^—\ 

* K 

— I 

o _ 

1 

i 

\ & m 

Z2  

1 « 

1 : 

4 fr— 

yjj*  S—  ^ Lf~  - 

— s-s — 

kingdom,  God  got  plenty  o’  room  my  Je-sussay,  ’Way  in  de 


r-f# — 

^ F 

* 1 

(- te— 

H ~ 

4 

5> P 

IZiT.. 

— * 

S 

& 

^-4 

. .& 

&- 

kingdom.  1.  Brethren,  I have  come  a - gain,  ’Way  in  de 


0 * 

*5 

3 fefc.  J 

rs — 

-L-J 

f T\  ■ P’  ® 

r'  r' 

r' 

• 1 -a 

rfgi  1 1 

vT7  rr  rz 

_L  L 



^ K 

~r  VS  W W vr 

kingdom,  To  help  you  all  to  pray  and  sing, ’Way  in  de  kingdom. 


2 So  many-a  weeks  and  days  have  passed 
Since  we  met  together  last. 

3 Old  Satan  tremble  when  he  sees 
The  weakest  saints  upon  their  knees. 

4 Prayer  makes  the  darkest  cloud  withdraw, 

Prayer  climbed  the  ladder  Jacob  saw. 

5 Daniel’s  wisdom  may  I know, 

Stephen’s  faith  and  spirit  sure. 

6 John’s  divine  communion  feel, 

Joseph’s  meek  and  Joshua’s  zeal. 

7 There  is  a school  on  earth  begun 
Supported  by  the  Holy  One. 

8 We  soon  shall  lay  our  school-books  by, 

And  shout  salvation  as  I fly. 

[The  above  is  given  exactly  as  it  was  sung,  some  of  the  measures  in  some  „ 
in  and  some  in  \ time.  The  irregularity  probably  arises  from  omission  of 
rests,  but  it  seemed  a hopeless  undertaking  to  attempt  to  restore  the  correct 
time,  and  it  was  thought  best  to  give  it  in  this  shape  as  at  any  rate  a charac- 
teristic specimen  of  negro  singing.  The  song  was  obtained  of  a North  Carolina 
negro,  who  said  it  came  from  Virginia.] 


107 


129.  YOU  MUST  BE  PURE  JlND  HOIY. 


y- » 

1 

"" ~'l 

y 



fc, 

j 

j 

Hr1 

v t ■—  - — 

7—  ^ 



jgtn 

* v ■ — w — mr—  gjp 

1.  When  I was  wick  - ed  an’  - a prone  to  sin,  My 


Lord,  brether-en,  ah  my  Lord!  I thought  that  I couldn’t  be 


F 

gff— 1 , 

=1= 

•\  ' J ""  ! - 

zA- 

1 h — 

\ 

1 

Lx. 

J — ■ ■ ■ " - • ■■■  ■ 

— & 

L <pi  ati  m 

& 

W " 

born  a - gin,  My  Lord,  breth  - er  - en,  ah  my  Lord ! 


You  must  be  pure  and  ho  - ly.  You  must  be  pure  an’  - a 


fcz 

if 

• 

— 1 — 

— 1 

H — 1 — f — | — 1 — | — i-t— j-~ 

a 

} 

-{g? — <35* 

— op 

— — j — & — S — — -^j — — 

ho  - ly,  You  must  be  pure  and  ho  - ly  To  see  God  feed  his  lambs. 


2 I’ll  run  all  round  the  cross  and  cry, 
My  Lord,  bretheren,  ah  my  Lord, 
Or  give  me  Jesus,  or  1 die, 

My  Lord,  bretheren,  ah  my  Lord. 

You  must  be  pure  and  holy,  etc. 


108 


3 


The  Devil  am  a liar  and  conjurer  too, 


My  Lord,  etc. 

If  you  don’t  look  out  he’ll 
My  Lord,  etc. 


conjure  you, 
cut  you  in  two, 
cut  you  through, 


4 0 run  up,  sonny,  and  get  your  crown, 

My  Lord,  etc. 

And  by  your  Father  sit  you  down, 
My  Lord,  etc. 

5 I was  pretty  young  when  I begun, 

My  Lord,  etc. 

But,  now  my  work  is  almost  done, 
My  Lord,  etc. 

6 The  Devil’s  mad  and  I am  glad, 

My  Lord,  etc. 

He  lost  this  soul,  he  thought  he  had, 
My  Lord,  etc. 


7 Go  ’way,  Satan,  I don’t  mind  you, 

My  Lord,  etc. 

You  wonder,  too,  that  you  can’t  go  through, 
My  Lord,  etc. 

8 A lilly  * white  stone  came  rolling  down, 

My  Lord,  etc. 

It  rolled  like  thunder  through  the  town, 

My  Lord,  etc. 

* Qu.  little.  ? 


[This  is  a favorite  and  apparently  genuine  song  which  “ flourishes  ” in  a colored 
church  at  Auburn,  N.  Y.  having  been  introduced  there  from  the  South.  “It 
is  sung  on  all  occasions,  and  without  any  regard  to  order  in  the  verses  ; you 
may  not  be  able  to  see  any  connection  between  any  of  them . The  chorus  is  always 
sung  once  or  twice  before  the  verses  are  used  at  all.  You  will  see  that  occasionally 
there  is  inserted  an  extra  syllable  (ah)  and  always  in  the  2nd  and  4th  lines  of 
the  verses  ; why  this  is  done  I am  unable  to  discover,  but  it  appears  to  assist 
them  wonderfully  in  singing.  The  first  note  in  the  chorus  is  sung  very  loud , 
and  is  prolonged  to  an  indefinite  time,  at  the  pleasure  of  the  leader.  You  will 
notice  that  the  air  is  in  the  minor  mode,  but  the  chorus,  with  the  exception  of 
the  last  line,  in  the  major.” — W.  A.  B.] 


130 


BELLE  LAYOTTE 


CHORUS. 


— 

s =r~  - -f*. — — 

\ & — 

_ - ^ :m 

^ ■■■■  agj  ai-  j '»i  ~m 

^ 

d 3 


Mo  de  - ja  rou  - le  tout  la  c6te  Pan  - cor  ouar  par  - eil 


FINE.  SOLO. 


K h 

1 

fa  fa  1 

« PK  J m 

”1  1 1 I 

flVT \ * » I ....  * L 

J & i, 

w W 1 

\si/  • 

ml 3 U — 

1 

belle  La  - yotte.  (bis)  1.  Mo  rou  - le  tout  la  c6te, 


Mo  rou  - le  tout  la  col  - o - nie  ; Mo  pan  - cor  ouar 


— — 

A 

lTo  & 

fa 

^ ^ 5- Nr 

h r 

JED 

_ L 

_ I 

— j r*^ — i 

* __h 

\v 

* <*> 

& 

■ m & 

<£? 

a w -*dL 

griffonne  la  Qua  mo  gout  cornme  la  belle  La  - yotte. 


2 Jean  Babet,  mon  ami, 

Si  vous  couri  par  en  haut, 

Yous  mande  belle  Layotte 
Cadeau  la  li  te  promi  mouin. 

3 Domestique  la  maison 

Ye  tout  fache  avec  mouin, 
Paraporte  chanson  la 
Mo  compose  pou  la  belle  Layotte. 


110 


131. 


r£mon. 


SOLO. 


— js 


fr 


ts=t 


W - fr 


M 


:4zzz zst 


JBL 


Mo  par  - le  Re  - mon,  R6  - mon,  Li  par  - le  Si  - moil,  Si  - 

-H N 


-jv 


*7 


-K fc- 


- mon,  Li  par  - le  Ti  - tine,  Ti  - tine,  Li  tom  - be  dans  chagrin. 

CHORUS. 


fa fa 


-K  — N- 


m 


& 


-K= 


4- 


^ ■ 


aet 


<u 


0 femme  Rom- u - lus,  oh!  Belle  femme  Romu  - lus,  oh!  0 

fa fe, 


fr 


-N K- 


1 — — r 


H &> 

3i5 


U 


femme  Rom-u  - lus,  oh!  Belle  femme  qui  ga  vou  - 16  mo  fai. 


132. 

CHORUS. 


AURORE  BRADAIRE, 


t4- 

>z4 


cy 


Au -rore  Bradaire,  belle  ti  fille,  Au- rore  Bradaire,  belle  ti  fille,  Au 
— N 


fcr 


4v 


rore  Bradaire,  belle  ti  fille,  C’est  li  mo  ou  - le,  c’est 

FINE.  SOLO. 


li  ma  pren.  Li  pas  man  - de  robe  mous-se  - line,  Li 

0>~ 


eJ 


f- 

% „9- 


pas  man  - de  de  - ba  bro  - de,  Li  pas  man  - de  sou  - 

D.  C. 


far 


35= 


N h- 


*r 


- lier  prinelle,  C’est  li  mo  ou  - le,  c’est  li  ma  pren. 


Ill 

133.  CAROLINE. 


iS  — r 

&> 

3 

W 

— 

. 



4 

yJA-P 

l=b=! 

4 

r— 

-im — pf — 

\4 ^ 

Aine,  de,  trois,  Car  - o - line,  ga  ga  yd  comme  ga  ma  chere, 


«h 

n — i 

Nr 

3 

tt_ 

— ^ 

^ 

/ 

m 

ml— 

r i 

TT 

N — 

w 

r 

m ^ m 

490 

7 

m — 

4— 

4 

4 & 3 — 

LJU 

Aine,  de,  trois,  Car- o - line,  ga  ga  ye  comme  ga  ma  chere.  Pa 


¥& K — S K — * 

r-* 

^ 14 

« fa 

b-  K K.  

% # 

9 ~ 

s 

« 

4- 

x Or  | 



tip 

<5 

j — — — 

~ ~ m <& 

ji  .. 

- pa  di  non, man- mj 

m d 

i n 

on,  C’est  li  mo  ould,  c’est  li  m 

a pr 

* 

en ; Y 

a 

y+f EST K 

S a 

jam  an 

* 

5 

L 

55  S3  . 4fHk  . M 

> 

r 

rj r n V 

% 

M 

_#?h J*  Jr  P r m 

s 

u 

i 

4L 

J, 

m. 

ass 

^ ^=F=S> 

Jft.— 

pas  l’arzan  pou  ache-td  ca-banne,  C’est  li  mo  ou-le,  c’est  li  ma  pren. 


184.  CALINBA. 


SOLO. 


Nr- 

Ns 

^ r 

Ns 

v Ut>  U1J 

i®>  j 

fir  --  ^ 

ZSl  ® 

fBP  |Er  fir 

r pr  

v y n 

-) 

p- — pt — — 

L—i ^ m 

1.  Mi  - chid  Prd  - val  li  don  - nin  gran  bal,  Li  fait 

CHORUS. 


*5 

^ ... 

-J 

> 

m 

— h — i — 

i 

p & 

<ss> 

— j— — & 

- 



M 

ZM 

— 

h#~-  ^ 

naig  pa  - yd  pou  sau  - td  in  - pe.  Dan  - sd  ca  - lin  - da,  bou  - 




— 

(3^ 



nr 

L A ^ —....  . 

m-  <s 

“^3 

iW." 

| ■ 

XZ 

^ 

^ 

jj 

■'(P1 

^ -J 

J 

Jki. 

1 

.^4 

=C*  4- 

29 

9 

fj 

^ r rnr  .v-  -:  ^ ' 

- doum,  boudoum,  Dan  - sd  ca  - lin  - da,  bou- doum,  boudoum. 


2 Michie  Preval  li  te  capitaine  bal, 

So  cocher  Louis  td  maite  ceremonie. 

3 Dans  lequirie  la  yave  gran  gala, 

Mo  ere  choual  laye  td  bien  e tonne. 

4 Yave  des  negresse  belle  passe  maitresse, 
Yd  vole  bebelle  dans  l’ormoire  mamzelle. 


112 


135. 


n 


b~u ft- 

^77i -,T 


LOLOTTE. 

-ft  ft  •• 


ft ft 


eh 


— 


Pauve  pi  - ti  Lolotte  a mouin,  Pauve  pi- ti  Lolotte  a mouin, 


Pauve  pi  - ti  Lolotte  a mouin,  Li  gaignin  doulair.  Ca  - la  - 


- lou  por  - te  madrasse,  li  por  - te  ji  - pon  gar  - ni. 


* ftr 


ft — zftr 


> ft- 


W- 


s — m 


Pauve  pi -ti  Lolotte  a mouin,  Pauve  pi- ti  Lolotte  a mouin, 


doulair,  doulair,  doulair,  Li  gaignin  doulair  dans  coeur  a li. 


113 


136.  MUSIEU  BAIN  JO. 


Z-iba — & — ,®>— 

V— — r; 

v— 

* — 

h 

v" — & — 

— bo- — p8 1® — 

2 tz 

-|jg> Csf> |® L 

£ g * y t1 



Voyez  ce  mu  - let  la,  Musieu  Bainjo,  Comme  il  esc  in  - so  - 


FINE. 


d.  c. 


n=\ 

t 

=K= 

“=R= 

tejj 

^ 

— 

s-i 

) — 

$$ 

4 — — 

— 48^ 

— p— 

m 

— v — h— A — — 

& m <& — 

LJ 

lent. 


Chapeau  sur 
La  canne  a 
Botte  qui  fait 


c6  - te,  Musieu  Bain -jo, 
la  main,  Musieu  Bain  - jo, 
crin,  crin,  Musieu  Bain  - jo, 


[The  seven  foregoing  songs  were  obtained  from  a lady  who  heard  them  song, 
before  the  war,  on  the  ‘‘Good  Hope”  plantation,  St.  Charles  Parish,  Louisiana. 
The  language,  evidently  a rude  corruption  of  French,  is  that  spoken  by  the  negroes 
in  that  part  of  the  State  ; and  it  is  said  that  it  is  more  difficult  for  persons  who 
speak  French  to  interpret  this  dialect,  than  for  those  who  speak  English  to  un- 
derstand the  most  corrupt  of  the  ordinary  negro-talk.  The  pronunciation  of  this 
negro-French  is  indicated,  as  accurately  as  possible,  in  the  versions  given  here, 
which  furnish,  also,  many  interesting  examples  of  the  peculiar  phrases  and 
idioms  employed  by  this  people,  'lhe  frequent  omission  of  prepositions,  ar- 
ticles. and  auxiliary  verbs,  as  well  as  of  single  letters,  and  the  contractions  con- 
stantly occurring,  are  among  the  most  noticeable  peculiarities.  Some  of  the 
most  difficult  words  are  : mo  for  me,  mon,  je ; li  for  lui.  le,  la,  il,  elk ; mcuin  for 
moi ; ye  for  ils,  leur ; aine , de,  for  un,  deux ; ic  for  e/e.  etait ; ya,  yave  for  il  y a, 
etc.;  ouar  for  voir  and  its  inflections  ; oule  for  vouloir,  etc. ; pancor  for  pas  en- 
core; michie  for  monsieur ; in  pc  for  un  peu.  The  words  are,  of  course,  to  be 
pronounced  as  if  they  were  pure  French. 

Four  of  these  songs.  Nos.  130.  131,  132  and  133.  were  sung  to  a simple  dance,, 
a sort  of  minuet,  called  the  Coonjai ; the  name  and  the  dance  are  probably  both 
of  African  origin.  When  the  Coonjai  is  danced,  the  music  is  furnished  by  an 
orchestra  of  singers,  the  leader  of  whom — a man  selected  both  for  the  quality  of 
his  voice  and  for  his  skill  in  improvising— -sustains  the  solo'part,  while  the  others 
afford  him  an  opportunity,  as  they  shout  in  chorus,  for  inventing  some  neat 
verse  to  compliment  some  lovely  danseuse , or  celebrate  the  deeds  of  some  planta- 
tion hero,  'lhe  dancers  themselves  never  sing,  as  in  the  case  of  the  religious 
“shout”  of  the  Port  Royal  negroes;  and  the  usual  musical  accompaniment,  be- 
sides that  of  the  singers,  is  that  furnished  by  a skilful  performer  on  the  barrel- 
head-drum, the  jaw-bone  and  key,  or  some  other  rude  instrument. 

No.  134.  The  “ calinda”  was  a sort -of  contra-dance,  which  has  now  passed 
entirely  out  of  use.  Bescherelle  describes  the  two  lines  as  “avangant  et  recu- 
lant  en  cadence,  et  faisant  des  contorsions  fort  singulieres  et  des  gestes  fort 
lascifs.” 

The  first  movement  of  No.  135,  “Lolotte,”  has  furnished  M.  Gottschalk  with 
the  theme  of  his  “Ballade  Cr6ole.”  “La  Savane,”  op.  3 de  la  Louisiane. 

- In  136,  we  have  the  attempt  of  some  enterprising  negro  to  write  a French 
song;  lie  is  certainly  to  be  congratulated  on  his  success. 

It  will  be  noticed  that  all  these  songs  are  “ seculars” ; and  that  while  the 
words  of  most  of  them  are  of  very  little  account,  the  music  is  as  peculiar,  as 
interesting,  and,  in  the  case  of  two  or  three  of  them,  as  difficult  to  write  down,, 
or  to  sing  correctly,  as  any  that  have  preceded  them.] 


114 


EDITORS’  NOTE. 


The  original  arrangement  of  the  foregoing  collection  has  not  been  adhered 
to.  Why  the  secular  songs  do  not  appear  by  themselves  has  been  already  ex- 
plained. That  the  division  into  parts  is  not  strictly  geographical  was  caused 
by  the  tardy  arrival  of  most  of  the  songs  contained  in  Part  LV.  Should  a second 
edition  ever  be  justified  by  the  favor  with  which  the  present  is  received,  these 
irregularities  will  be  corrected. 

It  was  proposed  to  print  music  without  words,  and  words  without  music,  each 
by  themselves.  But  the  first  can  hardly  be  said  to  have  been  obtained,  unless 
il  Shock  along,  John,”  No.  86,  is  an  instance.  The  words  without  music  which 
in  one  or  two  cases  were  kindly,  and  we  fear  laboriously,  communicated  to  us, 
presented  no  fresh  or  striking  peculiarities,  and  we  therefore  decided  against 
their  admission. 

As  was  remarked  in  the  Introduction,  we  are  fully  aware  of  the  incomplete- 
ness of  this  collection,  though  we  may  fairly  enough  assume  it  to  be  la  creme  de 
la  creme.  Col.  Iligginson  writes: 

“ I wish  you  would  look  up  one  ‘ spiritual,’  of  which  I only  remember  the 
chorus—4  It  doth  appear ’ — as  being  often  sung  in  camp.  Also,  ‘ Ring  dat  charm . 
ing  bell'  which  they  used  to  sing  to  please  Mrs.  Saxton,  who  liked  it.” 

Gen.  James  H.  Wilson,  who,  in  the  earlier  part  of  the  war,  was  at  Port  Royal, 
and,  during  explorations  and  night  surveys  of  the  coast  between  there  and  Ossa- 
baw  Sound,  had  frequent  opportunities  of  hearing  every  grade  of  “spirituals,” 
writes,  of  Col.  Higginson’s  collection  in  the  Atlantic  Monthly: 

“ fie  has  omitted  two  which  I heard  more  generally  sung  than  any  others.  I 
refer  to  the  one  beginning : 

“‘They  took  ole  Master  Lord, 

And  fed  him  on  pepper  and  gall/ 

and  the  other : 

“ ‘ My  brudder  Johnny’s  new-born  baby, 

Hi  oh,  de  new-born  ! ’ 

“ The  airs  to  which  these  were  sung  are  very  peculiar,  while  the  burthen  of 
the  songs  is  pretty  clearly  indicated  by  the  lines  given  above.  The  first  seems 
to  allude  to  the  persecutions  of  Christ,  while  the  latter  simply  refers  to  the  birth 
and  early  death  of  a new-born  baby,  and  is  varied  by  making  anew  verse  for  all 
• the  brothers  and  sisters  that  the  singer  happens  to  be  able  to  call  to  mind. 


115 


“I  also  recollect  the  refrain  of  a boat-song  which  a crew  of  ten  stalwart  ne- 
groes used  to  sing  for  me  in  our  excursions,  but  I am  inclined  to  the  belief  that 
it  was  by  no  means  a ‘ spiritual,’  as  I could  never  get  any  of  them  to  explain  it 
to  my  satisfaction.  The  only  words  I could  make  out  clearly  were  : 

“ ‘ Jail  de  window,  jah ! 

Oh  jah  de  window,’  etc. 

and  the  meaning  of  which  I took  to  be  ‘ ’jar  the  window.’  Tf  they  had  any  such 
thing  among  them,  this  was  probably  a fragment  of  a simple  ballad,  describing 
an  incident  in  a negro  courtship.  I got  this  impression  at  the  time,  partly  from 
the  peculiar  tone  of  the  song,  and  partly  from  their  hesitancy  to  explain  it.  But 
whatever  may  have  been  its  real  character,  it  was  quite  musical,  and  had  such 
an  inspiring  effect  upon  my  boatmen  that  I have  known  them  to  row  eighteen  or 
twenty  miles,  exerting  their  utmost  strength,  keeping  perfect  time  to  its  notes, 
and  never  pausing  for  breath.” 

These,  certainly,  are  songs  to  be  desired  and  regretted..  But  Ave  do  not  de- 
spair of  recovering  them  and  others  perhaps  equally  characteristic  for  a second 
edition;  and  we  herewith  solicit  the  kind  offices  of  collectors  into  whose  hands 
this  volume  may  have  fallen,  in  extending  and  perfecting  our  researches.  For 
fully  a third  of  the  songs  recorded  by  Col.  Migginson  we  have  failed  to  obtain 
the  music,  and  they  may  very  well  serve  as  a guide  for  future  investigators. 
We  shall  also  gratefully  acknowledge  any  errors  of  fact  or  of  typography  that 
may  be  brought  to  our  attention,  and  in  general  anything  that  would  enhance 
the  value  or  the  interest  of  this  collection.  Communications  may  be  addressed 
to  Mr.  W.  P.  Garrison,  Office  of  The  Nation  newspaper,  Now  York  City. 

November,  1867. 


» 


> 


(y 


j.  ■ 


% 


f 


i 


■ 


■ 


. . _ 


■ 


. a 


$ V. 


- 


. I 


-ii. 


1 • 1 


' V 


J 


& 


if 


a 


