™  «wed  nmaM  ma  uBwr 

m  Riverside  Drta,  j^  27f  ^  , 


5357 


ls\ 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 

in  2012  with  funding  from 

Princeton  Theological  Seminary  Library 


http://archive.org/details/folkamericOOwork 


FOLK  SONG  of  THE 
AMERICAN  NEGRO 


JOHN  WESLEY  WORK,  A.M. 

Professor  of  Latin  and  History 
Fisk  University- 


Press  o£ 
FISK  UNIVERSITY 

Nashville,  Term. 


Presbyterian  Historical   Society 
425   Lou  ,*&  eex 


o 

£    o 

— 

f^>      09 

£   = 

a* 


w 

►J     o 


, 


Loo 


indication 

Bo 
"6ulce  6ecu5  meum,"  "animae  6imi6ium  meae, 


IK  OTD  MESWjfil  MISSION  UHMN 
415  Uveisito  jgfo,  Mew  M  21,  H.  K. 


/76  26 


Copyrighted,  1915 

F.  A.  McKENZIE 

Nashville,  Tenn. 


CONTENTS. 


PAGE 

Introduction    5 

Chapter  I. 
African    Song    7 

Chapter  II. 
Transmigration  and  Transition  of  Song 1G 

Chapter  III. 
American   Folk   Song 20 

Chapter  IV. 
Characters  and  Peculiarities 35 

Chapter  V. 

Number    and    Classification 44 

Joy   Songs    45-49 

Sorrow  Songs 50-54 

Sorrow  Songs  with.  Note  of  Joy 55-GO 

Songs  of  Faith 60-G2 

Songs  of  Hope   02-04 

Songs  of  Love    G4,  05 

Songs  of  Determination     00,  07 

Songs  of  Adoration     08,  09 

Songs  of  Patience     * 09,  70 

Songs  of  Courage    71 

Songs  of  Humility    72 

Chapter  VI. 
Birth  and  Growth  of  Certain  Songs,  with  Exposition 76 

Chapter  VII. 
Agencies  of  Preservation  and  Development 90 

Chapter  VIII. 
The  Tour  of  the  Original  Jubilee  Singers 101 

Chapter  IN. 
What  the  Negro's  Music  Means  to  Him 110 

Chapter  X. 
A  Painted  Picture  of  a  Soul 122 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 

PAGE 

Jubilee  Hall    2 

"Daddy  Oomin'  Home" l:; 

Mrs.   Sheppard   TO 

Mrs.  Moore    81 

Original  Jubilee  Singers   1<i2 

You  May  Bury  Me 115 


MUSIC. 

PAGE 

I  Couldn't  Hear  Nobody  Pray 24 

Somebody's  Buried  in  the  Graveyard 34 

Balm  in  Gilead   43 

This  is  a  Sin-Trying  World 75 

Steal  away  to  Jesus   89 

Were  You  There?   100 

I'm  Going  to  Do  All  I  Can 100 

Swing   Low    121 

Lord.  I  Want  to  Be  a  Christian 131 


INTRODUCTION. 


Whet*  Fisk  University  was  chartered  after  the  close  of  the  war  the  treas- 
urer was  moved  to  devote  his  leisure  hours  to  the  instruction  of  the  pupils  in 
vocal  music.  Their  voices  and  progress  were  both  a  surprise  and  delight. 
Five  years  later  the  Jublilee  Singers  of  the  University  sang  before  the  National 
Council  at  Oberlin.  Leading  Congregational  ministers  and  laymen  from  all 
parts  of  the  land  were  thrilled  not  only  by  the  sweetness  of  their  voices  and 
the  accuracy  of  execution,  but  were  charmed  also  by  the  wonderful  feeling  of 
the  plantation  melodies  which  were  entirely  new  to  them.  As  a  member  of  that 
Council  in  1S71,  I  was  present  and  well  remember  the  marvelous  magic  of  their 
song  with  its  accompanying  rythm  and  the  revelation  it  gave  of  the  Negroes' 
religious  nature  and  experience.  This  was  the  introduction  to  the  American 
people  of  the  folk  songs  with  which  the  Jubilee  Singers  of  this  University 
went  on  a  triumphant  tour  around  the  world,  the  new  world  and  the  old. 

It  is  a  far  cry  from  that  day  of  the  introduction  of  these  folk  songs  which 
has  their  expression  and  birth  among  the  days  of  bondage,  and  which  have 
been  faithfully  preserved  and  steadfastly  cherished  for  the  light  they  give  in 
their  quaintness  of  expression  upon  the  experiences  which  call  them  forth, 
and  for  the  exquisite  melodies  which  touch  a  chord  that  the  most  consummate 
art  fails  to  reach. 

Professor  Work  not  only  presents  a  remarkable  collection  of  these  folk 
songs  of  his  race,  but  in  the  study  of  their  evolution  and  history  he  brings  an 
interpretative  and  enlightening  analysis  of  their  characteristics  and  qualities 
with  a  literary  expression  which  is  only  second  to  the  songs  themselves,  and 
which  will  richly  repay  attention.  As  one  of  a  race  whose  historic  life  in  this 
country  is  so  recent,  Professor  Work  understands  and  realizes  how  it  is  that 
the  accumulated  strength  of  a  patient  overcoming  of  trials  on  the  part  of  souls 
in  their  aspiration  and  struggles,  called  forth  the  inspiration  of  these  songs, 
while  God  in  the  hard  processes  of  His  providence  was  leading  His  people  to 
a  permanent  inheritance.  For  many  years  an  honored  professor  in  his  Alma 
Mater,  like  the  original  instructor  of  the  Jubilee  Singers,'  Professor  Work  has 
turned  from  his  classes  in  Latin  to  assist  in  his  leisure  hours  in  the  musical 
education  of  students,  especially  to  keep  in  mind  the  days  in  which  these  folk 
songs  sprang  into  light.  All  added  attraction  to  this  choice  collection  of 
melodies  of  the  people  of  his  race  are  those  of  his  own  composition,  which 
have  already  won  their  way  into  the  pleased  recognition  of  all  who  have  heard 
them. 

A.  F.  Beard, 
Secretary  American  Missionary  Association. 


(5) 


FOREWORD. 


Because  most  of  the  material  for  this  book  required  the  investiga- 
tion of  original  sources,  it  has  required  more  than  a  decade  to  bring 
the  work  to  completion.  So  much  of  what  has  been  written  on  the 
subject  of  the  "Folk  Song  of  the  American  Negro"  has  been  posi- 
tively inaccurate  and  unreliable,  that  I  deemed  it  proper  to  learn 
the  story  from  the  songs  themselves  and  from  the  makers  of  the  songs. 

This  has  sometimes  meant  hunting  in  out-of-the-way  places,  at- 
tendance upon  church  services  here,  there,  and  yonder,  in  season  and 
out  of  season.  It  has  meant  in  some  cases,  years  of  search  for  some 
special  information,  sometimes  following  the  trail  from  state  to 
state.  Sincere  efforts  have  been  made  to  verify  the  statements  and 
propositions  herein,  and  though  some  of  these  statements  seem  almost 
incredible,  I  beg  the  reader  to  understand  that  very  much  of  the 
history  and  description  has  come  to  me  first  hand  from  those  who 
have  been  a  part  of  them.  Xo  supporting  authorities  have  been  ad- 
duced save  those  that  are  considered  wholly  reliable. 

The  work  was  undertaken  for  the  love  of  our  fathers'  songs.  It 
has  brought  me  much  real  pleasure  and  now  it  is  sent  forth  in  love. 
My  cordial  gratitude  is  herewith  expressed  to  Professor  Adam  K. 
Spence,  who  taught  me  the  value  of  these  songs;  to  Mrs.  Ella  Shep- 
pard  Moore,  who  taught  me  so  much  about  them  (these  two  of  blessed 
memory)  ;  to  Miss  Mary  E.  Spence,  for  many  valuable  suggestions, 
and  to  scores  of  others  who  have  been  patient  with  me,  answered  so 
many,  many  questions  and  have  given  me  the  information  which  has 
made  this  book  possible;  to  Miss  Jennie  A.  Eobinson,  who  has  so 
largely  directed  my  musical  inclinations  and  inspired  my  musical 
efforts;  and  to  Miss  Dora  A.  Scribner,  who  so  kindly  criticized  my 
manuscript. 

John  Wesley  Work. 

Xashville,  Tenn.,  April,  1915. 


(6) 


CHAPTER  I. 


African  Song. 


"TT'o  man  singt,  da  lass  dich  ruhig  nieder 
Bose  menschen  haben  keine  lieder.' 

THIKTY  centuries  ago,  amidst  the  dawning  civilization  of  the 
Mediterranean  shores,  science  taught  that  the  earth  was  a  cir- 
cular disc  surrounded  by  the  ocean.  Contemporaneous  legends  told 
of  the  swarthy  Ethiopians  living  in  two  divisions ;  one  in  the  extreme 
East,  the  land  of  the  rising  sun,  and  the  other  in  the  extreme  West, 
the  land  of  the  setting  sun.  Consequently  the  Ethiopians  dwelt  in 
perpetual  light. 

This  light  was  symbolic  of  their  own  souls;  pure,  bright,  and 
happy.  So  worthy  were  they  that  the  Gods  from  Olympus  honored 
them  with  regular  visits.  Homer  in  narrating  these  events  calls 
them  the  ''blameless  Ethiopians,"  and  Vergil  speaks  of  the  black 
Memnono,  the  King  of  the  Ethiopians,  as  the  son  of  Aurora,  the 
Goddess  of  the  Morning  and  of  Light. 

Euthless  centuries  have  not  overcast  that  brightness,  nor  have 
they  destroyed  the  soul  happiness  of  the  Son  of  Light.  His  soul  is 
a  song.  He  expresses  his  every  experience,  his  whole  life,  in  terms 
of  melody  and  he  passes  through  the  Valley  of  the  Shadow  of  Death 
with  a  song  upon  his  lips.  Studied  through  his  music,  the  African, 
living  in  cruel  savagery  and  black  heathenism,  becomes  less  a  savage, 
less  a  heathen,  for  he  sings  a  song  intensely  human  which  strangely 
touches  human  hearts.  This  savage,  this  heathen,  sings  of  the  har- 
vest, of  love,  of  life,  of  death,  and  of  the  god  whom  he  elects  to  serve. 

The  songs  of  the  tribes  differ  as  tribal  life  differs.  This  difference 
however,  is  not  important,  for  in  the  essentials  all  the  songs  are  won- 
derfully the  same.  Mountains,  rivers,  forests,  valleys,  lakes,  plains, 
— in  fact,  all  natural  surroundings  and  manifestations, — make  their 
distinct  impressions  upon  the  tribes  and  in  some  marked  respects 
render  them  different.  But  in  the  deep  life  forces  there  is  oneness. 
This  difference  and  this  oneness  are  both  clearly  portrayed  in  the 
music  of  the  African. 

(7) 


8  FOLK  SOXG  OF  THE  AMERICAN  XEGRO. 

All  tribes  have  constructed  their  music  upon  the  verse  and  chorus 
plan.  There  is  a  verse  sung  by  a  leader,  and  the  chorus  follows. 
The  leader  is  generally  chosen  for  his  voice  and  his  superior  knowl- 
edge of  the  songs.  This  peculiarity  has  remained  fixed  as  the  song 
of  the  African  has  come  through  the  receding  centuries.  There  are 
some  songs  in  which  the  African  heathen  shows  his  kinship  to  other 
heathen,  namely,  in  the  almost  uncanny  chants  generally  wailed  as 
accompaniments  to  the  war  dance.  This  chant  still  lives  a  life  of 
strength  and  freshness  in  the  Negro's  musical  world,  bidding  fair 
to  reach  a  greener  old  age  and  finally  to  evolve  into  some  form  of 
music,  rare  in  charm  and  beauty.  In  America  we  hear  it  and  see 
it  acted  in  the  barn  dance,  on  the  stage,  in  the  streets  among  the 
children ;  in  fact,  many  an  occasion  is  enlivened  by  this  species  of 
music,  the  interest  in  which  is  intensified  by  the  rhythmical  patting 
of  hands  and  feet.  This  rhythm  is  most  strikingly  and  accurately 
brought  out  in  their  work  songs.  For  some  reason  or  other,  the 
African  seems  to  work  his  best  to  a  musical  accompaniment,  sung, 
whistled,  or  hummed.  Especially  is  this  true  when  the  laborers  are 
numerous  and  in  "gangs".  The  men  sing  and  their  music  seems  ir- 
resistible; for  their  bodies  sway,  and  their  hammers  rise  and  fall  to 
the  perfect  time  of  their  tune  and  the  work  goes  on  with  happiness, 
interest,  and  power. 

The  most  plausible  reason  for  the  African's  working  to  tune  seems 
to  be,  that  above  all  modes  of  expression  this  swarthy  man  loves  the 
musical  mode,  and  his  almost  riotous  emotions  are  forever  clamoring 
for  expression.  This  makes  his  life  a  life  of  song.  And  the  song  has 
upon  him  a  somewhat  intoxicating  effect  which  gives  strength  and 
spirit  to  his  being.  This  strength  and  this  spirit  thoroughly  possess 
him,  both  soul  and  body,  making  his  body  tireless  and  his  soul  happy. 

Among  the  Kroo  tribes  it  is  a  custom  to  change  farms  frequently, 
because  their  god  forbids  their  cultivating  the  same  farm  during  suc- 
cessive years.  Consequently  every  year  new  lands  must  be  opened  up, 
necessitating  the  felling  of  trees.  Three  or  four  surround  a  tree  to 
cut  it  down.  Gala  leads  a  song  but  does  no  cutting.  This  Gala  is 
the  leader  of  all  songs  and  shouts.  In  war  time  he  stands  in  the 
midst  of  his  warriors,  hurls  his  spear  into  the  air,  catches  it  again 
and  leads  a  shout,  which  is  a  vigorous  kind  of  song,  telling  of  the 
valor  of  their  ancestors,  and  describing  what  they  themselves  are 


AFRICAN  SONG.  9 

going  to  do  in  war,  such  as  bring  back  the  bead  of  the  conquered 
king  on  a  stick.  This  same  Gala  in  times  of  peace  and  in  times  of 
land-clearing  leads  a  song,  which,  translated,  runs  thus: 

Youthful  tree: 

We  must  cut  all  around  it 
Gala's  tree! 

We  must  cut  all  around  it 
Cawlaw,   Cawlaw.   Cawlaw.   Cawlaw. 

We  must  cut  all  around  it. 

Gala  sings  what  might  be  termed  the  verse,  setting  the  tempo 
for  the  strokes  of  the  axes  and  in  soft  melodious  chorus  all  the  chop- 
pers join,  imitating  as  best  they  can  the  sound  of  the  axes  striking 
the  tree,  "Cawlaw.  Cawlaw.  Cawlaw,  Cawlaw." 

It  is  most  likely  that  when  this  song  is  sung,  four  men  are  doing 
the  cutting,  since  this  number  striking  one  after  the  other  fits  in 
exactly  with  the  rhythm  of  the  song.  There  must  be  other  songs, 
however,  to  accommodate  different  numbers  of  choppers.  The  Kroo, 
from  whom  this  information  was  gained,  stated  that  three  or  four 
men  surrounded  a  tree  and  cut  it  down. 

Whether  it  be  of  war  or  of  peace,  the  song  the  African  sings  is  a 
gem  of  the  melody  of  motion,  full  of  human  spirit,  sometimes  mild, 
sometimes  wild,  oftentimes  bright  with  sublime  flashes  of  poetry : 
at  all  times  weird. 

War  Song. 

O  that  Great  Bird  of  War: 
Thou  hast  made  this  town  silent. 

They  come,  they  come 
Creeping  dowu  low 
Among  the  tall  grasses. 

The  enemy  come. 

The  meaning  of  this  song  is  clear.  One  tribe  has  destroyed  the 
village  of  another  and  this  apostrophetic  lamentation  bursts  forth 
from  the  souls  of  the  conquered. 

Before  going  to  war  the  Kroomen  assemble  to  drink  the  palm 
wine  five  days  old.  It  is  an  intoxicant  and  acts  doubtless  as  all  such 
drinks,  exaggerating  one's  idea  of  his  own  powers.  The  Kroos  con- 
sider this  intoxication  a  gift  of  physical  power  and  courage  from 


10  FOLK  SOXG  OF  THE  AMERICAN  XEGRO. 

their  god,  preparatory  to  the  mighty  struggle  awaiting  them.  Gala 
takes  his  place  in  their  midst,  hurls  his  spear  skyward,  catches  it, 
and  they  all  sing: 

"We  are  about  to  drink  of  the  palm  wine." 

Then  the  leader,  Gala,  sings : 

"I  have  not  drunk  of  the  palm  wine, 
So  you  need  not  put  me  out  of  the  town, 
Truly  you  are  my  soldiers." 

This  song  in  its  completeness  must  most  assuredly  have  leaped 
out  of  spontaneity.  While  the  soldiers  all  drink  freely  of  the  palm 
wine,  the  general,  Gala,  is  not  allowed  to  drink  at  all,  for  though 
the  soldiers  are  supposed  to  be  in  a  blind  fury,  the  leader  must  have 
full  possession  of  his  mental  faculties  so  as  to  lead  his  army  aright. 
If  he  drink  the  wine,  he  is  banished  from  the  town. 

Death  casts  the  same  darkening  shadow  over  the  heathen  African 
that  it  casts  over  more  enlightened  souls.  To  him,  as  to  others,  it 
is  the  same  soul-trying,  heart-breaking  mystery,  and  before  it  this 
black  child  of  heathenism  stands  in  awe,  helplessness  and  final  resig- 
nation. When  a  soul's  ''took  its  flight  and  gone  home"  into  the  far 
off  somewhere,  and  those  to  whom  it  was  dear  have  gathered  around 
and  taken  the  "feeble  body  and  carried  it  to  the  grave,"  the  pain  is 
just  as  poignant,  the  experience  is  just  as  overwhelming  to  them,  as 
to  the  rest  of  God's  children. 

Whatever  his  feeling  may  be,  he  expresses  in  his  own  weird  way 
just  as  much  as  any  of  us  could  possibly  say;  for  no  multiplication 
of  words  can  express  finer,  stronger,  or  sweeter  sentiment  than  that 
which  he  expresses  over  the  clay  of  him  whose  soul  has  gone  with  the 
''Pale  Horse  and  his  Eider." 

"Eonlay  zeer  marco  "Fare  thee  well, 
Eonlay  yonga  songa  Fare  thee  well, 

Monga   eonlay  zeer  On  thy  far-off  journey, 

Marco  way  marco  We  shall  carry  thee  to  the  hill." 

Marco  way  marco 
Mama." 

The  African  folk  song  is  naturally  quite  free  from  the  tender 
expressions  of  love  which  we  know  and  understand  so  well,  for  just 


AFRICAN  SONG.  H 

as  she  is  among  all  other  heathen  peoples,  so  is  woman  among  the 
Africans, — an  inferior  being  to  serve  and  fear  man,  her  superior,  her 
lord.  She  performs  much  of  the  drudgery  and  practically  makes  the 
living  for  the  family.  While  her  husband  sits  comfortably  in  the 
shade  smoking  his  pipe  and  perhaps  telling  stories  to  a  companion, 
the  wife  with  her  baby  strapped  upon  her  back,  sows,  tends,  and 
reaps  the  casada  and  rice.  On  the  other  hand,  man  is  a  being  of 
might  and  power  whose  every  wish,  however,  trifling,  must  be  a  law 
unto  her ;  while  he  is  a  law  unto  himself.  She  is  slave,  he  is  master ; 
and  the  relations  commonly  existing  between  master  and  slave  are 
cruelly  maintained  between  them.  Under  such  conditions  there  is 
no  deep  love  and  where  love  does  not  abide  there  can  be  born  no  such 
tender  expression  of  the  "divine  passion"  as  is  found  among  Christian 
people.  It  is  Christianity  that  has  taught  the  true  loveliness  of 
woman  and  the  true  nobility  of  man.  Those  love  songs  that  make 
our  hearts  throb  in  harmony  with  every  note  and  syllable  of  their 
divine  sentiment  are  expressions  of  those  hearts  alone  that  believe 
woman  to  be  an  angel  and  man  just  a  "little  lower  than  the  angels." 
Such  an  intelligent  recognition  of  the  divine  within  us;  such  homage 
to  that  divinity ;  such  tender  yet  powerful  affection  for  the  beautiful 
in  woman  and  the  noble  in  man, — these  all  have  their  sources  and 
nature  in  souls  that  have  been  touched  and  enlightened  by  a  God  of 
Love. 

The  heathen's  god  is  a  god  of  frowns  and  of  vengeance;  of  storm 
and  of  destruction ;  of  might  and  of  power ;  some  Zeus  who  "shakes 
Olympus  with  a  nod."     The  African  sings  his  love  in  these  words : 

"My  lover  is  in  yonder  town. 
So  I  also  must  hurry  to  be  there. 
For,  oh !  my  lover  shall  be  my  husband." 


The  American  Negro  sings : 


"Sun  lights  up  all  de  big  blue  skies, 

Shines  all  de  live-long  day : 
Silvah  moon  and  de  star's  bright  eyes 

Drives  all  de  darkness  away. 
But  what  is  dat  to  de  light  dat  gleams 

In  dis  merry  heart  of  mine  ? 
I  luv  her  true  an'  my  luv  jis  beams, 

Beats  all  de  sun  dat  shine. 


12 


FOLK  SONG  OF  THE  AMERICAN  NEGRO 


"Mockin'  bird,  oh!  he  sings  so  fine, 

Wa'bles  his  surenade; 
Lark,  he  sing  in  de  bright  sunshine ; 

Catbird  sing  in  de  shade. 
But  whut  is  dat  to  de  pretty  song 

Dat  rings  in  my  heart  all  day? 
My  luv  is  true  as  my  life  is  long, 

An'  it's  goin'  to  stay  dat  way. 

"Rose,  it  bloom,  oh !  it  bloom  so  sweet, 

Fills  all  de  summer  air; 
Vi'let  blue  underneaf  my  feet, 

Sen's  sweetness  ev'rywhere. 
But  whut  is  dat  to  de  flowers  dat  bloom 

In  my  heart  as  on  I  go, 
An'  fills  all  my  life  wid  sweet  perfume? 

Beats  all  de  flowers  I  know. 

"Light  may  shine,  it  may  shine  so  bright, 
Flowers  perfume  de  air ; 
Birds  may  sing  all  de  day  an'  night, 

Sen'  music  everywhere ; 
But  de  brightest  light  an'  de  sweetest  flower 
An'  de  prettiest  song  I  know 
Jis'  fills  my  heaht  every  live-long  hour, 
Jis'  case  1  luv  her  so." 

The  love  song  with  its  lack  of  color  and  spirit  is  in  bold  contrast 
to  the  lullaby  with  its  interesting  features.  True  to  nature,  the 
crude  children  of  the  Overshadowed  Continent  "gather  their  goods 
where  they  find  them"  and  sing  of  the  things  they  know  best.  While 
her  xlmerican  sister  sings: 

"Daddy's  comin'  home,  my  dahlin',  hear  him  a-whistlin'  low ; 
Leave  po'  daddy  jis'  one  kiss,  honey,  'fo'  you  go ; 
Den  close  dem  eyes,  my  honey,  deah,  dem  brown  eyes  tenduh  bright, 
For  God  an'  angels,  mammy's  luv,  will  watch  till  mawnin'  light ; 
Den  sleep,  my  honey,  baby  dahlin',  sleep — " 

the  African  mother  sings : 


"Nar  ju  pentee, 
Nar  de  an  mo  ne  clay 
Key  geelo  ply 
An  moo  moo  Ken  po— 


'My  child,  lie  down. 
Your  mother's  gone  to  the  farm 
So  the  Great  Spirit  will  bear 
You  on  his  back." 


'Daddy"s  coram'  home,  my  baby, 
Heah  him   a-whistlin'   low ; 

Leave  po'  daddy  jis  one  kiss. 
Honey,  fo'  you  go."' 


(13) 


14  FOLK  SONG  OF  THE  AMERICAN  NEGRO. 

To  grasp  the  meanings  of  Folk  Songs  is  oftentimes  difficult  be- 
cause of  the  workings  of  the  crude  minds  whence  they  sprung,  as 
well  as  because  of  the  passage  of  the  songs  from  locality  to  locality 
and  from  generation  to  generation.  Different  surroundings,  different 
dialects,  different  occasions  or  times  of  inspiration,  all  tend  to  work 
changes  in  these  songs.  Consequently  there  is  often  more  than  one 
explanation  for  the  same  song.  This  little  lullaby  may  correctly  be 
explained  in  the  following  ways  : 

(1)  The  tired  mother,  at  even  tide,  is  trying  to  inveigle  her  baby 
into  sleep;  the  baby,  however,  accustomed  to  sleep  in  the  sling  upon 
the  mother's  back  while  she  works  in  the  fields,  shows  some  unwill- 
ingness to  go  to  slumberland,  and  finally  to  overcome  that  objection 
the  mother  promises  that  the  Great  Spirit  will  bear  baby  upon  his 
back. 

(2)  It  may  be  that  at  this  particular  time  the  mother  had  some 
reason  for  leaving  baby  at  home  and  so  promises  baby  a  cradle  in  her 
absence  upon  the  back  of  the  Great  Spirit. 

(3)  It  is  possible  that  this  lullaby  did  not  have  its  birth  in  the 
heart  of  a  mother,  but  in  the  anxious  spontaneity  of  an  elder  brother 
or  sister  or  even  a  father  (while  the  mother  was  absent),  for  caring 
for  baby  in  mother's  absence  gives  rise  to  many  a  song,  many  a 
means  of  amusement,  many  a  soothing  dose. 

When  baby  is  troublesome  in  his  journey  to  bye-low-land,  the 
mother  has  recourse  to  another  "sleep  song,"  and  just  as  our  mothers 
frightened  us  with  "rag-man,"  "peg-leg,"  "boogoo-man,"  and  "raw- 
head  and  bloody-bones,"  the  African  mother  calls  upon  the  witch- 

"Kan,  Kan,  O  some  bay,  O,  "Witch,  O  great  Witch, 

An  noo  you  Kan."  You  will  take  all  bad  children." 

This  witch  song  is  sung  in  high,  throaty  tones  in  an  effort  to 
frighten  the  child  as  much  as  possible,  and  it  is  easy  to  believe  that 
the  wild  shriek  of  the  voice  would  arouse  in  baby's  mind  a  wish  for 
any  other  land  rather  than  the  land  of  wakefulness. 

Though  it  is  generally  agreed  that  through  music  the  soul  is  fully 
and  most  truthfully  expressed,  still  there  are  evidences  pointing  to 
the  fact  that  there  are  closer  relations  between  the  soul  and  musical 
expressions  than  have  been  satisfactorily  explained.  These  relations 
can  be  felt,  but  any  accurate  description  seems  beyond  the  grasp  of 
man's  mind. 


AFRICAN  SOXG.  15 

Why  do  certain  races  use  certain  scales  while  others  use  different 
ones?  It  is  quite  clear  why  certain  peoples  have  certain  subjects  for 
their  songs;  why  some  sing  of  mighty  oceans,  storms  and  waves,  and 
some  others  sing  of  blue  skies  and  olive  groves,  but  why  one  race 
from  the  very  beginning  of  its  existence  will  express  its  senti- 
ments in  tones  different  from  those  of  any  other  people  is  a  mystery 
yet  unsolved. 

The  African  soul  for  some  inexplicable  reason  expresses  himself 
in  its  own  peculiar  scale,  1-2-3-5-6-8.  Every  shout  of  triumph,  every 
note  of  endurance,  every  wail  of  sorrow,  every  cry  of  pain,  every 
heart-throb  of  love,  every  prompting  of  religion,  is  expressed  in  that 
scale,  and  moreover,  expressed  in  such  wise,  that  as  a  result  the 
quality  of  wierdness  is  the  essence  of  each  one.  Let  the  African 
sing  of  victory,  and  although  the  notes  stir  men's  hearts  to  deeds  of 
heroism,  those  same  heroic  hearts  will  express  themselves  through 
genuine  tearfulness;  let  him  sing  of  defeat,  and  the  strangeness  of 
it  all  with  subtle  force  takes  from  defeat  the  sharpness  of  its  sting- 
let  him  sing  of  the  toils  of  an  every-day,  humdrum  life,  and  the  very 
tools  with  which  he  labors,  the  drill,  the  hammer,  the  ax,  play  such 
a  queer  and  fascinating  tune  that  others  are  led  to  believe  that  the 
African's  existence  is  an  undisturbed  succession  of  bright,  cloudless 
days;  let  him  sing  of  Heaven,  and  a  weird  rapture  so  completely 
possesses  the  soul,  that  this  beautiful  world  of  ours,  the  grand  firma- 
ment above  us,  are  just  commonplace,  and  a  desire  for  the  celestial 
world  displaces  all  other  longings. 

In  truth,  the  African  Folk  Song  is  a  melodious  expression  of  tribal 
life  with  an  irresistible  weirdness  running  through  the  whole. 

"It  is  a  soul  breathed  into  Melody, 
A  heart  living  in  a  song." 


"•v/^r^AF 


16  FOLK  SONG  OF  THE  AMERICAN  NEGRO. 


CHAPTER  II. 


Transmigration  and  Transition  of  Song. 


i 


"What  bird  is  that?    It's  song  is  good." 

N  the  year  of  our  Lord,  one  thousand  six  hundred  and  nineteen, 
the  same  year  that  marks  the  birth  of  popular  government  on 
this  western  continent  and  only  a  short  time  before  the  Puritans, 
who  had  sacrificed  home  for  conscience  sake,  landed  at  Plymouth 
Kock,  there  sailed  up  the  James  Eiver  a  Dutch  man-of-war.  This  ves- 
sel came  to  port  at  Jamestown,  and  there,  in  return  for  provisions, 
bartered  to  the  settlers,  twenty  human  beings,  dark  children  of  darker 
Africa.  From  what  port  or  tribe  they  came  is  not  known ;  the  name 
of  the  ship  as  well  as  that  of  the  ship's  master,  are  also  unknown. 
In  fact,  the  only  reliable  information  concerning  the  whole  transac- 
tion is  found  in  the  chronicles  of  John  Eolfe,  the  husband  of  Poca- 
hontas, which  make  mention  of  a  ''Dutch  man-of-war  who  sold  us 
twenty  Negars."  It  is  probable  that  these  twenty  "Negars"  were 
snatched  from  some  point  on  the  west  coast  of  Africa.  That  such  an 
event,  so  full  of  mighty  possibilities,  should  be  so  veiled  in  uncer- 
tainty, is  itself  a  deep  mystery  and  leads  us  straight  into  these  lines 
of  Cowper's : 

"God  moves  in  a  mysterious  way 
His  wonders  to  perform." 

The  voyage  had  been  long  and  wearisome;  and  to  those  children  of 
the  tropics,  bound  and  fettered,  it  was  like  passing  through  the  fires 
of  purgatory.  Then,  too,  everything  was  so  new  and  overwhelming 
that  their  souls  were  plunged  into  abysmal  despair.  Many  a  time  they 
had  faced  the  spears  of  their  enemies ;  many  a  time  they  had  tasted  the 
bitterness  of  defeat ;  they  had  struggled  for  life  with  the  wild  beasts 
of  the  forests ;  but  now  life  had  changed,  and  everything  was  so  new, 
so  strange ;  home  was  so  far  away  in  another  world,  that  all  its  dearest 
relations  had  vanished  into  fading  dreams,  which,  nevertheless, 
started  bitter  pangs  of  longings  and  sorrows  that  would  not  die.  The 
past  was  dead,  and  freedom  was  no  more.  Henceforth  they  must  serve 


TRANSMIGRATION  AXD   TRAXSITIOX  OF  SOXG.  17 

other  men  whose  thoughts,  languages,  and  lives;  whose  very  God  were 
all  strange  and  unknown.  The  whole  panorama  was  so  stupendous  that 
these  simple-minded  children  were  cruelly  crushed  beneath  its  awful- 
ness.  Welcome  the  spears  of  the  enemy;  welcome  the  savage  wild 
beasts  of  the  forests !  They  groped  through  the  darkness  toward  the 
faintest  gleam  of  light.  To  us,  the  sons  of  these  pitiable  heathen, 
who  have  seen  greater  miracles  than  the  parting  of  the  Eed  Sea,  the 
falling  manna,  the  feeding  of  the  five  thousand,  and  the  raising  of 
the  dead;  to  us  who  have  seen  the  wrath  of  men  praise  Him,  it  is  all 
plain.  They  wept  and  sowed  in  the  darkness;  we  rejoice  and  reap 
in  the  light.  Many  of  His  ways  are  past  finding  out,  but  with  the 
question,  "Shall  not  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  do  right?"  we  leave 
it  all  with  Him,  for — 

"Deep  in  unfathomable  mines, 
Of  never-failing  skill, 
He  treasures  up  his  bright  designs, 
And  works  his  sovereign  will." 

Those  broken-hearted  strangers  soon  accepted  the  situation  they 
could  not  change,  and  unlike  the  ancient  Hebrews  who  hung  their 
harps  upon  the  willows  and  sat  weeping  by  the  rivers  of  Babylon, 
they,  through  their  bitter  tears  sang  a  sweet  song,  a  weird  song,  a 
new  song  in  a  strange  land. 

Why  these  men  who  had  just  cause  for  rebellion  against  a  fate 
so  cruel  and  whose  struggle  for  freedom  would  have  been  applauded 
by  all  who  believed  in  right  and  justice ;  why  these  men  who  through 
centuries  of  living  with  nature  and  amidst  perils  had  grown  mighty 
of  limb  and  of  courage,  chose  to  sing  and  not  to  curse,  from  a  human 
standpoint  is  akin  to  miracle.  It  is  one  of  those  psychic  phenomena 
which  show  the  inscrutible  workings  of  the  Creator.  Whatever  the 
force  that  led  them  to  bless  and  curse  not,  one  thing  we  do  know;  the 
New  World  heard  his  song,  listened,  wept,  and  rejoiced  as  the  strange 
musician  play  a  sympathetic  accompaniment  upon  the  heart- 
strings of  human  kind.  When  the  Trojans  fled  from  their  burning 
city  to  make  a  new  home  in  Italy,  they  left  all  save  their  household 
gods.  When  the  Hebrews  went  into  captivity  they  could  not  sing, 
but  they  wept  when  they  remembered  Zion.  They  carried  Jehovah 
their  God  into  a  strange  land.  When  the  Africans  were  snatched 
away  to  the  new  world  to  fell  the  forest  and  cultivate  the  fields,  they 

2 


18  FOLK  SONG  OF  THE  AMERICAN  NEGRO. 

left  their  all  save  their  song.  This  they  brought,  because  the  All- 
wise  knew  the  New  World  had  great  need  of  it.  The  New  World 
was  henceforth  to  be  their  home  and  they  could  speak  the  language, 
live  the  life,  and  worship  the  God  of  the  New  World,  but  in  their 
own  peculiar  melody  they  would  express  their  new  world  experiences. 
From  that  time  their  song  began  a  subtle  and  gradual  change  from 
African  to  American. 

The  evolution  of  African  to  American  song  correctly  indicates 
the  corresponding  evolution  in  the  African  himself.  The  process  was 
thorough,  and  both  singer  and  song  became  American.  In  propor- 
tion as  the  life  of  the  New  World  was  above  that  of  Africa,  in  pro- 
portion as  the  light  of  this  New  World  was  brighter  than  the  dim 
haziness  of  the  dark  continent,  in  that  same  proportion  is  this  new 
song  brighter  and  more  spiritual.  Loftier  things  are  treated  with  a 
more  blazing  religious  fervor. 

The  religion  of  the  Negro  has  long  been  a  subject  of  much  diverse 
criticism.  It  has  even  been  mocked  and  jeered.  Church  services  have 
been  sources  of  mirthful  entertainment.  Philosophers  and  learned 
men  have  pointed  to  the  Negro's  religious  outbursts,  his  shoutings 
and  rejoicings  as  marks  of  ignorance,  superstition  and  heathenism. 
Most  assuredly  these  are  not  the  most  approved  methods  of  worship, 
nor  do  they  measure  up  to  the  ideals  of  the  highly  cultured,  but  they 
at  least  have  an  explanation  which  might  lead  to  a  better  under- 
standing, and  sometimes  a  better  understanding  leads  to  a  higher 
respect. 

Whatever  else  the  Creator  has  given  to  other  children,  He  has 
given  to  the  African  a  heart  as  responsive  to  the  forces  of  life  as 
an  eolian  harp  to  the  evening's  zephyrs.  His  pains  are  poignant, 
his  joys  are  ecstatic.  He  is  either  on  the  mountain  top  or  deep  down 
in  the  valley.  The  plains  make  no  strong  appeal  to  him.  This  heart 
of  the  African  is  of  a  distinctly  religious  nature,  expressing  itself 
in  building  houses  of  worship,  and  in  the  fullest  enjoyment  of  devo- 
tion. The  fact  that  worship  is  man's  duty  does  not  always  appeal 
to  him.  Indeed,  the  joy  and  happiness  of  it  have  almost  effaced  the 
idea  of  duty.  He  worships  not  so  much  because  he  ought,  as  because 
he  loves  to  worship. 

Moreover,  the  religion  of  the  God  we  worship  makes  its  strongest 
appeal  to  the  burden  bearers  of  the  world.  "Come  unto  me  all  ye 
that  labor  and  are  heavy  laden  and  I  will  give  you  rest,"  has  always 


TRANSMIGRATION  AXD  TRANSITION  -OF  SOXG.  19 

been  a  most  effective  invitation  to  the  black  man.  For  who  could 
possibly  be  more  weary  than  he,  who  could  possibly  be  more  heavy 
laden,  who  could  possibly  enjoy  rest  more  than  he?  To  him  this  has 
always  been  a  real  invitation  to  a  truly  heavy-laden  man.  His  reli- 
gion has  always  been  a  real  power  that  relieves  real  burdens.  Chris- 
tianity to  him,  has  been  more  than  religion,  it  has  always  been  from 
the  very  first,  an  experience.  The  Spirit  beareth  witness  with  his 
spirit. 

True  it  is  that  this  "shouting"  is  sometimes  overdone;  sometimes 
it  is  spurious.  Nevertheless  it  is  most  often  a  genuine  expression  of 
souls  that  are  glad,  glad  in  the  living  reality  of  a  religion  whose  God 
lightens  burdens  and  wipes  sorrow's  tear  away;  glad  in  the  living 
assurance  of  an  eternal  life  without  burdens  and  without  tears.  It 
is  natural  and  quite  to  be  expected  that  the  Negro  should  shout.  His 
emotional  nature  has  been  so  deeply  wrought  into  for  generations 
by  bitter  pangs  of  sorrow,  that  when  he  contemplates  the  promises 
of  the  Christian  religion,  he  is  wholly  overcome  and  he  expresses  his 
ecstacy  in  "Glory!    Hallelujah!" 

With  his  transition  from  African  heathenism  to  American  slavery, 
the  Negro  set  up  an  altar  dedicated  to  the  God  of  love.  Blessed 
phenomenon,  under  such  circumstances  to  give  up  his  gods  and  all 
his  past  for  this  new  God.  What  wisdom !  Slavery  never  begets  love. 
The  very  thought  of  being  owned  is  abominable.  It  is  naturally  a 
source  of  antipathy  and  animosity,  hatred,  revenge.  It  even  some- 
times leads  men  to  question  the  justice  of  the  God  who  permits  it. 
The  human  heart  cannot  perceive  righteousness  in  being  torn  from 
those  it  loves,  from  the  memories  and  attachments  that  make  up  the 
happiness  of  life,  to  be  forced  to  labor  hard  and  long  that  another 
may  eat,  rest,  and  be  comfortable — yea,  to  suffer  and  die  at  the  whim 
of  a  master.  This  is  surely  beyond  a  mortal's  comprehension  of 
justice.  Still  through  all  these  crushing  experiences,  the  Negro 
slave  trusted  God.  What  faith!  The  transcendent  thought  that 
there  existed  somewhere  a  trustworthy  being  who  has  promised  never 
to  forsake  him,  but  to  turn  his  sorrow  into  joy,  has  ever  been  enough 
to  make  him  shout.  This  shouting  has  been  and  still  is  his  means  of 
expressing  adoration ;  it  has  been  also  for  all  his  pent-up  emotion,  a 
safety  valve.  Blessed  be  Providence  that  taught  him  to  shout.  This 
"shouting"  is  in  no  wise  essential  to  religion,  though  if  is  often  an 
evidence  of  it.     Measured  by  the  standard  of  Christanty,  how  does 


20  FOLK  SONG  OF  THE  AMERICAN  XEGRO. 

the  "shouting"  Negro  stand?  Look  around  and  see.  What  good 
has  he  wrought?  Has  he  not  abounded  in  good  works?  Who  laid 
the  foundation  of  our  religious  and  educational  life  ?  Who  gave  and 
still  is  giving  to  support  all  the  uplifting  agencies  of  our  life  ?  Who 
has  lived  more  strictly  up  to  the  standard  of  love  and  sacrifice?  Who 
founded  our  Christian  homes  ?  Whose  faith  has  ever  been  stronger ; 
whose  prayers  more  effective?  Whose  courage  greater?  Whose  labor 
more  productive?  Whose  religion  has  had  severer  tests?  Whose 
religion  has  come  forth  from  these  tests  more  triumphantly?  An- 
swers to  these  questions  will  draw  one  up  face  to  face  with  the  con- 
elusion  that  our  untutored  Negro  mothers  and  fathers  who  praised 
and  are  still  praising  God  in  loud  "Glories"  and  hallelujahs  did 
praise  and  still  praise  Him  also  in  spirit  and  in  truth. 

All  phases  of  his  regeneration  are  expressed  in  his  new  song,  and 
that  is  why  the  world  loves  to  hear  him  sing.  He  sings  life.  His 
song  is  new  in  thought  and  spirit.  It  chants  new  life.  The  vehicle, 
save  one  small,  weird  part,  is  as  old  as  the  African  himself.  This 
vehicle,  the  framework  of  his  musical  creation,  has  remained  ever 
the  same,  and  even  the  new  life,  though  powerful,  has  not  been  able 
to  change  it.  Africa  fashioned  the  body,  but  America  breathed  into 
it  the  breath  of  Life. 

No  influence  has  been  able  to  change  the  predominant  feature 
of  the  melody.  The  employment  of  certain  notes  to  form  his  scale, 
the  arrangements  of  these  notes  to  gain  certain  idiomatic  effects,  the 
general  mould,  consisting  of  verse  and  chorus,  with  variations  and 
its  perfect  rhythm,  all  of  which  suggest  the  term  "form"  remain 
essentially  the  same.  The  American  Negro,  however,  has  wrought 
some  development  into  this  form.  He  has,  because  of  an  intelligence 
superior  to  that  of  his  African  brother,  evolved  some  more  beautiful 
tunes  by  more  effective  arrangements  of  the  notes  of  his  scale.  He 
has  added  strength  to  the  melody  and,  in  some  degree,  has  polished 
and  refined  some  of  the  barbaric  tendencies.  The  most  striking  de- 
velopment has  been  the  use  of  syncopation  to  which  the  American 
Negro  has  given  such  charm  that  a  contagion  of  syncopation  has 
spread  and  taken  strong  hold  upon  the  music  of  today.  Any  further 
development  in  this  direction  would  seem  impossible;  certainly,  if  it 
could  be  done,  it  would  be  insufferable.  But  its  present  use  is  the 
great  contribution  of  America  to  Negro  melody. 


TRANSMIGRATION  AXD   TRANSITION  OF  SONG.  21 

Music  expressed  iu  the  "form"  described  in  the  foregoing  words, 
is  as  natural  to  the  American  Negro  as  his  breath.  No  other  form 
could  satisfy  his  soul.  Indeed,  it  is  a  portrayal  of  his  soul,  and  is 
as  characteristic  as  are  his  physical  features.  Hear  him  sing  in  his 
church,  hear  him  preach,  moan,  and  give  "gravery"  in  his  sermon, 
hear  the  washerwoman  singing  over  her  tub,  hear  the  laborer  sing- 
ing his  accompaniment  to  his  toil,  hear  the  child  babbling  an  ex- 
temporaneous tune,  and  most  or  all,  these  features  will  be  recognized. 
Even  those  Negroes  who  have  been  educated  and  who  have  been  in- 
tiuenced  by  long  study,  find  it  difficult  to  express  their  musical  selves 
in  any  other  way. 

In  addition  to  a  development  and  a  certain  perceptible  refinement 
in  some  phases,  the  American  Negro  has  made  a  new  kind  of  song 
out  of  a  combination  of  two  different  kinds  of  African  songs.  That 
monotonous  chant  with  the  ever-recurring  interjections,  a  prominent 
characteristic  of  heathen  music,  was  evidently  too  tiresome  and  un- 
attractive to  him.  It  did  not  at  all  express  the  emotions  born  of 
his  new  world  experiences.  His  vision  was  broadened  now,  and  this 
chant,  expressive  of  his  heathen  life,  was  too  limited  for  him,  so  the 
first  combination  resulted  in  the  following  character  of  song.  It 
has  the  qualities,  both  of  the  chant  with  its  interjections  and  of  the 
song  with  verse  and  chorus. 

"This  is  a  sin-tryin'  world — Oh.  Lord  ! 
This  is  a  sin-tryin'  world — Help  me,  Jesus ! 
This  is  a  sin-tryin'  world — In  trouble  ! 
Oh.  Heaven  is  so  high,  and  I  am  so  low. 
I  don't  know  if  I'll  ever  get  to  Heaven  or  no." 


The  first  three  lines  with  their  different  interjections,  expressing 
the  feelings  of  the  leader,  correspond  with  the  original  chant  of  the 
heathen  Africa,  and  the  two  final  lines  are  additions  made  by  the 
American  Negro.  He  went  further  and  made  another  combination 
by  adding  a  chorus  to  the  chant  and  interjection,  an  example  of 
which  is  one  of  the  most  interesting,  beautiful,  and  pathetic  of  all 
our  folk  songs: 

"Couldn't  hear  nobody  pray — ." 


22  FOLK  SOXG  OF  THE  AAIERICAX  XEGRO. 

Another  curious  as  well  as  interesting  addition  made  by  the 
American  Negro  is  a  real  groan  which  he  introduces.  There  were 
times  when  the  very  depths  of  pain  and  sorrow  were  sounded,  the 
awfulness  of  which  was  beyond  his  power  to  speak,  but  the  pent-up 
feelings  must  find  some  expression  which  would  as  nearly  as  possible, 
represent  in  essence  the  pain  itself.  The  spontaneity  of  his  nature 
brought  forth  the  little  linguistic  anomaly  "urn."  How  well  it  serves 
its  purpose!  How  completely  does  it  give  expression  to  that  emo- 
tion for  which  words  are  too  weak!  In  the  revival  services  when 
sinners  were  called  to  the  "mourners'  bench"  to  mourn  and  mourn 
and  mourn  in  their  struggles  to  "get  religion,"  the  Christians  ago- 
nized to  help  them  "come  through."  They  prayed,  sang,  and  wept. 
Under  such  conditions,  the  following  song  was  born : 

"Po'  mourner's  got  a  home  at  last — "' 

Under  the  power  of  this  song,  many  a  sinner  has  been  convicted 
of  wickedness  and  converted  to  a  new  life.  Strangely  enough,  this 
linguistic  anomaly  was  used  to  express  not  only  depths  of  sorrow 
but  also  the  heights  of  joy.  There  were  times  in  the  Negro's  life 
when  his  joy  and  hope  were  beyond  all  words  or  too  good  and  sweet 
to  be  spoken,  and  this  was  the  only  way  in  which  he  could  express 
himself.  The  expectation  of  rest  from  unrequited  toil  gave  birth 
to  this  song: 

"Urn — Most  done  toilin'  here — " 

There  is  one  more  notable  difference  in  the  song  of  the  American 
Negro  which  is  a  sublime  improvement  upon  the  song  of  his  ances- 
tors. It  may  be  an  omission,  intentional  or  unintentional.  It  cer- 
tainly is  a  subtraction  or  an  elmination.  Whatever  it  is,  it  has  the 
quality  of  the  divine.  In  all  his  song  there  is  neither  trace  nor  hint 
of  hatred  or  revenge.  It  is  most  assuredly  divine  in  human  nature, 
that  such  a  stupendous  burden  as  human  bondage,  with  all  its  in- 
herent sorrows  and  heart  breakings  could  fail  to  arouse  in  the  heart 
of  the  slave  sentiments  of  hatred  and  revenge  against  his  master. 

Doubtless  the  essence  of  the  Negro  character  epitomized  and  con- 
centrated in  the  character  of  one  man,  furnished  the  lofty  inspiration 
that  gave  birth  to  the  expression,  "No  man  can  drag  me  so  low  as  to 


TRANSMIGRATION  AND  TRANSITION  OF  SONG.  23 

make  me  hate  him."  Doubtless  it  was  for  such  a  time  as  this  that 
he  "came  to  the  kingdom."  Doubtless  he  was  chosen  by  God  to 
enounce  this  sentiment.  Such  a  development  of  race  character  shows 
plainly  divine  intention.  The  world  needs  to  know  that  love  is 
stronger  than  hatred. 

With  the  changing  of  conditions  and  experiences,  with  the  pass- 
ing of  the  years,  the  African  became  an  American,  and  the  melodies 
of  Africa  were  evolved  into  American  song,  and  this  song  is  the 
Song  of  Love. 


l^ 


"He  whom  love  rules,  where'er  his  path  may  be, 
Walks  safe  and  sacred." 


24 


FOLK  SOXG  OF  THE  AMERICAN  XEGRO. 


I  COULD'NT  HEAR  NOBODY  PRAY 


Leader. 


m 


Chorus. 


O     Lord !  * 


ss= 


i 


±A 


--N- 


And 


could  -  n't 


hear 


no   -    bod 


pray: 

Jf.  . 


And 


;    4    m  ' 


--*; 


^ 


-X 


■*-* 


ft    Is 


-A 


aa 


could-n't  hear    no  -  bo  -  dy   pray,     O      way  down  yon- der   by     my-  self  And  I 
.«.     _*.     -#.      #.     .#.      -#.     -*.  -*-     -#. 

=1 


-#-     #- 


^ 


« 


g  f  g  c  g-       [  b  '  '  b      l  &  E  g-1 

~j   2  -       — 

I 


Fine. 


1.  In        the 

2.  Chill  -  y 

3.  |  Hal  -  le 


val  -  ley  !  * 
wa  -  ters ! 
lu  -   jah  ! 
Unison 


fM 


could  -  n't     hear 


i 


A  - 


wm 


*  The  interjections  used  here  are  not  the  only  ones  which  can  be  used,  but  may  oe  cnanged 
accoi'ding  to  the  emotions  of  the  leader. 

t  Let  this  stanza  be  exceedingly  slow,  about  half  as  fast  as  the  others,  and  the  chorus  very 
soft.     But  go  into  the  refrain  a  tempo. 


TRAXSMIGRATIOX  AXD   TRAXSITIOX  OF  SOXG. 


25 


I  COULDN'T  HEAR  NOBODY  PRAY— Concluded. 


— ">  1 

V 

_£ 

_«i 

o-               ■ 

Mt— J — ■ 

... 

— # — - 

> 

-T™ 

^ 

t^T* 

%    _ 

•     # 

1 

# 

On 
In 

Troub 

my 

the 
-    les 

knees ! 
Jor    - 

0 

dan  I 

ver ! 

(fob   f       f 

-fc 

— * * 1 

.•1 .  • 

f~* 

could  -   n't 

I 

hear 

rs 

9 

no    - 

J             *            * 
bod     -      v          pray, 

P            1 

• 

A  - 

/m  V             j 

j 

R 

a        1 

[y  </  *            *j                   ^ 

w 

«-    • 

* 

*^^  1                          y1 

* 

*       y      1 

B 

^ 

-L 1 

^ 

— -^ 

l»s 

•S 

^5         N  "- 

•y-fe — i— 



— s * — 

"    "O 

Js     J H 

trf* — 

3 

d 

" »     ^ 

With 

Cross  - 
In 

my 
ing 

the 

bur   -    den  ! 
o      -      ver ! 
king  -  dom  ! 

[y                  * 

"_& 

^ 

.. 

*.     1 

&-*-r— 

-f- 

— ~£~ 

y — 

"i6" 

1 

-  "M 3=1 

could 

-i 

-  n't 

hear 

t 

no     - 

• 
bod     ■ 

y 

1 
pray, 

| 

-  r 

A  - 

ft 

//•V        0 

> 

J 

R 

* 

PJ«        *j 

£ 

— i 

™ 

i   .                 *      1 

Kl>  -7       * 

~ 

tf 

^ 

— ^— 

— V 

/ 

1 

i/     1 

And  my    Sav-  iour  ! 
In  -  to    Ca  -  naan I 
With  my   Je  -  sus  ! 


O  Lord! 
O  Lord ! 
O     Lord! 


fy — v . \ fy . 

" " w  ft  *  i        *     &  ff  * ' 


couldn't  hear  no-bod  -  y  pray, 


A-couldn't  hear  no-bod  -  y  pray. 


ft  ft 


W- 


*=* 


A— J- »>— N &— I- 


R   ' 


• — *- 


26  FOLK  SONG  OF  THE  AMERICAN  NEGRO. 


CHAPTER  HI. 


American  Folk  Song. 


"7  sang,  and  singing,  forgot  the  wrongs 
Of  blind  fortune  and  cunning  foes." 

CIVILIZATION  wears  away  the  spirit  and  conditions  which  giVe 
birth  to  Folk  Song.  Bearing  this  in  mind,  it  is  not  difficult 
to  understand  why  there  is  no  folk  song  which  expresses  the  soul  of 
America.  America  was  settled  by  people  who  came  from  countries 
whose  civilization  was  centuries  old  and  who  brought  their  institu- 
tions, customs,  literature,  and  music  with  them.  They  were  stronger 
than  their  surroundings.  They  had  developed  strength  building  na- 
tions which  they  had  now  abandoned.  This  strength  was  success- 
fully used  in  fashioning  and  moulding  their  new  surroundings  after 
their  own  ideals.  Their  work  was  to  build  a  new  nation,  by  felling 
the  forests,  tilling  fields,  building  roads,  cities,  harbors,  and  making 
laws.  They  came,  the  Englishman,  the  Scotchman,  the  Frenchman, 
the  Scandinavian,  the  German,  and  the  Spaniard.  Common  interests 
with  wondrous  power  welded  them  into  one.  But  the  beginnings 
were  too  far  advanced,  the  surroundings  too  conventional  for  folk 
song  creation.  Each  brought  his  own  song  from  his  fatherland.  So, 
strictly  speaking,  there  is  in  the  comprehensive  acceptation  of  the 
thought,  no  American  Folk  Song.  There  is,  however,  a  real  indis- 
putable folk  song  in  America — an  American  production.  It  was 
born  in  the  hearts  of  slaves  and  consequently  expresses  the  life,  not 
of  the  whole,  but  of  a  part,  of  our  country. 

From  the  very  moment  of  his  arrival,  all  conditions  were  favor- 
able to  the  Negro's  producing  a  folk  song.  Heaven  and  nature 
worked  in  harmony  with  the  soul  of  the  simple  heathen  to  generate  the 
spiritual  atmosphere:  the  man-directed  forces  of  the  new  world  fur- 
nished the  stimulus,  and  the  emotional  and  musical  soul  of  the 
simple  heathen  accomplished  the  rest.  The  African  was  vastly  differ- 
ent from  the  other  men  who  came  to  America.  He  was  not  fresh 
from  a  civilization  which  had  lived  through  centuries,  he  had  not 
been  the  builder  of  a  mighty  nation,  he  had  not  the  means  of  con- 


AMERICAN  FOLK  SONG.  27 

quering  this  rugged  land,  he  was  not  stronger  but  weaker  than  his 
surroundings  in  America.  He  did  not  appropriate,  but  was  appro- 
priated; he  did  not  assimilate  but  was  assimilated;  more  than  any 
other  immigrant  he  became  American,  and  to-day  he  is  the  American 
of  Americans.  Had  conditions  been  different,  it  is  certain  that  the 
trend  of  his  folk  music  would  have  been  in  another  direction.  It 
was  slavery  that  gave  color  to  his  music.  Slavery  was  the  starting 
point  and  Heaven  was  the  goal  of  his  life.  The  sorrows  of  slavery 
pierced  his  heart  and  it  poured  itself  out  in  such  lamentations  as: 

(1)  "Nobody  knows  the  trouble  I  see — " 

(2)  "I'm  troubled  in  mind — " 

(3)  "O  wretched  man  that  I  am — " 

(4)  "Before  I'd  be  a  slave — " 

Songs  of  this  kind  express  the  tragedies  of  slavery.  They  are 
the  depths  of  his  music.  Curiously  enough,  the  slave  held  Satan 
accountable  for  all  his  troubles.  His  mind  could  reach  no  lower.  At 
the  other  end,  the  upper  limits,  we  find  God  and  Heaven.  To  him 
Heaven  was  a  place  of  relief  from  the  ills  of  slavery  and  a  land  of 
eternal  joys.  The  thought  of  Heaven  winged  his  soul  to  flights  of 
imagination  that  wafted  it  into  a  state  of  consuming  ecstacy.  Then 
he  sang  of  "golden  slippers,"  "starry  crown,"  "long  white  robe," 
"golden  harp,"  and  all  the  adornments  that  made  Heaven  so  real 
to  him.    Or  he  raised  the  question,  "What  kind  of  shoes?" 

Who  could  tell  the  meaning. of  golden  slippers  to  him  who  had 
worn  brogans  or  no  shoes  at  all  ?  What  did  a  long  white  robe  mean 
to  him  who  had  known  no  better  raiment  than  sacks,  bags,  or  at  best 
the  roughest  and  poorest  of  clothing?  What  would  it  mean  to  him 
to  have  a  starry  crown,  the  adornment  of  a  king,  upon  that  old 
beaten  and  despised  head  of  his?  To  him,  those  golden  slippers  and 
long  white  robe  wrere  as  real  as  his  brogans  and  his  tattered  garments. 

His  soul  was  either  with  Satan  in  pain  or  with  God  in  joy.  He 
hardly  had  time  to  see  and  appreciate  the  things  of  an  everyday  life. 
His  surroundings  were  almost  always  extraordinary.  This  fact  ac- 
counts for  both  the  uncommon  character  of  his  religious  songs,  and 
the  paucity  and  utter  worthlessness  of  his  secular  songs.  So  few  and 
so  inferior  are  these  latter  that  w^e  may  justly  state  that  the  Negro 
Folk  Music  is  wholly  religious.  True  it  is  that  there  were  corn 
huskings,  camp  meetings,  barn  dances,  and  so  forth,  but  it  must  be 


28  FOLK  SONG  OF  THE  AMERICAN  NEGRO. 

remembered  that  the  corn  husking  was  work  as  serious  as  plowing 
and  hoeing;  that  the  camp  meeting  was  religious  and  in  those  days 
the  barn  dance  was  almost  a  priceless  luxury.  These  periods  of  re- 
laxation were  so  rare  that  they  could  not  make  any  such  impres- 
sions upon  the  Negro's  soul  as  did  those  experiences  that  made  up 
almost  his  whole  life.  Stephen  Foster's  old  melodies,  "Sewanee 
River,"  "Kentucky  Home."  "Nellie  was  a  Lady,"  "Massa's  in  the 
Cold,  Cold  Ground,"  and  "Ole  Black  Joe,"  are  sometimes  called 
plantation  melodies.  They  were  composed  by  a  white  man,  and, 
therefore,  cannot  be  placed  in  the  catalog  of  Negro  Folk  Songs:  still 
it  can  correctly  be  stated  that  in  spirit  and  pathos  they  bear  the 
Negro  stamp,  and  it  is  not  improbable  that  they  are  composed  of 
stories  and  airs  Mr.  Foster  learned  from  the  Negroes  he  knew  so 
well  and  among  whom  he  lived  during  the  days  of  slavery.  Conse- 
quently it  is  not  out  of  place  to  state  here  the  paradox  that  these 
are  the  finest  secular  Negro  Folk  Songs  in  existence.  There  have 
been  many  imitations  of  Negro  music  and  some  of  it  has  been  en- 
joyable, but  these  songs  of  Stephen  Foster  stand  out  as  the  best  of 
that  class,  in  fact  they  stand  alone,  in  a  class  between  all  other  imi- 
tations and  the  genuine  Negro  Folk  Song. 

When  the  question  of  American  Folk  Song  was  first  raised  in  this 
country,  and  some  bold  man  ventured  the  opinion  that  the  only 
American  folk  music  was  that  produced  by  the  Negro,  immediately 
there  was  vigorous  protest,  but  such  eminent  authorities  as  Dvorak 
and  Kiehbiel,  after  careful  investigation,  have  come  to  the  same 
conclusion.  As  soon  as  this  proof  positive  was  given  to  the  world, 
there  arose  another  question.  Is  this  music  original  with  the  Negro  ? 
The  implied  answer  was  "No."  Now,  as  soon  as  the  world  recognized 
the  worth  and  importance  of  this  music,  the  Negro  was  called  upon 
to  prove  himself  the  producer.  It  was  contended  that  he  got  it  from 
the  Scotch,  from  the  Portuguese,  from  the  Indian,  or  more  vaguely, 
from  the  European. 

Dr.  Eichard  YVallaschek  in  his  book  on  Primitive  Music,  makes 
this  statement:  "I  may  say  that,  generally  speaking,  these  Negro 
songs  are  very  much  overrated,  and  that  as  a  rule,  they  are  imita- 
tions of  European  compositions  which  the  Negroes  have  picked  up 
and  served  up  again  with  slight  variations."  '"Overrated?"  In  what 
way?  In  that  they  are  called  original  or  in  the  claims  to  the  pos- 
session of  value?    "Imitations  of  European  compositions  which  the 


AMERICAN  FOLK  SONG.  29 

Negro  has  picked  up  and  served  up  again,  with  slight  variations"? 

What  compositions?  What  variations?  Let  us  look  into  this.  "Over- 
rated." If  overrated  in  the  point  of  originality,  it  is  in  the  claim 
that  they  bear  no  trace  of  any  other  influence  outside  the  character 
of  the  American  Negro.  Of  course,  this  is  not  a  fact,  for  the  songs 
of  the  Negro  can  be  unmistakably  and  plainly  traced  to  African 
tribal  songs.  In  scale,  intervallic  relations,  rhythm,  construction  of 
melody,  picturesqueness ;  in  short,  in  vehicle,  in  frame  work,  there 
is  very  little  difference  between  African  tribal  songs  and  the  songs 
of  the  American  Negro.  To  be  sure,  America  has  added  something, 
and  in  some  places  pressed  a  stamp,  but  the  dominant  features  are 
African.  Again  "Overrated!"  If  in  the  claim  to  the  possession  of 
real  value,  then  Dr.  Wallaschek  certainly  cannot  have  made  any 
adequate  study  of  these  songs.  ••Value!"  Why,  the  value  of  such 
songs  as  "Swing  Low.  Sweet  Chariot."  "Steal  Away  to  Jesus,"  ''Lord, 
I  Want  to  be  Like  Jesus,"  can  no  more  be  overrated  than  the  beauty 
of  the  distant  "Jung  Fran,"  or  that  of  a  moonlight  night  of  south- 
ern June.  In  the  presence  of  either,  the  soul  is  helpless  to  express 
itself. 

"Imitations!"  It  would  be  folly  to  attempt  to  deny  the  fact 
that  the  American  Negro's  music  shows  some  resemblance  to  the 
music  of  other  peoples.  This  is  natural,  since  all  races  have  certain 
points  of  resemblance.  But  to  assert  that  he  has  found  any  greater 
resemblance  between  the  Negro's  music  and  European  music  than 
would  naturally  result  from  the  oneness  of  human  nature,  lays  the 
writer  open  to  the  suspicion  that  he  is  uninformed,  misinformed, 
superficial,  unscientific,  or  all  of  these. 

A  study  will  reveal  the  fact  that  the  Negro  music  is  more  un- 
mistakably stamped  with  the  Negro's  character  than  is  the  music  of 
any  other  people  stamped  with  the  character  of  the  race  which  pro- 
duced it.  The  characteristics  and  peculiarities  of  this  music  are  dis- 
cussed in  another  chapter.  "Variations !"  To  this  there  is  one  very 
good  explanation.  It  may  be  that  Dr.  Wallaschek  has  heard  the 
Negro  sing  the  "long  meters"  of  Dr.  Watt  and  other  hymn  writers. 
If  so.  he  certainly  heard  such  variations  as  never  man  heard  before! 
For  the  Negro  is  able  to  take  one  of  these  hymns  and  sing  it  in  such 
voice  that  it  will  seem  more  than  an  "European  composition,  picked 
up  and  served  up  again  with  slight  variations."  for  he  can  run  up 
and  down  the  scale,  make  side  trips  and  go  off  on  furloughs,  all  in 


30  FOLK  SONG  OF  THE  AMERICAN  XEGRO. 

time  and  in  such  perfectly  dazzling  ways  as  to  bewilder  the  un- 
initiated. In  truth,  the  uninitiated  would  not  recoguize  the  best 
known  hymn  sung  thus,  unless  he  could  catch  a  familiar  word  every 
now  and  then.  Another  example  of  variation  may  be  found  in  such 
songs  as  "I've  Been  Bedeeined.'"  The  chorus  is  Negro,  but  the 
stanzas  of  "There  is  a  Fountain  Filled  with  Blood*'  are  used.  Every 
feature  of  this  song  proves  that  it  was  composed  in  large  degree  and 
is  not  really  a  folk  song,  although  it  is  classed  as  one.  The  burdens 
of  bondage  made  the  one  overwhelming  impression  upon  the  Negro 
and  kept  him  faithful  to  God,  the  Burden-Bearer;  and  to  Heaven, 
where  burdens  are  no  more;  these,  therefore,  are  the  subjects  of  the 
Negro  Song. 

It  cannot  be  controverted,  that  in  certain  qualities  the  Negro's 
music  resembles  the  music  of  other  people,  but  that  is  natural,  in 
fact,  just  as  natural  as  that  the  Negro  himself  has  certain  qualities 
common  to  all  men.  There  are  points  of  resemblance  and  similarity 
in  all  the  music  that  has  ever  been  produced  by  any  people,  however 
different  in  race,  or  however  far  separated  by  ages.  In  essentials, 
all  men  have  been  and  are  still  the  same.  The  oldest  form  of  African 
song,  that  monotonous  chant  with  frequent  interjections,  strikingly 
resembles  the  music  of  the  Indian.  This  is  the  form  of  all  heathen 
music.  It  is  an  evidence  of  the  oneness  of  the  human  race.  The 
resemblance,  however,  between  the  music  of  the  Indian  and  that  of 
the  Negro  ceases  at  this  point.  In  other  respects,  the  difference  is 
amazing.  The  nature  of  this  very  difference  is,  in  itself,  a  conclusive 
argument  that  the  Negro  did  not  get  his  music  from  the  Indian.  It 
is  just  as  reasonable  to  contend  that  a  full  blood  Negro  could  be  born 
of  full-blood  Indian  parents.  There  is  no  strength  in  the  argument 
that  the  Negro  has  developed  the  Indian's  music  into  what  we  call 
Negro  Folk  Song;  for  it  is  impossible  that  this  development  could 
have  been  carried  on  to  the  point  where  not  one  trace  of  the  original 
remains.  In  r,cale.  intervallic  changes,  spirit,  melody,  rhythm,  there 
is  no  trace  of  the  Indian  in  the  Negro's  music.  It  is  all  Negro.  On 
this  point.  Mr.  Damrosch  says:  "The  Negro's  music  isn't  ours,  it 
is  the  Negro's.  It  has  become  a  popular  form  of  musical  expression 
and  is  interesting,  but  it  is  not  ours.  Nothing  more  characteristic 
of  a  race  exists,  but  it  is  characteristic  of  the  Negro,  not  the  Amer- 
ican race.  Through  it  a  primitive  people  poured  out  its  emotions 
with  wonderful  expressiveness.    It  no  more  expresses  our  emotions 


4 

AMERICAN  FOLK  SOXG.  31 

than  the  Indian  music  does."  On  the  other  hand,  however,  it  is  passing 
strange  that  with  the  same  skies  above  them,  the  same  earth  be- 
neath them,  the  same  mountains,  valleys,  and  streams  round  about 
them,  with  the  same  environs  touching  them  at  so  many  points,  the 
Negro  and  the  Indian  produced  music  different  in  every  respect  save 
that  in  which  the  music  of  all  primitive  peoples  resembles. 

The  strongest  resemblance  between  the  Negro's  music  and  that 
of  the  Scotchman  is  at  the  point  of  melody.  Melody  with  flow  is 
common  to  both,  but  the  Scotch  melody  is  the  more  developed.  The 
Scotch  music,  also,  sometimes  strikes  that  wild  note  we  find  so  com- 
monly in  the  Negro  music;  in  one  or  two  instances  the  "Scotch  Snap" 
has  been  found  in  the  Southern  Melodies,  but  it  is  not  at  all  clear 
why  these  facts  should  prove  that  the  Negro  got  his  music  from  the 
Scot.  Evidence  that  in  essentials  and  peculiarities  there  is  marked 
difference,  in  truth  that  there  is  no  resemblance,  seems  irrefutable. 
Then  even  a  casual  examination  will  show  the  impossibility  of  the 
very  thought  of  Scotch  origin  of  Negro  song.  The  Scot  sang  of  war 
and  vengeance.  A  man  of  blood,  he  sang  of  the  sword.  He  sang  the 
song  that  the  Negro  could  not  sing,  for  the  Negro  had  faith  in  Him 
who  said,  ''Vengeance  is  mine."  When  the  black  man  sang  of  the 
sword,  it  was  of  the  " Sword  of  the  Spirit."  Furthermore,  the  Scot's 
song  is  lacking  in  the  element  of  sacredness  which  we  find  pervading 
all  the  Negro's  music.  For  psychological  and  ethnological  reasons, 
it  is  not  strange  that  there  are  great  differences. 

How  the  African  could  have  received  his  music  from  the  Portu- 
guese is  beyond  reason.  It  is  true  that  Portugal  is  near  one  point  of 
Africa,  but  how  was  this  transmission  accomplished?  Did  the  Por- 
tuguese go  among  the  Africans  transplanting  their  music,  or  did  the 
African  come  to  Portugal  and  imbibe  Portuguese  melody?  Suppose, 
however,  there  were  such  intercourse  and  opportunity  for  such  trans- 
mission. Is  it  believable  that  the  Portuguese  song  was  so  strong  and 
so  pervasive  that  it  supplanted  whatever  music  the  African  possessed, 
or  gave  to  all  African  music  characteristics  the  Portuguese  music 
itself  does  not  possess?  The  strongest  evidence  against  a  Portuguese 
source  of  African  music  is  that  the  likenesses  are  so  few  and  so 
slight  and  the  differences  are  so  many  and  so  marked.  Furthermore, 
when,  where,  or  how  did  the  Indian,  the  Scot,  the  Portuguese  come 
into  such  powerful  contact  with  the  Negro  as  to  teach  him  a 
song  which  accurately  expresses  the  Negro's  soul  and  the  Negro's 


32  FOLK  SOXG  OF  THE  AMERICA*  XEGRO. 

soul  alone?  When  we  see  a  flower  with  all  the  characteristics  of 
the  rose,  and  with  those  of  no  other  flower,  we  never  trace  its  source 
to  the  sunflower,  but  to  the  rose  seed.  When  we  see  a  magnificent 
tree,  with  growth,  body,  spreading  boughs  and  leaves  of  an  oak  we 
never  trace  its  source  to  the  elm  seed,  but  to  the  acorn.  So  the  con- 
clusion is  irresistible  that  the  music  which  expresses  the  character- 
istic of  the  Negro's  soul  alone,  was  produced  by  the  Negro  alone. 
It  would  be  a  miracle  if  such  a  soul  as  his  did  not  produce  a  music 
all  its  own.  "Of  all  the  undeveloped  races,  the  Negro  seems  to  be 
the  most  gifted  musically."  says  one  notable  musical  authority.  His 
emotional  soul  possessed  of  melody  expresses  itself  in  those  unmis- 
takable terms  which  portray  the  Negro  as  nothing  else  can. 

Dr.  Henry  E.  Kiehbiel.  in  an  article  upon  the  subject  of  Negro 
Spirituals,  written  for  the  New  York  Tribune  September  12,  j909? 
makes  the  following  statement :  "Very  slowly  the  study  of  folk  song 
in  its  musical  and  literary  aspects  is  acquiring  scientific  value  as  a 
sub-division  of  Folk  Lore  which  in  turn  is  a  branch  of  the  science 
of  Ethnology.  To  this  study  America's  most  interesting  contribu- 
tion has  been  derived  from  the  black  people  who  tilled  the  fields  of 
cotton  and  of  rice  in  the  days  of  slavery.  This  peculiar  interest 
comes  from  two  sources,  the  songs  of  the  slaves  are  practically  the 
only  American  products  of  their  kind  which  meet  the  scientific  defini- 
tion of  Folk  Song:  that  is  to  say.  they  are  the  only  songs  of  which 
we  possess  a  significant  number,  which  were  created  by  an  ingenious 
people,  to  be  an  expression  of  their  feelings,  as  a  whole.  Nowhere, 
save  on  the  plantation,  could  the  emotional  life  which  is  essential  to 
the  creation  of  true  Folk  Song  be  developed.  Nowhere  else  was  the 
necessary  meeting  of  the  spiritual  cause  and  the  simple  agent  and 
vehicle." 

More  than  a  quarter  century  of  study  has  given  Dr.  Kiehbiel,  one 
of  the  very  few  men  whose  opinions  can  be  profitably  sought  regard- 
ing Negro  Folk  Song,  a  deep  and  comprehensive  knowledge  of  the 
subject,  such  a  knowledge  as  to  render  him  an  authority.  Facts 
bear  out  the  statement  of  Dr.  Kiehbiel  that  the  songs  of  the  slaves 
are  practically  the  only  American  product  of  this  kind  which  meet 
the  scientific  definition  of  Folk  Song.  These  songs  certainly  express 
the  feelings  of  the  Negro  "as  a  whole."  and  these  "feelings"  are  just 
as  certainly  expressive  of  the  life  of  the  Southern  States  of  America. 


AAIERICAX  FOLK  SOXG.  33 

A  people's  musical  expression  of  their  feelings  as  produced  by  the 
forces  and  conditions  of  their  life  constitutes  their  folk  song. 

Carl  Holliday,  M.A.,  instructor  in  English  Literature  in  the  Uni- 
versity of  Virginia,  says:  "Of  all  the  builders  of  the  nation  the 
Negro  alone  has  created  a  species  of  lyric  verse  that  all  the  world 
may  recognize  as  a  distinctly  American  production."  Mr.  Holliday 
has  shown  a  warm  interest  and  satisfying  knowledge  of  the  Negro 
Music.  He  approaches  his  subject  with  an  adequate  idea  of  its  im- 
portance, treating  it  in  a  deservedly  serious  manner  and  producing 
an  article,  which  is  a  distinct  contribution  to  the  subject. 

The  American  History  and  Encyclopedia  of  Music,  under  the 
heading  "Negro  Music  and  Negro  Minstrelsy,"  contains  the  follow- 
ing statement :  '"While  not  of  a  strictly  American  origin,  they  have 
undoubtedly  gone  to  form  the  foundation  of  such  Folk  Song  litera- 
ture as  this  country  possesses."  While  this  statement  adds  strength 
to  the  claim  that  the  Negro  has  produced  the  only  American  Folk 
Song  which  is  so  far  developed  and  improved  in  its  vehicle  that 
it  is  not  far  from  the  truth  to  call  it  American,  the  statement  needs 
explanation.  It  is  true  that  the  Negro  Folk  Song  is  not  wholly 
American,  for  the  vehicle  or  framework  is  African.  The  literary  and 
spiritual  forces,  however,  are  wholly  American.  The  subject-matter 
and  sentiment  express  American  life.  There  is  evidence  of  no  other 
source.  Eecognizing  both  its  Americanism  and  its  worth,  Dvorak 
in  his  ''New  World  Symphony,"  Chadwick  in  his  "Second  Symphony," 
and  Schoenfield  in  his  "Sunny  South  Overture,"  Kceger  in  his  ''Ten 
American  Sketches,"  have  all  used  the  essential  materials  of  Negro 
music.     Thematically,  its  use  is  becoming  more  and  more  extensive. 

Musical  and  literary  authority  through  scientific  investigation 
has  established  the  fact  that  while  there  is  no  American  Folk  Song 
in  the  sense  of  expressing  American  life  as  a  whole,  still  there  is  a 
Folk  Song  in  America,  and  that  is  the  Music  of  the  Negro. 


THE  UNITED  PRESBYTERIAN  MISSION  LIBRARY 
475  Riverside  Drive,  New  York  27,  N.  Y. 


34 


FOLK  SONG  OF  THE  AMERICAN  NEGRO. 


*  SOMEBODY'S  BURIED  IN  THE  GRAVEYARD 


i — — j — ^ —  —  — .  —  ~i — ?i — i 

[A  J  j  i  i  i-i-lm 


Somebody's  bur-ied  in  the  graveyard, Somebody's  bur-ied    in  the    sea, 

IS       *  j  -•-     -0-     -•-     -•-      -<&-' 

SIN  INN  }  -0-     -0-      -0-     -I —     -t —     H —     H —       H — . 

— , — P — I 1 — m — m — p — P  i  m— — i — -,-• — » — 0 — — i — i — V — i-^--t 

Z_±±_^ 1 + ^ + — I 1 1 ^ ^ ^ \/ — I 1 


Going  to  get  up  in  the  morning  a  shouting,Going  to    join     Ju  -  bi 


S 


i-U-t 


a-0 


:~ 


*=* 


H^-r^"- 


*=* 


lee. 


-* 


i 


&-*• 


=* 


see  me 

friends      be 
up,       some 


com 
fore 

times 


ing    a  -  long 

me 

I'm 


so, 
gone, 
down, 

B.C. 


*5>-- 


I! 


To 

the    prom  - 

ised 

land 

I'm 

bound 

Bv 

the    grace 

of 

God 

I'll 

fol 

But 

still 

my 

soul 

is 

heaven 

to 

go. 

low 

on. 

lv 

bound 

*  Death  held  a  very  prominent  place  in  the  mind  and  songs  of  the  slave.  In  exact  pro- 
portion to  his  hardships,  did  he  sing  of  death  and  the  glories  of  Heaven  where  he  should 
receive  just  those  things  that  were  here  denied  him.  Heaven  was  to  him  above  all  else  a 
place  of  rest  and  of  shouting  and  jubilation. 


CHARACTERISTIC*  AXD  PECULIARITIES.  35 


CHAPTER  IV. 


Characteristics  and  Peculiarities. 


"The  man  that  hath  not  music  in  himself, 
Nor  is  not  moved  with  concord  of  siceet  sounds. 
Is  fit  for  treasons,  strategems  and  spoils; 
The  motions  of  his  spirit  are  dull  as  night. 
And  his  affections  dark  as  Erebus; 
Let  no  such  man  be  trusted.'' 

IS  spite  of  the  continued  contact  with  the  whites,  the  Negro  melo- 
dies as  we  have  them  to-day  still  retain  their  exotic  traits." 
It  is  the  aim  of  this  chapter  to  point  out  these  exotic  traits  and 
other  elements  which  give  individuality  to  our  Folk  Song  and  as  far 
as  possible  to  give  the  reason  or  reasons  for  these  characterizing  and 
peculiarizing  features.  By  far  the  most  prominent  and  weighty 
influence  in  this  music,  as  we  have  often  reiterated,  is  its  religious 
element.  Each  song  is  based  upon  some  scriptural  passage  or  it  is 
created  by  the  imagination  out  of  a  religious  experience.  This  scrip- 
tural reference  may  not  always  be  used  accurately,  in  fact,  it  may 
be  and  often  is  twisted  and  changed  in  strange  manner,  but  it  is 
never  wrought  into  a  form  so  shapeless  as  to  be  unrecognizable; 
moreover,  it  is  generally  shaped  so  as  to  carry  a  point  which  sticks. 
Some  of  those  based  upon  direct  scriptural  passages  are : 

"Swing  low,  sweet  chariot — 

Coining  for  to  carry  me  home — " 
"I  look  over  Jordan.'' — 2  Kings  2  :  1-11. 
"There  is  a  balm  in  Gilead." — Jeremiah  8 :  22. 
"Rise,  shine,  for  thy  light  is  a-coming." — Isaiah  60 :  1. 
"I  know  I  have  another  building/' — 2  Corinthians  5:1. 
"Daniel  saw  the  stone.'' — Daniel  2  :  34. 
"Come  down,  angels." — John  5 :  23. 

Scores  of  songs  come  under  this  head  in  which  the  scriptural 
reference  is  most  direct. 

Among  those  songs  which  the  imagination  creates  out  of  its  re- 
ligious experiences  are  found : 


36  FOLK  SOXG  OF  THE  AMERICAS  XEGRO. 

"Great  camp  meeting." 

"Shout  all  over  God's  Heaven." 

"What  kind  o'  shoes  you  goin'  to  wear?" 

Though  these  songs  indicate  a  certain  imagination  they  also  show 
clearly  that  Heaven  to  the  Negro  slave  was  a  real  place  with  crowns 
of  victory  for  all  who  bear  the  cross  in  the  "low  ground  of  sorrow." 
In  marshaling  biblical  facts  and  history,  some  of  these  songs  are 
astonishing,  interesting,  and  in  the  display  of  ingenuity  in  fitting 
these  facts  to  rhythm,  are  comparable  to  Homer's  "Catalogue  of  the 
Ships." 

(1)  "We  read  in  the  Bible  and  we  understand, 

Methusaleh  was  the  oldest  man ; 

He  lived  nine  hundred  and  sixty-nine, 

He  died  and  went  to  Heaven,  Lord,  in  a-due  time." 

(2)  "We  read  in  the  Bible  and  we  understand, 

Samson  was  the  strongest  man ; 

Samson  went  out  at  a-one  time. 

Killed  about  a  thousand  of  the  Philistine : 

Delilah  fooled  Samson,  this  we  know- — 

The  Holy  Bible  tells  us  so. 

She  shaved  off  his  hair,  just  as  clean  as  your  ban*. 

His  strength  became  as  any  other  man." 

(3)  "Joshua  was  the  son  of  Nun; 

God  was  with  him,  till  the  work  was  done ; 
He  opened  the  window  and  began  to  look  out. 
The  ram's  horn  blew,  an'  the  children  did  shout. 
The  children  did  sbout,  till  the  hour  of  seven ; 
The  walls  fell  down,  an'  God  heard  it  in  Heaven." 

"My  soul  is  a  witness — " 

There  are  still  other  stanzas  to  this  song,  but  these  suffice  to  make 
clear  the  thought.  Someone  has  stated  that  if  the  Bible  should  be 
lost,  it  could  be  recovered  and  reconstructed  from  the  mind  of  the 
Negro.  This  seems  to  be  and  doubtless  is  an  extravagant  statement, 
but  conversation  with  a  Negro  preacher,  even  of  the  uneducated  class, 
will  oftentimes  cause  wonder  that  such  a  one  could  be  so  full  of  an 
accurate  knowledge  of  the  Bible  text.  Some  who  can  read  just  a 
little,  and  some  who  cannot  read  at  all,  can  go  on  and  on  with  cita- 
tions and  references,  giving  rapidly  and  off-hand,  the  book,  chapter, 


CHARACTERISTICS  AXD  PECULIARITIES.  37 

and  verse  containing  the  scriptures  which  bear  out  what  happens  to 
be  their  views.  They  always  have  "views,"  and  are  always  ready  to 
defend  them.  In  preaching  a  sermon  they  take  their  text,  sometimes 
reading  it  from  the  Bible,  sometimes  reciting  it,  then  close  the  Bible 
and  proceed  to  the  argument.  This  sermon,  delivered  without  hesi- 
tation and  without  notes,  is  often  a  strange  blending  of  imagery, 
poetry,  and  oratory,  glowing  with  religious  fire.  The  peroration  of 
this  sermon  is  intoned  or  "moaned."  In  other  words,  it  is  sung,  and 
the  effect  upon  the  audience  is  visible.  This  moaning,  singing  or  as 
the  Negroes  themselves  call  it,  "giving  gravey,"  is  quite  natural  to 
the  Negro.  His  proneness  to  sing  shows  itself  in  his  every  activity. 
Nothing  is  more  to  be  expected  than  that  when  his  activity  is  re- 
ligious, in  which  above  all  activities  he  is  most  interested,  he  should 
throw  away  all  restraint  and  conventionalities  and  be  his  natural 
self,  which  is  a  musical  self. 

This  manner  of  preaching  is  not  at  all  approved  of  by  the  later 
generation  of  Negroes;  that  is,  the  educated  class,  because  it  is  a 
mark  of  the  lack  of  intelligence.  That  is  true,  but  it  is  a  mark  of 
naturalness.  Education  and  civilization,  along  with  the  many  good 
things  they  bring,  bring  also  an  unnaturalness. 

The  reason  why  the  Negro  songs  are  so  full  of  scripture,  quoted 
and  implied,  is  that  for  centuries  the  Bible  was  the  only  book  he  was 
allowed  to  "study,"  and  it  consumed  all  his  time  and  attention.  This 
reason  finds  added  strength  in  the  Negro's  religious  nature. 

Another  characteristic  of  the  Negro  song  is,  as  has  been  stated 
before,  that  it  has  no  expression  of  hatred  or  revenge.  If  these  songs 
taught  no  other  truths  save  this,  they  would  be  invaluable.  That  a 
race  which  had  suffered  and  toiled  as  the  Negro  had,  could  find  no 
expression  for  bitterness  and  hatred,  yes,  could  positively  love,  is 
strong  evidence  that  it  possesses  a  clear  comprehension  of  the  great 
force  in  life,  and  that  it  must  have  had  experience  in  the  fundamen- 
tals of  Christianity.  "One  shriek  of  hate  would  jar  all  the  hymns 
of  heaven. 

The  rythm  of  this  music  is  the  element  which  has  been  most  gen- 
erally imitated  and  appropriated  by  the  composers  of  to-day.  Espe- 
cially is  this  true  of  those  who  write  popular  music,  both  secular  and 
sacred.  This  rhythm  is  a  distinguishing  feature  of  many  of  our  most 
effective  gospel  hymns,  and  with  heightened  syncopation,  another 
idiomatic  peculiarity  of  Negro  Folk  Song,  it  gives  "ragtime"  its  cur- 


38  FOLK  SOXG  OF  THE  AMERICAN  XEGRO. 

rency  and  popularity.  "Bagtime"  is  an  ingenious  and  fitting  appella- 
tion for  the  music  to  which  it  gives  a  name,  for  it  is  time  torn  to 
tatters,  but  in  such  rhythmically  fascinating  manner  as  to  arouse 
every  single  motor  nerve  of  our  being.  That  is  why  we  like  it,  say 
what  we  may.  The  element  of  ragtime  which  makes  it  objectionable 
is  the  language  and  thought,  not  the  vehicle,  for  were  the  vehicle 
objectionable  we  would  discard  some  of  the  choicest  music  we  now 
possess  and  cherish.  Against  the  words  and  moral  ideas  of  ragtime 
songs  all  respectable  people,  those  who  love  aright,  have  just  com- 
plaint; but  let  the  spirit  of  ragtime  be  changed  and  let  the  writers 
of  it  express  high  ideals,  instead  of  the  low  ones  they  now  use,  and 
the  public,  all,  would  welcome  it,  and  hail  it  as  a  new  development 
of  the  musical  art.  In  the  simple  music  of  ragtime  is  a  natural- 
ness which  appeals  to  nature.  This  rhythm  in  folk  music,  as  hinted 
before,  is  idiomatic  and  is  as  essential  to  the  body  of  our  music  as 
pure  red  blood  is  to  the  human  body.  A  fresh,  vigorous  flow  carries 
the  life-giving  forces  to  all  parts  of  the  system.  In  the  Negro's  char- 
acter there  is  a  quality  which  rhythm  alone  expresses.  This  quality 
is  as  striking  and  as  characteristic  as  rhythm  is  in  his  music,  and,  fur- 
thermore, it  is  as  evident  in  his  life  as  rhythm  is  in  his  songs.  When 
the  Xegro  sings  with  the  "Spirit  and  the  understanding"'  not  only 
with  his  voice  does  he  sing,  but  with  his  body  as  well.  This  body  or 
corporeal  accompaniment  is  contagious,  and  audiences  often  pat 
the  feet,  sway  the  body  or  move  the  head  "in  time."  Some  instances 
have  been  very  noticeable  and  amusing.  At  a  concert  given  by  a 
company  of  Fisk  singers  in  a  Kentucky  town,  the  audience  was  com- 
posed of  students  and  teachers  of  a  certain  academy.  The  contagion 
of  rhythm  was  so  general  that  the  concert  was  almost  "broken  up," 
because  the  singers  could  scarcely  withstand  the  sight  of  almost  the 
whole  audience  swaying  in  perfect  time  to  their  songs.  Ehythm 
arouses  emotion  and  emotion  arouses  motion.  That  is  the  explana- 
tion of  the  Negro's  keeping  time  with  his  body  while  he  sings.  Im- 
perfect rhythm  he  abhors  quite  as  profoundly  as  nature  abhors  a 
vacuum  and  he  has  interesting  and  effective  means  of  avoiding  such 
a  fault.  Long  holds  are  not  natural  to  this  music  ;  and  whenever  they 
occur  they  indicate  a  development  of  the  years  subsequent  to  the 
days  of  Folk  Song  creation.  The  movement  in  this  music,  which 
largely  contributes  to  what  Dr.  Krehbeil  calls  "Moving  beauty,"  de- 
mands short  notes   and   short  syllables.     To  gain   this  effect,   the 


CHARACTERISTICS  AXD  PECULIARITIES.  39 

creators  of  these  songs  have  resorted  ingeniously  to  the  use  of  a 
nameless  little  something-  represented  by  the  letter  "A,"  thereby  add- 
ing a  subtle  force  to  the  song  in  which  it  is  employed. 

In  that  beautiful  hymn  "Lord,  I  Want  to  be  a  Christian."  we  find 
in  the  refrain  instead  of  "In  my  heart." — "In-a-my  heart."  In  "Good 
^ews."  we  find,  "I  don't  want-her  leave-a-me  behind."  In  "Judgment 
Day,"  we  find,  "Judg-a-inent,  Jud-a-ment.  Judg-a-ment  day  is  a-roll- 
ing  around."  In  "Oh,  Kocks,  Don't  Fall  on  Me."  we  find.  "In-a-that 
great  judgment  day."  This  extra  syllable  was  used  much  more  gen- 
erally in  the  past  than  now.  Its  use  is  now  confined  to  those  who 
have  survived  from  ante-bellum  days  and  to  those  who  live  in  the 
rural  districts.  Those  in  the  cities  and  schools  are  paying  less  and 
less  attention  to  it.  Time  is  working  a  change.  Has  rhythm,  this 
perfect  beauty  in  movement,  any  real  importance  in  creation?  The 
rhythm  of  the  planets  as  they  encircle  each  other  with  paths  of  light: 
the  rhythm  of  the  seasons  as  they  follow  each  other,  each  bringing 
its  own  peculiar  beauty  and  life  suggest  at  least  that  rhythm  is  an 
important  principle  in  creation,  and  is  essential  to  the  harmony  of 
the  universe.  That  the  life  of  the  Negro  is  rhythmic  is  an  uncommon 
blessing.     It  is  an  ever-increasing  wealth  of  happiness. 

Another  peculiarity  is  the  common  and  surprising  use  of  ejacula- 
tions at  the  dictates  of  feeling.  Such  ejaculations  take  the  form  of 
"O  Lord!''  "Hallelujah  !"  "O  Yes  !"  "SSing  :"  "Sing  it,  children,-'  and 
are  usually  thrown  in  by  the  leader,  but  oftentimes  by  others,  just  as 
the  spirit  moves;  but  by  whomever  it  is  interjected  there  is  no  vio- 
lence done  to  the  rhythm,  and  the  effect  is  electrical.  Sometimes 
such  an  expression,  though  extemporaneous  and  spontaneous,  is  so 
fitting  and  effective  that  it  becomes  a  part  of  the  song.  The  particu- 
lar one  of  these  that  is  the  most  effective  is  the  single  word  "sing." 
It  is  a  sharp  spur  to  the  singers.  On  one  occasion,  while  in  chapel 
exercises  at  Fisk,  the  students  were  singing  in  a  purposeless  manner 
the  song,  "I  Want  to  be  Beady" — the  leader  in  the  genuine  Negro 
way,  without  harming  the  rhythm,  shouted.  "Sing!"  With  a  sparkle 
in  every  eye.  with  a  buoyancy  supreme,  that  student  body  burst  forth 
with  such  a  volume  of  spirited  song  as  is  seldom  permitted  one  to 
hear  more  than  once  in  a  lifetime — in  harmony  like  a  well-attuned 
organ,  in  power  like  the  rushing  of  many  waters. 

Another  peculiarity  is  a  certain  subtle  effect  which  only  the  true 
'•Jubilee  Voice"  can  produce.     This  is  indescribable,  for  it  consists 


40  FOLK  SONG  OF  THE  AMERICAN  NEGRO. 

in  certain  turns,  twists,  and  intonations  not  represented  by  any 
musical  term.     To  be  appreciated,  it  must  be  heard. 

In  the  "American  History  and  Encyclopaedia  of  Music"  is  found 
the  following  statement:  "In  order  to  form  a  true  conception  of 
Negro  Songs  it  is  necessary  to  hear  them  sung  by  their  creators. 
For  the  Negro  possesses  a  peculiar  quality  of  voice  which  it  is  next 
to  impossible  to  'imitate.'  "  True,  there  is  a  "peculiar  quality"  in 
the  Negro  voice,  which  it  is  difficult  if  not  "impossible"  to  "imitate" ; 
but  it  is  more  than  "quality  of  voice"  which  makes  the  Negro  sing- 
ing interesting;  it  is  the  use  of  the  voice.  This  use  of  the  voice  is 
what  gives  that  subtle,  indescribable  effect  in  some  of  the  Folk  Songs, 
which  many  find  so  fascinatingly  strange.  This  effect  is  produced 
without  conscious  effort,  it  is  only  the  natural  expression  of  what 
the  singer  feels.  Success  in  singing  Negro  Folk  Song  is  dependent 
upon  a  certain  spiritual  condition,  a  religious  state.  The  voice  is 
not  nearly  so  important  as  the  spirit. 

Of  course,  the  ideal  singer  of  this  music  is  the  one  whose  spiritual 
condition  is  deepest  and  whose  voice  is  best.  There  are  those  whose 
minds  as  well  as  whose  spirits,  voices,  and  experience  finely  fit  them 
for  the  satisfactory  singing  of  this  music.  Among  those  who  have 
almost  perfected  the  art  of  "Jubilee  Singing,"  Mrs.  Ella  Sheppard 
Moore  of  the  Original  Jubilee  Singers,  now  of  blessed  memory,  but 
who  is  still  an  inspiration  to  us  who  are  studying  Negro  music ;  Mrs. 
Mabel  Grant  Hadley  and  Eev.  James  A.  Myers,  are  prominent  ex- 
amples. Education  and  training  have  not  taken  from  them  that 
spirituality  and  courage  necessary  to  a  proper  rendering  of  these 
songs.  That  quality  as  expressed  in  the  ability  to  sing  the  folk  song 
effectively  is  not  prevalent  among  the  educated  Negroes,  for  it  is 
considered  bad  musical  taste  by  most  of  those  who  teach  Negroes. 
This  is  because  such  teachers  have  no  comprehension  of  the  impor- 
tance of  race  consciousness,  or  they  have  no  understanding  of  the 
worth  of  the  music.  Some  are,  as  yet,  too  thoroughly  possessed  of 
the  classical  idea,  or  too  sensitive  to  the  question  of  slavery  to  give 
serious  study  to  this  music,  but  the  time  is  coming  when  the  essen- 
tials of  the  Negro  Folk  Song  will  be  the  dominant  forces  in  a  new 
music.  "The  composer  is  yet  to  arise,"  states  the  History  and  En- 
cyclopaedia of  Music,  "who  will  take  those  bits  of  melody,  typical  of 
his  race,  and  on  them  construct  compositions  of  true  artistic  work." 


CHARACTERISTICS  AXD  PECULIARITIES.  41 

Coledridge-Taylor  has  set  a  fine  example  in  his  transcriptions  of 
Negro  melodies.  In  fact,  his  example  is  worth  more  to  the  Negro 
race  than  what  he  accomplished  in  a  musical  way.  His  productions, 
based  upon  these  melodies  thematic-ally,  are  most  assuredly  artistic 
For  one  who  knew  nothing  of  the  life  and  conditions  of  those  who 
created  these  songs,  he  expressed  their  spirit  remarkably  well.  This 
spirit  is  American,  generated  on  the  Southern  plantations,  and  these 
melodies  breathe  out  Southern  life  just  as  truly  as  the  magnolia 
sheds  its  fragrance,  or  the  mocking  bird  flutes  his  song.  Again,  let 
it  be  repeated  that  Coleridge-Taylor  has  given  inspiration,  a  powerful 
force  for  progress,  and  this  will  certainly  lead  some  Negro  composer, 
possessed  of  the  same  spirit  that  vitalizes  the  Negro  Folk  Song,  to 
give  to  the  world  productions  throbbing  with  our  own  life  forces 
and  worthy  to  be  bound  in  gold.  "God  hath  given  to  every  people  a 
prophet  in  their  own  tongues,"  states  the  Koran.  The  spontaneous 
birth  and  consequent  growth  of  this  music  are  decidedly  distinguish- 
ing features.  It  bursts  out  of  hearts  in  a  state  of  almost  religious 
frenzy.  At  such  times  only  the  theme  and  probably  a  stanza  were 
born;  afterwards  there  are  some  developments  as  the  new  song  is 
sung  in  different  localities.  In  this  spontaneity,  the  Folk  Song  of 
the  American  Negro  stands  preeminent.  Go  out  among  the  rural 
churches  to-day  and  attend  the  "Big  Meetings,"  and  there  will  spring 
up  before  your  very  eyes  the  first  fresh  shouts  of  songs  which  are 
soon  to  flourish  and  fructify.  During  slavery  in  some  localities  it 
was  a  custom  to  require  each  new  convert,  before  allowing  him  to 
"join  the  church"  to  sing  a  new  song,  and  many  a  passion  flower  of 
the  slave  cabin  smiling  through  dewey  tears,  raised  up  its  face,  greet- 
ing the  brightness  of  the  sun. 

Finally,  the  very  foundation  of  this  music  is  of  the  Negro's  build- 
ing. The  scale  is  peculiarly  his  own,  and  consequently  satisfies  his 
nature.  Through  it  this  nature  manifests  itself  to  the  world.  The 
spirit  of  music  is  a  common  possession  which  takes  outward  form 
according  to  the  nature  of  the  possessor.  The  Negro  in  his  primitive 
nature  expressed  his  musical  scale  1-2-3-5-6.  Why?  That  was  all 
the  world  meant  to  him.  But  the  American  Negro  has  gone  one 
step  further  and  added  one  more  note,  flat  seven,  an  addition  which 
goes  a  long  way  toward  expressing  the  effect  of  added  experience 
brought  to  him  by  a  new  life  in  a  New  World.  This  flat  seven  ex- 
presses a  wild  and  overwhelming  surprise  at  the  utter  strangeness 


42  FOLK  8ON6  OF  FHE  AMERICAS  XEGRO. 

of  things.  Who  can  describe  the  feelings  of  the  African  slave  as  he 
beheld  this  great  American  civilization  unfolding  itself?  What  are 
the  feelings  of  an  infant  as  the  big  world  gradually  opens  up  itself? 
What  would  be  the  feelings  of  a  black  boy  who  had  been  born  and 
reared  in  a  cabin  of  the  black  belt,  if  suddenly  he  should  be  placed 
in  the  palace  of  a  king?  Compared  to  the  feelings  of  the  African  in 
the  presence  of  this  new  American  civilization,  these  are  as  the  gentle 
ripple  on  the  calm  bosom  of  the  lake  to  the  boisterous  billows  of  the 
deep.  All  this  feeling  of  the  African's  awe  was  injected  into  that 
little  flat  seven,  America's  contribution  to  the  Negro's  scale. 

The  conditions  and  experiences  which  put  this  wild,  strange  note 
into  the  being  of  the  American  Xegro,  must  have  been  supremely 
overpowering.  They  must  have  cut  their  way  into  the  very  springs 
of  his  life,  for  their  influence  is  abiding.  Careful  investigation  has 
shown  that  Negroes  born  since  freedom  who  have  made  no  study  of 
the  Folk  Song,  in  fact,  know  nothing  technical  about  it,  will  often 
unconsciously  strike  this  note  in  songs  in  which  it  is  not  supposed 
to  occur.  While  they  are  singing  for  the  simple  joy  of  it.  that  note 
will  frequently  peal  out  with  its  weirdness. 

The  Folk  Song  of  the  American  Xegro,  then,  is  characterized  by 
the  elements  of  religion,  rhythm,  syncopation,  spontaneity,  and  the 
sexatonic  scale  with  the  flat  seven  expressing  surprise  and  the  ab- 
sence of  any  feeling  of  hatred  or  revenge. 


CHARACTERISTICS   AND   PECULIARITIES. 


43 


Balm  in  Silea&( 


^ « 


W~—9        # 

There  is   a     Balm  in   Gil  -e  -ad 
_# « *__ a 


To  make  the  wounded  whole.  There  is  a 


± 


Fink 


-#— r 


P-^ 9 9 » 9 

Balm    in    Gil  -  e  -  ad,     To    heal 


^=«^ 


the   sin -sick   soul.  There  is   a       soul. 


:=: 


:| 1— U4: 


1 


*     ; 


U    *• 


KG 


EE 


w 


-L*— — # — #— 


1.  Some -times  I     feel  dis-cour-aged, 

2.  Don't     ev  -  er    feel  dis-cour-aged, 

3.  If  you  can-not  preach  like  Pe  -  ter, 


And  think  my  work's  in  vain.  But 
For  Je  -  sos  is  your  friend.  And 
If   you  can-not  pray  like  Paul,  You  can 


UBS 


M 

\ 

\ 

V 

N 

f\ 

*> 

N 

_x 

V 

V 

r— ' 

% 

f.O. 

\ 

."«* 

'      9 

9 

*    1 

'     1 

9 

v  1 

Jfiu 

-9 — 

-• — 

9 

— 9 

•  • 

4  4 

then  the  Ho  -  ly  Spir  -  it  Pe  -  vives  my  soul  a 
if  you  lack  for  knowledge,  Ile'll  ne'er  re-fuse  to 
tell    the  love   of       Je  -  sus,     And   say, ''He  died  for 


HSe 


gain.  There  is  a 
lend.  There  is  a 
all."    There  is    a 

a * #. 

----       I  '  _L 


44  FOLK  SONG  OF  THE  AMERICAN  NEGRO. 


CHAPTER  V. 


Number  and  Classification. 


"The  object  of  music  is  to  strengthen  and  ennoble  the  soul." 

FEOM  the  nature  of  the  case  it  is  impossible  to  state  definitely 
the  number  of  these  songs;  impossible  even  to  approximate  it. 
That  they  reach  well  up  into  the  hundreds  is  evidenced  by  the  books 
that  have  been  published  by  Fisk,  Hampton,  Calhoun,  and  by  indi- 
viduals connected  with  no  institution  of  learning.  That  their  num- 
ber is  even  larger  is  shown  by  the  numerous  "new"  songs  and  frag- 
ments which  we  are  continually  discovering.  There  are  songs  which 
are  practically  never  heard  outside  of  the  localities  where  they  were 
born.  Those  interested  in  collecting  this  music,  go  into  these  locali- 
ties and  gather  them.  Collections  of  these  songs  are  continually  in- 
creased by  the  following  contributing  agencies : 

(1)  Students,  new  and  old,  coming  to  our  schools  year  by  year, 
bring  them  to  us,  (2)  we,  ourselves,  passing  from  state  to  state  fall- 
ing in  with  older  members  of  our  race,  and  attending  our  churches 
which  are  still  influenced  by  ante-bellum  life,  and  find  many  a  song 
we  have  never  heard  before.  Many  a  time  we  find  a  song  which  we 
call  "new,"  thinking  that  it  was  more  lately  born  than  those  we  know 
so  well,  but  in  most  cases  we  find  some  person  whose  grandmother 
or  grandfather  used  to  sing  it  all  the  time,  and  sometimes  we  even 
find  that  very  old  grandmother  or  grandfather  whose  favorite  it  was. 
So  now  we  never  call  a  song  "new"  in  point  of  its  birth,  but  from 
the  point  of  our  acquaintance  with  it.  After  what  deserves  to  be 
called  a  thorough  investigation,  we  are  led  to  the  conclusion  that 
practically  all,  if  not  absolutely  all,  of  the  best  and  most  interesting 
of  these  songs  were  born  in  slavery  days;  the  songs  of  the  Negro 
produced  since  those  days  bear  the  marks  of  attempted  composition, 
usually  called  "ballads,"  and  are  generally  poor  imitations.  Some- 
times we  find  one  song  to  be  practically  two,  which  is  a  result  of  de- 
velopment or  of  mistaken  interpretation,  sometimes  the  same  words 
to  different  tunes,  or  the  same  tune  used  with  different  words.  The 
following  are  examples: 


NUMBER  AND   CLASSIFICATION.  45 

'Tni-a-gom'  to  do  all  I  can  for  niy  Lord,"  which  words  are  used 
with  the  same  tune  as  "I've  a  mother  in  the  kingdom,  ain't  that  good 
news?''  Almost  the  identical  air  is  used  to  the  following  three  sets 
of  words: 

(1)   "Free  at  last,  free  at  last;  I  thank  God,  I'm  free  at  last." 
i  '2  i    "Hold  the  wind,  hold  the  wind ;  Hold  the  wind,  don't  let  it 

blow." 
(3)   ''Stand  on  the  rock,  Stand  on  the  rock, 
Stand  on  the  rock  a  little  longer." 

Conditions  were  favorable  for  the  birth  of  a  large  number  of 
songs.  The  Bible  is  the  main  source  both  of  the  subject,  and  material 
for  the  music.  This  in  itself  is  an  inexhaustible  source.  Then  the 
different  surroundings  in  different  localities,  influencing  the  imagina- 
tion of  the  Negro,  caused  a  diversity  of  thought  and  of  connection, 
which  in  turn  gave  birth  to  a  variety  of  songs.  In  the  light  of  all 
these  facts  it  is  easy  to  understand  how  these  songs  would  increase 
very  rapidly  and  soon  become  as  numerous  as  the  stars,  "a  number 
that  no  man  can  number."  While  we  must  acknowledge  a  positive 
and  absolute  indefiniteness  as  to  the  number  of  these  songs,  in  re- 
gard to  classification  we  can  state  quite  accurately  where  each  song 
with  which  we  are  acquainted  beloDgs.  To  begin  with,  there  are 
two  extremes  of  emotion, — joy  and  sorrow — expressed  in  this  music. 
There  is  practically  no  middle  ground.  At  first  it  seems  strange 
that  so  little  attention  was  given  to  the  common  every-day  life,  but 
then,  when  we  recall  that  this  work-a-day  life  had  so  few  attractions, 
his  strangeness  disappears. 

JOY  SONGS. 

"Great  Camp  Meeting." 

1.  Oh,  walk  together  children  ;  Don't  you  get  a-weary  ; 
Walk  together  children ;  Don't  you  get  a-weary  : 
Walk  together  children  ;  Don't  you  get  a-weary  : 
There's  a  great  camp  meeting  in  the  promise  land. 

2.  Oh,  sing  together  children,  Don't  you  get-a-weary, 
Sing  together  children,  Don't  you  get-a-weary ; 
Sing  together  children,  Don't  you  get-a-weary ; 
There's  a  great  camp  meeting  in  the  promise  land. 


46  FOLK  SONG  OF  THE  AMERICAN  NEGRO. 

3.    Going  to  moan  and  never  tire, 
Moan  and  never  tire, 
Moan  and  never  tire, 
There's  a  great  camp  meeting  in  the  promise  land. 

"Peter,  Go  Ring  Them   Bells." 

Chorus 
Oh,  Peter,  go  ring  them  bells, 
Peter,  go  ring  them  bells, 
Peter,  go  ring  them  bells, 
I  heard  from  Heaven  to-day. 
Oh,  I  heard  from  Heaven  to-day, 
Heard  from  Heaven  to-day, 
Oh,  thank  God,  and  I  thank  you  too, 
I  heard  from  Heaven  to-day. 

1.    I  wonder  where  sister  Mary's  gone, 
Wonder  where  sister  Mary's  gone, 
Wonder  where  sister  Mary's  gone, 
I  heard  from  Heaven  to-day. 

Chorus 
Oh,  heard  from  Heaven  to-day,  etc. 

"Free  at  Last." 

Chorus 
Oh,  free  at  last,  free  at  last, 
I  thank  God  I'm  free  at  last, 
Free  at  last,  free  at  last, 
I  thank  God  I'm  free  at  last. 

1.  Way  down  yonder  in  the  graveyard  walk, 

I  thank  God  I'm  free  at  last, 
Me  and  my  Jesus  goin'  to  meet  and  talk, 
I  thank  God  I'm  free  at  last. 

Chorus 
Oh,  free  at  last,  etc. 

2.  Down  on  my  knees  when  the  light  passed  by, 

I  thank  God  I'm  free  at  last, 
Thought  my  soul  would  rise  and  fly, 
I  thank  God  I'm  free  at  last. 

Chorus 
Oh,  free  at  last,  etc. 


NUMBER  AND  CLASSIFICATION.  47 

"Wide  River." 

Chorus 
Oh,  wasn't  that  a  wide  river, 

River  of  Jordan,  Lord, 
Wide  river, 

There's  one  more  river  to  cross. 

Oh,  the  River  of  Jordan  is  so  wide, 

One  more  river  to  cross, 
And  I  don't  know  how  to  get  on  the  other  side, 

One  more  river  to  cross. 

Chorus 
Oh,  wasn't  that  a  wide  river,  etc. 

Shout,  shout,  Satan's  about, 

One  more  river  to  cross, 
Shut  your  door  and  keep  him  out, 

One  more  river  to  cross. 

Chorus 
Oh,  wasn't  that  a  wide  river,  etc. 

"Some  of  these  Mornings." 

1.  Going  to  see  my  mother, 

Some  0'  these  mornings, 
See  my  mother, 

Some  0'  these  mornings, 
See  my  mother, 

Some  0'  these  mornings, 
Hope  I'll  join  the  band. 

2.  Going  to  chatter  with  the  angels, 

Some  0'  these  mornings, 
Chatter  with  the  angels, 

Some  o'  these  mornings, 
Chatter  with  the  angels, 

Some  0'  these  mornings, 
Hope  I'll  join  the  band. 

Chorus 
Look  away  in  the  Heavens, 
Look  away  in  the  Heavens, 
Look  away,  in  the  Heavens,  Lord; 
Hope  I'll  join  the  band. 


48  FOLK  SONG  OF  THE  AMERICAS  NEGRO. 

"Oh,  Religion  is  a  Fortune!" 

Chorus 
Oh,  religion  is  a  fortune, 

I  really  do  believe, 
Oh,  religion  is  a  fortune, 

I  really  do  believe. 

1.  Where've  you  been,  sister  Mary, 
Where've  you  been  so  long, 

Been  low  down  in  the  valley  for  to  pray, 
And  I  ain't  got  weary  yet. 

Chorus 
Oh,  religion  is  a  fortune,  etc. 

2.  Where've  you  been,  poor  mourner. 
Where've  you  been  so  long, 

Been  low  down  in  the  valley  for  to  pray, 
And  I  ain't  got  weary  yet. 

Chorus 
Oh,  religion  is  a  fortune,  etc. 


"Shout  All  Over  God's  Heaven." 

1.  I  got  a  cross, 
You  got  a  cross, 

All-a-God's  children  got  a  cross, 

When  I  get  to  Heaven, 

Goin'  to  lay  down  my  cross, 

Goin'  to  shout  all  over  God's  Heaven, 

Heaven,  Heaven. 

Everybody  talking  about  Heaven  ain't  goin'  there, 

Heaven,  Heaven. 

Shout  all  over  God's  Heaven. 

2.  I  got  a  song, 
You  got  a  song, 

All-a-God's  children  got  a  song, 

When  I  get  to  Heaven, 

Goin'  to  sing  a  new  song, 

Goin'  to  sing  all  over  God's  Heaven, 

Heaven,  Heaven. 

Everybody  talking  about  Heaven  ain't  goin'  there, 

Heaven,  Heaven. 

Sing  all  over  God's  Heaven. 


NUMBER  AND   CLASSIFICATION.  49 

"Good  News,  the  Chariot's  Coming." 

Chorus 
Good  news,  the  chariot's  corning, 
Good  news,  the  chariot's  corning, 
Good  news,  the  chariot's  coming, 
And  I  don't  want-her  to  leave-a-me  behind. 

1.  It's  a  golden  chariot. — Carry  me  home, 
A  golden  chariot, — Carry  me  home, 

A  golden  chariot, — Carry  me  home, 

And  I  don't  want-her  to  leave-a-me  behind. 

Chorus 

Good  news,  the  chariot's  coming,  etc. 

2.  There's  a  long  white  robe,  In  the  heaven  I  know ; 
A  long  white  robe, — In  the  heaven  I  know  ; 

A  long  white  robe, — In  the  heaven  I  know  ; 
And  I  don't  want-her  to  leave-a-me  behind. 

Chorus 
Good  news,  the  chariot's  coming,  etc. 

"Rise,  Shixe,  for  Thy  Light  is-a-coming." 

Chorus 
Oh  rise,  shine,  for  thy  light  is-a-coming, 
Oh  rise,  shine,  for  thy  light  is-a-coming, 
Oh  rise,  shine,  for  thy  light  is-a-coming, 
My  Lord  says  He*s  coming  by  and  by. 

1.  Oh  wet  and  dry  I  intend  to  try, 

My  Lord  says  He's  coming  by  and  by ; 
To  serve  the  Lord  until  I  die; 

My  Lord  says  He's  coming  by  and  by. 

Chorus 
Oh  rise,  shine,  for  thy  light  is-a-coming,  etc. 

2.  This  is  the  year  of  Jubilee, 

My  Lord  says  He's  coming  by  and  by, 
The  Lord  has  set  His  people  free, 

My  Lord  says  He's  coming  by  and  by. 

Chorus 
Oh  rise,  shine,  for  thy  light  is-a-coming,  etc. 


50  FOLK  SONG  OF  THE  AMERICAS  NEGRO. 

SORROW  SONGS. 

"Keep  Me  From  Sinking  Down." 

Chorus 
Oh  Lord,  Oh  my  Lord, 
Oh  Lord,  Oh  my  Lord, 
Keep  me  from  sinking  down. 

1.  I  tell  you  what  I  mean  to  do, 

Keep  me  from  sinking  down. 
I  mean  to  go  to  heaven,  too, 
Keep  me  from  sinking  down. 

Chorus 
Oh  Lord,  Oh  my  Lord,  etc. 

2.  I'm  sometimes  up,  I'm  sometimes  down, 

Keep  me  from  sinking  down. 
Sometimes  I'm  level  with  the  ground, 
Keep  me  from  sinking  down. 

Chorus 
Oh  Lord,  Oh  my  Lord,  etc. 

"Nobody  Knows  the  Trouble  I  See." 

Refrain 
Nobody  knows  the  trouble  I  see,  Lord, 
Nobody  knows  the  trouble  I  see. 
Nobody  knows  the  trouble  I  see,  Lord, 
Nobody  knows  but  Jesus. 

1.  Mother,  won't  you  pray  for  me; 
Mother,  won't  you  pray  for  me; 
Mother,  won't  you  pray  for  me ; 

And  help  me  to  drive  old  Satan  away. 

Refrain 
Nobody  knows  the  trouble  I  see,  Lord,  etc. 

2.  Preacher,  won't  you  pray  for  me ; 
Preacher,  won't  you  pray  for  me ; 
Preacher,  won't  you  pray  for  me; 
And  help  me  to  drive  old  Satan  away. 

Refrain 
Nobodv  knows  the  trouble  I  see,  Lord,  etc. 


NUMBER  AND  CLASSIFICATION.  51 

"Were  You  There  When  They  Crucified  My  Lord?" 

1.  Were  you  there  when  they  crucified  ray  Lord? 
Were  you  there  when  they  crucified  my  Lord? 

Oh,  sometimes  it  causes  me  to  tremble, — tremble, — tremble, 
Were  you  there  when  they  crucified  my  Lord? 

2.  Were  you  there  when  they  pierced  Him  in  the  side? 
Were  you  there  when  they  pierced  Him  in  the  side? 

Oh,  sometimes  it  causes  me  to  tremble, — tremble, — tremble, 
Were  you  there  when  they  pierced  Him  in  the  side? 

3.  Were  you  there  when  they  laid  Him  in  the  tomb? 
Were  you  there  when  they  laid  Him  in  the  tomb? 

Oh,  sometimes  it  causes  me  to  tremble, — tremble, — tremble, 
Were  your  there  when  they  laid  Him  in  the  tomb? 


"I'm  Troubled  in  Mind." 

Refrain 
I'm  troubled,  I'm  troubled,  I'm  troubled  in  mind 
And  if  Jesus  don't  help  me,  I  surely  will  die. 

1.  When  through  the  deep  waters  of  trouble  I  go, 
The  billows  of  sorrow  cannot  overflow. 

Refrain 
I'm  troubled,  etc. 

2.  Oh,  come  here,  my  Jesus,  and  help  me  along, 
Till  up  in  bright  glory,  I  sing  a  new  song. 

Refrain 
I'm  troubled,  etc. 


"Couldn't  Hear  Nobody  Pray." 

Chorus 
I  couldn't  hear  nobody  pray, 
Oh,  I  couldn't  hear  nobody  pray, 
Oh,  way  down  yonder  by  myself, 
And  I  couldn't  hear  nobody  pray. 

1.    In  the  valley — Couldn't  hear  nobody  pray; 
On-a  my  knees — Couldn't  hear  nobody  pray ; 
So  lonesome — Couldn't  hear  nobody  pray ; 
With  my  burden — Couldn't  hear  nobody  pray. 


52  FOLK  SONG  OF  THE  AMERICAN  NEGRO. 

Chorus 
And  I  couldn't  hear  nobody  pray,  etc. 

2.    Hallelujah — Couldn't  hear  nobody  pray ; 
Troubles  over — Couldn't  hear  nobody  pray ; 
In  the  Kingdom — Couldn't  hear  nobody  pray 
With  my  Jesus — Couldn't  hear  nobody  pray. 

Chorus 
And  I  couldn't  hear  nobody  pray, -etc. 


"Before  This  Time  Another  Year." 

Refrain 
Before  this  time  another  year ; 

I  may  be  gone, 
Out  in  some  lonesome  graveyard, 

Oh,  Lord,  how  long? 

1.  My  mother's  took  her  flight  and  gone ; 

Oh,  Lord,  how  long? 
By  the  grace  of  God  I'll  follow  on, 
Oh,  Lord,  how  long? 

Refrain 
Before  this  time  another  year,  etc. 

2.  My  sister's  took  her  flight  and  gone, 

Oh,  Lord,  how  long? 
By  the  grace  of  God  I'll  follow  on, 
Oh,  Lord,  how  long? 

Refrain 
Before  this  time  another  year,  etc. 


'Farewell,  My  Dear  Mother." 

Refrain 
Farewell,  my  dear  mother ; 
Farewell,  my  dear  mother ; 
Farewell,  my  dear  mother ; 
Mother,  mother,  mother,  mother ! 

For  now  I  must  leave  you, 

Now  I  must  leave  you ; 

Oh,  now  I  must  leave  you, 

Leave  you,  leave  you,  leave  you,  leave  you. 


NUMBER  AND   CLASSIFICATION.  53 

2.  I'll  meet  you  in  heaven ; 
I'll  meet  you  in  heaven ; 
I'll  meet  you  in  heaven; 
Heaven,  Heaven,  Heaven,  Heaven! 


"Oh,  Wretched  Man  that  I  Am." 

Chorus 

Oh,  wretched  man  that  I  am ; 

Oh,  wretched  man  that  I  am ; 

Oh,  wretched  man  that  I  am ; 

Who  will  deliver  poor  me? 

I'm  bowed  down  with  a  burden  of  woe, 
I'm  bowed  down  with  a  burden  of  woe, 
I'm  bowed  down  with  a  burden  of  woe, 
Who  will  deliver  poor  me? 

Chorus 
Oh,  wretched  man  that  I  am,  etc. 

My  heart's  filled  with  sadness  and  pain, 
My  heart's  filled  with  sadness  and  pain, 
My  heart's  filled  with  sadness  and  pain, 
Who  will  deliver  poor  me? 


"I  Must  Walk  My  Lonesome  Valley." 

1.  I've  got  to  walk  my  lonesome  valley, 

I've  got  to  walk  it  for  myself ; 
Nobody  else  can  walk  it  for  me, 
I've  got  to  walk  it  for  myself. 

2.  Jesus  walked  His  lonesome  valley, 

He  had  to  walk  it  for  Himself ; 

Nobody  else  could  walk  it  for  Him  ; 

He  had  to  walk  it  for  Himself. 

3.  I've  got  to  go  and  stand  my  trial, 

I've  got  to  stand  it  for  myself ; 
Nobody  else  can  stand  it  for  me, 
I've  got  to  stand  it  for  myself. 

4.  Jesus  had  to  stand  His  trial, 

He  had  to  stand  it  for  Himself; 
Nobody  else  could  stand  it  for  Him, 
He  had  to  stand  it  for  Himself. 


54  FOLK  SOXG  OF  THE  AMERICAX  XEGRO. 

"Feel  Like  a  Motherless  Child." 

Chorus 
I  feel  like,  I  feel  like  a  motherless  child, 
I  feel  like,  I  feel  like  a  motherless  child, 
I  feel  like,  I  feel  like  a  motherless  child, 
Glory  Hallelujah ! 

1.  I  have  some  friends  before  me  gone, 

Glory  Hallelujah! 
By  the  Grace  of  God  I'll  follow  on, 
Glory  Hallelujah! 

Chorus 
I  feel  like.  I  feel  like  a  motherless  child — 

2.  Sometimes  my  way  is  sad  and  lone, 

Glory  Hallelujah: 
I'm  far  away  and  lost  from  home, 
Glory  Hallelujah! 

Chorus 
I  feel  like.  I  feel  like  a  motherless  child — 

"Live  a  Humble." 

Chorus 
Live  a  humble,  humble, 
Humble  yourself. 
The  bells  done  rung, 
Live  a  humble,  humble, 
Humble  yourself. 
The  bells  done  rung. 

1.  You  see  God,  you  see  God, 
You  see  God  'n  the  morning, 

He'll  come  a-riding  down  the  line  of  time, 
Fire'll  be  falling,  He'll  be  calling. 
Come  to  judg-a-ment-a-come. 

Chorus 
Live  a  humble,  humble,  etc. 

2.  Oh,  the  bells  done  rung, 
And  the  songs  done  sung, 

And  a-don't  let  it  catch  you  with  your  work  undone. 

Chorus 
Live  a  humble,  humble,  etc. 


NUMBER  AND   CLASSIFICATION.  55 

The  fertile  imagination  of  the  Negro  was  ever  transporting  his 
soul  to  the  mount  of  ecstacy  or  into  the  valley  of  sorrow.  While 
there  is  a  plaintiveness  running  through  all  the  songs,  the  emotion 
of  joy  is  predominant.  There  is  sometimes  a  triumphant  ''hallelujah" 
even  in  the  valley.  Truly  the  maker  of  these  songs  was  he  "who 
passing  through  the  Valley  of  Baca  maketh  it  a  well." 

The  happiness  of  the  Negro  is  truly  proverbial,  so  it  would  be 
most  unnatural  if  his  songs  were  not  laden  with  joy,  and  it  is  quite 
significant  that  this  note  of  joy  rises  high  and  clear  above  the  sobs 
and  sighs  crushed  out  of  his  heart.  The  Negro  passes  most  of  his 
life  on  the  mountain  top.  He  verifies  the  legend  which  describes  him 
as  the  man  of  light  and  the  son  of  the  morning.  His  capacity  for 
joy  and  its  complement  in  his  capacity  for  sorrow.  No  sorrow  can 
be  deeper ;  he  drains  the  cup  of  suffering ;  he  descends  into  the  depths 
of  the  valley.  But  sorrow  and  suffering  have  not  embittered  him, 
nor  have  they  taken  away  "the  joys  that  sweeten  life." 

Mark  Twain  tells  the  story  of  an  old  negro  servant  of  his,  who 
seemed  always  to  be  happy.  Her  face  was  ever  lighted  with  a  smile 
and  she  shed  a  brightness  wherever  she  went.  "She  was  sixty  years 
old,  but  her  eye  was  undimmed  and  her  strength  unimpaired.  It 
was  no  more  trouble  for  her  to  laugh  than  for  a  bird  to  sing."  "Aunt 
Bachel,  how  is  it  that  you've  lived  sixty  years  and  have  had  no 
trouble?"  She  told  the  story  of  her  life.  Of  course,  she  had  been 
a  slave.  She  once  had  as  happy  a  family  as  a  slave  could  have.  She 
had  seen  her  husband  and  six  children  sold  from  her  in  one  day. 
She  saw  them  carried  away  into  different  directions,  some  away  down 
South ;  and  only  one  of  whom,  a  boy,  she  had  ever  seen  or  heard  of 
since.  And  yet,  as  Mark  Twain  says,  "it  was  no  more  trouble  for 
her  to  laugh  than  for  a  bird  to  sing."  Aunt  Kachel  is  an  epitome 
of  her  race.     She  lives  at  the  mountain  top. 


SORROW  SONGS  WITH  NOTE  OF  JOY. 

"Walk  Through  the  Valley." 

Refrain 

We  shall  walk  through  the  valley  and  the  shadow  of  death, 
We  shall  walk  through  the  valley  in  peace ; 

If  Jesus  Himself  shall  be  our  leader, 

We  shall  walk  through  the  valley  in  peace. 


56   ■        FOLK  SONG  OF  THE  AMERICAN  NEGRO. 

1.  We  shall  meet  our  loved  ones  there, 
We  shall  meet  our  loved  ones  there, 
If  Jesus  Himself  shall  be  our  leader, 

We  shall  walk  through  the  valley  in  peace. 

Refrain 
We  shall  walk  through  the  valley  and  the  shadow  of  death,  etc. 

2.  We  shall  meet  our  Saviour  there, 
We  shall  meet  our  Saviour  there, 

If  Jesus  Himself  shall  be  our  leader, 

We  shall  walk  through  the  valley  in  peace. 

Refrain 
We  shall  walk  through  the  valley  and  the  shadow  of  death,  etc. 


' Soon- a- will  Be  Done-a-with  Troubles  or  the  World." 

Chorus 
Soon-a-will  be  done-a-with  the  troubles  of  the  world, 
Troubles  of  the  World; 

Soon-a-will  be  done-a-with  the  troubles  of  the  world, 
Goin'  home  to  live  with  God. 

1.  These  are  my  Father's  children, 
These  are  my  Father's  children, 
These  are  my  Father's  children, 
All  in-a-one  band. 

Chorus 
Soon-a-will  be  done-a-with  the  troubles  of  the  world,  etc. 

2.  No  more  weeping  and  a-wailing, 
No  more  weeping  and-awailing, 
No  more  weeping  and-awailing, 
All  in-a-one  band. 

Chorus 
Soon-a-will  be  done-a-with  the  troubles  of  the  world,  etc. 


"Oh,  Mt  Little  Soul's  Going  to  Shine.'1 

Chorus 
Oh,  my  little  soul's  going  to  shine,  shine ; 
Oh,  my  little  soul's  going  to  shine,  shine ; 
Oh,  my  little  soul's  going  to  shine,  shine ; 
Oh,  my  little  soul's  going  to  shine,  shine. 


NUMBER  AND   CLASSIFICATION.  57 

1.  I'm  going  to  tell  God  all-a-my  troubles, 
I'm  going  to  tell  God  all-a-my  troubles, 
I'm  going  to  tell  God  all-a-my  troubles, 
Ob,  my  little  soul's  going  to  shine,  shine ; 
Oh,  my  little  soul's  going  to  shine,  shine. 

2.  You  may  bury  my  body  in  the  east  of  the  garden, 
'     Bury  my  body  in  the  east  of  the  garden, 

Bury  my  body  in  the  east  of  the  garden, 
Oh,  my  little  soul's  going  to  shine,  shine ; 
Oh,'  my  little  soul's  going  to  shine,  shine. 


"All  Ovee  this  World." 

Chorus 
All  over  this  world, 
All  over  this  world, 
All  over  this  world, 
All  over  this  world. 

1.  All-a-my  troubles  will  soon  be  over  with, 
Soon  be  over  with,  soon  be  over  with, 
All-a-my  troubles  will  soon  be  over  with, 

All  over  this  world. 

Chorus 
All  over  this  world,  etc. 

2.  All  back  sliding  will  soon  be  over  with, 
Soon  be  over  with,  soon  be  over  with, 
All  back  sliding  will  soon  be  over  with, 

All  over  this  world. 

C  horns 
All  over  this  world,  etc. 


'Oh,  Nobody  Knows  the  Trouble  I  See." 

Chorus 
Oh,  nobody  knows  the  trouble  I  see, 

Nobody  knows  but  Jesus. 
Oh,  nobody  knows  the  trouble  I  see, 

Glory  hallelujah. 

1.    Sometimes  I'm  up, 
Sometimes  I'm  down, 
Oh,  yes,  Lord. 

Sometimes  I'm  level  with  the  ground. 
Oh,  yes,  Lord. 


58  FOLK  SONG  OF  THE  AMERICAN  NEGRO. 

Chorus 
Oh,  nobody  knows  the  trouble  I  see,  etc. 

2.    If  you  get  there  before  I  do, 
Oh,  yes,  Lord. 

Tell  all-a-rny  friends  I'm  coming,  too, 
Oh,  yes,  Lord. 

Chorus 
Oh,  nobody  knows  the  trouble  I  see,  etc. 


"Don't  You  Grieve  for  Me." 

1.  My  sister's  took  her  flight, 

And  gone  home, 
And  the  angel's  waiting  at  the  door 
My  sister's  took  her  flight, 

And  gone  home, 
And  the  angel's  waiting  at  the  door. 

Chorus 
Tell  all-a-my  Father's  children, 

Don't  you  grieve  for  me; 
Tell  all-a-my  Father's  children, 

Don't  you  grieve  for  me. 

2.  She  has  taken  up  her  crown, 

And  gone  home, 
And  the  angel's  waiting  at  the  door 
She  has  taken  up  her  crown, 

And  gone  home, 
And  the  angel's  waiting  at  the  door. 

Chorus 
Tell  all-a-my  Father's  children,  etc. 


"Oh,  Rocks  Dox't  Fall  ox  Me." 

Chorus 
Oh,  rocks  don't  fall  on  me, 
Oh,  rocks  don't  fall  on  me, 
Oh,  rocks  don't  fall  on  me, 
Rocks  and  mountains  don't  fall  on  me. 


NUMBER  AND  CLASSIFICATION.  59 

1.  Look  over  yonder  on  Jericho's  walls, 

Rocks  and  mountains  don't  fall  on  me, 
See  those  sinners  tremble  and  fall, 

Rocks  and  mountains  don't  fall  on  me. 

Chorus 
Oh,  rocks  don't  fall  on  me,  etc. 

2.  In-a  that  great,  great  judg-a-ment  day, 

Rocks  and  mountains  don't  fall  on  me, 
The  sinner  will  run  to  the  rocks  and  say, 
Rocks  and  mountains  please  fall  on  me. 

Chorus 
Oh,  rocks  please  fall  on  me,  etc. 


"Now  We  Take  this  Feeble  Body." 

1.  Now  we  take  this  feeble  body, 
And  we  carry  it  to  the  tomb, 

And  we  all  leave  it  there, — Hallelujah. 

Chorus 
And  a  hallelujah, — And  a  hallelujah, 
And  we  all  leave  it  there, — Hallelujah. 

2.  Now  we  take  our  dear  old  father, 
And  we  carry  him  to  the  tomb, 

And  we  all  leave  him  there, — Hallelujah. 

Chorus 
And  a  hallelujah, — And  a  hallelujah — 


"Swing  Low,  Sweet  Chariot." 

Chorus 
Swing  low,  sweet  chariot,, 

Coming  for  to  carry  me  home; 
Swing  low,  sweet  chariot, 

Coming  for  to  carry  me  home. 

1.    If  you  get  there  before  I  do, 

Coming  for  to  carry  me  home ; 

Tell  all  my  friends  I'm  coming,  too, 

Coming  for  to  carry  me  home. 


60  FOLK  SONG  OF  THE  AMERICAN  NEGRO, 

Chorus 
Swing  low,  sweet  chariot,  etc. 

2.    I  looked  over  Jordan  and  what  did  I  see? 
Coming  for  to  carry  me  home; 
A  band  of  angels  coming  after  me, 
Coming  for  to  carry  me  home. 

Chorus 
Swing  low,  sweet  chariot,  etc. 


'Somebody's  Buried  in  the  Graveyard." 

Chorus 
Somebody's  buried  in  the  graveyard, 

Somebody's  buried  in  the  sea ; 
Going  to  get  up  in  the  morning  a-shoutiug, 

Going  to  sound  Jubilee. 

.    Sometimes  I'm  up,  sometimes  I'm  down, 
But  still  my  soul  feels  Heavenly  bound. 

Chorus 
Somebody's  buried  in  the  graveyard, 

Somebody's  buried  in  the  sea ; 
Going  to  get  up  in  the  morning  a-shouting, 

Going  to  sound  Jubilee. 


A  further  classification  presents  a  more  interesting  phase.  The 
songs  group  themselves  under  Faith,  Hope,  Love,  Determination, 
Adoration,  Patience,  Courage,  and  Humility. 


SONGS  OF  FAITH. 

"You  May  Bury  Me  in  the  East." 

1.    You  may  bury  me  in  the  East, 
You  may  bury  me  in  the  West, 
But  I'll  hear  the  trumpet  sound, 
In-a  that  morning. 


NUMBER  AND  CLASSIFICATION.  61 

Refrain 
In-a  that  morning, 
How  I  long  to  go, 
For  to  hear  the  trumpet  sound, 
In-a  that  morning. 

2.    In-a  that  dreadful  judg-a-ment  day, 
We'll  take  wings  and  fly  away, 
For  to  hear  the  trumpet  sound, 
In-a  that  morning. 

Refrain 
In-a  that  morning,  etc. 


"All  I  Want  is  a  Little  Moke  Faith." 

Chorus 

All  1  wTant, 

All  1  want, 

All  1  want, 

Is  a  little  more  faith  in  Jesus. 

1.  Did  ever  you  see  such  a  man  as  God, 

A  little  more  faith  in  Jesus, 
A  preaching  the  gospel  to  the  poor, 
A  little  more  faith  in  Jesus. 

Chorus 
It's  all  I  want,  etc. 

2.  He  died  for  all  upon  the  tree, 

A  little  more  faith  in  Jesus ; 
He  died  for  you  and  He  died  for  me, 
A  little  more  faith  in  Jesus. 

Chorus 
Oh,  it's  all  I  want,  etc. 


"I  Have  Another  Building." 

Chorus 
I  know  I  have  another  building, 

I  know  it's  not  made  with  hands ; 
I  know  I  have  another  building, 

I  know  it's  not  made  with  hands. 


62  FOLK  SONG  OF  THE  AMERICAN  NEGRO. 

1.  I  haven't  been  to  Heaven. 

But  I've  been  told, 
Not  made  with  hands, 
That  the  streets  are  pearl 

And  the  gates  are  gold ; 
Not  made  with  hands. 

Chorus 
I  know  1  have  another  building,  etc. 

2.  Some  of  these  morning  bright  and  fair, 

Not  made  with  hands ; 
Going  to  meet  my  Jesus  in-a-the  air ; 
Not  made  with  hands. 

Chorus 
I  know  1  have  another  building,  etc. 


SONGS  OF  HOPE. 


"In  Bright  Mansions  Above." 

Chorus 
In  bright  mansions  above, 
In  bright  mansions  above, 
Lord,  I  want  to  live  up  yonder, 
In  bright  mansions  above. 

1.  My  mother's  gone  to  glory, 
I  want  to  go  there,  too ; 
Lord,  I  want  to  live  up  yonder, 
In  bright  mansions  above. 

Chorus 
In  bright  mansions  above,  etc. 

2.  My   Saviour's  gone  to  glory, 
I  want  to  go  there,  too ; 
Lord,  I  want  to  live  up  yonder, 
In  bright  mansions  above. 

Chorus 
In  bright  mansions  above,  etc. 


y UMBER  AND   CLASSIFICATIONS  63 

"Good  Lord,  Whew  I  Die. 

Chorus 
Good  Lord,  when  I  die, 
Good  Lord,  when  I  die, 
Good  Lord,  when  I  die,  shout  one, 
Good  Lord,  when  I  die. 

1.  I  want  to  go  to  Heaven 
When  I  die. 

I  want  to  go  to  Heaven 

When  I  die. 

I  want  to  go  to  Heaven 

When  I  die. 

Good  Lord,  when  I  die. 

Chorus 
Good  Lord,  when  I  die,  etc. 

2.  Oh,  I  want  to  see  my  Jesus, 
When  I  die. 

I  want  to  see  my  Jesus, 

When  I  die. 

I  want  to  see  my  Jesus, 

When  I  die. 

Good  Lord,  when  I  die. 

Chorus 

Good  Lord,  when  I  die,  etc. 


'I  Hope  I'll  Join  the  Band." 

L.    Ride  up  in  the  chariot, 

Soon-a  in  the  morning, 

Ride  up  in  the  chariot, 
Soon-a  in  the  morning, 

Ride  up  in  the  chariot, 
Soon-a  in  the  morning, 

And  I  hope  I'll  join  the  band. 

Chorus 

Oh,  Lord,  have  mercy  on  me, 
Oh,  Lord,  have  mercy  on  me, 
Oh,  Lord,  have  mercy  on  me, 
And  I  hope  I'll  join  the  band. 


64  FOLK  SONG  OF  THE  AMERICAN  NEGRO. 

2.    Going  to  chatter  with  the  angels, 
Soon-a  in  the  morning, 

Chatter  with  the  angels, 
Soon-a  in  the  morning, 

Chatter  with  the  angels, 
Soon-a  in  the  morning, 

And  I  hope  I'll  join  the  band. 

Chorus 
Oh,  Lord,  have  mercy  on  me,  etc. 


SONGS  OF  LOVE. 


1  Know  the  Lord's  Laid  His  Hands  on  Me." 

Chorus 
Oh,  I  know  the  Lord, 
I  know  the  Lord, 
I  know  the  Lord  has  laid  His  hands  on  me. 

1.  I'm  born  of  God  I  know  I  am, 

I  know  the  Lord  has  laid  His  hands  on  me, 
Been  new  born  by  the  dying  Lamb, 

I  know  the  Lord  has  laid  His  hands  on  me. 

Chorus 
Oh,  I  know  the  Lord,  etc. 

2.  He  took  me  from  the  miry  clay, 

I  know  the  Lord  has  laid  His  hands  on  me, 
And  told  me  to  walk  the  narrow  way, 

I  know  the  Lord  has  laid  His  hands  on  me. 

Chorus 
Oh,  I  know  the  Lord,  etc. 

3.  I  never  felt  such  love  before, 

I  know  the  Lord  has  laid  His  hands  on  me, 
Saying,  "Go  in  peace  and  sin  no  more," 

I  know  the  Lord  has  laid  His  hands  on  me. 

Chorus 
Oh,  I  know  the  Lord,  etc. 


XU1IBER  AXD  CLASSIFICATION.  65 

"Love  Come  Twixklixg  Down.'* 

Chorus 

Oh,  the  love  coine  twinkling  down, 

Oh,  the  love  corne  twinkling  down, 

Oh,   the  love  come  twinkling  down, 

Oh,  the  love  come  twinkling  down. 

1.  All  around  ine. 

The  love  come  twinkling   down, 
Froin-a-heaven, 

The  love   come  twinkling   down. 

Chorus 
Oh,  the  love  come  twinkling  down,  etc. 

2.  Help  me  Jesus, 

Love  come  twinkling  down, 
Pity  Lord, 

Love  come  twinkling  down. 

Chorus 
Oh,  the  love  come  twinkling  down,  etc. 


"Old  Time  Religion. " 

Chorus 

Give  me  this-a-old  time  religion, 

Give  me  this-a-old  time  religion, 

Give  me  this-a-old  time  religion, 

It's  good  enough  for  me. 

1.  It  was  good  for  my  old  mother, 
It  was  good  for  my  old  mother, 
It  was  good  for  my  old  mother, 

It's  good  enough  for  me. 

Chorus 
Give  me  this-a-old  time  religion,  etc. 

2.  Makes  me  love  everybody. 
Makes  me  love  everybody, 
Makes  me  love  everybody, 

It's  good  enough  for  me. 

Chorus 
Give  me  this-a-old  time  religion,  etc. 


66  FOLK  SONG  OF  THE  AMERICAN  XEGRO. 


SONGS  OF  DETERMINATION. 


'"Oh,  Yes.  I'm  Going  Up." 

Chorus 
Oh.  yes,  Tin  going  up.  going  up, 

Going  all  the  way,  Lord. 
Going  up,  going  up, 

To  see  the  heavenly  land. 

1.  I'm  going  up  to  heaven  for  to  see  my  robe, 

See  the  heavenly  land. 
Going  to  see  my  robe  and  try  it  on, 

See  the  heavenly  land. 
It's  brighter  than  the  glittering  sun, 

See  the  heavenly  land. 
Oh,  saints  and  sinners  will-a-you  go, 

See  the  heavenly  land. 

Chorus 
Oh.  yes,  I'm  going  up,  etc. 

2.  I  tell  you  what  I  like-a-the  best, 

See  the  heavenly  land. 
It  is  them  shouting  Methodist, 

See  the  heavenly  land. 
They  shout  so  loud  that  the  Devil  looks, 

See  the  heavenly  land. 
And  he  gets  away  with  his  cloven  foot, 

See  the  heavenly  land. 

Chorus 
Oh.  yes,  I'm  going  up,  etc. 


'•'Keep-a-Ixchixg  Along. 

Chorus 
Keep-a-inching  along, 
Keep-a-inching  along, 
Jesus  will  come  by  and  by, 
Keep-a-inching  along,  like  a  poor  inch  worm, 
Jesus  will  come  by  and  by. 


NUMBER  AND   CLASSIFICATION.  £7 

'Twas  inch  by  inch  I  sought  the  Lord, 

Jesus  will  come  by  and  by  : 
'Twas  inch  by  inch  I  found  His  word, 

Jesus  will  come  by  and  by. 

Chorus 
Keep-a-inching  along,  etc. 

Down  on  my  knees  when  the  light  passed  by, 

Jesus  will  come  by  and  by ; 
I  though  my  soul  would  rise  and  fly, 

Jesus  will  come  by  and  by. 

Chorus 
Keep-a-inching  along,  etc. 


"Made  My  Vow  to  the  Loru." 

Refrain 
Done  made  my  vow  to  the  Lord, 
And  I  never  will  turn  back, 
I  will  go,  I  shall  go, 
To  see  what  the  end  will  be. 

1.  My  strength,  Good  Lord,  is  almost  gone, 
I  will  go,  I  shall  go, 

To  see  what  the  end  will  be, 

But  you  have  told  me  to  press  on, 

I  will  go,  I  shall  go, 

To  see  what  the  end  will  be. 

Refrain 
Done  made  my  vow  to  the  Lord,  etc. 

2.  Sometimes  I'm  helpless  on  the  ground, 
I  will  go,  I  shall  go, 

To  see  what  the  end  will  be, 

But  Jesus  speaks  and  I'm  heavenly  bound, 

I  will  go,  I  shall  go, 

To  see  what  the  end  will  be. 

Refrain 
Done  made  my  vow  to  the  Lord,  etc. 


68  FOLK  SONG  OF  THE  AMERICAN  NEGRO. 


SONGS  OF  ADORATION. 

"He  is  King  of  Kings." 

Chorus 
He  is  King  of  Kings, 
He  is  Lord  of  Lords, 
Jesus  Christ  the  first  and  the  last, 
No  man-a-works  like  Him. 

1.  He  sets  His  throne  in  the  middle  of  the  air, 

No  man  works  like  Him, 
And  sends  His  angels  everywhere, 
No  man  works  like  Him. 

Chorus 
He  is  King  of  Kings,  etc. 

2.  He  sends  them  east  and  He  sends  them  west, 

No  man  works  like  Him, 
He  tells  them  give  His  people  rest, 
No  man  works  like  Him. 

Chorus 
He  is  King  of  Kings,  etc. 


"King  Emanuel." 

1.  Oh,  who  do  call  King  Emanuel, 
I  call  my  Jesus  King  Emanuel. 

Chorus 
Oh,  de  King  Emanuel  is  a  mighty  Emanuel, 
I  call  my  Jesus  King  Emanuel. 

2.  Oh,  some  call  Him  Jesus, 
But  I  call  Him  Lord, 

I  call  my  Jesus  King  Emanuel ; 

Let's  talk  about  de  heaven  and  de  heaven's  fine  things, 

I  call  my  Jesus  King  Emanuel. 

Chorus 
Oh,  de  King  Emanuel  is  a  mighty  Emanuel, 
I  call  my  Jesus  King  Emanuel. 


NUMBER  AXD  CLASSIFICATION'.  69 


"Love  King  Jesus."' 

Chorus 
Elder,  you  say  you  love  King  Jesus ; 
Elder,  you  say  you  love  the  Lord. 

1.  Oh,  come  and  let  us  know, 

How  you  love  King  Jesus ; 
Come  and  let  us  know, 
How  you  love  the  Lord. 

Chorus 
Sister,  you  say  your  love  King  Jesus ; 
Sister,  you  say  you  love  the  Lord. 

2.  Oh,  sing  and  let  us  know  how  you  love  King  Jesus, 
Sing  and  let  us  know  how  you  love  the  Lord. 

Chorus 

Children,  you  say  you  love  King  Jesus ; 
Children,  you  say  you  love  the  Lord. 


SONGS  OF  PATIENCE. 

"Wait  a  Little   While.'* 

Chorus 
Wait  a  little  while, 

Then  we'll  sing  the  new  song, 
Wait  a  little  while, 

Then  we'll  sing  the  new  song. 

1.  My  heavenly  home  is  bright  and  fair, 

Then  we'll  sing  the  new  song. 
Xo  pain  or  sorrow  over  there, 
Then  we'll  sing  the  new  song. 

Chorus 
Wait  a  little  while,  etc. 

2.  Sometimes  I  get  a  heavenly  view, 

Then  we'll  sing  the  new  song, 
And  then  my  trials  are  so  few, 
Then  we'll  sing  the  new  song. 

Chorus 
Wait  a  little  while,  etc. 


70  FOLK  SONG  OF  THE  AMERICAN  NEGRO. 


"Mighty  Rocky  Road." 

1.  It's  a  mighty  rocky  road, 

Most  done  traveling, 
Mighty  rocky  road, 

Most  done  traveling, 
Mighty  rocky  road, 

Most  done  traveling, 
Bound  to  carry  my  soul  to  the  Lord. 

Chorus 
I'm  bound  to  carry  my  soul  to  Jesus, 

Bound  to  carry  my  soul  to  the  Lord, 
I'm  bound  to  carry  my  soul  to  Jesus, 

Bound  to  carry  my  soul  to  the  Lord. 

2.  My  sister's  on  the  road, 

Most  done  traveling, 
Sister's  on  the  road, 

Most  done  traveling, 
Sister's  on  the  road, 

Most  done  traveling, 
Bound  to  carry  my  soul  to  the  Lord. 

Chorus 

I'm  bound  to  carry  my  soul  to  Jesus,  etc. 

"By  and  By." 

Chorus 
Oh,  by  and  by,  by  and  by, 
I'm  a-going  to  lay  down  my  heavy  load. 

1.  I  know  my  robe's  going  to  fit  a-me,  well. 

I'm  a-going  to  lay  down  my  heavy  load ; 
I  tried  it  on  at  the  gates  of  hell, 

I'm  a-going  to  lay  down  my  heavy  load. 

» 
Chorus 

Oh,  by  and  by,  by  and  by,  etc. 

2.  Oh,  some-a  these  mornings  bright  and  fair, 

I'm  a-going  to  lay  down  my  heavy  load ; 

Going  to  take-a  my  wings  and  cleave  the  air, 

I'm  a-going  to  lay  down  my  heavy  load. 

Chorus 
Oh,  by  and  by,  by  and  by,  etc. 


y UMBER  AyD   CLASSIFICATION'.  71 


SONGS  OF  COURAGE. 

"March  Ox." 

Chorus 
March  on  and  you  shall  gain  the  victory, 
March  on  and  you  shall  gain  the  day. 

1.  We  want  no  cowards  in  our  day, 
You  shall  gain  the  victory. 

We  call  for  valiant-hearted  men, 
You  shall  gain  the  day. 

Chorus 
March  on  and  you  shall  gain  the  victory,  etc. 

2.  This  is  the  year  of  Jubilee, 
You  shall  gain  the  victory, 

The  Lord  has  set  His  people  free, 
You  shall  gain  the  day. 

Chorus 
March  on  and  you  shall  gain  the  victory,  etc. 


"Stay  in  the  Field." 

Chorus 
Stay  in  the  field, 
Stay  in  the  field, 
Stay  in  the  field, 
Until  the  war  is  ended. 

1.  Mine  eyes  are  turned  to  the  Heavenly  gate, 

Till  the  war  is  ended. 
I'll  keep  my  way,  or  I'll  be  too  late, 
Till  the  war  is  ended. 

Chorus 
Stay  in  the  field,  etc. 

2.  Green  trees  burning,  why  not  the  dry? 

Till  the  war  is  ended. 
My  Saviour  died,  Oh,  why  not  I? 
Till  the  war  is  ended. 


72  FOLK  SONG  OF  THE  AMERICAN  NEGRO. 


SONGS  OF  HUMILITY. 


"Reign,  Oh,  Reign." 

Chorus 
Oh,  reign,  Oh,  reign, 

Oh,  reign  my  Saviour, 
Reign,  Master  Jesus,  reign, 

Oh,  reign  salvation  in  my  poor  soul, 
Reign,  Master  Jesus,  reign. 

1.  I  tell  you  now  as  I  told  you  before, 

Reign,  Master  Jesus,  reign, 
To  the  promise  land  I'm  bound  to  go, 
Reign,  Master  Jesus,  reign. 

Chorus 
Oh,  reign,  Oh,  reign,  etc. 

2.  I  never  shall  forget  that  day, 

Reign,  Master  Jesus,  reign. 
When  Jesus  washed  my  sin's  away, 
Reign,  Master  Jesus,  reign. 

Chorus 
Oh,  reign,  Oh,  reign,  etc. 


The  very  few  songs  that  do  not  come  under  any  one  of  these  heads 
as  already  given  are  represented  by  such  songs  as:  "Ole  Ark," 
"Little  David."  It  is  likely  that  the  majority  of  the  stanzas  of  these 
songs  not  originally  composed,  belong  to  them.  It  is  a  fact  that  the 
stanza  in  "Little  David" — "I  tell  you  once,"  etc., — was  a  contribu- 
tion from  a  student  of  Fisk  University.  The  chorus  of  each  of  these 
songs  is  evidently  genuine. 


NUMBER  AND  CLASSIFICATION.  73 


"The  Ole  Ark." 

Chorus 

Oh,  the  ole  ark's  a-movering,  rnovering,  rnovering. 

The  ole  ark's  a-movering. 

And  I'm  going  home. 

The  ole  ark  she  reel, 

The  ole  ark  she  rock, 

The  ole  ark  she  landed  on  the  mountain  top, 

Oh,  the  ole  ark's  a-movering,  rnovering,  rnovering. 

The  ole  ark's  a-movering, 

And  I'm  going  home. 

1.  You  see  that  sister  dress  so  fine, 
She  ain't  got  Jesus  in  her  mind. 

Chorus 
Oh,  the  ole  ark's  a-movering,  etc. 

2.  There  ain't  but  the  one  thing  grieve  my  mind, 
Sister's  gone  to  heaven  and  a-left  me  behind. 


Chorus 
Oh,  the  ole  ark's  a-movering,  etc. 


"Little  David." 

Chorus 
Little  David  play  on  your  harp, 

Hailelu',  hallelu'. 
Little  David  play  on  your  harp, 

Hallelu'. 

1.  Joshua  was  the  son  of  Nun, 

He  never  would  quit,  till  the  work  was  done. 

Chorus 
Little  David  play  on  your  harp,  etc. 

2.  I  tell  you  once,  I  tell  you  twice, 

There  are  sinners  in  hell  for  shooting  dice. 

Chorus 
Little  David  play  on  your  harp,  etc. 


74  FOLK  SOXG  OF  THE  AMERICAN  XEGRO. 

"Live  a  Humble." 

Chorus 

Live  a  humble,   humble, 
Humble  yourself. 
The  bells  doue  rung. 
Live  a  humble,  humble, 
Humble  yourself, 
The  bells  done  rung. 

1.  You  see  God,  you  see  God, 
You  see  God  'n  the  morning, 

He'll  come  a-riding  down  the  line  of  time, 
Fire'll  be  falling,  He'll  be  calling, 
Come  to  judg-a-ment-a-come. 

Chorus 
Live  a  humble,  humble,  etc. 

2.  Oh,  the  bells  done  rung, 
And  the  songs  done  sung, 

And-a  don't  let  it  catch  you  with  your  work  undone. 

Chorus 

Live  a  humble,  humble,  etc. 

"Bow   Low,   Elder.'' 

Chorus 
Bow  low,  Elder, 

Jesus  lis-a-ning, 
Bow  low,  Elder, 

Jesus  died. 

1.  When  you  see  me  on  my  knees, 
Raise  me,  Jesus,  if-a  you  please. 

Chorus 

Bow  low,  Elder,  etc. 

2.  When  you  see  my  coffin  come, 

Then  a-you  know  my  soul's  gone  home. 

Chorus 
Bow  low,  Elder,  etc. 


The  number  of  these  songs  is  practically  unknown;  in  classifica- 
tion they  are  positive,  definite  and  satisfying. 


S'UMBEB  AND  CLASSIFICATION 


75 


*  THIS  IS  A  SIN-TRYING  WORLD 


:m 


Leader. 


0, 


=4: 


Lord! 


4v=5zist= 


Chorus.0'    this    is        a       sin  -  try  -  ing    world, 


This     is 


pEf^lS^lg^ 


^^ 


Help  ine,  Je  -   sus! 


& 


J|^3 


:trt 


sin  -  try  -    ing    world, 


ft>.  »  f  J    j 


This      is 


a      sin  -  try  -    ing 


T=A 


4 


Sing    it,  chil  -  dren! 


Fine. 


-fc — S^n — K--X-I— 


-N — ^ — p\ — i*. — N  - 
9 — m — * — # — 0— 

3 ^^  — 


1.  0          Heav'n  is         so            high,         and         I     am        so  low, 

2.  £                Jor      -      dan's      stream        is         chil  -  ly  and  wide, 

3.  £               Way  o     -     ver       yonder  in     the          harv     -  est  fields, 

4.  You  may  bur-y  me    in  the     East,     you  may    bur-y  me  in  the  West, 

4t-ft 


HH^g 


I  don't  know  whether  I'll  ev  -  er    get    to        Heav'n     or  no 

1       None        can cross      but  the        sane     -    ti      -       fied 

The      an     -      gels shov-ing    at  the  char- i  -  ot  wheels. 

But      in  that morning    my  soul  will  be    at      rest 


1.  High  Heaven! 
Hard  trials! 
Crown  af  Life! 


Exclamations  for  Verses 

2.  Cold  Jordan!  J  3.  O  the  harvest ! 

Deep  and  wide!  Few  laborers  ! 

Can't  you  cross  it?  I       Won't  you  join  them  ? 


4.  In  the  Heavens! 
With  my  mother! 
And  mv  Saviour' 


76  FOLK  SOXG  OF  THE  AMERICAS  XEGRO. 


CHAPTER  VI. 


Birth  and  Growth  of  Certain  Songs,  with  Exposition. 


"Music  is  a  fair  and  glorious  gift  of  God; 
I  icould  not  for  the  tcorld,  renounce  my  humble  share  in  Music'' 

IN  a  general  way,  we  know  how  this  music  as  a  whole  was  pro- 
duced; that  is,  the  conditions  and  forces  which  gave  it  birth. 
Facts  and  theories  have  been  presented  in  foregoing  chapters.  The 
vagueness  and  uncertainty  surrounding  its  beginning  clothe  it  in  a 
fascinating  mystery,  imparting  an  aspect  of  the  supernatural.  In 
the  cases  of  some  individual  songs,  however,  we  have  definite  and 
accurate  knowledge  of  birth  and  growth.  Parts  of  the  history  of 
some  songs  are  so  extraordinary  that  many  receive  them  "cum  grano 
salis,"  but  even  in  these  instances  it  is  morally  certain  the  events 
occurred  as  narrated.  Many  of  these  melodies  had  their  birth  dur- 
ing the  seasons  of  religious  meetings.  Masters  generally  granted  the 
privilege  of  holding  such  meetings,  for  they  had  a  certain  degree  of 
faith  in  the  slave's  religion.  It  made  him  a  better  slave  and  kept 
his  mind  from  plottings.  Sometimes  the  overseer  was  present,  some- 
times not.  Sometimes  the  slave  was  even  allowed  to  attend  the  mas- 
ter's church.  The  slave's  soul  demanded  communion  with  God  quite 
as  unfailingly  as  his  body  demanded  food.  Some  masters,  however, 
did  not  believe  either  in  the  slave's  religion  or  his  God. 

Some  masters  who  did  not  believe  in  the  slave's  God  or  in  his 
religion  had  some  extraordinary  experiences.  In  Southern  Ken- 
tucky, a  slave,  John  by  name,  was  known  for  his  piety,  religion,  and 
seasons  of  prayer  and  praise.  Like  Daniel  in  Babylon,  nothing  could 
prevent  him  from  turning  his  face  toward  Jerusalem  in  prayer.  The 
time  came  when  John  had  to  be  sold.  The  master  who  was  about 
to  buy  him  said,  "John,  they  tell  me  that  you  are  one  of  these  great 
praying  niggers.  Now,  I  want  to  tell  you  that  when  I  buy  you,  all 
that  stuff  must  stop."  "As  a  heart  unspotted  is  not  easily  daunted," 
John  answered,  "Massa,  ef  dat's  de  case,  you  better  not  buy  me,  for 
I'se  boun'  to  pray,  and  I'se  goin'  to  pray."  "All  right,  we'll  see  about 
that,"  said  the  master,  and  John  was  bought.    It  was  not  long  before 


BIRTH  AND   GROWTH  OF  CERTAIN  SONGS.  yrj 

this  master  missed  John,  and  upon  learning  from  the  slave's  own  lips 
that  he  had  been  praying,  his  wrath  blazed  in  angry  flame,  and  with 
curses  he  tore  John's  flesh  with  the  cruel  lash.  He  did  his  best  to 
kill  him.  That  night,  the  master  lay  down  in  complacency,  while 
John  lay  down  in  torture.  But  peace  and  complacency  soon  flew 
away  on  the  dark  wings  of  the  night,  and  the  master  was  troubled 
in  mind.  His  soul  was  like  the  stormy  sea.  He  left  his  bed  and 
walked  the  floor.  The  love  of  a  wife  could  not  comfort  him,  and  the 
physician  he  refused  to  see,  for  the  physician  could  not  reach  his  case. 
The  God  of  John  and  of  John's  religion  had  convicted  the  master  of 
his  sinfulness.  When  no  help  came  to  his  tempestuous  soul,  in  his 
extremity  he  said,  "Send  for  John."  With  labored  step,  John 
struggled  to  the  big  house  with  a  prayer  upon  his  lips,  and  when 
the  master  saw  him,  he  cried,  "John,  pray  for  me."  In  bloody  pain, 
John  sank  down  upon  his  knees  and  prayed  for  his  weeping  master, 
that  his  sins  might  be  forgiven,  and  his  soul  made  white  in  the  blood 
of  the  Lamb !  God  heard  that  prayer,  and  the  light  of  a  new  life 
broke  in  upon  the  master's  vision.  "Bedeemed!"  he  cried.  In  refer 
ence  to  John,  the  remainder  of  the  master's  life  was  expressed  in 
these  words,  "The  best  investment  I  ever  made,  the  best  money  I 
ever  spent,  was  when  I  bought  John."  John  was  cast  into  the  den 
of  lions,  but  they  harmed  him  not. 

On  a  plantation  down  on  the  Bed  Biver,  in  the  early  part  of  the 
nineteenth  century,  a  master  of  a  large  number  of  slaves  was  accus- 
tomed to  allow  them  to  go  across  the  river,  at  stated  times,  that  they 
might  worship  with  the  Indians,  who  had  a  mission  there.  Upon 
the  days  of  these  services,  the  slaves  crossed  the  river  in  many  an 
ingenious  craft.  They  always  enjoyed  themselves,  and  talked  much 
of  the  good  times  on  the  other  side.  But  one  day  the  master  learned 
that  the  missionary  to  the  Indians  was  a  northern  man ;  and,  believ- 
ing that  he  might  put  ideas  of  freedom  in  the  heads  of  his  slaves, 
even  if  "in  a  Bibleistic  way,"  as  Dunbar  says,  which  might  lead  them 
to  travel  the  nightly  path  toward  the  North  Star,  he  forthwith  pur- 
sued the  logical  course  and  prohibited  his  slaves  from  worshiping 
any  more  across  the  river.  Doubtless  the  master  thought  the  matter 
was  settled  then  and  there,  but  not  so;  the  slaves  could  not  forget 
the  good  times  across  the  river;  and  what  they  could  not  do  in  the 
open  they  determined  to  do  in  secret.  They  decided  to  "steal  away 
to  Jesus,"  as  one  slave  expressed  it.     "Steal  away  to  Jesus,"  whis- 


78  FOLK  SOXG  OF  THE  AMERICAN  NEGRO. 

pered  at  first,  later  chanted  softly,  was  notice  that  that  night  there 
were  to  be  services  across  the  river.  The  first-born  thought,  "Steal 
away  to  Jesus,"  was  expressed  all  day,  in  the  fields  of  cotton  and  of 
corn,  and  in  fragments  of  tuneful  melody  the  slaves  were  all  informed 
of  what  would  occur  that  night.  At  night  when  the  master,  overseer, 
and  hounds  had  retired  to  sweet  sleep,  the  slaves  would  steal  from 
their  cabins  and  quietly  creep  through  the  cotton,  corn,  and  tall 
grasses,  softly  humming  their  greetings  to  one  another.  On  toward 
the  river  they  crept,  and  the  night  breezes  wafted  their  melody  to 
the  ears  of  the  missionary,  who  thereby  knew  that  his  black  congre- 
gation was  coming.  Soon  he  espied  here,  there,  and  yonder,  black 
forms,  on  rafts  secretly  made  for  the  purpose,  paddling  themselves 
across  the  river.  When  they  reached  the  banks,  they  lifted  their 
voices  in  lofty  inspiration,  and  from  the  depths  of  their  hearts  sang : 

"My  Lord,  He  calls  rue.  He  calls  rue  by  de  thunder ; 
De  trumpet  soma's  it  in-a  my  soul ; 
I  ain't  got  long  to  stay  here." 

The  trees  swaying  in  the  night  wind  inspired  them  to  proclaim, 
"Green  trees  a-bendin',  poor  sinner  stands  a-tremblin',  de  trumpet 
soun's  it  in  a-my  soul,  I  ain't  got  long  to  stay  here."  The  judgment 
day,  the  most  important  day  in  his  calendar,  impressed  itself  upon 
him — 

"Tombstones  a-bustin', 
Poor  sinner  stands  a-tremblin', 
De  trumpet  soun's  it  in-a  my  soul." 

Of  course,  this  song  as  we  have  it  to-day  was  not  produced  in 
one  night;  it  is  a  product  of  development,  for  the  missionary  who 
told  the  story  to  the  Original  Fisk  Jubilee  Singers,  stated  that  he 
literally  saw  the  song  grow.  Each  stanza,  as  well  as  the  chorus,  ends 
with  the  expression,  "I  ain't  got  long  to  stay  here,"  which  was  not 
originally  sacred,  but  a  sharp  reminder  to  the  slaves  that  they  must 
not  stay  too  long  on  that  side  of  the  river,  or  they  must  pay  the 
penalty  of  disobeying  their  master.  Too  well  they  knew  what  such 
a  penalty  would  be.  So  that  little  expression  had  to  them  a  tre- 
mendous meaning. 

"Swing  Low,  Sweet  Chariot"  and  "Before  I'd  be  a  Slave,"  upon 
first  hand  authority,  may  be  called  the  "Twins,"  for  they  burst  from 


Mrs.   Sarah   Hannah    Sheppard, 

In  whose  heart  was  born  "Swing  Low,  Sweet 

Chariot"  and  "Before  I'd  be  a  Slave, 

I'd  be  Buried  in  My  Grave.'* 


(79) 


80  FOLK  SONG  OF  THE  AMERICAN  NEGRO. 

the  same  soul  of  anguish.    These  songs  were  born  from  the  same  heart 
at  the  same  time  and  under  the  same  condition. 

"Before  I'd  be  a  slave, 
I'd  be  buried  in  nay  grave, 
And  a-don't  let  it  catch  you  with  your  work  undone. 

A  master  of  a  Tennessee  plantation  had  sold  a  mother  from  her 
babe,  and  the  day  for  the  separation  was  fast  approaching  when  the 
mother  was  to  be  taken  "down  South."  Now,  the  condition  of  the 
slave  in  Tennessee  was  better  than  that  in  any  other  state,  with  the 
possible  exception  of  Virginia.  To  be  sold  "South"  was,  to  the  slave, 
to  make  the  journey  from  which  no  traveler  ever  returned.  So  it 
was  not  strange  that  the  mother  would  sooner  take  her  life  and  that 
of  her  babe,  than  to  go  down  into  Mississippi,  which,  to  her,  was 
going  to  her  grave.  Bent  upon  throwing  herself  and  her  child  over 
the  steep  banks  of  the  Cumberland  Eiver,  she  was  stumbling  along 
the  dusty  road,  her  infant  clasped  close  to  her  breast,  muttering  in 
frenzy  her  dire  determination,  "Before  I'd  be  a  slave,  I'd  be  buried 
in  my  grave!"  An  old  "mammy, "  seeing  the  terrible  expression  on 
her  face,  and  hearing  these  words,  read  her  intentions.  In  love  she 
laid  her  dear  old  hand  upon  the  shoulder  of  the  distressed  mother  and 
said,  "Don't  you  do  it,  honey;  wait,  let  de  chariot  of  de  Lord  swing 
low,  and  let  me  take  one  of  de  Lord's  scrolls  an'  read  it  to  you." 
Then,  making  a  motion  as  reaching  for  something,  and  unrolling  it, 
she  read,  "God's  got  a  great  work  for  dis  baby  to  do;  she's  goin'  to 
stand  befo'  kings  and  queens.  Don't  you  do  it,  honey."  The  mother 
was  so  impressed  with  the  words  of  the  old  "mammy"  she  gave  up 
her  fell  design  and  allowed  herself  to  be  taken  off  down  into  Mis- 
sissippi, leaving  her  baby  behind.  These  two  songs  grew  by  degrees, 
as  they  passed  from  mouth  to  mouth,  until  they  reached  their  present 
state.  That  prophecy  of  the  old  "mammy"  was  literally  fulfilled. 
After  the  war,  the  baby  girl  entered  Fisk  University  and  was  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Original  Fisk  Jubilee  Singers,  who  stood  before  kings  and 
queens.  When  the  tour  of  the  singers  was  ended,  this  girl  set  out 
to  find  her  mother,  and  after  searching  for  some  time,  found  her  and 
brought  her  into  a  beautiful  home,  where  she  lived  in  love  and  com- 
fort until  the  summer  of  1912,  wher  "the  Sweet  Chariot  Swung  Low" 
and  bore  her  home.  She  had  been  unconscious  for  some  hours,  but 
when  she  heard  the  strains  of  this,  her  heart-born  song,  which  was 


(81) 


82  FOLK  SOXG  OF  THE  AUERICAX  XEGRO. 

being  sung  at  her  bedside,  she  awoke  and  make  a  supreme  effort  to 
join  in  the  melody.  That  baby  girl  was  Ella  Sheppard,  who  after- 
wards became  the  pianist  of  the  Original  Jubilee  Singers.  At  the 
annual  meeting  of  the  American  Missionary  Association  in  Burling- 
ton, Vermont.  General  O.  O.  Howard  was  one  of  the  speakers.  Be- 
fore he  delivered  his  address,  he  requested  the  Fisk  Quartette  to  sing 
for  him  "Swing  Low,  Sweet  Chariot,"  adding  that  he  felt  it  would 
not  be  long  before  the  chariot  would  swing  low  for  him.  As  the 
quartette  sang,  the  General  stood  and  listened  as  tears  filled  his  eyes. 
He  then  touched  all  hearts  present  with  the  pathos  of  a  stirring  ad- 
dress. A  few  days  later,  the  chariot  swung  low  and  bore  the  Gen- 
eral home. 

"Most  done  toilin'  here ; 
Urn!     Most  done  toilin'  here!"' 

This  song  was  born  since  freedom  and  is  one  of  the  very  few  real 
folk  songs  that  were  produced  by  freedom.  It  is  really  a  'mew  song" 
of  Virginia.  It  leaped  almost  wholly  from  the  heart  of  a  good 
woman  who  simply  wanted  something  new  to  sing.  She  doubtless 
gave  some  thought  to  it  and  to  a  certain  degree  it  was  "composed, 
but  in  spirit  and  melody  it  is  a  true  folk  song.  The  good  woman  who 
gave  me  the  history  of  this  song,  told  it  in  these  words :  "We  simply 
wanted  a  new  song  to  sing  in  church,  and  we  just  started  to  sing 
this  song.  Our  troubles  weighted  us  down,  and,  of  course,  we  were 
thinking  of  them  more  than  anything  else.  It  came  to  me  this  way. 
Tin!  most  done  toiling  here.'  and  I  sang  it;  another  sister  added 
something  else,  and  it  kept  on  until  we  had  a  mew  song.'  " 

"You  may  bury  me  in  the  East. 
You  may  bury  me  in  the  West, 
But  I'll  hear  the  trumpet  sound. 
In-a  that  mornin'." 

If  there  is  in  all  the  collections  of  folk  song  a  pure  melody  this 
is  it.  It  is  the  song  of  faith.  It  was  born  in  Georgia,  near  Atlanta. 
A  slave  was  sold  from  his  wife  and  it  seemed  that  he  would  really 
die  of  broken  heart,  but  as  he  was  being  led  away  he  said  with  a 
wail : 

"You  may  bury  me  in  the  East. 
You  may  bury  me  in  the  West, 
But  I'll  hear  the  trumpet  sound. 
In-a  that  mornin'." 


BIRTH  AXD   GROWTH  OF  CERTAIX  SOXGS.  83 

This  song  was  the  favorite  of  Dr.  E.  M.  Cravath,  the  first  presi- 
dent of  Fisk  University. 

"Great  camp  meeting" ; 

"Goiii'  to  moan  and  never   tire." 

This  song  was  made  by  a  company  of  slaves  who  were  not  allowed 
to  sing  or  pray  in  the  hearing  of  their  master.  And  when  he  died, 
the  old  mistress,  looking  upon  them  with  pity,  granted  them  the 
privilege  of  singing  and  praying  in  their  cabins  at  night.  Then  they 
sang  their  hymn,  shouted  for  joy,  and  gave  God  honor  and  praise. 
This  song,  magnificent  in  composition,  subtle  in  application,  pre- 
sents an  extremely  interesting  study.  It  pictures  Heaven  as  a  great 
camp  meeting.  The  Negro's  imagination  could  find  no  more  satisfy- 
ing analogy.  The  camp  meeting  was  an  occasion  of  joy,  which  ex- 
pressed itself  in  eating,  drinking,  singing,  praying,  shouting,  and 
resting  from  fields  of  corn,  cotton,  and  rice,  and  all  the  while  there 
was  communion  with  God.  Heaven  could  be  no  more,  except  that 
this  meeting  went  on  forever.  There  they  would  sing,  shout,  moan, 
and  never  tire.  It  seems,  at  first,  strange  that  there  should  be  any 
moaning  in  the  Xegro's  Heaven.  But  this  was  a  paradox.  The 
"moan"  was  joyful.  In  the  big  meetings,"  there  was  a  certain  set 
of  church  members  set  aside  to  lead  in  the  moaning,  a  low  plaintive 
fragment  of  melody,  sometimes  a  hum  and  sometimes  accompanied 
by  words  of  striking  character.  This  is  done  to  help  the  preacher  as 
he  pours  out  his  sermon,  which  is  generally  a  vivid  description  of 
hell  and  destruction  awaiting  the  sinner.  This  moan  is  the  accom- 
paniment to  the  sermon  and  the  combination  has  sometimes  wonder- 
ful effect  upon  the  unconverted.  History  records  that  Gaius  Grac- 
chus used  to  deliver  his  great  orations  to  the  Roman  people  to  the 
accompaniment  of  a  stringed  instrument.  The  most  effective  Greek 
oration  was  that  which  was  most  melodious.  Melody  is  always  ef- 
fective, especially  that  which  is  spontaneous.  Xo  one  who  ever 
heard  the  moan  could  fail  to  be  deeply  impressed.  From  the  rural 
districts  of  West  Tennessee  came  the  one  that  follows: 

"O  Lord,  O  Lord.  O  Lord! 
Somebody's  dying,  somebody's  dying,  somebody's  dying 
Every  day,  every  day,  every  day." 


84  FOLK  SOXG  OF  THE  AMERICAN  XEGBO. 

The  tune  is  more  plaintive  than  the  lay  of  the  whippoorwill  or 
the  call  of  the  sorrowing  dove.  Such  is  the  meaning  of  "moan  and 
never  tire,"  and  it  seemed  to  inspire  the  preacher  with  heavenly  zeai 
and  celestial  vision.  It  is  not  likely  that  this  shout  sprang  complete 
from  the  soul  of  any  single  creator,  as  Minerva  from  the  brain  of 
Jupiter.  This  is  unthinkable,  for  it  is  too  comprehensive,  too  full  of 
meaning,  too  purposeful  and  too  finished  to  be  of  extemporaneous 
birth.  The  beginnings  and  essentials  were  doubtless  of  a  moment's 
inspiration,  but  most  assuredly  the  song  complete  is  a  product  of 
development.  This  process  of  evolution  is  clear.  While  this  song 
is  apparently  a  picture  of  Heaven  created  by  the  Negro's  imagina- 
tion, it  is  more  than  that;  it  is  a  consolation  to  the  slaves  in  their 
distress  and  the  expression  of  the  firm  expectation  that  freedom  was 
coming. 

The  song,  "Bright  Sparkles  in  the  Church  Yard,"  is  the  inco- 
herent wailing  of  a  delirious  soul  suffering  from  the  remorse  of  way- 
wardness. The  most  authentic  and  reliable  history  names  a  wayward 
girl  as  the  producer  of  this  song.  She  has  left  the  paths  laid  out 
for  her  by  her  sainted  mother,  and  the  wild,  riotous  fires  have  con- 
sumed her  life  forces  and  brought  her  down  through  sickness,  pain, 
and  sorrow  to  the  brink  of  death.    In  her  delirium  she  cries  out : 

"May  the  Lord.  He  will  be  glad  of  me, 
In  the  Heaven.  He'll  rejoice." 

Her  loneliness  with  the  thought  that  the  world  cares  little  or 
nothing  for  her,  brings  her  to  the  last  resort.  The  Lord  cares  for 
her,  maybe ;  maybe,  He'll  be  glad  to  see  her,  even  if  the  world  is  cold 
and  cruel.  The  fireflies  flashing  in  the  darkness  of  the  graveyard  add 
to  her  loneliness  in  the  summer  night. 

"Bright  sparkles  in  the  churchyard, 
Give  light  into  the  tomb ; 
Bright  summer,  spring's  over — 
Sweet  flowers  in  their  bloom." 

The  springtime  of  her  life  has  passed  into  summer,  and  summer, 
with  its  flowers,  has  withered  and  gone. 

"My  mother  once,  my  mother  twice,  my  mother,  she'll  rejoice. 
In  the  Heaven  once,  in  the  Heaven  twice,  she'll  rejoice." 


BIRTH  AND   GROWTH  OF  CERTAIN  SONGS.  85 

The  love  of  her  mother  now  in  Heaven  will  welcome  her  from 
the  heartless  world.  "Mother,  rock  me  in  the  cradle,  all  the  day/' 
was  her  longing  for  the  purity  of  infancy,  where  there  was  no  blight 
or  stain,  when  the  crooning  voice  of  her  mother  sang  soothing  lulla- 
bies, sweetly  lulling  her  to  a  blameless  sleep. 

"O  mother,  don't  you  love  your  darling  child? 
O  rock  me  in  the  cradle  all  the  day !" 

There  would  be  some  consolation  in  the  assurance  that  mother 
loved  her  "darling  child,"  who,  though  she  had  left  the  paths  her 
mother  had  shown  her  and  begged  her  to  tread,  though  the  stain  of 
impurity  was  upon  her  soul,  still  was  her  mother's  darling  child. 

"You  may  lay  me  down  to  sleep,  my  mother,  dear ; 
O  rock  me  in  the  cradle  all  the  day !" 

The  sleep  of  her  childhood  days  would  free  her  from  care,  from 
stain,  from  sorrow. 

"Let  us  cheer  the  Weary  Traveler, 

Let  us  cheer  the  Weary  Traveler, 

Let  us  cheer  the  Weary  Traveler, 

Along  the  lonesome  Way." 

"Aunt  Ailsie"  was  a  slave  in  Augusta  County,  Virginia.  She 
was  a  powerful  specimen  of  womanhood;  her  face  was  brown  and 
sweet ;  her  voice  was  soft  and  mellow ;  she  was  a  woman  of  few  words, 
but  capable,  and  as  a  servant,  invaluable.  Her  disposition  was 
wholly  lovable  until  she  was  angered,  and  then  she  was  a  lioness 
robbed  of  her  cubs.  "Aunt  Ailsie"  had  greatly  provoked  her  mas- 
ter, who  would  have  killed  her  had  she  not  been  too  valuable.  He 
decided  to  sell  her  South.  The  slave  trader  bought  her,  placed  her 
in  his  "gang"  and  went  to  Staunton  on  the  first  stage  of  the  jour- 
ney. They  pitched  camp  on  Sunny  Hill,  on  the  outskirts  of  the 
town.  "Uncle  Chester  Bowling,"  her  brother,  heard  the  news  and 
went  out  to  Sunny  Hill,  and  begged  the  trader  to  let  him  keep  his 
sister  in  his  cabin  over  night.  The  trader  yielded,  and  that  night 
the  cabin  was  full  of  prayers  and  songs.  Her  slave  friends  came  in 
and  stayed  all  night.  Not  an  eyed  closed  that  night.  They  sang  and 
prayed  for  help  and  comfort  for  "Aunt  Ailsie,"  and  when  the  bright 


86  FOLK  SOXG  OF  TfiE  AMERICAN  XEGRO. 

morn  of  nature  broke  upon  the  world,  "Aunt  Ailsie"  turned  her 
way  to  the  slave  gang,  bound  for  the  South.  The  weary,  heart-bowed 
slaves,  in  weird  vioce,  sang: 

"Let  us  cheer  the  Weary  Traveler, 

Let  us  cheer  the  Weary  Traveler. 

Let  us  cheer  the  Weary  Traveler, 

Aloug  the  lonesome  Way.'' 

"If  you  meet  with  trials  and  troubles  on  de  way — 
Jis'  put  yo'  trus'  in  Jesus,  an'  don't  forget  to  pray."' 

"Nobody  knows  the  trouble  I  see.  Lord, 
Nobody  knows  the  trouble  I  see ; 
Nobody  knows  the  trouble  I  see,  Lord ; 
Nobody  knows  like  Jesus." 


"Uncle  Anthony"  was  owned  by  an  Augusta  County  master,  and 
lived  happily  with  his  faithful  wife.  Their  cabin  was  a  realm  of 
melody.  It  was  singing,  singing,  singing!  One  day,  Heaven  sent  a 
child  to  them,  and  there  was  more  singing,  with  a  tenderer,  more 
ecstatic  note.  The  glad  father  worked  at  odd  times  upon  a  rude 
cradle  for  his  babe,  in  which  she  could  lie,  rock,  and  go  to  sleep  to 
the  comforting  lullabies  from  the  full-hearted  mother.  At  last  the 
cradle  was  finished,  and  with  an  overflowing  soul  he  bore  it  home. 
His  joy  grew  with  every  step;  anticipations  of  opening  the  door  of 
that  cabin,  seeing  the  baby  in  the  cradle,  and  beholding  the  smile 
upon  that  mother's  face  made  his  his  heart  swell  and  his  breath  come 
short  and  fast!  The  cabin  was  there;  that  was  all!  Mother  and 
babe  were  gone  with  the  trader,  somewhere  toward  the  South.  The 
bud  of  his  happiness  was  dead !  He  searched  the  whole  creation  for 
his  wife  and  child.  The  forests,  hills,  and  fields  mocked  his  cries. 
Days  and  days  he  was  a  madman  in  his  grief.  Xo  threats  or  lash- 
ings could  quiet  him  or  force  him  back  to  his  work.  His  usefulness 
as  a  slave  was  destroyed,  and  when  a  man  whose  heart  had  been 
touched  and  softened  by  the  poor  slave's  sorrow  offered  to  buy  him, 
his  offer  was  at  once  accepted.  Two  thousand  dollars  he  paid,  and 
received  his  purchase  of  flesh  and  blood.  The  bargain  closed,  he 
immediately  made  out  ''free  papers''  for  Anthony  and  told  him  to 
go  find  his  wife  and  child,  promising  that  if  he  found  them,  they,  too, 


BIRTH   AXD   GRO^YTH  OF  CERT  MX   SONGS.  87 

should  be  purchased  aud  freed.  The  last  account  of  him  was  that 
he  was  still  pursuing  his  quest  somewhere  in  North  Carolina,  with 
this  song  upon  his  lips : 

"Nobody  knows  the  trouble  I  see.  Lord, 
Nobody  knows  the  trouble  I  see ; 
Nobody  knows  the  trouble  I  see.  Lord ; 
Nobody  knows  like  Jesus." 


"Good  morning.  Everybody  !"" 

The  place  and  time  of  this  song's  birth  are  uncertain,  but  it  is 
certain  that  it  grew  out  of  the  following  conditions:  The  test  of 
••true  heart-felt  religion"  among  Negroes  is  love  for  everybody  and 
the  one  way  of  showing  this  love  is  to  "speak"  to  everybody,  espe- 
cially to  those  with  whom  one  has  not  been  upon  agreeable  terms. 
It  was  the  custom  of  the  new  convert,  or  the  Christian  who  "got 
happy"  to  run  first,  if  possible,  to  those  who  were  his  enemies,  shake 
hands,  embrace,  and  tell  what  a  "dear  loving  Saviour"  he  had  found ; 
that  his  soul  was  "alive"  and  that  he  had  nothing  against  anybody. 
The  never-failing  sign  of  hypocrisy  in  religion  was  a  refusal  to  ex- 
press love  for,  or  to  speak  to,  everybody.  The  originator  of  this  song 
was  simply  meeting  the  test  of  "true,  heart-felt  religion"  when  he 
went  into  the  field  to  work  with  the  salutation.  "Good  mornin',  every- 
body." It  was  in  this  state  of  happiness  that  the  Negro  sang  of 
"heaven  an"  immortal  glory"  with  all  the  robes,  crowns,  slippers, 
gates,  streets,  which  made  Heaven  so  real  to  him. 


"Go  down.  Moses — " 

"Way  down  in  Egypt  land,  tell  ole  Pharaoh 
Let  my  people  go." 

While  this  song  is  a  simple  chronicle  of  an  event  in  biblical 
history,  it  is  just  as  plainly  preaching  freedom  "in  a  Bibleistic  way." 
The  stanzas  are  quite  numerous,  running  up  to  thirty-six  in  one  edi- 
tion of  folk  songs,  but  doubtless  many  are  spurious.  The  very  best 
explanation  of  this  song  is  given  in  Dunbar's  "Antebellum  Sermon." 
where  an  old  Xegro  preacher  is  interpreting  slavery   in   terms  of 


88  FOLK  SONG  OF  THE  AMERICAN  NEGRO. 

Egyptian  bondage,  every  now  and  then  throwing  out  the  hint  that 
freedom  was  coming  to  the  Negro,  too.  This  song,  from  certain  bits 
of  information  gathered  from  a  surprising  source,  is  hoary  with  age. 
Either  the  Negroes  got  this  melody  from  the  Hebrews,  or  the  He- 
brews got  it  from  the  Negroes.  The  time  was  probably  the  age  of 
the  Pharaohs.  However,  it  may  be,  the  Hebrews  claim  it  as  one  of 
their  folk  songs,  the  subject  being  "Cain  and  Abel."  The  following 
interesting  piece  of  information  was  given  me  by  a  social  worker 
among  the  Kussian  Jews,  in  Henry  Street  Settlement,  New  York 
City: 

"I  was  holding  a  Woman's  Meeting  one  evening,  and  to  help 
things  move  along,  asked  the  women  to  sing  one  of  their  own  songs. 
To  my  surprise,  one  began  the  tune  of  'Go  Down,  Moses,'  and  the 
others  followed.  I  was  greatly  interested,  and  asked  them  what  the 
song  was.  I  was  told  that  it  was  one  of  their  folk  songs,  'Cain  and 
Abel.'  Desiring  to  satisfy  mself  in  this  matter,  I  held  another 
meeting  of  Hebrew  women  who  were  not  at  the  former  meeting,  and 
as  a  part  of  their  exercises  I  sang,  'Go  Down,  Moses.'  They  recog 
nized  it  as  their  song,  'Cain  and  Abel.'  Whether  of  Hebrew  or  of 
Negro  origin,  there  seems  to  be  no  way  of  determining,  but  it  bears 
all  the  evidences  of  the  Negro  music.  In  plaintiveness,  in  intervallic 
changes,  in  melody,  in  scale,  in  rhythm,  and  in  spirit,  it  has  all  evi- 
dence of  Negro  origin." 

"I'm  troubled  in  mind." 

This  song  was  born  in  a  Tennessee  plantation  and  was  the  burden 
of  an  old  slave's  lamentation,  after  he  had  been  flogged.  So  piteously 
did  he  sing  it  that  even  the  overseer  was  not  unmoved.  After  each 
whipping  he  would  sit  upon  an  old  log,  the  same  one  every  time, 
rest  his  head  upon  his  hand  and  pour  out  this  wail.  After  he  had 
wept  thus  in  melody  and  experienced  for  a  few  short  moments  the 
inexplicable  joy  of  resentless  suffering,  he  went  anew  to  the  humdrum 
tasks  of  a  slave. 

Other  songs  are  just  as  romantic  in  their  nativity,  but  the  mys- 
tery of  their  birth  forbids  our  telling  their  stories.  Each  song  is  a 
product  of  sudden  inspiration  and  subtle  evolution  with  a  meaning 
definite  and  consoling  to  the  slave.  In  birth,  in  development  and  in 
the  meaning,  each  song  is  an  inspiring  study. 


BIRTH  AND  GROWTH  OF  CERTAIN  SONGS. 


STEAL  AWAY  TO  JESUS 


i^r^-r- 

— \— — i — 

! — 

— \— i 

=3*     ^ 

A       -ft   4 

-ft-. 

— « — 

— 1— 

— i — i 

— -i — 

^      1 

Steal 

te:,4  *" 

-J — 3 

P     1 
a  -  way, 

:   i 

-in- 

steal 

a  -  way, 

-  -# — s? — 

r- — v m~~ 

steal        a  -  way 

r-  j  s:: 

— 9 — 

to 

~ 1 

— « — 
1 — « — 

Je 

-0-4- 

-   sus! 

-^-  • 

— i 

^£:4^=_ 

-£— 1 

1 

-4— i=— 

-l — *— i — 

— ■ # — 

r 

-    Ss>  • 

1 — -j 1^ \ 1 1 1 fy-i 1 , 

EE  — *-t— »— g — ^-— -a-t-Tj f — S-y-S-Fj gt-r-l 


Steal       a  -way,     steal      a -way  home,    I     ain't  got    long    to    stay    here! 

fl ST-! 


t 


w* 


1.  My  Lord  calls    me, 

2.  Green      trees     are    bend-ing, 

3.  Tomb  -  stones    are    burst -ing, 

4.  Mv  Lord         calls    me, 

Is       J  I 

-5 — 


-«- 


t= 


l 


He  calls      me    by  the  thun  -  der ; 

poor  sin   -  ner stands  a-  tremb-ling; 

poor  sin   -  ner  stands  a  -  tremb-ling; 

he  calls     me    by  the  light  -  ning ; 


tz 


tz 


r 


=t 


i=S 


i  ^  i/ 1 

The  trum-pet  sounds  with-in  -  a    my  soul,      I  ain't  got  long    to    stay  ne re. 
J      f  -     f  •    -••     f-    0       I      -•-  . 

i      1      i 


5EE 


--^_€_I_^_#t>--r 


r"M'S     I    iri 


90  FOLK  SO.YG  OF  THE  AilERICAX  XEGRO. 


CHAPTER  VII. 


Agencies  of  Preservation  and  Development. 


"7  verily  think  and  am  not  ashamed  to  say  that, 
next   to   Divinity,   no   art   is   comparable   to   music" 

NOTWITHSTANDING  the  facts  that  forty-five  years  have 
elapsed  since  the  Negro  Folk  Music  was  first  given  to  the  world 
by  the  Original  Fisk  Jubilee  Singers,  and  notwithstanding  the  first 
burst  of  consuming  enthusiasm  with  which  it  was  received  has  about 
all  passed  away,  still  there  is  to-day  a  more  serious  interest  taken  in 
it  than  ever  before. 

In  the  early  days  it  was  looked  upon  as  a  curiosity  in  the  world 
of  song,  beautiful,  entertaining  but  transient,  for  the  world  never 
considered  it  more  than  a  commodity,  through  which  one  or  two 
Negro  schools  maintained  themselves.  It  was  fully  expected  that 
when  these  schools  drew  in  their  companies  of  singers,  this  music 
would  die.  It  is  probable  that  it  owes  its  life  and  much  of  its  cur- 
rency largely  to  Hampton  Institute,  which  has  been  very  consistent 
in  collecting  and  singing  it. 

Now,  at  Fisk,  Hampton,  Tuskegee,  and  Calhoun  earnest  and  seri- 
ous efforts  are  being  put  forth  to  collect,  sing,  study,  and  develop  it. 
This  work  on  the  part  of  the  centers  of  learning  insures  a  perman- 
ency which  this  music  most  certainly  deserves. 

As  a  result  of  the  efforts  of  these  institutions  there  are  now  known 
to  be  something  over  five  hundred  of  these  songs,  the  most  beautiful 
of  which  are  known  to  the  most  of  us,  while  others  are  current  only 
in  certain  localities. 

Doubtless  the  same  methods  are  used  in  all  the  schools  engaged 
in  collecting  this  music.  At  certain  seasons  a  teacher  or  student 
will  make  excursions  into  the  districts  where  "big  meetings,"  "camp 
meetings''  or  revivals  are  being  held,  prepared  to  reduce  to  writing 
the  songs  he  is  almost  sure  to  hear.  At  these  special  occasions  there 
is  a  perfect  carnival  of  "Folk  Music,''  for  people  come  from  far  dis- 
tant and  separated  places,  bringing  different  songs,  new  songs,  and 


AGEXCIES  OF  PRESERVATION'  AND  DEVELOPMENT.  91 

varied  interpretations  of  the  same  songs.  Ofttimes  there  is  a  real 
musical  contest,  which  is  certain  to  bring  forth  a  large  number  of 
songs.  These  songs,  however,  lose  much  of  their  character  when 
taken  out  of  their  settings.  Certain  intonations  and  a  certain  inex- 
plicable something  imparted  by  those  in  whose  hearts  they  were 
born,  can  never  be  reproduced  otherwise  or  represented  by  musical 
notation.  Another  method  employed  is  to  find  out  some  expert  in 
the  knowledge  and  art  of  this  music,  and  tactfully  request  him  to 
sing  the  songs  to  be  copied.  There  is  in  every  locality  of  this  kind, 
one  person,  or  perhaps  two,  from  whom  many  of  these  melodies  may 
be  obtained.  Success  in  this  method  is  a  variable  quantity,  for  some- 
times just  as  soon  as  it  is  learned  that  some  teacher  or  student  is 
present  for  the  purpose  of  learning  these  songs,  the  memory  of  the 
singer  goes  wrong  or  leaves  him,  his  voice  is  all  out  of  fix,  or  his 
lungs  refuse  to  work  and  his  tongue  cleaves  to  the  roof  of  his  mouth. 
Yes,  this  or  even  worse  than  this  is  often  the  case.  Under  these  cir- 
cumstances it  takes  all  the  tact  available  to  get  one  single  note,  and 
most  often  there  is  absolute  failure.  Sometimes,  after  the  first  shock 
has  subsided  the  singer  will  make  copious  excuses,  close  his  eyes  and 
begin,  and  very  likely  the  visitor  will  get  a  sufficiency  long  before 
the  singer  decides  to  cease  his  song.  Sometimes  the  eyes  are  not 
closed,  but  are  viewing  the  visitor  askance,  in  an  effort  to  detect  an 
indication  of  insincerity.  Another  person  when  asked  to  sing,  will 
"sail  right  in"'  and  give  what  is  asked  for. 

These  trips  on  the  hunt  for  songs  are  always  extremely  interest- 
ing, and  often  open  up  a  new  world  to  the  searcher.  Such  rare  truths 
are  learned,  such  uplifting  knowledge  gained,  such  beautiful  voices, 
such  touching  sympathies,  such  noble  hearts,  such  simple  and  child- 
like faith,  such  attractive  and  expressive  features  are  met,  that  the 
visitor  is  convinced  that  the  Creator  has  made  a  fair  and  just  dis- 
tribution of  his  blessings. 

Another  method  is  to  canvass  among  the  students.  As  a  rule 
there  is  always  a  considerable  number  of  students  who  come  from 
the  localities  where  this  music  is  current,  and  who  are  almost  always 
glad  to  make  any  possible  contribution  in  this  matter. 

The  formation  of  clubs  for  the  study  of  this  music  is  a  most  ef- 
fective method  for  collecting  and  preserving  it.  It  both  interests 
and  instructs,  and  is  the  one  place  where  reproduction  is  truest  to 
nature;  for  with  such  singers  as  are  naturally  selected  for  these 


92  FOLK  SOXG  OF  THE  AMERICAN  XEGRO. 

clubs,  it  is  possible  to  make  them  see  and  understand  the  minutest 
point  which  makes  for  perfection. 

Forty-five  years  have  naturally  made  some  changes  in  the  ren- 
derings of  certain  songs,  not  so  marked,  however,  as  is  sometimes 
supposed.  These  changes  have  come  about  in  different  ways.  The 
idea,  which  is  now  regnant  in  singing  these  songs,  that  of  using  har- 
monies of  close  chords,  was  first  brought  forward  by  some  boys  in 
Livingstone  Hall,  Fisk  University,  who  were  whiling  away  the  time 
between  supper  and  study  hour  one  spring  evening.  They  were  mem- 
bers of  no  organization  whatever,  but  had  good  voices.  The  song 
they  liked  and  were  singing  was  '"Golden  Slippers,"  and  they  were 
great  in  making  "snakes,"  their  word  for  close  chords,  which  were 
so  successfully  accomplished  and  which  sounded  so  rare  and  accept- 
able that  the  idea  was  adopted  at  once  by  the  folk  song  organization 
at  Fisk  and  has  now  become  a  fixed  part  of  the  folk  music. 

In  addition  to  this,  there  has  been  a  studied  endeavor  at  develop- 
ment which  has  produced  some  new  harmonies  and  arrangements 
much  preferable  to  the  old  ones.  In  truth,  the  general  adaptability 
of  this  music  to  a  high  degree  of  development  is  its  hope  of  gaining 
artistic  recognition.  It  deserves  to  be  put  into  a  finished  form;  it 
lends  itself  admirably  to  such  a  purpose;  and  those  who  would  keep 
it  as  it  was  first  reduced  to  writing,  in  their  mistaken  zeal  would 
doom  it  to  stagnation  and  to  the  contempt  of  highly  musical  people. 

Where  we  find  these  songs  there  is  no  harmony,  nothing  but 
melody  and  words.  The  harmony  is  a  matter  of  individual  taste. 
That  is  why  there  is  a  difference  in  rendering. 

Undoubtedly  the  best  results  in  singing,  in  point  of  nuance,  are 
obtained  in  a  musical  organization;  but  for  striking  down  deep  into 
the  soul  and  stimulating  every  lofty  emotion,  for  arousing  niems 
hearts  to  action,  the  singing  of  these  songs  by  a  large  congregation 
is  as  indescribable  as  melodious  thunder  or  as  the  rushing  of  many 
waters. 

We  sometimes  hear  this  lamentation,  "It  is  too  bad  that  the  old 
plantation  melodies  are  dying  out."  Such  laments  are  felt  more 
keenly  and  expressed  more  fully  by  the  Southern  white  man  who 
was  a  part  of  the  system  of  slavery,  than  by  any  other  class.  It  is 
no  sickly  sentimentality  but  a  deep  feeling  for  a  life,  the  memory 
of  which  is  dear.    For  these  'old  songs"  link  the  Southern  white  man 


AGEXCIES  OF  PRESERVATION'  AXD  DEVELOPMENT.  93 

to  a  romantic  past.  That  past  was  full  of  poetry,  and  though  often 
tragic,  it  was  a  life  of  tender  and  strong  relations,  when  the  "black 
mammies"  with  their  great  big  hearts  and  mystic  wisdom,  loved  and 
reared  ten  generations  of  masters.  It  was  a  time  when  the  rich 
plantation  rang  with  the  sweetly  lonesome  melodies  of  the  faithful 
slave.  No  mortal  could  forget  those  days.  Such  regrets  were  much 
to  the  point  thirty-five  years  ago  before  the  educated  Negroes  began 
to  study,  understand,  and  appreciate  their  old  songs,  but  this  danger 
is  now  forever  past.  While,  however,  we  shall  always  preserve  these 
songs,  in  their  original  forms  and  while  we  shall  always  go  back 
to  them  for  inspiration  and  history  ''lest  we  forget,"  they  can  never 
be  the  "last  word"  in  the  development  of  our  music.  In  other  words, 
they  are  our  starting  point,  not  our  goal;  the  source,  not  the  issue, 
of  our  music.  The  Negro  ought  never  be  content  with  the  folk  songs 
as  they  are,  but  should  work  for  development,  which  would  bring 
them  into  a  more  exalted  life.  This  is  just  what  is  being  done  by 
the  agencies  of  preservation  and  development.  Among  these  agencies, 
are  educational  institutions,  musical  organizations,  and  individuals. 
The  educational  institutions  foremost  in  this  work  are  Fisk  Uni- 
versty,  Hampton  Institute,  Atlanta  University,  Talladega  College, 
Tuskegee  Institute,  and  Calhoun  School.  In  addition  to  these  there 
are  numerous  others,  both  private  and  public.  Each  one  of  these 
institutions  is  carrying  on  the  work  of  preservation  or  development 
or  both,  in  its  own  way.  The  character  of  the  work  depends  almost 
wholly  upon  the  conditions  surrounding  them.  Fisk  first  gave  them 
to  the  world,  through  that  band  of  Jubilee  Singers  which  left  Nash- 
ville on  October  6,  1871,  to  raise  funds  for  a  starving  institution. 
This  day  is  still  celebrated  each  year,  with  appropriate  ceremonies. 
These  songs  are  of  much  traditional  value  at  Fisk,  and  are  insepa- 
rably interwoven  with  the  life  of  the  University.  Jubilee  Hall  has 
been  called  "frozen  music,"  significant  of  the  fact  that  it  was  erected 
by  money  earned  by  the  "Original  Fisk  Jubilee  Singers."  Fisk  has 
done  the  most  toward  development  of  this  music.  Several  editions 
of  the  Folk  Songs  have  been  issued,  containing  "new  songs"  as  they 
are  found.  These  songs  along  with  the  favorite  "old  songs"  have 
been  adorned  with  new  harmonies  more  in  keeping  with  the  idea  of 
development.  These  harmonies  have  not  all  been  studied  out,  as  a 
composer  would  do,  but  often  they  have  been  written  as  they  have 
been  sung  by  the  students  naturally  and  without  instructions.    Such 


94  FOLK  SOXG  OF  THE  AMERICAN  XEGRO. 

method,  we  think,  is  more  interesting,  and  since  it  is  more  natural, 
is  more  nearly  correct  and  certainly  most  effective.  To  explain : 
When  the  chorus  is  singing  one  of  these  songs,  some  voice  strikes  an 
entirely  new  and  pleasing  note  in  the  harmony.  This  singer  is  often 
unconscious  of  his  departure,  oftentimes  he  knows  little  if  anything 
of  the  theory  of  music.  Then,  again,  small  groups  of  students  get 
together  to  '"harmonize"  or  '"chord."  Here,  too,  new  and  striking 
combinations  of  tones  are  sometimes  struck.  Again,  some  of  the 
musical  organizations,  composed  of  those  who  really  understand  the 
technique  of  music,  in  searching  for  harmonies,  glide  into  certain 
resolutions  which  are  entirely  new.  All  of  these  are  immediately 
written  into  their  appropriate  songs  and  become  parts  of  them.  The 
plan  here  has  been  to  combine  natural,  spontaneous  melody  with 
natural,  spontaneous  harmony.  The  result  has  been  a  most  natural 
kind  of  satisfaction.  Of  course,  in  some  measure  the  harmonies  have 
been  worked  out  according  to  the  rules  of  the  theory  of  harmony. 

The  most  decided  effort  at  development  at  Fisk  was  a  cantata, 
"Out  of  the  Depths,"  which  was  rendered  publicly  several  times  in 
Nashville.  It  is  still  in  manuscript.  It  tells  the  story  of  a  slave 
girl  who  was  sold  from  her  parents,  to  go  down  South,  and  describes 
the  scene  just  before  and  at  the  time  of  parting,  the  struggle  and 
trials  of  her  life,  "The  Camp  Meeting,"  the  "Big  Meeting,"  the  scenes 
common  to  slave  life,  and  the  coming  of  freedom.  Into  this  cantata 
all  the  best  of  the  folk  songs  are  brought,  but  some  of  them  are  so 
changed  that  they  seem  new.  Probably  the  most  effective  of  all  is 
the  "Bright  Sparkles  in  the  Church  Yard,"  which  is  developed  into 
a  touching  lullaby.  "I  am  Troubled  in  Mind,"  "O  Wretched  Man 
that  I  Am,"  "You  May  Bury  Me  in  the  East,"  are  used  effectively 
as  solos.  The  changes  in  "Couldn't  Hear  Nobody  Pray"  add  some 
strength  and  power,  while  the  climax  is  reached  in  "Free  at  Last." 
No  claims  of  especial  merit  are  made  for  this  cantata,  but  it  does 
show  the  possibilities  in  the  folk  songs  for  development. 

Those  who  have  been  at  different  times  head  of  Fisk  University 
have  had  some  "favorite"  among  the  folk  songs. 

Dr.  Erastus  M.  Cravath  simply  loved  "You  May  Bury  in  the 
East,"  and  he  never  let  pass  an  opportunity  to  have  Mrs.  Agnes 
Haynes  Work  sing  that  song. 

Dr.  James  G.  Merrill  enjoyed  to  the  uttermost  the  "Great  Camp 
Meeting"  as  the  student  body  would  pour  it  forth  in  torrents  of 
harmony. 


AGENCIES  OF  PRESERVATION  AND  DEVELOPMENT.  95 

Dr.  George  A.  Gates,  on  any  occasion  whatever,  would  call  for 
-Made  My  Vow  to  the  Lord/'  and  never  failed  to  evince  his  pleasure 
as  he  listened  to  it. 

Dr.  C.  W.  Morrow  always  loves  and  calls  his  song,  ''In-a-my 
Heart."  All  these  have  shown  a  broad-minded  interest  in  the  folk 
music,  each  in  a  different  and  peculiar  way,  and  have  closely  iden- 
tified themselves  with  it. 

Dr.  Cravath  toured  Europe  with  the  original  company,  Dr.  Mer- 
rill toured  America  with  the  third  company  during  the  years  1899- 
1903,  and  Dr.  Gates  campaigned  with  the  Fisk  Male  Quartette,  1909- 
1910.  Dr.  Morrow's  connection  has  been  mainly  confined  to  Uni- 
versity life  in  its  religious  aspects.  While  he  was  pastor  of  the 
University  Church  he  arranged  an  order  of  service  with  a  jubilee 
song  immediately  following  his  sermon.  This  custom  is  still  fol- 
lowed. One  of  these  songs  is  always  sung  to  clinch  the  thought  of 
the  sermon. 

At  Hampton,  the  spirit  and  attitude  are  admirable.  It  is  doubt- 
ful if  at  any  place  this  music  is  more  thoroughly  appreciated. 
Through  all  these  years  since  its  founding.  Hampton  has  steadily 
collected  and  published  these  songs  in  attractive  form.  Their  edi- 
tions have  been  more  thorough,  more  painstaking  and  more  impor- 
tant than  those  of  any  other  school.  There  has  been,  however,  prac- 
tically no  effort  at  development,  until  quite  recently.  The  songs 
have  been  written  and  published  in  their  original  forms,  just  as  they 
came  from  the  people,  and  the  harmonies  have  been  written  with  no 
particular  significance. 

In  interpretation,  Hampton  has  always  done  well.  She  has  stood 
far  forward.  This  may  be  due  to  the  fact  that  Virginia  has  a  most 
interesting  and  fine  class  of  Negroes.  They  are  full  of  folk  lore,  folk 
song,  and  folk  spirit.  It  is  fortunate  for  this  institution  that  Major 
E.  E.  Moton  stands  as  the  chief  exponent  of  this  music.  His  spirit 
and  understanding  are  commendable.  Doubly  fortunate  is  it  that 
Hampton  has  secured  the  services  of  E.  Nathaniel  Dett  for  the  head 
of  her  music  department.  His  arrangement  of  the  folk  song.  ••Listen 
to  the  Lambs,"'  is  meritorious  and  marks  the  beginning  of  the  period 
of  development  in  Xegro  Folk  Song  in  Hampton.  It  would  not  be 
surprising  if  under  his  leadership  this  institution  would  be  the  fore- 
most in  both  preservation  and  development. 


96  FOLK  SONG  OF  THE  AMERICAN  NEGRO. 

In  the  work  of  preservation  the  Calhonn  School  has  done  some 
notable  work.  Its  edition  of  these  songs  is  a  distinct  credit  to  itself. 
The  singing  of  this  music  at  this  school,  in  spirit  at  least,  could  not 
be  surpassed. 

Tuskegee  Institute  has  lately  begun  to  collect  and  publish  these 
songs,  showing  marked  progress  in  development.  Mrs.  Jennie  C. 
Lee  has  done  a  good  work  in  this  line.  Her  choruses  interpret  and 
render  this  music  with  splendid  effect  and  she  herself  understands 
it  as  very  few  people  do.  A  most  interesting  work  was  done  by  N. 
Clark  Smith,  in  stamping  this  music  with  some  distinctive  features. 
Tuskegee  has  probably  the  broadest  opportunity  of  any  of  the  schools 
for  this  work.  It  is  in  a  locality  wealthy  in  folk  songs  and  its  fif- 
teen hundred  students  are  a  fruitful  source  as  well  as  a  fine  force 
for  the  production  of  them. 

Atlanta  University  and  Talladega  College  have  both  contributed 
to  the  work  of  preservation  through  their  attitude  and  through  their 
different  musical  organizations. 

One  of  the  most  interesting  points  in  this  matter  is  that  schools 
all  over  the  country  are  beginning  serious  study  of  this  music.  Public 
schools,  especially  in  the  South,  are  beginning  to  use  it ;  all  of  which 
means  that  the  folk  song  of  the  American  Negro  is  rising  to  new  life. 

Musical  organizations  that  have  helped  to  preserve  this  music, 
in  one  way  or  another,  are  numerous,  some  worthy,  some  not.  Many 
organizations  caught  by  greed  for  "easy  money"  have  toured  this 
country,  aping  and  badly  imitating  the  companies  who,  in  the  right 
spirit  and  from  the  best  motives,  have  sung  these  songs.  These  spur- 
ious "Jubilee  Singers"  have  done  the  world  no  good;  in  fact,  they 
have  so  maltreated  and  lowered  the  folk  music  that  it  will  require 
much  time  and  effort  to  raise  it  again  to  the  respect  due  it.  They 
have  prostituted  it  to  base  desire  for  lucre.  Happily,  however,  some 
companies  separate  and  apart  from  any  institution,  have  maintained 
a  high  standard  in  singing  this  music.  The  most  prominent  of  those 
now  before  the  public  is  the  company  of  "William  Singers."  It  is 
composed  of  four  male  and  four  female  voices,  well  balanced  and 
well  trained.  These  singers  have  a  high  ideal  and  are  a  positive 
force  for  good. 

Among  the  individuals  who  are  or  have  been  angencies  of  preser- 
vation may  be  named,  George  L.  White  and  Professor  A.  K.  Spence, 


AGENCIES  OF  PRESERVATION  AND  DEVELOPMENT.  97 

of  Fisk  University;  Miss  Mary  E.  Spence,  his  daughter;  Mrs.  Ella 
Sheppard  Moore,  of  the  Original  Fisk  Jubilee  Singers ;  Fred  J.  Work, 
of  Kansas  City,  Missouri;  Harry  T.  Burleigh;  Dr.  C.  J.  Ryder;  Dr. 
W.  E.  B.  DuBois;  Miss  Kitty  Cheatham;  Dr.  Henry  E.  Krehbiel ; 
Autonin  Dvorak;  and  Samuel  Coleridge-Taylor.  There  are  others 
who  are  spoken  of  elsewhere  in  this  book. 

Mr.  George  L.  White  might  well  be  called  the  miracle  mau  of 
Negro  Folk  Song.  It  was  he  who  really  faced  an  opposing  world 
in  his  purpose  to  send  out  those  first  Jubilee  Singers,  who,  through 
these  strange  melodies,  overcame  mountainous  prejudice,  and  won 
the  hearts  of  the  world. 

Professor  Adam  K.  Spence  always  had  an  intense  interest  in  this 
music.  He  was  a  poet  and  philosopher  and  from  the  very  first  saw 
the  real  worth  of  these  songs.  He  resurrected  them  for  the  religious 
worship  in  Fisk  University,  and  it  was  he  alone  who  taught  the  later 
generation  of  students  to  love  and  respect  them.  Miss  Mary  E. 
Spence  is  of  one  and  the  same  spirit  with  her  father.  She  has  always 
been  a  helpful  force  in  this  work. 

Mrs.  Ella  Sheppard  Moore  might  properly  be  called  a  "folk  song 
of  the  American  Negro."  She  has  been  so  closely  connected  with  the 
presentation  of  them  to  the  world,  so  intimately  associated  with  their 
preservation  that  it  is  impossible  to  think  of  the  one  separate  and 
apart  from  the  other. 

Frederick  J.  Work  has  collected,  harmonized,  and  published  more 
Negro  folk  songs  and  probably  has  a  better  technical  knowledge  of 
this  music  than  any  other  individual.  The  work  of  that  cantata, 
"Out  of  the  Depths,"  mentioned  before,  is  largely  his  original  work. 
He  has  contributed  some  helpful  articles  upon  the  subject  to  different 
journals  and  has  edited  a  book  of  songs  for  a  prominent  publishing 
company. 

Harry  T.  Burleigh  is  doubtless  the  foremost  musician  of  our  race, 
and  has  applied  his  splendid  powers  to  the  development  of  our  music. 
His  voice  and  his  mind  make  an  admirable  combination  for  the  work. 
He  has  transcribed  and  harmonized  several  of  the  best  known  of 
these  songs  which  are  being  used  in  large  choruses.  His  accurate 
and  sympathetic  interpretations  are  among  the  brightest  accomplish- 
ments in  this  field  of  endeavor. 
7 


98  FOLK  SONG  OF  THE  AMERICAN  NEGRO. 

Miss  Kitty  Cheatham,  born  in  the  South  of  parents  who  owned 
slaves,  has  had  fine  environments  and  opportunity  for  the  study  and 
understanding  of  the  slave  music.  It  was  her  family  that  owned 
Ella  Sheppard.  She  is  one  of  the  few  outside  of  the  Negro  race  who 
have  an  adequate  understanding  and  appreciation  of  this  music. 
She  approaches  it  with  the  right  spirit  and  proper  motive.  Her 
renderings  are  sympathetic  and  characteristic.  Her  religious  nature 
helps  her  to  a  serious  study  of  these  songs.  In  addition  to  this,  her 
life  among  those  who  produced  them  made  it  most  natural  for  her 
to  get  into  the  spirit  of  the  Negro. 

Dr.  C.  J.  Kyder  was  connected  with  the  campaign  of  the  original 
band  of  singers  and  has  had  good  opportunity  to  see  the  effect  of 
these  songs  upon  people's  hearts.  His  long  service  with  the  Ameri- 
can Missionary  Association  has  kept  him  in  close  touch  with  the 
Negroes  and  their  songs.  He  has,  for  a  long  time,  studied  the  songs 
and  has  delivered  some  interesting  lectures  upon  them.  His  study 
has  been  from  the  viewpoint  of  religion. 

Dr.  W.  E.  B.  DuBois  has  devoted  one  chapter  in  his  book,  "Souls 
of  Black  Folk,"  to  the  songs  of  his  fathers.  His  viewpoint  is  that  of 
the  philosopher  who  sees  in  these  songs  the  life  of  a  people,  the 
possibilities  of  the  future  written  in  the  past,  the  story  of  admirable 
strength  developed  through  burden  bearing,  and  purification  by  fire. 
This  one  chapter  is  a  weighty  contribution  to  the  preservation  and 
perpetuation  of  these  songs.  "Ever  since  I  was  a  child,"  says  he, 
"these  songs  stirred  me  strangely.  They  came  out  of  the  South  un- 
known to  me;  one  by  one,  and  at  once,  I  knew  them  as  of  me  and 
of  mine." 

Dr.  Henry  E.  Kriehbiel  has  for  more  than  a  quarter  of  a  cen- 
tury been  a  faithful  student  of  the  Negro  Folk  Song.  He  has  ana- 
lyzed, described  and  harmonized  many  specimens.  He  has  lectured 
and  written  upon  the  subject  and  has  published  a  book,  "Afro- 
American  Folk  Songs."  His  viewpoint  is  that  of  the  musician.  He 
has  a  broad  knowledge  of  the  music  and  the  work  he  has  done  is 
important  and  efficient. 

Dr.  Antonin  Dvorak  made  in  some  ways  the  most  effective  pro- 
nouncement ever  made  regarding  this  music.  When  he  announced 
that  the  only  original  music  America  could  claim  was  the  music  of 
the  Negro,  he  mildly  startled  the  United  States  of  America.    There 


AGENCIES  OF  PRESERVATION  AND  DEVELOPMENT.  99 

is  no  doubt  that  lie  successfully  defended  his  position,  for  the  ma- 
jority of  the  most  important  composers  in  this  country  are  with  him. 
He  suggested  that  this  music  would  lend  itself  to  higher  develop- 
ment, and  that  it  would  be  a  basis  for  a  national  music. 

Acting  upon  his  own  suggestion,  Dvorak  composed  the  symphony, 
"From  the  New  World,''  in  which  he  endeavored  with  eminent  suc- 
cess, to  preserve  the  characteristic  feature  of  the  Negro  music.  Others 
have  followed  his  example;  among  whom  are  Chadwick,  Schoenberg, 
and  Kroeger. 

Samuel  Coleridge-Taylor  has  transcribed  several  of  the  folk 
songs,  and,  in  fact,  has  transformed  them  into  classics.  It  is  true 
that  they  do  not  throb  with  American  life,  but  they  throb  with 
human  feeling.  They  were  born  to  immortal  life.  His  "Sometimes 
I  Feel  Like  a  Motherless  Child''  and  "Deep  Kiver"  are  the  most  suc- 
cessful of  his  transcriptions,  and  point  the  way  toward  the  future 
where  lives  the  dream  and  hope  of  the  Negro  race,  which,  too,  was 
seen  by  Dvorak. 

No,  these  songs  cannot  die.    They  are  eternal. 


100 


FOLK  SONG  OF  THE  AMERICAN  NEGRO. 


WERE  YOU  THERE? 


% ->-U_L 


fe£ 


^d: 


1.  "Were  you  there  when  they     cru  -   ci  -  tied 

2.  Were  you  there  when  they  nailed  Him    to 

3.  Were  you  there  when  they  pierced  Him  in 

4.  Were  you  there  when   the     sun       re-fused 

5.  WTere  you  there  when  they    laid    Him    in 


my  Lord?  (were  vou 
the  tree?  (to    the 
the   side?  (in    the 
to  shine?  (were  you 
the  tomb?  (in    the 
-•- 


hk 


i 1 — —  - 


-• — & 

I       ! 


\ — , 1- 


1 r 

Were  you  there  when  they  cru  -    ci  -  tied 

"Were  you  there  when  they  nailed  Him   to 

"Were  you  there  when  they  pierced  Him  in 

"Were  you  there  when   the    sun      re  -  fused 

"Were  you  there  when  they  laid    Him     in 


£ 


^smm^ 


my  Lord?    Oh!, 

the  tree?     Oh!, 

the  side?     Oh!, 

to  shine?   Oh!, 

the  tomb?   Oh!. 


a=i=|=iizz=:fezz=^zzz=iiz=i: 


-**  J 

1 

1 

| 

o 

^ 

Jf        «| 

A 

r\ 

1 

1 

1 

^ 

J    • 

J 

1      \\                   0 

3 

5 

J    • 

jj 

• 

J — : 

EJhP« 

90 

s 

J 

Some- 
Some- 
Some- 
Some- 
Some- 

-#- 

times 
times 
times 
times 
times 

it 
it 
it 
it 

it 

A. 

m  • 

caus    - 
caus    - 
caus    - 
caus    - 
caus    - 

0*.. 

9 

es 
es 
es 
es 
es 

A. 
■f— 

1 

me 

me 
me 
me 
me 

c  • 

to 
to 
to 
to 
to 

m 

trem 
trem 
trem 
trem 
trem  ■ 

-#- 

-  ble, 

-  ble, 

-  ble, 

-  ble, 
ble, 

-•- 

trem  - 
trem  - 
trem  - 
trem  - 
trem  - 

-•- 

ble, 
ble, 
ble, 
ble, 
ble, 

-0- 

uy  ^    • 

p? 

U 

p   • 

I 

| 

| 

1         1 

| 

L. 

\^m^ 

1 

k 

• 

» 

* 

p 

r 

1 

/ 

1 

1 

i 

1 

:l_—  q: 


trem  -  ble,  Were  you  there 

trem  -  ble,  Were  you  there 

trem  -  ble,  Were  you  there 

trem  -  ble,  Were  you  there 

trem  -  ble,  Were  you  there 


=}=P 


^FlNE. 


mmm 


when  they     cru  -  ci    -   fled  my 

when  they  nailed  Him      to  the 

when  they  pierced  Him     in  the 

when  the     sun      re  -    fused  to 

when  they    laid    Him      in  the 


Lord? 
tree? 

side? 

shine? 

tomb? 


THE  TOUR  OF  THE  ORIGINAL  JUBILEE  SINGERS.  1Q1 


CHAPTER  VIII. 


The  Tour  of  the  Original  Jubilee  Singers. 


"For  Orpheus*  Jute  was  strung  with  poet's  sinews, 
Whose  golden  touch  could  soften  steel  and  stones; 

Make  tigers  tame,  and  huge  leviathans 
Forsake  unsounded  deeps  to  dance  on  sands." 

THESE  songs  were  never  intended  for  the  world  at  large.  On 
the  contrary,  they  were  lines  of  communication  between  the 
slaves  and  God,  and  between  the  slave  and  slave.  The  slave  never- 
dreamed  that  the  world  cared  for  his  song,  nor  did  he  dream  that  his 
song  had  a  message  for  the  world.  So  he  sang  in  the  field,  in  the 
cabin,  and  in  the  meeting  house,  to  lighten  his  burden,  to  comfort 
his  brother,  and  to  entreat  his  God.  All  these  were  the  personal 
concern  of  the  slave,  and  not  in  the  least  the  concern  of  the  world. 
The  world  was  big,  cold,  and  awful,  and  not  only  cared  not  for  his 
song,  but  had  not  one  spark  of  real  human  interest  in  him,  the 
maker  and  singer  of  his  song.  No !  not  the  world !  But  the  secret 
place,  the  lonesome  valley,  the  purple  dawn,  solitudes  all  wet  with 
dews,  and  God  away  off  in  the  listening  Heavens,  they  would  hear 
his  songs.  They  did  hear.  But  lo !  this  humble  singer  knew  not  how 
near  to  pure  glory  he  was,  nor  did  he  know  into  what  effective  means 
of  salvation  he  had  been  fashioned.  This  strange  new  song  fairly 
burst  upon  the  world;  burst  from  unwilling  hearts  upon  unwilling 
hearts. 

A  man  of  faith  and  vision  came  from  New  York  State  to  work 
among  the  freedmen,  in  a  school  founded  in  the  city  of  Nashville  by 
the  American  Missionary  Association.  This  school  had  been  given 
the  name  of  Fisk.  It  was  to  offer  the  opportunity  for  higher  educa- 
tion to  those  who  for  two  and  a  half  hundred  years  had  been  slaves, 
and  whose  ancestors  for  untold  centuries  had  lived  in  the  wilds  of 
Africa.  After  the  first  bloom  of  success  had  faded  from  this  novel 
"experiment,"  and  men  began  to  proclaim,  "It  is  not  worth  while," 
then  strong  men  began  to  grow  faint  and  their  faith  weakened,  their 
hopes  faded  and  the  Fisk  School  was  given  up  to  die.     "Man's  ex- 


(102) 


THE  TOUR  OF  THE  ORIGINAL  JUBILEE  SINGERS.  103 

tremity  is  God's  opportunity,"  is  an  old  proverb  and  it  proved  true 
here.  The  God  who  loves  and  honors  faith  has,  in  every  crisis,  a 
faithful  servant.  George  L.  White  had  the  faith  that  moves  moun- 
tains. He  had  heard  the  black  boys  and  girls  singing  their  peculiar 
songs.  He  was  a  musician.  He  felt  a  moving  of  his  emotion  as  those 
weird  melodies  struck  his  soul ;  and,  as  they  touched  him,  they  would 
touch  the  world,  for  the  world  was  himself  multiplied  over  and  over 
again.  So  these  songs  must  be  sung  abroad,  and  men's  hearts, 
touched  and  softened,  would  respond  with  interest.  This  accom- 
plished, Fisk  School  would  be  saved.  But  in  the  hearts  of  those 
black  boys  and  girls  there  was  the  echoing  of  that  thought,  "The  world 
cares  not  for  our  song."  So  it  was  with  great  difficulty  that  Mr. 
White  could  persuade  his  scholars  to  sing  their  songs  in  concert. 
Finally,  through  tact,  patience,  and  the  faith  they  had  in  him,  he 
was  successful.  So  he  organized  his  choir  and  began  his  training. 
Even  then  it  was  only  sometimes  that  they  would  sing  their  own 
songs.  They  preferred  the  white  man's  music.  It  soon  became 
known  that  Mr.  White  was  preparing  to  lead  a  troup  of  his  singers 
into  the  world  that  the  world  might  hear  their  songs.  Immediately 
a  mighty  protest  burst  from  the  mothers  and  fathers,  for  to  them 
these  songs  were  sacred,  their  message-bearers  from  heart  to  heart, 
from  here  to  Heaven.  They  were  to  be  sung  in  the  dewy  dawn  down 
in  the  valley,  in  the  solitude,  and  to  the  far-off  listening  Heaven.  In 
their  hearts  there  echoed  and  re-echoed,  "The  world  is  not  worthy 
of  them." 

Mr.  Whitens  vision,  however,  would  not  leave  him,  truly  it 
haunted  him.  He  saw  Henry  Ward  Beecher  standing  up  before  his 
great  congregation  commending  these  singers  and  their  songs  to  the 
sympathies  of  those  who  listened  in  tears.  He  saw  philanthropy 
pour  out  its  money  with  its  tears;  he  saw  the  scoffers  bow  their 
heads  and  raise  them  up  again  with  fairest  words  of  praise.  He  saw 
the  blue  expanse  of  the  broad  Atlantic  beyond  which  England's  sor- 
rowing queen  was  speaking  words  of  gratitude  for  the  comfort  these 
singers  and  their  songs  had  brought  her ;  he  saw  the  palace  in  Potts- 
dam  and  the  royal  family  listening  with  evident  approval  to  these 
strange,  new  songs;  he  saw  the  nobles  bringing  gifts  and  the  peas- 
ants and  those  in  prison  shedding  tears  and  heaving  sighs,  more 
precious  than  frankincense  and  myrrh.  He  saw  Fisk  rise  in  the 
newness  and  strength  of  life.     He  saw  his  faith  justified.     All  this 


106  FOLK  SOXG  OF  THE  AUER1CAX  XEGRO. 

When  the  Metropolitan  newspapers  called  the  company  "Nigger 
Minstrels."  Mr.  White  was  face  to  face  with  a  situation  as  serious 
as  it  was  awkward.  His  company  had  no  appropriate  name,  and  the 
odium  of  the  title  attributed  by  the  New  York  newspapers  pained 
him  intensely.  If  they  were  to  be  known  as  "Nigger  Minstrels." 
they  could  never  realize  his  vision ;  they  were  both  handicapped  and 
checkmated,  and  their  career  was  dead.  One  whole  night  he  spent 
in  prayer,  and  his  little  band  of  pupils  have  borne  witness  that  the 
next  morning  his  face  shone  as  if,  like  Moses,  he  had  spoken  with 
God  "face  to  face,  as  a  man  speaketh  unto  his  friend."  The  sug- 
gestiveness  of  the  Hebrew  Jubilee  had  been  borne  in  upon  his  mind, 
and  with  the  joy  of  a  deep  conviction  he  exclaimed.  "Children,  you 
are  the  Jubilee  Singers." 

From  1S71  to  1878  that  company  enjoyed  one  continuous  ovation. 
New  England  crowded  her  largest  buildings  and  paid  liberally  to 
hear  them  sing.  Mr.  White  began  to  send  back  to  Professor  Spenee 
hundreds  of  dollars  to  add  to  that  one  lonely  dollar  held  back  to 
keep  from  having  an  empty  treasury. 

After  a  most  astounding  and  unexpected  success  in  this  country 
plans  were  made  for  touring  England.  They  sang  their  way  into 
the  good  graces  of  the  whole  of  Great  Britain  from  the  queen  down 
to  the  peasant.  The  queen,  the  Duke  of  Argyle.  Lord  Shaftesbury  and 
Mr.  Gladstone  did  them  especial  honor,  and  their  concerts  were  very 
largely  attended.  They  were  the  sensation  of  the  kingdom.  Not 
simply  because  they  were  strange  and  novel,  but  because  their  sing- 
ing and  their  music  made  a  deep  impression  upon  the  hearts  of  all 
who  heard  them.  Mr.  Gladstone  gave  absorbing  attention  as  they 
sang  for  him,  and  his  spontaneous  comment  was.  "Isn't  it  wonder- 
ful !"  The  good  Queen  Victoria  wept,  and  declared  that  she  had  re- 
ceived no  such  comfort  as  this,  from  any  other  source,  since  the  death 
of  her  consort.  Dwight  L.  Moody,  who  was  conducting  evangelistic 
services  in  London  at  the  time,  used  them  whenever  he  could  get 
them,  and  hundreds  were  converted  to  the  better  life.  The  English 
people  paid  large  sums  to  hear  them  sing  and  loaded  them  down  with 
gifts  and  gratitude. 

The  English  Independent,  April  2.  1874,  in  an  article.  "Jubilee 
singers  at  Edetan  Hall."  states : 

••Lord  Shaftesbury,  at  the  close,  said  they  had  received  the  singers 
with  the  deepest  sympathy  and  now  rejoiced  at  the  greatness  of 


THE  TOUR  OF  THE  ORIGINAL  JUBILEE  SINGERS.  107 

their  success.  He  eulogized  the  self-denial  and  patriotism  of  "these 
pious  young  people"  for  their  exertions  to  exalt  their  race,  and  said 
that  the  affection  and  respect  of  the  English  people  would  follow 
them  wherever  they  went.  After  a  few  words  addressed  to  the  singers 
by  his  lordship,  the  doxology  was  sung  by  the  entire  assembly,  and 
Lord  Shaftesbury,  amid  the  cheers  of  the  audience,  shook  hands  with 
each  of  the  singers  as  they  quitted  the  platform." 

They  spent  eight  months  in  Germany  with  experiences  similar  to 
those  they  had  in  England.  They  were  welcomed,  heard,  and  enter- 
tained by  royalty,  nobility,  and  peasant.  They  sang,  by  special  en- 
gagements, before  the  leading  critics  of  Germany. 

Perhaps  the  final  word  of  criticism  from  Germany  was  this : 
"They  disarm  the  critic."  The  visits  to  Great  Britain  and  to  Ger- 
many were  the  most  notable  of  their  campaigns.  Their  fame  spread 
rapidly  and  "gained  strength  by  going,"  until  their  songs  resounded 
round  the  world.  After  seven  years  of  such  campaigning  these  hum- 
ble singers  returned  to  Fisk  and  laid  at  her  feet  $150,000  and  many 
rich  gifts.  Jubilee  Hall,  a  monument  to  their  sacrifice,  stands  on 
the  identical  spot  upon  w^hich  was  once  a  slave  pen.  There  it  stands, 
lifting  up  its  grateful  head  to  God  and  His  Heaven. 

The  noble  altruism  of  these  singers  was  ever  manifest  in  their 
work.  Through  suffering,  they  sang  to  the  world  strange  songs  from 
their  bruised  hearts.  In  need  of  comfort,  they  comforted  the  sor- 
rowing. Their  courage,  their  faith,  their  love  for  Fisk  brought  to 
them  the  honor  of  being  the  first  to  sing  these  songs  to  the  world. 
October  6,  1871,  was  a  great  day  for  Fisk,  for  it  was  the  day  when 
was  made  the  sacrifice  which  gave  her  salvation.  But  the  divinest 
element  of  this  sacrifice  was  that  not  one  of  that  band  of  singers 
ever  enjoyed  the  blessing  which  Fisk  has  bestowed  upon  so  many. 
2s  ot  one  returned  to  finish  his  Christian  education. 

The  original  company  consisted  of  Ella  Sheppard,  Jennie  Jack- 
son, Maggie  Porter,  Minnie  Tate,  Mary  Eliza  Walker,  Thomas  Bur- 
ling, Benjamin  M.  Holmes,  Green  Evans,  and  Isaac  Dickinson.  As 
time  passed,  there  were  changes  in  the  personnel.  During  this  seven 
years,  at  one  time  or  another,  Hinton  Alexander,  Fred  Louden, 
Mabel  Lewis,  Georgia  Gordon,  and  America  Bobinson,  were  members 
of  the  Fisk  Company. 

A  Harwick  paper  of  January  9,  1874,  makes  the  following  com- 
ment: 


108  FOLK  SONG  OF  THE  AMERICAN  NEGRO. 

"In  personal  appearance  they  are  far  from  unprepossessing,  three 
of  the  young  ladies  being  both  handsome  and  pretty,  and  their  com- 
plexion present  every  variety  of  the  'colored'  from  deep  black  to  al- 
most white.  Their  service  of  song,  regarded  as  a  musical  perform- 
ance is  chiefly  remarkable  for  its  novelty.  The  melodies  and 
choruses  are  of  the  simplest  possible  construction,  but  one  or  two  of 
them  were  very  picturesque  and  the  harmony  exquisite,  if  not  per- 
fect. They  have  been  very  highly  spoken  of  by  Mr.  Gladstone,  Mr. 
Bright,  and  by  the  Metropolitan  and  provincial  press." 

Fisk  has  sent  out  other  companies  at  different  times,  since  the 
original  company  made  its  memorable  campaign. 

In  1890-189.1  a  company  composed  of  Misses  Linalina  Haynes, 
Alice  Vassar,  Fanny  Snow,  Marie  Antoniette  Crump,  and  Messrs. 
John  W.  Halloway,  Paul  LaCour  and  Thos.  W.  Talley  toured  the 
North  and  East  in  the  interest  of  the  Theological  Building. 

In  1899  another  troup  left  the  University  in  the  general  interest 
of  the  institution.  It  was  composed  of  Misses  Mabel  L.  Grant,  Ida 
M.  Napier,  Lenetta  V.  Hayes,  Edith  Bowman,  Mrs.  Agnes  H.  Work, 
and  Messrs.  S.  S.  Caruthers,  A.  E.  Greenlow,  G.  E.  Martin,  and 
J.  W.  Work,  the  director.  This  company,  with  some  changes,  re- 
mained in  the  field  for  four  years.  During  these  four  years  Misses 
Jeanette  Washington,  Katherine  Kainey,  Florence  Pamplin,  Marie 
Antoniette  Crump,  Henrietta  H.  Crawley,  Elnora  J.  Work;  Messrs. 
J.  A.  Myers,  Frederick  J.  Work,  and  N.  W.  Ryder  at  one  time  or 
another  were  members  of  this  company. 

In  1909-1910  the  University  was  represented  by  a  male  quartette, 
the  members  of  which  were  J.  A.  Myers,  Alfred  G.  King,  N.  W. 
Ryder,  and  J.  W.  Work.  This  quartette  was  engaged  by  the  Victor 
Talking  Machine  Company  to  make  twenty  records  of  folk  songs.  Of 
this  quartette,  Dr.  H.  E.  Krehbiel  wrote  in  the  New  York  Tribune: 

"A  concert  goer  might  live  a  lifetime  and  never  hear  such  beau- 
tiful homogeneity  of  tone  as  that  which  they  produce,  nor  such  euph- 
ony, perfection  of  nuance  and  precision.  Save  for  its  vital  human 
quality,  which  lifts  it  above  all  mechanical  products,  their  harmony 
sounds  like  that  of  a  well-attuned  organ.  A  quartette  of  instinctively 
excellent  artists  are  these  Fisk  Singers." 

The  quality  of  all  the  singing  at  Fisk  University  since  the  time 
of  the  Original  Company  has  been  largely  wrought  out  and  main- 
tained through  the  efficient  work  of  Miss  Jennie  A.  Robinson,  who 


THE  TOUR  OF  THE  ORIGIXAL  JUBILEE  SIXGERS. 


109 


for  years  has  been  the  teacher  of  voice  culture  and  the  principal  of 
the  Music  Department.  All  the  singers  have  been  under  her  per- 
sonal charge  and  their  ability  to  sing  has  resulted  in  great  measure 
from  her  teaching.  There  is  always  some  musical  organization  in 
training  at  Fisk,  ever  ready  to  serve  the  institution  in  this  capacity. 
Her  sons  and  daughters,  loving  their  fathers'  songs,  are  ever 
ready  with  hearts  and  voices  attuned  in  spirit  and  understanding  to 
their  sacred  meaning — to  sing,  whenever  and  wherever  a  heart  needs 
the  comfort  of  a  song. 


I 


Andante. 


I'm  (Soing  to  ©o  ail  11  Can. 


5* 


ffif 


V 


^B 


T1, 

for  my 
for  my 
for  my 
for  my 
for  my 
_# «_• 


^7 

Lord, 
Lord, 
Lord, 
Lord, 
Lord, 


9 

I'm 
I'm 
I'm 
I'm 
I'm 

-• — 


going 
going 
going 
going 
going 

=*= 


to    do  all 

to  pray  all 

to  sing  all 

to  mourn  all 

to  love  all 


can 
can 
can 
can 
can 


I'm  a-gcing  to 
I'm  a-going  to 
I'm  a-going  to 
I'm  a-going  to 
I'm  a-going  to 


I         i    .3 


*4-f 


r 


n  r 

\ 

> 

1 

\      iN      1 

\  \  &  b  -^T  j 

lN     1 

T»      4 

9 

j 

S        V        V        N i«        • 

J              1 

T^ 

lb    1 

— A — 

— % 

/  t'^i 

•      9m      #_^ 1 

—t — J — J 

fe* •— 

— 0 — 

— #— 

'       ■ 

•     3 — 1 

t) 

> 

> 

do 

all 

i 

can 

for  my  Lord, 

I'm  a-going  to    do     all 

I     can, 

pray 

all 

i 

can 

for  my   .Lord, 

I*  m  a-going  to  pray  all 

I     can, 

sing 

all 

i 

can 

for  my   Lord, 

I'm  a-going  to  sing   all 

I      can, 

mourn  all 

i 

can 

for  my   Lord, 

I  m  a-going  to  mourn  all 

I      can, 

love 

all 

i 

can 

for  my   Lord, 

I'm  a-going  to  love   all 
> 

I      can, 

m 

m 

* 

-#-      — 

-•-     -•- 

r  f" 

/*V 

J 

5          m  '           r? 

\m.                   jS\ 

V     «      I 

t£J:         ! 

r       i         1 

V 

-">    f 

y 

'# 

/' 

1 

s  r 

•        s 

.  / 

z1       '         1 

V 

1 

V 

a 


8 


,r#. 


<?  tejnpo. 


Till 
Till 
Till 
Till 
Till 


:#s: 


H=j  ,  ij^J 


I  can't  do   no  more  ;  I'm  a-going  to    do    all  I 

I  can't  pray  no  more  ;  I'm  a-going  to  pray  all  I 

I  can't  sing  no  more  ;  I'm  a-going  to  sing  all  I 

I  can't  mourn  no  more  ;  I'm  a-going  to  mourn  all  I 

I  can't  love  no  more  ;  I'm  a-going  to  love  all  I 


\^\=i 


can  for  my  Lord, 

can  for  my  Lord. 

can  for  my  Lord, 

can  for  my  Lord 

can  for  my  Lord. 


im 


* 


110  FOLK  SOSG  OF  THE  AMERICAN  XEGRO. 


CHAPTER  IX. 


What  the  Negro's  Music  Means  to  Him. 


"The  human  soul  and  music  are  alone  eternal" 

IN  the  Negro's  own  mind  his  music  has  held,  and  still  holds,  posi- 
tions of  variable  importance.  In  the  darkness  of  bondage,  it 
was  his  light ;  in  the  morn  of  his  freedom,  it  was  his  darkness ;  but 
as  the  day  advances,  and  he  is  being  gradually  lifted  up  into  a 
higher  life,  it  is  becoming  not  only  his  proud  heritage,  but  a  support, 
and  powerful  inspiration.  The  songs  of  the  slave  were  his  sweet 
consolation  and  his  messages  to  Heaven,  bearing  sorrow,  pain,  joy, 
prayer,  and  adoration.  Undisturbed  and  unafraid,  he  could  always 
unburden  his  heart  in  these  simple  songs  pregnant  with  faith,  hope, 
and  love.  The  man,  though  a  slave,  produced  the  song,  and  the  song, 
in  turn,  produced  a  better  man.  The  slave  is  perennially  praised 
for  his  perfect  devotion.  Some  attribute  it  to  one  cause,  some  to 
another.  Some  even  go  so  far  as  to  attribute  it  to  the  influence  of 
the  system  of  slavery,  but  more  than  any  other  cause,  the  retroactive 
power  of  his  own  music  influenced  this  character  of  the  slave.  What 
else  could  he  be  who  had  such  ideals  ever  before  him?  How  could 
a  man  be  base  who  looked  ever  to  the  hills?  Could  a  man  cherish 
the  idea  of  rapine  whose  soul  was  ever  singing  these  songs  of  love, 
patience  and  God?  Neither  African  heathenism  nor  American  sla- 
very could  wholly  extinguish  that  spark  of  idealism,  set  aglow  by 
his  Creator.  This  idealism,  expressed  in  terms  so  beautiful  and 
strong  grew  in  power,  and  the  possessor  found  himself  irresistibly 
drawn  and  willingly  striving  to  attain  unto  it.  The  creator  of  these 
songs  had  now  become  the  creature  of  his  own  creation. 

Naturally  enough,  when  the  Negro  found  himself  free,  he  literally 
put  his  past  behind  him.  It  was  his  determination  that  as  far  as 
within  him  lay,  not  one  single  reminder  of  that  black  past  should 
mar  his  future.  So  away  went  all  these  reminders  into  the  "abyss 
of  oblivion." 

His  music  was  one  of  these  reminders  and  as  sweet  as  it  was  to 
him,  as  much  as  it  had  helped  him,  it.  too,  must  go,  for  it  was  a 


^YHAT  THE  XEGRO'S  MUSIC  MEAXS  TO  HIM.  m 

reminder  of  the  awful  night  of  bondage.  It  is  nothing  that  newly 
emancipated  slaves  sent  out  by  schools  like  Fisk  and  Hampton, 
gained  friends  and  large  sums  of  money  by  singing  these  slave  songs. 
That  Fisk  University  can  truthfully  be  said  in  large  part  to  be  a 
product  of  these  plantation  melodies,  is  nothing  against  the  fact  that 
just  after  emancipation  the  Negro  refused  to  sing  his  own  music  in 
public,  especially  in  the  schools. 

When  the  Original  Fisk  Singers  started  out  to  earn  money  for 
their  struggling  school,  they  did  not  sing  their  own,  but  the  cur- 
rent music  of  the  day.  It  was  not  until  they  saw  that  they  were 
doomed  to  failure  that  they  began  to  use  the  plantation  melodies, 
the  effectiveness  of  which  was  discovered  by  what  was  apparently  a 
mere  chance.  After  one  crushingly  unsuccessful  concert,  the  an- 
nouncement was  made  that  if  any  cared  to  remain  for  a  while  after 
the  conclusion  of  the  program,  the  company  would  sing  a  few  of 
their  own  folk  songs.  Those  who  remained  showed  so  plainly  their 
perfect  delight,  that  the  singers  themselves  were  astonished.  People 
then  began  to  talk  about  this  new  music,  not  knowing  just  what  to 
believe  about  it.  It  was  something  similar  to  curiosity  but,  in  fact, 
more  than  that  which  seized  upon  the  people.  The  music  made  men 
rejoice,  it  made  them  weep,  it  made  them  ashamed,  it  made  them 
better.  They  loved  to  hear  it.  All  this  was  positive.  The  singing 
of  these  songs  brought  ovation  after  ovation.  Though  it  was  a 
sacrifice  of  a  just  pride  to  sing  these  songs,  the  sacrifice,  when  made, 
brought  a  new  day,  and  a  new  blessing.  It  introduced  the  Negro 
to  himself!  The  Negro  is  not  so  different  from  other  men  in  his 
thought  as  he  is  in  his  feelings.  In  thought,  he  is  generic;  in  feel- 
ing, more  specific.  His  feelings  are  broader  and  deeper  than  those 
of  other  men  and  they  have  more  directive  influence  and  power  over 
him  than  other  men's  feelings  have  upon  them.  This  spirituality  is 
the  source  of  his  consuming  enthusiasm,  which  has  carried  him  over 
so  many  obstacles,  to  the  accomplishment  of  the  all  but  miraculous. 
The  fact,  however,  that  this  feeling  is  so  evident  in  all  his  life,  work, 
play,  and  religion,  has  led  many  to  conclude  that  as  he  abounds  in 
emotion  he  is  lacking  in  intellect.  It  is  almost  unnecessary  to  state 
that  this  inference  is  a  non-sequitur.  Like  other  men,  the  Negro  is 
affected  by  his  environment,  only  more  deeply  affected.  He  suffers 
more,  he  enjoys  more.  This  is  one  reason  why  he  seems  an  imitator; 
this  is  the  reason  why  he  can  so  easily  adapt  himself  to  his  surround- 


112  FOLK  SONG  OF  THE  AMERICAN  NEGRO. 

ings  and  assume  cordial  relations  with  the  different  phases  of  life. 
It  is  largely  on  account  of  this  "emotional  nature,"  which  so  many 
condemn,  that  he  is  monopolizing  in  different  ways  so  much  of  the 
world's  attention.  Consequently,  when  we  begin  to  describe  the 
attitude  of  the  Negro  toward  his  own  folk  song,  accuracy  demands 
that  we  take  into  consideration  time,  place,  and  condition. 

Following  this  course,  we  shall  classify  the  Negro  as  follows: 
(1)  Our  fathers  who  came  out  of  bondage.  (2a)  Those  of  the  first 
generation  of  freedom,  who  grew  up  in  illiberal  and  intolerant  locali- 
ties. (2b)  Those  who  grew  up  in  localities  where  the  relations  be- 
tween the  races  were  more  amicable.  (3)  The  educators;  (a)  teach- 
ers, (b)  clergymen,  (c)  musicians,  and  (d)  authors.  (4)  The  second 
generation  of  freedom;  (a)  those  who  have  lived  in  the  North,  (b) 
those  who  have  lived  in  the  South. 

To  our  fathers  who  came  out  of  bondage  and  who  are  still  with 
us,  these  songs  are  prayers,  praises,  and  sermons.  They  sang  them 
at  work;  in  leisure  moments;  they  crooned  them  to  their  babes  in 
their  cradles;  to  their  wayward  children;  they  sang  them  to  their 
sick,  wracked  with  pain  on  beds  of  affliction;  they  sang  them  over 
their  dead.  Blessings,  warnings,  benedictions,  and  the  very  heart 
beats  of  life  were  all  expressed  to  our  fathers  by  their  songs.  To 
them  there  is  not  one  insignificant  pause,  cadence,  inflexion,  or  ex- 
pression anywhere  in  all  these  countless  songs;  but  every  note,  every 
word,  every  sentiment,  is  of  tremendous  import.  Yes,  those  who 
lived  in  bondage  with  these  songs,  the  offspring  of  their  souls  still 
love  them  as  their  comforters. 

To  those  of  the  first  generation,  who  grew  up  in  localities  illiberal 
and  intolerant,  these  songs  are  generally  objects  of  indifference  or 
aversion.  To  them  slavery  is  more  indefensible  than  it  was  to  their 
fathers,  and  present-day  ill-treatment  adds  to  their  indignation. 
Then,  too,  these  songs  always  remind  them  of  slavery  and  all  slavery 
meant  to  their  fathers;  therefore,  the  logical  sequence  is  that  they 
either  pass  them  by  with  "silent  contempt,"  or  they  regard  them  with 
positive  apathy.  They  take  neither  time  nor  pains  to  understand,  or 
if  they  do  this,  it  is  only  to  condemn.  They  find  all  kinds  of  fault 
with  them,  make  all  kinds  of  odious  comparisons,  and  "laugh  them 
to  scorn."  As  it  is  true  that  mankind  will  find  fault  with,  criticize, 
and  pick  flaws  in  anything  for  which  he  may  have  conceived  a  dis- 


WHAT  THE  NEGRO'S  MUSIC  MEANS  TO  HIM.  H3 

like,  so  it  is  true  that  mankind  will  seek  something  to  praise  in  any- 
thing for  which  he  may  have  conceived  a  liking. 

As  a  boy,  I  was  very  hard  on  shoes.  My  poor  father  was  put  to 
it  to  keep  my  feet  off  the  ground.  Thinking  it  was  an  economy,  he 
always  paid  a  good  price  for  my  shoes.  When  I  literally  kicked  out, 
burnt  out,  and  ran  through  those,  he  decided  that  he  would  make  a 
change,  and  I  heard  him  say  to  my  mother  that  he  was  going  to  buy 
me  brogans.  Now,  I  did  not  know  what  brogans  were,  never  heard 
of  them  before,  but  I  decided  that  I  did  not  like  these  brogans  any- 
way, because  there  seemed  to  be  in  them  some  reprimand  for  me. 
No,  I  never  would  like  them.  In  due  time,  however,  my  father 
brought  me  home  a  pair  of  soft  calf  skin,  front-laced  shoes  with 
brass  tips,  no  cap,  but  plain  toe.  I  immediately  began  to  express  to 
the  family  my  dislike  for  front  laces,  brass  tips,  and  plain  toes ;  then, 
too,  they  did  not  feel  good  on  my  feet,  and  as  I  walked  around  the 
room  there  was  a  positive  limp  in  my  gait,  because  I  was  sure  that 
that  shoe  hurt  my  foot,  or  would  hurt  it  tomorrow.  The  only  good 
I  could  see  in  that  shoe  was  that  it  could  be  cut  up  into  "dandy  top- 
strings"  because  the  leather  was  so  smooth.  No  persuasions,  threats, 
promises,  or  the  process  that  generally  follows,  could  make  me  treat 
that  shoe  with  friendliness  or  even  common  decency.  They  lived 
and  died  the  objects  of  my  utter  contempt. 

Some  time  after  that  I  took  it  into  by  head  that  high-top  boots 
were  good  and  proper  things  for  a  boy  to  have.  So  I  begged  for 
boots.  I  dearly  loved  boots,  though  I  had  never  had  any.  My  father 
bought  the  boots.  High  tops,  brass  tips,  plain  toes,  rough  leather; 
I  never  saw  anything  prettier.  I  went  into  ecstacies  over  those  brass 
tips,  that  plain  toe,  no  caps  to  hurt  my  feet, — those  old  caps  always 
did  hurt, — then  that  pretty  fuzzy  leather!  It  was  rough,  too,  and 
would  last  a  long  time.  I  put  on  my  boots,  partially  and  pain- 
fully, and  walked  all  over  the  house  to  show  that  they  fit  all  right. 
If  they  did  hurt  a  little,  they  would  be  all  right  tomorrow.  In  agony 
at  my  heels,  I  kept  those  boots  because  they  were  just  what  I  wanted, 
and  while  I  had  them  I  was  going  to  hold  fast  to  them.  No  exchang- 
ing them  for  larger  ones,  they  might  not  come  back,  and  I  loved 
them  so.  I  did  not  wear  those  boots  out,  it  was  rather  the  other  way. 
That  was  many  years  ago,  but  I  remember  them  yet,  as  if  they  were 
mine  but  yesterday.  They  lived  and  died  the  objects  of  my  tenderest 
affections.     My  little  experience  of  brogans  and  boots  is  enacted  by 

8 


114  FOLK  SOXG  OF  THE  AMERICAN  NEGRO. 

mankind  every  day.  There  is  not  one  good  point  in  anything  which 
we  do  not  fancy,  nothing  undesirable  in  anything  we  choose  to  like. 
It  is  sometimes  the  case  that,  by  tact  and  persistence  this  un- 
friendly class  is  brought  into  a  friendly  attitude  toward  this  music. 
There  was  noteworthy  and  interesting  proof  of  this  at  Fisk  Univer- 
sity. It  is  clearly  paradoxical  that  for  many  years  it  was  impossible 
to  induce  the  students  of  Fisk  to  sing  these  songs,  even  after  that 
famous  first  company  had  sung  this  institution  into  new  life.  For 
years  one  would  be  as  likely  to  hear  Negro  Folk  Songs  in  St.  Peter's 
at  Borne  as  in  Fisk  University.  But  Fisk  had  no  ordinary  presi- 
dent. Erastus  Milo  Cravath  was  a  man  of  big  faith,  broad  vision, 
great  wisdom  and  heroic  courage,  and  he  knew  as  well  as  any  living 
man  along  what  lines  the  education  of  the  Negro  youth  should  be 
wrought  out.  He  recognized  the  importance  of  the  Negro  music  in 
the  development  of  the  race,  and  consequently  worked  to  have  it 
incorporated  into  the  life  of  Fisk.  He  had  a  discriminating  under- 
standing of  this  music.  He  was  not  a  musician,  but  a  philosopher 
who  loved  music.  To  him  it  was  history  and  prophecy.  He  was 
thoroughly  convinced  that  no  system  of  education  for  the  Negro 
race  was  complete  without  his  music.  His  big  faith  was  expressed 
in  the  Song  of  Faith : 

"You  may  bury  ine  in  the  East, 
You  may  bury  me  in  the  West. 
But  I'll  bear  the  trumpet  sound, 
In   that   morning." 

Dr.  Cravath  had  a  fine  helper  in  Professor  Adam  K.  Spence,  who 
led  the  music  in  chapel,  and  who  was  largely  responsible  for  the 
salvation  of  the  Negro  music.  When  Professor  Spence  would  rise  in 
chapel  services  and  "start"  one  of  these  songs,  requesting  the  stu- 
dents to  "join  in,"  they  would  "join  in"  with  a  chorus  of  cold  silence. 
They  knew  enough  to  comprehend  slavery  dialect  and  bad  grammar, 
and  they  would  have  none  of  either.  Elijah,  Messiah,  and  Creation 
were  different  and  meant  better  things  than  the  times  and  condi- 
tions represented  by  these  songs.  But  Professor  Spence  would  ana- 
lyze and  explain  individual  songs  and  show  their  beauty.  This  he 
did  day  in  and  day  out,  illustrating  with  his  own  sweet  voice  and 
sweeter  soul  the  virtues  expressed  by  the  music,  until  he  finally  led 
them  to  an  understanding;  and  now,  at  all  religious  services,  these 


'You  may  bury  me  iu  the  East, 
You  may  bury  me  in  the  West, 
But  I'll  bear  the  trumpet  soun' 
iD-a-that  mawnin'." 


(115) 


116  FOLK  SONG  OF  THE  AMERICAN  NEGRO. 

songs  are  sung  in  melody  abundant  and  divine.  So  important  a 
place  has  this  music  assumed  in  the  worship  and  in  the  life  of  Fisk 
that  both  teachers  and  students  feel  that  something  is  lacking,  and 
that  there  is  a  distinct  loss,  if  these  songs  are  not  sung.  These  con- 
ditions are  practically  the  same  in  a  majority  of  the  southern  schools. 
This  growing  interest  in  his  own  music,  the  solitary  connecting  link 
between  the  lack  of  race  respect  and  confidence,  and  the  possibility 
of  race  consciousness,  is  a  harbinger  of  the  New  Day  of  Hope. 

To  us  who  have  been  reared  in  surroundings  more  pleasant,  much 
of  the  bitterness  of  slavery  has  passed  away.  In  the  consideration 
and  kindness  of  the  present,  the  past  is  almost  forgotten.  So  to  this 
class,  this  folk  music  has  a  somewhat  different  meaning.  Not  con- 
sumed by  fires  of  bitter  animosity,  nor  fanned  by  winds  of  antipathy, 
we  see  every  good  point  of  this  music.  Though  we  could  not  forget 
that  it  was  born  in  slavery,  to  us  it  is  beautiful.  It  does  not  express 
itself  in  the  purity  of  the  king's  English,  but,  oh !  the  crooning  sweet- 
ness of  the  dialect !  It  does  not  employ  the  smoothed,  well-balanced 
sentences  of  the  classics,  but,  oh!  the  directness,  the  pithiness,  the 
strength !  Its  melody  does  not  flow  in  channels  laid  out  by  the  great 
musicians,  but,  what  is  more  to  be  praised,  its  melody  is  all  its  own. 
It  is  original  in  its  beauty.  In  its  entirety  it  does  not  touch  with 
satisfaction  the  intellects  of  the  standard  composers,  but  it  most 
assuredly  touches  the  heart  of  all  mankind.  It  may  be  our  fathers' 
history  of  their  enslaved  past,  but  it  is  also  projecting  itself  into  a 
future  full  of  bright  promise,  for  he  needs  not  to  be  called  a  prophet 
who  predicts  that  out  of  our  fathers'  song  there  will  be  evolved  a 
greater  song,  sublime  and  glorious.  Its  coming  is  foretold  by  the 
forerunners,  Nathaniel  Dett,  Frederick-  J.  Work,  Harry  T.  Burleigh, 
Coleridge-Taylor,  Henry  E.  Krehbiel,  and  Anton  Dvorak. 

Further,  these  songs  are  to  us  a  storehouse  of  comfort.  How  can 
we  ever  forget  those  by-gone  days  when  our  mothers  sang  them  to 
us  as  our  lullabies?  "This  old-time  religion,  makes  me  love  every- 
body." Think  of  the  great  blessing  of  being  sung  to  sleep  by  such 
a  lullaby — "Makes  Me  Love  Everybody!"  Think  of  the  great  favor 
of  being  reared  in  the  atmosphere  of  "Lord,  I  Want  to  be  Like  Jesus !" 
In  times  of  sorrow,  we  have  heard  our  mothers  sing  "Keep  Me  from 
Sinking  Down,"  and  often,  oh !  so  often,  "March  on  and  You  Shall 
Gain  the  Victory,"  has  rung  with  such  meaning  through  the  humble 
home.  Can  you  blame  us  for  loving  these  songs  which  have  so  much 
inspired  us  to  be  and  to  do  ? 


"WHAT  THE  NEGRO'S  MUSIC  MEANS  TO  HIM.  H7 

The  study  of  the  attitude  of  the  educators  in  regard  to  this 
music  is  more  interesting  than  that  of  any  other  class.  For  conveni- 
ence we  have  sub-divided  this  class  into  (a)  teachers,  (b)  clergymen, 
(c)  musician,  (d)  authors.  While  there  is  generally  a  favorable 
attitude  among  these  groups,  each  group  is  influenced  by  their  view- 
point, which  is  determined  by  their  calling.  The  teachers  regard 
this  music  as  a  desirable  possession,  which  is  worth  study  and  under- 
standing. They  have  a  feeling  of  ownership  of  something  original ; 
and  if  teachers  admire  any  one  quality  in  the  course  of  education,  it 
is  originality.  They  find  that  this  music  grips  the  hearts  of  the 
scholars  and  awakens  interest.  Teachers  always  welcome  interest 
in  pupils.  They  find  in  this  music  a  refreshing  departure  from  the 
routine  of  the  class  room,  giving  variety  to  the  work.  Then  there  is 
around  this  folk  song  an  atmosphere  invigorating  and  inspiring.  All 
this  is  of  practical  help  to  the  teacher.  Subjectively,  the  teacher  is 
the  better  for  an  understanding  of  this  music,  for  which  his  intelli- 
gence fits.  Not  only  does  he  experience  intellectual,  but  spiritual  en- 
joyment as  well. 

The  clergymen's  regard  is  determined  almost  wholly  by  the  reli- 
gious power  of  this  music.  The  wise  preacher  who  really  understands 
his  people  and  the  preacher  who  helps  them  most,  knows  that  he 
must  take  into  consideration  and  give  due  reverence  to  the  Negro's 
emotional  nature,  the  whole  world  to  the  contrary  notwithstanding. 
Of  course,  this  can  be  overdone  and  it  often  is,  but  on  the  other  hand 
many  Negro  preachers  fail  because  they  go  too  far  the  other  way. 
They  long  for  the  reputation,  "intellectual",  and  discountenance  and 
discourage  any  manifestations  of  "feeling."  But  the  arousing  of  a 
feeling  for  the  right,  is  a  very  nearly  sure  way  of  having  right  done. 
I  am  certain  that  this  is  psychological  heresy,  but  experience  has 
proved  and  will  continue  to  prove  that  the  Negro's  soul  obeys  some 
such  law.  And  the  truth  is,  the  souls  of  some  others  work  the  same 
way.  Most  men  know  the  right,  but  it  is  where  they  have  an  enthu- 
siasm for  the  right,  that  they  will  do  right.  To  the  preacher  these 
songs  of  the  Negro  are  powers  for  arousing  "feelings  for  the  right." 
It  is  hardly  believable  that  any  man  could  remain  the  same  and 
unaffected,  after  singing  in  the  spirit,  "Lord,  I  Want  to  be  Like 
Jesus,"  or  "Were  You  There  When  They  Crucified  My  Lord?"  So  it 
seems  plain,  that  the  preacher  who  uses  this  music  to  add  momentum 
to  the  gospel,  is  wise. 


118  FOLK  SONG  OF  THE  AMERICAN  NEGRO. 

To  the  musician,  these  songs  furnish  both  a  keen  intellectual  and 
a  deep  emotional  enjoyment.  He  sees  their  idiomatic  features,  their 
characteristic  originalities,  their  smooth  exquisite  melodies,  their 
thematic  values,  and  their  possibilities.  He  enjoys  the  wonder  of  it, 
that  untutored  slaves  could  produce  such  music,  that  they  could  give 
forth  such  rhythm,  such  well  balanced  periods,  such  lofty  sentiments. 
He  loves  to  take  these  old  songs  and  build  them  into  something  new 
without  destroying  their  individuality.  He  loves  to  select  from  them 
his  themes,  to  be  adorned  in  classic  vestments.  He  loves  to  build 
harmonies  congenial  to  their  characteristics.  He  loves  to  feel  that 
he  is  working  with  something  original,  separate  and  apart,  all  his 
own ;  he  loves  to  contemplate  the  future  life  of  this  music,  which  he 
believes  will  be  a  glorious  transformation. 

The  author  generally  regards  this  music  from  an  historical  and 
psychological  viewpoint.  To  him  it  is  a  reliable  account  of  our 
people's  past.  It  tells  of  their  suffering  and  how  they  bore  them, 
of  their  joys  and  how  they  expressed  them,  of  their  lives  and  how 
they  lived  them,  how  deep  and  dark  were  the  depths  into  which  they 
sank,  what  obstacles  they  had  to  surmount.  It  describes  the  very 
tissue  of  their  souls.  In  short,  it  tells  the  stuff  of  which  the  Negro 
is  made.  With  this  as  a  source  of  facts  and  inspiration,  the  author 
is  conscious  of  a  power  enabling  him  to  present  effectively  the  cause 
of  his  people  before  the  bar  of  humanity. 

Those  of  the  second  generation  of  freedom  who  have  lived  in  the 
North,  have  been  more  positively  and  deeply  affected  in  their  regard 
for  their  racial  possessions  and  characteristics  than  any  other  class. 
They  have  come  nearer  experiencing  civic  and  political  freedom  than 
their  brothers  in  the  South,  and  have  had  their  racial  bonds  greatly 
weakened.  They  simply  hate  the  thought  of  slavery,  despise  any 
reference  to  it,  and  turn  away  from  anything  that  reminds  them  of 
it.  They  naturally  care  nothing  for  the  songs  born  in  slavery.  They 
see  no  beauty  in  them,  nothing  commendable,  nothing  worth  while. 
They  do  not  study  them,  because  obviously  they  are  not  fit  subjects 
for  serious  thought.  Among  this  group,  Negro  Folk  Music  finds 
least  favor. 

There  are  some  schools  attended  largely  by  northern  Negroes 
where  the  students  flatly  refuse  to  sing  these  songs.  This  is  due 
to  the  fact  that  these  students  have  the  idea  (which  is  often  correct) 
that  white  people  are  looking  for  amusement  in  their  singing.    Some 


^YHAT  THE  NEGRO'S  MUSIC  MEANS  TO  HIM.  H9 

Negroes  enjoy  being  laughed  at,  but  they  are  not  found  in  the  schools. 
The  same  students  assume  the  attitude  that  the  rest  of  the  world 
concedes  to  the  Negroes  the  ability  to  execute  well  their  own  music, 
but  it  is  beyond  them  to  understand  and  execute  the  classics,  and 
any  attempt  to  do  this  is  presumptious.  To  them,  this  is  another 
form  of  circumscription  which  has  been  a  hindrance  and  handicap. 
They  cannot  afford  to  recognize  any  limitation,  except  those  which 
confine  the  abilities  of  the  whole  human  race.  Some  look  upon  this 
music  with  disfavor,  because  they  simply  cannot  do  otherwise.  They 
have  been  thoroughly  overwhelmed  by  that  powerful  propaganda, 
which  aims  at  impressing  upon  the  Negro  his  nothingness,  or  at  best 
his  inferiority  to  other  races.  In  their  desperate  effort  to  prove  they 
are  something,  they  fatuously  struggle  to  abandon  that  self  which 
the  world  deems  inferior,  and  to  become  some  other  self.  They  re- 
pudiate everything  which  bears  the  stamp  of  race.  It  is  cause  for 
sincere  congratulation  to  ourselves  that  this  class  is  growing  pro- 
portionally smaller  as  time  passes.     It  will  finally  disappear. 

To  those  of  the  second  generation  of  freedmen  who  live  in  the 
South,  these  songs  are  a  source  of  encouragement.  They  read  their 
story  with  open  minds  and  hearts.  They  tell  the  story  of  our  fathers' 
agony,  the  cleansing  fire  into  which  they  were  cast.  It  tells  how 
they  emerged  from  the  fires  unharmed  and  without  the  smell  of 
smoke  upon  their  garments,  how  character  was  brightened  and  faith 
strengthened.  It  tells  our  fathers'  sublime  standard  of  spirituality, 
which  their  children  must  make  their  very  own.  When  they  read 
this  story  and  comprehend  its  meaning,  when  they  catch  the  vision 
of  the  past,  joyfully  cry,  "Thanks.be  to  God  for  our  fathers!"  To 
be  children  of  such  forbears  is  a  blessed  inspiration ;  to  be  the  heirs 
of  such  wealth  of  wisdom  as  our  fathers'  songs  is  in  itself  tran- 
scendant. 

"Keep  a-inching,  Keep  a-inching  along, 
Jesus  will  come  bye  and  bye; 
Keep  a-inching  along  like  a  poor  inch  worm, 
Jesus  will  come  bye  and  bye." 

"Goin'  to  hold  out  to  the  end, 
Goin'  to  hold  out  to  the  end ; 
Let  trials  come  as  they  will  come, 
Goin'  to  hold  out  to  the  end." 


120  FOLK  SONG  OF  THE  AMERICAN  NEGRO. 

"Made  my  vow  to  the  Lord, 
And  I  never  will  turn  back; 
I  will  go,  I  shall  go, 
To  see  what  the  end  will  be." 

"He  sees  all  you  do, 
He  hears  all  you  say ; 
My  Lord  is  writing  all  the  time. 
Run,   Mourner,   run, 
Low,  says  the  Bible ; 
Run,  Mourner,  run 
Low  is  the  way." 

"Prayer  is  the  key  to  Heaven, 
Faith  unlocks  the  door." 

These  are  some  of  the  golden  thoughts  of  which  these  songs  are 
full.  They  are  ever  calling  us  from  discouragement  and  fears,  they 
lead  us  to  face  with  confidence  the  hostile  forces  of  life.  Because  we 
have  such  fathers  and  such  inheritance,  w^e  are  ashamed  not  to  be 
striving  ever  and  ever  onwTard  and  upward,  we  are  ashamed  not  to 
do  our  best.  It  nerves  us  to  fight.  To  their  understanding  of  our 
fathers  more  than  to  any  other  cause,  is  due  this  agreeable  difference 
between  this  second  generation  of  southern  Negroes  and  other  classes. 
In  conclusion  it  must  be  stated  that  though  the  different  groups  are 
affected  in  their  regard  for  this  music,  by  time,  place,  and  environ- 
ment and  consequently  make  different  manifestations  of  their  regard, 
deep  down  in  their  hearts  they  share  a  common  feeling.  Though  all 
may  not  sing  these  songs  openly,  they  sing  them  in  their  souls.  They 
are  a  part  of  the  very  breath  they  breathe,  and  of  the  life  they  live. 
They  influence  their  lives  and  help  mould  their  character. 


WHAT  THE  XEGRO'S  MUSIC  1IEAXS  TO  HIM. 


121 


SWING  LOW 


-0-T 


-0—- 


$ £ ?•- 


Fine. 


.*.  X  B  I  x  J*  >  j  /  £  Jr?rfl 

p-=— 0 ^— -• — 0-r— 0— — 0 — 0 — 0-^— %—  \-0---\i 


home.  Swing  low,  sweet  char  -  i  -  ot,    Com-ing    for    to    car  -  ry    me  home. 


an 
-*  -0 


WHP- 


— V- 

V  - 


m \ 0 0 0—J—0 0 0 a — i I 

0 ^_^ 1 ___ 0 gJ-s-J 


1.  I      looked  o     -     -     ver    Jor  -  dan,    and   what  did      I  see, 

2.  If  you  get  there  be    -     -     fore  I  do, 

3.  I'm    some  *    -    -     times  up,  I'm  some  -   times      down, 


f,  *       \ 

-A       -*         ft 

[> 

N 

«*~"^ 

f*        n 

V   "        \          \           N 

N       -£       m    • 

v     * 

r        p        si 

t\                   R 

N       «            i 

* 

• 

#          #         #    * 

,«* 

_ 

w 

\>  J 

p 

#      1 

3      I     $     i 

Com-ing      for 
Com-ing      for 
Com-ing      for 

m          0    •      0    . 

I 

to      car  -  ry 
to      car  -  ry 
to      car  -  ry 

j0.      a.  . 

* 

me  home? 
me  home ; 
me  home ; 

1 
0         0  • 

band 
all 
still 

"1 

A 

Tell 
But 

JS. 

of       an  -  gels 
my  friends  I'm 
my    soul     feels 

(m\*  *t     m        0*0- 

p 

sz, 

»  • 

^3-    H       ' 5 

— * yf- • — 

\  Vl 

=H 

~ 

^-=^ • ^ • — 

a 

0 — Hi      ' 

— • — 

' 

1 

1 

± 


-± 


35 


dfe 


=fc 


m 


com  -  ing      af  -  ter       me.         Com  -  ing      for 

com       -       ing  too,         Com  -  ing      for 

heav  -  en     -     ly  bound,      Com  -  ing      for 

.0 0-> 0 


car  -  ry 

car  -  ry 
car  -  ry 

.0.      -k. 


me  home, 

me  home, 

me  home. 

-»-  -  . 


• — ^ ^ y — s — p 1 — — . 1 

^ ^ ^ y 1 0        •  I 


122  FOLK  SONG  OF  THE  AMERICAN  NEGRO. 


CHAPTER  X. 


A  Painted  Picture  of  a  Soul. 


"To  seek  the  truth,  wherever  it  leads, 
*    To  live  the  life  of  Love,  whatever  it  costs; 
This  is  to  be  the  friend  and  helper  of  God." 

IT  is  with  a  full  sense  of  responsibility  and  of  accountability,  and, 
I  hope,  it  is  with  due  reverence  that  I  shall  now  lead  you,  dear 
reader,  into  the  presence  of  a  soul, — this  "sanctum  sanctorum  of 
life,"  stripped  of  every  covering  which  civilization  has  thrown  about 
it,  the  naked  Ego  of  our  race.  It  must  seem  the  climax  of  presump- 
tion and  the  essence  of  blasphemy  to  make  even  the  slightest  pretense 
of  laying  open  the  well-springs  of  our  life,  and  presenting  to 
view  the  very  essence  of  that  which  gives  us  class,  name,  and  distinc- 
tion from  other  men.  My  apology?  In  these  days  of  misunderstand- 
ing, injustice,  and  readjustments,  when  the  best  in  man  is  fighting 
for  the  right,  when  the  spirit  of  brotherhood  is  waging  so  heroic  a 
struggle  for  supremacy,  whose  victory  means  the  efficaciousness  of 
Christ's  death ;  in  the  presence  of  these  portentous  facts,  any  thought 
which  can  shed  so  much  as  one  ray  of  light  upon  the  darkness  of  the 
struggle  ought  to  be  expressed. 

There  should  not  be  so  many  unanswered  questions  about  the 
Negro.  Since  he  is  so  momentous  a  problem,  he  ought  to  be  studied 
scientifically  and  the  truth  about  him  sought,  found,  and  proclaimed. 
Of  all  the  problems  that  face  the  human  race,  the  problem  of  the 
Negro  is  the  least  scientifically  studied.  It  is  far  and  away  the  most 
important  problem  which  is  before  our  country  for  solution,  and  it 
is  the  most  unwisely  treated. 

The  black  man  is  a  great  obstruction  to  the  white  man's  Chris- 
tianity. Except  for  the  Negro  the  principle  of  brotherhood  would 
doubtless  be  in  forceful  operation  to-day;  now  it  is  a  mountainous 
difficulty  for  the  white  man  to  accept  the  black  man  as  brother,  but 
it  is  an  eternal  verity  that  Christianity  can  never  reach  its  ultimate 
saving  power,  it  can  never  put  forth  its  full  flower  of  perfection 
until  every  man  accepts  every  other  man  as  his  brother.     Brother- 


A  PAIXTED  PICTURE  OF  A  SOUL.  123 

hood  is  the  business  of  life.  With  these  words  of  explanation,  let  us 
go  on  to  the  sanctum.  Our  journey  will  lead  us  through  a  tangled 
waste;  it  will  be  necessary  to  clear  away  and  tear  up  by  the  roots 
much  that  civilization  has  produced,  for  some  of  the  traits  which 
men  call  characteristic  of  Negro  soul,  are  the  plain  excrescences  of 
civilization;  which,  although  they  influence  him,  are  not  essential 
but  accidental. 

To  be  sure,  the  black  man  is  afflicted  with  many  of  the  defects 
and  weaknesses  with  which  other  men  are  afflicted,  and  like  all  other 
branches  of  the  human  family,  he  is  fearfully  and  wonderfully  made; 
these  faults  are  characteristic  of  the  genus  homo,  and  not  peculiar 
to  the  Ethiopian  species.  The  faults  of  humanity  are  well  known ; 
it  is  ours  to  seek  the  unknown,  the  soul  of  the  American  Negro.  How- 
ever it  may  seem,  it  is  not  fanciful  to  portray  the  'Tainted  Picture 
of  a  Soul"  in  colors  of  music.  This  music  is  his  own;  and  the  only 
means  of  expressing  his  life.  Folk  Song  is  the  unguarded,  spon- 
taneous expression  of  a  people's  soul.  It  is  their  natural  means  of 
communication,  which  they  understand  among  themselves.  We  know 
for  a  fact  that  it  was  never  intended  that  the  world  should  under- 
stand the  slave  music.  It  was  a  kind  of  secret  pass-word  into  their 
lives.  In  some  instances  their  secrets  are  protected  by  dual  meanings 
to  their  songs.  "Steal  Away  to  Jesus"  meant  to  the  slave  a  secret 
meeting  which  the  master  had  prohibited ;  and  to  the  overseer  and  the 
rest  of  the  world,  a  longing  for  the  quiet  communion  with  God. 
"Bise !  Shine !  For  the  Light  is  a-Coming !"  meant  to  the  slave,  free- 
dom approaching!  To  the  world  it  was  the  Messianic  prophecy. 
"Keep  a-Inching  Along,  Jesus  Will  Come  Bye  and  Bye,"  means  to 
the  slave  that  freedom  would  come  in  answer  to  faithful  prayer  and 
service;  to  the  world,  conversion.  "Great  Camp  Meeting  in  the 
Promised  Land"  and  "Good  News,  the  Chariot's  a-Coming,  Don't  Yer 
Leave  Me  Behind"  were  to  the  slaves  prophecies  of  the  joys  of  free- 
dom; to  the  uninitiated,  anticipations  of  joy  in  Heaven. 

Man  generally  tells  the  truth  in  secret.  "As  a  man  thinketh  in 
his  heart,  so  is  he,"  and  he  will  generally  express  what  he  thinks  if 
he  is  not  to  be  charged  with  it  afterwards.  This  was  just  the  atti- 
tude, condition,  and  environment  of  the  Xegro  slave.  So  the  only 
source  of  authentic  information,  the  only  reliable  source  of  truth  in 
regard  to  the  fundamentals  of  his  character,  is  his  songs.  In  making 
this  investigation  extending  over  a  decade,  all  available  publications 


124  FOLK  SONG  OF  THE  AMERICAN  NEGRO. 

were  consulted,  all  possible  byways  and  highways  were  searched, 
as  many  ex-slaves  as  possible  were  conferred  with,  and  every  available 
person  who  knew  anything  was  questioned.  From  these  sources  there 
have  been  gathered  about  five  hundred  songs  and  fragments  of  sungs. 
These  have  all  been  analyzed  and  their  thoughts  and  sentiments 
gathered.     These  are  the  colors  in  which  the  soul  is  painted. 

The  first  is  the  rich  color  of  Home  Love,  as  expressed  in  the  home 
songs.  It  is  a  striking  fact  that  the  best  known  and  the  most  dearly 
beloved  of  Stephen  Foster's  songs  are  his  best  imitations  of  the  Ne- 
gro Folk  Songs,  and  they  sing  the  love  of  home.  "The  Old  Folks  at 
Home"  and  "Kentucky  Home"  are  generally  classed  as  Negro  music. 
In  his  very  life,  the  black  man  portrays  himself  a  home-loving  being. 
He  is  no  willing  wanderer,  and  whatever  spot  he  adopts  as  his  home 
has  his  full  devotion.  "Way  Down  Upon  the  Sewanee  Kiver"  paints 
for  him  a  vision  of  love  and  happiness.  So  strong  are  these  home  ties 
that  Heaven,  Canaan,  the  Promised  Land,  and  the  Kingdom,  mean 
nothing  more  nor  less  than  home.  As  glorious  as  he  knows  Heaven  to 
be  with  all  its  joys,  peace,  rest,  crowns,  harps,  robes,  angels,  and  God, 
home  comprehends  it  all. 

The  next  is  the  powerful  color  of  prayer.  It  is  one  of  the  em- 
phatic forces  of  his  soul. 

"Ask  and  it  shall  be  given, 
Seek  and  you  shall  find, 
Knock  and  the  door  shall  be  opened." 

"Prayer  is  the  key  of  Heaven." 

If  there  is  any  life  to  which  prayer  means  more  than  to  that  of 
the  Negro,  in  what  part  of  God's  universe  can  it  be  found?  Who  has 
tested  the  power  of  prayer  more  severely  than  he?  Who  has  proved 
more  than  he  its  efficacy?  Not  only  in  his  closet  and  on  his  knees 
has  he  lifted  up  his  heart  in  petition,  but  he  has  sped  his  pleadings 
on  the  pinions  of  song. 

"O  Lord,  O  my  Lord — 
O  my  Good  Lord — 
Keep  me  from  sinking  down." 

"Lord,  I  want  to  be  like  Jesus 
In-a  my  heart." 


A  PAIXTED  PICTURE  OF  A  SOUL.  125 

This  Jesus,  like  whom  he  prayed  to  be,  was  the  One  he  knew  to 
have  been  the  Great  Servant,  the  One  who  said  He  came  not  to  be 
ministered  unto,  but  to  minister,  and  this  spirit  of  service  is  one  of 
the  regnant  forces  of  his  own  life.  This  life  of  service  from  one  view- 
point was  apparently  wrought  out  by  a  superior  power  well-nigh 
irresistible,  the  system  of  slavery,  but  away  down  under  the  over- 
whelming and  crushing  force  was  that  humble  sacrificing  spirit, 
which  though  misguided,  misdirected  and  over-awed,  still  had  the 
essence  of  Christlikeness. 

Humility  was  taught  him  by  every  power  of  nature.  He  learned 
from  the  heavens,  the  mountains,  the  storms,  and  the  will  of  mas- 
ters, that  his  duty  was  to  be  humble.    He  sang  humility  in — 

"Live  a  humble." 

"Lord,  make  me  more  humble."' 

"Lord,  I  want  to  be  more." 

"Takes  a  humble  soul  to  join  us, 
In  the  army  of  the  Lord." 

"Low  is  the  way — " 

"Heaven  is  so  high,  and  I  am  so  low, 
I  don't  know  if  I'll  ever  get  to  Heaven  or  no." 

It  is  a  great  wonder  that  the  Negro,  during  the  period  which 
witnessed  the  birth  of  these  heart  songs,  should  make  any  expression 
of  love  for  the  world.  It  is,  of  course,  explainable  that  he  should 
love  his  own  kind,  those  of  his  own  blood,  who  were  suffering  with 
him,  but  that  he  should  express  love  for  God  who  permitted  his  suf- 
ferings, and  for  the  man  who  inflicted  them,  is  wonderful !  But  he 
did  in  forty  of  his  songs,  express  love  for  God  and  the  world,  which 
means  that  by  love  he  was  possessed  and  mightily  ruled.  Otherwise, 
the  blight  of  desolation  would  have  hovered  where  the  smile  of 
prosperity  beamed  upon  our  land.  For  love  is  stronger  than  hate, 
and  is  ever  engaged  in  the  sanctification  of  the  heart  wherein  it 
abides.  It  were  valueless  to  wage  any  discussion  as  to  the  causes 
that  produce  this  phenomenon  of  a  suffering  slave,  manacled  and 


126         FOLK  SONG  OF  THE  AMERICAN  NEGRO. 

shackled,  singing  and  living  a  brotherly  love,  the  all  important  fact 
is  that  this  phenomenon  was  a  real,  live  force  in  the  heart  of  these, 
God's  children. 

One  of  the  noblest  fruits  of  love  is  patience.  Because  God's  black 
child  loved  his  Father,  he  was  willing  to  accept  as  wise  his  Father's 
dispensation,  and  walk,  almost  without  complaint  or  question  the 
dark,  stormy,  thorny  path  he  could  not  see,  and  endure  meekly  the 
sorrow-laden  life  which  he  could  not  understand.  Because  he  loved 
his  fellows,  he  was  willing  to  bear  with  their  shortcomings,  feeling 
that  if  he  should  "wait  a  little  while,"  man's  humanity  would  assert 
itself,  and  bring  to  him  opportunity  and  happiness,  all  the  more  ex- 
tensive and  deep  because  he  endured  so  long  and  so  painfully.  In 
the  awful  struggle  between  inhumanity  and  patience,  patience 
triumphed,  and  patience  triumphant  is  what  the  slave  has  wrought 
out  and  presented  to  the  world,  and  still  he  cries,  "Lord,  make  me 
more  patient." 

It  is  the  common  way  of  the  world  to  class  love,  patience,  and 
meekness  among  the  fragile  pulchritudes  of  human  character,  and 
to  stamp  as  weak  and  pusillanimous  those  persons  whom  these  qual- 
ities dominate.  It  is  the  world's  way  of  thinking  that  character,  to 
be  admirable,  must  be  a  live  kinetic  energy,  moving  things  before  it 
or  drawing  them  in  the  wake.  Many  powerful  personalities,  with- 
out any  dirigent  love  for  their  fellows  to  make  them  benefactors,  have 
called  forth  clamorous  praises  from  the  world,  because  they  could 
"make  things  go"  or  could  "do  things."  And  much  of  the  world  has 
refused  to  accept  as  its  standard  the  one  perfect  character  because 
he  did  not  overcome  his  enemies  and  build  up  his  kingdom  by  force. 
But  as  the  years  come  on,  bringing  the  exigencies  and  crises  in 
human  affairs  that  try  men's  souls,  the  world  is  most  assuredly 
recognizing  the  efficacy  and  beneficence  of  force  ruled  by  love,  pa- 
tience, and  meekness. 

Patience  breathes  through  all  the  Negro's  songs,  yet  though  he 
has  loved,  has  been  patient  and  meek  almost  to  such  a  degree  that  the 
world  has  sometimes  thought  him  cowardly,  there  is  abundant  proof 
both  in  his  music  and  in  his  life,  that  the  blood  of  a  coward  flows 
not  in  his  veins.    The  most  striking  of  his  martial  songs  are : 


A  PAINTED  PICTURE  OF  A  SOUL.  127 

"March  on,  and  you  shall  gain  the  victory — 
March  on,  and  you  shall  gain  the  day." 

"We  want  no  cowards  in  our  band, 
We  call  for  valiant  hearted  men — " 

"O  brethren,  rise,  shine,  give  God  the  glory, 
For  the  year  of  Jubilee." 

"Do  you  want  to  be  a  soldier, 
For  the  year  of  Jubilee?" 

"Rise,  shine,  for  thy  light  is  a-coining." 

"I  intend  to  fight  and  never  stop, 
Until  I  reach  the  mountain  top." 

"O,  what  do  you  say,  brother? 
O,  what  do  you  say,  brother, 
O,  what  do  you  say,  brother, 
About  this  Gospel  War?" 

"I  will  die  in  the  field, 
Stay  in  the  field, 
Stay  in  the  field,  brother, 
Stay  in  the  field, 
Until  the  War  is  ended." 

"Fight,"  "battle,"  and  "war"  are  important  words  in  his  vocabu- 
lary, and  his  record  for  courage  shames  him  not.  The  slaves  who 
faced  perennial  dangers  while  protecting  inviolate  the  women,  chil- 
dren, and  homes  of  their  absent  masters;  the  multitudes  of  freedmen 
who  met  and  overcame  unspeakable  opposition  during  those  dark, 
uncertain  days  following  the  Emancipation  Proclamation;  Crispus 
Attucks,  in  Boston,  Massachusetts;  Peter  Salem,  at  Bunker  Hill; 
the  men  wiio  stood  with  Jackson  at  New  Orleans;  the  Fifty-fourth 
Massachusetts  wThich  smiled  at  death  before  Fort  Wagner;  those 
black  regiments  who  have  hallowed  the  West,  the  Philippines,  and 
the  West  Indies  with  their  blood ;  and  the  millions  in  civil  life  wTho 
are  forever  contending  in  mortal  combat  with  the  hydra  and  the 
fiery  dragon,  attest  the  Negro's  courage. 

Great  souls  are  souls  of  great  faith.  Great  faith  is  a  mighty 
weapon  for  fighting  battles  and  winning  victories.     No  faithless, 


128  FOLK  SONG  OF  THE  AMERICAN  NEGRO. 

doubting  soul  has  been  a  positive  blessing  to  mankind,  but  that  soul 
with  an  abiding,  immutable  belief  in  "omnipotent  righteousness"  has 
ever  been  the  "salt  of  the  earth,"  and  it  is  a  deep  satisfaction  to  the 
Negro  himself  that  he  is  no  doubter  but  a  positive  believer;  that 
his  own  soul  finds  no  overmatching  difficulty  in  holding  to  his  faith 
in  his  God,  but  that  he  willingly  trusts  to  omniscence,  fully  expect- 
ing the  final  triumph  of  justice.  Judged  by  his  own  soul-thoughts, 
if  there  can  be  any  comparison  of  virtues,  his  supreme  virtue  is  his 
faith ;  for  every  one  of  his  songs  is  a  song  of  faith.  It  is  true  that 
there  are  some  individual  songs  which  have  faith  for  a  theme,  such 
as — 

"All  1  want  is  a  little  more  faith  in  Jesus" ; 
"Faith  unlocks  the  door,"  and 
"Lord,  make  me  more  faithful," 

but  from  the  nature  of  the  case,  these  must  be  few,  for  faith  is  the 
all-pervading  power  of  all  the  Negro's  music. 

A  most  natural  consequence  of  having  faith  is  having  joy,  for 
the  soul  that  believes  that  all  things  will  eventuate  according  to  the 
laws  of  right,  and  that  "God's  in  his  Heaven,"  has  joy  in  his  security. 
Truly,  clouds  sometimes  overcast  the  skies,  but  these  are  only  inci- 
dents in  the  life  of  faith.  The  believer  can  smile  through  tears  and 
shout  Hallelujah!  in  a  minor  strain.  So,  for  every  sorrow  song  like 
"Nobody  Knows  the  Trouble  I  See,"  there  are  many  of  those  blasts 
of  joy,  like  "Great  Camp  Meeting,"  "Shout  All  Over  God's  Heaven," 
and  "Golden  Slippers."    The  Negro  has  the  habit  of  being  happy. 

His  endurance  is  a  child  of  his  faith  and  his  hope.  What  a  child 
it  is!  What  power!  What  prodigious  strength!  What  an  Atlas, 
bearing  what  a  world!  The  Maker  made  the  African  strong  that 
he  might  endure.  What  has  he  endured?  What  no  other  would, — 
cruel  wrath,  and  the  folly  of  man,  the  hidden  face  of  God,  Gethse- 
mane,  and  Calvary, — that  here  on  this  western  continent  oppor- 
tunity might  be  given  for  the  growth  of  a  nation  which  should  be 
a  mighty  instrument  in  the  strong  right  hand  of  God.  The  songs  of 
endurance  are  pointed  and  positive : 


A  PAINTED  PICTURE  OF  A  SOUL.  129 

"Goin'  to  hold  out  to  the  end, 
Let  trials  coine  as  they  will  come — " 

"Keepa--incbing  along;  Jesus  will  come  by  and  by." 

"Made  my  vow  to  the  Lord ; 
Never  will  turn  back ; 
I  will  go,  shall  go, 
To  see  what  the  end  will  be." 

"Stand  the  storm,  it  won't  be  long, 
We'll  anchor  by  and  by." 


His  soul  is  strengthened  with  hope,  else  why  would  he  strive,  en- 
dure, and  be  patient?  How  could  he?  If  he  had  not  been  sure  that 
a  better  day  was  coming,  all  that  remained  for  him  would  have  been 
renunciation  of  all  strivings  and  aspirations,  giving  himself  up  to 
the  things  of  this  wrorld,  exacting  an  eye  for  an  eye  and  a  tooth  for 
a  tooth.    He  sang  his  hope  in  such  songs  as — 

"Goin'  to  see  my  Jesus, 

"Goin'  to  see  my  Jesus, 
Some  of  these  mornings 
Hope  I'll  join  the  band." 

"I  hope  to  meet  my  brother  there, 
Who  used  to  join  with  me  in  prayer." 

Thus  we  find  faith,  hope,  patience,  endurance,  prayer,  joy,  cour- 
age, and  humility  and  the  love  of  mankind,  of  home,  and  of  God  to 
be  the  salient  qualities  of  the  Negro's  soul.  Such  is  the  testimony  of 
the  only  true  expression  of  his  soul,  his  songs.  Yet  were  there  no 
songs  to  record  these,  they  could  be  seen  reflected  in  his  life.  With 
these  virtues,  his  regnant  forces,  it  is  not  difficult  to  account  for  his 
progress.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  quite  difficult  to  understand  why 
he  receives  such  unbrotherly  treatment  at  the  hands  of  his  brothers. 
If  not  to  others,  it  is  certainly  a  wonder  to  the  later  generation  of 
Negroes,  that  in  spite  of  such  unwholesome  and  positively  pernicious 
conditions  as  the  system  of  slavery  generated,  our  forbears  possessed 
and  developed  such  souls,  and  although  the  story  brings  tears  to  our 
eyes,  our  hearts  swell  with  pride  that  we  can  claim  such  ancestors 


130  FOLK  SOXG  OF  THE  AMERICAN  XEGRO. 

many  of  whom  are  still  with  us  (blessed  be  their  beloved  heads!) 
with  their  sweet  inspirations. 

From  the  extent  to  which  the  different  qualities  of  the  Xegro  soul 
are  emphasized  it  is  clear  that  his  fundamentals  are  strong,  pure, 
and  abundant.  Also  it  would  seem  that  he  believes  more  in  the  effi- 
ciency of  the  propulsive  power  of  hope,  than  in  the  impulsive  power 
of  fear,  more  in  love  than  in  fear.  The  greatest  emphasis  was  laid 
upon  virtue  and,  as  Seneca  says : 

"Virtue,  alone,  raises  us  above  fears." 

The  picture  is  before  you :  Virtues  powerfully  blended  upon  an 
ample  background  of  love,  energized  by  the  spirit  of  the  eternal.  It 
is  not  a  picture  of  perfection,  for  there  are  daubings  here  and  there 
which  civilization  has  smeared,  but  these  are  overshadowed  by  the 
sublimity  of  the  artist's  conception.  This  picture,  although  most 
beautiful  to  us,  their  children,  cannot  express  all  there  is  of  our 
fathers'  souls,  for,  as  Bacon  says : 

"The  best  part  of  beauty  is  that  which  no  picture  can  express." 


A  PAINTED  PICTURE  OF  A  SOUL. 


131 


LORD,  I  WANT  TO  BE  A  CHRISTIAN 


nc  if 

I 

K        K        1 

-yVr  \ 

1 

K         !                1 

, 

| 

/    it  S4 

1          1          N 

IV          1 

i            J     J     d 

— •— - 

— 0 0 

— m A 1 1 1— 

—<% 

— 0     0     dr- 

1. Lord,     I 

2.  Lord,     I 

3.  Lord,     I 

4.  I    don't 

5.  Lord,     I 

want 
want 
want 
want 
want 

to  be     a 
to  be  more 
to  be  more 
to  be  like 
to  be  like 

Chris-tian   In 
lov  -  ing    In 
ho    -    ly     In 
Ju  -  das    In 
Je  -  sus     In 

*  r 

a    my 
a    my 
a    my 
a    my 
a    my 

1 — & 

heart, 
heart, 
heart, 
heart, 
heart, 

f3 

ill    a    my 
in    a    my 
in    a    my 
in    a    my 
in    a    my 

'■£  "*"  +^ 

/•vtf  5    'i        — 

m 

0       m 

fff 

•     #     # 

Pj*.^tt  H-            ™ 

™ 

_                p 

p       m 

^—    IF  3A 

Lj      '^      1 

*     -1- 

V 

F     1 

"     "     '      \ 

i-EiP 


I     I 


n: 


-#-  -0-  -0-  -0- 

\s  \s  ~v — ' 

heart,    Lord,  I     want     to  be      a     Chris-tian  In  a  my  heart, 

heart,   Lord,  I     want     to  be  more    lov  -  ing  In  a  my  heart, 

heart,   Lord,  I     want     to  be  more    ho  -  ly  In  a  my  heart, 

heart,       I  don't  want     to  be  like      Ju  -  das  In  a  my  heart, 

heart,    Lord,  I     want     to  be  like      Je  -  sus  In  a  my  heart. 


up 


Kefkaix. 

, 

h 

N      . 

1 

~A-S-5a    -      J— J-, 

\—7& 

~^ 

|— 25* 1 

^ 

ir5- - — 

-W                                                        ^ 

'       *      \~r 

f? 1 

(_ 

v*            « 

■      *      *      •         i 

m 

_.  #_ 

-f— 1 

fc 

>> 

™                  ,11 

i  M    r 

t> 

In    a    my     heart, 

In    a   mv     heart, 

£    £   £       £ 

-c==-# 1 • » » — i— {5» 

In 

V 

a   my      heart,.. 
In 

-•- 

-j — E 

f  1 

a    my 

f  f 

heart, 
i- 1 ■ 

4Jg   »u — —  — 1 1 1 p 

m 

-  • 

fr    k 

=^— 

E 

^-ft-- K — - — ' — ' 

i — ^_ 

4r-t= 

=t==  1 

3 


I 


I  I 

Lord,     I     want 


m 


m 


to     be 


=*=t 


1 i\ — n — i- 

a    Chris-tian     In      a     mv 


heart. 


*= 


N=^=t 


I 


*,         ^ 


The  Jubilee  Songs  and 
Fisk  University 

are  companion  facts.  Fisk  is  the  special  home  of 
the  Jubilee  music  and  gave  that  music  its  name. 
The  Jubilee  Singers  saved  Fisk  University,  as  has 
been  shown  in  this  book.  Fisk  has  always  paid  a 
great  deal  of  attention  to  music,  and  the  graduates 
of  the  School  of  Music  are  sought  for  by  many  more 
schools  than  can  be  supplied.  A  music  building  is 
a  crying  need.  Fisk  would  also  take  upon  herself 
new  and  larger  tasks  is  the  discovery  and  develop- 
ment of  the  folk  songs  of  the  South  and  in  their  forms 
of  service  among  the  musical  people  of  the  South. 
Dreams  of  great  service  wait  on  sufficient  resources. 
^J  Fisk  University  includes  a  standard  college  for 
Negro  education,  with  four -year  courses  in  Arts, 
Science,  Home  Economics  and  Education.  It  is 
expected  to  make  these  four  college  courses  ever 
increasingly  stronger  and  better.  This  will  involve 
larger  expenditures,  but  it  is  believed  that  friends  of 
education  will  help,  as  they  realize  "what  Fisk  and 
and  Fisk  graduates  are  doing  for  the  race  and  the 
nation.  Aid  is  solicited  in  sums  of  any  amount, 
from  very  small  to  very  large.  Whatever  aids  a 
student  to  live  at  Fisk  or  aids  Fisk  to  train  leaders 
of  high  power  and  keen  good  will,  will  strengthen 
the  nation  and  hasten  the  era  of  peace  of  earth. 
€J  Fisk  aims  to  train  leaders  in  education,  in  the 
church,  in  the  professions,  and  in  business.  The 
magnitude  of  the  "work  which  Fisk  shall  do  "will 
depend  upon  the  resources  placed  at  her  disposal. 


