This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 
to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 
to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 
are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  marginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 
publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  this  resource,  we  have  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 

We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  from  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attribution  The  Google  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  informing  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liability  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.  Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 


at|http  :  //books  .  google  .  com/ 


1 

THE 

NEW  YORK  PUBLIC  LIBRARY 

PRESENTED   BY 

...J)T. 

_Ar.t.hur.Purdj  .  Rtput 

20   Veh.    1914 

b 


^r.; 


IN  RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 


IN 

RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

A  GARDEN  OF  ASIA  AND 
ITS  PEOPLE 


BY 

ANNETTE  M.  B.  MEAKIN 

AUTHOR  OF  ''a  RIBBON  OP  IRON" 

FBLLOW  OF  THE  ANTHROPOLOGICAL  INSTITUTE  OF 

GREAT  BRITAIN  AND  IRELAND,    ETC 


"TX*  most  tavi^e  dominion  has  not  extirpated  the  seeds  of 
agricuhure  and  commerce^  in  a  region  tvhich  is  celebrated  as  one 
of  the  four  gardens  of  Asia.** — GiBBON. 


WITH  16  FULL-PAGE  ILLUSTR/.TIONS- 


LONDON  ^     " 

GEORGE  ALLEN,  156,  CHARING  CROSS  ROAD 

1903 

[All  rights  reserved} 


659*^86^ 


h  »y^4  L 


Printed  by  Ballantynb,  Hanson  ^  Co. 
At  the  Bkllantyne  Press 


TO 

HER  IMPERIAL   MAJESTY 

ALEXANDRA    FEODOROVNA 

EMPRESS   OF   ALL  THE   RUSSIAS 

THIS  PEN  AND  INK  SKETCH  OF 

HER  GARDEN  IN   ASIA 

IS  RESPECTFULLY  AND  GRATEFULLY 

DEDICATED 


PREFACE 

"  Tell  me,  ye  learned,  shall  we  for  ever  be  adding  so  much  to  the 
bulk— so  litUe  to  the  stock? 

*'  Shall  we  for  ever  make  new  books,  as  apothecaries  make  new 
mixtures,  by  pouring  only  out  of  one  vessel  into  another  ?  " 

—Sterne. 

This  volume  is  not  intended  to  be  a  compendium 
of  all  the  information  that  has  been  contributed 
by  previous  writers  on  Turkestan.  Had  it  been 
so  it  would  necessarily  have  swelled  into  thrice  its 
present  size.  It  is  simply  the  result  of  two  visits 
to  the  country  made  for  purposes  of  personal  ob- 
servation. Other  writers  have  occasionally  been 
quoted,  such  as  Vamb^ry,  Schuyler,  Schwarz  and 
Nalivkin;  but  all  these  and  many  more  must  be 
carefully  read  by  those  who  wish  to  gain  a  complete 
knowledge  of  Russian  Central  Asia,  especially  if 
they  wish  to  trace  its  progress  towards  civilisation 
during  the  last  thirty  or  forty  years.  Some  have 
thought  it  necessary  to  devote  chapters  to  a  descrip- 
tion of  allthe  Mohammedan  rites  and  ceremonies  of 
the  Sarts,  Turkomans  and  Kirgiz.  I  have  chosen 
rather  to  describe  a  few  of  those  in  which  Islam  in 
Central  Asia  differs  somewhat  from  Islam  in  other 
countries.  Two  years  spent  among  Mohammedans 
in  Morocco,  added  to  travels  among  the  Tatdrs,  in 


viii  PREFACE 

Kazan,  the  Crimea  and  Northern  Siberia,  the  Arabs 
in  Egypt  and  the  Turks  in  Constantinople  and  Pales- 
tine, have  been  my  chief  preparation  for  the  task. 
Its  accomplishment  is  due  to  the  kindness  of  his  Im- 
perial Majesty  the  Emperor  of  Russia,  who,  at  the 
instance  of  his  Excellency  Prince  Hilkoff,  Minister 
of  Ways  and  Communications,  graciously  granted 
me  special  facilities  for  travelling  in  his  Central  Asian 
dominions.  It  would  be  impossible  for  me  to  say 
how  much  I  owe  to  the  kindness  of  his  Excellency 
M.  Ivanoff,  the  Governor-General  at  Tashkent,  who 
provided  me  with  an  open  letter  to  officials  in  every 
part  of  his  territory,  and  to  that  of  Colonel  Horvat, 
Chief  of  the  Central  Asian  railways  at  Askhabad, 
who  placed  a  luxuriously  fitted-up  governor's  carriage 
entirely  at  my  disposal  for  the  whole  of  my  stay,  which 
would  have  covered  a  much  longer  period  had  .not 
circumstances  beyond  my  control  compelled  me  to 
return  to  England  early  in  March  1902. 

To  my  other  Russian  friends,  and  especially  to 
the  ladies  who  one  and  all  received  my  mother  and 
myself  with  such  warm  hospitality,  and  who  on 
many  occasions  accompanied  us  to  the  native  houses 
and  acted  as  our  interpreters,  I  also  owe  far  more 
than  I  can  possibly  express. 

A.  M.  B.  M. 

lONA,  August  29,  1903. 


CONTENTS 

PART   I 
THE    LAND  OF  TAMERLANE 

CHAPTER   I 
THE  SARTS 

PACE 

Early  connection  of  Russia  with  Central  Asia^Russia's  ad- 
vance— Fate  of  travellers  in  eighteenth  century — Russian 
colonisation— Chief  Sart  towns— Fate  of  Andijan— An- 
cestry of  the  Sarts — Traces  of  Arab  occupation — The 
terms  Uzbeg  and  Tajik — Native  histories — M.  Nalivkin*s 
theory — Native  opinions — Babar  Khan — Tajik  versus 
Uzbeg 3 

CHAPTER   II 

WHERE  WATER   IS   PRECIOUS 

Importance  of  agriculture— Oases  in  the  desert — Fruitfulness 
of  the  soil — Sjrstem  of  canals — The  Zarafshan — Russian 
engineers — An  Aryk  Aksakal 1 1 

CHAPTER   III 

TREES  AND  FRUITS 

The  ktxra  agalch — The  poplar — Luxuriant  foliage — Native 
partiality  for  the  willow— The  plantain — ^A  remarkable 
tree — Christmas-trees — Sart  superstitions — Forty  days 
underground — Evergreens — Nut  -  trees — Vines — Various 
fruits — ^The  best  melons  in  the  world — Apples  and  beauti- 

frd  women — Dates  from  Mecca i8 

ix 


.   I 

X  CONTENTS  ' 

CHAPTER  IV 
CULTIVATION  OF  COTTON 

PAGE 

Rice  fields — Native  bread  —  Millet  —  Sesamum  Indicum  — 
American  cotton — Effect  produced  on  the  country — 
Cotton  -  separating  machines — **  Good  middling  " — At 
Namangan — Uses  of  cotton  seed — Camels  carrying  cotton      29 


CHAPTER  V 

THE  SILK  INDUSTRY 

Combing  silk — Climate  favourable  for  silkworms — Export  of 
cocoons — **  Le  roi  des  grains  *' — Weeping  mulberry-trees 
— Weaving — Quality  of  the  silk — Cotton  taking  its  place 
— The  Russian  curio-dealer 36 


CHAPTER  VI 

GOVERNMENT  OF  NATIVE  TOWNS 

The  name  of  Turkestan— A  Central  Asian  Khanate— The 
Cush  Beggi—An  Amir  and  his  Begs—The  SchcUtenseite 
—Native  police— A  **  Head  of  fifty  "—Russian  supervi- 
sion— Military  matters— Kokand  armour         ...      44 


CHAPTER   VII 

DESCRIPTION  OF  SART  TOWNS 

Their  similarity — How  to  build  a  Sart  house — Properties  of 
the  clay — Clay  walls  for  defence — City  gates — Streets — 
Their  state  in  winter — Absence  of  windows— Uses  of 
the  bazaar — Buying  and  selling — My  own  experience — 
An  eye  to  business — The  tea-shop — An  afternoon  in  the 
bazaar  at  Kokand 51 


CONTENTS  xi 


CHAPTER  VIII 

THE  STRICTEST  MOHAMMEDANS  IN 
THE  WORLD 

PAOB 

Their  fanaticism — ^Whipped  to  church — Antiquity  of  the  Sart 
dress — Bokharan  dervishes — Opium — Ishans  and  their 
office — ^The  rising  in  Andijan — Mullahs — Degrees  of 
holiness — Pilgrims  to  Mecca — Pilgrimesses — ^Tomhs  of 
saints — Blind  be^;ars 64 


CHAPTER    IX 

SART  COLLEGES 

The  medresse —  Vakuf—Vzym&ai  of  professors — Interviewing 
a  student — Examinations — ^The  most  difficult  profession 
— ^A  student's  quarters — Russian  administration — Russian 
schools  for  Sart  children 77 


CHAPTER    X 

SART  SCHOOLS 

A  maktab — ^The  schoolmaster — His  salary — His  method  of 
teaching — ^A  girls*  school — A  thousand  books — ^A  young 
pupil — A  chat  with  the  schoolmistress — Another  girls' 
school — Caligraphy — Copy-book  maxims        ...      84 


CHAPTER  XI 

CHILDHOOD 

The  Sart  baby — Shape  of  the  head — Early  marriages — ^Young 
mothers — Pocket-money — Reading  aloud— Embroidery 
— Hatching  silkworms'  eggs — Plain  sewing — Active  old 
age 95 


xii  CONTENTS 

CHAPTER  XII 
SART  WOMEN 

PAGE 

Why  the  black  veil  is  worn — Interiors — Visiting  the  ladies — 
Sart  hospitality — Pretended  bashfiilness — Seclusion  of 
women — A  native  oven — Dress  and  personal  appearance 
—  Beautiful  hair — Joining  eyebrows  —  Complexions — 
Types  of  women — Outdoor  dress — Indoor  dress — Native 
jewellery — Boots io6 


CHAPTER   XIII 

MARRIAGE 

No  old  maids — Wedding  presents — Number  of  wives — Riches 
do  not  bring  happiness — The  matchmaker — Dancing 
girls — Facility  of  divorce — Strange  customs — Husbands 
and  wives — Thrift 137 


CHAPTER    XIV 

SART  COOKING 

No  kitchens — Butchers — Mutton — "  Why,  these  are  dogs  ! " — 
Watching  grandmamma  making /i/a» — Table  manners — 
The  PclmhU—Yrmi  syrup — The  staflf  of  life — Easter  eggs 
— Sweetmeats 147 


CHAPTER    XV 

NATIVE  BATHS 

The  women's  bath  at  Samarkand  —  Horrible  noise  —  The 
bathers — Before  the  glass — Stolen  garments — On  the 
ashes — Festivities  in  the  bath — Batchas — ''  Song  of  the 
Bulbul"— A  Sart  "  Punch  and  Judy  "—Card-playing     .     155 


CONTENTS  xiii 

CHAPTER  XVI 
COMMON  AILMENTS 

PAGB 

The  rishta — "  One  year  " — A  sick  man — Strange  treatment  of 
erysipelas — Kokand  goitre — Malarial  fever — Leprosy — 
Russian  lady  doctors — ^A  great  doctor — Funeral  rites — 
Mourning— Strict  etiquette 165 


CHAPTER  XVII 

ISRAEL  IN  CENTRAL  ASIA 

The  Bokharan  Jew — ^Jews  who  have  become  Moslems-— The 
prescribed  dress — Beauty  of  the  women — Polygamy — 
Synagogues — Pilgrims  to  Jerusalem — Scene  at  a  wedding    1 76 


CHAPTER  XVIII 

AFGHANS  AND  OTHERS 

An  A%han  chief— A^han  characteristics — Gipsies — Afghan 
prisoners — Dungans — Our  mounted  policeman — Origin 
of  the  Dungans — ^Tatirs — A  difl&cult  question — "Only 
ninety>eight "  —  Hindoo  money-changers — Strings  of 
camels 185 


CHAPTER  XIX 

ANIMALS  AND  INSECTS 

Modes  of  conveyance — Mounted  beggars — Donkeys — The 
dog — Bokharan  cats — Falcons — ^Wild  doves — Ducks  and 
turkeys — A  dreaded  enemy — Local  museums — Scorpions 
— Linurds — ^A  rare  fish 193 


xiv  CONTENTS 

CHAPTER  XX 
SART  FAIRY  TALES 

PAGE 

Piles  of  books—The  Forty  Viziers— The  Tiger  Story— The 

Cruel  Stepmother 201 


CHAPTER  XXI 
SOME   NATIVE  INDUSTRIES 

Paper-making — Kungans — A  family  trade — Silver  filigree- 
work — Carpets — The  cap  bazaar — Watching  the  whole 
process .        .        .        .    210 


CHAPTER  XXII 

TAMASHA 

Music — A  moonlight  drive — A  dwarf — ^The  Amir's  ball — ^The 
meaning  of  Tamasha — Questions  about  England — **  Bok- 
hara is  far  off"        .        .        .        .        .  .  217 


CHAPTER   XXIII 

THE  KIRGIZ 

Among  the  mountains — On  the  plains — Their  encampments — 
A  Kirgiz  servant — Sons  of  Noah — Stragglers  for  the 
mastery — Semi-nomads — Derivation  of  Uzbeg — Hatred 
of  the  census — No  fenaticism — ^The  Kirgiz  horse — Over 
the  steppe — Kirgiz  digestive  powers        .        .        .        .     225 


CONTENTS  .   XV 

PART   II 
REMINISCENCES 

CHAPTER  I 
TASHKENT  AND   SAMARKAND 

PAGE 

History  of  Tashkent — General  Kauffmann — Buildings — Ab- 
sence of  hotels — Chambres  gamis — Atrocious  cooking — 
Russian  streets — Scattered  houses — Arrival  in  Samarkand 
— Tamerlane's  tomb  —  Inscriptions  —  Shah  Zindah  — 
Mosque  of  Bibi-Kanim — Its  former  grandeur — Crowning 
the  Amirs — The  Rigistan — Plague  at  Samarkand — De- 
scendants of  the  Greeks 237 

CHAPTER   II 

KOKAND,  CHYUST,  AND  NAMANGAN 

A  fertile  province — Fine  nudresses — Native  money — Palace 
of  the  Khans — Close  of  Ramazan — Impressive  scenes — 
Russian  Kokand — Our  journey  by  tarantass — Post  stations 
— Arrival  at  Chyust — Namangan — ^The  prison — Monks 
from  Syria — Ancient  naphtha  wells — Russian  actors       .     251 

CHAPTER  III 

MARGELAN  AND  ANDIJAN 

A  twelve-hours'  drive — Crossing  the  Syr  Daria— **  El  hamdu 
rniah  "—Refreshments  by  the  way— Old  Margclan— 
New  Margelan — ^A  great  authority — ''  Alexander  Mace- 
donsky  " — Andijan — Its  history — The  earthquake— A 
letter  from  one  who  escaped 263 


xvi  CONTENTS 

CHAPTER  IV 

MY  FIRST  VISIT  TO  BOKHARA 

PAGE 

Crossing  the  Caspian— The  Chief  of  Police— Fellow-passengers 
— Passing  Bokhara — Our  return  thither — How  We  fared 
—The  fifth  day— Driving  to  the  station  ....     273 

CHAPTER   V 

MY  SECOND  VISIT  TO    BOKHARA 

The  Russian  Political  Agent — A  Sart  doctor's  prescription — 
Fanatical  Bokharans — Our  jigit — An  embarassing  ques- 
tion— The  Amir — The  Cush  Beggi — Days  of  slavery       .     279 


CHAPTER   VI 

AMONG  THE  TEKKE  TURKOMANS 

AtAskhabad — A  Turkoman  baby — Choice  of  a  name — Penjeh 
carpets — Freedom  of  the  women — A  proud  people — The 
market  at  Merv — Striking  bargains — A  Turkoman  mosque 
— Soap -making — Bairam  Ali — Monuments  of  Islam — 
Work  of  an  English  tourist  —  A  Merv  legend — The 
Emperor's  estate — Fertility  of  the  Merv  oasis — Cotton- 
cleaning — The  Turkoman  horse — A  Turkoman  wedding 
— The  river  Murgab — Homeward  bound         .        .        .    286 

INDEX 30s 


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS 


The  Author  in  Sart  Dress  .       .       .      Frontispiece 

Sart  Women  Spinning,  Old  Margelan    To  face  p,    39 

Amir's  Summer  Palace  near  Bokhara 

Sart  Children  in  Fergana   . 

A  Beggar  in  Kokand 

Sart  Woman  with  Veil  Lifted    . 

Wives  of  a  Wealthy  Sart    . 

Sart  Women  of  the  Middle  Class 

A  Sart  Lady  and  Child 

A  Sart  Butcher's  Shop  in  Fergana 

Kokand  Mullahs  and  Musicians 

Medrbsse  Shir  Dar 

A  Sart  and  his  Sons 

Turkoman  Women  Making  a  Carpet 

Ruins  of  Ancient  Merv 

Turkoman  Family,  Bairam  Ali    . 


fV      ,) 

40 

n 

S2 

» 

82 

» 

107 

» 

III 

)) 

127 

j> 

131 

•     >i 

147 

n 

217 

» 

247 

n 

269 

f> 

289 

» 

296 

j> 

298 

PART   I 
THE   LAND  OF  TAMERLANE 


IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 


CHAPTER   I 

THE  SARTS 

•  The  individuals  at  the  extremes  of  divergence  in  one  race  of 
n  are  as  unlike  as  the  wolf  to  the  lapd<^.    Yet  each  variety 

shades  down  imperceptibly  into  the  next,  and  yon  cannot  diaw  the 

line  where  a  race  begins  or  ends.*' — Emerson. 

As  early  as  the  twelfth  and  thirteenth  centuries, 
Russia  was  connected  by  commerce  with  the 
people  of  Central  Asia.  Khiva  and  Bokhara  sent 
their  caravans  across  her  steppes  to  Moscow  and 
Novgorod  long  before  she  had  risen  to  the  rank 
of  a  European  power,  but  it  was  not  until  1867 
that  Russian  troops  made  their  way  from  Siberia 
to  Tashkent  and  took  possession  of  the  province 
of  which  that  town  is  now .  the  capital.  On  the 
nth  of  June  in  that  year  the  General  Government 
of  Turkestan  came  into  existence.  Seventeen  years 
later,  on  the  i6th  of  March  1884,  Transcaspia, 
the  home  of  the  Turkomans,  also  became  Russian 
ground,  and  to-day  a  Governor-General  appointed  by 
the  Czar,  and  holding  a  position  equivalent  to  that  of 


4  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN, 

Lord  Curzon  and  Lord  Kitchener  rolled  into  one, 
watches  over  the  interests  of  a  territory  that  stretches 
from  the  shores  of  the  Caspian  to  the  Chinese  border. 
Some  day  he  will  be  called  a  Viceroy, 

The  story  of  Russia's  advance  into  Asia  has  been 
told  many  times.  After  the  taking  of  Merv  the 
country  was  at  last  safe  for  travellers,  and  the 
power  of  the  Turkomans  was  broken.  Brigands 
of  the  fiercest  type,  these  wild  people  had  blocked 
for  centuries  all  entrance  to  Central  Asia  by  way 
of  the  Caspian.  But  even  when  the  Russians  built 
their  military  railway  they  did  not  throw  the  new 
route  open  to  the  public,  and  to-day  no  traveller 
may  use  it  without  a  permit  from  St.  Petersburg. 
Hence  it  comes  that  we  have  so  few  books  on  the 
country,  and  know  so  little  about  it.  The  names 
and  the  fate  of  the  few  travellers  who  succeeded  in 
reaching  Bokhara  and  Samarkand  in  the  first  half  of 
the  nineteenth  century  are  known  to  us  all.  The 
two  English  officers,  Stoddard  and  Konolly,  who 
penetrated  to  Bokhara  from  India,  were  thrown  from 
the  top  of  the  criminal  tower  in  that  city.  Schlagin- 
tweit,  an  Austrian,  was  put  to  death  in  Kashgar, 
while  the  more  fortunate  Vamb6ry,  who  travelled  in 
the  disguise  of  a  dervish,  returned  in  safety  to  Hun- 
gary, where  he  still  enjoys  the  well-earned  reputation 
of  being  the  greatest  authority  on  the  people  of . 
Central  Asia.^ 

I  For  the  fate  of  Wolfe  see  Norman's  **  All  the  Russias." 


THE  SARTS  5 

Russian  Turkestan  is  peopled  partly  by  a 
sedentary  race  called  Sarts  and  partly  by  nomads, 
with  an  ever-increasing  number  of  foreigners  from 
European  Russia,  who  live  in  distinct  towns  of 
their  own,  just  as  the  English  do  in  India.  Wher- 
ever there  is  a  Sart  town  of  any  importance,  one 
finds  close  to  it,  and  bearing  the  same  name,  a 
thriving  Russian  colony,  which  has  its  own  church, 
its  own  clubs  and  schools,  and  its  own  public 
gardens. 

After  Tashkent  the  chief  Sart  towns  are  Samar- 
kand, Kokand,  Margelan,  Andijan,  Namangan  and 
Chyust,  though  perhaps  it  is  hardly  correct  to  class 
Andijan  among  the  rest  without  adding  the  lament- 
able fact  that  it  was  almost  completely  destroyed  by 
a  terrible  earthquake  in  December  1902.  Bokhara, 
of  ancient  fame,  may  also  be  classed  as  a  Sart 
town ;  it  grows  every  year  more  like  its  above- 
mentioned  neighbours,  though  the  Khanate  of  which 
it  is  the  capital  has  still  an  Amir  of  its  own,  and, 
like  Khiva,  can  boast  of  an  apparent  independence. 

The  Sarts  are  a  mixture  of  the  Indo-Germanic 
race — the  earliest  inhabitants  of  Turkestan — with 
every  other  race  that  during  the  last  two  thousand 
years  has  conquered  and  dwelt  in  the  land.  To 
use  a  homely  simile,  their  country  is  like  a  sieve 
through  which  many  varieties  of  the  humankind 
have  passed.  Take  out  the  residue,  boil  it  all  up 
together,  and  you  have  a  new  race — the  Sarts.     In 


6  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

some  towns  the  boiling  process  has  been  very 
thorough,  while  in  others  it  has  been  less  so. 
Persians,  Greeks,  Arabs,  Chinese,  Huns,  Mongols, 
Kirgiz  and  Uzbegs  all  have  passed  through  the 
sieve,  besides  many  more  with  whose  names  we  are 
less  familiar. 

The  Arabs  left  behind  them  the  Koran,  and  con- 
sequently much  of  their  language.  In  Margelan 
there  are  still  a  few  families  who  call  their 
movable  dwellings  arabesy  and  who  trace  their 
genealogies  back  to  the  Arab  conquerors.  A 
certain  village  in  Fergana  still  bears  an  Arab 
name,  which  is  accounted  for  by  a  legend  that  the 
enemy  surprised  a  party  of  Arabs  by  night,  just  as 
they  had  halted  and  lit  their  fires  in  preparation 
for  supper.  The  cook,  in  his  trepidation,  fell  into 
the  flames  and  was  burned  to  death,  whereupon 
his  supperless  and  sorrowing  friends  called  the 
spot  Kuryug  Mezar  ("  the  place  of  burning  ")  in  his 
memory. 

Every  traveller  who  has  attempted  to  describe 
the  Sarts  has  mentioned  the  strong  Mongolian 
element  that  betrays  itself  so  unmistakably  in 
their  physiognomy,  but  no  Sart  will  ever  tell  you 
that  he  is  of  Mongol  origin.  When  you  put  the 
question,  as  I  have  put  it  scores  of  times,  "  What 
is  your  nationality  ?  "  the  answer  is  invariably,  "  I 
am  an  Uzbeg,"  or  ''  I  am  a  Tajik."  According  to 
native  histories  the  Mongols  were  one  of  the  ninety 


THE  SARTS  7 

and  odd  tribes  into  which  the  hordes  of  Ghengis 
Khan  were  divided,  while  the  term  Uzbeg  is  applied 
collectively  to  those  tribes  who  owned  allegiance  to 
the  four  sons  of  Ghengis. 

The  Uzbegs  were  the  last  ingredient  to  be  poured 
through  our  sieve ;  that  is  to  say,  they  were  the  last 
conquerors  of  the  land.  They  gave  the  Sarts  their 
language — ^Turki — and  it  is  from  their  rulers  that 
the  reigning  Amirs  of  Khiva  and  Bokhara  are  de- 
scended. Some  of  the  Uzbegs  have  abandoned  their 
nomadic  life  and  become  entirely  sedentary,  others 
have  partially  abandoned  it,  while  others  again 
have  remained  nomads  in  the  full  sense  of  the 
term.  All  of  them,  except  the  first  named  and 
the  Kipchaks  and  the  Karakalpaks,  are  distinguished 
by  the  Russians  as  Kirgiz. 

M.  Nalivkin,  who  has  studied  the  subject  carefully 
during  his  long  residence  among  the  Sarts,  is  op-  * 
posed  to  the  prevailing  opinion  that  the  term  "  Sart" 
is  one  of  contempt  given  by  the  nomadic  Uzbegs 
to  their  sedentary  brethren;  he  afSrms  that  there 
is  now  in  existence  a  tribe  of  that  very  name.  He 
has  met  not  unfrequently  with  the  name  of  "  Sart- 
Bey "  in  Kirgiz  families.  "  I  own,"  he  writes,  "that 
the  Kirgiz  often  give  strange  names  to  their  chil- 
dren, but  they  never  give  names  conveying  an 
idea  of  contempt.  The  probability  is  that  the  first 
tribe  from  the  hordes  of  Ghengis  that  gave  up  its 
roving  life  was  one  bearing  the  name  of  Sart" 


8  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

Until  the  Uzbegs  came  the  Persian  element  had 
predominated  in  many  of  the  towns,  and  the  Sart 
who  tells  you  he  is  a  Tajik  is  one  whose  family, 
not  having  mixed  with  the  conquering  Uzbegs,  has 
retained,  more  or  less,  the  Persian  tongue  and  type. 
A  learned  Sart  in  Margelan  told  me  that  the  earliest 
inhabitants  of  Fergana  were  fire- worshippers,  people 
called  "  Tojeliks,''  because  their  king  wore  a  crown 
and  was  known  as  "  Tajik."  He  also  asserted  that 
the  word  "Sart"  meant  "stout  and  round,"  and 
that  the  term  Aad  been  first  used  by  the  Kirgiz 
to  distinguish  the  sedentary  population  from  them- 
selves. Another  native  sage  whom  I  visited  in 
Andijan  fetched  out  two  great  books  when  I  ques- 
tioned him  about  the  history  of  his  race,  and 
translated  for  my  benefit  certain  passages  which 
it  took  him  a  long  time  to  find.  They  were  to  the 
effect  that  Andijan  was  the  first  Sart  town,  and 
that  the  eldest  son  of  Ghengis  Khan  had  settled 
there  with  his  followers.  He  turned  over  the 
leaves  of  the  smaller  of  the  two  volumes  with 
particular  reverence.  "This  book,"  he  said,  "was 
written  by  a  wise  man  who  was  chief  of  this  very 
town  three  hundred  years  ago.  India  belonged  to 
him  before  the  English  took  it.  He  wrote  his  own 
life,  and  when  he  died  he  was  buried  in  Kabul. 
His  name  was  Bdbar  Khan."^    Yet  M.  Nalivkin 

^  Bdbar  in  exile  founded  a  grandiose  empire,  but  Bdbar  in  the 
home  of  his  fore&thers  was  but  a  little  prince  among  many  rivals. 
^*'Bddar,"  by  Stanley  Lane-Poole, 


THE  SARTS  9 

writes  that  Sultan  Bihar  is  hardly  known  by  name 
to  the  Sarts.  He  showed  his  writings  to  some 
of  the  most  learned  natives  in  Fergana,  and  found 
that  they  had  never  even  heard  of  them.  " Bihar" 
he  writes,  'Ms  in  bad  repute  in  Fergana;  there  is 
only  one  legend  there  about  him.  One  day  a 
voice  was  heard  from  Heaven  saying,  'Kill  the 
Khan  Bihar,  kill  him,  kill  him.'  So  the  people  fell 
upon  him  and  killed  him." 

Some  writers  speak  of  the  Tajiks  as  being  in 
every  way  a  superior  type  of  humanity  to  the 
Uzbegs,  but  my  own  experience  and  the  opinions 
expressed  to  me  by  Russians  living  amongst  them 
have  inclined  me  to  the  opposite  opinion.  In  such 
towns  as  Bokhara  and  Samarkand,  where  the  two 
live  side  by  side,  the  Uzbeg  is  found  to  be  the  more 
intelligent,  the  more  active,  and  the  more  pleasant 
to  deal  with.  The  Tajik  is  apt  to  be  slinking  and 
cowardly,  and  ready  to  fawn  upon  a  dreaded  foe ; 
while  the  Uzbeg,  though  outwardly  of  a  rougher 
cast,  has  a  touch  of  real  chivalry  in  his  character. 
I  remember  hearing  a  Russian  say  that  it  was  the 
preponderance  of  Tajik  blood  in  Bokhara  which 
led  that  Khanate  to  submit  to  the  Czar  without  a 
struggle,  whereas  it  was  the  Uzbegs  of  Kokand 
who  resisted  so  stoutly.  Having  heard  much  about 
the  fanaticism  of  the  Bokharans,  I  asked  a  Russian 
in  Bokhara  whether  his  government  distrusted  the 
Amir. 


lo  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

"Can  you  distrust  your  own  pocket-handker- 
chief?" was  the  quick  reply. 

The  Tajik  carries  the  palm  for  good  looks,  at 
least  according  to  our  ideas  of  beauty.  He  has 
the  dark,  expressive  eye  and  the  regular  features  of 
his  Persian  ancestors.  He  decks  himself  out  in 
bright  colours  that  enhance  his  comeliness,  and 
the  result  is  that  travellers  are  much  more  favour- 
ably impressed  by  his  appearance  than  by  that  of 
his  neighbour  the  Uzbeg,  who  is  content  to  dress 
in  more  sombre  robes,  and  whose  Mongol  eyes  and 
high  cheek-bones  are  far  less  attractive,  though, 
strange  to  say,  the  pure  Uzbeg  type  is  more 
noticeable  in  the  women  than  in  the  men. 


CHAPTER   11 

WHERE  WATER  IS  PRECIOUS 

"  Drop  upon  drop  makes  a  sea ;  if  there  are  no  drops  there  is 
a  desert."— 5izr^  Proverb, 

The  chief  occupation  of  the  sedentary  population 
in  Turkestan  is  agriculture,  and  it  is  on  the  pro- 
duce of  their  fields  and  gardens  that  they  mainly 
subsist.  The  inhabited  parts  of  the  country  are 
separated  from  one  another  by  great  stretches  of 
desert,  where  one  may  travel  for  days  without  see- 
ing a  tree  or  meeting  a  human  being.  These  oases, 
that  seem  to  float  like  islands  on  a  sea  of  sand,  are 
as  thickly  populated  as  any  corner  of  God's  earth, 
and  the  soil  of  Paradise  could  not  have  been  more 
fruitful  than  theirs.  The  man  who  sows  his  sack 
of  wheat  or  rice,  or  millet,  is  sure  of  his  forty-fold, 
his  hundred-fold,  or  even  his  three  hundred-fold 
return;  while  the  rapidity  with  which  trees  grow 
is  almost  incredible.  Everything  that  is  planted 
flourishes  in  profusion,  provided  there  is  plenty  of 
water,  and  there  is  plenty  in  the  cultivable  land, 
but  every  drop  has  been  brought  by  artificial  means, 
and  where  there  are  no  canals  there  is  desert. 
Thus  it  comes  about  that  for  the  smallest  strip  of 


12  IN  RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

watered  land  such  an  enormous  price  is  asked, 
that  a  poor  man  can  never  purchase  any.  Rain, 
there  is  none  to  speak  of  in  the  plains;  none  ever 
falls  in  summer,  and  very  little  in  winter.  During 
three  months,  from  November  to  the  middle  of 
February,  I  spent  a  good  part  of  each  day  out  of 
doors,  but  never  once  opened  an  umbrella. 

There  is  nothing  more  remarkable  in  the  whole  of 
Turkestan  than  its  wonderful  system  of  canals — 3, 
system  that  must  have  been  handed  down  from  the 
earliest  inhabitants,  for  without  canals  nothing  could 
ever  have  grown.  Traces  of  ancient  canals  in  what 
is  now  unreclaimed  desert  have  convinced  archaeolo- 
gists that  in  many  parts  where  there  is  now  no  human 
habitation  there  were  once  rich  and  populous  cities. 
A  soil  possessing  so  many  of  the  properties  of 
the  finest  clay  is  especially  suited  to  the  construc- 
tion of  canals,  for  with  a  little  water  it  is  easily 
worked;  and  once  baked  by  the  Central  Asian 
sun,  it  is  impervious  to  water  as  any  such  sub- 
stance could  be,  and  canal  walls  need  not  be  of 
any  very  great  thickness  to  ensure  the  waters  not 
breaking  through. 

"But  how,"  we  naturally  ask,  *'does  a  Sart 
manage  without  those  instruments  which  to 
European  engineers  would  be  essential  ? " 

The  answer  is  simple:  where  we  should  use  a 
level,  a  Sart  uses  his  eye.  If  he  wants  to  know 
whether  a  canal  can  be  carried  to  a  certain  part  of 


WHERE  WATER   IS   PRECIOUS        13 

his  field,  he  throws  himself  on  his  back,  and  with 
his  chin  in  the  air,  looks  over  his  forehead  towards 
the  point  in  question.  If  he  can  see  it  with  his 
head  in  that  position  he  knows  that  the  water  will 
flow  to  it.  The  cleverest  of  European  engineers 
have  failed  in  their  attempts  to  bring  water  to 
spots  that  to  this  day  bear  the  traces  of  a  perfect 
network  of  ancient  canals.  Topographers  say  that 
in  some  cases  the  cause  of  their  failure  lies  in  the 
fact  that  the  level  of  some  of  the  rivers  has  altered 
and  that  the  engineers  did  not  take  that  alteration 
into  account. 

The  province  of  Samarkand  is  watered  entirely 
by  the  Zarafshan  (the  Polytimetus  of  the  Ancients), 
and  should  that  river  dry  up,  Samarkand  would 
cease  to  exist.  The  same  may  be  said  about  the 
province  of  Syr  Daria,  which  is  watered  by  the  river 
Syr  Daria,  formerly  known  as  the  Jaxartes.  The. 
Zarafshan  rises  in  a  gigantic  glacier  of  that  name, 
situated  in  the  same  longitude  as  Peshawar,  and 
about  as  far,  in  a  south-easterly  direction,  from 
Samarkand  as  Berwick  is  from  London.  The  glacier 
is  eighteen  miles  wide,  and  its  foot  is  gooo  feet 
above  sea-level.  The  river  rushes  for  many  miles 
in  a  narrow  ravine  between  two  mountain  chains, 
that  of  the  Turkestan  range  on  the  north  and  that 
of  the  Zarafshan  range  on  the  south.  When  it 
emerges  at  last  into  the  open  country,  it  is  joined 
by  a  small  affluent,  the  Iskander,  so  named  after 


14  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

Alexander  the  Great.  Every  drop  of  water  in  the 
river  is  speedily  utilised  for  fertilising  the  land.  A 
plan  of  the  canals  into  which  it  flows  reminds  one 
of  a  skeleton  laurel  leaf.  Rows  of  wide  canals  spring 
from  either  side  of  the  river  and  run  in  almost 
parallel  lines;  from  these  again  spring  narrower 
ones,  and  so  the  network  is  continued  till  every 
drop  of  water  has  been  used  up.  In  order  that  no 
landowner  may  get  more  than  his  fair  share  of 
water,  the  canals  nearest  to  the  source  of  the  river 
are  closed  periodically,  when  sufficient  water  has 
flowed  down  them.  As  there  are  no  proper  dykes, 
the  work  of  closing  canals  is  extremely  arduous ;  it 
is  accomplished  by  means  of  hard  manual  labour. 
Heavy  stones  are  heaped  together  and  kept  in  place 
with  branches  of  trees.  The  strongest  of  these 
primitive  dykes  would  not  last  three  years. 

It  has  been  estimated  that  12,000  cubic  feet  of 
water  a  minute  are  needed  to  water  the  province  of 
Samarkand.  Bokhara  needs  6000,  so  the  total 
required  is  18,000  cubic  feet  a  minute.  Now  the 
actual  supply  of  water  in  spring  is  never  more  than 
6000  cubic  feet,  so  it  is  only  by  portioning  it  out 
with  the  greatest  care  that  the  Sarts  can  get  enough 
moisture  for  the  land.  Between  the  source  of  the 
river  and  Bokhara  there  are  no  less  than  ninety 
wide  canals,  not  to  speak  of  the  vast  network  of 
narrower  ones  between.  By  the  time  it  reaches 
Bokhara  the  Zarafshan  entirely  loses  its  identity, 


WHERE   WATER  IS   PRECIOUS        15 

and  canals  are  all  that  is  left  of  that  river.  It 
has  been  suggested  by  Russian  engineers  that  if 
reservoirs  were  to  be  cut  in  the  mountain  sides 
close  to  the  Zarafshan  Glacier,  they  could  be  sup- 
plied from  the  overflowing  water  of  the  river  at  the 
time  of  the  spring  rains,  and  that  in  summer,  when 
the  river  showed  signs  of  exhaustion,  the  water 
thus  collected  could  be  allowed  to  flow  back  to  it ; 
but  such  enormous  sums  of  money  would  be  needed 
to  carry  out  the  plan,  that  there  is  no  immediate 
likelihood  of  its  being  undertaken.  Should  all 
attempts  to  improve  the  water-supply  of  Bokhara 
fail,  we  may  look  upon  her  fate  as  sealed.  This  is 
not  the  place  to  give  a  detailed  account  of  all  the 
rivers  by  which  Turkestan  is  watered.  I  have 
merely  chosen  the  story  of  the  Zarafshan  to  show 
how  precious  water  is  to  the  land.  When  in 
Tschust,  we  were  handsomely  entertained  by  the 
wealthiest  Sart  in  the  town,  and  hearing  much 
of  his  affluence  from  our  Russian  friends,  I  asked 
how  he  had  come  by  his  riches. 

"  He  is  an  Aryk  Aksakal^^  was  the  reply.  "  It 
is  his  duty  to  see  that  the  canals  in  thi&.  district 
are  properly  worked,  and  when  the  people  quarrel 
over  the  water  it  is  he  who  settles  the  disputes. 
Half  the  fights  and  murders  that  take  place  arise 
from  one  man  thinking  another  has  taken  more 
than  his  share  of  water.'' 

''  But  how  does  his  position  come  to  be  such  a 


i6  IN  RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

lucrative  one  ?  "  I  asked.  "  Does  he  receive  a  very 
high  salary  for  his  services  ?  " 

"  He  receives  no  regular  salary/'  was  the  answer. 
"  To  ensure  his  making  the  most  of  the  water,  the 
Russian  Government  pays  him  in  proportion  to  the 
results  of  each  year's  harvest,  but  that  is  not  how 
he  makes  his  money/' 

"  How  then  does  he  make  it  ?  "  I  inquired. 

It  is  a  case  of  "  Briiderchen,  gieb  mir  noch  ein 
Viertelstiindchen/' ^  was  the  reply.  "The  water 
is  allowed  to  run  into  each  man's  canal  or  canals 
for  so  many  minutes,  according  to  the  extent  of  his 
land.  Now  in  hot  weather  a  man  who  is  keen 
about  his  crops,  and  thinks  they  are  not  getting 
enough,  goes  to  the  Aryk  Aksakal  and  bribes  him 
to  let  the  water  run  into  his  canal  for  a  longer 
period.     That  is  how  our  friend  fills  his  pockets." 

On  further  inquiries  I  learned  that  the  Govern- 
ment had  at  one  time  tried  the  experiment  of  doing 
away  with  the  post  of  Atyk  Aksakal  and  putting 
the  management  of  the  canals  in  Russian  hands, 
but  it  was  soon  found  that  with  all  their  ignorance 
and  want  of  technical  skill,  the  natives,  in  simply 
following  the  custom  of  their  forefathers,  were  in- 
variably rewarded  with  success,  while  Russian 
efforts  to  understand  the  wants  of  the  soil  were 
a  miserable  failure. 

If  a  man  is  cultivating  rice  or  anything  else  that 

^  Little  brother,  give  mc  one  more  little  quarter  of  an  hour. 


WHERE  WATER   IS   PRECIOUS        n 

needs  covering  with  water,  he  divides  his  field  into 
small  squares  and  surrounds  each  of  them  with  a 
low  mud  walL  The  level  of  the  first  square  is  a 
little  higher  than  that  of  the  second,  and  so  on. 
Water  is  let  into  the  highest  first,  and  when  that 
has  been  sufficiently  flooded  a  hole  in  the  wall 
empties  the  water  into  the  next  square.  The  mud 
that  collects  in  the  canals  is  cleared  out  every  spring; 
it  is  not  carried  away  but  heaped  up  on  the  sides, 
with  the  result  that  they  grow  deeper  and  deeper 
every  year. 


CHAPTER  III 

TREES    AND    FRUITS 

In  a  country  where  the  sky  is  blue  even  in  the 
depth  of  winter,  and  where  in  the  middle  of  Decem- 
ber the  sun  is  often  oppressively  hot,  it  is  a  surprise 
to  find  that  not  an  orange  or  a  lemon  or  an  olive 
tree  is  to  be  seen.  On  account  of  its  mild  and 
exhilarating  winter  climate  Turkestan  has  been 
called  "the  Riviera  of  the  future,"  and  yet  not 
a  single  palm  or  cypress  or  myrtle  is  found. 
Turkestan  has,  however,  one  tree  quite  peculiar 
to  itself,  the  kara  agatch  or  "black  tree,"  called 
by  Europeans  Ulnius  Turkestanica,  Its  branches, 
covered  in  summer  with  dark  green  leaves,  spring 
out  in  a  bunch  from  the  stem ;  seen  from  a  distance 
its  shape  is  that  of  a  balloon,  and  to  the  Euro- 
pean eye  extremely  ugly,  but  the  Sarts  admire  its 
strange  form  and,  on  account  of  its  beauty  and  the 
grateful  shade  afforded  by  its  leaves,  are  fond  of 
planting  it  round  their  reservoirs  and  in  places 
where  they  sit  and  stroll  in  summer.  The  Rus- 
sians say  that  it  harbours  mosquitoes  in  its  thick 
foliage,  and  that  these  in  their  turn  help  to 
spread  disease.     The  wood  of  the  kara  agatch  is 

x8 


TREES  AND   FRUITS  19 

employed  in  carving,  for  which  use  it  is  well 
fitted;  being  very  heavy  and  hard,  it  also  looks 
well  when  polished. 

The  poplar  grows  to  great  perfection — it  is  the 
tree  of  all  others  that  is  connected  in  my  mind 
with  Russian  Central  Asia.  The  streets  of  every 
Russian  town  are  lined  with  poplars ;  two  kinds 
in  particular  attracted  my  attention.  In  Tashkent, 
Namangan,  Margelan,  and  Kokand  the  kind  most 
frequently  met  with  is  like  our  own  common  poplar, 
except  that  it  grows  more  rapidly  and  to  a  far 
greater  height.  While  walking  in  the  Russian 
park  at  Margelan  a  lady  astonished  me  by  ob- 
serving that  every  one  of  the  trees  there  had  been 
planted  within  the  last  fifteen  years ;  in  Europe  a 
poplar  would  hardly  reach  that  height  in  thirty 
years.  There  is  a  spreading  poplar  in  Samarkand, 
the  Populus  diversifoliay  our  silver  poplar,  whose 
far-reaching  branches  meet  across  the  wide  Euro- 
pean roads,  and  hide  the  houses  so  completely  that 
in  summer  one  almost  forgets  one  is  in  a  town. 
Owing  to  the  peculiarities  of  the  climate  too  much 
shade  from  trees  is  considered  unhealthy,  and 
numbers  of  men  are  constantly  employed  in  cutting 
away  the  superfluous  branches  of  trees  which  the 
Russians  themselves  have  planted.  The  wood  of 
the  poplar  is  too  soft  for  building  purposes,  owing 
to  the  rapidity  of  its  growth.  Where  the  Russian 
plants  a  poplar  the  Sart  prefers  to  plant  a  willow, 


20  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

of  which  tree  there  are  at  least  four  kinds.  Native 
towns  and  villages  are  full  of  them,  they  line  the 
canals  and  hang  over  garden  walls,  they  form 
hedges  to  the  fields,  and  are  an  indispensable 
feature  of  every  Sart  landscape. 

In  the  province  of  Bokhara,  the  tree  that  grows 
to  greatest  perfection  is  the  plane-tree.  The  Sarts 
have  a  veneration  for  the  plane  ;  they  often 
place  it,  in  preference  to  any  other  tree,  in  front 
of  their  mosques,  and  the  native  traveller  takes  it 
for  granted  that  all  he  comes  across  have  been 
planted  by  holy  men.  Some  of  the  largest  have 
trunks  equal  in  circumference  to  those  of  the  giant 
trees  of  California,  and  grow  to  an  immense 
height. 

The  saxaul  {Haloxylon  ammodendron)  is  per- 
haps the  most  remarkable  of  all  the  trees  that  grow 
in  Central  Asia.  It  is  found  in  the  moving  sands 
of  the  desert,  thriving  apparently  without  any 
water.  I  was  at  first  under  the  impression,  like 
many  Russians  who  live  in  the  vicinity,  that  it 
never  bore  any  foliage,  but  the  fact  is  its  leaves  are 
so  small  that  they  can  hardly  be  seen  with  the 
naked  eye.  Its  trunk  and  branches  are  much 
knotted.  The  nomads  find  it  useful  for  firewood, 
besides  which  it  helps  with  its  long  roots  to  hold 
the  shifting  sands  together,  and  is  for  this  reason 
planted  by  the  Russians  along  their  railway  lines. 
Its  wood  is  so  heavy  that  it  cannot  be  made  to  float 


TREES  AND   FRUITS  21 

upon  water,  even  when  all  the  sap  has  been  dried 
out  of  it.  Russian  river  steamers  bum  it  as  fuel, 
as  it  gives  out  twice  the  heat  of  ordinary  coal- 
The  growth  of  the  saxaul  is  so  slow  that  it 
is  hardly  perceptible.  The  natives  say  that  to 
reach  its  full  size  it  must  grow  for  a  hundred 
years.  Some  Frenchmen  have  been  trying  to 
acclimatise  it  in  the  Sahara,  but  with  what  result 
I  do  not  know. 

Neither  fir-trees  nor  pines  are  to  be  found  in 
the  plains,  but  they  thrive  in  the  mountains  to  the 
north  of  Namangan,  at  a  height  of  nearly  3000  feet 
above  sea-level.  We  happened  to  be  in  Russian 
Namangan  just  before  Christmas,  and  met  one  day 
a  troop  of  Sarts,  each  canying  a  tall  Christmas- 
tree.  I  counted  twenty-five.  Colonel  Jesson,  the 
chief  of  the  district,  which  by  the  way  is  as  large 
as  Holland,  noticing  my  surprise,  explained  that 
the  trees  had  been  brought  from  the  mountains  for 
Christmas,  and  that  twenty-five  Russian  families 
were  eagerly  looking  out  for  them  in  Kokand,  to 
which  town  they  were  now  going.  This  explanation 
was  plausible  enough,  but  it  seemed  strange  never- 
theless to  see  Mohammedans  carrying  Christmas- 
trees.  Yet  the  custom  of  having  them  is  supposed 
by  some  writers  to  have  been  brought  to  Germany 
by  the  Indo-Germanic  races,  whose  first  home  was 
in  Turkestan.  It  is,  of  course,  well  known  that 
the  custom  is  a  recent  one  in  Russia,  the  Slavs 


22  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

having  borrowed  it  from  their  German  neighbours. 
Whatever  degree  of  truth  there  may  be  in  the 
above  theory,  the  Sarts  certainly  have  a  reverence 
for  some  trees,  which  they  show  by  tearing  strips 
off  their  clothes  and  hanging  them  on  the  branches. 
The  appearance  of  these  holy  trees  struck  me  as 
particularly  gruesome,  especially  in  winter,  when 
there  were  no  leaves  to  hide  the  rags  that  fluttered 
in  the  breeze.  When  a  Sart  woman  is  anxious  to 
have  a  son,  her  first  act  is  to  contribute  such  a 
rag.  While  walking  up  the  steps  of  the  Schah 
Zindah  mosque  in  Samarkand,  my  Mohammedan 
guide  pointed  out  to  me  a  tree,  the  fruit  of  which, 
he  said,  was  eagerly  sought  for  by  women  who 
desired  to  have  sons.  He  did  not  know  its  name. 
Inside  the  same  mosque  there  is  a  dark  hole  in 
the  ground,  and  if  a  man  is  very  anxious  to  have 
a  son  he  goes  down  into  it  at  the  beginning  of 
Ramazan  and  stays  there  forty  days,  coming  out 
at  nights  to  take  a  walk  and  eat  food,  the  quantity 
and  quality  of  which  depends  on  the  severity  of  the 
vow  he  has  taken.  Some  allow  themselves  only 
three  raisins  a  day,  others  eat  bread,  while  those 
who  are  less  in  earnest  eat  a  good  plateful  of 
pilau.  I  looked  down  into  the  dismal  place,  but 
it  was  pitch  dark.  The  devotees  descend  into  this 
living  tomb  by  a  winding  stone  staircase.  The 
name  of  it  is  ChiUah  Hanah  ("  Forty  Days  "). 
With  regard    to  evergreens,  I   s^w  several  in 


TREES  AND   FRUITS  23 

General  Medinsky's  beautiful  garden  in  Samarkand, 
but  was  told  that  they  had  all  been  brought  from 
Russia.  As  a  rule  one  never  sees  a  green  leaf  in 
winter. 

The  mulberry-tree  thrives  even  better  in  Central 
Asia  than  in  Japan ;  it  is,  of  course,  inseparably 
connected  with  the  culture  of  silkworms.  Its  fruit 
ripens  too  quickly  to  be  good  and  sweet,  it  is 
flavourless;  the  natives  sometimes  make  a  syrup 
of  it.i 

Walnut-trees  grow  wild  in  the  mountains  ;  not 
far  from  Bokhara  there  are  hills  covered  with 
walnut-woods.  The  air  is  full  of  their  fragrance. 
Whole  villages  in  that  neighbourhood  live  entirely 
by  the  sale  of  these  nuts.  Pistachio-trees  also  grow 
wild ;  the  nut  is  to  be  found  wherever  there  is  a 
Sart.  Nearly  every  native  sweetmeat  contains  it, 
and  it  is  offered  to  every  guest,  sometimes  with, 
sometimes  without  its  shell. 

The  Sarts  seem  to  eat  fruit  on  all  occasions 
when  we  should  eat  meat.  With  the  poorer  classes 
it  quite  takes  the  place  of  animal  food,  and  fruit- 
trees  are  planted  on  every  inch  of  available  ground 
inside  the  town  walls.  The  clay  soil  suits  them 
admirably.  A  whole  family  can  live  on  the  produce 
of  one  small  garden.  When  a  native  starts  out 
for  a  day's  work  or  a  journey  he  takes   nothing 

1  I  have  read  that  they  make  a  kind  of  cake  from  the  fruit  after 
it  has  been  dried  and  powdered. 


24  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

but  a  piece  of  bread  with  him.  Fruit  gathered  on 
the  way  completes  his  meal.  No  one  is  convicted 
of  theft  for  simply  helping  himself  to  fruit  from 
another's  garden. 

The  vine  is  cultivated  in  the  courtyards  of  the 
houses  very  much  as  we  should  cultivate  rose-trees. 
Its  branches,  supported  by  a  rough  trelliswork, 
form  delightful  arbours  in  which  whole  families 
spend  their  days  and  nights  during  the  hot  summer 
months.  Besides  this  the  towns  and  villages  in 
many  districts  are  surrounded  by  vineyards  all 
enclosed  by  high  mud  walls.  We  could  just  see 
over  the  top  by  standing  up  in  our  tarantass  as 
we  drove  past.  The  grapes  are  of  many  kinds, 
white,  green,  and  purple  in  colour,  and  vary  con- 
siderably in  shape.  Some  are  almost  as  large  as 
plums,  while  the  grape  that  is  cultivated  most  is 
green  and  bottled-shaped,  longer  than  any  I  have 
seen  elsewhere;  -cut  in  half,  it  would  make  two 
grapes  of  the  ordinary  size. 

During  my  first  visit  to  the  country,  which  was 
just  in  the  grape  season,  forty  pounds  of  these 
grapes  could  be  purchased  for  the  equivalent  of 
threepence,  and  even  in  January  and  February 
they  were  selling  at  a  penny  a  pound.  The  natives 
pick  them  when  ripe  in  the  autumn,  and  preserve 
them  by  suspending  the  bunches  separately  from 
the  ceilings  of  their  houses.  The  grape  has  been 
cultivated  in  Turkestan  from  the  very  earliest  times. 


TREES  AND   FRUITS  25 

History  tells  us  that  the  Governor  of  one  of  its 
ancient  provinces  provided  wine  for  the  soldiers 
of  Alexander  the  Great's  army;  the  Uzbegs,  who 
were  strict  Mohammedans,  did  away  with  the 
making  of  wine,  and  when  the  Russians  came  they 
found  no  fermented  drink  made  from  the  grape. 
Soon  after  peace  had  been  restored,  French  experts 
came  out  and  put  several  Russian  firms  in  the  way 
of  making  what  has  been  pronounced  by  competent 
judges  to  be  a  very  good  wine.  At  the  same  time 
vines  from  the  Crimea  and  from  Italy  were  intro- 
duced. As  the  natives  have  not  yet  learned  the 
art,  the  few  Russians  who  are  engaged  in  it  are 
enjo3dng  a  profitable  monopoly.  Even  in  St.  Peters- 
burg their  wine  has  found  favour.  Turkestan  wine 
is  stronger  and  sweeter  than  European  wines; 
bought  in  the  country,  it  costs  hardly  a  fifth  of 
what  a  wine  of  the  same  quality  would  cost  with 
us.  This  is  not  to  be  wondered  at,  when  the 
cheapness  of  the  grape  is  considered.  The  cost 
price  of  each  bottle  of  wine  made  by  the  firms  I 
have  alluded  to  is  one  penny.  Red  and  purple 
grapes  are  dried  in  great  quantities  by  the  natives ; 
the  women  spread  them  .out  in  the  sun  on  the  flat 
roofs  of  the  houses,  and  vine-growers  who  make 
a  business  of  it  build  special  houses  for  drying  the 
fruit 

The  apricot  of  Turkestan  has  a  fame  of  its  own. 
In  the  Syr  Daria  province  and  in  Feigana  it  is 


26  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

particularly  abundant.^  There  are  two  apricot 
seasons  in  the  year;  the  tree  blossoms  first  in 
March,  and  the  early  crop  is  gathered  in  May. 
Tashkent  can  even  boast  of  a  grove  of  these  trees. 
Cooks  prefer  apricot  wood  to  any  other  fuel  for 
their  kitchens.  The  fruit  has  a  fine  flavour;  it  is 
smaller  than  ours,  but  extremely  luscious ;  the  natives 
dry  it  in  the  sun  with  the  stone  left  in.  The  kernel 
of  the  apricot  is  considered  a  great  delicacy,  and 
can  be  bought  in  the  bazaars  like  almonds. 

Khiva,  Karki,  and  Charjui  rival  one  another  in 
producing  melons,  which  are  not  to  be  surpassed  in 
flavour  by  those  of  any  other  country.  There  is  a 
small  yellow  kind,  almost  round  in  shape,  which 
ripens  in  May,  and  a  green  one,  the  shape  of  an 
egg,  which  ripens  in  August  and  September.  I 
mention  these  two  in  particular  because  they  repre- 
sent the  melons  par  excellence  of  the  country.  The 
last  mentioned,  like  the  long  green  grapes,  can  be 
preserved  throughout  the  winter.  They  are  so 
plentiful  that  the  poor  almost  live  upon  them  in 
the  autumn ;  a  slice  of  melon  with  a  piece  of  bread 
makes  them  a  most  enjoyable  dinner.  Russians, 
on  the  other  hand,  are  afraid  to  eat  them;  they 
believe  them  to  cause  fever,  and  many  were  the 
warnings  we  received  in  connection  with  this  fruit 

^  Many  years  after  he  was  banished  from  his  land,  Bibar  recalled 
with  a  sigh  the  flavour  of  the  dried  apricots  stuffed  with  almonds 
which  were  so  good  in  Margelan.-:-"iffi3tfr,"  Stanley  Lane- Pooh, 


TREES  AND   FRUITS  27 

It  was  not  till  we  found  ourselves  in  Bokhara,  with 
no  Russians  at  hand  to  caution  us,  that  we  tried 
them.  Here  we  set  one  before  our  native  friends 
and  helped  to  eat  it:  the  first  was  by  no  means 
the  last.  Though  they  had  been  hung  up  for  four 
months,  they  were  as  fresh  as  those  I  had  so 
greatly  appreciated  in  September  during  my  first 
visit.  There  are  also  several  kinds  of  water-melon, 
but  they  are  not  equal  to  those  that  grow  in  the 
vicinity  of  Samara,  on  the  banks  of  the  Volga. 

There  is  a  kind  of  gourd  or  pumpkin,  remarkable 
chiefly  for  the  size  to  which  it  can  be  grown  and 
the  uses  to  which  it  can  be  adapted.  I  saw  one  at 
a  friend's  house  a  foot  and  a  half  high  and  two  feet 
and  a  half  in  circumference.^  The  smaller  kinds  are 
trained  in  the  shape  of  a  bell,  and  are  used  as  snuff- 
boxes or  medicine-bottles;  while  gourd-pipes,  and 
the  dervish's  money-boxes,  are  made  out  of  the 
larger  ones.  I  have  seen  several  beautifully  deco- 
rated with  artistic  designs  of  inlaid  silver.  Mar- 
gdan  is  the  town  in  which  to  look  for  these.  The 
chilim  or  gourd-pipe  is  often  dyed  brown  and  studded 
with  turquoises  set  in  silver. 

I  found  two  kinds  of  fig  in  the  bazaar  in 
September,  bright  yellow  ones,  which  were  the 
most  expensive,  and  others  blue-black.  The  Sarts 
do  not  dry  them,  so  we  did  not  meet  with  any  of 
this  fruit,  during  our  winter  visit. 

^  This  will  account  for  the  size  of  Cinderella's  pumpkih  I 


28  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

Pomegranates  are  abundant  at  all  seasons,  but 
are  sour  even  when  ripe,  as  compared  with  those  of 
other  countries.  The  Sarts  squeeze  them  over  their 
meat  just  as  we  should  a  lemon  over  fish.  The 
juice  is  also  used  as  a  red  dye,  and  a  yellow  dye 
is  made  from  the  skin. 

.The  pears  of  Turkestan  are  most  of  them  of  a 
quality  that  might  be  described  as  wooden,  yet 
their  juice,  which  is  as  fresh  and  as  cooling  as  that 
of  the  prickly  pear,  makes  them  very  welcome  in 
thirsty  weather.  But  there  is  a  village  in  Fergana, 
about  fifty  miles  from  Kokand,  which  is  famed  far 
and  wide  for  its  pears,  equal  to  any  that  Europe 
can  produce.  Delafrus  is  the  name  of  the  village, 
and  that  is  the  French-sounding  name  by  which 
these  pears  are  known. 

Another  village,  Ulmas^  lying  a  few  miles  from 
Chyust,  is  equally  famous  for  its  apples,  and, 
strange  to  say,  also  for  its  beautiful  women! 
Russians  have  tried  in  vain  to  transplant  the 
apples;  they  invariably  languish  when  removed 
from  their  native  soil.  The  Sart  word  for  apple 
is  ulma. 

The  only  dates  I  came  across  were  some  crys- 
tallised ones  placed  before  us  by  a  Sart,  as  the 
greatest  delicacy  his  house  contained;  his  brother 
had  brought  them  for  him  from  Mecca. 


CHAPTER   IV 

CULTIVATION  OF  COTTON 
"  Por  el  dinero  baila  el  perro." — Spanish  Proverb, 

I  HAVE  visited  towns  in  Japan  where  bread  could 
not  be  bought  for  money,  and  where  the  inhabitants 
used  rice  instead.  In  Turkestan  every  Sart  who 
can  afford  it  likes  to  have  one  meal  of  meat  and 
rice  a  day,  but  here,  rice  never  takes  the  place  of 
bread.  Rice  fields  are  to  be  found  wherever 
su£Scient  water  can  be  had  to  cover  them,  though 
of  late  the  Russians  have  made  a  law  that  they 
must  not  come  within  a  prescribed  distance  of  the 
towns,  as  a  miasma  which  rises  from  their  standing 
water  is  thought  to  engender  fevers. 

The  native  bread  is  made  of  wheat,  which  cereal, 
like  barley,  has  both  a  summer  and  a  winter 
harvest.  The  best  wheat  grows  in  East  Bokhara. 
Millet  is  much  cultivated  by  the  nomads,  as  food 
for  horses;  but  rye  and  oats,  which  were  intro- 
duced by  the  Russians,  are  not  much  cultivated  by 
any  of  the  natives.  There  is  a  kind  of  American 
maize  called  Jyugara  which  the  Venetians  are  said 
to  have  introduced  into  Asia.      It  is  extensively 

39 


30  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

cultivated,  and  its  stalks  are  used  as  food  for 
horses.  We  saw  quantities  of  it  stacked  in  the 
branches  of  leafless  willow -trees,  while  on  our 
winter  journey  through  the  villages  of  the  Syr 
Daria  Province.  Russia  has  forbidden  the  cultiva- 
tion of  opium,  which  was  formerly  very  extensive. 

"  What  have  you  got  in  that  great  jar  ?  "  was  a 
question  I  often  asked  when  visiting  native  homes* 

"  Kunshyut,"  was  the  invariable  reply. 

Kunshyut  {Sesamum  Indicum)  is  cultivated  for 
the  sake  of  the  oil  that  can  be  extracted  from  its 
seeds ;  it  is  one  of  the  chief  ingredients  in  native 
cooking,  though  the  very  poor  substitute  cotton- 
seed oil.  The  oil  is  pressed  out  by  means  of  a 
mill,  turned  by  horses,  just  as  wheat  is  ground  in 
Morocco ;  each  horse  is  made  to  turn  the  millstone 
for  three  hours  at  a  time  —  during  which  period 
three  pounds  of  oil  are  extracted.^ 

Morgui^  another  cereal,  is  said  to  grow  only  in 
Central  Asia.     It  has  the  appearance  of  linseed. 

Reeds,  which  thrive  in  swamps  and  marshy 
lands,  often  grow  to  a  height  of  more  than  twelve 
feet ;  clumps  of  them  were  used  as  places  of  ambush 

1  Schwarz  tells  us  that  the  extraction  of  oil  from  sesamum  was 
known  in  Turkestan  as  far  back  as  the  time  of  Alexander,  and  he 
quotes  from  Curcius,  Book  VIII.:  ''Alexander  Caucasum,  quidem, 
ut  supra  dictum  est,  transierat,  sed  inopia  frumenti  prope  ad  famem 
ventum  erat.  Suco  ex  sesama  expresso  hand  secus  quam  oleo 
artus  perunguebant.  Sed  huius  suci  ducenis  quadragenis  denariis 
amphorse  singulae  sestimabantur." 


CULTIVATION   OF  COTTON  31 

by  the  natives  in  their  contests  with  the  Russians. 
A  man  on  horseback,  or  a  camel,  could  be  completely 
hidden  by  them. 

Next  to  the  arrival  of  the  Russians  themselves  no 
event  has  brought  so  many  changes  into  the  life  of 
the  Sarts  as  the  introduction  of  American  cotton ; 
whether  it  will  prove  a  blessing  or  a  curse  it  yet 
remains  to  be  seen.  Turkestan  has  grown  cotton 
from  time  immemorial ;  the  seeds  were  brought  in 
the  first  place  from  India,  and  the  quality  of  their 
cotton  is  the  same  as  that  now  produced  in  India. 
It  was  Greneral  Kaufmann,  the  first  Governor- 
General,  who,  in  his  efforts  for  the  good  of  the 
land,  introduced  seed  from  America.  Native  seed 
is  nowgrowa  only  in  Bokhara^  and  Samarkand;  its 
pods  do  not  open  so  widely  as  those  produced  by 
American  seed,  and  consequently  cause  double 
labour,  having  to  be  picked  from  the  shrub  before 
the  cotton  can  be  taken  out;  besides  which  the 
quality  of  the  cotton  is  less  elastic.  Certain 
Moscow  capitalists,  hearing  of  the  splendid  crops 
that  American  seed  was  yielding,  and  being  fully 
aware  that  labour  was  far  cheaper  in  Central  Asia 
than  in  America,  soon  turned  their  attention  to  the 

^  The  grower  of  American  cotton  has  difficulties  to  contend 
with  from  which  the  grower  of  Bokharan  cotton  is  exempt.  The 
pod,  opening  widely  as  it  does  of  its  own  accord,  induces  sparrows 
and  mice  to  steal  its  wool  for  their  nests.  I  heard  of  one  case 
where  considerable  loss  was  sustained  owing  to  those  troublesome 
visitors.    As  for  the  sparrows,  they  come  in  clouds  like  locusts. 


32  IN  RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

matter,  and  from  that  day  to  this  cotton  has  been 
quickly  and  steadily  taking  the  place  of  every  other 
field  produce  in  the  country.  To-day  the  cotton 
production  of  Turkestan  is  only  surpassed  by  that 
of  America.  During  the  season  1899- 1900  two 
thousand  seven  hundred  puds  of  pure  American 
cotton  were  harvested  in  the  province  of  Fer- 
gana alone;  in  1900- 1901  five  thousand,  and  in 
1 901- 1902  three  thousand  puds.  The  local  price 
of  this  cotton  per  pud  (40  lbs.  Eng.)  is  eighteen 
shillings,  while  in  the  Moscow  markets  it  fetches 
twenty-two  shillings ;  the  extra  four  shillings  being 
the  cost  of  transport.  Not  only  Russians  but  Sarts 
also  are  discovering  that  the  way  to  become  rich  is 
to  cultivate  cotton ;  the  latter  find  it  far  more  pro- 
fitable to  grow  cotton  than  even  rice.  The  rice- 
grower  gets  no  money  for  his  pains  till  after  the 
harvest,  whereas  within  an  equal  period  of  time 
the  cotton-grower  is  paid  three  times  over  by 
Russian  cotton  merchants.  He  is  paid  first  for 
planting  the  seed,  which  he  gets  gratis,  then  for 
gathering  the  crop,  and  finally  he  receives  a  full 
price  for  it  on  delivery.  The  consequence  is  that 
every  Sart  who  has  an  inch  of  ground  that  he 
can  call  his  own  is  beginning  to  plant  cotton. 
Russians  who  are  otherwise  employed  are  be- 
ginning to  look  askance  at  this  state  of  things; 
they  are  reminded  most  unpleasantly  of  "where 
the  shoe  pinches.'^     As  there  are  no  meadows,  and 


CULTIVATION   OF  COTTON  33 

consequently  no  haystacks,  in  Turkestan,  horses 
have  to  depend  on  crops  that  are  specially  sown 
for  them,  as  I  have  mentioned  above,  and,  less 
ground  being  available  for  this  purpose  every  year, 
incredibly  high  prices  are  being  asked  for  their 
food,  so  that  ladies  who  kept  their  own  carriages 
until  four  years  ago  are  now  obliged  to  go  on 
foot.  I  asked  a  cotton  merchant  in  Kokand  what 
final  result  was  to  be  expected  from  this  state  of 
things. 

"  Matters  will  grow  worse  and  worse,"  he  replied, 
"  till  the  railway  between  Orenburg  and  Tashkent 
is  completed,  after  which  corn  from  Siberia  will  be 
supplied  in  plenty  at  just  one-sixth  the  price  we 
now  pay  for  it  in  Fergana ;  all  the  land  can  then 
be  used  to  grow  cotton.  The  Amir  of  Bokhara 
forces  his  subjects  to  grow  a  certain  amount  of 
corn  on  their  private  lands,  and  thus  the  danger 
of  famine  in  that  province  is  warded  off." 

I  visited  cotton-separating  establishments  in 
Samarkand,  in  Namangan,  and  in  Bairam-Ali.  In 
the  first,  cotton  was  being  separated  from  its  seed 
in  machines  worked  by  petroleum,  and  then  rammed 
into  sacks  till  it  became  as  hard  as  a  wall — twenty 
pounds  rammed  into  one  cubic  foot  by  means  of 
hydraulic  pressure ;  the  machines  used  were  from 
Halifax.  In  America  each  bale  is  tied  up  with 
iron  bands,  but  here  iron  wire  was  used.  The  air 
becomes  so  full  of  cotton  fluff  in  dry  weather  that 
the  packers  can  only  work  for  a  short  time  at  a 

C 


34  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

stretch.  Women  and  children  go  out  into  the 
country  and  pick  the  pods  when  ripe,  and  men 
bring  them  to  the  bazaar  in  sacks.  There  is  a 
particular  period  of  its  growth  at  which  it  must 
be  picked,  otherwise  it  is  useless.  It  has  a  pretty 
yellow,  and  sometimes  a  lilac  flower,  which  blooms 
about  the  end  of  July.  While  going  my  round  of 
inspection  it  was  amusing  to  have  a  heap  of  cotton 
pointed  out  to  me  as  "  good  middling ''  by  a  Russian 
who  knew  no  English. 

"  You  see  we  have  adopted  the  American  terms/' 
said  he  in  German ;  "  even  the  separating-machines 
are  known  as  *  gins.' " 

The  factory  at  Namangan  was  one  of  the  sights 
of  the  town  at  night,  when  all  its  separating- 
machines  were  at  work  and  its  electric  lights 
turned  on.  But  the  sight  that  impressed  me  more 
than  all  was  that  of  mountains  of  cotton-seed  on 
the  Emperor's  private  estate  at  Bairam-Ali. 

'*  Whatever  do  you  propose  to  do  with  all  this 
seed  ?  "  I  asked  the  manager. 

*'  That  is  our  difficulty,"  he  replied,  "  we  don't 
know  what  to  do  with  it.  The  people  engaged  on 
the  estate  use  some  of  it  for  fuel,  but  they  could 
not  possibly  make  use  of  a  hundredth  part,  and 
we  are  so  far  from  any  town  where  it  could  be 
used  that  the  expense  of  taking  it  there  would  be 
greater  than  the  profit  in  selling  it." 

Russians  use  cotton-seed  for  fuel  when  they  wish 
to  be  economical,  but  many  object  to  it  on  account 


CULTIVATION  OF  COTTON  35 

of  the  unpleasant  odour  that  pervades  the  house 
even  when  it  is  only  used  in  the  kitchen.  The 
very  poor  among  the  natives  use  oil  pressed  from 
the  seeds  for  cooking ;  they  say  it  has  no  taste  and 
makes  an  excellent  salad.  They  also  burn  it  in 
their  lamps  instead  of  petroleum.  When  the  oil 
has  been  extracted,  the  bruised  seeds  are  made 
into  cakes  for  camels'  food,  or  what  seems  more 
strange,  moulded  like  clay  into  graceful,  long-necked 
bottles,  which,  after  having  been  baked  in  the  fire 
and  blackened  with  smoke,  are  used  to  carry  the 
very  oil  that  has  been  extracted  from  them.  One 
sees  many  a  man  sitting  in  the  bazaar  with  a  pile 
of  camels'  cakes  on  one  side  of  him  and  a  number 
of  these  oil-vessels  on  the  other. 

No  cotton  is  grown  further  south  than  Tashkent, 
or  further  east  than  Andijan,  as  the  cold  becomes 
too  great.  From  Andijan  to  Osh  the  ground  rises 
steadily,  and  snow  lies  inches  deep  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood  of  Osh  during  winter.  While  driving 
through  the  stony  stretch  of  desert  that  lies  be- 
tween Kokand  and  Namangan,  we  espied  in  the 
distance  what  we  took  to  be  a  group  of  ancient 
ruins,  not  unlike  Stonehenge.  A  drove  of  camels 
on  their  knees  close  by  added  to  the  picturesque- 
ness  of  the  scene.  What  was  our  astonishment 
when  on  coming  up  to  them  we  discovered  that 
the  supposed  ruins  were  huge  bales  of  cotton  on 
their  way  to  Moscow.  The  camels  were  waiting 
to  be  reloaded  after  a  halt  for  rest  and  food. 


CHAPTER  V 

THE  SILK  INDUSTRY 

When  taking  our  first  stroll  in  Russian  Kokand, 
we  noticed  a  band  of  gold  shining  through  the 
trees  on  the  other  side  of  the  street,  and  wondering 
what  it  could  be,  crossed  over  to  examine  the 
glittering  object.  It  proved  to  be  a  skein  of  silk 
fresh  from  the  cocoons,  of  such  a  length  that  it  had 
been  wound  round  the  trunks  of  two  poplars  more 
than  twenty  yards  apart.  A  Sart  was  carefully 
combing  it;  he  seemed  surprised  that  we  should 
stop  to  look  at  what,  to  him,  was  so  common  a 
sight.  A  little  later,  in  another  street  we  came 
across  a  still  longer  skein,  but  this  one  had  been 
dyed,  and  shone  a  brilliant  purple  in  the  afternoon 
sunlight.  It  was  thus  that  I  began  my  acquaint- 
ance with  the  most  ancient  as  well  as  the  most 
important  industry  of  the  country.  In  a  land  where 
mulberry-trees  abound,  and  where  the  sky  is  serene 
and  the  temperature  warm  throughout  the  greater 
part  of  the  year,  the  cultivation  of  silkworms  has 
much  in  its  favour ;  yet  there  was  a  time,  soon  after 
the  Russians  came,  when  silkworms  were  scarce, 
and  when  disease  threatened  to  destroy  those  that 

3^ 


THE  SILK   INDUSTRY  37 

were  left.  Silk  manufecturers  from  Europe  had  for 
some  years  been  carrying  oflF  cocoons  by  thousands, 
when,  in  1 87 1,  through  the  eflforts  of  General 
Kaufmann,  a  stop  was  put  to  this,  and  experts  were 
induced  to  settle  in  the  country,  that  they  might 
revive  the  languishing  industry,  which  was  then  at 
its  last  gasp. 

In  the  year  1889,  M.  Alois^,  a  Corsican  by  birth, 
came  to  Turkestan  with  500  boxes  of  eggs  from 
France.  The  Russian  Government  supported  his 
efforts,  and  from  that  time  to  this  he  has  thrown  his 
whole  energy  into  the  cultivation  of  silkworms  in 
Central  Asia.  I  heard  from  his  own  lips  that  he 
sold  to  the  Sart  peasants  in  1901  as  many  as 
202,000  boxes  of  French  eggs.  The  cultivation  of 
native  worms  has  practically  ceased.  Every  season 
when  the  cocoons  are  ready,  M.  Alois6  buys  them 
from  the  people.  On  paying  a  visit  to  his  establish- 
ment, we  were  shown  with  what  care  the  eggs  of 
each  moth  are  examined  under  the  microscope,  lest 
one  diseased  grub  might  get  amongst  the  rest  and 
so  cause  a  deterioration  in  the  quality  of  the  silk. 
Until  the  time  for  this  each  moth  is  shut  up  with  its 
eggs  in  a  separate  cotton  bag,  and  if  it  or  one  of  the 
eggs  is  found  to  be  diseased,  both  moth  and  eggs 
are  destroyed  by  fire. 

The  machinery  for  boiling  the  cocoons  and  wind- 
ing the  silk  is  all  on  a  much  more  primitive  scale 
than   that   of   Japan,   but  the  quality  of  the   silk 


38  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

produced  is  infinitely  superior.  One  worm  is  said 
to  devour  the  leaves  of  seven  mulberry-trees  during 
the  course  of  its  short  but  active  career.  M.  Aloise 
showed  us  in  his  garden  several  specimens  of  the 
weeping  mulberry  which  he  had  imported  from 
Spain.  Having  come  into  the  country  a  poor  man, 
this  gentleman  is  now  one  of  the  richest  merchants 
in  Fergana,  where,  greatly  respected  by  Russians 
and  natives  alike,  he  rejoices  in  the  title  of  "  Le  roi 
des  grains."  M.  Alois6  is  also  the  author  of  a 
manual  of  instruction  as  to  how  silkworms  should 
be  cultivated.  He  gave  me  one  as  a  memento,  and 
I  found  that  its  contents  were  arranged  in  the  form 
of  questions  and  answers,  like  the  school  books  of 
our  early  days.  Though  the  women  still  rear  a 
great  many  worms,  this  business  is  now  carried  on 
to  a  great  extent  by  men.  In  Margelan  I  saw  long 
low  buildings  which  had  been  set  apart  for  the 
purpose.  During  the  cold  weather  the  eggs  are 
stored  here  in  sacks.  Until  the  price  of  the  cocoons 
went  down,  many  of  the  Russian  ladies  used  also  to 
rear  worms,  and  add  to  their  pocket-money  by  sell- 
ing cocoons. 

When  the  silk  has  been  wound  off  the  cocoons,  it 
is  sold  to  native  dyers.  In  Bokhara  this  depart- 
ment is  almost  exclusively  in  the  hands  of  Jews. 
The  dyes  most  in  use  are  indigo,  imported  from 
India ;  cochineal,  from  Russia ;  and  madder  {Del^ 
phinium   sulphureum)^  which   grows  wild   on   the 


THE   SILK   INDUSTRY  39 

steppes.      Sophora  Japonica    is    also    used    as    a 
yellow  dye. 

The  weavers  buy  the  silk  for  the  dyer  and 
weave  it  on  the  most  primitive  of  looms.  We 
visited  several  weavers  at  their  work  in  Kokand. 
Turning  suddenly  in  at  a  low  doorway  in  a  rough 
mud  wall,  we  found  ourselves  in  a  fair-sized  room 
where  a  number  of  weavers  sat  at  work.  The 
mud  walls  bristled  with  the  straw  of  which  they 
were  partially  composed,  and  the  weavers'  garments 
were  ragged  and  dirty.  What  a  strange  contrast 
the  rich,  soft  silk  upon  the  looms  presented  to  its 
miserable  surroundings !  Silk  is  not  always  a 
sign  of  luxury  or  wealth  in  Turkestan.  I  can 
see  as  I  write  the  figure  of  one  of  the  stalwart 
countrymen  who  ferried  us  across  the  Syr  Daria, 
miles  away  from  any  town  or  village.  His  outer 
garment  was  in  rags  and  half  covered  with  mud, 
but  as  he  worked  away  at  the  rope  we  could  see 
that  he  wore  beneath  this  a  tunic  of  the  finest  silk, 
fine,  I  would  add,  in  quality,  for  the  thread  of 
Turkestan  silk  is  much  coarser  than  that  of  China 
and  Japan,  and  consequently  stands  a  far  greater 
amount  of  wear.  The  Russians  have  proved  this 
for  themselves;  gentlemen  find  it  a  real  economy 
to  indulge  in  the  luxury  of  silken  shirts,  for  a  piece 
of  white  silk  costing  forty-five  shillings  makes  them 
six  European  shirts  which  "will  wear  for  ever"; 
and   ladies   can   line   all   their   dresses   with  silk. 


40  IN  RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

without  feeling  that  it  is  an  extravagance.  The 
Sarts  also  manufacture  a  curious  material  called 
adras,  half  cotton,  half  silk ;  of  this  the  robes  of 
Bokharan  officials  are  usually  made.  It  has  a 
shiny,  paper-like  appearance,  which  is  obtained 
by  soaking  it  in  white  of  egg.  There  is  also  a 
rich  velvet  manufactured  in  Bokhara. 

It  seemed  to  me,  when  driving  for  the  first  time 
through  the  streets  of  Samarkand  on  a  brilliant 
September  morning  in  1896,  that  Keats  could  not 
have  chosen  a  more  appropriate  epithet  for  that  city 
than  "  Silken  Samarkand  " ;  almost  every  other  man 
we  met  was  clothed  in  silk.  A  gentle  breeze  filled 
their  long,  wide  sleeves  till  they  looked  like  silken 
pillows,  and  spread  out  the  folds  of  their  ample  gar- 
ments, while  the  silk  embroidery  on  the  boys*  caps 
shone  in  the  direct  rays  of  the  midday  sun.  I  feel 
it  impossible  to  write  about  Central  Asia  without 
constantly  referring  to  the  rapid  changes  that  have 
taken  place  during  the  last  few  years.  Were  a 
poet  to  write  of  Samarkand  to-day,  "  cotton  "  is  the 
epithet  that  truth  would  compel  him  to  use.  While 
the  cotton-seed  is  usurping  every  inch  of  cultivable 
ground,  while  its  odour  is  spoiling  the  fragrance  of 
the  air,  and  its  scattered  fluff  making  the  very  streets 
look  like  factories,  materials  manufactured  in  Moscow 
from  that  very  same  cotton  are  quietly  but  surely 
usurping  the  place  of  those  glorious  silks  that  once 
charmed  the  eye  of  every  European  traveller.     But, 


THE  SILK   INDUSTRY  41 

alas !  it  is  not  only  the  silk  that  is  disappearing.  A 
book  published  in  1901  has  the  following  passage : — 
"We  are  not  quite  certain  that  the  treasures  of 
Samarkand  are  dispersed.  The  plunder  of  a  world 
was  collected  there  once,  and,  though  it  is  impro- 
bable, the  Khans  of  Bokhara  may  still  possess 
articles  forwarded  by  Jenghiz  and  his  son's  couriers 
to  that  strange  capital  at  the  back  of  the  world,  on 
which  every  road  in  Asia  is  said  to  have  converged."  ^ 
There  are  still  treasures  in  Samarkand,  but  it  is 
only  the  patient  excavators  who  will  find  them,  they 
lie  hidden  under  the  ruin  and  rubbish  of  centuries. 
Many  a  Sart  who  has  an  eye  for  gain  would  will- 
ingly do  a  little  digging  on  his  own  account  had  not 
the  Government  wisely  put  a  check  to  such  destruc- 
tive proceedings.  As  it  is,  they  flock  like  birds  of 
prey  to  each  likely  spot  after  a  fall  of  rain,  pick  up 
every  fragment  that  has  been  worked  into  sight,  and 
sell  it  for  all  they  can  get  to  the  first  curio-dealer 
they  meet,  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  the  law  commands 
them  to  bring  everything  they  find  to  the  local 
museum,  and  promises  them  in  return  one-half  the 
value  of  their  treasure. 

The  Russian  curio-dealer  is  a  lucky  fellow.  For 
the  last  ten  years,  to  say  the  least,  he  has  been 
making  his  fortune  rapidly ;  a  fact  not  to  be  won- 
dered at  when  we  consider  that  he  has  the  whole 
of  Russian  Turkestan  as  his  own  private  reserve. 

^  "  Asia  and  Europe,"  by  Meredith  Townsend. 


42  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

As  a  permit  to  enter  Turkestan  is  rarely  granted  to 
any  but  Russian  subjects,  and  never  to  foreigners  of 
the  mercantile  class,  the  Russian  curio-dealer  has  no 
one  to  interfere  with  the  splendid  monopoly  upon 
which  he  is  growing  so  fat  and  sleek.  He  has  his 
emissaries  all  over  the  country,  in  Khiva,  in  Bok- 
hara, in  Samarkand,  and  in  Kashgar,  which  last 
named,  being  Chinese  territory,  is  of  course  open 
to  all.  Many  of  these  emissaries  are  of  the  Hebrew 
race ;  and  this  point  is  greatly  in  their  favour,  for 
it  enables  them  to  gain  an  easy  admittance  to  the 
houses  of  native  Jews,  which  in  themselves  are  mines 
of  wealth  to  the  collector  of  antiquities.  I  came 
across  one  such  emissary  in  Kokand,  and  was  inter- 
ested in  looking  over  some  of  his  latest  booty,  which 
consisted  of  several  Greek  coins,  on  one  of  which 
it  was  easy  to  distinguish  the  head  of  Alexander  the 
Great,  with  his  name  in  Greek  characters  round  it ; 
another  was  a  Roman  coin  of  pure  gold,  on  which 
we  read  the  inscription  of  the  Emperor  Titus ;  we 
also  saw  several  beautifully  carved  metal  caskets. 

"  How  do  you  know  that  the  coins  are  genuine  ?  " 
I  asked. 

*^  Show  me  the  man  in  Kokand  who  could  make 
one  of  them,"  was  the  man's  reply. 

I  then  asked  who  would  buy  them  of  him. 

"I  sell  a  good  many  to  private  gentlemen,"  he 
replied,  '*  in  England  and  Scotland,  who  are  them- 
selves clever  numismatologists  and  possess  priceless 


THE  SILK  INDUSTRY  43 

collections  that  have  been  handed  down  from  father 
to  son  for  generations.  I  also  sell  a  great  many  in 
America,  but  the  Americans  only  began  to  collect 
about  fifteen  or  twenty  years  ago.  They  are  keen 
at  it,  but  have  not  the  understanding  that  I  find  in 
Britain ;  still,  they  are  ready  enough  to  buy." 


CHAPTER  VI 

GOVERNMENT  OF  NATIVE  TOWNS 

A  LITTLE  to  the  north  of  Tashkent  there  lies  a 
small  town  called  Turkestan.  On  their  way  south- 
ward from  Siberia  in  1864,  ^^^  Russians  took  it,  and 
many  writers  affirm  that,  mistaking  its  name  for  that 
of  the  entire  region,  they  adopted  the  appellation 
of  **  Turkestan  "  for  their  new  territory.  Up  to  that 
time,  they  assure  us,  the  Khanates  of  Bokhara, 
Khiva,  and  Kokand  were  known  by  these  names 
alone.  Yet  I  find  that  Gibbon  also  gave  the  name 
of  Turkestan  to  that  part  of  the  world,  and  he  wrote 
more  than  a  hundred  years  earlier.^ 

A  Central  Asian  Khanate  consists  of  a  number 
of  small  states  gathered  loosely  together  under  one 
supreme  ruler.  Each  of  these  states  is  composed 
of  a  large  town  and  the  villages  scattered  around  it. 
A  Khan  or  Amir  governs  directly  that  town  alone 
in  which  he  resides.  Here  he  collects  the  taxes, 
appoints  judges  and  other  officials,  and  decides  all 
important  disputes  and  criminal  cases.  The  states, 
it  will  be  remembered,  are  separated  from  one 
another  by  great  stretches  of  desert,  and  each  is 

1  Marco  Polo  called  it  "Great  Turkey." 
44 


GOVERNMENT  OF  NATIVE  TOWNS    45 

in  itself  an  oasis  from  which  its  nearest  neighbour 
is  often  a  hundred  miles  removed.  It  was  impera- 
tive in  the  old  days,  when  communication  was 
more  difficult,  that  the  individual  Governors  or 
Begs  should  be  invested  with  absolute  power  over 
the  territory  they  had  to  govern.  Their  position 
has  been  compared  to  that  of  the  Satraps  of  ancient 
Persia.  Like  the  Satraps,  they  often  rebelled  against 
their  masters  and  fought  with  one  another  when  it 
suited  them  to  do  so ;  but  when  the  Russians  came 
upon  the  scene  things  were  changed.  Bokhara 
and  Khiva  surrendered  and  became  vassal  states 
to  Russia,  who  thought  it  the  wisest  policy  to 
strengthen  the  hands  of  their  respective  Khans  and 
reduce  the  position  of  the  Begs  to  that  of  mere 
government  officials.  The  execution  of  several  un- 
ruly Begs  upon  Russian  territory  was  a  sufficient 
warning  to  their  successors.  The  people  of  Kokand 
showed  more  spirit ;  they  fought  it  out  to  the  last ; 
but  the  Russians  won  the  day,  and  the  Khan  was 
forced  to  flee,  leaving  the  land  to  become  Russian 
territory. 

The  Khanates  were  all  governed  in  one  and  the 
same  manner :  each  had,  as  Bokhara  has  to-day,  its 
Cush  Beggi  or  Chief  Minister,  who  was  prohibited 
from  leaving  the  citadel  in  the  absence  of  the  Amir ; 
its  Diwan  Beggi  or  Finance  Minister,  and  a  number 
of  minor  officials,  besides  its  military  commander 
and  the  officers  under  him.     In  addition  there  were 


46  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

always  numerous  courtiers  whose  duty  it  was  to  ap- 
pear in  gorgeous  robes  on  state  occasions,  and  help 
to  increase  the  pomp  that  surrounded  their  ruler. 

Twice  every  year  the  Amir  of  Bokhara  receives  a 
prescribed  number  of  presents  from  each  of  his 
Begs — so  many  horses,  so  many  robes,  so  many 
yards  of  silk.  The  costliness  of  these  presents  is 
regulated  according  to  the  wealth  of  the  terri- 
tory over  which  the  Beg  is  ruler.  If  the  Amir 
chooses  to  visit  one  of  his  Begs,  he  must  be 
received,  retinue  and  all,  into  the  Beg's  palace, 
where  he  remains  as  long  as  he  likes  at  the  ex- 
pense of  the  town.  In  February  1902  the  Amir 
of  Bokhara  spent  ten  days  with  the  Beg  of  Chaijui, 
on  'his  way  to  St.  Petersburg,  and  the  cost  of  en- 
tertaining him  was  by  no  means  light.  The  women 
of  Charjui  are  said  to  be  the  most  beautiful  in  all 
Bokhara ;  and  among  his  presents  the  Beg  has  to 
supply  two  young  girls  every  year  for  the  Amir's 
harem. 

Before  the  Russian  conquest  the  Amirs  of  Bok- 
hara had  their  summer  palace  at  Samarkand.  Ker- 
min^,  about  seventy  miles  from  the  town  of  Bokhara, 
is  the  favourite  residence  of  the  present  Amir.  "  He 
was  Beg  there  before  he  became  Amir,  and  has  a 
particular  attachment  for  the  place."  So  says  an 
official  guide-book  published  in  Tashkent;  but  in 
Bokhara  the  natives  tell  a  diflferent  tale. 

The  relationship   I    have   described  as  existing 


GOVERNMENT  OF  NATIVE  TOWNS    47 

between  the  Amirs  or  Khans  and  their  Begs,  and 
their  mode  of  government,  was  established  long 
before  the  land  came  under  Uzbeg  sway ;  indeed 
some  writers  trace  it  back  to  the  time  of  its  original 
inhabitants,  the  people  of  Bactria  and  Sogdiana,  who 
were  of  Indo-Germanic  stock.  His  periodical  visits 
to  the  Amir  are  the  Schattenseite^  as  a  German  writer 
expresses  it,  of  a  Beg's  otherwise  happy  existence. 
He  leaves  his  house  without  knowing  whether  his 
master  will  allow  him  ever  to  return  to  it ;  all  de- 
pends upon  the  humour  in  which  the  Amir  happens 
to  be  when  the  Beg  arrives  on  the  scene,  and  the 
words  which  may  be  whispered  into  his  ear  by 
jealous  courtiers.  Under  these  circumstances  it  is 
not  surprising  that  heavy  sums  spent  in  bribery 
have  to  be  included  in  a  Beg's  annual  outlay. 

The  administration  of  Bokhara  is  in  the  hands  of 
its  Cush  Beggi,  but  if  there  is  a  case  between  a 
Bokharan  and  a  European  it  goes  before  the  Russian 
Political  Agent,  who  resides  in  the  Russian  town  of 
that  name.  If  a  street  quarrel  arises  in  Bokhara,  an 
official  called  a  Reis^  whose  special  duty  it  is  to 
keep  order  in  the  streets,  has  a  right  to  whip  the 
disputants  out  of  the  way ;  and,  although  this  office 
has  been  done  away  with  in  Russian  territory,  even 
there  the  native  police  still  make  free  use  of  the 
whip  when  a  crowd  has  to  be  dispersed.  One  of 
the  most  amusing  memories  I  carried  away  with  me 
is  that  of  a  whipping  scene  that  took  place  in  front 


48  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

of  the  chief  mosque  in  Kokand,  after  the  hour  of 
universal  prayer  with  which  the  fast  of  Ramazan 
was  brought  to  a  close.  The  people  who  filled  the 
great  court  made  a  rush  for  the  gate,  and  the  native 
police  fearing  a  crush,  began  to  whip  vigorously  on 
all  sides.  Whack !  whack  !  whack !  went  the  whip 
on  their  wadded-cotton  coats  —  it  really  seemed 
enough  to  frighten  a  hero.  As  all  fled  before  the 
whip,  no  one  was  hurt ;  had  any  one  tried  to  brave 
it,  a  lash  across  the  face  would  soon  have  brought 
him  to  his  senses. 

Every  native  town  has  its  own  police,  with  a 
Kur-bashif  or  Chief  of  Police,  at  their  head,  who,  in 
his  turn,  is  under  the  supervision  of  the  Russian 
police.  As  in  Bokhara  and  Khiva,  here  also  the 
night-watchman  disturbs  the  slumbers  of  all  who 
are  not  accustomed  to  it  from  their  youth,  with  the 
noise  of  his  weird-sounding  drum.  All  night  long 
he  wanders  up  and  down  the  deserted  streets,  or, 
oftener  still,  upon  the  flat  roofs  of  the  particular 
half-dozen  houses  whose  inmates  have  subscribed 
towards  his  maintenance,  hardly  ceasing  for  an 
instant  to  beat  his  drum.  The  idea  is  that  thieves 
will  be  afraid  to  do  any  mischief  when  he  is  on  the 
watch,  whereas  in  reality  the  system  has  great  ad- 
vantages for  evildoers,  as  it  relieves  them  from  all 
fear  of  being  surprised. 

The  houses  of  Sart  towns  are  divided  into  sets  of 
fifty.     From  the  fifty  householders  in  each  set  one 


GOVERNMENT  OF  NATIVE  TOWNS    49 

is  chosen  to  be  Ellik-bashi^  or  "  head  of  fifty  " ;  he 
again  is  under  a  head  of  a  district,  a  Min-bashi^ 
who,  in  his  turn,  is  under  Russian  supervision. 

Every  town  has  its  Aksakal,  or  Grey-beard, 
whose  position  corresponds  in  the  main  with  that  of 
a  mayor.  He  is  chosen  by  the  people  for  a  period 
of  three  years,  and  acts  as  their  representative  to 
the  Russians,  whose  policy  it  is  to  allow  the  Sarts 
as  much  freedom  as  possible  in  the  management  of 
their  own  affairs.  The  same  Aksakal  may  not  be 
elected  more  than  twice  following. 

With  regard  to  military  matters,  there  is  no  con- 
scription for  Sarts  on  Russian  ground,  the  Govern- 
ment being  well  aware  that  these  people  are  not  such 
stuff  as  heroes  are  made  of,  and  that  their  presence 
in  the  army  would  be  less  advantageous  than  their 
absence  from  it.  The  Amir  of  Bokhara  has  of 
course  his  own  militia,  and,  since  the  Czar  honoured 
him  with  the  title  of  Ataman  of  the  Terski  Cossacks, 
he  has  always  maintained  a  bodyguard  of  a  hundred 
Cossacks.  His  army  is  divided  into  regulars  and 
irregulars,  besides  which  there  are  also  volunteers. 
Once  a  man  enters  the  army  he  remains  in  it  for 
life,  with  the  result  that  youths  and  old  men  are 
to  be  seen  serving  side  by  side.  The  only  paid 
servants  of  the  Amir  are  those  in  the  army,  which 
is  composed  chiefly  of  men  who  have  committed 
some  crime — loafers,  good-for-nothings,  young  boys, 

and  decrepit  veterans;  each  of  these  receives  as 

D 


50  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

much  as  six  shillings  monthly  from  his  government. 
As  for  their  weapons,  one  soldier  is  furnished  with 
a  gun  that  served  in  the  Crimean  War,  another  with 
a  bayonet  from  the  time  of  Napoleon ;  the  cannon 
with  which  the  citadel  would  be  defended  in  the 
case  of  an  attack  are  copper  ones  from  the  field 
of  Waterloo,  on  wooden  wheels,  which  have  to  be 
loaded  in  front.  The  uniform  of  the  rank  and  file 
is  partly  Russian,  but  the  trousers  are  red,  and  the 
caps  are  without  cockades.  The  uniform  of  the 
officers  is  quite  Russian,  while  the  cavalry  are 
attired  as  Cossacks.  The  epaulettes  of  the  former, 
which  have  a  sorry  appearance,  have  been  mostly 
procured  from  hawkers  of  old  clothes,  after  having 
served  their  day  upon  Russian  shoulders.  The 
entire  force  is  said  to  consist  of  20,000  men,  though 
I  heard  in  Bokhara  that  it  was  only  14,000. 

Russians  residing  in  the  country  are  fond  of 
decorating  the  walls  of  their  houses  with  native 
armour  made  in  Kokand.  I  saw  helmets  with  per- 
forated visors,  breastplates,  and  whole  suits  of  chain 
armour,  many  of  which  had  been  picked  up  on  the 
battlefield  after  the  conquest  of  Kokand  in  1876. 
Yet,  in  spite  of  the  warlike  appearance  that  the 
natives  must  have  presented  in  those  days,  the 
Russians  succeeded  in  taking  the  largest  and  most 
strongly  fortified  town  in  Central  Asia  with  a  force 
of  only  two  battalions. 


CHAPTER  VII 

SART    TOWNS 

There  is  a  remarkable  similarity  between  one  Sart 
town  and  another.  Indeed  it  has  been  truly  said 
that,  if  a  man  well  acquainted  with  the  country  were 
to  be  set  down  blindfolded  in  any  one  of  those  that 
are  not  distinguishable  by  their  towering  ruins  dating 
from  the  time  of  Tamerlane,  he  would  find  it  difficult, 
on  using  his  eyes  again,  to  say  in  which  town  he 
was.  The  central  point  in  every  town  is  its  bazaar. 
Round  this  are  built  the  dwelling-houses  of  the 
people,  interspersed  with  small  gardens,  courtyards, 
and  crooked  alleys,  very  few  of  which  are  wide 
enough  for  European  traffic;  Surrounding  all  these 
is  the  town  wall  with  its  gates  and  citadel,  or  at  least 
the  traces  of  them,  and  outside  the  walls  are  the 
fields  and  gardens  of  the  citizens.  The  whole  is 
intersected  by  innumerable  canals.  As  all  the  chief 
streets  converge  to  one  point — either  the  market- 
place or  the  bazaar — a  new-comer  soon  learns  to 
find  his  way  about.  Then,  too,  there  are  always 
plenty  of  heavily  laden  Kirgiz  camels  passing  to 
and  from  the  surrounding  steppe,  and  a  glance  at 
these  will  soon  show  the  lie  of  the  land.    Town 

5« 


52  IN  RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

wall,  citadel,  houses,  all  are  built  of  the  very  soil 
on  which  they  stand,  a  kind  of  clay,  particularly 
suited  for  the  purpose,  and,  as  a  Jew  who  remem- 
bered the  history  of  his  ancestors  informed  me, 
closely  resembles  that  of  which  bricks  were  once 
made  in  Egypt. 

"To  build  a  Sart  house,"  said  that  gentleman, 
"  you  only  need  a  good  rainfall  and  plenty  of  mud. 
You  can  get  some  doors  and  windows  ready-made. 
Be  sure  to  put  your  household  stores  of  wood  and 
charcoal  on  the  roof,  or  the  rain  alone  will  soon 
demolish  your  dwelling.  As  it  is,  every  house  is  in 
a  constant  state  of  rebuilding." 

When  dry  this  clay  is  as  hard  as  stone,  and,  as 
the  climate  is  an  exceptionally  dry  one,  bricks  made 
of  it  can  very  well  be  used  for  building.  Moistened 
with  water  it  becomes  pliable  as  wax.  When  a 
Sart  is  going  to  build  a  wall,  he  jfirst  digs  a  trench 
close  to  the  site  chosen,  and  then  turns  into  it  the 
water  from  the  nearest  canal.  With  the  water  he 
now  mixes  the  soil  thrown  up  from  the  trench,  add- 
ing at  the  same  time  a  quantity  of  straw,  and  stamp- 
ing on  it  till  his  feet  have  kneaded  it  into  a  thick 
paste.  Then  he  takes  a  lump,  works  a  stone  into 
the  middle,  and  lays  his  first  brick  aside  to  bake  in 
the  sun ;  as  soon  as  a  sufficient  number  are  ready 
the  first  layer  of  the  wall  is  made,  and  the  second  is 
added  when  the  first  is  dry.  When  the  wall  has 
reached  the  desired  height  it  is  smoothly  plastered 


SART  TOWNS  53 

over  with  a  thin  layer  of  clay,  and  this,  of  course,  is 
the  first  to  suffer  when  rain  comes.  One  often  sees 
the  rough  bricks  partially  exposed  to  view,  and  the 
whole  structure  looking  quite  dilapidated,  though 
but  a  few  months  have  passed  since  its  com- 
pletion. 

"  How  did  these  walls  serve  the  Sarts  when  the 
Russians  came  against  them  ?  "  was  a  question  that 
rose  to  my  lips,  as  I  looked  at  what  remains  of  the 
old  wall  at  Tashkent. 

"  Our  bullets  went  through  them  if  they  were  at 
all  thin,"  was  the  answer ;  "  and  if  they  were  thick 
the  bullets  simply  rebounded,  so  we  always  concen- 
trated our  attacks  upon  the  city  gates." 

Some  towns  have  as  many  as  twelve  gates.  Bok- 
hara the  Noble  has  eleven.  Every  gate  has  a 
round  tower  on  either  side  of  it,  always  larger  at 
the  base  than  at  the  summit,  and  built  with  plat- 
forms for  its  defenders.  The  gates  of  Bokhara  and 
Khiva  are  shut  at  sunset,  and  the  keys  handed 
over  to  the  keeping  of  the  chief  of  the  police,  lest 
the  sentinel  should  fall  asleep  or  prove  unfaithful 
to  his  charge.  The  people  of  Tashkent  further 
protected  their  town  in  the  old  days  by  making 
artificial  hills  at  regular  intervals  in  the  surround- 
ing steppe,  on  each  of  which  two  sentinels  were 
placed  to  spy  out  an  approaching  foe;  they  are 
still  to  be  seen  in  the  direction  of  Fergana,  reach- 
ing to  a  distance  of  fifty  miles. 


54  IN   RUSSIAN   TURKESTAN 

The  streets  of  a  Sart  town  are  little  more  than 
twisting  pathways  between  windowless  mud  walls  ; 
these  are  not  the  walls  of  the  houses,  but  of  the  court- 
yards in  which  the  houses  are  enclosed.  Their 
height  is  just  sufficient  to  make  it  impossible  for  a 
man  mounted  on  horse  or  camel  to  see  over  them  as 
he  rides  along  the  street.  A  Sart's  home  is  his  castle, 
and  no  stranger's  eye  must  ever  rest  on  the  fair  forms 
that  dwell  therein.  Curiosity  often  led  me  to  look  in 
at  the  open  doorways,  but,  as  far  as  seeing  anything 
went,  I  was  invariably  disappointed,  for  in  every  case 
my  eye  rested  on  the  blank  wall  of  another  court 
which  stood  between  me  and  the  abode  on  the 
threshold  of  which  I  was  trespassing.  In  order  to' 
ensure  the  strictest  privacy,  no  door  ever  opens 
opposite  another.  The  streets  are  paved  by  nature 
with  the  same  clay  as  that  with  which  the  houses 
are  built,  so  that  they  are  inches  deep  in  powdery 
dust  in  summer,  and  covered  with  an  even  greater 
depth  of  oozy  mud  in  winter.  Of  all  the  towns  I 
saw  at  this  season  Tashkent  was  certainly  the 
richest  in  mud.  On  one  occasion  when  we  were 
visiting  two  of  the  wealthiest  families  in  the  native 
town,  who  lived  in  the  same  street  exactly  opposite 
each  other,  we  had  to  get  into  the  droshky  to  cross 
the  road.  Had  we  attempted  it  on  foot  the  mud 
would  have  reached  above  our  knees.  Yet  there 
had  been  no  rain  for  a  week.  A  writer  describes 
how  he  rescued  a  little  Sart  boy,  whose  horse  had 


SART  TOWNS  55 

stumbled,  from  an  untimely  end.  He  lifted  the 
child  out  of  the  mud  by  the  only  part  of  him  that 
was  visible — his  heels.  In  Bokhara,  after  a  day's 
rain,  I  found  it  impossible  to  walk,  even  in  the 
covered  streets  of  the  bazaar,  without  clutching  the 
arm  of  the  gentleman  who  accompanied  me.  Narrow 
though  the  streets  of  Tashkent  may  be,  they  are 
wider  as  a  rule  than  those  of  Tangier,  or  of  old 
Cairo;  wheeled  vehicles  can  pass  through  many  of 
them,  though  it  often  happens  that,  when  two  con- 
veyances meet,  one  has  to  back  out  of  the  way. 

Not  only  the  absence  of  windows,  but  also  that  of 
women,  has  to  do  with  the  monotony  of  the  streets. 
I  have  roamed  about  Bokhara  for  days  together 
without  encountering  one  solitary  female  figure. 
In  the  towns  that  are  completely  under  Russian 
sway  one  certainly  sees  more  women  about,  but 
even  there  their  presence  does  little  to  enliven  the 
scene,  for,  rich  and  poor  alike,  all  are  enveloped  in  a 
shapeless  outer  garment  of  sombre  grey,  with  veils 
of  black  horsehair. 

When  a  Sart  wants  amusement  he  turns  his  steps 
instinctively  to  the  bazaar;  when  he  wants  news 
of  what  is  going  on  in  the  world  he  is  off  to  the 
bazaar,  and  when  in  fact  there  is  no  urgent  reason 
why  he  should  be  there,  you  will  find  him  in 
the  bazaar.  He  has  the  usual  Eastern  peculiarity 
that  he  would  rather  walk  than  run,  stand  than 
walk,  sit  than  stand,  and  the  place  above  all  where 


56  IN   RUSSIAN   TURKESTAN 

he  prefers  to  sit  is  the  bazaar.  The  most  interest- 
ing bazaars  to  foreigners  are  those  of  Bokhara  and 
Tashkent.  The  latter  is  one  of  the  largest  in  Cen- 
tral Asia ;  it  has  upwards  of  4500  booths  or  shops 
lining  the  sides  of  its  interesting  streets,  which  are 
wider  than  those  of  Bokhara.  In  both  towns  they 
are  covered  with  reed  matting  supported  by  beams 
laid  across  from  the  booths  on  either  side,  so  that 
one  can  stroll  there  in  the  hottest  part  of  a  summer's 
day  without  any  inconvenience  from  the  sun's  rays. 
The  booths  have  neither  windows  nor  doors ;  they 
are  closed  at  night  by  means  of  shutters  made  of 
wood,  or  sometimes  of  matting.  The  salesman  sits 
tailor  fashion  in  the  front  of  his  shop  in  summer, 
while  in  winter  his  feet  are  tucked  under  a  low  table 
covered  with  a  cotton  quilt  under  which  is  a  pan  of 
charcoal,  and  his  appearance  is  more  like  that  of  a 
sick  person  in  bed  than  of  a  pushing  tradesman 
anxious  to  sell  his  wares.  One  customer  will  seat 
himself  comfortably  by  his  side  before  beginning  to 
inspect  his  goods,  while  another  will  complete  a 
bargain  without  descending  from  his  horse,  the 
articles  being  spread  out  one  by  one  on  the  animal's 
neck  for  inspection.  When  several  customers  halt 
before  the  same  booth,  a  wooden  bench  is  placed  in 
front  of  it,  and  they  sit  there  in  a  row.  Shopping 
is  simplified  by  the  fact  that  all  shoemakers  are 
together  in  one  section,  all  jewellers  in  another,  and 
so  on.     No  time  is  lost  in  hunting  for  a  particular 


SART  TOWNS  57 

class  of  article,  the  buyer  knows  exactly  where  to 
look  for  what  he  wants,  nevertheless  shopping  is 
a  much  more  lengthy  and  serious  affair  with  the 
Sart  than  it  is  with  us.  More  than  once  my  Russian 
friends  administered  to  me  a  mild  reproof  for  asking 
the  prices  too  abruptly.  "  The  price  must  be  asked 
in  a  separate  conversation/'  I  was  told  ;  and  when  I 
requested  that  an  article  I  had  chosen  should  be 
wrapped  in  paper,  a  man  standing  by  went  off  to 
fetch  some,  but  took  so  long  about  it  that  I  began  to 
despair  of  seeing  him  again.  Paper  always  has  to 
be  fetched  when  customers  want  it,  and  it  is  often 
more  expensive  than  the  goods  themselves.  One 
day  in  Samarkand  I  bought  a  number  of  caps,  and 
my  parcel  needed  string  as  well  as  paper.  Im- 
mediately one  bystander  went  off"  for  paper,  while 
another,  an  old  man  with  one  eye,  stepped  up  and 
handed  me  a  piece  of  string.  On  another  occasion, 
though  pressed  for  time,  I  stopped  to  buy  some 
grapes  in  the  Rigistan,  thinking  it  would  be  a  matter 
of  but  a  few  moments  to  pay  for  and  carry  them  off; 
but,  alas  I  it  was  not  such  a  simple  affair ;  a  crowd 
of  spectators  gathered  round.  The  man,  who  was 
sitting  on  the  ground  with  his  fruit  around  him,  slowly 
weighed  out  two  pounds,  stopping  in  the  middle  to 
talk  to  the  lookers-on,  apologising  for  his  use  of  a 
stone  as  a  weight,  which  was  against  the  law,  he  being 
too  poor  to  purchase  standard  weights,  and  talking 
on  and  on  about  this  and  that  till  I  lost  all  patience. 


58  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

"You  can't  buy  without  a  conversation/'  said  a 
lady  who  was  with  me.     "  That  is  impossible ! " 

If  you  ask  a  man  the  price  of  all  the  goods  in 
his  shop  he  says,  "Oh,  I  could  not  possibly  sell 
you  all|  because  then  I  should  have  no  shop  and 
my  business  would  come  to  a  standstill."  This  is 
not  unlike  a  story  told  me  by  a  friend  in  Japan. 
She  wished  to  buy  some  biscuits  of  a  particular 
kind,  but  the  Jap  had  sold  them  all.  "  I  suppose 
you  will  get  more?"  she  said.  "Oh  no,"  he 
replied,  "they  would  only  be  sold  over  again  di- 
rectly, if  I  did."  A  Chinaman  would  act  differently. 
The  most  profitable  months  for  a  tradesman  are 
those  following  the  wheat  and  cotton  harvests,  for 
the  people  have  more  money  and  are  anxious  to 
buy.  A  Russian  gentleman,  who  was  acting  as 
my  interpreter  in  the  bazaar  at  Andijan,  said  to  one 
of  the  shopkeepers — 

"  How  much  money  do  you  make  a  year  ?  " 

"  God  alone  knows,"  was  the  reply. 

"He  is  afraid  to  tell  the  truth  to  a  Russian," 
said  my  friend,  "lest  he  might  go  home  and  raise 
the  prices  of  Russian  goods.  No  Sart  will  ever 
tell  us  what  he  sells  or  gains.  They  make  a  little 
money  and  then  lend  it  out,  requiring  cent,  per 
cent.  Indeed  it  is  no  uncommon  thing  for  a  man 
to  lend  his  neighbour  five  roubles  for  a  week  and 
demand  six  in  return." 

The  Sarts  love  to  bargain.     M.  Nalivkin  tells  us 


SART  TOWNS  59 

how  on  one  occasion,  when  there  was  to  be  a  theatri- 
cal performance  for  which  the  entrance  was  fifteen 
kopecks  (threepence),  they  bargained  at  the  door  to 
be  allowed  to  enter  for  eight,  nine,  and  ten  kopecks. 
The  women,  too,  have  an  eye  to  business;  they  are 
occasionally  to  be  seen  seated  on  the  ground  in  the 
bazaar  with  bread  or  caps  for  sale,  but  they  do  not 
make  very  much  in  that  way,  as  it  is  against  the  law 
of  Mohammed  that  their  voices  should  be  heard  in 
the  street ;  thus  the  men,  who  may  shout  as  much 
as  they  like,  take  most  of  the  custom  away  from 
them.  Whereas  in  Europe  the  ladies  do  most  of 
the  shopping,  with  the  Sarts  it  is  just  the  reverse. 
No  lady  of  the  upper  class  ever  goes  to  the  bazaar ; 
her  men-folk  go  for  her,  and  they  are  nothing 
loth. 

A  very  characteristic  feature  of  the  Central  Asian 
bazaar  is  its  ubiquitous  ckai  kkana  or  tea-shop.  A 
carpet  is  spread  on  the  floor  for  the  passer-by  to 
rest  upon.  And  a  huge  samovar  hisses  at  the 
entrance  with  a  tempting  row  of  teapots,  one  for 
every  customer,  ranged  before  it.  There  is  a  row 
of  chai  khanas  on  one  side  of  the  public  square,  or 
chosu  as  the  Sarts  call  it,  of  Kokand,  and  we  elected 
to  spend  an  afternoon  in  one  of  them,  that  we  might 
have  an  opportunity  of  studying  the  ways  of  the 
people.  The  day  chosen  was  a  very  favourable  one, 
their  feast-day  at  the  close  of  Ramazan.  Everybody 
had  come  to  the  bazaar  with  the  intention  of  having 


6o  IN   RUSSIAN   TURKESTAN 

a  good  time.  The  word  chosu  means  '*  four  canals"; 
it  was  most  appropriate  to  the  square  in  which  we 
found  ourselves  that  afternoon,  for  that  was  bounded 
on  all  sides  by  four  filthy  canals.  When  I  first  saw 
a  man  stoop  to  fill  a  pitcher  from  one  of  those  muddy 
streams,  and  hand  it  to  another  for  a  drink,  I  in- 
voluntarily shut  my  eyes  in  horror.  I  ended,  how- 
ever, by  drinking  some  of  the  selfsame  water  in 
my  tea  an  hour  later,  but  not  until  it  had  been 
well  boiled  in  the  samovar. 

Close  to  our  tea-shop  a  man  sat  on  the  ground 
with  a  metal  tray  in  front  of  him  heaped  with  bits 
of  cooked  meat.  He  had  a  pile  of  small  plates  by 
his  side,  and,  as  each  customer  approached,  took  a 
piece  of  meat  in  his  fingers,  cut  it  up  with  a  rough 
pocket-knive,  and  handed  a  plateful  to  him;  the 
customer  ate  it  with  his  fingers,  put  down  the  plate, 
threw  three  tiny  copper  coins  in  payment,  and  walked 
off.  The  meat-seller,  having  dexterously  caught  the 
coins  in  his  right  hand,  slapped  them  into  his  mouth, 
and  so  had  his  hand  free  to  provide  for  the  next 
comer.  I  was  just  wondering  how  much  money  that 
mouth  would  hold,  when  my  attention  was  attracted 
by  a  prettier  scene.  Close  by,  also  squatted  on  the 
ground,  was  a  seller  of  children's  toys.  Round  him 
were  collected  all  manner  of  quaint  playthings, 
strange-looking  whistles  and  musical,  or  rather 
unmusical,  instruments.  Several  juvenile  customers 
between  the  ages  of  five  and  six  had  gone  down  on 


\ 


SART  TOWNS  6i 

their  little  knees  before  these  treasures,  and  were 
taking  music  lessons  from  the  good-natured  fellow 
as  he  lifted  his  wares  one  by  one  and  explained 
their  use.  As  soon  as  one  of  the  children  had  suc- 
ceeded in  blowing  a  shrill  whistle,  from  an  instru- 
ment which  looked  like  a  mud  teapot,  he  gravely 
decided  to  purchase  it,  and  handed  from  his  little 
store  three  kopecks  (about  three  farthings)  in  ex- 
change, with  the  air  of  a  man  who  had  successfully 
concluded  a  weighty  transaction. 

The  crowd  in  the  square  was  rapidly  increasing, 
and  the  sellers  on  the  ground  were  soon  hidden 
by  the  people  pressing  round  them.  How  they 
managed  to  keep  their  wares  from  being  trodden 
on  was  a  mystery.  Presently  a  man  made 
his  way  through  the  crowd  by  means  of  a  whip 
which  he  held  in  his  hand.  Slash,  slash,  slash 
went  the  whip,  and  the  people  made  way  in  a 
twinkle. 

**  What  right  has  that  man  to  whip  the  rest  out 
of  his  way  like  that  ?  "  I  asked. 

"  He  who  has  the  whip  whips,"  was  the  answer ; 
and  then,  seeing  my  surprise,  my  informant  added, 
"It  doesn't  really  hurt  any  one,  you  know,  espe- 
cially in  winter  when  the  men's  robes  are  so  well 
wadded." 

In  front  of  the  tea-shop  in  which  we  had  in- 
stalled ourselves  was  a  long  row  of  men's  shoes, 
to  which  we  had  added  our  goloshes.     In  a  land  of 


62  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

mud — in  winter — it  is  the  custom  to  leave  one's 
foot-gear  at  the  entrance  even  of  a  tea-shop,  but 
there  is  no  religious  importance  attached  to  the 
taking  off  of  shoes  in  Central  Asia,  it  is  merely  a 
matter  of  convenience.  The  ceiling  above  us  was 
in  itself  a  study.  Here  was  a  solitary  apple  sus- 
pended by  matting,  here  an  onion,  here  a  broken 
teapot,  a  bunch  of  dried  herbs,  and  an  egg ;  there, 
a  medicine  bottle,  a  fan,  a  key,  and  a  melon — each 
object  suspended  from  the  rafters  with  equal  pre- 
cision. In  and  out  and  all  about  were  fluttering 
small  brown  doves.  They  seemed  to  have  their 
nests  in  the  eaves,  and  no  one  took  any  notice  of 
them.  When  any  native  member  of  our  party 
wanted  a  fresh  cup  of  tea,  he  tossed  the  last  drops 
into  the  corner  before  handing  the  cup  to  be  refilled. 

"I  have  known  Russians  who  have  been  much 
with  Sarts  take  up  that  habit,"  said  a  friend, 
smiling,  "and  it  has  had  rather  awkward  con- 
sequences in  European  drawing-rooms." 

Every  one  was  eating  pistachio-nuts,  so  the  ground 
was  strewed  all  over  with  their  shells.  Presently 
a  man  came  forward  with  a  broom  and  began  to 
sweep  them  together,  wherever  the  people  left  him 
room  to  do  so. 

"You  see,"  said  my  companion,  "they  are 
sweeping  up  the  pistachio-shells.  Nothing  is  wasted 
here." 

A  few  minutes  later  all  the  shops  in  the  bazaar 


SART  TOWNS  63 

were  shut,  for  the  sun  was  setting,  and  it  is  against 
the  rules  for  them  to  remain  open  after  the  first 
call  to  prayer.  Many  of  the  tradesmen  wrapped 
up  their  wares,  and  took  them  home  with  them 
for  the  night. 


CHAPTER  VIII 

THE  STRICTEST  MOHAMMEDANS  IN  THE  WORLD 

The  public  buildings  of  a  Sart  town  are  so  closely 
connected  with  the  religion  of  its  inhabitants  that  it 
will  be  best  for  us  to  make  ourselves  clear  about  the 
tenets  of  the  latter  before  we  go  any  further.  To 
begin  with,  the  Sarts  are  Mohammedans;  they  be- 
long to  that  section  of  the  Prophet's  followers  who 
accept  the  sunna  or  traditions,  and  the  four  Caliphs, 
as  well  as  the  Koran.  They  are  much  more  zealous 
in  their  religious  observances  than  their  neigh- 
bours the  Persians — who  are  Shiites,  and  only  re- 
cognise Mohammed  and  his  nephew  Ali^;  in  fact 
throughout  the  whole  of  the  Mohammedan  world 
there  is  no  one  so  strict,  or  so  fanatical  in  some 
respects,  as  the  Sart,  though,  as  regards  the  for- 
bidding of  intercourse  with  unbelievers,  such  as 
Christians  or  Jews,  the  Shiites  are  the  more  strict 
of  the  two.  The  Russians  make  a  point  of  doing 
away  with  everything  that  might  fan  zeal  or  increase 
the  fanaticism  of  their  Asiatic  subjects.  For  this  rea- 
son they  will  not  let  them  rebuild  their  crumbling 

^  The  Shiites  believe  it  allowable  to  abjure  their  religion  in  case 
of  danger  to  their  life,  which  is  not  permitted  by  the  Sunnites. — 
Schiller, 


THE  STRICTEST  MOHAMMEDANS     65 

mosques,  and  for  the  same  reason  they  have  done 
away  with  the  custom  of  appointing  a  Rets,  or 
native  ofEcial,  to  enforce  obedience  to  the  Koran. 
The  people  are  no  longer  whipped  to  church  if  they 
refuse  to  go  of  their  own  accord,  and  if  a  tradesman 
uses  false  weights,  or  cheats  in  any  other  way,  he 
is  no  longer  in  daily  fear  of  a  whipping,  whatever 
other  punishment  may  be  in  store  for  him.  I  am 
told,  however,  that  the  Rets  of  Bokhara  only  uses 
his  whip  with  those  culprits  who  are  not  ready  to 
bribe  him  sufficiently,  so  the  whole  is  nothing  but 
a  system  of  corruption,  and  all  intelligent  citizens 
must  be  glad  that  it  has  been  abolished  in  so  many 
towns. 

The  Persian  costume  is  much  more  recent  than 
that  of  the  Sart,  which,  with  its  ample  turban  and 
flowing  robes,  was  in  vogue  long  before  the  time 
of  Mohammed,  and  has  never  changed  since.  In 
Persia  it  is  only  the  mullahs  who  wear  turbans,  as 
a  sign  of  holiness,  whilst  in  Bokhara  and  Khiva  all 
must  wear  them,  and  girdles  as  well.  In  Afghan- 
istan a  man  must  wear  a  girdle  that  can  be  used  as 
his  shroud ;  but  here  it  is  the  turban  that  is  adapted 
to  that  purpose.  In  Persia  the  face  may  or  may  not 
be  shaved,  according  to  individual  taste ;  it  is  only 
compulsory  for  a  mullah.  With  the  Sarts  all  must 
shave  the  head  as  soon  as  the  beard  begins  to  grow, 
and  this,  of  course,  necessitates  the  wearing  of  a 
turban  or  a  cap.    The*  moustache  is  shaved  above  the 


66  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

upper  lip,  which  must  always  show,  to  ensure  cleanli- 
ness in  eating,  but  the  beard  is  not  touched.  In  no 
country  are  there  so  many  barbers,  or,  I  should  say, 
head-shavers,  for  the  word  barber,  from  its  very 
meaning,  is  an  inappropriate  translation.  A  head- 
shaver  goes  by  the  Tajik  name  of  Sartarash;  sar^ 
head,  and  tarash  —  sYi^vtr.  There  are  many  Shiites 
to  be  found  in  Bokhara,  but  they  are  people  who 
have  emigrated  from  Persia,  never  natives. 

The  Dervishes  of  Bokhara  live  in  a  settlement 
outside  the  town.     With  them  long  hair  is  obliga- 
tory, so  they  can  easily  be  distinguished  from  their 
fellow-men.      Questioned,  they  will   tell  you  that 
Hagar's  son,  Ishmael,  was  the  first  dervish..    Most 
of  them  live  a  life  of  celibacy ;  the  married  ones  are 
those  who  have  joined  the  order  since  their  marriage. 
Another  name  for  them  is  Kalendar^  from  kakm^ 
ask,  and  ^r=door,  because  it  is  their  principal  duty 
to  beg,  and  beat  at  the  doors  at  the  same  time. 
They  are  under  the  leadership  of  a  dervish-in-chief, 
who  keeps  the  bag  and  sends  them  all  over  the 
country  to  beg,  receiving  from  them  on  their  return 
all  that  they  have   collected  during  the  journey. 
Sometimes  he  sends  them  to  travel  for  a  period  of 
one  or  two  years  in  Afghanistan,  in  Persia,  in  Khiva, 
or  in  Kashgar.     His  discipline  is  said  to  be  very 
severe,  a  statement  which  is  hard  to  believe  when 
one  meets  them  tearing  along  the  streets  in  noisy 
troops,  singing  and  shouting  like  men  the  worse  for 


THE  STRICTEST  MOHAMMEDANS    (>y 

drink ;  one  might  mistake  them  for  male  Bacchanals. 
I  once  tempted  a  party  of  five  to  let  me  photograph 
them  by  ofiering  to  each  a  silver  coin,  but  the  pic- 
ture was  not  a  success,  as  they  could  not  be  per- 
suaded to  stop  singing  and  swaying  their  bodies 
backwards  and  forwards. 

*'  What  are  they  singing  ?  "  I  asked. 

"They  are  praising  God,"  was  the  reply. 

It  is  strange  how  much  respect  the  people  have 
for  them,  considering  what  a  wild,  worthless  lot 
they  apparently  are.  I  have  heard  that  most  of 
them  are  dervishes  because  they  are  too  lazy  to 
work  for  their  bread  and  prefer  to  live  at  the  ex- 
pense of  others.  They  wear  a  peculiar  kind  of 
high  cone-shaped  cap,  lined  with  black  sheep's  wool, 
which  hangs  down  over  forehead  and  neck,  and 
mingles  so  completely  with  their  lank,  dishevelled 
hair  that  it  is  almost  impossible  to  tell  where  one 
begins  and  the  other  ends.  The  upper  part  of  the 
cap  is  usually  covered  with  green  or  red  velvet  As 
a  money-box  for  collecting  alms,  the  dervish  carries 
in  his  right  hand  a  gourd  with  one  end  cut  off  and 
replaced  as  a  lid,  while  in  his  left  hand  he  has 
always  a  staff  with  an  iron  ring  let  into  the  end, 
which  can  be  used  as  a  rattle  to  attract  attention. 
His  only  visible  garment  is  a  patchwork  of  rags 
with  numerous  rents  through  which  his  bare  flesh 
is  partially  visible.  His  feet  are  bare  winter  and 
summer,  unless  he  indulges  in  a  pair  of  dilapidated 


68  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

slippers.  Among  other  vices  he  is  addicted  to 
opium-eatingi  to  which  may  be  attributed  the  dazed, 
half-imbecile  expression  of  his  countenance.  The 
native  word  for  dervish,  dervana^  is  also  used,  I  may 
add — and  not  inappropriately — to  designate  an  idiot. 

Before  the  Russians  came  the  poppy  was  widely 
cultivated  in  Turkestan,  and  opium  dens  were  to  be 
found  in  many  of  the  towns.  Happily  that  is  now 
a  thing  of  the  past,  and  all  opium  consumed  to-day 
on  Russian  territory  has  been  smuggled  there  from 
India,  Persia,  or  Bokhara,  in  which  last,  as  the  Amir 
does  not  object  to  it,  it  is  still  grown,  chiefly  in 
Sharisab  ("  Green  City  ")  and  in  Khitab  ("  Book 
City  "),  not  far  from  Samarkand.  There  are  several 
ways  in  which  this  drug  is  taken.  They  mix  oil  of 
opium,  prepared  in  Persia,  with  their  food,  and  it 
stupefies  them.  They  also  prepare  it  like  tobacco, 
and  smoke  it  in  the  chUim^  or  chew  it  in  the  form 
of  a  red  pulp  till  all  its  juice  has  been  extracted. 
A  drink  called  kuknar  is  still  sold  in  Bokhara,  in 
shops  set  apart  for  the  purpose,  and  known  as 
kuknar  khanas.    It  is  a  tea  made  from  poppy-heads. 

The  Sarts  in  general,  though  not  addicted  to  the 
use  of  opium,  are  very  fond  of  nas  or  green  tobacco. 
After  it  has  been  ground  in  mills,  it  is  mixed  with 
ashes,  oil,  and  lime.  This  preparation  they  chew  in 
great  quantities.  To  those  who  are  not  used  to  it, 
it  is  a  powerful  narcotic,  while  those  who  have 
acquired  the  habit  are  its  helpless  victims.    This 


THE  STRICTEST   MOHAMMEDANS    69 

green  mixture,  sold  in  heaps  in  the  bazaar,  is  one 
of  the  first  sights  to  attract  a  foreigner's  notice, 
for  its  shades  of  exquisite  green,  varying  in  depth 
according  to  the  proportion  of  oil  with  which  it  is 
mixed,  are  particularly  beautiful.  Another  variety 
is  made  of  hemp  or  hasheesh.  Though  forbidden 
by  both  Mohammedan  and  Russian  law,  it  still  finds 
much  favour  with  the  natives. 

Some  three  years  ago  the  Russian  colonists  of 
Andijan  had  an  unpleasant  experience  with  regard 
to  Sart  fanaticism  and  the  results  it  may  lead  to. 
There  is — besides  the  Dervishes — a.  class  of  saintly 
men  who  live  upon  the  piety  of  others;  they  are 
called  IsAans,  and  their  office  it  is  to  sit  or  stand 
and  pray  at  street  comers  where  passers-by  can 
drop  them  alms.  They  dress  in  fine  clothing,  and 
are  chiefly  supported  by  men  who,  not  liking  the 
trouble  of  praying  for  themselves,  are  glad  to  find 
some  one  who  will  do  it  for  them,  and  so  make  their 
share  in  Paradise  secure.  One  of  these  IsAans 
who  lived  in  Andijan  had  prospered  to  such  a 
degree  that  he  had  even  built  a  wooden  mosque 
for  his  own  use,  and  had  it  painted  with  gorgeous 
colours.  Much  of  his  time  was  spent  in  ecstasies, 
dreaming  dreams  and  seeing  visions — with  the  help 
of  opium — till  at  last  he  got  so  great  a  hold  on  the 
simple  people  of  Andijan  that  he  persuaded  them 
it  was  God's  will  that  they  should  rise  against 
the  Russians  and  drive  them  from  the  land.    The 


70  IN  RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

conspiracy  was  carried  out  with  such  a  degree  of 
secrecy  that  the  fanatics  were  able  to  surprise  the 
Russian  soldiers  in  their  fortress  and  kill  more  than 
twenty  of  them  in  their  sleep.  It  is  true  that,  once 
the  alarm  given,  the  rising  was  quickly  checked,  but 
not  until  after  every  Russian  woman  and  child  had 
been  placed  in  the  fortress.  A  cross  used  to  mark 
the  spot  where  the  twenty  victims  from  the  Russian 
garrison  lay  buried,  and  even  till  last  year  the  affair 
was  spoken  of  with  bated  breath,  when  that  more 
terrible  occurrence,  the  earthquake  of  December 
1902,  obliterated  the  memory  of  all  minor  troubles. 
The  Ishan  was  put  to  death,  and  his  mosque  de- 
molished ;  only  the  capital  of  one  of  the  pillars  has 
been  preserved,  and  that  is  now  in  the  museum  at 
New  Margelan.  A  mosque  with  such  memories 
attached  to  it  could  not  safely  have  been  left  stand- 
ing amongst  so  fanatical  a  people. 

There  are  no  priests  among  the  followers  of 
Mohammed,  The  men  whom  travellers  so  often 
mistake  for  such  are  mullahs  or  holy  men,  who 
have  spent  many  years  of  their  life  in  the  study  of 
the  Koran,  and  are  thus  qualified  to  officiate  at 
religious  ceremonies.  Poor  men  cannot  afford  to 
have  their  sons  trained  for  this  profession,  as  it 
means  a  regular,  though  small,  outlay  for  many 
years,  with  practically  no  return,  and  every  mullah 
must  be  prepared  to  live  on  his  own  means.  Mullahs 
officiating  at  circumcisions,  marriages,  and  funerals 


THE   STRICTEST   MOHAMMEDANS    71 

receive  presents  from  the  families  concerned,  but 
are  seldom  paid  in  money.  There  are  various  de- 
grees of  holiness  among  them.  Those  who  aspire  to 
the  greatest  sanctity  never  engage  openly  in  trade, 
but  most  of  them  are  glad  to  do  a  little  business  when 
the  opportunity  presents  itself.  All  marry,  and  some 
of  the  richer  ones  have  as  many  as  five  wives, 

A  Sart  who  has  made  a  pilgrimage  to  Mecca 
enjoys  a  much  greater  degree  of  respect  than  is 
shown  to  his  less  fortunate  neighbours.  He  has 
the  right  to  be  addressed  as  Hadj^  and  may  wear  a 
white  calaU  In  old  times  the  way  to  Mecca  lay 
through  Afghanistan  and  India,  and  at  least  two 
years  had  to  be  allowed  for  the  journey,  which  was 
an  extremely  perilous  one.  Many  pilgrims  were 
robbed  and  many  murdered  in  Afghan  territory, 
whilst  numbers  died  of  cholera  in  India.  Since  the 
Russians  opened  their  railway,  pilgrims  have  found 
it  a  much  easier  route  to  go  by  way  of  Batoum, 
Constantinople,  and  Damascus.  Now  that  facilities 
have  so  greatly  increased,  the  number  of  pilgrims 
has  grown  larger  in  proportion.  I  learned  from  the 
Governor  of  Samarkand  that  at  the  present  day  up- 
wards of  ten  thousand  pilgrims  start  annually  from 
each  of  the  governments  of  which  Russian  Turkestan 
is  composed.  Each  pilgrim  carries  a  passport  which 
must  be  visie  at  Constantinople ;  it  is  made  out  for 
six  months.  All  who  can  do  so  aim  to  arrive  in 
Mecca  before  the  great  feast  which  follows  Ramazan, 


72  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

in  spite  of  the  fact  that  a  month  of  fasting  on  the 
way  adds  greatly  to  the  fatigue  of  the  journey. 
Hundreds  die  on  the  road,  and  nearly  half  fall  sick 
or  are  robbed  before  they  reach  their  destination. 
One  never  hears  them  complain,  for  they  are  for- 
bidden to  speak  of  any  misfortune  that  may  have 
befallen  them  coming  or  going. 

"  You  have  had  ill  luck,"  says  the  mullah,  "  but  it 
was  the  will  of  God,  and  you  must  never  speak  of  it." 

When  I  asked  an  old  man  in  Samarkand  if  he  had 
been  to  Mecca  he  replied  in  the  negative,  but  added, 
"  I  intend  to  go  in  the  spring  when  my  little  grand- 
son's hair  is  cut,^  but  I  am  old,  I  know  I  shall  never 
return  from  that  long  journey." 

However,  the  journey  bids  fair  to  become  easier 
every  year.  Turkish  engineers  are  already  engaged 
in  making  a  railway  between  Mecca  and  Damascus, 
but  their  work  has  been  at  a  standstill  of  late  because 
they  considered  themselves  insufficiently  paid. 

On  the  walls  of  Sart  houses  I  used  often  to  see 
prints  of  Mecca ;  they  were  not  a  native  production, 
but  had  come  from  one  of  the  three  centres  of 
Mohammedanism,  Constantinople,  Bombay,  or  Kazan, 
unless,  indeed,  as  I  found  more  than  once,  they  had 
been  printed  by  unbelievers  in  St.  Petersburg. 
Sir  Richard  Burton,  in  describing  his  pilgrimage 

^  A  tress  of  hair  had  been  allowed  to  grow  at  the  back  of  the 
child's  head  as  a  token  of  a  vow  made  by  its  parents  at  its  birth. 
We  often  saw  children  with  such  tresses ;  their  appearance  reminded 
us  of  that  of  the  Riffs  in  North  Africa. 


THE  STRICTEST  MOHAMMEDANS      73 

to  Mecca,  speaks  of  the  baseless  but  world-wide 
calumny  which  declares  that  Islam  recognises  no 
soul  in,  and  consequently  no  future  for,  the  female 
sex.  "The  early  Fathers,"  he  says,  "may  have 
held  such  tenets,  the  Mohammedans  never/' — and 
then  he  goes  on  to  speak  of  the  female  pilgrims  in 
whose  company  he  travelled.  Pilgrimesses  (ap- 
proaching Mecca)  exchanged  the  lisam — that  coquet- 
tish fold  of  thin  white  muslin  which  veils  but  does 
not  hide  the  mouth — for  a  hideous  mask  of  split, 
dried,  and  plaited  palm-leaves,  pierced  with  bull's 
eyes  to  admit  the  light.  The  ugly  mask  is  worn 
because  the  veil  must  not  touch  the  features.  The 
rest  of  the  outer  garment  is  a  long  sheet  of  white 
cotton,  covering  the  head  and  falling  to  the  heels." 

I  have  quoted  these  passages  for  two  reasons: 
firstly,  because  the  erroneous  idea  about  Moham- 
med's opinion  of  women  exists  to  this  day  in  the  minds 
of  many  of  the  Russian  settlers  in  Turkestan ;  and, 
secondly,  because  the  veil  and  outer  dress  described 
is  still  worn  by  the  pilgrimesses  from  that  country.. 
When  visiting  a  native  house  in  Andijan  I  asked 
the  Sart  ladies  if  any  of  them  had  been  to  Mecca. 

"  No,  we  have  not  been  there,"  was  the  response, 
"  but  there  is  a  woman  in  the  next  house  who  has." 

On  my  expressing  a  desire  to  see  the  pilgrimess, 
one  of  the  men  went  in  search  of  her,  and  she  soon 
appeared.  Her  face  was  wrinkled  and  tanned,  and 
she  looked  at  least  seventy,  though  she  gave  her  age 


74  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

as  fifty-eight.  It  was  a  fine,  sad  face,  down  which 
the  tears  trickled  as  she  talked  to  us  of  her  long 
journey,  and  of  the  children  she  had  left  behind  in 
her  adopted  home  in  Kashgar. 

"I  travelled  with  my  brother,"  she  said.  "We 
passed  through  Stamboul,  and  spent  one  week  in 
Jerusalem.  Now  I  have  come  short  of  money  and 
cannot  rejoin  my  children,  for  to  travel  from  Andi- 
jan  to  Kashgar  takes  ten  days  on  horseback.  I 
have  already  been  five  months  travelling." 

"  Can  you  read  ?  "  we  asked. 

"  No,"  she  replied;  "I  went  to  Mecca  that  I  might 
pray  there." 

"  Are  you  glad  you  have  been  ? "  was  our  next 
question. 

"Oh  yes,"  she  replied,  laying  her  hand  on  her 
heart ;  "  I  am  very  glad." 

It  is  strange  that  while  a  woman  may  go  all  the 
way  to  Mecca  to  pray,  she  is  not  permitted  to  join 
in  any  public  worship  at  home,  and  must  carry  out 
all  the  prescribed  rules  for  devotion  in  her  own 
house.  It  is  a  mistake  to  think  that  women  may 
not  ent^r  the  mosques;  they  often  stop  on  their 
way  past  them  to  go  in  and  have  a  look  round, 
when  there  are  no  men  about.  That  the  Sarts  do 
not  consider  the  interior  of  a  mosque  as  holy 
ground  is  proved  by  the  fact  that,,  when  no  better 
sleeping  accommodation  has  been  available,  the  use 
of  one  as  a  lodging  has  sometimes  been  offered  to 


THE  STRICTEST  MOHAMMEDANS     75 

Russian  officials.  If  the  number  of  mosques  in  a 
town  were  to  be  taken  as  an  indication  of  the  piety 
of  its  inhabitants,  visitors  to  Central  Asia  would 
truly  be  filled  with  awe,  as  there  is  one,  if  not 
more,  in  almost  every  street  of  any  size  or  import- 
ance ;  even  the  villages  are  full  of  them ;  one  near 
Kokand  has  for  its  eleven  thousand  inhabitants 
no  less  than  twenty-five  mosques.  The  method 
of  building,  described  in  a  previous  chapter,  is  not, 
of  course,  employed  in  the  case  of  mosques  and 
medresses  which  are  built  of  properly  baked  brick. 

Within  the  precincts  of  a  mosque  one  often 
finds  the  tomb  of  some  saint  who  had  lived 
and  died  in  the  neighbourhood.  The  spot  is 
marked  by  a  long  pole  stuck  in  the  ground  and 
a  horse's  tail  floating  like  a  flag  from  the  top« 
There  is  a  wonderful  vitality  about  these  dead 
saints ;  they  grow  taller  in  their  graves,  some 
of  which  have  to  be  lengthened  periodically  in 
consequence.  The  reader  will  perhaps  be  sur- 
prised to  hear  that  the  graves  of  Daniel,  Noah, 
Solomon,  and  numerous  other  saints  of  Bible  fame 
are  to  be  found  in  Central  Asian  ground.  Daniel 
grew  to  such  an  extent  that  his  tomb,  which  is 
in  the  vicinity  of  Samarkand,  now  measures  twice 
the  original  number  of  feet,  and  he  would  have 
gone  on  growing  had  not  the  Russian  Government 
put  a  stop  to  him  by  building  a  wall  to  keep  him 
within  bounds.     That  wall  was  a  rude  shock  to  a 


76  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

certain  superstition  of  the  Sarts — a  belief  that,  as 
long  as  Daniel  continued  to  grow,  no  foreigner  would 
succeed  in  gaining  complete  possession  of  the  land. 
The  graves  of  even  female  saints  are  an  extra- 
ordinary length.  One  near  Askhabad,  in  Trans- 
caspia,  measures  quite  eighteen  feet.  Burton,  who 
noticed  this  peculiarity  in  other  Mohammedan 
countries,  wrote:  "The  archaeologist  will  remem- 
ber that  the  great  idol  of  Jeddah  in  the  age  of 
Arab  lithology  was  '  a  long  stone.' " 

Close  to  the  burial-place  of  the  Khans  of  Kokand 
there  is  an  asylum,  or  school,  for  blind  old  men. 
They  are  taught  to  repeat  long  passages  of  the 
Koran  by  heart,  in  order  that  they  may  wander 
among  the  tombs  and  pray  for  the  souls  of  the 
departed  Khans;  they  also  go  about  with  a  long 
staff,  begging  for  alms.  The  gateway  of  their 
asylum  is  covered  with  tessellated  work  in  imitation 
of  that  upon  Tamerlane's  beautiful  monuments  in 
Samarkand,  but  it  only  dates  back  to  the  time  of 
the  last  Khan  of  Kokand,  whose  workmen  had  not 
the  secret  of  the  art,  and,  although  it  looks  well 
from  a  distance,  a  nearer  view  shows  it  to  be  as 
miserable  a  failure  as  the  decoration  of  the  Khan's 
palace,  a  building  now  used  as'  a  Russian  church. 
In  Bokhara  blind  beggars  walk  the  streets  at  night- 
fall, when  there  is  no  traffic.  They  call  for  alms 
as  soon  as  they  hear  a  step  coming,  and  bless 
loudly  those  who  give. 


CHAPTER    IX 

SART  COLLEGES 

''  Much  of  the  soul  they  talked,  and  all  awry." 

— ParacUse  Regained, 

Every  book  of  travel  in  Central  Asia  has  much 
to  say  on  the  subject  of  its  imposing  and  historic 
medresseSf  but  of  their  possible  usefulness  in  the 
present  day  not  a  word  has  been  said.  The  more 
recent  ones  have  been  built  by  private  persons,  and 
each  has  its  own  lands,  on  the  revenues  of  which 
its  professors  and  pupils  manage  to  lead  very  com- 
fortable lives.  Many  rich  old  men  try  to  secure 
themselves  happiness  in  the  world  to  which  they 
feel  they  are  hastening,  not  merely  by  building 
medresseSf  but  also  by  building  houses  on  the  rent 
of  which  these  may  be  supported.  All  such  pious 
legacies  are  known  as  vakuf ;  they  are  free  of  taxes, 
and  represent  quite  a  third  of  the  State  property. 
When  a  new  medresse  is  opened  in  Bokhara,  the 
chief  magistrate  of  the  town  decides  how  many 
students  it  shall  contain.  Generally  one  student  is 
allotted  to  each  room,  and  more  than  two  are  never 
allowed.  Married  professors  live  outside  the  college, 
while  each  unmarried  one  has  a  room  to  himself. 
The  rooms  all  open  into  a  square,  not  altogether 

77 


78  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

unlike  an  Oxford  "quad."  Before  he  can  gain 
admittance  as  a  student  a  boy  must  have  passed 
through  the  lower  schools  and  have  won  a  prize, 
which  consists  of  120  tengas^  about  ;f4,  which  sum 
is  awarded  to  promising  scholars  on  leaving.  He 
must  also  have  good  recommendations,  and  be  able 
to  prove  that  he  has  means. 

The  income  of  a  medresse  is  divided  among  the 
students  in  equal  portions,  the  amount  being  regu- 
lated by  the  number  of  rooms,  which  varies  from  ten 
to  forty,  including  accommodation  for  the  professors, 
the  servants,  and  a  head-shaver,  who  always  lives 
on  the  premises.  The  student  does  not  spend  all 
his  time  at  one  medresse^  but  passes  through  several 
until  he  has  finished  his  course.  Once  admitted, 
he  can  remain  a  student  for  life.  He  may  sell  the 
income  of  his  own  particular  z;«^«/*  to  anyone  he 
likes,  consequently  many  of  the  legacies  are  now 
in  the  hands  of  persons  who  are  not  students  at  all. 
The  incomes  range  from  eight  shillings  a  year  to 
twenty  pounds.  A  student's  attendance  is  not,  as 
I  have  already  remarked,  restricted  to  the  college 
in  which  he  lives.  He  may  go  to  lectures  in  any 
medresse  he  likes  to  select,  and  pays  his  fees  to  that 
professor  whose  classes  he  attends.  The  professors 
are  nothing  more  than  learned  mullahs ;  their  salaries 
depend  upon  the  number  of  pupils  they  attract.  A 
celebrated  or  a  favourite  professor  gets  as  much 
as  ;f6oo  yearly,  but  the  ordinary  run  of  teachers 


SART  COLLEGES,  79 

content  themselves  with  a  much  smaller  sum. 
Occasionally  a  student's  father  pays  down  a  cer- 
tain sum  on  the  boy's  entrance.  I  talked  with  a 
youth  in  Kokand  whose  father  had  paid  £^o,  his 
room's  income  was  £2  3.  year,  and  he  was  free 
to  stay  there  for  the  rest  of  his  life  if  he  chose. 
His  father,  who  is  a  farmer,  keeps  him  supplied 
with  pocket-money. 

**  What  is  your  profession  to  be  ? "  I  asked 
him. 

"  I  don't  know." 

"  How  do  you  manage  about  food  ?  " 

"  I  and  several  other  students  join  together  and 
make  a  pilau  at  night ;  in  the  day  we  have  bread, 
fruit,  and  tea." 

I  looked  round  his  quarters  as  he  spoke,  and 
noticed  that  he  had  a  good  supply  of  apples  and 
teapots  in  niches  on  the  wall. 

"  How  long  have  you  been  here  ?  "  I  ask. 

"  Six  years." 

"  Your  life  is  an  easy  one,  is  it  not  ?  " 

"  No.     Arabic  is  difficult." 

"  How  many  hours  do  you  give  to  study  ?  " 

"  I  attend  lectures  in  the  medresse  for  three  hours 
a  day,  and  the  rest  of  the  time  I  study  alone  and 
prepare  my  work." 

"  Do  you  study  at  night  ?  " 

"  No,  I  sleep," — with  a  look  of  great  surprise. 

"  Was  it  your  own  wish  to  come  here  ?  " 


8o  IN   RUSSIAN   TURKESTAN 

"  No,  my  father  wished  it ;  my  brother  is  a 
farmer." 

"Your  brother's  occupation  is  the  more  arduous, 
is  it  not  ?  " 

In  reply  to  this  question  the  youth  laughed,  and 
two  of  his  fellow-students  who  had  joined  us 
were  shaking  with  laughter ;  they  evidently  agreed 
with  me. 

In  the  same  medresse  I  had  a  conversation  with 
one  of  the  professors. 

"  Do  you  have  examinations  to  test  the  progress 
of  your  pupils  ?  "  I  asked. 

"  Yes,"  was  the  reply.  "  I  examine  them  every 
day,  and  if  I  am  not  satisfied  I  do  not  give  them 
another  book." 

"  What  are  the  subjects  taught  ?  " 

"Theology,  Philosophy,  Persian,  Arabic,  and 
Turki." 

"  And  what  is  the  goal  of  your  most  successful 
pupils?" 

"  Our  best  pupils  study  for  fifteen  or  twenty  years 
till  they  can  repeat  whole  books  by  heart,  and  are 
well  versed  in  Arabic  and  Persian  literature,  then 
they  take  the  post  of  Imam  "  (reciter  of  prayer  in 
the  mosques),  "or  Suffi^^  (the  man  who  calls  to 
prayer  from  the  minaret),  "  or  Cast "  (a  judge),  "  or 
Alam  "  (a  man  whose  duty  it  is  to  explain  the  law 
to  the  judges,  and  who  helps  them  to  give  an  opinion 
when  in  doubt). 


SART  COLLEGES  8i 

"  Which  of  these  professions  is  the  most  diffi- 
cult?" 

"  That  of  a  casi — ^you  cannot  get  the  post  of  a  casi 
without  influence." 

"  What  happens  to  the  rest  of  the  students  ?  " 

"  They  become  mullahs." 

The  Sarts  despise  all  subjects  of  study  ex- 
cept languages,  theology,  and  Mussulman  law. 
"  More  than  once,"  says  M.  Nalivkin,  "  some 
learned  native,  on  seeing  history  books  in  my 
house,  has  expressed  a  conviction  that  if  I  gave 
my  time  to  that  sort  of  reading  it  must  be  purely 
in  the  hope  of  discovering  where  treasures  had 
been  concealed." 

A  student's  room  is  not  a  cheerful  place.  It  is 
about  sixteen  feet  square,  and  there  is  no  light 
beyond  that  which  can  get  through  a  small  opening 
over  the  door,  which  is  covered  with  paper  and 
serves  as  a  window;  so  it  is  not  surprising  that 
the  young  men  spend  as  much  of  their  time  out 
of  doors  as  possible.  In  one  corner  are  a  roll  of 
bedding  and  some  pillows,  which,  spread  out  on  the 
rush  matting,  on  which  they  sit  by  day,  make  a 
comfortable  bed  by  night,  while  above  there  is  a 
kind  of  loft  in  which  drinking  and  cooking  vessels 
are  stored  when  hot  in  use. 

The  professors,  who  are  mullahs  of  the  most 
learned  type,  are  easily  distinguished  by  the  size 
of  their  spotless  white  turbans.      Those  worn  by 


82  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

their  pupils  are  of  the  same  kind,  but  much  smaller. 
A  mullah  who  has  passed  thirty  years  of  his  life  in 
preparing  himself  to  be  a  teacher  thinks  nothing  of 
taking  a  year  to  expound  the  contents  of  a  single 
book  to  his  disciples.  There  is  something  inex- 
pressibly sad  in  this  decay  of  learning,  this  eternal 
"  chewing  the  cud  " — as  some  one  has  called  it — of 
knowledge  that  has  lost  its  savour,  and  can  never 
repay  the  time  that  is  wasted  on  its  acquirement. 
The  Russian  administrators  of  Public  Education, 
by  whom  the  vakuf  is  now  managed  everywhere 
except  in  Bokhara  and  Khiva,  are  doing  nothing 
even  to  repair  the  wonderful  old  fourteenth-century 
medresses,  which  are  rapidly  falling  into  decay. 
Yet  there  is  no  reason  why,  if  in  good  hands,  they 
should  not  yet  become  what  they  were  originally 
intended  to  be,  the  life  and  light  of  the  people.  If 
the  Czar  were  but  to  send  one  capable  Russian  to 
teach  practical  subjects  in  each  medresse,  students 
would  flock  to  them  from  every  part  of  the  country, 
and  there  is  no  doubt  but  that  these  venerable 
institutions  would  soon  be  a  self-supporting  and 
valuable  aid  to  the  welfare  of  the  people.  The 
town  of  Bokhara  alone  contains  one  hundred  and 
three  of  these  colleges,  calculated  for  the  reception 
of  ten  thousand  students.  In  Kokand  there  are 
eighty  thousand  Sart  inhabitants  and  forty-eight 
medresses,  but  only  two  Russian  primary  schools. 
Among  the  pupils  of  these  schools  there  are  not 


Copyright 


Photo  by  Annk iTE  M.  li.  Meakin 


A   BEGGAR   IN    KOKAND 

(Taken  in  the  University  "  quad  "  with  students  and  idle  boys 
laughing  at  the  author's  taste) 


/.  82 


SART  COLLEGES  83 

more  than  sixty  Sart  children.  The  beat  Sart 
families  will  not  send  their  boys  because  the  Mo- 
hammedan religion  is  not  taught  there;  and  even 
if  they  were  to  send  them,  they  would  learn  only 
to  read  and  write.  The  chief  medresse  in  Kokand 
— Medresse  Djammi — has  fifteen  hundred  students, 
four  Mudharias^  or  resident  professors,  and  five 
MutevalliSy  whose  duty  is  to  manage  the  finances. 
But  how,  to  use  the  words  of  Carlyle,  shall  these 
professors  give  kindling  in  whose  inward  man 
there  is  no  live  coal? 


CHAPTER    X 

SART  SCHOOLS 

Whence  comes  the  hum  of  little  voices  that  greets 
my  ear  as  I  am  passing  the  side  entrance  of  that 
crumbling  and  dilapidated  mosque  ? 

"This  is  a  maktab^  a  school  for  beginners,"  ex- 
plains my  guide ;  ''  you  can  look  in  and  see  them  at 
their  work." 

The  room  is  packed  with  little  boys,  all  sitting 
on  the  ground  and  rocking  themselves  to  and  fro 
as  they  sing  in  sleepy  tones  the  verses  they  are 
learning.  In  their  midst  sits  a  mullah,  their  teacher, 
and  he  looks  the  sleepiest  of  all.  The  floor  is 
covered  with  straw  to  keep  the  little  feet  from  freez- 
ing, for  the  weather  is  cold.  In  front  of  each  row  of 
children  lies  a  rough  tree-trunk,  which  serves  for 
both  reading  and  writing  desk.  One  sees  much  the 
same  sight  in  other  Mohammedan  countries,  yet  it 
is  not  the  same,  for  the  dress  of  the  little  scholars  is 
so  different.  While  in  Egypt  and  Morocco  every 
small  head  is  covered  with  a  bright  red  fez,  here  the 
eye  rests  on  a  more  pleasing  picture;  each  child 
wears  an  artistically  embroidered  cap,  and,  though 

no  two  are  alike,  a  wonderful  blending  of  soft  colours 

84 


SART   SCHOOLS  85 

is  the  result.  So  much  was  I  struck  with  this  on 
my  first  visit  to  a  Sart  school  that  I  pondered  more 
deeply  on  the  remarkable  understanding  for  colour, 
of  which  the  caps  were  a  proof,  than  on  the  method 
of  instruction  I  had  come  there  to  inspect.  Wishing 
to  convey  to  my  friends  at  home  some  idea  of  what 
it  was  impossible  satisfactorily  to  describe,  I  resolved 
then  and  there  to  take  home  to  England  an  assort- 
ment of  these  unique  head-coverings,  and  I  kept  ray 
resolution  by  purchasing,  later  on,  at  least  twenty  of 
them  in  the  cap  bazaar  at  Samarkand. 

The  sleepy-looking  schoolmaster  brightens  up 
occasionally  to  give  some  inattentive  pupil  a  warn- 
ing tap  with  the  end  of  a  long  stick  he  has  in  readi- 
ness. The  books  from  which  they  are  learning  are 
lithographed,  and  have  come  all  the  way  from  Kazan, 
the  ancient  Tatdr  capital.  School  begins  each 
morning  as  soon  as  the  second  prayer  is  over,  and 
goes  on  till  sunset,  with  a  pause  in  the  middle  of  the 
day  for  lunch,  which  consists  of  a  piece  of  bread 
and  a  little  fruit,  which  each  child  has  brought  with 
him.  The  school  week  begins  on  Saturday  morning 
and  ends  on  Thursday  evening.  There  is  no  dis- 
tinction of  classes  in  Sart  schools,  children  of  rich 
and  poor  learn  side  by  side;  the  very  poor  never 
send  their  children  to  school  at  all.  The  school- 
•master  gets  no  regular  salary ;  he  subsists  on  what 
the  parents  see  fit  to  give  him  in  the  way  of  presents. 
When  a  boy  has  progressed  so  far  as  to  be  able  to 


86  IN   RUSSIAN   TURKESTAN 

read  the  Koran  his  father  presents  the  mullah  with 
a  calatf  the  equivalent  of  which  with  us  would  be  a 
new  coat.  It  is  also  customary  for  the  pupils  to 
bring  their  master  weekly  presents  of  bread,  fruit, 
or  some  other  article  of  food. 

In  hot  weather  school  goes  on  in  the  open  air, 
some  shady  corner  being  chosen  outside  the  mosque, 
or  in  the  courtyard  of  the  teacher's  house.  The  boys 
are  first  taught  the  alphabet,  after  which  they  are 
set  to  copy  out  and  learn  by  heart  selected  passages 
from  the  Koran.  When  the  pupil  can  read  and  copy 
out  a  book,  besides  knowing  the  greater  part  of  its 
contents  by  heart,  he  is  considered  sufficiently  ad- 
vanced to  begin  the  study  of  another  volume.  As 
soon  as  he  has  thus  mastered  six  or  seven  books 
his  education,  as  far  as  the  maktab  is  concerned,  is 
over.  As  there  is  only  one  master  to  each  school, 
there  is  no  separation  into  classes.  One  shouts  his 
A  B  C  at  the  top  of  his  voice,  while  another  recites 
a  piece  of  poetry,  and  another  a  passage  from  the 
Koran.  It  is  marvellous  that  anything  is  learnt  at 
all,  considering  the  noise  that  goes  on  all  the  time. 
Sometimes,  however,  the  master  reads  aloud  and 
the  pupils  listen.  A  Russian  officer  in  Namangan 
told  me  that  on  his  once  finding  a  master  engaged 
in  reading  to  his  pupils,  that  pedagogue  had  ex- 
plained to  him,  "  It  is  a  Persian  book  that  I  am 
reading^  and  I  can  read  it  quite  fluently  though  I  do 
not  understand  a  word." 


SART  SCHOOLS  87 

Many  Russians  living  in  Turkestan  had  assured 
me  that  such  a  thing  as  a  girls'  school  did  not  exist 
among  the  Sarts,  so  that  I  was  surprised  to  find,  on 
inquiry  among  the  Sart  ladies  of  the  higher  class, 
that  each  had  been  to  school  in  her  time,  and  that 
some  had  even  kept  up  their  studies,  such  as  they 
were,  after  marriage.  When  visiting  the  wife  of 
the  chief  judge  in  Samarkand,  I  inquired  of  that 
lady  whether  she  was  fond  of  reading. 

"My  wife  has  read  more  than  two  thousand 
books,"  said  her  husband,  answering  for  her ;  "  she 
reads  when  she  is  sad." 

This  certainly  looked  like  an  indication  that  her 
life  was  not  a  very  cheerful  one,  but  I  let  that  pass 
and  merely  inquired  at  what  school  she  had  been 
educated. 

"  At  her  mother's  school,"  was  the  reply.  "  Her 
mother  is  a  learned  woman,  who  in  her  time  had 
a  learned  mother,  who  also  kept  a  school." 

The  profession  of  schoolmistress  passes  down 
from  mother  to  daughter.  When  a  schoolmistress 
has  no  daughter  of  her  own,  she  trains  one  of  her 
pupils  to  help  her  when  she  grows  old,  and  take 
her  place  when  she  dies. 

Having  heard  me  express  a  desire  to  visit  the 
judge's  mother-in-law  and  inspect  her  school,  my 
friends  took  me  there  the  following  day.  In  a  primi- 
tive verandah  opening  into  a  courtyard  in  which 
cows  and  hens  were  wandering  at  large,  I  found  the 


88  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

children  at  their  lessons.  They  were  not  all  girls  ; 
there  were  several  boys  among  them,  including  the 
judge's  two  little  sons.  The  girls  did  not  wear  caps 
like  the  boys,  but  brightly-coloured  handkerchiefs 
tied  round  their  heads  in  such  a  manner  that  an 
end  hung  down  behind  one  ear.  There  were  fifteen 
children  in  all;  they  sat  in  couples,  two  in  front  of 
one  book,  with  their  legs  tucked  away  out  of  sight. 
Some  of  the  books  rested  on  flat  stones,  others  on 
little  desks  made  of  crossed  pieces  of  wood.  Each 
child  held  a  pointer  in  its  hand. 

"  If  you  see  a  book  resting  on  the  ground,"  said 
my  guide,  "  you  will  know  that  it  is  not  a  Koran,  for 
that  must  never  touch  the  ground." 

One  of  the  little  girls  could  not  have  been  more 
than  four  years  old.  Seeing  that  we  noticed  this 
child,  the  old  schoolmistress  explained  that  she  was 
not  yet  a  pupil,  being  too  young,  but  that  she  was 
brought  to  school  every  day  that  she  might  accustom 
her  ears  to  the  sound  of  what  she  would  have  to 
learn  herself  later  on. 

"She  will  learn  very  quickly  when  she  once 
begins,"  added  the  old  lady. 

"  I  do  not  teach  for  the  sake  of  money,"  she  went 
on  to  say,  "  but  for  the  sake  of  the  good  Grod.  No 
one  pays  me  anything,  but  each  pupil  brings  a  small 
offering  every  week — sometimes  a  log  of  wood  for 
the  fire,  sometimes  a  chicken." 

"May  I  take  a  photograph  of  your  school?"  I  asked. 


SART  SCHOOLS  89 

"Yes,"  replied  she,  "but  it  would  be  wrong  to 
make  a  picture  of  me.  You  must  not  put  me  in  on 
any  account,  but  I  do  not  mind  standing  by  the 
children  to  keep  order." 

So,  for  the  first  time  in  Sart  history,  a  girls' 
school  has  been  photographed,  and  the  old  lady  is 
there  too,  but  she  does  not  know  it.  She  afterwards 
invited  us  into  her  house,  and  we  had  a  long  talk 
with  the  aid  of  a  lady  interpreter. 

"  I  have  four  children,"  she  said ;  "  for,  besides 
my  own  son  and  daughter,  I  have  adopted  two 
orphan  girls,  in  order  that  when  I  am  old  and  die, 
they  may  bury  me  and  pray  God  to  bless  me  out  of 
gratitude." 

ot  y7)pofio(Ticrf(TOV(n  Kal  davovra  ae 
ireptcrreXovin  Kav  irpodriaovTat  vcKpov, 

Her  history  was  interesting.  She  had  been  a 
great  beauty  in  her  youth.  Her  wedding  had  taken 
place,  she  told  us,  on  the  very  day  on  which  Samar- 
kand fell  into  the  hands  of  the  Russians  (1868). 

"We  had  to  hurry  over  the  ceremony  because 
they  were  entering  the  town,"  she  said. 

Yet  it  was  not  until  her  daughter  was  married  to 
the  judge,  five  years  ago,  that  she  ever  came  in  con- 
tact with  a  European ;  she  had  never  been  in  the 
street  since  her  marriage.  Her  son-in-law's  position 
had  necessitated  his  inviting  certain  Russian  officials 
to  his  wedding. 


90  IN  RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

"  Would  you  like  to  travel  and  see  the  world,  as 
we  are  doing  ?  "  I  asked. 

"The  desire  is  not  permitted  to  us,"  she  replied 
gravely.  "  We  may  read  about  the  world,  and  that 
is  enough;  why  should  we  wish  to  see  things  for 
which  we  have  no  understanding  ?  " 

"  Do  you  read  much  ?  "  I  asked. 

'*  1  read  a  great  deal  until  I  reached  the  age  of 
fifty-one,"  she  said.  "  After  that  I  left  off  reading 
poetry  and  worldly  books,  and  gave  my  attention  to 
the  Koran  and  prayers.  It  becomes  an  old  woman 
Jike  me  to  occupy  herself  only  with  the  care  of  her 
soul." 

As  we  rose  to  go,  she  sent  one  of  the  children  for 
a  handkerchief,  and,  filling  it  with  apples,  begged 
our  acceptance  of  them. 

"  But  we  must  not  carry  away  your  handkerchief," 
we  said. 

"Yes,  I  want  you  to  take  the  handkerchief  too," 
was  her  rejoinder.  '*  Throw  it  in  a  corner  when  you 
get  home,  and  then,  if  you  forget,  it  will  remind  you 
of  me." 

While  staying  in  Kokand  we  had  the  opportunity 
of  visiting  another  interesting  girls'  school.  As  we 
entered  I  noticed  that,  for  a  wonder,  all  the  children 
seemed  to  be  reading  aloud  in  unison. 

"What  is  it  they  are  reading?"  was  my  first 
question. 

"  They  are  reading  the  story  of  one  of  Mohammed's 


SART  SCHOOLS  91 

sons,  and  how  he  was  murdered  in  the  desert/* 
was  the  answer. 

The  schoolmistress  who  sat  in  their  midst  was 
as  charming  an  old  lady  as  the  one  in  Samar- 
kand, but  of  quite  another  type.  She  wore  a  light 
blue  stuff  handkerchief  tied  over  her  forehead  in  the 
shape  of  a  cone,  her  head  and  chin  were  wrapped 
in  white  muslin,  and  over  all  was  a  pair  of  spec- 
tacles, which  made  her  look  very  wise  indeed.  She 
was  quite  pleased  to  see  us  come  in,  hurried  some 
of  her  pupils  out  of  the  way  to  make  room  for  us  on 
the  floor,  and  talked  intelligently  about  her  work« 

"  To-day,"  she  said,  "  I  am  teaching  my  pupils 
how  God  gave  a  law  to  Mohammed  that  prayer 
should  be  said  five  times  a  day,  and  how  the 
Prophet's  breath  had  a  sweet  scent  after  his  inter- 
view with  his  Creator." 

"  How  many  pupils  have  you  ?  "  I  asked. 

"  Forty-five  just  now.  The  parents  of  each  pay 
me  according  to  their  means.  They  do  not  pay  in 
money,  but  give  me  clothes.  As  soon  as  a  pupil 
has  mastered  two  lines  of  her  book  I  receive  a 
present." 

'*  How  long  do  they  take  to  learn  two  lines  ?  " 

"About  a  month  if  they  are  intelligent.  The 
whole  course  is  five  years,  but  dull  boys  stay  eight. 
Some  girls  leave  to  be  married  at  the  age  of  nine ; 
the  boys  go  from  here  to  boys'  schools  occasionally, 
and  one  or  two  have  gone  to  the  Russian  school." 


92  IN   RUSSIAN   TURKESTAN 

When  we  put  questions  about  herselfi  she  told  us 
that  she  was  the  daughter  of  a  mullah,  that  one  of 
her  sons  dealt  in  native  goloshes,  another  was  a 
tailor,  and  a  third  a  student  in  Bokhara,  having 
taken  a  passport  for  one  year;  he  was  to  be  a 
mullah.  In  the  summer  he  would  have  four 
months*  holiday,  during  which  time  he  would  return 
to  Kokand,  and  either  work  in  the  fields  or  get 
employment  in  some  shop.  Wishing  to  test  her 
powers,  I  asked  her  to  write  a  sentence  in  Sart 
characters  on  a  piece  of  native  paper  which  lay  in 
front  of  her.  She  picked  it  up  at  once  and  wrote 
a  line.  I  took  it  away  with  me  and  afterwards 
showed  it  to  a  Russian  who  had  made  a  study  of 
the  Sart  language. 

"  That  is  very  well  written,"  he  exclaimed,  and 
he  translated  the  sentence  as  follows : — 

"  My  school  has  had  visitors  to-day." 

I  thought  much  more  of  this  than  if  it  had  been  a 
quotation  from  the  Koran  (as  I  had  taken  for  granted 
it  would  be),  for  it  proved  her  capable  of  expressing 
her  own  thoughts  quickly  and  easily  upon  paper. 
Before  leaving  I  examined  the  school  ink-bottles, 
and  found  that  each  contained  a  sponge  soaked  in 
Indian  ink  diluted  with  water,  a  most  practical 
arrangement,  for  in  that  form  there  was  no  fear  of 
its  being  spilt.  The  reed  pens  were  of  the  usual 
Eastern  kind. 

Caligraphy  is  a  very  important  part  of  the  Bart's 


SART  SCHOOLS  93 

education,  and  a  good  handwriting  has  made  more 
than  one  man  famous.  In  place  of  our  copy-books 
the  pupil  is  provided  with  a  sentence  or  two  of 
wisdom,  written  on  parchment.  A  Russian  friend, 
who  has  been  making  a  collection  of  these,  kindly 
gave  me  the  translations  of  several.  One  is  a 
quatrain  composed  by  a  celebrated  caligraphist,  Mir 
Ali  by  name. 

'*  I  have  spent  the  last  thirty  years  of  my  life  in 
the  exercise  of  writing.  Now  my  name  will  remain 
throughout  eternity,  thanks  to  my  caligraphy.  My 
pen  leaves  behind  it  the  memory  of  a  remarkable 
handwriting.  It  is  from  the  king  that  I  have 
receive  my  title,  '  The  Reed  of  Musk.' 

(Signed)         "  MiR  Ali  OF  HfeRAT 
(May  grace  be  upon  him) 
The  Royal  Scribe." 

Mir  Ali  was  a  native  of  H^rat  He  was  educated 
at  Meshed,  under  another  famous  caligraphist,  Zain 
Eddin.  In  the  year  15 17  he  passed  from  Khorassan 
to  Maveronnahr,  and  lived  there  till  his  death,  when 
he  was  buried  in  the  mosque  of  Saif  Eddin.  He  is 
known  in  Turkestan  under  the  name  of  Hadja  Path 
Haboth.  During  his  lifetime  his  reputation  was  so 
great  that  if  a  beggar  came  to  him  for  alms  he  had 
only  to  write  the  letter  A/i/  on  a  slip  of  paper  and 
the  beggar  had  no  difficulty  in  realising  a  good  price 
for  it. 


94  IN  RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

The  following  copy-book  maxims  are  also  among- 
our  friend's  collection : — 

**  Select  thy  friends  from  among  the  capable  and 
the  intelligent." 

"  Avoid  stupid  and  ignorant  men." 

'*  Place  not  thy  confidence  in  women,  even  if  they 
appear  to  be  trustworthy." 

"  Prove  thy  words  by  thy  actions." 

*'  Seek  to  learn  of  men  who  are  successful  in  life." 

*'  Consider  thy  youth  a  great  blessing,  and  occupy 
it  in  preparing  for  the  next  world." 

"  Be  open  with  thine  enemies  as  well  as  with  thy 
friends." 

"  Look  upon  him  who  is  thy  teacher  as  the  best 
of  fathers." 

**  Regulate  thy  expenses  according  to  thy  income." 

'*  Always  avoid  extremes." 

"Treat  in  a  becoming  manner  the  guests  thou 
hast  invited." 

•'Is  it  not  known  that  everything  which  falls 
among  salt  changes  itself  to  salt  after  a  certain 
length  of  time  ?  If,  then,  thou  art  desirous  that  thy 
name  should  resound  from  the  sky  above  to  the 
uttermost  bounds  of  the  earth,  take  a  vow  that  thou 
wilt  enter  the  service  of  eminent  men,  be  it  only  for 
a  few  days  of  thy  life." 


CHAPTER  XI 

CHILDHOOD 

Babies  are  laid  in  long,  narrow  cradles,  above  which 
a  horizontal  rod  is  fixed  lengthwise  ;  over  the  rod 
a  thick  shawl  is  hung,  and  you  wonder  how  the 
little  creatures  manage  to  breathe,  for  there  is  no 
visible  opening.  The  first  cradle  I  saw  was  in 
Bokhara;  it  roused  my  curiosity,  and  wondering 
what  the  thing  could  be,  I  pointed  to  it  inquiringly, 
little  dreaming  that  it  contained  a  baby.  Great  was 
my  astonishment  when  the  proud  mother  turned 
back  the  shawl  and  lifted  her  treasure  out.  What 
a  strange  little  creature  it  looked.  Though  only  a 
few  months  old,  it  had  on  an  embroidered  cap,  as 
varied  in  its  colours  as  any  I  had  seen  in  the  bazaar, 
while  its  little  silk  robe  was  a  miniature  of  that  worn 
by  its  father,  the  same  material,  and  the  same  loose 
sleeves.  As  it  began  to  cry,  an  older  woman  with 
a  haggard  face,  but  with  the  traces  of  former  beauty 
still  about  her,  stepped  forward  and  took  the  child 
from  its  mother's  arms.  Poor  thing,  though  now  but 
a  servant  in  the  household,  she  too  had  been  brought 
to  it  as  a  wife.  When  a  child  falls  ill  a  mullah  is 
sent  for,  in  order  that  he  may  read  passages  from 
the  Koran  over  it,  and  charm  away  its  sickness. 

95 


96  IN  RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

At  one  house  I  saw  this  going  on.  An  attend- 
ant had  the  child  in  his  arms  while  the  mullah, 
holding  a  tesbihy  or  rosary,  over  its  head,  mumbled 
away  for  some  time.  The  father,  who  was  pouring 
out  tea  for  us  at  the  other  end  of  the  room,  took  the 
matter  very  coolly,  and  when  we  questioned  him 
about  the  little  invalid,  indicated  that  he  had  no 
doubt  whatever  as  to  the  cure  being  effectual.  A 
little  later  I  saw  the  infant  in  the  mother's  arms. 
She  did  not  seem  to  have  quite  as  much  faith,  and 
was  looking  anxiously  into  its  face  to  see  if  the 
mullah  had  really  done  it  any  good. 

The  back  of  a  Sart's  head  is  invariably  flat,  but 
this  can  hardly  be  taken  as  an  indication  of  character, 
even  by  phrenologists,  as  it  is  to  be  accounted  for 
by  the  fact  that  as  a  baby  he  was  laid  on  his  back 
for  hours  together  on  a  hard,  unyielding  cotton  quilt 
It  is  the  same  with  the  women,  though  one  remarks 
it  less  because  of  their  long  hair.^ 

Families  are  often  very  numerous,  sixteen  children 
is  not  an  unusual  number  for  one  mother,  but  she 
seldom  rears  more  than  half  of  them.  I  have  even 
heard  of  a  family  of  twenty-five.*  Many  young 
mothers  die,  and  their  babies  too,  for  want  of  a 

^  Since  writing  the  above  my  attention  has  been  drawn  to  an 
interesting  article  in  Man  (January  1902),  entitled  "  Head-shaping 
in  the  Punjaub."  There  seems  to  be  some  doubt  as  to  whether  the 
shape  of  the  skull  flat  behind  is  artificial  or  not  In  Turkestan 
I  should  not  call  it  artificial,  but  a  result  of  circumstances. 

^  My  informant  was  the  medical  assistant  at  one  of  the  Russian 
hospitals  for  natives. 


CHILDHOOD  97 

skilled  woman  to  attend  to  them ;  but  the  Russian 
Government  is  endeavouring  to  remedy  this  evil, 
and  I  trust  the  time  will  soon  come  when  there  will 
be  a  sufficient  number  of  trained  nurses.  A  large 
p-oportion  of  children  die  because  their  girl-mothers 
have  no  notion  how  to  look  after  them.  This  state 
of  things  the  Government  is  also  hoping  to  stop  by 
inducing  the  natives  not  to  marry  their  daughters 
till  they  are  old  enough  to  understand  a  mother's 
duties.  This  will  be  a  more  difficult  matter,  for 
both  the  father  who  cares  for  the  welfare  of  his 
daughter,  and  the  father  who  wants  to  make  money 
out  of  her,  will  be  running  great  risks  if  they  defer 
her  marriage.  The  former,  by  doing  so,  may  find 
that  some  one  had  run  off  with  the  girl  before  he 
has  got  her  safely  married,  whilst  the  latter  may 
have  her  left  on  his  hands  altogether.  A  Sart  pro- 
verb says,  ''Do  not  keep  salt  long  or  it  will  get 
damp.  Do  not  keep  a  young  girl  or  she  will  spoil." 
An  ambitious  father  who  kept  his  daughter  at  home 
to  the  age  of  twenty-three  in  the  hope  of  her  making 
a  specially  good  match,  returned  home  one  day  to 
find  that  she  had  eloped  with  a  Tatdr. 

At  the  birth  of  a  girl  there  is  always  some  dis- 
appointment, and  a  woman  will  often  hide  the  truth 
from  her  husband  as  long  as  possible.  Nalivkin 
tells  of  a  case  where  a  man,  having  been  informed 
by  the  ladies  of  his  household  that  his  child  was  a 
boy,  when  it  was  really  a  girl,  invited  all  his  friends 

G 


98  IN   RUSSIAN   TURKESTAN 

and  acquaintances  to  come  and  rejoice  with  him  at 
the  birth  of  a  son.  Refreshments  had  been  ordered 
and  the  guests  were  there  when  the  father  was  told 
the  truth,  whereupon  he  had  nothing  for  it  but  to 
explain  his  disappointment  to  the  assembled  guests 
and  send  them  away.  A  child  is  washed  as  soon  as 
it  is  bom,  but  often  not  again  for  three  weeks,  as 
there  is  an  idea  that  washing  will  hinder  its  growth. 
It  is  to  this  neglect  that  many  of  the  diseases  found 
among  native  children  may  be  attributed.  When  a 
child  has  completed  its  first  year,  the  father  shaves 
off  all  its  hair  except  two  little  tufts  over  its  ears. 
When  these  grow  long  they  are  plaited,  and,  if  it  is 
a  girl,  an  amulet  or  a  string  of  coral  is  attached  to 
the  ends.  Until  she  is  seven  years  old  a  girVs  head 
is  shaved  regularly,  but  after  that  the  hair  is  allowed 
to  grow.  When  a  boy  wears  these  plaits  after  five 
years  of  age  it  is  because  his  parents  have  made 
some  vow  in  connection  with  him  which  has  not  yet 
been  fulfilled.  The  pretty  little  sons  of  the  judge  in 
Samarkand  had  long  tresses  of  hair  attached  to  their 
gold -embroidered  velvet  caps,  and  terminating  in 
silver  tassels,  but  underneath,  their  tiny  heads  were 
shorn  as  bare  as  billiard  balls.  Their  father  saw 
me  take  hold  of  one  of  these  raven  tresses,  with  a 
puzzled  look  on  my  face,  and  hastened  to  explain. 

"It  is  woman's  hair  bought  in  the  bazaar,"  he 
said,  with  a  satisfied  smile. 

Mothers  often  nurse  their  children  till  they  are 


CHILDHOOD  99 

three  and  four  years  old.  When  a  baby  is  six  days 
old  its  father  decides  what  it  shall  be  called,  and 
gives  the  name  to  a  mullah,  who  repeats  it  over  the 
infant  in  a  prayer.  The  circumcision  takes  place  at 
any  age  between  four  and  twelve.  The  ceremony 
is  always  an  expensive  one  to  the  parents,  as  all 
their  relatives  and  friends  expect  to  be  handsomely 
entertained  on  such  an  occasion. 

Until  she  is  nine  years  old  a  girl  is  allowed  almost 
as  much  freedom  as  her  brothers,  and  she  is  even 
allowed  to  play  with  them  in  the  street.  After  that 
she  is  strictly  confined  to  the  women's  quarters,  and 
her  parents  begin  to  keep  a  sharp  watch  upon  her 
movements.  If  her  father  gives  her  money  to  buy 
sweets,  she  can  no  longer  go  herself  to  choose  them 
in  the  bazaar,  but  must  keep  the  coin  safely  folded 
in  her  girdle  till  she  can  persuade  her  brother  or 
her  grandmother  or  some  aged  neighbour  to  get 
them  for  her. 

A  Sart  boy,  if  his  parents  can  afford  it,  goes  first 
to  school  and  then  to  college,  as  I  have  pointed  out 
in  a  previous  chapter;  but  if  he  comes  of  a  poor 
family  he  leaves  school  at  the  age  of  ten  or  twelve 
to  be  apprenticed  to  his  father,  if  he  is  a  tradesman, 
or  to  make  himself  useful  in  the  fields  if  his  father 
is  engaged  in  agriculture.  In  his  spare  time  he  is 
free  to  go  where  he  likes,  and  the  place  of  his  choice 
is  invariably  the  street  or  the  bazaar.  But  he  is  not 
always  idle,  and  while  his  sister  earns  money  with 


f^59Ja86 


100  IN  RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

her  silkworms  he  often  keeps  fowls  and  makes 
something  by  selling  the  eggs.  I  have  travelled 
in  many  Eastern  countries,  but  nowhere  have  I 
found  myself  surrounded  by  such  swarms  of  boys 
as  in  Turkestan.  I  had  but  to  pause  for  a  few 
minutes  in  a  bazaar  or  public  square,  or  even  at 
a  street  comer,  and  a  juvenile  crowd  of  huge 
proportions  would  immediately  gather  round  me. 
Surely  the  hours  of  youth  must  hang  heavily  on 
their  hands!  So  much  for  Sart  boyhood.  Girl- 
hood, on  the  other  hand,  such  as  we  understand 
by  the  word,  hardly  exists  here.  Often  before  his 
daughter  is  twelve  years  old  the  father  contemplates 
her  marriage,  and  begins  to  look  round  for  a  suit- 
able husband.  Yet  her  life  is  not  without  its  interest 
whilst  the  choice  of  a  husband  is  pending.  The 
innate  love  of  trade  peculiar  to  her  people  is  as 
strong  in  her  as  in  her  brothers.  Before  she  is  ten 
years  old  she  has  usually  begun  to  hatch  silkworms* 
eggs  in  the  folds  of  her  dress,  and  when  the  cocoons 
are  ready  she  sells  them  for  what  she  can  get.  The 
money  thus  earned  is  her  very  own,  and  she  can 
do  what  she  likes  with  it.  Sometimes  she  buys 
finery  with  her  savings,  but  oftener  than  not  she 
lays  out  her  money  in  a  larger  supply  of  eggs  for 
the  following  year,  or  invests  it  in  bright  skeins  of 
silk  and  caps  to  be  embroidered. 

In  Kokand  we  visited  the  wife  of  a  golosh-maker ; 
her  bright,  intelligent  face  comes  up  before  me  as  I 


CHILDHOOD  loi 

write.  Though  only  fourteen  years  of  age  and  the 
mother  of  a  child  two  months  old,  she  had  earned 
a  considerable  sum  of  money  in  her  short  life,  and 
bade  fair  to  earn  a  good  deal  more.  Her  two  arts 
were  embroidering  caps  and  copying  books.  So 
fascinated  were  we  with  this  clever  little  woman  that 
we  persuaded  her  to  let  us  buy  the  cap  on  which 
she  was  at  work,  to  keep  in  memory  of  our  visit 
She  brought  out  for  our  inspection  a  book  that  she 
had  just  finished  copying,  which  was  to  be  sold  in 
the  bazaar.  It  was  beautifully  done ;  not  a  blot  or  a 
correction  could  we  find.  Its  title  was,  "  History  of 
the  Young  Daughter  of  a  Khan."  With  regard  to 
such  books,  I  remember  an  interesting  evening  spent 
with  a  family  in  Old  Margelan.  While  we  were  all 
seated  cosily  round  a  low  table,  with  our  feet  over 
the  charcoal  and  the  quilted  table-cover  drawn  up  to 
our  chins,  I  happened  to  ask  one  of  the  ladies  present 
whether  she  was  fond  of  reading,  and  was  surprised 
to  see  the  alacrity  with  which,  instead  of  replying  to 
my  question,  she  jumped  up  from  the  floor,  and, 
reaching  a  pile  of  books  from  a  niche  in  the  wall, 
brought  them  for  me  to  look  at. 

"This  book,"  she  said,  taking  up  one  of  the 
volumes,  "  is  a  very  interesting  one ;  it  is  about  a 
pasha  who  wanted  to  marry  a  girl,  and  she  refused 
to  have  him." 

Then  she  sat  down  in  her  former  place,  covered 
her  knees  once  more  with  the  quilt,  and  began  to 


I02  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

read  aloud,  while  the  girl  who  sat  next  her  looked 
over  her  shoulder  and  read  with  her.  It  was  really 
a  very  pretty  duet.  On  and  on  they  read,  so  inter- 
ested in  the  story  that  they  seemed  to  forget  our 
presence  entirely.  Together  their  young  voices  rose 
and  fell  in  softest  cadence,  and  together  they  paused 
at  the  end  of  each  paragraph,  till  one  felt  they  must 
have  made  a  special  study  of  reading  in  unison ;  yet 
no  idea  of  show  or  effect  seemed  to  enter  their  heads 
for  a  moment.  They  were  deep  in  a  love-story — 
that  was  all.  On  and  on  they  read  till  at  last  I  was 
obliged  to  stop  them,  that  they  might  explain  the 
plot  of  the  tale  before  it  was  time  for  us  to  go.  I 
jotted  down  the  words  as  my  interpreter  gave  them 
to  roe,  but  as  I  was  not  a  little  shocked  at  the  im- 
morality of  its  sentiments  I  shall  not  give  it  here. 

The  young  women  in  Tashkent  spend  a  great 
deal  of  time  in  working  their  dowry  coverlets,  A 
coarse  canvas-like  material  is  worked  all  over  with 
rounds  of  closely  filled-in  stitches  in  crimson  silk, 
with  a  little  black  introduced  here  and  there.  These 
rounds  are  sometimes  nearly  a  foot  in  diameter,  and 
the  more  there  are  of  them,  and  the  closer  they  are 
together,  the  greater  the  value  of  the  coverlet.  The 
effect  is  extremely  handsome,  and  now  that  they  have 
reached  the  Moscow  markets  there  is  a  great  demand 
for  them.  Girls  are  beginning  to  embroider  them 
rather  for  sale  than  for  the  decoration  of  their  own 
homes,  consequently  the  work  put  into  them  is  greatly 


CHILDHOOD  103 

inferior,  as  there  is  less  personal  interest  in  the  labour. 
In  more  than  one  home  I  came  across  coverlets  of 
which  the  embroidery  had  never  been  completed ; 
the  explanation  being  that  the  wedding  had  taken 
place  before  the  bride  and  her  friends  could  finish  it. 
Sometimes  too  the  work  comes  to  a  standstill  for 
want  of  silk,  and  the  bride,  if  too  poor  to  buy  it,  has 
to  do  other  work  in  between,  that  she  may  sell  it  in 
the  bazaar  and  thus  get  money  with  which  to  buy  silk. 
Rich  brides  often  have  two,  and  three,  of  these  cover- 
lets.    They  are  sometimes  used  as  prayer  carpets. 

"Did  you  design  this  yourself?  "  I  asked  of  one 
lady  who  was  showing  me  her  treasures. 

'*  No,"  she  replied,  *'  she  did  that  part  of  it,"  and 
she  pointed  as  she  spoke  to  an  aged  crone  who  sat 
huddled  up  in  a  distant  corner.  When  they  have 
no  one  in  the  house  who  is  clever  enough  to  draw  a 
pattern,  they  send  for  a  woman  whose  profession  it 
is  to  do  that  kind  of  work. 

Besides  hatching  silkworms'  eggs  the  women  also 
spin  their  own  silk,  but  this  is  chiefly  in  Old 
Margelan ;  in  fact  I  came  across  very  few  house- 
hold spinning-wheels  elsewhere.  Since  so  many 
foreigners  have  settled  in  the  country  for  the  purpose 
of  silkworm  culture,  the  price  of  cocoons  has  been 
reduced  by  half.  Even  Russian  ladies  used  not  to 
disdain  making  a  little  money  in  the  egg-hatching 
line,  but  now  it  hardly  repays  them. 

A  woman  often   finds  it   difficult   to  procure  a 


I04  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

regular  supply  of  mulberry  leaves  when  her  eggs 
are  hatched,  for  she  can  seldom  go  out  to  fetch  them, 
and  her  men-folk  are  not  always  willing  to  go  for 
her.  Nalivkin  tells  us  that  when  a  lazy  husband 
refuses  to  fetch  leaves,  his  wife  scolds  him  and 
threatens  that  if  he  will  not  go  she  will  sell  his  best 
clothes  and  buy  leaves  for  herself.  She  assures 
him  that  her  worms  are  of  far  greater  value  than 
he  is. 

"It  always  ends/'  continues  Nalivkin,  "in  the 
husband  getting  the  leaves." 

Plain  sewing,  such  as  we  understand  it,  is  done 
by  the  Sart  women  in  a  very  bungling  fashion, 
whereas  their  embroidery  could  hardly  find  its 
superior.  Kokand  work  in  particular  fetches  a  high 
price  all  over  Central  Asia,  as  well  as  in  the  shops 
of  Moscow.  Embroidery  is  the  one  kind  of  work 
they  are  allowed  to  do  on  a  Friday.  The  thimble  is 
worn  on  the  third  finger  instead  of  on  the  second 
as  with  us. 

It  is  only  amongst  the  very  lowest  classes  that 
women  engage  in  agricultural  work.  They  never 
dig  the  ground.  Once,  in  the  Dolomites,  I  watched 
an  old  lady  of  sixty-seven  dig  up  a  whole  turnip- 
field  unaided.  Such  a  sight  would  be  a  surprise  to 
the  Sarts,  for  even  their  neighbours  the  muscular 
and  powerful  Kirgiz  women  limit  themselves  to 
the  lighter  kinds  of  work.  Sart  women  go  into  the 
cotton-fields  with  their  children  to  pick  the  pods. 


CHILDHOOD  105 

but  they  have  to  be  on  the  watch  all  the  time,  for 
the  approach  of  a  stranger  would  necessitate  the 
pulling  down  of  their  horsehair  veil,  which  is  tucked 
back  under  the  parandja  while  they  are  at  work. 
No  husband  or  father  ever  forces  a  woman  to  go 
and  work  in  the  fields,  because  the  Mohammedan 
law  says  that  she  must  stay  at  home.  I  used  often 
to  find  the  old  women,  who  were  too  infirm  for 
active  work  in  the  house,  engaged  in  taking  cotton 
from  the  pods  and  spreading  it  out  on  the  ground 
ready  to  be  sewn  into  quilts.  In  Japan  this  work  is 
entrusted  to  younger  and  more  active  women,  and 
the  quilts  are  much  less  lumpy  in  consequence. 


CHAPTER  XII 

SART  WOMEN 

**  I  have  been  frequently  asked  since  my  return — it  is  a  question 
which  an  Englishman  always  seems  to  ask  first — what  the  women 
of  Bokhara  were  like.  I  am  utterly  unable  to  say.  I  never  saw 
the  features  of  one  between  the  ages  of  ten  and  fifty." — CuRZON. 

"  Do  you  consider  the  Sarts  to  be  a  people  with  a 
future  ?  "  was  a  question  I  put  to  one  of  the  most 
thoughtful  of  my  Russian  acquaintances. 

''They  can  have  no  future  as  long  as  their  women 
are  veiled,"  was  the  reply.  "  Russia  should  have 
commanded  them  to  unveil  their  women  from  the 
first ;  now  it  would  be  a  more  difficult  matter." 

"You  seem  to  forget,"  he  continued,  "that 
Russia's  own  women  were  veiled  till  Peter  the 
Great  put  a  stop  to  it ;  they  had  their  separate  re- 
ception-rooms, just  as  the  Sarts  have  to-day." 

"  It  will  take  more  than  one  Peter  the  Great  to 
set  the  world  to  rights,"  I  mused,  as  a  shapeless 
mass  in  jack-boots  hurried  past  me.  Could  that 
unsightly  object  reaUy  be  a  woman  ?  Yes,  it  was, 
but  whether  a  beautiful  girl  in  her  teens  or  a 
shrivelled-up  crone,  it  was  impossible  to  say. 

One  day   I   was   conversing  with    a   venerable 

xo6 


lOO  IN  RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

her  silkworms  he  often  keeps  fowls  and  makes 
something  by  selling  the  eggs.  I  have  travelled 
in  many  Eastern  countries,  but  nowhere  have  I 
found  myself  surrounded  by  such  swarms  of  boys 
as  in  Turkestan.  I  had  but  to  pause  for  a  few 
minutes  in  a  bazaar  or  public  square,  or  even  at 
a  street  comer,  and  a  juvenile  crowd  of  huge 
proportions  would  immediately  gather  round  me. 
Surely  the  hours  of  youth  must  hang  heavily  on 
their  hands!  So  much  for  Sart  boyhood.  Girl- 
hood, on  the  other  hand,  such  as  we  understand 
by  the  word,  hardly  exists  here.  Often  before  his 
daughter  is  twelve  years  old  the  father  contemplates 
her  marriage,  and  begins  to  look  round  for  a  suit- 
able husband.  Yet  her  life  is  not  without  its  interest 
whilst  the  choice  of  a  husband  is  pending.  The 
innate  love  of  trade  peculiar  to  her  people  is  as 
strong  in  her  as  in  her  brothers.  Before  she  is  ten 
years  old  she  has  usually  begun  to  hatch  silkworms' 
eggs  in  the  folds  of  her  dress,  and  when  the  cocoons 
are  ready  she  sells  them  for  what  she  can  get.  The 
money  thus  earned  is  her  very  own,  and  she  can 
do  what  she  likes  with  it.  Sometimes  she  buys 
finery  with  her  savings,  but  oftener  than  not  she 
lays  out  her  money  in  a  larger  supply  of  eggs  for 
the  following  year,  or  invests  it  in  bright  skeins  of 
silk  and  caps  to  be  embroidered. 

In  Kokand  we  visited  the  wife  of  a  golosh-maker ; 
her  bright,  intelligent  face  comes  up  before  me  as  I 


CHILDHOOD  loi 

write.  Though  only  fourteen  years  of  age  and  the 
mother  of  a  child  two  months  old,  she  had  earned 
a  considerable  sum  of  money  in  her  short  life,  and 
bade  fair  to  earn  a  good  deal  more.  Her  two  arts 
were  embroidering  caps  and  copying  books.  So 
fascinated  were  we  with  this  clever  little  woman  that 
we  persuaded  her  to  let  us  buy  the  cap  on  which 
she  was  at  work,  to  keep  in  memory  of  our  visit 
She  brought  out  for  our  inspection  a  book  that  she 
had  just  finished  copying,  which  was  to  be  sold  in 
the  bazaar.  It  was  beautifully  done ;  not  a  blot  or  a 
correction  could  we  find.  Its  title  was,  "  History  of 
the  Young  Daughter  of  a  Khan."  With  regard  to 
such  books,  I  remember  an  interesting  evening  spent 
with  a  family  in  Old  Margelan.  While  we  were  all 
seated  cosily  round  a  low  table,  with  our  feet  over 
the  charcoal  and  the  quilted  table-cover  drawn  up  to 
our  chins,  I  happened  to  ask  one  of  the  ladies  present 
whether  she  was  fond  of  reading,  and  was  surprised 
to  see  the  alacrity  with  which,  instead  of  replying  to 
my  question,  she  jumped  up  from  the  floor,  and, 
reaching  a  pile  of  books  from  a  niche  in  the  wall, 
brought  them  for  me  to  look  at. 

"This  book,"  she  said,  taking  up  one  of  the 
volumes,  "  is  a  very  interesting  one ;  it  is  about  a 
pasha  who  wanted  to  marry  a  girl,  and  she  refused 
to  have  him." 

Then  she  sat  down  in  her  former  place,  covered 
her  knees  once  more  with  the  quilt,  and  began  to 


io8  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

who  is  peculiarly  sensitive  as  to  any  want  in  this 
respect,  I  have  no  hesitation  in  saying  that,  out  of 
every  sixty  native  houses,  rich  and  poor  taken 
together,  only  one,  on  an  average,  will  be  found 
in  which  the  air  is  not  perfectly  fresh  and  sweet. 
I  do  not  know  a  single  European  town  of  which 
such  a  statement  would  be  true.  It  is  not  because 
the  Sarts  are  cleaner  or  more  scrupulous  in  their 
habits  than  Europeans.  The  first  piece  of  infor- 
mation the  traveller  receives  about  these  people 
from  the  foreigners  dwelling  in  their  vicinity  is, 
"  lis  sont  si  salles  I "  A  visit  to  the  home  of  any 
one  of  the  Russian  peasants  who  have  emigrated  to 
Turkestan  will  sufficiently  prove  that  it  is  not  the 
climate  alone  that  is  responsible  for  this  happy 
state  of  things,  but  rather  the  absence  of  window- 
panes  and  tightly-closed  doors.  How  can  the  air 
be  stale  when  it  is  continually  changing?  Sart 
doors  are  made  of  poplar  wood,  which,  for  reasons 
already  explained,  is  very  unsuited  for  the  pur- 
pose; it  soon  warps,  and  a  native  door  that  will 
shut  properly  is  an  exception.  Added  to  this, 
there  is  often  a  small  opening  in  the  roof  for 
ventilation. 

Whenever  we  visited  at  a  native  house  our  host 
would  meet  us  in  the  courtyard,  and,  after  a 
friendly  greeting,  conduct  us  to  what  we  might 
call  his  dining-room.  A  handsome  Bokhara  carpet 
generally  covered  the  floor  if  the  house  was  a  rich 


SART  WOMEN  109 

one;  in  poorer  dwellings  a  cheaper  carpet,  from 
Kashgar,  took  its  place,  while  the  lowest  classes 
contented  themselves  with  a  rush  mat,  or  even  the 
bare  mud  floor.  In  some  houses  that  had  been 
partially  Russianised  we  found  European  chairs, 
tables,  beds,  lamps,  and  even  Russian  stoves  built 
into  the  wall.  The  last  were  there  merely  for  show 
in  most  cases,  for,  as  the  owners  of  one  explained 
to  us,  the  heat  from  them  gave  them  such  dreadful 
headaches.  It  is,  however,  with  the  non-Russianised 
homes  that  we  have  now  to  deal,  and  in  these  the 
men's  rooms  have  no  furniture  except  a  few  folded 
cotton  quilts  on  which  to  sit  The  ceilings  are 
covered  with  roughly -cut  saplings,  or  narrow 
boards  cut  to  represent  them;  the  lower  classes 
use  reeds.  These  are  supported  by  rough  cross- 
beams about  a  yard  apart.  It  is  now  becoming 
the  fashion  to  whitewash  walls  and  ceilings,  but 
in  purely  native  houses  they  are  often  painted  with 
the  most  brilliant  colours.  In  Fergana  we  seldom 
saw  painted  walls ;  but  in  Bokhara,  where  there  is 
so  much  of  the  Persian  element,  the  designs  upon 
the  walls  were  a  study  in  themselves.  Trees  with 
flowers  larger  than  life  spread  out  in  a  fan  shape 
and  reached  nearly  to  the  ceiling.  They  were 
often  represented  as  springing  from  a  teapot, 
which  rather  astonished  me  at  first,  but  I  soon 
discovered  that  his  teapot  is  very  dear  to  the 
Sart,  and  the  sight  of  it  ever  pleasant  to  his  eye. 


no  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

While  three  walls  of  a  room  are  painted  in  this 
way,  the  fourth  is  invariably  fitted  up  with 
numerous  small  niches  in  which  many  little  house- 
hold treasures  can  be  stowed  away.  The  niches  in 
poorer  dwellings  are  built  within  the  wall,  of  the 
same  clay,  and,  being  the  same  colour  as  the  mud 
in  the  streets,  have  a  very  earthy  appearance ;  but 
rich  people  have  them  of  painted,  and  often  of 
carved  wood. 

Sart  houses  are  built  entirely  on  the  ground 
floor,  partly  from  fear  of  earthquakes.  It  is  true 
indeed  that  I  visited  at  a  house  with  an  upper 
storey  in  Samarkand  (where  there  was  a  serious 
earthquake  only  three  years  ago,  sufficiently  violent 
to  set  the  church  bells  ringing  and  fill  the  air  with 
dust),  but  in  that  case  the  owner  had  had  special 
provocation,  as  he  carefully  explained  to  us — his 
first  wife  quarrelled  so  much  with  the  new  one 
that  he  had  been  obliged  to  give  each  a  floor  to 
herself.  The  old  wife,  I  may  add,  occupied  the 
ground  floor. 

Our  host  generally  knew  beforehand  that  it  was 
the  ladies  of  his  household  for  whom  our  visit 
was  chiefly  intended.  Nevertheless,  native  rules  of 
etiquette  and  the  ingrained  objection  of  his  race 
to  anything  like  hurry,  invariably  led  him  to  detain 
us  awhile  in  his  own  reception-room,  after  which 
he  would  either  go  himself  to  prepare  the  ladies  or 
send  a  little  boy  to  do  so.    A  few  minutes  more 


Copyright 


Photo  by  Annette  M.  B.  Meakin 


WIVES   OF   A   WEALTHY   SAR  r 
(Taken  in  their  own  courtyard) 


/.  Ill 


SART  WOMEN  iii 

would  pass,  and  then  some  aged  hag,  with  her  face 
bound  up  in  a  cloth  like  the  pictures  one  sees  of 
Lazarus  in  his  grave-clothes,  would  look  out  of  a 
kind  of  stable  door  and  beckon  to  us.  The  first 
time  this  happened  I  began  to  think  I  should  find 
the  poor  ladies  living  in  the  stables,  especially  when 
the  old  woman  led  us  down  a  dark  passage  between 
heaps  of  rubbish  and  shavings.  However,  we  found 
ourselves  at  last  in  a  cheerful  courtyard,  quite  equal 
to  that  belonging  to  the  men. 

The  size  of  the  women's  rooms,  the  quality  of  the 
carpets,  as  also  the  quality  of  the  clothes  and  of  the 
jewellery  they  wore,  corresponded  as  a  rule  with  the 
wealth  of  the  husband.  When  a  Sart  builds  himself 
a  Russian  house  he  generally  thinks  the  old  one 
good  enough  for  his  wives,  and  so  leaves  them 
there ;  partly  for  that  reason,  but  also  because,  as 
the  new  house  is  built  solely  for  the  entertainment 
of  his  gentleman  friends,  it  would  be  impossible  to 
bring  the  women  and  children  into  it  without  con- 
siderably increasing  its  size.  So  long  as  the  women 
are  doomed  to  live  in  seclusion  I  see  nothing  un- 
reasonable in  this  arrangement,  but  a  Russian  lady 
friend,  when  pointing  out  such  a  house  to  me, 
remarked :  "  That  fine  house  was  built  by  a  Sart ! 
Would  you  believe  it  ?  But  the  ladies,  poor  things, 
have  no  share  in  its  comforts,  they  are  still  im- 
prisoned in  the  old  one ;  anything  seems  to  be  good 
enough  for  them." 


112  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

Even  their  worst  enemies  admit  that  it  would 
be  hard  to  beat  the  Sarts  in  their  generous  and 
open-hearted  hospitality.  I  do  not  think  we  ever 
entered  a  house  without  having  some  token  of 
welcome  set  before  us.  If  we  were  expected,  the 
dasturkattf  or  time-honoured  tray  of  fruits,  sweets, 
and  nuts,  would  invariably  await  our  arrival.  The 
richer  our  host  the  greater  the  spread.  The  fruits 
varied  according  to  the  season  of  the  year.  In 
winter  we  found  apples,  pears,  pomegranates,  and 
grapes ;  while  in  autumn  plums,  figs,  and  apricots 
took  the  place  of  the  first  three.  In  early  summer 
uncooked  rhubarb  is  offered  to  the  guests.  The 
sweets  are  heaped  on  plates  and  saucers  in  great 
profusion,  native  sweets  made  with  mutton  fat, 
and  tasting  so  strongly  of  it  that  few  Europeans 
care  to  try  them  twice,  and  caramels  supplied  by 
a  Russian  bonbon  factory  at  Tashkent.  Pistachios 
are  always  there,  and  other  nuts  according  to  the 
season.  In  summer  we  found  the  dasturkan  laid 
out  upon  the  floor,  but  in  winter  it  was  usually 
placed  upon  a  low  square  table  covered  with  a 
thick  cotton  quilt.  The  table  stood  at  one  end  of 
the  room,  where  there  was  no  carpet,  over  a  square 
hole  built  in  the  floor,  just  as  in  Persia,  to  serve 
as  a  fireplace,  and  containing  a  brazier  filled  with 
live  charcoal.  Folded  quilts  were  placed  round  the 
table,  and  upon  these  we  were  cordially  invited 
to  sit.    We  soon  learned  to  make  ourselves  quite 


SART  WOMEN  113 

at  home,  and,  following  the  example  of  the  ladies 

of  the  household,  used  to  push  our  toes  under  the 

table  and  draw  the  quilt  over  our  knees.    On  frosty 

days  the  genial  warmth  was  particularly  acceptable, 

and  the  ladies,  finding  that  we  did  not  treat  them 

as  strangers,  would  chatter  away  with  much  less 

restraint  when  we  were  all  seated  in  this  way.    As 

there  are  very  few  Russian  ladies  in  Turkestan 

who  can  speak  the  Sart  language,  I  was  usually 

obliged  to  take  with  me  a  female  interpreter  from 

the  local  hospital.     The  women  who  occupy  these 

posts  are  nearly  always  Tatars  of  the  lower  class, 

and  though  they  think  themselves  greatly  superior 

to  the  Sarts,  their  manners  often  leave  a  great  deal 

to  be  desired.    Although  we  paid  them  well  for 

their  services,  they  were  determined  to  make  a  little 

more  than  we  gave  them,  by  eating  from  every  dish 

that  had  been  provided  in  our  honour,  and,  finally, 

by  filling  their  handkerchiefs  with  as  much  as  they 

could  possibly  carry  away.     During  Ramazan,  as 

they  could  not  eat  till  sunset,  they  made  up  for 

it  by  sweeping  the  contents  of  half  the  dishes  into 

their  laps.    The  behaviour  of  one  of  these  wretches 

was  so  atrocious  that  I  refused  to  take  her  with 

me  a  second  time,  and  thus  ran  the  risk  of  having 

no  one  to  interpret.    Luckily  for  me  the  mounted 

policeman  who  had  been  told  off  to  accompany 

me  could  speak  Russian.     He  was  not  allowed,  of 

course,  to  come  into  the  presence  of  the  ladies,  but, 

H 


114  IN  RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

by  standing  outside  the  half-closed  door,  could  con- 
verse with  their  husband,  and  repeat  his  remarks  in 
Russian  to  us. 

The  reception-room  of  a  Sart  lady  is  at  the  same 
time  her  living-room  and  her  bedroom,  yet  there 
is  seldom  in  it  more  than  one  piece  of  furniture — 
a  metal-bound  trunk,  smaller  by  far  than  that  with 
which  her  American  sister  would  set  out  to  cross 
the  ''herring  pond."  Thousands  of  such  trunks 
are  now  manufactured  annually  in  Moscow  for  sale 
in  the  bazaars  of  Turkestan.  They  are  distinguish- 
able from  those  of  native  make  by  their  gaudy 
colouring.  In  a  house  in  Andijan  I  came  across 
a  beautifully  made  mulberry-wood  trunk,  more  than 
a  hundred  years  old,  and  greatly  superior  in  colour 
and  workmanship  to  the  imported  ones.  The 
trunks  were  often  opened  for  our  benefit,  and  gor- 
geous silken  robes  and  flashing  but  often  worth- 
less jewellery  were  displayed  before  our  admiring 
eyes.  Their  owners  would  show  them  to  us  with 
evident  pleasure,  and  were  nothing  loath  to  don 
their  finery  that  I  might  photograph  them  in  it. 

At  one  end  of  the  room  there  was  always  a  great 
pile  of  neatly  folded  quilts  and  pillows.  The  quilts 
were  spread  out  at  night  to  serve  as  beds.  The 
pillows  were  stuffed  with  articles  of  clothing,  and 
served  as  wardrobes.  There  was  usually  a  cord 
or  a  pole  across  one  corner  of  the  room,  which 
served  as  a  clothes-line  with  the  rich,  and  as  a 


SART  WOMEN  115 

larder  with  the  poor.  In  the  former  case  it  was 
covered  with  garments  in  daily  use — silk  costumes, 
embroidered  handkerchiefs,  and  such  like.  One 
wall  had  always  its  niches  for  teapots  and  small 
household  articles  such  as  we  have  already  seen 
in  the  men's  quarters. 

''  I  suppose  you  give  all  your  cast-off  clothes  to 
the  poor  ?  "  I  said  to  the  wife  of  a  wealthy  official, 
when  I  had  vainly  tried  to  conjecture  where  any 
article  of  clothing  that  was  neither  among  the 
treasures  in  the  trunk  nor  on  her  back  could  pos- 
sibly be  stowed  away — I  had  not  yet  discovered 
the  secret  of  the  pillows. 

"  Oh  no,"  was  her  reply ;  "  we  tear  them  up  and 
use  them  as  dusters  and  dish-cloths." 

I  tried  several  times  to  photograph  interesting 
interiors,  but  gave  it  up  at  last  in  despair,  for  the 
most  typical  ones  had  no  windows,  and  all  the  light 
that  entered  came  through  a  doorway  so  low  that 
we  had  to  stoop  to  enter. 

When  a  young  lady  came  forward  to  welcome 
us,  she  would  cast  down  her  eyes  and  look  very 
bashful.  Pretended  shyness  is  thought  "good 
form,"  the  idea  being  that  the  test  of  a  virtuous 
woman  is  the  seclusion  in  which  she  lives,  and, 
consequently,  the  shyness  she  feels  at  meeting 
strangers.  I  noticed  that  the  higher  the  rank  of 
the  lady  the  more  bashful  she  appeared  to  be. 
The  wife  of  the  chief  magistrate  in  Samarkand 


ii6  IN  RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

could  never  once  be  induced  to  open  her  lips  in 
our  presence ;  her  husband  did  all  the  talking  for 
her.  He  informed  me  that  her  high  position  did 
not  allow  of  her  paying  any  visits,  though  she  could 
receive  the  ladies  of  the  town  in  her  own  house. 
If  a  husband  finds  a  pair  of  shoes  outside  his  wife's 
door  he  may  not  enter,  no,  not  even  if  the  shoes 
look  big  enough  to  hold  a  man's  foot.  Ladies  could 
not  do  any  visiting  at  all  but  for  this  rule.  The 
qualities  that  a  Sart  prizes  most  highly  in  a  woman 
are  the  love  of  staying  at  home  and  the  love  of 
work.  A  Sart  in  Namangan  told  me  his  wife  had 
not  been  outside  her  courtyard  more  than  once 
during  the  past  year,  and  that  was  only  because 
her  mother  was  vety  ill  and  wanted  to  see  her. 
''And  then,"  he  added,  "she  did  not  go  oh  foot,  but 
in  an  arba.    No  real  ladies  ever  go  on  foot." 

While  we  have  been  chatting  round  the  dasturkan 
one  of  the  family  has  been  preparing  tea.  The 
water  has  been  heated  either  in  the  charcoal  fire 
round  which  we  are  sitting,  or  in  another  in  an 
adjoining  apartment.  A  graceful,  long -necked 
copper  or  brass  vessel  takes  the  place  of  our 
practical  but  ugly  kettle,  and,  though  it  may  be 
black  with  smoke,  it  still  retains  its  elegance  of 
form.  Another  vessel,  similar  to  it  in  shape, 
though  made  of  brass  and  elaborately  chiselled, 
serves  as  teapot,  but  the  tea  is  often  put  straight 
into  the  water  as  it  comes  off  the  fire,  and  then 


SART  WOMEN  117 

served  in  small  basins  a  little  larger  than  those 
used  in  Japan;  these  are  mostly  imported  from 
Kashgan  Now  the  chilim  or  gourd-pipe  is  handed 
round,  and  each  person  present,  ourselves  excepted, 
takes  a  whiff.  Our  host  then  takes  us  to  inspect 
the  rest  of  the  house,  and  the  courtyard,  in  which 
we  find  a  bread  oven  built  into  the  wall,  and  near  it 
a  supply  of  copper  and  iron  drinking-vessels.  A 
false  ceiling  of  rough  planks  forms  a  sort  of  loft 
above  the  outer  apartment  of  the  women's  quarters, 
and  here  are  stored  the  fruits  that  are  destined  to 
last  through  the  winter.  Underneath  are  clay  jars 
containing  rice,  kunchuk^  and  a  green  seed  called 
nuish^  used  for  making  a  kind  of  porridge. 

The  ancient  hag  who  introduced  us  to  the  ladies' 
household  is  busy  preparing  kababs  for  dinner. 
Let  us  watch  her  a  minute.  First  she  chops  up 
some  mutton  into  little  pieces  half  the  size  of  her 
thumb.  By  her  side  is  a  pile  of  skewers ;  on  each 
of  these  she  sticks  a  piece  of  mutton  and  a  piece  of 
fat  alternately ;  then  she  takes  them,  six  at  a  time, 
and  balances  them  across  a  brazier  of  glowing  char- 
coal. The  children  stand  round  her  and  eat  the 
frizzling  kababs  from  the  skewers  as  fast  as  they  are 
cooked.  Watching  them  at  their  feast  with  skewer 
in  one  hand  and  bread  in  the  other,  one  feels  tempted 
to  join  the  party. 

The  heavy  work  of  the  household  is  nearly  always 
done  by  the  grandmammas.    After  middle  age  a 


Ii8  IN  RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

woman  seems  to  grow  more  active  with  every  year 
of  her  life.  In  one  courtyard  we  found  the  host's 
three  mothers-in-law  engaged  in  bread-making.  A 
native  oven  is  like  a  great  clay  jar  with  no  bottom 
and  a  round  opening  in  its  side.  It  is  bought  ready  in 
the  bazaar,  and  has  only  to  be  built  into  the  wall  and 
plastered  over  with  mud,  except  at  its  two  openings. 
To  prepare  it  for  bread-baking,  a  fire  is  lit  inside  and 
allowed  to  burn  itself  out ;  then  the  ashes  are  taken 
away,  and  the  oven  is  ready.  We  watched  two  of 
the  energetic  old  ladies  clapping  flat  cakes  of  bread 
on  to  the  inner  walls  of  their  strange-looking  oven ; 
a  little  water  having  been  first  sprinkled  over  the 
dough,  it  stuck  to  the  hot  sides  till  cooked  through. 
The  third  mother-in-law  had  her  sleeves  tucked  up 
above  the  elbow  and  was  vigorously  kneading.  By 
her  side  stood  a  sort  of  tub  full  of  flour.  This  is 
perhaps  a  fitting  place  to  remark  that  some  of  the 
finest  features  we  looked  upon  in  Central  Asia  were 
those  of  old  Sart  women.  There  is  a  look  of  noble 
resignation  on  some  of  their  aged  faces  that,  coupled 
with  their  well-defined  features  and  dignified  pre- 
sence, is  often  most  attractive. 

A  mother  often  slips  into  the  position  of  general 
servant  to  her  daughter  from  the  day  of  the  girFs 
marriage.  There  have  been  cases  where  the  mother 
has  gone  down  on  her  knees  before  her  daughter  on 
the  wedding-day  and  entreated  her  to  forgive  her 
for  any  harshness  she  may  have  shown  to  her  as  a 


SART  WOMEN  119 

child,  so  great  has  been  her  fear  that  her  daughter, 
in  revenge,  would  make  her  work  too  hard,  and  so 
render  her  life  unbearable. 

Every  courtyard  has  a  muddy  canal  running 
through  it.  Sometimes,  when  it  is  close  to  a  door, 
it  has  a  rough  bridge  of  planks  thrown  across  it. 
The  water  looks,  and  is,  unspeakably  dirty,  yet  the 
children  do  not  hesitate  to  stoop  and  drink  from  it 
when  thirsty ;  indeed,  it  is  the  only  available  water- 
supply  for  drinking  or  cooking  purposes.  The 
diseases  that  result  from  the  use  of  such  impure 
water  will  be  described  later  on. 

Every  pious  Mohammedan  must  wash  face  and 
hands  five  times  a  day.  Not  seeing  any  arrange- 
ment for  washing  in  the  first  house  I  entered  in 
Tashkent,  I  asked  my  hostess  where  she  performed 
her  ablutions.  In  answer  she  rolled  up  one  end  of 
the  handsome  rug  on  which  we  were  reclining,  and 
pointed  to  a  sink  in  the  floor,  which  it  concealed. 

"  I  stand  there,"  she  said,  "  and  pour  water  over 
me  from  one  of  those  brass  pots  you  see  in  the 
comer." 

"  Do  you  never  go  to  the  public  baths  ?  "  I  said 

"No;  ladies  of  the  better  class  rarely  go;  we 
prefer  the  privacy  of  our  own  homes."  ^ 

"  But,"  I  persisted,  ''  I  have  heard  that  you  have 
very  beautiful  baths   with    marble   floors."     Here 

^  The  custom  of  resorting  to  public  baths  was  introduced  from 
Bokhara  by  the  rich  Jews  who  emigrated  to  Russian  territory. 


120  IN  RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

all  my  listeners  began  to  laugh  and  shake  their 
heads. 

"There  are  no  baths  in  Tashkent  with  marble 
floors,"  they  said. 

This,  as  I  found  afterwards,  was  quite  correct; 
there  is  no  marble  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Tash- 
kent. The  provinces  that  rejoice  in  such  luxuries 
are  those  of  Bokhara  and  Samarkand.  As  for 
Fergana,  it  is  only  just  beginning  to  build  baths  for 
its  women,  and  these,  they  say,  will  not  be  provided 
with  marble  floors. 

In  describing  the  dress  and  personal  appearance 
of  Sart  women,  I  should  give  an  erroneous  impres- 
sion were  I  to  speak  of  any  one  habit  or  custom  as 
if  it  were  a  hard  and  fast  rule.  There  is  as  much 
variety  in  their  indoor  dress  as  in  our  own.  For 
instance,  though  I  never  saw  an  old  woman  with 
her  head  uncovered,  there  was  an  endless  variety  in 
the  ways  of  wearing  the  headdress,  and  also  in  its 
quality.  Some  women  wrap  their  heads  in  a  kind 
of  coarse  linen,  while  others  use  muslin.  I  remem- 
ber the  headdress  of  one  of  the  elder  ladies  of  the 
Cushbeggi's  household  at  Bokhara.  It  was  of  the 
finest  transparent  muslin,  which  had  come,  probably, 
like  the  Cushbeggi's  turban,  from  Manchester,  which 
town  has  the  honour  of  suppl}dng  many  turbans  to 
Bokharan  royalty.  Long  ends  hung  down  at  the 
back  of  the  neck,  and  were  brought  round  over 
the  shoulders  like  a  shawl,  softening  the  brilliant 


SART  WOMEN  121 

colours  of  the  silken  robes  beneath,  and  reminding 
one  of  the  almost  transparent  haik  worn  by  the 
upper  classes  in  Morocco. 

Oftener  than  not  I  found  unmarried  girls  wearing 
no  head-covering  in  the  house.  Their  straight, 
black  hair  was  parted  in  the  middle,  and  hung  in 
numerous  plaits  upon  their  shoulders.  At  first  I 
was  astonished  at  the  length  of  these  plaits,  but  on 
examining  them  I  found  that,  a  little  below  the  waist, 
they  merged  into  false  ones  of  black  silk,  each  of 
which  terminated  at  the  ankle  in  a  tassel  of  coloured 
glass  beads.  One  girl  graciously  allowed  me  to 
count  her  plaits.  I  took  each  of  them  in  my  fingers 
and  examined  it  carefully — there  was  no  wig  in 
the  question — ^she  had  fifty-five  long  plaits,  and  all 
her  own  hair.  When  I  spoke  of  this  to  a  Russian 
merchant  who  had  resided  for  some  years  in  Samar- 
kand, he  replied :  "  Yes,  that  is  all  very  well,  but 
if  you  had  examined  them  more  closely,  you  would 
have  discovered  that  all  the  women  wear  wigs." 
It  is  just  the  same  in  England;  when  }rour  hair 
curls  naturally  strangers  say :  ''What  a  lot  of  time 
that  woman  must  waste  before  her  glass."  I  may 
add  that  the  girl  in  her  turn  asked  me  to  let  her 
rub  my  eyebrows  with  her  white  sleeve,  that  she 
might  test  the  quality  of  the  black  paint  she  sup- 
posed I  had  used.  "Why,  it  doesn't  come  off"!" 
she  exclaimed  in  surprise. 

To  return  to  the  subject  of  wigs,  Vamb^ry,  to 


122  IN  RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

whom  I  submitted  my  notes  in  1896,  wrote  to  me 
as  follows :  ''  The  wearing  of  them  is  strictly  pro- 
hibited by  the  Mohammedan  religion,  which  is  more 
strictly  observed  in  Bokhara  than  anywhere  else  in 
Islam."  Sart  women  spare  no  pains  to  make  their 
hair  grow  thick  and  long.  I  found  it  always  thick, 
but  coarse.  Nalivkin  tells  us  that  a  woman  wears 
several  plaits  till  her  first  child  is  born,  and  goes 
by  the  name  of  Bushkakul,  or  "  five  plaits."  After- 
wards she  wears  only  two.  There  is  a  belief  that 
unless  the  ends  of  the  plaits  are  tied  up  in  cotton- 
wool the  hair  will  all  come  out  in  summer  time. 
The  hair  is  not  brushed  every  morning;  a  Sart 
woman  merely  puts  her  hand  through  her  hair  on 
rising.  If  there  happens  to  be  a  Koran  in  the  room 
she  covers  her  head  the  first  thing  out  of  respect  to 
its  holy  presence.  She  washes  her  hair  once  a  week, 
every  Thursday,  and  it  is  only  then  that  she  brushes 
it  To  wash  the  head  on  a  Tuesday,  or  on  a  market- 
day,  is  considered  very  unlucky.  When  a  woman 
has  undone  her  plaits  she  washes  her  head  in  katik 
or  boiled  sour  milk,  and  combs  it  while  wet,  but 
never  at  any  other  time,  lest  she  might  pull  out  a 
hair.  Rich  and  poor  alike,  all  use  katik^  but  there 
is  this  difference,  the  rich  wash  the  milk  out  again 
with  warm  water,  while  the  poor  leave  it  in,  and 
consequently  carry  about  with  them  a  sour  odour 
that  is  not  exactly  agreeable.  Many  Russian  ladies, 
admiring  the  splendid  hair  of  their  Sart  neighbours, 


SART  WOMEN  123 

have  adopted  the  sour-milk  process.  I  do  not  know 
the  result.  Sart  women  never  cut  their  hair.  The 
fact  that  it  thrives  so  well  without,  inclines  me  to 
suspect  that  the  time->honoured  idea  in  Europe  that 
periodical  clippings  are  a  necessity  may  have  origi- 
nated in  the  mind  of  some  ingenious  hairdresser. 
Young  girls  arrange  their  plaits  with  coquettish  care ; 
two  are  generally  drawn  over  the  ears  so  as  to  hang 
down  upon  the  breast,  and  two  very  fine  plaits  start 
close  on  either  side  of  the  central  parting,  and  fall 
over  the  sides  of  the  forehead. 

Her  pearly  little  teeth  are  one  of  the  pleasing 
points  in  a  Sart  girl.  I  do  not  think  I  met  one  who 
had  not  pretty  and  regular  teeth. 

"  How  is  it  you  all  have  such  beautiful  teeth  ?  "  I 
asked  in  every  town  I  came  to ;  but  the  only  ex- 
planation I  received  was  that  they  ate  much  less 
meat  than  Europeans.  No  tooth-powder  is  ever 
used.  The  Sart  simply  dips  his  or  her  first  finger 
into  water  after  every  meal,  and  rubs  the  teeth  with 
it.  Schwarz  says  that  the  women  chew  mastics, 
such  as  Pistachio  lenticusy  to  improve  their  teeth, 
but  this  cannot  be  a  widespread  practice,  or  I 
should  certainly  have  heard  of  it  from  the  Sart 
women. 

I  was  informed  that  before  a  woman  is  twenty- 
five  she  begins  to  lose  her  teeth ;  and  that  it  is  to 
make  the  gaps  less  prominent  that  the  lower  classes 
resort  to  a  ghastly  custom  of  painting  all  that  remain 


124  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

with  a  black  substance  called  ackli^  one  application 
of  which  sufBces  to  keep  the  teeth  black  for  a  year. 
I  met  with  a  similar  custom  in  northern  Japan. 
Nalivkin  says  that  in  Fergana  even  quite  young 
women  paint  their  teeth  black.  I  saw  it  only 
among  old  women.  To  blacken  their  eyelashes 
they  employ  an  herb  called  usma;  Russian  ladies 
also  use  it. 

"  Joining  eyebrows  are  considered  a  beauty  in  all 
Mohammedan  lands/'  says  Vamb^ry,  and  I  was  told 
by  the  ladies  of  Tashkent  that  it  was  the  custom 
there  for  every  woman  to  dye  her  eyebrows  in 
summer  with  the  juice  of  a  particular  plant  that 
grows  in  the  gardens.  When  the  juice  is  fresh  it 
dyes  a  dark  green,  but  they  do  not  mind  that,  as  it 
is  considered  to  impart  brightness  to  the  eyes,  be- 
sides making  the  brows  thicker.  A  Sart  in  Naman- 
gan told  me  he  brought  special  paint  for  the  eyebrows 
of  his  four  wives  all  the  way  from  Mecca.  I  have 
seen  some  ladies,  especially  in  Bokhara  and  Samar- 
kand, with  a  thick  black  line  drawn  over  the  eye- 
brows and  extending  from  ear  to  ear.  The  dye  used 
for  this  purpose  is  prepared  from  peach-stones. 

Nearly  all  the  young  women  I  saw  in  Tashkent 
had  bright  healthy  complexions,  which  needed  noth- 
ing in  the  way  of  paint  or  powder ;  and  when  I  asked 
them  if  they  used  any,  they  were  often  greatly 
amused.  One  lady  in  Tashkent  answered  quite 
indignantly  in  the  negative,  and  assured  me  that  her 


SART  WOMEN  125 

husband  would  be  very  angry  indeed  if  she  ever  did 
such  a  thing. 

"  Pretty  women  never  paint,"  she  said,  "  only  the 
ugly  ones." 

The  best  complexions  were  in  Fergana,  where 
painting  the  face,  except  on  the  marriage-day,  is  a 
thing  unheard  of  in  respectable  families.  Life  there 
is  in  general  much  simpler,  less  ostentatious  than 
in  Samarkand  or  Bokhara,  where  a  great  deal  of 
paint  and  powder  are  used.  The  painting  of  the 
finger-nails  and  the  palms  of  the  hands  with  henna 
is  a  custom  that  one  meets  with  in  all  Sart  towns ; 
but  I  found  it  almost  entirely  confined  to  the  middle 
and  lower  classes.  The  wife  of  an  influential  Sart 
in  Tashkent  told  me  that  she  only  used  henna  to 
cool  her  feet  when  they  ached  in  hot  weather. 
Many  use  balsam  juice  instead  of  henna ;  they  stain 
the  soles  of  their  feet  by  wrapping  them  at  night  in 
bandages  soaked  in  henna,  a  practice  that  is  equally 
in  vogUe  amongst  Moorish  women.  On  her  mar- 
riage-day a  Sart  girl  is  expected,  however,  to  have 
an  artificial  flush  upon  her  cheeks,  and  her  friends 
would  not  consider  her  a  proper  bride  were  she  to 
omit  the  daubs  of  brilliant  cochineal  that  make  her 
so  hideous.  To  satisfy  the  Sart  ideas  of  beauty  a 
girl  must  be  fat  and  plump,  but  I  never  heard  of 
her  being  dieted  to  that  end  as  is  the  case  in 
Morocco.  Sart  women  have  small,  well-shaped 
hands,  but  rather  large  feet,  which  defect,  however. 


126  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

is  of  little  importance,  as  everybody  wears  the  same 
sized  jack-boots.  As  the  boots  are  always  at  least 
a  size  larger  than  the  feet,  no  one  is  ever  troubled 
with  corns. 

On  my  first  journey  across  the  Caspian  my  brother 
introduced  me  to  a  young  Russian  officer  who  had 
spent  his  childhood  in  Tashkent,  and  in  the  course 
of  our  conversation  I  asked  him  what  the  Sart 
women  were  like.  Placing  his  finger  on  his  nose, 
he  did  his  best  to  flatten  that  poor  feature,  while  he 
blew  out  his  cheeks  to  the  utmost. 

"  They  are  uglier  than  that ! "  he  said. 

I  was  compelled  to  own  when  I  saw  them  that 
there  was  some  truth  in  this  description ;  for  many 
of  their  faces  were  decidedly  broad,  and  their  noses, 
which  were  very  wide  at  the  base,  appeared  flat  on 
account  of  their  width  of  cheek-bone.  At  the  same 
time  the  chin  was  pointed,  and  the  general  contour 
was  almost  pear-shaped,  while  their  ears  were  large, 
and  inclined  to  stick  out.  I  was  the  more  surprised 
because  I  had  seen  nothing  in  the  men's  faces  to 
prepare  me  for  so  pronounced  a  type  in  the  women. 
This  type  is  a  result  of  the  mixture  of  Uzbegs  and 
Tajiks.  It  is  a  curious  blend  between  the  Mongol 
and  the  Persian.  I  was  almost  startled  to  come 
across  one  very  much  like  it  in  the  museum  at 
Khabarovsk  in  Siberia,  and  to  find  it  labelled 
Japanese.  The  race  to  which  the  Mongol  face  be- 
longs has  spread  over  a  goodly  portion  of  the  earth 


SART  WOMEN  127 

in  its  day,  and  to  trace  its  history  is  fascinating 
work.  I  grew  rather  to  like  this  Sart  type  in  time — 
the  fresh  complexion,  the  shining  Mongol  eyes,  and 
the  long  Persian  lashes  curling  upwards. 

In  a  country  with  so  varied  a  history  as  that  of 
Turkestan,  one  naturally  meets  with  many  types  of 
women,  but  I  have  confined  myself  for  the  present 
to  a  description  of  the  people  called  Sarts,  and  there 
is  only  one  other  type  to  be  described  under  that 
head  ;  the  Tajik  type — ^met  with  chiefly  in  Bokhara 
and  Samarkand,  a  product  of  an  unceasing  influx  of 
foreign  blood,  Aral,  Persian,  Turkoman,  and  all  the 
nationalities  that  have  swept  over  the  land  since  our 
forefathers  left  it,  Uzbegs  only  excepted.  The 
Tajik  woman's  face  is  small  and  oval,  and,  though 
very  Persian-looking,  is  yet  quite  distinct.  Some  oi 
her  ancestors  must  have  been  pure  Persian,  for  every 
man  who  could  afford  it  used  to  buy  himself  a  Per- 
sian slave  wife  from  the  Turkoman  brigands,  till 
Russia  put  a  stop  to  slavery.  The  present  Amir 
of  Bokhara,  though  an  Uzbeg,  inherits  his  good 
looks  from  a  Persian  slave-mother.  The  women  of 
Samarkand  are  mostly  of  Bokharan  descent,  and 
vary  but  slightly  from  those  of  that  Khanate,  whose 
clear,  olive  complexions,  though  attractive  in  their 
way,  and  greatly  admired  by  some  people,  are  a  con- 
trast to  those  of  the  fair  and  ruddy  Uzbeg  women 
of  Tashkent,  Namangan,  and  Fergana.  The  chief 
difference  between  a  Tajik  and  a  Persian  face,  in  my 


128  IN  RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

opiniooi  is  the  sad  lackof  individuality  in  the  former. 
A  boy's  face  hardly  differs  from  that  of  a  giri  till  he 
is  in  his  teens.  Small  mouths,  regular  features, 
pretty,  girlish  noses,  and  almost  consumptive-look- 
ing faces  met  us  everywhere  in  the  streets  of  Bok- 
hara. I  speak  now  of  the  men ;  but  it  is  much  the 
same  with  the  women.  A  Russian  resident  to  whom 
I  remarked  upon  the  sickly  look  of  the  Bokharans 
told  me  that  he  attributed  it  to  two  causes :  their 
unhealthy,  cramped-up  houses,  together  with  a  lack 
of  exercise  and  fresh  air,  and  the  immorality  of 
their  private  life. 

Although  it  is  impossible  to  distinguish,  behind 
her  horsehair  veil,  the  pretty  woman  from  the  ugly 
one,  or  the  old  from  the  young,  "  the  man  in  the 
street"  can  generally  tell  at  a  glance  whether  she 
is  rich  or  poor,  for  the  quality  and  condition  of  her 
parandja^  or  outer  garment,  are  sure  indications  of 
her  social  position.  If  she  is  poor  xSx^parandja  is 
often  ragged  and  dirty,  or  carefully  patched,  accord- 
ing to  the  wearer's  idleness  or  thrift.  The  veils,  too, 
are  sometimes  in  a  state  of  great  dilapidation.  I 
heard  of  cases  where  women,  being  too  poor  to 
renew  their  street  attire,  have  done  without  for  years 
by  borrowing  that  ofa  neighbour  whenever  necessity 
compelled  them  to  leave  their  homes.  There  have 
also  been  cases  where  spirited  young  ladies,  wishing 
to  walk  abroad  without  running  the  risk  of  being 
recognised  and  sent  home  by  jealous  husbands,  have 


SART  WOMEN  129 

donned  the  shabby  garb  of  a  poorer  neighbour  for 
greater  security.  Th^  parandjas  of  the  rich  women 
are  often  of  silk,  the  material  most  used  is  cotton ; 
but  no  colour  except  the  regulation  one  of  dull  grey 
is  ever  worn  out  of  doors  by  Sart  women.  In  the 
bazaar  at  Namangan  I  once  caught  sight  of  a 
parandja  of  canary  yellow ;  and  in  another  town 
a  figure  in  bright  red  crossed  my  path.  On  making 
inquiries  about  these  phenomena  I  was  informed  by 
my  native  friends  that  the  wearers  were  Tatdr 
women.  It  is  possible  to  stroll  about  the  streets  of 
Bokhara  for  days  together  without  meeting  a  woman; 
then,  turning  a  comer,  you  may  suddenly  come,  as  I 
once  did,  upon  an  unveiled  female  beggar,  seated  in 
the  very  middle  of  the  narrow  street,  as  though  she 
were  determined  to  be  trodden  upon.  She  is,  of 
course,  a  woman  who  has  no  character  to  lose.  One 
evening  when  I  was  returning  to  our  caravanserai 
just  after  dark,  I  met  several  women  walking  along 
with  their  veils  thrown  back  over  their  foreheads. 

'*  They  are  permitted  to  do  that,"  explained  my 
companion,  "  when  it  is  too  dark  for  their  features 
to  be  distinguished." 

I  once  asked  a  Sart  if  young  girls  did  not  find  the 
heavy  veil  very  irksome  when  they  first  began  to 
wear  it,  to  which  he  replied  that  that  depended  much 
on  the  character  of  the  individual. 

"  If  a  girl  is  inclined  to  be  a  coquette,"  he  added, 
"  or  wishes  to  be  thought  grown-up,  she  is  so  anxious 

I 


I30  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

to  wear  the  veil  that  she  sometimes  begins  too  soon ; 
but  if  she  is  childish  and  simple  she  puts  off  the  evil 
day  as  long  as  possible." 

The  horsehair  veiling  is  manufactured  in  great 
quantities  in  Bokhara.  It  is  woven  in  pieces  of  so 
many  yards,  and  cut  up  afterwards  to  the  desired 
length.  The  price  varies  according  to  the  quality, 
from  one  to  four  shillings  a  yard.  Ruy  Gonzalez 
de  Clavijo  mentions  this  veiling  in  a  description  of 
his  journey  to  the  court  of  Tamerlane,  A.D.  1403.^ 

The  strangest  thing  about  iht  parandjuy  or  outer 
garment,  is  its  long,  tapering  sleeves,  which,  too 
narrow  for  use,  are  thrown  back  over  the  shoulders 
and  pinned  together  behind.  This  useless  fashion 
arose  in  the  following  way.  It  was  found  that,  as 
women  never  put  their  arms  through  the  sleeves  of 
this  garment,  their  shape  and  length  was  of  no  con- 
sequence, and  that  by  being  made  long  and  tapering 
they  could  be  pinned  out  of  the  way  more  easily. 
A  woman's  boots,  always  very  visible,  are  exactly 
like  those  worn  by  the  men,  a  kind  of  Wellington, 
made  of  native  leather,  reaching  to  the  knee.  As  in 
Turkey,  the  ladies  all  wear  trousers,  and  over  these 
the  indoor  boots  are  drawn  ;  stockings  are  unknown. 
The  sole  of  the  boot  is  soft,  and  there  are  no  heels. 
A  huge  golosh,  turning  up  at  the  toe,  is  bought  with 
the  boot  for  outdoor  wear,  and  fits  over  it.    Just  as 

^  This  fascinating  book  of  travel  was  translated  into  English  for 
the  Hakluyt  Society  in  1859,  by  Sir  Clements  Markharo, 


Copyright  Photo  by  Annettk  M.  B.  Meakin 

A   SART   LADY   AND   CHILD 

This  lady,  having  seen  the  author  pass  with  her  camera  (through 
a  hole  in  the  door),  sent  her  little  daughter  out  lo  inquire  how  much 
it  would  cost  to  be  photographed. 

A  131 


SART  WOMEN  131 

the  Japs  slip  their  feet  out  of  their  footgear  before 
entering  a  house,  so  the  Sarts  slip  theirs  out  of  their 
goloshes.  There  is  a  special  boot  for  riding,  worn 
by  men  and  women  alike ;  its  long  heel  tapers  off  to 
the  size  of  a  lady's  thimble.  I  never  saw  any  one 
try  to  walk  in  such  boots,  but  have  heard  that  they 
are  of  great  assistance  in  wading  through  the  Tash- 
kent mud. 

The  indoor  dress  of  Sart  women  varies  in  dif- 
ferent provinces.  In  Tashkent  and  in  Namangan 
I  found  some  ladies  wearing  short  silk  tunics  over 
silken  robes,  the  last  like  those  worn  by  the  men ; 
others  wore  loose  jackets  with  sleeves  cut  after 
the  fashion  of  those  wide  ones  which  were  worn 
by  our  grandmothers  in  the  early  part  of  last 
century.  In  Bokhara  no  short  over-garment  is 
worn,  but  the  robe  is  much  wider  and  shorter, 
and ,  shows  a  great  deal  more  of  the  high  indoor 
boots,  which  are  specially  elaborate  in  consequence. 
A  Bokharan  gentleman,  who  had  been  in  Europe, 
explained  this  difference  to  me  by  saying  that  as 
far  as  the  fashion  of  the  women's  dress  was  con- 
cerned, Bokhara  was  the  Paris,  and  Samarkand  the 
Moscow  of  Central  Asia.  The  ladies  of  Bokhara 
wear  a  stiff  band  of  one-coloured  silk  over  the 
forehead  called  a  peeshanaban^  which  I  did  not 
meet  with  anywhere  else.  The  usual  head-cover- 
ing is  a  silk  handkerchief  tied  over  an  embroidered 
cap  such  as  the  boys  wear.    Many  Bokharan  ladies 


132  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

wear,  in  addition  to  the  peeshanaban^  a  silk  hand- 
kerchief round  the  chin  just  as  if  they  were  suffer* 
ing  from  mumps.  The  cotton  tunic  and  trousers 
worn  under  the  silken  robe  are  slept  in  at  night, 
the  outer  garment  only  being  removed.  Having^ 
beard  repeatedly  that  the  Sarts  never  changed 
their  under-garments  till  they  fell  from  them  in 
rags,  I  asked  a  native  lady  if  this  was  true. 

"  That  may  be  the  case  with  the  lower  classes/' 
she  replied  indignantly,  ''  but  all  respectable  people 
have  their  clothes  washed  every  two  or  three  weeks. 
The  Koran  forbids  our  changing  them  oftener;  we 
must  not  be  too  luxurious  in  our  habits.'' 

In  these  days  the  higher-class  ladies  of  Bokhara 
wear  jewellery  brought  direct  from  Paris,  but  a 
great  many  native  ornaments  are  mixed  up  with 
it.  A  Sart  woman  who  has  any  pretensions  to 
dress  wears  at  least  a  dozen  strings  of  coral  round 
her  neck.  The  coral  is  imported  from  China  by 
way  of  Kashgan  Heavy  silver  earrings  are  much 
in  vogue,  and  also  amulets  decorated  with  tur- 
quoises and  coral  or  glass  beads ;  both  are  hooked 
into  the  hair  above  the  ears.  A  lady  in  Andijan 
who  was  really  very  pretty,  and  the  apple  of  her 
husband's  eye,  told  me  that  the  amulet  she  wore 
upon  her  heart  contained  an  Arabic  prayer  for  her 
health,  which  had  been  written  on  purpose  by  the 
chief  kazi  or  judge  of  the  town.  Her  husband  had 
paid  five  roubles  (ten  shillings)  for  it.     Rings  are 


SART  WOMEN  133 

much  worn,  but  I  saw  few  on  the  ladies'  fingers 
superior  to  those  bought  by  children  in  England 
at  two  a  penny.  In  the  bazaar  at  Tashkent  a  man 
was  making  pretty  silver  rings  with  three  hoops 
which  fitted  into  one,  on  the  finger,  not  unlike  those 
we  get  from  Ceylon.  At  his  side  was  a  pail  of 
nose-rings,  and  a  little  Jewish  girl,  who  had  just 
bought  one,  stood  by  it,  apparently  waiting  to  see 
if  we  would  follow  her  example.  She  had  fitted 
hers  on  to  her  left  nostril  as  we  might  fit  z,  pince- 
nez  on  to  the  bridge  of  our  nose.  After  a  second 
visit  to  the  country  I  can  repeat  with  truth  what 
I  said  in  my  paper  on  the  women  of  Bokhara, 
read  at  University  CoUege,  London,  1897,  that  I 
have  never  seen  a  Sart  woman  with  a  hole  bored 
in  her  nostril;  and,  what  is  more,  I  believe  that 
most,  if  not  all,  the  nose-rings  I  saw  in  that  pail 
were  destined  for  the  adornment  of  Jewish  damsels. 
Thinking  I  should  have  plenty  of  other  opportuni- 
ties, I  did  not  buy  one,  an  omission  I  now  regret, 
for,  as  it  happened,  I  never  again  saw  any  for 
sale.  Bracelets,  consisting  of  solid  bands  of  pure 
silver,  were  to  be  seen  in  the  houses  of  the  rich, 
but  I  saw  none  that  would  tempt  me  to  buy.  Some 
of  the  necklaces  were  rather  quaint ;  they  were  like 
rows  of  silver  fishes  strung  together  with  a  glass 
bead  or  two  between  each  fish.  Some  writers 
illustrate  their  descriptions  of  Sart  jewellery  with 
photographs  of  ladies  covered  with  massive  silver 


134  IN  RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

breastplates,  and  rings  studded  with  agates  as  large 
as  the  top  of  a  man's  thumb;  but  such  jewellery 
being  made  for,  and  worn  only  by,  Turkoman 
women,  these  photographs  are  somewhat  mislead- 
ing. There  is,  of  course,  the  excuse  that  no  male 
photographer  has  ever  had  an  opportunity  of  photo- 
graphing a  respectable  Sart  woman.  When  enter- 
tained by  the  chief  Sart  of  Namangan  I  was  anxious 
to  photograph  his  four  pretty  wives  in  a  group,  and 
urged  as  an  inducement  that  the  picture  would 
appear  in  a  book  presented  to  the  Empress  of 
Russia. 

"Nothing  would  give  me  greater  pleasure,"  re- 
plied my  host  with  dignity,  "  than  that  the  White 
Empress  should  look  upon  a  photograph  of  myself 
and  my  sons,  but  my  wives  must  ever  remain  in 
the  privacy  of  their  home." 

On  almost  every  occasion  when  I  succeeded  in 
obtaining  permission  to  photograph  the  women, 
their  husbands  only  allowed  it  with  the  under- 
standing that  the  pictures  should  not  appear  any- 
where except  in  my  book.  Happily  for  me,  it 
never  seemed  to  enter  their  heads  that  a  copy 
might  some  day  reach  Central  Asia.  Possibly  they 
thought  that  their  wives  would  have  ceased  to  be 
young  and  pretty  before  such  a  thing  could  happen. 

A  lady,  who  had  resided  for  many  years  in 
Morocco,  was  looking  over  the  photographs  I 
had  brought  from  Turkestan,  when  she  suddenly 


SART  WOMEN  13S 

exclaimed,  "Why,  all  the  people  have  got  boots  on!" 
She  had  hit  upon  one  of  the  chief  differences  in 
the  dress  of  the  two  countries.  The  high  boots 
worn  by  Sart  women  indoors  and  out  are  a  charac- 
teristic feature  of  their  attire.  Professor  Vamb6ry, 
on  reading  over  my  notes,  wrote  at  the  side: 
"These  boots  are  really  leathern  stockings  over 
which  the  shoes  for  outdoor  wear  are  drawn.  The 
former  are  callen  mez^  the  latter  kafshJ*  Burnes, 
who  visited  Bokhara  in  1834,  wrote  of  the  women : 
"What  a  strange  taste  for  those  who  are  forever 
concealed  to  choose  to  be  thus  booted,  as  if  prepared 
for  a  journey ! " 

Dark  green  is  a  favourite  colour  for  these  boots. 
The  price  of  a  good  pair  is  from  four  to  ten 
shillings,  according  to  the  amount  of  coloured 
leather  that  has  been  let  in  as  ornament;  cheap 
ones  have  only  one  little  piece  of  coloured  leather 
let  in  at  the  heel.  The  most  expensive,  which  are 
covered  all  over  with  brilliant  designs,  are  not  of 
native  manufacture;  they  are  of  Tatdr  make,  and 
come  in  great  quantities  from  Kazan.  I  remember 
once  spending  an  afternoon  at  the  house  of  a  rich 
Tatdr  there,  who  had  made  his  fortune  by  supply- 
ing boots  to  Bokhara,  where,  as  I  have  already 
said,  the  shortest  dresses  and  the  most  elaborate 
boots  are  worn.  Native  boots  are  made  of  horse 
and  donkey  leather.  Schwarz  says  that  the  green 
colour  is  obtained  by  the  use  of  vitriol,  and  that  in 


136  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

order  to  make  the  leather  elastic  it  is  soaked  for 
several  days  in  water  and  then  strewn  with  millet ; 
the  millet  is  hammered  into  it,  and  the  whole  is  left 
to  dry.  Afterwards,  when  the  millet  has  been 
brushed  away,  it  is  dyed,  and  the  indentations 
caused  by  the  seed  swell  out,  thus  giving  the 
leather  its  peculiar  mottled  appearance. 


CHAPTER  XIII 

MARRIAGE 

The  schoolmistress  in  Kokand  told  me  that  it  was 
a  rare  thing  if  a  girl  remained  in  her  school  after 
she  had  reached  her  twelfth  year,  as  most  scholars 
left  to  be  married  before  that  age,  some  even  at 
nine.  The  husbands  are  much  older.  A  boy  is 
never  married  before  he  is  sixteen.  When  a  family 
is  very  poor,  the  daughter's  marriage  is  frequently 
hurried  on,  that  the  parents  may  get  money  from 
the  bridegroom.  Nalivkin  tells  of  a  destitute  sweet- 
seller  who  could  not  make  more  than  twopence-half- 
penny a  day,  and  was  at  last  compelled  to  sell  his 
only  daughter  for  eight  shillings.  Some  girls  are 
quite  anxious  to  be  married.  One  damsel  was  so 
glad  when  her  wedding-day  arrived  that,  instead 
of  crying,  as  she  ought  to  have  done  on  leaving 
the  parental  roof,  she  literally  jumped  for  joy. 
Her  mother  was  obliged  to  beat  her  at  last,  just 
to  make  the  tears  come.  There  are  practically  no 
old  maids  among  the  Sarts.  In  our  country  some 
men  hold  back  from  marriage  because  they  fear  to 
run  the  risk  of  getting  an  unsuitable  wife.  No  Sart 
ever  has  that  fear,  because  he  can  change  her  for 

X37 


138  IN  RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

another  whenever  he  likes  without  the  least  diffi- 
culty. Then,  too,  the  Mohammedan  law  commands 
all  men  to  marry.  Women,  on  the  other  hand,  are 
anxious  for  the  protection  that  a  husband's  name 
will  give.  There  is  no  marriage  ceremony  except 
the  drawing  up  of  a  settlement,  when  a  mullah  is 
called  in,  it  is  true,  but  merely  that  he  may  serve  as 
a  witness. 

Sometimes  there  is  so  much  disputing  as  to  the 
calim^  or  price,  that  is  to  be  paid  to  the  bride  that 
all  the  neighbours  round  have  to  be  called  in  to 
settle  it  Part  of  the  calim  is  paid  on  the  day  of 
the  betrothal,  but  the  bride  is  not  supposed  to  go 
to  her  husband's  home  till  the  whole  has  been  paid. 
Between  the  betrothal  and  a  wedding  delayed  on 
account  of  the  dowry  the  husband  may  visit  his 
wife,  but  the  parents  must  not  see  him  come,  or 
go,  or  meet  him  anywhere,  till  the  wedding-day. 
Strange  scenes  are  often  the  result  of  this  extra- 
ordinary custom.  For  instance,  the  bridegroom  is 
buying  something  in  the  bazaar,  when  the  people 
standing  near  all  begin  to  laugh  ;  he  looks  round  to 
see  what  is  the  cause  of  their  merriment,  and  meets 
the  eye  of  his  father-in-law.  The  next  moment  he 
has  bolted  from  the  spot  like  a  frightened  hare. 
With  the  Turkomans  this  custom  holds  good  even 
longer.  A  man  must  not  see  his  wife's  father  until 
the  first  child  is  bom.  A  Russian  officer  in  Merv 
told  me  that  a  Turkoman  who  had  come  to  his  office 


MARRIAGE  139 

to  speak  to  him  on  a  matter  of  business  suddenly 
leaped  on  to  a  chair,  broke  the  iron  bar  across  the 
office  window,  and  made  his  escape  by  it,  and  only 
because  his  father-in-law  had  entered  the  room. 
Strange  that  in  England — it  is  his  mother-in-law  of 
whom  a  man  usually  stands  in  awe ! 

Although  it  is  written  in  the  Mohammedan  law 
that  a  man  may  only  have  four  wives,  I  was  con- 
stantly told  by  the  Sarts  themselves  that  a  rich 
mullah  might  have,  and  generally  had,  five.  Other 
people  have  to  be  content  with  four,  but  that  matters 
little,  seeing  that  they  can  change  as  often  as  they 
like.  A  woman  may  only  have  one  husband  at  a 
time,^  but  it  is  immaterial  how  often  she  changes 
him.  A  man's  first  wife  keeps  house,  and  the  other 
three  must  obey  her,  and  address  her  as  ''elder 
sister."  If  she  dies,  the  favourite  wife  takes  her 
place,  not  the  next  in  order.  If  a  wife's  relations 
do  not  want  her  to  go  to  another  town  with  her 
husband,  he  leaves  her  with  them  and  finds  another 
wife  to  replace  her  in  the  other  town.  If  a  man  has 
his  property  scattered  about  in  several  places,  he 
marries  a  wife  in  each,  so  that  each  of  his  estates 
may  have  a  mistress  to  manage  it.  The  scolding 
and  squabbling  that  goes  on  when  all  the  wives  are 
in  one  house  is  something  terrible.  Yet  a  first  wife 
occasionally  begs  her  husband  to  take  a  second  that 

^  Polyandry  does  exist  in  some  parts  of  Central  Asia,  but  not  in 
Turkestan. 


I40  IN  RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

she  may  be  reBeved  of  the  housework.  We  were 
greatly  touched  by  the  words  of  an  old  lady  in 
Samarkand,  who  said  to  us :  *'  Every  first  wife  prays 
God  that  her  husband  may  never  become  rich,  so 
that  she  may  be  his  only  wife  always.  We  are 
happy  if  there  is  just  enough  money  to  buy  food 
and  drink.  If  there  is  a  little  over  there  comes  a 
new  wife,  and  our  happiness  is  gone."  Then  she 
went  on  to  tell  us  how  a  woman  in  the  next  house 
had,  quite  recently,  tried  to  poison  her  husband  by 
pouring  mercury  into  his  ear,  but  his  life  was  saved 
and  the  matter  hushed  up.  Before  the  Russians 
came  women  used  frequently,  out  of  jealousy,  to 
poison  their  husbands  with  aconite,  which  grows 
wild  in  the  country  round ;  but  now,  afraid  of  being 
punished  for  murder,  they  content  themselves  with 
calling  in  the  aid  of  sorcerers,  and  carrying  prayers 
in  their  amulets  with  such  words  as  "Love  me 
best "  written  in  Arabic.  If  .a  bride  is  poor,  her 
people  spend  the  calim  in  bu3dng  her  a  trousseau, 
but  if  she  is  rich  they  return  a  double  calim  to  the 
bridegroom,  a  piece  of  silk  or  porcelain,  or  some 
such  present,  stating  at  the  same  time  the  exact 
worth  of  each  gift.  When  a  man  wants  a  wife  he 
employs  some  elderly  female  relative  to  find  out 
where  there  is  a  suitable  lady;  and  then,  though 
he  is  not  supposed  to  see  his  future  wife  before 
the  betrothal,  he  sometimes  bribes  the  aged  match- 
maker to  let  him  get  a  peep  at  his  intended  through 


MARRIAGE  141 

some  hole  in  a  door  or  curtain.  If  she  happens  to 
be  a  cousin  or  some  other  near  relative,  he  has  pro- 
bably known  her  well  as  a  child.  The  calim  is  a 
large  or  small  sum  of  money,  or  a  tray  of  presents, 
proportionate  to  her  reported  looks  and  general  con- 
dition. I  was  informed  that  a  girl  marked  with 
smallpox  could  be  had  very  cheaply,  also  a  girl  who 
was  slightly  lame.  A  Russian  lady  whose  man- 
servant was  about  to  be  married  said  to  him — 

'^  Suppose  you  don't  like  the  looks  of  your  wife 
when  you  see  her  ?  " 

"If  I  don't  like  her,"  he  replied  with  vehemence, 
"  I  shall  kill  my  mother." 

The  wedding  is  celebrated  by  several  days  of 
feasting  in  the  house  of  the  bride,  when  she  is  sur- 
rounded by  all  her  lady  friends  and  their  children.  I 
was  present  at  a  Tashkent  wedding,  and  cannot  easily 
forget  the  deafening  shouts  of  the  young  people. 

"  They  are  asking  you  to  photograph  the  bride," 
said  my  interpreter. 

"  Bring  her  out  into  the  light,"  I  answered,  "  and 
we  will  see  what  we  can  do." 

"  Oh  no,  oh  no ;  she  cannot  come  out  for  at  least 
a  week,"  replied  her  friends ;  "  you  must  go  inside 
and  photograph  her  in  her  state  apartment."  I  went 
in  and  shook  hands  with  her,  but  as  there  were 
no  windows,  and  her  face  was  but  dimly  visible, 
taking  her  photograph  was  out  of  the  question.  I 
have  visited  a  goodly  number  of  Sart  brides,  and 


142  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

invariably  found  them  in  a  fainting  attitude,  as 
though  they  were  anxious  to  swoon  away.  Nothing 
would  induce  them  to  lift  their  eyes  from  the  ground, 
and  whenever  it  was  possible  they  would  bury  their 
faces  in  the  robe  of  some  lady  relative  during  the 
whole  of  our  interview.  Outside  in  the  courtyard 
there  would  be  a  row  of  female  musicians  seated  on 
mattresses,  and  dancing-girls  performed  to  the  tam- 
bourine music.  The  girls  wore  red  cloths  tied  over 
their  foreheads,  strings  of  coral  round  their  necks, 
and  purple  velvet  tunics  over  robes  with  sleeves 
half  a  yard  longer  than  their  arms,  which  flapped 
about  like  fins.  Round  and  round  they  twirled,  the 
centre  of  an  admiring  crowd,  singing  as  they  danced, 
and  presently  the  little  boys,  without  waiting  for  a 
pause,  threw  them  coins,  which  they  dexterously 
caught  in  their  mouths.  All  this  time  the  bride  sat 
alone  in  her  inner  chamber,  never  attempting  to  join 
in  the  fun.  Sart  women  of  good  character  never 
dance  in  public ;  they  consider  it  undignified.  The 
schoolmistress  at  Samarkand  took  us  into  the  room 
where  her  son's  bride  was  just  concluding  her  week 
of  enforced  seclusion.  Her  trousseau  was  hung 
upon  lines  at  one  end  of  the  room.  She  had  an 
embroidered  handkerchief,  especially  worked  in 
three  corners,  so  that  she  might  hold  it  in  her  right 
hand  and  effectively  cover  her  face  with  it  when 
visitors  were  announced.  Behind  the  cord  hung 
with  her  trousseau  was  a  handsome  velvet  cloth. 


MARRIAGE  143 

about  twelve  feet  square,  with  pictures  of  Mecca 
embroidered  all  over  it,  which  had  been  in  the 
family  for  several  generations,  and  was  only  used 
on  state  occasions.  This  divided  her  sleeping 
apartment  from  the  one  in  which  she  spent  the  day. 
The  bride  was  wearing  a  thimble  on  her  third 
finger,  but  it  was  against  the  law  for  her  to  touch 
any  work,  even  embroidery,  till  the  seven  days 
were  over.  Perhaps  she  had  found  idleness  un- 
bearable, and  was  amusing  herself  on  the  sly  when 
we  interrupted  her.  Seeing  the  father-in-law 
waiting  about  in  the  courtyard,  I  asked  why  he  did 
not  come  in. 

*'  He  must  wait  until  the  seven  days  are  over," 
said  the  old  lady,  ''  then  he  will  pay  the  bride  a 
visit." 

"What  is  your  husband's  name?"  I  asked  the 
bride. 

"  I  have  not  the  right  to  pronounce  the  name  of 
my  husband,"  she  answered. 

Many  divorces  occur  because  a  man  thinks  his 
wife  ugly,  or  because  his  lady  relatives  have  spoken 
to  him  about  some  prettier  girl.  A  wife  can  seldom 
get  a  divorce  without  the  consent  of  her  husband. 
A  rich  girl,  if  she  does  not  like  her  husband,  goes 
back  to  her  own  people,  but  she  is  still  his  wife.  A 
poor  girl  cannot  go  home,  she  remains  in  the  home 
— a  servant  to  the  new  wife  very  often.  If  the 
husband  has  consented  to  her  divorce  she  may 


144  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

marry  again.  A  widow  may  marry  again  two 
months  and  ten  days  after  the  death  of  her  hus- 
band. A  divorced  woman's  position  in  society  is 
as  good  as  that  of  an  unmarried  girl,  and  better, 
because  she  has  more  liberty.  The  frequent 
divorces  are  a  source  of  gain  to  the  mullahs,  who 
receive  presents  in  return  for  their  services.  The 
cases  in  which  a  woman  can  compel  her  husband  to 
divorce  her  are :  when  she  can  prove  that  he  has 
beaten  her  black  and  blue  without  cause;  when  he 
marries  a  second  wife  without  her  formal  permis- 
sion ;  when  he  has  given  her  nothing  to  eat  for  six 
months ;  when  he  has  taken  her  to  live  in  a  place 
three  days'  journey  from  her  own  home  without  her 
consent ;  when  he  loses  his  reason ;  or  when  he  is 
a  leper. 

Divorce  begins  by  one  or  the  other  saying  Talek, 
Then  they  must  think  it  over  for  three  days.  If 
both  are  still  anxious  for  a  divorce,  they  then  say 
before  witnesses  that  they  want  it.  If  a  husband 
wishes  to  get  rid  of  his  wife  without  good  reason, 
he  must  return  to  her  all  that  she  brought  with  her 
of  value,  but  she  does  not  return  him  his  calim. 
When  the  word  Takk  has  been  said  three  times 
they  cannot  go  back.  After  that,  should  the  wife 
wish  to  return  to  her  husband,  she  must  first  marry 
another  man,  and  get  a  divorce  from  him,  before  she 
can  do  so.  Then  there  has  to  be  a  new  wedding,  as 
if  she  had  never  been  married  before.    After  she 


MARRIAGE  145 

has  been  divorced  a  wife  may  keep  her  children  till 
they  are  seven  years  of  age,  then  the  husband  must 
sup[>ort  them.  Women  often  marry  again  after 
they  have  reached  the  age  of  forty,  or  even  forty- 
five.i 

Out  in  the  villages  there  are  very  few  women  who 
can  read ;  perhaps  two  in  each  village,  but  not  more. 
Nalivkin,  who  lived  among  the  Sarts  as  one  of 
themselves,  relates  that  the  country  people  have 
signs  and  symbols  for  expressing  what  they  want  to 
say  to  friends  at  a  distance.  If  a  woman  sends  her 
husband  a  piece  of  coal,  for  instance,  he  interprets 
the  message  as, ''  I  am  black  as  a  coal  with  sorrow  at 
your  absence."  If  the  emblem  sent  is  a  straw,  the 
meaning  is,  "  I  am  yellow  with  regret,"  &a  If  it  is 
a  blue  thread  it  is,  ''  There  has  been  a  death  in  our 
family." 

Another  strange  custom  is  that  if  three  genera- 
tions of  a  family  live  together,  as  is  nearly  always 
the  case,  the  children  are  taught  to  call  their  grand- 
parents father  and  mother,  and  their  own  parents 
elder  brother  and  elder  sister  respectively.  This 
seems  to  indicate  a  reverence  for  the  aged,  which  is 
more  than  contradicted  by  actions  that  speak  louder 
than  words. 

There  is  little  companionship  between  a  Sart 
husband  and  wife  unless  they  work  at  the  same 

^  A  widow  may  marry  again  four  months  and  ten  days  after  the 
death  of  her  first  husband. 

K 


146  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

trade,   seeing    that    the    man    spends   every   free 
moment  in  the  bazaar. 

Some  women  are  very  thrifty;  they  work  hard 
while  their  lazy  husbands  hang  about  doing  nothing. 
There  have  been  cases  where  a  wife  has  supported 
the  whole  family  by  selling  her  embroidery  and 
hatching  silkworms'  eggs.  With  regard  to  the 
latter  employment,  it  was,  till  quite  lately,  entirely 
in  the  hands  of  the  women. 


(   ili\':: 


CHAPTER  XIV 

SART  COOKING 

There  is  no  such  thing  as  a  kitchen  in  a  Sart 
household,  and  the  cooking  utensils  are  so  few 
that  they  can  stand  in  the  comer  of  the  living- 
room  without  inconvenience  to  its  occupants.  In 
the  same  comer,  a  pole  stretched  across  from  wall 
to  wall,  about  six  feet  from  the  ground,  serves,  as 
I  have  said  before,  as  the  family  larder,  and  from  it 
are  suspended  a  number  of  ragged-looking  pieces 
of  meat,  which,  to  our  ideas,  are  anything  but  a 
tempting  sight.  Large  joints  of  meat  are  unknown 
among  the  Sarts ;  it  is  sold  in  the  bazaar  in  frag- 
ments of  never  more  than  two  pounds,  and  looks  as 
if  it  had  been  torn  from  the  carcase  without  the  aid 
of  a  knife.  Finding  the  primitive  larder  rather  full 
in  one  house,  I  inquired  of  our  hostess  how  long 
she  could  keep  her  meat  hanging  there,  to  which 
she  replied  that  the  particular  supply  at  which  I 
was  looking  had  been  carefully  salted,  and,  as  the 
weather  was  cold,  it  would  hang  there  safely  for 
several  weeks.  In  hot  weather  it  is  not  pleasant 
to  pass  a  butcher's  shop,  for,  take  what  care  they 
will,  the  natives  cannot  keep  all  their  meat  in  good 

»47 


148       •  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

condition  until  it  is  sold,  besides  which,  flies  settle 
on  it  in  myriads,  till  sight  and  smell  drive  the 
traveller  from  the  spot.  The  poor  seldom  indulge 
in  meat,  and  the  rich  are  content  to  have  it  only 
once  a  day  in  their  national  dish-^ilau.  The 
meat  that  finds  most  favour  is  mutton.  Central 
Asian  sheep  are  particularly  fine,  and  we  thought 
their  meat  the  only  kind  worth  eating.  These 
animals  are  kept  in  great  flocks  by  the  Kirgiz,^ 
who  supply  them  to  the  Sart  markets.  They  are 
a  large  breed,  with  long  legs,  flapping  ears,  and 
curved  noses.  Some  of  them  weigh  as  much  as  a 
hundred  and  fifty  pounds.  Travellers  describe  them 
as  fat-tailed  sheep,  but  it  would  be  more  correct  to 
say  that  they  have  no  tails  at  all.  The  lump  of  fat, 
which  the  Sarts  find  so  useful  in  their  cooking,  is 
really  part  of  the  back,  which  hangs  over  the  hind 
legs  and  swings  with  every  movement  of  the  body. 
It  disappears  altogether  when  the  sheep  are  in- 
sufficiently fed.  The  Sarts  don't  understand  sheep 
without  these  "  tails."  I  heard  of  one  who,  when 
he  saw  some  hanging  in  a  butcher's  shop  in  Europe, 
exclaimed  in  a  tone  of  horror — 
"  Why,  these  are  dogs ! " 
To  the  Moslem  the  dog  is  an  unclean  animaL 
When  skinned  and  hung  up  in  the  bazaar  the 
back  of  the  carcase  has  the  appearance  of  merging 
into  two  great  bags  of  suet ;  it  is  not  suet,  however, 
1  See  Chap.  XXIII. 


SART  COOKING  149 

but  ordinary  mutton  fat,  and  its  taste  does  not  differ 
from  that  of  the  mutton  fat  of  Europe,  from  which 
I  have  been  told  we  manufacture,  amongst  other 
things,  a  deUcacy  known  as  chocolate  cream.  By 
the  Sarts  it  is  also  used  in  confectionery,  a  fact  of 
which  no  one  who  has  tasted  a  native  sweetmeat 
can  remain  in  doubt. 

As  I  have  never  seen  a  young  Sart  woman 
employed  in  cooking,  I  once  more  draw  my  in- 
spiration from  a  grandmamma,  and  describe  how 
I  saw  her  prepare  the  family  pilau.  She  was  the 
oldest  member  of  the  family  of  a  wealthy  Sart  in 
Chyust,  and  on  the  occasion  of  my  visit  I  found 
her  standing  over  a  great  copper  stewpan  in  the 
courtyard,  stirring  its  contents  with  a  long  wooden 
spoon.  It  was  a  bright  but  cold  and  frosty  Decem- 
ber day,  and  I  for  my  part  should  have  preferred 
seeing  the  operation  carried  on  indoors,  for  I  felt 
my  toes  freeze  on  the  hard  ground.  The  stewpan 
was  on  a  charcoal  fire  in  a  clay  fireplace,  about  two 
feet  above  the  ground,  that  had  evidently  been  built 
for  the  purpose.  I  looked  into  the  pot  and  saw 
what  I  at  first  took  to  be  a  quantity  of  boiling  oil ; 
it  was  almost  as  clear  as  water. 

"  That  is  mutton  fat,"  said  my  guide.  "  This  old 
lady  is  making  pilau;  you  see  how  well  she  has 
melted  down  the  fat  and  removed  every  atom  of 
scum.     You  can  hardly  tell  it  from  water." 

There  were  at  least  six  quarts  of  fat  in  that 


ISO  IN  RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

stewpan,  and  I  remarked  upon  the  expense  it 
must  be  to  prepare  such  a  dish  if  all  that  oil  was 
required. 

"  Oh  I  she  will  use  that  again  and  again/'  was 
the  reply.  "  If  it  is  well  cleared  after  the  pilau  is 
taken  out  it  will  last  a  long  time." 

The  next  step  was  to  drop  into  the  pan  little  bits 
of  mutton  about  half  an  inch  square;  then  a  quantity 
of  carrots  cut  into  fine  strips  was  added :  it  would 
have  taken  a  long  time  to  prepare  this  vegetable  at 
home,  but  it  is  bought  already  sliced  in  the  bazaar, 
where  great  piles  of  it  form  one  of  the  brightest  bits 
of  colouring  in  a  greengrocer's  booth.  After  awhile 
the  rice  is  added,  and  a  cover  put  on  to  keep  in  the 
steam,  which  cooks  it.  The  old  lady  was  prepared 
to  do  the  thing  thoroughly,  but  I  felt  too  cold  to 
stand  there  any  longer,  so  she  explained  to  me, 
through  my  interpreter,  that  there  was  nothing 
more  to  be  done  but  to  stir  the  rice  at  intervals 
and  add  dried  raisins  and  various  condiments  to 
give  it  a  pleasant  flavour.  The  best  dish  oi  pilau 
I  ever  tasted  was  served  up  straight  from  the  pot 
at  the  house  of  a  Kokand  merchant.  Every  grain 
of  rice  was  separate,  and  a  more  savoury  dish  I 
could  never  wish  for;  it  had  no  taste  of  the  oil. 
In  some  houses  it  had  cooled  slightly  before  it  was 
handed  to  us,  and  then  we  could  hardly  eat  it  for 
the  strong  taste  of  mutton  fat. 

It  must  not  be  inferred  from  what  I  have  said 


SART  COOKING  151 

above  that  only  the  old  women  know  how  to  cook, 
for  every  Sart  can  make  a  pilau.  It  is  served  up 
in  a  large  dish,  and  the  family  sit  round  it  eating 
with  their  fingers,  which,  needless  to  say,  are  soon 
in  a  very  oily  condition;  however,  the  hands  and 
lips  are  washed  before  and  after  every  meal.  A 
brass  basin  being  brought  to  each  one  in  turn, 
water  is  poured  over  the  hands  by  an  attendant. 
In  rich  families  the  men  eat  in  their  own  apart- 
ment, waited  on  by  the  women,  but  in  quiet 
households  they  often  eat  with  their  wives.  There 
is  a  saying  in  Fergana  that  if  a  woman  eats  with 
uncovered  head  her  good  angel  leaves  her.  When 
a  meal  is  over  the  oldest  man  present  makes  a  sign 
to  the  others,  and  then  all  wipe  their  beards  with 
both  hands. 

Another  thing  the  Sart  can  make  to  perfection 
is  the  pelmene,  as  the  Russians  call  it  (I  forget 
the  native  name),  a  kind  of  meat  turnover.  The 
orthodox  way  of  making  these  is  to  put  them  into 
a  covered  sieve  and  steam  them  over  boiling  water, 
but  I  came  across  a  booth  in  Bokhara  where  one 
Sart  was  filling  these  patties  with  chopped  meat 
and  onions,  while  another  at  his  side  threw  them 
into  a  pan  of  boiling  fat  as  soon  as  they  were 
ready.  After  letting  them  frizzle  for  a  few 
minutes  he  fished  them  out  with  a  ladle  and 
browned  them  before  a  brisk  charcoal  fire.  They 
were  bought  and  eaten  by  the  passers-by  as  fast 


152  IN  RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

as  they  could  be  made,  and  at  last,  having  watched 
the  whole  process,  we  tried  them  too,  and  found 
them  very  good  indeed.  At  one  dinner-party  a 
dish  of  stewed  apples  mashed  in  mutton  fat  was 
handed  round.  A  single  mouthful  was  all  I  could 
manage  of  this  concoction,  at  which  our  host  looked 
quite  perplexed — he  thought  it  so  very  nice. 

The  Sarts  make  neither  butter  nor  cheese ;  they 
drink  their  milk  fresh,  or  cook  rice  in  it.  Cows 
do  not  thrive  in  Central  Asia;  there  is  no  proper 
pasturage  for  them.  You  occasionally  see  a  boy 
leading  a  lean,  wretched-looking  cow  by  a  string, 
and  letting  it  stop  from  time  to  time  to  snatch  a 
blade  of  grass  upon  the  roadside.  This  is  all  the 
''leading  to  pasture"  the  poor  creatures  get,  so 
neither  their  beef  nor  their  butter  can  ever  amount 
to  much. 

The  Sarts  excel  in  making  fruit  syrups,  and  often 
put  these  into  their  tea  instead  of  sugar.  In  hot 
weather  fruit  ices  are  made  with  syrup,  and  sold  in 
the  bazaar.  The  man  in  the  refreshment  booth  has 
a  block  of  ice  at  hand,  and  as  a  passer-by  stops  to 
buy  some  he  scrapes  the  block  with  a  sharp  knife 
over  a  saucer,  and,  when  this  is  sufficiently  full  of 
the  frozen  shavings,  pours  a  spoonful  of  grape  or 
some  other  syrup  over  it  and  the  ice  is  ready.  The 
quality  of  the  ice  depends  entirely  upon  the  cleanli- 
ness of  the  particular  canal  from  which  it  has  been 
taken,  and  it  is  therefore  more  doubtful  in  Bokhara 


SART  COOKING  153 

than  elsewhere ;  nevertheless  that  is  just  where  the 
most  ice  is  eaten.  During  Ramazan  the  people  break 
their  long  fast  at  sunset  by  eating  neeshaldah^  a 
preparation  of  white  of  egg  that  looks  like  whipped 
cream.  Though  I  saw  it  at  every  street  comer  for 
a  month,  I  never  could  bring  myself  to  taste  this 
mixture.  At  sunset  every  man  and  boy  we  met 
seemed  to  be  carrying  a  basin  of  neeshcUelah.  Some- 
times we  met  one  carrying  a  pole  with  four  basins 
swinging  from  it ;  this  seemed  to  me  rather  a  sensible 
method  of  carrying  liquid,  as  it  jerked  less  with  the 
movement  of  the  body  than  if  carried  on  a  tray. 

The  Sarts  have  a  great  reverence  for  bread, 
because  it  is  the  staff  of  life.  ''You  must  never 
turn  a  piece  of  bread  on  its  back,"  they  say.  The 
amount  of  bread  a  man  can  pile  up  before  his  visitor 
is  considered  a  token  of  his  wealth.  At  the  close  of 
Ramazan  many  families  put  away  a  piece  of  bread 
to  be  kept  till  the  next  fast.  In  one  house  they 
showed  me  a  piece  that  had  been  kept  for  seven 
years.  Sometimes  flat  loaves  are  hung  on  nails 
round  the  walls  and  kept  in  that  way.  Curiously 
enough,  the  keeping  of  bread  from  Easter  to  Easter 
was  once  a  custom  in  England.  An  old  lady  of  my 
mother's  acquaintance  used  to  treasure  under  a  glass 
shade  an  Easter  loaf  that  had  been  handed  down  to 
her  by  her  ancestors.  There  are  hens  in  nearly 
every  courtyard,  and  eggs  are  plentiful,  but  very 
small,  and  rarely  to  be  had  quite  fresh.    The  Sarts 


154  IN  RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

boil  them  hard,  and  sell  them  in  the  bazaar  coloured 
blue  and  red.  Schwarz  believes  that  the  Indo-Ger- 
manic  races  brought  the  custom  of  Easter  eggs  from 
Turkestan,  especially  as  the  Chinese,  who  also  look 
upon  Central  Asia  as  the  cradle  of  their  nation,  have 
preserved,  up  to  this  day,  a  similar  custom. 

The  omelette  aux  fines  herbes  is  much  appreciated 
by  the  lower  classes,  for  whom  it  is  prepared  in  a 
round  pan  a  foot  and  a  half  in  diameter  and  then 
cut  up  into  slices.  It  was  amusing  to  watch  the 
hungry  customers  crowding  round  an  omelette-seller, 
and  swallowing  his  wares  with  evident  relish  at  two 
slices  a  farthing.  There  is  a  kind  of  cake  made  after ' 
Ramazan,  which  is  composed  chiefly  of  flour,  honey, 
and  pistachio-nuts.  It  is  not  a  cake  peculiar  to  the 
Sarts,  however,  as  the  Tatars  ^Iso  have  it ;  they  too 
think  it  a  great  delicacy,  but,  to  my  taste,  partaking  of 
it  seemed  too  much  like  filling  the  mouth  with  flour. 

The  Sarts,  like  other  Asiatics,  have  an  almost 
childish  love  for  sweetmeats,  some  of  which,  in  spite 
of  the  external  mutton  fat,  are  really  prepared  with 
great  skill.  Their  imitations  of  various  fruits  and 
nuts  are  sometimes  quite  deceptive.  I  remember  a 
warm  discussion  that  arose  between  my  two  inter- 
preters on  one  occasion  as  to  whether  a  dish  of 
blanched  almonds  that  a  Sarthad  set  before  us  con- 
sisted of  real  almonds  or  of  an  exceedingly  close 
imitation  of  them.  I  put  one  into  my  mouth  and 
proved  it  to  be  a  sweetmeat. 


CHAPTER    XV 

NATIVE    BATHS 

Having  obtained  permission  from  the  proprietor  of 
the  largest  bath  in  Samarkand,  we  went  to  see  it 
on  the  women's  day,  and  were  so  fascinated  by  the 
surroundings  in  which  we  found  ourselves  that  we 
remained  there  for  the  rest  of  the  morning.  The  wife 
of  the  proprietor,  who  was  gorgeous  with  silk  and 
jewels,  received  us  with  gracious  smiles,  and  found 
us  seats.  She  looked  about  the  age  of  thirty-five, 
and,  even  at  that  advanced  age,  could  still  be  called 
a  pretty  woman.  Her  husband,  she  told  us,  allowed 
her  the  use  of  the  bath  one  day  a  week,  and  all  that 
she  could  make  out  of  the  women  bathers  was  her 
own  private  pocket-money.  Each  bather  pays  from 
half  a  farthing  to  twopence,  according  to  her  means. 
The  half-farthing  bather  pays  for  two  baths  together, 
as  there  is  no  coin  of  that  value.  The  proprietress 
does  not  pay  the  bathing  attendants  anything ;  they 
come  of  their  own  accord,  and  earn  what  they  can 
from  the  bathers  in  return  for  scrubbing  them  and 
pouring  vessels  of  water  over  them. 

Oh  what  a  scene  that  was !   and  what  a  Babel ! 
The  only  light  came  from  an  aperture  in  the  roof. 


156  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

about  two  feet  square,  and  our  eyes  had  to  get 
accustomed  to  the  dimness  before  we  could  dis- 
tinguish anything  but  a  writhing  mass  of  women 
and  children  employed  in  putting  on  and  taking  off 
their  clothes.  The  bath  itself  was  below  the  ground 
floor,  and  the  steps  down  to  it,  in  the  centre  of  the 
dressing  apartment,  seemed  to  lead  into  a  dark 
vault,  for  there  was  very  little  light  inside.  Up  and 
down  these  steps  there  passed  incessantly  a  naked 
crowd.  Mothers  carrying  their  babies,  and  looking 
half  savage,  like  North  American  Indians  with  their 
long,  straight  hair  hanging  lank  upon  their  bare 
shoulders,  would  emerge  with  steaming  skin,  and 
begin  to  put  on  their  clothes  in  front  of  us.  Little 
children,  carrying  smaller  ones  on  their  backs, 
toiled  with  hands  and  feet  up  the  steps  that  were 
too  high  for  their  tiny  legs.  One  child,  who  could 
not  have  been  more  than  five,  arrived  at  the  bath 
quite  alone,  carrying  her  baby  brother  on  her  back. 
She  undressed  the  baby  and  herself  and,  taking  the 
little  thing  again  on  her  back,  crawled  down  the 
steps  and  was  lost  to  sight  among  the  other  bathers ; 
so  tiny  was  that  little  couple  that  I  could  have 
carried  the  two  of  them  easily  in  my  arms.  Gather- 
ing my  skirts  together,  I  followed  them  down  the 
wet  and  slippery  steps  and  entered  the  bath.  Here 
was  a  scene!  The  slanting  marble  floor,  heated 
from  beneath,  was  not  easy  to  stand  upon,  and  the 
walls  rang  with  the  screams  of  children  falling  about 


NATIVE  BATHS  157 

and  clinging  to  their  mothers  in  fear.  The  mothers' 
voices,  scolding  loudly,  added  to  the  deafening  up- 
roar. A  low  doorway  led  into  a  hotter  and  still 
darker  room,  where  the  floor,  having  been  still  more 
heated  from  below,  was  too  hot  to  stand  on,  and  the 
scene  even  more  exciting  in  consequence.  The  old 
bathing-women,  with  nothing  but  a  towel  round 
their  shrivelled-up  forms,  were  dashing  water  over 
their  victims,  while  here  and  there  some  bather  with 
a  frugal  mind  was  pouring  water  over  herself  from  a 
copper  vessel  with  a  spout.  The  horrible  noise  was 
as  trying  as  the  hot  air,  and  I  was  soon  glad  to  go 
back  to  the  dressing-chamber.  I  sat  down  and 
looked  round  me.  On  my  left  an  interesting  scene 
was  being  enacted.  Seated  tailor  fashion  upon 
the  floor  was  an  old  woman  with  three  saucers  on 
her  lap  containing  mixtures  red,  white,  and  black 
respectively ;  squatted  down  in  front  of  her  was  one 
of  the  bathers,  dressed  now,  and  apparently  clothed 
in  her  right  mind.  The  old  woman  was  trimming 
up  her  eyebrows  previous  to  blacking  them.  With 
a  little  knife  she  dexterously  pulled  out  a  hair  here 
and  a  hair  there  till  the  brows  were  correctly  arched* 
The  operation  must  have  been  rather  unpleasant, 
but  her  client  never  flinched.  Others,  who  had 
gone  through  the  beautifying  process,  were  regard- 
ing themselves  carefblly  in  little  Russian  looking- 
glasses  that  hung  round  the  walls. 

"You  see,"  said  my  interpreter,  "each  woman 


158  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

paints  and  powders  before  the  glass  till  she  thinks 
she  resembles  an  angel,  then  she  is  happy." 

While  the  artist  was  busy  in  her  corner,  other 
women  were  doing  a  brisk  trade  in  powdered  native 
soap,  also  heaped  in  saucers.  It  was  of  a  dirty 
green  colour  and  looked  far  from  inviting,  yet  the 
bathers  readily  exchanged  small  coins  for  a  pinch  of 
it  on  their  way  down.  They  only  used  it  for  their 
faces,  content  to  rub  their  bodies  with  a  rough  glove. 
Other  women  were  making  an  honest  penny  by 
mounting  guard  over  their  neighbours'  clothes. 
Each  bather  wraps  her  things  together  in  a  bundle. 
One  woman  had  charge  of  about  fifty  of  these. 

''  In  spite  of  all  their  care,  thefts  often  occur,"  said 
my  interpreter.  "You  should  hear  the  cries  of 
women  who  can't  find  their  clothes ! " 

"  That  is  surely  a  serious  matter,"  I  remarked. 

"  Yes,"  was  the  reply ;  "  sometimes  a  woman  finds 
all  stolen  but  her  veil  and  parandja^  and  then  she 
has  to  go  home  with  nothing  else  on*" 

"  Shocking ! "  I  said.  "  Surely  she  might  borrow 
a  garment  from  one  of  the  others ! " 

"  No,  that  is  the  difficulty.  You  see  each  bather 
has  with  her  only  the  clothes  she  has  taken  off,  and 
she  would  be  in  a  bad  plight  herself  if  she  let  any 
one  borrow  them." 

The  ashes  are  periodically  raked  out  from  under 
the  bath  and  left  in  heaps  in  the  passage  leading  to 
the  building.     Poor  people  find  them  a  warm  and 


NATIVE  BATHS  159 

comfortable  bed  in  cold  weather ;  and  the  so-called 
gulasha  who,  preferring  sleep  and  the  narcotics 
which  induce  it  to  honest  labour,  has  reduced  him- 
self to  the  last  stage  of  poverty  and  homelessness, 
finds  these  hot  ashes  a  good  place  to  lie  on  when  he 
has  not  enough  clothes  on  his  back  to  keep  him 
warm.  It  is  also  a  custom  to  cook  beetroot  in  the 
cinderSi  and  men  often  cook  it  and  carry  it  home  to 
their  wives  and  children. 

The  proprietor  came  to  meet  us  as  we  were 
leaving  the  bath,  and  on  his  inviting  us  to  come  to 
an  entertainment  that  was  to  take  place  there  in  the 
evening,  we  accepted  with  feelings  of  both  pleasure 
and  curiosity.  An  entertainment  in  a  bath  was  a 
novel  idea.  When  the  evening  came  (it  was  the 
third  day  of  Ramazan),  we  left  our  hotel  at  9  P.M. ; 
four  ladies,  accompanied  by  four  mounted  police, 
and  the  Aksakal  who  rode  beside  our  carriage, 
attired  in  a  many-coloured  flowing  robe  and  a  large 
white  turban. 

Arrived  at  the  bath,  we  entered  by  the  same  door 
as  in  the  morning,  and  mounted  the  steps  which  had 
then  been  so  wet  and  slippery.  Now  they  were 
dry,  and  the  dressing-chamber,  or  vestibule,  was 
carpeted  with  bright,  soft  carpets  except  at  one 
comer,  where  the  floor  had  been  intentionally  left 
bare.  Looking  up,  we  saw  above  us  a  gallery  which 
we  had  not  noticed  in  the  morning.  It  surrounded 
us  on  all  four  sides,  and  was  crowded  with  row  upon 


i6o  IN  RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

row  of  spectators,  the  first  row  squatting  on  the 
ground  and  peering  out  between  the  railings,  over 
which  the  next  row  of  heads  were  bending.  These 
undulating  lines  of  gleaming  turbans,  many  of  which 
were  coloured,  had  the  effect  of  a  picturesque  cornice 
in  the  wavering  light  of  the  torches.  On  the  carpet, 
wedged  as  close  to  one  another  as  herrings  in  a 
barrel,  were  several  hundred  Sarts  in  festive  array, 
with  turbans  of  every  colour  and  description,  all 
turning  their  faces  eagerly  to  the  uncarpeted  comer, 
where  three  batchas  or  dancing-boys  were  performing 
to  music.  The  musicians  were  seated  in  a  row 
behind  the  batchas  with  their  backs  to  the  wall, 
playing  on  native  guitars  and  tambourines.  A 
brazier  of  charcoal  stood  near  them  on  a  bench,  and 
over  this  they  warmed  the  parchments  of  their 
instruments  at  intervals.  The  batchas  are  an  in- 
stitution peculiar  to  Central  Asia.  Dancing-boys, 
chosen  for  their  beauty  and  girl-like  appearance, 
they  tfavel  round  the  country,  ten  or  twelve  in  a 
troupe,  under  a  manager  who  is  often  hard  and  cruel. 
He  hires  them  out  to  amuse  people  with  their 
dancing,  often  forcing  them  to  exert  themselves 
beyond  their  strength.  During  the  entertainments 
of  Ramazan  they  sometimes  dance  the  whole  night 
through.  They  wear  their  hair  long,  shorn  off  a 
little  at  the  forehead,  and  somewhat  shorter  than 
a  girl's.  On  this  occasion  they  wore  long,  coloured 
tunics  over  others  of  various  hues,  and  loose  trousers 


NATIVE  BATHS  i6i 

which  in  some  cases  ended  in  high  leather  boots. 
On  the  backs  of  their  heads  the  batchas  in  question 
wore  embroidered  caps,  A  turbaned  Sart,  holding 
a  lighted  tallow  candle,  stood  on  either  side  of  the 
performers  to  throw  light  upon  their  faces.  They 
twirled  round  and  round,  with  uplifted  hands,  faster 
or  slower  according  to  the  music.  When  that 
stopped  they  sank  upon  their  knees  in  a  row.  We 
sent  some  small  coins  across  to  them  when  we  had 
seen  enough  of  this  performance.  Thereupon  the 
manager  of  the  troupe  stopped  the  whole  thing,  and, 
as  soon  as  there  was  silence,  offered  up  a  loud 
prayer  on  our  behalf.  This  done,  he  made  a  sign 
for  the  music  to  strike  up  once  more.  Tired  of 
looking  at  the  batchas^  my  eyes  wandered  round  the 
place,  and  I  noticed  many  ropes  extended  across 
the  ceiling ;  they  were  used  for  drying  the  men's 
towels  in  bath  time  (women  bring  their  own),  but 
now  they  were  hung  with  brilliantly  coloured  cloths 
and  scarfs,  which  added  not  a  little  to  the  general 
effect.  Our  English  bunting  would  have  been  tame 
beside  them.  The  life  of  the  batchas  is  a  very  sad 
one.  As  soon  as  they  begin  to  lose  their  girlish 
appearance  the  manager  who  has  trained  them  finds 
them  wives  and  starts  them  in  a  trade,  but,  having 
lived  an  immoral  and  effeminate  life,  they  are  no 
longer  fit  for  hard  work.  Many  of  them,  finding 
they  cannot  support  a  working  existence,  take  to 
opium  and  sink  into  such  miserable  objects  as  the 

L 


i62  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

gulashas  I  have  described  above.  Honest  parents 
are  heartbroken  when  their  sons  choose  this  life, 
and  do  all  that  is  in  their  power  to  dissuade  them 
from  it ;  but  men  tempt  them  from  their  homes  by 
saying  what  a  delightful  and  easy  life  will  be  theirs, 
till  they  are  fired  with  such  a  desire  to  begin  it  that 
nothing  will  restrain  them. 

At  last  there  came  a  welcome  interval,  during 
which  green  tea  and  grapes  were  handed  to  us. 
While  we  were  partaking  of  these  refreshments  a 
musician  tuned  up  his  guitar  and  sang 

"The  Song  of  the  Bulbul." 

"There  was  once  a  beautiful  lady  whose  name 
was  Latifa.  So  beautiful  was  she  that  all  who  looked 
upon  her  were  charmed ;  even  the  nightingale  sang 
a  new  song  in  the  night — the  song  of  Latifa." 

Latifa  sees  through  her  dark  horsehair  veil  a 
handsome  youth  who  is  coming-  along  the  street, 
and  she  straightway  falls  in  love  with  him.  Lifting 
the  corner  of  her  veil,  she  reveals  such  charms  that 
at  once  her  love  is  ardently  returned.  But,  alas ! 
the  youth's  father  refuses  to  give  his  consent  to 
their  union,  and  the  lover  of  Latifa  leaves  the  town 
in  his  despair.  She,  all  disconsolate,  takes  her 
guitar  and  starts  in  search  of  her  lost  one.  Some 
one  has  told  her  that  if  she  were  to  go  to  the  bazaar 
of  a  certain  village  and  sing  to  the  passers-by  per- 
chance she  might  find  her  lover,  so  she  sets  out  on 


NATIVE   BATHS  163 

her  quest  and  sings  each  day  in  the  bazaar,  but  all 
in  vain.  Then  she  takes  her  guitar  and  wanders  on 
through  the  land  till  she  comes  to  a  village  on  the 
mountain  side,  where  a  grave  is  being  hewn  in  the 
rock. 

"  Whose  grave  are  you  digging  ?  "  she  asks. 

*'  It  is  the  grave  of  a  stranger,"  the  villagers  reply ; 
"we  do  not  know  his  name,  or  whence  he  came, 
but  he  wandered  here  full  of  sorrow,  and  has  died 
amongst  us." 

*'  Let  me  see  him,"  she  entreats,  and  they  uncover 
for  her  the  dead  man's  face. 

"  It  is  he  !  It  is  my  beloved !  "  she  cries,  in  an 
agony  of  grief.  "  Life  has  no  longer  any  charm  for 
me ;  let  me  sleep  by  the  side  of  my  dear  one.  My 
life  is  over." 

"  We  cannot  bury  the  living  with  the  dead,"  say 
the  villagers,  "  that  is  impossible." 

Latifa  continues  to  entreat,  but  in  vain.  Then,  in 
despair,  she  takes  her  guitar  and  pours  out  her  soul 
in  song.  Her  plaintive  music  brings  tears  to  every 
eye,  and  at  last  proves  so  irresistible  that  her  re- 
quest can  no  longer  be  refused.  Latifa  is  buried  in 
the  mountain  grave  beside  her  lover,  and  the  living 
and  the  dead  are  for  ever  united. 

While  this  song  was  being  sung  the  inevitable 
chilim  was  handed  round  among  the  audience.  The 
next  thing  on  the  programme  was  a  puppet  show/ 
a  sort  of  Punch  and  Judy, 


i64  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

A  tambourine-player  converses  loudly  with  Mr. 
Punch. 

"  Where  do  you  come  from,  sir  ?  " 

"  I  hail  from  Tashkent — from  the  capital ! "  Mrs. 
Judy  now  appears  and  asks  her  husl^and  for  a  new 
dress,  whereupon  the  loving  spouse  belabours  her 
with  a  stick.  After  that  they  make  it  up ;  he  pro- 
mises her  that  she  shall  have  her  wish,  and  goes  on 
a  journey  to  buy  the  dress.  Being  left  alone,  the 
lady  laments  that  her  husband  has  gone  to  Tash- 
kent and  left  her  disconsolate.  Suddenly  she  utters 
a  cry  of  joy,  her  husband  reappears ;  he  had,  it 
seems,  not  gone  to  Tashkent  at  all,  but  merely 
hidden  himself  to  test  her  love  for  him.  They 
embrace,  and  the  curtain  falls. 

I  had  plenty  of  time  during  these  performances  to 
study  the  faces  of  the  audience,  and  what  struck  me 
particularly  was  the  absence  of  boys.  Women,  of 
course,  I  had  not  expected  to  see,  for  the  only  public 
entertainments  in  which  they  join  are  weddings, 

''  Boys  seldom  come  to  these  functions,"  explained 
my  interpreter ;  "  they  find  them  dull,  and  prefer  to 
play  at  cards  instead.  Cards,"  she  added,  *'  have 
become  quite  a  passion  with  the  Sarts  of  late." 

As  it  was  getting  late,  and  the  rest  of  the  audience 
had  no  intention  of  leaving  before  daybreak,  we 
thanked  our  host  for  his  hospitality  and  rose  to  go. 
Thus  ended  our  first  entertainment  in  a  public  bath. 


CHAPTER   XVI 

COMMON    AILMENTS 

No  description  of  Turkestan  would  be  complete 
without  some  account  of  the  peculiar  ailments  to 
which  its  people  are  subject.  With  regard  to  one 
of  them,  here  is  an  interesting  paragraph  from  a 
work  on  Bokhara  published  in  1747  :  "  The  water  of 
the  little  river  that  runs  through  the  city  is  very 
bad,  breeding  in  the  legs  of  those  who  drink  it 
worms  an  ell  long,  between  the  flesh  and  the  skin, 
which,  working  out  about  an  inch,  are  rolled  up  and 
thus  extracted.  But  if  they  break  in  the  operation 
the  patient  dies.  For  all  this  inconvenience  it  is 
there  forbidden  to  drink  any  other  liquor  but  water 
or  mare's  milk;  such  as  break  that  law  being 
whipped  through  the  markets."^  If  their  law  did 
not  forbid  them  to  drink  standing  water,  many  a 
Sart  of  my  acquaintance  would  have  been  buried 

1  The  earliest  positive  reference  to  the  existence  of  this  worm — 
the  guinea  worm — is  apparently  that  of  Plutarch,  who  quotes  a  de- 
scription of  it  as  occurring  on  the  shores  of  the  Red  Sea,  by  a  writer 
who  lived  in  the  second  century  before  Christ.  It  has  frequently 
been  introduced  into  America  by  the  importation  of  infected  negroes 
from  those  parts  of  Africa  where  it  is  common. — Chmow^s  "  Geog- 
raphy ofDiseasCt'  1903. 

i6s 


i66  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

long  ago.  The  worm  alluded  to  is  the  rishte  [FUaria 
medinensis).  While  in  Bokhara  I  saw  one  two 
yards  in  length,  and  I  have  brought  home  a  specimen 
preserved  in  spirit.  A  man  may  become  its  victim 
through  drinking  water  from  the  canal  that  runs 
through  his  courtyard,  or  from  one  of  the  reservoirs 
in  which  the  horses  are  washed.  It  is  the  special 
business  of  the  head-shavers  to  extract  these  crea- 
tures, and  you  can  see  them  at  their  occupation 
under  the  trees  in  summer  time.  The  patient  does 
not  necessarily  die  if  the  rishte  breaks,  though  he 
becomes  seriously  ill  and  suffers  from  fever.  Women, 
whose  secluded  life  protects  them  from  exposure  to 
heat  and  thirst,  are  less  tempted  to  drink  the  water 
unboiled.  They  keep  large  clay  pitchers  full  of 
boiled  water  ready  for  use,  and  are  consequently 
less  troubled  with  the  rishte^  or  with  that  dreadful 
ulcer  that  comes  on  the  cheek,^  called  "  the  Sart  dis- 
ease," "the  Afghan  rose,"  "the  Persian  beauty 
spot,"  or  "the  Aleppo  button,"  according  to  the 
land  in  which  it  is  found.  This  ulcer  is  especially 
prevalent  in  Askhabad,  where  most  of  the  natives 
suffer  from  it ;  even  Russian  settlers  are  its  victims. 
In  Askhabad  people  get  it  from  merely  washing  in 
unboiled  water,  and  as  it  always  lasts  twelve  months, 
the  Persian  settlers  there  call  it  Salek^  or  "  one  year." 
Their  treatment  of  erysipelas  is  peculiar.  We 
had  promised  while  in  Kokand  to  call  on  a  certain 
*  The  Oriental  sore. 


COMMON  AILMENTS  167 

Hadj  Matkowe  Mahzoum,  but  he  fell  ill  before  the 
day  arrived,  and  a  Sart  doctor  was  sent  for  to  cure 
his  swollen  face. 

"Where  did  the  Sart  doctor  study?"  I  asked 
of  the  sick  man's  brother. 

"At  the  great  school  of  medicine  in  Bokhara," 
was  his  reply;  "he  has  studied  medicine-books 
brought  from  Bombay.  He  is  a  mullah  —  all 
mullahs  know  something  of  medicine,  but  those 
who  have  studied  in  Bokhara  get  higher  fees." 

"What  has  he  done  for  the  sick  man?" 

"He  buried  some  milk  in  the  earth  for  two 
days,  then  mixed  it  up  with  flour  and  an  herb, 
and  put  it  on  Mahzoum's  face,  which  he  then 
gashed  with  a  knife  in  several  places." 

I  crossed  Mahzoum's  name  off  my  visiting  list 
after  this,  and  told  the  guide  not  to  take  us  to  see 
him  till  he  was  better;  but,  as  fate  would  have 
it,  we  were  conducted  to  his  house  by  mistake, 
and,  walking  suddenly  in  upon  him,  were  more 
than  startled  at  his  appearance.  Lying  on  the 
floor  in  a  steady  draught,  with  door  and  windows 
wide  open  —  the  windows  had  shutters,  but  no 
glass — he  was  covered  with  a  cotton  quilt  up  to 
his  chin;  another  rolled  up  beneath  his  head  did 
duty  as  a  pillow.  His  face,  daubed  with  a  thick 
coating  of  the  ointment  prescribed  by  the  Sart 
doctor,  was  the  colour  of  the  yolk  of  an  egg,  and 
his  eyes  appeared  to  look  at  us  through  a  hideous 


i68  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

mask.  He  tried  to  lift  his  head  and  welcome  us, 
but  he  was  too  ill  to  speak  or  do  anything  but  roll 
his  head  from  side  to  side.  Our  commiseration 
was  profound,  but  we  hurried  away  as  soon  as  we 
had  expressed  our  pity  by  gestures  rather  than 
words.  The  next  day  a  friend  of  his,  meeting  us 
accidentally,  stooped  down  and  touching  the  ground 
with  his  open  palm,  explained  to  us,  with  the  little 
Russian  he  could  muster,  that  Mahzoum  had  ex- 
pired a  few  hours  after  our  visit,  and  been  buried 
that  very  morning.  So  much  for  the  treatment  of 
erysipelas  by  a  Sart  doctor! 

In  Kokand  there  are  many  sufferers  from  a  kind 
of  goitre,^  which  Sven  Hedin  is  mistaken  in  con- 
sidering peculiar  to  Yarkand.  It  hangs  under  its 
victim's  chin,  often  as  large  as  his  head.  When 
the  train  comes  into  the  station  goitres  are  the 
first  thing  you  notice  in  the  native  crowd,  and  you 
meet  with  them  constantly  in  the  streets  and  in 
the  bazaars.  A  professor  in  one  of  the  medresses 
told  me  that  the  goitre  was  often  hereditary;  but 
Russian  doctors  do  not  believe  this,  they  say  it 
must  be  the  result  either  of  drinking  snow-water 
from  the  neighbouring  mountains,  or,  what  is  more 
likely,  of  some  peculiarity  of  the  soil,  which  affects 
the  water  in  the  canals.  I  did  not  hear  of  any 
European  suffering  from  it. 

^  This  goitre  is  mainly  found  where  people  live  on  a  magnesium- 
limestone  soil. — The  Geography  of  Disease, 


COMMON   AILMENTS  169 

Malarial  fevers  are  the  cause  of  half  the  deaths. 
I  did  not  visit  a  single  town,  Russian  or  native, 
where  fever  of  one  kind  or  another  was  not  more 
or  less  prevalent.  Sometimes  they  come  upon  the 
people  like  an  epidemic  and  carry  off  thousands  at 
a  time.  When  I  visited  Bokhara  in  September 
1896  every  house  seemed  to  contain  an  invalid, 
while  the  streets  were  full  of  sick  people  lying 
helplessly  about  with  fever  upon  them.  In  every 
native  town  of  any  size,  Bokhara  included,  there 
is  now  a  Russian  apothecary,  a  doctor,  and  a  lady 
doctor,  with  hospitals  for  native  men  and  women 
respectively.  Quinine  is  given  in  doses  of  five 
grains  to  fever  patients;  but  there  is  a  growing 
feeling  against  this  remedy  on  account  of  its  effect 
upon  the  head. 

There  is  a  sickness  met  with  in  Sart  towns  for 
which  the  Russians  say  they  have  not  yet  found 
a  name.  White  spots  appear  on  hands  and  face, 
and  the  Sarts  often  mistake  it  for  leprosy.  They 
call  it  Pess^  and  isolate  individuals  who  show  signs 
of  it,  banishing  them  to  villages  called  Mahon 
Kishlaks.  Leprosy  is  to  be  met  with  everywhere  ; 
for,  though  the  lepers  are  banished  to  separate 
villages,  they  come  into  the  towns  and  beg  in  the 
bazaars.  We  saw  groups  of  these  terrible-looking 
objects  in  the  Rigestan  at  Samarkand,  where  they 
persistently  held  out  their  fingerless  hands  for 
alms.     It  is  said  that  many  of  them  make  a  good 


I70  IN  RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

living  by  holding  the  horses  of  visitors  to  the 
ruined  mosques.  They  intermarry  among  them- 
selves, and  their  children  develop  it  also,  but  only 
late  in  life.  There  is  a  leper  hospital  at  Tashkent 
under  Russian  management.  Sometimes  a  leper, 
ignorant  of  the  nature  of  his  complaint,  continues 
to  live  with  his  family  for  years  after  the  disease 
has  taken  hold  of  him. 

The  Russian  lady  doctors  lead  a  busy  life,  for 
Sart  women  are  beginning  to  have  confidence  in 
them,  and  give  them  more  work  already  than  they 
can  possibly  get  through.  They  are  assisted  by 
Tatir  nurses,  who  speak  the  Turki  language,  and 
are  indispensable  as  interpreters.  A  lady  doctor 
told  me  that  many  of  the  women's  complaints  were 
due  to  the  secluded  life  they  lead,  and  to  the  want 
of  proper  exercise  for  the  body.  Maternity  patients 
only  come  to  the  hospitals  when  an  operation  is 
necessary.    A  Sart  once  said  to  me — 

"Russian  doctors  like  to  perform  operations, 
ours  don't.  When  I  broke  my  leg  I  went  to  a 
Sart  doctor." 

"And  how  did  he  set  it?"  I  asked. 

"  He  put  wooden  splints  round  it,"  was  the  reply, 
**  then  he  bound  it  up  tight,  and  wrapped  it  in  sand 
mixed  with  yolk  of  egg  and  oil.  Then  he  gave  me 
some  black  pills,  and  my  leg  got  better." 

As  the  town  of  Bokhara  has  about  fifty  thousand 
inhabitants,  and   only   one   Russian   doctor,   it   is 


COMMON  AILMENTS  171 

perhaps  as  well  that  the  natives  should  be  able  to 
set  their  own  bones.  It  was  in  Bokhara  that  a 
Sart  said  to  me — 

"For  external  ailments  I  would  go  to  the 
Russian  doctor,  but  for  internal  ones  I  would 
always  employ  a  Sart." 

"  Why,"  I  asked,  "  do  you  not  send  your  students 
to  study  medicine  in  Europe  ?  " 

"  We  should  like  to  do  it,"  was  the  reply,  "  but 
medicine  is  the  most  dangerous  study  for  a  man's 
religion ;  we  fear  our  young  men  would  lose  more 
than  they  would  gain.  We  have  seen  the  effect  that 
European  learning  has  had  upon  Persian  doctors,  and 
we  dare  not  expose  our  sons  to  such  influence." 

**  We  had  a  great  doctor  here  once,"  he  continued; 
"  he  died  six  hundred  years  ago,  but  his  book  is  still 
studied  in  Bokhara.  He  was  a  nephew  of  the  great 
Timur,  and  his  name  was  Ulug  Beg."  ^ 

"  You  mean  the  astronomer  ?  "  I  said. 

"  Yes,"  replied  the  Sart.  "  He  shut  himself  up 
for  ten  years  in  an  observatory,  and  then  wrote  a 
book  on  the  stars." 

^  The  astronomical  tables  of  this  prince  are  divided  into  four 
parts.  The  first  treats  of  eras  and  epochs;  the  second  of  the 
knowledge  of  the  times  ;  the  third  of  the  course  of  the  planets ;  and 
the  fourth  of  the  fixed  stars,  in  two  hundred  sections,  A.D.  1437. 
These  are  considered  the  most  correct  of  all  those  which  have  been 
given  us  by  Mohammedans,  and  they  agree  very  well  with  those  of 
Tycho  Brah^.  John  Greaves,  the  great  English  mathematician, 
translated  the  tables  of  fixed  stars  in  1650. — jyfferbelot. 

See  note  to  Sir  C.  Markham's  translation  of  Clavijo's  narrative. 


172  IN  RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

Sart  doctors  also  do  a  little  dentistry.  The  way 
in  which  they  extract  teeth  will  sound  familiar.  The 
patient  is  locked  into  a  room,  where  he  must  remain 
until  the  teeth  is  out.  The  doctor  ties  a  cord  to  the 
tooth,  and,  holding  the  other  end  firmly  in  one  hand, 
applies  a  red-hot  iron  to  the  patient's  cheek,  where- 
upon the  latter  gives  a  violent  jump  backwards,  and 
out  comes  the  tooth.  Although  I  never  heard  of  a 
case,  smallpox  must  be  common  in  Turkestan,  for 
out  of  every  crowd  a  large  proportion  of  the  faces 
are  pock-marked. 

Having  enumerated  some  of  the  diseases  to  which 
a  Sart  may  fall  a  victim,  I  now  come  to  the  particu- 
lars of  his  burial.  Whether  his  death  has  been  a 
sudden  one  or  not,  there  is  no  post-mortem  examina- 
tion, for  such  a  thing  would  be  against  the  law  of 
Mohammed.  If  a  man  dies,  it  is  the  will  of  Allah, 
and  that  is  enough.  When  a  man  thinks  he  is  going 
to  die,  the  same  fatalism  keeps  him  calm.  Nalivkin 
tells  of  a  mullah  who  read  his  own  funeral  service. 

As  soon  as  life  is  extinct  the  jaws  are  bound  with 
a  cloth,  to  prevent  the  lower  one  from  falling.  The 
relatives,  together  with  the  people  who  have  come 
to  wash  the  corpse,  start  a  loud  wail.  The  body  is 
then  wrapped  in  a  white  cloth,  and  carried  on  a  bier 
to  the  mosque,  where  a  mullah  reads  verses  from 
the  Koran  over  it.  During  the  service  after  Rama- 
zan  in  Kokand,  when  the  square  in  front  of  the 
chief  mosque  was  crowded  with  worshippers,  the 


COMMON  AILMENTS  173 

friends  of  a  man  who  had  just  died  tried  to  force 
their  way  in,  lifting  the  bier  high  over  the  heads  of 
the  crowd.  The  Russian  police  were  obliged  to 
order  them  back ;  but  I  could  not  help  feeling  sorry 
for  them,  for  they  had  evidently  thought  that  the 
prayers  of  the  multitude  would  tell  in  the  dead 
man's  favour  before  Allah's  throne. 

From  the  mosque  the  bier  is  carried  to  the  grave- 
yard, followed  in  solemn  silence  by  all  the  male 
relatives.  Each  man  carries  a  stick  and  a  dark  blue 
handkerchief  in  sign  of  mourning.  As  there  is 
no  coffin,  the  grave,  which  is  only  three  feet  below 
the  surface,  is  dug  in  such  a  manner  that,  when  the 
body  has  been  lowered  into  it,  it  can  be  slipped  into 
a  niche  hollowed  out  in  the  side,  and  thus  no  earth 
is  thrown  upon  it  in  filling  up  the  grave.  The  head 
is  always  laid  towards  the  north.  Nalivkin  says 
that  at  rich  men's  funerals  a  coin  wrapped  in  paper 
is  given  to  each  guest.  The  men  who  wash  the 
body  put  on  a  glove  so  as  not  to  touch  it.  The 
body  is  usually  put  into  a  kind  of  bag  with  a  hole 
at  each  end,  then  the  two  ends  are  tied  up.  In 
some  parts  the  women  go  to  the  grave  early  on  the 
day  after  the  burial ;  in  others  they  do  not  go  till  the 
seventh  day.  They  do  not  place  fruit  upon  the  grave, 
as  some  travellers  affirm,  but  bread  and  money. 

The  feasting  of  the  relatives  is  sometimes  accom- 
panied by  a  kind  of  mournful  dancing,  the  dancers 
working  themselves  slowly  into  a  kind  of  frenzy, 


174  IN  RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

which  sometimes  ends  in  tearing  the  hair  and  dis- 
torting the  face.  For  three  days  after  a  death  the 
family  is  expected  to  do  no  cooking  for  themselves, 
but  to  live  upon  what  their  relatives  bring  them. 

Nalivkin  describes  a  very  strange  custom  observed 
by  the  Sarts  of  Fergana,  It  is  known  as  Kir,  or 
"soiled  linen."  On  the  eighth,  or  sometimes  the 
fortieth  day  after  the  funeral,  friends  and  relations 
gather  at  the  house,  and  one  of  the  female  relatives 
washes  all  the  linen  that  was  worn  by  tjie  family  at 
the  funeral ;  she  then  gives  a  piece  of  sbkp  to  each 
guest,  that  he  may  wash  the  linen  he  wore  on  that 
occasion. 

Men  do  not  wear  regular  mourning,  but  women 
put  on  blue  for  slight,  and  black  for  deep  mourning. 
On  one  occasion,  the  ladies  of  the  household  having 
taken  longer  than  usual  to  prepare  for  my  reception, 
I  was  surprised  to  find  that,  instead  of  being  decked 
out  more  finely  than  usual,  they  were  all  attired  in 
what  I  may  describe  as  grey  cotton  nightdresses, 
with  handkerchiefs  to  match  folded  over  their  heads 
in  such  a  way  that  one  corner  hung  down  the  back. 
Not  a  trace  of  colour,  not  a  single  ornament,  al- 
though the  husband  had  in  no  way  prepared  me 
for  the  sight  of  so  doleful  a  group.  He  met  me  as 
I  returned  to  his  part  of  the  house  with  profuse 
apologies  for  this  absence  of  display.  Strange  as 
it  seems,  the  men,  who  do  not  think  it  necessary 
to  go  into  mourning  themselves,  enforce  this  cus- 
tom strictly  upon  their  wives.    On  this  particular 


COMMON  AILMENTS  175 

occasion  the  husband  was  dressed  like  a  brilliant 
butterfly,  as  though  he  had  wished  to  make  up  in 
his  own  person  for  what  was  lacking  in  the  appear- 
ance of  the  ladies. 

A  faithful  servant  of  the  Czar,  who  has  lived 
among  the  Sarts,  and  had  intimate  dealings  with 
them  for  more  than  thirty  years,  said  to  me :  "  They 
are  not  a  bad  lot  on  the  whole,  but  some  of  their 
ways  are  mighty  strange,  to  say  the  least  of  it.  I 
have  seen  them  go  laughing  to  a  funeral  and  burst 
into  wailing  when  they  got  to  the  grave,  I  have 
heard  men  reading  aloud,  with  great  solemnity,  books 
of  which  they  could  not  understand  a  word,  and  with 
all  their  pretended  piety  it  would  be  hard  for  any  one 
to  live  a  more  immoral  life  than  theirs,  if  you  take 
them  as  a  whole." 

"Recount  me  more  of  your  personal  experience 
in  connection  with  them,"  I  entreated. 

"Well,"  replied  the  old  man,  "to  show  you  what 
ridiculous  notions  they  have  about  the  seclusion  of 
women,  let  me  tell  you  that  ten  years  ago  when 
there  was  an  outbreak  of  cholera  in  Namangan, 
and  it  was  my  duty  to  go  round  with  the  soldiers 
to  collect  the  dead  bodies,  they  actually  refused  to 
let  the  corpse  of  a  woman  be  placed  on  the  same 
cart  with  that  of  a  man,  and  I  was  compelled  to 
send  for  another  conveyance  for  the  female  bodies. 
Had  they  been  at  all  consistent,  they  would  surely 
have  raised  an  objection  to  my  burying  men  and 
women  in  the  same  grave,  but  this  they  did  not  do." 


CHAPTER  XVII 

ISRAEL   IN   CENTRAL  ASIA 

The  Bokharan  Jews  are  as  much  a  part  of  the 
population  of  Turkestan  as  the  English  Jews  are  of 
London.  Questioned  about  their  ancestry,  they  will 
tell  you  they  are  descendants  of  those  Israelites  who 
were  taken  prisoners  by  the  kings  of  Assyria  and 
Babylon,  and  brought  by  them  to  Central  Asia 
between  six  and  seven  hundred  years  before  the 
time  of  Christ.  Both  in  Bokhara  and  in  Samarkand 
there  is  still  a  Jewish  quarter;  but  in  the  other 
provinces  we  find  their  houses  scattered  among  those 
of  the  Sarts,  without  any  outward  distinction.  Their 
position  under  the  successive  Mohammedan  con- 
querors was  not  an  enviable  one,  and  no  one  per- 
haps owes  more  to  the  beneficial  changes  wrought  by 
Russia  than  the  Bokharan  Jew.  He  is  quite  aware 
of  what  Russia  has  done  for  him,  and  by  showing 
himself  an  honest  and  friendly  citizen  under  the  new 
regime,  he  has  won  a  place  in  the  Russian's  regard 
that  is  in  no  way  shared  by  his  brother  the  Polish 
Jew.  Leaving  the  despicable  practice  of  usury  to  the 
Hindoo  settlers,  the  Jews  of  Bokhara  devote  them- 
selves principally  to  the  dyeing  of  native  silk,  and 

176 


ISRAEL  IN   CENTRAL  ASIA         177 

you  can  generally  tell  a  Hebrew  from  a  Sart  by  the 
purple  stain  upon  his  hands,  as  well  as  by  his  dis- 
tinctive features.  They  also  do  a  good  deal  of  trade 
with  other  countries,  and  have  the  advantage  of 
being  able  to  find  agents,  of  their  own  race,  in  all 
the  trading  cities  of  Europe.  So  good  a  character 
have  they  won  by  their  honourable  and  upright 
dealings  that  to-day  the  Russian  man  of  business 
relies  implicitly  on  the  word  of  an  unconverted 
Bokharan  Jew,  while  he  is  exceedingly  doubtful 
about  that  of  an  Armenian,  or  even  a  so-caUed 
Christian. 

"  We  trust  the  word  of  a  Bokharan  Jew,"  said  a 
Russian  banker,  when  I  was  asking  him  about  them. 
''  A  Bokharan  Jew  could  go  to  Russia  and  bring  all 
Moscow  back  on  bare  credit.  Every  one  would  trust 
him.  Polish  and  Lithuanian  Jews  may  not  live  in 
Moscow,  but  the  Bokharans  have  a  right  to  settle 
there," 

This  reminds  me  of  a  conversation  I  had  with  a 
wealthy  German  Jew  who  had  settled  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  Namangan,  and  by  whom  we  were  re- 
ceived with  much  kindness. 

"  Tell  me  about  England,"  he  said.  "  Can  a  Jew 
marry  a  Christian  in  your  country  ?  " 

"Yes,"  I  replied;  '* we  have  no  law  against  it." 

At  this  he  looked  incredulous.  "  It  is  not  so  in 
Russia,"  he  replied.  "  My  wife  is  a  Christian,  and 
before  I  could  marry  her  I  had  to  become  one." 

M 


178  IN  RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

Jews  living  in  towns  governed  by  an  Amir  still 
feel  some  of  the  old  restraints ;  a  number  of  families 
have  even  turned  Mohammedan  to  avoid  them.  A 
Jew  living  in  Bokhara  cannot  grow  rich,  no  one  can, 
for  the  native  government  will  not  let  even  the  Sarts 
do  so.  The  richest  Israelite  there  has  not  more 
than  a  hundred  thousand  roubles.  That  is  one 
reason  why  Bokharan  Jews  are  moving  so  fast  into 
actual  Russian  territory ;  another  is  that  the  Amir 
imposes  double  duty  on  all  goods  imported  by  them 
into  his  Khanate.  Many  of  the  best  houses  in  the 
Russian  town  of  Kokand  belong  to  Jews.  Well- 
to-do  families  whom  I  had  visited  in  Bokhara  five 
years  before  were  established  in  European  houses 
in  Kokand  and  Tashkent  when  I  inquired  after 
them  in  1902. 

The  Mohammedans  of  Central  Asia  have  an 
aversion  to  their  Jewish  neighbours.  In  old  times 
they  would  not  let  them  enter  their  houses.  In 
Bokhara  they  prohibit  them  from  wearing  either 
turban  or  girdle,  and,  whether  they  will  or  no,  their 
head-covering  must  be  a  special  kind  of  black  cap, 
which  distinguishes  them  at  once,  while  round  their 
loins  they  are  obliged  to  wear  a  distinctive  belt 
They  may  not  ride  on  horses  or  mules,  but  have  to 
restrict  themselves  to  donkeys.  If  a  Jew  meets  a 
Mussulman  in  the  street  he  is  expected  to  dismount 
and  make  way  for  him.  The  only  people  whom  the 
Turkomans  did   not  kidnap  were  the  Jews,  their 


ISRAEL  IN   CENTRAL  ASIA         179 

reason  for  passing  them  over  being  that  no 
Mohammedan  would  buy  a  Jewish  slave.  Marriage 
between  Jew  and  Mussulman  is  of  course  strictly 
forbidden,  yet  for  all  this  many  a  Mohammedan 
youth  has  been  smitten  by  the  charms  of  a 
beautiful  Jewish  maiden.  For  their  own  safety  the 
Jewish  women  wear  the  Sart  parandja  and  horse- 
hair veil  when  out  of  doors,  so  that  they  cannot 
be  distinguished  from  Mohammedan  women  in  the 
street.  In  their  own  homes  they  mix  as  freely 
with  the  men  as  they  would  in  Europe. 

"  The  Jewesses  of  Bokhara  are  Bildschan^^  said  a 
gentleman  in  whose  company  we  crossed  the  Caspian, 
and  my  own  eyes  confirmed  the  truth  of  that  state- 
ment later  on.  More  beautiful  faces  than  those  of 
some  of  the  girls  between  twelve  and  sixteen  I  could 
never  wish  to  see ;  oval  in  shape,  with  exquisite 
complexions,  tiny  coral  mouths,  perfect  teeth,  deli- 
cate, almost  Grecian  noses,  pretty  little  ears  and 
arched  eyebrows,  beautiful  dark  eyes,  and  raven 
hair.  A  Russian  merchant,  who  is  now  the  husband 
of  a  charming  European  wife  and  the  father  of  a 
family,  confessed  to  me  that  when  he  came  as  a 
young  man  to  Bokhara  ten  years  ago,  he  was  so 
overcome  by  the  beauty  of  a  young  Jewess  that 
he  was  ready  to  turn  heaven  and  earth  to  get  her 
father's  consent  to  her  becoming  a  Christian  and 
marrying  him.  The  father  was  obdurate,  however, 
and  the  girl  was  very  soon  married  to  one  of  her  own 


i8o  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

people.  Polygamy  is  not  forbidden  by  the  Jews ; 
they  may  have  as  many  wives  as  they  like.  When 
calling  at  a  rich  house  in  Samarkand  we  found  six 
pretty  little  girls  playing  in  the  garden.  They  were 
gaily  dressed  in  native  silks  of  many  colours,  and 
wore  gold-embroidered  caps,  over  which  were  tied 
gaudy  silk  handkerchiefs  of  which  the  predominant 
colour  was  a  rose  pink.  Hearing  that  the  head  of 
the  family  was  not  at  home,  we  asked  if  we  could 
see  his  wife. 

"We  are  his  wives,*'  said  one  of  the  juvenile 
group,  and  she  pointed  to  herself  and  another  girl. 
Neither  of  them  could  have  reached  her  thirteenth 
year. 

It  would  be  almost  impossible  to  find  an  unmarried 
Jewess  over  eighteen  years  of  age.  Living  a  less 
secluded  life  than  the  Sart  women,  they  develop 
more  character,  and  often  make  their  own  choice  of 
a  husband.  In  one  of  the  families  we  visited,  a  girl 
had  chosen  one  man,  but  been  forced  by  her  father 
to  marry  another.  Determined  to  have  her  own  way, 
she  made  her  husband's  life  so  miserable  that  he  in- 
sisted upon  giving  her  up.  Another  husband  was 
chosen  for  her,  but  she  treated  him  even  worse,  and 
at  last  he  too  was  glad  to  get  rid  of  her.  Eventually 
it  was  thought  best  to  let  her  have  her  own  way, 
and  she  married  the  man  of  her  choice. 

The  Jews  will  not  touch  bread  or  wine  that  has 
not  been  made  by  their  own  people.     Until  seventy 


ISRAEL  IN  CENTRAL  ASIA         i8i 

years  ago  Samarkand  had  no  special  Jewish  quarter; 
the  grandfather  of  the  present  Amir  of  Bokhara  drove 
the  Jews  out  of  the  Sart  town,  and  forced  them  to 
build  the  present  ghetto,  because  they  would  persist 
in  throwing  their  household  refuse  into  the  canals, 
and  thus  making  the  water  impure.  Most  writers 
state  that  the  Amir  does  not  allow  Jews  in  his 
Khanate  to  wear  silken  robes,  but  all  the  rich  ones 
wore  them  when  I  was  there  in  1896,  and  many  of 
them  do  so  still. 

We  visited  a  number  of  synagogues  both  in 
Bokhara  and  Samarkand.  The  women  sit  in  a 
gallery,  just  as  they  do  in  England ;  there  is  a  sort 
of  fretwork  screen  in  front  of  them  that  reminds 
one  of  the  ladies'  gallery  in  the  House  of  Commons. 
The  writers  who  tell  us  that  Sart  women  go  to  the 
mosques  and  worship  behind  such  screens  have  evi- 
dently mistaken  this  Jewish  custom  for  a  Moham- 
medan one.  Sart  women  never  worship  in  the 
mosques.  The  synagogues  are  built  round  court- 
yards like  the  Sart  dwelling-houses.  One  in 
Samarkand  has  five  apartments.  I  was  interested 
to  find  that  the  Jews  make  pilgrimages  to  Jerusalem 
as  devoutly  as  the  Mussulmans.  It  must  be  exceed- 
ingly painful  to  them  to  see  the  mosque  of  Omar 
standing  on  the  very  site  of  their  ancient  temple. 
However,  they  have  in  the  Holy  City  a  synagogue 
especially  for  pilgrims,  called  ^'Bethel."  Their 
route    used    to    be    through    Afghanistan,    Herat, 


i82  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

Bombay,  and  Jaffa.  Many  pilgrims  stay  so  long  in 
Jerusalem  that  they  pick  up  new  habits  and  customs. 
I  remember  having  seen  in  Jerusalem  the  houses  of 
Bokharan  Jews  who  preferred  to  remain  in  Palestine. 
They  are  quite  European.  The  floors  of  the  syna- 
gogues are  covered  with  felt  made  of  camels'  hair, 
except  near  the  altar,  where  there  is  usually  a  hand- 
some Bokharan  rug.  Scrolls  of  Scripture  some 
three  feet  in  length  are  kept  in  wooden  cupboards, 
each  scroll  wrapped  in  a  costly  cover  of  silk  and 
gold  brocade.  There  is  a  lobby  in  which  the 
worshippers  took  off  their  goloshes  before  entering. 
Underneath  or  close  to  the  synagogue  there  is 
always  a  school  for  little  children,  who  sit  in  groups 
upon  the  floor,  with  their  heels  tucked  under  them. 
They  struck  me  from  a  little  distance  as  a  mass  of 
warm  colour,  being  most  of  them  dressed  in  pink 
cotton.  On  the  wall  of  one  school  I  noticed  an 
instrument  of  torture,  used,  as  I  was  informed  by 
the  teacher,  to  bring  delinquents  to  a  proper  state 
of  mind.  It  was  called  a  falaka^  and  consisted  of 
a  stick  with  leather  thongs,  not  for  beating,  but  for 
worrying  the  children  in  some  complicated  manner. 
Immediately  opposite  the  entrance  of  the  chief  syna- 
gogue was  a  Jewish  butcher's  shop. 

"  The  Jews  here  are  Sarts  in  everything  but  their 
religion,"  said  our  companion  as  we  walked  away; 
and  then  I  remembered  some  remarks  made  by  a 
Russian  in  Tashkent,  in  a  conversation  I  had  with 


ISRAEL  IN  CENTRAL  ASIA         183 

him  about  the  Sarts  in  his  vicinity.  He  had  said  that 
the  Sarts  of  Tashkent  had  a  great  deal  of  Jewish  blood 
in  their  veins  and  much  of  the  Jewish  character. 

"The  Sarts  have  the  monopoly  of  the  cotton 
trade,  just  as  the  Jews  have  the  dyeing  of  silk,"  he 
said.  "They  are  shrewd  business  men.  A  man 
will  hire  out  his  wife  to  another  if  he  is  short  of 
money,  and  take  her  back  afterwards.  The  early 
Russian  settlers  often  hired  women  in  that  way,  not 
only  in  Tashkent  but  all  over  the  country." 

"  How  did  the  Sarts  come  by  their  Jewish  blood  ?  " 
I  had  asked. 

"  Through  the  Chaldean  Nestorians  and  the  Jews 
of  Bokhara,"  was  the  reply.  "  There  have  been  two 
distinct  Jewish  influences ;  the  former  includes  that 
of  the  Semitic  Arabs." 

A  lady  who  had  been  present  at  a  Jewish  wedding 
the  day  before  we  reached  Samarkand,  described  it 
to  us  as  an  unusually  interesting  one.  It  seems 
that  in  the  middle  of  the  ceremony  the  bride's 
father  insisted  that  the  bridegroom  should  sign  a 
document  to  the  effect  that  the  bride  might  be  at 
liberty  to  return  to  her  home — that  is,  to  Samarkand 
from  Tashkent,  a  twelve  hours'  journey  by  rail — ^as 
often  as  she  felt  inclined  to  do  so.  He  did  this 
because  his  other  daughter's  husband  objected  to 
giving  his  wife  such  freedom.  The  bridegroom  got 
very  angry,  and  in  a  loud  and  surly  voice  refused 
to  comply.    This  unseemly  quarrel  took  place  before 


1 84  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

the  eyes  of  the  assembled  guests,  and  the  conclusion 
of  the  ceremony  was  postponed  for  some  hours. 

"  Poor  bride !  "  I  ventured  to  remark. 

"  The  bride  ! "  said  my  friend,  '*  why,  she  covered 
her  face  with  her  hands  and  pretended  her  heart 
was  breaking,  but  I  could  see  her  looking  out  be- 
tween her  fingers  and  smiling  with  repressed 
amusement.  She  is  only  fifteen,  the  bridegroom 
is  nineteen." 


CHAPTER  XVIII 

AFGHANS    AND    OTHERS 

"  In  the  entrails  of  an  ox  you  will  find  no  meat. 
In  an  A^han— no  friendship." — Sart  Proverb, 

There  are  various  opinions  about  Isaakhan,  the 
Afghan  chief  who  resides  in  Samarkand.  Some 
English  people  think  that  Russia  is  preserving  him 
to  be  her  puppet  in  the  day  when  she  has  her  own 
way  with  the  Buffer  State.  Many  Russians,  on  the 
other  hand,  will  tell  you  that  the  man  is  a  useless 
humbug.  I  have  also  heard  that  he  is  for  an 
Asiatic  "a  charming  man  to  meet  in  society."  What- 
ever may  be  the  truth  about  Isaakhan,  his  country- 
men form  an  interesting  part  of  the  foreign  element 
in  Sart  towns,  where  they  may  be  known  by  their 
peculiar  type  of  face,  tall  figures,  and  blue-grey 
turbans.  Their  type  of  countenance  has  been 
rightly  described  as  partly  Jewish,  partly  Spanish 
in  character ;  they  have  receding  foreheads,  straight 
black  hair,  hooked  noses,  and  black  eyes,  with  a 
defiant,  warlike  bearing.  Russian  officers  say  that, 
but  for  one  grave  fault,  which  nullifies  all  their  good 
points,  the  Afghans  would  make  the  finest  soldiers 
in  the  world.     Courage,  daring,  coolness  in  danger, 

x8s 


i86  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

powers  of  endurance  are  theirs ;  but  with  all  these, 
they  are  unstable  as  water.  As  long  as  it  suits 
his  purpose  the  Afghan  will  be  true  to  his  leader, 
his  master,  or  his  brother,  but  there  is  no  sense  of 
honour  in  his  heart,  no  nobility  of  soul.  He  is 
ready  to  rob,  cheat,  or  murder  even  his  nearest  of 
kin  if  it  suits  his  purpose  to  do  so.  His  fiery  blood 
is  up  on  the  most  trivial  provocation,  and  in  spite  of 
the  manliness,  politeness,  and  modesty  of  his  outward 
bearing,  which  compares  so  favourably  with  that  of 
many  of  his  neighbours,  he  will  stoop,  when  provoked, 
to  the  most  dastardly  of  crimes.  An  Austrian  writer 
assures  his  readers  that  the  soldiers  of  Bokhara  are 
looked  upon  by  Central  Asians  generally  as  the 
worst  fighters  on  the  face  of  the  earth,  but  that  the 
Afghans  have  a  still  greater  contempt  for  the 
English^  whom  they  —  the  Afghans  —  would  have 
crushed  long  ago  but  for  the  lack  of  proper  weapons. 
It  is  well  sometimes  to  see  ourselves  as  others  sec 
us.  ** Afghanistan,"  says  Townsend,  "which  the 
English  think  about  as  a  turbulent  little  kingdom 
on  the  skirts  of  their  own  dominion,  is  40,000 
square  miles  larger  than  France." 

A  Bokharan,  speaking  to  me  of  the  Afghans  in 
1902,  referred  to  the  fact  that  a  party  of  pilgrims 
to  Mecca,  who  had  recently  attempted  to  pass 
through  Afghanistan,  had  been  attacked  and  robbed 
of  all  they  possessed.  Some  of  them  were  killed ; 
the  rest  were  forced  to  return  to  Bokhara  and  go 


AFGHANS  AND   OTHERS  187 

by  way  of  the  Caspian.  "Afghans  are  poor,"  he 
said;  "their  country  is  most  of  it  barren  moun- 
tains, they  take  all  they  can  from  others.  We  have 
many  Afghan  merchants  living  in  Bokhara.  An 
Afghan  political  agent  came  here  not  long  since 
disguised  as  a  merchant  that  he  might  see  the 
Bokharans  on  political  business,  but  the  Russians 
detected  him  and  sent  him  back." 

Afghan  gipsies  are  constantly  to  be  seen  in  the 
streets  and  bazaars.  Their  women  go  about  with 
uncovered  faces,  and  work  a  good  deal  harder  than 
the  men.  Their  handicraft  is  basket-making,  but 
they  take  alms  when  they  can  get  them.  Some  live 
in  Salt  villages,  others  camp  out  in  tents  which 
they  bring  with  them. 

It  is  a  strange  thing  that,  while  there  is  no  love 
lost  between  the  Afghan  and  the  Jew,  the  Afghan 
will  tell  you  with  pride  that  he  is  a  descendant  of 
those  Israelites  who  were  carried  captive  by  Nebu- 
chadnezzar into  Babylon.  Being  Mohammedans, 
the  Afghan  merchants  in  Bokhara  have  many  ad- 
vantages over  their  Jewish  rivals,  the  chief  one 
being  that  they  have  no  greater  import  duties  to 
pay  than  the  Bokharans  themselves.  I  have  already 
alluded  to  the  fact  that  while  the  Sart  carries  his 
shroud  as  a  turban  the  Afghan  carries  it  as  a  girdle. 
Some  think  that  the  Afghans  are  Jews  who  have 
become  Aryanised,  others  that  they  are  a  mixture 
of  a  Jewish  element  with  the  onginal  Indo-Germanic 


i88  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

inhabitants.  The  old  name  for  an  Afghan  was 
Paktu^  which,  as  Werth  observes,  is  a  name  given 
by  Persians  to  their  children,  and  it  also  occurs  as 
the  name  of  a  town  in  Thracian  Chersones.  "  In 
India,"  says  Bellew,  "this  people  is  known  by  the 
name  of  Pathan,  which  is  merely  the  Hindustani 
form  for  Pukhtana — the  plural  of  Pukhtan." 

There  is  a  pretty  story  told  in  Samarkand  about 
one  of  the  Afghan  prisoners  who  were  set  at  liberty 
by  the  Russian  Minister  of  War  in  1901.  He  had 
been  greatly  touched  by  the  kind  treatment  he  had 
received  at  the  hand  of  his  jailer,  and  on  receiving 
his  freedom  he  said :  "  If  I  ever  become  a  minister, 
I  shall  send  all  the  money  I  can  get  to  this  kind- 
hearted  jailer." 

One  of  the  mounted  policemen  in  Kokand,  whose 
duty  it  was  to  accompany  us  on  our  rounds,  had 
a  face  for  all  the  world  like  a  Chinaman,  and  the 
musicians  who  performed  at  an  entertainment  given 
in  our  honour  at  Andijan  would  easily  have  passed 
for  Celestials,  but  for  the  missing  pigtail.  They 
were  all  Dungans.  The  home  of  these  people  is 
really  Kashgar.  You  find  them  all  over  Central 
Asia,  but  they  only  come  to  make  money,  and 
rarely  bring  their  women  with  them.  They  are 
Chinese  Mussulmans.  There  is  quite  a  large 
sprinkling  of  them  in  Margelan.  On  further  in- 
vestigation I  discovered  that  our  jigit  or  police- 
man in  Kokand  was  to  all  intents  and  purposes 


AFGHANS  AND   OTHERS  189 

a  naturalised  Sart.  He  had  even  married  a  Sart 
woman,  and  had  no  thought  of  returning  eastward. 
The  present  Minister  of  War  at  St.  Petersburg, 
Kuropatkin,  wrote  a  book  on  Kashgaria  in  his 
younger  days.  At  the  foot  of  one  of  its  pages 
there  is  a  note  about  the  people  in  question. 
"The  story  as  to  the  origin  of  the  Dungans 
which  most  merits  attention,  and  which  I  heard 
in  the  town  of  Koocha,  is  as  follows :  '  When 
Chingiz  Khan  advanced  on  Pekin  he  had  in  his 
army  many  Mussulmans  from  Eastern  Turkestan  ; 
when  he  took  possession  of  Pekin  he  appointed 
his  son  Mangoo  (or  Mandgoo)  governor  of  China. 
With  Mangoo  he  left  many  Mussulmans  in  China, 
who  from  that  time  have  received  the  name  of 
Toorgan,  which  means  those  left  behind^  " 

The  Tatars  are  another  foreign  element  in  Sart 
towns.  They  think  themselves  vastly  superior  to 
the  Sarts,  and  those  from  Kazan  have  not  forgotten 
the  important  part  their  ancestors  once  played  in 
the  world's  history.  I  have  already  said  that  I  was 
often  glad  to  have  the  help  of  a  Tatir  woman  as 
interpreter.  One  of  these  came  to  me  in  Samar- 
kand with  a  jaunty  blue  velvet  cap  covered  with 
gold  embroidery  set  coquettishly  on  one  side  of 
her  head.  She  told  me  that  her  husband  was  a 
Russian,  and  her  son  an  officer  in  the  Russian 
army. 

Besides  Tatdrs  from  Kazan,  there  are  many  from 


190  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

the  Crimea;  numbers,  too,  have  come  down  from 
Siberia.  A  Russian  officer,  a  TatAr  by  birth  and 
religion,  whose  wife  is  a  Sart  lady,  educated  in 
St.  Petersburg,  was  discussing  with  me  the  posi- 
tion of  his  wife's  countrywomen. 

'*  Which,"  he  asked,  "  do  you  think  best  ?  that 
all  the  women  should  have  husbands  as  here,  or 
that  only  two-thirds  of  them  should  have  a  chance 
of  marriage  as  in  England  ?  " 

In  Namangan,  a  province  as  large  as  Holland^ 
there  is  only  one  garden  of  any  size  devoted  to 
the  cultivation  of  flowers;  its  owner  is  a  Tatdr, 
and  so  successful  has  he  proved  with  his  hobby 
that  when  the  Goverhor-General  passed  through 
he  was  taken  to  see  this  garden  as  one  of  the 
sights  of  the  neighbourhood.  The  father  of  its 
owner  came  from  Moscow  to  Namangan  at  about 
twenty  years  of  age.  After  he  had  been  there 
seventy  years  he  decided  to  pay  a  visit  to  Moscow, 
saying,  "I  must  go  and  see  my  old  friends  once 
in  a  while."  He  went,  and  after  a  short  stay  in 
Russia  returned  safely  to  his  adopted  home. 

"  How  old  are  you  ?  "  asked  a  Russian  friend  in 
Namangan,  some  time  after  his  return. 

"  Oh,  I  am  only  ninety-eight." 

Not  crediting  this  statement,  the  Russian  asked 
the  son  how  old  his  father  really  was. 

'*  He  was  a  hundred  and  two  last  birthday,"  was 
the  reply. 


AFGHANS  AND  OTHERS  191 

"  But  he  told  me  he  was  only  ninety-eight." 

"  Ah,  that  was  because  he  wants  to  marry  again, 
and  is  anxious  to  make  himself  out  as  young  as 
possible." 

As  servants  Tatirs  are  often  preferred  to 
Russians,  on  account  of  the  abstemiousness  which 
their  religion  forces  upon  them.  Being  strict 
Mohammedans,  they  should  drink  nothing  stronger 
than  water. 

Of  the  Hindu  money-changers  I  have  already 
spoken.  They  have  their  caravanserais  in  all  the 
towns,  and  are  known  by  the  Sarts  as  Multani. 
Their  chief  business  and  raison  d^itre  is  usury,  but 
they  give  themselves  an  air  of  respectability  by 
doing  a  little  honest  trade  as  well.  Their  influence 
on  the  Sarts  being  anything  but  good,  their  presence 
in  Russian  territory  is  rather  resented  by  the 
authorities.  In  Bokhara  they  trade  in  wool  and 
fruits  from  Afghanistan.  The  tea  trade  there  is 
almost  entirely  in  the  hands  of  Indians  from 
Peshawar.  They  put  their  earnings  in  the  Russo- 
Chinese  Bank,  which  has  now  a  branch  in  Bokhara 
proper,  as  well  as  in  the  Russian  colony  of  that 
name.  As  no  coffee  is  drunk  by  the  Sarts,  the 
consumption  of  tea  is  enormous.  Great  quantities 
of  it  are  now  being  sent  from  China  through  rich 
Indian  merchants.  Though  the  Indians  possess 
English  passports,  they  have  lived  so  long  in 
Turkestan  that  they  have  even  forgotten  how  to 


192  IN  RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

speak  Hindustani.  I  did,  however,  find  one  in 
Bokhara  who  remembered  a  few  words  of  English. 
They  are  anything  but  warlike  in  either  appearance 
or  character,  and  prefer  going  to  India  by  the 
circuitous  route  of  Batoum  rather  than  facing  the 
turbulent  Afghans  in  their  own  territory.  Some  of 
them,  Brahmins,  have  the  sacred  mark  upon  their 
foreheads.  ^ 

The  long  strings  of  camels — thirty,  forty,  and 
fifty  in  single  file — that  one  meets  in  the  towns 
every  market-day  belong  to  the  Kirgiz,  about 
whom,  as  also  about  the  Turkomans,  I  must  speak 
elsewhere. 


CHAPTER  XIX 

ANIMALS  AND   INSECTS 

A  Sart  lady  of  the  upper  class  never  goes  out  on 
foot.  Some  never  go  out  at  all,  from  the  day  of 
their  marriage  to  the  day  of  their  death,  but  those 
who  do  are  conveyed  to  their  destination  in  an 
arba  or  native  cart,  the  wheels  of  which  are  some 
six  feet  in  diameter.  The  arba  is  made  entirely  of 
wood,  and  each  huge  wheel  is  a  young  elm  bent 
into  shape.  The  shafts  are  joined  together  by  a 
strap  going  over  the  horse's  back,  to  prevent  the 
weight  falling  on  its  neck.  The  driver  sits  in  a 
saddle  on  the  back  of  the  horse,  with  his  feet  rest- 
ing on  the  shafts.  When  going  uphill  he  stands 
up  and  presses  with  all  his  might  upon  the  shafts, 
to  prevent  the  arba  from  overbalancing.  At  the 
same  time  he  screeches  like  an  owl  in  the  animal's 
ears  to  spur  it  on.  I  shall  never  forget  the  unearthly 
noises  made  by  a  driver  we  passed  at  a  steep  place 
on  the  road  to  Chyust.  The  high  wheels  of  the 
arba  are  invaluable  in  a  country  covered  with 
bridgeless  canals.  Raised  high  above  the  ground, 
the  arba  passes  safely  over  water  three  and  four 
feet  deep;  and  when  a  river  is  deeper  than  that, 

»93  N 


194  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

the  horses  swim  across  with  the  arba  borne  up 
behind  them  like  a  boat.  Russians  use  covered 
arbas  for  longer  journeys,  and  fit  them  up  so  that 
they  can  be  placed  upon  the  ground  and  slept  in, 
like  tents.  Sportsmen  use  them  thus  for  weeks 
together. 

Women  of  the  middle  class  are  constantly  to  be 
seen  riding  in  arbas^  often  five  or  six  of  them  to- 
gether with  their  children  round  them,  but  oftener 
still  they  are  on  horseback,  either  behind  their 
husbands  on  horse  or  donkey,  or  riding  alone. 
One  of  the  most  comical  sights  imaginable  is  a 
Sart  woman — vtil, parandja,  and  all — riding  straddle 
on  a  tiny  Samarkand  donkey,  so  near  the  ground 
that  her  feet  almost  touch  it.  Everybody  rides  in 
Turkestan,  even  the  beggars  in  the  streets  are 
frequently  mounted,  and  one  is  reminded  of  the 
old  adage,  "  If  wishes  were  horses,  beggars  would 
ride." 

When  a  Sart  woman  rides  behind  her  husband 
he  sits  in  the  saddle,  and  she  on  the  horse's  bare 
back,  with  her  arms  round  his  waist.  If  one  of  the 
children  joins  the  party  it  rides  behind  its  mother. 
I  have  seen  a  father  riding  with  three  children 
behind  him.  Rich  men  cover  their  horses'  backs 
with  velvet  cloths  embroidered  in  silver  and  gold, 
and  covered  with  turquoises.  I  never  saw  any  in 
the  streets,  but  people  used  to  show  them  to  us, 
together  with  their  fine  robes  and  jewellery,  when 


ANIMALS  AND   INSECTS  195 

we  visited  their  houses.  Horses  are  shod  at  the 
street  corners  or  in  the  bazaar,  where  two  poles 
stuck  in  the  ground  with  one  across,  in  the  form  of 
the  letter  H,  serve  to  keep  the  animal  steady  while 
the  shoe  is  being  put  on.  The  horse  stands  under 
the  horizontal  pole,  and  is  strapped  to  it,  so  as  to 
be  supported,  like  a  child  learning  to  swim.  The 
native  horseshoe  can  be  bent  when  cold.  Donkeys 
in  Central  Asia  are  almost  as  small  as  our  English 
ones,  but  very  much  stronger.  The  amount  they 
can  carry  with  ease  is  astohishing;  and  they  are 
credited  with  even  more  intelligence  than  the  horses, 
but  no  Sart  of  any  position  would  care  to  be  seen 
riding  on  one,  as  that  would  be  beneath  his  dignity. 
Mules  are  ridden  a  great  deal,  especially  by  country- 
men coming  to  market.  They  are  of  all  sizes  and 
colours. 

Dogs  are  not  pets  in  a  Sart  household.  Looked 
upon  as  unclean  animals,  they  are  not  allowed  to 
enter  the  houses.  Most  of  the  dogs  that  wander  in 
the  streets  are  ownerless,  and  pick  up  a  living  as  best 
they  can,  as  a  Russian  friend  in  Fergana  found  to  his 
cost,  when  a  batch  of  them,  mad  with  hunger,  flew 
into  his  courtyard  and  almost  tore  to  shreds  a  live 
sheep  that  friends  in  Bokhara  had  recently  sent  him 
as  a  present  So  furious  was  their  attack  that  our 
friend  mistook  them  for  wolves  at  the  first  onset, 
and  rushed  out  upon  them  with  his  rifle.  Neighbours 
came  to  his  aid,  and  the  dogs,  receiving  blows  that 


190  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

the  Crimea;  numbers,  too,  have  come  down  from 
Siberia.  A  Russian  officer,  a  TatAr  by  birth  and 
religion,  whose  wife  is  a  Sart  lady,  educated  in 
St.  Petersburg,  was  discussing  with  me  the  posi- 
tion of  his  wife's  countrywomen. 

"Which,"  he  asked,  "do  you  think  best?  that 
all  the  women  should  have  husbands  as  here,  or 
that  only  two-thirds  of  them  should  have  a  chance 
of  marriage  as  in  England  ?  " 

In  Namangan,  a  province  as  large  as  Holland, 
there  is  only  one  garden  of  any  size  devoted  to 
the  cultivation  of  flowers;  its  owner  is  a  Tat4r, 
and  so  successful  has  he  proved  with  his  hobby 
that  when  the  Govertior-General  passed  through 
he  was  taken  to  see  this  garden  as  one  of  the 
sights  of  the  neighbourhood.  The  father  of  its 
owner  came  from  Moscow  to  Namangan  at  about 
twenty  years  of  age.  After  he  had  been  there 
seventy  years  he  decided  to  pay  a  visit  to  Moscow, 
saying,  "I  must  go  and  see  my  old  friends  once 
in  a  while."  He  went,  and  after  a  short  stay  in 
Russia  returned  safely  to  his  adopted  home. 

"  How  old  are  you  ?  "  asked  a  Russian  friend  in 
Namangan,  some  time  after  his  return. 

"  Oh,  I  am  only  ninety-eight." 

Not  crediting  this  statement,  the  Russian  asked 
the  son  how  old  his  father  really  was. 

"  He  was  a  hundred  and  two  last  birthday,"  was 
the  reply. 


AFGHANS  AND   OTHERS  191 

"  But  he  told  me  he  was  only  ninety-eight." 

"  Ah,  that  was  because  he  wants  to  marry  again, 
and  is  anxious  to  make  himself  out  as  young  as 
possible." 

As  servants  Tatdrs  are  often  preferred  to 
Russians,  on  account  of  the  abstemiousness  which 
their  religion  forces  upon  them.  Being  strict 
Mohammedans,  they  should  drink  nothing  stronger 
than  water. 

Of  the  Hindu  money-changers  I  have  already 
spoken.  They  have  their  caravanserais  in  all  the 
towns,  and  are  known  by  the  Sarts  as  Multanu 
Their  chief  business  and  raison  d^itre  is  usury,  but 
they  give  themselves  an  air  of  respectability  by 
doing  a  little  honest  trade  as  well.  Their  influence 
on  the  Sarts  being  anything  but  good,  their  presence 
in  Russian  territory  is  rather  resented  by  the 
authorities.  In  Bokhara  they  trade  in  wool  and 
fruits  from  Afghanistan.  The  tea  trade  there  is 
almost  entirely  in  the  hands  of  Indians  from 
Peshawar.  They  put  their  earnings  in  the  Russo- 
Chinese  Bank,  which  has  now  a  branch  in  Bokhara 
proper,  as  well  as  in  the  Russian  colony  of  that 
name.  As  no  coffee  is  drunk  by  the  Sarts,  the 
consumption  of  tea  is  enormous.  Great  quantities 
of  it  are  now  being  sent  from  China  through  rich 
Indian  merchants.  Though  the  Indians  possess 
English  passports,  they  have  lived  so  long  in 
Turkestan  that  they  have  even  forgotten  how  to 


192  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

speak  Hindustani.  I  did,  howeveri  find  one  in 
Bokhara  who  remembered  a  few  words  of  English. 
They  are  anything  but  warlike  in  either  appearance 
or  character,  and  prefer  going  to  India  by  the 
circuitous  route  of  Batoum  rather  than  facing  the 
turbulent  Afghans  in  their  own  territory.  Some  of 
them,  Brahmins,  have  the  sacred  mark  upon  their 
foreheads.  ^ 

The  long  strings  of  camels — thirty,  forty,  and 
fifty  in  single  file — that  one  meets  in  the  towns 
every  market  -  day  belong  to  the  Kirgiz,  about 
whom,  as  also  about  the  Turkomans,  I  must  speak 
elsewhere. 


CHAPTER  XIX 

ANIMALS  AND   INSECTS 

A  Sart  lady  of  the  upper  class  never  goes  out  on 
foot.  Some  never  go  out  at  all,  from  the  day  of 
their  marriage  to  the  day  of  their  death,  but  those 
who  do  are  conveyed  to  their  destination  in  an 
arba  or  native  cart,  the  wheels  of  which  are  some 
six  feet  in  diameter.  The  arba  is  made  entirely  of 
wood,  and  each  huge  wheel  is  a  young  elm  bent 
into  shape.  The  shafts  are  joined  together  by  a 
strap  going  over  the  horse's  back,  to  prevent  the 
weight  falling  on  its  neck.  The  driver  sits  in  a 
saddle  on  |he  back  of  the  horse,  with  his  feet  rest- 
ing on  the  shafts.  When  going  uphill  he  stands 
up  and  presses  with  all  his  might  upon  the  shafts, 
to  prevent  the  arba  from  overbalancing.  At  the 
same  time  he  screeches  like  an  owl  in  the  animal's 
ears  to  spur  it  on.  I  shall  never  forget  the  unearthly 
noises  made  by  a  driver  we  passed  at  a  steep  place 
on  the  road  to  Chyust.  The  high  wheels  of  the 
arba  are  invaluable  in  a  country  covered  with 
bridgeless  canals.  Raised  high  above  the  ground, 
the  arba  passes  safely  over  water  three  and  four 

feet  deep;  and  when  a  river  is  deeper  than  that, 

m  N 


194  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

the  horses  swim  across  with  the  arba  borne  up 
behind  them  like  a  boat  Russians  use  covered 
arbas  for  longer  journeys,  and  fit  them  up  so  that 
they  can  be  placed  upon  the  ground  and  slept  in, 
like  tents.  Sportsmen  use  them  thus  for  weeks 
together. 

Women  of  the  middle  class  are  constantly  to  be 
seen  riding  in  arbas^  often  five  or  six  of  them  to- 
gether with  their  children  round  them,  but  oftener 
still  they  are  on  horseback,  either  behind  their 
husbands  on  horse  or  donkey,  or  riding  alone. 
One  of  the  most  comical  sights  imaginable  is  a 
Sart  woman — vdX.parandja^  and  all — riding  straddle 
on  a  tiny  Samarkand  donkey,  so  near  the  ground 
that  her  feet  almost  touch  it.  Everybody  rides  in 
Turkestan,  even  the  beggars  in  the  streets  are 
frequently  mounted,  and  one  is  reminded  of  the 
old  adage,  "  If  wishes  were  horses,  beggars  would 
ride." 

When  a  Sart  woman  rides  behind  her  husband 
he  sits  in  the  saddle,  and  she  on  the  horse's  bare 
back,  with  her  arms  round  his  waist.  If  one  of  the 
children  joins  the  party  it  rides  behind  its  mother. 
I  have  seen  a  father  riding  with  three  children 
behind  him.  Rich  men  cover  their  horses'  backs 
with  velvet  cloths  embroidered  in  silver  and  gold, 
and  covered  with  turquoises.  I  never  saw  any  in 
the  streets,  but  people  used  to  show  them  to  us, 
together  with  their  fine  robes  and  jewellery,  when 


ANIMALS  AND   INSECTS  195 

we  visited  their  houses.  Horses  are  shod  at  the 
street  corners  or  in  the  bazaar,  where  two  poles 
stuck  in  the  ground  with  one  across,  in  the  form  of 
the  letter  H,  serve  to  keep  the  animal  steady  while 
the  shoe  is  being  put  on.  The  horse  stands  under 
the  horizontal  pole,  and  is  strapped  to  it,  so  as  to 
be  supported,  like  a  child  learning  to  swim.  The 
native  horseshoe  can  be  bent  when  cold.  Donkeys 
in  Central  Asia  are  almost  as  small  as  our  English 
ones,  but  very  much  stronger.  The  amount  they 
can  carry  with  ease  is  astohishing;  and  they  are 
credited  with  even  more  intelligence  than  the  horses, 
but  no  Sart  of  any  position  would  care  to  be  seen 
riding  on  one,  as  that  would  be  beneath  his  dignity. 
Mules  are  ridden  a  great  deal,  especially  by  country- 
men coming  to  market.  They  are  of  all  sizes  and 
colours. 

Dogs  are  not  pets  in  a  Sart  household.  Looked 
upon  as  unclean  animals,  they  are  not  allowed  to 
enter  the  houses.  Most  of  the  dogs  that  wander  in 
the  streets  are  ownerless,  and  pick  up  a  living  as  best 
they  can,  as  a  Russian  friend  in  Fergana  found  to  his 
cost,  when  a  batch  of  them,  mad  with  hunger,  flew 
into  his  courtyard  and  almost  tore  to  shreds  a  live 
sheep  that  friends  in  Bokhara  had  recently  sent  him 
as  a  present.  So  furious  was  their  attack  that  our 
friend  mistook  them  for  wolves  at  the  first  onset, 
and  rushed  out  upon  them  with  his  rifle.  Neighbours 
came  to  his  aid,  and  the  dogs,  receiving  blows  that 


196  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

brought  them  to  their  senses,  made  a  dash  for  the 
entrance  through  which  they  had  come,  and  dis- 
appeared to  be  seen  no  more.  Our  friend  still 
mourns  the  loss  of  his  sheep,  which  was  a  par- 
ticularly fine  one. 

"  In  Bokhara,"  said  he,  in  a  plaintive  voice,  "  this 
catastrophe  could  not  have  happened,  for  there  the 
dogs  promenade  on  the  roofs  of  the  houses,  and 
there  are  never  any  in  the  street." 

"  How  do  you  account  for  that  ?  "  I  asked. 

"  It  is  because  the  Bokharans  have  a  habit  of 
throwing  all  their  meat  -  bones  on  the  roof  when 
done  with,  and  the  dogs  know  where  to  find  them,'* 
he  replied. 

Bokhara  is  famous  for  its  beautiful,  long-haired 
cats.  A  finer  breed  of  the  feline  race  one  could 
not  wish  to  see.  They  have  bushy  tails  and  silky 
hair.  They  too  walk  about  on  the  roofs,  but  the 
best  specimens  we  saw  were  children's  pets  in 
Russian  houses.  Sarts  keep  them  also  in  their 
houses,  and  have  many  other  pets  as  well. 

In  the  courtyard  of  a  rich  Sart  in  Namangan  I 
found  a  peacock  strutting  proudly  about,  as  if  the 
place  belonged  to  him ;  a  female  stag  that  one  of  the 
sons  had  caught  in  the  neighbouring  mountains,  two 
falcons,  a  cat,  a  duck,  and  an  owl.  Our  host, 
wishing  to  show  us  the  character  of  his  falcon, 
fetched  a  dead  chicken,  destined  for  the  pilau^  and 
dangled  it  over  the  bird's  head.     Half  asleep  till 


ANIMALS  AND   INSECTS  197 

that  moment,  it  suddenly  roused  itself  and,  darting 
at  the  tempting  prey,  would  have  pulled  it  in  pieces 
in  a  twinkle,  if  its  master  had  not  extricated  it  with 
difficulty  from  its  claws.  Falcons  are  kept  for  the 
sport  they  give,  rather  than  for  the  sake  of  the 
game  they  catch.  In  the  old  days  every  Khan  had 
his  falcon,  and  the  first  man  in  his  Khanate  was 
the  Cushbeggi  or  chief  falconer ;  the  title  is  still  held 
by  the  Amir's  Prime  Minister  in  Bokhara.  Marco 
Polo  relates  that  one  of  the  Khans  of  Khiva  had 
lOfiOO  falconers  who  accompanied  him  in  his  hunt- 
ing expeditions,  and  the  Sultan  Baber  tells  in  his 
book  how  another  Khan,  hearing  of  the  death  of  a 
favourite  falcon,  exclaimed — 

"I  would  rather  have  heard  that  my  son  had 
broken  his  neck!" 

The  wild  doves  that  hover  under  the  eaves  in 
quantities  are  almost  the  same  colour  as  the  mud 
walls  of  the  houses.  In  size  they  resemble  our 
English  starling,  but  are,  if  anything,  a  little 
smaller.  No  Sart  ever  thinks  of  hurting  these 
birds,  while  the  remembrance  that  Christ  "came 
in  semblance  of  a  dove"  restrains  the  Russians 
from  touching  them.  Native  bird-cages  are  made 
with  string,  not  unlike  those  one  sees  in  the  streets 
of  Italy ;  they  look  like  shrimp-nets  turned  upside 
down.  Small  birds  are  kept  in  them  for  fighting 
purposes,  and  men  earn  their  living  by  providing 
their  neighbours  with  this  cruel  sport,  which,  we 


198  IN  RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

must  remember,  was  popular  in  England^  till  the 
middle  of  the  nineteenth  century. 

Ducks  and  turkeys  have  been  recently  introduced 
by  the  Russians ;  but  there  is,  among  the  wild-fowl 
high  up  in  the  mountains,  an  indigenous  bird  of 
the  partridge  family,  called  the  "  mountain  turkey." 

Locusts  do  great  harm  to  the  agricultural  country 
round  Tashkent.  They  come  in  swarms  in  early 
summer.  The  Government  sent  a  Russian  officer 
to  France  in  1901  to  see  a  man  named  Vermorel 
at  Villefranche,  who  has  patented  a  poison  to  be 
spread  over  the  fields  by  means  of  a  special  kind 
of  douche  invented  for  the  purpose.  The  officer 
brought  back  ten  such  douches,  and  an  order  has  been 
sent  for  a  hundred  more.  Perhaps  some  day  they 
will  try  to  conquer  the  locusts  by  means  of  screens 
and  ditches,  a  method  that  we  English  have  adopted 
with  so  much  success  in  the  island  of  Cyprus. 

Insects  abound  in  Turkestan  as  in  all  hot  coun- 
tries. The  canals  are  noisy  with  frogs  at  certain 
seasons  of  the  year,  and  snakes  of  various  kinds 
are  to  be  found,  but  only  two  are  poisonous.  The 
smallest  boa  in  existence,  Eryx  jacubis^  is  found  on 
the  steppe ;  it  catches  and  swallows  its  prey  in  true 
boa  style.  A  spider  known  as  the  PhaUmga  is 
found  both  in  the  deserts  and  in  the  towns.  It  is 
said  to  be  the  largest  spider  in  the  world.  Its 
sting  is  poisonous,  but  it  does  not  kill.  A  much 
^  See  the  account  of  one  in  '*  Lavengro." 


ANIMALS  AND   INSECTS  199 

more  dreaded  enemy  is  the  Karakut  {Lactrodectus 
lugubris\  a  little  black  spider,  which  is  said  to  kill 
even  a  camel  with  its  deadly  poison.  The  Sarts 
say  its  poison  will  kill  a  man,  but  Europeans  have 
had  no  proof  of  this.  They  also  say  that  sheep 
eat  these  dangerous  little  creatures,  and  that  they 
will  never  come  near  a  sheep's  skin,  so  that  to 
wrap  oneself  in  one  when  sleeping  out  of  doors 
is  the  best  safeguard  against  them. 

The  local  museums  contain  specimens  of  all  the 
insects  of  any  importance  that  have  as  yet  been 
discovered  by  Russian  naturalists.  And  this  is 
well,  as  the  traveller  might  otherwise  find  it  difficult 
to  distinguish  between  the  fact  and  the  fiction  with 
which  the  hospitable  colonists  are  ready  to  over- 
whelm him.  The  tarantula  is  found  occasionally. 
The  Sarts  say  that  its  sting  can  be  rendered  harm- 
less by  rubbing  the  part  stung  with  the  body  of 
another  tarantula.  Scorpions  are  numerous  in  hot 
weather;  they  conceal  themselves  in  the  rush 
matting  of  the  floors  and  ceilings,  but  they  only 
sting  when  angry.  Fleas  are  found  everywhere, 
but  bugs  were  unknown  until  their  introduction 
by  European  settlers.  Such  big  lizards  are  found 
in  the  steppe  that  I  have  heard  them  described  as 
"quite  like  crocodiles."  In  Namangan  we  heard 
of  a  kind  called  by  the  Sarts  tchkemar*  They  are 
frequently  a  yard  in  length,  and  are  addicted  to 
sucking  the  milk  of  goats. 


I90  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

the  Crimea;  numbers,  too,  have  come  down  from 
Siberia.  A  Russian  officer,  a  Tatdr  by  birth  and 
religion,  whose  wife  is  a  Sart  lady,  educated  in 
St.  Petersburg,  was  discussing  with  me  the  posi- 
tion of  his  wife's  countrywomen. 

"Which,"  he  asked,  "do  you  think  best?  that 
all  the  women  should  have  husbands  as  here,  or 
that  only  two-thirds  of  them  should  have  a  chance 
of  marriage  as  in  England  ?  " 

In  Namangan,  a  province  as  large  as  Holland, 
there  is  only  one  garden  of  any  size  devoted  to 
the  cultivation  of  flowers;  its  owner  is  a  Tatdr, 
and  so  successful  has  he  proved  with  his  hobby 
that  when  the  Goverhor-General  passed  through 
he  was  taken  to  see  this  garden  as  one  of  the 
sights  of  the  neighbourhood.  The  father  of  its 
owner  came  from  Moscow  to  Namangan  at  about 
twenty  years  of  age.  After  he  had  been  there 
seventy  years  he  decided  to  pay  a  visit  to  Moscow, 
saying,  "I  must  go  and  see  my  old  friends  once 
in  a  while."  He  went,  and  after  a  short  stay  in 
Russia  returned  safely  to  his  adopted  home. 

"  How  old  are  you  ?  "  asked  a  Russian  friend  in 
Namangan,  some  time  after  his  return. 

"  Oh,  I  am  only  ninety-eight." 

Not  crediting  this  statement,  the  Russian  asked 
the  son  how  old  his  father  really  was. 

"  He  was  a  hundred  and  two  last  birthday,"  was 
the  reply. 


AFGHANS  AND  OTHERS  191 

"  But  he  told  me  he  was  only  ninety-eight." 

"  Ah,  that  was  because  he  wants  to  marry  again, 
and  is  anxious  to  make  himself  out  as  young  as 
possible." 

As  servants  Tatdrs  are  often  preferred  to 
Russians,  on  account  of  the  abstemiousness  which 
their  religion  forces  upon  them.  Being  strict 
Mohammedans,  they  should  drink  nothing  stronger 
than  water. 

Of  the  Hindu  money-changers  I  have  already 
spoken.  They  have  their  caravanserais  in  all  the 
towns,  and  are  known  by  the  Sarts  as  Multani, 
Their  chief  business  and  raison  d^Hre  is  usury,  but 
they  give  themselves  an  air  of  respectability  by 
doing  a  little  honest  trade  as  well.  Their  influence 
on  the  Sarts  being  anything  but  good,  their  presence 
in  Russian  territory  is  rather  resented  by  the 
authorities.  In  Bokhara  they  trade  in  wool  and 
fruits  from  Afghanistan.  The  tea  trade  there  is 
almost  entirely  in  the  hands  of  Indians  from 
Peshawar.  They  put  their  earnings  in  the  Russo- 
Chinese  Bank,  which  has  now  a  branch  in  Bokhara 
proper,  as  well  as  in  the  Russian  colony  of  that 
name.  As  no  coffee  is  drunk  by  the  Sarts,  the 
consumption  of  tea  is  enormous.  Great  quantities 
of  it  are  now  being  sent  from  China  through  rich 
Indian  merchants.  Though  the  Indians  possess 
English  passports,  they  have  lived  so  long  in 
Turkestan  that  they  have  even  forgotten  how  to 


194  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

the  horses  swim  across  with  the  arba  borne  up 
behind  them  like  a  boat.  Russians  use  covered 
arbas  for  longer  journeys,  and  fit  them  up  so  that 
they  can  be  placed  upon  the  ground  and  slept  in, 
like  tents.  Sportsmen  use  them  thus  for  weeks 
together. 

Women  of  the  middle  class  are  constantly  to  be 
seen  riding  in  arbas^  often  five  or  six  of  them  to- 
gether with  their  children  round  them,  but  oftener 
still  they  are  on  horseback,  either  behind  their 
husbands  on  horse  or  donkey,  or  riding  alone. 
One  of  the  most  comical  sights  imaginable  is  a 
Sart  woman — veXl^parandja^  and  all — riding  straddle 
on  a  tiny  Samarkand  donkey,  so  near  the  ground 
that  her  feet  almost  touch  it.  Everybody  rides  in 
Turkestan,  even  the  beggars  in  the  streets  are 
frequently  mounted,  and  one  is  reminded  of  the 
old  adage,  "  If  wishes  were  horses,  beggars  would 
ride." 

When  a  Sart  woman  rides  behind  her  husband 
he  sits  in  the  saddle,  and  she  on  the  horse's  bare 
back,  with  her  arms  round  his  waist.  If  one  of  the 
children  joins  the  party  it  rides  behind  its  mother. 
I  have  seen  a  father  riding  with  three  children 
behind  him.  Rich  men  cover  their  horses'  backs 
with  velvet  cloths  embroidered  in  silver  and  gold, 
and  covered  with  turquoises.  I  never  saw  any  in 
the  streets,  but  people  used  to  show  them  to  us, 
together  with  their  fine  robes  and  jewellery,  when 


ANIMALS  AND   INSECTS  195 

we  visited  their  houses.  Horses  are  shod  at  the 
street  corners  or  in  the  bazaar,  where  two  poles 
stuck  in  the  ground  with  one  across,  in  the  form  of 
the  letter  H,  serve  to  keep  the  animal  steady  while 
the  shoe  is  being  put  on.  The  horse  stands  under 
the  horizontal  pole,  and  is  strapped  to  it,  so  as  to 
be  supported,  like  a  child  learning  to  swim.  The 
native  horseshoe  can  be  bent  when  cold.  Donkeys 
in  Central  Asia  are  almost  as  small  as  our  English 
ones,  but  very  much  stronger.  The  amount  they 
can  carry  with  ease  is  astohishing;  and  they  are 
credited  with  even  more  intelligence  than  the  horses, 
but  no  Sart  of  any  position  would  care  to  be  seen 
riding  on  one,  as  that  would  be  beneath  his  dignity. 
Mules  are  ridden  a  great  deal,  especially  by  country- 
men coming  to  market.  They  are  of  all  sizes  and 
colours. 

Dogs  are  not  pets  in  a  Sart  household.  Looked 
upon  as  unclean  animals,  they  are  not  allowed  to 
enter  the  houses.  Most  of  the  dogs  that  wander  in 
the  streets  are  ownerless,  and  pick  up  a  living  as  best 
they  can,  as  a  Russian  friend  in  Fergana  found  to  his 
cost,  when  a  batch  of  them,  mad  with  hunger,  flew 
into  his  courtyard  and  almost  tore  to  shreds  a  live 
sheep  that  friends  in  Bokhara  had  recently  sent  him 
as  a  present  So  furious  was  their  attack  that  our 
friend  mistook  them  for  wolves  at  the  first  onset, 
and  rushed  out  upon  them  with  his  rifle.  Neighbours 
came  to  his  aid,  and  the  dogs,  receiving  blows  that 


194  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

the  horses  swim  across  with  the  arba  borne  up 
behind  them  like  a  boat.  Russians  use  covered 
arbas  for  longer  journeys,  and  fit  them  up  so  that 
they  can  be  placed  upon  the  ground  and  slept  in, 
like  tents.  Sportsmen  use  them  thus  for  weeks 
together. 

Women  of  the  middle  class  are  constantly  to  be 
seen  riding  in  arbas^  often  five  or  six  of  them  to- 
gether with  their  children  round  them,  but  oftener 
still  they  are  on  horseback,  either  behind  their 
husbands  on  horse  or  donkey,  or  riding  alone. 
One  of  the  most  comical  sights  imaginable  is  a 
Sart  woman — vdX,parandja^  and  all — ^riding  straddle 
on  a  tiny  Samarkand  donkey,  so  near  the  ground 
that  her  feet  almost  touch  it.  Everybody  rides  in 
Turkestan,  even  the  beggars  in  the  streets  are 
frequently  mounted,  and  one  is  reminded  of  the 
old  adage,  "  If  wishes  were  horses,  beggars  would 
ride." 

When  a  Sart  woman  rides  behind  her  husband 
he  sits  in  the  saddle,  and  she  on  the  horse's  bare 
back,  with  her  arms  round  his  waist.  If  one  of  the 
children  joins  the  party  it  rides  behind  its  mother. 
I  have  seen  a  father  riding  with  three  children 
behind  him.  Rich  men  cover  their  horses'  backs 
with  velvet  cloths  embroidered  in  silver  and  gold, 
and  covered  with  turquoises.  I  never  saw  any  in 
the  streets,  but  people  used  to  show  them  to  us, 
together  with  their  fine  robes  and  jewellery,  when 


ANIMALS  AND   INSECTS  195 

we  visited  their  houses.  Horses  are  shod  at  the 
street  corners  or  in  the  bazaar,  where  two  poles 
stuck  in  the  ground  with  one  across,  in  the  form  of 
the  letter  H,  serve  to  keep  the  animal  steady  while 
the  shoe  is  being  put  on.  The  horse  stands  under 
the  horizontal  pole,  and  is  strapped  to  it,  so  as  to 
be  supported,  like  a  child  learning  to  swim.  The 
native  horseshoe  can  be  bent  when  cold.  Donkeys 
in  Central  Asia  are  almost  as  small  as  our  English 
ones,  but  very  much  stronger.  The  amount  they 
can  carry  with  ease  is  astohishing;  and  they  are 
credited  with  even  more  intelligence  than  the  horses, 
but  no  Sart  of  any  position  would  care  to  be  seen 
riding  on  one,  as  that  would  be  beneath  his  dignity. 
Mules  are  ridden  a  great  deal,  especially  by  country- 
men coming  to  market.  They  are  of  all  sizes  and 
colours. 

Dogs  are  not  pets  in  a  Sart  household.  Looked 
upon  as  unclean  animals,  they  are  not  allowed  to 
enter  the  houses.  Most  of  the  dogs  that  wander  in 
the  streets  are  ownerless,  and  pick  up  a  living  as  best 
they  can,  as  a  Russian  friend  in  Fergana  found  to  his 
cost,  when  a  batch  of  them,  mad  with  hunger,  flew 
into  his  courtyard  and  almost  tore  to  shreds  a  live 
sheep  that  friends  in  Bokhara  had  recently  sent  him 
as  a  present  So  furious  was  their  attack  that  our 
friend  mistook  them  for  wolves  at  the  first  onset, 
and  rushed  out  upon  them  with  his  rifle.  Neighbours 
came  to  his  aid,  and  the  dogs,  receiving  blows  that 


2o6  IN   RUSSIAN' TURKESTAN 

The  other  animals  agreed  to  this,  and  settled 
to  form  themselves  into  a  line  on  the  following 
morning.  Then  the  fox  crept  slyly  away  and  told 
the  tiger  that  he  could  supply  him  with  a  plump 
animal  every  day  if  he  would  only  spare  him  (the 
fox)  from  the  death  to  which  he  was  subjecting  his 
friends.  The  tiger  consented  to  the  arrangement, 
and  the  fox,  having  put  himself  at  the  head  of  the 
row  the  first  day,  disappeared  as  though  he  had 
been  seized  by  the  tiger.  The  animals  stuck  to 
the  plan  for  some  days,  but  soon  got  tired  of  being 
devoured,  even  in  regular  order,  so  they  met  again 
to  consider.  This  time  a  very  little  animal,  a  jerboa, 
got  up  and  said — 

"The  fox's  plan  has  really  done  us  no  good  at 
all ;  now  we  will  try  mine.  Go  and  hide,  every  one 
of  you,  and  I  will  settle  it  with  the  tiger." 

To  this  the  rest  agreed,  and  when  the  tiger  came 
he  could  find  nothing  for  breakfast  except  the  jerboa, 
who  came  up  to  him  and  said — 

"O  tiger,  I  will  tell  you  the  reason  why  there  is 
no  breakfast  waiting  for  you  to-day.  Another  tiger, 
finer  and  stronger  than  yourself,  has  come  into  the 
neighbourhood  and  eaten  the  animals  that  should 
have  fallen  to  your  lot." 

"  Where  is  he  ?  "  said  the  tiger,  in  a  rage. 

"I  will  lead  you  quietly  to  him,"  replied  the 
jerboa,  "  and  then  you  can  spring  at  him  and  tear 
him  to  death." 


i 


SART   FAIRY  TALES  207 

So  sa3dngy  he  led  the  tiger  down  the  bank  of  the 
river,  and  told  him  to  bend  over  the  water  and  look 
in.  The  tiger  followed  the  counsel  of  the  little 
jerboa,  and,  seeing  his  own  angry  visage  reflected 
in  the  clear  liquid,  mistook  it  for  that  of  his  rival. 
In  another  moment  he  had  sprung  at  it  and  dis- 
appeared into  the  water.  Thus  it  was  that  the 
plan  of  the  little  jerboa  succeeded. 

Tigers,  I  may  add,  are  still  to  be  found  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  Namangan,  one  was  wandering 
close  to  the  town  when  we  were  there,  and  the 
chief  of  the  district  had  provided  a  brave  Sart  ^  of 
his  acquaintance  with  a  gun  to  shoot  it.  The 
Sart,  in  his  turn,  had  promised  the  skin  to  that 
gentleman's  wife. 

I  shall  close  my  chapter  with  one  more  tale, — 

The  Cruel  Stepmother. 

Once  upon  a  time  there  lived  a  Sart.  His  wife 
had  died  and  left  him  with  two  children,  a  boy  and 
a  girl.  The  Sart  married  again.  Very  soon  his 
second  wife  had  a  little  girl  of  her  own,  whereupon 
she  said  to  her  husband*,  "  Boil  your  son,  and  I  will 
eat  him." 

The  Sart  was  sorry,  for  he  loved  his  son  dearly. 

^  When  a  Kirgiz  wishes  to  attack  a  tiger,  he  shuts  himself  up  in 
his  portable  beehive  hut  and  moves  it  steadily  towards  the  tiger ; 
when  near  enough,  he  shoots  at  him  through  a  small  opening. 


208  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

However,  his  wife  insisted,  so  he  took  the  boy  out 
into  the  garden,  and  collected  a  heap  of  firewood. 
Soon  after  he  returned  alone  to  his  wife  and  said — 

''  Go  out  and  look  behind  the  bam ;  there  you  will 
find  what  you  have  asked  for."  His  wife  went  and 
looked  behind  the  bam;  there,  sure  enough,  she 
found  the  boy  and  the  firewood  all  ready.  She  put 
the  boy  in  a  pot,  boiled  him,  and  ate  him,  throwing 
his  bones  into  the  back  yard.  The  boy's  sister  found 
them  there  the  next  day,  and  burst  into  tears  at  the 
sorrowful  sight.  Weeping  and  crying,  she  gathered 
the  bones  together,  put  them  in  a  bag,  and  hung 
them  on  the  branch  of  a  tree,  where,  wonderful  to 
relate,  they  turned  into  a  dove.  Under  the  tree  there 
passed  a  pedlar. 

''Sing  me  a  song,  O  dove,"  said  he. 

"  Give  me  a  needle,"  said  the  dove,  "  and  I  will 
sing." 

The  pedlar  gave  the  dove  a  needle,  and  the  dove 
sang  a  song. 

"  Sing  again,"  said  the  pedlar. 

"  Give  me  another  needle  and  I  will  sing  again." 

The  pedlar  gave  the  dove  another  needle,  and  was 
repaid  by  another  song. 

The  boy's  father  now  went  to  the  mosque,  and  on 
his  way  he  saw  the  dove  sitting  on  the  tree. 

"  Sing  me  a  song,  O  dove,"  said  he, 

"First  shut  your  eyes  and  open  your  mouth," 
said  the  dove. 


SART   FAIRY  TALES  209 

But  when  the  father  shut  his  eyes  and  opened  his 
mouth  the  dove  dropped  the  needle  down  his  throat, 
and  killed  him.  Then  the  stepmother  came  out  into 
the  yard  to  bake  bread,  and  she  too  noticed,  the 
dove. 

'*  Sing  to  me/'  said  she. 

"  First  shut  your  eyes  and  open  your  mouth,"  re- 
plied the  dove. 

So  the  stepmother  shut  her  eyes  and  opened  her 
mouth,  whereupon  the  dove  dropped  the  other  needle 
down  her  throat,  and  she  died  too.  After  that  the 
dove  flew  down  from  the  tree  and  turned  into  a 
beautiful  little  boy,  to  the  great  delight  of  his  faith- 
ful sister. 


O 


CHAPTER  XXI 

SOME  NATIVE  INDUSTRIES 

The  art  of  converting  rags  into  paper  came  to 
Europe  from  China,  by  way  of  Samarkand  and 
Morocco :  the  Spaniards  learned  it  from  the  Moors. 
The  date  given  by  some  writers  as  that  of  its  in- 
vention in  Samarkand — A.D.  751 — is  really  that  at 
which  it  was  introduced  there  from  China — ^the 
thirtieth  year  of  the  Hegira.^  In  the  Escurial  library 
there  is  said  to  be  MSS.  as  old  as  the  eleventh  cen- 
tury of  our  era.  Most  of  the  paper  used  in  native 
Turkestan  to-day  is  manufactured  in  the  town  of 
Kokand.  The  Sarts  mix  their  rags  with  water  and 
stamp  them  to  a  pulp.  Then  they  dilute  the  pulp 
with  more  water  and  shake  it  in  a  coarse  matting 
sieve,  after  which  they  flatten  it  out  between  layers 
of  felt,  and  polish  it  on  one  side  by  means  of  pressure 
upon  a  flat  surface.  Native  writing-paper  is  thick 
and  rather  like  parchment  in  appearance.  It  is 
glazed  with  a  kind  of  gum  extracted  from  a  native 
plant. 

1  In  his  recently  published  account  of  the  sand-buried  ruins  of 
Khotan,  Stein  writes  :  "It  was  a  fact  of  archseolc^ical  significance 
that  among  all  the  wealth  of  written  documents  not  a  single  scrap 
of  actual  paper  was  found." 


SOME  NATIVE  INDUSTRIES        211 

An  industry  in  which  the  Sart  particularly  excels 
is  that  of  making,  and  ornamenting  with  the  chisel, 
copper  and  brass  drinking-vessels,  basins,  plates  and 
lamps,  and  gourd-pipes.  Every  bazaar  has  its  street  of 
coppersmiths,  where  you  can  see  them  at  their  work 
and  hear  the  deafening  noise  of  their  hammers  all 
going  at  once.  The  usual  shape  of  a  Sart  drinking- 
vessel  resembles  that  of  an  elegant  coffee-pot,  so  tall 
and  slender  that  it  must  be  difiScult  to  keep  it  clean. 
Some  of  the  brass  ones  are  overlaid  with  a  thin  coat- 
ing of  silver.  As  I  have  said  elsewhere,  the  best 
work  is  put  into  those  destined  for  sale  in  Moscow, 
so  that  it  is  no  longer  easy  to  pick  them  up  on  the 
spot,  as  of  old,  and  the  man  in  the  booth  has  very 
few  of  his  wares  on  show,  perhaps  only  the  particu- 
lar vessel  upon  which  he  is  at  work.  Wishing  to 
purchase  a  kungaUf  or  brass  water-pot,  in  Kokand, 
where  the  best  work  is  done,  I  stopped  one  day  in 
front  of  a  booth  to  which  I  had  been  directed,  and 
asked  the  worker  if  he  could  not  show  me  a  larger 
assortment  than  those  he  had  with  him.  Great  was 
my  surprise  when  he  replied — 

"  My  wife  and  children  have  several  on  hand,  but 
they  are  doing  their  work  at  home." 

"  May  I  come  ajid  see  them  at  it  ?  "  I  asked. 

"  They  will  be  very  pleased  to  receive  a  visit  from 
you,"  was  his  gracious  reply. 

The  next  day  I  went  to  the  house  indicated,  and 
found  the  women  and  children  sitting  in  a  row  on  the 


212  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

ground^  each  engaged,  hammer  and  chisel  in  hand, 
upon  some  delicate  bit  of  work.  At  one  end  of  the 
row  sat  the  white-haired  grandmother  ornamenting  a 
large  copper  bowl,  which  rested  on  a  piece  of  rough- 
hewn  tree-trunk,  that  served  her  as  a  low  table.  The 
young  wife  sat  in  the  middle  with  her  rainbow-dressed 
children  on  cither  side  of  her.  Some  of  them  were 
chiselling  brass -bound  gourd -pipes,  and  one  little 
girl  was  hammering  at  a  kungan.  I  took  an  instan- 
taneous photograph  of  this  interesting  group,  but  the 
colouring  of  the  picture  was  half  its  charm. 

"  My  wife's  family  are  not  metal-workers,"  said 
the  husband,  who  came  in  before  we  left;  "she 
learned  the  art  after  her  marriage." 

Bokhara  is  celebrated  for  its  knives,  which  are  as 
well  made  as  any  in  Europe.  I  have  read  that  the 
making  of  them  to  such  perfection  is  a  secret  of  the 
trade.  Their  shape  is  extremely  elegant,  and  their 
metal  is  so  good  that  the  blades  seldom  need  to  be 
sharpened.  Every  Sart  carries  one  in  a  leather  case 
attached  to  his  girdle.  The  handles  are  of  wood  or 
bone.  I  bought  some  of  wood  adorned  with  inlaid 
silver.  Sometimes  the  handles  are  studded  with 
turquoises,  but  in  these  cases  a  very  high  price  is 
asked.  The  most  valuable  jewellery  is  that  made  of 
silver ;  the  filigree  work  is  heavier  and  coarser,  but 
not  less  tasteful  in  its  way,  than  that  of  European 
countries.  At  first  sight  many  of  the  trinkets  ex- 
posed for  sale  appear  to  sparkle  with  precious  stones. 


SOME  NATIVE  INDUSTRIES         213 

but  on  closer  inspection  one  finds  that,  with  the 
exception  of  coral  beads  and  turquoises,  the  efiiect  is 
produced  entirely  by  the  use  of  glass  with  coloured 
paper  laid  underneath.  I  stood  for  a  long  time 
before  a  booth  in  Andijan  watching  a  silversmith 
finish  ofi*  a  delicate  earring.  He  had  screwed  him- 
self into  such  a  posture  as  to  be  able  to  make  use 
of  the  sole  of  his  right  boot  as  a  bench  on  which  to 
mould  the  red-hot  trinket,  after  he  had  got  it  into 
that  condition  by  holding  it,  with  a  long  pair  of 
tongs,  over  a  brazier  of  glowing  charcoal.  His  little 
apprentice,  who  happened  to  be  his  own  son,  a  boy 
of  about  twelve  years  of  age,  was  on  his  knees  at 
his  side,  ready  to  take  the  tongs  from  his  father's 
hand  and  dip  the  earring  into  a  pail  of  cold  water 
that  stood  on  the  other  side  of  him.  Before  leaving 
the  booth  I  asked  the  price  of  a  bracelet  that  had 
attracted  my  attention,  whereupon  the  man  put  it 
into  the  scales  and  weighed  out  its  equivalent  in 
small  silver  coins. 

"  That  is  its  price,"  said  he,  taking  the  little  pile 
of  money  out  of  the  scales  and  counting  it. 

In  Kokand  we  were  taken  to  see  a  man  whose  art 
was  that  of  covering  European  studs  and  scarf-pins 
with  a  mosaic  of  turquoise  set  in  a  honeycomb  of 
silver,  not  unlike  the  inlaid  woodwork  of  Tunbridge 
Wells.  This  branch  of  the  industry  dates  back 
no  further  than  to  the  advent  of  the  Russians,  and 
hardly  comes  under  the  category  of  native  jewellery. 


204  IN  RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

I 

Then  she  brought   the   bird  to   the  vizier  and        | 
said —  i 

"  Go  to  the  Sultan  and  tell  him  you  have  fulfilled        j 
his  commandsi  but  first  set  the  little  bird  at  liberty        ! 
beneath  some  high  tree.    Then  take  the  Sultan  and 
those  wicked  viziers  to  the  spot  and  say — 

'^  I  have  begun  the  house ;  it  is  so  high  up  that         ' 
you  cannot  see  it.     The  workman  is  up  there  now, 
but  he  cannot  get  on  for  want  of  bricks  and  mortar." 

So  the  vizier  did  as  his  betrothed  had  told  him, 
and  the  Sultan  and  all  his  viziers  were  standing 
under  the  tree  listening  to  the  words  of  the 
favourite,  when  they  heard  a  voice  above  them 
say,  "  Loi  !    Gisht  f    Lot  I    Gisht  /  " 

"Bricks!     Mortar!     Bricks!     Mortar!" 

"O  my  Sultan,"  said  the  favourite,  "thou 
seest  I  have  done  my  part.  Let  not  the  work- 
man be  kept  waiting  any  longer  for  material.  I 
pray  thee  command  these  thirty-nine  viziers  to 
supply  it." 

The  Sultan,  more  pleased  than  ever  with  his 
favourite,  turned  to  the  others  and  said — 

"  Do  not  let  the  workman  call  in  vain ;  you  have 
now  your  part  to  fulfil." 

Pale  with  terror,  the  thirty-nine  wicked  men 
began  to  throw  bricks  into  the  air,  but  of  course 
they  all  came  down  on  their  own  heads,  while  the 
lark  sang  louder  and  louder:  "Z^i/  Gisht \  Lai! 
Gisht  I''    "Bricks!    Mortar!    Bricks!    Mortar!" 


SART  FAIRY  TALES  205 

"  O  useless  and  wicked  viziers,"  cried  the  en- 
raged Sultan,  "  it  is  you  who  fail  to  carry  out  my 
behests."  And  he  straightway  sent  for  an  execu- 
tioner, who  cut  the  throat  of  every  one  of  them. 

Here  is  another: — 


The  Tiger  Story. 

There  was  once  a  beautiful  stream  that  ran  by 
the  side  of  a  great  forest.  On  its  banks  there 
dwelt  wild  boars,  foxes,  deer,  and  many  other 
animals,  in  happiness  and  safety,  till  one  day 
there  came  a  cruel  tiger  to  disturb  their  peace. 
He  carried  off  victim  after  victim,  now  that  he  had 
once  discovered  their  retreat.  At  last  these  animals 
met  together  to  see  what  plan  they  could  devise  for 
ridding  the  land  of  so  terrible  an  enemy. 

''  It  is  no  use  going  on  like  this,"  said  the  fox. 
''  I  have  a  plan  to  suggest.  Instead  of  all  of  us 
passing  every  day  of  our  lives  in  fear  and  trembling, 
let  us  take  our  fate  into  our  own  hands  and  decide 
for  ourselves  which  of  us  shall  be  seized  by  the 
tiger  in  his  daily  rounds.  Let  us  form  ourselves 
into  a  long  row,  and  the  tiger  will  then  seize  the 
nearest  of  us  every  day,  and  the  rest  can  live  once 
more  in  comparative  peace.  To  show  you  that  this 
plan  has  not  been  suggested  by  me|  from  motives  of 
self-interest,  I  am  quite  willing  to  stand  at  the  end 
of  the  row  to  begin  with," 


2o6  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

The  other  animals  agreed  to  this,  and  settled 
to  form  themselves  into  a  line  on  the  following 
morning.  Then  the  fox  crept  slyly  away  and  told 
the  tiger  that  he  could  supply  him  with  a  plump 
animal  every  day  if  he  would  only  spare  him  (the 
fox)  from  the  death  to  which  he  was  subjecting  his 
friends.  The  tiger  consented  to  the  arrangement, 
and  the  fox,  having  put  himself  at  the  head  of  the 
row  the  first  day,  disappeared  as  though  he  had 
been  seized  by  the  tiger.  The  animals  stuck  to 
the  plan  for  some  days,  but  soon  got  tired  of  being 
devoured,  even  in  regular  order,  so  they  met  again 
to  consider.  This  time  a  very  little  animal,  a  jerboa, 
got  up  and  said — 

"The  fox's  plan  has  really  done  us  no  good  at 
all ;  now  we  will  try  mine.  Gro  and  hide,  every  one 
of  you,  and  I  will  settle  it  with  the  tiger." 

To  this  the  rest  agreed,  and  when  the  tiger  came 
he  could  find  nothing  for  breakfast  except  the  jerboa, 
who  came  up  to  him  and  said — 

"O  tiger,  I  will  tell  you  the  reason  why  there  is 
no  breakfast  waiting  for  you  to-day.  Another  tiger, 
finer  and  stronger  than  yourself,  has  come  into  the 
neighbourhood  and  eaten  the  animals  that  should 
have  fallen  to  your  lot." 

"  Where  is  he  ?  "  said  the  tiger,  in  a  rage. 

"I  will  lead  you  quietly  to  him,"  replied  the 
jerboa,  "  and  then  you  can  spring  at  him  and  tear 
him  to  death." 


SART  FAIRY  TALES  207 

So  saying,  he  led  the  tiger  down  the  bank  of  the 
river,  and  told  him  to  bend  over  the  water  and  look 
in.  The  tiger  followed  the  counsel  of  the  little 
jerboa,  and,  seeing  his  own  angry  visage  reflected 
in  the  clear  liquid,  mistook  it  for  that  of  his  rival. 
In  another  moment  he  had  sprung  at  it  and  dis- 
appeared into  the  water.  Thus  it  was  that  the 
plan  of  the  little  jerboa  succeeded. 

Tigers,  I  may  add,  are  still  to  be  found  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  Namangan,  one  was  wandering 
close  to  the  town  when  we  were  there,  and  the 
chief  of  the  district  had  provided  a  brave  Sart  ^  of 
his  acquaintance  with  a  gun  to  shoot  it.  The 
Sart,  in  his  turn,  had  promised  the  skin  to  that 
gentleman's  wife. 

I  shall  dose  my  chapter  with  one  more  tale, — 

The  Cruel  Stepmother. 

Once  upon  a  time  there  lived  a  Sart.  His  wife 
had  died  and  left  him  with  two  children,  a  boy  and 
a  girl.  The  Sart  married  again.  Very  soon  his 
second  wife  had  a  little  girl  of  her  own,  whereupon 
she  said  to  her  husband*,  ''  Boil  your  son,  and  I  will 
eat  him." 

The  Sart  was  sorry,  for  he  loved  his  son  dearly. 

^  When  a  Kirgiz  wishes  to  attack  a  tiger,  he  shuts  himself  up  in 
his  portable  beehive  hut  and  moves  it  steadily  towards  the  tiger ; 
when  near  enough,  he  shoots  at  him  through  a  small  opening. 


208  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

However,  his  wife  insisted,  so  he  took  the  boy  out 
into  the  garden,  and  collected  a  heap  of  firewood. 
Soon  after  he  returned  alone  to  his  wife  and  said — 

"  Go  out  and  look  behind  the  bam ;  there  you  will 
find  what  you  have  asked  for/'  His  wife  went  and 
looked  behind  the  bam;  there,  sure  enough,  she 
found  the  boy  and  the  firewood  all  ready.  She  put 
the  boy  in  a  pot,  boiled  him,  and  ate  him,  throwing 
his  bones  into  the  back  yard.  The  boy's  sister  found 
them  there  the  next  day,  and  burst  into  tears  at  the 
sorrowful  sight.  Weeping  and  crying,  she  gathered 
the  bones  together,  put  them  in  a  bag,  and  hung 
them  on  the  branch  of  a  tree,  where,  wonderful  to 
relate,  they  tumed  into  a  dove.  Under  the  tree  there 
passed  a  pedlar. 

"  Sing  me  a  song,  O  dove,"  said  he. 

"Give  me  a  needle,"  said  the  dove,  "and  I  will 
sing." 

The  pedlar  gave  the  dove  a  needle,  and  the  dove 
sang  a  song. 

"  Sing  again,"  said  the  pedlar. 

"Give  me  another  needle  and  I  will  sing  again." 

The  pedlar  gave  the  dove  another  needle,  and  was 
repaid  by  another  song. 

The  boy's  father  now  went  to  the  mosque,  and  on 
his  way  he  saw  the  dove  sitting  on  the  tree. 

"  Sing  me  a  song,  O  dove,"  said  he. 

"First  shut  your  eyes  and  open  your  mouth," 
said  the  dove. 


SART   FAIRY  TALES  209 

But  when  the  father  shut  his  eyes  and  opened  his 
mouth  the  dove  dropped  the  needle  down  his  throat, 
and  killed  him.  Then  the  stepmother  came  out  into 
the  yard  to  bake  bread,  and  she  too  noticed,  the 
dove. 

"  Sing  to  me/'  said  she. 

"  First  shut  your  eyes  and  open  your  mouth,"  re- 
plied the  dove. 

So  the  stepmother  shut  her  eyes  and  opened  her 
mouth,  whereupon  the  dove  dropped  the  other  needle 
down  her  throat,  and  she  died  too.  After  that  the 
dove  flew  down  from  the  tree  and  turned  into  a 
beautiful  little  boy,  to  the  great  delight  of  his  faith- 
ful sister. 


O 


CHAPTER  XXI 

SOME  NATIVE  INDUSTRIES 

The  art  of  converting  rags  into  paper  came  to 
Europe  from  China,  by  way  of  Samarkand  and 
Morocco :  the  Spaniards  learned  it  from  the  Moors. 
The  date  given  by  some  writers  as  that  of  its  in- 
vention in  Samarkand — A.D.  751 — is  really  that  at 
which  it  was  introduced  there  from  China — ^the 
thirtieth  year  of  the  Hegira.^  In  the  Escurial  library 
there  is  said  to  be  MSS.  as  old  as  the  eleventh  cen- 
tury of  our  era.  Most  of  the  paper  used  in  native 
Turkestan  to-day  is  manufactured  in  the  town  of 
Kokand,  The  Sarts  mix  their  rags  with  water  and 
stamp  them  to  a  pulp.  Then  they  dilute  the  pulp 
with  more  water  and  shake  it  in  a  coarse  matting 
sieve,  after  which  they  flatten  it  out  between  layers 
of  felt,  and  polish  it  on  one  side  by  means  of  pressure 
upon  a  flat  surface.  Native  writing-paper  is  thick 
and  rather  like  parchment  in  appearance.  It  is 
glazed  with  a  kind  of  gum  extracted  from  a  native 
plant. 

1  In  his  recently  published  account  of  the  sand-buried  ruins  of 
Khotan,  Stein  writes :  '<It  was  a  fact  of  archseolc^cal  significance 
that  among  all  the  wealth  of  written  documents  not  a  single  scrap 
of  actual  paper  was  found." 


SOME   NATIVE   INDUSTRIES         211 

An  industry  in  which  the  Sart  particularly  excels 
is  that  of  making,  and  ornamenting  with  the  chisel, 
copper  and  brass  drinking-vessels,  basins,  plates  and 
lamps,  and  gourd-pipes.  Every  bazaar  has  its  street  of 
coppersmiths,  where  you  can  see  them  at  their  work 
and  hear  the  deafening  noise  of  their  hammers  all 
going  at  once.  The  usual  shape  of  a  Sart  drinking- 
vessel  resembles  that  of  an  elegant  coffee-pot,  so  tall 
and  slender  that  it  must  be  difiicult  to  keep  it  clean. 
Some  of  the  brass  ones  are  overlaid  with  a  thin  coat- 
ing of  silver.  As  I  have  said  elsewhere,  the  best 
work  is  put  into  those  destined  for  sale  in  Moscow, 
so  that  it  is  no  longer  easy  to  pick  them  up  on  the 
spot,  as  of  old,  and  the  man  in  the  booth  has  very 
few  of  his  wares  on  show,  perhaps  only  the  particu- 
lar vessel  upon  which  he  is  at  work.  Wishing  to 
purchase  a  kungan,  or  brass  water-pot,  in  Kokand, 
where  the  best  work  is  done,  I  stopped  one  day  in 
front  of  a  booth  to  which  I  had  been  directed,  and 
asked  the  worker  if  he  could  not  show  me  a  larger 
assortment  than  those  he  had  with  him.  Great  was 
my  surprise  when  he  replied — 

"  My  wife  and  children  have  several  on  hand,  but 
they  are  doing  their  work  at  home." 

"  May  I  come  and  see  them  at  it  ?  "  I  asked. 

"  They  will  be  very  pleased  to  receive  a  visit  from 
you,"  was  his  gracious  reply. 

The  next  day  I  went  to  the  house  indicated,  and 
found  the  women  and  children  sitting  in  a  row  on  the 


204  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

Then  she  brought  the  bird  to  the  vizier  and 
said — 

''  Go  to  the  Sultan  and  tell  him  you  have  fulfilled 
his  commands,  but  first  set  the  little  bird  at  liberty 
beneath  some  high  tree.  Then  take  the  Sultan  and 
those  wicked  viziers  to  the  spot  and  say — 

"  I  have  begun  the  house ;  it  is  so  high  up  that 
you  cannot  see  it.  The  workman  is  up  there  now, 
but  he  cannot  get  on  for  want  of  bricks  and  mortar." 

So  the  vizier  did  as  his  betrothed  had  told  him, 
and  the  Sultan  and  all  his  viziers  were  standing 
under  the  tree  listening  to  the  words  of  the 
favourite,  when  they  heard  a  voice  above  them 
say,  "  Loi  !     Gisht  /    Loi  I     Gisht !  " 

''Bricks!     Mortar!     Bricks!     Mortar!" 

"O  my  Sultan,"  said  the  favourite,  "thou 
seest  I  have  done  my  part.  Let  not  the  work- 
man be  kept  waiting  any  longer  for  material.  I 
pray  thee  command  these  thirty-nine  viziers  to 
supply  it." 

The  Sultan,  more  pleased  than  ever  with  his 
favourite,  turned  to  the  others  and  said — 

"  Do  not  let  the  workman  call  in  vain ;  you  have 
now  your  part  to  fulfil." 

Pale  with  terror,  the  thirty-nine  wicked  men 
began  to  throw  bricks  into  the  air,  but  of  course 
they  all  came  down  on  their  own  heads,  while  the 
lark  sang  louder  and  louder:  ^^Loil  Gisht  I  Lot! 
Gisht r'    "Bricks!    Mortar!    Bricks!    Mortar!" 


SART  FAIRY  TALES  205 

"  O  useless  and  wicked  viziers,"  cried  the  en- 
raged Sultan,  "  it  is  you  who  fail  to  carry  out  my 
behests."  And  he  straightway  sent  for  an  execu- 
tioner, who  cut  the  throat  of  every  one  of  them. 

Here  is  another: — 

The  Tiger  Story. 

There  was  once  a  beautiful  stream  that  ran  by 
the  side  of  a  great  forest.  On  its  banks  there 
dwelt  wild  boars,  foxes,  deer,  and  many  other 
animals,  in  happiness  and  safety,  till  one  day 
there  came  a  cruel  tiger  to  disturb  their  peace. 
He  carried  off  victim  after  victim,  now  that  he  had 
once  discovered  their  retreat.  At  last  these  animals 
met  together  to  see  what  plan  they  could  devise  for 
ridding  the  land  of  so  terrible  an  enemy. 

'*  It  is  no  use  going  on  like  this,"  said  the  fox. 
"  I  have  a  plan  to  suggest.  Instead  of  all  of  us 
passing  every  day  of  our  lives  in  fear  and  trembling, 
let  us  take  our  fate  into  our  own  hands  and  decide 
for  ourselves  which  of  us  shall  be  seized  by  the 
tiger  in  his  daily  rounds.  Let  us  form  ourselves 
into  a  long  row,  and  the  tiger  will  then  seize  the 
nearest  of  us  every  day,  and  the  rest  can  live  once 
more  in  comparative  peace.  To  show  you  that  this 
plan  has  not  been  suggested  by  mej  from  motives  of 
self-interest,  I  am  quite  willing  to  stand  at  the  end 
of  the  row  to  begin  with/' 


206  IN   RUSSIAN' TURKESTAN 

The  other  animals  agreed  to  this,  and  settled 
to  form  themselves  into  a  line  on  the  following 
morning.  Then  the  fox  crept  slyly  away  and  told 
the  tiger  that  he  could  supply  him  with  a  plump 
animal  every  day  if  he  would  only  spare  him  (the 
fox)  from  the  death  to  which  he  was  subjecting  his 
friends.  The  tiger  consented  to  the  arrangement, 
and  the  fox,  having  put  himself  at  the  head  of  the 
row  the  first  day,  disappeared  as  though  he  had 
been  seized  by  the  tiger.  The  animals  stuck  to 
the  plan  for  some  days,  but  soon  got  tired  of  being 
devoured,  even  in  regular  order,  so  they  met  again 
to  consider.  This  time  a  very  little  animal,  a  jerboa, 
got  up  and  said — 

**  The  fox's  plan  has  really  done  us  no  good  at 
all ;  now  we  will  try  mine.  Go  and  hide,  every  one 
of  you,  and  I  will  settle  it  with  the  tiger." 

To  this  the  rest  agreed,  and  when  the  tiger  came 
he  could  find  nothing  for  breakfast  except  the  jerboa, 
who  came  up  to  him  and  said — 

"O  tiger,  I  will  tell  you  the  reason  why  there  is 
no  breakfast  waiting  for  you  to-day.  Another  tiger, 
finer  and  stronger  than  yourself,  has  come  into  the 
neighbourhood  and  eaten  the  animals  that  should 
have  fallen  to  your  lot." 

"  Where  is  he  ?  "  said  the  tiger,  in  a  rage. 

"I  will  lead  you  quietly  to  him,"  replied  the 
jerboa,  "  and  then  you  can  spring  at  him  and  tear 
him  to  death." 


i 


SART   FAIRY  TALES  207 

So  saying,  he  led  the  tiger  down  the  bank  of  the 
river,  and  told  him  to  bend  over  the  water  and  look 
in.  The  tiger  followed  the  counsel  of  the  little 
jerboa,  and,  seeing  his  own  angry  visage  reflected 
in  the  clear  liquid,  mistook  it  for  that  of  his  rival. 
In  another  moment  he  had  sprung  at  it  and  dis- 
appeared into  the  water.  Thus  it  was  that  the 
plan  of  the  little  jerboa  succeeded. 

Tigers,  I  may  add,  are  still  to  be  found  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  Namangan,  one  was  wandering 
close  to  the  town  when  we  were  there,  and  the 
chief  of  the  district  had  provided  a  brave  Sart  ^  of 
his  acquaintance  with  a  gun  to  shoot  it.  The 
Sart,  in  his  turn,  had  promised  the  skin  to  that 
gentleman's  wife. 

I  shall  close  my  chapter  with  one  more  tale, — 

The  Cruel  Stepmother. 

Once  upon  a  time  there  lived  a  Sart.  His  wife 
had  died  and  left  him  with  two  children,  a  boy  and 
a  girl.  The  Sart  married  again.  Very  soon  his 
second  wife  had  a  little  girl  of  her  own,  whereupon 
she  said  to  her  husband",  "  Boil  your  son,  and  I  will 
eat  him." 

The  Sart  was  sorry,  for  he  loved  his  son  dearly. 

^  When  a  Kirgiz  wishes  to  attack  a  tiger,  he  shuts  himself  up  in 
his  portable  beehive  hut  and  moves  it  steadily  towards  the  tiger ; 
when  near  enough,  he  shoots  at  him  through  a  small  opening. 


2o8  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

However,  his  wife  insisted,  so  he  took  the  boy  out 
into  the  garden,  and  collected  a  heap  of  firewood. 
Soon  after  he  returned  alone  to  his  wife  and  said — 

"  Go  out  and  look  behind  the  bam ;  there  you  will 
find  what  you  have  asked  for/'  His  wife  went  and 
looked  behind  the  bam;  there,  sure  enough,  she 
found  the  boy  and  the  firewood  all  ready.  She  put 
the  boy  in  a  pot,  boiled  him,  and  ate  him,  throwing 
his  bones  into  the  back  yard.  The  boy's  sister  found 
them  there  the  next  day,  and  burst  into  tears  at  the 
sorrowful  sight.  Weeping  and  crying,  she  gathered 
the  bones  together,  put  them  in  a  bag,  and  hung 
them  on  the  branch  of  a  tree,  where,  wonderful  to 
relate,  they  turned  into  a  dove.  Under  the  tree  there 
passed  a  pedlar. 

'*  Sing  me  a  song,  O  dove,"  said  he. 

"Give  me  a  needle,"  said  the  dove,  "and  I  will 
sing." 

The  pedlar  gave  the  dove  a  needle,  and  the  dove 
sang  a  song. 

"  Sing  again,"  said  the  pedlar. 

"  Give  me  another  needle  and  I  will  sing  again." 

The  pedlar  gave  the  dove  another  needle,  and  was 
repaid  by  another  song. 

The  boy's  father  now  went  to  the  mosque,  and  on 
his  way  he  saw  the  dove  sitting  on  the  tree. 

"  Sing  me  a  song,  O  dove,"  said  he. 

"First  shut  your  eyes  and  open  your  mouth," 
said  the  dove. 


SART  FAIRY  TALES  209 

But  when  the  father  shut  his  eyes  and  opened  his 
mouth  the  dove  dropped  the  needle  down  his  throat, 
and  killed  him.  Then  the  stepmother  came  out  into 
the  yard  to  bake  bread,  and  she  too  noticed  the 
dove. 

"  Sing  to  me,"  said  she. 

"  First  shut  your  eyes  and  open  your  mouth,"  re- 
plied the  dove. 

So  the  stepmother  shut  her  eyes  and  opened  her 
mouth,  whereupon  the  dove  dropped  the  other  needle 
down  her  throat,  and  she  died  too.  After  that  the 
dove  flew  down  from  the  tree  and  turned  into  a 
beautiful  little  boy,  to  the  great  delight  of  his  faith- 
ful sister. 


O 


CHAPTER  XXI 

SOME  NATIVE  INDUSTRIES 

The  art  of  converting  rags  into  paper  came  to 
Europe  from  China,  by  way  of  Samarkand  and 
Morocco :  the  Spaniards  learned  it  from  the  Moors. 
The  date  given  by  some  writers  as  that  of  its  in- 
vention in  Samarkand — A.D.  751 — is  really  that  at 
which  it  was  introduced  there  from  China  —  the 
thirtieth  year  of  the  Hegira.^  In  the  Escurial  library 
there  is  said  to  be  MSS.  as  old  as  the  eleventh  cen- 
tury of  our  era.  Most  of  the  paper  used  in  native 
Turkestan  to-day  is  manufactured  in  the  town  of 
Kokand.  The  Sarts  mix  their  rags  with  water  and 
stamp  them  to  a  pulp.  Then  they  dilute  the  pulp 
with  more  water  and  shake  it  in  a  coarse  matting 
sieve,  after  which  they  flatten  it  out  between  layers 
of  felt,  and  polish  it  on  one  side  by  means  of  pressure 
upon  a  flat  surface.  Native  writing-paper  is  thick 
and  rather  like  parchment  in  appearance.  It  is 
glazed  with  a  kind  of  gum  extracted  from  a  native 
plant. 

1  In  his  recently  published  account  of  the  sand-buried  ruins  of 
Khotan,  Stein  writes :  "It  was  a  fact  of  archseol(^cal  significance 
that  among  all  the  wealth  of  written  documents  not  a  single  scrap 
of  actual  paper  was  found." 


SOME   NATIVE   INDUSTRIES         211 

An  industry  in  which  the  Sart  particularly  excels 
is  that  of  making,  and  ornamenting  with  the  chisel, 
copper  and  brass  drinking-vessels,  basins,  plates  and 
lamps,  and  gourd-pipes.  Every  bazaar  has  its  street  of 
coppersmiths,  where  you  can  see  them  at  their  work 
and  hear  the  deafening  noise  of  their  hammers  all 
going  at  once.  The  usual  shape  of  a  Sart  drinking- 
vessel  resembles  that  of  an  elegant  coffee-pot,  so  tall 
and  slender  that  it  must  be  difScult  to  keep  it  clean. 
Some  of  the  brass  ones  are  overlaid  with  a  thin  coat- 
ing of  silver.  As  I  have  said  elsewhere,  the  best 
work  is  put  into  those  destined  for  sale  in  Moscow, 
so  that  it  is  no  longer  easy  to  pick  them  up  on  the 
spot,  as  of  old,  and  the  man  in  the  booth  has  very 
few  of  his  wares  on  show,  perhaps  only  the  particu- 
lar vessel  upon  which  he  is  at  work.  Wishing  to 
purchase  a  kungan^  or  brass  water-pot,  in  Kokand, 
where  the  best  work  is  done,  I  stopped  one  day  in 
front  of  a  booth  to  which  I  had  been  directed,  and 
asked  the  worker  if  he  could  not  show  me  a  larger 
assortment  than  those  he  had  with  him.  Great  was 
my  surprise  when  he  replied — 

"  My  wife  and  children  have  several  on  hand,  but 
they  are  doing  their  work  at  home." 

"  May  I  come  and  see  them  at  it  ?  "  I  asked. 

"  They  will  be  very  pleased  to  receive  a  visit  from 
you,"  was  his  gracious  reply. 

The  next  day  I  went  to  the  house  indicated,  and 
found  the  women  and  children  sitting  in  a  row  on  the 


212  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

ground,  each  engaged,  hammer  and  chisel  in  hand, 
upon  some  delicate  bit  of  work.  At  one  end  of  the 
row  sat  the  white-haired  grandmother  ornamenting  a 
large  copper  bowl,  which  rested  on  a  piece  of  rough- 
hewn  tree-trunk,  that  served  her  as  a  low  table.  The 
young  wife  sat  in  the  middle  with  her  rainbow-dressed 
children  on  either  side  of  her.  Some  of  them  were 
chiselling  brass- bound  gourd-pipes,  and  one  little 
girl  was  hammering  at  a  kungan>  I  took  an  instan- 
taneous photograph  of  this  interesting  group,  but  the 
colouring  of  the  picture  was  half  its  charm. 

"My  wife's  family  are  not  metal-workers,"  said 
the  husband,  who  came  in  before  we  left;  ''she 
learned  the  art  after  her  marriage." 

Bokhara  is  celebrated  for  its  knives,  which  are  as 
well  made  as  any  in  Europe.  I  have  read  that  the 
making  of  them  to  such  perfection  is  a  secret  of  the 
trade.  Their  shape  is  extremely  elegant,  and  their 
metal  is  so  good  that  the  blades  seldom  need  to  be 
sharpened.  Every  Sart  carries  one  in  a  leather  case 
attached  to  his  girdle.  The  handles  are  of  wood  or 
bone.  I  bought  some  of  wood  adorned  with  inlaid 
silver.  Sometimes  the  handles  are  studded  with 
turquoises,  but  in  these  cases  a  very  high  price  is 
asked.  The  most  valuable  jewellery  is  that  made  of 
silver ;  the  filigree  work  is  heavier  and  coarser,  but 
not  less  tasteful  in  its  way,  than  that  of  European 
countries.  At  first  sight  many  of  the  trinkets  ex- 
posed for  sale  appear  to  sparkle  with  precious  stones, 


SOME  NATIVE  INDUSTRIES         213 

but  on  closer  inspection  one  finds  that,  with  the 
exception  of  coral  beads  and  turquoises,  the  effect  is 
produced  entirely  by  the  use  of  glass  with  coloured 
paper  laid  underneath.  I  stood  for  a  long  time 
before  a  booth  in  Andijan  watching  a  silversmith 
finish  ofi"  a  delicate  earring.  He  had  screwed  him- 
self into  such  a  posture  as  to  be  able  to  make  use 
of  the  sole  of  his  right  boot  as  a  bench  on  which  to 
mould  the  red-hot  trinket,  after  he  had  got  it  into 
that  condition  by  holding  it,  with  a  long  pair  of 
tongs,  over  a  brazier  of  glowing  charcoal.  His  little 
apprentice,  who  happened  to  be  his  own  son,  a  boy 
of  about  twelve  years  of  age,  was  on  his  knees  at 
his  side,  ready  to  take  the  tongs  from  his  father's 
hand  and  dip  the  earring  into  a  pail  of  cold  water 
that  stood  on  the  other  side  of  him.  Before  leaving 
the  booth  I  asked  the  price  of  a  bracelet  that  had 
attracted  my  attention,  whereupon  the  man  put  it 
into  the  scales  and  weighed  out  its  equivalent  in 
small  silver  coins. 

"  That  is  its  price,"  said  he,  taking  the  little  pile 
of  money  out  of  the  scales  and  counting  it. 

In  Kokand  we  were  taken  to  see  a  man  whose  art 
was  that  of  covering  European  studs  and  scarf-pins 
with  a  mosaic  of  turquoise  set  in  a  honeycomb  of 
silver,  not  unlike  the  inlaid  woodwork  of  Tunbridge 
Wells.  This  branch  of  the  industry  dates  back 
no  further  than  to  the  advent  of  the  Russians,  and 
hardly  comes  under  the  category  of  native  jewellery. 


214  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

When  Vamb6ry  visited  Bokhara  in  the  year  1863 
he  found  that  the  use  of  the  Russian  samovar  had 
already  been  adopted  by  the  natives,  so  it  is  not 
surprising  that  we  found  one  or  more  of  them  in 
every  tea-shop.  The  Sarts  have  not  yet  learned 
how  to  manufacture  samovars,  so  Russia  does  a 
good  business  in  that  line.  Those  people  who  have 
a  weakness  for  going  over  factories  and  seeing  ''just 
how  the  whole  thing  is  done  "  would,  I  should  think, 
derive  a  peculiar  pleasure  from  wandering  through 
the  bazaars  of  Turkestan,  for  here,  especially  in 
Tashkent,  tl^y  would  have  but  to  begin  at  the  right 
end  of  the  street  to  see  the  complete  process  of 
shoe-making,  cap-making,  coat-making,  or  any  other 
manufacturing  that  might  take  their  fancy  or  excite 
their  curiosity.  Let  us  take  the  art  of  shoe-making, 
for  instance.  Here  we  see  a  man  engaged  in  cutting 
out.  His  immediate  neighbour,  who  is  busily  sew- 
ing the  pieces  together,  will  come  to  him  presently 
and  purchase  the  leather  on  which  he  is  now  at 
work.  The  latter,  in  his  turn,  will  dispose  of  his 
finished  ''  uppers "  to  another  whose  business  it  is 
to  add  the  soles,  and  so  on.  The  leather  used  for 
Sart  footgear  is  so  elastic  and  soft  that  a  boot  is 
sure  to  fit  if  purchased  a  size  larger  than  the  foot 
for  which  it  is  intended.  Thus  all  annoyance  of 
"  trying  on  "  is  avoided. 

Carpets  are  manufactured  in  all  parts  of  Turkestan, 
but  the  only  kind  of  any  durability  or  value  produced 


SOME   NATIVE   INDUSTRIES         215 

by  the  sedentary  population  is  the  deservedly  famous 
"  Bokharan  carpet,"  which  comes  from  Bokhara  and 
Karshi.  It  is  quite  distinct  from,  and  made  more 
uniform  in  colour  than,  the  still  more  celebrated  pro- 
duct of  Merv  and  Penjeh,  which  is,  alas !  so  rapidly 
becoming  extinct.  To  get  an  idea  of  the  Bokharan 
carpet,  the  traveller  should  make  a  point  of  calling 
on  some  of  the  wealthy  Israelites,  whose  spacious 
dwellings  are  furnished  with  the  choicest  that  money 
can  buy,  or  rather  would  buy,  for  to-day  it  is  difficult 
to  find  even  these  elsewhere. 

The  cap  bazaar  at  Samarkand  is  a  wondrous 
sight,  which  never  fails  to  attract  the  traveller.  High 
walls  are  decked  out  with  caps  of  every  shade,  in 
endless  variety  of  shape  and  size.  The  salesman 
stands  ready  with  a  hooked  pole  six  feet  or  more  in 
length,  and  hooks  down  any  particular  one  that  may 
attract  the  customer's  eye.  But  it  is  not  only  in 
the  bazaar  that  caps  may  be  bought.  Just  outside, 
I  came  upon  a  shrub  about  five  feet  high,  upon 
every  branch  of  which  there  hung  a  gorgeous  cap. 
Beneath,  and  crossed-legged  upon  the  ground,  sat 
the  owner,  waiting  for  customers. 

It  was  in  Andijan  that  we  were  initiated  into 
the  art  of  cap-making.  In  one  booth  we  found  a 
man  cutting  out  rounds  of  cloth,  silk,  and  other 
material ;  in  the  next  the  stamping  of  patterns  was 
going  on  :  a  youth  had  in  his  hand  a  mould  which, 
aft^r  smearing  yellow  powder  over  it,  he  stamped 


2o8  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

However,  his  wife  insisted,  so  he  took  the  boy  out 
into  the  garden,  and  collected  a  heap  of  firewood. 
Soon  after  he  returned  alone  to  his  wife  and  said — 

"  Go  out  and  look  behind  the  bam ;  there  you  will 
find  what  you  have  asked  for."  His  wife  went  and 
looked  behind  the  barn;  there,  sure  enough,  she 
found  the  boy  and  the  firewood  all  ready.  She  put 
the  boy  in  a  pot,  boiled  him,  and  ate  him,  throwing 
his  bones  into  the  back  yard.  The  boy's  sister  found 
them  there  the  next  day,  and  burst  into  tears  at  the 
sorrowful  sight.  Weeping  and  crying,  she  gathered 
the  bones  together,  put  them  in  a  bag,  and  hung 
them  on  the  branch  of  a  tree,  where,  wonderful  to 
relate,  they  turned  into  a  dove.  Under  the  tree  there 
passed  a  pedlar. 

"Sing  me  a  song,  O  dove,"  said  he. 

"Give  me  a  needle,"  said  the  dove,  "and  I  will 
sing." 

The  pedlar  gave  the  dove  a  needle,  and  the  dove 
sang  a  song. 

"  Sing  again,"  said  the  pedlar. 

"  Give  me  another  needle  and  I  will  sing  again." 

The  pedlar  gave  the  dove  another  needle,  and  was 
repaid  by  another  song. 

The  boy's  father  now  went  to  the  mosque,  and  on 
his  way  he  saw  the  dove  sitting  on  the  tree. 

"  Sing  me  a  song,  O  dove,"  said  he. 

"First  shut  your  eyes  and  open  your  mouth," 
said  the  dove. 


SART  FAIRY  TALES  209 

But  when  the  father  shut  his  eyes  and  opened  his 
mouth  the  dove  dropped  the  needle  down  his  throat, 
and  killed  him.  Then  the  stepmother  came  out  into 
the  yard  to  bake  bread,  and  she  too  noticed,  the 
dove. 

"  Sing  to  me,"  said  she. 

"  First  shut  your  eyes  and  open  your  mouth,"  re- 
plied the  dove. 

So  the  stepmother  shut  her  eyes  and  opened  her 
mouth,  whereupon  the  dove  dropped  the  other  needle 
down  her  throat,  and  she  died  too.  After  that  the 
dove  flew  down  from  the  tree  and  turned  into  a 
beautiful  little  boy,  to  the  great  delight  of  his  faith- 
ful sister. 


O 


204  IN  RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

Then  she  brought  the  bird  to  the  vizier  and 
said — 

''  Go  to  the  Sultan  and  tell  him  you  have  fulfilled 
his  commandsi  but  first  set  the  little  bird  at  liberty 
beneath  some  high  tree.  Then  take  the  Sultan  and 
those  wicked  viziers  to  the  spot  and  say — 

"  I  have  begun  the  house ;  it  is  so  high  up  that 
you  cannot  see  it.  The  workman  is  up  there  now, 
but  he  cannot  get  on  for  want  of  bricks  and  mortar." 

So  the  vizier  did  as  his  betrothed  had  told  him, 
and  the  Sultan  and  all  his  viziers  were  standing 
under  the  tree  listening  to  the  words  of  the 
favourite,  when  they  heard  a  voice  above  them 
say,  "  Loi  I     Gishi  I    Loi  I     Gisht !  " 

''Bricks!     Mortar!     Bricks!     Mortar!" 

*'0  my  Sultan,"  said  the  favourite,  "thou 
seest  I  have  done  my  part.  Let  not  the  work- 
man be  kept  waiting  any  longer  for  material.  I 
pray  thee  command  these  thirty-nine  viziers  to 
supply  it," 

The  Sultan,  more  pleased  than  ever  with  his 
favourite,  turned  to  the  others  and  said — 

''  Do  not  let  the  workman  call  in  vain ;  you  have 
now  your  part  to  fulfil." 

Pale  with  terror,  the  thirty-nine  wicked  men 
began  to  throw  bricks  into  the  air,  but  of  course 
they  all  came  down  on  their  own  heads,  while  the 
lark  sang  louder  and  louder:  ^^Loil  Gisht \  Loi! 
Gisht!''    "Bricks!    Mortar!    Bricks!    Mortar!" 


SART  FAIRY  TALES  205 

"  O  useless  and  wicked  viziers/'  cried  the  en- 
raged Sultan,  "  it  is  you  who  fail  to  carry  out  my 
behests."  And  he  straightway  sent  for  an  ezecu- 
tioner,  who  cut  the  throat  of  every  one  of  them. 

Here  is  another: — 


The  Tiger  Story. 

There  was  once  a  beautiful  stream  that  ran  by 
the  side  of  a  great  forest.  On  its  banks  there 
dwelt  wild  boars,  foxes,  deer,  and  many  other 
animals,  in  happiness  and  safety,  till  one  day 
there  came  a  cruel  tiger  to  disturb  their  peace. 
He  carried  off  victim  after  victim,  now  that  he  had 
once  discovered  their  retreat.  At  last  these  animals 
met  together  to  see  what  plan  they  could  devise  for 
ridding  the  land  of  so  terrible  an  enemy. 

"  It  is  no  use  going  on  like  this,"  said  the  fox. 
"  I  have  a  plan  to  suggest.  Instead  of  all  of  us 
passing  every  day  of  our  lives  in  fear  and  trembling, 
let  us  take  our  fate  into  our  own  hands  and  decide 
for  ourselves  which  of  us  shall  be  seized  by  the 
tiger  in  his  daily  rounds.  Let  us  form  ourselves 
into  a  long  row,  and  the  tiger  will  then  seize  the 
nearest  of  us  every  day,  and  the  rest  can  live  once 
more  in  comparative  peace.  To  show  you  that  this 
plan  has  not  been  suggested  by  me|  from  motives  of 
self-interest,  I  am  quite  willing  to  stand  at  the  end 
of  the  row  to  begin  with," 


206  IN  RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

The  other  animals  agreed  to  this,  and  settled 
to  form  themselves  into  a  line  on  the  following 
morning.  Then  the  fox  crept  slyly  away  and  told 
the  tiger  that  he  could  supply  him  with  a  plump 
animal  every  day  if  he  would  only  spare  him  (the 
fox)  from  the  death  to  which  he  was  subjecting  his 
friends.  The  tiger  consented  to  the  arrangement, 
and  the  fox,  having  put  himself  at  the  head  of  the 
row  the  first  day,  disappeared  as  though  he  had 
been  seized  by  the  tiger.  The  animals  stuck  to 
the  plan  for  some  days,  but  soon  got  tired  of  being 
devoured,  even  in  regular  order,  so  they  met  again 
to  consider.  This  time  a  very  little  animal,  a  jerboa, 
got  up  and  said — 

''The  fox's  plan  has  really  done  us  no  good  at 
all ;  now  we  will  try  mine.  Go  and  hide,  every  one 
of  you,  and  I  will  settle  it  with  the  tiger." 

To  this  the  rest  agreed,  and  when  the  tiger  came 
he  could  find  nothing  for  breakfast  except  the  jerboa, 
who  came  up  to  him  and  said — 

"O  tiger,  I  will  tell  you  the  reason  why  there  is 
no  breakfast  waiting  for  you  to-day.  Another  tiger, 
finer  and  stronger  than  yourself,  has  come  into  the 
neighbourhood  and  eaten  the  animals  that  should 
have  fallen  to  your  lot." 

"  Where  is  he  ?  "  said  the  tiger,  in  a  rage. 

"  I  will  lead  you  quietly  to  him,"  replied  the 
jerboa,  "  and  then  you  can  spring  at  him  and  tear 
him  to  death." 


SART  FAIRY  TALES  207 

So  saying,  he  led  the  tiger  down  the  bank  of  the 
river,  and  told  him  to  bend  over  the  water  and  look 
in.  The  tiger  followed  the  counsel  of  the  little 
jerboa,  and,  seeing  his  own  angry  visage  reflected 
in  the  clear  liquid,  mistook  it  for  that  of  his  rival. 
In  another  moment  he  had  sprung  at  it  and  dis- 
appeared into  the  water.  Thus  it  was  that  the 
plan  of  the  little  jerboa  succeeded. 

Tigers,  I  may  add,  are  still  to  be  found  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  Namangan,  one  was  wandering 
close  to  the  town  when  we  were  there,  and  the 
chief  of  the  district  had  provided  a  brave  Sart  ^  of 
his  acquaintance  with  a  gun  to  shoot  it.  The 
Sart,  in  his  turn,  had  promised  the  skin  to  that 
gentleman's  wife. 

I  shall  close  my  chapter  with  one  more  tale, — 

The  Cruel  Stepmother. 

Once  upon  a  time  there  lived  a  Sart.  His  wife 
had  died  and  left  him  with  two  children,  a  boy  and 
a  girl.  The  Sart  married  again.  Very  soon  his 
second  wife  had  a  little  girl  of  her  own,  whereupon 
she  said  to  her  husband*,  "  Boil  your  son,  and  I  will 
eat  him." 

The  Sart  was  sorry,  for  he  loved  his  son  dearly. 

^  When  a  Kirgiz  wishes  to  attack  a  tiger,  he  shuts  himself  up  in 
his  portable  beehive  hut  and  moves  it  steadily  towards  the  tiger ; 
when  near  enough,  he  shoots  at  him  through  a  small  opening. 


2o8  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

However,  his  wife  insisted,  so  he  took  the  boy  out 
into  the  garden,  and  collected  a  heap  of  firewood. 
Soon  after  he  returned  alone  to  his  wife  and  said — 

"  Go  out  and  look  behind  the  bam ;  there  you  will 
find  what  you  have  asked  for."  His  wife  went  and 
looked  behind  the  bam;  there,  sure  enough,  she 
found  the  boy  and  the  firewood  all  ready.  She  put 
the  boy  in  a  pot,  boiled  him,  and  ate  him,  throwing 
his  bones  into  the  back  yard.  The  boy's  sister  found 
them  there  the  next  day,  and  burst  into  tears  at  the 
sorrowful  sight  Weeping  and  crying,  she  gathered 
the  bones  together,  put  them  in  a  bag,  and  hung 
them  on  the  branch  of  a  tree,  where,  wonderful  to 
relate,  they  turned  into  a  dove.  Under  the  tree  there 
passed  a  pedlar. 

"  Sing  me  a  song,  O  dove,"  said  he. 

"  Give  me  a  needle,"  said  the  dove,  "  and  I  will 
sing." 

The  pedlar  gave  the  dove  a  needle,  and  the  dove 
sang  a  song. 

"  Sing  again,"  said  the  pedlar. 

"Give  me  another  needle  and  I  will  sing  again." 

The  pedlar  gave  the  dove  another  needle,  and  was 
repaid  by  another  song. 

The  boy's  father  now  went  to  the  mosque,  and  on 
his  way  he  saw  the  dove  sitting  on  the  tree. 

"  Sing  me  a  song,  O  dove,"  said  he. 

"First  shut  your  eyes  and  open  your  mouth," 
said  the  dove. 


SART  FAIRY  TALES  209 

But  when  the  father  shut  his  eyes  and  opened  his 
mouth  the  dove  dropped  the  needle  down  his  throat, 
and  killed  him.  Then  the  stepmother  came  out  into 
the  yard  to  bake  bread,  and  she  too  noticed,  the 
dove. 

"  Sing  to  me/'  said  she. 

"  First  shut  your  eyes  and  open  your  mouth,"  re- 
plied the  dove. 

So  the  stepmother  shut  her  eyes  and  opened  her 
mouth,  whereupon  the  dove  dropped  the  other  needle 
down  her  throat,  and  she  died  too.  After  that  the 
dove  flew  down  from  the  tree  and  turned  into  a 
beautiful  little  boy,  to  the  great  delight  of  his  faith- 
ful sister. 


CHAPTER  XXI 

SOME  NATIVE   INDUSTRIES 

The  art  of  converting  rags  into  paper  came  to 
Europe  from  China,  by  way  of  Samarkand  and 
Morocco :  the  Spaniards  learned  it  from  the  Moors. 
The  date  given  by  some  writers  as  that  of  its  in- 
vention in  Samarkand — A.D.  751 — is  really  that  at 
which  it  was  introduced  there  from  China — ^the 
thirtieth  year  of  the  Hegira.^  In  the  Escurial  library 
there  is  said  to  be  MSS.  as  old  as  the  eleventh  cen- 
tury of  our  era.  Most  of  the  paper  used  in  native 
Turkestan  to-day  is  manufactured  in  the  town  of 
Kokand.  The  Sarts  mix  their  rags  with  water  and 
stamp  them  to  a  pulp.  Then  they  dilute  the  pulp 
with  more  water  and  shake  it  in  a  coarse  matting 
sieve,  after  which  they  flatten  it  out  between  layers 
of  felt,  and  polish  it  on  one  side  by  means  of  pressure 
upon  a  flat  surface.  Native  writing-paper  is  thick 
and  rather  like  parchment  in  appearance.  It  is 
glazed  with  a  kind  of  gum  extracted  from  a  native 
plant. 

1  In  his  recently  published  account  of  the  sand-buried  ruins  of 
Khotan,  Stein  writes :  "It  was  a  fact  of  archaeological  significance 
that  among  all  the  wealth  of  written  documents  not  a  single  scrap 
of  actual  paper  was  found." 


SOME  NATIVE   INDUSTRIES        211 

An  industry  in  which  the  Sart  particularly  excels 
is  that  of  makings  and  ornamenting  with  the  chisel, 
copper  and  brass  drinking-vessels,  basins,  plates  and 
lamps,  and  gourd-pipes.  Every  bazaar  has  its  street  of 
coppersmiths,  where  you  can  see  them  at  their  work 
and  hear  the  deafening  noise  of  their  hammers  all 
going  at  once.  The  usual  shape  of  a  Sart  drinking- 
vessel  resembles  that  of  an  elegant  coffee-pot,  so  tall 
and  slender  that  it  must  be  difficult  to  keep  it  clean. 
Some  of  the  brass  ones  are  overlaid  with  a  thin  coat- 
ing of  silver.  As  I  have  said  elsewhere,  the  best 
work  is  put  into  those  destined  for  sale  in  Moscow, 
so  that  it  is  no  longer  easy  to  pick  them  up  on  the 
spot,  as  of  old,  and  the  man  in  the  booth  has  very 
few  of  his  wares  on  show,  perhaps  only  the  particu- 
lar vessel  upon  which  he  is  at  work.  Wishing  to 
purchase  a  kung-an,  or  brass  water-pot,  in  Kokand, 
where  the  best  work  is  done,  I  stopped  one  day  in 
front  of  a  booth  to  which  I  had  been  directed,  and 
asked  the  worker  if  he  could  not  show  me  a  larger 
assortment  than  those  he  had  with  him.  Great  was 
my  surprise  when  he  replied — 

"  My  wife  and  children  have  several  on  hand,  but 
they  are  doing  their  work  at  home." 

"  May  I  come  and  see  them  at  it  ?  "  I  asked. 

"  They  will  be  very  pleased  to  receive  a  visit  from 
you,"  was  his  gracious  reply. 

The  next  day  I  went  to  the  house  indicated,  and 
found  the  women  and  children  sitting  in  a  row  on  the 


212  IN  RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

ground,  each  engaged,  hammer  and  chisel  in  hand, 
upon  some  delicate  bit  of  work.  At  one  end  of  the 
row  sat  the  white-haired  grandmother  ornamenting  a 
large  copper  bowl,  which  rested  on  a  piece  of  rough- 
hewn  tree-trunk,  that  served  her  as  a  low  table.  The 
young  wife  sat  in  the  middle  with  her  rainbow-dressed 
children  on  either  side  of  her.  Some  of  them  were 
chiselling  brass- bound  gourd-pipes,  and  one  little 
girl  was  hammering  at  a  kungan.  I  took  an  instan- 
taneous photograph  of  this  interesting  group,  but  the 
colouring  of  the  picture  was  half  its  charm. 

"My  wife's  family  are  not  metal-workers,"  said 
the  husband,  who  came  in  before  we  left;  "she 
learned  the  art  after  her  marriage." 

Bokhara  is  celebrated  for  its  knives,  which  are  as 
well  made  as  any  in  Europe.  I  have  read  that  the 
making  of  them  to  such  perfection  is  a  secret  of  the 
trade.  Their  shape  is  extremely  elegant,  and  their 
metal  is  so  good  that  the  blades  seldom  need  to  be 
sharpened.  Every  Sart  carries  one  in  a  leather  case 
attached  to  his  girdle.  The  handles  are  of  wood  or 
bone.  I  bought  some  of  wood  adorned  vnth  inlaid 
silver.  Sometimes  the  handles  are  studded  with 
turquoises,  but  in  these  cases  a  very  high  price  is 
asked.  The  most  valuable  jewellery  is  that  made  of 
silver ;  the  filigree  work  is  heavier  and  coarser,  but 
not  less  tasteful  in  its  way,  than  that  of  European 
countries.  At  first  sight  many  of  the  trinkets  ex- 
posed for  sale  appear  to  sparkle  with  precious  stones. 


SOME  NATIVE  INDUSTRIES         213 

but  on  closer  inspection  one  finds  that,  with  the 
exception  of  coral  beads  and  turquoises,  the  effect  is 
produced  entirely  by  the  use  of  glass  with  coloured 
paper  laid  underneath.  I  stood  for  a  long  time 
before  a  booth  in  Andijan  watching  a  silversmith 
finish  off  a  delicate  earring.  He  had  screwed  him- 
self into  such  a  posture  as  to  be  able  to  make  use 
of  the  sole  of  his  right  boot  as  a  bench  on  which  to 
mould  the  red-hot  trinket,  after  he  had  got  it  into 
that  condition  by  holding  it,  with  a  long  pair  of 
tongs,  over  a  brazier  of  glowing  charcoal.  His  little 
apprentice,  who  happened  to  be  his  own  son,  a  boy 
of  about  twelve  years  of  age,  was  on  his  knees  at 
his  side,  ready  to  take  the  tongs  from  his  father's 
hand  and  dip  the  earring  into  a  pail  of  cold  water 
that  stood  on  the  other  side  of  him.  Before  leaving 
the  booth  I  asked  the  price  of  a  bracelet  that  had 
attracted  my  attention,  whereupon  the  man  put  it 
into  the  scales  and  weighed  out  its  equivalent  in 
small  silver  coins. 

"  That  is  its  price,''  said  he,  taking  the  little  pile 
of  money  out  of  the  scales  and  counting  it. 

In  Kokand  we  were  taken  to  see  a  man  whose  art 
was  that  of  covering  European  studs  and  scarf-pins 
with  a  mosaic  of  turquoise  set  in  a  honeycomb  of 
silver,  not  unlike  the  inlaid  woodwork  of  Tunbridge 
Wells.  This  branch  of  the  industry  dates  back 
no  further  than  to  the  advent  of  the  Russians,  and 
hardly  comes  under  the  category  of  native  jewellery. 


214  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

When  Vamb6ry  visited  Bokhara  in  the  year  1863 
he  found  that  the  use  of  the  Russian  samovar  had 
already  been  adopted  by  the  natives,  so  it  is  not 
surprising  that  we  found  one  or  more  of  them  in 
every  tea-shop.  The  Sarts  have  not  yet  learned 
how  to  manufacture  samovars,  so  Russia  does  a 
good  business  in  that  line.  Those  people  who  have 
a  weakness  for  going  over  factories  and  seeing  "just 
how  the  whole  thing  is  done  '*  would,  I  should  think, 
derive  a  peculiar  pleasure  from  wandering  through 
the  bazaars  of  Turkestan,  for  here,  especially  in 
Tashkent,  ti^y  would  have  but  to  begin  at  the  right 
end  of  the  street  to  see  the  complete  process  of 
shoe-making,  cap-making,  coat-making,  or  any  other 
manufacturing  that  might  take  their  fancy  or  excite 
their  curiosity.  Let  us  take  the  art  of  shoe-making, 
for  instance.  Here  we  see  a  man  engaged  in  cutting 
out.  His  immediate  neighbour,  who  is  busily  sew- 
ing the  pieces  together,  will  come  to  him  presently 
and  purchase  the  leather  on  which  he  is  now  at 
work.  The  latter,  in  his  turn,  will  dispose  of  his 
finished  "  uppers "  to  another  whose  business  it  is 
to  add  the  soles,  and  so  on.  The  leather  used  for 
Sart  footgear  is  so  elastic  and  soft  that  a  boot  is 
sure  to  fit  if  purchased  a  size  larger  than  the  foot 
for  which  it  is  intended.  Thus  all  annoyance  of 
"  trying  on  "  is  avoided. 

Carpets  are  manufactured  in  all  parts  of  Turkestan, 
but  the  only  kind  of  any  durability  or  value  produced 


SOME  NATIVE   INDUSTRIES        215 

by  the  sedentary  population  is  the  deservedly  famous 
"  Bokharan  carpet/'  which  comes  from  Bokhara  and 
Karshi.  It  is  quite  distinct  from,  and  made  more 
uniform  in  colour  than,  the  still  more  celebrated  pro- 
duct of  Merv  and  Penjeh,  which  is,  alas !  so  rapidly 
becoming  extinct.  To  get  an  idea  of  the  Bokharan 
carpet,  the  traveller  should  make  a  point  of  calling 
on  some  of  the  wealthy  Israelites,  whose  spacious 
dwellings  are  furnished  with  the  choicest  that  money 
can  buy,  or  rather  would  buy,  for  to-day  it  is  difficult 
to  find  even  these  elsewhere. 

The  cap  bazaar  at  Samarkand  is  a  wondrous 
sight,  which  never  fails  to  attract  the  traveller.  High 
walls  are  decked  out  with  caps  of  every  shade,  in 
endless  variety  of  shape  and  size.  The  salesman 
stands  ready  with  a  hooked  pole  six  feet  or  more  in 
length,  and  hooks  down  any  particular  one  that  may 
attract  the  customer's  eye.  But  it  is  not  only  in 
the  bazaar  that  caps  may  be  bought.  Just  outside, 
I  came  upon  a  shrub  about  five  feet  high,  upon 
every  branch  of  which  there  hung  a  gorgeous  cap. 
Beneath,  and  crossed-legged  upon  the  ground,  sat 
the  owner,  waiting  for  customers. 

It  was  in  Andijan  that  we  were  initiated  into 
the  art  of  cap-making.  In  one  booth  we  found  a 
man  cutting  out  rounds  of  cloth,  silk,  and  other 
material ;  in  the  next  the  stamping  of  patterns  was 
going  on :  a  youth  had  in  his  hand  a  mould  which, 
after  smearing  yellow  powder  over  it,  he  stamped 


2o8  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

However,  his  wife  insisted,  so  he  took  the  boy  out 
into  the  garden,  and  collected  a  heap  of  firewood. 
Soon  after  he  returned  alone  to  his  wife  and  said — 

"  Go  out  and  look  behind  the  bam ;  there  you  will 
find  what  you  have  asked  for/'  His  wife  went  and 
looked  behind  the  bam;  there,  sure  enough,  she 
found  the  boy  and  the  firewood  all  ready.  She  put 
the  boy  in  a  pot,  boiled  him,  and  ate  him,  throwing 
his  bones  into  the  back  yard.  The  boy's  sister  found 
them  there  the  next  day,  and  burst  into  tears  at  the 
sorrowful  sight.  Weeping  and  crying,  she  gathered 
the  bones  together,  put  them  in  a  bag,  and  hung 
them  on  the  branch  of  a  tree,  where,  wonderful  to 
relate,  they  turned  into  a  dove.  Under  the  tree  there 
passed  a  pedlar. 

"Sing  me  a  song,  O  dove,"  said  he. 

"Give  me  a  needle,"  said  the  dove,  "and  I  will 
sing." 

The  pedlar  gave  the  dove  a  needle,  and  the  dove 
sang  a  song. 

"  Sing  again,"  said  the  pedlar. 

"  Give  me  another  needle  and  I  will  sing  again." 

The  pedlar  gave  the  dove  another  needle,  and  was 
repaid  by  another  song. 

The  boy's  father  now  went  to  the  mosque,  and  on 
his  way  he  saw  the  dove  sitting  on  the  tree. 

"  Sing  me  a  song,  O  dove,"  said  he, 

"First  shut  your  eyes  and  open  your  mouth," 
said  the  dove. 


SART  FAIRY  TALES  209 

But  when  the  father  shut  his  eyes  and  opened  his 
mouth  the  dove  dropped  the  needle  down  his  throati 
and  killed  him.  Then  the  stepmother  came  out  into 
the  yard  to  bake  bread,  and  she  too  noticed  the 
dove. 

"  Sing  to  me,"  said  she. 

"  First  shut  your  eyes  and  open  your  mouth,"  re- 
plied the  dove. 

So  the  stepmother  shut  her  eyes  and  opened  her 
mouth,  whereupon  the  dove  dropped  the  other  needle 
down  her  throat,  and  she  died  too.  After  that  the 
dove  flew  down  from  the  tree  and  turned  into  a 
beautiful  little  boy,  to  the  great  delight  of  his  faith- 
ful sister. 


CHAPTER  XXI 

SOME  NATIVE  INDUSTRIES 

The  art  of  converting  rags  into  paper  came  to 
Europe  from  China,  by  way  of  Samarkand  and 
Morocco :  the  Spaniards  learned  it  from  the  Moors. 
The  date  given  by  some  writers  as  that  of  its  in- 
vention in  Samarkand — A.D.  751 — is  really  that  at 
which  it  was  introduced  there  from  China — ^the 
thirtieth  year  of  the  Hegira.^  In  the  Escurial  library 
there  is  said  to  be  MSS.  as  old  as  the  eleventh  cen- 
tury of  our  era.  Most  of  the  paper  used  in  native 
Turkestan  to-day  is  manufactured  in  the  town  of 
Kokand.  The  Sarts  mix  their  rags  with  water  and 
stamp  them  to  a  pulp.  Then  they  dilute  the  pulp 
with  more  water  and  shake  it  in  a  coarse  matting 
sieve,  after  which  they  flatten  it  out  between  layers 
of  felt,  and  polish  it  on  one  side  by  means  of  pressure 
upon  a  flat  surface.  Native  writing-paper  is  thick 
and  rather  like  parchment  in  appearance.  It  is 
glazed  with  a  kind  of  gum  extracted  from  a  native 
plant. 

1  In  his  recently  published  account  of  the  sand-buried  ruins  of 
Khotan,  Stein  writes :  "It  was  a  fact  of  archaeological  significance 
that  among  all  the  wealth  of  written  documents  not  a  single  scrap 
of  actual  paper  was  found." 


SOME  NATIVE  INDUSTRIES        211 

An  industry  in  which  the  Sart  particularly  excels 
is  that  of  making,  and  ornamenting  with  the  chisel, 
copper  and  brass  drinking-vessels,  basins,  plates  and 
lamps,  and  gourd-pipes.  Every  bazaar  has  its  street  of 
coppersmiths,  where  you  can  see  them  at  their  work 
and  hear  the  deafening  noise  of  their  hammers  all 
going  at  once.  The  usual  shape  of  a  Sart  drinking- 
vessel  resembles  that  of  an  elegant  coffee-pot,  so  tall 
and  slender  that  it  must  be  difficult  to  keep  it  clean. 
Some  of  the  brass  ones  are  overlaid  with  a  thin  coat- 
ing of  silver.  As  I  have  said  elsewhere,  the  best 
work  is  put  into  those  destined  for  sale  in  Moscow, 
so  that  it  is  no  longer  easy  to  pick  them  up  on  the 
spot,  as  of  old,  and  the  man  in  the  booth  has  very 
few  of  his  wares  on  show,  perhaps  only  the  particu- 
lar vessel  upon  which  he  is  at  work.  Wishing  to 
purchase  a  kungan,  or  brass  water-pot,  in  Kokand, 
where  the  best  work  is  done,  I  stopped  one  day  in 
front  of  a  booth  to  which  I  had  been  directed,  and 
asked  the  worker  if  he  could  not  show  me  a  larger 
assortment  than  those  he  had  with  him.  Great  was 
my  surprise  when  he  replied — 

"  My  wife  and  children  have  several  on  hand,  but 
they  are  doing  their  work  at  home." 

"  May  I  come  and  see  them  at  it  ?  "  I  asked. 

"  They  will  be  very  pleased  to  receive  a  visit  from 
you,"  was  his  gracious  reply. 

The  next  day  I  went  to  the  house  indicated,  and 
found  the  women  and  children  sitting  in  a  row  on  the 


CHAPTER  XXI 

SOME  NATIVE  INDUSTRIES 

The  art  of  converting  rags  into  paper  came  to 
Europe  from  China,  by  way  of  Samarkand  and 
Morocco :  the  Spaniards  learned  it  from  the  Moors. 
The  date  given  by  some  writers  as  that  of  its  in- 
vention in  Samarkand — A.D.  751 — is  really  that  at 
which  it  was  introduced  there  from  China — ^the 
thirtieth  year  of  the  Hegira.^  In  the  Escurial  library 
there  is  said  to  be  MSS.  as  old  as  the  eleventh  cen- 
tury of  our  era.  Most  of  the  paper  used  in  native 
Turkestan  to-day  is  manufactured  in  the  town  of 
Kokand.  The  Sarts  mix  their  rags  with  water  and 
stamp  them  to  a  pulp.  Then  they  dilute  the  pulp 
with  more  water  and  shake  it  in  a  coarse  matting 
sieve,  after  which  they  flatten  it  out  between  layers 
of  felt,  and  polish  it  on  one  side  by  means  of  pressure 
upon  a  flat  surface.  Native  writing-paper  is  thick 
and  rather  like  parchment  in  appearance.  It  is 
glazed  with  a  kind  of  gum  extracted  from  a  native 
plant. 

1  In  his  recently  published  account  of  the  sand-buried  ruins  of 
Khotan,  Stein  writes :  "It  was  a  fact  of  archaeological  significance 
that  among  all  the  wealth  of  written  documents  not  a  single  scrap 
of  actual  paper  was  found." 


SOME  NATIVE  INDUSTRIES        211 

An  industry  in  which  the  Sart  particularly  excels 
is  that  of  making,  and  ornamenting  with  the  chisel, 
copper  and  brass  drinking-vessels,  basins,  plates  and 
lamps,  and  gourd-pipes.  Every  bazaar  has  its  street  of 
coppersmiths,  where  you  can  see  them  at  their  work 
and  hear  the  deafening  noise  of  their  hammers  all 
going  at  once.  The  usual  shape  of  a  Sart  drinking- 
vessel  resembles  that  of  an  elegant  coffee-pot,  so  tall 
and  slender  that  it  must  be  difficult  to  keep  it  clean. 
Some  of  the  brass  ones  are  overlaid  with  a  thin  coat- 
ing of  silver.  As  I  have  said  elsewhere,  the  best 
work  is  put  into  those  destined  for  sale  in  Moscow, 
so  that  it  is  no  longer  easy  to  pick  them  up  on  the 
spot,  as  of  old,  and  the  man  in  the  booth  has  very 
few  of  his  wares  on  show,  perhaps  only  the  particu- 
lar vessel  upon  which  he  is  at  work.  Wishing  to 
purchase  a  kungan,  or  brass  water-pot,  in  Kokand, 
where  the  best  work  is  done,  I  stopped  one  day  in 
front  of  a  booth  to  which  I  had  been  directed,  and 
asked  the  worker  if  he  could  not  show  me  a  larger 
assortment  than  those  he  had  with  him.  Great  was 
my  surprise  when  he  replied — 

"  My  wife  and  children  have  several  on  hand,  but 
they  are  doing  their  work  at  home," 

"  May  I  come  and  see  them  at  it  ?  "  I  asked. 

"  They  will  be  very  pleased  to  receive  a  visit  from 
you,"  was  his  gracious  reply. 

The  next  day  I  went  to  the  house  indicated,  and 
found  the  women  and  children  sitting  in  a  row  on  the 


212  IN  RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

ground,  each  engaged,  hammer  and  chisel  in  hand, 
upon  some  delicate  bit  of  work.  At  one  end  of  the 
row  sat  the  white-haired  grandmother  ornamenting  a 
large  copper  bowl,  which  rested  on  a  piece  of  rough- 
hewn  tree-trunk,  that  served  her  as  a  low  table.  The 
young  wife  sat  in  the  middle  with  her  rainbow-dressed 
children  on  either  side  of  her.  Some  of  them  were 
chiselling  brass- bound  gourd -pipes,  and  one  little 
girl  was  hammering  at  a  kungan.  I  took  an  instan- 
taneous photograph  of  this  interesting  group,  but  the 
colouring  of  the  picture  was  half  its  charm. 

"  My  wife's  family  are  not  metal-workers,"  said 
the  husband,  who  came  in  before  we  left;  ''she 
learned  the  art  after  her  marriage." 

Bokhara  is  celebrated  for  its  knives,  which  are  as 
well  made  as  any  in  Europe.  I  have  read  that  the 
making  of  them  to  such  perfection  is  a  secret  of  the 
trade.  Their  shape  is  extremely  elegant,  and  their 
metal  is  so  good  that  the  blades  seldom  need  to  be 
sharpened.  Every  Sart  carries  one  in  a  leather  case 
attached  to  his  girdle.  The  handles  are  of  wood  or 
bone.  I  bought  some  of  wood  adorned  with  inlaid 
silver.  Sometimes  the  handles  are  studded  with 
turquoises,  but  in  these  cases  a  very  high  price  is 
asked.  The  most  valuable  jewellery  is  that  made  of 
silver ;  the  filigree  work  is  heavier  and  coarser,  but 
not  less  tasteful  in  its  way,  than  that  of  European 
countries.  At  first  sight  many  of  the  trinkets  ex- 
posed for  sale  appear  to  sparkle  with  precious  stones, 


SOME  NATIVE  INDUSTRIES         213 

but  on  closer  inspection  one  finds  that,  with  the 
exception  of  coral  beads  and  turquoises,  the  effect  is 
produced  entirely  by  the  use  of  glass  with  coloured 
paper  laid  underneath.  I  stood  for  a  long  time 
before  a  booth  in  Andijan  watching  a  silversmith 
finish  off  a  delicate  earring.  He  had  screwed  him- 
self into  such  a  posture  as  to  be  able  to  make  use 
of  the  sole  of  his  right  boot  as  a  bench  on  which  to 
mould  the  red-hot  trinket,  after  he  had  got  it  into 
that  condition  by  holding  it,  with  a  long  pair  of 
tongs,  over  a  brazier  of  glowing  charcoal.  His  little 
apprentice,  who  happened  to  be  his  own  son,  a  boy 
of  about  twelve  years  of  age,  was  on  his  knees  at 
his  side,  ready  to  take  the  tongs  from  his  father's 
hand  and  dip  the  earring  into  a  pail  of  cold  water 
that  stood  on  the  other  side  of  him.  Before  leaving 
the  booth  I  asked  the  price  of  a  bracelet  that  had 
attracted  my  attention,  whereupon  the  man  put  it 
into  the  scales  and  weighed  out  its  equivalent  in 
small  silver  coins. 

"  That  is  its  price,''  said  he,  taking  the  little  pile 
of  money  out  of  the  scales  and  counting  it. 

In  Kokand  we  were  taken  to  see  a  man  whose  art 
was  that  of  covering  European  studs  and  scarf-pins 
with  a  mosaic  of  turquoise  set  in  a  honeycomb  of 
silver,  not  unlike  the  inlaid  woodwork  of  Tunbridge 
Wells.  This  branch  of  the  industry  dates  back 
no  further  than  to  the  advent  of  the  Russians,  and 
hardly  comes  under  the  category  of  native  jewellery. 


214  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

When  Vamb6ry  visited  Bokhara  in  the  year  1863 
he  found  that  the  use  of  the  Russian  samovar  had 
already  been  adopted  by  the  natives,  so  it  is  not 
surprising  that  we  found  one  or  more  of  them  in 
every  tea-shop.  The  Sarts  have  not  yet  learned 
how  to  manufacture  samovars,  so  Russia  does  a 
good  business  in  that  line.  Those  people  who  have 
a  weakness  for  going  over  factories  and  seeing  "just 
how  the  whole  thing  is  done  "  would,  I  should  think, 
derive  a  peculiar  pleasure  from  wandering  through 
the  bazaars  of  Turkestan,  for  here,  especially  in 
Tashkent,  tlAy  would  have  but  to  begin  at  the  right 
end  of  the  street  to  see  the  complete  process  of 
shoe-making,  cap-making,  coat-making,  or  any  other 
manufacturing  that  might  take  their  fancy  or  excite 
their  curiosity.  Let  us  take  the  art  of  shoe-making, 
for  instance.  Here  we  see  a  man  engaged  in  cutting 
out  His  immediate  neighbour,  who  is  busily  sew- 
ing the  pieces  together,  will  come  to  him  presently 
and  purchase  the  leather  on  which  he  is  now  at 
work.  The  latter,  in  his  turn,  will  dispose  of  his 
finished  '*  uppers  **  to  another  whose  business  it  is 
to  add  the  soles,  and  so  on.  The  leather  used  for 
Sart  footgear  is  so  elastic  and  soft  that  a  boot  is 
sure  to  fit  if  purchased  a  size  larger  than  the  foot 
for  which  it  is  intended.  Thus  all  annoyance  of 
"  trying  on  "  is  avoided. 

Carpets  are  manufactured  in  all  parts  of  Turkestan, 
but  the  only  kind  of  any  durability  or  value  produced 


SOME   NATIVE   INDUSTRIES         215 

by  the  sedentary  population  is  the  deservedly  famous 
"  Bokharan  carpet,"  which  comes  from  Bokhara  and 
Karshi.  It  is  quite  distinct  from,  and  made  more 
uniform  in  colour  than,  the  still  more  celebrated  pro- 
duct of  Merv  and  Penjeh,  which  is,  alas !  so  rapidly 
becoming  extinct.  To  get  an  idea  of  the  Bokharan 
carpet,  the  traveller  should  make  a  point  of  calling 
on  some  of  the  wealthy  Israelites,  whose  spacious 
dwellings  are  furnished  with  the  choicest  that  money 
can  buy,  or  rather  would  buy,  for  to-day  it  is  difficult 
to  find  even  these  elsewhere. 

The  cap  bazaar  at  Samarkand  is  a  wondrous 
sight,  which  never  fails  to  attract  the  traveller.  High 
walls  are  decked  out  with  caps  of  every  shade,  in 
endless  variety  of  shape  and  size.  The  salesman 
stands  ready  with  a  hooked  pole  six  feet  or  more  in 
length,  and  hooks  down  any  particular  one  that  may 
attract  the  customer's  eye.  But  it  is  not  only  in 
the  bazaar  that  caps  may  be  bought.  Just  outside, 
I  came  upon  a  shrub  about  five  feet  high,  upon 
every  branch  of  which  there  hung  a  gorgeous  cap. 
Beneath,  and  crossed-legged  upon  the  ground,  sat 
the  owner,  waiting  for  customers. 

It  was  in  Andijan  that  we  were  initiated  into 
the  art  of  cap-making.  In  one  booth  we  found  a 
man  cutting  out  rounds  of  cloth,  silk,  and  other 
material ;  in  the  next  the  stamping  of  patterns  was 
going  on  :  a  youth  had  in  his  hand  a  mould  which, 
after  smearing  yellow  powder  over  it,  he  stamped 


2i6  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

upon  the  cloth  in  four  places,  the  round  having  been 
previously  folded  in  four,  and  pressed,  to  show  by 
its  creases  where  the  stamp  should  come.  Bands 
to  form  the  lower  part  of  the  caps  were  also  being 
stamped.  In  a  third  booth  the  rounds  of  cloth, 
having  been  already  purchased  by  women  and  em- 
broidered at  home,  were  being  made  into  shape. 
The  fourth  booth  contained  caps  ready  for  wean 


CHAPTER  XXII 

TAMASHA 

"  Durch  nichts  bezeichnen  die  Menscben  mebr  ibren  character  als 
durch  das  was  sie  lacherlich  finden.'' — Gobthe. 

In  most  of  the  towns  a  special  tamasha  was  pro- 
vided for  our  benefit.  It  consisted  for  the  most  part 
of  instrumental  music,  singing,  dancing,  and  acting, 
which  usually  took  place  on  the  ground  floor  of  a  tea- 
house, whilst  we  and  other  foreign  spectators  took  our 
seats  in  the  gallery  above.  Sart  music  is  peculiar. 
I  should  never  have  recognised  it  as  music  but  for 
the  instruments  by  means  of  which  it  was  produced. 
Most  striking  of  all  were  the  brass  trumpets,  nine 
feet  in  length,  quite  unlike  any  other  musical  instru- 
ment that  I  know  of*  The  Russians  call  them  the 
"  trumpets  of  Jericho,"  and  there  is  certainly  a  like- 
ness between  these  and  the  trumpets  of  angels  in 
mediaeval  pictures.^  The  Sart  has  to  take  many 
lessons  before  he  can  manage  so  unwieldy  a  tube, 
and  when  he  can,  the  sound  is  like  the  roar  of  an 
angry  bull.  The  dutar  comes  next  in  importance. 
It  is  a  kind  of  guitar,  used  chiefly  to  accompany  the 
human  voice,  and  resembles  those  found  in  other 
1  See  those  on  the  carved  doors  of  the  Baptistery  at  Florence. 

»X7 


CHAPTER  XXI 

SOME  NATIVE  INDUSTRIES 

The  art  of  converting  rags  into  paper  came  to 
Europe  from  China,  by  way  of  Samarkand  and 
Morocco :  the  Spaniards  learned  it  from  the  Moors. 
The  date  given  by  some  writers  as  that  of  its  in- 
vention in  Samarkand — A.D.  751 — is  really  that  at 
which  it  was  introduced  there  from  China — ^the 
thirtieth  year  of  the  Hegira.^  In  the  Escurial  library 
there  is  said  to  be  MSS.  as  old  as  the  eleventh  cen- 
tury of  our  era.  Most  of  the  paper  used  in  native 
Turkestan  to-day  is  manufactured  in  the  town  of 
Kokand.  The  Sarts  mix  their  rags  with  water  and 
stamp  them  to  a  pulp.  Then  they  dilute  the  pulp 
with  more  water  and  shake  it  in  a  coarse  matting 
sieve,  after  which  they  flatten  it  out  between  layers 
of  felt,  and  polish  it  on  one  side  by  means  of  pressure 
upon  a  flat  surface.  Native  writing-paper  is  thick 
and  rather  like  parchment  in  appearance.  It  is 
glazed  with  a  kind  of  gum  extracted  from  a  native 
plant. 

1  In  his  recently  published  account  of  the  sand-buried  ruins  of 
Khotan,  Stein  writes :  "It  was  a  fact  of  archaeolt^cal  significance 
that  among  all  the  wealth  of  written  documents  not  a  single  scrap 
of  actual  paper  was  found." 


SOME  NATIVE   INDUSTRIES        211 

An  industry  in  which  the  Sart  particularly  excels 
is  that  of  making,  and  ornamenting  with  the  chisel, 
copper  and  brass  drinking-vessels,  basins,  plates  and 
lamps,  and  gourd-pipes.  Every  bazaar  has  its  street  of 
coppersmiths,  where  you  can  see  them  at  their  work 
and  hear  the  deafening  noise  of  their  hammers  all 
going  at  once.  The  usual  shape  of  a  Sart  drinking- 
vessel  resembles  that  of  an  elegant  coffee-pot,  so  tall 
and  slender  that  it  must  be  difficult  to  keep  it  clean. 
Some  of  the  brass  ones  are  overlaid  with  a  thin  coat- 
ing of  silver.  As  I  have  said  elsewhere,  the  best 
work  is  put  into  those  destined  for  sale  in  Moscow, 
so  that  it  is  no  longer  easy  to  pick  them  up  on  the 
spot,  as  of  old,  and  the  man  in  the  booth  has  very 
few  of  his  wares  on  show,  perhaps  only  the  particu- 
lar vessel  upon  which  he  is  at  work.  Wishing  to 
purchase  a  kungany  or  brass  water-pot,  in  Kpkand, 
where  the  best  work  is  done,  I  stopped  one  day  in 
front  of  a  booth  to  which  I  had  been  directed,  and 
asked  the  worker  if  he  could  not  show  me  a  larger 
assortment  than  those  he  had  with  him.  Great  was 
my  surprise  when  he  replied — 

"  My  wife  and  children  have  several  on  hand,  but 
they  are  doing  their  work  at  home," 

"  May  I  come  and  see  them  at  it  ?  "  I  asked. 

"  They  will  be  very  pleased  to  receive  a  visit  from 
you,"  was  his  gracious  reply. 

The  next  day  I  went  to  the  house  indicated,  and 
found  the  women  and  children  sitting  in  a  row  on  the 


212  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

ground,  each  engaged,  hammer  and  chisel  in  hand, 
upon  some  delicate  bit  of  work.  At  one  end  of  the 
row  sat  the  white-haired  grandmother  ornamenting  a 
large  copper  bowl,  which  rested  on  a  piece  of  rough- 
hewn  tree-trunk,  that  served  her  as  a  low  table.  The 
young  wife  sat  in  the  middle  with  her  rainbow-dressed 
children  on  either  side  of  her.  Some  of  them  were 
chiselling  brass- bound  gourd-pipes,  and  one  little 
girl  was  hammering  at  a  kungan.  I  took  an  instan- 
taneous photograph  of  this  interesting  group,  but  the 
colouring  of  the  picture  was  half  its  charm. 

''My  wife's  family  are  not  metal-workers,''  said 
the  husband,  who  came  in  before  we  left ;  "  she 
learned  the  art  after  her  marriage." 

Bokhara  is  celebrated  for  its  knives,  which  are  as 
well  made  as  any  in  Europe.  I  have  read  that  the 
making  of  them  to  such  perfection  is  a  secret  of  the 
trade.  Their  shape  is  extremely  elegant,  and  their 
metal  is  so  good  that  the  blades  seldom  need  to  be 
sharpened.  Every  Sart  carries  one  in  a  leather  case 
attached  to  his  girdle.  The  handles  are  of  wood  or 
bone.  I  bought  some  of  wood  adorned  with  inlaid 
silver.  Sometimes  the  handles  are  studded  with 
turquoises,  but  in  these  cases  a  very  high  price  is 
asked.  The  most  valuable  jewellery  is  that  made  of 
silver ;  the  filigree  work  is  heavier  and  coarser,  but 
not  less  tasteful  in  its  way,  than  that  of  European 
countries.  At  first  sight  many  of  the  trinkets  ex- 
posed for  sale  appear  to  sparkle  with  precious  stones, 


SOME  NATIVE  INDUSTRIES         213 

but  on  closer  inspection  one  finds  that,  with  the 
exception  of  coral  beads  and  turquoises,  the  efiiect  is 
produced  entirely  by  the  use  of  glass  with  coloured 
paper  laid  underneath.  I  stood  for  a  long  time 
before  a  booth  in  Andijan  watching  a  silversmith 
finish  off  a  delicate  earring.  He  had  screwed  him- 
self into  such  a  posture  as  to  be  able  to  make  use 
of  the  sole  of  his  right  boot  as  a  bench  on  which  to 
mould  the  red-hot  trinket,  after  he  had  got  it  into 
that  condition  by  holding  it,  with  a  long  pair  of 
tongs,  over  a  brazier  of  glowing  charcoal.  His  little 
apprentice,  who  happened  to  be  his  own  son,  a  boy 
of  about  twelve  years  of  age,  was  on  his  knees  at 
his  side,  ready  to  take  the  tongs  from  his  father's 
hand  and  dip  the  earring  into  a  pail  of  cold  water 
that  stood  on  the  other  side  of  him.  Before  leaving 
the  booth  I  asked  the  price  of  a  bracelet  that  had 
attracted  my  attention,  whereupon  the  man  put  it 
into  the  scales  and  weighed  out  its  equivalent  in 
small  silver  coins. 

''  That  is  its  price,''  said  he,  taking  the  little  pile 
of  money  out  of  the  scales  and  counting  it. 

In  Kokand  we  were  taken  to  see  a  man  whose  art 
was  that  of  covering  European  studs  and  scarf-pins 
with  a  mosaic  of  turquoise  set  in  a  honeycomb  of 
silver,  not  unlike  the  inlaid  woodwork  of  Tunbridge 
Wells.  This  branch  of  the  industry  dates  back 
no  further  than  to  the  advent  of  the  Russians,  and 
hardly  comes  under  the  category  of  native  jewellery. 


214  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

When  Vamb6ry  visited  Bokhara  in  the  year  1863 
he  found  that  the  use  of  the  Russian  samovar  had 
already  been  adopted  by  the  natives,  so  it  is  not 
surprising  that  we  found  one  or  more  of  them  in 
every  tea-shop.  The  Sarts  have  not  yet  learned 
how  to  manufacture  samovars,  so  Russia  does  a 
good  business  in  that  line.  Those  people  who  have 
a  weakness  for  going  over  factories  and  seeing  ''just 
how  the  whole  thing  is  done ''  would,  I  should  think, 
derive  a  peculiar  pleasure  from  wandering  through 
the  bazaars  of  Turkestan,  for  here,  especially  in 
Tashkent,  ti^y  would  have  but  to  begin  at  the  right 
end  of  the  street  to  see  the  complete  process  of 
shoe-making,  cap-making,  coat-making,  or  any  other 
manufacturing  that  might  take  their  fancy  or  excite 
their  curiosity.  Let  us  take  the  art  of  shoe-making, 
for  instance.  Here  we  see  a  man  engaged  in  cutting 
out  His  immediate  neighbour,  who  is  busily  sew- 
ing the  pieces  together,  will  come  to  him  presently 
and  purchase  the  leather  on  which  he  is  now  at 
work.  The  latter,  in  his  turn,  will  dispose  of  his 
finished  ''  uppers "  to  another  whose  business  it  is 
to  add  the  soles,  and  so  on.  The  leather  used  for 
Sart  footgear  is  so  elastic  and  soft  that  a  boot  is 
sure  to  fit  if  purchased  a  size  larger  than  the  foot 
for  which  it  is  intended.  Thus  all  annoyance  of 
"  trying  on  "  is  avoided. 

Carpets  are  manufactured  in  all  parts  of  Turkestan, 
but  the  only  kind  of  any  durability  or  value  produced 


SOME  NATIVE   INDUSTRIES         215 

by  the  sedentary  population  is  the  deservedly  famous 
"  Bokharan  carpet,"  which  comes  from  Bokhara  and 
Karshi.  It  is  quite  distinct  from,  and  made  more 
uniform  in  colour  than,  the  still  more  celebrated  pro- 
duct of  Merv  and  Penjeh,  which  is,  alas !  so  rapidly 
becoming  extinct.  To  get  an  idea  of  the  Bokharan 
carpet,  the  traveller  should  make  a  point  of  calling 
on  some  of  the  wealthy  Israelites,  whose  spacious 
dwellings  are  furnished  with  the  choicest  that  money 
can  buy,  or  rather  would  buy,  for  to-day  it  is  difficult 
to  find  even  these  elsewhere. 

The  cap  bazaar  at  Samarkand  is  a  wondrous 
sight,  which  never  fails  to  attract  the  traveller.  High 
walls  are  decked  out  with  caps  of  every  shade,  in 
endless  variety  of  shape  and  size.  The  salesman 
stands  ready  with  a  hooked  pole  six  feet  or  more  in 
length,  and  hooks  down  any  particular  one  that  may 
attract  the  customer's  eye.  But  it  is  not  only  in 
the  bazaar  that  caps  may  be  bought.  Just  outside, 
I  came  upon  a  shrub  about  five  feet  high,  upon 
every  branch  of  which  there  hung  a  gorgeous  cap. 
Beneath,  and  crossed-legged  upon  the  ground^  sat 
the  owner,  waiting  for  customers. 

It  was  in  Andijan  that  we  were  initiated  into 
the  art  of  cap-making.  In  one  booth  we  found  a 
man  cutting  out  rounds  of  cloth,  silk,  and  other 
material ;  in  the  next  the  stamping  of  patterns  was 
going  on  :  a  youth  had  in  his  hand  a  mould  which, 
after  smearing  yellow  powder  over  it,  he  stamped 


224  IN  RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

"  Yes,  one  hour  of  sea." 

"One  hour?  Oh,  that's  nothing!"  he  replied. 
"  I  shall  come  and  see  you  some  day,''  and  then  he 
carefully  took  down  our  address. 

If  he  comes  he  will  probably  be  the  first  Sart  to 
visit  England.  Not  long  since  I  was  describing 
to  a  Mohammedan  gentleman  from  Tetuan  some 
of  the  manners  and  customs  of  his  co-religionists 
in  Bokhara.  He  listened  with  interest,  and,  when 
I  had  finished,  folded  his  hands  upon  his  breast 
and,  turning  up  his  eyes  to  heaven,  remarked 
gravely,  "Bokhara  is  far  off — who  knows?" 


CHAPTER  XXIII 

THE  KIRGIZ 

The  Kirgiz  spring  from  the  same  stock  as  the 
Uzbegs;  or  rather  they  are  Uzbegs  who  have  re- 
mained nomads.  Russian  ethnographers  divide 
them  into  two  classes,  the  dwellers  in  the  moun- 
tains and  the  dwellers  in  the  plains.  The  former 
are  called  Kara-Kirgiz,  and  the  latter  Kirgiz- 
Kaizaks.  Wandering  amongst  the  mountains  and 
rarely  coming  in  close  contact  with  other  races, 
the  Kara-Kirgiz  have  naturally  retained  a  greater 
purity  of  type  than  their  cousins  the  Kirgiz-Kaizaks, 
whose  life  in  the  plains  keeps  them  in  compara- 
tively close  relationship  with  the  sedentary  popu- 
lation. You  can  hardly  spend  an  hour  in  any  Sart 
bazaar  without  seeing  the  stalwart  forms  of  one 
or  more  Kirgiz  women  who,  unveiled  and  seated  on 
their  sturdy  little  horses,  have  come  to  make  pur- 
chases for  their  families  at  home.  A  Kirgiz  house 
is  nothing  but  an  encampment  of  movable  tents, 
made  of  withes  and  covered  with  felt.  We  drove 
out  to  one  of  these  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Tash- 
kent.     The   encampment   was   surrounded    by    a 

circular  mud  wall,  enclosing  about  five  acres  of 

"5  p 


220  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

barren  ground.  In  the  centre  we  found  a  crowd  of 
camels,  most  of  them  kneeling,  on  a  kind  of  dung- 
heap.  There  seemed  to  be  more  camels  than  any- 
thing else.  I  counted  twenty  tents,  about  three 
cows,  and  several  groups  of  dirty-looking  children. 
We  entered  most  of  the  tents,  or  yurta  as  they 
are  called,  and  what  struck  me  more  than  anything 
else  was  the  absolute  bareness  of  these  nomad 
dwellings.  Besides  the  clothes  they  wore,  the  occu- 
pants seemed  to  possess  hardly  a  rag.  The  whole 
furniture  of  one  inhabited  by  a  large  family  would 
consist  of  nothing  but  a  samovar,  one  small  trunk 
containing  the  household  plate,  a  rug  or  two  on  the 
floor,  and  a  roll  of  wadded  quilts  on  which  to  sleep 
at  night.  Even  this  amount  of  furniture  is  more 
than  they  can  take  about  with  them  on  their  summer 
wanderings,  so  they  often  bury  part  of  it  for  a  few 
months  every  year.  That  crowd  of  camels  to  which 
I  have  alluded  appeared  to  represent  the  whole  of 
their  worldly  goods.  How  large  were  the  herds 
of  horses  and  sheep  which  the  men-folk  were  at 
that  moment  guarding  on  the  neighbouring  plains 
I  am,  of  course,  unable  to  say.  The  friend  who 
had  lent  us  his  carriage  for  the  drive,  had  also  lent 
us  his  head  coachman,  who  was  himself  a  Kir- 
giz,  and  therefore  felt  quite  at  home  among  the 
camels  and  the  yurta.  He  was  dressed  neatly 
in  blue  cloth,  and  wore  a  pair  of  bright  yellow  kid 
gloves.    It  was  evident  by  his  manner  among  his 


THE   KIRGIZ  2?7 

compatriots  that  he  was  pleased  to  show  what  a  Kir- 
giz  could  rise  to.  He  smilingly  refused  to  take  the 
tip  of  half-a-crown  that  an  English  coachman  would 
have  considered  as  his  due^  and  expressed  with 
smiles  and  bows  that  the  pleasure  of  driving  us  had 
been  an  ample  reward  for  his  pains.  His  master 
told  us  later  on  that  the  man  considered  himself 
**  quite  one  of  the  family."  He  had  one  day  come 
to  him  with  a  calm  request  for  three  hundred 
roubles  {£iO)» 

'*  What ! "  exclaimed  his  master,  "  that  is  half  a 
year's  wages ! " 

"Yes;  but  my  brother's  wife  is  dead  and  he 
wants  to  buy  another." 

If  you  ask  a  Kirgiz  about  his  origin,  he  can  tell 
you  little  more  than  the  name  of  the  particular  c/an 
to  which  he  belongs.  They  have  no  chronicles 
and  no  monuments  of  their  past ;  but  there  are  a 
few  vague  traditions  handed  down  from  parents 
to  children.  An  old  man  in  Margelan  told  me  that 
Noah  had  nine  sons,  one  of  whom  settled  in  Fer- 
gana, and  that  a  descendant  of  his  had  forty 
daughters,  who  were  called  in  the  Turki  language 
Kirk  (forty)  and  Giz  (daughters),  hence  the  name 
Kirgiz. 

M.  Nalivkin,  in  his  history  of  Fergana,  divides 
the  Uzbegs  into  three  classes :  nomads,  semi- 
nomads,  and  nomads  who  have  become  sedentary, 
that  is  to  say,  those  who  conquered  the  Tajiks,  and 


228  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

settling  down  among  them,  gradually  adopted  their 
manners,  their  customs,  and  their  agricultural  pur- 
suits. Those  who  remained  nomads  considered 
themselves  vastly  superior  to  the  degenerate  breth- 
ren, and  were  ready  to  make  them  feel  their 
superiority  whenever  they  could,  by  making  raids 
upon  their  fields,  and  stealing  anything  they  could 
lay  hands  on.  When,  however,  the  necessities  of 
life  forced  the  nomads  or  Kirgiz  to  come  to  their 
bazaars,  the  Sarts  took  care  to  charge  them  exor- 
bitant prices  for  everything  they  bought.  Where- 
upon the  Kirgiz,  accustomed  from  their  childhood 
to  war  and  rapine,  would  swoop  down  upon  the 
Sart  granaries  in  the  autumn,  and  carry  off  the 
newly  thrashed  grain,  which  many  an  industrious 
Sart  had  sown  and  harvested  with  the  sweat  of 
his  brow.  The  natural  result  of  this  was,  that  the 
Sarts  began  to  look  upon  the  Kirgiz  as  brigands, 
assassins,  and  everything  that  was  bad,  while  the 
Kirgiz  came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  Sarts,  having 
lost  all  their  manly  qualities  since  they  had  taken 
to  driving  carts  and  digging  the  fields,  were  nq 
longer  capable  of  resisting  their  incursions.  Noth- 
ing succeeds  like  success.  The  Sarts  began  to 
tremble  more  and  more  before  the  inroads  of  the 
Kirgiz,  and  the  latter  grew  more  and  more  audacious. 
At  last  the  Sarts  took  to  defending  themselves  with 
firearms,  and  this  gave  them  an  advantage  over  the 
nomads  who  had  no  such  weapons,  and  they  were 


.  THE   KIRG12  229 

able  to  enjoy  a  little  respite.  But  the  Sarts  at  last 
hit  upon  a  still  better  kind  of  revenge.  They  began 
gradually  to  buy  up  all  the  lands  of  the  Kirgiz,  who 
were  quite  willing  to  part  with  them  for  a  mere 
song,  for,  being  too  proud  to  cultivate  them  them- 
selves, they  got  very  little  profit  out  of  them,  and 
did  not  realise  their  value.  One  man  parted  with 
several  acres  of  land  for  a  glass  of  his  favourite 
drink,  busa^  a  kind  of  beer  made  of  millet.  Another 
sold  a  plot  of  land  for  a  horse ;  twenty  years  later 
its  value  was  seven  hundred  roubles.  Thus  the 
Kirgiz  got  pushed  off  the  valleys  little  by  little, 
till  at  last  they  i>ossessed  but  very  little  cultivable 
ground.  The  third  class,  the  semi-nomads,  was 
that  of  the  Kipchaks  and  the  Karakalpaks,  who 
joined  the  occupation  of  cattle-breeding  to  that  of 
agriculture.  They  remained  faithful  to  the  prin- 
ciples of  their  ancestors;  their  political  and  adminis- 
trative unity  remained  in  the  tribe  rather  than  in 
the  clan.  They  did  not,  like  the  Kirgiz,  cease  to 
think  of  themselves  as  tribes,  and  distinguish  them- 
selves only  as  subdivisions  of  tribes,  that  is,  as 
clans.  Consequently  their  traditions  were  much 
better  preserved;  they  had  much  more  power, 
through  their  unity,  than  the  Kirgiz  who  had  split 
up  into  clans.  For  a  further  account  of  the  Kip- 
chaks and  the  Karakalpaks  and  of  the  way  in  which 
these  people  used  their  power,  I  would  refer  my 
reader  to  M.  Nalivkin's  interesting  work.     I  will 


230  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

simply  add  that,  finally,  it  was  the  loss  of  their 
unity  which  proved  their  ruin.  The  ambitions  of 
one  man  was  what  eventually  caused  their  fall. 
The  word  Uzbeg  means  "your  own  master";  Uz 
(self)  and  Beg  (master). 

The  Kirgiz  are  obliged  to  move  their  herds  from 
the  plains  to  the  surrounding  hills  at  the  approach 
of  summer,  for  the  grass  dries  up  and  there  is  no 
longer  sufficient  water  for  their  needs.  Those  in 
the  vicinity  of  Sart  towns  are  just  as  much  the 
owners  of  the  spots  in  which  they  settle  for  the 
winter,  as  if  they  dwelt  there  all  the  year  round. 
In  this  respect  they  resemble  the  Turkomans  of 
Merv.  The  steppe  over  which  the  Kirgiz  wander 
reaches  from  the  Amu  Daria  to  the  confines  of 
Siberia.  In  my  book  "  A  Ribbon  of  Iron "  I 
have  given  a  short  account  of  a  visit  to  those 
in  the  vicinity  of  Omsk  on  the  Siberian  railway. 
The  Kirgiz  are  steadily  decreasing  in  numbers. 
Schwarz,  quoting  the  memoirs  of  Sultan  Babar, 
tells  us  that  one  of  these  Khans  was  able  to  bring 
an  army  of  three  hundred  thousand  men  into  the 
field.  The  Kirgiz  of  to-day  abhor  the  idea  of  a 
census;  they  are  quite  superstitious  about  letting 
the  Russians  count  them,  so  that  it  is  difficult  to 
get  at  their  numbers. 

Among  these  people  great  respect  is  shown  to 
old  men;  and  women,  though  they  have  to  work 
hard,  have  a  far  more  important  position  in  the 


THE  KIRGIZ  231 

household  than  Sart  women.  A  reason  assigned 
for  their  custom  of  polygamy  is  that  one  wife 
would  find  it  so  hard  to  put  up  a  yurta  all 
alone.  Neither  the  Sarts  nor  the  Kirgiz  have 
servants.  A  Kirgiz  husband  would  never  dream 
of  assisting  his  wife  in  her  household  duties.  It 
would  be  quite  improper,  A  Kirgiz  of  distinction 
wiU  never  touch  work  of  any  kind.  The  women 
not  only  put  up  the  yurtasy  but  they  make  the  felt 
which  covers  them.  They  also  make  very  good 
carpets.  Their  favourite  drink  is  kumys^  or  fer- 
mented mare's  milk;  it  froths  up  like  ginger-beer 
when  you  uncork  it. 

The  Kirgiz  are  followers  of  Islam ;  some  writers 
affirm  that  the  Russians,  finding  them  without 
any  religion  at  all,  introduced  Mohammedanism 
as  the  faith  most  likely  to  suit  them.  Others  say 
that  they  were  Mohammedans  before,  and  that  the 
Russians  only  encouraged  them.  One  thing,  how- 
ever, is  clear,  they  are  the  least  fanatical  of  all  the 
Prophet's  followers.  This  may  arise  from  the  fact 
that  they  can  neither  read  nor  write,  nor  worship 
in  a  mosque  except  when  they  come  into  the  towns. 
In  spite  of  all  these  disadvantages,  their  private  life 
is  infinitely  more  moral  than  that  of  the  fanatical 
Sarts.  Town  life  has  a  corrupting  influence  in 
Central  Asia  as  elsewhere.  The  Kirgiz  are  an 
honest  people.  The  Russian  authorities  respect 
the  word   of  a   Kirgiz  magistrate.      If  a  theft  is 


232  IN   RUSSIAN   TURKESTAN 

discovered,  the  perpetrator  of  it  is  severely  punished. 
The  herds  of  horses  which  the  Kirgiz  let  out  to 
graze  far  and  wide,  provide  these  {>eople  literally 
with  food  and  drink;  for,  in  addition  to  the  fact 
that  they  consume  an  enormous  amount  of  kumys^ 
I  must  add  that  no  meat  is  to  them  so  great  a 
delicacy  as  horseflesh.  A  Sart  would  never  touch 
it.  The  Kirgiz  horse  has  been  described  as  small, 
strong,  and  ugly.  It  carries  its  head  low,  a  result 
of  continual  grazing  in  s{>ots  where  the  grass  is 
very  short;  and  it  is  not  quite  so  swift  as  the 
Turkoman  breed. 

The  fat-tail  sheep,  which  provide  the  Sarts  with 
their  excellent  mutton,  are  supplied  to  the  markets 
by  the  Kirgiz.  I  never  saw  a  respectable-looking 
cow  during  my  stay  in  the  country;  but  my 
Russian  friends  informed  me  that  there  were  plenty 
of  fine  yaks  in  the  mountains,  and  that  the  Kirgiz 
used  them  both  for  riding  and  as  beasts  of  burden. 
They  look  very  fierce  with  their  great  horns  and 
long,  shaggy  black  hair,  but  in  reality  they  are  quite 
tame,  and  the  little  Russian  boys  delight  to  ride  on 
them,  when  they  go  to  the  hills  for  their  summer 
holidays.  All  the  animals  grow  thin  in  winter, 
because  there  is  so  little  food  for  them.  When  it 
is  about  time  for  the  fresh  herbage  to  appear,  the 
Kirgiz  set  fire  to  the  stubble  that  has  remained 
from  the  previous  year,  in  order  to  clear  the  ground 
for  the  new  grass.     They  keep  their  thrashed  grain 


THE  KIRGIZ  233 

in  underground  storehouses,  just  as  the  Moors  do, 
but  it  is  only  the  poorest  that  engage  in  agriculture. 
Numbers  of  them  make  a  living  by  supplying  the 
Russians  with  charcoal  for  their  samovars. 

The  reason  assigned  for  the  fact  that  the  Kirgiz 
always  march  their  animals  in  separate  herds  is 
that  they  require  different  kinds  of  food ;  while  the 
horse  requires  grass,  the  camel  must  be  led  where 
it  can  find  the  so-called  "camel  plant,"  which 
grows  so  plentifully  in  the  sandy  plains  and 
deserts.  It  is  not  uncommon  to  find  a  whole 
family  riding  into  town  on  one  horse — father, 
mother,  and  children,  one  behind  the  other.  Like 
the  Turkomans,  the  Kirgiz  are  splendid  riders. 
Their  stirrups  are  very  short  and  wide,  and  they 
sit  so  loosely  that  they  can  spring  to  the  ground 
more  easily  than  a  European  could  rise  from  his 
chair;  hence  they  are  never  thrown,  or  dragged 
along  the  ground,  or  crushed  against  a  wall,  as  is 
too  often  the  case  with  us.  The  horses  go  unshod, 
and  no  spurs  are  used.  Ever  since  the  Russians 
began  to  settle  in  Tashkent,  thousands  of  Kirgiz 
have  lived  by  transporting,  across  their  vast  steppe, 
household  furniture  and  every  article  that  the 
Russian  settlers  needed  to  bring  from  Russia.  The 
new  railway  will  probably  take  from  them  this 
means  of  subsistence,  and  force  many  of  them  to 
take  up  agriculture  in  place  of  it. 

The  Kirgiz,  like  his  horse/ can  sustain  life  for 


234  IN  RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

many  days  without  food.  Schwarz  relates  a  story 
to  the  effect  that  a  Kirgiz  courier,  who  had  been 
sent  with  a  telegram  from  Kokand  to  Vernie  in 
the  winter  of  1 880-1881,  was  snowed  up  on  his 
way  over  the  mountains.  There  was  nothing  for 
it  but  to  wait  quietly  till  the  snow  melted.  He 
remained  in  one  spot  for  forty-two  days  (?),  and 
in  order  to  still  the  pangs  of  hunger  ate  up  all 
his  clothes  except  his  fur  cap,  and  would  have 
swallowed  the  telegram  too  had  he  not  feared,  as 
he  afterwards  said,  that  he  would  be  held  respon- 
sible for  its  safety.  A  relief  party  sent  out  to  find 
him,  brought  him,  in  a  famished  condition,  to  the 
nearest  yurta^  where  he  ate  so  much  food  at  one 
sitting  that  he  died  of  indigestion  two  days  later. 


PART  II 
REMINISCENCES 


CHAPTER   I 

TASHKENT  AND  SAMARKAND 

Russian  historians  divide  the  history  of  Tashkent 
into  eight  distinct  periods,  and  tell  us  that  its 
eariiest  name  was  Shash.  Then  in  some  way  or 
other  Shash  got  changed  into  Tash,  which  signi- 
fies **  a  stone/'  and  the  name  appeared  in  Russian 
books  of  the  fifteenth  century  as  Tashkur.  Accord- 
ing to  a  local  guide-book  published  in  Tashkent  in 
the  autumn  of  1901,  the  Russian  and  native  towns 
combined  could  then  boast  of  156,414  inhabitants, 
2S,cxX)  01  whom  were  Russians.  There  are  163 
kilometres  of  street ;  when  General  Kaufmann  laid 
out  the  wide  streets  of  the  Russian  town  he  had  an 
eye  to  the  future,  for  he  took  in  as  much  ground  as 
if  he  were  building  a  second  Paris.  Although  its 
comparatively  small  European  population,  civil  and 
military  combined,  seems  at  present  to  roll  about 
in  it  like  "one  pill  in  a  pill-box,"  another  genera- 
tion will  be  able  to  tell  a  different  tale.  In 
1906  Tashkent  will,  if  all  goes  well,  be  brought 
Mrithin  three  days'  journey  of  Moscow,  by  means 
of  the  railway  from  Orenburg  now  under  con- 
struction, 

»37 


238  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

Others  have  already  described  its  public  build- 
ings, its  clubs,  and  its  churches ;  I  will  simply  add 
that  it  has  now  a  library  of  24,000  books,  an 
Archaeological  Society,  a  museum  and  a  winter 
theatre,  three  banks,  and  besides  its  boys'  and 
girls'  schools,  a  training  college  for  male  teachers, 
and  a  military  academy. 

It  was  on  a  cold  and  cheerless  wintfer's  day  that 
we  stepped  from  the  luxuriously  fitted-up  governor's 
carriage  in  which  we  had  spent  so  many  pleasant 
hours,  on  to  the  platform  of  the  Tashkent  railway 
station.  As  we  drove  to  our  destination,  the  double 
rows  of  gaunt  and  leafless  poplars  on  either  side  of 
the  unpaved  streets,  as  wide  as  the  Champs  Elys6es, 
looked  like  an  endless  array  of  gigantic  garden- 
brooms  with  their  bristles  in  the  air.  We  seemed 
to  be  driving  through  ploughed  fields  after  a  night 
of  heavy  rain.  The  low  bungalow-like  houses  were 
so  far  apart  that  they  did  not  appear  to  be  in  streets 
at  all,  but  rather  popped  down  in  a  waste  of  no 
man's  land.  Had  they  been  built  of  logs,  I  should 
have  believed  myself  in  some  corner  of  Siberia,  but 
as  it  was  they  were  all  of  white  stone,  and  not  badly 
built  either  when  you  came  to  look  at  them.  Their 
plate-glass  windows  had  come  on  camel-back  from 
Russia,  over  miles  and  miles  of  desert. 

Such  a  thing  as  an  hotel  does  not  even  yet  exist 
in  Turkestan ;  for  travellers,  other  than  commer- 
cial, are  not  expected,  and  business  men  put  up  in 


TASHKENT  AND   SAMARKAND      239 

chambres  gamis^  as  we  were  obliged  to  do.  New 
arrivals,  coming  to  stay,  are  received  as  guests  in 
the  houses  of  people  to  whom  they  have  brought 
introductions,  official  or  otherwise,  from  the  home 
country,  until  they  can  settle  down  in  houses  of 
their  own.  They  in  their  turn  are  ready  to  show 
a  similar  kindness  to  others.  Russian  hospitality 
is  deservedly  proverbial.  I  shiver  to  think  how  we 
should  have  fared  had  we  not  found  it  so.  The 
food  we  paid  for  was  always  atrociously  cooked, 
and  invariably  stuck  fast  to  our  plates  in  cold 
mutton  fat  before  we  had  eaten  two  mouthfuls.  But 
happily  for  us,  we  rarely  lunched  or  dined  at  home, 
so  many  were  the  kind  invitations  we  received,  not 
only  in  Tashkent  but  in  every  Russian  town. 

The  Russian  streets,  as  I  have  said,  were  wide 
and  empty,  but  we  found  the  native  ones  narrow 
and  full,  and  there  was  plenty  to  see  and  learn  as 
we  strolled  in  the  matting-covered  bazaar  with  its 
45CX)  booths,  or  visited  the  homes  of  rich  and  poor 
in  turn.  We  found  mounted  Russian  policemen 
keeping  order  at  the  crossings,  and  thus  preventing 
the  collisions  that  would  have  otherwise  been  un- 
avoidable between  strings  of  camels,  native  carts, 
and  Russian  droshkies;  but  the  thing  that  impressed 
us  most,  both  in  the  Old  Tashkent  and  the  New, 
was  the  extraordinary  depth  of  the  liquid  mud 
which  made  it  out  of  the  question  to  think  of  cross- 
ing any  street  on  foot. 


240  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

It  was  still  midwinter  when  we  retraced  our  steps 
to  Samarkand,  a  distance  of  200  miles.  This  was 
not  my  first  visit  to  the  "centre  of  the  globe,"  as 
the  Persian  proverb  has  it.  I  had  seen  Samar- 
kand before,  adorned  in  aU  its  summer  beauty,  and 
could  picture  its  scattered  houses  peeping  out  from 
amongst  green  foliage,  as  luxuriant  as  that  of  a 
forest  glade.  The  long  avenue  of  acacia-trees 
leading  from  the  station  to  the  Russian  town  was 
leafless  now,  but  the  scene  was  gay  with  brilliantly 
robed  and  turbaned  natives,  many  of  them  trotting 
along  on  the  lively  little  donkeys  for  which  Samar- 
kand is  famed.  It  is  here  that  the  eye  feasts  on 
colour.  It  is  here  that  the  Sart  appears  as  a  butter- 
fly. In  Bokhara  he  has  not  room  to  spread  l^is 
rainbow  wings,  and  in  all  the  other  towns  where 
Uzbeg  influence  prevails  he  is  a  sombre  moth  by 
comparison. 

On  revisiting  the  world-famed  ruins  that  still 
remind  us  of  Tamerlane  and  his  splendour,  I 
was  glad  to  find  them  more  carefully  guarded 
than  formerly.  Native  custodians  are  now  on  the 
watch  against  barbaric  tourists  and  professors  with 
hammers.  There  are  actually  notices  up  in  English 
to  the  effect  that  no  damage  is  to  be  done.  The 
exquisitely  carved  wooden  door  of  Tamerlane's 
tomb  has  been  transported  to  the  Asiatic  Museum 
in  St.  Petersburg,  and  perhaps  that  is  as  well.  I 
felt  myself  a  privileged  mortal  when  I  looked  once 


TASHKENT  AND  SAMARKAND   241 

more  upon  the  Gur  Emir  or  grave  of  the  commander, 
as  the  Sarts  call  it.  As  we  approached,  the  impos- 
ing cupola  rose  before. us  above  the  trees  at  the 
end  of  the  long  avenue  that  inclines  upward  to  its 
entrance,  and  the  mosaic  tilework  of  palest  blue- 
green,  with  which  it  is  still  covered'  in  patches, 
shone  in  the  morning  sunlight.  We  entered  by 
the  quaint  portico  which  is  all  that  remains  of  what 
was  once  the  entrance  both  to  the  tomb  and  to  the 
medresse  at  its  side.  The  mosaic  over  the  archway 
has  remained  almost  intact,  and  the  inscription  in 
white  Arabic  letters  on  an  azure  background,  which 
forms  the  centre  of  the  design,  has  been  left  un- 
touched by  time:  ''Mohammed  the  son  of  Mah- 
moud  from  Isfahan  was  the  architect." 

Tamerlane  superintended  the  building  of  his  own 
tomb.  The  workmen  were  the  prisoners  he  had 
brought  with  him  from  India,  China,  and  Persia. 
We  passed  under  the  archway,  and  standing  in  a 
courtyard  which  was  at  one  time  joined  to  the  tomb 
by  the  buildings  of  the  medresse,  looked  up  at  the 
melon-shaped  cupola,  ornamented  at  its  base  with 
verses  from  the  Koran,  in  characters  so  large  that 
the  "Alif"  measured  ten  feet  if  not  more.  I 
inquired  how  high  it  was. 

**  Its  height  is  unknown,"  replied  my  companion, 
a  Persian  and  Arabic  scholar,  who  had  studied  all 
the  available  literature  upon  the  subject.  **  It  has 
never  been  thought  of.     When  you  look  up  inside," 

Q 


242  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

he  continued,  **  you  will  not  think  it  nearly  so  high, 
for  there  are  two  cupolas,  one  inside  the  other,  and 
the  inner  one  is  considerably  lower  than  the  other." 

And  such  indeed  was  the  case.  Over  the  door  of 
the  side  entrance  is  written  in  white  letters,  again 
on  a  blue  background,  an  inscription  which  my 
friend  translated  as  :  ''  Here  is  buried  Timur 
Kuragan." 

The  word  Kuragan  signifies  that  he  was  allied 
by  marriage  to  a  royal  princess.  The  floor  of  the 
antechamber  was  covered  with  pieces  of  coarse 
matting.  When  the  Sarts  who  accompanied  us 
had  taken  off  their  shoes,  we  entered  the  chamber 
beneath  the  cupola,  in  the  centre  of  which,  enclosed 
by  a  beautifully  sculptured  marble  railing  about  two 
feet  in  height,  lay  the  flat  tombstones  in  honour  of 
Tamerlane,  his  confessor,  and  several  members  of 
this  family.  The  actual  graves  are  in  a  vault 
below.  We  visited  them  afterwards,  descending 
a  winding  stair  of  seven  stone  steps,  which  was 
illumined  for  our  benefit  by  our  Sart  companions, 
each  of  whom  carried  a  piece  of  lighted  candle. 

There,  in  front  of  our  eyes,  lay  the  renowned  block 
of  shining  jasper,  in  two  pieces.  It  was  a  very  dark 
green,  almost  black,  in  colour,  and  covered  all  over 
with  Arabic  writing.  There  is  a  legend  that  it  was 
broken  by  some  robbers  when  they  tried  to  carry 
it  away. 

*'  How  many  camels,"  said  my  friend  as  we  looked 


TASHKENT  AND   SAMARKAND      243 

at  it,  "must  have  perished  in  the  transport  of  that 
unique  mass  of  nephrite !  It  was  brought  from  the 
Altai  mountains,  but  the  spot  and  the  year  are  un- 
known." 

A  well-known  Russian  geologist,  M.  Mushvetoff, 
is  of  the  opinion  that  it  was  brought  from  the  Kuan 
Sun  Mountains,  and  is  the  only  one  of  its  kind.  A 
translation  of  the  inscription,  published  in  1 90 1,  by 
M.  Medinsky,  son  of  the  present  governor  of  Samar- 
kand, is  as  follows :  "  This  is  the  tomb  of  the  great 
Sultan,  of  the  great  and  merciful  monarch.  Amir 
Timur  Kuragan,  son  of  the  Amir  Taragaz  "  (and  here 
comes  a  genealogy  of  nine  generations).  "  Ghengis 
Khan  came  from  the  same  stock  as  the  ancestors  of 
this  sultan  worthy  of  praise,  buried  in  this  sacred 
and  superb  tomb.  Let  all  know  that  the  mother  of 
one  of  the  ancestors  of  Tamerlane,  named  Alan- 
kociva,  known  far  and  wide  for  her  chastity  and 
spotless  virtue,  was  once  visited  by  a  wolf  in  the 
form  of  a  man,  who  persuaded  her  that  he  was  a 
descendant  of  the  sovereign  of  the  Faithful,  Ali,  son 
of  Abru  Talib,  and  that  Allah  had  destined  him  to 
be  her  husband.  She  consented  to  their  union,  and 
when  her  son  was  bom  her  word,  with  regard  to  his 
parentage,  was  received  as  pure  truth.  Her  worthy 
descendants  conquered  the  world,  and  they  will  pos- 
sess it  for  ever." 

"  An  important  and  interesting  discovery  has  been 
made  during  the  last  few  months  with  regard  to  this 


244  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

inscription,"  said  my  companion.  "We  have  now 
proved  that  the  word  wolf  is  incorrect,  and  that  the 
letters  signify  a  ray  of  sunshine.  The  mistake  was 
owing  to  the  ravages  of  time  upon  the  first  letter  of 
the  word.  The  Arabic  equivalent  for  B  was  formerly 
read ;  we  now  read  N.  It  is  certainly  much  more 
probable  that  Tamerlane  should  have  traced  his 
origin  to  the  sun  than  to  a  wolf."^ 

The  other  tombstones  were  of  rough  unpolished 
marble  like  those  in  the  native  burial-grounds  of  the 
present  day.  Marble  is  as  plentiful  in  Samarkand 
as  it  is  in  some  parts  of  Italy,  but  though  one  sees 
so  much  of  it,  it  is  seldom  polished.  The  most 
prominent  tomb  after  that  of  Tamerlane  is  that  of 
a  mullah  whom  Tamerlane  brought  with  him  from 
Afghanistan,  because  he  attributed  his  successes  to 
the  prayers  of  this  holy  man,  and  wished  him  to 
continue  his  intercessions  on  his  behalf.  At  the 
head  of  the  mullah's  tomb  are  two  poles  bearing 
flags  and  horsehair  tails,  the  usual  emblems  used 
to  mark  the  spot  where  a  saint  has  been  laid  to 
rest.  The  walls  of  the  chamber  are  decorated  with 
a  dado  of  sculptured  and  polished  sardonyx,  while 
the  four  arched  recesses  are  decorated  with  stalactite 
work  of  crumbling  stucco,  somewhat  resembling  that 
of  the  Alhambra. 

The  tombs  of  Tamerlane's  relatives  lie  in  two 

I  The  Nogai  Tatars  have  a  tradition  that  Ghengis  Khan  was 
bom  among  them  of  a  virgin  by  a  sunbeam.  See  the  travels  of 
Haxthausen,  published  in  1856. 


TASHKENT  AND  SAMARKAND   245 

rows,  with  the  remains  of  a  mosaic-covered  passage 
of  fairy-like  beauty  between  them,  which  leads  to 
the  tomb  of  Shah  Zindah^  or  the  Living  King,  over 
whkh  stands  a  mosque  called  after  him.  The  Sarts 
firmly  believe  that  he  is  only  asleep,  and  that  he 
will  one  day  rise  up  and  reconquer  the  world  for 
Mohammed.  On  the  handsome  flight  of  steps  by 
which  this  beautiful  ruin  is  approached  there  are 
always  to  be  found  a  number  of  sedate  and  vener- 
able mullahs,  who  have  a  hereditary  right  to  haunt 
the  holy  precincts.  When  we  appeared  upon  the 
scene,  one  of  them  rose  with  dignity  and  went  before 
us  with  a  rosary  in  his  hand.  It  was  he  who  pointed 
out  to  us  the  Chillah  Hanah^  or  Hole  of  Forty  Days, 
which  I  have  described  elsewhere.  He  also  told  me 
that  Shah  Zindah  was  one  of  the  Arab  chiefs  who 
conquered  the  country  long  before  the  time  of  Tamer- 
lane ;  he  was  a  first  cousin  of  Mohammed.  We  were 
then  taken  into  the  room  in  front  of  the  tomb,  which  is 
said  to  be  the  most  ancient  room  in  Samarkand.  It 
was  built  fifty-twoyears  after  the  flight  of  Mohammed. 
Close  outside  the  mosque  are  some  remains  of  the 
ancient  wall  built  by  Alexander.  The  old  cemetery 
in  its  vicinity  is  a  happy  hunting-ground  for  curio- 
seekers,  especially  after  rain  has  fallen.  Children 
come  here  to  look  for  Greek  coins.  It  is  here  that 
the  tomb  of  Alexander's  friend  Clitus  is  supposed 
to  be ;  but  as  the  Sarts  have  a  way  of  burying  their 

*  See  Chap.  III.  Part  I. 


246  IN   RUSSIAN   TURKESTAN 

dead  one  upon  another,  there  Is  no  knowing  how 
many  deep  they  may  not  lie  above  that  hero.  Before 
leaving  Shah  Zindah  I  asked  the  mullah  with  the 
rosary  how  many  steps  there  were  leading  up  to  it, 
to  which  he  replied : — 

"  I  have  often  tried  to  count  them,  but  the  number 
comes  different  every  time ! " 

On  coming  away,  my  companion,  the  Oriental 
scholar,  explained  to  me  that  the  figure  of  a  fish 
which  I  had  noticed  on  several  of  the  tombs  was 
cut  in  the  stone  as  a  symbol  of  silence. 

We  next  visited  the  mosque  of  Bibi  Kanim,  the 
Chinese  wife  of  Tamerlane.  It  is  magnificent  still, 
though  much  of  it  has  fallen  during  the  last  three 
or  four  years.  I  fear  it  would  be  the  first  to  suffer 
should  there  be  another  earthquake,  for  there  are 
many  fresh  cracks  in  its  tottering  walls.  The 
medresse  which  was  once  connected  with  it  has 
already  crumbled  and  fallen,  only  a  wall  or  two  now 
standing.  The  mosque  formerly  stood  in  a  court 
300  feet  long  and  250  feet  broad,  paved  throughout 
with  marble.  From  the  historian  Abu  Tagir  Khogi 
we  learn  that  Tamerlane  brought  two  hundred  stone- 
masons from  Persia  and  India  besides  five  hundred 
artists,  and  that  princes  of  the  blood  superintended 
the  building,  besides  which  Tamerlane  was  constantly 
present  in  person  to  encourage  the  workers. 

Ii^  the  Russian  citadel  is  the  koktash,  or  blue 
stone,  on  which  the  Amirs  of  Bokhara  were  regu- 


TASHKENT  AND  SAMARKAND      247 

larly  crowned,  so  to  speak,  for  there  was  no  crown, 
until  the  Russians  took  it  from  them.  The  ceremony 
took  place  in  this  manner :  A  large  piece  of  white 
felt  was  spread  upon  the  ground,  and  on  this  the 
new  Amir  had  to  take  his  seat.  Then  four  of  the 
principal  dignitaries  of  the  Khanate  lifted  the  cloth 
by  its  four  comers,  and,  raising  it  high  in  the  air, 
placed  it  upon  the  sacred  stone. 

The  Rigistatiy  or  public  square,  is  formed  by  three 
fine  medresses — the  Shir  Dar^  or  Lion  Gods;  the 
Tilla^Karri^  or  golden-dressed ;  and  the  Ulug  Begy 
named  after  the  celebrated  astronomer  of  that  name, 
a  grandson  of  Tamerlane.^  He  must  have  been  a 
man  of  some  character,  for  he  did  not  hesitate  to 
punish  his  own  son  for  taking  the  lead  in  an  insur- 
rection against  him,  by  cutting  off  his  head  and 
exhibiting  it  to  the  people  from  the  walls  of  this 
medresse.  The  ruins  of  his  observatory  on  a  hill 
outside  the  town  are  still  to  be  seen.  Great  is  the 
esteem  in  which  his  medical  skill  is  still  held  in 
Bokhara.  I  do  not  think  I  should  recognise  the 
Registan  if  I  saw  it  empty.  Every  time  we  looked 
in,  it  was  swarming  with  brightly-robed  idlers ;  and 
the  walls  of  its  medresses  were  always  fringed  with 
the  gleaming  turbans  of  Sarts,  who  seemed  to  have 
nothing  in  the  world  to  do  but  enjoy  the  spectacle 
of  the  crowd  below. 

It  will  be  interesting  to  see  what  place  Samarkand 
^  See  note,  p.  171. 


248  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

eventually  takes  among  the  Russian  towns  of  Tur- 
kestan. At  present  it  is  in  a  sleepy  state,  and 
unless  it  bestirs  itself,  it  will  soon  be  left  behind 
in  the  race,  with  nothing  to  boast  of  but  its  ruins 
and  its  historical  past.  So  long  as  the  railway  went 
no  further,  there  was  every  reason  to  hope  that  it 
would  bring  new  life  to  the  ancient  capital  of  Tamer- 
lane. Travellers  by  rail  were  forced  to  alight  there 
and  continue  their  journey  by  tarantass.  Six  years 
ago  I  greatly  enjoyed  watching  whole  families,  who 
had  been  my  fellow-passengers  across  the  Caspian, 
packing  themselves,  father,  mother,  babies,  servants 
and  all,  into  the  huge  barrel  on  wheels  that  was  to 
convey  them  by  slow  stages  to  Tashkent.  Now  the 
train  only  stops  twenty  minutes  in  the  station,  and 
no  one  who  is  not  bound  for  Samarkand  ever  dreams 
of  alighting.  Energetic  business  men  who  had  de- 
liberately chosen  Samarkand  as  their  centre,  and 
even  built  themselves  houses  there,  are  now  seri- 
ously meditating  a  move  to  Tashkent  or  Kokand, 
as  more  suitable  places  in  which  to  make  a  fortune. 
It  was  only  in  1899  that  a  train  entered  Kokand  for 
the  first  time,  yet  many  fortune-seekers  from  the  old 
country  have  already  chosen  that  bustling  and  lively 
little  town  in  preference  to  sleepy  Samarkand.  I 
am  not  at  all  inclined  to  think  that  this  state  of 
things  was  the  wish  of  the  Russian  Government. 
The  beautifully  laid  out  pleasure-gardens,  the  hand- 
some church,  and  the  absolutely  palatial  splendour 


TASHKENT  AND  SAMARKAND   249 

of  the  new  Russo-Chinese  bank,  all  tell  a  different 
tale.  But  Russia  must  do  more  if  she  wishes  to 
save  the  prestige  of  this  beautiful  town.  She  must 
put  a  man  with  the  energies  of  a  Kuropatkin  there, 
if  only  for  a  year  or  two. 

In  the  autumn  of  1898  I  read  in  the  English 
papers  that  Samarkand  had  been  attacked  by  plague, 
but  I  found  on  making  inquiries  on  the  spot  in  1901 
that  the  real  facts  of  the  case  were  as  follows.  Near 
the  lake  of  Iskander,  or  Alexander,  there  is  a  small 
mountain  village  called  Anzob,  the  inhabitants  of 
which  are  said  to  be  direct  descendants  of  some  of 
the  Greek  soldiers  who  accompanied  Alexander  the 
Great  on  his  conquering  journey  from  Macedon  to 
Sogdiana.  It  was  in  this  village  that  a  terrible  and 
unknown  disease  broke  out  in  1898.  Every  pre- 
caution was  taken  by  the  Russians  to  prevent  its 
spreading  to  Samarkand,  and  happily  it  did  not 
spread.  Anzob  is  so  situated  that  to  reach  it  from 
Samarkand  one  must  ride  for  a  considerable  distance 
along  a  dangerous  and  circuitous  path  which  skirts 
the  side  of  a  steep  mountain,  at  the  foot  of  which 
lies  the  lake.  The  Russian  lady  doctors  who 
attended  the  women  of  Anzob  got  so  accustomed, 
through  their  constant  journeys  thither,  to  the 
difficulties  of  the  route  that  they  actually  began  to 
take  it  at  a  canter !  But  when  this  reached  the  ears 
of  the  authorities  it  was  put  a  stop  to,  as  being  an 
unnecessary  risk  of  human  life. 


250  IN  RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

Though  Samarkand  is  well  watered  by  its  canals 
from  the  Zarafshan,  it  has  no  water-works,  and 
every  Russian  household  has  to  depend  for  its 
supply  on  native  water-carriers,  and  the  water  has 
always  to  be  boiled,  for,  although  in  itself  it  is  pure 
enough,  there  is  no  knowing  what  may  be  the  state 
of  the  vessels  in  which  it  is  brought. 


CHAPTER  II 

KOKAND,  CHYUST,  AND  NAMANGAN 

KoKANDi  in  the  Khanate  of  that  name,  was  for- 
merly the  chief  town  of  Fergana.  The  word  is 
derived  from  Ko^z,  wild  boar,  and  Kand^^  town, 
and  means  "  the  town  of  the  wild  boars."  Fergana 
is  perhaps  the  most  fertile  province  in  the  whole  of 
Central  Asia,  and  its  inhabitants  are  in  consequence 
richer  if  not  happier  than  their  neighbours.  Kokand 
was  enjoying  a  spell  of  sharp,  cold  weather  when 
we  arrived,  and  the  natives  were  walking  about  in 
thickly  wadded  cotton  robes,  with  sleeves  a  foot 
longer  than  their  arms,  which  completely  hid  their 
hands  and  flapped  with  every  movement  like  the 
fins  of  a  fish. 

The  Sart  town  contains  several  fine  medresses,^ 
the  largest  of  which,  Medresse  Jammi,  accommo- 
dates fifteen  hundred  pupils.  The  total  number  of 
medresses  is  fifty-six,  and  there  are  between  five 
and  six  hundred  mosques.  We  visited  the  family 
tombs  of  Kudoyar,  the  last  Khan  of  Kokand.  They 
are  in  a  piece  of  ground  that  the  Russians  have 
turned  into  a  park.  Kudoyar  is  not  buried  there ; 
1  See  Chap.  IX. 


252  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

he  died  in  Mecca,  to  which  town  he  fled  after  dis- 
tributing his  many  wives  among  the  most  faithful 
of  his  followers.  Kokand  used  to  have  its  own 
coinage.  The  Russian  Government  has  bought  up 
all  the  native  money  it  could  find,  but  some  of  the 
old  people  still  hoard  it  in  their  houses.  Just  before 
we  arrived  a  poor  old  man  was  robbed  of  all  his 
hidden  wealth,  the  worth  of  which  in  English  money 
was  ;£'20.  The  gold  coin  was  called  a  tilla^  and  the 
people  still  count  in  tillas.  The  silver  coins  are  of 
unadulterated  metal,  and  are  bought  up  by  the 
Government  as  pure  silver. 

The  palace  of  the  Khans  looks  far  better  in  a 
photograph  than  it  does  in  reality.  Its  mosaic 
front  is  but  a  miserable  imitation  of  the  beautiful 
art  which  Tamerlane  brought  to  such  perfection  iQ 
Samarkand.  The  Russians  now  use  the  palace  as 
a  church.  They  would  have  built  an  edifice  of  their 
own,  but  for  the  difficulty  and  expense  of  draining 
the  plot  of  ground  that  has  long  been  set  apart  for 
the  purpose. 

It  was  in  Kokand  that  we  witnessed  the  great 
religious  service  with  which  Ramazan  was  brought 
to  a  close.  Our  friend  the  chief  of  the  police  was 
bound  to  be  on  the  spot  to  keep  order,  and  he  kindly 
called  for  us,  on  his  way  to  the  principal  mosque,  at 
the  early  hour  of  7  A.M.  The  streets  were  full  of 
people  hastening  to  the  festival,  with  their  goloshes 
in  their  hands  to  keep  them  clean.     A  boy  with 


KOKAND,  CHYUST,  AND  NAMANGAN  253 

two  live  fowls  under  one  arm  was  standing  at  the 
entrance,  and  a  cart  loaded  with  melons  had  drawn 
up  close  by.  When  we  arrived  the  square  in  front 
of  the  mosque  was  already  crowded,  as  well  as  the 
inside  of  the  building.  Every  inch  of  standing 
place  upon  the  surrounding  walls  was  thick  with 
worshippers.  Each  man  had  either  a  prayer- 
carpet  under  his  arm  or  an  embroidered  hand- 
kerchief round  his  waist  to  be  used  as  such,  and, 
when  the  call  for  prayer  was  heard  from  the 
minaret  in  the  centre  of  the  square,  the  whole 
throng  spread  their  carpets  or  girdles  and  pro- 
strated themselves  in  perfect  order.  In  answer 
to  my  inquiries  as  to  how  many  people  there  were 
present,  the  chief  of  police  replied  that  there  were 
qjiite  five  thousand  worshippers  within  the  precincts, 
and  not  less  than  ten  thousand  in  the  street  outside. 
It  was  truly  a  magnificent  spectacle.  At  the  close 
of  the  service  a  solemn  prayer  was  offered  for  the 
Emperor  of  Russia.  Then  there  was  a  general 
shaking  of  hands  and  the  crowd  began  to  disperse. 
On  the  roof  of  a  house  near  the  entrance  sat  a 
group  of  Sart  musicians,  each  armed  with  a  gigantic 
*'  trumpet  of  Jericho."  The  blasts  they  blew  from 
these  terrific  tubes  were  loud,  if  not  agreeable. 

The  Russian  town  of  Kokand  consists  of  two 
long  streets,  the  Rosenbach  and  the  Skobeleff. 
These  are  already  crowded  with  houses,  and  I 
trust,  for  the  sake   of  the  colonists,  that  it  will 


254  IN   RUSSIAN   TURKESTAN 

not  ,  be  long  before  new  streets  are  added.  In 
1902  the  Sart  town  had  a  population  of  eighty 
thousand,  and  the  Russian  three  thousand.  The 
latter  contains  a  good  sprinkling  of  well-paid 
representatives  of  some  of  the  great  business 
houses  of  Moscow.  These  keep  the  civil  element 
in  a  flourishing  condition,  with  the  result  that  there 
is  a  pleasant  feeling  of  commercial  prosperity  in  the 
air ;  a  feeling  which  is  sadly  lacking  in  some  of  the 
other  towns.  The  administration  is  military.  Con- 
sidering the  civil  needs  of  the  town,  this  fact  strikes 
the  traveller  as  slightly  incongruous ;  but  Rome  was 
not  built  in  a  day,  and  things  will  right  themselves 
in  time. 

There  is  as  yet  no  railway  to  Namangan,  so  we 
had  to  order  a  tarantass  to  take  us  thither.  Two 
horses  were  harnessed  to  the  vehicle,  and  a  third 
ran  at  the  side  with  a  loose  rein.  It  was  what  the 
Russians  call  a  troika.  We  packed  ourselves  in  at 
7.30  A.M.,  with  provisions  for  lunch  and  a  small 
valise.  We  had,  of  course,  our  rugs  and  our  fur 
cloaks,  but  these,  our  friends  had  assured  us, 
would  not  be  sufficient  to  keep  out  the  cold,  so 
we  wisely  accepted  the  loan  of  two  gentlemen's 
coats  made  of  black  sheepskin,  into  which  we  and 
our  English  wraps  disappeared  so  completely  that 
only  the  tops  of  our  heads  were  visible.  For 
knowing  how  to  keep  warm  in  freezing  weather, 
there  is  no  one  like  a  Russian.     We  were  in  that 


KOKAND,  CHYUST,  AND  NAMANGAN  255 

tarantass  for  twelve  hours,  and  were  all  the  time 
as  warm  as  if  we  had  been  sitting  by  a  roasting 
fire.  The  sun  shone  brightly  all  day,  but  a  white 
frost  covered  the  ground,  which  was  very  hard  in 
consequence.  An  inch  of  ice  lay  on  the  water  in 
the  canals.  Our  undipped  horses  had  long,  curling 
hair,  and  long  tails  knotted  up  with  string.  The 
chief  of  police  rode  with  us  to  the  outskirts  of  the 
town  and  then  turned  back,  leaving  a  mounted 
Cossack  to  ride  in  front  and  clear  the  way.  After 
the  Cossack  had  preceded  us  in  state  for  half-an- 
hour  he  handed  us  over  to  the  care  of  a  mounted 
Sart  policeman,  who  rode  ahead  for  the  rest  of  the 
journey,  clearing  all  and  sundry  out  of  our  way 
with  a  long  whip  which  he  brandished  in  the  air 
as  if  it  were  a  scimitar.  On  and  on  we  drove, 
passing  now  one  village  now  another.  All  were 
built  entirely  of  mud,  with  never  a  door  or  window 
to  be  seen.  The  post-road  was  lined  with  double 
rows  of  leafless  willow-trees,  in  the  branches  of 
which  were  stacked  great  loads  of  maize  stalks. 
Between  the  rows  of  willows  were  canals.  Just 
as  we  got  to  the  first  post-house  something  went 
wrong  with  one  of  our  wheels,  so  we  halted  to  get 
it  mended,  as  well  as  to  rest  the  horses.  Villagers 
old  and  young  squatted  down  on  the  frosty  ground 
on  every  side  of  us  and  chatted  gaily  with  our 
driver.  With  the  chocolate-coloured  walls  of  the 
mud  houses  as  a  background,  these  people  made 


2S6  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

a  wonderful  picture  in  their  robes  of  every  hue. 
One  man  had  on  a  garment  of  brightest  apple- 
green  and  a  white  turban,  another  sported  a  robe 
of  yellow  and  red  stripes.  Every  one  of  the 
villagers  had  high  leather  boots.  Over  our  heads 
hovered  hundreds  of  magpies,  floating  in  circles 
and  occasionally  settling  in  swarms  on  the  tops 
of  the  leafless  trees.  On  we  went  again,  past 
more  villages  and  high  mud  walls  surrounding 
private  vineyards.  When  you  pass  through  vil- 
lages in  England  it  is  the  women  who  come  out, 
with  their  little  ones  in  their  arms,  to  have  a  look 
at  the  strangers.  In  Turkestan  it  is  the  men,  and 
they  hold  their  children  quite  as  tenderly  as  any 
woman  could.  At  the  next  post-house  we  ordered 
a  samovar,  made  some  tea,  and  ate  our  lunch. 
When  we  got  once  more  into  our  tarantass,  we 
found  to  our  dismay  that  one  of  our  rugs  had 
disappeared.  We  never  saw  it  again.  The  great 
event  of  the  journey  from  Kokand  to  Namangan 
is  the  crossing  of  the  river  Syr  Daria  (the  Jaxartes 
of  the  ancients).  There  is  no  such  thing  as  a  bridge 
in  those  parts.  When  we  reached  the  bank  we  found 
a  crowd  of  natives  waiting  to  cross. 

The  horses  were  now  taken  from  our  tarantass 
and  led  on  to  the  front  of  the  raft  on  which  we 
were  to  be  floated  over  to  the  other  side.  There 
were  a  number  of  other  horses  there  already,  and 
some  of  these  began  to  kick  and  show  fight  as  the 


KOKAND,  CHYUST,  AND  NAMANGAN  257 

men  pushed  them  all  together  to  leave  as  much  space 
as  possible  for  the  vehicles.  We  got  out,  and  our 
tarantass  was  then  pulled  on  to  the  raft,  and  as 
many  other  carts  were  crowded  in  behind  it  as  the 
raft  would  hold.  Then  we  were  floated  across. 
Happily  the  day  was  calm  and  the  water  quiet. 
When  there  is  a  storm  it  is  impossible  to  get  the 
raft  across.  Once  on  the  other  side,  we  soon  had 
our  horses  in  again,  and  were  off  at  a  brisk  pace 
across  a  stony  waste  of  desert  land  that  lay  be- 
tween the  river  and  our  next  halting-place — the 
town  of  Chyust. 

Chyust  is  a  Sart  town  with  a  population  of  sixteen 
thousand.  Here  the  Tajik  element  predominates. 
It  has  not  a  Russian  town  of  the  same  name  attached 
to  it  like  all  the  others,  but  there  are  already  three 
European  houses  standing  close  together  in  a  newly- 
made  street.  One  of  these  is  occupied  by  the  chief 
of  the  district.  That  gentleman  has  a  French  gover- 
ness for  his  children,  and  from  the  young  lady  I  heard 
that  out  of  twenty-five  seeking  situations  she  was 
the  only  one  who  had  had  the  courage  to  accept  a 
post  so  far  from  home,  in  a  town  that  nobody  had 
ever  heard  of.  I  may  add  that  we  were  the  first 
Englishwomen  to  arrive  there,  and  as  yet  neither 
Chyust  nor  Namangan  has  ever  seen  an  Englishman, 
nor  indeed  an  American,  unless  he  has  appeared  on 
the  scene  since  February  1902. 

I  shall  always  remember  with  pleasure  the  hours 

R 


258  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

we  spent  at  Chyust,  and  the  kind  hospitality  of  our 
Russian  host  and  hostess.  The  next  morning  I 
wandered  round  the  town,  note-book  in  hand,  and 
greatly  impressed  the  natives  by  so  doing.  It  evi- 
dently pleased  them  to  find  that  they  and  their 
homes  were  worth  writing  about.  The  largest 
mosque  is  three  hundred  and  fifty  years  old.  The 
entrance  to  this,  and  indeed  the  entrance  to  each  of 
the  mosques,  was  barred  by  a  thick  wooden  rail 
apparently  as  old  as  the  doorway,  and  about  two 
feet  and  a  half  from  the  ground.  It  was  not  easy 
for  a  lady  with  long  skirts  to  clamber  over  these,  and 
I  could  see  that  the  mosques  of  Chyust,  at  any  rate, 
were  only  intended  for  male  worshippers.  How  the 
crowd  of  boys  that  followed  me  enjoyed  watching  my 
efforts  to  leap  gracefully  over  the  barriers  I  But  it 
was  worth  trying,  if  only  to  see  their  merry  faces, 
and  prove  that  the  Sart  is  not  devoid  of  humour, 
whatever  may  be  his  other  characteristics. 

Our  journey  from  Chyust  to  Namangan  lay 
through  another  wide  expanse  of  stony  ground, 
with  here  and  there  a  large  village,  each  of  which 
was  surrounded  by  vineyards  as  before,  and  then 
again  by  high  mud  walls,  over  which  we  could  only 
just  see  the  tops  of  the  vines.  The  villagers  con- 
tinued to  take  a  lazy  interest  in  us  as  we  passed,  but 
there  was  not  a  single  case  of  begging.  Where  in 
Europe,  I  should  like  to  ask,  could  we  drive  through 
a  dozen  villages  and  say  as  much  ?      Until  quite 


KOKAND,  CHYUST,  AND  NAMANGAN  259 

recently  a  Sart  woman  in  these  parts  would  scream 
if  she  met  a  Russian  in  the  street,  no  matter  how 
closely  her  impenetrable  veil  might  be  drawn  over 
her  charming  features.  It  seems  that  such  treatment 
was  unpleasing  to  the  Russians,  for  they  took  strong 
measures  to  stop  this  greeting  (if  I  may  make  a  Scotch 
pun).  Every  time  a  woman  screamed  her  husband 
had  to  pay  a  fine.     The  remedy  proved  most  effectual. 

We  reached  Namangan  late  in  the  evening,  but  it 
was  not  too  dark  to  see  the  rows  of  poplar-trees  that 
lined  streets  as  wide  as  those  of  Tashkent.  The 
native  town  here  is  in  a  particularly  prosperous  con- 
dition. Many  poor  Sarts  have  become  rich  since 
the  introduction  of  American  cotton.  In  contrast  to 
Chyust,  this  town  is  almost  purely  Uzbeg.  The 
Mohammedan  law  that  you  must  pay  your  debts  is 
strictly  kept ;  the  people  are  so  honest  that  Russians 
will  trust  them  with  large  sums  of  money  without 
any  security,  but  at  the  same  time  they  are  inclined 
to  be  miserly,  and  would  take  care  to  get  a  farthing 
from  you  if  you  owed  it  them.  It  is  sad  that  the 
result  of  keeping  of  Mohammedan  laws  is  not  al- 
ways so  favourable.  The  number  of  murders  would 
probably  be  much  smaller  had  not  that  prophet 
forbidden /fosf-morUm  examinations. 

Land  in  Namangan  has  five  times  the  agricultural 
value  that  it  has  in  Kokand.  I  speak,  of  course,  of 
land  watered  by  canals.  The  rest  is  useless  desert, 
for  no  private  individual  could  afford  to  reclaim  it. 


26o  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

The  word  Namangan  is  a  Persian  word  meaning 
"  salt  town/'  All  the  salt  used  in  Fergana  comes 
from  here.  Nearly  everybody  in  the  Russian  town 
is  connected  with  the  growing,  or  cleaning,  or  ex- 
porting of  cotton.  The  present  chief  of  the  district 
has  done  much  to  improve  both  the  Russian  and  the 
native  towns.  He  has  had  wooden  lamps  placed  at 
regular  intervals  along  the  streets,  and,  in  order  that 
the  posts  may  not  rot,  he  has  invented  the  ingenious 
plan  of  encasing  them  in  iron  pipes. 

The  new  prison  is  a  fine  building,  with  large  and 
airy  rooms  (they  can  hardly  be  called  cells)  all  white- 
washed and  spotlessly  clean;  they  are  used  for 
Russians  and  natives  alike.  All  the  work  of  the 
prison  is  done  by  native  prisoners.  Even  the  head 
cook  is  a  Sart.  We  found  four  Sart  women  in  one  of 
the  rooms.  One  had  murdered  her  husband  from 
jealousy,  another  had  helped  to  murder  some  one 
else's  husband.  There  is  also  a  smaller  prison  for 
those  convicted  of  slight  offences.  These  are  taken 
out  to  work  in  the  streets  all  day.  Many  a  Sart 
will  deliberately  steal  something  in  the  autumn,  in 
order  that  he  may  have  a  comfortable  place  to  sleep 
in  during  the  winter  months,  in  which  the  weather 
is  usually  as  cold  as  it  is  in  the  county  of  Middlesex, 
if  not  colder.  In  the  centre  of  the  Russian  pleasure- 
grounds  there  is  a  little  piece  of  water  where  skating 
can  be  indulged  in  during  the  month  of  January. 
Namangan  is  situated  on  the  right  bank  of  a  small 


KOKAND,  CHYUST,  AND  NAMANGAN  261 

river  that  flows  down  from  the  neighbouring  moun- 
tains. It  overflows  its  banks  every  now  and  then 
in  spring,  and  it  is  of  the  utmost  importance  to  the 
inhabitants  that  they  should  know  in  time  when  to 
open  their  side  canals,  and  secure  the  extra  water, 
which  would  otherwise  do  terrible  damage,  as  they 
know  from  past  experience.  Water,  like  fire,  is  a 
dangerous  master.  During  several  months  of  the 
year  men  with  their  horses  ready  are  stationed  day 
and  night  at  regular  intervals  along  the  course  of 
the  river  to  watch,  and  pass  on  the  news  directly  its 
floods  begin  to  swell. 

It  was  to  Namangan  that  a  party  of  monks 
journeyed  all  the  way  from  Syria  in  the  year  1901, 
that  they  might  search  for  certain  Christian  graves 
(of  Nestorian  Christians)  which,  according  to  their 
sacred  books,  must  lie  somewhere  near  that  town. 
They  succeeded  in  finding  several  graves,  but  when 
they  started  to  excavate,  the  Sarts  rose  to  a  man 
and  declared  that  the  saints  who  rested  there  were 
pious  followers  of  the  Prophet,  and  must  on  no 
account  be  disturbed. 

"  Let  us  at  least  dig  them  up,"  pleaded  the  monks, 
'*  and  see  which  way  their  bodies  have  been  laid, 
for  then  we  shall  have  convincing  proof." 

But  the  Sarts  were  obdurate,  and  the  monks 
turned  sorrowfully  homeward,  their  mission  unful- 
filled. They  were  missionaries  to  the  dead,  it  is 
true,  but  since  the  time  of  Wolff  there  has  been  no 


262  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

avowedly  Christian  mission  to  the  living  in  Russian 
Central  Asia. 

An  interesting  discovery  has  recently  been  made 
in  the  neighbourhood,  of  several  ancient  naphtha 
wells.  The  wood  in  them  is  so  hard  that  no  drill 
can  pierce  it,  and  experts  say  that  this  is  the  effect 
of  petroleum  coming  in  contact  with  it  for  many 
centuries.  They  suppose  the  wells  to  have  been 
built  by  Alexander's  followers. 

There  is  as  yet  no  theatre  in  Russian  Namangan, 
but  in  spite  of  this,  the  great  event  during  our  stay 
there  was  the  arrival  of  a  theatrical  company  from 
Russia.  A  room  in  the  Military  Club  was  fitted  up  for 
their  use,  and  we  were  amongst  their  first  audience. 

**  Did  they  come  from  Kokand  by  tarantass  ?  "  I 
whispered  to  my  nearest  neighbour,  after  the  first 
fall  of  the  curtain. 

"  Oh  dear  no,"  he  replied,  "  that  would  have  ruined 
them.  They  came  in  native  carts,  arbasy  and  took 
twice  as  long  on  the  road  as  you  did.  As  it  is  we 
are  making  a  collection  for  them  to  defray  the  ex- 
penses of  their  journey.  It  is  the  first  troupe  that  has 
ever  come  so  far  as  Namangan.  If  you  look  behind 
you,  you  will  see  that  the  back  seats  are  crowded 
with  Sarts.     This  is  something  quite  new  to  them." 

I  prefer  not  to  criticise  the  performance  of  the 
first  play  produced  in  Namangan ;  it  is  sufficient  to 
say  that  the  adventurous  spirit  of  the  actors  and  ac- 
tresses impressed  me  more  even  than  their  acting. 


CHAPTER  III 

MARGELAN  AND  ANDIJAN 

The  journey  by  tarantass  from  Namangan  to  Mar- 
gelan  occupied  twelve  hours.  Besides  the  post- 
house,  where  we  halted  for  tea,  there  is  no  place  on 
the  way  at  which  a  European  can  stop,  even  for 
half-an-hour.  As  Margelan  lies  on  the  same  side 
of  the  Syr  Daria  as  Kokand,  we  had  once  more  to 
trust  ourselves  to  the  primitive  raft  of  the  country. 
When  we  reached  the  bank,  about  midday,  we 
found  twenty  horses  already  on  board,  with  five 
men  holding  their  bridles.  Five  great  wheeled 
arbas  came  next,  and  left  very  little  room  for  our 
tarantass,  but  plentiful  tipping  did  wonders,  and  we 
were  soon  on  board.  This  time  we  did  not  alight. 
Oxxxjigit^  a  handsome  mounted  soldier  from  Naman- 
gan, superintended  the  unharnessing  and  stood  be- 
side his  own  horse,  patting  its  neck  and  encouraging 
it;  it  did  not  like  the  look  of  the  raft  at  all,  and  seemed 
inclined  to  be  restive.  At  this  crossing  the  water 
was  much  shallower,  and  three  men  on  horseback 
waded  across  with  the  raft,  singing  to  their  horses. 
Behind  us  a  stalwart  fellow  was  punting ;  ten  more 
pulled  at  a  rope  drawn  along  the  opposite   bank. 


264     •     IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

It  was  a  strange  scene,  that  little  spot  of  Eastern 
life  in  the  midst  of  the  flat,  brown  desert  stretching 
for  miles  in  every  direction  as  far  as  the  eye  could 
see,  with  the  silent  river  flowing  through  it — silent 
then,  but  often  rushing  like  a  mountain  torrent,  an 
impassable  barrier  between  Namangan  and  the  rest 
of  the  civilised  world.  I  looked  towards  the  re- 
ceding shore ;  it  was  easy  to  count  the  men  upon 
it,  for  their  white  turbans  stood  out  against  the 
brown  background  in  vivid  colouring.  On  the 
opposite  bank  we  descried  many  bales  of  cotton 
waiting  for  transport  to  Moscow.  They  were  coated 
with  boar-frost.  At  one  moment,  just  as  we  were 
nearing  land,  there  seemed  danger  of  a  general 
stampede  among  the  horses.  One  man  stroked  the 
head  of  his  restive  steed  and  threw  his  long  wadded 
sleeve  over  its  eyes.  Once  more  I  looked  back  at 
the  shore  we  had  left,  but  to  my  astonishment  it 
was  no  longer  visible,  a  thick  white  mist  had  risen 
like  a  wall  between  it  and  us. 

*'  El  hamdu  TlUah  ! "  cried  the  men  in  a  chorus. 
"  God  be  praised !  We  are  on  the  right  side  of  it ! " 
Then  they  began  to  call  upon  Mohammed  that  he 
might  keep  the  mist  back  till  they  had  landed.  At 
last  we  were  as  close  to  the  land  as  the  shallowness 
of  the  water  would  allow.  The  raft  stopped,  and  to 
ray  surprise  the  horses  had  now  to  be  whipped  till 
they  jumped  ashore.  When  they  had  all  taken  the 
necessary  leap  and  thus  cleared  the  way,  a  couple  of 


MARGELAN  AND  ANDIJAN  265 

planks  were  laid  across  from  the  bank,  which  was 
twelve  feet  deep,  and  the  wheels  of  our  tarantass 
were  carefully  guided  along  them.  To  me  that 
seemed  the  most  critical  moment  of  all,  for  had  one 
of  the  planks  slipped  an  inch,  where  should  we  and 
our  carriage  have  been  ?  At  this  juncture  the  sun 
burst  out  from  behind  the  clouds  and  cleared  away 
the  wall  of  mist  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye.  In 
another  moment  the  sky  had  become  an  azure  blue, 
and  the  river  had  taken  that  soft  opal  tint  which  one 
always  associates  with  the  waters  of  the  Nile. 

The  horses  were  now  put  in,  our  jigit  presiding 
with  dignity  and  giving  orders  all  the  time.  He  had 
on  a  grey  felt  coat  reaching  below  his  knees,  a 
Cossack  cap  of  astrakhan,  a  yellow  band  across 
his  shoulder,  and  a  yellow  cording  round  his  neck. 
Top-boots  and  a  powder-flask  completed  his  outfit. 
On  we  went  again,  the  ground  we  now  had  to 
cover  resembling  in  many  ways  an  English  moor, 
dotted  at  intervals  with  small  shrubs.  The  road 
became  worse  and  worse,  though  it  had  not  rained 
during. our  stay  at  Namangan.  The  frosted  ruts 
were  often  eighteen  inches  deep,  and  the  horses  had 
to  step  along  like  wild  goats  on  a  crag.  At  last  the 
animal  on  my  left  got  all  four  feet  into  one  of  these 
ruts,  and  OMXJigithzA  to  dismount  and  pull  the  poor 
creature  out,  for  it  was  powerless  to  extricate  itself 
without  help.  A  worse  road  for  horses  than  the 
last  bit  of  the  way  to  Margelan  I  could  not  imagine. 


256  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

a  wonderful  picture  in  their  robes  of  every  hue. 
One  man  had  on  a  garment  of  brightest  apple- 
green  and  a  white  turban,  another  sported  a  robe 
of  yellow  and  red  stripes.  Every  one  of  the 
villagers  had  high  leather  boots.  Over  our  heads 
hovered  hundreds  of  magpies,  floating  in  circles 
and  occasionally  settling  in  swarms  on  the  tops 
of  the  leafless  trees*  On  we  went  again,  past 
more  villages  and  high  mud  walls  surrounding 
private  vineyards.  When  you  pass  through  vil- 
lages in  England  it  is  the  women  who  come  out, 
with  their  little  ones  in  their  arms,  to  have  a  look 
at  the  strangers.  In  Turkestan  it  is  the  men,  and 
they  hold  their  children  quite  as  tenderly  as  any 
woman  could.  At  the  next  post-house  we  ordered 
a  samovar,  made  some  tea,  and  ate  our  lunch. 
When  we  got  once  more  into  our  tarantass,  we 
found  to  our  dismay  that  one  of  our  rugs  had 
disappeared.  We  never  saw  it  again.  The  great 
event  of  the  journey  from  Kokand  to  Namangan 
is  the  crossing  of  the  river  Syr  Daria  (the  Jaxartes 
of  the  ancients).  There  is  no  such  thing  as  a  bridge 
in  those  parts.  When  we  reached  the  bank  we  found 
a  crowd  of  natives  waiting  to  cross. 

The  horses  were  now  taken  from  our  tarantass 
and  led  on  to  the  front  of  the  raft  on  which  we 
were  to  be  floated  over  to  the  other  side.  There 
were  a  number  of  other  horses  there  already,  and 
some  of  these  began  to  kick  and  show  fight  as  the 


KOKAND,  CHYUST,  AND  NAMANGAN     257 

men  pushed  them  all  together  to  leave  as  much  space 
as  possible  for  the  vehicles.  We  got  out,  and  our 
tarantass  was  then  pulled  on  to  the  raft,  and  as 
many  other  carts  were  crowded  in  behind  it  as  the 
raft  would  hold.  Then  we  were  floated  across. 
Happily  the  day  was  calm  and  the  water  quiet. 
When  there  is  a  storm  it  is  impossible  to  get  the 
raft  across.  Once  on  the  other  side,  we  soon  had 
our  horses  in  again,  and  were  off  at  a  brisk  pace 
across  a  stony  waste  of  desert  land  that  lay  be- 
tween the  river  and  our  next  halting-place — the 
town  of  Chyust. 

Chyust  is  a  Sart  town  with  a  population  of  sixteen 
thousand.  Here  the  Tajik  element  predominates. 
It  has  not  a  Russian  town  of  the  same  name  attached 
to  it  like  all  the  others,  but  there  are  already  three 
European  houses  standing  close  together  in  a  newly- 
made  street.  One  of  these  is  occupied  by  the  chief 
of  the  district.  That  gentleman  has  a  French  gover- 
ness for  his  children,  and  from  the  young  lady  I  heard 
that  out  of  twenty-five  seeking  situations  she  was 
the  only  one  who  had  had  the  courage  to  accept  a 
p>ost  so  far  from  home,  in  a  town  that  nobody  had 
ever  heard  of.  I  may  add  that  we  were  the  first 
Englishwomen  to  arrive  there,  and  as  yet  neither 
Chyust  nor  Namangan  has  ever  seen  an  Englishman, 
nor  indeed  an  American,  unless  he  has  appeared  on 
the  scene  since  February  1902. 

I  shall  always  remember  with  pleasure  the  hours 

R 


258  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

we  spent  at  Chyust,  and  the  kind  hospitality  of  our 
Russian  host  and  hostess.  The  next  morning  I 
wandered  round  the  town,  note-book  in  hand,  and 
g^'eatly  impressed  the  natives  by  so  doing.  It  evi- 
dently pleased  them  to  find  that  they  and  their 
homes  were  worth  writing  about.  The  largest 
mosque  is  three  hundred  and  fifty  years  old.  The 
entrance  to  this,  and  indeed  the  entrance  to  each  of 
the  mosques,  was  barred  by  a  thick  wooden  rail 
apparently  as  old  as  the  doorway,  and  about  two 
feet  and  a  half  from  the  ground.  It  was  not  easy 
for  a  lady  with  long  skirts  to  clamber  over  these,  and 
I  could  see  that  the  mosques  of  Chyust,  at  any  rate, 
were  only  intended  for  male  worshippers.  How  the 
crowd  of  boys  that  followed  me  enjoyed  watching  my 
efforts  to  leap  gracefully  over  the  barriers !  But  it 
was  worth  trying,  if  only  to  see  their  merry  faces, 
and  prove  that  the  Sart  is  not  devoid  of  humour, 
whatever  may  be  his  other  characteristics. 

Our  journey  from  Chyust  to  Namangan  lay 
through  another  wide  expanse  of  stony  ground, 
with  here  and  there  a  large  village,  each  of  which 
was  surrounded  by  vineyards  as  before,  and  then 
again  by  high  mud  walls,  over  which  we  could  only 
just  see  the  tops  of  the  vines.  The  villagers  con- 
tinued to  take  a  lazy  interest  in  us  as  we  passed,  but 
there  was  not  a  single  case  of  begging.  Where  in 
Europe,  I  should  like  to  ask,  could  we  drive  through 
a  dozen  villages  and  say  as  much  ?      Until  quite 


KOKAND,  CHYUST,  AND  NAMANGAN  259 

recently  a  Sart  woman  in  these  parts  would  scream 
if  she  met  a  Russian  in  the  street,  no  matter  how 
closely  her  impenetrable  veil  might  be  drawn  over 
her  charming  features.  It  seems  that  such  treatment 
was  unpleasing  to  the  Russians,  for  they  took  strong 
measures  to  stop  this  greeting  (if  I  may  make  a  Scotch 
pun).  Every  time  a  woman  screamed  her  husband 
had  to  pay  a  fine.     The  remedy  proved  most  effectual. 

We  reached  Namangan  late  in  the  evening,  but  it 
was  not  too  dark  to  see  the  rows  of  poplar-trees  that 
lined  streets  as  wide  as  those  of  Tashkent.  The 
native  town  here  is  in  a  particularly  prosperous  con- 
dition. Many  p)oor  Sarts  have  become  rich  since 
the  introduction  of  American  cotton.  In  contrast  to 
Ch3rust,  this  town  is  almost  purely  Uzbeg.  The 
Mohammedan  law  that  you  must  pay  your  debts  is 
strictly  kept ;  the  people  are  so  honest  that  Russians 
will  trust  them  with  large  sums  of  money  without 
any  security,  but  at  the  same  time  they  are  inclined 
to  be  miserly,  and  would  take  care  to  get  a  farthing 
from  you  if  you  owed  it  them.  It  is  sad  that  the 
result  of  keeping  of  Mohammedan  laws  is  not  al- 
ways so  favourable.  The  number  of  murders  would 
probably  be  much  smaller  had  not  that  prophet 
forbidden  post-mortem  examinations. 

Land  in  Namangan  has  five  times  the  agricultural 
value  that  it  has  in  Kokand.  I  speak,  of  course,  of 
land  watered  by  canals.  The  rest  is  useless  desert, 
for  no  private  individual  could  afford  to  reclaim  it. 


26o  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

The  word  Namangan  is  a  Persian  word  meaning 
"  salt  town."  All  the  salt  used  in  Fergana  comes 
from  here.  Nearly  everybody  in  the  Russian  town 
is  connected  with  the  growing,  or  cleaning,  or  ex- 
porting of  cotton.  The  present  chief  of  the  district 
has  done  much  to  improve  both  the  Russian  and  the 
native  towns.  He  has  had  wooden  lamps  placed  at 
regular  intervals  along  the  streets,  and,  in  order  that 
the  posts  may  not  rot,  he  has  invented  the  ingenious 
plan  of  encasing  them  in  iron  pipes. 

The  new  prison  is  a  fine  building,  with  large  and 
airy  rooms  (they  can  hardly  be  called  cells)  all  white- 
washed and  spotlessly  clean;  they  are  used  for 
Russians  and  natives  alike.  All  the  work  of  the 
prison  is  done  by  native  prisoners.  Even  the  head 
cook  is  a  Sart.  We  found  four  Sart  women  in  one  of 
the  rooms.  One  had  murdered  her  husband  from 
jealousy,  another  had  helped  to  murder  some  one 
else's  husband.  There  is  also  a  smaller  prison  for 
those  convicted  of  slight  offences.  These  are  taken 
out  to  work  in  the  streets  all  day.  Many  a  Sart 
will  deliberately  steal  something  in  the  autumn,  in 
order  that  he  may  have  a  comfortable  place  to  sleep 
in  during  the  winter  months,  in  which  the  weather 
is  usually  as  cold  as  it  is  in  the  county  of  Middlesex, 
if  not  colder.  In  the  centre  of  the  Russian  pleasure- 
grounds  there  is  a  little  piece  of  water  where  skating 
can  be  indulged  in  during  the  month  of  January. 
Namangan  is  situated  on  the  right  bank  of  a  small 


KOKAND,  CHYUST,  AND  NAMANGAN  261 

river  that  flows  down  from  the  neighbouring  moun- 
tains. It  overflows  its  banks  every  now  and  then 
in  spring,  and  it  is  of  the  utmost  importance  to  the 
inhabitants  that  they  should  know  in  time  when  to 
open  their  side  canals,  and  secure  the  extra  water, 
which  would  otherwise  do  terrible  damage,  as  they 
know  from  past  experience.  Water,  like  fire,  is  a 
dangerous  master.  During  several  months  of  the 
year  men  with  their  horses  ready  are  stationed  day 
and  night  at  regular  intervals  along  the  course  of 
the  river  to  watch,  and  pass  on  the  news  directly  its 
floods  begin  to  swell. 

It  was  to  Namangan  that  a  party  of  monks 
journeyed  all  the  way  from  Syria  in  the  year  1901, 
that  they  might  search  for  certain  Christian  graves 
(of  Nestorian  Christians)  which,  according  to  their 
sacred  books,  must  lie  somewhere  near  that  town. 
They  succeeded  in  finding  several  graves,  but  when 
they  started  to  excavate,  the  Sarts  rose  to  a  man 
and  declared  that  the  saints  who  rested  there  were 
pious  followers  of  the  Prophet,  and  must  on  no 
account  be  disturbed. 

"  Let  us  at  least  dig  them  up,"  pleaded  the  monks, 
**  and  see  which  way  their  bodies  have  been  laid, 
for  then  we  shall  have  convincing  proof." 

But  the  Sarts  were  obdurate,  and  the  monks 
turned  sorrowfully  homeward,  their  mission  unful- 
filled. They  were  missionaries  to  the  dead,  it  is 
true,  but  since  the  time  of  Wolff  there  has  been  no 


262  IN  RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

avowedly  Christian  mission  to  the  living  in  Russian 
Central  Asia. 

An  interesting  discovery  has  recently  been  made 
in  the  neighbourhood,  of  several  ancient  naphtha 
wells.  The  wood  in  them  is  so  hard  that  no  drill 
can  pierce  it,  and  experts  say  that  this  is  the  effect 
of  petroleum  coming  in  contact  with  it  for  many 
centuries.  They  suppose  the  wells  to  have  been 
built  by  Alexander's  followers. 

There  is  as  yet  no  theatre  in  Russian  Namangan, 
but  in  spite  of  this,  the  great  event  during  our  stay 
there  was  the  arrival  of  a  theatrical  company  from 
Russia.  A  room  in  the  Military  Club  was  fitted  up  for 
their  use,  and  we  were  amongst  their  first  audience. 

**  Did  they  come  from  Kokand  by  tarantass  ?  "  I 
whispered  to  my  nearest  neighbour,  after  the  first 
fall  of  the  curtain. 

"  Oh  dear  no,"  he  replied,  "  that  would  have  ruined 
them.  They  came  in  native  carts,  arbas^  and  took 
twice  as  long  on  the  road  as  you  did.  As  it  is  we 
are  making  a  collection  for  them  to  defray  the  ex- 
penses of  their  journey.  It  is  the  first  troupe  that  has 
ever  come  so  far  as  Namangan.  If  you  look  behind 
you,  you  will  see  that  the  back  seats  are  crowded 
with  Sarts.     This  is  something  quite  new  to  them." 

I  prefer  not  to  criticise  the  performance  of  the 
first  play  produced  in  Namangan ;  it  is  sufficient  to 
say  that  the  adventurous  spirit  of  the  actors  and  ac- 
tresses impressed  me  more  even  than  their  acting. 


CHAPTER   III 

MARGELAN  AND  ANDIJAN 

The  journey  by  tarantass  from  Namangan  to  Mar- 
gelan  occupied  twelve  hours.  Besides  the  p)ost- 
house,  where  we  halted  for  tea,  there  is  no  place  on 
the  way  at  which  a  European  can  stop,  even  for 
half-an-hour.  As  Margelan  lies  on  the  same  side 
of  the  Syr  Daria  as  Kokand,  we  had  once  more  to 
trust  ourselves  to  the  primitive  raft  of  the  country. 
When  we  reached  the  bank,  about  midday,  we 
found  twenty  horses  already  on  board,  with  five 
men  holding  their  bridles.  Five  great  wheeled 
arbas  came  next,  and  left  very  little  room  for  our 
tarantass,  but  plentiful  tipping  did  wonders,  and  we 
were  soon  on  board.  This  time  we  did  not  alight. 
Onrjigit^  a  handsome  mounted  soldier  from  Naman- 
gan, superintended  the  unharnessing  and  stood  be- 
side his  own  horse,  patting  its  neck  and  encouraging 
it;  it  did  not  like  the  look  of  the  raft  at  all,  and  seemed 
inclined  to  be  restive.  At  this  crossing  the  water 
was  much  shallower,  and  three  men  on  horseback 
waded  across  with  the  raft,  singing  to  their  horses. 
Behind  us  a  stalwart  fellow  was  punting ;  ten  more 
pulled  at  a  rope  drawn  along  the  opposite   bank. 


264     •     IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

It  was  a  strange  scene,  that  little  sp>ot  of  Eastern 
life  in  the  midst  of  the  flat,  brown  desert  stretching 
for  miles  in  every  direction  as  far  as  the  eye  could 
see,  with  the  silent  river  flowing  through  it — silent 
then,  but  often  rushing  like  a  mountain  torrent,  an 
impassable  barrier  between  Namangan  and  the  rest 
of  the  civilised  world.  I  looked  towards  the  re- 
ceding shore ;  it  was  easy  to  count  the  men  upon 
it,  for  their  white  turbans  stood  out  against  the 
Iwown  background  in  vivid  colouring.  On  the 
opposite  bank  we  descried  many  bales  of  cotton 
waiting  for  transport  to  Moscow.  They  were  coated 
with  hoar-frost.  At  one  moment,  just  as  we  were 
nearing  land,  there  seemed  danger  of  a  general 
stampede  among  the  horses.  One  man  stroked  the 
head  of  his  restive  steed  and  threw  his  long  wadded 
sleeve  over  its  eyes.  Once  more  I  looked  back  at 
the  shore  we  had  left,  but  to  my  astonishment  it 
was  no  longer  visible,  a  thick  white  mist  had  risen 
like  a  wall  between  it  and  us. 

"  El  hamdu  FlUah  !  "  cried  the  men  in  a  chorus. 
"  God  be  praised  !  We  are  on  the  right  side  of  it ! " 
Then  they  began  to  call  upon  Mohammed  that  he 
might  keep  the  mist  back  till  they  had  landed.  At 
last  we  were  as  close  to  the  land  as  the  shallowness 
of  the  water  would  allow.  The  raft  stopped,  and  to 
my  surprise  the  horses  had  now  to  be  whipped  till 
they  jumped  ashore.  When  they  had  all  taken  the 
necessary  leap  and  thus  cleared  the  way,  a  couple  of 


MARGELAN  AND   ANDIJAN  265 

planks  were  laid  across  from  the  bank,  which  was 
twelve  feet  deep,  and  the  wheels  of  our  tarantass 
were  carefully  guided  along  them.  To  me  that 
seemed  the  most  critical  moment  of  all,  for  had  one 
of  the  planks  slipped  an  inch,  where  should  we  and 
our  carriage  have  been  ?  At  this  juncture  the  sun 
burst  out  from  behind  the  clouds  and  cleared  away 
the  wall  of  mist  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye.  In 
another  moment  the  sky  had  become  an  azure  blue, 
and  the  river  had  taken  that  soft  opal  tint  which  one 
always  associates  with  the  waters  of  the  Nile. 

The  horses  were  now  put  in,  our  jigit  presiding 
with  dignity  and  giving  orders  all  the  time.  He  had 
on  a  grey  felt  coat  reaching  below  his  knees,  a 
Cossack  cap  of  astrakhan,  a  yellow  band  across 
his  shoulder,  and  a  yellow  cording  round  his  neck. 
Top-boots  and  a  powder-flask  completed  his  outfit. 
On  we  went  again,  the  ground  we  now  had  to 
cover  resembling  in  many  ways  an  English  moor, 
dotted  at  intervals  with  small  shrubs.  The  road 
became  worse  and  worse,  though  it  had  not  rained 
during. our  stay  at  Namangan.  The  frosted  ruts 
were  often  eighteen  inches  deep,  and  the  horses  had 
to  step  along  like  wild  goats  on  a  crag.  At  last  the 
animal  on  my  left  got  all  four  feet  into  one  of  these 
ruts,  and  oMxjigithzA  to  dismount  and  pull  the  poor 
creature  out,  for  it  was  powerless  to  extricate  itself 
without  help.  A  worse  road  for  horses  than  the 
last  bit  of  the  way  to  Margelan  I  could  not  imagine. 


256  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

a  wonderful  picture  in  their  robes  of  every  hue. 
One  man  had  on  a  garment  of  brightest  apple- 
green  and  a  white  turban,  another  sported  a  robe 
of  yellow  and  red  stripes.  Every  one  of  the 
villagers  had  high  leather  boots.  Over  our  heads 
hovered  hundreds  of  magpies,  floating  in  circles 
and  occasionally  settling  in  swarms  on  the  tops 
of  the  leafless  trees.  On  we  went  again,  past 
more  villages  and  high  mud  walls  surrounding 
private  vineyards.  When  you  pass  through  vil- 
lages in  England  it  is  the  women  who  come  out, 
with  their  little  ones  in  their  arms,  to  have  a  look 
at  the  strangers.  In  Turkestan  it  is  the  men,  and 
they  hold  their  children  quite  as  tenderly  as  any 
woman  could.  At  the  next  post-house  we  ordered 
a  samovar,  made  some  tea,  and  ate  our  lunch. 
When  we  got  once  more  into  our  tarantass,  we 
found  to  our  dismay  that  one  of  our  rugs  had 
disappeared.  We  never  saw  it  again.  The  great 
event  of  the  journey  from  Kokand  to  Namangan 
is  the  crossing  of  the  river  Syr  Daria  (the  Jaxartes 
of  the  ancients).  There  is  no  such  thing  as  a  bridge 
in  those  parts.  When  we  reached  the  bank  we  found 
a  crowd  of  natives  waiting  to  cross. 

The  horses  were  now  taken  from  our  tarantass 
and  led  on  to  the  front  of  the  raft  on  which  we 
were  to  be  floated  over  to  the  other  side.  There 
were  a  number  of  other  horses  there  already,  and 
some  of  these  began  to  kick  and  show  fight  as  the 


KOKAND,  CHYUST,  AND  NAMANGAN     257 

men  pushed  them  all  together  to  leave  as  much  space 
as  possible  for  the  vehicles.  We  got  out,  and  our 
tarantass  was  then  pulled  on  to  the  raft,  and  as 
many  other  carts  were  crowded  in  behind  it  as  the 
raft  would  hold.  Then  we  were  floated  across. 
Happily  the  day  was  calm  and  the  water  quiet. 
When  there  is  a  storm  it  is  impossible  to  get  the 
raft  across.  Once  on  the  other  side,  we  soon  had 
our  horses  in  again,  and  were  off  at  a  brisk  pace 
across  a  stony  waste  of  desert  land  that  lay  be- 
tween the  river  and  our  next  halting-place — the 
town  of  Chyust. 

Chyust  is  a  Sart  town  with  a  population  of  sixteen 
thousand.  Here  the  Tajik  element  predominates. 
It  has  not  a  Russian  town  of  the  same  name  attached 
to  it  like  all  the  others,  but  there  are  already  three 
European  houses  standing  close  together  in  a  newly- 
made  street.  One  of  these  is  occupied  by  the  chief 
of  the  district.  That  gentleman  has  a  French  gover- 
ness for  his  children,  and  from  the  young  lady  I  heard 
that  out  of  twenty-five  seeking  situations  she  was 
the  only  one  who  had  had  the  courage  to  accept  a 
post  so  far  from  home,  in  a  town  that  nobody  had 
ever  heard  of.  I  may  add  that  we  were  the  first 
Englishwomen  to  arrive  there,  and  as  yet  neither 
Chyust  nor  Namangan  has  ever  seen  an  Englishman, 
nor  indeed  an  American,  unless  he  has  appeared  on 
the  scene  since  February  1902. 

I  shall  always  remember  with  pleasure  the  hours 

R 


258  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

we  spent  at  Chyust,  and  the  kind  hospitality  of  our 
Russian  host  and  hostess.  The  next  morning  I 
wandered  round  the  town,  note-book  in  hand,  and 
greatly  impressed  the  natives  by  so  doing.  It  evi- 
dently pleased  them  to  find  that  they  and  their 
homes  were  worth  writing  about.  The  largest 
mosque  is  three  hundred  and  fifty  years  old.  The 
entrance  to  this,  and  indeed  the  entrance  to  each  of 
the  mosques,  was  barred  by  a  thick  wooden  rail 
apparently  as  old  as  the  doorway,  and  about  two 
feet  and  a  half  from  the  ground.  It  was  not  easy 
for  a  lady  with  long  skirts  to  clamber  over  these,  and 
I  could  see  that  the  mosques  of  Chyust,  at  any  rate, 
were  only  intended  for  male  worshippers.  How  the 
crowd  of  boys  that  followed  me  enjoyed  watching  my 
efforts  to  leap  gracefully  over  the  barriers  I  But  it 
was  worth  trying,  if  only  to  see  their  merry  faces, 
and  prove  that  the  Sart  is  not  devoid  of  humour, 
whatever  may  be  his  other  characteristics. 

Our  journey  from  Chyust  to  Namangan  lay 
through  another  wide  expanse  of  stony  ground, 
with  here  and  there  a  large  village,  each  of  which 
was  surrounded  by  vineyards  as  before,  and  then 
again  by  high  mud  walls,  over  which  we  could  only 
just  see  the  tops  of  the  vines.  The  villagers  con- 
tinued to  take  a  lazy  interest  in  us  as  we  passed,  but 
there  was  not  a  single  case  of  begging.  Where  in 
Europe,  I  should  like  to  ask,  could  we  drive  through 
a  dozen  villages  and  say  as  much  ?      Until  quite 


KOKAND,  CHYUST,  AND  NAMANGAN  259 

recently  a  Sart  woman  in  these  parts  would  scream 
if  she  met  a  Russian  in  the  street,  no  matter  how 
closely  her  impenetrable  veil  might  be  drawn  over 
her  charming  features.  It  seems  that  such  treatment 
was  unpleasing  to  the  Russians,  for  they  took  strong 
measures  to  stop  this  greeting  (if  I  may  make  a  Scotch 
pun).  Every  time  a  woman  screamed  her  husband 
had  to  pay  a  fine.     The  remedy  proved  most  effectual. 

We  reached  Namangan  late  in  the  evening,  but  it 
was  not  too  dark  to  see  the  rows  of  poplar-trees  that 
lined  streets  as  wide  as  those  of  Tashkent.  The 
native  town  here  is  in  a  particularly  prosperous  con- 
dition. Many  poor  Sarts  have  become  rich  since 
the  introduction  of  American  cotton.  In  contrast  to 
Chyust,  this  town  is  almost  purely  Uzbeg.  The 
Mohammedan  law  that  you  must  pay  your  debts  is 
strictly  kept;  the  people  are  so  honest  that  Russians 
will  trust  them  with  large  sums  of  money  without 
any  security,  but  at  the  same  time  they  are  inclined 
to  be  miserly,  and  would  take  care  to  get  a  farthing 
from  you  if  you  owed  it  them.  It  is  sad  that  the 
result  of  keeping  of  Mohammedan  laws  is  not  al- 
ways so  favourable.  The  number  of  murders  would 
probably  be  much  smaller  had  not  that  prophet 
forbidden  posf-morUm  examinations. 

Land  in  Namangan  has  five  times  the  agricultural 
value  that  it  has  in  Kokand.  I  speak,  of  course,  of 
land  watered  by  canals.  The  rest  is  useless  desert, 
for  no  private  individual  could  afford  to  reclaim  it. 


26o  IN  RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

The  word  Namangan  is  a  Persian  word  meaning 
"  salt  town."  All  the  salt  used  in  Fergana  comes 
from  here.  Nearly  everybody  in  the  Russian  town 
is  connected  with  the  growing,  or  cleaning,  or  ex- 
porting of  cotton.  The  present  chief  of  the  district 
has  done  much  to  improve  both  the  Russian  and  the 
native  towns.  He  has  had  wooden  lamps  placed  at 
regular  intervals  along  the  streets,  and,  in  order  that 
the  posts  may  not  rot,  he  has  invented  the  ingenious 
plan  of  encasing  them  in  iron  pipes. 

The  new  prison  is  a  fine  building,  with  large  and 
airy  rooms  (they  can  hardly  be  called  cells)  all  white- 
washed and  spotlessly  clean;  they  are  used  for 
Russians  and  natives  alike.  All  the  work  of  the 
prison  is  done  by  native  prisoners.  Even  the  head 
cook  is  a  Sart.  We  found  four  Sart  women  in  one  of 
the  rooms.  One  had  murdered  her  husband  from 
jealousy,  another  had  helped  to  murder  some  one 
else's  husband.  There  is  also  a  smaller  prison  for 
those  convicted  of  slight  offences.  These  are  taken 
out  to  work  in  the  streets  all  day.  Many  a  Sart 
will  deliberately  steal  something  in  the  autumn,  in 
order  that  he  may  have  a  comfortable  place  to  sleep 
in  during  the  winter  months,  in  which  the  weather 
is  usually  as  cold  as  it  is  in  the  county  of  Middlesex, 
if  not  colder.  In  the  centre  of  the  Russian  pleasure- 
grounds  there  is  a  little  piece  of  water  where  skating 
can  be  indulged  in  during  the  month  of  January. 
Namangan  is  situated  on  the  right  bank  of  a  small 


KOKAND,  CHYUST,  AND  NAMANGAN  261 

river  that  flows  down  from  the  neighbouring  moun- 
tains. It  overflows  its  banks  every  now  and  then 
in  spring,  and  it  is  of  the  utmost  importance  to  the 
inhabitants  that  they  should  know  in  time  when  to 
open  their  side  canals,  and  secure  the  extra  water, 
which  would  otherwise  do  terrible  damage,  as  they 
know  from  past  experience.  Water,  like  fire,  is  a 
dangerous  master.  During  several  months  of  the 
year  men  with  their  horses  ready  are  stationed  day 
and  night  at  regular  intervals  along  the  course  of 
the  river  to  watch,  and  pass  on  the  news  directly  its 
floods  begin  to  swell. 

It  was  to  Namangan  that  a  party  of  monks 
journeyed  all  the  way  from  Syria  in  the  year  1901, 
that  they  might  search  for  certain  Christian  graves 
(of  Nestorian  Christians)  which,  according  to  their 
sacred  books,  must  lie  somewhere  near  that  town. 
They  succeeded  in  finding  several  graves,  but  when 
they  started  to  excavate,  the  Sarts  rose  to  a  man 
and  declared  that  the  saints  who  rested  there  were 
pious  followers  of  the  Prophet,  and  must  on  no 
account  be  disturbed. 

"  Let  us  at  least  dig  them  up,"  pleaded  the  monks, 
"  and  see  which  way  their  bodies  have  been  laid, 
for  then  we  shall  have  convincing  proof." 

But  the  Sarts  were  obdurate,  and  the  monks 
turned  sorrowfully  homeward,  their  mission  unful- 
filled. They  were  missionaries  to  the  dead,  it  is 
true,  but  since  the  time  of  Wolff  there  has  been  no 


262  IN  RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

avowedly  Christian  mission  to  the  living  in  Russian 
Central  Asia. 

An  interesting  discovery  has  recently  been  made 
in  the  neighbourhood,  of  several  ancient  naphtha 
wells.  The  wood  in  them  is  so  hard  that  no  drill 
can  pierce  it,  and  experts  say  that  this  is  the  effect 
of  petroleum  coming  in  contact  with  it  for  many 
centuries.  They  suppose  the  wells  to  have  been 
built  by  Alexander's  followers. 

There  is  as  yet  no  theatre  in  Russian  Namangan, 
but  in  spite  of  this,  the  great  event  during  our  stay 
there  was  the  arrival  of  a  theatrical  company  from 
Russia.  A  room  in  the  Military  Club  was  fitted  up  for 
their  use,  and  we  were  amongst  their  first  audience. 

**  Did  they  come  from  Kokand  by  tarantass  ?  "  I 
whispered  to  my  nearest  neighbour,  after  the  first 
fall  of  the  curtain. 

"  Oh  dear  no,"  he  replied,  "  that  would  have  ruined 
them.  They  came  in  native  carts,  arbas^  and  took 
twice  as  long  on  the  road  as  you  did.  As  it  is  we 
are  making  a  collection  for  them  to  defray  the  ex- 
penses of  their  journey.  It  is  the  first  troupe  that  has 
ever  come  so  far  as  Namangan.  If  you  look  behind 
you,  you  will  see  that  the  back  seats  are  crowded 
with  Sarts.     This  is  something  quite  new  to  them." 

I  prefer  not  to  criticise  the  performance  of  the 
first  play  produced  in  Namangan ;  it  is  sufficient  to 
say  that  the  adventurous  spirit  of  the  actors  and  ac- 
tresses  impressed  me  more  even  than  their  acting. 


CHAPTER   III 

MARGELAN  AND  ANDIJAN 

The  journey  by  tarantass  from  Namangan  to  Mar- 
gelan  occupied  twelve  hours.  Besides  the  post- 
house,  where  we  halted  for  tea,  there  is  no  place  on 
the  way  at  which  a  European  can  stop,  even  for 
half-an-hour.  As  Margelan  lies  on  the  same  side 
of  the  Syr  Daria  as  Kokand,  we  had  once  more  to 
trust  ourselves  to  the  primitive  raft  of  the  country. 
When  we  reached  the  bank,  about  midday,  we 
found  twenty  horses  already  on  board,  with  five 
men  holding  their  bridles.  Five  great  wheeled 
arbas  came  next,  and  left  very  little  room  for  our 
tarantass,  but  plentiful  tipping  did  wonders,  and  we 
were  soon  on  board.  This  time  we  did  not  alight. 
OMTjigit,  a  handsome  mounted  soldier  from  Naman- 
gan, superintended  the  unharnessing  and  stood  be- 
side his  own  horse,  patting  its  neck  and  encouraging 
it;  it  did  not  like  the  look  of  the  raft  at  all,  and  seemed 
inclined  to  be  restive.  At  this  crossing  the  water 
was  much  shallower,  and  three  men  on  horseback 
waded  across  with  the  raft,  singing  to  their  horses. 
Behind  us  a  stalwart  fellow  was  punting;  ten  more 

pulled  at  a  rope  drawn  along  the  opposite   bank. 

263 


264     •     IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

It  was  a  strange  scene,  that  little  spot  of  Eastern 
life  in  the  midst  of  the  flat,  brown  desert  stretching 
for  miles  in  every  direction  as  far  as  the  eye  could 
see,  with  the  silent  river  flowing  through  it — silent 
then,  but  often  rushing  like  a  mountain  torrent,  an 
impassable  barrier  between  Namangan  and  the  rest 
of  the  civilised  world.  I  looked  towards  the  re- 
ceding shore ;  it  was  easy  to  count  the  men  upon 
it,  for  their  white  turbans  stood  out  against  the 
brown  background  in  vivid  colouring.  On  the 
opposite  bank  we  descried  many  bales  of  cotton 
waiting  for  transport  to  Moscow.  They  were  coated 
with  hoar-frost.  At  one  moment,  just  as  we  were 
nearing  land,  there  seemed  danger  of  a  general 
stampede  among  the  horses.  One  man  stroked  the 
head  of  his  restive  steed  and  threw  his  long  wadded 
sleeve  over  its  eyes.  Once  more  I  looked  back  at 
the  shore  we  had  left,  but  to  my  astonishment  it 
was  no  longer  visible,  a  thick  white  mist  had  risen 
like  a  wall  between  it  and  us. 

"  El  hamdu  Tlllah  ! "  cried  the  men  in  a  chorus. 
"  God  be  praised !  We  are  on  the  right  side  of  it ! " 
Then  they  began  to  call  upon  Mohammed  that  he 
might  keep  the  mist  back  till  they  had  landed.  At 
last  we  were  as  close  to  the  land  as  the  shallowness 
of  the  water  would  allow.  The  raft  stopped,  and  to 
my  surprise  the  horses  had  now  to  be  whipped  till 
they  jumped  ashore.  When  they  had  all  taken  the 
necessary  leap  and  thus  cleared  the  way,  a  couple  of 


MARGELAN  AND  ANDIJAN  265 

planks  were  laid  across  from  the  bank,  which  was 
twelve  feet  deep,  and  the  wheels  of  our  tarantass 
were  carefully  guided  along  them.  To  me  that 
seemed  the  most  critical  moment  of  all,  for  had  one 
of  the  planks  slipped  an  inch,  where  should  we  and 
our  carriage  have  been  ?  At  this  juncture  the  sun 
burst  out  from  behind  the  clouds  and  cleared  away 
the  wall  of  mist  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye.  In 
another  moment  the  sky  had  become  an  azure  blue, 
and  the  river  had  taken  that  soft  opal  tint  which  one 
always  associates  with  the  waters  of  the  Nile. 

The  horses  were  now  put  in,  our  jigit  presiding 
with  dignity  and  giving  orders  all  the  time.  He  had 
on  a  grey  felt  coat  reaching  below  his  knees,  a 
Cossack  cap  of  astrakhan,  a  yellow  band  across 
his  shoulder,  and  a  yellow  cording  round  his  neck. 
Top-boots  and  a  powder-flask  completed  his  outfit. 
On  we  went  again,  the  ground  we  now  had  to 
cover  resembling  in  many  ways  an  English  moor, 
dotted  at  intervals  with  small  shrubs.  The  road 
became  worse  and  worse,  though  it  had  not  rained 
during* our  stay  at  Namangan.  The  frosted  ruts 
were  often  eighteen  inches  deep,  and  the  horses  had 
to  step  along  like  wild  goats  on  a  crag.  At  last  the 
animal  on  my  left  got  all  four  feet  into  one  of  these 
ruts,  and  owxjigithsA  to  dismount  and  pull  the  poor 
creature  out,  for  it  was  powerless  to  extricate  itself 
without  help.  A  worse  road  for  horses  than  the 
last  bit  of  the  way  to  Margelan  I  could  not  imagine. 


266  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

We  heard  afterwards  that  two  Russian  gentlemen 
who  started  out  for  Namangan  that  very  morning 
had,  after  proceeding  a  little  way,  considered  the 
journey  absolutely  impracticable,  and  abandoned  it 
in  consequence.  When  they  heard  that  we  had 
accomplished  it  they  were  amazed.  But  we  had  no 
choice,  with  the  river  behind  and  the  ruts  before ; 
we  were  obliged  to  choose  the  lesser  evil. 

It  was  quite  dark  as  we  drove  into  Old  Marge-: 
Ian,  but  this  was  not  the  end  of  our  journey,  for  we 
were  bound  for  the  Russian  town,  or  New  Margelan, 
and  that  lay  twelve  versts  (about  nine  miles)  further 
on.  However,  our  driver  had  made  up  his  tnind  to 
have  half-an-hour*s  rest  before  going  any  further,  so 
whether  we  would  or  no,  our  tarantass  drew  up  in 
front  of  a  native  tea-shop.  Sart  bread,  grapes,  and 
little  basins  of  tea  were  handed  in  to  us  as  we  sat 
there,  and  very  acceptable  they  proved,  for  we  had 
not  stopped  for  refreshments  since  the  middle  of 
the  day.  Similar  fare  to  that  with  which  we  were 
regaling  ourselves  was  handed  to  the  driver,  who 
had  taken  out  the  horses  and  was  soon  sitting  cross- 
legged  on  the  matting-covered  floor  of  the  tea-shop, 
in  which  several  petroleum  lamps  were  flickering. 
Our  jigit  had  also  dismounted,  and  was  chatting 
amicably  with  the  few  late  customers  who  had 
strolled  into  the  shop.  With  the  exception  of  the 
samovar  and  the  tarantass,  there  was  nothing  in 
sight  to  remind  us  that  we  were  on  Russian  soil. 


MARGELAN  AND  ANDIJAN  267 

The  shafts  of  our  tarantass  rested  on  the  boarding 
in  front  of  the  tea-shop,  and  we  were  still  wrapped 
in  the  rough  astrakhan  cloaks ;  I  shall  never  forget 
that  weird  half-hour  in  the  flickering  lamplight  of 
Old  Margelan. 

At  last  the  horses  were  put  in,  our  supper  was 
paid  for,  and  we  again  took  the  road.  That  last 
piece  of  the  journey  was  uninteresting  because  it 
was  too  dark  to  distinguish  anything  except  the 
gaunt  white  poles  that  marked  the  number  of  versts, 
and  we  began  to  look  forward  eagerly  to  a  night's 
rest  after  all  the  jolting  of  the  day.  But  unfor- 
unately  for  us  our  jigit  was  a  stranger  in  New 
Margelan,  and  though  well-meaning  enough,  he 
took  us  to  the  second-best  lodging-house.  Now  the 
best  was  bad^  as  we  discovered  when  another  day 
had  dawned,  for  we  packed  up  our  belongings  before 
breakfast  and  moved  into  it. 

New  Margelan  is  well  laid  out  and  has  some 
handsome  public  buildings.  The  Russians  intend 
it  to  become  the  chief  town  of  Fergana,  and  the 
second  in  importance  to  Tashkent.  It  has  a  public 
park  in  which  a  military  band  plays  at  regular 
intervals.  Two  battalions  are  stationed  there. 
There  is  a  good  hospital  furnished  with  thirty-five 
beds  ;  it  is  under  the  care  of  the  Margelan  Medical 
Society,  which  body  has  drawn  some  attention  of 
late  by  preparing  in  its  laboratory  certain  injec- 
tions that  are  thought  to  be  a  sure  preventive  of 


268  IN  RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

leprosy.  The  Ethnographical  Museum  only  came 
into  existence  in  1900,  but  it  already  contains  much 
that  is  of  interest  to  students  of  Sart  life.  Dr.  Alex- 
ander Smirnoff  the  curator,  pointed  out  to  us  a 
collection  of  children's  toys,  the  popular  baby's  rattle 
made  from  a  strip  of  shaving,  a  doll  carved  out  of 
the  branch  of  a  tree,  and  even  a  monkey  on  a  stick. 
Here  we  examined  the  clumsy  locks  used  on  the 
house  doors.  A  Sart  key  is  something  like  a  horse- 
shoe in  appearance.  Its  one  great  convenience, 
which  was  pointed  out  to  me,  is  that  you  can  open 
a  door  that  has  been  locked,  quite  as  easily  without 
the  key  as  with  it  1  There  was  also  a  good  model 
of  a  Sart  dwelling. 

The  Vice-Governor  of  Fergana,  who  resides  in 
New  Margelan,  M.  Nalivkin,  is  perhaps  the  greatest 
living  authority  on  Sart  life  and  literature.  He 
and  Madame  Nalivkin  have  devoted  their  leisure 
to  the  study  of  these  people  for  more  than  twenty- 
five  years.  In  1884  they  published  in  Russian  a 
joint  work  on  the  women  of  Fergana,  which  has 
never  been  translated,  and  is  now  out  of  print. 
M.  Nalivkin  kindly  presented  me  with  copies  of 
his  "  History  of  Kokand  "  and  his  "  Russian  and 
Persian  Dictionary."  It  was  he  who  organised, 
in  1884,  at  the  command  of  the  Governor-General, 
the  first  school  in  Tashkent  for  teaching  Russian 
and  arithmetic. 

We  paid  several  visits  to  Old  Margelan,  in  spite 


Copyright 


A  SART  AND   HIS  SONS 
(Natives  of  Old  Margelan) 


/.  269 


MARGELAN  AND  ANDIJAN  269 

of  the  tedious  distance  between  thb  two  towns. 
The  mud  wall  which  formerly  surrounded  the  Sart 
town  is  fast  disappearing,  and  people  are  beginning 
to  build  outside.  M.  Nalivkin  states  that  as  far  back 
as  the  year  990  the  town  was  an  important  strong- 
hold. The  Sarts  themselves  insist  that  it  existed 
before  the  time  of  Alexander.  They  even  took  me 
to  see  the  spot  where  they  believe  that  illus- 
trious Greek  to  have  been  buried.  The  tomb  of 
''Alexander  Macedonsky/'  as  the  Russians  call 
him,  is  there  indeed.  The  story  goes  that  when 
Alexander  came  to  Margelan,  the  people  met  him 
with  an  offering  of  a  hen  and  a  loaf  of  bread, 
which  attention  pleased  him  so  greatly  that  after- 
wards, when  he  could  not  remember  the  name  of 
the  town,  he  called  it  Murghi  han^  which  means 
"hen  and  bread."  Twenty  versts  away  there  are 
distinct  traces  of  a  still  older  town,  called  Bist 
Takhla,  in  reference  to  the  fact  that  its  king  ruled 
over  twenty  tribes.  A  river  once  ran  through  Bist 
Takhla,  according  to  native  historians,  but  an  earth- 
quake altered  its  course  and  destroyed  the  town. 

Andijan,  our  next  halting-place,  which  is  now  a 
heap  of  ruins,  was,  till  its  terrible  fate  overtook 
it,  one  of  the  most  flourishing  towns  in  Russian 
Turkestan.  Its  chief  interest  for  English  people 
lies  in  the  fact  that  it  is  the  terminus  of  the  Trans- 
caspian  Railway,  and  therefore  the  point  at  which 
travellers  by  the  overland  route  to  India  are  obliged 


262  IN  RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

avowedly  Christian  mission  to  the  living  in  Russian 
Central  Asia. 

An  interesting  discovery  has  recently  been  made 
in  the  neighbourhood,  of  several  ancient  naphtha 
wells.  The  wood  in  them  is  so  hard  that  no  drill 
can  pierce  it,  and  experts  say  that  this  is  the  effect 
of  petroleum  coming  in  contact  with  it  for  many 
centuries.  They  suppose  the  wells  to  have  been 
built  by  Alexander's  followers. 

There  is  as  yet  no  theatre  in  Russian  Namangan, 
but  in  spite  of  this,  the  great  event  during  our  stay 
there  was  the  arrival  of  a  theatrical  company  from 
Russia.  A  room  in  the  Military  Club  was  fitted  up  for 
their  use,  and  we  were  amongst  their  first  audience. 

'*  Did  they  come  from  Kokand  by  tarantass  ?  "  I 
whispered  to  my  nearest  neighbour,  after  the  first 
fall  of  the  curtain. 

"  Oh  dear  no,"  he  replied,  "  that  would  have  ruined 
them.  They  came  in  native  carts,  arbas^  and  took 
twice  as  long  on  the  road  as  you  did.  As  it  is  we 
are  making  a  collection  for  them  to  defray  the  ex- 
penses of  their  journey.  It  is  the  first  troupe  that  has 
ever  come  so  far  as  Namangan.  If  you  look  behind 
you,  you  will  see  that  the  back  seats  are  crowded 
with  Sarts.     This  is  something  quite  new  to  them." 

I  prefer  not  to  criticise  the  performance  of  the 
first  play  produced  in  Namangan ;  it  is  sufficient  to 
say  that  the  adventurous  spirit  of  the  actors  and  ac- 
tresses impressed  me  more  even  than  their  acting. 


CHAPTER   III 

MARGELAN  AND  ANDIJAN 

The  journey  by  tarantass  from  Namangan  to  Mar- 
gelan  occupied  twelve  hours.  Besides  the  post- 
house,  where  we  halted  for  tea,  there  is  no  place  on 
the  way  at  which  a  European  can  stop,  even  for 
half-an-hour.  As  Margelan  lies  on  the  same  side 
of  the  Syr  Daria  as  Kokand,  we  had  once  more  to 
trust  ourselves  to  the  primitive  raft  of  the  country. 
When  we  reached  the  bank,  about  midday,  we 
found  twenty  horses  already  on  board,  with  five 
men  holding  their  bridles.  Five  great  wheeled 
arbas  came  next,  and  left  very  little  room  for  our 
tarantass,  but  plentiful  tipping  did  wonders,  and  we 
were  soon  on  board.  This  time  we  did  not  alight. 
Oyivjigit^  a  handsome  mounted  soldier  from  Naman- 
gan, superintended  the  unharnessing  and  stood  be- 
side his  own  horse,  patting  its  neck  and  encouraging 
it;  it  did  not  like  the  look  of  the  raft  at  all,  and  seemed 
inclined  to  be  restive.  At  this  crossing  the  water 
was  much  shallower,  and  three  men  on  horseback 
waded  across  with  the  raft,  singing  to  their  horses. 
Behind  us  a  stalwart  fellow  was  punting ;  ten  more 

pulled  at  a  rope  drawn  along  the  opposite   bank. 

263 


264     •     IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

It  was  a  strange  scene,  that  little  spot  of  Eastern 
life  in  the  midst  of  the  flat,  brown  desert  stretching 
for  miles  in  every  direction  as  far  as  the  eye  could 
see,  with  the  silent  river  flowing  through  it — silent 
then,  but  often  rushing  like  a  mountain  torrent,  an 
impassable  barrier  between  Namangan  and  the  rest 
of  the  civilised  world.  I  looked  towards  the  re- 
ceding shore ;  it  was  easy  to  count  the  men  upon 
it,  for  their  white  turbans  stood  out  against  the 
brown  background  in  vivid  colouring.  On  the 
opposite  bank  we  descried  many  bales  of  cotton 
waiting  for  transport  to  Moscow.  They  were  coated 
with  hoar-frost.  At  one  moment,  just  as  we  were 
nearing  land,  there  seemed  danger  of  a  general 
stampede  among  the  horses.  One  man  stroked  the 
head  of  his  restive  steed  and  threw  his  long  wadded 
sleeve  over  its  eyes.  Once  more  I  looked  back  at 
the  shore  we  had  left,  but  to  my  astonishment  it 
was  no  longer  visible,  a  thick  white  mist  had  risen 
like  a  wall  between  it  and  us. 

"  El  hamdu  I'lUah  ! "  cried  the  men  in  a  chorus. 
"  God  be  praised !  We  are  on  the  right  side  of  it ! " 
Then  they  began  to  call  upon  Mohammed  that  he 
might  keep  the  mist  back  till  they  had  landed.  At 
last  we  were  as  close  to  the  land  as  the  shallowness 
of  the  water  would  allow.  The  raft  stopped,  and  to 
my  surprise  the  horses  had  now  to  be  whipped  till 
they  jumped  ashore.  When  they  had  all  taken  the 
necessary  leap  and  thus  cleared  the  way,  a  couple  of 


MARGELAN  AND  ANDIJAN  265 

planks  were  laid  across  from  the  bank,  which  was 
twelve  feet  deep,  and  the  wheels  of  our  tarantass 
were  carefully  guided  along  them.  To  me  that 
seemed  the  most  critical  moment  of  all,  for  had  one 
of  the  planks  slipped  an  inch,  where  should  we  and 
our  carriage  have  been  ?  At  this  juncture  the  sun 
burst  out  from  behind  the  clouds  and  cleared  away 
the  wall  of  mist  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye.  In 
another  moment  the  sky  had  become  an  azure  blue, 
and  the  river  had  taken  that  soft  opal  tint  which  one 
always  associates  with  the  waters  of  the  Nile. 

The  horses  were  now  put  in,  our  jigit  presiding 
with  dignity  and  giving  orders  all  the  time.  He  had 
on  a  grey  felt  coat  reaching  below  his  knees,  a 
Cossack  cap  of  astrakhan,  a  yellow  band  across 
his  shoulder,  and  a  yellow  cording  round  his  neck. 
Top-boots  and  a  powder-flask  completed  his  outfit. 
On  we  went  again,  the  ground  we  now  had  to 
cover  resembling  in  many  ways  an  English  moor, 
dotted  at  intervals  with  small  shrubs.  The  road 
became  worse  and  worse,  though  it  had  not  rained 
during. our  stay  at  Namangan.  The  frosted  ruts 
were  often  eighteen  inches  deep,  and  the  horses  had 
to  step  along  like  wild  goats  on  a  crag.  At  last  the 
animal  on  my  left  got  all  four  feet  into  one  of  these 
ruts,  and  oMTJigit\izA  to  dismount  and  pull  the  poor 
creature  out,  for  it  was  powerless  to  extricate  itself 
without  help.  A  worse  road  for  horses  than  the 
last  bit  of  the  way  to  Margelan  I  could  not  imagine. 


274  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

"I  have  all  the  papers  that  we  shall  require," 
answered  my  brother  loftily,  and  he  clapped  his 
right  hand  carelessly  upon  his  br^sist-pocket,  which 
was  indeed  stuffed  with  papers. 

A  Russian  colonel  approached  us  amicably  on 
deck  a  little  later,  and  said,  in  the  course  of  a 
pleasant  conversation  in  French  (at  that  time 
neither  of  us  knew  a  word  of  Russian),  that  it 
would  be  of  great  interest  to  him  to  see  our  permit. 

"Who  is  that  gentleman  in  the  long  astrakhan 
cloak  ?  "  asked  my  brother,  deftly  turning  the  con- 
versation. 

"  Oh,  that  is  the  Chief  of  the  Russian  Police  at 
Bokhara,"  replied  the  colonel ;  "  he  is  returning  to 
his  duties  after  a  summer  holiday  in  the  Caucasus. 
You  had  better  make  his  acquaintance,  as  he  will  have 
to  conduct  you  round  Bokhara  if  you  stop  there." 

The  subject  of  these  remarks  now  approached, 
and  we  lost  no  time  in  making  friends  with  him. 
He  proved  most  agreeable,  and  offered  to  lend  us  a 
book  on  Bokhara  if  we  stopped  there. 

"  I  suppose  you  are  coming  to  Bokhara  ?  "  he  added. 

"  We  may,  or  we  may  not,"  replied  my  brother 
dubiously,  and  the  subject  dropped. 

Among  the  passengers  were  several  young 
Russian  ladies,  who  turned  out  to  be  school 
teachers  returning  to  their  posts  at  Askhabad  and 
Samarkand.  From  them  we  learned  that  Central 
Asia,  besides  being  the  seat  of  the  most  fanatical 


MY  FIRST  VISIT  TO  BOKHARA    275 

followers  of  Islam,  was  also  the  seat  of  a  flourishing 
European  colony  with  High  Schools  for  Girls,  quite 
equal  to  anything  of  the  sort  in  our  own  country. 
To  me  this  was  a  revelation  indeed. 

How  these  young  ladies  enjoyed  themselves ! 
how  they  frizzed  their  hair  before  the  mirror  in  the 
ladies'  cabin !  and  how  they  flirted  with  the  hand-f 
some  ofBcers  bound  for  more  distant  and  less 
civilised  stations,  where  there  was  to  be  no  amuse- 
ment in  life  beyond  the  delectable  game  of  Vintj  a 
version  of  which  we  now  call  "  Bridge." 

As  the  train  came  into  the  states  of  New  Bokhara, 
two  days  after  we  had  landed  on  the  farther  side  of 
the  Caspian,  the  Chief  of  Police  in  the  long  cloak 
came  up  and  offered  to  show  us  the  way  to  the 
Russian  Embassy ;  but  my  brother,  who  had  already 
stepped  out  on  to  the  platform,  declined  with  thanks, 
and  said  that  we  had  decided  not  to  break  our 
journey  till  we  got  to  Samarkand.  He  then  rejoined 
me  in  the  train,  where  I  had  just  finished  packing 
up  our  things  and  was  preparing  to  alight.  We 
resumed  our  journey. 

It  was  on  our  return  that  we  stopped  at  Bokhara. 
On  that  occasion  there  was  no  one  at  the  station  to 
offer  us  any  assistance.  We  got  into  a  droshky 
and  drove  at  once  to  Old  Bokhara,  a  distance  of 
about  four  miles.  No  one  asked  us  any  questions, 
and  we  settled  down  comfortably  in  the  only 
caravanserai  that  is  fit  to  receive  Europeans.     It 


276  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

was  kept  by  a  German-speaking  Russian.  Five 
delightful  days  we  spent  there,  roaming  through 
the  bazaar,  dining  with  hospitable  Sarts  to  whom 
we  had  brought  introductions  from  their  friends  in 
Samarkand,  picking  up  all  sorts  of  curios,  visiting 
the  rich  Jews  of  the  Ghetto,  and  having  what  our 
transatlantic  friends  would  call  "  a  real  good  time." 
I  believe  that  since  the  time  of  Vamb6ry  no  other 
English-speaking  travellers  have  ever  explored 
Bokhara  under  such  exceptional  circumstances. 
We  were  not  a  ''conducted  party,"  we  were  troubled 
with  no  guides,  no  mounted  police,  no  servants  ot 
the  state,  we  were  free  to  follow  our  own  sweet 
will.  The  only  Russian  who  knew  that  we  were 
there  was  the  keeper  of  the  caravanserai,  and  he 
"lay  low."  We  not  only  explored  the  town  by 
day,  we  also  wandered  forth  in  the  blue  light  of  an 
unclouded  moon,  and  threaded  our  way  fearlessly 
through  the  inkiest  of  shadows,  for  there  were  no 
street  lamps  in  those  days,  and  where  some  pro- 
jecting wall  came  between  us  and  the  moon  our 
path  was  black  as  night,  and  I  being  a  girl 
would  clutch  my  brother's  arm  and  remember  for 
an  instant  that  we  were  not  under  Russian  pro- 
tection. Had  some  fanatic  taken  it  into  his  head 
to  murder  us  he  could  have  done  it  safely,  for  the 
discovery  of  our  bodies  would  only  have  proved 
that  we  had  been  foolish  enough  to  venture  into 
the  heart  of  Islam  without  a  permit,  and  without  a 


MY  FIRST  VISIT  TO   BOKHARA    277 

guard.  Once  we  paid  an  evening  call  on  a  student 
in  one  of  the  medresses.  A  friendly  mullah  who  was 
our  companion  on  that  occasion  introduced  us  with 
much  ceremony  to  the  young  man,  the  son  of  a 
wealthy  landowner  in  a  distant  part  of  the  Khanate. 

"  What  are  you  studying  ?  "  my  brother  asked  in 
Arabic. 

"I  am  just  now  engaged  in  the  study  of  the 
seventh  heaven  and  the  ninth  universe,"  replied  the 
student  with  dignity. 

As  I  did  not  speak  Arabic,  I  looked  round  the 
room,  and  counted  about  fifty  small  teapots  in  the 
niches  on  the  wall.  The  youth  was  evidently  fond 
of  entertaining  his  friends,  if  only  with  tea.  On  the 
wall  was  a  map  of  the  world,  on  which  Bokhara 
was  written  very  large.  After  looking  for  some  time 
I  also  discovered  Petersburg  and  even  London  ! 

Our  visits  to  Bokharan  houses  were  especially 
interesting  to  me,  because,  as  a  woman,  I  was  per- 
mitted to  pay  my  respects  to  the  ladies,  while  my 
brother  chatted  with  the  gentlemen  in  the  outer 
courts.  Though  they  could  not  converse  with  me 
as  they  were  able  to  do  on  my  second  visit,  they 
were  delighted  to  show  me  their  clothes,  their 
jewellery,  and  last  but  not  least  their  babies.  On 
the  evening  of  our  fifth  day  there,  I  was  packing  my 
valise  to  return  to  Samarkand  by  the  night  train, 
when  I  heard  hurried  steps  and  the  clanking  of  a 
sword  outside  my  window.    I  looked  up  and  saw  our 


278  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

friend  the  Chief  of  the  Police  talking  excitedly  with 
my  brother.    I  went  out  to  see  what  was  the  matter. 

"You  must  leave  at  once,"  he  cried,  hardly 
bowing  as  I  came  up;  ^'you  ought  not  to  have 
entered  the  town  till  you  had  called  on  the  Russian 
Political  Agent  and  shown  your  permit  I  must 
take  you  to  him  at  once ! " 

"  Calm  yourself,  my  dear  sir,"  replied  my  brother ; 
"  we  have  sufficiently  explored  Bokhara  during  our 
five  days'  stay,  and  we  are  leaving  in  half-an-hour." 

We  drove  in  fine  style  from  the  Old  Bokhara  to 
the  New.  Four  mounted  policemen  escorted  our 
droshky,  and  the  Chief  of  the  Police  rode  ahead  to 
clear  our  way.  Within  a  few  steps  of  the  Russian 
Embassy  our  escort  left  us,  but  not  before  the 
Chief  of  Police  had  extracted  from  us  a  solemn 
promise  that  we  would  not  return  to  Old  Bokhara 
till  we  had  called  on  the  Political  Agent  and  shown 
him  our  permit.  As  we  had  no  permit  to  show,  it 
seemed  to  us  superfluous  to  call  upon  Russia's  re- 
presentative, but  we  merely  left  our  cards,  and  then, 
getting  into  the  train  for  Samarkand  as  soon  as  it 
came  up,  returned  to  that  equally  interesting  though 
totally  different  town,  where  we  stayed  till  our  re- 
turn to  Europe.  So  much  for  my  first  visit  to 
Bokhara.  '*You  have  been  playing  the  game  of 
bluff!"  remarked  Lord  Curzon  when  my  brother 
told  him  the  story. 


CHAPTER  V 

MY  SECOND  VISIT  TO  BOKHARA 

"  The  officer  who  rode  up  to  my  lord  had,  it  appeared,  said  to 
him  that  he  was  not  under  arrest,  but  under  surveillance  ;  and  to  re- 
quest him  not  to  ride  abroad  that  day.  My  lord  replied  that  riding 
was  good  for  his  health ;  that  if  the  captain  chose  to  accompany 
him  he  was  welcome ;  and  it  was  then  that  he  made  a  bow  and  they 
cantered  away  together.** — The  History  of  Henry  Esmond. 

It  was  in  February  1902  that  I  found  myself  for 
the  second  time  in  Bokhara.  On  this  occasion  it 
was  not  my  brother,  but  my  mother  who  accom- 
panied me.  The  Russian  Political  Agent  was  lying 
ill  in  his  bed  a  victim  to  asthma,  and  it  was  thought 
doubtful  whether  he  would  ever  recover.  A  young 
gentleman  recently  arrived  from  Russia,  who  was 
acting  temporarily  in  his  place,  told  me  that  a  Sart 
doctor,  who  had  been  called  in  when  all  the  Russian 
physicians  had  failed  to  relieve  the  patient,  had  pre- 
scribed a  cup  of  hare's  blood  to  be  drunk  warm  from 
the  body  of  the  live  animal.  Even  this  extraordi- 
nary remedy  had  failed  to  bring  the  sufferer  any 
relief.  Our  informant  offered  politely  to  assist  us 
in  any  way  that  was  in  his  power. 

"  There  is  no  place  where  you  can  stay  in  Old 
Bokhara,"  he  added,  "you  will  have  to  drive  in 

379 


28o  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

every  day,  or  go  by  train ;  we  have  a  railway,  you 
know." 

I  remembered  the  caravanserai. 

"  Is  there  not  a  rough  sort  of  caravanserai  in  which 
we  could  spend  a  few  days  ?  "  I  asked.  "  The  journey 
backwards  and  forwards  would  be  very  tiring." 

"  Well,  yes,"  he  said  after  a  pause,  "  but  Euro- 
peans never  stay  there.  If  you  wish  to  do  so,  how- 
ever, I  will  telephone  to  the  man  and  tell  him  you 
are  coming.  You  will  find  the  people  of  Bokhara 
extremely  fanatical,"  he  went  on;  "we  should  have 
a  war  with  them  if  we  were  not  very  cautious.  You 
cannot  expect  to  be  invited  into  their  houses;  it  is 
quite  different  here  from  any  of  the  towns  you  have 
visited  in  Russian  territory.  It  will  not  be  safe  for 
you  to  stir  without  ^jigit.  I  will  place  a  trustworthy 
man  at  your  disposal,  and  he  will  take  you  about." 

The  trustworthy  man  in  question  was  accordingly 
sent  with  us  to  Old  Bokhara.  We  lived  very  com- 
fortably in  the  selfsame  caravanserai,  and  fared 
sumptuously  on  tinned  dainties  bought  in  the  town, 
as  we  did  not  relish  the  meat.  Here  is  a  paragraph 
from  my  diary :  '*  I  ate  to-day  strawberry  jam  and 
cheese,  sardines,  tinned  cherries,  pomegranates, 
melon,  and  chocolate,  besides  bread  and  pickled 
cucumber." 

One  of  our  first  expeditions  was  to  the  recently 
established  branch  of  the  Moscow  Bank,  for  which 
we  were  furnished  with  a  letter  of  credit. 


MY   SECOND   VISIT  TO   BOKHARA     281 

'*  Oh,  you  are  under  surveillance,"  said  the  banker, 
as  he  accompanied  us  politely  to  the  door,  and 
caught  sight  of  our  tall  jigit  in  his  robe  of  many 
colours  and  his  spotless  white  turban. 

"  What  makes  you  think  that  ?  "  I  asked. 

"  Your  jigit  is  an  official  in  the  Cushbeggi's  ser- 
vice," he  replied — "  he  has  on  boots  ;  if  he  were  a 
servant  he  would  wear  goloshes." 

Servant  or  no,  the  jigit  was  useful,  for  I  made 
him  carry  ray  camera  on  all  our  outings,  and  he  held 
my  hat  while  I  took  my  photographs,  and  cleared  the 
donkeys  and  camels  out  of  our  way  when  we  walked 
in  the  streets.  Still  I  knew  from  experience  that 
Bokhara  would  have  been  pleasanter  without  him. 
As  for  the  Bokhara  of  seven  years  ago,  the  Bokhara 
of  Vamb6ry,  Schuyler,  and  Curzon,  it  was  gone  for 
ever.  The  town  was  now  like  a  nut  from  which  the 
kernel  had  been  extracted.  How  thankful  I  felt 
that  I  had  seen  that  kernel.  Like  the  campanile  of 
Venice,  Bokhara  the  Noble  is  to-day  a  thing  of  the 
past.  In  the  bazaars  that  once  had  not  their  equal, 
there  is  hardly  a  booth  that  has  not  procured  its 
wares  direct  from  Moscow.  I  spent  hours  in  search- 
ing for  curios  that  I  could  take  to  friends  in  England, 
but  there  was  literally  nothing  Bokharan  left  except 
a  few  knives.  Even  the  Ghetto  had  changed,  and 
the  rich  Jews  by  whom  I  had  been  entertained  six 
years  before  were  now  living  in  Russian-built  houses 
in  Tashkent  and  Kokand.     Through  the  kindness  of 


282  IN   RUSSIAN   TURKESTAN 

the  Russian  colonists,  opportunities  were  given  me 
of  conversing  with  some  of  the  most  influential  Sarts 
of  the  Khanate.  It  was  somewhat  embarrassing  when 
one  and  all  eagerly  demanded  what  were  my  first 
impressions  of  Bokhara  the  Noble.  With  eager  eyes 
fixed  upon  my  face,  I  often  came  very  near  betraying 
the  fact  that  this  was  not  my  first  visit.  One  day  an 
Armenian  gentleman  put  the  question  to  me  direct. 

''Mademoiselle,"  he  said,  "have  you  not  seen 
Bokhara  before  ?  " 

My  answer  was  a  look  of  innocent  surprise,  which 
had  the  effect  of  making  my  interlocutor  feel  rather 
foolish,  and  he  said  no  more. 

On  visiting  the  fortress  prison,  which  may  be 
described  as  a  mud  edition  of  Agrippa's  Pantheon,  I 
observed  that  it  was  much  cleaner,  as  to  the  floor 
and  the  general  state  of  the  prisoners,  than  it  had 
been  on  my  former  visit;  but  when  I  raised  my  eyes 
to  the  walls  and  the  roof  I  saw  dust  and  cobwebs 
which  would  have  said  they  remembered  me  could 
they  but  have  spoken.  One  of  the  prisoners  was 
having  his  head  shaved,  and  another  was  contentedly 
peeling  an  apple  while  he  waited  for  his  turn.  It  was 
through  the  influence  of  M.  Lessar,  formerly  the 
Czar's  ambassador  to  London,  that  the  horrible 
underground  dungeon,  made  so  famous  by  Veres- 
chagin's  masterpiece  in  the  Moscow  gallery,  was 
done  away  with.  M.  Lessar  was  at  one  time  Russian 
Political  Agent  at  Bokhara. 


MY  SECOND  VISIT  TO   BOKHARA    283 

The  Amir  was  at  Kermin6  preparing  for  his 
approaching  visit  to  St.  Petersburg,  so  we  did  not 
see  him.  The  Cushbeggi  sent  his  next  in  office  to 
welcome  us,  and  an  entertainment  was  prepared  in 
our  honour,  but  the  most  interesting  memory  I 
carried  away  with  me  was  that  of  the  sweet  face  of 
one  of  the  Cushbeggi's  ladies ;  I  think  she  was  his 
chiefs  wife.  The  dear  old  lady  took  both  my  hands 
and  pressed  them  to  her  heart  in  token  of  sincerest 
welcome.  Then  in  queenly  tones  she  commanded 
several  of  the  younger  ladies  to  perform  a  Tajik 
dance  for  our  especial  benefit,  and  very  gracefully 
they  did  it,  waving  their  tambourines  above  their 
heads,  and  reminding  us  in  their  movements  of  the 
castonette  dancers  in  Spain*  It  is  only  in  Bokhara 
and  Khiva  that  one  meets  with  what  I  may  call  the 
Sart  aristocracy.  In  Russian  territory  native  rank 
and  titles  have  disappeared.  In  Bokhara  the  ladies 
of  rank  resort  once  a  week  to  a  public  bath  to  which 
women  of  the  lower  classes  are  not  admitted.  It  is 
situated,  strange  to  say,  at  the  foot,  or  rather  inside 
the  foot  of  the  world-renowned  criminal  tower.  A 
more  novel  economy  of  spaqe  I  never  met  with. 
One  day  when  the  bath  was  filled  with  ladies,  we 
went  in  to  have  a  chat  with  some  of  them,  leaving 
our  gay  jigit  at  the  door.  Unhappily  I  had  my 
camera  under  my  arm,  and  that  caused  some  com- 
motion, but  I  soon  managed  to  quiet  suspicion  by 
returning  to  the  jigit  and  leaving  the  dangerous 


284  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

machine  in  his  charge.  There  was  a  great  display 
of  jewellery  and  silks  of  every  hue,  and  I  picked  out 
more  than  one  beautiful  face  in  the  dim  light.  Many 
young  mothers  had  brought  their  babies  with  them, 
and  a  number  of  elderly  women,  with  their  faces 
enveloped  in  fine  white  muslin,  were  looking  after 
the  little  ones  in  the  outer  room  while  the  mothers 
bathed.  There  was  naturally  much  more  quiet  and 
order  than  in  the  bath  at  Samarkand,  which  was 
open  to  all  classes.  Every  movement  of  the  fair 
bathers  was  dignified ;  they  might  have  been  assist- 
ing at  a  religious  service. 

The  women  of  Bokhara  have  less  freedom  and 
less  education  than  those  in  Russian  territory.  Not 
long  since,  when  a  wealthy  citizen  was  asked  how 
often  he  conversed  with  his  wife,  he  replied — 

"  About  three  or  four  times  a  year.  Why  should 
I  talk  to  her  ?  She  is  an  uneducated  and  ignorant 
person." 

Yet  even  in  Bokhara  it  is  not  a  rare  thing  for  a 
woman  to  give  her  husband  a  good  drubbing  if  she 
suspects  him  of  inconstancy.  If  a  woman  poisons 
her  husband,  she  is  shot  by  command  of  the  Amir. 
If  a  man  poisons  his  wife,  he  has  his  throat  cut. 

During  Ramazan  a  mullah  calls  to  prayer  from 
the  top  of  the  tower  twice  a  day,  five  minutes  after 
sunrise  and  sunset.  Every  Friday,  at  fifteen  minutes 
past  twelve,  three  mullahs  mount  to  the  top  and  sing 
out  the  call  to  prayer  in  unison.     The  last  criminal 


MY   SECOND  VISIT  TO   BOKHARA    285 

to  be  thrown  from  this  tower  was  tied  up  in  a  sack; 
they  dragged  his  body  out  of  the  sack  and  left  it  for 
weeks  in  a  corner  of  the  street.  This  occurred  early 
in  the  eighties,  and  I  quote  from  an  eye-witness. 

The  present  Emir  has  much  tact;  he  gave  in 
gracefully  to  Russia,  and  it  is  in  consequence  ot 
this  that  he  enjoys  the  title  of  lieutenant-general  in 
one  of  the  Cossack  regiments.  He  is  the  youngest 
son  of  the  late  Amir.  The  eldest  is  at  present  in 
Peshawar,  and  two  others  are  kept  under  surveil- 
lance in  Bokhara,  where  they  receive  a  certain 
number  of  roubles  annually  for  their  personal  ex- 
penses. The  heir  to  the  throne  is  said  to  be  more 
of  a  European  than  an  Oriental 

The  Cushbeggi  is  a  kind-hearted  man ;  it  is  owing 
to  his  efforts  that  a  home  has  been  opened  in  Bokhara 
for  the  destitute  poor.  This  institution  is  supported 
entirely  by  the  native  government,  without  any  help 
from  Russia. 

There  are  many  middle-aged  Sarts  in  Bokhara 
to-day  who  can  remember  the  time  when  Turko- 
man slave-dealers  used  regularly  to  expose  their 
Persian  captives  for  sale  in  the  market.  A  man 
usually  fetched  the  equivalent  of  £^0,  and  a  woman 
£60.  In  the  year  1864  the  Russians  took  Khiva, 
and  liberated  nearly  forty  thousand  slaves,  among 
whom  there  were  twenty-six  Russians.  Three  of 
them  were  women,  and  as  they  had  children  they 
preferred  to  stay,  and  did  not  return  to  Russia. 


CHAPTER  VI 

AMONG  THE  TEKKE  TURKOMANS 

It  was  on  our  homeward  journey  that  we  visited 
MerV|  Askhabad,  and  Bairam  Ali.    Askhabad,  now 
the  chief  town  of  Transcaspia,  was  once  a  Turko- 
man  encampment  —  Eshkabad,   or    "the  town  of 
love."     It  was  here  that  I  paid  my  first  visit  to  a 
Turkoman  kibitka^  which  had  been  erected  in  the 
comer  of  a  garden  belonging  to  a  Russian  official. 
It  was  a  cold,  frosty  day,  and  we  were  nothing  loath 
to  join  the  cosy  family  party  that  clustered  round 
the  wood  fire,  and  thaw  our  frozen  fingers  while 
the  smoke  curled  upwards  to  its  only  exit,  a  small 
hole  in  the  roof;  that  roof,  by  the  way,  was  nothing 
more  than  a  covering  of  thick  felt  laid  over  a  skele* 
ton  hut  of  willow  withes.    The  mother  held  a  black- 
eyed  babe  in  her  arms,  and  several  other  children 
belonging   to   another   wife  made   up    the    group. 
Presently   the   father  lifted  the  piece  of  felt  that 
served  as  a  door,  and  came  and  stood  behind  his 
wife.    Being  a  trusted  servant  of  the  Russian  family 
under  whose  protection  we  had  come  to  visit  him, 
he  was  anxious  to  show  the  hospitality  of  his  race, 
and  begged  us  to  let  him  prepare  some  tea. 


AMONG  THE  TEKKE   TURKOMANS     287 

"That  baby  came  into  the  world  just  after  the 
cold  weather  set  in,"  said  Madame  H.  "Until  it 
was  born  the  mother  refused  to  lie  down,  though 
it  took  all  the  strength  of  a  powerful  female  neigh- 
bour to  support  her  in  a  standing  position.  She  was 
true  to  the  time-honoured  custom  of  her  race.  It 
was  a  bitter  day/'  she  continued,  "  and  as  the  poor 
creature's  teeth  chattered  with  the  cold,  I  sent  for 
an  old  coat  to  throw  over  her  shoulders.  It  was 
not  much  use  after  all,  for  as  soon  as  my  back 
was  turned  her  husband  appropriated  it  for  his 
own  wear." 

There  had  been  difficulty  about  deciding  on  a 
name  for  the  child.  The  father  had  begged  his 
Russian  master  to  choose  one. 

"  I  think  Mohammed  would  do,"  said  the  colonel, 
but  the  father  shook  his  head;  then,  after  a  little 
reflection,  he  said,  "Well,  it  was  snowing  yester- 
day, so  the  boy  shall  be  called  '  It  Snows.' " 

As  soon  as  "  It  Snows "  was  bom,  a  neighbour 
had  set  about  making  a  cake,  while  the  father  had 
rushed  out  to  tell  his  friends  the  good  news  and 
invite  them  to  a  feast.  He  had  returned  home  with 
as  many  nuts  and  sweets  as  he  could  carry.  The 
cake  made,  the  useful  neighbour  had  seated  herself 
upon  the  ground,  and,  holding  the  child  between  her 
upturned  toes,  proceeded  to  wash  its  face  with  oil 
and  mud,  mixed  with  native  soap. 

The  Turkomans,  though  their  Mohammedanism  is 


288  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

very  lax,  have  a  great  horror  of  pigs.  They  firmly 
believe  that  a  man  who  has  touched  one  of  these  ani- 
mals cannot  enter  heaven  within  a  certain  number 
of  years  after  the  event.  One  of  Colonel  H.'s  ser- 
vants finding  that  a  certain  mullah  had  taken  a 
fancy  to  his  wife,  got  some  bristles  from  a  wild 
boar  and  stuck  them  in  her  head-dress.  The  mullah 
ceased  from  that  moment  to  trouble  her  with  his 
attentions. 

The  next  day  we  visited  a  large  encampment 
several  miles  distant.  The  chief  came  out  to  wel- 
come us.  He  was  responsible  to  the  Russians  for 
the  good  behaviour  of  all  the  families  in  that  par- 
ticular encampment,  and  wore  round  his  neck  the 
usual  insignia  of  office,  a  gilt  chain  and  medal.  He 
was  much  richer  and  lived  in  better  style  than  his 
neighbours.  His  kibitka  was  hung  with  valuable 
Penjeh  carpets  and  saddlebags,  and  wonderfully 
comfortable  they  made  it  Musicians  were  called 
for,  and  we  were  soon  listening  to  music  excruciat- 
ing to  European  ears.  One  sang  to  a  native  guitar, 
while  another  played  on  a  peculiar  kind  of  pipe.  The 
music  soon  attracted  a  great  crowd,  but  as  there  was 
only  room  for  a  limited  number  of  people  inside  the 
kibitka^  the  people  who  could  not  possibly  squeeze 
in  began  to  lift  up  bits  of  the  felt  covering,  and  lean- 
ing with  all  their  weight  upon  the  frail  walls,  made 
them  tremble  so  that  I  thought  every  minute  the 
whole  thing  would  collapse  upon  our  heads.     The 


AMONG  THE  TEKKE  TURKOMANS    289 

windows  thus  made  let  in  a  current  of  piercingly 
cold  air,  and  wherever  we  looked  black  eyes  seemed 
to  be  peering  down  upon  us.  The  music  and  tea 
being  over,  we  asked  if  we  might  be  introduced  to 
the  ladies  of  the  encampment,  whereupon  their  men- 
folk went  in  search  of  them,  and  they  soon  appeared 
in  such  numbers  that  there  was  not  an  inch  of  stand- 
ing room  left,  and  many  had  to  stay  outside.  They 
all  wore  masses  of  weighty  silver  jewellery.  The 
most  remarkable  of  their  ornaments  were  heavy 
silver  breastplates  studded  with  agates.  Very  poor 
women,  if  they  cannot  possess  themselves  of  solid 
silver,  will  content  themselves  with  imitation.  The 
candle  sockets  off  a  Russian  Christmas-tree  had  been 
thankfully  received  and  sewn  on  to  the  clothes  of  a 
woman  who  could  not  afford  to  buy  anything  better. 
The  women's  caps  were  thickly  covered  with  heavy 
silver  buttons,  sewn  on.  Their  feet  were  bare,  in 
spite  of  the  fact  that  the  ground  outside  was  covered 
with  snow. 

Of  all  Mohammedan  women,  the  Turkomans 
seem  to  enjoy  the  greatest  freedom  ;  they  go  where 
they  like,  unveiled,  and  mix  freely  with  the  men 
from  childhood  onwards.  They  seldom  have  much 
pretension  to  good  looks.  Those  of  pure  Turkoman 
blood  are  the  ugliest,  and  have  a  Mongol  type  of 
face.  The  better-looking  among  them  are  invari- 
ably descended  from  Persian  slaves,  and  consequently 

take  a  low  rank  in  Turkoman  society.    A  Turkoman 

T 


290  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

of  pure  blood  will  never  choose  such  a  woman  for 
his  wife,  for  to  him  she  is  nothing  but  a  slave,  or 
the  child  of  one. 

The  Turkomans  are  a  proud  people.  The  poorest 
urchin  among  them  is  bom  with  a  fiery  pride  of 
race ;  if  you  offer  him  a  tip  for  some  small  service 
rendered  he  declines  it  with  an  offended  flash  of 
the  eye  and  a  movement  of  his  well-set  head  which 
tells  you  more  plainly  than  words  that  despite  his 
rags  he  is  a  gentleman. 

No  Russian  official  ever  dreams  of  giving  orders 
to  a  Turkoman  servant.  He  asks  him  as  a  favour 
to  do  this  or  that,  and  meets  in  return  with  the 
obedience  of  a  lamb.  Whereas  servility  is  half  the 
character  of  a  Sart  there  is  not  a  grain  of  it  in  the 
Turkoman,  yet  a  simpler-minded  people  does  not 
exist.  The  wild  foe  has  become  the  trusted  subject, 
and  there  is  a  mutual  esteem  between  conqueror  and 
conquered  that  is  pleasing  to  behold.^  The  little 
museum  at  Geok  Teppe,  which  contains  the  trophies 
of  Skobeleff 's  victory,  contains  also  the  trophies  of 
Turkoman  bravery,  and  all  has  been  done  that  could 
be  done  to  show  that  Russia  admires  bravery,  even 
if  it  be  that  of  a  vanquished  foe. 

We  spent  a  morning  in  the  native  market  at  Merv. 
The  first  thing  that  attracted  our  attention  was  9, 


^  "  It  would  be  well  if  nations  and  races  could  communicate  their 
qualities;  but  in  practice  when  they  look  upon  each  other,  they 
have  an  eye  to  nothing  but  defects.** — /^.  L,  St^ettf^, 


AMONG  THE  TEKKE  TURKOMANS    291 

number  of  long  bars  of  native  soap  selling  at  eight 
kopecks  (2d.)  a  bar.  Russians  have  found  it  better 
than  their  own  for  washing  linen,  and  buy  it  from 
the  Turkomans  in  quantities  for  that  purpose.  Close 
by  a  hat  business  was  going  on  ;  each  sheepskin  hat 
or  red  skull-cap  was  suspended  on  a  stick  the  other 
end  of  which  had  been  stuck  firmly  in  the  ground ; 
a  cap  is  always  worn  under  the  sheepskin  hat.  Then 
we  passed  on  to  the  carpet-seDers,  who  sat  on  the 
ground  with  their  rugs  piled  up  on  either  side  of 
them.  Fresh  rugs  were  continually  arriving  on  the 
backs  of  camels  from  distant  encampments,  and  we 
stood  for  some  time  watching  them  unfolded.  Con- 
sidering myself  somewhat  of  a  connoisseur  in  carpets, 
I  had  looked  forward  to  picking  up  a  rug  or  two 
here,  but  alas !  as  rug  after  rug  was  unfolded,  the 
sad  truth  was  impressed  upon  me  that  I  had  come 
too  late.  Cheap  work  and  cheap  designs  abounded, 
but  the  Turkoman  carpet  of  world-wide  renown  was 
not  there.  Later  in  the  day  when  we  dined  with 
the  Govetiior,  his  daughters  took  me  for  a  tour  of 
inspection  round  their  handsomely  furnished  house, 
and  showed  me  the  carpets  they  prized  the  most. 
There  were  not  many  I  should  have  cared  to  buy. 
Two  subsequent  visits  to  the  chief  carpet  warehouse 
at  Merv  resulted  in  our  purchasing  a  couple  of  small 
Penjeh  rugs,  the  only  ones  of  their  kind  that  we 
met  with. 

We  stopped  to  look  next  at  a  bootseller's  wares, 


292  IN   RUSSIAN   TURKESTAN 

and  were  interested  to  notice  that  unlike  the  Sart, 
who  sports  heelless  boots  and  goloshes,  the  Turko- 
man has  heels  to  his  boots  and  also  to  his  slippers, 
while  the  toes  of  both  turn  up  in  something  of  a 
Chinese  fashion.  This  must  be  one  of  the  remnants 
of  his  Mongolian  origin.  No  stockings  and  few 
socks  are  worn,  but  we  saw  long  strips  of  coarse 
material  being  sold  for  winding  round  feet  and  legs. 
Horses  stood  about  in  groups  while  their  masters, 
who  had  evidently  come  in  from  a  distance,  were 
making  their  purchases.  Each  animal  had  its  back 
covered  with  a  heavy  piece  of  felt.  Turkoman 
horses  live  out  of  doors,  they  are  never  kept  in 
stables.  One  result  of  their  backs  always  being 
covered  is  that  they  lose  a  great  deal  of  their  hair. 
Some  riders  had  brought  bundles  of  hay  on  the 
front  of  their  saddles,  and  were  selling  it  in  wisps 
to  the  townsfolk.  The  silversmiths  were  selling 
their  jewellery  in  roughly  erected  booths.  All  their 
wares  lay  on  the  ground  upon  a  spread-out  handker- 
chief. The  bracelets  of  solid  silver  must  have 
weighed  pounds ;  they  were  heavy  even  to  lift,  as 
we  examined  them ;  I  should  be  sorry  to  have  to 
wear  one.  On  an  ordinary  woman's  arm  they 
would  reach  three-parts  of  the  way  between  the 
wrist  and  the  elbow ;  they  were  only  sold  in  pairs. 
The  necklaces  might  appropriately  be  described  as 
collars,  suitable  for  a  mastiff  or  a  large  greyhound. 
To  carry  these,  a  Turkoman  woman  should  have 


AMONG  THE  TEKKE  TURKOMANS    293 

the  strength  of  a  horse.  The  solid  silver  jewellery 
that  a  man  buys  for  his  wife  often  represents  a  good 
part  of  his  capital.  He  cannot  afford  to  purchase 
in  a  hurry.  A  great  many  cups  of  tea  must  be 
drunk,  and  every  bystander  must  give  his  opinion 
before  a  bargain  can  be  struck.  The  jeweller  is 
quite  aware  of  this,  and  has  a  number  of  little  tea- 
pots ready  for  his  customers. 

We  were  still  strolling  about  the  market  when 
all  at  once,  without  any  apparent  reason,  everybody 
jumped  up  and  rushed  in  one  direction.  If  there 
had  been  any  thieves  about,  now  would  have  been 
their  opportunity.  As  it  was,  I  made  use  of  the 
occasion  to  peep  into  one  of  the  numerous  carpet 
sacks  in  which  the  men  had  brought  their  goods  ; 
it  was  full  of  plump  ducks.  When  the  owner  re- 
turned I  discovered  that  the  irresistible  attraction 
had  been  nothing  more  than  two  men  fighting. 

The  chief  of  the  district  took  us  with  him  to  the 
"law  courts,"  where  a  case  of  theft  was  about  to 
be  tried.  A  camel  had  been  stolen,  and  six  Turko- 
mans of  good  standing  were  present  as  a  kind  of 
jury  to  judge  the  case.  We  watched  the  witnesses 
and  the  offender  brought  in  and  examined,  and  heard 
the  sentence  of  six  months'  imprisonment.  The 
prisoner  was  not  a  Turkoman,  but  a  Sart  from 
Bokhara,  hence  his  light  punishment.  He  was  to 
be  expelled  from  Russian  territory  on  his  release. 
The  jury  wore  only  their  red  skull-caps,  and  had  a 


294  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

comparatively  meek  appearance  without  their  sheep- 
skin headgear.  After  peeing  them  thus  I  was  more 
than  ever  convinced  that  the  proverbially  fierce  look 
of  the  Turkoman  is  chiefly  due  to  his  sheepskin 
cap,  with  its  shaggy  wool  hanging  over  his  piercing 
black  eyes. 

We  drove  several  miles  out  of  Merv  to  visit  a 
village  or  winter  encampment  called  Tegelik  Mejek. 
The  chief  had  four  wives,  each  of  whom  dwelt  in  a 
kibitka  of  her  own.  He  had  also  a  comfortable 
kibitka  for  himself,  made  very  snug  with  handsome 
carpets.  We  visited  each  of  the  ladies  in  turn ;  the 
youngest  had  only  been  married  a  few  months ;  she 
was  sixteen  years  of  age ;  her  husband  had  paid 
a  thousand  roubles  for  her.  Our  host  set  before  us 
some  preserved  fruit  called  ali  buchara;  it  grows 
in  Persia  as  well  as  in  Bokhara.  When  picked 
from  the  tree  it  is  said  to  resemble  "a  plum 
without  a  skin,  or  a  strawberry  without  a  stone." 
There  is  a  pretty  custom  among  the  Turkomans 
that  when  a  guest  takes  leave  of  his  host  the 
latter  springs  on  to  his  horse  and  goes  part  of 
the  way  with  his  guest,  and  we  also  were  escorted 
on  our  way. 

We  next  visited  a  Turkoman  mosque,  with  a 
minaret  and  a  medresse  attached  to  it.  They  were 
built  entirely  of  mud.  The  medresse  had  no  lecture- 
room  ;  it  consisted  simply  of  a  number  of  mud-built 
kibitkas  surrounding  a  square;    their  walls  were 


AMONG  THE  TEKKE  TURKOMANS     295 

a  foot  and  a  half  thick.  Above  each  entrance  was  a 
tiny  square  window,  covered  with  parchment  in  place 
of  glass.  The  reader  will  perhaps  be  surprised  to 
learn  that  a  nomadic  race  should  possess  even  a 
mosque  or  a  medresse  which  is  not  portable,  but 
this  is  just  one  of  the  points  in  which  the  Turko- 
mans differ  from  the  Kirgiz.  They  are  not  for 
ever  roving  without  a  plan  like  most  of  the  latter, 
but  have  their  regular  winter  and  summer  encamp- 
ments which,  once  chosen,  are  resorted  to  for 
many  years  in  succession.  It  is  thus  that  they  are 
better  enabled  to  take  up  agriculture.  The  Kirgiz, 
on  the  other  hand,  who  are  always  on  the  move, 
devote  themselves  mainly  to  cattle-breeding. 

We  stopped  on  our  way  back  to  Merv  to  see 
how  soap  was  made  on  the  steppe.  Near  one  of 
the  encampments  there  was  an  enormous  vat  with 
a  fire  under  it  and  a  number  of  smaller  vats 
scattered  about  near  at  hand.  The  ingredients 
used  were  sheep's  fat,  potash,  salt  and  an  herb 
called  choghofij  which  is  said  to  grow  only  in  the 
Turkoman  steppe.  The  soap  thus  made  has  re- 
markable cleansing  properties,  and  is  preferred  by 
the  Russians  to  their  own  for  laundry  purposes. 
Nearly  every  kibitka  had  its  own  watch-dog,  which 
made  a  great  noise  and  had  to  be  held  back  as  we 
approached. 

From  Merv  we  retraced  our  steps  to  Bairam  Ali, 
\  whence  we  could  drive  out  to  see  the  wonderful 


296  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

ruins  of  ancient  Merv,  about  which  Gibbon  wrote : 
"The  Antiochia  founded  by  the  Greeks  in  Hyr- 
cania  still  existed  in  the  days  of  Timour  under 
the  name  of  Merve."  ^  To-day  there  are  still  forty 
miles  of  ruins  that  have  never  been  properly  ex- 
plored  by  archceologists.  The  tombs  of  the  two 
standard-bearers  of  All  are  still  in  fairly  good 
preservation,  so  also  is  the  mosque  of  Sultan 
Sanjar,  the  hero  of  the  Seljuks.  Unhappily  the 
Turkomans,  who  have  a  practice  of  making  pil- 
grimages to  these  holy  ruins,  think  it  right  that 
each  pilgrim  should  pull  out  a  couple  of  bricks 
from  their  lower  walls,  that  he  may  lean  them  up 
against  each  other  in  memory  of  his  visit  to  these 
monuments  of  Islam,  so  they  are  not  likely  to 
remain  standing  many  years  longer.  The  beauti- 
fully sculptured  tomb  of  one  of  the  standard- 
bearers  has  had  a  great  piece  hacked  out  of  it; 
this  recent  act  of  vandalism  was,  I  am  told,  the 
work  of  an  English   tourist.      It  is  thought  that 

^  "Its  glories  and  sieges  and  sacks  excited  the  eloquence  of 
chroniclers  and  the  wonderment  of  pilgrims.  Successively  a 
satrapy  of  Darius  ...  a  city  and  colony  of  Alexander  ;  a  province 
of  the  Parthians  whither  Orodes  transported  the  10,000  Roman 
soldiers  whom  he  took  prisoners  in  his  famous  victory  over  Crassus; 
the  site  of  a  Christian  bishopric ;  an  Arabian  capital  (where  at  the 
end  of  the  eighth  century,  Mokannah,  the  veiled  prophet  of  Khor- 
asan,  kindled  the  flame  of  schism),  the  seat  of  power  of  a  Seljuk 
dynasty,  and  the  residence  and  last  resting-place  of  Alp  Arslan  and 
Sultan  Sanjar  ;  a  prey  to  the  awful  scourge  of  the  Mongol,  and  an 
altar  for  the  human  hecatombs  of  Jenghiz  Khan ;  a  frontier  outpost 
of  Persia;  a  bone  of  armed  contention  between  Bokhara  and 
Khiva;  a  Turkoman  encampment ;  and  a  Russian  town." — Curzon*s 
*•  Russia  in  Central  Asia.^^ 


AMONG  THE  TEKKE  TURKOMANS     297 

during  its  most  flourishing  period  Merv  had  a 
population  of  at  least  a  million  souls.  There  is 
a  legend  that  the  canals  by  which  the  town  was 
watered,  and  of  which  there  are  still  traces,  were 
supplied  with  water  from  a  mountain  reservoir, 
and  that  a  certain  noble  had  the  management  of  it. 
One  day  the  sultan  carried  off  the  noble's  beautiful 
daughter,  and  her  father  in  revenge  gave  the 
reservoir  into  the  hands  of  the  Persians,  who  cut 
off  the  entire  water  supply.  A  drought  ensued, 
and  no  effort  of  its  inhabitants  could  save  the  fated 
town.  Since  the  Russians  came  they  have  spent 
millions  of  roubles  in  trying  to  make  new  reser- 
voirs, but  their  efforts  have  met  with  little  success. 
The  Merv  oasis  is  surrounded  on  all  sides  by  a 
desert  which,  in  the  old  days,  was  a  better  pro- 
tection to  the  Turkomans  than  the  strongest  of 
fortifications  could  possibly  have  been.  This 
steppe,  as  the  Russians  call  it,  is  cut  up  by 
caravan  routes,  which  have  for  ages  been  con- 
necting-links between  Khiva,  Bokhara  and  Persia. 
The  Turkomans,  like  the  Kirgiz,  are  divided  into 
clans,  which  again  are  subdivided  into  tribes  and 
families.  My  personal  acquaintance  with  them 
has  been  confined,  so  far,  to  the  Tekke  races;  all 
the  Turkomans  are  Sunnites.  There  is  a  wide- 
spread belief  that  their  desert  was  once  the  bottom 
of  an  inland  sea,  comprising  within  its  boundaries 
the  Caspian  as  well  as  the  Aral  Sea.     Seals  have 


298  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

been  found  in  the  Caspian;  this  suggests  a  con- 
nection between  it  and  the  Polar  seas.  No  seals 
have  ever  been  found  in  either  the  Black  Sea  or 
the  Mediterranean.  For  miles  I  saw  the  ground 
covered  with  a  white  powder,  which  turned  out 
to  be  pure  salt 

At  Bairam  Ali,  the  next  station  to  Merv,  the 
Emperor  of  Russia  has  a  private  estate  covering 
a  hundred  and  twenty  thousand  desatines.  It  is 
superintended  by  M.  Spiridon  Tolstoy,  one  of  the 
Life  Guards  who  stood  on  the  steps  of  the  throne 
at  the  coronation  of  Alexander  III.  A  palatial 
residence  was  built  and  furnished  for  him  in  1902 
out  of  the  Emperor's  own  pocket,  and  he  receives 
a  salary  of  nine  thousand  roubles  yearly.  The 
labourers  on  the  estate  are  all  Turkomans,  who 
are  fast  being  reclaimed  to  the  ways  of  civilisation 
and  learning  the  useful  art  of  agriculture  in  place 
of  the  brigandage  in  which  they  no  longer  have  an 
opportunity  to  excel;  their  number  on  the  estate 
exceeds  three  thousand.  There  is  a  hospital,  under 
the  care  of  a  Russian  doctor  with  two  trained 
assistants.  The  doctor,  who  escorted  us  round 
the  neat  wards  and  showed  us  his  operating-room, 
with  its  glazed  walls  and  all  the  latest  improve- 
ments, looked  somewhat  like  a  chef  de  cuisine  in 
his  long  white  pinafore.  In  time  there  will  also 
be  a  church;  as  it  is,  a  church  railway-carriage 
visits  the  estate  occasionally.    The  estate  already 


s    ' 


AMONG  THE  TEKKE  TURKOMANS    299 

boasts  of  shops,  factories  and  a  bazaar.  Some  of 
the  employes  are  Afghans,  which  is  not  surpris- 
ing when  one  remembers  how  close  Merv  is  to 
Afghanistan.  While  we  were  driving  round  the 
estate  with  our  kind  hostess,  Madame  Tolstoy,  we 
came  upon  a  party  of  Afghans  making  bread  pretty 
much  after  the  Sart  fashion — ^which  I  have  described 
elsewhere — only  that  they  kneaded  the  paste  on  a 
cushion.  Some  of  these  men  had  actually  decorated 
their  upper  garments  with  buttons  from  the  coats 
of  English  soldiers !  I  saw  three  of  them  at 
least.     India  seemed  near  indeed. 

The  fertility  of  the  Merv  oasis  is  almost  incredible. 
From  soil  that  had  not  been  touched  for  more  than 
a  hundred  and  fifty  years,  two  hundred  puds  of 
fruit  were  produced  on  the  estate  the  first  year  from 
two  and  a  half  acres.  Even  the  richest  American 
soil  cannot  beat  that.  A  gentleman  who  spoke  a 
little  English  described  it  to  me  as  '*  an  awful  crop." 
A  Russian  has  charge  of  the  jam  manufactory,  where 
thousands  of  tins  of  apricot  and  strawberry  jam  are 
turned  out  every  year.  I  can  say  from  experience 
that  no  English  jam  can  hold  a  candle  to  it.  The 
fruit  retains  its  shape,  its  colour  and  its  flavour. 

A  Russian  gentleman,  M.  Vickouline,  manages 
the  cotton-cleaning  department.  He  has  introduced 
the  latest  improvements  in  English  machinery.  Out- 
side the  buildings  are  to  be  seen  the  mountains  of 
cotton-seed  to  which  I  have  already  alluded. 


300  IN  RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

Jn  summer  the  heat  is  often  ss""  Reamur,  and  in 
winter  it  is  so  cold  that  the  thermometer  stands  at 
28""  for  a  month  at  a  time.  In  the  cold  weather, 
both  Russians  and  natives  are  exposed  to  attacks 
of  what  they  call  "  yellow  fever,"  which  is  almost 
always  fatal  on  the  second  or  third  day.  Its  victims 
are  nearly  always  people  who  have  recently  suffered 
from  malarial  fever. 

The  Merv  territory  was  defended  against  the 
Russians  by  four  Khans,  after  their  nominal  sur- 
render in  1884 ;  they  even  built  fresh  forts.  One 
of  the  Khans  was  a  child  at  the  time.  His  mother, 
a  woman  of  strong  character,  saw  how  useless  it 
was  to  hold  out  any  longer  and  used  her  influence 
with  the  three  other  Khans  so  well  that  they  were 
brought  round  to  her  opinion,  and  peace  was  con- 
firmed. The  Emperor  Alexander  was  so  pleased 
when  he  heard  the  story  that  he  assigned  a  pension 
to  her  and  her  son  for  life.  The  old  lady  is  still 
living ;  she  had  the  honour  of  being  presented  to  the 
late  Emperor  when  he  passed  through  Baku.  The 
Empress  gave  her  some  valuable  jewels.  Her  name 
is  Gulgimi  Bai. 

Young  horses  grow  up  with  the  children  of  the 
family,  and  some  think  this  the  reason  why  they  are 
so  remarkably  intelligent.  As  I  have  said  before, 
such  a  thing  as  a  stable  is  unknown.  The  spe- 
cial breed  for  which  the  desert  was  once  famed 
has  almost  disappeared.     The  owner  of  the  finest 


AMONG  THE  TEKKE  TURKOMANS     301 

Turkoman  horse  I  met  with  was  a  Russian  gentle- 
man in  Tashkent;  my  friend  has  since  sent  me  a 
photograph  of  that  beautiful  animal. 

On  our  return  to  Merv  we  were  delighted  to  hear 
that  an  invitation  to  a  Turkoman  wedding  awaited 
us.  About  ten  in  the  morning  we  drove  out  to  the 
village  where  the  bride  lived.  I  may  describe  it  as 
a  settlement  of  beehives  full  of  excited  women. 
What  a  buzzing  their  voices  made !  Every  avail- 
able scrap  of  jewellery  was  displa3red  on  this 
occasion.  On  her  right  hand  each  woman  had  a 
heavy  silver  thumb-ring,  while  numerous  silver 
amulets  hooked  into  her  hair  tinkled  like  Swiss  cow- 
bells at  her  every  movement;  on  her  breast  she 
wore  the  agate-studded  breastplate  of  which  I  have 
spoken.  Every  face  looked  happy  and  expectant. 
We  were  taken  into  a  large  kiUtka^  and  ate  pilau 
seated  on  handsome  silk  mattresses.  We  all  partook 
of  one  big  dish,  with  European  spoons,  while  our 
host,  the  bride's  father,  brought  out  one  handker- 
chief after  another  filled  with  nuts,  sweets,  apples, 
oranges  and  sugar.  We  were  not  expected  to  put 
the  sugar  into  our  tea,  but  to  eat  it  separately.  One 
old  lady  being  rather  far  from  the  dish  I  handed  her 
my  spoon  when  I  had  finished ;  as  she  helped  her- 
self Xo  pilau  the  whole  company  was  convulsed  with 
merriment,  for  it  was  the  first  time  in  her  life  that 
she  had  handled  a  spoon. 

«'Whoisshe?"Iasked. 


302  IN   RUSSIAN  TURKESTAN 

"  Allah  knows  "  replied  one  of  the  men. 

There  was  feasting  in  all  the  kibitkas  at  the  same 
time ;  from  where  I  sat  I  could  see  bowls  of  steam- 
ing pilau  being  carried  past.  The  bride  and  her 
young  lady  friends  had  had  theirs  an  hour  earlier. 
Six  carts  were  drawn  up  outside  their  tent.  It  is 
only  quite  recently  that  the  Russian  cart  has  taken 
the  place  of  the  Turkoman  camel  at  these  festivals. 
At  a  given  signal  the  girls  rushed  out  of  their 
kibitka  and  hopped  on  to  the  carts  like  so  many 
kittens^  laughing  merrily  all  the  time.  The  drivers, 
who  were  already  seated,  now  smacked  their 
whips  and  the  six  horses  started  off  at  a  gallop; 
another  cart  drove  up  to  take  the  bride.  We  saw 
the  mother  step  forward  to  receive  the  price  that 
had  to  be  paid  for  her.  Three  women  then  rushed 
into  the  kibitka  and  soon  reappeared  carrying  what 
looked  like  a  large  silk-covered  bolster  suitable  for 
a  double  bed.  They  bundled  it  into  the  cart,  in  a 
horizontal  position.  That  was  the  bride !  Two 
women  jumped  in  beside  her  and  off  she  went ;  but 
a  shout  from  the  men  soon  stopped  the  cart.  I 
now  heard  that  as  only  half  the  money  had  been  paid 
she  could  not  proceed.  Then  a  man  from  the  crowd 
stepped  up  to  the  mother  and  put  a  silver  coin  into 
her  hand.  She  looked  at  it,  and  being  apparently 
satisfied,  let  the  cart  go  on.  I  was  then  told  that 
the  bride  must  return  to  her  parents  after  twenty 
days,  as  not  all  of  the  money  had  yet  been  paid. 


AMONG  THE  TEKKE  TURKOMANS     303 

We  got  into  our  carriage  and  followed  the  bridal 
party  to  the  adjoining  village,  where  we  found  the 
girls  all  crowded  into  another  kibitka  with  the  bride 
in  their  midst.  She  pretended  to  be  very  shy,  and 
it  was  difficult  to  make  her  show  her  face.  Outside 
the  men  had  formed  a  wide  circle,  and  stood  four  or 
five  deep  to  watch  a  wrestling-match  between  the 
youths  of  the  encampment.  The  struggles  of  each 
couple  of  barefooted  wrestlers  were  followed  with 
breathless  interest;  shouts  applauded  every  hero 
who  succeeded  in  tripping  up  his  opponent  and 
bringing  him  to  the  ground  with  a  crash.  They 
wrestled  each  with  one  hand  on  the  other's  shoulder 
and  one  on  his  hip.  The  struggle  began  with  slow, 
deliberate  pressure  and  very  little  movement ;  this 
exhibition  of  quiet  force  was  the  most  impressive 
part  of  it.  The  victors  were  rewarded  with  bright 
silk  handkerchiefs  which  were  handed  to  them  by 
the  umpire,  who  kept  order  with  a  stick  in  his  hand. 
None  of  the  women  were  present.  A  horse-race 
came  next,  but  we  could  not  stay  to  witness  it 

At  dinner  that  evening  I  had  for  my  neighbour 
the  military  doctor  stationed  at  Merv,  and  it  was 
from  him  I  learned  that  the  eye-disease  which  I  had 
noticed  so  frequently  among  the  Turkomans  was 
not  cataract  but  trachoma^  a  disease  of  the  eyelid 
resulting  from  the  smoky  atmosphere  oitht  kibitkas. 
If  it  is  not  treated  in  time  the  eyeball  becomes  white 
and  blindness  ensues.     It  is  very  contagious  and  is 


304  IN   RUSSIAN   TURKESTAN 

passed  on  from  one  member  of  a  family  to  another 
through  their  habit  of  eating  and  drinking  from  the 
same  vessel. 

The  river  Murgab  overflowed  its  banks  in  the 
spring  of  1896,  and  the  Russians,  fearing  lest  it 
might  cause  serious  devastation,  dammed  up  its 
course.  The  result  was  that  the  water  spread  over 
a  considerable  tract  of  country  and  formed  marshes. 
From  these  marshes  a  poisonous  miasma  arose  and 
a  terrible  mortality  from  malarial  fever  ensued.  It 
is  no  exaggeration  to  say  that  the  population  of  New 
Merv  was  diminished  by  one-third  in  consequence. 
Many  families  who  were  not  themselves  attacked 
preferred  to  leave  the  place;  even  in  1901  and 
1902  there  were  victims,  though  the  marshes  have 
long  since  dried  up.  It  is  not  considered  safe  for  a 
Russian  child  to  remain  in  Merv  between  the  months 
of  May  and  September ;  even  the  soldiers  stationed 
there  are  removed. 

From  Merv  we  travelled  back  to  Krasnovodsk 
without  again  breaking  our  journey.  Passing 
through  Askhabad  we  had  the  great  pleasure  of  a 
last  chat  and  handshake  with  those  of  our  Russian 
friends  who  had  been  able  to  come  to  the  station  to 
bid  us  God-speed  on  our  homeward  way. 


INDEX 


INDEX 


Abu  Tagir  Khogi.  historian,  246 
AdraSt  40 
Afghan  gipsies,  187 
Afghanistan,  186 
Afghans,  185  seqq. 
At  Merv,  298 
Character,  185 
Agriculture,  11 
Aihnents,  165  segg, 
Aksakal,  or  Grey-beard,  49,  159 
A  lam,  duties  of,  80 
Alexander  III.,  coronation,  297 
Alexander  III.,  pensions  Gulgimi 

Bai,  300 
Alexander  the  Great,  "  tomb"  of, 

269 
AH  buchara,  294 
Alois^,  M.,  silkworm  cultivation. 

37.38 
American  cotton,  30,  31  and  note, 

259 
Amir  of  Bokhara,  283,  285 

Begs  and,  46 

Bodyguard,  49 

Cultivation  of  com  and,  33 

Descent,  7,  127 

European  ball,  220 

Sons,  285 
Amir  or  Khan,  rule  of,  44 
Amirs,  crowning,  247 
Amu  Daria   (Jaxartes),  13,   200, 
230 


Andijan,  5,  8,  35 

Cap-making  at,  215 

Earthquake  at,  271 

History  of,  270 

Medresses,  271,  272 

Rising  in,  69 

Silversmith,  213 
Animals,  193  seqq. 
An2ob,  inhabitants  of,  249 
Apricots,  25,  26 
Arab  occupation,  traces  of,  6 
Arba,  native  cart,  193 
Army,  49 

Aryk  Aksakal,  15,  16 
Askhabad,  304 

Museum,  200 

Russian  school  teachers  at, 
274 

SaUk,  166 

Visited,  286 


BXbar  Khan,  8, 197 
Bairam  Ali,  286,  295 

Cotton-separating    establish- 
ment, 33 

Cotton-seed  at,  34 

Czar's  estate  at,  297 
Baku,  273 
Basket-making,  187 
Batchas,  160,  218 


307 


308 


INDEX 


Baths,  lao,  155  seqq.,  283 

Entertainment  at,  159 
Bazaars,  51,  55    seqq.   (see   also 

under  names  of  towns) 
Begs  or  governors,  45,  46 
Bellew.  quoted,  on  Pathan,  188 
Bibi  Kanim  mosque,  246 
Bird-cages,  197 
Bist  Takhla,  269 
Blind  men,  76 
Boa,  Eryxjaculus,  198 
Bokhara,  3,  5,  9 

Administration  of,  47 

Afghan  merchants  in,  187 

Amir  of.    See  Amir. 

Author  visits  ladies.  277 

Author's    first   visit   to,   273 
seqq. 

Author's  second  visit  to,  279 
seqq, 

Bath,  283 

Bazaar,  56,  281 

Cats,  196 

Colleges  {see  Medresses) 

Designs  on  walls  of  houses, 
109 

Illness  in,  169 

Jewish  quarter,  176 

Jews.    See  Jews. 

Knives,  212 

Life  in,  125 

Medresse,  82 ;  visited,  276 

Old  Bokhara,  275 

Prison,  282 

Silk-dyers,  38 

Submits  to  Russia,  45 

Water-supply,  14 

Women,  127,  128,  284 ;  their 
dress,  131,  132 
"  Bokharan  carpet,"  215 
Bombay,  72 
Boots,  135,  291 
Bread,  29 
Bread-making,  118 
Bread,  Sart  reverence  for,  153 


"  Bridge  "  and  Vint,  275 

Brigands,  4 

Burials,  172  * 

Bumes,  quoted,  on  women's  boots , 

13s 
Burton,   Sir    Richard,  on   Islam 

and  women,  72 
Buza,  229 


Calai,  71,  86 
Caligraphy,  92 
Calim,  138,  Z40,  141,  144 
•*  Camel-plant,"  233 
Camels,  192,  226 

Carrying  cotton,  35 

Food,  35 
Canals,  12,  14,  17,  51 
Cap  bazaar,  Samarkand,  215 
Caps,  291,  294 

Embroidered,  84 

Schoolboys',  84 
Caravan  routes,  297 
Carpets,  214,  288,  291 
Casi  (judge),  80,  81 
Caspian,  crossing,  273 
Cats,  196 

Chat  khana,  tea-shop,  59,  266 
Charjui,  Beg  of,  46 

Melons,  26 
Childhood,  95  seqq. 

Boyhood,  99 

Circumcision,  99 

Girlhood,  100 
Chilinit  27,  117,  163 
Chillah  Hanaht  22.  245 
Chinese,  6 
Christmas-trees,  21 
Chyust,  5, 149,  257 

Mosques,  258 
Clavijo,  Ruz  Gonzalez  de,  130 
Climate,  winter,  18 
Clitus'  tomb,  245 
Colleges,  77  seqq, 
Constantinople,  72 


INDEX 


309 


Cooking,  147  seqq. 
Coppersmiths,  211 
Coral  ornaments,  132 
Cotton-cleaning  at  Merv,  299 
Cotton  cultivation,  30  seqq. 
Cotton  in  Andijan,  270 
Cotton-seed  as  fuel,  34 
Cotton-separating  establishments, 

33 
Cotton  trade,  Sart  monopoly,  183 
Coverlets,  dowry,  102 
Cows,  152 
Cradle,  95 

Cruel  Stepmother^  207 
Curcius,  quoted,  30  note 
Curio-dealer,  Russian,  41,  42 
Curios  in  Bokhara,  276,  281 
CtLsh  Beggi,  chief  minister,  45,  47, 

197,281,283,  285 
Cyprus,  locusts  in,  198 


Daniel's  tomb,  75 
Dasturkan,  112, 116,  218 
Dates.  28 
Delafrus  pears,  28 
Dentistry,  171 
Dervishes  of  Bokhara,  66 

Costume,  67 
Divorce,  143 
Diwan  Beggi,  Finance  Minister, 

45 
Dogs.  19s,  29s 
Donkeys,  195 
Ducks,  198,  293 
Dungans,  188 

Origin  of,  189 
Dutar,  217 
Dwarf,  219 
Dykes,  14 


Earthquakes,  271,  272 

Easter  eggs,  154 

Ellik-bashi,  "  head  of  fifty,"  49 


Embroidery,  102,  104 
Erysipelas,  treatment  of,  166 
Eryxjaculus,  198 
Eye-disease,  303 


Falaka,  182 
Falcons,  196 
Families  numerous.  96 
Fergana,  6,  8,  251 

American  cotton  in,  31 

Apricots,  25 

Life  in,  125 

Sart  custom  of  Kir,  173 
Figs,  27 
Fir-trees,  21 
Fleas,  199 
Forty  Viziers,  202 
Frogs,  198 
Fruit  syrups,  152 


Geok  Teppe  museum,  290 
Ghengis  Khan,  7 

Tradition  of  his   birth,  244, 
note 
Gibbon,  quoted,  on  Merv  ruins, 

39s 
Girls'  schools,  87,  90 
Goitre,  168 
Gourds,  27 
Government  of  native  towns,  44 

seqq. 
Grapes,  24,  25,  26 
Graves,  length  of,  75,  76 
Greeks,  6 

Guinea-worm,  165  and  note 
Gulasha,  159,  162 
Gulgimi  Bai,  and  Czar,  300 


Hadj,  71 

Hats,  sheepskin,  291 
Head,  shape  of  back  of,  96 
Shaved,  98 


310 


INDEX 


Hedin.  Sven,  270 

On  goitre,  168 
Henna,  ustf  of.  125 
Hindu    money-changers    (Mul- 

tani),  176,  191 
Horsehair  veil,  105,  107,  130,  179 
Horses,  292,  300 

Shoeing,  195 

Special  crops  for,  32 
Huns.  6 


/main,  reciter  of  prayer,  80 

Insects,  198 

Isaakhan,  Afghan  chief,  185 

/shafts,  69 

Iskander,  the,  14 

Islam  monuments,  296 

Jam  factory,  Merv,  299 

Japan,  silk  industry,  37 

Jaxartes  River  (see  Amu    Daria 
and  Syr  Daria) 

Jerusalem,  74 

Jesson,  Colonel,  21 

Jewellery,  132,  292,  300 

Jewish  wedding,  183 

Jews  in  Bokhara,  276,  281 

Jews  in  Central  Asia,  176  seqq. 
Character,  177 
Dress,  178 

Dyers  of  silk,  176,  183 
Pilgrimages  to  Jerusalem,  i8z 
Polygamy,  i8o 
Sarts  and,  182, 183 
Synagogues,  181, 182 
Turning  Moslems,  178 
Women's  beauty,  179 

Jigit,  263,  265,266,  267,  280,  281, 
283 


KahabSf  Z17 
Kara    agatck    {Ulmus 
tanica),  18 


Turkes- 


Kara-Kirgiz,  225 

Karakalpaks,  229 

KaraJtut,  Lactrodectus  lugubris, 
199 

Karki  melons,  26 

Karshi,  215 

Kashgar,  42,  74 

Kazan.  72,  85 

TatArs  from,  189 

Katik,  122 

Kaufmann,  General : 
Builds  Tashkent.  237 
Introduced  American  cotton, 

Silk  industry  and,  37 
Kermin^,  46,  283 
Khanates,  44 

Government  of,  45 
Khiva,  3,  82,  283 

Amir's  descent,  7 

Melons,  26 

Submits  to  Russia,  45 

Taken  by  Russians,  285 
Khotan,  ruins  of,  210 
Kibitka,    Turkoman,    286,    288, 

294.  301 
Kipchaks,  229 
ICir  (soiled  linen),  173 
Kirgiz,  6,  17.  225  seqq. 

Attacking  tiger,  207,  note 

Digestive  powers,  234 

Hatred  of  census.  230 

Horses,  232 

House,  225 

Moslems,  231 

Riders,  233 

Sarts  and,  228 

Sheep,  148 

Tent,  826 

Turkomans  and,  295,  297 

Women,  230 
Kokand,  5,  21,  35,  36,  42 

Armour,  50 

Bazaar,  59 ;  tamasha  at,  218 

Coinage,  252 


INDEX 


3" 


Kokand,  conquered   by  Russia, 

45 

Derivatioa  of,  251 

Earthquake  at,  272 

Girls'  school,  90 

Jews  in,  178 

Medresses,  82,  83,  251 

Number  of  mosques  in,  75 

Palace,  252 

Paper-making,  210 

Railways  at,  248 

Russian  town,  253 

Sart  town,  254 

Visit  to  wife  of  golosh-maker 
at,  100 
Koktash,  246 

Konolly,  Captain,  fate  of,  4 
Krasnovodsk,  304 
Kuan  Sun  Mountains,  243 
Kudoyar,  tombs  of,  251 
Kuknar,  68 
Kumys^  231 

JCungans,  brass  water-pots,  2n 
Kunshyut   {Sesamum    Indicum), 

30 
Kur-hashi,  Chief  of  Police,  48 
Kuropatkin,  quoted,  on  origin  of 

Dungans,  189 
Kuryug  Mezar,  6 


Leprosy,  169 
Lessar.,  M.,  282 
Lizards,  199 
Locusts,  198 


Magpies,  256 

Mahzoum,  Matkowe,  167 

Malarial  fevers,  169,  303 

Marble,  244 

Margelan,  5,  6,  19 

Earthquake  at,  272 
Gourd-pipes,  27 
Meaning  of  word ,  269 


Margelan  Medical  Society,  267 

Margelan,  Old,  263,  268 

Margelan,  New,  267 

Silkworms  at,  38 
Marriage,  137  seqq. 
Meat,  147 
Mecca: 

Pilgrimages  to,  71 

Prints  of,  72 
Medinsky,  General,  22 
Medinsky,  M.,  243 
Medresses  (colleges),  77  seqq,  (see 

also  under  names  of  towns) 
Melons,  26 
Merv,  4,  286 

Carpet,  215 

Climate,  299 

Cotton-cleaning  at,  299 

Defended  against  Russians. 
299 

•  •  Law  Courts,"  293 

Malarial  fever  at,  303 

Market,  290 

Medresse  and  mosque,  294 

Oasis,  297 
Fertility,  299 
Merv  ruins,  295,  296 
Metal- work,  211 
Millet,  29 
Miti'bashi,  49 
Mir  Ali,  93 

Modes  of  conveyance,  193, 194 
Mohammedanism    and    women, 

73 
Mohammedanism,  centres  of,  72 
Mohammedanism  and  Jews,  178 
Mongols,  6 

Monks  from  Syria,  261 
Morgui^  30 
Mosques,  74,  75 

Of  Sultan  Sanjar,  296 

Turkoman,  294 
"  Mountain  turkey,"  198 
Mourgab  River,  303 
Mourning,  174 


312 


INDEX 


Mulbeny-tree,  33,  36 

Weeping  mulberry,  38 

Mules,  195 

Mullahs,  70,  81.  82,  84,  95,  138, 
144.  167 
Duties  during  Ramazan,284 

Museums,  local,  199 

Mushvetoff,  on  Jasper  block,  243 


Nalivkin,  Vice-Govenor  of  Fer- 
gana, authority  on  Sart  life 
and  literature,  81,  368 
On  divisions  of  Uzbegs,  227 
funerals,  172,  173 
Margelan.  269 
"Sart,"  7 
Sart  fairy  tales,  201 
Sart  signs  and    symbols, 

14s 
Sultan  Bdbar,  8 
Women's  plaits,  122 
teeth,  124 
Story  of  birth  of  a  girl ,  97 

husband  and  mulberry 

leaves,  104 
Sart  bargaining,  58 
Works  of,  268 
Namangan,  5,  19,  21,  259 

Cotton-separating    establish- 
ment, 33,  34 
Garden  in,  190 
German  Jew  of,  177 
Meaning  of,  260 
Prison,  360 
Russian  actors  in,  262 
Tigers  in,  307 
Women's  dress,  131 
Naphtha  wells,  262 
Nas,  green  tobacco,  68 
Native  baths,  155  seqq.    (See  also 

Baths.) 
Native  industries,  2x0 
Native  histories,  6 
Neeshaldahy  153 


Nicholas  II.,  273 
Nose-rings,  133 
Numismatologists.  42 


Oases,  ii.  44 

Merv,  297,  299 
Oats,  29 

Oil  from  cotton-seed,  30,  34 
Omsk,  230 
Opium,  68 
Orenburg,  railway  to  Tashkent, 

233.  237 
Osh,  35,  270 
Oven,  117 


Paper-making,  210 

Parandja,  105,  128,  129,  130,  179 

Pathan,  meaning  of,  188 

Patti,  Adelina,  at  St.  Petersburg, 

220 
Pears,  27,  28 
Peeshanadan,  131 
PeltnerU,  151 

Penjeh  carpets,  215,  288,  291 
Permits,  273 
Persian  costume,  65 
Persians,  6 
Pess,  169 
Petrovsk,  273 
Phalanga,  198 
Pilau,  148,  149,  301 
Pilgrims  to  Jerusalem,  i8i 
Pilgrims  to  Mecca,  71.  73.  74 

,   Robbed,  186 
Pillows,  114 
Pines,  21 

Pistachio-nuts,  63,  113 
Pistachio-tree,  33 
Plantain,  ^ 
Police,  48,  188 
Police,  Chief  of,  352,  274,  275, 

378 
Polo,  Marco,  197 


INDEX 


313 


Pomegranates,  27 
Poplar- trees,  19,  359 
Populus  diversifolia,  19 
Prints  of  Mecca,  72 
Professors,  78,  8t,  83 


Quilts,  114 


Railway   between   Mecca   and 

Damascus,  72 
Ramazan,284 

Close  of,  252 
Reeds,  30 

Reis,  duty  of,  47,  65 
Rice- fields,  29 
Rishte  {Felaria  medinensis),  165, 

166 
Russia  and  Bokharan  Jews,  176 
Russia,    early    connection    with 

Central  Asia,  3 
Russian  colonies,  5 
Russian  hospitality,  239 
Russian  lady  doctors,  170,  249 
Russian  officials  and  Turkoman 

servants,  290 
Russian  Political  Agent,  278, 279 
Russian  teachers,  274 
Rye,  29 


St.  Petersburg,  72 
Salt,  260 
Samarkand,  5 

Bath,  284  , 

Cap-bazaar,  215 

Cotton-separating    establish- 
ment, 33 

Girls'  school,  87 

Jewish  quarter,  176,  181 

Lepers  at,  169 

Life  in,  125 

Medresses,  247 

Plague  at,  249 


Samarkand  Railways,  248 
Revisited,  240 
Higistan^  247 
Russian  school  teachers  at, 

275 

Schah  Zindah  mosque,  22 

Silk  and  cotton  of,  40 

State  of  town,  248 

Synagogue,  i8x 

Taken  by  Russians,  89 

Treasures  in,  41 

Water-supply,  350 

Women  of,  127 
Samarkand   Province,  bow  wat- 
ered, 13,  14 
Samovars,  214,  218 
Sart  aristocracy,  283 
Sart  colleges,  jj  seqq. 

Professors,  77,  81 

Students,  78 
Sart  fairy  tales,  201  seqq, 
Sart  houses,  107  seqq. 

Water-supply,  119 

Women's  rooms,  iii,  114 
Sart  towns,  5,  51  seqq. 

Gates,  S3 

Streets,  53  seqq. 
Sarts: 

As  engineers,  12 

Babies,  95 

Burial,  172 

Card-playing,  164 

Characteristics,  175 

Christmas-trees,  21 

Cooking,  147  seqq. 

Costume,  65 

Cultivate  cotton,  32 

Customs,  strange,  145 

Dancing-girls,  142 

Doctors,  167,  171,  279 

Food,  23,  29 

Hospitality,  112 

Jews  and,  182,  183 

Kirgiz  and,  228 

Language,  7 


314 


INDEX 


Sarts  {continued) : 

Locks  and  keys,  968 

Love  of  bargaining,  58 

Meaning  of  word,  8 

Mourning,  174 

Music,  2x7 

People  and  towns,  5, 6,  7 

Religion,  64;^^. 

Signs  and  symbols,  145 

Silk  and  cotton,  40 

Singing,  218 

Veneration  for  plane  tree,  20 

Women,  xo6  segg. ,  181 

Black  veil,  105,  106, 107, 

129,  130 
Boots,  135 

Complexion,  124,  125 
Dress,  xao,  131 
Eyebrows,  124 
Hair,  121,  122 
In  bazaar,  59 
Industrious,  146 
Marriage,  137  segg. 
Divorce,  143 
Matchmaker,  140 
Ornaments,  132 
Pocket-money,  100,  103 
Riding,  194 
Teeth,  123 
Type  of  face,  126 
Satraps  and  Begs,  45 
Saxaul     (Haloxylon     ammaden- 
dron),  20 
Growth  of,  21 
Schah  Zindah  mosque,  22 
Schlagintweit,  death  of,  4 
Schoolmasters,  84,  85,  86 
Schoolmistresses,  87,  91 
Schools  (maktah),  84 
Schwarz,  on : 

Easter  eggs,  154 

Green  native  boots,  135 

Khan's  army,  230 

Oil  from  sesamum,  30,  note 

Sart  women's  teeth,  123 


Scorpions,  199 
Seals,  297 

Sesamum  Indicum,  30 
Shah  Zindah's  tomb,  245 
Sheep,  148 
Shiites,  64, 66 
Shoe-making,  214 
Silk  industry,  36  seqq. 
Combing,  36 
Dyeing,  X76,  183 
Dyes,  38 
Weavers,  39 
"  Silken  Samarkand,"  40 
Silkworms,  cultivation  of,  36-38 
Silkworms'  eggs,  hatching,   100, 

X03,  146 
Silver  filigree- work,  212 
Silversmiths,  292 

At  Andijan,  213 
Skobelefif  trophies  at  GeokTeppe, 

290 
Skrine  quoted  on  music  in  Turkes- 
tan, 218 
Slaves,  285 
Smallpox,  172 
Smirnof,  Alexander,  268 
Snakes,  198 
Soap,  158,  290 
Soap-making,  295 
Soil,  XI,  12 

•'  Song  of  the  Bulbul,*'  162 
Spider,     Lactrodectus     lugubris, 

X99 
Spider,  Phalanga,  198 
Stamboul,  74 
Stein,  account  of  ruins  of  Khotan, 

210 
Stoddard,  Colonel,  fate  of,  4 
Students,  78  seqq. 
Rooms,  81 
Subjects  of  study,  81 
Sturgeon,  Skaphirhunchus  Kauf- 

manni,  200 
Sujffi,  caller  to  prayer,  80 
Sweetmeats,  154 
Syr    Daria    (Jaxartes),    crossing, 

256,  263 


INDEX 


315 


Syr  Daria  Province,  13 
Apricots,  25 


Tajik  dance,  383 
Tajik  women,  127 
Tajiks  and  Uzbegs,  9-10 
Tamasha,  217  seqq. 

Meaning  of,  223 
Tambourine,  218 
Tamerlane's  tomb,  240 

Inscriptions,  241,  242,  243 
Tarantass,  journeys  by,  254,  263 
Tarantula,  199 
Tashkent,  3,  5,  19 

Apricot  grove,  25 

Artificial  hills,  53 

Baths,  119 

Bazaar,  56,  214 

Buildings,  238 

Earthquake  at,  238 

History  of,  ^yj  seqq. 

Houses,  238 

Leper  hospital,  170 

Mud  at,  54 

Streets,  239 

Women's  dress,  131 
Tatdrs,  189 

Nurses,  170 

Servants,  191 

Women,  129 

as  interpreters,  113,  189 
Tea,  consumption  of,  191 

How  prepared,  116 
Tea-shop,  native,  59,  266 
Tegelik  Mejek,  294 
Tekke  Turkomans,  ^^seqq. 
Tiger  Story,  205 
Tigers,  207 
••Tojeliks,"8 
Tolstoy,  Spiridon,  297 
Tombs  at  Merv,  296 
Tombstones,  76,  242,  244 
Townsend,   quoted,  on   Afghan- 
istan, 186 


Transcaspia,   Russian  Governor- 
General,  3 
Trees  and  fruits,  18  seqq. 
Trumpets,  brass,  217,  253 
Trunks,  114 
Turbans,  Sart  and  Afghan,  65, 

187 
Turkestan,  44 

Government,  3 

Peoples  of,  4.  5,  47 
Turkeys,  198 
Turkoman  carpets,  291 
Turkoman  horse,  300 
Turkoman  kibitka^  286,  288.  294, 

301 
Turkoman  mosque,  294 
Turkomans,  4 

Baby,  287 

Characteristics.  290 

Eye-disease,  303 

Kirgiz  and,  295,  297 

Of  Merv,  230 

Slave-dealers,  285 

Wedding,  300 

Women,  289 


UlmaSy  apples  of,  28 
Ulug  Beg,  171,  247 
Uzbegs,  6,  7 

Derivation  of,  230 
Tajiks  and,  9-10 
Three  classes,  227 
Wine  and,  24 
Women,  127 


Faifet/ (legacies),  77,  78,  82 
Vamb^ry : 

In  Bokhara,  276 

On  Sart  boots,  135 

On  wigs,  122 

On  women's  eyebrows,  124 

Tavels  in  Turkestan,  4 


3i6 


INDEX 


Vermorel,   invention   to   destroy 

locusts,  198 
Vickouline.  M.,  299 
Vines,  24 


Walnut-tree,  23 
Water-pots,  brass,  211 
Water-supply,  ii  stqq. 
Weddings : 

Jewish,  183 

Sart,  141 

Turkoman,  300 
Werth, quoted  iOn  nameof  Afghan , 

188 
Wheat,  29,  33 
Wild  doves,  197 


Willows,  19,  20 
Wines,  24,  25 
Women : 

Engaged  in  agriculture,  104 

Interpreters,  113 

Mohammedanism  and,  73 

Turkoman,  289 

Types  of,  127 

[See  also  under  Sarts) 
Wrestling-match,  302 

Yaks,  232 

Zain  Eddin,  93 
Zarafshan  glacier,  13,  15 
Zarafshan  River  (Polytimetus),  13 


THE  END 


Printed  by  Ballantvne,  Hanson  &»  Co. 
Edinburgh  <5r'  London 


RUSSIAN  Tl 

PART  OF  OFFICIAL  MAP 
RUSSIAN  MINISTRY  OFWA^ 

Route  trtwelUd  byJiiUhor^ ^ 

Open  RculMtxAra  now  in.  nj^  , 

ITiUuusked  lutes 

300  Mo^    150      00   o  rersts 

1  Verst  -  350(1 


1 

\ 


i 


>-. 


iH 


SEP  1  2  la^u 


