Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 



iv/lfj. iia. 



MUSIC LIBRARY 






4 






DUE DATE 



ilPP n 


7 irto^ 






furrt u 


' i997 






8EP1I 


»9nw 






















1 
















1 
1 








1 
































1 








1 
i 

1 








1 

1 

■ 


























201-6603 




Printed 
in USA 




1 1 ^1 



>Ww 



[\ 



U ' •. ] 



THE MUSIC 



AND 



MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 



OF 



JAPAN. 



A 



."N 



i KOT0-PlJ\YEn. 



r 



♦i. 




- --i 



PLATE /., Frcntiipifct. 



THE MUSIC 



AND 



MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 



OF 



JAPAN. 



BY 



F. T. PIGGOTT. 



(with notes by t. l. southgate.) 



LONDON : 

B. T. BATSFORD, 94, HIGH HOLBORN. 

1893. 



KurTT^rTTTC^ 



"«miO coilttt UMMBT 

9ifT or 
«i»r eooowcii stiumm 



rvLc 



r ;.> ^ 



^^ I /v: , ? ./?o 



LONDON : 

PRINTED BY WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, LIMITED, 
STAMFORD STKBBT AND CHARING CROSS. 




1 ' 








^ 




TO MY 



FRIEND A ND TEA CHER 



MRS MAEDA 





/ 





ir 




?> 



? 



J 



Any Preface which I write to the following pages must of necessity 
be so full of apologies for their shortcomings that I shall reduce it 
to the smallest compass possible. 

The book contains the results of observations made in leisure 
moments in Japan, supplemented by studies made since my return 
from the East. I am now painfully conscious how incomplete 
those observations must have been. I have, nevertheless, some 
confidence in the accuracy of the results of my Western studies, 
because I have had more than .an author's fair share of assistance 
from others more competent than I to grapple with scientific 
difficulties. 

Sir John Stainer has, with customary kindness, helped me to 
unravel some of the mysteries of the Japanese scale : and, though 
I have no right to say that my conclusions are justified by his 
assent to them, I may plead his help to show that they have not 
been lightly arrived at. 

Mr. Southgates erudition and historical knowledge have been 
placed so unreservedly at my disposal that I cannot but regret 
that the sheaf of notes with which he has contented himself is of 
such modest proportions. 



X PREFACE. 

Finally, Mr. Daigoro Goh, with Eastern patience, has pruned 
away many — I hope all — of the errors in names, dates, and words 
which so easily beset the Western writer on Eastern things. 

I have made use of the following authorities : — 

Sdkyoku'tai'i Sho, by Yamada Ryu, 1781. 

Miyako-no-nishiki^ by Miyakoji Bungo, 1785. 

Seikyoku Ruisan, by Saito Gekkin, .1840. 

Kdbu'Ongaku Ryakushi, by Professor Konakamura, 1887. 

" MS. Records of Ancient Music," by Ab^ Suyenao. 

The Encyclopaedia, Sansai Zuy^, 

Hoiicho Seidan, by Kikuoka Seniyo. 

"La Musique du Japon," by M. Alexandre Kraus Fils. 

The translations in Japan have all been made by Mr. A. T. 
Kawaji, of Tokyo, who has also interpreted a great number of 
conversations with various musicians. Mr. Kowaki has assisted me 
with many translations in England. 

Of the book itself I have but one word to say. It appeared 
in its earliest form as a Paper read before the Asiatic Society of 
Japan, in January, 1891. I have endeavoured to remove many 
errors which existed in that Paper. In its present form it is a 
contribution, quantum valeat, to the history of the music and 
musical instruments of the world. Among the things which go to 
make it up, some, I hope, may be of interest : some may be merely 
curious : and some, I venture to think, will be surprising. 

F. T. P. 

May, 1893. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS. 



PART L 

THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 



PAGE 



Of the teaching of Confucius^ and the meaning of ^^mtisic** in the Far East — 
Of modern Japanese music and instruments generally — The mythology of 
Japanese music: how Amaterasu was enticed from her cave: of the 
invention of t/ie Koto and Flute of Japan: of the influence of the 
Hichiriki: traces of early music — Early historical records: the teaching 
of the Corean musicians: the zeal of the Crown Prince Umayado — The 
establishment of Chinese music in Japan : the Musical Bureau : tfie 
development of the Bugaku dances — Lingering traces of the old music of 
Japan : primitive sacred music : of the Kagura^ and its modern offshoots — 
Early forms of Japanese music : the Ro-yei^ and the Ima yd — Introduction 
of the Biwa : the Satsuma Biwa : of the Heikd Monogatari — Influence of 
the Biwa on the national music : the Saiba-gaku^ and the Dengaku — The 
Chinese and Japanese dances: the *WJ" dances — The early Japanese 
Theatre — Early Japanese songs : their classification : the Joruri Mono- 
gatari — \A scheme of Chinese and Japaiuse dances and music — A scheme 
of Japanese songs — Classes of Ha-uta and Ko-uia — Different varieties of 
small songs'\ — Introduction of the Shakuhachi. ..... 1-43 

The modern music of Japan: the Koto-uta: " Ak^-no-kan6 " r Koto music: 
its mythical origin — Rise of Yatsuhashi : his work: improvements in tlu 
Koto: tlte Dragon on the Sea-sfiore — \Japanese Musical Degrees'] — Tfie 
Samisen — The Kokyu — Japanese singing: a table for the production of 
sounds: instructions for Samisen players when performing ^* Joruri*' — 
Of the Japanese musicians: their education: examinations: children at 
school: the course of instruction and the diplomas : the final ceremony at 
Enoshima — Of the /tereditary skill of the musicians — T/ie Temple 
musicians: their executive skill: their training: their pay and duties: 
their decadence in modern times ........ 44-75 



xii TABLE OF CONTENTS, 



PART II. 

THE JAPANESE SCALE. 

PACE 

Current statements as to the nature of the scale — Meaning of the expressiofi 
*' different scale ^* — The scientific ratios — Chinese intervals — The ^* bearings'* 

of the scale — The fifth of China and of Pythagoras — " Tunings " and \ 

" scales " — The sequence of notes in the Japanese scale — The normal 

tuning — The gaps in the tuning — The two missing notes — Harmonizing % 

Japanese music — The double pressures . . . . • . . 79-9^ ' 

Tunings of the Japanese Koto — Tunings of the Chinese So-no-kotOy and of t/te 

Bugaku-biwa .•••••..••• 92-93 « 

"Hirajoshi" and its variations — "Ak^bono" — "Kumoi" and its variations — 
" Han-Kumoi " — " Iwato " — " San-sagari roku-agari " — Conclusions as to the 

structure of the tunings^ and as to the keys on which they cu^e based — { 

Pentatonic character of the music — The key sequence; principle of the \ 

bridge changes — Transposition — The equal temperament system of the 
Japanese — " Saita-Sakurai " in three keys in string notcUion^ and on the 
staff 94-107 

The Chine' e scale : ritsusen and ryosen : analysis of the tunings of the So-no- 

koto ..•.••...•... 108-110 



Pitch — Time — Harmony — Form: the Dan and Kumi of Yatsuhashi; analysis 
of *' Umegae " ; analysis of " Rokudan "; analysis of " Matsuzu-kichi " and 
" Kasuga-m5de " . . . . . . . . . .111-125 

General conclusions: the relation of Japanese to Chinese music — The modern 
music of Japan : getieral characteristics of the music : its intervals and 
phrases: its structure .••.....•. 126-129 

"Hitotsu-toya" harmonized— ^'SdL\X.di'Sdk\xxdLV* harmonized • . . . 130, 131 



TABLE OF CONTENTS. xiii 



PART III. 

THE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS OF THE JAPANESE. 

PAGE 

The Koto : — Historical outline — The Yamato-koto — Diagrams of hand 
positions — Measurements of modern Kotos — Varieties of Kotos — General 
scheme of development -^ Technical terms used for Koto music — Koto 
notation — Facsimile of a page of Koto music, with translation . . 135-163 

BiwAS, AND Stringed Instruments with Frets :— Varieties of Biwas— 

Measurements — The Gekkins 164-172 

Samisens, Fiddles, and Stringed Instruments without Frets:— 

Tunings of the Samisen — Varieties — The Kokyu — Chinese Fiddles . 173-179 

Flutes, and Bamboo Wind Instruments:— Fan>//>j of Flutes —Th-e 

Hichiriki — The Shakuhachi— The S^C)— Arrangement and measure- 
ments of pipes : scheme of chords . ....... 180-188 

Drums: — L Plain cylindrical Drums — IL Drums with braces: sclieme of 

Chinese time — in. Drums with dumbbell-shaped bodies, or Tsuzumi . 191-204 

GToNGS : — Varieties of Gongs ......... 205-212 

Brass Instruments 213 



Notes (by T. L. Southgate) 215-222 

Index . . . .' 223-230 




LIST OF PLATES. 



Plate I. 


i» 


II. 


)) 


III. 


»» 


IV. 


>» 


v.- 


» 


VI. 


>» 


VII. 


M 


VIII. 


)l 


IX.- 


>» 


X. 


f • 


XL- 



>» 



» 



*» 



» 



*^ 



XII.— 
XIII.— 
XIV.— 

XV.— 



XVI.— 



■The Koto-player (Frontispiece). 

•The Gekkin-player . 

The Flute-player . 

The Kagen-gaku Orchestra . 

The Shakuhachi-player . 

The Wandering Samisen-player 

The Wandering Kokyu-player 

A School of Music . 

The Koto-player 

The Yamato-koto: The Yamada-koto 

The Ichi-gen-kin or Suma-koto, and the Ni-gen-kin 

Various Forms of Koto Tsum£ 
The Samisen and the Kokyu . 
The Samisen-player. 
The Kokyu-player .... 
The ShO: The Bugaku-fuy£, with lacquer case: The Uta- 

DAiKO : The Ko-tsuzumi 

The Waniguchi : The Kei in two forms, and the FOrin : 

The DObachi and MOku-gyo: The Suzu 



PAGE 

6 
i6 

19 

43 

53 

55 

65 

136 
142 

144 

173 

174 
178 

188 



212 



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 



PAGE 

Orchestra of the Classical NO Dance . . . • ... .27 
The Orchestra of the Modern Theatre— in undress • ... 32 

ditto ditto — in full dress . . -33 

The Dance Orchestra 37 

The Chamber Trio 57 

Positions of the Hands in Playing the Yamato-koto . . . .140 

ditto ditto the SO-no-koto . . . .141 

Front and Back View of the Shichi-gen-kin .147 

The YO-kin 150 

Old Corean Kotos 151 

The Bugaku-biwa: The Satsuma-biwa : The Chinese Biwa . . .167 

The Genkwan 171 

The Jamisen 175 

The Keikin, Kokin, and Teikin 177 

The Seiteki 181 

The Hichiriki, with Box and Cleaning Rod 182 

The Shakuhachi, with Vertical Section 183 

The ShOno-fuy^ . .184 

The Barbarian ShO 187 

The O-daiko, Ko-daiko, and DaibyOshi 189 

The ShOko, Tsuri-daiko, and Kakko : The Tsuri-daiko, DObyOshi, and 

Hakuhan 193 

The Kero 194 

The Happu 196 

The Da-daiko and Ni-daiko 197 

c 



XVlll 



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 



1 HK JvAIKO ••••••.•••..• 

The Uta-daiko, the 0-tsuzumi, the Ko-tsuzumi, and the Kagura-fuy£ . 
The Ni-no-tsuzumi 

1 HE JvEI ••••••• 

The Dai-shOko and Ni-shOko 

The DOko : The Ken : The Hi . 

The Shoku : The Gyo ; The DO-byOshi 

The HyOshigi : The Byakushi : The Yotsudake 

The Furi-tsuzumi 

The Mokkin 

The Rappa : The DOkaku : The Charumera 



PAGE 
20 1 
202 
203 
206 
207 
208 
209 
210 
211 
212 
213 




PART I. 



THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE 



#' 



THE 



MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 



**}itkVtnony has the pocuev to di>aui Heaven docuncuards to the 
Earth. It inspires men to love the good, and to do their duty. If 
one should desire to knocu cuhether a kingdom is cuell governed, if 
its morals are good or bad, the quality of its musie shall furnish 
forth the anscuers." — Confucius. • 



SYNOPSIS. 

0/ tJte teaching of Confucius^ and the meaning of ^^ music'' in the Far 
East — Of modern Japanese music and instruments generally — Tlte 
mythology of Japanese music : how Amaterasu was enticed from Iter cave: 
of the invention of tJte Koto and Flute of Japan : of tJte influence of tlu 
Hichiriki: traces of early music — Early historical records: tJte teaching 
of the Corean musicians: tlie zeal of the Crown Prince Umayado — The 
establishment of Chinese music in Japan : tJte Musical Bureau : tJie develop- 
ment of the Bugaku dances — Lingering traces of the old music of Japan : 
primitive sacred music: of the Kagura^ and its modern offsJwots — Early 
forms of Japanese music : tJie Ro-yeiy and the Ima yd. — Introduction of the 
Biiua : tlie Satsuma Biwa : of tJie Heik^ Monogatart, — Influence of tlie 
Biwa on the national music: the Saiba-gakuy and tlie Dengaku. — The 
Chinese and Japanese dances : tlie " No " dances, — Tlu early Japanese 
Theatre — Early Japanese songs : their classification : the Joruri Mono- 
gatari — \A sclieme of Chinese and Japanese dances and music — A scheme 

B 



THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 

m 

of Japanese songs — Classes of Ha-uta and Ko-nta — Different varieties of 
small songs\ — Introduction of the Shakiihachi, 

The modern music of Japan: the Koto-uta: " Ak6-no-kan6 " ; Koto 
music: its mythical origin — Rise of Yatsuhashi: his work: improvements 
in the Koto: the Dragon on the Sea-shore — {Japanese Musical Degrees'] — 
T/ie Samisen — The Kokyu— Japanese singing: a table for the production of 
sounds: instructions for Samisen players wJien performing ^^ JorurV — 
Of the Japanese musicians : their editcation : examinations : children at 
sc/iool: the course of instruction and t/te diplomas : the final ceremony at 
Enoshima~Of the fiereditary skill of the musicians — The Temple musicians : 
their executive skill: t/ieir training: their, pay and duties: tJieir decadence 
in modem times. 



IF I say that Japanese music does not lack some reflex of the national 
grace, that it has some prettHy quaint flashes of melody which strike 
the most inattentive listener at a tea-house festival, that it has some curious 
phrase-repetitions which seem to the attentive listener to indicate the 
possible existence of a science of construction, and that generally it is not 
altogether a concourse of weird sounds, it will appear to many that I have 
not merely stated, but have overstated, the case in its favour. 

From our Western point of view Japanese music has everything against 
it, nothing in its favour : we with our majestic Organs, our stupendous or- 
chestras, our volumes of sound, which set the nerves, even of the unmusical, 
quivering : they with a few pitiful strings strung by men not very learned 
in the mysteries of sound-producing bodies, the subtleties of varnish, the pre- 
cedents of ** bellies.*' Comparison is absurd : the tinkling of their Samisens 
hardly reaches ears accustomed to sonorous symphonies from earliest infancy.* 
Their appliances are so crude : how, with instruments so feeble, can they 
make that music which beats upon the brain, which so plays on the nervous 



THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 3 

tissues that their vibrations fill the caverns of the memory with whispering 
voices of the past? How, indeed! The quality of music is so often lost 
in the quality of the sound which makes it. It is the noise and blare of 
great Organs that have brought to Western music, perhaps also to Western 
religions, half their devotees. It is the witchery of the fiddle and the bow that 
holds two-thirds of a London audience in their places. Rob the high art of 
music of its attendant mysteries of sound, what is left concerns the musician 
alone, and with his joy few of the outer barbarians can intermingle. The 
*' Hallelujah Chorus" on two Flutes (it was once, as I have heard, so 
"arranged"), '* Pop goes the Weasel," with variations and orchestral accom- 
paniments — is there much doubt which would command the larger audience ? 
And yet the childish frivolity of **Up and down the City Road" would be un- 
altered, and that wonderful phrase, ** For the Lord God omnipotent reigneth," 
would still remain the most fitting expression of a majestic thought. 

What Japanese music might have been if the Sho, the primeval Organ, 
had amplified its soft reeds in the East instead of in the West; whether 
the ** missing notes " would have been so deliberately disregarded as, in the 
popular music, they seem to have been ; whether their use would not have 
taught a larger science and more sweet melody, it is scarcely profitable to 
enquire ; we should be led inevitably to the larger question whether, had 
these things been, the Japanese life, ^ and above all the Japanese religion, 
would have been quite what they are. The Chinese had been taught by 
their great philosopher the true relation of music to life. Pope only caught 
half the teaching of Confucius when he sang of order as ** Heaven's first 
law": in full it ran, and runs thus — ** There are two important things which 
should exist in a well-ordered society : m, ceremonial, order ; and gakti. 



4 THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 

music." And the character for gaJsu, music, is the same as the character for 
raku, pleasure : whence music came to be not only synonymous with the giving 
of pleasure to everybody, but its influence was held in Chinese philosophy to 
be the chief corrective to undue and ill-regulated pleasures. It was but a step 
from this to the consideration of music as the divine pleasure, God-given, for 
the purification of the human heart. So, to the popular and largest of the 
Chinese stringed instruments was given a character ^, kin, which had the 
same sound as ^, kin, "prohibition"; and thence, at first, they wove the 
idea that its music symbolised the prohibition of anything impure, until at length 
** music" came to be actually synonymous with ** purity of the human heart." 

The Japanese, when the time came for christening as their own the 
Kin which they had borrowed from China, chose for it a name, Koto, to 
which, though it signified merely "things," they were able to attach an idea 
of something higher than worldly things by imagining it to be an abbrevi- 
ation only, of kami no nori koto — "the oracles of the gods." "the heavenly 
things " — and hence they, in their turn, came to see in Koto music, something 
supernal ; and in Koto playing something synonymous with worship and 
invocation of the divine advice. 

On its more sublunary influence, its power to subdue not animals 
merely, but the lower man, Eastern writers love to dwell, proving their 

« 

position by the chapter and verse of recorded incident. As Congreve wrote 
that Musics charms can soothe savage breasts, so the Eastern poet wrote 
that Music can soften the thoughts even of a stern man. So let it be 
noted that how dissimilar soever the sounds of the East and the West may 
be, there is a link between them, riveted somewhere on to the heart of man. 
Let us deal then with the music of this far-oriental people such as we 



THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE, 5 

find it. I feel, however, both considerable difficulty and diffidence in laying 
the results of my investigations before my readers. An opinion, which I do 
in fact hold, that the case in favour of Japanese music may be put much 
higher than I have ventured to do in my first sentence, should, for full 
weight to be given to it, be supported by a far wider range of examples 
than it is possible to give at present The only completeness at which it 
was possible to aim was in the investigation of the rudiments. To the 
many beauties, and to the great merit, of the structure which has been raised 
upon them, only my own ears can bear witness. 

The difficulties which stand in the way of reducing the music into 
Western written forms are so great, that, unless Japanese musicians will 
come and play to us here in England, accurate knowledge of their art, due 
appreciation of their craft, can only come into being in the West very 
gradually. If the conclusions at which I have arrived are sound, we may 
look, sooner or later, to have accurate transcriptions which shall lead to fuller 
knowledge : and I may venture so far as to say that that fuller knowledge 
will justify and repay the labour spent upon its acquisition. Yet we shall 
never hear it at its best until the deft fingers of the native musicians weave 
their spells for us. Much of the charm of the music, all its individuality 
nearly, depend upon its graceful and delicate phrasing: and though I think 
that Western notation is capable of expressing these phrases to one who has 
already heard them, I feel a little uncertain whether their more complicated 
forms could be set down in it with sufficient accuracy to enable a stranger 
to interpret them satisfactorily. The Japanese musician learns this phrasing 
by ear; by an ear long trained to phrases of a similar character. My own 
experience has been that even in the first-grade tunes it required twenty or 



6 THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE, 

thirty lessons to enable one to grasp the delicate nuances of many of the 
passages.* 

Modern Japanese music, a term to be explained more fully hereafter, is 
composed almost exclusively for the 13-stringed Koto. For the Kokyu, 
or Fiddle, I have not come across any independent music : but for the 
Samisen — irreverently called by some the Banjo of Japan, an instrument 
with which it has no affinities — there exists a small repertoire of songs. For 
the Shakuhachi — a lipped bamboo pipe — there is also a considerable quantity 
of independent music, which seems to have come down to the present time 
from quite different sources than those from which the Koto music has been 
derived. The music for the Biwa has not altered for over six hundred years. 
The charming little songs sung to the accompaniment of the Gekkin are, I 
think, almost entirely of Chinese origin. 

Koto music is written. It has been many times stated that there is no 
notation : but the music is so complicated that it would pass the wit of man 
to do without some form of musical writing. The error, however, is perhaps 
not to be wondered at ; it has arisen from two causes. In the first place the 
books are never used except for reference : by the majority of professional 
musicians indeed they could not be used, for they are blind, music being one 
of the recognized professions of the blind. And secondly, the written 
music is the exclusive possession of the professionals of the highest rank. 
Except by very special dispensation no pupil is ever allowed to learn in 
any other way than by listening, watching, and committing to memory. 
Hence a curious little social custom has arisen : it is considered quite im- 
polite for a guest to require pressing if she is asked to play the Koto : 
she cannot have forgotten to bring music which she never possessed. 



^^^*ti:^-^'-^-VX.f[j^in 1 1 >v I'l VMJ^^-^lJ^^iS 



THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 7 

The Samisen songs, on the other hand, are written and carried with the 
instrument in its case. 

The Koto notation, which I shall explain in due course, is simple but 
sufficient ; the numbers of the strings only being given. On account of 
the gaps in our diatonic scale which exist in the normal tuning of the 
instrument, I think it is easier for Europeans to learn the Koto by adopting 
this notation, translating the Japanese numerals into Arabic, than by writing 
out the melodies on a stave. Yet even for a European, more curious to 
know and understand than to play, the rigid rule I have referred to above 
will not be relaxed until he has made considerable progress. The books 
will remain sealed even to him : if he wants to write the tunes down he 
must do it for himself and invent some system of notation of his own.^ 

I have indicated briefly the different kinds of music now existing in 
Japan. There is one other, which is not less interesting than the rest : the 
ancient form of it, which, chiefly as an accompaniment to the various styles 
of classical dance, has been preserved for centuries, and which is still per- 
formed with the same profound solemnity as in old days. Such purity 
could only have been achieved by the Japanese method, which obtains in 
everything, of making the profession hereditary, and thus keeping the scores 
and the traditions in certain families. 

Performed by an orchestra of Shos, Flutes, Hichirikis, Drums, and 
Gongs, this ancient music it is which sounds so gruesome to Western ears, 
and to which Japanese music owes much of its bad reputation. 

It is far, however, from being formless and void. It has a venerable 
history, which goes back through the period of reliable chronicles into the 
mythical ages, when the Sun-Goddess Amaterasu hid herself in a cave and 



8 THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE, 

the world saw the light of her countenance no more. Then it was that the 
eight million deities came to entreat her return to the world, her fair 
dominion : yet all their many prayers failed, until one God, wiser than his 
fellows, took from among them six long-bows ; these he bound firmly 
together, and, setting them with their backs upon the ground, gently twanged 

their strincfs. Then he brougfht to the cave's mouth the fair 

The MytkoUgy of ^ ^ 

apaneu ustc, Am6-no-Uzum6, her hair tied with the trailing vines of Hikage- 
kazura, gathered from the mount AnU no Kaga Yama, the sleeves of her 
raiment girded with links of evergreen twigs of Ami no masakiy a halberd 
in one hand and a bundle of bamboo branches in the other. And Am6- 
no-Uzum6, as the murmurings of the bow-strings rose and fell, waved her 
bamboo branches to and fro ; and as the rhythm grew her body moved 
in cadence, and her voice mingled with the strains, until the Goddess, 
gently drawn, inquisitive, came forth at last from out the gloomy 
depths of her cave. Some say that Am6-no-Uzum6 added to her 
incantation the words ''Momo, chi, yorodsu^' asking the Gods, in her vanity, 
whether her charms were not all-potent ; the Gods shook the heavens 
with their mirth, and this noise it was that drew the Goddess from her 
hiding-place. Thus was light restored to the world, and music and dancing 
were given to it for its delight. And the all-wise Gods had taken pre- 
cautions that the light, if it should be restored, should never again be 
hidden. Amatsumora, the ironsmith, had made a magic mirror, emblem of 
all purity, and it was hung at the entrance to the cave. The Goddess could 
never hide that face again which she then saw for the first time in all its 
radiant splendour. 

Tradition holds that these were the very words of the incantation : — 



THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 9 

HitOy futay miyoy Gods, behold the cavern's mouth, 

Itsuy muyuy nana^ Comes thence the majestic Goddess; Rejoice! 

yay kokonOy forty Shall not joy now fill all our hearts ? 

MomOy chiy yorodzu. Are not my charms all-powerful ? 

In more prosaic fashion, and with miyo divided, this gives the numerals — 

One, two, three, four, 

Five, six, seven. 

Eight, nine, ten. 

Hundred, thousand, ten thousand 

The Yamat(hdamashiy the nationalist spirit which is responsible for much 
that is good and much that is evil in the nation's history, finds herein the 
most true account of the origin of the Koto of Japan, the Yamato Koto : 
and indeed its six long notches are there to this day to bear witness to it. 
The classical botanist, when he called that Kadzura tree ''A', japofiicay' em- 
phasized another of the long-to-be-remembered incidents of that eventful 
day, for which service the Yamato-damashi is duly grateful. 

The Encyclopaedia, Sansai Zuyi — " All things in heaven and earth and 
the human brain set out and illustrated" — has christened Am6-no-Uzum6 the 
"Japanese Apollo"; she is "the deity who invented music and gave it to 
humanity." To her is ascribed also the invention of the only other national 
instrument, the Yamato Fuyiy or Flute of Japan : otherwise called the " Bird 
from Heaven " — Ami no Tori FuyS — which she made from bamboo gathered 
on the " Mountain of the Heavenly Fragrance," Am6 no Kaga Yamay whence 
had also come those Kadzura vines which bound her hair : a trio of things 
celestial {Ami no\ the mountain, the bird, and the Goddess. She added, so 
they say, the strains of this heavenly reed to the music of the bow-strings 
before the cave, while the Gods, creating then the principles of time, beat 
the measure upon the mother of all the Castanettes. 



lo THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 

Probably owing to its divine origin, the Flutes have always been re- 
garded as most sacred instruments. They are preserved with peculiar 
veneration, and for an extraordinary number of years : many of those now 
in use are said to be over a thousand years old. A list of the Temple 
Flutes was kept at Court, and, like most of the old instruments, they were 
known by special names : ** The Snake-charmer," ** Green Leaves," " The 
Fisherman," are among those which are still preserved. 

Not until the twenty-second year of the Emperor Jimmyo — a.d. 835 — 
does the Japanese Orpheus appear upon the scene ; not mythical at all, how- 
ever, but very practical, in the person of a nobleman of the Court, who had 
for his Lute that most villainous of vile-sounding instruments, the Hichiriki. 
Yet, so they say, he played it so sweetly that one who had burglarious 
designs upon his property, hearing, went in unaccustomed innocence away. 
May-be the kindly mists of time have somewhat clouded the true perception 
of the burglar's state of mind. He must have fled in frightened horror ; 
for, of all the gruesome sounds ever invented by man, the Hichiriki gives 
forth the most unearthly. 

Then there is the story of the pirate who was vanquished, not by 
valorous deeds, but by the music of this wild reed coming from the decks of 
his intended prey, which caused him to bend his sails the other way in a vain 
attempt at flight. This, indeed, is a true story, for that same Hichiriki is still 
treasured in the land, wrapped in silken cloths in its fan-shaped box, whereon 
its name is written largely and legibly — Kaizoku maru — which means ** The 
Pirate." Possibly, too, it was the soul of this very Hichiriki which was en- 
rolled among the heavenly beings, and to whose honour a temple was built 
in Banshiu, the province of Harima, and called ^^ Hichiriki no Miya^' — '*The 



THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. ii 

Temple of the Hichiriki/' A strange fate has, however, intercepted worship 
at the shrine, for a great rock has fallen from the mountains in front of the 
doorway so that none can enter, and none have been able to remove it. 

This terrible instrument, called sometimes the " sad-toned tube," in spite 
of those sweetly potent sounds which tradition ascribes to it, is the diapason 
of the old classical orchestra ; the cacophony of the music must be visited 
on its head, and not, as is too common, on that of the much-maligned 
Sho. This "octave mixture," as it may be called, is guilty, it is true, of 

■ 

strange chords ; but it is innocent of harsh sounds, and is, comparatively 
speaking, quite "bird-like," as the Japanese say. "Its music." says the poet, 
"is like the wind of spring murmuring in rocky caves; the very nightingales 
come to listen and to sing." 

The historian has been at pains to collect, in chemists' language, " traces " 
of music in the earliest of recorded times. He finds them in the weird 
huUaballoos of the funeral ceremonial of the hero Amewaka, which lasted 
eight days and nights, and at which " musical instruments were certainly 
used." He finds them too in the time of the great first Emperor of Japan, 
Jimmu Tenno — about six hundred and sixty years before Christ — who 
stands, as the Japanese consider, in spite of our own scholarly opinion 
to the contrary, in the border-land between mythology and history. The 
Imperial troops went to battle shouting, as other warriors have done in 
other countries and earlier ages ; but these songs of war are declared to 
have been in regular and metrical form. 

History becomes more interesting, though the Western scholars will not 
yet let it be called reliable, at the beginning of the third century after Christ, 
concerning the reign of the Empress Jingo Kogo, who conquered Corea. 



12 THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 

Before setting forth on her victorious journey, she worshipped, as in private 
and in public duty bound, at the ancestral shrines; and all the authorities 
agree, to the intense gratification of the Yamato-damasfdy that the instrument 
used to accompany the rites was in very deed the Yamato Koto. Takeno-uchi, 
the minister in attendance on the Empress, is said, by one more circumstantial 
than his fellows, to have played the instrument on the occasion. 

The Yamato Koto and the Yamato Fuy6, the Koto and Flute of Japan, 
alone among early instruments are indigenous to Japan. China, with its 
instruments and its music, occupies almost the whole ground : and they were, 
from earliest times, borrowed and appropriated by the Japanese, Even the 
Empress Jingo, though she set forth to war with the sound of national music 
in her ears, included both musicians and musical instruments in the tribute 
to be paid by Corea after its conquest These Corean musicians are siid to 
have been the first to direct attention to the importance of selecting well- 
seasoned wood for the bodies of instruments, by the eagerness with which 
they rescued from the furnaces of the salt manufacturers on the coast the 
timbers of a shipwrecked vessel. Musical histories preserve with much 
particularity both the date — 291 a.d.— and the name of the ship — '*The 
Kareno." Afterwards, as communication between the Islands of Dai Nippon 
. , and the Kingdom on the mainland became more frequent, all 

Early Huioncal *-' * ' 

the Chinese instruments and music which Corea possessed, 
together with expert musicians in great numbers, passed into and influenced 
Japan. More especially in the Soshun era — 588 a.d. — young men were 
chosen for the musical profession, to learn their art at the feet of the 
Coreans, and to study specially the Kakko, the Drum of Southern China. 
Fifteen years later, in the Suiko era, three famous musicians, Mimashi, 



THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 13 

Nakayoshi, and another whose name has perished with him, came from 
Kutara, an independent province of Corea, to teach the use of many- 
instruments and much novel and delightful music. Two years later, a 
great number of students went to China to enquire for themselves at the 
seat of learning.* 

At the beginning of the seventh century musical progress received a great 
impetus from the zeal of the Crown Prince Umayado. This illustrious Prince, 
called after his death Shotoku-taishi — " Prince of the saint-like virtue"— is the 
hero of all the chroniclers. He is described as the first architect, the first 
law-giver, the first to study the art of boat-building, the first true civilizer of 
Japan. He also invented the O-tsuzumi and the Ko-tsuzumi — the shoulder 
and the side Drums of Japan : the invention being, however, more properly 
described as an adaptation and modification of the old Tsuzumi of China. He 
is said also to have introduced Indian music into the country ; but neither at 
this time, nor a century later, when Indian dancers were brought over, did 
Indian music ever obtain much popularity in Japan. 

The Kutara musicians speedily came under Prince Umayado*s notice; 
and his influence enabled them to found their school in the village of 
Sakurai, in the Yamato province. 

In the reign of the Emperor Temmu — 673 a.d. — both Corean and 
Chinese musicians are found playing in the Imperial Gardens, Btianuhment 0/ 

Chinese Music 

Chinese music having by that time long been firmly established injapan, 
in Court favour. And again, at the close of the century, its popularity was 
still in the ascendant, for Chinese musicians and dancers invariably performed 
at the banquets of the Empress Jito. 

In the first years of the next century the Emperor Mommu developed 



14 THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 

so great a taste for the foreign music, that to be learned in it was to be in 
the height of fashion ; and all who were, and all who would be, in the highest 
circles, devoted themselves eagerly to its study. To encourage an art which 
found such eager' students the Emperor established a Musical Bureau, and 
constituted it as part of his household. Yet even here history is caught 
repeating herself: the Emperor Mommu doing no more for Chinese music 
than had been done ages before for the national music by his great pre- 
decessor and first of his line. For, says the Yamato historian, did not the 
greatest of Emperors, Jimmu Tenno himself, order the Lady Sarumd to attend 
to all the musical affairs of his Court ? 

The new Musical Bureau was christened " Gagaku Rio " : Ga meaning 
'"tasteful," and therefore, in old days as in new, an equivalent to some- 
thing but lately introduced from foreign parts. It grew yearly in importance. 
In 724 A.D., in the reign of the Emperor Shomu, there were under 
its direct control thirty-nine principal Chinese musicians, eight from Corea 
proper, twenty-six from Kutara, four from Shinra, and sixty-two from Dora : 
Kutara, Shinra, and Dora being the three independent provinces of Corea. 
The instruments in use were the Hichiriki, the Flutes, the Sho, the Gongs, 
and the various Drums, large and small. 

The chief work of the Bureau was the development of the study of 
the classical Chinese dance — the Bugaku — and of its more popular 
companion, the Sangaku, of which more hereafter. It may be noted here 
that the Bugaku in its original form is still performed on State occasions 
at the Palace in Tokyo. The dancers, many of them lineal descendants 
of the musicians of the Bureau, have a special establishment near the 
Kudan, where they practise, and twice or three times in the year give 



THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 15 

full-dress entertainments, attended by the members and household of the 
Imperial family : and, more often still, private performances in the presence 
of the Empress. 

For a full century the work of the Bureau is unrecorded. The year 
935 A.D., however, marks a distinct step forward. The Emperor Jimmyo, 
himself a musician of no mean order, sent commissioners to China to make 
further enquiries. They returned with fresh stores of knowledge, and brought 
back a new instrument — the Biwa — which figures largely in the history of 
Japanese music proper. It was in this reign that the noble Hichiriki player 
unconsciously melted the heart of his burglarious visitor : so wide indeed was 
the spread of musical culture. 

Such in briefest outline was the advent of Chinese music into Japan. 
Not all the Yamaio-damashi in the world could resist it. So potent was 
it, that it seems almost to have crushed Japanese music, as in those days 
everything Chinese crushed everything Japanese, out of existence. What with 
travelling students, and commissioners, and Bureaux, and musicianly Emperors, 
the YamatO'damashi could scarce console itself with the memories of the 
good old days, four centuries before, when the Emperor Inkyo Lingering Traces 

qftfu OU Music 

gave a great feast, and himself played the Koto— the true Yamato o/7a^n. 

Koto. But the Priests remained faithful, and the national music was heard 
in the Temples at festivals, such as the Daijo-i—tht. grand harvest feast. 
And even the Emperor Mommu, though he devoted himself, perhaps too 
much, to advance the prosperity of his new Bureau, did not omit the annual 
custom — dating from the time of Onin, when the shipwrecked ** Kareno " 
gave its timbers to the musicians — of summoning the Nara band to the 
ceremonial banquet at the Palace to play the old melodies with which, to 



i6 THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 

the accompaniment of Koto and Flute — Yamato both — the tribute of fish 
and mushrooms had been brought to the Sovereign. Only in very troublous 
times, subsequently, was this venerable custom discontinued. The con- 
tinued service of the two national instruments in the Temples earned for 
them the epithet kami — divine : and thenceforward they were known as the 
Kami Koto and Kami Fuyi. The songs which they accompanied were divided 
into two classes: the O-uta^ or "grand singing," in which the chorus sang 
sitting, and the Tacki-uta, or "standing singing," during which they stood on 
the steps of the Temple. From these forms of primitive sacred music the 
Kagura— -ffaw^ Asobi^ the divine playing — or true Temple music seems to 
have been developed, which has lasted through many centuries to the 
present day. 

When the Court was at Nara, a special chamber — the Seishido — was set 
apart in the Palace for the performance of the Kagura; and ever since the 
time of the Emperor Ichijo — 987 a.d. — this music has been the special 
accompaniment to the worship of the Sacred Treasures — the ceremony of 
the Naishi'dokoro.' The performance took place in the garden of the 
Treasures, the musicians being ranged on either side, the hereditary con- 
ductor standing between them in the fullest of full dresses, and wearing his 
swords. The instruments used were the Yamato Koto, Yamato Fuy6, and 
Hichiriki. The more celebrated Temples, at Is6 and Kyoto for example, 
had each their special version of the music. 

Tradition bases the music of the Kagura on the very strains which 
Amaterasu in the earliest year found so soul-compelling. The performance 
is intended, in fact, to preserve the incidents of the cave in pious memory. 
The darkness of the world and the at length yielding dawn were typified by 



>^ •* ^^ ,,»3f> 




V 



THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 17 

the hours during which, in former times, it took place : from ten at night till 
four in the morning. A fire of sticks was kindled in front of the Treasures, 
as the fire had been kindled before the mouth of the cave. And the presence 
of the Gods themselves was something more than symbolized in the presence 
of the Emperor with all the nobles of his Court. The music itself is divided 
into many parts, each of them intended to signify some scene of the Drama 
of the Entreaty. Thus among the main divisions there are ** The Illumination,*' 
and ** The Assembly " ; and the smaller sections are called tori mono — " the 
things to be brought," — ^as **the bow," **the gohei," "the stick," ''the sword," 
'*the spear," ** the bamboo leaves," and *'the Kadzura bough." 

The following are two verses of the song of the Kagura; in the first the allusion is to the 
Kadzura bough which Amd-no-Uzum^ held in her hand when she danced before the cave. 

Miyama ni wa t-u * u -i • i r it 

J, y .. The autumn hail is surely falling 

Arare fururaji , ^,. , \^ ,^ 

rr on the Miyama mountain, for the 

Toyama nam ,^ , r^ 

,-- ,. , pure Kadzura trees on Toyama are 

Masaki no kazura , . , . , 

Irotsuki ni km. ^^^°S'"« *'^"' ^°^°"^- 

Sasa no ha ni t • , , , 

yr i_' X ' A It IS pleasant to gather together 

r. . on a wintry night when the snow is 

J*uyu no yo ni ^ o 

„ , . lying thick on the leaves of the 

loyo no asobi ^ , 

o ^ , ., . young Bamboos. 

Ssuruga tanoshiki, "" ° 

Much of the old ceremonial has to-day passed away : the fire, indeed, is 

still kindled, but the time has been changed to more convenient hours, for 

the Princes of the Blood may not sleep during the celebration of the rites. 

Thus the tradition of the darkness has been forgotten ; but the especial 

sanctity of the occasion is still maintained. It runs risk of being marred by 

the devices of the modern side of life : the conclusion of the performance in 

the Palace at Tokyo is telegraphed to Kyoto. 

I) 



1 8 THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE, 

The modern offshoot of the Kagura is the short benedictory dance of 
the *' scarlet ladies," with their jangle of bells and waving of fans, familiar to all 
visitors to the Nikko Temples. For a few rin the pilgrim gets his blessing, 
and passes on before it is half finished to look at the famous Nikko Cat; 
only the more pious of the country-folk linger till the last of the old lady s 
sedate steps have been accomplished. This dance, which does not occupy 
more than thirty seconds, is a very abbreviated form of the Dai dai Kagura, 
the Grand Kagura, which lasts upwards of two hours, and is only performed 
in return for some special offering to the Temple. This is more properly 
called Yu otomS mat — **the dance of the eight virgins" — and is not the true 
form of the old dance, whose name it commonly bears. It is performed by 
the full staff of eight dancers, who attend daily at the Temples to perform 
to those who. need their shortened ministrations. A much longer benedictory 
measure is gone through by each of the dancers in turn. It is accompanied 
by a big Drum, two large Kakko, and Flutes. The Drums are different 
from those used in the Bugaku orchestra.** 



Independently of this Temple music, short compositions, called Ro-yei, in 
which Chinese poetry was used, made their appearance at a very early 
period. Being more easily remembered than the classical music, they acquired 
some popularity, especially among the educated classes. It is very uncertain 
what their form was ; but some definite form they must have had, the 
chronicler mentioning a collection of ninety ro-yet, made ** and published " 
about the year 1070.® 

A rival of the Ro-yei is heard of in the Engi era, called the Imayo, or 
** present style of song." Traces of both have entirely vanished. This Engi 



OnCHESTR*. 



I 

\ 



THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 19 

era, which extended from 901 to 922 A.D., was the Golden Age of old 
Japan. Poetry, music, dancing, the arts and the sciences, all flourished under 
the genial influence of the Court. For the delectation of the courtiers a 
band of female musicians and dancers was established, the dancers numbering 
one hundred and forty. By this band the taste of the musical world in its 
lighter phases was practically regulated ; it seems to have existed side by side 
with the already ancient Musical Bureau, which still had the Chinese classical 
dances under its especial protection. The band could make or mar a musician's 
fame ; success and popularity for a new composition were attained only by 
performance by these Court musicians. The chief Chinese orchestral instru- 
ments in use at this period were the following. For the Sogaku, the Chinese 
orchestral music — which included the accompaniments to the Bugaku and 
Sangaku dances, and a certain amount of music performed without dancing — 
the Hichiriki, the Flute, and the Sho, which supplied the harmonies ; 
the Taiko, or big Drum, in different sizes ; the Kakko, or small drum, 
and the Shoko, a small and very acute Gong. For the private per- 
formances in the Palace — the Kagen-gaku — the Drums and Gong might be 
omitted : but stringed instruments were added, the So-no-koto — the only 
form of the Chinese Koto which obtained a footing in Japan — and the sonorous 
Biwa. In addition to these, for the modern forms of Kagura already noticed, 
the drums were changed to a big Drum without braces — O-daiko ; and a 
larger Kakko — O-kakko, or Daibyoshi, the ** grand time beater." 



We must now revert to the introduction of the Biwa into 

Introductton of 

Japan, about 935 a.d., as this instrument had a most im- 
portant influence on the growth of modern Japanese music. 



20 THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 

As it came from China it was a ponderous instrument, very rich and 
sonorous in its tones. The heavy bachi was grasped firmly in the hand, 
and was dragged slowly across the four strings, making harmonious open 
chords, emphasizing the measure of the stately dance. As it was used then, 
nine centuries ago, so it is used now : its original form preserved with the 
same religious care that has preserved the music which came with it, and 
the dances which it helped to accompany. But like all things else from 
China that came within the sphere of Japans eclecticism, when it was put 
to Japanese purposes it underwent a transformation. While preserving its 
essential qualities of rich tone and open harmonies, and though still a massive 
instrument that must rest on the ground, its Chinese and somewhat uncouth 
solidity gave place to something lighter, more graceful, more refined. The 
shape of the bachi was altered so as to obtain freer and more rapid sweeps 
over the strings ; a fourth fret was added, and all the frets were raised. 
The finger pressing the strings behind the frets could produce five semitones 
in succession without touching the neck, and the strings passing over their 
broad flat edges gave forth strange bird-like trills, which, though they were 
unclassic in Chinese music, were utilized to the full in the music which was 
specially written for it by the singers of Satsuma, where it made its home, 
and whence it derived its name, the Satsuma Biwa, It was essentially a 
harmonic, and not a melodic, instrument : and its open chords made it 
admirably suited to the accompaniment of long heroic recitations and ancient 
songs of love and war, which are dear to the soul of Japan.^ The chief 
among them is the famous Heiki Monogatari, a long, long story, taking some 
hours in the reciting, which tells of the conflict between the Heike and the 
Genji clans, of the discomfiture of the Heik^, and the drowning of the 



THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 21 

infant Emperor Antoku. This story was first shaped, as they say, by the 
blind musicians who fled with the infant Emperors followers to Kagoshima, 
in the province of Satsuma ; it was handed down as the Saga of the war, 
and sung long afterwards to incite the descendants of the defeated clansmen 
to admiration and revenge. To this chanted story of that struggle, famous 
and Eastern-world renowned — to the simple descriptive music, centuries old, 
increasing in vigour as the battle waged, sinking into slow melancholy 
cadences with the retreat of the vanquished, the people listen still in rapt 
attention, in a solemn. Japanese silence. For is it not told still by one of 
the few remaining lineal descendants of the pupils of the blind priest Jo-ichi, 
who had it from the blind Ichi-botok^ himself a pupil of the man who, in 
1445, gave it its present form } Of Ichi-botok6 it is said that he sang with 
so sweet a voice that it seemed scarcely human : the common people thought 
in listening that he was indeed divine, that Buddha had reappeared. The 
accompaniment is of the simplest nature ; merely rhythmical beats on the 
lower strings, with occasional taps on the wood, slowly drawn open chords, 
or a series of rapid sweeps to and fro over all four strings, finishing with an 
up-stroke on the fourth, with a pause to allow the trill of the string to be 
heard. The dexterity with which these rapid passages are executed 
astonishes, but their simple appropriateness gives the whole composition, 
without exaggeration, a charm which not all ancient music, even in the 
West, can be said to possess. It is rugged, as such ancient music must 
be ; almost devoid of melody. One short lilting phrase, which has without 
doubt descended to the modern music of the Samisen, gilone dwells in 
the memory ; and this, so far as my explorations extend, occurs in nearly 
every composition. 



22 THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 

So the family history of the Biwa is characteristic of all the imported 
instruments. The Chinese instrument was preserved, but there grew up by 
its side the Japanese instrument that sprang from it. From its use 
exclusively in the orchestra of the Bugaku dancers, the old Biwa came to 
be christened the Bugaku Biwa; but in Japan the Satsuma Biwa is the 
Biwa proper ; it is often called the ** Heik6-biwa." 

The chroniclers note the formation of a special band of blind Biwa 
players, drawn, it seems, entirely from Kagoshima, for the service of the 
Court. There were thus three distinct branches of music competing for 
popular favour — three bands of musicians specially under the Imperial 
patronage : the Gagaku Rio, the Bureau with its Chinese and Corean 
musicians, which preserved the imported music in all its classical rigidity ; the 
Court band of female dancers and musicians, to whose hands the development 
of the national dances was confided ; and the band of Biwa players.® 

Much of the modern song music for the Samisen owes its origin to 
infiuenceofthe the Blwa music ; and there is no doubt that, in its descrip- 

Biwa on the 

National Music. tive methods, it had also an important influence on the national 
dance music. Inspiration for the dances was sought in the common incidents 
of daily life. The characteristic features of the incident were reduced into 
rhythmic form ; and this was surrounded with the stereotyped common forms 
of dance movement and gesture, just as one would make a phrase the 
subject of a musical composition, weaving . with it the commoner forms of 
musical expression. 

Thus the national Saiba-gaku (Saibara in the vulgar tongue), invented in 
the Engi era — 901 a.d.— and which remained famous and popular for many 
years after, was based on the peasants' songs as they trudged over the 



THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE, 23 

mountains with the pack-horses, bringing tribute to the Emperor. This 
dance, with fifty-three varieties of songs, is said to have been "established 
as music by Imperial order," and was for a long time performed annually at 
the Palace. It is occasionally, though rarely, heard now. 

The following are two verses of the song of the Saiba-gaku. There is a curious construction 
in the poetry, which involves the repetition in the third line of the subject of the second. 

Idi waga koma wa Oh, my pony, 

Hayaku yuki-kose Matsuchi yama^ Hasten past the Matsuchi mountain; 

Aware Matsuchi yama wark. Oh, fair Matsuchi mountain ! 

Ao-yagi wo Weeping willow-tree, 

Kata4to ni yoritc oki ya Twist thy single silken strands into a perch 

Uguisu ni oki ya. Whereon the nightingale may perch. 

The same idea seems in later times to have led to the reduction into 
regular forms of the humming accompaniments to daily occupations, and to 
which characteristic names were given.^ Thus there is Clia-tsutni uta, the 
** Tea-pickers* Song"; Mari uLi, the ** Song of the girls playing at ball "; Ta-uy^ 
utay the " Rice-planting Song ;" Usu-hiki uta, the ** Mortar Song," sung by two 
girls pounding rice or tea in a mortar, to the rhythmical beat of the pestle ; 
and Bon-odori uta, the moonlight dance of fisher peasants in July, when the 
boys and girls danced through the village shouting, " Come and join the 
dance," and, perpetually adding to their numbers, finished their frolic on the 
sea-shore. So again the same idea has led to the invention of many of the 
charming geisha dances of the present day : the most graceful among them 
all, the ** Bleachers* dance," is known probably to all who have travelled in 
Japan ; the dexterous waving of the long strips of white cotton, the 
characteristic poses of the three girls, dwell in the memory as the most 
delightful of recollections among a whole world of delights. 



24 THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE, 

So, going back again into the regions of antiquity, we find almost an 
epoch of musical history marked by the introduction of such a song and 
dance — the Dengaku — the song of the rice-planters, which was ** ordered to be 
established as music." To the accompaniment of Flutes and the Drums 
Taiko and O-tsuzumi, the Dengaku lived in Court favour until the close 
of the twelfth century, when, in the time of Yoritomo, the Sarugaku, the 
purest form of the No dance of the present day, was established. The 
rice-planters' dance fled to the provinces, reappearing intermittently in more 
modern times. It is said to have been performed at Mito two hundred 
years ago, by, it is almost needless to add, descendants of the original 
dancers ; and yet again, only a hundred years ago, in Kishiu ; and still later 
for a period at Nikko, on the occasion of the festival of the Shogun 
lyeyasu. But, with Japanese particularity, the historian adds that at Nikko 
they did not perform the true Dengaku ; for the Kakko, the small stand- 
drum, was added to the orchestra. 



It will be convenient in this place to trace the distinction between 
Theckimstand ^^incse aud Japanese dancing, both being current to-day. The 

Ja^ntii Dances* j , • i_ • r r r^y • r i • t 

dances and music which came from China were of two kinds : 
the severe classical Bugaku, to which reference has been made ; and the 
Sangaku — literally '* leisure dance," or ** leisure amusement." This was of a light 
character, and more appealing to the popular taste : the severe Chinese mind 
attributing its invention, in a general sort of way, to the ** foreign barbarian." 
The music was used chiefly to accompany comic acting and acrobatic per- 
formances. In the Musical Bureau, both Bugaku and Sangaku were studied, 
but they were performed by different bodies of musicians. 



THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 25 

On the other hand, the Dengaku was purely Japanese in its origin ; and 
so also was its rival the Sarugaku. In the intervals of the Sarugaku light 
comedy pieces were performed, called Kiogen ; and these seem gradually to 
have supplanted the Chinese Sangaku, which after a time went out of vogue. 
The word Sarugaku, however, dropped the "ru," and was very easily confused 
with Sangaku ; and, although the two dances had no connection, the old 
Chinese word came to be applied to the newer Japanese dance, which thence- 
forward was called "Sarugaku" or ** Sangaku" indiscriminately. 

In much later years the Bugaku remained as the amusement of the 
Court, the Sarugaku of the Shogun and Daimyo, the most wealthy of the 
nobles having their own theatre and dancers, together with a costly wardrobe 
of sumptuous brocade and embroidered dresses. In the present day, the 
Sarugaku and Kiogen dancers, like the Bugaku dancers, have their home in 
Tokyo; their theatre adjoins the "Maple Club" — Koyo-kwan — in Shiba Park, 
where they give frequent performances. Six or eight pieces of each class 
are given, the performance beginning at ten in the morning and lasting till 
six in the evening. 

Both Bugaku and Sarugaku are popularly called No dancing ; the 
word no signifying ability in any art. Strictly speaking, however, the 
No dance is a still later development of Sarugaku, standing midway 
between the old and the modern Japanese dances. Just as the old Japanese 
dance infused a little life and action into the old Chinese methods, so the 
No infused still more vigour into the Sarugaku, and incorporated the ideas 
and spirit of the times. 

The Sarugaku appears to have achieved popularity rapidly, though in- 
vention was slow. By the middle of the thirteenth century no more than 



26 THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 

sixteen standard pieces had, been invented and approved. The orchestra 
consisted only of the Yoko Fuy^, the Flute, and three Drums — the Uta- 
daiko, O-tsuzumi, and Ko-tsuzumi. There was also a voice part, the song 
itself being called utai. Later, these utai were composed separately, and 
were recited without music. A collection of two hundred was published 
about the year 1500, most of them composed by Se-ami, son of Uizaki Iro, 
buffoon to the Shogun Ashikaga. The son of Se-ami, Oto-ami, founded the 
now-existing house of Kanzi, which is in fact the true and original family of 
No dancers. Four other ancient houses are still flourishing, but they date 
only from the later years of the sixteenth century. The Kiogen, or light 
interludes, were invariably unaccompanied. The later varieties of the No 
seem to have had no larger orchestra than the classical models, that is, Flute 
and Drums. In one instance only, the boys' Fan-dance — Ennen — brass 
Cymbals were added. In the modern No dance, however, the orchestra is 
composed of three Samisens in unison, with the O-tsuzumi and Ko-tsuzumi, 
and one reciter. 

The accompanying illustration shows the classical No orchestra in full- 
dress. The black lacquer cap — ^'yeboshV — is never removed even before 
persons of the highest rank. 

The separate utai which have been referred to were composed chiefly 
by the priests : the words were based upon the Buddhist books, and the per- 
formance much resembled the Temple incantations. They were, moreover, 
invariably written with a double meaning, and were used as an indirect 
means of conveying instruction to the people, a notion derived from the old 
Chinese priesthood. The performance of the Sarugaku indeed at one time 
passed almost entirely into the hands of the priests : and many of the 



1 



THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 29 

Temples used it as a substitute for the Kagura, maintaining special per- 
formers for the purpose. In the same way the words of the comic Kiogen 
were invariably written with double meanings, but with a view to imparting 
a different kind of information to a different class of people. The Daimyo 
living in their palaces, secluded from the commoner branch of humanity 
which served them, and surrounded by a band of attendants through whom 
information filtered but slowly, and purged of all unpleasantness, knew but 
little of the smaller matters which were going on outside. Special information 
as to any hardship which the people were suffering, or wrongs which needed 
redress, was conveyed to the Prince's ear by a dexterous use of the second 
meanings. The subtle play of meaning is a thing which delights the 
Japanese mind, and one with which they are very familiar; and it is said 
that these comedies rarely failed in giving the necessary information to the 
lord for whose amusement they were provided. 

It is to be noted that women took part in the dancing of the No. 
They are now indeed banished from the Japanese stage ; but they hold an 
important position in its history. 

Okumi of Izumo, a young female Temple dancer, is the reputed 
inventor of the Kabuki, the Buddhist incantation and dance, 
accompanied by Flute and Drums. Leaving the Temple she 
performed the dance on a small stage in Kyoto ; gradually enlarging the 
scope of the incantation, as well as its character, she developed it into a 
sort of play, in the performance of which she took the men's parts, while 
her husband, Sanjiro, took the women's. The new plays grew in popularity, 
until the Government, in 1643, suspended them on account of their immoral 
tendencies. Okumi then substituted a dance by boys, who played both male 



Tlu Early Ja^neu 
Theatre, 



30 THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 

and female parts; but this, in 1667, was in its turn suspended by the 
Government. Finally, the system of licensing theatrical performances was 
adopted, the licence being confined to pieces in which all the characters 
were taken by men, and this system remains to the present day, so far as 
the theatre proper is concerned. Popular taste remained satisfied with the 
early orchestra down to the middle of the seventeenth century: about 1640 
the Samisen was first used in the Theatre to accompany the incidental songs. 
It was introduced by the founder of the now-existing house of Kineya. 

The Orchestra of the Modern Theatre is composed of two Samisens, 
one Flute, and three Drums — the Uta-daiko, O-tsuzumi, and Ko-tsuzumi ; the 
Samisens having been added to the orchestra of the No. There are also 
two reciters. It is called the '' Hayashi-kata^^ the "accompaniment party.*' 
The illustrations show this orchestra both in undress and in full dress. The 
latter is called '' Dega tarV — **the orchestra which appears"; the full dress 
being worn on certain special occasions, when it appears on the stage in 
short one-act pieces, and occasionally in scenes in longer plays, by way of 
accompaniment to soliloquies or solo dances. In ordinary cases, however, 
the orchestra is behind the scenes, and the full dress is not worn. 

The Female Orchestra, " Shita kata^^ for accompanying dancing, is 
composed of the same instruments, but without reciters. From the illustra- 
tion it will be seen that the O-tsuzumi and the Ko-tsuzumi are played by 
the same performer, as the music does not require these two drums at the 
same time. 



Early Japaneat 
Songs. 



The gradual growth of music apart from dancing has been 
chronicled with a refinement of precision and discrimination 



THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 35 

peculiarly Japanese. Apart from the number of Japanese names which 
it would involve, it would be impossible to attempt even a partial 
description of the classifications, which are based on lines quite un- 
familiar to us. Solemnity and lightness, loudness and softness, the greater 
or sparing use of large intervals : these are some of the characteristics 
which differentiate one class from another. The composer who used a 
different characteristic from his predecessor in popular favour is invariably 
said to have invented a "new kind of music." Thus we find that the "new 
music" of the Kwanyei and ShohO eras, invented by Satsuma Joun of Izumi, 
was of a "very sober, decent kind," his themes being the valour and deeds 
of the ancient heroes. Satsuma Joun had a pupil Toraya Genjitsu, who, 
having settled in Yedo, made a reputation by inventing music of a less 
solemn kind. His pupil was Inouye Harima, a learned man and fertile 
composer. His most celebrated pupil was Takemoto Chikugo, who is handed 
down to fame as the inventor of "an entirely new class of music made by 
mixing all the others up together." He also is celebrated as the inventor 
of the " Qidayu-bushiy' the music for the marionette stage which he had set 
up in Osaka. 

The marionettes achieved a great popularity, Takemoto being assisted 
by Chikamatsu Monzayemon — the " Shakespeare of Japan " — who supplied the 
books of the words. But the music was somewhat loud and vulgar. Miyako 
Itchu of Kyoto therefore invented "softer songs" — '^ ItchU-bushV ; but these, 
as well as the '^ Bungo-bushiy' so called after their composer, Miyakoji Bungo, 
degenerated into indecency, and were suppressed by the Government. They 
were afterwards started afresh in Yedo by Miyako Bunyemon; but he found 
their music too soft and languorous for popular taste. He therefore made 



36 THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 

a new departure with the " Tokiwazu " ; and presently Tomimoto Buzen, a 
performer of the Tokiwazu^ invented the songs named after him, the " Tomi- 
moto-bushV ; and Kiyomoto Enjusai, in the Kwansei era, invented his songs, 
the '' KiyomotO'bushV ; and Uji Kadayu of Kyoto invented his, the '' Kadayu- 
bushV ; and Fujimatsu, a descendant of Miyakoji, invented his, the '' Fujimatsu- 
bushV ; and so the classification goes on, ad infinitum. The ^^ Shinnaiy' 
invented by Tsuruga, a pupil of Fujimatsu, were songs of a low order and 
an indecent character : the music is described as ** very sweet and bird-like." 
These, however, like their predecessors, the "softer songs" of Itchu, were 
condemned by a troublesome Government. All these, however, really 
belong to one class, the ** Joruri," so called after the first of the kind, 
the '' y oruri ' Monogatariy This had sprung in direct succession from 
the f SLinous *' H'ei^^ Monogatari,'' to which reference has already been 
made, the Samisen being substituted, in accompanying, for the Biwa. Like 
the Heike song, the Joruri was a recitative accompanied by solemn open 
chords and descriptive music ; it dealt, however, with a softer theme than 
war and defeat — the prayer of aged parents to the Gods for a child : the 
answer to the prayer and birth of a daughter : the naming of the child 
Joruri Himi, "the maid from Paradise": the youth and maidenhood of the 
lovely girl : and the love for her of Yoshitsuh6. 

The softer ideas of the Joruri Monogatari thus led to the development 
of the numerous subordinate classes already mentioned. They led, too, to 
the creation of' another distinct class of songs. In the Keicho era, about 
1620, Sawazumi, a very skilful Biwa player, departed from the strict tradition 
of his profession, and sought fresh fields of fame in Samisen playing and 
the study of the titat of the Sarugaku dance. A combination of the Joruri 



% 



1 



THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE, 39 

recitation and these utai occurred to him, and his novel compositions led to 
the invention of the Ha-uta and Ko-uta, short poems or proverbial sayings 
which became very popular during the Ashikaga dynasty: from these again 
developed the Naga-uta, or "long songs," which included many classes : they 
were first composed by Tobaya Tanyemon of Tokyo, in the Enkyo era, 
about 1744. Two of the composers many pupils founded two still existing 
families of musicians. In the Bunroku era, 1592 a.d., many varieties of 
K(huta, especially the ^^ Ryutatsu-bushiy' prevailed: they were accompanied 
by the Samisen and Shakuhachi. The Samisen was then fast becoming the 
popular instrument which it is at the present day. 

In the following list are given all the varieties of the songs which 
sprang from the yoruri Monogatari, as indicated above : these songs 
are generically termed '' yoruri-bushU' The Encyclopaedia gives them as 
springing immediately from the ''Gidayu-bushi'' and the greater number of 
them as having been, like those, specially composed for the performances 
of the marionettes. Out of the somewhat long list, although many are 
still heard occasionally, the only survivors in popular favour at the present 
time are the two forms of '' Gidayu-bushiy' the '' Shinnai,'' which seem to 
have braved the storm of Government indignation, and the *' Tokiwazuy 

I have added, further, a list of the songs which come under the head 
of '^ Ha-uta'' and ^^ Ko-uta'' i and, also, for convenience of reference, a tabular 
scheme of songs, showing the chronological development of the songs, as 
well as a similar scheme for the Chinese and Japanese Dances. 



40 THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 

A LIST OF VARIETIES OF ''JORURl-BUSHr WHICH SPRANG FROM 

THE ''JORURI MONOGATARir 



Joun-bushi: the "New Music" composed by Satsuma Joun of Izumi in the Kwanyei and 

Sh5hd eras. 
Genjitsu'bushi : the songs invented by Toraya Genjitsu of Yedo, pupil of Satsuma J5un. 

Harima-bushi : the songs invented by Inouye Harima, a pupil of Toraya Genjitsu. 

Kadayu-bushi^ c. 1670: the songs invented by Uji Kadayu of Kyoto. 

Gidayu-bushiy 1675 : ^^ music for the marionette stage invented by Inouye Harima's pupil, 
Takemoto Chikugo at Osaka, whose professional name was Gidayu. 

The Harima-bushi seem to have been characterised by a long droning intonation : while 
the KadayU'bushi were precisely the reverse, being sung with a short crisp accent Takemoto 
Chikugo combined both these qualities in his songs. Between 17 12 and 1731, two varieties 
were introduced by two of Gidayu's pupils: the first, pathetic songs written by Takemoto 
Harima, known to the profession as Gidayu the Second; the other, songs in a lighter vein, 
composed by Toyotaki Wakatayu. Both are still extant. 

Bunya-bushiy 1681 : marionette music invented by Okamoto Bunya, a pupil of Yamamoto 
Tosanojo, and a singer of Gidayu-bushi, His songs went out of fashion in 1704. 

JtchU'bushiy 1 688 : marionette music composed by a priest Miyako Itchu, also a pupil of 
Yamamoto Tosanojo, who was a famous singer of the ^^Joruri Manogatari^ 

Bungo-bushiy 17 16: derived from the Itchu-bushi by Miyakoji Bungo, a pupil of Itchu. 

Tokiwazuy 1736: the ultimate development of the Bungo-bushi^ invented for the marionette stage 
by Miyako Bunyemon of Yedo. 

Kato-bushiy 17 16: invented by Kato Tojuro, the son of a fishmonger, whose fondness for sakh 
drove him to bankruptcy. His songs are still heard occasionally. 

FujimatsU'bushiy 1744: derived from the Bungo-bushi by Fujimatsu Satsuma, a pupil of Bungo. 

Tomimoto-bushiy 1748: derived from the Tokiwazu by Tomimoto Buzen, a pupil of Bunyemon. 
His songs are still extant. 

Shinnai-bushi, 1751: indecent songs invented by Tsuruga Shinnai, a pupil of Fujimatsu, which 
seem to have been revived in a purer form after their condemnation by the Government 

Sonohachl-bushiy 1751: derived from the Bung(hbmhi\iy^\y2ik.0)\ Sonohachi, and still occasionally 
heard. 

Kiyomota-bushiy 1804 • derived from the Tomimoto-bushi by Kiyomoto Enjusai. 



A LIST OF VARIETIES OF '' HA-UTA'' AND '' KO-UTAr 



RyutatsU'bushiy 1592 : short songs for the Samisen, composed by a priest named Ryutatsu, who 
afterwards became a merchant-chemist : afterwards sung with Samisen and Shakuhachi. 

RostU'bushi : songs for Samisen and Koto, composed of 31 characters, developed out of the 
preceding by a priest named Rosai : their date is uncertain, but they were still in vogue 
at the beginning of the eighteenth century. 



THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 41 

Naga-uta-bushi : "long songs" : so called because they were lengthened developments of the songs O ^>^ 3,^ 
included in the RyOtatsu and Rosai class. They were composed by Ukon G enzaemon , and t\dSt' ^^ 

are described as "very soft" ^'ij 

Shiba-kaki-bushiy 1655 : songs and comic dances of a low character, in which the gestures were 
made chiefly with the hands. They went out of fashion in 1683. 

Okazaki'hushi^ 1661 : songs and step-dances of a low character, still extant. 

Magaki-bushty 1658 to 17 18: songs of the " Shim-machi," or Osaka Yoshiwara. 

Doiebushiy 1661 : songs sung outside the Yoshiwara at Yedo. 

Kagorbushiy 1658 to 1674 : songs of the Kaga province based on the Ryutatsu and Rosai. 

Lbnen-bushiy 1684: songs to accompany dances. 

Nagk-bushiy or Tsugi-bushiy 1684: small songs popular in Kyoto: "up and down" songs. 

Kokon-biishi^ 1688: songs composed by the actor Kokon Shinzaemon. 

Komuro-bushiy c. 1688: according to some, songs sung before the Daimyo during their pro- 
gresses to Yedo: according to others, songs sung by the betto as their masters were going 
to the Yoshiwara. 

Osaka ko-uta : songs of Osaka, accompanied by Samisen and Koto. 

Daijin-mai-ruhkautay 17 16: the "rich man" song and dance. 

Sasanza: songs in vogue in 1596. 

Hosori : songs in vogue in 1661. 

Kamigata-uta : songs of the " Kamigata," />. Osaka and Kyoto. 

Toridi uta: the wandering minstrels' songs. 

Bon-odori uta : moonlight dance of peasants on the sea-shore in July. 

Yotsudake uta : a song accompanied by the Yotsudake, or " four bamboos." 

Cha-tsumi uta: the tea-picking song. 

Mari uta: the girl's ball song. 

Sumiyoshi-odori uta: the chant of the priest of the Temple of Sumiyoshi when accompanied by 
his umbrella-bearer. 

Ta-uye uta: the rice-planting song. 

Usu-hiki uta: the pestle and mortar song, sung by two girls pounding tea or rice. 

Isk-ondo uta, the Is^ song : the guests are seated in the room, the dancers and the orchestra — 
Koto, Samisen, and Kokyu — being on gallery running round the room, which is gradually 
raised during the performance. 

Kiyari: the name given to the workmen's shouting at the matsuriy and at the feast held when 
the foundations of a new building have been laid. 

The form of the song is supposed to have originated 400 years ago : the old bell of 
the Kenjugi Temple at Kyoto had fallen into the river, and the coolies when they were 
dragging it out were told each to scream his own name in chorus. 

According to another story, Nobunaga the Shogua ordered the coolies who were 
dragging the stones for the foundations of his castle to scream together, but anything 
they liked. 

G 



/: 



I 

60*5: 
c S" 



9 lO 



I* 



s 



•a 



u 

Q 

< 
in 
U 

Q 
o 

u 

C/3 



CO 

< 






.a 
H 




% 



J 
I 



^ 



& 
^ 




CO 



3 

-a. 



*^ <4$ ^ 

^ s w ^ 

-Sd I 
§ I 



.5 -it's 



55 



CO 

O 
C/3 

M 

CO 

U 

£ 

•-a 
b 

O 

u 

S 

o 

t/3 



1 



ot) 



I 

•c — 
e o 

§ 



a a 



o 
1^ 






a 

lO 



§ 

CO 









V 

^ 



S 

S 

9 



«0: 



I 

CO 



a 
o 

CO 
g g 



1 

I 

o 



ll-;l- 



•s 



3 




I 



o 

a 



il 

CO^ 

O 



I 

-iS 



9 



3 

o 

s 



en 



o 
o 






L:g 



O 

a 
o 

CO 



I 



CO 

o 



a 

I 

s 

.3 



a 

o 



(A 

I 

.o 
6 



I 

SP 

2i 



•§ 




<" 



THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE, 43 

The Shakuhachi, introduced into Japan from China by 
Prince Tsuneyoshi as far back as the year 1335, seems to have 
been treated from the first as a solo instrument, with the one exception 
already noted, that it was sometimes used in accompaniments with the 
Samisen ; it figures nowhere in the orchestra. Its use in the country, and 
the great admiration which the beauty of its tone evokes among the Japanese, 
are not the least curious of the problems which the study of the music of the 
country presents. How the Shakuhachi can have given pleasure to people who 
delighted in the gruesome dronings and wailings of the Hichiriki : how the 
Hichiriki can have been tolerated by ears which had once listened to the 
mellow notes of the Shakuhachi, are questions of musical pathology which 
it is not given to us to understand. The two instruments are, indeed, 
at the opposite poles of sound. Nor is it possible to say that the 
Shakuhachi is the only beautiful sounding instrument in use : the pipes of 
the Sho give delicate notes of no little beauty, if they are used alone; but, 
unfortunately, they never are used alone, such is the contrariety of this music. 
The greater Drums, too, are full and rich-toned ; and the tones of the Temple 
Gongs float through the air in the gentlest of musical murmurings. 

The tones of the Shakuhachi have woven pleasant fancies round its early 
history. So sweet were they that they travelled from the cave of its hermit 
inventor, through the still midnight ether, straight to the Emperors Palace. 
They mingled with his dreams, telling as in a song where the magician 
dwelt whose slaves they were. On the morrow the Emperor sent to find 
him, and lo ! the dream was true. 

By way of more sober and veracious history, I have yet in my mind 
the memory of a dark night, when we sat on the verandah of a tea-house 



44 THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE, 

in the mountain village of Chiuzenji ; the lake was lit by a thousand candles 
stuck on to slight rafts of wood, votive offerings drifting slowly over the 
water into eternity, and bearing on their way the prayers of the pilgrims 
who had launched them to the shrine on the opposite shore. And there 
suddenly came across the waters the soft clear tones of this simple pipe, 
which filled me in those earliest of days in Japan with wonder that any 
sound so sweet should come out of this very Galilee, so they say, among 
the unmusical nations. 



The Modern Music 
of Japan, 



Thus far, as clearly as it can be traced, but with, I fear, too much 
infusion of uninteresting detail, and reference to names unknown and things 
not very intelligible without example and illustration, the history of old 
Japanese music: old as to its origin, but still practised, still performed, and 
still listened to with intelligent interest by large audiences of all classes. I 
must turn now to the modern music of the country. 

The modern music is practically synonymous with Koto 
music. Generically it is called Koto-uta — songs for the Koto ; 
in it we find a more clear expression of the Japanese character. Freed 
from the weight of Chinese influence : freed from the inharmonic chords 
of the Sho, the imperfect lipping of the Flutes, and the coarse discord- 
ance of the Hichiriki, and dependent entirely on stringed instruments, it 
acquired a more definite intonation than the classical music, and developed 
distinct melodies, recognisable even to Western ears, which are characterised 
by the grace and minute quaintness of the national idea. Exceptions 
to this are indeed numerous : many even among the more elementary 
compositions, fail altogether of significance to us ; but this seems to be 



THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 



45 



due, not to fault on either side, but to those fundamental differences of 
idea which must inevitably exist between two entirely distinct races — 
differences of idea which find expression not in their music alone, not in 
their arts alone, but in every phase of their thought and existence.** Of 
this unintelligible music I may give one example in the following tune called 
'' A Jt/-no-Jtan^''— the "Bells at Dawn." 



AKE-NO-KANE— (The Bells at Dawn). 




i^ 



Andante, 



s 



^^ 



|E^ 



^ 



l^=F 



f 



lA 



iP 



-c^ 



U: 



^m 



^^^^ 



V -J- 



m 



^=jLi=J^ 



± 



m 



I 



alznt 



i^i 



1^=^- 



:^B 



f=* 




iJI 



E3= 



an 



^ 



.M=f: 




y 



^ 




^ ' -J .. 



lA 



^ ' ^ 



^^^ 



l^^^i^^^ 



s 



'=f 



m 



iA 



W 



-€Jf 



^ 1- 



S 



^ 



^ 



**: 



I do not imagine that this little piece will find many admirers ; it is not 
indeed a fair example of the better qualities of the music, some at least of 
which will be found in the four examples given later — '^ Hitotsu-toyay' ''Salt a- 
Sakurai'' ^'Ma/suzu-kishi,'' and "^^ Kasuga-modi'' \ and with regard to these, and 



I 



46 THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE, 

« 

the many others which resemble them, among the popular songs, the point 
which seems to me of interest is that there is so much in them which not 
only is easily retained by Western memory, but which distinctly satisfies the 
canons of Western taste. Many are the little haunting melodies one hears 
tinkled in the street ; many a one even commends itself to the whistling 
Briton. Is not this indeed, as one has somewhere said, one of the tests 
of the true inwardness of music } This incomprehensible music must, 
however, not be confused with the more rigid and complicated forms 
of Koto composition, classical music as it may be aptly termed. This is^ 
no more to be called incomprehensible than the rigid and classical composi- 
tions of the West. It is distinctly of a high quality; it is based on an 
elaborate system of form to be presently examined ; but it requires close 
attention, some musical training, and at least intelligent understanding 
to appreciate it. Unfortunately, the circumstances under which we are 
accustomed to listen to this music are not too favourable to very close 
attention : it comes but as the interlude to a Japanese feast : occasionally 
something specially bright and sparkling divides attention with the other 
graces of the feast, and secures a meed of applause ; but this is all, the 
same piece is rarely heard a second time, and there is no intelligible 
score available at which the foreigner can refresh his memory. So the 
thing passes ; it has brightened a few moments of the evening, and has 
fulfilled the end for which it was created. But the science of its creation, 
the dexterous skill of its execution, pass unheeded, or, if noticed hastily, 
are as speedily forgotten. To the Western musician there is another 
serious impediment to the spontaneous appreciation of this Koto music in 
the absence of strongly marked and regular accent. It flows on the even 



THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 47 

tenour of its way, full of interpolated ** graces," full of quaint "accidentals^' full 
of curious rhythm, but the accent falls a little promiscuously, and our notion 
of regular time is apt to be not a little shocked. And yet, strange to say, 
it appears perhaps to be the strangest thing of all when one discovers it, 
the music is built upon a regular scheme of "two-four" time, and the 
necessity of keeping time is dinned into the pupils as remorselessly in 
the Japanese as in the Western schools. 

There are then classical compositions, as well as popular songs, in 
modern Koto music. The songs are not fettered by formal KotoMusu, 
rules, but there is a strong tendency to run to eight-bar phrases. The 
classical compositions are subject to the most rigid rules. They are divided 
into two classes: dan and kumu The d^n — "steps" — are progressive studies 
without singing, built on leading themes, increasing gradually in complexity. 
The number of the steps varies from five to nine : thus there are pieces 
named ^^ Gchdan'' '^ Roku-dafty' ^^ Skichi-daity' '^ Hachi-dan" ^' Ku-dan'' — the 
five, six, seven, eight, and nine "steps." Each dan is composed of fifty-four 
bars, two crotchets to the bar. The '^ KumV are songs with elaborate 
accompaniments, the parts corresponding with the verses of the poem ; 
they also are built on leading themes, giving the effect of "airs with 
variations." There are four verses at least, but generally a greater number. 
Each verse is divided into eight sections, and each section into eight bars; 
the length of the parts, sixty-four bars, is thus greater than the length 
of the dan. The bars are called hyoshi^ like the bars of the Chinese 
music, and, as I have said, though our ears do not catch it at once, 
except for an occasional rubato passage, time is kept rigidly throughout 
the performance. Directly, indeed, the original intimate connection between 



48 THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 

the two classes of music is realised, it becomes evident that, however the 
Japanese offspring may have wandered from the austere courses of its 
Chinese parent, it could never shake itself free of the rigid time principle 
which characterised its ancestor : a Void formlessness, which we are so apt 
to imagine the leading feature of Japanese music, was the very last thing 
which was likely to come over it. I reserve, until I have described the 
Drums, a fuller explanation of Chinese time. 

The story of the rise of this modern Koto music takes us back through 
some few centuries, to the time when angels and the higher powers were 
wont to visit the islands of Japan. 

Among the many things which stand out of the haze of time more or 
less distinctly there is one interesting point very much in doubt : Which of 
the many forms of the Chinese Kitij or Koto, came first to Japan, and the 
manner of its coming. The So-no-koto is the one now in use in the 
Bugaku orchestra ; but a more cumbersome instrument, the Hitsu-no-koto, 
is pointed to as the one which first came over the seas ; so delicate a matter 
can be decided only by the researches of Japanese experts. The current 
Story, given even by the sober-minded and accomplished Yamada Ryu in his 
** Short Outlines of the S5-no-koto and its Music," surrounds the coming 
of the instrument with clouds, and mountain-tops, and lovely ladies. 

There was in old time — more particularly, in the reign of the Emperor 
Temmu, 673 a.d. — a Court lady, the Lady Ishikawa Iroko, who, for her 

health's sake, had left the Imperial service for awhile to 

Origin of the Koto ' *^ 

""*"* reside in Kiushiu. Wandering one day on the slopes of 

the mountain Hikosan to gather flowers, her footsteps strayed — <)r a soft 
influence crept over her brain directing her footsteps — far into the recesses 



THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 49 

of the mountain. Strains of a strange unknown music floated through the 
air, and led her at length to their source, a glade, wherein sat sedately a 
Chinese musician playing on the So-no-koto. Him she at first imagined to 
be a deity, so unconscious was he of her presence, so sweet the sounds he 
drew from the vibrating strings. But presently, when the music ceased, he 
saw that she had come whom he had desired should come. Then he spoke 
to her, seeing that she should convey his soft message to the people, 
telling her all the secrets and the mystery of his art. And as the days 
went by her fingers began to stray over the strings, at first aimlessly, 
impelled only by a feminine curiosity, but afterwards, with more purpose, 
as they yielded to the master's guidance. And the weeks and the months 
went by, until her skill was perfected, and her store of learning was complete. 
Then she descended from the mountain, bearing with her the Koto of the 
spell. But when she sought again the place wherein all this wonder had 
been wrought, lo! the grove and its musician had vanished, and a cloud 
only rested where it had stood. Truly therefore the Lady Ishikawas first 
thought was the true one : the musician was a God indeed. 

Her descendants taught this music to many people, even down to the 
reign of Gotoba the Emperor, at the end of the twelfth century, when it 
was known as ^^ Tsukushi-gaku'' — " Kiushiu music.'' So potent was it that 
it flourished still among all classes down to the reign of Gonara the 
Emperor, in 1527 a. d. 

A difficulty occurs here which I have not been able to unravel. The date of the Lady Ishikawa*s 
visit to the mountain Hikosan roughly coincides with the date given by other historians of the 
advent of Chinese music and the construction of the Musical Bureau. The story of the 
mountain may therefore be the legendary form of the history of the coming of this music. 
Tsukushl-^akUy however, is mentioned as something quite distinct from the Sogaku and Bugaku 

H 



so THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE, 

music. Although all traces of it have beea lost, it seems probable that a» form of solo music 
for the S5-no-Koto did exist in China, and that it came over to Japan at about the same time 
as the orchestral and dance music. 

At this time the priests of Hizen were very accomplished musicians, 
and a short genealogy of priestly master and neophyte pupil brings us 
to the coming of the young priest Hosui, of the Zent5ji Temple in Chikugo, 

to Yedo, in the reign of the Emperor Gomizu-no-o, in 1612. 

Rise 0/ Yatsukeuki. 

He daily delighted audiences of rank and fashion, and the 
fame of his playing went abroad. It reached the ears of Yamazumi of 
Oshu, a blind Biwa player of repute, who had already received the 
degree of ** Koto.'' Eagerly the blind musician journeyed to the Eastern 
capital, and sat at Hosui s feet. The master became the young priests 
pupil, and when the stores of his learning were exhausted, went to 
Hizen to learn of Hosui's master, Genjo. Thence returning to Yedo 
a perfect Tsukushi-gaku musician, he received the second degree of 
" Kengyo/' and took the name Yatsuhashi ; and he afterwards became the 
father of the modern Japanese Koto music, and the inventor of the Japanese 
Koto. The Tsukushi-gaku is described as being **very high class and 
solemn." Yatsuhashi, though a profound admirer, yet thought that it might 
give place occasionally to something lighter and more melodious, and that 
he might obtain a wider audience among the people. He gave his thought 
shape in the kumi which he gradually elaborated. For subjects he went 
to the famous romances of the period, the *'/f^ MonogatarV and the 
'' Genji Monogatari^' composing thirteen pieces: *'one for each month and 
one over for leap-month," or **one for each string," according to the 
fancy. Within a very short time the grace of the new music appealed 



THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 51 

successfully to the popular taste, and many kumi were composed by Yatsu- 
hashi's pupils, who were then, by the rules of the profession, admitted to 
the honour of founding a house of musicians. 

In the meantime Hosui had become a layman, still teaching the Koto, 
under the name of Kashiwaya. His former pupil, Yatsuhashi, then an old 
man, became his master, and an intimate friendship sprang up between them, 
Hosui adding many kumi to their joint repertoire. The master attained 
to the highest proficiency, taking the third degree of " Soroku." He then 
elaborated a second series of compositions of a more severe kind, called at 
the time '' Shin-kyoku'' — the **new pieces": the datty to which reference has 
already been made. Yatsuhashi's chief pupils through several generations 
were Kitajima, Kurahashi, Mutsuhashi, Yasumura, Hisamura, Ishizaka, 
Ikuta, and Yamada Ryu the most famous of them, who set down in his 
book what he remembered of his master's teaching. They all received the 
degree of Kengyo. Yatsuhashi s energy was not exhausted by his composi- 
tions ; he turned his attention to making improvements in the Koto, 
insisting chiefly on the selection of hard kiri wood {Pawllonia Itnperialis) 
for the sounding-board, and on its being thoroughly seasoned. His earliest 
attempts he christened '' Akikiri Koto'' — the "Autumn-mist" Koto; and 
** Matsu-nami " — the " Murmuring of the Pines " Koto. From these 
afterwards developed the two forms of Koto now in use. The 
'^ Ikuia-kotOy' so called from the name of its originator, Ikuta, a pupil of 
the second generation from the master. Its sides and extremities are 
covered with much inlay and lacquer ornament ; but these are banished in 
the " Yamada-koto'' of Yamada Ryu. In this instrument the eye is gratified 
only by the beautiful graining of the natural wood, a thing delighted in by 



52 THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 

the purest Japanese taste ; only occasionally a little severe gold ornament 
being permitted along the sides. The Yamada-koto is used by all pro- 
fessionals, as it has a clearer and more resonant tone than the more 
delicately built Ikuta-koto, which, though prevalent in the west of Japan, is 
used in the east almost entirely by lady amateurs. Like the Kin, the Koto 
is fantastically supposed to be a dragon, symbolical of all that is noble and 
precious, lying on the sea-shore, holding such sweet converse with the 
waves that the angels come to sit and listen by his side. And so the 
Oriental, his mind full and fond of quaint conceits, has given many curious 
names to the parts of the instrument in accordance with this mythical idea. 
The upper surface is the dragon's back ; the under surface his belly. The 
upper part of the side is the sea-shore — o-iso ; the lower, ko-iso, the lesser 
shore. The oval of tortoise-shell at the right end of the upper surface is 
the sea — umi ; the long bridge at the right end, the dragon's horn — 
ryokiku; the long bridge at the left end, the horn of cloud, or the angel's 
seat — temmyo. The angular projection at the right end is the dragon's 
forked tongue — ryo no shita ; the other end, kashiwaba, his tail. The ' 
cavity at the right end of the under surface is the ** hidden moon" — 
ingetsu ; and that at the left end, marigata, the ** bowl-shaped place." 



Note on Japanese Musical Degrees. 

Special encouragement was offered to the blind to obtain proficiency in music, the house of 
Yoshida, of the Imperial Household, being empowered to confer on them ranks or degrees. The 
degrees were three ; Koto^ Kcngyd^ Soroku, about ten years elapsing between the grant of each. The 
claim for a degree had to be supported by a recommendation from those in the same profession 
that the candidate was worthy of the honour : as a mark of great honour and esteem the suggestion 
would often be made in the first place by the profession. A subscription was generally made 
among the pupils for the necessary expenses and the fees, which were loo yen, 200 yen, and 1000 



1 



THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 53 

yen, for the three degrees respectively. Then came the pilgrimage to Yedo, the ceremonial presen- 
tation of the candidate, the payment of the money, three or four months of somewhat unnecessary 
delay, a refusal of the degree being unheard of, and, lastly, the information that the degree had been 
conferred, and that the money had been paid into the Imperial Treasury. 

Blind " pin-prickers " shared with musicians in the three degrees just mentioned. The title of 
Shojo, or Daijo, was also conferred on musicians who were not blind, Shinto priests, high-class 
fortune-tellers, and cake makers ; the rank was equivalent to Third Governor, and was conferred in 
connection with the name of a town, much in the same way as English titles are granted. A title 
would run thus : Inouye Harima no Shojo — the Shojo Inouye of Harima ; Takemoto Chikugo no 
Daijo — the Daijo Takemoto of Chikugo. A ccn.iection between the person ennobled and the 
place of his title was not essential The whole business of conferring titles on professional men, 
except those who were recommended by the Shogun, was in the hands of the Yoshida family, a 
monopoly granted to them by the Emperor. 

Monopolies formed the chief source of income of many of the Court nobles till the system was 
abolished at the time of the Restoration. Thus the teaching of the So-no-koto was entirely in the 
hands of the house of Yotsu Tsuji : the teaching of the Biwa in that of Fushimi, a prince of the 
blood : singing in that of Jimyoin. All certificates of proficiency, without which no teacher could 
exercise his profession, were signed by the head of the house holding the monopoly, and in 
many cases he himself would conduct the examinations. Other monopolies not connected with 
the subject in hand were the right to grant to football players the distmction of wearing lilac 
strings to their hats, vested in the house of Sakai : and to ^Iconers lilac tassels for their falcons 
who had caught a crane. In the house of Takakura was vested the sole right of initiating 
into the mystery of Court dressing those who approached the Imperial presence. 



Although the Koto is the national instrument, the Samisen is the instru- 
ment of the people. It is played by ladies of high and low The s misen, 
degree, chiefly perhaps by those whose crest is the butterfly. A momentary 
pause in a peculiar thrumming, to which, with its accompaniment of weird 
nasal sounds, the ear soon gets accustomed in Japanese streets, tells you 
that the beggar is going her rounds and has received her dole — many doles 
make one penny ; a delicate tinkling in the air as you pass an open window 
tells you that the geisha is busy practising for her evening s entertainment — 
many practisings go to one five minutes entertainment. The Samisen figures 
everywhere and on every occasion ; it accompanies dancing, acting, singing, 



54 THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 

begging, eating, drinking, everything almost except praying, and that is the 
smallest of exceptions. The sound is curiously complex, a mixture between 
thrumming and tinkling — in '* Looking Glass" language, " thrinkling." The 
bachi, or plectrum, with its sharp pointed edges, strikes the strings with a 
downward and outward motion, but it meets the parchment face of the body 
first, making a drum sound before the string vibration is heard. When it 
forms part of the Chamber quartettes, in company with two Kotos and 
Kokyu, this drumming first attracts attention, the delicate twang of the 
strings seeming to come from some fifth and invisible instrument. It more 
often than not doubles the Kokyu part, but occasionally has more difficult 
passages written for it. 

The Samisen is supposed to have come to Japan, about 1560, from 
Liu Chiu, where it was used more as a children's toy than as a serious 
musical instrument. To this dignity it was advanced by the Biwa players, 
who found it a more portable instrument than their own, and was first used 
for accompanying the ^' y oruri-bu^hiy History has preserved to us the names 
of the earliest players — Nakanokoji and his pupil Torasawa, and later, in the 
Keicho era, 1596 a.d., Sawazumi, who was a master of the Ko-iita and other 
offshoots of the '' ^oruri Monogatari'' Sawazumi settled in Osaka; his two 
pupils, Kagaichi and Johid6, came ultimately to Yedo, where they created a 
great sensation with the new instrument — so great, indeed, that the chroniclers 
say that the second degree of Kengyo, with the names Yanagawa and 
Yamahashi, were " granted " to them. The remission of the customary fees 
due to the noble house of Yoshida, is, however, not recorded. Yamahashi 
Kengyo is regarded as the father of modern Samisen players : he gave the 
instrument the name Sin sen — " three strings," which was afterwards converted 



\'^- W £. 



THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE, 55 

into the three-character word Sa-mi-^en, or ** three tasteful strings." Another 
but rather doubtful theory is that the instrument existed in Japan in the 
fifteenth century, at the time of the Ashikaga dynasty. It is probable, 
however, that it was in use in China during the twelfth century, and 
thence travelled to Liu Chiu. The belly was originally covered with 
snake's skin, and it was strung with two strings only, the third being added 
by one Ishimura. 

The Kokyu^ the Japanese Fiddle, the last of the trio of Chamber 
instruments, came from Hindustan to China ; thence it th* Kokyn, 
travelled through Liu Chiu to Japan. It is described in the Encyclo- 
paedia as having been originally used by the southern barbarians to ward 
off the attacks of venomous reptiles on account of its mournful tone. 
Originally the bow was a miniature long archery bow, with one stout 
string ; it is now made of a loose bundle of horsehair, two feet and a half 
long. Unlike the fiddle of the West, the Kokyu fulfils no function of 
any importance with regard to Japanese music : it is used only to emphasise 
the melody or important phrases in the Chamber quartettes, and but seldom, 
if ever, as a solo instrument. Indeed, the position in which the instrument 
is played, and the cumbersome bow with its heavy swaying tassel, prevent 
the execution of any elaborate passages. The player, as in the case of 
all other instruments, sits on the floor, with the Kokyu resting on its metal 
spike in front of the left knee. This spike serves as a pivot, enabling 
the instrument to be turned in order that the outer strings may be pulled 
clean. It is not often that one hears it well played ; but in the hands of a 
professional the best instruments give forth a sweet and somewhat plaintive 
tone : all the notes on the doubled upper strings, though very delicate, are 



56 THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 

exceedingly, penetrating. It is curious to note that the loose bundle of 
horse-hair is as capable of making the sound float off the strings as the 
tight-strung Western bow, and without the slightest suspicion of scratching. 
It is, indeed, not the least remarkable example of the topsy-turviness of 
things in general out in the East. 

The capabilities of the instrument have, as I have said, never been 
realised, and the reason is not far to seek. In the first place, the teaching 
knows nothing whatever of ** positions ; " the fingering is learnt entirely by 
rote. The pupil sits facing the teacher, and must copy the motions of her 
hand and fingers. With so crude a method of teaching — its difficulties 
being recognised by a fee being charged which is double that for teaching 
the Koto — the playing must inevitably become untrue; added to which, it 
is often careless. But, in the second place, the diatonic scale is not known 
as such in Japanese music. Any instrument which is capable of producing 
the complete scale, of which only a selection of notes is used, is rather like 
a hand with two fingers paralysed : they get in the way, and so do the 
unfingered portions of the Kokyu strings. 

The illustration shows the trio of Chamber instruments. It is called in 
Japanese '' Sankyo-ku a was^ mono"— ''three instruments in harmony." It is 
generally heard at private parties, the instruments being often played by 
amateur ladies of high rank. At public entertainments a second Koto is 
usually added. 

One other instrument heard often enough — too often — I have not 

ya/anesi Singing, ventured to describe, nor shall I venture : the human voice. 

Words would fail me were I to attempt to do justice to its peculiarities. It 

is mere horrid sound, disfigured by excruciating quarter-tones. Nor have I 



THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 59 

ever found a Japanese express any admiration for it It is accepted and 
tolerated. But again there comes uppermost that perplexing query, how 
the curious mixture of sweet and unsweet sounds has been suffered to 
endure. Though there are many directions to the singer of Joruri — which 
I give in a note — to try and produce as sweet a sound as possible, not 
to sing coarsely, not to strain the voice, and not to make grotesque 
grimaces, to live soberly and temperately, for "bad conduct spoils both the 
character and the voice " ; yet " smooth and sweet '' singing never has any 
one heard in Japan. Therefore let the voice pass. Not so, however, the 
" quarter-tones." They are an integral part of the singing, and have to be 
produced correctly. Corresponding as they do with those produced on the 
Flute and Hichiriki, they are probably of Chinese origin. It has been 
supposed that they are real notes and form part of the scale ; but, the books, 
so far as I have been able to ascertain, throwing no light on the matter, 
I can hardly accept this hypothesis. Indeed, I doubt if they are real notes 
at all. It is convenient to use the term "quarter-tone," but more accurately 
it is a slur up to the note through the tones contained in a quarter-tone, 
without any emphasis on the first tone. The quarter-tone sound is used, 
but so are all the intervening sounds, as in a " slide " on a violin, and 
therefore, although, like the "slide," the slur has to be produced correctly 
and with a certain art, yet it seems impossible to treat the quarter-tones as 
forming one of the definite series of notes on which the music is built. 



6o THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 

Instructions for Samisen Players when performing Joruri, 

[From the work on music by Miyakoji Bongo, the inyentor of the Bungo-iushi.'X 

The performer should sit with his knees apart and in a straight line, the bookstand in front 
of him, and his head just level with the kendai — the bookstand, and neither bent down nor with 
his chin too much in the air. When seated he should take his fan out of his oUj and place it 
horizontally across the book, moving it as he turns the pages one after the other. He must 
not do an3rthing ugly, and therefore he should avoid too much motion ; he should not force his 
voice in singing, and should refrain from making grotesque grimaces. Thus only will he be able 
to sing smoothly and sweetly. This b called zashikUsadamh^ or the method for determining the 
position of the body. 

Next comes choshi'Sadamk^ or the determination of the tone of the voice, which must vary 
in loudness or softness according to the size of the room. Therefore when the musician enters 
the room he should at once take a mental measurement of it, and determine on this matter 
immediately. 

Next comes hyoshi-uchi, the rule of emphasis. The singer should mark the time with his 
fan {hydshi-dgt). He should avoid too much emphasis, but, thinking only of the circumstances of 
the song, let his mouth and heart work together and guide his hand. 

Next comes ishokusashiy the consideration of the rank. The singer should accommodate 
his voice to the character of the person about whom he sings, whether it be a hero, for example, 
or a woman. Thus, if he sings of a priest he should be priest-like ; or if of a woodcutter he 
should simulate his voice, and so forth. 

Next comes chdshi-amoi^ the consideration of the tuning. Now although our Samisen has only 
three strings, yet all the twelve sounds are there and to be played upon them. So the player 
ought to take deep consideration of all these twelve sounds.* 

Next comes onsei-tashimiy the preparation of the voice in the chest, by opening the lungs. 
Now every phrase may be sung in two breaths ; yet the singer must not avail himself of this 
rule and sing coarsely. He ought to try and produce as sweet a sound as possible, which can 
only be done by keeping the body in its proper position. So while singing he must not bow 
too much, but let the voice come from the chest No human voice has a sound higher than 
fusho. Therefore straining to produce higher sounds such as osho must be avoided. This is 
called uragoh — ^the production of bad sounds. 

Next comes kwaigo-no-ben, the consideration of opening and closing the mouth, so as to 
avoid a slovenly pronunciation of the words. 

Opening the mouth is the male principle ; it is equivalent to spring and summer : it is ryo. 
Shutting the mouth is the female principle; it is equivalent to autumn and winter: it is ritsu. 

Finally comes sekijo, the consideration of the audience. If in the songs which are to be sung 

7 

* The twelve sounds are the twelve Chinese riisu or semitones. This direction puzzles me somewhat ; it may 
refer to one of two things, either to the pitch, as to which there is no special direction if this does not refer to it : or to 
the tuning of the instrument, whether honchoshi^ niagari, or sansagari. It is quite possible, however, that it refers to 
both : that the singer is to be careful to select the right tuning for the music, lest it should miss any of its due effect by 
not getting the proper open notes ; and he must be careful, too, to pitch it so as not to strain his voice. 



THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 



6i 



any fax:t is mentioned which would be unpleasant for any of the audience to hear, it should be 
omitted or altered ; and if any name is referred to which corresponds with the name of any person 
present, it should be changed, so that anything that might appear to be a personal reference may 
be avoided. 

Finally, a singer should be temperate, drinking little, and of quiet sober conduct in his every- 
day life, for bad conduct spoils both the character and the voice. 



A Table for the Production of Sounds — Kwaigo-no-ben. 

The Chinese characters used for musical sounds were five in number: — 

kyu sko kaku chi or cho u 
but they are not simple sounds, and are more like syllables. Therefore the simpler kana sounds 
are used : — . a i u e o 

These are called go-sei, or go-in — the "five voices," — and these with different consonants pre- 
fixed are used for the formation of the voice according to the following table, the sounds of 
which are called the goju-in — ^the " fifty voices " : — 



a 


ka 


sa 


fa 


na 


m 

t 


ki 


ski 


chi 


ni 


u 


ku 


su. 


isu 


nu 


e 


ke 


se 


te 


ne 





ko 


so 


to 


no 


resonance 
in throat 


in back 
teeth 


in the 
teeth 


on 
the tongue 


on 
the tongue 



ha 



hi 



he 



ho 



M 

O4 

43 



ma 



mt 



mu 



me 



mo 



M 

o. 



ya 



yu 



yo 






ra 


wa 


ri 


• 

t 


ru 


u 


re 


e 


ro 





on 
tongue 


in 
throat. 


6 


the 



open mouth 
closed „ 



>» 



open 
closed 



» 



91 



» 



These fifty sounds are also called the sei-in^ or " clear voices " : then follow twenty more sounds 
called daku'in^ the " thick voices " : — 



g^ 
g^ 
go 



za 


da 


ba 


• m 


• • 


bi 


ZU 


dzu 


bu 


ze 


de 


be 


zo 


do 


bo 



and finally five more, called 
Jisei-in — the " second clear 
voices"; ox handaku-in — the 
"half-thick voices." 



pa 

pi 
pu 

po 



62 THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 

I fear that, from what I have said on the subject of the singing of the 
Japanese, there is but one conclusion : that the Japanese musician is not a 
very musical person. I am not sure that this is capable of disproof. And 
yet music is used to accompany almost every incident of daily life that is 
in the least out of the common. I do not think that it could ever so move 
this light-hearted people as music stirs the people of the West. There is 
no evidence that Japanese music has ever occupied so high a position. 
Scattered through all their " Myriad Leaves " there is but a verse now and 
again which is due to its influence. And, withal, there is a strangely 
romantic side to their nature which impels the utterance of tender nothings 
to tender flowers, which, when their petals fly off upon the wind, are 
nothings too ; which makes them think with a momentary sadness on the 
mutability of human affairs and the uncertain flowing of the currents of 
existence ; which makes them dwell the longer with appreciating glances and 
soft words of delight on some small speck of beauty hardly coming within 
the Western visual angle. And so their music has been fostered only to 
give an hour or half s delight, to make a maiden blush or gently smile, and 
**so to bid good-night." 

And I have to add one more to the many paradoxes which 
a study of the country's customs reveals. All the musicians have 
an acutely sensitive ear. The tuning of any stringed instrument needs some- 
thing more than mere practice: it demands the harmonic sense in great 
perfection. The Koto, with its thirteen moveable bridges, is probably the 
most difficult of all instruments under the sun, both to tune and to keep in 
tune. Yet the tuning is faultless, and during the playing the slightest flaw 
is detected immediately; the left hand, busy as it always is in producing 



Ttu Jap<intt€ 
Musicians. 



THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 



63 



the grace notes and accidentals which abound in all compositions of any 
degree of difficulty, still finds time to be perpetually correcting the minutest 
errors due to the inevitable slipping of the bridges. Yet the training is 
far from perfect : there is no general grounding in intervals such as the 
Western pupil must go through, only the special instruction in the actual 
intervals necessary to the tuning. Knowledge of the interval between two 
strings, and of its position in the sequence of intervals in the tuning, is 
acquired by constant practice. The process of tuning the 7th and 8th 
strings of Hirajoshi on the Koto would be indicated by the following 
diagram ; the 5th and 6th strings being supposed to be already tuned, the 
player proceeds thus : — 

7th String. 



i 



SS^SS! 



«i J «^' 



W 



ISL 



8th String. 



% 



^HpHf 



^hikHf^ ^ J ^^P 



In tuning the upper strings, the octave strings are always struck in the 
same way. But I think that neither the constant practice nor the re- 
iteration of any given interval is sufficient to account for the extreme 
accuracy which is noticeable on all sides, without the addition of the natural 
gift of the perfect musical ear. 

A child destined for the musical profession — which is composed chiefly 
of women and blind men — begins to learn the Koto when it is four 
years old, and continues hard at work to the age of fourteen, by which 
time all the elementary tunes have been learnt. In order to MutUai sdwathn, 
accomplish this result, when the child is eight years old, or thereabouts, 



64 THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE, 

every day and all day is devoted to the work. This ceaseless devotion 
to study of the grindstone order is characteristic of all the old Japanese 
professions, and has produced that extraordinary mechanical dexterity 
for which the nation is famous. **Ten hours a day for ten years" is 
the initial routine of drudgery both for the painter and the musician ; it 
brings the students to the threshold of their professions, furnished with an 
accuracy which is never afterwards shaken off: it has become their second 
nature. It has, indeed, done more : except in the case of genius of a 
high order it has crushed the first nature with its abundant gifts out of 
existence ; ninety out of every hundred artists and musicians, when the 
years of study have run their course, have become the merest mechanics. 
Means to achieve the required end are unknown ; the end itself is studied, 
and is achieved by continued repetitions. In music, scales and exercises, 
studies, and all the paraphernalia with which the pupil is armed in the 
West, do not exist. In painting, straight lines and curved lines, shaded 
cubes and spheres, the '* grounding" of drawing, are never learnt. Just as 
the strokes which make the head, the breast, and the wing of the flying 
bird are learnt from the master, as he learnt from his master, who had it 
from the master who first invented them, so the passages of a musical 
composition, with their phrasing and their graces, are learnt directly from 
the teacher as tradition has handed them down to him. And as the methods 
in music and art are exactly parallel, so also are the results. A new 
musical composition is as rare as a new subject among the old school of 
painters. Two new compositions in the course of a year is probably an 
over-estimate of the rate of production ; anything else that appears being 
nothing more than a pot-pourri of old and well-worn phrases. 



THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 65 

The course of instruction is divided into four stages ; at the end of each 
a diploma is granted. These diplomas were formerly only granted by 
teachers who had received one of the degrees — Koto, Kengyo, or SOroku; 
but latterly any of the male teachers have been allowed to grant them. The 
female teachers, who have largely increased in number since the Restoration, 
are not allowed to grant the diplomas. A school is visited once every three 
months by the teacher's former master, and the granting of diplomas rests 
with him. 

The diploma examination is a curiously interesting little ceremony. In 
a small room in a very small house a crowd of twenty or rtu Examination, 
thirty persons are assembled, pupils, parents, friends. The mistress sits before 
her Koto, and in front of her six or seven Kotos are ranged one behind the 
other, step-wise, so as to leave the "above-bridge" space of each instrument 
clear : and there sit demurely the little maid musicians. Behind them again 
the Samisen and the Kokyu pupils. At the upper end of the room sits the 
blind professor with his Koto ; in other nooks and corners the audience 
and the smaller pupils, who will presently play their little pieces separately. 
There is a pause in the days occupation — one of those intervals of busy 
silence which play so important a part in the life of a Japanese day. 
Presently the door slides back, and a late comer enters. Is there, indeed, 
room for her."* Yes, and to spare. She brings a tiny packet done up in 
paper, and tied with red and white string, which she hands to the school- 
mistress with a low bow. It is received with a lower bow and put away 
unopened in a mysterious cupboard. It is the fee for tuition ; something 
miserably small to make so much fuss about — one yen for a month ; or, 
may-be, she is going to receive her diploma, and this is the present-fee 

K 






66 THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 

therefor. Then with many bows and smiles she finds her place upon the 
floor. By-and-bye the silence is again broken ; the mistress says what tune 
is to be taken next. It is *'Roku-dan'* — the "tune in six parts" — which it 
is the ambition of all the little maids- to play perfectly. . The professor 
strikes the first string ; the pupils adjust the ivory ^sum^ on their fingers and 
begin to tune. The blind man listens, striking the note on his Koto 
occasionally to help — listens patiently, immovably, but with acute sensibility 
written on every line of his intelligent face, while the teacher points out the 
pupils who are still out of tune. At length the professor is satisfied. Then 
comes the second string, an easy falling fifth — from the dominant to the 
tonic, if my analysis of the scale should prove correct. All the pupils know { 

this interval well ; the professor tunes his last, verifying what they have done. 
And so from the second to the third, the third to the fourth, till a slow 
sweep over all of them tells that the thirteen are in perfect tune, and 
the blind listener is satisfied. Finally, with the privilege which their degrees 
permit, the professor and the mistress lower the first string an octave, a 
dignity which fills some of the listeners with awe, and with an ambition that by- 
and-bye they may be permitted to do likewise. Then all being thus patiently 
made ready, the piece begins; first in solemn cadences, gradually quickening 
through the six parts, the divisions indicated by a slight pause and a, /orie 
beat on the first and second strings, till it works up to a quick time. And 
through the parts the leading ideas are woven in the meshes of a hundred 
graces and quaintnesses, which the Western stave will not hold, in the ripple 
of beats on two strings, and sweeps, and iEolian slides, and " waves coming 
and going," with a skill worthy perhaps of a better cause and more perfect, 
fuller-toned instruments, but woven with a constructive skill of a high order : 



THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 67 

a skill which reveals a purpose distinctly followed to the end. At last the 
time slackens, gradually, as befits a close : a long sweep ending with a weird 
vibratory sharp long-suspended, — the Japanese cadence, — then the final note 
long dwelt on : heads are bent over the Kotos : the performance is over. 
The professor expresses satisfaction ; his attention has been almost painfully 
acute ; but he has no grave faults to find ; the teacher points out one or two 
places where greater accuracy is necessary, one or two pupils who need more 
practice. And then a little child of five, whose arms are hardly long enough 
to reach across the Koto, toddles out of the crowd, puts minute tsumi on her 
fingers, and, with the help of mother sitting beside her, goes through her 
little performance, and receives her little meed of praise and encouragement. 



A girl should be ready to receive her first diploma two years after she 
has passed the infantile stage and begun the regular course — that is to say, 
when she is about eleven or twelve. By that time she has learnt to tune 
her Koto, and to play accurately about a dozen pieces. Many do not go 
beyond this, but are content to become the ordinary musicians of the tea- 
houses; but for those who intend to become regular professionals, many and 
great difficulties lie beyond. 

On receiving the first diploma — omoU no yurushi, the ''front licence'' — 
five yen is paid to the teacher, together with a present of The Diplomas, 
seki-han — boiled rice mixed with a small red bean. A present of seki-han 
is also made to the fellow-pupils. The more wealthy pupils give a 
dinner instead of the rice and bean present. The course includes ^^ Hitotsu- 
toya'' — the counting song, or New Years song; '^ Saita SakuraV — the 
'*Song of the Blooming of the Cherry-trees," and a great number of easy 



68 THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE, 

pieces ; also a certain number of more complicated ones —kumi, such as 
*' Umega^*'—\\ie, "Song of the Plum-branch"; and ends with '' Rolu-dan'' 
During this first course, the fees paid for tuition are : for the Koto, one yen 
a month ; for the Kokyu or Samisen, by reason of the greater trouble in 
teaching and learning, two yen a month. These instruments, by the way, 
would obviously be much easier than the Koto, both for the teacher and 
the taught, if a better system of teaching were employed. 

The second course begins with " Kunto no uyi no kyoku " — the " Song 
of the Clouds"; and ends with '' Midari'' — "Confusion." The pupil learns 
the second principal tuning — Kumoi — the " Cloud-tuning," so named from the 
" Song of the Clouds," which is the first piece learnt in it ; and also the 
subordinate modulating tuning — Han-kumoi. At the end of the course, the 
second diploma is granted — naka no yurushiy the " intermediate licence," or 
ura no yurushi, the "rear licence." The payment to the teacher for this 
diploma is eight yen^ with the presents of rice and beans, or the dinner, 
as before. 

The rigidity of Japanese professional rules is well illustrated by the fact 
that it would be impossible for a foreigner to obtain any instruction in the 
pieces written in the kumoi tuning until he had been through the regular 
course, and was entitled to receive the first diploma. 

The third course begins with " Go-dan " — the " five-grade tune " — and 
ends with " Shuyen no kyoku " — the " Song of the Banquet." The third prin- 
cipal tuning — Iwato — is learnt, and also the subordinate modulating tuning 
— Gosagari-rokuagari. At the end of the course, the third diploma is 
granted — oku no yurushi — the " innermost licence " — the fee for which is 
fifteen yen, with the rice presents, or dinner, as before. When this 



THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 69 

diploma has been obtained, the first string of the Koto may be lowered an 
octave in all the tunings. 

In this fourth and last course pieces of great difficulty are studied, 
and the remainder of the subordinate tunings are learnt. It begins with 
'' Ogi no kyoku'' — the " Song of the Fan*' — and ends with '' Hiyen no 
kyoku'' — xkit "Song of the Flying Swallows." When this course is finished 
a fee of twenty yen is paid to the teacher for a sign-board, and permission 
to use the teacher's name. The pupil then becomes a professional, and is 
allowed to start a school on her own account. The use of the teacher s 
name corresponds to the ** grant of one character " among artists." 

A ceremony of a peculiarly Japanese character used to be performed 
when this dignity was reached by men. The new professor, with his fellow- 
pupils, his friends, and his master, journeyed to the island of Enoshima. 
The Koto was borne by the pupils in procession across the stretch of sand 
which connects the rock with the mainland, up the village steps and the 
steep mountain-path, then down by the other side to the sea-lapt rocks and 
caves. Therein, in the darkness, before the tiny shrine at its furthest end, 
the latest ornament to the profession played the melody named after the 
island ; and in the low reverences with which his former comrades greeted 
his performance he received the public recognition and approval of his 
admission. This ceremony was last performed by Mr. Yamato, only fifteen 
years ago. 

In the foregoing pages two points seem to be perpetually recurring — 
the executive skill of the musicians, and the existence of something in the 
music itself which shows the attentive listener that it is not void and 



\ 



70 THE MI/SIC OF THE JAPANESE. 

formless, but- is the product of a well-considered, though somewhat inex- 
Th€ Htrtditary tensivc and inexpansive, science. On the first I must still 

SkOlof 

iJuMMMidans. dwell for a space before I proceed to deal with the music 
and the instruments in greater detail. 

I have already introduced my little friends the Koto players at their work. 
Their industry is but the traditional industry of the whole race of Japanese 
musicians, and in the old days not merely traditional, but hereditary. In the 
city which surrounded the Palace, in the village which encircled the Temples, 
there was to be found not one Flute player, nor one Sho player, nor one Koto 
player, but whole families : of Flute players who had received the traditions of 
lipping and the mysteries of quarter-tones from their fathers, and who were 
already busy passing them on to their sons : of ShO players who, in like manner, 
were handing down the rules of the difficult fingering and the art of producing 
the gentle inhalations which alone can make the most delicate of instruments 
speak true : of Koto players who were training youthful ears, as their own 
had been trained, in the knowledge of fourths and fifths and octaves, youthful 
fingers to the production of sharps and graces. From father to son this 
traditional knowledge had been handed down ; from father to son the process 
would have continued far as human thought can stretch, if — if that had 
not happened which so abruptly changed the current of the nation's history, 
and twisted it into a channel where the waters must run swiftly, and in 
which the slow smooth progress of tradition was impossible. These present 
days are too new indeed for the influence of old Japan to have been entirely 
shaken off, the instincts of the traditions too deeply set to be quickly killed. 
And so we find in many cases that the dancers and musicians of to-day 
are the lineal descendants, the lineal inheritors of the traditions of some 



( 



THE MUSIC OP THE JAPANESE, 71 

far-distant ancestor, the inventor of a dance, the singer of a song that 
has not yet lost its power to please. The old Biwa player who made 
the " Phoenix-voiced one " discourse to us one summer evening as he sang 
of the hero who, armed cap^-pie, dashed with his charger into the sea to 
the rescue of his comrades, and was held by his foes too valiant to be slain, 
claimed a descent from one who had learnt from one who had learnt from 
another, and so for a series right up to Ichibotok6, himself of the tribe and 
lineage of the Heik6 clansmen. More than once in the preceding pages 
the name has been mentioned of one who, though his work may-be was not 
quite sublime, still has followers in his foot-tracks through the sands. This 
hereditary tradition of industry it is that has made the executive art of 
the Japanese, without hyperbole, the foremost in the world. If their music 
were as taking to Western ears as their art is to Western eyes, assuredly 
we should have heard something more of the executive skill of the musicians. 
Many who would perhaps admit the existence of this skill, are disposed 
to think it wasted because it is devoted to instruments unfamiliar to us, 
whose gentle notes are drowned in the echoes of our own gigantic 
orchestras. Wasted, too, even if its existence be admitted, because it is 
devoted to a music perhaps uncongenial to our taste, whose science is 
lost in the shadow of the wonderful mystery of the West. But poor though 
their music be, and thin the gentle twanging of their strings, this may be 
maintained against all contradicting — that the executive skill of their musicians 
is of the first order, and that in this respect, all other things being, alas! 
unequal, they may at least hold the candles of comparison by the side of 
their Western fellows ; and in their blindness, how great is this inequality ! 
Did tenor in the West ever sing to waterfalls night and morning 



72 THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 

through the freezing months of snow ? or Western player play through the 
dark dawns of mid-winter till the icicles hung from his Flute ; or through 
the fierce midday heats of summer till he was literally bathed in the sweat 
of his brow? Surely not. Yet this was but a small part of the drudgery of 
the Japanese Temple musician's early years. The Kan-geiko was the winter 
practice, when he rose at four during the thirty days of the Kan season — 
January 5th to February 6th — and worked for three hours without even 
the slender warmth of a hibachi to cheer him ; and the Gebuki was 
the summer practice, devised in Kyoto for the special training of flute- 
players — the word means literally ** summer-blowing" — lest their yielding 
to the heat should mar the grace of summer festivals. And all the year 
through, from morning to night, work ; three hours' lesson every day, and 
practice the rest for as many hours as the day would yield, with a public 
examination six times a month. 

From the age of ten to fifteen the lessons were confined to the reading 
of the Bugaku books, and mastering the difficulties of intonation. At fifteen 
the hereditary instrument was taken in hand, instruction being given either 
by the father himself, or by a member of the orchestra under the surveillance 
of the father. Visible progress was effected by the end of three years ; after 
five years the pupil took a place in the orchestra on the lesser occasions. 
After the age of twenty-one, when he had satisfied the local examiners, he 
was sent to Kyoto to receive the higher training for two years, in order to 
qualify for the final certificate of proficiency, which enabled him to take 
his position in the orchestras of the public Sogaku and the sacred Azuma- 
asobi. At Kyoto instruction was sought in the schools of the great 
monopolists, either in the Chinese Biwa, the Chinese Koto, or in singing. 



THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 73 

according to the student's fancy. Once in ten years only the pupils were 
excused this journey to Kyoto. By Imperial dispensation a musician was 
sent from Kyoto to the other Temples, to conduct the examinations and 
grant the final certificates. At the age of sixty a pension for long service 
was received, and the succession devolved on the son. The tradition of 
the profession was that if work was begun betimes, proficiency might be 
reached at thirty years of age, and extreme skill at forty : but by fifty 
the skill was passing away, and it was time to begin to think of moving 
off the stage and making room for others. 

The hereditary office of the Temple musicians at Kyoto is of very great 
antiquity ; at Nikko it was founded by lyemitsu, the third Tokugawa 
Shogun, where, in 161 7, he founded the Temple to the memory of his 
ancestor the first Shogun, lyeyasu. In the selection of his musicians from 
the Kyoto and other bands, he was assisted, as in all other things, by his 
chief adviser, the Abbot Tenkai, named after his death Jugen Daishi, 
the Temple to whose memory stands on the wooded summit of a hill over- 
looking his master's shrine. 

Twenty hereditary musicians were established on the new foundation. 
They were divided into three classes : the ** Nanto," those who had 
originally come from Nara, and whose duties were specially connected 
with the ancient Kagura ; the ** Kyoto," and the ** Tamoji," those who 
had come from Kyoto and Osaka respectively, and who were specially 
in charge of the Bugaku performances. Other music was shared by the 
three classes equally. 

Their pay was at the rate of thirty-five koku of rice annually, paid 
half in money and half in kind ; and fuchi, a daily allowance of rice for 

L 



74 THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 

five persons. Roughly estimated, this was about equivalent to 150 yen a 
year, at that time amply sufficient for a comfortable livelihood. 

Their chief duties consisted of: first, the occasional performances of 
the Hi kyoku — the "secret music" — in other words, music of the highest class, 
which was a sealed book to all who had not obtained the final certificate 
of proficiency; secondly, the performances of the Bugaku dances which 
were given on important celebrations ; thirdly, the " Azuma-asobi," a very 
sacred dance, the music of which is said to have been received from heaven 
by a descendant of Jimmu Tenno : it is now performed before the sacred 
emblems on the two great festivals at Nikko. To be included in the 
orchestra of the " Azuma-asobi " was the summit of the Temple musician s 
ambition ; thirteen only out of the twenty were specially selected, and received 
extra remuneration in kind, three hundred bags of rice being distributed 
among them : and lastly, the Sogaku, public performances of orchestral 
music only, which were held in the Temple on the first, fifteenth, and 
twenty-eighth of each month ; and also on the festivals of the Gosekku — the 
seventh of the first month, the third of the third month, the fifth, 
seventh, and ninth of the fifth, seventh, and ninth months respectively. 

If these duties were light the most rigid accuracy was expected in 
the performance of them, entailing constant practice during leisure hours. 
Recruits to the profession have now to acquire their art as they best 
can. The rigour of the old rules is relaxed, and the polished proficiency 
which it produced is no longer expected. Temple musicians have fallen on 
evil days : their number reduced, their gorgeous costumes faded, their hats 
of black lacquered paper or of quaintly-shaped gauze somewhat battered 
and the worse for wear and non-repair, the gold ornament on the heads of 



THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 75 

the Sh5s passing almost out of recognition : nothing but the long-lived 
Flutes and Hichirikis improving as the years pass by : themselves, not 
endowed with such perpetual life, withering old men, ekeing out a precarious 
livelihood, supplementing a pittance of about six yen a month by performing 
small services in the Temples and engaging ip other trades. 

Temple music never greatly appealed to the people ; an audience was 
always quite superfluous ; it was in great part an offering to the Gods who 
gave it, and was self-sustaining. But in these days, when ancient glories are 
left to fade, and there is no money to renew them, and little desire even to 
repair them, the spirit of the song has fled, the energies of the musicians 
have withered with their fingers ; they practise no longer, and their per- 
formances have become slovenly in the extreme. They themselves are full 
of apologies, something more in their case than the customary Japanese 
formula of politeness ; their shortcomings and mistakes must be forgiven, 
they are quite conscious of them : they cannot be helped, even though the 
honourable European who deigns to give them audience should, as he 
certainly will — this without trace of irony — detect them. 




PART II. 



THE JAPANESE SCALE 



< 



THE JAPANESE SCALE. 



SYNOPSIS. 

Current statements as to tlie nature of the scale — Meaning of the 
expression ^^ different scale'* — The scientific ratios — Chinese intervals — Tlie 
" bearings " of the scale — The fifth of China and of Pythagoras — " Tunings " 
and " scales " — The sequence of notes in the Japanese scale — The normal 
tuning — The gaps in tlte tuning — The two missing notes — Harmonizing 
Japanese music — The double pressures. 

Tunings of the Japanese Koto — Tunings of the Chinese Sd-no-koto^ and 
of the Bugaku'biwa. 

" Hiraj5shi" and its variations — " Ak^bono" — " Kumoi" a fid its varia- 
tions — ** Han-Kumoi " — " Iwato " — " San-sagari roku-agari " — Conclusions as 
to the structure of the tunings^ and as to the keys on which titey are based — 
Pentatonic character of the music — The key sequence ; prvuiple of the bridge 
changes — Transposition — The equal temperament system of the Japanese — 
" Saita-Sakurai " in three keys in string notation^ and on the stave, 

Tlie Chinese scale: ritsusen and ryosen; analysis of tlie tunings of 
tlie So'UO'koto, 

Pitch — Time — Harmony — Form: tlie Dan and Kumi of Yatsuhaslii ; 
analysis of "Umegae"/ analysis of "Rokudan"/ analysis of **Matsuzu- 
kichi " and " Kasuga-mode." 

General coficlusions : the relation of Japanese to Chinese music — The 
modern music of Japan : general characteristics of the music : its intervals 
and phrases : its structure. 

"Hitotsu-toya" harmonized — " Saita-Sakurai " harmonized. 



1 APPROACH the difficult question of the Japanese scale, or rather the 
expression of the basis of Japanese music in terms of the Western 
art, with much diffidence, for two reasons. First, because very positive 
statements as to the nature of the scale have already been advanced which 



•» 



8o THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 

I think need criticism : and secondly, because it is impossible to deal with 
a question which is so fundamental in its nature without appearing to 
dogmatize : and, although the conclusions at which I have arrived are the 
result of as much research and examination as I was capable of conducting, 
I would avoid as far as possible all semblance of dogmatic utterance. The 
assertion that the Eastern scale so far resembles the Western, that for 
all practical purposes they may be treated as identical is, I think, 
sufficiently startling ; it could not be advanced otherwise than as my 
own belief: it must be for others more deeply versed in the science of 
music to determine whether the grounds of that belief are sufficient to 
warrant it. 

The first of the statements alluded to is very authoritative. ** Like the 
scale of mediaeval Europe it has for its chief peculiarity a semitone above 
the tonic." This statement seems to be based on the opinion of a Japanese 
expert, Mr. Izawa, which is discussed in the following paragraph. But 
beyond this, I can find no authority to support the view. If we apply the 
ordinary meaning to the terms used, it means that the scale of Japan is not 
five-toned ; but that there is a diatonic scale, in which the semitones, instead 
of occurring as they do in the diatonic scale of the West, between the 3rd 
and 4th, and 7th and 8th, fall between the tonic and the 2nd, and the 7th 
and 8th. Assuming the first and fifth strings of the Koto, which are 
tuned in unison, to be C^, the sixth string will be D, in the normal tuning 
Hirajoshi. I suppose therefore that Cj is intended to be the tonic, and 
we should get the diatonic scale of Japan composed in the following way: — 

Cjf. D. E, F#. G| A#, B| Q% 

This is the scale of CJ minor with a flat second. Any other note taken as 
the tonic gives notes which do not exist in the normal tuning of the Koto ; 
and even this arrangement gives the fourth Koto string as A^ instead 
of A. And then there are the two notes E and B^, which are not given 
by the open strings, to be accounted for. 

The second statement is to be found in Mr. Izawa's Report on Music 
published in 1883. ** In the tuning called Hirajoshi^ the ist and 5th string, 
being in unison, are taken as the Tonic ; the 2nd string is tuned as the 
Fifth, the 3rd as the Fourth, the 4th as the Third below the tonic, and 
the 6th string is the Fourth above the tone last obtained, or minor Second 



THE JAPANESE SCALE. 8i 

from the tonic • ♦ ♦. But if we assume the 2nd string to be the tonic, 
then the relations of the several tones will stand in the following order^ 
which is essentially the same as the natural minor scale." 
The order of notes referred to is: — 

In his second assumption, therefore, Mr. Izawa would seem to indicate 
the possibility of a similarity between the scales of the East and the West. 
But his Report does not follow up the assumption, nor does he examine 
into the reason for the large gaps between A and CjJ, and between D and 
F|. The weight of his authority is, as I take it, in favour of taking O^ 
(the first and fifth strings) as a tonic ; but whether of a pentatonic, or of a 
diatonic scale, I am somewhat in doubt. 

Then there is the broad general statement that the Japanese scale 
differs from the European scale, which has passed into a conversational 
formula. Its currency has relegated Japanese music to the limbo where all 
is chaotic : has helped to stamp it as a concourse of weird sounds, and 
therefore not worth a moment's consideration. 

Before examining the structure of the scale, it is necessary to determine 
what the expression ** different scale" really means. This much, I think, 
may be taken for granted, that the fact that the same notes recur, though 
at a different pitch, as sound gradually rises, is instinctively and universally 
recognized. It seems also to have been known universally and at all times» 
that half the length of any sound-producing body, whether string, pipe, or 
wooden tablet, produces the same note in a higher range, the ** octave" as 
we call it in the West. The octave, with the intervening notes, is obviously 
therefore the basis of all scales, and the variation in scale will depend on 
the variation of the intervening notes. Now, if the sound-distance between 
the lower and higher notes of the octave be divided in one system of music 
into twelve equal parts, and in another system into thirteen, it is obvious 
that we have two different sets of notes, two different chromatic scales, and 
consequently the diatonic scales of the two systems will differ radically. 
Campanology gives us examples of such different scales, and I believe 
the octave in the Arab scale is divided into twenty-six notes. If, 
however, two systems divide the octave into the same number of notes, 
and if the sound divisions are equal, then the notes of the two systems 

M 



I 
I 



82 THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 

are identical, and their chromatic scales are identical. The diatonic scales 
may, however, vary. 

This, I know, is most unscientific. The chromatic scale did not precede 
in construction the diatonic scale, but followed it. The octave in the West 
is not divided into twelve intervals whose ratios are identical. In the 
Pythagorean scale the ratios of two semitones (^-|^) multiplied together give 
more than the ratio of the full tone (§) ; and conversely the square root of 
the ratio of the full tone gives less than the ratio of the semitone. In the 
diatonic scale there are both major tones {%) and minor tones (^^), and the 
semitones used between the third and fourth, and seventh and eighth {\^), 
are larger than the Pythagorean semitone by a ** comma*' (|J). And even 
those who do not much care for ratios and complicated calculations, will 
not fail to remember from the earliest years of their musical instruction that 
the ** black notes" on the Piano do double duty for sharps and flats; that 
Afl and B^, for example, are both represented by the same note which 
scientifically is neither: mathematically, because the result of multiplying the 
ratio of the preceding interval by the ratio of the semitone is not identical 
with the result of dividing the ratio of the succeeding interval by that 
semitone ratio. 

I introduce this parenthesis to put myself right with science. The point 
I wish to emphasize is that for practical purposes these slight differences 
are disregarded. For the question of disregarding small differences is im- 
portant, because the question now before us is the comparison of Japanese 
and Western music from a practical rather than from a scientific point 
of view. Seeing that the basis of European music is neither the scale 
of Pythagoras nor the scientific diatonic scale, but the eminently practical 
equal temperament scale of the Piano, the question is whether the ratios of 
the intervals of the Japanese scale are sufficiently near to the ratios of 
intervals in the diatonic scale in use in the West to enable us to disregard 
the differences : whether it is possible to put Japanese music on to the 
Western staff", and play it on that most scientifically inaccurate instrument, 
the Piano, without altering its character very perceptibly. Reverting to cam- 
panology for a moment to illustrate my meaning, it is common knowledge 
that it is often quite impossible to put the music of a peal of bells on to the 
Piano. Is it the same with Japanese music .'^ 

My own experience is that practically these differences may be dis- 



t 



THE JAPANESE SCALE. 83 

regarded, but the idea has been much criticized since I ventured to express 
it before the Asiatic Society of Japan in 1891. This criticism has, I think, 
rendered necessary a certain amount of rudimentary . explanation. 

I think that I may now safely revert to my original heresy of the 
equal intervals, and to the convenient idea of treating the diatonic scale as 
a sequence of notes selected from the chromatic scale. 

Speaking then very broadly, the Chinese scale, from which the Japanese 
has descended, is made by dividing the octave into. twelve equal inter\^als, 
and so also is the Western scale. These intervals are called in Chinese, 
riisu. Prima facie, therefore, they correspond to the Western semitones. 

The origin of the twelve Chinese ritsu is given, mythologically, thus : " When in the year 
1000 B.C, Wantai, Emperor of China, established music, he found out the composition of sound 
in the following way. His servant Leyling, who was a natural musician, went one day into a 
deep glen and cut some bamboo into twelve lengths. He did this because the number 12 
governs all human affairs: thus there are 12 months, 12 signs, and so forth. On blowing through 
these pieces of bamboo he found that some had strong sounds like heavenly thunder, and some 
were gentle and of a wavelike murmuring, and some were metallic, others wooden, and others 
earthy. Then he named them, Ichiotsu^ Dankin^ Hydj'dy Shozetu^ Kamu^ SdjB, Fushd, Osho, 
Ranshdy Banshikiy Shinsen, /omuJ* 

A series of bamboo Pitch-pipes is used for determining the sound of 
the twelve Chinese semitones, but they are scientifically obtained on the 
thirteen strings of the Koto from the three fundamental intervals of the 
fourth, the fifth, and the falling fourth : or, taking the thirteen strings of the 
Koto to represent an octave of semitones, the interval of the fourth will be 
represented by an interval of six strings, and that of the fifth, by one of 
eight strings, the first and last strings inclusive. The Japanese terms for 
these intervals are : — jun-rokuy ** the upward six " ; jun-pachi, ** the upward 
eight " ; gyaku-roku, " the downward six." The addition of the two semitones, 
or the intervals between three strings, to jun-rokuy which makes jun-pachi, 
and subtraction of them from jun-packi to arrive at gyaku-roku, is called in 
both cases san-bun son-yeki. 

The ** bearings'' of the scale are obtained by tuning the ist and the 
6th strings to a fourth, the ist and the 8th to a fifth, the 8th and the 3rd 
to a falling fourth : and then the remainder of the notes come by using the 
fifth and the falling fourth alternately in the following way: — 



K 



84 



THE MUSIC CF THE JAPANESE. 



1st to 6th 


. fourth 


1st , 


, 8th 


. fifth 


8th , 


, 3rd 


. falling fourth 


3rd , 


, loth 


. fifth 


loth , 


, .5th 


. falling fourth 


5th , 


, 1 2th 


. fifth 


1 2th , 


, 7th 


. falling fourth 


7th , 


, 2nd 


. falling fourth 


2nd , 


, 9th 


. fifth 


9th , 


, 4th 


. falling fourth 


4th , 


, nth 


. fifth 


nth , 


, 6th 


. falling fourth 


6th , 


, 13th 


. fifth ^"•'"'^ 


ist , 


, 13th 


. octave 



jun-roku — C 
' jun-pachi — C 

■ gyaku-roku — G 
Jun-pachi — D 

'gyaku-roku — A 

jun-pachi — E 

gyaku-roku — B 

'gyaku-roku — FjJ 

'jun-pachi — CjJ 

■ gyaku-roku — G j| 
jun-pachi — DjJ 

■gyaku-roku — A J 
-jun-pachi — F 
— C 



to 



y* 



>» 



»♦ 



>> 



>» 



M 



>» 



»> 



M 



>» 



»l 



y% 



)i 



F. 
G. 
D. 
A. 
E. 
B. 

gJ 

Al 

F. (E|.) 
c. 
c. 



Here we arrive at a most important stage of our inquir}^ We find in 
the Japanese scale, first, an octave divided into twelve semitones ; secondly, 
the relation of these semitones determined on a principle which is the same 
as the familiar principle of the "bearings" of the Western tuner. 

There seems, further, to be no doubt that this system has not been 
borrowed from the West, as might be supposed, but has always existed. In 
the description of the Koto, it has been suggested that the reason why 
thirteen was finally determined on as the number of its strings, was to enable 
all the thirteen notes to be produced on the open strings of one in- 
strument when they were required. And as a means of testing the tuning 
of an instrument, a second Koto is often set with its strings tuned to the 
chromatic scale on this system. 

I have so far assumed, for the sake of convenience, that the Eastern 
intervals y«»-r(?^ ^xA jun-pachi are identical with the Western "fourth" and 
"fifth." This identity must now be tested. We have very precise evidence 
as to how the fifth was obtained. It was given by a string two- thirds of 
the length of the string from which the fifth was to be taken ; and this, it 
need hardly be said, is the string-length which gives the perfect fifth of 
Pythagoras, and of the diatonic scale. The books, so far as I am aware, 
do not give the string-length of jun-roku ; but with jun-pachi established, 
the task of comparison is simple. 



THE JAPANESE SCALE. 85 

The falling fourth is obviously used as the fifth inverted, giving the 
octave lower than a note actually given by taking the fifth from the last 
note, in order to bring the required note within the compass of the octave. 
Instead, therefore, of ** falling fourths,*' in the above table, we may substitute 
fifths, and we get the complete series of thirteen notes by a continuous 
succession of intervals, each represented by a ratio of f, the string-length 
of each note being two-thirds of the length of that of the preceding note : 
that is to say, the thirteen notes of the Chinese chromatic scale were 
obtained in precisely the same way as the thirteen notes of Pythagoras 
may be obtained-r-by a succession of perfect fifths. The reduction of the 
^notes into the octave compass leaves an untrue falling fourth between the 
eleventh and sixth strings, the sixth string being already tuned. We may, 
therefore, use the Western nomenclature to signify the notes of the Chinese 
scale, as they are used for the Pythagorean scale. 

The "different scale" of Japan, then, if it exists, exists because different 
notes have been selected from those which have been selected in Europe 
to form its diatonic scale. From the same chromatic scale it is possible 
to construct many different diatonic scales. In Western music there are 
three in common use ; the major, the ascending minor, and the descending 
minor. 

There is, however, one more previous question to be determined : 
what is the meaning of the word ** scale"? It is a natural and continuous 
sequence of sounds. Continuity, or the absence of breaks, is essential. The 
chromatic scale is such a sequence. But the ear accepts the tone as a unit 
of natural progression just as much as the semitone ; that is to say, it does 
not feel the omission of the intermediate note. But with a larger interval \ 
than a full tone it is at once conscious of an omission. A sequence that 
has any larger interval than a full tone is not natural, and does not satisfy 
the condition which the definition of ** scale " implies ; but any sequence 
which is composed of tones and semitones does. If this were not so, not 
only the six notes of the Koto should be called a scale, but also the three 
notes of the Samisen, the three notes of the Kokyu, the four notes of 
the Biwa, would be the scales of those instruments respectively ; this is 
obviously a misuse of the word. These are tunings, not scales. 

As it is important to keep the idea of the scale perfectly distinct from the "tuning" of 
the strings of an instrument, so also is it important not to confuse the notes of the scale with 



86 THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 

the prevalent intervals which are frequently noticeable in national music. For example, the 
augmented second is a prevalent and characteristic interval in Hungarian music. But the 
inference that the augmented second forms part of the Hungarian scale is not necessarily 
warranted. 

Let us now see what the sequence of notes is on which modern 
Japanese music is based. Now one thing at least is certain ; whatever the 
scale may be it must contain all the notes which are to be found on the 
open strings of the normal tuning of the Koto. It may contain more, but it 
must contain these. The mediaeval European scale, alluded to above, is 
therefore put out of the field at once because it has A$ in its composition 
instead of the Aj] of the Koto. The question then arises, does this normal 
tuning of the Koto, to which we must confine ourselves for the present, 
express the full scale of Japanese music .^ The notes are five in number, 
and taking the pitch of the second string to be represented by Fj^ on the 
Piano, these notes are Cj, F^ G^, A, D. Now there is no reason, on the 
face of it, why the Koto strings should not, like those of the Violin, be tuned 
to selected convenient notes of the scale. The height of the bridges does 
not admit of the strings being raised by pressure more than a full tone, but 
the gaps are not sufficiently great to need more than this to fill them in ; 
assuming, of course, that there are some notes to fill in. 

But even supposing that the gaps are not filled in in this way, are we 
to assume that because these two notes are not used, therefore they do not 
exist in the scale : that the scale is limited to the notes of Hirajoshi, and 
that it is consequently what is called a five-tone scale? I see absolutely no 
reason for it. We have only to turn to the Yamato Koto to have this idea 
at once dispelled. Its six strings are tuned to the major triad of the tonic 
and the minor triad of the second of the Western diatonic scale : that is to 
say, the seventh of the scale only is omitted. Reverting, however, to the 
modern Koto, if the gaps which exist in its tuning exist also in the scale, 
the music which is built on such a pentatonic scale must refuse to recognize 
the existence of any notes to fill them in ; it must refuse them, that is to 
say, in its science : the musician must not feel the want of them, nor be 
conscious of their existence : and further, if they are introduced, the trained 
musician will feel not only that they are out of place, but that if they are 
used in harmonizing his national music its character will be gone. 

Let us assume that the existence of two notes in these two gaps is 



THE JAPANESE SCALE. 87 

probable, the question arises, what are these notes? It is legitimate now 
to refer to the diatonic scale of the West for a suggestion, but only on 
one hypothesis, which is important : it is, that the five Koto notes are to be 
found in our diatonic scale sequence. Now the notes F^, Gl, A, C^, D, 
will be seen to form part of the scale of A major, or of F^ minor 
descending. I assume, as before, the pitch to be FJ for convenience of 
argument : but even without definite names to the notes, we get, starting 
from the second string, the following order of intervals : — 

2nd string to 3rd string 
3rd „ to 4th 
4th „ to 5 th 



5 th „ to 6th 
6th ,, to 7th 
2nd „ to 7th 



full tone 
half tone 
major third 
half tone 
major third 
octave 



The use of the terms ** tones " and " thirds " is, I think, justified, since 
the fundamental basis of the perfect fifth has been established. 

Now if we divide each major third into the two full tones of which it 
is composed we get the following result : — 

2nd string to 3rd string . full tone 

3rd ,, to 4th ,, . half tone 

4th „ to 5th „ . full tone^ . ... 

- „ h major third 

full tone J ^ 

5 th „ to 6th „ . half tone 

6th „ to 7th „ • full tone^ . 1 • t 

^ „ V major third 

full tone/ ^ 

2nd „ to 7th „ . octave 

This sequence of intervals is the sequence of the descending minor 
diatonic scale of the West. 

The suggestion is inevitable that between the fourth and fifth strings 
of the Koto normal tuning there is a note in the Japanese scale which is a 
full tone from both ; and that there is a similar note between the sixth and 
seventh strings. Taking the pitch as before, these notes would be B and 
E : and, if they are legitimate, we get the perfect Western scale. 



88 THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 

Now I have a certain amount of evidence to show that these two notes 
are legitimate, and may conveniently, though not accurately, be called the 
** missing notes" of the modern national music. This evidence is of two 
kinds : the statements of a Koto teacher of the old school who knows 
nothing of any other music ; and those of Mr. Yamas6 Shoin, a pro- 
fessional of the highest rank, who has, however, come under the influence 
of Western music. 

After many conversations with my teacher, and after seeking the infor- 
mation in many various and devious ways to avoid error or even doubt, 
she told me that she felt, and always had felt, that there was a note 
between the fourth and fifth strings, and one between the sixth and seventh. 
What these notes were she did not know, nor had she any means of finding 
out; for above all things it is important to remember that a "scale," as 
such, had no meaning to her. It is important, too, to explain that a 
Japanese is not taught music in the broad sense of the term : she learns 
only the music of her special instrument." 

I then took the Kokyu, and avoiding everything in the shape of a 
leading question, I played A, A:f|, B, C, Cj, several times, both in and out 
of order. She selected B as the note between A and CJ ; and in the same 
way she selected E to come in between D and FJ. The full scale of 
A major as I then played it to her satisfied her completely ; more than 
this, she picked it up rapidly, and played it with evident pleasure. Avoiding 
the intricacies of our minor scale, I told her to begin on Fj^, and substitute 
Ail for Ai|, and sp on ; we then had the scale of FjJ major, and pleasure 
still more evident. Finally we went to the Piano, and when I had told 
her about the black notes and the white notes, she proceeded to fumble 
out the diatonic scale for herself on any note I chose to start her on. 
Our lessons thenceforward invariably terminated with a little scale-playing 
by the old lady on the Piano. 

It was possible, however, to go a step further. If the scale is what I 
assume it to be, if these are really "missing notes," yet another test must 
be satisfied. If a melody should be harmonized it must not lose its 
character. With such tunes as I have harmonized — two examples of which 
are given at the end of this Part — I have not found the character altered 
in any way : and what is more to the point the many Japanese to whom 
I have played them have agreed with me in this opinion. Obviously here 



THE JAPANESE SCALE. 



89 



I could appeal to a larger body of witnesses. On account of the presence 
of, to US| awkward and unaccustomed intervalsi I find much of the advanced 
music very difficult to harmonize satisfactorily. But this, as musicians will 
recognize, is beside the present question. 

Yet another matter has to be mentioned as pointing in the same 
direction. My teacher told me more than once that the second string is 
the "fundamental" note, and that it is regarded as such when they tune 
down to it, as from the dominanti from the first string. The difficulties 
attending accurate interpretation, caused not only by the language but by the 
absence of sufficient musical knowledge in the teacher herself, made it difficult 
for her to explain exactly what she meant by "fundamental," but it was 
evident to my mind that she had some idea in her head as of a key-note. 

The next point has, I think, great value. It will be observed in the 
scheme of strings and notes, given below, that the scale of A major 
lies between the fourth and the ninth strings. But as the minor pre- 
dominates in Japanese music, the relative minor, Fjj^ lying between the 
second and the seventh strings, seems to be indicated as the prevailing 
scale. This is confirmed in a remarkable way by the popular New Year's 
Song — ^^ Hitotsu-toya'' — which not only permits the full scale of Fj minor to 
be used in harmonizing it— including the use of the sharp seventh, Ej]!, of 
the ascending scale — but in its variations recognizes the essential difference 
between the minor and the major; this points to the existence of a funda- 
mental idea of scale and key corresponding to the fundamental idea of 
Western music. 



I St string . 


C^ in unison with 5th. 


2nd „ 


. f5; 


3rd „ 


. Gj: 


4th „ 


. A 


"missing note" 


. B 


5th string . 


. c# 


6th „ 


. D 


"missing note" 


. E 


7th string . 


• fj' 


8th „ 


. %% 


9th „ 


. a 



and so on. 



K 



90 THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 

Mr. Yamas6 has supplemented my own observations in the following 
manner: my only reason for not putting his views first is that I cannot 
quite decide whether they have not been to some slight extent tinged by 
his studies of European music. 

He says that the second string, F^ has always been considered as the 
fundamental note in the tuning, not only of Hirajoski, but of all the others ; 
Fjl and the Cj of the first string being constant throughout As to the 
missing notes, he says that certainly the existence of some others has 
always been known, because the Koto tunings were founded on the Chinese 
chromatic scale, and also because they could be produced on the Kokyu. 
And, further, that B and E are distinctly pointed to as the missing notes 
of the scale, because in tunes written in Hirajoshi, the ** double pressure" 
\niju o>hi), when it does occur in the classical music, invariably occurs on 
the 4th string — A — giving B : and on the 6th — D — giving E ; and also on 
their octave strings respectively, the ninth and the eleventh. 

Notes of the Hirajdshi tuning, with the two notes used in the Classical Music. 

==^r-»-|g— 



^^^ 



22: 




It does not appear, however, that the use of these notes is frequent : 
in the examples of elementary classical music which I have given — 
^'Umegae'' and ^' Rokudan'' — neither B nor E occurs once. These notes are 
found, however, more frequently in the more advanced music. 

We now come to the other tunings of the Koto, which are set out in 
the diagram on page 92. 

No. I is Hirajdshi, No. 2 shows the first string lowered an octave, 
as used by the professionals. No. 3 is a variation of Hirajdshi ^ the last 
three strings being changed from D;j^, F, G|, to Fj, G|, Cjl, the loth and 
kin strings giving an octave : . hence this variation is called Kin-jU, In 
No. 4 we have another variation of Hirajdshi, all the strings being raised 
a fifth, thus giving three additional notes above the normal kin string, 
A, CJ, DJ. It is not very clear why this upper D is sharpened. It is 
probably introduced either for the sake of brilliancy, or for the sake of 
the extra semitone, the 12th string sharpened giving D!|| when wanted. 
This tuning, as it gives a higher range of notes, enables pieces to be 



THE JAPANESE SCALE. 91 

played an octave higher ; when two Kotos are used together one of them 
is usually tuned to it, the performers playing in octaves. In the upper 
part, which is taken by the leader, innumerable graces and complicated 
little variations are introduced on to the melody, much in the manner of 
the Treble part of duets on the Piano, which add considerably to the 
charm of the performance. 

In No. 5 we come to the first new arrangement of the strings. It is 
called AkSbono, and springs directly out of Hirajoshi ; differing only in the 
sharpening of the 6th and nth strings, aijd introducing E on the 7th and 
1 2th, instead of Fjj;. If anything were wanting to complete the proof that 
the five notes of the Koto do not by themselves constitute the Japanese 
scale, it is supplied by this tuning, which has six notes : the five notes of 
the normal appear in it, together with the missing E. 

The notes belong to the scale of E major, giving it with the omission 
of one note only, B, which can be produced by the double pressure on the 
4th and 9th, in the same way as B is supplied in Hirajoshi. It seems, 
however, that the tuning is not used in this way, though it has an important 
position in the scheme of keys. The most frequent pressed notes are simple 
pressures on the 4th, 7th, and 9th, giving Aj and E| ; and, in consequence, 
the scale of F^ major. This is in accordance with the Japanese idea which 
connects Akibono with Hirajoshi. 

No. 6 is Kumoi, the " cloud " tuning, which, next to the normal tuning, 
is in most frequent use, and is ranked by the Japanese as the second 
principal tuning. It is so named because the first tune learnt in the tuning 
is '' Kumo-no-ye'' — the ** Song of the Clouds." The 3rd and 4th strings 
are G and B, instead of Gj and A, in the normal; the 8th, 9th, and 13th 
being tuned to the octaves respectively. These changes give a different 
character to the music, suggesting the introduction of a fresh key ; and 
analysis bears out this suggestion in rather a curious manner. The five 
notes, D, Fj, G, B, Cj, form part of the Western scale of D major, or 
B minor descending ; and applying the same process of reasoning that was 
adopted in the case of Hirajoshi, the missing notes are E and A. We do, 
in fact, get a fresh key. But perhaps the most interesting feature of this 
new key is that, in what I may call the Koto expression of it, the same two 
notes are omitted, the fourth and the seventh. This enables Koto music to 



( 92 ) 

TUNINGS OF THE JAPANESE KOTO. 



L HISAJOflHI. 



Strings:— I s 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 to it (/») ta(/) ti(iM) 



i 



8. 



If 



m 



8. 



{JUtt/gU 



$ 



C „ \yniud ajijik\ 



t. Asbovo. 



m 



m 



6. KUMLOL 



i 



7. SASnSA. 



i 



8. EAV-KVKOL 



i 



CHISAJ08HL 



0. IWATO. 



i 



10. OO-8AGAEI BOKV-AOABI 



Tks ikrte pri$tciptU tunSngt art 



^* 



etc. 



I I I .,.- 1- ,^- ^ ^ 




rn^ 



[For those who have received the third grade diploma : the first string is lowered an 
octave in Hin,j6tki and all other tunings.] 



:fa 



•XSL 



fsr 



*=C 



*=: 



4B 



4= 



zs: 



:]b: 



[BUM 01 



[pn doi . 



*= 



*s- 



za: 



il^ 



r ] 



^ 



: ] 



*SL 



.^SL 



i 



-fa 



e 



SPECIAL TUNINGS. 



i 



U. XDBAXA-naHL 



i 



Afterwards changing to HIBA108HI by lowering the 6th and nth strings a semitone. 



tar 



12. BIEAJ08EL 



With the 4th and 9th strings raised a semitone, and afterwards lowered to the normal. 



^ ^i_i_i I =T^3|ii;q^^q^i 



j g I f "= > 



^^ 



( 93 ) 

TUNINGS OF THE CHINESE SO-NO-KOTO 



AND OP TRB 



BUGAKU BIWA. 



Strings :— x a 



- 1. ETOJO— i?«^^M«"« 



L 8. TAnaXl^RyMtm. 



$ 



$ 






r 8. MnKUOr-XiUuseM. 



m 



Ryosen, 



$ 



r S. 08HIKI— i?«<!MMi». 



^ 



g 



L 6. >UUO-^/«M». 



^ 



1 



r 7. I0HI0I8U— ^i^M(M»- 



i 



L8. 



RjOUH, 



^ 



9. 85j5*J?«^»fm. 



^ 

^ 



-10. ifjwrw. 



g 



r-Off SO-NO'KOTO. 

3456789 xo xi(/tf) ia(0 Xi(*»») 



» 3 



19- ■tS' 



^ 



1^ 



l8Sr 



•»■ 



-^ 



«=^ 



.^ 



^ 



fsr 



sea: 




<= 



-«»- 



IB? 



JEZ 



33Cr 



-^ 



-^- 



zs: 



zc 



JSL 



li 



f!^ 



4 



I 



*a. 



I 



W 



Ua. 



I 



:«CL 



te: 



11 



I 



Jte: 



11 



I 



-««- 



^— «- 



I 



I 



«= = 



I 



zc 




94 THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE, 

be easily transposed from Hirajoshi to Kumai, The relation between the 
Koto tuning and the Western scale is borne out in precisely the same 
manner as before ; the missing notes can be supplied by double pressure on 
the sixth and eighth strings ; and these are the double pressures which are 
invariably used in classical music written in Kumoi. 

Notes of the Kumoi tuning, with the two notes used in the Classical Music. 



^^ 



• I 

I 

I do not know how far the knowledge of the relation which exists 
between Kumoi and Hirajoshi extends — probably a very little way. Even 
so perfect a Koto musician as Mr. Yamas6, who has always more than 
suspected the existence of such an intimate relation between Hirajoshi and 
the Western scale as I have pointed out, had not observed that the relation ^ 

between Kumoi and that scale was precisely identical. Although trans- 
position is very rarely resorted to, if at all, he knew that the Hirajoshi 
music could be transposed into Kumoiy and as a matter of fact he could i 

transpose it without the slightest difficulty. But directly we get below 
the highest rank of professional, the rote-teaching of the music steps in 
to prevent the acquisition of such knowledge, because all the tunes would 
have to be learnt twice over. 

I mean that a tune, '' Hitotsu-toya'' for example, is learnt by the numbers 
of the strings, thus — 9, 9, 10, 9, 10, 10, etc., and not as we should learn 
it, by the intervals of the scale, thus — 3rd, 3rd, 5th, 3rd, 5th, 5th, etc. 
Transposing on the Japanese system involves, therefore, the learning of a 
fresh sequence of strings: thus in Kumoiy '^ Hitotsu-toya'' would be written 
thus— 6, 6, 7, 6, 7, 7, etc. 



i 



No. 7 is Sakura, a variation of Kumoi, made by introducing a higher 
note on the thirteenth string, B instead of G. In this respect Sakura t 

holds to Kumoi a relation much resembling that of Kin-ju to Hirajoshi, 
the twelfth and thirteenth strings being at an interval of a fourth. The 
eleventh and twelfth strings are, however, not raised as in Kin-ju. On 
the same principle of nomenclature Sakura might be called Kin-ku^ the new 
thirteenth string giving the octave from the ninth. ^ 



THE JAPANESE SCALE. 95 

We now come to a curious tuning called Han-kumoi, or ^'\i2\i'kumoi!' 
It is a mixture of Hirajoshi and Kumoi, the first seven notes being in the 
normal, the next five in the "cloud" tuning. The Gjf of the thirteenth 
string is probably to be explained in the same way as the Dj of Hirajoshi 
when raised a fifth — (No. 4). 

At first sight, and, indeed, for some time after, this arbitrary tuning 
seems to upset any idea that may have been formed from what has gone 
before as to the existence of a Japanese scheme of scale and key. The 
explanation of its existence is, however, simple. It is sometimes necessary 
to change rapidly from Kumoi to Hirajoshi — to modulate, in fact, from 
FJt minor to B minor ; and this complex tuning enables it to be done 
with greater ease, by reducing the number of bridges which require to 
be shifted. 

It is possible to play in the key of B minor in the Hirajoshi tuning : 
the G naturals can be produced by a simple pressure on the second string 
and its octaves, the seventh and twelfth ; the B*s by double pressure on 
the fourth, and its octave, the ninth. And, similarly, it is possible to play 
in FjJ; minor in the Kumoi tuning ; the G sharps being produced by simple 
pressure on the third string, and its octaves, the eighth and thirteenth, 
and the A naturals by double pressure on the same strings. But the use 
of double-pressures instead of open strings is obviously to be avoided if 
possible : when the transition from one key to the other occurs during the 
progress of the piece, the change in the tuning is effected by rapid bridge 
changes made with the left hand. In order to effect the change from 
Hirajoshi to Kumoi the bridges of the third, fourth, eighth, ninth, and 
thirteenth strings would have to be moved. But to avoid this complicated 
change, and further, to avoid the danger of the changes not being per- 
fectly in tune, the lower strings are often kept in Hirajoshi^ the upper 
half in Kumoi; and hence has sprung the tuning Han-kumoi. When 
the piece is alternating rapidly, as often happens, between the two keys, 
Hirajoshi can be played on the upper strings (tuned to Kumoi) by using 
the necessary pressures ; and so Kumoi can be played on the lower strings 
(tuned to Hirajoshi) by the same means. But when the piece settles down 
into either key, the number of bridge changes is not only reduced by half, 
but they can be easily and accurately made, because their octave strings 
are already in tune. Thus, if there is a long passage in Hirajoshi, the 



96 THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 

eighth and ninth bridges only have to be shifted in order to tune the 
strings to the octaves to the third and fourth ; and similarly, if the piece 
settles into Kumoi, the third and fourth bridges only have to be shifted 
in order to tune the strings to the octaves of the eighth and ninth. 

The thirteenth string is kept to the G^ of Htrajoshi, probably in order 
to save the trouble of an additional bridge change, so that the sweeps over 
the strings in that tuning may be accurate ; and also because the Gi^ of 
Kumai can be produced by pressure on the twelfth string. 

No. 9, Iwato, the third important tuning, springs out of Kumai by 
lowering the fifth string a semitone and raising the sixth a tone. The 
constant quantity of all the tunings, the Cj and FJ of the first and second 
strings, is preserved, but the first string is seldom used in Iwato music. As 
the first and the fifth strings are normally in unison, the former never holds a 
very prominent position in Koto compositions; it is seldom used, except to 
reinforce the fifth, or to get a slightly different intonation when the two are 
struck consecutively by the second finger and thumb, or in the Kaki beat ; 
and in this latter case, from the nature of the beat, accurate tuning is not 
absolutely essential. Iwato is constructed on precisely the same principle 
as Hirajoshi and Kumoi, the notes giving, as before, a major and a minor 
scale ; G major and E minor, the fourth and seventh of the diatonic minor, 
being omitted as before. And, again, not only are these missing notes 
supplied by double pressure on the eighth and tenth strings, but these are 
the double pressures which are invariably used in classical music written 
in Iwato. 

Notes of the Iwato tuning, with the two notes used in the Gassical Music* 




No. ID, Go-sagari roku-agari — the "lowered fifth and raised sixth" — is 
a mixed tuning, developed out of Iwato and Kumoi^ and used to facilitate 
rapid transitions between those tunings, in the same way as Han-kumai is 
used to facilitate transitions between Kumai and Hirajoshi. It is, however, 
constructed in the inverse order to Han-kumai^ the first to the seventh 
strings being in Iwato, and the eighth to the twelfth in Kumai; the GJ of 
the thirteenth being retained as before. All the dianges indicated in the 



THE JAPANESE SCALE. 97 

preceding explanation of Han-kumoi, as occurring on the third and fourth 
and eighth and ninth strings respectively, occur in Go-sangari roku-agari, 
on the fifth and sixth and tenth and eleventh strings respectively. 

Some authorities give the eleventh string in this tuning as E, instead 
of D. I think, however, that the symmetrical construction of the scheme of 
tunings points inevitably to D as the proper note. 

These are all the regular tunings ; in addition, however, there are some 
special tunings, which have no distinguishing names, being only used for 
certain tunes which require a note not in the regular tunings ; they 
frequently revert to the regular tunings during the progress of the piece- 
Thus, No. II is the tuning for the piece '' Kurama-jishU' It is written in 
Hirajoshi, but Dj is frequently used in the early part ; the sixth and 
eleventh strings are therefore tuned up a semitone for convenience. After 
a time, however, Djj reappears, and at given points the bridges of the sixth 
and of the eleventh strings are moved back to their normal positions, and 
the tuning reverts to Hirajoshi. In the same way in No. 12, the fourth 
and the ninth strings start tuned to Ajj, and are afterwards lowered to the 
normal AJj of Hirajoshu " 

And now, what are the conclusions which this analysis forces upon us ? 

In the first place, that ** scale" and **key" were principles with which 
the early founders of Eastern music were familiar; they possibly did not so 
thoroughly understand them as to be able to reduce what they knew into 
transmissible thought. But what they knew was precisely what we know 
in the West — that music must be built upon a systematic sequence of notes ; 
their science gave them the same natural notes that Pythagoras employed ; 
and their instinct led them to a sequence which is, the sequence of the West, 
thus confirming in a remarkable manner our somewhat arrogant assumption 
that we alone had received nature's revelation. They knew that music 
acquired brilliancy when played upon a range of notes of a high pitch, and 
solidity and profundity when their range was lowered. Above all, they 
knew that the major and the minor modes are in the main the natural 
exponents of the two chief emotions of mankind, gaiety and sadness. 

But I think they knew, or after a time discovered, more. The whole 
scale could not be put on to an instrument with only thirteen strings 

o 



98 THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 

without curtailing its compass. The dimensions of the Koto, therefore, 
imposed upon them very practical limitations in determining how the scale 
should be rendered upon it. Certain notes of the scale had to be selected 
for the "open notes," leaving the other notes to be produced by pressures 
when wanted. Why the fourth and seventh of the minor scale, or the 
second and fifth of the major, were omitted there is no tradition to tell us, 
and, as we shall presently see, there is a curious divergence on this point 
between the Japanese and the Chinese tunings : but a very unscientific 
suggestion may be made. 

A feature of the oldest music of Japan, that of the Yamato-Koto, was 
a scratch of the plectrum over the six strings : this seems without doubt 
to have been the origin of the modern sweep with the tsumS over all the 
thirteen strings. It was obviously necessary that this characteristic feature 
of their music should be melodious, and the first thing that strikes the 
student of Japanese music is the melodiousness of the sequence of the 
strings. The open strings of Hirajoshi give an arpeggio cadenza which 
would have rejoiced the heart of Mendelssohn, who revelled in such 
aeolian music. 

But this selection of notes led inevitably to the construction of melodies 
built on the selected notes, the open strings, alone. The composers of the 
severe classical school might use pressures and double pressures, and build 
their music on the full scale ; but the songs for the children and the 
melodies of the lighter sort came inevitably to rest on the notes of this 
aeolian arpeggio, and on those alone : and so, as it seems to me, came into 
being the Koto-uta of the present day, for which I can find no name less 
graceful than arpeggio-music. In the West, Scarlatti had once done the 
same as a tour de force ; he had built the subject of his ** Cat s Fugue " 
upon the five black notes of the Piano. And, indeed, our own Bugle 
music supplies an apt analogy, its melodies being built on the notes of 
the common chord. Even to the easy classical music, of which I have 
been able to give two examples, the tuning imparted a pentatonic 
character. The simple phrases of ^' Umegae^* and '' Rokudan'' are con- 
structed entirely on the open strings, and there seems to be very little 
doubt that, from their frequent use, musical thought among the Japanese 
runs almost .entirely up and down these five notes, obviously limiting its 
powers of expression. 



THE JAPANESE SCALE. 99 

A more scientific suggestion may, however, be made. The evolution of the seventh of the 
scale far away up in the altitudes of the natural musical sounds is so curious that it is not sur- 
prising that it should be called the last discovered note : it is not surprising that it should have 
been omitted in the Eastern tunings. Now, if we take a two-stringed instrument with frets, 
such as the Gekkin, tuned to a fifth, it is obvious that, as the same fret does duty for both 
strings, if the seventh is omitted on the first string the fourth will be omitted on the second 
string. The diagram showing the Gekkin frets on page 170 will make this clearer. In this 
way, two-stringed instruments tuned in fifths being very common, it seems probable that the 
fourth and the seventh have become intimately connected. It is possible that a very similar 
reason accounts for the omission of the third in the Chinese ritsusen tunings of the So-no-koto : 
two-stringed instruments being also occasionally tuned in fourths. 

I may here allude to the "cyclical tetrachord" theory which has been advanced in opposi- ' 
tion to my own theory of the similarity of the Western and Eastern scale-systems. (Dr. Knott, 
"Transactions of the Asiatic Society of Japan," vol. xix., pt IL, p. 373.) 

If we start from the fifth string of the Koto we get CJ, D, F| — ^ fourth, and G|, A, C| — 
a fourth. The fascinating "tetrachord" is almost immediately suggested, for the arrangement of 
notes in the two groups is identical, the intervals being a semitone and a major third. By 
assuming that the gaps in the " tetrachords " can be filled in in a variety of ways, and by 
putting tliem together "disjunctively," the complete Dorian mode sequence is obtained, and the ^- \.^\}, " ^^\ 
conclusion is somewhat rapidly arrived at that Japanese music is based on the "Dorian mode." /^t^^K 
The contention is supported by reference to many pieces of Japanese music which finish on ' ^ 
CJ: some of them, indeed, end on Gj, and in harmonizing ^^ Hitotsu-toya'' the last chord must 
undoubtedly be the common chord of Ctt; but this is, as it seems to me, nothing more than 
the ending on the dominant so common in old "round" music. 

The cyclical form of the tuning, though exceedingly curious and interesting, cannot outweigh 
the other evidences which point to a sequence of notes in the scale identical with that of the 
Western diatonic scale. That scale itself, it need hardly be said, is also based on the "cyclical 
tetrachord" system, two similar tetrachords being put together "disjunctively." 

But the suggestion in the preceding paragraph seems to afiford a perfectly simple explanation 
why a cycle of intervals should be found in the tuning: the frets of the Gekkin, with its two 
strings tuned to a fifth, repeated on the second string whatever intervals the first string gave, 
only a fifth higher. 

We may now take one more step forward. It needed musical capacity 
of the most primitive order to understand that a lower pitch could be given 
to Hirajoshi by moving all the bridges down a degree ; but a greater 
contrast was desired — the lowering the pitch a fifth — than could be effected 
practically by moving all the bridges. 

Before determining what science it was that enabled them to do it, 
it is necessary to describe the system which the early Japanese musicians 
adopted in order to effect this lowering of the pitch in the simplest possible 
way. If the right hand on the Piano is on the notes C, E, G, we are in 
the key of C major ; by moving the thumb a semitone higher we have 



lOO THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 

the notes Cjj, E, G, and the key of D major : and so on. And so it is 
on the Koto : if the right hand covers the third to the seventh strings, the 
notes which fall under the fingers are from Gji to Fj in Hirajoshi; but 
in Kumai^ after making the two bridge changes, the notes are from Gjf to 
F^, and we are in a different key. 

Now, if Kumoi were an entirely new and independent tuning, with no 
inherent relationship to Hirajoshiy a fresh arrangement of the strings might 
have been devised for the open notes; another arpeggio might have been 
invented, with a fresh series of melodies ; but the Japanese musicians — and 
I think here I may use Japanese as distinct from Eastern — deliberately set 
themselves to make the new arrangement of the strings dependent on the 
notes of the arpeggio established by Hirajoshi ^ and yet it was to bring a 
new series of scale-intervals into the normal position of the hand. 

Without scientific knowledge they devised a re-arrangement of strings 
giving the same arpeggio cadence in a different order and in a different 
key. Again they had a harmonious sequence composed of the notes of 
the diatonic scale with the second and fifth of the major, the fourth and 
seventh of the minor, omitted. The arpeggio of Hirajoshi, starting from 
the second string, is made up of the following intervals of the major 
scale : the 6th, 7th (below the tonic), ist, 3rd, 4th, 6th, 7th, 8th, etc. ; of 
Kumoi, it is the 3rd, 4th, 6th, 7th (below the tonic), ist, 3rd, 4th, 6th, 
7th, 8th, loth, etc., and therefore, although if we start from the same string, 
the full CL^peggio sequences of the two tunings sound very differently to 
the ear, if we start in Hirajoshi from the second, and in Kumoi from 
the fourth string, we hear precisely the same sequence of intervals, but 
in Kumoi pitched a fourth higher. 

Yet again we find the same principles applied to the evolution of a 
third principal innmg—Iwato — formed out of Kumoi in precisely the same 
way as Kiimoi was formed out of Hirajoshi, Again the pitch is lowered 
a fifth and a fresh set of intervals brought into position, and again we 
find the key of the sub-dominant taken the next in the order of the scale 
sequence. Iwato gives E minor with its relative G major, the fourth and 
seventh of the minor, or the second and fifth of the major, being omitted as 
before. The Cjf of the first string remains constant, as has already been 
explained ; the Fj^ of the second string has become the second of the 
minor scale, its importance being correspondingly diminished. The arpeggio 



THE JAPANESE SCALE, loi 

of Iwato is: 7th (below the tonic), ist, 3rd, 4th, 6th, 7th, 8th, etc. And, 
again, if we start on the sixth string we hear precisely the same sequence 
of intervals as before, and again pitched a fourth higher than in the 
preceding tuning. With Iwato the sequence of scales ends, the key of 
its sub-dominant requiring Fb, which would involve an alteration in the 
fundamental second string. 

The principle of the bridge changes in the consecutive tunings is 
revealed in the name of the mixed tuning — Go-sagari roku-agari — used for 
facilitating the transitions between Iwato and Kumoi. Iwato is obtained 
from Kumoi by lowering the fifth string a semitone, and raising the sixth 
a full tone ; or, in terms of the diatonic scale, lowering the leading note 
and raising the tonic. And this is precisely the way in which Kumoi was 
obtained out of Hirajoshi: the leading note Q\ of A major is lowered to 
Gh ; the tonic A is raised to B. In Japanese terms this application of the 
principle might be called san-sagari shi-agari. 

Here, then, we have the practical factor by which the sequence of scales 
was made ; and if the first and second strings were not constant, it might 
be applied for the formation of all the other scales ; thus. 

For making Kumoi from the normal, lower the 3rd string a semitone, 
and raise the 4th a full tone ; 

For making Iwato from Kumoiy lower the 5th string a semitone, and 
raise the 6th a full tone ; 

For making the next scale from Iwato, lower the 7 th string a semitone, 
and raise the 8th a full tone ; and so on. 

So much for the principal tunings. But the group of scales clustered 
round the C^ and ¥^ of the first and second strings is not yet quite 
accounted for. There is the normal F^t minor with its relative A major; 
secondly, there is the scale of the sub-dominant B minor with its relative 
D major ; thirdly, again the scale of the sub-dominant E minor, with its 
relative G major. But these three relative major keys are, as far as I have 
been able to trace, quite ignored. Probably owing to the important position 
held by the second string, and for other reasons with which musicians are 
familiar, the transition from grave to gay, of the method of which the 
variations of ** Hitotsu-toya " are good examples, is better effected by 
using the keys of the tonic majors, instead of the relative majors. Thus, 
the major corresponding to the FjJ; minor of Hirajoshi would be Fjl major. 



i 



102 



THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 



and not A major. For short transitions the simple pressure on the fourth, 
and Its octave, ninth, would be sufficient ; for longer cheerful compositions, 
however, AkSbofto was invented. This tuning, and other variations already 
noticed, are not recognized by the Japanese as cfioshi — the equivalent for 
** scale": they are called ti ; and it is not necessary in these subordinate 
tunings, invented purely for convenience, to look for diatonic scale notes. 
Thus, in Akibono there is no difficulty about the Aij of the fourth string: 
A^j; is producible at pleasure by pressure, but an open string Ai] is con- 
venient for those short transitions into the minor, and vice versd, which are 
so frequent in Japanese music. 

The key of B major has not been specially provided for Kumoi in the 
same way, but the possibility of making such a tuning, if it were required, 
seems to be admitted. Curiously enough the E major, which, as I have 
already pointed out, exists in Akibono, would serve the purpose for Iwato ; 
but, as it would involve transposing the piece on to a different order of 
strings, it is not so used. 

We have now a perfect sequence of keys : — 
A major Hirajoshi not used. 



n 



mmor 



F|; major 



Hirajoshi 
Hirajoshi 



Hirajdshi 



by pressure on the 4th and 6th strings, 
and their octaves, for short transitions, 
or 

by bridge changes (No. 12) for longer 
passages, or 





Akibono 


for pieces in the major key. 


D major 


Kumoi 


not used. 


B minor 


Kumoi 




B major 


Kutnai 


by pressure on the 6th and 8th strings, 
and their octaves. 


G major 


Iwato 


not used. 


E minor 


Iwato 





E major Iwato 



Akibono 



by pressure on the 8th and loth strings, 

and their octaves ; or 
by transposition of strings : not used. 



Transitional tuning for Iwato to Kumoi — Go-sagari roku-agari. 
„ „ for Kumoi to Hirajoshi — Han-kumoi. 



^ 



THE JAPANESE SCALE. 103 

The sequence principle is, therefore, a fall of a third from major to minor 
alternately ; or from major to major, and minor to minor, a fall of a fifth. 
And this is precisely the backward scale-sequence of Western music. 

The principle of the Western scale-sequence backward is, a fall of a 
fifth and flatten the seventh ; the principle of the Japanese sequence is 
the ^^ sagari-agarV rule, already explained. The principle of the Western 
sequence forward is, a rise of a fifth and sharpen the fourth ; the principle 
of the Japanese sequence the other way about, that is to say, from Iwato 
to Hirajoshi, is obviously the reverse of . the rule just given, and might 
be called ^^ agari-sagari!' 

And now we come to the last point of the enquiry : how, with Pytha- 
gorean notes, were they enabled to obtain the transposition of the pentatonic 
sequence by means of this simple system of bridge-changes? In the Piano 
illustration which I used above, the relation of E to G in the C major 
sequence C, E, G, is identical with the relation of E to G in the D major 
sequence Cjj, E, G. In the corresponding Koto illustration the relation of 
CJ to Fjjl (5th to 7th strings) in the Hirajoshi sequence Gj, A, Cj, D, F;{f, 
is identical with the relation of Cj to Y% (5th to 7th strings) in the Kumoi 
sequence G, B, C^, D, Fj. Further, the full sequence of intervals in Kumoi 
is identical, as I have shown above, with the full sequence of intervals in 
Hirajoshiy just as the full sequence on the Piano of D major is identical 
with the full sequence of C major. 

Yet we know that if the notes of the Piano were tuned in C major, 
either to the Pythagorean or the diatonic scale, the "wolf" would be heard 
when the C was changed to Cj in the above illustration : we should not 
get the true interval E to G of the scale of D major. We know now 
that the fundamental Chinese scale was made of *' fifth upon fifth," like the 
Pythagorean : and we must know, therefore, that we should find somewhere 
a Chinese **wolf" by preserving intact the interval C;jJ to Fi both in the 
Hirajoshi and the Kumoi sequences : and yet it is absent, for perfect tonal 
transposition is possible. There is but one conclusion. The Japanese do 
not use, on the Koto at least, the Pythagorean notes. They have tempered 
them in some way ; and seeing that transposition is possible, the principle 
which governs the Koto must be the principle which governs the Piano. 
That principle is ** equal temperament *' — and this was invented in Japan, 
unless Yatsuhashi went to Desima and learnt it of the Dutch, about the 



104 



THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 



year 1620, one hundred and twenty years before Bach wrote his Forty-eight 
Preludes and Fugues for the ** well-tempered Clavier." 

This is not a mere question of theory; it is supported by facts derived 
from the Japanese themselves. I cannot say that my suggestions either agree 
or differ from theirs, for they have none to offer. The fact that the highest 
professionals know something, but that something very dimly, of the relations 
between the tunings, does not affect the truth of the statement that the 
theory of their scale is absolutely lost. But the practical test is that, if 
the theory is sound, transposition on open strings should be possible on 
the Koto. And the best of the musicians can invariably transpose melodies 
in the three principal tunings of Hirajoshi^ Kumoi^ and Iwato. 

Dr. Knott, in his paper already alluded to, bears me witness, if unwittingly, at least in a most 
remarkable manner. He has built his " tetrachord " theory on the notes of the Gekkin ; and he 
tells us of three several instruments — the Chinese Gekkin, the Nagahara Gekkin, and the 
Keian Gekkin. Each of these instruments, assuming the frets to have been glued on to the 
necks of the instruments with an intense accuracy, and to have remained in position, gives a 
different scale. This is the scheme of vibrations : — 



Fret. 


CHINESE. 


NAGAHARA. 


KEIAN. 


Major Scalb. 





300 


300 


300 


300 (dolC^ 


I 


335 


337 


333 


337 '5 {ray) 


2 


365 


368 


371 


375 (fne) 


3 


400 


398 


397 


400 {fah) 


4 


443 


446 


447 


450 {soh) 


5 


505 


500 


497 ' 


500 {la) 


6 


598 


598 


595 


600 (dofC) 


7 


681 


671 


667 


675 {ray) 


8 


815 


797 


800 


800 {fah) 



More valuable testimony to the theory I have ventured to propound it would be impossible 
to receive. The difference between the upper Bj produced by twelve fifths and the upper C 
produced by seven octaves is the celebrated "Pythagorean comma." It has been eliminated 
and distributed over the various intervals of the scale — in one way, under the "unequal tem- 
perament" system, which gave a truer scale in a few keys and a terribly untrue scale in a 
great many; in another way, under the "equal temperament" system, which gave no true 
scale in any key, but the same scale in all keys. So this table of vibrations (assuming the 
frets in position accurately) shows us the different schools of Gekkin players endeavouring 
each in its own way to distribute the " Chinese comma " over the other intervals of the scale. 



THE JAPANESE SCALE. 105 

Neither the Chinese, nor the Nagahara, nor the Keian school seem to have thought a true 
octave essential : the two former were satisfied with two vibrations too few, the Keian with five ; 
and so through the other intervals. 

On any of these Gekkins transposition is obviously impossible; on the Koto it is possible. 
We have on the Koto parallel keys, as we have on the Piano. It b to be noted that an 
extremely sensitive ear should be able to appreciate a difference between two notes two vibra- 
tions apart, sounded independently. Putting my own evidence out of the question, I am 
certain that if the keys were not parallel, the difference of the tonal relations of the intervals 
after the very simple bridge changes from Hirajoshi to Kumoi^ and from Kumoi to Iwato^ had 
been made, could not have been passed over by the extremely sensitive ears of the Japanese 
musicians who have transposed melodies for me. 

I now give the tune ** Saita Sakurai '' in the three tunings, side by 
side, in string notation, and on the Western staff in the keys of F| minor, 
B minor, and E minor. 



( io6 ) 



SAITA SAKURAI. 

[Read down the columns and from right to left. The figures indicate the strings to be played.] 



IV. 


III. 


II. 


I. 


X 


K 


H 


I 


K 


H 


I 


K 


H 


IWATO 


KVXOI 


HIBA- 
Jd8KI 


• 

t 


10 


kin 


9 


• 

1 


10 


4 


7 


s 


6 


9 


7 


to 


9 


« 

1 


8 


/tf 


9 


3 


6 


4 


6 


9 


7 


lO 


8 


A? 








4 


7 


5 








9 


7 


10 


9 

10 


• 

1 
kin 


10 
to 


S 


8 


6 


7 


10 


8 


T% 


78 


P 


9 


• 
t 


10 


4 


7 


5 


6 
6 


9 
9 


7 
7 


45 
9 


78 

• 

1 


56 

10 


9 
8 

7 


• 
1 

10 


xo 

9 
8 


4 

3 

2 


7 
6. 

5 


5 
4 
3 


7 


to 


8 


45 


78 


56 


6 


4 


7 


12 


12 


12 


12 


12 


12 


45 


78 


56 


6 


4 


7 


8 


to 


9 


8 


«> 


9 


9 


• 

t 


10 


7 


5 


8 


8 
7 


to 
10 


9 
8 


8 


to 


9 


8 


to 


9 


6 


4 


7 


6 


9 


7 


7 


10 


8 








6 


4 


7 








6 


9 


7 


9 


• 

1 


10 


7 


5 


8 


7 


xo 


8 








8 


/^ 


9 








6 


9 


7 


7 


10 


8 


7 


10 


8 


8 


6 


9 


S 


8 


6 


6 


9 


7 








9 


7 


10 








5 


8 


6 


6 


9 


7 


10 


8 


to 


12 


12 


13 


12 


12 


12 


7 


10 


8 


• 

I 


xo 


kin 


8 


/^ 


9 














to 


9 


» 
t 


8 


to 


9 


8 


to 


9 


7 


10 


8 


10 


8 


to 


7 


10 


8 


8 


to 


9 


6 


9 


7 


9 


7 


10 


6 


9 


7 


7 


10 


8 


5 


8 


6 














6 


9 


7 


9~ 


7"" 


s~| 


8 


6 


9 


7 


10 


8 


7 


10 


8 


4_ 


2_ 


I J 


9 


7 


10 


6 


9 


7 


6 


9 


7 


V «^* 






10 . 


8 


to 


S 


8 


6 


5 


8 


6 



^ 



a 



( 107 ) 



SAITA SAKURAI. 



In HirajOski (F j( minor). [Written an octave hisrber than the Koi0,'\ 



i 



^\T T \ r-^ ^ 



Jd. 



^ 



^^ 




^ 



^ 




^r_rtr_a ^^te{ 



e f- 



^ 





OtUlM^«*Mii 



^ ^ 




i^^e 




^ 



In Kumoi (B minor). [Written to actual notes of the AV/«.] 




:^z: 



f — -r 



1 f 



^ 



§ 




^ 



=^3^ 





pH Cj- J I J_,i j 5 ^^E|^j=nr:ri ^=: g 




^^ 




c c r I C-C r I ^ 




^ 



ip* 




^trE=t 



^ 



^ ^i^i^lS 



:jt= 



^S 




I 



In Iwaio (£ minor). [Written an octave higher than the Keio.l 



P 



Hr-w 



■I 1 



t 



^m 



'^^^^^m 





j J7~rH 



■JSiL 





^m 



m 



i£ 




m 



=feE^^ 





^^^^^i^ 



( io8 ) 



THE CHINESE SCALE. 

The discussion on the Japanese scale should have been preceded by an 
examination into the Chinese scale ; but for many reasons the difficulties 
of getting at it, of deciphering the sounds, and of transcribing any music 
which could explain it, are infinitely greater even than in the case of the 
Japanese scale. The tunings of the S5-no-koto are set out in the table 
given on page 93 ; it is printed so as to face the tunings of the Koto, 
for convenience of comparison. 

In the first place, there are two terms which require explanation — 
ritsusen and ryosen. They are interpreted by Japanese musicians who are 
familiar with Western music as equivalent to the minor and major re- 
spectively, and I think this interpretation is accurate. The words indicate, 
as is usual with things which go in couples and are the complement of 
each other, the ** male " and ** female " elements : the major is represented 
by the male, ryosen ; the minor by the female, ritsusen ; and it will be 
seen that each of the tunings has the two modes. The name of the tuning 
is generally applied to the ritsusen mode, but in two cases the corresponding 
7yosen mode has received a separate name — Taisiki, the ryosen of Hyojo ; 
and Suijo, the ryosen of Oshiki, 

All the tunings are composed of five notes with their octaves, and, 
as before, these five notes may be taken as indicative of the scale and 
key of the music based on them ; though it is beyond my power to 
apply the tests of harmony and transposition as in the case of the 
Japanese tunings. 

The six-note tuning of the Japanese — Akibono — does not appear to 
have its counterpart in China. A careful examination reveals a constant 
difference between the notes of the ritsusen and ryosen of the different 
tunings ; one note only is changed, and that is lowered a semitone from 
the minor tuning to the major. 

Thus, in Hyojo, the five notes of the ritsusen mode, 
F#, Gfr B, C#, D#, become F#. G#, A|. Q% D|, 
in the ryosen mode : the B falling to A|L 



THE JAPANESE SCALE, 109 

In Banshiki: 

Fft Gf, A#, Ql D#, become E#, G#, A|, Q% D#: 
the F|; falling to EjJ. 
In Oshiki: 

Y% Q% B, €#, E, become F| Gjt, B, Cjf, D^: 
the E falling to D;|^. 
In Ichiotsu : 

Fjj^ A, B, C;|, E, become Fj, Gj, B, C^, E : 
the A falling to G^. 
And in So/o : 

F% A, B, D, E, become F| A, B, C#, E : 
the D falling to Cj. 
Now, proceeding on lines analogous to those adopted in unravelling 
the Japanese tunings, the five notes of Hydjo appear to belong to the 
diatonic scale of F|; with the third and seventh omitted. The omission 
of the third prevents our saying whether it is Y\ major or minor; but 
we may conclude that Ajj, the minor third, is the missing note, because 
in Taisiki, the corresponding ryosen, Al| — the major third of the scale — 
is inserted, and the missing notes are the fourth and the seventh. 

Further, the Chinese word Hydjo has precisely the same meaning as 
the Japanese word Hirajoshiy both signifying " normal scale." If, therefore, 
the preceding assumption is true, we find the normal tuning of the So-no-koto 
is built on the same diatonic scale as the normal tuning of the Koto, but 
with different intervals — the third and seventh being omitted instead of 
the fourth and seventh. The tonic major — F| major — produced from 
Hirajoshi by pressures on the fourth and sixth strings, is given by the 
ryosen, Taisiki; the fourth and seventh of the scale being omitted in both. 

The practical information necessary to support this theoretical view of 
the Hydjo tuning is, however, wanting. I have been unable to ascertain 
whether the missing notes, A and E or Etf, are, in fact, supplied by 
•pressure on the third and sixth strings, or double pressure on the sixth. 
The theory may, however, be supported inductively, for we find that the 
assumption holds good for the other tunings, and supports similar conclusions. 
Thus, in Banshiki: 

the notes of the ritsusen mode, C^, Dj, Fjf, Gj, Aj, C* give the 
scale of GJ minor with the third and seventh omitted ; and of 



no THE MUSIC OF 7 HE JAPANESE. 

the ryosen mode, that of C# major with the fourth and seventh 
omitted : C| D|, E^ Gj, A#, C#. 
In Oshiki: 

the notes of ritsusen, B, Cj, E, Fj, Gj|, B, give B minor with the 
third and seventh omitted; and of Suijo, the corresponding ryosen, 
B major with the fourth and seventh omitted : B, CJ, D|, Fj, Gj, B. 
In Ichiotsu : 

the notes of ritsusen, E, F}, A, B, Cjjl, E, give E minor with the 
third and seventh omitted ; and of ryosen, E major with the fourth 
and seventh omitted : E, Fj, G^, B, Cj, E. 
And in Sojo : 

the notes of riisusen, A, B, D, E, FJJ, A, give A minor with the 
third and seventh omitted ; and of ryosen^ A major with the fourth 
and seventh omitted : A, B, C^ E, Fj, A. 
It would appear, therefore, that the assumption made in the case of the 
normal is warranted, all the other tunings conforming to the same test. 

The tunings of the Bugaku-biwa also support these conclusions. It 
will be seen that the lowest string is invariably tuned either to the 
keynote or the dominant of the key to which, it is suggested, the tunings 
respectively belong. 

The change which is constant in all the transitions from ritsusen to 
ryosen is the lowering of the fourth of the minor scale a semitone, appar- 
ently giving the third of the tonic major. 

In the constant omission of the seventh from all the tunings the 
Chinese and the Japanese systems resemble each other. 

Further, if the above assumptions are accurate, we get the following 
sequence of keys, transposing the order of BanshiH and Hyojo : — Cj, Fj, B, 
E, A,— a fall of a fifth ; this is the same key-sequence as the Japanese, 
the backward key-sequence of the West. 

But beyond this sequence of keys, and the fact that six notes of the 
diatonic eight only are taken for each tuning, there seems to be no 
connecting link between the Japanese and the Chinese tunings, and I cannot 
discover in the Chinese any such symmetrical scheme of construction as 
the Japanese tunings revealed. Above all, I have no data on which any 
conclusion could be based as to whether or not it is an " equal- tempera- 
ment" scale. 



THE JAPANESE SCALE. iii 



PITCH. 

On the subject of pitch, in spite of the savour of an ancient theory which 
seems to attach to the statement, I am tempted to say boldly that the 
key of F# minor on the Piano more nearly renders the plaintive character 
of the Koto music in the normal tuning. I have used it invariably in 
transcribing on to the Western staff, as the other keys seem too clear and 
open, or too heavy and lugubrious ; and it is when I have played in this 
key that the Japanese musicians have agreed with my conclusions. It has, 
indeed, the practical advantage of avoiding the use of flats, which impede 
the clear rendering of the music on the Western staff, as the flat is not 
known on the Koto, and sharp pressures would often have to be trans- 
lated by naturals. 

It is not, however, necessary to rely on the old favourite idea that 
each key had its special characteristics. Although a pitch-pipe is sometimes 
used, the first string, the dominant of the scale, is tuned first, and is within 
limits arbitrary : for a loud singer it is tuned up, for a singer with a small 
voice it is tuned down. But the normal pitch of the note approximately 
is middle C ; I have, however, taken it as C;jJL On the Japanese Flute this 
note lies midway between C and CJ on a Piano tuned to Broadwood s 
Philharmonic pitch tuning. 

For the sake of convenience of reference I have kept to the same 
pitch in transcribing the Chinese tunings, though I believe that the Chinese 
normal pitch is slightly lower than the Japanese. 



TIME. 

On the question of transcription one other point remains — the time. In 
spite of much rubato and of many seeming lapses from regular and metro- 
homical time, the beat is alternate and equal. The unequal accent of our 
common time seems hardly suited to Japanese music. I therefore always 



112 THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE, 

use \ time, which seems accurately to convey the idea of the hydshi marks, 
or bars, in the example of Koto notation given on page 162. Many of 
the phrase difficulties are apparent only, and are caused by the presence of 
innumerable grace notes, and also, I am bound to say, by the carelessness 
of many of the ordinary musicians. 

An explanation of the complex system of Chinese time will be found 
on page 199, under the description of the Kakko, the small Drum used 
in the Bugaku orchestra. 



HARMONY. 



The statement that Japanese music is devoid of harmony is, perhaps, the 
only one among the many current dogmatic utterances on the subject which 
at all approximates to accuracy. So far as my observations have carried 
me there is very little ; but there is some. But, again, I have to remark 
that until we can examine the higher forms of Koto music our judgment 
must remain in suspense. My impression is, that when elaborate com- 
positions are studied (such an one as ''Adzuma-jishi^' for example, a name 
which will recall a very graceful but complicated piece sometimes heard 
at the Maple Club in Tokyo), we shall find a great deal more harmony 
than we at present imagine. I have, however, to deal now with facts, 
not impressions. 

The simple fact that two notes may be played together with pleasing 
effect is recognized by the existence of the term awaseru — literally **to 
put together " ; it is used as well for the reinforcing unison of the first and 
fifth strings, as for the octave which is frequently used in whole passages. 
Thus, in '' Hiiotsu-toya^' the first and one of the simplest of the Koto-uta, 
octave passages frequently occur. In the third variation, moreover, we find 
some traces of harmony : the interval of the sixth, for example, which adds 
vigour to the melody : — 

-<K r- f -r . f 




and also that of the minor seventh, which is used with great effect and 
emphasis. It comes, indeed, as somewhat of a surprising refutation of the 



THE JAPANESE SCALE. 



"3 



statement that no harmony exists, occurring as it does thus early in the 
musician's learning : — 




Using Western terms, the interval of the sixth is doubtless part of the 
common chord of the tonic, the key at the commencement of the two 
variations being F|f major, and the first passage, more fully harmonized, 
may be rendered thus : — 




and the interval of the seventh is also doubtless part of the chord of the 
minor seventh on the second : the second passage, more fully harmonized, 
standing thus : — 




; 



•7 



g^^^fe 



The first of these two chords, the fifth string and the sharpened 
ninth, — I am disposed to say, as might be expected of the common chord 
of the tonic, — is of frequent occurrence. Thus, the phrase which commences 
each fragment of '' Matsuzu-kishV^ is as follows: — 



fcj^-LtJlj-^ 




a variation of the leading phrase of '' Hitoisu-toya " in the major, 
following is another example of its use, from ^'Kurama-jiskV^ : — 



The 




a. 



^s 



? 



i 



v -J- 



114 THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 

In a piece called ^^ Gosho-guruma^^ again, the eighth and sharpened to string 
occur in harmony, giving a major fifth: — 



I 



1^ 



I cannot pretend that these few examples do more than support the 
limited statement that there are distinct traces of harmony in the modern 
Koto music. I have not unravelled the harmonies of the Chinese music, 
but the scheme of chords, given with the description of the Sho, on 
page 1 88, indicates that harmony, though perhaps of a crude sort, formed 
a very important part of that music. 



FORM. 

Perhaps the most interesting fact which a study of Japanese music reveals { 

is, that it is not formless and void, but is built on an elaborate system of 
construction, which, if its products were filled out with harmonies and that 
complicated musical verbosity which is the delight of Western musicians, 
would entitle it to a very favourable comparison with our own music. 
What Japanese music shows us is, as it were, the skeleton of construction ; 
and I find it a very interesting, well-knit, and cleverly-articulated skeleton. 

The rules established by Yatsuhashi dealt only with the dimensions of 
the composition, and did not touch its interior structure ; in this matter he 
seems to have thought example better than precept. 

The rules for the structure of Koto music, apart from the short songs, 
are interesting : it is divided into two classes, dan and kumi. The dan- 
mono are written in parts — ** steps *' or " grades " — in a severe style with 
connecting motives, but without a voice part. The grades are called re- ^ 

spectively ichidan^ nidan^ sandauy and so on, and the whole piece is often 
named after the number of dan of which it is composed : thus there are 
pieces called ^' Godan" ^^ Rokudan^' ^' Shichidan^' '' Hachidan,'' '' Kudan,'' ih^ 
pieces with five, six, seven, eight, and nine steps. Each dan is composed 
of fifty-two hydski or bars : the first, however, may have fifty-four, and 
the last fifty. This is the case in '' Rokudan" as will be seen from the printed 
version of it on the staff given on page 120, and I believe also in most 
of the compositions of the class. 



THE JAPANESE SCALE. 



IIS 



The kumi are somewhat lighter in style, but are, like the dan-^mono, 
written in several parts ; they are invariably accompanied by the voice. 
The parts correspond with the verses of the song, and are called hito-uta^ 
futa-uta — ** first verse," " second verse " — and so on. Each verse is divided 
into eight sections, and each section into eight hyoshi. The ** verse " is, 
therefore, twelve bars longer than the dan. 

As to the internal structure, or principle of composition, I have been 
unable to discover anything in the shape of rules or suggestions, or even 
analysis, in the later books, and the Koto musicians have very little to 
say on the matter. Ignorant of the Japanese idea, we can only look at 
it, therefore, with Western eyes, and to this end I proceed to analyse 
the piece ** Utnegae " — " The Plum Branch " — the first kumi which is 
taught to beginners. It is accurately rendered on the Western staff on 
pages 1 1 6, 117. 

In the first place it will be noticed that it is built entirely on kaki^ 
the undulations of the phrase having probably suggested its name. In 
the first verse this subject is given out seven times, making seven distinct 
phrases, which I have lettered A, B, C, D, E, F, G. Variety or colour 
is given by starting the subject on different strings. This sequential treat- 
ment is, in fact, a common device of contrapuntal music, where the subject 
often reappears a third or fifth higher or lower, and so on, sometimes 
modulated into another key, but as often not." The peculiar feature of the 
repetition of the kaki subject is, as is pointed out in the explanation of 
Koto terms, that the relations of the strings not being constant, the 
musical intervals composing the phrase must vary. Thus, in A {to kaki) 
and B {i kaki) the first interval is a second, but in E {Ju kaki) and F 
{fmchi kakt) it is a third. Finally, on its seventh appearance the subject 
is decapitated, having three notes only instead of five ; it is really shicki 
kaki^ an octave below the i kaki of D. 

The chief feature of the remainder of the seven sections is the re- 
currence of a short phrase composed of the loth, to^ /, strings arranged 
in different ways : thus, 10, A?, i\ /, A?, 10 ; to^ /', 10 ; 10, z, to ; z, to^ i, 10 ; 
and so on. 




1^^ 



?=: 



m 



^^ 



1a. AtuUnie. 



( "6 ) 
UMEGAE— {"The Plum Branch"). 

Hrro-DTA — (First verse). 



g*^3ij J I J J inmriijjjTfisVgjifi-a^ If ri ^ i^^h f^-s g ^^i 




^^-^ ' j J^r^-^-^ 



5 h^i-ii-=fr 



%L 



FuTA-UTA — (Second verse). 



8b* 



^''jJ i jjir i rr i »-jjirc;rir^gf|j^tijff-[r^ 



:^(?:& 



5=^ 






^^^ i ^^'^^-t 




Mi-UTA--(Third verse). 
8b. 




mrm 



\ 



( "7 ) 



1*. 



^^ P 




^^ 



Yo-UTA — (Fourth verse). 

at 




^^mi 



iffzr: 



T=J^ 





8c. 



fl^ -I — i-Jl I ~r 






rail. 



i^^p^^^^25^g(Sge 



Itsu-uta — (Fifth verse). 




^^^^g1^ 



5«. ^ 



61^. 



^EBeg 



S 



"^^ i -* i -if .-if * 



i^eii 



i:|3 







m//. 




• ' — — • — ■. 



^..^ 



=r— 



lA. 



Mu-UTA — (Sixth verse). 

2a'. 



^^gp 







4a«'. 



Sa"". 



'^' ^jE^gg 



^ 




E^J^l 






• Ami - 



7f. f^ - ... - /^M .... /igjg ..... jfi gc. 



Ii8 THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE, 

The fourth section has a second part, in which the kaki subject does 
not appear. It is written in a freer style, with more graces and slides ; it 
is lettered D'. The short rallentando close of the verse is constant in 
the first five variations : — 

rail* 




So much for the first, or chief part ; we may now follow the con- 
struction through the remaining five verses. The phrase A begins all 
through with the subject in its normal form, to kaki. 

Apart from the first phrase, however, each succeeding verse throws 
off some feature of the first verse, and specially elaborates one or more 
of its sections ; and, further, each verse borrows some feature from its 
predecessor. 

In the second verse, A is identical, and B almost, with A and B of 
the first verse. C introduces some slight changes. D is simplified, and 
its second part is omitted ; but E is elaborated with a second and a third 
part, E' and E", in which entirely new subjects are given out — in E' an 
interesting phrase of quavers; and in E", an equally interesting phrase in 
octaves, syncopated. F and G are discarded, E" running on into the 
eighth section, introducing the close by a glissade, which, however, is taken 
in strict time. 

In the third verse, at C, to kaki is given out an octave lower, as roku 
kaki, a chime-like variation of the principal subject caused by the rise to 
C|! on the third note instead of the usual fall. Three variations are 
appended to D ; the octave passage introduced in E" of the second verse 
appears in D'" inverted ; and the verse terminates with G in its decapitated 
form, a new variation introducing the rallentando close. 

In the fourth verse, the first four sections are treated simply, the 
subject being given differently in each. Two variations are attached to E ; 
the quaver subject introduced in E' of the second verse, reappears in E", 
varied in its second part ; and in E" the inverted octave passage of D'", 
of the third verse, is introduced with an interesting variation in its form. 
F is discarded, and the verse closes with G decapitated as before, the close 
being introduced by a fresh quaver passage. 



THE JAPANESE SCALE. 



119 



' : 1 



) 



\ ^ 



»» 



V 



F 



V. 

i 



In the fifth- verse C, D, and G are discarded ; B has two variations, and 
F one, which is continued into the eighth section, and leads up to the close. 

Finally, in the sixth verse, B, C, D, and E are discarded, a long and 
elaborate second part being inserted after A, which occupies five sections. 
This is the climax of the composition, the namigdeshi^ most elaborate of graces, 
being reserved for it ; it contains suggestions of many of the subordinate 
ideas scattered through the second parts in the preceding variations. 

The composition is then closed in a sedate and dignified manner with a 
continuous rallentando. The phrase F is used concisely with hachi kaki de- 
capitated. At G the shichi kakiy which has hitherto been decapitated before 
the half close, is given in full, an inversion of the phrase being appended to 
it ; this introduces the full close to the song. 

''RokudaUy' \4\Cv^ is set out on the Western staff on pages 120, 121, is 
the simplest illustration of the second class of Koto classical music, and may 
be subjected to a similar analysis. Each dan will be found to consist of 
two sections, the first occupying rather less than a third of the part. 
The sections are marked with an asterisk. 

The principal subject is the following passage : — 




which occurs over and over again throughout the composition, marking, in 
some form or other, both the beginning and the ending of all the dan. 
This simple form is elaborated into a second subject : — 




which is itself subjected to many variations, its chief characteristic being 
the introduction of an accidental, which is immediately contradicted on 
the next return to the note. The following varieties of it will be easily 
noticed : — 





^m 



te=^ 



t 




fe^na^a ^ 



n 



\ 



AtuiaHU. 



( I20 ) 

ROKUDAN— (The Six-Grade Tune). 

ICHi-DAN — (First part). 



w^^ 




gtfyl ^ ^^-^r^.q^ .j ^^ ^ 'g^ 




a==|: 



W^^- 








i 



^ 



mOtUmiOt 



Ni-D AN— (Second part). 




:^=^ 



^y^J 




^^^PW 




g g=^ 



a=q: 




^^^ 



titz^ 



ar-=t 



^^ p^g^^fe^^^ ^^t-^ p i tiUt^ ^^ J^za^^^ Jl^^^ 



Moderato. 




San-dan — (Third part). 



^^!e 






m 



5S 



5ff 



^ 




1= 



t^ 



zzazzE 



3^ 






^ 



^^^^^^^ 



1=5: 



;^ 



:l=P 



r-^ 




^ ^^^^^^ J^gEJ^S^^g 



g 




^^fc=^t 



g^=^ 



3F^ 



i«: 




2^3=3: 



5==±t 



a^i^fr-^^^iiHrr^^E^ 



tt=itl= 







«-» '^-4 



1 

> 



i 



All€grtii0, 



A a t ^^*'^ 



r^^^^^Pf^gw 



( 121 ) 

Yo-DAN — (Fourth part). 




'^-rnr'^^^^^^ 



s 




n 



*==s 



^ 





-\ — \ I 



g^^ 



I I 



^ 



I i 



i 





^fe 




^ 



J T^ ^-JUTT?^ 



i 



Go-dan — (Fifth part). 




^ ^^^^^^^^^ 



rf'' Jj'iJ^' 




i 



M- 



!I=P: 



^:^^i^^ #r-f-t^ i j r i j I 1^ r |i-..3H . £^ 




RoKU-DAN — (Sixth part). 




J" J- J" 




i 



tj 



«=?c 




s 




£ 



mi/ • 



Ml 



t=i: 



f 



i 



ii 



Um 






:fli:.4itfjtf4i- .u jj^ , i^f-ua 1 1 1 1 !• I ^' r I I r ^' i 






rmtt. 




ft\ tt\ 



^ 



I 



122 



THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 



Again, a variety is introduced a fifth lower, thus :■ 



i 



jt J "^ ijJ I -i^ -i ^^ 



The introduction to the sixth part will be seen to be built up on this 
phrase, with the introduction of double kaki beats. Finally, it is elaborated 
into a third subject, which occurs at the end of the first part : — 



^?5ftJ-^;^4^SL^^l^i#S 



9J 




with the following variation a fourth higher, corresponding to the variation 
of the simpler phrase given above : — 



fe« r [£^ 




Another important feature is the phrase rising to and terminating 
abruptly on the major third, which is of frequent occurrence : — 




Octave passages are also scattered through the parts, out of which the 
following rhythmical figure is made up : — 



^-jrj^^^ 



In the fifth part this is echoed immediately a fourth higher :■ 




J J I I J 



Each of the first five parts is played quicker than the preceding 
one ; when the first section of the sixth part, which starts allegro, is 
reached, the time is gradually slackened to andante. 



In the lighter and popular songs, the same precision of construction, 
and adherence to principles of form, are, it is needless to say, not observed. 



THE JAPANESE SCALE. 123 

The two melodies, ^^ Hitotsu-toya'' and ^^ Saita-Sakurai^' printed on pages 
130, 131, speak for themselves. But, before leaving the subject, it will be 
interesting to glance at some of the more formal of the lighter pieces : and 
for this purpose I have translated two into Western music, '^ Matsuzu- 
kishV — "The Pihe Branches" (page 124), and '' Kasuga-mode'' — "On the 
Road to the Kasuga Temple" (page 125).*" 

'' Matsuzu'kishi " is composed of ten short phrases, of which all contain 
eight bars, except the fourth, which has twelve, and the tenth, which has 
fourteen. The remaining eight closely resemble one another — so closely, 
indeed, that at first hearing they seem to be precisely identical. 

The theme- 
life 




occurs in all except the fifth part ; the remainder is built up of variations 
on this simple phase : — 




and the close : — 




but in every one these phrases are subjected to some very subtle change ; 
more especially the close, which is given with every conceivable variation of 
time and accent. The first bar is changed in all the subsequent parts 
to a short passage with the major fifth, which has already been noticed. 

" Kasuga-mode " is a composition of an entirely different character : it is 
more sparkling and more continuous, and its phrase repetitions are of a very 
graceful and interesting character. 



* The chief compositions of Yatsuhashi are comprised in the following list, all of which are frequently performed 
at the present day: — Um^e^ KokonmukusM^ TenkeUaiAHj Usuyuki^ YuH-no-asa, Rokudan^ Sdroj JCumo-no-uy^, 
UmgoromOy Kiritsubo^ Hachidan, Midare, Suma, Kumoi, SAiki-no-kyoku, Ogi-no-kyoku. 



( "4 ) 



MATSUZU-KISHM" The Pine Branches"). 



AlUgrttio. 




g=F^-r5^f^-g-^ * g-Xi£g ^ 





Mp-J^J J l i^^ 



/ I / " i«- 



=^ 




coLJUa g g^Rr^feft^ ^-r-fe 



rf>'''j j-i l r g 








i»mf0. 



IV t f r ILurri^ I C '.' j 



:ik: 




I 




Mjc e ci; ^ ^^i^c-gj'gi l^ gj' i C^r I 




I r ^ c 4i ! --^N!j J-g- c I r . g-^rtg-^•H-t- J ^ c g i ££j^ ^ 




£ C i r g Cir C--gTg=g::^:^^£p:^ 





g-'J^j j | j g-g^ 




g— g» [t~ff= ^ 



Poco iwceleramdo. 




e c I r c c-H?"i^f I j ^ g i ^^:g^s=g=}: 






m// • Ml • ttm • do. 




( 125 ) 



KASUGA-MODE— ("On the Road to the Kasuga Temple"). 



i 



m Alle/erttio. _^_j^ 



t: 



:^=^=^ 




l^^s 



pn=^ 



«<»r/< 



a tem^. 





d 4 ^ 




rmll. 





I 



Isl: 



^ 





^=J- 




i 




^ 



^m 



w 



^^§ 





^ 




^^— ^ ^^ ^^ 2 IpS 




^=r=^ 



¥t=^=^ 



^ 



^m 



i 



fcl: 



nizr. 



^ 




^^^^1 



F^=^^ 



r 



1^ 



^ 



^ 



126 



THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 



It is incontestable that at first hearing, and, indeed, after many hearings, 
this music leaves much to be desired ; perhaps, indeed, it merits some of 
the epithets which have been bestowed upon it. I do not imagine that the 
classical examples which I have given will do otherwise than emphasize 
those epithets on the lips of many. But I think that they do establish 
at least one point in its favour ; that there is, in the midst of much that 
is weird, a considerable amount of graceful and melodious phrase-com- 
position, and that, though the materials are limited, an ingenuity of a high 
artistic order is displayed in varying these phrases and in weaving them 
together. 

But almost all the music that we hear is, as I have indicated, penta- 
tonic in its character ; apart from the limitations it imposes, our ears are 
not only unaccustomed to such music, but do not very willingly get 
accustomed. I doubt if the absence of the seventh is very material in this 
respect; but the absence of the fourth has undoubtedly something to do 
with it. Our ears must, I think, miss the phrases and sequences — **Gods 
music," they have been called — in which the fourth of the scale holds a 
prominent position. 

I imagine that different character in music is derived almost entirely 
from the prevalence of certain intervals. The Japanese themselves were 
probably not far wrong when they classified the different ** new music *' 
in old days according to the character of the intervals used. And so I 
think the most cursory analysis of this Koto music reveals two qualities, 
the one good, the other bad. The good — those graceful phrases I have 
referred to — charms us ; the bad — the prevalence of awkward and ungainly 
intervals, and, consequently, a queer unmelodic formlessness in many of 
the phrases — irritates us : they are so unlike the smooth, natural sequences 
with which our own music abounds. Perhaps, after all, it is not surprising 
that in the struggle between the good and the bad characters, the victory 
has remained with the latter, for graceful and pretty phrases are but a 
poor compensation for a too prevalent ugliness. 

Let it be confessed at once that such passages as these find no way 
to please the Western ear : — 



% 






THE JAPANESE SCALE. 



127 








^^ 



Nor such as this — the opening phrase of *' Yatsuyo-jishiy' a piece in the 
Kumoi tuning : — 

* — . — ^^ — . — . . . 1 ■^-^- 



^^m 



^^^ 



Nor are the queer drops in these two phrases of '' Umegae'' such as 
are likely to yield delight to the soul of the Western musician : — 





3t^^ 




But I need not accumulate instances of phrases out of which it is 
impossible to twist musical meaning such as we understand it ; the printed 
examples of the music will undoubtedly furnish quite sufficient to any who 
care to seek for them. Nor, on the other hand, is it necessary to accumu- 
late instances of phrases of the other kind, for they are to be found 
plentifully scattered, not in the classical examples which have been given, 
but in the more popular forms, of which ^' MMuzu-kishV and '' Kasuga-mode'' 
are excellent illustrations. I select the following only for the purpose of 
making the point clear that something at least is to be said on the 
other side. 

. From " Rokuddn:' 




From " Unugaei!^ 







qf==t 



^ 




From " Kurama-jishiJ* 




128 THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 

As to the form of it, I have * analysed at some length two elementary 
pieces of classical Koto music, one of each class, dan and kumi^ because 
without such an analysis it would be impossible to arrive at any notion 
of the Japanese idea of composition. I do not imagine that every composi- 
tion when subjected to the same rigorous analysis would reveal so intricate 
a construction as appears to exist ; but when we find it in the least 
advanced example of the severer music, we are certainly entitled to 
assume that the principles of construction are not ignored in, the more 
elaborate compositions. A complete mastery of the science of " form " 
must be in the East, as it is in the West, the corner-stone' of all successful 
composition. It seems fully in accordance with the Western idea, too, 
that in the elementary compositions of a rigid or classical nature, the 
elements of the science should be easily discoverable, their clothing of 
phrases being only the thinnest of coverings. What, then, is the Japanese 
idea as we see it after our analysis ? A composition built on a principal 
theme, constantly recurring, but in varied forms : to the principal theme, 
subordinate themes added from time to time, these again recurring in 
varied forms: finally, a gradual working* up to a climax which is full of 
pleasant reflexion of all that has gone before ; being, in fact, the themes 
and pretty phrases of the composition woven together. 

The little popular pieces, such as ** Saita-Sakurail' speak for themselves ; 
and of '' Hitotsu-toya'' — indeed, it is curious that so simple a song, the very 
first piece of music that the children learn to hum, anc^ the maidens 
to play on Koto or Samisen, contains within itself the refutation of three 
of the statements that are made to the discredit of Japanese music. " It is 
altogether unmelodious." Why, here is a little melody full of grace, catching 
to the ear, to be whistled, to be hummed, to be strummed, like any 
Western popular song. **The distinction between major and minor is un- 
known." And here is this tune, which, in its first variation, goes from the 
minor to the major in a manner which no tyro among musicians can fail to 
recognize. Lastly, " There is no harmony." And yet in both its variations 
there are most distinct traces of harmony, not elaborate, it is true, but 
sufficient to show that the harmonic science was not altogether unknown. 

I have ventured to give these two melodies at the end of this Part, 
with harmonies based on these harmonic indications, and which have been 
received with approval by Japanese musicians who have listened to them. 



r 



THE JAPANESE SCALE. 129 

And in the more elaborate popular music, such as '' Matsuzu-kishV and 
'' Kasuga-mode^' do we not again find a reflexion of the main * principle on 
which the classical music of Yatsuhashi was built ? Themes constructed of 
delicate little phrases ; variations with subtly reminiscent suggestions of 
the principal theme ; and graces superadded, throUgh which its charm is 
plainly visible. 

Surely the Western idea does not altogether differ from this. In 
means for carrying it out, for inventing grander themes, for elaborating 
them, for beautifying them, for involving them one with the other, for 
mystifying the cllar vision of the brain by surrounding everything with a 
delightful mist of sound, yes : the music of the East cannot compare with 
the music of the West. But again I say we must remember the few 
pitiful strings, the imperfect knowledge of the scale, the deficient knowledge 
of the capacity of some of their instruments, and then I think what has 
been done is a thing to wonder at and not to scoff at ; and again I say 
we have no notion how far this modern Japanese music has gone, because 
we don't listen to it, and we won't listen to it, and as yet there is no 
means whereby we may study it for ourselves when the sliding doors have 
been drawn to, and the tea-house candles have been extinguished. 




s 



( »30 ) 



HITOTSU-TOYA. 



ACCOM- 
PANIMKNT. 




First Variation, 




^^g^j^^j^g^E^^ 




lfc=* 




* — • 



^^^^^^m 




Second Variation. 




( 131 ) 



ACCOM- 
PANIMBIfT. 



i 




SAITA-SAKURAI. 






.A. 



.a. 



t: 



■^^ 






I I 



r irrif I'J If fTf-frc-r^ 





^ ^^j-g_c-j!_u e r I r ^jLi c^, p t 




^E^ 



Sew. 



fv ikfcf i jfe-fHr^^ i f^j i r^ ^r:.'! 




^"f-^^r r I r r r 1 1' i. rii [i ir^rir'fi ^ 



4:»^ 



JJJJ 'JJ^ 



<?" f i lr r 



^^^m 



2=F 



^^ 



i 




i 



' — t^h'^^^^p r I i^ F 



r i ji Jc T if f i T f i r rr 



1^ 



#. 



^ 



A 



^ 



1 



> 



/ 

^ 



f 



( 



PART III. 



THE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 

OF THE JAPANESE. 



1 



N 



> 



> 



^ 



JAPANESE INSTRUMENTS. 



SYNOPSIS. 

The Koto: — Historical outline — The Yamato-koto — Diagrams of 
hand positions — Measurements of modern Kotos — Varieties of Kotos — 
General scheme of development — Technical terms used for Koto music — 
Koto notation — Facsimile of a page of Koto music, with translation. 

BiWAS, AND Stringed Instruments with Yke^ts \— Varieties of 
Biwas — Measurements — ^The Gekkins. 

Samisens, Fiddles, and Stringed Instruments without 

Frets : — Tunings of the Samisen — Varieties — The Kokyu — Chinese 
Fiddles, 

Flutes, and Bamboo Wind Instruments: — Varieties of Flutes— 
The Hichiriki— The Shakuhachi — The ShO — Arrangement and 
measurements of pipes : scheme of chords. 

Drums : — L Plain cylindrical Drums — IL Drums with braces : scheme 
of Chinese time — IIL Drums with dumbbell-shaped bodies^ or Tsuzumi. 

Gongs : — Varieties of Gongs. 
Brass Instruments. 



THE koto. 

THE KOTO IS the chief of modern Japanese instruments. In its 
present form it is the last of a long series of instruments, the one 
developed out of the other, some with many strings, some with few, 
of which four principal and several minor varieties remain in use at the 
present day. 

From what has already been said on the subject of the Kin and the 
Koto, it appears that this class of instrument originated both in China 



136 THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 

and Japan, all the evidence which is available pointing to the fact that 
the Yamato-koto is indigenous to Japan. The instrument in its popular 
form, however, originated without doubt in China, and went through many 
stages of development there. When this development was arrested, many 
forms of the instrument seem to have passed into Japan, where the process 
was continued. 

Its form, a number of strings stretched over a long narrow sounding- 
board, was the same at all periods of its existence. The principal variations 
consist in the dimensions and treatment of the sounding-board, and the 
method of attaching the strings to it : in the number of strings, and con* 
sequent tunings ; the minor variations, in the shape of the tsum6, or playing 
nails, the quality of the strings, the height of the bridges, and so forth, 
these last having been made in more recent times to improve the quality 
of the tone. The strings, it should be said, are of tightly twisted silk, 
soaked in wax ; and we find strings of different thickness, more or less 
tightly twisted, and indued with a lighter or heavier coating of wax. 

It seems possible to divide the numerous forms of the instrument into 
three groups : first, those with one or more strings, tuned in unison or to a 
fifth, attached to tuning-pegs, and played with tsumS, the notes being pro- 
duced by stopping ; secondly, those with a fixed bridge at each end, with 
many strings tuned in different ways, but without tuning-pegs, the strings 
being permanently stretched, and the notes produced by stopping as before, 
but tsumS not being used in general ; thirdly, those with a movable 
bridge, or loose fret, for each string. 

Before describing the many varieties of which the first two classes are 
composed, some further particulars of the main group may now be given. 

According to the ** Outline of the Origin of the So-no-koto Music," 
written by Yamada Ryu, a master of the Japanese Koto, and the inventor 
of the form of it in principal use at the present time, the period in which 
the Kin is supposed to have originated in China is that of the Emperor 
Fukki — B.C. 2000. It measured 7 feet 2 inches (one foot longer than the 
modern instruments), and had only five strings. In the Chew dynasty, 
1 50 years later, a sixth string was added ; and later still a seventh. The 
early Kin remained a seven-stringed instrument for a long period, and as 
such it is generally quoted in the books. It was made in two sizes, the 
smaller being an octave instrument measuring 3 feet 6 inches, A miniature 



i 



yAPANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS. 137 

Koto — the Han-koto — used, in old Japanese days, to form part of a 
traveller's luggage ; and it seems reasonable to suppose that the small Kin 
in older times was made for the same purpose, and was called into being 
by the same fondness for its music. In the Chin dynasty another miniature 
Kin, 3 feet 7 inches long, appears to have been in vogue, and also a one- 
stringed instrument, Ichi-gen-kin, which disappeared from China to reappear 
in later times in Japan under the same name. 

An endeavour to make the Kin a twelve-stringed instrument seems to 
have failed, probably because the need for a many-stringed instrument was 
already supplied by the H itsu-no-koto, which is attributed also to the 
reign of the Emperor Fukki. We can only conjecture what the precise 
differences in construction between the Kin and the H itsu-no-koto were, 
the only records being as to the number pf the strings. At first, the H itsu- 
no-koto had fifty; but in the reign of the Emperor Kotei the number was 
reduced to twenty-five ; it was again reduced by the Emperor Shun to 
twenty-three, **many other alterations being made at the same time."* It 
measured 8 feet i inch long, by i foot 9 inches broad. After a time three 
more strings were discarded." 

Two further varieties are noticed in the books : the Sho-hitsu-no-koto, 
7 feet 3 inches long, with twenty-five strings, and ** ornamented with precious 
stones " ; and the Chiku-no-koto, a thirteen-stringed instrument struck with 
a short bamboo — chtku. ** Even the Kin,*' says the historian, **was sometimes 
struck with a stick, the idea having originated with a poet who derived 
inspiration from striking the strings with his pen."" 

At the points of greatest interest in the history of Japanese music, 
when the thirteen-stringed Kin was finally established in China, and which 
of the many forms already noticed came to Japan, we unfortunately find 
the greatest doubt. The Chinese instrument now used for Chinese music 
in Japan is neither the pure Kin nor the H itsu-no-koto, but the So-no-koto ; 
and even in the sober work of so accomplished a musician as Yamada Ryu, 
its introduction into these islands is surrounded by angels, mountain-tops, 
clouds, and lovely ladies. The story of the mountain-grove has already 
been told. The period is given as the reign of the Emperor Temmu^ 
about A.D. 673. 

The Chiku-no-koto is the first thirteen-stringed instrument mentioned, 
but this again is treated as quite distinct from the So-no-koto. The 



138 THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 

number, though as a matter of course it is connected with all other human 
and divine things which have settled themselves into thirteen, seems un- 
doubtedly to have been finally determined upon because it could give the 
full octave of ritsu, or semitones, one string for each, when they were required. 

Somewhere, then, in the mists of the early Chinese dynasties, about two 
thousand years ago, the So-no-koto developed out of the H itsu-no-koto, and 
came to Japan with Chinese music, dancing, and the rest of the Chinese 
orchestra, about the middle of the seventh century. It remained the 
fashionable instrument of the Japanese Court for upwards of a thousand 
years, but was used for Chinese music alone. National music was left to 
the Yamato-koto — of which more hereafter — the Satsuma-biwa, and the 
other instruments which had gradually developed in Japan. 

The development of the Japanese Koto out of the So-no-koto is, 
however, given by Yamada Ryu with the precision with which it has 
already been related. 

The two forms in which the Japanese Koto is now found are, first, 
the Ikuta-koto, which developed out of Yatsuhashi s improvements ; and, 
secondly, the Yamada-koto, in which the instrument has been brought 
to its highest pitch, no further development having been attempted, and 
none indeed seeming possible. The So-no-koto remains for use when the 
old Chinese music is performed. 

It has been impossible to give more than the barest indication of the 
differences between the earliest forms of Koto; but with regard to the three 
now in use they can be pointed out with more precision. The So-no-koto 
has low bridges, the strings are coarser and more loosely twisted than 
those now used, and the tsumi are of thick paper, gilt or silvered, with 
a very small piece of bamboo let in, not more than one-fifth of an inch in 
length. In playing, the paper stall first rubs the string, the bamboo striking 
it afterwards, but with very little force ; the result is a soft woolly tone. 
In the Japanese Koto these three points are altered ; the bridges are 
raised, the strings are of finer quality, and the tsuniS are of ivory standing 
clear of the leather stall, enabling the strings to be struck clean. The 
result is a clear bright tone, tending naturally to the production of lighter 
and brighter music. 

The Ikuta-koto is used now almost exclusively in the west of Japan, 
though occasionally in the east by ladies. Its sides and extremities are 



JAPANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS. 139 

covered with elaborate lacquer designs and inlay of tortoise-shell, ivory, and 
silver; the strings are of different colours, like those of the Western Harp, 
enabling them to be more easily distinguished and remembered. The tsutnS 
are of thick ivory or tortoise-shell set in lacquered leather stalls, and are 
cut square at the top. In the Yamada-koto, used by all the profession in 
the east of Japan, superfluous ornament is discarded, the whole art of the 
maker being devoted to the preparation of the finest wood for the body ; 
only on very costly instruments is a little gold lacquer ornament of the 
most severe kind introduced. The bridges have again been raised ; they 
are made much stouter, and are either tipped with ivory or made of solid 
ivory; the strings are of the finest white or yellow silk. The tsum^ are 
about an inch long, of ivory in leather stalls, with an elliptical top. On 
the whole the instrument is more substantial and more workmanlike 
than the delicately-built Ikuta-koto, and gives a much clearer and more 
resonant tone. 

The three forms of tsum^ are figured on the plate facing page 144, 
drawn to their exact sizes. 

We have now to go back to the old Koto of Japan, the Yamato- 
koto — otherwise called Wa-gon — which differs essentially in structure and 
principle from those which have been described. The Japanese authorities 
agree, and I see neither reason nor authority for disputing with them, in 
claiming it, as the name indicates, as a purely national instrument. The story 
of its development from six long bows tied side by side is a familiar one ; 
and the form of the instrument suggests that it is by no means improbable. 

The sounding-board of the Yamato-koto is cut at one end into five 
long notches, the six strings being attached to the six ** bow " projections 
by thick coarse cords. The bridges are made of untrimmed joints of 
maple twigs ; the strings themselves being of coarse twisted silk. The idea 
of the roughness of the instrument is further preserved in the rule that it 
ought not to have a case of any sort. Crude though its construction is, 
its tone is very sweet and mellow. 

Again, the principle of the instrument is entirely different from that 
of the ordinary Koto. The six strings are tuned in the following order — 

D, F, A, C, E, G — 

123456 



t 



f 



zc 



140 



THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE, 



the major triad of the tonic, and the minor triad of the ' second of the 
diatonic scale of C major : an interesting and harmonious tonal relation 
with which Western musicians are perfectly familiar. 

The method of playing is as follows. In the right hand a small slip 
of ox-horn, or other hard material, is held, with which all the six strings 
are scratched (literally kot(hsaki) rapidly, from the first to the sixth, close to 
the long bridge at the right end of the instrument. The strings are then 
at once damped with the left hand, and a little melody accompanying the 
voice is tinkled out with the left little finger, the ** scratch" coming to 
mark the pauses in the rhythm. 

The instrument is now used only on the rare occasions when the music 
which was originally written for it is performed : the Kagura^ the Saibara, 
and the rest of the old music of the country. 

The following diagrams of the proper positions of the hand in playing 
the Koto are taken from Ab6 Suyenao's " Records of Ancient Music." 



POSITIONS OF THE HANDS IN PLAYING THE YAMATO-KOTO. 
Positions of Right Hand Holding the Plectrum : — 





Scratching outwards. 



Scratching inwards. 



Positions of Left Hand : — 





The little finger playing the melody. 



Damping the strings after scratching. 



JAPANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS, 



141 



POSITIONS OF THE HANDS IN PLAYING THE SD-NO-KOTO. 

Right-Hand Positions:— 





Suga-kaki: thumb striking the string, fingers playing kaki. 



Kotsumi: up -stroke of the thumb. 





Ren : position of thumb after a sweep over several strings. 



Kaeski'tuffU : thumb-stroke. 



Left-Hand Positions: — 





The hand at rest below the bridges. 



Pressing the string to produce a sharp. 



( 142 ) 

PRINCIPAL MEASUREMENTS OF THE FOUR KOTOS 

NOW IN USE. 





Yamato-koto, 


Sd-no-koto. 


Ikuta-koio. 


YamacUi-koto. 




(Old Japanese.) 


(Chinese.) 


(Modern 


Japanese.) 


Length 


6 feet 3 in. 


6 feet 4^ in. 


6 feet 3 in. 


6 feet 


Breadth 


5f in. [upper 

end] 
9^ in. [lower 

end] 


lo in. 
9iin. 


9|in. 


9|in. 


Depth of sounding 
board 


2 in. 


if in. 


3 in. 


3 in. 


Height of upper 
end 


4i in. 


4i in. 


5 in. 


5iin. 


Height of lower 
epd 


3 in. 


34 in. 


i\ in. 


3iin. 


Height of string 
bridges 


2\ in. 


2 in. 


2 in. 


2\ in. 


Upper bridge from 
end 


3 in. 


44 in. 


5iin. 


4iin. 


Lower bridge from 
end 




lo in. 


9i in. 


Sin. 


Length of fastening 


11^ in. 








ropes 










Strings apart ,.. 


\ in. at upper 
bridge 

I J in. at rope 
fastening 

Notches of 
the "bows" 
project 2| 
inches from 
lower end 


f in. 


1 in. 


1 in. 



\ 



>^ 



( 143 ) 



VARIETIES OF THE KIN, OR KOTO. 



We have not sufficient information available to attempt a systematic 
classification of the numerous instruments which fall properly under the 
head of Kins, or Kotos. The order in which the following instruments are 
described is based on the preceding account, and is a possible approximation 
to their order of development 



IcHi-GEN-KiN — the "One-stringed Kin'* — or Suma-koto: a one-stringed 
instrument, said to have been invented in Japan in the Engi era, a.d. 901, 
at Suma, near Kob^, whence it took its name. 

It is made of kiri wood, very slightly convexed, and measures 3 feet 
7 inches long, by 4^ inches broad. Its one string, '2 feet 9^ inches in 
length, is fastened underneath the body of the instrument; coming through 
a small hole at one end, it passes over a low movable bridge and is 
wound round a peg 4^ inches high, which stands at right-angles to the 
body at the other end. The string is tuned to F;J^, the second string of the 
Koto, and fundamental note of the scale. 

The method of playing is peculiar. Between the thumb and first 
finger of the right hand is held an ivory tsumiy composed of a section of 
a cylinder, the two ends of which are cut at a right-angle to one another, 
as shown on Plate XL, page 144. With this the string is struck near 
the bridge, the stroke being generally upwards ; a down stroke is, however, 
occasionally introduced in order to obtain variety of intonation. On the 
second finger of the left hand is worn a heavy ivory cylinder, 2\ inches 
long, figured on the same Plate. The different notes are produced by 
resting this cylinder lightly on different parts of the string, the divisions into 
tones and semitones being indicated by small ivory or painted spots on the 
face of the body. A peculiar jangling trill is produced by sliding the 
cylinder along the string to the different positions, instead of lifting it clear. 

The one-stringed Koto is said to have been invented by an exiled 
nobleman to chase away his melancholy ; his original instrument being a 
string stretched across his hat There is no doubt, however, that a one- 



144 THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE, 

stringed instrument existed in China in very early times. The chroniclers 
assert that its departed spirit took the usual means of returning to earth, 
revealing itself in a dream to the exile of Suma. 

Ni-GEN-KiN — the ** Two-stringed Kin": a variety of the Suma-koto, 
with two strings tuned in unison to FJ. The dimensions of the. body are 
the same, but instead of being flat it is hollowed to a depth of two inches. 
The strings, fastened underneath as in the Suma-Koto, pass over a bridge 
with two notches, half-an-inch apart at one end, but instead of going direct 
to the tuning-pegs, they are brought together on a second bridge with one 
notch only : thence they pass through a small piece of brass to their 
respective pegs, which are 2\ inches long. The Ni-gen-kin is played with 
the same heavy cylindrical tsumS as the Suma-koto, the double string 
emphasizing the trills produced on that instrument Small pieces of metal 
are inserted in the body to indicate the positions of the notes." 

The Ichi-gen-kin and the Ni-gen-kin are figured on Plate XI., page 
144 ; the one-stringed instrument rests on a low table which is generally 
used when any of these small Kotos are played. 

A variety of the Ni-gen-kin is made of a section of bamboo ; the 
strings are tied to thick silk cords at one end, and pass to the tuning-pegs 
through a large hole at the other end ; the pegs are placed one on each 
side of the body. A second hole at the upper end allows the strings to 
be struck freely. The cords are of purple silk, adorned with heavy tassels. 

Yakumo-koto — the ** Eight-cloud Koto": a two-stringed instrument, 
almost identical with the Ni-gen-kin, except that the body is enclosed, 
thus making a true sounding-board. 

San-gen-kin — the "Three-stringed Kin": a further development of the 
Suma-koto, with three strings, the outer tuned in unison to C^, the middle 
one to Ft, thus : — 

giving the first, second, and fifth strings of the Koto. The dimensions of 
the sounding-board — which is enclosed, as in the case of the Yakumo-koto 
— are the same as those of the one and two-stringed instruments ; and the 
same heavy tsutni and cylinder are used by the player. 



II-GEN-KIN, OR SUMA-KOTO, AND T 




VARIOUS FORMS OF KOTO rauui. 



JAPANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS. 145 

The third string, Cjj;, is used for the melody, the first and second for 
the kak^ beat. The melody, moreover, is occasionally reinforced by the 
F|| of the second string, whole passages being played in fifths. The three 
strings are also often struck together in quick arpeggio fashion. 

As in the case of the Ni-gen-kin, a variety of the San-gen-kin is 
sometimes made of a segment of bamboo. It is a simple reproduction, 
however, of the original, without the silk cords and tassels, and without the 
apertures in the body. The pegs are disposed at right-angles to one 
another, two at the sides and one in the centre of the body. 

AzuMA-KOTO — the ** Eastern Koto": another three-stringed instrument 
with a perfect sounding-board. Certain differences in its structure are, 
however, very important to notice. Three wires are strung loosely inside, 
which produce slight vibrations when the instniment is played. These wires 
do not rattle like the one which is fixed inside the Gekkin, but seem to 
be used for sympathetic vibrations, like those of the Viol d'Amore, though 
they are not tuned to special notes as are those of the more modern 
Western instrument. 

The upper end of the sounding-board is cut into three bow-notches, 
showing the affinity between this Koto and the Yamato-koto ; it is also 
bound thrice in its length with wicker, to preserve the idea of three 
bows being tied together. Purple silk tassels hang from two small holes 
in the side. 

» 

In the next group the instruments are constructed on somewhat 
different principles, and are played in a different way. Instead of the loose 
bridges which are used in the one, two, and three-stringed Kotos, one long 
fixed bridge is placed at each end; the tuning-pegs have disappeared, and 
the strings passing under the sounding-board are tuned permanently, and 
not as occasion requires ; and, finally, the cylindrical tsunt^ are not used, 
the strings being plucked with the thumb and first finger. The strings are 
stopped with the fingers of the left hand, the positions of the notes being 
indicated, as in the first group, by marks on the sounding-board.* 



* I have to regret that my information on this group of Kotos is exceedingly meagre, and I have some doubt 
whether it is altogether reliable. The instruments are seldom used, and there are few people who possess any 
knowledge of them. I have occasionally supplemented my own observations by those of Monsieur Alexandre Kraus 
Fils, published in his pamphlet, ''La Musique du Japon," which he permits me to refer to. 

U 



146 . THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE, 

It will be easily understood, however, that there are links connecting 
the two groups, in which some of the characteristics of both are noticeable : 
these links are the five and the six-stringed Kotos. The resemblances to 
the first group seem to show that the natural order of development is as 
I have given them, although the absence of tsum^ and the more primitive 
method of playing point to the second group as the earlier. 

Go-KiN — the ** Five-stringed Kin." The body is the same length as 
that of the Suma-koto, and only slightly broader. It is in the same way 
slightly convexed, and has the two lateral indentations which are shown in 
the figure of the Suma-koto facing page 144 ; the lower bridge is movable. 

" Le Gokkine rappelle son origine Chinoise par ses deux enfoncements 
latdraux. II est montd de cinq cordes dont les trois plus grosses sont 
jaunes ; la quatri^me est violette, et la cinquieme, bleue. Au lieu des 
points blancs du Souma-koto, il y a sur le Gokkine, en characteres Chinois, 
les noms des sons que Ton produit, en appqyant sur la corde aux endroits 
marquds. On toume les chevilles a laide d une clef k bois." — [KrausJ] 

RoKU-KiN — the " Six-stringed Kin " : an instrument with six strings 
passing over two fixed bridges, one at each end of the sounding-board. 
The sides of the body are parallel, and the characteristic lateral indentations 
are wanting. 

Shichi-gen-kin — the " Seven-stringed Kin." This is the most im- 
portant instrument of the group now under consideration, and it is greatly 
to be regretted that information respecting it is so very meagre. The 
accompanying illustration shows the front and the back of the instrument. 

The length of the sounding-board is 3 feet 10^ inches, with a string 
length of 3 feet 7 inches. The breadth, 6^ inches, tapering to ^\ ; the 
height at the upper end z\ inches, at the lower end if ; the thickness, 
X inch at the outside edges, and if inch at the centre of the convexity. 

The strings are tied to loops of silk cord, which are fastened under- 
neath the sounding-board to seven small pegs; the cords come up to the 
upper surface through small holes, the knots between the cords and the 
strings resting on a bridge, half an inch high, which serves to keep the strings 
free of the sounding-board. On the bridge the strings are three-quarters of 



JAPANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS. 147 

an inch apart; from this point they converge, and passing over the lower 
end, which is slightly raised to form a bridge, within a space of. an inch and 
a quarter, they are tightly wound round two stout pegs fastened underneath 



the sounding-board one foot from the end ; these pegs serve as rests for the 
instrument. It will be observed from this description that the strings of the 
Shichi-gen-kin can only be tuned by untying the knots at their upper ends. 

The body has the characteristic lateral indentations; and the positions 
for the stopping are indicated by small ivory circles. 

The tuning of the strings is remarkable : — 



or, raising the notes to the Koto pitch : — 

A, E, G, Ff, G, E, F#. 

The method of playing is, however, more remarkable still. The melody 
is played entirely by "plucking" the last string, the first and second fingers 
of the left hand being used for stopping. The remaining strings are swept 
in arpeggio by the thumb of the right hand. 

Monsieur Kraus calls this instrument the Chinese Kin. 



148 THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 

The Kin, however, was undoubtedly, like all the Chinese instruments of 
the class, a much larger instrument. It may possibly be the miniature 
Kin, in vogue in China during the Chin dynasty, its length corresponding 
with the length of that instrument as given in the Encyclopcsdia. If this 
supposition should be correct, it furnishes us with the important con- 
clusion that the development of the Hitsu-no-koto from the Kin, or, as 
it is sometimes called, the Kin-no-koto, was accomplished by means of the 
addition of a movable bridge or fret for each string. Monsieur Kraus, 
however, gives both the Shichi-gen-kin, and its companion the Gindai, with 
movable bridges. The presence of the "stopping-points" on the sounding- 
board seems to show, however, that this is inaccurate. 

Gindai : an instrument of precisely the same size and shape as the 
preceding, but strung with thirteen strings. — \Kraus^ The name is probably 
made out of the words ^^dai kin*' — i.e.^ the ** larger Kin." 

Kaku-goto — the ** Square Koto": **un autre instrument Japonais de 
la plus haute antiquity, tombd aujourd'hui en d6su6tude." It is rectangular, 
being 2 feet long by i foot 6 inches broad, with a string-length of i foot 
5 inches. There are twenty-five strings, stretched over two long fixed 
bridges ; it is played with hard wooden tsumi.—\Krau$7\ 

Sag6-koto : a small Koto of very ancient origin, said to have been 
invented in the year 3468 B.C. It has nine strings, and measures 2 feet 
long, with a string-length of i foot 6 inches : its breadth at the upper end 
is 6 inches, and at the lower end 4f inches. 

The group diverges at this point in two directions : the Nichin, 
forming a connecting link between the Koto and the Gekkin ; and the 
Tsuma-koto, which seems to show traces of foreign influence. 

Nichin : a circular Koto, with a diameter of i foot 3 inches, and a 
string-length of i foot. The thickness of the body is 2 inches. 

** Le Nichine est une espece de psalt^rion rond, sur lequel sont tendues 
six cordes de grosseur et de couleurs diff^rentes. La premiere, beaucoup 
plus grosse que les autres, est jaune et donne Toctave basse de la tonique; 
la seconde est bleu clair, la cinqui^me, noire, et la sixieme, blanche. Ces 
six cordes sont attachdes k un bouton en bois et passent au dessus de deux 



i 



JAPANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS. 149 

chevalets placds k o".32, Tun de Tautre ; on les accorde en tournant leurs 
chevilles avec une petite clef en bois. II est pourvu a Tintdrieur dune 
petite lame en fer, qui se trouve dans la plupart des instruments populaires 
au Japon et qui sert a faire un petit bruit, quand on remue Tinstru- 
ment." — \Kraus?[ 

The circular shape and the vibrating wire seem to show clearly the 
process by which the Gekkin was developed from the Koto. 

TsuMA-KOTO : a Koto with thirteen strings on a sounding-board in the 
form of a trapezoid. Its measurements are as follows : — Greatest length, 
2 feet 2 inches ; shortest length, i foot 7 inches ; breadth, 1 1 inches. Each 
string is attached to a small tuning-peg on the upper surface, resembling 
those used in the Piano. — \Krau$^ Monsieur Kraus gives to this in- 
strument movable bridges for each string. I am inclined to doubt whether 
this information is accurate, as the presence of tuning-pegs seems to indicate 
that bridges would not be used. 

Ya-goto — the ** Eight-stringed Koto": an instrument said to have been 
developed out of the Yamato-koto. Its distinguishing feature is that it is 
double-strung. The sounding-board measures 3 feet 7 inches long by about 
5 inches high, and is more con vexed than that of any other Koto. The 
eight double strings pass over two long low bridges, giving a string length 
of 32 inches. Above the upper bridge they pass through ivory holes let 
into the surface of the sounding-board, and are wound round eight long 
tuning-pegs which are fastened underneath. These pegs terminate in small 
spear-heads, which project from the upper end of the instrument. 

Yan-kin : the Chinese form of the Zither, the shape of which is 
accurately copied. It is strung with fifteen double wires, and is said by 
the instrument makers to have come to China from Italy. 

Another double-stringed instrument, sometimes called the Yo-kin, with 
thirteen double brass wires, has probably developed out of this adaptation 
of the Zither, though it is said to be of Japanese origin. The sounding- 
board is of black wood, measuring 26 inches by 10; it is 4 inches high, 
con vexed, and decorated with metal ornaments. The wires are attached 
to a double row of tuning-pegs placed at both ends beyond the bridges. 



ISO THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 

In the last group the instruments are distinguished by the introduction of 
the small movable bridges for each string, which have already been noticed. 

In this group come two instruments which have already been men- 
tioned, but of which no accurate description can be given : — 

HiTSU-NO-KOTO ; an instrument of which there were many varieties, 
the largest having fifty strings. 

Chiku-no-koto : a thirteen-stringed instrument, struck with a short 
bamboo. 

There are also the following, which have already been described : — 
Yamato-koto : the old six-stringed Koto of Japan. 
So-NO-KOTO : the ultimate form of the thirteen-stringed Kin of China. 
Ikuta-koto and Yamada-koto : the ultimate forms of the thirteen- 
stringed Koto of Japan. 

To these must be added : — 

Han-koto — the "Half-Koto": the ordinary Japanese Koto in miniature, 
which is used on journeys. 

Yo-KiN — the " Chinese Koto " : a miniature thirteen-stringed instrument 
from China. Its measurements are as follows: — Length, 3 feet 7 inches; 
breadth, 9 inches ; height at the sides, 5 inches. 



Two forms of Corean Kotos must be mentioned here which are given 
in the Encyclopedia. The drawings show one to have been somewhat in 
the ordinary form, with a figure-head at one end — the Kudara-koto, or 
Corean Koto ; the other — the Shiragi-koto — seems to have resembled the 
traditional form of the ancient Harp. 



JAPANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS. 151 

Although the amount of information at present procurable is not all 
that could be desired, there is sufficient to indicate how important a position 
the Koto holds in the development of stringed instruments of music. All 
authorities are, I think, agreed that the long-bow of the archers first 
suggested the tight-drawn string as a sound-producing body. Development 
seems to have been along two distinct lines. There is first the well-known 
one, the multiplication of strings on the same bow, one behind the other. 



which speedily produced the early forms of Harp ; and it is somewhat 
curious to note that the Shiragi-koto of Corea is the only trace of this 
form in the three Kingdoms of the Far East. 

Secondly, there is the multiplication of bows as well as strings, the 
weapons being placed side by side and tied together. The Koto family 
springs immediately from this idea, and it seems probable that the sounding- 
board sprang from this class rather than from an amplification of the arc 
of the bow.* 



* In cODsideiing (he bow-theory of the derelopmeiit of the Koto, it is impotuble not to lefei to the Valiha, 
a Tcmarkable instnunent in Die in MadagBscat. This instnunent is of the Koto famil)'. It is made of a piece of 

entice bamboo ; the strings are made of thin slices of the leed, raised od biidges, but unseveced (torn th« main 
stem which forms the sounding-lxwid. The stiiogs completely eociide the bamboo, the iniliumeDt being placed 
upright 



152 THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 

Finally, the archery bow reappears in the bow of the Fiddle class as 
the vibrator instead of the vibrating instrument. 

The subordinate points of development are also to be noticed. 

The body of the instrument appears first as a flat piece of wood very 
slightly convexed, then as a fully-curved hollow resonator, and lastly, as a 
regular enclosed sounding-board. 

At a certain stage loose vibrating wires are introduced into the 
sounding-board, which afterwards give place to a noisy jangling wire. 

The strings, at first arranged unmethodically, and of any number from 
one to fifty, afterwards settle down to thirteen, capable of producing the 
thirteen notes in the octave. Double strings are, after a time, introduced, 
and become the regular features in a certain class of instruments. Much 
later, wire is introduced, instead of string soaked in wax ; but this never 
seems to have become popular. 

« 

The strings are, in the early instruments, attached to large tuning- 
pegs ; these diminish in size till they become small pins turned with a key 
instead of by hand. Where the movable bridges are introduced the pegs 
or pins are discarded altogether, the strings being fastened either below or 
above the sounding-board. 

The strings are vibrated either by the finger or with a plectrum, which 
at first is a small piece of horn, and afterwards developes into the large 
backi of the Biwa and Samisen ; and then dwindles again into the Koto 
tsumi, worn on the thumb and first and second fingers. 

This continued process of development will be traced further in the 
two remaining classes of stringed instruments : those with frets — the Biwas ; 
and those without frets — the Samisens and Fiddles. 

We may proceed now to consider certain points of interest in con- 
nection with the Koto notation and the method of playing that instrument. 



JAPANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS. 153 



TECHNICAL TERMS USED FOR KOTO MUSIC 



Riisu — a semitone. 

The Sharps. 

Osu — to press : i.e. to press a string below its bridge and thus sharpen 
Its tone. The pressure should raise the natural note of the string one 
riisu \ the term is therefore equivalent to the Western "sharp." It is 
commonly called ka, the Japanese sign being 77 • Thus, ku osu, or ku ka, 
means the ninth string pressed, and it may be properly translated by A+f.^* 

There are, in addition, three other varieties of sharps. 

Zf, the "after sharp": the pressure being applied below the bridge 
after the string has been struck. The pressure is retained until the next 
note is played. The Japanese sign is 2> and it might be conveniently 
rendered for purposes of translation by the sign v^. Ku /, or 9 ^, would 
be interpreted on the Western staff thus : — 




AV-— the "twisted sharp": sharp vibrations are introduced into the 
natural ones of the string by twisting it slightly below its bridge with the 
thumb and first finger, the natural vibrations being then allowed to continue. 
The Japanese sign is 3^, and it may be conveniently rendered by "^^l. 
Kti ki, or 9 '♦*), would be interpreted thus on the staff: — 




Yu — the "half sharp": sharp vibrations are, as in ki, introduced into 
the natural ones of the string by a pressure below the string : but the 
pressure is removed before the next note is played.^^ The higher vibrations 
therefore predominate, but the relapse into the natural is allowed to be 
distinctly heard, unless it occurs in a quick passage. The Japanese sign 
is i, and it may be conveniently rendered by ^. Ku yu, or 9 kJ^, would 
be interpreted as nearly as possible on the staff by — 




154 THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 

Niju oski — the double pressure, which raises the natural note of the 
string a full tone. The proper use of the double-pressure is, according to 
Mr. Yamas6's explanation, to produce the notes of the scale which are not 
given by the open strings. Thus, the phrase in ^' Kasuga-mode^' 

9 

lO 

^0 ka 

to niju oski 

translated on to the Western staff, becomes — 




There is not an unnatural temptation to call this a "double sharp," but 
the refinements of the double sharp, as distinguished from the note which 
represents it on the Piano, are, I think, unknown to the Japanese musician. 
In translating on to the Western staff, it may be necessary occasionally to 
use the double sharp, as in the inverted kaki given below, but this would 
occur in Japanese music more frequently with a simple than with a double 
pressure. 

Examples of ka, /, ^ and yUy will be found in the specimen of Koto 
notation given on page 162, the translation of which on to the Western 
staff will be found on page 116. ^ 

Agari — to raise a string from its normal tuning one semitone or more, by 
moving its bridge up. 

Sagari — to lower a string a semitone or more, by moving its bridge down. 
One of the tunings is called Go-sagari roku-agari, in consequence of such 
changes in the fifth and sixth strings. 

There is obviously no other way of flattening the natural note of a 
string : where a flattening is required, therefore, the bridge is moved by the 
left hand during the progress of the piece. This occurs to the 6th and to 
strings during the progress of the tune '' Kurama-jishiy' -wntx^n in Hirajoshi 
with those strings raised a semitone — Tuning No. 11, on the scheme of 
Koto-tunings given on page 92. 

Kaki — '* to scratch": two adjoining strings struck in succession with the 



JAPANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS. 155 

same finger, sometimes quickly, sometimes slowly : thus kaki on the first 
and second would be : — 

or 





and on the fifth and sixth it would be:- 




or 







It is often used to mark a pause in the melody, as in '' Saita-Sakurai" ; and 
in the same way to mark the conclusion of a part of the composition, or 
as we might say "variation," as in ^' RokudanJ* In this case the kaki is 
always on the first and second strings, and is played more vigorously, like a 
short roll on a drum, a strong accent being laid on the second note." 

In the Japanese notation the strings on which kaki is to be played are 
only indicated by being written close together : but, as ordinary quavers are 
written in the same way, the kakiy like so many other things, has to be 
remembered by the player. The following would be a convenient method 
of indicating kaki in turning Japanese notation into English figures: — 



12 34 56 67 78 

These five are in commonest use : they are played with the first or 
second finger. 

Haya-kaki—^^ c\;ii\c\i or double kaki:'* two kaki beats played in quick 

succession ; haya-kaki on the sixth and seventh strings, for example, would 
be written thus : — 




WarizunU — an inverted kaki on the eighth and seventh strings, with a 
**half sharp" (^'w) on the seventh : it is played slowly, and is often used in 
the concluding phrase of a composition, the yu being prolonged ; it may be 
thus rendered on the staff: — 




156 



THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 



Another inverted kaki is sometimes found on the thirteenth and twelfth 
strings, the latter sharpened ; it has, however, no distinct name, being written 
simply kin^ i ka : on the staff this is : — 




Hazamu — a short phrase in frequent use, composed of the tenth string 
dotted, followed by the ninth and eighth : translated on to the staff 
thus : — 




Kak6 — the name given to a phrase of five notes of frequent occurrence : 
it may be given on any string, the number of the string on which it ends 
being written before the word kaki ; the phrase consists of two consecutive 
strings played with the first finger ; then two, one string lower, played with 
the second ; then one with the thumb, four strings higher ; thus : — 



to kaki 7^67 



ikaki 8978 



" ^V j_ J I J J hr 



kin kaki 9 10 8 9 kin 




> I J J-lT 



jukaki 6 7 5 6 10 



hachikaki\ 5348 




^ 



'W=^ 



i>'ii 



i 



roku kaki 23126 



T 4 4 b 



3 



and so on. 



JAPANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS. 157 

The piece ** Umegae " is built up on this phrase. An interesting variation 
of it occurs, in which the kakS is shorn of its last two notes : thus shichi 
kaki, 3, 4, 2, 3, 7, appears as 3, 4, 2 :— 




^^ 



In the example of notation it will be seen that, although the numbers of 
the strings composing the kaki are written in their proper sequence, the name 
is written at the sfde to enable the performer to phrase the notes properly. 

Kaki is literally ** to superpose," referring to the thumb note which 
stands up prominently above the gentle swaying of the first four notes of 
the phrase ; and with the exception of roku kakS, this superposed note is the 
octave of the third note. 

So far as I have been able to observe no common phrases, with the 
exception of kaki and hazumu, have special names given to them. 



Glissades. 

Nagashi, or omoti — *' to flow " : a slide or glissando with the first finger 
over the strings ; both the first and last strings of the slide are named ; 
nagashi is, however, generally used for the common glissade i to kin^ 

Hikiren is used for shorter glissades from the first string, as from i to 6, 
I to 10. 

In rapid movements hikiren is often only a swift sweep over the strings 
from right to left of the first and second fingers held together, without much 
regard to the actual strings struck. 

Uraren is also used for short glissades — those starting downwards from 
the last string. This is a very graceful glissade, often used in finishing part 
of a composition ; it is played with the first and second fingers turned back, 
moving slowly with a slight circular motion outwards, finishing with an in- 
verted kaki on the indicated string played with the thumb. 

Thus rokii-ntadi uraren is a slide from kin to 6, or kin to 76. 

Namigaeshi — ** waves coming and going " : probably in allusion to the 
fanciful idea of a dragon lying on the sea-shore which the form of the Koto 
suggests. Namigaeshi is made up of alternate glissades over all the strings, 



158 



THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 



from I to kin, and back from kin to i ; this is done once or twice, and occa- 
sionally thrice, in all cases terminating with an upward nagashi, or with a 
hikiren from i to 56: — 

First Namigaeshi. 

U 




Second Nami 




Nagashu 




or, for the last bar, Hikiren, i to 56- 



^m^j 



Shu — ** to whistle " : a moderately rapid sweep with the edge of the 
tsum6 from right to left on one string, generally the sixth ; the first and 
second fingers are held closely together : it must be cleanly finished. 

SurizumS — ** rubbing with the fingers": a double sweep from right to 
left and back from left to right, also on one string, which is held tightly 
between the tsumi of the first and second fingers. Surizumiy like shU, is 
moderately rapid, must be cleanly finished, and is usually confined to the 
sixth string. 

Awaseru — "to put together'*: hence, "to harmonize." 

It is used both for octaves as well as other harmonies, the commonest 
examples of which are the following. " Harmonies " may be indicated thus 
in English : — 

the Japanese sign is 



n 9^1 /-i 
S-" 5 -^ 2-' 



8-1 offn 7i tol-. 



8 



JAPANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS. 



159 



In octaves the upper note is called kan, the lower ryo. Awaseru is also used 
for the unison of the first and fifth strings, which is frequently met 'with. 

Haneru — an up-stroke with the first or second finger, the edge, instead 
of the face of the tsumS, striking the string.^ 

Sukui — an up-stroke with the thumb, commonly used to finish a 
sequence of rapid beats either on the same or a lower string. 

A down and an up-stroke with the thumb on the same string are often 
used in rapid succession ; no special name is given to this. The edge of 
the tsumi is used in this case for both notes. 

Both the up and the up-and-down strokes have corresponding phrases 
on the Samisen ; when the latter occurs on the Koto, a trill is played on 
the Samisen by touching the string lightly with the third or fourth finger, 
above the finger which presses the note, directly after the string is struck 
with the bachi. The following are examples from '' Kasuga-mode" rendered 
on the staff: — 



Example of Sukui: the four semiquavers are played with rapid down-beats of the thumb, the quaver 
following with the up-stroke of the thumb. 




Example of Sukui: the second of each group of semiquavers is played with an up-stroke of the thumb, 
the first with a down-stroke, the edge of the tsufn^ being used for both. 




J 



^^ 



:ST-^i=^~^-\ ^ -I 



g^ 



3=i 



Example of Sukui and Haneru: the groups of semiquavers are played as in the last example, the 
succeeding quavers with an up-stroke of the first and second fingers alternately. 




The same phrase as rendered on the Samisen : the middle note of each triplet is produced by the light 
pressure of the finger on the string, the succeeding quaver is sounded by the open string being 
plucked by a finger of the left hand near the neck. 








i6o THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 

« 

Although triplets accurately represent the Samisen phrase, they would 
alter the character of the phrase on the Koto ; the accent, however, is on 
the first note of each of the "doublets," in the same way as the accent falls 
on the first note of a triplet. 

Maotoru — ** to measure the interval " : a rest or pause." 

Uchi — beating with the left hand on the strings below the bridges, 
during long pauses : it is used whether the song is continued during the 
pause or not. 

The word hayaku is sometimes used as we use accelerattdo. Where the 
notes are of less value than the common unit of time, which I have taken 
as a crotchet of \ time — a passage of quavers for example — the numbers of 
the strings are written close together, in a manner now to be explained. 

In the following diagrams are given, on the left, a specimen of the 
notation used for Koto music ; on the right, an English rendering of it. It 
is half of the first verse of ''Umegaey^ 

The columns are to be read downwards and from right to left. Each 
column is divided into four : on the left are the words of the song 
(omitted in the English translation) ; then follow three kinds of circles ; 
the numbers of the strings come next ; and lastly, the directions as to phrasing 
and accidentals. 

The circles require to be explained first: they are the marks for the 
bars. The large circles, of which there are two kinds, to prevent the eye 
getting confused, mark the commencement of the bars ; the small circles mark 
the half-bars. Taking the time as J, the distance between the large and 
small circles represents one crotchet ; the number of the string to be played 
is printed opposite the circle. Quavers and semiquavers are indicated by 
the position which the numbers of the strings occupy in the intervening 
space ; thus, if there are two quavers on the first beat of the bar, and 
a crotchet on the second, the first quaver would stand opposite the large 
circle, the crotchet opposite the small circle, and the second quaver halfway 
between the two. Similarly, if there is a dotted quaver followed by a semi- 
quaver and then a crotchet, the quaver stands opposite the circle belonging 
to the beat, the semiquaver close to the crotchet which is opposite to the 
next circle. The rests are marked in precisely the same way, the position 
of the succeeding string indicating the duration of the rest. 



JAPANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS. i6i 

It will be observed that kando — the commencement — is also marked by 
a small circle, and that the half-bars belonging to the bars at the bottom of 
the columns run over on to the next. I have not found any satisfactory 
explanation of this. I believe, however, that pieces generally begin with a 
beat of the left hand, and that this is indicated by the first small circle. 

The numbers of the strings are put, as I have said, by the side of the 
circles, but it will be seen that some of the numbers are more to the right 
than others. Where the figures are in their normal position the thumb is to 
be used ; where they stand nearer the circles the first finger is to be used ; 
where they stand away to the right the second finger is to be used. 

The little dash which occasionally follows the number of the string 
indicates that the note is to be repeated. Occasionally two or more dashes 
will be found occurring in their proper relative positions between the circles. 

The different marks for the sharps, which are placed after the string 
numbers, have already been explained. 

This form of notation is, I believe, common in the East. When it is 
understood it is amply sufficient for all purposes ; and in the translated form, 
as I have given it, I find everything that is needful for playing the instru- 
ment. For the stringed instruments without frets I have not been able to 
discover any form of notation, though I believe it does exist. For the 
stringed instruments with frets, and for the Flutes, Hichiriki and Sho, a 
notation on a principle identical with that of the Koto exists, the number 
of the fret to be pressed, or of the hole to be stopped, being indicated.* 



♦ The Rev. Marmaduke E. Browne informs me that the notation for the Salvation Army Concertina is 
based on this principle, the melodies being written with numbers indicating which buttons are to be pressed, and 
with extra marks where the thumb goes, and where to push in and pull out. 



( i62 ) 
FAC-SIMILE OF A PAGE OF KOTO MUSIC 



ORIGINAL. 




■^ 
^ 



o -f 



O 



o ii^ 








o ^ 



< 




4 

o ^ 

o ^, 




^^ 



:t« 




o ^ 

of 







•t 



O 4- 

o -t 

©4^ 



o i- 



O'- 



^ 



^ 



o-^ 



t 




-t 



>>w 



o « 



o^ 




\j\ o^jr 



I 






,x«^ 




"H 
^ 



O ^* 



^ 



7 ^ 





^ 



o ^ 



•f^ o^ 











:^ 



O-tf 




(T. 






otf 



o ^ 

+ 

o ^ 

o ^ 

of 







\ 



^* 



( i63 ) 

TRANSLATION. 
[The first two lines on page Ii6 render this page of music on sta£f notation.] 



Umegae. 
No. I 
Printed according to 
the Original Copy. 



9» 

lO 



8 



- 9 



ka 



i kaki 



8 



.■^ 



- r 



/ 



uchi 



to 



10 



lO 



to kak^ 



« 8 



to 



lo 



8 



- 9 



/ kaki 



8 



^'v^ / 



10 



to 



^ . 



i^ 



- r 



uchi 



\ i 



6 
6 

to v^ j^u 

to Y^ yu 

uchi 
ki 



to 

lO 




yu 



9jf ka 



- r 



uchi 



- r 



uchi 



Kandd — the 
— commencement. 



to kaki 



- 8 



to 



to 



10 



ktnl 



- r 



awaseru 



uchi 



12 kaki 



kin 



- ^ 



kin )( ka 
kin Q 

to ^ yu 

10 



i^ 



uchi 



6 
6 

/i? v^ yu 

' to ^^ [y^ 

to 5^ yu 



lO 



9JJ *« 



- r 



uchi 



i^ 



to 



10 



- 1 



5 

5 



i* / 



/^ 



/ •& ki 

10 I 



3 t^A/ 

5 

5 

9% ka 



( i64 ) 



BIWAS, AND STRINGED INSTRUMENTS WITH FRETS. 



The position which the Biwa holds in the history of musical development 
in Japan has already been explained. It was brought from China by the 
commissioners sent to that country by the Emperor Jimmyo, about the 
year 935 a.d. It is attributed by the Chinese to **the Barbarians," and was 
probably a development from some instruments in use in other Oriental 
countries, but from which it is difficult to say. Its position in what may 
be called the ** natural order " of musical instruments seems fairly clear : 
it stands at the head of the second great group of stringed instruments, 
as the So-no-koto stands at the head of the first group. As in the case 
of the So-no-koto, modifications, rather than material alterations, were 
introduced by the Japanese, so in the case of the Biwa, similar modifi- 
cations were introduced after it had left its home in the Celestial Empire. 
The modifications were in the direction of lightening and clearing the tone, 
and making the instrument less unwieldy. But they were still Biwas, and 
flourished without destroying the vitality of the parent instrument. A 
national music sprang up, lighter in its nature, more "bird-like" than the 
ponderous chords which swept from the Chinese strings ; but when the 
old music of China was performed as the accompaniment of the Bugaku 
dances, the old Biwa was still, and is still, to be found side by side with the 
old S5-no-koto, reinforcing its woolly tones with rich and sonorous arpeggios ; 
and thence came its modern distinguishing name— the ** Bugaku-biwa." 

The process by which the Biwa group developed from the Koto group 
is easily accounted for. 

In the Kotos only about one-third of the string-length is used for 
producing the notes. To gather the strings below the bridges into a 
narrower compass, and reduce two-thirds of the sounding-board into a neck, 
must, very early in the history of the instruments, have appeared feasible. 
To reduce the number of the strings without reducing the compass of the 
instrument was an easy matter for musicians accustomed to Kotos with 
one string only. Fixing the loose Koto bridges as frets upon the neck 



JAPANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS. 165 

must have followed in due course ; Oriental ingenuity finally displaying 
itself in making the frets of different heights, so that the strings should 
pass freely over the lower frets to those higher up on the neck. But 
in the Biwa we find the development thus roughly indicated not in pro- 
gress, but in its final stage of completeness ; the intermediate stages are 
omitted, and nothing remains to-day to which we can point with certainty 
as the Biwa in embryo. The Gekkin may have preceded the Biwa, but 
the dates vouchsafed to us by the books do not afford any reliable guide : 
the only visible link between the two groups is the circular Koto, the 
Nichin, which very probably suggested the circular body of the Gekkin. A 
curious link between the East and the West must here be noted in 
passing : the upper end of the neck of the Biwa, in which the tuning-pegs 
are placed, is bent back at right-angles in the same way as the old 
Theorbo Lyre, which is sometimes seen in mediaeval pictures. In the Biwa 
this serves the purpose of allowing the instrument to rest on the ground 
while it is being tuned. 

The BuGAKU-BiWA is a massive stringed instrument, with a gourd-shaped 
body measuring 3 feet 3 inches long and 16 inches across the broadest 
part of the face, and having a string-length of 25 inches. It is said for- 
merly to have been played on horseback. Now it rests on its lower edge 
on the ground between the knees of the performer, seated, in Japanese 
fashion, on the floor. It has four strings passing over three high frets 
and collected in a notch at the upper end. The normal tuning is a com- 
bination of ni-agari and san-sagari. The other tunings will be found in the 
diagram of the tunings of the So-no-koto on page 93, with which it is in- 
variably used for private performances of the Bugaku dances. It is played 
with a bachi of hard wood ; but this is very much heavier than that of the 
Samisen, and has rounded instead of pointed ends. It is grasped firmly in 
the right hand and dragged over the band of black leather which runs across 
the face of the instrument, and over the strings, which are strung close to 
the body, actually striking only the third or fourth string, on which the 
melody is thus played. The effect of the music, therefore, is that of a series 
of open chords. The tone of instrument is sonorous and rich. 

The body of the Biwa is made of shitan^ the neck of willow, and tuning- 
handles of peach : thie bachi of ** yellow willow." The side, like that of the 



i66 THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE, 

Koto, is called o-iso — the sea-shore. The measurements are given on 
page 1 68, with the corresponding ones of the Satsuma-biwa for convenience 
of comparison. 

It appears that after the Biwa was established in Japan some slight 
variations were introduced, one, and sometimes two, frets being added. The 
5-fret instrument is figured on the opposite page. The instruments with 3, 
4, and 5 frets are all in use at the present time. 

The Satsuma-biwa, figured on the opposite page, is a smaller and more 
delicate instrument than the Bugaku-biwa, from which it was developed 
in Kagoshima, where it was afterwards used to accompany the Heiki- 
vionogatari recitations. 

Four larger frets, rather less than half an inch in breadth, are placed 
on the neck, but in different positions from those on the Chinese Biwa. The 
notes are produced by varying pressures above the frets, the strings being 
struck with a very large bachi: a peculiar bird-like trill is imparted to the 
notes by the vibrations of the string on the broad surface of the fret. These 
delicate vibrations are emphasized by the up and down stroke with the 
bachiy which is a chief characteristic of the music.** Its tones depend for 
their accuracy both on the position of the fingers between the frets, and also 
on the amount of pressure placed upon them ; the frets stand up from the 
neck about an inch, and as many as five semitones can be produced by a 
finger in one position. 

The leathern band which runs across the body of the Bugaku-biwa is 
replaced by a broad band of black ornamented lacquer ; the belly is made 
of polished mulberry or cherry wood, the back and neck being inscribed with 
poems and the fanciful name of the instrument in bold gold lettering, e.g. 
'' Phoenix-voiced ! " At the point where the neck meets the back it expands 
into a large conical form, called toyama — ** the distant mountain "; in the face 
are two ivory crescents — ** new moons" — 6| inches from the lowest fret; in 
each of these a very small aperture is cut. In the Bugaku-biwa the aper- 
tures are themselves crescent-shaped, and are rather larger; there is also a 
circular aperture underneath the string-holder. 

The strings are fastened at the base to a large holder, which stands 
clear of the body except at its lower end : the strings at the holder are one 
inch apart in both instruments ; they get closer together as they pass over 



( 16; ) 



i68 



THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 



the frets, finally meeting in an ivory or ebony notch at the head of the 
neck, which comes down at right-angles to the body. 

The frets are broad, sloping down to about an inch where they are 
fastened to the neck, and increase in height from an inch to an inch and 
a half, thus allowing the strings to pass clear of the lower frets when the 
pressure is on one higher up. 

The strings are tuned to A, E, A, C : — 



W 



zz 



The first and second are almost invariably used as open strings ; the 
third string is also often used open, very few touched notes being played on 
it, the melody being left almost entirely to the upper string, which is drawn 
clear of the others by the little finger of the left hand. Being lighter than 
the Bugaku-biwa, it is played sitting, with the instrument resting on the right 
leg. The ripertoire consists of over one hundred pieces, of which, however, 
gnly thirty are considered classical. 



The following table shows the comparative measurements of the 
Bugaku-biwa and the Satsuma-biwa : — 



Full length. . . '. 

Length of neck, measured from lowest fret .... 

Breadth of neck ( tapering from 

I to 

Depth of neck ....... 

Length of neck rest, in which the tuning pegs are placed 
Length of tuning pegs ..... 

Greatest breadth of belly .... 

Greatest thickness of belly .... 

Thickness at edge of belly (both faces being slightly convexed) 

Distances of apertures from lowest fret . 

Breadth of leather or lacquer band . 

Length of string-holder at base of belly . 

Breadth „ ,, „ . 

Length of belly below string-holder 

Distance of strings apart at the string-holder 



Bugaku-biwa. 

Chinese. 


Satsuma-biwa. 
Japanese. 


Feet. 


Inches. 


Feet 


lnch«.s. 


3 


3 
8-5 


3 

I 


I 




I 




I'2 




i'5 




1-4 




I'2 




i'3 




9-5 




II 




4-25 




5'5 


I 


4 


I 


I 




2'5 




2 




1*5 
II 




I 

6-5 




7'25 




4-8 




3-S 
5*25 

•s 




3'2 

4-8 
•8 




I 




I 



— ^ 



JAPANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS. 



169 





BUGAKU-BIWA. 


SATSUMA-BIWA. 




Chinese. 


Japanese. 


String and Fret Measurements. 






Length of string from the holder to the first fret at the nape of 


Feet. Inches. 


Feet. Inches. 


tne necK ••••••••• 


2 I 


I 5-5 


Length of string between first and second frets . 


• 




I 


2T 


„ „ second and third frets 


• 




I'l 


2 


„ „ third and fourth frets . 


• 






4-8 


„ „ third fret and ivory notch 






5'i 




„ „ fourth fret and ivory notch . 






— 


i'6 


Height of frets — First 






•3 


I 


Second 






1 


• 1 






•35 


1*1 


Third 






» 


■ « 






• 4 


I •a 


Fourth 






1 


» « 








15 


Length of frets — First 






» 


> ■ 






I 


2'S 


Second 






) 1 


1 • 






2 


2-5 


Third 






a 


• 






I 


^•5 


Fourth 






■ 


1 « 






— 


1-8 


Breadth of frets • 






t 
* 


• 






•3 


•45 


Bach I Measurements. 






Length ......:••. 


7-5 


6-5 


Length of striking edge ....... 


2'7S 


9^5 



The Chinese Biwa, figured on page 166, is a Chinese modification of 
the Bugaku-biwa used for lighter music. As the picture shows, it is 
smaller than the Satsuma-biwa ; it has ten frets on the face of the 
body, and four on the neck. These four upper frets are exceedingly 
interesting on account of their semi-cylindrical form. They are obviously 
derived from the heavy cylindrical tsumS used in playing the one and 
two-stringed Kotos, and form one more link between the two families 
of instruments. 



The Gekkin, sometimes called the ** Miniature Biwa," and sometimes 
the " Moon-shaped Koto," is a Chinese instrument much used in Japan. 
Although it differs entirely in construction from the Biwa, its high frets 
clearly show the family likeness. The illustration of ** The Gekkin Player" 
will be found facing page 6. 



I/O 



THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 



The body is circular, 14 inches in diameter, and i^ inch thick, the 
two surfaces being parallel ; they are without apertures ; on the upper face 
are generally placed two carved flowers where the apertures would be. 
The neck is one foot long and \\ inch broad, capped by a large flat- 
headed ornament. There are in all nine frets, decreasing in height, like 
those of the Biwa : the upper one, over which the strings pass to the 
pegs, is half an inch in height, and is placed 5^ inches up the neck. 
Four of the frets are on the face of the instrument, one at the joint of 
the neck and the body, the remainder on the neck. 

There are four strings, 16 inches in length, tuned in pairs to a fifth, 
the first and second to C, the third and fourth to G, thus — 



The compass of the instrument is two octaves. 




The frets give the notes in the following manner :• 



No. of 
Fret 

o 
I 

2 

3 

4 

5 
6 

7 
8 



First and Second Third and Fourth 



Strings. 

[open strings] C 




The seventh of the scale is omitted on the first and second strings, 
the sixth fret giving the octave to the open string. This is characteristic 
of the tunings of the Chinese Koto, but as the note is given on the third 
and fourth strings, on which the fourth of the scale is omitted, this is an 
obvious necessity, as the strings are a fifth apart, and the same fret does 






JAPANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS, 171 

duty for both sets of strings. I doubt whether this fact supplies any 
argument in support of what I think is often stated, that the seventh is 
omitted in the Chinese diatonic scale." 

The music for the Gekkin consists entirely of quaint little Chinese 
songs, many of them very melodious and pretty. It is played with a small 
ivory or tortoise-shell plectrum, the double strings giving a trill to the notes, 
which is accentuated by the vibrations of a wire fastened loosely inside the 
body : this wire produces a curious jangling whenever the instrument is 
moved. The up-and-down stroke of the plectrum, which is characteristic of 
Chinese and Japanese music, acquires additional grace by coming on different 
strings.* 



The Genkwan : another Chinese instrument of the same class which 
has evidently developed out of the Gekkin ; it is without apertures, and 
contains a wire vibrator in the body. It is played with a small plectrum, 
to which a long silk cord and tassel are attached, almost identical with 
that of the Jamisen. It differs from the Gekkin chiefly in its octagonal 
body and long neck. The sides of the octagon are 4J inches, and the 
measurement from side to side 10 inches. The neck is a feet long, and 
the string-length also 2 feet. In addition to the upper fret, which gives 



• From Dr. Knotl's paper in the " Transactions of the Asiatic Society of Japan "—some of the remarks in which 
I have already dealt with in my analysis of the scale— it appears that there are in Japim two distinct scbook of 
Gekkin players, and that their instruments differ appreciably :— the Nagahaia school and the Keian school. 
From the table of vibrations given, it appears that the differences between the same notes on the two inslrumenli 
vary from one to four vibrations; and that the variations (iom the notes given by the Chinese Gekkin often 
amount to eighteen vibrations — an almost sufficient proof that the instrument aumot be of much service in 
determining the trae notes of the scale. l"his table of vibrations is given on page 104. 



172 THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 

the open notes, there are eleven frets on the neck and one on the body, 
giving the full diatonic scale, including the seventh of the scale, which is 
absent in the lower strings of the Gekkin. The four strings are tuned in 
pairs to C and G, the compass of the instrument being two octaves and 
two notes : — ^ 



The following instruments, belonging to the Biwa or Gekkin family, 
are noted in M. Kraus' pamphlet : — 

The Ko : an instrument similar to the Genkwan, but with a circular 
body. It differs essentially from all the other instruments of the class in 
being richly ornamented with gold lacquer designs. It has four strings and 
nine frets. The strings do not appear to be tuned in pairs like those of 
the Gekkin. 

The SnuNGA : a very ancient instrument, resembling the Kokyu in 
the construction of its body, but with five frets on a neck slightly shorter 
than that of the Gekkin. It is strung with four strings, one of which 
is much thicker than the rest. It is said to be played by plucking the 
strings with the fingers, and not with a bachi or plectrum. As in the 
case of the Ku, the strings do not appear to be strung in pairs. 

Of the Gekkins also the following varieties are noted. — The ** Biwa- 
shaped Gekkin," with the gourd-shaped body of the Biwa in miniature, 
strung with four strings tuned in pairs, and eight frets. The ** Six-string 
Gekkin," with six strings tuned in pairs : it has a circular body and sixteen 
frets, eight of which are set on the body of the instrument and eight on 
the neck. 

The Shigen lies midway between the two groups of instruments with 
frets and instruments without frets. In construction it is allied to the 
Gekkin, being somewhat larger, and having the octagon body of the 
Genkwan : it has the vibrating wire but no frets. The disposition of the 
four strings, however, is that of the Kokyu, the two upper ones being 
tuned in unison. It is said to be played with the fingers in the manner 
of the Guitar, and not by plucking the strings. 



( 173 ) 



SAMISENS, FIDDLES, AND STRINGED INSTRUMENTS 

WITHOUT FRETS. 



We come now to a class of instruments of an essentially different type 
from that of the Biwas and Gekkins. Progress is marked by the dis- 
appearance of the frets, the player depending no longer on their aid in 
producing the different notes, but on the custom which his fingers may 
acquire in hitting off at once the proper positions for stopping the strings. 
The cumbersome bodies of the Biwas, and the large faces of the 
Gekkins, give place to bodies of an altogether different form : in the 
typical instruments of the family it is an almost square, somewhat shallow 
box, the sides of wood, the upper and lower surfaces of parchment. This 
seems to have been developed from a body made of a solid piece of wood. 
The family may be sub-divided into Samisens, or instruments played with 
a bachi, and Kokyus — those played with a bow. 

The Samisen. — The instrument as used at the present day is a final 
development reached by many stages, most of which occurred in China. 
As has already been said, it was advanced to its present dignity of a 
national instrument very soon after its advent to Japan from Liu Chiu 
in 1560: the Biwa players finding it a more portable instrument than 
their own, and more suited to the accompaniment of lighter songs. The 
tradition that it had originally two strings only instead of three, as at 
present, is not supported by the existence of any instrument, as a 
relic of the past, corresponding with this description. The snake-skin 
covering to the body is, however, still to be found in some instruments 
of the family. It has given place now to cat-skin, the value of the parch- 
ment being estimated by the number of the nipple marks which are 
preserved. 

There are three tunings, but they have no relation to any system 
of keys, and are all adapted to Hirajoshi, the normal tuning of the Koto. 



i 



174 



-THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 



It is rarely used when the Koto is tuned in any other way, though the 
possibility of using it is recognised. The three tunings are as follow : — 



Honchdshi, 



i 



SHM" 




Ni-agaru 



i 



^ 



1^ 



-m 



^ 




San-sagarL 



These names would appear to be given to the tunings as a guide to 
the player, and to enable him to remember what changes have to be made. 
The use of the words agari and sagari — ** raising *' and ** lowering " — is some- 
what arbitrary, but not entirely unintelligible. Honchdshi is the normal 
clioshi, joshi, or tuning ; Ni-agari, ** the second string raised " ; from F^ to 
Gi ; San-sagari, ** the third string lowered " — that is, from the octave of the 
first string Gj, to Fj. 

There are also these two special tunings, used only for comic music : — 



Ichi'Sagari, 



i 



f 



1^ 



1^ 



im 



San'Sa-sagari, 



i 



%J 



ww^ 



t=r 



These are named on a similar principle : Ichi-sagari, " the first lowered ; " 
that is, from the octave of the third string Cj, to D|; ; San'Sa-sagari, " the 
third lowered," but this time lowered an octave from the third string — D^ 
of the last tuning. 

The object of these tunings is curious. They have, as I have said, no 
relation whatever to changes of key, but are simply selected so that open 
strings should be used in the. piece more frequently than stopped strings, 
the object being not only to get a clearer vibration, but to ensure greater 
accuracy by avoiding stopping and the consequent chances of errors. For 
example, ** Hitotsu-toya " is played on the Samisen tuned in Honchdshi, while 
ioY '' Saita SakuraV the tuning is San-sagari. Both of these pieces would, 
on the Koto, be played in the same key. 



■.' 






JAPANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS. 175 

The Samisen is played with a backi of wood, ivory, or tortoise-shell, 
which strikes the strings just below where the neck joins the body. At this 
point the face is strengthened with a small extra piece of parchment, which 
receives the first blow from the bachi: there are thus produced two distinct 
sounds — the drumming on the face, and the vibration of the strings. In the 
fingering great care is used to let the strings be pressed by the finger-nails. 

The measurements of the Samisen are : The body, "j^ inches long by 
7 inches broad, by 3I inches deep ; the neck, 2 feet 5^ inches long, taper- 
ing from I inch broad to -^^ inch ; the pegs, 3 inches long ; the tac/ii, 8J 
inches long, rather less than an inch square at the top, and 3^ inches long 
at the striking edge. 

The Jamisen is a Chinese instrument whose history I have not been 
able to trace clearly. Although it differs in the construction of its body 



THI JAMIUN. 



from the Samisen, it so much resembles that instrument in other respects 
that there seems very little doubt that they both sprang from the same 
source. Both front and back of the body of the Jamisen are covered with 
snake-skin, but instead of being a hollow rectangular frame, like that of 
the Samisen, the body is an oval block of hard wood, measuring 6 Inches 
in leng^th, 5 in breadth, and 2J in thickness, in which a hole 2 inches in 
diameter is cut. It has three strings, which pass from the tuning pegs, 
through a small ivory notch on the neck, and over a small ivory bridge on 
the face ; they are fastened to an ivory knob at the base of the belly. 
The Jamisen is played with a small tortoise-shell plectrum, to which a long 
silk cord and tassel are attached. The neck is 2 inches shorter than that 
of the Samisen, but the pegs are much larger. The strings are tuned to 
HonehSshi. ** 



••• 



176 



THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 



The following varieties of the Samisen are noted by M. Kraus': — 

The Chosen : identical in construction with the Samisen, but with 
a much longer neck, measuring about 3 feet 6 inches. 

The CoREAN Samisen : almost identical with the Jamisen, but with a 
shorter neck and without the small ivory bridge on the face. 

The Kaotari : an ancient three-stringed instrument from Liu Chiu, 
with a circular body covered with snake-skin. 

The KiRiSEN : a similar instrument, with three strings, but with a 
larger body covered with parchment : it is square, with rounded angles. 
It is played with the small tortoise-shell plectrum of the Gekkin. 

The Taisen : an enlarged form of the Kirisen, with a circular body, 
about 15 inches in diameter, covered with parchment. It is played with 
a small wooden plectrum. 

The group of stringed instruments without frets is, as I have said, 
divided into two classes — those played with a plectrum, and those played 
with a bow. 

In the second class, the Kokyu, or Japanese Fiddle, holds precisely 

the same position as the Samisen does in the first class : that is to say, 

it is the ultimate form which has resulted from the innumerable varieties 

which have preceded it. Its shape is that of the Samisen, but much 

smaller. It is a four-stringed instrument, almost invariably tuned to San- 

sagari: the third and the fourth strings — the upper and not the lower 

ones, as with us — are tuned in unison, imparting to the high notes 

great strength and clearness. It is sometimes, though rarely, tuned to 

Honchoshi and Ni-agari. A small wooden rest, with a hole in it for the 

pivot, fixed in the obi, enables the Kokyu to be played by beggars in 

the street : and when held under the left knee, by foreigners sitting in 

a chair 

TUNINGS OF THE KOKYU. 



San-sagari (normal). 



m 



^ 



HonchdsL 



Ni-agari, 



W 



P 



] )a:. 



?P 



I: 




>■ 



JAPANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS. 177 

The measurements of the Kokyu are : the body, 5^ inches long, by 
4'9 broad, by 2*3 deep; tfie neck, 18 inches long, its breadth tapering 
from '7 to -6; the pegs, sj inches long; the bow, 3 feet 8J inches long, 
with a bend at the upper end 3 inches long ; length of horsehair, 2 feet 6J 
inches. 

The relative sizes of the Samisen and Kokyu are shown tn the accom- 
panying illustration. The dacki is resting on the face of the Samisen, 
while the long bow of the Kokyu is hanging above that instrument. 

We next come to a group of three curious and somewhat primitive 
Chinese Fiddles, figured in the accompanying illustration. 



The Keikin : a four-stringed Chinese Fiddle, with a body made of 
a small segment of bamboo, 5 J inches long by 4 inches in diameter; the 
neck measures 27 inghes. The pegs are 5 inches long, and are placed 
one below the other, projecting beneath the neck; the strings pass 
separately through an ivory notch half way down the neck and over a 
small ivory bridge on the face of the body, the string-length being only 
loi inches. They are tuned in pairs to a fifth, but occasionally also to 
a fourth.** The most curious feature of this instrument is that the horse- 
hair of the bow is twined in and out of the strings, making it impossible 

2 A 



178 THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 

for a single note to be produced. The bow is 28 inches long. The only 
fingering which is possible is by pressure on the strings between the lowest 
peg and the ivory notch : they are then quite close together. The bow 
IS pulled close to the body, on which a lump of resin is stuck. The face 
of the body is covered with snake-skin, and the back embellished with an 
open black-wood ornament. 

The KoKiN : a two-stringed variety of the Keikin. The body is only 
4 inches long by 2 inches in diameter, and the neck, of bamboo, 18 inches 
long. There is no ivory notch on the neck, but the strings are tied back 
with a loop of silk. They are, like those of the Keikin, tuned to a fifth, 
and occasionally to a fourth, the bow being twined in and out of the 
strings, as in the larger instrument. The face of the body is covered with 
snake-skin, and the back is uncovered. It has a lump of resin stuck 
on to it. 

The Teikin : another form of Chinese Fiddle. 1 1 is the same length 
as the Keikin, but has only two strings, and the pegs project at the side 
of the neck. The length of the neck is 2 feet 6 inches. The body is 
spherical in form, and made of black-wood with carved open-work at the 
back. The face is of lighter wood, 4 inches in diameter. The strings 
are tuned to a fifth, and pass over a small ivory bridge, to which they 
come straight from the pegs. The bow is twined in the strings, as in 
the case of the Keikin and Kokin, and there is, as in the other instru- 
ments, a lump of resin on the body. 

Two minor varieties in this class alone remain to be noted : the Kokun 
and the Nisen, the four- and two-stringed Fiddles of Corea. Except that 
they are somewhat more ornate they correspond in almost all respects with 
the Keikin and Kokin of China. 

It would have been an interesting task to have classified in order of 
development the whole of this group of stringed instruments, but the 
necessary materials are wanting. 

One general remark alone can be made» There is manifest a desire 
to produce, by every conceivable combination of mechanical contrivance, 
every variety of tone of which stringed instruments are capable. The 



J 



I 



■■ — ^^- 



JAPANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS. 179 

characteristics of the Biwa are preserved in the Gekkin : they are handed 
on and applied to the newer forms of the Samisen, to be afterwards 
developed by the Kokyu. 

Thus we find the Gekkin and Samisen merged in the Taisen, with its 
circular parchment-covered body; the Kokyu and the Gekkin merged in 
the Shunga, with its fretted neck set on a Kokyu body with four strings. 
One instrument alone is wanting — a fretted Fiddle : but I am disposed to 
think that the Shunga must have been occasionally played with a bow, 
although, on the authority of Monsieur Kraus, I have stated that it was 
played with the fingers. 



( 180 ) 



FLUTES, AND BAMBOO WIND INSTRUMENTS. 



The Fuyd, or Flute, is said to have originated in North-West Asia, and 
to have come thence to Japan through China. The Japanese, however, 
claim their Flute as indigenous to the country. The Chinese Flute is 
called O-teki, or in Japanese, Yok5fuy6 — ** Side-blowing Flute" — probably 
to distinguish it from the Hichiriki, which is blown from the end. It 
is also called Ryuteki — the ** Dragon-Flute." It has seven finger-holes, 
and was made originally of monkey-bone, but afterwards of bamboo. 
There were two kinds, the long and the short ; the latter alone seems 
to have been in frequent use. It measures 15*5 inches in length; the 
internal diameter being about '55 inch, and the lip-hole 10*9 inches, the 
first finger-hole 6*5, and the last 1*3 from the end. The long variety 
was made of a thinner bamboo, and produced more delicate notes. 

The Japanese Flute, or Yamato-fuy^, is lacquered red inside, and 
closely bound outside between the holes with string laid on with paste, 
and afterwards fixed with lacquer. The string is a substitute for strips 
of the cherry-tree bark which was formerly used, this itself being a sub- 
stitute for the bark of the kaba tree of China, with which the old Chinese 
Flutes were bound. The top is plugged with lead wrapped in rolls of 
paper fastened with wax, and finished at the end with wood decorated 
either with brocade or a highly finished metal ornament. 

It is difficult fully to appreciate the clear tones of the Japanese Flute, 
as the notes are seldom blown " clean." Weird quarter-tones disfigure both 
the beginning and the end of all sustained notes, the musicians being 
specially taught to acquire the art of producing them ; and for some 
reason, which much enquiry has not revealed to me, the music would be 
considered as shorn of its beauties if they were omitted. 

It has six holes, and measures 17^ inches long, with an internal 
diameter at the base of slightly less than half an inch. The Hp-hole is 
12 '6 inches, the first finger-hole 7*5, and last 2*7 inches from the end. 



,) 



yAPANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS. i8i 

The Yamato-fuy^ were divided into two classes : the Kagura-fuy^, the 
measurements of which have just been given, and the Azuma-fuy6, made of 
a thinner bamboo, and giving a more delicate tone. As their names imply, 
the former was used in the Kagura orchestra, the latter in that of the 
Azuma-asobi. In the same way the Chinese Flute is sometimes called the 
Bugaku-fuyi. The Azuma-fuy^ has now given way to the Corean Flute, 
Koma-fuy^, which is usually carried by the temple musicians with the 
Kagura-fuy^ in a double-barrelled lacquer case. 

■The Koma-fuye has six holes, and is made of very thin bamboo, 14^ 
inches long, with an internal diameter of only '4 inch. The lip-hole is 
9 • 9 inches, the first finger-hole 5 • 7, and the last 2 inches from the end. 

Seiteki : a primitive Chinese Flute, used with the Gekkin, Teikin, 
and Keikin, which are often played together. It is made of plain bamboo. 



unlacquered inside, 21 inches long, with six finger-holes. Its chief peculi- 
arity is that between the upper finger-hole and the lip-hole there is another 
hole which is covered with paper before the instrument is played, which 
gives a quaint buzz to the music. At the lower end, also, holes are pierced 
for a cord and tassel." 

The Encyclopadia gives two additional forms of Flute : 
DOSHO, or " Cave Flute " : said to have been much used during the 
Tong dynasty in China. It measured 2 feet in length. It was originally 
made as a toy, but was afterwards adopted seriously, and bound with 
ornamental strings. It was never popular with the Japanese. 

Chi ; a bamboo Flute with seven holes, said to have been first made 
about 1000 B.C. The tones resembled a baby's crying, and hence it was 
never much used. 



182 THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 

In Dr. Veeder's paper on Japanese Musical Intervals,* the learned 
author gives the vibration numbers of several different kinds of Flutes 
and Shakuhachis. 

HrCHiRiKi : the " Sad-toned Tube " : in appearance and structure this 
instrument resembles a small Flute, bearing the same proportion to the 
Flute as the Piccolo does in the West, It is made of bamboo, lacquered 
inside, and bound with lacquered string, like the Flute, with seven holes 
above and two thumb-holes below. It is, however, played with a loose 
reed mouthpiece inserted at one end ; this is bound with paper which, 
having been damped, swells and keeps it firmly in its place. The re- 
semblance to the Piccolo is limited, however, to its size, for the Hichiriki 
is the diapason of the classical orchestra, and on it must- be laid the 
blame of those sounds, often attributed to the Sho, which are entirely 
gruesome to Western ears.** 



Hichiriki players are even greater sinners than the flautists in the 
matter of those superfluous quarter-tones already referred to : the ante- 
cedent slur is often a prolonged wailing slide through a full tone, more 
or less ; the note finishing with an excruciating rise of a semitone, more 
or less, cut off short. These sounds seem always to have pleased the 
Japanese ear. The old Hichirikls are as much prized as the old Flutes, 
their history being recorded with greatest care. It is more correctly kept 
in a box shaped like a closed fan, but a cover is only an invention of 
modern times. It measures 7-1 inches long, with an internal diameter 

* " Tiansaclions of the Asiatic Society of Japan," vol. *ii. pt. ii., p. 86. 



JAPANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS. 183 

tapering from '6 to '4 of an inch. The first hole is 1*4 inches from 
the top, the last i ■ I from the bottom. The under holes are i • 9 and 
4 • I from the top respectively. The reed mouthpiece — sMta — is 2 • 3 inches 
long, but when in place it only projects one inch from the end of the 
instrument. Special instnictions are given for the manufacture of this 
mouthpiece. It should be made from cane cut at Udono in the province 
of Yamashiro, in the depth of winter, and dried slowly in the kitchen. 
It should be bound with the best Mino paper. 

The lincyclop^dia refers to a larger form of the instrument, the 
O-Hichiriki. The only detail given concerning it is that it has nine finger- 
holes instead of seven. 



The Shakuhachi is made of thick bamboo lacquered inside, measuring 
from 20 to 2oi inches long. The approximate measurements from joint 
to joint are 6|, 5J, 4, %\ inches respectively ; but in the best instruments 
these measurements should be 6, 5, 4, 3, inches. The internal diameter 
measures i inch at the top and \\ at the base; the external diameter 
\\ inch at the top and 2 inches at the base, which is cut so as to 
include the root-swell of the reed.** 



1 84 THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 

Well played it is one of the mellowest of wind instruments ; but the 
exceeding difficulty of playing it at all justifies the tradition of secrets 
which have been handed down from Omori Toku, a hermit of Yedo, from 
generation to generation of patient teachers and patient pupils. The prin- 
ciple of the instrument corresponds with that of an oi^an pipe, being no 
more than a hollow tube with a slight cut at the end fitted with a hard 
ebony " voicing." The under lip of the player almost covers the upper 
cavity, and thus takes the place of the "language" of the pipe, the breath 
entering between the edge of the lower lip and the "voicing." It has four 
upper holes, the centre of the first being 9^ inches from the lip, and a 
thumb-hole underneath 8^ inches from the lip. By half opening the finger- 
holes the full Chinese chromatic scale is produced. 

The method of playing the Shakuhachi is shown in the engraving of 
the Kagen-gaku, plate IV., page 18. 

There are some small kinds of Shakuhachi, some of them being most 
elaborately carved. 



HtTovoKiRi — given by the Encyclopedia as a variety of Shakuhachi, 
a little shorter, but of very sweet sound. It measures 21 inches, and is 
made out of two joints of bamboo only, the finger-holes coming below 
the ring, the lip above. The difficulty of finding the necessary bamboo 
probably accounts for its scarcity. 

ShOno-fuy£ : a very ancient instrument, composed of twenty-two pipes, 
arranged side by side like Pan-pipes. The largest pipe measured 17 inches. 
Smaller varieties contained sixteen and twelve pipes respectively. 



JAPANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS. 



18^5 



The Sh5 {Shi-yo), figured on page i88, the primitive mouth-organ, 
is composed of a compact bundle of seventeen thin bamboo reeds' fixed 
into a circular lacquered wind-chamber of cherry-wood or hard pine, the 
air passing in a channel round the central support. It is fitted with a 
silver mouthpiece." 

The following are the precise details : — ^Wind-box : height, 3 • 4 inches ; 
diameter, 2*8, which decreases slightly at the base. Projection of silver 
mouthpiece, • 7 inch ; length, i • 8 ; breadth, i • i . Rectangular hole in 
mouthpiece, ^25 by -6. Height from wind-box of the silver band which 
holds the reeds in position, 5^ inches. 

The reeds are arranged in two sets, those opposite one another being 
of equal height : each set is also arranged like the front pipes of an 
organ, the longest in the middle, the remainder getting shorter in couples, 
one on each side. The longest pipes are in a line with the centre of 
the mouthpiece ; these are the 4th and the 1 3th, the first being on the 
right side. The following diagram shows the arrangement, and also the 
true pipe-lengths in inches and decimals. 




2 B 



t 



i86 THE MUSIC OP THE JAPANESE. 

No. Name of Pipe. Length. 

1 Hii 8-3 

2 Mo io'7 

3 Kotsu 13-5 

4 Bok 17*2 

5 JS 13-5 

6 Gy5 ID' 7 

7 Hichi 8*5 

8 Gon 5 • 9 

9 Ya 5-9 
ID Hachi 8" 3 

11 Ichi ID" 7 

12 Bei 13*8 

13 Ku 17*2 

14 Otsu 13-5 

15 Gei ID' 7 

16 Jeu 8 "3 

17 Sen 5-9 

In the above table the length of the pipes is given in the third column : 
and in the fourth column are given the true pipe-lengths — that is to say, 
the measurements from the upper surface of the wind-box to the bases of 
the slits made in the pipes, in the same way as the ornamented organ- 
pipes are treated in the West. These slits are inside, with the exception 
of those of the 8th and 9th pipes, which are on the outside, and mounted 
with silver: the tops of the 8th, 9th, and 17th pipes are also silver-mounted: 
all the others are plain. The 2nd and 9th are dummies. 

The pipes are made of the oldest bamboo procurable, much of it being ^ 

obtained from old country houses ; their internal diameter is • 3. They are 
closely packed side by side, some of the outei: surface being cut away to 
allow them to fit tightly ; they are inserted into the wind-box to the depth 
of I '2 inch. In their bases are fixed small metal reeds, which are silent 
till the finger-holes are closed : these holes are all one inch from the top 
of the wind-box, except those of the 6th and 7th pipes, which are i • 9 inch 
from the top: those of the 14th and 15th pipes are inside; that of the first 
pipe at the side facing the player. The breath is inhaled very gently, the 



True Pipe-length. 


Note on the Staff. 


4-7 


b 


• • 

IO'2 


• • 

A 


8-2 


D 


3'4 


d 


5 


a 


4-1 


c 


3-6 


cj! 


2-8 


• • 

E 


9-1 


B 


6*2 


F;; 


8-6 


C; 


6"9 


E 


5'9 


G 


5-8 


Gjf , 


2-5 


f| 



• — -—^ 



JAPANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS. 187 

player having at his side a kibacH, over which he occasionally warms the 
wind-box, to prevent the accumulation of moisture. 

The instrument is held to the mouth with both hands, the pipes being 
disposed among the fingers for stopping as follows : — 

ist finger, right hand: — t4th and 15th pipes, (hole inside), and ist 

pipe, with outside of the second joint of the finger, 
and finger, right hand : — 3rd, 4th, and 5th pipes, 
thumb, right hand: — i6th and 17th pipes. 
thumb, left hand: — 8th, loth, nth, and 13th pipes, 
ist finger, left hand : — 7th pipe, 
and finger, left hand : — 6th pipe. 



The first line of the following score gives the notes of the ShQ ; and 
the second line gives the chords that occur in music written for the 



i88 



THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 



instrument These are taken from tables prepared by the Educational 
Department in Tokyo : — 



Zva, 



E 



i J ti J^-»^-^ ^ 




r f 



^ 



^ 



8i/^i. 




There seem to have been many varieties of the Sho at different periods, 
varying chiefly in the number of reeds. One is mentioned as having had 
thirty-six, and others with twenty-six, nineteen, and thirteen respectively. 
A curious form with a " tea-pot spout *' mouthpiece, said to have been 
called in China the " Barbarian Sho," is figured in Ab6 Suyenao's " Re- 
cords," a copy of which is given on the preceding page. 

The Sho is probably the oldest Eastern instrument ; the date of its 
introduction into China being given as the early part of the Chin dynasty, 
400 years before the time of Confucius. 



4 
1 



1 



■ buo*ku-fuy1 with L*cquEf 



J 



H 



i 



1 



< 191 ) 



DRUMS. 



The generic name for Drums of all kinds in Japanese is Taiko ; they 
are, however, divided into three classes : the Taiko proper, the Kakko, 
and the Tsuzumi. But this classification, in the case of the Taiko and 
Kakko, is one of nomenclature simply ; a better one may be made which 
depends on construction. The three classes will then be — 

I. Plain Cylindrical Drums. 
II. Drums with braces or cords. 
III. Drums with dumb-bell-shaped bodies, or Tsuzumi. 



I. PLAIN CYLINDRICAL DRUMS. 

O-DAiKO : the large Drum, used occasionally in Temple services. It 
is generally seen in large Temples standing on the right of the altar ; 
it also forms part of the Dai-daukagura orchestra. It rests on a black 
lacquer stand, the surface of the cylinder being usually elaborately decorated 
either with gold clouds or coloured dragons, the faces having a large 
black '' mitsu-tomoyS'^ on a plain ground. In the cylinder are fitted two 
large iron rings, which enable it to be carried, as it sometimes, though 
rarely, appears in processions. The origin of this Drum, beyond the fact 
that it came from China, is not clear. It is said to have been developed 
from the Bugaku-daiko (Tsuri-daiko), but the connection between the two, 
if it exists at all, would seem to be the other way round. 

The faces measure 2 feet 5 inches in diameter, the parchment over- 
lapping 5 inches on to the cylinder, to which it is fastened by two rows 
of heavy studs. The cylinder is 2 feet 9^ inches long, its section being 
slightly convexed, giving a central diameter of 2 feet 10 inches. With 
its stand the height is 4 feet 10 inches. 

Ko-DAiKO : a small form of O-daiko, used chiefly in processions, and 
in the orchestra for some of the shorter performances of the Kagura. 



192 THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 

The cylinder of the orchestral Drum is decorated, and it rests on a 
stand ; the processional Drum is plain ; in both cases the faces are 
undecorated. It is placed in a cubical frame suspended from a pole 
carried on the shoulders of two men, the : drummer walking by the side 
delivering vigorous blows on the parchment with two plain thick sticks 
of hard wood without knobs or leather : these sticks are about one foot 
in length and over an inch and a half in diameter. Before the procession 
starts it isi placed at the Temple ^ate, where it is beaten continuously for 
two hours or more to summon the people. Either this Drum, or a smaller 
variety, was formerly used in battle. 

The faces measure i foot ioJ[^ inches in diameter, the parchment over- 
lapping 3i inches. The convexed cylinder is 2 feet 2\ inches in length, 
with a central diameter of 2 feet 4^ inches. With its stand the height 
is 3 feet II inches. The stand, however, is occasionally much higher, as 
in the Temple of the second Tokugawa ShOgun at Shiba. 

TsuRi-DAiKo — the ''Hanging Drum" — more commonly called simply 
Taiko : the larger of the two Drums used in the Bugaku orchestra. 
It is a shallow cylinder very slightly convexed, hung in a circular rim 
or frame on a stand, and so arranged as to height that the drummer 
sitting in front of this instrument may, without the slightest stretching of 
his arm, strike the exact centre of the face. The sticks have leather- 
covered knobs, and measure only 1 1 inches in length ; when not in use 
they are placed in rings at the side of the frame. The right stick is 
called obachi — the male stick : the left mebachi — the female stick. Both 
faces and the cylinder are elaborately painted in the usual style of 
Temple decoration, the phoenix or the dragon surrounded by gorgeous 
clouds. The stand and frame are richly lacquered, and terminate with the 
kwa-yen — the flame ornament — and balls of fire, made in brass. In tone 
the Drum is very full and mellow. Its use in the orchestra is to mark 
the larger divisions of the time — the hydshi — ^which are practically equivalent 
to the Western bars." 

On very great occasions a much larger Drum — Da-daiko — is used ; 
but this belongs properly to the second, or "braced" class. 

The Tsuri-daiko varies . slightly in size ; its average dimensions, how- 
ever, are as follow : . Diameter of face, 20 inches ; diameter of circular 



a iSfiil*'/rrmi E&avSiar, i 



194 THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 

frame, 32 inches, the rim being two inches broad and one inch thick. 
The cylinder is only 8 inches long. The height from the floor to the 
top of the kwa-yen ornament is 4 feet 3 inches. 

In the illustrations on the preceding page two varieties of Tsuri-daiko 
are g^ven : in the upper one is shown the form here described ; in the 
lower, a form sometimes found for the secular orchestra. The different 
shape of the single stick will be noticed. The other instruments shown 
in the plates will be described in due course. 

Very special instructions are given for playing this Drum. As will be 
seen in the analysis of the time of Bagaku music, given after the description 
of the Kakko, a loud drum point with the " male " is invariably preceded 
by a soft beat with the " female " stick. The position of the sticks at the 
time of striking is indicated in the following illustration : — 



;t 



KerO : a small Drum used in China, according to the old records, 
about the period of the Tong dynasty, to signalize the appearance of dawn ; 



it is now used in Japan for the purpose of marking the time in processional 
orchestras. It is hung round the leader's neck by a cord, which he holds 
in his left hand, together with the rattle, Furi-tsuzumi, beating the hydski 



JAPANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS. 195 

• 

with the stick in the right hand. The face measures only 6 J inches in 
diameter, with a cylinder 6 inches long, the sides slightly convexed, giving 
a central diameter of 7^ inches. The faces are silvered, with black " mitsu- 
tomoyiy' and are fastened on to the gilt cylinder by gilt studs, the parchment 
overlapping as in the large Drums of the class. 



II. DRUMS WITH BRACES. 

The chief characteristic of this class is that the faces have a larger 
diameter than the cylinder, giving roughly the following section : — 






The braces or ** snares," generally of thick silk or hemp cords, run 
through holes cut in the rims of the faces, as in the dotted lines in the 
diagram, and are drawn tight by a central cord. 

Da-daiko : the large Drum used only on the greatest occasions in the 
Bugaku orchestra instead of the Tsuri-daiko. It is erected on a special plat- 
form, draped and tasseled, with a gold railing and steps. The drummer, 
who is specially selected for his skill, stands in front of the Drum, the 
directions being that he should, for greater vigour in striking, place his 
left foot on the platform, and his right on the upper step. It is surrounded 
with a broad rim ornamented with phoenix and dragon, and edged with 
red kwa-yen, or "flames." This frame is fixed into a socket in the plat- 
form. The whole is surmounted by a black lacquer pole, ^\ feet in 
length, which supports a gold sun more than a foot in diameter, with rays 
18 inches long. The faces are gilt, and bear in front a black ''mitsu- 
tomoyi^' and at the back a '' futatsu-tomoyi!' The cylinder is richly decorated 
on red lacquer ; the hemp braces are black, white, and red, and are nearly 
an inch in diameter. 

The diameter of the faces is about 6 feet 3 inches; the length of 
the cylinder 5 feet, with diameter 4 feet 2 inches, the wood of which it is 



19(5 THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 

composed being 2^ inches thick. The Drum is not fastened to the pole, as 
appears in the accompanying sketch, but rests on a stand, which is shown 
in a separate cut. The cylinder is provided with two "ears," which serve 
as handles. The form of the internal supports of the case of the body is 
also shown in the illustrations. 

The description and rough sketches of this huge Drum are taken from 
Suyenao's "MS. Records of Ancient Music," the Drums themselves being 
exceedingly rare. The two belonging to the Temples at Nikko are hope- 
lessly broken ; another, sent to the Vienna Exhibition in 1873, suffered 
shipwreck, and still lies at the bottom of the sea. 

Ni-DAiKO — the "Portable" Drum, figured on page 197; a smaller pro- 
cessional variety of the Da-daiko. It is carried by a black lacquer pole, 
eight feet long, on the shoulders of two men ; the drummer, as in the case 
of the Ko-daiko, walking by the side. The tone is very poor and thin. 
Its gilt faces with black " mitsU'tomoyS," red lacquer body, and coloured 
strings, correspond with those of the larger Drum. It has, however, no 
outer rim, and is merely surmounted by one red flame, 15 inches high by 
20 broad. The diameter of the faces is 2 feet 7 inches ; the cylinder is 
I foot 3 inches long, and i foot 8 inches in diameter. 



Happu : a very old Chinese Drum filled with rice-powder. It was 
similar in shape to the Ni-daiko, but was hung in a circular frame on a 




ft 




The DA-DAIKO and NI-DAIKO {/nm tIttkJUt in AM Suymaa't " MS. Xtcordt of Anrimt Muiie "). 



198 THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE, 

stand embellished with flame ornament like the Tsuri-daiko, and was 
probably about the same size. The figure in the cut on page 196 is taken 
from the Encyclopedia. 

Kakko (figured in the upper engraving on page 193) : described in the 
Encyclopedia **the Barbarian Drum which came through China from Turkestan 
and Thibet." It is the small Drum of the Bugaku orchestra; it is, never- 
theless, the leader of that orchestra, its function being to mark the "beats" 
of the music. It is composed of a painted wooden cylinder, i foot long, 
and 6*2 inches in diameter, with a parallel section. The projecting faces 
are 10 inches in diameter: these faces are painted white. The Drum is 
braced eight times with thick silk cords. It rests on a small stand in 
front of the player, the height of the whole being 1 5 inches ; the sticks 
are unpadded, i^\ inches long, and knobbed like those of the Western 
Kettle-drum. 

It is struck in three different ways : 

Katarai: a number of quick strokes with the left stick, slightly increas- 
ing in speed. 

Mororai: a number of alternate strokes with both sticks, also increasing 
in speed, making a slow roll. 

Sei : a single tap with the right stick. 

The stroke is a circular motion, figured in the ** Records of Ancient 
Music" as a ^' tomoyi,'"^ thus: — 





MOTIOM OP LBPr STICK. MOTION OP RIGHT STICK. 



Bugaku music is divided into bars — hyoshi — which are each subdivided 
into divisions or beats, called kobyoshi ; the half-beat of each kobyoshi is 
called kagi — corresponding with the **and" in Western counting. Katarai, 
or mororai, exactly fills one of the full beats, and as the time is about 
alia breve, the length of each roll can easily be estimated. 

There are three species of time — yo-hyoshi or shi-hyoshi, containing four 
beats, the common time ; ya-hyoshi or kachi-hyoshi, with eight beats ; and 
mu'hyoshi or roku-hyoshi, with six. 

The conclusion of every hyoshi is marked by a tap on the Kakko {set). 



i 



JAPANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS. 



199 



and a forte stroke on the Taiko with the right stick {obachi), which is itself 
prepared by a piano stroke with the left stick {mebacki) at the half-beat 
immediately preceding it: in the common time at ** three and." . 

It will thus be seen that the rhythm of this music differs from Western 
music in working up to its accent, instead of starting with it. 

The emphasis of the dance follows naturally the accent of the music, 
the drum-point being marked by the stamp of the foot with which those 
who have seen these dances are familiar. 

Kuy the places where the singers take breath, correspond with the kobyoshi. 

These explanations will be sufficient to explain the following scheme of 
the different *' times," which governs both the music with, and that without, 
the Drums: — 



YO-HYOSHI 

[the bar of 4 beats.] 



Beat Kakko, 



Tsuri'daiko. 



YA-HYOSHI 

[the bar of 8 beats.] 



MU-HYOSHI 

[the bar of 6 beats.] 



I. 
2. 

3- 
and 



I. 
2. 

3- 

and 



and 
6. 



mororai 

sei 

katarai 

sei 



kagk 



I. 


mororai 


2. 


mororai 


3- 


mororai* 


4. 


sei 




katarai t 


5- 


sei 


6. 


sei 




katarai 


7. 


sei 


and 


kagk 


8. 


sei 



mororai 

mororai 

mororai 

katarai 

sei 

katarai 
sei 

kagk 

sei 



mebachi {Piano) 
obachi (Forte) 



mebachi 
obachi 



mebachi 
obachi 



* This is not continuous roll for three beats ; the mororai recommences at each beat, 
t ICatarai follows the sei immediately. 



200 THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 

In addition to these a mixed time — Tadabyoshi — is sometimes, though rarely, used, which 
contains three beats. In this there are no rolls on the Kakko. 



ist hydshi 


I 




* 


2 

3 


and 
and 
and 


2nd hydshi 


I 

2 

3 


and 
and 
and 



sei 



sei 



kagk 



kage 

kage mebachi 

kage 
sei obachi 



sei 



kage 

kage 

kage mebachi 

kage 

yd hydshi i sei obachi 

D, C. from 'fk 

The full time of Tadabyoshi contains four hydshi^ which are all alike, except that the forte 
beat on the big Drum on the first beat of the bar does not occur in the first bar: and the 
last bar is incomplete, containing only the obachi beat. The cycle of four bars is ranked as a 
species of Ya-hyoshi. 

Daibyoshi, sometimes called O-Kakko : a large form of Kakko used 
in the Kagura orchestra. Its dimensions are: diameter of face, i foot 6' 5 
inches, with a gold band 3 inches broad, and an inner black band about '625 
inch broad; length, i foot 6 '75 inches; diameter of the cylinder, 11 inches. 
It rests on a small stand, the whole standing 2 feet 2*75 inches from the 
ground. It is strung with 12 braces, and is struck with plain sticks, without 
knobs, I foot 10 inches long. The Drum is figured on page 189. 

The name, the ** grand time beater," signifies the instrument used to 
mark the beats on special occasions. When the short benedictory dance, 
the modern Kagura, is performed at festivals, this Drum is always used 
to mark the hydshi, 

Kaiko : "an enlarged and shortened Kakko," not now in use. According 
to the ** Records of Ancient Music" it was called *'the third processional 
instrument," the Ni-daiko and the Ni-sh5ko probably being the first and the 
second. It was carried on the left shoulder, and struck or rubbed with 
the fingers of the right hand, the beating being accompanied by short shouts, 
which, it is said, caused the instrument to be disliked. The face, painted 
white, measured 14 inches in diameter; the length of the cylinder was 



JAPANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS. 201 

6' 5 inches, with a diameter of 10 inches. It was painted red, and decorated 
in the usual elaborate manner; the thick red cords formed eight braces. 




THB KAIKO. 



Uta-daiko, the ** Song-Drum"; commonly called Shim^-daiko, the **Tied- 
Drum"; and also Geza-daiko, the Drum of the geza theatres. It is the 
commonest of the Japanese Drums, and is used in the theatres, in the orchestra 
of Sarugaku, and on many other occasions. In shape it resembles the Kaiko, 
its dimensions being practically the same. The painted body of the Chinese 
Drum gives place, however, to one of plain kiri wood, and the white face 
to one of plain parchment with a black lacquer border 1*5 inch wide. It 
is played with two plain sticks without knobs, but with the sharp edges 
bevelled off. The Drum is placed in front of the player in a wooden frame, 
which gives it a slight forward inclination, so that the lower edge of the 
instrument is 7*5 inches high, the upper Ji inches. It seems to have been 
first played about 1540 a.d. by Komparu Gon-no-kami, a Taiko player in 
the Court band, and one of the famous house of Komparu. The cords are, 
as usual, orange-red ; but the dignity of the pale blue and lilac cords used 
formerly to be conferred on the celebrated players. 

The Uta-daiko appears in many of the illustrations of this work. The 
front view is shown on page 188, the back view in the following illustration. 

The illustrations of the different orchestras, on pages 27 and 33, indicate 
the very vigorous action of the drummer, and the position of the Drum on 
the floor in front of him. Both the sticks are lifted over the right shoulder 
and brought down with a rapid circular motion on to the face of the Drum, 
and immediately raised into position again for the next stroke. 

2 D 



THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 



I KAGUKA-rUVl. 



III. DRUMS WITH DUMB-BELL-SHAPED BODIES— TSUZUM I. 

This class of Drums seems to be really a modification of the Kakko. 
They have overlapping faces, but a curious dumb-bell-shaped body has 
been substituted for the straight cylinder. The bell-shaped ends of the 
body are hollow. These Drums came to Japan from China, but, like the 
Kakko, are not of Chinese origin ; it is said that they were used' by the 
Barbarians r.ooo years before the time of Confucius to accompany the 
worship of the Gods. In Japan their chief use is to supply the place of 
the Kakko when the orchestra is standing. 

The body is red, and highly decorated ; the leather face painted white, 
with eight metal-faced holes for the red cords. It is struck with black 
sticks I foot long. 

The Drum is made in three sizes. 

IcHr-NO-TsuzuMi, or Ikko : the face, 8 inches in diameter; length of 
cylinder, 14 inches; and diameter where it meets the face, 6 inches. 



JAPANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS. 203 

Ni-NO-TSUZUMi : mention of this Drum is to be found only in ancient 
records — it is now never used. Its dimensions were : diameter of face, 10 
inches; length of cylinder, 16 inches; and diameter, 7^ inches. 

San-no-tsuzumi : used only for " Koma," or Corean music. Its dimen- 
sions are not given, but are probably : diameter of face, 1 2 inches ; length 
of cylinder, 18 inches; and diameter, 9 inches. 

From this Chinese Drum the Japanese variety was invented by the 
Crown Prince Umayado in the reign of the Empress Suiko, at the beginning 
of the eighth century. The Japanese Drums are of two sizes, both smaller 
than the Ikko ; the cords are grasped tightly in the left hand, and the Drum 
struck with the right, the larger being held over the left thigh, the smaller 
over the right shoulder, the musician sitting in the usual Japanese position. 




THB NI-NO-TS(7ZUUI. 

{From a sketch in the ** Records of Anctent Afusic.*') 



Oto-tsuzumi, or Ko-tsuzumi : the " Younger," or shoulder-drum. 
Diameter of face, 8 inches; length of body, 10 inches; diameter at ends, 
3 • 5 inches ; and in the centre, i • 5 inches. 

E-TSUzuMi, or O-TSUZUMi : the '' Elder," or side-drum. Diameter of face, 
8-75 inches; length of body, 11*5 inches; diameter at ends, 4 inches, and in 
the centre, 2 inches. 

The faces of the side-drum are plain : those of the shoulder-drum 
have black lacquer rims, one ring inside, and trefoil ornaments at the six 
holes through which the cords pass. 

The red body of the Chinese Drum is replaced by one of black lacquer 
with gold decoration, and the parchment faces are unpainted. The only 



204 THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 

difference in the structure of the body is, that the centre part of the dumb- 
bell is moulded in the Japanese Drums, and has a parallel section in the ti 
Chinese. 

Yamato and Kyoto produced the most famous Drum makers. The 
colour of the silken cords denotes the grade of the musician : the ordinary 
colour is orange-red, the next rank has light-blue, and the highest lilac. 
This rule applies also to the Uta-daiko. 

The function of the Drum in the orchestra was to mark and empha- 
size the rhythm of the dance : the orchestra of the later No often contains 
one side- and three shoulder-Drums : they are tuned together, but they do 
not necessarily play all together. 

The tone is much fuller than might be expected, more especially that 
of the O-tsuzumi, which is struck with more vigorous strokes than the 
shoulder-drum. 



( 205 ) 



GONGS. 



Shoko : the Gong of the Bugaku orchestra, and the first metal instrument 
introduced into Japan. It is shown by the side of the Tsuri-daiko, in 
the upper plate on page 193. In China it dates from a little later than 
the time of Confucius. It is said that until brass instruments were made in 
Japan it was used in the place of a bugle for the words of command. It 
is of bronze, saucer-shaped, and measures 5*5 inches in diameter, and '75 
inch in depth : it is struck with two very hard knobbed sticks 1 8 inches 
long (figured on page 207), joined by a cord, giving a very acute sound. 
It is used to emphasize the hydshi beat of the Tsuri-daiko, the authorities on 
the ancient dancing saying that it is always struck immediately after the 
big Drum. It is suspended by orange silk cords from a lacquer stand 
resembling in form that of the Taiko, but with a proportionately longer 
stem : it stands 2 feet 5^ inches from the ground, the player sitting in front 
of it in the usual Japanese position. The diameter of the circular part of 
the stand is 11 inches, the rim being i^ inch broad by \ inch thick. 

There are two larger sizes of Shoko, corresponding with the two large- 
sized Drums, Ni-daiko and Da-daiko, with which they are respectively used. 
Both the Ni-shoko and the Dai-shoko are exceedingly rare instruments, and 
not often seen ; I have, therefore, again had recourse to the ** Records of 
Ancient Music," already referred to, for the illustrations on page 207. 

Dai-shOko : the " Grand Shoko " ; used to accompany the Da-daiko. 
Like the Drum, it stands on a special platform with its steps, draperies, and 
tassels. This platform is 2 feet high and 3 feet 7 inches square ; the railing 
9 inches high. The Gong is 14 inches in diameter: it is gilt, and has the 
usual frame of kwa-yen, which fits into a socket into the platform : the frame 
is 5 feet high, and 3 feet broad at the base. 

Ni-shOko: the ** Portable Shoko"; carried by two men on a long pole, 
and used to accompany the Ni-daiko in processions. It is gilt, and has an 
elaborate frame of clouds and fire, measuring 3 feet 5 inches in height by 



2o6 THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 

2 feet wide. The black lacquer pole is 7 feet long, and the Gong 8 inches 
in diameter. 

Kei, or HoKvo : the Temple Gong, which stands on a table at the 
right of the altar. It is of solid metal three-fifths of an inch thick, and is 
often gilt, being suspended by curiously interlaced silk cords from a lacquer 
stand 2 feet 3 inches high by i foot 10 inches broad : it is struck with a 
very hard knobbed stick, i foot long, and gives a lower and mellower 
note than the Shoko. 

There are various shapes, but they may all be roughly described as a 
truncated half lozenge. 



The length of the gilt Kei in use in the NikkO Temples (shown in 
the accompanying illustration) is 8-5 inches at the top and iO"7S ^^ '^^ 
bottom, with an average breadth of 4*5 inches. 

A smaller and thinner variety, in plain bronze, measures 6*75 inches 
at the top, 9" 25 at the bottom, with an average breadth of 3 '25 Inches. 
Both forms of the Kei are given on page 212. 

Dobachi : the " Copper Cup." The large cup-shaped Gong used in the 
Temples, and also given on page 212. It is placed on a cushion on a 
lacquer stand, and struck with a short stick covered with leather. The best 
tone is produced by an upward stroke, the stick just catching the rim of the 
Gong. It is called Keisu by some sects, who use it instead of the Kei. 

The tone of the Dobachi is exceedingly beautiful, and I can only regret 
that I have no information to give my readers as to the composition of 



THm dai-shOko oh its platfobu. 



The DAl-SHOKO and NI-SHOKO {from stAMa in AM Suyenao'i " Rttoris af AneieHt MmU"). 



2o8 THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 

the metal. I believe, however, that a considerable amount of silver is 
mixed with the copper. 

The following instruments are taken chiefly from the Encyclopjedia, 
" Sansai Zuyi" : — 

DOko : a small brass or copper Gong from Southern China, hung on 
a stand, and generally arranged in a set of three. 






Ken : a small Gong originally made of porcelain, the size of a goose's 
egg. It was pierced with six holes, and was tapped with a stick. 




KuRfi-TSUZUMi : a wooden ring, struck with sticks, from - Southern China. 
Hi : a teacup-shaped porcelain Gong. Its use was suggested by the 
sound of drinking cups when accidentally struck. 




JAPANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS. 



209 



SiiOKU : a box of wood or metal, 2 feet 5 inches by i foot 10 inches. 
A movable clapper is fixed inside, with which the player struck the sides 
of the box. 




MoKU-GYO — the ** Wooden Fish": a wooden Gong used in the Temples, 
struck with a padded stick. It was formerly shaped like a fish bent back- 
wards with its tail in its mouth : it now takes the shape of a bird in the 
same position. It will be seen in the picture of the Dobachi, on page 212, 
lying by the side of the stand. 

Dora: the ordinary Gong, which has been adopted in the West. It 
was originally used in China by the night watchmen. 

Waniguchi— the ** Sharks Mouth" Gong: the' gilt Gong which hangs 
at the entrance of the shrines. It is struck by worshippers by means of a 
rope hanging in front of it. It is shown on page 212. 

Gyo : a hollow wooden figure of a recumbent tiger, one foot long. It 
was struck with a small broom or split bamboo. 




Do-BVOSHI : brass Cymbals of different sizes. These Cymbals are also 
shown lying in front of the Tsuri-daiko in the lower picture on page 193. 




2 £ 



2IO THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 

The name, like that of the Drum Dai-byOshi, indicates its use, which is to 
mark the kyoski of the dance; they are the "Copper Time-beaters." 

HyOshigi : two hard wood Clappers, used on a variety of occasions. 
In the Theatre they are beaten on the floor rapidly to emphasize confusion. 




The conductors of juggling, athletic, and other performances, use them to 
attract attention ; also the night-watchmen during their perambulations of 
the streets. The word hydshi again appears ; these are the "Wooden Time- 
beaters." 

BvAKUSHi : nine long tablet-shaped pieces of hard wood strung together, 
used as Clappers. They are now made of bamboo. 



YoTSUDAKE — the " Four Bamboos " : Clappers like the preceding, used 
at the Theatre, and by beggars. 



Haku-han : another form of wooden Clapper, shown by the side of the 
Tsuri-daiko in the lower picture on page 193. 



JAPANESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS, 211 

FuRi-TsuzuMi — the "Shaking Drum," or Toko: a Rattle used in pro- 
cessions. It is composed of two miniature Drums, about 3 inches in 
diameter, and 4 inches in lengftb, placed at right-angles, one on top of the 
other, at the end of a stick about 20 inches long. Five or six little bell 
Rattles are hung on the Drums by short strings. The faces of the Drums 
are silvered, with black " mitsu-toTnoy^" painted on them, and are surrounded 
by a row of gilt studs. The bodies are red, and elaborately ornamented; 
the stick is painted red and black, and terminates with a gilt spear-head 



3 inches above the Drums. The Rattle is held by the leader of the 
processional band with the small Drum KerO.** 

Suzu : the Rattle used by the scarlet-robed dancing ladies of the 
Temples, when performing their benedictory dance. It is shown on page 212. 

FOrin — the "Wind Bell," shown with the Kei on page 212: a Bell 
with a broad flat clapper coming below the body of the Bell, which catches 
the wind. Occasionally streamers were tied to the clappers. The Furin is 
usually suspended at the four corners of the eaves of the Temples. 



212 THE MUSIC OF THE JAPANESE. 

MoKKiN : thirteen wooden tablets fixed on a frame or hollow box with 
handles, somewhat in the form of a Western Harmonicons. It measures 
22 inches long by 9 inches high by 9 inches broad. It is played with two 
knobbed sticks. 



\ 



( 213 ) 



BRASS. 



Rappa : a brass Bugle used in camp ; sometimes called the *' Foreigner's 
Flute." 

DoKAKU : another Bugle, made of copper, and formerly of wood. 

Charumera : a Bugle with holes, which is used occasionally in the 
Theatre, but chiefly by the itinerant vendors of sweets in Japan. Its 
sounds, and the tunes played on it, have many affinities with those of 
the Italian Pifferari. Both the Charumera and Dokaku are said to be 
much used in Corea as processional instruments. 





THB RAPFA. 



THB dOkAKV. 



THB CHARVMBRA. 



( 2IS ) 



NOTES. 



By T. L. SOUTHGATE. 



1 [Page 2]. — It should be noted that the early stringed instruments, from the types of 
those used by the ancient Egyptians down to the instruments employed in Europe till the seven- 
teenth century, were also of a sweet, but feeble, quality of tone. Owing to the shape of the 
instruments of the Viol family, notably their flat backs, they lacked resonance ; with the improve- 
ments of the great Cremonese makers they gained in power. The same may be observed of the 
ancient Harp, which, owing to its having no front pillar to resist the tension of the strings, 
could only have given forth faint sounds, probably not so loud as those drawn from the Lutes 
and Theorbos of our ancestors. And much the same may be said of the Clavichord, Viiginal, 
Spinet, and Harpsichord, the precursors of the Pianoforte ; the tone of all these instruments was 
sweet but very feeble in comparison with that evoked from a sonorous "Broadwood'' of to-day. 
Oddly enough, just the converse is true of the wind reed instruments. These were all much 
more powerful and less under control than those in use to-day. Of the wind family in general 
the Flute no doubt was softer, but the brass and all the others must have been much louder 
than are their modified descendants now used. 

2 [Page 6]. — In that the Japanese musicians produce some effects different from those 
obtained by Western musicians, it is evident that our system of notation is not available to 
include all that these Eastern musicians do. In early times, music, like ancient poetry, and like 
the religious lituigies, was oral, and not written down : it was carried on from age to age by 
tradition. The history of musical notation teaches us that, with the gradual development of the 
art, the capabilities of representing it in signs grew with the advance of the music itself. A full 
score of to-day, representing in definite characters our tone-language, would excite the wonder- 
ment of the old Greek priests, who chanted their hymns to Bacchus from the single signs of 
their alphabet (variously arranged), quite as much as would the elaborate music itself given forth 
by our orchestras of to-day. The art of writing has been characterised as the greatest invention 
mankind has made; the art of setting down signs to represent sounds is just as wonderful. It 
is quite certain that, if the necessity arises, it will be possible to write in an intelligible 
notation any effects that may be produced by nations using a system of music differing from 
that of our own. 

3 [^^.^ 7]- — ^The fact that the music for the Koto is learnt by rote, rather than by being 
taught through notation, would seem to point to the great antiquity of the instrument This was 
the mode of instruction the players went through in the Egyptian temples ages ago; and, 
indeed, it may be pointed out that in early Christian times, the pneumes in which the chant 
was set down were regarded rather as aids to memory, than as signs which exactly represented 
the pitch and duration of the notes to be sung. 



2i6 NOTES. 

4 [T^^S^ ^i\' — W^ ^^^^ * somewhat analogous example in the Western world to this 
temporary migration of musical pupils. The early Egyptian school of music was so famous, 
that, according to Diodorus Sicculus, the Greek musicians went to Alexandria to obtain 
instruction, and occasionally famous natives of Egypt came to Athens and Corinth to give 
performances. Pythagoras, who may be looked upon as the father of scientific music in Greece, 
obtained all his knowledge of the art during his long residence in the Land of the Pharaohs. 
This happened about a thousand years before Japan sent her students in music to study in 
Corea or China. 

5 \.^^S^ 1^1* — ^^ ^^y ^^ noted that Dancing is still a part of the ritual of the Abyssinian 
Church, which professes to have derived this ceremony from the ancient Jewish Church — 
'* David danced before the Lord." In the Abyssinian ritual, the Dance is accompanied by Bells 
and Drums. In our Western Church, the custom still lingers at Seville, where the late 
Sir Frederick Gore Ouseley relates he once saw a solemn Fandango danced in front of the 
high altar. 

6 [Page 1 8]. — ^This reminds one of the famous collection of the "Cantigas de Santa 
Maria," a remarkable set of songs with music of the 13th century, preserved in the library of 
the Escurial. 

7 \.^^S^ ^^\ — Such was the ancient Lyre of the Greeks, an instrument of open strings and 
having no finger-board ; and coming to later times, such was the Italian '^ Accordo," an 
instrument possessing twelve strings, and used mainly for accompanimental purpose, though its 
neck was fretted, and various intervals could be played on each string. 

8 [Pag^ 32]. — It is a little curious to note that in the Middle Ages we also had three sets 
of people dealing with music — the performers in the Church, engaged with sacred music; the 
teachers in the Universities, who composed academic music; and the more popular minstrels, 
who played and sang for the public, and were quite unable to read or write music. 

9 [.-^^S^ 23]. — Analogous examples of trade cries existed with us until within the last few 
years. In ancient Egypt, trade songs and cries were rigorously protected, and many such 
distinctive public street cries are still common in the East. 

10 [Pagg 45]. — The appreciation of music in its different systems resembles that of language. 
It is mainly a matter of where we are bom, and what we have been accustomed to hear from 
infancy. The music current among some other races is unintelligible to us, just as their 
language is. The system with which we are familiar seems to us the only perfect and intelligible 
one. Our Western method is both melodic and susceptible of harmony; but it is not wise to 
despise other systems just because we do not understand and arc not familiar with them. Nor 
is it safe to say that they are only melodic, and incapable of harmonic treatment. The 
resources of harmony are not yet exhausted; and though it seems a fundamental truth to rely 
on the statement that our scalar division of the octave is founded on Nature's acoustic laws, it 
is certain that our system is not mathematically correct so far as the division of intervals is con- 
cerned : we have to temper them for purposes of harmony and combination. There is no valid 
reason to prove that other scalar divisions are not also practicable for harmonic as well as 
melodic purposes. 



NOTES. 217 

11 [Page 69]. — That public exambations for degrees in music and diplomas are held under 
authorisation is proof of the great importance in which the art is regarded in Japan. The very 
long study it requires, and the slow progress made in it, are evidences of the abundant leisure 
which everyone seems to enjoy in that country. It seems that everything must be done thoroughly, 
and each step completely mastered, before a fresh advance is taken — a very different state of 
things from that which exists here, where bogus institutions, intent on fee-gathering, are too ready 
to issue degrees and diplomas for payment, combined with very little knowledge or proficiency. 

12 [Pag€ 88]. — The history of the scale, or series of sounds, employed by the Japanese in 
their music, is so obscure, that an attempt to unravel its origin and trace its development would 
probably result in adding little to our knowledge. The scale was no doubt derived from 
Chinese sources, and its chief interest for us lies in its present capacity of expression. So far 
as we are able to determine by hearing their music and examining the tunings of their instru- 
ments, and apart from the scientific testing of the individual sounds by means of a syren or a 
graduated monochord, the notes employed by the Japanese do not materially differ from the 
sounds we use. They may not be mathematically the same as our tempered system, so far as 
the exact number of their individual vibrations is concerned, but they are practically identical 
with our diatonic and chromatic scales. In all probability the Japanese have had no mathe- 
maticians able to determine the, vibration-number of the notes and their ratios to one another, 
nor do they seem acquainted with the acoustic laws of harmonics on which the Western system 
of chord-construction is founded, yet their musicians have arrived at much the same result as 
obtains with us. The question is one of much interest, because among the near neighbours of 
the Chinese are the Hindoos, and in the not. far south the Maories. Carl Engel and Captain 
C. H. Day have pointed out that these nations employ a scale containing many more sounds 
in the octaves than those used by us ; while the Javanese, according to Mr. W. Ellis, divide 
their octave into five exactly equal parts. Yet the Japanese system is allied to the Western 
method, and the Eastern systems of their nearer neighbours are ignored. 

In one respect the Japanese follow the Eastern plan of slurring up or do\^ii to a note 
instead of taking it firmly; this occurs chiefly in their vocal music, but it has caused musical 
visitors to declare that they sing out of tune, and use minuter intervals than ours. This declara- 
tion is founded on as erroneous an assumption as it would be to declare that our string-instrument 
players did the same when they slurred up to a note, or to censure a vocalist for singing out 
of tune when passing insensibly from the leading note to the tonic at the close of a song. We 
must admit that the Japanese know of and use all our intervals, but the haphazard sort of way 
they select the notes to tune their strings to, and the fact that the systematised scale we accept 
as a logical ladder of sounds is not recognised by them, and that in much of their music some, 
notes find no place, have caused investigators to come to the conclusion that the Japanese scale 
is an imperfect one. This is as much an error as it would be to assume that a piece of modem 
music, deliberately written without employing the fourth or seventh of the scale, did not belong 
to our diatonic method. We cannot judge of what intervals a scale is composed merely by the 
tuning of certain strings, neither can we say that a system is truncated because we find tunes 
in which some notes are omitted. The duty of the Japanese ; musician is to learn to play tunes ; 
he only concerns himself with the notes necessary for each tune in the scale, qu& scale, and is 
indifferent to anything more. He looks at the music from an emotional rather than from a 
scientific point of view; hence, Western musicians, with their fuller knowledge, are better able 
to analyse and reduce Japanese music to its elements than are the native musicians themselves. 

2 F 



8i8 NOTES. 

ft 

1 3 \.^^S^ 97]* — ^^^ different tunings of the Kotos, Biwas, and Samisens, seem arbitrary and 
unmeaning to us, and in investigating Japanese music there is a danger that we may confound 
the tuning i^ith the scale; but the two things are quite distinct We can no more judge of 
what the scale is like from the tuning of these instruments, than we can assert that the different 
notes employed for the lowest strings of the Violin, Viola, Violoncello, and Double-bass, or the 
Pianoforte and Organ, form the tonic foundation on which the scales of these instruments rest 
The lowest note is a mere accident of convenience. During the reign of the Lute it was 
common to vary the tuning of its strings according to the pitcli of the song to be sung. 
Paganini, for certain pieces, altered the tuning of the strings of his Fiddle from the orthodox 
method, and Berlioz has directed the lowest string of the Double-bass to be altered in pitch for 
playing some of his works. The tuning, therefore, of an instrument, teaches us but little. The 
Jai>anese have an infinite number of modes of tuning, which, together with the occasional 
alteration of the bridges during the performance in order to obtain some lower notes, makes 
their free system seem arbitrary and very complicated to us. 

14 \Page 115]. — The answer to a fugue subject with us is not always strictly regular, so 
far as the exact intervals are concerned. The point to be aimed at is, to get the same motion 
of the notes comprising the phrase; it oflen happens that, without going out of the key, or 
introducing extraneous notes, the subject cannot always be repeated exactly spaced as it 
appeared in its initial setting forth. 

15 {Page 123]. — The examples which are given show that the Japanese have some acquaint- 
ance with harmony, and occasionally use it The description of the classical " Form," and the 
analysis of the two pieces of Koto music given, will come as a surprise to most persons who 
look lightly on the music of this Eastern race. It is clear that they set forth a first and second 
subject, and that the form is what we know as the variation type; then their music displays 
imitative and sequential phrases, fanciful treatment of a simple recurrent theme, episodal 
passages, balanced sections; and the figures show considerable ingenuity in construction, even 
if we do not perceive any planned artistic effect It would not be fair to place this music 
side by side with our own sonata form for the sake of comparison ; but still their " Flum>branch " 
and "Rokudan," together with the graceful "On the Road to the Kasuga Temple," exhibit 
thought in construction and some distinct art-purpose. No doubt the large intervals employed 
in these pieces, and a prevalence of harsh intervals rarely used with us, make the music sound 
ungraceful to our ears; but the music is not without grace. As Dr. Hubert Parry has thought- 
fully pointed out, our melodies are based on certain harmonic considerations; were the 
Japanese accustomed to hear our richly-harmonised themes, their ears would recognise certain 
laws which underlie the construction of melody itself, and their music would no doubt show 
the effect of this wider knowledge. 

16 [Page 137]. — It is to be regretted that nothing for certain is known of the ancient Hitsu- 
no'koto. It is reputed to have had as many as fifly strings, and it would supply a valuable 
piece of information if we only knew to what notes these strings were tuned. Speculation as 
to whether this large number of strings represented a diatonic or a chromatic scale-system is 
useless. But even if some of the notes were doubled — Le,, two unisons — it is clear that the 
compass of this Harp, four thousand years old, must have been laige, and its number of 
intervals very considerable. . 



NOTES. 219 

17 \JP^i^ I37]« — The striking of a stringed instrument with beaters or hammers is of great 
antiquity. Such instruments were the forerunners of our modem Dulcimer; the last lingering 
example is the Cembalo of the Hungarians, who play marvellously on this simply-constructed 
pumo-farUy />., an instrument yielding soft and loud tones according to the force with which the 
strings are struck. In many of the Assyrian sculptures will be found players with an instrument 
of this type suspended in front of them, while marching in procession with other musicians. 

18 \Page 144]. — The method of playing the one, two, and three-stringed Kin or Koto is 
curious, so far as the production of notes other than those of the open strings is concerned. 
It is difficult to say why, instead of stopping the string with the finger, as is common in all 
coimtries and with all instruments, a heavy ivory cylinder worn on the second finger of the left 
hand should have been employed : the sliding of this along the string, instead of striking it 
clear, has some little analogy to the action of our Violin and Violoncello players, who produce 
charming effects by this gliding up to a note. The indication of the position of the tones and 
semitones by spots painted on the body of the Koto is allied to the plan of using frets for a 
similar purpose placed across the necks of instruments of the Guitar type. 

J 9 \.P<^S^ ^53]' — ^This mode of raising the pitch of the string, by depressing that portion 
of it not intended to sound on the wrong side of the bridge, is an ingenious device peculiar 
to the Japanese musicians; so far as we know, the practice exists nowhere else, though it may 
be mentioned that the old Welsh harpists pinched their strings at the top in order to raise them 
a semitone. No one would guess that such a device was employed who merely saw the 
instrument We should judge that the Koto possessed an imperfect scale : but this mode of 
artificially raising the pitch of a string by a single or a double pressure, either a semitone or 
a tone, elevates the instrument into the rank of one possessing a complete chromatic scale, 
and on it any music cau be played. 

20 \Page 153]. — The device of sharpening a note from its initial pitch while the string is 
still vibrating, by tightening the tension of the string, and then, by gradually removing the 
pressure, letting the note fall to its original sound, is indeed remarkable; it suggests effects 
quite new to us. It may be pointed out, that some such result may be obtained by depressing 
still further the keys of the old Clavichord, after they have been struck and the tangents have 
hit the wire; the additional pressure on the key slightly raises, and thus tightens, the strings, 
making the note rise in pitch. There is a tradition that Bach, who preferred the Clavichord, 
used to produce this effect occasionally ; but as the alteration of the pitch of a note would have 
affected the harmonic chord of which it was a component part, the tradition as to this after- 
sharpening seems hardly credible. 

21 \Pagt 155]. — The Kaki would seem to resemble in its effect our acciaccatura^ which is a 
short grace-note lying beside and struck together with a longer principal note. 

22 \Page 157]. — The Japanese grace-notes and ornamentations, though not so numerous 
as our own, are of the same conventional and stereotyped character as those employed by the 
Harpsichord and Clavichord writers of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. But there is 
one special feature they use, the "Glissades," not found in our music. On instruments of the 
Pianoforte tribe, a glissando is possible only on the white notes forming the key of C; on the 
Harp, by means of its pedals setting the strings in any key required, the glissafido can be 



220 NOTES. 

played just where desiced; the ease with which it can be done has been a temptation to the 
Harpist to use the device so constantly that we find the expression "to sweep die strings" 
employed very often by the old writers of poetry. But it should be noted that the Harp and 
Pianoforte glissando necessarily took in every note of the diatonic scale; the Japanese, owing 
to the fact that there is no separate string for eveiy note of the scale, omit certain notes in the 
glissttde, and thus an effect is produced novel to our ears. The occasional introduction of this 
device in their pieces, the glissade being played both up and down pianissimo^ lends a singular 
charm and romance to their music, besides affording a distinct contrast in tone-colour to the 
strings plucked with the plectrum. 

23 \Page 159]. — It is interesting to note the many refinements employed by the Japanese 
in the way in which the strings are plucked, sometimes with the plectrum, and sometimes the 
fingers, a difference being made (as by the players on our bow instruments) between the up 
and down-strokes of the exciting medium. 

24 \Page 160]. — "Uchi." This beating of the strings below the bridges is novel, and 
must produce an effect altogether strange to us. 

25 \Page 160]. — The Japanese notation is very interesting. It differs vastly from our own, 
than which we can think of nothing more exact or simple; yet it is complete enough to 
represent the time, the accent, the notes to be played, and the way in which the strings are 
to be plucked. It would be useful to have some historical account of the inception and gradual 
development of this system of notation. 

26 \Page 166]. — It would seem by this device that the strings are not so much stopped — 
as we use the term — as they are tightened by the varying pressure of the fingers, and so several 
notes can be produced by the finger in one position; the task must be a difficult one to do 
accurately. 

27 \Page 171]. — The omission of the fourth and seventh of the scale goes to show the great 
antiquity of the instrument, and that its series of sounds were of the pentatonic order, the most 
ancient type of the scale-systems. 

28 \Page 172]. — It would be incorrect to consider the vibrating wire in the body of the 
Gek-kin, Gen-kan, and Shigen, as an attempt to obtain sympathetic effects, as in the Viol 
d*Amour; there appears to be no tuning of this wire, and it could only produce a jangling effect 

29 \Page 17 s].— The use of snake-skin is an example of the custom which obtains of 
nations employing in the making of their musical instruments just such materials as are 
commonly found in their several countries. For instance, in European countries pine and maple 
are the woods chiefly selected for the bowed instruments, and until later times boxwood was 
employed for the wind instruments. In Egypt, the stems of the large reed plant, Arundo donax^ 
form the flutes; in India, cane and gourds are made use of; in Siam, ivory; in China and 
Japan, bamboo; and in countries where snakes are common, the skins of these reptiles are 
pressed into use for musical purposes : Drums in Africa are often covered with the skins of 
lions. In Japan, the use of monkey-bone for the ancient Flute finds its parallelism in ancient 
Greece and Italy, where the early flute was made of the tibia bone, and this supplied the 
generic name for the whole family of instruments of this type. In Japan, as may be expected, 
a great deal of lacquer-work is employed with their instruments. 



NOTES. 221 

30 [Pag£ 177]. — It may be remarked that, provided the bridge is slightly rounded, the 
same effect of strings sounding together was produced on the old Italian "Accordo," by the 
hair of the bow being kept very loose, thus setting in vibration all the strings over which it 
passed. 

* 

31 [Page 181]. — This peculiarity of a hole in the side of the Flute covered with paper is 
no doubt borrowed from the well-known Chinese type. Its effect is to create a tremolo by the 
rapid movements of the paper, which practically acts as a vibrating reed, and causes a distinct 
alteration in the character of the tone the tube gives out without this contrivance. 

32 [Page 182]. — In that the Hichiriki is played through a reed mouthpiece (shita) it should 
be more correctly classed with the reed (Oboe, Clarinet, and Bassoon) type of wind instrument, 
and not with the Flute proper, or the flue-organ-pipe type of tubed instruments. 

•33 \,^^g^ '^3]' — The Shakuhachi is of exactly the same character as the ancient long Flutes 
blown at the end, which are often seen in the Egyptian tomb paintings. The instrument (Nay) 
is still in use in the land of the Pharaohs; it is difficult to blow, the tone is singularly sweet 
and mellow. 

34 \.^^i^ '^S]' — The Sho (Chinese "Cheng") is to us the most interesting of all Eastern 
instruments. Considering its elaborate construction, it is difficult to accept the statement made 
as to its enormous antiquity ; yet it seems to have been known in China and Japan for centuries. 
The vibrating reed employed is that technically called the " single reed." No instrument of 
this character is known in Europe, but the Regal of the Middle Ages, occasionally used in place 
of the Organ in churches, and sometimes used in processions, as may be seen in some old 
pictures, was of this type so far as the tone was concerned. The sound was produced from 
the vibration of small reeds set in short pieces of pipe; but a bellows was employed to supply 
the wind, and the valves were opened from an ordinary key-board. The present representatives 
of the Regal are the Harmonium and the so-called American Oigan. There is a tradition that 
the free reed came to tis from China, but its principle has been known for thousands of years. 
Reeds were used for one of the species of the Greek avAos. It may be noted that the word 
in John, c. xii., v. 6, translated bag (" Judas was a thief, and had the bag "), is in the Greek 
version •yXoxradicftw, />., a box to keep the tongues or reeds in, just as modem Oboe, Clarinet, 
and Bassoon players still have to hold their reeds. The fact that several notes can be sounded 
at once on the Sho is sufficient to prove that the Japanese were at an early period of their 
history acquainted with harmony, />., different notes sounded simultaneously. It is curious to 
note that instead of blowing into the pipes as we do, the Japanese draw in the breath, so the 
sound is produced by exhaustion of the air, and not by pressure of the breath; and, further, 
that we uncover the holes of our wind instruments with our fingers to produce the sound, 
whereas the Japanese in this instrument cover them — the reverse of our plan. 

35 U^^S^ '92]» — It seems that in Japan, as in other Eastern countries, the Drum is 
regarded chiefly as an instrument of percussion to mark the time and accentuate the rhythm, the 
drummer having the same office as was assigned to the Coryphaeus in the Greek orchestra; this 
official had a heavy metal shoe on his foot, and beat time by stamping on the stage. With us 
the Drum is much more extensively employed ; indeed, Beethoven has elevated it into the 
rank of a solo instrument {vide "The Violin Concerto" and "The Choral Symphony")* 



222 NOTES. 

36 [Page 211]. — ^This shaking Drum, or Rattle, resembles the Sistrum of ancient Egypt 
The instrument was deemed sacred; it consisted of a handle to which was attached a metal 
frame, and through the sides of this were thin metal bars moving to and fro when shaken. 
Sometimes pierced coins were strung on the bars to increase the jingle. 

Of the various percussive instruments — and, indeed, of some of other types — it may be 
remarked how much more pains the Japanese seem to take in ornamenting them, and showing 
more feeling for art in their construction and ornamentation than is generally the case among 
the Western nations. The use of and fondness for colour is always more strongly shown in 
the East than in the West, and the musical instruments of these nations are beautifully painted, 
lacquered, and inlaid. 



1 



( 223 ) 



INDEX. 



A. 



« 



Adzuma-jishi " 
After-sharp, the 
Agari 

Ak^bono . • 
" AW-no-kan^ " 
"Akikiri Koto** 
Amaterasu 
Amatsumora, the iron-smith 
Am^-no-Kaga-Yama 
Am^-no-masaki • 
Ara^-no-Tori-Fuy^ 
Am^-no-Uzum^ 
Amewaka . 
Awaseni • 
Azuma-asobi 
Azuma-fuy^y the 
Azuma-koto, the 



91, I03 



112, 



PAGS 
112 

154 
, 108 

45 

51 
7,16 

8 

9 
8 

9 

8,9 
II 

158 

74 
181 

145 



B. 



Bachi, the. .... 

of the Biwa 

of the Samisen. 
Band of female musicians . 
Banshiki • . . 

tuning .... 
" Barbarian Sh5," the . 
Biwa, the, introduced from China 

description of • 

influence of, on Japanese music 
Bleachers' dance 

Blind men, degrees conferred on . 
Bon-odori-uta . • . • 



54 
165 
175 

19 

83 
109 

187 

15,19 
164 

22 

23 

53 

23*41 



PAGE 

Bow-theory of development of instru- 
ments . . . . .151 
Brass instruments 
Bugaku, the 
Bugaku-biwa, the 

tunings of 
Bungo-bushi 
Bunya-bushi 
Byakushi, the . 



. 213 

14, 19, 24 

. 165 

• 93 

•35>4o 

40 

210 



9 

181 

53 
213 

23>4i 
181 

137, 150 



15 



0. 



Castanettes, invention of 
"Cave-flute," the 
Certificates of proficiency 
Charumera, the • 
Cha-tsumi-uta . 
Chi, the • 
Chiku-no-koto, the 

China, commissioners sent to, by Em- 
peror Jimmyo 

dances of, studied under influence 
of Musical Bureau . • i4» 24 

Japanese students go to learn 
music in • 

music of, established in Japan . 

orchestral instruments of • 

scale of . 
Chinese Biwa, the .... 
Chinese Flutes ..... 
Chinese Gekkin, the, vibration numbers of 
Chosen, the ..... 
Choshi ...,., 
Ch5shi-omoi ..... 



13 
13 

19 

108 

169 
180 
104 
176 
102 
60 



224 



INDEX. 



PAGE 

Cb5shi-sadamd ..... 60 
Clappers . . . . . ,210 
Classical music ..... 47 
Comma, the . . . . .104 
Concertina, Salvation Army, notation for 161 
Corea, tribute of musicians from . . 12 
Corean Koto, the . . . .150 
Corean Samisen, the . . . .176 



.. • 



D. 

Da-daiko, the 

Daibydshi, the . 

Dai dai Kagura • 

Daij in-mai-no-kouta 

Daijo 

Dai-sh5ko, the • 

Daku-in . 

Dan, the . 

Dankin 

Danmono . 

Dega^ari . 

Degrees given to musicuns 

Dengaku, the 

Diplomas . 

Dobachi, the 

Do-byoshi, the . 

Dokaku, the 

D5ko, the . 

Donen-bushi 

Dora, the . 

D53hd 

Dotd-bushi 

Dragon, Koto named after 

" Dragon-Flute," the 

Drums 



the 



E. 



" Eastern Koto," the . 

" Eight-cloud Koto," the . 

" Eight-stringed Koto," the . 



200 
18 

41 

53 

205 

61 

47, "4 

83 
114 

30 
52 

24,25 
67 
206 
209 
213 
208 

41 
209 

181 

41 

52 
180 

189 



153 

145 
144 

149 



Engi era . 

Ennen . 

Enoshima, ceremony at 

^tsuzumi . 

Examination for diplomas 



F. 



Fan-dance. 

Fifth, how obtained in the East 
"Five-stringed Koto," the 
Flute, description of . 

pitch of . 

notation for 

invention of Yamato Fuy^ 

sacredness of . 
Form 

"Four-Bamboos," the. 
Fuchi 

Fujimatsu-bushi . 
Furin, the. 
Furi-tsuzumi, the 
Fusho 
Futa-uta . 
Fuy^. Sx Flute. 



G. 

Gagaku Rio 
Gebuki 

Geisha dances . 
Gekkin, the 

vibration numbers 
varieties of 

songs for the 
Genji Monogatari 
Genjitsu-bushi . 
Genkwan, the . 
Geza-daiko, the 
Gidayu-bushi 
Gindai, the 
Glissades . 



PAGE 

18 

26 

69 

203 

<>5 



26 

84 

14^ 
180 

III 

161 

9 
10 

114 

210 

73 
36,40 
211 

211 

83 
"5 



14 

. 72 

23 

165, 196 

of different 

104 
6 

50 
40 

171 

2CI 

35, 39, 40 
148 

157 









INDEX. 






225 


PAGE 


PAGE 


"Go-dan'* . . 47f ^^» ii4 


Hitsu-no-koto, the 48, 137, 150 


Goju-in 






. 6t 


" Hiyen no kyoku " . 




69 


Go-kin, the 






. 146 


Hokyo, the 






206 


Gongs 






. 205 


Honchosi • 






174, 176 


Go-sagari roku-agari . 






92, xox 


Hosori 






41 


Go-sei or Go-m. 






. 61 


Hyojd 






. 83 


Gosho-guruma . 






XI4 


tuning 






. 108 


Gyaku-roku 






. . 83 


Hydshi 






47, 190 


Gyo, the . 






209 


Hyoshigiy the . 
HyOshi-uchi 




1 


. 218 
60 



H. 

" Hachi-dan " 

Hachi-hyoshi 

Hakuhan, the 

Handaku-in 

Haneru 

"Hanging Drum," the 

Han-koto, the 

Han-kumoi 

Happu, the 

Harima-bushi 

Harmony . 

Ha-uta 

Haya-kaki . 

Hayaku . 

Hayashi-kata 

Hazamu • 

Heik^biwa, the 

Heikd Monogatari 

Hi, the . 

Hichiriki, description of 

notation for 

influence of its music 
Hichiriki-no-miya 
Hikiren 
Hi-kyoku • 
Hirajoshi . 

full scale of. 
variations df . 
Hisamura . 
"Hitotsu-toya" . 

harmonized 
Hito-uta • 
Hitoyokiri, the . 



47, 114, 123 
198 
210 
61 

159 
190 

i37i 150 

95 
196 

40 

X12 

39 

155 
160 

30 

156 

22 

20, 36 

208 

X82 

x6x 

10 

10 

157 

74 
80, 109 

90 

90 

51 
67 

130 

"5 

184 



I. 



I (i2th string) . 


• 


• 


92 


Ichi-botok^ 


« 


■ 


21 


Ichidan . . . . 


• 


■ 


114 


Ichi-gen-kin, the 


• 


• 


143 


Ichi-no-tsuzum^, the . 


• 




202 


Ichiotsu . . . . 


1 




83 


tuning . 


1 i 




109 


Ichi*sagari 


t 




. 174 


Ikko, the . 


f 




202 


Ikuta 


» 




• 51 


Ikuta-koto, the . 






51,52 


description of 






. 138 


Ima-yo 






18 


Tngetsu . 






• 52 


Intervals, characteristic 






126 


Is^ Monogatari . 


• 




• 59 


Is^-ondo uta 






41 


Isbizaka • 






• 51 


Ishoku-sashi 






. 60 


Itcha-bushi 




35, 40 


Iwato 




< 


)2. 100 



J. 



Jamisen, the . . . -175 

Japan, dances of . . . -24 

modem music of . • •44 

musicians of • . . .62 

national music of, preserved by the 

priests 15 

2 G 



226 



INDEX. 



Japan, scale of . 

song[s of. . • 

Jingo Kogo, Empress : conquest 
Corea .... 

Jisei-in ..... 

Jomu ..... 

Joruri-bushi .... 
accompanied by Samisen 
instructions to singers of 

Joruri Monogatari 

Joun-bushi .... 

Jun-pachi ..... 

Jun-roku 



of 



PAGE 

79 
30 



II 
. 61 

. 83 

.39i4o 

. 54 
60 

• 3^1 40 
40 

. 83 

. 83 



K. 

Kabuki, the 

Kadayu-bushi 

Kadzura Japonica 

Kaeshi-zumd 

Kaga-bushi 

Kagd 

Kagen-gaku, the 

Kagura, modem form of 

performance of 

poetry of 
Kagura-fuy^y the 
Kaiko, the 
Kak^ 
Kaki 

KakkOy the 
Kaku-goto, the 
Kami Asobi 
Kami, no nori 
the Gods" 
Kami Fuyd 
Kami Koto 
Kamigata-uta 
Kamu 
Kan 

Kando • 
Kan-geiko 
Kaotari, the 
"Kareno," the 
Kashiwaba 



Koto—" the 



oracles of 



29 

36>4o 

9»i7 
141 

41 
198 

19 
18 

16 

17 
181 

201 
156 

154 
198 

148 

16 



4 
16 

16 

41 

83 

159 
161 

72 

176 

12,15 

52 



" Kasuga-mode " 
Katarai 
Kat5-bushi 
j^e • • . 
Kei, the . 
Keian Gekkin, vibration numbers 
Keikin, the 
Ken, the • 
Kengyo degree . 
Kero, the. 
Key, knowledge of principle in 
musicians 

parallel keys of the Koto 
Kin (13th string) 
Kin, " prohibition " 
Kin, the, description of 

its "dragon" form 

the origin of name 

varieties of 
Kin-ju 
Ki5gen, the 

popular use of 
Kirisen, the 
" Kiritsubo " . 
Kiri wood, used for Kotos 
Kitajima . 
Kiushiu music • 
Kiyari 

Kiyomoto-bushi . 
Kobyoshi • 
Ko-daiko, the . 
Ko-iso 
Kokin, the 
Kokon-bushi 
Kokun, the 
" Kokorozukishi " 
Kokyu, the, description of 

introduction into Japan 
method of teaching 
Koma-fuy^, the . 
Komuro-bushi • 
Kotd, degree 
Koto, description of 

its music • 



measurements of different forms of 142 



music is written 
notation . 

specimens of. 



123 



of 



early 



PAGB 

> "S 
198 

40 

153 
206 

104 

177 

208 

52' 
194 



97 

105 
92 

4 
136, 148 

52 
4 

143 
90 

25 
29 

176 

123 

51 

51 

49 

41 

3^,40 

198 

189 

52 
178 

41 
178 

123 

176 

55 

56 

181 

41 
52 

135 
47,48 



6 
160 
162, 163 



INDEX. 



227 



Koto, the origin of the name 

technical terms 

varieties of 

Yatsuhaishi's improvements 
Ko-tsum^ 
Ko-tsuzumi, the . 
Koto-saki 
Koto-uta 
Ko-uta 
Ku . 
Ku, the 
" Ku-dan " 
Kudara-Koto, the 
Kumi, the 
" Kumo-no-uyd " 
Kumoi 

full scale of 
Kurahashi 
"Kurama-jishi" . 
Kur^-tsuzumi, the 
Kutara, musicians of, 

Yamato 
Kyoto musicians 
Kwaigo-no-ben . 



founded school in 



PAGE 

4 

153 

143 

SI 
141 

3i 203 
140 

44,98 

39 
199 

172 

47, "4 

. 150 

47, "4 
68, 123 



9ij 



97i 



100 

94 

51 

"3 
208 



13 

• 73 
.60, 61 



M. 

Madagascar, Koto of . . . •151 
Magaki-bushi ..... 41 

Maotoru . . . . . .160 

Marigata ...... 52 

Marionettes, music for . . . 39 
Mari-uta . • . . . •23,41 
"Matsunami Koto" . . . • Si 
^'Matsuzukishi". . 123,124 

Mebachi . . . . . .190 

"Midare" 68, 123 

" Missing Notes " of the scale . . 88 
Mokkin, the .... , 212 

M5ku-gyo, the ..... 209 

Mommu, Emperor, patron of music « 14 
Monopolies, system of . . * S3 
"Moon-shaped Koto," the . . ,169 
Mororai . . . . . .198 

Mortar Song • • . < ^ 23 



Mu-hydshi . . . . 

Musical Bureau .... 
Musical Degrees 
Musicians, hereditary skill of 

hereditaiy office in temple 

training of 
Mutsuhashi .... 



PAGE 

199 
14, 24 

S2 

70 

73 
63 
SI 



N. 



Nagahara Gekkin, vibration numbers of. 104 


Nagashi 157 


Naga-uta-bushi . 






39,41 


Nag^-bushi 






. 41 


Naishi-dokoro . 






. 16 


Naka-no-yurushi . 






. 68 


Namigaeshi 






. IS7 


Nanto musicians. 






• 73 


Nara, band of . 






• IS 


" New Music," the 






• 3S 


Ni-agari • 






174, 176 


Ni-chin, the 






. 148 


Ni-daiko, the 






196 


Nidan 






, 114 


Ni-gen-kin, the . 






, 144 


Niju oshi . 






. 154 


Ni-no-tsuzumi, the 






. 203 


Nisen, the . 






. 178 


Ni-sh5ko, the 






. 205 


No dancing 






25, 26 


Notation for the Koto 




. 160 




exam 


iples . 


• 162 



o. 



Obachi , , . . . 


• 190 


0-daiko 


. 189 


" Ogi-no-kyoku " 


69, 123 


0-hichiriki ^ ^. 


. 183 


0-iso 


52, 166 


Okazaki-bushi ^ . . . 


41 


Oku-no-yurushi . . . , 


. 68 


Omote « « . . 


. 157 



228 




INDEX. 






- 








PAOB 




PACK 


Omot^-no-yururfii 


67 


Ren 


141 


One-stringed Kin, the. 


143 


Rice-planters* song 






• 


24 


Onsei-tashimi . . . . . 


60 


Rice-planting song 






1 « 


23 


Orchestra of ancient muBic . 


7 


Ritsu 






60, 83, 153 


of Dai dai Kagura 


18 


Ritsusen . 






1 « 


» 108 


of Dengaku 


24 


Roku-hyoshi 






i 


. 198 


of girls for dances 


30 


^ Roku-dan " . 






.47iii 


C4, 123 


of Kagura . . * . 


19 


analysis of 




1 < 


. 119 


of Kagen-gaku 


19 


in stafif notation. 




1 


120 


of Modem Theatre 


30 


Roku-kin, the . 




I 1 


146 


of the Musical Bureau 


14 


Rosai-bushi 




< 




> , 


40 


of No dance 


26 


Ro-yei 




1 
> 1 


►• t 


1 


18 


of Sogaku . 


*t 


19 


Ryo 


» 


I 




. 


60 


Osaka ko-uta 


^ 


41 


Ryo 




> a 




1 


. X59 


Oshiki . . 




108 


Ryo kaku . 


» 


• 




a 


• 52 


Osho 




83 


Ryo no shita 


( 


1 I 




• 


• 52 


Osu .... 




• 153 


Ryosen 


» 


• 






. 108 


0-teki, the 




z8o 


Ryu-tatsu-bushi . 


1 


1 < 




1 4 


•39,40 


0-tsuzumi, the . 


] 


3i 203 


Rya-teki . 


t < 


1 1 




B 


180 


Oto-tsuzumi, the 




203 






O-uta 




. 16 


4 








8. 




P. 




" Sad-toned tube," the . . . 


. 182 




Sagari 


% 


. 154 


Fawlionia Imperialis, used for Kotos . 


• 51 


Sag^-koto, the . 




148 


Fentatonic character of Japanese music 


98 


Saiba-gaku .... 

4 ^ ^ 




22 


Phrases, characteristic . . . . 


126 


examples of poetry of . 




23 


Phrasing 


5 


Saibara .... 


• 


. . 22 


Pin-prickers, degrees conferred on 


• 53 


" Saita-Sakurai " 




. 67 


Pitch 


III 


in 3 keys in string notatioi 


1 106 


Pitch-pipes 


83 


in 3 keys in staff notation. 


107 


Pythagorean scale «. 


85,97 


harmonized . 
5>akura ..... 
Sakurai, school of music at. 
Samisen, description of 




131 

• 94 

13 

■ 173 


Q. 




examples of Sukui and 


hanen 


' 159 




instructions for players . 




60 


Quarter-tones . . . . . 


59 


introduction into Japan . 
songs for the 




. 53 
7 






San-bun son-yeki 






. 83 






Sandan .... 






. 114 


R. 




Sangaku, the . 






.19,24 


I %• 




San-gen-kin, the. 






144 


Ranshd 


■ 83 


Sankyo-ku awas^ mono 






■ 56 


Rappa, the ... . 


. 213 


San-no-tsuzumi, the 




, 


203 


RatUes .... 


1 . • 


211 


San-sagari . 


. 


1 . 


. • 


11 


4, 176 



INDEX. 



229 



San-sa-sagari 
Sansen, the 
Saragaku, the 
Satsuma Biwa, the 

description of 
Sazanza 

Scale, the Chinese 
the Japanese 
tsei • • • 

Sei-in 

" Seiro " . 
Seishido, the 
Seiteki, the 
Sekijo 
Semitone . 

" Seven-stringed Kin," the 
Shakuhachi, the, description of 

introduction of 
" Shark's-mouth Gong," the 
Sharps, different kinds of 
Shiba-kaki-bushi 
" Shichi-dan " . 
Shichi-gen-kin, the 
Shigen, the 
Shi-hyoshi 
Shiki-no-kyoku . 
Shin-kyoku 
Shinnai-bushi 
Shinsen 

Shiragi-koto, the 
Shita 

Shita-kata . 
Sho, the, notation for 

sweetness of its music 

description of 
Sh5-hitsu-no-koto, the « 
Shojo 
Shoko, the 
Shoku, the 
Shono-fuy^, the . 
Shotoku-taishi — " Prince of the saint 

virtue " . 
Shoulder-drum, the 
Shozetu 

" Shuyen-no-kyoku " . 
Sha . 

Shunga, the 
"Side-blowmg Flute," the 



47 



36, 



-like 



PACE 

174 

54 

24,25 
20 

166 

41 
108 

79 
198 

61 
123 

16 
181 

60 

153 
146 

183 

43 
209 

153 

41 
114 

146 

172 

198 

123 

51 
39, 40 

83 
150 

183 

30 
161 

II 

185 

137 

53 
205 

209 

184 



13 

203 

83 
68 

158 
172, 179 

. x8o 



Side-drum, the . 

Sign-board, privilege of using 

Singing 

" Six-stringed Koto," the 

Sogaku, the 

Sojo. 

tuning 
"Song-drum," the 
Songs, growth of early 
Sonohachi-bushi 
So-no-koto, the . 

tunings of 
Soroku degree . 
Sounds, taMe of production of 
"Square Koto," the . 
Suga-kaki . 
Suijo 
Sukui 

"Suma" . 
Suma-koto, the . 
Sumiyoshi-odori-uta 
Surizumd . 
Suzu, the . 



PAGE 

203 
69 

56 
146 

19 

83 
109 

201 

30 
40 

48, 137, 150 

93 

52 

6i 

148 

141 

108 

159 
123 

143 

41 

'58 
211 



. T. 

Tachi-uta . 

Tadabyoshi 

Tamoji musicians 

Taisen, the 

Taisiki 

Ta-uyd uta 

Td . 

Tea-pickers* song 

Teaching, course of, for girls 

for temple 
Teikin, the . . . 
Temmyo .... 
Temperament of Koto 
"Tenkatahei" . 
Tetrachord theory of tunings 
Theatre, foundation of 
"Three-stringed Kin," the . 
Time .... 
principles of Chinese . 
To (nth string) 



smgers 



16 
200 

73 
176 

108 

23,41 
102 

23 

65 

72 

178 

52 

103 

123 

99 

30 
144 

III 

199 

92 



230 



INDEX. 



Tokiwazu . 

Toyama • 

Tomimoto-bushi 

Torioi'Uta . 

Transposition 

Tsugi-bushi 

Tsukushi-gaku . 

Tsuma-kotOy the 

Tsum^, description of 

of one-stringed Kin 

Tsuri-daikOy the 

Tsuzumi} the 

of China, modified by Prince 
Umayado. 

Tunings, analysis of . 

table of, for Bugaku Biwa 
for Koto 
for Kokyu 
for Samisen 
for So-no-koto . 

•* Two-stringed Km," the . 



PAGB 

166 

36>40 

41 
94, 104 

41 

48,50 
149 



U. 



V. 



138 

M3 
190 

2oa 

13 
90 

93 
92 

176 

174 

93 
144 



W. 



Uchi 


• • 1 


. 160 


Umayado, Crown Prince 


• 13 


" Umegae " 


• • • 


68, 123 


analysed 


• • 4 


. "5 


in staff notation. 


. 116 


Umi 




• 52 


Urago^ 




. 60 


Ura-no-yurushi . 




. 68 


Uraren 




• 157 


" Usugoromo " . 




. 123 


Usu-hiki uta 




23» 41 


"Usuyuki" 




. 123 


Uta-daiko, the . 




. 201 


Utai, the . 




. 26 



Wa-gon, the 
Waniguchi, the . 
Warizum^ . 
" Wind-beU," the 



PAGE 

139 
209 

155 
211 



Valiha, the 



151 



Y. 



Ya otomd mai . 
Yagoto, the 
Ya-hyoshi • 
Yakmna-koto, the 
Yamada Ryu 
Yamada-koto 

description of 
Yamaha shi 
Yamato-damashi 
Yamato-Fuy^, the 
Yamato-koto, the 

used by Empress 
Kogo 
Yanagawa 
Yan-kin, the 
Yasumusa • 
Yatsuhashi, his rise and work 

his pupils. 
" Yatsuyo-jishi " 
Yo-hyoshi . 
Yo-kin, the 
Yo-kin, the 
Yoko-fuyd, the 
Yotsudak^, the 
Yotsudak^uta 
Yu . 
"Yuki-no-asa" 



. 18 

. 149 

. 199 

. 144 

.48,51 

•5ii5« 

138, 150 

. 54 

9, ", IS 
.9, 180 

139, 150 
Jingo 

12 

54 

149 

51 

50 

51 
127 

199 

150 

145 
180 

210 
41 

153 
123 



Z. 



Zashiki-sadamd . 



60 



LONDON : PRINTED BY WILUAM CLOWBS AND SONS, UMITBD, STAMFORD STRBBT AND CHASING CROSS. 



aft 




\ 



The music and muncal HMtruments o 

BDBS04) 




3 2044 041 127 564 



ULI 



I • 




