CORNELL 

UNIVERSITY 

LIBRARY 


BOUGHT  WITH  THE  INCOME 
OF  THE  SAGE  ENDOWMENT 
FUND      GIVEN     IN      1891      BY 

HENRY  WILLIAMS  SAGE 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


E   98.F6B96"'"  "'"™™'*V  Library 
Indians'  book; 


3   1924  028  767  238    L, 


OLIN  LIBRARY  -  C«aJLA.TiqN 
DATE  DUE 

^^- 

'  '  ''>-^ 

^^— — . 

^^^ *\ 

MffR^S  li 

)72  MP 

^.^jMr 

#^ 

"^^ 

t^"  ^ 

umAm^^ 

4§mmm 

mm»^ 

""^  """^T 

^'sf^^^'jM  nmrn 

"^i****;^;-. 

I^^^Mii  mr*  II 

JIf:  d  I' 

iiwu  r 

^ 

itoisj^ 

_  -i  '"^y   ^ 

/ 

^iiii^i" 

It 

Ipn^^^^M^^ 

iWlf*' 

GAYLORD 

PRINTED  IN  U.S.A. 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


This  book  was  digitized  by  Microsoft  Corporation  in 

cooperation  witli  Cornell  University  Libraries,  2007. 

You  may  use  and  print  this  copy  in  limited  quantity 

for  your  personal  purposes,  but  may  not  distribute  or 

provide  access  to  it  (or  modified  or  partial  versions  of  it) 

for  revenue-generating  or  other  commercial  purposes. 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


¥2< 


Cornell  University 
Library 


The  original  of  this  book  is  in 
the  Cornell  University  Library. 

There  are  no  known  copyright  restrictions  in 
the  United  States  on  the  use  of  the  text. 


http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924028767238 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'    BOOK 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THINGS    OF    THE   OLDEN    TIME 

Painted  by  Hiamovi  (High  Chief)  and  his  wife  Wowesta  (White 
Buffalo  Woman),  Cheyenne  Indians. 

A.  I.  Painted  fay  Hiamovi,  is  a  case  for  a  bow  and  arrows. 
It  was  slong  on  the  back  by  passing  the  loop  over  one 
shoulder.  The  bow  was  carried  in  the  long  upper  part 
of  the  case,  the  arrows  in  the  shorter  part  below.  The 
claws  of  the  mountain-lion  hung  down  as  ornaments. 

A.  2.       Painted  by  Hiamovi,  is  a  screen  ornamented  with  por- 

cupine-quill  work.     Such  screens  were  tipi  decorations 
in  old  times,  and  hung  on  the  tipi-waK  back  of  the  bed. 

B.  Painted  fay  Wowesta,  is  a  bag  of  buffalo-hide,  painted 
and  decorated  with  buckskin  fringe.  Such  bags  were 
used  for  carrying  wild  cherries. 

C.  Painted  fay.  Hiamovi,  is  a  head-dress  case  in  which  was 
carried  the  war-bonnet  or  other  head-dress;  upon  the 
case  are  painted  deer-tracks  and  stars. 

D.,  E.  Painted  fay  Wowesta,  are  satchels  of  painted  fauffalo- 
hide  (parfleches). 

F.  Painted  fay  Hiamovi,  is  a  satchel  of  fauffalo-hide  dec- 
orated with  porcupine-quill  work,  and  black  horse- 
hair trimmings. 

G.  Painted  fay  Hiamovi,  is  a  chief's  pipe.  The  bowl  is  of 
pipe-stone,  the  stem  is  of  wood  decorated  with  bead- 
work  and  with   streamers  of  buckskin   and  horse-hair. 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


me  IJlDIi^m  BOOK 


AR  DFFERinG  BW  THE  flHERICAPi  IIMDIAH5  DF 
im\m  LDRE,  nUSICAL  ftlHD  nflRRATIVE.TD 
FDRH  A  FiECDRD  DF  THE  5DPiG5  AIHD  LEGEPiDS 
DF  THEIR  RACE 


RECORDED     RIMD   EDITED 


BM 


Hf^^TPiLiE  Curtis 


X 


X 


ILLU5TRATIDH5    FRDH    PNDTDCRAPN5   AHD 
FRDPl    ORIGirMAL  DRfllUmGS    BH    fHOIRnS 


NEUJ    MDRK  AND    LDPiDDN 

HARPER  i=inD  BROTHERS  PUBLISHERS 


ncnvii 


Pvq 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


r-. . 


Copyright,  1907,  by  Natalie  Curtis 


y4//  rights  reserved- 
Published  September,  1907. 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


CONTENTS 


INTRODUCTION 


PAGE 

xxi 


EASTERN   INDIANS 

Wabanaki I 

PLAINS  INDIANS 

Organizations  of  the  Plains  Indians 31 

The  Holy  Man  or  "Medicine  Man"   .  ' .      32 

Dakota T      ^35 

Pawnee 91 

^Cheyenne J45^ 

Arapaho 195 

Kiowa 219 

LAKE  INDIANS 

Winnebago 241 

NORTHWESTERN  INDIANS 

KwakiotI 295 

SOUTHWESTERN   INDIANS 

Pima 311 

Apache 321 

Mojave-Apache 327 

Yama 337 

Navajo 345 

"PUEBLO   INDIANS 

The  Pueblo  Indians ^23 

Zani 427 

e       T  445 

San  Joan ......••• 

Acoma     .....•..•• *     * 

Lagona    v 

^Hopi 47> 

APPENDIX ^^^ 

INDEX ^^' 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


FOREWORD 

By  Hiamovi  (High  Chief) 
(Chief  among  the  Cheyennes  and  the  Dakotas.) 

To  the  Great  Chief  at  Washington,  and  to  the  Chiefs  of  Peoples  across  the  Great  Water 

This  is  the  Indians'  Book 

Long  ago  the  Great  Mystery  caused  this  land  to  be,  and  made  the  Indians  to 
live  in  this  land.  Well  has  the  Indian  fulfilled  all  the  intent  of  the  Great  Mystery 
for  fiim.  Through  this  book  may  men  know  that  the  Indian  people  was  made  by  the 
Great  Mystery  for  a  purpose. 

Once,  only  Indians  lived  in  this  land.  Then  came  strangers  from  across  the 
Great  "Water.  No  land  had  they;  we  gave  them  of  our  land.  No  food  had  they; 
we  gave  them  of  our  corn.  The  strangers  are  become  many  and  they  fill  all  the 
country.  They  dig  gold — from  my  mountains;  they  build  houses — of  the  trees  of 
my  forests;  they  rear  cities — of  my  stones  and  rocks;  they  make  fine  garments — from 
the  hides  and  wool  of  animals  .that  eat  my  grass.  None  of  the  things  that  make 
their  riches  did  they  bring  with  them  from  beyond  the  Great  Water;  all  comes  from 
my  land,  the  land  the  Great  Mystery  gave  unto  the  Indian. 

And  when  I  think  upon  this  I  know  that  it  is  right,  even  thus.  In  the  heart  of 
the  great  Mystery  it  was  meant  that  stranger-visitors — my  friends  across  the  Great 
Water — should  come  to  my  land;  that  I  should  bid  them  welcome;  that  all  men 
should  sit  down  with  me  and  cat  together  of  my  corn.  It  was  meant  by  the  Great 
Mystery  that  the  Indian  should  give  to  all  peoples. 

But  the  white  man  never  has  known  the  Indian.  It  is  thus:  there  are  two  roads, 
the  wliite  man's  road,  and  the  Indian's  road.  Neither  traveller  knows  the  road  of  the 
other.  Thus  ever  has  it  been,  from  the  long  ago,  even  unto  to-day.  May  tliis  book 
help  to  make  the  Indian  truly  known  in  the  time  to  come. 

The  Indian  wise-speakers  in  this  book  are  of  the  best  men  of  their  tribes.  Only 
what  is  true  is  witfiin  this  book.  I  want  all  Indians  and  white  men  to  read  and 
learn  how  the  Indians  lived  and  thought  in  the  olden  time,  and  may  it  bring  holy- 
good  upon  the  younger  Indians  to  know  of  their  fathers.  A  little  wliile,  and  the  old 
Indians  will  no  longer  be,  and  the  young  will  be  even  as  white  men.  When  I  think, 
I  know  that  it  is  the  mind  of  the  Great  Mystery  that  wliite  men  and  Indians  who 
fought  together  should  now  be  one  people.    ' 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


There  are  birds  of  many  colors — red,  blue,  green,  yellow — yet  it  is  all  one  bird. 
There  are  horses  of  many  colors — brown,  black,  yellow,  white — yet  it  is  all  one  horse. 
So  cattle,  so  all  living  things — animals,  flowers,  trees.  So  men:  in  this  land  where 
once  were  only  Indians  are  now  men  of  every  color — white,  black,  yellow,  red — yet 
all  one  people.  That  this  should  come  to  pass  was  in  the  heart  of  the  Great  Mystery. 
It  is  right  thus.     And  everywhere  there  shall  be  peace. 


wV^C/v^ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


The  Indians  are  the  authors  of  this  volume.  The  songs  and  stories  are  theirs; 
the  drawings,  cover-design,  and  title-pages  were  made  by  them. 

The  work  of  the  recorder  has  been  but  the  collecting,  editing,  and  arranging  of  the 
Indians*  contributions. 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


MUSIC 

The  songs  in  this  book  are  written  after  a  new  manner  in  that  corresponding 
musical  phrases  are  placed  one  beneath  another  like  lines  of  verse.  This  system 
makes  the  form  of  the  song  to  flash  before  the  eye  like  the  form  of  a  stanza  in  poetry. 
For  this  idea,  the  recorder  is  indebted  to  Mr.  Kurt  Schindler. 

A  general  characteristic  of  Indian  singing  is  a  rhythmical  pulsation  of  the  voice 
on  sustained  notes.  This  pulsation  is  expressed  in  tliis  book  'wherever  tied  notes 
ha.'ve  "vocables  or  syllables  ivritten  out  beneath  them. 

A  rhythmical  peculiarity  of  Pueblo  music  is  a  sudden  holding  back  of  the  time 
<luring  one,  two,  or  more  bars.  This  effect  is  in  no  sense  a  rallentando.  It  is  an 
abrupt  change  of  tempo  with  no  loss  of  rhythmical  precision.  At  the  end  of  the 
slower  bars  the  first  tempo  is  resumed  with  the  original  impetus.  Such  change  is 
merely  a  leap  from  one  tempo  to  another  and  back  again.  As  it  was  impossible 
wholly  to  express  this  peculiarity  in  the  usual  musical  symbols,  brackets  have  been 
placed  over  the  sloiver  bars,  that  the  eye  may  catch  at  a  glance  the  change  of  time. 
The  exact  tempi  are  designated  by  metronome  marks.  For  further  details  in  regard 
to  Indian  music,  see  Introduction,  page  xxvi. 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


SONGS 

(The  left-hand  column  of  figures  refers  to  pages  of  printed  text  or  of  explanatory  description, 
the  middle  column  to  pages  of  music,  the  right-hand  column  to  pages  of  text  with  interlinear 
translations,  in  the  appendix.) 

WABANAKI 

-P»            <                    o                     r     ^  PAGES 

fenobscot  Song  of  Greeting. — I 7  14 

Penobscot  Song  of  Greeting. — II. 715 

Passamaquoddy  Song  of  Greeting. 7  16 

Penobscot  Barter  Dance-Song 8  17 

Penobscot  War-Dance  Song.    . .    8  18 

Penobscot  Dance-Song 9  19 

Penobscot  Medicine-Song. 92J 

Maliseet  Dance-Song 10  23    535 

Passamaquoddy  Dance-Song.^-I 10  24    535 

Passamaqaoddy  Dance-Song. — II. 25 

Passamaquoddy  Dance-Song. — III. 26 

Maliseet  Love-Song.' 13  27    535 

DAKOTA 

Wanagi  Wacipi  Olowan.    Song  of  the  Spirit -Dance  (Ghost -Dance 

Song).— 1 47  65    536 

Wanagi  Wacipi  Olowan.     Song  of  the  Spirit -Dance  (Ghost -Dance 

Song).— II 48  66    536 

Wanagi  Wacipi  Olowan.     Song  of  the  Spirit -Dance  (Ghost -Dance 

Song).— Ill 48  67    536 

Wicasa-Atawan  Olowan.    Song  of  the  Seer 49  68    536 

Sonka  Olowan.    Song  of  the  Dog  Society 50  69 

Tas«nke-ska  Olowan.    Song  of  the  WIiite-Horse  Society      .    .    .    .50  7  J     537 

Tokala  Olowan.    Song  of  the  Fox  Society 51  73    537 

Tokala  Wacipi  Olowan.    Dance-Song  of  the  Fox  Society     .    .    .    .51  75    537 

Wakan  Olowan.    Holy  Song  (Medicine-Song)      ........  53  77    539 

Songmanitu  Olowan.    Wolf  Song 54  78 

Olowan.    Song 55  79    540 

Omaha  Wacipi  Olowan.     Omaha  Dance-Song. — I.  .......  55  80    540 

Omaha  Wacipi  Olowan.    Omaha  Dance-Song. — II 56  81     540 

[ix] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


PAGES 

82 

540 

83 

540 

84 

540 

85 

541 

86 

541 

88 

541 

89 

541 

117 

541 

120 

542 

I2J 

542 

J22 

542 

J24 

542 

126 

542 

J  28 

129 

542 

131 

543 

133 

543 

135 

J  36 

543 

THE    INDIANS'    BOOK 

Wioste  Olowan,  Love-Song. — I 56 

Wioite  Olowan,  Love-Song. — II 56 

Wioste  Olowan,  Love-Song. — III 57 

Wioste  Olowan,  Love-Song, — IV.  ............  57 

Wioste  Olowan,  Love-Song. — V. .  58 

Sunka  Olowan.    Song  of  the  Dog-Feast     .........  59 

Ofcicize  Olowan.    War-Song 60 

PAWNEE 

Tawi'  Koruks.    Song  of  the  Bear  Society. — I. 105 

Tawi'  Kuruks.    Song  of  the  Bear  Society. — II. .......  108 

Iruska.    Song  of  the  Iruska. — I .109 

Iraska.    Song  of  the  Iroska. — II IIO 

Iruska.    Song  of  the  Irtiska  (War-Dance  Song). — III.     .     .    .    .  IJO 

Iruska.    Song  of  the  Iruska  (Song  of  the  Corn-Offering). — IV.    .  JIO 

Hao-Wari.    Lullaby 

Skiriki.     Coyote  Warrior-Song 112 

Sakipiriru.    Young  Dog  Dance-Song.     ..........112 

Kisaka.    Song  of  Rejoicing  and  Thanksgiving    .......  113 

Kisaka.    Woman's  Song  of  Rejoicing    .......... 

KitzicAta.     Song  of  the  Lance  Ceremony  ........     .114 

Kefiare    Katzaru.      Song    of    the    Spirit  -  Dance    (Ghost  -  Dance 

Song).— 1 114     139    543 

Kehare   Katzaru.      Song    of    the    Spirit  -  Dance    (Ghost  -  Dance 

Song).— II 115     J40    543 

Kehare    Katzaru.     Song    of    the    Spirit  -  Dance    (Ghost  -  Dance 

Song).— Ill 115     141     543 

Kehare    Katzaru.      Song    of    the    Spirit  -  Dance    (Ghost  -  Dance 

Song).— IV 115     143    544 

CHEYENNE 

Ohwiwi  No-otz.     Song  of  the  Offering  Ceremony  (Sun-Dance  Song)  15  J 

Mahoeva  No-otz.    Buffalo-Dance  Song J  52 

WucAtchse  Etan  No-otz.    Song  of  the  Red  Fox  Society    .     .    .  J53 
Hinimiyotzu.     Song  of  the  Bow  and  Arrow  Society    ..... 

Hohiotsitsi  No-otz.    Morning  Song    ...........  153 

Aotzi  No-otz.    Song  of  Victory. — I J55 

Aotzi  No-otz.    Song  of  Victory. — II.     ..........  155 

Aotzi  No-otz.    Song  of  Victory. — III J  57 

Nai  No-otz.    Song  of  Healing  (Medicine-Song)  .......  160 

Wawahi  No-otz.    Swinging  Song 160 

Meshivotzi  No-otz.    Baby-Song  (Lullaby)      ........  160 

[x] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


166 

168 

{69 

544 

171 

172 

544 

174 

544 

176 

544 

178 

544 

179 

544 

180 

545 

181 

545 

SONGS 

Na-u-sinim  No-otz.    Hand-Game  Song. — I.    ........  J6I 

Na-u-sinim  No-otz.    Hand-Game  Song. — II. J6J 

Nu-u-sinim  No-otz.    Hand-Game  Song. — III.     .......  J6J 

Na-u-sinim  No-otz.    Hand-Game  Song. — IV.      .......  161 

NtJ-o-sinim  No-otz.    Hand-Game  Song. — V.        .......  161 

Ntt-a-sinim  No-otz.    Hand-Game  Song. — VI 161 

Mata  No-otz.    Song  of  the  Mescal  Rite 164 

Mata  No-otz.    Song  of  the  Mescal  Rite     .........  J64 

Mata  No-otz.    Song  of  the  Mescal  Rite .    .    .  J64 

ARAPAHO 

Hasse-hi  Naad.    Song  of  the  Buffalo-Hide  Ceremony. — I.   ...  198 
Hasse-hi  Naad.    Song  of  the  Buffalo-Hide  Ceremony. — II.      .    .199 

Hac^e-hi  Naad,  JacAu-Naad.    Wolf-Song,  or  Comanche-Song    .    .  J99 

Kainawad  Naad.    Song  of  the  Spirit-Dance  (Ghost-Dance  Song) .  200 

Ho  Nawad  Naad.    Crow-Dance  Song    ..........  20  ( 

Nakahu  Naad.    Lullaby 20J 

HacAayac^u  Naad.    Song  of  the  Mescal  Rite     ....... 

GocAoti  Naad.    Hand-Game  Song     . 202 

HichaacAuthi.     Song  of  the  Qub  Society  .........  202 

KIOWA 

Gomda  Daagya.     Wind-Song. — I.       ...........  224 

Gomda  Daagya.     Wind-Spng. — II.     ...........  224 

Gomda  Daagya.    Wind-Song. — III.  ...........  225 

Song  of  the  Mescal  Rite  ........'....... 

Koalda  Daagya.    Begging-Song     ............  226 

T'jtpk'o  Daagya.     Song  of  the  Antelope  Ceremony      .....  228 

Okum  Daagya.    Lullaby. — I. 228 

Okum  Daagya.    Lullaby. — II.       ............  229 

Gwu  Daagya.    War-Path  Song 229 

WINNEBAGO 

Wash-ching-geka  Nawa*  Nina.     Song  of  the  Hare  ......  249 

Wi-Ia  Na-wa'  Ni-na.     Song  of  the  Sun. 250 

Wai-Kun.    Fable 253 

Ma-o-na.     Song  to  the  Earth-Maker  ...        .......  254 

Mun-Kun  Na-wan.     Holy  Song  (Medicine-Song)  .......  255 

Hi-wa-shi-da.    Dance  following  the  Holy  Song  .......  256 

Mun-Kun  Na-wan.    Holy  Song  (Medicine-Song) 256 

He-Iush-ka  Na-wan.     Warrior-Song. — I. •  258 

He-Iush-ka  Na-wan.    Warrior-Song. — II.    .........  258 

[xi] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


PAGES 

182 

183 

184 

J  85 

{86 

187 

188 

J90 

192 

203 

545 

204 

206 

545 

208 

545 

209 

545 

211 

545 

212 

213 

v34o 

215 

546 

230 

546 

23J 

546 

232 

546 

233 

235 

547 

236 

547 

238 

547 

239 

547 

240 

548 

264 

548 

265 

548 

266 

548 

268 

548 

270 

548 

273 

549 

274 

549 

275 

549 

278 

549 

THE    INDIANS'    BOOK 


PAGES 


He-Iash-ka  Na-wan.    Warrior-Song.— Ill 259    280    549 

He-Iash-ka  Na-wa«.    Warrior-Song.— IV.  . 259    282    549 

He-Iash-ka  Na-wan.    Warrior-Song.- V. 260    284    549 

He-Iush-ka  Na-wan.    Warrior-Song. — VI ,  286 

Wa-gi-tt'eh  Na-wan.    Wailing-Song 260    288    550 

Wak-je  Na-wan.    Victory-Song 260    289    550 

Wonk-hi  Na-wan.    Love-Song.— 1 261     291     550 

W«nk-hi  Na-wan.    Love-Song.— II 262    292    550 

KWAKIUTL 

KlawuIacAa.    Song  of  the  Totem-Pole  ..........  302    304    550 

Cradle-Song 303    307 

PIMA 

Chuhwuht.    Song  of  the  World 316    318    551 

Chuhtek-Ohohik  Nieh.    Bluebird  Song 317    3J9    551 

Hahwwhli  Nieh.     Wind-Song  (Medicine-Song) 3J7     320     551 

APACHE 

Medicine-Song 324    325    551 

Song 327 

Dance-Song     ...................  328 

MGJAVE-APACHE 

Dance-Song.— 1 329    334 

Dance-Song.— II 329    335 

Samadia-Saan.    Medicine-Song. — 1 33^ 

Samadia-S«an.    Medicine-Song. — II. 337 

YUMA 

Arowp.    Song  of  the  Mocking-Bird 34  j     342    55  j 

NAVAJO 

Dsichi  Biyin.    Mountain-Song 352     374     55* 

Dsichl  Biyin.    Mountain-Songs. 353     37^     552 

Hogan  Biyin.    Song  of  the  Hogans ,    ^  357    302 

Hlin  Biyin.     Song  of  the  Horse 3^1     30Q 

Naye-e  Sin.    War-Song 3^3    393 

Tro  Hatal.    Song  of  the  Rain-Chant 3^5    3^^ 

[xH] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


553 
553 

554 

555 


SONGS 


PAGES 


Kledzhi  Hatal. — I.    Dance-Song  from  the  Ceremony  of  the  Night- 
Chant 402 

Kledzhi  Hatal. — II.    Dance-Song  from  the  Ceremony  of  the  Night- 
Chant : 403 

Kledzhi  Hatal. — III.     Dance-Song  from  the  Ceremony  of  the  Night- 
Chant 404 

Dsic%idje  Hatal 368  408    555 

Dinni-e  Sin;    Hunting-Song 370  413    555 

Naestsan  Biyin.    Song  of  the  Earth 372  417    556 

ZUNI 

Ockaya.    Corn-Grinding  Song. — I. 430  .433    556 

Ocfcaya.    Corn-Grinding  Song. — II 431  435    556 

Ockaya.    Corn-Grinding  Song. — III .    431  437    557 

Shoko  Otii^we.    Corn-Dance  Song 432  440    557 

Thiah  Hewe.     Song  of  the  Blue-Corn  Dance . 432  442    557 

SAN   JUAN 

Medicine-Song.     From  San  Joan  Paeblo 449 

ACOMA 

Yaka-Hano  Gatzina  Yoni.    Corn-People  Gatzina  Song. — I. .    .    .    447  451 

Yafca-Hano  Gatzina  Yoni.    Corn-People  Gatzina  Song. — II.    .    .    447  453 

Yaka-Hano  Gatzina  Yoni.    Corn-People  Gatzina  Song. — III,  .    .    447  456 

LAGUNA 

Aiya  G£ita.ni  Yoni.    Corn-Grinding  Song. — 1 462  464    558 

Aiya  GaYtani  Yoni.    Corn-Grinding  Song. — II 462  466    558 

Song 463  469 

HOPI 

WffWBchim  Tawi.     Wowachim-Chant 479  495    558 

Pirwttch  Tawi.     LaHaby 480  498    558 

Poll  Tiwa  Tawi.     Botterfly-Dance  Song 482  500    558 

Anga  Katzina  Tawi.     Anga  Katzina  Song 483  505    559 

Korosta  Katzina  Tawi.     Korosta  Katzina  Song 484  508    559 

He-hea  Katzina  Tawi.     He-hea  Katzina  Song 485  5J7    559 

Hevebe  Tawi.     Hevebe-Song.— 1 487  523    559 

Hevebe  Tawi.    Hevebe-Song.— II 488  526    560 

Lene  Tawi.    Flote-Song 489  529    560 

[  xiii  ] 

Digitized  by  IVIicrosoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


DRAWINGS 

AH  drawings  in  this  book  are  by  Indians,  and  were  made  free-hand  without  rule 
or  measure,  except  that  in  some  instances  an  inverted  basket  was  used  to  form  a 
circle.  Nearly  all  represent  first  efforts  to  draw  on  paper  with  the  white  man's 
brush,  and  many  were  first  attempts  at  drawing  of  any  kind. 

The  lettering  on  the  title-pages  is  by  Angel  De  Cora  (Hinook  Hahiwi  Kilinaka), 
of  the  Winnebago  tribe. 

The  cover-design  is  taken  from  a  parfleche  (satchel  of  dressed  hide),  painted  by 
Wihunahe  (Chief  Woman),  of  the  Cheyenne  tribe. 

The  parfleches  were  used  by  the  prairie  tribes  to  hold  and  carry  their  belongings, 
especially  the  dried  buffalo-meat  that  was  their  sustenance. 

The  idea  in  choosing  tliis  design  is  that  the  cover  of  the  book  is  in  itself  a  parfleche 
to  keep  those  possessions  of  the  Indian  which  he  must  carry  ever  with  him — the  songs 
and  legends  of  his  race. 

A  Dakota  Indian  suggested  as  title  for  the  book  the  word  Ozula,  "  All  Filled." 

The  title-page,  by  Angel  De  Cora  (Hinook  Mahiwi  Kilinaka),  has  for  the  motive  of 
its  design  an  adaptation  of  an  old  Indian  design  which  represents  in  highly  con- 
ventionalized form  the  Eagle,  and  the  Eagle's  Song.  The  soaring  eagle  is  seen  in 
the  green  figure  whose  points  are  the  two  out-spread  wings,  with  the  tail  in  the  centre. 
The  yellow  spot  at  the  top  of  the  figure  is  the  eagle's  head?  from  the  beak  rises  the 
song — waving  lines  wliich  broaden  out  as  the  song  floats  on  the  air.  The  whole 
symbol  is  used  in  decorative  form  throughout  the  page,  two  eagles  being  joined 
together  by  the  tips  of  wings  and  tails  to  form  a  symmetrical  design.  In  the  centre 
of  the  page,  at  the  top  and  bottom,  and  at  the  sides,  is  seen  the  eagle-symbol,  while 
the  page  is  framed,  as  it  were,  in  the  symbol  of  the  song. 

The  eagle  is  loved  and  revered  by  the  Indians.  He  is  strongest  of  all  birds.  He 
soars  aloft,  and  he  may  look  upon  the  sun,  the  giver  of  life,  the  celestial  emblem  of 
divine  force.  Therefore  has  the  symbol  of  the  Eagle  and  the  Eagle's  Song  been 
chosen  for  the  title-page  of  "  The  Indians'  Book." 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


PAGE 

i 


ILLUSTRATIONS 

From  Original  Drawings  by  Indians,  and  Photographs  by  the  Recorder 

Buffalo  Head,  by  Hiamovi 

Things  of  the  Olden  Time  (in  color) Frontisp 

Design,  Qoud  Symbol,  from  Prehistoric  Pottery xxi 

Design,  Com-sproat  Symbol,  from  Prehistoric  Pottery xxxi 

Tatanka-Ptecila  (Short  BtjII) Facing  p.  44 

Taianke-Qqala  (Little  Horse) ) 

A  Chief  of  the  Olden  Time  (Chief  Yeflow-Hair)  \ "        ^ 

Letakots-Lesa  (Eagle  Chief) "        98 

Cradle-board  of  the  Morning  Star  Qan  (in  color) .        "       102 

A  Daughter  of  the  Prairie     ...............         "       J04 

The  Wife  of  Young  Chief "       108 

The  Daughter  of  Young  Chief "       JJO 

'Hiamovi  (High  Chief)    . "       150 

The  Pipe  of  Friendship  (Hiamovi:  High  Chief) "       160 

Apiatan  (Wooden  Lance),  Head  Chief  of  the  Kiowas  ......        "      222 

Carved  Dance-Rattle. 299 

Klalish  in  Ceremonial  Costume .......] 

A  KwakiutI  Chief  Standing  before  His  Canoe,  Holding  Carved  Dance-  \  Facing  p.  300 

Rattle ) 

A  Daughter  of  the  Desert "      3J6 

Design,  by  Geronimo 324 

Geronimo Facing  p.  324 

A  Shepherd  Leaving  His  Hogan  at  Dawn "       348 

Prayer  by  the  Great  Waters — "  Two  priests  stood  absorbed  in  chant, 

while  the  rising  tide  washed  up  about  their  ankles "     .     .     .     .         "       364 
Sacred  Sand-Picture,  Navajo  (in  color)     ...........        "      366 

Offering  Sacred  Com-poIIen  on  the  Waters "      370 

Going  to  the  Spring  in  Winter .         "       430 

A  Zuni  Maiden .        "      432 

Gatzina  Mask 447 

An  Evening  Reverie  on  the  House-tops Facing  p.  474 

The  Song  of  Tawakwaptiwa "      480 

Poll  Tiwa  (Butterfly-Dance) "482 

Pottery  Design 494 

(See  also  Illustrated  Tribal  Title-pages.) 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


WHITE    HOUSE. 

WASHINGTON. 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


iiasiMS 


INTRODUCTION 


I IHIS  book  reflects  the  soul  of  one  of  the  noblest  types  of 

T  primitive  man — the  North  American  Indian.  It  is  the 
direct  trtterance  of  the  Indians  themselves.  The  red 
'I man  dictated  and  the  white  friend  has  recorded.  Songs, 
stories,  and  drawings,  all  have  been  purposely  contributed  by  Ind- 
ians as  their  separate  offerings  to  a  volume  that  should  be  their 
own. 

By  rail,  by  wagon,  and  by  horse,  over  prairie  and  desert,  the 
white  friend  journeyed  from  tribe  to  tribe,  seeking  the  Indians  with 
open  friendship,  and  everywhere  meeting  their  warm  response.  In 
nearly  every  instance  a  chief  was  visited  first  and  the  purpose  of 
the  book  explained  to  him.  Would  he  and  his  people  join  in  the 
making  of  a  book  to  be  the  Indians*  own — a  book  which  should 
keep  for  all  time  the  songs  and  stories  of  their  race  ?  The  olden 
days  were  gone;  the  buffalo  had  vanished  from  the  plains;  even 
so  would  there  soon  be  lost  forever  the  songs  and  stories  of  the 
Indian.  But  there  was  a  way  to  save  them  to  the  life  and  memory 
of  their  children,  and  that  was  to  write  them,  even  as  the  white 
man  writes.  The  white  friend  had  come  to  be  the  pencil  in  the 
hand  of  the  Indian. 

Thus  was  the  book  undertaken  primarily  for  the  Indians,  in 
the  hope  that  this  their  own  volume,  when  placed  in  the  hands 
of  their  children,  might  help  to  revive  for  the  younger  generation 
that  sense  of  the  dignity  and  worth  of  their  race  which  is  the  Indians' 
birthright,  and  without  which  no  people  can  progress. 

With  enthusiasm  that  was  touching  in  its  gladness,  the  Indians 
responded  to  the  appeal.  Already  had  one  or  two  old  men  tried 
to  make  some  record  of  the  songs,  others  had  sought   deeply   to 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'    BOOK 

engrave  the  old  tales  upon  the  minds  of  a  younger  generation.  All 
realized  that  they  walked  in  the  sunset  hour  of  their  native  life 
and  that  the  night  was  soon  to  come. 

The  Indians  sang  the  songs  directly  to  the  recording  pencil. 
Theirs  are  the  explanations  and  the  tales  connected  with  the  songs. 
Of  the  drawings,  every  one  is  Indian. 

At  first  the  noting  of  the  music  was,  to  the  recorder,  though 
a  musician,  a  task  of  no  small  difficulty.  In  the  beginning  the 
songs  were  first  taken  upon  a  phonograph,  but  the  machine  soon 
was  abandoned  as  inadequate  and  unnecessary,  and  note-book 
and  pencil,  a  camera,  and  a  color-box  for  the  use  of  the  Indians 
made  the  sole  equipment  carried  into  camp  or  village.  The  songs 
were  written  down  by  the  light  of  the  tipi  fire  or  under  the  glare 
of  the  desert  sun;  in  adobe  houses  while  the  women  ground  the 
com,  or  in  the  open  camp  where  after  some  festival  or  ceremonial 
gathering  of  the  people  a  leader  resang  for  the  book  a  characteristic 
song. 

Many  Indian  songs  are  sacred  to  certain  occasions  or  ceremonies. 
Respect  was  always  shown,  therefore,  for  the  natural  and  some- 
times superstitious  reluctance  of  the  people  to  sing  such  songs  at 
other  than  the  proper  time,  or  even  to  consent  to  the  recording 
of  them.  When  a  singer  chose  such  a  song  for  his  contribution, 
it  was  well,  indeed;  but  no  one  was  ever  urged  to  desecrate  any- 
thing held  sacred,  no  matter  what  the  motive.  This  book,  it  is 
hoped,  may  serve  as  an  encouragement  to  educated  Indians  to  carry 
on  the  Work  of  record,  for  their  access  to  their  people's  holiest 
rites,  and  their  understanding  of  Indian  thought,  make  possible  for 
them,  as  for  no  white  person,  a  full  exposition  of  Indian  religious 
life.  This  hope  is  augmented  by  the  fact  that  it  has  been  physically 
impossible,  in  this  collection,  to  represent  every  tribe. ' 

Many  of  the  songs  in  this  book  are  traditional  and  of  lost  origin; 
some  are  current  songs  of  the  day,  still  others  are  quite  new,  taken 
down,  indeed,  from  the  lips  of  their  own  composers.     Each  con- 

'  America  owes  a  debt  to  Miss  Alice  C.  Fletcher,  holder  of  the  Thaw  Fellowship  Department 
of  Anthropology,  Harvard  University,  who  has  been  the  pioneer  in  the  study  of  Indian  song. 
Her  very  valuable  collaborator  has  been  Mr.  Francis  La  Flesche,  an  Omaha  Indian  of  education 
and  colttjre,  who  many  years  ago  first  conceived  the  idea  of  writing  down  the  songs  of  his  people. 

[xxii] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


INTRODUCTION 

tributor  himself  chose  what  songs  or  stories  he  wished  to  ptrt  into 
the  book,  sometimes  spending  hoars  in  deliberation. 

Old  men  and  young,  mothers  and  maidens  —  all  types  of  the 
people  were  sought  that  the  collection  might  reflect  as  fully  as 
possible  the  many  sides  of  Indian  life.  Especially  sought  out  were 
the  very  oldest  men,  the  keepers  of  the  ancient  lore,  and  these 
gave  stories  and  songs  often  entirely  unknown  to  younger  genera- 
tions, and  sometimes  in  archaic  language.  . 

The  Indians  say  that  the  book  **  speaks  with  the  straight  tongue," 
for  it  holds  the  words  of  their  head  men,  their  wise  men  and  their 
chiefs.  They  believe  it  will  be  an  influence  in  their  own  future, 
and  they  look  to  it  to  tell  the  white  man  that  "  Indians  are  a  good 
people." 

The  making  of  this  record  has  been  a  consecrated  work.  Joy 
in  the  task  has  been  shadowed  by  close  contact  with  a  struggling 
people  in  their  need.  It  was  impossible  to  live  near  to  Indian  life 
without  being  heart-wrung  by  the  pathos  of  its  tragedy — impossi- 
ble to  be  among  Indians  without  crying,  **  Is  there  a  people  more 
deeply  misunderstood  ?" 

This  book  reveals  the  inner  life  of  a  primitive  race.  The  Indian 
looks  out  with  reverence  upon  the  world  of  nature,  to  him  the 
only  world,  while  deep  in  his  being  thrills  the  consciousness  of  a 
power  greater  than  nature,  greater  than  man,  yet  eternally  mani- 
fest throughout  all  life.  This  consciousness  is  so  vital  to  the  Ind- 
ian that  almost  his  every  act  is  linked  with  it.  The  Indian  is  at 
all  times  prayerful.  Sacred  to  him  is  the  hour  of  birth,  sacred 
the  hour  of  death?  and  in  symbol  and  ceremony  he  tells  his 
reverence. 

Art  is  one  of  the  earliest  of  human  impulses.  It  is  bom  of 
man's  instinctive  desire  to  create  in  beauty  the  objects  of  his  neces- 
sity. The  earthen  jar,  the  water-gourd,  the  woven  tunic,  all  are 
graced  with  ornament.  And  the  ornament  ?  It  is  most  often  the 
symbol  of  a  prayer. 

The  prayer  of  the  Indian  is  offered  in  many  ways — by  the  cere- 
monial smoking  of  tobacco,  which  symbolizes  the  breath  of  life; 
by  the  scattering  of  holy  corn-poIIen,  emblem  of  fruitfulness  and 
productiveness;  or  by  the  planting  of  plumed  prayer-sticks  upon 

[  xxiii  ] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE   INDIANS'   BOOK 

whose  feathers  is  breathed  the  sttpplication,  to  be  wafted  by  the 
wind.  Prayer  is  conveyed  in  the  designs  of  woven  fabrics,  in  bead- 
work,  pottery,  and  decorations  of  all  kinds,  in  dance,  in  ceremony, 
and  in  song. 

Weflnigh  impossible  is  it  for  civilized  man  to  conceive  of  the 
importance  of  song  in  the  life  of  the  Indian.  To  the  Indian,  song 
is  the  breath  of  the  spirit  that  consecrates  the  acts  of  life.  Not 
all  songs  are  religious,  b«t  there  is  scarcely  a  task,  light  or  grave, 
scarcely  an  event,  great  or  small,  but  has  its  fitting  song. 

In  the  Hebrew  ''  Genesis  "  the  creating  word  is  spoken — "  And 
God  said.  Let  there  be  light.**  In  nesLtly  every  Indian  myth  the 
creator  sings  things  into  life.  For  civilized  man,  the  messages  of 
truth,  the  traditions  of  his  ancestors,  the  history  of  his  race,  the 
records  of  his  thought  have  been  secured  upon  the  written  page 
and  so  transmitted  through  the  years.  To  the  Indian,  truth,  tradi- 
tion, history,  and  thought  are  preserved  in  ritual  of  poetry  and  song. 
The  red  man's  song  records  the  teachings  of  his  wise  men,  the  great 
deeds  of  his  heroes,  the  counsel  of  his  seers,  the  worship  of  his  God. 
If  all  things  Indian  must,  indeed,  pass  away  under  the  white  man's 
ban  as  being  ''pagan"  and  ''uncivilized,"  then  will  be  lost  to  the 
red  man  not  only  his  whole  unwritten  literature,  but  also,  and 
sadder  still,  the  realm  wherein  his  soul  aspires.  For  to  the  primi- 
tive man  of  another  race,  no  creed  whofly  alien  to  his  thought 
and  environment  ever  can  replace  his  own  entire  spiritual  world, 
which  is  the  heritage  of  his  past  and  the  natural  expression  of 
his  soul. 

Throughout  this  book  the  effort  has  been  made  to  render  truth- 
fully into  English  the  thought  in  the  Indian  poetry.  Translations 
have  carefufly  been  worked  out  with  educated  Indians  as  inter- 
preters and  old  men  of  authority  as  informants.  Indian  poetry  is 
difficult  of  translation,  not  only  because  of  the  differences  in  lan- 
guage (for  there  are  Indian  words  that  have  no  counterpart  in 
English),  but  also  because  of  the  very  nature  of  the  poetry. 

Indian  poetry,  like  Indian  art,  is  expressed  in  symbol.  The 
cloud-form  in  Indian  design  is  no  copy  of  a  cloud,  but  a  conven- 
tionalized image  that  is  a  symbol  meaning  cloud,  as  a  wavy  line 
means  water  or  a  cross  stands  for  a  star.    Even  so  in  poetry.    One 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


INTRODUCTION 

word  may  be  the  symbol  of  a  complete  idea  that,  in  English,  would 
need  a  whole  sentence  for  its  expression.  Even  those  who  know  the 
language  may  not  understand  the  songs  unless  they  know  what 
meaning  lies  behind  the  symbolic  words.^  Such  poetry  is  impres- 
sionistic, and  many  may  be  the  interpretations  of  the  same  song 
given  by  different  singers.  Again,  where  the  songs  belong  to 
sacred  ceremonies  or  to  secret  societies,  the  meaning  is  purposely 
hidden — a  holy  mystery  enshrined — ^that  only  the  initiated  may 
hear  and  understand. 

Indians  feel  that,  in  the  English  rendering  of  their  verse,  justice 
is  not  done  to  the  poetry  when  there  is  given  only  a  bare  and  literal 
translation  of  the  symbolic  word  instead  of  a  full  expression  of  the 
meaning.  They  say,  **  It  takes  many  words  in  English  to  tell 
what  we  say  in  one.  But  since  you  have  no  one  word  to  tell  all  we 
mean,  then  you  must  speak  our  one  word  in  your  many."  In 
some  of  the  songs,  however,  the  meaning  is  fully  expressed  in  words. 
Yet  even  such  a  song  cannot  wholly  be  understood  without  a  knowl- 
edge of  the  event  which  called  it  into  being,  the  legend  with  which 
it  is  connected,  or  the  ceremony  of  which  it  is  a  part. 

The  translations  are  as  literal  as  possible,  yet  the  chief  desire 
has  been  that  the  real  meaning  should  truthfully  flash  through 
the  English  words,  and  that  the  translation  should  retain  the  fra- 
grance, the  color,  and,  above  all,  the  spirit  of  the  original.  The 
translation  has  been  fitted  to  the  music,  for  only  when  the  meaning 
of  the  song  is  clearly  revealed  through  the  intertwining  of  poetry 
and  melody  can  there  be  fully  felt  the  elemental  emotion,  the  nature 
quality,  the  forceful  sweeping  charm  of  Indian  song. 

Of  the^'music,  how  does  Indian  song  differ  from  that  of  civiliza- 
tion ?  Music  is  a  trinity.  It  is  composed  of  three  elements — rhythm, 
melody,  and  harmony.  The  first  element  is  rhythm,  for  rhythm 
is  in  the  earliest  consciousness  of  man.  It  is  in  the  throb  of  the 
pulses,  the  beat  of  horse-hoofs,  the  break  of  waves.  All  life  is 
rhythmic,  for  life  is  vibration,  motion.  So  music  in  its  earliest  form 
consists  chiefly  in  rhythm. 

'  Literal  translations  of  the  Indian  words  are  offered  in  the  appendix. 

[xxv] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'    BOOK 

The  next  element  is  melody — a  succession  of  sounds  of  different 
pitch.  The  wail  of  the  wind,  the  laughter  of  the  brook,  the  mating 
song  of  birds,  these  are  melodies  of  nature.  The  emotional  re- 
sponse is  in  man.  Song  becomes  the  cry  of  the  heart  and  the  trans- 
figuration of  the  spoken  word. 

Next  comes  harmony  —  the  combination  of  different  sounds. 
Harmony  is  in  the  blending,  bktrring  overtones  of  nature,  the  melt- 
ing of  many  sounds  into  one;  It  is  the  last  element  of  music  to 
evolve,  and  it  has  developed  with  the  progress  of  science — the  un- 
folding to  man's  comprehension  of  the  universal  laws  of  life.  With 
harmony  music  becomes  an  art  of  greatest  dignity  and  power,  a 
subtle,  sensitive  reflex  of  the  soul's  impressions,  a  language  which 
expresses  thoughts,  emotions,  and  aspirations  incapable  of  utterance 
in  form  less  spiritual. 

The  unstudied  song  of  primitive  man  is  as  soulful  in  its  purpose 
as  developed  art,  but  it  is  a  simple  expression  of  far  simpler  things. 
The  music  of  most  primitive  people  contains  the  first  two  elements 
only — rhythm  and  melody — and  these  elements,  especially  rhythm, 
are  highly  developed.  Harmony  is  lacking;  but  the  life  and  art 
of  the  Indian  are  so  linked  with  nature  that  it  is  to  be  questioned 
whether  the  sounds  of  the  nature-world  do  not  supply  to  these  singers 
of  the  open  a  certain  unconscious  sense  of  harmonic  background. 
No  one  who  has  heard  Indian  songs  in  their  own  environment, 
under  broad  skies  amid  the  sweep  of  wind  and  grasses,  can  fail  to 
feel  that  they  are  there  a  note  in  a  nature  symphony.  Take  the 
Indian  from  nature,  or  nature  from  the  Indian,  and  the  Indian's 
art,  if  it  survive,  must  undergo  the  change  of  supplying  from  within 
that  which  was  unconsciously  received  from  without.  It  must  em- 
bod/ the  lost  nature-world.  Thus  ever  in  the  growth  of  civilization 
are  the  influences  of  nature  absorbed  into  the  creations  of  art.  Not 
knowing  harmony,  it  is  chiefly  on  variety  of  rhythm  that  primitive 
man  depends  for  his  variety  of  musical  effect.  No  civilized  music 
has  such  complex,  elaborate,  and  changing  rhythm  as  has  the  music 
of  the  American  Indian. 

The  songs  in  this  book  are  written  exactly  as  sung  by  the  Ind- 
ians, as  nearly  as  musical  notation  can  record.  No  harmony  has 
been   added.    The    original    melodies    are    absolutely    unchanged. 

[xxvi] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


y 


INTRODUCTION 

The  book  thus  offers  a  faithful  record  of  the  song  of  primitive 
man. 

Different  Indian  tribes  differ  as  widely  in  their  music  and  in  their 
manner  of  singing  as  in  their  life  and  customs.  Yet  there  is  one 
characteristic  peculiarity  of  Indian  song  that  is  almost  universal. 
This  is  a  rhythmic  pulsation  of  the  voice  on  sustained  notes  some- 
what analogous  to  the  effect  produced  on  the  violin  when  the  same 
note  is  slightly  sounded  several  times  during  one  stroke  of  the  bow. 
This  pulsating  accentuation  is  expressed  in  this  book  ivherever  tied 
notes  have  vocables  or  syllables  written  out  beneath  them.  The 
effect  must  be  heard,  however,  in  order  adequately  to  be  repro- 
duced. Also  ft  should  always  be  borne  in  mind  that  Indian  music 
is  essentially  for  singing.  It  cannot  properly  be  performed  on  an 
instrument  of  percussion,  such  as  a  piano,  but  must  be  sung,  or  at 
least  played  on  a  stringed  instrument.  Nor  can  it  be  too  em- 
phatically stated  that  all  notation  of  Indian  music,  however  accu- 
rate, must  necessarily  be  but  as  a  skeleton  to  the  living  form. 
The  actual  melody  can  be  recorded,  with  its  rhythmic  accompani- 
ment of  drum  or  rattle.  But  the  rendering  of  the  song  —  the 
vocal  embellishment,  the  strange  gutturals,  slurs,  and  accents  that 
make  Indian  singing  so  distinctive  —  all  this  is  altogether  too 
subtle  and  too  much  a  part  of  the  voice  itself  to  be  possible  of 
notation. 

The  Indians  of  the  Lakes  and  Plains  whose  lives  in  the  old  days 
were  exposed  to  all  the  severities  of  weather,  and  who  still  sing 
constantly  in  the  open  air  and  against  the  wind,  have  voices  more 
striking  for  their  stirring  ring  than  for  actual  beauty,  as  we  deem 
it.  The  voices  of  the  men  extend  in  range  from  a  sort  of  falsetto 
tenor  to  a  bass  so  deep  as  scarcely  to  sound  the  pitch  of  any  given 
note.  Accents  are  made  by  an  almost  harshly  aspirated  staccato 
attack,  and  sustained  notes  are  often  sung  with  a  tightening  of  the 
throat  that  produces  a  peculiar  quaver.  The  songs  frequently 
begin  with  high  quavering  tones,  then  gradually  descend  and  end 
with  low  phrases  that  break  off  or  die  away  on  open  vowel  syllables. 
This  is  consistent  with  the  sounds  of  nature  and  with  the  cries 
of  animals.  Indeed,  the  Indian  can  so  imitate  the  call  of  a  bird 
or  the  howl  of  the  wolf  as  to  be  entirely  deceptive. 

fxxviil 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'    BOOK 

The  singing  of  the  Plains  women  is  less  violent  in  its  accent  and 
more  legato  than  that  of  the  men,  and  its  mellow  nasal  quality  sug- 
gests the  rustic  note  of  the  oboe. 

The  song  of  the  Plains  Indian  has  its  fitting  surrounding  in 
the  fire-lit  lodge  or  the  open  prairie.  The  drum-beat,  vibrant  in 
the  crisp,  cold  air  of  a  winter  night,  adds  its  throb  to  the  life-puIse 
of  tliis  music  which  is  exciting,  exhilarating,  and  inspiring  through 
its  spirit  and  vitality. 

Strikingly  different  is  the  song  of  the  Pueblo  Indian.  The  shrill 
coyote  cry  of  the  Plains  warrior  is  unknown  to  the  Southwestern 
tiller  of  the  soil.  The  song  of  the  Pueblo  men  is  a  strong,  clear  out- 
pouring from  full  lungs,  while  the  note  of  the  ceremonial  chant  is 
deep  and  solemn.  The  women  of  the  Rio  Grande  and  Zuni  Pueblos 
have  high  and  flutelike  voices;  but  the  gentle  Hopi  women  sing 
with  veiled  tone  of  peculiar  feminine  charm,  and  the  long-drawn 
slurring  of  their  phrases  gives  to  their  singing  a  certain  vagueness  of 
quality  and  intonation  that  is  altogether  alluring  in  its  suggestion 
of  the  surrounding  empty  desert. 

The  sacred  songs  of  the  Navajos  and  Apaches  are  chanted  with 
low  nasal  swing,  but  the  dance-songs  are  sung  with  lusty  vigor,  and 
the  call  of  the  shepherd  on  the  mountain-side  echoes  in  clear-cut 
beauty  through  cliffs  and  canons. 

Like  all  folk-music,  the  music  of  the  Indian  is  the  spontaneous 
and  sincere  expression  of  the  soul  of  a  people.  It  springs  from 
our  own  continent,  and  is  thus,  of  all  music,  distinctively  American. 
If  Indian  song  be  encouraged  with  Indians,  .and  recognition  of  it 
awakened  among  our  own  people,  America  may  one  day  contribute 
a  unique  music  to  the  world  of  art.  Not  that  the  musical  art  of 
America  can  ever  be  founded  on  Indian  melodies;  for  the  art  of 
the  Aryan  must  be  Aryan  to  be  the  true  expression  of  his  race. 
But  the  folk-music  of  any  land  is  a  soil  from  which  genius  draws 
sustenance  for  fresh  growth,  and  the  stimulus  to  the  creative  mind 
through  contact  with  this  native  art  should  give  to  America  a 
new  and  vigorous  art  impulse. 

The  drawings  in  this  book  are  all  made  by  the  Indians,  many  of 
whom  had  never  held  brush  before.  Teachers  in  Indian  schools 
say  that  Indian  children  in  the  first  grade  draw  as  well  as  white 

[  xxviii  ] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


INTRODUCTION 

children  in  the  fifth.  With  the  Indian  a  sense  for  form  and  color 
is  inborn.  The  hand  that  has  woven  for  generations  the  matchless 
basket,  perfect  in  symmetry  and  beautiful  in  design,  wields  the 
white  man's  pencil  with  delicacy  and  sweeping  certitude.  Even 
when  painting  for  the  first  time,  the  untutored  draughtsman  lays 
the  color  on  the  paper  as  evenly  as  though  drilled  to  the  task. 

The  technique  of  all  art  handwork  is  the  Indian's  by  nature. 
But  technique  is  only  the  offspring  of  a  larger  gift  which  fashions 
the  imagery  of  cloud,  rain,  star,  and  growing  com  into  symbol,  and  of 
symbols  composes  decorative  designs  both  beautiful  and  meaning- 
ful. The  Indian  is  artistic  by  nature.  His  art  is  not  a  luxury  of 
the  cultured  few,  but  the  unconscious  striving  of  the  many  to  make 
beautiful  the  things  of  daily  living. 

The  child  race  of  a  by-gone  age  has  left  no  written  record  of  its 
thoughts.  Silent  through  the  ages  has  passed  barbaric  man.  The 
voices  that  greeted  the  sunrise  of  the  race  have  died  away  without 
an  echo.  A  bit  of  broken  pottery,  a  bone-awl,  an  arrow-head,  a 
grave-mound,  mute  testimonies  these  of  the  art,  the  industry,  the 
life,  the  death  of  man  in  the  long  ago.  A  footprint  only  tefls  of 
his  passing. ,  And  of  his  thoughts  ?  The  lips  of  the  past  are  closed 
forever  on  the  mystery.  Of  value,  then,  to  the  history  of  the  human 
race,  as  well  as  to  the  history  of  America,  are  the  written  utterances 
of  this  primitive  people. 

In  music,  art,  and  letters,  as  well  as  in  history  and  archaeology, 
should  The  Indians'  Book  find  a  place.  Here  may  we  look  into  the 
mind  of  a  race  utterly  unlike  any  other  in  the  world.  Indian 
thought  presents  material  absolutely  unique.  What  other  nation 
has  in  its  midst  a  like  opportunity  for  inspiration?  Let  us  pause 
in  the  stress  of  our  modem  life  to  listen  to  the  ancient  lore  of  our 
own  land.  From  the  heart  of  the  nature-world  speaks  the  voice  of 
man  proclaiming  deity.  The  Indian's  religious  thought,  uttered 
with  the  simplicity  of  childhood,  is  bom  of  his  recognition  of  spirit 
in  every  form  of  life,  and  his  conception  of  an  omnipotent  and  all- 
pervading  divine  power  is  entirely  spiritual  and  impersonal.  The 
Indian  has  a  message  for  the  seekers  after  truth  who  welcome, 
whatsoever  its  form,  the  recognition  of  God  by  man.     And  if  there 

[xxix] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'    BOOK 

be  truth  in  the  theory  that  the  American  continent  was  the  first  to 
emerge,  then  are  the  Indians,  indeed,  perhaps  the  most  ancient  of 
peoples  and  their  spiritual  conceptions  should  be  of  interest  and 
value  to  the  whole  human  race.  The  whole  civilized  world  to-day 
faces  the  question:  Is  primitive  man  to  retain  his  God-given  right 
to  evolution,  or  is  he  to  be  swept  from  off  the  earth  before  the  im- 
perious needs  of  civilized  powers?  The  Spartan  mother  left  her 
weakling  on  the  mountain-side  to  perish.  Now  science,  with  the 
incubator,  preserves  the  life  of  the  pauper  babe  prematurely  bom. 
Should  not  this  recognition  of  the  sacredness  of  life  be  applied  to 
races  as  well  as  to  individuals  ?  He  who  can  offer  most  to  the  devel- 
opment of  humanity  is  now  deemed  the  fittest  to  survive.  The 
primitive  races  are  child  races.  Who  can  tell  what  may  be  their 
contribution  to  humanity  when  they  are  grown  ?  And  have  they 
not  even  now  something  to  give  ? 

What  of  the  type  of  manhood  that  the  Indian  presents,  reserved 
and  poised,  courageous,  enduring,  master  of  eloquence,  master  of 
silence,  above  all,  self-controlled — a  proud,  vanishing  figure  in  a 
nation  of  unrest  ?  A  hewer  of  wood  and  a  drawer  of  water,  yes — 
but  what  more  ?  What  of  his  talents  ? — have  they  not  a  place  to 
fill  in  the  culture  and  industry  of  our  country  ?  We  are  a  people  of 
great  mechanical  and  inventive  genius,  but  we  are  not  naturally 
song-makers,  poets,  or  designers.  Can  we  afford  to  lose  from  our 
country  any  sincere  and  spontaneous  art  impulse,  however  crude? 
The  undeveloped  talents  native  to  the  aboriginal  American  are 
precisely  those  in  which  the  Anglo-Saxon  American  is  deficient. 
Far  ahead  of  Europe  are  we  in  labor-saving  devices,  but  far  behind 
in  all  art  industries.  Our  patterns  and  designs  are  largely  imported 
from  France.  And  yet,  here  among  us,  down-trodden  and  by  us 
debauched,  is  a  people  of  real  creative  artistic  genius — the  first 
Americans  and  possibly  the  oldest  race  on  earth.  And  our  interests 
declare  that  this  proud  race  must  perish  ?  If  The  Indians'  Book 
proves  that  the  Indians  have  qualities  worthy  of  a  place  in  civiliza- 
tion, may  not  the  same  be  true  of  other  primitive  peoples  also? 
Would  we  not  do  well  at  least  to  find  out  what  the  people  really 
are  before  we  declare  that  the  natural  law  of  the  survival  of  the 
fittest  pronounces  for  our  progress  their  doom  ? 

[xxxj 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


INTRODUCTION 

If  The  Indians'  Book  can  help  to  a  recognition  of  primitfve  men 
as  men  of  latent  capabilities;  if  it  can  help  in  ever  so  small  degree 
to  herald  the  day  when  adttlt  races  wisely  shall  guide  child  races, 
and  civilization  nourish  the  genius  of  every  people,  then  will  this 
utterance  of  the  North  American  Indians  be  not  for  the  race  alone, 
but  for  all  humanity. 

August,  t905. 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


NOTE 

For  the  benefit  of  the  wliite  reader  it  may  be  well  to  state  in  brief  the  present 
conditions  of  Indian  life.  "With  the  advance  of  the  wliite  man  the  Indian  has  been 
pushed  from  plac?  to  place,  until  the  several  tribes  have  finally  been  located  on 
reservations — ^that  is,  land  set  apart  for  them.  The  Indians  are  considered  wards 
of  the  nation  and  are  ruled  by  the  Federal  government.  Each  reservation  is  con- 
trolled by  a  government  officer  appointed  by  the  Commissioner  of  Indian  Affairs. 
On  nearly  every  agency  is  a  government  Indian  school;  there  are  also  several  non- 
reservation  boarding-schools. 

The  reservation  system  is  now  gradually  being  abolished,  principally  on  account 
of  the  white  man's  ever-increasing  demand  for  land.  The  Indians  receive  a  stated 
number  of  acres  in  severalty,  and  the  rest  of  the  reservation  is  sold  for  white  set- 
tlement. 

The  national  policy  of  the  past  for  the  civilization  and  education  of  the  Indian 
lias  been  to  abolish  tribal  relations,  native  religion,  customs,  art,  language,  and  dress. 
This  form  of  racial  suicide  expected  of  the  red  man  has  not  added  happiness  to 
his  lot.  Of  late  years  there  has  been  a  desire  on  the  part  of  many  earnest  people 
to  see  this  policy  modified,  and  the  present  Indian  Commissioner,  Hon.  Francis  E. 
Leupp  is  the  friend  of  intelligent  effort  along  these  lines. 

Mr.  Leupp  came  into  office  after  this  book  was  undertaken.  Since  his  admin- 
istration two  important  reforms  in  Indian  education  have  been  instituted:  the  offi- 
cial encouragement  of  native  music  in  ihe  schools,  and  the  appointment  of  Angel  De 
Cora,  a  Winnebago  Indian,  as  art  instructor  at  Carlisle  Indian  School. 

No  claim  is  made  that  all  work  in  this  book  is  without  error. 

The  short  sketches  of  the  tribes  have  been  compiled  by  the  recorder  with  the 
help  of  standard  authorities,  but  the  migrations  and  early  history  of  Indians  form 
a  subject  that  is  still  largely  conjectural.  Though  great  care  has  been  taken  in 
the  preparation  of  this  material,  years  might  still  be  spent  with  advantage  in  further 
comparing  it  with  the  work  of  students  who  have  made  particular  Indian  tribes 
the  subject  of  valuable  and  exhaustive  research.  Nevertheless,  in  view  of  the 
eagerness  of  the  Indians  for  their  book,  it  is  deemed  desirable  to  publish  the  collection 
as  it  is,  without  further  delay. 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


VABANAKI    TITLE-PAGE 

The  design  is  a  picture  cot  in  birch-bark  by  a  Penobscot  Indian. 
It  represents  the  cow  moose,  the  ball  moose,  and  the  wild  duck. 
The  lettering  is  by  Hinook  Mahiwi  Kilinaka  (Angel  De  Cora). 


..■v!^> 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


^SSSSSSSSSSSSS3S3S3S3SS5SSSSli:Si3XS5323SIS:SSSSSl 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS^    BOOK 

THE  WABANAKIS^ 

Told  by  Bedagi  (Big  Thtmder) 


.||E  are  the  Wabanakis ' — "  Children  of  the  Dawn  Country/' 

W"  People  of  the  East/'  Five  tribes  made  «p  oar  nation 
— Passamaqwoddy,  Penobscot,  Micmac,  Maliseet,  and  a 
■'I  tribe  now  gone  that  lived  on  the  Kennebec  River.  Some 
of  the  tribes  had  almost  the  same  speech,  others  a  different  one. 
Long  have  the  white  men  been  among  tis,  yet  though  we  have  for- 
gotten many  of  the  old  songs  and  stories,  we  have  never  lost  our 
language.  It  is  only  nowadays  that  the  children  use  less  and 
less  the  speech  of  their  fathers. 

Long  have  the  white  men  been  among  us.  Yet  some  of  us  still 
remember  the  time  when  our  lives  were  spent  in  hunting  and  fish- 
ing, and  our  villages  were  of  wigwams  instead  of  houses. 

In  the  olden  time  our  garments  were  of  moose-skin  and  fur,  our 
pouches  were  the  skins  of  animals,  our  dishes  were  of  wood  and 
bark.  Before  the  coming  of  white  men,  our  knives  and  toma- 
hawks and  all  our  tools  were  of  stone.  With  a  stone  knife  we  cut 
open  the  moose  and  with  a  tool  of  stone  we  skinned  him.  We 
fished  with  a  bait  of  stone,  well  greased  with  moose-taflow,  on  a 
line  of  moose-sinew.  Our  lives  were  simple  and  glad,  and  our 
marriages  were  happy.    Man  and  woman  made  their  vow  to  the 

NOTE  FOR  PRONUNCIATION  OF  WABANAKI  TEXT 

Unless  otherwise  indicated,  vowels  have  the  Continental  so«nd  and  conso- 
nants the  English.  Where  no  translation  appears,  the  song-words  are  meaning- 
less vocables. 

'  The  'V^abanakis  are  of  Algonquian  stock. 
[3] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'    BOOK 

Great  Spirit.  In  oar  old  religion  we  believed  that  the  Great  Spirit 
who  made  all  things  is  in  everything,  and  that  with  every  breath 
of  air  we  drew  in  the  life  of  the  Great  Spirit. 


THE  STORY  OF  THE  FIRST  MOTHER 

Joseph  Nicolar,  a  Penobscot  Indian,  compiled  and  wrote  the  legends  of  his 
people,  and  published  them  himself  in  the  year  J  893,  in  a  small  volume  entitled 
The  Red  Man.  "  The  Story  of  the  First  Mother,"  is  adapted  from  the  book  and 
is  here  contributed  by  Nicolar's  wife,  who  is  still  living  at  Oldtown,  Maine,  The 
same  story  as  told  to  the  compiler  by  Big  Thunder  differs  somewhat  in  detail, 
but  is  essentially  the  same. 


ONG  ago,  when  Kloskttrbeh,  the  great  teacher,  lived 
in  the  land,  and  there  were  as  yet  no  other  men,  there 
came  to  him  one  day  at  noon  a  yottth;  and  the  youth 
stood  before  Kloskarbeh  and  called  him  **  mother's 
brother,"  and  said:  *'  I  was  born  of  the  foam  of  the  waters;  for  the 
wind  blew,  and  the  waves  quickened  into  foam,  and  the  sun  shone 
on  the  foam  and  warmed  it,  and  the  warmth  made  life,  and  that 
life  is  I.  See,  I  am  young  and  swift,  and  I  have  come  to  abide 
with  you  and  be  your  help  in  all  things." 

Again  on  a  day  at  noon  there  came  a  maiden  and  stood  before 
the  two  and  called  them  "  my  children,"  and  the  maiden  said : 
"  I  have  come  to  abide  with  you,  and  I  have  brought  with  me  love. 
I  will  give  it  to  you,  and  if  you  will  love  me  and  grant  my  wish, 
all  the  world  will  love  me  well,  even  the  very  beasts.  Strength 
is  mine,  and  I  give  it  to  whosoever  may  get  me ;  comfort  also ;  for 
though  I  am  young  my  strength  shall  be  felt  over  all  the  earth, 
I  was  born  of  the  beautiful  plant  of  the  earth ;  for  the  dew  fell  on 
the  leaf,  and  the  sun  warmed  the  dew,  and  the  warmth  was  life, 
and  that  life  is  I." 

Then  Kloskurbeh  lifted  up  his  hands  towards  the  sun  and 
praised  the  Great  Spirit,  and  afterwards  the  young  man  and  the 
maid  were  man  and  wife,  and  she  became  the  first  mother.  Klos- 
kurbeh taught  their  children  and  did  great  works  for  them,  and 
when  his  works  were  finished  he  went  away  to  live  in  the  Northland 
until  it  should  be  time  for  him  to  come  again.     But  the  people 

Digitized  b}  i^icrosoft® 


WA.BANAKI 

increased  until  they  were  very  many,  and  there  came  a  famine 
among  them;  and  then  the  first  mother  grew  more  and  more  sorrow- 
ftil.  Every  day  at  noon  she  left  her  husband's  lodge  and  stayed 
from  him  until  the  shadows  were  long.  And  her  husband  that 
dearly  loved  her  was  sad  because  of  her  sorrow,  and  one  day  he 
followed  her  trail  as  far  as  the  ford  of  the  river,  and  there  he  waited 
for  her  to  return.  When  she  came,  she  sang  as  she  began  to  ford 
the  river,  and  as  long  as  her  feet  were'  in  the  water  she  seemed  glad, 
and  the  man  saw  something  that  trailed  behind  her  right  foot,  like 
a  long  green  blade.  But  when  she  came  out  of  the  water  she  stooped 
and  cast  off  the  blade,  and  then  she  appeared  sorrowful. 

The  husband  followed  her  home  as  the  sun  was  going  down, 
and  he  bade  her  come  out  and  look  at  the  beautiful  sun.  And  while 
they  stood  side  by  side,  there  came  seven  little  children  that  stood 
in  front  of  them  and  looked  into  the  woman's  face,  saying,  **  We  are 
hungry,  and  the  night  will  soon  be  here.  Where  is  the  food  ?" 
Then  the  woman's  tears  ran  down,  and  she  said,  **  Be  quiet,  little 
ones;  in  seven  moons  you  shall  be  filled,  and  shall  hunger  no  more." 

The  husband  reached  out  his  hand  and  wiped  away  her  tears 
and  said,  "  My  wife,  what  can  I  do  to  make  you  happy  ?"  And 
she  answered,  "  Take  my  life." 

"I  cannot  take  your  life,"  said  the  man;  "will  nothing  else 
make  you  happy?" 

"Nothing  else,"  she  answered.    "Nothing  else  will  make  me 

happy." 

Then  the  husband  went  away  to  the  Northland  to  take  counsel 
with  Kloskurbeh,  and  with  the  rising  of  the  seventh  sun  he  came 
again  and  said,  "  O  wife,  Kloskurbeh  has  told  me  to  do  the  thing 
you  wish."  Then  the  woman  was  glad  and  said :  "  When  you  have 
slain  me,  let  two  men  lay  hold  of  my  hair  and  draw  my  body  all 
around  a  field,  and  when  they  have  come  to  the  middle  of  the  field, 
there  let  them  bury  my  bones.  Then  they  must  come  away;  but 
when  seven  moons  have  passed  let  them  go  again  to  the  field  and 
gather  all  that  they  find,  and  eat;  it  is  my  flesh;  but  you  must  save 
a  part  of  it  to  put  in  the  ground  again.  My  bones  you  cannot  eat, 
but  you  may  burn  them,  and  the  smoke  will  bring  peace  to  you 
and  to  your  children." 

[5] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'    BOOK 

On  the  morrow  when  the  sun  was  rising  the  man  slew  his  wife; 
and,  as  she  had  bidden,  men  drew  her  body  all  about  an  open  field, 
until  the  flesh  was  worn  away,  and  in  the  middle"  of  the  field  they 
buried  her  bones.  But  when  seven  moons  had  gone  by,  and  the 
husband  came  again  to  that  place,  he  saw  it  all  filled  with  beautiful 
tall  plants;  and  he  tasted  the  fruit  of  the  plants  and  found  it  sweet, 
and  he  called  it  "  Skar-mu-nal,"  corn.  And  on  the  place  where 
her  bones  were  buried  he  saw  a  plant  with  broad  leaves,  bitter  to 
the  taste,  and  he  called  it  **  Utar-Mur-wa-yeh,"  tobacco. 

Then  the  people  were  glad  in  their  hearts,  and  they  came  to 
his  harvest;  but  when  it  was  all  gathered  in,  the  man  did  not  know 
how  they  should  divide  it,  and  he  sent  to  Kloskurbeh  for  counsel. 
When  Kloskurbeh  came  and  saw  the  great  harvest,  he  gave 
thanks  to  the  Great  Spirit  and  said,  "  Now  have  the  first  words  of 
the  first  mother  come  to  pass,  for  she  said  she  was  born  of  the  leaf 
of  the  beautiful  plant,  and  that  her  power  should  be  felt  over  the 
whole  world,  and  that  all  men  should  love  her.  And  now  that  she 
is  gone  into  this  substance,  take  care  that  this,  the  second  seed  of 
the  first  mother,  be  always  with  you,  for  it  is  her  flesh.  Her  bones 
also  have  been  given  for  your  good;  burn  them,  and  the  smoke 
will  bring  freshness  to  the  mind.  And  since  these  things  came 
from  the  goodness  of  a  woman's  heart,  see  that  you  hold  her  always 
in  memory ;  remember  her  when  you  eat,  remember  her  when  the 
smoke  of  her  bones  rises  before  you.  And  because  you  are  all 
brothers,  divide  among  you  her  flesh  and  her  bones— let  all  shares 
be  alike  — for  so  will  the  love  of  the  first  mother  have  been 
fulfilled." 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


WABANAKI 
N'SKAWEWINTUAGUNUL 

Songs  of  Greeting 

Sung  and  told  by  Blamswe-Zozep  Tene  (Francis  Joseph  Dana),  Lincoln,  Maine,  and  Asawhis 

(John  Salis),  Eastport,  Haine 


— ,  ••       I IHENEVER  we  saw  a  canoe  rounding  the  points  flying 

Wa  white  flag,  we  knew  that  strangers  were  coming  to 
visit  «s.  Then  we  gathered  on  the  shore,  men,  women, 
'I and  children, like  a  great  procession,  waiting  to  welcome 
them.  In  those  days  the  Wabanaki  tribes  had  each  their  chief 
(sagam),  lieutenant  -  chief  (mehchichiket,  or  leptahnit),  and  five 
or  six  head  warriors  or  captains  (s'moganis).  The  stranger  (s*mo- 
ganis)  first  sprang  to  land  and  sang  the  N'SkawewintuagunuI  (song 
of  greeting),  stepping  slowty  towards  our  chief,  in  time  to  the  song, 
while  all  the  people  sang  ^*  hega,  hega."  At  the  end  of  the  song 
the  stranger  had  drawn  close  to  the  chief,  and  holding  out  his  hand 
said,  "I  greet  you,  chief  of  the  Passamaquoddy."  Then  the  peo- 
ple gave  a  great  shout  and  fired  off  their  guns.  In  the  same  way 
the  stranger  greeted  the  lieutenant-chief  and  the  captains.  Then 
we  in  our  turn  performed  the  same  ceremony,  singing  the  song  of 
welcome,  ^nd  shaking  hands  with  the  visiting  chief  and  his  men. 

Then  the  visitors  and  all  the  people  went  up  together  to  the 
village,  and  there  the  guests  were  feasted. 

These  are  the  songs  of  greeting  of  the  olden  days. 


.    THE    GAME    OF    BARTER 

Sang  and  told  by  Bedagi    (Big  Thunder) 


I  lINTER  is  the  season  for  story-telling  and  games.    One 

Wof  our  amusements  in  the  old  days  was  the  game  of 
barter.     Two  companies  would  gather  in  separate  wig- 
I  wams  and  each  dress  one  of  their  men  in  comic  dress  as 
a  nolmihigon,  or  clown.      The  first  nolmihigon  and   his  company 
would  go  to  the  second  wigwam  with  some  article  to  be  offered 

[7] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'    BOOK 

for  exchange.  Then  the  nolmihigon  would  dance  and  sing  so 
comically  and  praise  the  article  with  so  much  wit  that  often  he 
would  receive  in  exchange  for  it  something  of  far  greater  value. 
For  instance,  he  would  take  an  old  wooden  spoon,  and  stroking  it 
would  say  how  fair  it  was,  how  useful,  singing,  "  If  you  will  keep 
him  well,  he  will  serve  you  your  life  long." 

The  people  of  the  opposite  company  then  would  offer  him  their 
things  in  excliange,  and  if  the  nolmihigon  were  clever  he  might 
obtain  a  good  canoe  for  his  old  spoon.  Snow-shoes,  moose-skin 
garments,  axes,  all  things  were  bartered  in  this  merry  way.  When 
the  exchange  had  been  made,  the  first  nolmihigon  and  his  company 
would  go  back  to  their  own  wigwam,  and  then  the  nolmihigon  and 
people  of  the  second  wigwam  would  visit  them  with  their  wares. 
But  great  was  the  fun  if  the  people  of  the  second  wigwam  ran  very 
fast  and  arrived  at  the  first  wigwam  before  their  hosts  had  returned. 
Of  course,  the  party  with  the  wittiest  nolmihigon  were  winners  in 
the  end.  So  we  joked  and  played  on  long  winter  evenings  in  the 
olden  days. 

PENOBSCOT   BARTER   DANCE-SONG 

Ko  na  wa  ya  ti  ge 

Ko  na  wa  ya  ti  ge 

Ko  cha  ba  la  chich  a  , 

Ni  ta  ge  si  za 

(Meaning  of  words  unknown) 

PENOBSCOT   WAR-DANCE   SONG 

Kwa  ha  hi-a 

Kwa  nu  kwa  nu  de  he  no 
Kwa  nti  de  kwa  nu  de 
He  no 

These  are  no  real  words,  but  the  meaning  of  the  song  as  given  by  Big  Thunder  might  be,  "  I 
wish  that  yoa  were  dancing,  too." 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


WABANAKI 


PENOBSCOT  DANCE-SONG 


.1  IKE  most  Indian  dance-songs,  this  song  may  be  repeated 

Lan  indefinite  number  of  times,  sometimes  varying  the  form 
by  repeating  certain  parts  instead  of  singing  the  song 
'I  straight  through.  The  beat  of  the  rattle,  also,  varies. 
Sometimes  the  long  rattle-shake  or  the  short  rattle-beats  occur  in 
one  place,  sometimes  in  another. 

The  rattle  used  is  of  horn,  beautifully  carved,  and  filled  with 
pebbles  or  shot.    The  mouth  of  the  horn  is  stopped  with  wood. 

With  the  Maliseet  Indians,  "Kwe-hiu-wha-ni-ho"  is  a  greeting, 
like  "how  are  you?"     It  is  not  used  in  speech,  but  only  in  singing. 


PENOBSCOT  MEDICINE-SONG 


LAMSWE-ZOZEP  TENE  used  to  hear  his  grandfather 

Bsing  this  song,  and  in  those  old  days  the  song  had  words. 
But  it  has  not  been  sung  by  the  people  for  forty  or  fifty 
years,  and  now  Blamswe  knows  only  the  vocables  used 
in  the  refrain.  The  song  is  thought  to  be  an  old  medicine-song  of 
the  Penobscots,  but  some  of  the  Wabanakis  say  it  is  a  social  song. 


DANCE-SONGS 

Now    used   at    Weddings 
Told  by  Maliseet  Indians 


I  [HFN   a   youth   wishes   to  marry,  he  sends  wampum  to 

Wthe  father  of  the  maid  by  the  hand  of  one  of  the  old 
men  of  the  tribe.  The  old  man  delivers  the  wampum 
■M  and  speaks  in  praise  of  the  youth;  then  he  goes  away. 
If  the  father  send  the  wampum  back  to  the  youth,  it  is  a  sign  that 
the  suit  is  rejected,  but  if  the  wampum  be  kept,  the  youth  knows 
that  he  is  accepted.  When  the  wedding-day  comes,  the  maid  and  her 
lover  each  prepare  a  great  feast  in  the  open  air,  and  then  a  messenger 

[9] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'   BOOK 

goes  through  the  village,  calling,  **  Your  dishes  V*  This  is  the  signal 
that  the  feast  is  ready,  and  all  the  people  gather  to  it,  men,  women, 
and  children,  bringing  bowls  and  platters;  every  one  is  bidden. 

These  are  all  that  are  still  kept  of  the  ancient  marriage  customs, 
and  it  is  only  at  weddings  that  we  still  dance  the  old  Indian  dances. 
We  dance  half  the  evening  in  the  French  or  American  manner  and 
then  the  other  half  in  the  old  Indian  way.  To  keep  time  in  our 
dances,  we  use  a  rattle  made  of  horn,  filled  with  pebbles  or  shot,  and 
stopped  with  wood.  At  the  end  of  the  song  we  call  out  quickly, 
twa,  tivaf  tiva,  twa,  like  a  summons  to  others  to  come  and  dance 
with  us.  Sometimes  the  whole  song  is  sung  with  only  "  twa,  twa" 
for  words.  The  old  people  still  love  the  Indian  dance,  and  for 
the  wedding  merry-making  wear  all  their  ancient  Indian  orna- 
ments of  silver,  shell,  or  fur. 


MALISEET  DANCE-SONG 


Kwe-hio-wha-ni-ho 

Ya  hi  ye 
Kwe-hia-wha-ni-yo 

Ya  hi  ye 

Ya  hi  ye 
Kshi-te-ka-mo-tik  'lo 

Ya  hi  ye 

Ya  hi  ye 
Pilsh-kwe-sis-tok  'lo 

Ya  hi  ye 
Ski-no-sis-tok  'lo 

Ya  hi  ye 
Kshi-te-ka-mo-tik  'lo 

Ya  hi  ye 
Twa,  twa,  twa,  twa !  (etc.) 


Hey,  ho,  dance  away. 

Dance  away ! 
Hey,  ho,  dance  away. 

Dance  away ! 

Dance  away ! 
Harder,  faster  let  os  go. 

Dance  away ! 

Dance  away  ! 
Youths  and  maidens,  be  gay. 

Dance  away ! 
Youths  and  maidens,  be  gay. 

Dance  away ! 
Fast  and  faster  let  tts  go. 

Dance  away  ! 
Come,  come,  come,  come ! 


PASSAMAQUODDY  DANCE-SONG 

Wagad-alo 
N'Hustims  sanow 
Kchi  Blamswe-Zozep 
Ha-ba-mes-ba-na 
We  ho  (etc.) 

Grandfather  "  is  a  title  of  respect  or  reverence  for  any  old  man 
[10] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


He  is  coming,  oor  grandfather,* 
Great  Blamswe-Zozep, 
With  a  string  of  fish  ! 
We  ho  (etc.) 


WABANAKI 
HUNTING   THE   MOOSE       (^  <-' ' '      ^^ 

Told  by  Bedagi  (Bfg  Thunder)  jy^^^ 


--,[  HE  Great  Spirit  made  all  things;  all  men  are  his  children. 

np  He  made  the  Indians  last  of  all,  and  so,  since  they  are 
*  his  youngest  children,  they  are  not  as  wise  as  the  white 
I  men.  But  the  Great  Spirit  said,  "  In  time  you  shall 
know  me."  And  he  placed  in  the  hands  of  the  Indian  the  bow 
and  said,  "  This  shall  find  for  you  both  food  and  clothing." 

The  Great  Spirit  is  in  all  things ;  he  is  in  the  air  we  breathe. 
The  Great  Spirit  is  our  father,  but  the  earth  is  our  mother.  She 
nourishes  us;  that  which  we  put  into  the  ground  she  returns  to  us, 
and  healing  plants  she  gives  us  likewise.  If  we  are  wounded,  we 
go  to  our  mother  and  seek  to  lay  the  wounded  part  against  her,  to 
be  healed.  Animals,  too,  do  thus,  they  lay  their  wounds  to  the 
earth.  Wheii  we  go  hunting,  it  is  not  our  arrow  that  kills  the  moose, 
however  powerful  be  the  bow;  it  is  nature  that  kills  him.  The  arrow 
sticks  in  his  hide;  and,  like  all  living  things,  the  moose  goes  to  our 
mother  to  be  healed.  He  seeks  to  lay  his  wound  against  the  earth, 
and  thus  he  drives  the  arrow  farther  in.  Meanwhile  I  follow. 
He  is  out  of  sight,  but  I  put  my  ear  to  a  tree  in  the  forest,  and  that 
brings  me  the  sound,  and  I  hear  when  the  moose  makes  his  next 
leap,  and  I  follow.  The  moose  stops  again  for  the  pain  of  the 
arrow,  and  he  rubs  his  side  upon  the  earth  and  drives  the  arrow 
farther  in.  I  follow  always,  listening  now  and  then  with  my  ear 
against  a  tree.  Every  time  he  stops  to  rub  his  side  he  drives  the 
arrow  farther  in,  till  at  last  when  he  is  nearly  exhausted  and  I 
come  up  with  him,  the  arrow  may  be  driven  clean  through  his  body. 
Then  I  can  kill  him  easily  with  my  knife. 

The  moose  comes  when  he  is  called.  We  call  him  with  a  horn 
made  of  bark;  or  we  stand  in  the  water  and  scoop  it  up  and  then  let 
it  slowly  drip  as  if  a  moose  were  drinking.  The  moose  comes  to 
the  sound  because  he  thinks  to  find  his  mate. 

Now  follows  the  story  of  the  moose: 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'   BOOK 


STORY   OF  THE   MOOSE 


i^- 


In  olden  days  the  moose  was  so  large  that  he  ttsed  to  browse  on 
the  tops  of  trees;  also  he  destroyed  the  people.  So  the  Great  Spirit 
sent  Ksiwhambeh'  to  the  people,  and  when  he  had  come  he  called 
us  all  together  and  said,  **  I  have  come  to  change  that  animal,  the 
moose,  so  that  yoti  can  take  comfort  in  him." 

Then  Ksiwhambeh  called  for  a  strip  of  birch-bark,  three  hands 
long,  and  when  it  was  brought  him  he  set  one  hand  wpon  an  end  of 
it,  and  two  fingers  tjpon'^e  other  end,  and  he  rolled  the  bark  into 
a  horn  and  began  to  call  the  moose.  The  first  time  he  called,  the 
people  could  only  faintly,  hear  the  sound  of  the  answer  far  in  the 
distance;  then  he  called  again,  and  the  answer  was  nearer  and 
nearer  till  at  last  a  moose  appeared.  And  Ksiwhambeh  spoke  to 
the  moose  and  said:  "  I  have  come  to  make  you  smaller  so  that 
my  children  can  take  comfort  in  you.     Come  here  to  me." 

The  moose  came  and  held  down  his  head,  and  Ksiwhambeh  took 
him  between  the  horns  and  pushed  him  down  to  the  size  that  He 
now  has.  Then  Ksiwhambeh  said  to  him,  "  Henceforth  look  that 
you  never  come  till  you  are  called." 

Thus  Ksiwhambeh  changed  the  moose;  and  to  this  day  the 
hunter  calls  him  with  a  horn  of  birch-bark. 


MATteEET   LOVE-SONG 

This  song  comes  from  St.  John,  New  Brunswick.  It  is  a  hunter's 
farewell  song.  In  the  autumn  the  youth  sets  out  for  the  long  winter 
hunt,  and  parts  from  his  love,  telling  her  to  watch  for  him  at  the 
breaking  of  the  ice  in  the  spring,  that  she  may  see  him  coming  down 
the  river  in  his  canoe.  * 

The  Wabanakis  have  many  such  songs.  They  call  them  "  Songs 
of  Loneliness." 

'  Coltare  hero  of  the  Eastern  Algonquins,  known  among  the  Penobscots  as  Ksiwhambeh, 
Klosfcurbeh  (Klusfcabe).     Among  the  Passamaquoddys  the  namg  is  Koloscap  or  Glooscop. 

[12] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


WABANAKI 

LOVE-SONG 

(In  the  Indian  text  certain  syllables  are  interpolated,  changed,  or  prolonged  for  euphony) 

Boskia  ta-Ia-bin  Look  oft  ap  the  river,  look  oft  and  oft. 

Elmi  na-Iamwoaik  In   spring    at    the   breaking    of    the    ice, 

Elmi  siguak-Io  look  oft ; 

Tabegi-Iok-!o  Yoa  may   sec  me   coming  down  in  my 

Qiipdak  knamihi  canoe. 

Safcwelagweyan  Look  oft  ap  the  river,  look  anew,  anew. 

K«  we  nu  de  nu 

Ku  we  nxi  de  nu 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


^^A-M  ' 


A.M.  i, ill 


* 


%  J  -f^  ^  !•' 


^' 


■^ojol.  Mo       3-«u 


iC^Oi.  ■  ■   *i « 


SiOu    "J^o  /U*ro_ 


r 


£ 


^'in^i  'i  1  ;  )     I  J    J    I  J  J    ij    Uj.ff 


<• 


W^-  •     tto-  ■  ■■         'o-  ■  -  — 


-t^ 


«.     ■*>o 


Jdl    -mo      '^ij-e 


r 


^^^^^^^^^^^^^s 


VM     J 


/Kmo..-     pu)  -■     h>.  '       -vto       /Knyfe^  **"      ^ 


»**    -        ''k^a-- 


T 


rn  rj  l-v/i^  IV  J  J  iju  1^ 


^i^. 


A"     i\jB- 


y«SL------  'ICi^jra.    -»to       8«L.    -»cc      4CiyJ-i 


A/yy. 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


v/x«<«<^    f**n    (*^'i^'^*uu>  (jLar&A>>    StfJU/*}   i-0^»^P' 


ckX-,  JAa'*'»*Jl^ 


/HA).  J-  Itb 


I J^  J  1 J   ^j  I  ,^ 


^^ 


^ 


;/«- 


r    ^T 


i^- 


'*-«. 


-^t*. 


.;^      i  J    I  J^  J   l^'f  n  /  J      13 


ik 


r 


■L. 


r- 


r 


I  h  ^^  UJ'i^ 


A. 


ij  J    1  y    ^^ 


o/^« 


r^ 


;6.- 


r 


A. 


r 


'»V«. 


^ 


4    i   ^'    1^^^'  .'  I  I   n  1   I     1^^ 


^e- 


r 


r 


A- 


(T 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


4^ 


41. /Vl.  J-//fc- 
L 


i\rH.  1    1    1  JT^j    N    rj 


^ 


-2=7 — 

-#f  e. 


^^- 


r  ^7 


-  4<»- 


;^ 


/' 


-^ 


h    1     1     ^^ 


I  ^J     L  J 


^ 


^^e 


^         ^-^. 


A 


^ 


-^€_ 


Digitized  by  MicroSoft® 


Lr€a-f<rv,rt^  j    ,JU 


,|,n  ,,,jr.f|j..,j'iu-v  Jn  \i  ^ 


<• 


o    »!<».   MO-  tA-a.  ■6r        At i^  t\0~  ««J«.    <^«L 


r- 


^^ 


^ 


^ 


a:- 


c/a.  ^a-   ^<a.   cLxtX^ 


-tU  4^ 


^  ^^ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


dBav^^'  "^  "^^  ^>"  ^^ 

ff».     t^  ,. I  J.  J- ..  j,w  ^ 


W 


W=^ 


m 


■y^.. 


? 


h^OAK  ifl.   Ki.    a.      iCuJO.  »uM.*4w»-  x<-<.     ^-fc      ^A. . 


te 


.^•^/i   ij  1  r\  J    i>n  J 


^ 


^cj-a.  ■x^  ^  i£«A/».  *ia_    ^<,       Jut, A« 


Nt 


"S^Am  /'«.   IU     <9_        ^tlv/-*.  *A<.   4Cyj-a.    fiMA.        ^       ^ 


•c^e 


* 


'/,K  -li  n    t  i^  J'  JM  ,1    J-^  --J  111 


J^ura.   -H**  ^  4w<».    *iA.    S-€.      Kjl ^< 


I  *  U.  JotjTvtjOAi   ai2*^  ^  ab    -vn.^^^  ■ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


(y^T<n..st^ ,  xju 


tKjt.'*%* 


/^UK,    Kyiu.       urK€K.... 


X 


J- 


J A- 


— X 


^      1     t  \n  J-|j.^  ij.     \n.i-\i 


rSL 


-J ^ ■  J^ — 


-I 


^ 


y  -.  <  --^ 


U-  J^U  '    U      M.^  /-IJ 


* 


n   .  j^-^  ■  j~7  ■  n  , 


[       ^ 


^^ 
^  /      *= 


=* 


3 


-y^ 


I 


O-  ^N,    li 


E 


I*/       I 


5^^*f^  -^Kw^.   ^.iu.        t^ 


A,      -»«^ 


i^.,. 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


^Y«-*«  tf-<r-»«r^  S? 


<JL  ~    tf  O* 


J" 


J^r->»^>-^~~ 


J4rr^ 


-ih 


5 


^^ 


^^ 


^>^l*r<  A^tJ<     /**«.     t^^>-         '*^        *^ 

_J J ^J U_ 


^ 


i^ 


vjl-    >|J^     [sf 


i*r 


i\if*.         :/^(u<.  CuiK    or£,e^      •**     ■*>© 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


/  e^4yi  &(>^C4>^  jUe^ict.^€^    lit 


r 


■/a^  AH.ft.  J*,   ff// 


i 


I'?  B/jfj  ;  h  j-l  .r-  ^ 


^ 


t 


^  U  **c .-  <*i: 


r 


ACa,  -»»  «.  ^< 


* 


j^  ir  ri  J   1  j^ 


^ 


^P 


^ 


« L 


^O    ^    '^^ 


iCfL  U<t4,-  4Cc 


kA. 


r 


^ 


*  c^ 


-L, 


T     ^f-'-  vn  r  \  ■'  J  \  r  ^^ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


nf^tttr^t^Me^itU^e-.  >R)^a  J 


f°  ^r 


^     ^ 


T 


ic*.       <«<«. 


'^  ^\\''in]\  ■'  JIM'  I J  I 


^^ 


t 


■^  ii.  ■^... 


'Jl*. 


^<a.      ^   '^       '?iA  ■^< 


J    JtJj? 


?   J.  I  p  j^4^^ 


r 


^        '*t<a. 


-if. 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


ftk.m.  f,  IS^ 


fe 


t^fjU^f/lj    lj^»/UJ 


r..  / 


<Mtcc  a-  «-r 


<u»c«.    A  —       e^ 


^    / 


4l^pl^J7l;-J-l  J  11^7-1  J  I  N^  UJ 


■f       ^JplK7  ri  J  u-^'^ 


CA.    A-        '-'*^  ' 


^  r-  ^ 


«.  A-    ty 


if      iJTJi^^j  l,t  rlj  1  t'^^ 


I 


f^oti-     ti-^C^-    ■h>t^--t^    '^  -^A    4U        'tfJL. 


is 


rrrrir  rr^ 


Icjo.'tt^*^, K"^,^C7a , -K^c ,  fZJft ,  ^« ,  4=^^  , 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


^^ 


m 


*< 


le.     TKCui       -oJ-hjL.  A- 


A.       ■»»-«■ 


-«j-3L«_ 


'I'       J.      J   1 J        \  J 


^^ 


^- 


w-«-      <<a* 


tJ'KlL.  fL, 


a.      '»ot 


tJ-KM. 


a 


s 


p 


j</j^     ^«^      <Ajl.  Kt 


<K       '*uk. 


■tJThJL. 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


/»i./vi.  i  =  ii>8 


TX 


f 


Vj    ^    ^    M^^J^iP 


■f^r    ^      M    ^      i,:i    lyj^.     l.j     J 


ii;^^  .f«- 


r- 


;»tc  .  ..  . 


Ac 


-U 


^^ 


J  1^     '    i    -4     1   J   I-' 


;4^.. 


6%;«-       A-  WO.       -Kjt  •d*^». 


y- 


£,- 


4    ^:  ^ 


^f= 


^^ 


^^f. 


■coe,     A.  -cja.      ne. 


T^ 


m 


1    I J  J 


-* — ^ 


1^    ^o  fcJt^     <)L         ua.      -*< 


r 


;«^ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


-f^ 


CLyO^Cu*^   O. 


f^'^ 


^ 


eXA/'  cjt.  -  e/i/'Vi 


«/l/-l 


r 


Im    JMi'W 


\  T^' 


J      J      Ij 


^*m.- X«/»mJ  So---  -h«vJ     5<^Xi'    'fiioMA- Scj*.  -  ^o 


^^' 

3^> 


'^       n-i  ^  1  J  UtJ    ^ 


^^ 


^j  U  ^'1^4^ 


1 


<j~e     c^e. 


hJL    Ko 


is 


j^j  l^^htj  Irj  1^  J  l^^l^  l^-j= 


£. 


<CiA    Kf-      -^ 


fc/e     -tje. 


i^    Ko      M,A    *^     *%'^    t-J^      *'*-      AJt-    *« 


j^  J  Ij^^  1^  U    Ij  J  1^^  J  1)^^ 


f^r 


we    *je      "*.« 


f-<-     ^ 


u<.        </>r<. 


;&.  ^e. 


J  J  i|;J  I'^i^  II J  J  ij^  JM  i.rj.  ii;^j^^ 


'M<X    ^L      jpj. 


tj^'  i^'e   «Lo 


Ma  -is-  -^ 


eye-    cJ 


e,    %M.    -Lo     ^o-   KIL  jUA  w-c 


^  ^r 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


,^^  a£^  A^ih- ^iral^^ey^  -   cJ  cr»^<0 


J^'l^^l.*     J      l^f 


^^ 


3 


^4= 


J       J|J 


i 


^S 


fe 


^^ 


^^=^ 


^^=i^ 


i 


j.iu;u  M  r-j  J  i^j  r,^i  jij 


Ckift-   5*1/*       '^«.-?»ML-J^     ^oi.-'^t       €fl.^e-» 


>«*\ 


^ 


^£it    *««.    Cex-  ii*>^  d«^»n\  *•<  »>fa  CA-  -»«•<_/. 


"-^ 


11  l-i^i       1  ii>    J  -t  fl-J.  r^ 


^^ 


</«- 


■t^t.       -?*«A     i^t    -»!»*  'Xi*. 


*JC 


,-3^^       r^        A.^     ^^ 


rtir-  c^ 


•Cet/k 


^ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


"hi 


PLAINS   INDIANS    TITLE-PAGE 

The  buffalo  is  paiflted  fay  Hiamovi  (High  Chief )<  of  the  Cheyenne 
trifae.     The  fettffalo  is  chosen  to  represent  the  Plains  people,  to 
whose  life  in  former  days  it  was  all  important. 
The  lettering  is  by  Ifinook  Hahiwi  Kilinaka  (Angel  De  Cora). 
The  letters  are  formed  of  the  horns  of  the  buffalo. 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


ORGANIZATIONS  OF  THE  PLAINS  INDIANS' 


MONG  the  Indians  of  the  plains  there  are  societies  to 

A  which  the  men  of  the  tribe  belong  according  to  age  or 
achievement.  These  societies  are  religious,  military,  or 
social,  and  some  are  very  old,  while  others  are  modfern. 
The  military  organizations  are  old,  and  are  commonly  called  warrior 
societies.  In  old  times  the  different  societies  had  their  several 
peculiar  functions  in  warfare,  in  the  hunt,  and  in  camp  discipline. 
Where  the  organizations  are  regulated  by  age,  a  man  passes  through 
successive  societies  and  graduates  from  the  lower  to  the  higher. 

Among  some  tribes  the  highest  is  the  Chiefs'  Society,  composed 
entirely  of  chiefs ;  the  Fox  Men  are  usually  young,  while  the  Dog 
Soldiers  are  older  warriors  of  high  standing. 

Again,  a  society  may  have  for  the  nucleus  of  its  being  a  dream 
or  supernatural  revelation  common  to  all  its  members;  or  it  may 
be  the  guardian  of  some  wisdom  revealed  in  vision  by  a  spirit — 
often  the  emblematic  spirit-animal.^  Thus  an  organization  may 
bear  the  name  of  some  animal  whose  virtue  or  psychic  power  it 
incorporates. 

Each  society  has  its  own  songs  and  ceremonies,  and  in  some 
cases  its  members  carry  the  peculiar  staff  or  badge  of  office  belong- 
ing to  the  society,  such  as  a  lance,  a  club,  or  a  crook, 

'  The  Plains  Indians  are   those  who  live  between   the  Mississippi  River   and    the  Rocky 
Mountains,  and  who  used  to  hunt  the  buffalo  in  days  gone  by. 

'  See  "  Song^  of  the  Dakotas,"  page  60,  and  "  Introdactioa  to  Pawnee  Songs,"  page  96. 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'    BOOK 


THE  HOLY  MAN,  OR  **  MEDICINE-MAN " 


HE  English  word  "medicine"  has  come  to  be  applied  to 
what  the  Dakota  Indian  calls  Tvakan,  Wakan  means 
both  mystery  and  holiness,  and  is  ttsed  by  the  Indian 
to  designate  all  that  is  sacred,  mysterious,  spiritual,  or 
swpematural. 

The  Supreme  Being  of  the  Dakotas  is  called  Wakan-Tanka.  In 
English  this  name  is  commonly  rendered  "The  Great  Spirit,"  bat 
it  would  be  translated  more  correctly  as  "The  Great  Holy-Mys- 
tery." 

Wakan-Tanka  is  an  omniscient  force.  This  conception  of  an 
impersonal,  spirittial,  and  life-giving  power  is  held  by  many  Indian 
tribes  as  well  as  by  the  Dakotas,  and  would  seem  in  no  way  to  be  a 
product  of  early  missionary  teaching,  but  rather  an  intense  and 
integral  part  of  the  Indian's  nature.  Besides  the  Great  Mystery, 
the  Indians  recognize  lesser  spiritual  beings  who  are  personifications 
of  certain  elements  in  nature,  in  animals,  and  in  man ;  but  these, 
like  all  else,  owe  their  existence  and  their  power  to  the  Supreme  One. 

The  Wicasa-Wakan,  Holy  Men,  or  Men  of  Mystery,  are  the 
prophets,  soothsayers,  moral  leaders,  and  healers  of  the  tribe.  On 
account  of  their  service  as  healers  they  were  called  by  the  early 
French  traders  medecinSt  or  doctors,  and  the  word  "medecin"  came  to 
be  applied  to  everything  pertaining  to  the  Holy  Man  and  to  all  that 
is  sacred  or  supernatural  to  the  Indian.  Anglicized,  the  word  be- 
came medicine,  and  thus  the  Holy  Man  is  known  everywhere  in 
English  as  the  "  Medicine-Man." '  Catlin  says,  "  The  Indians  do  not 
use  the  word  medicine,  however,  but  in  each  tribe  they  have  a  word 
of  their  own  construction,  synonymous  with  mystery  or  mystery- 
men." 

Healing  plants  and  herbs,  manipulation,  and  the  sweat-bath  are 
curative  agents  long  understood  by  the  Indian.     In  case  of  wound, 

'  A  remarkable  exposition  of  the  true  character  of  the  medicine-man  is  given  in  an  address 
fey  Mr.  Francis  La  Flesche,  entitled  "  Who  was  the  Medicine-Man?"  printed  in  the  Thirty-second 
Annual  Report  of  the  Fairmount  Park  Art  Association,  Philadelphia,  1904. 

[321 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


PLAINS    INDIANS 

the  poison  is  first  sucked  oat  by  the  medicine-man  and  then  healing 
drugs  are  applied.  The  sweat-bath  is  a  means  of  purification  and 
is  connected  with  the  Indian's  religion,  having  its  place  in  many 
ceremonies. 

Broadly  speaking,  the  character  and  functions  of  the  Holy  Man 
are  the  same  in  most  Indian  tribes*  The  Indian  conception  of  heal- 
ing is  through  divine  power;  and  be  the  healing  agent  some  super- 
natural charm,  or  be  it  medicine  in  the  ordinary  sense  of  the  word, 
the  act  of  cure  is  usually  accomplished  amid  song,  ceremony,  and 
prayer. 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


\. 


DAKOTA    TITLE-PAGE 

,       \  .|\^  ..-v      ^  ... 

A   Dakota    brave    and   Medicine  -  Mao,   painted   by    a    Dakota 
Indian,  Tatanka-Ptecila  (Short  Ball).     The    warrior   wears    the 
homed  head-dress  emblematic  of  divine  power,  the  insignia  of 
the  Holy  Man,  or  Mail  of  Medi<:ine. 
The  lettering  is  by  Hinook  Mahiwi  Kilinaka  (Angel  De  Cora). 


'•    %.^  w 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE   DAKOTAS 


W 


ITH  the  possible  exception  of  the  Ojibwas,  the  Dakotas 
(or  Sioax)  are  the  most  numerous  of  any  Indian  tribe 
within  the  United  States.  The  name  Sioux  is  the  ending 
of  the  word  Nadcnvessioux,  said  to  be,  in  its  original  form, 
an  Algonquian  word  signifying  "  snakes" — that  is,  enemies — ^but 
the  Sioux  call  themselves  **  Dakota,"  or  **  Lakota,"  a  name  mean- 
ing "allied,"  or  "many  in  one."  Although  the  Dakotas  have  come 
to  be  associated  almost  exclusively  with  the  West,  there  is  a  theory 
to  the  effect  that  their  home  was  originally  east  of  the  Alleghanies. 
When  first  known  to  the  French,  the  main  body  of  the  Dakota 
nation  had  already  migrated  to  the  most  westerly  regions  of  the 
Great  Lakes,  in  northwestern  Wisconsin,  eastern  Minnesota,  and 
about  the  headwaters  of  the  Mississippi.  From  this  country  they 
were  driven  by  the  French  and  the  Ojibwas,  who  possessed  fire-arms, 
of  which  the  Dakotas  were  at  that  time  ignorant.  They  then  es- 
tablished themselves  in  the  Black  Hills  and  Platte  country.  In 
the  course  of  their  migrations  they  lost   entirely  the  agricultural 

NOTE  FOR   PRONUNCIATION  OF  DAKOTA  TEXT 
(Adapted  from  Riggs's  Dakota-English  Dictionary) 

The  five  vowels  have  each  one  tmiform  sound — the  Continental. 
The  following  consonants  are  peculiar  to  the  Dakota  language : 
c  is  an  aspirate  with  the  sound  of  English  ch,  as  in  chin. 

c  is  an  emphatic  "  c,"  pronounced  like  a  vigorous  "  c  "  and  followed  by  sudden 
expulsion  of  the  breath. 

g  is  a  deep  sonant  guttural  like  Arabic  ghain, 

h  is  a  strong  surd  guttural  like  Arabic  kha, 

n  in  italic  has  the  nasal  sound  of  "  n  "  in  the  French  word  bon. 

q  represents  a  sound  bearing  the  same  relation  to  "  k ' 

s  has  the  sound  of  sh,  as  in  shine. 

z  has  the  value  of  "  s  "  in  pleasure. 

[37] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'    BOOK 

habits  that  had  characterized  them  in  their  more  easterly  homes, 
and  with  the  exception  of  the  Eastern  and  Santee  branches,  who 
remained  sedentary  and  agricaltttral,  the  tribe,  with  the  acquisition 
of  the  horse,  adopted  the  roving  life  of  the  Plains  hunters. 

About  the  year  1875,  when  the  Dakota  and  Ojibwa  struggle 
came  to  a  close,  the  Dakotas  were  in  undisputed  possession  of  terri- 
tory that  stretched  from  Devil's  Lake  to  Sioux  City,  and  from 
the  east  bank  of  the  Mississippi  River  almost  to  the  Rocky  Mountains. 
Little  by  little  these  Indians  were  forced  to  yield  to  the  United 
States  government  one  tract  after  another  of  this  country.  Yet  in 
the  face  of  suffering,  and,  it  must  be  admitted,  of  great  provocation 
to  violence,  the  Dakotas  have  shown  themselves  capable  of  superb 
loyalty,  truth,  and  heroism.  When  forced  to  fight  in  defence  of 
their  hunting-grounds,  the  warriors  proved  themselves  brave  and 
skilful  in  battle;  while  the  warlike  ability  of  their  chiefs  won  the 
admiration  of  those  who  fought  against  them.  Nor  can  the  mas- 
sacres and  depredations  perpetrated  by  minorities  of  the  tribe 
counterbalance  the  uprightness  of  the  majority  and  the  honor  of 
the  leaders. 

The  Dakota  songs  in  this  book  were  contributed  by  members 
of  the  Ogallalla  and  Brule  bands,  belonging  to  the  Teton  branch  of 
the  Dakota  family,  and  now  living  in  the  reservations  of  Pine  Ridge 
and  Rosebud,  South  Dakota. 


A  HOLY  STORY 

Told  by  Chief  Haza  Blaska  (Fiat-Iron,  meaning  a  piece  of  flat  iron).     Maza  Blasfca  is  one  of 
the  oldest  living  chiefs  of  the'  Ogallalla  band 


F 


ROM  Wakan-Tanka,  the  Great  Mystery,  comes  all  power. 
It  is  from  Waka,n^a.nka.  that  the  Holy  Man  has  wisdom 
and  the  power  to  heal  and  to  make  holy  charms.  Man 
knows  that  all  healing  plants  are  given  by  Wakan-Tanka; 
therefore  are  they  holy.  So  too  is  the  buffalo  holy,  because  it  is  the 
gift  of  Wakan-Tanka.  The  Great  Mystery  gave  to  men  all  things 
for  their  food,  their  clothing,  and  their  welfare.  And  to  man  he  gave 
also  the  knowledge  how  to  use  these  gifts— how  to  find  the  holy  heal- 

138] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


DAKOTAS 

ing  plants,  how  to  hunt  and  surround  the  buffalo,  how  to  know 
wisdom.    For  all  comes  from  Wakan-Tanka — all. 

To  the  Holy  Man  comes  in  youth  the  knowledge  that  he  will  be 
holy*  The  Great  Mystery  makes  him  to  know  this.  Sometimes  it  / , 
is  the  Spirits  who  tell  him.  The  Spirits  come  not  in  sleep  always,  (/ 
but  also  when  man  is  awake.  When  a  Spirit  comes  it  would  seem  as 
though  a  man  stood  there,  but  when  this  man  has  spoken  and  goes 
forth  again,  none  may  see  whither  he  goes.  Thus  the  Spirits.  With 
the  Spirits  the  Holy  Man  may  commune  always,  and  they  teach  him 
holy  things. 

The  Holy  Man  goes  apart  to  a  lone  tipi  and  fasts  and  prays. 
Or  he  goes  into  the  hills  in  solitude.  When  he  returns  to  men,  he 
teaches  them  and  tells  them  what  the  Great  Mystery  has  bidden 
him  to  ten.  He  counsels,  he  heals,  and  he  makes  holy  charms  to 
protect  the  people  from  all  evil.  Great  is  his  power  and  greatly  is 
he  revered;  his  place  in  the  tipi  is  an  honored  one. 

Now  I  will  tell  the  story  of  how  a  Holy  Man,  the  greatest  in  the 
tribe,  made  mystery-power  in  the  olden  days. 

The  people  were  encamped  in  a  circle'  with  the  opening  towards 
the  east.  In  the  middle  of  the  circle  they  set  up  a  great  tipi' 
made  of  several  tipis  put  together.  On  one  side  of  the  tipi  sat 
the  women,  on  the  other  side  the  men.  And  they  made  ready  a 
great  feast.  Beyond  the  central  fire,  opposite  the  doorway,  the 
Holy  Man  made  mystery.  With  a  stick  like  an  arrow  he  made  a 
line  of  holes  in  the  ground  a  fingcr's-Iength  deep.  Then  he  touched 
the* ground'  in  front  of  all  the  people  and  came  back  to  the  door- 

'  From  the  writings  of  Hr.  Francis  La  Flesche  we  learn  that  with  the  Omaha  tribe  the  tribal 
circle  typified  the  cosmos,  the  dwelling-place  of  the  Great  Spirit.  The  circle  was  divided  in  half, 
one  section  representing  the  heavens,  the  other  the  earth-a  symbolic  division  embodying  the 
idea  that  the  Great  Spirit  pervades  the  heavens  and  the  earth.  Mr.  La  Flesche  says,  further, 
"  Each  of  the  two  great  divisions  of  the  tribe  had  its  particular  symbol,  representing  a  cosmic 
force,  or  one  of  the  various  forms  of  life  on  the  earth.  The  name  of  the  clan,  and  the  personal 
names  of  its  members,  all  have  reference  to  its  symbol.  The  personal  name  was  ceremoniaUy 
bestowed  upon  the  child;  so  within  the  tribe  we  have  clan  names  that  refer  to  the  sun,  moon, 
stars,  clouds,  rain,  and  wind;  the  earth,  hills,  lakes,  rivers,  and  all  animals  from  b<rds  to  msects. 
In  this  manner  the  Indian  recognized  that  all  things  were  created  by  the  Great  Spmt. 

'  Tipi  is  the  Dakota  word  for  the  native  dwelling  of  the  Plains  Indians-a  conical  tent,  formerly 
made  of  boffalo-hide.  and  frequently  ornamented  and  painted  with  symbols. 

'  An  act  of  consecration. 

[39] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE   INDIANS'    BOOK 

way  and  sat  down.  And  he  bade  the  people  hasten  to  prepare 
the  mystery.  So  they  took  clay  and  filled  the  holes  with  it  and 
covered  the  holes  with  earth.  When  they  had  done  this  the  Holy 
Man  touched  the  ground.  Then  he  came  back  to  the  doorway  and 
was  about  to  sing.  And  the  people  watched  the  ground  where  the 
clay  was  buried,  and  behold,  young  plants  began  to  sprout.  Then, 
before  he  sang,  the  Holy  Man  said : 

"  Far  to  the  west. 
Far  by  the  sky 
Stands  a  blue'  Elk. 
That  Elk  standing  yonder 
Watches  o'er  all  the  females 
On  the  earth. 

"Far  to  the  east,  * 
Far  by  the  sky 
Stands  a  blue  Elk. 
That  Elk  standing  yonder 
Watches  o'er  all  the  females 
On  the  earth."  2 

Thus  he  spoke;  then  he  said,  "Now  I  will  sing,"  and  beating  on  his 
drum  he  sang  a  holy  song.  When  he  had  sung  he  badje  the  people 
pull  up  the  sprouts,  and  they  did  so;  one  by  one  they  pulled  them 
up.  And  behold,  the  roots  were  holy  mystery-power.  And  the 
people  took  the  mystery-power  and  laid  it  on  sprigs  of  sage,  for  sage 
is  holy  because  it  will  heal.  This  mystery  would  protect  the  warriors 
in  war.  No  arrow  could  pierce  them,  no  arrow  could  strike  th^m, 
unharmed  would  they  pass  through  every  danger. 

So  have  I  told  of  how  a  Holy  Man  made  mystery  to  help  the 
people.  Now  may  Wakan-Tanka  help  me,  because  I  have  spoken 
truly  of  how  Wakan-Tanka  bade  the  Indians  to  do  in  the  olden 
times. 

'  The  Daiotas  call  "  tlae  "  what  the  white  man  calls  gray. 

'  The  Elk  is  said  to  have  power  to  guard  females.     Thus  the  Holy  Man  has  invoked  the  power 
of  the  Elk  to  watch  over  the  women,  and  has  made  mystery-power  to  help  tfie  men  in  battle. 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


DAKOT^S 
THE  HISTORY   OF   THE   SPIRIT-DANCE' 


■  I  10  understand  the  so-called  "Ghost-Dance  Movement" 

T  among  the  Indians,  the  white  reader  will  find  it  neces- 
sary to  understand  the  causes  that  inspired^  it. 
'1  It  is  hard  for  the  white  man  to  realize  the  suffering 
of  the  red  man  in  the  first  sharp  crisis  of  adjustment  to  the  new 
life.  The  span  of  one  generation  brought  to  the  Indian  of  the 
plains  change  such  as  the  white  man  experienced  only  through 
long  centuries  of  evolution — the  change  from  the  life  of  primitive 
man  to  that  of  civilization.  Nor  did  the  white  man  in  his  wholesale 
slaughter  of  the  buffalo  for  hides  realize,  perhaps,  what  the  ex- 
tinction of  the  animal  would  mean  to  the  people  of  the  prairies,  to 
whom  the  buffalo  supplied  nearly  every  physical  want — food,  cloth- 
ing, and  even  lodging,  for  of  buffalo-hides  were  made  the  portable 
skin  lodges  of  the  prairie  tribes.  • 

In  the  white  man's  invasion  of  the  plains  and  in  the  advent  of 
the  railroad,  the  red  man  saw  his  own  doom.  All  effort  of  the 
Indian  to  stem  the  stream  of  settlement  pouring  through  his  terri- 
tory was  as  a  straw  against  the  tide.  The  railroad  brought  more 
white  men;  the  buffalo  vanished,  and  with  it  passed  forever  from 
the  Indian  the  old  life — the  only  life  he  had  ever  known. 

The  change  was  swift  and  cruel.  **  The  earth  is  our  mother,'* 
had  declared  the  Indian.  But  now  no  longer  was  the  Indian  the 
free  child  of  the  prairie.  Confined  in  reservations  and  fed  on  ra- 
tions, or  transported  to  another  clime  where  he  fevered  and  died; 
swept  by  disease,  bewildered  amid  conflicting  change,  crushed  in 
spirit  and  broken  of  heart,  the  Plains  Indian  at  this  period  presents 
to  the  calm  eye  of  history  a  tragic  picture  of  the  workings  of  a 
seemingly  relentless  destiny. 

In  about  the  year  1888,  perhaps  at  a  time  when,  to  the  prairie 
tribes,  their  utter  subjugation  had  become  a  vivid  and  despairing 

>  A  very  fall  and  valaable  study  of  the  religion  of  the  Ghost-Dance,  as  it  is  usually  called, 
has  been  made  by  Mr.  James  Mooney,  of  the  Bureau  of  American  Ethnology,  Washington,  D.  C 
The  work  is  contained  in  the  fourteenth  annual  report  of  the  bureau. 

L4J] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INPIANS'   BOOK 

trtrth,  there  arose  in  western  Nevada  an  Indian  prophet.  He  was 
a  simple  Paittte,  and  his  teachings  were  simple.  He  announced  that 
he  had  been  with  God,  of  God  was  his  wisdom,  and  from  God  were 
the  messages  he  brought.  First,  there  should  be  no  fighting;  all 
men  should  love  one  another.  A  great  change  was  to  come  over 
the  earth — a  day  when  there  would  be  no  misery  and  no  sickness. 
The  dead  would  return  from  the  spirit-world,  and  all  Indians  would 
be  united  in  deathless  happiness  upon  a  rejuvenated  earth.  The 
Indians  should  make  themselves  worthy  of  the  change.  **  Harm 
no  man,  do  right  always,*'  taught  the  prophet.  As  a  holy  rite,  all 
people  should  dance  a  holy  dance  which  the  prophet  gave  to  his 
followers.  The  Indians  should  be  honest  and  industrious,  should 
quietly  do  their  work  and  remain  at  peace  with  the  whites.  For  by 
God  alone  would  be  wrought  the  change,  and  earthquakes  would 
herald  its  approach.     It  was  soon  to  come,  even  with  the  spring. 

"Word  flashed  from  tribe  to  tribe — **  A  savior  has  arisen  for  the 
Indians."  Delegates  from  different  tribes  were  sent  to  the  prophet 
and  returned  convinced.  Then  followed  unconscious  distortions 
of  the  messages.  Some  Indians,  influenced  by  missionary  teachings, 
cried:  **  Jesus  is  on  earth.  He  came  once  long  ago  beyond  the 
waters,  and  the  white  people  kifled  him.  Now  he  is  come  to  the 
Indians,  who  never  did  him  harm."  The  Plains  Indians  believed 
that  the  race  would  be  reinforced  by  the  spirits  of  the  dead,  that 
the  old  days  would  come  agaia,  the  buffalo  return,  the  white  man 
be  swept  back  across  the  sea  or  buried  beneath  the  new  earth  which 
would  cover  the  Jand.  In  the  country  of  their  fathers  again  would 
the  Indians  be  powerful  and  free.  Men  wise  and  less  despairing 
than  these  hopeless  Indians  have  known  religious  revivals  scarcely 
less  fanatic. 

The  new  religion  developed  into  an  answer  to  the  longing  of 
the  Indian's  heart.  Some  tribes  laid  aside  fire-arms  and  every- 
thing of  metal,  that  they  might  be  as  they  were  before  the  coming 
of  the  white  man.  Many  were  drawn  to  the  new  faith  by  the  word 
that  those  who  danced  in  the  holy  dance  "  died  "  (fell  in  a  trance) 
and  what  to  the  spirit-world,  where  they  saw  their  dead  loved  ones. 
Any  one  familiar  with  the  inner  life  of  the  Indians  knows  that,  to 
this  people,  the  trance  condition  is  not  uncommon. 

[42] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


DAKOTAS 

The  dancers  moved  in  a  circle,  with  clasped  hands  and  slow, 
dragging  step,  singing  with  rhythmic  swing  the  songs  of  the  Spirit- 
Dance.  Round  and  round  went  the  circle,  while  every  now  and 
then  a  dancer  staggered  from  the  ring  and  fell  swooning  in  a  trance. 
On  awakening,  the  **  dreamer  "  described  his  vision  of  the  spirit- 
world.  Then  the  experience  of  the  trance  was  embodied  in  a  spon- 
taneous song,  to  be  thereafter  used  in  the  dance.  The  passionate 
attachment  of  Indians  to  their  children  and  to  chosen  friends  made 
this  religion,  with  its  hope  and  its  communion  with  the  spirit-world, 
seize  upon  the  people  with  twofold  intensity.  The  new  faith  spread 
from  tribe  to  tribe  like  prairie-fire.  It  was  as  though  a  sudden 
breath  of  hope  had  blown  into  one  last  flame  the  dying  embers  of 
the  native  spirit.  The  flame  flared  for  a  moment  on  the  Indian's 
night,  then  sank  with  the  hideous  tragedy,  the  battle  at  '*  "Wounded 
Knee"  in  South  Dakota. 

News  that  the  Indians  were  meeting  and  dancing  spread  alarm 
among  the  whites.  Those  who  knew  the  Indians  vainly  counselled, 
"  This  is  a  religious  movement;  do  not  oppose  it  and  it  will  pass." 
Commands  to  the  Indians  to  cease  dancing  met  with  the  response: 
"  We  harm  no  one.  The  Father  has  bidden  us  to  dance.  We 
will  defend  our  religion,  if  need  be,  with  our  lives." 

The  agent  in  charge  of  the  Dakota  Indians  at  Pine  Ridge  was 
unable  to  check  the  dance  among  his  people.  Thoroughly  fright- 
ened, he  telegraphed  for  troops.  At  sight  of  the  soldiers,  the  war- 
like Dakotas  were  in  arms.  "  We  will  die,  but  we  will  not  give  up 
our  religion,"  they  cried.  Broken  promises  of  the  government,  in- 
sufficient rations,  ravages  of  disease,  had  rendered  these  Indians 
wellnigh  desperate.  An  attempt  to  disarm  them  in  the  effort  to 
bring  them  amicably  to  the  agency  was  misunderstood  by  the 
Indians,  who  feared  massacre.  An  Indian  fired  his  rifle.  The 
shot  was  answered  by  a  volley  from  the  troops.  Machine  guns  at 
close  range  mowed  down  the  entire  camp,  blowing  the  victims 
to  pieces.  Wellnigh  thre?  hundred  Dakotas,  men,  women,  and 
children,  fell  in  what  is  now  called  the  massacre  of  Wounded  Knee. 
Brave  Roman  Catholic  missionaries  succored  the  few  wounded 
Indians  who  escaped.  Throughout  the  trouble,  their  loyalty  to 
their  duty  met  with  answering  loyalty  from  the  Indians.    The 

[43] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'   BOOK 

tonit  frozen  bodies  of  the  dead  were  thrown  by  the  whites  into 
an  open  trench  one  tipon  ajiother.  Around  the  trench  the  Indians 
have  since  placed  posts  decorated  with  red  paint,  the  holy  emblem 
of  the  Spirit-Dance.  There  is  probably  throaghotit  the  cotmtry 
no  more  pathetic  bttrial-ground.  All  silently  it  tells  of  the  straggle 
of  a  desperate  people. 

Thus  perished  among  the  Dakota  Indians  the  so-called  **  Ghost- 
Dance  Movement."  With  some  other  tribes  the  dance  is  stifl  con- 
tinued, but  not  with  the  old  significance.  The  religion  of  which 
the  dance  is  the  embodiment  has  undergone  this  change — the  hope 
contained  in  it  is  now  a  spiritual  one.  The  old  days  never  came 
again,  but  the  prophet's  moral  teachfaigs  still  endure.  Since  the 
message  of  the  Paiute,  all  thought  of  strife  has  ceased. 

May  another  prophet  tell  a  future  of  happy  adjustment  to  the 
new  life !  For  with  the  slaughtered  Indians  in  the  trench  at  "Wound- 
ed Knee  lies  buried  the  hope  of  the  people  of  the  plains  for  the 
happiness  of  vanished  days. 

Short  Bull  (Tatanka-Ptecila),  a  Dakota  medicine-man,  had  been 
a  leader  in  the  new  religion.  He  was  revered  among  his  people  as  a 
great  medicine-man,  a  prophet,  and  a  worker  of  miracles.  He  was 
one  of  those  who  first  sought  "  the  Father,"  as  the  Indians  called 
the  Paiute  prophet.  He  had  brought  back  to  his  people  the  messages 
and  the  dance,  and  had  given  them  many  songs.  He  had  made  the 
charmed  "  ghost-shirts  "  which  should  render  the  Indians  invul- 
nerable to  the  white  man's  bullet.  He  had  taught,  had  prophesied, 
had  led. 

Short  Bull  is  low  of  stature  (hence  his  name,  "  Short-Buffalo- 
BuII "),  but  he  bears  himself  with  the  dignity  of  the  Indian  of  the 
past  generation.  His  face  is  full  of  distinction,  diplomacy,  and 
power;  but  it  is  marked  with  wistful  dreaminess.  It  is  the  face 
of  the  seer— visionary,  inteflectual,  and  idealistic.  Most  striking 
of  all  is  the  expression  of  profound  sadness. 

Short  Bull  saw  the  old  life  pass,  he  saw  the  new  hope  killed  at  a 
blow.     The  noble  sorrow  of  his  race  is  graven  on  his  face. 

From  Short  Bull's  own  lips  The  Indians'  Book  receives  the  story 
of  his  visit  to  "  the  Father  "  and  his  message  to  his  people. 

[44] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Tatanfca-Ptecila  (Short  Ball) 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


DAKOTAS 


SHORT   BULL'S   NARRATIVE 

Note. — ^The  white  reader  shoold  bear  in  mind  that  this  is  the  narrative  of  a 
seer.  As  is  osaal  with  Indians,  the  language  is  often  figarative.  In  the  English 
rendering,  the  attempt  has  been  made  to  reflect  the  rhythmic  dignity  and  simplicity 
of  the  Dakota.  The  narrated  visit  to  the  spirit-camp  was  probably  a  vision,  or 
was  made  in  a  trance.  To  the  Indian,  sach  a  vision  is  as  real  as  a  waking  event. 
The  visit  to  the  other  camp  was  a  reality.  The  Paiate  Indians  wear  blankets  or 
robes  of  rabbit-skin.  He  who  is  referred  to  as  "  this  one  of  the  rabbit-robe  "  is 
the  prophet,  known  to  the  people  as  "  the  Father."  "  The  land  where  the  sun  sets  " 
is  Nevada,  the  home  of  the  prophet.  "  Rosebud "  is  an  Indian  reservation  in 
South  Dakota. 


w 


HO  would  have  thought  that  danckig  could  make  such 
trouble?  We  had  no  wish  to  make  trouble,  nor  did  we 
cause  it  of  ourselves.  There  was  trouble,  but  it  was 
not  of  my  making.  We  had  no  thought  of  fighting; 
if  we  had  meant  to  fight,  would  we  not  have  carried  arms?  We 
went  unarmed  to  the  dance.  How  could  we  have  held  weapons  ? 
For  thus  we  danced,  in  a  circle,  hand  in  hand,  each  man's  fingers 
linked  in  those  of  his  neighbor. 

Who  would  have  thought  that  dancing  could  make  such  trouble  ? 
For  the  message  that  I  brought  was  peace.  And  the  message  was 
given  by  the  Father  to  all  the  tribes.    Thus  it  happened: 

I  journeyed  to  the  land  where  the  sun  sets,  and  then  I  went 
to  the  spirit-land,  where  I  saw  the  spirit-encampment.  I  drew 
near  and  stood  outside  a  spirit-tipi.  A  spirit-man  came  out  and 
stood  beside  me.    He  spoke  to  me  and  said : 

**  Behold,  I  give  you  something  holy!"  Then  he  said,  "  Whence 
come  you  ?" 

And  I  answered,  "  I  come  from  Rosebud." 

Then  said  the  spirit-man,  **  Go  we  together  in  a  cloud,  upward, 
to  the  Father." 

So  we  rose  in  a  cloud  to  where  were  other  camps,  and  there  we 
saw  those  who  wear  the  blanket  of  rabbit-skin.  As  we  passed 
through  the  camp  of  these,  there  came  towards  us  a  man  and  his 
wife.    Said  this  one  of  the  rabbit-robe: 

[45] 

Digitized  by  microsoft® 


THE   INDIANS'   BOOK 

"  I  wo«Id  speak  with  yoti  now.  Behold,  I  tell  you  something 
for  yoo  to  tell  to  all  the  people !  Give  this  dance  to  all  the  different 
tribes  of  Indians.  White  people  and  Indians  shall  all  dance  to- 
gether. Bot  first  they  shall  sing.  There  shall  be  no  more  fighting. 
No  man  shall  kill  another.  If  any  man  should  be  killed  it  would  be 
a  grievous  thing.  No  man  shall  lie.  Love  one  another.  Help  one 
another.  Revile  not  one  another.  Hear  me,  for  I  will  give  you 
water  to  drink.  Thus  I  tell  you,  this  is  why  I  have  called  you. 
My  meaning,  have  you  understood  it  ?" 

Thus  spoke  he  of  the  rabbit-blanket,  and  holy  red  paint  he  gave 
to  me.  In  the  spirit-camp  I  had  seen  those  who  had  died,  and 
when  I  came  homeward  there  came  with  me  two  spirit-companions, 
invisible  to  all  but  me.  These  journeyed  with  me  and  stayed 
ever  with  me.     I  heard  their  counsel. 

Alone  in  my  tipi  I  dreamed,  and  saw  visions,  and  communed 
with  the  spirits.  And  I  went  forth  and  taught  the  people  and  told 
them  of  the  Father's  word  and  of  the  help  that  should  come  to  the 
Indians.  There  were  others  who  taught  as  well  as  I.  The  Father 
had  commanded  all  the  world  to  dance,  and  we  gave  the  dance  to 
the  people  as  we  had  been  bidden.  When  they  danced  they  fell 
dead  and  went  to  the  spirit-camp  and  saw  those  who  had  died,  those 
whom  they  loved  —  their  fathers,  their  mothers,  and  their  little 
children.  Then  came  trouble.  Yet  in  our  dance  we  harmed  no 
one,  nor  meant  we  ill  to  any  man.  As  the  Father  had  commanded, 
so  did  we. 

It  is  true,  all  men  should  love  one  another.  It  is  true,  all  men 
should  live  as  brothers.  Is  it  we  who  do  not  thus  ?  What  others 
demand  of  us,  should  they  not  themselves  give?  Is  it  just  to  ex- 
pect one  friend  to  give  all  the  friendship?  We  are  glad  to  live 
with  white  men  as  brothers.  But  we  ask  that  they  expect  not  the 
brotherhood  and  the  love  to  come  from  the  Indian  alone. 

In  this  world  the  Great  Father  has  given  to  the  white  man 
everything  and  to  the  Indian  nothing.  But  it  will  not  always 
be  thus.  In  another  world  the  Indian  shafl  be  as  the  white  man 
and  the  white  man  as  the  Indian.  To  the  Indian  will  be  given  wis- 
dom and  power,  and  the  white  man  shafl  be  helpless  and  unknowing 
with  only  the  bow  and  arrow.     For  ere  long  this  world  wifl  be  con- 

Digitized  by  Mivrosoft® 


DAKOTAS 

sumed  in  flame  and  pass  away.    Then,  in  the  life  after  this,  to  the 
Indian  shall  all  be  given. 

With  clasped  hands  stood  the  Indian  narrator  and  the  white 
recorder,  and  then  the  white  friend  spoke: 

*'  I  leave  yott  with  this  word:  Be  of  good  heart.  Even  though 
the  old  days  are  gone,  never  to  come  again,  still  be  of  good  heart. 
A  better  day  will  dawn  for  yoor  people.  The  old  days  will  never 
be  again,  even  as  a  man  will  never  again  be  a  child.  Those  days 
were  the  happy  childhood  of  yotfr  race.  Manhood  brings  sorrow 
and  sorrow  wisdom.  Wise  through  sorrow  will  be  yo«r  people, 
and  the  days  of  fttll  maturity  will  be  warm  with  sunshine.  You 
journeyed  to  the  west  for  tidings  of  hope.  You  sought  the  Father 
in  the  land  of  the  sinking  sun.  The  hope  you  brought  of  the  old 
life  was  not  as  the  dawn-light,  but  as  the  after-glow  of  sunset 
skies.  Now  look  for  the  new  day.  In  the  land  where  the  sun  rises 
the  Indians  have  friends.  Not  westward,  but  eastward  seek  the 
coming  of  the  light." 

May  The  Indians'  Book  echo  to  every  Indian  the  message,  "  Look 
for  the  new  day  V* 

WANAGI  WACIPI   OLOWAiV 

Songs  of  the  Spirit-Dance  (Ghost-Dance  Songs) 
Sung  and  tolcf  by  Tatanfca-Ptecila  (Short  Boll) 


WANAGI  VACIPI  OLO-WAJV  SONG  OF  THE  SPIRIT-DANCE 

Ateyapi  kin  Thus  the  Father  saith, 

Haka  owancaya  Lo,  he  now  commandeth 

Lowan  nisipe-Io  All  on  earth  to  sing, 
Heya-po,  To  sing  now. 

Heya-po,  Thtis  he  hath  spoken, 

Oyakapo — he  I  Thus  he  hath  spoken. 

Oyakapo— he  I  Tell  afar  his  message, 

Tell  afar  his  message ! 
[47] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'   BOOK 


II 


In  this  song  the  dancer  calls  to  the  dead  mother  to  come  back, 
for  the  little  brother  is  always  crying,  always  crying.  The  song 
was  much  sung  in  the  time  of  the  Spirit-Dance.  Many  of  the  songs 
of  the  Spirit-Dance  end  with  the  words,  "  Saith  the  Father,"  like 
a  final  benediction. 


WANAGI  WACIPI  OLOWAJV 

Ina,  hekuye, 

Ina,  hekaye, 

Misunkala  ceya-ya  omanf, 

Misunkala  ceya-ya  omani 

Ina,  hekuye, 

Ina,  hekfiye! 

Ate  heye-Io, 

Ate  heye-Io  I 


SONG  OF  THE  SPIRIT-DANCE 

Mother,  oh  come  back, 
Mother,  oh  come  back. 
Little  brother  calls  as  he  seeks 

thee,  weeping, 
Little  brother  calls  as  he  seeks 

thee,  weeping. 
Mother,  oh  come  back, 
Mother,  oh  come  back  1 
Saith  the  Father, 
Saith  the  Father. 


Ill 

This  song  tells  how  the  dancer  has  been,  in  trance,  to  the.  spirit- 
world,  and  there  has  feasted  with  his  friends  «pon  the  old-time 
Indian  dish  of  pemmican,  made  of  dried  b«ffaIo-meat,  poonded 
fine,  with  tallow,  wild-cherries,  and  spices. 


WANAGI  WACIPI  OLOWAA? 

He,  he,  wanna  wawate, 
He,  he,  wanna  wawate ; 
Wasna  watinkte, 
Wasna  watinkte  I 


SONG   OF  THE  SPIRIT-DANCE 

Hey,  hey,  joyous  feast  we  now. 
Hey,  hey,  joyous  feast  we  now ;  ■ 

Eating  pemmican. 

Eating  pemmican ! 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


DtAKOTAS 
WICASA-ATAWAiV  OLOWAN 

Song  of  the  Seer 
Sang  and  told  fay  TaUnka-Ptecila.  (Short  Bull),  a  Holy  Man,  Prophet,  or  "  Hedicine-Man.' 


jll^^  ^^^^^  always  camped  in  a  circle,  and  in  the  middle 

Tof  the  circle  was  a  place  called  Hocoka,  the  centre. 
Before  the  people  set  oat  to  war,  the  prophet,  or 
'I holy  man,  made  a  tipi  for  himself  and  sat  in  it  alone, 
looking  into  the  f«tare  and  seeing  in  vision  all  that  would  befall. 
The  people  brought  him  offerings  of  gifts,  and  he  made  holy  em- 
blems and  charms  to  protect  them  in  battle. 

Then,  before  sending  out  the  scouts,  the  warriors  assembled  in 
ihe  centre  of  the  camp  and  sat  in  a  circle  awaiting  the  prophet. 
He  came  forth,  singing  a  holy  song,  and  bestowed  upon  the  warriors 
the  charms  that  he  had  made,  and  told  to  every  man  his  fate. 

This  is  the  song  of  prophecy  that  he*  sang.  In  the  last  part 
of  the  song,  where  now  there  are  only  sounds  of  no  meaning,  he 
sang  words  which  foretold  to  each  warrior  the  fate  that  would 
befall  him  in  the  strife. 

This  song  is  sung  when  the  tribe  is  going  to  war,  just  before  the 
scouts  set  out  to  find  the  enemy. 


WICASA-ATAWAJV  OLOWAJV 

Hocoka  wan  cfcaqon 
Yutonkal  nunwc 


SONG  OF  THE  SEER 

In  this  circle, 
0  ye  warriors, 
Lo,  I  tell  yoa 
Each  his  future. 
All  shall  be 
As  I  now  reveal  it 
In  this  circle; 

Hear  ye ! 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE   INDIANS'    BOOK 
SUJVKA   OLOWAN 

Song    of    the    Dog    Society' 


I 


N  old  times  when  the  hosts  were  drawn  up  for  battle,  it 
was  the  duty  of  certain  of  the  Dog  Soldiers  to  dismount 
in  front  of  the  hosts  and  drive  their  lances  into  the  ground. 

To  these  lances  they  tied  themselves  with  a  buckskin 

thong.  Every  man's  heart  grew  strong  when  the  Dog  Soldiers 
drove  down  the  lance.'  There  they  stood  at  the  front  of  the  battle, 
shaking  their  rattles  and  singing.  Howsoever  the  battle  might  go, 
the  hosts  might  not  turn  back  until  the  Dog  Soldiers  gave  the  signal. 
Even  then  the  Dog  Soldiers  would  not  themselves  leave  their  posts 
until  one  of  their  own  society  should  pull  up  the  lance  and  whip 
them  away.  If  the  flying  warriors  forgot  to  release  them,  the 
Dog  Soldiers  died  where  they  stood.  For  death  is  as  nothing,  and 
pain  is  as  nothing;  but  cowardice  is  crime,  and  disgrace  is  the  greatest 
punishment. 

TASUiVKE-SKA  OLOWAN 

Song    of    the  White-Horse    Society^ 

Sting  fay  Matoisto-Nakipin  (Bear-Arm-Necfclace,  meaning  necklace  of  claws  ffom  the  forefeet 

of  the  faear). 

TASUiVKE-SKA   OLOWAJV  SONG   OF   THE  WHITE-HORSE    SOCIETY 

Kola,  taktj  Friend,  whatever  hardships  threaten, 

Otehika  If  thou  call  me, 
Imakawapi-Io  I'll  befriend  thee; 

Hena  kowokipi  sni  All  enduring  fearlessly, 
Waon  welo!  I'll  befriend  thee. 

'  See  "  Organizations  of  the  Plains  Indians,"  page  31. 
The  Dog  Soldiers  were  human  emblems  of  courage,  and  their  presence  inspired  their  fol- 
lowers with  desperate  zeal. 

'Often  sung  while  on  the  war-path.     See  "The  War-Path,"  page  154. 

[50] 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


DAKOTA 


TOKALA   OLOWAN 

Songs    of   the    Fox    Society 
Sung  and  told  by  Wicapi  (Star) 


I  [HE  Dakotas  tell  how,  a  few  years  ago,  a  party  of  yoisng 

Tmen  went  over  into  Montana  to  hunt.  They  were  «n- 
jtfstly  arrested  by  the  local  sheriff,  and  Agna-Iyanfee 
M  (Runs  Beside)  was  shot.  Though  mortafly  wounded, 
he  lived  two  days,  and,  being  a  Fox  warrior,  he  sang  on  his  home- 
ward joamcy  a  song  of  the  Fox  Society.  His  song  is  the  first  of 
the  two  Fox  songs  here  recorded.  The  melody  is  old,  bat  the 
words  are  Agna-Iyanfce's  own. 

The  second  song  was  sung  by  the  men  of  the  Fox  Society  at 
their  next  dance  in  honor  of  their  dead  companion. 


TOKALA  OLOWAJV 

Tokalaka  miye  ca, 
Nakenula  waon  welo. 


SONG  OF  THE   FOX   SOCIETY 

Lo,  the  Fox,  the  Fox  am  I ! 
Still  the  Fox  a  moment  yet, 
Then  the  Fox  shall  be  no  more. 


TOKALA  WACIPI  OLOWAN 

Oniani  kin  nayapapi,  ca 
Agna-Iyanfce  hena  yonke-Io ! 


DANCE-SONG   OF   THE   FOX   SOCIETY 

Ha,  you  hunters, 

All  yoo  hunters  fled. 

Yea,  but  the  Fox  fled  not. 

There,  behold,  he  lay ! 

Ha,  you  fled. 

But  there,  behold,  he  lay! 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'    BOOK 


O 


WAKAN  GLOW  AN 

Holy  Song  (Medicine-Song) 
Sang  and  told  by  Wambli-Wa^te  (Good-Eagle),  a  Holy  Man. 

N  the  banks  of  a  thickly  wooded  creek  the  people  camped, 
and  there  came  to  them  a  Holy  Man  who  said,  "  Give 
me  of  yottr  bracelets  and  yottr  rings,  and  in  retttrn  I 
will  do  so  m«ch  for  yo«  that  you  shall  feel  no  sickness 
as  long  as  my  own  life  shall  endure/* 

They  gave  him  bracelets  and  rings,  both  of  bttffalo-hide  and 
of  silver,  and  then  the  Holy  Man  told  them  to  make  for  him  a  sweat- 
lodge,  such  as  the  people  call  **  new  life,"  becatfse  the  man  that 
comes  oat  of  it  feels  as  if  made  anew.  So  when  he  had  purified 
himself  in  solitude  he  set  up  a  pole  in  the  earth,  and  bound  upon 
it  a  buffalo-calf's  hide  painted  red.  Then  the  crier  went  through- 
out the  camp  and  called  for  all  the  sick  to  come  close  to  the  pole, 
and  when  they  were  gathered  there  they  cut  off  strips  of  skin  from 
their  arms  for  an  offering  and  laid  them  at  the  foot  of  the  pole. 
Then  came  forth  the  Holy  Man,  and  he  set  a  wooden  cup  at  the  foot 
of  the  pole,  and  began  to  sing  this  song: 

"  0  ye  people,  be  ye  healed ; 
Life  anew  I  bring  unto  ye. 
y  Through  the  Father  over  all 

Do  I  thus. 
Life  anew  I  bring  anto  ye." 

While  he  sang,  water  trickled  down  the  pole  until  it  filled  the 
cup.  He  gave  the  cup  to  the  sick,  and  they  all  drank  of  the  water 
and  were  healed,  yet  the  cup  was  never  empty.  And  when  they 
had  all  drunk,  he  sent  them  to  their  tipis  and  bade  them  rest  un- 
til evening.  When  the  sun  was  down  they  gathered  again  about 
the  pole,  and  the  Holy  Man  cleared  a  space  upon  the  ground  and 
sang  again  and  drew  with  his  finger  in  the  dust.  No  man  could  tell 
the  meaning  of  that  which  he  had  drawn,  until  the  Holy  Man  spread 

[521 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


DAKOTA 

his  hand  above  the  characters,  and  looked  tjpon  the  ground  and 
said,  **  The  spirits  of  the  fathers  tell  me  that  to-morrow  yo«  shall 
see  bttffalo  in  plenty,  and  every  man  of  yo«  shall  kill  three."  Also 
he  said,  "  You  shall  cut  off  the  legs  and  cut  out  the  tongues  and 
hearts  of  all  those  that  you  kill,  and  leave  them  for  an  offering 
to  the  Great  Mystery ;  but  you  shall  bring  to  me  forty  hides." 

All  happened  as  he  had  said,  and  he  took  the  hides  and  made 
of  them  forty  holy  shirts  for  the  people.  Then  he  told  them  to 
bring  him  clay  and  straw  and  charcoal,  and  with  these  he  made 
gunpowder,  caps,  and  wads,  and  gave  to  all  men.  So  when  he  had 
provided  thus  for  the  people,  he  cafled  them  all  and  ranged  them  in 
a  line,  and  then  he  stood  at  the  end  of  the  line  holding  a  wooden 
pipe  in  his  hands,  and  he  filled  the  pipe  and  lit  it  from  the  rays  of 
the  sun,'  and  then  passing  it  from  hand  to  hand  each  man  blew 
out  a  few  whiffs  to  symbolize  the  breath  of  life.  Then  said  the 
Holy  Man :  "  This  people  is  good.  I  have  healed  their  sickness.  I 
have  renewed  their  life.  Now  shall  I  go  back  to  my  own  place." 
After  that  the  people  saw  him  no  more. 


WAKAN  OLOWAJV 

Oyate  wan  waste  ca 
Wanna  piyawakage-Io ! 
Wankanta  Tunfcansila  heya  ca 
Wanna  piyawakage-Io  ! 


HOLY    SONG 

0  ye  people,  be  ye  healed ; 
Life  anew  I  bring  onto  ye. 
0  ye  people,  be  ye  healed ; 
Life  anew  I  bring  tinto  ye. 
Through  the  Father  over  all 
Do  I  thas. 
Life  anew  I  bring  onto  ye. 


'  The  Navajo  Indians  light  their  ceremonial  cigarettes  by  the  son  by  means  of  ^  crystal. 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'    BOOK 


SUJVGMANITU   OLOWAAT 

Wolf  Song 

Sang  and  told  by  Chief  Ta^unke-Hinto  (Blue  Horse)' 

0  other  man  may  sing  this  song  bat  Tasttnfce  -  Hinto. 
He  only  has  the  right,  for  it  is  his  own  song,  learned 
by  him  of  the  wolves.  So  long  as  the  wolves  shall  Iive^ 
so  long  shall  Tasanke - Hinto  live;  and  when  they  diCf 
he  too  will  die. 

This  is  how  he  learned  the  song : 

When  he  was  a  yo«ng  man  of  twenty-seven  winters,  he  set  oat 
on  the  war-path^  with  twelve  other  warriors.  Jast  as  the  dawn 
grew  yellow  he  heard  the  wolves  begin  to  sing,  and  one  of  them 
broke  into  this  song.  Tasa«ke-Hinto  listened  to  the  wolf's  song 
and  learned  it  and  took  it  for  his  own.  It  is  in  very  troth  the 
song  that  the  wolf  sang  at  dawn.  Tasanke-Hinto  then  sang  it  to 
his  comrades — and  lo!  on  that  same  day  they  met  a  war-party 
of  Pawnees,  and  killed  them,  every  man.^ 

Tasanke-Hinto  is  now  very  old,  bat  he  still  sings  the  Song 
of  the  Wolf.  Before  he  sings  he  tarns  to  the  west,  and,  holding 
ap  his  hand,  calls  aload :  **  O  West  Wind,  and  ye,  my  old  comrades, 
if  any  be  there,  listen,  listen  to  my  song  V*  For  he  says:  **  The 
East  is  the  white  man's  coantry,  bat  the  West  is  where  we  belong, 
I  and  the  wolves,  and  my  old  friends  now  long  dead.  Perhaps  I 
shall  soon  be  with  them!" 

'  The  Dakotas  call  "  blue  "  what  the  white  man  calls  gray. 
'  See  "  The  War-Path,"  page  154. 

'  The  wolf,  as  an  animal,  is  a  symbol  of  war.  Also,  the  Pawnees  are  known  as  Wolves ; 
they  are  hereditary  foes  of  the  Dakotas. 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


H 
p 

01- 

e 

3 

n 
I 

n 


o 


> 

n 
o 


O 

8- 

s 
H 

S 


I 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


DAKOTA 


OLOWAiV 

Song 
Sang  and  told  by  Tasanfce-Qq^Ia  (Little  Horse) 

HIS  song  tells  how  an  aged  warrior  sees  the  yottng  men 
setting  oat  to  war,  and  as  he  thinks  of  his  own  by-gone 
glory,  he  sadly  realizes  that  he  is  now  only  an  old  man 
with  the  toothache.  When  the  people  are  gathered  for 
a  dance  or  festival,  this  song  may  be  s«ng  in  honor  of  some  old 
T«rarrior,  who  then  makes  gifts  of  garments  or  horses  to  the  singers. 


OLOWAiV 

Okicize  iyotan  micilaqon, 
Miye  sni  se,  4yotiyewakiye-Io ! 


SONG 

Mighty,  mighty,  great  in  war. 

So  was  I  honored  ; 
Now  behold  me  old  and  wretched ! 


OMAHA  WACIPI   OLOWAN 

Omaha  Dance-Songs 
Sang  fay  Tasanke  Ciqala  (Little  Horse) 

HE  Omaha  Dance  ^  came  from  the  Omahas.  It  is  an 
occasion  when  men  narrate  the  tales  of  great  deeds 
and  make  gifts  to  one  another;  it  has  now  become  also 
a  social  gatherkig  of  the  people. 


OHAHA  WACIPI    OLOWA7V 
Natanhiwan  winyan  wafcage 


OMAHA    DANCE-SONG 

Charged  the  foe, 

Btrt  I  made  a  woman  of  him  I 


'  See  "Winnebago  He-Iash-ka  Na-wan." 
[55] 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'    BOOK 


II 


At  the  end  of  the  Omaha  dance  a  feast  is  held,  the  food  being 
first  consecrated  by  ceremony.  This  song  is  s«ng  daring  the  con- 
secration, as  a  sttmmons  to  the  people  to  partake  of  the  feast. 


OMAHA  WACIPI  OLOWAJV 
Ho,  leciya  nicopi ! 


OMAHA  DANCE-SONG 

Come  hither,  hither,  ho ! 
Hither  now  we  sanunon  ye  I 
Come  hither,  ho ! 
Hither,  ho ! 


WIOSTE   OLOWAN 

Love-Songs 

These  love-songs  are  modem;  they  are  current  Indian  songs  of 
the  day. 

I 

Sang  by  Capa-Tanfca  (Big  Beaver,  Frank  Goings) 
WIOSTE  OLOWAiV  LOVE-SONG 


Tokiya  amayaleso? 
Tokiya  amayaleso? 
Hignawaya  cin  na 
Temahilaqon, 
Esa  wagnikte! 
Esa  wagnikte! 


Nay,  love,  but  whither  are  you  leading  me  ?       u 
Nay,  love,  but  whither  are  you  leading  me^N  i 
My  own  husband  loves  me,  ^     | 

He  whom  I  have  left.  v  A^ 

Leave  me,  for  he  loves  me,  J-' 

Leave  me,  let  me  go.  \J^ 


0  leave  me ! 


II 


Sung  by  Capa-Tafifca  (Big  Beaver) 
WIOSTE  OLOWAA'  LOVE-SONG 


Inkpataya  nawazin 
Na  sina  cicoze 
Ma-ya,  Ha-ya, 
Leciya  ku  wanna ! 


Up  the  creek  I  stand  and  wave  ? 
See,  all  alone  I  wave ! 

Ah,  hither. 

Ah,  hither. 
Haste  thee  to  me  1 


[56] 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


DAKOTA 


III 

Sting  by  Tasurtfce-Ciqala  (Little  Horse) 


WIOSTE   OLOWAJV 

Koskalaka  otapi  tka, 
Nisna  fyokipi  mayaye. 
lyotan  cilaqon, 
Wankiciyake  sni  anqonkte ! 


LOVE-SONG 

Many  are  the  youths,  many  youths : 
Thou  alone  art  he  who  pleaseth  me» 
Over  all  I  love  thee. 
Long  shall  be  the  years  of  parting  I 


IV 

Sung  fay  Tatanfca-Hinapawi  (Buffalo-Appearing)  wife  of  Tasunfce-Ciqala 
WIOSTE  OLOWAJV  LOVE-SONG 


Eyas  hececa  ye  lakas, 
Awanicigia  waonqon. 

He-ye,  he-ye, 
Nape-may«za ! 


Know  the  reason  of  oar  parting : 

I  have  watched  thee  well,  faithless  one  I 

He-ye,  he-ye. 
Clasp  my  hand  and  part ! 


Sung  by  'Wicapi-'Wafcan  (Holy  Star,  Julia  Yellow-Hair) 

In  the  present  state  of  transition  from  the  old  life  to  the  new,. 
Indian  children  often  are  educated  by  the  government  at  a  distant 
boarding-school,  where  they  mast  remam  for  five  years  without  re- 
taming  home.'  Not  infrequently  the  pupil  stays  in  school  for  a 
longer  period  than  the  five  years,  and  on  going  home  finds  the  life 
of  his  people  completely  strange  to  him.  It  is  not  at  all  uncommon 
for  the  Indian  child  to  have  forgotten  his  own  language  during 
the  school  period,  and  so,  on  his  return,  to  be  unable  to  speak 
with  his  parents.  The  going  away  to  boarding-school,  with  its 
parting  from  parents  and  friends,  is  a  distinct  era  in  the  life  of  the 
Indian.  The  following  song  shows  how  throughout  the  changing 
conditions  of  his  life  the  Indian  retains  the  instinct  to  embody 
experience  in  song.  It  is  supposed  to  be  sung  by  a  young  maid  just 
setting  out  for  school. 

'  See  page  xxxiii. 
[57] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'    BOOK 

Holy  Star  (Jttlia  Yellow-Hair)  is  in  boarding-schoolt  and  that 
is  why  she  has  chosen  this  song  for  h^r  contribtrtion  to  The  Ind- 
ians' Book.  She  is  granddaughter  of  the  aged  chief,  Yellow-Hair, 
renowned  among  the  Dakotas. 


WIOSTE   OLOWAiV 

Ehake  waranayaktiwe, 
Ehake  wanmayaktiwe. 
Sice  tecihrlaqon ! 
Wanna  waya  wamanikte. 
Ehake  wanmayakawe, 
Ehake  nape-maytiza ! 


LOVE-SONG 

For  the  last  time,  come  greet  me  again, 
For  the  last  time,  come  greet  me  again. 
Dear  friend,  I  loved  thee  alone  I 
Now  to  school  I'm  going  away  ; 
For  the  last  time,  come  greet  me  again. 
For  the  last  time,  come  take  my  hand! 


SUJVKA   OLOWAN 

Song  of  the  Dog-Feast 
Sung  and  told  by  Chief  Haza-BIasfca  (Fiat-Iron,  meaning  a  piece  of  flat  iron) 


I  [EHOLD,  it  was  thus.    Once  long  ago  in  the  season  of 

B       falling  leaves  the  Dakotas  went  hunting  at  the  edge  of  the 
Black  Hills.     The  people  were  starving  and  great  was 
'I  their  need  of  meat,     So  they  vowed,'  **li  only  we  find 
buffalo  we  will  give  all  our  dogs  a  feast."     Thus  they  vowed. 

Lo,  soon  afterwards  they  saw  a  herd  and  killed  many  buffaloes, 
and  came  back  to  their  camp,  weary  but  rejoicing.  Then,  true  to 
their  vow,  they  made  a  great  feast  for  their  dogs;  in  the  centre  of 
the  camp  they  piled  all  the  tallow  from  the  buffaloes  and  amid  this 
they  scattered  the  tongues.  So  they  did,  giving  to  the  dogs  the 
choicest  morsels.  Then  the  men  took  their  dogs  and  painted  them 
for  the  feast.  With  a  stripe  of  red  down  the  back  and  red  on  the 
side  of  the  jaw  they  painted  them.  Then  they  led  them  to  the  pile 
of  tallow  in  the  centre  of  the  camp  and  held  them  in  a  circle  while  all 
sang,  "May  you  feast  well,  O  dog!"  Three  times  they  sang  this  song, 
while  the  dogs  strained  and  growled  and  yelped.  Then-  a  man  cried 
out,  "Hold  well  your  dogs!    Once  more  shall  the  song  be  sung." 


'  To  the  spirit-animals:  perhaps  to  the  Dog.     See  introduction  to  Pawnee  songs. 

[58] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


DAKOTA 


So  yet  again  the  people  sang,  while  the  dogs  strained  harder; 
then  at  the  last  of  the  song — away!  The  dogs  flew  at  the  meat  and 
devoured  it  eagerly,  every  morsel.  Lo,  they  as  well  as  their  masters 
had  hungered  long. 

Thus  came  about  the  custom  of  the  Dog-Feast.  It  was  the 
grandfather  of  Maza-BIaska  who  originated  it.  It  has  great  mystery- 
power;  through  it  the  Dog  is  honored,  and  the  secrets  of  the  Dog,  in 
mystery  and  in  hunting,  are  revealed  to  the  men  of  the  feast. 


SUiVKA  OLOWA/V 
Sunka  wayataninl 


SONG  OF  THE  DOG-FEAST 
May  you  feast  well,  0  dog  ! 


OKICIZE   OLOWAiV 

War-Song 


Sung  by  Tasunfce-Hinsa  (Sorrel  Horse),  Mahpiya-Tatanfca  (Sky  Bull,  meaning  buffalo-bulI), 
and  Mato-Wankantuya  (High  Bear) 


-ilHIS  is  a  war-song  well-known  among  the  Dakotas.    It 

Tis   an   old   song   and   was   sung  by  the  Dakotas   when 
fighting   for  their  land.     It  is  now  sung  by  chiefs  on 
'  I  various   occasions,  sometimes   at   the  opening  of   cere- 
monies or  of  councils. 

The  melody  is  also  used  with  different  words  as  Wopila  Olowan, 
a  song  of  thanksgiving.  A  gathering  of  the  people  for  social  festival 
or  ceremonial  dance  is  an  occasion  for  the  giving  of  presents.'  At 
some  time  during  the  dance  or  ceremony  a  herald  announces  that  a 
gift  is  to  be  made,  and  summons  by  name  him  who  is  to  receive  it. 
This  one  goes  forward  and  accepts  his  present,  or,  if  the  present  be 
a  pony  or  other  animal,  he  may  receive  at  the  moment  only  the 
promise  of  the  gift.  He  expresses  his  thanks  with  quiet  solemnity 
and  passes  his  hand  in  blessing  over  the  giver.  Many  may  give 
presents  one  after  the  other  on  the  same  occasion. 

If  blankets  or  robes  are  given  at  a  dance,  it  is  customary  some- 

'  Strangers  or  visitors  from  other  tribes  receive  at  such  times  gifts  of  horses,  money,  food, 
and  clothing.     This  hospitality  is  reciprocated  when  the  visit  is  returned. 

[59] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'   BOOK 


times  for  parents  to  make  the  gift  through  their  child,  dressed  for 
the  occasion  in  fairest  apparel.  The  parent  spreads  the  gift  upon 
the  ground,  and  the  child,  shod  in  finest  moccasins,  dances  upon  it 
in  consecration  while  appropriate  songs  are  sung.  Sometimes  the 
child  is  a  young  maiden  in  buckskin  dress  ornamented  with  elk- 
teeth,  who  dances  shyly  with  drooping  head  and  downcast  eyes. 
Sometimes  it  is  a  little  lad  in  costume  of  the  olden  time,  with  painted 
face  and  jangling  ornaments.  The  boy  is  led  by  his  father  to  the 
blanket,  and,  in  imitation  of  his  elders,  right  manfully  dances  a 
little  war-dance  to  the  rhythmic  beat  of  the  drum. 

The  recipients  return  thanks  with  song,  and  visitors  from  an- 
other tribe  sing  in  thank-offering  the  songs  of  their  people. 

This  song  is  frequently  sung  on  such  occasions;  it  is  used  in 
many  bands  of  the  Dakotas,  and  has  come  to  be  known  to  other 
tribes  as  well: 


OKICIZE    OLOWAiV 

Kolapila  tafctryakapi-Io ! 
Maka  kin  mitawa  yelo ! 
Epinahan  blehemiciye-Io ! 


WAR-SONG 


u# 


Comrades,  kinsmen, 

Now  have  ye  spoken  thas. 
The  earth  is  mine, 

'Tis  my  domain. 
'Tis  said,  and  now  anew  I  exert  me! 


f 


THE  SONGS  OF  THE  DAKOTAS' 

Told  by  H«h«seca-ska  (White  Bone),  Zintkala  Haza  (Iron  Bird),  and  Mato-Nazin 

(Standing-Bear) 


][  WO  ar«  the  kinds  of  songs:  songs  made  by  man,  and 

T       songs  that  come  in  dreams  or  in  visions  through  the 
spirits  from  Wakan-Ta«ka. 

I  Of  the  first  kind  there  are  songs  made  by  the  mind 
of  man  to  please  the  ear.  Then  there  are  songs  to  express  feelings, 
and  to  rouse  feelings— songs  to  stir  men  to  brave  deeds,  to  give 

'  Dafcbta  musical  instnanents  are  flute,  rattle,  drum,  and  whistle  of  eagle-bone. 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


DAKOTA 

strength  in  battle,  and  songs  to  make  strong  the  heart  to  meet 
danger,  grief,  and  death.  <=— ^ 

War -songs,  victory  -  songs,  songs  sang  in  Omaha  dances  —  all       / 
these  are  of  this  first  kind.     So  also  are  the  songs  of  the  different      / 
societies,  s«ch  as  the  White-Horse  Society,  the  Fox  Society,  and      / 
many  others.    Love-songs,  gaming-songs,  more  kinds  of  songs  than 
can  be  named  are  made  by  man  for  his  feeling,  and  his  pleasure. 
AU  Such  songs  may  be  sang  by  iny  one. 

Songs  of  the  second  kind  come  from  Wakan-Tanka  and  are     / 
<a)akan — holy,  apart.    No  man  has  the  right  to  sing  sach  a  song 
save  him  to  whom  the  song  came  in  dream  or  in  vision.     Bat  this 
man  may  teach  the  song  to  others  and  give  to  them  the  right  to 
sing  it. 

All  songs  that  are  holy,  that  belong  to  sacred  rites  and  ceremoniesT 
that  have  power  to  work  wonders,  that  go  with  healing,  are  of  this 
kind:  for  holy  rites,  wisdom,  and  healing  are  from  Wakan-Tanka. 

Everything  that  has  life  has  spirit  as  well  as  fleshly  form.  AH 
things  have  nagi — soal.  Rocks  and  animals  have  the  power  to 
appear  in  the  form  of  man,  and  to  speak  to  man  in  dream  or  in 
vision.*  It  is  from  Wakan-Tanka  that  they  have  power  and 
wisdom.^ 

Spirits  come  to  man  in  dreams  and  in  waking  visions.  When 
the  spirit  comes  to  man  in  a  dream,  it  may  be  thus:  a  song  is  heard 
on  the  air,  then  a  form  appears.  This  form  is  of  a  man,  often  dressed 
or  painted  in  some  particalar  or  strange  way.  It  is  a  spirit,  who 
gives  to  the  man  a  message,  a  teaching,  or  a  song.  When  he  tarns 
to  go,  he  takes,  in  disappearing,  whatsoever  form  may  be  his  own, 
— if  he  be  animal,  he  will  take  the  form  of  bear,  baffalo,  or  bird — 
whatever  his  nature. 

When  the  spirit  comes  in  waking  vision,  it  may  be  in  this  way: 
A  man  wants  to  gain  some  power,  or  to  learn  some  holy  practice. 
Into  the  wilderness  he  goes  alone,  and  seeks  the  moantain-top. 
There  withoat  food  or  drink  he  stays,  three  days,  three  nights,  and 
cries  for  power  to  come  to  him,  whether  from  bear  or  snake  or  rock. 

'  Rocks,  or  trees  may  also  appear  in  animal  form. 

'  Thus  the  Indian  learns  from  nature,  from  the  animals,  and  from  elemental  forces,  whose 
power  to  teach  him  is  from  the  Supreme  Being. 

[6J] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE   INDIANS'   BOOK 

Then  in  the  darkness  will  appear  to  him  some  animal  in  the  form 
of  man.  This  spirit  talks  to  the  fasting  man  as  one  man  to  another 
and  teaches  him  to  gain  that  power  for  which  he  cries.  Thtjs  the 
spirits  come  to  man  in  solitude. 

So  are  the  songs  of  two  kinds:  songs  made  by  man,  and  songs 
given  from  Wakan-Tanka,  the  Great  Power  that  is  not  to  be  un- 
derstood. 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Ot- 


croooyyx^ 


^i-  ^  n\i  n\j    I 


-JL^       -C       -^ 


-r" 


^ 


J  J  N     J 


-i 


a.       -c 


-li 


T^ 


4  '  ^  MM  ^m 


^ 


^ 


'^  r-  ^  r  ^  T 


^     _     e_ 


1     ;    J  ^ 


31 


I  .^       I  r  I  r 


T 


^ 


r 


r 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


/.l^^^kj    (Do.c^'   OeKT^a^ 


4  J  j 


r 


^ 


^ 


r^ 


-u 


T 


^j^    J    ■'      1    i  '   J     Id 


^ 


^^ 


r 


r 


->ue. 


r 


.|.  <'  'f  J  1 '  J 1 1  ^ 


A-  ^  - 


/iCif^^ 


JiiuA   'tijL.      _/a,  -  -tJCtA.     ^a^tMC 


J      J] I  i     J     H 


^ 


^^ 


^ 


=^5= 


^ 


^ 


c^/^  -  ura^   -JVC  -   ^  -      ^«  -  oo 


v 


•l  n-  j  1  .^   ^^ 


^ 


i 


1^       l.'l    ?•! 


#     # 


JU'^-^'i^ 


(flu^  a  ^aXlC  ^c  .        ^^e^r^, 


S; 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


l^.'ia»,».ki    C^AcZ^ 


oe«w< 


% 


^^ 


6-    -<*^ 


■K. 


A.  -   -7*0 


/" 


'-A 


-t^ 

X.  - 


^o. 


^^ 


^^ 


^ 


-* #- 


4: 


0-  r^ 


^ul  ^- 


o.    - 


r 


Xa. 


A*^  — >M  C4  •<  «* 


r> 


■coo 

(JLo 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


tJ, 


O/tta 


r 


or 


^.^c-'Jo-M-  y^  111 


tt 


^ 


^ 


^ 


J    s 


■U  a- 


ki 


w 


^^^ 


JAo' 


■d^  .1  J  Iri    IJ   Li    1.1    1.1  Im  L-^   I J 


c* 


lO.      o  -   f*> <*--   -**^- 


zrzL 


J    J      IJ       1J-' 


^a 


^^^^ 


H 


W^ 


^ 


■J  -       -^  «. ,     -iLa  -  -^ic  -  'OUL  , 


I J  U   I  j^  ^ 


3 


r* 


L 


T 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


"COll^AAfi^    €c?/a.CA.f**     <^£<r^«J< 


JUL 


m 


^s 


X  1  J-  J     1  .'  ^ 


^^ 


i 


t 


.-00*9         -ile'tuot~  OJ^         ■*\<n-o^.. 


ty 


H  ^J  ■^'■J     N   n  1^  .1 


^c,        A., 


*<Jci  -    too  - 


't*  <n^; .  .  ,  . 


g^'j-j    in 


S3E 


tit 


'CJcui-  *\Oi.       CJA-    -diSx  -     'lotx.,  . 


i;M-j     l;-i 


latU 


'^r 


.7H.t  -        C^v•^. 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


I        AI./»I.J.=63 


hh  1  ^it'  1  1 1  "  I  I  1 1  'II  I  h  'I I  I 


4^'l'4    Hj.  J.  I  M'J- j     ] 


di  ^  L.  Y^     Li.     -^ 


,.|,n.  I  ■''J  J  J  I J  ijj.  J.  Ij  Hj.  j.Li  JM 


^^ 


^ 


5 


^*V 


.e-     ^ 


# 


^S 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


<iJu,^4t^O-      0£en^ 


OyfX, 


/»./yi.  J  .  j^Jf 


4.^-  y\r    ^■^\  r    J' J 


3 


ti'  J  J  I  ^  ^^ 


sV. 


e  -e 


r 


AJL  "A-^l- 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


(Su^4(o^    Ot 


^U^OjO^/ 


I'li  irr  J 


i  i  '^i'4-,JJ 


^    AA.   ....        X. 


r 


A 


r 


-  o 


^ 


3i 


V 


>c 


e.  e  -     «- 


'DIgltUtiUUy  Miuo^ofl®" 


a^rx. 


xjGU^  (d  (tr  Oy^jJCC- H-<rn  ^    ■Jo  C/oz 


V 


StAA^'^   (yiyJXaJ'''>^*^-J{a4U'pic:  (1b^ay^-{Xyv^v,.Jrca(eA<^\ 


^^e,  'F^S^ 


jI^'i-  r  -J'  I  1'i,    N    i   I II J    jliiJ  jlXjjj 


Al./H.  J-    4( 


^6 


t-    e.  -     *.  -   A. 


<JO    ' 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


^^  A.^ /lU, .  ■v-i'/i  nei^ a^ 


V'  i  i  I  hi 


zs: 


I      I       I  J     j 


■ka-       o  —  o   — 


ifjn   hJ  J  ^ 


5,(^-'el.  ,fii-'4l-      o-TS~_    ^--^c 


f^. 


f'tui44ji  ,  crUat -  €^ -  eA^    koA^-^fbupi    ttAJLcut-e^n^  ^ 


^ 


I 


i  'Ji  U^UF^ 


^7-  <»«  A-  4^-  tj<» —  ifii '  Co 


m 


t 


Xy  -£<J,n*    ca££    ->i,e,j     O'CL      (k-    A-. 


4u.  'Co  «-»       ^to  "^"^ 


s 


Ji.  i  '^4  '#f^^ 


tt 


3e 


^4  U^  'j  ^ 


Digitized  fly  Miuiunun® 


/n./v\.  J  L /zo 


i 


^ 


^^ 


^T^      J        J        ^^ 


-• r- 


t^ 


I     i. 


T 


T 


■L 


T  r 


m 


usn  J 


^ 


*^ 


C/     tLa 


^  .  • . 


r 


z> . 


r 


<^ 


T  r  r 


* 


s 


^^ 


a' u  I A^ 


* — # 


k^v       e,... 


T 


r  ^T  T  r 


gi 


r  '-•■■J*-   ^r  r 


g 


■t'  - 


T" 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


4? 


\yk^O^      d^^rt^a^ 


r  1  I  ■'  y  1  J'T  P 


ii 


:* 


^ 


i-        ^U.-  ^-        ^. 


<*-  -?•<-<. 


^jA)  ,    "^te-  ^"^  I      tt^         f'try)      <a-».«.  J ,   ■  ■ 


^^ 


I  n  1 


^^ 


=^ 


<^C- 


« 


e*,, 


.   . .   ... .  1 


m 


J-jLeA^   ttJ.       'faya        \^£.tUi.    i&L.  ... 


-itO  -  -  .  -tCwTT-e- 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


11. N\.    J.;  10 Z 


<tu*.Ji^ 


-^iJ^JS^ 


h 


i^ 


\   1      ?/l  1      T   \  1     1.  I  J     g 


^     1     \ 


t    / 


«>-  £. 


T 


r 


r  "  r 


^S  g  t.  JM  J    \:\  \ 


S4*-  •**-«  <»-      ^ 


r 


^ 


# 


^-  J'-  ;■  I  i 


J^e   -cpo     A.        «. 


r 


r 


-u. 


fe 


J  I J  r  I  a 


•fy«.    ^      CK 


T 


x^ 


4^'  J  rij  j-'j  gij  j-i^  ^^ 


r'jju 


^e       e       -£ 


r 


A 


;-•' 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


^^.c^   ^V^^  O^^^^ 


% 


I 


'II    I      ill      r  I   I  ■  I-  I  I     1^ 


CO- 


Jiix ,    -tyv^    3^M/«./-  £*^ ,   /{2«    -^.o-*  /L.^-  e*^   -Mji^:^ 


'ti  I  J- 1  1  J  ^^ 


J 


^^ 


k 


I 


i 


I 


J     J-    '  J 


^  -  e^ 


^^ 


^ 


^ 


^^ 


■1  j'i 


^i      'Jul        -£il     A«      <^ 


^        -e 


:Hi      Ul.       -fjn.    fio.     tL    ^  e.       -^  f^         *^  ^ 


i 


^ 


^ 


^ 


-*i« 


^ 


'   Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


(n.^  Aft, 


~\eii^  pun 


,f.iV':'ii  T  1  1  !■  I  1  '    I  '    I  I  = 


B? 


'.iM   i,  I  hi  III  III  I  i^^jj 


a.      -     -e. 


r 


^= 


^ 


JN        I  J^J 


M 


^ 


a«i  -  A£v 


O^ 


f'T 


<^a  -  4(0.  -  AxL.  -  ^. 


i  ru  U-  u^ 


i 


s 


r 


r«>      «.   -     «. 


J      v-fot^c-  ■«**>  -''^^     '*1h^~' ' 


e   -        e. 


:  r.' 


j.t'tfg  r/n/is'i  i:U  'f  h.T^ 


^ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Qj^^a 


r 


7H^J-*« 


Ji^^r      O^^rt^  €kyt^ 


f^ 


■eJL     Uyfi'tt.t, 


>l^^        1     1      'l         111        "'I        1-1        ^ 


^^    ^^-a.     ^        2^  ^^-«»-    '^        '^ 


^ 


^ 


^|4'  M         1  l-Vlo'^l    I  M    ^ 


:^aji         .-h^o-         ^    ^^«-    ^'*      <*-^ 


i^  . )    J  1  j'J^ 


i?^^*.     —  <»^  7^ 


r  ■ 


^/'^-     1 


^s 


?^  ^^ 


^ 


^ 


^ 


^ 


;V. 


^ 


I     I  I     I         I      ^ 


M<^ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


U'vfi  I- 1 1-  nrrii-Mi-  M  f 


^^ 


<a  Ia»  ....     jOtA 


-r-t-f'T 


■li 


T" 


kt 


^r*'     1  r  t  T>  \j  1 1-  1^  I  V  r<  I T-  u  I  ^i  r^ 


1 


a.   iu^ A-»^ 


t"  T'T  t 


Lo 


r 


4/  J^J  \  J  n  J-  vlyr- 


f 


A       KO  o 


r" 


i 


^y^"^:$  r 


-4- 


4>'-  ji  l?i  1,^^ 


t 


tr^i   —      <rv 


«^T, 


r^ 


1: 


^ 


¥ 


r. 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


0-y^aIo.   lOo^clf^    (ye^oyri. 


/a./H- J 


?^^-r  b  v 


Tx:T-r 


£ 


^ 


^ie 


a. 


o-  -   o-   -    o^ 


L 


■u. 


T-"^  T 


)   ^A^^KXi^    \\\    \  1^} 


<X  -        <X.  ~    O-  A. 


liA.      CfA.      Kb. 


r 


g^^ 


pm 


a. 


OL  -    *a- 


iL. 


A. 


r  ^  r 


^ 


I  I  i|  J  i_fi!i4-^  11-  rj|i 


<s. 


£>-  ^.rt. 


r- 


A 


e   -      e    -     < 


^ 


J-  .r  !;■  J-  IP-  l^n^jnir  ij-j- 


^ 


;^   ]■     I__l  IJJJ-     M]'.     |lj^ 


^a.  -    <a.       A 


A_C     .^^        <^      ■***"    "^ 


J!  J  J  J'  ]■  I  l'V  '  i\yj  LJ'^P 


^9= 


1     / 


CL  -     <A  -    «. 


<>«.  -  -U.*.-  A 


r- 


Ajb.  -    C  - 


<  -      <-    - 


r' 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Oi»oJIol    'COACAAai    O'Cxr-i^ayr^ 
H 


^\,^  n  t  It.'   .,  M'   }  I  ,h  Kl. .!' 


^e,     £jt.~   CJ4LA.    ovL-  e^-   ^  -  i- 


e  —     e   ,' 


P  >  I  j!  J'  I  J.  )i  ^jT\ 


^0,        £t  -  C^lt    ^U .  CO-    jU 


€.     —        <-    . 


a  ~     e  ; 


//*,        ^-     <54«.     fU.  -    CO-     **'    -^         /^ 


* 


e 


f 


# 


■Ud.      eu      Xm.     -^ao  -  o  -     o 


l\l  i\i  Jlj  Jlj  J  lj.'^j:Jj 


Ctrm^,  iU  .  dJA. ,£a-  tJU*.  ,  -tin .  <*o' 


r: 


f''  \  ^ij.^  ij-.^i^J; 


fezA • -^ 


''^^  VI VI I 


li  _  ^/l&v   ,        ,6  -     ^Ofe-  ,       /^c    / 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


X 


T 


Jr^ 


« 


^ 


"^o. 


lU 


-ti^k.     <X-   •i'M^-   -^<a 


JYo^  ,      C<ru^  ,  Cri^  csis.      ttiA.  AX>-     ^<f*^ 


6,<^- 


'^ 


■J*JL. 


4     r    I  J    M  M   h.  I    1  I    J'  I  J   ,- 


i 


^ 


% 


1.    J         IJ 


te 


jiia-         -net- 

A 


CV^TT^ 


*1«V 


^^ 


5 


^ 


^^ 


U3< 


^^ 


^  r  r 


1*<t^ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


ayyy^ 


cf v  n  \n  \ ^^^ 


JiiA 


ts: 


/ 


'^  ^  Ul  I  '   I  ^ 


aJ^.  ;■  J^  I  ,N 


Ax."    t^jtAT, 


i    I    i.         'i       « 


0<k 


^U 


cJO^n.       'ha.  ^ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


TH. 


m-r*.    /=      /if. 


I'i  ;■  J-  1)  J- 1  ■!    M'  1   1  ■^^ 


-a. 


r 


-t:3f« 


jUio.-  A*f^       ayy<-    'tCi-    .^yj,iru:fuZ ^    yv%a.-  nt^     -c^-iriffKo  i 


ilp    J'^    I  J'J    li    J  I  t;     !■?  J-i  J 


^^ 


/■J      I    J 


^ 


i     u 


^  T 


0       €^<nr<. 


i 


"ttiji ..... 


s 


Ji  lii  i"u_LJi  'U.  '4.^^ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Ca]  c^erotxT'  O-Co-i^ 


CJ^-rv 


o-v-t.        \j  cryy 


Of? 


^ 


i)  n  .mi  VI  \y   I J 


Mill     IV     \\\    N.     I.J. 


CX    i^A  -    -tm  -  ci        p£«». 


CiJO^~  crr\- 


j     TyOM*.  t^cJcLDi  duuL  t^txi. ^  'icuM:-  £tjL^ 


if^- 


m 


>j  I  J.  ij-j 


5 


^t-  ^ 


^c- 


r- 


* 


J- '   I JU  u  ■'  I 


^ 


J^A- 


r-  T":r^'  ^ 


CjLo,a^  '7'u^   r^O^i    /Zt^       rioyjt     ■>  . 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


p(  f  f^  \i  y  \  r'J'  n\  \  m 


'^  ^ 


CO-i-f. 


CLA*. 


■CJaAo'^l- 


^^  ^"^ 


S-r^  t^l^^-Ji^^.  Sir^-^ftr^-^ 


e.-  4..-  /^ 


<yoa/^  -   -Tyta 


r^ 


_4!Xk-      CfC 


r-JT 


^^   tin  £a^  tZii^ ,  cai^^L   a^t.M3~^      1-jil    a.-     a^a-i** ,  o. -  i>e^^^ 


j      i    d-    N    J-   I  1  'J    J   J  I  ^ 


J.     J  j^  ■!  J^^^ 


5 


5 


■^ 


y  I LJ  J  X  i:i.P 


->«e     <3- 


rr 


* 


i-vj  y   1  t'j  J  J  I J    ^j 


^ 


^ 


£.tiV" 


cjL     'te.  - 


i    i-      i\  J      J       U  J  J  J^^^^^^ 


-^fcZc 


^.^^ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


(a  \^  f»-p'/g*      Ottrt^  qyy^. 


^m 


y  I  J.  J  J  I  ^S 


^a         -U. 


■CJayry.  -    -nto.  - 


<r. 


r 


'iCi*.    oj<. 


r  r- 


'itrr  ^  Ca.ar~4^e.,  e.tm'e.   ^«ut3r--w«.  «._   tyt^^ ,  a~  j^>:-^  , 


*^ 


J.         J.  ^ 


JU   Ij'ii 


6-    ^. 


c-     -IGl 


M  A 


be.         "HyA  ■ 


'y.^  ttz  eoj:*-  *^5;;^. c^e  Xa/tiM.  ^^     /^         /.^^/ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


cf. 


• 

I 


\  \\\  l>,-t>-Ti    M  r  I'  I  1'^ 


0«/n-<fii 


fa.   t^o.-         ^ 


<x  -       »•   - 


CH  _    .>it  -    <. 


O  '^"^ 


i.  ]■  )■  1.   V^-vrW   iy\\v\-V^ 


0~   -  "^OL    -       -X*   -     <.      _ 


-V.    -—  -    iyf-x. 


l\H  V  r  >^^'  1-  i^i.    J^l  t'lJ^^ 


c)*«/»v  -  -^CL     tO£k  - 


^o-ij^ *^i^  ■fctuit     -ojiJS.,- 


<y  a.  -  "Co.  -    ■'}**.  -  <  —       <-  ~     <-^  ■ 

o  ^^-^ ! 


^p,  .1'  I  r  iw^jjJ-  J.  I  1  } 


P^==?^ 


'J**  —  •< 


c      %o^L  ■■ 


I  >  J-  ^  I'i  .LJ'^J'  ^  I  O*^^ 


^ICU^   <.t*>-    /cAaSf-     'UiU/-, 


--  "^   -     ^  - 


,? 


(j^  -i     i'  J'  J'    W  n  J  J-^  J^  I  J-   V  I  J-  J-  \l^\  J^  J^lj'^ 


Jt.^-'Jf 


A.    CJA- 


r 


^^l^Y*t,  ylao^i^ttt,..  o'^^^f. 


t^  ^-^r- 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


0^ 


■Ul/t 


.  /vT^.  J-  «fc 


I  A-  I     I     LjI^^ 


5^       -^       'ho 


■L 


^ 


r 


T 


^ 


1  1  h    V  It  U  [•  1.  l^f     Ivf  ■ 


J4^ 


Y- 


■KA.       Xo 


-L 


T-- 


T 


_2 2_ 


^1  I J  J 


:^ 


Pl^i^J 


^ 


^    ^ 


/. 


a.. 


.^ 


r^ 


-^• 


4      i       i        ifl^^ 


r 


^  r 


-iLA  ** 


^^ 


ij^^/  y    I  u    Uj   1 


w 


U    I J  p 


;^ 


r 


T" 


m 


^ 


1  i'    1  Vi  1^   \  \\'i     \x^ 


.  ia.  '         yp^-  ^^  -(rci.-     <<^-      o*^  -    -^o-  'l^       Co 


(^tfj^.  ^«il*4       /4:^i^-  ^«**7     -*«<7l-3    'fc.A^A-e.    ^ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


(\iCi'ejJ<^    &Ctn-^0''>^ 


i 


i^ — *- 


J/.    J       N 


^^^^^P 


IHj  ^  N  J  ip  1 .1  j)j.n  I  y^jij 


-^^^  ; 


* 


J    1 1  j  Ji  j 


r' 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


PAWNEE    TITLE-PAGE 

The  design  represents  a  Pawnee  tipi,  and  is  painted  by  a  Pawnee 
girl.  The  tipi  is  decorated  with  symbols  of  the  buffalo,  giver 
of  life;  the  eagle,  Tirawa's  bird;  the  son;  the  ceremonial  pipe; 
the  dome  of  heaven;  the  rainbow;  the  moon-mother;  the  morn- 
ing star;  horse  and  corn,  emblems  of  plenty;  the  eagle  and  the 
evening  star. 

j^  The  lettering  is  by  Hinoofc  Mahiwi  Kilinaka  (Angel  De  Cora). 
r    From  the  border,  in  the  centre,  hangs  the  star,  an  emblem  of 

^  L     Pawnee  religious  thought. 


x 


> 


If' 


m 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


«         «       > 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE   PAWNEES 


HE  Pawnees  are  one  of  the  most  famed  tribes  of  the 
West.  Though  they  form  a  group  of  the  Plains  Indians, 
yet  are  the  Pawnees  a  distinct  linguistic  stock,  allied 
to  the  Wichitas,  Caddos,  Arifcarees,  Waces,  Keechis,  and 
Tawacumers.  The  name  Pawnee  (Pa'ni)  is  generally  conceded  to 
mean  "  Wolf,"  and  was  probably  given  to  the  Pawnees  because  of 
their  method  of  warfare,  their  skill  as  scouts,  their  custom  of  simu- 
lating wolves  while  on  the  war-path,  and  their  tireless  endurance. 
The  Pawnees,  however,  have  their  own  legend  regarding  the  origin 
of  their  name. 

Until  recent  years  the  home  of  the  Pawnees  was  in  southern 
Nebraska  and  northern  Kansas.  But  it  is  generally  believed  that 
the  tribe  came  originally  from  the  Southwest,  some  say  even  from 
Mexico.  Customs  are  said  to  have  been  found  among  them  closely 
resembling  those  of  the  Aztecs  when  first  discovered  by  the  Span- 
iards. Their  mythology  as  well  as  their  traditions  would  help  to 
bear  out  the  theory  of  their  southern  origin,  for  their  religion  shows 
an  observance  of  the  stars  and  a  reverence  for  the  heavenly  bodies 
which,  to  a  people  of  deep  religious  thought,  would  be  the  natural 
result  of  life  in  a  dry  climate  and  clear  atmosphere.   The  Morning  Star 

NOTE  FOR  PRONUNCIATION  OF  PAWNEE  TEXT 

Unless  otherwise  indicated,  vowels  have  the  Continental  sound  and  consonants 
the  English. 

Ch,  in  italic,  is  a  gtrttaral,  like  ch  in  German. 

The  Pawnee  songs  are  spelled  according  to  the  pronunciation  of  the  Skidi  band. 
The  Skidi  dialect  differs  from  that  of  the  three  other  bands  in  that  what  is  pro- 
nounced as  an  /  in  the  others  is  pronounced  as  an  r  in  Skidi. 

Acknowledgment  is  made  to  Sakuruta  (Coming  Sun,  James  R.  Murie)  for  his 
help  in  the  gathering  and  in  the  translation  of  these  songs  of  his  people. 

[93] 
Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'   BOOK 

and  the  Evening  Star,  the  San  and  the  Moon,  are  deeply  revered  by 
the  Pawnees,  and  the  myths  relating  to  the  two  stars  are  of  peculiar 
beauty.  But  highest  of  all,  the  Pawnees  hold  the  Ruler,  Atius 
Tirawa,  the  Father  Above,  him  whom  they  have  always  known 
and  recognized  —  a  being  omniscient,  spiritual,  supreme.  Tirawa 
made  the  Morning  Star  and  the  Evening  Star,  and  he  made  all 
lesser  spiritual  beings  to  carry  out  his  commands.  Say  the 
Pawnees,  "  Of  Tirawa  himself  we  know  only  that  he  made  all 
things,  that  he  is  everywhere  and  in  everything,  and  that  he  is 
almighty." 

Another  argument  in  favor  of  the  southern  origin  of  this  people 
is  the  fact  that  the  Pawnees  were  perhaps  more  distinctly  agricult- 
ural than  most  of  the  Plains  Indians,  and  possessed  permanent  vil- 
lages like  the  people  of  the  Southwest,  in  addition  to  the  portable 
skin  lodges  common  to  the  prairie  tribes.  Though  in  olden  days 
they  were  skilled  hunters,  and  spent  many  months  each  year  upon 
the  buffalo  chase  to  provide  the  people  with  meat  and  skins,  yet 
their  agricultural  life  was  of  great  importance,  and  they  returned 
regularly  to  their  villages  at  certain  seasons  to  work  in  their  fields. 
Like  almost  all  Indians,  they  have  cultivated  corn  since  earliest 
times,  and  crops  of  beans,  pumpkins,  and  squash  rewarded  their 
toil  as  well. 

The  permanent  dwellings  of  the  Pawnees  were  earth  lodges, 
almost  conical  in  shape,  whose  entrance  was  a  covered  passage.' 
The  earth  was  laid  oh  a  frame-work  of  poles,  and  the  structure  was 
supported  within  by  stout  posts  ranged  in  a  circle.  The  hearth 
was  in  the  centre  of  the  lodge,  and  the  smoke  passed  out  through 
a  hole  in  the  roof.  The  simple  dwelling  is  full  of  beauty  to  him 
who  knows  its  meaning.  There  is  no  part  of  it  that  is  not  symbolic. 
The  entrance  must  always  face  the  rising  sun,  the  round,  domed 
roof  is  a  symbol  of  the  sky,  and  each  post  represents  a  star  which 
tells  the  Pawnee  of  some  divine  being.  So  whether  within  his  walls 
or  upon  the  open  prairie  the  Pawnee  lived  in  conscious  recognition 
of  the  universe  about  him,  ever  in  the  presence  of  Tirawa,  the 
One  Above. 

The  Pawnees  were  intrepid  warriors,  known  to  their  enemies 
as  strong  and  courageous  fighters.    Yet  they  have  always  been 

[94] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


PAWNEE 

the  friends  of  the  United  States  government,  and  their  loyal  valor 
as  government  scouts  is  widely  known. 

In  1874  the  pressure  of  white  interests  forced  the  Pawnees 
from  their  homes  on  the  Platte  River  to  Oklahoma,  then  known  as 
the  Indian  Territory.  Since  their  removal  the  people  have  suffered 
great  sickness  and  loss.  Scarcely  had  they  time  to  become  adjusted 
to  the  change  of  climate  and  conditions  before  their  new  home 
was  thrown  open  to  white  settlement.  The  up-springing  of  the 
pioneer  town  and  the  close  proximity  of  the  frontiersman  brought 
to  the  Pawnees  disease,  discouragement,  and  vice.  From  a  tribe 
eight  thousand  strong  they  have  dwindled  to  a  scant  six  hundred. 

Yet  these  Indians  have  splendid  qualities  of  manhood.  They 
are  truly  worthy  of  life,  evolution,  and  development.  They  are, 
as  a  tribe,  brave,  loyal,  self-controlled,  lofty  of  thought,  and  fine 
of  feeling.  May  these  sons  of  our  continent  be  better  known  to  the 
race  that  now  must  dominate  their  lives.  The  warriors  of  yester- 
day must  make  their  hardest  fight  to-day — a  fight  in  the  name 
of  peace  against  degradation  and  extinction.  Better  to  under- 
stand them  will  mean  better  to  help  them  in  their  struggle. 

These  are  their  songs,  sung  and  explained  by  the  Pawnees  them- 
selves. There  are  here  not  enough  of  the  songs  to  give  more  than 
the  merest  glimpse  into  the  Pawnee  mind.  But  even  this  glimpse 
may  help  to  reveal  something  of  that  which  to  the  red  man  is  more 
vital  than  material  possessions — his  inner  world  of  thought  and 
feeling,  an  appreciation  of  which  alone  makes  possible  to  the  white 
man  a  knowledge  of  the  real  Indian. 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE   INDIANS'   BOOK 
INTRODUCTION   TO   THE   PAWNEE   SONGS 

By  Letakots-Lesa  (Eagle  Chief) 

Letakots-Lesa  is  chief  of  the  Pita-Iiaa-erat  band,  one  of  the  foar  divisions  of  the  Pawnees. 
As  part  of  his  ceremonial  dress  he  wears  a  necklace  of  bear- claws,  for  he  is  one  of  the  Bear  So- 
ciety, a  turban  of  otter-skin,  and  two  eagle-feathers  in  his  hair 


N  the  beginning  of  all  things,  wisdom  and  knowledge 
were  with  the  animals/  for  Tirawa,  the  One  Above,  did 
not  speak  directly  to  man.    He  sent  certain  animals  to 

tell   men  that  he  showed  himself  through  the  beasts, 

and  that  from  them,  and  from  the  stars  and  the  sun  and  the 
moon  should  man  learn.  Tirawa  spoke  to  man  through  his  works, 
and  the  Pawnee  understands  the  heavens,  the  beasts,  and  the 
plants.     For  all  things  tell  of  Tirawa. 

When  man  sought  to  know  how  he  should  live,  he  went  into 
solitude  and  cried  until  in  vision  some  animal  brought  wisdom  to 
him.  It  was  Tirawa,  in  truth,  who  sent  his  message  through  the 
animal.  He  never  spoke  to  man  himself,  but  gave  his  command 
to  beast  or  bird,  and  this  one  came  to  some  chosen  man  and  taught 
him  holy  things.  Thus  were  the  sacred  songs  and  ceremonial 
dances  given  the  Pawnees  through  the  animals. 

So  it  was  in  the  beginning. 

In  the  beginning  Tirawa  gave  to  man  the  corn.  The  com  told 
man  that  she  is  mother — almighty,  like  Tirawa.  If  a  grain  of  com 
be  split,  within  it  will  be  found  a  juice  like  mother's  milk.  So 
the  corn  is  mother,  because  she  nourishes. 

'  Some  animals  are  spiritual  beings  with  deified  attributes,  each  one  possessing  a  psychic 
quality  peculiar  to  itself.  The  actual  animals  upon  earth  are  the  diminutive  eartlily  image 
of  these  divine  ones,  and  are  placed  here  for  the  good  of  man.  The  spiritual  animals  are  often 
symbolic  of  forces  in  nature.  The  Pawnees  say  that  the  Bear — the  divine,  generic  Bear — is 
hard  to  kill,  and  this  not  only  because  of  his  thick  hide  but  because  of  the  psychic  quality  of 
ever-renewing  life  within  him.  The  man  who  has  learned  of  the  Bear,  or  upon  whom  the 
Bear  has  bestowed  power,  has  attained  something  of  the  nature  of  the  Bear;  he  has  become 
like  the  Bear,  hard  to  kill  because  of  the  miraculous  life  force  within  him.  The  Bear  has  his 
power  from  the  Sun,  and  the  Bear  himself  is  oftentimes  the  symbol  of  the  Sun.  The  Sun 
is  recognized  by  man  throughout  the  world  as  the  ever-renewing  life  principle.  This  knowl- 
edge of  the  power  of  the  Bear  is  the  secret  of  the  Bear  Society,  a  secret  never  lightly  told. 

[96] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


PAWNEE 

That  is  why,  long  ago,  woman  had  all  the  work  of  planting.  We 
might,^^ indeed,  call  all  women  ''mother."  Men  might  call  their 
wives  "  mother,"  for  women  grow  the  com  and  cook  for  men  ?  they 
nourish  men,  and  give  them  food. 

The  com  is  mother,  bat  the  bow  and  arrow  is  father,  for  the 
father  always  protects.  So  man  mast  wield  the  bow  and  arrow. 
Thas  it  was  long  ago. 

The  Pawnees  hold  the  Bear  in  reverence.  He  has  wonderfal 
power.  A  chosen  man  once  saw  the  Bear.  The  Bear  came  to 
him  and  revealed  to  him  a  dance,  and  gave  him  all  the  Bear  Songs. 
The  Bear  had  been  commanded  of  Tirawa  thas  to  instruct  the  man, 
and  to  tell  him  that  Tirawa  had  said  that  certain  beasts  woald  give 
man  wisdom  and  power. 

But  the  animal  supreme  for  the  Pawnees  is  the  Otter.  His  is 
a  message  of  wisdom,  for  of  all  beasts  the  Otter  is  the  wisest.  No 
other  people  than  the  Pawnees  has  deeper  knowledge  of  medicines, 
roots,  and  herbs,  and  of  all  that  lives  upon  the  earth,  in  the  air,  and 
under  the  ground. 

The  Eagle  is  Tirawa's  bird.  Of  all  birds  Tirawa  loves  this  one 
the  most.  For  the  Eagle  has  two  eggs,  and  only  two,  and  this 
tells  the  story.  All  things  in  the  world  are  two — man  and  woman. 
This  is  true  whether  of  men,  of  animals,  of  trees,  of  flowers.  All 
things  have  children  of  two  kinds  in  order  that  life  may  be.  Look 
well  upon  the  eagle-feathers  worn  by  Letakots-Lesa:  the  one  on 
the  right  side  is  tall  and  fair  and  decorated  with  a  tuft.  This  is 
man.  The  one  on  the  left  is  short  and  unadorned.  This  is  woman. 
So  do  the  feathers  tell  the  story — man  and  Woman.' 

All  things  in  the  world  are  two.  Man  himself  is  two  in  every- 
thing. Two  eyes,  two  ears,  two  nostrils,  two  hands,  two  feet — one 
for  man  and  one  for  woman,"  Stand  in  the  sunshine  and  behold 
how  man  is  two  —  substance  and  shadow,  body  and  spirit.    Even 

'  The  feathers  are  in  accordance  with  the  law  of  nature  that  makes  the  male  creature, 
whether  bird  or  animal,  to  be  the  larger,  the  stronger,  and  the  more  beautiful. 

'  The  idea  evidently  is  that  the  human  form  is  in  itself  symbolic  of  all  created  life,  in 
that  it  is  two  in  everything,  typifying  the  male  and  female  principles.  Indeed,  it  would 
seem  that  to  the  Pawnees  the  right  side  typifies  man,  the  left  side  woman.  See  the  above 
description  of  the  wearing  of  the  eagle-feathers.  Also  compare  Tawi'-Kurufcs,  Song  of  the 
Bear  Society,  page  J07,  where  the  warrior  wears  the  Father-Hawk  on  the  right  side  and  the 
Mother-Corn  on  the  left. 

[97] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE   INDIANS'    BOOK 

so  there  are  son  and  moon,  and  in  moonlight  as  in  sunlight  man  is 
two,  always  two. 

All  things  in  the  world  are  two,  the  Eagle's  eggs  tell  us  this  story. 
Bttt  behold,  the  Eagle's  feather  tells  the  story  also,  for  the  feather 
in  itself  is  two— half  dark,  half  light.  So  we  see  tfpon  it  daylight 
and  darkness,  stiinmer  and  winter.  The  white  tefls  of  the  stimmer 
when  the  earth  is  fair,  the  dark  of  the  winter  when  the  skies  are 
gloomy.  Even  in  a  single  day  we  may  see  weather  that  is  two — 
clowd  and  sunshine. 

All  things  in  the  world  are  two.  In  our  minds  we  are  two — 
good  and  evil.  With  oar  eyes  we  see  two  things — things  that  are 
fair  and  things  that  are  ugly.  Through  our  nostrils  we  smell  two 
things — things  that  are  good,  things  that  are  bad.  With  our  ears 
we  hear  two  things — things  that  fill  us  with  joy,  things  that  fill 
us  with  sorrow.  We  have  the  right  hand  that  strikes  and  makes 
for  evil,  and  the  left  hand  full  of  kindness,  near  the  heart.  One 
foot  may  lead  us  to  an  evil  way,  the  other  foot  may  lead  us  to  a 
good.     So  are  all  things  two,  all  two. 

This  is  the  Eagle's  story,  known  to  the  fathers  of  Eagle  Chief, 
and  handed  down  from  son  to  son.  Thus  did  the  Pawnees  learn 
of  the  wisest  bird,  and  thus  did  they  learn  of  the  Otter  and  of  the 
Bear.    Even  so  came  the  messages  of  Tirawa  to  man. 

All  this  will  make  clear  the  songs,  and  will  tell  why  Letakots- 
Lesa  wears  the  necklace  of  bear-claws,  the  turban  of  otter-skin, 
and  two  eagle-feathers  in  his  hair. 

Letakots-Lesa  (Eagle  Chief)  owns  a  modem  frame  house,  cattle,  and  horses. 
He  is  thrifty  and  well  to  do.  Upon  the  side  of  his  American  house,  at  the  top, 
beneath  the  gable,  is  painted  a  white  star  on  a  blue  ground.  Thus  he  explained  the 
decoration ; 

"  Once  I  saw  in  a  trance  the  white  star — the  Evening  Star.  It  told  me  that  it 
stood  there  to  watch  over  the  people  and  give  them  plenty.  I  took  the  star  for 
my  emblem,  and  painted  it  on  my  house,  and  branded  all  my  animals  with  it." 

To  infuse  into  the  new  life  of  labor  something  of  the  old  Indian  poetry  is  an 
ideal  for  the  future  Indian  working  -  man,  unconsciously  set  before  him  by  the 
thoughtful  chief  of  the  Pita-hau-erat. 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Letakots-Lesa  (Eagle  Chief) 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


PAWNEE 


THE  MORNING  STAR  AND  THE  EVENING  STAR 

Told  by  Sakurata  (Coming  Sun) 

Sakorata  is  a  Pawnee  of  the  Sfcidi  band,  and  belongs  to  the  Morning-Star  Qan.  He  is  one 
of  the  four  Kurahus  (priests)  who  own  the  right  to  tell  this  story.  Also  he  is  one  of  the  heirs  to 
the  Morning-Star  Bundle. 

Indian  thought  finds  sublime  expression  in  this  myth,  and  in  the  Introduction  to  the  Pawnee 
Songs,  by  Eagle  Chief.  Over  all  is  the  supreme,  impersonal  Being,  Tirawa,  the  infinite  Creator. 
After  Tirawa,  the  Pawnee  sees  duality  in  all  life.  The  very  universe  is  divided  into  two  great 
elements,  male  and  female,  finding  their  natural  counterpart  in  day  and  night.  Humanity  is 
not  the  direct  cliild  of  Tirawa,  but  the  offspring  of  dual  elements  in  the  cosmic  world.  It  is  not 
the  part  of  the  recorder  to  point  out  beauties  in  song  and  story.  When  questioned  deeply  as  to 
the  meaning  of  a  myth,  the  Indian  sometimes  replies,  "  That  is  for  each  to  think  out  for  himself." 


VER  all  is  Tirawa,  the  One  Above,  changeless  and  su- 
preme. From  Tirawa  come  all  things:  Tirawa  made  the 
heavens  and  the  stars. 

The  Pathway  of  Departed  Spirits'  parts  the  heavens. 
In  the  beginning,  east  of  the  path  was  Man:  west  of  the  path  was 
Woman.^  In  the  east  was  creation  planned:  in  the  west  was  crea- 
tion fulfilled.^  All  that  the  stars*  did  in  the  heavens  foretold  what 
would  befall  upon  the  earth,  for  as  yet  was  the  earth  not  made.  /\ 
In  the  west  dwelt  the  White  Star  Woman,  the  Evening  Star, 
who  must  be  sought  and  overcome  that  creation  might  be  achieved. 
From  the  east  went  forth  the  Great  Star,  the  Morning  Star,  to  find 
and  overcome  the  Evening  Star,  that  creation  might  be  achieved. 
The  Morning  Star  called  to  his  younger  brother:'  "  Take  the  Sacred 
Bundle,"  bear  it  over  thy  shoulder  and  follow."    And  the  Morning 

'  The  Milky  Way  is  called  by  the  Pawnees  "  The  Pathway  of  Departed  Spirits,"  because  after 
death  the  spirit  passes  on  this  pathway  to  the  Southern  Star,  the  abiding  place  of  the  dead. 
A  star  that  stands  in  the  north  first  receives  the  spirit  and  sends  it  onward  to  the  Southern  Star. 
This  is  the  sacred  belief,  known  to  the  priests,  but  the  common  people  say  that  the  Milky  Way 
is  the  dust  of  the  Buffalo  (the  Spirit-Buffalo).  The  Southern  Star  is  not  always  seen.  At  a 
certain  time  in  summer,  just  at  dusk,  it  rises  like  fire  for  a  moment,  and  then  disappears.  When 
the  star  rises  thus,  it  means  that  a  great  man  will  die. 

'  Man,  meaning  the  male  principles  woman,  meaning  the  female  principle. 

'  Even  as  the  creative  impulse  is  in  man,  and  the  power  of  fruition  in  woman. 

*  The  stars  are  divine  beings. 

'A  small  star  just  above  the  horizon. 

"  The  Sacred  Bundles  contain  certain  symbols  of  cosmic  forces,  or  symbols  representmg  the 
psychological  or  elemental  attributes  of  the  divinity  to  whom  they  are  consecrated.     The  Pawnees 
say  that  these  Bundles  came  from  Tirawa.     Different  clans  among  the  Pawnees  keep  different 
Bundles.     The  Morning-Star  Bundle  is  kept  by  the  Morning-Star  Qan.     See  page  107. 
,  [99] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE   INDIANS'    BOOK 

Star  joameyed  to  the  west.  And  ever  as  he  joameyed,  the  Evening 
Star  moved,  came,  and  drew  him  towards  her.  (For  men  may  see 
how  the  Evening  Star  moves  nightly.  One  night  she  is  low  in  the 
heavens,  another  night  she  is  high  in  the  heavens.  Even  so  she 
moved  and  drew  the  Morning  Star.)  Yet  when  the  Evening  Star  be- 
held the  Morning  Star  draw  near,  she  placed  in  his  path  Hard  Things 
to  hinder  his  approach.  Th«s,  even  as  the  Morning  Star  first  saw 
the  Evening  Star,  she  rose  and  looked  on  him  and  beckoned  him.  He 
started  towards  her,  b«t  the  earth  opened  and  waters  swept  down, 
and  in  the  waters  was  a  serpent  with  moath  wide  opened  to  devour. 

The  Morning  Star  sang,'  and  drew  from  his  powch  a  ball  of  fire^ 
and  threw  it  at  the  serpent;  and  straightway  the  monster  van- 
ished, the  waters  dried,  the  ground  was  level,  and  the  Morning  Star 
passed  on. 

Even  so,  each  time  the  Evening  Star  placed  in  the  path  of  the 
Morning  Star  Hard  Things  to  hinder  his  approach,  the  Morning 
Star  sang,  and  drew  from  his  pouch  a  ball  of  fire  and  tlirew  it  at 
the  hinderance;  and  straightway  the  hinderance  vanished  and  the 
Morning  Star  passed  on.  After  each  triumph  he  spoke,  saying,  "  I 
have  overcome  my  Grandfather,"  or,  "  I  have  overcome  my  Grand- 
mother," and  again,  "  I  have  overcome  my  Father,"  **  I  have  over- 
come my  Mother,"  and  again,  '*  I  have  overcome  my  Brother," 
**  I  have  overcome  my  Sister." 

Ten  were  the  hinderances,  and  ten  times  spake  he  thus,  each  time 
naming  a  kinship,  in  prophecy  of  kinships  on  the  earth:  for  of  human 
kinships  is  the  number  ten.'  Cactus,  thorns,  and  thick  woods, 
monsters,  and  evil  animals — of  such  forms  were  the  hinderances;^ 
so  were  they  the  prophecy  of  what  should  be  Hard  Things  for  man 
upon  the  earth. 

'  In  olden  times  a  maiden  was  ceremonially  slain  in  sacrifice  to  the  Morning  Star.  This  song 
sung  by  the  Morning  Star  was  the  prophecy  of  the  song  that  the  people  should  sing  when  they 
captured  the  maiden  for  the  sacrifice.  Also  the  song  was  to  be  sung  by  Pawnee  warriors  of  the 
Morning-Star  Qan  before  setting  out  on  the  war-path. 

'  In  another  version  the  younger  brother  each  time  draws  a  war-club  from  the  Sacred  Bundle 
and  gives  it  to  the  Morning  Star. 

'  The  Pawnees  say  that  even  so  have  the  Pawnee  songs  ten  steps.  A  stanra  is  perhaps  the 
nearest  English  equivalent  to  what  the  Pawnee  calls  a  "  step."  The  idea  would  seem  to  be 
that  the  stanzas  of  the  song  are  as  kinsmen  in  a  family,  or  that  they  typify,  by  their  number, 
the  human  relationships.     Of  course  the  songs  alluded  to  are  sacred,  ritualistic  songs. 

<The  hinderances  were  also  symbolic  of  dangers  and  of  forces  of  nature. 

[100] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


PAWNEE 

So  passed  the  Morning  Star  in  victory,  and  journeyed  westward 
ever,  and  reached  the  lodge  of  the  Evening  Star* 

To  the  Evening  Star  had  Tirawa  given  the  Powers  of  the  West. 
Also  had  he  placed,  to  guard  her,  four  beasts — Black  Bear,  Mountain 
Lion,  Wild-Cat,  and  Wolf.  These  Beasts,  placed  by  Tirawa  in  the 
heavens,  were  stars— Black  Star,  Yellow  Star,  White  Star,  Red  Star. 
They  were  beings  who  should  send  to  earth  beasts  like  themselves. 
They  were  the  prophecy  of  animals  to  be  upon  the  earth.  Also 
were  they  Autumn,  Spring,  Winter,  Summer;  thunder,  lightning, 
clouds,  winds;  and  they  betokened  four  kinds  of  wood  to  be  upon 
the  earth — cottonwood,  ehn,  willow,  box-elder;  and  four  kinds  of 
corn — black,  yellow,  white,  red.  Great  was  the  power  of  the  four 
beasts:  great  was  their  power  to  guard  the  Evening  Star;  yet  were 
they  vanquished  by  the  Morning  Star. 

And  the  Morning  Star  spoke  and  said,  **  I  have  conquered,  and 
ye  shall  obey  my  command.  Thou,  Black  Star,  shalt  stand  in  the 
northeast,  whence  cometh  night.  Thou  art  Autumn.  Thou,  Yellow 
Star,  shalt  stand  in  the  northwest,  where  is  the  golden  settiag  of  the 
sun.  Thou  art  Spring.  Thou,  White  Star,  shalt  stand  in  the  south, 
facing  north,  whence  cometh  the  snow.  Thou  art  Winter.  Thou, 
Red  Star,  shalt  stand  in  the  southeast.    Thou  art  Summer." ' 

Now  are  the  four  stars  known  as  the  four  World-Quarter  Gods. 
At  the  four  world-points  they  stand  to  hold  up  the  heavens,  and  they 
obey  the  Morning  Star. 

Then  the  Morning  Star  approached  the  Evening  Star  to  over- 
come her.  Yet  might  the  Evening  Star  not  yield  until  the  Morning 
Star  should  bring  to  her  the  cradle-board  for  the  child  that  was  to 
be  bom.''  The  board  should  be  of  the  cottonwood;  the  covering,  a 
speckled  wild-cat-skin,  emblem  of  the  starry  heavens.  With  strips 
of  otter-skin  should  the  child  be  bound  upon  the  board;  for  the  otter 
lives  in  the  water,  and  betokens  the  rain-storms. 

'  Ibe  Pawnees  say  that  the  Yellow  Star  faces  to  the  sooth,  and  the  White  Star  faces  to  the 
north,  and  the  Yellow  Star  and  the  White  Star  change  places.  For  the  Yellow  Star  stands  to 
tlie  north  in  winter,  and  the  White  Star  stands  to  the  north  in  sanuner.  Thus  the  stars  of 
the  west  change  places,  even  as  the  change  of  seasons  comes  in  the  west.  The  east  is  plan; 
the  west  is  fulfihnent,  movement,  achievement. 

*  Among  the  Pawnees  the  htJsfaand  brings  to  his  wife  the  cradle-board.  Tliis  is  ceremoniaDy 
cat  from  a  tree  by  the  husband's  kinsmen,  and  decorated  with  symbolic  emblems.  See  illus- 
tration. Pawnee  cradle-board. 

noj] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'    BOOK 

Above  the  board,  over  the  head  of  the  child,  should  be  stretched 
a  hoop,  cat  from  the  willow -tree.  This  too  betokens  the  rain- 
storm, also  the  Arch-Above-the-Earth— the  Rainbow. 

The  Morning  Star  went  forth  to  seek  the  cradle-board.'  The 
Star  Beasts  helped  him,'  and  the  Morning  Star  found,  and  won,  and 
brottght  the  cradle-board  to  the  Evening  Star.  But  stifl,  ere  she 
yielded,  the  Evening  Star  bade  the  Morning  Star  seek  and  bring  to 
her  a  mat  for  the  child  to  lie  ttpon.  And  the  Morning  Star  went 
to  the  south  and  killed  a  buffalo,  and  brought  the  softest  part  of 
the  hide  to  be  a  mat  for  the  child  to  lie  upon. 

Then  said  the  Evening  Star,  **  Yet  must  thou  seek  and  bring  to 
me  water  wherewith  to  bathe  the  child."  And  the  Morning  Star 
sought  and  won  and  brought  to  the  Evening  Star  water  wherewith 
to  bathe  the  child.^  The  water  was  sweet  and  fragrant,  for  it  came 
from  a  spring  around  which  grew  sweet-smelling  grasses.  The  water 
was  the  rain,  and  it  was  part  of  the  garden  of  the  Evening  Star — 
her  garden,  ever  growing  and  ever  green.  This  water,  brought  by 
the  Morning  Star  to  the  Evening  Star,  was  that  rain  which  from 
henceforth  should  go  to  the  people  of  the  earth. 

Now  could  the  Morning  Star  approach  the  Evening  Star  and 
overcome  her.  And  when  the  Morning  Star  overcame  the  Evening 
Star,  he  gave  to  her  all  that  he  had.     And  when  the  Evening  Star 

'  There  is  a  detailed  legend  of  how  the  Homing  Star  won  the  cradle-board,  which  hang  with 
many  other  cradle-boards  cpon  posts  within  n.  lodge  in  the  heavens.  These  cradle-boards  were 
decorated  with  emblematic  designs,  which  the  people  of  earth  now  ase  to  decorate  their  cradle- 
boards.     Thus  the  Pawnees  say  that  their  designs  came  from  the  stars. 

'  Probably  a  prophecy  of  how  on  earth  the  kinsmen  of  the  husband  should  procure  the  cradle- 
board. 

^  There  is  also  a  detailed  legend  of  how  the  Morning  Star  got  the  water  through  the  help  of 
a  woman.  The  Evening  Star  herself  controlled  the  waters.  But  the  woman  knew  how  to 
find  the  water  for  the  Morning  Star.  As  she  started  forth  she  said  to  her  children,  "  Sing,  for 
I  go  to  fetch  water  for  the  Morning  Star."  And  the  children  helped  her  through  their  singing. 
The  woman  came  to  a  hollow  around  which  grew  sweet  grasses,  and  within  the  hollow  was  the 
spring.  She  thrust  a  stick  into  the  hollow,  and  water  gushed  forth;  and  she  caught  the  water 
in  a  sack  made  from  the  covering  of  the  buffalo's  heart,  and  gave  it  to  the  Morning  Star. 

The  woman  is  probably  emblematic  of  the  midwife.  "  And  so  to-day,"  say  the  Pawnees, 
"  when  a  child  is  born,  the  midwife  takes  a  wooden  bowl  and  goes  to  a  running  stream  and 
fetches  water  to  bathe  the  child." 

The  incident  of  the  singing  of  the  children  draws  attention  to  the  Indians'  belief  in  the  power 
of  thought  directed  by  one  person  or  group  of  persons  towards  another.  The  thought,  will- 
power, or  prayer  sent  out  for  another  is  often  uttered  in  song.  The  absence  of  the  one  to  whom 
the  thought  is  directed  does  not  interfere  with  the  helpful  power  of  the  thought.  See  Indian 
Story  and  Song,  by  Alice  C  Fletcher,  page  81.  Also  compare  Gomda  Daakia,  page  223,  and 
Tuari's  song,  page  463. 

[102] 
Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


CRADLE-BOARD   FOR  THE  MORNING  STAR  CLAN 

Painted  by  Pawnee  Women.  Upon  this  cradle -board  have 
been  bound  the  children  of  Saktirtita  and,  his  wife.  Above  the 
head  of  the  child,  at  the  top  of  the  board,  are  painted  the  morn- 
ing star,  flint  arrow-heads,  and  the  rainbow.  This  design  tells 
that  the  child  is  under  the  protection  of  the  morning  star  and 
is  watched  over  by  the  Powers  of  the  West,  because  of  the 
rainbow.  On  each  side  of  the  drawing  of  the  cradle-board  is 
a  bead-work  design,  painted  by  Pawnee  women. 

\ 


Pllllffil! 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


PAWNEE 

yielded  to  the  Morning  Star,  she  gave  to  him  afl  tHat  she  had:  each 
gave  unto  the  other  of  their  Power  for  the  sake  of  the  people;  for  all 
that  they  gave  should  henceforth  go  to  men  upon  the  earth.  The 
Power  of  the  Morning  Star  is  in  the  bed  of  flint  on  which  he  stands. 
And  the  Morning  Star  gave  to  the  Evening  Star  his  Power.  To  the 
Evening  Star  belong  the  Powers  of  the  West:  the  Power  of  the  Storms 
is  hers.  But  into  the  Storms  the  Morning  Star  put  his  Power  of 
Flint,  and  placed  it  in  the  clouds  to  strike  as  lightning  from  the  rain- 
storms. This  Power  of  Flint  from  the  Morning  Star  would  give 
knives,  axes,  and  weapons  to  the  people  of  the  earth.' 

Now  when  the  Morning  Star  had  overcome  the  Evening  Star,  he 
received  from  her  a  pebble,  and  he  let  fall  the  pebble  into  great 
waters.  After  a  long  time  (so  tell  the  songs)  the  pebble  became  the 
earth.  Then  the  Morning  Star  threw  into  the  air  his  ball  of  fire, 
and  said,  "  Stand  there,  and  give  light  to  the  earth!"  And  the  ball 
of  fire  became  the  Sun.  The  Power  of  the  Sun  is  from  the  Morn- 
ing Star. 

Now  when  the  pebble  under  the  waters  had  become  the  earth, 
the  four  World-Quarter  Gods  struck  downward,  with  closed  hands, 
and  on  each  side  of  the  waters  the  earth  rose  up.  (Thus  in  the 
Bundle  of  each  World-Quarter  God  is  a  war-club  to  mean  the  down- 
ward stroke  that  made  the  earth  to  rise  up  on  each  side  of  the  waters.) 

The  Evening  Star  bore  a  daughter.  And  she  placed  the  little 
maiden  on  a  cloud  to  send  her  to  the  earth.  Now  in  the  garden 
of  the  Evening  Star  were  seeds  of  afl  kinds  that  should  go  to  the 
people  of  earth.     Here  grew  the  Mother-Corn.^     And  the  Evening 

'  The  Morning  Star  typifies  the  masctiline  principle.  The  part  of  man  in  ancient  times  was 
to  hunt  the  game  that  was  his  food,  to  protect  himself  from  beast  or  foe,  and  to  fight  his  enemies. 
Man's  power  was  in  the  strength  and  skill  of  his  weaponed  arm.  All  sharp  weapons  were  of 
flint.  It  is  natural,  therefore,  that  the  power  of  the  Morning  Star  should  be  the  Power  of  Flint. 
In  ancient  times  arrow-heads  were  of  flint.  Flint  generates  fire.  With  many  tribes  it  is  con- 
nected with  lightning,  and  the  flint-tipped  arrows  of  the  Indian  correspond  to  the  lightning 
arrows  shot  to  earth  by  higher  powers.  In  Navajo  mythology  the  war-god,  Nayenezrani,  is 
clad  all  in  flint,  and  from  the  joints  of  his  flint  armor  flash  the  four  lightnings,  hurling  his  enemies 
down  into  the  earth  (see  pages  351,  362).  Pueblo  Indian  designs  also  show  the  zigzag  light- 
ning, tipped  with  arrow-heads.  It  is  of  interest  to  note  that  the  Power  of  the  Morning  Star  is 
the  fire-impelling  stone.     (Compare  Pima  creation  myth,  page  3J5.) 

The  Evening  Star  typifies  the  female  principle.  Rain  makes  the  earth  to  bring  forth,  and  so 
this  fructifying  element  is  part  of  the  Power  of  the  Evening  Star. 

^  The  Mother-Corn  is  a  small  and  very  beautiful  corn-ear,  symbolic  of  fruitfulness  and  of  the 
female  principle. 

[103] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE   INDIANS'   BOOK 

Star  gave  to  the  maiden  the  Mother-Corn  and  said,  "  Plant  this  wpon 
the  earth!"^   Then  she  sent  her  daughter  downward. 

The  maiden  dropped  from  the  clottd  ttpon  the  earth  like  rain,  and 
to  this  day  the  name  for  maiden  in  the  Pawnee  tongue  is  **  Standing 
Rain."  The  little  maiden  knew  not  where  she  was.  She  tamed  her 
ear  this  way  and  that,  listening,  till  at  last  there  came  towards  her 
a  boy,  child  of  the  San  and  the  Moon,  even  as  was  the  maiden  child 
of  the  Morning  Star  and  the  Evening  Star.  From  the  anion  of  these 
two  sprang  the  people  of  the  earth. 

To  the  Stars  did  Tirawa  givz  power  to  watch  over  the  people. 
If  the  people  were  evil,  the  Stars  might  send  storms  to  destroy 
them.  Bat  Tirawa  himself  is  ever  withoat  anger.  He  is  feared  by 
none.    Tirawa  is  changeless. 

TAWI'   KURUKS 

Song  of  the  Bear  Society' 
Sung  and  told  by  Letakots-Lesa   (Eagle  Chief) 


HE  men  of  the  Bear  Society  are  called  Bear  Warriors. 
The  Bear,  the  great  Spirit-Bear,  receives  his  power  from 
the  san,  and  so  it  was  throagh  the  san  that  the  Bear 

. Warriors  had  been  victorious.     In  this   song  theyfc  are 

i-etaming  from  war  jast  as  the  san  rises.  The  women  go  forth 
with  song  to  meet  the  victors,  who  are  coming  all  splendidly  decked 
and  painted.  One  of  the  women,  seeing  the  warriors  thas  beaatifal 
in  their  triamph,  cries : 

"  If  Atias  Tirawa,  the  Father  Above,  had  bat  made  me  man, 
I  too  might  be  like  these!  Bat  alas!  women  may  never  achieve 
greatness.  They  mast  remain  ever  in  the  same  station.  Great 
deeds  are  not  for  them.  Bat  had  I  been  a  man,  I  might  have  done 
even  what  these  have  done !" 

The  rays  of  the  rising  san  now  toach  the  earth  and  speed  swiftly 
over  the  groand  until  they  shine  upon  the  victors.  The  hidden 
meaning  of  the  song  is  the  victorious  power  of  the  sun. 

'  See  "Organizations  of  the  Plains  Indians,"  page  31. 
[104] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


A  Daughter  of  the  Prairie 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


PAWNEE 

In  the  first  stanza,  the  "  many  coming  "  are  the  warriors:  in 
the  second,  the  sunbeams.  This  is  a  very  old  song,  and  is  sung 
in  ceremonies  of  the  Bear  Society  jttst  as  the  sun  is  about  to  rise. 


TAWr   KURUKS 

Rerawha-a 
Rerawha-a  * 
Rerawha-a  rera  c 


Yol 


SONG   OF   THE   BEAR   SOCIETY 
(Literal  translation) 
Yonder  coming. 
Yonder  coming, 
Lo,  the  many  yonder,  he — 
Yo! 


Para  rika  ratutah 
Rerawha-a  rera  e 


Yo! 


Mine,  too,  might  have  been  a  triumph 
Like  the  many  yonder,  he — 
Yo! 


Hi  tzapat  rakuwaka  kaatutah 

Iriritah 

Rerawha-a 

Rerawha-a 
Rerawha-a  rera  e 

Yol 


Cried  the  woman. 

Would  that  I  were  like  to  these. 
The  many  coming. 
Yonder  coming. 
Yonder  coming, 
Lo,  the  many  yonder,  he — 
Yol 


Para  riku  ratutah 
Rerawha-a  rera  e 


Yo! 


Mine,  too,  might  have  been  a  triumph 
Like  the  many  yonder,  he — 
Yo! 


Rasakura  rukuksa  rerawha-a 

Rerawha-a 

Rerawha-a 

Rerawha-a 
Rerawha-a  rera  e 

Yol 


Now  the  rising   sun  hath  sent   his  rays 
to  earth, 

A  many  coming. 
Yonder  coming. 
Yonder  coming, 
Lo,  the  many  yonder,  he — 
Yol 


Rasakura  rura  whia 
Rerawha-a  rera  e 


Yo! 


Sunbeams  o'er  the  ground  are  speeding, 
Lo.  the  many  yonder,  he — 
Yo! 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'   BOOK 

SONG   OF   THE   BEAR   SOCIETY 

(Free  metrical  translation — ;the  hidden  meaning  revealed) 

They  are  coming, 

They  are  coming 

Lo,  the  victor  hosts,  ya  he — 

Yo! 

c 

Forth  to  meet  them  go  the  women 
With  the  rising  son,  ya  he — 

Yo! 

Cries  a  maid, 
Had  bat  the  Father  made  me  man. 
Oh  then  might  I  have  been  like  these 

Who  now  are  coming. 
With  the  rising  san,  ya  he — 

Yo! 

Like  to  these  who  now  are  coming 
With  the  rising  sun,  ya  he — 

Yo! 

Now  the  stin 
Hath  sent  to  earth  his  hosts  of  sunbeams 

Swiftly  speeding 

Who  are  coming. 

Who  are  coming 
With  the  rising  sun,  ya  he — 

Yo! 

Radiant  now  the  warriors'  triumph 
In  the  rising  sun,  ya  he — 
Yo! 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


PAWNEE 
TAWI'    KURUKS 

Song  of  the  Bear  Society 
Sung  and  told  by  Safcaruta  (Coming  San) 


HE  Sacred  Bandies  are  bandies  containing  holy  symbols. 
These  bandies  came  to  the  Pawnees  long  ago  through 
the  power  of  Tirawa. 

Once  a  warrior  of  the  Bear  Society  borrowed  from 
a  Sacred  Bundle  the  Mother-Corn'  and  the  Father-Hawk,  and  wore 
them  apon  his  back  forth  to  war — the  Father-Hawk  on  the  right 
side  where  is  the  power  to  smite,  for  the  Father-Hawk  strikes  with 
his  wing  and  kills  his  prey;  the  Mother-Corn  on  the  left  side,  near 
the  heart,  where  is  kindness,  for  the  Mother-Corn  harms  no  thing, 
bat  protects  only. 

Mother-Corn  and  Father-Hawk  brought  victory  to  the  warrior, 
for  Tirawa  watched  over  the  man  because  he  wore  these  holy  things, 
and,  because  of  the  bundle,  Tirawa  sent  storms  of  wind  and  rain 
to  protect  him  from  his  enemies.  For  this  Sacred  Bundle  was 
known  as  the  Rains-Enfolded,  and  when  it  was  opened  at  the  time 
of  the  first  thunder,  and  certain  songs  were  sung,  the  clouds  opened 
and  the  rains  fell. 

So,  because  of  his  triumph  the  warrior  made  this  song,  that 
when  he  came  with  the  sacred  symbols  upon  his  back  the  people 
might  sing,  **  Yonder  come  the  Mother-Corn  and  the  Father-Hawk^** 
for  it  was  through  these,  and  through  the  power  of  Tirawa,  that 
^le  man  had  been  victorious.  No  man  may  succeed  except  it  be 
through  Tirawa's  aid. 

The  warrior  was  afterwards  made  the  leader  of  the  Bear  So- 
ciety, and  this  his  song  may  be  sung  in  ceremony  by  night  or  day : 

'  The  Mother-Corn  and  the  Father-Hawk  are  sacred  symbols,  representing  the  female 
principle  and  the  male  principle.  They  also  stand  for  the  Evening  Star  and  the  Morning  Star. 
The  one  is  an  ear  of  corn  symbolically  decorated  and  painted,  the  other  is  a  staffed  hawk. 
A  fall  description  of  the  Mother-Corn  is  given  in  The  Hako,  a.  Pam>nee  Ceremony,  by  Miss  Alice 
C  Retcher,  published  by  the  Bareaa  of  American  Ethnology,  1904. 

[J07] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'    BOOK 


TAWI'   KURUKS 

Nawa  Atira, 
Nawa  Atira, 
Nawa  Atira, 
Ha  we-ra 
Nawa  Atira, 

He  yol 


SONG   OF   THE   BEAR   SOCIETY 
(Literal  translation) 
Hither  the  Mother — 
Hither  the  Mother- 
Hither  the  Mother — 
Now  she  Cometh, 
Hither  the  Mother ! 
He  yol 


Nawa  Atios, 
Nawa  Atias, 
Nawa  Atius, 
Ha  we-ra 
Nawa  Atios, 

He  yo  1 


Hither  the  Father — 
Hither  the  Father — 
Hither  the  Father — 
Now  he  Cometh, 
Hither  the  Father ! 
He  yol 


(Translation  with  fall  meaning  revealed) 

Hither  the  Mother-Corn — 
Greet  we  the  Mother-Corn — 
Thanks  to  the .  Mother-Corn — 

Now  she  cometh. 
Hither  the  Mother-(^rn ! 

He  yo ! 

Hither  the  Father-Hawk — 
Greet  we  the  Father-Hawk — 
Thanks  to  the  Father-Hawk — 

Now  he  cometh. 
Hither  the  Father-Hawk ! 
He  yo  I 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


The  Wife  of  Young  Chief 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


PAWNEE 
IRUSKA 

Songs  of  the  "Irttsfca" — warriors  who  have  won  war  honors^ 

I 

Sang  and  told  by  Lesa-Kipiliru  (Young  ChieQ 

CERTAIN  man  had  a  loved  son.  This  son  had  a  fine 
spotted  horse  of  which  he  thought  highly.  The  son 
died  and  the  father  cherished  the  horse.  Of  all  his  many 
horses  he  loved  the  spotted  horse  the  most.  Then  the 
father,  too,  died,  and  the  horse  went  from  one  person  to  another. 
But  of  the  many  masters,  none  gave  it  the  love  of  the  owners  of 
old.     So  was  it,  in  very  truth,  an  orphaned  steed. 

Once  while  Young  Chief  lay  sleeping,  he  heard  in  dream  as 
from  afar  some  one  singing.  He  could  not  see  the  singer,  but 
the  song  was  plain  upon  the  air.  Then,  still  dreaming,  he  saw  four 
men  seated  about  a  drum.  Beside  them  stood  the  old  man  who 
had  died,  dressed  even  as  in  life,  around  him  his  blanket  and  on 
his  head  a  wide  hat  decked  with  a  feather  from  the  eagle's  breast. 
Then  the  men  struck  the  drum  and  broke  into  the  song  which 
had  come  from  the  unknown  voice  upon  the  air. 

Young  Chief  awoke  and  sang  aloud  the  song.  His  wife  heard 
him,  and  she,  too,  caught  up  the  song  and  learned  it.  For  hours 
after  waking  it  seemed  to  Young  Chief  as  though  the  song  still 
hovered  in  the  air  around  him. 

The  song  became  a  favorite  among  the  people  and  was  used  in 
the  Iruska  dances. 

IRUSKA  SONG   OF   THE   IRUSKA 

Orphaned,  lone,  forsaken ! 
Orphaned,  lone,  forsaken  I 
Orphaned,  lone,  forsaken  1 
Atiu7  tTwaka,  Father  saith 

Asawafci  ratawe ;  In  Y°»^  ^^^^ 

Narutitawe— he  I  A  spotted  horse 

Is  ownerless ; 
Orphaned,  lone,  forsaken  I 
.  See  "Omaha  Dance-Songs  of  the  Dakotas,"  page  55,  and  "He-I«sh-fca  Songs  of  Winne- 
bagos,"  page  257.  [\W\ 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Narutitawe — he-re 
Narutitawe — he-re 
Narutitawe — he-re 


THE   INDIANS'   BOOK 


II 

Sang  by  Saktirota  (Coming  Son) 
IRUSKA  SONG   OF   THE   IRUSKA 

Hawa  Atira,  Again,  0  Mother-Moon, 


E-yo! 
Atira  tziksu  wcta  tarirtrta 
Hawa  Atira, 

E-yo ! 


E-yo  I 
In  thy  power,  Mother-Moon, 

I  put  my  faith  again. 
Again,  O  Mother-Moon, 

E-yo  I 


III 


WAR-DANCE  SONG  OF  THE  IRUSKA 

Sang  by  Letafcots-Lesa  (Eagle  Chief) 


IRUSKA 

Atios  si  ttJS  kitawi*, 
Ati«s  si  tos  kitawi', 
Atius  si  tws  kitawi', 
Karaku  tikitawio 

He-hi  I 
Atius  si  taka  ruski 
Tak«  t«s  kitawi', 

AtitJS  si, 
Karaka  okitawi« 

He-yo  I 


SONG   OF   THE   IRUSKA 

0  Father,  thou  dost  rale  sapreme, 
O  Father,  thou  dost  rule  sapreme, 
O  Father,  thou  dost  rule  supreme, 
None  greater,  thou  dost  rule  sapreme. 

Can  there  be  any  over  thee? 
0  Father,    can   there   greater   be 
than  thou? 
None  greater,  thoa  dost  rule  sapreme. 


IV 


IRUSKA  SONG  OF  THE  CORN-OFFERING 

Sang  and  told  fay  Sakarata  (Coming  San) 

The  com  is  upheld  and  offered  to  Tirawa,  and  he  is  implored  to 
look  down  while  the  people  sing,  **  Partake  we  together/'  for  while 
we  offer  the  com  we  eat  in  symbol  with  the  Father. 


IRUSKA 

Atius, 
Ha,  is-tewat 
Askururit 
Weta  tsihakawatsista 


SONG   OF   THE   IRUSKA 

Father,  thou. 
Look  upon  us. 
Now  partake  we 
Of  the  corn  with  thee. 


[HO] 
Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


The  Daughter  of  Young  Chief 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


PAWNEE 
SKIRIKI 

Coyote  Warrior-Song 
Suilg  and  told  by  Lukitawika-wari   (Rider- Around- the-Great-Heaven-Domed-Lodge) 


[  HIS  is  a  Coyote  warrior-song,  belonging  to  the  Chawi 

Tband  of  Pawnees.  A  man  upon  the  war-path'  strays 
from  his  companions,  roaming  the  prairie  alone.  He 
'  1  thinks  of  home,  of  those  whom  he  loves,  and  is  lonely 
and  sad.  Then  he  looks  up  at  the  heavens  and  knows  that  ever 
present  is  Tirawa,  the  One  Above,  in  whom  he  puts  his  trust.  So 
he  sings : 

"O  great  expanse  of  the  blae  sky. 
See  me  roaming  here 
Again  on  the  war-path,  lonely; 
I  trust  in  you,  protect  me !" 

This  song  belonged  first  to  Tirirak-tawirus.  The  friend  of  Tiri- 
rak-tawirus  was  Lukitawika-wari.  These  two  were  brother^  in 
the  Indian  manner — that  is,  brothers  by  mutual  adoption,  and 
such  brotherhood  is  stronger  than  blood. 

Tirirak-tawirus  was  older  than  Lukitawika-wari.  He  was  a 
man  when  the  other  was  but  a  boy.  When  the  elder  brother  was 
grown  old,  indeed,  he  gave  to  the  youth  this,  his  own  song,  bidding 
him  sing  it  when  he  needed  help  or  protection.  While  singing  it 
Lukitawika-wari  would  remember  his  brother. 

The  song  is  a  prayer  to  Tirawa  for  guidance  and  protection. 
As  such,  Lukitawika-wari  sang  it  when  far  from  home.  He  sang 
it,  too,  while  on  the  water  for  the  first  time.  Tirirak-tawirus  is 
long  dead,  but  Lukitawika-wari  still  lives  and  cherishes  the  song. 

The  names  of  the  two  brothers  are  very  beautiful.  Tirirak-ta- 
wirus means  the  Rescuer,  or  the  good  one  who  comes  forward  in 
time  of  need.    The  significance  is  twofold.     It  may  mean  him  who 

'  See  "  The  War-Path,"  page  J  54. 
[HI] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE   INDIANS'    BOOK 

saved  the  life  of  a  friend  in  battle,  or  him  who  went  to  kill  a  baff alo 
as  a  consecrated  and  necessary  offering  to  Tirawa  in  religiotjs  cere- 
mony. 

Lttkitawika-wari  means :  He  who  rides  his  horse  around  in  the 
lodge.  But  the  lodge  here  meant  is  not  such  as  the  Pawnees  used 
to  build  of  earth  with  a  domed  roof  supported  by  posts ;  the  lodge 
is  the  world — the  open  prairie,  roofed  with  the  blue  vault  of  the  sky. 

SKIRIKI  COYOTE   WARRIOR-SONG 

Ah !    Tiras  takawaha  O  great  expanse  of  the  blue  sky, 
Tiratpari — ho  I  See  me  roaming  here 

Tatara  kita-wira  Again  on  the  war-path,  lonely; 

Hawa  re-rawira — he-yo  !  I  trust  in  yoti,  protect  me  I 


SAKIPIRIRU 

Yotjng  Dog  Dance-Song 

Song  and  told  by  Letafcots-Lcsa  (Eagle  Chief) 


I 


N  olden  times  the  Pawnee  would  dream  of  the  protection 
of  Tirawa.  He  would  see  in  vision  the  war-bonnet, 
for  this  may  be  worn  only  by  those  who  have  achieved 
greatness,  and  thus  the  war-boimet  is  a  symbol  of  Tirawa. 
So  in  dream  or  trance  might  the  Pawnees  see  the  Father'  wearing 
the  war-bonnet.    Such  was  the  vision  of  Eagle  Chief. 

The  music  of  this  song  is  a  "Young  Dog  Dance-Song,"  an  old 
song  of  the  Dog  Society.  But  the  words  are  those  heard  by  Eagle 
Chief  in  a  trance.  The  song  as  here  written  is  sometimes  sung  at 
the  opening  of  the  Pawnee  Spirit-Dance  ceremonies,  when  the 
dancers  stand  in  a  circle  before  beginning  the  dance. 

SAKIPIRIRU  YOUNG    DOG    DANCE-SONG 

Atias  esa  rufca  ratu  teriku  The  Father,  him  I  saw 

Wearing  bonnet  of  war, 
Wearing  emblem  of  power — 
Father,  him  I  saw. 
Yea,  'twas  the  Father  I  saw. 

'  In  this  particular  song  it  is  the  prophet  of  the  Spirit-Dance  religion  who  is  alluded  to  as 
"the  Father."     See  "History  of  the  Spirit-Dance,"  page  4J. 

[112] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


PAWNEE 
KISAKA 

Song   of   Rejoicing  and   Thanksgiving 
Explained  by  Lesa-Kipiliru  (Young  Chief) 


HEN  a  man  receives  presents  from  another,  he  may  sing 
this  song,  remembering  that   all  things  come  through 
the  power  of  Tirawa,  and  asking  of  the  Father,  while 
giving  thanks,  a   renewal   of  his   gifts — long  life,  good' 
health,  and  plenty  in  the  fields. 

The  man  who  receives  prays  for  a  blessing  on  the  man  who  gives. 
Thus  thanks  he  the  giver.  Well  is  it  to  give  to  the  poor  and  to 
the  helpless,  for  they  are  heeded  of  the  Father.  Their  prayers  will 
be  heard,  and  more  s«rely  than  those  of  all  others  will  their  blessings 
be  fulfilled  upon  the  giver.  Worth  more  than  all  the  prayers  of 
the  prosperous  and  strong  are  the  thankful  prayers  of  the  feeble, 
the  aged,  and  the  poor. 

KISAKA  SONG   OF   THANKSGIVING 

Nawa  Atiws,  Now,  O  Father, 

Iri  ta-titska.  Our  thanks  be  unto  thee, 

Iri  asuta  hawa.  Our  thanks  !     Renew  our  plenty  I 

Iri  rurahe  ! .  Our  thanks  ! 

Renew  these  thy  gifts  to  us ! 

KITZIC^TA 

Song  of  the  Lance  Ceremony 
Sung  and  told  by  Letakots-Lesa  (Eagle  Chief) 


T 


HE  men  of  the  Lance  Society  are  all  brave  warriors  who 
never  turn  back  for  fear  of  death.  One  day  while  they 
were  holding  their  ceremonial    dance  in  the  village  a 

^^ .boy -child  was  bom.    Said   the  mother  to  her  dearly 

loved  babe,  "  When  you  are  grown,  join  not  that  Society  lest  you 
be  killed ;  for  those  men  fear  not  death."    One  of  the  braves  heard 

[113] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'   BOOK 

the  woman  speaking  thtts  to  the  boy,  and  told  the  other  warriors 
of  her  words.    Said  one  of  these : 

**  Where  will  the  woman  send  her  son  that  he  will  not  meet  death  ? 
All  men  must  die ;  every  man  mttst  one  day  meet  with  death." 

So  the  Lance  Warriors  made  this  song  which  is  s«ng  in  their 
ceremonies.  The  woman's  words  of  warning  to  her  son  were  in- 
deed proof  that  all  knew  the  Lance  Warriors  feared  not  death. 
But  the  inner  meaning  of  the  song  is  the  reply :  "  Where  will  the 
woman  send  her  son  that  he  will  not  meet  death?  All  men 
mttst  die." 

KUZICHTA  SONG   OF    THE   LANCE   CEREMONY 

Nari-ru-rit  riwaka  This  the  word  there  overheard, 

Nari-ra-rit  riwaka  This  the  word  there  overheard ; 
Tzapat  .tiwaku  'Twas  a  woman  spoke  : 

Taku  kaki  nariksha  "Heed  not  you  the  men  who  dance, 

Kitzichta.  ra  hariwi  Never,  my  son,  for  yoo  the  "Lance  !" 

Nari-rfi-rit  riwaka.  This  the  word  there  overheard. 

KEHARE   KATZARU' 

Songs  of  the  Spirit-Dance  (Ghost-Dance  Songs) 

I 

Sung  and  told  by  Letakots-Lesa  (Eagle  Chief) 

In  a  dream.  Eagle  Chief  saW  spread  out  above  him  the  heaven 
with  all  its  stars,  like  the  many  stars  upon  the  American  flag;  so 
in  this  song,  which  he  heard  in  his  dream,  he  sings  of  the  heavens 
as  of  the  flag. 

KEHARE  KATZARU  SONG   OF   THE    SPIRIT-DANCE 

Irittatu  terit,  I  saw  it,  yea,  I  saw  it, 

Irittata  terit,  I  saw  it,  yea,  I  saw  it, 

Na-rittattf  terit,  In  very  truth  I  saw  it, 

Na-rittato  terit.  In  very  truth  I  saw  it. 

Nawiru-tzawhio  rhurhera,  Twas  the  starry  banner  beautiful, 

Nawiru-tzawhio  rhurhera.  'Twas  the  starry  banner  beautiful. 

'  See  "The  History  of  the  Spirit-Dance,"  page  41.  Compare  songs  of  the  Spirit-Dance, 
Dakota,  and  Arapaho. 

[114]     ' 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


PAWNEE 


II 

Explained  fay  Sakurata  (Coming  San) 

Once  the  spirit  of  Tirawa  touched  a  woman  as  she  lay  in  trance 
during  the  Spirit-Dance.  So  afterwards  when  Spirit-Dances  were 
held,  the  people  would  call  the  woman  to  join  them,  singing  this 
song: 


KEHARE  KATZARU 

Ah,  heru  tza-ot. 
Ah,  herti  tzo-ut, 

Atius, 
We  ta-ita  Atius, 

Atius, 
We  ta-ita  Atius. 


SONG   OF   THE    SPIRIT-DANCE 

Ah,  beloved  sister, 
Ah,  beloved  sister. 

He  above, 
He  the  Father  fcnoweth  thee. 

He  above. 
He  the  Father  knoweth  thee. 


Ill 
Explained  fay  Sakuruta  (Coming  Sun) 

The  dancers  in  the  Spirit-Dance  gather  at  sundown  and  dance 
all  night  until  the  rising  of  the  morning  star.  The  Pawnees  are  a 
people  of  deep  feeling.  Sometimes  the  spirit  of  man  is  touched  and 
stirred  with  the  coming  of  night.  In  this  song  the  dancer  is  impefled 
to  utter  his  feeling,  and  gives  the  cry  of  the  crow,  the  sacred  bird 
of  the  Spirit-Dance. 


KEHARE    KATZARU 

Ah,  tziksu  rutatiku 
We  raku  retkaha  ra, 
Kaw-kaw,  rakuwak-tahu, 
Kaw-kaw,  rakuwak-tahu, 
Operit  we  ra  ti  kuhruri, 
Operit  ti  ra-hu. 


SONG   OF   THE    SPIRIT-DANCE 

Ah,  now  my  spirit  stirreth 

With  the  coming  of  the  nightfall. 

Caw-caw,  like  the  crow  I  cry. 

Caw-caw,  like  the  crow  I  cry. 

All  the  night  we  shall  wait  for  the  star 

Till  the  star  riseth  here. 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE   INDIANS'    BOOK 


IV 

Explained  and  translated  by  Lesa-Kipilira  (Yoang  Chief) 

In  singing  this  song,  whenever  the  dancers,  through  weariness, 
begin  to  flag  and  make  as  though  they  would  cease  at  the  end  of  the 
round,  some  one  starts  another  verse  to  the  song.  So  long  as  new 
verses  are  started,  the  dance  continues,  round  on  round. 


KEHARE   KATZARU 

Ruwerera,  rtjwerera, 
Operit  ruwerera, 
Operit  ruwerera. 

Rerawha-a,  rerawha-a, 
Operit  rerawha-a, 
Operit  rerawha-a. 

Ruwerera,  ruwerera, 
Atira  ruwerera,' 
Atira  ruwerera. 

Ruwerera,  ruwerera, 
Operit  ruwerera, 
Operit  ruwerera. 

Ruwerera,  ruwerera, 
Atius  ruwerera, 
Atius  ruwerera. 


SONG    OF    THE    SPIRIT-DANCE 

Star  of  Evening,  Star  of  Evening, 
Look,  where  yonder  she  cometh. 
Look,  where  yonder  she  cometh. 

Stars  of  heaven,  stars  of  heaven, 
Lo,  the  many  are  coming, 
Lo,  the  many  are  coming. 

Mother-Moon,  Mother-Moon, 

Look,  where  yonder  she  cometh, 
Look,  where  yonder  she  cometh. 

Star  of  Morning,  Star  of  Morning, 
Look,  where  yonder  he  cometh. 
Look,  where  yonder  he  cometh. 

Father-Sun,  Father-Sun, 

Look,  where  yonder  he  cometh, 
Look,  where  yonder  he  cometh. 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


J  CiA-O-f-  9<^xx-r-«-"-'^^' 


^c4  iav  io-^V 


t,  -V    i  r  I  t^i  r.  I  r  f  1  ^"^ 


«^-  n.<K. 


tArKa-  a-       CL, 


4     J'  f  1 1-^  J'  I  j^/ 


^3=; 


i 


J^j      IjjJ^^^^ 


E 


i 


^^ 


^^ 


^^ 


^ 


^ 


yud. 


r 


rr  \nr  ^i^i^UiJa^i' 


^i 


? 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


/?. 


^-.^     '    <j<:<>/t.oc^ 


\  ^ 

g^  r   r     I  r-    r    \  r-   f-  l_L_g 


-^* 


^7  V        P 


sj     P 


^^ 


^^ 


4.  _         ^Ia 

at. 


t-«^     >»»  *y*^      *^ 


Am.  -       tSX- 


4>  }■:■   I  ^j  J'  1  J- J  I  J.  p 


)  n  I  n  I  J-.> 


J- J     I  ;j  ;-    Ij.-,g3^ 


^ 


y   I  J--  J-    1 J^  J^    I  j-^ 


ii 


i 


7k  ^A 


■^ 


i^^ 


^^P^^ 


^ 


oniu  -A-    eK. 


'^4  -  A-a-       e.-  <.  -     «. 


^ 


r^ 


-e  -    -c  -.  <- 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


2? 


«r 


I/^jljO-K.     A^^A^i*-^ 


II    I  P=^^=  i^    V  I  t  r 


\'  r   1  Tj  f,  \  t  r  I  '^  g 


'?' 


'«,  -  >\.<».  - 


•Kitata      t/L 


i^a.  -  <x  -  ».         ^ 


<.  -    A<a- 


J***.-^*""*      ■oosiJJ^ 


T 


j- ;-  I  ■'^  !■  I  .^^ 


as 


^ 


,    t/'/i-O      OunrK.       C.<r>«. 


7" 


r  J  iJ-jr  liu-ixiiJj'r 


35 


C^foCt    tti.        Ajua-     fc*"^  --(»«*•'/ Y*    ^ 


(j'     r  J'  I J  ■ ;  I JW    1  ^^ 


* 


-?. 


m 


<  -    A<X 


*^ 


o  -  A  -  <a. 


1^«.-y*.tK    e,     <  -  <-      -^     ^^  / 


O^A         ££l  y\Ka- 


7 


Ot*-v^  ,     V  * 


^ 


.  <     <-  -t 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


cJV«^^     A  tti.    T^ea^    Jo 

IT 


_)^,    ->*.  <rO  iA  o-GT 


* 


i'    P  T 


31 


^^ 


tr- 


^o       cja.        a.        -tZ-    ■         «*^    ^ 


p       < 


^ 


-X- 


\UfJt      '-"'-*- 


w*-        ctZ        A^x-    ati    ^  ex^-r^ , 


"m 


^^ 


i 


IS 


^ 


^o^     

yia.    


»     Ji      X-   M^ 


^ 


^6  -  tv«       <X 


^ 


^^^ 


T  iH 


*. 


•«  - 


«.        V  ' 


X 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


/Vi.  /yi.  J*-  I  bo 

5-_ £1- ^ 


&>\  V  I  rt^  vl  r  I  ?  ^^ 


t 


J- ;'  I  iJ-  j^i  J- 1  J  -  u    B 


>ixc- 


^- 


—  i!^    _ 


.^toiffiA*<jii  ,   Cf^x.  ^ . .  .  Jitr^  ~ 


■oo^ 


^?= 


^^ 


? 


P 


^ 


^01  - 


«-       _  -Aji. 


.^^fc^  i 


,f       :  n  I J    I  J-  j-i  1 J  ^ 


U.    U'  X  '^^'J 


I 


^ 


i 


^j^<ff  ■  'XiX-  'k<m  e    <^ 


J-  J'  I  1:  J:  I  Jf 


isr 


-^5»- 


i  u-^ 


>r 


^* —  _  i^( 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


L^. 


l^t^,<A^%>li  I 


on 


^5I_^     L^    ^aX^-r^-^^K-^-^^-^J 


m 


m 


g;^    I      M  I  r  I  r  I  r      i ^^ 


g     if<. 


^yLO.    -  - 


L  ^ 


ytje^ 


r     T-  1  U^ 


^     -^ 


^ 


J\^Ci. 


g   J'ln  n 


^ 


-^ 


yLo- 


JMn  ri 


^^ 


E 


Sifc.t....      .lU- 


yu  <»- 


3E 


^_i  U.  J'i 


* 


>v< 


«-      fc^a_ 


Cl-    -&- 


/Ld,, 


^        a.a-i^\.^  O       Mo-   'tCU..MorTV., 


^^ 


f?^ 


£        «    -    e  -    -«.- 


r 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


* 


%^ 


,^^»^t>L>tt-^^^ 


1      I-  lu  tp 

tX-        ^'      A«- 


m 


J^  M-J    J-  3 


^=r*- 


^^ 


^ 


'^:i  nU-  !■ 


4z:   -.. 


^^ij   i   li  iU 


A  -     c/^'- 


/ 


<:> 


ex       "^tr  _  ^<a.    - 


4i 


l.iJl 


W 


~J 


t  ^     - 


r 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


M./M..  *■■ 


=crir 
Oo^i.  -'^  A^  c^  Sv^^ 


1X0 


m 


i;-n    t  ir-    Ml      ill      r  1^ 


fl.^  -er- 


,CW)  Ok 


-^CZt    -^ 


0  i-O-.-       CtJ^  ^tUe^^        JitraPf"  >»,**£*-     /O-*^  -  jx\JL^t^Jt^  ^ 


f-  I  r     f  1  '  t'T  uj    j- 


^ 


0      ^o.^ 


X*^       'tf-t 


,<ii<.    -^  -  ^?a  - 


(dSX.       -ttZc^       oQrif"     yU*M-      At^-    JiA,t*-Jt.  , 


^'^  J  'i-  >U.    J  u- 


life 


J-  I  J      ;^lj.,      jl^.      J.|^ 


m 


i 


^ 


^tn^l-  Cl\i~edt~-  tA.  ^  -dkt^^      iStra^    ^-ixaAc     -<*tA  -  pyijt^**>JL^  . 


P 


J,Ji:JJj:JJ J  ^^ 


^.c-c--^-    e  -  t-  * 


^-   / 


4^^   f If   til  .^j^ i#j 


^ 


■^<K.     4C^        -'tw-o-  ^ 


t 


irCfy. 


CtZL 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


,)  /\^.A>r\/Kn    . 


k 


i^^ 


k: 


JU.  I- '4     4'^ 


I 


i    I   •' 


/T 


O       Va-  <3Sl 


C<»^  CCu\j.    CiAjLoT.  JtA.     C*.       CtiXA^     Cft-^*~  f" 


nj    ju,  j^^ 


^ 


i 


^-^         «^         <— '  ^_^       ^*'  ^-^ 


:^C^ 


sVc  -€--«-   ^ 


r 


<.       -€. 


r- 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


fn.ri\.  i  -    I  lib 


J*^  c    d  fife  <!tfv*v  Cile^C^'p^ 


IhK'^i^    l"i   1  'I    I    Li  J   -I       l»t^^^^^ 


Ox  '"'      UtK^^CKA  KO.--   O         IkO.  ^     *X_  A.O.  fct.<*«.' 


i 


^-j-  Jf    I 


s 


a 


^  A 


r- 


i 


^       if  A 


ft.. 


^2.  -        o-    'K<»_         a. 


tc 


i^ 


m 


I 


-^niun^'^w^ 


0- a.         a.    ijL 


is. 


ytt*    Toe-    A<. 


^fe 


J      i     J 


^    •-    a 


a.     .  .      ^  .. 


'J        '"  J^     ^  f 


^    ^         ^ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


•  /I  AA/fi^i 


jtL^ 


m 


■J.   r^       1 

^_     tt-  Aju^ 


|#t  1  vn  N-  j'J,^  r^ 


s 


^ 


,-,^>n      ^>Jii  j^T^I^-^.  ^^ 


:^ 


1 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


J4-€L>0  •-    CD(^J*^ 


c^^'^'^^T^ 


I 


4-V    J  ^   J     Ml  .^j-j  IT]    j-p 


y/^ 


./ 


c«.  -  **.-  e 


J4o^-*^ 


^i 


Jl.  XJ  M  J-  ^g 


//(CX-  4A.  -    <J«L  -  '^  ;//o  -    XX    -  i-y<x  -  .^A. 


-L^^ 


gi 


i  ;j:   ^  ^'^-:^ 


y 


ttx 


y^^^  Uax:^  ^U  tti  -j^itr  U^  <n.,  etoL    CccG^o^^^y'i 


Ki-*'*  f. 


^1, 


ItlccOi^    4 


f         ^^^^^^"^^^"^       -i^tK.M^t 


ttx:   ^ric^,'. 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


I /\ijt^ -(X\_(Pu...^Si>  -  Ctu.  -  ^to^-  //ea.^e.1^  -ilcr>^'^~  (£a-&^ie^ ) 


I 


j<« *■ 


i 


-=r=^=^ 


4—^ — 4- 


w. 


^   ~     4L 


«.    -      -t    -     ^ 


1 


^    ^    tf  ir     1^  t  T|iij| 


^^ 


^ 


,  ^ ' 


r 


'^  e     ^*>  --     ^    -^^ 


ii 


-:r-^^ 


* — ^- 


2a«  £e^    f-     -e         ^       <:--£. 


ii 


.J.    UJ 


^^^ 


^ 


^ 


^=Q 


CUi  ! '^- ^tt*4     't»~  -    'iCo.-cjd.-      f!a         <7ji.   A.o±-- po.   ."i^        £^  f 


i 


y 


0  OAXot  JUy>-  JiOJLu*^      Of  Cd    t^AjJL.    -i?'^^,  S* 


.ut.   ■>*^t^    roa*--  »-*< 


"/ 


A^ 


^ 


^ 


:3^ 


£. 


/LO 


iCl.^   e  c  -  ^  -  ^-    ^ 


A 


^^^ 


12= 


^S 


^^^ 


^y*  '   ^O^ 


S 


C/l4A^  cr»v 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


.9-^r2^-^ 


^ 


m 


^ 


^^ 


J  1^. 


^ 


J  J  J    I J   ;   J    I  J  ^^ 


Me.'^-  ^  ~    -c  -  €  -    -e. 


r' 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


/W.A\,  J=  /fey 


^^^ 


^^ 


T  r     ;m 


xZ©   -  o  -    o 


0_       o 


^ 


)  J   I  %  ■'  i  il 


:s^ 


^^ 


£.    ,^lo-  o    -     o 


O  O 


H 


!     1%  J   J 


'»"     JN 


^      1^ 


# — •- 


Mi  cjui  ~        o-i-  ciX 


iJ. 


CUi 


"T- 


o       o 


# 


*  J.  ^ 
Hi  ^ 


1 


^=p 


r^ 


/. 


^  ■  ^.  ^ 


:Si: 


CK    ■  o  x«.  -    -*c 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


xVn^iO.  jriA.A^ 


Ay^-^- 


A 


Z  i 


r^ 


ha.  o 


A.a.    a  -  ^ 


i^ 


I  r  '  1T-^T  \}rr-r-nrr^- 


dh.....   ^.cc^ , 


m 


^ 


J  A  n 


x: 


5 


^^ 


c<  -  o^ 


"/ 


-^-a 


i-yoA. 


^ 


^^ 


^ 


#: 


fc? 


>v*-  - 1^ 


^  -  e  -  ^\^  _      /^  . . . . 


^ 


J  ^^j-^T^ 


7^  <a- 


i 


J  J  J I J  J  i 


^^^^^^^ 


^ 


£l 


r 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


t 


X 


iK 


^ 


n 


i^ 


f      I  f    r  It    JJU    U 


4jl^  , 


J-   Ajl  -i   "toL-^ch-  a4Co> 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


<^y  so. 


j^:^^ 


n  h    J  It  f  J.    r^i  k^  I 


^ 


^ 


^^ 


3 


* 


Ji    U  i  u 


t::? 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


fe 


j.T^J■^.T^  u^^ 


f 


A.    (L-     e. 


r 


cU. 


ffl  I  !^  \ii^m 


^ 


aX.     o  6.  -  £.  ~      -e.  -    e.      -    e-       -fc«_       ^  / 


±4 


,|.¥  Of  J-  J  J  N-' J^  j-j  I  >  J^  J^  I  J^J^  j-1  j 


^<2.    e    o^      ~L--^    j^ 


H<L      tL     cJL  II- 


e     ^ 


m 


it^ 


J-  JM  J  /]  1  Ji  ;■  I  r   r 


it 


s 


H<y- 


-jU.  oX      u 


(K-    «- 


r 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


i 


w 


^fe 


m 


E= 


L  1    M    I-   I         lg 


^lu       i^      cjtn2      CtjOuL^  o-   >*^-      C^aZi>^ 


S 


-Jl 


^ 


jLi/>       -dhc  vO<rrd     rfjLjL-  o~     c-eA_ 


gW-^    J 


s 


i"  I  J    J 


^ 


'^f  t  1 


* 


4 


^ 


i 


J^  I  J    ^1  I  J^ 


^ 


*l 


T/fc;*        .-^tl         tJ«rr«)    fifciAA-        O'     0-t>»-  '         -kJLtXjJ^i , 


^^ 


i^J':    J 


^g 


A 


->f<a.  -  \a-  -    AAA.  '  y\4^     Aa.  '  tJa  -  ■^A— 


pc: 


t,  vi  [»,  I  r.  J^ 


g,*»,  i  I- 1  V  ^ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


4<^.U^^r:J^  vfSI 


]M   Ir    iTl     ,      ^^g^ 


ii 


* 


.^^Ve- (-«-'.  »k<y    Jot*.        -lien-      -Cjc^    ttjT  ■zJ^OMCJf.  '.  ... 


7 


1    i       ■'       I^V    ^"^t^ — ^ 


^ 


^^^ 


^ 


^^ 


a        S~^ 

,A>t'   -    OCX-      '^«__ 


^ 


^ 


X 


^ 


^ 


4 


"flu.,      ttZ 


m 


cJ 


<rrt)       Cd^t 


m 


^ 


^^ 


^^ 


^ 


=^t=S^ 


xV^ 


* 


*i 


1U    az 


W=¥ 


i^  ju  ^^'j.r^ 


:S± 


y/«k.-      yL-t      yv-"^      yt^^--      »^ 


t_)Oi  - 


A 


« 


^tr    tj<^'3    flti^< 


o-     t;-t^ 


13 


^.     J  U    ^    '  ^-f^^ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


4JlU^M^^^^^^^^  ^  J  I  u-l 


-i^^^cl 


dL 


ttl 


^^ 


^a^ 


m 


^.  iU  1  ^'i-^  11 


^ 


t   n  .   L  f  1  :'UM        L 


1 


^^^  /»^'  ^  ,/wc  -     ^^t^/-  yv^'  .   cJa  ^      -^«  .  .. 


^ 


HI     l^T    1^-^^  S 


e 


^ 


tt& 


/XV*  /^  J.     J  I J      J-i  M^-  J  ^^ 


^f  ^^*<  I.  J.     J  I  J    B 


ts: 


^ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


a....*«7A.  Jit 


^   ^11-3=^ 


* 


i^ 


n.  I  1.  7^  U  ^ 


^ 


Q= 


J7 


yiOu^    -rf",      X^C^^D 


^«-^ 


1    1  Tl-  7>   J^  I   J^i 


1 


^ 


1  I  r  t-  r:  ^^ 


i 


y'^^dtr  I 


^ 


^ 


r  T'    If^  r     I  r^  r  I  r 


3 


t  T        1  P 


ttn.  -      y\A^ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


* 


3fc 


i 


^^ 


^ 


3 


OA,     ^~     €^- 


-^ 


/d-«-i»- 


^^is: 


^ 


^ 


3 


-.gi 


cu.    ^  - 


<    < 


^ 


^ 


J:      J-   I  J       /■^ 


# 


6*--    "6-    ><«-o ,        ^^t    ^-   ^_     -^      ^-    -^- x*o, 

y/e        A  ~        iy*-vr*-  ,        J4<-  ttZ  ^  -     eti\        ,iCu.€rU.   -eyCC  ttJ*., 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


iu,-^ 


^^ 


^? 


J    J  J 


^ 


T  '     "T' 


J  I     J 


^ 


^E 


^ 


^^ 


^ 


T' 


J     J     I  J.     J=^ 


^^ 


7>A 


•/'-   /• 


zaxt 


>j!  ^    J    N     J'  N-  ,tJ  I  ^    I  J 


^ 


J     liM-  ;■!  J      I  J     I  J 


J 


^j:>    J    I J    \i^-   r 


^ 


^ 


h(ou^  -      Ay^<sL*o  ,     Aa-  /^^-    u)oA(- 


J 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


-^tyLjO^'^    -i^J^^ 


^ 


^ 


£ 


^ 


^m 


0-      f^ 


yiir 


-6r 


-'jfcui-  j6c^     >j. 


#=? 


£S 


^ 


^»J1J 


<yje^ 


'lU*.  -  Aaa^ 


yXjL 


tti-       Oif^^ 


Digitized  by  Microsonw 


^. 


J(u 


CLv  C- 


CJi^  apt. 

MM-  J  -  /-VJy 


^ 


=f: 


^ 


^ 


£ 


"/ 


r' 


^p 


r      I  r     ^  ^irl  ^ "  iz5 


CJt.-      AJi-  - 


:/ 


T 


<j^^    J     \A    \  I     J_|J 


3E 


0-       ^.. 


^^ 


^ 


<!y 


P 


32 


~z^ 


0- 


/" 


^'ijo-tr^ ,        -crljuut^ 


aIx. 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


.irj^nta^iStti,^-.. 


t>.. 


1     I 


n 


*&*>■  I -A 


CHEYENNE    TITLE-PAGE 


The   war-tonnet   is   painted   by   a.  Cheyenne  Indian,   Hotuwasa 

(Little  Btjffalo  Boll).  ^ 

The  lettering  is  fay  Hinoofc  Mahiwi  Kilinaka  \AngeI  De  Cora). 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


«iWHi»,U^;i)(M'l'MIJlH  I II  inuntlllM^MM  11(111  nitl'"' '11(1 

I 

I 


'llijm'uiiliiii(,ilii(ii,i„/iii,m,.iiiih>;iiiiH((i(Kilt. 


\AfS 


*  iiiwff     ■^illimnlt«lii'iMiir(ni(iilfH/'ii«inj(utrliiii  i(t((i/i«(rii/((iir 


lillHliiirilniillJUil 


I 


■[513 


"A^H^H^»-  JL „„| 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE  CHEYENNES 


.[  HE  Cheyennes  belong,  lingaistically,  to  the  wide-spread 

TAIgonqttian  family,  and  are  one  of  its  northwestern 
outposts.  Their  original  home  was  probably  in  Minne- 
M  sota  along  the  river  that  now  bears  their  name,  but 
they  had  migrated  westward  of  the  Missouri,  and  were  found  by 
Lewis  and  Qark  in  the  Black  Hills  region  of  the  Dakota  and 
Wyoming  States.  The  name  "  Cheyenne  *'  is  of  Dakota  origin,  and 
means  **  red,"  or  **  alien./*  In  their  own  tongue  the  Cheyennes 
call  themselves  "  our  people." 

Early  in  the  last  century  there  occurred  a  division  in  the  tribe — 
one  band  went  southward  to  the  Arkansas  River  with  the  Arapahos, 
while  the  rest  remained  in  the  neighborhood  of  the  Dakotas.  Thus 
originated  the  northern  and  southern  bands  of  the  Cheyenne. 

Before  the  coming  of  the  white  man  brought  them  change,  these 
Indians  were  a  sturdy,  prosperous  folk,  fighting  their  enemies 
lustily,  trading  with  friendly  neighbors  over  a  vast  territory,  and 
themselves  supplying  all  the  needs  of  their  self-respecting  and 
vigorous  community  life.  To  them,  as  to  all  of  the  Indians  of  the 
plains,  the  buffalo  was  the  giver  and  sustainer  of  earthly  life.  It 
was  small  wonder,  indeed,  that  the  buffalo,  like  the  sun,  should 
have  been  revered  as  a  glorified  and  visible  emblem  of  the  source  of 
life  and  power. 

None  of  the  plains  tribes  was  more  skilful  in  the  chase,  and 
none  more  daring  on  horseback,  than  the  Cheyenne.     Nor  were 


NOTE  FOR  PRONUNQATION  OF  CHEYENNE  TEXT 
Unless  otherwise  indicated,  vowels  have  the  Continental  sound,  and  consonants 


the  English. 

Cht  in  italic,  is  a  guttural,  like  ch  in  German. 

[  147] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE   INDIANS'    BOOK 

any  Indians  more  thrifty  than  they  in  acquiring  the  ponies  and 
buffalo-robes  that  constituted  wealth. 

White  men  who  knew  the  Cheyennes  in  those  early  days  have 
left  indisputable  testimony  of  their  virtue  and  endurance.  Crime 
was  scarcely  known  among  them.  Their  family  government,  like 
that  of  many  other  tribes,  was  admirable,  and  even  beautiful.  Old 
age  everywhere  received  the  veneration  and  respect  that  are  its 
due;  the  child  rendered  complete  obedience  to  the  parent,  yet  harsh 
punishment  was  scarcely  ever  practised,  and  child-whipping,  it  is 
said,  was  quite  unknown.  The  Cheyennes  were  truthful,  invariably 
brave,  and  devout  in  peace  and  in  war. 

When  the  westward-bound  emigrant  began  to  cross  the  Cheyenne 
country  it  was  such  a  people  whom  he  found.  Though  the  white 
man  slaughtered  the  Indians'  game  and  burned  their  grass,  the 
Cheyennes  at  first  contented  themselves  with  urging  that  their 
possessions  be  protected,  if  need  be,  by  a  military  guard,  and  that 
the  tribe  be  compensated  for  the  right  of  way  through  its  territory. 
It  was  only  later,  when  whiskey  and  plunder  in  the  name  of  trade 
had  done  their  work — only  when  misunderstandings,  betrayals, 
starvation,  and  massacre  had  destroyed  his  faith  and  exhausted 
human  endurance — that  the  Cheyenne  turned  aggressor.  Then  it 
was  that  he  repaid  in  deeds  of  obvious  cruelty  and  horror  the  un- 
seen suffering  he  had  borne  from  youth  almost  to  old  age. 

History  tells  of  no  finer  effort  at  loyalty  than  that  made  by 
the  Cheyenne  and  allied  tribes  after  the  treaty  at  Fort  Laramie 
was  signed.  Nor  did  ever  a  more  heroic  and  desperate  attempt  at 
self-preservation  thrill  the  records  of  a  people  than  the  tragic  effort 
of  the  little  band  of  Northern  Cheyennes  to  escape  from  the  Indian 
Territory  and  return  to  their  homes — the  country  of  their  ancient 
freedom  and  manhood.' 

The  Cheyenne  songs  in  The  Indians*  Book  were  contributed  by 
the  Southern  Cheyennes,  who,  with  their  neighbors  the  Arapahos, 
have  received  lands  in  severalty  in  Oklahoma.  They  are  still  a 
valiant,  vigorous  people,  temperate,  keen-sighted,  and  intelligent. 
Indeed,  if  human  nature  be  measured  by  qualities  of  loyalty  and 

'  See  pamphlet  entitled  "  The  Case  of  Doll  Knife's  Band,"  Court  of  Qaims,  Government 
Printing-Office,  Washington,  I90I. 

[148] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


CHEYENNE 

courage,  by  scorn  of  death  and  scorn  of  falsehood,  even  by  spirited 
uprisings  against  oppression  and  injustice,  then  is  there,  perhaps, 
in  all  America  no  finer  stock  than  that  embodied  in  the  Cheyenne 
people.  Nor  is  there  a  truer  man  of  any  race  than  High  Chief, 
the  noble  Indian  who  has  helped  so  greatly  in  the  making  of  this 
book. 

WIHU-HWAIHU-0-USZ,  OR  HIAMOVI 

High  Chief,  or  High  Wolf    *  * 


IGH  CHIEF  is  the  great  son  of  great  parents.  His  father 
¥J  was  a  famed  Dakota  chief.  His  aged  mother  is  a  Chey- 
*  *  enne  woman  of  high  standing.  The  forceful  qualities  of 
M  both  tribes  have  united  to  make  in  High  Chief  a  striking 
expression  of  all  that  is  best  in  Indian  character.  He  is  a  chief 
among  both  the  Dakotas  and  Cheyennes,  and  is  cousin  to  Apiatan, 
the  head-chief  of  the  Kiowas.  He  has  travelled  widely,  and  is 
known  throughout  the  Indian  country.  Of  late  he  has  been  em- 
ployed by  the  government  as  Indian  policeman,  and  his  fidelity 
to  duty,  whether  he  be  observed  or  unobserved,  makes  his  service 
a  lesson  in  loyalty. 

With  entire  devotion  he  has  given  himself  to  the  making  of  this 
book,  going  with  the  white  friends  from  camp  to  camp,  telling  other 
Indians  of  the  purpose  of  the  book,  everywhere  hallowing  the  under- 
taking through  his  interest  and  enthusiasm.  It  is  his  wish  that  the 
collection  of  Cheyenne  songs  should  open  with  the  Sun-Dance 
Song,  "  because,"  he  said,  "  it  is  a  prayer."  Then  should  follow 
the  Song  of  the  Buffalo-Dance,  because  this  song  belongs  to  the 
society  composed  entirely  of  chiefs. 

The  drawings  that  High  Chief  has  made  for  this  book  are  faith- 
ful pictures  of  things  of  the  olden  time,  made  by  his  own  desire. 
He  has  drawn  nothing  which  he  has  not  himself  seen.  Every 
picture  is  the  **  straight  truth,"  not  one  is  "  a  lie." ' 

To  the  loving  enthusiasm  of  this  Indian  chief  The  Indians*  Book 
owes  more  than  can  ever  be  told. 

•  Of  the  many  illustrations  made  by  High  Chief,  it  has  been  possible  to  reproduce  only 

a  few. 

[149] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE   INDIANS'   BOOK 
CHEYENNE   LIFE   IN   THE   OLDEN   TIME 

Told  by  Chief  Hiamovi  (High  Chief) 


I 


N  the  beginning  out  Father  made  the  earth  and  gave 
to  OS  all  things.  We  had  no  such  clothes  as  now,  nor 
had  we  any  metals.  We  wore  the  skins  of  beasts,  for 
the  Father  gave  to  «s  the  buffalo  and  all  kinds  of  ani- 
mals to  meet  our  wants. 

The  bow  we  made  ourselves,  and  arrows,  too,  pointed  with  sharp 
stone.  When  we  had  made  the  bow  and  arrow  we  began  to  hunt, 
and  when  we  saw  the  buffalo  we  would  creep  up  to  him  on  hands 
and  knees,  softly,  softly,  until  within  a  hundred  paces  of  him.  Then 
we  would  rise  on  one  knee  and  shoot  him  dead.  We  had  knives 
made  of  the  ribs  of  the  buffalo  or  of  sharpened  stones,  and  with 
these  we  skinned  the  buffalo  and  cut  off  the  meat  and  carried  it 
home  on  our  backs.  The  women  sliced  the  meat  and  then  set  up 
long  poles  supported  on  notched  sticks,  and  on  these  poles  they 
hung  the  meat  to  dry.  They  dried  the  hides,  too,  and  then  scraped 
them  with  sharp  stones  until  they  grew  soft,  and  of  these  they 
made  shirts  and  leggings. 

We  had  no  horses,  but  used  big,  shaggy  dogs.  When  we  jour- 
neyed we  packed  the  dried  meat  in  satchels  of  painted  hide.  These 
were  carried  by  the  dogs.  Two  poles  were  bound  together  by  a 
strip  of  hide  and  fastened  to  the  neck  of  the  dog,  and  the  bundles 
were  tied  upon  the  poles.  Each  family  had  its  own  dogs.  Some- 
times on  a  long  journey  the  dogs  would  grow  tired  and  begin  to 
droop  and  flag.  Then  the  people  would  call  to  the  dogs,  **  Hiya, 
go  on,  go  on !"  But  no  matter  how  we  called,  the  dogs  would  hang 
their  tongues  and  lag  slower  and  slower. 

Then  some  one  would  cry,  ''Buffalo  ahead;  fresh  meat  in  plenty !" 
and  then  the  dogs  would  bound  forward  as  though  they  had  just 
set  out. 

When  we  came  to  a  camping  -  ground  the  women  untied  the 
bundles  and  put  the  meat  in  pots  to  boil.  These  pots  were  made 
of  fine  earth  hardened  in  the  fire. 

[150] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Hiamovi  (High  Chief) 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


CHEYENNE 

When  any  one  wanted  to  kindle  a  fire  he  would  hold  a  piece  of 
dry,  rotten  wood  against  a  stone,  and  then  strike  the  stone  with 
flint  so  that  the  sparks  would  light  upon  the  dry  wood.  Or  he 
would  take  the  stalk  of  the  soapweed  plant  and  rest  one  end  in  a 
socket  bored  in  a  stone.  Then  he  would  twirl  the  stalk  between 
his  hands,  and  twirl  and  twirl  till  at  last  smoke  and  fire  came  at 
the  end.  All  this  was  long  ago,  before  our  people  ever  had  seen 
the  white  man. 

But  one  time  a  man  was  far  away  in  Texas  and  there  he  saw 
a  horse.  He  was  frightened  at  first  because  he  thought  it  must 
be  a  creature  that  would  kill  men  and  devour  them.  But  he  caught 
the  horse  and  tied  him  fast  and  patted  him,  and  when  he  found  the 
horse  did  not  bite  he  was  glad  and  tried  to  tame  him.  When  he 
had  tamed  him  he  harnessed  him  with  poles,  like  a  dog,  and  put 
his  children  on  the  horse's  back  and  seated  himself  on  the  poles 
behind.  Afterwards  the  people  found  other  horses,  and  these  had 
colts.  So  we  came  to  have  many  horses.  Nobody  now  remembers 
the  time  when  we  had  no  horses.     Only  the  old  people  tefl  of  it. 

My  mother  told  me  all  these  things.  She  is  over  a  hundred 
years  old,  and  she  learned  these  stories  from  her  grandmother. 
This  was  the  way  we  lived  in  the  old,  old  time  when  all  that  we  had 
was  given  to  us  by  the  Father  or  made  by  us  ourselves. 


OHWIWI   NO-OTZ 

Song  of  the  Offering  Ceremony  (Strn-Dance  Song) 
Sang    and   told   fay    Chief    Hiamovi    (High   Chief,    or    High   Wolf) 


T 


HE  Sun-Dance  is  the  name  the  white  man  has  given 
to  what  the  Cheyenne  calls  The  Offering,  This  is  an  an- 
cient religious  ceremony,  and  through  it  is  worshipped 

^ ,Mac^a-Mahaiyu,  the  Great  Mystery,  who  rules  the  day 

by  the  sun  and  the  night  by  the  moon.    The  ceremony  is  also  for 

the  healing  of  the  sick. 

This  song  is  the  first  in  the  ceremony.    It  is  a  prayer,  sung 

slowly  four  times  while  the  dancers  stand  in  a  circle,  with  out- 

[J5I] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'   BOOK 

stretched  hands,  gazing  upward.  Sometimes  tears  will  stream 
from  the  upturned  eyes  in  the  intensity  of  prayer.  Thus  the  people 
pray  that  all  evil  may  be  lifted  from  them.  At  the  end  of  the 
fourth  singing  of  the  song  the  dram  is  struck,  the  time  of  the  song 
changes,  and  the  dance  begins.  The  dancers,  looking  ever  upward, 
blow  on  whistles  made  from  the  eagle's  wing.  The  song  is  then 
sung  in  quick  dance-time,  while  the  whistle  and  drum  are  sounded 
with  each  beat. 

This  is  only  one  of  the  welhiigh  countless  Sun -Dance  songs. 
But  it  is  an  old  song  hallowed  by  sacred  use. 


MAHOEVA'   NO-OTZ 

Buffalo-Dance  Song 
Sang  and  told  by  Chief  Hiamovr  (High  Chief) 


HE  Buffalo-Dance,  or  Red  Shields*  Dance,  belonged  to 
the  Red  Shields  Society.  Nearly  every  society  has 
its  own  songs.  But  the  Chiefs'  Society,  which  is  com- 
posed only  of  chiefs,  has  no  songs,  and,  therefore,  uses 
those  of  the  Red  Shields.  Thus  the  Buffalo-Dance  Song  belongs 
to  the  Chiefs'  Society  as  well  as  to  the  Red  Shields.  This  is  an 
old  song  of  high  importance. 


WUCffTCHSE   ETAN   NO-OTZ 

Song  of  the  Red  Fox  Society 
Sang    and    told   by   Chief   Hiamovi    (High   Chief) 


—      ,\  HE  men  of  the  Red  Fox  Society  are  the  bravest  young 

rp       warriors  of  the  tribe.    To,  them  death  is  as  nothing. 

*         Their  thought  is  only  of  great  deeds  and  war  honors. 

I  So  the  young  Red  Fox  sings  that  the  aching  tooth  and 

3ent  back  of  age  are  not  for  him;  rather  would  he  die  gloriously 

in  the  strength  of  young  manhood  than  creep  through  the  camp 

feeble  and  old. 

'  Mahoevas,  "  Red  Shields  " 
[152] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


CHEYENNE 

So  while  adorning  himself  for  battle  he  sings  this  song;  at  the 
same  time  may  be  heard  the  sound  of  women's  wailing  and  lament- 
ing that  one  so  young  and  comely  must  so  soon  meet  his  death. 
Then,  armed  and  mounted,  splendid  in  paint  and  eagle-feathers, 
with  holy  emblems  fixed  upon, himself  and  his  horse,  the  warrior 
goes  forth  to  dash  along  the  line  of  his  enemies,  shooting  into  the 
midst  of  them  as  he  rides  through  the  storm  of  their  bullets  and 
arrows.  If  he  pass  the  line  unscathed,  he  turns  his  horse  and  rides 
back  again  braving  the  same  storm;  but  now  perhaps  the  power  of 
his  protecting  emblems  no  longer  holds,  and  horse  and  man  roll 
to  the  earth,  shot  through  and  through. 

The  fight  is  done.  All  have  left  the  field.  There  lies  the  young 
warrior,  wounded  or  hopelessly  crippled.  How  long  will  he  lie 
alone  on  the  prairie  ?  Perhaps  the  wolves  will  come  with  the 
stars.  But  the  Red  Fox  warrior  shows  no  pain.  Sitting  up  and 
awaiting  his  death,  he  rocks  softly  to  and  fro,  singing  this  song  : 

Ma-achis  hevisa  Nay,  I  fear  the  aching  tooth  of  age  I 

Naehio  ! 


HOHIOTSITSI   NO-OTZ 

Morning  Song 
Sang  and  told  by  Chief  Honihi-Wotoma  (Wolf-Rofae) 

This  is  one  of  the  oldest  Cheyenne  melodies.  Different  words 
have  been  put  to  it  from  time  to  time.  It  is  sung  by  old  men, 
often  from  the  summit  of  the  hills  at  dawn. 

HOHIOTSITSI  NO-OTZ  MORNING  SONG 

Ehani  nah-hiwatama.  „Hf'  T/^^^M' 

■J  ,,    .  He  hath  shown  His  mercy  unto  me. 

apave  v  .  ^^  peace  I  walk  the  straight  road. 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE   INDIANS'    BOOK 


THE   WAR-PATH 


[{HE  war-path  might  bring  to  a  man  honor  and  glory,  or 

T  disgrace  and  death,  but  in  the  olden  time  it  was  the  life 
of  every  man.' 
'I  A  war-party  was  tis«afly  led  by  a  tried  warrior,  wise 
through  experience  and  consecrated  to  his  tr«st.  He  was  known 
as  the  Leader,  and  the  other  warriors  swore  allegiance  to  his  com- 
mand. Great  was  his  honor  if  he  always  brought  back  his  men 
unharmed. 

The  war-party  might  be  large,  or  it  might  number  but  a  few. 
Sometimes  two  men  only  would  set  out  together.  Often  a  warrior 
would  go  on  the  war-path  entirely  alone;  in  some  rare  case  a  woman 
might  accompany  her  husband.  But  in  time  of  intertribal  strife 
the  whole  tribe  would  go  forth.  No  one  knew  how  long  the  warriors 
would  be  gone.  Life  upon  the  war-path  was  full  of  danger,  priva- 
tion, and  indescribable  hardship. 

No  important  task  is  undertaken  by  the  Indian  without  prep- 
aration, consecration,  and  prayer.  If  the  Indian  prays  in  common 
acts  of  life,  how  serious  and  devout  is  he  upon  the  war-path,  when 
life  and  more  than  life — renown  and  honor — are  at  stake. 

Before  setting  out  on  the  war-path  religious  ceremonies  are 
performed  and  the  protection  of  the  Supreme  Being  is  invoked. 
Every  night  upon  the  war-path  prayers  are  made,  and  every  morn- 
ing each  warrior  renews  his  supplication  and  his  consecration. 
Many  of  the  so-called  war-songs  are  religious  in  character,  many 
again  are  expressions  of  grief  for  slain  comrades,  or  songs  in  praise 
of  the  valiant  dead.  Others  are  outbursts  of  longing  for  loved  ones 
at  home,  or  weary  sighs  of  loneliness.  Still  others  tell  more  directly 
of  the  deeds  of  war. 

The  Songs  of  Victory  are  usually  sung  on  return  of  the  victors, 

'  An  Indian  went  upon  the  war-path  in  somewhat  the  spirit  of  a  knight-errant  setting 
out  in  search  of  adventure  and  glory.  Every  Indian  was  a  warrior,  as  every  nobleman  was  a 
knight.  Chivalry  and  ideality  of  purpose  were  not  the  cause  of  the  Indian's  warfare.  But  like 
the  knight,  the  Indian  went  out  to  fight  from  personal  motives  and  through  the  desire  for  great 
deeds.  The  war-path  was  most  often  the  path  of  individual  adventure,  not  necessarily  a  general 
conflict  of  one  tribe  with  another. 

[154] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


CHEYENNE 

and  are  filled  with  praise,  flings  of  sarcasm,  bits  of  high-spirited 
humor,  and  triumphant  taunts  of  victory.  Yet  many  of  these 
victory-songs  are  religious  also  in  character  and  speak  the  profound 
belief  that  great  deeds  are  achieved  through  a  power  that  is  greater 
than  man. 

AOTZI  NO-OTZ 

Song  of  Victory 

I 

Sang  and  told  by  Chief  Honihi-Wotoma  CWoIf-Rofee) 

This  song  tells  how  the  "triumphant  Cheyennes  have  left  their 
slain  enemies  to  the  wolves.  It  is  also  descriptive  of  the  Chey- 
enne himself,  who  on  the  war-path  must  be  as  the  wolf,  often  hun- 
gry, lone,  and  enduring.^ 


AOTZI  NO-OTZ 

Honih-hio 
Tsi-wona-atz 
Imio-missi-yo ! 


SONG  OF  VICTORY 

Ho  ye !  hear  ye  !     Come  ye !     Feast  ye ! 

O  wolves  ! 
Feast,  be  ye  merry, 

Yo,  ho,  gather 
V     At  the  dawn. 


AOTZI  NO-OTZ^ 

Song  of  Victory 
II 

Strng  by  Chief  Honihi-Wotoma  CWolf-Robe) 


WAR  -  PARTY  is  returning  in  triumph.  The  faces  of 
the  warriors  are  blackened  with  ashes  as  a  sign  of  victory, 
for  to  the  Cheyenne  black  is  the  symbol  of  good. 

Among   the   watching  people   are   men   who   stayed 

behind  when  the  war-party  set  out,  and  these  all  wear  on  their 

faces  the  usual  red  paint. 

'  See  "  Huche-hi  Naad,  Arapaho,"  page  199. 

'The  story  of  this  song  was  told  by  an  aged  Cheyenne  warrior. 

[155] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'    BOOK 


Now  the  warriors  had  not  gone  forth  stealthily,  nor  by  night, 
tjut  by  open  day  in  view  of  all.  The  men  who  had  stayed  at  home 
coald  have  joined  them  had  they  wished. 

So,  as  they  come,  the  warriors  fling  a  triumphant  taunt  at  those 
with  the  red  paint  thick  upon  them,  while  on  their  own  faces  is 
the  black  of  victory. 

The  song  is  a  very  old  one,  and  is  song  in  time  of  victory  or  re- 
joicing. 


AOTZI    NO-OTZ 

Tsivais  siyo  tsitonitoyas 
Haitom  tsihotonihos. 
Talita  nanias-sini ! 


SONG   OF   VICTORY 

Who  are  these 

Who  stand  and  gaze  at  us  ? 

Who  are  these 

With  red  paint  thick  upon  them  ? 

By  day 
In  the  sight  of  all  men 
Went  we  forth  to  war  1 


AOTZI   NO-OTZ 

III 

Song  of  Victory 

Song  and  told  fay  Chief  Nahios-si  (Three  Fingers) 

HE  song  tells  of  the  Sacred  Bow  which  came  to  the  people 
through  the  Great  Mystery.'  This  was  made  of  box- 
wood, and  was  so  holy  that  it  never  was  allowed  to  touch 
the  ground.  When  the  people  encamped,  it  was  hung 
upon  the  branch  of  a  tree,  or,  if  there  were  no  timber,  it  was  laid 
upon  buffalo-dung,  for  the  buffalo  is  revered  by  the  Cheyenne. 
No  one  was  allowed  to  touch  the  Bow  except  the  man  appointed 
as  its  bearer.  Once  it  happened  that  just  before  the  warriors  set 
out  on  the  war-path  the  young  man  who  bore  the  Bow  went  to 
speak  to  the  maiden  whom  he  loved,  and  as  he  came  he  warned 
her,  saying,  "  Come  not  near,  for  I  carry  the  Sacred  Bow.'*  Then 
he  joined  the  warriors  and  was  foremost  in  the  attack  when  they 

'  Cheyenne  name  for  the  Supreme  Being. 

Digitized  bylVhcrosoft® 


CHEYENNE 

galloped  ttpon  the  enemy,  b«t  in  the  midst  of  the  charge  his  courage 
failed  him,  and  he  turned  his  horse  to  one  side.  When  the  war- 
party  returned  successful,  they  celebrated  their  victory  with  a  dance. 
But  the  young  man's  beloved  had  heard  of  his  cowardice,  and 
she  called  out  to  the  dancers,  **  Wait,  let  me  sing  you  a  song." 
Then  in  scornful  mockery  of  her  lover  she  sang : 

"  Bearer  of  the  Sacred  Bow, 
Yoa  should  carry  a  bow  of  elm!" 

The  young  man  stood  apart,  because  as  bearer  of  the  Bow  he 
might  not  mingle  with  others  lest  some  one  accidentally  touch 
the  sacred  charge.  When  he  heard  the  reproach  in  this  song  he 
felt  such  bitter  sorrow  and  shame  that  he  went  away  to  a  high  hill 
and  there  wept  like  a  child. 

There  were  but  two  or  three  of  these  bows  in  the  whole  tribe, 
and  now  there  is  none  at  all  among  the  Southern  Cheyennes,  though 
there  is  one  man  still  living  who  in  his  younger  days  carried  a  Sacred 
Bow. 

No  one  knows  how  old  is  this  song.  The  people  sang  it  when 
they  had  been  victorious  over  their  enemies  or  successful  on  the 
buf f alo  -  hunt.  Nahios-si  knows  that  his  great-grandfather  sang 
the  song,  and  that  it  w,as  sung  by  the  grandfathers  of  those  who 
now  are  old  men. 


AOXa   NO-OTZ 

Hctanu  dzinimat  *ta, 
Hetana  dzinimat  'to, 
Hita  homina  nimadzi  I 
Hita  homina  nimadzi ! 


SONG   OF  VICTORY 

Bearer  of  the  Sacred  Bow, 
Bearer  of  the  Sacred  Bow, 
You  should  carry  a  bow  of  elm. 
You  should  carry  a  bow  of  elm  I 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE   INDIANS'   BOOK 
AN   OLD   TALE 

Told  by  MocAta-Wontz-tz  (Starving  Elk) 


o 


NCE  on  a  time  the  people  were  encamped  in  a  circle, 
and  in  the  centre  of  the  camp  they  held  a  game.  But 
the  people  were  hungry;  they  had  nothing  to  eat. 

Now  there  were  two  medicine-men,  holy  men,  men  of 

mystery,  who  had  dressed  themselves  in  great  bea«ty  to  go  to  the 
game.  The  first  holy  man  wore  a  buffalo-robe,  the  second  wore 
one  also.  The  two  medicine-men  looked  at  each  other.  They 
were  dressed  exactly  alike,  their  faces  were  painted  alike,  and  their 
feathers  were  arranged  in  the  same  way. 

Said  the  first  holy  man,  **  Have  you  aught  against  me  that  you 
imitate  my  dress  ?    Are  you  mocking  me  ?" 

And  the  second  answered,  "  It  seems  that  you  are  mocking  me. 
Where  did  you  learn  to  dress  like  this  ?" 

Then  the  first  said,  "  In  a  dream  I  went  to  the  clear  spring  that 
is  near  the  camp,  and  there  in  the  spring  I  learned  this  dress." 

And  the  second  said,  "  I  too  went  to  the  spring  in  a  dream,  and 
there  I  learned  this  dress." 

Then  they  argued,  and  at  last  they  said,  "  Go  we  together  to 
the  spring  by  open  day  and  let  us  prove  which  has  the  better  right 
to  wear  this  dress." 

So  they  set  out  and  all  the  people  followed. 

When  they  came  to  the  spring,  each  one  said  defiantly  to  the 
other,  "  Dare  you  go  in  ?" 

So  they  stepped  in  together  and  sank  to  the  very  bottom.  There 
at  the  bottom  they  saw  an  old  woman  who  lived  in  the  spring,  and 
she  asked  of  them,  **  What  want  you  here  ?" 

Now  they  both  were  hungry,  and  they  answered,  "  Our  people 
have  nothing  to  eat." 

So  the  woman  gave  to  each  a  bowl  of  food  to  take  back  with 
him ;  in  the  one  bowl  she  put  com,  and  in  the  other  pemmican. 

So  the  two  holy  men  went  back  to  their  people  and  gave  them 
the  food,  and  they  all  ate  of  it,  the  whole  tribe,  even  the  little  chil- 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


CHEYENNE 

dren.    Yet,  however  much  they  ate  of  it,  the  two  bowls  never  were 
empty. 

This  is  an  old  tale,  often  told,  and  many  a  Cheyenne  knows 
how  thus  there  first  came  to  his  people  the  food  on  which  they  live 
— meat  and  corn. 


NAI   NO-OTZ 

Song  of  Healing  (Mcdfcine-Song) 
Sung  and  told  fay  Chief  Nahios-si  (Three  Fingers) 


HE  power  to  heal  men  was  bestowed  upon  Nahios-si  in  a 
vision  of  the  night.  In  dream  he  stood  facing  the  East, 
when,  as  the  day  broke,  a  Hawk  appeared  to  him  and 
spoke,  saying,  "  I  am  sent  to  yott  with  a  message."' 

Then  Nahios-si  asked  of  the  Hawk,  "  Who  are  yoa  ?" 

And  the  Hawk  said,  **  Mac/ia-Mahaiya,  the  Great  Mystery,  has 
sent  me  to  tell  yoa  that  henceforth  you  shall  have  power  to  heal 
all  kinds  of  sickness  among  white  men  and  black,  as  well  as 
among  yotir  own  people  and  the  animals." 

Thus  through  the  Hawk  came  power  and  knowledge  to  Nahios-si, 
also  this  song  which  the  Hawk  sang,  and  which  henceforth  Nahios-si 
should  sing  in  making  his  cures. 

Li  this  wise  Nahios-si  became  a  man  of  medicine.  To  cure  the 
sick  he  brews  a  drink  from  juniper  and  the  root  of  wild  anise,  ac- 
cording to  the  knowledge  revealed  to  Iiim  through  the  Hawk.  This 
drink  has  great  healing  power.  Nahios-si  stays  beside  the  sick 
all  night  and  sings  his  healing  song  until  just  before  the  sun  rises. 

And  now,  even  as  the  Hawk  foretold,  do  white  men  and  black, 
as  well  as  his  own  people,  come  to  Nahios-si  to  be  healed,  and  for 
all  men  and  animals  he  sings  his  holy  song.     • 

Often  stifl  in  sleep  the  Hawk  appears  to  him,  teaching  him  wis- 
dom, and  giv'tag  him  anew  the  power  to  heal. 

So  long  as  Nahios-si  shall  live  will  he  cherish  the  message  of  the 
Hawk,  and  this  story  of  his  vision  will  he  never  lightly  tell  to  any  man. 

'  See  "  Songs  of  the  Dafcotas,"  page  60,  and  "  Introduction  to  Pawnee  Songs,"  page  96. 

[159] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE   INDIANS'   BOOK 

NAI   NO-OTZ  SONG   OF   HEALING 

Taeva  nama-eyoni.  By  night  I  go  on  my  way  ttnseen. 

Tze-ihotzitta  nama-eyoni.  Then  am  I  holy. 

Then  have  I  power  to  heal  men, 

WAWAHI   NO-OTZ 

Swinging-Song  (a  very  old  song) 
Sang  and  told  fay^  Chief  Nahios-si  (Three  Fingers) 


I 


N  olden  times,  long,  long  ago,  the  Cheyennes  used  to  make 
swings  of  strips  of  bttffalo-hide  which  they  would  hang 
from  the  boughs  of  trees.  Men,  women,  and  children 
would  swing  in  pairs,  standing  face  to  face  in  the  swing, 
each  with  his  feet  braced  against  those  of  the  other.  The  on- 
lookers sat  around  them,  and  all  the  people  sang  while  the  swings 
moved  to  and  fro.  They  sang  to  the  wood-rats,  bidding  them  come  t 
for  in  those  days  the  Cheyennes  used  to  eat  the  wood-rats,  and 
they  were  hard  to  catch.  They  called  the  rats  **  timber-men,"  and 
so  they  sang : 

WAWAHI   NO-OTZ  SWINGING-SONG 

Huc^ieho  niocAdzi'I  Come,  ye  wood-rats,  here  to  me  I 

HucAdjeho  aiochdzi'l  Come,  ye  wood-rats,  here  to  me  I 

Mata-etanio-o  Now  the  timber-men  draw  near, 

Ini-stoni-wahno-tziyo,  Hither  stealing,  creeping  hither, 

Ehenowe,  h'm-h'm-h'm  !  Now  I  hear  them,  h'm-h'm-h'm  I 


MESHIVOTZI   NO-OTZ 

Baby-Song  (Lullaby) 

Sang    ty   Wihanahe    (Chief    Woman) 

MESHIVOTZI   NO-OTZ  BABY-SONG 

Meshivotzis-o—  Little  good  baby, 
he-ye,  he-ye, 

Naptziyo  tsiso  Sleepy  little  baby. 

A-ha,  h'm.  A-ha,  h'm. 

[1601 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


%fM 


The    Pipe    of    Friendship 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


CHEYENNE 
NU-U-SINIM   NO-OTZ 

Hand-Game  Songs 


I 


N  winter  the  Cheyennes  often  meet  in  little  companies 
to  play  the  "hand-game."  The  game  is  held  in  a  tipi, 
which  is  lit  by  a  central  fire  constantly  replenished  with 
fresh  logs.  The  company  sit  on  the  ground,  with  four  or 
five  leaders  of  the  singing  grouped  around  a  drum  and  the  rest 
lined  about  the  circular  wall.  The  game  opens  with  a  prayer,  de- 
livered by  the  one  who  may  be,  for  the  night,  the  leader  in  the 
game.  In  some  tribes  the  hand-game  is  itself  a  religious  ceremony, 
but  this  is  not  the  case  among  the  Cheyennes.  With  the  Cheyennes, 
the  details  of  the  game  may  change  with  each  night  of  the  playing, 
so  there  is  always  a  leader  to  direct  the  game.  This  leader  has  usually 
beheld  in  a  dream  the  arrangement  of  the  game — the  placing  of 
the  tally-sticks,  and  other  details — or  he  has  been  taught  by  some 
spirit  how  the  game  is  to  be  played  on  the  night  of  his  leadership, 
for,  with  the  Indian,  even  sports  are  divinely  directed.  Said  an 
educated  half-breed :  **  I  have  been  to  school,  and  I  have  lived  among 
white  men,  but  I  never  saw  any  people  so  religious  as  my  own. 
My  people  begin  all  things,  even  their  games,  with  prayer." 

The  opening  hand-game  prayer  asks  that  the  game  may  be 
played  as  divinely  revealed,  and  that  to  the  people  may  be  given 
happiness,  good  luck,  health,  welfare,  and  old  age.  With  simple 
dignity,  the  leader  tells  of  his  dream,  and  gives  his  directions  for 
the  game.  In  making  the  preparations  for  the  game,  he  accom- 
panies his  acts  with  the  saying,  "So  was  it  seen  by  me,"  or,  "So 
I  heard  it  commanded,"  or,  again,  "According  to  the  Spirit." 

In  a  general  way,  the  game  is  played  as  foflows :  The  players 
are  divided  into  two  sides,  the  object  being  for  one  side  to  guess  in 
whose  hands,  on  the  opposite  side,  are  held  certain  little  sticks  or 
counters.^  The  counters  are  often  carved  in  the  form  of  a  little 
black  bird,  probably  a  crow,  symbol  of  good.  If  all  the  guesses 
in  one  round  have  been  right,  the  hiding  side  must  give  over  the 

'  See  "  Arapaho  Hand-Game  Song,"  page  20J. 
[I6J] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'    BOOK 

counters  to  the  guessing  side,  and  the  g«essers  now  become  the 
hiders.  With  the  winning  of  the  counters  from  one  side  to  the  other, 
there  comes  a  cry  of  triumph  from  the  men,  a  trilling  halloo  of  vic- 
tory from  the  women,  and  laughter  from  all.  The  drum-beat  changes, 
a  dance-song  is  struck  up,  and  then  the  tipi  is  filled  with  the  rhythm 
of  dancing  feet  and  jangling  ornaments. 

During  the  whole  game  the  hand-game  songs  are  sung,  while 
all  the  players  wave  their  closed  hands  to  and  fro  in  time  to  the 
song.  The  hands  are  often  thrown  out  or  crossed  in  the  air,  while 
mystic  motions  are  made  to  confuse  the  guesser,  or  to  blight  his 
power  of  divination. 

At  the  close  of  the  game  there  is  a  dance,  and  then  the  feast  is 
brought  in  by  the  women.  Before  eating,  the  company  is  silent 
while  a  man  rises  and  delivers  a  long  prayer  for  the  welfare  of  the 
people.  When  the  feasting  is  over,  the  guests  quietly  disperse 
without  formality,  disappearing  through  the  tipi-flap.  In  a  few 
short  moments  the  gay  hand-game  company  has  melted  away 
into  the  darkness. 


THE   MESCAL   RELIGION 


T 


HE  peflote  (peyote),  or  "mescal-button"  is  the  top  of 
a  cactus  that  grows  in  Mexico  and  in  the  southwestern 
borderland  of  the  United  States.  In  shape  it  is  a  disk 
from  an  inch  to  an  inch  and  a  half  in  diameter,  and  per- 
haps a  quarter  of  an  inch  thick.  When  eaten  in  sufficient  quantity 
the  mescal  has  an  effect  which,  though  quite  distinct,  is  more  like 
that  of  hashish  than  of  anything  else  known.  It  produces  a  strange 
feeling  of  lightness,  dispels  pain  and  fatigue,  and  causes  visions 
of  marvellous  beauty  and  grandeur. 

The  religion  that  has  the  mescal  for  its  principal  symbol  is  a 
very  ancient  Indian  faith  that  probably  had  its  origin  with  the 
Indians  of  Mexico.  In  the  United  States  it  was  formerly  known 
only  to  the  southern  plains  tribes,  but  it  has  spread  from  the  Co- 
manches  and  Kiowas  to  the  Arapahos  and  Cheyennes,  and  on  up 
through  Oklahoma  till  now  the  mescal  rites  are  performed  as  far 

[I62J 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


CHEYENNE 

north  as  Winnebago,  in  Nebraska.  The  ancient  faith  has  undergone 
change,  and  the  mescal  religion,  as  it  is  practised  to-day,  may  al- 
most be  called  a  modem  cult.  Its  leaders  are  mostly  the  younger 
men  who  have  never  known  the  old  life  of  the  buffalo-hunting  days. 
Many  are  drawn  to  this  faith  through  the  belief  that  its  followers 
are  cured  of  consumption'  and  drunkenness — the  two  dread  enemies 
of  the  Indian,  which  were  unknown  till  the  coming  of  the  white 
man. 

In  the  ancient  faith  the  mescal-button  was  the  symbol  of  the 
sun,  which  is  the  manifestation  of  the  source  of  life.  Indeed,  the 
button  itself  resembles  the  sun,  for  it  has  a  circle  in  the  centre  which 
is  surrounded  with  white  spots  like  sun-rays. 

Like  many  Indian  rites,  the  mescal  ceremony  begins  at  night 
and  lasts  until  daybreak.^  As  performed  among  the  Southern 
Cheyennes,  it  is*  held  in  a  tipi,  which  is  consecrated  to  this  use,  and 
must  always  be  scrupulously  clean.  In  the  centre  is  a  crescent  of 
earth  some  six  inches  high,  which  curves  around  a  fire  built  of 
sticks  so  arranged  that  the  ashes  as  they  fall  form  a  second  crescent 
within  the  other.  A  man  tends  this  sacred  fire  all  night.  At  the 
centre  of  the  earth-crescent,  upon  a  little  cross  of  sage-twigs,'  lies 
the  vision-impelling  mescal,  the  symbol  of  the  rite.  The  leader  of 
the  ceremony  sits  opposite  this,  in  the  place  of  honor,  facing  the 
opening  of  the  tipi.  In  his  hands  he  holds  the  emblems  of  his 
office,  a  rattle,  a  wand,  and  a  fan  of  eagle-plumes.  AH  around  the 
tipi  sit  motionless  blanketed  forms.  Four  is  the  sacred  number 
in  this  religion,  and  four  mescal-buttons  arc  ceremonially  eaten 
during  the  rite.  Each  ritualist  brings  with  him  his  own  supply, 
and  it  is  often  customary  to  take  more  of  the  mescal-buttons 
than  the  ceremonial  four.  There  is  a  solemnity  in  the  atmosphere 
that  awes  the  on-Iooker.  Intense  consecration  seems  to  bum  like 
a  holy  fire.  Some  sit  with  heads  bowed,  but  most  of  the  devo- 
tees gaze  fixedly  upon  the  mescal.    Every  now  and  then  a  man 

'  Indeed,  it  has  been  claimed  by  a  medical  a«thority,  S.  F.  Landry,  that  the  mescal  is  a 
very  powerfal  cardiac  and  respiratory  stimulant,  especially  asefol  in  cases  of  asthma. 

2  The  recorder  has  made  no  exhaustive  study  of  the  mescal  religion,  and  describes  only 

that  which  she  has  seen.  .  .  -rr      ^t      •     -i- 

3  The  cross  is  an  ancient  Indian  symbol,  in  this  case  meanmg  a  star.     For  the  significance 

of  sage,  see  "  A  Holy  Story,"  page  38. 

[163] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'   BOOK 

will  slowly  draw   his  blanket  over  his  head  and  sink  back  to  re- 
ceive the  vision. 

All  night  they  sing,  each  one  in  his  t«m,  the  singer  shaking  his 
rattle,  while  the  man  next  to  him  beats  upon  a  small  buckskin  dram. 
Each  song  is  sung  four  times.  At  the  close  of  the  ceremony,  the 
worshippers  go  down  to  the  river  and  bathe  ;  for  cleanliness  is 
enjoined  by  the  mescal  faith.  The  rest  of  the  day  is  passed  in 
sleep. 

The  mescal  songs  are  all  esoteric.  They  contain  no  words,  the 
meaning  asually  being  known  only  to  the  members  of  the  same  lodge 
or  fraternity,  or  sometimes  only  to  the  singer  or  to  the  man  who 
made  the  song.  Many  men  have  their  own  songs,  inspired  by  some 
spiritual  experience.  The  mescal -songs  are  invocations  that  the 
truths  of  the  universe  may  be  revealed.  The  poetry  and  mysticism 
of  this  cult  supply  to  the  modern  Indian  the  spiritual  uplift  known 
in  the  old  days  to  those  who  went  apart  to  fast  and  learn  of  the 
spirits  what  should  be  their  guiding  ** medicine"  through  life.'  But 
it  is  possible  that  the  physical  effect  of  the  mescal  may  in  time  fulfil 
the  forebodings  of  the  older  Indians  who  fear  that  visions  thus  pro- 
duced can  bring  to  their  people  little  good. 


MATA  NO-OTZ 

Song   of   the   Mescal   Rite 

Sung  and  told  by  Mowihaii  (Magpie),  nephew  of  High  Chief  and  of  'Wolf-Robe,  and  leader 
of  the  mescal  religion  among  the  Southern  Cheyennes 


o 


THER  religions  teach  men  what  to  believe,  but  in  this 
religion  each  man  learns  truth  for  himself.  God  has 
given  the  mescal  to  man  that  through  it  man  might 
know.  There  is  a  word  that  comes  at  the  end  of  mescal- 
songs  and  that  word  means  "the  road."  Each  man's  road  is 
shown  to  him  within  his  own  heart.  When  he  eats  the  mescal  he 
sees  the  road;  he  knows;  he  sees  all  the  truths  of  life  and  of  the 
spirit. 

„J^^.  "1°"^^,,°*  the  Dafcotas,"  page  60,  and  Winnebago  "Song  to  the  Earth  -  Maker," 
Medicme-Song,"  and     A  True  Story,"  pages  253,  256,  262. 

[164] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


CHEYENNE 

Yoa  have  seen  the  mescal  lodge.  The  round  tipi  is  the  son, 
and  the  half-circle  of  earth  is  the  moon.  The  star  of  sage  on  which 
the  mescal  rests  is  woman,  for  the  earth  is  woman,  mother  of  all 
things.  The  fire  of  sticks  is  man,  and  the  flame  and  smoke  are 
the  spirit. 

You  ask  why  I  wear  purple.  Purple  is  my  color.  I  choose  it 
because  it  means  the  spirit,  it  means  the  breath.  The  breath 
of  man  and  of  every  living  thing  is  purple.  You  can  see  it  in  the 
cold.  So  is  smoke  purple.  Breath  and  smoke  are  the  spirit.  That 
is  why  I  have  taken  purple  for  my  color.  So  will  another  man 
take  green,  to  mean  the  green  earth.  AH  things  in  the  mescal 
ceremony  have  their  meaning.  The  gourd-rattle  is  the  sun;  the 
tuft  of  red  feathers  at  the  end  of  the  rattle  is  flame,  spirit;  the  handle 
is  "the  road**;  the  beaded  decoration  on  the  handle  of  each  rattle  is 
different,  because  each  man*s  road  is  different,  and  what  the  man 
wears  or  uses  must  speak  of  himself  and  of  what  he  has  himself  seen 
or  heard. 

The  mescal  takes  from  us  sickness  and  pain.  It  purifies  us. 
Through  it  we  may  come  to  know  all.  We  eat  the  mescal  because 
we  want  to  see — ^we  want  to  know — ^we  want  to  know  God. 

The  song  that  I  have  sung  for  you  is  the  one  that  I  sing  last 
in  the  ceremony,  just  before  dawn.  It  means  the  eagle  who 
spreads  his  wings  and  soars  aloft  and  breathes  deep  with  the  joy 
of  well-being.  The  eagle  is  myself.  God  has  given  me  that  bird. 
I  have  taken  the  eagle  for  my  bird  because  he  is  greatest  of  all 
birds.  He  is  the  father,  and  all  little  birds  are  his  children.  He 
is  strong,  for  he  flies  where  no  man  can  reach  him.  He  is  clean, 
for  he  spreads  his  wings  when  he  eats  that  no  dirt  may  fall  upon 
his  food,  and  he  washes  his  claws  in  the  mud  of  streams.  In  his 
feathers,  white  and  black,  we  see  day  and  night.  That  is  why  I 
carry  the  fan  of  eagle-feathers.  So  this  song  is  the  eagle,  breathing 
deep,  rejoicing  in  his  strength.     I  sing  it  just  at  sunrise. 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


01^ 


s. 


^ 


r    p  r^    I  r^r  r    m^,  r   t^ 


r 


^ 


0-.  <«rc.  ■ 


r 


r  <r 


A 


»'>^-  r  f  t  f  If^  J    k  J  J   j^ 


y^L«,  ^  .         ■<. 


o  t*r^  - 


r 


ojyuL. 


r  r 


.^  V  T    f.  Mtj  r 


r    r    r 


O         ■w.o-     tLck^ 


r 


^  r  T 


^^ 


1 1^  f  i^^i  J  ui^  i  ;;i: 


/v-^ 


r 


....  ^ 


•■  r 


A.ajt    ...      UA.       Id,     li»_ 


'1  ifi  ;-;■  I  4^ 


* 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


yttx^Jill  ^ 


JU  o^   -L    ^     L.. 


m 


M^ 


r 


r 


^    4    '^?^ 


i 


7^ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Ml 


<r. 


9*^ 


%  I  I    1  l^A^   ^^  I  \'  T>  t  I  C  t-  C  I  f- '  t'  I  ^ 


^2*   «^      It  a.   <*«-      -  ■  ■    ^^     ^-e-  <ii-  •*«-    ^*-  ^*-  JtAt  -^.ai.     Ax'      «ie- 


4   pr  UiJJ  riJ^rriJ-JviJ^Ji^s 


^  ^  if. 


A. 


lit.     H^      XjOui.     <^o         %[<! 


<^         Lo~     •i^*- -H^       •«•    ***-    y^-     *-«•     j*^      XjOui.     <M)         Hx.        Lue^ 


I  yj  it,h  ij  mTj  j'ljr,MV>  m'^''' 


"i   «*-«-       »Lc  .«i^  .tJA.      iLi    ^    <J/i.      lit.    ««.     A-a*    •^*«  -fc^' 


r 


rri 


rx— » 


J^    n    I    r-J^    I  J     J-|    n     I    J^g 


-^f-^ 


iU      tL.<f^        L 


r    T 


r 


lo 


t 


I  ;-;■  J'  I  r^  N  ^fj  ii  J^ 


u 


I. 


f  ^  T  "^  r  r 


T        T 


J     JM  ,1 


jijU      ^         ^      ^         £«.       -<^       x<^      A"        —  '    ' 


T  r     T 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


iV\.  /Vv.   J  -  89 


*. 


r 


■crc         o 


r 


I  >  j-i;-j_i.rj  J7  1  j-j.    I  J    ^2 


& 


r 


r 


^c 


r 


r 


i 


J    I  J    ri 


J    J  I  rx 


^ 


r    T- 


Ouu 


T   r  T 


i 


^^ 


T    .r- 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


/X.ci:hAy>,    Fjhx.r^Jfo-o^y 


1^1   1 1 J  1 1 1 1  II 


^^ 


JULo.- 


U**-  C'TM^ 


r^^ 


1^ 


»  (.  t.     It.   t,  f  I  J'  t  I  t^  r    I 


r 


iXa.        «.<L.      '»-o  " 


r 


r 


^^ 


n  J-  I  J  j.^ 


^o 


^ 


-Lo.--    o  1^ 


I     JN'      I  J   f     In  r   I  r^ 


^  ^"5^         'f 


A^  -  <i  CuL 


T 


l  n !  \n  I  I  s t  ^ 


H.~ 


io.... 


^ 


r 


^i  r  'xi^  I  ri-  'i  ^ 


^ 


r 


r 


Oi 


r     T 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


/v\.  /vi  .  J  =    )/  to  , 


Oc. 


^ 


^ 


/. 


^ 


1  J     U  .J 


n  J  'J 


6L       hi.  ^      ^  "^ 


'C<x>i-        ■«!*-        'i^'*'' — 


i 


I T" 


J  J      I  J     J    I   J    .i       I    J       Jj  ^^ 


^^ 


St 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


^fo'Li.ml^L^  -  to.  -  JrC.  -  o-^^ 


i 


Jr. 


J     J       1    J    J 


^ 


v^AL 


'JW.   -  f^ 


^ 


«^^       -eti.     ^iJbia^vlJt-      A^a,< 


I  J    In  J 


^3 


^ 


(2.     ^ 


L. 


-I: 


T 


L 


7^ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


<a.o>fe>^  ^o  -  «^y 


^ 


J'  J   fl  I  n 


Mo    <^, 


-Ki. o 


^^ 


t».<»-  - 


<»i^  ^fti  -     <, 


f*-  ,  je.oua-  txA.  ,       O 


# 


r. 


Cjo^*-o  ■ 


J  rt\  li 


m 


^ 


^S 


# 


f 


^ 


s 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


^  (j,  U^.i4^l..  o)<^t^^  (c3<^-^:^) 


rh 


l'.-  r  t"    I  t  'm^u  Lf  I  t^g 


"^  "^     T  T'   '^- 


■-JL<u. 


r^ 


^  ^4,     I  /j^^ 


a.  A,     /. 


r^ 


i\^r  \  n  ri^ 


^?     V   t^ 


^   1^ 


r 


^ 


r 


^A    in. 


CU 


IT 


Oj^ 


i^^ 


fe 


^       I     J"     a 


^ 


iU     ^ 


r" 


£c 


r 


Digitized  by  Microsott(S 


Q>'>'<^ Jffi-i^^ 


i-,  f\    IV  t  tkt  \\\\u  \^^ 


m 


^ 


^^ 


^     \     \      \    \     \k^      I  ft  J* 


^ 


-n*  - 


iLo^- 


CtZLt**^ 


^  li    \^y.m 


/3, 


.f  J  /n-J  I 


^ 
w 


^ 


^ 


eui  -  ■a*.    - 


ojUL 


^        I    I  I     i        j-       I       J-       ^        l» 


^Oui^ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


(sJl.^ -,  6y  eLuu  Jr»Mj>^-  ^  (y*''*^    '^S^^J 


1  t    r    i  r  t^^ 


^^ 


^ 


i 


''TtXA. 


d 


ft     1 1:^  t:  i^ 


^ 


'TtAA. 


i:: 


T- 


^ 


-^    i    J    l^s 


i 


^ 


^ 


^ 


7- 


"/ 


i  i  '^ 


Digitized  by  Mioroooft® 


JioK-^  ft 


(ij>  >'><     I      t    t'    I  t  H'  ^    ^  '  ^-     ^ 


-SL- 


€.  -    ■«^«. 


-/a 


'^  "T^  •' 


t\0.  -        tn-CL.  -  O  -  -U/O   -     *** 


f-nf^i- 


r 


,|HH    r  J  ,,  ,1   ?  ^ 


1  jU    ^ 


^. 


/L.  -  V^-  6i      jft 


<7/.^»-v   ->     ^-     if.    ^e-^^»^^-^    jf*^      £1^ 


1      Jl       J       J  f      1     J  J  IJ^I 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


^  r  ■'  ^i  M  J^ 


? 


.0*>    j-^  n-d^j^ 


•T 


^    J-  j-  r  ;;eee^ 


^P 


ii 


tt 


^a»*/    rf^     tia^-'^*^        -7»,*»v  «^-«LcJ-  -»u€.«.v- 


I       3 


^j:     J    JMJ    rJ^E^ 


3 


-aVe - 


ra-A.  - 


A 


^^ 


r-r^ 


^m 


^ 


5 


"A.    ■»»»-   - 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


/OaJ^  -  S<n^<y  kUi^  '"'^'^P^  /' 


l\-  \    (-f    1^^ 


OJk.         /to.    O  It O.   O        A^wv 


^|: 


.^|.  t-t   t^f    I  [,/;_,) 


^a 


i      f      I  ft  J 


{I        /o- 


^'. 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


^u.  -  **.-  ■?■*"»■  »'»^     -^  ~  *^^ 


k 


n  j-j  n 


-J    m 


n  r-j 


1-t  r  ;•  i    1^^ 


•y  J    i 


^ 


g^ 


a.  ^ 


A.  Aa 


r^       e  ^ 


iM 


r 


H   'n    I~3    :v    •'""■1     J    J    «^- 


ir  i    i    t.t  I'V  i^r  J    I  ^^ 


^        iCa.         <l* 


r 


r 


A 


-r- 


4-i-  J  J  I  i^M  r  I J   n  l^'M  J 


=3= 


e    /. 


T^  "T       -u  <^i.     ^ 


^*     r 


r*- 


h^ 


3? 


i  ^  J:^'  >>  ^  xj  '  J  ^-ir^^ 


C       aX      I 


«.     o 


cM     t.    c         «^  ^  ^      e    ^ 


uigmzea  oy  iviicrosonw 


fiuit  eu^  a-fiiriJ'tji 


3ir 


AI.AI.   Jr    ;;^ 


j~:     n  n  n  n     n  n    n  n 


>  '■       ■  r  ■  T 


;  ^  ;  'Jt 


7  \,\\'      Ml  J^  I, irf  J  u^ 


^ 


^ 


a.       *.o 


»<»...      ««^    ->^^» 


)C«.  xo.    K-c 


■J^x. 


v^      M''      I  ^J  '^  ^^^n-|J-J. 


^' 


16, 


ta...    ««A<.     -»» 


A     "AjL  Aa.    Ht- 


■e  -   <_ 


^t^<      n.)       ij— ;;  ijj-t,M^^^ 


^ 


t 


^ 


«.   <aa     e  «-A  t/3U"  «*«-  ^Jt-  »«*-•■<- 


nr,l      \j    J^lrn  til  1.1 1^ 


t 


■L 


T^  ^^'^t 


i-/tU  'fa.    Kt. 


t^J.-   <- 


4,  T^  f ;-  vy  rT7 


f^'^r 


r 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


i{a..^-  ^«^«-    Scr^Y 


/w./yi.  J  -  /'i 


^ 


gi 


^. 


il.  -*> «.     TUt-     -»i «- 


A. 


■*.o-  ---       KA  ■•-■ 


m 


f     r-  r  r     I  nr;  j:i^ 


^ 


^A  -»<  o.     ^     ^  <*-  K<Q.  A< 


<a. o 


V  [^  \     It     t  i^  J^  i^  I 


^ 


>,>l^         *ia.    5Ce.     ->ia,  aa.       •*">-   *-«-  »*  (^"^-^ 


r      MM     It     I.  J^  J^  ^ 


_/Ta.         ->»*.    Ajt, 


-^<L       ^a    -^    "tA    ^•'*— 


T     f.  f  f    I  nn  Jrii 


^(JL  ->ia.       AX 


-*<«. 


Ka  ■■■     Ka  ■-■ 


r        1-t-  f      IflT-l   JTT] 


>. 


A.  ^o- 


;6. 


A^C>.  -••       "Afi^  ■  ■•■ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


^u- 


4^ -f/ ;!</»>.    <yfo-oi 


^-^ 


¥<La 


n     n  ri    p  n    n  n  jt  n  ei^ 


j,.t-  ri  |J    J  \.  If  ^  iV.'' 


^^ 


? 


^Jt;    i         -e^        -^     '*-*        "AjK- 


•^-     ofiji  *  Ay^     aii.  ua.  Jv«.   «-<l 


4n  li  ;  J'  I J-H  ij-j-j  ij 


T  ^  Y^  f 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


f. 


^i 


-t— fa-i-T=t 


r 


TT 


n  n    n   ri     n  n^ 


-^. 


«d. 


Y-     "^^  7^ 


t. 


=g? 


Ll    I   I      I      1    \^V.L    I    I    I      I 


r- 


-L. 


r    T    T 


-L 


.j         J      J'  I    I    J     ]     1  V 


trx ■ 1  i 


r 


—    ^ 


i 


L 


r 


-^ 


r  ^ ^r 


A 


^^ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


X 


UL'  -oi^  -  Si 


r 


1^  I— r    UJ 


fe 


;;  ;   '  T  tt^t^ 


l—I    !  L_r    L-J-    ;  L_r    r_ 

t        5- 


T     T    T 


C^    ^ 


,0        "-     -^-»-  "Ajt- 


.ci^L.      £-    *jt.   ^-a.     Xt.  —  -e.  -^-a- 


j>V*      T^f    1  r^j  n  !\  !   j^  j^ 


C      >-«.    '^.-«-        -iCe. .  -  ■  jL-  .«-«.      ^A —      <,     ,<^/«_ 


iV'     1^1    I  J-^  n  r  1 J  -t  ii  ^PP 


O     >jt-    '^*-*-        *^ 


T- 


A 


v^r- 


m 


^^ 


^3 


.^^^      <^<«.         Xl       ^^e- 


I 3 ' 


J    J  .'    I  ,r^  M  hi  I  I  1  IJ  }-fi  r 


"P  I   ''  M  r  1  I  Ml   'If  I 
^  ... 


^  ^^  ^^  -u ^ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


/T 


4  '•  '  J  I  f   ^ '   ^  h  ^ 


d/         -t 


J  I  1  !■  J  1  i  n  i    p    1 


/^       -H^  t.nX:    ti 


•Crft  ->T-<. 


4     U    M'     1 1—11^ 


^z/ 


-l^i 


i  J  r  I  r  -n  ^  JM  J     1 


.^ 


<v<^  "6;       -^t-o-   <-«^* 


^ 


M^  V    1 r   I  i 


.A< 


lO-      -►i-oi  <ArtX      6r 


^^HMl  J      1  J      Ij     1 


Jta 


^ 


r" 


^ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


KJIa:*~o-.      ^c-  iPK^ 


^ 


t't?   .^1    I    J-  J^ 


J(c^ 


L 


■XaJ-O,  tto 


^ 


^^ 


^ 


5 


:? ^ 


■OrtX'   CT 


-♦iCk. 


-1^ 


l^tK. 


4  J-J   M 


^ 


r 


^^ 


^ 


/fc 


-*L^ 


■urit   "ti. 


-»<K> 


;6. 


'/^.a^ 


^ 


J-  I  J'    J    U^   J-  I  J     I  J      ^ 


A< 


r 


*».A. 


->V«-  «*7t^     "^  '^CA^  -*Jt. 


-*.a_ 


^ 


^ 


^ 


^ 


/c 


r 


-A-4 


^m 


w 


i 


t.rftX'  -c         -*<.« 


r     r 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


i 


I  r^       J    J 


> 


n 


et 


.  A.         •C«r«, 


m 


^m 


^ 


^ 


^ 


>. 


^ 


r^ 


i^«    1     vTi     V  M      1  J-   ^ 


i/c 


/ 


CK.  -CiJ^ 


^ 


^. 


L 


m- 


\k 


g^i    I    \  n  ^^ 


>^ 


->t.«- 


^^L        <>cr«. 


^j:frt  J  ]j  I  J    r^^ 


^ 


J^c 


-A 


r- 


uigiTizea  by  MiCi'Osott(s> 


.^ALai. 


ft-      ~^o-    »^\> 


^ 


I      > 


# 


JTJ     Jl  J 


Mi 


.o.  -cin- 


^ 


,'■  I .'    y\  J. 


/^  -M-O- 


I 


tk.  -OJ* 


^ 


^^ 


^  -^vft 


k.flL  *»'^ 


^ 


S^ 


-?" 


//i 


r 


-»»>» 


^ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


-r 


tV^   t  t-  I  r     If      lU-  i'  i 


1' 


'^   -^l«- 


Xe 


r 


^ 


r 


l^^ih  t  r^  U'  n^  nJ^TTi 


I' 


£o. 


f 


^ 


T 


^ 


4^^^    -^  n  i      P       l^y  J^  V]  t^ 


■f\o. 


-L 


''kJi.    -^f^f-    '*'-'■ 


Uh  J-  f.  1 1- 


\AT  i   \  i      I  J      I J-     I  J 


-»lo<-       -)tx '^^^    -*i<»-       "jCc 


^ . .  .  .  .  ^. 


i 


^fc=f= 


I  J       N       IV  i-  ^,   T.^  1 


t 


A 


r 


t. 


r 


fei* 


^■'•1-^   J-  T-    1  (-    i:  1  ^  ^  1    J. 


T 


w 


-Ki    -^^«-  '»^<»-         -fU.   ■  '- -^^ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


<fiin4»  ' "^t- 


-^ 


M'  J-  r  1  J    I  i^^ 


A 


a.      -K  »-  .         -jiA.  ycyc  -iLt.      .tyy^ 


# 


.fn-  J-  r  1  r.  I- 1  J.  j^  I  J.   j»^ 


a.    *»»- 


;a 


r 


r 


4 1'l^  ^.  I  TT^i  ''^  i  ^  ^ ' 


^ 


-^ 


56 


r 


r  J  'x  j^j  I  ^  J  I  U 


Ha.         -■■         iye-    >^o^      "K-A.    --••  y<^yc 


m 


J 1 1 1  I  ^  1^^ 


ij, 


ite 


r 


-MA 


^ 


r 


-id. 


r 


i 


'^"'  u'i  'a'^  'L'^J^i' 


r 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


HOA-)  HJTIT    C' 'A'lASA 

,ri£i!;'  -   oritqnA   j;j      %   at  awoT;t   b.ii  wod   3fl"J  lo   gniwfcib   srIT 

.(liirfg  jiitJH)  Juriaia   £nitR/>W 
.(bioD  -I-    }--.',!  A)  !,3!tniiiyr  iwiricM  ^'ooaiH  yd  2i  s'l'is^sl  srtT 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


ftY      > 

A 

i 

?] 

«,»ij.*; 

il 

^ 

;j 

f 

f] 

if 

= 

=  1 

(■ 

^ 

& 

: 

-'■ 

?. 

uJ 

riJ 

IIlii(li^vJlliiifc 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE   ARAPAHOS 


.1  HE  Arapahos  are  allies  of  the  Cheyennes,  and,  like  the 

TCheyennes,  are  a  northern  AIgonq«ian  tribe.  Early 
in  the  last  century,  abotit  the  year  1800,  both  tribes 
'  I  were  living  in  the  Black  Hills  region.  The  Arapahos 
lad  probably  poshed  their  way  through  alien  peoples  east  of  the 
Missouri  and  continued  their  migrations  on  into  Wyoming  until 
they  reached  and  occupied  the  lands  about  the  head-waters  of 
the  Arkansas  and  Platte  rivers.  Their  range  practically  extended 
from  the  Rio  Grande  to  the  Yellowstone. 

The  Arapaho  tribe  falls  properly  into  five  divisions,  each  of 
which  is  recognized  by  the  others  as  an  integral  part  of  the  nation. 
The  Gros  Ventres  are  reckoned  as  the  fifth  of  these  sub-tribes. 
Originally  these  divisions  were  separate  entities,  though  they  al- 
ways were  allied  and  sometimes  closely  associated,  but  gradually 
all  were  absorbed  by  the  Hinanatinai.,  or  Arapaho  people  proper. 

As  with  the  Cheyenne,  the  Arapaho  nation  underwent  a  distinct 
cleavage  into  a  Northern  and  a  Southern  branch,  a  division  which, 
according  to  ethnologists,  seems  to  have  occurred  before  the  tribe 
was  placed  on  reservations.  The  Northern  Arapahos  share  their 
reservation  in  Wyoming  with  the  Shoshones,  while  the  Southern 
Arapahos  are  affiliated  with  the  Southern  Cheyennes,  with  whom 
they  have  received  land  in  severalty  in  Oklahoma. 

In  olden  times  the  Arapahos  lived  altogether  in  tipis  of  buffalo- 
skin,  and  depended  upon  the  buffalo  almost  exclusively  for  the 

NOTE  FOR  PRONUNCIATION  OF  ARAPAHO  TEXT 

Unless  otherwise  indicated,  vowels  have  the  Continental  sound,  and  consonants 
the  English. 

ch,  in  italic,  is  a  gtrttaral,  like  ch  in  German, 
a  has  the  sound  of  the  same  character  in  German. 

f  1971 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'    BOOK 

necessities  of  life.  Unlike  many  of  the  plains  tribes,  they  practised 
little  or  no  agriculturet  and  accordingly  had  no  fixed  settlements 
to  which  to  return  for  planting  or  harvesting. 

Though  in  the  border  warfare  with  white  settlers,  their  neighbors 
the  Cheyennes  and  Kiowas  were  classed  as  hostiles,  the  Arapahos 
remained  for  the  most  part  neutral  and  unaggressive.  They  are 
an  imaginative  and  very  devoutly  religious  people.  The  religion 
of  the  Spirit-Dance  (Ghost-Dance)  was  received  by  them  with  par- 
ticular fervor,  and  the  Arapahos  are  to-day  among  the  few  tribes 
who  still  perform  the  ancient  and  deeply  emblematic  religious  cere- 
monial known  to  white  men  as  the  Sun-Dance. 

Said  a  young  Arapaho,  ''Our  fathers  and  mothers  knew  religion, 
even  though  not  the  same  as  what  the  white  people  teach." 


HASSE-HI   NAAD 

Song  of  the  Buffalo-Hide  Ceremony  (San-Dance  Song) 

I 


.[  HIS  is  a  prayer  that  Ichebeniatha  (One-On-High),  may 

Ttake  pity  on  the  people.  In  this  song  it  i$  the  sun  who 
is  addressed  as  Father,  for  father  and  grandfather  are,  to 
I  the  Indian,  terms  of  veneration,  respect,  and  love. 
The  ceremony  is  commonly  called  by  the  whites  the  Sun-Dance. 
The  Arapaho  word,  "Hasse,"  means  rawhide,  and  refers  to  the 
buf f  alo  -  hide,  which  is  an  important  part  of  the  ceremony.  Ac- 
cording to  Dr.  George  A.  Dorsey,  of  the  Field  Columbian  Museum, 
Chicago,  the  ceremony  is  known  as  **  Hassehawu,"  the  Ceremony 
of  the  Offerings'  Lodge.' 

HASSE-HI  NAAD  SONG  OF   THE   BUFFALO-HIDE  CEREMONY 

Hedawunaneina  O  may  he  take  pity  on  «s, 

Hishish  nisana  !  Father  Sun, 

O  my  Father ! 

'  See  page  151  for  songs  of  the  same  ceremony  among  the  Cheyennes. 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


ARAPAHO 
HASSE-HI    NAAD 

Song  of  the  Buffalo-Hide  Ceremony 

II 

Sang  by  Chief  Nakos  (Sage) 

This  is  the  last  song  in  the  ceremony.  While  it  is  sang  the 
people  run  hither  and  thither  in  symbol  of  dispersing  to  the  four 
ends  of  the  earth.  At  the  close  of  the  song  they  shake  their  blankets 
and  garments  to  symbolize  the  casting  from  themselves  of  all  evil. 

HACHE-HI    NAAD,  JACmj   NAAD' 

"Wolf-Song,  or  Comanche-Song 
Sang   by  Chief  Nakos  (Sage) 


T  is  the  dttty  of  certain  warriors  to  go  ahead  of  the  war- 
party  and  spy  on  the  enemy,  and  then  to  return  and 
give  the  signal  for  the  attack.     These  warriors  are  called 

wolves,  for   they   are   like  wolves,  prowling   about   the 

enemy's  camp,  moving  by  night,  and  falling  on  the  foe  unawares. 
This  is  one  of  the  oldest  songs  of  the  Wolf  warriors.  Such  songs 
are  also  cafled  Jac/iu-naad,  Comanche  -  Songs,  because  in  former 
days  the  Comanches  were  the  foes  of  the  Arapahos,  and  "Co- 
manche" came  to  be  a  common  word  for  enemy. 

HACim-m   NAAD  WOLF-SONG 

Nah'ni  chita-ini.  Look,  O  maid,  behold  me, 

Hitha  babian  niyihana ;  I  am  going  far  away 

Hani  httinahawoni,  Upon  the  war-path  roaming ; 

Haka  niliin.  And  yoar  words  have  caused  the  parting. 

Long  shall  be  the  time 
Ere  again  you  see  me. 

'See  "Cheyenne  Songs  of  Victory,"  page  155. 
[199] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'    BOOK 


KAINAWAD  NAAD' 

Song  of  the  Spirit-Dance  (Ghost-Dance  Song) 
Song  by  many  Arapahos,  and  explained  fay  Chief  Nakos  (Sage) 

ONG  ago  all  was  water,  and  the  Turtle  went  to  the  bottom 
of  the  water  and  brought  up  a  bit  of  clay^  Out  of  this 
clay  the  world  was  made,  and  thereafter  the  Turtle 
became  a  symbol  of  the  earth.  The  ridge  on  his  back 
is  the  mountain-line,  and  the  marks  are  streams  and  rivers.  He 
himself  is  like  a  bit  of  land  in  the  midst  of  water. 

The  Turtle  Waters  are  yellow,  and  through  these  must  the 
spirit  pass  to  enter  the  spirit-world.  The  man  who  falls  entranced 
during  the  Spirit-Dance  knows  nothing  until  he  finds  himself  upon 
the  brink  of  the  yellow  waters.  In  this  song  the  dreamer  tefls 
how  he  waded  through  the  Turtle  Lake  even  to  the  spirit-world. 
The  song  was  composed  by  HanScha  -  thiak  (Sitting  Buffalo- 
Bull),  an  Arapaho  leader  in  the  Spirit-Dance. 


KAINAWAD  NAAD 

Seniesana 

Niha-nawu, 
Seniesana 

Niha-nawu, 
Nanai  baeno  nidjieh-hi, 

Niha-nawu, 
Nanai  bSeno  nidjieh-hi, 
Niha-nawu. 


SONG  OF  THE  SPIRIT-DANCE 

Wading  passed  I  through 

Yellow  waters, 
Wading  passed  I  through 

Yellow  waters. 
Ah,  'twas  e'en,  e'en  the  Turtle  Lake — 

Yellow  waters — 
Ah,  'twas  e'en,  e'en  the  Turtle  Lake — 

Yellow  waters. 


'  See  "  History  of  the  Spirit-Dance,"  page  41.     Compare  songs  of  the  Spirit-Danse,  Dakota, 
and  Pawnee,  pages  47-48,  114-116. 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


ARAPAHO 


HO  NAWAD  NAAD» 

Crow-Dance  Song 

The  Crow-Dance  is  a  ceremony  that  the  Arapahos  hold  in  con- 
nation  with  the  Spirit-Dance.  The  crow  is  the  messenger  of  the 
Father.''  As  black  paint  is  symbolic  of  good,  so  is  the  black  crow 
a  symbol  of  gpod.  For  the  crow  is  a  harmless  bird;  he  kills  nothing? 
even  little  birds  can  drive  him  away.  In  this  song  the  crow  is  the 
symbol  of  the  Father. 


HO  NAWAD  NAAD 

Hesunani'  ho-hti 

Bahinahnit-ti, 
Hesunani'  no  I 

A  e-yo  he-ye  he-ye  yo  1 


CRO"W-DANCE  SONG 

Oh,  the  Crow,  our  Father, 

He  is  all  in  all, 
Oh,  our  Father  Crow  I 

A  e-yo  he-ye  he-ye  yo  I 


NAKAHU  NAAD 

Lttllaby 

Sung  by  Wageoh  (Maad  Shawnee),  Nawadefc  (Sasie  Sage),  Nabilase  (Jessie   Sage),  Gelfaini 

(Cappie  Webster) 
NAKAHU  NAAD  LULLABY 


Cheda-e, 
Nakahu-kahu, 
Be-fae  I 


Go  to  sleep. 
Baby  dear,  slumber. 
Baby  I 


GOCHOTl  NAAD' 

Hand-Game  Song 

HE  Indian  t«ms  his  horses  loose  to  graze  where  they 
may  find  pasture.  When  he  wants  to  «se  his  horses 
he  must  hunt  them  up  and  drive  them  hqme.  Some- 
times the  horses  wander  far  away  and  the  man  mast  be 
op  before  daylight  to  bring  them  in  for  a  day's  work,  or  else  hunt 

'  See  "Pawnee  Song  of  the  Spirit-Dance,"  page  J  J  5.  • 

'  In  this  particular  song  it  is  the   prophet   of  the   Spirit-Dance  ■  religion  who   is  alluded 
to  as  "the  Father." 

'  See  "  Cheyenne  Hand-Game  Songs,"  page  161. 

[20J] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'    BOOK 

them  the  day  before.    "White  men,  too,  who  camiot  afford  to  bay 
feed,  turn  their  horses  loose  in  this  way. 

This  Hand-Game  Song  refers  to  the  search  for  the  sticks  hidden 
in  the  hands  of  the  players. 


GOCHOTl  NAAD 

Natinac^abena, 
Ni  nananaecAana  ! 
Ni  nananaecAana ! 

NatinacAabena, 


HAND-GAME  SONG 

Now  I  go  to  seek  my  horses  ! 
So  here  I  stand  and  look  about  me  ! 
So  here  I  stand  and  look  about  me  ! 

Now  I  go  to  seek  my  horses  ! 


HICHAACifUTHI' 

Song    of    the    Club    Society 
Sung  and  told  by  a  member  of  the  society 

The  melody  of  this  song  is  old,  and  it  is  used  by  the  Cheyennes 
as  well  as  by  the  Arapahos  with  some  slight  changes  to  fit  the  Chey- 
enne words.  Bttt  these  words  were  heard  in  sleep  by  an  Arapaho 
brave  of  the  CI«b  Society.  In  dream  there  appeared  to  him  two 
Arapaho  warriors,  White-Horn  and  Running- Whirlwind,^  who  had 
both  been  killed  by  the  Pawnees,  and  they  sang  this  song : 


HICHAACHUTHI 

Nananina  Nanakunithana 
Nananina  NeyacAat-Chawaat 
Cha  anitana. 


SONG  OF  THE  CLUB  SOCIETY 

Behold,  I  am  White-Horn, 
Behold,  I  am  Running- Whirlwind, 
We  live,  we  live, 

Behold  us  ! 


'  See  "  Organizations  of  the  Plains  Indians,"  page  31. 

'  The  whirlwind,  the  thunder,  the  sun,  and  other  forces  of  nature  are  personifications  of 
divine  power.  As  such  they  are  spirits,  and  the  name  Running- Whirlwind  might  hold  much 
significance  to  the  Indian.  Most  Indian  names  have  deeper  meaning  than  is  conveyed  by  the 
actual  word. 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


^4  tn"io.at? 


.X 


C-^^AMtf^ 


f 


i 


14 


» 


J    U'J    J 


J  i  |J  .■ 


5 


^ 


0        /^     ^   :C«t.    --■—  o      /«^     ^^  -^    -tai  ( 


1    "1    I  .1    V  g  I  T-i  1^ 


^ 


.fr  ,  ^iiij  J  .1  rn^, n 


Mid.-UL  -L    -La    ^-      Jec-Ka  / 


„.^'l^  I     J    I  J    J     1^^ 


dsx.f 


>|y  J    M  I  J    III    I   1  I  ^  Ip 

/a.  'Tui    -UOl <>  -trO.         -tcK       ■**-        Tt^    / 


4t 


7" 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


jr 


/fi./vi-  J-  f,f_  (a 


3*^^   ^    Cl.uJ'  jTaM^  (-fa^) 


h 


^\i'       f  VtTt         I     \'\V^     ^^^ 


^> 


-uLa^      ^    -^<su-«a-    -y-<!»- 


Kt,       o.      lit-      Lt- 


r 


-L. 


^W       ^  1      Ml     ^<\\  y.i^ 


s 


./^  e,        M^'  ^      -^ 


lC«-      ^J^    *ja-       JLt     ,^^t^       -Co 


A/<.  ^^a-      L<-         ^-<&.      ^^L  1^        ■OLOL     -fit-      'Hjl.        -^i-^^      -H-A- 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


'Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


V  I  1  LJ  1  rj  \  V  V 1  uj  \  n 


s^ 


a  A 


r 


o.    Z. 


r- 


^- 


\~\\\^\n\\  r\n\  rj 


a.  A 


T 


-  A 


i^-x.        ^       A 


r 


-a        a-   «_ 


J-  J- 1  iJ-  \^]\  r  J' 


^ 


Qu.  -^     /c»'  ^^ 


/Loo  (X.      -iuL- 


r- 


^■ 


(^    V  V  \^ 


rr  I     K.    j^: 


W 


a  L 


r 


iuo     'O  C^       iL> 


<x  -  e>- 


L- 


3S 


^  X.  il-^XlAUi:!- 


i 


A     vJ. 


r 


a- 


il 


cu. 


T 


-L. 


Uigitizea  by  Microsoft® 


LH^i^f  Jj  4li^x-lj  1^  JJ-'# 


a  ^ 


T- 


lu. 


£IUL 


t 


^ 


T- 


1^1 


I  V  v-M^^  \  ^i^ 


J  ,r  u  Mj  nP^nrr^i'^xii^jp 


35= 


^-  ^^  ;^. 


4  i  X  U  X^  I  ^-  ^"  I XJ.  ' 


(ji^    uc^^     cjirrS-ti  Ucui*.   COu-Jj^   CtZi     ^>a-rY-  i^'Y 


O.    Uo 


^O-Ao^         hJl.-    ti      t^ 


(M/tn^^  ■yi-'^  ^  '^      ^ii«~<- 


Z^-t 


r 


i^x^a^i^    ■^'^y^^^ 


tz 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


O-L^  £>(' 


M.Art'  J-  tfl 


*  c^  a\xJ^  ^^  c 


V  r    \v  ^-   § 


^ 


■?r- 


i.     \\    Ir^-    u    ll  J  -'    Id    1  J 


lyy  \j    in  J I J  J  I 


c|        J       J       I    j     ^ 


t 


g.  J-  J-    U     I  J^J  J  IJ   J 


^ 


^1      J     J     I  .J   ^ 


^1        tA  -  -^i  «a 


^' 


'CZZa   , 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


l^  I  Y\^.  i-\\y^  \ 


n^-  -L     1^ 


oJL  -  riiiX-      'd.  — 


■H*- 


OJLX.         <-*! 


t^i'  J-   i-  N-  h\  1^1   I  ^  \ 


Mt.  -     o^^  -      ■Pi  a.-   -^M.  JLo  -   o    —      /^-  -t».  , 


£ 


=^^ 


-ibii-  -L.     MoX-'u:^ 


OJUL, 


^ 


r^ 


N      {Ss 


l\ll  iXXlX'^P 


■*-* 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


i^r,    ^A^a)>    J/'gAi 


^ 


^^^m 


^ 


1* 


jHi  n 


5 


Qf^^       til.        C^tr^,  cr^      'ttK-     - 


m 


^ 


+S" 


^■\  o  I  rj 


iS 


fc 


^i^ 


^ 


3g? 


/3<i  -   -L  ^    fyaJi-  *i;f-     -^-    -i  ^ 
M^       -6i         oJLSL     -t^  ixx*.  


.m  \  \  I  ft 


f-=^ 


1^ 


im^ti^^ 


Ck  ,     cru^ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


JroJ^i^a^iy.^  Sc^)  ddl^, [C^l>'^  CJUnJ^ 


^^l  ^  1  rH  1^  vi   h  ^  \\v  ^  M.  t^^ 


dx.-da       e,      Jfo- 4lio.- Lu<- ^ty-  £j^  ^  1i)^-UL- 


^, 


e^ 


^ 


^ 


p  T    I ^     1^ 


vrTT 


5 


s 


^f^— ^ 


4=^^ 


=5^ 


g;  i        iT-i^rrn^v-h-N-^ 


m 


^ 


^fe^: 


fe?- 


^-?-1      I    1      ^      1    Ir  T-  T    1^^ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


^ 


(^./v\.  1'^  JoS   


r~i 


r~i 


\  r      1  1     V  h     ^    >  i^^^ 


JU^ 


oK-        A.^ 


->i_^.        -^^  6.  oK-        A_  A_         ■'rf-'* 


^' 


£c 


^ 


i    M  i     ^    1^^^^ 


^^^ 


^ 


^ 


>vt         >v». 


c/A,    aTo 


r 


r- 


^^ 


^^ 


^ 


t\ct.cA.     fia 


r- 


^ 


r- 


i 


r  I  i  I 


1    r  I  I 


& 


r 


>6.- 


r" 


^    I  U  i-  u 


^x 


I. 


<A,e^        iU         <pA 


'^^  i    I i.    'J.    u 


"^ 


i/^ 


Jt-O 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


J ] 


rit 


^ 


^.    ^      M   T      1. 


a    ^ 


r 


^, 


4     1    M  r   ^ 


^     ;^ 


r- 


/-, 


4  1  V 1 1   t  I H  n  I   g 


T 


-U  - 


■e.   — 


-    s^^ 


L  \  t  I  1  t  iH  c  1  ^ 


s 


T-     n 


-^  -  ^    -         €^ 


Jfc^      )  4«        -^      •o-'^^^    '"I-     'i-<n^ '         ■*-*^ 


^x' 


'JiO.  -      ->1  <S> -*  i>- 


cJ< 


«.-      »"«-  ' 


ii 


->i/i-      u  a  '     -U  a.  - 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


-L.  _ 


jg.  —       -e- 


yiCA 


± 


i 


^ 


^ 


1   1-  in  I'TT 


-■^=>- 


-^-=>- 


^ 


.^A  -    6^-     •*!<»-£*<»--     ^- 


-/^r 


Ao         -/T  ^-CA^  ««^     *oV  — 


/ 


/ 


^ 


^.t/0  , 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


t^^ 


T]  J_|  J  .J    I J  ^    N  ^H  ^i 


^ 


Cu 


T   "  T 


fjL,  -CdA.    Ix- 


l^     L 


r 


^ 


J  J      I  J   A     I  ^ 


f  ^  7  ^ 


^ 


Ol  Lu.    -L-  ^    A  -«^       ^^ 


.0N  'r  I  iH   I  JIJ    |.'^^   IM    IB 


r  '  r 


''    Mj   I  a-'   l^ijl^ 


a  -L     ou  -L.     ^    ^     L-^.    -    ^ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


<^  rl/x.  a.  <LL^^t=t^ 


ife 


}u'^   Y-      ^'^     ^  r-  -^T  T'- 


T    Lj  P  1  Pn  T  ^  1 


2,  ^^ 


^    -^7^ 


# 


1    "^M^T   ^       N- 


^ 


^ 


^ 


<5U 


r- 


7< 


^ 


4Tt<  h  ^  I  Ji^4,J  j   1^^^^ 


u£jco-  M^^ . .    . 


#  J  J   \^  ^    N  .i:l-r.    1 


0,  -U      -U 


r 


A 


r-     ^ 


fefc 


#^1  'M  1  ^  -pj'^    IJ    J  liy.j,  [jyi^,, 


«^ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


"N'  ^/^'-tLrJ.juLJtJi^ 


w 


1  i  '  1 
^  ■r  T- 


kk 


m 


II      M     X    1 1    I  '  1 


(L-t.    -L.  Y-  '^  T  T~' 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


KIOWA    TITLE-PAGE 

The  design  is  of  a  Kiow4  cradle-board  with  covering  of  bead- 
work. 

The  lettering  and  decorations  are  by  Hinook  Mahiwi  Kilinaka 
(Angel  De  Cora).  The  string  of  beads  is  such  as  children  wear, 
and  is  here  used  to  typify  childhood. 


\ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE   KIOWAS 


O 


F  all  the  plains  tribes,  perhaps  none  is  more  obscure  of 
origin  than  the  Kiowa,  or  **Gaigw«,"  as  they  call  them- 
selves. Although,  according  to  some  ethnologists,  their 
langttage  bears   a  certain  resemblance  to  those  of  the 


Athapascan  and  Shoshonean  groups,  the  similarity  is  not  sufficient 
to  justify  the  identification  of  the  Kiowas  with  these  tribes.  For 
the  present  these  Indians  stand  apart  in  a  iaxnUy  by  themselves. 

The  Kiowas  have  lived  on  the  southwestern  plains  for  more 
than  half  a  century,  but  their  earliest  home  of  which  there  is  historic 
evidence  was  around  the  sources  of  the  Missouri  and  the  Yellow- 
stone rivers.  Here  they  seem  to  have  led  a  nomadic  life,  depending 
upon  game,  great  and  small,  for  their  livelihood. 

The  Kiowas  have  a  tradition  of  an  ancient  division  of  the  tribe. 
A  quarrel  arose  between  two  chiefs  over  an  antelope,  which  re- 
sulted in  the  migration  of  part  of  the  tribe  from  the  river  country 
to  the  Black  Hills,  where  they  came  into  relation  with  the  Crow 
Indians  and  settled  near  them.  Then  they  pushed  southward 
again,  raiding  and  wandering  and  frequently  entering  what  was 

NOTE  FOR   PRONUNCIATION  OF  KIOWA  TEXT 

Unless  otherwise  indicated,  vowels  have  the  Continental  sound,  and  consonants 
the  English. 

The  inverted  apostrophe  after  a  consonant  signifies  an  explosive  soand,  sharper 
than  an  asperated  consonant. 

H  has  the  sound  of  the  same  character  in  German. 

n  has  the  nasal  sound,  as  in  French. 

ain  has  the  vowel-sound  of  the  French  word,  "  main." 

Since  words  are  sometimes  changed  and  distorted  to  fit  the  rhythm  of  a  song, 
and  vowel-soonds  modified  for  euphony,  the  ear  has  been  the  sole  guide  in  writing 
the  Kiowa  song- words.     The  spelling  here  adopted  is  an  attempt  of  the  recorder  to 

reproduce  the  sounds  as  sung. 

[221] 
Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'   BOOK 

then  Spanish  territory.  The  migrators  were  the  ancestors  of  the 
Kiowas.  But  these  Indians  believe  that  descendants  of  the  other 
ancient  branch  still  dwell  in  the  ancestral  home  about  the  head- 
waters of  the  two  great  rivers. 

The  Kiowas  were  known  in  the  old  days  as  strong  fighters,  and 
were  among  the  fiercest  of  the  plains  warriors.  Their  roving  life 
brought  them  into  contact  with  other  tribes  to  a  marked  degree, 
and  alien  blood  was  frequently  absorbed  into  the  tribe  through 
the  adoption  of  captives. 

In  1867  they  forsook  the  free  life  of  the  plains  and  entered  upon 
the  reservation  in  Indian  Territory  which,  in  common  with  the 
Comanches,  they  have  since  occupied.  They  are  now  citizens, 
having  received  allotments  of  land  in  severalty  in  what  is  now 
Oklahoma.  Their  life  has  undergone  great  change.  Ill-ventilated 
frame-houses  have  replaced  the  tipi  with  its  leaping  fire  and  its 
open  flap  and  smoke-hole,  and  the  Kiowas  have  suffered  the  ravages 
of  that  foe  to  Indians  in  the  transition  state — consumption.  But 
these  people  are  industrious  and  for  the  most  part  hardy,  and  it 
is  to  be  hoped  that  discrimination  in  their  absorption  of  new  ways 
may  help  them  to  bring  something  of  the  old  vigor  into  their  new 
life. 

APIATAJV 


p  [PIATAiV  is  the  head  chief  of  the  Kiowas.     He  is  the 

A  cousin  of  High  Chief,  the  Cheyenne,'  and  High  Chief  it 
was  who  brought  his  white  friends  to  the  Kiowa  coun- 
'I try  and  led  them  to  Apiatan. .  The  Kiowa  chief  received 
his  guests  with  Indian  dignity  and  courtesy.  The  purpose  of  the 
visit  and  the  mission  of  the  book  were  explained  to  him,  and  he 
was  asked  to  contribute  something  to  represent  the  Kiowa  people. 
He  sang  the  oldest  song  he  knew,  an  ancient  lay  with  archaic  words, 
and  then  some  of  his  Indian  guests  also  offered  songs.  It  is  owing 
to  High  Chief's  full  explanation  to  the  Kiowas  of  the  purpose  of 
the  book,  and  to  the  interest  of  Apiatan,  that  all  the  songs  contrib- 

'  See  Viha-Hwaiha-o-tisr,  or  Hiamovi  (High  Chief,  or  High  'Wolf),  page  J49. 

[222] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


ifray.  ■ 


Apiatari  (Wooden  Lance),   Head  Chief  of  the  Kiowas 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


KIOWA 

«ted  then  and  afterwards  by  the  Kiowas  are  some  of  the  oldest 
now  remembered  by  the  tribe.  At  the  mid-day  meal  the  white  visi- 
tors were  given  the  place  of  honor  facing  the  opening  of  the  tent,  and 
were  treated  with  the  marked  courtesy  typical  of  Indian  hospitality. 
Afterwards  Apiatan  complied  with  the  wish  of  his  new  friends  and 
prepared  himself  to  be  photographed.  He  voluntarily  ptrt  on 
the  dress  worn  in  the  ceremony  of  the  mescal  religion,  of  which  he 
is  a  leader — a  beautiful  costume  of  buckskin  decorated  with  fine 
bead-work  designs  symbolic  of  the  mescal  faith.  In  his  hand  he 
carried  a  fan  of  eagle-feathers,  an  emblem  of  his  high  office.  Thus 
clothed  he  was  an  imposing  figure,  the  earthly  chief  of  his  people 
and  their  spiritual  leader. 

Apiatan  is  a  man  of  intelligence  and  strong  personality.  At  the 
time  when  the  Ghost-Dance  movement^  reached  the  Kiowas,  Apiatan 
was  stricken  with  grief  at  the  loss  of  a  dearly  loved  son.  Hearing 
that  this  religion  promised  communion  with  the  dead,  the  Kiowa 
chief  determined  to  see  the  Prophet  and  learn  more  of  the  new 
faith.  Apiatan  .  found  the  Father,  but  only  to  be  disappointed, 
and  to  return  to  his  people  unconvinced.  This  checked  the  ardor 
of  the  Ghost-Dance  movement  among  the  Kiowas,  in  whose  lives 
the  mescal  religion,  long  known  to  them,  is  now  the  strongest  spirit- 
ual influence.^  As  mescal  leader,  Apiatan  receives  a  loyalty  from 
his  people  that  is  second  only  to  their  faith  in  his  judgment  and  in 
his  ability  to  guard  their  welfare. 

GOMDA   DAAGYA 

Wind-Songs 
Told  fay  Owik'ayain  (The  Home-Comer) 


I  [HF'RK  are  different  kinds  of  war-songs.     Gomda  Dsiagya 

T  (Wind-Songs)  are  war-songs  made  while  the  men  are  on 
the  war-path,  and  are  sung  by  those  at  home  who  think 
H  of  the  distant  warriors,  or  by  the  men  on  the  war-path 
who  think  of  their  loved  ones  at  home.  As  a  mother  sings  a  luflaby 
to  the  child  in  her  arms,  even  so  she  sings  to  the  absent  son  far 

'  See  "History  of  the  Spirit-Dance,"  page  4 J. 

'  See  "  The  Mescal  Religion  "  and  "  Song  of  the  Mescal  Rite,"  pages  162-165. 

[223] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'    BOOK 

ly  poor  boy  I"  might  she  croon,  "Alone  on  the  prairie 
thy  days  V*     So  might  the  maiden  sing,  thinking  of 
light  the  young  warrior  sing,  thinking  of  the  maid.' 
"mi^T  are  called  Wind-Songs  because  they  are  songs  of 
loneliness  and  longing  like  the  open  prairie  where  there  is  only  the 
sweep  of  the  wind.' 

GOMDA   DAAGYA 

Wfnd-Song 

Very  ancient  song ;  words  archaic 

I 

Sang  by  Apiatan  (Wooden  Lance) 

GOMDA   DAAGYA  "WIND-SONG 

A-doguonko  do-peya  kayo,  Idlers  and  cowards  are  here  at  home  now^ 

O  a-doguonko  do-peya  kayo.  Whenever  they  wish,  they  see  their  be- 

Kionte-go-k'ian  etbonholgon.  loved  ones. 

Ayi-ya  on-pali,  on-dekia.  Oh,  idlers  and  cowards  are  here  at  home 

now. 
Idlers  and  cowards  are  here  at  home  now. 
Bat  the  youth  I  love  is  gone  to  war,  far 

hence. 
Weary,  lonely,  for  me  he  longs. 

GOMDA    DAAGYA 


Wind-Song 

II 

Song  fay  T'e-ne-t'e 

(Eagl 

e  Chief) 

GOMDA    DAAGYA 

WIND-SONG 

Pako  e'k'ianda, 

Pako  e'k'ianda, 

Pako  e'k'ianda, 

Ayi  apo 

Hayi  ankom  oyom  giie. 

I  have  but  one  love, 
I  have  but  one  love, 
I  have  bat  one  love. 
And  he  is  far  away, 

On  the  war-path,  e-ye,  e-ye ! 

Lonely  are  the  days  and  weary. 

'  See  foot-note  No.  3,  page  102,  also  page  453. 
^  See  "  The  "War-Path,"  page  J54. 
[224] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


KIOWA 

GOMDA  DAAGYA 

Wind-Song 

A  very  old  song ;  some  words  archaic 

III 

Song  and  told  fay  Sah-mount  (Samon) 

A  group  of  yo«ng  men  are  on  the  war-path.  They  are  wefl- 
bom,  rich  in  love  and  in  the  goods  of  the  world.  Yet  they  are 
pining,  silent,  and  forlorn,  overcome  with  homesick  longing.  Then 
one  of  the  war-party,  a  poor  yoang  man  with  never  a  sweetheart  to 
mark  his  absence,  upbraids  the  drooping  warriors,  saying  that  he 
should  be  the  one  to  pine,  for  no  one  misses  him.  But  these  others 
who  have  loved  ones  thinking  of  them — they  should  sing  and  be 
glad! 

GOMDA    DAAGYA  WIND-SONG 

Agulkide  dogal-ong«,  O  you  warriors,  yoa  have  loved  ones 
Ambonpoya,  ambonpoya  Longing  for  yoti,  longing  for  you ; 

Dogya-hi  1  Rich  are  ye. 

Agulkide  dogol-ongu,  O  you  lovers,  you  have  maidens 
Ambonpoya,  dogya-hi  1  Longing  for  you ;  none  have  I. 

Nokon  honde  imp'oya  tont'-o-no  Wherefore  droop  ye  in  silence,  so  down- 
Yai-dahe-ba  kuyo  1  cast  ? 

Cheer  your  hearts  with  song,  ho  I 


KOALDA   DAAGYA 

Begging-Song 
Sung  and  told  by  Potine  (White  Beaver) 

Sometimes  twenty  or  thirty  children  go  at  night  to  the  tipi  of 
some  people  who  have  one  dearly  loved  child.  They  stand  outside 
the  tipi  and  make  songs  about  the  child,  begging  that  for  love  of 
the  little  one  the  parents  will  throw  them  something  to  eat. 

[225] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'    BOOK 

KOALDA  DAAGYA  BEGGING-SONG 


Inhote  to  sai  tSiyi 
K'anhoton  atzeyoda 
Hondeta  al  ahanda 

Goa-ain, 
Ak'ainkot'na  giat'akwot  1 


Give  us  food  we  beg  of  yoa, 
For  the  love  of  yoar  only  child. 
And  his  little  spider-pet. 

For  their  sake, 
Give,  oh  give  ws  something, 

Give ! 


PAPK'O   DAAGYA 

Song  of  the  Antelope  Ceremony 


Sang  and  told  fay  T*e-ne-t*e  (Eagle  Chief) 


I  |HKT?K  was  once  a  little  boy  who  lived  with  his  old  grand- 

T  mother.  One  day  he  happened  to  lose  her  spoon — a 
wooden  spoon — for  this  was  long  ago,  when  the  people 
Mhad  no  iron  or  other  metals.  His  grandmother  was 
angry  and  whipped  him,  and  so  the  boy  threw  himself  apon  the 
ground,  crying,  beside  the  wall  of  the  tipi.  There  he  lay,  sobbing, 
until  he  fell  asleep;  and  in  his  sleep  he  dreamed  a  wonderful  dream 
which  gave  him  mysterious  power,  so  that  he  would  always  be  able 
to  kill  game  in  plenty. 

Time  passed,  and  at  length  there  came  a  famine  upon  the  people; 
for  many  days  they  could  get  no  meat,  and  they  were  hungry. 
The  boy  had  grown  to  be  a  man,  yet  had  he  not  forgotten  the  secret 
power  that  he  had  learned  in  a  dream.  So  he  spoke  to  his  grand- 
mother and  said:  "Call  all  the  people  to  my  tipi.  Bid  them  all 
come." 

"Why,"  said  the  grandmother,  "we  are  poor,  and  we  have 
neither  wisdom  nor  power.  The  people  will  be  angry  if  we  call 
them  here,  for  there  is  no  help  in  us." 

The  young  man  himself  went  out  and  summoned  all  the  people, 
and  when  they  were  come  he  took  his  seat  opposite  the  door  of  the 
tipi,  and  the  people  sat  around  in  a  circle,  as  many  as  could  find 
room  within  the  tipi,  and  the  rest  waited  outside.'  The  man  made 
two  arrows,  one  of  wild-cherry,  and  the  other  of  plum-tree  wood.' 

'  The  wild-cherry  tree  and  the  plum-tree  are  symbols  of  spring  and  autumn  fruitfolness, 
and  are  thus  symbols  of  plenty.     Other  details  of  the  ceremony  also  are  probably  emblematic. 

[226] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


KIOWA 

When  they  were  finished  he  stood  them  in  the  ground  before  him 
and  began  to  sing: 

"My  grandmother  punished  me, 
I  wept  until  I  fell  asleep. 
In  dream  came  a  holy  power,  wonderful. 
Mighty  to  win  food." 

He  waved  the  arrows  in  time  to  the  song,  and  at  the  end  of  each 
verse  he  shook  them,  and  blew  upon  his  whistle  of  eagle-bone, 
"Whew I"  Down  from  the  arrows  fell  a  shower  of  antelope-ftir! 
He  did  this  wonder  in  order  to  prove  to  the  people  his  power.  When 
he  had  finished  singing  he  took  his  bow  in  his  hands  and  reached 
down  to  the  edge  of  the  tipi  wall  where  he  had  thrown  himself  when 
a  child.  There  was  nothing  there  that  any  man  could  see,  yet 
the  wonderful  power  that  had  visited  the  sleeping  boy  was  still 
present;  and  so  when  he  drew  back  his  bow,  behold  an  antelope 
was  caught  in  it  by  the  horns,  and  the  man  dragged  him  forth  into 
the  light  of  the  fire  and  showed  him  to  the  astonished  people.  All 
night  long  they  sat  in  the  tipi,  singing  together  in  mystic  ceremony. 

When  morning  came  the  man  went  out  on  the  prairie  and  walked 
to  the  top  of  a  high  hill.  There  he  sat  down,  and  the  people  sat  • 
on  each  side  of  him,  forming  a  circle  as  before;  and  those  who  had 
come  on  horseback  gathered  outside  the  circle.  The  man  planted 
his  arrows  in  the  ground  and  sang  again  and  did  his  mystic  work. 
Then  he  gave  the  two  arrows  to  the  two  men  who  sat  opposite  to 
him,  and  they  set  off  in  opposite  directions,  carrying  the  arrows. 
The  people  followed  them  on  foot,  gradually  separating  from  one 
another  until  they  had  formed  the  half  of  a  large  circle.  Then  the 
two  leaders  stopped  and  delivered  the  arrows  to  two  horsemen, 
and  the  horsemen  rode  on,  and  other  horsemen  followed  them, 
gradually  separating  from  one  another  just  as  the  people  afoot  had 
done  until  they  had  completed  the  great  circle.  And  when  the 
arrow-bearers  met  at  the  far  side  of  the  circle  they  turned  and  rode 
back  through  the- centre  of  the  circle  till  they  came  again  to  the 
starting-point  and  delivered  up  their  mystic  arrows.  Then  all  the 
horsemen  forming  the  farther  side  of  the  great  circle  began  to  gallop 
here  and  there,  whooping'  and  shouting,  to  rouse  the  game;  and 

[227] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'    BOOK 


the  horsemen  gradtjally  drew  nearer,  driving  the  game  towards  the 
men  on  foot;  and  when  the  animals  were  gathered  together  the 
people  on  foot  closed  in  around  them,  and  kept  closing  in  until  the 
circle  was  small  enough  for  the  people  to  join  hands.  The  frightened 
antelopes  ran  around  inside  the  circle  until  they  became  dizzy  and 
exhausted;  then  the  people  killed  them  easily  with  tomahawks 
and  knives,  or  if  any  broke  through  the  circle  the  horsemen  outside 
caught  and  killed  them. 

So  the  people  had  meat  in  plenty  through  the  miraculous  wisdom 
taught  the  boy  in  a  dream.  Thus  originated  this  rite,  which  was 
performed  only  when  the  people  were  in  great  need.  It  came  down 
from  father  to  son  for  many  years — none  know  how  many.  It  is 
now  no  longer  used,  for  all  is  changed,  and  there  is  little  game  to 
hunt.  But  some  of  the  old  men  saw  the  ceremony  in  their  youth, 
and  it  is  well  remembered  by  the  aged  Eagle  Chief. 


T'APK'O  DAAGYA 

Torz-k'an  giapowitzep  no 
Tainkyowittc  tain  hoi 
Komdombc  tonok'o 
Tsainiya  ode  domgya 


SONG  OF  THE  ANTELOPE  CEREMONY 
(Antelope-Song) 

My  grandmother  punished  me, 

I  wept  until  I  fell  asleep. 

In  dream  came  a  holy  power,  wonderful. 

Mighty  to  win  food. 


OKUM   DAAGYA 

Lullabies 
Sang  and  told  by  Owifc'ayain  (The  Home-Comer) 

The  Holy  Man^  has  performed  the  ceremony  to  gather  in  the 
game,  and  the  mother  has  gone  to  kill  an  antelope.  She  has  left 
her  baby  to  the  care  of  an  old  woman,  who  soothes  the  crying  child 
with  this  song: 

I 


OKUM   DAAGYA 

A-go-go 

T'oph'o  goan-kontono, 

T'anba  ok'un-balita. 


LULLABY 

Hush  thee,  child — 

Mother  bringeth  an  antelope, 

And  the  tid-bit  shall  be  thine. 


V 


See  f  The  Holy  Man,"  pige  32. 
[228] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


KIOWA 


11 

Nonsense-Rhyme 


OKUM   DAAGYA 

I'pagy'mainte  fcoain-ko, 
Zotom  tonsad'I, 
Tsainyi  tonsSd'I, 
Polainyi  tonsad'I. 


LULLABY 


Baby  swimming  down  the  river. 
Driftwood  leggies,  rabbit  leggies. 
Little  rabbit  leggies. 


GWU   DAAGYA' 

War-Path  Song 
Sung  and  told  by  T'e-ne-t'e  (Eagle  Qiief) 


■  ilHEN  a  young  man  woos  a  maiden  he  brings  gifts  of  horses 

Wto  her  father.  The  maid  in  this  song  is  thinking  of  her 
first  lover  whose  playful  word  she  never  can  forget. 
-*  I  For  the  man  who  now  seeks  to  marry  her,  offering  her 
father  his  sore-backed  ponies,  she  has  only  scorn.  So  she  waits 
for  her  first  lover. 

This  is  a  very  old  war-path  song,  and  the  words  are  not  all  in 
the  Kiowa  language  of  to-day.  It  was  often  sung  before  the  war- 
party  set  out.  The  war-leader  would  start  the  song,  and  those 
young  men  who  wanted  to  follow  him  would  join  in  the  singing. 


GVrU   DAAGYA 

Ameyaidonhonme 
Ain  honya  mopoiko 
Anti  ya'wtrt  hoyano 
Tsainfco  gompaomk'o 
Eyamkom 


WAR-PATH  SONG 

Ah,  I  never,  never  can  forget 
The  playful  word  you  spoke  long  since. 
This  man  who  seeks  to  marry  me. 
He  with  his  sore-backed  ponies, 
What's  he  to  me  ! 

See  "  The  War-Path,"  page  154. 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


^o^a-ii'^  'Ji^^'^  y 


irrr-TTT!;  J   i    H?  Lr  r  f   v:;-  i   ) 


<  J  IMj  T  T  \\  i  J  \\^\  \  \  V,  rl 


^> 


0        a-    do 


fO.  /tCu>.- 


,*<*   -      e^-4{<i  3o-     f*--    ■^'*-         /fU*'-'-t;<^j 

Tstfci^      Uri/lA,  ^*t*^     -4<j«.     tJuuit.      i*.-      C^^tt-tHl    fftntA 


n  J  i  i  J  i 


^^=^ 


h  I  I 


^ 


*= 


J) — « — # — ^ 


^. 


<3  A       "io- ^         <rn,-4(c       do-     *><--<^«.      '7C^--ti^, 


r. 


A-<X. 


^^ 


S 


IX    I^HUl     1^^ 


^ 


V*^    ^ 

-<--'«-^  y^^*-^  /«*^<-«-, 


x.^ 


I 


M  '''i  •''i^  '-'^^^  U 


^. 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Jfti    ffi    s€dU3 
ft.it.  J  -  li)o 


<Jx«v.^   ^-i-    j  ^~  r\t.-  't'<.   /  Zar£*.  -  CJ>UM  j 


l^\k  1  t.^1  \^^m 


71     4(c 


',  -^C-t  a*y  -  i'-W— 


^ 


ayr<- 


CuJh 


<r»Kt. 


■€«-t/-e. 


M 


Li  J    It    1    1^ 


ij^^''^  J  Ji  1 .1  .'  I J  .11  Ji  j'i  \in  )  i  ^ 


Jo-    o 


m 


i 


^^n  ' 


1^ 


# 


^  i   I  i   i  U- 


^^ 


* 


r  r 


r 


g 


^ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


2ZX. 


0<*«'5.  ^ 


X^  -  ^o«^^  ^Ja^<n^) 


^,    1  M    1  -"-i     1   M    M     1^^ 


i 


^oai*.     Ctnf^   0>i«« 


%  j.J  I J    j  IJ  J   IJ    J  ^ 


^- 


r- 


^  *<L        2)o 


O  -<*«*'      C.CV -  .ci/i,  "^kfn*- 


4   .1    J3M   J    ^^ 


-%%  tn^jt-  "uouM-e^ 


cH^j^  I J 


s 


3 


lei 


-C^nTa   —    <5  - 


T 


</*«         .^^  - 


^ 


^ 


^=^^ 


<2i  «l 

V 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


^;^'  I; y  \\\  ^\^  |  i 


^  *iA« 


-L, 


A. 


=5> 


I  t-  r  |i    I  r  V  I  M  J  (M  J 


^ 


^..        ;6 


tf 


r 


'*\Ct^ 


i^      y**^^      -^tA       <Cl'     .Ot^.    t\CL       fJL     .^-M 


1/    M.U   J  U    1  J      1 


>- 


/ 


O/C,    -»|A 


X:      - 


^    I  J^  ■'•  M     1  M>  I  1    \  Y 


^ 


^^      -cl  „.y^v       •**-      *^ 


-n 


^ 


r^ 


t 


i;  n  J  I J 


E 


>4^     ■ha*>.  ■**^       *-* 


/  ^^  ij  J I  J'  .1'  I J  J I  j-.'i 


Ml    II  U 


J^a.      Li  -*j^    *«-    ^    ^<^  '"^'     ^  ♦^   *»<*- 


tX.      tOL      ■Cju.      t-J^- 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


^m^^    <lj  ttDu.Mt^cAX.   '^U3Z 


f 


# 


^^^^^^^ 


^ 


/u 


-Cn,a*<     *' 


^ 


r^ 


-u 


r- 


%i  ^  v\y  y\i 


Jtjju     't^o^  "**       *-*- 


-tsJO 


MJ  n  J   in^u  I  f  ji 


J\f^K     iU  ^^    '*»<a-         ^-t    -^-rt^      *•«-       "^ 


r 


^ 


T 


^ 


^^^ 


E 


,^     -^fO*^  *<*•      *^ 


^^ 


/f^ 


VI  \  J-  ;  I  j^^ 


_yf^a.  iLt    ^^-c      ,-»ii»     AJt-    r-5^*  t\<*.     Cn   <-«    '*«>» 


r 


T 


J    'J   'J   ' i 


:He- 


ir   - 


'CJex, 


lL.-fk*^tklL   S" 


'fi 


C*f»»^^»*-*'«-»>q,    <ij»    -trcL/lK^,  ia    ^<A.^a  4-t^ 


2-  /^"^ 


it-t^^m^^  .    /-ih  < 


7' 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


i 


5 


I    J    1^/  J    J  ^ 


^Kt 


^r  i  y 


r 


in-'    I  J^ 


^ 


J    T  I  ^ 


4  1   1    I  '^i  J  B#J^i  J  ^ 


4  I   \ 


t 


Ci'..^  , 


/rv     ^^tt.»>      ^ayt^  ^ 


i 


is 


J  J    Ih 


A/vu<- ^   <r^       ^'^ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


o' 


/Vl./M.  J --/of 


^ 


^ 


^^^^ 


/^       ^a^      M-€>^         X-t.    ^*A  -OpeK. 


^-i — r 


J    U1   -LUil^l^^-^ 


m 


1  i  11  n'u^ 


^ 


^ 


;  )  j^U-'n^ 


^ 


^     <<u    .^,.^      i6l  >^d   .     -^-<». 


lA     Keu  'Ol.a.      a    .  -  •   h.o^    - .  -**<«.  •  ■  au   -^»-<*-    JLc 


^ 


c 


ti  Vi^i  I  J 


>/<: 


r  ■■ 


-/< 


^ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


M 


^fcIlJ-J.1  ^IXj^lXi-^  4- 


a 


U.  ^-.   ^-f--  ^ 


A 


'^'•<  1  J  iVW^ 


/      f-T^ C22 r-T-' 


H  Uiixnxr^P 


a:' 


gt^.dfrt^-V-*-   .         Tarty-        o~ 


■tu....       /loaxJ-r:....  CJrv-tJt-r  -  ^-X_ 

inU^^U  '-W 


0-  0*... 


-A 


r  r- 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


{jilt:  ^iux<j 


^^ 


U^        J        J 


^ 


^i.       /.* 


t/A     *^A 


J|         l.i  I 


i 


^ 


J      I  J  J 


J     J     'j 


7  V*-  X  o      4« 


IE 


J    ^  I  J'  J 


^^ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


HI 


^ .«*</.  4,    ^-^     Oun-^ '.tj^^a*^    (O-Ll    tro'i-^      Onfc^  j 


T  T 


L^h  ^  i"M;  J-  ^i-'-l-j 


<a  / 


Ok  - 


tJW. 


/a 


«.!-»* 


<<rc« 


J  J  I     ^    J.  I    J^J.        1    J 


J  -     ^a.  -     A^   t^KOui^  ~  til  ^iCti  -   cU^  -  ''iCtt  ^ 


g^ 


^^ 


k 


Vr^ 


'»''  I J  I"  J  J  i 


^SOA^- 


r 


'fi%,  -  Jo.^-^  ) 


^^ 


^a*.<k^      ^^-  ^^^ 


^ 


^ 


6^     ^ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


\ 


bi  iM.  ij  t  1-M   ljN  I  1^5=3^ 


^     A     *A  ■    -*>Jt-         A       -»»a.      -to     lo,     ^       *-^   ^ 


^    \    \  \    \    \:^    < 


Mjl 


T  r 


T 


J   T    1  ^  t    in.   1 J  J  1 


>e 


^ 


'   '"  4  4 i  U  I 


^2^   -^#*k 


^ 


-»^c 


A,»--i-   'K-O-     O   _, 


^^     ;fti      ut*^, 'LmjL-       cjr^     "^t^  °f 


r' 


\/Kf^    ^r^c  ^<^  <^ 


1  I J  j'j,  ^  i  J  n  J  I J  j;.^- 


s 


m 


^ 


^  T  T- 


Digitized  by  Microsott® 


WINNEBAGO  TITLE-PAGE 


The  design  and  the  lettering  are  by  Hinoofc  Mahiwi  Kilinaka 
(Angel  De  Cora),  of  the  Winnebago  tribe.  The  design  represents 
a  piece  of  Winnebago  bead-work.  The  Winnebagos  are  skilled 
in  bead  and  quill  work.  * 


t 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


LfiKS 

M1HHE8HE0 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE   WINNEBAGOS 


■  t  HE  Winnebagos  are  a  branch  of  the  great  Siotian  family, 

Tyct  they  never  have  affiliated  with  its  more  warlike 
divisions.  Thottgh  now  in  Nebraska,  in  the  early  days 
'I when  these  Indians  first  became  known  to  white  men 
they  were  living  in  a  fertile  and  beautif«I  country  on  the  shores  of 
Lake  Michigan.  Early  travellers  have  told  of  the  almost  idyllic 
conditions  of  the  Winnebago  life  in  this  lake  country.  The  Indians 
were  hospitable  and  temperate,  ** remarkably  provident"  and  in- 
dustrious, raising  crops  of  com,  beans,  squash,  and  pumpkins,  and 
fishing  in  lake  or  stream.  As  white  settlement  increased,  the 
pressure  was  such  that  in  the  year  1832  the  Winnebagos  ceded  a 
large  tract  of  country  to  the  United  States,  receiving  in  exchange 
land  to  the  west  of  the  Mississippi.  This  was  but  the  first  of  a  scries 
of  cessions  and  removals  which  entailed  great  hardships  to  the 
Indians,  and  which  culminated  when  the  Winnebagos  were  moved 
against  their  will  and  at  their  own  expense  from  prosperous  homes 
in  Minnesota  to  a  desolate  Dakota  agency,  where,  because  of  their 
fidelity  to  the  whites,  they  were  in  peril  from  bands  of  desperate 
Dakotas,  and  where  the  conditions  of  the  country  were  such  that  it 
was  impossible  for  them  to  sustain  themselves  either  by  farming 
or  by  the  chase.  Such  was  their  suffering  that  within  a  year  over 
a  thousand  of  them  escaped  in  canoes  to  the  Omaha  reservation  in 

NOTE  FOR  PRONUNCIATION  OF  WINNEBAGO  TEXT 

Unless  otherwise  indicated,  vowels  have  the  Continental  sound,  and  consonants 

the  English. 

n  has  the  nasal  sound,  as  in  French. 

ch,  in  italic,  is  a  guttural,  like  ch  in  German. 

The  use  of  the  hyphen,  in  Winnebago  words,  is  by  the  advice  of  an  educated 

member  of  the  tribe. 

[243] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'    BOOK 

Nebraska,  where  they  were  fed  and  sheltered.  They  preferred  to 
be  shot  by  the  United  States  troops,  if  detected,  than  to  die  of 
starvation,  disease,  and  cold.  The  friendly  Omahas  allowed  them 
to  settle  apon  their  land.  The  Winnebagos  started  farming,  and  in 
1889  they  received  land  in  allotments;  bat  since  this,  their  last 
resting-place,  was  thrown  open  to  white  settlement,  their  deteriora- 
tion has  been  rapid.  It  is  now  to  be  hoped  that  an  awakened 
interest  in  the  Indians  may  help  to  revivify  this  exhausted  and  dis- 
couraged tribe,  and  that  the  happy  memories  of  past  days,  deep- 
planted  in  the  hearts  of  the  old  people,  may  be  to  younger  Winne- 
bagos  as  seeds  for  growth  in  character  and  endurance  that  shall 
bring  to  their  future  the  strraigth  and  virtue  of  their  old  lake  life. 


STORIES  OF  WAK-CHUNG-KAKA  AND  WASH-CHING-GEKA 

Told   by   Chash-chunfc-a    (Wave),    Ncfc-ha-wi-fca    (South   Wind),   and   other    Winnebagos   of 

Nebraska  and  Wisconsin 


A-O-NA,  the  Earth-Haker,  made  the  earth  and  every- 

M  thing  on  it.  He  made  a  man,  but  the  man  was  not  good. 
Ma-o-na  did  not  want  to  bum  him  up,  so  he  tossed  him 
to  one  side  and  went  on  with  his  work.  This  man  became 
Wa-cho-pi-ni-Shi-shik,  an  evil  spirit.  He  watched  Ma-o-na  at 
work,  and  everything  that  Ma-o-na  made  he  copied;  but  whereas 
Ma-o-na's  works  were  all  good,  those  of  Wa-cho-pi-ni-Shi-shik  were 
evil.  Ma-o-na  made  the  deer  and  elk  and  buffalo;  Wa-cho-pi-ni- 
Shi-shik  made  the  huge  animals,  the  monsters  that  devoured  men. 
All  bad  tilings,  evil  spirits  and  the  like,  are  the  work  of  Wa-cho-pi- 
ni-Shi-shik. 

Ma-o-na  sent  his  son,  Wak-chung-kaka,  the  Foolish  One,  to  kill 
the  monsters  and  make  the  earth  fit  for  man.  But  Wak-chung-kaka 
could  not  destroy  all  the  works  of  the  evil  spirit.  Then  Ma-o-na 
sent  another  son,  Ke-chung-geka,  the  Tortoise,  but  he  was  too  fond 
of  war.  So,  too,  was  Wuh-te-huk,  the  third  son.  Last  of  all  Ma-o-na 
sent  his  youngest  son,  Wash-ching-geka,  the  Little  Hare. 
These  are  stories  of  Wak-chung-kaka  and  Wash-ching-geka. 

[244] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


WINNEBAGO 

STORIES   OF  WAK-CHUNG-KAKA,  THE   FOOLISH    ONE 

I 


>i]NE  day  Wafc-chang-kaka  was  walking  over  a  hill  and  he 
g"^  looked  down  into  a  hollow  where  reeds  grew  tall,  and 
^^  he  thought  he  saw  a  throng  of  people  with  feathers  on 
-'  I  their  heads.  The  wind  blew  through  the  reeds,  and 
Wak-ch«ng-kaka  thought  that  the  people  danced  and  hallooed 
**  Wu-wu-wu !"  So  he  put  a  feather  on  his  head  and  went  in  among 
the  people  and  danced  and  shouted  "Wu-wu-wu!"  He  danced 
all  day  long,  till  at  evening  the  wind  dropped  and  everything  was 
still;  and  then  Wak-chung-kaka  looked  around  him  and  found  him- 
self alone  among  the  reeds. 

II 

Wak-chung-kaka  was  walking  one  day  beside  the  water  when 
he  saw  a  chief  standing  there  dressed  all  in  black  with  a  shining 
disk  on  his  breast,  and  the  chief  was  pointing  across  the  water. 
He  stood  quite  still,  and  always  pointed  steadily  across  the  water. 
Wak-chung-kaka  spoke  to  him,  but  the  chief  never  moved  or  an- 
swered; he  still  pointed  steadily  across  the  water.  Wak-chung-kaka 
spoke  to  him  again,  and  still  there  was  no  answer.  Four  times  he 
spoke  to  him,  and  then  at  last  Wak-chung-kaka  grew  angry  and 
said,  "I  can  point,  too,  and  I  can  point  longer  than  you." 

So  Wak-chung-kaka  set  down  his  bundle  and  opened  it  and 
dressed  himself  all  in  black  like  the  chief,  and  hung  a  disk  on  his 
breast  and  stood  there  beside  the  chief,  pointing  across  the  water. 
But  when  he  had  stood  thus  for  a  great  time  without  moving, 
Wak-chung-kaka  began  to  be  weary  of  this,  and  he  looked  around 
at  the  chief,  and,  behold!  it  was  only  the  blackened  stump  of  a 
burned  tree  with  a  white  spot  that  the  fire  had  not  touched. 

Ill 

Another  time  Wak-chung-kaka  was  walking  along  the  sandy 
shore  of  a  lake,  and  when  he  came  to  a  point  of  the  shore  he  heard 
a  cry,  *'Wu-wu-wu!"    He  looked  over  the  point,  but  could  see  no- 

[245] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE   INDIANS'    BOOK 

body,  so  he  walked  on  till  he  heard  the  cry,  *' Wa-w«-wt(  I"  and 
saw  a  little  cIo«d  of  flies  fly  up  into  the  air.  There  was  an  elk's 
head  lying  on  the  shore,  and  a  swarm  of  flies  flew  in  at  the  neck-hole 
behind,  and  then  flew  out  again  all  at  once.  "Wak-ch«ng-kaka 
stood  and  looked  at  them.  **That  mast  be  good  sport,"  he  thought. 
"I  wish  I  could  do  that  too." 

A  little  fly  looked  up  at  him  and  said,  "Wak-chung-kaka,  you 
canl" 

At  once  "Wak-chung-kaka  felt  himself  growing  smaller  and 
smaller,  till  he  was  no  bigger  than  a  fly,  and  then  he  easily  went  in 
at  the  hole  in  the  head  and  flew  out  again,  crying,  "Wu-wu-wu!" 
He  thought  it  was  fine  sport  to  fly  in  and  out,  in  and  out,  with 
the  swarm  of  flies.  So  the  flies  let  him  play  with  them  for  a  while, 
till  all  at  once,  when  Wak-chung-kaka  was  just  starting  to  go  in, 
he  grew  to  his  own  natural  size,  and  as  he  already  had  his  head 
within  the  elk's  head,  the  neck-hole  fitted  him  so  closely  that  he 
could  not  get  his  head  out  again. 

Wak-chung-kaka  walked  on,  wearing  the  elk's  head;  and  as 
he  could  not  see  very  well,  he  walked  into  the  lake.  The  water 
came  up  to  the  eye-holes  of  the  head,  and  Wak-chung-kaka  swam 
until  he  came  near  a  viflage  that  stood  beside  the  lake,  and  when 
the  peeple  saw  the  elk-horns  moving  along  the  water  they  said, 
"It  is  a  water-spirit;  let  us  offer  him  gifts."  For  there  are  spirits 
in  the  ground,  under  the  water,  and  in  great  springs  of  the  hills, 
and  the  spirits  often  look  like  elk  or  buffalo. 

So  the  people  brought  tobacco  and  beads  and  laid  them  on 
the  shore  before  Wak-chung-kaka,  and  he  stayed  in  the  water; 
and  the  young  people  prayed  to  him,  ''Spirit,  grant  us  long  life!" 
and  the  old  people  prayed,  "Long  life  for  our  children!"  and  to 
.every  prayer  Wak-chung-kaka  answered,  "Ho!"  (yes).  At  length, 
when  all  the  people  were  gathered  before  him,  he  said:  "My  nephews 
and  nieces,  I  will  grant  your  prayers  if  you  will  do  what  I  tell  you. 
Let  two  strong  men  take  hold  of  my  horns,  one  on  each  side,  and 
let  another  one  split  my  head  down  the  middle,  carefully,  carefully 
— he  must  be  careful  not  to  cut  too  deep." 

So  two  strong  men  took  hold  of  his  horns,  one  on  each  side, 
and  pulled  with  all  their  might,  while  a  third  took  a  stone  axe  and 

[246] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


WINNEBAGO 

very  carefully  chopped  the  elk's  head  down  the  middle,  till,  crack! 
the  skttll  fell  apart  and  there  stood  Wak-chang-kaka,  and  laughed, 
"Haw,  haw,  haw!" 


STORIES    OF  WASH-CHING-GEKA,  THE    LITTLE   HARE 

Youngest  son  of  Ma-o-na  (Earth-Maker) 
I 


■  I  ASH-CHING-GEKA  lived  with  his   grandmother  while 

W  doing  his  works.  His  grandmother  was  the  earth,  and 
she  was  very  wise.  She  cooked  for  the  Little  Hare 
■■'  i  and  nourished  him  and  took  care  of  him. 

Now  among  the  other  evil  things  then  in  the  world  were  eight 
blind  men  who  lived  in  a  wood;  they  went  abotrt  with  the  help 
of  long  cords  and  spread  webs  among  the  trees,  in  which  they  cattght 
people  and  killed  them. 

One  day  when  the  blind  men  were  cooking  their  dinner  of  bear's 
meat,  Wash-ching-geka  went  in  among  them.  There  was  a  piece 
of  meat  for  each.  Now  the  men  could  not  see  Wash-ching-geka, 
and  he  stepped  softly  to  the  pot  and  took  out  one  portion  of  meat. 
When  the  blind  men  began  to  eat  they  quarrelled  with  one  an- 
other over  the  missing  portion,  because  each  one  thought  another 
had  taken  his  meat.  As  they  were  quarrelling,  Wash-ching-geka 
slapped  one  of  them,  and  then  that  one  slapped  his  neighbor,  and 
he  tapped  the  next,  and  so  fhey  all  fell  to  fighting. 

Meanwhile,  Wash-ching-geka  ran  home  to  his  wise  grandmother 
and  took  counsel  with  her. 

Next  day  he  went  again  to  the  blind  men,  and  while  they  were 
cooking  he  took  out  the  meat  and  put  poison  on  it.  So  the  blind 
men  ate  of  the  poisoned  meat  and  were  killed.  They  would  never 
again  spread  webs  among  the  trees  to  destroy  the  people.  And 
now  when  they  were  dead,  behold,  Wash-ching-geka  saw  that  really 
they  were  spiders. 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE   INDIANS'    BOOK 


II 


In  the  early  days  there  was  a  great  hill  that  used  to  open  and 
shut  like  a  pair  of  jaws  and  devour  men  and  animals.  The  hill 
would  open  in  the  middle  and  the  sides  would  fall  back  till  they 
lay  flat  upon  the  ground,  and  all  the  land  looked  like  good  smooth 
prairie. 

Then  herds  of  elk  and  deer  and  buffalo  would  come  to  graze, 
and  when  the  place  was  full,  the  jaws  of  the  hill  would  close,  and, 
crack!  all  the  animals  would  be  crushed  and  killed.  This  hill  killed 
so  much  game  that  the  Earth-Maker  feared  that  all  the  people 
would  starve.  So  he  sent  his  son,  Wash-ching-geka,  to  destroy 
the  hill. 

When  the  Little  Hare  came  there  the  hill  opened  and  all  the 
ground  was  smooth;  and  Wash-ching-geka  made  himself  like  a 
small  stone  and  lay  quite  still.  Then  the  elk  and  deer  and  buffalo 
came  to  graze,  but  as  soon  as  the  mouth  began  to  close  on  them, 
see!  Wash-ching-geka  quickly  changed  himself  into  a  great  stone, 
and  so,  when  the  hill  shut  on  him,  hoo!  the  jaws  were  broken 
aH  to  pieces.  The  hill  lay  shattered  and  never  could  devour  men 
or  animals  any  more. 


Ill 

There  was  a  great,  great  elephant'  that  used  to  devour  people 
by  reaching  out  for  them  with  his  long  tongue  and  swallowing 
them.  This  elephant  looked  like  a  large  hill  all  covered  with  grass. 
Wash-ching-geka  went  out  to  kill  the  elephant  because  he  devoured 
so  many  of  the  people.  First  he  sprinkled  himself  all  over  with 
little  pieces  of  flint,  and  then  he  sat  down  in  front  of  the  elephant 
and  sang  this  song: 

"  You,  who  reach  with  your  tongue. 
Great  One,  you  draw  them  in. 
So  have  I  heard  it  told. 
Gather  me  in,  gather  me  in  !" 

'  The  Indians  have  many  legends  to  account  for  the  remains  of  prehistoric  animals. 

[248] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


WINNEBAGO 

The  elephant  saw  Wash-ching-geka's  ears  sticking  up  in  the 
grass,  and  he  thought  they  were  feathers  on  somebody's  head, 
so  he  reached  out  his  tongue  and  swallowed  the  Little  Hare.  In- 
side the  elephant  all  was  dark  and  vast;  there  were  starving  people 
here,  some  dead  and  some  dying,  for  they  had  no  wood  to  cook 
with. 

'  Then  Wash-ching-geka  said  to  a  young  woman  that  was  inside, 
"Look  in  my  fur  and  see  if  you  can  find  a  piece  of  flint." 

The  woman  searched  through  his  fur  and  found  a  little  piece 
of  flint.  "Wash-ching-geka  struck  his  hand  upon  the  flint  and 
said,  "Grow  bigger!"  and  it  was  bigger.  Four  times  he  struck 
thus,  and  each  time  the  flint  grew  bigger.  Then  he  struck  it  again 
and  said,  "Be  a  knife!"  and  it  was  a  knife.  Then  he  struck  yet 
again  and  said,  "Be  a  big  knife!"  and  it  was  a  great  big  knife. 

Wash-ching-geka  felt  along  the  ribs  of  the  elephant  till  he  found 
a  soft  place  between  two  rib-bones,  and  there  he  cut  a  hole  like 
a  door  and  sent  out  all  the  people.  Then  he  ran  forward  to  the 
elephant's  heart,  and  with  one  blow  of  his  knife  he  split  the  heart  in 
two.  Then  he  also  jumped  out  through  the  hole.  But  on  his 
way  he  caught  up  the  elephant's  young,  and  when  he  came  outside 
he  threw  the  little  elephants  clear  across  the  water.  That  is  why 
the  elephant  now  lives  only  on  the  other  side  of  the  water. 

WASH-CHING-GEKA  NA-WA'  NI-NA  SONG  OF  THE  HARE 

Wa-Ie  ki-zi-na-nap.  You,  who  reach  with  your  tongae, 

Chtin-ka,  wa-Iai-na-nap,  Great  One,  yoa  draw  them  in, 

Sa-ah-zhe  ai-Ie-Ia,  So  have  I  heard  it  told. 

Hi/i-gi  na-nap  I  Gather  me  in  ! 

Hin-gi  na-nap  !  Gather  me  in  ! 


IV 

While  running  here  and  there  over  the  earth  to  see  what  work 
was  still  to  do,  "Wash-ching-geka  found  a  pass  or  trail  where  some 
huge  thing  had  gone  by. 

"I  must  find  out  what  this  is,"  said  he;  "maybe  it  is  some  great 
animal  that  will  run  over  the  people  and  kill  them." 

[2491 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE   INDIANS'   BOOK 

So  he  blocked  up  the  pass  with  trees  and  stones;  but  when  he 
came  there  again,  lo!  the  big  thing  had  burst  through  them. 

Then  he  went  to  his  grandmother  and  told  her  about  it,  and  she 
made  a  net  which  he  spread  across  the  pass.  Next  day  he  heard 
some  one  crying  aloud  and  singing  this  song: 

"  Wash-ching-ge,  let  me  loose,  I  cry, 
Wash-ching-ge,  let  me  loose,  I  cry ! 
Your  uncles  and  yoar  aunts, 
Oh,  whatever  will  they  do. 
Whatever,  whatever  will  they  do  ! 
Wash-ching-ge,  let  me  loose,  I  cry, 
Wash-ching-ge,  let  me  loose,  I  cry  !" 

Who  was  it  that  Wash-ching-geka  had  caught — who  but  the 
sun!  For  the  sun  used  to  go  through  that  pass  every  day,  and 
now  he  was  fast  in  Wash-ching-geka's  net! 

**Go  you  and  set  him  loose!"  cried  the  grandmother,  and  she 
scolded  the  Little  Hare  and  beat  him  over  the  head  with  her  cane. 
"  What  will  all  your  little-fathers  and  your  little-mothers*  do  with- 
out the  sun?    Go,  set  him  loose!" 

So  Wash-ching-geka  tried  to  untie  the  net.  But  the  sun  was 
so  hot  that  the  Little  Hare  could  not  face  him.  He  could  only 
back  up,  turning  away  his  head;  and  so  his  hinder  parts  were  so 
scorched  that,  to  this  day,  the  skin  of  the  harems  hind-quarters  is 
tender  and  easily  broken. 

WI-LA  NA-WA'  NI-NA  SONG  OF  THE  SUN 

Wash-ching-ge,  hin-kha  lush-ka-Ie,  Wash-ching-ge,  let  me  loose,  I  cry, 

Wash-ching-ge,  hin-kha  lush-ka-Ie  !  Wash-ching-ge,  let  me  loose,  I  cry ! 

Hi-tek-nik  wa-Ia-ka,  Your  uncles  and  your  aunts, 

Hi-u-ni-nik  wa-Ia-ka,  Oh,  whatever  will  they  do, 
Cha-ku  ki-shkan  hi-Ia-ni-he  kche-zhe  !     Whatever,  whatever  will  they  do  ! 

Wash-ching-ge,  hin-khu  lush-ka-Ie,  Wash-ching-ge,  let  me  loose,  I  cry, 

Wash-ching-ge,  hin-khu  lush-ka-Ie  !  Wash-ching-ge,  let  me  loose,  I  cry ! 

'  Literal  translation  of  aunts  and  ancles.  Aunt  and  uncle  are  terms  of  respect  or  reverence. 
An  older  person,  or  a  person  of  importance,  will  address  a  younger  one  as  "  my  nephew  "  or 
"  my  niece."     "  Your  uncles  and  your  aunts  "  means  here,  of  course,  all  the  people  in  the  world. 

[250] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


WINNEBAGO 


La-ga-ka-nan-shke  was  a  monster  shaped  like  a  flying  ant, 
with  a  big  body  and  legs,  but  very,  very  small  in  the  middle.  He 
lived  behind  a  hill  and  never  came  out.  But  he  carried  a  great 
tree  and  pounded  with  it  on  the  ground  while  he  sang  a  song,  and 
when  the  elk  and  other  animals  came  near  he  threw  down  his  tree 
upon  them  and  killed  them.  This  ant-man  was  scarcely  thicker 
at  the  waist  than  a  hair.  Wash-ching-geka  thought  that  he  could 
blow  him  in  two,  so  he  blew — "Soo!  sool"  But  instead  of  blow- 
ing La-ga-ka-nan-shke  in  two,  Wash-ching-geka  himself  got  killed, 
for  the  ant-man  threw  his  tree  and  crushed  the  Little  Hare. 

When  La-ga-ka-nan-shke  lifted  up  his  tree  he  found  only  a  very 
small  and  flattened  thing.  He  picked  it  up  by  the  ears.  *'No 
good  to  eat,*'  he  thought,  so  he  threw  the  Little  Hare  away. 

That  evening  when  Wash-ching-geka  did  not  come  home  his 
grandmother  said,  "My  little  nephew  is  killed."  For  though  Wash- 
ching-geka  ran  over  the  whole  earth  in  the  daytime,  he  always 
came  back  at  night;  so  when  he  did  not  return  his  grandmother 
knew  that  he  had  been  killed. 

Next  morning  she  rose  up  and  ate  and  girt  her  dress  above  her 
knees  so  that  she  could  run  faster,  and  she  took  an  elk-horn  club 
of  Wash-ching-geka's  and  started  out  to  find  him.  The  old  grand- 
mother could  run  fast  like  Wash-ching-geka,  and  she  ran  over  the 
whole  earth  till  she  heard  the  noise  of  the  huge  ant-man  pounding 
and  singing.  La-ga-ka-nan-shke  lifted  up  his  tree  to  throw  it  on 
her,  but  the  grandmother  said,  ''Brother,  better  not  do  that!" 
So  he  stayed  his  hand  and  talked  with  her. 

Said  the  grandmother:  "Brother,  I  fear  my  little  nephew  has 
been  killed.  Perhaps  he  came  here  and  annoyed  you  and  you  killed 
him." 

Said  the  ant-man,  "Well,  sister,  what  kind  of  nephew  was  it,  big 

or  little?" 

"Oh,"  she  said,  "very  little." 
Then  said  he:  "Well,  sister,  maybe  I  did  kill  him,    I  killed  some- 
thing very  small  yesterday.     It  was  no  good  for  eating,  so  I  threw 

[2511 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'    BOOK 

it  away.  Go  yoa  down  there  and  look  at  it.  Maybe  it  was  the 
little  nephew." 

So  the  grandmother  went  down  and  looked,  and  there  lay  the 
Little  Hare.  Then  she  said:  "Brother,  it  was  my  little  nephew 
yoo  killed  yesterday.     He  is  here  now,  dead." 

Then  she  picked  op  the  Little  Hare  by  the  ears  and  said,  "You 
sleep  here  too  long;  wake  «p  and  go  to  work!" 

She  threw  him  to  one  side,  and  j«st  as  he  totJched  the  ground 
he  jtimped  and  ran  a  little,  as  hares  do,  and  sat  up  and  said,  "Grand- 
mother, I  was  asleep  here,  and  you  wakened  me." 

"No,  nephew,"  said  the  grandmother,  "you  were  not  asleep. 
You  were  k^ed  by  the  grandfather  that  walks  and  walks  up  there 
on  the  hifl.  You  came  here  yesterday  and  annoyed  him,  and  he 
killed  you.     I  made  you  alive  again." 

The  Little  Hare  said:  "Oh,  that  is  so.  I  remember  now.  I 
will  go  to  see  him  again  and  set  that  right." 

So  the  Hare  went  home  with  his  grandmother.  Next  morning 
after  he  had  eaten  he  started  out.  La-ga-ka-nan-shke  had  a  big 
fir-tree,  so  the  Little  Hare  went  away  to  the  very  edge  of  the  earth 
where  the  biggest  pine-trees  grow,  and  there  he  spoke  to  Wa-zi- 
chunk,  the  tallest  tree  in  the  world. 

"Big  tree,"  said  he,  "  I  have  come  for  you;  I  am  going  to  use  you. 
I  will  pull  you  out  of  the  ground,  but  when  I  have  finished  with  you 
I  will  set  you  back  again." 

So  he  laid  hold  of  the  tree  and  pulled  it  out,  and  then  went  to 
the  place  where  he  had  been  killed.  He  climbed  the  hiK  at  one 
end;  La-ga-ka-nan-shke  was  at  the  other  end,  and  he  began  to  sing 
and  pound  with  his  tree.  Wash-ching-geka  did  the  same,  and 
they  danced  towards  each  other,  singing  and  pounding.  But  soon 
the  big  ant-man  walked  slower,  and  could  hardly  keep  on  his  feet, 
because  the  Hare  made  the  ground  shake  with  the  pounding  of 
the  tallest  tree  in  the  world. 

La-ga-ka-nan-shke  came  slowly,  growing  more  and  more  fright- 
ened, and  at  last  when  they  were  close  to  each  other  he  cried  out, 
"Ka-Io-quaw!"  And  the  Hare  answered,  "Ka-Io-quaw!"  The 
Little  Hare  heard  where  the  ant-man  was,  and  he  took  his  tail  tree 
and  crushed  the  monster — "Boom!"  and  a  swarm  of  flying  ants  came 

[252] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


WINNEBAGO 

out  of  the  monster's  body.  And  the  wise  grandmother,  far  away, 
when  she  heard  the  noise  of  that  blow,  cried,  "Oh,  little  nephew 
has  killed  his  grandfather!"  Then  Wash-ching-gefca  said,  *'Yoa 
big  flying  ant  can  never  kill  anything  more,  and  yott  little  ants  will 
have  to  creep  on  the  ground,  but  sometimes  you  may  fly."  And 
then  he  carried  the  tall  tree  to  the  edge  of  the  earth  and  set  it  back 
in  its  place. 

WAI-KUN 

Fable 

Sung  and  told  fay  Chash-chunfc-a  (Wave,  Peter  Sampson) 

Once  there  were  some  mice  under  a  crooked  log  and  they  be- 
lieved they  were  the  only  people  in  the  whole  world.  One  of  them 
standing  up  and  stretching  his  little  arms  could  just  touch  the 
under  side  of  the  log.  He  thought  that  he  was  very  tall  and  that  he 
touched  the  sky.     So  he  danced  and  sang  this  song: 

■WAI-KUN  FABLE 

Mo-2h«n-na-Ie,  Throughout  the  world 

Pe-zhe  ya-ki-ske  shon-non-nink  Who  is  there  like  little  me! 

na-gi-kche!  Who  is  like  me! 

Slo-zhun-na-Ie,  I  can  touch  the  sky, 

Pe-zhe  ya-ki-ske  shun-non-nink  I  touch  the  sky  indeed! 

na-gi-kche !  .  (■ 
Ne-sha-na  ma-cAi-nifc-gIa  ya-ki-o-o! 

MA-O-NA 

Song  to  the  Earth-Maker 
Sung  and  told  by  Chash-chunk-a  (Wave,  Peter  Sampson) 


I 


N"  olden  times  it  was  customary  for  a  young  man  often 
to  blacken  his  face  and  go  into  solitude  to  fast.  Then 
while  his  body  lay  sleeping  his  soul  went  away  to  the 

, ,  spirits.     Spirits  often  have  the  form  of  animals,'  and  so 

the  young  man  might  see  in  dream  the  Elk  Chief  or  the  Buffalo 
Chief. 

'  See  "  The  Songs  of  the  Dakotas,"  page  60,  and  "  Introduction  to  the  Pawnee  Songs," 

page  96. 

[253] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE   INDIANS'    BOOK 

The  thunder  is  a  spirit,  and  it  is  the  emblem  of  war;  it  is  winged, 
mighty,  and  awful,  and  it  is  called  the  Thunder-Bird.  Great  is  he 
to  whom  the  thunder  appears  in  vision,  for  he  will  become  war-chief. 

So  this  man  who  fasted  would  see  and  talk  with  the  spirits  and 
they  would  teach  him  wisdom.  From  some  one  of  them,  perhaps 
from  his  own  guiding  spirit,  would  he  learn  a  song.  So  did  a  man 
long  ago  learn  of  the  spirits  this  song.  Thereafter  it  was  sung  as 
a  consecration  before  going  to  war. 

MA-O-NA  SONG   TO   THE   EARTH-MAKER 

Ma-o-na  Earth-Maker, 

Wai-kan-chank  hi  kche,  hing-ge  I  Holy  shall  I  be,— holy  ! 

mUN-KVN    NA-WA7V 

Holy    Song    (Medicine    Song) 
Sang  and  told  fay  Nefc-hu-wi-ka  (Sooth  Wind,  Jacob  Rossell) 

I 


I INCE  long  ago,  before  the  Winnebagos  left  their  old  home 

Oby  the  Great  Water  in  Wisconsin,  there  went  a  ypung 
man  into  the  hills  to  fast.'  He  fasted  for  twelve  days, 
'I  and  then  a  spirit  came  to  him  in  a  vision  and  talked  with 
him.  Ma-o-na,  the  Earth-Maker,  had  sent  the  spirit  to  teach  the 
man;  and  the  spirit  gave  him  knowledge  and  taught  him  wonderful 
words  that  brought  health,  welfare,  and  long  life.  Wise  was  the 
young  man  when  he  left  the  hills,  for  he  brought  with  him  the  teach- 
ings of  the  spirit  and  the  power  of  the  holy  words.  When  he  came 
back  to  his  people  he  sang  this  song,  and  this  was  the  beginning  of 
one  kind  of  medicine  ceremony.  The  words  he  had  learned  of  the 
spirit  were  so  holy  that  the  man  lived  long  without  any  sickness, 
nor  did  he  die  of  any  ill.  At  the  last  all  the  joints  of  his  body  fell 
apart  from  mere  old  age,  and  of  old  age  alone  he  died. 

So  the  song  that  he  made  containing  the  wonderful  words  has 
always  been  cherished  by  the  Winnebagos  because  of  its  great  power. 

'  See  "The  Holy  Man,"  page  32;  "The  Songs  of  the  Dakotas,"  page  60s    and  "Introduc- 
tion to  the  Pawnee  Songs,"  page  96. 

[254] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


WINNEBAGO 

AH  this  was  long  ago  when  the  language  of  the  Winnebagos 
was  different  from  what  it  is  to-day.  Now  the  people  no  longer 
«se  such  words  in  common  speech.  Indeed,  no  one  knows  the 
exact  meaning  of  the  wonderful  words.  The  song  is  still  used  in 
some  of  the  medicine  ceremonies,  but  only  the  Medicine-Men,  the 
Holy  Men,  understand  its  meaning. 

The  medicine  ceremony  of  the  "Winnebagos  lasts  four  days  and 
nights.  Holy  songs  are  sung,  and  there  is  spoken  ritual,  when 
the  Holy  Man  gives  commandments  and  teaches  the  people  the 
ways  of  goodness.  Now  and  again,  that  the  people  may  not  become 
tired  and  drowsy,  the  ceremony  is  enlivened  by  dancing.  So  the 
slow  part  of  this  holy  song  is  followed  by  a  quick  part  which  is  the 
music  of  the  dance.  The  medicine  ceremony  used  to  be  very  solemn 
and  sacred  in  the  olden  times,  and  its  mysteries  were  known  only 
to  the  initiated.  The  white  people  called  it  the  *' medicine  religion" 
of  the  Winnebagos. 


mUN-KUN  NA-VIAN 

Ni  hai  na  wi  nu  ha 
Ha  ha  ti  hi 
Hi  na  wi  hi  na 

Ma-na-gle  he 
Na  ha  wha 
Han  gle  he 
Ha  ha  ti  hi 
Hi  na  wi  hi  na 

Shi-ke  hai  na  wi  na-, 
Ha  ha  ti  hi 
Hi  na  wi  hi  na 

Shi-ke  hai  na  wi  na- 
Ha  ha  ti  hi 
Hi  na  wi  hi  na 


HOLY  SONG 

(Saith  the  Spirit, 

"  Dream,  oh,  dream  again. 

And  tell  of  me. 

Dream  tho«  !") 
Into  solitude  went  I 
And  wisdom  was  revealed  to  me. 
(Saith  the  Spirit, 
"  Dream,  oh,  dream  again, 
I  And  tell  of  me. 

Dream  thou  !") 
Let  the  whole  world  hear  me, 
1  Wise  am  I  ! 

(Now  saith  the  Spirit, 
"  Tell  of  me. 

Dream  thoa  !") 
All  was  revealed  to  me; 
From  the  beginning 
Know  I  all,  hear  me  ! 
All  was  revealed  to  me  ! 

(Now  saith  the  Spirit, 
"  Tell  of  me. 

Dream  tho«  !"^ 
12551 
Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'    BOOK 


HI-WA-SHI-DA 

Ma-na-gle  wo-hi-ni-gi-gi-na, 
Ma-na-gle  wa-hi-ni-gi-gi-na, 
Ha-chi-je-na  ! 

Chi-na-gia  wu-hi-ni-gi-gi-na, 
Chi-na-gia  wu-hi-ni-gi-gi-na, 
Ha-clu-je-na  1 


DANCE 

I  have  won  the  world, 
The  world  is  won, 

I  have  won  the  world, 
The  world  is  won, 

I  am  come, 

I  am  come  here  now  1 

I  have  won  the  village, 

Yea,  'tis  won, 
I  have  won  the  village. 

Yea,  'tis  won, 
I  am  come, 
I  am  come  here  now  I 


mUN-KUN   NA-WAi7 

Holy    Song    (Medicine    Song) 
II 

HE  wisdom  of  the  otter'  is  known  to  the  Men  of  Medicine. 
In  pouches  made  of  otter-skin,  or  of  the  skin  of  some 
other  emblematic  animal,  the  Men  of  Medicine  p«t  their 
mystic  "medicine"  and  charms.  During  a  Medicine- 
Dance  the  Medicine -Men  hold  their  skin -pouches  in  their  hands, 
and  suddenly  shoot  them  out  at  arm's-length  towards  some  man, 
when  the  mysterious  power  that  is  inside  the  pouch  flies  out  like  an 
arrow  and  strikes  the  man  dead.  He  falls  on  his  face,  and  lies  mo- 
tionless until  the  Men  of  Medicine,  through  their  mysterious  power, 
bring  him  to  life  again.  Women,  too,  are  pierced  by  the  unseen 
arrows. 


mVN-KXJN  NA-WAJV 

Ma-ni-na,  le-ha-no, 
Ma-ni-na,  le-ha-no, 
Wank-i-wi-zha  le-ha-no, 
Ma-ni-na,  le-ha-no  ! 


HOLY  SONG 

Let  it  fly — the  arrow. 

Let  it  fly — the  arrow. 

Pierce  with  a  spell  the  man,  ohl 

Let  it  fly — the  arrow. 


'  See  "  Introduction  to  the  Pawnee  Songs,"  page  96. 
[256] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


WINNEBAGO 


Ma-ni-na,  le-ia-no, 
Ma-ni-na,  le-ha-no, 
Hi-nuk-i-zha  le-Iia-no, 
Ma-ni-na,  le-ha-nol 


Let  it  fly — the  arrow, 
Let  it  fly — the  arrow. 
Pierce  with  a  spell  the  woman  1 
Let  it  fly — the  arrow. 


HE-LUSH-KA   NA-WAJV^ 

Warrior-Songs 


ll  HE  Winnebago  ceremony  of  the  He-ltjsh-ka  is  of  Omaha 

»^       origin,  and  corresponds  to  the  ''Omaha  Dance"  of  the 

*         Dakotas.    It  has  come  to  be  a  purely  sociable  dance, 

I  but  the  recitals,  in  song  and  story,  of  great  deeds  or  of 

events  in  the  tribe  form  still  an  important  part  of  the  ceremony. 

The  dance  is  an  occasion  of  general  gift-making,  and  any  one 

who  gives  may  be  called  "  He-I«sh-ka." 


HE-LUSH-KA    NA-WAi7 
Three  Warrior-Songs 
Sang  and  told  by  Chash-chanfc-a  (Wave,  Peter  Sampson) 


■[  HESE  three  warrior-songs  tell  the  story  of  the  last  f  ight- 

Ting  done  by  the  Winnebagos.  Some  of  the  tribe  were 
employed  in  the  year  1864  as  government  scoots.  They 
'  I  were  looking  for  the  Arapahos,  when  they  came  sud- 
denly upon  a  party  of  Pawnees  and  charged  them,  mistaking  them 
for  the  enemy.  The  Pawnees,  who  were  themselves  friends  of  the 
government,  did  not  wish  to  fight  the  government  scouts,  so  they 
fled,  in  haste,  dropping  their  bundles  to  lighten  their  ponies  as  they 
galloped  away.  Now,  among  the  pursuing  Winnebagos  was  a 
Pawnee  who  had  married  into  the  Winnebago  tribe,  so  when  the 
Pawnee  cliief  lifted  his  hand  and  cried  out,  "Friends!"  this  man 
recognized  the  flying  braves  as  his  own  people,  and  the  Winnebagos, 
seeing  their  mistake,  ceased  their  pursuit.    But  in  the  excitement 


'  See  Dakota  "  Omaha  Dance-Songs," 
[257] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


page  55. 


THE    INDIANS'    BOOK 

one  of  the  Winnebagos  fired  a  shot  and  wounded  the  horse  of  a 
Pawnee;  and  the  owner  afterwards  came  to  the  Winnebagos  and 
claimed  payment  for  damages.  Bat  the  Winnebago  refused  to  pay, 
and,  with  Winnebago  wit,  pat  in  a  coanter-claim  for  his  lost  ballet, 
which,  he  said,  had  been  intended  for  an  Arapaho.  This  man 
was  called  by  the  whites  George  Eaton,  bat  after  this  incident  he 
was  known  to  the  Winnebagos  as  "Pawnee  Shooter." 

The  first  song  describes  the  parsait  of  the  Pawnees  by  the  Winne- 
bagos. The  next  is  an  exclamation  of  derisive  triamph  at  the  trail 
the  Pawnees  ha.ve  left,  all  strewn  with  their  bandies.  The  last  tells 
of  the  mataal  recognition  of  the  parsaers  and  parsaed:  "Winne- 
bagos,' these,  yoa  say!  Pawnees,  these,  yoa  say!  Friends,  halloo, 
yoa  say!"  These  three  songs  are  well  liked  by  the  Winnebagos 
and  are  still  sang  at  the  He-Iash-ka  dances. 


HE-LUSH-KA  NA-'WAA/' 

Shun-ke  wo-djin  wi-ne  ! 
Shan-ke  wo-djin  wi-ne  I 

Ko-Ia-wi-Ia, 
Pa-ni  ka-Iai-Ia-dju-ka  I 
Shan-ke  wo-djin  wi-ne  I 

Sh«n-ke  wa-na-ma-ne  ! 
Shan-ke  wa-na-ma-ne  I 
Pa-ni  guch-Ia, 
Pa-ni  ka-Iai-Ia-dj«-ka  ! 
Shan-ke  wa-na-ma-ne  I 


WARRIOR-SONG 

Ho,  friend,  whip  ap  your  horse  I 
Now  they  fly  fast — Pawnees — see 

how  they  fly  I 
Ho,  friend,  whip  ap  yoar  horse ! 


Ho,  friend,  prick  ap  your  horse  1 
Pawnee    Shooter,    ride    fast,   for 

they  are  gone  I 
Ho,  friend,  prick  ap  yoar  horse  ! 


II 


HE-LUSH-KA  NA-WAJV 

Wa-we-Ia  ha-dja-Ie  ! 
Wa-wc-Ia  ha-dja-Ie  ! 
Hi-cha-ko-Io, 
Pa-ni-na  wa-cha-Ia  ! 
Wa-we-Ia  ga-ske-na  ! 
Wa-we-Ia  ha-dja-Ie  ! 


WARRIOR-SONG 

See  the  trail  they've  left  here  I 
Comrades,  hearken — Pawnee  braves, 

I  saw  them. 
What  a  trail  they've  left  here  ! 


'  It  was  not  possible  to  make  an  absolutely  literal  translation  to  fit  the  masic. 

Digitized  by  Wcrosoft® 


WINNEBAGO 


III 


HE-LUSH-KA   NA-WAAT 

Ho-chunk-gi-Ie,  hi-she-na  1 
Ho-chank-gi-Ie,  hi-she-na ! 

Pa-ni-na,  hi-she-na  ! 

Hi-ta-Io,  hi-she-na  I 
Ho-chunfc-gi-Ie,  hi-she-na  1 


WARRIOR-SONG 

Ho,  they  arc  Winnebagos  1 
Pawnee  braves,  they  hailed  as; 
"  Friends !  Halloo !"  they  hailed  as. 
Ho,  they  are  Winnebagos  1 


HE-LUSH-KA   NA-WAN 

Warrior-Song 

IV 

Sitag  and  told  by  'Wa-che-Ii-man-iga  (Surly  'Walker,  of  the  Bear  Clan,  James  Mallory) 


||AN-CHO-SEP-KA  (Black  Bear)  was  one  of  the  leaders 

Mof  the  Winnebago  scouts  in  the  United  States  service 
daring  the  Civil  War.  In  the  Black  Hills  he  fought 
'I  alone  against  forty  Dakota  braves  and  received  many 
wounds.  This  song  was  sung  in  honor  of  him.  Eagle-feathers  are 
worn  by  braves,  and  each  feather  is  a  war  honor  given  for  some 
valorous  deed. 


HE-LUSH-KA  NA-WAN 

Ho-wi  lo-ki-wa-wi-Ie  I 
Lo-han  tt*eh-hi-ga, 
Ma-shon  o-ni  je-na  I      , 
Ho-wi  lo-fci-wa-wi-Ie  ! 


WARRIOR-SONG     • 

Follow  him,  mount  year  horses  I 

He  killed  many. 
He  hants  eagle-feathers  now  I 
Follow  him,  mount  your  horses  I 


HE-LUSH-KA    NA-'^AN 

Warrior-Song 

V 

Sung  and  told  fay  Wa-che-Ii-man-iga  (Surly  Walker,  of  the  Bear  Qan,  James  Mallory) 

Some  Wiimebagos  went  to  visit  the  Dakota  chief,  "Yellow- 
Hair"'  and  his  people.    While  there  they  sang  this  song: 

'See  illustration,  facing  page  54. 
[2591 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'    BOOK 


HE-LUSH-KA 

Ya-tt'-eh-Ia  hamb-Ia  pin-na, 
Ya-tt'-eh-Ia  hamb-Ia  pin-na, 
Hi-he-Ia  na-nac^-kon-je, 
Ya-tt'-eh-Ia  hamb-Ia  pin-na  ! 

Na-ja-zi-Ia, 

Ho-chunk-Ia  zhe-skai-Ie, 
Hi-he-Ia  na-nacA-kon-je, 
Ya-tt'-eh-Ia  hamb-Ia  pin-na  ! 


VARRIOR-SONG 

When  I  talk,  'tis  fair  weather. 
When  I  talk,  'tis  fair  weather. 
So  say  I,  yoo  hear  me, 
When  I  talk,  'tis  fair  weather  I 

Yellow-Hair,  ho. 

Thus  are  all  Winnebagos, 

So  say  I,  yo«  hear  me. 

When  I  talk,  'tis  fair  weather ! 


WA-GI-TT'EH   NA-WAJV 

Wailing-Song 
Sung  and  told  by  Chash-chonfc-a  (Wave,  Peter  Sampson) 


MAN  was  riding  homeward  in  a  wagon  with  an  old  woman 

A  whom  he  called  grandmother,  for  aged  people  of  kin, 
or  even  aged  friends,  may  always  be  known  as  grands 
mother  or  as  grandfather  to  those  who  are  younger.  On 
the  way  the  grandmother  suddenly  died.  So  as  he  came  near 
home  the  man  began  to  sing  this  wailing-song  with  sobbing  voice 
to  let  the  people  know  that  she  was  dead. 


WA-GI-TT'EH   NA-WAiV 

Pe-zhe-ga  ko-ni-ka  ya-ge- 
kche-ne-zhe  ! 


"WAILING-SONG 

Whom,  oh,  whom  shall  I  now  call  grand- 
mother ! 


WAK-JE   NA-WAiV^ 

Victory-Song 

Pajoka  is  the  "Winnebago  name  for  Comanche.      In  this  song 
the  triumphant  Winnebago  has  shot  a  Pajoka. 


WAK-JE   NA-WAiV 

Pa-jo-ka  nik-Ia, 

Hi-zhok  ha-ni-na 
Nan-na-ke-we-no ! 


VICTORY-SONG 

Ah,  my  little  Pajoka, 

Do  yott  fear  my  gun,  Pajoka  ? 


'  See  "Victory-Songs  of  the  Cheyennes,"  pages  1 55- J  57. 
[260] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


WINNEBAGO 


WUNK-HI  NA-WAiV 
Love-Song 

Song  and  told  by  'Winnebago  women 
I 

N  the  summer  of  the  olden  time  there  might  often  be 
heard  at  eventide  the  call  of  flates.  It  was  the  youths 
upon  the  hifl-side  piping  love-songs.  Every  one  may 
know  a  love-song  when  he  hears  it,  for  the  flute-tones 
are  long  and  languorous,  and  are  filled  with  a  soft  tremor.  When 
a  maiden  heard  the  flute-music  of  her  lover  without,  she  always 
found  it  necessary  to  leave  the  tipi  to  draw  water  or  to  visit  some 
neighbor. 

In  this  song  the  maid  asks  leave  of  her  mother  to  go  to  see  her 
uncle,  but  the  music  tells  that  it  is  really  her  lover  to  whom  she  is 
going.  The  old  people  were  not  often^  deceived  when  the  flute- 
music  sounded. 


WUNK-HI   NA-WAN 

Na-ni,  dega-go 
E-dja  wa-de-kjela! 


LOVE-SONG 
Mother,  let  me  go  to  my  «ncle  I 


WUNK-HI    NA-WAJV 

Love-Song 

II 


WINNEBAGO  maiden  dreamed  of  a  mythical  Dakota 

A       woman  famed  for  her  many  lovers  and  for  her  great 
power   of   inspiring   love.    On   awakenmg,  the   maiden 

felt  herself  impelled  to  lead  the  same  kind  of  life.    At 

once  she  composed  this  song,  in  which  she  tells  another  woman 
of  the  miraculous  power  that  has  come  upon  her.  This  song  is 
only  a  few  years  old* 

[261] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE   INDIANS'    BOOK 


WUNK-HI   NA-WAiV 

Hi-zhan  ho-do-chuch-ka, 

Zhe-ske  sha-na-na; 
Hi-zhan  wa-ki-tt'-eh-ka, 

Zhc-ske  sha-nu-na; 
Hi-zhan  wai-zhi-zhi-ka, 

Zhe-ske  sho-n«-na; 
Hi-cha-ko-Io,  hi-nak  lo-in-na-gic 

wi-do-kan-na-na ; 
Hi-zhan  do-mai-ka-ka, 

Zhe-ske  sh«-na-na. 


LOVE-SONG 

Whomsoe'er  look  I  apon. 

He  becomes  love-crazed; 
Whomsoever  speak  I  onto, 

He  becomes  love-crazed; 
Whomsoever  whisper  I  to, 

He  becomes  love-crazed; 
All  men  who  love  women, 
Them  I  rule,  them  I  rule. 

My  friend; 
Whom  I  touch,  whom  I  touch. 

He  becomes  love-crazed. 


A   TRUE   STORY 


HERE  was  once  a  young  man  who  was  about  to  enter 
upon  a  fast,  and  nothing  less  would  satisfy  him  than 
that  he  must  dream  of  Ma-o-na,  the  Earth-Maker.  He 
blackened  his  face,  as  was  the  custom,  and  fasted  four 


days  or  more,  and  dreamed  of  many  things;  then  he  ate  a  little 
food,  and  fasted  again.  So  he  persevered  until  he  had  dreamed 
of  everything  on  the  earth,  or  under  the  earth,  or  in  the  air;  he 
dreamed  of  the  whole  world,  but  he  never  saw  Ma-o-na.  The 
spirits  said  to  him,  "You  have  dreamed  of  Ma-o-na  because  you  have 
dreamed  of  all  his  works."  But  the  man  was  not  satisfied.  He 
blackened  his  face  and  lay  down  again,  and  again  he  dreamed  of  the 
whole  world,  yet  still  he  wished  to  dream  of  Ma-o-na,  but  could 
not.  But  after  four  nights  he  dreamed  again,  and  now  at  last  he 
dreamed  of  Ma-o-na.  And  Ma-o-na  said:  "I  am  the  Earth-Maker. 
You  will  see  me  to-morrow  at  noon.  But  it  is  not  well;  you  wish 
too  much." 

So  the  next  morning  the  man  rose  up  and  made  himself  ready 
and  took  some  tobacco  for  an  offering,  and  before  noon  he  set  out 
for  the  place  where  Ma-o-na  had  said  that  he  could  meet  him,  a 
place  where  mighty  oak-trees  grew  to  a  vast  height.  There  he  stood 
still,  and  watched  and  listened,  till  just  at  noon  he  saw  a  large  flag 

[262] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


WINNEBAGO 

drop  down  to  the  earth  and  hang  suspended  before  him.  The 
man  looked  up  and  saw  that  Ma-o-na  was  there,  among  the  tall 
oaks;  he  saw  only  the  face  of  Ma-o-na,  a  long  face  with  good  eyes, 
for  the  flag  covered  all  the  rest.  Then  the  face  spoke  to  him  and 
said:  "Nephew,  you  said  that  if  you  could  not  dream  of  me  you 
would  die.  Nephew,  you  never  can  die.  You  never  can  die, 
because  you  are  like  me.  You  have  dreamed  of  all  my  works,  you 
know  them  all,  and  so  you  are  like  me.  The  spirits  told  you  this, 
but  you  would  not  believe.  You  wanted  to  see  me.  Now  you  see 
me  here  to-day." 

The  man  thought  that  he  saw  Ma-o-na,  and  he  looked  long  at  the 
face  and  never  turned  his  eyes  away,  till  at  last  the  creature  before 
him  grew  tired  and  drew  back  his  wing;  and  then  the  man  saw  that 
it  was  only  a  chicken-hawk,  one  of  the  evil  spirit's  birds,  that  had 
flown  down  into  a  low  oak  close  in  front  of  him;  and  the  chicken- 
hawk's  wing  had  seemed  to  be  the  flag.  The  man  cried  for  sorrow, 
and  he  lay  four  nights  more,  and  then  the  spirits  came  and  talked 
with  him  and  took  his  soul  away  with  them  and  said  to  him:  "Cease 
trying  to  dream  of  Ma-o-na.  There  are  many  more  little  birds  and 
creatures  of  the  evil  spirit  that  may  deceive  you.  You  can  dream 
no  more,  for  you  have  seen  all  things." 

So  the  man  ceased  his  fast  and  no  longer  tried  to  dream  of  Ma-o-na. 
He  never  saw  Ma-o-na,  nor  he  nor  any  one  upon  this  earth.  It 
is  not  possible  to  see  Ma-o-na. 

Note. — This  story  was  told  to  the  recorder  as  the  actual  experience  of  an  Indian  in  his  youth. 
It  gives  a  deep  insight  into  Indian  thought.  Maona  is  no  personified  deity  to  be  seen  with 
fleshly  eye.  He  who  would  thus  seek  to  look  upon  the  Earth-Maker  is  but  deceived  by  trivial 
things.  Maona,  to  the  Indian,  is  seen  in  all  his  works,  and  the  whole  world  of  nature  tells  of 
spiritual  life.  Maona  is  reflected  in  the  mind  of  man  himself,  for  man  is  like  Maona  when  he 
has  seen  and  understood  Maona's  works — the  universe  about  him. 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


-COa/>i.-cLi 


1-r^' 


^Aa^O^   Mi  »t  O^ 


/^.M.       J.-  ^i 


l^jt  r   I  f  IfV  If   ^T  t  I  (  p  I  r- 


-Lda-ej^     ^ 


^0 


I ,  t/no    rl-O-cM.  i./yjt 


jx-  -tio.  -  ><<l*,  '^•M.-A'a.jfc/*-    60^- -no.-  *yaj3) 


^ 


^■^    M 


4^  J^J   I  J.    li^i^H-^  M 


^.; 


:r. 


^fc^ 


T,- 


'■/.I    I  J.    IISW^^ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


'L0<-  Co.    Jrc-  ui«u  '  vK". 


-^/'    V  1<     1       V   V 


-t/Oo*l-  cki 


rr 


f  fii^-^Uju.         Cuuoi. 


~COacLcLCu<».^.  ^^*' I*'*-       €tnn>^. 


J 


.j^  j->  /  j    j^  J-"IT J  -J  ^ 


COtui' cLa,a^  Out ,  CiJt  -Mite.         Cev^a. ,      3  *^^^ 


4  ff  1  1  1  II  l^'i    Ui-i    I   M    J   l^i/.l  .1  J 


''OliIUJ  tty-  ctut    and  -tft**^   Ojm^j      0%.,   t^tut-    *jJ--   CK        *.fi**-  ***S  f)", 


S^k  J    J    I  J    J    1 J   J    IJ   J   IJ  J  1 


^ 


I ')  ^  f  }    }  W  \      I1 1^ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


J^^   ^  Cl'^^^'^'^'^C^'^) 


;|   J'  I J  ii'tt  I  ;■  r  f-  i'"  I  i  '^'' 


m 


E 


m 


\  \  V 


* 


/  ; ;  I  ;■;  j-i ; J-  r  ii%^^ 


^/lo  «  flt^   t^   £iJr- 4Ci    tU ,  ctC    c,  .^J:* 


-  /^ci-..  ! 


c^t^r  Z'/  A  Ih.  ;- ;- J- 1^4  Hij^-^' 


>^- 


«-   o 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


t  -  o-    o 


p^  ^;'  /./s;.  |tJ^  jv;.  /  1V^J'^^;  r  jl 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


m 


felJ   J,,J 


^ 


J   J    I  .M     K-  J   J    J    I'  iim 


rrs 


~60oui-  4iou»i~  eJLu*M  -Li    KcIm-- 


t 


L*»i 


4J^'> 


m 


f 


m 


^fe- 


J      J      J 


^    ^_ 


Ec^^'^t^-  ^^^ 


^g 


-y=v- 


J    I  J"  J 


■<!  i    J     i     l-t^g 


a     f 
:^=^ 


X'M  i  ^ 


^fi.-        a-  ypta 


A. 


j  i    I  i  J       I^^^L^J  l^'ip 


^^.  .-  -..^^^/ 


A 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


.Ji/1-  fi-  -ua^ 


^ 


^^ 


ii     '^-i     '"^M>    '"J=^^ 


^ 


;  t^^/ 


^  ^^  '-'^  ^  ^ 


^O^-  -^^V**  -  cluA.^  'Li.     /kcJjL'  <.-<-)     '^^^  -    6^    . 
^O-     ^      UoJUi    J  A ,         -Ictdy      I 

r4.%    m  l>     I      I      ^         I  — i- 


^^^^ 


*^:     t    1 


i 


ig.  l6        A-  i-     -LI 


11        11       ^^ 


r;-   T  1 


^.-  y&        -^ 


-L  ! 


Digitized  by  l\/licrosoft<^ 


fjA*^ici. 


tA^*\^^ 


-  s. 


'^tr) 


•cf***,^   t-^Mi(-L.-<^-*'x  C'^o^^i^i^] 


g>T  1     1 


!■  T.  1     1 


"IkO.     -Cj-t     'TbU      tiiu<. 


^ 


^ 


^^ 


j^ 


J        J         4- 


:5=^ 


f 


£U 


") 


4>i  1    1    Iv  r  vh    ^ 


'Ua.    *J^     ->-«*    "tM. 


^ 


^ 


^^ 


i 


UiA' 


<^«L4    ye-  vtcMa^      ic~     -^e  . 


^  J     J      1 


^ 


fcp: 


ftat 


^yy^"      TLai.  -tiCL    cji.     f***-    -jua- 


-X    i    I  i  i  X     I  X    i 


r 


■«  o- 


tt^ !") 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


%M^Aj*i- 7Cuu*\   ^ty-ojoyiy 


^ 


F 


J'  J    J    I 


-£^ 


? 


^ 


^  i   '  i  X  i    ^  i   i 


^ 


iiJ   a 


* 


Out. 


'^^'■i  i  Uii  ^'''1  -I  ''  ' 


-fl- 


r  J    J  i-;r  J  J   I  j   j 


^^ 


^s 


'e^ 


■/  ■!  i  N  J  I  J-  J'.  J  I'i  m 


-T^e , 


/  I  I    I    I'  I  I   I    I 


.*•*    fCo-»*   '     j 


/^   W/»»    ^-         IfCixii^i)  to     *.«-; 


f' 


<r***- 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


tJ^u/^-'iC'*^  ^a.-cja/t^ 


^ 


^ 


XI  Ui'X  '^^ 


J  J  J  "ii-^ 


i 


X  i   U   i  I  Jlii  U  i 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


4<-  <^a-  J-A  -   *^ 


i'pHK',    It  I  V    r\  r    i'   \i'  ^m 


^OL-    ♦»<».-      *^         t«rt-- 


y  /, 


CUu-t.     i«rtn«. 


iM 


^^^ 


n  in    1 J-J-.    1  J-  \  \%  J 


«.-£-€_ 


Mc-cXi- 


^- 


-tt  «_ 


,P       <2^*M        C^TM^e.    "-»-<- 


CJx-tux-     *%/c>.      -cru.  .    aU-      -/U  A<:         «-t  -         «f<5 


^ 


CJji-^CL-    ^€k.     -urt*.  -    tx  -      -/U  A<;        «-t 


'tfCK. 


i 


ifc 


''!■'  M    I  n   I  I  I    I  I  I     I   I    I    I   I       III 
-fir'.--' 


^ 


-Ht 


la.       tt-  c-      C-  €,      ^e,.  Jb.  -     <^  -    -L. 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Ju    'iMffve^oif^  fii^-*. 


.Yt.m.i  -  ito 


^i)^    1    \    1       l=4g=j^ 


JjIa. 


itA.  ~  -*ia. J. 


c^/  -^     A  — 


a^. 


--VC-««5> 


11-1      V  J'l-S  J       U 


4>  i   1  V  V  i^V    ^  I V'  i  ^ 


Mi.  -  HuJI-  <  -  jAo.  ■  ■  ■ 


6l- 

Ca.~ 

etsi 

ctx. 


'Va.  -      ■*«-e>, 

■jt,  om.  ,      Of 


A  l^v   J 


^UAa-  iM.-  ■AA 


O^^^    wf 


/..- 


-*«  o. 


^iLA-      >U<X-oJ^ 


4-^  ]■/ 


^ 


EE 


i^-r^^   '4   I 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


flh*p  /it«/  «<^  OPviitCi 


iL 


i^\  LJ  I  Lj   17  '-r  I-  r- 


fc 


fe=fc 


* 


.tn-S-t.  ■ 


^ 


^ 


P        I         I' 


^ 


* 


iJKi4/tt.  -  UM.  —  XjL 


^tjtt^yu,  -^  ' 


-*«  -  e. 


«r->-J--e. 


J-       ,--^ 


^ 


■rLJ-   [/    K/     ^^ 


4i^ 


R= 


J'/ 


m^  -  (.t.*^ 


/ 


ft&  -  €_ 


/ 


e/v*.<_. 


4    .  r  ]   in  i;-  y  >  j-  ^^ 


/f[ji_  -  €_  Cjo-    f^t</»*.    erf-  -  ■*£  -  ^  . 


£ 


'i     n   I  n  I-'  }  ji 


^ 


4    .Q 


.    Xce^ ... 


tn  - 


•*»c-  e. 


.  «o-j€ 


-^^:^ 

^ 


f  J   J-   J- 


<*^ 


y- 


f  y  'i 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


y/g  -  e^i.  -  ^A  Jfa  -  cj«^*v. 


i  n  ■  I  ;"i  i-i'  i-  i:  i  I  i^^ 


^-X  JxUiv^ 


ijix 


j>^  t>  t  It.  i'  I  t~f- 


4    t:  t^   I  L_r    It -f^  f^^ 


dt 


^^ 


win' y  !'■  i 


i  n  \  ri 


-•it-  ■<-  ' 


J  i-  ;■  n  ri 


i 


i 


•iir^<....  I 


n  I  c'   lUJ^'J^  J^  U   ri 


U<M-  tl/M. 


Cje  ■ 


^ 


ur\ 


'»»«-   «-.' 


tj^*^   «--«    A^L,tr%A^^         "A) 


tfvJ*  • 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


•ke  -  fjuytl-yKo,.  Jfa  -  ugyy^ 


11 


Tj  \  ri  ^''  II  i'  ijs 


wo-  3 


•^      I    i.iij-,i^^^ 


^Jt^X-xrt^    )    K* 


C^/*./*;-*^  fc/A-  »ii»-  m«.-  n*.i 


ifo,  (rlju^,  fnitJk  "/»  ^*— ^  *rt-f*.' 


7. 


"i^-  ».■     *^.  <W  -  €o.    ^-  ^i'a^  ,' 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


1 


~Cy>J  tXA^  f^^  -     Jtri^' 


S^-}    ^  Ci^i-^^-^^'"    (CJa^  ) 


/^?^_  y,    -     Lje-  ^   -     £a  ~  Q-        AA  -    A.  -   t>-i-a.-  «x  -      €a.  -  K 


COa-  a.  -     tJ*  -  e 
^4X <J*J- 


I  ^  I  .n  I  J 11 


^ 


^ 


fJtJL. 6fe 


-      ^A  -   A.         Jv  a       rt. 
^  tfl^    ..  .  ^  fct,  'cf< 


7         I 


■i  i-n  Ml  1  n  I  r"j  1  ji  ^  jl 


J-CL  bti. 


^^  tn 


n  I  n  I  n  I  rf 


^ — » 


Jot...        ctz. 


'•\>  iri\  Y3\rj\  Ti^n^W 


^ 


r^i  n^iru^ 


-y. 


« ->«. 


Jul-  e.  ~     ^      .e      e-<-- 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


y/e  -  Cajl^J-  'Ko.    J/a.  -  cJ  gyy^ 


^^ 


* 


^ 


}U      cXo.  -     '^-    to  J 

Cts*>^~    roJt^,     ;Cta-^- ****  __ 


gU'  Lj  I  Lj  1  n  1  n  I  c^  I  j^ 


r^\  n\  O Tji '  i^ 


gi 


CJicdt-..     o.    .. 


''f  in  Nj  I  n  I  ma  i  ii. 


tJjA-A        CJt-«-       €a-<i.        /a-  a  -   ^a-^  -    -fit-   -t  l' 


^ii^  JH  '  n  i  ^ 


i 


1^6.    e-  ^-     e-    «.-€•-    c-«.-    «.-€.£- 


i8 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


ZETL 


^r- 


J^j    Ly  Cl-^^-J.^^-^  (Ll^^) 


gvHt4-+"FFT-:i  c  r  J  l-i  J- J  1^.  K^^^) 


■j^a  ~  <x  -   a. 


r- 


I K  i  T  I  /■  J  V,  I  ^'  •''  I'V  1-  I-  ^^ 


Jin....,     tbu^  CU^        CJi*s -"e^-      i^tx- 


€  -  -iia  -  «- 


/"•   •' 


jh'.  J' J  11/  Itj;^/  ;  l^'i  j:  I-?  j;  j^ 


i 


j-jfi . . . ,    ^''^^'-v-  *'-''*-    ^t*i  —  -#t « 


■^ex—  -  ■  ■ 


-»,<a  _  <a  -  «.  , 


^ 


i^JT'i  ,rf  I  J  ;  lijy;  ^  K^' j;  J  '  j;  J 


-/r«  -  o^- 


J^         •€-€-  •*■-€  <_<. 


i 


*= 


i:  V  M  ;',/.;  1  J'  J:  J  I   f^^ 


Tfl.-    a-     -tU       -ha      A  -   ot. ^      yii  -  '^/jL.  -  e  - 
fou^ ■*,<*-     ^A^t/i...,        {iiy.    ^oJCl^.  ... 


■tiOL"  tx~   <a_  .' 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


JH<.  -    €tJL^  *,  -    /^(X   JfOi.  -  CJ  Oty*y 


(\>   J-^J-   J'  1  ."  ^J  I   J  TlJ  I  ^  j;J 


"'^^^f^c^e-    too 


^tLiu^  A  ^  f^  . 


<A/a 


4^  \j  I  J'  !^  I -».];.  i±  i^y 


f^ 


r 


^^ 


;J/c    ie-c-        e-e        -e.-^ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


IT-        ^ 


cU^^^«-cA-&-^— >^(>/-^<^-'^ 


4ta   T.  I  \'V    II     I     I  '    I    ^^ 


^         to-     o-  4U.    cjo.-  '^        ^ 


4>    t   r    I   I    T-   I   1-    ^-    I  '^  t^    T-  "  7 


€SL      e.  ! 


4  h  1-  i'  I  r  /■  I  '  ^  1-^'  -^  ^ 


4t     J^    J"    I   X    i    I    j;   i    ^ 


F=f^ 


-* » 


m 


i^  i  l\  i  i  ^i  i  1  i 


4  iJTTTT^p 


?=?= 


"^  <^^  e  -      c  -   c  -  <_ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


j^o  -  £u/»/,  yi(eK.   Jra  -  tJ  a^rr-^ 


i^h'  J  ^  I  j^j'   i-i-  J'  J'  ;■  ^^ 


/ 


A-    <a- 


J  J  li  !■  ^  i  in- 1 


-#1  «.  -  <a 


-*»  <r«^  . 


^'  ^  i  I  i  ^'  I  ji  ji  i^i  j: 


I    1'    Jl  1  JliJ    1^ 


jVca*'   )6l-     <-  -      <:       e       <-      -cjo! 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


<5L,  >^     -Oic-  cJ.€-€i-K,^-i^CK  (Su^^  CJ^U^O^J 


\}    il   I  \n  \  11'  I  v|iuj'j'  I  1^1- 


yt 


^  ,  -<  -,         -A  -    <  -.        ^4fl  -  a.    ttOr'tyAeX.  -4(a^  -  <w  -  Aa.  -  e.  ^ 


f^....         J--.,       c^ 


....    /c 


»>c  ...     '^^e,. 


J'    I  \J  I  J'  }  I  J'  J;  1  J)  J'  I  j!  I 


E 


•^<3l-     O.    -  tt'eX-^-    ^<»-    «^    Ka,t*.i^-€A.       4,Uy 


i/yi-l/t^-    ■»«-«_. 


^/**v...      ,>?. /az^..,  ^  /ox^  Aj<«x —  flO  ••  .' 


''^ '  1  jrjnT~p3~i  I  '■■  ^ ) 


A 


/«.-<--  « 


<  -  -t- 


^•' 


* 


^ 


V  T^  I  i^v  I  T~r  I 


i 


t/-  Ctft^-  Tlau^ ,     x!o 


^A- 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


4l»-  4>4.aI-  ^c^    .>a-  i^gyt^ 


A 


,f  1^1,  I   1.1.  I  JLMM'lH'lr  N 


V^A/a'..       CUT* axt...      cji*^--*'*- ^ 'jy*^ ' 


i^  O  I  J^J^  '  Ml  J^J-  U^J'.J^J 


i 


fc 


TL 


^t: 


J,  J.  I  ^j  I  J' J I  J' J.  I  J.  J I  j^ 


-t^-  <»  -     '&t  tJi-  tM.  -      CO.  ~  A.     Kn^t^-  t<K    ^t^-  '^  -    **  "  **/ 


~$^^IY^I^^  i''  i 


1 


^  -ix-  «.-    c  -    e~    *. 


r 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


(a   SfiyiC<rfii     ■JuJU^^   oi^PCii    ^  ttZ    CDi»"^*^o.t^J 


4>  t    t-  M^   r  I  r  T    I  t,J~n^ 


a    I 


A.         < 


r^ 


L 


«.  -         e  -    ^  «, 


4       1^     1-     l~1-     ^'      I    V     1^     I    T      ^     I 


^i^au    ^.^        1L«.      '^^s.        *J-3U      -^^^^       ^'      ^'*- 


■^  ^'  I  /'  I  I  ^   j^  I 


^ 


'fjlX  M.^        "Le.    -ctA.        <.JX«     ■^'A      -^' 


^^ 


I   I  J  I  J  J.  I  y^  i/j  I 


^   / 


^a.        X 


5^ 


A-  ^ 


£.--£- 


4  i  i  I  J.  i  I  i-  /  1 J  j.i 


W»-»     -t*^  TLc     -tj-«.       crfc* 


r^ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


fil^^-(.M^i-4(€K.    ^C<-  cjg^ps. 


i  i  u.  ^1^  ^1  l^lj  Jl^f 


MC  ^ 


-L 


CjX. 


r- 


L.-e.- 


c-     *- 


T 


4  V   ^-"1  \'  ^'  \\<  \  \  \  ^  I 


-lJ/u    .^*.«_      -fc«_      zA^>-       /ur£i^    "5^^^      ^^ 


^ 


4    J^   M   J'    ;   I   J    J'  -I  i^ 


^/t'  M^     -K*-  .  -Ha^       *JiU 


■H'S^     -^J^i  fi''^-' 


4  i.  i  I  j  j:  1  j^  ^Zj^ 


^  -/<3L        ^.        -^.^  -^Z.  - 


-c  -   e. 


^  i  ;■  '  i  i  '  -'J:  J' '  i  j- 


Py.^      tCc- 


j6>  <^      «- 


i'  i'i  ^  'i''  s 


j7£_  e-^    e.-^  e. 


r- 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


s> 


■^  ^  ^  N-  ''■'•!  ^  -nj-M  J   I 


f    I  I  I '    " " r   Ml  I ^^^ 


''->    ^   '  M    ^  n  '  -  -  ]■  I  ;  -  J- 1 J    I 


i 


^ 


m 


a 


^:  K 


J  I  J.  j^i  I  j    I  ^ 


'f(t 


0'  -»vt.  • 


'Cjlc*^,  ai^i    -t-rio,  j//iZt    )  -t^c^    CeUJL  ^<a*-S)- . 


5^'r 


-  4(cIa.  _    *  £  -  O^  ,' 


y. 


lo-      CfcCf'f 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


tJcwfy. 


4-tj  j'tIB  If 


^. 


L.- 


■e.  ~    -e- 


I. 


(L    r    V-T^.n  J      1 


I. 


a.  ~   ^ 


u^. 


4  ^'  J'- 1 J--  /j-j_^^i^ 


A 


c  £- 


r 


^. 


<.a — 


i 


> ' 


^^j^i  J-  J^  I  n- 1  ii 


r 


^ 


r^ 


h. 


•  e. 


T- 


* 


J  I.   M  iUi  i  I  J  J'  I  i- 


s 


r 


^   «^,^i-     <jL       -5^^**      '^*-       '^*^  • 


* 


J  til    I  ^ 


E 


^^ 


^ 


d^-  ^ 


fc 


r 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Y?)^     Aji^Jro.- 


C»^<L-yt^ 


^ 


S 


^ 


r- 


s 


T- 


■Ka,  €     -^.A.      ^       ^t**.      j6t-  -^*t.  ' 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


cs/ffn*-*--  xTtrU' 


mm.  f  =  *^. 


4^^i  c  n  ,  1^ 


.^'■i  rl  J^.l 


-JmC 


V^^ — 


c£^ 


^^ 


^ 


^^ 


ifi 


g^'t    >J'  i  -. 


fe 


1^ 


£. 


f^ 


ua.       %-e. 


Jo  ...     >. v.      M*> 


^ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


<l'--:  J    I    M'     !■'   '^1  li 


h 


J  i  I     J 


^ 


^tA« 


r/u- 


Ctlut/t     Ccv< 


■no. 


Cvi 


n^ 


h     1    1  t 


1 


^ 


^ 


jyt 


i^^ 


5 


J    J    1  .:j 


-»«  A. 


CtfT»i«/S 


tt 


■Ca^r*.  -    C^OL-9JLd~^ 


^ 


± 


^    J7  I  J 


-y  ^.  I J  -rj  I  J  ^ 


^ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


"Witt/t^^-  Z.1      A/A.  -  uJ  ayr\^ 


i 


L 


^ 


>      1     1    L  M    I   l^^ 


CaXL    ytre*^      *jCj»     Cnt<.     <oo- >,e.*v.        .  ^Zte«^  J.  ..  r*J^ 

ilk    . ',_ 


m 


k 


P 


i 


h 


e«M ... 


N„nJ  Jr  I  I 


s 


u 


1^ 


g 


S 


S 


^«_ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


KWAKIUTL    TITLE-PAGE 

The  design  at  the  top  of  the  page  represents  the  grizzly '6ear; 
that  at  the  bottom  the  "  killer-whale."  These  drawings  are  by 
Klalish  (Charles  James  Nowell),  a'Kwakiutl  Indian. 
The  lettering  is  by  Hinook  Mahiwi  Kilinaka  (Angel  De  Gira). 
The  letters  are  composed  of  motives  peculiar  to  Kwafciotl  de- 
sign: the  tail  and  fin  of  the  whale,  the  hawk,  and  the  eye-joint. 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE   KWAKIUTLS 


.1  |HE  Indians  of  the  Northwest  coast,  between  Juan  de 
rw*  Fuca  Strait  and  Yaktrtat  Bay,  are  classed  by  ethnol- 
*  ogists  as  a  single  culture  family,  subdivided  into  many 
I  linguistic  and  physical  groupings,  but  a  unit  in  point  of 
general  development.  Of  the  linguistic  branches,  the  Wakashan 
is  among  the  most  important,  and  to  this  division  the  KwakiutI 
Indians  belong. 

Physically  the  KwakiutI  is  different  from  the  other  Indians  of 
the  North  Pacific  group.  WhHe  his  neighbors  all  have  low  faces 
with  broad,  flat  noses,  the  KwakiutI  has  an  unusually  long  face 
and  a  high,  arched  nose.  The  social  organization,  too,  of  these  Ind- 
ians is  different  in  some  important  respects  from  that  of  the  sur- 
rounding groups. 

The  singers  here  represented  have  their  home  on  Vancouver 
Island,  Like  all  the  Northwest  coast  tribes,  these  Indians  are  great 
fishermen.  The  deep  fiords  and  inlets  which  cut  into  the  main- 
land of  British  Columbia  and  the  shores  of  Vancouver  Island  yield 
quantities  of  salmon,  sea -lions,  and  even  whales.  The  women 
also  gather  mussels.  The  coast  tribes  are  dexterous  seamen,  and 
make  a  variety  of  strong  canoes  hewn  sometimes  from  a.  single 
great  log  and  decorated  with  strange  emblematic  signs  and  figures. 
Similar  emblems  appear  upon  the  carved  wooden  house-posts  and 

NOTE    FOR   PRONUNQATION   OF   KWAKIUTL   TEXT 

While  in  many  Indian  languages  there  are  sounds  not  exactly  the  same  as  the 
corresponding  ones  of  European  tongues,  in  the  KwakiutI  occur  sounds  that  have 
no  counterpart  at  all  in  European  languages.  Such  sounds,  therefore,  can  be  ex- 
pressed by  the  Roman  alphabet  approximately  only. 

Unless  otherwise  indicated,  vowels  have  the  Continental  sound,  and  consonants 
the  English. 

ch,  in  italic,  is  a  guttural,  like  ch  in  German. 

[297] 
Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE   INDIANS'    BOOK 

totem -poles.  Sach  emblems  often  represent  to  the  Indian  a 
long  and  sacred  narrative  of  his  ancestors;  they  are,  as  it  were, 
family  or  tribal  coats  of  arms.  Each  clan  among  the  Kwakititis  is 
derived  from  a  mythical  ancestor  who  acquired  a  crest  in  the  course 
of  some  phenomenal  adventure,  and  whose  privileges  descend  from 
generation  to  generation.' 

The  Kwakiutis  make  a  variety  of  beautiful  things,  and  unlike 
many  other  tribes  they  set  great  value  upon  their  possessions.  Their 
arts  and  art  industries  reflect  a  wealth  of  barbaric  imagination  in 
design  and  show  power  and  accuracy  in  execution.  The  superb 
grotesques  of  the  giant  totem-poles  and  carved  canoes  are  wrought 
with  the  same  skill  as  are  the  delicate  and  symmetrical  tracings  upon 
stone  and  silver,  and  the  easy  curves  on  painted  boxes  and  other 
articles  of  use  and  decoration. 

These  Indians  live  in  wooden  houses  on  which  are  often  painted 
animal  forms  both  decorative  and  emblematic.  The  totem-polc, 
carved  from  a  great  tree,  rises  at  the  front  of  the  house;  the  en- 
trance is  often  a  doorway  cut  through  the  pole.  The  native  life  is 
rich  in  ceremonial  and  symbolic  functions  which  are  frequently  ac- 
companied by  song.  "Everything  has  its  song,"  say  the  Kwakiutis ; 
"Every  person,  every  animal,  and  everything  has  its  song  and  its 
story."  Even  objects  have  songs  either  connected  directly  with 
the  object  itself  or  through  the  association  of  song  and  object  in 
ceremonial.  So  there  is  a  song  belonging  to  each  totem-pole.  Cer- 
tain songs  belong  to  certain  families,  and  are  as  much  a  part  of  the 
family  inheritance  as  are  the  crest  and  the  clan  emblems. 

The  KwakiutI  music,  with  its  sharp  and  rugged  rhythm,  suggests 
to  the  imagination  the  steady  yet  broken  beat  of  the  sea,  while  in 
the  melodies  we  seem  to  hear  the  cry  of  the  sea-gull  or  the  shriek 
of  the  Hu-huk,  the  mythical  bird  of  prey.  To  the  white  man  there 
hovers  over  this  music  a  spirit  of  the  wilder  elements  of  nature, 
sublime,  sometimes  destructive,  mysterious,  and  awful,  like  the 
whir  of  the  Thunder-Bird's  wings.  Yet  the  music  is  often  as  full  of 
beauty  as  the  white  gull  on  the  blue  sky. 

The  Kwakiutis  are  sinewy,  strong,  and  of  keen  and  fearless  im- 

'  The  ethnological  facts  regarding  the  KwakiutI  Indians  are  derived  from  the  works  of  Dr. 
Franz  Boas,  the  authority  on  this  subject. 

Digitized  byWcrosoft® 


KWAKIUTL 

agination.  Though  their  carved  canoes  seek  no  new  lands,  yet 
well  might  the  Indians  of  the  Northwest  coast  be  called  the  sea- 
kings  of  America. 


THE  STORY  OF  WAKIASH  AND  THE  FIRST  TOTEM-POLE 

Told  by  Klalish  (Charles  James  Nowell) 


[IHERE  was  once  a  chief  named  Wakiash,  and  he  was 

T  named  after  the  river  Wakiash  because  he  was  open- 
handed,  flowing  with  gifts  even  as  the  river  flowed  with 
'  1  fish.  It  happened  on  a  time  that  all  the  tribe  were 
having  a  big  dance.  Wakiash  had  never  had  any  kind  of  dance  of 
his  own,  and  he  was  ttnhappy  because  all  the  other  chiefs  of  the 
tribe  had  fine  dances.  So  he  thought  to  himself,  "I  will  go  up 
into  the  mountains  to  fast."  And  he  made  himself  ready,  and  went 
up  into  the  mountains  and  stayed  there  four  days,  fasting  and 
bathing.  On  the  fourth  day,  early  in  the  morning,  he  grew  so 
weary  that  he  lay  upon  his  back  and  fell  asleep;  and  then  he  felt 

something  that  came 
upon  his  breast  and 
woke  him.  It  was  a 
little  green  frog.  The 
frog  said,  "Wake  up, 
that  you  may  see  where 
you  are  going." 

Wakiash  opened  his 
eyes  and  saw  that  the 
frog  was  on  his  breast. 
The  frog  said,  "Lie  still 
as  you  are,  because  you 
are  on  the  back  of  a 
raven  that  is  going  to 
fly  with  you  around  the 
world,  so  that  you  may  see  what  you  want,  and  take  it."  And 
the  frog  said  that  he  would  stay  with  the  man  till  they  came  back 

•  [  299  ] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


This  drawing  by  a  KwakiatI  Indian  represents  the  carved 
rattle  ased  in  the  Kl.awalacAa  dance  and  song.  It  shows 
Wakiash  on  the  raven's  back  with  the  frog  upon  his  breast. 
The  line  from  the  mouth  of  the  frog  to  that  of  Wakiash  indi- 
cates that  the  frog  is  talking  to  the  man. 


THE   INDIANS'   BOOK 

again  to  the  same  place.  Then  the  frog  told  the  man  to  get  ready, 
and  bade  the  raven  to  start. 

The  raven  flew  and  carried  the  man  around  the  world  and 
showed  him  all  the  things  of  the  world.  They  flew  four  days,  and 
when  they  were  on  their  way  back  Wakiash  saw  a  hottse  with  a 
beatrtiftti  totem-pole  in  front,  and  heard  a  noise  of  singing  inside 
the  house.  He  thought  to  himself  that  these  were  fine  things, 
and  he  wished  that  he  might  take  them  with  him.  Now  the  frog 
knew  his  thoughts  and  told  the  raven  to  stop.  So  the  raven  stopped 
and  the  frog  told  the  man  to  hide  himself  behind  the  door.  The 
man  did  as  the  frog  told  him,  and  the  frog  said,  ''Stay  here,  and 
when  they  begin  to  dance,  leap  out  into  the  room." 

The  people  tried  to  begin  a  dance,  but  could  do  nothing— they 
could  neither  dance  nor  sing.  One  of  them  stood  up  and  said, 
"There  is  something  the  matter  with  us;  there  must  be  something 
near  us  that  makes  us  feel  like  this."  And  the  chief  said,  "Let  one 
of  us,  who  can  run  faster  than  the  flames  of  the  fire,  go  around 
the  house  and  see."  So  the  little  mouse  came  and  said  that  she 
would  go,  for  she  could  go  anywhere,  even  into  a  box,  and  if  any 
one  were  hiding  she  could  find  him.  The  mouse  was  in  the  form 
of  a  woman,  because  she  had  taken  off  her  mouse-skin  clothes; 
indeed,  all  the  people  in  the  house  were  animals,  and  their  chief 
was  the  beaver,  but  they  had  taken  off  their  animal-skin  clothes 
to  dance,  and  so  they  looked  like  men. 

\>  The  mouse  ran  out,  and  Wakiash  caught  her  and  said,  "Ha,  my 
friend,  wait  here  and  I  will  make  you  a  gift.*'  And  he  gave  the 
mouse  a  piece  of  mountain-goat's  fat.  Now  this  mouse  was  so 
pleased  with  Wakiash  that  she  talked  with  him  and  asked  him  what 
he  wanted,  and  Wakiash  said  that  he  wanted  the  totem-pole,  the 
house,  and  the  kind  of  dances  and  songs  that  belonged  to  them. 
The  mouse  said,  "Stay  here,  and  wait  till  I  come  again." 

Wakiash  stayed,  and  the  mouse  went  in  and  said  to  the  people, 
"I  have  been  everywhere  to  find  if  there  were  a  man  about,  but  I 
could  find  nobody."  And  the  chief  said,  "Now  let  us  try  again  to 
dance."  They  tried  three  times  before  they  could  do  anything, 
and  they  sent  out  the  mouse  each  time  to  see  what  she  could  find. 
But  each  time  the  mouse  was  sent  out  she  talked  with  Wakiash; 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


KWAKIUTL 

and  the  third  time  that  she  went  out  she  said,  "Now  make  ready, 
and  when  they  begin  to  dance,  leap  into  the  room." 

Then  the  moose  went  back  to  the  animals  and  told  them  that 
she  could  find  no  one,  and  so  they  began  to  dance,  and  jttst  then 
Wakiash  sprang  in.  At  once  the  dancers  dropped  their  heads 
for  shame,  because  a  man  had  seen  them  looking  like  men, 
whereas  they  were  really  animals.  And  they  stood  silent  for  some 
time,  till  at  last  the  mouse  began  to  speak  and  said:  "Let  us  not 
wait  thus;  let  us  ask  our  friend  what  he  wants.  He  must  want 
something  or  he  would  not  come  here."  So  they  all  lifted  up  their 
heads,  and  the  chief  asked  the  man  what  he  wanted.  Wakiash 
thought  to  himself  that  he  would  like  to  have  the  dance,  because 
he  had  never  had  one  of  his  own,  though  all  the  other  chiefs  had 
dances.  Also  he  wanted  the  house,  and  the  totem-pole  that  he 
had  seen  outside.  Though  the  man  did  not  speak,  the  mouse 
heard  his  thoughts  and  told  the  people.  And  the  chief  said,  "Let 
our  friend  sit  down  and  we  will  show  him  how  we  dance,  and  he 
can  pick  out  whatsoever  kind  of  dance  he  wants." 

So  they  began  to  dance,  and  when  they  had  ended  the  chief 
asked  Wakiash  what  kind  of  dance  he  would  like.  They  were 
using  all  sorts  of  masks.  Wakiash  wanted  most  of  all  the  Echo 
mask,  and  the  mask  of  the  Little  Man  that  goes  about  the  house 
talking,  talking,  and  trying  to  quarrel  with  others.  Wakiash  only 
thought  to  himself;  the  mouse  told  the  chief  his  thoughts.  So 
the  animals  taught  Wakiash  all  their  dances,  and  the  chief  told 
him  that  he  might  take  as  many  dances  and  masks  as  he  wished, 
also  the  house  and  the  totem-pole.  The  chief  said  to  Wakiash  that 
these  things  would  all  go  with  him  when  he  went  home,  and  that 
he  should  use  them  all  in  one  dance;  also  that  he  should  thence- 
forth have,  for  his  own,  the  name  of  the  totem-pole,  Kalakuyuwish, 
meaning  sky-pole,  because  the  pole  was  so  tall.  So  the  chief  took 
the  house  and  folded  it  up  in  a  little  bundle.  He  put  it  in  the  head- 
dress of  one  of  the  dancers,  and  this  he  gave  to  Wakiash,  saying, 
"When  you  reach  home,  throw  down  this  bundle;  the  house  will 
become  as  it  was  when  you  first  saw  it,  and  then  you  can  begin  to 

give  a  dance." 

Wakiash  went  back  to  the  raven,  and  the  raven  flew  away  with 

[301] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'    BOOK 

him  towards  the  mountain  from  which  they  had  set  oat;  but  before 
they  arrived  there  Wakiash  fell  asleep,  and  when  he  awoke  the 
raven  and  the  frog  were  gone  and  he  was  all  alone.  Then  he  started 
for  home,  and  when  he  got  there  it  was  night,  and  he  threw  down 
the  bundle  that  was  in  the  head-dress,  and  there  was  the  house 
with  its  totem-pole!  The  whale  painted  on  the  house  was  blowing, 
the  animals  carved  on  the  totem -pole  were  making  their  noises, 
and  all  the  masks  inside  the  house  were  talking  and  crying  aloud. 
At  once  Wakiash's  people  awoke  and  came  out  to  see  what  was 
happening,  and  Wakiash  found  that  instead  of  four  days  he  had 
been  away  four  years.  They  went  into  the  house,  and  Wakiash 
began  to  make  a  dance;  he  taught  the  people  the  songs,  and  they 
sang,  and  Wakiash  danced,  and  then  the  Echo  came,  and  who- 
soever made  a  noise  the  Echo  made  the  same,  changing  its  mouths^ 
When  they  had  finished  dancing  the  house  was  gone;  it  went  back 
to  the  animals.  And  all  the  chiefs  were  ashamed  because  Wakiash 
now  had  the  best  dance. 

Then  Wakiash  made,  out  of  wood,  a  house  and  masks  and  a 
totem -pole;  and  when  the  totem -pole  was  finished  the  people 
made  a  song  for  it.  This  totem-pole  was  the  first  that  this  tribe 
had  ever  had;  the  animals  had  named  it  Kaiakayuivishf  *'the  pole 
that  holds  up  the  sky,"  and  they  said  that  it  made  a  creaking  noise 
because  the  sky  was  so  heavy.  And  Wakiash  took  for  his  own 
the  name  of  the  totem-pole,  Kalakuyuwish. 


KLAWULACHA 

Song  of  the  Totem-Pole,     In  praise  of  Wakiash  Kalakayawish 

Sung  by  Klalish  (Charles  James  Nowell) 

KLAWULACHA  SONG  OF  THE  TOTEM-POLE 

Waw  haw  le  Now  doth  it  rise,  oar  river; 

Pulnakwila  kiash  ila  koi  Oar  river  is  Wakiash,  good  is  he. 

Wakiash  kiash  o  wa 
Ya  c^oi 

'  Alluding  to  different  mouth-pieces  that  fit  into  the  echo-mask. 

[302] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


KWAKIUTL 


Waw  haw  le 
Hitlpalkwala  kyilish 

Kiash  ila  kof 
Kalakuyuwish  kiash  o  wa 
LacAnahkwuIIa 

Ya  choi 


Now  doth  ft  creak,  this  totem-pole; 

Clouds  rest  on  its  top. 
Kalakuyuwish,  great  as  the  sky-pole  is  he  I 


CRADLE-SONG 


—       .1  HE  KwakiutI  baby  hangs  in  his  cradle  from  a  cross-beam 

Tin  a  comer  of  the  house.     A  cord  is  attached  to  the  cradle, 
and  the  mother  rocks  her  baby  by  pulling  on  the  cord. 
M  To  and  fro  swings  the  cradle,  to  and  fro,  while  the  mother 
sings  a  loUaby. 

Sometimes  the  cradle  is  hung  from  a  long  pole,  one  end  of  which 
is  fixed  aslant  in  the  ground  while  the  middle  rests  on  a  forked 
stick  set  upright  in  the  earth.  The  cradle  hangs  from  the  free, 
flexible  end  of  the  pole,  and  instead  of  swinging  to  and  fro,  it  springs 
up  and  down  with  the  mother's  touch  upon  the  cord — up  and  down, 
up  and  down,  while  the  mother  sings  a  luflaby. 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


II 


?i 


^=^ 


^ 


S 


Jl^       \i<\  J 


-U      / 


^. 


>l  J    J   1 J    >^  1^^ 


^i 


^^ 


7  J^  r    ,^7 


4-^        <,»ro 


"A^       A^       A^ 


fc 


^ 


^^ 


:3^ 


r  V 


^ 


■Lr^ 


r 


J^ 


r^K 


^     7 


^^ 


^ 


J  U 


i^^ 


-* — 


j' 


iji       <s*. 


J- 


/. 


S  7      i 


ii 


^ 


a;. 


a-d^-  <a-co 


^. 


£». 


f. 


:Loe. 


_    /Zo^-^<^-^Z^a^l. 


^^iri^     ■    .        ^    citrdZ      -Ch      K 


V  r^r 


^ 


rj^  J  I J 


„#^      4^ 


-  a       — 
-0& 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


J^ 


^l^*^-*^ 


IccAc 


i. 


w 


-Aix.       a  a.     A.< 


'l-n  ^        in     J       \    J        1  J 


t^t*   A-A-  *-c K<x.  ~K^ 


\  s  ^y 


4>  J    u^ 


J  ^J  UJ     J 


t^. 


A 


/. 


i   7  t  y  >  .,y  i-  s 


7  S-^S-.ri-  r 


;'  N  J  I J   ;  I J  J  I 


ii 


«= 


^^ 


are 


<a.        <c(      <jeu 


;-r    ,  J^ 


'f>  J  J  Jl  J  tj  ^i ''  I 


0 


■COtx. 


1-  ^  h  ^ 


^^ 


-iL 


a-*. 


^ 


7     i^ 


^ 


I   I    J    I   I   I    I   i    I    I     I    I     M 


uigitizea  by  Microsoft® 


j4^ 


<>-lr'^^ 


e^cM.< 


i — jmr- 


.   ^ 


7  y  .  s     >!-  :    sr^  S' 


i;  J  i  J  1  M 


^^ 


^^ 


i 


^H.      cX<rv  .^^t'jSl.  -AA  t«"4.      -^A         Acx       A<! 


^      ^ 


^^  J  J    K  i   i    I J    Ij   IJO^ 


-d)^  ^ 


^ 


/. 


-/.   f 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


OlaM^-^^ 


•r^ 


/V\.  AH.  J  =  6f    " 


\^\\  ^    iiir|j  J  Ur| 


>       ^    J-      ;  7     ^   J-      ..  ^J"j-  .yl- 


s 


A  A  -  O 


i 


■/a.  -      o O       I 

sC<-^  o O 


I 


FJ  ^    i^ff]  ^  U^]^  J^i  J^  T 


Tf-A  —         o 


Ko^  —       o 


A  a.  -     o  . .  .  ....        0 

7    ^  y      •y/'x    .7ts 


4   fr^]  J    ifjji  i   ll^^fr1i■  h.   ij  ir 


o 


i  I  r|7  ;     i  }jjj  J^J  \j 


^^ 


T 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


:« 


:j.  «» 


TfflffiSliERN   INDIANS   TITLE-PAGE        "  :. 

The  designs  arc  copies  of  decorations  on  Southwestern  prehistoric 
pottery.  These  copies  were  painted  free-hand  by  Poeblo  Ind- 
ians of  Laguna,  New  Mexico.  The  uppermost  design  has  for 
its  central  figure  a  cloud-form;  the  dots  on  the  line  below  are 
grains  of  corn,  and  the  design  immediately  beneath  represents 
the  young  corn-shoots.  At  the  bottom  of  the  page  is  seen  the 
corn-stalk  with  its  joints.  Corn  might  almost  be  called  a  sym- 
bol of  the  life  of  the  Southwestern  Indians,  who  are,  before  all 
else,  agriculturalists.  '''  '■     "> 

The  lettering  is  by  Hinoofc  Mahiwi  Kilinaka  (Angel  De  Cora).   ; 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


SI 


ovlil  WcsUni 


n 


n 


Tl<dl[R<nS 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


PIMA    TITLE-PAGE 

The  design  is  a  copy  of  a  typical  Pima  basket,  and  was  drawn 
free-hand  by  Ataloya,  a  Pima  Indian  girl. 

The  lettering  is  by  Hgioofc  Mahiwi  Kilinaka  (Angel  De  Cora). 
The  letters  suggest  the  motives  in  the  basket  design;  the  border 
of  the  page  is  the  figure  of  the  running  swastika,  seen  also  in  the 
basket.     The  Pimas  are  skilled  basket-makers. 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


~r^  -^ 


m 


IJi^i 


f 


tfiii 


m 


m 


m 


m 


m 


m 


m 


m 


^  T^ ^  m. 


S 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE   PIMAS 


I 


N  the  deserts  of  southern  Arizona  the  Pima  Indians  have 
their  home.  Though  brave,  the  Phnas  never  were  ag- 
gressive fighters.  So  far  as  known,  the  life  of  this  ancient 
people  always  has  been  one  of  agriculture  and  simple 
industry.  Through  a  native  system  of  irrigation,  they  raise  the 
crops  that  are  their  sustenance.  Formerly  they  grew  cotton  also, 
which  they  wove  and  dyed.  This  industry  is  now  abandoned,  but 
the  beautiful  art  of  basket-weaving  still  survives. 

It  is  thought  that  in  olden  times  the  people  lived  in  villages  of 
adobe  with  strongholds  of  defence.  Indeed,  it  is  said  that  the  ruins 
of  Czisa  Grande  and  other  similar  ones  in  Arizona  are  those  of  an- 
cient Pima  buildings. 

Because  of  their  gentle  and  submissive  disposition,  the  Pimas 
never  have  offered  much  resistance  to  the  white  man.  Though 
to-day  the  dwellings  still  are  native  houses  of  adobe  and  woven 
saplings?  though,  as  of  old,  the  life  is  that  of  agriculture,  yet  all 
trace  of  native  dress  has  vanished,  and  of  the  old  customs  little 
is  left — dances  and  ceremonies  are  gone,  and  to  the  younger  genera- 
tion the  songs  are  wellnigh  utterly  lost.  Yet  Pima  mythology  is 
full  of  beauty  and  poetry,  and  the  music  has  plaintive  individuality. 

That  The  Indians*  Book  might  hold  some  record  of  the  fast-vanish- 
ing Pima  lore,  an  aged  Pima  chief  was  sought  out  for  a  contribution. 

His  face  and  mien  had  the  grave  sadness,   the   retrospective 
melancholy  of  the  old  Indian. 

"We  are  glad,  indeed,  to  sing  our  songs  for  you/*  said  the  chief, 

NOTE    FOR   PRONUNaATION    OF    PIMA   TEXT 

Unless  otherwise  indicated,  vowels  have  the  Continental  sound  and  consonants 

the  English. 

[313] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'   BOOK 

**for  thas  we  can  hear  them  again  ourselves.  On  oar  reservation 
no  man  dares  to  sing.  It  is  as  you  say — soon  all  the  songs  will  be 
forgotten.  White  people  do  not  like  us  to  sing  Indian  songs.  They 
think  our  songs  are  bad.     We  are  glad  you  say  they  are  good." 

''And  how  did  you  make  your  songs?*'  the  chief  was  asked. 

"We  dreamed  them/*  was  the  answer.  "When  a  man  would  go 
away  by  himself — off  into  solitude — then  he  would  dream  a  song." 

"And  do  the  men  still  dream  songs?" 

"If  they  do,  they  do  not  tell.  White  people  do  not  like  it. 
But  if  a  man  has  dreamed  a  song,  he  may  take  another  man  quietly 
aside  and  teach  the  song  to  him.  His  song  will  not  so  soon  be  for- 
gotten if  one  other  has  it  as  well  as  he  himself.  But  he  dares  not 
sing  for  many.  White  people  say  our  dances  and  our  songs  are  not 
good.     We  are  glad  that  you  say  it  is  no  harm  for  us  to  sing." 

"It  is  no  harm,  but  good  for  you  to  sing.  When  a  man  sings, 
we  know  his  heart  is  happy." 

"It  is  well  that  you  have  come  to  do  this  thing  for  us,  but  we 
have  not  much  money  to  offpr  you  in  return.  The  white  people 
living  up  above  us  on  the  river  have  taken  all  the  water,  so  that 
our  fields  are  dry.    We  are  poor." 

"A  task  that  is  done  in  friendship  asks  only  friendship  in  return. 
Do  not  be  sad.  When  the  songs  are  written,  perhaps  white  people 
will  no  longer  think  them  bad." 

The  chief  dropped  his  head  in  thought.  "I  will  sing,"  he  said, 
"an  old,  old  song — a  song  sung  by  the  Creator  at  the  beginning 
of  the  world.  I  am  a  medicine-man,^  and  I  know  all  the  stories  and 
songs  of  my  people.  I  will  tell  you  the  story  of  how  the  world 
was  made.  The  story  tells  of  the  beginning  of  all  things,  and  there 
are  many  songs  in  the  story.  To  tell  it  rightly  and  to  sing  all  the 
songs  would  take  all  night  and  longer.  So  I  will  only  tell  you, 
shortly,  just  a  part  of  it,  and  sing  you  the  one  song.  I  am  glad  to 
tell  this  now  to  you.  It  will  keep  me  from  forgetting  it.  Leave 
me  now,  and  come  back  when  I  have  thought  more  over  it." 

Later,  in  the  shadow  of  afternoon,  the  old  chief  told  the  story 
of  the  beginning  of  the  world. 

'  See  "  The  Holy  Man,"  page  32. 
[314] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


PIMA 


CHUHWUHT 


Song    of   the  World 
Sang  and  told  by  Chief  Visafc-Vo-o-yim  (Hovering  Hawk) 


I 


N  the  beginning  there  was  only  darkness  everywhere — 
darkness  and  water.  And  the  darkness  gathered  thick 
in  places,  crowding  together  and  then  separating,  crowd- 
ing and  separating  until  at  last  out  of  one  of  the  places 
where  the  darkness  had  crowded  there  came  forth  a  man.  This 
man  wandered  through  the  darkness  until  he  began  to  think;  then 
he  knew  himself  and  that  he  was  a  man;  he  knew  that  he  was  there 
for  some  purpose. 

He  put  his  hand  over  his  heart  and  drew  forth  a  large  stick.  He 
used  the  stick  to  help  him  through  the  darkness,  and  when  he  was 
weary  he  rested  upon  it.  Then  he  made  for  himself  little  ants;  he 
brought  them  from  his  body  and  put  them  on  the  stick.  Every- 
thing that  he  made  he  drew  from  his  own  body  even  as  he  had  drawn 
the  stick  from  his  heart.  The  stick  was  of  grease-wood,  and  of  the 
gum  of  the  wood  the  ants  made  a  round  ball  upon  the  stick.  Then 
the  man  took  the  ball  from  the  stick  and  put  it  down  in  the  darkness 
under  his  foot,  and  as  he  stood  upon  the  ball  he  rolled  it  under  his 
foot  and  sang: 

"I  make  the  world,  and  lo! 
The  world  is  finished. 
Thus  I  make  the  world,  and  lo  I 
The  world  is  finished." 

So  he  sang,  calling  himself  the  maker  of  the  world.'  He  sang 
slowly,  and  all  the  while  the  ball  grew  larger  as  he  rolled  it,  till  at 
the  end  of  his  song,  behold,  it  was  the  world.  Then  he  sang  more 
quickly: 

"Let  it  go,  let  it  go. 
Let  it  go,  start  it  forth  I" 

» The  story  is  striking  faecaase  of  the  conception  of  the  world  as  a  round  hall,  rolled 
"beneath  the  foot  of  the  Creator  and  then  started  going.  Also  because  the  heavenly  bodies  are 
conceived  to  be  made  of  rock. 

rsjsi 
Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE   INDIANS'    BOOK 

So  the  world  was  made,  and  now  the  man  brought  from  him- 
self a  rock  and  divided  it  into  little  pieces.  Of  these  he  made  stars, 
and  put  them  in  the  sky  to  light  the  darkness.  Bat  the  stars  were 
not  bright  enough. 

So  he  made  Tau-muk,  the  milky-way.  Yet  Tau-muk  was  not 
bright  enough.  Then  he  made  the  moon.  AH  these  he  made  of 
rocks  drawn  forth  from  himself.  But  even  the  moon  was  not  bright 
enough.  So  he  began  to  wonder  what  next  he  could  do.  He  could 
bring  nothing  from  himself  that  could  lighten  the  darkness. 

Then  he  thought.  And  from  himself  he  made  two  large  bowls, 
and  he  filled  the  one  with  water  and  covered  it  with  the  other.  He 
sat  and  watched  the  bowls,  and  while  he  watched  he  wished  that 
what  he  wanted  to  make  in  very  truth  would  come  to  be.  And 
it  was  even  as  he  wished.  For  the  water  in  the  bowl  turned  into 
the  sun  and  shone  out  in  rays  through  the  cracks  where  the  bowls 
joined. 

When  the  sun  was  made,  the  man  lifted  off  the  top  bowl  and 
took  out  the  sun  and  threw  it  to  the  east.  But  the  sun  did  not 
touch  the  ground;  it  stayed  in  the  sky  where  he  threw  it  and  never 
moved.  Then  in  the  same  way  he  threw  the  sun  to  the  north  and 
to  the  west  and  to  the  south.  But  each  time  it  only  stayed  in  the 
sky,  motionless,  for  it  never  touched  the  ground.  Then  he  threw 
it  once  more  to  the  east,  and  this  time  it  touched  the  ground  and 
bounced  and  started  upward.  Since  then  the  sun  has  never  ceased 
to  move.  It  goes  around  the  world  in  a  day,  but  every  morning 
it  must  bounce  anew  in  the  east. 

CHUHWUHT  SONG  OF  THE  WORLD 

Qiahwaht-tah  maka-i,  I  make  the  world,  and  lo ! 

Qiuhwuht-t«h  nato —  The  world  is  finished. 

Chwhwoht-tah  maka-i  Thos  I  make  the  world,  and  lo ! 

Chahwaht-tah  nato —  The  world  is  finished. 
Himalo,  tiimalo.  Let  it  go,  let  it  go, 

Himalo,  himicho  I  Let  it  go,  start  it  forth  I 

[316] 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


A  Daughter  of  the  Desert 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


PIMA 


CHUHTEK-OHOHIK   NIEH 

Bluebird  Song 
Stmg  by  Katarina  Valenzuela 

This  is  a  dance-song.     It  is  the  lament  of  a  bluebird  for  his  lost 
song.    Nearly  all  the  Pima  dance-songs  are  named  after  birds. 


CHUHTEK-OHOHIK  NIEH 

Hai-ya,  hai-ya — hai-ya,  hai-ya — 
Nieh  ha  nieh  va  yo-ha-ka 
Cheh  wahl  ohi  nieh-nieh 
Va  ha  maw-haw  va  yu-ka 
Cheh  wahl  ohi  nieh-nieh 
Va  ha  maw-haw  va  ya-ka. 


BLUEBIRD   SONG 

Hai-ya,  hai-ya — hai-ya,  hai-ya — 
All  my  song  is  tost  and  gone. 
Sad  at  heart  is  the  bluebird. 
All  my  song  is  lost  and  gone, 
Woe  is  me,  alas  !  alas  ! 
All  my  song  is  lost  and  gone  ! 


HUHWUHLI   NIEH 

Wind  -  Song    (Medicine  -  Song) 
Sung   fcy  Hal  Antonio 


HUH\7UHLI    NIEH 

Hanam-a  yo-osik-a 
Ya-hai  huh-wurt 
Kani-hu-va  muh-muhk 
Ka-cho-wuch-chi  kano  ya  ki-moi 


WIND-SONG 

Far  on  the  desert  ridges 

Stands  the  cactus; 
Lo,  the  blossoms  swaying 
To  and  fro,  the  blossoms  swaying,  swaying. 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


^c 


U.c^-^cy^r^    ) 


i 


I  .\  hi  II  J I  jtM  J  J  i^=(^ 


.;6Si- 


1      1     H)      i 


^ 


^ 


^ 


:z2!: 


CUt^'Ji^*^ 


,-^0 


'7ri<a  -  y<o*  -  A, 


^   diLi-K  - -tvT-^M^fcC  *»  <*  -  <5>.- 


^ J-hu^     3       -*M  a^i.   Oti.  t^cnJiJ,  CK-^  (xij  -ttjL    ootnjQ   xU>    . .      t!j»i         AyrKxi, 


i     J     I.I       1 


^^ 


^ 


-»*« a  -     Co,  -)C»  - 


j  I J  I  J. J  1^ 


^ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


0  J 


jk  ■'    nin..^)-j  irjrjifi  ^ 


^c 


T' 


T- 


-ic 


r 


,^. 


7' 


3 


,^.«,^ 


i  i^nP'-j '  iJU'^^Hf^ 


g 


IS 


^ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


^^JLur^^^M^JL. 


"CDl/uh  -   Oi 


'W.'M-  Jr  a*" 


1 1  M  J   J  h   J  1  ;j  J 


S^ 


f 


f^u^t^  -  A. 


^x.4C 


r 


-Ke^K    yiu^^  tyjtAA:t^.. 


f  O.A.       o-i-\     "tCX      Ja-S-  eA^— .   ./i^S^-    4-*^    Ja^a^ib -^ti,    c.<a-c  -  *^»v»/. 


^ 


^^ 


^j    :  iM 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


APACHE    niLE-PAGE 

The  design  shows  an  Apache  dancert  painted  fay  aa  Apache 
Indian,  Gumanchia  (Rivers  Lavender).  The  dancer  is  in  cere- 
monial dress,  and  wears  a  symbolic  head-dress,  and  a  black 
mask  of  buckskin.  i 

The  lettering  is  by  Hinook  Mahiwi  Kilinaka  (Angel  De  G>ra). 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


nrnL 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE   APACHES 


.[  HE  Apaches,  a  tribe  of  Athapascan  stock,  have  their 
rw^  home  in  New  Mexico  and  Arizona.  They  are  related 
•*  to  the  Navajos  and  speak  a  similar  tong«e.  T^e  name 
:zrr=zJ." Apache"  is  a  Y«ma  Indian  word  meaning  "fighting- 
men,"  and  was  probably  given  to  the  Apaches  by  neighboring 
tribes  of  Yaman  stock. 

The  acquisition  by  the  United  States  of  new  territory  at  the 
close  of  the  Mexican  War,  and  the  discovery  of  gold  in  California 
in  the  year  1849,  brought  more  and  more  white  emigrants  through 
New  Mexico  and  Arizona.  The  fierce,  intrepid  Apaches  resisted 
with  open  hostility  the  encroachment  of  the  whites,  and  for  a  long 
period  of  years  there  were  bloody  clashings.  The  Indian  war 
leaders  and  warriors  showed  not  only  daring  and  cruelty,  but  also 
extraordinary  skill  and  strategy  in  warfare,  and  endurance  that 
seemed  inexhaustible.  The  tribe  was  finally  subdued,  and  has 
been  placed  on  reservations,  but  the  old  invincible  spirit  is  still 
shown  to-day  by  an  energy  and  fire  which  should  make  of  the 
Apaches  a  people  strong  and  hardy  in  the  new  life  of  industry. 


GERONIMO 


ERONIMO  is  perhaps  the  most  famous  of  Apache  war- 
leaders.  He  and  his  followers  long  withstood  and  evaded 
the  United  States  troops,  and  were  captured  at  the  last 
only  by  the  aid  of  other  Indians — scouts  employed  in 
the  army.  Geronimo  is  now  between  seventy  and  eighty  years 
of  age,  but  he  bears  himself  with  the  erectness  of  the  Indian  warrior, 

NOTE  FOR  PRONUNCIATION  OF  APACHE  TEXT 

Unless  otherwise  indicated,  vowels  have  the  Continental  soand,  and  consonants 
the  English. 

ch,  in  italic,  is  a  gottoral,  like  ch  in  German. 

[323] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


^^ 


THE    INDIANS'   BOOK 

and  in  his  eye  is  still  the  tiger-flash.'     Among  his  people  he  is 
isimed  as  Chief  and  Holy  Man  (Man  of  Medicine).' 

Said  Geronimo: ''  The  song  that  I  will  sing  is  an  old  song,  so  bid 
that  none  knows  who  made  it.  It  has  been  handed  down  through 
generations  and  was  tattght  to  me  when  I  was  bat  a  little  lad.  It 
is  now  my  own  song.     It  belongs  to  me. 

**This  is  a  holy  song  (medicine-song),  and  great  is  its  power.    The 
song  tells  how,  as  I  sing,  I  go  through  the  air  to  a  holy  place  where 
Ytts«n^  will  give  me  power  to  do  wonderful  things.    I  am  sur- 
rounded  by   little   clouds,  and 
i^X\       \ \       /^"T^  ^s  ^  so  through  the  air  I  change, 

becoming  spirit  only." 

Geronimo   drew  an  illustra- 
tion of  his  song,  showing  him- 
self passing  through  the  sky  to 
the   holy  place.     His  changed 
form  is  symbolized  by  a  circle, 
and   this   is    surrounded   by  a 
"kind  of  air" — a  mystic  aureole.    The  holy  place  is  symbolized  by 
the  sun,  which  is  decorated  with  a  homed  head-dress  emblematic  of 
divine  power.    Such  head-dress  is  the  insignia  of  the  Holy  Man. 

MEDICINE-SONG 

Sang  fay  Geronimo 

O,  ha  le  0,  ha  le 

0/  ha  le  1  O,  ha  le ! 

Awbizhaye  Through  the  air 

Shic^I  hadahiyago  niniya  I  fly  upon  a  cloud 

O,  ha  le  Towards  the  sky,  far,  far,  far, 

0,  ha  le  !  O,  ha  le   . 

Tsago  degi  naleya  O,  ha  le  ! 

Ah— yu  whi  ye  I  There  to  find  the  holy  place, 

0>  ha  le  Ah,  now  the  change  comes  o'er  me  ! 

O,  ha  le  !  O,  ha  le 

O,  ha  le ! 

'  Since  contributing  to  "  The  Indians'  Book,"  Geronimo  has  dictated  an  autobiography, 
"Geronimo's  Story  of  His  Life."  Taken  down  and  edited  fay  S.  M,  Barrett,  Superintendent 
of  Education,  Lawton,  Oklahoma.    New  York  :    Duffield  &  Co.,  1906. 

'See  "The  Holy  Man,"  page  32.  a  The  Supreme  Being. 

Digitized  Dy  Microsoft® 


Geronimo 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


atMf^o, 


|.M.  J  = 


■CJM 

AH. An.  3  =  108 


m 


-^  >  1     JM  T     ■!    I   V  1     >  I  J     J 


0 -ic  ^ 


e,         O- 


Ic  ej^ 


#i 


M    MJ  M  f'j  J' 1. 1  I  Ij  J 


0 i^  £«• 


«-        o. 


.  /«   & 


■  r  "-  T- 


i.T  M  ,i-j-  ij-j-j;  I J-J-JJ  I  J- J  I  j  J 


,'|,w  r  1  H 1  1  1 1. 1  >  I J  J  I 


0.-^        /»  fiL 


^  O- 


■i^       t 


^ 


>rr'  h  !■  I  )  I  I  n   f  I  I   1  I  i  i 


o U   e- 


^        ^. 


<f^».       ^ 


T  "^  r- 


■f"*'  1  I  I  I  I'  '-  f  I 

J/>a-^    da.      ^      'na-^-'yo- 


Jacl- e^    dn.      ^      ->i  a  -  &»■  -  >*«». 
;^^   t  L^  etc    ic-  e^  4b^c*-, 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


.uul 


.'ft^*^' 


-   r^^rr-u^a    ^ 


V>  n  I-  r  I  I  I  ^^ 


OM. 


iMt.     uT^       '*^t**' 


tvikt 


r 


il 


j^'i''  ri  f]  I)  ,  1^ 


^ 


ly^'^  1 1  M  1  1  I  r  1  n  J  J 


<9. 


6z.   ^ 


^6.    6. 


j¥^  I  ]  / 1 J^ 


^;   / 1 j  J  1 J  p 


O- 


/^    6. 


^r  ^  ^ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


£r*r  fi*-*  O 


.  'rt*    /A.  J=  "6 


;^  J'  J  n  J  >  ,!■  J  iij  |j  ^ 


0 


Cc/t 


^ 


r 


r 


^)M  ^-^h^n  J 1 J  J  1 J  J 


j^  i^- 


uc    Y> 


cJ^ 


i  nU)^^)  j..J'  Iix-j  j 


U    taA    Mt>  °  Ho         O  «ji.  . 


<l  mj^j  i«j  /  ■M{;]j  ijj  11 


0 


r 


vo        o         ^^    -  •   V*      **■  "  '*^    «  -«■ 


r 


4  >JJ'-M  J  hU'ifi  II J  J 


0      -C^i*-    -^        ""> 


T 


-L 


T 


r 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


^. 


Jc 


/w.»/M.  J     fey 


^ 


N* 


^    ^ 


..  i    J 


J      J         .     J      J  :     J        J 


4>"i.v^;  ij  M    1  u>   ^1 1^    ir^ 


.V.  ._  ^.... ^ 


J  J  -  J  .'   j  J .  J  J 


Uf 


n    ij  n    1  U-'    ijl  J   ilJ.  Ic^.j^ 


J.     ..        o-^. 


w?fe 


.  J    J   .  J   J 


(l^W  r]•^\A.   ^ 


,  i  J      J  .'      J   J      i  J  .  J  i  .  J  J 


li\  Ijl.)  1 1,1  ^^ 


J.  I  J.  I J 


^ 


»-/-  o         CTK.     -  .         ^-  o        cttL  .  ■  ■  o  ■ftl*. 


'•J^''  j-a'j.  I  j  n  ij  J I J  -i 


^- 


"*-«  -<  -  O  O  Tilo  %-C  *L-t 


Digitized  by  Microsoft© 


THE   MOJAVE-APACHES 


HE  Mojave-Apaches  are  a  band  of  Mojave  Indians  whose 

T  original  home  was  in  the  Verde  Valley  of  Arizona.  Like 
the  Apaches,  these  Indians  were  hostile  to  American  in- 
vasion of  their  land.  In  about  the  year  1874  they  were 
conquered  and  placed  with  the  Apaches  on  a  reservation  in  San 
Carlos  County,  Arizona,  and  accordingly  are  known  as  Mojave- 
Apaches. 

On  their  removal  to  San  Carlos,  these  Indians  were  promised 
that  if  they  would  remain  there  peacefully  and  adopt  the  white 
man's  ways,  they  should  be  allowed,  when  civilized,  to  return  to 
their  land,  there  to  resume  their  life  of  agriculture.  The  Indians 
faithfully  kept  the  pledge,  but  when,  after  twenty-nine  years,  they 
were  allowed  to  leave  San  Carlos,  they  found  their  land  in  the  Verde 
Valley  completely  taken  up  by  white  settlers.  In  piteous  poverty 
they  waited  in  the  mountains,  sending  appeal  on  appeal  to  Wash- 
ington. Four  years  ,they  waited  with  the  natural  trust  of  an  Indian 
that  a  promise  made  would  be  fulfilled.  At  last  help  came  to  them 
from  a  private  citizen,  Mr.  Frank  Mead,  who  found  them  starving, 
with  winter  coming  on.  Mr.  Mead  brought  the  matter  directly  to 
President  Roosevelt,  and  obtained  the  power  to  b.uy  for  the  Indians, 
from  the  settlers,  a  fertile  tract  of  country  in  the  Verde  Valley. 
So  the  Mojave-Apaches  came  into  their  own  again,  and  on  Christmas 
Day,  in  the  year  1903,  the  land  was  divided  among  them.  That 
night  the  Indians  gave  a  dance  in  honor  of  their  "Savior,"  as  they 
called  Mr.  Mead,  and  in  thanksgiving  for  their  land.  "We  have 
our  homes;  we  are  men  again,"  they  said.  Beneath  the  moon  on 
the  open  desert  they  danced  in  a  wide  circle  around  a  fire  of 
blazing  logs.  The  recorder  was  present  at  the  time,  and  so  two  of 
the  dance-songs  then  sting  are  preserved  in  The  Indians'  Book. 

[  329  ] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'    BOOK 
THE   STORY   OF   GOMOIDEMA   POKOMA-KIAKA 

The  First  Woman  who  made  the  Son  of  God 


I  [ANY  years  ago  we  lived  not  here  upon  this  earth  b«t 

Mdown  under  the  ground.  And  there  came  a  time  when 
we  had  no  fr«it  and  there  was  nothing  to  eat.  So  we 
M  sent  the  httmming-bird  to  see  what  he  coald  find.  Where- 
ever  he  might  find  f rttit  or  food  of  any  kind,  there  the  people  would 
go.  He  flew  «p  into  the  sky,  and  there  he  saw  a  grape-vine  that 
had  its  roots  in  the  underworld  and  grew  up  through  a  hole  in  the 
middle  of  the  sky  into  the  upper  world.  The  humming-bird  saw 
the  hole  in  the  sky  and  flew  through  it,  and  came  to  a  land  where 
mescal  and  fruits  and  flowers  of  all  kinds  were  growing.  It  was 
a  good  land.     It  was  this  world. 

So  the  humming-bird  flew  back  and  told  the  people  that  he  had 
seen  a  beautiful  country  above.  "Let  us  all  go  up  there,"  he  said. 
So  they  all  went  up,  climbing  on  the  grape-vine.  They  climbed 
without  stopping  until  they  had  come  out  through  the  hole  in  the 
sky  into  the  upper  world.  But  they  left  behind  them  in  the  under- 
world the  frog-folk,  who  were  blind.  Now  when  the  people  had 
lived  for  a  while  in  that  land  they  heard  a  noise,  and  they  won- 
dered at  ft  and  sent  a  man  to  look  down  the  hole,  through  which 
they  had  come,  to  see  what  made  the  noise.  The  man  looked  and 
saw  that  waters  were  rising  from  the  underworld  and  were  already 
so  high  that  they  nearly  reached  the  mouth  of  the  hole.  The  people 
said,  "The  blind  frogs  below  have  made  this  flood,  and  if  it  rises 
out  of  the  hole  it  will  wash  us  all  away."  So  they  took  counsel 
together,  and  then  they  hollowed  out  a. tree  like  a  trough  and  put 
into  it  plenty  of  fruits  and  blankets.  They  chose  a  beautiful  maiden 
and  laid  her  in  the  trough,  and  closed  it  up  and  said,  "Now  if  the 
waters  come  and  we  are  all  washed  away,  she  will  be  saved  alive." 

The  flood  came  up  through  the  hole,  and  the  people  ran  to  the 
mountains,  but  though  the  mountains  were  high  the  waters  rose 
over  them. 

The  trough  floated  like  a  boat,  and  the  flood  kept  rising,  till 
Digitized  by  Mictosoft® 


MOJAVE-APACHE 

at  last  it  nearly  touched  the  sky.  Still  the  waters  rose  till  the 
waves  dashed  the  trough  against  the  sky,  where  it  struck  with  a 
loud  noise.  It  struck  first  to  the  south,  then  to  the  west,  then  to 
the  north,  then  nearly  to  the  east.  Then  the  flood  began  to  go 
down. 

The  people  had  said  to  the  woman,  "If  you  hear  the  waters 
going  down,  wait  till  the  trough  rests  on  the  earth,  then  make  a 
little  opening  and  look  around  you." 

"When  the  trough  rested  on  the  ground  the  woman  opened  it  and 
went  out.  She  looked  all  around  her,  over  all  the  world,  but  saw 
no  one.  All  the  people  had  been  drowned.  Then  the  woman 
thought,  "How  can  I  bear  children  and  make  a  new  people?" 

She  went  up  into  the  mountains  early,  before  sunrise,  and  lay 
there  alone.  Then  the  daylight  came  and  the  beams  from  the 
sun  shone  warm  upon  the  woman,  and  the  water  dripped  from  the 
crag,  and  in  this  way  she  conceived,  and  bore  a  daughter.  When 
the  child  was  grown  to  maidenhood  the  mother  said  to  her,  "Do 
you  know,  my  daughter,  how  you  came  to  be?"  And  the  maid 
said,  "No." 

"I  will  show  you,"  said  the  mother. 

So  she  led  her  daughter  up  into  the  mountains,  and  bade  her  lie 
down  as  she  herself  had  lain.  And  the  maid  lay  on  the  mountain 
all  day.  Next  morning  early,  before  sunrise,  the  mother  went  to 
her,  and  she  lay  down  upon  her  daughter  and  looked  at  the  sun. 
Then  she  quickly  sprang  up,  and  in  this  way  the  maiden  conceived 
of  the  sun,  and  the  child  that  she  bore  was  the  Son  of  God — Sekala 
Ka-amja,  "  The-One-Who-Never-Died." 

THE  DEATHLESS  ONE  AND  THE  WIND 


T 


HE  Son  of  God,  the  Deathless  One,  had  a  wife,  and  she 
was  a  good  woman.  One  day  she  went  out  to  gather 
fruit,  and  the  Hot  Wind  saw  her  and  stole  her  away. 
The  Deathless  One  found  the  Wind's  trail,  and  knew 
the  footprints;  so  he  went  home  to  his  grandmother,  the  First 
Woman,  and  said,  "  I  have  seen  the  trail  of  the  Wind  who  has  stolen 
my  wife,  and  I  am  going  to  follow  him."    So  the  Deathless  One 

[331] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE   INDIANS'   BOOK 

followed  the  trail  until  he  came  upon  some  people  who  lived  close 
beside  it,  and  he  asked  of  them,  **Have  yoa  seen  any  one  pass?" 

"Yes,"  said  the  people,  "the  Wind  passed  by  a  short  time  ago, 
and  with  him  went  a  beaotifal  woman."  Also  they  said,  "The 
Wind  is  a  great  pole-player.'  He  has  beaten  every  one,  and  has 
won  all  the  people.  Stop  for  a  while  and  we  will  tell  yo«  how  the 
Wind  plays.  If  you  let  him  play  with  his  own  pole,  he  will  beat 
you  and  put  you  with  the  rest  of  the  men,  women,  and  children 
that  he  has  won.  But  if  you  will  wait  we  will  make  you  two  good 
poles  to  play  with,  and  then  perhaps  you  will  beat  the  Wind  and 
win  back  the  people  and  set  them  free." 

So  they  made  good  poles  for  him,  and  the  Deathless  One  went 
on  until  he  came  to  the  Wind's  lodge  that  was  made  of  willow- 
brush,  and  there,  inside,  sitting  with  the  Wind,  he  saw  his  wife. 

"Ho,  friend!"  said  the  Wind,  "will  you  play  pole  with  me?" 

"Yes,"  said  the  Deathless  One.     "That  is  why  I  have  come." 

The  Deathless  One  looked  at  the  Wind's  pole;  it  was  not  made 
of  wood,  but  of  a  dead  man's  thigh-bone.  He  did  not  want  to 
play  with  the  bone  pole.  Then  he  said  to  the  Wind,  "Give  me 
your  ring  that  I  may  look  at  it."  He  took  the  ring  and  knew 
that  it  was  made  of  a  live  snake,  for  he  saw  the  gleam  of  its  eyes. 
He  had  pins^  in  his  hand,  and  with  these  he  pierced  the  eyes  of  the 
snake,  and  gave  back  the  ring  to  the  Wind.  The  Wind  tried  to 
throw  the  ring,  but  he  could  not,  because  it  was  dead.  He  tried 
again,  and  then  asked  of  the  Son  of  God,  "How  did  you  kill  this?" 

"I  like  not  your  ring  nor  your  bone  pole,"  said  the  Deathless 
One;  "I  have  a  good  ring  and  good  wooden  poles."  Then  he  threw 
away  the  Wind's  ring  and  pole  and  made  ready  to  play. 

"Where  did  you  get  these  good  poles  and  this  ring?"  said  the 
Wind.  "I  like  them.  I  will  play  with  you  and  stake  half  of  these 
people." 

They  played  one  game,  and  the  ring  leaped  over  the  Wind's 
pole  and  fell  on  the  pole  of  the  Deathless  One,  and  so  the  Deathless 
One  won  half  the  people.  The  second  game  went  the  same  way, 
and  the  Deathless  One  won  the  other  half  of  the  people. 

'  Games  played  with  poles  and  rings  are  aboriginal  Indian  games  found  among  many  tribes. 
'  The  "  pins  "  are  possibly  cactus  thorns. 


Digitized  by  mcrosoft® 


MOJAVE-APACHE 

Then  said  the  Wind,  "Are  you  a  runner?" 

"No,"  said  the  Deathless  One,  "I  am  not  a  runner,  but  I  mean 
to  run  with  you  to-day." 

"Let  us  race,"  said  the  Wind.  "Let  us  start  from  the  south 
and  race  all  around  the  earth.  The  one  that  first  reaches  again 
the  south  point  shall  win  the  other.  If  I  win  you,  I  shall  kill  you; 
if  you  win  me,  you  may  kill  me." 

They  started  from  the  south  and  ran  all  around  the  earth,  and 
before  noon  the  Deathless  One  reached  again  the  starting-point. 
There  he  waited  until  the  Wind  came.  The  Wind  stepped  up  close 
to  him  and  said:  **I  am  ready  if  you  are  ready.  You  may  kill  me." 
The  Deathless  One  took  up  a  stick  and  struck  at  the  Wind's  head, 
but  every  time  he  struck  the  Wind  dodged.  Then  a  little  fly 
helped  the  Deathless  One;  the  fly  flew  into  his  ear  and  said,  "Aim 
at  his  head,  but  strike  the  shadow  of  his  head  upon  the  ground." 

So  the  Deathless  One  struck  downward  at  the  shadow  and  killed 
the  Wind.  Then  he  said:  "I  never  saw  a  man  such  as  the  Wind. 
Now  I  will  make  him  no  man,  but  wind  only."  So  he  cut  the  body 
into  four  quarters,  and  threw  them  east,  west,  north,  and  south. 
That  is  why  the  wind  still  blows  from  four  directions,  but  no  longer 
lives  in  the  form  of  a  man.'  Then  the  Deathless  One  released  his 
wife  and  brought  her  home. 

'  The  wife  of  the  Deathless  One  probably  represents  the  froitfolness  of  the  earth  which  was 
taken  away  by  the  hot  wind,  and  «pon  whose  release  depended  the  life  of  the  people. 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


°>, 


tr 


i 


tj 


s 


J  J-Mj    I 


S   X'  T'  I  Ti  V  •^-  1    1 


jOl  -o^  ...    fcL 


;Cc- 


Aa.         ->»* 


r- 


^ 


vv   I   >  V    i>  V  T 


^ 


iii*i.  -H*       /i.    -^^k.  -  ■--     '«J«- 


A. 


^ 


j-v  ^  11 1  n    f  s 


'  i./iU 


•(*H   -KO       3LC.    -^-*-        A-B' 


"^>, 


iSi 


"A 


K 


I    >      Vy     .     \    y    ^y     I- 


s 


-^-rr 


i*»t   -M-O 


■XX-  -**■«-  •■■   AjS- 


r 


Oji.  ri^ 


r" 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


VCLtrCS-  ~ 


rSa>ya_ 


i"*««  i^    y  >  7   S^  t  f 


,    }    77     r>r       .\       I 


"—^        J    f  7      ^    T  7        .    J      7  7      J   7  T       .|       i       7     >  i      7    y       i 


i  .r 


cJL, 


li  n^  J->J  I  ^J  Jj-^"^ 


yiiua.  omao.     i.      t^  -ho-    a.     -i    ■^-*-  "**■  '"«-  '^""^ 


;    .1     YU     I  I   Jlj    \h^\\\    I    I    J      J       J 


Si    ^ t^  7    /., 


■Ola.   ^<l   *»•   *«»■         .51*.     ^»^    t*«-  J«*o        Xi  -UX-  -^-^ 


tj'.  ;p  o  i  0  j.  jj 


:?= 


£ 


2= 


-^• 


^o^^ 


^r«4<9-«     A 


4^   -UA     a.      <.      -^^*^ 


7U  «^        ■^-»- 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


^ 


S 


% 


1> 


at=i 


t=t 


r — V 


^A         tie.'  o     "^o- 


^ 


r 


^ 


r^ 


-^^J  V  I'^i  I 


s= 


^^ 


i^A  t*A         HtX.  -M. 


T 


O         *10~-. 


>/    '  S^JJTi  ^N 


i^tr 


■i K 


^ 


fe 


^. 


«       C         *«<»- 


;£. 


^-^-^  J  >j   /L^ 


^ 


t 


tie. 


r 


^ 


^ 


I       Mat. 


c         *•<>-, 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


UL 


7  ^ 


^\  J  I  J    J.  M  J    M     '^ 


t 


A      ^ 


T   ^  T 


I. 


r   T- 


I    J  hJ     J  M  ')    N  J 


^ 


t^  ^ 


r  ^  r" 


z. 


r- 


-*f  <5»_ 


cj  -^  J  ^  I J  jgurpT^ 


/^ 


^ 


r^ 


.-j;    J  M     J    M  .t     I  cJ     J  1^ 


A 


r  "  r"  '  "^  r-  ^■ 


J    J  I  j 


r  J  J   I  j 


gi 


-77 


^ 


!•<»-  *<5X_ 


.j:   J    ^ 


r 


r 


r  7 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


^ 


'  jj  J  I^J  J 


::£= 


^ 


lul     ««^ 


r 


.^4,^        -e.        '';^'^*- 


^ 


JU 


^ 


/.■ 


^ 

^ 


d- 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE   YUMAS 


■  I  HE  word  "Yttma"  is  said  to  mean  "Sons  of  the  River," 

^W^  and  this  name  is  given  to  a  southwestern  linguistic  family 
*         comprising  several  tribes,  among  them  the  Cocopas,  Ha- 

LI  vasupais,  Maricopas,  Cochimis,  Walapais,  Seris,  Mojaves, 

and  the  Yumas  proper.  This  last-named  tribe  is  on  a  reservation  on 
the  Colorado  River,  in  the  southernmost  part  of  California,  near  the 
border-line  of  California  and  Arizona. 

The  Yumas  are  a  quiet  peaceable  people,  yet  they  are  strong  and 
brave,  and,  like  the  Apaches,  they  fought  the  whites  and  Mexicans 
who  traversed  their  territory  in  the  rush  of  emigration  after  the  dis- 
covery of  gold  in  California. 

In  spite  of  the  proximity  of  whites  and  Mexicans,  many  of  the 
native  Yuma  customs  endure,  and  the  Indians  still  practise  their 
ancient  mode  of  agriculture. 

In  spring  when  the  melted  snows  pour  down  from  the  mountains 
the  Colorado  River  overflows  its  banks,  like  the  Nile,  and  in  the  soil 
thus  fertilized,  these  "River  Indians"  plant  their  crops  of  com, 
wheat,  squash  and  melons. 

Among  the  wisest  and  most  thoughtful  of  the  Yumas,  in  recent 
years,  was  CAiparopai,  an  aged  woman,  whose  knowledge  of  Spanish 
and  English  had  made  her  a  leader  among  her  people.  In  the  year 
1905  the  Yumas  received  news  that  their  land  was  to  be  irrigated, 
as  part  of  a  great  irrigation  scheme,  one-fifth  of  the  reservation  to  be 
left  to  them  and  the  rest  sold  for  white  settlement.    Alarmed  at 


NOTE  FOR  PRONUNCIATION  OF  YUMA  TEXT 

Unless  otherwise  indicated,  vowels  have  the  Continental  soand,  and  consonants 
the  English. 

Ch,  in  italic,  is  a  girttoral,  like  ch  in  German. 

[339] 
Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE   INDIANS'   BOOK 

this,  they  met  in  cotmcil  with  a  government  official  and  C^iparopai 
was  chosen  as  their  interpreter.  The  Indians  dreaded  the  change 
to  come  upon  them  through  the  proposed  transaction,  fearing  that 
closer  contact  with  the  whites  would  mean  their  doom,^  "Why  not 
knock  us  on  the  head  and  end  it  at  once,"  they  cried;  "it  would  be 
kinder  than  the  slow  agony." 

Ci^iparopai  was  old  and  bent,  and  said  that  it  was  only  service 
to  her  people  that  kept  life  within  her  frail  form.  "  I  want  to  live 
to  help  them  through  the  trouble  that  will  come  when  white  settlers 
are  among  us,"  she  said.  But  CT^iparopai  has  been  spared  the  sight 
of  the  change  to  come  upon  her  people.  She  has  died  consecrated 
to  the  good  of  her  tribe. 


AROWP 

Song   of   the   Mocking-Bird 


.1  HIS  Song  of  the  Mocking-Bird  was  sung  by  C^iparopai. 

Tit  is  a  song  of  happiness.  The  Yuma  Indians  live  be- 
neath rainless  desert  skies  and  love  the  days  when  thin 
'I little  clouds  veil  the  blue.  The  mocking-bird  is  a  voice 
of  melody  in  the  silent  desert.  Of  this  song  C^iparopai  said:  "I 
am  going  my  way  when  I  hear  the  mocking-bird  singing.  It  sings 
only  when  it  is  happy,  so  I  stop  to  listen.  It  sings  that  the  world 
is  fair,  the  clouds  are  in  the  sky,  and  it  is  glad  at  heart.  Then  I, 
too,  am  glad  at  heart  and  go  on  my  uphill  road,  the  road  of  good- 
ness and  happiness." 

The  meaning  is  only  implied,  not  fully  expressed,  by  the  words 
of  the  song,  but  the  Indian  understands  all  that  lies  behind  the  few 
syllables. 

'  The  Yoma  reservation  still  intact  as  Indian  land  lies  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  river  troffl 
the  town  of  Ycma  and  the  white  settlements.  The  irrigation  scheme  has  not  yet  been  carried 
through— 1906. 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


YUMA 


AROWP 

'Mai  ariwa — 
'riwa — 

'Mai  ariwa — 
'riwa — 


Shakwa  tza  mi  na  hi 
Shakwa  tza  mi  na 


Hunya  kwa  pai  va 
Honya  kwa  hal  pa 


SONG  OF  THE  MOCKING-BIRD 

*  Thin  little  clouds  are  spread 
Across  the  blue  of  the  sky. 
Thin  little  clouds  are  spread — 
Oh,  happy  am  I  as  I  sing, 
I  sing  of  the  clouds  in  the  sky." 

Thus  tells  the  bird, 

'Tis  the  mocking-bird  who  sings. 

And  I  stop  to  hear. 

For  he  is  glad  at  heart 

And  I  will  list  to  his  message. 

Then  up  the  hill, 

Up  the  hill  I  go  my  straight  road. 

The  road  of  good — 

Up  the  hill  I  go  my  straight  road, 

The  happy  road  and  good. 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


■i^'^j  n\i  J'lj  Jl||J-liTil  J 


^Oa       a-     \-i  t-^a.        '  1»  tJA       AA       '-tuoJi  a-A^  -t^A        'y>Jl  cjaJ  > 


tf/'''     ,1      il-     h         III        ll'     IMiTjh      4: 


^ 


J   M'l  J  J  ,1  LI 


# 


^"iHt.jIj   >|i    I J  JIU/^  ^1^ 


Mfl 


m 


n\i'    ni 


ii 


J  ij  ;i ; 


A 


f 


W  \  r  i'  I  N'  M  ^ 


.^r:^ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


O.  rg-«^>>-^ 


1 1 J  J  u  \n 


^ 


Eg- 


=7::z: 


i 


^ 


O  HJ^<^K.     »^«-     /«»*         *''*-     *-*^  -  '•-^*«-    ***><•■    ***J^  •  •  /!<»- 


J       Ij     H^     JIJJ'S 


f 


5/!/tx- 


>cx^^A.     ilfxyJet.     0«-i        tTA      fc«*  -  ^*^-*-  '^'^<»-    *^*^ 


/" 


Jtt,       >oai>     ojf        A<r»rt) ,     -tY"    '^       ^^     ■'^         ^  '"y  ■itraiyit  r<raj) ^ 


'i^j'N  Jin /I  I 


s4^- 


^ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


NAVAJO    TITLE-PAGE 

The  design  is  a  copy  of  a  figure  from  a  Navajo  ceremonial  sanci- 
pictur^  representing  in  conventionalized  form  a  Navajo  deity 
standing  upon  tlie  lightning  arrows.  The  drawing  is  fay  I  a 
Navajo  Indian. 

The  lettering  by  Hinook  Mahiwi  Kilinaka  (Angel  De  Cora), 
sug'gests  the  metal-work  for  which  the  Navajos  are  famed;,  the 
characters  at  the  foot  of  the  page  hold  the  com-symboli  which 
is  seen  at  tlie  four  corners  of  the  square  below  the  Navajo  deity. 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE   NAVAJOS 


HE  Navajos,  often  and  tmly  called  the  Bedouins  of  Amer- 
ica, are  a  large  nomad  tribe  whose  home  is  in  the  deserts 
and  table -lands  of  Arizona  and  New  Mexico.  Their 
own  name  for  themselves  is  "Dine,  or  the  People."  They 
are  of  Athapascan  stock,  though  in  their  veins  flows  the  blood 
of  other  peoples  with  whom  they  have  mixed — ^Pueblo,  Z«ni,  and 
Mexican.  The  lands  of  the  Navajos  are  arid,  and  therefore  useless 
to  the  white  man.  Accordingly,  this  tribe  has  remained,  wntil 
quite  recently,  comparatively  remote  from  white  intercourse.  The 
conquest  of  New  Mexico  by  Coronado,  in  the  year  1540,  brought 
domestic  animals  to  the  Indians,  and  since  that  time  the  Navajos 
have  been  a  shepherd  folk  whose  main  sustenance  is  from  their 
flocks  of  sheep  and  goats. 

NOTE   FOR   PRONUNCIATION   OF   NAVAJO   TEXT 

While  in  many  Indian  languages  there  are  sounds  not  exactly  the  same  as  the 
corresponding  ones  of  European  tongues,  in  the  Navajo  occur  sounds  that  have  no 
counterpart  at  all  in  European  languages.  Such  sounds,  therefore,  can  be  expressed 
by  the  Roman  alphabet  approximately  only. 

Unless  otherwise  indicated,  vowels  have  the  Continental  sound,  and  consonants 
the  English. 

n  has  the  nasal  sound,  as  in  French. 

ch,  in  italic,  is  a  guttural,  like  ch  in  German. 

r  has  a  guttural  roll. 

Navajo  songs  frequently  begin  and  end  with  the  vocables  "  Ko-Ia-ra-ne," 
and  the  song-words  are  often  prolonged  with  vocables  interspersed  among  the 
syllables  or  added  to  the  end  of  the  word. 

The  Navajo  legends  and  stories  connected  with  the  songs  here  given  were 
heard  by  the  recorder  with  slight  variations  in  different  parts  of  the  Navajo 
country.  To  insure  authenticity,  and  also  to  avoid  discrepancy,  the  recorder  has 
consulted  the  works  of  the  late  Washington  Matthews  and  those  of  the  late  James 
Stevenson,  to  which  authorities  indebtedness  is  acknowledged. 

[347] 
Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE   INDIANS'   BOOK 

The  dwelling  of  the  Navajo  is  a  **hogan/'  or  rude  hat  built  of 
poles  and  earth  when  on  the  level  desert,  or  of  stone  and  timber  when 
on  the  fir-grown  motmtain-side.  With  ceremony  and  song  the  hogan 
is  consecrated  to  the  tise  of  the  owner;  yet  it  is  rarely  more  than 
a  temporary  dwelling,  to  be  abandoned  when  the  flock  must  seek 
new  pastures. 

It  is  thought  that  the  Navajos  acquired  the  art  of  weaving 
from  the  Pueblo  peoples,  their  close  neighbors.  To-day  the  Navajos 
are  famed  for  the  blankets  they  make  from  the  wool  of  their  sheep. 
From  the  Mexicans  the  Navajos  learned  smithing;  and  in  their  crude 
forges  they  make  necklaces,  buttons,  clasps,  bridle-ornaments,  rings, 
bracelets,  and  every  sort  of  silver  decoration,  using  metal  obtained 
from  melted  coin.  The  originality  of  design  and  the  barbaric  charm 
of  the  workmanship  make  the  handiwork  of  the  Navajos  unique  of 
its  kind.    Of  such  art  industries  the  Southwest  may  well  be  proud. 

Like  all  Indians,  the  Navajos  are  intensely  religious,  and  their 
ceremonies  are  long,  elaborate,  poetic,  and  ritualistic,  abounding 
in  long  chants,  which  contain  many  verses  with  preludes  and  re- 
frains. Indeed,  the  ceremonies  themselves  are  called  ^'hatal," 
meaning  chant,  a  name  which  well  describes  the  importance  of  music 
in  the  rite. 

The  mythology  of  this  tribe  contains  a  wealth  of  beautiful  imagery 
striking  in  its  originality,  and  strongly  reflecting  the  nature-world 
of  the  Southwest. 

The  Navajo  is  industrious,  independent,  and  fearless.  He  has 
the  strength  of  the  warrior  and  the  simplicity  of  the  shepherd.  In 
his  glance  is  the  lightning's  flash  and  the  wide  freedom  of  the  desert, 
yet  the  absent,  dreamy  look  of  the  herdsman  accustomed  to  gazing 
off  upon  a  vast  horizon  gives  to  the  face  an  almost  graven  calm. 
Pastoral  yet  majestic,  the  Navajo  is  the  true  son  of  the  silence,  the 
awe,  the  grandeur  of  the  desert. 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


■o 


p 
< 


o 

1? 

3 


o 

p 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


NAVAJO 


HOZHONJI   SONGS 


HE  Hozhonji  songs  are  holy  songs,  given  to  os  by  the 
gods/*  say  the  Navajos.  ''They  are  songs  of  peace  and 
of  blessing.  They  protect  the  people  against  all  evil. 
A  man  will  often  sing  a  Hozhonji  song  before  starting 
on  a  journey.  Ceremonies  are  begun  sometimes  with  a  Hozhonji 
song,  and  always  end  with  one,  for  the  song  is  a  final  blessing.  It 
is  the  parting  song  before  the  people  scatter  at  daybreak  after  a 
rite  which  has  lasted  all  night.  The  Navajo  must  never  make  a 
mistake  or  miss  a  word  in  singing  any  sacred  chant;  if  he  does,  the 
singing  must  stop,  for  its  good  has  been  blighted.  Even  a  whole 
ceremony  will  be  given  up  if  a  single  mistake  occur  in  any  part  of 
the  ritual.  That  is  why  we  often  close  our  eyes  when  we  sing, 
that  we  may  think  of  the  song  more  clearly.  The  Navajo  sings  a 
Hozhonji  song  to  purify  or  bless  himself  or  others;  or  he  will  sing 
in  order  that  his  flocks  and  herds  may  thrive.  If  he  make  no  mis- 
take, blessings  will  surely  follow  and  evils  will  be  warded  off." 

So  say  the  Navajos,  and  an  educated  member  of  the  tribe  adds: 

"Our  Hozhonji  songs  are  like  the  Psalms  of  David.  We  sing 
them  as  a  white  man  says  his  prayers.  Our  hero,  Nayenezrani,  is 
like  the  Bible  hero  David.  By  our  Holy  Ones  were  the  songs  made, 
even  as  the  Bible  was  made  by  holy  people." 

To  the  white  man  there  is  scarcely  a  more  impressive  sight  than 
a  group  of  Navajos  chanting  these  ancient  traditional  songs  which 
have  been  learned  and  handed  down  with  the  greatest  accuracy  and 
care.  The  quiet,  monotonous  quality  of  the  chant  seems  heightened 
by  the  concentration  of  the  singers,  who,  with  closed  eyes  or  fixed 
gaze,  bend  every  thought  upon  their  singing  that  they  may  not  err 
in  word  or  sequence  of  the  holy  song. 

At  a  healing-ceremony  in  some  hogan  where  there  is  sickness,  the 
steady  rhythm  of  the  medicine-songs  pulses  all  night  long,  groups 
of  singers  on  opposite  sides  of  the  fire  vying  with  one  another  in 
endurance.  Does  one  group  flag,  another  starts  in  freshly,  and  so, 
like  the  central  pile  of  burning  logs,  the  song  flares  unextinguished 
till  the  paling  of  the  stars.     Then  comes  a  pause — the  song  changes; 

[3491 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE   INDIANS'   BOOK 

all  the  voices  join  in  chanting,  and  then  in  measared  cadence  rises  a 
Hozhonji  song  to  end  the  ceremony  of  the  night  and  greet  the  com- 
ing day.  The  singing  of  a  Hozhonji  song  is  at  all  times  an  act  of 
consecration. 


DSICHL   BIYIN 

Moantain-Song  (Hozhonji   Song) 


-ilHE  singer  of  this  Mountain  -  Song  was  an  old  man  of 

T  character  and  great  intelligence,  who  was  looked  «pon  as 
leader  by  a  certain  band  of  Navajos  in  New  Mexico. 
'  1  Said  he: 

"It  is  well  that  o«r  songs  should  be  written,  and  it  is  now 
time,  indeed,  that  this  should  be  done.  The  young  people  grow 
careless  of  the  songs,  and  mistakes  will  come  into  them.  Unless 
the  songs  are  written  they  will  in  time  be  forgotten.  I  know  this; 
I  have  long  known  it.  I  have  tried  myself  to  find  a  way  to  record 
the  songs,  but  I  cannot  write.     Now  you  will  write  what  I  sing. 

"  I  will  sing  for  you  the  oldest  song  I  know.  It  was  taught  to 
me  by  my  grandfather.  He  learned  it  from  his  father,  for  it  has 
been  taught  by  fathers  to  their  sons  for  no  one  knows  how  many 
years.  It  is  true,  there  were  older  songs  than  this  sung  by  an 
ancient  people  in  days  before  the  coming  of  the  Navajos.  But 
those  songs  are  all  lost  because  the  people  themselves  have  per- 
ished; they  grew  wicked,  therefore  sand-storms  and  cyclones  were 
sent  to  destroy  them  and  their  villages.  There  is  nothing  left  of 
them  but  the  ruins  of  their  dwellings.' 

"The  song  that  I  will  sing  is  a  holy  song.  In  olden  times  it  was 
the  first  song  that  a  boy  learned.  It  was  taught  to  him  by  his 
father,  for  every  boy  should  know  this  song  before  starting  into 
life." 

The  following  narrative  explaining  the  song  was  told  in  part 
by  the  aged  singer,  in  part  by  other  Navajos:' 

'  The  ruins  and  cliff-dwellings  of  New  Mexico  and  Arizona. 
'  There  are  other  versions  of  the  Navajo  story  of  the  Emergence. 

[350] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


NAVAJO 

There  are  fo«r  worlds,  one  above  another:  the  first  world;  the 
second  world,  which  is  the  underworld;  the  third,  which  is  the 
middle  world;  and  the  fourth  world,  our  own  world.  In  the  under- 
world there  arose  a  great  flood  and  the  people  were  driven  up  by 
the  waters.  They  planted  a  hollow  reed  and  came  up  through  it 
to  this  world. 

First-Man  and  First- Woman  had  brought  with  them  earth  from 
the  mountains  of  the  world  below.  With  this  they  made  the  sacred 
mountains  of  the  Navajo  land. 

To  the  East  they  placed  the  sacred  mountain  Sisnajiimi.'  They 
adorned  it  with  white  shell  and  fastened  it  to  the  earth  with  a 
bolt  of  lightning.  They  covered  it  with  a  sheet  of  daylight,  and 
put  the  Dawn  Youth  and  the  Dawn  Maiden  to  dwell  in  it. 

To  the  South  they  placed  Tsodsic^I.  They  adorned  it  with 
turquoise  and  fastened  it  to  the  earth  with  a  knife  of  stone.  They 
covered  it  with  blue  sky,  and  put  the  Turquoise  Youth  and  the 
Turquoise  Maiden  to  dwell  in  it. 

To  the  West  they  placed  Doko-oslid.  They  adorned  it  with 
haliotis-shell  and  fastened  it  to  the  earth  with  a  sunbeam.  They 
covered  it  with  a  yellow  cloud,  and  put  the  Twilight  Youth  and  the 
Haliotis  Maiden  to  dwell  in  it. 

To  the  North  they  placed  Depenitsa.  They  adorned  it  with 
cannel  coaP  and  fastened  it  to  the  earth  with  a  rainbow.  They 
covered  it  with  a  covering  of  darkness,  and  put  the  Youth  of  Cannel 
Coal  and  the  Darkness  Maiden  to  dwell  in  it. 

In  the  centre  they  placed  Tsic^Inaodic/ili  and  adorned  it  with 
striped  agate.  Here  were  created  the  first  Navajos.  The  Navajos 
will  never  live  elsewhere  than  around  this  mountain. 

So  the  mountains  were  placed  and  decorated;  then,  before  they 
Were  named,  holy  songs  were  sung  which  tell  of  a  journey  up  the 
mountain.     The  song  here  given  is  the  first  of  these. 

'  The  recorder  acknowledges  indebtedness  to  the  works  of  Dr.  Washington  Matthews  for 
some  of  the  details  contained  in  the  description  of  the  decoration  of  the  mountains. 

2  This  beautiful,  lustrous  coal  is  highly  prized  by  the  Navajos,  who  make  from  it  black  beads. 
Torquaise  (abundantly  found  in  the  Southwest),  different  kinds  of  shell,  and  this  variety  of  coal 
are  gems  to  the  Navajos,  who  make  from  them  their  necklaces  and  ornaments.  Such  gems  are  also 
used  as  sacred  offerings  to  the  gods.  The  decorations  of  the  mountains  accord  with  the  Navajo 
color-symbolism— white  for  the  east;  blue  for  the  south;  yellow  for  the  west;  black  for  the 
north.     "  The  north  skies  are  dark  and  the  south  skies  are  blue,"  say  the  Navajos. 

[351] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'    BOOK 


When  the  Navajo  sings  "Chief  of  all  mountains/*  he  means 
something  higher  and  holier  than  chief.  He  sings  to  the  mountain 
as  to  a  god,  for  the  mountain  is  pure  and  holy;  there  is  freedom 
above  it,  freedom  below  it,  freedom  all  around  it.  Happiness  and 
peace  are  given  by  the  mountain,  and  the  mountain  blesses  man 
when  in  the  song  it  calls  him  "son." 


DSICHL  BIYIN 

Piki  yo-ye! 
DsicAI-nantar, 

Piki  yo-ye, 
Sa-a  narai', 

Piki  yo-ye, 
Bike  hozhoni, 

Piki  yo-ye, 
Tsoya  shicA  ni-Ia  ! 

Piki  yo-ye ! 


MOUNTAIN-SONG 

Thither  go  I  ! 
Chief  of  all  mountains. 

Thither  go  I, 
Living  forever, 

Tliither  go  I, 
Blessings  bestowing. 

Thither  go  I, 
Calling  me  "  Son,  my  son.' 

Thither  go  I ! 


DSICm.   BIYIN 

Moantain-Songs 
Sung  and  told  by  Navajos  near  Fort  Defiance,  Arizona 

N  a  certain  ceremony  for  healing,  holy  mountain-songs 
are  sung  over  the  sick  man.  These  songs  describe  a 
journey  to  a  holy  place  beyond  the  sacred  mountains 
where  are  everlasting  life  and  blessedness.  The  Divine 
Ones  who  live  in  and  beyond  the  mountains  made  the  songs,  and 
so  they  tell  of  the  journey  as  of  a  home-coming. 

When  these  songs  are  sung  over  a  man,  the  spirit  of  the  man  makes 
the  journey  that  the  song  describes.  Upon  the  rainbow  he  moves 
from  mountain  to  mountain,  for  it  is  thus  that  the  gods  travel, 
standing  upon  the  rainbow.  The  rainbow  is  swift  as  lightning. 
Any  man  may  know  this  to  be  true,  for  he  may  see  clearly  where 
the  rainbow  touches  the  ground,  and  walk  to  the  spot,  but  before 
he  is  there  the  rainbow  has  moved  quickly  away  and  is  far  beyond. 

[352] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


NAVAJO 

He  never  can  overtake  it;  it  moves  more  swiftly  than  any  one  can 
see.  Sometimes  these  songs  are  sung  for  ranners  before  a  great  race 
in  order  to  bless  them  and  give  them  the  speed  of  the  rainbow. 

There  are  many  mountain-songs,  and  of  the  songs  here  given 
there  are  six,  all  to  the  same  music.  Each  song  is  sung  four  times, 
once  for  each  mountain,  and  the  singers  must  make  no  mistake 
in  their  sequence  nor  miss  a  word.  We  always  sing  of  the  moun- 
tains in  this  order — East,  South,  West,  and  North,  for  it  is  thus 
that  the  sun  moves. 

The  mountain  protects  man  like  a  god.  When  a  man  sings  of 
the  mountain,  then,  through  the  singing,  his  spirit  goes  to  the  holy 
place  beyond  the  mountain,  and  he  himself  becomes  like  the  moun- 
tain, pure  and  holy,  living  eternally,  forever  blessed. 

DSICHL  BIYIN 

Be-yc-Ia-naseya, 
Be-ye-Ia-naseyo, 
Be-ye-Ia-naseya, 
Ho-digin-Iadji-ye-ye, 
■     Be-ye-Ia-naseya, 
Ka'  Sisnajinni 
Bine  dji-ye-ye, 
Be-ye-Ia-naseya, 
Dsic^I-nanita" 
Bine  dji-ye-ye, 
Be-ye-Ia-naseya, 
Sa-a  narai 

Bine  dji-ye-ye, 
Be-ye-Ia-naseya, 
'Bike  hozhoni 
Bine  dji-ye-ye, 
Be-ye-Ia-naseya, 

The  above  is  repeated  three  times,  substituting  for  the  moantain  name,  Sisnajinni,  the  names, 
in  order,  TsodsicAI,  Doko-oslid,  and  Depenitsa.  .        ,        i    .     t>  t    „,=^,„ 

The  five  songs  that  follow  are  the  same  as  the  first,  excepting  that  the  refram,  Be-ye-Ia-naseya, 
is  replaced  everywhere  by  a  different  refrain.     These  refrains  are  as  follows: 

Second  song:  Be-ye-Ia-nadesta 
Third     song:  Be-ye-nikiniya 
[353] 
Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'   BOOK 

Fourth  song:  Be-yc-Ia-na?shtatI 
Fifth  song:  Be-ye-Ia-nanistsa 
Sixth     song:  Be-ye-Ia-nanishta 

Like  the  first  song,  each  of  these  lias  four  verses,  one  for  each  mountain.  There  are  thus 
twenty-four  stanzas.  The  first  song  only  is  written  in  the  Navajo  language  under  the  music, 
since  the  refrains  of  the  other  five  songs  exactly  correspond  in  the  number  of  syllables.  The 
names  of  the  four  mountains  mentioned  in  four  successive  singings  of  each  song  are  writtep 
in  their  proper  place  below  the  music,  but  in  the  English  version  the  four  mountain  names 
must  be  used  without  the  Indian  prolongation  by  extra  syllables.     See  music  page  377. 


MOUNTAIN-SONGS 

Each  song  sung  four  times,  with  substitution,  in  the  sixth  line,  of  the  name  of  another 
mountain 


Swift  and  far  I  journey. 
Swift  upon  the  rainbow. 
Swift  and  far  I  journey, 
Lo,  yonder,  the  Holy  Place  ! 

Yea,  swift  and  far  I  journey. 
To  Sisnajinni,  and  beyond  it. 

Yea,  swift  and  far  I  journey; 
The  Chief  of  Mountains,  and  beyond  it. 

Yea,  swift  and  far  I  journey; 
To  Life  Unending,  and  beyond  it. 

Yea,  swift  and  far  I  journey; 
To  Joy  Unchanging,  and  beyond  it. 

Yea,  swift  and  far  I  journey. 


II 

Homeward  now  shall  I  journey, 
Homeward  upon  the  rainbow; 
Homeward  now  shall  I  journey, 
Lo,  yonder  the  Holy  Place  ! 

Yea,  homeward  now  shall  I  journey. 
To  Sisnajinni,  and  beyond  it. 

Yea,  homeward  now  shall  I  journey; 
The  Chief  of  Mountains,  and  beyond  it. 

Yea,  homeward  now  shall  I  journey; 
[354] 
Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


NAVAJO 

To  Life  Unending,  and  beyond  it. 

Yea,  homeward  now  shall  I  journey; 
To  Joy  Unchanging,  and  beyond  it. 

Yea,  homeward  now  shall  I  joamey. 

Ill 

Homeward  behold  me  starting. 
Homeward  upon  the  rainbow; 
Homeward  behold  me  starting. 
Lo,  yonder,  the  Holy  Place  ! 

Yea,  homeward  behold  me  starting. 
To  Sisnajinni,  and  beyond  it. 

Yea,  homeward  behold  me  starting; 
The  Chief  of  Mountains,  and  beyond  it. 

Yea,  homeward  behold  me  starting; 
To  Life  Unending,  and  beyond  it, 

Yea,  homeward  behold  me  starting; 
To  Joy  Unchanging,  and  beyond  it. 

Yea,  homeward  behold  me  starting. 

IV 

Homeward  behold  me  faring. 
Homeward  upon  the  rainbow; 
Homeward  behold  me  faring. 
Lo,  yonder,  the  Holy  Place  !  « 

Yea,  homeward  behold  me  faring. 
To  Sisnajinni,  and  beyond  it. 

Yea,  homeward  behold  me  faring; 
The  Chief  of  Mountains,  and  beyond  it. 

Yea,  homeward  behold  me  faring;  _ 
To  Life  Unending,  and  beyond  it. 

Yea,  homeward  behold  me  faring; 
To  Joy  Unchanging,  and  beyond  it. 

Yea,  homeward  behold  me  faring. 


Now  arrived  home  behold  me. 
Now  arrived  on  the  rainbow; 
Now  arrived  home  behold  me, 
Lo,  here,  the  Holy  Place  ! 

Yea,  now  arrived  home  behold  me. 
f3551 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'    BOOK 

At  Sisnajinni,  and  beyond  it. 

Yea,  now  arrived  home  behold  me; 
The  Chief  of  Mountains,  and  beyond  it, 

Yea,  now  arrived  home  behold  me; 
In  Life  Unending,  and  beyond  it. 

Yea,  now  arrived  home  behold  me; 
In  Joy  Unchanging,  and  beyond  it. 

Yea,  now  arrived  home  behold  me. 


VI 


Seated  at  home  behold  me. 
Seated  amid  the  rainbow; 
Seated  at  home  behold  me, 
Lo,  here,  the  Holy  Place  ! 

Yea,  seated  at  home  behold  me. 
At  Sisnajinni,  and  beyond  it. 

Yea,  seated  at  home  behold  me; 
The  Chief  of  Mountains,  and  beyond  it. 

Yea,  seated  at  home  behold  me; 
In  Life  Unending,  and  beyond  it. 

Yea,  seated  at  home  behold  me; 
In  Joy  Unchanging,  and  beyond  it. 

Yea,  seated  at  home  behold  me. 


HOGAN   BIYIN 

Song  of  the  Hogans  (Hozhonji  Song) 
Sang  and  told  by  Navajos  of  Arizona 


I  HIS  is  one  of  the  oldest  and  most  revered  of  the  Hozhonji 

T  songs.  It  tells  of  two  blessed  hogans,  the  first  that  ever 
were  made  —  in  the  east,  the  hogan  of  Hastyeyaiti, 
Mpod  of  stmrise;  in  the  west,  the  hogan  of  Hastyehogan, 
god  of  sunset.  Long  ago,  the  gods  had  no  dwellings  bot  met  in 
the  open,  they  say.  Then  they  decided  that  they  must  have 
houses  wherein  they  might  hold  their  sacred  rites  and  sing  their 
holy  songs.     So  the  blessed  hogans  were  made,  and  this  song  was 

[356] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


NAVAJO 

sung  to  consecrate  them.  Even  so  with  the  same  song  the  Navajo 
now  consecrates  a  new  dwelling.  He  may  also  sing  it  at  any  time 
as  a  blessing  opon  himself  or  his  people : 


HCXJAN    BIYIN 

Tsanti  hogani-Ia, 

Hozhon  hogan-e. 

Hayiash-iye  beashdje 
Hogani-Ia, 
Hozhon  hogan-e, 

Ka'  Hastyeyalti-ye  bi 
Hogani-Ia, 
Hozhon  hogan-e; 

Hayolkatli-ye  be  bi 
Hogani-Ia, 
Hozhon  hogan-e; 

Tan-alcAkai-ye  be  bi 
Hogani-Ia, 
Hozhon  hogan-e; 

Yotti-iltrassai'-ye  be  bi 
Hogani-Ia, 
Hozhon  hogan-e; 

Tro-altlanastshini-ye  be  bi 
Hogani-Ia, 
Hozhon  hogan-e; 

Tradetin-iye  be  bi 
Hogani-Ia, 
Hozhon  hogan-e; 

Ka'  sa-a  narai*, 
Ka'  bike  hozhoni  bi 
Hogani-Ia, 
Hozhon  hogan-e. 


Tsanti  hogani-Ia, 

Hozhon  hogan-e. 


SONG  OF  THE  HOGANS 
(Hozhonji  Song) 

Lo,  yonder  the  hogan. 

The  hogan  blessed  ! 

There  beneath  the  sunrise 
Standeth  the  hogan. 
The  hogan  blessed. 

Of  Hastyeyalti-ye 
The  hogan. 
The  hogan  blessed. 

Boilt  of  dawn's  first  light 
Standeth  his  hogan. 
The  hogan  blessed. 

Built  of  fair  white  com 

Standeth  his  hogan. 
The  hogan  blessed. 

Built  of  broidered  robes  and  hides 
Standeth  his  hogan. 
The  hogan  blessed. 

Built  of  mixed  All-Waters  pure 
Standeth  his  hogan, 
The  hogan  blessed. 

Built  of  holy  pollen 

Standeth  his  hogan. 
The  hogan  blessed. 

Evermore  enduring, 

Happy  evermore. 
His  hogan. 
The  hogan  blessed. 

Lo,  yonder  the  hogan. 

The  hogan  blessed  ! 


1357] 
Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'    BOOK 


I-iash-iye  beashdje 
Hogani-Ia, 
Hozhon  hogan-e; 

Ka'  Hastyehogan-i  bi 
Hogani-Ia, 
Hozhon  hogan-e; 

Nahotsoi-ye  be  bi 
Hogani-Ia, 
Hozhon  hogan-e; 

Tan-alcAtso?-ye  be  bi 
Hogani-Ia, 
Hozhon  hogan-e; 

Nekliz  iltrassai-ye  be  bi 
Hogani-Ia, 
Hozhon  hogan-e; 

Tro-piyash-iye  be  bi 
Hogani-Ia, 
Hozhon  hogan-e; 

Tradetin-iye  be  bi 
Hogani-Ia, 
Hozhon  hogan-e; 

Ka'  sa-a  narai, 
Ka  bike  hozhoni  bi 

Hogani-Ia, 

Hozhon  hogan-e. 

Tsanti  hogani-Ia, 

Hozhon  hogan-e. 


There  beneath  the  sanset 
Standeth  the  hogan, 
The  hogan  blessed. 

Of  Hastyehogan-i 
The  hogan. 
The  hogan  blessed. 

Built  of  afterglow 

Standeth  his  hogan, 
The  hogan  blessed. 

Built  of  yellow  com 

Standeth  his  hogan, 
The  hogan  blessed. 

Built  of  gems  and  shining  shells 
Standeth  his  hogan. 
The  hogan  blessed. 

Built  of  Little-Waters 

Standeth  his  hogan, 
The  hogan  blessed. 

Built  of  holy  pollen 

Standeth  his  hogan. 
The  hogan  blessed. 

Evermore  enduring, 

Happy  evermore. 
His  hogan. 
The  hogan  blessed. 

Lo,  yonder  the  hogan. 

The  hogan  blessed  1 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


NAVAJO 
STORY   OF   THE   TWO   BROTHERS 

Told  by  Navajos  of  New  Mexico  and  Arizona 


F  all  the  Divine  Ones  none  fe  more  revered  than  Estsan- 

ONatlehi  (She-Who-Changeth).*  Highly  honored,  too,  is  her 
younger  sister  Yolkai-Estsan  (White-Shell-Woman).  Of 
the  turquoise  of  the  land  was  made  She-Who-Changeth; 
of  the  white  shell  of  the  ocean  was  made  White-Shell- Woman.  Each 
sister  bore  a  son;  the  child  of  She-Who-Changeth  was  the  god  Na- 
yenezrani;  the  child  of  White-Shefl-Woman  was  the  god  Tobajischini. 

At  that  time  there  were  in  the  world  many  Anaye,  they  say, 
gods  unfriendly  to  man,  evil  beings,  giants,  monsters,  who  destroyed 
the  people.^  When  the  two  young  gods  were  grown,  they  wanted  to 
slay  the  Anaye  that  the  people  might  be  saved. 

Now  the  brothers'  often  asked  of  the  mothers,  **Who  is  our 
father?**  The  mothers  always  answered,  "You  have  none."  At 
last,  one  day,  they  set  out  to  find  him  for  themselves;  they  took  a 
holy  trail  and  journeyed  on  the  sunbeams.  It  was  Niltshi,  the 
Wind,  who  guided  them,  whispering  his  counsel  in  their  ears. 

Their  father  was  Johano-ai,  the  Sun.  His  beautiful  house  was  in 
the  east;  it  was  made  of  turquoise,  and  stood  on  the  shore  of  great 
waters.  There  he  dwelled  with  his  wife,  his  daughters,  and  his  sons. 
The  Black  Thunder  and  The  Blue  Thunder.  Until  the  coming 
of  the  strange  brothers,  the  wife  of  the  Sun  had  not  known  that 
her  husband  had  visited  a  goddess  on  the  earth.  Nor  would 
Johano-ai  believe  that  the  two  gods  were  his  sons  until  he  had 
proved  it  by  making  them  undergo  all  kinds  of  trials.  But  the 
youths  came  through  eachgtest  unharmed,  and  then  the  Sun  re- 
joiced that  these  were  indeed  his  children,  and  promised  to  give 
them  what  they  asked.  The  brothers  told  their  father  that  they 
wanted  weapons  with  which  to  slay  the  Anaye.    So  Johano-ai  gave 

'  According  to  Dr.  Washington  Matthews,  the  goddess  is  thas  named  because  she  passes 
through  endless  lives,  continuafly  changing  from  rfd  to  young  again—"  it  is  probable  that  she  is 
an  apotheosis  of  nature  or  of  the  changing  year." 

2  Many  of  the  Anaye  are  personifications  of  the  dangers  that  lie  in  nature. 

3  The  two  gods  are  called  "  brothers  "  in  afl  versions  of  the  myth.  Another  version  makes 
both  gods  twin-children  of  She-Who-Changeth. 

[359] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE   INDIANS'    BOOK 

them  helmets,  shirts,  leggings,  and  moccasins,  all  of  black  flint;  and 
when  this  armor  was  pat  on,  the  four  lightnings  flashed  from  the 
different  joints.'  He  gave  them  for  weapons  a  mighty  knife  of 
stone,  and  arrows  of  rainbow,  of  sttnbeam,  and  of  lightning.  So  the 
brothers  slew  the  Anaye,  and  after  each  victory  they  returned  to 
their  mothers  rejoicing. 

Then  Johano-ai  came  to  She-Who-Changeth  and  begged  her  to 
make  for  him  a  home  in  the  west,  where  he  might  rest  at  evening 
after  his  long  day's  journey  across  the  skies.  Long  he  pleaded  with 
her,  until  at  last  she  yielded  and  said,  "I  will  go  and  make  a  home 
for  you,  if  you  will  give  me  what  I  ask.  You  have  a  beautiful  tur- 
quoise house  in  the  east,  they  say.  I  must  have  just  such  a  beautiful 
house  in  the  west,  only  it  must  be  beyond  the  shore  and  floating 
amid  the  waters;  and  around  the  house  must  be  planted  all  kinds  of 
gems,  that  they  may  grow  and  become  many." 

Johano-ai  granted  every  wish,  and  now,  beyond  the  mountains, 
the  sun-god  rests  at  evening  in  the  gem-surrounded  floating  house 
of  Estsan-Natlehi  in  the  west. 


HLIiV  BIYIN 

Song    of    the    Horse 
Sang  and  told  fcy  Navajos  of  Arizona 


OHANO-AI  starts  each  day  from  his  hogan,  in  the  east, 

J  and  rides  across  the  skies  to  his  hogan  in  the  west, 
carrying  the  shining  golden  disk,  the  sun.  He  has  five 
horses — a  horse  of  turquois^,  a  horse  of  white  shell,  a 
horse  of  pearl  shell,  a  horse  of  red  shell,  and  a  horse  of  coal.^  When 
the  skies  are  blue  and  the  weather  is  fair,  Johano-ai  is  riding  his 
turquoise  horse  or  his  horse  of  white  shell  or  of  pearl;  but  when  the 
heavens  are  dark  with  storm,  he  has  mounted  the  red  horse,  or  the 
horse  of  coal. 

Beneath  the  hoofs  of  the  horses  are  spread  precious  hides  of 

'  See  "The  Morning  Star  and  The  Evening  Star,"  page  103;  also  foot-note,  page  315. 
'  See  mountain  narrative,  page  351. 

[360] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


NAVAJO 

all  kinds,  and  beautiftjl  woven  blankets,  richly  decorated,  cafled 
"naskan."  In  olden  times  the  Navajos  ased  to  wear  such  blankets, 
and  men  say  they  were  first  found  in  the  home  of  the  stm-god.' 

Johano-ai  pastures  his  herds  on  flower-blossoms  and  gives  them 
to  drink  of  the  mingled  waters.  These  are  holy  waters,  waters  of 
all  kinds,  spring-water,  snow-water,  hail-water  and  water  from 
the  four  quarters  of  the  world.  The  Navajos  use  such  waters  in 
their  rites.  When  the  horse  of  the  sun-god  goes,  he  raises,  not  dust, 
but  "pitistchi,"  glittering  grains  of  mineral  such  as  are  used  in  re- 
ligious ceremonies;  and  when  he  rolls,  and  shakes  himself,  it  is  shin- 
ing pitistshi  that  flies  from  him.  When  he  runs,  the  sacred  pollen 
offered  to  the  sun-god  is  all  about  him,  like  dust,  so  that  he  looks 
like  a  mist;  for  the  Navajos  sometimes  say  that  the  mist  on  the 
horizon  is  the  pollen  that  has  been  offered  to  the  gods. 

The  Navajo  sings  of  the  horses  of  Johano-ai  in  order  that  he,  too, 
may  have  beautiful  horses  like  those  of  the  sun -god.  Standing 
among  his  herds  he  scatters  holy  pollen,  and  sings  this  song  for 
the  blessing  and  protection  of  his  animals: 

HLIJV  BIYIN 

Nizho'fco  ani — hiye  ! 
Ka'  Johano-ai  dotlizhi  be  lin-iye 

Nizho'ko  ani — hiye, 
Yotti  bahostieli  tsi  bafcai  yiki 

Nizho'ko  ani — hiye, 
Tshilatra  hozhoni  be  jinic^tan  laki 

Nizho'ko  ani — hiye, 
Tro-tlanastshini-ye  be  jinicAItan  lafci 

Nizho'ko  ani— hiye, 
Ka'  pitistshi-ye  pilch  tashokishko, 

Nizho'ko  ani — hiye, 
Ka'  ba  tradetin-iye  yan-a  toitinyeko, 

Nizho'ko  ani — hiye, 
K'ean  natelzhishko  k'at  tonidineshko, 

Nizho^ko  ani — hiye  ! 

'  This  bit  of  imagery  andotifatedly  depicts  the  cloads.     The  sunlight  on  meadow  and  spring 
is  suggested  in  the  pasturing  of  the  san-gOd's  horses. 
,3  [361] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'    BOOK 

SONG  OF  THE   HORSE 

How  joyous  his  neigh  ! 
Lo,  the  Turquoise  Horse  of  Johano-ai, 

How  joyous  his  neigh. 
There  on  precious  hides  outspread  standeth  he; 

How  joyous  his  neigh. 
There  on  tips  of  fair  fresh  flowers  feedeth  he; 

How  joyous  his  neigh. 
There  of  mingled  waters  holy  drinketh  he; 

How  joyous  his  neigh. 
There  he  spumeth  dust  of  glittering  grains; 

How  joyous  Iiis  neigh. 
There  in  mist  of  sacred  pollen  hidden,  all  hidden  he; 

How  joyous  his  neigh. 
There  his  offspring  many  grow  and  thrive  for  evermore; 

How  joyous  his  neigh  ! 


NAYE-E   SIN 


War-Song 
Sung  and  told  by  Navajos  of  Arizona 

HIS  is  an  ancient  Navajo  war-chant.  It  was  sung  by 
the  god  Nayenezrani,  the  Slayer  of  the  Anaye.'  Nay- 
enezrani  made  the  ancient  war-songs  and  gave  them  to 
the  Navajos.  In  olden  times,  when  the  Navajos  were 
going  to  war,  the  warriors  chanted  this  song  and  then  went  oat  into 
a  wide  plain  and  put  the  war-feather  in  their  hair.  These  feathers 
were  very  holy  and  were  ornamented  with  turquoise.  No  woman 
or  child  might  ever  look  upon  them,  lest  the  warrior,  in  battle, 
become  like  a  child  or  a  woman. 

The  war-chant  tells  how  Nayenezrani  hurls  his  enemies  into  the 
ground  with  the  lightning,  one  after  another.  The  four  lightnings 
strike  from  him  in  all  directions  and  return,  for  lightning  always 
looks  as  if  it  flashed  out  and  then  went  back.^ 

"  Whe-e-yoni-sin"  means  the  songs  the  enemy  sings  against  him. 
They  are  the  sorcerous  songs  and  evil  prayers  of  the  foe. 


'  Ana.ye.     See  "  Story  of  the  Two  Brothers," 
'  See  foot-note,  page  103. 

[362] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


page  359. 


NAVAJO 

When  chanting  this  song  in  time  of  war,  the 
place  the  words,  **the  old  peoples  of  the  earth** 
the  enemy,  whoever  he  might  be — ^Moq«i,  Ztmi,  o 


NAYE-E   SIN 

Pesh  ashike  ni  shli — yi-na, 
Pesh  ashike  ni  shli — ya-e 

Nayenezrani  shi  ni  shli — kola 
Pesh  ashike  ni  shli — 
E-na 


kola. 


Pesh  tilyilcA-iye  shi  ki 
Pesh  ashike  ni  shli — 
E-na 


Pesh  tilyilc^-iye  siskle — kola, 
Pesh  ashike  ni  shli — 
E-na 

Pesh  tilyilcA-iye  shi  e — kola, 
Pesh  ashike  ni  shli — 
E-na 

Pesh  tilyilcA-iye  shi  tsha — kola 
Pesh  ashike  ni  shli — 
E-na 

Nolienni  tshina  shi-ye 
Shi  yiki  holon-e — kola, 
Pesh  ashike  ni  shli — 
E-na 

Ka'  itsiniklizhi-ye 

Din-ikwo 
Sitzan  nahatiIcA — kola, 
Din-ikwo 
Pesh  ashike  ni  shli — 
E-na 

Tsini  nahatiIcA  ki  la 
Nihoka  hastoyo-Ia 
Whe-e-yoni-sin-iye  • 


WAR-5 

l^^.^ 

Lo,  the  flint  youthTTie  am  I, 

The  flint  youth. 

Nayenezrani,  Lo,  behold  me,  he  am  I, 
Lo,  the  flint  yooth,  he  am  L 
The  flint  youth. 

Hoccasins  of  black  flint  have  I; 

Lo,  the  flint  youth,  he  am  I, 

The  flint  youth. 

Leggings  of  black  flint  have  I; 
Lo,  the  flint  youth,  he  am  L 
The  flint  youth. 

Tunic  of  black  flint  have  I; 
Lo,  the  flint  youth,  he  am  I, 
The  flint  youth. 

Bonnet  of  black  flint  have  I; 
Lo,  the  flint  youth,  he  am  I, 
The  flint  youth. 

Clearest,  purest  flint  the  heart 
Living  strong  within  me — ^heart  of  flint; 
Lo,  the  flint  youth,  he  am  1, 
The  flint  youth. 

Now  the  zig-zag  lightnings  four 
From  me  flash. 

Striking  and  returning. 

From  me  flash; 

Lo,  the  flint  youth,  he  am  1, 

The  flint  youth. 

There  where'er  the  lightnings  strike, 
Into  the  ground  they  hurl  the  foe — 
Ancient  folk  with  evil  charms, 
[363] 
Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'    BOOK 


Yoya  aiyiniIcA — kola, 
Pesh  ashike  ni  shii — 
E-na 

Ka'  sa-a  narai, 

Ka'  binihotsitti  shi  ni  shIi — kola, 
Pesh  ashike  ni  shIi — 
E-na 

Pesh  ashike  ni  shli — kola 
Pesh  ashike  ni  shli — ya-e. 


One  opon  another,  dashed  to  earth; 
Lo,  the  flint  youth,  he  am  I, 
The  flint  yoath. 

Living  evermore. 
Feared  of  all  forevermore, 
Lo,  the  flint  yoath,  he  am  I, 
The  flint  youth. 

Lo,  the  flint  yoath,  he  am  I, 
The  flint  yoath. 


PRAYER  BY  THE  GREAT  WATERS 

A  First  Visit  of  Navajos  to  the  Sea 


I 


N  the  winter  of  1903  a  small  band  of  Navajos  left  their 
native  deserts  to  come,  at  the  invitation  of  some  Cali- 
fomians,  to  a  New- Year's  festival  at  Pasadena.  Such 
verdant  country  was  never  before  seen  by  the  Navajos. 
"Here  might  our  flocks  graze  forever/'  they  cried,  as  they  looked 
with  wonder  on  the  green  slopes  and  orange-laden  trees  of  Southern 
California.  The  Indians  were  taken  to  the  coast,  to  see  for  the 
first  time  the  "Great  Waters" — ^waters  incredibly  great,  where  "a 
man  upon  the  shore  could  not  see  the  farther  side." 

In  reverent  silence  they  gazed,  while  the  chief  stuped  solemnly 
to  the  water's  edge  and  with  quiet  prayer  sprinkled  sacred  corn- 
pollen  on  each  receding  wave.  Two  priests  followed,  and  stood 
absorbed  in  chant,  while  the  rising  tide  washed  up  about  their 
ankles.  Then  all  the  little  band  approached  the  water,  praying 
and  scattering  their  poflen-sacrifice. 

"So  much  of  water  is  there  here,"  they  prayed,  "here  where 
there  seems  no  need.  With  us  the  need  is  great.  As  we  give  of 
our  offering,  so  may  there  be  given  to  us  of  these  Great  Waters." 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Prayer  by  the  Great  Waters 
"  Two  priests  stood  absorbed  in  cS4gUiZ^i)^MfiS^SCtft®  washed  up  about  their  ankles  " 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


NAVAJO 


TRO  HATAL 

Song  of  the  Rain-Chant 
Sang  and  told  by  a  Navajo  "Chanter"  (Medicine-Man)  of  Arizona 


,    ■[  HE  Navajo  ceremonies  are  called  ** Chants."    This  is  a 

Tsong  from  the  "Water,  or  Rain,  Chant."  The  Navajos 
tell  of  the  Male -Rain  and  of  the  Female -Rain.  The 
'  I  MaTe-Rain  is  the  storm,  with  thttnder  and  lightning; 
the  Female -Rain  is  the  gentle  shower.  The  two  Rains  meet  on 
the  mountains,  and  from  their  union  springs  all  vegetation  upon 
the  earth.' 

The^Rain-Mountain  is  a  distant  mountain  west  of  Zuiii,  and  it  is 
the  home  of  the  Rain-Youth,  one  of  the  Divine  Beings.  The  Rain- 
Youth  made  the  rain-songs  and  gave  them  to  the  Navajos.  This 
song  tells  of  him  with  the  rain-feathers  in  his  hair,  coming  with  the 
rain,  down  from  the  Rain-Mountain,  through  the  com,  amid  the 
song  of  swallows  chirping  with  joy  of  the  rain,  and  through  the 
pollen  which  covers  him,  so  that  the  Rain- Youth  himself  is  hidden, 
and  only  a  mist  is  seen.  The  Navajos  say  that  it  is  well  to  be  covered 
with  holy  pollen,  for  such  pollen  is  an  emblem  of  peace. 


TRO   HATAL 

Niye  tinishten 

ShicAI  tsha  httiyish  tin'shta — a-ye-na. 


Niltsan  Dsic^I-iye 
Biya  ra-ashte, 

Shic^I  tsha  haiyish  tin'shta — a-ye-na. 


Tshi-natan  a-tso-hiye 
Betra-fco, 

Sbichl  tshahuiyish  tin'  shta— a-ye-na, 


SONG   OF  THE   RAIN-CHANT 

Far  as  man  can  see. 
Comes  the  rain. 
Comes  the  rain  with  me. 

From  the  Rain-Hoant, 
Rain-Mount  far  away. 

Comes  the  rain. 

Comes  the  rain  with  me. 

O'er  the  com, 

O'er  the  corn,  tall  corn. 

Comes  the  rain, 

Comes  the  rain  with  me. 


'  See  "  The  Ceremonial  of  Hasjelti  Dailjis,"  by  James  Stevenson.     Extract  from  the  Eighth 
Annual  Report  of  the  Bureau  of  American  Ethnology,  Washington,  D.  C. 

[365] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'   BOOK 


Betra-ko 
Ka'  itsiniklizh-iye, 
Ka'  itahazla-ko, 

ShicAI  tsha  httiyish  tin'  shta— a-ye-na, 


Betra-ko 
Ka'  trashjesh  dotlizh-iye 
Ka'  enadetla-ko, 

ShicAI  tsha  huiyish  tin'  shta— a-ye-na, 


Betra-ko 
Tradetin-iye 
Banga-toyishtini-ko, 

ShicAI  tsha  huiyish  tin'  shta — a-ye-na, 

Niye  tfnishten 

ShicAI  tsha  hwiyish  tin'  shta — a-ye-na. 


'Hid  the  lightnings, 
'Mid  the  lightning  zigzag, 
'Hid  the  lightning  flashing, 

Comes  the  rain. 

Comes  the  rain  with  me. 

'Hid  the  swallows, 
'Hid  the  swallows  blue 
Chirping  glad  together. 
Comes  the  rain, 
■     Comes  the  rain  with  me. 

Through  the  pollen. 
Through  the  pollen  blest, 
All  in  pollen  hidden 

Comes  the  rain. 

Comes  the  rain  with  me. 

Far  as  man  can  see 
Comes  the  rain. 
Comes  the  rain  with  me. 


DSICi^LYIDJE  HATAL 

Song  from  the  Ceremony  of  the  Hountain-Chant 

Sung  and  told  by  a  Navajo  "Chanter"  (Medicine-Man)  of  Arizona 


HE  Holy  Youth,  Tsilc/ike  Digini,  loved  a  mortal  maid, 
and  to  make  bet  divine  like  himself,  so  that  he  might 
take  her  to  wife,  he  sang  holy  songs  over  her.  Thence- 
forth she  was  called  Estsan  Digini,  The  Holy  Woman. 
Together  the  two  gave  these  songs  to  the  Navajos,  to  be  tfsed  by 
them  as  a  c«re  for  sickness.  Daring  the  ceremony  of  the  mottntain- 
chant,  four  runners  are  dressed  to  represent  four  holy  beings — 
The  Holy  Youth,  The  Holy  Woman,  Alilorani  (The  Lightning 
Yotrth),  and  Digini  -  ossini  (The  Holy  Believer).'  The  last  two 
are  The  Holy  Youth  and  The  Holy  Woman  in  other  forms.     These 

'  The  translation  of  the  last  two  names  is  of  somewhat  doubtful  accuracy.  According  to 
Dr.  Wasliington  Matthews,  "  Alili  means  show,  dance,  or  other  single  exJiibition  of  the  rites. 
It  also  means  a  wand  or  other  sacred  implement  used  in  the  rites."  The  mythical  colored  hoops 
for  ^^ising  a  storm  are  also  referred  to  as  alili,  Ora,ni  may  possibly  be  hogani,  the  *'  g  "  in  the 
latter  word  being  pronounced  like  the  gutttjral  "  r." 

[366] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


'  SACRED  SAND-PICTURE 

Sacred  SancJ-pictare  in.  the  ceremony  of  the  Moantain-Chant. 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


NAVAJO 

four  runners  carry  sacred  corn-meal  in  their  pouches,  to  sprinkle 
upon  medicine-men  as  a  summons  to  attend  the  ceremony,  each 
with  his  own  songs  and  dances.  At  some  part  of  the  ceremony,  one 
of  the  chanters  (medicine-men)  thus  makes  a  sand-picture  of  the 
four  Digini,.  or  "Divine  Ones,"  placing  them  from  left  to  right: 
The  Holy  Youth,  The  Holy  Woman,  The  Lightning  Youth,  and 
The  Holy  Believer.  The  sand -pictures^  are  made  in  this  wise: 
Upon  the  floor  of  the  hogan  is  spread  fresh  sand  smoothed  flat; 
then  upon  this  background  the  medicine -man  and  his  assistants 
make  the  symbolic  figures,  by  sifting  through  thumb  and  finger 
colored  powders  ground  from  minerals  and  charcoal. 

In  the  picture  of  the  four  Digini,  the  black  streak  at  the  bottom 
represents  the  hogan  of  The  Holy  Youth  and  The  Holy  Woman. 
Above  the  heads  of  the  Divine  Ones  are  the  guardian  bats  of 
the  hogan.  A  rainbow  surrounds  the  picture,  decked  with  sprays 
of  prayer-feathers.  Each  figure  stands  upon  a  piece  of  rainbow, 
for  it  is  upon  the  rainbow  that  the  Divine  Ones  travel.  Streaks 
of  lightning  are  painted  upon  the  legs,  for  lightning  is  the  symbol 
of  speed;  around  the  neck  hangs  a  whistle  of  eagle  bone;  while 
on  the  arms  are  bracelets^  of  eagle  feathers,  for  the  Divine  Ones 
move  swiftly,  as  with  wings.  The  forms  are  naked  except  for 
the  richly  decorated  sash  and  the  ''woman's  belt."  Tbeir  bodies 
are  painted  with  clays  of  different  colors.  In  the  right  hand 
each  figure  holds  a  pouch  containing  com-meal,  and  in  the  left 
a  small  ceremonial  basket  and  a  sprig  of  spruce,  which  can  be 
swallowed  and  drawn  up  again  by  those  who  have  holy  power. 
From  the  ears  hang  pendants  of  turquoise,  and  on  the  heads  are 
five  rain-feathers  pointing  upward  towards  the  clouds.  The  medi- 
cine-men, while  dressing  the  runners  to  represent  the  Divine  Ones, 
chant  the  following  song: 

'  Otherwise  known  as  "  dry-paintings." 

^  The  bracelets  are  omitted,  probably  by  error,  from  the  accompanying  sand-painting. 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE 

DSICWLYIDJE   RATAL 
Baiyajiltriyish, 

TsilcAke  dfgini, 
Baiyajiltriyish, 

Ke-pa-nashjini, 
Baiyajiltriyish, 

Kla-pa-naskan-a, 
Baiyajiltriyishi, 

Ka'  ka  pa-stran-a, 
Baiyajiltriyish, 

Niltsan  atsoz-i, 
Baiyajiltriyish, 

Niltsan-befcan-a, 
Baiyajiltriyish, 

Ka'  bi  datro-e, 
Baiyajiltriyish, 

Sa-a  narai, 
Baiyajiltriyish, 

Bike  hozhoni, 
Baiyajiltriyish, 

Baiyajiltriyish,^ 


INDIANS'    BOOK 

SONG   FROM  THE   MOUNTAIN-CHANT 
Thereof  he  telleth. 

Now  of  the  Holy  Youth, 
Thereof  he  tellcth. 

Moccasins  decked  with  black, 
Thereof  he  telleth. 

And  richly  broidered  dress, 
Thereof  he  telleth. 

Arm-bands  of  eagle  feathers, 
Thereof  he  telleth. 

And  now  the  rain-pltimes. 
Thereof  he  telleth. 

Now  of  the  Male-Rain,' 
Thereof  he  telleth. 

Now  of  the  rain-drops  fallen. 
Thereof  he  telleth. 

Now  of  Unending  Life, 
Thereof  he  telleth. 

Now  of  Unchanging  Joy, 
Thereof  he  telleth. 

Thereof  he  telleth. 


'  The  Male-Rain  is  the  heavy  storm-rain,  with  lightning  and  thunder;  the  Female-Rain  is 
the  gentle  shower.     Both  kinds  of  rain  are  prized  in  sickness  for  their  cooling  power. 

'  A  second  stanza  follows,  identical  with  the  first,  except  that  the  word  estsa.n  (woman) 
takes  the  place  of  tsilchke  (youth)  and  the  word  Niltsan-faaad  (female-rain)  that  of  Niltsanbekan 
(male-rain).  In  the  second  stanza  the  refrain  ba.iya.jiUriyish  is  to  be  translated  "  thereof  she 
teHeth." 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


NAVAJO 
DINNI-E   SIN 

Hunting-Song 
Sting  and  told  by  Navajos,  near  Fort  Defiance,  Arizona 


A 


LL  animals  of  the  chase  are  the  herds  of  Hastyeyaiti, 
God  of  Sunrise.  Hastyeyaiti  is  god  of  game,  and  he 
made  the  hunting-songs  and  gave  them  to  the  Navajos. 
In  the  old  days,  before  they  were  shepherds,  the  Navajos 
lived  by  hunting.  The  Navajo  hunter  sits  quite  still  and  chants 
a  song,  and  the  game  comes  straight  to  him.'  When  the  animal 
is  near  enough,  the  hunter  shoots  him  through  the  heart.  The 
Navajos  say  that  the  deer  like  the  song  of  the  hunter,  and  come 
from  all  directions  to  hear  it. 

When  a  man  starts  to  hunt  he  first  prays  to  Hastyeyaiti,  then 
he  sings  a  holy  song  to  the  god,  and  then  he  sings  the  hunting-songs. 
If  he  miss  a  word  or  make  a  mistake  in  the  song  he  will  have  ill 
luck.  But  if  his  song  be  without  error  of  any  kind  he  will  surely 
kill  something. 

In  this  song  the  hunter  likens  himself  to  the  beautiful  black- 
bird loved  by  the  deer.  The  Navajos  say  that  this  bird  alights 
on  the  animals  and  sometimes  tries  to  make  its  nest  between  the 
horns.  The  refrain  of  the  song  tells  of  the  coming  of  the  deer — 
how  he  makes  a  trail  from  the  top  of  Black  Mountain  down  through 
the  fair  meadows,  how  he  comes  through  the  dew-drops  and  the 
pollen  of  the  flowers,  and  then  how,  startled  at  sight  of  the  hunter, 

'  This  can  readily  be  believed,  for  the  Indian  can  be  absolutely  imniovabie.  The  measured 
chant  attracts  the  animals,  who,  always  curious,  first  come  to  find  out  what  is  the  sound,  and  are 
then  ahnost  hypnotized,  as  it  were,  by  the  monotony  and  rhythm  of  the  chanting.  A  young 
Navajo  who  had  been  educated  away  from  the  reservation  told  the  recorder  that  he  had  been 
taught  to  look  upon  the  ways  of  his  people  as  foolish  and  superstitious.  He  did  not  believe  in 
what  the  Navajos  told  him  of  their  hunting.  One  day  an  old  uncle  took  him  to  hunt.  The 
two  men  sat  motionless  while  the  uncle  chanted.  Then  the  young  man  saw  that  the  Navajos 
had  spoken  truly,  for  the  deer  walked  straight  to  the  hunters  and  fell  their  easy  prey.  "  Since 
then,"  declared  the  young  man,  "  I  believe  that  the  old  people  have  wisdom  that  the  white 
men  do  not  always  know  about."  Pueblo  Indians  say  that  before  they  start  on  the  hunt  they 
sing,  bending  every  thought  on  prayerful  wish  for  success.  While  they  sing,  the  distant  deer 
gather  in  council  and  choose  to  whom  each  will  fall.  To  those  who  have  been  most  devout  in 
singing  will  the  animals  go.  This  idea  is  held  by  the  Navajos  also,  as  is  shown  in  this  song. 
Indians  believe  in  man's  power  to  draw  to  himself  or  to  bring  about  that  upon  which  he  fixes 
his  mind  in  song  and  prayer. 

[3691 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE   INDIANS'    BOOK 


he  stamps  and  turns  to  ran.  But  the  man  kills  him,  and  will  kill 
yet  many  another,  for  he  is  lucky  and  blessed  in  hunting.  The 
Navajos  say  that  the  male  deer  always  starts  with  the  left  foreleg, 
the  female  with  the  right.  This  is  an  ancient  song  made  by  the 
god  Hastyeyalti. 


DINNI-E   SIN 

Ye  shakaikatal,  i-ne-yanga. 
Ye  shakaikatal,  ai-ye-Io, 
Ye  shakaikatal,  i-ne-yanga. 

Ka*  aiyash-te  tilyilch-ye 
Shini  shiini  ko-Io, 

Ye  shakaikatal,  i-ne  yanga 

DsicAI-tilyilcA-iye 

Bakashte 

Ka'  ta-adetin  'shte  lo. 

Ye  shakaikatal,  i-ne  yanga 

Tshilatra  hozhoni-ye 
Bitra  'shte  lo. 

Ye  shakaikatal,  i-ne  yanga 

Bi  datro-iye 
Bitra  'shte  lo. 

Ye  shakaikatal,  i-ne  yanga 

Ka'  bi  tradetin-iye 
Bitra  'shte  lo. 

Ye  shakaikatal,  i-ne  yanga 

Dinnitshc-bekan-iye 
Bitzil-Ie  deshklashdji-Io 

Ye  shakaikatal,  i-ne  yanga 

Bisedje 

Ka'  shinosin-k«  lo. 

Ye  shakaikatal,  i-ne  yanga 

Ye  shakaikatal,  i-ne-yanga. 
Ye  shakaikatal,  ai-ye-Io 
Ye  shakaikatal,  i-ne-yanga. 


HUNTING-SONG 

Comes  the  deer  to  my  singing. 
Comes  the  deer  to  my  song. 
Comes  the  deer  to  my  singing. 

He,  the  blackbird,  he  am  I, 
Bird  beloved  of  the  wild  deer. 
Comes  the  deer  to  my  singing. 

From  the  Mountain  Black, 
From  the  sammit, 

Down  the  trail,  coming,  coming  now. 
Comes  the  deer  to  my  singing. 

Through  the  blossoms. 
Through  the  flowers,  coming,  coming  now. 
Comes  the  deer  to  my  singing. 

Though  the  fIow;er  dew-drops. 
Coming,  coming  now. 
Comes  the  deer  to  my  singing. 

Through  the  pollen,  flower  pollen. 
Coming,  coming  now. 
Comes  the  deer  to  nay  singing. 

Starting  with  his  left  fore-foot. 
Stamping,  turns  the  frightened  deer 
Comes  the  deer  to  my  singing. 

Quarry  mine,  blessed  am  I 
In  the  luck  of  the  chase. 
Comes  the  deer  to  my  singing. 

Conies  the  deer  to  my  singing. 
Comes  the  deer  to  my  song, 
Comes  the  deer  to  my  singing. 


A  second  stanza  follows,  identical  with  the  first,  except  that  the  word  baad  (female)  takes 
the  place  of  bek^n  (male),  and  the  word  deshn^h  (right)  that  of  deshkUshdfi  (left.) 

[370] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


B 


00 


n 

o 


p. 


^ 


jumiMi.iiiwii— >— wwiwg 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


NAVAJO 
NAESTSAN  BIYIN 

Song  of  the  Earth 
(Hozhonji-Song) 


I 


N  a  ceremony  for  the  healing  of  the  sick,  the  Navajos 
sing  of  all  things  in  the  world,  declaring  them  perfect 
as  when  first  made — the  heavens,  winds,  clouds,  rain, 
lightning,  rainbow,  sun,  moon,  stars;  the  earth,  the 
mountains,  the  com,  and  all  the  growing  things;  in  sequence  of  holy- 
songs  all  forms  of  life  are  pronounced  beautiful  and  good. 

These  songs  are  sung  over  the  sick  man,  and  the  sufferer  is  thus 
placed  in  a  perfect  world,  so  that  new  and  perfect  life  comes  to  him 
also.  He  is  reborn  into  a  state  of  wholeness.  Thereafter  he  may 
wear  a  turquoise  or  bit  of  shell  tied  in  his  hair  as  a  sign  of  his  new 
birth. 

This  song  is  not  a  medicine-song  but  a  Hozhonji-song.  But 
like  the  medicine  ceremony,  it  declares  all  things  beautiful.  It  is 
highly  revered  and  has  great  power  to  bless.  It  is  a  benediction 
on  the  created  world.  It  tells  how  all  things  go  in  pairs,  bending 
towards  each  other,  joining  and  helping  one  another,  as  the  heavens  ^ 
help  the  earth  with  rain. 

Though  the  Navajos,  like  the  Pueblos,  have  com  of  many  colors, 
white  com  and  yellow  com  are  the  two  kinds  most  often  used  em- 
blematically in  the  songs.  Of  the  white  com  was  made,  in  the  be- 
ginning, First-Man,  and  of  the  yellow  com.  First- Woman.  The 
white  com  is  looked  upon  as  male,  and  the  yellow  com  as  female. 
Also,  white  is  the  symbolic  color  of  the  east,  and  yellow  of  the 
west. 

"  The  Ripener  "  is  he  that  makes  the  com  ripe.  This  is  an  in- 
sect that  flies  among  the  plants,  possibly  the  wild  bee.  -  The  Navajos 
say:  "  It  has  spotted  wings,  three  on  each  side.  It  makes  a  very 
pretty  noise  and  comes  in  the  night-time.  It  eats  com-pofien  and 
only  comes  when  the  com  is  ripening." 

The  idea  that,  in  nature,  contrasting  elements  are  complements 
and  helpmates  of  one  another  is  carried  in  the  end  of  the  song  to  the 

[371] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'   BOOK 

transcendent  point  of  Everlasting  Life,  and  the  Happiness  of  All 
Things.  Besides  this,  the  earth  or  the  s«n  is  sometimes  symboli- 
cally called  Sa-a  narai  (Everlasting  Life),  and  the  sky  or  the  moon, 
Bike  hozhoni  (Happiness  of  All  Things,  or  Universal  Blessedness). 
Sometimes,  after  singing  this  Hozhonji-song,  the  Navajo  sprinkles 
sacred  pollen  on  the  ground,  calling  the  earth  ''  Mother,"  and  then 
scatters  pollen  upward  to  the  sky,  calling  the  heavens  "  Father." 


NAESTSAN  BIYIN 

Daltso  hozhoni, 
Daltso  hozho'fca', 
Daltso  hozhoni. 

Naestsan-iye, 
Yatilyilc^-iye, 

PilcA  ka'  altsin  sella 
Ho-ashte-hiye. 

Daltso  hozhoni^ 
Daltso  hozho'ka', 
Daltso  hozhoni. 

Sisnajinni-ye, 
Tsodsic^I-iye, 

PilcA  ka'  altsin  sella 
Ho-ashte-hiye. 

Daltso  hozhoni. 
Daltso  hozho'ka', 
Daltso  hozhoni. 

Ka'  Doko-oslid-iye, 
Ka'  Depenitsa-ye, 
PilcA  ka'  altsin  sella 
Ho-ushte-hiye. 

Daltso  hozhoni, 
Daltso  hozho'ka', 
Daltso  hozhoni. 

Ka'  TshalyiIcA, 
Hayolkatli-ye, 

PilcA  ka'  altsin  sella 

Ho-ashte-hiye. 


Digitized  b\^Mbrosott® 


SONG  OF  THE  EARTH  (Hozhonji-Song) 

All  is  beaatiful. 
All  is  beaatifal. 
All  is  beaatifal,  indeed. 

Now  the  Mother  Earth 
And  the  Father  Sky, 

Meeting,  joining  one  another. 
Helpmates  ever,  they. 
All  is  beaatifal. 
All  is  beaatifal. 
All  is  beaatifal,  indeed. 

Sisnajinni, 
TsodsicAI, 
Meeting,  joining  one  another. 
Helpmates  ever,  they. 
All  is  beaatifal. 
All  is  beaatifal. 
All  is  beaatifal,  indeed. 

Now  Doko-oslid 
And  Depenitsa, 

Meeting,  joining  one  another. 
Helpmates  «ver,  they. 
All  is  beaatiful. 
All  is  beaatifal. 
All  is  beaatifal,  indeed. 

And  the  night  of  darkness 
And  the  dawn  of  light. 

Meeting,  joining  one  another, 

Helpmates  ever,  they. 


NAVAJO 


Daltso  hozhoni, 
Daltso  hozho'fca', 
Daltso  hozhoni. 

Ka'  Hastyeyalti-ye, 
Ka'  Hastyehogani-ye, 
Pilch  ka'  altsin  sella 
Ho-oshte-hiye. 

Daltso  hozhoni, 
Daltso  hozho'fca', 
Daltso  hozhoni. 

Ka'  natan-alcAkai-ye, 
Ka'  natan-alcAtsot-ye, 
Pilch  ka'  altsirt  sella 
Ho-ushte-hiye. 

Daltso  hozhoni, 
Daltso  hozho'ka', 
Daltso  hozhoni. 

Tradetin-iye, 
AnilcAtani-ye, 
Pilch  ka'  altsin  sella 
Ho-ushte-hiye. 

Daltso  hozhoni, 
Daltso  hozho'ka', 
Daltso  hozhoni. 

Ka'  sa-a  narai*, 
Ka'  bike  hozhoni-ye. 
Pilch  ka'  altsin  sella 
Ho-ushte-hiye. 

Daltso  hozhoni, 
Daltso  hozho'ka', 
Daltso  hozhoni, 

Daltso  hozhoni, 
Daltso  hozho'ka', 
Daltso  hozhoni. 


All  is  beautiful. 
All  is  beautiful, 
All  is  beautiful,  indeed. 

Now  Hastyeyaiti 
And  Hastyehogan 

Meeting,  joining  one  another. 
Helpmates  ever,  they. 
All  is  beautiful. 
All  is  beautiful. 
All  is  beautiful,  indeed. 

And  the  white  com 
And  the  yellow  com. 
Meeting,  joining  one  another. 
Helpmates  ever,  they. 
All  is  beautiful. 
All  is  beautiful. 
All  is  beautiful,  indeed. 

And  the  com-pollen 
And  the  Ripener, 
Meeting,  joining  one  another. 
Helpmates  ever,  they. 
All  is  beautiful. 
All  is  beautiful. 
All  is  beautiful,  indeed. 

Life-that-never-passeth, 
Happiness-of -all-things. 
Meeting,  joining  one  another. 
Helpmates  ever,  they. 
All  is  beautiful, 
AH  is  beautiful. 
All  is  beautiful,  indeed. 

Now  all  is  beautiful. 

All  is  beautiful. 

All  is  beautiful,  indeed. 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


^ 


* 


=^=^ 
^ 


-Tl*^ 


-T" 


#^ 


^ 


^ 


dbj^ 


r 


■.F^'*     M       1-1 


?f+ 


^ 


^; 


i-j  "r^  1 1 


^ 


^ 


T- 

r 


.yr^-i-i  J     1-^i  J  i^j  J    |j  J   I 


.-diA. 


rf; 


al 


1^ 


;^ 


^ 


^i 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


^,uAiL.     ^ 


'\yyv^\^ 


^ 


lW'*  ^«  ^  i^  H  ^ 


f- 


K 


P  J  I   J   1 4- J 


f 


^ 


•f^-^    7--  --r 

(jLi-C^    4* 3, 


J  I  J  I-:  J 


^ 


O  -    1*^   , 


^-    ,<HFw«-i- 


■? 


1     1''!^ 


T' 

2>. 


5 


i^:: 


3=3C 


a 


',4^ 


r 


S-LicA         ^• 


^OJt-ti^^     >iA.  "a* 


<r-»^  ,       >« 


^ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


S^icJjL^     '^-cy.^v. 


A 


jV*  i,    I    j      li  i  I 


'fie    -^        X    -^ 


J  ^-  I  J  d 


X: 


. -^A 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


C^'-f- 

S<n^^  ) 

/HAt.  ;*=/}'* 

P     . 

y 

~*^ — ; 

-3 

(f 

■>  't      ' 

1 

1 

-5 

<*    5 

J 

i 

J 

0 

4 
TT — "h    H. — r 1 — 

JU 

/ot- 

-4-t — »-- 

-4 

4>-^/{-;'=^ 

=t= 

-+4-1 

^—^ 1 

-i?      '*i      *         ' 

4 

3~'    Hin^'.- oJti^    ^ 

V    ■    ^ai..t'Ojo^h    U- 

<^ 

7*« «.                        £a^K.  -    -  -         *^  tft    1  • 

f-       «      »>f««l       /lA- 

JU^&-        i.  <rtt>a. 

fe-             ^^^S-           /-e   , 

-ir^ 

6  "^^  Jk^U--  *>- 
^ P^— fr H^ 

4^ 

m4- 

=^ 

■4^-^ — * — « — H» 

4  . 

^j«-  _ 

-  I    o 

JivU^..-      •<**>- 

av. 

66. 

t/ 

irv-ij 

Mffi»*-cJtM  ^ 

<n». 

ttz 

'.  1.^U«1 ^»VJ  ,      ,^  oi^M.  _   . 

■   (nn-} , 

^cr*,*.  -cjOM^  -u^- 

ai>\. 

db. 

v'Ltf^'^M  -  •  •      <nrvJj      V<Xi-«  -    . 

■  i^^i 

Hon^t.-<^<t^  t*^- 

o-^\ 

Ui. 

yXO-*"^--       (rv^  ,       y^-CA-ty^^  -  ■  ■ 

.     irc^; 

^m^  a^-   .^lA^t^ 

<r>» 

cytJL. 

^\.0-C^ inr\^ ,     ^„<A<.*i  _  . 

■     <rtrxJ; 

b£to>-  tii-     ^- 

An-<H 

ijki 

^ULAyVt-  •  ■  ■  ifVK^  g         ^.CCC'*--- 

■    OttvJ; 

,BorVi*0 

lU^»^    Ccc^^ 

gWctS— -^«"    f'T'^tii    A-^>T-r 

a4 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


%,J  ri  ,  .   -^ 


.^JL^l/Wy\—: 


g^^ 


•a  Y  '^  \l- 


^^ 


-£a- 


* 


/•jetut- oJo^tJ    »t<ruO     jXaXJL      a) 


7' 


/*^  , 


,h  ^'  I  J'i 


^ 


OtOj 


*c- 


d^ 


XtAX t^fc- 


Hc- 
Ho- 


^'    T- 


J        ■  (/ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


lir.'ifcJjL.  ^ 


c-t-d^f^^-v^ 


'p^nT^JTJi  jf I -n  1  ;■  ,^'^m 


J(o.'        T^o- '^sic£,- 

ICo-        o  —         jIa.  - 
p*-  -      A*  -     -^a.  - 


Si- 


^-  r-r^ 


If  rJ  r^   '  (J 


-MO. 
yon. 


'k<rMn<.     ■0*.  ~   l\oCJ    -^te. 


r 


J*  y  >T  u  J 


»n  !■  I  J-  r 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


'^^L.tJ.JL       -^^ 


*,*-t'*y*\. 


g'"  ;J  1^  ^  ^'  -MJ,'  t   rl.t  P 


Six.-  Y-  ^^- 


1^      "^. 


JM'i^^tJ'if  /  lyj^i  iH'unnr  r 


J'a- 


-7, 


^_...    ^-e     a^-..    Y-T"' 


-  e/t^-  4^^    atJ^  C<  .x^««J/  S*  -  t^ytr*^  ''ct,  i^^'  If*"' 

-  t^M-  <^4-    A*«J   ^..^^^^J,  ^  -  ^fvu^  'ijh^  *y'^i  "if*^! 


d^^'  \\y  f  ,nu  .i\jj  \ 


-     x 


'■Ha-    a*-      yt^-  <*-i 


€a- 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


JLs^cLL ^ 


A^t^yu»'%u 


?  ^  M'jin  Mini)'  J'Uflr^ 


'M^-  yl^ 


■to-       5t^O  ~    '*'^  &*.-■■■      fJL.-    e,  ^jt^ - 

•ilftn-    eXou^^-  «*iA,,««tJ  ^-J^ytfu^i  C*.  -  ^f*^ 


J  li-j'  .M,j  m 


•iMrt.- 


^a* 


^ 


^ 


J^O       ^A  ^'^^ 


-XC^ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Yv 


* 


s 


^ 


^ 


.^ 


fi-C 


T" 


^  J  J   H;  J  J  J  |:^  i^^ 


Ot-       'TU.—  ■ 


,^1  J  J  H-i  J  Pi-?  j.,.i  i'^'  J  J 


^ 


^^^-    A^yy. 


-  <z-  L 


e-   4a.  '7^ 


I 


ec- 


.'^Nltaijj  l,L^ 


^^M 


<7A  Ic--^  Uu^ -*^ *>j.... 


^ 


^ 


5 


^ 


^^ 


^; 


^^-<i^. 


^  /C,. 


'?«-«.-<'   < 


6l*.-    «.,  AO-       'zMwy      <(o- 


<;2>4^ "5^'*^"    '^   ^^      "*■"  ■  ■  ■        ^o^t^,--  t^     -^^-  'I. 


^ 


^ 


^ 


-^C       (.  <X.         ^\<K  ^  ^ 


r^ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


yjeiOL-gyi/y    -^V^., 


^ 


f 


«^->v^ 


* 


i 


S 


/I  C  * 


-f  i  u.  ■'! I  1 J  J  I  I  ■' 


fd^ 


«X        £»  -«€-«-, 


.S^.. 


i^ 


^  J  1 J  J  I J  J  i-Vj  J  J  U  ''J  Ujv^ 


M 


i/  Jj  \'^  i\\\  J  j  I  J  ;  I 


7 


^L      ^- 


^ 


e^. 


J   I J  M  I  i  Uj  J  ,1  i^Jjfr:^!^ 


;z 


^5= 


^ 


fr«!    *<  ■ 


<%^a-  -7«<-  <- 


i 


J  J  1 1  J  J  I  j^ 


i 


a  -  <^'      -»!«-<<•, 


V:^..^ 


^. 


i  J  1 .1  I  h  ''  1  I  I  rv  j  J  J 


J   J   HJ^v:f 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


^-         -^Icv..-     /o-     fO.~   <>^-       ^«-     e-i 


7U    '^Ic- 


& 


■  ^ia/v\ 


46i^.. 


^,.. 


J  J  1 J  ,1 1 J  On  \^\\  jl^/^J|^ 


iz-  ^*«- 


m 


^^ 


i 


J  i  I J   ,h  J  I  i 


-^-, 


f-tx  -  <c  —    -at  <  -    c^ 


^. 


i 


J  1 J  J 


^ 


f-T 


^f.|".^  /'^'r^ 


'Jvi  -  <  -    c«. , 


v^         ^  % 


1 


12: 


i 


J         I      J       J       1    J     ^ 


^^ 


f 


^ 


T- 


^ 


->«^ 


'^^        -tc-  ^- 


-<-*/-     .t-a  -       •»*«crvx- 


5^ 


i 


^ 


^^ 


■Af^:*  iCo'  ^-^i 


'X*  _   <■  ■ 


—       ''t/*J^.  -  ^ 


<fc 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


^j.^11;  .l_l   lir  J  J   Jl  l-i  ij^m 


$ 


^ 


J'OOk  ~  Oy^  -      zX"    iLo 


4 


6a, 


A<-    <  - 


J  1^  O  ^\  ij  I  j^j )  J)  J 


I  A  -  A  . 


I^b 


^^"  J  J  U  J  J  J  1^  J  J  It  J  J  J  Rj  }\M 


y^ 


^.       ^ 


^ 


•71*-     * 


-  JtA.      C^   -         -^  - 


i 


J  J.  I  J  J  1^ 


3^:^   e 


<3k.       >X<a. 


'XX 


r^ 


* 


(f;j  I J  I  hj  l--;^j  J  K  I  l-IUJJL^ 


r  I  I,  U^  I  LI  '  ij 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


4 


Ms 


e^<M^. 


f 


4?,^ 


-t-'y-'^v-^ 


% 


J   J   I  J   J   IJ  J   I't  J  J  J 


^ 


>^ 


f(a. '  S^a^-  <M/L  -  ^ 


^ 


H^ojO-- 


T" 


.lo- 


r- 


-«-c  -    -c. 


^ 


^h  1 J  i 


^ 


=^? 


^ 


■Aj>- 


Hh 


^; 


4  j.  i  I J  J  I J  ^'  1  j^i  uj  J  jivuiy^ 


i^  i  I'i-  i' 


J   I  N    1    I   J^ 


<r^       ^-.    j^  '2::£.^>*.. 


^e 


^i. .-. 


i^  ^  J   IJ  J  I  J^  IJj.Uj  J  jl',LiB/]>^ 


-fiiuJiMi    ii        •'*^'  ^^•'^^-    ««'>^^ 


^ 


^^ 


s 


^ 


J  1  J  J 


It 


4/o-         -yin*.        'to-      4<i 


n  Hj  jjKUhyp 


* 


s 


J  U    J 


-l^uUjLt  <fl     ***"» 


'o^ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Jk 


-^ 


43=1 


/x^*^ 


-^^■cy<.^^^ 


S^"   ^  I^JJ  I  1  J  ^^ 


^^  'L-..^.^-  !&«*- *^ 


fe 


J  J  I J  jl,i  f  Ijj  I'.jj  J  \-.o^^ 


§5= 


<yro- 


ro  -  tli.  -  -^^^ 


i-i. 


T- 


U- 


4 


=fe 


I    ■»   1 


<hU     -L- 


# 


S 


^ 


^ 


J.  i    l-rJ  J   J 


P 


^  ^.  ,^  i"»-*^- 


T 


/T, 


U- 


fi     to. 


-  -n*.-  <-    Co.  ^ 


H= 


g/   J  1-^  n  I  1  J  J  I  .1  J 


6U     -L- 


-»» c  -    -c-  -, 


*>-i. 


* 


t 


^ 


^s 


^^ 


J    I  J    J    N  i 


■C*--    */V  -       -7».<rt«.- 


ij^ij  J  j  M  \j\^m 


1^   ic-  c^a-        'tU-  <- 
~)^    'Ko-  *«-       '7^-    -<■' 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


M^A-A^-     -^B-vyC/yo 


ii 


£4 


',  {i  1 1 .11 1 J^ 


^ 


^S 


r 


J   J  fT  Ii  I    )  ^^ 


^ 


'=4: -^ 


X 


'!¥  i  nhi\  i  n i  1 


r*i 


$ 


.;^ 


LQ/H   •  t-tlM^  —  ■    -J        **j 


,-  ^. 


'^  J  .1  \i  n  )  1^  i  J  Ivj  J  J  K.J  J  U 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


/V,./VI.  S'=  /bO 


tt 


^ 


M^        f* 


T" 


4'm-1'^H' ]■  nfli^jij^j. 


t'   1     J'-    J'    J' 


<f ''j'  I  J'  J'  ;■  I  j'j'  M  J  j'l  J  J  lij'j' 


^  -    tjL/n.—  ■ 


I"i  1 1  I  'Mm  I  I  LI 


n 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


—4   J'  \  ''  J'  .1'  I  I  J  >'  h  J'  ^t^^H^^hl^- 


H^-^    ^ 


■c^yt-^^-rx  J 


te 


'^ 


^i  -    "^Xjo  -  '^      o.  -       -nX  -  -»♦<•     "-  -     7»-i      ij/L.   «^je-    -»«-i       -<4«  -  o 


4]^  I  j^  ;  1  j^  ;  1  J  y  l-i''^,f^^ 


cj^'  J  I  .!■  J'  ■!'  I  fJT;  J  1  js  Js 


frfe 


J(i  -  ■pAx, '-  'iU>   a~     -^U. 
:rjg\^  ^iv<f-  f^'^  '*^^  -nt*. 


^  r  r- 


(h  ^  I  ^  J  ;■  Ij  J-  J'l  J  j'ij  >l^j'j; 


i 


■rr 


r" 


4  4;  l|  >  I  !■  J-   \  )^J-lr  J' l^-i?7l J- Ij^ J>l 


J-KIAJL.       C^-s 


€«-^. 


^a    -to-     J[*~°  -  '^^  &*-  -    *-       ^j***  "  icMi~-  fiany 


* 


iij.^  J'  in' J-  ift^j-i  rj^ 


fefc 


"/' 


¥  y  I ''' ''  y  I  J' J  J' I J  jij  jih'J' 


^ 


^  r"  r  "^ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


¥  111'  i  n  ij'j'i  ninij'  NiJi^ij'ijj 


■TV/yxt^      -7^  <-Xy  l/'T*^ 


1 


<^e  _  ^      ^<-»i  -  tcXt  -  6c«»;     €o  -  Ai.'  M» 


'-^i^fif-  ««t;  3A^iC      *Xt     is-y  ■  - 


^ 


ii 


^^ 


3  J'l]-J^ 


± 


A-'Ai -iX-     Uf.-    «^  J 


vit'^j'  I  J' J'  J'  1;^  J'  J'  I J    J' I J    Pl-^jjll 


± 


J(i- ^'-   tU.  -^-cj^     o.-      -fU       ^       -^      t-^       ^- 


J-n-^-tJTijO>jll 


4  -  w  J' 


tV-fT 


J'  .r  I  J'- J' 


^ 


■» — * 


jA.  -^-< 


l^      Y     I       >      J'        J^     I      f??^      ;■     I      I     J' 


i 


J,    I   J'  J'  J'  I   J  ^ 


r^j  j-i^j'j 


-S ar- 


fci 


JKA. 


f 


a.  -    -»«^ 


r  r 


^^  ><^^  <-.  ""^i^.-  ^  "^r-r  ^ 


r 


4  4J  ij-iij-j'ij;^ij:J'ij  j'l^M 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Al/'^  Iti 


^ 


^ 


^? 


JTT^  '  I  ^>iP^ 


t 


JUci  -  yyLo  '-  'ICo    o.  -     'n*. 


JTe^^   -yr^-  cn^^  ""^    ■"• 


rTT^^  J' j'l  ;■;  j'l  J  jl]  j'llpjil 


tt 


g 


J.  J' I  J.  jU'  J  H-i:fiij>l  j.jI 


i 


^ 


r-v 


-?<A 


->i- 


^v« 


1  ;-  I  ]■  I  .ryj,  j.  I  ^ 


3S 


!^ 


#  ]■  I  J'  J'  ^'  1  ^  M  J  :■ 


M: 


'J'  J' I  I''  MrH  ij  jij  }\m 


^l  -  ^Xo'-  '^   a,' 


^c 


'TlA.   - 


t. 


■7^ 


r  'T 


n' 


trv^  -Li^  fKA.^,.     Ll<,  .^>^Jji  «^  ,  t^    *-lA.       -»»-»"     'y« 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


~CO<xj\.-  O 


Ot^ 


7 


i'^"-i'      J  1       J  Ij         ^ 


>^ 


^ 


^ 


4^^'  )i,  J  1  >  J  I  J  J"  ^ 


P- 


M 


S5 


J^  J-    '  J-    '- 


^ 


y^,.    a.T»v         Oy 


Tc-  IaJL  ay-  -*Jtt  -  ^ifcjt-    -jxX      O-Ci     <*^       c-    e-        *<o.         I^a-  o-   ■>>£..  m^ 


^m 


fiJU'J'JJ'4J"J'J' 


J-    -ta-  -7«-A.     o^ 


<>^ 


'Tt-i 


^ 


's-- 


^ 


M-K.    a,t 


:>, 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


j(c 


^ 


-  f.    «)ty*\^ 


J-Si^iji  J  h  rij  j'iJj'iJ'^^5^ 


I'i  M^|_^^|||ip 


1   yf    V 
^.t-ca-J^Jvo  tfj[   ^»o^  j&^  /o^^  ^,      • 


^^^^^p 


j^  ,.    .   .  €a  -  A. 


(j/^f;^J,ljJ    I  J'  J   I  J'  J'  U^;''ll^jlj^,J' 


A 


<^p*  Jlj  ijj  U'j  Ip;' 


,  J!£it,J:.  ■  Y* 


m 


^ia-  'iCJU.  -«. , 
/ia-<r<.  D, 


jj^  J- 1  ;j" 


fj''  J^  J  l;j.  1;/  I  J  J  |J:,J  IjHnljy' 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Jc 


^ 


-  e,       O^-^yx-. 


Ml 


^'P"  f^j^U'J  iJ:J.'U'  I 


TcoA  ^u.^ca.^^.^  <. 


ai   ^act<   Mi^U  -Ca^t^  Oj. 


<ft  J|J'   Ij-J   I 


Co.. 


# 


/^J-ljsjJj-jlj.J    I    J^J'    I    J'.'^^ 


^#  J'^J'I.J'^  L^M^M^ 


,^  iOL-ijitcl 


r 


oJjt.       iSXtH,-! 


s 


i  'iiUJ.'^^^ 


^o-  c^t^-^  «^  . ^-^  -^^ ^jr  ^ 


y!^;. 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


J^..  -o^  ^  ^Ck      "Wc-     Com.-  €- 


-.</»v     ?»«je^  — 


to.      o~ 


.j?^J;j^  I4.-  J.'  I/J  ll't  lljlj'MljIjJ 


'fk..    col.      A-      A^-    -*>-    ^^      <djU  ^ 


c-   c-    *«A     Aa-am-v 


^'/ 


'P  fjjljj  U'  J  I  Jl''^ 


O  Oa.- 


^^ 


/<i-    <Uc^. 


^  <rH^  •»»«  t^    itcLo*- ,. . .   atKi  'K-  i/*\a   gf—ir  AX.  -  ti*M^  -  »»,  ^_^j 


^^V  w  J  i  j^ 


^ 


k 


jUr«T»»   >"<-     -lia^£.^ 


.jr«  j^js  I  J.  J,  I  J^;^  ij^j^lnljvMjjlpj 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


_^ 


^ 


ig  >  g-     Oct^^ 


^£k2: 


i 


fe 


n  J'  '  J  i  I  J;  j:^ 


^ 


# 


^^ 


^A.-       -Lc-    4(i\.      'ko^-t^- 


r. 


k 


Jn-i*    tkx    4A<f^  ^^^  Lu^^fL   tkjL       fo^  — 


^  J.  1  J;  J.  I  j^  ;>^^ 


iE 


i 


i 


J|iJJ"-M^ 


J'  ji f  I  \j 


* 


Ij^jnI^j.  Ij^J'  I  jv  J'  I  ^  I  IJ"^^ 


e.-      e.~    tyoi.      'hM.-a.T^-^A. 


ft 


^r  JU'  U  J  '^ 


£-t/--      fcA-  /»i<rXX^ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


'P^  S-j}  \  jij.  Ij  J  Ij.'  J'  'J^ 


ife 


.'ft     »  J-   I  J'  j'   1   JW'   I  J      1 


•'T'e.-  £oA       A      «>X«.-    ^     -Ti-i      »X£«. 


CiVo;     Cfer    aci/n/f"  <*v^' 


1/^  ,  ^t  ^a^**^      (i^ 


4^'  ^^ V I  J: J'  i 


a 


m 


i'^j^ljjl>J'l|>lKMMl;'^p 


3,    6feL    / 


Diuni2tiU  by  Mtcwauim 


n 


^ 


^ 


1 


J  n       J^J^ 


::!^ 


^ 


r^  T 


2_ 


i}^\-  I  r  j-^ 


I 


M^-<^A_-  -^i^ 


7A^      <3LO     ^»^  «.^    CO,-^ 


.^A  I-  J' 


i 


^ 


jj'  \  I'  1  -i  r  ^ 


^ 


li 


^f^l^>i|.  h  l^h  Jy-i  N  1^  I'  >■?' 


;    .1'  U    I   M'    (J'E^^^ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


.■Pk  /  J'^v  i>  y\l  M.  I    I  t^^p 


"'i  W^U''''^'^ 


rt 


t 


p 


N      N 


^s^=^ 


^''-'  r  r 


i=^ 


ZZZ3 


-v^ 


'M-'i^  t^   ^^^-  ■^'^^    j^a^i^-      uv^ai^, 


W  j^  ft    >  n^^ 


^  u,  ;■  :■  J    I  ;■  >  :■  ;■ 


i 


feyiE 


^ 


J,  ^  n  ij,  J- :;!:'';  J''' 


^ 


^,^vi  jv  jN  n'\\M 


,1,^^;;^!.    >^pj,  jilU.  J,J     I   J;^^ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


% 


i^  n'U'^  i-g 


^ 


'j-ixc'ttc  f>»<-  €a^,  otix>'  <afct   W-  fie^  t^^^iT^ 


i^H  J.  :■  >j  ]■  1 1:^ 


'^<i».<%,-a-  it  'j>-Uo(L-  it' -  •7«-i  -  ^  , 


^ 


J< 


Cy%/y.  , 


^ 


p^,- 1  J^  r  b  ^ 


^ 


.y  r  .p  j^ ;  I  ;^f^ 


^ 


>^=¥ 


S-K'tciL  ^^*  LuLi-t^i  tix,  'aLt^ 


,     "ha- 


i^jtryvit^  XAuL  y^^fc**^^  C«'>»ie4  etc      > 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


# 


If- 


V>A  '\       Li  N   1 1  M  H    1 


Mo~         -Li    -(tK  -frc^  Ice-^a.   ic  ley. 


"Y 


^ 


f^    1  1  V\\\   ij^^ 


^^ 


}^^.U  -Lo.....  c    -U  (o.  -Lc.lc- 


UA. 


"7 


^- A.   "Aa.    Ka_    ko-jjL    "<v»^       /Uj  a.  -*>«».   «< 


4t 


J. 


■;¥  'I  iju  1,^ 


dWt 


ji/^        TCr«-€<^     -/io.     toi-  i<K   tc   -£.«• 


l- 


"r 


I V    V  1  I J  I  i  ^ 


J  *  d 


T 


^ 


J  J    J    1  ,-J    J     \  J^^ 


^ 


"t — ~ "^ ^ — ^ 

Mv- a.    "Ka     1\  ex.       id-  a.    "Ka.       /to- a   "k<»- ■ 


T 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


K^J^  7^.»/s^ 


1^(1    )  i'l    i'l     \\    ^    \^^     1*1 


T 


f^      ^  T- 


h  vi»ijTniJ  h^i  h  -^ 


-f^   4^    U     -U         -f-  y 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


t 


X^3J^ 


-^ciyr^Jl_^ 


SEo^  a-^ 


'^ 


m 


'V'-i-    V    S. 


^ 


2^=t^ 


^ 


■j.T^JXil^v]^]-j].rI^a^ilU^  I 


)li.XA^  a  e  ■  '■<]«><4   a.   'Ko   (X. 


Mo  ^ 


T 


■%-t      'tLo 


-L      ^         -L^ 


#1 


¥ 


^ 


i  ^  I  ^  ^  j-^J  1^  41  'H  I 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


sAe 


^    ^     Lo  -La        -Ko    *^     i^  1^ 


T 


^ 


4J'I^J     J:1^UJ^ 


^ 


»V<a  •  ><■     tU  -  'jt^    iU  tvo.  -Lo    -Lo 


Tr 


i'  -^i '  ^j  m 


^ 


;/. 


<3. 


r 


■^  -  ^     -^L  x^   *lo  <5     ■Oyirvy.a^ 


JU  ^    i-o  o    ■    '^^' 


J    ^  riu 


*-'w" 


s 


^ 


-^ _    < _  ^      -^        ^      iLo-.ti..   tic..     £i...-^ 


m 


j'Ji  1^  ^^1'^^^ 


ju  ei...- 


to   Ic      .    -U    l^ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Ay..f^l^     Jf^^^f^iX. 


M^4=^ 


3? 


^ 


^ 


|iu^^  ^^^'4,^^ 


t 

^<^ 


-tji  jsU'  X**  fc«        O  '^**'5' 


J4<:  ^  io       °- 


^n 


A      M     Ct  .  .  c  -/t^o        A-O 


<i  -A 


3 


'fs 


^   ^    1   '^  4-^ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


^«Jj^^    ^aTF^^ 


CP'  J||l|..i    i^ 


•^a   -t^-    tU    -t^     tui  M^  -^       o    -^<^  ^ 


f*'Vrril^-!lJJ'J'aUi  i'i^ 


A    -iLo    ti.  . . 


L.    t. 


JU  e.. 


tc      to  i        U       i^ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


'^OicJj.^H^     ^«>.v^ 


Str^y    A--r^  etc    Cey-e^^.^-1,  df  tti.  M  <ru>^^^a^>^    C^«.*Of---> 


/T; 


SW      J* (TV.  A     Z^      ^.4-vKfl 


M./V,  d.  =  €"$ 


tt  0-  ^"; 


cV''"'-Jj  I J  L-j   g 


^ 


^^  ^ 


ba^ 


r^  J   J  N.   g 


^p 


^c)      i    ^  d      i 


d. 


^        ^....:    ^ 


T-    T  ^ 


^^ 


^ 


ux 


fe 


^^ 


i^ 


^d    J  I  J.   J 


^ 


r^ 


r- 


T     T    7^ 


^ 


^ 


^ 


3^ 


^ 


1  1  J    '  I  j  ^^  J  1  J 


^c 


T 


r  r 


r 


Digitized  by  Midi'ti&6tt<& 


^iMr<<r,M^.      .Umf^K 


Mk  (:    i     i     J     ^^ 


-^    J     IJ      'J 


Pe 


=5? 


J     J      J      I    J     c) 


-^ 


^^ 


T;^^ 


-t^ 


r 


^, 


^ 


fu^y^  (%.}  hx-  a^ 


^    ^    J  M-   N  |.:^   J  Ij    J 


\\^^    I     i     I     I     IJ       I 


«.J 


r-r* 


t>u 


^^'il^ 


l=€L.    €e^ 


M  J  J  .1  iJ._j')  I, J  J 1^  J 


.^^ 


"•J^o.-  po-~    xa^o-    /X<a/*v  _  -  ■  -ACL  <_        ,i^^  -    -<-*-<-  -  ■*'}■'-'  ■> 


<)   /vioti  -  Cm, 


J   J   J    M  J 


T't 


'-U. 


m 


i{^) 


>-;^P   J    J    I   N.,Hl^j     I 


i 


y<^      -jCfi      ho--       itn-oyy::-    ^t^  e_  '^-       V^  "      ^'^' 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


^x.-rla  Y'lr^.  ^o.^=<xJL^ 


* 


fe 


J      J      I    J     J 


15^- 


KJL  -    -X/y-i- 


i.. 


M 


jJi'lf    J     J    J     I  gS^ 


f J    n  j    J 


^ 


^ai  _. 


.-4t£-  %<ia/n    a.  -    Ca-«  _ .  .     .  .   <r^  ~       ^     ...  -  Hje.         t-yL.        t^pL. 


fe 


^ 


J       I      J       J 


T'JJ^  .'^'  7"^' 


^ 


4-) 


^■^J^-'  I  i J  J  I J  J  1 


^ 


^^ 


=^ 


^ 


J  J  J  I  J  d 


A 


^^^^^m 


\\^  ] 


^''    &<-  8^- '  OU>  ....  e.        <yc-     y-~     -^  , 


A. 


A 


f 


gi 


J    j    1  J   d 


DigilutiUUy  Miuui>uft® 


^s^tJ.jL-^J,-l.^   /J  ci-^aJL 


'T^ 


'   J    J    )    \ij'i   I   i-l     I    lj      ,ll 


J<a.  -  a       M  a.  -    -^  <5<-i-' 


c|^^^«  ,1  i  I  h  j   1 


t0  J  J  J  I  ^m 


I  ij     i    I  J       J 


"^    7^    T     T 


^5 


J      J      J      I      J 


EU4-+-i-^h-i- 


^ 


r 


<»-i . 


r 


Aa 


T   T   f"' 


^ 


""i  I  I   I  I    r 


t:.^!^^  -'  ^' 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Sf>..^^. 


AtyjnJ-Y^ 


M^Tf^aJU 


# 


'\     J    I  i-     \  J 


:6  ^  \6  J 


Ou 


T 


Oa. 


r 


r-  r  r- 


^ 


j  J  I  j    J 


■1{.^j 


A^      '^it-<^      ^^         i»f^    "^^        ''^      'V?* 


r 


^  r 


r 


digitized  by  iviicroson& 


Sf. 


J. 


»,  ijA***«i<a£  ,   afo**^aJh  ^«/*  CC.     ^L^vo/      iJ^»*<^.m^^ 


att    <Xvrr> 


T 


^ 


>^ 


-70L 


a 


IAe 


s 


^^ 


^^ 


^^ 


;t<»-  <xc,  oa" — 


d* 


* 


-^   <?^A-  -iffli-  ...       X<>-   f-'AiL.,   Ox--    '^. 


^ 


^ 


j   rj   ^ 


^ 


■MX    OA^  -  ^<3U. 


i& 


#»'*  ^^  ^   J        i^  J    I   ^ 


^ 


c!), 


444-^ 


^ 


^ 


^ 


^ 


a. 


fy^.N  '  in  M  1^^ 


C^c<,  tit /^x^  /fe-/-^  j^^-  c^'-^j      <  t^    y^ '^a^  -  <^^- 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


^ 


^■J    .N     I.     \%p    I   I' I  J)^^^ 


g.T»K  ^]  fj 


I 


^^ 


^j  I  i  M  ;^ 


^ 


l^O'hf\tO  CiX  J CiO\-  u  ft^ty   ^iA^Oj-  iA^o,  ^    < 


» 


S- J'  i    ;m    I  ;^^ 


?= 


#n^,  ^-j  Q-1  J  ■'! 


:f-V'l    'f^;  M  1 


J  -^  j  ^  J  r-. 


■Ley  -  ■■iCo-^ -^a  -  ^aJ- 


M-e- 


s 


^fe 


>«-    ^t/t^Oi  .  -c*^^ 


m 


4— 4- 


^ 


Jk 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


jfj^r^y^'*-^  -  e-        cJ 


-o^^ 


1 


ii 


^ 


t^ 


iJi  n  I  J  >  )  j-j  j'l^^ 


^ 


fc 


J:  J    M    1  J- 


s 


li 


^ 


-^— s 


.^^^'(^    ^<a.-c)«.-    -tr-'>^~   ^    6-^- 


JL\^)'  tkr  tiot.-  ^M/t^ J  itt^-  cA.  Do 


a 


J     J  >    J 


^ 


idc/o/^,  — 


OTAci 


J'y"  1-  ■!    i  I  !  ]  I  ^ 


a  ,  iTOM^f-  i*  ^ 


-yUo^-'i^L}  V 


'W 


tc. 


^^UAMua   Xi  ■f^fC't'-'^^j^.r^   V 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


fa 


j:  J     J      1  J>=3=^ 


^ 


JL'  ' 


*IX3- 


^Pl  ''nrn  i  . 


-  <Jx^«.-e-.,.-.^....     -Co;, 


I  ^'tf,i  J  J  u>  i  :j  ;  I 


3 


§5 


I    VUINI    '   M[^ 


^E 


^^ 


?s^ 


J.  I  J  /  J.    J   H 


3=S 


-*-<- 


^ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


/n.rti 


M^ 


■^ 


OM... 


'Ct.o^-'^s:. 


f^'- 


l^\  %     f-j^  ^     I  ^^ 


^-eo*- ^-   -tuJL, 


% 


m 


^ 


^^ 


^^ 


V^  \  n.  i  I  ^  ^  ^  !• 


^•^'''•'"'lii  iP^ 


A«^<^ 


^<X     /t£ 


r 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


-    <l'^''t  J  J    J  J;    rjlj.  j.^^^ 


JC^ey^iJt,]^ -jfft^V^. 


^'M'  Tj  J'ji  \l  \  nj'  Ml  J  ^i^/'l  ^ 


M^y 


^ 


lj_\i'i'i''\ 


^ 


cm    <x> 


¥''^ri  X  li^j.^ 


(f'^^'fllJ.  ^ 


<•  ^<l 


i<X.   -Ail 


r 


^ 


|i  fi  ,fj.ii  j^ 


0-^->»*- 4**»- "-*  "  <4*      ■^^  I       JX>-       ^<c£i-  <-  -^i-*- 


)^/0  -->»<i- 


^*i«-^ti- ^-  -^  ,       '\f..Oo...9^i'c^-^-^^. 


uigitizea  oy  iviicrosonfs) 


Jia  t/iP\  a/r\ ^^^^t^/^K. 


*>'  neli^jiyv. 


M 


S 


n  J' J;  I  J'j'  'IS  l-i'J'^  g|i^ 


4^^''-^  Tyi  I  )■  J  M  1 


i 


' ''  n  I  '  "^  ^  ^'  (Tiy 


:4 


4'i-^>t  rj  J.  iji  rj,   li 


i 


Oil...    <^    -Uouu.-^- f^»: 


fc=! 


S 


vj:j;  J.  ij 


Xt 


€Oi.    A<x      ^Aju 


r 


<P^^^|1  q  lU  Ju'i^Ulij'^ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


//f/i  f^^v  <o/i^  ^i) 


fx^tyyi. 


i[^yk^l  I'll  ^  U  f^jl  j^XJ'J;IJj^J"i'"/'" 


<^^OtZ   cm.^,..    ...Vlc/J-.     <^(>^^,        a^du  c^^y^,   Y^-£^- 


¥'^  ^^  I  i  I  i  ^  i  1 1 J^  J'i  ^^  ^' '  ''^^^ 


<j^n>  j,  ^  ^  J-Js  ^[J  1-^^.J;  J-J;l  J'J;r1^^/"^ 


fA.      <)a-  A 


^ 


^ 


ii 


n  j-j.  I J  J'  /rr^  p^  P  .Q'^p 


TJoX-    ♦So  7U>-  ^-fco- 9*Cv 


^ 


A. 


ti^- 


^^  I  ;■  J^  J^  ^i 


Z^-- 


M 


9^- 


^Oo  >^-    ]^*-°'  ^"^    > 


-^^tXAA-   XX  -      '■f^^    ^ 


31 


'li  i^J  H'U^ 


^ 


■Co  ^  -{y^O-f^  -  «■-    £-*^  )  ■   ■  <>«"  -    OjuD^i 

Digitized  by  MidrdSdn^ 


Jfa/i^<i^  iAo^^^i.-^r'/^' 


i^^Mi, nx  \  jv X 


m 


5S 


XXX   1 


?^o  e. 


a.   ^Lxx.    ^e^ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


PUEBLO   INDIANS    TITLE-PAGE 

The  design  at  the  bottom  of  the  page  is  a  symbolic  figure  which 
represents  in  conventionalized  form  ctoads,  lightning,  and  fall- 
ing rain.  The  drawing,  made  free-hand,  is  by  Gashhoienim,  a 
Hopi  Indian  girl. 

The  lettering  and  decorations  are  by  Hinook  Mahiwi  Kilinaka 
(Angel  De  Cora).  Each  letter  is  composed  of  the  terraced 
cloud-form,  typical  of  Southwestern  Indian  designs.  Behind 
the  words  "  Pueblo  Indians "  is  seen  a  suggestion  of  a  pueblo 
crowning  a  steep  mesa.  On  each  side  of  the  cloud-design  are 
lightning  arrows.  The  page  speaks  of  the  village  people,  in 
whose  agricultural  life  the  great  necessity  is  rain. 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


w!^M'////^ 


m 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE  PUEBLO  INDIANS 


UEBLO"  is  a  Spanish  word  meaning  tcnvrif  and  is  used 
to  designate  those  Indians  who  live  in  villages  or  cities. 
Ancient  Indian  towns  still  inhabited,  and  ruins  of  yet 
older  cities,Iie  strewn  throughout  New  Mexico  and  Arizona, 
the  home  of  the  Pueblo  people.  Though  the  natives  of  the  different 
Pueblos  are  of  different  linguistic  stock,  yet  they  closely  resemble 
one  another  in  their  manner  of  life  and  in  their  thought. 

The  Pueblo  Indians  have  ever  been  a  peaceful  agricultural 
folk,  subsisting  on  the  com,  vegetables,  and  fruits  which  by  dint 
of  ceaseless  toil  they  force  from  the  arid  land.  They  have  their 
own  peculiar  methods  of  desert-agriculture  and  their  own  system 
of  irrigation. 

Rumors  of  the  wealth  and  splendor  of  the  Indian  towns  at- 
tracted the  Spanish  explorers  of  the  sixteenth  century.  Over  the 
deserts  marched  the  weary  invaders,  only  to  find  a  simple  folk 
living  as  now  in  villages  of  stone  and  adobe.  The  Spaniards  sub- 
dued the  Pueblos  and  controlled  them  till,  in  the  year  1680,  the 
villages  rose  in  concerted  rebellion  and  drove  out  the  hated  con- 
querors. 

The  Pueblo  Indians  have  attained  to  a  very  high  grade  of  culture 
on  the  primitive  plane.  They  excel  in  their  own  ancient  industries, 
being  skilled  potters,  weavers,  basket-makers,  and  builders.  Also 
they  have  in  crude  form  veritable  musical,  poetic,  and  dramatic 
art.  As  with  all  Indians,  religion  is  here  closely  interwoven  with 
art  and  industry  and  with  daily  living.  But  with  the  Pueblo  Indians, 
religious  observance  is  perhaps  more  elaborately  ceremonial  than 
with  most  tribes.  The  Pueblos  are  rich  in  mythology  and  tradition, 
and  their  simple  viflage  life  is  framed  in  ancient  customs  both  in- 
teresting and  poetic.  Symbol  begins,  for  these  Indians,  with  the 
hour  of  birth.     In  some  villages  it  is  the  custom  that  the  new- 

'1  [425] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'    BOOK 

bom  child  shall  not  behold  the  outside  world  until,  after  a  stated 
number  of  days,  it  is  carried  forth  at  dawn  to  see  its  father,  the  sun. 
As  the  first  rays  shine  upon  the  child,  prayers  are  uttered  for  the 
new  life,  while  over  the  little  one  are  solemnly  repeated  its  newly 
given  names.  Thus  at  birth  does  the  Pueblo  Indian  first  look  upon 
the  world  at  birth  of  day.  Existence,  for  him,  begins,  unfolds, 
and  ends  with  symbol  that  is  the  very  poetry  of  life  itself. 

The  religion  of  this  desert  -  dwelling,  agricultural  people  ex- 
presses the  supreme  need  —  rain.  Song  and  ceremony  are  one 
long  invocation  for  the  life  -  producing  waters.  Hard  must  the 
Pueblo  Indian  work,  struggling  against  drought  and  sand-storm 
to  procure  the  com  which  is  his  sustenance. 

Of  these  village  -  dwellers  the  Spanish  conquerors  narrated, 
**  They  have  the  finest  persons  of  any  people  we  saw."  They  are 
small  and  brown,  delicate  of  feature,  courteous  of  manner,  gentle 
and  refined.  The  native  dress  has  beauty  and  charm,  and  is  per- 
fectly adapted  to  the  climate  and  to  the  life  of  the  people.  But 
it  is  passing  away  before  the  effort  to  force  all  things  Anglo-Saxon 
upon  this  unaggressive,  beauty-loving  folk. 

The  peaceful  disposition  of  the  Pueblo  Indians  and  their  native 
ancient  systems  of  civic  government  have  made  of  their  villages 
well-ordered,  thrifty,  and  industrious  communities.  The  white 
visitor  learns  many  a  simple  lesson  from  the  life  of  these  most  ancient 
inhabited  towns  of  the  United  States,  the  pueblos  of  the  Southwest. 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


)TiQiaiii 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


ZUNI 


I  lUNI  is  one  of  the  most  famed  of  all  Pueblos.  It  is  now 
^  generally  agreed  that  the  Seven  Cities  of  Cibola,  chron- 
^^  idled  by  the  Spanish  discoverers,  were  identical  with  the 
'  \  habitations  of  the  Zani  people.  The  pueblo  lies  on  the 
level  plain  near  an  arm  of  the  Little  Colorado  River.  Around  it 
rise  the  steep  buttes  and  table-lands  of  New  Mexico.*  To  the  east 
stands  the  great  mesa'  **  To'yaHanne,"  ^  the  sacred  mountain  of  the 
Zunis,  ever  hallowed  by  tradition  and  prayerful  pilgrimage.  Com 
is  the  main  sustenance  of  the  Pueblo  people.  It  is  ground  by  the 
women  in  stone  grinding-troughs,  or  ''metates."  These  consist  of 
a  flat  stone  slab  which  is  set  into  the  floor  of  the  house  at  a  slight 
angle,'  and  encompassed  by  stone  gutters  to  receive  the  ground 
particles. 

The  com  is  placed  on  the  stone  and  is  ground  by  rubbing  over 
it  another  cubelike  stone.  The  woman  kneels  to  the  work  and 
sways  back  and  forth  with  rhythmic  swing.  As  she  grinds  she 
sings.  There  are  usually  two  or  three  mctates  in  each  house,  and 
two  or  three  women  often  grind  and  sing  together.  Sometimes  a 
woman  will  invite  many  others  to  her  house  to  grind,  spreading 
for  her  guests  a  mid-day  feast.     The  visitors  grind  the  com  of 

NOTE   FOR  PRONUNCIATION  OF  ZUNI   TEXT 

While  in  many  Indian  languages  there  are  sounds  not  exactly  the  same  as  in  the 
corresponding  ones  of  European  tongues,  in  the  Zuni  occur  sounds  that  have  no 
counterpart  at  all  in  European  languages.  Such  sounds,  therefore,  can  be  expressed 
by  the  Roman  alphabet  approximately  only. 

Unless  otherwise  specified,  vowels  have  the  Continental  sound,  and  consonants 
the  English.  ^ 

'  Table-land — plateaa.  _         „  .  v  j.      .. 

'According  to  Mrs.  M.  C.  Stevenson,  "  Towa  -  Yallanne  "  (Com -Mountain)?  accordmg  to 
Mr.  Frank  Gushing,  "  Toyalane  "  (Thunder-Mountain). 

[4291 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'    BOOK 

their  hostess,  taking  their  places  in  turn  at  the  metates.  Those 
who  are  resting  swell  the  chorus  of  the  workers,  and  the  flutelike 
voices  rise  Iiigh  and  clear  over  the  rhythmic  scraping  of  the  stones. 
In  Zuni,  at  such  gatherings,  the  youths  sometimes  sing,  or  play  the 
flute  and  drum,  while  the  maidens  ply  the  stones,  and  when  the 
grinding  is  done  the  maidens  dance. 

The  Zuni  grinding-songs  here  offered  are  old  traditional  songs. 
Two  were  sung  by  women  whose  white  hair  and  quavering  voices 
told  of  weflnigh  fourscore  years.  All  the  songs  were  contributed 
by  persons  high  in  authority  in  the  village,  whose  traditional  con- 
servatism forbids  the  mention  of  their  names. 


OCKAYA 

Corn-Grinding   Songs 


OCKAYA 

EI«  homa 

Yallanne  I 
Ela  homa 

Yallanne  I 

Yallannc  I 
Awehlwla'  kwai-i, 
Imana  kwagia, 
Lonan-eshto  'wiyane, 

He-ya,  ha-ya,  he-yal 
Liwamani 
lyateapa 
Awiyane, 
Hawilana  litla. 


CORN-GRINDING  SONG 

O,  my  lovely  mountain, 

To'yallanne  I 
O,  my  lovely  mountain, 

To'yallanne ! 

To'yallanne ! 
High  up  in  the  sky, 
See  Rain-Makers  seated, 
Hither  come  the  rain-clouds  now, 

He-ya,  ha-ya,  he-ya  I 
Behold,  yonder 
All  will  soon  be  abloom 
Where  the  flowers  spring — 
Tall  shall  grow  the  youthful  corn-plants. 


Note. — ^Mrs.  Stevenson,  of  the  Bureau  of  American  Ethnology  in  Washington,  says  that 
the  Rain-Makers  are  the  spirits  of  the  dead  Zunis,  who,  dwelling  in  the  nether  world,  come  at 
the  summons  of  the  gods  to  make  rain  for  the  Zuni  people.  The  clouds  are  their  masks,  for 
their  faces  are  too  holy  to  be  seen  of  men.  So  when  impersonating  the  Rain-Makers  in  their 
dances,  the  Zunis  wear  masks. 

See  "  iSie  Zuni  Indians,  their  Mythology,  Esoteric  Societies,  and  Ceremonies,"  by  Matilda 
Coxe  Stevenson,  Twenty-third  Annual  Report,  Bureau  American  Etlinology.  "Outlines  ZuSi 
Creation  Myths,"  by  Frank  Hamilton  Cushing,  Thirteenth  Annual  Report,  Bureau  American 
Ethnology. 

[430] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


w 


IV  H^ 


■■*# 


,**^ 


Going  to  tf^^   Spring  in  Winter 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


ZUNI 


II 


Song  by  the  youths  while  the  maidens  grind  the  com 


OCKAYA 

EIu  honkwa  lonan  iyane  I 
EIu  honkwa  hiiton  iyane  ! 

Lekwa  kela  aiyan-towa 

Pene  aiyaye 
Haihoma  antona, 
Holon-ellete 
Lilthno  kela 
Kiawe-kwai-i  nawane  1 


CORN-GRINDING   SONG 

Lovely  !    See  the  dead,  the  cloud  appear ! 
Lovely  !    See  the  rain,  the  rain  draw  near ! 

Who  spoke  ? 
'Twas  the  little  corn-ear 
High  on  the  tip  of  the  stalk 
Saying  while  it  looked  at  me 

Talking  aloft  there — 
"  Ah,  perchance  the  floods 

Hither  moving — 
Ah,  may  the  floods  come  this  way  1" 


III 

In  this  song  the  rainbow  is  imagined  as  the  Rainbow  Youth, 
and  he  is  described  as  "  brightly  decked  and  painted."  The  swallow 
is  the  stanmoner  of  rain.     The  Zunis  say  he  "  sings  for  rain !" 


OCKAYA 

Amitola  tsina-u-a-ne 
Ela,  el«  toma  wahane 
Kiawulokia  pena  wulokia. 
Kesi  liwamani 

HIiton  iyane  ! 
Kesi  liwamani 

HIapi  hanan  iyane ! 

Letekwan  atowai 
Awawakia  litla. 
Hi  yai — ela  ! 


CORN-GRINDING  SONG 

Yonder,  yonder  see  the  fair  rainbow, 
See  the  rainbow  brightly  decked  and 

painted  ! 
Now  the  swallow  bringeth  glad  news  to 

your  corn. 
Singing,  "  Hitherward,  hitherward,  hither- 
ward,  rain, 

"  Hither  come  !" 
Singing,  "  Hitherward,  hitherward,  hither- 
ward, white  cloud, 
"  Hither  come  !" 
Now  hear  the  corn-plants  murmur, 
"  We  are  growing  everywhere  !" 
Hi,  yai!    The  world,  how  fair  ! 
[431] 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'    BOOK 


SHOKO  OTinCWE 


SHOKO  OTIIKWE 

Qiuap-tono, 

Chuap-tono, 

Kela  ite  tsina-u  ? 

Amitola-Tsawafci. 

Ma  honkwa  hito; 

Lonawe, 

HIitowe, 

Uletchi 

Ite  tsina-u  1 


CORN-DANCE  SONG 

Who,  ah  know  ye  who — 

Who,  ah  know  ye  who — 

Who  was't  that  made  a  picture  the  first  ? 

'Twas  the  bright  Rainbow  Youth, 

Rainbow  Youth — 
Ay,  behold,  'twas  even  thus — 

Qouds  came, 

And  rain  came 

Qose  following — 
Rainbow  then  colored  all  I 


THLAH   HEWE 

Song  of  the  Blue-Corn  Dance 


THLAH  HEWE 

Hi — ah-hai,  elu  ! 

Shi— elu ! 
Lowi-yuteapa, 
Mateona  kesi, 
Lowi-yuteapa 
Awiyane 
Litia 


(Old  Chief's  Song) 

SONG  OF  THE  BLUE-CORN  DANCE 

Beautiful,  lo,  the  summer  clouds. 
Beautiful,  lo,  the  summer  clouds  I 
Blossoming  clouds  in  the  sky. 
Like  unto  shimmering  flowers. 
Blossoming  clouds  in  the  sky. 
Onward,  lo,  they  come, 
Hither,  hither  bound  ! 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


A  Zuni  Maiden 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


L/C/A  ^i-M-^s — ■' 


j.^,  K  1,  \  V  I'l    n't^v  liKJ  I J 


^yf 


of-  6a^ 


7o    -  -Vo*  -  ^O'*^  -      '»!  C 


I — s — ' 


!:>     ^.   1.   r   t  n     ir   h.  |1  h  1  Lj 


£-  &.  t,- 


-  ^aJi  -  Ca^  -     -  •    -»t  e  / 


.%iw.^. 


<X»i  -      tJt^  ', 


i^  J  J  .1  1    1     1 


^ 


-Ci^.^Oyt,..'-         -».e    / 


/^ 


£ 


5C'w-  6 


a.^  -    -»ie 


^ 


■^    J  ^'  i  i'  '  ^^ 


{ji-'^e.--i£uri-o^  /U!^o-^  ■*- 


Mfy 


*y^       ttx. 


.^, 


J'**- 


4  I    J  J I  <t   1^1 


i 


!M    i      U 


c-    -yto-^yi 


'^tiiX.  C<rtv.e.   -ttr        ^A-^SLi^  '  eXv^^ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


fe 


'^'  ii-ly  I'  I  ^  J I JJ 


■'^r-n 


''^C  -         -Ao^j  .  .   ■  ■     -M^r^.  -      <)£A-        <5iX<.        4,^Ct    a^o-iT*'     ^ 


'»»^  -       -<.  -  ..4^,c*  -   "^  -  <a.  -    -^tt- 


i 


i 


J  J  1  Jin 


^ 


• — sr 


..^^^K.'it^a.  -^ 


'j'  I  '  u  i  I  na>j  u  li 


:£z 


4 


O.  -    co-i  - 


€a.^    ^<^       6_. 


-t5ft 


^^^j.Xjt    ^^d£<.    CT-<rwo    tfe"  ^  c-^^-  Xi-X^         C«j-tx»i  -    /h€<iL/fjf^ .  - 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


c 


1  /S-x^'-tX-^ 


U<r^'^y 


* 


^^iq  1   1  I  I's.^ ' )  \  I  \  -I  t^^ 


I        1         ' 


Gx^^' 


3 


r 


j.  1   1  h   1  I  i-{  '-I   1  i'-^^^ 


L     d.      -^^.4^0.  hx-i^ 


^'■^ 


<JoL         tfcc 


«■  -   -<^'«. 

-fix,     .^ou^      ^ 


CLoJ      '»t  ^OA^   , 


(|>  J^  J        - 


^ 


'h        ^         -I         I  I      ^  ^ 


c      ^<x  .  cu  -   -^  O'^         "'e 


JcJOJ)  ttk. .  .  .  oJ~  - 


Cj<y^-^*K.  -      c<sLA- 


'i  i  1 1  u  im 


^ 


* 


Ox" 


^^ 


tv-i-l  i    i:^^ 


^ 


iS-c- 


'<3^  -    ''*»'5t-- 


■  DiyitUtiU  by  MlcmsolHa) 


tX^AJL^    


4  ^    J   1 J  i  U     1 


m 


1^  J  J  \ 


u^- 


ftc 


/^. 


^ 


J^i  -    -flfc-C  ->»•  trcr-  4*ya)    _ 


1    J      J.    I       1 


3£ 


J       -       '-J 


^y»j<  -  tAXk.- 


Coft^e    ^fciS". 


-»•«, 


iU>Ci^  !  ■ 


DigitivRrl  hv  MicmRnfK^ 


^\    \\      It  V     I  J  /   J^ 


3 


4     >i   ^     I  J     '' 


&-<r«-0  J 


.  .  .     €r<r>^ 


* 


5 


n  rn J   I J   i 


/- 


Jo  -     'i*^o-       COO- -Ao.  .  fie— 


j  J  J  I 


irjj  Ij    I 


^ 


'.f'  /  J  J  I  I     4-  J     I J  i 


^^-  ^-      /lu. 


/T 


r*^ 


to->-»v, , 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


(^cJCc 


O-^t^L^OL-^ 


4^1    1   I  1-  M  II  1   I    I  '^^HT} 


<« 


>^-7r- 


i  J   .Li  I  J      I 


C<r-»»*«^ 


(  " 


j    J   J    I  J  J'  J   I  J  J'  I    I  J-^ 


/<'« 


A- 


d        J 


i  i  U  I  J 


t7-  -^.^ — '••      -»>< 


i^    U  J    N     I  ^^  '7  I  U 


_^<l*0  M*-*-     'fct'       ecu-" 


Ol—     ■ 


-ir- 


'/HCtA-  ■ 


-2? 


n  rj 


g:>  J    I  J 


i 


-COXA.  - 


fe 


t^ 


r- 


'  J I J  -  l-J  I 


^ 


* 


o4:  -- ;  ■ 


^cruj.^^ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Oc^H. 


r 


^^ 


^ 
^ 


0 


■  ttn 


l\  '  Min  Ij  rj  I  rj  nij  ij 


e.....     6^'.... 


jv.-^ .^^...  -A  ^ 


T 


■KJL    '-u^  ...         -fji,     -^<* 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


g^*A*A#<^  ^3L.»j3~-<«  C^ 


'I  >        ■'  1        1l       ^^ 


(2A- 


^. 


^i 


\  \    in  J 


s 


/a-£ 


41. 


fe 


r 


i 


TS? 


te 


^    \'^      \'^      I.I       1    ,1       1  J     J    I.I 


ii 


P\>  J     i     I  J    J    I  J-J  J    1 


h 


^^ 


ii 


^ 


^ 


C^o- 


->>«a.-  «oe. 


,     -^-         '^-        6JC,       ^<-      ^-        -/^ 


IJt.  ffl-tStti      C  a^t9\  C      £ly*--0  /tjOLA^^m,  C.  < 


c/U-^n.    £a<  -    d«rT-0 


Ct^Cju 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


S-i.^^  cyti^A"^^ 


^ 


,\^n  J  J  J  1^.  ^ 


j^'^  u  I  ij  11  mj  1  iji. 


o^    -^ 


^ 


-AX.  -W*. 


r- 


^^ 


?^ 


<>-«.     ^   -Ok    '^?-''*-      "*■*• 


38 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


m.m.    J  -  /3Z 


f'liV,  i^i'    I  I    I    M.I   I    h' 


# 


■Ujl J  Co ,    -ttx 


ij,"' '  i'  ^i 


^ 


h 


6^    ' 


i-1,  \  h  1  M  Li  I  J"J    1 


S? 


tt 


4,V  j-j  j  I  j-|  J  1 J  rj  I  J 


1^. 


V     I 


M,i 


i 


i 


^^ 


n  i  u  -^^ 


±1^ 


M 


^. 


Ih'  '^.^  1^'    ij 


.^         -Jxjcrr^ 


-ty\yi, 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


1 


m 


a 


'it,  —       CL  - 


n  I J  J 


a 


■Cf-at.  ~    "A  <A  ■ 


■ttK_^ 


i 


<9*»-    <*}ouCt),        ^Co,      "^^"^        c<r»««  , 


J      I   J      -t-J 


^ 


SI 


V  I    I  n  D^ 


-^ 


^L 


1^ 


fe^ 


/. 
^ 


r 


/- 


<X4. 


^ 


3=Z 


^ 


^ 


£^ 


r^ 


J   I J   1 J 


r 


<^ 


-/« 


I  J      Ml 


JU 


r^ 


/«.   ^ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


SAN   JUAN   AND   ACOMA  TITLE-PAGE 

The   designs  represent  masks  worn  fay  the  Pueblo  Indians  in 
'.ilSeremonial  costttme.     Upon  the  masks  are  painted  symbols  of 
cloud,  sun,  lightning,  rainbow,  and  rain.     These  drawings  are 
by  a  Laguna  Indian,  Idima  (John  Com),  of  the  Com  clan. 
The  fettering  is  by  Hinook  Hahiwi  Kilinafca  (Angel  De  Cora). 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


SAN  JUAN 


AN  JUAN  is  one  of  the  largest  of  the  tipper  Rio  Grande 
pueblos,  inhabited  by  people  of  Taiioan  stock.  The 
village  was  dedicated  by  the  Spanish  conquerors  to  St. 
John.' 


ACOMA 

Yaka-Hano  Gatzina  Yoni 
(Corn-People  Gatiiaa.  Songs) 


.1  HREE  dance -songs  from  the  paeblo   of  Acoma,  New 

TMexicot  have  been  contributed  to  The  Indians*  Book  by 
an  Acoma  Indian.  They  are  songs  of  the  Yaka-Hano 
zrrzdy  Gatzina,  or  Corn-People  Gatzina.  The  Gatzinas  are 
mythological  beings  who  are  impersonated  in  the  ceremonials  by 
dancers  wearing  masks  deco- 
rated with  emblems  of  clouds, 
lightning,  rainbow,  and  with 
other  symbols.  The  word  Gat- 
zina. corresponds  to  the  Hopi 
word  Kaizinat  only  that  with 
the  Acomas  the  accent  is  placed 
on  the  first  syllable,  with  the 
Hopis,  on  the  second. 

The  three  Acoma  songs  in 
this  book  are  sung  on  vocables  and  contain  only  two  words,  pro- 
longed in  singing — "shiwana"  (cloud),  and  "hawilana"  (growing 
com).^    These  songs  are  sung  in  Acoma,  Laguna,  Zuni,  and  possibly 
in  other  villages. 

'  For  San  Joan  song,  see  page  449.  '  See  Hopi  "  Katzinas,"  page  482. 

[447] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


'  ^»^v>     ^>^t«.  «a--»v  '.^tjuij^-<j4) 


4- 


J         J 


J  J  :    J        J       ..       J        ei^ 


4-^,'    1    I  44^171'  I  vV"i    Ij  ^-h  J 


A         e- 


r 


L 


c    -e- 


I     1  1  la^^  1 1/'V^  1^^ 


^«.  i^ 


r 


/C 


^U-    e 


fe^ 


li-J-    J       I 


SS 


^. 


c  v<x    e. 


r 


'^-  I H.  n  u^  J  J' ' 


^ 


^ 


^7     '  T'^ 


-9 

Oi.        A. 


«_ 


w^m 


ty      i 


1^"  7- 


I J  1 J  1 


^ 


3 


^5= 


^ 


^^=^    .# 
C-.. 


M' 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


^   "T      '  T 


a.     - 


I  n.   n.  in_riiij    t\  ^ 

1 


<-  -     <-- 


Digitized  by  kiicrosonfs) 


0  ^ 


Sir*"*".  At, — ■ T 


I  I   v\.\ 


* 


r. 


(    I 


jf 


^ 


^ 


a- 


■H*. 


Ty^tme  /^M-  i'/aJf 


o        Ok  -  n*. 


4u.- 


t*Z^ 


O         <X  -     «M. 


Ac*-  o  -  1 


-i^        ■ ' 


I  jjritij'j'hi 


^..  «ii».  a/  iU.  »-A.     ■i-^'  ^lh^^ 


1  n: 


4  ^  j^  j^  J^  j^  I  J'  y  y  ^  '■ 


a  -L 


.0.-0-         o^ 


^  iJi-u 


T 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


-^aA(o^  ^a**o   ^ejjf\i^  o^  V- 


^ry»*-*- 


TZ    n....-  n   ri  .  n    n    ,  n    ^  y 


jJi  J^  ]-n  i  j^gp 


£«.— 


<<^ 


i 


:♦ 


J     i      .J      J 


i        i       :     J        J 


* 


J        J       J    ^ 


OjHU.jj  JilJjVj  f'nin,iJJ 


12: 


=S? 


V^--'-''' 


Xl2 r— r^ 


^^ 


1^;.  >  i-v  J^■rJ'J'^■lJlJ■J^J■;'; 


a-ni 


h. 


oX. ..  all.  aX.  «-^    <^ 


--^ 11-.  ■,  J    J 


..1- 


■f^f^r 


iU \   1 J  J  I  J^ 


A      -Ka.  -Aa     <»-^        ~*-^ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


(jCr>r.f?^ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


I± 


1  J    J     i     I  J    J     i    l^-J^   i 


^ 


Ma  oM. 


'ka.   aA.    oM. 


J- J--,..  J    -J  r     y       T        : 


c;j^  Tj  ]  1  j  ^^ 


-J  -    J   -.  J    J 


:     i 


I         I 


^ 


I     t 


^.. 


J   ; 


r 


-J J . 


^^  J   J    ''  J 


^ 


^^ 


* 


■Li        -ti     ^        '^ 


J-  ,'4      J 


J    ..  i  J    JJ-.ij 


}j    U^  U^  j  JjTj  I  /jjiji^jji; 


JL 


4 1 


* - 


n — I 


■cjtK~ «.-  *«.-  «ta.. 


r       I     .a-i.,ll  :ls 


dpW    I.U.I  N^]  J  li  J  J  r.nj  1 1  J]i.iij 


t//A- a.- .t.»i-. 

•-- —  /     #  — .-  #-— J — i-i   -  • 


^  — . . 


3 


-    J -J 


J     J 


L-  A<x- 


J  J  Ij   im^  I J  .1  I J  ^1 1) 


^ 


■?ia. . 


c3^c*.-'fc<!- 


r- 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


-r£ 


f  JnM'o.    41a^o  ^asM^  a  "^P"^*^^ 


t 


>.    J   ;    5 


.  J    ; 


4-4  J  i  |-r^ 


^ 


j«/a^ 


-r 


Aa     ^'»-    oJs.  ^a.        ■e-^ 


#?TTi  J  J  t 


»     J 


^ 


^      /<».         Aa     /^ 


k<2^ 


)  \ 


)        \  ..      )  \  .       i  .J 


J  J 


.,'5- 


^j^   JlJ      1  J    1     I  J     1      1    ]      J      I  ^^ 


•'     /■       ^f^f 


Ol 


KA      Js.a 


uigirizea  by  Microsoft® 


^  nr 


Mt.m-  J  ^  /o8 


s^ 


i     J     .  J      J        .  i 

I — sri 


vl]N-    ^1^    ^'^ 


^ 


p    ''^ 


J      .  J 


^^....^ 


V  '1 1  I  i     t  U  I  1     Li  I  1  1-L1  J-  ^ 


i^: 


^? 


t 


r         4  *- 


e,     iS. 


A 


fe 


->  iJ    ^J, 


^  J   J   J  ^a  i   J 


J.  1 J    J   J  IV 


-* — ^-#- 


^a    e.         a.         to     e. 

4  i     i 


;zt4 


^ 


J   J  l.J    J 


^^ 


I        J        .     )         I  ^     I  J  V 


I'     J 


3 


J     ]    1  J    Vlj   1-',  >i'^      ^^1 


y^ 


»=*: 


^i^V 


-^  6r    ntK.     -nl. . 

.     1  i 


i'|,  |Ti  i  J  jTi  1 1  {Ti  1 1^^^ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


"iA-a/CA.    J4ii^o  ^oAry^o-   ^^<r>t>c^ 


I       i        i         J 


^ 


J         I        > 


J        i        J       It 


^E 


^ 


>v. 


<?  ^ 


<aL  ,to 


^ 


i  J  J   1 J    J    U     1  J  -"^ 


12 


3^ 


A        7f. 


A.  CL 


<< 


^ 


r 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


LAGUNA    TITLE-PAGE 

Tfae  design  represents  a  symbolic  beast  sach  as  is  painted  on 
the  wall  of  the  poeblo  estufa   (ceremonial  council    chamber). 
The  drawing  is  by  a  Laguna  Indian,  Idima  (John  Com),  of  the 
G>m  clan. 
The  lettering  is  by  Hinook  Mahiwi  Kilinafca  (Angel  De  Cora). 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


1-jr 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


LAGUNA 


AGUNA  is  one  of  the  largest  pueblos  in  New  Mexico. 
The  houses,  like  nearly  all  ptteblo  dwellings,  are  of  two 
or  more  stories  set  back  one  above  another  in  terrace 
form,  so  that  the  roof  of  the  first  story  is  at  the  same 
time  the  balcony  of  the  second.  On  balcony  and  ho«se-top  the 
Pueblo  Indian  lives  almost  as  much  as  within  doors.  Floating 
from  the  upper  story  of  some  whitewashed  house  may  be  often 
heard  the  song  of  the  corn-grinder  quavering  in  sweet,  unusual 
melody  to  the  rhythm  of  the  stones. 

The  grinding-songs  here  offered  are  very  old,  and  most  of  the 
words  are  archaic.  The  first  song  tells  of  "wonder-water,"  the 
welcome  rain-water  caught,  after  showers,  by  the  hollows  in  the 
rocks  so  common  in  this  country  of  strange  erosion.  The  Laguna 
Indians  thus  explain  these  songs  t  "After  rain,  the  water  stands 
in  hollows  in  the  rocks.  It  is  good,  fresh  water — medicine-water. 
It  brings  new  life  to  him  who  drinks.  In  the  song  we  say:  'Look 
to  the  southwest,  look  to  the  southeast!  The  clouds  are  coming 
towards  the  spring;  the  clouds  will  bring  the  water!*  It  is  from  the 
southwest  and  the  southeast  that  we  usually  get  our  rains.  The 
other  song  is  about  the  butterflies,  blue  and  red  and  yellow  and 
white.  We  tell  them  to  fly  to  the  blossoms.  At  the  end  of  the 
song  we  say,  *Go,  butterfly,  now  go,  for  that  is  all!*" 

The  songs  were  sung  by  many  Indians,  among  them  an  aged 
woman  of  authority  well  versed  in  the  lore  of  her  people. 

NOTE  FOR  PRONUNCIATION  OF  LAGUNA  TEXT 

Unless  otherwise  indicated,  vowels  have  the  Continental  soond,  and  consonants 
the  English. 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'    BOOK 


AIYA-GAITANI  YONI 

Corn-Grinding   Song 


AIYA-GAfTANI  YONI 

I-o-ho,  waitilanni, 
I-o-ho,  waitilanni, 
Tzi  washo  iyani-i  ! 
Yaweh  puniakoekolika, 
Yuwch  haniakoekolika, 
Tzi  washo  iyani-i  ! 
I-o-ho,  waitilanni, 
I-o-ho,  waitilanni, 
Tzi  washo  iyani-i  I 


CORN-GRINDING  SONG 

I-o-ho,  wonder-water, 

I-o-ho,  wonder-water. 

Life  anew  to  him  who  drinks  ! 

Look  where  southwest  clouds  are  bringing 

rain; 
Look  where  southeast  clouds  are  bringing 

rain  1 
Life  anew  to  him  who  drinks  I 
I-o-ho,  wonder-water, 
I-o-ho,  wonder-water. 
Life  anew  to  him  who  drinks  I 


II 


AIYA-GAITANI  YONI 

Polaina,  polaina, 

Hai-ke-o-tzi-o-no-ho, 

Kohochinishi, 

Koeshkasi, 

Hai-ke-o-tzi-o-no-ho, 

Kukanishi, 

Kasheshi, 

Hai-ke-o-tzi-o-no-ho, 

Ha-na-pu-ra-ni  ! 

Polaina,  polaina, 

Hai-ke-o-tzi-o-no-ho, 

Ha-na-pu-ra-ni  I 


CORN-GRINDING   SONG 

Butterflies,  butterflies, 
Now  fly  away  to  the  blossoms. 

Fly,  blue-wing, 

Fly,  yellow-wing. 
Now  fly  away  to  the  blossoms. 

Fly,  red-wing,  . 

Fly,  wliite-wing. 
Now  fly  away  to  the  blossoms. 

Butterflies,  away  I 
Butterflies,  butterflies. 
Now  fly  away  to  the  blossoms. 

Butterflies,  away  ! 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


LAGUNA 


TUARI'S    SONG 


[lUARI  (Young  Eagle)  is  at  work  far  from  his  native  vil- 

Tlage.    When  asked  for  a  song,  he  said,  "I  will  sing  you 
my  own  song  that  I  sing  to  my  wife." 
'1        "B«t  how  can  you  sing  to  her  when  she  is  at  home 
in  Laguna  and  you  are  here?" 

The  Pueblo  youth  stared  at  the  question,  then  answered,  quietly, 
"I  sing  to  her  though  I  am  far  away,  and  she,  too,  sings  to  me. 
The  meaning  of  my  song  is  this:  'I  am  here,  working  for  you.  All 
the  while  I  work  I  think  of  you.  Take  care  of  yourself,  and  take 
care  of  the  horses,  and  the  sheep  and  the  fields.* " 

"But  your  song  has  no  words!"  ' 

"No,  but  that  is  what  it  means.  So  when  I  am  far  away  we 
sing  to  each  other,  my  wife  and  I."' 

In  the  composer^s  mind  the  song  is  accompanied  by  the  drum, 
and  can  be  used  as  a  dance-song  for  a  dance  of  young  men  in  the 
spring-time. 

'See  footnote,  page  (02. 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


X 


i;  ^"i.^  ^i  Jill 


m 


^^ 


^ 


^> 


X     o- 


<*Ja>t- 


^^K-     €'il>»         -Tl/*.   , 


i)e^-    cJa.- 


^. 


k 


t 


¥^^ 


rj  jT  I  I  J  1^ 


^ 


*      I 


J>-- 


o-  .. 


# 


J  I  J  Mr,g_^ 


# 


/J    IJ^  I 


;^ 


T  r 


^ 


^ 


J    If  J^j'Nj  jp^ 


A 


"T 


4U-.     e-... 


■rp  I  J  ifJ'n  irjj}  I  j^^^ 


4Co  -   d-   -^A  , 


c/%/,  o,  ^  i^t^  <a     ^<l,<4/»x. 


T^^ 


uiQittzeci  fly  ywjgrogott^ 


Ci*4itt.. Cf  .^a^'yf^^^-^^i    ■wl/.-^r^. 


# 


i  i  \i  }  \n 


/3-i       COA-       .^)Jio 


^ 


<^ 


o.  -        -*<e<^ 


4^'<>'  >j  I J  ^ 


^^ 


'1    J    I  tW7 


J    J    f  J  ^' 


J 


^, 


IM  n  J  -fj^ 


^Z»-     y 


^^ 


^^ 


J-       c- 


.  ^, 


w 


^ 


J     J     Ij      J     IJlJ^ 


i>/e      -< 


—  » "»*-<  _  ,^ 


<K  -  txejl^      'to'  UJ(t*^        <JTic      d^CM  46^    ' 


^ 


'VY  n  I J 


^ 


//■ 


'  r   r. 


4'''-' J' I.  I  J 


?v< 


r    r- 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


^\  u^iMnli  111  lmTij  i=^^^^4^^ 


9.. 

0 


n  I  j.hn 


=;^^ 


# 


^ 


^ 


S 


IP 


t 

.A-^  i^ ....  A 


J  n  i.n  J 


^p§ 


t 


r 


J   'U-^JIJ 


S 


tF 


fcfe 


T' 


^ 


S^     J    J 


^ 


^ 


^^ 


*f 


o  - 
«.  - 


o-  -  ■  - 


(•■Co-n  - 


Digitized  by  Microsoft© 


{lU-t^f.-A-.   Ci.  aJi  S^o-'Tt-*.    '^H^c-y-ji-. 


* 


5r- 


t 


rrj  u^j  I  '^  I  jj7^  ij  'i 


J  n  \ }  ij  ^uu^ 


A^A  -    -^4.  . 


^ 


jKr-ilU^in  ^PM  Ml  I  M-^ 


<9. 


.I-'^''  -'..IN  J  I  I  ^ 


0-  -L. 


-/t<x. 


<fexju, 


i\a^-4(^-  c-      -^ 


J^^ 


/Y 


iSL  -  to 


"7- 


^         £t  ^^«-9-    ^cr>^^^  , 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


^Zc-<^^    ^^^  /^a^^*-^   ■^H^erty.A-^ 


tt 


4,'     J     JJ     l-J,J^^ 


f 


A-      -^<A     —        PtJi.-     -\.CIL  -        ^/«-< 


^ 


MiM^ 


o-.—        <jO 


^ 


3 


J    iri^ij 


:x± 


^e- 


r 


/       H^- 


r- 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Uigitizea  by  Microsott(S 


gJg-T^^r^ 


J         ,     J  J      .      J        J        ,    J        i        .     .1         J 


^■,  i  \i  <}    N  J  1 ,1 J  m 


Diyiti^ed  by  Mioroooft© 


HOPI    TITLE-PAGE 

The  round  design  in  the  centre  of  the  page  represents  a  pottery 
plaqtie,  on  which  is  painted  a  birtterfly.  This  drawing  is  fay 
Gashhoienim,  a  Hopi  Indian  girl. 

The  lettering  and  cfeOOr  j  ■;  oi  t  are  by  Hinook  Mahiwi  Kilinaka 
(Angel  De  Cora).  The  decorations  at  the  top  and  bottom  of 
the  page  show  the  head  and  the  antennaj  of  the  butterfly;  the 
letters  are  formed  of  the  butterfly's   body. 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


V 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


O' 


THE   HOPIS' 


N  northeastern  Arizona,  high  on  the  summit  of  sheer 
cliffs,  overlooking  wide  stretches  of  desert,  and  desert 
only,  stand  the  seven  villages  of  the  Hopi  Indians,  the 
''People  of  Peace."  Centttries  ago,  the  gentle  Hopis 
fled  to  the  craggy  heights  to  escape  the  ravages  of  wilder  tribes. 
Here  might  the  Hopi  live  at  peace,  creeping  at  dawn  down  the 
precipitous  rock-hewn  trail  to  labor  in  his  field,  and  climbing  «p 
again  at  eventide.  His  village  was  his  fortress,  inaccessible  and 
remote.  Though  some  of  the  villages  had  been  discovered  by  the 
Spaniards,  yet  since  the  Pueblo  insurrection  of  1680  the  Hopis  have 
had  little  contact  with  white  men  until  quite  recently.  They  are 
still  a  conservative  folk,  who,  ever  industrious  and  self-supporting, 
cling  to  their  traditions  and  customs  with  dignity  and  reserve. 

Song  is  the  spontaneous  expression  of  the  people.  It  may  be 
heard  at  all  hours  rising  from  the  Hopi  village  or  from  the  surround- 
ing desert  plains  and  cliffs.  The  shepherd  driving  his  flock  down 
the  steep,  rocky  trail;  the  planter  seeking  his  field  at  dawn;  the 
woman  at  her  task;  the  child  at  his  play,  all  sing  as  naturally  as  the 
bird  on  the  bough.     Besides  old  traditional  songs,  the  Hopis  have 

NOTE  FOR  PRONUNCIATION  OF  HOPI  TEXT 

While  in  many  Indian  languages  there  are  sounds  not  exactly  the  same  as  the 
corresponding  ones  of  European  tongues,  in  the  Hopi  occur  sounds  that  have  no 
counterpart  at  all  in  European  languages.  Such  sounds,  therefore,  can  be  ex- 
pressed by  the  Roman  alphabet  approximately  only. 

Unless  otherwise  indicated,  vowels  have  the  Continental  sound,  and  consonants 
the  English. 

q  has  a  guttural  sound. 

o  is  pronounced  as  in  German. 

u  has  the  sound  of  u  in  curd. 

'  Commonly  called  "  Mofcis  "  or  "  KloqaJs." 
[4731 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE   INDIANS'   BOOK 

ountless  songs  of  the  moment,  which  are  composed  and  sttng  for  a 
few  years  and  then  forgotten. 

To  seize  on  paper  the  spirit  of  Hopi  m«sic  is  a  task  as  impossible 
as  to  ptrt  on  canvas  the  shimmer  and  glare  of  the  desert.  Hopi 
music  is  bom  of  its  environment.  The  wind  sweeping  among  the 
crags  and  whirling  down  the  trail  has  carved  its  strange  melody 
«pon  the  Indian's  plastic  mind,  even  as  it  has  carved  apon  the 
rocks,  in  curioas  erosion,  the  record  of  its  presence.  Its  echo  is 
heard  in  the  song  of  the  Hopi,  yodelling  through  the  desert  solitudes. 
There,  in  that  wide  land,  under  the  blaze  of  the  Arizona  sun,  amid 
the  shifting  color  of  the  tinted  sands  and  the  purpIe-blue  of  the  sharp- 
shadowed  rocks  must  the  songs  be  heard  to  be  heard  truly. 

Nearly  sixty  Hopi  songs  have  been  recorded,  but  because  of 
their  length  and  difficulty  there  is  not  here  place  for  more  than  a 
few.  These  few  have  been  chosen  less  for  their  quality  than  for 
the  association  with  their  composers,  the  song-poets  of  the  cliff- 
perched  Hopi  pueblos. 


THE  SONG  OF  THE  HOPI  CHIEF 


nlOLOLOMAI,  chief  of  the  Hopi  village  of  Oraibi,  was 

Lwell  named  Lolotomai  (Very -Good),  for  he  had  ever 
been  the  watchful  father  of  his  people.  Eighty  summers 
'I had  shone  upon  him,  yet  he  bore  himself  with  the  dignity 
of  chieftaincy.  Unlike  many  Hopis,  he  had  travelled  far  and  had 
been  to  see  the  great  chief  in  Washington,  in  the  land  where  "  there 
were  many  clouds  and  the  sun  looked  like  the  moon." 

To  The  Indians'  Book  is  here  given  the  account  of  the  white 
friend's  talk  with  Lololomai,  word  for  word,  as  written  shortly  after 
the  visit: 

I  sought  Lololomai  to  tell  him  of  my  purpose  with  the  Hopi 
songs.  My  interpreter  was  a  Hopi  lad,  who,  though  blind,  led  with 
sure  foot  the  way  up  the  steep,  rocky,  trail  to  the  viflage.  The 
chief  was  seated  on  his  house-top,  spinning,  for  in  Hopi-Iand  it  is 
the  men  who  spin  and  weave.  He  rose  and  met  us  at  the  head 
of  the  ladder  that  led  to  where  he  sat. 

[474J 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


HOPI 

"  I  have  come  to  talk  with  yoa,  friend,  on  something  that  con- 
cerns yottr  people/*  I  said. 

"Ancha-a  (*Tis  well)/*  he  answered,  solemnly,  and  motioned 
me  to  sit  down  with  him. 

"Lololomai/*  I  said,  "the  Hopi  children  are  going  to  school; 
they  are  learning  new  ways  and  are  singing  new  songs — ^American 
songs  instead  of  Hopi.  Some  of  the  cliildren  are  very  yotrng — 
so  yoting  that  there  have  been,  perhaps,  bat  three  corn-plantings 
since  they  came  into  the  world.  These  little  ones  will  never  sing 
the  songs  of  their  fathers.  They  will  not  sing  of  the  com,  the  bean- 
blossoms,  and  the  butterflies.  They  will  know  only  American  songs. 
Hopi  songs  are  beatrtiful;  it  is  sad  that  they  should  be  forgotten." 

To  all  of  this  the  old  chief  said,  "  Hao,  hao  (Even  so,  even  so)," 
and  nodded  slowly. 

"  Btrt,"  I  continued,  "  there  is  one  thing  in  the  school  good  for 
all  to  have  and  to  know,  and  that  is  books*  Books  can  be  of  many 
kinds,  Hopi  as  well  as  English.  As  yet  your  people  have  no  books 
nor  do  they  read  or  write.  That  is  why  your  songs  will  be  for- 
gotten, why  even  your  language  may  some  day  pass  away. 

"When  you  sing,  your  song  is  heard,  then  dies  like  the  wind 
that  sweeps  the  cornfields  and  is  gone,  none  knows  whither.  But 
if  you  could  write,  you  could  put  your  song  into  a  book,  and  your 
people,  even  to  the  children  of  their  children,  could  know  your 
song  as  if  you  yourself  were  singing.  They  could  look  upon  the 
written  page  and  say:  *  Thus  sang  Lololomai,  our  chief,  in  the  long 
ago.    Thus  sings  Lololomai  to-day.'  " 

The  head  drooped  lower  and  the  aged  face  was  grave. 

"But  until  the  time  shall  come,"  I  said,  "when  the  Hopis  shall 
themselves  record  their  stories  and  their  songs,  some  one  must  do 
this  for  them,  else  much  will  be  lost— lost  forever,  like  a  wind- 
blown trail.  So  I  have  come  from  my  far-distant  home  by  the 
'great  waters*  in  the  East  to  write  the  Hopi  songs." 

There  was  a  pause.  Then  the  old  chief  turned  to  me  pathetically. 
There  was  a  wistful  yearning  in  the  aged  eyes,  a  cloud  of  trouble 
on  the  wrinkled  brow. 

"It  is  well,"  he  said,  "but  will  not  the  superintendent  be  angry 
if  you  do  this  thing?    Are  you  sure  that  you  wifl  not  bring  trouble 

30  [475] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE   INDIANS'    BOOK 

opon  us?  White  people  try  to  stop  otjr  songs  and  dances,  so  I 
am  fearftti  of  your  talk." 

**  Be  at  rest,  my  friend,"  I  said,  '*  the  great  chief  at  Washington' 
is  father  of  all  the  people  in  this  country,  as  you  are  father  of  all 
in  this  village.  He  has  given  his  permission  for  the  writing  of  the 
Hopi  songs.  He  is  glad  to  have  them  written,  for  he,  too,  knows 
that  Hopi  songs  are  beautiful." 

**  Then  it  is  well,"  tepMzd  Lololomai — "  then  it  is  well,  indeed. 
But  will  you,  friend,  explain  to  me  that  which  I  cannot  understand? 
Why  do  the  white  people  want  to  stop  our  dances  and  our  songs? 
Why  do  they  trouble  us?  Why  do  they  interfere  with  what  can 
harm  them  not?  What  ill  do  we  to  any  white  man  when  we 
dance?" 

*'  Lololomai,  white  men  do  not  understand  your  dances  or  your 
songs.  They  do  not  even  know  one  word  of  your  language.  When 
I  have  written  your  songs,  I  will  write  English  words  as  well  as 
Hopi,  that  white  men  may  know  of  what  you  sing.  When  they 
understand,  they  will  perhaps  no  longer  want  to  stop  your  dances 
and  your  songs.  To  you,  Lololomai,  the  Hopi  chief,  will  I  give 
the  Hopi  songs  when  they  are  written.  You  will  keep  them  for 
your  people  with  the  other  sacred  things  that  are  your  trust.  Then 
in  the  days  to  come  the  younger  Hopis  will  read,  and  so  the  songs 
never  will  be  forgotten." 

Lololomai  bowed  his  head.  "  Lolomai,"  he  said,  **  pas  lolomai 
(good,  very  good)." 

**And  now  will  you  sing  one  of  your  own  songs,  that  I  may  write 
it  ?"  I  asked.  **  Sing  a  song  of  your  own  making,  for  Lololomai's 
song  should  be  the  first." 

The  chief  rested  his  chin  on  his  hand  and  gazed  before  him  over 
the  desert  in  deep  thought.  **  I  am  old,"  he  said,  "  and  I  have 
made  many  songs  and  have  forgotten  many  songs.  It  is  as  you 
say,  the  songs  I  made  when  I  was  young  I  remember  now  no  longer. 
I  will  sing  the  last  song  that  I  made." 

He  rose  and  beckoned  me  to  another  sunny  corner  on  the  house- 
top, spreading  a  blanket  for  a  seat. 

'  President  Theodore  Roosevelt,  who,  from  the  first,  took  great  interest  in  the  work. 

[476] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


HOPI 

"  This  song,"  Lololomai  explained,  "  was  sung  during  our  cere- 
mony of  thank-offering  after  the  com  was  garnered  for  the  year.' 
The  men  go  from  one  kiva^  to  another,  all  night  long,  dancing  and 
singing.  This  is  the  song  of  the  men  from  my  kiva,  the  chief  kiva. 
It  tefls  how  in  my  kiva  the  chief  and  his  men  are  praying  to  make 
the  com  to  grow  next  year  for  all  the  people.  That  is  the  meaning 
of  my  song." 

Then  in  rhythmic  monotone  the  old  man  crooned  beside  me. 
Long  and  diligently  I  worked  at  the  recording,  with  the  glare  of 
the  hot  sun  on  my  paper.  It  was  no  light  task  to  fix  the  chant  in 
musical  notation. 

I  saw  this  question  in  the  chief's  eyes:  "  I  have  sung  the  song; 
why  does  it  take  so  long  to  make  those  black  marks  on  the  paper?" 
And  I  said,  "  Lololomai,  you  know  that  when  the  Hopi  sets  a  trap 
for  the  blackbird,  sometimes  it  is  long  before  he  can  catch  his 
fluttering  prey.  Your  song  is  a  wild  blackbird  to  me,  and  it 
may  be  that  the  sun  will  move  far  along  the  sky  before  I  have 
captured  it." 

When  I  had  finished,  I  showed  Lololomai  the  written  page. 
The  old  man  scanned  the  mysterious  tracings,  and,  nodding  slowly, 
repeated  again  and  again,  "  Ancha-a, -ikwatchi,  ancha-a  (It  is  well, 
my  friend,  it  is  well)."  Then  drawing  his  blanket  around  him, 
Lololomai  stepped  to  the  edge  of  the  roof,  and,  facing  the  sun,  sank 
upon  his  knees  with  head  bowed  in  his  hands.  What  his  act  meant 
I  knew  not,  for  I  had  heard  that  Hopis  stood  erect  to  pray.  But 
the  swift  instinct  of  sympathy  said— the  aged  father  of  the  village 
thus  consecrates  the  new  task  for  the  Hopis. 

The  shadows  on  the  village  street  grew  long.  The  sun  was  sink- 
ing. Here  and  there  a  lone  Hopi  was  returning  from  below  with 
laden  burro.  Soon  the  trail  would  be  dotted  with  home-coming 
Indians.  We  sat  long  in  silence,  Lololomai,  the  blind  boy,  and  I. 
I  watched  the  glow  enfold  the  desert  with  the  mystery  of  dying 

'  This  ceremony  is  called  Wuiouchim-yungya.. 

^The  kiva  is  an  underground  council-chamber.  There  are  many  fc.vas.  probably  one  or 
each  clan,  originafly.  Here  the  men  come  to  meet  in  council  or  to  spm  and  weave.  Here  also 
the  new  songs  are  Lmed  and  dances  practised.  But  the  most  imporUnt  use  of  the  k.va  .s  as 
a  sacred  chamber  where  altars  are  placed  and  secret  ceremonial  r.tes  performed. 

[477] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'    BOOK 

day.  The  chief's  song  was  that  sung  when  the  com  was  garnered. 
And  I — with  book  and  pencil  I  was  gleaning  in  the  Hopi  fields  in 
this  the  sunset  hour  of  the  people's  native  life.  The  time  is  short 
before  night  shall  fall  forever  on  the  spirit  of  spontaneous  song 
within  the  Indian. 

Silent  still,  the  blind  boy  and  I  took  our  downward  way  upon 
the  rocky  trail.  To  my  companion,  in  his  night,  the  deepening 
shadow  bore  no  import,  but  a  twilight  sadness  lay  upon  my  spirit. 
I  thought  of  the  garnered  Hopi  com.  Will  there  be  many  more 
plantings  of  poetry  and  harvestings  of  song?  Darkness  closed  in. 
But  off  beyond  in  silver  glory  rose  the  moon. 

To  Lololomai  had  been  promised  the  songs  of  his  people.  But 
before  the  pledge  could  be  fulfilled  the  old  chief  followed  the  western 
sun.  The  silent  desert  never  again  will  waken  to  his  voice.  But 
for  Hopis  yet  unborn  The  Indians'  Book  holds  the  song  of  the  long- 
loved  chieftain  of  Oraibi. 

Note. — Grateffil  acknowledgment  is  d«e  to  the  Hopi  authority,  Rev.  H.  R.  Voth, 
of  the  Field  Colombian  Museum,  Chicago,  for  assistance  in  the  English  rendering 
of  Lololomai's  song,  and  for  explanation  of  its  contents.  The  whole  collection 
of  Hopi  text  has  received  Mr.  Voth's  expert  criticism.  The  spelling,  however,  is 
not  Mr.  Voth's,  but  one  conforming  to  the  general  system  adopted  in  this  book 
for  the  spelling  of  Indian  words.  Also,  since  Hopi  songs  are  capable  of  many  dif- 
ferent interpretations,  the  recorder  has  felt  obliged  to  hold  to  versions  acquired 
tliroogh  her  own  research  among  the  Indians,  even  where  such  versions  are  more 
or  less  at  variance  with  those  kindly  given  by  Mr.  Voth.  Mr.  Voth,  therefore, 
is  not  responsible  for  possible  errors  in  the  translations. 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


HOPI 


WUWUCHm   TAWI 

Wtfwachim-Chant 
Q}inposed  and  sung  by  Lololomai 


N  the  kiva  of  the  chieftain  is  perfonned  a  ceremonial, 
symbolic  corn-planting.  The  idea  in  this  song  seems  to 
be  that  a  ceremonial  planting  of  a  perfect  com -ear — 
that  is,  one  completely  filled  with  kernels — ^will  procure 
even  such  perfect  corn-ears  in  the  crop  of  the  next  season.  Mayingwa 
is  the  god  of  germination  and  growth.  He  lives  underground  be- 
neath the  fcivas.  In  this  song  he  would  seem  to  be  beneath  the 
kiva  of  the  chief. 

The  Hopi  word  translated  as  ''double  corn-ear"  means  a  corn- 
ear  more  or  less  cleft.  By  "rain  that  stands"  the  Hopis  mean  rain 
seen  to  fall  from  a  distant  cloud,  giving  an  appearance  of  upright 
lines. 

The  Hopis  have  different  words  for  the  different  kinds  of  cloud. 


The  he^apo  cloud,  translated  here  as  "cloud  that  rushes," 
fast-driven  scud  that  underlies  heavy  masses  of  rain-cloud. 


IS 


the 


WUWUCHm.   TAWI 

Yan  itam,  yan  itam 
Tokflnawita 
Hahlai  anangway 
Na'kalmomaya. 

Natwanlawa  inama 
Ayam  Moyingwa 
Mongwi  kive 
Mokwa  kao 
Choduningwan ; 
Natwantaqo  pom  nikiang 
Bavas  nawita  sitalwonguni. 

Peyo  amffmi  namasha, 
Yoyowtinoto  heyapo  o-omawata ! 


WUW  i/CHIM-CHANT 

Thus  we,  thus  we, 
The  night  along. 
With  happy  hearts 
Wish  well  one  another. 

In  the  chief's  kiva 

They,  the  fathers. 

They  and  Mtiyingwa 

Plant  the  double  ear — 

Plant  the  perfect  doable  corn-ear. 

So  the  fields  shall  shine 

With  tassels  white  of  perfect  corn-ears. 

Hither  to  them,  hither  come. 

Rain  that  stands  and  cload  that  rushes  ! 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'    BOOK 


PUWUCH   TAWI 
Lullaby 


HIS  Idttaby  is  one  of  the  oldest  Hopf  songs.  It  is  song 
in  many  of  the  Hopi  villages,  and  there  is  perhaps  scarcely 
a  Hopi  who  has  not  been  lulled  to  sleep  with  its  refrain 
— "p«va,  ptiva!  (sleep,  sleep!)" 
The  mother  binds  her  baby  on  a  board  to  sleep.  Then  she 
fastens  board  and  baby  on  her  back,  and,  swaying  to  and  fro,  be- 
comes herself  a  living  cradle,  gently  rocking  to  sleep  the  little  one. 
As  she  rocks,  she  sings  this  ancient  crooning  IwIIaby. 

The  song  tells  of  the  beetles  asleep  on  the  trail.  In  Hopi-Iand, 
the  beetles  carry  one  another  on  their  backs  in  the  hot  s«n.  The 
Hopis  say,  "The  beetles  are  blind;  the  beetles  are  sleeping."  So 
the  child  upon  its  mother's  back  must  close  its  eyes,  and,  like  the 
beetle,  see  no  more. 


Pt/Wf/CH  TAWI 

P«va,  puva,  pava. 
Hohoyawa 
Shahpo  pave-e 
Na-ikwiokiango, 

Pava,  pava,  pava  ! 


LULLABY 

Pava,  pwoa,  pwva,^ 
In  the  trail  the  beetles 
On  each  other's  backs  are  sleeping, 
So  on  mine,  my  baby,  thoa 
Pwva,  pava,  pava  I 


o 


POLI    TIWA   TAWI 

Batterfly-Dance   Song 
Composed  and  sang  by  Tawafcwaptiwa 


F  all  the  Hopi  poets,  none  sings  a  gladder  song  than  Ta:- 
wakwaptiwa  (Son-Down-Shining)  .^  He  is  one  in  whom 
the  gift  of  song  wells  op  like  living  waters,  a  Hopi  on- 
tooched  by  foreign  infloence,  the  child  of  natural  environ- 
ment, spontaneoos,  alert,  foil  of  life  and  laughter. 

'  PwDA,   sleep. 

'  Like  many  Hopi  names,  this  one  is  almost  impossible  of  literal  translation.     San-Down- 
Shining  is  the  general  meaning  of  the  name,  as  given  by  the  Indians. 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


The  Song  of  Tawakwaptiwa 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


HOPI 

**He  makes  good  songs,"  say  the  Hopis.  "Everybody  likes 
Tawakwaptiwa." 

The  poet's  answer  to  the  question,  "How  do  you  make  your 
songs?"  was  like  the  answer  made  by  many  a  Hopi  singer:  "When 
I  am  herding  my  sheep,  or  away  in  the  fields,  and  I  see  something 
that  I  like — then  I  sing  about  it." 

"This  song,"  Tawakwaptiwa  explained,  "is  sung  in  the  Butter- 
fly-Dance. It  tefls  how  the  youths  and  maidens  are  playing  in 
the  fields." 

"Yes,"  upspoke  a  second  Hopi,  "when  the  com  and  melons  are 
ripe,  the  youths  in  the  field  hold  high  the  fairest  fruit  -and  summon 
the  maidens  with  a  call.  Then  the  butterfly-girls  come  running, 
and  try  to  wrest  the  prize." 

"The  'butterfly-girls'?" 

"Yes,"  answered  Tawakwaptiwa,  "so  we  call  the  Hopi  girls, 
because  their  hair  makes  them  to  look  like  butterflies."^ 

Then  the  poet  threw  his  blanket  over  his  shoulder,  and,  stretch- 
ing his  hand  before  him,  with  quick  commanding  gesture  he  sang 
the  second  stanza  of  his  song,  the  summons  to  the  thunder. 

"So  the  thunder  will  come,"  he  explained,  "so  the  rain  will 
come,  that  the  corn-maidens  may  grow  high." 

"The  'corn-maidens'?" 

"Yes,  the  little  young  cOm-pIants  are  corn-maidens." 

"When  the  corn  is  no  longer  little,  but  grown,"  said  the  second 
Hopi,  "then  come  the  corn-ears,  and  these  are  the  children  of  the 
com.  We  call  the  com  'mother.'  It  nourishes  us,  it  gives  us  life, 
— is  it  not  our  mother?  Tawakwaptiwa's  song  tefls  how  we  want 
the  rain,  that  the  little  com-plant  maidens  may  help  one  another 
to  grow  tafl." 

"How  do  they  help  one  another?" 

"Oh,  by  gathering  the  moisture  under  the  ground  with  their 

little  roots." 

The  Poli  Tiwa  (Butterfly  -  Dance)  is  a  dance  of  youths  and 
maidens.    The   leaders   plan   the  changing  figures   and  drifl  the 


1  The  Hopi  maidens  wear  their  hair  in  glistening  wheels  at  each  side  of  the  head.     The  head- 
dress really  represents  the  sqcash-Wossom,  emblem  of  virginity. 

[481] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE   INDIANS'    BOOK 

dancers  in  the  preparation  that  for  several  days  precedes  the  per- 
formance. The  dance  begins  at  noon  and  lasts  wntil  sundown, 
many  figures  being  performed  with  intermissions  for  rest  and  change 
of  costume.  The  dance  is  held  in  the  open  plaza  of  the  village, 
and  the  on-Iookers  usually  mount  the  house-tops  for  their  view.  The 
unaccustomed  eye  quivers  and  falls  beneath  the  mid-day  glare  and 
the  glinting  color  of  the  scene;  for  many  of  the  spectators  are  brightly 
clad  and  the  dancers  are  elaborately  decked.  The  maidens  wear 
wooden  tablets  on  the  head,  symbolic  of  clouds.  They  carry  little 
sprigs  and  decorously  dance  with  downcast  eyes  and  scarcely 
moving  feet.  The  youths  shake  rattles  and  lift  high  the  knee  with 
springing  step.  Silently  the  dancers  move,  while  a  chorus  sings  the 
dance-music  and  sounds  a  drum  whose  steady  rhythm  is  like  the 
pulse-beat  of  the  quivering  hot  air. 


POLI   TTWA    TAVI 

Hamicita  cingolawa, 
Mozhicita  cingolawo. 

Itam  totim  nikiang 

Uyi  shonaka  ngoti-timani 

TtA^evoI  manata  amami. 

Peyo,  peyo ! 

C/tnomtrtani 

Ita  ayatani, 

f/yi  manata 

Omi  nawangwinani. 


BUTTERFLY-DANCE  SONG 

Now  for  corn-blooms  we  wrestle, 
Now  for  bean-blooms  we  wrestle. 

We  are  youths,  'mid  the  com. 
Chasing  each  other  in  sport, 
Playing  with  botterfly-maidens. 

Hither,  hither  ! 

Thunder  will  hither  move, 

We  shall  summon  the  thunder  here. 

That  the  maiden-plants 

Upward  may  help  one  another  to  grow. 


KATZINAS 


-       n  HE  Hopi  "  Katzinas  "  are  intermediary  deities  who  bring 

Tto  the  gods  the  Hopis*  prayers. 
Long  ago  the  Katzinas  lived  upon  the  earth  and  danced 
'I in  the  plazas  of  the  villages  and  brought  the  rain.  But 
now  they  come  no  more,  and  so  to  bring  the  rain  the  Hopis  them- 
selves impersonate  the  Katzinas.  They  dress  like  them,  wear 
masks  to  represent  the  faces,  and  dance  and  sing  for  rain  even  as  the 

[482] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


? 


a 
•< 

0 

a 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


HOPI 

Katzinas  did  of  old.  There  are  many  kinds  of  Katzinas,  and  the 
Katzina  dance-songs  are  innumerable.  The  wooden  masks  are 
painted  with  symbols  full  of  meaning,  and  the  border  of  the  woven 
sash  worn  by  the  Katzina  dancer  tefls  of  the  earth  in  blossom 
with  the  rain-clouds  sending  water  upon  it. 


ANGA  KATZINA  TAWI 

Anga  Katzina  Song 
Composed  and  sung  fay  Lahpa 


-  .1  AHPU  is  brother  of  Tawakwaptiwa,  and  both  men  are 
¥  nephews   of   the   chief  Lololomai.     The  blood   of  aris- 

^^        tocracy  is  in  their  veins,  for  they  belong  to  the  oldest 

'  1  cf an  in  Oraibi. 
Said  Lahpu  of  his  song:  **  Tliis  is  the  first  song  that  I  ever  made. 
I  had  been  a  long  time  away,  and  so  my  heart  was  happy  as  I  came 
through  the  fields.  I  saw  the  Hopi  girls  playing  among  the  corn- 
plants,  chasing  one  another  and  laughing  and  singing,  and — I  liked 
it;  it  was  pretty,  and  I  was  happy,  so  I  made  this  song  about  it." 


ANGA  KATZINA  TAWI 

Uyi  shonaka  yoki; 

Ttfvevoli  manata 

Nangoyimani  yoyang. 

Yala  puma  tatunpa  natayawina 

Yang  ayi  shonaka ! 

A-ha,  ha-ha, 

0-ah,  e-Io  ! 
Yani  pwma  towati 
Tataw-yoyttwina  yanga 

0-0,  o-ho, 

0-he,  e-Io  ! 


ANGA  KATZINA  SONG 

Rain  all  over  the  cornfields. 

Pretty  batterfly-maidens 

Chasing  one  another  when  the  rain  is  done, 

Hither,  thither,  so. 
How  they  frolic  'mid  the  corn, 
Laugliing,  laughing,  thus: 
A-ha.,  ha-ha, 
0-ah,  e-to! 
How  they  frolic  'mid  the  com. 
Singing,  singing,  thus: 
0-0,  o-ho, 
0-he,  e-lol 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'    BOOK 


KOROSTA  KATZINA  TAWI 

Korosta  Katzina  Song 

Composed  and  sung  by  Koianimptiwa 


O  one  had  as  yet  heard  this  song  when  its  author,  a 

]^       yoting  poet,  Koianiniptiwa,  first  offered  to  sing  it  for 

■^^        the  recorder.     He  had  jttst  composed  it  for  a  coming 

dance  in  May  —  "  Corn  -  Planting  Time  **  —  a  "  Korosta 

Katzina  Dance,"  in  wliich  the  katzinas  wear  masks  whereon   is 

painted  the  rainbow. 

Said  Koianimptiwa:  "My  song  is  about  the  butterflies  flying 

over  the  cornfields  and  over  the  beans.     One  butterfly  is  running 

after  the  other  like  the  hunt,  and  there  are  many." 

Even  as  the  Hopis  paint  their  faces  for  a  ceremonial  dance,  so 

have  the  butterflies,  for  their  flight  over  the  corn-blossoms,  painted 

themselves  with  poflen. 

"  The  butterflies  must  go  through  many  flowers,"  say  the  Hopis, 

"  to  make  themselves  so  pretty." 

Koianimptiwa  is  a  true  poet,  and  he  spoke  well  when  he  said, 

"Not  all  men  can  make  songs." 


KOROSTA  KATZINA  TAWI 

Sikya  volima 
Haimsi  manata 
Talasi  yamma 
Pitzangwa  timakiang 
Tave-nangffyimani. 

Shakwa  volima 
Mozhisi  manata 
Talasi  yamma 
Pitzangwa  timakiang 
TfA^e-nangoyimani. 

Hamisi  manata 

Amanawita 

Tatangayata 

Tokiyoyawintani. 


KOROSTA  KATZINA  SONG 

Yellow  butterflies, 
Over  the  blossoming  virgin  com, 

With  pollen-painted  faces 
Chase  one  another  in  brilliant  throng. 


Blue  butterflies, 
Over  the  blossoming  virgin  beans, 

With  pollen-painted  faces 
Chase  one  another  in  brilliant  streams. 


Over  the  blossoming  com, 
Over  the  virgin  corn 
Wild  bees  hum: 


[484] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Mozhisi  manattt 
Amtmawita 
Tatangayata 
TOkiyaycfwintani. 

Umah  ttyi 
Amanawit 
Yoi-amamfftimani 
Tawanawita. 

Umah  ayi 
Amanawit 
Yoi-hoyoyotimani 
Tawanawita. 


HOPI 

Over  the  blossoming  beans, 
Over  the  virgin  beans, 
Wild  bees  ham. 


Over  yo«r  field  of  growing  com 

All  day  shall  hang  the  thunder-clood; 

Over  yotir  field  of  growing  corn 

AU  day  shall  come  the  rushing  rain. 


HE-HEA   KATZINA    TAWI 

He-hea   Katzina   Song 
Sting  ty  Masahongva 
HE-HEA  KATZINA  TAWI  HE-HEA  KATZINA  SONG 


Hamisi  ayi  manata, 
Mozhisi  ayi  siqolova, 
Bavatalawinani, 
Shakwa  omawota — 


Hapi  me — 

Hesiqolova 

Sikia  voli  nangSyimani. 

Mozhisiqolova 

Shakwa  voli  nangoyimani. 


Corn-blossom  maidens 
Here  in  the  fields. 
Patches  of  beans  in  flower. 
Fields  all  abloom, 
Water  shining  after  rain. 
Blue  clouds  looming  above. 

Now  behold  I 

Through  bright  clusters  of  flowers 

Yellow  butterflies 

Are  chasing  at  play, 

And  tlirough  the  blossoming  beans 

Blue  butterflies 

Are  chasing  at  pliy. 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'    BOOK 


HEVEBE    TAWI 


B 


Hevebe-Songs 

OTH  of  these  Hevebe' -songs  are  very  old.  The  Hopis 
have  an  ancient  custom  that  is  a  playftd  sport  and  at 
the  same  time  a  symbolic  invocation  for  rain. 

At  the  coming  of  the  "yellow  line,"  for  so  the  Hopis 
call  the  dawn,  there  may  sometimes  be  heard  the  Hevebe-song  of 
the  men,  as  they  go  in  line  through  the  village,  from  house  to  house, 
calling  to  the  inmates  to  rise  and  pour  water  on  them  from  the 
house-tops. 

"Often  we  are  fast  asleep,"  explained  a  little  butterfly-maiden; 
"  the  song  wakes  us  and  we  hear  the  men  and  boys  coming  nearer 
and  nearer.  We  hear  the  voices  and  the  splashing  water  and  the 
laughing.  And  quickly  we  rise  and  take  our  water -jars  and  go 
to  the  top  of  the  house,  to  be  ready  when  they  reach  us.  It  is  fun! 
We  try  to  get  the  coldest  water  to  pour  on  them!  But  the  old 
people  scold.  They  do  not  like  to  be  waked.  In  the  song,  the 
boys  call  themselves  the  'dawnlight-youths.'  We  often  call  the 
Hopi  boys  Mawnlight  -  youths,'  as  Hopi  girls  are  called  'butter- 
fly-maidens* and  'shower-maidens.'  They  are  pretty  names.  And 
the  dawnlight-youth  is  always  happy  because  the  sunlight  is  in  his 
heart." 

The  custom  is  a  symbolic  invocation  for  rain.  For  even  as  the 
Hopi  woman  pours  water  from  the  house-tops  upon  the  men,  so 
will  those  above  pour  water  on  the  Hopi  fields. 

'  Hevebe,  archaic  Hopi  word,  possibly  the  name  of  a  certain  kind  of  cloud  or  cloud-deity. 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


HOPI 


Sung  by  Masahongva 


HEVEBE    TAWl 

Nana  hopipaqu 
QSyangwiinuka  fcoyiva. 

Nana  hopipaqS 
Sikiangwanaka  kayiva. 

Angwa  howam 
HawiwokJalyata. 


Itamami  koyivawfcha 

Itamami  amah  kayap  kayi  wataya — 

lyo,  iyo  I 

lyo,  iyo  I 

Hevebeta  peyowi  I 
Wata,  wata, 
Wata,  wata  I 

Q5yangw«n-taIao  ti' 
Sikifingwun-talao  ti' 

Tahiyongva  to, 
Nahiyongva  to, 

Yanikitiwa 
Pav5n  mamanta. 

Iyo,  iyo  ! 

Iyo,  iyo  I 


HEVEBE-SONG 

Now  from  the  cast 

The  white  dawn  hath  arisen. 

Now  from  the  east 

The  yellow  dawn  hath  arisen. 

Please  ye,  please  ye. 
Now  awake  I 
Aroase  yourselves; 
Look  ye  here. 
Oh,  look  on  us  ! 

Lift  your  water-jars  and  o'er  us 
Poor  ye,  pour: 
Pour  ye,  pour  ye. 
Cold,  cold  ! 
Cold,  cold  ! 

Hevebeta,  come,  oh,  come ! 
Pour  down,  pour  down. 
Pour  down,  pour  down  ! 

Come  we,  white  dawnlight-youths,  - 
Come  we,  yellow  dawnlight-youths 

Bringing  joy  to  ye. 
E'en  as  joyful,  we, 

Here  where  dwell  the  maids — 
Dwell  the  shower-maidens. 

Cold,  cold  ! 

Cold,  cold  1 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE   INDIANS'    BOOK 


II 

Sung  by  Kuwanyisnifli 

This  is  a  Hevebe-song  of  little  girls.  The  naked  children 
stand  in  line  before  the  houses  and  clap  their  hands  in  time  to 
the  song,  while  sprinkled  by  the  elders  from  the  house-tops. 
The  little  singers  frolic  and  laugh  as  they  frisk  -about  and  rub 
the  water  over  their  shining  bodies.  The  children  may  sing  and 
play  thus  at  any  time.  Sometimes,  when  the  scarce  and  welcome 
rain  is  falling,  they  run  out  into  the  shower  and  perform  their  play- 
ful ceremony  under  the  downpour  of  the  long-invoked  clouds. 


HEVEBE    TAWI 

Hevebeta,  peyowi, 
Hevebeta,  hevebeta  peyowi, 
Wtt-wata,  wa-wata — 

Wttta,  wtrta — ow  ! 

Wata,  wata — ow  I 

Tovi  chi  chi, 

Tovi  chi  chi, 

Tovi  chi  chi, 

Shi-i-wa-hana,  (Shiwana) 

Shi-wa-wai-ya, 

Shi-wa-wai-ya, 

Wa-wa-wa-wa. 


Wa-wttta,  wa-wota, 
Anoshka't  anoshkai, 
Naishi  o-oa-ya-a, 
Naipa  o-ou-ya-a. 


Hevebeta,  peyowi, 
Hevebeta,  hevebeta  peyowi, 

Wa-wfrta,  wa-wata. 

Wata,  wtrta — ow  ! 

Wata,  wtrta — ow ! 


[488] 
Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


HEVEBE-SONG 

Hevebeta,  come,  come, 

Pour,  poor  down. 

Pour,  pour  down. 
Pour  down,  pour  down — ow  1 
Pour  down,  pour  down — ow  I 

Hither,  flying  cloud. 

Hither,  flying  cloud, 

Hither,  flying  cloud. 

Sprinkle  me. 

Sprinkle  me. 

Cloud,  come  bathe  me  1 

Hither  hasten. 

Hither  hasten. 

Come,  come,  come,  come  1 

Pour,  pour  down, 

Pour,  pour  down. 
Oh,  change  me  now. 
Oh,  change  me  now 
Into  a  cluster  of  flowers. 
Into  a  cluster  of  showers ! 

Hevebeta,  come,  come, 

Pour,  pour  down, 

Pour,  pour  down. 
Pour  down,  pour  down — ow  I 
Pour  down,  pour  down — o 


-ow  J 


HOPI 


LENE   TAWI 

Flote-Song 
Sung  fay  Hasaveimah  and  Kavanghongevah 


^1  HE   Flute   Ceremony,  like   most  Hopi  ceremoniest  is  a 

T  prayer  for  rain  and  for  water  in  the  springs.  It  is  held 
in  A«g«st  when  water  is  most  needed,  and  is  performed 
Min  alternate  years  with  the  Snake  Ceremony.  On  the 
ninth  day  of  the  ceremony,  the  priests  hold  sacred  rites  aro«nd  a 
spring,  some  singing,  while  others  play  the  same  melody  on  large 
flutes.  There  are  two  flute  societies  in  every  Hopi  village,  the 
"Blue"  and  the  "Gray."  This  song  belongs  to  the  Gray  Flute 
Society. 


LENE    TAWI 

Hao,  hao,  hao  inam«  ! 
Mashilenangwa  mongwitft ! 

Nananivo  omawata  wawai  inama ; 
Nananivaqo  yoi  nanafcwushani. 

Peyo  yoi-amamatiraani  yanga ! 
Peyo  yoi-hoyoyotimani ! 

Uyi  shonaka 
Hakame  yang 

Uyi  shonaka 
Bava-tala-winani. 


FLUTE-SONG 

Hail,  fathers,  hail  1 

Chieftains  of  the  Gray  FItrte,  hail  1 

At  the  four  world-points 

Ye  .call,  ye  summon  clouds. 

From  the  four  world-points  upstarting. 

Shall  the  rain  hither  come. 

Hither  thunder,  rain-thunder  here. 
Hither  the  rain-thunder  will  come; 
Hither  rain,  moving-rain — 
Onward  now,  over  all  the  fields, 

Moving-rain. 
And  the  wet  earth,  'mid  the  corn. 
Everywhere,  far  and  near, 
It  will  shine — water-shine. 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE   INDIANS'   BOOK 
LOLOLOMAI'S  PRAYER 

A  Leaf  from  the  Recorder's  Diary 


I 


T  was  stinset  when  for  the  last  time  I  climbed  the  steep  trail 
to  the  village  of  Oraibi.  The  level  desert  seemed  a  lilac 
sea,  and  the  outlines  of  the  craggy  table-lands  were  sharp 
against  the  flaming  sky.  Many  weeks  had  passed  since 
I  had  left  the  railroad  to  take  the  long  two-days'  drive  across  the 
**  Painted  Desert "  to  the  Hopi  villages,  and  in  those  weeks  I  had 
learned  to  know  and  to  love  the  "People  of  Peace/'  To-morrow 
I  must  leave  the  desert  and  its  freedom  for  my  distant  Eastern  home, 
and  so  I  sought  Lololomai,  the  aged  chief,  to  say  to  him  and  to  his 
household  a  parting  word.  Thus  I  passed  on  a  farewell  visit  through 
the  ancient  town,  with  its  terraces  of  roofs,  its  open  dance-plazas, 
and  its  odd  comers. 

The  chief's  house  was  near  the  end  of  the  village.  I  opened  the 
low  door  and  entered  a  dark  chamber  of  stone.  The  pale  light  of 
dying  day  came  faintly  through  the  narrow  windows;  a  smouldering 
fire  on  the  hearth  threw  flicker  of  light  and  shadow  on  a  group  of 
Indians  seated  on  the  floor.  A  nephew  of  the  chief  stood  before  the 
hearth;  the  firelight  showed  the  brown,  handsome  face,  velvet  clothes 
and  buckskin  leggings.  He  had  passed  me  on  the  trail  on  his  fleet 
white  horse,  flourishing  his  riding  quirt,  and  singing  as  he  rode. 

"Where  is  your  uncle,  the  chief,  Lololomai?"  I  asked  of  the 
young  man,  when  I  had  made  my  greetings. 

"He  has  gone  with  .some  men  to  clear  the  springs,"  was  the 
answer.  "  The  sand  has  filled  the  springs  and  our  animals  have  no 
water." 

"  Then  I  shall  not  see  him,"  I  said,  sadly.  "  I  had  come  to  bid 
him  good-bye." 

But  Ponianomsi,  the  chief's  sister,  said, "  I  will  bear  your  message 
to  Lololomai,  if  you  will  leave  your  words  with  me." 

Ponianomsi  was  of  high  importance  in  the  village,  for,  with  the 
Hopi,  descent  is  reckoned  on  the  female  side,  and  as  the  chief  is  the 
father  of  his  people,  so  is  his  sister  the  mother.  Ponianomsi  had  the 
gentle  courtesy  of  the  Hopi  and  the  added  dignity  of  her  position. 

[490] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


HOPI 

Her  shoulders  were  square  and  firm;  they  had  not  bent  beneath  the 
weight  of  the  water-jar  carried  daily  by  the  Hopi  women  from  the 
springs  up  the  steep  trail  to  the  village.  Mules  had  hauled  water  for 
the  household  of  the  chief;  Ponianomsi's  small  form  was  erect. 

The  hostess  spread  »  roll  of  sheepskin  on  the  floor  for  me  to  sit 
upon,  and  I  joined  the  group  by  the  fire.  I  had  brought,  as  a  fare- 
well gift,  a  jar  of  gray  sand  from  the  shores  of  the  Atlantic.  The 
Navajos,  neighbors  to  the  Hopis,  had  asked  me  the  year  before  to 
bring  them  such  sand.  They  had  said,  "  If,  in  our  ceremonies,  we 
use  sand  that  comes  from  where  there  is  so  much  water,  that  sand 
will  surely  bring  water  to  us  here;  it  must  help  us  in  our  prayers  for 
rain." 

I  had  brought  enough  sand  for  Hopis  as  well  as  Navajos.  "  See," 
I  said  to  the  group  at  the  fireside,  *'  I  have  brought  you  something 
from  the  great  waters,  even  some  of  the  very  ground  that  lies  beneath 
the  waters.  The  sand  is  silver  there,  not  golden,  like  yours  upon 
the  desert." 

I  opened  the  jar  and  poured  the  gray  particles  into  Ponianomsi's 
out-stretched  palm.  She  stooped  by  the  fire  the  better  to  see,  and 
slowly  let  fall  the  shining  stream  from  one  hand  into  the  other. 

"  Where  I  live,"  I  continued,  "  there  is  much  sand  like  this  and 
there  are  great  waters,  so  great  that  a  man  standing  on  the  edge  can 
see  no  land  upon  the  other  side." 

PonianSmsi  closed  her  fingers  over  the  sand  and  looked  at  me 
with  earnest  eyes.  The  other  Indians,  too,  children  of  the  desert, 
all  gazed  upon  me  with  fixed  look.  The  sand  was  passed  from  hand 
to  hand.     Each  Indian  fingered  it  with  reverence. 

"  There  is  a  great  water  to  the  west  of  California  s  that  you  know. 
But  my  home  is  by  the  Eastern  waters,  towards  the  rising  sun.  And 
in  my  home  the  fields  are  green  with  grass,  and  trees  grow  tall.  The 
mountains  there  are  not  barren  rocks  like  yours;  they  are  covered 
with  waving  forests.  The  sun  does  not  shine  always,  as  with  you; 
there  are  many  clouds,  and  much  rain  fafls.  Sometimes  it  rains  for 
many  days;  then  skies  are  gray,  not  blue." 

"  And  are  you  going  back  to  those  great  waters  and  that  Eastern 
land?"  said  Ponianomsi. 

"  To-morrow  I  must  go,"  I  said.    Then  spoke  Talaskwaptiwa, 

31  [49J] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'    BOOK 

brother  of  the  chief,  with  true  Indian  hospitality.  "  Bat  you  will 
come  to  see  as  many  times?" 

"Ah  no/*  I  answered,  "  I  cannot  come  back  soon  again,  nor  can 
I  come  back  often,  for  my  home  is  far  away." 

"How  far?"  said  Talaskwaptiwa.  "Hpw  many  days  mast  a 
Hopi  ran  before  he  find  yoar  land  ?" 

"  A  Hopi  mast  ran  for  many  moons  to  reach  the  great  waters  of 
the  East,"  I  answered.  "The  raih-oad  train  rans  foar  days  and 
foar  nights  withoat  rest,  and  the  train  rans  in  one  hoar  as  far  as  a 
Hopi  does  in  a  day." 

The  Indians  fingered  the  sand  in  silence.     It  had  come  a  long  way. 

"  Yoa  woald  be  sarprised  at  so  mach  green,  if  yoa  coald  see  my 
coantry,"  I  said.  "  Bat  my  people  woald  be  as  mach  sarprised  if 
they  coald  see  yoar  com.  With  as,  com  is  all  yeflow  and  white, 
not  many  colored,  as  with  yoa.  We  have  never  seen  com  blae  and 
red  and  black  like  yoars.  Will  yoa,  in  friendship,  give  me  of  yoar 
com  an  ear  of  every  color  to  take  to  my  people?" 

Ponianomsi  rose,  and  with  her  Talaskwaptiwa.  At  the  embers 
they  lit  a  tiny  bit  of  candle  and  picking  ap  a  woven  basket-tray  went 
to  the  store-room  where  the  com  was  neatly  stacked  in  sorted  piles 
of  different  colors.  They  broaght  me  the  fall  tray.  Ponianomsi 
held  it  in  the  light  of  the  fire.  "  See,"  she  said,  picking  ap  in  tarn  an 
ear  of  each  color, "  the  blae,  the  black,  the  spotted,  the  pink,  the  red, 
the  yellow,  the  white,  the  lilac,  I  have  broaght  one  of  each  kind." 

All  light  had  faded  from  the  windows.  The  room  was  lit  by  the 
fire  alone?  night  had  come.  Oatside,  the  white  horse  whinnied  and 
stirred  the  dost  impatiently.  I  rose  to  go;  Ponianomsi  took  my 
hand.  "Yoa  will  not  forget  me,"  I  said.  Ponianomsi  answered, 
"  We  will  pray  for  yoa,  oar  friend,  and  when  yoa  are  in  yoar  far-off 
home  by  those  great  waters,  will  yoa  pray  for  the  Hopis,  that  they 
may  have  rain?" 

"  I  will  pray  for  the  Hopis  that  they  may  have  rain  and  that  they 
may  be  'good  in  their  hearts,'  "  I  answered,  asing  the  Hopis*  own 
prayer-phrase. 

Talaskwaptiwa  stood  by  the  hearth,  his  face  grave  in  the  fire- 
light. I  knew  that  the  time  was  drawing  near  when  the  Hopis 
woald  plant  their  bahos,  —  emblematic  prayer  -  sticks,  into  whose 

[492] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


HOPI 

feathered  ends  prayers  are  breathed.  If  any  Hopis  are  absent  at  the 
time  of  the  of f ering  of  bahos,  those  at  home  make  bahos  for  them. 
bo  I  s^d.  When  the  Hopis  make  their  bahos,  wifl  they  make  one 
for  me? 

Talaskwaptiwa  looked  up  quickly;  this  was  a  strange  request  from 
a  Baham—an  American.  But  he  answered,  "  We  are  spinning  now 
in  the  kivas;'  soon  we  shafl  make  the  bahos.  I  wiU  make  a  baho 
for  you,  and  we  will  pray  for  you." 

''Pray  that  I^  too,  may  be  good  in  my  heart,"  I  said,  as  I  bent 
and  kissed  the  cheek  of  Ponianomsi. 

So  we  parted.  The  young  nephew  left  with  me,  for  he,  too,  lived 
at  the  foot  of  the  mesa.  Together  we  passed  through  the  shadowed 
village,  meeting  here  and  there  a  hurrying  barefoot  Hopi  flitting 
homeward  through  the  dark. 

The  young  man  led  his  white  horse  by  the  bridle  as  we  clambered 
down  the  rocky  trail  beneath  the  stars.  "When  Talaskwaptiwa 
has  made  the  baho,  what  will  he  do  with  it?"  I  asked. 

"He  will  give  it  to  Ponianomsi,"  answered  the  Hopi,  "when  all 
the  women  go  to  plant  their  bahos  she  will  take  it  with  her." 

"And  where  do  the  women  plant  the  bahos?" 

"  Over  there — east !"  He  pointed  with  his  whip  to  the  cliff  above. 
"  On  the  edge  of  the  mesa  they  will  plant  the  bahos  when  the  yellow 
line^  comes  over  the  mountains." 

"Why  do  they  plant  them  at  the  coming  of  the  yellow  line?" 

"  Because  they  pray,  and  if  they  pray  when  the  sun  rises,  the 
sun  wifl  carry  the  prayers  up,  up!"  His  whip  moved,  in  iflustration, 
from  horizon  to  zenith. 

"  And  to  whom  do  the  Hopis  pray?" 

There  was  a  pause,  then,  slowly,  "  It  is  that  which  makes  the  rain 
— that  makes  afl  things.    It  is  the  Power,  and  it  lives  behind  the  sun." ' 

'  Woollen  cord,  used  to  bind  the  bahos,  is  ceremonially  spun  by  the  men  in  the  kit/as — ander- 
ground  council  chambers. 

'  The  Hopi  expression  for  dawn. 

'  Mrs.  Matilda  Cox  Stevenson,  of  the  Bureau  of  American  Ethnology,  in  her  classification 
of  the  Zuiii  higher  powers,  tells  of  "  A'wonawil'ona,  the  supreme,  life-giving,  bisexual  power, 
who  is  referred  to  as  He-She,  the  symbol  and  initiator  of  life,  and  life  itself,  pervading  all 
space,"  also  of  "  The  Sun  Father,  who  is  directly  associated  with  the  supreme  power;  ...  he 
is  the  giver  of  light  and  warmth,  and  through  the  supreme  power  the  giver  of  life."  (See 
"  The  Zuiii  Indians;  Their  Mythology,  Esoteric  Fraternities,  and  Ceremonies."  Twenty-Third 
Annual  Report,  Bureau  of  American  Ethnology,  Washington,  D.  C.) 

[493] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE   INDIANS'    BOOK 

"And  the  katzinas?" 

**  The  katzinas  only  take  the  prayers.     Wc  do  not  pray  to  them." 

■"  Does  the  Power  that  lives  behind  the  sttn  look  like  a  man,  or 
like  anything  that  the  Hopis  have  ever  seen?" 

The  Hopi  looked  at  me  in  surprise.     "  No,  it  is  not  a  man;  we 
don't  know  how  it  looks.     We  only  know  that  it  is" 

"  When  Lololomai,  the  chief,  prays,  how  does  he  pray?    Will  you 
tefl  me?" 

"  He  goes  to  the  edge  of  the  cliff  and  tarns  his  face  to  the  rising 
son,  and  scatters  the  sacred  com-meal.  Then  he  prays  for  all  the 
people.  He  asks  that  we  may  have  rain  and  com  and  melons,  and 
that  oar  fields  may  bring  as  plenty.  Bat  these  are  not  the  only 
things  he  prays  for.  He  prays  that  all  the  people  may  have  health 
and  long  life  and  be  happy  and  good  in  their  hearts.  And  Hopis 
are  not  the  only  people  he  prays  for.  He  prays  for  everybody  in  the 
whole  world — everybody.  And  not  people  alone;  Lololomai  prays 
for  all  the  animals.  And  not  animals  alone;  Lololomai  prays  for  all  • 
the  plants.  He  prays  for  everything  that  has  life.  That  is  how 
Lololomai  prays." 

We  trod  the  rest  of  oar  downward  way  in  silence.  I  looked  up 
at  the  sky,  so  vast  and  deep,  lit  by  the  brilliant  desert  stars.  As 
we  neared  the  foot  of  the  trail,  I  glanced  back  at  the  viflage-crcsted 
mesa.  It  loomed  a  great  black  shadow  on  the  sky.  To-morrow, 
the  Hopi  world  woald  no  longer  be  mine.  Then,  as  though  to  seal  in 
spiritual  beauty  the  memory  of  the  simple  people  of  Oraibi,  the  wide 
night  seemed  to  echo,  "He  prays  for  the  whole  world — for  everything 
that  has  life." 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Co-|*^y3Ca"'«t^     StAy^a       6-*i      Cj\Oi£  ci^cr^jr-Co 


M.Nt   i-  ltd 


^ 


J     I    J        J     I  J        J      I   J         J       I    ,1    ^ 


1^^ 


I 


^ 


?^^^?5? 


Tick.  -   CJ*. 


Pt — ' . £3: 


cli\  (rg  \n   I  ^J.    i-J:i^ 


^ 


^^ 


^rt^ 


Ui^ 


.xyof^ 


Co   ^o 


■Cpc*-^ 


Co  e^ 


|i- i-l-.i  Irjjj-Li 


i 


H-O^— B 


j?^ •^..  -tU  el^  aX-^<^  Uy,tU  j^. .  r^t.; 


Ji'  I.I  h  I  Ij  J  II  I  1 1  I  ^^ 


_i.lct- 


^<>-<^A    y^f*^j. 


'h 


-  oJ^  ii^  -     •'•*-  * 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


"IxXa  «^i-«A.<l-iv  «-<*^     '^  J 


fctt 


(^^ ^  ,\    I   \A   J  i^j.  ri^ 


l^^  J    I J    N  J  ^ 


fc-»T-<_^ 


#j,>j^  J  J  I  J    J  ij  J  J   lg 


^ 


"I     \t 


Torf\-0     -Tvi-  ^icL*t^       fro.-      *-<l^        -MA-    Ot-    "^^  ^V   _         -"^a 


Ih   I'iu  nn  J  Uj  J  I  fjj^ 


^^ 


Digitized  by  Micmsoft® 


"T^y-y^.-oo-c-c  cJk  t^tt^    Jc 


^ 


I 


fe— tT 


i  li^"  U    u    u  i  I J 


¥\\  I'lj  I J 


eA 


m 


^ 


1£H»: 


J  I  'Sj    u  ^ 


^c 


^c. 


vne.  -c- 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


\ujejL 


/MA.  -    -VtX.  , 


-  ■    ..^fn* 


^-tA.  -      zra^  , 


#^  JT^N.-irjij^jj-jij    i^i'ij 


-^ 


rtUA 


f 


■c*.  -    -t/Ta, 


fat 


l4m  ^.T^-^ 


5g 


Jn   £^t  Ci.t>K    tit    t^ 


^^etr 


t 


g 


g 


^ 


P 


t^ 


^ 


vr»^       t: 


O^-.. 


:r 


^^ 


^^ 


P 


^a- <-/-i*»>^  -o      'lUa^'i-o. 


# 


*-.-- f 

-3 — '- * 


•C?^^ 


*^-+ 


V  IHUJTVT^P  iT^lj    Ij  I 


'52.- 


-  rfi-**  - 


(^A*^ 


-     -</-CC 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


7y^  OJ-I^  C^ (^ 


*■    i- 


j--^''  mfhujn  i|j-f3 


-T*-- 


/■ 


■XA  -      V<X 


/' 


Ta     A.    O^tt^jt-      ^  (ra-vr'-ini.     ct-kiJilM.      t^x. 


^-Uci^f^-^  6--,    /itc 


'V' 


T 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


^ 


# 


J^  J  J 

V 


'^'''      1      a     '    wl      1 


^tx. 


<^YX  C3L 


J  J 


I 


'Ix  U  ^    I  i  i  u  i 


L^^  (X.  <a 


J  J 


J  J 


)         J 


iU 


^W 


a  i    I  i  jL^gE^ 


^ 


J      J 


^^ 


J      .'J    J  ^JJ^ 


^*i-o     'jo 


* 


»    T        f 


11    •^'    IM      K  J_J.l7Jj  II 


i     J 


.<lffn:rxr^.  .  .  . 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


t,a   <-rUC    inJJh-  Gl\.  -   ftjL,-      -ftttxiJ- e-M^  .  . 


-<—■<.    .  —  -«   — 


i  J  .     J         J         .    J      J      , 


i 


rui'J-i 


^ 


i^    1    lis 


J        1      .     i         J 


-A  -  e  -    ^  -  -^.^     ,  .fj; 


i 


<  -     e- 


l'!'  i    I  J' 


Tjmj. 


J        J         J  .% 


j    i     j^     I    I     I     J     IJj.      I'iii 


1 


-7«-<  -    -c         < 


^^ 


J  1  I    ii-i 


■U- 


^T^a.-  ■f>- 


-  -fcr 


'^o/  ^-tiZ  .  -       ^.;»^-  ^  -  f 


i^il/tv/**' 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


^ff^      <1uU..r^»^    6 A 


^  J    : 


J  :       J       ) 


'-       .1       J         ^     t 


;»      •       . 


3= 


i 


j|j^ixil4,.^jpi 


^^^- 


]  *  .        J  i. 


a 


11X1 1 X  m^^ 


m 


T~^    -11  J1  ffl 


;M^-^^ 


i 


r^ 


<< 


XX  I  J'x  i  U  i  U 


-r 


i"       1  .      J  J 


ah.m.J-  />r 


T^ 


4  1  "v1i"^i  i 


—  © 


o    —     o 


j->  n  n 


-<::n. 


^i  U  r  'XX  ivx^'^ 


»/--»l-«.    A< 


/i 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


^ 


7^      ^ 


^7^^   <C,\.^  .  ^ 


'''^^^r^^ 


U. 


T-     ^ 


S(.m^€K,    M.M.    i  -    111.' 


*«.    ^ 


Jwj.  J  J.  \if^iAxJ\Cj^^ 


^-T  ^"      ^  T    T 


•*  O-  hU.        -^-t'  •^ 


4-4— 1-^    i 


i.        i-        .     i     -    i.-       ,i_J__J 


■»      iJ.        I J  J.       I^ij^^i 


^.-- 


^li 


%  1-— J \-.-h-^ 


^^ 


il^    ^     I'ii^^^ 


^     A  ^ 


-J- 


.-X  - 


J  Jii  J  I  Ui  Ui  ''ia  ''- 

J«^ -<to 


s 


^  ^  'r    ^  T 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


-fVCy       ^:/2w^     <hsL 


i 


J      J      i    .  J 


^^^^^^^ 


i 


J       r   ^      :     J         J         J      .1    i  J      :^J   Jj- 


fPf? 


^^^  'r '  U4^'^^^^i^'^ii 


^  if. 


^  > 


Cc  •^*-»  ^ 


J  r'j  ^"  r 


* 


i  i  'ii  'i^^ 


^ 


-A-*  '7m. 


ilc 


J  J 


J       J  ,  J      i  :     J        J         .J  J 

_2_ 


-'i-  U  'ii.  U'i.-^^'i    Uf 


)U 


'/t*        /«-^ 


T   '^7" 


-i.< 


o^  —C^tx. 


/< 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


L/t^-v.-^-^*-  7^^CL^^y-t.-»v  <vj  Jaw. 


t 

■o- 


-  <) 


%w 


^^ 


i  J.  1^  J-  U  i  '  J-  ^ 


* 


i  i   'i  i'ii  U  J 


A 


4j     jj    1  ^m 


i 


d 


r: 


'<wr«_  <ax/- 


7c, 


,'l  \  i-,M  1'),^ 


<4 


^^ 


0- 


y 


J  I J  I  Uvi}  liij  I 


>n  <x.      -Ka.. 


* 


1 «  -     <a.  ■ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


(_iyty  a. A.    1\CLA^^>f^^^ a^j    J' 


A 


:    A 


<} 


:       J  . 


^m 


m 


^ 


.  A 


4>  J  ^  lUi'^i'i  1 J  1-)  I  i-f'^'^ 


■  A  -  t^"*  -St  «. 


A    ^A 


^ 


J 


4 


;  J   I  j     I  J'j.^^ 


yx<>  na^a 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


(jyi^aiX    Aa><;^-J«A<X     'JgjL^r^ 


* 


d  -     i 


;'  J  J 1  n  J  1  ^^ 


<>*. .... 


ri]  m 


mi  j_j 


o. 


p^  ujiijii 


o o. 


o  —    o  o 


^ 


^^  .. 


£^__a.-      <»-     ■    ***'• "**•-  •*        *'<'■ ^  -   e«_ 


J.- 


J  Ijj  I  ji  j,^  1^   I 


'fxrj,ijj: 


fiCi  rtf  *:-  /<^»».  Jju^n^    -uup-Mv,^  da.    Jn.^  of 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


J'        J 


i       \     .H   1      i     s 


^ 


wi 


:^ 


A        iS»        -iJ 


0.-0.  <.  . .  • 


-^  i£. 


^        i 


J  i 


J  J 


t 


\  o     J 


1 


w 


<r«-  ^'  —  -"T^^-c-i  —  -<-*.  - 


<A  —     -c^ 


A^  i     // -T J !  ^     i     ..    J     J       .^  J 


J     J    - 


(^■]'  1    1  nj  tl.  ^ 


^ 


*i^~  7P*^-     -**■  ->*iA-  -M<».-     ^^5^.  .   ■   -  -<^AA    -      '^ 

0-  trtA.      £a*jL        ^^cr»-<3OT*-i^  t/-c^^t^"<urVvx 


*A  _       <. 


,-fFT- 


S 


T 


^ 


^^ 


^ 


i^S: 


(^.^A-  -tn 


i 


J         J 


t 


AieunK-  7*\^~'*'y^ 


d'JC  ■hiA-  dn-  ^Xii.1--  eS-'  s?a-<M-> 


J 


r 


-.  J    J 


^'^iJlTM  iM.   i^ 


<r-  -Tua  -      'iii, 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


^^p-i-o^<a.   i/o-^<i^ty>^o-^    \I(X 


< 


i    I    ..  J    J     rr 


T^-\ 


J      ^  •  J 


^= 


'  a'i  ^  'Hi  i^mi 


:*: 


y<A  -   cr«. 


•JtK    A^(fei«v.cr7(/<foje-    £ia-~^    cJU-ffva^. 


Ijt 


* 


t 


5J      i      .   J     1      ,   J       .'     ..  i     J 


E 


U  4  1^4  '^  ^^ 


# 


i      J 


— r  J   .  -. 


^  - 


J    i 


^  J 


% 


^  n.  iiM.   1  ]  J  i^u  J 


^ 


J       J^     J !  J    J 


fn — 3 — j^  J 


J  J 


^^^ 


j.-j-'-j-i 


Ulo--^. 


^    ->•«:(  -  »<  a  -    ^u. 


6-  V^A,      fiuL       i^ln  r"""-*^!^.  VW-<5i»«        <>«<^»v«. 


^ 


i-^  i  I  l/j  n.  i 


i 


J    J 


-   J      J      .    J         J      ,    J     ; 


J  J 


/«*_    <r<.-  -na.t^OL.-  -c^  -       -^-       '*t"i  -        '*^  ■ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


>{|^-o-a^^-g^   k'oJ^^c^.   ./<Xa>>x^ 


k 


k       i         J 


1        i         ■.      J         i         ,      J        J    , 


g^ 


j.    1    'j.   ^    '^    ^U  ^ 


« 


J    J     .  1     i 


J  i       J      ,      1      J      J        ,f  J        i 


^ll  J.i/i-J.  un  J  J IJ  i  i  \\\  ^ 


o        lo 


o—     o  —       o  —  o  —  o 


■  ■  o     -tLo 


e.  -  <-  ~    «■  ~      <- 


^ 


i  i  .J  i  .        )  J  -     i  J  :     J  i       . 


<¥  U'  J'  I  !■  V  1  Jg 


<5 jCT 


te 


r- 


«.         e. 


1  n — ] — 1 


4'  J"-  'I  i  \^T]i  i 


O.  o  o  "- 


^iJrU^n  M  n^p 


i 


J     1     .  1       J 


o     a- 


)      i       i  I  ,  I     i 


u   i^nn  '  j'J.  -'-jrjff 


i     1       J 


■  r 


J     1 


^2-*.         -tl/».  Aa  -^tO-        •<-<<».  <7-C-J 


i  i       .     J       J 


^^ 


^     la      Y^    ^ 


Co    -Co  -^ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


A;^»-tt-f^    Hi/aJ^^a^  <Ja^^ 


,-i-  i  J  i  -.     i  I  :        J  J 


if ;.,)?!  ijjiJ  ii  ;J  JM  J 


i 


A-o  l*J>    ■  .  o 


^  J--     :    i  J.J  J 


/^ 


'^     ^  ^iHlJ^J^^ 


^ 


i(t>. 


J     J 


O       OL  .  e.  . 


1         )       .    i 


r- 


^-^nj;!  j,-^^    I  4     -;l^ 


* 


fc 


J  J        J        .J       J    --.-    )       i    -  J       J 


y  J  j  I    i,f  1  ii;:^^  ^lj.j^  I; 


M<  C: 


c  ■     .  .   o  ■  ■  ■  ■      o 


^. 


VV^'     -^,<rU>      ^    *.«    -^  <^      *^    -^-<^- 


^ 


J.J  J  :       J  3  .J 


J  J.J 


^^ 


J*< 


<?   • 


o       ^    •  -  ■  <:*. 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


q>  liH  I  l|i.    |i^p 


S 


J i_-.-J      i 


^f  n^i|^j,  ijii  ^n^^U 


(JU... 


n 


i 


i 


;J  J.   J. -J 


■^'  U  'ij-1  '  j^i^^j'^ 'JJr??f 


^ 


ex 


-£M)        'C;»^L  ^ 


J  J  -         i  J 


£.• 


M 


J    -J 


w 


m 


ni  'o  '  n^^ 


*-  '     J    .  J    J     .  J 


-ti*     "^^ 


r 


M 


1    ^j,  J  j..j_.. 


^il^^  nil;.  ^  ir;  j,  in^^ 


^1^^   i^. 


^■...    /!.■       -L 


7" 


J ^--i :  J  --,^-  J     J     J-_  ,^%.. 


/]  Ijj^/  l-j^j-^-j  w 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


°k./t-A.^et'aSt^S~.  4<aLX^t^ty%^  <x^  J<PT<  q  J 


<Tr 


J J 


% 


J    J   J 


^-  n.  n.  I  riiV?^  j  ^  H; 


_^^„^.___.a--4 


J   J 


^ 


^_J— X 


-J_-X- 


^ 


^ 


rr 


J 


J- 


^  J    J-  J 


j   H  )^LI   1^ 


g 


^ 


,?- 


4- 


J- 


_i_ J 


^-  J 


i-    J 


'<f^  j^J'  ^i  I  r^^  i^i  1^^ 


^M 


^^ 


^^^ 


^i»,/n  <»  -  <X  — 


<iZ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


AW.<>-ajho^   i^oJ^w^cA^  Oa^^^cr*-. 


m 


t  * 


rr 


1     !%  J 

3         ^- 


i      S 


II  U  ^  U.'l^  '''Uii  ' 


tti: 


J        J 


J      J 


i.  ._J-  ... 


J-.       J- 


^^ 


i 


J      -X        ,.J  J  .J  J        .       1         J»      .i      J       .     1       J        :     i      J        J    J 


A* 


I      J.  LJ J- J 


•To^tul.  3««,«X«tf  ^«tui 


4-^\U}^\mm 


.  ^=23* — :jx 

J       J     ^    :     J J t-  -      1-  - J-        J 


Mz 


■'  n  I J  J  1  MJ  1  J  J 


^5 


cJO.-' 


a 


1  J  ..  J  J 


J    J     rr 


<^ 


* 


^ "i-^ "hix.       a. 

J -J 1 J    r 


^^ 


i-j  J  .i  a  - 


i  J I J  J 1  Jti  i  111 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


9(^^x^n-id=^  h^^if^^o^  Strucy^ 


i         I 


L?  I'^'rllHiJ-i 


i  J         ,        i  i  ,       J  J  ;        J  J  ,        J  i  :      J  I 


i  I  n  J I  i  f]  1^ 


^^ 


.  ^  ...    A^       £L-  ■  ■  ■  -/KA*.-   >to-  c-yi-/*  4 


^? 


^ 


J= 


# 


;     i 


7- 
i     i-    .   i      i 


t/UCu  A.Aa«\  , 


n  1.1  J 


JJ  I  J  J 


P^jua^^   ^^  -^OX**       ,V4A4i 


t 


tt 


i      i 


1    i   n      I   I J   i 


^jp   rj.j   I  i  J    I  i    J    I  nii  li  X  I 


CJU. Oji  ■  ■  ■  ■■      t\tK.  0~.       .   .        A.O-  A«.  -    «0 


n — I — ^ 


J   J    '  J    J    I  1 7  ^  ^  I  ^  ^ 


ji  n  ij  J  ij  J 


i  J  .      i  i  :     i 


J'lllMl|iliij||^^Mjj^l^Ml 


£.. .    a..        «.■■■     e.  ..  ..    e.. 


-U     to-      o   - 


o  -       o-v. 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


j(|^/T^  .rrai-/a   ^k^^^^ym.tKu  ./<a,c■^r*^ 


11       i    i      J      J     .  J     J     .  J 


JTj  Ij^  I  ^   n|.r^j  Ij 


^  a__       <3-  -  a- 


i     ■)     A    .  J    J    n "i — !  .J      I 


^^^  ^b  U^^'tji  I  ^  J- 


JU        c^     -^c..^-    I 


r- 


^ 


i    J    .  J 


n  I  !      J  I  :     J  i  . 


J? 


I. 


T 


J      1       >     i         I      i       i       J 


,|^  n  J  I J '  n  ^ 


^^ 


t.  .X,  <x     ^<x  A 

)     J     .   1    j    .  J     !    n ] — 3  J     i 


T 


? 


^ 


T^ "-a — * ^—» — ■» -w 

i     .  )     :    n J 


^ 


i  J  ..      J         r       rJ        i- 


m 


^JJJ  ^iJJ-^i'  njj^i^iU 


i 


./ -       iLi. -t  4t.   ...     A    ,  .   .    -  t^OA. 

i    .       J       ,     J         i  i  .  :      J  I  J  J  J  J 


■  ■  •     <    .  .   .    ■  "Haa      ■Jrf-**-  •<-*■ 


rij  ^J;' jj'i  'jj;  'JJJ  ij# 


1... 


<x 


£»  -u^c  -tj-<v  €a. 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


^*-fy^  ^  TA-o  -^♦^^ 


JA,l 


M.HiS-.  lid 


HL<^ft:».    <T^   Ota.   Sin^aJ  (T  I 


i 


s 


J/"  jfj  J  \u_n\\_j^  Mi  ^ 


d.. 


i. 


i^ 


^c     ic 


^ 


s 


■   + 


i^\  \  lif  n  fj'i  J  J' J  ij  J  I J  J 


Pii(  I  I  I  III  ill  ij.  I  ii 


/      i  J      J  :      J  i  ..    1      i      -  i     i     .  J      J 


I'fi'ii  i"i,j  ij|i  I  M   Miiill  i^^U-Uj-^ 

//     _  /  .    -iV"^,.       ^^       ,4^  -  oro  -      Co  ~    -va.  ~  ■       a.  , 


juc-^-^  ■^- ^    <^-ir-  <^- -^-    '^ 


•fcA^   y    e<^i^   ji^-'^    ,^c^<uXa 


_  e^*7  *i  •■'V  -  - 


Digitized  by  Microsoft© 


lU-JUtX.  J^^jPyJ^CK.  <7.a 


J       J  .     J        J        .    J  J  ,     i       i      , 


a 


■f^a.-  -tr*.-     €■««.-     €<».  -    <,«r«.  -  •»•  a. - 


i       J 


I 


O^OL  -  y^Ci^^^K.  O    ^ 


O  -  -TV^tfL  -   <«/XA 


—       -*A    -     -OC 


4^r^f^  /-  - 


^n  J   M  J^^    iqji.-nul  J.^^^ 


o.., . 


.  .   a. 


£.. 


/I't^j  J  iJ,  jj  iJiTi^k^iljri 


^ 


-^  i  i 


^  <s.- 


1  J 

_± n 


1      J 


i       J    .  J  J 

tra— I — , — \  +.    \t 


\-v,\  iJ  jnil  ihiJ-HiiViTni^ 


o. 


iLo-   &  e.      £trt. 


&      -fCoA.   - .  .    <x 


a.        .,      U^ 


Sfjn^t*..»m-  i-  log 


^^m 


3^ 


^   l4i<4.j  1 


J   i 

± 


^ 


i 


i         I  ,       J         .«  -         /       J  ,       i  J 


,|,*j  i,T  JH^J  1 


^ 


a.  i< 


\<5L      -<.  O-    • 


/. 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


^ 


■ik-Heo<.    '^^aA^^o^  Oau.^j-^, 


J        i         ,    i         J  .      i        J 


'f^  U    i^    r 


^ 


/3.      ^o-  -A<i 


4 


i   J      .  J    J 


'P   M    l.i^i^ 


S 


^     ^<a.  ^4CL . 


r~T"T  3  ?       J  >  :        i  J  .       J  J  :        J         J 


^1.'.  ^ 


<».  A 


^^        &....-£.<> 


<k         tyi*. 


i  J 


i'j  '.  ^'"j'j'Vj "J  .  i  i  V^  J 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


}Li  -,^<'<v  h^&jf^-*yt^Q^    Jajuo-<^ 


^ 


J    ; 


J   .' 


I 


«■  ^-^ 


^^^=^ 


i  I  .     )  I  :      J        i 


J    J 


J   \  J  J    I J  ^ 


is 


S»<.  -     -^i  -      Q/i  -  Co  -  -c-cc  -    c>.  ~      <X  -       '  o- 

J      i        :     J       J       ..      J      J  J         J 


1    J    • J    J    -i      J 


m 


I,!  I  '^  i  u 


^^-o-  ^. 


-wi  <i  -    '>vi—  <       <:-<;- 


trtK  -Ca.  o.-         fi.,       CK  -      <*~- 


i  i  J         J  ,         i  1  _      J  J 


CV.    /^.  „.    ._    /-.      ..      .  .      _  ^     —    ^    ■— 'vj* 


L-   tr,<K.  -...  .j^x- 


<  <        ■*.-<.- 


I        ,  i       .  t       -^      . \-s *: -«■    ^   ; ♦-  +-   ^f  ^ 


o. ......  iL 


^ 


■t  1   J  J  .  J  i  J    I 


,|,i>|     I     I  J     |.l     I   i,-|-^|.;  ^%:a 


^ 


)6.... 


■  e  . 


-U      ^- 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


y/g  -  T1-e<\   J\oJ^\i.'^<3y_     Ja^yj^, 


4^,  )  ,iu  r^j  li  i,|j  1 F  ^Ttjiin  I  ^ 


0.    ..      -L- 


a  ■  -      e. 


"Cfl-t         a.       Si 


a^  ■  .  .     «_. 


^J,   .  ,  -<a^. 


c 


"i     J        \     J     ^^    J    i      .  J    J 


+■    -f- 


^.  rj  J  '  i^'J'")  ij 


1 


^^ 


4 

J  J  .     1  1  .      J         J  .      )        J 


I  ^'L.'  I  J    I  j^ 


/a 


-fc  <?.  A  <a.  -t 


^ 


oi  i7  1  1  J  I  ^m 


(X.   "f^f-      i^A  ■  ■  iLi 

I             J        .      !           J          :       J  J 

0  '~3~'. , !=S=? — ^ !^     3     -■ 


^      iio^         "A, 


^x  . .  A 


!         J              J       J        ,    J       J        .    J      i  I       J 

_± : — ±- 


i  Ui'^dJ  U''^t^  'aijiij^ 


<:l  ...  d 


J     1 


^        J       J         S        -.J        i      i     :  T 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


JU  -  //e.x  -k^Aiiyi^ 


CK,       0< 


J J-    .-.     J^         .^J. 


I  J  .       i- J 


M  i^,  l.'|]Vj  1  ^  1  'Pip 


*^ 


u J- J-  J- J      J  .    J    J 


n 


;^     I"  > 


^^ 


'      1 


2^ 


nt^„  UV  '-0^^^^^^^ 


I.' 


/f. 


_1 y... 


(X.  'f^  (X  Ct.        --H<X^ 


^         J  .' 


^  # 


'^^niA  i^a  jj 


3^ 


9= 


i 


'    T 


i  i 


^P 


^.  )^. 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


77  e^od-c^     VAx.o-c 


r 


4^  ^   I  ^w  li-  J'  Y  \  V.  t  i'^m 


-^ 


J.- 

1 


-no. .  .      .  .  fc*  -  Ai  -  <.  ^ A  -  <?y« 


r 


■<ra     CK 


j>  j^  J  I :  ■;  1^ 


~^a.  -   ■  ■  .  ■    Cy-i 


^ 


r* 


'■f  J'  J'  I  J'  M  ^ 


A  -    ^  '    <=*- 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


CL^tl-  «»r«A.     Xtj 


•  Ci/O-M*    "A  «  -  <^  -     <.M>  -  iCiaX   - 


-  -^  - 


T^ 


-  ^.e£«-e^  3 


cr^tftr-ZT  .«*<.     -jCe**  y  «»%  ,      -dertf-^ 


«'>i  >«'*^/ 


t|  J-  I-  u- 1  1  r  M  )'  f 


■Ct-A  -    €lR.-  't*-*^   4mJv        0^4^^     4a4 


^  J'  ri  M    I  ;■  M  n  I- 1  ,i    '■! 


\  ^~^?l  ^  ^-M  <  I  h"hi  r  ^^  1  -^ 


4f'  t-   I  V   MJ!  tin  J  KM 


j  n  M  tf  1  ;i  f  M'h  I'M 


Ui^itiz^d  by  IVIIdi'd^dm 


Ji^^r^j^-^      >       \/<Lx,v>-<     , 


» 


J>^\n^;^M  M'   ir  M 


^  ^'l^  ^.'^ '  J  J  i.-^ 


V  Ji    I    t   f     I     )^ 


f  r  '■  I  h  r  I  "L"^r '  i 


if    r'i'v  I   M  '  I     I  L'    '  '^' 


J- 


ri 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


t  }  ^       i^  t 


j^  / 


r   r 


I  j^  j^  > 


^ 


^ 


^^ 


-%- 


^ 


J^  ^ 


i4e.-  <^- 


^    ^  ■  .^  ^  r  ? 


^-^       1-    V   Ijl^JfJ^  1 1  {_jl 


Jlf^  ^    -o<         Ce.        <«  Vl,<r»*.c  <^.. 

i  J         .J    ^ L  i 


^ 


^^"^iJtP7ii  ti^iJp-i^^ 


^c.^.. 


(PW^AU^T^i  I  4^     ' 


IF 


-to^ 


i 


J    i 


/ 


rr.^ 


T  7 


rf 


/  y 


J  J  Ij  J  P,  v^'^  v>jj>  Ijsj  B 


I 


:2=^ 


'CO*x--d^ ,    -UnK      4^^ 


/^i«A.  J<n4/v»  ^/pcvtji,  a ff-K^^s"*^  J     arx^  ,  '/  <r>-«^  ^Sr^^rx* ,  lii 

"  DiyilutiU  Uy  Miuusuft® 


^<A.  -    ^^  ,    -C«/-«A  -    ^!5i.  <jr"»^  / 


/  O-t-tA    £^v^^rx«  ,    ^(r«*A    ^~V*-»/»»  ,      - 


Mt^rtLX^j  I  ^lA.r-l 


>  j^ 


[J 


■i  /  ''  I  ^-Jjl  W^ 


^C   -        <.r-». 


i 


#    i^ 


cX;    -i. 
ir       ^ 


^y    1^  t'    I  J1 


^    ^ 


'•  ^ll  \1^  '• 


/,  r 


O  >"  *^  4Xx     i*.  c-  ,  ^/>i'  i-^  '^MJU  f%-  €  ,   <jCtn^,  Ctf-y*^  «■      ^  £a-^ifc      »--  -c  ' 


^ 


1^ 


J'  .r  I  h>  -> 


<^a.       u)oJi.    <<-*»-  _,      b*-<        i^o-A-  -    cjoU..  -*-«-, 


/|>    Pv   ^^    \   }f  p9  I  ■■^' 


^^J^O.  <»J-«)U 


i-    r    7 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


:U-e^(J^-e-^      .1  .'X^'.^-j--^ 


.    ^       J'       ^ 


r  I 


4'^  'Ttj.  I  n  .^  It  J  J^^ 


i 


2 


n^w  )^^-^^ 


^\  nil  I  n  rtixpi 


^   >  I  f 


^ 


,-f  n--    'M4'^>r^  J'^'.    HU'  M 


Oa       CA^Q^rJL.      A»€         *t  <n^^ 


ixt.  ,  ci^a^'v^    •**«-       -*'a'«o 


^ 


> 


J 


i 


I  J  M  J 


o  -      ar*^  ■ 


4'  .rjT  I  J  jg 


^# 


Al^ 


^g 


■W<r- 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


7 


<^^x.UX--   J, 


s 


r 


1  h- 


^AA<JL/^  CL</C*>*^ 


olX^  ,    ^2-*^      ix^cju'x^  c^-^  ^  f\  ci^  ^.-^-^  ^-'fy^      ^ 


j^  ,-J  -h-i  -.l--Llg 


^ 


i^ 


k   'U     'if^'- 


2 


'•f .  J  1.1  'U     1^^ 


''  li  'M  'l^j^ 


f  J  III'  I^^J^  J^^jl^  " 


£- 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


g-^^l ' 


^  JtXx.'J-*- 


m 


^& 


-\ 


—     ^\ 


A>--. 


^> 


U}^'  IITj  j-  Ijjj.  h._J 


«^A -  o  "Act-  -■  ■■    o  _  . 

1^-  LtZ^,  Ic^ ,  jc—  ctz^ ,  ^c^  ,  -L-ttZ^,  /«1£./--. 


^  -  -Zia  -    <a.  -  '>»\ct  -    *<;  ; 


s? 


M  j-J  '  J^J  J.  -I  J.   J 


40.  J.     I   AJ     J      I  J_J^  JJ     J     II     j- 


^ 


h      J.      I    ^J      J 


? 


IS 


ti^i     I        I     ■'-'    ''^ 


^-    Z:. 


i 


j-ij.  u  JO  1  rn  J, 


^ 


^,»A>_.-^A^      ^IojU  ds:  A-£t-^     A'- t^^  Ctr>M^  — 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


<^  e^e^     Oa 


<a.oo-<_/ 


^^ 


^ 


ft^    U   TT^ 


=^ 


fi_     e-        e- 


=fF 


yoziL      -at-. 


/     I  J      J  J 


o 


4'uJ-i^QN'   1^ 


4 


^ 


J.      H'J    J. 


^ 


^^ 


,  ..    <X      —  C3L  —        ^*_ 


^1    J-    J    -f-J      J^  J.       1  J— J    'fj     !■  J 


fiL-      e.-  < ^  -^ 


_        o  —  a  _     -  -  ■ 


r- 


J  u D  i  ^   ^Wji  ' 


f    M 1  I     I  J  J    r  I    I  I    I  I 


Ol^  - '-"^^ ■■    ua^  J      c-  -(r^     ^a**- 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


[' J ■  J.  I  J-  i 


4Co.  -        o^ 


h  -n    I  i->j'  J    iij  ^ 


I- 


"^ 


;z 


5 


^n   '-mj 


§^ 


IS 


^^ 


li 


*^^ 


£ 


«  -        -t. 


^ 


^^ 


I 


s 


J    1  j.t^f  ^Tif-1^>  'l^-w^ 


li 


S. 


r 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


APPENDIX 


■  I  HE   following  paragraphs   are   from    The  Discovery  of 

T  America,  by  John  Fiske.  The  famous  historian  here 
sets  the  seal  of  authority  on  the  value  of  the  study  and 
'  I  preservation  of  Indian  thought: 

"Aboriginal  America  is  the  richest  field  in  the  world  for  the 
study  of  barbarism.  .  ♦ .  Until  we  have  become  familiar  with  ancient 
American  society,  and  so  long  as  our  view  is  confined  to  the  phases 
of  progress  in  the  Old  World,  this  demarcation  between  civilized  and 
uncivilized  life  seems  too  abrupt  and  sudden;  we  do  not  get  a  correct 
measure  of  it.  .  .  .  But  among  the  red  men  of  America  the  social 
life  of  ages  more  remote  than  the  lake  villages  of  Switzerland  is 
in  many  particulars  preserved  for  us  to-day,  and  when  we  study 
it  we  realize  as  never  before  the  continuity  of  human  development, 
its  enormous  duration,  and  the  almost  infinite  accumulation  of  slow 
efforts  by  which  progress  has  been  achieved.  .  .  . 

"  The  folk-lore  of  the  red  men  is  found  to  be  extremely  interesting 
and  instructive.  ...  No  time  should  be  lost  in  gathering  and  re- 
cording every  scrap  of  this  folk-lore  that  can  be  found. 

"  The  pueblos  of  New  Mexico  and  Arizona  are  among  the  most 
interesting  structures  in  the  world.  Several  are  still  inhabited  by 
the  descendants  of  the  people  who  were  living  in  them  at  the  time 
of  the  Spanish  Discovery,  and  their  primitive  customs  and  habits 
of  thought  have  been  preserved  to  the  present  day  with  but  little 

change.  l  u    c  • 

"The  house  communities  of  the  southern  Slavs  are  tuU  ot  m- 
terest  for  the  student  of  the  early  phases  of  social  evolution,  but  the 
Mandan  round-house  and  the  Zufii  pueblo  carry  us  much  deeper  into 
the  past.  Aboriginal  American  institutions  thus  afford  one  of  the 
richest  fields  in  the  world  for  the  application  of  the  comparative 

[533] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'    BOOK 

method,  and  the  red  Indian,  viewed  in  this  light,  becomes  one  of  the 
most  interesting  of  menj  for  in  studying  him  intelligently,  one  gets 
down  into  the  stone  age  of  human  thought.  No  time  should  be 
lost  in  gathering  whatever  can  be  learned  of  his  ideas  and  institutions 
before  their  character  has  been  wholly  lost  under  the  influence  of 
white  men.  .  .  .  Some  extremely  ancient  types  of  society,  still  pre- 
served on  this  continent  in  something  like  purity,  are  among  the 
most  instructive  monuments  of  the  past  that  can  now  be  found  in 
the  world.  Such  a  type  is  that  of  the  Moquis  [Hopis]  of  northeastern 
Arizona.  I  have  heard  a  rumor,  which  it  is  to  be  hoped  is  ill-founded, 
that  there  are  persons  who  wish  the  United  States  government  to 
interfere  with  this  peaceful  and  self-respecting  people,  break  up 
their  pueblo  life,  scatter  them  in  farmsteads,  and  otherwise  compel 
them,  against  their  own  wishes,  to  change  their  habits  and  customs^ 
If  such  a  cruel  and  stupid  thing  were  ever  to  be  done,  we  might  justly 
be  said  to  have  equalled  or  surpassed  the  folly  of  those  Spaniards 
who  used  to  make  bonfires  of  Mexican  hieroglyphics." 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


APPENDIX 


NOTE 

The  interlinear  translations  here  given  have  been  made  with  care  in  the  hope  that  the  book 
may  be  of  some  aid  in  the  comparative  study  of  the  linguistic  stocks  of  the  North  American 
continent;  yet  they  are  offered  as  approximate  only,  for  philological  accuracy  requires  full  and 
intimate  knowledge  of  Indian  languages — a  knowledge  which  the  recorder  does  not  possess. 
"Whenever  an  authority  on  the  language  of  a  given  tribe  has  been  found,  his  criticism  has 
been  solicited,  as  follows,  and  the  recorder  wishes  here  to  express  her  grateful  acknowledgment 
of  the  services  so  kindly  rendered: 

Penobscot  and  Passamaquoddyt     Dr.  J.  Dynely  Prince,  Columbia  University,  New  York. 

Kiowa:    Hr.  James  Mooney,  Bureau  of  American  Ethnology  'Washington,  D.  C. 

Kwakiutl:     Dr.  Franz  Boas,  Columbia  University,  New  York. 

ZuSi:     Mrs.  M.  C  Stevenson,  Bureau  of  American  Ethnology,  Washington,  D.  C. 

Hopi:     Rev.  H.  R.  Voth,  Field  Columbian  Museum,  Chicago,  Illinois. 

The  words  in  Indian  songs  are  often  changed  for  euphony  in  singing,  or  they  are  prolonged 
for  rhythmic  and  poetic  effect  by  the  addition  of  vocables.  In  the  following  pages  the  aim  has 
been  to  present  only  actual  words,  omitting  vocables  and  meaningless  refrains. 


WABANAKI 

MALISEET  DANCE-SONG 

Now  used  at  weddings 

Kwe-hiu-wha-ni-ho 

how  are  yoti:  how  d'ye  do  (used  in  songs — not  the  common  expression — more  a  song-phrase 

than  words  with  distinct  meaning) 

kshi-te-fca-mo-tik  '1° 

dance  hard  if  you   please    (abbreviation   of   I  to  the, 

"I"  twice  sounded) 

pilsh-kwe-sis-tok  ski-no-sis-tok 

young  girls:  maidens  yo'^ng  boys:  youths 


PASSAMAQUODDY  DANCE-SONG 


n  musums 


"Wagad-alo 

our        (r, 

^meaningless  syllables,  as  above)     great     Fran(ois-Josephe\Francis.Joseph)     has  been -fishing 


our        {no  meaning— syllables  affixed  for  song-euphony)  grandfather 

sanow  fc=J>'  Blamswe-Zozep  ha-ba-mes-ba-na 


MALISEET  LOVE-SONG 

Boski  u  ■                               fclabin   (sung,  "ta-li-bin")                   elmi  niamwouik 

v^°%el  you  look  up         •                            up  the  river 

<     .      .         <  tabp-ffilok                                                 chipduk 

tZ  TpZi  ice  is  leaking                  you  might  (might-  may  be) 

fcTam^S  skwelagweyan                             fc«  we  nu  de  n« 

^TZ^me  coming  down  the  river                  (meaningless  vocables) 

yuu  iee  me  "       ,„^,   „ff„„  ,ni  the  river   ■    You  mav  see  me  coming 
Next  spring,  when  the  tee  is  breaking  up,  look  open  up  tne  river,      x  u,        y 

down  the  river  ("  in  my  canoe,"  understood)  . 

[  535  ] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE   INDIANS'    BOOK 


WANAGI 

The  soul  when  separated 
from  the  body:  Spirit 


DAKOTA 

WACIPI 

Dance 


OLOVAJV 

Songs 


(Ghost-Dance  Songs) 


maka 

earth 
nisipe-Io 

commands  you  (ni,  you;  si,  command; 
pz,  plural  form  of  pi,  abbreviation  of 
pi-yela-yelo,  an  emphatic  ending) 
oyakapo 
tell  it  abroad 
The  Father  commands  all  on  earth  to  sing.     Say  this.      Tell  it  abroad. 


Ateyapi 

Father 
owancaya 

everywhere 


he. 

this 


eya 

say 


kin 

the 
lowan 

to  sing 


po 


{imperative  particle) 


II 


Ina 

Mother 


ceya 

to  cry 
to  weep 


hektiye 

come  back :  come  home  (he  interjection; 
ku  com.e  home;  ye  a  precatory  form 
of  the  imperative  singular) 
omani  Ate  heye 

walking  about  Father  thus  saith  (heya  to 

say  this  or  that) 


misunkala 

my  younger  brother 
little 

lo 

{emphatic  ending 


III 


He,  he 

wanna 

wawate 

wasna 

{exclamation) 
watinkte 

now 

/  am  eating,  feasting 

pemmican  {dried  buffalo-meat 
minced  with  wild   cherries 

/  shall  eat 

and  spices) 

■WICASA  ATAWAJV         OLOWAN 

Man    Looking  at,  or  towards      Song 


Hocoka 

Centre  of  the  camp — in  this  case, 
the  circle  of  warriors  who  are 
gathered  in  the  centre  of  the 
camp  awaiting  the  prophecies 
of  the  Seer,  or  Holy  Man,  be- 
fore setting  out  to  war 

yatonfcal 

elsewhere 


{Song  of  the  Seer) 


■wan 

a 


[536] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


cicuqon 

what  I  have  given  you 
what  I  have  prophesied 
to  you 


ntifiwe 

let  it  be  {let  it  be  fulfilled) 


APPENDIX 


lo 

(emphatic  ending) 

welo 

(emphatic  ending) 


TASUWKE-SKA    OLOWAAT 

Horse      White  Song 

(Song  of  llie  White-Horse  Society) 

Kola  taku  oteHika  imakuwapi 

Friend  whatever  hardship  charge  me  with 

difficulty  put  upon  nic 

hena  kowoklpi  sni  waon 

these  fearing  not  I  am 

Friend,  whatever  hardships  fall  upon  ine,  I  fear  them  not ! 

(The  song  is  also  sung  when  one  man  tells  another  that  whatever  the  hardship  lie  will  be- 
friend him) . 

TOKALA  OLOWAJV 

Fox  Song 

(Song  of  the  Fox  Society) 

Tokalaka  miye  ca  nakenula  waon  welo 

Fox  I  (connective)  a  short  time  I  am  (emphatic  ending) 

I  am  the  Fox.     I  am,  living  but  a  short  time. 


TOKALA  WACIPI  GLOW KN 

Fox  Dance  Song 


Omani 

kin 

nayapapi                                            ca 

Travellers 

the 

yo-u  -fled                                             and 

Agna-Iyanke 

hena 

yonke-Io 

Beside  Runs 

there 

lay  (was  killed) 
yujkhe,  lying  prone,  lo  (emphatic  ending) 

You,  the  travellers. 

fled. 

and  Runs 

-Beside  lay 

killed. 

-WAKAN  OLOWAAT 

Holy  Song 

(The  story  of  the  Holy  Song  is  here  given  in  abbreviated  form  in  the  original  Dakota) 

sofca  el 

thick  at 


■Wafcpa 

creek 

river  or  stream 


can 

wood 

a  tree 

trees 


ahi  tipi 

came  into  camp 

ahi 

to  bring  to  a  place 


na 

and 
also 

moreover 


etipi 

camped  at 

ha 

and 

ca 

and 


inikaga 


yun-fcan 

and  then 


napoktan 

bracelet 
kupi 

they  gave 

(ku,  to  give  to  any  one; 

pi    (suffix)    is     usually 

the  sign  of  the  plural) 


memeya 

circle 


ahiti 

to  come  and  pitch  one's  tent.     Ti,  tipi, 
a  tent,  liouse,  dwelling 

napsiyoKii 
finger-ring 
^Q  wicakila 

also  he  asked  of  them 

n~  wica  fcila 


and 


them  he  asked 


Ze^Uodge:  new  life  (called  "  new  life"  because  after   the  --'ff  J^f/;;""  JtaV'infkal^^^ 
made  over.     The  sweat-bath  is  u  sacred  act  of  purtficatron:  in,,  to  take  a  vapor-bath,  m.kaga. 


made  over 

to  make  "  int.") 


[537] 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE   INDIANS'   BOOK 


kagapi 

na 

can 

'  wan 

they  made 

and 

pole 
{wood) 

a 

paslatapi 

na 

el 

set  up 

and 

in 

pte-hinca-ha 

wan 

sayapi 

buffalo  calf  hide 

red  i/iej;  painted 

na 

el 

iyakaskapi 

and 

on 

/•fed  on  to  it 

(iya-kaskapi 

kaska 

iyakaska 

to  it  they  bound 

to  6ind 

to  6md  to) 

wicasa 

■wan 

eyanpaha 

icu 

na 

man 

a 

crier 

toofe 

and 

eyanpaha 

si 

na 

tona 

sum-mon,  cry  out 

'.,or 

feod?  /m')m 

and 

a5  many  as 

herald 

kazapi 

hena 

owasin 

kusela 

sick 

;/ioie 

aZ/ 

c/ojf,  nfar 

(were,  understood) 

o 

wicasi 

na 

can 

kin 

to  come 

told 

them 

and 

^o/e 

the 

(wica  them  tell; 

{wood) 

si,  command) 

hute 

el 

ca.n 

waksica                        egle 

na 

base 

at 

wooden 

cup 

placed 

and 

foot 

1                 bowl 

. 

used  by  medicine-men) 

lowan 

yun-kan 

can 

etan 

mini 

sang 

i/ww 

pole 

/j-ow 

{abbreviated  form 

of  etanhan) 

water 

ti 

na 

waksica 

el 

ozula 

came 

OM(i 

CMp 

a« 

full 

{Poured  or 

trickled  into  the  bowl  until  it  was  full) 

ca 

koza 

kin 

wicaku 

waksica 

awd 

sick 

the 

them  gave 

cup 
wicasa 

etanhan 

mini 

onqon 

he 

/ram  it 

it/aier 

roAere  i/ze  water 
was  contained 

those 

wen 

Ota 

yatfcanpi 

tka 

yahepapi 

sni 

wanj' 

drank 

6m«  ' 

ifcji  drank  up 
they  drained 

woi 

ohinni 

ozula 

asnipi                       glapi                      na 

owanzi 

a/i£;oyi 

full 

cured                     go 
{they  were  cured) 

home                 and 

be  quiet 
one  or  some  {they)'; 

"o"  indicates  the 

yankapo 

na 

ake                lowan                     na 

locative  form 
maka 
ground 

he  commanded  them  to          and 

aga^'n               sang                    and 

stay  in  one  place 

earth 

(yanka  to  be  in 

one  /j/ace; 

po,  imperative  particle) 

el 

owa 

na 

iwankam 

yagata 

on 

wrote 
drew 

and 

above 

his  hand  spread  out 

[538] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


APPENDIX 


yu/ifcan 

maka                        el                        owa 

qon 

he 

then 

ground                     on                      draw 

{drawing 

that 

it 

yawa 

ytinkan                           ihanhanna 

kin 

pte 

read 

<ten                                weA;«  day 
morrow 

the 

buffalo 

otapi 

fete  lo                           eya                          yankan 

ecetu 

plenty 

will  he                       he  said                           then 

', 

it  was  fulfilled 

(lo 

(suffix)  is  an  emphatic 
particle) 

ytjnka« 

ake                        I'eya                          cezi 

kin 

hena 

//!«» 

again                this  he  said                tongue 
(le,  this;  eya.,  he  said) 

the 

those 

oyoya 

kin                        na                      cante 

kin 

hena 

thighs 

the                       and                      heart 

the 

them 

{the  best  parti 

:  of  the  meat) 

ayustanpiktelo                                eya                            na                         wanna     • 

tiyata 

they  leave  shall                            he  said                      and 

now 

home  to 

(lo,  emphatic 

particle) 

at  home 

glipi 

nahan                pte-ha                etanhan 

ogle 

wikcemna 

they  came  hack                  and             buffalo-hide                 of 

shirts 

ten 

from 

topa 

(wikcemna-topa)                         kaga 

na 

pezi 

four 

forty                                     made                       i 

and 

straw 

na 

makahlilila 

and 

mud  :  clay  (baked  clayf  '■  lilila  "  Teton  form  of 

•'lilita,"  hot) 

na 

ca-iai                                                icu 

na 

and 

charcoal                                        took 

and 

ca-KIi 

wahinsa                            na                            mazasu 

kaga 

gunpowder 

caps                            and                          wads 

made 

na                  wicasa                  kin                  wicakti                  na 

owasin 

inzinpi 

a«(i 

■men                    the              to  them,  gave             and 

all 

rose  up 

na 

can-nonpa                           wan                       opagipi 

na 

wi 

and 

wooden  pipe                           a                          filed 

and 

sun 

kin 

on                      iyat'anpi                             I'eya 

oyate 

wan 

i^i? 

with              lighted  the  pipe                 this  he  said 

people 

a 

(by  the  sun)         (le,  this;  eya,  he  said) 

tribe 

waste 

ca                  piya                  wakage                 eya 

na 

wanna 

good 

and                renew                  I  made                he  said 
regenerate 
infuse  new  life 

and 

now 

wagnikte 

eya 

/  return  will 

he  said 

WAKAiV    OLOWAiV 

Holy  Song 


(Medicine-Song) 


Oyate 

people 
nation 
tribe 
wanna 

now 


wan 

a 


waste 

good 


piya  wakage 

/  renew 
I  heal 
I  make  anew 
[5391 


ca 

and 


lo 

(emphatic 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE   INDIANS'   BOOK 


wankanta 

On  high — above 


ca 

and 


Tunkansila 

Great  Father 

Grandfather  (in  this  case  the  Supreme 

Being) — literally,  the  Great  Father 

wanna 


heya 

thus  said 


piyawakage 

/  make  anew 


Okicize 

war 
battle 

iyotan 

great 
chief 

sni 

(adverb  of  negation) 
not,  no 

OLOWAiV 

Song 


micilaqon 

/  was  thought 


used  at  end  of  sentence  to 
emphasize — i.e. ,  it  would 
seem  so,  so  it  seems 
I  was  thought  the  greatest  in  battle.     But  it  is  no  longer  so. 
ships. 

OMAHA    WACIPI    OLOWAAT 

Omaha        Dance  Songs 


ffliye 

myself 
I,  me 
iyotiyewakiye 

condition 
state 

Now  I  am  enduring  hard- 


Natanhiwan 

winyan 

wakage 

The  charging  enemy 

woman 

made 

The  enemy  charged,  but  I  made  a  woman  of  liim  ! 

II 

Ho 

leciya 

nicopi 

(exclamation) 

hither 

they  called  you 

WIOSTE  OLOWAiV 

Love           Songs 

T 

Tokiya                amayaleso 

X 

higna-waya 

cin                       na 

where                  are  you  taking  me 

to  have  for  husband 

the                       and 

temah'ilaqon 

(higna,  husband) 

esa 

wagnikte 

tjiat  one  dearly  loves  me 

II 

so 

7  will  go  back 

Inkpataya                                    nawazin 

na 

sina 

lip  the  creek                                     I  stand 

and 

shawl 
blanket 

cicoze                                                 ma-ya 

leciya 

kti  wanna 

io  'thee  wave                                (exclamation) 

hither 

come  now 

III 

Koskalaka                        otapi 

tka 

nisna 

iyokipj  mayaye 

young  men                       very  tnany 

although 

you 

alone 

pleased  me 

iyotan                                      cilaqon 

wankiciyake 

sni 

unqonkte 

tnost  highly,  most          I  esteemed  you 

seeing  one  another 

(negative)           we  must  part 

of  all,  chief 

not 

Although  the  youths  are  many,  thou  alone  art  pleasing  to  m,e. 
We  must  part,  not  to  see  one  another  for  a  long  time. 

[540] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Above  all  others  I  hold  thee. 


APPENDIX 


IV 


EyaK  hececa  ye  lakas 

Although  thus  (an  emphatic  particle)  indeed,   certainly,   truly 

awanicigia  waonqon 
I  shall  govern  myself 
I  watched  you 

First  Version. — Although  it  is  thus,  indeed  [that  I  am  in  love),  I  will  nevertheless  guard 
my  self-respect.     Take  me  by  the  hand. 

Second  Version. — That  is  the  reason.     I  watched  you.     Take  yny  hand  and  part. 


(an  emphatic  particle) 

nape-mayura 

hands  grasp  me 


Ehake 

wanmayakawe 

sice 

last 

look  upon  me 

term  of  endearment  of  a  woman  to  a  man- 

come  to  see  me 

loved  one 
my  love 

teciHilaqon 

wanna 

waya                                wamanikte 

/  loved  you 

now 

school                          I  am  going  away 

ehake 

wanmayakawe 

ehake                                 nape-mayuza 

last 

look  upon  m.e 

last                                take  my  hand 

last  time 

come  to  see  me 

last  time 

Sonka 

Dog 


Kolapila 

Friends  my 

yelo 

(emphatic  ending) 


SUJVKA    OLOWAiV 

Dog  Song 

Song  of  the  Dog  Feast 


wayatanin 

may  you  eat ! 


OKICIZE 

War 


takuyakapi  lo 

what  you  say 
epinahan 

/  said 


/wayata 

V   to  eat 

OLOWAJV 

Song 

maka 

earth 
blehemiciye  lo 

/  exert  me  {emphatic  ending 


kin 

the 


nm       \ 

may  it  be) 


mitawa 

mine 
(my  kingdom) 
(my  domain) 


Rerawha-a' 

Those  yonder  coming 

rakuwaka 

who  would  say 


PAWNEE 

TAWI'  KURUKS 

Song        Bear 

("Tawi"'    abbreviation  of  "Tawio") 
Song  of  the  Bear  Society 


rasaktira* 

rays  of  sun 


para 

almost 
kuatutah 
oh,  if  I  could  do 
(koa,  oh,  if:  t,  /.'  at, 
on  behalf:  ah,  to  do) 


rika  ratatah 

thus  I  who  did  so 

(ra,  the  one  who: 
t,  /•■   at,  on  be- 
half: ah,  to  do) 
rakuksa  rasakura 


hi 

and 


tzapat 
a  woman 
iriritah 

(as)  those  do 


which  come  down      rays  of  sun 


Tata,  whia' 

which  come  moving 
along  the  ground 


'  The  terminal  "a"  indicates  "to  corm,-  i.  e.  direction  towards  the  speaker. 

[54J] 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE   INDIANS'    BOOK 

TAWI'    KURUKS 

Song  Bear 

Song  of  the  Bear  Society 


Nawa 

Atira 

ha 

we 

ra 

Now 

the  mother  {Mother-Corn  understood) 

behold 

she 

Cometh 

nawa 

Atius 

ha 

we 

ra 

now 

the  father  (Father-Hawk  understood) 

behold 

he 

Cometh 

IRUSKA 

Songs  of  the  "  Iruska  " — warriors  who  have  won  war  honors 

I 
Narutitawe  Atias  tiwaku 

a  noun  meaning  a  thing  without  an  owner- —  Father  saith 

a  lone  thing,  abandoned,  forsaken,  orphaned 
asawaki  ratawe 

spotted  horse  the  one  among  them,  i.  e.  the  one  among  them,  that  does  not  belong  there 

II 
Hawa  Atira 

again  Mother 

tziksu  weta  tarirata  (Mother-Moon  understood) 

spirit  now  I  do  for  you:  meaning,  my  spirit  relies  upon  thee,  I  put  my  faith  in  thy  power 
(triksu,  thinking  power,  mind,  spirit) 

III 


War-Dance  Song  of  the  Iruska 


Atius 

si 

Father 

thou  art  he 

karaku 

there  is  not  over  thee  any  that  is  greater 

tus  kitawiu 

thou  ruling  over 
u-kitawiu 

thou  alone  art  ruler 


IV 

Iruska  Song  of  the  Corn-Offering 


Atius                     ha 

Father                      behold 

is-tewat                      askururit 

look  thou                      together 

SKIRIKI 

Coyote 

Coyote  Warrior-Song 

weta  tsihakawatsista 

now  we  partake,  eat 

Ah 

(exclamation  of  adoration) 

tirus 

yonder 

takawaha 

expanse  of  heaven 

tiratpari 

/  walk  or  roam  (I  walk  over  the  prairies) 

tatara  kita-wira 

/  recognize  thee  as  supreme ;  meaning,  I  put  my  faith  in  the  supreme  power  (kita,  above,  over  all, 

supreme) 
hawa  re-rawira 

again  /  am  on  the  war-path   (literally.  ' '  walking  in 

anger" ;  "  war-path"  is  not  a  Pawnee  expression) 
[542] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


APPENDIX 


Atius 

Father 


esa 
is 


SAKIPIRIRU 

Young  Dog  Dance-Song 

rtika 

the  one 


ratu 

ine 


teriko 

/  saw 


Nawa 

Atius 

now 

Father 

ta-titska 

asuta 

/  wish 

should  he 

KISAKA 

Song  of  Rejoicing  and  Thanksgiving 

iri 

an  expression  meaning  thanks,  or  with  gladness  or  thankfulness 
hawa  rurahe 

again  thai  which  is  good 

{long  life,  plenty  in  the  fields,  good  gifts) 
O  Father,  while  giving  thanks  I  wish  that  that  which  is  good  may  be  again — -or,  that  all  good 
gifts  may  be  renewed. 

-KlTZlCHTk. 

Lance  Ceremony 

Kitzic/ita:  A   particular  kind  of  lance  from  which  comes  the  name  given  to  the  society  and  ils 
ceremonies 
Nari-r«-rit  riwaka 
it  was  said,  or,  some  one  said  (narit-ru  somebody,  they  ■  riwaka,  spoke,  said) 


tzapat 
woman 
nariksha 

not  real 

tiwakti 

this  did  say 
Kitzichta 
The  Lance 

Taka 

dance  {Lance-Dance) 
ra 
yonder 

kaki 

no 
huriwi 

walking  around 

not  true 
not  true  for 

you 

(The  men  who  own  the  lance  are  walking  around 

in  the  ceremony) . 

KEHARE 

Dance 

KATZARU 

Spirit 

Songs  of  the  Spirit-Dance 


Irittata  terit  'la- 

/  saw  it  ^^"^3' 

nawira-tzawhio  . 

Hag  (nawira,  cloth ;  tzawhio,  that  which  floats  in  the  air) 

II 


Ah 

{exclamation) 


Metis 

dear 
beloved 


tzo-ut 

sister 


Atias 

Father 


Ah 

{exclamation) 


tzikstt 

mind 

spirit 

thinking-power 

kaw-kaw 

the  caw  of  the  crow 


kuhruri 

wait 


III 

rotatika 

/  am  stirred 
moved 
touched 
rakowak-tahu 
cawing  like  a  crow 
imitating  the  sound  of  the  crow 
operit  ti 

star  'hat 

[543] 


we 

now 


rittata  terit 

/  saw  it 
rhorhera 

beautiful 


ta-ita 

knows  you 


we  rafcu 

when  it  is 


operit 

star 
{morning  star) 
ra-ha 
coming 


retkaha 

night 


ra 

coming 

we  ra  ti 

when  coming         I 
that 
(pronoun) 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'   BOOK 


Ruwerera 

it  is  coming  yonder 

Atira 

Mother  {Mother-Moon) 


IV 

operit 

star  {Evening  Star  understood  in  first 
verse.  Morning  Star  in  fourth) 
Atius 
Father  {Father-Sun) 


rerawha-a 

they  are  coming  yonder 
(re,  yonder :  ra,  com- 
ing: wha-a,  many) 


Ma-acAis 

old  man 


CHEYENNE 

■WVCHTCHSE    ETAN    NO-OTZ 

Red  Fox         Man        Song 

hevisa  naehio 

abbreviation  of  hevisocAtzi,  his  teeth  abbreviation  of  natomo-wonotziyi, 

/  am  afraid  of  hint 


HOHIOTSITSI   NO-OTZ 

Morning  Song 

Ehani  nah-hiwatama  napave 

Our  father  has  had  pity  on  me  good 

{is  blessing  me)  {I  am  happy,  blessed,  at  peace) 

Our  Father,  the  rider  of  the  sun,  has  been  merciful  to  we.     Happily  I  go  on  my  way  in 
peace. 


vihnivo 

on  my  way 


AOTZI    NO-OTZ 

Song  of  Victory 

Honih-hio 

wolves 

Wolves  eat 

in  the  morning. 

tsi-wona-atz 

in  the  -morning 
(wona,  morning) 

AOTZI    NO-OTZ 

Song  of  Victory 

imio-missi-yo 

eating 

Tsivais 

these 

tahta 

in  sight 

/j7.  -     -J--     _T     J-, 

siyo 

•many 
{people) 

7  ■  _r. .    •          7 

tsitonitoyas                    maitom 

look                         red  paint 

nanias-sini 

we  start  off  {plural  form) 

tsihetonihos 

thickly  piled  on 

{those  with  red  paint 

thickly  piled  on) 

{the  idea  of  daylight  is  also  conveyed  by  this  word) 


AOTZI    NO-OTZ 

Song   of  Victory 

Hetano  dzinimat  '  hitu 

box-wood  bow  carrying  this  one 

{sacred  bow)  {bow  understood) 

Bearer  of  the  Sacred  Bow.     You  should  carry  a  bow  of  elm. 


hofflinu 

elm. 


nimadzi 

carry 


Taeva 

at  night 


NAI   NO-OTZ 

Healing      Song 

nama-eyoni 

holy    man 
[544] 

Digitized  by  IVIicrosoft® 


tze-ihtitzittu 

when  I  go  my  way 


APPENDIX 


HticAdjeho 

wood-rats 
etanio-o 

■men  {the  double  o  is  plural  form) 


Meshivotzis 

baby 


WAWAHI   NO-OTZ 

Swinging        Song 

tiiochdziyo 

come  here 

ini-stoni-wahno-tziyo 

''w)                             are  drawing  near 

Mata- 

Timber 
ehenowe 

thus  they  say 

MESHIVOTZI   NO-OTZ 

Baby              Song 

naotziyo 

sleep 
{a  prolongation,  for  singing,  of  naotz) 

tsiso 

little 
(little  one) 

nisana 

my  father 


ARAPAHO 

HASSE-HI    NAAD 

Raw-hide      Song 

(The  name  raw-hide  alludes  to  the  buffalo-hide,  which  is  an  important  feature  of  the  ceremony) 

Hedawtinaneina  hishish 

he  will  have  pity  on  us  sun 

that  he  may 
may  he   {invocation) 

nhCHU-m    NAAD 
Wolf  Song 

or 
JACHU    NAAD 
Comanche    Song 

hitha  babian 

there  far  away 

hatinahawoni 

you  will  see  me 


NahanS  chita-inf 

behold    '  look  hither 

here 

hani 

probably  for  a  long  time 

{it  will  be  long  ere  you  will  see  me) 


niyihana 

/  am  going 
{on  the  war-path  understood) 
haka  nihin 

because  you  say 


Seniesana 

/  stepped  into 

I  waded  in,  or  through 


Hestinanin 

Our  Father 


KAINAWAD    NAAD 

Circle  Dance     Song 

niha-nawu  nanai  baeno 

yellow  water  it  was  turtle 

that  is 

HO    NAWAD    NAAD 

Crow      Dance         Song 

ho-ho 

crow 
(ho,  croiv;  ho,  syllable  added  in  singing) 


nidjieh-hi 

lake  (hi,  added  syllable  for 

euphony  in  singing) 


bahinahnit-ti 
he  is  all  (ti,  added  syllable 
for  euphony  in  singing) 


NAKAHU   NAAD 

Sleep        Song 
{Lullaby) 
Cheda-e 
term  of  endearment 

{literally:  little  big-belly,  meaning  little  boy,  little  tot) 

[545] 


nakahfi-kahu 

go  to  sleep 


bebe 

baby 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE   INDIANS'    BOOK 


NatinacAabena 

seeking  for  horses 
I  seek  my  horses 


NanSnina 

/  am 

{second  vowel  "  a  "  broadened 
for  euphony  in  singing) 


GOCHOTl    NAAD 

Hand-Game     Song 


HICHAACffUTHI 

Those  with  Clubs 
(HichaacA) 

Clubs 


Neyac/iat-Chawaat 

Whirlwind  Running 


ni  nananaec/zana 

now  I  am,  looking  all  around 


Nanakunithana 

White  Horn 
chS 
again 


nananina 

I  am 

Snitana 

/  am.  living 


KIOWA 

GOMDA   DAAGYA 

Wind  Song 

{Very  old  song,  some  words  archaic) 


A-doguonko 

do-peya 

kayo 

kionte-go-k'ian 

the  lazy  youths 

at  home 

sitting  about 

loved  ones 

{those  who  have  remained 

{idly?) 

in  camp  instead  of  going 

etbonholgon 

ayi-ya 

on-pali 

on  the  war-path) 

they  can  see  thetn 

somewhere 

he  is  sick 

whenever  they  wish 

home-sick 

on-dekia 

pining 

he  is  alone 

weary 

The  lazy  youths  idling  at  home  in  camp  may  see  their  loved  ones  whenever  they  choose. 
But  him  whom  I  love  is  far  away  on  the  war-path,   lonely  and  weary. 


GOMDA  DAAGYA 

Wind  Song 

Pako  e'k'ianda 

but  one  lover 

{but  one  that  I  love) 

ankom  oyom  giie 

an  expression  meaning,  the  time  grows  long,  or  he  is  lonely  and  weary 


ayi  apo  hayi 

taken  somewhere  somewhere 

{he  has  gone  on  the  war-path  with  other  men)  afar 


Agalkide 

/  envy 


imp  oya 

missing  me 


GOMDA  DAAGYA 

Wind  Song 


dogul-onga 

young  men 
{who  are  well  off) 

tont'-o-no 

has  no  thought  of  it 
{nobody  at  home  has 
any  thought  of  mis- 
sing me) 


ambonpoya  dogya  nokon  honde 

they  are  missing  you         at  home  me  nobody 


yai-dahe-faa  kuyo 

why  are  you  sitting  about  silent  and  forlorn?  why 

do  you  not  sing  and  lighten  your  hearts?  (yai, 

joy :   dahe,   singing :  ba,   plural   ending  for 

m.ore  than  three  ;  kayo,  sitting  about 

I  envy  you  fortunate  young  men.      You  are  well  off — you  have  loved  ones  at  home  who  are 

longing  for  you.     I  have  no  one.     Nobody  has  a  thought  of  missing  me.     Why  are  you  sitting 

silent  and  forlorn?     You  should  be  singing  to  lighten  your  hearts. 

[546] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


APPENDIX 


fc'anhoton 

spider 


atzeyuda 

pet 


KOALDA  DAAGYA 

Begging         Song 

taiyi 

boy 
{sung,  talyi) 

ahanda 
to  eat 
afc'ainkotana  giat'afcwot 
give  something  for  the  sake  of  the  child 
(ak'ainkot,  iny  oily  food:  na,  connective:  giat'akwot,  knock  out,  such  as  to  knock  something 
out  of  a  box — to  throw  away) 
Within  this  tipi  dwells  a  child  with  his  little  spider-pet.      That  is  why  we  come  to  you.     Give 
us  something  to  eat  for  love  of  the  child  and  his  pet! 


Inhote 

to 

sai 

here 

tipi 

(connective) 

(in  this) 

hondeta 

al 

something 

(connective) 

goa-^in 

that  is  why  we  are  coming 


Ton  k'an 

wooden  spoon 

tainkyowitte 

my  grandmother 
komdombe 

the  interior  edge  of  the  tipi,  near  the  wall 

tsainiya 

that  was  the  time 


T'X.PK'0  DAAGYA 

Antelope       Song 

giapowitzep  no 

/  lost  it  and  tlien 

tain  hoi 

whipped  me 
tonok'o 

lying  on  the  ground  and  crying 
(to  throw  one's  self  on  the  ground  in  anger,  crying) 
ode 
a  prophet  or  holy  man  :   one   who    has   super- 
natural or  divine  power,  who,  through  divine 
aid,  is  always  able  to  procure  food  in  plenty. 


domgya 

divine,  miraculous  power 

I  lost  my  grarldmother' s  wooden  spoon.  She  whipped  me,  and  I  threw  myself  on  the  ground, 
crying,  beside  the  tipi  wall.  There  it  was  that  there  came  upon  me  in  sleep  the  divine  power 
to  become  a  holy  man,  a  worker  of  wonders,  a  winner  of  food. 


OKUM    DAAGYA 

Stop-crying     Song 

t'oph'o  goan-kontono 

(same  as  t'apk'o)  she  will  bring  it  to  you 

antelope  ok'un-balfta 

a  noun,  meaning  that  which  one 
eats  when  too  hungry  to  wait 
for  the  regular  meal 
Thy  mother  will  bring  thee  the  antelope,  and  the  choice  morsel  shall  be  thine  for  a  tidbit. 


A-go-go 

your  mother 
t'anfaa  (or  tomba) 

tiibe  near  the  heart  of  the  antelope 
the  choice  morsel 


lapagya 

baby 

tonsadal 


OKUM  DAAGYA 

Stop-crying      Song 
(Lullaby) 
mainte  koai« 

coming  down  the  river  swimming 

(with  the  current) 

tsainyi 
rabbit  (prairie  dog  ?) 
The  baby  is  swimming  down  the  river 
Little  drift-wood  legs, 
Little  rabbit  legs. 

(Nonsense-rhyme) 
[547] 


zotom 

drift-wood 

polainyi 

rabbit 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'    BOOK 

GWU  DAAGYA 

War- path     Song 

Ameyaidonhonme  ain  honya  mopoiko 

that  playful  word  you  said  to  me  I  never  can  forget  (yai,  playing  :  don,  words  :  hon,  negative) 

anti  yayowut  hoyano 

/  am  waiting  for  the  first  lover 

tsainko  gompaomk'o  eyamkom 

horses  sore  back  thai    are    being   given    for    me 

The  maiden,  speaking  in  thought  to  her  first  lover,  says: 

That  playful  word  you  said  to  me,  I  never  can  forget.      Thus  I  wait  for  my  first  lover. 
The  ponies  that  are  now  being  given  for  me  all  have  sore  backs! 

WINNEBAGO 


Wa-Ie 

who 
wa-Iai-na-nap 

you  gather  them  in 


Wash-ching-ge 

hare 

wa-Ia-fca 

your 


WASH-CHING-GEKA   NA-WA'   NI-NA 
Hare-  Song  Own 

Song  of  the  Hare 

ki-zi-na-nap 

reaches  out  with  his  tongue 
sa-ah-zhe  ai-le-Ia 


used  to 


they  say 


WI-LA   NA-WA'    NI-NA 

The  Sun      Song  Own 

hin-khu  I«sh-ka-Ie  hi-tek-nifc 

to  loosen  me  little  fathers 

(uncles) 
cha-ku  ki-shfcan 

what  they  do 


wa-Ia-ka 

your 


chun-ka 

great  one 
hin-gi  na-nap 

gather  me  in 


hi-o-ni-nik 

little  mothers 
{aunts) 
hi-Ia-ni-he  kche-zhe 

will  ever 


WAI-KUN 

FabU 

pe-zhe 

ya-ki-sfce  shan-no«-nink  na-gi-kche 

who 

is  there  like  little  me 

ma-c/ii-nik-gia 

ya-ki-o-o 

sky  little  the 

can  touch 

Mo-zhtin-na-Ie 

earth  full  this 
ne-sha-na 
/  alone 

Throughout  the  earth,  who  is  there  like  to  little^  me!     I  alone  can  totich  the  little^  sky! 


Ma-o-na 

Earth-Maker 


HA-O-NA 

Song  to  the  Earth-Maker 

wai-kan-chunk  hi  kche 

holy  am  I  to  be 


hing-ge 

tells  me 


mUN-KUN    NA-WAiV 

Medicine  So7ig 

The  words  of  this  song  are  ritiMilistic,  and  most  of  them,  are  archaic.  They  arc  greatly 
changed  in  singing,  being  drawn  out  by  the  interpolation  of  vecables.  The  hidden  meaning  is 
understood  only  by  the  initiated.     The  few  words  that  can  be  translated  literally  are  the  following: 

Han-te  (sung,  ha-ha-ti-hi)  hi-na-wi-na 

I  went  away  and  learned  the  spirit  says,  "  Dream   again,   tell  of  me  " 

ma-na-gle  nacA-kwang-l  (sung,  ha-ha-wha-nan-g'Ie)  shi-ke-ha-e-hi 

the  world  hear  ine  in  the  beginning 


Diminutive ,  like  the  German  suffix, 
[5481 

Digitized  by  IVIicrosoft® 


'  chen.' 


APPENDIX 


Ma-na-gle 

the  world 
chi-na-gia 

the  village 


HI-WA-SHI-DA 

Dance 

wu-hi-ni-gi-gi-na 

/  have  won 
wa-hi-ni-gi-gi-na 

I  have  won 


ha-chi-je-na 

/  am  come  now 
ha-chi-je-na 

/  am  come  now 


mUN-KUN  NA-WAJV 

Medicine  Song  , 

{The  words  of  this  song  are  ritualistic,  and  do  not  occur  in  the  spoken  language  of  to-day) 

Ma-ni-na  le-ha-no                                     wank-i-wi-zha 

medicine-arrow  (mana,  arrow)  make  it  go,  let  it  fly              upon  the  man  (wunfc,  man) 

le-ha-no                 ma-ni-na  le-ha-no                             hi-nuk-i-zha                              le-ha-no 

let  it  fly          medicine-arrow  let  it  fly          upon  the  woman  (hinuk,  woman)          let  it  fly 


HE-LUSH-KA    NA-'WAN 


Warrior                Song 
I 

wi-ne               ko-Ia-wi-Ia 

your                comrades 
Pa-ni                 guch-la 

Pawnee               shooter 

Sh«n-fcc 

horses 

shun-ke 

horses 

wo-djin 

whip 
wa-na-ma- 

urge  them 

ne 

on 

Pa-ni 

Pawnees 
Pa-ni 

Pawnees 

HE-LUSH-KA    NA-WAiV 

Warrior               Song 

Wa-we-Ia 

my  trail 
wa-cha-Ia 

/  saw 

II 

ha-dja-le                                  hi-cha-ko-lo 

you  see                                       friend 
wa-we-la 

my  trail 

ka-lai-Ia-dja-fca 
they  have  gone 
ka-lai-Ia-dju-fca 

they  have  gone 


Pa-ni-na 

Pawnees  those 
ga-ske-na 

it  is  thus 


See  what  a  trail  is  mine!     Friend,  I  saw  the  Pawnees.     See  what  u  trail  is  mine! 

HE-LUSH-KA   NA-WAiV 


Warrior  Song 


Ho-ch«nk-gi-Ie 

Winnebagos  these 

hi-ta-Io 

friends 


hi-she-na 

you  say 
hi-she-na 

you  say 


III 


Pa-ni-na 

Pawnees  these 
Ho-chank-gi-Ie 

Winnebagos  these 


Ho-wi 

around 


lo-ki-wa-wi-Ie 

ride  with  him 


HE-LUSH-KA   NA-WAN 

Warrior  Song 

IV 
lo-han  tt'eh-hi-ga 

yyiany  kills 

HE-LUSH-KA    NA-WAAT 


Warrior 


Song 


Ya-tt'-eh-Ia 

when  I  speak 
Na-jtt-zi-Ia 

Yellow-Hair 


hamb-Ia 

day  the 
Ho-chank-Ia 

Winnebagos  the 


pin-na 

fine 
'  zhe-skai-le 
are  all  like  this 
[549] 


ma-shon 

feathers 


hi-he-Ia 
50  /  say 
hi-he-Ia 

/  say 


hi-she-na 

you  say 
hi-she-na 

you  say 


o-ni  je-na 

is  looking  for 


na-nac/i-kon-je 

you  hear  ine 
na-nacft-kon-je 

you  hear  me 


Digitized  by  IVIicrosoft® 


THE   INDIANS'    BOOK 


Pe-zhe-ga 

whom 


Pa-jo-ka 

Winnebago  nami  for  Comanche, 
a  neighboring  tribe 


WA-GI-TT'EH   nk-WKN 

Mourner's  Song 

ko-ni-ka 

grandmotlier 

"^kK-J-E    NA-WAJV 

Scalp  Song 

Victory  Song  . 

nik-Ia  hi-zhafc  ha-ni-na 

little  gun  my 


ya-ge-kche-ne-zhe 

to  call  I  wonder 


nan-na-ke-we-no 

you  are  afraid  of 


Na-n: 
mother 


WUNK-HI    ^k-^kN 
Men  about         Songs 
Songs  about  Men 
{Love-Songs  of  the  Women) 
dega-go  e-dja 

my  uncle  to  him 

WUNK-HI    Nk-^WkN 
Men  about         Songs 
Songs  about  Men 
{Love-Songs  of  the  Women) 


wa-de-kjela 

/  wish  to  go 


Hi-zhan 

ever 
wa-ki-tt'-eh-fca 
/  speak  to 
zhe-ske 
becomes 

wi-do-kan-na-na 
one  under  my  power 


ho-do-chuch-ka 

/  look  at 

zhe-ske 
becomes 
shfj-na-na 
thus 
hi-zhan 
whoever 


zhe-ske  shu-n«-na  hi-zhan 

becomes           thus  {love-crazed,  understood)  whoever 

sho-nu-na  hi-zhan  wai-zhi-zhi-fca 

thus  whoever  I  whisper  to 

hj-cha-ko-lo  hi-nok  lo-in-na-gle 

friend  women  ones  who  want 

do-mai-ka-ka  zhe-ske  sha-na-na 

/  touch  becomes  thus 


KWAKIUTL 

KLAWULAC^A 

Song  of  the  Totem.-Pole 
Polnakwila-  kiash-  ila- 

growing  real  causing 

Wakiash- 

{the  literal  meaning  of  the  nam.e  "Wakiash"  is  Wa,  river,  kiash,  real) 
kiash-  o- 

real 


koi 

distant 


choi 

there 


'The  River"  because  he  is  rich  and  generous,  full  of  gifts  as  the 


ila- 

causing 


koi 

distant 


(Wakiash,  the  man,  is  called 

river  is  full  of  fish) 
hitlpalkwala-  kyilish-  kiash- 

fiood  noise  the  world  real 

Kalakuyowish 
name  of  a  particular  totem-pole,  supposed  to  mean  the  "pole  that  holds  up  the  sky."     Also  a 

name  of  the  man,  Wakiash,  who  takes  the  name  of  the  totem-pole. 
lacA-nahkwalla-  choi 

in  the  world  there 

Meaning: — Wakiash  causes  the  distant  flood  to  rise,  signifying  that  his  greatness  and 
generosity  are  overflowing.  The  totem-pole  is  m.aking  a  noise  {like  the  creaking  of  trees)  be- 
cause it  holds  up  the  sky  and  the  sky  is  so  heavy.  Good  in  the  world  is  Kalakuyuwish  who 
raised  up  this  pole. 

[5501 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


APPENDIX 


PIMA 


CHUHWUHT 

World 

Chahwtfht-ttih 

world 

mafcai  {sung,  maka-i)           chohwuht-tah 

creator                                            world 
maker 

nato 

finished 

himalo  himicho 

now  it  is  started 

also  holy  man,  or  medicine-man 

CHUHTEK-OHOHIK  NIEH 

Blue-Bird  Song 

(The  words  of  this  song  are  very  much  changed  for  singing) 
Hai-ya  hai-ya  hai-ya  nieh-nieh-i  a-to 

(exclamatton  of  sadness,  meaning,  "alas,woe's  mef")  my  song  is  all 

{sung,  nieh  ha  nieh  va  yo-hu-fca) 
va  ha  va  ho-hafc 


ho-hufc 

gone 


chtthtek-ohohik  nieh-nieh 

hlue-hird  iong 

,  cheh  wahl  ohi  nieh-nieh) 


Hanam 

cactus 

{a  variety  that  has  fruit  which 

the  Indians  eat) 
kachuwuch  {sung,  ka-cho-wach-chi) 

they  groiv,  stand 


will  all  be  gone 
{sung,  va  ha  maw-haw  va  yu-ka) 

HUHWUHLI   NIEH 

Wind  Song 

{Medicine-Song) 

yo-osik  a-ai  hah-wart  {sung,  ya-hai  hah-wart) 

blossom  swaying  back  and  forth 

kano  {sung,  kani-hu-va  mah-mahfc)  muk 

way  over  jar 

kano  ya-ha  kimoich  {sung,  kl-moi) 

way  over        ridges  in  the  desert         o'er 


APACHE 

MEDICINE-SONG 
Awbizhaye  shicM 

little  cloud  me,  I 

niniya  tsago  degi 

this  is  the  way  I  go  this  place  holy 

Upon  a  little  cloud  I  ascend;  thus  I  journey  upward, 
pass  through  the  air. 

YUMA 

AROWP 

Song 


hadahiyago 

going  up 
naleya 

changing  while  going  through  the  air 
To  a  holy  place  I  go,  changing  as  I 


Amai 

sky 

tza  mi  na  hi 

it  is  he  who  sings  (?) 


ariwa 

thinly  covered  with  clouds 
hunya  kwa  pai  va 
/  go  up  the  grade 


(I  go  on  the  straight  road,  meaning  I  am  good  and  happy) . 

NAVAJO 

DSlCHh  BIYIN 

Mountain-Song,  or  Hymn 

Piki  yo  ye                                   dsicM            na.nta~  sa-a  nara"i 

meaning,  I  ivalk  up  to  the         mountain         chief  living  forever 

mountain,  or,  I  walk  thither  life  unending 

[5511 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


shakwakwa  {sung,  shakwa) 
mocking-bird 
hunya  kwa  hal  pa 

I  go  up  on  the  level,  or  {straight)  road 


bike 

happiness 


hozhoni 

everywhere 


THE    INDIANS'    BOO  K 

Tlie  expressions  sa-a  nara?  and  bike  hozhoni  occur  in  many  songs,  usually  at  the  end. 
{According  to  Dr.  Washington  Maitliews,  their  literal  translation  is,  "In  old  age  walking  the 
beautiful  trail."  This  scholar  further  states  that  the  expressions  are  equivalent  to  saying, 
"Long  life  and  happiness,"  and  as  a  part  of  a  prayer  tlie  phrases  are  a  supplication  for  a  long 
and  happy  life.)  The  present  compiler  has  found  the  usual  translation  given  by  the  Indians 
in  tlie  songs  recorded  by  lier  to  be,  "living  forever,"  or  "life  unending,"  and  "universal  hap- 
piness," or  "the  happiness  of  all  things."  The  significance  may  of  course  vary  slightly  in 
different  soitgs.  In  this  instance  tlie  meaning  is  that  the  mountain  gives  long  life  and  peace 
to  man,  calling  him  "grandchild,"  or  "son." 
tsoya  shich  ni  la 

grandchild  with  me 

son  {called  me) 

The  mountain  calls  me  "son."     {This,  say  the  Navajos,  is  a  blessing.") 


DSICHL   BIYIN 

Mountain- Songs,  or  Hymns 


Be 

naseya 

ho-digin 

ladji 

ka',  or  fcat 

with 

I  go  everywhere 

place  holy 

yonder 

now 

{or,  with  it — the  rain- 

{with the  rainbow) 

divine 

there 

{a  word  often  used  to  begin 

bow  is  understood) 

a  phrase;  when  used  as  the 
ending  of  a  word,  it  denotes 
em-phasis,  as  "  indeed  ") 

Sisnajinni 

The  sacred  mountain  of  the  East.    {.According  to  Dr.  Mattliews,  the  name  probably  means  Dark 

Horizontal  Belt,  and   the   mountain  is    presumably  Pelado   Peak,  Bernalillo   County,  New 

Mexico) 
bine  dji  dsicAI-nantaV  sa-a   narat*  bike  hozhoni 

behind  there  mountain  chief  life  unending  happiness  of  all  things 

Tsodsic/il 
The  sacred  mountain  of  the  South.     {.According  to  Dr.  Matthews,  the  name  is  from  tso,  great  and 

6aich\,  mountain.     Called  San  Mateo  by  the  Mexicans,  Mount  Taylor  by  the  Americans) 
Doko-oslid 
The  sacred  mountain  of  tlie  West.      {.According  to  Dr.  Matthews,  the  name  seems  to  contain, 

modified,  the  words  tro,  water,  and    fcos,  cloud.     Called  by  the  Americans,  San  Francisco 

Mountain) 
Depenitsa 
The  sacred  mountain  of  the  North.      {According  to  Dr.  Mattliews,  the  name  is  from  depe,  sheep — 

Rocky  Mountain  sheep — and  jntsa,  scattered  all   over.      Depenitsa  seem-s  identical  with  the 

tlie  San  Juan  Mountains  of  Colorado) 
The  present  compiler  received  from  the  Navajos  slightly  varying  translations  of  the  moun- 
tain names,  but  the  thorough  sttidy  made  by  Dr.  Matthews  of  the  subject,  and  the  authority  of 
his  Navajo  informants,  make  his  version  to  be  preferred. 

Second  song; 

Third  songs 
Fourth  song: 
Fifth  song: 

Sixth  song: 

With  {it) 

[552] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Be 

nadesta 

With  {it) 

/  am  going  homeward.      {I  shall  go  home- 

ward with,  or  upon,  the  rainbow) 

Be 

nikiniya 

With  {it) 

I  start  homeward 

Be 

naYshtatI 

With  {it) 

/  am  on  my  homeward  way 

Be 

nanist^a 

With  {it) 

/  ain  come  home 

Be 

nanishta 

With  {it) 

/  sit  down 

APPENDIX 


Tsanti 

behold 
yonder 
fca',  or  fcat 

now 


HOGAN         BIYIN 

Hogan     Song,  or  Hymn 


hogani  hozhon 

house  beautiful 

dwelling  blessed 

Hastyeyaiti 
name  of  God  of  Sunrise 


bi 

his 


be 

from 
made 


of 


bi 

his 


hogan 

house 


hogan 

house 

hogani 

house 

tan  aichki't 

white  corn 


hayiash 

sunrise 


beashdje 

under 


hayolkatii 

dawn-light,  first  light,  coming 
light  (fcatii,  coming) 

yotti-iltrassa? 

hides  precious 


{from  natan,  corn,  and  alchkni",  white) 
(According  to  Dr.  Matthews,  yotti,  or  yodi  are  "furs,  skins,  textile  fabrics,  and  such  things 

as  Indians  bartered  among  themselves,  except  food  and  jewels") 

tro-altlanastshini,  or  tro-tlanastshi 

all  waters,  waters  from  many  springs 

{According  to  Dr.  Matthews,  tro-tlanastsKi  "  is  a  mixture  of  all  kinds  of  water — i.  e.,  spring- 
water,  snow-water,  hail-water,  and  water  from  the  four  quarters  of  the  world.  Water  used 
to-day  in  some  of  the  Navajo  rites  approximates  the  mixture  as  nearly  as  possible  ") 

tradetin 

sacred  corn-pollen 

{According  to  Dr.  Matthews,  sacred  pollen  is  obtained  from  various  plants,  but  Indian-corn 
is  the  chief  source  of  supply:  The  offering  of  sacred  pollen  almost  always  follows  or  accom- 
panies prayer,  and  is  a  part  of  religious  rites) 


sa-a  narar 

living  forever 
everlasting  life 
Hastyehogan 

name  of  God  of  Sunset 


bike  hozhoni 

happiness  everywhere 


i-iash 

sunset 


tan-aIcAtso7 

yellow  corn 
{from  natan,  corn,  and  aXchtsdt,  yellow 


nahotso? 

yellow  after  gloiv  or 
evening  twilight 
nekliz,  or  inkliz 
gems 

(Nekliz,  or  inkliz,  are  shells  of  all  colors,  turquoise,  cannel-coal,  and  many  oilier  stones 
prized  by  the  Navajos,  and  from  which  they  make  their  jewels.  The  expression  as  here  used 
signifies  the  gems  used  in  prayer) . 

iltrassa?  tro-piyash 

precious  little  waters 

dew-drops  {literally,  tro,  water  ;  piyash,  children) 


KLIN        BIYIN 

Horse  Song,  or  Hymn 

Johano-ai 

name  of  tlte  Sun-God, 
the  Bearer  of  the  Sun 


dotlizh 

turquoise 


be 

his 


tin,  or  hlin 

horse 


Nizho'ko  ani 

from  nizhoni,  beautiful,  happy,        voice 

and  ko,  having 
yotti 

precious  hides  of  buckskin,  buffalo,  beaver,  and  mountain-lion;   and  "  naskan,  "an  elaborately 
decorated  ancient  woven  blanket  formerly  worn  by   the  Navajos.     The  Navajos  say  that  the 
"  naskan  "  was  first  found  in  the  house  of  the  Sun-God 
bahostiel  bakai  yiki 

spread  out  on  top  on  it    {the   horse  stands  upon 

rich   hides    that    are   s 
out  beneath  him) 
tshilatra  hozhoni  be 

blossoms,  tips  of  flowers  beautiful  with,  from 

jinicAltan 

he  {Johano-ai)  feeds  him,  pastures  him  {he  feeds  his  horse  on  the  tips  of  flowers) 

[5531 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'    BOOK 

tro-tlanastshini,  or  tro-tlanastshi 

mixed  waters — waters  of  all  kinds:  spring-water,  snow-water,  hail-water,  and  ivatcr  from  the 

jour  quarters  of  tlie  world;  such  waters,  as  nearly  as  possible,  are  used  in  the  Mavajo  religious 

ceremonies 
ka',  or  kat  pitistshi  pilch 

now  fine  particles,   shining  grains  of  mineral  used  with 

in  religious  ceremonies,  possibly  mica 
tashokishko 
mist,   dust  (meaning :    when   the   horse   of   the    Sun  -  God    goes,    he    raises    a    dust    of    these 

glittering  particles') 
ba,  or  bi  tradetin  yan 

his,  his  own  sacred  pollen   {here,  flower- pollen)  on 

toitinko 
covered,  hidden  {when  the  horse  runs,  the  sacred  corn-pollen  belonging  to  the  sun  is  all  about 

him,  like  dust,  so  that  he  looks  like  a  mist.     The  Navajos  sometimes  say  that  the  mist  on  the 

horizon  is  the  corn-pollen  offered  to  the  gods) 


k'ean 

natelzhishko 

kaf 

tonidineshko 

they 

increase 

now 

eternally  {the  herds  of  Johano-ai 
increase    eternally,    growing 
ever  more  and  more) 

NAYE-E   SIN 

Enem.y      Song 
{War  Song) 

Naye,  from  anaye,  translated  by  Dr.  Matthews,  "  alien  gods  " 
pesh  ashike  ni  shii  Nayenezrani 

flint  youth  suffix,  meaning  person  I  am  name  of  the  war-god,  the  slayer 

of  the  alien  gods 
shi  ni  shIi  pesh  tilyilcA  shi 

/,  me,  my  person  I  am  (shi  ni  shIi,  1  am)  flint  black  my 

ke  pesh  tilyilcA  siskle  pesh  tilyilc^  shi  e 

tnoccasins  flint  black  leggings  flint  black  my  tunic 

pesh  tilyilch  shi  tsha  nolienni 

flint  black  tny  helm,  hat,  head-dress  finest  kind  of  transparent  flint,' 

highly  valued  by  the  Navajos 
tshina      shi         yiki  holon        ka',  or  kat  itsiniklizh  din  ikwo 

alive         me         in  it  (f)         within  now  zig-zag  lightning         four        {no  meaning 

{within  me) 
sitzan  nahatilcft 
from  me  :  coming  back  to  ine  {the  four  lightnings  strike,  or  flash  from  me  and  return,  "  for," 

say  the  Navajos,  "  lightning  always  looks  as  thoiigh  it  flashed  out  and  then  went  back  ") 
tsini  nahatiIcA 

there  where  the  lightning  strikes  {word  for  common  use,  tsitte)  and  comes  back  to  me 

nihoka  hastoi 

on  the  earth  old  men:  old  people   {probably  an  ancient  evil 

whe-e-yoni-sin  people,  before  the  coming  of  the  Navajos) 

"  the  songs  the  enemy  sings  against  me"  {instead of  fighting,  the  old  people  would  sometimes  sing 

sorcerous  songs  and  pray  evil  prayers  against  their  foe) 
yoya  aiyiniIcA 

under :  down  :  in  the  bottom  in  the  ground  {there  where  the  lightning  strikes, 

the   old   enemies,   with   their   evil   songs   and 
charms,     are     cast    into     the    ground.     The 
Navajos  say  "  he  hurls  them  into  the  ^ 
ka'  sa-a  nara?  with  the  lightning,  one  after  another") 

now  :  verily  :  indeed  living  forever 

ka'  binihotsitti  shi  ni  shIi 

verily  the  brave  one,  he  whom  all  fear  (tsitti,  fear)  I  am 

[554] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


APPENDIX 


Niye  tifzishten 

as  far  as  may  be  seen 

Niltsan  Dsichl 

ra  in    mountain 

(a  mountain  west  of  Zuhi — the 

home  of  the  Rain-Youth) 
tso  betra 

great  among 

tall  through 

big 

{the  rain  comes  with 
itahazia 
streaks  of  lightning 


TRO   HATAL 

Water     Chant 
(Song  from  a  ceremony  called  the  "Water-Chant' 


■) 


shichi 

with  me 


tsha  haiyish 

coming 
(the  rain  comes  with  me) 
biya  ra-ashte 


from     behind 
(biya,  bottom,  base) 


zig-zag 


enadetia 

chirping  together 


fca',  or  fcat 

•   nou) 
indeed 
verily 
through  the  tall  corn) 
betra  fca'  trashjesh 

among  now  swallows 

through 

betra  tradetin 

among  pollen 

through 
(through  the  pollen,  hidden  in  pollen) 


tin!  shta 

water 
rain 
tshi-nata/i 
corn 
(natan,  corn ;  tshi-natan, 
word  used  in  poetry) 


itsiniklizh 


'.ning 


dotlizh 

blue 


ka' 

now 


fca' 

now 


bantoyishtin 

hidden 
covered  all  over 


(  estan  digm  )  ,     . 

i  !    7    f  second  stanza 

{  woman  holy  ) 


DSICOT-YIDJE   HATAL 

On  the  Mountain     Chant 
(Mountain-Chant) 
Baiyajiltrish  tsilc/zfce  digin 

thereof  he  telleih  youth  holy 

ke  pa  nashjin  fcia 

moccasins  upon  black  dress  (f) 

nasfcan 

the  word,  as  here  used,  is  translated  by  the  Navajos  thus:  "  The  pretty  work  on  the  dress  :  the 

embroidery  (of  quills)."     General  meaning,  the  beautiful  adorned  woven  dress 
fca'  fca  pa-stran 

now  (probably  inserted  to  fill  out  the  rhythm)  arm-bands,  or  bracelets,  of  eagle  feathers 

niltsan  atsoz  niltsan-befcan  (  niltsan-baad  )  ,    ^ 

}■  second  stanza 


pa 

upon 


rain  feathers  rain 

fca'  bi  datro 

now  his  :  her  drops  (drops  after  rain  : 

fallen  drops) 


{  ram 
sa-a  nara" 

life  unending 


female  j  ' 

bifce  hozhoni 

happiness-  of  all  things 


DINNI-E   SIN 

Game        Song 
Deer 
Ye  shafcaifcatal  ka' 

he  starts,  coming  towards  me  with  it  now 

he  walks  towards  me  with  it — "  it "  referring  to  the  song 
shi  ni  shii  DsicAI-tilyiIcA  bafcashte 

/  am  mountain  black  on  top 

(Black  Mountain)  (where  tlie  trail  starts) 


'shte 

abbreviation  of  yoshte 
or  ho-ashte,  coming 
bi  datro 

their  dew-drops 


tshilatra  hozhoni 

flowers  of  all  kinds,  beautiful 

blossoms,  tips  of  flowers  pretty 

bitra                   'shte  ka' 

among                 coming  now 
[555] 


aiyash-tilyilc/i 

a  beautiful  blackbird- 
(tilyilc^,  black) 
ka'  ta-adetin 

now  trail 

bitra  'shte 

among  coming 

bi  tradetin 

their  pollen 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'    BOOK 


bitra 

among 


bitzil 

foreleg 


'shte  dinnitshe  bekan 

coming  game  male 

deer 
(ceremonial  word  used  in  poetry  or  rites)  • 

deshklashdji  (  deshnash  )  ^^^^^^  ^^^^^ 

left  [      right      S 

quarry 
{game  killed  by  the  hunter) 
The  hunter  is  blessed  and  lucky  in 


\fimai\'''°'"^'^''""' 


bizedje 

the  kill 


shinosin 

tliey  want  me  (meaning,  the  game  choose  to  come  to  me 
hunting 

NAESTSAN         BIYIN 
Earth  Song,  or  Hymn 

Matthews,  the  Earth-Mother,  or  the  Woman  H orizontal^estsa.n,  woman) 

hozhoni 


Naestsan 
(according  to  Dr. 
daltso 


all,  everything 

hozho'fca' 

from  hozhoni,  beautiful 

naestsan 

the  Earth-Mother 


beautiful,  blessed,  happy,   perfect 


ka',  or  fcat,  suffix,  denoting  emi 


'  or  "  forever" 
Alatihews, 


pilch 

ivith:  facing  one  another 


asis,  meaning  "  indeed,' 
yaiAy'Ach 
the   Sky-Father    (according    to    Dr. 
literally,  the   Upper  Darkness) 

ka'  altsin  sella  ho-ushte 

er  :   bending  towards  one  another  : 
complements ,   or  helpmates   of  one    another  : 
(ho-ushte,  or  ytishte,  coming) 
Sisnajinni,  Tsodsicftl,  Doko-oslid,  Depenitsa, 
names  of  sacred  mountains  bounding  the  Navajo  land 
tshalyiIcA  hayolfcatii 

darkness  :  night  dawn 

Hastyehogan  natan-alc/ikaV 

name  of  God  of  Sunset  corn  white 

tradetin  anilc^tani  sa-a  nara*i 

sacred  pollen  "  The  Ripener  "  life  unending 


Hastyeyaiti 

name  of  God  of  Sunrise 

na.ta.n-a.lchtscn 

corn  yellow 

bike  hozhoni 

happiness  of  all  things 


ZUKI 


EIo 

beautiful 

lovely 

fair 

imuna 

sitting 

(expression 

liwamani 

yonder 


homa 

my 


OCKAYA 

Corn-Grinding  Song 
I 
yallanne  awehlwiawe,  or  awehluyawe 

mountain  clouds 

(cumulus  clouds) 


kwagia 

up  in  the  sky 

used  in  song)  (refers  to  the  Rain-Makers) 

iyuteapa  awiyane 

poetic  word  for  flowers  coming 


lonan-eshto 

rain-clouds  coming 


hawilana 

young  corn  growing  up 
(Laguna  word) 


kwai-i 

coming  out 
rising 

'wiyane 

coming 
(one  after  another) 


litla 

here 


Elu 

beautiful 

lovely 

fair 


OCKAYA 

Corn-Grinding  Song 
II 
Sunp  by  the  youths  while  the  maidens  grind  the  corn 
honkwa  lonan 

indeed,  perchance,  or  implying  cloud 

a  wish  "O  would  that — " 

[5561 

Digitized  by  IVIicrosoft® 


lyane 

contine 


lekwa 

said 


kela 

first 


APPENDIX 


aiyan-towa 

little  corn-ear  on  the  tip  of  the  corn-stalk 
holon-ellete  lijthno 

perchance   (?)  ^^^^^ 

with  wish  or  hope  implied  this  way 


pene 

talking 
kela 

first 


aiyaye  maihoma         antana 

up  there  at  me  looking 

kiawe-fcwai-i  nuwane 

water  coming  out  moving,  coming 

floods  going 


Amitola 

rainbow 


wtilofcia 

swallow 

tilapi  hanan 

white  clouds 


tsina-an  elu 

painting  beautift^l 

painted  lovely 

fair 
fcesi  liwamani 

now  yonder 

hither 
iyane  letekwan 

coming  it  said 


OCKAYA 

Corn-Grinding  Song 
III 

toma  wahane 

your  corn  (?) 


hiiton 

rain 


iyane 

coming 

atowa 


kiawtilokia 

swallow 


kesi 

now 

awuwakia 

all  growing 


pena 

talking 


liwamani 

yonder 
hither 
litla 
here 


Chuap 

who 

lonawe 

clouds 


tono 

you 

hlitowe 

rains 


ma  honkwa  hito 

thus  it  is,  or  thus  it  was 
— or  it  was  in  this  wise 
ite  tsina-u 
make  a  shadow 
draw  a  picture 


SHOKO    OTlifKWEi 

Corn-Dance  Song 

kela  ite  tsina-a  amitola       tsawaki 

first       make  a  shadow         rainbow         youth 
draw  a  picture 

oletchi 
under  or  behind,  coming  one  after  another  ; 
modern    use    of    word    means    saddle- 
blankets,  or  folds,  one  over  another 
ist  Version.~Who  was  the  first  to  paint  a  picture?     It  was  the  Rainbow-Youth.     It  was 
even  thus:  first  clouds,  then  rain,  one  after  the  other— then  the  Rainbow-Youth  painted  on  them. 
2d  Version. — Who  was  the  first  to  cast  a  shadow?     It  was  the  Rainbow-Youth.       Ay,  thus 
it  was:  first  tlouds,  then  rain — then  from  behind  the  Rainbow-Youth  cast  his  shadow  (probably 
meaning  that  the  rainbow  is  the  shimmering  reflection  of  the  Rainbow-Youth). 

THLAH    HEWE=i 

Song  of  the  Blue-Corn  Dance 
{Old  Chief's  Song) 

Ela  shi  lowi-yuteapa 

beautiful  see!  cloud  flowers 

lovely  or  listen 

fair  {exclamation  to  call  attention) 

cloud  flowers  are  blooming  in  the  sky,  or  the  clouds  are  blooming  like  flowers 
mateona  kesi  lowi-yateapa  awiyane  litla 

at  this  time  now  cloud  flowers  coming  here 

(awiya,  coming;  final  ne  added  for  euphony) 

'  {According  to  Mrs.  M.  C.  Stevenson,  of  the  Bureau  of  American  Ethnology,  Washington, 
the  word  "Shoko,"  is  from  "Shokona,"  the  flute  of  Payatamu,  god  of  music,  flowers  and 
butterflies.) 

^  {According  to  Mrs.  M.  C.  Stevenson,  of  the  Bureau  of  American  Ethnology,  Washington, 
"Thlah  hewe"  is  a  ceremonial  for  rain  and  the  growth  of  corn.  The  singular  of  the  word  is 
"  Thlaha,"  rabbit-skin  blanket.  TPie  name  signifies  fecundity.  This  song  is  one  used  in  the 
"  Thlah  hewe  "  ceremonial,  one  of  the  tnost  sacred  of  the  Zuni  festivals.  The  words  are  spelled 
'Hlahewe  and  'Hla'ha,  according  to  the  Bureau  of  American  Ethnology). 

[557] 


oteapa 

{archaic  word  for  flowers, 
y  added  for  euphony) 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'    BOOK 


I-o-ho 

(meaningless  vocables) 

yaweh 

yonder 


LAGUNA 
aiya-gaItani  yoni 

Corn-Grinding        Song 

I 

waitilanni 

wonder-water 


puniakoekolika 

southwest 


yaweh 

yonder 


tzi  washo  iyani-i 

what  life  now 
haniakoekolika 

sotUheast 


Polaina 

butterfly  {archaic  word) 

koeshkasi 

yellow 


AIYA-GAITANI    YONI 

Corn-Grinding        Song 
II 
hai-ke-o-tzi-o-no-ho 

now  fly  away  to  the  blossoms 
kukanishi  kasheshi 

red  white 


kochinishi  (sung  kohochinishi) 
blue 

ha-na-pu-ra-ni 

now  go  I  away ! 


HOPI 

■W^/WE/CHIM 

Wuwuchiin 


TAWI 

Song 


Yan         itam 

thus               we 
natwanlawa 
they  plant 
mongwi 
chiefs 

tokilnawita                hahlai               anangway                na'kalmamaya 

{alt)  night  along            happy               heart  with          wish  well  one  another 
inama                    ayam                                             Moyingwa 
my  fathers               yonder               Muyingwa,  god  of  germination  and  growth 
kive                                             mokwa                                kaB 
kiva,  in  the                                       double                             corn-ear 

chochmingwun 

perfect   {one) 
nikiang 

but :  yet 

natwantaqo. 

if  {they)  plant  {that) 
bavas                                  nawita 

fleld                                     along 

pom 

that 
sitalwangoni 

blossom,  tassel,  will  shine 

peyo                                 amami                                namasha 

hither                              to  thetn                                    here 

heyapo 

scud  underlying  heavy  masses  of  rain-cloud 

yoyowunoto 

rain-standing 
o-omawata 

clouds 

PimUCH   TAWI 

Sleep          Song 

Puva 

sleep 

hohoyawu-a            shahpS  pave-e                      na-ikwiokiango                       pava 

beetles               on  the  road  {trail)              they  carry  one  another                  sleep 

on  their  backs 

POLI   TIWA   TAWI 

Butterfly-Dance  Song 

Hemicita 

corn-blossoms 

cingolawu                                  mozhicita 

wrestle                                 bean-blossoms 

cingblawa  . 

wrestle 

itam                                totim                           nikiang                        ayi 

we                             are  youths                         but                    corn-plants 
ngoti-timani                                                           tavevol 

we  shall  chase  each  other                                      butterfly 

shonoka 

among 
manata 

maidens 

amami 

with 

peyo                             amumatani 

hither                        it  shall  thunder 

jta 

we 

ayatani 

shall  send 

oyi 

corn-plant 

manata                                       omi 

maidens                                 upward 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 

nawongwinani 

shall  grow  together 

APPENDIX 


Uyi  shonaka 

corn-plants  among  rain 

(rain  all  over  the  cornfields) 
yoyang 
raining  (after  the  rain  is  over) 


ANGA 

Anga 
yoki 


KATZINA 

Katzina 

tavevoli 

butterfly 


TAWI 

Song 


yala 

behold 


puma 

they 


manatu 

maidens 

tahinpa 

how 


yang 

all  over 
tuwati 

also 


uyi  shonaka  yani 

corn-plants  among  thus 

tataw-yuyuwina 

singing  enjoy  themselves 

KOROSTA  KATZINA  TAWI 

Korosta  Katzina       Song 

volima 

butterflies  corn- 

yamma  pitzangwa 

?  faces 

shakwa 

blue 


nanguyimani 

chasing  one  another 

natayawina 

flitting  about 
(enjoying  themselves) 
puma 
they 
yanga 
all  over  :  there 


Sikya 

yellow 

manata  talasi 

maidens  pollen 

tt/ve-nangayimani 

bright,  chasing  one  another 

brilliant 

mozhisi  i^tc.,  as  before) 

bean-blossoms  :  blossoming  beans 

humisi  manata 

corn-blossom  :  blossoming  corn  maidens 

tatangayata  tofciyuyuwintani  (etc.,  as  before) 

wild  bees  humming 

umah  "yi  amanawit 

your  plants :  fleld  over 

tawanawita  amah 

all  day  (tawa,  sun ;  'nawrta,  over)  your 

amanawit  yoi-hoyoyotimani 

Q^g^  rain  on-moving 


hamisi 

blossom.  :  blossoming  corn 
timakiang 
painted 
volimu 

butterflies 


amanawita 

over 


yoj-umamutimani 

rain-thunder 
uyi 
fleld 
tawanawita 
all  day 


HE-HEA 

He-hea 


KATZINA 

Katzina 


TAWI 

Song 


uyi 

plant 


manatt/  mozhisi 

maidens  bean-blossom 

faavatalawinani  shakwa 

water  will  shine,  the  wet  earth  will  blue 

shine  with  water  after  rain 
hesiqSIova  sikia  voli 

patch,  or  cluster,  of  yellow  flowers  yellow  butterflies 

(hesi,  a  certain  yellow  flower) 

mozhisiq^Sva  u'^^'^TVf.. 

patch,  or  cluster,  of  bean-blossoms  blue  butterflies 

HEVEBE    TAWI 

"  Hevebe ''-  Song 


Hamisi 

corn-blossom 
siqBISva 

patch,  cluster 

hapi  me 

behold 


Nana-hopipaqS 

now  from  the  east  (hopaqS,  east) 
nana  hopipaqb 

now  from  the  east 


qSyangwunuka 

tite  white  dawn 
sikiangwunuka 
the  yellow  dawn 
[559] 


ayi 

plant 
omawuta 

clouds 

nangByimani 

chase  one  another 


nangbyimani 

chase  one  another 


kayiva 

has  arisen 
kayiva 

has  arisen 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'    BOOK 


angwa  hawam 

so  now  an  expression  of  politeness,  analogous  to  \ 

English  "  and  it  please  yc  " 
itamumi  kayivawicha 

to  us  ;  at  us  come  look 

kayi  wataya 

of  water  pour 

wttta  qSyangwan-talao 

pour  ,  the  white  dawn-light 

tuhiyongva  to 

we  please  every  one,  or,  we  surprise  others 
yanikitiwa 
thus  it  has  been  said,  or,  thus  dwell 


hawiwokialyata 

arouse,  bestir  yourself 


itamumi 

amt/h 

kuyap 

to  us 

your 

cup ;  vessel 

iyo 

hevebeta 

peyowi 

cold 

a  kind  of  cloud  (?) 

come 

tiyo 

sikiangwan-talao 

tiyo 

youth 

the  yellow  dawn-light 

youth 

nahiongva 

to 

we  please  ourselves,  or,  we 

surprise  ourselves 

pavbn-mamantu 

corn-stalk  maidens,  or 

■,  shower -maidens 

Hevebeta 

a  kind  of  cloud  (?) 


HEVEBE  TAWI 

"  Hevebe  "-  Song 

II 
eyowi        wuta  tovi  chi 

come         pour  {archaic  or  foreign  :  translated, ' '  the  clouds  are  moving 

here,"  or  "  the  cloud  deities  are  seated  in  the  sky  ") 
Shiwana  Shi-wa-wai-ya  wuta 

(Laguna  word  used  for  the  m-asked  dancers,  who  probably  (corruption  of  Shiwana)  pour 

impersonate  clouds,  or  cloud  deities  ;  also  means  cloud) 
anoshkai'  nuishi  o-o«-ya-a  ntiipa  o-oa-ya-a 

(archaic  Hopi  or  foreign  word  m.ake  of  mg  a  cluster  of  flowers  make  of  me  a  cluster  of 

translated    by    the    Hopis,  (shi,  or  si,  means  flower,  or  showers  (pa  is  water) 

"Come,  bathe  me")  blossom) 


Hao 

hail 
omawuta 

clouds 


tnama 

my  fathers 

wawai 

call :  want 


nanakwushani 

will  start  to  come 


peyo 

hither 


LENE  TAWI 

Flute  -  Song 

mashilenangwa  mongwita 

gray  flute  chiefs 

inamu 
my  fathers 
yoi-omomatimani 

rain-thunder  it  shall 


nananivo 

at  the  four  world-points 


yoi 

rain 
peyo 

hither 


yoi-hoyoyotimani 

rain-moving  will  move 

yang 

far  and  near 


oyi 

the  plants 
uyi 
the  plants 


nananivaqo 

from  the  four  world-points 
yanga 
yonder  moving  along,  or, 
all  over,  here,  there 
shonaka  hakame 

am,ong  everywhere 

shonaka  faava-tala-winani 

omtong  the  earth  will  water-shine 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


CONTRIBUTORS 


WABANAKI 


Bedagi,  Big  Thunder. 

Joseph  Nicolar. 

Blamswe-Zozep  Tene,  Francis  Joseph  Dana. 

Asawhis,  John  Salis. 

DAKOTA 

Maza  Blaska,  Flat  Iron. 
Tatanfca-Ptecila,  Short  Bull. 
Matoisto-Nakipin,  Bear-Arm-Necklace. 
Wicapi,  Star. 

Vambli-'Waste,  Good-Eagle. 
Takonke-Hinto,  Blue  Horse. 
Taiunke-Ciqala,  Little  Horse. 
Capa-Tanka,  Big  Beaver,  Frank  Goings. 
Tatanka-Hinapawi,  Buffalo-Appearing 
yicapi-Wafcan,  Holy  Star,  Julia  Yellow-Hair. 
Tasunke-Hinsa,  Sorrel  Horse. 
MaKpiya-Tatanka,  Sky  Bull. 
Mato-Wankantuya,  High  Bear. 
Huhuseca-ska,  White  Bone. 
Zintkala  Maza,  Iron  Bird. 
Mato-Naiin,  Standing-Bear. 

PAWNEE 

Sakuruta,  Gnning  Sun,  James  R.  Murie. 
Letakots-Lesa,  Eagle  Chief. 
Lesa-Kipiliru,  Young  Chief. 
Lukitawika  -  wari.    Rider  -  Around  -  the  -  Great- 
Heaven-Domed-Lodge. 
• 

CHEYENNE 

Wihu-Hwaiha-O-Usz,  or  Hiamovi,  High  Chief, 

or  High  Wolf. 
Honihi-Wotoma,  Wolf-Robe. 
Nahios-si,  Three  Fingers. 
MocAta-Wontz-tz,  Starving  Elk. 
Wihunahe,  Chief  Woman. 
Mowihaiz,  Magpie,  Leonard  Tyler. 
Wupcha-e,  White  Cap. 
Wowesta,  White  Buffalo  Woman. 
Hotuwasu,  Little  Buffalo  Bull. 


ARAPAHO 
Nakos,  Sage. 
Wageoh,  Maud  Shawnee. 
Nawadek,  Susie  Sage. 
Nabilase,  Jessie  Sage. 
Gelbini,  Cappie  Webster. 
Waatina  Bichut,  Black  Shirt. 


KIOWA 


Owik'uyairj,  The  Home-Comer. 
Apiatan,  Wooden  Lance. 
T'e-ne-t'e,  Eagle  Chief. 
Sah-mount,  Samon. 
Guwekondgieh,  Black  Wolf. 
Potine,  White  Beaver. 

WINNEBAGO 

Hinook  Mahrwi  Kilinaka,  Angel  De  Cora. 
Chash-chunk-a,  Wave,  Peter  Sampson. 
Nek-hu-wi-fca,  South  Wind,  Jacob  Russell. 
Wa-che-Ii-man-iga,  Surly  Walker,  James  Mal- 
lory. 

KWAKIUTL 
Klalish,  Charles  James  Nowell. 

PIMA 

Visak-Vo-o-yim,  Hovering  Hawk. 
Katarina  Valenzuela. 
Hal  Antonio. 
Ataloya. 

APACHE 
Geronimo. 
Fleming  Lavender. 
Rivers  Lavender  (Gumanchia.) 

MOJAVE-APACHE 
Hukutgodga. 
Somurturgigu-a. 

YUHA 
C/iiparopai. 

Ema-liya. 


ZUNI 


LAGUNA 


Tuari,  Young  Eagle. 
Idima,  John  Corn. 


HOPI 


Lololomai,  Very  Good. 

Tawakwaptiwa,  Sun-Down-Shining. 

Lahpu,  Cedar-Bark. 

Koianimptiwa. 

Masahongva. 

Kuwanyisnim. 

Masaveimah. 

Kavanghongevah. 

Gashoienim. 


Also  various  Indians  from  the  Navajo  tribe,  and.from  the  villages  of  Acoma  and  San  Juan. 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


INDEX 


ABBREVIATIONS 


Ac. 
Ap. 
Ar. 

c. 

D. 

f. 
H. 


Acoma 

Apache 

Arapaho 

Cheyenne 

Dakota 

foot-note 

Hopi 


Acoma,  447. 

Agna-Iyanke  (Runs  Beside),  Fox  warrior  (D.), 
51. 

Agricaltore,  Agricoltaral  (D.),  37,  38;  (Pa.), 
94;  (Ar.),  198;  (Pi.),  3J3;  (M.),  329;  (Y.), 
339;  (Pa.),  425,  426;  see  also  sutjject-matter 
on  pages  (Wi.),  244;  (H.),  473. 

Aiya-Gaitani  Yoni,  Corn-Grinding  Song  (L.), 
451,  452,  464,  466,  558. 

Alili  (N.),  meaning  of,  366  (f.). 

Alilorani  (Lightning  Youth),  mythic  personage 
(N.),  366. 

All-Waters  (N.),  357. 

Anaye,  alien  deities  (N.),  359,  360. 

Anga  Katzina  Song  (H.),  see  Anga  Katzina 
Tawi. 

Anga  Katzina  Tawi,  Anga  Katzina  Song  (H.), 
483,  505,  559. 

Anglo-Saxon  Influence,  see  subject-matter  on 
pages  (Pi.),  313,  314;  (Pu.),  426,  and  also 
Song  of  the  Hopi  Chief,  474. 

Animals,  Beasts,  in  song,  story,  myth,  custom, 
or  belief  (Wa.),  4,  11;  (PI.),  31,  32;  (D.),  59, 
61,  62;  (Pa.),  96,  97,  lOJ;  (C),  159;  (Ki.), 
228;  (Wi.),  244,  248,  249,  251,  253;  (Kw.\ 
298,  300,  301,  302;  (N.),  361,  369;  (H.), 
494;  see-  also  Antelope,  Bear,  Buffalo,  Deer, 
Elk,  Frog,  Frog-folfc,  Horse,  Moose,  Mouse, 
Otter,  Wolf;  compare  also  Birds,  Reptiles, 
Insects. 

Ant  (Wi.),  251,  253;  (Pi.),  315. 
Antelope  (Ki.),  221,  226,  227,  228. 
Antelope  Song  (Ki.),  see  T'apfco  Daagya. 
Ant-man  (Wi.),  251,  252. 
Aotzi  No-otz,  Song  of  Victory  (C),  155,  156, 
157,  J74,  176,  178,  544. 


Ki. 

Kiowa 

PL    Plains  Indians 

Kw. 

KwakiutI 

Pu.  Pueblo  Indians 

L. 

Laguna 

S.      San  Juan 

M. 

Mojave-Apache 

Wa.  Wabanafci 

N. 

Navajo 

Wi.  Winnebago 

Pa. 

Pawnee 

Y.     Yuma 

Pi. 

Pima 

Z.     Zuni 

Apaches 

1,  323. 

, 

singing  of,  xxviii. 

Apiatan  Ki.,  chief,  contributor,  222,  223,  224, 

230,  561. 
Arapahos,  195. 

,  mescal  religion  among,  162. 

Arch-Above-the-Earth  (Rainbow)  (Pa.),   102. 
Arowp,   Song  of  the  Mocking-Bird   (Y.),   340, 

342,  55t. 
Asawhis,  John  Salis,  Wa.  contributor,  7,  15,  16, 

24,  25,  26,  561. 
Ataloya  Pi.  contributor,  Pima  title-page  facing 

p.  310,  561. 
Atius  Tirawa  (Pa.),  see  Tirawa. 
A'wonawil'ona,  Z.  Supreme  Being,  493  (f.). 


Baby    Song    (LuUaby)    (C),     see    Meshivotzi 

No-otz. 
Bahana    (H.),    name    for    an   American   white 

person,  493. 
Bahos,  prayer-sticks  (H.),  492,  493. 
Bear  (D.),  61;  (Pa.),  96  (f.),  97,  98,  104. 
Bear  -  Arm  -  Necklace      (D.),      see      Matoisto- 

Nakipin. 
Bear  Society  (Pa.),  96,  104,  107. 
Bear  warriors  (Pa.),  104    IC5. 
Beasts,  see  Animals. 
Bedagi   (Big  Thunder),  Wa.  contributor,  3,   7, 

n,  561. 
Bedouins  of  America,  Navajos,  so-called,  347. 
Bee  (N.),  371;   (H.),  484. 
Beetle  (H.),  480. 

Begging-Song  (Ki.),  see  Koalda  Daagya. 
Big  Beaver  (D.),  see  Capa-Tanka. 
Big  Thunder  (Wa.),  see  Bedagi. 
Bike  hozhoni,  prayer-phrase  (N.),  372,  552. 


[563] 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'    BOOK 


Birds,  in  song,  story,  myth,  custom,  or  be- 
lief (D.),  61;  (Pa.),  96,  97,  98;  (C),  16 J; 
(Ar.),  20J;  (Wi.),  263);  (Pi.),  317;  see  also 
Bluebird,  Blackbird,  Chicken-hawk,  Crow, 
Eagle,  Hawk,  Hamming  .-bird,  Ha-hok, 
Swallow,  Thunder-Bird;  compare  also  Ani- 
mals, Reptiles,  Insects. 

Black  Bear,  mythic  Star  Beast  (Pa.),   10 1. 

,  Wi.  scout,  259. 

Blackbird  (N.),  369,  370. 

Black  Mountain  (N.),  369,  370. 

Black  Shirt  (Ar.),  see  Waatina  Bichut. 

Black  Star,  mythic  Star  Beast  (Pa.),   10 1. 

Black  Thunder,  mythic  personage  (N.),  359. 

Black  Wolf  (Ki.),  see  Guwefcondgieh. 

Blamswe-Zozep  Tene,  Francis  Joseph  Dana, 
"Wa.  contributor,  7,  9,  10,  14,  21,  561. 

Bluebird  (Pi.),  317. 

Song    (Pi.),    see    Chuhtek-Ohohik 

Nieh. 

Blue  Horse  (D.),  see  Tasufike-Hinto. 

Thunder,  mythic  personage  (N.),  359. 

Boas,  Dr.  Franz  298  (f.);  535. 

Bow,  the  Sacred  (C),  see  Sacred  Bow. 

Brule,  members  bf  the  band  contributors  of 
D.  songs. 

Buffalo,  xxi.;  (PI.),  31  (f.);  (D.),  38,  39,  41, 
42,  53,  58,  6J;  (Pa.),  94,  99,  J02,  1 12;  (C), 
J47,  150,  156;  (Ar.),  197;  (Wi.),  244,  248. 

Buffalo-Appearing  (D.),  see  Tatanka-Hina- 
pawi. 

Buffalo  Chief  (Wi.),  253. 

Buffalo-Dance   (C),    152. 

Buffalo-Dance  Song  (C),  see  Mohoeva  No-otz. 

Bundles,  the  Sacred  (Pa.),  see  Sacred  Bun- 
dles. 

Butterfly  (L.),  461,  462;  (H.),  475,  484,  485. 

Butterfly-Dance   (H.),   481. 

Butterfly-Dance  Song  (H.),  see  Poli  Tiwa 
Tawi. 

Butterfly-girls   (H.),  481. 

Butterfly-maidens  (H.),  482,  483,  486. 


Caddos,  Pawnees  allied  to,  93. 

Capa-Tanka,  Big  Beaver,  Frank  Goings,  D. 
contributor,  56,  561. 

Casa  Grande,  as  ruins  of  ancient  Pi.  build- 
ings, 3(3. 

Ceremony,  Ceremonial,  xxv.;  (Wa.),  7;  (PI.), 
31,  33;  (D.),  56,  59,  61;  (Pa.),  96,  107,  JJ2, 
113;  (C),  151,  154,  I6J,  163,  164,  165; 
(Ar.),  198,  199,  201;  (Ki.),  223,  228;  (Wi.), 
254,  255,  257;  (N.),  348,  349,  352,  361,  365, 
366,  367,  371;  (Pu.),  425,  126;  (H.)  477, 
479,  484,  488,  489,  491. 

Ceremony  of  the  Offerings'  Lodge  (Ar.),  see 
Hassehawu. 

Chants,  name  for  N.  ceremonies,  365. 

Chash-chunk-a,  Wave,  Peter  Sampson,  Wi. 
contributor,  244,  253,  257,  260,  264,  266, 
268,  275,  278,  280,  288,  561. 

Chawi  band  of  Pawnees,  song  belonging  to, 

in. 


Cheyenne  Life  in  the  Olden  Time,   150. 
Cheyennes,    J  47. 

,  mescal  religion  among,  J  62. 

Chicken-hawk   (Wi.),  263. 
Chief  of  Mountains  (N.),  352,  354,  355,  356. 
Chief  Woman  (C),  see  Wihunahe. 
Chiefs'  Society  (PI.),  31;  (C),  J52. 
£7,^iparopai,    Y.   contributor,    339,   340,   342, 

561. 
Chuhtek-Ohohik  Nieh,  Bluebird  Song  (Pi.), 

317,  319,  551. 

Chuhwuht,  Song  of  the  World  (Pi.),  3 J 5,  3 J 6, 

318,  55J. 

Cibola,  seven  cities  of,  identical  with  Z.  habi- 
tations, 429. 

Civilization  of  primitive  man,  ^xx. 

Club  Society  (Ar.),  202. 

Cochimis,  as  one  of  the  Y.  tribes,  339. 

Cocopas,  as  one  of  the  Y.  tribes,  339. 

Comanche  Song  (Ar.),  see  Hache-iii  Naad.  ' 

Comanches,  mescal  religion  among,   162. 

,  Kiowas  occupy  reservation  with,  222. 

Coming  Sun  (Pa.),  see  Safcuruta. 

Contributors,    see   list    of,    561. 

Corn,  male  and  female  (N.),  371. 

,  as  mother  (Pa.),  96;  see  also  Mother- 
Corn. 

Corn  -  blossom  maidens  (H.),  see  Corn- 
maidens. 

Corn-Dance  Song  (Z.),  see  Shoko  Otifkwe. 

Corn-grinding,  xxii.;  (Z.),  429. 

Corn-Grinding  Song  (L.),  see  Aiya-Gaitani 
Yoni. 

Songs  (Z.),  see  Ockaya. 

Com  -  maidens,  corn  -  plant  maidens,  corn- 
blossom  maidens,  maiden  plants,  virgin 
corn  (H.),  481,  482,  484,  485. 

Corn-meal,  sacred,   see  Sacred  corn-meal. 

Corn-People  Gatzina  Songs  (Ac),  see  Yaka- 
Hano  Gatzina  Yoni. 

Corn-plant  maidens  (H.),  see  Corn-maidens. 

Coronado  (N.),  347. 

Coyote  Warrior-Song  (Pa.),  see  Sfciriki. 

Cradle  (Kw.),  303. 

Cradle-Biard  (Pa.),    1 01,    102. 

Cradle-Board  for  the  Morning-Star  Clan  (Pa.), 
facing  p.  102. 

Cradle-Song  (Kw.),  303,  307. 

Crow  (Pa.),  115;  (C),  J6I;  (Ar.),  201. 

Crow-Dance  (Ar.),  20 J. 

Crow-Dance  Song  (Ar.),  see  Ho  Nawad  Naad. 

Crow  Indians,  Ki.  relation  with,  221. 

Gushing,  Frank  Hamilton  (Z).,  429  (f.),  430 
(f.). 


Dakotas,  32. 

Dana,  Francis  Joseph  (Wa.),  see  Blamswe- 
Zozep  Tene. 

Dance,  Dances,  Dancing  (Wa.),  8,  10;  (D.), 
42,  43,  44,  45,  46,  48,  55,  59,  60,  61;  (Pa.), 
96,  97,  113,  115,  116;  (C),  151,  J52,  J57, 
162;  (Wi.),  245,  255,  257;  (Kw.),  300,  301, 
302;  (M.),  329;  (N.),  367;  (Z.),  430;  (H.), 
476,  481,  482,  483,  484. 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


\ir 


INDEX 


Dance,  Dances,  Dancing  (Wi.),  255;  see  Hi-wa- 

shi-da. 
Dance-Song  (Ap.),  328;  (M.),  334,  335. 
— — —  — —  of    the    Fox    Society    (D.),    see 

Tofcala  wacipi  Olowan. 
Dance-Songs  (Wa.),  9. 
'- from  the  Ceremony  of  the  Night 

Chant  (R),  see  Kledzhi  Hatal. 
Darkness  Maiden,  mythic  personage  (N.),35I. 
Dawnlight- Youths  (H.),  486,  487. 
Dawn  Maiden,  mythic  personage  (N.),  351.- 

Youth,  mythic  personage  (N.),  35 J. 

Death  (D.),  50,  61;  (Pa.),  113,  114;  (C),  J52, 

153,  154. 
DeatMess  One,  mythic  personage  (M.),  33 J, 

332,  333. 

and  the  Wind,  story  (M.),  331. 

De   Cora,   Angel   (Wi.),   see   Hinook  Mahiwi 

Kilinaka. 
Deer  (Wi.),  244,  248?  <N.),  369,  370. 
Depenitsa,  sacred  motmtain  (N.),  351,  353, 

372,  552. 
Digini,   "  Divine   Ones,"   mythic   personages 

(N.),  367. 
Digini-ossini,  the  Holy  Believer,  mythic  per- 
sonage (N.),  366. 
Dine,   "  The    people "    N.    name    for    them- 
selves, 347. 
Dinni-e  Sin,   Hunting -Song  (N.),   369,  370, 

413    555. 
Divine  Beings  (Pa.),  99;  (N.),  365. 
Divine  Ones  (N.),  352,  367. 
Dog  (D.),  58,  59;  (C),  150. 

Feast  (D.),  59. 

Society  (Pa.),  112. 

Soldiers  (PI.),  31;  (D.),  50. 

Doko-oslid,  sacred  mountain  (N.),  35),  353, 

372,  552. 
Dorsey,  Dr.  George  A.  (Ar.),  198. 
Drawings  by  Indians,  xxii.,  xxviii. 

— by  High  Chief,  149. 

Dream,   Dreams,   Dreamer,   Dreaming   (PI.), 

31;  (D.),  43,  60,  61;  (Pa.),  109,  J 12,  114; 

(C),  158,  J59,  161;  (Ar.),  200,  202;  (Ki.), 

226;  (Wi.),  26J,  263;  (Pi.),  314;  compare 

also  Spirit,   Trance,  Vision. 
Dry-paintings,  sand-pictures,  so-called    (N.), 

367. 
DsicM  Biyin,  Mountain-Song  (N.),  352,  353, 

354,  355,  356,  377,  552. 
,  Mountain-Song  (Hozhonji  Song), 

(N.),  350,  352,  374,  551. 
DsicMyidje  Hatal,  Song  from  the  Ceremony 

of  the  Mountain-Chant  (N.),  366,  368,  408, 

555 
Dwellings  (Wa.),  3;  (PL),  39  (f.);  (Pa.),  94; 

(Ar.),   197;   (Ki.).  222;   (Kw.),  298;  (N.), 

348;  (Pu.),  425,  461. 


Eagle  symbol,  xv. 

Earth,  as  the  common  mother  (Wa.),  II;  (D.), 
41;  (N.),  372;  compare  also  Story  of  the 
First  Mother  (Wa.),  and  Stories  of  Wash- 
ching-geka,  the  Little  Hare  (Wi.). 

Earth-Maker  (Wi.),  see  Ma-o-na. 

r .  Song  to  the  (Wi.),  see  Ma-o-na. 

Eaton,  George,  a  Wi.  Indian,  258. 

Echo,  in  myth  (Kw.),  302. 

Echo  Mask  (Kw.),  301. 

Education  of  Indians,  national  policy  for, 
xxxiii.;  see  also  Indian  children  at  govern- 
ment boarding-school   (D.). 

Elephant  (Wi.),  248,  249. 

Elk  (D.),  40;  (Wi.),  244,  248,  251. 

—     Chief  (Wi.),  253. 

Ema-Iiya,  Z.  contributor,  Zuni  Indians'  Title- 
page,  facing  p.  426;  561. 

Emergence,  Navajo  Story  of  the,  350  (f.)( 
compare  also  Story  of  Gomoidema  Pokoma- 
Kiaka  (M.). 

Estsan  Digini,  Holy  Woman  (N.),.  366. 

Estsan-Natlehi,  deity  (N.),  359,  360. 

Evening  Star  (Pa.),  94,  99,  100,  lOI,  102,  103, 
104,   107. 


Fable  (Wi.),  see  Wai-fcun. 

Father,  Prophet  of  the  Ghost-Dance  Religion 

(D.),  43,  44,  45,  46,  47,  48;  (Pa.),  112;  see 

also  Prophet. 
Father-Crow  (Ar.),  201. 
Father-Hawk  (Pa.),  97;  (f.),  107,  108. 
Father-Sky  (N.),  372. 
Father-Sun  (Pa.),  116;  (Ar.),  198. 
Female-Rain  (N.),  365,  368. 
First-Man,  mythic  personage  (N.),  351,  371. 
First  Mother  (Wa.),  4. 
First- Woman,    mythic    personage    (N.),    351, 

371. 
First  Woman  who  made  the  Son  of  God  (M.), 

see  Story  of  Gomoidema  Pokoma-Kiaka. 
Fiske,  John,  quotation  from,  533. 
Flat  Iron,  D.  chief,  see  Maza  Blaska. 
Fletcher,  Alice  C,  xxii.  (f.);  (Pa.),  102,  I07(f.). 
Flint  (Pa.),  103;  (Wi.),  248,  249;  (N.),  360,  363, 

364. 

Youth  (N.),  363,  364. 

Flute  (Wi.),  261;  (Z.),  430. 

Ceremony  (H.),  489. 

Song  (H.),  see  Lene  Tawi. 

Fly,  Flies  (Wi.),  246;  (M.),  333. 
Foolish  One  (Wi.),  see  Wak-chung-kaka. 
Fort  Laramie,  treaty  signed  at  (C),  148. 
Fox  (D.),  51. 

Men  (PI.),  31. 

Society  (D.),  61. 

Frog  (Kw.),  299,  300,  302. 
Frog-folfc  (M.),  330. 


Eagle,  XV.;  (Pa.),  97,  98;  (C),  165. 

Chief  (Pa.),  see  Letakots-Lesa. 

■ —  (Ki.),  see  Te'-ne-t'e. 

Eagle's  song,  xv. 


"  Gaigwu,"  Ki.  name  for  the  tribe,  221. 
Game  of  Barter  (Wa.),  7. 
Games  (Wa.),  7;  (C).  158,  161,  162;  (Ar.),  201, 
202;  (M.),  332. 
[5651 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'   BOOK 


224, 


Gashoienim,  H.  contributor,  Paefalo  Indians' 
Title-page,  facing  p.  422;  Hopi  Indians'  Title- 
page  facing  p.  470;   561. 

Gatzinas,  mythic  personages  (Ac),  447. 

Gelbini,  Ar.  contributor,  201,  2(1,561. 

Geronimo,  Ap.  chief,  contributor,  323,  324,  325, 
327,  561. 

"Geronimo's  Story  of  His  Life  "  (Ap.),  324 

(f.) 
Ghost-Dance  (D.),  4J;  (Ar.),  198,  223;  sec  also 

Spirit-Dance. 
"  Ghost-Dance  Movement  "  (D.),  41,  44. 
Ghost-Dance  Song  (Ar.),  see  Kainawad  Naad. 
(D.),  see  Wanagi  Wiicipi  OIo- 

wan;  (Pa.),  see  Kehare  Katzaru. 
"  Ghost-Shirts  "  (D.),  44. 
GIooscop  (Wa.),  12  (f.). 
GocAoti  Naad,  Hand-Game  Song   (Ar.),  201, 

202,  213,  546. 
God  (D.),  42;  (C),  164,  165. 
Goings,  Frank  (D.),  see  Capa-Tanfca. 
Gomda  Daagya,  Wind-Songs   (Ki.),   223, 

225,  230,  231,  232,  546. 
Gomoidema  Pokoma-Kiafca  (H.),^330. 
Good-Eagle  (D.),  see  Wambli-'Waste. 
Government,  civic  (Pu.),  426. 
Gray  Flute  Society  (H.),  489. 
"  Great  Holy-Hystery  "  (PL),  32. 
Great  Mystery  (PI.),  32;  (D.),  38,  39,  53;  (C), 

151,  156,  159;  see  also  Great  Spirit. 
Great  Spirit  (Wa.),  4,  6,  11,  12;  (PL),  32;  (D.), 

39;  see  also  Great  Mystery,  Wafcan-Tanka 

(D.),   Tirawa   (Pa.),  MacAa  -  Mahaiyu   (C), 

Ichebeniatha    (Ar.),   Ma-o-na   (Wi.),   Yusun 

(Ap.),  He-She  (Z.). 
Great  Star,  Pa.  name  for  the  Morning  Star,  99. 
Great  Waters  (N.),  364. 

Gros  Ventres,  subtribe  of  the  Arapahos,  197. 
Gumanchia,  Rivers  Lavender,  Ap.  contributor, 

Apache  Title-page  facing  p.  320,  561. 
Guwekondgieh,   Black  Wolf,   Ki.    contributor, 

233,  561. 
Gwu  Daagya,  War-Path  Song  (Ki.),  229,  240, 

548. 

H 

HacAayac/iu  Naad,  Song  of  the  Mescal  Rite 
(Ar.),  212. 

Hache-hi  Naad,  Jichxs  Naad,  Wolf -Song  or 
Comanche-Song  (Ar.),  J99,  206,  545. 

Hako,  a.  Paiunee  Ceremony,  107  (f.). 

Hal  Antonio,  Pi.  contributor,  317,  320,  561. 

Haliotis  Maiden,  mythic  personage  (N.),  351. 

Hariacha-thiafc,  Sitting  Buffalo-Bull,  Ar.  con- 
tributor, 200. 

Hand-Game  Song  (Ar.),  see  Oochoti  Naad. 

Songs  (C),  see  Nu-u-sinim. 

Hao-Wari  (Pa.),  128. 

Hard  Things,  mythic  obstacles  (Pa.),  100. 

Hasjeiti  Dailjis,  ceremonial  of  (N.),  365  (f.) 

"  Hassehawu,"  Ceremony  of  the  Offerings' 
Lodge   (Ar.),    198. 

Hasse-hi  Naad,  Song  of  the  Buffalo-Hide  Cere- 
mony (Sun-Dance  Song)  (Ar.),  198,  199,  203, 
204,  545. 


Hastyehogan,  deity  (N.),  356,  373. 

Hastyeyaiti,  deity  (N.),  356,  369,  373. 

"  Hatal,"  N.  word  for  chant,  348. 

Havasupais,  as  one  of  the  Y.  tribes,  339. 

Hawk  (C),  159. 

Healing  (PL),  32,  33;  (D.),  38,  39,  40,  52,  53, 
61;  (C),  151,  159. 

He-hea  Katzina  Song  (H.),  see  He-hea  Katzina 
Tawi. 

Tawi,   He-hea   Katzina   Song 

(H.),  485,  517,  559. 

"He-Iush-fca"   (Wi.),  257. 

He-Iush-ka  Nawan,  Warrior-Songs  (Wi.),  258, 
259,  260,  275,  278,  280,  282,  549. 

He-She,  Z.,  Supreme  Being,  493  (f.) 

Hevebe  (H.),  486  (f.). 

Hevebe  Songs  (H.),  see  Hevebe  Tawi. 

Tawi,  Hevebe  Songs  (H.),  486, 487, 488, 

523,  526,  560. 

Hevebeta  (H.),  487,  488. 

Heyapo  cloud  (H.),  479. 

Hiamovi,  or  Wihu-hwaihu-o-usz,  High  Cfiief ,  or 
High  Wolf,  C.  Cliief,  contributor,  "  Things  of 
the  Olden  Time,"  frontispiece.  Plains  Indians' 
Title-page,  facing  p.  28;  149,  150,  151,  152, 
166,  168,  169,  I7J,  222. 

HichaSc/iuthi,  Song  of  the  Club  Society  (Ar.), 
202,  215,  546. 

High  Bear  (D.),  see  Mato-Wankantuya. 

High  Chief  (C),  see  Hiamovi. 

Wolf  (C),  see  Hiamovi. 

Hinanatina,  the  Arapaho  people  proper,  197. 

Hinimiyotzu,  Song  of  the  Bow  and  Arrow 
Society   (C),    171. 

Hinook  Mahiwi  Kilinaka,  Angel  De  Cora,  Wi. 
contributor,  xv.,xxxiii.;  Wabanaki  Title-page, 
facing  p.  xxxiv. ;  Plains  Indians'  Title-page, 
facing  p.  28;  Dakota  Title-page,  facing  p.  34; 
Pawnee  Title-page,  facing  p.  90;  Cheyenne 
Title-page,  facing  p.  J  44;  Arapaho  Title-pige, 
facing  p.  194;  Kiowa  Title-page,  facing  p. 
218;  Winnebago  Title-page,  facing  p.  240; 
Kwakiutl  Title-page,  facing  p.  294;  South- 
western Indians'  Title-page,  facing  p.  308; 
Pima  Title-page,  facing  p.  3 JO;  Apache  Title- 
page,  facing  p.  320;  Navajo  Title-page,  facing 
p.  344;  Pueblo  Indians'  Title-page,  facing  p. 
422;  Zuni  Indians'  Title-page,  facing  p.  426; 
San  Juan  and  Acoma  Title-page,  facing  p. 
444;  Laguna  Title-page,  facing  p.  458;  Hopi 
Title-page,  facing  p.  470;  561. 

History  of  the  Spirit-Dance,  41. 

Hi-wa-shi-da,  Dance  following  the  Holy  Song 
(Wi.),  256,  273,  549. 

Hlin  Biyin,  Song  of  the  Horse  (N.),  360,  361, 

362,  389,  553. 
Hogan,  N.  dwelling,  348,  356,  357,  358,  367. 

Biyin,  Song  of  the  Hogans  (Hozhonji 

Song)  (N.),  356,  357,  382,  553. 
Hohiotsitsi  No-otz,  Morning  Song  (C),  153,  J  72, 

544. 
Hocoka,  centre  of  the  camp-circle  (D.),  49. 
Holy  Believer,  mythic  personage  (N.),  366,  367. 

Man,  Holy  Men  (PL),  32,  33;  <D.)  Title- 

pige,  facing  p.  34;  (D.),  38,  39,  40,  49,  52, 

Digitized  b^^^rosoft® 


INDEX 


™ 'i^:^'  \^^'  (^*->'  255;  (Ap.),  324,-  see  also 
Medicine-Man. 

Holy  Ones  (N.),  349. 

Place  (N.),  354,  355,  356. 

— —   Song  (Medicine -Song)    (D.),  see  Wafcan 

Olowan. 
— —   Song  (Medicine- Song)    (Wi.),  see   Mun- 

kan  Na-wan. 

Star  (D.),  see  Wicapi-Wafcan. 

Story  (D.),  38. 

Woman,  mythic  personage  (N.),  366,  367. 

Youth,  mythic  personage  0^.),  366,  368. 

Home-Comer  (Ki.),  see  Owifc'tiyain. 

Ho  Nawad  Naad,  Crow-Dance  Song  (Ar.).  201. 
209,  545.  s\      ;. 

Honihi-Wotoma,   Wolf -Robe,   C.   chief,   con- 

trifaator,  153,  155,  172,  174,  J76,  561. 
Hopis,  473,  534. 
Horse,  Pony  (D.),  59;  (Pa.),   109;   (C),   151, 

J53;  (Ar.),  201,  202;  (Ki.),  329;  (Wi.),  258, 

259;  CN.),  360,  361,  362. 
Hotowasu,  Little  Buffalo  Bull,  C.  contributor, 

Cheyenne  Title-page,  facing  p.  144;  561. 
Hot  Wind  (M.),  331. 

Hovering  Hawk  (Pi.),  see  Visak-Vo-o-yim. 
Hozhonji  Song  (N.),  see  Dsic/il  Biyin,  Hogan 

Biyin,  Naestsan  Biyin. 
Hozhonji  Songs  (N.),  349. 
Hu-huk,  mythic  bird  (Kw.),  298. 
Huhuseca-ska,  White  Bone,  D.  contributor,  60, 

561. 
Huhwuhli  Nieh,  Wind- Song  (Medicine  -  Song) 

(Pi.),  317,  320,  551. 
Hukutgodga,  M.  contributor,  336,  56 J. 
Humming-bird  (M.),  330. 
Huntiug-Song  (N.),  see  Dinni-e  Sin. 
Hunting  the  Moose  (Wa.),  JJ. 


Ichebeniatha,  Ar.  Supreme  Being,  198. 
Idima,   L.   contributor,   San  Juan   and  Acoma 

Title-page,  facing  p.  444;  Laguna  Title-page, 

facing  p.  458;  561. 
Indian  Art,  xxiv.,  xxix.;  (Kw.),  298;  (N.),  348; 

(Pi.),  313;  (Pu.),  425. 
Art  Industries  (Kw.),  298;  (N.),  348; 

(Pu.),  425. 

Gvilization,  national  policy  for,  xxxiii. 

Children,   ability  to  draw,   xxviii.;  at 


government  boarding-school  (D.),  57. 

Drawing,  see  Drawings  by  Indians. 

Life,  present  condition,  xxxiii.;  tragedy 

peculiarity  of 


of. 


XXIII. 

Music,  notation  of,  vii.; 


Pueblo,  vii.;  character  of,  xxv.,  xxvi.,  xxvii., 
xxviii.;   character   of   KwakiutI,   298;   char- 
acter of  Hopi,  474;  encouragement  of  xxviii, 
xxxiii. 
Names,  deeper  meaning  (Ar.),  302  (f.). 

Poetry,  xxiv.,  xxv. 

Prophet  (D.),  42. 

Religious  Thought  (Pa.),  93;  compare 

also   subject-matter   on   pages   xxiv.,   xxix.; 


96,  99,  107,  J 1 1,  112,  113;  (C),  154,  161,  162, 
164;  (Ar.),  198;  (Wi.),  253,  254,  262;  (Ap.), 
324;  (N.),  349,  364;  (Pu.),  425,  426;  (H.), 
477,493,494;  (Z.),  493  (f.). 

Indian  Schools,  xxviii.,  xxxiii.;  (D.),  57. 

Singing,  generail  characteristic  of,  vii. 

Song,  as  cont-'ibution  to  art,  xxviii. 

IndUn  Story  and  Song,  by  Alice  C.  Fletcher, 
citation,   102  (f.) 

Talent,  xxix.,  xxx. 

Type  of  manhood,  xxx. 

Industries  (Pi.),  313;  (H.),  474. 

Insects,  in  song,  story,  myth,  custom,  or  belief,  see 
Ant,  Bee,  Beetle,  Butterfly,  "  Rioener,"  Spid- 
ers; compare  also  Animals,  Birds,  Reptiles. 

Introduction,  xxi. 

to  the  Pawnee  Songs,  96. 

Iron  Bird  (D.),  see  Zintkala  Maza. 

Irusfca  (Pa.),  109,  1 10,  121,  J22,  124,  J26,  542. 

Song  of  the  Corn-offering,  see  Iruska. 


(Wa.),  H;  (PI.),  32;  (D.),  42,  60;  (Pa.),  93, 


JacAu  Naad,  Comanche-Songs  (Ar.),  199. 
Jesus,  Paiute  Prophet  thought  to  be  (D.),  42. 
Johano-ai,  sun-god  (N.),  359,  360,  361,  362. 

K 

Kainawad  Naad,  Song  of  the  Spirit-Dance 
(Ghost-Dance  Song)  (Ar.),  200,  208,  545. 

Kalakuyuwish,  name  of  totem-pole  (Kw.),  302. 

Katarina  Valenzuela,  Pi.  contributor,  317,  3J9, 
561. 

Katzinas,  H.  deities,  482,  494. 

KavaJighongevah,  H.  contributor,  489,  529,  561. 

Ke-chung-gefca,  The  Tortoise,  mythic  person- 
age (Wi.),  244. 

Keechis,  Pawnees  allied  to,  93. 

Kehare  Katzaru,  Songs  of  the  Spirit-Dance 
(Ghost-Dance  Songs)  (Pa.),  JJ4,  115,  116, 
139,  140,  141,  143,  543. 

Kiowas,  221. 

,  mescal  religion  among,   162. 

Kisafca,  Song  of  Rejoicing  and  Thanksgiving 
(Pa.),  113,  136,  543. 

,  Woman's  Song  of  Rejoicing  (Pa.),  I'35. 

Kitzichta.,  Song  of  the  Lance  Ceremony  (Pa.), 
113,  114,  131,  543. 

Kiva,  ceremonial  council-chamber  (H.),  477, 
479,  493. 

Klalish,  Charles  James  Nowell,  Kw.  contrib- 
utor, KwakiutI  Title-page,  facing  p.  294; 
299,  302,  304,  561. 

KlawuIacAa,  Song  of  the  Totem-Pole  (Kw.), 
302,  304,  550. 

Kledzhi  Hatal,  Dance-Songs  from  the  Cere- 
mony of  the  Night-Chant  (N.),  402,  403,  404. 

Kloskurbeh  (Wa.),  4,  5,  6,  12  (f.) 

Kluskabe  C^a.),  12  (f.) 

Koalda  Daagya,  Begging-Song  (ECi.),  225,  226, 
235,  547. 

Koianimptiwa,  H.  contributor,  484,  508,  561. 

Korosta  Katzina  Song  (H.),  see  Korosta  Kat- 
zina  Tawi. 


f5671 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE   INDIANS'   BOOK 


Korosta  Katrina  Tawi,  Korosta  Katzina  Song 

(H.),  484,  508,  559. 
Ksiwhambeh,    caltore    hero    of    the    Eastern 

Algonqujns  (Wa.).   12. 
Koloscap  (Wa.),  12  (f.). 
Kurahus,  Pa.  priests,  99. 
Ktiwanyisnim,  H.  contributor,  488,  526,  561. 
Kwakiatls,  297. 
"  Kwe-hiu-wha-nj-ho,"  Maliseet  greeting  CWa.), 

9. 

L 

La  Flesche,  Francis,  xxii.;  32  (f.),  39  (f.). 
La-ga-ka-nan-shke,  mythic  monster  (Wi.),  251, 

252. 
Laguna,  461. 

Lahpa,  H.  contributor,  483,  505,  561. 
Lake  Indians,  description  of  singing  of,  xxvii. 
Lakota,  synonyme  for  Dakota,  37. 
Lance  (Pa.),  J 14. 

Society,  men  of  (Pa.),  113. 

Warriors  (Pa.),  114. 

Landry,  S.  F.,  163  (f.). 

Lavender,  Ap.  contributor,  328,  561. 

Rivers,  Ap.  contributor,  see  GumancIiiS. 

Lcne  Tawi,  Hute-Song  (H.),  489,  529,  560. 
Leptahnit,  Wa.  word  for  lieutenant-chief,  7. 
Lcsa-Kipiiiru,  Young  Chief,  Pa.  chief,  contrib- 
utor, 109,  113,  116,  121,  561. 

Letakots-Lesa,  Eagle  Chief,  Pa.  chief,  contrib- 
utor, 96,  98,  J04,  112,  113,  114,  117,  124, 
131,  139,  561. 

Leupp,  Hon.  Francis  E.,  Commissioner  of  Ind- 
ian Affairs,  xxxiii. 

Lightning  Youth,  mythic  personage  (N.).  366, 
367.  * 

Little  Buffalo  Bull  (C),  see  Hotowasu. 

Hare,    mythic    personage    (Wi.),    see 

Wash-ching-geka. 

Horse  (D.),  see  Tasunke-Ciqala. 

Man,  mythic  personage  (Kw.),  301. 

'Waters  (N.),  358. 

Lololomai,  H.  chief,  contributor,  474,  475,  476, 
477,  479,  490,  494,  495,  561. 

Lololomai's  Prayer  (H.),  490. 

Love-Song  (Wi.),  see  Wunk-hi  Na-wan. 

Love  Songs  (D.),  Wio^te  Olowan. 

Lukitawika  -  wari.  Rider  -  Around  -  the  -  Great- 
Heaven-Domed-Lodge,  Pa.  contributor,  J 11, 
129,  561. 

Lullabies  (Ki.),  see  Okum  Daagya. 

Lullaby  (C),  see  Meshivotzi  No-otz. 

(Ar.),  see  Nakahu  Naad. 

(H.),  see  Pawach  Tawi. 

M 

MacAa-Mahaiyu,  The  Great  Mystery  (C),  J 5 J, 

159. 
Magpie  (C),  see  Mowihaiz. 
Mahoeva    No-otz,    Buffalo-Dance    Song    (C), 

152,    168. 
MaKpiya  -  Tatanka,   Sky  Bull,  D.  contributor, 

59,  89,  56 J. 
Maiden-plants,  see  Corn-maidens. 


[568] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Male-Rain  (N.),  365,  368. 

Maliseet,  a  tribe  of  the  Wabanakis,  3. 

Dance-Song  (Wa.),  10,  23,  535. 

Love-Song  (Wa.),  12,  J3,  27,  535. 

Mallory,  James  (Wi.),  see  Wa-che-li-man-iga. 
Man-cho-sep-ka,  Black  Bear,  Wi.  scout,  259. 
Ma-o-na,  The  Earth-Maker,  Wi.  Supreme  Being, 

244,  253,  254,  262,  263,  268,  548. 
Maricopas,  one  of  the  Yuma  tribes,  339. 
Marriage  customs  (Wa.),   10. 
Masahongva,   H.    contributor,   485,   487,  517, 

523,  561. 
Masaveimah,  H.  contributor,  489,  529,  561. 
Masks,  among  the  Zunis,  430  (f.). 

,  ceremonial  (Kw.),  301,  302;  (Ac),  447. 

,  Katzina  (H.),  482,  483. 

Mata  No-otz,  Song  of  the  Mescal  Rite  (C),  J  64, 

188,  J90,  192. 
Matoisto-Nafcipin,  Bear-Arm-Necklace,  D.  con- 
tributor, 50,  71,561. 
Mato-Nazin,  Standing  Bear,  D.  contributor,  60, 

561. 
Mato-Wanfcantuya,  High  Bear,  D.  contributor, 

59,  89,  561. 
Matthews,  Dr.  Washington,  347  (f.),  35J,  359 

(f.),  366  (f.). 
Maza  Blaska,  Flat  Iron,  D.  chief,  contributor, 

38,  58,  88,  561. 
Mead,  Frank  (M.),  329. 
"  Medicine,"  (D.),  32. 

ceremony  (Wi.),  255. 

Man  (PI.),  32,  33;  Dakota  Title-page, 

facing  p.  34;  (D.),  44,  49;  (C),  158;  (Wi.), 
255,  256;  (Pi.),  314;  (Ap.),  324;  (N.),  365, 
366,  367;  see  also  Holy  Man. 

" Religion  "   (Wi.).  255. 

Song   (Wa.),  see   Penobscot   Medicine- 

(D.),  see  Wakan  Olowari. 

SC),  see  Nai  No-otz. 
Wi.),  see  Mun-kun  Na-wan. 

(Pi.)»  see  Huhwuhli  Nieh. 

(Ap.),  324,  325,  55J. 

(M.),  see  Samadia-Suan. 

(S.)    449. 

Medicine-Water  (L.),  451. 

Mehchichiket,  Wa.  word  for  lieutenant-chief, 
7. 

Mescal  button  (C),  162,  163,  165. 

Religion  (C),  162;  (Ki.),  223. 

Meshivotzi  No-otz,  Baby-Song  (Lullaby)  (C). 
J60,  I8J,  545. 

Metates  (Z.),  429. 

Mice,  see  Mouse. 

Micmac,  a  tribe  of  the  Wabanakis,  3. 

Milky  Way  (Pa.),  99;  see  also  Tau-muk. 

Missionaries,  Roman  Catholic,  succoring  wound- 
ed Indians  (D.),  43. 

MocAta- Wontz-tz,  Starving  Elk,  C.  contrib- 
utor, J  58,  561. 

Mocking-bird  (Y.),'340,  341. 

Mojave- Apaches,  329. 

Mojaves,  one  of  the  Yuma  tribes,  339. 

Mokis,  see  Hopis. 

Moon  (Pa.),  94;  (C),  151,  156;  (Pi.),  316, 


Song. 


INDEX 


Mooney,  James,  41  (f.),  535. 

Moose  (Wa.),  IJ,  12. 

Moqui,  363. 

Moquis,  see  Hopis. 

Morning  Song  (C.),  see  Hohiotsitsi  No-otz. 

-^F^iSr^' '''  ''•  ''• '°°' '''-  '°2' 

Qan  (Pa.),  99,  100. 

Mother-Corn  (Pa.),  97  (f.),  J03,  107,  108. 
Earth  (N.),  372. 

Moon  (Pa.),  J 10,  116. 

Mountain  Lion,  mythic  Star  Beast  (Pa.),  lOI. 
Song  (N.),  see  XHicM.  Biyia. 

Songs  (N.),  see  Dsic^I  Biyin. 

Mountains,  sacred  (N.),  see  Sacred  Mountains. 
Mouse,  Mice  (Wi.),  253;  (Kw.),  300,  301. 
Howihaiz,    Magpie,    C   contributor,    J  64,    188, 

192,  56 J. 
Mun-kun  Na-wan,  Holy  Song  (Medicine-Song) 

CWi.),  254,  255,  256,  270,  274,  548,  549. 
Murie,  James  R.  (Pa.),  see  Sakuruta. 
Music,  Indian,  see  Indian  Music. 
Muyingwa,  H.  deity,  479. 
Mystery-power  (D.),  39,  40. 

N 

Nabilase,  Jessie  Sage,  Ar.  contributor,  201,  211, 

561. 
Naestsan  Biyin,  Song  of  the  Earth  (Hozhonji 

Song)  (N.),  371,  372,  417,  556. 
Nagi,  D.  word  for  soul,  6 J. 
Nahios-si,  Three  Fingers,  C.  chief,  contributor, 

156,  157,  159,  160,  178,  179,  180,561. 
Nai  No-otz,  Song  of  Healing   (Medicine-Song) 

(C),  159,  160,  179,  544. 
Nafcahu  Naad,  Lullaby  (Ar.),  201,  21  J,  545. 
Nakos,  Sage,   Ar.  chief,  contributor,  199,  200, 

204,  206,  561. 
Naskan,  beautiful  woven  blankets  (N.),  361. 
Navajos,  347;  singing  of,  xxviii. 
Nawadek,  Susie  Sage,  Ar.  contributor,  201,  2(1, 

561. 
Naye-e  Sin,  War-Song  (N.),  362,  363,  393,  554. 
Nayenezrani,  N.  deity,  J03  (f.),  349,  359,  362. 
Nek-hu-wi-ka,  South  Wind,  Jacob  Russell,  Wi. 

contributor,  244,  254,  265,  270,  561. 
Nicolar,  Joseph,  Wa.  contributor,  4,  561. 
Niltshi,  The  Wind,  N.  personification,  359. 
NoJmihigon,  Wa.  word  for  clown,  7,  8. 
Nowell,  Charles  James  (Kw.),  see  Klalish. 
N'SkawewintuagunuI,  Songs  of  Greeting  (Wa.), 

7;  (for  music,  see  Penobscot  Song  of  Greeting, 

Passamaquoddy  Song  of  Greeting). 
Nu-u-sinim  No-otz,  Hand-Game  Songs  (C),  161, 

182,  183,  J84,  185,  J86,  187. 


Ockaya,   Corn-Grinding  Songs   (Z.),   430,  43 J, 

433,  435,  437,  556,  557. 
Offering,  ceremony  (C),   151. 
Ogallalla,  members   of  the  band,  contributors 

of  D.  songs,  38. 
Okicize  Olowan,  War-Song  (D.),  59,  60,  89,  541. 


Oktm  Daagya,  Lullabies  (Ki.),  228,  229,  238, 

Old  Chief's  Song  (Z.),  see  Thiah  Hewe. 

Tale  (C),  158. 

Olowan,  Song  (D.),  55,  79,  540. 
Omaha  Dance  (D.),  55,  56. 

— —  Dance-Songs  (D.),  see  Omaha  Wacipi 

Olowan. 

— — — -  Wacipi  Olowan,  Omaha  Dance -Songs 
(D.),  55,  56,  80,  81,  540. 

One- Above  (Pa.),  see  Tirawa. 

One-On-High  (Ar.),  see  Ichebeniatha. 

One-Who-Never-Died  (M.),  see  Sefcala  Ka- 
amja. 

Oraibi,  H.  village,  474,  483,  490,  494. 

Orani,  possible  derivation  of  (N.),  366  (f.). 

Organizations  of  the  Plains  Indians,  31. 

Otter  (Pa.),  97,  98,  lOI;  (Wi.),  256. 

Owik'uyain,  The  Home -Comer,  Ki.  contrib- 
utor, 223,  228,  236,  238,  239,  561. 

Ohwiwi  No-otz,  Song  of  the  Offering  Ceremony 
(Sun-Dance  Song)  (C),  151,  J66. 


Painted  Desert  (H.),  490. 

Paiute  (D.),  42,  44,  45. 

Pajoka,  Wi.  name  for  Comanche,  260. 

Pani,  synonyme  for  Pawnee,  93. 

Parfleche,  satchel  of  dressed  hide,  xv. 

Passamaquoddy,  a.  tribe  of  the  Wafaanakis,  3. 

Dance-Song  (Wa.),  10,  24,  25,  26,  535, 

Song  of  Greeting  (Wa.),  16. 

Pathway  of  Departed  Spirits,  Pa.  designation 

of  the  Milky  Way,  99. 
"  Pawnee  Shooter,"  a  Wi.  Indian,  258. 
•Pawnees,  93. 

Pellote,  mescal  button  (C),  162. 
Pemmican,  Indian  dish  (D.),  48. 
Penobscot,  a  tribe  of  the  Wabanakis,  3. 

Barter  Dance-Song  (Wa.),  8,  17. 

Dance-Song  Ot^a.),  9,  19. 

Medicine-Song  QWa..),  9,  21. 

Song  of  Greeting  (Wa.),  14,  15. 

War-Dance  Song  (Wa.),  8,   18. 

People  of  Peace,  H.  designation  of  themselves, 

473,  490. 
Peyote  (C),  see  Peflote. 
Pimas,  313. 
"  Pitistchi  "  (N.),  361. 
Plains  Indians,  31,  41,  42,  93,  94;  singing  of, 

xxviii. 
Plum-tree,  as  symbol  (Ki.),  226. 
Pony  (D.),  see  Horse. 

Potine,  white  Beaver,  Ki.  contributor,  225, 561. 
Prayer,  Prayers,  Praying,  xxiii.,  xxiv.;   (PI.), 

33;  (D.),  39;  (Pa.),  113;  (C),  149,  151,  J52, 

154,  J6I,  162;  (N.),  362,  364,  369;  (H.),  490, 

49 J,  493,  494. 
Prayer  by  the  Great  Waters  (N.),  364. 
Prayer-Sticks   (H.),  xxiii.,  492. 
Prince,  Dr.  J.  Dynely,  535. 
Prophet,  Paiute,  of  the  Spirit-Dance  Religion 

(D.),   42,   44,   45;    (Pa.),    Ul   (f.);   see   also 

Father. 


[5691 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'    BOOK 


Paeblo,  Pueblos  (Po.),  425,  426;  (Z.),  429;  (S.). 

447;  (L.),  461;  (H.),  473,  533. 
Pueblo  Indians,  rhythmical  peculiarity  of  music, 

vii.;  singing,  xxviii.;  hunting,  369  (f.). 

425,  426,  533. 

Puva,  H.  word  for  sleep,  480. 

Pawtfch  Tawi,  Luflafay  (H.),  480,  498,  558.' 


Rabbit-skin,  robes  of,  worn  by  Paiutes  (D.), 

45. 
Rain,  male  and  female  (N.),  365,  368. 
Rainbow  (N.),  352,  354,  356,  367;  (Z.),  43J, 

432.  ' 

Rainbow- Youth  (Z.),  431,  432, 
Rain-Chant  (N.),  see  Tro  Hatal. 

Makers  (Z.),  430. 

Mountain  (N.),  365. 

that-Stands  (H.),  479. 

Youth  (N.),  365. 

Rains-Enfolded,  a  Sacred  Bundle  (Pa.),  J 07. 
Rattle  (Wa.),  9;  (D.),  50;  (C),  164,  165;  (H.), 

482. 
Raven  (Kw.),  299,  300,  301,  302. 
Red  Fox  (C),  152,  153. 
Fox  Society  (C),  152. 

Shields,  a  society  (C),  152. 

Shields'  Dance  (C),  152. 

Shields  Society  (C),  152. 

Star,  mythic  Star  Breast  (Pa.),  10 1. 

Religion  (D.),  41,  42;  (Pa.),  93;  (C),  162,  163, 

164;  (Ar.),  198. 
Reptiles,  see  Snake,  Turtle. 
Rescuer  (Pa.),  III. 
Reservation,  system,  xxxiii.;  Pine  Ridge,  38; 

Rosebud,   38,   45;   Cheyenne   and   Arapaho,  • 

197;  Apache,  323;  Yuma,  339,  340  (f.). 
Rider-Around-the-Great-Heaven-Domed-Lodge 

(Pa.),  see  Lukitawika-wari. 
Ripener,  an  insect  (N.),  371. 
Rite,  Rites  (D.),  42,  6J;  (C),  J62,  163;  (Ki.), 

228;  (N.),  348;  (H.),  489. 
"  River  Indians  "  (Y.),  339. 
Roosevelt,  Theodore,  xix,  329,  476  (f.). 
Rosebud  reservation  (D.),  38,  45. 
Running  Whirlwind  (Ar.),  202. 


Sn-n  nsirdi,  N.  prayer-phrase,  372,  552. 
Sacred  Bow  (C),  156,  157. 

Bundles  (Pa.),  99,  100,  107. 

corn-meat  (N.),  367. 

Mountains  (N.),  351. 

Sagam,  Wa.  word  for  chief,  7. 
Sage,  Ar.  chief,  see  Nakos. 

Jessie  (Ar.),  see  Nabilase. 

Susie  (Ar.),  see  Nawadek. 

Sah-mount,  Samon,  Ki.  contributor,  225,  232, 

561. 
Sakipiriru,  Young  Dog  Dance-Song  (Pa.),  J 12, 

131,  543. 
Sakuruta,  Coming   Sun,  James  R.  Murie,  Pa. 

contributor,  93  (f.),  99,  Cradle-Board  for  the 


Morning-Star  Clan,  facing  p.  102;  (07,  1 10, 
115,  120,  122,  126,561. 
Salis,  John  (Wa.),  see  Asawhis. 
Samadia-Suan  Medicine-Song  (M.),  336,  337. 
Samon  (Ki.),  see  Sah-mount. 
Sampson,  Peter  (Wi.),  see  Chash-chunk-a. 
Sand-pictures   (N.),   367. 
San  Juan,  447. 
Schindler,  Kurt,  vii. 

Sekala  Ka-amja,   Son  of  God,  The-One-Who- 
Never-Died,  mythic  personage  (M.),  331. 

Seris,  one  of  the  Yuma  tribes,  339. 

Seven  cities  of  Cibola,  identical  with  Z.  habi- 
tations, 429. 

Shawnee,  Maud  (Ar.),  see  Wageoh. 

She-Who-Changeth  (N.),  see  Estsan-Natlehi. 

Shoko  Oti'ikwe,  Corn-Dance  Song  (Z.),  432,  440, 
557. 

"  Short  Buffalo  Bull  "   (D.),  44. 

Short  Bull  (D.),  see  Tatanka-Ptecila. 

Bull's  Narrative  (D.),  45. 

Shoshone  group,  Ki.  language  resembles  that 
of,  221. 

Shoshones,  Northern  Arapahos  affiliated  with, 
J97. 

Shower-maidens  (H.),  486,  487. 

Siouan  family,  Wi.  a  branch  of,  243. 

Sioux  (D.),  37. 

Sisnajinni,  N.  sacred  mountain,  351,  353,  354, 
355,  356,  372,  552. 

Sfcar-mu-nal,  corn  (Wa.),  6. 

Skidi  band.  Pa.  songs  spelled  according  to  the 
pronunciation  of,  93. 

Sfcirifci,  Coyote  Warrior-Song  (Pa.),  Ill,  112, 
129,  542. 

Sky  Bull  (D.),  see  MaKpiya-Tatanka. 

Slayer  of  the  Anaye  (N.),  see  Nayenezrani. 

S'moganis,  Wa.  word  for  head  -  warrior,  or 
captain,  7. 

Smoking,  ceremonial,  xxiii.;  (D.),  53. 

Snake  (M.),  332. 

Snake  ceremony  (H.),  489. 

Societies  (PI.),  31;  compare  also  Chiefs'  So- 
ciety, Fox  Men,  Dog  Soldiers,  Sufika  Olowan, 
Tasu/tke-ska  Olowan,  Tokala  Olowarj,  Fox 
Society,  White-horse  Society,  Bear  Society, 
Tawi'  Kuruks,  Dog  Society,  Lance  Society, 
Kitzic/ita,  Red  Shields  Society,  Mahoeva  No- 
otz,  WucAtchse  Etan  No-otz,  Red  Fox  So- 
ciety, Hinimiyotzu,  HichaSc/iuthi,  Club  So- 
ciety, Gray  Flute  Society. 

Somurturgigu-a,  M.  contributor,  337,  561. 

Son  of  God  (M.),  see  Sekala  Ka-amja. 

Song,  in  Indian  life,  xxii.,  xxiv.;  with  the 
Dakotas,  60;  with  the  Kwakiutls,  298;  with 
the  Pimas,  313,  314;  with  the  Navajos,  348, 
349,  350;  with  the  Hopis,  473,  475,  481,  483, 
484. 

(D.),  see  Olowan. 

from  the  Ceremony  of  the  Mountain- 
Chant  (N.),  see  DsicMyidje  Hatal. 

of  Healing  (Medicine  Song)  (C),  see  Nai 

No-otz. 

Rejoicing  and  Thanksgiving  (Pa.),  see 

Kisaka. 


[5701 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


INDEX 


(Ki.), 


Tawi' 


Ceremony 
(Pa.), 

(Z.),   see  Thiah 

(C),   see 

Mahoeva 

(Ar.),  see 


Song  of  the    Antelope 

T'a'pfco  Daagya. 
Bear     Society 

Kuruks. 
Blue-Corn  Dance 

Hewe. 
Bow-and-Arrow    Society 

Honimiyotzu. 
Buffalo-Dance   (C), 

No-otz. 
Buffalo-Hide  Ceremony 

Hasse-hi  Naad. 
Qub    Society    (Ar.),    see    Hichaa- 

cAuthi.  I 

Dog-Feast  (D.),  see  Sunfca  Olowan. 

Dog  Society  (D. ),  see  SunfcaOIowan. 

Eartli   (Hozhonji  Song)   (N.),  see 

Naestsan  Biyin. 
Hare   (Wi.),  see  Wash-ching-geka 

Na-wa'  Ni-na. 
Hogans  (Hozhonji  Song)  (N.),  see 

Hogan  Biyin. 

Hopi  Chief  (H.),  474. 

Horse  (N.),  see  Hlin  Biyin. 

Lance  Ceremony    (Pa.),    see   Kit- 


zichta. 
Naad. 


Mescal  Rite  (Ar.),  see  HacAayacAu        535. 


(Ki.),   133. 


Hocfcing-faird  (Y.),  see  Arowp. 

Offering  Ceremony  (C),  see  Ohwiwi 

No-otz. 

Rain-Chant  (Nl),  see  Tro  Hatal. 

Red  Fox  Society  (C),  see  Wtxch- 

tchse  Etan  No-otz. 
Seer  (D.),  see  Wicaia-Atawan  OIo- 

wan. 
Spirit-Dance    (Ghost-Dance   Song) 

(Ax.),  see  Kainawad  Naad. 

Sun  (Wi.),  see  Wi-Ia  Na-wa'  Ni-na. 

Totem-Pole  (Kw.),  see  Klawulac^a. 

White -Horse    Society    (D.),     see 

Ta&unke-ska  Olowan. 

—  Wolf  (D.),  54. 

World  (Pi.),  see  Chuhwuht. 

Victory  (C),  see  Aotzi  No-otz. 

sung  by  Geronimo  (Ap.),  327. 

to  the  Earth-Maker  (Wi.),  see  Ma-o-na. 

Songs,  contributing  of,  xxi.,  xxii.,  xxiii.;  re- 
cording of,  xxii.;  sacred  to  occasions,  xxii.; 
Pa.  stanzas  in,  100  (f.). 

of  Greeting  (Wa.),  see  N'Skawewintua- 

gunul. 

Loneliness  (Wa.),  12. 

the  Dakotas,  60.  _  ,    ,    ->, 

Fox  Society  (D.),  see  Tokala  Olo- 
wan. 

L-usfca  (Pa.),  see  Iruska. 

Spirit-Dance  (Ghost-Dance  Songs) 

(D.),  see  Wanagi  Wacipi  Olowan. 

Spirit-Dance  (Ghost-Dance  Songs) 

(Pa.),  see  Kehare  Katzaru. 

-—  —  Victory  (C),  154. 

«  Sons  of  the  River  "  (Y.),  339. 

Sorrel  Horse  (D.),  see  Ta4unke-H«n4a. 

36 


South  Wind  (Wi.),  see  Nek-hu-wi-ka. 

Southern  Star  (Pa.),  99  (f.). 

Spanish  explorers  (Pu.),  425. 

Spiders  (Wi.),  247. 

Spirit,  Spirits  (PL),  31;  (D.),  39,  46,  53,  61,  62? 
(C),  161,  J65;  (At.),  200,  202;  (Wi.),  244, 
246,  253,  254,  262,  263;  (Ap.),  324;  (N.),  353; 
compare  also  Dream,  Trance,  Vision. 

animal  (PI.),  31. 

camp.  Spirit-encampment  (D.),  45,  46. 

companions  (D.),  46. 

Dance    (D.),  44,   48;     (Ar.),    198,    200; 

(Ki.),  223;  see  also  (D.)  History  of  the  Spirit- 
Dance,  Wanagi  Wacipi  Olowan. 

Land  (D.),  45. 

man  (£>.),  45. 

world  (D.),  42,  43,  48;  (Ar.),  200. 

Standing  Bear  (D.),  see  Mato-Nazin. 
Standing  Rain,  Pa.  name  for  maiden,  104. 
Star,  a  D.  Indian,  see  Wicapi. 

of  Morning  (Pa.),  1 16. 

Evening  (Pa.),   116. 

Starving  Elk  (C),  see  MocAta-Wontz-tz. 
"  Step,"  Pa.  designation  of  stanza,  100  (f.). 
Stevenson,  James  (N.),  347  (f.),  365. 

Matilda  Cox  (Z.),  429,  430;  (H.),  493; 


Stories  of  Wak-chung-kaka  (Wi.),  245. 
and  Wash-ching-geka 

(Wi.),  244. 

Wash-ching-geka  (Wi.),  247. 

Story  of  Gomoidema  Pokoma-Kiaka  (M.),  330. 

the  First  Mother  (Wa.),  4. 

Moose  (Wa.),  12. 

Two  Brothers  (N.),  359. 

Wafciash   and   the   First   Totem-Pole 

(Kw.),  299;  for  stories,  compare  also  (D.), 

Holy   Story;   (D.),   Short  Bull's  Narrative; 

(Pa.),  Morning  Star  and  the  Evening  Star; 

(C),  Old  Tale;  (Wi.),  True  Story;  also  stories 

connected  with  the  various  songs,  passim. 
Sun  (Pa.),  94,  96,  103;  (C),  151,  J65;  (Ar.), 

198;  (Wi.),  250;  (Pi.),  3J6;  (M.),  33J;  (Pu.), 

426;  (H.),  493. 
Sun-Dance  (C),  J5I;  (Ar.),  198. 

Song  (C),  J5I;  (Ar.),  198. 

Sun-Down-Shining  (H.),  see  Tawafcwaptiwa. 

Father,  Z.  cfeity,  493  (f.). 

Sungmanitu  Olowan,  Wolf  Song  (D.),  54,  78. 
Sunka  Olowan,  Song  of  the  Dog-Feast  (D.), 

58,  59,  88,  541. 
,  Song  of  the  Dog  Society  (D.), 

50,  69. 
Supreme  Being  (PI.),  32;  (C),  154. 
Surly  Walker  (Wi.),  see  Wa-che-Ii-man-iga. 
Swaflow  (N.),  365,  366;  (Z.),  431. 
Sweat-Lodge  (D.),  52. 
Swinging-Song  (C),  see  Wawahi  No-otz. 
Symbolism   of   color  (N.),  see   subject-matter 

on  pages  351,  371. 


Talaskwaptiwa  (H.),  491,  492,  493. 
Tanoan  stock,  people  of  (S.),  447. 

[57J] 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


THE    INDIANS'    BOOK 


T'Spfc'o  Daagya,  Song  of  the  Antelope  Cere- 
mony (Ki.).  226,  228,  236,  547. 

Taiunfce  -  Ciqala,  Little  Horse,  D.  contributor, 
55,  57,  79,  80,  561. 

Tasanfce-Hinas,  Sorrel  Horse,  D.  contributor, 
59,  89,  561. 

Tasunke-Hinto,  Blue  Horse,  D.  chief,  contrib- 
utor, 54,  78,  561. 

Tasunfce-Ska  Olowan,  Song  of  the  White-Horse 
Society  (D.),  50,  71,  537. 

Tatanka-Hinapawr,  Buffalo-Appearing,  D.  con- 
tributor, 57,  561. 

Tatanka  -  Ptecila,  Short  Bull,  D.  contributor, 
Dakota  Title-page,  facing  p.  34;  44,  47,  49, 
63,  66,  67,  68,  69,  561. 

Tau-muk,  the  Milky  "Way  (Pi.),  316. 

Tawakwaptiwa,  H.  contributor,  480,  500,  56 J. 

Tawi'  Kuruks,  Song  of  the  Bear  Society  (Pa.), 
104,  105,  106,  IJ7,  541. 

, (Pa.), 

107,  108,  120,  542. 

T'e-ne-t'e,  Eagle  Qiief,  Ki.  chief,  contributor, 
224,  226,  229,  231,  236,  240,  56t. 

"  The  Red  Man,"  book  of  Penobscot  legends 
CWa.),  4. 

Thiah  Hewe,  Song  of  the  Blue-Corn  Dance  (Z.), 
432,  442,  557. 

Thought,  Indians'  belief  in  the  power  of  (Pa.), 
102-  (f.). 

Three  Fingers  (C),  see  Nahios-si. 

Thunder-Bird  (Wi.),  254,  298. 

Timfaer-Men,  wood-rats  (C),  160. 

Tipi,  D.  word  for  the  native  dwelling  of  the 
Plains  Indians,  39. 

Tirawa,  Atius  Tirawa,  Pa.  Supreme  Being,  94, 
96,  97,  98,  99,  J04,  107,  1 10,  I J  I,  112,  113, 
115. 

Tirirak-tawirus  (Pa.),  III. 

Tobacco  (Wa.),  6;  (Wi.),  246,  262. 

Tofaajischini,  N.  deity,  359. 

Tokala  Olowan,  Song  of  the  Fox  Society  (D.), 
5 J,  73,  537. 

,  Songs  of  the  Fox  Society  (D.), 

51. 

Tofcala  Wacipi  Olowan,  Dance-Song  of  the  Fox 
Society  (D.),  51,  75,  537. 

Tortoise,  mythic  personage  (Wi.),  see  Ke- 
chong-geka. 

Totem-Pole  (Kw.),  298;  see  also  Story  of 
Vafciash  and  the  First  Totem-Pole. 

To'yallanne,  sacred  mountain  (Z.),  429,  430. 

Trance  (D.),  42,  43,  45,  48;  (Pa.),  112;  com- 
pare also.  Dream,  Spirit,  Vision. 

Translations,  the  making  of,  xxiv.,  xxv.;  in- 
terlinear, 535. 

Tro  Hatal,  Song  of  the  Rain-Chant  (N.),  365, 
399,  555. 

True  Story  (Wi.),  262. 

TsicAnaodicftli,  mythic  mountain  (N.),  351. 

Tsilc/ifce  Digini,  The  Holy  Youth,  mythic  per- 
sonage (N.),  366. 

Tsodsic/il,  sacred  mountain  (N.),  351,  353,  372, 
552. 

Tuari,  L.  contributor,  463,  469,  561. 

Tuari's  Song  (L.),  463,  469. 


Turquoise  Horse  of  Johano-ai  (N.),  362. 

Maiden,    mythic    personage    (N.),   351, 

360. 

Youth,  mythic  personage  (N.),  351. 

Turtle,  as  symbol  of  the  Earth  (Ar.),  200. 

Lake,  mythic  lake  (Ar.),  200. 

Twilight  Youth,  mythic  personage  (N.),  351. 

U 

Utar-Mur-wa-yeh,  tobacco  (Wa.),  6. 
Ute  (N.),  363. 

V 

Very-Good  (H.),  see  Lololomai. 

Victory  Song  (Wi.),  see  Wak-je  Na-wan. 

Virgin  corn  (H.),  see  Corn-maidens. 

Visak-Vo-o-yim,  Hovering  Hawk,  Pi.  contrib- 
utor, 315,  318,  561. 

Vision,  Visions  (D.),  43,  45,  46,  49,  60,  61 ;  (Pa.), 
96;  (C),  159,  162,  164;  (Wi.),  254;  compare 
also.  Dream,  Spirit,  Trance. 

Voth,  Rev.  H.  R.  (H.),  478,  535. 

W 

Waatina  Bichut,  Black  Shirt,  Ar.  contributor, 
Arapaho  Title-page,  facing  p.  194;  561. 

Wabanakis,  3. 

Waces,  Pawnees  allied  to,  93. 

Wa-che-li-man-iga,  Surly  Walker,  James  Mal- 
lory,  Wi.  contributor,  259,  282,  284,  56(. 

Wa-cho-pi-ni-Shi-shik,  an  evil  spirit  (Wi.),  244. 

Wageoh,  Maud  Shawnee,  Ar.  contributor,  201, 
211,561. 

Wa-gi-tt'eh  Na-wan,  Wailing-Song  (Wi.),  260, 
288,  550. 

Wai-fcun,  Fable  (Wi.),  253,  266,  548. 

Wailing-Song  (Wi.),  see  Wa-gi-tt'eh. 

Wakarz  (D.),  32,  6J. 

Wafcan  Olowan,  Holy  Song  (D.),  52,  77,  537, 
538,  539. 

Wakan-Tanka,  D.  Supreme  Being,  32,  38,  39, 
40,  60,  61,  62. 

Wafcashan,  linguistic  branch  of  Northwest 
coast  Indians,  297. 

Wak-chung-kaka,  mythic  personage  (Wi.), 
244,  245,  246. 

Wakiash,  mythic  Kw.  chief,  see  Story  of 
Wakiash  and  the  First  Totem-Pole. 

Wak-je  Na-wan,  Victory  Song  (Wi.),  260,  298, 
550. 

Walapais,  one  of  the  Yuma  tribes,  339. 

Wambli-Waite,  Good -Eagle,  D.  contributor, 
52,  77,  561. 

Wampum,  sending  of,  in  token  of  offer  of  mar- 
riage (Wa.),  9. 

Wanagi  Wacipi  Olowan,  Songs  of  the  Spirit- 
Dance  (Ghost-Dance  Songs)  (D.),  47,  48,  63, 
66,  67,  536. 

War-Dance  of  the  Irtisfca  (Pa.),  see  Iruska. 

War-Path  (C),  154. 

Song  (Ki.),  see  Gwo  Daagya. 

War-Song  (D.),  see  Okicize  Olowan. 

(N.),  see  Naye-e  Sin. 


[572] 

Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


INDEX 


War-Songs  (C),   154. 

Warrior-Songs  (Wi.),  see  He-Iush-ka  Na-wart. 

Wash-ching-ge  (Wi.),  250. 

Wash-chlng-geka,  mythic  personage  (Wi.),  247, 

253. 
Wash-ching-geka    Nawa'   Nina,    Song    of    the 

Hare  (Wi.),  249,  264,  548. 
Wave  (Wi.),  see  Chash-chunk-a. 
Wawahi  No-otz,  Swinging-Song  (C),  160,  180, 

545. 
Wa-2i-chank,  mythic  tree  (Wi.),  252. 
Webster,  Cappie  (Ar.),  see  Gelbint. 
West  Wind  (D.),  54. 
Whe-e-yoni-sin,  sorcerous  songs  of  a  foe  (N.). 

362. 
White  Beaver  (Ki.),  see  Potine. 

Bone  (D.),  see  Htihuseca-ska. 

Buffalo  Woman  (C),  see  Wowesta. 

Cap  (C),  see  Wupcha-e. 

Horn  (Ar.),  202. 

Horse  Society  (D.),  61. 

White-Shell-Woman  (N.),  see  Yolkai-Estsan. 
White  Star,  mythic  Star  Beast  (Pa.),  lOI. 

Star    Woman,    Pa.    designation    of    the 

Evening  Star,  99. 

Wicapi,  Star,  D.  contributor,  51,  73,  75,  561. 
Wicapi-Wakan,  Holy  Star,  Julia  Yellow-Hair, 

D.  contributor,  57,  86,  561. 
Wicasa-Atawan  Olowan,  Song  of  the  Seer  (D.), 

49,  68,  536. 
Wicasa-Wakan,  Holy  Man  (D.),  32. 
Wichitas,  Pawnees  allied  to,  93. 
Wihu-Hwaihu-O-Usz  (C),  see  Hiamovi. 
Wihunahe,  Chief  Woman  C.  contributor,  xv., 

160,  I8(,  561. 
Wi-Ia  Na-wa'  Ni-na,   Song  of  the  San   (Wi.), 

250  265   548. 
Wild-Cat,  mythic  Star  Beast  (Pa.),  lOI. 
Wild-cherry  tree,  as  symbol  (Ki.),  226. 
Wind  (N.),  see  Niltshi. 
Wind-Song    (Medicine-Song)    (Pi.),    see    Huh- 

wuhli  Nieh. 
Wind-Songs  (Ki.),  see  Gomda  Daagya. 
Winnebagos,  243. 
Wioste  Olowan,  Love-Songs  (D.),  56,  57,  58, 

82,  83,  84,  85,  86,  540,  541. 
Wolf,  Wolves  (D.),  54;  (Pa.),  93?  (C),  153,  155 

(Ar.),  199. 

,  mythic  Star  Beast  (Pa.),  lOI. 

'  Wolf,"  name  for  Pawnees,^3. 


Wolf  Song,  or  Comanche-Song  (Ar.),  see  Hache- 

hi  Naad. 
Woman's  Song  of  Rejoicing  (Pa.),  see  Kisaka. 
Wonder-Water  (L.),  461,  462. 
Wooden  Lance  (Ki.),  see  Apiatan. 
Wood-rats  (C),  160.  . 
Wopila  Olowan,  Song  of  Thanksgiving   (D.), 

reference,  59. 
World,  Worlds  (D.),  46;  (Ar.),  200;  (Wi.),  256, 

262;  (Kw.),  300;  (Pi.),  314,  315,  316;  (M.), 

330;  (N.),  35J,  371;  (Z.),  430;  (H.),  494,  533. 
World-Quarter  Gods,  mythic  Star  Beasts  (Pa.). 

lOI,  103. 
Wounded  Knee,  battle  of  (D.),  43. 
Wowesta,  White  Buffalo  Woman,   C.  contrib- 
utor. Things  of  the  Olden  Time,  frontispiece; 

^56). 
WucAtchse  Etan  No-otz,  Song  of  the  Red  Fox 

Society  (C),  152,  153,  169,  544. 
Wuh-te-hufc,  mythic  personage  (Wi.),  244. 
Wunk-hi  Na-wan,  Love-Song  (Wi.),  261,  262, 

29J,  292,  550. 
Wupcha-e,  Wliite  Cap,  C  contributor,  190,  561. 
Wowachim-Chant  (H.),  see  Wffwachim  Tawi. 
Wawuchim  Tawi,  W«wachim-Chant  (H.),  479, 

495,  558. 
Wwwuchim-yungya  (H.),  477  (f.). 


Yafca-Hano  Gatzina  Yoni,  Corn-People  Gat- 
zina  Songs  (Ac),  447,  451,  453,  456. 

"  Yebitshai  Dance  "  (N.),  see  Kledzhi  Hatal. 

Yellow-Hair,  D.  chief,  58,  259,  260. 

-Hair,  Julia  (D.),  see  Wicapi-Wakan. 

Yellow  Line,  H.  designation  of  the  dawn,  486, 
493. 

Star,  mythic  Star  Beast  (Pa.),  lOI. 

Yolkai-Estsan,  N.  deity,  359. 

Young  Chief  (Pa.),  see  Lesa-Kipiliru. 

Dog  Dance-Song  (Pa.),  see  Sakipiriru. 

Eagle  (L.),  see  Tuari. 

Youth  of  Cannel  Coal,  mytJiic  personage  (N.), 
351. 

Yumas,  339,  340. 

Yusun,  Ap.  Supreme  Being,  324. 


Wolf-Robe  (C),  see  Honihi-Wotoma. 
Wolf  Song  (D.),  see  Sangmanita  Olowan. 


Zintkala  Maza,  Iron  Bird,  D.  contributor,  60, 

561. 
Zuni,  429,  533. 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


ET  OS  recognize  in  all  things  the  value  of  oor  opposites.  Old  age 
seems  justly  to  be  the  summing-time  of  life,  the  only  philosophic 
decade;  yet  should  we  never  forget  the  child  nor  the  child-race  who 
live  so  near  to  God  that  truth  flows  to  them  from  a  still  untainted 
channel.  For  of  such  is  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven.  Do  we  tend  to 
become  a  people  continually  busy  with  the  world's  affairs,  let  us  remember  that 
the  sources  of  spiritual  truth  have  arisen  oftenest  among  the  contemplative  peoples 
of  the  Orient,  and  let  us  then  turn  to  the  contemplative  dark-skinned  natives  of 
our  own  land.  If  not  in  the  hope  and  expectancy  that  are  bom  of  friendship,  at 
least  with  tolerance  and  without  scepticism  let  us  stop  long  enough  to  hear  the 
broken  fragments  of  a  message  which  they  might  have  brought  in  its  entirety  to  all 
their  brethren  in  the  world." — From  Genius  and  PrimUi've  Man. 


+ 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


Digitized  by  Microsoft® 


