.  SSiiiSlS* 


Hilili  ;  \W?- 
'%»»» 


■sppfflp™* 


®»ii;  :  ;  i; 

^ L^* 


I 

A  RCHJEOLOGICAL  AND  ETHNOLOGICAL  PAPERS 

OP  THE 

PEABODY  MUSEUM. 

—  Harvard  University  — 

Vol.  I.  No.  5. 


7 


F 


A  STUDY  OI 


BUREAU  OF  t  i  HhiJuti 
1393 

LI  BRaRY. 


OMAHA  INDIAN  MUSIC 


BY 


ALICE  C.  FLETCHER, 

It.  I 


i-  r  yfol) 


Assistant  in  American  Ethnology,  Peabody  Museum,  and 

HOLDER  OF  THE  THAW  FELLOWSHIP. 

AIDED  BY 

FRANCIS  LA  FLESCHE. 

WITH  A 

REPORT  ON  THE 

STRUCTURAL  PECULIARITIES  OF  THE  MUSIC 


BY 


JOHN  COMFORT  FILLMORE,  A.M. 


CAMBRIDGE,  MASS. 
PEABODY  MUSEUM  OF  AMERICAN 
ARCHAEOLOGY  AND  ETHNOLOGY. 
June,  1893. 


PRINTED  AT 
THE  SALEM  PRESS. 
1893. 


®0 

JHrs.  Jflars  (Copies  Qlljatu, 
rol)ose  unfailing  interest  in  these  researches  l)as  malic 
possible  tl)e  completion  of  tl)e  roork, 
tt)is  monograph  on  ©mal)a  fntiian  Jtlnsic 
is  grateful  lg  itetricatefr. 


EDITORIAL  NOTE. 


In  this  paper  Miss  Fletcher  has  treated  the  subject  of  Indian 
music  in  a  manner  both  novel  and  instructive.  Her  long  residence 
among  the  Indians  and  her  success  in  winning  their  love  and  per¬ 
fect  confidence  have  enabled  her  to  penetrate  the  meaning  of  many 
things  which  to  an  ordinary  observer  of  Indian  life  are  incomprehen¬ 
sible.  She  is  able  to  put  herself  mentally  in  the  Indians’  place 
and  regard  them  and  their  acts  from  their  own  standpoint.  It  is 
this  which  gives  importance  to  all  that  Miss  Fletcher  writes.  She 
describes  the  thoughts  and  acts  of  her  Indian  friends  as  they  would 
describe  them,  while  her  scientific  training  leads  her  to  analytical 
work  and  thence  to  an  understanding  of  the  meaning  of  what  she 
sees  and  hears.  The  present  memoir  is  therefore  to  be  taken  as 
the  work  of  one  who  has  conscientiously  studied  the  subject  and 
after  years  of  patient  investigation  has  presented  it  in  a  form  which 
can  readily  be  comprehended  by  others.  No  doubt  some  critical 
student  of  music  and  of  its  primitive  expressions  will  question 
Miss  Fletcher’s  conclusions,  particularly  her  method  of  presenta¬ 
tion  and  her  views  upon  the  existence  of  harmony ;  but  such  crit¬ 
icism  will  be  shorn  of  its  force  unless  the  critic  lias  made  an  equally 
careful  study  of  the  subject  among  the  people  and  can  show  as 
good  reasons  for  a  different  opinion. 

The  technical  questions  involved  are  so  well  expressed  and  dis- 

O) 


VI 


EDITORIAL  NOTE. 


cussed  by  Professor  Fillmore  in  his  “report”  following  Miss  Fletch¬ 
er’s  paper  that  the  whole  subject  is  now  placed  fairly  before  students 
for  their  consideration. 

On  reading  the  manuscript  of  this  joint  work  of  Miss  Fletcher 
and  Mr.  La  Flesche  and  the  critical  analysis  by  Professor  Fillmore, 
I  became  impressed  with  the  scientific  value  of  the  memoir  and 
consequently  take  pleasure  in  issuing  it  in  the  series  of  Museum 
Papers. 

This  publication,  however,  would  not  have  been  possible  at  pres¬ 
ent  had  it  not  been  for  the  timely  assistance  of  Mrs.  Mary  Copley 
Thaw  who,  in  appreciation  of  Miss  Fletcher  and  her  work,  has 
founded  the  fellowship  which  enables  Miss  Fletcher  to  devote  the 
remainder  of  her  life  to  the  preparation  of  her  Indian  memoirs. 
For  this  act  and  example  ethnologists  will  ever  be  grateful  to  Mrs. 
Thaw. 


F.  W.  Putnam, 

Curator  of  the  Peabody  Museum. 


Cambridge ,  June  17,  1893. 


A  STUDY  OF  OMAHA  INDIAN  MUSIC. 


After  more  than  ten  years  of  constant  study,  during  which  I 
have  had  the  invaluable  aid  of  Mr.  Francis  La  Flesche  and  the 
technical  council  and  assistance  of  Miss  Sarah  Eliot  Newman  and 
Prof.  John  Comfort  Fillmore,  I  no  longer  hesitate  to  present  to 
the  public  the  following  collection  of  Omaha  Indian  Songs,  feeling 
confident  that  therein  is  truthfully  set  forth  in  a  manner  intelligible 
to  members  of  my  own  race  the  Indian’s  mode  of  expressing  emo¬ 
tion  in  musical  forms. 

I  well  remember  my  first  experience  in  listening  to  Indian  music. 
Although  from  habit  as  a  student  I  had  endeavored  to  divest  my¬ 
self  of  preconceived  ideas,  and  to  rise  above  prejudice  and  distaste, 
I  found  it  difficult  to  penetrate  beneath  the  noise  and  hear  what  the 
people  were  trying  to  express.  I  think  I  may  safely  say  that  I 
heard  little  or  nothing  of  Indian  music  the  first  three  or  four  times 
that  I  attended  dances  or  festivals,  beyond  a  screaming  downward 
movement  that  was  gashed  and  torn  by  the  vehemently  beaten  drum. 
The  sound  was  distressing,  and  my  interest  in  this  music  was  not 
aroused  until  I  perceived  that  this  distress  was  peculiarly  my  own, 
every  one  else  was  so  enjoying  himself  (I  was  the  only  one  of  my 
race  present)  that  I  felt  sure  something  was  eluding  my  ears ;  it 
was  not  rational  that  human  beings  should  scream  for  hours,  look¬ 
ing  and  acting  as  did  these  Indians  before  me,  and  the  sounds  they 
made  not  mean  something  more  than  mere  noise.  I  therefore  began 
to  listen  below  this  noise,  much  as  one  must  listen  to  the  phonograph, 
ignoring  the  sound  of  the  machinery  before  the  registered  tones  of 
the  voice  are  caught.  I  have  since  watched  Indians  laboring  with 
a  like  difficulty  when  their  songs  were  rendered  to  them  upon  the 
piano  ;  their  ears  were  accustomed  to  the  portamento  of  the  voice  in 
the  song,  which  was  broken  up  by  the  hammers  of  the  instrument 
on  the  strings,  producing  such  confusion  of  sound  that  it  was  hard 
for  the  Indians  to  hear  and  recognize  the  tune.  My  efforts  in  listen- 


237 


8 


A  STUDY  OF  OMAHA  INDIAN  MUSIC. 


ing  below  the  noise  were  rewarded  by  my  hearing  the  music,  and  I 
discovered  that  there  was  in  these  Indian  songs  matter  worth  study 
and  record. 

My  first  studies  were  crude  and  full  of  difficulties,  difficulties  that 
I  afterward  learned  were  bred  of  preconceived  ideas,  the  influence 
of  generally  accepted  theories  concerning  “savage”  music.  The 
tones,  the  scales,  the  rhythms,  the  melodies  that  I  heard,  which  after 
months  of  work  stood  out  more  and  more  clearly  as  indisputable 
facts,  lay  athwart  these  theories  and  could  not  be  made  to  coincide 
with  them.  For  a  considerable  time  I  was  more  inclined  to  distrust 
my  ears  than  m37  theories,  but  when  I  strove  to  find  facts  that  would 
agree  with  these  theories  I  met  only  failure.  Meanwhile  the  Indi¬ 
ans  sang  on,  and  I  faithfully  noted  their  songs,  studying  their  char¬ 
acter  and  their  relation  to  Indian  life  and  ceremonial.  During  these 
investigations  I  was  stricken  with  a  severe  illness  and  lay  for 
months  ministered  to  in  part  by  Indian  friends.  While  I  was  thus 
shut  in  from  the  rest  of  the  world,  with  the  Indians  coming  and 
going  about  me  in  their  affectionate  solicitude,  they  would  often  at 
my  request  sing  for  me.  They  sang  softly  because  I  was  weak, 
and  there  was  no  drum,  and  then  it  was  that  the  distraction  of  noise 
and  confusion  of  theory  were  dispelled,  and  the  sweetness,  the 
beauty  and  meaning  of  these  songs  were  revealed  to  me.  As  I 
grew  stronger  I  was  taught  them,  and  sang  them  with  my  Indian 
friends,  and  when  I  was  able  to  be  carried  about,  my  returning 
health  was  celebrated  by  the  exemplification  of  the  Wa-wan1  cere¬ 
mony  with  its  music. 

The  ceremony  took  place  in  a  large  earth  lodge  two  or  three  miles 
distant.  I  was  laid  in  the  bottom  of  a  wagon  and  driven  along  the 
bluffs  of  the  Missouri  river,  overtaking  men,  women  and  children 
on  their  ponies  all  headed  toward  the  lodge,  where  we  arrived  just 
as  the  sun  dropped  like  a  red  ball  below  the  horizon.  A  few  old 
men  were  sitting  on  the  dome-like  roof,  while  boys  and  dogs  chased 
each  other  up  the  grass}7,  flowery  sides  of  the  picturesque  dwelling. 
At  the  door  of  the  long  projection  forming  the  entrance  to  the  lodge 
stood  friends  ready  to  welcome  me.  I  was  lifted  carefully  from  the 
wagon  bed,  borne  by  strong  arms  within  and  placed  on  a  sort  of 
lounge  made  of  skins  arranged  nearly  opposite  the  entrance.  The 
people  gathered  by  scores  until  between  two  and  three  hundred 
were  seated  around  the  central  fire  that  leaped  up  brightly  making 

1  The  italicized  n  has  a  nasal  sound  as  in  the  French  word  en. 

238 


A  STUDY  OF  OMAHA  INDIAN  MUSIC. 


9 


the  blackened  roof  of  poles  shine  like  polished  ebony.  Every  one 
was  glad  and  welcomed  me  with  no  uncertain  word  or  glance.  Soon 
I  heard  the  cadences  of  the  ceremonial  Song  of  Approach.  I  knew 
the  tune,  I  had  been  taught  it  in  my  sickness,  and  now  I  listened 
understanding^  to  the  familiar  strains  as  they  came  nearer  and 
nearer  until  the  bearers  of  the  Pipes  of  Fellowship  were  seen  coming 
down  the  long  entrance  way,  waving  the  feather  pendants  of  the 
Calumets  they  bore.  As  they  turned  into  the  lodge  the  whole  people 
took  up  the  song  and  I  too  joined,  able  at  last  to  hear  and  compre¬ 
hend  the  music  that  had  through  all  my  difficulties  fascinated  even 
while  it  eluded  me.  The  occasion  of  this  exemplification  was  one  I 
can  never  forget,  not  only  because  of  the  insight  it  gave  me  into  the 
music  of  the  people  and  the  meaning  of  the  ceremony  I  witnessed, 
but  because  of  its  deeper  revelation  of  the  heart  and  inner  life  of 
the  Indian.  From  that  time  forth  I  ceased  to  trouble  about  theo¬ 
ries  of  scales,  tones,  rhythm  and  melody,  and  trusted  the  facts 
which  daily  accumulated  in  my  willing  hands. 

I  have  transcribed  several  hundreds  of  Omaha  songs,  and  have 
also  taken  down  songs  of  the  Dakotas,  Otoes  and  Poncas,  tribes 
belonging  to  the  same  linguistic  family  as  the  Omahas.  The  Paw¬ 
nees  are  of  another  stock  and  their  songs,  of  which  I  have  a  number, 
present  shades  of  difference  that  may  become  more  defined  when  I 
have  worked  over  a  larger  collection  of  their  music  ;  the  songs  of 
the  Nez  Perce  of  Idaho  also  show  differences  that  are  interesting 
and  well  worth  study,  but  these  songs  from  different  stocks  have  in 
them  nothing  radically  divergent  from  the  music  of  the  Omahas, 
so  that  the  facts  herein  set  forth  would  seem  to  pertain  to  the  music 
of  various  linguistic  families. 

Indian  songs  I  have  discovered  travel  far,  and  those  of  one  tribe 
are  soon  at  home  in  another.  There  seems  to  have  been  quite  an 
extended  acquaintance  between  tribes,  the  Rocky  Mountains  prov¬ 
ing  no  serious  barrier.  Customs  and  songs  borrowed  from  the  Crow 
Indians  have  obtained  for  a  century  at  least  among  the  Nez  Perce. 
Dakota  songs  are  also  found  there  with  an  equally  remote  intro¬ 
duction.  The  Omahas  took  from  the  Sioux  the  Ma-wa-da-ne  songs, 
and  from  the  Otoe,  the  Hae-ka-ne.  The  Dakotas  appropriated  the 
Omaha  Hae-tlm-ska  songs,  as  did  the  Winnebagos.  I  have  had 
Omahas  sing  me  the  songs  of  many  different  tribes,  but  they  wrere 
always  credited  to  the  tribe  to  which  they  belonged.  I  have  never 
met  an  instance  of  plagiarism  among  the  Indians.  Certain  kinds 

239 


10 


A  STUDY  OF  OMAHA  INDIAN  MUSIC. 


of  songs  can  be  purchased  by  individuals,  and  the  song  becomes 
personal  property,  but  the  purchaser  would  never  claim  to  have 
composed  it. 

Professor  Fillmore  in  his  valuable  report  demonstrates  the  exis¬ 
tence  of  a  “  natural  harmonic  sense’’ in  the  Indian  which  had  been 
apparent  to  me  in  my  field  researches.  I  first  detected  this  feeling 
for  harmony  while  rendering  to  the  Indians  their  melodies  upon  an 
instrument ;  the  song  played  as  an  unsupported  solo  did  not  satisfy 
my  memory  of  their  unison  singing,  and  the  music  did  not  “sound 
natural”  to  them,  but  when  I  added  a  simple  harmony  my  ear  was 
content  and  the  Indians  were  satisfied.  What  years  of  observa¬ 
tions  forced  me  to  recognize,  Professor  Fillmore  has  also  discovered 
in  his  exhaustive  study  of  the  structure  of  these  songs.  Leaving 
to  his  scholarly  treatment  the  technicalities  of  the  music,  I  shall 
restrict  myself  to  the  consideration  of  the  relations  existing  between 
the  Indian’s  music  and  his  life,  social  and  individual. 

Among  the  Indians,  music  envelopes  like  an  atmosphere  every  re¬ 
ligious,  tribal  and  social  ceremony  as  well  as  every  personal  ex¬ 
perience.  There  is  not  a  phase  of  life  that  does  not  find  expression 
in  song.  Religious  rituals  are  embedded  in  it,  the  reverent  recog¬ 
nition  of  the  creation  of  the  corn,  of  the  food-giving  animals,  of  the 
powers  of  the  air,  of  the  fructifying  sun,  is  passed  from  one  genera¬ 
tion  to  another  in  melodious  measures  ;  song  nerves  the  warrior 
to  deeds  of  heroism  and  robs  death  of  its  terrors  ;  it  speeds  the  spirit 
to  the  land  of  the  hereafter  and  solaces  those  who  live  to  mourn  ; 
children  compose  ditties  for  their  games,  and  young  men  by  music 
give  zest  to  their  sports ;  the  lover  sings  his  way  to  the  maiden’s 
heart,  and  the  old  man  tunefully  evokes  those  agencies  which  can 
avert  death.  Music  is  also  the  medium  through  which  man  holds 
communion  with  his  soul,  and  with  the  unseen  powers  which  control 
his  destiny. 

The  songs  of  a  tribe  are  its  heritage  ;  many  of  them  have  been 
handed  down  through  generations  and  embody  not  only  the  feeling 
of  the  composer,  but  record  some  past  event  or  experience  ;  conse¬ 
quently  they  are  treasured  by  the  people  and  care  is  taken  to  trans¬ 
mit  them  accurately  and  this  is  effected  without  the  usual  external 
aids  to  memory  common  to  races  who  have  a  written  language. 

People  who  possess  written  music  have  also  some  mechanical 
240 


A  STUDY  OF  OMAHA  INDIAN  MUSIC. 


11 


device  by  which  a  tone  can  be  uniformly  produced,  as  by  the  vibra¬ 
tions  of  a  cord  of  given  length  and  tension,  the  tone  of  such  a  cord 
becoming  the  standard  by  which  all  other  tones  can  be  regulated ; 
thus  a  succession  of  tones  can  be  recorded,  and  accurately  repeated 
at  long  intervals  of  time,  and  by  different  persons.  The  Indians 
have  no  mechanism  for  determining  a  pitch,  there  is  no  uniform 
key  for  a  song,  it  can  be  started  on  any  note  suitable  to  the  singer’s 
voice.  This  absence  of  a  standard  pitch,  and  the  Indian’s  manage¬ 
ment  of  the  voice  which  is  similar  in  singing  and  in  speaking,  make 
Indian  music  seem  to  be  out  of  tune  to  our  ears  conventionally 
trained  to  distinguish  between  the  singing  and  the  speaking  tone 
of  voice.  Although  the  Indians  have  no  fixed  pitch,  yet,  given  a 
starting  note,  graduated  intervals  are  observed  ;  not  that  any  Indian 
can  sing  a  scale,  but  he  repeats  his  songs  without  any  material 
variation.  Men  with  good  voices  and  memories  are  the  music 
teachers,  who  take  pride  in  their  accuracy  of  singing,  and  frequently 
have  at  their  command  several  hundred  tribal  songs,  as  the  number 
of  native  songs  in  a  tribe  is  always  very  large. 

The  baritone  and  mezzo  soprano  are  more  common  than  the 
higher  or  lower  class  of  voices.  The  habit  of  singing  in  the  open 
air  to  the  accompaniment  of  percussion  instruments  tends  to  strain 
the  voice  to  the  detriment  of  its  sweetness  of  tone  and  mobility 
of  expression.  There  is  little  attempt  on  the  part  of  the  Indian 
singer  to  render  piano  or  forte  passages,  or  to  swell  and  diminish 
a  tone,  although  this  is  sometimes  noticeable  in  love  songs.  When 
more  than  one  person  take  part  in  a  song  the  voices  are  always  in 
unison  ;  the  different  qualities  of  the  male  and  female  voice  bring  out 
harmonic  effects  which  are  enhanced  by  the  practice  of  the  women 
using  the  falsetto;  the  chord  usually  presents  to  the  ear  two  or 
three  octaves  struck  simultaneously,  and  one  becomes  aware  of  over 
tones. 

The  Indian  enjoys  the  effect  produced  by  vibrations  of  the  voice, 
upon  a  prolonged  note,  he  will  give  a  throbbing  tremolo  not  unlike 
the  sound  obtained  by  vibrating  the  string  of  a  ’cello  while  passing 
over  it  the  bow  in  an  undulating  movement.  In  the  love  song 
the  singer  sometimes  waves  his  hand  slowly  to  and  from  his  mouth 
to  break  the  flow  of  the  breath  and  produce  pulsations  ;  the  tremolo 
of  the  voice  does  not  break  the  tone  to  his  ear,  as  do  the  vibrations 
produced  by  striking  the  piano  strings.  I  have  mentioned  the  diffi¬ 
culty  which  besets  the  Indian  the  first  time  he  hears  his  tribal  songs 

241 


12 


A  STUDY  OF  OMAHA  INDIAN  MUSIC. 


played  upon  the  piano;  his  trouble  with  the  instrument  has  gener¬ 
ally  been  removed  bjr  my  singing  a  few  bars  with  the  piano ;  thus 
led  by  the  voice  upon  the  melody,  he  has  easily  followed  it  to  the 
end.  One  day  a  Ponca  who  had  been  struggling  with  a  piano  ren¬ 
dering  of  a  well-known  song  said  : 

“The  Omahas  and  Poncas  speak  the  same  language,  yet  there  is 
something  I  cannot  explain  which  makes  a  difference,  so  that  we 
Poncas  can  always  tell  even  in  the  dark  when  it  is  an  Omaha  speak¬ 
ing.  It  is  the  same  way  with  this  piano  and  the  songs,  their  music 
is  familiar,  yet  when  you  play  them  it  is  like  the  Omaha  speaking  ; 
when  they  are  sung  it  is  like  the  Ponca  talking.” 

Words  clearly  enunciated  in  singing  break  the  melody  to  the  In¬ 
dian  ear  and  mar  the  music.  They  say  of  us  that  we  “talk  a  great 
deal  as  we  sing.”  Comparatively  few  Indian  songs  are  supplied 
with  words,  and  when  they  are  so  supplied,  the  words  are  frequently 
taken  apart  or  modified  so  as  to  make  them  more  melodious  ;  more¬ 
over,  the  selection  of  the  words  and  their  arrangement  do  not 
always  correspond  to  that  which  obtains  in  ordinary  speech.  A 
majority  of  the  songs,  however,  are  furnished  almost  wholly  with 
syllables  which  are  not  parts  or  even  fragments  of  words  but 
sounds  that  lend  themselves  easily  to  singing  and  are  without  defi¬ 
nite  meaning ;  yet  when  a  composer  has  once  set  syllables  to  his 
song,  they  are  never  changed  or  transposed  but  preserved  with  as 
much  accuracy  as  we  would  observe  in  maintaining  the  integrity  of 
a  poem.  These  syllables  are  vowel  sounds  both  open  and  nasal, 
the  initial  letter  being  generally  h,  th,  or  y.  While  a  desire  for  eu¬ 
phony  directs  the  conscious  choice  of  the  initial  letter,  yet  a  study 
of  the  use  of  these  letters  seems  to  indicate  that  the  feeling  to  be 
expressed  controls  in  a  measure  the  selection  of  the  syllables.  The 
flowing  hae  ha  lie  hi  ho  ha  or  athae  athee  lend  themselves  to  the 
gentler  emotions ;  these  sounds  are  common  in  the  love-songs,  the 
funeral  song,  and  when  the  singer  breathes  his  desire  for  the 
strengthening  of  his  own  life  from  sources  beyond  his  sight,  or 
seeks  to  express  his  aspiration  toward  the  ideal ;  yah  yae  yee  yi 
permit  sharp  explosive  tones,  and  these  sjdlables  are  generally  em¬ 
ployed  when  warlike  emotions  are  excited. 

The  use  of  these  syllables  and  the  management  of  the  words  of 
the  songs  reveal  a  striving  toward  poetic  expression  in  measured 
language.  In  order  to  meet  the  demands  of  the  rhythm  of  the 
music,  the  words  of  a  song  are  frequently  taken  apart  and  melodi- 
242 


A  STUDY  OP  OMAHA  INDIAN  MUSIC. 


13 


ous  syllables  interposed,  giving  to  the  newly  formed  word  a  meas¬ 
ure  it  did  not  possess  in  ordinary  speech  ;  accents  too  are  changed 
to  meet  the  exigencies  of  rhythm,  and  elliptical  phrases  are  used  ; 
moreover  there  is  often  an  answering  sound  at  the  end  of  repeated 
phrases  made  by  adding  a  syllable ;  this  suggests  that  the  expres¬ 
sion  of  emotion  calls  for  rhyme.  We  seem  here  to  come  upon  the 
beginnings  of  versification,  to  have  found  the  little  springs  of  feel¬ 
ing  and  expression  that  lie  at  the  source  of  the  mighty  stream  of 
poetry. 

The  following  example  will  illustrate  the  foregoing : 

Na-g’the  wa-aw,  Captive  Song  No.  1. 

Ahyae-zhum-mae  tlio ;2 

Ahyae-zhum-mae  tlio  ; 

Ahyae-zhum-mae  tlio ; 

Hm  !  We-sa-thun  nu-kae-dae  ; 

Ahyae-zhum-mae  tlio ; 

Ahyae-zhum-mae  tlio. 

This  song  is  sung  by  the  leader  of  a  war  party  when  disaster  or 
death  seems  inevitable,  and  victory  is  to  be  plucked  from  defeat  only 
by  the  most  daring  and  heroic  efforts.  Under  such  circumstances, 
or  when  death  alone  can  be  the  issue  of  a  combat,  these  strains  are 
sung  to  nerve  the  warrior  to  do  his  utmost.  The  song  awakens  in 
the  memory  of  the  soldier  the  joy  at  his  birth,  when  his  sister  came 
to  his  mother’s  retired  tent  and  seeing  the  new-born  infant,  with  a 
cry  of  delight  and  endearment  exclaimed;  “My  Brother  !  A  man 
lies  there  A  man,  who  will  ever  guard  from  danger  and  hunger  and 
death.  The  thought  of  that  home  joy  and  trust  stimulates  the 
warrior  beset  by  dangers  to  defy  death  and  fulfil  the  prediction  at 
his  birth. 

The  phrase  Ahyae-zhum-mae  tlio  is  elliptical,  made  so  to  accord 
with  the  rhythm  of  the  music.  The  spoken  words  would  be  Ahyae- 
zhum-me  ha.  In  the  song  the  phrase  is  oratorical,  me  is  made 
mae  ;  ha,  denoting  the  close  of  the  sentence,  is  changed  for  euphony 
to  the  musical  syllable  tlio;  the  phrase  as  sung  conveys  something 
more  than  the  literal  meaning  of  the  words  “they  may  have  said 
“Have  they  not  said,”  is  the  true  signification  ;  and  the  ideal  of  a 

2  Throughout  this  monograph  all  italicized  syllables,  are  not  parts  of  words  but  mus¬ 
ical  syllables  without  definite  meaning,  as  described  in  the  text. 


243 


14 


A  STUDY  OF  OMAHA  INDIAN  MUSIC. 


man’s  career  is  set  as  a  gem  in  the  words  “Hm  !  we-sa-thuw  nu-kae* 
dae,”  My  Brother  !  He  is  a  man  !  Hi n,  is  a  feminine  exclama¬ 
tion  of  pleasure.  We-sa-tlnm  or  we-tha-tlnm,  a  term  of  endearment 
used  by  an  elder  sister  to  her  younger  brother  equivalent  to,  my  dear 
brother.  Nu-kae  dae,  nu,  man,  kae-dae,  the  suffix  indicating  the 
position  of  the  infant,  lying  down.  Through  these  lines  twines 
the  pOetry  of  thought  and  expression,  simple  as  a  wild  flower  and 
as  delicate  ;  the  music  assists  the  tender  verse  and  bears  the  weight 
of  the  thought.  “Ahyae-zhum-mae  tho”  in  the  three  musical  phrases 
with  the  hold  on  tlio  in  the  third  bar  of  each  phrase,  sounds  the  call 
of  the  man’s  birth  prophecy,  the  long-echoing  notes  carry  the 
thoughts  over  the  plains  and  the  forests  that  have  known  his  foot¬ 
steps,  where  dwell  the  omniscient  birds  that  watch  over  the  brave 
man,  taking  note  of  his  deeds.1  The  musical  treatment  of  these  same 
words  when  they  follow  the  fourth  phrase  makes  them  simply  nar¬ 
rative,  but  in  the  last  three  bars  the  words  become  again  significant, 
taking  on  a  deeper  meaning,  one  that  partakes  of  an  oracular  char¬ 
acter,  as,  ‘‘Have  they  not  said,  A  man  !”  The  climax  of  both  poem 
and  song  is  in  this  last  phrase  and  it  cannot  fail  to  be  felt  by  any¬ 
one  following  the  words  and  music. 

The  Wa-oo  wa-a n  (woman  songs)  resemble  our  ballads.  They 
are  narrative  and  tell  of  happenings  in  the  life  of  the  composer, 
and,  as  their  name  implies,  are  experiences  of  young  men  and 
women.  They  are  sung  by  young  men  when  in  each  others’  com¬ 
pany  and  are  seldom  overheard  by  women,  almost  never  by  women 
of  high  character ;  men  in  mature  life,  unless  of  the  old  beaux 
class,  forego  these  songs,  as  the  Wa-oo  wa-an  belong  to  that  season 
in  a  man’s  career  when  “wild  oats”  are  said  to  be  sown.  Many 
of  them  are  quite  pleasing  both  as  to  music  and  versification,  a 
few  are  vulgar,  and  some  are  humorous. 

For  our  understanding  of  these  songs,  a  knowledge  of  Indian  cus¬ 
toms  and  modes  of  living  is  necessary,  for  these  are  all  implied  in 
the  situations  which  give  point  to  the  ballads.  To  the  tent  or  lodge 
come  few  young  men  except  the  kindred  of  the  family,  and  as 
among  the  Omahas  marriage  in  the  gens  of  the  father  and  subgens 
of  the  mother  is  forbidden,  there  is  little  chance  for  a  girl  to  meet 
in  her  parents’  tent  a  lover  and  be  openly  wooed  by  him.  Court- 

.  1  These  birds  are  represented  in  the  pack  used  in  testing  a  warrior’s  record  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  rites  of  the  Tent  of  War. 

244 


A  STUDY  OF  OMAHA  INDIAN  MUSIC. 


15 


ing  is  always  in  secret,  the  lovers  usually  meeting  at  the  spring 
whither  the  girls  go  in  the  earty  morning  and  at  evening  for  the 
family  supply  of  water.  The  lover,  however,  is  apt  to  haunt  the 
abode  of  his  sweetheart  to  watch  her  movements  from  some  hid¬ 
den  vantage  point,  and  at  the  dawn  his  love-song  may  be  heard 
echoing  over  the  hills.  Sometimes  he  sings  in  the  evening  to  let 
the  maiden  know  of  his  presence.  Girls  find  ways  of  learning 
who  are  the  young  men  seeking  them,  and  they  also  in  their  turn 
watch  these  lovers  secretly  and  either  flirt  a  little  or  entertain  a 
serious  regard  for  the  young  wooer.  All  this  little  drama  takes 
place  covertly,  no  elder  is  made  a  confidant ;  girls,  however,  some¬ 
times  compare  notes  with  each  other.  Generally  an  honorable 
courtship  ends  in  a  more  or  less  speedy  elopement  and  marriage, 
but  there  are  men  and  women  who  prefer  dalliance,  and  it  is  this 
class  that  furnish  the  heroes  and  heroines  of  the  Wa-oo  wa-an. 

In  the  following  example,  No.  2,  as  is  commonly  the  case,  the 
song  is  without  any  setting.  There  is  no  description  of  the  hero¬ 
ine  or  of  her  surroundings,  her  lament  only  is  given,  a  lament  ad¬ 
dressed  to  the  lover  who,  having  won  her,  holds  so  full  possession 
of  her  thoughts  that  she  has  unconsciously  betrayed  her  relation 
to  him.  The  picture  of  the  song  is  one  common  in  Indian  life. 
The  twilight  is  deepening,  the  evening  meal  is  over,  the  father  and 
mother,  the  grandparents,  the  uncle,  the  brothers  and  sisters  are 
all  gathered  about  the  cheerful  fire,  whose  smoke  curls  lazily  up 
through  the  opening  of  the  tent  and  the  children  and  puppies  are 
sleepy  in  the  quiet  restfulness  of  the  hour.  The  elder  daughter  sits 
demurely  at  the  back  of  the  tent,  her  fingers  idling  over  a  bit 
of  porcupine  quill  embroidery  she  can  no  longer  see  to  work  upon, 
her  thoughts  are  busy  with  the  youth  who  has  wooed  her  more  ar¬ 
dently  than  prudence  would  sanction  ;  upon  this  peaceful  scene 
falls  the  clear  voice  of  a  singer  as  he  passes  on  to  the  trysting  place. 
The  girl  hears  the  well-known  tones  and  the  blood  mounts  to  her 
cheek  and  her  heart  beats  fast,  the  old  men  about  the  fire  carelessly 
ask  ;  “Who  is  that  singing?”  the  girl  in  the  stress  of  her  emotion 
unconsciously  lets  slip  from  her  lips  the  name  of  her  lover.  At  the 
word  all  eyes  turn  upon  her  and  she  realizes  what  she  has  done  and 
her  confusion  gives  place  to  anger  at  her  lack  of  self-control,  so  when 
she  meets  her  lover  she  reproachfully  tells  him  of  her  betrayal  of 
their  secret.  The  song  is  composed  by  the  vain  youth  who  in  it  re¬ 
hearses  his  conquest  to  his  companions. 


245 


16 


A  STUDY  OF  OMAHA  INDIAN  MUSIC. 


Da-dun  na  e-ba-hun  beali-ke-thae,  thae 
Da-dun  na  e-ba-hun  beali-ke-thae,  time 
Han-ah-de  oo-tha-g’tha-ali  tliun  e-zha-zhae  we-b’tha-dae  thae ;  time 
Da-dun  na  e-ba-hu?i  beah-ke-thae  :  tlm  lu 
Ae-bae-in-tae  time  !  ali-be-dan  ae-hae  me-kae  thae ;  time 
Wa-gun-tha-nia  ae-hae  rae-kae  time  ;  thae 
E-zha-zhae  we-b’tha-dae  thae  :  tlm  hi. 

Da-dun,  an  exclamation  for  which  there  is  no  exact  English 
equivalent,  the  word  denotes  trouble  in  the  sense  of  a  fear  of  con¬ 
sequences,  if  one  knew  of  a  friend  who  was  placing  himself  in  an 
equivocal  relation  Da-dun  might  naturally  be  used  to  express  the 
dread  of  his  future  shame.  Na,  an  abbreviation  of  ae-na,  an  ex¬ 
clamation  of  surprise.  In  the  two  exclamations  da-dun  na,  the 
girl  gives  voice  to  her  apprehension  and  her  surprise  that  she  should 
have  allowed  herself  to  do  as  she  did,  there  is  also  an  implied 
self-reproach,  and  a  reflection  upon  her  lover.  E-ba-hun,  known  ; 
be-ah-ke-thae,  I  have  made  myself.  The  italicized  words  at  the 
end  of  the  lines  are  musical  syllables.  Han-ah-de,  last  night ;  oo- 
tha-g’tha-ali,  you  sang,  literally,  shouted  ;  thun,  is  a  portion  of  the 
word  tae-tliun-de,  when  ;  e-zha-zhae,  name ;  we-b’tha-dae,  I  spoke 
your,  or  I  called  your  ;  thae,  the  feminine  termination  of  a  sentence. 
Ae-bae-in-tae,  who  is  it ;  ali-be-dan,  when  they  said  ;  ae-hae  me-kae, 
I  said  sitting  ;  thae,  the  feminine  termination  of  the  sentence.  Wa- 
gun-tha-ma,  the  lover’s  name,  the  final  sjdlable  ma  ueing  a  suffix 
indicating  that  Wa-gun-tha  was  moving,  passing  akmg ;  ae-hae 
me-kae,  I  said  sitting ;  thae,  feminine  termination  of  the  sentence. 
E-zha-zhae,  name ;  we-b’tha-dae,  I  spoke  your ;  thae,  feminine  ter¬ 
mination  of  the  sentence. 

In  ordinary  speech  the  feminine  termination  of  a  sentence  is  hae, 
corresponding  to  the  masculine  ha ;  in  oratory  the  men  use  tha,  in¬ 
stead  of  ha,  and  women  thae,  rather  than  hae.  In  the  poem,  thae, 
the  formal  word,  is  used,  and  tends  to  give  dramatic  feeling  to  the 
lines.  The  syllables  thae  tlm  are  added  for  rhythm  and  hi  is  used 
in  place  of  the  usual  tho-e  which  marks  the  close  of  the  first  part ; 
hi  is  also  used  at  the  close  of  the  last  line  instead  of  tlio ,  which 
generally  indicates  that  the  song  is  finished. 

In  the  following  translation  the  exclamation  and  syllables  are 
retained,  as  no  adequate  rendering  of  them  is  possible. 

246 


A  STUDY  OF  OMAHA  INDIAN  MUSIC. 


17 


Da-dun'na  !  I  have  made  myself  known  ;  time! 

Da-dun'na  !  I  have  made  myself  known  ;  time! 

Last  night  when  you  sang,  I  uttered  your  name,  time! 

Da-dunna  !  I  have  made  myself  known  :  tha  !  hi. 
“Who  is  it  that  sings?”  time!  they  said,  and  I  sitting  there,  time! 

“Wa-gun-tha  is  passing”  I  said  ;  time! 

It  was  your  name  I  uttered  !  tha  hi. 

The  structure  of  the  song  reveals  a  groping  after  metrical  form, 
and  the  choice  of  the  words  as  well  as  their  arrangement,  which  is 
not  colloquial,  indicates  a  desire  to  express  the  story  effectively 
and  to  lift  it  above  the  commonplace.  The  use  of  the  syllable 
time  as  a  musical  refrain  at  the  end  of  each  line  is  noteworthy. 
The  introduction  of  time  in  the  fifth  line  after  Ae-bae-in-tae, 
“Who  is  it  that  sings?”  has  the  effect  of  a  sigh,  adding  dramatic 
expression  and  a  touch  of  pathos  to  the  narrative.  The  opening 
lines  presenting  at  once  the  theme  of  the  song,  resemble  in  a  strik¬ 
ing  manner  the  chorus  of  a  Scotch  ballad  that  always  sets  forth 
the  central  thought  or  feeling,  around  which  all  the  circumstances 
of  the  story  cluster.  In  the  Indian  song,  however,  there  is  no  elab¬ 
oration  in  literary  form,  and  the  music  is  equally  simple  ;  the  thought, 
the  scene,  the  melody,  come  without  warning  or  prelude,  breathe 
out  their  burden  and  are  gone  almost  before  a  listener  of  our  own 
race  realizes  their  presence. 

Examplesfof  nascent  poetry  could  be  multiplied,  were  further  il¬ 
lustration  necessary,  to  show  that  the  Omahas  had  begun  to  use  sim¬ 
ple  metrical  forms.  Their  oratory  and  many  of  their  ordinary  figures 
of  speech  afford  abundant  proof  of  their  poetic  feeling ;  in  their 
songs  we  see  indications  that  the  demand  of  the  rhythm  of  emotion 
for  an  answering  expression  in  measured  language  was  more  or  less 
consciously  recognized,  but  we  fail  to  find  evidence  of  the  sustained 
intellectual  effort  essential  to  the  development  of  poetic  art. 

The  following  collection  shows  how  pervasive  were  the  Omaha 
songs  not  only  in  th6  social  and  political  forms  of  the  tribe  but  in 
permeating  the  avocations  of  the  people,  and  the  beliefs  and  as¬ 
pirations  of  the  individual  Indian. 

The  songs  fall  into  three  groups : 

I.  CLASS  SONGS. 

II.  SOCIAL  SONGS. 

III.  INDIVIDUAL  SONGS. 


F.  M.  PAPERS  1  17 


247 


18 


A  STUDY  OF  OMAHA  INDIAN  MUSIC* 


The  first  group  embraces  the  songs  of  the  Sacred  Pole,  and 
Buffalo  Hide  ;  the  Hae-de-wa-che  or  annual  tribal  dance  ;  those  per¬ 
taining  to  the  rites  of  the  Tent  of  War ;  and  the  ritual  of  the  filling  of 
the  Tribal  Pipes.  These  songs  are  either  religious  or  ritualistic  and 
are  sung  only  by  the  initiated,  or  by  the  members  of  certain  sub- 
gentes  having  charge  of  sacred  or  of  tribal  ceremonies* 

The  second  group  includes  songs  belonging  to  the  Poo-g'thim, 
Hae-tliu-ska,  To-ka-lo,  Ma~wa~da-ne,  and  other  secular  or  secret 
societies  ;  also  all  dance  and  game  songs  ;  the  songs  of  the  Wa-waw 
or  ceremony  of  the  Pipes  of  Fellowship;  and  the  Funeral  song. 
These  songs  are  always  sung  by  companies  of  persons  ;  the  last  two 
are  somewhat  religious  in  character,  but  are  not  sacerdotal. 

To  the  third  group  belong  the  In-g’thu7iwa-aw  (Thunder  songs), 
and  those  which  relate  to  Mystery,  to  Dreams,  and  to  the  Sweat 
Lodge  ;  Na-g’the  wa-an  (Captive  or  Death  songs)  ;  Mekasee  (  Wolf 
or  Brave  songs)  ;  Wae-tow  wa-an  (Woman’s  songs  of  Sorrow)  ; 
Love  lays  ;  Songs  of  Thanks,  and  the  Prayer  taught  every  Omaha 
child  by  its  parents  and  used  throughout  life,  by  the  whole  tribe. 
These  songs  pertain  to  individual  hopes,  desires,  or  experiences  and 
they  are  generally  sung  as  solos. 

I.  CLASS  SONGS. 

SONGS  OF  THE  SACRED  POLE  AND  THE  BUFFALO  HIDE. 

The  Omaha  tribe  lived  in  the  buffalo  countiy,  and  their  hunting 
of  this  game  was  governed  by  well  defined  rules  and  regulations 
which  were  obligatory  upon  every  member  of  the  tribe,  were  rig¬ 
orously  enforced,  and  any  disobedience  was  severely  punished  by 
officers  appointed  to  execute  the  laws.  Early  in'J uly  the  entire  tribe 
moved  out  of  their  village  under  a  leader  who  had  been  ceremoni¬ 
ously  placed  in  command.  Upon  this  man  rested  the  sole  respon¬ 
sibility  of  directing  the  movements  of  the  tribe,  of  selecting  their 
camping  places,  of  searching  for  the  game,  and  of  regulating  the 
manner  of  hunting  and  securing  food.  He  was  held  accountable 
for  everything  that  happened,  for  the  attacks  of  enemies  without, 
and  for  quarrels  within,  even  down  to  the  fighting  of  the  dogs.  If 
disasters  occurred  the  leader  was  deposed,  for  it  was  considered  that 
his  prayers  were  ineffectual,  and  he  was  not  in  favor  with  the  Un¬ 
seen  Powers.  The  tribe,  when  moving,  kept  well  together  and 
often  stretched  out  a  mile  or  two  in  length,  and  was  guarded 
by  picked  men  detailed  from  the  bravest  of  the  warriors  ;  this 
soldier  police  force  not  only  looked  out  for  lurking  enemies,  but 
248 


A  STUDY  OF  OMAHA  INDIAN  MUSIC. 


19 


prevented  any  man  slipping  from  the  ranks  for  a  private  hunt.  All 
the  rules  respecting  the  movements  of  the  tribe  on  the  annual  hunt 
were  based  upon  the  principle  that  the  liberty  of  the  individual 
must  be  subordinated  to  the  welfare  of  the  community,  and  there¬ 
fore  no  one  for  his  personal  pleasure  or  gain  was  permitted  to  in¬ 
fringe  any  of  the  time-honored  regulations.  The  Leader  traveled 
apart  at  one  side,  in  prayerful  contemplation  of  the  duties  which 
devolved  upon  him.  His  office  was  one  of  the  most  coveted 
within  the  tribal  gift  and  was  also  one  of  the  most  onerous. 

After  the  tribe  had  secured  an  ample  store  of  meat,  sufficient  to 
meet  the  requirements  of  the  winter  season,  the  festival  of  Thanks¬ 
giving  took  place  ;  on  this  occasion  the  Sacred  Pole  and  the  Buffalo 
Hide  were  taken  from  their  tents  and  became  the  central  objects  in 
the  ceremony.  The  Wa-hrae'-hae-tan,  a  sub-gens  of  the  Himga  gens, 
had  charge  of  the  Pole  and  its  tent  and  the  Wa-sha-ba-taw  another 
subsens  cared  for  the  Hide  and  its  tent.  To  the  Hunga  was  en- 
trusted  the  preservation  of  the  ritual  and  songs  of  the  Pole,  and  no 
one  in  the  tribe  except  a  male  member  of  this  gens  had  the  right 
to  sing  these  hubae  wa-an  or  sacred  songs.1 

Song  No.  3  was  sung  when  the  ceremony  of  anointing  the  Pole 
was  about  to  take  place,  and  was  a  call  to  the  people  to  gather  to¬ 
gether  to  witness  the  rite.  Some  of  the  words  are  evidently  mod¬ 
ified  so  as  to  be  more  musical,  as  in  the  first  line  where  Ae-hae  when 
repeated  is  changed  to  thae-hae ;  “Ae-hae  thae-hae”  being  more 
euphonious  and  flowing  than  ae-hae  ae-hae. 

Ae-hae  thae-hae  tha 
Ae-guw  shu-ka-tha-lia  nuz-zlim-ga 
Ae-hae  thae-hae  tha 
Mim-da-ha  ae-ali  ba-da?i  ae-ah 
Ae-hae  thae-hae  tha. 

Ae-hae,  I  bid  or  command  ;  Ae-gim,  therefore  ;  sliu-ka  tha-ha,  in  a 
group  ;  nuz-zhin-ga,  stand  ye  ;  Mim-da-ha  is  an  obsolete  word,  as  is 
ae-ah,  the  meaning  however  seems  to  be,  gather,  come  nearer ; 
ba-daw,  and  ;  the  word  ae-gim  is  difficult  to  translate,  it  implies 
that  the  Hurtga  having  been  formally  requested  by  the  chiefs  to 
perform  this  ceremony  ae-gim  (therefore)  the  people  on  their  part 
are  to  gather  and  stand  near  the  sacred  tent  and  witness  it. 

1 A  full  account  of  the  Pole  or  Wa-hrae'-hae  and  the  ceremonies  connected  with  it, 
and  all  other  rites  pertaining  to  the  tribe  will  be  given  in  a  monograph  entitled  “  The 
Omalias.” 


249 


20 


A  STUDY  OF  OMAHA  INDIAN  MUSIC. 


I  bid  I  bid  tha 

Therefore,  shall  ye  all  stand  in  a  group 
I  bid  I  bid  tha 

Gather  ye  nearer,  come  hither,  come ! 

I  bid  I  bid  tha. 

The  following  song,  No.  4,  was  sung  during  the  painting  of  the 
Sacred  Pole. 

Zhe-da  ke-thae  zhe-da  ke-thae  hae  hae 

Kum-peah  ke-thae  kum-peah  ke-thae  hae  hae 

Zhe-da,  red  ;  ke-thae,  I  make ;  kum-peah,  comely,  pleasant  to 
look  upon. 

I  make  the  Pole  red  and  comely  to  look  upon. 

There  are  a  number  of  ritual  songs  belonging  to  this  ceremony 
which  tell  of  the  creation  and  growth  of  the  corn ;  the  music  of 
these,  like  the  foregoing  example,  is  of  the  chant  order. 

On  the  third  day  of  the  Thanksgiving  festival  the  Hae-de-wa-che 
or  tribal  dance  took  place  conducted  by  the  In-kae-sabbae  gens  ;  the 
singing  of  the  songs  was  the  duty  of  the  Wa-the-ge-zhae  subgens. 
The  dance  was  highly  dramatic  especially  that  part  wherein  the 
past  experiences  of  the  warriors  were  depicted.  The  scene  was  full 
of  action  and  color,  the  whole  tribe  took  part  in  it ;  every  one 
was  in  gala  dress,  there  was  hardly  an  Omaha  too  old  or  too  young 
not  to  have  upon  him  some  token  of  festivity.  Fragments  of  an¬ 
cient  tribal  rites  are  discernible  in  this  dance,  as  well  as  bits  of 
tribal  history ;  the  music  however  presents  little  of  interest  it  being 
simple  in  rhythm,  and  fitted  to  the  movements  of  the  dancing  men 
and  women  as  they  pass  in  a  vast  circle  around  a  pole,1  the  male 
singers  and  drummers  sitting  at  its  base. 

The  Call  to  the  Hae-de-wa-che  No.  5  is  peculiar  and  noteworthy. 
Its  melodious  cadences  suggest  the  echo  of  some  well  nigh  forgotten 
song  which  belonged  possibly  to  an  obsolete  rite  that  has  long  since 
been  lost  or  merged  in  this  dance  of  the  tribe. 

Zha-wa  e-ba  e-ba  ha 
Ae-hae 

are  the  words.  Zha-wa  is  an  abridgment  of  oo-zha-wa,  to  rejoice  ; 
eba,  come;  ae-hae,  I  command. 

1  The  pole  used  in  the  Hae-de-wa-che  is  not  the  Sacred  Pole,  but  one  cut  for  the  occa¬ 
sion  with  peculiar  ceremonies. 

250 


A  STUDY  OF  OMAHA  INDIAN  MUSIC. 


21 


Come  !  Come  and  rejoice  ! 

I  bid  you ! 

The  words  in  the  dance  song,  No.  6,  are,  Ae-hae  wa-na-shae,  I 
command,  soldiers.  The  bidding  was  from  the  In-kae-sabbae 
gens  to  the  soldiers  of  the  tribe  to  take  part  in  the  dance. 

SONGS  OF  THE  TENT  OF  WAR. 

The  Wae-jin-ste  gens  had  charge  of  the  Tent  of  War  wherein 
were  preserved  certain  articles  used  in  those  rites  which  were  sup¬ 
posed  to  test  the  truthfulness  of  a  warrior’s  recital  of  his  deeds  of 
valor.  One  of  these  articles  was  a  skin  case  or  pack  fashioned  in 
the  symbolic  form  of  a  bird  and  containing  the  skins  of  a  number 
of  birds  supposed  to  possess  warlike  instincts.  These  birds  in 
their  flight  over  the  earth  watched  and  noted  all  valorous  deeds,  so 
when  a  man  boasted  or  exaggerated  as  he  told  his  tale  in  the  pres¬ 
ence  of  this  pack,  his  untruthfulness  was  brought  to  light  by  these 
birds  who  caused  the  reed  which  he  was  required  to  drop  upon  the 
pack  to  roll  off  to  the  ground.  The  rites  of  the  Tent  of  War  are 
allied  to  those  ceremonies  connected  with  the  hearing  of  the  first 
thunder  peal  in  the  spring-time.  There  are  indications  of  a  kinship 
of  ideas  and  emotions  between  the  songs  of  the  War-Tent  ceremony 
and  the  Ing’than  wa-an  (thunder  songs)  the  latter,  being  the  ex¬ 
pression  of  an  individual  appeal  to  the  unseen  powers,  are  more 
varied  and  tuneful ;  the  former,  belonging  to  a  ceremonial  are,  of 
necessity  restricted  and  formal,  resembling  a  chant  rather  than  a 
melody.  These  differences,  however,  do  not  conceal  the  likeness 
between  the  two  classes  of  songs,  and  there  is  reason  to  believe  that 
the  resemblance  has  an  historical  basis,  and  that  the  chants  of  the 
Tent  of  War  were  once  Thunder  songs  of  individuals  which  became 
in  the  lapse  of  years  modified  to  suit  the  ritual  as  sung  during  the 
truth-testing  rites  of  the  Tent  of  War. 

The  following  No.  7  is  an  example  of  the  songs  pertaining  to 
these  rites.  The  words  refer  to  the  mythical  form  and  weapon  of 
Thunder. 

The-te-gan  num-pae-wa-thae !  ga. 

The-te-gaw  num-pae-wa-thae !  ga 
The-te-gaw  num-pae-wa-thae !  ga 
The-te-gan  wae-tin  kae  g’the-him  ke  num-pae-wa-thae  !  ga 
The-te-gaw  num-pae-wa-thae !  ga. 


1  These  songs  are  Nos.  75,  76,  77. 


251 


22 


A  STUDY  OF  OMAHA  INDIAN  MUSIC. 


The-te-ga«,  your  grandfather;  num-pae-wa-thae,  fearful  to  be¬ 
hold  ;  wae-tm,  club ;  kae,  long ;  g’the-huw,  lifts  his ;  ke,  when. 

Your  Grandfather  fearful  to  behold  is  he !  get 
Your  Grandfather  fearful  to  behold  is  he !  ga 
Your  Grandfather  fearful  to  behold  is  he  !  ga 
When  your  Grandfather  lifts  his  long  club  he  is  fearful  to  behold !  ga 
Your  Grandfather  fearful  to  behold  is  he !  ga 

It  is  only  in  rituals,  or  the  songs  of  a  religious  ceremony  that  there 
is  ever  any  picturing  of  the  gods,  any  attempt  to  appeal  to  the 
imagination  and  stir  the  emotions  of  awe  or  fear.  In  this  song 
not  only  is  Thunder  addressed,  but  his  powerful  ancestors  are 
called  to  mind.  Myths  tell  of  these  wonderful  beings  who  some¬ 
times  descended  to  avenge  wrong  doing  and  this  song  recalls  a  time 
when  Thunder  warred  against  man. 

The  music  of  the  ritual  of  filling  the  Tribal  Pipes  is  lost.  The 
keeping  of  this  ritual  was  the  hereditary  charge  of  certain  members 
of  a  subgens  of  the  In-shtae-sunda  gens,  and  the  last  man  who  knew 
it  died  some  years  ago.  It  was  a  chant  and  was  sung  without 
accentuation  by  the  drum. 

All  the  songs  of  group  I  are  Hubae  wa-an,  sacred  songs  and  were 
the  property  of  certain  subgentes  and  initiated  persons.  Although 
many  of  these  songs,  as  those  of  the  Hae-de  wa-che,  and  the  Sacred 
Pole  were  often  learned  stealthily  by  ear,  no  persuasion  could  in¬ 
duce  a  man  not  of  the  In-kae-sabbae  or  Huwga  gens  to  sing  them  in 
the  presence  of  a  member  of  either  of  these  gentes  ;  it  would  be  as¬ 
suming  a  right  or  tribal  privilege,  and  as  unbecoming  an  Omaha, 
as  for  an  obscure  person  among  us  to  arrogate  to  himself  the  func¬ 
tions  of  an  official.  It  is  difficultt  to  obtain  a  hearing  of  these 
songs  apart  from  their  appropriate  ceremonies ;  those  here  given 
have  been  obtained  through  personal  friendship  of  the  singers. 

II.  SOCIAL  SONGS. 

Societies  afforded  the  only  opportunities  within  the  tribe  for  the 
indulgence  of  the  social  instinct,  membership  not  being  confined  to 
any  one  gens ;  persons  who  were  not  kindred  could  thus  meet  upon 
terms  of  equality.  The  various  gatherings  were  occasions  for  the 
display  of  talent  and  the  enjoyment  of  applause  or  the  practice  of 
rites  supernatural  in  their  import.  Some  of  the  societies  bore  a 
resemblance  to  our  clubs,  others  were  historical,  religious  or  secret. 
252 


A  STUDY  OF  OMAHA  INDIAN  MUSIC.  23 

These  ■associations  embraced  within  their  membership  almost  every 
adult  man  and  many  women  in  the  tribe. 

poo-g’thov  songs. 

The  Poo-g’thnn  society  is  said  to  be  one  of  the  oldest.  Chiefs 
only  were  eligible  and  a  candidate  once  admitted  remained  a  mem¬ 
ber  until  death.  The  Leader  or  principal  officer  was  that  chief  who 
could  count  the  greatest  number  of  valiant  deeds,  therefore  unless 
a  man  kept  up  his  war  record  he  could  hardly  hope  to  retain  this 
position.  The  office  of  Keeper  of  the  songs  was  held  for  life 
and  it  was  the  duty  of  the  incumbent  to  train  his  successor.  The 
songs  were  the  archives  of  the  society;  little  more  than  the  name 
of  a  noted  chief  might  be  mentioned  in  the  song  but  the  story 
of  the  hero’s  deeds  was  stored  in  the  Keeper’s  memory  and  trans¬ 
mitted  with  the  song,  thus  the  tradit'ons  of  the  Poo-g’tlnm  preserved 
a  partial  history  of  the  tribe.  Through  a  series  of  coincidences 
a  superstition  grew  up  that  whenever  the  Keeper  sang  one  of  the 
old  songs  death  would  visit  his  family ;  members  therefore  became 
loath  to  take  the  responsibility  of  asking  for  them,  and  when  the 
request  was  made  it  was  accompanied  by  a  large  gift,  offered  to  atone 
for  any  ill  fortune  which  might  come  upon  the  Keeper.  It  is  said 
that  the  last  time  the  Keeper  sang  an  old  song,  while  he  was  singing, 
a  Sioux  warrior  crept  stealthily  into  the  camp,  made  his  way  to 
the  singer's  tent  and  there  shot  dead  the  Keeper’s  daughter.  The 
society  has  been  extinct  for  about  half  a  century  and  the  stories 
connected  with  the  Poo-g’thim  Songs  are  lost ;  no  one  knows  by 
whom  they  were  composed  or  the  events  they  celebrate.  The  songs 
are  of  two  kinds  :  those  sung  while  the  men  sat  resting,  and  those 
which  served  as  an  accompaniment  to  dancing.1 

In  Song  No.  8,  musical  syllables  are  used  in  all  the  phrases 
except  in  that  at  the  commencement  of  the  second  part.  En-da-koo- 
tha,  an  old  word  for  friend  ;  wa-ha-tun-ga,  shield  ;  ae-ah-mae,  they 
say.  Wa-ha-tunga  was  probably  the  hero’s  name,  and  the  song 
may  record  this  man’s  services  as  a  friend  to  the  people,  or  as  a 
shield.  The  song  is  lively,  easily  starts  the  heels,  and  once  heard 
is  not  apt  to  be  forgotten ;  the  music  has  by  these  qualities  outlived 
its  burden. 


1  A  full  account  of  the  Societies  of  the  Omahas  will  he  given  in  the  Omaha  monograph. 

253 


24 


A  STUDY  OF  OMAHA  INDIAN  MUSIC. 


The  words  of  No.  9  are  also  few  and  the  hero  whose  war  cry  is 
recorded  is  now  forgotten. 

Shu-pe-da  hu-ah-ta  na-zhm  ;  time , 

Shu-pe-da  hu-ahTa  na-zhm  ;  time , 

Ah  ae  time  tha ! 

Ae  time  he  time ! 

Ae-hae  hu-ah-ta  na-zhm  ;  time , 

Ae  thae  tha! 

Ae  thae  he  thae ! 

Shu-pe-da,  when  I  come;  hu-ah-ta,  I  shout,  I  cry;  na-zhm, 
stand.  These  scanty  words  convey  to  the  Omaha  the  picture  of  the 
warrior  who,  when  he  reaches  his  place  in  the  battle  line,  shouts 
forth  his  cry  that  sends  terror  to  the  enemy. 

When  I  come  to  my  place  I  shout ;  thae , 

When  I  come  to  my  place  I  shout ;  time , 

Ah  ae  thae  tha ! 

Ae  thae  he  thae ! 

I  command  as  I  stand  and  shout ;  thae , 

Ae  thae  tha  ! 

Ae  thae  he  thae ! 

The  following,  No.  10,  is  full  of  spirit  and  defiance,  a  real  war-song. 
Shu-pe-da  wea-wa-ta  tha-wa-thae 
Shu-pe-da  wea-wa-ta  tha-wa-thae 
Pa-tha-ga-ta ! 

Tha  wa  thae  ah  hae  time  he 

Thae  ah  he  thae  ! 

Shu-pe-da,  when  I  come ;  wea-wa-ta,  where ;  tha-wa-thae,  do  I 
send  them  ;  Pa-tha-ga-ta,  to  the  hill  or  mounds.1 

Where  do  I  send  them  when  I  come? 

Where  do  I  send  them  when  I  come? 

To  their  graves ! 

I  send  them  ah  hae  thae  he 

Thae  ah  he  thae  ! 

A  song  so  full  of  bravery  could  not  die  in  the  memory  of  a  peo¬ 
ple  as  valiant  as  the  Omahas. 

The  war-cry  at  the  close  of  these  songs  is  not  vociferous,  but 
seems  to  be  addressed  to  that  particular  guardian  of  the  warrior  which 

1  The  Omahas  erected  mounds  over  their  dead. 

254 


A  STUDY  OF  OMAHA  INDIAN  MUSIC. 


25 


had  appeared  to  him  in  his  fastings  and  whose  token  was  always 
worn  on  his  person  in  the  hour  of  danger.  Such  cries  possessed 
a  subjective  character,  they  roused  within  the  singer  the  memory 
of  his  vigils  when  the  promise  of  supernatural  help  in  time  of  need 
was  given,  they  nerved  him  to  greater  power,  while  they  reminded 
his  enemy  that  he  had  to  contend  with  an  unseen  ally  in  the  battle  ; 
they  were  altogether  different  from  the  yell  or  whoop  so  generally 
present  in  Indian  warfare,  and  were  used  for  a  very  different  pur¬ 
pose. 

The  Poo-g’tlnm  wa-an  constitute  the  wildest  music  of  the  Omalias 
and,  unlike  other  war-songs  of  the  tribe,  they  are  marked  by  a 
rhythm,  simple  and  forceful,  and  are  quite  in  contrast  with  many  of 
the  Hae-thu-ska  songs  wherein  the  rhythms  are  contesting  and 
complicated. 

HAE-THU-SKA  SONGS. 

The  origin  of  the  Hae-thu-ska  society  is  not  known,  there  is  a 
tradition  that  it  sprang  from  the  Poo-g’thuit  and  there  are  reasons 
which  give  weight  to  this  view.  A  valiant  record  alone  entitled  a 
man  to  admission  and  promotion  in  the  Hae-thu-ska  ;  a  chief  secured 
no  precedence,  for  the  society  was  democratic  as  to  the  standing  of 
its  members.  Like  the  Poo-g’thun,  the  Hae-thu-ska  preserved  the 
history  of  its  members  in  its  songs ;  when  a  brave  deed  was  per¬ 
formed,  the  society  decided  whether  it  should  be  celebrated  and 
without  this  dictate  no  man  would  dare  permit  a  song  to  be  com¬ 
posed  in  his  honor.  When  a  favorable  decision  was  given,  the  task 
of  composing  the  song  devolved  upon  some  man  with  musical  talent. 
It  has  happened  that  the  name  of  a  man  long  dead  has  given  place 
in  a  popular  song  to  that  of  a  modern  warrior ;  this  could  only  be 
done  by  the  consent  of  the  society,  which  was  seldom  given  as 
the  Omahas  were  averse  to  letting  the  memory  of  a  brave  man  die. 
There  are  a  few  songs  that  carry  two  names,  the  old  being  still 
remembered,  although  a  new  name  is  gradually  taking  its  place. 
This  overlapping  offers  a  clew  as  to  the  age  of  the  song,  since  a 
man’s  name  would  not  be  dropped  during  the  life  time  of  any  near 
kindred  ;  it  seems  safe  to  date  such  songs  fully  fifty  years  prior  to 
the  substitution  of  the  new  name.  Although  the  Haethuska  had 
no  office  of  ‘‘Keeper  of  the  songs,”  the  songs  were  transmitted  from 
one  generation  to  another  with  care  as  was  also  the  story  of  the 
deeds  the  songs  commemorated.  The  singing  was  by  selected  mem- 

255 


26 


A  STUDY  OF  OMAHA  INDIAN  MUSIC. 


bers  assisted  by  a  few  women,  who^sat  around  the  drum  ;  some  of  the 
songs  were  sung  by  the  whole  assembly,  particularly  those  used 
in  the  opening  and  closing  ceremonies. 

The  officers  of  the  Hae-thu-ska  comprised  a  Leader,  a  Herald  and 
two  Servers  who  held  their  places  for  life,  or  until  they  resigned. 
The  meetings  of  the  Society  generally  took  place  once  a  month, 
but  there  were  no  stated  times.  The  Herald,  on  the  evening  of  a 
meeting,  four  times  sounded  the  call  “Hae-thu-ska  !”  prolonging 
the  last  syllable  which  echoed  among  the  hills  and  woods,  produc¬ 
ing  an  effect  not  unlike  soft  modulating  chords.  The  first  act  after 
the  members  were  gathered  together  was  the  preparation  of  the 
charcoal  for  blackening  the  face  in  honor  of  Thunder.  Song  No.  11 
was  sung  as  the  box  elder  wood  charred  upon  the  fire. 

Nim-g’thae  thae-tae 

He-tha-ke-im-tae 

Thim-ah-he-dae. 

Nim-g’thae,  charcoal ;  thse-tae,  this  standing  before  me.  He-tlia- 
ke-im-tae,  to  paint  or  decorate  himself  with  ;  tlnm-ah-he-dae  from 
uw-tha-he-dae,  I  wearily  wait  or  wait  until  I  am  weary.  The  song 
implies  that  the  warrior  is  weary  waiting  for  the  time  when  he  shall 
go  forth  to  fight  under  the  shadow  or  protection  of  Thunder,  the 
god  of  War.  The  music  expresses  the  eagerness  of  the  warrior  and 
suggests  the  tremulous  movement  of  the  leaves  just  before  a  thun¬ 
der  storm. 

After  the  painting  of  the  face  the  pipe  was  filled  and  then  pre¬ 
sented  to  the  zenith  and  the  four  points  of  the  compass  as  the  as¬ 
sembly  joined  in  the  following  prayer  No.  12  : 

Wa-ka%-da  tha-ne  ga  thae  kae. 

Wa-kaw-da  tha-ne  ga  thae  kae. 

Wa-kaw-da  tha-ne  ga  thae  kae 
Ae-ha  tha-ne  liin-ga 

Wae  tho  hae  tho 

Wa-kan-da,  God;  tha-ne  from  ne-ne,  tobacco;  ga,  here;  thae, 
this  ;  kae,  long ;  ae-ha,  now ;  lim-ga,  from  m-ga,  to  draw  with  the 
lips.  Wa-kan-da,  we  offer  tobacco  in  this  pipe,  will  you  accept  our 
offering  and  smoke  it?  is  the  meaning  of  the  words.  This  prayer 
concluded  the  opening  ceremonies. 

The  evening  was  spent  in  social  converse,  interspersed  with 
256 


A  STUDY  OF  OMAHA  INDIAN  MUSIC. 


27 


songs  sung  as  the  members  sat  at  rest ;  dance  songs  were  struck  up 
occasionally,  each  dancer  acting  out  his  personal  experiences,  or 
the  story  of  the  song  that  was  being  sung.  When  a  name  occurred 
in  a  song  the  drum  ceased  and  the  voices  alone  carried  the  music. 
Food  was  always  prepared  in  the  presence  of  the  assembly  ;  when 
it  was  ready  to  be  served  No.  13  was  sung,,  while  the  servers  per¬ 
formed  a  dance  peculiar  to  this  part  of  the  evening’s  ceremony. 

Ou  han  thae-tae  ne-dae  tho. 

En-da-koo-tha  ne-dae  tho. 

Ou-haw,  cooked  food,  or  the  one  who  cooks  the  food  for  a  com¬ 
pany  ;  thae-tae,  this;  ne-dae,  it  is  cooked.  En-da-koo-tha,  the 
same  old  word  for  friend  as  that  used  in  the  Porg’thuw,  song  No.  8  ; 
tho,  a  substitute  for  the  oratorical  tha,  to  mark  the  close  of  the 
sentence.  The  words  proclaim,  Friend,  the  food  is  cooked. 

After  supper,  dance  and  resting  songs  were  sung,  dramatic 
dances  accompanying  the  former.  Well  on  in  the  night,  the  cere¬ 
monies  were  brought  to  a  close  by  the  entire  company  singing  the 
song  of  dismissal  No.  14.  With  the  beginning  of  the  song  the 
members  arose,  and,  at  the  second  part  they  moved  slowly  around 
the  fire  singing  as  they  walked  ;  the  thud  of  the  feet  answered  to 
the  drum  as  the  warriors  passed  out  into  the  night,  and  the  final 
note  was  struck  as  the  last  man  emerged  from  the  lodge.  The 
meetings  of  the  Hae-thu-ska  opened  and  closed  with  chorals  of  a 
religious  character;  in  these  ceremonial  songs,  as  well  as  in  other 
music  pertaining  to  War,  we  see  how  closely  allied  were  War  and 
religious  ceremonies  among  the  Omahas.  The  music  of  No.  14  is 
worthy  of  note ;  so  is  the  harmony  insisted  upon  by  the  Indians  as 
necessary  to  the  expression  of  the  feeling  of  the  song  when  it  is 
rendered  upon  the  piano.  The  words,  though  simple,  show  why  the 
Omahas  demanded  fuller  chords  for  the  march  of  the  warriors  around 
the  lodge  than  for  the  call  to  rise  and  stand,  preparatory  to  moving 
out  under  the  stars. 

Hm-da-koo-tha  na-zhm  thae. 

Hm-da  koo-tha  na  zhm  thae . 

Hm-da-koo-tha  na-zhm  thae. 

Ae-ha  na-zhm  he-tha-mae  tho  hae  thae. 

Hm-da-koo-tha  ma-thm  thae.  etc. 

Hm-da-koo-tha  is  the  same  old  word  used  in  the  ceremonial  song 
No.  13,  the  letter  h  is  prefixed  to  give  musical  effect  and  an  added 

257 


28 


A  STUDY  OP  OMAHA  INDIAN  MUSIC. 


meaning  to  the  word  En-da-koo-tha ;  the  members  of  the  Hae- 
thn-ska  were  friends  bound  together  by  experiences  and  deeds  that 
had  proved  each  one’s  valor  and  dependence  upon  the  unseen  pow¬ 
ers,  those  forces  that  help  and  protect  man  in  the  hour  of  danger, 
the  word  recognizes  this  tie  :  na-zhm,  stand  ;  ae-ha,  now ;  he-tha- 
mae,  they  say,  they  will.  In  the  second  part  the  only  change  is 
the  substitution  of  ma-thm,  to  walk,  for  the  word  na-zhm,  to  stand. 

Song  No.  15. 

Zhm-thae  sha-e-be-thae 
Zhm-thae  sha-e-be-thae 
Nim-dae  wae-ga-tlnm-ga  ta-ba-dan 
Zhm-thae  sha-e-be-thae  tho  hae  tho-e 
Ta-hae-zhm-ga  Hae-thu-ska  ga-hae-dan. 

Nim-dae  wae-ga-tlnm-ga  ta-ba-dan. 

Zhm-thae  sha-e-be-thae  tho  hae  tho. 

Zhin-thae,  elder  brother;  Sha-e-be-thae,  and  Sha-e-ba-dan  are 
modifications  of  Sha-e-eha,  they  are  coming;  Nun-dae,  heart;  wae- 
ga-thun-ga,  to  test  our;  ta-ba-dan,  that  they  may;  ga-hae-dan, 
when  he  made.  The  song  may  be  translated  : 

When  Ta-hae-zhm-ga  was  the  Leader  of  the  Hae-thu-ska  he 
made  this  saying : — Brother,  they  are  coming  to  test  our  hearts 
or  courage. 

The  song  is  very  old.  The  most  aged  men  to  be  found  in  the 
tribe  ten  years  ago,  had  heard  it  when  they  were  boys  sung  by  old 
warriors.  The  name  in  the  text  was  being  supplanted  three  gen¬ 
erations  ago  by  that  of  Ne  koo-the-b’than,  and  still  later,  Han-dan- 
ma-thm ,  who  fought  valiantly  against  the  Pawnees  over  fifty  years 
since,  was  honored  by  having  his  name  occasionally  introduced  in 
the  song. 

Song  No.  16. 

Hae-thu-ska  tlim-ga-bae 
Hae-thu-ska  thm-ga-bae 
Hae-thu-ska  tlim-ga-bae 
Gha-gae  ah-thm-hae  tho  hae  tho-e 
Te-thu  tlie-shaw  tlim-ga-bae 
Hae-thu-ska  thm-ga-bae 
Gha-gae  ah-tlim-hae  tho  hae  tho. 

Hae-thu-ska,  the  members  of  the  Hae-thu-ska  Society  ;  thin-ga- 
bae,  they  are  naught,  or,  they  are  dead  ;  Gha-gae,  I  weep  ;  ah-thm- 
hae,  I  walk ;  Te-thu,  the  village ;  the-shaw,  around. 

258 


A  STUDY  OF  OMAHA  INDIAN  MUSIC. 


29 


This  old  song  was  composed  at  a  time  when  so  many  of  the 
Omaha  warriors  had  been  slain  that  the  Hae-thu-ska  Society  ad¬ 
journed  its  meetings  until  the  period  of  mourning  was  over ;  when 
the  members  came  together  again,  this  song  was  sung  in  memory  of 
the  days  when  men  went  about  the  village  weeping  for  the  brave 
comrades  who  had  fallen  in  battle  and  were  seen  no  more.  I  have 
heard  old  men  sing  this  song  in  a  low  tone  as  they  sat  by  the  fire, 
tears  in  their  faded  eyes,  their  thoughts  upon  the  friends  who  had 
gone,  and  the  days  that  could  never  return.  The  double  drum 
beats  are  not  here  represented  because  to  our  ear  they  would  detract 
from  the  feeling  expressed  in  the  music,  and  prevent  an  understand¬ 
ing  of  the  pathos  of  the  song.  The  thirty-second  notes  as  rendered 
by  the  Indian  suggest  the  catching  of  the  breath  in  sobs. 

Song  No.  17. 

Tun-gae-ah  da-dun  nan-tha-pae  he-we-tha  ga 
Tun-gae-ah  da-dun  nan-tha-pae  he-we-tha  ga 
Tun-gae-ah  um-ba  ya-dun  he-we-tha  ga 
Tun-gae-ah  da-dun  nan-tha-pae  he-we-tha  ga 
Tun-gae-ah  um-ba  ya-dan  he-we-tha  ga. 

Tun-gae,  my  sister  ;  ah,  calls  the  attention  of  the  one  addressed  ; 
da-dun,  what ;  nan-tha-pae,  fear  you  ;  he-we-tha  ga,  tell  me  ;  um-ba, 
day  ;  ya-dan,  coming. 

My  sister !  tell  me  what  it  is  you  fear  as  the  day  dawns? 

The  song  is  old.  It  was  sung  slowly  while  the  members  sat  at 
rest  in  the  meetings  of  the  Hae-thu-ska,  and  it  was  also  one  of  the 
songs  sung  as  the  men  went  out  to  fight.  u  Sister”  personates  the 
women  of  the  tribe.  “What  can  they  fear  when  the  warriors  are 
gathered  for  their  protection.”  The  song  is  knightly  in  its  sentiment. 

Song  No.  18. 

Um-ba  thae-na  un-ge-tun-ba  ga 
Um-ba  thae-na  un-ge-tun-ba-gae  Tun-gae 
Um-ba  thae-na  un-ge-tun-ba-gae  tho  hae 
Hae-thu-ska  na  tae-he-ae-dae 
Pa-hae-tae  ah-ke-he-b’tha 
Um-ba  thae-na  un-ge-tun-ba  gae  tlio  hae  tho. 

Um-ba,  day  ;  thae-na,  this  only  ;  un-ge-tun-ba  ga,  look  at  me 
who  belong  to  you,  tun  is  from  dun-bae,  to  see,  ge  gives  the  pos¬ 
sessive,  ga  the  imperative ;  tun-gae,  sister ;  hae-thu-ska,  the  so- 

259 


30 


A  STUDY  OF  OMAHA  INDIAN  MUSIC. 


ciety  membership  ;  11a,  only ;  tae-he-ae  dae,  a  difficult  task  or  duty 
which  one  is  under  obligation  to  perform  ;  pa-hae-tae,  I  make  my¬ 
self,  that  is  I  become  a  part  of  the  Hae-thu-ska  society,  an  ellip¬ 
tical  and  poetic  form.  Ah-ke-he-b’tha,  I  feel  unqualified,  that  is, 
the  duty  is  difficult  and  although  I  shall  attempt  it  I  feel  my  dis¬ 
qualifications.  “Sister  look  upon  me  who  belong  to  you  for  the  last 
time  to-day,  the  tasks  of  a  member  of  the  Hae-thu-ska  are  difficult. 
I  feel  my  shortcomings,  and  go  forth  for  the  last  time  to-day.” 

The  song  was  sung  when  the  members  were  resting,  or  when  the 
Hae-thu-ska,  circling  the  camp,  were  going  forth  to  battle.  Sister 
personifies  the  women  of  the  tribe. 

An  occasion  is  remembered  when,  over  seventy-five  years  ago,  this 
song  was  sung  in  a  fight  with  the  Che}Tenne  and  Arrapahos,  the 
Omaha  camp  was  threatened,  and  many  women  saw  their  warriors 
for  the  last  time  as  they  moved  off  to  do  battle  for  the  preservation 
of  their  homes. 

Song  No.  19. 


Sha-e-ba-dan  wa-dan-ba  ga 
Sha-e-ba-dan  wa-dan-ba  ga 
Sha-e-ba-dan  wa-dan-ba  ga 
Hae-thu-ska  wa-shu-shae  tho  hae  thoe 
Mun-chu-tun-ga  wa-dan-ba  ga 
Sha-e-ba-dan  wa-dan-ba  ga 
Sha-e-ba-dan  wa-dan-ba  ga 
Hae-thu-ska  wa-shu-shae  tho  hae  tho. 

Sha-e-ba-dan,  they  are  coming;  wa-dan-ba  ga,  see  them,  the  syl¬ 
lable  ga  indicates  a  command  ;  Wa-shu-shae,  warriors  or  braves  ; 
Mun-chu-tun-ga,  the  name  of  the  man  celebrated  in  the  song. 

See  them  !  they  are  coming, 

Warriors  of  the  Hae-thuska. 

Mun-chu-tun-ga !  behold  them 
See  them  !  they  are  coming, 

Warriors  of  the  Hae-thu-ska. 

The  mention  of  Mun-chu-tun-ga  by  name,  when  all  the  warriors 
of  the  Hae-thu-ska  were  addressed  collectively,  commemorated  the 
bravery  of  this  one  man  in  the  face  of  an  advancing  enemy. 

260 


A  STUDY  OF  OMAHA  INDIAN  MUSIC. 


31 


Song  No.  20. 

Ho  eya  ae  ho  ivae  Ho  e  ya  ae  ho  wae ,  etc. 

Zhin-ga-wa-shu-shae  we-gee-the-thae  da n  wa-nun-hae 
Man-b’thin-ah  tho  shu-b’thae-ah  thin-ha. 

The  first  lines  are  syllables  having  no  definite  meaning  except 
as  the  music  gives  them  expression.  Zhin-ga-wa-shu-shae,  the  name 
of  the  hero  of  the  song  who  fell  in  battle ;  we-gee-the-thae  daw, 
when  I  remember  you  ;  wa-nun-hae,  spirit ;  Man-b’thin-ah,  I  walk  ; 
sliu-b’thae,  I  am  coming ;  ah-thin-hae,  I  walk. 

The  words  are  modified  and  fitted  to  the  rhythm  of  the  song  and 
are  used  figuratively  rather  than  literally.  The  song  interpreted  is 
Zlim-ga-wa-shu-shae,  when  I  remember  you  I  walk  as  a  spirit,  I 
am  coming  to  become  such  ;  meaning  that  to  avenge  the  killing  of 
Zhin-ga-wa-shu-shae  death  must  be  faced,  and  he  who  avenges  may 
lose  his  life ;  but  that  will  not  deter  the  warrior  who  declares  to  his 
friend  “I  am  coming.” 

This  old  song  was  used  to  commemorate  a  battle  with  the  Sioux 
some  fifty  years  ago,  and  Nan-kae-nae,  the  name  of  a  warrior  who 
then  fell  was  substituted,  his  mounded  grave  is  upon  the  bluffs  of 
the  Missouri  and  beside  that  grave  I  first  heard  this  song. 

Song  No.  21. 

Han-thin-gae  ae-ah-ma, 

Han-thin-gae  ae-ah-ma, 

Ha?i-thm-gae  ae-ah-ma, 

Wa-kan-da  thin-gae  ae-ah-ma, 

Han-thin-ga  wae  tho  hae  tlio-e 
Han-thin-gae  ae-ah-ma 
Wa-kan-da  thin-gae  ae-ah-ma 
Han-thin-ga  wae  tho  hae  tho. 

An-thin  gae,  I  have  nothing,  literally,  and  so  used  in  ordinary 
speech ;  the  word  in  the  song,  however,  is  figurative,  I  become  as 
nothing,  vanish,  die  ;  in  the  prefixing  of  H  is  an  attempt  to  express 
the  feeling  of  self  abnegation  in  the  contemplation  of  death;  ae- 
ah-ma,  they  say ;  Wakanda,  the  god  or  gods ;  thin-gae,  nothing, 
has  the  same  meaning  as  an-thin-gae,  the  first  syllable  is  omitted 
on  account  of  the  measure  of  the  line.  The  accents  of  the  words 
are  also  modified  to  suit  the  rhythm  and  Han-thin-gae  is  changed 
to  Han-thin-ga  before  the  syllable  ivae  for  greater  euphony.  These 
words,  if  spoken  colloquially  in  the  order  here  given,  would  be 
without  meaning ;  but,  as  used  in  the  song,  in  a  figurative  and  ellip- 

261 


32  A  STUDY  OP  OMAHA  INDIAN  MUSIC. 

tical  sense,  they  become  highly  poetic,  and  take  possession  of  the 
mind.  Their  meaning  is,  the  lives  of  men  are  at  the  command  or 
in  the  keeping  of  the  gods,  when  they  speak,  or  decree,  man  obeys 
or  yields  up  his  life.  The  song  is  highly  esteemed  in  the  Omaha 
tribe,  as  expressing  religious  emotion,  and  its  cadences  are  heard 
when  serious  thoughts  come  to  the  old  or  to  the  man  in  danger. 
I  have  been  unable  to  ascertain  its  age,  but  it  was  known  in  the 
early  part  of  this  century,  and  probably  was  handed  down  from  the 
last. 

This  song  was  sung  by  the  members  of  the  Hae-thu-ska  when 
sitting  at  rest . 

Song  No.  22. 

Ali-taw  taw-bae  daw  shae-gaw  ah-thiw-hae  no 
Ah-taw  taw-bae  daw  shae-gaw  ah-thiw-hae  no 
Ah-taw  taw-bae  daw  shae-gaw  ah-thiw-hae  no 
Gha-gae-wa-thae  wa-oo  hae-the-gaw-ae 

Ah-taw  taw-bae  daw  shae-gaw  ah-thiw-hae  no 
Ah-taw  taw-bae  daw  shae-gaw  ah-thiw-bae  no. 

Ah-taw  taw-bae  daw,  when  I  see ;  shae-gaw,  likewise  ;  ah-thiw-hae, 
I  am ;  no,  end  of  sentence  and  used  instead  of  the  ordinary  word 
ha ;  Gha-gae-wa-thae,  name  of  the  man  whose  lack  of  fighting  abil¬ 
ity  is  signalized  in  the  song ;  wa-oo,  woman ;  hae-the-gaw-ae,  like 
you.  The  song  is  old  and  refers  to  the  conduct  of  a  man  who  left 
his  wounded  comrade  on  the  field  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy, 
whereas  a  brave  warrior  would  have  stood  beside  his  fallen  friend 
and  fought  until  death  or  victory  came.  The  words  of  the  song 
are  scant  and  used  elliptically  ;  the  meaning  is,  “when  in  a  conflict, 
do  I  act  like  you,  Gha-gae-wa-thae,  you  fled  as  a  woman  might 
have  done/’ 

Song  No.  23. 

Ah-thn-ha  uw-dum-ba-ga 
Uw-dum-ba-ga  uw-dum-ba-ga 
Ah-thu-ha  uw-dum-ba-gae  tho  hae 
Ah-thu-ha  uw-dum-ba-gae  tho  hae 
Um-ba  e-daw  hoo-ma-thuw 
We-ae-b’thiw  ae-dae  uw-dum-ba-ga 
Ah-thu-ha  uw-dum-ba-gae  tho  hae 
Ah-thu-ha  uw-dum-ba-gae  tho  hae 


262 


A  STUDY  OF  OMAHA  INDIAN  MUSIC. 


33 


Ah-thu-ka,  again ;  un-dum-ba-ga  or  Um-ba  e-dan,  in  the  coming 
day,  or  at  day  dawn,  see  me  ;  hoo-ma-tkm  they  who  howl.  The 
song  refers  to  the  wolf,  and  the  warrior  here  personifies  himself  as 
that  animal  and  bids  the  people  behold  him  who,  as  a  wolf,  is  seek¬ 
ing  his  prey  in  the  morning. 

The  song  was  composed  by  a  member  of  the  In-shta-snnda  gens, 
a  brave  man,  who  was  frequently  called  upon  to  act  as  a  soldier 
guard  to  maintain  order  when  the  people  were  on  the  hunt ;  he  would 
then  ride  singing;  “Once  again  you  shall  use  your  weapons  upon 
me,”  referring  to  the  liabilities  incurred  in  the  performance  of  the 
duties  imposed  upon  him  as  a  guard.  He  is  said  to  have  shaved  his 
hair  close  to  his  head  on  these  occasions,  painted  his  scalp  red, 
and  that  when  struck  by  any  resisting  hunter  no  blood  flowed  from 
the  wound. 

Song  No.  24.  e 

Ne-ka  we-ta  wa-gan-tha  te-bae-no 

Ne-ka  we-ta  wa-ga?i-tha  te-bae-no  :  11  : 
Nu-dan-hun-ga  Ish-e-buz-zhe  tha-da-e  thm-kae-dae. 

Ne-ka  we-ta  wa-gan-tha  te-bae-no  :  11 : 

Ne-ka  is  part  of  the  word  ne-ka -she-ga,  persons  or  people ;  we-ta, 
part  of  we-we-ta,  my;  wa-gan-tha,  they  want;  te-bae-no,  part  of 
ah-te  be-ah-no,  they  come  ;  Nu-dan-hun-ga,  Leader;  tha-da-e,  they 
call ;  thin-kae  describes  Ish-e-buz-zhe  as  sitting  ;  dae,  part  of  ae-ae- 
dae,  he  is  the  one.  The  song  refers  to  the  people  calling  for  their 
noted  Leader  Ish-e-buz-zhe  who  remained  sitting  in  his  tent,  when 
the  enemy  was  approaching  the  camp.  The  song  is  one  of  the 
oldest  known  and  a  great  favorite,  not  only  for  dancing,  but  tucause 
of  the  fame  of  Ish-e-buz-zhe,  who  lived  several  generations  ago ; 
his  eccentricities  form  parTof  the  nursery  lore  of  the  tribe,  so  to 
speak,  and  men  tell  of  his  queer  humorous  ways,  his  valor  when 
once  aroused,  and  his  great  physical  power.  A  very  old  man  who 
died  in  1884,  a  member  of  the  Tae-thm-dae  gens  and  therefore  a 
descendant  of  Ish-e-buz-zhe,  said  that  his  grandfather’s  grandfather 
when  he  was  young  saw  Ish-e-buz-zhe.  This  throws  the  song  back 
over  one  hundred  and  fifty  years,  at  the  lowest  computation ;  the 
man  who  died  in  1884  was  born  near  the  beginning  of  this  cen¬ 
tury.  His  statement  was  confirmed  by  another  very  old  man  of 
the  same  gens, 
p.  m.  papers  1  18 


263 


34 


A  STUDY  OF  OMAHA  INDIAN  MUSIC. 


TO-KA-LO  SONGS. 

The  To-ka-lo  society  has  been  extinct  for  many  years.  It  was 
for  a  time  in  great  repute  with  the  warriors  ;  its  dances  somewhat 
resembled  those  of  the  Hae-thu-ska.  One  of  the  chief  features  of 
this  society  was  its  procession  about  the  tribal  circle,  when  all  the 
members  were  dressed  in  full  regalia  and  rode  their  best  horses  which 
were  elaborately  decorated.  Song  No.  25  was  sung  on  their  last 
parade  as  they  moved  slowly  on  their  curveting  steeds,  to  the  de¬ 
light  of  all  the  boys  in  the  camp ;  many  of  these,  to-day  mature 
men,  recall  the  scene  with  youthful  enthusiasm.  The  music  is 
well  suited  to  the  prancing  step  of  a  spirited  charger.  Very  few 
songs  survive  from  this  society. 

Secret  societies  had  their  songs.  A  few  of  these  and  all  of  the 
Ma-wa-da-ne  songs  were  borrowed  from  other  tribes. 

I-ZV-OU-TIiV  OR  GAME  SONGS. 

Game  songs  are  sung  by  young  men  when  they  gamble  with 
sticks,  pebbles,  or  moccasins  either  for  fun  or  in  earnest.  Nos. 
26,  27,  28  and  29  afford  a  fair  representation  of  these  pretty  and 
spirited  tunes  which  are  repeated  ad  libitum ,  much  as  we  use  the 
jig  and  dance  tunes.  Words  are  seldom  employed:  there  are, 
however,  exceptions.  No.  26  is  an  instance.  E-ae  zhmga,  little 
stone;  da-dan  ska-hae,  what  are  you  making?  refers  to  the  tiny 
pebble  which  is  being  dexterously  tossed  from  one  hand  to  the  other, 
the  arms  keeping  the  rhythm  of  the  song ;  at  its  end  the  closed 
hands  are  stretched  out  for  persons  to  guess  in  which  one  is  the 
stone  and  so  win  or  lose  a  stake.  The  grace  and  precision  of  move¬ 
ment  together  with  the  liveliness  of  the  music  is  often  very  pleas¬ 
ing. 

The  alternate  rhythms  in  song  No.  27  are  marked  by  the  chang¬ 
ing  movements  of  those  playing  the  game. 

In  the  song  of  success  No.  29,  the  singer  humorously  asks,  as 
he  gathers  in  the  stakes  he  has  won,  “Friends  !  Why  is  it  you  say 
I  am  little?” 

Children  have  songs  of  their  own  handed  on  from  older  sets  of 
playmates  to  the  younger  coming  after  them  ;  they  are  sung  during 
games  such  as  “Follow  my  Leader”  (No.  30)  when  the  little  ones 
trot  along  keeping  time  to  the  tune. 

264 


A  STUDY  OF  OMAHA  INDIAN  MUSIC. 


35 


The  Omahas  have  few  songs  of  their  own  composition  that  are 
used  simply  for  social  dancing.  The  Hae-kar-nee  of  the  Otoe  are 
favorites  for  this  purpose.  The  following  is  an  example  (No.  31). 

THE  WA-WA-V. 

Wa-waw  means  to  sing  for  some  one  and  is  the  name  given  to 
the  ceremony  connected  with  the  Pipes  of  Fellowship, — songs  form 
so  important  a  part  of  the  ritual  that  the  peculiar  pipes  used  in  this 
ceremony  are  called  Ne-ne-ba  wae-ah-wan,  pipes  to  sing  with.  The 
songs  are  accompanied  by  rhythmic  movements  of  the  Pipe  Bearers, 
and  also  of  the  Pipes,  which  are  swayed  to  the  music.  These  mo¬ 
tions  are  termed  Ne-ne  ba  ba-zhan,  shaking  the  Wa-waw  pipes.  As 
the  rhythmic  movements  of  the  Pipes  and  their  Bearers  have  always 
attracted  the  attention  of  white  observers,  the  ceremony  has  been 
characterized  by  them  as  a  “Pipe-dance”  or  “Calumet  dance, ’’where¬ 
as  the  performance  does  not  convey  to  the  Omaha  mind  the  idea 
of  a  dance,  nor  do  the  movements  really  resemble  Indian  dancing, 
with  the  possible  exception  of  that  part  of  the  ceremony  which 
takes  place  on  the  fourth  night. 

The  ceremony  of  the  Wa-waw  consists  of  the  formal  presentation 
of  the  Wa-wa n  pipes  by  a  man  of  one  gens  to  a  man  of  another 
gens,  or  a  man  of  one  tribe  to  one  of  another.  By  means  of  this 
ceremony  the  two  men  become  bound  by  a  tie  equal  in  strength  and 
obligation  to  that  between  father  and  son.  The  man  who  presents 
the  Pipes  is  called  Wa-waw  ah-ka,  the  one  who  sings  ;  the  man  who 
receives  them  is  spoken  of  as  Ah-wan  e-ah-ka,  the  one  who  is  sung 
to.  The  Wa-waw  ah-ka  must  be  of  good  standing  in  his  tribe  as 
must  also  be  the  recipient  of  the  Pipes ;  otherwise  the  chiefs  would 
refuse  to  permit  the  Wa-waw  to  take  place,  and  their  consent  is 
requisite  to  the  inauguration  of  the  ceremony. 

As  a  considerable  expenditure  of  property  is  necessary  for  the 
presenting  and  receiving  of  the  Pipes,  a  man  undertaking  the  cere¬ 
mony  mentions  his  plan  to  his  kindred  who  contribute  toward  the 
Hun-ga  wa-iw,  or  gifts  which  go  with  the  Pipes,  and  in  the  same 
way  the  man  who  receives  the  Pipes  calls  on  his  kindred  to  help  in 
making  the  return  gifts.  These  gifts  all  count  in  a  man’s  tribal 
honors  and  are  all  made  in  the  interest  of  peace  and  fellowship. 

The  Wa-wa n  ah-ka  provides  the  two  Pipes  :  these  are  ceremonially 
made,  with  secret  ritual,  are  not  used  for  smoking,  have  no  bowl, 

265 


36 


A  STUDY  OF  OMAHA  INDIAN  MUSIC. 


and  are  ornamented  with  paint  and  the  feathers  of  birds,  every 
tint  and  article  in  their  construction  being  emblematic.  There  is  a 
crotched  stick,  Zhan-zha-ta,  for  the  Pipes  to  rest  upon;  also  two 
gourd -rattles,  Pae-g’  hae,  and  a  bladder  tobacco  pouch,  Ne-ne- 
bakh-tae,  around  each  of  which  is  painted  a  symbolic  device,  a 
circle  representing  the  horizon,  with  four  projecting  lines  indicating 
the  four  points  of  the  compass  or  the  four  winds  ;  a  whistle  made 
from  the  wing  bone  of  an  eagle,  Ne-thu-dae  ;  three  downy  eagle 
feathers,  Hink-hpae,  and  the  skin  of  a  wild  cat  having  the  claws 
intact,  In-g’ttum-ga-ha.  The  skin  forms  the  case  or  covering  for 
the  Pipes  and  the  other  ceremonial  articles. 

A  Wa-wa?i  party  usually  consisted  of  from  eight  to  twelve  men 
and  they  sometimes  traveled  over  two  hundred  miles  to  reach  their 
destination.  They  were  never  in  fear  of  hostile  attacks  by  the  way, 
war  parties  turning  to  one  side  and  letting  the  Pipes  of  Fellowship 
pass  in  peace. 

The  Wa-waw  has  been  observed  by  many  tribes  of  different  lin¬ 
guistic  stocks.  Marquette,  in  1672,  says  that  the  Calumet  is  “the 
most  mysterious  thing  in  the  world.  The  scepters  of  our  kings  are 
not  so  much  respected,  for  the  Indians  have  such  a  reverence  for 
it  that  one  may  call  it  the  God  of  peace  and  war,  and  the  arbiter 
of  life  and  death.”  .  .  .  “One  with  this  Calumet  may  venture 
among  his  enemies  and  in  the  hottest  battles  they  lay  down  their 
arms  before  this  sacred  pipe.  The  Illinois  presented  me  with  one  of 
them  which  was  very  useful  to  us  in  our  voyage.” 

Marquette’s  description  of  the  ceremony  he  witnessed,  making- 
due  allowance  for  his  lack  of  intimate  acquaintance  with  Indian 
religious  customs,  indicates  that  there  has  been  little  change  in  the 
Wa-waw  as  seen  two  hundred  years  ago  among  the  Algonquin  stocks, 
and  its  observance  by  the  Omahas  within  the  last  decade. 

The  ceremony  is  replete  with  symbolism,  from  the  rule  which  in 
token  of  humility  restrains  the  members  of  the  party  from  washing 
their  faces,  to  the  employment  of  the  little  child,  Hunga  (the 
Ancient  or  Leader),  from  whose  hands  the  gifts  are  bestowed  which 
count  as  honors  to  their  donors,  and  over  whose  head  the  teachings 
-of  peace  are  delivered,  and  the  groove  along  the  pipe  stem  pointed 
out  as  the  straight  path  bright  with  sunshine  and  happiness  for  him 
who  will  pursue  it.  Said  an  Omaha  to  me,  “The  eagle  whose  feath¬ 
ers  deck  the  Pipes  and  the  wild  cat  whose  skin  is  their  covering 
266 


A  STUDY  OF  OMAHA  INDIAN  MUSIC. 


37 


are  fierce  creatures  that  do  not  fail  of  their  prey,  but  in  the  Pipes 
all  their  power  is  turned  from  destruction  to  the  making  of  peace 
among  men.” 

The  movements  of  the  Pipes  represent  the  eagle  rising  from  its 
nest  and  its  flight  on  this  mission  of  fellowship  and  peace  ;  the  songs 
constantly  refer  to  the  eagle,  to  the  clear  sky  symbolic  of  peace  and 
the  good  that  is  brought  man  by  his  becoming  as  one  family,  or  as 
one  of  the  song  says  “bound  by  a  tie  stronger  than  the  one  of  the 
body” — meaning  that  between  father  and  son.1 

Song  No.  32  was  sung  en  route  before  the  party  dispatched  the 
runners  to  carry  their  gift  of  tobacco  to  the  man  to  whom  they  in¬ 
tended  to  present  the  Pipes.  The  words  mean,  “Whom  do  I  seek.” 

As  the  messenger  from  the  man  who  has  accepted  the  tobacco 
approaches  the  Wa-wan  party  he  is  greeted  with  song  No.  33 ; 
the  words  are,  “This  I  seek.”  There  is  a  double  meaning  in  this 
song  ;  it  implies  that  those  bringing  the  Pipes  seek  to  give  the  assur¬ 
ance  of  peace  to  the  gens  they  are  to  visit,  and  that  fellowship  is 
also  sought  by  those  about  to  entertain  the  Wa-waw  party. 

After  due  preparation  the  men  move  on  to  the  village,  generally 
about  half  a  mile  or  so  distant,  preceded  by  the  Pipe  Bearers  in 
ceremonial  costume,  and,  as  they  near  the  village  the  Pipes  are 
swayed  to  song  No.  34,  which  is  sung  four  times.  All  the  Wa- 
wan  songs  are  thus  repeated.  This  song  is  the  first  in  the  ritual 
to  mention  the  eagle.  The  words  say:  “We  have  reached  there, 
the  mother  screams  returning meaning,  after  our  long  journey  we 
near  the  place  to  which  we  have  come  to  bring  peace  and  lay  the  Pipes 
at  rest,  and,  as  the  mother  eagle  screams  on  her  return,  that  her 
young  may  know  of  her  coming,  we  sing  as  we  come  bringing  peace. 

Having  entered  the  village  the  visitors  halt,  and  after  a  few  mo¬ 
ments,  again  advance  directing  their  steps  toward  the  lodge  set 
apart  for  the  ceremony.  They  move  to  the  beautiful  song  No.  35 
that,  once  heard,  can  hardly  be  forgotten.  The  words  are,  “This  is 
the  one  or  only  good,”  meaning,  The  peace  and  fellowship  which  I 
bring,  is  the  one  good  gift  for  man. 

At  the  back  of  the  lodge  a  place  is  set  apart  for  the  Pipes  where 
they  are  laid  at  rest  in  a  ceremonial  manner,  certain  forms,  move- 

1  An  account  of  this  ceremony  was  published  in  the  XVI  Report  of  the  Peabody  Mu¬ 
seum  of  American  Archaeology  and  Ethnology;  years  of  additional  study  have  shown  a 
few  errors  in  that  narrative,  which  is  in  the  main  correct  although  not  complete  in  all 
the  details,  or  the  bearing  of  the  ceremony  upon  the  tribal  organization. 


267 


38 


A  STUDY  OF  OMAHA  INDIAN  MUSIC. 


ments  and  positions  being  carefully  observed.  The  Bearers  take 
their  station  just  behind  the  Pipes,  and  remain  there  during  the 
three  days  and  nights  required  for  the  full  performance  of  the  cer¬ 
emony.1 

The  Bearer  of  the  wild-cat  skin  lays  it  on  a  prepared  space  upon 
the  floor  of  the  lodge,  and  the  Pipe  Bearers  sing  the  songs  belonging 
to  the  ceremony  of  laying  down  the  Pipes ;  the  Pipes  are  swayed 
high  over  the  skin,  then  sweep  lower  and  lower,  rising  and  falling 
and  circling  as  does  the  eagle  over  its  nest.  With  the  final  cadence 
of  the  last  song  the  Pipes  are  laid  one  end  resting  on  the  skin  and 
the  mouth-piece  leaning  on  the  crotched  stick,  which  is  thrust  in 
the  ground  at  the  head  of  the  wild-cat.  Under  the  feather  orna¬ 
ments  of  the  Pipes  the  rattles  are  placed. 

There  are  several  songs  belonging  to  the  act  of  laying  down  the 
Pipes  ;  two  of  the  more  popular  ones  are  given,  Nos.  36  and  37. 
There  are  no  words  except  Huw-ga,  and  this  refers  to  the  important 
part  in  the  ceremony  borne  by  the  child  Hunga.- 

No.  38  is  always  sung  at  the  final  resting  of  the  Pipes  on  the 
cat-skin  and  crotched  stick. 

When  the  Ah-wan  e-ah-ka,  the  man  who  receives*  the  Pipes,  ar¬ 
rives  in  the  lodge,  the  ceremonies  are  renewed ;  the  Pipes  are  cere¬ 
monially  raised,  the  Bearers  lifting  and  holding  them  in  the  left 
hand,  taking  the  rattles  in  the  right — the  Pipes  are  first  waved  near 
the  ground,  then  higher  and  higher  until  during  the  final  song  they 
are  well  up  and  represent  the  eagle  ready  for  flight. 

Song  No.  39  suggests  the  eagle  stirring,  and  lifting  itself  from 
the  nest ;  as  the  wind  blows  the  branches  of  the  trees,  so  the  Pipes 
are  raised  and  the  song  stirs  the  hearts  of  the  people.2 

Among  the  Pawnees  it  is  the  custom  to  explain  many  of  the  songs, 
that  they  may  be  more  heartily  enjoyed. 

The  highly  poetic  character  of  the  Wa- wan  songs  and  of  this 
entire  ceremony  is  native ;  nothing  has  been  borrowed  from  our 
own  race  that  I  have,  been  able  to  discover.  The  ethical  teachings 
are  in  strict  accordance  with  Indian  ideals  which  here  reach  some 
of  their  highest  expressions. 

1  The  great  change  which  has  overtaken  the  Indian  in  his  mode  of  living,  his  present 
farming  life,  prevents  these  lengthy  ceremonies  and  one  afternoon  and  evening  is  all 
that  can  now  be  given  to  the  Wa-wan  under  the  new  conditions. 

2  The  signification  of  these  songs  was  given  me  by  Indians  initiated  in  the  ritual  of 
the  ceremony.  Although  they  are  frequently  without  words,  or  with  only  fragmentary 
syllables,  their  meaning  is  inculcated  and  treasured  by  the  people. 

268 


A  STUDY  OF  OMAHA  INDIAN  MUSIC. 


39 


There  are  several  songs  belonging  to  the  ritual  of  raising  the 
Pipes.  No.  40  is  the  one  always  sung  at  the  close  of  this  movement 
and  its  final  exultant  phrase  indicates  the  eagle  fully  risen  ready 
for  the  onward  flight,  which  is  typical  of  the  sending  out  over  the 
people  the  message  of  peace. 

At  the  close  of  the  song  the  Pipe  Bearers  turn  to  the  left  and 
with  slow  rhythmic  steps,  face  the  people  sitting  in  groups  close 
to  the  walls  of  the  lodge,  the  drum  follows  accompanied  by  a  few 
singers  and  the  choral  No.  41  is  sung ;  the  Pipes  as  they  are  borne 
past  are  waved  over  the  heads  of  the  men  and  women  who  join  in 
the  song,  until  the  entire  lodge  is  vibrating  with  this  majestic  hymn 
of  welcome  to  peace.  The  words  are  few,  broken,  changed  and 
elliptical :  “This  is  what  is  given,  what  is  brought  to  you  — peace, 
brotherhood.”  “The  Pipes  are  of  God !”  said  an  old  Indian  to  me 
at  the  close  of  this  song. 

The  Pipes  are  generally  carried  four  times  about  the  lodge,  a 
new  song  is  sung  for  each  circuit,  each  song  being  repeated  four 
times ;  a  pause  follows  the  close  of  the  repetition  of  each  song, 
while  the  singers  halt  for  a  moment.  There  is  a  large  number  of 
these  chorals — some  of  them  very  spirited,  some  full  and  solemn, 
some  delicate  and  tender  as  No.  42.  The  words  are  few.  Kae- 
tha  means  the  clear  sky  ;  een-tuw-ee-nae,  now  coming.  The  mean¬ 
ing  of  this  song  was  given  me  by  Indians  who  were  responsible 
and  well  versed  in  the  ceremony.  “The  clear  sky,  the  green  fruit¬ 
ful  earth  is  good,  but  peace  among  men  is  better.”  The  music  is 
faithful  to  the  thought. 

No.  42  A  is  a  favorite  choral. 

Nos.  43  and  44  are  prayers  for  clear  weather.  Traces  of  ancient 
Sun  worship  are  recognizable  in  some  of  the  symbolic  adornments 
of  the  Pipes,  and  for  the  happy„issue  of  the  ceremony  wherein  peace 
and  fellowship  are  sought,  the  blessing  of  sunshine  is  considered 
essential ;  therefore  if  storms  come  during  the  performance  of  the 
Wa-wan,  the  people  cry  for  the  happy  omen  of  the  sunlight.  The 
words  are  broken  and  few,  but  the  choral  No.  44  is  full  and  solemn. 

After  the  lodge  has  been  circled  four  times  the  Bearers  stand  at 
the  back  of  the  lodge  facing  the  place  assigned  to  the  Pipes.  Then 
follow  the  songs  in  the  ritual  of  laying  down  the  Pipes,  and  when 
the  Pipes  are  at  rest,  speeches,  gifts  and  other  ceremonial  acts  take 
place.  Generally  the  Pipes  are  taken  up  and  the  lodge  circled 

269 


40 


A  STUDY  OF  OMAHA  INDIAN  MUSIC. 


twice  during  the  first  three  evenings;  the  ceremonies  of  the  fourth 
night  are  different. 

The  examples  of  Otoe  Wawan  songs  are  of  interest  musically. 
The  first  two,  Nos.  46  and  47,  are  sung  as  chorals  while  the  Pipes 
are  carried  around  the  lodge. 

The  beautiful  song  No.  48  is  sung  as  the  Pipes  are  laid  at  rest. 
It  is  a  great  favorite. 

Nos.  49  and  50  are  Pawnee  songs.  The  Wa-waw  music  of  this 
tribe  is  good  and  often  quite  spirited. 

On  the  fourth  night  the  dance  called  I-maw-tha  is  performed,  but 
if  for  any  reason  the  ceremony  of  the  Wa-waw  is  not  to  be  complete, 
it  is  brought  to  a  close  prior  to  this  dance  ;  otherwise  the  final  dance 
called  Ba-zhaw  takes  place  the  next  morning.  The  two  dances  are 
similar  in  movement,  but  the  latter  must  be  in  the  presence  of  the 
little  child,  Hunga.  For  these  dances  two  athletic  young  men  from 
the  Wa-wari  party  strip  to  the  breech  cloth,  and  take  off  the  moc¬ 
casins  ;  a  red  circle,  typical  of  the  sun,  is  painted  on  the  breast  and 
back  and  a  hmkh-pae,  downy  eagle  feather,  tied  in  the  scalp  lock. 
The  Pipes  are  handed  to  the  dancers  with  certain  ceremonies,  and 
they  begin  their  dance,  advancing  and  retreating,  each  one  on  his 
own  side  of  the  fire,  and  waving  the  Pipe  high  over  his  head.  The 
movements  are  light,  rapid,  spirited  and  graceful ;  the  songs  are 
different  from  any  used  in  other  parts  of  the  ceremony  and  are 
never  sung  except  for  the  Ba-zhaw,  or  I-man-tha.  During  this  dance 
the  Pipes  may  be  challenged  and  taken  from  the  dancer  by  some 
one  of  the  entertaining  party,  who  recounts  a  brave  act  or  generous 
deed.  He  then  lays  the  Pipe  down  at  the  spot  where  the  dancer 
wTas  checked,  and  it  can  only  be  taken  up  or  redeemed  by  some 
one  of  the  Wa-wan  party  who  matches  the  recited  deed  from  his 
own  experience,  and  restores  the  Pipe  and  the  interrupted  dance 
is  resumed ;  much  mirth  often  comes  in  play  at  this  part  of  the 
ceremony.  In  these  songs  there  are  generally  two  divisions,  an 
introduction  and  an  accompaniment  to  the  dancing  movements. 
As  the  dance  requires  great  agility  and  strength  it  is  of  short  dura¬ 
tion.  No.  51  is  an  example  of  these  songs. 

On  the  morning  of  the  fifth  day  before  sunrise  and  without  break¬ 
ing  their  fast,  the  Wa-wa%  party  proceed  to  the  lodge  of  the  Ah- 
wa n  e-ah-ka  taking  with  them  the  third  Hmkh-pae  and  the  clothing 


270 


A  STUDY  OF  OMAHA  INDIAN  MUSIC. 


41 


brought  to  dress  the  little  child  or  Hmiga.  The  Pipes,  borne  by 
the  two  dancers  of  the  preceding  night,  lead  the  procession  and  the 
men  all  sing  the  ritual  song  No.  52.  The  words  are  :  Zhm-ga,  little 
or  child ;  the,  you ;  ou-we-nae,  I  seek.  I  seek  you  little  child  to 
be  the  Hunga. 

At  the  door  a  halt  is  made  and  song  No.  53  sung.  The  words 
are  :  “I  have  come,  I  seek  you,  child,  it  is  you  I  seek  as  Hunga.” 

After  this  the  party  enters  and  one  of  the  younger  children  of 
the  Ah-waw  e-ah-ka  is  handed  over  to  the  Leader  to  be  dressed  and 
painted.  This  is  done  by  a  man  of  valiant  record.  The  face  is 
painted  red  symbolic  of  the  dawn,  a  black  line  is  drawn  across  the 
forehead  and  down  each  cheek  and  the  nose,  indicative  of  the  ex¬ 
periences  of  life  and  death.  While  the  painting  is  being  done,  the 
Pipes  are  swayed  to  song,  No.  54.  The  words  are :  Ah-tha-ha, 
adhere  ;  thae,  this  ;  ah-thae,  I  make  it. 

After  the  painting  is  completed,  while  another  song  No.  55  is 
sung,  eagle  down  is  sprinkled  over  the  child’s  head  to  symbolize 
the  young  eagle,  and  the  Hmkh-pae,  downy  eagle  feather,  tied 
upon  its  hair.  The  words  of  this  ritual  song  are :  Ah-g’thae,  I 
make  it  stand,  Hunga. 

The  Wa-wan  ah-ka  or  Leader  of  the  Wa-waw  party  then  selects 
a  man  to  carry  the  Himga  to  the  lodge  where  the  ceremonies  have 
been  held  during  the  past  four  days.  The  man  takes  the  child  upon 
his  back,  keeping  it  in  place  by  a  blanket  thrown  around  his  own 
shoulders,  and  walks  before  the  Pipes  and  the  Wa-waw  party  who 
follow  singing  No.  56,  “You  have  the  Hunga.”  The  Wa-waw  ah-ka 
takes  his  place  at  the  left  of  the  man,  who  outside  the  door  of  the 
lodge  sits  with  the  Hunga  between  his  knees. 

All  gifts  made  to  the  Wa-waw  party  are  sent  by  children  who  ad¬ 
vance  leading  the  ponies,  and  are  thanked  by  the  Himga  who 
strokes  the  left  arm  of  the  messenger.  Sometimes  a  man  in  full 
gala  dress,  well  painted,  his  horse  also  decorated,  will  ride  up  in 
front  of  the  Himga,  and  there  recount  his  valiant  deeds,  the  drum¬ 
mers  responding,  then  return  to  his  lodge,  and  send  back  the  horse 
as  a  gift  by  the  hand  of  his  little  child.  The  day  is  often  far  spent 
before  all  the  gifts  of  horses  are  gathered  together.  The  ceremon- 
ial  articles  are  left  with  the  Ah-waw,  e-ah-ka  who  has  become  bound 
to  the  Wa-wan  ah-ka  and  his  gens,  as  a  son  to  a  father.  The  Wa- 
wan  party  hasten  to  start  on  their  homeward  journey,  and  camp 

271 


42 


A  STUDY  OF  OMAHA  INDIAN  MUSIC. 


half  a  mile  from  the  village,  where  they  cook  and  eat  their  first 
meal,  after  a  fast  of  nearly  twenty-four  hours. 

THE  FUNERAL  SONG. 

There  is  but  one  funeral  song  among  the  Omahas,  and  it  is  only 
sung  during  the  obsequies  of  a  man  or  woman  who  has  been  greatly 
respected  in  the  tribe. 

Upon  the  death  of  such  an  one,  the  men  in  the  prime  of  early 
manhood  meet  together  near  the  lodge  of  the  deceased,  divest 
themselves  of  all  clothing  but  the  breech-cloth,  make  two  incisions 
in  the  left  arm,  and  under  the  loop  of  flesh  thus  made,  thrust  the 
stem  of  a  willow  twig,  having  on  it  sprays  of  leaves.  With  their 
blood  dripping  upon  the  green  branches  hanging  from  their  arms, 
the  men  move  silently  to  the  lodge  where  the  dead  lies ;  there 
ranging  themselves  in  a  line,  shoulder  to  shoulder,  and  marking 
the  rhythm  of  the  tune  by  beating  together  two  willow  sticks,  they 
sing  in  unison  the  funeral  song  No.  57.  There  is  a  violent  con¬ 
trast  between  the  bleeding  singers  and  their  vocal  utterances, 
for  the  music  in  its  major  strains  suggests  sunshine,  birds  and  ver¬ 
dure,  and  a  fleet,  happy  movement ;  nevertheless  there  must  be 
some  latent  harmony  between  the  song  and  the  ceremony.  Music, 
as  we  have  seen,  has,  according  to  Omaha  belief,  power  to  reach  the 
unseen  world.  The  spirit  of  the  dead  man  can  hear  the  song  as  it 
leaves  the  body,  and  the  glad  cadences  are  to  cheer  him  as  he  goes 
from  his  kindred.  He  hears  only,  he  cannot  see,  so  the  song  is  for 
him  ;  the  bleeding  body  is  an  expression  of  the  love  felt  b}^  the  liv¬ 
ing,  and  the  kindred  of  the  dead  can  see  the  blood  and  note  the 
manifested  honor  and  sympathy.  It  is  a  custom  among  the  Omahas 
to  cease  wailing  at  a  certain  point  in  the  funeral  ceremonies,  for  the 
reason,  they  say,  that  the  departing  one  must  not  be  distressed  as 
he  leaves  his  home  behind  him.  And  it  is  also  customary  after  a 
death  to  lacerate  the  limbs,  as  the  shedding  of  blood  expresses  how 
vital  is  the  loss.  The  funeral  song  and  ceremony,  savage  as  they 
appear  at  first  sight,  are  really  full  of  tender  unselfishness,  and  in¬ 
dicate  a  strong  belief  in  the  continuation  of  life  and  its  affections. 

III.  INDIVIDUAL  SONGS. 

In  this  group,  under  seven  sub-groups,  are  classed  those  songs 
that,  in  their  origin,  are  expressions  of  personal  feeling  or  appeal. 
They  are  sung  either  as  solos,  or  by  companies  of  persons  who  are 
272 


A  STUDY  OF  OMAHA  INDIAN  MUSIC. 


43 


about  to  engage  in  a  common  action,  or  who  are  united  by  having 
received,  while  fasting,  visions  of  a  like  object. 

Sub-group  A  comprises  songs  pertaining  to  war.  These  fall  into 
four  divisions : 

(a)  The  Me-ka-se  wa-a n,  sung  at  the  initiation  of  warlike  ex¬ 
peditions. 

(&)  The  Na-g’the  wa-an,  used  when  the  warriors  are  in  the  field 
and  dangers  threaten  them. 

(c)  The  Wae-fcm  wa-an,  chanted  by  the  women  in  behalf  of  men 
on  the  war-path. 

( d )  The  Wae-wa-che  wa-an,  the  song  of  triumph  over  the  fallen 
enemy,  sung  after  the  return  of  a  successful  war  party. 

The  songs  of  this  group,  although  taking  their  rise  in  personal 
experiences  or  emotions,  are  not  considered  as  the  sole  property  of 
the  composer,  but  can  be  learned  and  sung  by  the  people. 

Sub-group  B  contains  songs  of  mystery  which  directly  appeal  to 
the  unseen  forces  which  surround  man,  and  these  arrange  themselves 
in  five  divisions : 

(a)  The  tribal  prayer. 

( b )  Songs  that  came  to  a  youth  during  his  fasting  vigil,  at 
which  time  the  Powers  appealed  to  revealed  themselves  to  the  sup¬ 
pliant  in  some  particular  form ;  and  songs  thus  given  become  the 
medium  by  which  help  and  succor  are  asked  and  received  in  the 
hour  of  need.  Later  in  life  the  man  may  ally  himself  to  a  society 
composed  of  persons  who  have  received  a  similar  revelation  ;  for 
instance,  those  who  have  seen  a  horse  in  a  vision  are  eligible  to 
membership  in  the  Horse  Society,  or  those  to  whom  Thunder 
symbols  came  can  join  the  Thunder  Society.  Songs  of  this  divis¬ 
ion  while  they  are  sacred  to  the  man  who  receives  them  can  some¬ 
times  be  sung  by  members  of  the  society  to  which  the  man  belongs. 

(c)  In  this  division  are  grouped  the  songs  that  in  dreams  come 
to  a  man.  together  with  the  knowledge  and  use  of  medicinal  roots 
and  herbs.  Some  of  these  songs  have  been  handed  down  for  gen¬ 
erations,  but  neither  songs  nor  knowledge  is  an  inheritance,  but  is  to 
be  had  by  purchase  only  ;  even  a  mother  will  not  impart  to  her  chil¬ 
dren  this  use  of  roots  without  a  quid  pro  quo.  The  songs  belong 
to  the  acts  of  seeking,  gathering  and  preparing  the  plants,  they 
may  be  heard  by  any  one,  but  nobody  attempts  to  sing  them  as 
they  are  private  property,  and  so  respected  by  old  and  young. 

273 


44 


A  STUDY  OF  OMAHA  INDIAN  MUSIC. 


Sometimes  persons  having  knowledge  of  certain  remedies  assist  one 
another  in  the  management  of  cases,  as  the  Buffalo  doctors  have 
been  known  to  do.  These  men  in  a  vision  of  Buffalo  have  re¬ 
ceived  instructions  concerning  a  certain  remedy  efficacious  in  heal¬ 
ing  wounds,  to  be  applied  in  a  particular  manner  and  with  certain 
ceremonies  which  include  songs  ;  the  Buffalo  doctors  are  therefore 
specialists  and  treat  only  wounds.  The  songs  and  the  medicine  go 
together,  and  the  former  would  not  avail  without  the  latter. 

( d )  These  songs  differ  from  those  of  the  preceding  division  in 
that  they  are  general  in  their  benefits  and  can  give  the  singer  suc¬ 
cess  in  hunting,  in  war,  or  in  any  of  his  undertakings. 

(e)  The  songs  of  this  division  bring  help  to  the  hunter  or  trapper  ; 
they  too  can  be  bought,  and  must  be  sung  after  the  traps  are  set 
or  before  the  hunter  seeks  the  game.  They  have  power  to  entice 
the  animals,  and  cause  them  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  singer. 

Sub-group  C  comprises  Songs  of  Thanks.  These  are  sung  when 
gifts  are  publicly  bestowed  and  received  ;  they  are  bought  and  sold. 

Sub-group  D  comprises  songs  that  occur  in  myths.  They  are  the 
delight  of  the  children  who  use  them  in  their  games  and  they  form 
the  only  nursery  music  known  in  the  tribe. 

Sub-group  E  are  the  Wa-oo  wa-an.  These  songs  relate  to  the 
adventures  and  experiences  of  young  men  and  women,  and  are  some¬ 
what  of  the  ballad  order. 

Sub-group  F  are  the  Be-thae  wa-a n  or  love  songs,  sung  by  young 
men  during  courtship. 

Sub-group  Gf :  Flageolet  Music.  The  flageolet  is  the  musical  in¬ 
strument  of  young  men  and  is  principally  used  in  love  affairs  to  at¬ 
tract  the  attention  of  the  maiden  and  reveal  the  presence  of  the  lover. 

SUB-GROUP  A,  SONGS  PERTAINING  TO  WAR. 

(a)  Me-ka-see  wa-an  :  Me-ka-see,  wolf ;  wa-ajt,  song.  The  wolf 
is  the  patron  of  the  warrior ;  the  man  on  the  war-path  speaks  of 
himself  as  a  wolf.  When  a  number  of  men  have  decided  to  go  out 
as  a  war  party,  they  meet  together  and  perform  the  Me-ka-see  dance 
and  sing  the  Me-ka-see  wa-an.  These  songs  are  also  sung  as  the 
warriors  leave  the  village,  going  forth  on  a  long  expedition,  or  when 
the  party  is  travelling  and  in  no  immediate  danger. 

Song  No.  58  was  composed  by  the  Leader  of  a  war  party  when 
he  had  been  a  long  time  away  from  the  tribe  and  all  the  men  were 
homesick.  The  song,  although  giving  vent  to  their  unhappiness, 
274 


A  STUDY  OF  OMAHA  INDIAN  MUSIC. 


45 


seems  to  have  cheered  the  warriors,  they  persevered  in  their  ad¬ 
venture  and  returned  to  the  village  with  trophies  of  their  success. 
The  song  opens  with  syllables  expressive  of  war-like  emotion  over¬ 
shadowed  by  memory  of  the  home  scenes.  The  words  are  :  wa-oo, 
women;  ah-rna,  they;  wae-tha-he-ba,  have  gone  for  wood  ;  hoo- 
zha-wa,  are  happy;  hte,  really  or  very;  ma-thm-ah  mae-in-tae, 
they  must  be  walking  ;  thae-thu,  here  ;  wakh-pa-thin,  very  poor  ;  hte, 
very  ;  mum-b’thm  ah-thm-hae,  I  walk. 

“The  women  have  gone  to  gather  wood  and  are  having  a  joyous 
time  chatting  amid  the  trees,  while  here  very  miserable  am  I  walk¬ 
ing”  is  the  picture  conveyed  by  the  song  which  closes  with  war-like 
syllables. 

No.  59  commemorates  a  victory  over  the  Pawnees,  when  an 
Omaha  war  party  divided,  and,  simulating  peaceable  white  men  by 
swinging  their  arms  as  they  walked,  approached  the  Pawnee  village, 
and  fell  upon  the  people  before  they  had  discovered  the  ruse. 

The  words  are:  We-tim-gae,  sister;  sae-sa-sa,  trotting;  a n- 
thun-wuw-ge-ha,  follows  me. 

The  women  who  accompanied  the  war  party  shared  the  dangers 
and  were  awarded  their  portion  of  the  spoils.  The  song  refers  to 
them. 

In  the  song  No.  60,  the  warrior  declares  that  he,  like  the  wolf, 
has  no  fear  in  venturing  into  distant  and  strange  lands.  The 
words  are  few,  barely  expressing  the  sentiment,  the  music  and  syl¬ 
lables  giving  amplification.  The  song  is  liked  by  brave  men,  and 
is  quite  spirited. 

Me-ka-see,  wolf ;  ah-ma,  they ;  ma-zha^i,  land  ;  num-pa,  fear ; 
ba-zlie,  not ;  ba,  like  them  ;  hae-ge-mun,  I  am  so.  The  words  are 
blended  and  modified  in  the  song. 

(b)  Na-g’thae  wa-a%.  Na-g’tliae  means  captive:  the  war¬ 
rior  if  taken  captive  goes  to  his  death,  therefore  the  word  is  to  the 
soldier  the  synonym  of  death.  These  songs  are  sung  when  dangers 
threaten  and  death  is  near.  They  are  sometimes  sung  by  the 
Leader  to  inspirit  the  men,  or  Ivy  individuals  of  the  party,  who  thus 
strengthen  their  own  courage  to  meet  death.  No.  1,  referred  to 
on  page  13,  belongs  to  this  group. 

No.  61  is  a  rallying  song.  Ae-de,  there  ;  uw-ga-thae-tae,  let  us 
go;  ka-gae,  friend  ;  the-tim-gae,  your  sisters;  nim-he-tha,  fright¬ 
ened  as  in  danger;  be-dan,  when  they;  thim-zae,  but;  ma-thm-un- 
ga  thae-tae,  walk  let  us. 


275 


46 


A  STUDY  OF  OMAHA  INDIAN  MUSIC. 


Sisters  refer  to  the  women  of  the  tribe  who,  if  not  defended,  or  if 
the  warriors  are  unsuccessful,  will  be  left  exposed  to  the  enemy  ; 
hence  the  appeal  uHae!  Friend  let  us  go  to  the  rescue,  your  sisters 
are  in  danger,  let  us  walk,  Hae  !  Friend  !” 

The  music  suggests  that  the  path  of  duty  is  not  easy,  the  rhythm 
gives  the  call,  the  urgent  appeal  and  the  movement  are  fitted  to 
the  stress  of  feeling. 

No.  62  expresses  the  willingness  of  the  warrior  to  go  forth  to 
fight.  He  would  rise  with  the  dawn,  and  like  the  day  increase  in 
power,  following  his  leader.  Um-ba,  day;  edan,  approaching; 
naw-koo-thae,  hasten;  him-the-be-ga,  take  me;  Nu-dan-lnm-ga, 
Leader;  ah-yae-zhum-mae-tho,  they  may  have  said. 

The  day  is  approaching,  Hai !  Nu-dan-lnm-ga  hasten  to  lead  me 
forward. 

Song  No.  63  tells  its  own  story — words  and  music  being  closely 
woven  about  the  thought  of  death.  E-bae-tan,  to  go  around,  as 
around  an  obstacle  or  to  circumvent  a  threatened  disaster ;  thm- 
gae,  none ;  ish-ali-ga,  old  men  ;  ma,  the  plural ;  wa-guw-za-be-daw, 
when  they  tell ;  shae-ah,  yonder  ;  he-be-tae,  reached  that  first ;  ali- 
buz-zhe-tae,have  not  said  ;  Nu-dan-him-ga,  Leader  ;  tae-hae,  the  dif¬ 
ficult,  hard  to  accomplish. 

There  is  no  evading  death.  The  old  men  have  not  told  that  any 
one  has  found  a  way  to  pass  beyond  it.  The  career  of  a  Leader  is 
difficult  of  accomplishment. 

(c)  The  Wae-ton  wa-an  are  sung  by  women  in  mature  life  stand¬ 
ing  before  the  lodge  of  a  family,  one  or  more  of  whose  members  are 
on  the  war  path.  The  songs  are  accompanied  by  beats  upon  a  raw 
hide,  which  serves  as  a  drum.1  These  songs  are  spoken  of  as  Wa- 
zhm-thae-thae ;  this  word  indicates  that  through,  or  by  means  of 
these  songs,  strength,  power,  passion  is  sent  to  the  warrior  assist¬ 
ing  him  to  be  victorious  in  battle.  The  family  thus  remembered 
bestow  gifts  upon  the  singers,  who  by  these  Wae-Um  wa-an  have 
helped  the  distant  husband  or  brother  in  the  hour  of  danger. 

No.  64.  The  words  of  the  song  are  few  and  used  elliptically. 
Nu-daw-himga,  Leader;  wa-shu-shae,  brave  ;  sua  yae,  are  always  ; 
ae-de-he-ke,  when  he  arrives.  The  meaning  is  :  When  one  is  a 

1  At  the  Sun  dance  among  the  Dakotas  the  song,  sung  at  the  beginning  of  that  part  of 
the  ceremony  when  the  men  are  tortured  at  the  pole, is  led  by  women  who  hold  as  they 
beat  it,  a  raw  hide,  in  place  of  a  drum. 

276 


A  STUDY  OF  OMAHA  INDIAN  MUSIC. 


47 


Leader  lie  must  always  be  brave,  and  when  lie  (the  one  of  whom 
the  women  sing)  reaches  the  enemy  he  will  not  fail  to  be  brave. 

No.  65.  This  song  is  serious  and  replete  with  feeling ;  note  the 
change  of  time  in  connection  with  the  meaning  of  the  words.  These 
are  not  easy  to  translate  so  as  clearly  to  reflect  the  full  meaning. 
Ka-gae,  Friend  ;  tae-he,  difficult ;  lia-ee  thim-zha  ;  they  say  but ; 
hae  ish-ah-gae,  the  old  men  ;  wa-gan-za-be-dari,  when  they  teach 
or  exhort ;  nu,  man  ;  tae,  to  be  ;  tha-thim-ga  ta-dun,  that  you  are 
to  find  out;  shun-tha-the-shae,  that  is  the  reason  you  are  going. 
Friend  !  the  old  men  in  their  exhortations  have  said,  it  is  hard  to 
be  a  man,  to  be  able  to  meet  hardships  and  overcome  difficulties; 
to  learn  this  for  yourself  you  are  now  in  quest  of  the  enemy. 

The  words  in  No.  66  are  few  but  full  of  assurance.  The  open¬ 
ing  phrases  are  accompanied  by  syllables  only,  so  also  the  last 
two,  one  phrase  alone  is  supplied  with  words. 

Ae-de-he-ke,  when  he  gets  there ;  wa-shu-sha,  brave ;  meaning 
when  he,  the  warrior  who  has  gone  forth,  reaches  the  enemy  he  will 
be  brave. 

The  words  of  Song  No.  67  are  difficult  to  translate  literally. 
Oo-hae-ke-tha-mae  can  be  rendered  by,  “they  gave  him  his  way” 
the  obstinate  person  who  persists  in  the  face  of  the  setting  forth 
by  friends  of  the  dangers  that  beset  the  course  he  wishes  to  pursue, 
is  at  last  left  to  follow  his  desire,  to  have  his 'own  way.  Wa-ba- 
ska  is  a  name  that  was  used  in  this  song  while  its  possessor  was 
on  the  war  path,  but  any  name  can  be  introduced  ;  gha-gae,  cry ; 
wa-tha-staw-zlieah-da7i-hae,  did  not  cease. 

He  did  not  cease  to  cry,  or  plead,  so  they  gave  him  his  way. 

The  music  of  No.  68  is  Dakotan.  The  song  was  adopted  by  the 
Poncas  who  supplied  their  own  words,  and  the  Omahas  took  it  from 
the  Poncas.  It  was  sung  by  the  Dakota  women  when  the  warriors 
moved  out  of  the  camp.  As  it  is  a  foreign  song  among  the  Omahas, 
it  is  sometimes  used  as  a  Wae-tow  wa-a n  and  sometimes  as  a  Wae- 
wa-che  wa-an. 

The  words  are  Ou-ke-tae  ah-ma,  the  tribes ;  the-nun-im-ta- 
yae,  that  they  may  hear  you  ;  wash-konae  gim-yah-hae,  exert ;  yah- 
hae  is  the  woman’s  form  of  command.  Exert  yourselves  that  the 
tribes  may  hear  of  your  bravery. 

(c?)  The  Wae-wa-che  wa-aw  are  songs  of  triumph,  sung  when 
the  dance  around  the  scalp  of  a  fallen  enemy  is  in  progress.  Parts 
of  these  songs  are  sometimes  sung  by  women  alone. 


277 


48 


A  STUDY  OF  OMAHA  INDIAN  MUSIC. 


The  music  of  No.  69  is  quite  expressive  of  the  movements  of 
one  carefully  making  his  way  through  the  tall  prairie  grass,  avoid¬ 
ing  observation  that  he  may  successfully  capture  the  horses  of  his 
enemy. 

Sha-an  zhiwga,  little  Sioux  ;  shon-gae,  horses  ;  the-ta,  your  ;  ou- 
daw,  good  ;  lioo-wa-nae,  I  seek. 

Little  Sioux,  I  seek  your  good  horses. 

No  70  is  full  of  assurance  and  taunting  and  the  music  is  lively 
and  stimulating  to  pride.  Oo-tha-zha-zhae-gan,  you  emulated  ; 
in-tae-dae,  and  now,  or  in  consequence  ;  tha-gha-gae,  you  weep  ;  ou- 
tha-dae,  people  ;  the-show,  surrounding  ;  we-sna-hte,  I  only  ;  uw-wim- 
shu-shae,  I  am  brave. 

You  (the  enemy)  emulated  me  (the  Omahas)  and  now  you  cry. 
Among  the  surrounding  people  I  (the  Omahas)  only  am  brave — 
because  you  emulated  my  deeds,  you  weep  for  your  slain. 

Zan-zhe-mim-dae,  the  person  mentioned  in  Song  No.  71,  was  a 
very  old  man  when  the  incident  which  gave  birth  to  the  song  oc¬ 
curred.  There  had  been  an  attack  on  the  village,  and  the  enemy 
had  been  driven  off  with  such  vigor  that  they  were  obliged  to  leave 
their  slain  on  the  field.  As  the  warriors  rode  toward  the  dead  to 
claim  their  honors,  the  old  man,  Zaw-zhe-mun-dae,  was  seen  coming 
as  fast  as  his  feebleness  would  allow;  they  halted  for  him  to  join 
them,  and  permitted  him  out  of  respect  to  his  age  and  previous 
valiant  career,  to  touch  the  dead,  and  thus  carry  off  one  of  the 
coveted  honors. 

The  words  ah-ma,  he ;  sha-ee,  is  coming,  are  the  only  ones  used  ; 
the  rest  are  syllables. 

Song  No.  72  has  reference  to  the  Dakotas  who  were  almost  con¬ 
stantly  at  war  with  the  Omahas  during  the  present  century.  The 
words  are  modern,  but  the  music  is  old  ;  the  same  is  true  of  other 
Wae-wa-che  wa-an. 

Sha-a%  zhinga,  little  Sioux ;  ae-ge-zhan-dafi,  because  you  have 
done  so ;  Ae-ge-ma,  I  have  done ;  ae-ah-tan,  why ;  tha-gha-gae,  do 
you  weep. 

Little  Sioux,  why  do  you  weep,  because  I  have  done  what  you  have 
done,  that  is,  the  Sioux  attacked  the  Omahas  and  killed  some  of 
the  tribe,  the  Omahas  retaliated  and  the  Sioux  lost  some  of  their 
number.  The  song  asks  why  they  should  mourn  who  have  received 
the  same  treatment  they  gave  to  others. 

2  78 


A  STUDY  OF  OMAHA  INDIAN  MUSIC. 


49 


SUB-GROUP  B,  MYSTERY  SONGS. 

(a)  The  Tribal  Prayer,  No.  73,  is  the  prayer  which  is  taught 
the  child  when  he  is  sent  forth  to  fast  and  pray  alone,  if  haply  he 
ma}7  obtain  a  vision  which  shall  be  a  help  during  all  his  life.  There 
is  only  this  one  prayer  in  the  tribe,  and  it  is  applicable  to  all  sol¬ 
emn  experiences  and  important  events  in  the  life  of  every  one.  It 
is  often  heard  when  the  lightning  flashes,  and  the  thunder  rolls, 
and  the  singer  goes  alone  to  lift  up  his  voice  to  the  mighty  powers 
of  the  air. 

The  words  are  Wa-kan-da,  God;  tliae-thu,  here;  Wah-pa-thm, 
poor  or  needy  ;  ah-tan-hae,  I  stand. 

God!  here,  poor  and  needy,  I  stand. 

(&)  The  spirited  Mystery  song  No.  74  exemplifies  the  movement 
of  the  Horse,  not  any  particular  horse,  but  that  creative  power  or 
force  which  is  embodied  in  the  form  of  the  horse.  This  song  may 
be  sung  in  time  of  danger  or  when  the  man’s  horse  is  to  be  tested 
as  to  its  speed  or  endurance.  After  the  singing  of  this  song  the 
animal  is  supposed  to  be  reinforced  by  the  spirit  Horse. 

Nun-gae,  gallop;  sha-tha-mae,  there  they  go;  shon-gae,  horse, 
weta,  contractions  of  we-we-ta,  my  or  mine ;  pa-huft-ga,  first ;  tlirn, 
the  ;  ae-ahma,  they  say. 

There  they  go  galloping, 

My  horse  leading,  they  say. 

The  word  ae-ah-ma,  they  say,  at  the  close  of  the  song,  indicates 
that  the  man  is  not  merely  describing  something  he  has  seen,  but 
something  that  has  been  interpreted  to  him  to  mean  that  his  guar¬ 
dian,  his  especial  spirit,  would  lead  him  and  bring  him  to  success. 

In-g’thati  wa-an,  or  Thunder  songs,  belong  to  this  subdivision. 
Men  who  sing  these  songs  have  in  their  visions  seen  the  symbol  of 
Thunder  and  heard  the  song  which  will  have  power  to  reach  the  god 
of  the  storm.  By  these  melodies  rain  can  be  secured  or  the  tempest 
stilled,  and  lightning  may  be  called  down  to  destroy  man.  These 
songs  are  also  sung  in  the  sweat  lodge  during  purification,  or  when 
seeking  to  arrest  death. 

The  words  in  Song  No.  75  speak  of  the  Thunder  gods  as  umy 
friends”  and  their  dwelling  place  or  village  is  referred  to  and  they 
are  the  gods  who  are  speaking  in  the  thunder, 
p.  M.  papers  1  19 


279 


50 


A  STUDY  OF  OMAHA  INDIAN  MUSIC. 


E-ka-gae,  my  friends  ;  e-ah-mae,  they  speak ;  Ta-wa?z-g7thim 
the  village  or  people  of  the  village  ;  Wakanda,  gods  ;  ma,  plural. 

My  friends  they  are  speaking 

The  people  of  the  village  are  speaking. 

The  gods  they  are  speaking. 

Song  76  has  no  words.  It  is  sung  during  the  Thunder  rites. 

No.  77,  contrary  to  the  usual  manner  of  rendering  these  songs, 
can  be  sung  by  nine  old  men,  all  of  them  Thunder  dreamers,  as 
they  move  solemnly  around  the  camp  circle  generally  during  the 
night.  The  words  are  somewhat  obscure,  they  speak  of  the  Thun¬ 
der  gods  going  around,  encompassing,  circumventing ;  and  declare 
that  the  gods  make  fearful,  are  themselves  objects  of  fear  to  man. 
The  music  has  a  dramatic  suggestiveness  in  sympathy  with  the 
vagueness  of  the  words  ;  the  effect  is  heightened  by  the  accompani¬ 
ment  of  bells. 

(c)  Songs  in  this  subdivision  find  their  inspiration  in  visions 
which  have  conveyed  to  man  a  knowledge  of  medicinal  plants  use¬ 
ful  in  sickness  or  injuries. 

No.  78  is  sung  by  the  Buffalo  doctors  when  attending  a  wounded 
man — during  the  preparation  and  application  of  the  remedy  to  the 
wound.  The  medicine  is  generally  sprayed  from  the  lips  with  con¬ 
siderable  force  so  that  it  may  reach  every  part  of  the  lacerated 
flesh.  The  song  indicates  that  this  mode  of  treatment  was  incul¬ 
cated  in  the  vision. 

“From  here  do  I  send  it  (the  medicine  to  the  wound)  thus,— in 
this  manner  am  I  bidden  to  send  it.” 

Thae-thu-tuw,  from  here  ;  thae-ah-thae,  do  I  send  ;  Ae-gim,  thus  ; 
ne-thim,  the  water  or  medicine  ;  shaw-ah-daw,  I  am  bidden. 

(d)  The  songs  belonging  to  this  subdivision  are  potent  to  se¬ 
cure  general  benefits,  and  do  not  belong  to  any  one  avocation.  The 
singer  by  means  of  this  Mystery  wa-an  can  achieve  success  in  any 
of  his  undertakings.  These  songs  can  be  purchased,  but  the  sell¬ 
ing  does  not  preclude  the  use  of  the  song  by  the  seller.  Several 
men  may  therefore  use  the  same  song. 

No.  79  is  an  example.  Tlie  words  “walk  this  way”  toward  me, 
the  singer,  convey  the  invitation  to  that  which  he  seeks,  to  yield 
to  the  magic  of  the  song. 

Du-da-ha,  this  way  ;  maw-thm,  walk.  These  are  the  only  words  ; 
the  syllables  carry  the  musical  tones  and  fuller  meaning. 

280 


A  STUDY  OP  OMAHA  INDIAN  MUSIC. 


51 


(e)  Trapping  and  hunting  songs ;  sung  after  setting  the  trap, 
and  before  tracking  the  game.  The  songs  are  seldom  elaborate  in 
melody  or  rhythm. 

SUB-GROUP  C,  SONGS  OF  THANKS. 

There  are  quite  a  number  of  varied  songs  in  this  group,  they  are 
always  sung  in  acknowledgment  of  a  gift.  When  a  poor  man  is 
remembered  he  generally  goes  outside  the  lodge  and  in  the  hearing 
of  the  entire  village  sings  the  song  which  tells  of  his  good  fortune, 
and  proclaims  the  name  of  his  benefactor.  When  gifts  are  made 
and  received  between  men  of  equal  standing,  the  songs  are  apt  to 
be  sung  in  the  company  only  of  those  who  happen  to  be  present ; 
at  the  same  time,  however,  some  old  man  less  fortunate  in  his  life 
who  may  have  been  the  recipient  of  favors  from  either  one  of  the 
parties,  will  go  abroad  to  proclaim  in  a  public  manner  the  gifts  that 
have  been  thus  bestowed  privately. 

No.  80  gives  an  idea  of  this  class  of  songs.  The  name  of  the 
giver  is  always  introduced  in  the  beginning  of  the  second  part  of 
the  song,  followed  by  the  words  tha-uw-tha-thae,  you  pity  me,  have 
compassion  on  me ;  wm-tha-kae,  you  are  true. 

When  the  name  of  the  giver  is  short,  syllables  are  added  to  meet 
the  requirements  of  the  music. 

SUB-GROUP  D,  MYTH  SONGS. 

These  are  bits  of  songs  which  occur  in  the  myths  that  are  told 
during  the  winter  days  and  evenings  ;  they  are  generally  attributed 
to  the  animals  who  are  so  often  the  heroes  of  these  tales.  These 
melodies  are  sung  by  the  women  to  amuse  the  children  who  catch 
them  readily  and  in  their  childish  way  dramatize  that  portion  of 
the  myth  wherein  the  song  occurs,  singing  the  melody  with  childish 
fervor. 

When  No.  81  is  well  rendered,  there  is  much  humor  in  the  de¬ 
scending  notes  beginning  withoh-hae-o,  hae-o,  etc.,  and  the  assertive 
conclusion  “they  have  gone  to  the  spirit,”  “they  have  gone  to  the 
spirit.”  The  song  never  fails  to  delight  all  hearers. 

Ma-stin-gae,  rabbit;  shae-tha-thin-shae,  yonder  going  you;  wm- 
jae-ga-tha-thm  shae,  where  are  you  going ;  wa-na-hae-tha-ba,  they 
have  gone  to  the  spirits. 


281 


52 


A  STUDY  OF  OMAHA  INDIAN  MUSIC. 


SUB-GROUP  E,  WA-00  WA-AY. 

This  group  of  songs  has  already  been  characterized  on  p.  14. 

No.  82  is  the  confession  of  a  woman  to  the  man  she  loves,  that 
he  had  conquered  her  heart  before  he  had  achieved  a  valorous  repu¬ 
tation.  The  song  opens  upon  the  scene.  The  warrior  has  returned 
victorious  and  successfully  passed  through  the  rites  of  the  Tent  of 
War,  so  he  is  entitled  to  wear  his  honors  publicly ;  the  woman  tells 
him  how  when  he  started  on  the  war  path,  she  went  up  on  the  hill 
and  standing  there  cried  to  Wa-kaw-da  to  grant  him  success.  He 
who  had  now  won  that  success  had  even  then  vanquished  her  heart, 
“had  caused  her  to  die”  to  all  else  but  the  thought  of  him. 

The  modification  and  the  choice  of  words  and  the  use  of  the 
syllables  indicate  metrical  feeling  and  expression. 

Nu-daw  tha-g’the-u/i  daw 
Ae-tae-uw  tha-thae-thae 
Nu-daw  tha-g’the-o/i-daw 
Ae-tae-uw  tha-thae-thae 
Nu-daw  tha-g’the-a/i-daw 
Ae-tae-uw  tha-thae-tha  ya  tha  ya  hi 
Ha  tlia  ha  tha 

Nu-daw  snae-tae-de  wa-kaw-da  wae-ka-tuw-hae  thae 
Wakawda  ae-hae-ah  fom-hae  thae 
Ae-tae-uw  tha-thae-tha  ya  tha  ya  hi. 

Nu-dan,  war ;  tha-g’the-daw,  when  you  returned ;  ae-tae-uw, 
die  ;  tha-thae-thae,  you  caused  me  ;  snae-tae-de,  go  when  you  did  ; 
Wa-kaw-da,  God;  wae-ka-ah,  I  appealed ;  tuw-hae,  standing. 

No.  83  is  difficult  to  translate  so  as  to  convey  its  humor  and 
sarcasm.  The  song  purports  to  be  sung  by  a  man  of  the  Don  Juan 
type ;  he  sits  upon  a  hill  overlooking  the  village,  the  murmurs  of 
the  people  come  up  to  him  as  they  talk  of  his  entanglements  in  un¬ 
complimentary  speeches  interspersed  with  threats  ;  he  however  shifts 
all  responsibility,  saying,  “The  gods  have  made  me  what  I  am” 
finresistible ! 

Ta^wuw-gthuw,  village;  thae-mm-j’ae  dae,  this  many ;  im-thun- 
ge-ah,  of  me  they  talk  ;  thuw-kae,  group  ;  Wa-kaw-da,  Gods  ;  hae-ge- 
lmm-tae,  what  I  am  ;  iw-thin-ga-yae,  of  me  they  decreed — h  is  added 
for  euphony  ;  ga-ma,  yonder  they ;  he-ah-mae,  they  talk. 

282 


A  STUDY  OF  OMAHA  INDIAN  MUSIC. 


53 


No.  84  is  derisive  in  spirit.  An  aunt,  whose  lover  had  left  her 
and  gone  to  her  niece,  acquaints  the  girl  with  the  young  man’s  pre¬ 
vious  attachment.  He  who  so  “skilled  in  speech”  considers  him¬ 
self  able  to  captivate  both  old  and  young. 

Thae-thu-tan,  from  here;  sha-tha-yae,  he  went  to  you ;  we-tu- 
zhon-gae,  my  niece  ;  e-ae,  speech ;  tha-pe-ba,  he  is  skilled ;  han- 
wan-ke-ah,  he  spoke  to  me;  Wa-han-thin-gae,  orphan,  name  given 
the  youth. 

No.  85  gives  a  glimpse  into  the  life  of  a  woman  whose  circum¬ 
stances  keep  her  from  the  man  of  her  choice ;  she  pleads  with  him 
to  flee  with  her  from  the  tribe  and  go  to  the  Ponkas. 

Dude-ha,  nearer  this  way;  uu-dum-bae,  me  look  at ;  nuz-zhin, 
stand  ;  ae-thum-bae,  appear ;  ah-ya-nuz-zhin-dan,  I  stand  when ; 
the-shna,  you  only  ;  ou-we-b’the-zke-dae,  I  look  for  you  ;  ee?2-u-dan, 
I  am  content ;  muz-zhe-hae,  I  am  not ;  Kan-zae-zhin-ga,  man’s 
name  ;  Ponkata,  to  the  Ponkas  ;  un-ga-thae  tae-hae,  let  us  go. 

SUB-GROUP  F,  LOVE  SONGS. 

The  Be-thae  wa-aw,  or  love  songs,  are  sung  in  the  early  morning 
about  daybreak.  The  few  words  that  are  set  to  the  music  refer  to 
the  time  of  day.  The  young  man  seeks  a  vantage  point  and  there 
sings  his  lay,  the  girl  within  the  tent  hears  him  and  perchance  by 
and  by  they  may  meet  at  the  spring,  the  trysting  place  of  lovers. 

The  syllables  lend  themselves  to  a  flowing  breathing  sound,  and 
the  hand  is  sometimes  waved  before  the  mouth  to  enhance  the  ef¬ 
fect  by  vibrations.  The  music  is  sung  ad  libitum  as  feeling  may 
sway  the  singer. 

No.  86  is  very  charming  when  sung  with  expression.  The  long 
notes  suggest  echoes,  .and  the  solitariness  of  the  woods.  The 
music  is  as  simple  and  untutored  as  the  flowers  that  are  often  the 
only  listeners. 

No.  87  is  blithe  and  full  of  the  joy  of  spring  and  the  delightsome¬ 
ness  of  youth.  There  are  no  suggestions  of  shadows  in  the  song, 
no  questionings,  only  a  bubbling  of  happiness. 

No.  88  is  more  serious  in  feeling,  and  there  is  a  consciousness 
of  nature,  expressed  in  the  music  and  of  the  passion  felt  for  the 
object  of  the  young  man’s  affection.  The  few  words  are  umba, 
day ;  e-dan,  approaching,  or  dawn ;  hoo-we-nae,  I  seek  you. 

No.  89  is  full  of  the  movements  of  dawn,  the  gentle  breeze  that 
heralds  the  day,  stirring  the  leaves,  nodding  the  flowers,  and  awak- 

283 


54 


A  STUDY  OF  OMAHA  INDIAN  MUSIC. 


ening  the  birds.  The  youth  comes  forth  with  the  light,  his  love 
overflowing  in  song,  and  the  maid  feels  the  day  dawning  in  her 
breast ;  lovers,  birds  and  the  very  sky  are  all  in  accord. 

No.  90  would  be  recognized  as  a  love  song  wherever  heard ;  it 
is  full  of  passionate  fervor,  and  is  worthy  of  recognition  among 
musicians. 


SUB-GROUP  G,  FLAGEOLET  MUSIC. 

Songs  Nos.  91  and  92  are  referred  to  by  Prof.  J.  C.  Fillmore. 
They,  too,  are  the  heralds  of  the  lover  who  seeks  his  mistress. 

INSTRUMENTS. 

The  instruments  used  to  accompany  the  voice  are  the  drum,  the 
rattle  and  the  whistle.  The  drum  is  of  varied  form  and  capacity, 
and  is  played  indifferent  ways  according  to  the  character  of  the  song. 

The  small  drum,  about  the  size  of,  and  similar  in  shape  to  the 
tamborine,  is  used  in  Mystery  and  Dream  songs.  It  is  beaten  in 
tremolo  by  the  fingers,  or  a  small  reed.  Its  rhythm  is  marked  at 
the  opening  of  a  phrase,  and  the  rapid  light  touch  like  the  fluttering 
of  the  heart  of  a  frightened  bird,  produces  a  stimulating  eifect  up¬ 
on  the  listener.  This  light  drumming  can  be  heard  at  a  long  dis¬ 
tance  in  the  night.  Lying  on  the  ground  in  my  tent,  my  ear  has 
caught  the  weird  throbbing  of  one  of  these  drums  that  some  man 
more  than  a  mile  away  was  playing  as  he  sang  his  song  of  the  Super¬ 
natural.  Listening  to  the  sound  and  knowing  its  potency  with  the 
native  mind,  one  can  apprehend  how  this  rhythm  expresses  the  trep¬ 
idation  of  man  as  he  essays  to  approach  the  Unseen  Powers  that 
he  believes  controls  his  destiny. 

The  large  drums  were  formerly  made  from  the  section  of  a  tree, 
hollowed  out,  over  the  open  end  of  which  a  skin  was  stretched. 
The  drum  was  tuned  by  partly  filling  it  with  water  kept  sweet  by 
charcoal,  the  skin  being  moistened,  strained  and  dried  to  the  desired 
tone.  Drums  of  this  kind  are  now  almost  unknown  ;  a  keg  has  been 
substituted  for  the  hollowed  section  of  a  tree,  and  this  sort  of  drum 
is  used  in  many  of  the  religious  ceremonies.  Large  flat  drums  were 
constructed  by  stretching  a  calf  skin  over  a  hoop  of  wythes  ;  these 
drums,  supported  by  four  sticks  driven  into  the  ground,  were  beaten 
with  sticks  muffled  with  leather.  Our  ordinary  drum  has  now  sup¬ 
planted  this  particular  native  instrument. 

284 


A  STUDY  OF  OMAHA  INDIAN  MUSIC. 


55 


The  double  beat,  so  peculiar  a  feature  in  many  of  the  songs  here 
presented,  is  played  upon  the  large  drums.  In  the  drum  accompani¬ 
ment  of  the  Hae  thuska  the  accent  is  given  with  great  force  ;  in  the 
Wa-wa n,  the  accent  is  not  the  less  marked  but  the  stroke  is  not  as 
vehement  as  in  the  former. 

The  Indian  dram  answers  to  the  rhythm  of  the  human  heart-beat 
as  it  responds  to  the  emotion  evoked  by  the  song ;  man’s  ambition  and 
daring  are  aroused,  and  his  social  or  religious  sentiments  are  awa¬ 
kened.  The  variety  of  treatment  and  power  of  expression  of  this 
simple  instrument  as  shown  in  Indian  music  are  worthy  of  particular 
mention. 

Rattles  are  made  of  gourds  filled  with  fine  or  coarse  gravel  or 
pebbles,  according  to  the  tone  required.  A  tremolo  can  be  pro¬ 
duced  by  shaking  them,  or  they  are  played  with  a  strong  stroke  and 
a  rebound.  The  manner  of  playing  them  is  determined  by  the 
character  of  the  song.  The  rattles  are  used  to  accompany  Mystery 
songs,  and  those  of  the  Wa-wa?i  ceremony,  and  are  associated  with 
the  idea  of  an  appeal  to  the  Supernatural. 

In  presenting  these  Indian  songs  to  her  own  race,  the  writer  is 
conscious  that  they  suffer  in  the  divorcement  from  their  own  pe¬ 
culiar  scene  and  circumstance.  The  music,  to  be  understood  and 
appreciated,  needs  its  original  setting  of  nature’s  colors,  Indian 
life,  and  tribal  ceremonial.  This  setting  is  always  present  to  the 
consciousness  of  the  native  singer  and  his  audience,  it  renders 
an  introduction  to  the  theme  unnecessary,  supplies  the  picture 
which  stands  in  the  place  of  an  elaborated  expression  of  the  thought 
or  feeling  the  song  is  intended  to  convey,  and  obviates  the  neces¬ 
sity  of  any  prelude  or  elaboration  either  of  the  words  or  music.  The 
words  are  always  few,  giving  a  hint  rather  than  a  clearly  defined 
expression  or  narration,  rendering  it  difficult  for  the  unheralded 
melody  to  secure  our  attention  or  rouse  our  sympathy  before  it  has 
finished  its  message  and  passed  into  silence.  It  is  difficult  for  any 
one  born  and  bred  in  our  complicated  social  relations  and  customs 
to  appreciate  the  openness  and  simplicity  of  Indian  life,  and  to 
understand  how  all  are  under  like  conditions.  There  are  no  secrets, 
no  hidden  tragedies,  no  private  sorrows  in  the  tribe ;  everything  is 
known  and  seen  by  everybody.  The  directness,  the  briefness,  the 
lack  of  preparatory  words  or  chords,  and  the  absence  of  subsequent 
unfolding  of  the  ideas  or  feelings,  which  are  so  marked  a  character- 

285 


56 


A  STUDY  OF  OMAHA  INDIAN  MUSIC. 


istic  of  these  songs,  do  not  take  the  Indian  by  surprise  or  leave  him 
unsatisfied.  These  songs — the  product  of  Indian  tribal  life — sug¬ 
gest  the  question  whether  sustained  thinking,  without  which  there 
can  be  no  full  expression  of  thought  in  literature,  music  or  any 
other  art,  is  possible  in  a  state  of  society  where  labor  is  not  coor¬ 
dinated,  where  each  person,  each  family,  each  gens  must  stand  in¬ 
dividually  against  dread  hunger,  and  mortal  enemies.  The  neces¬ 
sity  of  providing  food  and  clothing  is  upon  every  man  and  woman, 
and  the  mode  of  living  is  such  as  to  preclude  the  accumulation  of 
property  necessary  to  secure  immunity  from  the  pressure  of  daily 
needs,  and  the  consequent  leisure  for  mental  labor  and  its  artistic 
expression.  While  it  is  true  that  evidences  of  sustained  thinking 
are  wanting,  these  Indian  songs  show  nascent  art  both  in  music 
and  poetry.  Moreover  they  reveal  the  fact  that  emotion  in  its  sim¬ 
plest  utterance  weaves  together  words  and  melody  and  is  uncon¬ 
sciously  true  to  the  laws  which  we  have  discovered  to  underlie  and 
govern  our  separated  arts  of  music  and  poetry. 

In  considering  these  groups  of  songs  in  their  relation  to  Indian 
life,  one  is  naturally  led  to  compare  them  with  similar  groups  among 
our  own  people.  Taking  a  broad  outlook  over  the  two,  one  finds 
much  in  common  in  Indian  and  Aryan  songs.  Wherever  one  man 
yearns  toward  the  mysterious  unseen  powers  that  environ  him, 
whenever  he  seeks  expression  of  his  personal  loves,  hopes,  fears 
and  griefs,  his  song  will  answer  in  its  fundamental  directive  emo¬ 
tion  to  that  of  every  other  man ;  this  is  particularly  true  of  our 
folk  music,  which  embraced  in  the  past  the  Mystery  songs,  like 
the  Ragas  which  controlled  the  elements,  and  other  religious  songs 
of  our  ancestors.  When  we  bring  the  Indian  song  side  by  side  with 
our  more  modern  music,  in  which  the  intellect  controls  the  expres¬ 
sion  of  emotion,  marked  differences  are  shown,  but  there  is  a  sym¬ 
pathetic  chord  and  even  some  of  the  fundamental  forms  of  expres¬ 
sion,  as  the  use  of  melody,  harmony  and  rhythm,  the  grouping  of 
measures,  and  the  beating  of  one  rhythm  against  another  are  common 
to  both.  The  divergence  is  upon  the  intellectual  rather  than  the 
emotional  plane.  Our  music  shows  the  influence  of  our  social  con¬ 
ditions,  our  coordinated  society — our  leisure  class,  whether  this  be 
sacerdotal  or  secular,  and  the  added  power  gained  through  written 
music,  wherein  the  eye  has  reenforced  the  ear,  making  the  intellect 
more  potent,  and  developing  a  new  enjoyment  and  a  broader  field 
for  musical  expression. 

286 


A  STUDY  OF  OMAHA  INDIAN  MUSIC. 


57 


The  absence  of  certain  kinds  of  songs  among  the  Indians  stimu¬ 
lates  the  inquiry,  why,  where  so  much  is  common  between  the  races 
these  should  not  be  found,  for  example,  the  Labor  or  Guild  songs, 
such  as  the  old  English  Catch.  These  Catches  originated  in  a  so¬ 
ciety  where  labor  had  become  secularized  both  in  feeling  and  as¬ 
sociation.  With  the  Indian,  labor  was  not  yet  divorced  from  super¬ 
natural  influences,  the  mystery  of  the  fruitfulness  of  nature  still 
surrounded  the  cultivation  of  the  soil ;  he  planted  when  the  keeper 
of  the  Sacred  Tent  from  the  Hunga  gens  distributed  a  few  kernels 
of  corn  with  religious  ceremony.  The  hunter  and  the  trapper 
called  the  game  by  means  of  the  Mystery  song.  In  a  word,  pros¬ 
perity  by  means  of  labor  was  not  recognized  as  in  the  control  of  the 
laborer,  but  subject  to  favoring  or  disturbing  occult  Powers.  The 
ground  was  still  Mother  Earth,  the  stones,  the  animals,  the  trees 
shared  with  man  a  common  gift  of  life,  and  were  his  friends  or 
foes.  The  Indian  had  not  shaken  himself  free  so  that  he  could 
face  Nature  and  bend  her  to  his  will ;  he  had  not  yet  comprehended 
the  possibility  of  an  intellectual,  independent  and  external  relation 
to  the  natural  world. 

In  this  contribution  to  the  archaeology  of  music  it  can  be  seen 
how  far  a  people  had  advanced  in  the  art  of  musical  expression, 
who  were  living  not  in  a  primitive  condition,  but  were  organized 
in  a  social  state  where  there  was  no  class  distinction  or  coordinated 
labor ;  where  the  food  supply  was  still  dependent  in  a  considerable 
degree  upon  the  hunter ;  where  warfare  was  constant,  and  conducted 
by  private  enterprise  rather  than  directed  by  a  centered  govern¬ 
ment  ;  where  the  language  of  the  people  had  never  been  reduced  to 
writing,  and  where  there  was  no  possible  training  of  the  mind  in 
literature  or  art.  These  songs  therefore  stand  as  a  monument, 
marking  the  limit  which  the  Omaha  Indian’s  environment  placed 
upon  the  development  of  his  mental  life  and  expression. 

The  Omahas  as  a  tribe  have  ceased  to  exist.  The  young  men 
and  woman  are  being  educated  in  English  speech,  and  imbued  with 
English  thought ;  their  directive  emotion  will  hereafter  take  the 
lines  of  our  artistic  forms ;  therefore  there  can  be  no  speculation 
upon  any  future  development  of  Omaha  Indian  music. 


287 


REPORT  ON  THE  STRUCTURAL  PECULIARITIES 
OF  THE  MUSIC. 


BY  JOHN  COMFORT  FILLMORE. 


In  the  spring  of  1888,  Miss  Alice  C.  Fletcher  of  the  Peabody 
Museum  of  American  Archaeology  and  Ethnology  of  Harvard  Uni¬ 
versity  sent  me  an  Indian  song  which  she  had  noted  down  from 
the  singing  of  the  Omahas,  asking  me  some  questions  concerning 
its  scale.  A  correspondence  ensued  which  finally  resulted  in  her 
commissioning  me  to  make  a  careful  scientific  study  of  her  collec¬ 
tion  of  Indian  Songs,  several  hundred  in  number.  During  the 
spring  and  summer  of  1891,  she  also  provided  me  opportunities  of 
hearing  many  of  the  songs  performed  by  Indians  and  of  submit¬ 
ting  to  them  my  harmonizations  of  nearly  the  whole  collection  of 
songs. 

My  principal  reliance  in  this  work  was  on  Mr.  Francis  La  Flesche, 
an  Omaha  Indian  in  the  service  of  the  Indian  Bureau  at  Washing¬ 
ton,  D.  C.  I  spent  a  week  with  him  in  Washington,  devoting  my 
whole  strength  to  the  study  of  the  songs.  I  afterwards  accompa¬ 
nied  him  to  the  Omaha  Reservation  in  Nebraska  for  another  week 
of  work.  We  were  fortunate  enough  to  find  the  tribe  assembled 
in  camp  for  the  celebration  of  their  tribal  festival.  We  witnessed 
their  dances,  heard  their  songs,  and  their  devotion  and  gratitude  to 
Miss  Fletcher  procured  for  me  the  unprecedented  favor  of  a  special 
performance  of  the  Wa-wan  (Sacred  Calumet)  ceremony.  This 
was  given  at  her  request,  and  on  her  account  only,  she  being  the 
only  white  person  to  whom  such  a  concession  had  ever  before  been 
made. 

A  few  weeks  later  Mr.  La  Flesche  spent  a  week  at  my  home,  at 
which  time  we  gathered  up  the  loose  threads  and  rounded  up  our 

289 


60  REPORT  ON  THE  STRUCTURAL  PECULIARITIES  OF  THE  MUSIC. 

work  as  far  as  possible.  To  his  unwearied  patience,  intelligence, 
courtesy  and  carefulness  I  owe  much  ;  vastly  more,  indeed,  than  I 
can  give  any  adequate  idea  of  in  any  acknowledgment  I  can  make. 
Without  his  devoted  assistance,  no  thorough  or  complete  investi¬ 
gation  of  the  music  of  his  tribe  would  have  been  possible.  No 
one  else  was  so  thoroughly  competent  in  every  way  to  assist  a  mu¬ 
sician  in  finding  out  what  needed  to  be  known. 

I  also  desire  to  acknowledge  my  obligations  to  Mr.  George  Miller, 
another  Omaha  whom  I  met  on  the  Reservation,  for  his  patience  in 
repeatedly  singing  for  me  songs  which  Mr.  La  Flesche  did  not  know, 
until  I  had  noted  them  correctly ;  to  Mr.  Noah  La  Flesche  for  a 
similar  service  in  the  music  for  the  Indian  flageolet,  and  to  Pae- 
zhae-hoo  ta,  Doo-ba-mon-ne  and  He-tha-ga-he-gae,  the  three  Indians 
who  conducted  the  Wa-wan  ceremony. 

In  my  investigations  I  have  sought  to  cover  the  following  points  : 

1.  The  scales  on  which  the  Indian  songs  are  built. 

2.  The  harmonies  naturally  implied  in  the  melodies  of  the  songs. 

3.  The  tonality  of  the  songs  as  indicated  by  melody  and  har¬ 
mony  combined. 

4.  Rhythms. 

5.  Phrasing  and  motivization. 

6.  Quality  of  tone  and  correctness  of  intonation. 

7.  The  Indian  flageolet ;  its  scale,  fingering  and  capabilities  as 
a  musical  instrument. 

1.  /Scales.  My  first  work  on  the  collection  of  songs  turned  over 
to  me  was  to  go  over  them  laboriously,  picking  out  the  tones  of 
which  each  song  was  composed  and  arranging  them  in  scale  order. 
I  found  that  a  great  majority  of  them  were  composed  of  the  tones 
of  the  pentatonic  (five  toned)  major  scale,  familiar  in  old  Scotch, 
Irish,  Chinese  and  other  ancient  music;  i.  e.,  of  the  tones  of  our 
major  scale  with  the  fourth  and  seventh  omitted.  Some  of  them 
employed  the  corresponding  five-toned  minor  scale.  But  a  very 
considerable  number  seemed  capricious,  in  that  they  employed 
either  the  fourth  or  seventh  and  omitted  one  or  more  of  the  other 
regular  scale  intervals  ;  so  that  there  were  among  them  songs  which 
could  be  reduced  to  major  or  minor  scales  of  four,  five,  six,  seven 
or  eight  tones.  The  minor  scale  appeared  both  in  its  “pure”  and 
“mixed”  form ;  i.  e.,  with  a  minor  or  major  seventh,  the  latter  being 
our  so-called  “harmonic”  minor  scale.  But  there  remained  some 
very  puzzling  cases  of  songs  whose  tones  could  not  be  reduced 
290 


REPORT  ON  THE  STRUCTURAL  PECULIARITIES  OF  THE  MUSIC.  61 

to  either  the  major  or  the  minor  scale,  whether  complete  or  incom¬ 
plete,  because  chromatic  tones  were  employed.  Such  were  the 
“Poogethun”  song  (No  8  of  this  collection),  where  the  tones  B 
and  G-  #  are  introduced,  the  rest  of  the  song  being  plainly  in  the 
scale  of  F;  the  “Taking  away  the  Hunga”  (No.  56)  where  A  b 
is  used,  the  scale  being  Q  major,  etc.  If  these  tones  could  have 
been  treated  as  mere  chromatic  bye-tones,  they  would  not  have 
caused  much  difficulty  but  the  A  b  in  No.  56,  at  least,  is  an  impor¬ 
tant  melodic  note  ;  is  principal  and  not  accessory.  So  is  the  C  b  in 
the  song  No.  32.  These  tones  can  easily  be  accounted  for  on  har¬ 
monic  grounds,  but  not  by  a  reference  to  any  known  form  of  scale. 
But  the  Indians  always  sing  in  unison  and  never  employ  harmony. 
However,  I  hope  I  shall  be  able  in  the  next  paragraph  to  offer  con¬ 
siderations  which  may  point  the  way  to  the  solution  of  the  problem. 

2.  Harmony.  Miss  Fletcher  had  informed  me  of  the  curious  fact 
that  although  the  Indians  never  made  any  attempt  at  singing  in 
parts,  whenever  their  songs  were  played  for  them  on  a  piano  or 
organ,  they  were  not  satisfied  without  the  addition  of  chords  to  the 
melodies. 

This  fact  seemed  to  me  significant  and  important.  I  thought  it 
indicated  the  presence  of  a  latent  harmonic  sense  which  might, 
unconsciously  on  their  part,  be  a  determining  factor  in  their  choice 
of  melody  tones.  Accordingly  I  set  myself  to  harmonizing  a  con¬ 
siderable  number  of  songs,  seeking  only  to  employ  the  natural  har¬ 
monies  implied  in  the  melodies.  I  then  sent  those  harmonized 
songs  to  Miss  Fletcher,  requesting  her  to  try  them  on  as  many  In¬ 
dians  as  she  could,  with  a  view  to  discovering  whether  they  found 
my  harmonies  natural  and  satisfactory. 

The  result  of  the  experiment  was  entirely  successful.  Whatever  • 
chords  were  natural  and  satisfactory  to  me  were  equally  so  to  them, 
from  which  it  seems  proper  to  draw  the  conclusion  that  the  sense 
of  harmony  is  an  innate  endowment  of  human  nature,  that  it  is 
the  same  for  the  trained  musician  and  for  the  untrained  primitive 
man,  the  difference  being  purely  one  of  development. 

I. have  myself  personally  repeated  this  experiment  many  times 
and  always  with  the  same  result.  And  since  these  melodic  aberra¬ 
tions  to  which  I  have  referred  are  easily  and  naturally  accounted 
for  by  reference  to  their  natural  harmonic  relations,  and  in  no  other 
way ,  I  am  forced  to  the  conclusion  that  melody  is  a  product  of  the/ 
natural  harmonic  sense  and  that  all  efforts  to  reduce  primitive  m el- 

291 


62  REPORT  ON  THE  STRUCTURE L  PECULIARITIES  OF  THE  MUSIC. 

oclies  to  scales  without  reference  to  the  natural  harmonies  implied 
in  them  must  prove  futile.  I  therefore  spare  myself  the  useless 
labor  of  enumerating  all  the  specific  varieties  of  scale  to  be  found 
in  these  songs,  regarding  it  as  a  wholly  irrelevant  matter. 

The  harmonizations  given  in  the  songs  which  accompany  this  re¬ 
port  have  all  been  submitted  to  Indian  criticism,  some  of  them  many 
times,  and  have  been  found  satisfactory.  I  have  also  experimented 
with  different  harmonies  and  have  invariably  retained  those  which 
the  Indian  ear  preferred. 

These  accepted  harmonizations  give  some  curious  results.  The 
Indian  ear  accepts  not  only  the  major  and  minor  concords,  but  the 
dominant  seventh,  as  shown  in  most  if  not  all  of  the  songs  ;  the 
diminished  seventh,  as  shown  in  the  second  measure  of  No.  63 
(this  chord  was  distinctly  preferred  to  the  dominant  seventh  in 
that  place)  ;  sharp  dissonances  in  the  shape  of  suspensions,  whether 
prepared,  as  in  the  twelfth  measure  of  No.  41,  or  free  (appoggia- 
turas)  as  in  the  first  measure  of  No.  37  and  in  numerous  other 
cases.  These  points  cover  pretty  much  the  whole  ground  of  mod¬ 
ern  harmonic  structure.  In  addition  to  this,  some  of  these  melodies 
as,  for  example,  No.  41,  are  clearly  based  on  harmonic  modulation 
and  some  of  them,  like  No.  56  already  cited,  depend  on  third  or 
sixth  relationships.  The  chord  of  A  b  in  that  song  is  the  chord 
of  the  (major)  under  third  of  C,  in  which  latter  key  the  song  closes, 
although  it  begins  in  G.  This  latter  point,  the  use  of  the  third  and 
sixth  relationships  in  harmony,  is  one  of  the  most  notable  peculiar¬ 
ities  of  the  Modern  Romantic  School. 

Practice  of  this  sort  is  to  be  found  in  Beethoven  and  in  Schubert ; 
more  of  it  in  Schumann  and  in  Chopin ;  most  of  all  in  Liszt  and 
Wagner.  That  some  of  these  primitive  melodies,  created  by  a 
people  who  never  use  harmony  and  who  have  mo  musical  theory  of 
any  kind  nor  even  a  musical  notation,  should  be  explicable  by  re¬ 
ferring  them  to  a  latent  perception  of  these  relationships  and  ex¬ 
plicable  in  no  other  way,  is  certainly  a  surprising  fact.  It  would 
seem  to  prove  beyond  question,  if  proof  had  been  needed,  that 
these  relationships  are  primary  and  natural  and  that  modern .  com¬ 
posers  in  extending  the  limits  of  the  traditional  harmonic  system 
in  which  the  fifth  relationships  had  reigned  supreme  have  simply 
discovered  and  utilized  new  natural  materials  and  relations. 

It  seems  clear  enough  that,  as  we  might  expect  from  what  we 
now  know,  since  Helmholtz’  epoch-making  work,  of  the  complex 
292 


REPORT  ON  THE  STRUCTURAL  PECULIARITIES  OF  THE  MUSIC.  63 

nature  of  single  tones,  the  primitive  mind  has,  from  the  very  first 
tone  of  a  song,  a  sort  of  subconscious  perception  of  harmonic  re¬ 
lations  and  that  these  relations  determine,  at  least  in  no  small  de¬ 
gree,  the  melodic  succession  of  tones  in  the  song.  Whether  this 
subconscious  perception  includes  the  undertone  series  as  well  as 
the  overtone  series,  according  to  the  doctrines  of  Dr.  Hugo  Rie- 
mann  and  Prof.  Arthur  von  Oettingen,  I  have  not  been  able  con¬ 
clusively  to  determine.  The  only  fact  which  seems  to  bear  on  this 
question  is  that  primitive  man,  in  common  with  the  trained  musician, 
accepts  the  minor  chord  (so  called)  as  a  satisfactory  concord.  And 
this  chord,  from  the  point  of  view  of  acoustics,  is  certainly  not  a 
concord  in  the  overtone  series  and  is  a  concord  when  referred  to 
the  undertone  series  and  not  otherwise.  But  my  experiments  with 
the  Indians  have  thrown  no  new  light  on  the  problem  of  the  rela¬ 
tion  of  Harmony  to  Acoustics.  It  is  clear  enough  that  Indian 
musical  composition  is  due  to  the  impulse  to  express  emotion  in 
melodic  and  rhythmic  forms  and  that  the  determining  forces  are 
imagination  and  feeling.  Of  course  this  expression  of  feeling  is 
conditioned  on  physical  laws ;  but  thus  far  I  see  no  reason  to  ex¬ 
pect,  as  I  once  hoped,  that  the  study  of  primitive  music  may  lead 
to  further  discoveries  as  to  how  far-reaching  those  laws  may  be. 
The  fact  may  be  noted,  however,  that  major  keys  and  major  chords 
predominate  in  these  songs,  and  that  the  Indian  ear  prefers  a  ma¬ 
jor  chord,  as  a  rule,  at  the  close  of  a  minor  song.  All  of  which 
suggests  that,  even  if  there  be  a  subconscious  perception  of  the 
undertone  series,  the  overtone  series  predominates  over  it,  in  their 
minds. 

It  is  possible  we  shall  sometime  discover  that  the  tones  we  hear 
are  more  complex  than  even  Helmholtz  knew ;  that  the  undertone 
series  as  well  as  the  overtone  series  is  present  in  every  tone,  and 
that  “major”  and  “minor”  conceptions  are  due  to  the  predomi¬ 
nance  of  one  or  the  other,  much  as  quality  of  tone  ( timbre ,  klang- 
farbe )  is  due  to  the  predominance  of  one  or  another  set  of  overtones. 
But  this  is  yet  to  be  conclusively  proved. 

3.  Tonality .  Before  I  became  convinced  that  a  latent  sense  of 
harmony  in  the  aboriginal  mind  played  an  important  part  in  deter¬ 
mining  these  melodies,  I  had  found  that  the  question  of  their  to¬ 
nality  was  often  difficult,  not  to  say  impossible  to  decide  from  the 
melody  tones  alone.  A  few  illustrations  will  help  to  make  this 
clear.  Song  No.  72  (Wae-wa-chee)  contains  two  sharps  (F  # 

293 


64  REPORT  ON  THE  STRUCTURAL  PECULIARITIES  OF  THE  MUSIC. 

and  C  #).  Ordinarily,  therefore,  we  should  say  that  its  key 
note  is  D.  But  note  the  build  of  the  melody.  It  begins  on  C# 
(third  space  of  treble  staff)  ends  on  the  A  below  the  treble  staff 
and  omits  the  tone  G.  If  it  be  in  the  key  of  D,  not  only  is  the 
fourth  of  the  scale  omitted,  but  the  song  begins  on  the  leading 
tone  (seventh)  of  the  scale  and  goes  downward  until  it  finally 
ends  on  the  Dominant  (fifth).  The  trained  musical  ear,  at  least, 
cannot  but  feel  that  this  is  a  somewhat  unnatural  beginning.  But 
if  it  be  assumed  that  the  missing  scale  tone  is  not  G  but  G#,  the 
case  presents  no  further  difficulty.  It  is  natural  enough  for  a  mel- 
od}^  to  begin  on  the  third  of  the  scale  and  go  down.  What  is  more, 
if  we  think  the  song  as  beginning,  in  the  key  of  A,  there  is  no 
difficulty  in  harmonizing  it  easily  and  naturally.  Whereas  the 
first  part  of  it  can  hardly  be  harmonized  in  the  key  of  D  otherwise 
than  awkwardly  and  unsatisfactorily,  the  latter  part  can  be  har¬ 
monized  as  well  in  D  as  in  A,  and  the  Indian  ear  prefers  the  end¬ 
ing  in  D.  One  would  decide  the  tonality  then,  not  alone  from  the 
tones  actually  employed  in  the  song,  but  from  considering  what 
tone  or  tones  needed  to  be  supplied  in  order  to  make  a  natural  and 
satisfactory  harmony.  Thus,  the  question  “What  scale  has  this 
song?”  simply  resolves  itself  into  the  question  of  harmony.  If  we 
can  decide  on  the  Tonic  chord,  the  scale  will  settle  itself.  And 
the  question  of  the  Tonic  chord  depends  mainly  on  the  harmonic 
implications  of  the  melody.  Scale,  I  have  come  to  think,  is  an 
entirely  subordinate  matter. 

Take  No.  67  for  further  example.  It  is  in  the  key  of  A,  beyond 
doubt ;  yet  the  leading  tone  (G#)  is  nowhere  to  be  found  in  it,  and 
must  be  supplied  in  the  harmony. 

So  I  regard  No.  17  as  in  the  key  of  A,  although  it  contains  neither 
the  seventh  nor  the  fourth  of  the  scale  of  A.  And  No.  19  is  in 
the  key  of  D,  although  both  C#  and  G  are  missing.  These  last 
two  furnish  admirable  examples  of  pentatonic  scales.  It  is  curi¬ 
ous,  by  the  way,  to  see  how  many  of  these  songs  begin  and  end 
on  the  fifth  of  the  scale,  as  does  No.  17.  And  many  others  end  on 
the  fifth  (among  them  No.  72,  if  we  end  it  in  D,  as  the  Indian  ear 
prefers  it),  although  they  begin  on  some  other  interval,  perhaps 
the  tonic,  as  does  No.  19.  This  brings  the  tonic  chord,  at  the  close, 
into  its  natural  position  when  made  up  of  three  tones  only,  with 
none  of  them  doubled.  Whether  this  peculiar  ending  is  due  to  a 
dim  consciousness  in  the  Indian  mind  of  this  natural  position  of 
294 


REPORT  OX  THE  STRUCTURAL  PECULIARITIES  OF  THE  MUSIC.  65 

the  tonic  chord,  it  is  impossible,  of  course,  to  say  with  the  full  as¬ 
surance  of  certainty.  But  it  is  certain  that  the  songs  thus  har¬ 
monized  satisfy  the  Indian  ear  equally  with  that  of  the  trained 
musician.  Can  this  be  accounted  for  otherwise  than  on  the  ground 
of  a  common  perception?  I  think  not.  The  difference,  as  it  seems 
to  me,  is  one  purely  of  degree,  due  to  training  in  the  one  case,  and 
lack  of  it  in  the  other. 

The  examples  I  have  cited  might  be  numerously  multiplied  if 
necessary.  But  they  serve  to  illustrate  the  point  that  the  question 
of  tonality  in  these  songs  is  a  question  to  be  settled  by  the  help  of 
harmonic  considerations  and  not  otherwise.  Any  reader  who  is 
interested  will  study  the  songs  for  himself.  For  others  there  is  no 
need  to  multiply  illustrations. 

But  the  case  becomes  stronger  when  we  come  to  take  into  ac¬ 
count  the  melodies  which  more  or  less  plainly  imply  modulation. 
Of  these,  the  beautiful  choral  No.  41  is  the  most  conspicuous  ex¬ 
ample.  The  song  begins  in  the  key  of  TBb.  There  is  not  a  single 
tone  in  the  melody,  except  the  E  in  the  last  measure  but  one, 
which  is  not  to  be  found  in  the  scale  of  Bb-  Yet  the  course  of 
the  melody  is  such  as  to  force  on  one  the  sense  of  a  change  of  key. 
It  is  quite  impossible  to  harmonize  it  satisfactorily  without  modu¬ 
lating,  especially  considering  the  form  of  the  ending.  The  harmony 
I  have  given  to  it  seems  to  me  to  be  naturally  implied  in  the  mel¬ 
ody  and  satisfactory.  I  tried  numerous  experiments  on  Mr.  La 
Flesclie  with  the  harmony  of  this  song,  beginning  with  the  sixth 
measure.  His  comments  would  run  about  thus  :  “This  sounds 
right  to  me  up  to  that  point;  the  next  part  is  weak;  now  it  is  bet¬ 
ter, — but  it  isn’t  right  yet;  now  it  is  right.”  The  latter  comment 
was  made  when  I  played  the  harmony  as  here  given.  I  also  tried 
it  on  Reservation  Indians  afterwards  with  the  same  result,  so  that 
I  feel  justified  in  holding  this  harmony  to  be  entirely  natural. 

In  this  song  the  original  key  is  kept  until  the  fifth  measure,  in 
which  the  first  clause  ends  with  the  relative  minor  chord.  The 
next  phrase  of  three  measures  is  in  the  key  of  Eb  (sub-dominant ), 
the  third  measure  effecting  a  transition  to  the  key  of  F  by  means 
of  the  chord  of  G  (over-third  of  Eb),  followed  naturally  by  the 
chord  of  C  (dominant  in  F).  The  last  clause  begins  in  F,  modu¬ 
lates  to  C,  in  the  second  measure  and  closes  the  period  in  that  key. 
This  key,  the  major  over-second  of  Bb,  the  original  key-note, 
would  seem  to  be  so  remote  as  to  make  it  impossible  to  preserve 
p.  m.  papers.  1  20  295 


66  REPORT  ON  THE  STRUCTURAL  PECULIARITIES  OF  THE  MUSIC. 

unity  within  the  limits  of  a  short  twelve-measure  period.  But 
the  melodic  flow  is  so  smooth  and  the  harmonic  connections  so 
natural  that  I,  at  least,  do  not  get  from  it  the  impression  of  any¬ 
thing  forced,  harsh  or  unpleasant,  nor,  do  I  feel  the  need  of  a  return 
to  the  original  tonic.  The  whole  choral  impresses  me  with  its 
beauty,  nobility  and  dignity.  Indeed,  I  know  not  where  to  look 
for  a  finer  musical  expression  of  noble,  dignified  religious  feeling 
within  the  limits  of  the  choral. 

In  No.  45  the  principal  key  is  Ab,  but  I  found  it  impossible 
to  harmonize  it  satisfactorily  without  introducing  the  key  of  the 
relative  minor  and  of  the  dominant.  It  closes  in  the  relative  minor  ; 
but  the  Indians  prefer  the  major  chord  for  the  final,  and  it  cannot 
be  denied  that  the  form  of  plagal  cadence  here  given  is  very  beau¬ 
tiful. 

No.  56  seems  to  be  an  example  of  change  of  key  within  very 
narrow  limits.  The  first  two  phrases,  comprising  only  three  meas¬ 
ures,  would  seem  to  be  clearly  in  the  key  of  G,  while  the  remain¬ 
ing  two  phrases,  of  two  measures  each,  seem  to  be  in  the  kej^  of 
C,  with  a  modification  of  the  plagal  close,  the  major  chord  of  the 
under-third  being  used  in  place  of  the  sub-dominant. 

The  Otoe  song,  No.  47,  may  well  close  our  list  of  citations  on 
this  subject.  In  it,  we  find,  at  least  according  to  current  methods 
of  reckoning  modulation,  the  three  keys  of  E  minor,,  B  minor,  and 
D  major,  the  predominant  tonality  being  that  of  B  minor.  The 
ending  with  the  dominant  chord  gives  a  peculiar  feeling  of  incom¬ 
pleteness  ;  a  feeling  caused  also  by  the  endings  of  some  of  the  other 
songs,  notably  No.  32,  which  ends  with  the  supertonic  chord.  This 
last  song  is  also  notable  for  its  employment  of  the  minor  chord  of 
the  sub-dominant,,  thus  making  it  a  ‘fcmixed  major”  key,  as  Dr* 
Moritz  Hauptmann  aptly  named  this  kind  of  tonality. 

These  unusual  endings  remind  one  of  Schumann  ;  I  recall  par¬ 
ticularly  No.  4  of  the  “Kreisleriana,”  which  ends  with  the  chord 
of  D  major  (over-third),  the  key  of  the  piece  being  Bb*  Such 
endings  doubtless  serve  the  requirements  of  emotional  expression 
and  thus  used,  are,  of  course,  legitimate.  No  musician,  civilized 
or  uncivilized,  is  under  obligation  to  cut  his  feelings  to  fit  the  the¬ 
oretical  requirements  of  cadence.  He  has  a  right  to  express  his 
feeling  just  as  it  is  ; — if  he  can. 

4.  Rhythms.  One  of  the  most  noticeable  rhythmic  peculiarities 
of  these  songs  is  the  grouping  of  pulses  into  measures  of  different 
296 


REPORT  ON  THE  STRUCTURAL  PECULIARITIES  OF  THE  MUSIC.  67 

lengths.  Some  of  them  group  their  pulses  in  twos  or  in  threes 
throughout.  But  many  of  them  have  groups  of  an  unequal  num¬ 
ber  of  beats.  Such  are  the  beautiful  Mekasee  song,  No.  59  (twos 
and  threes),  No.  36,  also  twos  and  threes,  No.  62,  threes  and  fours, 
and  others.  No.  74  changes  its  measures  from  J  to  f,  the  dotted 
quarter  note  in  the  second  part  and  the  quarter  note  in  the  first 
part  each  standing  for  a  drum  beat,  at  the  rate  of  104  to  the  minute. 

This  last  song  serves  also  to  exemplify  the  syncopation  of  which 
these  songs  contain  numerous  examples.  The  song  begins  a  half¬ 
pulse  before  the  drum-beat,  and  the  first  measure  of  five  beats  is 
divided  into  five  twos.  There  is  also  a  syncopation  toward  the 
end  of  the  f  portion.  The  first  measure  is  syncopated,  in  that 
the  drum  beat  comes  on  the  first  note  of  the  second  phrase,  while 
it  comes  on  the  second  note  of  the  first  phrase,  the  second  phrase 
being  melodically  an  exact  repetition  of  the  first.  This  song  I 
found  very  difficult  to  note  down  from  the  singing,  its  rhythm  be¬ 
ing  extremely  complicated. 

One  of  the  most  striking  peculiarities  of  rhythm  is  the  mixture 
of  twos  and  threes  in  the  same  measure.  The  Mekasee  song,  No. 
58,  has  two  examples  of  this  in  the  |  rhythm  where  there  are  two 
drum-beats  in  each  measure,  represented  by  dotted  quarters,  while 
the  song  has  three  quarter  notes  in  the  measure.  This  is  the  same 
rhythm  to  be  found  in  the  No.  20  of  the  Mendelssohn  “Song  with¬ 
out  Words,”  in  “Abschied,”  Op.  82,  Schumann  and  elsewhere  in 
the  works  of  the  modern  romantic  composers.  But  the  Omahas 
carry  this  rhythm  to  the  greatest  length  in  the  Haethuska  songs. 
The  Haethuska  dances,  as  I  have  seen  them,  require  the  double- 
drum-beat,  a  strong  pulse  followed  by  a  weak  one.  Against  this 
many  of  the  songs  have  three  equal  notes  or  their  value.  The 
drum-beat  being  represented  by  two  eighth  notes,  with  a  strong 
accent  on  the  first,  the  voice  will  sing  against  it  now  an  eighth  fol¬ 
lowed  by  a  quarter,  now  a  quarter  followed  by  an  eighth,  now  three 
eighths,  now  a  syncopation,  the  quarter  note  crossing  the  drum¬ 
beat.  Examples  of  all  these  rhythmic  forms  may  be  found  in  the 
Haethuska  Song,  No.  19,  and  most  of  the  other  Haethuska  songs 
exemplify  them  more  or  less.  That  a  primitive  people,  without 
any  musical  notation  and  without  any  theory  of  rhythm,  should 
have  developed  such  complicated  rhythms  seems  to  me  very  sur¬ 
prising.  I  know  of  no  greater  rhythmic  difficulties  anywhere  in 
our  modern  music  than  these  Omahas  have  completely  at  command 

297 


68  REPORT  ON  THE  STRUCTURAL  PECULIARITIES  OF  THE  MUSIC. 

in  their  every-day  music.  It  seems  to  be  as  natural  and  easy  for 
them  to  beat  two  and  sing  three,  and  that  too  in  all  sorts  of  syn¬ 
copation  and  complex  combinations  as  though  they  had  received 
the  most  thorough  rhythmical  training  to  be  had  in  any  conservatory 
in  the  world.  Indeed,  I  suspect  that  a  great  majority  of  conserva¬ 
tory  students  the  world  over  might  have  a  good  deal  of  difficulty 
in  learning  to  do  what  is  to  the  Indians  an  every-day  matter.  And 
if  white  students  of  music  had  to  pass  an  examination  in  taking 
down  Indian  rhythms  from  hearing  them,  I  fear  a  good  many 
would  come  to  grief.  Rhythm  is  by  far  the  most  elaborately  devel¬ 
oped  element  of  the  Indian  music,  and  in  this  respect  civilized  mu¬ 
sic  has  not  surpassed  it,  at  least  in  the  point  of  combining  dissim¬ 
ilar  rhythms. 

5.  Phrasing  and  Motivization.  That  larger  phase  of  rhythm 
which  is  called  phrasing ,  the  grouping  of  measures  into  phrases 
and  clauses  and  the  correlating  them  into  periods,  is  represented 
in  these  songs  in  quite  as  rich  variety  as  is  that  grouping  of  pulses 
which  we  call  measures.  We  are  accustomed  to  think  of  the  nor¬ 
mal  phrase  as  a  group  of  two  measures,  less  frequently  of  three,  but 
these  songs  afford  numerous  examples  not  only  of  two-  and  three- 
measure  phrases  but  also  of  four-measure,  five  measure  and  even 
larger  phrases.  In  No.  19,  already  cited,  the  first  three  phrases 
have  four  measures  each,  the  fourth  has  seven  ;  the  fifth,  sixth  and 
seventh  phrases  have  four  measures  each  and  the  eighth  six. 

No.  17  consists  of  two  periods.  The  first  consists  of  two  five- 
measure  phrases  and  one  nine-measure  phrase,  unless  one  chooses 
to  divide  the  latter  into  a  five  and  a  four.  (The  odd  measure  at  the 
end  is  a  mere  breathing  space;  as  also  in  No.  19.)  The  second 
period  has  a  five-  and  an  eight-measure  phrase,  or  two  fives  and  a 
three.  The  former  division  is  perhaps  more  natural  with  the  har¬ 
mony  I  have  given  it,  the  final  measures  seeming  to  be  an  integral 
portion  of  the  long  phrase  rather  than  a  separate  short  one. 

These  two  examples  are  sufficient  to  show  the  richness  and  vari¬ 
ety  of  the  grouping  in  phrases  and  the  correlation  of  phrases  in 
larger  forms  which  characterize  the  Omaha  songs.  No  one  with 
the  songs  before  him  needs  more,  to  call  his  attention  to  the  point. 

As  regards  “moltivization,”  the  building  up  of  a  melody  out  of 
modified  repetitions  of  a  short  melodic  phrase  which  serves  as  a 
model  (technically  a  “motive”),  Nature  seems  to  have  taught 
these  people  precisely  what  our  professors  of  composition  teach 
298 


REPORT  ON  THE  STRUCTURAL  PECULIARITIES  OF  THE  MUSIC.  69 

their  pupils,  and  with  marked  success.  Not  only  the  two  songs 
I  have  just  cited  as  examples  in  phrasing,  but  almost  every  song 
in  the  collection,  employs  its  first  motive  as  a  model  and  thus  se¬ 
cures  the  prime  quality  unity.  They  all  repeat  the  motive  in  mod¬ 
ified  forms  and  thus  obtain  variety,  without  which  Unity  becomes 
mere  monotonous  uniformity.  They  all  correlate  their  phrases 
into  clauses;  their  clauses  into  periods  and  the  larger  ones  their 
periods  into  two-period  “Primary  Forms”  with  a  S}rmmetry  which 
is  entirely  satisfactory. 

As  for  Contrast  and  Climax,  the  remaining  two  essentials  of  any 
great  Art  work,  the  dimensions  of  the  songs  are  too  small  to  ad¬ 
mit  of  the  former,  except  as  it  is  included  in  the  variety  of  the 
treatment  of  the  motive  and  of  the  rhythm  ;  and  there  seems  to  be, 
in  most  cases  at  least,  a  real  culmination  of  interest  and  of  effect, 
notwithstanding  the  curious  fact  that  the  melodies  almost  invari¬ 
ably  descend  in  pitch,  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  each  period. 

That  is  to  say,  the  fundamental  requirements  of  a  work  of  art 
are  founded  in  the  nature  of  things  and  of  the  human  mind  and  are 
obeyed  as  unerringly  by  these  untaught  primitive  men  in  their  ef¬ 
forts  to  express  emotion  in  terms  of  the  beautiful  as  by  the  best 
of  trained  composers.  The  difference  seems  to  be  one  of  develop¬ 
ment  merely.  The  Indians  produce  no  long,  elaborate  musical 
forms  because  they  have  not  acquired  the  power  of  sustained 
musical  thinking.  But  their  spontaneous  expressions  of  feeling 
in  tones  are,  within  their  limits,  artistic. 

6.  Quality  of  T  one  and  Correctness  of  Intonation  in  Indian  Sing * 
ing.  That  many  of  the  melodies  in  the  collection  accompanying  this 
report  are  beautiful,  I  think  no  one  will  deny.  But  I  think  also 
that  the  general  impression  of  those  who  have  happened  to  hear 
Indians  sing  is  that  their  songs,  as  given  by  themselves,  are  not 
beautiful ;  and  I  shall  be  obliged  to  admit  that,  in  certain  im¬ 
portant  respects,  my  own  impressions  confirm  those  of  other  ob¬ 
servers. 

Of  sensuous  beauty  of  tone  I  have  heard  comparatively  little  in 
Indian  voices.  Nor  do  I  see  how  it  could  possibly  be  attained 
under  the  ordinary  conditions  of  Indian  singing.  Take  the  Wae- 
wachee  or  the  Haethuska  dances  for  example.  A  half  dozen  or 
more  men  sit  in  the  open  air  round  a  large  drum,  beating  it  with 
their  utmost  force  and  shouting  out  war  or  victory  songs  at  the  top 
of  their  voices.  In  the  Waewachee  songs  the  women  add  their 

299 


70  REPORT  ON  THE  STRUCTURAL  PECULIARITIES  OF  THE  MUSIC. 

shrill  voices  at  their  very  loudest  and  both  men  and  women  begin 
at  the  highest  pitch  they  can  reach.  There  is  a  continual  inter¬ 
jection  of  war-whoops  from  the  men,  and  of  shrill  cries  in  imitation 
of  the  bird-hawk  from  women  both  among  the  dancers  and  outside 
of  the  circle.  In  the  Haethuska  dances  the  men  have  strings  of 
sleigh-bells  on  their  legs.  All  of  these  noises  are  symbolic  and 
deeply  significant  to  the  Indian,  but  of  course  serve  only  to  con¬ 
fuse,  if  not  to  repel,  the  musical  sense  of  the  casual  white  visitor. 
There  is  more  or  less  noise  and  confusion  .in  the  camp.  The  wind 
perhaps  blows  hard ;  it  generally  does  on  these  rolling  prairies. 
Often  another  company  is  singing,  dancing  and  drumming  at  no 
great  distance.  The  songs  are  the  expression  of  excited  feeling 
and  the  singers  are  stirred  up  almost  to  frenzy.  Under  such  con¬ 
ditions  the  production  of  a  beautiful  quality  of  vocal  tone  is  physi¬ 
cally  and  morally  impossible.  The  most  beautiful  natural  voices 
would  soon  be  rendered  shrill  and  harsh  by  such  unrestrained 
shouting  and  screeching  out  of  doors  in  damp  or  windy  weather. 
Any  one  who  desired  to  cultivate  a  beautiful  quality  of  voice  would 
find  it  impossible  for  his  ear  to  make  nice  discriminations  in  tone 
quality  amidst  such  a  hubbub.  Indeed,  nobody  seems  to  think  of 
paying  any  attention  to  such  considerations  and  the  very  idea  of 
vocal  cultivation  is,  so  far  as  I  am  aware,  foreign  to  the  Indian 
mind.  The  qualities  which  they  esteem  in  a  singer’s  voice  are  power 
and  penetrating  quality.  I  have  heard  strong,  manly  voices  among 
them,  and  in  the  Wawan  (Calumet)  songs,  these  come  out  well, 
lacking  much  of  the  shrillness  and  screechy  quality  I  heard  in  the 
war-songs  and  scalp-songs.  But  even  here,  the  men  san g  forte  and 
fortissimo  for  hours  together,  out  of  doors,  in  the  face  of  a  strong 
southeast  wind,  with  an  accompaniment  of  big  drum  and  rattles. 
What  chorus  is  there  in  the  world  which  could  endure  such  a  testr 
and  acquire  or  preserve  a  beautiful  quality  of  tone,  under  such 
conditions  ?  Or  how  could  beauty  of  tone  even  be  thought  of  ? 

The  same  conditions  which  prevent  the  development  of  beauty 
of  vocal  tone  prevent  also  any  nice  discrimination  as  regards  pitch. 
There  is  in  the  Indian  singing  a  good  deal  of  inaccuracy  of  inton¬ 
ation  ;  much  less,  however,  it  seems  to  me,  than  might  reasonably 
be  expected.  I  have  known  many  eminent  singers  (soloists)  to 
sharp  or  flat  a  good  deal  under  unfavorable  circumstances ;  some 
otherwise  good  singers  do  one  or  the  other  habitually ;  and  the  best 
choruses  sometimes  fall  in  pitch  a  full  half-tone  during  the  per- 
300 


REPORT  ON  THE  STRUCTURAL  PECULIARITIES  OF  THE  MUSIC.  71 

forinance  of  a  single  song  no  longer  than  some  of  these  Indian 
son^s.  I  do  not  think  these  Gmahas  often  varied  more  than  half 
as  much  as  that  from  the  true  pitch  in  most  instances  when  I  heard 
them,  except  when  they  rose  to  what  was  meant  for  an  octave  at 
the  beginning  of  the  second  part  of  a  song.  Then  they  often  fell 
short  a  semitone.  This  is  saying  a  good  deal  when  we  take  into 
account  that  the  drumming  and  other  noise  made  so  much  confus¬ 
ion  that  it  sometimes  required  very  sharp  listening  on  my  part  to 
recognize  a  song  with  which  I  was  already  perfectly  familiar.  I 
do  not  wonder  that  superficial  observers  find  no  melody  and  no 
beauty  in  Indian  singing.  The  melody  is  covered  up  and  hidden 
by  overpowering  noise.  It  is  not  always  easy  to  extract  the  real 
kernel  from  the  rough  husk  which  surrounds  it,  and  those  who  go 
to  hear  Indian  music  out  of  mere  curiosity  with  no  desire  to  pen¬ 
etrate  to  the  core  of  it  may  very  well  find  their  surface  impressions 
unfavorable.  They  are  looking  for  what  is  not  there  ;  and  what 
is  there  of  real  merit  is  not  to  be  found  without  seeking. 

But  there  is  another  reason  why  casual  hearers  of  Indian  music 
find  nothing  in  it,  and  that  is  that  they  have  not  the  faintest  idea 
of  the  meaning  and  spirit  of  it.  To  them  it  is  mere  barbaric  noise ; 
“all  sound  and  fury,  signifying  nothing.”  But  the  truth  is  that, 
to  the  Indian,  many  of  these  songs  are  the  fervid  expression  of 
his  most  sacred  beliefs  and  experiences.  The  Wawan  ceremony 
is  profoundly  religious,  its  symbols  are  treated  with  as  great  rever¬ 
ence  as  any  priest  treats  the  crucifix  or  the  Sacred  Host ;  all  phases 
of  religious  emotion  are  embodied  in  its  songs.  He  who  knows, 
feels  and  appreciates  this,  who  penetrates  so  far  into  the  Indian 
feeling  as  to  be  partly  oblivious  of  non-essential  accessories,  can 
begin  to  appreciate  the  feeling  Miss  Fletcher  expressed  to  me  when 
she  told  me  that  she  had  never  been  so  powerfully  impressed  or  so 
profoundly  stirred  by  any  music  as  by  the  Wawan  songs,  except 
by  some  of  the  great  Wagnerian,  music  dramas.  This  Indian 
music  is  the  true  and  natural  expression  of  genuine  emotion  ;  much 
of  it  profound,  much  of  it  high  and  ennobling ;  and  the  better  it  is 
known  the  more  this  will  be  seen. 

If  an  appreciative  and  intelligent  listener  like  Miss  Fletcher  can 
speak  with  such  enthusiasm  of  Indian  music,  notwithstanding  the 
deficiencies  of  Indian  performance  on  the  side  of  sensuous  beaut}7, 
much  more  ought  it  to  make  its  natural  impression  when  given 
with  a  beautiful  quality  of  tone,  whether  by  singers  or  orchestral 

301 


72  REPORT  ON  THE  STRUCTURAL  PECULIARITIES  OF  THE  MUSIC. 

instruments  or  by  both  together,  as  I  hope  it  will  be  some  day. 
The  music,  as  such,  doubtless  will  make  its  impression.  Whether 
it  can  arouse  such  enthusiasm  as  Miss  Fletcher’s,  when  taken  out 
of  the  religious  ceremony  to  which  it  belongs,  given  by  people  who 
do  not  sympathize  with  the  feeling  which  gave  it  birth  and  wholly 
separated  from  its  natural  accessories,  remains  to  be  seen.  But 
tliese  beautiful  chorals  will  certainly  always  remain  the  expression 
of  genuine  religious  feeling  and  I  doubt  not  their  merit  will  be  rec¬ 
ognized. 

7.  The  Indian  Flageolet.  This  instrument  is  made  of  red  cedar, 
ornamented  with  lead  run  into  grooves.  The  specimen  now  in  my 
possession  is  twenty-four  and  one-half  inches  long.  It  is  bored, 
as  evenly  as  possible  from  the  lower  end  to  a  length  of  about  seven¬ 
teen  and  one- fourth  inches.  The  upper  end  is  bored  down  six  and 
one-half  inches.  Each  opening  contains  a  narrow  slit  close  to  the 
partition  between  the  long  and  short  bores.  The  partition  is  made 
smooth  on  the  top,  a  thin  plate  of  metal  is  laid  over  it,  having  a 
long  opening  and  a  rider  is  tied  down  over  the  plate  so  that  a  thin 
sheet  of  air  is  blown  through  the  narrow  space  between  the  partition 
and  the  plate  into  the  longer  bore,  the  surplus  air  escaping  through 
a  vertical  aperture  in  the  rider.  The  instrument  is  blown  from 
the  end.  Its  construction  is  therefore  substantially  the  same  as  that 
of  a  small  open  organ  pipe ;  for  the  stream  of  air  blown  in  at  the 
upper  end  and  passing  through  the  thin  passage  at  the  upper  side  of 
the  partition  impinges  on  the  sharp  edge  or  “lip”  of  the  metal  plat  e 
at  the  entrance  of  the  long  bore  and  thus  sets  the  column  of  air  in 
vibration.  The  diameter  of  the  longer  bore  is  about  seven-eighths  of 
an  inch  and  that  of  the  short  one  at  the  upper  end  is  less  than  one- 
fourth  of  an  inch.  Inside  it  is  doubtless  larger.  Close  to  the  lower 
end  of  the  flageolet  are  four  small  holes  circularly  arranged,  the  use 
of  which  I  have  not  been  able  to  determine,  as  they  are  never  stopped. 
The  holes  in  actual  use  are  six  in  number.  The  lowest  of  these  holes 
is  five  and  five-eighths  inches  from  the  lower  end  of  the  flageolet  and 
three  and  three-eighths  inches  from  the  circular  row  of  holes  near 
the  lower  end.  The  upper  (sixth)  hole  is  four  and  five-eighths 
inches  from  the  “lip.”  The  six  holes  are  about  equidistant  each 
from  its  neighbors,  the  distance  between  each  two  being  a  scant 
inch. 

No.  91,  a  flageolet  piece  which  I  transcribed  in  Nebraska,  il¬ 
lustrates  somewhat  imperfectly  the  defects  of  this  flageolet  as  regards 
302 


REPORT  ON  THE  STRUCTURAL  PECULIARITIES  OF  THE  MUSIC.  73 

the  key  relationship  of  tones.  This  piece  seems  to  be  in  the  key  of 
F#  minor,  omitting  G#.  But  the  fundamental  tone  of  the  flageolet 
is  nearer  F  than  F#.  The  key  relationship  of  the  tones  A,  B,  C#, 
D#  and  F#  (fifth  line)  are  tolerably  correct ;  but  the  lower  tone 
being  almost  a  major  third  lower  than  the  A  makes  the  piece  sound 
very  badly  out  of  tune.  The  upper  F,  meant  for  the  octave  of  the 
fundamental,  is  about  a  quarter  of  a  tone  sharp.  The  fundamental 
is,  of  course,  produced  by  closing  all  the  six  holes  with  the  fingers. 
The  upper  F  the  Indians  produce  by  opening  all  the  holes  except 
the  lower  one.  The  true  octave  of  the  fundamental,  or  nearly  so, 
may  be  obtained  by  opening  the  fifth  hole  only  and  blowing  with 
considerable  pressure.  But  this  I  have  not  seen  Indians  do.  Blow¬ 
ing  with  less  pressure  produces  the  over-fifth  of  the  fundamental. 
The  upper  F#  is  produced  by  opening  the  sixth  hole  only  and  in¬ 
creasing  the  wind-pressure.  A  ttue  minor  third  (Ah)  to  the  fun¬ 
damental,  or  nearly  so,  is  produced  by  opening  the  first  hole.  Open¬ 
ing  the  first  and  second  holes  produces  Bb  ;  opening  the  first  three 
holes  produces  C,  but  flat.  With  the  first  four  holes  open  we  get 
D  ;  with  the  first  five  open,  E ;  with  all  six  open,  F,  but  almost  a 
semi  tone  sharp.  All  these  values  are  approximate  only.  The 
tones  used  in  this  piece  (No,  91)  are  all  produced  with  the  first 
hole  closed,  except  the  upper  F#  which  is  produced  as  above  de¬ 
scribed,  and  excepting,  of  course,  also  the  fundamental.  In  pro¬ 
ducing  the  A ,  the  second  hole  only  is  open ;  the  second  and  third 
holes  open  give  B,  the  second,  third  and  fourth  holes  open  give 
C# ;  the  second,  third,  fourth  and  fifth  holes  open  give  D# ;  all  the 
holes  open  except  the  first  give  F,  or  E#.  It  is  the  fundamental 
which  is  most  out  of  tune  with  the  rest.  No.  92  illustrates  the 
same  points. 

I  have  made,  as  yet,  no  attempt  to  determine  accurately  the  pre¬ 
cise  vibration  ratios  of  the  scale  of  this  flageolet.  Such  an  investi¬ 
gation  would  be  interesting,  but  has  little  bearing  on  the  really 
important  relations  of  the  Indian  music,  since  the  imperfections  of 
it  are  plainly  due  to  the  limitations,  not  of  the  Indian’s  musical 
perception,  so  much  as  of  his  scientific  knowledge.  The  flageolet 
is  evidently  built  uby  guess”  and  only  remotely  approximates  the 
Indian  voice  in  accuracy  of  intonation.  The  really  instructive  in¬ 
vestigations  in  their  music  must  be  made,  I  think,  in  their  songs, 
which  are  not  only  the  natural,  free,  spontaneous  expression  of 
their  musical  conceptions,  wholly  unhampered  by  the  defects  of  a 

303 


74  REPORT  ON  THE  STRUCTURAL  PECULIARITIES  OF  THE  MUSIC. 

faultily  constructed  instrument,  but  greatly  predominate  in  amount 
over  their  instrumental  music.  We  must  recollect  that  they  have 
no  theory  of  music  whatever,  and  therefore  their  flageolet  expresses 
nothing  but  a  rude  attempt  at  approximating  tone-relations  which 
the  more  flexible  apparatus  of  the  voice  enables  them  to  reach  in 
their  songs. 

Summary.  The  results  of  the  foregoing  investigation  may  be 
summed  up  thus  :  The  deficiencies  and  defects  of  Indian  music  are, 
first,  lack  of  sensuous  beauty  of  tone  quality;  second,  uncertainty 
of  intonation.  There  is  apt  to  be  more  or  less  wavering  of  pitch 
under  any  circumstances  and  this  defect  is  most  pronounced  in  the 
Indian  flageolet,  which  always  gives  out  its  tones  in  false  key- 
relationship  owing  to  its  faulty  construction.  The  more  it  is  used, 
the  more  it  accustoms  the  ear  to  false  intonation  and  it  is  therefore 
fortunate  that  this  instrument  is  never  used  to  accompany  Indian 
singing.  The  only  exception  to  this  is  in  the  case  of  some  of  the 
love-songs ;  and  it  is  precisely  in  these  that  the  intonation  in  sing¬ 
ing  is  most  wavering  and  uncertain. 

But  it  seems  clear  that,  notwithstanding  these  defects,  the  sense 
of  key-relationship  and  of  harmonic  relations  as  determining  the 
key-relationship  of  melodic  tones  is  at  least  subconsciously  present 
in  the  Indian  mind.  For  when  the  melodies  are  given  in  correct 
pitch  and  with  natural  harmonies  the  Indians  soon  come,  to  recog¬ 
nize  and  enjoy  them. 

The  merits  of  the  Indian  music  consist,  first,  in  an  elaborate, 
well-developed  rhythm ;  second,  in  fresh,  original,  clear,  character¬ 
istic  expression  of  the  whole  range  of  emotional  experience  of 
primitive  people.  As  such,  this  collection  of  songs  must  necessarily 
prove  of  interest  even  if  they  were  less  beautiful  than  they  are. 
Those  here  given  form  only  a  fraction  of  those  in  Miss  Fletcher’s 
possession ;  and  those  she  has  are  only  a  small  percentage  of  the 
great  number  which  might  be  collected  under  favorable  conditions. 
But  the  older  songs  are  rapidly  passing  away  under  the  changing 
conditions  of  Indian  life  and  must  be  gathered  soon  if  they  are  not 
to  be  forever  lost.  It  is  greatly  to  be  hoped  that  the  work  of  col¬ 
lecting  and  verifying  them  may  be  pressed  before  it  becomes  too 
late. 

The  problems  presented  in  the  study  of  primitive  music  are  two  : 

1.  The  problem  of  the  origin  and  function  of  music. 

2.  The  problem  of  the  psychological,  physical  and  acoustic 
304 


REPORT  ON  THE  STRUCTURAL  PECULIARITIES  OF  THE  MUSIC.  75 

laws  in  accordance  with  which  the  musical  phenomena  have  be¬ 
come  what  they  are. 

1.  As  regards  the  first  of  these  problems,  I,  at  least,  can  have 
no  doubt  that  music  takes  its  origin  in  the  impulse  to  express  states 
and  movements  of  the  sensibility.  These  Omaha  songs  mean  feeling 
to  the  Indian,  in  all  cases.  Nine-tenths,  at  least,  of  the  criticism 
I  have  received  from  Indians  in  my  efforts  to  play  these  songs  has 
had  reference  to  emotional  expression  ;  and  there  is  not  a  song  in 
the  collection  which  does  not  express  to  the  Indian  as  well  as  to 
myself  and  other  white  persons  who  have  heard  them,  well  defined 
moods  or  excited  states  of  feeling.  They  had  their  origin  in  feeling 
and  their  function  is  to  express  feeling.  And  this  conclusion  I 
correlate  with  other  similar  facts  into  the  generalized  statement 
that  the  content  of  music  is  emotion.  I  am,  of  course,  aware,  that 
distinguished  critics,  chief  among  whom  are  Dr.  Edward  Hanslick 
and  the  late  Edmund  Gurney,  maintain  the  opposite  opinion.  But 
this  opinion  I  believe  to  be  based  solely  on  a  misapprehension  such 
as  might,  perhaps  be  easily  explained  by  a  proper  definition  and 
analysis  of  emotion,  which  I  have  not  found  in  the  works  of  any 
writer  on  the  aesthetics  of  music.  Even  Dr.  Hanslick,  while  ad¬ 
mitting  that  music  may  express  the  “dynamic  element”  of  feeling, 
fails  to  perceive  that  what  he  calls  the  “dynamic  element,”  identi¬ 
fying  it,  as  he  does,  with  “psychical  motion,”  is  really  emotion 
itself.  And  he  overlooks  also  the  fact  that  states  and  movements 
of  the  sensibility  may  be  expressed  so  as  to  be  recognizable  with¬ 
out  reference  to  the  ideas  involved  in  them. 

It  is  true  enough'that  music  by  itself  does  not  and  cannot  express 
love,  hate,  anger,  jealousy,  revenge,  etc.,  if  we  include  in  these 
terms,  as  we  seem  forced  to  do,  the  conception  of  two  or  more  per¬ 
sons  and  their  relations  to  one  another.  There  is,  of  course,  no 
musical  equivalent  for  a  man  or  woman  or  for  the  relations  between 
the  two  nor  for  two  men  fighting,  etc.  But  these  ideas  are  purely 
of  the  intellect,  not  of  the  sensibility.  The  purely  emotional  ele¬ 
ment  awakened  by  these  ideas,  and  that  alone,  is  expressible  in 
music.  And  emotional  excitement  frequently,  if  not  always,  be¬ 
gets  the  impulse  to  musical  expression.  At  least,  the  impulse  to 
express  states  and  movements  of  the  sensibility  in  song  is  nearly 
or  quite  universal  among  all  the  varieties  of  the  human  race  and  it 
seems  to  me  wholly  unphilosophical  to  deny  that  the  content  of 

305 


76  REPORT  ON  THE  STRUCTURAL  PECULIARITIES  OF  THE  MUSIC. 

music  is  that  which  gives  it  its  origin,  which  it  expresses  to  those 
who  produce  it  and  which  it  also  conveys  to  other  minds. 

2.  The  second  problem  may  be  succinctly  stated  thus  :  What 
determines  the  particular  form  of  musical  expression? 

From  the  psychological  point  of  view  it  may  be  answered  that 
the  content  determines  the  form  ;  i.  e.,  the  feeling  which  the  prim¬ 
itive  man  is  impelled  to  express  in  song  finds  its  own  mode  and 
means  of  expression  spontaneously.  This  Omaha  music  illustrates 
this  admirably;  for  Indian  song  is  an  absolutely  spontaneous  nat¬ 
ural  product. 

But  there  remains  the  further  question  :  What  correlations  of  the 
mind  with  the  auditory  and  vocal  apparatus  and  of  these  with  the 
physical  laws  of  acoustics  determine  the  course  of  melody?  Under 
this  head  numerous  questions  immediately  suggest  themselves  in 
view  of  the  observed  facts.  For  example,  how  does  it  happen 
that,  not  only  among  the  Omaha  and  other  Indians,  but  also  among 
the  Chinese,  the  primitive  Scotch,  Irish,  Negroes,  etc.,  the  impulse 
to  express  emotion  in  song  should  so  frequently  result  in  melodies 
based  on  the  five-toned  scale?  What  facts  and  laws  determine 
the  development  of  this  into  the  full  scale  of  eight  tones  in  common 
use?  What  determines  aberrations  from  this  scale,  such  as  are 
found  in  various  songs  of  this  collection  ?  What  determines  the 
choice  or  the  preponderance  of  major  or  minor?  Is  there  anything 
in  the  facts  of  primitive  music  which  will  help  us  to  determine 
whether  the  minor  chord  is  a  perfect  or  imperfect  concord?  If  the 
former,  does  it  depend  on  some  acoustic  principle  opposed  to  that 
which  generates  the  major  chord,  or  not?  These  are  all  questions 
of  importance  in  the  fundamental  science  of  music,  none  of  which 
can  be  regarded  as  settled  in  any  way  which  commands  universal 
acceptance. 

I  have  already  pointed  out  that  my  experience  during  this  in¬ 
vestigation  has  led  me  to  think  that  the  fundamental  fact  which  is 
to  point  the  way  to  the  solution  of  some,  at  least,  of  these  questions 
is  that  the  harmonic  sense  is  universal.  It  seems  clear  to  me  that 
the  course  of  these  melodies  can  be  accounted  for  in  no  other  way 
than  on  the  assumption  that  the  Indian  possesses  the  same  sense 
of  a  tonic  chord  and  its  attendant  related  harmonies  that  we  do ; 
although,  of  course,  it  is  latent  and  never  comes  clearly  forward 
into  his  consciousness.  The  five-toned  (major)  scale,  exemplified 
306 


REPORT  ON  THE  STRUCTURAL  PECULIARITIES  OF  THE  MUSIC.  77 

so  numerously  in  this  collection  of  songs,  may  be  regarded  as  a 
tonic  chord  with  two  bye-tones,  one  of  which  belongs  to  the  domi¬ 
nant  and  the  other  to  the  sub-dominant  chord.  At  first,  perhaps, 
there  is  merely  a  feeling  for  the  tonic  chord,  arising  from  the  com¬ 
plex  nature  of  a  single  tone  with  its  consonant  overtones.  The 
two  bye-tones,  are  perhaps,  in  this  stage,  merely  used  to  partially 
fill  up  the  gaps  between  the  tones  of  the  tonic  chord,  which  is  often 
implied  in  the  initial  melody  tone.  The  dim  perception  of  the 
harmonic  relations  of  these  two  tones  would  seem  to  be  a  later  de¬ 
velopment  which  results  in  the  addition  of  the  missing  fourth  and 
seventh  tones  of  the. scale.  How  the  feeling  for  the  tonic  chord  is 
generated  in  melodies  which  do  not  begin  with  the  key-note,  and 
especially  in  those  which  begin  with  a  bye-tone,  as  some  of  these 
songs  do,  I  am,  as  yet,  unable  to  conjecture.  Nor  am  I,  at  present, 
able  to  discuss  the  other  questions  here  raised  more  fully  than  I 
have  already  done.  But  I  hope  further  investigation  may  fully 
disclose  the  natural  laws  which  govern  these  phenomena  and  I  am 
strongly  in  hopes  that  the  suggestions  here  offered  may  prove  fruit¬ 
ful. 

307 


79 


OMAHA  SONGS. 


No.  1.  NA-GTHAE  WA-AA/. 

RALLYING  SONG  IN  FACE  OF  DEATH. 

Flowingly ,  with  feeling . 


-fiS; #9- 

!  1  STi  u»r>  1 

J  — r~*  *  •  *  p  & 

rH  H 

- am. — 1 - \y  '  =^_.— j - - 

25 

"  -  --  

•  -i) 

•  9  h 

^  ^  r  ~ 

« 

i  S - ^ - - '| 

Ah  -  yae  -  zhum-mae  tho. 

-g-  ^ 

1  ft _ f* 

Ah  -  yae  -  zhum-mae  tho. 

m-  ■&■  ^ - rv 

l E  1  - 

f— * 

ft  1 

;  ,  I-  r 

*  z±^r  < 

:  f5^  r  l 

l  

- 

Ped. 

|  |  V - ■'I  "> - - - ' 

\  i1-  ^  1  i  ^ — - '\ 

—1 

3S=*-tJ-  

^  ,-j  j"j- 

J  J  C 

=1  •’  n 

^  n  r—9— _  1  r  1  __  w  ^ 

Hi  h  - — -  1 

(TZ* 

-  ^ 

Z *■  _  ®  . 

r  p 

Lv. — J — 0 — >^j — — | - 

-^-  -s»-  1  "* —  — - 

- d 

Ah  -  yae  -  zhum-mae  tho.  Hi!  we  -  saft  -  thura  nu  kae  -  dae, 


m 


$i==l 


I 

Ah 

^2- 


&EM 


ii 


yae  -  zhum-mae  tho. 


Ah  -  yae  -  zhum  -  mae 


tho . 


m 


g 


-P2- 


( 

1 

n : 

l  S - 

II 


80 


No.  2. 

Floutingly. 


WA-OO  WA-A/V. 


ssn 


n  r  i  —i 


iiii  i  i 


j^-i— k 


Da-dun  n a  e-ba-hnn  beah-ke-thae,£/m£  Da  -  dun  na  e-ba-hun  beab  -  ke  -  thae, 

u- — -fr _ 

i . - A - LA »• 


^pe==r^Ez=^z: 

ESEfESE: 


l^V-! - l^p— I' - -^^-1 ^  ~  ■ — ,"^V ~  , - , - ! 


thae  Han-ah-de  oo-tha-g’tha-ah  thun  e-zha-zbae  we-b'  tha-dae  thae,  thae  1  Da- 


=^= 


:£r 


m- 


-P-—P- 


N  I  —l 


■Q-  b  _ ^jda 

— i—  r 

/?s 

<  *1  * 

3  “H' 

t  L  ^ 

i  III  III  |W 

i 

^  4 

qr  V  w  2  * 

J  p  * 

1  f 

it**-. 

=4  =4  bzj  =1  t=j  =p 

-+~ 

— | — 

(5^ 

j 

=i=  t=  j 

dun-na  e  -  ba-hun  beab-ke  -  tba. 

^ - -I - n-J— 4 


tha 


hi! 


ha  ha  Ae-bae-in- 


±±  w  -|- 


i — i — Lt — r-cF— F— 1 i — CM3^*-— * — 


fc* 


J — 4; 


i  I  i 

tae  thae  ab  -  be  -  ban  ae-hae-me-kae  thae, 


:^— *1 

i 


:=£|rj;^|: 

-*-hgi-*: 


thae 


l 

Wa-gun-tha-ma  ae-hae- 


^T=5* 


m 


M- 


n=t- 


t~ r 


:(e — |e: 


t— r 


81 


No.  3. 

Solemnly. 
Sostenulo.  ^  m 


HUBAE  WA-A/V, 

SACRED  POLE  SONG. 


92. 


Con.  Fed.. 


r 

Ae-hae  thae-hae  tha.  Ae  -<mn  shu-ka  -  tha  -ha  nuz-zhiw-£>-a 


F=Jfc=fc= 

HI 

ae  -hae 


:£• 

N- 


-f- 


r’P- 


:fa:qv:z|: 


*~fr — ^ — ar 


4®-.  I®  •  -a©-.  -&•-&-&- 


I  I  I 

thae-liae  i/ia.Mua-da-ha  ae  -ah  ba-daw  ae  -  ah 


- Isjj - 1 — - - 1 - I- 


ae -hae  thae-hae  tha. 


SW 


r  r  r. 


No.  4. 

Solemnly. 

Moderato. 


HUBAE  WA-A/V. 

SACRED  POLE  SONG. 


60. 

Zf 


43-TUX 


(®— 


m 

^ 


H-a-S* 


Zhe  -  da  ke-thae,  zhedake  -  thae  hae 
Kum  -peah  ke-thae,  kumpeahke  -  thae  liae 

4  4 


LJ' 

hae . 
hae 


3ElgfEfZ|Efe 


Zhe  -  da  ke  -thae 
Kum  -  peah  ke  -thae 


14  -^  h 

Con  Fed. 

f  = 


E=C 


H®~  »•- 


-»•— Kg!>- — & 

31 


zhe-da  ke  -  thae 
kum-peah  ke  -  thae 

^ — 1®~ i®— 1®— l® - i® — I® — I — 


T®“  /Cs  -t®- 

=3===t 


Zhe  -  da  ke  -thae  ke-thae 
Kum  -  peah  ke  -thae  ke-thae 

n®-  t®-  -i®-  -i®-  -tS?-  -i®” 

f— t— t=Ffc=t=fc=S= 


— F — p — p£® — i® — S® — i ^ 


r— 1 - :H- — 

P  -  . ] 

H  1 

=* 

=1  ^ 

p^=^-| 

- 1— - 

=1 

i 

hae  hae  -  a , 
hae  hae  -  a, 


Zhe-da  ke-thae  2he-da  ke-thae  7iae  hae. 
Kum-peah  ke-thae  kum-peah  ke-thae  hae  hae. 

— — 1 — — ^=c^--®^4rc3 - 


82 

No.  5 


HUBAE  WA-AA/. 

HAE-DE-WA-CHE  CALL. 


✓rs 

>3  2,.  J 

S 

■gpl 

i  a=a 

-P  i  - 

| r - -j - 

“ft  0-  * — 

h*  **  *  * 

r  *  • 

'  ft 

V  H  & : 

- &— — 1 

F  -i*- 

f .  j- '§  .  : 

l 

Zha 

-  wa 

e  -  ba 

t  r 

e  -  ba  lia 

1 

83 

—»—i - 1 — is-- — 

1 

hae  .  .  . 

Dr  urn. p 
Trundo 


pp  ppp 


No.  6.  HUBAE  WA-AA/. 

HAE-DE-WA-CHE  DANCE. 


No.  7 


HUBAE  WA-AW, 

TENT  OF  WAR  SONG. 


83 


~y,  i>w  i 

^  , 

.  ...  1^.  tc  I 

~  i  ivf 

iw i 

—1 ,v 

r  m _ j _ ze 

r  1 

r J 

L | |  "  | 

^  i 

H 

LzP  zj  p 

fnv  J  J 

,  J  J 

 J^L 

 ! ! 

_ j _ _ 

..gm  i _ 

1  1 

_  i _ _^e» _ 

%E7  W  W 

9  w 

s  ”  r 

/  9 

L»  ^ J 

tf  w 

w 

tr  i 

s 

"n  ! 

Wr:  r  r 

thae  pa.  The  -  te  -  gan  wa< 

l^-^J  -  .  *  

r  r  r  r  t* 

2  -  tin  kae  g’the  -  hun  ke  num  -  pae- 

gf 

K9 

s  * 

! 

&  • 

•  > 

(“J*. 

™  • 

1  .. 

1  i 

i 

| 

f*  *  — 

9  •  1 

* 

1 

9  • 

i 

~9 

1 

1— - 

. ■ 

T  Lh 

Lr 

r 

t-f— 

ffrri 


84 

No.  8. 


POO-G’THUA/  WA-AA/. 


Dignified.  ^  =  76. 

^zj^z^====r_^==z=d:E^jgb^-Td:^^— w— ^ 


/f  r-  %  f"; 

Fa  ae  he  tha  ae  he  thae,  Fa  ae  he  tha  ae  he  thae 

iV: 

fcftSE 


S—&-&-W - 


F-^h-h  : 


±=S±=f£±=£ 

=!=&=* 


Con  Peel. 


r 


3— 


^==3t±a 


==^==n=rn=p=fc 

z=:^z=^=E^ 


t==4==^=4==^ 


^ _ jd  &  • 

?:  f: 


Fa  ae  he  tha  ae  he  thae ,  Fa  ae  he  tha  ae  he  thae 


/5tTv - - »  • - 

r-St- - 0^ - - 

K.  urffV  L*®. 

— g£-— - 1 

ir-  -  - 

y£3 

fr^7«  &P*  sP" 

i  r  *  h 

St'  o 

•  • 

1 

^  ,  !  1 

!  1 

1 

| - * - 1 - 

r  ^ 

F  t 

Lj 

— -J — J 

i - 


~A 


-$}-  O  ~£&~  O  -tS 

-k©-  .  ,-k$-  .  -Tfi 

I  l  I 


it 


<®~r 


-litf-zr- 1 — ^-Fjz — : 


En  -  da  -  koo  -  tlia  wa  -  ha  -  tun  -  ga  ae  -  ah-mae. 


.I— l- 


.  «• .  0,-.  •  ®  • - • • - »'  • - *  • 

~d— z]z^"|jg^ss^^|g-J?jss^r>s=fqg^ 


t± 


$  : 


:*± 


I  I 

Fa  ae  he  tha  ae  he  thae , 


No.  9.  POO-G’THIW  WA-AAJ 

J  #  =84.  Dignified. 


85 


"a - r - - - ^ - £~ - i  -i  rggT - p~ - 


SMi i 


f.f  i  i  * 

Shu  -  pe  -  da  hu  - 
Con  Fed.  j®.. 

f=^±:— rfc 


ah  -  ta  na-zhiw,f/iae  Shu  -  pe  -  da  hu- 


H- 


^=ft^p|===:j=r^ 


W 


I  I 

ah  -  ta  na-zhi n,  thae  ah  ae 


thae  tha  ae  thae  he  thae. 


$=t 


7 


9— 


I  •  \ 


r 


9— 


- 91— — 9—r 


7^-T 


-<3>Ps? - 9— 


jgh—tt*+ 


f- 


2=2 


9rl 


1 


Ae  -  hae  Hu-  ah  -  ta  na-zhm  thae  ae  thae  tha  ae  thae  he  thae. 

I  -9-  •  ^  .  I  -9-  *  I  -9~  •  I  -9-  • 


/—V+f  d  •  b  . 

r  ap” 

u 

few  .  m 

7BTT-  ter  . 

-®|  •  ^  • 

n 

rphS  -J2  p 

r“- 

i  i 

J  >•  a  a 

1  m 

b  . 

b  • 

*H  # 

— i£p — r - - 1 - 

4 - 1 - — 

r  Jr 

— 1  _ 

— i - i 

-J  •  ^ 

_q  :IJ 

No.  10. 


POO-G’THU/V  WA-A/V. 


86 

No.  11.  HAE-THU-SKA  WA-AW. 


m 


-0—0—0- 


— K 


& 

Nim-g’thae  thae-tae 


0  i: 


I  ”  i/ 

he-tha-ke-uw  -  tae  thimati-he-dae.  Nim-g’thae  thae-tae, 


t=i- 


«■> 


±£-£=£=(tztz£=:g=£z£dl 


£  __ 

^  W  isr 


n 

9-0 

9-0 
9-  & 

ZT 


he-tha-ke-im-tae  thuwah-he-dae.  Nim-g’thae  thae  -  tae  he-tha-ke-im  -  tae 


thimah-he  -  dae.  Nim-g’tha  thae-tae  he-tha-ke-im-tae  thunah-he-dae. 


87 


No.  12.  HAE-THU-SKA  WA-A/V. 


Religioso.  PRAYER  OF  WARRIORS. 


No.  13. 

Smoothly. 


HAE-THU-SKA  WA-AA/. 

CALL  TO  CEREMONIAL  REPAST. 


=  66. 


:  ~~:g: zz g - Egzg  t^TZ~z^r— *zzgz±  a>-;^r.fappgz3ezi*=:l 

i  i  r  i  i  ii  >  ■ 


On-haw  thae-tae  ne-daeah  tho,  On-haw  thae-tae  ne-daeah  tho,  En-cla-coo-tha  ne-clae  tho, 


Con  Ped.  f 


MEfc! 


H  &  ft-  &  & 


n  n 


- 5  J- — ffS5— pg-p- 

- 

A - - 1—4 


r 

Repeat  ad  lib. 


T 


I  I 

On-haw  thae-tae  ne-daeah  tho,  hae 


ae 


En-cla-coo-tha  ne-dae  tho  hae 


tho. 


88 

No.  14.  HAE-THU-SKA  WA-A/V. 

SONG  OF  DISMISSAL,  CHORAL  SONG  OF  WARRIORS. 

With  dignity  and  feeling. 

Double  Drum  beat.  J  =  116. 


I  & 


JC1 


-£2- 


— -0——0A-& d 


— * 


S  -  ~ 


//i  1  1  1  1  1  r  r  r  *  • 

Hin  -  da  -  koo-tha  na  -  zhi?z  thae,  Hin-da  -  koo-tha  na  -  zhin  thae  Hin  - 


Con.  Ped. 

1F.3F - ff. 


p-fer4=g: 


^ — '1®.--^' — Jj®.rp2!. 


— 1® — 


ijazu^: 


-i*— 


tt=t 


i®-k^ 


:d2: 


=SEi 


p3^d=q=| 

J— - - - L. 


da  -  koo-tha  na 


-®-..  -#■  -ar«  •  -*■ 


i«_u _ :8e_8e _ 

zidz. _ P--P- _ fk. 


zhin  thae,  ae  -  ha  na  -  zhin  he  -  tha-mae  £7m 

I 


f=F 


H 


^azzzjazzE^zitzt;=fcz3 


®— i® 


,  I  rT 


— (/  17 

®  i 

'  a2*  •  ®  & 

r®  _  1  E 

q 

S_D 

✓L  U  u 

^  £  Si* 

-  "  -  ‘  "r 

Lffi- — f — 

— — ^ 

— A 

. ■■  - 

—1 m  1 

V-W- — ® — 

L» — '.®- — 1 

<s - 1 

7me 


tho-  e 


im — a^^^zzs^zia^ir^ 
^=1*— ®— r®= F® 
±fcl=3z=t=t 


1 - J-J-^ 


w> 

W—\ ®— ®' 


Hin  -da  -  koo  -tha 

t3>- 

0fe21Ht — ! 


•i®-  -H®- 


H 


:^=r^z=i: 


-1 — r 


ma  -  thin  thae.  Hin  - 


-dV  t£>- 

- , 

:te=t=t=d 


-|2— zjz==^=:=)zi==^s;j: 

^dE&E^ES— El; 


#TT - - «7T-« 


-R- 


1  1  r  r  r- 

da  -  koo-tha  ma  -  thin  thae.  Hin  -  da  -  koo-tha 


ma  -  thin  thae  ae  - 


— ®Jr — r®  ®.  ®_ ® 

t?  »  »'  .  V^srrBe^czfcz tr 


$5 


!J=== 


» — ’<& 


|=|==?=E 


•® - ® 


L>=l*=t==t= 

I  I 


=fc=t=dfe=t 


f 

I 


d: 


=lt=t 


*: 


t-j: 


1 


ha 


Ma  -  thin  he  -  tha  mae  tho 


IgLiz  f-jEj&Sc 


■^r 

7iae 

1 


f 


:^=^=E=t==i=z=:Et=t=:t:=:t=E 


I  .  1 
) 

t 


tho. 

J 


1 


89 


No.  15.  HAE-THU-SKA  WA-A/V. 


Moderato.  Martial. 
Double  beat. 


thun  -  ga 


ta  -  ba  -  daw,  Zhiw-thae  sha  -  e  -  ba-daw.  tho  hae 


S3: 


Hs 


t=i: 


r-  r  i 

£/&o  -  e.  Ta  -  hae-zliiw-ga  Hae  -  thu-ska  ga  -  hae-daw  Nun-dae  wae 


— 9- — & — &■— = - 

» - & — *— =1 - 

-* - s - 

* — l~  l~ — h. 

»  & 


90 


No.  1  6.  HAE-THU-SKA  WA-A/V. 

With  feeling^  J  =  56.  — , 


mi 


j  i  n-n  !  I  S  i 

r&z - H 


44 


L»- — 


— ! - — j"— — 1 - 1 - “H--)-- 


I  I  I 

Hae-thu-ska  thin-ga-bae,  Hae-thu-ska  thin-ga-bae,  Hae-tbu-ska  thin-ga  - 
Con  Ped.  '  "  a 

g  f - rp— r— rf-g: 


-f^2— *■- 


@rz* 


4=* 


E^jjzEzgj: 


zf 


•* 


7 


¥  '  *  , 

bae,  Gha-gae-ahthin-hae.  £/io  hae 


L* 

thoe. 


iz=3: 


r 


-g- 


— I— T3 — i— 


r 


Te-thu  the-shan  thin-ga  - 


£ifr=4— 


--( 


=3=d=1=il= 


:.~I  zJzj  ~l  I-  - 


-*•  T5T  7®“ 


]  — 

e  | 

:  1 1I 

y 

=-4 

q*  1.1 

bae,  Hae-thn-ska  thin-ga-bae  Gha-gae-ah  thin-hae. 


hae 


:*: 


fcfc-. _ ^ 

-£-fr-jg — h 


~r 


WE 


Iz^pj_ 


i7io. 


Jzztzz:E!ziE^±:±:^ibt:— 1:1 

rr  !  r  ttxt  ■£• 


No.  1  7.  HAE-THU-SKA  WA-A/V. 

Martial feeling . 

Double  Beat.  Drum.  ^  =  160.  Song.  =  80. 


:r#=4— ® —  — c- 


J 


4 - 1 


9  = 


*  ;g  ^  ^ 


j=l*=F=£  zjzzz 


m/ 


fT 


Pi 


-m-T- 


Tun-gae-ah  da  -  dun  nan  -  tha-pae  he  -  we 

mfT 


-rwr — 

|S= 


-r-P- - *►- 


tha  -  ga,  Tun-gae-ah 

P%  ^ 


+E—  E 


Ped. 


Iff— i*: 


*=N= 


t®:: 


IL. 


91 


s 


-jfap-J—j—i- 

■■fi— nnriiiimiMi 

9 

•  / 

=r  =1  ■  i 

~f - t— , 

lJ  "  f*  ~ 

2C  #  *  «? 

-*—J — -J— ; 

*  H  -1  - 

"i - if” 

*  * 

\\TT  ^  • 

mf  f  ' 

-£  ^ 

1  * 

r 

-j#- - ^ 

1 

^  . 
B  • 

1 

1 

da  -  daw 

r=- 

na?^-tha-pae 

he  -  we  - 

tha  -  ga,  Tuw-gae-ah 

am  -  ba 

«?/-«-  -s- 

> 

-  /**- - A - 

i  4B- 

> 

>- 

m. 

Ti  — i  - rr — i 

-1*  *-  If  * 


// 


s3 


r  r  r 

ya  -  daw  he  -  we  -  tha  -  ga. 


/me 


-g— - L-®- 


H 


tho-e. 


#-—#■- 


£ 


7nj - - «6» - f“** - «r- - r— «r - «r - r-t 

f=l=E=:J=t=j==l=El 

!==£lm=ie=Elm=iEElM=^=£l 


'W  - t£J 


I _ I  I  I  I _ I  I 


92 


No.  1  8. 

Song.  ,J  . 


HAE-THUSKA  WA-AW. 

RESTING  SONG. 


i 


=  72. 

fU- 


5k 


$SS 


SE5 


t&-—r 


=$S=— j: 


ill 


Um  -  ba  thae  -  na 


xm 


ga 

■I 


tVLll 


r  *  r  * 

ba  -  ga  Um  -  ba  thae- 


8: 


Con  Fed. 


:$el 


: 


ifto  7iae  .  .  £7me  Hae  -  thu  -  ska 


93 


No.  19.  HAE-THU-SKA  WA-A/V. 

Double  Beat.  Drum.  144-  Song.  =72. 


M 


r 


JV.Z 


r 


to 


f 


Sha 
Drum.  ppn 


a«jggftog: 


Con  Ped. 


e  -  ba  -  claw  wa  -claw  -  ba  -  ga,  Sha 


M 


e  -  ba  -  claw 


to: 


:fct 


£ — &■■ 


to=3=i 


1  r  i 

wa-daw-  ba  -  ga  Sha 


4? -  ~ — - a - L_£_ 0 - L^— ^ 4 


W 

I 


I  I  I 

e  -  ba  -  claw  wa-daw-ba  -  ga  Hae  -  thu  -  ska 


m 


*=w- 


M—M: 


'&—&■ 


■i — i 


R=j: 


HP— HP* 


I 


— I - ft* - 1 - 1 - - 1— 

-&-• 


wa  -  shu  -  shae  tho  hae  . 


-<*>— — 


tho-e 


Mnw  -  chu  -  tuw  -  ga 


R- 


■w- — 

tz 


&~%r- 


& — =1- 
t= 


-3 — z - to- 


No.  20.  HAE-THU-SKA  WA-A/V. 

Martial ,  with  feeling. 


Song.  _e%  —  60.  Drum  heat.  .J*  =  120. 


IS  I 


s 


ts=p± 


f 

Ho  -e  ya  ae  ho  oh  wae 

* 


ho 


1 — I — s 


ya 


i  I 

ae  ho  oh  wae  Ho 


Drum.  j&.  & 


i=8: 


*=l*: 


*  ^ 

=N==fc= 


** 


t=t=: 


Con  Fed. 


95 


No.  21.  HAE-THU-SKA  WA-AA/. 

With  solemnity. 


s 


=±=t=t 


O- 


— I - 1 - - 1 - 4 


j — il — t 


r4— J- 


t=t 


& — & 


-«r 


W-&- 


96 

No.  22.  HAE-THU-SKA  WA-AA/, 

Divisive ,  with  spirit. 


K  _ 


=  176. 


7^-33- 

*  & 

— I1-*- - F — f— 

Ezf  -  |  3 

-^— ~ffl— 0—m-  J— - 
-tf- - 0- - — - 

-tr  ^  h  *-  L  h  LisJ-  L  r 

T  r  11 

Ah-  tan  tan-bae  -  dan  shae-  gan  ah-thin  -  hae  no,  Ah  -  tan  tan-bae 

Con  Fed.  ^  jsl.  js,  jje.  ^ 


| 


^=3 


t=t===£3= 


dan  shae  -  gan  ah-thin-  hae  no. 


r  1  r  l _ f 

Ah-  tan  tan  -  bae-  dan  shae  -  s:an 


— 1= — ^ — -M — 4-p4-F — 
p — | — ^ ^ - 1 — j-Fi — i— 


-HL 


:^=z^z=rj^=^=z: 


"SI 

r  w  h 

- J. — 

-^-r- — - - — 

-J  4 

- rmi - - 

— j 

|  >  1  * 

ah-thin- hae  no. 

a)==^: 


■?sr 


tho-e. 


Gha  -  gae  -  wa  - 


=1=3= 


thae  wa  -  oo  hae  -  the  -  gan-ae 

S  4  -£> 


All  -  tan  tan-bae-da?z  shae-gan 


Sr* 


—I-  \=J= 


ft=S=E= jE: 


'f 


#  f 


« — *r- 


t: 


4: 


nS^  ®  -g-~ 


^1 


i  1  I 

ah-thin-hae  no,  Ah  -  tan  tan-bae  dan  shae-gan  ah-thin-hae  no  hae 


tlio. 


-Mr*-*- 


:*=K 


CU 

rF“ 

m 


ET=*iS- 


t= 


*  » 


£3=:N=W«=P 


33 


*5=4: 


Jt4 


I 


97 


No.  23.  HAE-THU-SKA  WA-AA/. 

Spirited  Martial. 


98 


No.  24. 


HAE-THU-SKA  WA-AA/. 


Light  and  spirited. 

J*  =  208. 


DANCE  SONG. 


W- — & — & — & -  & — t 

trera-B 


i  v* 


Ne-ka  we-ta  wa-gu^-tha  te-bae -no,  Ne-ka  we-ta  wa-gun-tlia 
Oorc  Fed. 

+-  f  j|  1 1 


'  ■  Ei — i — i — i- 


m m 


t3=tJ=±t3=t3=l 


1  I  1  SS  i . f  . .  .  ~ El  1  ^ 

- L - *-t  L*-  — ^-.g^g.-^rEy  V  -J.  f 


te-bae-no,  Ne-ka  we-ta  wa-gn^-tlia  te-bae -no,  Ne-ka  we-ta 

t  ttT 


SSS3S 


S3 


'  LnJ 

wa-ga^-tha  te-bae-no,  Ne-ka  we-ta  wa-gu?i-tha 


te-bae  -  no, 


-j 

fcfe  6 

ri@  <@  <S> 

jm  [  *~-~W 

J? ift  .A  1 

aT\ 

1  U  U|  1 

if 

TC 

hrP  17  ^  —\ 

bE  (E 

4 

^  j®  |s;  |spl 

_|E _ BE _ BE _ ! 

3LJ 

V 

r  -p-  L_r  L^J  i_J  I_J 

tho  -  e  Nu  -cla?i  -  hu-gan  Ish  -  e  -  buz- zhe 

A  .  •«•  -*■  4-  -® 

;  tli  a  -  da  -  e  thm- 

i  ^  1 

£ 

h— ^ 

Hpr  BT 

| - --d 

7r  7  K 

— 

n 

Vi  ~ 

i 

1  1 

i 

■  2 

J 

I 


Note.  —  The  Indians  usually  sing  the  second  part  of  this  song  in  the  Key  of  G.  But  when  I 
played  it  in  A  flat  for  Mr.  La  Flesche,  he  declared  it  correct,  although  I  had  heard  him  sing  it  in  G. 
This  shows  that  the  interval  aimed  at,  in  going  from  the  first  to  the  second  part,  was  an  octave. 
But  D  was  easier  to  reach  than  the  upper  E  flat,  and  the  Indian  ear  does  not  make  nice  discrim¬ 
inations.— J.  C.  F. 


99 


3=$ 


— , 

i 

- _ 

_ H  9 

! 

- 

=1 

iggelgg* 

—I - i 

bSi 

wa-gim-tha  te-bae-no,  Ne-ka  we-ta  wa-guw-tha  te-bae-no. 


— i - 0 — 0 — 0 — #  I  — 0 — tf — 0—r-0 — — 0 — 0~r  0 — 0 — 0 — 0—r0 — 0 — 0 - 

Bz^-pE^-j—UZZlt-pEZ^E^g-^- |*±j*  j«t  -jErfrcf ^ztez^rrrH 


No.  25.  TOKALO  WA-A/V. 

Majestic . 


g-: 

r*#— J- 

—in 

j  j  J= 

r  J  i- 

if-h 

i  ■■  i  1  ^ 'i  n 

2k4-4 

IS_!_ 

-4* — S— 

4-4 

J-J  •» 

U-4^V  l—gjVi— gj-^-H-l 

W7  4 

'F2 

-*JP— - 

-4^- - — 

4— 

-4S- - 

<  ^  .^-1 

^  1  T  r-  Tj 

Hae  he  tha y  ha  ah  h 

im  S  s — a  • y  i  1  * 

'P=> .  4-p-*  4^-: 

,a  aft  he  tha  ah  e  tha  e 

—  l  ^  i  •  ^  >  • 

■&: 

then  h(X€f 

✓  •  /  im  . 

Ti  *  n 

v  ! 

| 

?  1 

Ti 

<i  1 1 

vrD  . 

S's'* 

u  . 

o',  • 

S 's*  • 

•  S's*  • 

S'r-3  . 

i  s)  s*  .  N 

w  ft  ■; 

x  1 -  “VI - 

| 

V  f 

#  vr* - 

S[ 

ig-fcll:l 

- - - ^ 

te2  •  4t=  • 

<  - 

f^-! 

1 

C— • 

i 

i 

100 

No.  26. 


IA/-OU-TI/V. 

GAME  SONG. 


*  _ 


=  192. 

A, 


^=4 — i -  . 


>  I 

Ha  -  ah  ah  ho  -  e  tha  ah  Ha 
Con  Peel. 


t=t- 


ah  ah  ho  -  e  tha  ah 


P 


5-S-S  * 1 


Ha  -  ah  ah  ho  -  e  tha  ah  Ha  -  ah  ah 


ho  -  e  tha 


E  -  ae-zhiw-ga 


2-j - 1 — - fr— br-f. - 1 - ! - h~ 


. * 


cla-danskha-hae.  Ha  -  ah  ah  ho  -  e  tha  ah  Ha 


- —A-  A- 

fcfeii=t==-t==t= 


ah  ah  ho  -  e  tha. 


$±ft 


[J*-£  T  ^jT  fr.ff  £-£— q-fl 


No.  27.  I/V/-OU-TI/V. 

GAME  SONG. 


* 


101 


No.  28. 


IA/-OU-TI/V. 

GAME  SONG. 


J  =  116.  p*. 


P^?3B^53=4^: 


crtrw=,:¥rn5 


p  p 


E  ya  ha-  e  ha-  e  tha- e  ya  ha  -  e  ho-  e  tha-  e  ya  ha-  e  ho  -  e  tlia  -  e 
Con  Ped.  _ 


m 


-&=m=. 


— - igjfc.j>  |»  W  |»  jtz 


~af 


W 


LJ  LJ  LJ~LJ — tf 


I 


F=fc 


t=t: 


t=f 


n 


-J  -TJT#ndH 


-■■■1,  ■* — i — i—1 -h 


?/a  /m-  e  -e  E  ya  ha-e  ho  -  e  tha-  e  ya  ha-  e  ho  -e  tha- 


^-Tm-O-n 

.«««««•  £3 


=zfz|=t 


-■0—0—0- 


s^srfpg 


m  C  w  3 


— •*— - — «— P— #1 — d — H  .— g — -#-— — «— P— « - 1 - - f 


0-0-0— 0—0 


~m — i — - i-h^l- - — i — i- 


f=fc 


I 


ya  ha-e  ho  -e  tha-e  ya  ha  -  e  ho  -  e  tha  -  e  ya  ha-  e  ho-  e  ya. 


P-  P-P 


=P=p 

lez^Ezrp^WEzfe 

rj - c|— I— . — 1 •-•-* 


3 


:4— 4 


- - jri-J 


102 

No.  29. 


IA/-OU-TIA/. 

GAME  SONG.  SUCCESS, 


rqq 

cd— ra= 

t  A 

1  !H 

^  n  n 

/rU  jl  -J  m 

^  -*  il 

.33  V  •  £ 

j*  mb 

j 

QS7  W7 

■V  -W  — »  -33 H 

>rr  mt*  '<w 

"  f 

Ka  -gae  ha  -  ta  -  ah-  daw  ansna  zhiw-ga,  hae  thae  Ka  -  gae 

GonPed.  je. 

ha  -  ta  -ah- 

AeVq  »>  pi 

BF  M 

 @7 

9 -  ' 

0 

LffziiLZ  r 

1  1 

} 

I  1 

1  *1  1 

j 

.i 

J 

 L 

Lm  1  W 

HF  '  ^  -T—  i - r  r 

No.  30.  CHILDREN’S  SONG  FOR  “FOLLOW 

MY  LEADER.” 


No.  31.  HAE-KA-NE  DANCE. 

OTOE. 

Song.  J.  =  100.  Double  Drum-beat.  =  200. 
dT'' 


103 


No.  32. 


WA-WA N  WA-A/W. 

EN  ROUTE. 


Double  beat.  J  =  63. 


H2: 


sll 


- #=f? 


f — f 


r 


Ha-wa-thm  ho-wa-nae  Ha-wa-thm  ho-wa-nae  Ha-wa-thin  ho  -wa-nae  Ha- 


Con  Ped.: 


“fid?  ^ 

-h— 

-n  •>  -i 

RH  rgj 

■h-j— J 

J3= 

— IT-i^— ri 

^  Hi  ki  *9  jm  ***  .^sn  H 

VW  W  zJ  2  Ei  i^rSl 

$  * 

«©  ' 

^  If  ^  p  ^  l 8i 

WE7  *  g  g G=T  ET 

i 

°  f 

,  r  -  (■ 

wa-thm  ho  -wa-nae  H 

=»  :=»  := 

 a*  &?  a  “d 

r  r  t  i 

ia-wa-thiw  ho-wa-nae  Hae-  wa-thm 

E-  it-  tm- 

r  i  *• 

ho-wa  -  nae. 

& 

L  [T  r  n  F”  P"  ■F-p^B»r®r  pr  ~ - 

E 

•  w  m  ar  r 

r~  — i 

|  | 

j 

*  m  W  h 

x— 'U  u  r 

r““ — —r^  r^-  r 

,  1 

^  HIL1 

r~  h:  ■ 

^-5^ 

w- 

f  -[ 

-™J=— U=  t! 

«J=^ - : 

I 


104 

No.  33. 


Sostenuto.  Dignified. 


WA-WA/V  WA-AW. 

RECEIVING  THE  MESSENGER. 

>  =  182. 


^§3:4 


=3=3= 


Pt 


I  I 

Thae  ho-wa  -  nae  thae 
Double  beat. 

jsiratstajzgzigzcat 


7^ 

I 

ho-wa  -  nae  thae 


i  - - - 

ho-wa-nae,cf/iftae 


2± 


Fed.: 


r^i  rn  rn  rn  m  r™"i  m  rn  r~i 

^T^=g=|j=r^=3|=^i:3i=:s)=^zr^z^=^i:^z;^=^=^=^: 

: «=5=i 4Dfi.+-4p— E5— 3— W— J—J— o— -2— 3- 


fE^EE^s4ips5p=pS; 

I  1^ - 


Hun  -  ga. 


1=233-2 

-ft — d  -  J-^- 


Thae  ho-wa  -  nae  thae  ho-wa-nae  a/i  lxae 

Q 


:aQ^z 


pa]=pa|-a|rai-a|za|=a|zr*|i*|:^-a!|-a|zsBjr^^:ra|rar^=^:r| 
\-m— h^— m— m— *i— m— m— \-m-m-m— m~ m  -m  -a  m  g-«i~i-^-^-|-| 

L#-=S— «1— * — c  .-- 3— <*-  3— - 'J 


No.  34. 


WA-WAA/  WA-A/V. 

NEARING  THE  VILLAGE. 

/Sbn#.  J.  =  63.  Drum.  =  126. 


tE=&f± 


J-r-£ 


*5=±t± 


f 


S3 


I  I  -  I  U* 

Ae  -deun-ga  -  he  -  bae  Ae-  deun-ga  -  he  -  bae  tha 
Double  drumbeat. 


1 


; 


i  v  •  r 

nae  Ae  -deun-ga  -  he  -  bae  tha  lie  thu 

— r5_^_r5_^_ 


crtr — -^jr— rrt^r 


Ae-deun-ga- 


»^sa=g 

-TT  ”i 

==t— 

bzm- 

"t 

=r-d= 

_ -gi _ | _ 

AE  41 

==  f  i  i 

z.  *  ^ 

*  * 

f: 

s.m  * 

S^-s- 

f-:- 

w  ^gp 

i*  • 

*  g  i  ziz  i  l 

I  i  i  u>  i  i  r 

he-bae  e-na  ho  -tan  ge-e  -  nae  Ae-deun-ga  -  he  -bae 


tha 


:^^REf^EE=d^^E^E^PE^EEfEfET| 

— R— r — 1>-£ — FrT-Fr~r-F-r — u 


*tzt 


he  thu 


tha. 

e 


-I#-- 1#- 

"I  r 


!#■-!#■  H»— 1#~ 

u  L 


105 


No.  35. 


J*  =  132.  _ 


rrfZL 


WA-WAA/  WA-A/V. 

SONG  OF  APPROACH. 


?ET?C±=& 


-P2- 


- LX 

Thae-naw  ho  -  claw  thae-naw  ho  -  daw  thae-naw  ho  -  thae-naw 

Trem.  >•  >■  >  > 


— F> — f — ! — i — F — C1-Ejr- 


Con  Ped . 


m 


fc$=R 


izsi; 


3=4 


=&qae5 

fi£p2 


ho  -  daw 


tha  hae  thae-naw  ho-  thae-naw  ho  -  daw  thae-naw  ho 


— tf-# — s2>— £3> — d&-  4IL.$L._£2_ 

-i — 0-0—0-0-0-r0-0-0  -0-0 — 0-A — | — »■ — » 

-fc*~ F— I - f— 4 - 1 - H - 1 - h—H— hr — hr — —  h~  hr — Fr 


SfeEEgisa^;! 


0-0- 


0-0-0 

S=E 


y§§ 


& - 0- 


t-t— t—  -0—0 - 0— P— 


=to-=H  iHr 

r~ i — — ; — 

— rl  pt 

^tVt?  f>  to  ™ - -#1  *ad 

5)5  2  *  *  *  S 

thae-naw  ho  - 

>  > 

fe^v-12— b-i#- — i#- — ^0 — ^0— 

£ 

th£ 

f| 

2  J  -rL 

ie-naw  ho  -  daw 

-  -®-  r=s-  >• 

g  £  Frrj 

1  s  s  -i 

thae-naw  ho  - 

2  : 5  r 

W  -i  -i  * 

daw  Hnw  -  ga. 

:=t=  H=  t==t~ E=Et=  : 

Et= 

U 

bt=t t=d= 

— 

106 

No.  36.  WA-WA/W  WA-A/V. 


LAYING  DOWN  PIPES. 


No.  37. 


WA-WAA/  WA-AA/. 


J  =  84. 


LAYING  DOWN  PIPES. 


4=l-r-f 

- 1. - -w 


^  ^ 


=P 


:j^ — g>~ 


L/ 

ya  hae  thae  hae  thu  tlia 

S-S 


/ 


Fa  hae  thae  hae  thu  tlia 
^ — i®- — l®— ni-- 


Oora  PecZ. 


! 


107 


No.  38.  WA-WAN,  WA-AN, 

.  LAYING  DOWN  PIPES. 


P"*]  Jp  |maq 

I 

XT  <r> 

p  d  v  d  n ™ 

- 1 

~w~zA  i  d —  ^ 

7  ft 

ff  *  -  0  •  W 

» 

h  9  -0  a—  ~b* 

i  m2  1 

V  /I  H 

\* 

f  * 

&  m  &  '& 

□  Hi 

Wr  a w  ff 

^  r  [  r  r  r 

Heah  o  tha  ae  o  hae  ha  Heah  o  tha  ae  o 

TremrEt.  :gz:  ft.  -g~  a 

hae  ha 

g" 

7i\.  c» 

i" 

■S5  I 

r  w  \— 

fS  *1 

1  1 

&«■ 

4- 

*** 

Ped.\ 

1  !  11  '  !  1  l\^  *** 

^-zr-Z-zr" l-ziTs- 

3: 

r  -1  -!  4- 

— 0—J-0- 

5^  J  3- 

:zd— d— dtl: 

r 

w  i  -g*  -  .g. 

1  *T 

Lf 

d 

*  * 

1 

— d — -«— 

a*  * 

"4r  L 

Heah 

o  tha  ae  o  hae 

ha 

Heah  o 

tha  ae  o 

hae  Him  • 

-ga. 

• 

5S 

52 

K 

M  % 

m-  t- 

C-d 

9 - 

— 1 - 

-  ^  ^  Fl 

'-'SS 

— >-t— -fe — 

• 

— d - 

f  >  :  4 

,gr 

gj  ■ 

0 

a 

2?  1 L 

ss 

:— - 7 

L. 

— m  i 

108 

No.  39 


WA-WA/V,  WA-A N. 


109 


No.  41. 


CHORAL.  WA-WAN  WA-AN. 


- 

K  | 1  | 

  N i . 

— fcl 

P>— zl  .  |  | 

l  I  !  ^  \' 

pk  \)  '' 

J  1  9 — 

ZA  2  ~  L  ^ 

h/n. 

oo-tha 

J  1  J 

■&  Up 

Thae  ah-wa  -  kae  -  dae  heah  thae  hae  Heah  -  o< 

1  J  J  LI  J  1,2-  „  2-  ~  _J ...  _.l 

4.^. 

3  -  tha 

1  => 

u  &  W  <9 

1 

\\ 

\7mr  wr 

1  1  1  1 

p  ^  ^ 

p  p  b  kt? 

r*-  r~- 

i  “ | 

j—  i  r'- 

Ui  l  1  __ 

i  ■ 

Iw  iar  •" 

- Z - ^ « 

1 - 0— 

=i— =!  j  =t 

21*  t® - 1*  I®- 

^ 

r~- 

1 — i — i — 

0 - 0—\ - 1 - 1 - 1 - - f 

=>  ^  -«u  [  |  | 


ah  -  kae  -  dae  heah 

J—J_ I- 


oo  tha  ah-wa  -  kae-  dae  heah-^ae  hae. 

IS 


2M— -4- 


±==t= sf 


& — S — & 


*  5H*- 


“^J.— Jr 
tr*  -* 


3r3n3 


*  N.  B.  This  and  the  other  syncopations  in  this  choral  are  struck  by  the  Indians  about  a  quarter 
dtf  a  tone  above  pitch.  Both  Miss  Fletcher  and  myself  noted  them  down  as  grace-notes ;  but  they 
never  satisfied  Mr.  La  Flesche.  But  when  I  played  them  as  plain  syncopations  he  at  once  expressed 
the  most  emphatic  approval,  saying  that  now,  at  last,  they  were  correct.  J.  C.  F. 


110 


No.  42.  WA-WA/V  WA-AA/. 

Flowingly,  with  feeling.  AROUND  THE  LODGE. 
Double  Beat.  — 126. 


P 


J=f£ 


4-4-* 


— i- 

0 


;=f 


4P 


-gFN=t==p 


3t± 


§:S  5 


Kae  -  tha 


I  I  I 

yah  Hun  -  ga  Kae-tha  Hun-ga  een-tun  -ee-nae 


=  *  f  1|*  -#— #  '£-*  £  |*  *  -S-'i 


Con.  Bed. 


0*jj 


iN 


yah 


Hun  -  ga 


4==- 


"T  *  w  * 

i  t  i  ^ 

Kae-tha  Hun-ga  een-tun  -  ee  -  nae  thae 


m. 


^  f-~l  JT~1  ,. .  r-q_-.r~n,r_~~i^,  JTTi 


L.J- 

9 

—0—^-0 — « — 

^ ^ - — - 

n-  n 

tk—d — 

=i 

-J*— « — 

— 1  — h^y — |  — | 

0  0)  *  -i 

0  0.  W 

=i  ”  =rn  h  q 

£  *  S.s  2  . 

Hun 


ga 


iii 

Heah  tha  Kae-tha  Hun-ga  een-tun-  ee  -nae 


fee 


0 — 0  & 


-fm- — 0 

fe 


0 — 0 


:|z-|r.,:— £rq 

:*=*-(* 

llSsB 


a 


f 


— — — 


f 


i  i 


=t=£ 


ya  ah  Hun  -  ga  Kae-tha  Hun-ga  een-tun-ee-nae  thae  Hun  -  ga. 


s 


n._.  nx-  33 

I®- — -tfl — vai — -#1 — ■#!— |— • •gj — -ggj — ^ — ■#)— (x? tfl — 0 — 7<W — -ad' 


mm&m 


-0 — 0 — 


■J=i=2 


M==f- 


iJ*  £  *  tjftjhlhgJ 


trtrtr^ 


Ill 


No.  42a. 


WA-WA/V,  WA-A/V, 


i 


PRAYER  FOR  CLEAR  WEATHER. 
|S  |  ^  ^  I— T 


=Ht^- - -Ffc - 


4-4- 


<&  -0- 


ff  I  I  I 

Kae  -  tha  wae  tha  Him-ga 
Double  Drum  Beat. 


*± 


.  »  « 


£=t 


»  *■ 


f^-cr 


Kae  -  tha  wae  tha  Hun-ga  Kae  -  tha 


K-a 


i#- 


(7cw  Bed 


tsf 


£ 


— 10- 


112 


Him-ga 
—&■ — 0t~ 


Kae  -  e  -  tha  wae  tha 


*c=pc 


m 


wt 


-a- 


h#-»~ 


s 


91 


No.  44.  WA-WA/V,  WA-A/V. 

TO/i  dignity.  prayer  FOR  CLEAR  WEATHER. 

Double  Beat.  _J*  — 126. 

-  ,  I . .  I .  ^  r*"!  i  n— i 


^z=4:4z^=£)ff=tE=^zf=Et 


&  ^ 


/ 

Kae -tha  Kae  -  tha  Kae  -  tha  ha 


rteTrl-q-Tq 

i*£jZI-5LS 


heah-o  tha  Kae-tha  Kae- 


3 


s  s  ;  34  *  , 

dj 


31—4—4: 


:4 


* 


« 


m 


fr=f« 


tha 


?/a  wae  fto 


Kae-tha  aft  Kae-tha  o  ha 


heah  o  tha 


^2=4=tzt 

-0 - ,1 - 0— i 


"LZl 


I - 1 - 1 - « - « - 4* - -#1- 


:^E (ffizj 


w- — i#-- 


7F 


=fc 


Kae-tha  ah  Huw-ga  aft  fta 

JXj  > _ =; 


•*-*■•*•  5 

Heali  o  tha  ah  Kae-tha  Kae-tha  o  ha 


fegpiiffMbg: 


 «  »* 


•«— 4H . 

-zr  sr  sr  ~ar 


m 


:3^=E: 


-•#-#- 


-■«-«- 
1= 


■■m-m-m- 


5 — ^1— 1— - — 


_i - j— m - - rn — 0 — 0 — « - 1 - 1 - 1 - ! - 1 - 1- 

%¥*  If* 


ya-nae  ho  Kae-tha  ah  Kae-tha  o  ha  heah  o  tha 


Kae-tha  ah  Hun-ga. 


mm 


S 


■-d— : 


=t==t=t 


s 


m 


n~n. 


t=t=l=t 


~S~~S  &  S' 


3= 


113 


No.  45.  WA-WAA/,  WA-A/V. 

.  RAISING  THE  PIPES. 

J  .  =  72. 


_ A-  x 

r'i  v  a  i 

y ,  i'  b  i  to. 

L 

L  | 

 ]  1 

i  **i 

i  *111 

r  r  i 

p* 

1  h 

1  *  • 

1  H  II 

!  !  t 

L- 

!  !  ! 

• 

1  1 8 

W  i W  "  ^ 

&  W^Z Zf- _ #- 

1*-.  w 

TP - ^ - 

^  *i  1 1 

-  r-  r  r'  r-  f:  f  '  «p 

?cae  tha  kae  tha  wae  Thae  ah  -  wa  kae-tha  tha. 

=2:  -  =2^=2;  ^  ^  I”™!  _  1 

®.» 

JvJ*  \)  U 

1 

Ust  1^ 

i  n 

i  H  • 

i 

19  19 

-1  -H  . 

■  i  I 

^  1 

E 

i  i 

9  9 

1  - 1 

"1 

_  —  L_r  "  * 

114 

No.  46.  WA-WA/V  WA-A/V. 

Smoothly.  OTOE. 


*5 


115 


No.  47. 


WA-WA/V,  WA-AW. 


r  i  i 

L 

— i — ! — i — ^ — H 

— 0— 

--=£ - =n 

-& - 7^-^- 

#d  =1  *  ^l  i 

% 

- k=^c— 1 - P - 

1 - - ■~»J - -mJ - 

-#f  It 

T=I  


r 


i  i 


_ *!» 

# - fr— »» 


1 


No.  48. 


Lightly  and  smoothly. 
J  =  56. 


WA-WA/V,  WA-A/V. 

OTOE. 


■H 


Trem , 


(7orc  Perf. 


..b? 


Eg±E* 


1—4 


t 


22: 


@4=  #-  -f«-  -P2- 

: ^=^-=i-j^^S===±S, m 


HS — 


igsj 


P5 


fstzr^ 


rfc: 


-£2. 


fap 


■#■  ^2- 


- -S 


n= 


-IS' 


116 


No.  49.  WA-WA/V,  WA-AA/. 

PAWNEE. 

Dignified.  >  - 120.  |  ^  | 


^-2l3. — z] 


•  ~~4  4 — -gj — w 


A - 

U^H 


rr=  sf\  sf\*. 


:  T’ffTl’TTT  fi-  £  .TIS-  %  T:g  jT*  ; 

Con.  Ped.  i -T  I— r  i—1  *"-J  UJ“ 


«//v 


No.  50. 


Smoothly ,  with  spirit 

>  =  120.  j- 


WA-WAW,  WA-AA/. 

PAWNEE. 


a-j— -f^ 


Sbfcz# 


fcS3: 


~*~w~0 


•  H  pi 


zZ=d=3 
-g — -g— 3 


gat— |*  -p  -l».1rT>  k-  t  1=1 
z^z=McSCte4^=4K=l 

— , - 1 - (— I - ' 


:=tg=^j 


~L ! - i-- 


Con.  Ped. 


7 

2  * 

’  *>'  ®  ' 

l- 

C- 

} - -m 

Z. - A - ^0 

. -& 

i — 

— \-m — m- 


w 


T+Xi-  PH- 


i  i 


*♦'•-** 

■IWff 


?cPWflf — &zz&~&-.p..&.x:p. — .|b_JL0L_|b: 

■far— brtrhr-hrHB - bis — H — ! — — I — h|g--- (g  ■■! - 1 - tar 


:ht=hE=WffW 


i — i — i — hi®- — F—  l__ - W^f*- P 

rcrt=^ — tr-a 


:|*=t 


i] 


t=j— trtr 


117 


No.  51  . 


WA-WA/V  WA-A/V. 

INTRODUCTION  TO  FINAL  DANCE. 


Ka  -  wae  tha  ka  -  wae  £/ia  ka  -  wae  tha  ka  -  wae  tha  kae  ah  wae  tlia  kae  ah 
Trent,  h  ^  ^  .g 


?= 


-js- 


-L-Q- 


Ped._ 


5? 


5f* 


*a!i3£zai 


1 - n:n 


I  I  I  I  II 

kae  tha  ka-wae  tha  ka  wae  tha  ka  wae  tha  kae  ah  wae  tha  kae  ah  kae  tha  ka  ivae  tha. 

-<S>— - nS>- - x~&-n - r-^PTT - riS~i - |-<S>- - 


:±t 


-£2 


Mi&B'A 

JESS 


'G- 


U 


LS- 


>  =  160. 


I 


■ 


8:83; 


jSG3 


-33- 


«*« 


ritard. 

a 


=|!F=fc*9F=^=i=q 

« - - -# - - ; HH - 


P=tf 


Ka-wae  tha  ka  -  wae  tha  wae 


8  4  - 

'  IF  .  ‘ 

Con  Ped. 
a  tempo. 


e± 


&a  wae  tha  ka  wae  tha  ka  wae  tha 
- r-f*-± - r-S~ - r -0B - 


-g= 


-its 


_  _  _  _ 

wae  fta  wae  ffta  &a  wae  -tha  wae  ka  wae  tha  ka  wae  tha  ka  wae  tha  wae  ka  wae 


es"^  s^r  «**P* 


:ij 


#S 


H 


J=ft 


192. 


E^EzEjE 


e- 

tha  wae  ka  wae  tha  ka  wae  tha  wae 


-tw$ 


isg 


e 


^=1- 


!— -H— 4 


ee-the  ka  wae  tha  tha  kae  tha  wae. 


is 1J-  !J: 


t=Hz-:| 


**f  I  eHt 


- 1 — I — I — t— - 1 — 1— 

Lrtr^^  ^ 


Drum-beat. 


118 


Dance. 

Double-beat.  .J  =  116. 


. — — L-0-—m — p- 


i 


LJ  L_J 

Kae  tha  kae  thae  kae  tha  kaa  thae  kae  thae 


*,2-=fIif  iiiii 

— I - 1 - ! - 1 - 1 - 1 - ! - h- 


-f®- 

-I - 1 - W—m—r& — » — » 1#- 


*=t 


*e=*=£=p= 


.  L— H— -H— ^1 
H#— I#— »— H 

=t=tE3 


H#- — » — i#~ 


— j  ;  "1 


119 


Very  slight  pause. 


■£-■9  ~9~  -&- 


--■=T3==Z 


-^|  n: 

f  SIS 


Two  Voices  only. 

fto  kae  tha  ho  kae  tlia  o  ha  kae  tlia  hae  Ho  kae  tha  ho  kae  tha 


m-«- 1 — i — i — i — bf — p  r~|~~ 


#  0  # 


p=f=f=  q 

tzzt=tzzd 


:y=z^=|=. 


No.  52. 


>  =  168. 


WA-A/V  WA-A/V. 

GOING  FOR  THE  HU  VGA. 


if 


tea 


«- 


P^4=t=^z=^=gz=E^— £ 


-w-*- 


Zhiw-  ga  the  ou  -we  -  nae 


Him-ga 


S±&B=jtz 

4-44 


f 


_*_.*.**  ... 

A — ^ — » — » — & - m — m- — m- — m 

2 =£^=t=E=fa=B= 


Zhm  -  ga  the  ou-we- 
>  > 

^  ^ 


i* 


120 


No.  53. 


A=168- 


-K 


WA-WAA/,  WA-AA/. 

AT  THE  DOOR. 


wae-ah  -  nae 


4=£ 


ah-te  -ae 


-**■— i*- 


rTf' 


Cow  Pec?. 


121 


No.  54. 

/  =  184. 

# 


WA-WA/V,  WA-AAf. 

PAINTING  THE  HUiVGA. 
A - 


4-4-^=E^ - -+-z3= J=S=^=r^=tg~f~=S: 


Ah  -  tha  -  ha 


thae  -  ah  -  thae, 

S ® 


Ah  -  tha  -  ha  thae  -  ah  -  thae, 
>  '  '  ay® 

# - - P 


t~.  * ~  *— »  *  '  -  :  £*...  '<r  '  3  3 


Cora  Fed. 


3^- 


8*  ^  l*~  I*- 

Ah  -  the  -  tha  -  ha, 


a 


=t 


:3s— §“ 


-*-  -r-  r 

ah  -  the  -  tha  -  ha,  Haw 


ga. 

D.  C.  ad  lib. 


m 


:zw - « - ,i - ~ 


:N=t*=N— 


i 


No.  55. 


WA-WA/V,  WA-A/V- 


No.  56. 

*  =  176. 


WA-WA/V  WA-A/V. 

TAKING  AWAY  THE  HUJGA. 


i 


=t 


Hun 


*  s 

-  ga  ha  -  ne, 


^Egl 


fAo, 


|g£4=! 


nS: 

CW  Fed. 


Him  -  ga  ha  -  ne, 

fe=? '=r$=?=t=? '=rJZ=t=*=f£ 

- » » HP- I* 19- — — ! - j H - 1 — 


tA 


122 


no  tho  Him-ga  ha-ne  no  tho  Hura-ga  ha-ne. 


...  £ 

> 

£  \ 

m 

s 

<9  » 

•S'-.-  J*'-  *- 

>  > 

rs  s  s  «ii 

t£Z5$  gJi.  UL 

p 

~  1 

i 

t  i 

^  .  T7  is  irsr  rr^  r~  i - i 

r-  n 

%Js  C  I 

i  , 

r 

S 

ar  is 

m  Is  i,'  H5  rw  ts — Is  - 

k  II 

J2#  rf> 

k 

l  n 

1 

i  r :t;s 

1  r 

r  II 

i  1 

L— — 1  l— J  r  r 

L»»  i  1 

r 

-No.  57. 


FUNERAL  SONG. 


r  «  * — t  ;  o 


a 


111  I  I  I 

e  tha  ha  ah  e  tha  ah  e  ah  ha  ae  ha  o  e  tha  hae 


tho. 


m 


% 


B 


33 


ME-KASEE 


123 


No.  58. 


J  =  100. 


4 

— PT 

jm  ! 

— 

K 

- j, 

-f— 

0 - 

"T 

J- 

i 

w  0 

1 

i  ' 

<p  j 

r 

Fate  ah 

ha  yaw  < 

ah 

ha  ah  yaw  ah 

ha  ah 

yaw  ah 

fta  a* 

?  yaw 

7 zr^sr^r 

-ft - 

ft  r 

T 

-0- 

Si 

r-f- 

m 

1 

- 1* 

fg&dt 

4= 

t=— . : 

-0 - 

0 - 

— 0 - 

-F 

4 

=* - 

H —  ■* 

.  fig - 

d 

o 

s 

— ,  -) -  -rq 

fjy - 1 - 

=J  J#  — *  *  * 

f  f 

$  r 

*  r- 

r  r- 

1  1 

hae , 

hae , 

£fto-e  Wa 

oo  ah-ma  wae-tha-he  -  ba  hoo-zhae  - 

Si51S — *1 — 4- 

1  1 

=N— 4~: 

I  ft  ■!  ^ 

— 

pit:  S:  1: 

Ez  3  4 

- ■# — 0— 

L# — W— ■ - 

.  .r  - - 

4  t-  s 

pa  -  thm  h’te  raum-b’thift  ah-thm-hae  hoo  ah  -  wae  yaw  hae  yaw. 


124 


No.  59, 


MEKASEE. 


spSta 


I 

Heali 


>S3^. — — _r- 

-  p -r -*— -"j-  --f— — | — h — i- 

=*==dfe=*z=gf 


yatv 


ha 


» - f- — F*-- 

^£-4-4-F - 1 - FF— 

Con  ped. 


I 

ah  heali  e 


n 


:p: 


f 


t= 


7m  aft 


1 


- - 0 - <9 — - 9* 


r — r 


heah 


e  yah  ha 


heah  e  yaw 


»  r 

ha  a/i  wae 


p 


i  i  ✓  *  *  * 


tha  hae 


s 


m 


\/ ,   i  i  i  m 

- — fc-— 

1  rnmmmmm »  . 

r  i  n 

/[.  U  1 . 1  H 

h  j  j  w  rj 

i 

i  „n£  n 

g/TVZ. _ ^0 _ i _ • _ ,^n _ 

j  ~  \  1 

VM7  2T  ^  S  ^  # 

L  £9 

F  0  *  zj  i 

L  m  U 

r  rr  r  r  f  f 

warc-ge  -  hae  ?/a  he  ah  e  yaw  hi 

^  ^  <a 

*  r  *  *  * 

z  wae  ah  hae  tho. 

p _  1  1  1  . 

®^55T  X  i  r^K  32  32  ^  II 

r^,  r  p 

BT  v- 

i —  r 

wr  wi  vi 

w!  v.  II 

K  BF  HF 

t“ 

pr  v 

■|“  - 1  i 

'  f  S  1  fl 

— ^-r - r-r— 

r  r 

Lr  r  L 

j - ^ 

y - IJ 

125 


No.  60. 


MEKASEE. 


Song.  =  104.  Drum-beat.  ^  =  208. 

N 


— I — F— 1_ — P?— L^— , — l — » — r_r._TT-j-P^-n 

Hea/i  7&a  aft  ha  e  ah  ha  e  yaw  heah  ha  ah  ha  ee  yaw  ee  yaw 
Double  Drum-beat. 


-*■  JB-  JZ-jSL  JL 


^=|s=|p=|*=|s:=|e: 


}e=tei=te=te: 


t=t=t 


Con  Fed. 


$ 


5=1= 


-0-0- 


£ 


3 


wmm 


^p — J— bL.^»< 


1  1  1  '  ‘  f:  f 

ee  yaw?  ha  e  yaw?  heah  ha  ah  ha  ee  yaw  ee  yaw  ee  yaw  ah  ha  ee  yaw 


**=t=t==^^«==t: 

— ( 1 - P— P — p-p-HP— p — p- 


=t==Pt= 


it  irr-^Rhfil 


i  i  —*i  i-tt 

*=& — r  r-i=t 


HI 


HP — I#- - IP— IP— Hi 

t=t=t=tEEt 


■ip  p- 


1  iK  1  IV  1 

r4  -T>  -1 - N 

r-F* 

H"  '  1 

vr  *  ^  d 

-j  — p  d  “r  n  i' 

p  P - p 

- — — 1  ~i  d 

frW  p1 

P  ZJ  22  ^2  ^2  ^ 

p  p  p  p  *-  n 

p  •  p  •   

w  *flr  w  -i3p” 

P  • P  • 

40  .  ~  ^  w  -j 

°  i  i  ^  1 

;  ba  -  zhe  ba  Lae  -  ge  mim  Heah 

■j®»  H®-  H®*  ”j§*  -^§“  -P~  H 

i  1 

ha  ah  ha  ee  \ 

%  JB.  5.  H 

yaw  ee  -  g aw 

asv+t  t  i  r  p  p  p  p  p  p  n  h  p  v  n 

LA.  La. (A  IP.  I   .  L  L  1  P  LA   LA.  .A  JP  iP  1 

^  op^  S*r- 

{  | 

j  | 

KT~ 

HP"  hf~  tar 

i  i 

v - 

r_ _ r  i 

J—  -t~ 

— ™ - 

— 

u 

t=  t= 

d=  i 

— 

— “  d 

126 


rM - rr-rr-rzzrr - =r - 

- 1 - 1% 1—2!- 1 - — d - 1%— 

-  r-r— 1 . -p 

f£H=*L  -n 

w  i  3%  ^ 

r  r  r 

1  1 

- - 1 - IL 

pE^E 


ha  e  ya  ah  ha  ah  ha  ee  -  yaw  ee  -  yaw  ee-yawha  e  yaw 

— 1  m  r“i  rn  — —  — —  _  _ 


4 


^40-^0 - 0 - ■*- 


i 


■1 — -4- 


No.  61 

Martial.)  ^ 

0  =  7J. 

N  I  K 

.HI  *  *— r~» 


p 


ss 


NA-G’THE  WA-A/V. 

ii 


r- 


1  i 

Ae  -  deuw  -  ga  -  thae 


tae  tho 


|  ^ - 

Hae !  Ka  -  gae 


SSl=F 


H- 


Con  Ped. 


127 


“  P - - 

II 

-=r — =i 

- ^ - J - 

- to - 1 - 

v  ■  r— ft 

- 1 - 1| 

a;  JL 

JL  * 

r 

Jr  — i 

i.  ■*■ 

1 

f- 

J; 

^r= 

*: 

> 

f^\  •  u  . 

ga. 

1 

thae  -  tae 

- 1 - "1 

I 

tho 

r+= 

Hae! 

Ka  -  gae.  . 

-H— r— H— ■ 

=r-f - n 

Ito- 

f*- 

=^~ 

— «— - 

- 

i= 

H 

- -^9- 

— 1 - 

. - . 

^  ‘ 

i — i - 1 — 

X  v — 

- 1 - 

jt' 

i - 1 - i-i 

128 

No.  62. 


N  A-G’THE-WA-A/V. 


:±± 


J3-d: 


»  *  S 

« - 0> 


Um-ba  e 


ij2£:^i£i  t- 


:F  i 

— - r-w - m- - 1 - 

r  r  r  * 

r 

|T 

if 

IJ 

r 

1 - : - 1 - 1- 

i 4 

i  i 

1 

-t 

Con  Ped . 


— “1 1 - 1  - T 

j=b=3fafc5±=ij: 


i— Jr 


=t== 


-J — -jl— . J— ■ g'—  r-gl^J - -I - 1- 

"pgaai 


i- 


naw-koo-thae  him  -  thiw-be -ga  Hai!  Nu-daw  him-ga  ah-ah-je  ah-ma-ta  ah-an- 


:  j  * 


2=r 


"S’ — ^ 


t=t^=E==! 


h5T* — 15* — 


J-Z 


*  * 


M  S 


PI 


H 


i -*-£ 


33 


l£is 


'  I 

tae  ah- yae- zha-nia- tho  Um-ba  e  -  dan  naw-koo-thae  him-thm-be  -ga. 

^  r* - « - #- - & — - 1-#- - #■ - #■ - a - r<S>- 


-=1  -*■■- - 1 


~zsl 


1 


No.  63. 

Solemnly. 

iESEd^3= 


NA-G’THE  WA-A/W 


1 - 1 

1 - 

1— - 

-- te-l - 

- 1 

— — — 

J - 

— <9 

\-r~m 

1— - al - ; 

- 

— i - - 

1 

[) — ■ — 

■1 

.  M 

•  4? 

j  2 

Lgp— T4 

td 

- - 4 

1 - J - 

- [  ,  - 

I  I 


E  -  bae-taw  thm-g;ae-  tho 


:2: 


bae  -  taw  tliiw-gae  -  tho 

4 — 4==t 


2-  x-A"-»-  x 

.  .  E-bae  -  tara-thbPgae  -  tho 

J — C3-,-J-_pq  J__J 

^  Jm..  , 


~  r 

Hae  Ish  -  ah-ga-ma  wa-guw-za-be-dan 

4  -  J  -,J 


felt 


a  -  buz-zhe  -  tae  .  . 


E  -  bae  -  tan  shaeah  he  -  be-  tae 


m 


+ — 4- 


iff - J. — — J — hiff - 


w  •  & 


tz=t 


=t 


!== q^iJzt 


m 


:#fe-  -life 


Nu  -  daw  -  him-  ga  tae  -  hae  -  tho  Nu  -  dan  him  -  ga  tae  -  hae  -  tho. 


5^ 


i 


=t 

-m 


BF 


No.  63a. 


I 


rid}-" 


NA-G’THE  WA-A/V. 

(Another  version  by  Mr.  La  Flesche.J 
/r\ 

- 


ff)— 4~4 — g - # - Iff; - 1 


r— r— r 


=t 


(S23ESE£i. 

=-4:4- 


E  -  bae  -  tan  thin  -  gae-tho 


-g- 


:t==t=: 


E  -  bae  -  ta n  thin-gae  -  tho 

ffL  ~  ^ 

** - g— 


Con  Fed. 


=1-" 


=zqmq:==n=-}s 

^L— 


i^i± 


- 1 - 1 - 1- 


E  -  bae-  tan  thin-  gae-  tho  Hae  Ish-ah  -  ga  wa-gun-ja-be  -dan  shaeah  he-be-tae 


i— r 


/T\ 


4 


:t=t 


r gr:£: 


j— 


r  r 


=l=t!=l=fc=t 


F  T 

ah- buzzhe  tae.  Nu-dan-hun-ga  tae-hae  tho  Nu-dan-hun-ga  ’tae  -  hae  tho.. 

^  i 


* 


g- 


-a- 


p 


i 


130 


No.  64. 


With  feeling. 

K 


WAE-TOA/-W  A-A/V. 


r 


g~ - g+8=P^_:g_^:$r:^: 

•  -1-  g  r  h 


IZw  e  tha  ae  he 


't 

thae 


Hu  e  tha  ae  ha  ae  he  thae  thae 


mm. 


Sk:  £  £ 


1*= 


=*r. 


H 


# 


-K- 


-8=;t 


11 


he  thae  thae 

.C2.  JZ2.  2. 

t=: 


:i*=alzgrj3.Tjz3q:j3: 


f=f 


-a-^—PL 


Nu  -  da  -  him-ga  ke  wa-shu  -  shae  sna  yae 


ae 


1 1 


O  r2 


EEE 


-IS>- 


HS- 


F 


de  -  he  -  ke  wa-shu  -  shae 

JSL  JL. 

*=!*=t=- - ' - 


£ 


:t: 


Hu  e  tha  ae  he  thae  Hu  e 
-^z— 


£2- 


r=^f=ff±t=zf 


-S-& 

d==Et 


131 


No.  65. 


WAE-TOA/-WA-A/V. 


Flowingly. 

M  r-a  ,  .  =  , 

t/fTT*  o  ^ 

W  0»  • 

i  • 

n  n 

H  1  ^  n 

~zr  it  

•  (0. 

I  |  j  | 

i  j  i  _ i 

irr\  n  a  a  a 

W  V  a  9 

0  m  0  • 

\zj  m  ■»  •  j  1 

VF7 -f  ^  r 

i  i  i 

r«r  w  a  0  i 

tr  f 

K 

a-gae 

i  t  r  r 

tae  -  he  ha  -  ee  thun  -  zha  ka-gae  tae  -  he  ha  -  ee 

.*■  £  €■  ts-  . f-  -fi- 

fmS*#  U  O  r 

i  i 

r  r  r 

\  \  r  i 

.  1  1# 

1   L 

U_  t  L 

tt  ,, r-  w  w  n 

*r~3E5L-  : 

P 

CF— -F — F - 3 

them  -  zha  Hae  ish  -  all  -  gae  wa-gan-za  be  -  clan  mi 


tlia  -  thim  -  ga  ta  -  dun  shun  -  tha  -  the  -  shae. 


132 

No.  66. 

Song.  J.  =88. 
With  feeling. 


WAE-TO/V-WA-AA/. 


Drum.  ^  =  176. 


- Q M  #  J  -  <* 

- 1 - % — 

rJ*  -j  rH -J^ - 

— a~ 

*  Q  & 

- 1 - p — 

*  W 

- j~~ - - — i - 

•  . • 

_« - 1 — — | - j - 

->  ■*  r# 

T  ' 

L.0. - 

1 

-5.  L-5. 

1  :  T:'  J 

Ho.  ah  e  tha  ae 


he  time  thae 


Heali  e 


tha 


ae 


l  '  f  it  ^  j  S  r 

-1 - 1 - - — 

r» — »■ - rW — W~r  W — 

rf~ 

H - 1 - 

:^^e - 

c — rz 

-*-N— = 

„  ‘“77”'/  !l"j 

— 

tLJ - 

!-  h 

— 

=  56.  With  marked  rhythm. 


-j  ■ 

ih  r  ~1  ' '  f* —  | 

=|*>  ^  - 

2t_rfi=aL_^_ 

A . J.  r** . ~w  ■  ^ 

*  ^  *  -j 

°  . 

^  • 

«  ^  *  L 

9 

-*-•  p  • 

Ou  -  hae  -  ke  -  tha  -  mae  Wa  -  ba  -  ska  -  ha  gha  -  gae  wa  -  tha  - 


133 


sta?i-zheali  -  daw  -  hae  Ke  -  tha  -  mae  Ou-hae  -  ke  -  tha  -  mae. 


No.  68.  PONCA  SONG. 

J  =  100. 


- 

-F-  ^ 

f  -J  -> 

xn 

rJ — h 

r-h-T— -M— 

1 

u 

!  ! 

^  F 

9j 

JH 

0  P  ^  ■ 

fOsZ  a  

F-  ' 

0  p 

J  Zj 

/#p  _|  _._h 

r  ^ 

9  9  . 

&  9 

^  9  ^9  SP 

4 

E 

rL] 

yah 

$ ... 

1  1  1  1  1 

hae  ah  hae  thae  hae  thae 

4  4  4  4  4  4  «  * 

1  1  -»• 

all  ha  thae  hae  thae 

*  *  9  9  ~  - 

u  o  S 

j  ! 

um  In 

,  r  r 

}  } 

;  | 

■r-- 

s — 

9* 

1“^  1  1 

19  19 

r  r  f 

1  r 

1#.  {V 

r  r — 

V^rU  /«.  1 

P L  II. 

1  1-  ■ 

p - 

i7— r 

1  1 

L 

1 — i- 

1  "1 

Con  Ped. 


LC- 


-<SI- 


e  yah  hae 

-v — v  ,4 


I  I 

ah  hae  tha  hae 

* - F— 


sss 


— r-t- 


hae  ah  hae  thae  hae  tho-e 
*— F-,  F— *-rF - F— ,  f f 


*  * 


t=t 


f 


-10- - 10 


rP-fo—r-^ — 

Prpp-: 

f— Tr 

J— 4 - PS-, 

:J  j 

rj  j  f 

-r 

yf  U 

0  A 

JH  -9  i 

J  p 

FTT^  ,  F 

|o.  |fe  . 

If  If 

0  0 

,  Wl 

/«  gm 

9  J  J 

1 

xstr  0  ^ 

JP  r 

! 

.  9  9 

0  ■0 

0  1  1  1 

Ou  -  ke-tae-ah  -ma  • 

1  1  1  1  ~  ■  w  r  ■ 

the-nuw-im  -  ta  -  yae  wash-kaw- ae-gnm  -  yah -hae 

£  4  4  -  4  4  *  «  -  »  *  - 

/i*A  • .  1/  iTsT  Ixtt 

.  !  a 

P  1 

P  L 

1  I 

rr 

ar  etr- 

19*  19 

1  1 

19  9 

1  1 

F  F 

F  F 

1 - f~ 

\ •  .  1 

P 

1  1 

L  L 

1  1 

1 L 

1  1 

1  1 

1 

L  L 

L L 

IF  F  J 

u  r"5  1  j 

1  1 

—nr.  1;  1  n  -r 

| 

—3  1 

r  1  lk 

l 

_J  _ 1 

_ 1  11 

“yr-fc !  FF 

0  9 

J  J  p 

| 

p ] 

1  .  1 

1  n»  1  a 

frTT9 — 1  j 

9  • 

... T...  ^  .. 

.  . 

-»J  -*j 

ars  ^ 

9  9  . 

.F  F  • 

F  F 

-M  1J 

E  yah  hae 

£  £  4  * 

& 

1 

ah  hae 

9  9 

r 

thae  hae  hae 

0  9  0 

P 

«/i  hae  thae  hae  tho. 

^  ^  000 

!  } 

1  n 

1 _ _ 

—  1 - 

|  -.  L 

St  s. 

I  I - 

4  ri 

r®7:.  ft  F  F 

|«W— ■■PAW 

i 

m.  0  - 

J? fL 

.  L  L  . 

■P  4?-  11 

h-  h~ 

1  1 

ixn  jfn 

lyft  l,4A 

ft  h~  r~ 

19 - 19 - 

fBr  mr 

-L-  L  . 

1  1 

.4*  p-  . 

p  SI 

WAE-WA-CHEE. 


134 

No.  69. 

M.M.  J  =  63. 


Ah  hae  thae  hae,ah  hae  thae  hae  Ah  hae  thae  hae,ah  hae  thae  hae  Ah  he  he  ae  ha  hae 


i  t 

9 

=t  t=  t=t  -tz  i=tr  tr  ... 

r~ - r- - 

i  -U - 3 

V.)L5  rE 

Ped.  I 

i . -  ■ 

r .  Lr  r j 

T  ~  H 

5^1 


:=]= 


3t=3t=Ez3t= 


-9-— 


ae  ah  hae 


— 1 - 1 - 

- «r- - 1 

-tz_ j 

- ! - - 

rn - 1 

rr- - j 

r 

— 9 - 

— i9 - 

-i9 - 1 - - - 

-19 - 

rrtr-t_L  E — j=?z=±±  -£=£?. — J 


b&$ 


on -da  ho  -  wa-ne  Ah  hae  thae  ah  hae  ah  hae  thae  hae  tho. 

»  % - »  ■*' - l - ,  •  -S'  »- 


I 


No.  70, 


Double  beat. 


WAE-WA-CHEE. 


!  ZL^S^=zJ^Jrr-j^ — d==j: 


SS=££ 


r 


■■mm. 

r - 1 - 


He  aw  Tha  ha  hae  ya  hae  hae  aw  tha  ha  thoe  He  aw  tha  ha 

^9"  — 9"— 9"— hS— 


- wr - - Ifc^- - 1 - 1 - 


Con  Ped. 


I  ^  ^ 

tha-gha-gae  fte  ?/ae  thae  hae  tho-e  Ou  -  thadaeou-the-shon  we-snahte  im-wan-shushae 

«SBa,  H®-  -i®-  -tf-  H®-  H®-  -^®- 

0 — i#~l — h - ri#-— i — j— — j»-rj- — | — | — j®~~i 


»— I#-—  l#~  »•■ 

fc=t=M=r 


Si 


-  «  0  ■  »  £>  «  «  *'■  J» - ^  *  L_f  -»— J—p^-l  1  I  T  J 

r  r  e-t  r  r  r 


i  i  j=  .i,  i  i  1  f 

He  yah  tha  ha  Ou-tlia-zha-zhae-gan  intae-dae  tha-gha-gae  he  yah  tha  ha  tho. 


mm 


■#-0 — 0-0-—0-r0 

#- 1 — i — F— , — h — 


m 


— v — m- — ^ - r  & - I- 

l=t=E= P— EE=P-*£ 

=l*=fctezdE I  ■ 


1 


No.  71.  WAE  WACHEE. 

Double  beat  =  152. 

i“  rss  fl  w  ,  Fp 


-^ra-tj— cr crCT “trir ±<r— v> 


Fae  ha  hae  ya  ae  hae  tha  yae  ha  hae  ya  ae  hae  tha  ah  ha  ya  ae  hae  tha 

-0-0-0-  0 


fefc4:#itt;Sh 


Cots  Fed. 


4- — 4 — r4 — * — »-g-r^  —  —  —  i  ^ — m — -T, 


.  , 

W  3: 

tr  000? 

i 

jz* 

n% 

Ptp- 

A  !«. 

l_u 

=FS  ^  if*  -t=  f  f-  fL 

-0—0  0 - L^J - FJ - 

r?  .  >  ?  - j 

ii  Fj  '  «  l- F  ' 

?/ae  fta  hae  ya  ae  hae  tha  tha  ha  tho-e  Zan-zhemimdae  ahma  slia-e 

_  0  0  0  0  0  0  _._.0  0  0  . 

w  r  0 

!  I^J 

;e  thae 

^9  A  A 

/ia\<  u  L.  \  I  

J 

#  #  Li 

9  0  0  0 

rr  i 

i  i  i  1 

frr.  17  r  r  p 

4  . 

0  0  1  S 

¥.000 

Llf..  |A 

F  i'  — 

k  14ft  .Lm.  L®  a* 

\jtSL.  L 

ii. 

Ii  i  I® 

IH9  [tf  Ml 

X7  yj  V3P  tS?  wr 

00  a 

f_ L l_ LI 

L  L  1 

.  u  w 

w-  w-  w- — 

i  r  u  i_j 

mmm  ■ 

“  L_„ 

r  is 

1 j  .  \j 

'■as 

; 

U  u.  i  i 

i«ss5a 

M  Pa  1 

■  ■ 1  n  J  n i  1 1  s  i 

^  k  kH  II 

Cl)9  *  ~1  l 

AP 

HP 

“P  -1-— T-l-l 

• 

1  1  J  J 

.  _.0  0  1  -J  J 

-D  ~  ~  ? 

Lam 

w  0  0  0  0  0  0™  ™  - - 

■!  LaJ  UJ  La. 

ya  ae  hae  tha  ae  ha  hae 


ah  ha 


yae  ae  ha  tha  tha  ha  tho. 


136 

No.  72. 


WAE-WA-CHEE, 


i 


Double  drumbeat.  —  126 


f 


m 


#  # 


He  ya  hae  thae  hae  e  ya  hae 

f*  ®- 


he 


r  r  { 

?/a  liae  thae  hae  e  ya 


hae 


/ZTviSf  tf  >■>-,  >  - # — I®  ^ -1®-!® — pi®- — i®- — I®— i®— 

pzH=d 

Ccm  Pe<2.  - '  L_T  L_T  L _ r 

_ - .  r - - - r- 


*— *4=1: 


0  0 

t= 


H  1 

.t-^=^jB±t==zt=:^=^=: 


:r 


m 


49  -0- 


— i— h — i — i - l-#- 


^s=sii 


-=l— h 


he  ya  ha  thae  hae  e  ya 
-0 - # — 0-0—  0~0— 1 


hae 


£=t=t 


r  r 

hae  ah  hae  thae  hae  tho-e  Sha-aw 

*  m-K  4  w  :*- 


:  ¥= ! ,:  xv  x'  ."  t  ••  ~i . 


i  i  r  r  i  i  i 

zliiw-^a  na  ae  -  ge-zlian-dan  ae  -  ge-ma  tho  aeah-taw  tha-ha  -  gae-ah  hae 


P§ 

^t± — ;J— J=!=-^- 


0—0—0 


£e£e$ee £e£&EsE£3 


S# 


— " 1— : 1 1 1 hi# #— 0— 0— 0— 0— hi# 1#— I — - — I 0~h 

^=1^— ^~^~Nc~Et:~F^^~b^tr-^-Et:=l==^-te=^-t 


3t 


4-1— * — 


e  ?/a  hae  thae  hae  e  ya  hae 


sr  sr 

hae 


ah  hae  thae  hae  tho. 


a— g-J: 


- — rj~— n. 

#—#— #3#— H*3 - ®! - #— #- 


3t=#F 


J— 4 


=|— =]==!— 


■® — ^ 


•#*  -*■ 

Note.  Mr.  La  Flesche  prefers  this  song  in  the  key  of  C,  with  the  last  four  measures  in  F. 


No. 73. 

Orave,  Solemn. 

mp 

jp 


OMAHA  PRAYER 

~  ^ _ s  * 

2=3— r 


Wa-kan-da  thae-thu  wah-pa-thbi  ah-tun-hae.Wa-kan-da  thae-thu  wah-pa-thm  ah-tua-hae. 


-£2- 


-£2- 


O.  /ts 

rp £2 


I 


-s— mmm 


f=p: 


-j— 


f- 


&-b? 


HORSE  MYSTERY  SONG. 


137 


No.  74. 

J  =  104. 


J  =104. 


£ 


**--£- 


si 


P-P-P— P— =H*- 

F-! — tz.— fr—  fe 


Nuw-gae  sha  -tha-  ma  Nim  -gae  sha  -tha  -  ma  Shcm  ■»'  gae  we  -  ta  pa  - 


gy-4-#— F 


i  *  s 


k 


I* 


=S=: 

:=t= 


1 — h— f 

i 

^ik^— a^~ * — j 

- 

LJ 

■sAr—m- 


P=i=ti 


B 


f ±=t±=-S. 


s 


No.  75. 


=  69. 


1^:8: 


:4dbrsS. 


IN-G’TH AN  WA-A/V. 


- ay — ■ — 3-w— 


iifiHi 


i  ■  i  i  -p-  r  f 

E  -  ka  -  gae  clae  e  -  ah-  ma  E  -  ka  -  gae  clae  e  -  ah  -  ma  Ah  hae 


if-  -k 

Ik  F  k  t 

v - 

-| - k - 

- -i 

=t=  t=  i 

~k  L 

it  t  t 

k  u 

M - w — - 

iggipt 


Con  Ped 


ae  ta-waw  g’thun  ma 


ah  -  ma  Ah  hae  tho-e. 


I-  i 


Wa  -  ka n  - 


or - tw- - 

- m • - 

r-m- - m- - 

\-9- — 

Sh - p«P- - 

- 

EZ J7V  h  .  r~  . 

i  .  .  i  ... 

if# 

k  k  

u'7  .  i  i  r  -  .  :  !  . 

p  ■  p 

m  p 

p  m 

up: — 

p  -P 

A 

IN-G’THA/V  WA-AA/. 


138 

No.  76. 

J.  =  60. 


-A-b  ■  J-J-  »  * 

/  J- 

j<- 

S=.  JT3  J 

J'  J 

£  -1 

- j*— 1 

7Nr&  - 

-W-.  £2  .  ■  -  ■  - 

-p— 

=/  i 

E  ha  ya  ae 

ha  hae 

7me  7ia  ?/a  ae 

ha 

1 

hae 

ha  hae 

.  /  ; 

ah 

|  -S£* 

g-‘  n 

.£2.» 

i _  &  •  _ 

- - 1- 

S’- - 1- 

S— — 

©  •■ 

-j- 

^]7^-o-r^= - =f 

^1 - 

>  n  r 

L 

LI 

; 

Con  Fed . 


^  m  i  ,  _ 

.1374  1/  ~  J  ~  -  J  Ij 

1  1 

m  ...  i  i  w  f 

_ l  LI 

/  k  w  &  J 

a  r  \  N 

r  n 

1  N*  »1  1  I 

FTT^  (•  •  • 

X — Zd  .<•  7J 

— i  — i  — i  i  i 

•  *  |  1 

\v  ;  t®  •  «  • 

— W - m - ~9 — 

~d  m  w  A 

#  •  IJ 

^  r  i 

i  E  ha  ya  ae  ha  ) 

___  “*  ■§■*• 

r  •  ^  •  f=>  • 

i  i  i 

'me  ah  hae  ah  ae  ha  wae  tho 

•  &  •  '  rS  •  . 

hae  tho. 

£2  •  »  • 

J 

J 

J _ _ _ _  LI 

S§J^  *  i  1 

W  .  -|~ 

| 

if  r)  |_| 

.  u*-">  ..• 

P  u  | 

4= . h  " 

C— - 

r  1 1 

No.  77. 

J  =  288. 


i 


ft 


4-4- 


IN-G’TH AN  WA-AN. 


f~ I - -^=^-1^^- 


tta 


r  r  r 

Wa-  kan-da  e  -  bae  -  tan  tan  -  hae  -  ga  .  .  . 

— , — u — r^- — rAAFA'*- 


A 


fcEfcfc 


I-  I 

Wa-kan-cla  e  -  bae-tan 

- 


:S: 


Con  Fed.\ 


*~r 


r 


-m-— 


139 


-f-b - r - 

:  c - c  : 

J 

I  1— 

rrj  |v  -r 

7i  h  ...i  r  i  1  , 

l— * J 

LZJ.  w  w 

3?  P 

fr*\V  L-L  n 

1  IS 

i  Li  Li 

 s  <r^ 

i  iflf 

*if-  -f.  -  * 

.  .  .  ta?i-hae-  ga  tho  h 

^  J  J  I 

■ae  .  .  .  £7io-e. 

Wa-kaw*cla  na  -  pae  - 

Sv  k  j 

i  in  in 

n 

#  • 

m  .  n 

p7=.  o  ii  • 

•1  • 

€P  * 

•  1  M  •  .«  • 

L3B  m. 

L  | 

1  1 

sa  h  i 

!  J  1 

^  J  ^ 

i  » . 

m  .  n 

P  2  ^  • 

«i  • 

6^  * 

13? 

«  L3PH^n_  WIlJ 

tJz _ 

:  r  d 

140 


No.  78.  BUFFALO  MYSTERY  SONG. 

J  =  80. 

N 


i  i  ■*■  "  '  r 

Thae-thu  -  ta n  thae  -  ah-thae,  Thae-thu-taw  thae-ah  -  thae  Thae-thu-taw  thae-ah-thae  thae-ah 


— d 


-a-'  -P- 

I&5  EEpEpEEt 
. ; 


— «~ 


Con  Ped. 


:|«s£=F— 


4^pJ=|fc=t 


tg4- 

:4= 


"P: 


thae 


; 


3= fc- 


Ae-araw  ne-tlraw  thae-ah  -  thae  clim-ah 


~0 — & 


-A - 


:a4=sj— : 


ma  shaw-ah-clim  thae-ah- 


*  * 


t=|: 


:SA 


tr 


4==j= 


Long  hold. 


:  *  S  S  Z:  l 


M  1  i 

thae  Ae-<mw  thae-thu-tuw  thae-ah-thae  shun  thae  -  ah 


i 


thae. 


-if 

^ - 

— J — 

— ® 

%  L:  z 

rp- - 

1 

- & - ^ - 

m  m  r  r 

1 

^4 - ^ - 7 

* 

=t= 

L 

— E— P-Hc 

-m 

L  tz  _Je  L  ^ 

r-^2  -  :l 

No.  79. 

J  =  100. 

iTJaasB^ 


MYSTERY  SONG, 


4=i—  m 


9  9  -  ® 


f 

1 

f****®!  L 

^  ^  id 

mf  i s x  i " - " 

Du-da  -  ha  maw-thin  do  lie  tho 


pSg 


i?o 


he  tha  ha 


(7ow  Ped. 


141 


H 

- s  —***»^ 

 -i 

- c“^,  — 1  r  1 

t? 

— [ - 1— 

“j™~1  «j 

«  4'  •  j—J  -  ■  J 

^  ^  * 

1 

.Ho  fte 

J:  JL 

tha  ha 

r  * 

Du  -  da  -  ha 

maw-thm .  do  7ie  tho 

#  p  -  * 

U* 

L <J  -#i 

~ar,  var 

tJ 

T/ 

Ml 

=1 

¥ 

=1 

¥ 

Z-J 

¥ 

Ho  he  tha 

he  tha 

,Ho  he 

tha 

he 

tha. 

No.  80.  SONG  OF  THANKS. 


Slowly. 

r-fc^  <®  -*  x-=,'  '  ^.  Z1 

SOLO.  (No  Accompaniment.) 

^  /?%  I  |%W  N*  I  l""™- InZ*  P"E3 

eI 

'=r-t7 - r-^- — - 0^- - H* 

^  t? * 

Haae  tha  hae 

^-b tr  *  °>m>  *  *-3.  +  *  *bQ .- 

aft  hae  thae  hae  we  tha  hae  ah  hae  thae  hae  ae  ahe  hae  thae 

W.U i 

K  nna  \* 

N*  H  0  4*  4*  A  A  1  N* 

xz  in  .  «* 

»  !  1  1*^  II  r  !■ 

7  1  1  h 

r*  b  L  • 

*■  T^* 

hae  tho 

— f  -  — H  — l  — l  1  1  1  1 

■#■  "CP“  T^* 

aft  hae  hae  thae  thoe  (name  of  don  -  or  given.) 

~rr 

tha-uw-tha-thae  win-thae-kae  ah  hae  thae  hae  ae  tho  ah  hae  thae  hae  ae  tho  ah  hae  thae  hae  tho 


No.  81 


MYTH  SONGS  FOR  CHILDREN 


HOW  THE  RABBIT  LOST  HIS  TAIL. 

J  =  76. 


5* - £=& 

— ! — 

g  ?  i  ^ 

s 

— 

Ma-stin-gae  shae  -  tha- thin-  shae  win  -  jae  -  ga  -  tha  -  thin  -  shae, 


win  -  jae  -  ga  -  tha  -  thin  -  shae  oh  hae  ya  hae  ya 


— 

V^L-b— K  -Ike  —IW  51.  H 

^  M 

Kgwami 

„  H  11 

Jmr  2  1  1 

ZJ Zj  ID  ZD  ^ 

V  •'  1-8 

K- - 

&  ®  0  & 

0 — J— J 

V 

0 

- LI 

hae  ya  -  hae  ya  wa  -  na  -hae  -  tha  -ba  wa  -  na  -hae- tha  -  ba. 


No.  82.  WA-OO  WA-A/V. 


143 


No.  83. 

J  =  60. 


WA-OO  WA-A/V. 


is 


I  XI 


3 


Ft 


is»— F 


3SS 


r 


S:  g:- 


!==bfc 


m 


Ta-wim-g’thim  thae-nim-yae  -  clae  un-thrm  -ge  -  ah  thim-kae  thae 


ftf 


Con  Fed. 


*  • !  m  • — - h^-5- 


144 

No.  84.  WA-OO  WA-A/V. 


a  it  t  _ttj  j  b  _F3  ^  .  r?  ra 

S3 

on*,,-"  o  o  «  »  w  ~ 

9 j  j  -n  j • 

1 

-Ft— Pn- 

**  ;  ! 

W~0r~Z2  ~\ 

725  *  a  .a  »  m  L »  IT  ^ 

^  ‘  0  i 

«  |  ^ 

W  4-4-!  !  1 

1  i 

t—  r  i 

V  1  1 

Thae-thu-taw  sha-tha-yae 

LL  UjfflL 

1  1 

thae-thu-taw  sha-thi 

v  f- 

r  i 

i  yae  we-tu-zhow-gae  e  -  a 

3-^* 

b-  -* 

1* 

ie  tha-pe-ba 

n 

i-  r-t 

^S-^SilF - F - 

-1 - 

-\ - tp- - 

ru"&> - p( 

t-F* 

f  7  j  1- 

-1 — 

h  * 

\-y\-  -i 

- r-H 

*  -5-4 

u 

r 

it-rd 

Con  Ped . 


No.  85.  WA-OO  WA-A/V. 

J  =  58.  "1 _ 


g- 

•Tj  i  *Ks  I 

»  ' ;  * 

jb  _ri” |  m', 

E#  *  r*  *  *  *  3  : 

- t=- 

1  Du-de-ha 

i  $ 

1- 1 - 

un-dum-bae  nuz-zhi; 

II  Ff 

■Ht— 1 p — 1 

rc-ga  : 

a  4- 

b — t  b - =f 

Du-de-ha  un-dum-bae  nuz-zhm- 

4-4-^r#^- — 1 

SiM1 -E 

►J-d- 

L-#l- — -gj— 1 --«- - 1 - 

I 


14  5. 


—^3 


=t=t 


o 


K3 


^  3:  *  #  ■=*■ 


■ 

b’the-he  -  dae  tha  hi 


S3  I 


J&ZJ* 


all 


lia  Een-u-daft  muz-zeah  tuw-hae  thae 


^d2= a|: 


tfe= 


■I — aj — aj'-4 


it 


£-j* 


£ 


— =! - - p* 

=«-  S'  »  !#. 


r-r  r  | - W-  J - jr 

Een-u-dan  mnz-zheah  tun-hae  thae  Kan  -  zae-zhm-ga  Eew-u-dan  muz-zheah  tim-hae 


S± 


j£l 

=f= 


S-SH. 


k.3  I 

>  0 


rt 


±n= * 


.hae 


pr5-|=|: 


Bz 


3 


1  ?  ?  ? 

I 

Yon  -  ca  -  ta  uw  -  ga-thae-tae  tha  tha  hi. 

» - j - j — 1 — -i> 


II 


:=J===]===T= 

•0-  -0-  -0- 


146 

No.  86, 


BE  THAE-WA-A/V. 


§£ 


?r.f;  <  •- 

1  r-r  ® 


3t 


i  " 


-S-- 


Tio  7io  fte 


tha  hae 


I  I  ^1 

7te  tha  ha  tha  he  ha 

J _ -g^.  i  > 


I 

fta  tha  ha 


t 


£ 


£2- 


=t= 


S 


*£ 


atnrzzpsz: 


-f 

ha  ah  ha  ah  ho  wae  hae  tho-e  He 


S~\  & 


tlia  ho  ha  he  ah  hae  hae 


ha 


mm 


No.  87. 


BE-THAE  WA-A/V. 


147 


LOVE  SONG. 


^  =  80.  Smooth  and  flowing. 

q. - — M 


izSdizi 


Efei 


;  5  ?  i  ' 


I - 1 

J  A 


— w  — 


Con  Ped. 


148 

No.  88. 

With  feeling,  .J  =  69. 

=t 


BE-THAE  WA-A/V. 


£2- 


I 


ESS 


f=} 


Ha  hae  ha  ha  hae  ha  hae  ha  nae  thae  ha  tha 

i  !  ,  ! 


ae  ha  tho-e 


i  <2  • 

1 — i 

-f- 

|- 

- 

-\s>— - 

- 

w  4  u  y - : — 

£ 

=t 

-i - 

Con  Fed. 
J.  =69. 


Um  -  ba 


ss=== 


EtiftEE 


e  -  dan 


ha  ee  -  dan 

j 


ho  o  -  we  - nae 


:B=Ez 


-Sz 


I 

ha  ho 


T*1 


=J=E: 


:=2: 


ae  fto  tua  ftae  £7iae  ee  -  /ia 

I 


J- 


^2Z= 


■zr 

Aa  ftae  Tio 

I 

- 


r 


i 


J  =  69. 


=± 


— _? — — -j.- 

^  .  "Tit 

I 

ha  hae  ho 


£ 


—- 1- 


l 


1=^ 


& 


W- 


ftae  Tia  wae  thae  tho-e. 


Um  -  ba 

=s±— 


ee  - 
S- 


dan 


1 


ft- 


-Izj^ZeJ— 


baa 


=  69. 
Hh— 


if 


ha  ee-dan 

i  * 

J  JL 


T~ 

hoo  we  nae 


r 


1 


fto  ae  fto  nae  tho  hae. 

/Tv 


jSp-f- — '■ 

fe-f5 - r- 

^  |l 

k  t  f 

— - 

U 

149 


No.  89. 


BE-THAE  WA-AA/. 

LOVE  SONG. 


i 


120.  Light  and  joyous,  smoothly. 

J  Jljj*  J:  JLt  J- 


P2- 


£2= 


:t=: 


ZTvi»  tt  <r»  o- 1 T 

— ! 

1 

-j 

_ i  """"""I  n 

=s3 

3?. 

«  ■■  M  3 

Cow  PecZ. 

J:  .  — 

L<SI- - 

^ : 

3t 

*  3: 

150 

No.  90 


BE-TH  AE-WA-A/V. 


LOVE  SONG. 

Flowingly ,  with  feeling. 

J  =  48. 


=&«-J 

pzt - Zh - : 

1  1 

fp  ®  *  3 

C— ^ 

— <s> — 

-W- - - ;(|--j - =£ - 

— — . — 

^2. 

L_ 

 J  J*  ..J 

pL  - 

— W - — 

:  '  :  g;  - 

W  #  f 

::F  " 

- £2 - L - J 

■=±— 


1 


I  K  I. 

m=*±E*E-^ 


3 


Be 


- 1 - * - 

1 

■ 

i-5  «-sr<s  ^ 

— - 

- 1 - 1 - 

--S:  i  5? 

J.  =f>  j 

=  .3  =}■  = 

«j  "  -> — 

i  js 

*.•*■<=* 

S5S— ' =? - 1 

-£2-  .£2. 

==t 

K— q 

^  ■*  ® 

J  K  1 

'  *  •  W~— & 

»'■“  ^  -1 

-  §  * 

.  .  L 

q-- 

£2 

No.  91 . 


FLAGEOLET  PIECE. 


151 


— p — #p — * — 

alz^=r.T=z====^z==E==L===L== 


nri  , .  -i  -»  -t=i  =i 

- ; - - 0— - n 

v  _ -  -i  ^  ^  i  in  :□  ^  ^  ..  _  !  r~  ii 

T  ■  «  -  - *  - * — * 

^ — El 

No.  92.  FLAGEOLET  PIECE. 


i 


g»-^~ ■ 


:fiEz5=Zfc 


&=(=& 


+-*-0 - -Q—j 


i 


152 


APPENDIX, 


APPENDIX 


If  the  question  should  be  asked,  why  in  my  notation  of  the  songs 
here  presented,  I  have  not  attempted  to  express  certain  peculiari¬ 
ties  of  intonation  observable  in  Indian  singing,  I  would  simply 
say,  that,  during  the  earlier  years  of  my  studies,  I  was,  with  other 
observers,  inclined  to  believe  in  the  theory  of  a  musical  scale,  in 
which  the  interval  of  a  tone  was  divided  into  many  parts ;  but,  for 
several  years  now  past,  having  become  more  familiar  with  the  In¬ 
dian’s  mode  of  thought  and  feeling  concerning  music,  and  as  the  re¬ 
sult  of  careful  investigation  of  hundreds  of  songs  which  I  have 
transcribed,  I  have  been  led  to  account  for  his  peculiar  intonations 
in  other  ways  than  in  the  use  of  a  minutely  divided  scale. 

Upon  page  111  have  called  attention  to  the  Indian’s  manage¬ 
ment  of  his  voice,  to  his  lack  of  ear  training  due  to  the  absence  of 
a  standard  pitch,  and  also  to  the  influence  upon  his  voice  of  out-of- 
door  singing.  Professor  Fillmore  on  page  69  has  spoken  more 
fully  upon  this  subject.  I  have  also  mentioned  the  Indian’s  fond¬ 
ness  for  the  effect  produced  by  vibrations  of  his  voice.  He  uses 
various  kinds  of  tremolo  in  his  attempts  at  expression.  For  in¬ 
stance,  a  man,  when  accepting  the  gift  of  a  horse,  will  render  his 
song  of  thanks  as  if  he  were  singing  it  while  riding  the  animal ; 
his  notes  will  be  broken  and  jarred  in  pitch,  as  if  by  the  galloping 
of  the  horse.  Or,  as  in  the  Mekasee  songs,  the  warrior  will  so 
manage  his  voice  as  to  convey  the  picture  of  the  wolf  trotting  or 
loping  over  the  prairie.  Then  again,  the  expression  of  emotions 
of  mystery,  or  dread,  seems  to  require  the  notes  to  be  broken.  If, 
when  I  was  learning  one  of  these  songs,  I  held  a  quarter  or  half 
note  to  a  steady  tone,  I  was  corrected  and  told  to  “make  it  trem¬ 
ble.”  It  has  not  always  been  easy  for  me  to  distinguish  between 
a  tremolo  used  for  expression,  and  a  series  of  short  notes ;  I  have 
many  times  been  set  right  by  the  Indian  when  I  have  mistaken  a 
tremolo  for  thirty-second  notes.  In  trying  to  express  religious 
fears,  or  stress  of  emotion,  the  Indian  is  apt  to  slur  from  the  pitch  ; 
he  seldom  attacks  a  note  clearly. 

In  noting  these  songs  I  have  been  careful  to  present  them  truth¬ 
fully,  and  they  have  been  accepted  by  the  Indian  as  correct.  To 
convey  Indian  mannerism  would  be  impossible,  and  any  attempt 
to  do  so  by  a  fanciful  notation  would  end  in  caricature.  These 
mannerisms  do  not  form  an  integral  part  of  the  Indian’s  music,  he 
is  unconscious  of  them.  It  is  easy  to  be  caught  in  the  meshes  of 
these  external  peculiarities  of  a  strange  people,  but  if  one  would 
hear  Indian  music  and  understand  it,  one  must  ignore  as  he  does 
his  manner  of  singing. 


Alice  C.  Fletcher, 


s 


\ 


505  1( 


Longn'idni  Green,  <i  CS  JLorulon. NerrYork, Bombay  .Cctlciitlu,  iLMadrc 


