•8 
•8 


HOPI  SONGS 


BENJAMIN    1/KS   OILMAN 


A  JOURNAL   OF 

AMERiCAN  ETHNOLOGY  AND 
ARCHAEOLOGY 

FIFTH   AND   CONCLUDING  VOLUME 


COLLECTION  G.M.A 
ta 


pbimg 


at  tl|0 

of 


An  Anon>Dious  Donor 


HOPI  SONGS 

BENJAMIN   IVES   OILMAN 


A  JOURNAL  OF 

AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY  AND 
ARCHAEOLOGY 

FIFTH   AND   CONCLUDING  VOLUME 


ML 

355^7 


698397 


TO  THE  MEMORY  OF 


HONORED  WHEREVER  THE  STUDY  OF  ARCHEOLOGY  IS  PURSUED 

THIS  TARDY  FRUIT  OF  AN  INQUIRY 

BEGUN  AT  HER  INSTANCE,  WITH   HER  AID 

AND  UNDER  THE  STIMULUS  OF  HER  ENTHUSIASM 

IS  INSCRIBED 
WITH  GRATITUDE  AND   RESPECT 


THE  study  of  Hopi,  or  Moqui,  singing,  to  which  this  volume  is 
devoted,  completes  an  inquiry  into  Pueblo  music  begun  in  1891  with  a 
study  of  Zuni  Melodies.1  The  records  upon  which  both  investigations 
have  been  based  were  obtained  in  Arizona  by  Dr.  J.  Walter  Fewkes, 
now  of  the  Bureau  of  Ethnology,  Washington,  at  the  time  in  charge 


1  Published  in  vol.  i  of  A  Journal  of 
American  Archaeology  and  Ethnology, 
Boston,  1891.  Review  by  C.  Stumpf  in 
the  Vierteljahrsschrift  fur  Musikivissen- 
schaft,  1892,  Heft  1,  under  the  title,  "  Pho- 
nographirte  Indianermelodien."  Among 
the  chief  sources  of  information  regarding 
aboriginal  American  music  are  the  follow- 
ing: Theodore  Baker,  DieMusik  der  nord- 
amerikanischen  Wilden  (Leipzig,  1882)  ; 
C.  Stumpf,  "  Lieder  der  Bellakula  Indi- 
aner  (  Vierteljahrsschrift  filr  Musikwis- 
senschaft,  1886,  Heft  4)  ;  Franz  Boas, 
"  The  Central  Esquimo  "  (Bureau  of  Eth- 
nology, 6th  Annual  Report,  1888)  ;  Miss 
Alice  C.  Fletcher,  "  A  Study  of  Omaha 
Indian  Music,"  with  a  report  on  the  struc- 
tural peculiarities  of  the  music  by  J.  C. 
Fillmore  (Archaeological  and  Ethnologi- 
cal Papers  of  the  Peabody  Museum,  i,  5, 
Cambridge,  Mass.,  1893) ;  Franz  Boas, 
"The  Kwakiutl  Indians  "  (United  States 
National  Museum,  Report  for  1895}  ; 
Miss  Alice  C.  Fletcher,  "  The  Hako :  A 
Pawnee  Ceremony  "  (Bureau  of  American 
Ethnology,  22d  Report,  Part  2,  Wash- 
ington, 1903) ;  O.  Abraham  and  E.  M.  von 
Hornbostel,  "  Phonographirte  Indianer- 
melodien aus  British  Columbia "  (Boas 
Memorial  Volume,  New  York,  1906); 
Natalie  Curtis,  The  Indian's  Book,  New 
York,  1907. 

The  Hopi  and  other  Pueblo  tribes  of 
the  southwestern  United  States  are  the  sub- 


ject of  papers  contributed  by  J.  Walter 
Fewkes,  J.  G.  Owen,  F.  H.  Cashing,  A.  F. 
Bandelier,  H.  F.  C.  ten  Kate,  V.  Mindeleff, 
G.  A.  Dorsey,  H.  R.  Voth,  and  others  to 
the  Journal  of  American  Archaeology 
and  Ethnology,  issued  under  Dr.  Fewkes's 
editorship,  1891-94,  to  the  American  An- 
thropologist, and  the  Journal  of  American 
Folk-Lore,  and  to  the  publications  of  the 
Bureau  of  American  Ethnology,  the  Smith- 
sonian Institution,  the  National  Museum, 
the  Field  Museum  (Anthropological  Se- 
ries), and  the  Archaeological  Institute  of 
America  (American  Series),  as  well  as  to 
other  publications  mentioned  in  the  biblio- 
graphical list  at  the  close  of  this  volume. 
Many  of  these  papers  are  abundantly  illus- 
trated. The  reproductions  of  photographs 
in  the  "  Study  of  Pueblo  Architecture  " 
contributed  by  V.  Mindeleff  to  the  Eighth 
Annual  Report  of  the  Bureau  of  Eth- 
nology, 1886-87,  show  the  country  and 
the  villages  of  the  Hopi;  and  those  in 
the  papers  of  G.  A.  Dorsey  and  H.  R. 
Voth  of  the  Field  Museum,  the  people 
themselves  and  their  ceremonial  life.  Vol. 
iii  of  this  series  contains  striking  illustra- 
tions of  the  kiva  ceremonies  of  the  Snake 
and  Antelope  Fraternities  at  the  Pueblo 
of  Oraibe,  and  describes  the  singing  of 
the  eight  traditional  songs,  of  which  the 
present  notations  give  six  from  the  cor- 
responding ceremonial  at  the  Pueblo  of 
Walpi,  as  the  most  beautiful  incident 


of  the  Hemenway  Southwestern  Expedition,  who  first  applied  the  phono- 
graph to  the  preservation  and  study  of  aboriginal  folk-lore.1  All  of  the 
/  present  series  were  taken  at  the  Pueblo  of  Walpi,  on  the  East  Mesa,  the 
singer  of  Coyohim-katcina  coming  from  Oraibe,  on  the  West  Mesa,  one 
of  the  more  primitive  of  the  seven  Hopi  villages.  All  of  the  songs  but 
:-  the  last  appear  to  have  a  religious  or  mythological  significance,  the  first 
six  being  among  those  sung  in  chorus  by  a  number  of  priests  in  an 
underground  chamber,  or  kiva,  in  the  course  of  the  well-known  Snake 
ceremonial.  The  word  katcina  denotes  a  kind  of  mediating  spirit. 
The  name  of  the  last  song,  "  Mana,"  means  maiden,  and  the  song  is 
sung  by  a  man  accompanying  a  dance  of  girls.  A  rudimentary  flute 
appears  to  be  the  only  one  of  several  instruments  used  by  the  Hopi  to 
accompany  their  singing,  which  is  not  almost  wholly  a  source  of  noise. 
Specimens  show  holes  at  one,  two,  three,  three  and  a  half,  and  four  sev- 
enths of  the  length,  making  possible  a  sequence  of  a  very  roughly 
approximate  octave,  fifth,  and  equally  divided  fourth.  The  instrument 
gives  its  name  to  an  important  ceremonial,  and  is  apt  to  be  used, 
according  to  accounts,  without  close  relation  to  the  melody  sung,  as 
its  make  would  suggest. 

The  accompanying  notations  aim  chiefly  to  present  a  close  approxi- 
mation to  the  actual  course  of  tone  produced  by  the  singer.  The  mea- 
sure of  this  music  is  often  exceedingly  difficult  to  observe,  sometimes 
sounding  differently  at  will,  and  the  notations  are  in  this  respect 
undoubtedly  less  accurate  than  in  the  matter  of  intonation.  To  the 
singers  themselves  time  and  emphasis  perhaps  altogether  outweighed 
the  element  of  interval.  Tolstoi  writes  that  in  a  peasant's  song  the  mo- 
tive appears  "  an  accessory,  coming  of  itself  without  effort,  and  seeming 
solely  to  mark  the  cadence."2  As  an  art  of  tone,  Pueblo  singing  is 
doubtless  subliminal  in  the  same  way. 

This  probability  has  been  kept  in  mind  throughout  the  study  of  the 

of  the  occasion.    The  Handbook  of  Amer-  romance),  A.  F.  Bandelier  (New  York, 

ican   Indians,  published   by  the  Bureau  1890)  ;   and    The   Song  of  the   Ancient 

of  American  Ethnology  (Part  I,  Wash-  People,  Edna  Dean  Proctor,  with  an  intro- 

ington,  1907),  is  an  encyclopaedia  of  its  duction  by  John  Fiske  and  a  commentary 

subject.     Other   books  are :    The  Snake  by  F.  H.  Gushing  (Boston,  1893). 

Dance  of  the  Moqnis  of  Arizona,  Capt.  *  "  Contribution  to  Pasamaquoddy  Folk- 

J.  G.  Bourke,  U.  S.  A.  (New  York,  1884) ;  Lore,"  Journal  of  American  Folk-Lore, 

Zuni  Folk  Tales,  F.  H.  Gushing  (New  October-December,  1890. 

York,  1901)  ;    The   Delight  Makers  (a  2  La  Guerre  et  la  Paix,  vol.  ii,  p.  110. 

vi 


songs.  To  do  justice  to  this  music  without  overdoing  has  not  been  easy. 
The  wiles  of  the  heavenly  maid  are  well  known  to  all  her  pursuers. 
Analogies  and  rhythms  and  coincidences  and  laws  throng  every  step  of 
the  student  of  music,  delighting  and  bewildering  him  by  their  beauty 
and  profusion.  All  are  true,  perhaps,  and  none  as  they  appear.  He  is 
wise  and  well-balanced  indeed  who  can  preserve  perfect  sobriety  of 
judgment.  Most  of  what  is  claimed  for  the  present  songs  will,  it  is  be- 
lieved, be  found  simply  a  way  of  describing  the  facts  of  the  notations; 
and  the  residue  of  interpretation  infers  not  to  a  conscious  but  instinct- 
ive purpose. 

The  science  of  music,  although  ancient,  counts  few  votaries.  The 
reason  is  plain.  Essentially  fugitive,  music  must  in  the  main  be  studied 
indirectly,  through  a  difficult  and  always  imperfect  symbolism  that  tends 
to  reduce  the  most  passionate  form  of  artistic  expression  to  a  datum  for 
abstract  inquiry.  "Musical  works,"  wrote  von  Winterfeld,1  "do  not 
readily  offer  themselves  to  investigation,  as  do  the  works  of  the  mate- 
rial arts.  They  must  be  recalled  to  life  out  of  dead  signs,  and  is  their 
imaginative  contemplation  insufficient,  performers  must  be  gathered 
and  trained  in  order  to  obtain  the  actual  impression  of  sense.  For  this 
reason  most  investigators  have  devoted  themselves  to  the  inquiry  into 
musical  theory." 

Through  the  invention  of  the  phonograph  the  actual  impression  of 
sense  is  henceforth  in  a  measure  open  to  exact  —  if  still  exacting  — 
investigation.  The  study  of  performance  attempted  for  the  Zunis  has 
since  been  taken  up  for  many  other  non-European  peoples.  The  field  is 
a  wide  one,  the  harvest  will  be  of  value  not  alone  to  musical  science, 
and  those  who  aid  should  no  longer  be  few. 

CAMBRIDGE,  MASS., 
July,  1908. 

1  J.  Gabrieli,  1834,  vol.  i,  p.  63. 


TERMS  AND   SIGNS 

IN  the  following  table  of  the  diatonic  scale  and  intervals,  the  breadth  of  the  latter, 
both  pure  and  tempered,  is  expressed  in  hundredths  of  a  tempered  (piano)  semitone, 
the  tempered  in  parentheses.  This  is  the  unit  of  interval  measurement  proposed  by 
A.  J.  Ellis,  and  called  by  him  the  cent.  The  ratios  are  those  of  the  vibration  numbers 
of  the  component  tones  of  the  pure  intervals. 

(e)  (d)  (e)  (f)  (g)  (a)  (b)  (c) 

DO  RE  MI  FA  SOL  LA  SI  DO 

|  204  (200)  ||  182  (200)  ||112  (100) ||  204  (200)  ||  182  (200)  ||  204  (200)  ||112  (100) | 

9  :  8  Major   10  :  9  Minor       16  : 15       9:8  Major     10  :  9  Minor    9  :  8  Major       16  :  15 
Second  or       Second  or       Semitone     Second  or        Second  or       Second  or     Semitone 
Tone  Tone  Tone  Tone  Tone 


1 

1200 

(1200)                                                                   | 

|                        498  (500) 

2:1 

11 

Octave 
702  (700)                                      | 

4  :  3  Fourth 
1 

884  (900) 

3:2  Fifth 
||              316  (300)             | 

5 

|              386  (400) 

:  3  Major  Sixth 
II 

6  :  5  Minor  Third 
814  (800)                                              | 

5  :  4  Major  Third 

1 

8  :  5  Minor  Sixth 
996  (1000)                                                         | 

16  :  9  Minor  Seventh  (Dissonant) 
1088  (1100) 


15  :  8  Major  Seventh  (Dissonant) 

|  590  (600) 


45  :  32  Tritonus  (Dissonant) 

The  word  trichord  is  hereafter  used  by  analogy  with  tetrachord,  to  signify  a  combi- 
nation of  three  notes  spanning  the  interval  of  a  fourth  or  less :  and  the  word  tetrad 
by  analogy  with  triad,  to  signify  a  combination  of  four  notes  spanning  the  interval  of  a 
fifth  or  more.  A  trichord  or  triad  is  called  major  or  minor  according  as  the  lower 
interval  is  the  larger  or  the  smaller.  The  extremes  of  these  combinations  are  called 
summit  and  base,  the  intermediate  note  or  notes,  the  axis  or  mediants. 

Following  the  analogy  of  the  compass,  the  black  keys  of  pianos  are  denoted  by  com- 
bining the  letters  for  the  white  notes  between  which  they  lie :  thus,  cd  for  the  black 
key  representing  c#  or  d^. 

The  sign  +  or  —  after  a  letter,  or  combination,  signifying  a  certain  pitch,  denotes  a 
pitch  slightly  above  or  slightly  below. 

The  symbolism  of  the  notations  is  more  fully  explained  on  pp.  53  f. 


CONTENTS 

I.    THE  ROTE-SONG  OP  THE  HOPI 1 

1.  The  music  of  America.  2.  Scale :  and  music  with  or  without  it.  3. 
Pueblo  music  sounds  independent  of  scale.  4.  Four  corroborative  argu- 
ments, (a)  Melody  of  simple  ratios  the  parent  of  the  scale,  (b)  The  Eu- 
ropean ear  hears  diatonically.  (c)  Adiatonic  repetition,  (d)  Chromatic  or 
modulated  structure  improbable.  5.  Scales  an  instrumental  product :  the 
voice  determining  their  general  form,  the  ear,  hand,  and  eye  their  varieties. 
6.  Character  of  Pueblo  music,  (a)  Freedom,  (b)  Melodic  instead  of  har- 
monic norms,  (c)  Division,  combination,  and  balance  of  intervals,  (d)  The- 
matic development ;  strophe  form ;  downward  course ;  delivery,  (e)  Mu- 
tation :  its  varieties  and  its  motives. 

II.    THE  PHONOGRAPHIC  METHOD 23 

1.  Actual  music  first  accessible  to  scientific  study  through  the  phonograph. 

2.  Tests  of  the  phonograph.     3.  Behavior  of  the  phonograph  during  the 
record  and  study  of  this  music.     4.  Method  and  symbolism  of  the  notations. 
5.  Value  of  the  exacter  notation  of  non-European  music.     6.  Trustworthiness 
of  the  present  method.     7.  Deficiencies  and  improvements. 

III.    NOTATIONS,  DIAGRAMS,  AND  COMMENTS 69 

Snake  Song  No.  1 

Staff  notation 71 

Phonographic  notation 72 

Course  of  tone  :  observed  and  noted  . 74 

Comment 75 

Snake  Song  No.  2 

Staff  notation 77 

Phonographic  notation    ..........  78 

Course  of  tone  :  observed  and  noted  ......  81 

Comment  .  ..........  82 

Snake  Song  No.  3 

Staff  notation  ...  ....... 

Phonographic  notation 84 

Course  of  tone :  observed  and  noted 89 

Comment 89 

ix 


CONTENTS 

Snake  Song  No.  4 

Staff  notation       .  * 93 

Phonographic  notation 94 

Course  of  tone :  observed  and  noted 97 

Comment 97 

Snake  Song  No.  6 

Staff  notation 99 

Phonographic  notation 100 

Course  of  tone :  observed  and  noted 101 

Comment 101 

Snake  Song  No.  8 

Staff  notation 103 

Phonographic  notation 104 

Course  of  tone  :  observed  and  noted 105 

Comment 105 

Malo-katcina 

Staff  notation 107 

Phonographic  notation :  Kano     ........  108 

Phonographic  notation :  Masi-umtiwa .  110 

Course  of  tone :  observed  and  noted 112 

Comment 113 

Qoy6him-katcina 

Staff  notation 117 

Phonographic  notation 118 

Course  of  tone  :  observed  and  noted 122 

Comment 123 

Shiashtasha 

Staff  notation 125 

Phonographic  notation :  Singer  No.  1    .         .         .         .         .         .         .  126 

Phonographic  notation:  Singer  No.    2 132 

Course  of  tone  :  noted 139 

Comment 139 

Course  of  tone  :  observed 140 

Cycle  of  mutation 143 

Anoshkaey 

Staff  notation 147 

Phonographic  notation :  Lesma 148 

Phonographic  notation :  Polakka 149 

x 


CONTENTS 

Course  of  tone :  observed  and  noted 155 

Comment 156 

Maihai-katcina, 

Staff  notation 159 

Phonographic  notation      .  160 

Course  of  tone :  observed 166 

Course  of  tone  :  noted 167 

Comment    .  167 


Staff  notation  .         ..........         171 

Phonographic  notation  .........     172 

Course  of  tone :  observed .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .  177 

Comment     ............     177 

Observed  and  noted  courses  of  tone  superposed   .....         178 

Star  sequence  :  observed  course 178 

Star  sequence  :  staff  notation  and  noted  course 179 

Jakwaina 

Staff  notation 181 

Phonographic  notation 182 

Course  of  tone  :  observed 189 

Course  of  tone :  noted 190 

Comment •.  190 

Inferred  basis  of  mutation 191 

Major  and  minor  diatonic  modes 192 

Haikaya 

Staff  notation 195 

Phonographic  notation 196 

Course  of  tone :  observed  and  noted  .......  198 

Comment     ............  199 

Anonymous  II 

Staff  notation 201 

Phonographic  notation 202 

Course  of  tone  :  observed  and  noted 204 

Comment  ...  .  205 


Staff  notation 207 

Phonographic  notation          .........  208 

Course  of  tone :  observed  and  noted  .  .         .  213 

xi 


CONTENTS 

Comment 

Discord:  Resolution:  Modulation:  Mutation         .  ...     216 

Mana 

Staff  notation       ...  •  .219 

Phonographic  notation      .  

Course  of  tone  :  observed  and  noted 224 

Comment 224 


THE  HEMENWAY  SOUTHWESTERN  EXPEDITION 227 


I 

THE  ROTE-SONG  OP  THE  HOPI 


THE  ROTE-SONG  OF  THE  HOPI 

i  The  music  of  ^N  mJ  PaPer  on  Zuni  Melodies  I  called  them  examples 
America  of  a  music  without  scale.1  The  view  was  a  novel  one, 

and  its  confirmation  has  been  sought  in  the  performances  of  Hopi 
singers  here  presented.  These  supplement  the  previous  negative 
result  by  indicating  methods  of  composition  and  performance  which 
replace  and  exclude  reliance  upon  a  scale.  They  strengthen  the 
belief  that  aboriginal  American  music  is  a  type  apart,  whose  essential 
remoteness  from  the  music  of  Europe  and  Asia  may  be  symbolized, 
as  it  doubtless  was  conditioned,  by  the  physical  isolation  of  the 
Americas. 

A  new  artistic  principle,  ethnic  in  scope,  demands  a  name.  The  old 
word  "  rote-song  "  (route)  signifies,  by  the  analogy  of  a  pathway,  the 
pursuit  of  a  beaten  track  of  tone,  and  is  here  taken  to  imply  the  sub- 
stitution of  melodic  autonomy  for  the  support  and  limitation  compared 
in  the  word  "  scale  "  to  a  stairway. 

Defining  music  as  the  fine  art  of  interval,  a  scale  is  an 

2.  Scale ;  and 

music  with  or       interval-order  auxiliary  in  its  production.  What  is  an  order 
of  intervals,  and  how  may  it  be  operative  in  their  satisfac- 
tory combination? 

An  order  of  intervals  is  a  complex  relation  in  tone.  Tones  differ 
from  noises,  the  other  species  of  auditory  sensation,  in  presenting  them- 
selves arranged  in  a  continuous  series,  having  one  dimension,  called 

1  Page  89.  "  What  we  have  in  these  of  interval  order  already  fixed  in  the  con- 
melodies  is  the  musical  growths  out  of  sciousness  of  the  singers.  In  this  archaic 
which  scales  are  elaborated,  and  not  compo-  stage  of  the  art,  scales  are  not  formed  but 
sitions  undertaken  in  conformity  to  norms  forming." 


4  HOPI  SONGS 

height  or  depth.  The  elements  of  the  series  are  individual  tones,  and 
musical  intervals  are  relations  between  these.  Such  relations  may  be 
conceived  as  themselves  having  relations  in  tone,  combining  intervals 
into  orders.  Excluding  the  limiting  relation  of  identity  or  unison,  an 
interval  order  may  be  defined  as  a  set  of  intervals  in  which  one  of  the 
tones,  a  or  b,  forming  one  of  the  set,  forms  with  a  tone  c,  different  from 
either  a  or  b,  a  second  of  the  set  in  a  certain  sense ;  and  one  of  these 
three  different  tones  forms  with  a  tone  d,  different  from  either  a,  b,  or 
c,  a  third  of  the  set  in  a  certain  sense:  and  so  on  until  the  set  is 
exhausted. 

The  different  tones  conceived  as  the  elements  of  an  interval-order  are 
known  as  the  steps  of  the  order.  A  step  may  be  defined  as  a  tone  con- 
ceived as  related  to  every  one  of  a  certain  number  of  others,  either 
directly  by  one  of  a  certain  set  of  intervals  in  a  certain  sense,  or  indi- 
rectly through  others  of  the  tones  and  by  a  certain  sequence  from  the 
intervals,  each  in  a  certain  sense. 

It  is  through  the  conception  of  its  steps  that  an  interval-order  be- 
comes operative  in  interval  combination.  The  viewing  of  notes  as  steps 
is  the  differentia  of  scalar  music.  A  scale  is  a  complex  relation  in  tone 
with  one  or  other  element  of  which  each  note  of  certain  music  is  identi- 
fied by  the  maker. 

In  European  music  the  names  of  the  notes  —  a,  b,  c,  do,  re,  mi  — 
designate  steps  in  one  order  of  intervals  called  the  diatonic  scale.  Every 
note  of  a  European  composition  either  has  its  diatonic  name  or  is  re- 
garded as  an  accidental,  the  consciousness  of  scale  being  the  invariable 
concomitant  of  musical  production.  The  names  of  the  accidentals  also 
give  them  a  place  in  the  scale-system  as  new  loci  resulting  from  a 
changed  conception  of  the  step  represented  by  a  given  tone,  —  or,  as  it 
is  called,  modulation  from  one  key  to  another.  Scale  is  even  so  familiar 
a  fact  as  to  be  difficult  to  grasp.  We  fancy  that  music  without  it 
would  hardly  be  music.  Yet  if  the  consciousness  of  scale  be  simply  the 
embedding  of  each  actual  note  in  the  same  fancied  complex  of  related 
notes,  its  presence  is  not  essential  to  the  combination  of  intervals  into 
a  work  of  art.  Taking  away  the  scale-consciousness  takes  away  a  norm 


THE  ROTE-SONG   OF   THE  HOPI  5 

through  which  different  compositions  receive  structural  likeness,  but 
does  not  destroy  their  identity.  They  become  individual  but  may 
remain  each  a  norm  to  itself.  Their  irregularity  may  have  the  precise 
outlines  of  arrested  waves. 

3  Pueblo  music  Pueblo  songs  produce  this  impression.  What  seems  at 
sounds  inde-  first  a  lawless  cacophony,  at  least  in  the  phonograph, 
proves  on  further  hearing  to  consist  of  phrases  repeated 
with  an  exactness  surprising  to  the  European  ear  in  view  of  their 
divergence  from  diatonic  norms.  The  singer's  musical  consciousness 
seems  restricted  to  a  few  intervals  of  simplest  vibration  ratio  approxi- 
mately rendered,  and  to  melodic  sequences  formed  by  their  various 
analysis  and  synthesis  and  rendered  with  a  certain  loose  fidelity. 
If  a  scale  were  in  his  mind,  even  dimly,  it  should  make  itself  known 
both  in  a  more  uniform  interval  production  and  in  a  more  impartial 
use  of  the  tones  continually  at  hand  in  the  fancy.  The  hearer  seems 
witness  to  a  wholly  strange  method  of  musical  thought  and  delivery. 
The  total  complex  of  tone,  timbre,  and  articulation  —  doubtless  at 
the  time  movements,  and  other  noises  also  —  moves  on  apparently 
without  guidance  by  any  vanguard  of  fancied  tones  at  fixed  intervals. 
Upon  reflection  the  surprise  occasioned  by  the  security  of  its  movement 
appears  uncalled  for.  A  good  mimic  reproduces  by  an  act  of  unaided 
memory  and  with  indistinguishable  accuracy  very  delicate  nuances  in 
the  long  sequence  of  tone  and  noise  constituting  his  model's  delivery. 
Why  may  not  this  music  be  perpetuated  as  a  vernacular  is,  by  the  imi- 
tation of  specific  examples  and  not  the  application  of  general  stand- 
ards? It  is  true  that  such  standards  exist  in  the  European  music 
which  these  Pueblo  tribes  have  for  centuries  had  opportunities  to  hear. 

!Yet  the  sacred  rites  of  which  much  of  this  singing  forms  a  part  seem 
exempt  from  European  influence:  and  their  element  of  tone  is  pre- 
sumably no  less  aboriginal. 

4.  Fourcorrobo-       The  real  bar  to  the  belief  that  Pueblo  musicians  know 
nothing  of  scale  is  the  diatonic  form  of  their  music  itself. 


6  HOPI  SONGS 

On  formal  analysis  the  following  appear  the  logical  rights  and  duties 
of  the  two  sides  to  the  question :  - 

For  scale.  The  coincidence  of  any  music  with  the  diatonic  order  of 
intervals  is  prima  facie  evidence  that  that  order  is  the  scale  of  the 
music;  but  the  evidence  is  not  complete  without  an  explanation  of  its 
divergences  therefrom.  These  may  be  accounted  for  in  two  opposite 
ways :  either  as  inaccuracies  of  execution  or  complexities  of  conception. 
The  musician  may  rudely  grasp  (or  roughly  deliver)  the  diatonic  step 
he  proposes ;  or  he  may  change  it  by  an  accidental ;  or  view  it  as  a  new 
step  in  uttering  it,  that  is,  go  on  in  a  new  key. 

Against  scale.  Any  opposing  theory  of  a  music  showing  diatonic 
features  must  both  explain  its  coincidences  with  diatonic  form  and  show 
the  insufficiency  of  mistake,  alteration,  and  transposition  to  account 
for  its  divergences  therefrom.  The  coincidences  will  be  accounted  for 
if  proved  characteristic  of  harmonic  sequences,  or  the  contribution  of 
the  observer.  The  divergences  will  be  proved  not  to  be  mistakes  if 
repeated  by  the  same  or  different  singers ;  and  not  to  be  accidentals 
or  due  to  modulation  if  they  imply  complex  changes  of  the  pitch  or 
conception  of  notes. 

The  evidence  of  the  present  notations  bears  strongly  against  the 
diatonic  theory  of  this  music  on  all  four  of  these  points.  A  measure 
of  coincidence  with  the  diatonic  scale  is  implied  in  a  predominant  use 
of  approximations  to  intervals  of  simplest  ratio  such  as  the  phonograph 
here  records.  The  diatonic  form  of  the  notations  by  ear  proves  in  part 
the  invention  of  the  observer.  The  divergences  of  the  songs  from  dia- 
tonic norms  are  in  many  cases  shown  to  be  intentional  by  repetition. 
In  many  cases  also  their  explanation  by  the  shifting  of  notes  or  of  key 
demands  an  improbably  complex  use  of  the  scale. 

(a)  Melody  of  A  measure  of  coincidence  with  the  diatonic  scale  is 
^mP^ec^  *n  *ne  predominant  use  of  approximations  to  con- 
sonant  intervals  in  melody. 

Any  sequence  of  the  seven  consonant  intervals,  minor  third,  major 
third,  fourth,  fifth,  minor  sixth,  major  sixth,  and  octave,  tends  to 
move  within,  and  hence  to  outline  the  diatonic  scale.  There  are  seven 


THE  ROTE-SONG   OF  THE  HOPI  7 

steps  in  the  diatonic  scale;  and  of  the  fourteen  possible  movements 
by  these  intervals  down  and  up  from  each,  ninety-eight  in  all,  sixty- 
six,  or  two  thirds,  will  end  on  other  steps  of  the  diatonic  scale 
extended  in  octaves.  If  the  thirds  and  sixths  employed  are  subject 
to  the  quarter  tone  aberration  common  in  Pueblo  music,  the  number 
will  be  ninety-four,  or  nineteen  twentieths.  The  diatonic  form,  either 
with  or  without  occasional  lapses,  is  the  necessary  dress  of  any 
harmonic  melody.  In  this  physico-mathematical  fact  plainly  lies  the 
genesis  of  the  diatonic  scale.  To  argue  therefrom  to  a  diatonic  con- 
sciousness is  to  mistake  cause  for  effect,  the  root  of  the  diatonic  order 
for  its  fruit. 

The  diatonic  form   of  the  present  notations  by  ear  is 

(b)  The  Euro-  J 

pean  ear  hears     in  part  the  invention  of  the  observer. 

The  accurate  observation  of  a  musical  performance  of 
any  length  is  beyond  the  power  of  the  unaided  ear.  In  the  limiting 
case  of  Mozart's  transcription  of  singing  in  Rome,  what  was  carried 
away  was  the  diatonic  form  of  the  rendition,  not  its  accidental  material. 
The  fractional  tone  which  Hehnholtz  reports  in  the  call  of  certain 
dervishes  in  Cairo  impressed  a  trained  ear  as  a  nondescript  blunder 
until  after  repeated  hearings.  The  invention  of  the  phonograph  has 
given  to  science  a  new  field  of  observation,  that  of  music  in  the  mak- 
ing. Fixed  on  a  wax  cylinder  in  reproducible  form,  the  sequence  of 
tone  concerned  in  a  performance  of  music  can  now  be  observed  and 
recorded  to  within  minute  intervals.  This  has  been  attempted  in  the 
present  phonographic  notations,  and  during  the  process  and  later  the 
melodies  were  written  down  currently  by  ear  in  the  customary  musical 
notation.  On  comparing  the  two  records,  the  actual  (carefully  estimated) 
notes  proved  in  many  cases  far  from  the  pitch  which  the  unaided  ear 
assigned  to  them  and  which  in  general  brought  them  within  the  bounds 
of  the  scale.  In  liberal  measure  the  diatonic  garb  which  Pueblo  singing 
wears  to  the  European  hearer  is  woven  by  his  own  musical  sense.  It  is 
a  false  show  due  to  his  inability  to  divest  himself  quickly  of  inveterate 
prepossessions  of  the  Western  ear,  or,  as  we  may  say,  due  to  the  aber- 
ration of  an  instrument  unequal  to  rapid  observation. 


8  HOPI  SONGS 

The  illusions  of  apperception  here  illustrated  anew  are  common  in 
all  fields  of  sensation,  and  may  possess  any  degree  of  verisimilitude. 
We  recognize  as  our  arbitrary  creation  the  familiar  phrase  repeated  in 
the  rattle  of  a  railway  train,  or  the  diatonic  melody  heard  in  dropping 
water.  But  old-time  British  tars  had  doubtless  a  haunting  sense  that  it 
was  only  the  imperfect  command  of  the  French  over  human  speech 
that  distorted  in  their  mouths  the  plain  injunction  "Wheel 'em  along" 
to  the  outlandish  "  Ville  de  Milan  "  ;  and  the  ship's  company  bringing 
the  Empress  Eugenie  to  England  is  said  to  have  welcomed  the  cry 
"  Beef,  brandy,  and  cheese,"  suggested  impromptu  by  Cecil  Rhodes, 
as  the  familiar  "  Vive  1'Imperatrice "  delivered  as  well  as  English 
tongues  and  channel  breezes  would  permit.  The  apperceptive  task  is 
no  greater  in  the  case  of  melody.  To  hear  any  sequence  of  tone 
whatever  as  a  rude  essay  at  the  diatonic  scale,  we  have  to  draw  any 
note  but  a  fraction  of  a  semitone  from  its  actual  position.  When 
the  performers  themselves  aim  at  approximate  diatonic  intervals,  the 
task  is  still  more  easily  within  the  power  of  the  group  of  tones 
diatonically  spaced  which  are  continually  sounding  in  the  fancy  of 
the  European  listener.  Of  this  the  subsequent  staff  notations  offer 
abundant  evidence. 

(c)  Adiatonic          Many  adiatonic  features  of  the  songs  are  shown  to  be 
repetition  intentional  by  repetition. 

The  curious  dress  of  the  following  phonographic  notations  is  a 
development  from  the  attempt  at  an  impartial  record  of  Zuni  melodies, 
and  still  more  plainly  signifies  that  the  writing  of  music  has  entered 
upon  a  new  phase.  The  extent  of  the  departure  of  both  from  the  cus- 
tomary staff  notation  may  easily  be  underestimated.  The  step  taken 
is  no  otjier  than  that  separating  the  indicative  from  the  imperative 
mood,  the  real  from  the  ideal.  Written  music  as  otherwise  known  is 
not  a  record  of  occurrence  but  of  purpose.  It  expresses  a  scheme 
of  pitch,  time,  and  stress  at  which,  in  the  case  of  music  observed,  we 
assume  a  performer  to  have  aimed,  and  toward  which  we  direct  future 
performers.  The  Zuni  notations  did  not  add  another  to  such  interpre- 
tations, but  gave  memoranda  of  observation.  They  were  the  roughly 


THE  ROTE-SONG   OF  THE  HOPI  9 

approximate  record  of  certain  facts  of  pitch  and  time  which  had  been 
caused  to  take  place  under  circumstances  permitting  subsequent  study. 
The  present  notations  record  similar  facts,  with  an  attempt  at  much 
greater  exactness.  Compared  with  the  customary  writing  of  music, 
these  again  are  as  annals  to  laws,  as  a  ship's  log  to  its  sailing  direc- 
tions. 

The  chief  exegetical  value  of  records  of  performance  lies  in  the  com- 
parison they  make  possible  between  different  renditions  of  the  same 
melody,  or  fragment,  by  the  same  or  different  singers.  Repetition 
argues  purpose ;  and  in  this  music  is  frequently  adiatonic  repetition 
proving  adiatonic  purpose.  In  Snake  Song  No.  1  the  singer  repeats 
notes  embodying  a  sequence  of  four  approximate  semitones,  e-de-d-cd-c, 
below,  and  one  above  a  minor  third.  No.  3  repeats  a  sequence  of  two 
major  thirds  (four  tones)  over  three  semitones,  c'-ga-e-de-d-cd.  Snake 
Song  No.  6  repeats  a  semitone  below  a  minor  third  and  in  the  lower 
octave  two  semitones  above  it,  forming  the  sequence  c'-a-ga-d-cd. 
Anoshkaey  repeats  a  fourth  over  a  fifth  divided  by  semitones  sym- 
metrically placed,  forming  the  sequence  d'-c'-b-a-fg-f-d.  Anonymous 
II  repeats  two  approximate  semitones  above  and  four  below  a  tone, 
forming  the  sequence  ab-a-ga-f-e-de-d.  All  of  these  combinations, 
and  others  like  them,  are  impossible  within  the  diatonic  scale  in 
any  one  form,  and  some  of  them  transcend  all  the  minor  forms 
together. 

(d)  Chromatic  or  ^ne  explanati°n  of  the  adiatonic  features  of  the  songs 
modulated stmc-  by  accidentals  or  changes  of  key  demands  in  many  cases 

ture  improbable  •  111  i  Pji  i 

an  improbably  complex  use  of  the  scale. 

The  application  of  this  theory  to  irregular  sequences  of  tone  like 
these  songs  involves  two  steps  comparable  to  lower  and  higher  literary 
criticism,  —  the  settlement  of  a  text  and  of  its  meaning  to  the  authors. 
The  notes  intended  by  the  singers  must  first  be  inferred  before  they 
can  be  interpreted  as  accidentals  or  as  steps  in  different  keys;  this 
irregularity  being  in  itself  an  argument  against  the  possession  of  any 
scale-consciousness  by  the  singers.  The  principle  of  the  inference  may 
be  that  diatonic  intervals  are  intended ;  and  the  melodies  seem,  at  least 


10  HOPI  SONGS 

at  first,  to  justify  this  assumption.  In  working  with  it,  particular  care 
must  be  taken  lest  the  conception  scale  be  substituted  for  the  concep- 
tion interval.  Petitio  prineipii  more  adroitly  steals  the  livery  of  logic 
to  serve  unreason  in  than  any  other  fallacy.  On  closer  study  of  the 
melodies,  even  the  legitimate  assumption  becomes  doubtful.  More 
probably  these  singers  aim  neither  at  diatonic  intervals  nor  at  any 
other  limited  set,  but  at  indefinitely  varying  approximations  to  the 
former,  precise  only  as  they  are  run  into  the  mould  of  each  individual 
song. 

Aside  from  this  probability  and  supposing  a  text  settled  on  any 
assumption  (other  than  that  of  the  point  to  be  proved),  it  is  to  be  noted 
that  any  sequence  of  tone  can  be  exhibited  as  moving  within  any  scale 
if  entire  freedom  as  to  frequence  and  position  of  changed  notes  be 
granted;  since  every  note  that  does  not  fit  can  be  given  the  latter 
standing.  But  while  theoretically  admissible,  indefinite  chromatic  free- 
dom is  a  practical  impossibility.  The  explanation  of  the  adiatonic 
features  of  these  songs  by  accidentals  will  be  disproved  by  showing  that 
the  implied  interference  with  the  scale  is  improbable.  In  the  adiatonic 
sequences  just  cited,  entitled  through  their  repetition  to  a  place  in  a 
corrected  text  of  the  melodies,  this  interference  sometimes  affects  sev- 
/eral  semitones,  a  degree  of  freedom  hardly  credible.  Logical  parsimony 
\  demands  a  simpler  explanation  of  these  songs  than  a  chromatic  structure 
rivaling  that  of  modern  European  music. 

It  is  to  be  noted  in  like  manner  that  any  melody  restricted  to  inter- 
vals of  a  given  scale  can  be  exhibited  as  moving  within  that  scale  if 
entire  freedom  as  to  change  of  key  be  granted.  For,  if  any  given 
transition  is  impossible  from  the  step  with  which  its  start  is  now  identi- 
fied, it  will  by  hypothesis  exist  from  some  other  step,  and  its  start  needs 
only  to  be  identified  with  that ;  this  change  of  scalar  significance  being 
a  modulation.  As  before,  the  disproof  of  the  explanation  will  consist 
in  showing  not  the  impossibility  but  the  improbability  of  the  changes 
assumed.  The  adiatonic  sequences  just  cited  are  simply  accounted 
for  by  the  tendency  of  these  singers  to  move  toward  or  past  coming 
notes,  make  such  combinations  as  they  please,  and  substitute  other 


THE  ROTE-SONG   OF  THE  HOPI  11 

intervals  when  the  need  of  change  is  felt.  Their  diatonic  explana- 
tion by  rapidly  succeeding  modulations  is  necessarily  a  complex  one ; 
and  still  more  complex  if  accidentals  also  enter.  In  themselves  they 
give  no  hint  of  a  scale-consciousness  in  intricate  activity.  The  com- 
/  bination  of  fifths  in  B  of  Anoshkaey  is  the  only  one  among  them  that 
/suggests  modulation,  and  this  occurs  just  before  in  A  without  giving 
the  suggestion. 

Further,  these  combinations,  and  all  but  one  or  two  of  the  other 
repeated  phrases  of  the  songs,  are  more  or  less  changed  in  repetition 
by  a  semitone  shifting  of  the  pitch  of  some  but  not  all  of  the  notes ; 
and  this  flexibility  of  structure  forms  what  is  apparently  a  definitive 
bar  to  the  scalar  theory  of  this  music.  The  effect  of  the  partial  shift- 
ing is  that  of  a  movement  of  one  part  of  the  texture  affected  on  the 
rest,  and  its  explanation  on  the  scalar  theory  involves  either  a  modula- 
tion transferring  the  phrase  to  another  part  of  the  scale  or  a  mod- 
ulation advancing  part  of  it  into  the  new  key  before  the  rest.  The 
former  case  presents  the  unlikely  supposition  that  a  grasp  of  the  scale 
as  doubtfully  expressed  as  elsewhere  in  these  songs,  even  in  the  imme- 
diate context  of  the  phrases  in  question,  should  be  equal  to  changing 
the  scalar  significance  of  all  the  notes  of  a  phrase  upon  a  change  of 
but  one  or  two  in  pitch.  The  supposition  of  modulation  by  install- 
ments —  that  of  an  alternation  between  two  atmospheres  represented 
by  parts  of  two  keys  in  rapidly  succeeding  instants  of  passage  across 
a  given  tract  of  tone  —  involves  an  intricacy  of  musical  thought 
hitherto  unknown  even  in  modern  European  music,  and  not  easily 
credible  of  any. 

The  major  thesis  of  the  "  Zuni  Melodies  "  —  that  Pueblo  music  is 
without  scale  —  is  strongly  confirmed  by  this  cumulative  evidence. 
The  diatonic  form  of  the  Hopi  songs  is  (a)  harmonic  necessity  or 
(b)  apperceptive  illusion.  In  large  measure  their  adiatonic  features 
are  at  once  (c)  intentional  and  (d)  inexplicable  by  interpolation  and 
transposition. 


12  HOPI  SONGS 

5.  Scales  an  in-  The  minor  thesis  of  the  "Zuni  Melodies" — that  "in 
strumentai  pro-  thig  archaic  stage  of  the  art  scales  are  not  formed  but 

duct ;  the  voice 

determining  torming  — is  rather  weakened  than  corroborated  by  a 
their  general  closer  study  of  Pueblo  music.  Its  bent  toward  change 
hand]  and  eye  inspires  a  doubt  whether,  unless  by  outward  compulsion, 
their  varieties  j^  WOuld  ever  submit  to  the  trammels  of  a  system.  It 
appears  an  unhistoric  rather  than  a  prehistoric  art. 

Although  the  voice  provides  the  raw  material  for  scale  building, 
through  its  tendency  toward  intervals  of  simplest  ratio,  this  might 
apparently  remain  unused  unless  in  the  construction  of  composite 
instruments.  The  process  called  tuning  any  instrument  giving  a 
number  of  fixed  notes  consists  in  adjusting  these  notes  to  certain 
standard  pitches,  which  might  be  either  absolute  or  determined  by  cer- 
tain music,  and  in  either  case  would  embody  a  definite  interval-order. 
Music  played  on  such  an  instrument  could  also  be  played  on  any 
other  embodying  the  same  interval-order,  though  at  a  different  pitch  ; 
and  the  order  might  thus  obtain  a  separate  existence.  Its  steps  would 
be  recognized  and  the  notes  of  music  viewed  as  their  embodiment. 
A  musical  system  would  have  arisen.  The  five  and  seven  step 
octave  scales  of  the  Eurasian  continent,  East  and  West,  have  their 
legendary  origin  in  such  composite  sources  of  tone,  groups  of  pipes 
and  of  strings  respectively;  and  the  frequent  diatonic  sequences  of 
the  present  songs  indicate  how  these  may  have  received  their  form 
from  the  voice.  In  particular,  a  movement  dividing  a  fourth  by 
thirds,  as  in  Snake  Song  No.  3,  Qoyohim-katcina,  Anonymous  II, 
Sumyacoli  or  Mana,  shifted  through  a  fourth,  as  in  Snake  Song 
No.  6,  Malo-katcina,  or  Haikaya,  and  repeated  in  a  lower  octave  like 
the  shadow  dance  to  which  the  lowest  notes  of  these  songs  often 
seem  the  invitation,  tends  to  result  in  either  a  five  step  or  the  seven 
step  diatonic  order.  Carried  out  in  all  possible  ways,  the  process  gives 
fifteen  orders,  three  being  the  diatonic  seven  step  octave  division, 
two  the  five  step  division  formed  therefrom  by  the  elimination  of 
its  tritonus,  "Si  contra  Fa,"  two  a  nine  step  octave  admitting  three 


THE  ROTE-SONG   OF  THE  HOPI 


13 


Diatonic  octave 
with  tritonus 
eliminated. 


tritonuses,  and  the  remainder  differing  from  these  and  among  them- 
selves.1 

The  diatonic  order  actually  emerges  in  but  one  of  the  three  cases 
/just  mentioned  in  which  a  theme  is  shifted  through  a  fourth.    Snake 
I  Song  No.  6  groups  semitones  and  minor  thirds,  Malo-katcina  juxta- 
poses  two    minor    thirds.     Only  Haikaya,   by  the    modulation    of  a 
sequence  consisting  of  a  minor  third  following  one  tone  and  followed 

1  Expressed  in  the  nearest  semitones  the  divisions  are  as  follows  :  — 
Trichordal  fourths 
Major  3d  from  base 
Major  3d  from  summit 
Minor  3d  from  summit 
Minor  3d  from  base 
Tetrachordal  fourths 
Major  3d  from  base  and 

summit 
Minor  3d  from  base  and 

summit 
Major   3d    from    base  : 

minor  3d  from  summit 
Minor    3d    from    base  : 

major  3d  from  summit 
Major  3d  and  minor  3d 

from  base 
Major  3d  and  minor  3d 

from  summit 

Pentechordal  fourths 

Major  and  minor  from 
base :  major  from  sum- 
mit 

Major  and  minor  from 
base :  minor  from  sum- 
mit 

Major  and  minor  from 
summit:  minor  from 
base 

Major  and  minor  from 
summit :    major  from 
base 
Hexachordal  fourths 

Major  and  minor  from 

both  base  and  summit    .1.1.1.1.    1    .1.1.    1   .1.1.   2 


.  1 

.     4 

, 

1 

4 

. 

2  . 

. 

4     . 

1 

.     4 

. 

1   . 

2   . 

.  3 

.     2 

.       3 

2  . 

2   .' 

2   .  3 

2 

.  3 

• 

2   . 

.  1 

.  3  . 

1 

.  1   . 

3  . 

1  . 

2   . 

.  2 

.   1   . 

2 

.   2   . 

1  . 

2  . 

2 

.  1 

.   2  . 

2 

.   1   . 

2  . 

2   . 

2 

.  2 

.  2   . 

1 

.   2   . 

2   . 

1   . 

2 

.   1 

.   1   . 

3 

.   1   . 

1   . 

3  . 

2  . 

.  3 

.  1   . 

1 

.   3   . 

1   . 

1   . 

2  . 

>•  Diatonic  octave. 


1   .1.2.   1   .   1   .1.2.   1 


1  .1.1.  2  .  1   .1.1.  2 


2  .1.1.  1   .  2  .1.1.  1 


Diatonic  octave  with 
tritonuses  added. 


1.2.   1 


2  .1.1.  2 


14  HOPI  SONGS 

by  two  others,  marks  out  the  diatonic  scale  less  one  step,  Fa,  which 
the  first  interval  of  the  final  descent  supplies  by  expanding  from  a 
fourth  to  a  fifth.  It  would  appear  that  while  still  disembodied  music 
tends  to  remain  adiatonic,  though  always  of  necessity  diatonoid.  Only 
when  incarnate  by  instrumental  constraint  does  it  choose,  because  it 
must,  the  best  of  all  possible  yokes. 

Once  thus  embodied  in  composite  instruments,  other  factors  than 
the  tendency  of  the  voice  toward  intervals  of  simplest  ratio  influence 
the  development  of  the  scale.  The  ear  may  choose  equality  of  tone- 
distance  as  an  ideal.  Instruments  being  permanent  utensils,  ease  of 
manufacture,  or  use,  and  charm  of  appearance  may  influence  the  make 
of  their  parts,  the  tones  they  give,  and  the  interval-orders  they  embody. 
Scales  may  result  with  which  the  voice  has  had  little  to  do,  giving 
back  to  music,  at  the  convenience  and  pleasure  of  ear  and  hand  and 
eye,  a  semblance  of  the  liberty  of  its  vocal  stage. 

6.  character  of  What,  then,  is  the  character  of  this  singular  music, 
Pueblo  music  containing  neither  a  scale  nor  the  promise  of  any? 

In  one  word,  this  character  is  the  freedom  which  the 

(a)  Freedom  -P-IA-TT 

white  race  personifies  in  the  American  Indian.  Apart  from 
the  tendency  to  consonant  intervals  no  metes  and  bounds  to  invention 
manifest  themselves  in  these  melodies,  and  they  may  apparently  be 
altered  by  every  performer.1  Such  exactness  as  the  songs  possess  does 
not  lie  in  the  individual  intervals  which  constantly  vary  and  are  often 
exchanged,  but  in  the  course  of  the  melodies  which  sometimes  coincide 
precisely  in  the  repetition  at  points  far  removed. 

These   correspondences  betoken   the  attainment  of  an 

ideal  radically  differing  from  the  harmonic  precision  which 


monic  norms. 


1  It  is  a  noteworthy  fact  that  the  anato-  in  speech  and  song.    (J.  L.  Wortman  and 

mists  of  the  Hememvay  Southwestern  Ex-  H.   F.  C.  ten   Kate,  On  an  Anatomical 

pedition  found  the  hyoid  bone  of  the  an-  Characteristic  of  the  Hyoid  Bone  of  Pre- 

cient  skeletons  exhumed  on  the  Rio  Salado  Columbian  Pueblo  Indians  of  Arizona, 

exceptionally    elastic    in    structure.     The  U.  S.  A.  Congres  Internationale  des  Ame'r- 

position  of    this  bone  at  the  base  of  the  icanistes.   Compte  Rendu  de  la  7mc  Session, 

tongue  makes  it  an  important  factor  both  Berlin,  1888.  Berlin,  1890,  pp.  263-270.) 


THE  ROTE-SONG    OF  THE  HOPI  15 

is  the  first  principle  of  scalar  performance.  It  is  as  if  from  any  given 
tone  there  were  to  these  singers  a  comparatively  narrow  but  not  very 
intense  field  of  attraction  at  the  octave,  others  stronger  but  perhaps 
more  diffused  at  the  fifth  and  fourth ;  and  at  the  sixths  and  thirds 
such  confused  and  spreading  attractions  as  might  be  expected  from 
centres  elongated  but  perhaps  not  clearly  separable  to  the  ear,  —  as  a 
double  star  may  be  to  the  eye.  The  prominence  of  sixthsjsjm.  unex- 
pected feature,  and  in  the  form  of  a  sequence  of  major  thirds  (Snake 
Songs  Nos.  2  and  3,  Jakwaina)  unpromising  diatonically.  These 
approximate  ideals  of  vocal  transition  await  incorporation  in  an  indi- 
vidual melody  to  receive  exact  determination,  and  then  not  individ- 
ually but  collectively  in  the  form  of  the  frequent  precise  adjustments 
of  texture  which  are  so  great  a  surprise  in  view  of  the  fluctuating  and 
alternating  intervals  beneath  which  they  are  hidden. 
(C)  Division,  Three  complementary  methods  of  composition  are  sug- 

onrf  "balance of  gested  throughout  the  songs,  whose  movement  may  be 
intervals  conveniently  described  in  terms  of  this  hypothetical  psy- 

chology of  their  invention.  Assuming  the  singer  in  executing  any 
step  of  his  melody  to  be  guided  by  another  tone  than  those  he  leaves 
and  reaches,  such  an  auxiliary  note  may  lie  beyond  his  goal,  beyond 
his  start,  or  between  the  two.  His  movement  may  in  the  first  case 
be  called  a  division  of  the  interval  start-auxiliary ;  in  the  second, 
a  combination  of  the  interval  start-goal  with  the  interval  auxiliary- 
start;  and  in  the  third  case,  a  balance  of  the  interval  start-goal  upon 
the  auxiliary.  The  division  of  an  interval  by  a  goal  near  the  auxil- 
iary may  be  called  a  movement  of  approach.  The  particular  case  of 
combination  in  which  an  interior  note  of  a  divided  interval  becomes 
an  extreme  of  another  may  be  called  lapinng.  The  balance  of  an 
interval  upon  a  coming  auxiliary  note  near  its  goal  may  be  called  over- 
running. Steps  in  general  thus  interpretable  group  themselves,  by 
repetition,  rests,  or  changes  of  measure,  into  movements  within  which 
the  singer  often  revisits  the  pitches  touched.  The  chief  movement  in 
Snake  Songs  Nos.  1  and  8  appears  a  simple  division  of  a  fifth ;  those 
of  No.  3,  Malo-katcina,  and  Haikaya,  in  the  main  simple  divisions  of 


16  HOPI  SONGS 

sixths.  Iii  No.  6  a  divided  fifth  is  combined  with  an  undivided  third. 
The  combination  of  divided  intervals  is  illustrated  in  Anonymous  II 
by  superposed  fourths ;  in  Coyohim-katcina,  by  a  fourth  (extended  by 
a  minor  third)  over  a  fifth ;  in  Shiashtasha,  by  a  fifth  lapping  two 
others  superposed ;  in  Anoshkaey,  by  a  fifth  lapping  a  fourth  and  a 
fifth  superposed ;  in  Jakwaina,  by  superposed  fifths ;  in  Sumyacoli,  by 
doubly  lapped  fifths.  Thirds  and  fourths  are  balanced  in  No.  3,  No. 
6,  Anonymous  I,  Haikaya,  and  elsewhere.  Maihai-katcina  illustrates 
the  extension  of  a  fifth  (fourth)  to  a  sixth  by  a  balanced  fourth,  and 
the  lapping  of  fifths. 

(d)  Thematic  The  figures  thus  elaborated  are  used  as  themes ;  repeated 
development;      in  var|e^  forms  (Malo-katcina) ;  shifted  in  pitch,  as  well 

strophe  form ; 

downward  through  a  minor  third  (Snake  Song  No.  6,  Anoshkaey)  as 
course; delivery  through  the  fourth  above  noted;  and  in  particular  ex- 
panded (Anoshkaey  and  Haikaya).  The  main  figures  may  be  preceded 
by  an  introduction,  separated  by  interludes,  and  followed  by  a  finale. 
The  introductions  are  apt  to  present  anomalies  of  form,  and  by  sug- 
gesting that  the  singer  is  laying  his  course  in  the  song  emphasize  its 
freedom  of  structure.  Through  their  rehearsal  of  important  notes  the 
finales  represent  clotures  in  overture  form.  The  general  course  of 
the  melodies  is  downward,  both  within  the  individual  figures  and  from 
figure  to  figure,  the  rate  varying  from  the  gradual  descent  of  Snake 
Song  No.  6  to  the  notable  plunges  of  Malo-katcina,  Maihai-katcina, 
and  Shiashtasha.  Snake  Song  No.  1  and  Anonymous  Nos.  I  and  II 
keep  their  general  level  throughout,  and  Qoyohim-katcina  and  Jak- 
waina return  to  the  initial  tract  after  a  climax.  The  singers  often 
attain  their  highest  notes  by  an  approach  (Qoyohim-katcina :  D',  C", 
D'")  or  a  flourish  also  (Shiashtasha,  Jakwaina),  and  in  descending  like- 
wise often  overrun  (Anonymous  I). 

The  partial  change  in  the  pitch   of  repeated  phrases, 

(e)  Mutation  i  •    i       i  111  •  i  •  i 

which  has  already  been  seen  to  resist  explanation  by 
modulation,  is  the  most  noteworthy  formal  feature  of  this  music.  De- 
fining a  musical  figure  as  a  combination  of  notes  determinate  in  their 
relations  of  pitch,  sequence,  duration,  and  emphasis,  this  process  may 


THE  ROTE-SONG   OF  THE  HOPI  17 

be  called  the  mutation  of  figure,  and  defined  as  a  repetition  in  which 

other  pitches  are  substituted  for  certain  only  of  those  employed  at  first. 

The  change  is  of  two  kinds :  a  larger  shift  of  about  a 

Its  varieties  .  . 

semitone,  which  may  anect  any  01  the  notes  of  a  phrase, 
and  which  is  illustrated  in  almost  all  of  the  melodies;  and  a  smaller  and 
less  frequent  shift  of  about  a  quarter  tone,  affecting  only  notes  whose 
central  position  or  office  as  starting-points  distinguishes  them  as  axes  or 
bases.  The  larger  mutation  may  be  spoken  of  as  compound  or  simple 
according  as  the  shift  occurs  in  both  senses  about  such  a  cardinal  note, 
or  moves  all  the  notes  affected  in  the  same  sense.  Simple  mutation  may 
terminate  either  by  the  return  of  the  shifted  notes,  or  the  advance  of 
the  others ;  or,  as  they  may  be  called,  reentrant  and  progressive  muta- 
tion ;  to  which  may  be  added  incomplete  mutation,  in  which  neither 
happens.  The  smaller  mutation  may  be  interpreted  as  a  mark  of  the 
sympathy  of  the  whole  structure  in  the  displacement  of  a  part.  Com- 
pound mutation  is  illustrated  in  Snake  Song  No.  3,  where  a  triad  con- 
tracts, expands,  and  contracts  again  upon  a  constant  mediant  in  four 
out  of  five  recurrences  of  a  melody ;  and  in  Anoshkaey  and  Maihai- 
katcina,  where  a  movement  in  a  fourth  is  repeated  in  a  fifth,  and  then 
returns  to  a  fourth  (in  Anoshkaey  through  a  representative  in  the  same 
tract).  Reentrant  mutation  is  illustrated  in  Snake  Song  No.  1,  where 
a  semitone  rise  of  the  summit  of  a  triad  is  repeated  after  a  like  intro- 
ductory movement,  the  base  being  periodically  raised  a  sixth  tone 
throughout  the  song ;  in  Snake  Song  No.  8,  where  the  base  of  a  triad 
descends  a  semitone  in  repetition  and  is  restored  at  the  outset  of  a  third 
performance ;  and  in  Shiashtasha,  where  the  mediant  of  a  triad  gives 
and  reacts  a  quarter  tone  as  a  semitone  shift  of  the  extremes  makes  the 
triad  alternately  major  and  minor,  the  rest  of  the  fabric  tending  to  fol- 
low them.  Progressive  mutation  is  illustrated  singly  by  Qoyohim- 
katcina,  where  the  basal  triad  rises  a  semitone  as  the  song  proceeds,  the 
fourth  upon  it  first  rising  accordingly,  then  lapsing  and  again  rising, 
the  mediant  of  the  triad  yielding  and  reacting  in  harmony;  and  by 
Jakwaina,  where  the  upper  boundary  of  the  main  theme  first  rises  inter- 
mittently, later  the  lower  boundary,  and  finally  all  the  notes  perma- 


18  HOPI  SONGS 

nently.  Multiple  progressive  mutation  is  illustrated  by  Snake  Song 
No.  2,  where  a  semitone  rise  in  the  extremes  of  a  triad  is  followed  by 
a  similar  rise  of  the  mediant,  the  extremes  adjusting  themselves  as  at 
first,  and  the  mediant  thereupon  rising  again  ;  and  in  Snake  Song  No.  4, 
where  the  mediant  rises  by  successive  quarter  tones  in  four  out  of  five 
repetitions  of  the  melody,  the  extremes  alternately  delaying  and  follow- 
ing. Incomplete  mutation  is  illustrated  in  Malo-katcina  as  performed 
by  Kano,  where  the  lower  extreme  of  the  theme  is  raised  a  semitone 
in  repeating  it;  by  Anonymous  II,  where  each  of  two  superposed 
fourths  exhibits  in  the  repetition  the  predominant  division  that  was 
originally  predominant  in  the  other ;  and  in  Sumyacoli,  where  the 
lower  notes  of  each  of  two  themes  rise  a  semitone  in  the  repetition. 
Neither  in  Malo-katcina  nor  in  Sumyacoli  is  the  arrest  of  mutation 
definitive,  for  in  codas  to  those  songs  the  outlines  (or  octave  outlines) 
of  the  themes,  though  not  the  figures  themselves,  appear  completely 
shifted. 

Three  songs  of  the  seventeen  show  no  important  mutation  of  figure 
and  no  displacement  of  a  cardinal  note.  The  modulation  of  the  theme 
through  a  fourth  seems  to  engross  the  thoughts  of  the  singer  of  Snake 
Song  No.  6,  and  this  he  executes  again  with  precision,  diverging  now 
and  then  rather  by  an  inveterate  habitude  of  variety  than  by  definite 
purpose.  Haikaya  also  modulates  the  theme  through  a  fourth,  and  also 
repeats  the  process  without  any  variation  indicative  of  purpose,  although 
a  final  access  of  fervor  stretches  the  modulated  figure  beyond  all  bounds. 
Anonymous  I  repeats  without  mutation  a  loose-jointed  melody,  that 
forthwith  expands  or  contracts  every  step  it  takes.  These  instances  in 
which  the  impulse  to  vocal  freedom,  denied  expression  in  the  larger 
features  of  the  songs,  finds  an  outlet  in  the  smaller,  makes  their  exposi- 
tion of  the  device  of  mutation  complete. 

Mutation  results  in  the  substitution  of  other  intervals  for 

all  those  formed  by  a  certain  pitch  or  certain  pitches  in  the 

figure  shaped.   The  initial  change  of  span,  if  not  a  chance  result,  may  be 

ascribed  to  caprice,  to  a  desire  for  novelty,  or  to  pleasure  in  vocal  skill ; 

and  the  correspondingly  altered  span  of  subsequent  movements  involv- 


THE  ROTE-SONG   OF  THE  HOPI  19 

ing  the  pitch  of  the  shifted  note  may  be  referred  to  the  attraction  of 
the  after  image  of  its  new  position.  Doubtless  these  motives  all  enter, 
but  not  alone  nor  even  chiefly.  A  completely  satisfactory  account  has 
perhaps  not  yet  been  given  of  the  emotional  contrast  to  European  feel- 
ing between  the  major  and  the  minor  modes  of  the  scale.  The  fact 
remains  that  a  semitone  alteration  of  a  phrase  may  change  it  from  an 
expression  of  exaltation  to  an  expression  of  depression.  Mutation  pre- 
sents such  changes,  varied  and  multiplied.  It  appears  a  generalization 
of  modality,  affecting  not  one  or  two  steps  in  an  otherwise  invariable 
standard  of  pitch  combination,  but  any  part  of  indefinitely  various  orders 
marked  out  by  a  melodic  movement  free  of  all  guidance  other  than  that 
of  approximate  consonance.  Such  a  generalized  expansion  and  con- 
traction of  intervals  would  seem  to  promise  an  indefinite  enrichment 
of  the  emotional  expressiveness  of  combinations  of  tone.  A  melodic 
music  of  fourths  (of  which  a  chain  of  two  might  mark  out  a  five  step 
octave),  like  the  diatonic  music  of  fifths,  but  with  an  inverse  expressive- 
ness, is  suggested  by  the  use  of  the  major  trichord  to  carry  a  drooping 
movement  like  Mana,  and  the  minor  to  carry  a  vigorous  turn  of  phrase 
like  the  opening  of  the  repetition  of  Anonymous  II.  All  the  pathetic 
charm  which  Pueblo  singing  possesses  to  European  ears  is  assuredly 
there,  and  much  beside  that  does  not  penetrate  the  diatonic  sense. 

With  its  amplified  emotional  expressiveness  mutation  combines  an- 
other important  source  of  effect,  that  of  the  reappearance  of  the  fa- 
miliar. The  shaped  fabrics  demand  to  be  restored  in  form  and  mood, 
as  all  music  and  all  poetry  demand  the  return  of  the  same.  This  mo- 
tive also  is  fruitfully  used  by  the  Hopi  singers.  Apart  from  the  charm 
their  songs  possess  at  a  single  hearing,  and  from  the  varied  emotional 
suggestion  resulting  from  their  mutability,  they  are  full  of  imagina- 
tive expression,  based  on  the  multifarious  ways  in  which  the  natural 
end  of  their  mutation  is  withheld,  delayed,  or  conceded. 

Inference  concerning  these  possible  moods  and  images  must  be 
largely  conjectural ;  only  the  orderly  variety  of  form  which  invites  it 
is  a  fact.  In  Snake  Song  No.  8  the  fall  and  momentary  recovery  of 
the  base  of  the  tetrad  vividly  picture  depression.  A  mind  at  rest  is 


20  HOPI  SONGS 

suggested  in  No.  3  by  the  rhythmic  expansion  of  the  theme  both  ways 
from  a  constant  axis,  and  the  undisturbed  course  of  the  second  theme 
meanwhile;  and  a  like  balance  by  the  slow  reintegration  of  the  tetrad 
in  No.  1.  Anoshkaey  at  once  expands  and  shifts  its  theme,  occupying 
the  same  zone  later  with  a  contracted  phrase,  and  becoming  by  these 
duplications  of  movement  a  type  of  reality  and  appearance.  Shiash- 
tasha  moves  between  major  and  minor  versions  like  the  shuttle  of  the 
Fates,  inclining  neither  way,  the  one  phase  leading  back  into  the  other 
through  a  neutral  interlude  ;  neither  plainly  the  beginning  of  the  song, 
and  perhaps  the  neutral  interlude  the  end.  In  Jakwaina  the  movement 
upward  begins  in  a  leap  beyond,  instead  of  to  a  previous  limit,  and  the 
pursuit  of  this  vivacious  initiative  through  a  motley  sequence  of  themes 
displays  the  verve  of  the  singer  and  symbolizes  a  persistent  and  suc- 
cessful struggle.  A  diffident  opening  and  a  confident  close  mark 
Anonymous  II,  of  whose  effect,  dependent  in  part  upon  its  portamenti, 
no  simple  account  can  be  given.  The  expansion  of  the  theme  of  Mai- 
hai-katcina  from  a  fourth  to  a  fifth,  taken  together  with  its  other  muta- 
tions, its  inverse  rhythm,  and  its  conclusion,  make  up  a  dialogue  of 
moods  like  Tennyson's  "Two  Voices."  In  Coyohim-katcina,  where  a 
movement  in  a  triad  is  shifted  upward,  and  movements  in  a  fourth 
above  give  place  to  it,  close  down  upon  it,  and  finally  adjust  themselves 
to  it,  the  upper  third  of  the  triad  at  the  higher  pitch  forms  by  itself 
(at  first  augmented  to  major)  a  long  introduction  to  the  melody,  whose 
course  thus  appears  its  temporary  defeat  and  final  victory.  In  Malo- 
katcina  the  shaped  figure  is  not  restored,  but  a  coda  outlines  in  the 
lower  octave  the  tract  within  which  it  would  move  were  the  semitone 
shift  upward  complete ;  and  the  expression  of  the  song  mainly  resides, 
to  our  apprehension,  in  the  unexpected  source  from  which  its  deliver- 
ance comes.  Sumyacoli  ends  likewise.  The  two  figures  are  not  them- 
selves restored,  but  the  tracts  they  would  occupy  are  outlined  in  a  coda, 
which  seems  to  bring  their  release  from  duress.  The  two  remaining 
songs  are  buoyant  in  quality  throughout.  In  Snake  Song  No.  2  re- 
peated vigorous  shifts  upward  by  the  extremes  of  a  triad  incite  the 
mediant  to  take  the  lead.  The  leadership  of  the  mediant  from  the 


THE  ROTE-SONG   OF  THE  HOPI  21 

start  in  similar  smaller  movements  gives  No.  4  the  terraced  rise  of  the 
cliffs  among  which  the  Hopi  live. 

These  wild  flowers  of  fancy,  the  wanton  yield  of  a  naive  delight  in 
the  vocal  production  of  interval,  will  not  long  survive  the  spread  of 
European  music  throughout  the  Americas.  Even  the  singers  them- 
selves will  accept  instrumental  substitutes  from  which  they  delicately 
and  intricately  differ.  It  is  a  satisfaction  to  reflect  that  the  memory 
of  a  few  will  be  approximately  preserved  in  the  pages  of  this  hortus 
siccus.  Under  the  microscope  they  exchange  the  aspect  of  transplanted 
weeds  for  that  of  a  native  flora.  Doubtless  songs  like  these  once  lent 
solemnity  to  Aztec  rites  and  graced  the  state  of  Inca  kings. 


II 

THE  PHONOGRAPHIC  METHOD 


II 

THE  PHONOGRAPHIC  METHOD 

THE  following  account  of  the  method  of  the  present  notations  was 
written  immediately  after  their  completion.  Their  subsequent  study 
has  brought  to  light  coincidences  of  form  evidencing  an  accuracy  of 
reproduction  by  the  phonograph  even  greater  than  could  at  that  time 
be  inferred. 

The  largest  variation  in  the  speed  of  the  instrument  observed  during 
the  process  of  notation  —  a  ratio  equivalent  to  a  tenth  of  a  tone  on  eleven 
occasions — does  not  affect  the  interpretation  of  any  song;  and  several 
exact  repetitions  of  notes  within  the  regions  involved  indicate  that  the 
aberrations  may  sometimes  have  been  narrowly  ephemeral.  A  correction 
is  definitely  indicated  in  one  instance  only.  In  Sumyacoli  a  fall  in  the 
phonograph  rate  equivalent  to  a  twentieth  of  a  tone  (following  another 
of  an  equal  interval)  is  registered  between  the  two  slides  of  A" ;  and 
had  the  instrument  remained  as  constant  here  as  between  the  two  slides 
of  A',  the  pair  in  A"  would  doubtless  have  been  judged  as  nearly 
identical  in  pitch  as  that  in  A'. 

It  is  remarked  in  the  sequel  that  the  chief  motive  of  the  unusual 
effort  there  described  to  note  these  songs  accurately  was  not  a  love  of 
accuracy  for  its  own  sake,  but  a  hope  that  some  proportion  of  the 
resulting  close  determinations  of  pitch  might  prove  significant.  The 
study  of  the  first  song  fulfilled  this  hope  by  bringing  to  light  the  novel 
habitude  of  performance  for  which  the  name  mutation  has  been  chosen, 
and  which  proved  characteristic  of  the  series.  The  discovery  trans- 
ferred the  focus  of  the  inquiry  from  the  intervals  used,  on  which  light 
had  been  awaited,  to  the  use  made  of  them,  —  a  new  and  widely  differ- 
ent topic.  Undertaken  in  the  interest  of  a  view  of  this  music  still 
largely  harmonic,  the  notations  proved  to  indicate  that  not  harmony 
but  melody  was  its  basis,  not  individual  intervals  but  larger  form  its 
essence.  This  discovery  of  a  musical  method  important  both  in  theory 


26  HOPI  SONGS 

and  practice  amply  justified  the  labor  which  had  made  it  possible  ;  the 
more  amply  because  of  the  unlooked-for  character  of  the  new  fact. 


i  Actual  music  ^ie  n°tat;ions  presented  herewith  differ  from  all  others 
first  accessible  to  known  to  me,  excepting  the  collection  of  Zuni  melodies  I 
through  the  have  already  published,  in  being  notations  of  perform- 
ances and  not  of  pieces  of  music.1  This  difference  is  one 
of  importance,  involving  no  less  a  distinction  than  that  between  facts 
of  observation  and  theories  upon  them.  A  fact  of  observation  is  any- 
thing that  is  observed  ;  a  theory  is  the  idea  that  something  would 
be  observed  under  specified  conditions.  A  musical  performance  is  a 
real  event  open  to  observation  like  any  other  ;  a  piece  of  music  is  an 
ideal  of  event  which  any  given  performance  more  or  less  completely 
realizes. 

The  exacter  notation  of  musical  performance  by  the  naked  ear  may 
be  said  to  be  practically  impossible.  None  but  the  most  exceptional 
observers  would  be  equal  to  the  task  of  writing  down  with  any  pre- 

1  The  year  after  the  appearance  of  the  published  results  of  these  studies  include 

Zuni  Melodies  I  contributed  to  the  Phi-  C.  Stunipf,  "  Tonsystem  und  Musik  der 

losophical  Review  (1892,  vol.  i,  Nos.  1  Siamesen,"    Beitrdge   zur   Akustik   und 

and  2)  a  paper  entitled  "  Some  Psycho-  Musikwissenschaft,  3  Heft,  1901  ;  E.  M. 

logical  Aspects   of    the   Chinese    Musical  von  Hornbostel,   "  Phonographirte  Tune- 

System,"  containing  notations  of  Chinese  sische  Melodien  ";"  Notiz  iiber  die  Musik 

performances  of  which  I  had  myself  ob-  der    Bewohner  von    Sud    Neu    Mecklen- 

tained   phonographic    records.     In    these  burg  "  ;  also  an  essay  on  the  present  state 

notations  a  mean  of  closely  grouped  notes  of  the  science  of  Comparative  Music  con- 

was  assumed  as  the  pitch  intended  by  the  tributed    to    the    Bericht   of    the    Basler 

performer.     Within   the    past   few  years  Kongress  of  the  Internationale  Musikge- 

the  closer  examination  of   musical  struc-  sellschaft,  1906.     O.  Abraham  and  E.  M. 

ture  with  the  aid  of  the  phonograph  and  von    Hornbostel,  "  Phonographirte   Indi- 

by  a  similar  method  has  been  continued  in  anermelodien  aus  British  Columbia,"  con- 

the  Psychologisches  Instittit  of  Professor  tributed   to  the  Boas  Memorial  Volume, 

Carl  Stumpf  at  Berlin  University,  by  Pro-  New  York,  1906.     I  regret  that  the  limits 

fessor  Stumpf,  Dr.  E.  M.  von  Hornbostel,  of  my  leisure  forbid  more  than  the  men- 

and   Dr.  0.  Abraham,  using  records  col-  tion  of  these  inquiries. 
lected   by   themselves    and   others.     Tho 


THE  PHONOGRAPHIC  METHOD  27 

tense  at  minuter  exactitude  a  tone  sequence  of  any  complexity  from  a 
single  hearing.  In  particular,  all  direct  study  of  musical  forms  unfa- 
miliar to  the  observer  must  proceed  as  it  has  proceeded,  by  a  process 
of  the  correction  of  an  original  notation  by  repeated  hearings  of  the 
music  noted.  This  process  does  not  result  in  a  record  of  the  facts  of 
any  one  or  any  number  of  the  performances  tributary  to  it ;  but  is  a 
record  of  the  observer's  idea  of  what  the  performers  of  certain  observed 
sequences  of  tone  would  have  performed  had  their  execution  perfectly 
corresponded  to  their  intention,  or  (perhaps)  had  their  intention  not 
wandered  also  from  a  certain  norm.  In  a  word,  a  notation  made  by 
ear  from  repeated  hearings  does  not  report  observations,  but  presents 
a  theory  of  observations. 

The  present  notations  have  also  been  taken  down  from  repeated  per- 
formances ;  and,  moreover,  from  performances  of  a  mechanism,  and  not 
of  musicians.  But  this  mechanism  is  an  apparatus  by  which,  as  it 
is  claimed,  many  musical  performances  can  be  given  which  shall  not 
perceptibly  differ,  except  perhaps  in  tone  quality,  either  among  them- 
selves or  from  an  original  performance  having  another  source  to  which 
the  instrument  shall  have  been  exposed.  Admitting  this  claim,  such 
performances  are  for  the  most  important  purposes  of  purely  musical 
observation  recurrences  of  their  original,  and  records  made  from  them 
are  records  of  facts  of  observation  which  this  has  presented.  Such 
notations  as  are  given  herewith  might  accordingly  be  described  as  the 
record  of  conclusions  from  many  observations  of  one  and  the  same  set 
of  facts.  This  set  of  facts  being  any  sequence  of  audible  event  to  which 
the  instrument  may  have  been  exposed,  the  phonograph  thus  makes  pos- 
sible a  hitherto  unheard-of  thing,  the  detailed  study  of  an  individual 
performance  of  music.  It  opens  a  field  of  investigation,  that  of  the 
actual  events  of  which  music  consists,  which  has  hitherto  been  accessi- 
ble to  observation  in  only  a  very  limited  way,  —  while  a  performance 
lasts,  and  in  so  far  as  it  can  afterward  be  recalled  in  memory.  The 
study  of  performance  is  created,  it  may  be  said,  as  a  branch  of  the 
exacter  investigation  of  the  art  of  music,  through  the  invention  of  the 
phonograph ;  always  provided  that  phonographic  reproductions  may  be 


28  HOPI  SONGS 

made  at  least  in  the  most  important  respects  and  for  the  most  important 
purposes  indistinguishable  among  themselves  and  from  their  orio-inal. 

2.  Tests  of  the  ^  testing  this  assumption,  the  main  question  to  settle  is 
phonograph  that  of  the  degree  of  accuracy  with  which  the  phonograph 
repeats  a  sequence  of  intervals.  For  accuracy  in  the  reproduction  of 
intervals  means  that  the  instrument  gives  back  air  waves  in  time  rela- 
tions which  are  closely  like  those  incorporated  in  the  vibrations  consti- 
tuting the  original  performance,  and  this  involves  a  due  reproduction 
also  of  the  larger  time  structure  of  the  music.  These  two  formal  ele- 
ments, relations  of  pitch  and  relations  of  time,  are  the  fundamental 
ones  in  a  musical  product;  the 'material  element,  the  quality  of  the 
sounds,  being  of  subordinate  importance.  Music  is  an  art  of  interval 
and  measure  primarily,  and  one  of  timbre  secondarily.  As  at  present 
constructed,  the  phonograph  is  noticeably  deficient  in  the  reproduction 
of  delicate  shades  of  timbre ;  and  this  shortcoming  may  easily  lead  to 
an  underestimate  of  its  possible  value  as  an  aid  in  musical  investigation. 
Purity  and  variety  of  tone  quality  being  important  sources  of  pleasure 
from  music,  the  phonograph  may  seem  at  first  hearing  to  reproduce 
structures  of  tone  with  essential  elements  lacking ;  or  it  may  be  that 
we  argue  from  this  conspicuous  imperfection  of  material  to  a  corre- 
sponding distortion  of  form. 

What  little  acquaintance  I  had  with  the  phonograph  before  learning 
of  Dr.  Fewkes's  collection  of  records  sufficed  to  make  their  study  seem 
to  me  well  worth  while.  These  records  had,  it  is  true,  been  taken  on 
a  phonograph  run  by  a  treadle,  but  the  experiments  detailed  in  the 
"  Zuni  Melodies  "  went  to  show  that  such  records  when  reproduced  by 
the  electric  motor  and  storage  battery  would  only  very  seldom  be  notice- 
ably at  fault.  For  the  latter  motor  used  both  in  record  and  reproduc- 
tion, the  experiments  indicated  that  the  error  would  never  be  as  great 
as  the  eighth  of  a  tone.  Later,  in  studying  by  the  phonograph  the 
Chinese  performances  before  mentioned,  I  made  another  effort  to  deter- 
mine by  ear  the  amount  of  the  distortion  to  which  a  sequence  of  inter- 
vals might  be  expected  to  be  subjected  by  the  phonograph  used  with  a 


THE  PHONOGRAPHIC  METHOD  29 

storage  battery.  An  account  of  this  test  is  given  in  an  appendix  to  my 
paper  on  the  Chinese  Musical  System.  The  test  sequence  employed 
(which  could  as  well  be  one  as  another)  was  a  sequence  in  unison  with- 
out any  interruption  of  the  sound,  that  is,  a  single  note  held  continu- 
ously until  the  inscription  covered  the  cylinder.  I  sought  to  determine 
how  far  this  varied  in  the  reproduction  from  perfect  constancy  of  pitch 
by  tuning  the  phonograph  note  between  two  others  (notes  of  the  instru- 
ment called  the  Harmonical),  which  could  be  sounded  at  will  for  com- 
parison, and  which  were  one  ninth  of  a  tone  apart.  In  some  of  the 
trials  I  found  it  impossible,  even  by  the  use  of  this  delicate  criterion, 
which  I  convinced  myself  would  enable  me  to  detect  variations  of  very 
much  less  than  this  small  fraction  of  a  tone,  to  be  sure  that  the  phono- 
graph note  had  changed  its  pitch  at  all  during  the  entire  reproduction. 
This  unexpected  result  led  me  to  preface  the  following  study  of  the 
second  collection  of  phonographic  cylinders  obtained  among  the  Pueblo 
Indians  by  Dr.  Fewkes,  who  this  time  used  an  electro-motor  and 
storage  battery,  with  a  series  of  tests  not  psychological  but  physical.  I 
endeavored  both  to  find  the  principal  limitations  of  the  instrument  by 
the  trial  of  various  conditions  of  inscription  and  reproduction,  and  to 
determine  the  degree  of  exactness  of  its  best  performance.  The  method 
consisted  mainly  in  noting  the  amount  of  variation  in  the  rapidity  of 
the  pulsations  of  sound  called  beats  produced  between  a  phonographic 
reproduction  of  a  note  held  continuously  and  another  note  known  to 
be  of  constant  pitch. 

A  general  expression  for  the  distortion  by  the  phonograph  of  the  intervals 
of  any  sequence  of  tones  may  be  reached  as  follows :  Consider  any  tones  ^  and 
v  of  a  sequence  phonographically  inscribed.  Let  the  rate  of  the  cylinder 
during  the  reception  of  the  air  waves  concerned  in  the  production  of  p  be 
denoted  by  the  term  P,  and  the  like  rate  for  v  by  I".  If  in  the  reproduction 
the  rate  of  the  cvlinder  while  the  needle  traverses  the  inscription  made  by  the 
air  waves  of  /n  is  IM,  and  while  it  traverses  the  inscription  of  v  is  I",  the  two 
rapidities  of  vibration  imparted  to  the  diaphragm  from  within  will  be  the  same 
as  it  received  from  without  in  the  original  performance  of  the  music.  But 
further,  the  ratio  of  these  rapidities  of  vibration  will  be  unchanged  when  the 


30  HOPI  SONGS 

cylinder  moves  during  the  reproduction  of  /*  at  any  velocity  RM,  if  only  it 
moves  during  the  reproduction  of  v  at  a  velocity  R",  which  is  the  same  mul- 
tiple of  I"  as  RM  is  of  F.  That  is,  while  any  two  tones  of  a  sequence  will  be 
reproduced  at  the  original  pitch  only  when  the  reproducing  needle  traverses  the 
inscription  of  each  at  the  rate  the  inscribing  needle  moved  in  making  it,  they 
will  be  reproduced  at  the  original  interval  whenever  the  second  moves  in  each 
case  at  the  same  multiple  of  the  rate  of  the  first. 
Supposing  for  a  given  reproduction  we  have 

(1)  R*=aF 

(2)  R"=bF 

we  have  then  ~  R"=aF. 

b 

That  is,  had  the  velocity  of  the  cylinder  during  the  reproduction  of  v  been 
-  times  what  it  was,  the  tone  v  would  have  been  given  at  the  interval  from  /* 

at  which  it  occurred  in  the  original  music.  But  the  rapidities  of  the  impulses 
communicated  to  the  diaphragm  by  the  same  inscription  of  tone  at  any  two 
velocities  of  the  cylinder  will  be  to  one  another  as  these  velocities.  The  ratio 
of  these  latter  will  then  be  that  of  the  vibration  numbers  of  the  two  tones 
obtained  in  this  way  from  a  single  inscription ;  that  is,  it  will  be  the  interval 
through  which  the  tone  is  changed  by  the  change  of  rapidity.  The  ratio 

-RVH-R1',  or  -,  will  then  be  the  interval  by  which  the  reproduction  of  v 
differed  from  a  pitch  at  which  the  original  interval  of  /M  to  v  would  have 

reappeared.  It  is  the  amount  of  distortion  or  error  of  the  interval  -  in  the 
given  reproduction.  Denoting  this  by  A,  we  have 

(3)  A;-5. 

But  from  (1)  we  have  a=  — ,  and  from  (2)  b=— "•• 

TM  '  p 

Whence  (4)     AJ-^- 

The  ratio  of  the  inscription  velocities  and  the  ratio  of  the  reproduction  velo- 
cities of  the  cylinder  for  two  given  tones  of  an  inscribed  sequence  may  then  be 
regarded  as  two  variables  on  which  depends  the  error  of  the  interval  between 
these  notes  in  a  given  reproduction.  In  estimating  the  element  of  phono- 
graphic distortion,  not  only  the  variation  in  the  speed  of  the  cylinder  at  the 
time  of  reproduction  is  to  be  taken  into  account,  but  its  changes  of  rate 
while  receiving  the  inscription. 


THE  PHONOGRAPHIC  METHOD  31 

The  span  in  pitch  of  an  interval  is  smaller  as  its  ratio  approaches  unity, 
becoming  zero  at  this  ratio,  in  the  interval  of  unison.  The  amount  of  a  distor- 

1"          RM 
tion  A£  will  therefore  be  zero  when  the  product  of  the  ratios  —  and  —  is  unity. 

v      R" 

This  will  occur  when  one  of  these  ratios  is  the  reciprocal  of  the  other,  that  is, 
when  the  variation  in  the  rate  of  the  cylinder  from  fj.  to  v  is  in  the  same  pro- 
portion in  the  reproduction  as  in  the  inscription.  When  this  ratio  of  varia- 
tion is  unity,  we  speak  of  the  rate  as  constant.  A  constant  speed  in  both 
inscription  and  reproduction  is  therefore  a  special  form  of  the  conditions  for 
an  undistorted  copy  of  an  inscribed  music.  Moreover,  according  as  the  pro- 
duct of  the  above  ratios  approaches  unity,  that  is,  as  one  comes  nearer  to  being 
the  reciprocal  of  the  other,  the  distortion  A^  will  be  smaller.  A  special  form 
of  these  conditions  is  given  in  the  close  approach  of  both  ratios  to  unity.  In 
other  words,  the  distortion  of  a  texture  will  be  inconsiderable  when  in  both 
its  inscription  and  its  reproduction  the  rate  of  the  phonograph  has  varied 
very  little  from  perfect  constancy.  Further,  the  motor  of  the  phonograph 
being  specially  designed  to  give  the  cylinder  as  nearly  constant  a  velocity  as 
possible,  this  proposition  may  be  simply  converted,  and  we  may  affirm  that 
if  a  texture  of  tone  is  little  distorted  in  phonographic  reproduction  it  is  be- 
cause the  rate  of  the  instrument  has  been  very  closely  constant  during  both 
inscription  and  reproduction.  The  following  observations  of  A^  where 
/j.  and  v  are  different  segments  in  the  reproduction  of  a  constant  note  ac- 
cordingly afford  data  for  estimating  the  degree  of  approach  of  the  phono- 
graph cylinder  to  constancy  of  rotation  during  the  performance  of  each  of 
its  functions. 

The  physical  cause  of  tone  is  the  regularly  periodic  vibration  of  the  body 
producing  it,  this  vibration  being  more  or  less  rapid  according  as  the  tone  is 
higher  or  lower  in  pitch.  It  is  found  that  if  two  tones  sufficiently  near 
together  in  pitch  be  produced  simultaneously,  the  resultant  sound  is  no  longer 
constant  in  intensity,  but  regularly  waxes  and  wanes.  The  number  of  these 
pulsations,  or  beats,  as  they  are  called,  in  any  given  time  proves  to  be  equal 
to  the  difference  between  the  numbers  of  vibrations  executed  in  this  time  by 
the  two  sources  of  tone  employed.  If  the  united  sound  makes  in  ten. seconds 
forty  pulsations,  the  one  tone  is  produced  by  four  more  vibrations  per  second 
than  the  other. 

Let  us  suppose  a  sounding  body  giving  a  tone  which  cannot  be  certainly 
affirmed  on  the  testimony  of  the  ear  to  change  its  pitch.  If  we  are  in  posses- 
sion of  a  source  of  tone  of  nearly  this  pitch,  whose  rate  of  vibration  is  known 


32  HOPI  SONGS 

to  be  constant,  we  can  determine  whether  the  rate  of  vibration  of  the  other 
varies,  by  noting  whether  the  pulsations  made  by  the  two  when  sounded 
together  are  subject  to  change.  For  since  the  one  source  vibrates  at  a  con- 
stant rate,  a  change  in  the  rapidity  of  the  beating  of  the  two  will  mean  that 
the  other  is  vibrating  slower  or  faster  than  before.  In  this  indirect  way  varia- 
tions in  pitch  may  be  detected  which  would  entirely  escape  notice  by  the  ear. 
Moreover,  if  the  vibration  rate  of  the  source  producing  the  constant  tone  be 
known,  we  are  enabled  to  determine  also  the  interval  which  the  variation  in 
pitch  of  the  other  represents,  for  this  interval  is  expressed  by  the  ratio  of  the 
vibration  rates  of  the  note  before  and  after  the  change ;  and  these  are  found 
by  adding  to  (or  subtracting  from)  the  number  of  vibrations  per  second  exe- 
cuted by  the  constant  source  the  number  of  beats  formed  with  it  by  the 
varying  source  before  and  after  the  variation. 

The  constant  source  of  tone  which  I  used  in  applying  this  test  to  the  phono- 
graph was  a  tuning-fork  by  Koenig  of  Paris  making  250  vibrations  per  second, 
that  is,  giving  the  pitch  called  by  the  French  Ut3.  The  phonographic  inscrip- 
tions which  were  compared  with  it  were  taken  from  the  middle  c'  of  a  Mason  & 
Hamlin  harmonium,  a  pitch  higher  than  Ut3  by  a  fraction  of  a  semitone.  This 
note  was  in  each  case  held  uninterruptedly  until  the  inscription  covered  the 
cylinder. 

There  are  two  possible  sources  of  variation  from  a  constant  pitch  in  such  a 
reproduction  as  this.  While  the  phonograph  may  not  give  back  accurately  the 
sequence  of  pitch  it  received,  there  may  also  have  been  a  variation  in  the  origi- 
nal note.  The  pitch  of  a  note  produced  as  in  the  harmonium,  by  the  action  of 
a  current  of  air  on  a  reed,  is  found  to  vary  somewhat  with  the  strength  of  the 
current  employed.  In  order  to  estimate  what  importance  should  be  attributed 
to  this  factor  of  original  variation,  when  all  possible  care  was  taken  to  keep 
the  inscribed  note  constant  in  intensity,  I  compared  the  beats  made  with  the 
Ut3  fork  by  the  nearest  semitone  on  the  harmonium  at  its  faintest  and  at  its 
loudest.  The  note  b,  when  just  audible,  made  with  the  fork,  which  was  slightly 
higher  in  pitch,  eleven  beats  in  ten  seconds  ;  when  given  with  all  possible  in- 
tensity, twenty-two  beats  in  ten  seconds.  The  greatest  possible  change  which 
could  be  produced  in  the  vibration  rate  of  the  reed  by  differences  of  intensity 
of  blowing  was  therefore  but  little  over  one  vibration  per  second,  corresponding 
at  this  pitch  to  an  interval  of  about  one  twenty-ninth  of  a  tone.  The  original 
variation  being  so  small  when  the  conditions  were  made  as  unfavorable  as 
possible,  I  concluded  that  when  all  possible  care  was  taken  to  make  them 
favorable  it  might  be  neglected;  and  that  any  irregularities  which  should 


THE  PHONOGRAPHIC  METHOD  33 

reveal  themselves  nevertheless  in  the  reproduction  of  the  test  inscriptions  might 
be  laid  to  the  charge  of  the  phonograph. 

In  taking  the  first  inscription  (Cylinder  A)  the  screw  regulating  the  supply 
of  electricity  was  adjusted  so  that  the  shaft  of  the  phonograph  made  about  140 
revolutions  a  minute.  At  this  rate  the  needle  took  over  three  minutes  to  cover 
the  cylinder.  About  two  and  a  half  minutes  being,  I  am  told,  the  standard  time, 
the  instrument  was  running  during  the  inscription  of  Cylinder  A  considerably 
below  what  is  considered  its  normal  rate.  In  listening  to  the  reproduction  the 
mingling  of  the  air  waves  from  the  phonograph  and  the  fork  was  effected  by 
attaching  another  pipe  by  means  of  a  hard  rubber  Y  to  that  leading  from  the 
phonograph  diaphragm  to  the  ear-piece,  the  free  end  of  this  secondary  pipe  being 
favorably  placed  for  the  reception  of  sound  from  the  fork.  In  the  phono- 
graphic note  itself  the  rhythm  of  intensity  which  I  had  noticed  in  using  the 
instrument  before  reappeared  in  some  slight  degree,  seeming  now  in  general  a 
double  wave  with  a  period  equal  to  that  of  the  revolution  of  the  cylinder. 
This  rhythm  of  intensity,  accomplishing  itself  in  the  course  of  a  revolution  of 
the  cylinder,  is  plausibly  to  be  explained  as  the  result  of  a  slight  difference  in 
the  nearness  of  the  diaphragm  to  the  surface  of  the  wax  at  different  points 
in  its  circumference.  This  would  be  the  result  of  any  deviation  of  the  cylinder 
from  perfect  circularity,  or  any  want  of  coincidence  between  its  axis  of  rota- 
tion and  its  axis  of  form.  If  this  is  its  origin,  some  pulsation  of  this  kind  is  to 
be  generally  expected  in  a  phonograph  note.  In  later  observations  I  seemed 
to  notice  that  at  higher  rates  of  the  speed  of  the  instrument  this  pulsation  of 
the  note  was  less  distinct.  Accompanying  the  tone  I  could  detect  two  distinct 
currents  of  noise :  one  irregular,  like  a  stream  of  sparsely  scattered  pebbles  ; 
the  other  a  continuous  mild  grating  noise.  This  latter  exhibited  the  double 
rhythm  sometimes  very  distinctly ;  but  it  seemed  to  me  I  could  hear  it  also  in 
the  tone  itself. 

During  two  days  in  which  I  studied  Cylinder  A  I  found  difficulty  in  so 
arranging  the  apparatus  as  to  bring  out  the  beats  between  the  two  notes  dis- 
tinctly. Although  I  seemed  to  be  able  to  detect  them  as  a  shimmer  of  sound 
through  the  grinding  pulsations  of  the  phonograph  note,  yet  I  could  not  always 
be  sure  that  I  was  not  at  times  counting  the  mechanical  instead  of  the  auricular 
beats.  Moreover,  they  sometimes  escaped  me  through  their  irregularity ;  now 
and  then  becoming  unaccountably  fast,  fusing  into  a  slow  whir.  Indeed,  on 
attending  to  the  pitch  of  the  note,  I  found  it  to  be  varying  perceptibly.  Since 
the  speed  of  the  cylinder  was  below  the  normal  rate,  this  fact  could  be  inter- 
preted as  pointing  to  one  of  the  limits  of  the  accurate  performance  of  the  instru- 


34  HOPI  SONGS 

ment.  At  so  slow  a  rate  as  135  to  140  revolutions  per  minute,  the  motor  could 
no  longer  perhaps  be  depended  upon  to  give  the  cylinder  a  constant  speed. 
The  trial  of  different  rapidities  confirmed  this  conclusion.  The  electrical 
supply  being  reduced  until  the  cylinder  made  on  starting  but  72  revolutions  a 
minute,  the  note  wandered  over  a  wide  interval,  during  most  of  the  reproduc- 
tion a  minor  third,  but  at  the  end  becoming  a  sixth.  At  120  revolutions  the 
variation,  while  unceasing,  kept  within  comparatively  narrow  limits,  perhaps  a 
quarter  tone  or  somewhat  more.  In  trying  the  same  cylinder  again  on  another 
day  at  135  revolutions,  I  estimated  the  variation  at  nearly  if  not  quite  a  semi- 
tone from  first  to  last.  Sometimes  a  change  up  and  back  through  perhaps  an 
eighth  of  a  tone  took  place  in  a  few  seconds,  but  the  general  rule  seemed  to  be 
a  change  to  a  new  level,  which  it  thereupon  held  for  some  time.  At  158  revo- 
lutions the  same  cylinder  showed  a  total  variation  which  I  estimated  at  less 
than  a  quarter  tone,  and  perhaps  not  much  more  than  an  eighth, — certainly 
within  an  eighth  during  much  the  larger  part  of  the  cylinder.  After  trying 
120  revolutions  on  the  day  before  mentioned,  I  set  the  instrument  at  180,  the 
result  being  that  the  note  seemed  to  the  ear  quite  steady. 

Since  at  this  speed  the  pitch  of  the  record  on  Cylinder  A  was  far  removed 
from  Ut3,  I  took  on  the  day  after  an  inscription  of  the  harmonium  c',  at  176 
revolutions,  Cylinder  B.  In  order  to  make  the  reproduction  beat  with  Ut3  with 
sufficient  slowness  to  be  easily  counted,  this  rate  had  to  be  reduced  to  170.  At 
174  revolutions  I  found  the  needle  covered  the  cylinder  to  the  very  end  in  just 
two  and  a  half  minutes.  We  may  then  take  165  to  175  revolutions  as  the 
standard  speed,  and  Cylinder  B  as  a  standard  cylinder  both  in  the  inscription 
and  when  it  was  reproduced  to  beat  with  Ut3. 

The  beats  became  most  distinct  when  the  auxiliary  tube  was  introduced  into 
the  resonator  of  the  fork,  a  minimal  tone  being  produced  from  the  latter  by 
gentle  taps  with  the  finger  near  the  junction  of  the  tines.  Under  these  condi- 
tions I  examined  a  quadruple  series  of  reproductions  from  B,  the  regulator 
screw  being  untouched  meanwhile,  and  the  time  between  one  and  the  next 
being  only  that  required  to  replace  the  diaphragm  at  the  head  of  the  cylinder. 
As  the  needle  took  something  over  two  minutes  to  traverse  the  inscription, 
this  was  a  nearly  continuous  test  of  the  performance  of  the  instrument  dur- 
ing a  lapse  of  about  ten  minutes.  The  number  of  beats  in  those  ten  second 
spaces  in  each  reproduction  during  which  I  was  able  to  count  them  were  as 
follows :  — 


THE  PHONOGRAPHIC  METHOD  35 

SEMES  I 


23  (?) 

10 

9 

8 

10 

9 

10 

9 

10 

8 

10 

8 

12 

12 

15  (?) 

8 

12 

12 

14 

11 

11 

12 

20 

13 

16 

16 

14 

9 

16 

16 

15 

15 

20 

In  Appendix  XX  to  Mr.  A.  J.  Ellis's  translation  of  Helmholtz's  "  Sensa- 
tions of  Tone,"  he  has  given  methods  by  which  the  number  of  cents  covered  by 
any  interval  may  be  calculated  from  its  expression  as  a  vibration  ratio.  The 
following  table  gives  the  span,  in  cents,  of  intervals  covering  multiples  of  the 
tenth  of  a  vibration  up  to  thirty,  in  the  neighborhood  of  250  per  second:  — 

Tenths  of  a  Tenths  of  a  Tenths  of  a 

vibration       Cents  vibration  Cents  vibration          Cents 

11  11  7  21  14 

21  12  8  22  15 

32  13  9  23  16 

43  14  9  24  16 

53  15  10  25  17 

6            4  16  11  26  18 

75  17  12  27  18 

85  18  12  28  19 

96  19  13  29  20 

10            7  20  14  30  20 

Leaving  out  the  rate  23  as  doubtful,  the  phonographic  note  made,  at  the  be- 
ginning of  the  first  reproduction  of  Series  I,  one  beat  per  second  with  the  fork  ; 
and  toward  the  end,  1.6  beats.  The  variation  here  amounted  then  to  .6  of  a 
vibration,  and  according  to  the  above  table  covered  an  interval  of  4c,  or  the 
fiftieth  part  of  a  tone.  In  the  second  reproduction  it  was  .8  of  a  vibration,  or 
5c  ;  in  the  third,  1.1,  or  7c  ;  and  in  the  fourth,  .5,  or  3c.  The  lowest  rate  of 
beating  counted  at  any  time  during  the  ten  minutes  was  8,  the  highest  20,  in 
ten  seconds  ;  the  total  span  of  the  variation  noted  in  the  ten  minutes  being 
accordingly  1.2  vibration,  or  8c,  that  is,  one  twenty-fifth  of  a  tempered  tone. 
During  the  ten  second  spaces  the  beats  were  not  entirely  regular,  a  certain 
momentary  hurrying  and  slackening  of  them  being  occasionally  noticeable. 


36  HOPI  SONGS 

Still,  as  far  as  I  could  judge,  these  ephemeral  changes  did  not  represent  a  vari- 
ation extending  much  if  at  all  beyond  the  limits  expressed  in  the  above  figures. 
To  verify  these  results,  I  made  in  the  afternoon  of  the  same  day  two  more 
quadruple  series  of  reproductions,  the  conditions  of  the  experiment  remaining 
the  same,  excepting  that  now  I  counted  the  beats  only  in  alternate  ten  seconds 
of  the  reproductions.  The  intermediate  spaces  (during  which  I  had  occasion 
to  notice  no  marked  divergence  from  the  rates  counted)  I  employed  in  writing 
down  the  number  just  counted,  in  assuring  myself  that  what  I  was  counting 
was  really  the  beats  and  not  any  pulsations  of  sound  from  the  phonograph,  and 
in  tapping  the  fork  again.  In  Series  II  and  a  single  reproduction  observed 
after  it,  the  sequence  of  beats  was  the  following :  — 


SERIES  II 


20 

20 

19 

Single  (slower) 
reproduction 

19        12 

22 

22 

21 

19 

13 

22 

23 

22 

22 

15 

26 

24 

24 

23 

15 

26 

27 

23 

21 

18 

31 

28 

26 

26 

18 

30 

Individual  variations,       7c         5c         5c        5c         4c 

Total  variation  in  Series  II,  1.2  vibr.  =  8c.  These  results  are  almost  identi- 
cal with  those  of  Series  I. 

Before  the  fifth  reproduction  I  turned  the  regulator  screw  down,  slightly 
diminishing  the  electrical  supply.  The  slowing  of  the  beats  which  followed 
shows  that  the  phonograph  note  was  in  this  trial  above  the  fork  Ut3  in  pitch. 

This  second  attempt  to  watch  the  beats  closely  during  several  reproductions, 
made  under  conditions  more  favorable  to  the  correctness  of  the  observations 
than  I  had  before  devised,  revealed  the  same  quickening  from  the  beginning  to 
the  end  of  the  cylinder  that  was  noticeable  in  the  first  series.  The  other  form 
of  inconstancy,  an  occasional  hurrying  or  slowing  within  the  ten  second  spaces, 
was  also  again  remarked.  While  this  time  I  judged  it  to  represent  a  somewhat 
larger  range  of  momentary  variation  in  pitch  than  is  exhibited  in  the  above 
figures,  it  was  never  sufficient  to  interfere  with  the  easy  counting  of  the  beats.  In 
both  these  series,  especially  noticeable  is  the  close  return  of  the  phonograph 
to  one  pitch  each  time  the  diaphragm  was  brought  again  to  the  head  of  the 
cylinder.  The  four  initial  vibration  rates  in  1  differed  (leaving  out  23)  by 


THE  PHONOGRAPHIC  METHOD  37 

only  T2Q-,  in  II  by  -fa  of  a  vibration.  The  corresponding  interval,  about  one 
cent,  is  probably  as  small  a  pitch  difference  as  even  the  best  ears  under  the 
most  favorable  circumstances  could  detect.  Indeed,  in  this  part  of  the  scale 
no  one  has  yet  been  found  able  to  discriminate  tone  to  ^  of  a  vibration  (cf. 
Stumpf,  "  Tonpsychologie,"  ii,  p.  552). 

Series  III  gave,  under  the  same  conditions,  the  following  figures  for  alternate 
ten  second  spaces  during  each  of  four  continuous  reproductions :  — 
SERIES  III  11  11  9  10 

12  12  11  11 

14  14  14  13 

14  13  13  13 

14  15  13  14 

18  18  18  17 

Individual  variations,       5c  5c  6c  5c 

Total  variation  during  Series  III  .9  vibr.  =  6c.  After  the  series  was  com- 
pleted I  tried  the  effect  of  bearing  down  with  the  hand  on  the  regulator  screw 
without  turning  it.  The  result  was  a  relaxation  in  the  rapidity  of  the  beats, 
which  became  faster  again  when  the  pressure  was  relaxed.  Since  this  pres- 
sure on  the  screw  produced  minimally  the  same  effect  as  would  follow  in  greater 
degree  from  turning  down  the  screw,  this  slowing  of  the  beats  proved  again 
that  the  phonograph  note  was  above  that  of  the  fork. 

The  result  here  was  almost  exactly  the  same  as  before,  the  note  being  if 
anything  a  little  more  constant.  The  initial  pitches  differed  by  J,  the  final  by 
JQ  vibration.  As  in  I  and  II,  the  change  in  the  beats  is  a  gradual  quickening 
from  beginning  to  end  of  the  cylinder. 

These  three  tests  indicated  that,  while  under  favorable  circumstances  a  con- 
stant note  would  at  the  same  spot  in  the  cylinder  be  given  in  several  immediately 
successive  reproductions  at  the  same  pitch  to  within  an  almost  imperceptible 
fraction  of  a  tone  (in  general  not  more  than  ^JQ),  the  instrument  was  subject 
to  a  constant  aberration,  a  sharping  of  pitch,  as  the  reproduction  went  on  by  a 
much  larger  though  still  very  minute  interval,  not  more  than  about  ^  of  a  tone. 

During  all  of  the  tests  thus  far  described,  the  motor  of  the  phonograph  had 
been  supplied  with  electricity  from  a  single  storage  battery  (Battery  1)  of  150 
amperes.  On  taking  up  the  experiments  again  after  an  absence  of  ten  days, 
during  which  time  the  phonograph  and  the  battery  had  stood  idle,  I  obtained 
from  Cylinder  B  very  different  and  much  inferior  results  to  those  just  reported. 
Since  it  was  now  two  weeks  since  the  battery  had  been  charged,  I  concluded 


38 


HOPI  SONGS 


these  were  signs  of  its  exhaustion.  I  continued  the  tests,  nevertheless,  in  order 
to  ascertain  what  form  the  aberrations  of  the  phonograph  would  take  under 
these  conditions.  While  the  beats  still  kept  during  a  good  part  of  the  repro- 
ductions within  limits  approximately  those  just  determined,  there  were  con- 
stantly recurring  moments  of  much  wider  change  of  rapidity.  They  would 
suddenly  quicken  into  a  whirring  sound,  returning  after  a  few  seconds  to  ap- 
proximately the  former  rate.  On  listening  to  the  tone,  the  absolute  constancy 
of  the  earlier  trials  had  given  place  to  occasional  marked  unevenness  of  pitch. 
The  following  are  such  fragmentary  notes  of  the  course  of  the  beats  as  I  was 
able  to  take;  tests  united  by  a  brace  signifying  as  before  continuous  series 
of  reproductions :  — 


11 
13. 
13 
15 

18 

~5c 


8 

17 
13 
14 

18 

~5c 


Total  variation,  7c. 


10 

15 

18 

14 

13 

19 

14 

22 

15 

15 

14 

18 

16 

24 

20 

20 

22 

7c 

7c 

~3c 

Total  variation,  9c. 


8        13 

15 

9 

10       6(?; 

)   11        10 

12        14 

15 

9 

10          8 

12        17 

Whir   14 

22 

11 

13          9 

12        15 

18 

15 

13 

12        10 

Whir   18 

22        15 

17 

Whir 

Whir   13 

20        18 

16 
Whir 

18 

19 

3c        5c 


17 
17 

18 
14 


3c 


8 

12 
14 
15 
17 
17 

6c 


7 

7 

8 

8 

10 
12 

3c 


3 
5 
4 
9 

8 

3c 


25 
26 
30 
36 
20 
31 

7c 


5c 

>v 

5c 

Phonograph 

24 

16 

29 

30    38 

18 

17 

33 

20    37 

17 

21 

35 

25    36 

16 

22 

41 

31    35 

23 

22 

23    36 

31 

33    32 

Total  variation,  lOc. 


5c       lOc         8c         7c        4c 
Total  variation,  17c. 


THE  PHONOGRAPHIC   METHOD  39 

It  was  noticeable  that  while  a  tendency  to  raise  the  pitch  of  the  note  from 
first  to  last,  and  through  about  the  customary  interval  of  -fa  of  a .  tone,  could 
still  be  discerned  in  most  of  the  reproductions,  it  was  seldom  a  continu- 
ous sharping.  In  one  or  two  of  the  earlier  reproductions  the  sharping  was 
only  minimal,  and  in  one  or  two  of  the  later  the  change  became  a  minimal 
flatting. 

The  fresh  battery  (Battery  2)  which  I  obtained  in  place  of  the  one  that  now 
seemed  exhausted  I  was  again  prevented  from  using  during  a  month,  and  upon 
trial  at  the  end  of  that  time  it  gave  equally  unsatisfactory  results  with  Cylinder 
B,  the  note  varying  audibly.  Another  smaller  battery  (Battery  3)  of  75  am- 
peres, which  had  also  been  standing  idle  during  this  time,  gave  better  results, 
in  that  no  whirring  of  the  beats  occurred  with  it.  Two  quadruple  series  with 
it  gave  the  following  figures :  — 

16  24        19        20  24        21        19        19 
18        22        23        26  24        24        20        20 

17  20        30        28  38        28        25        26 

18  22        30        26  40        28        21        24 
24        40        32  38        31        20        27 

38        37        18        30 
Ic         3c      14c        8c  __        

lie       lie        4c         7c 
Total  variation,  16c  =  y1^  tone.        Total  variation,  15c  =  y1^  tone. 

Here,  again,  in  two  cases  the  sharping  from  first  to  last  is  lost. 

Three  days  thereafter  I  obtained  a  fresh  battery  (Battery  4)  of  150  amperes 
and  tested  Cylinder  B  again.  But  on  listening  to  its  note  I  found  that  the 
element  of  noise  in  it  had  become  markedly  predominant  over  the  element  of 
tone.  I  concluded  that  I  was  here  in  contact  with  another  of  the  limitations 
of  the  phonograph,  that  of  the  durability  of  a  cylinder.  The  trace  of  the  inscrib- 
ing needle  on  the  wax  was  evidently  beginning  to  wear  out.  While  in  the 
earlier  part  of  the  inscription  the  tone  was  still  strong,  perhaps  because  that 
part  of  the  cylinder  had  been  less  often  examined,  it  rapidly  weakened  into 
almost  pure  noise.  Conceiving  that  I  had  made  all  the  use  I  could  of  Cylinder 
B,  I  turned  my  attention  to  the  further  examination  of  the  limit  of  speed  of 
revolution  for  the  best  results. 

On  Cylinder  C  I  inscribed  the  harmonium  c'  at  150  revolutions.  Two  quad- 
ruple series  gave  the  following  figures :  — 


40  HOPI  SONGS 

Cylinder  C  (inscription  150  revs.,  reproduction  146) 


19  16  18  18  15  14  14  11 

23  28  25  20  21  23  16  19 
16  11  10  14  375  (0?) 
15  21  18  12  13  13  8    8 

24  24  23  25  25  19  15  16 
31  26  31  30  23  21  19  23 
13  6  8    9(?)  8  12  10  12 


lie       15c       16c       14c  15c       lie        9c       16c  (?) 

Total  variations,  170  =  ^  tone.  Total  variations,  17c. 

The  average  variation  in  these  reproductions  is  not  much  above  a  sixteenth  of 
a  tone  (12c).  This  is  only  about  half  the  amount  of  variation  to  which  I 
judged  (by  ear)  a  reproduction  at  158  revolutions  of  Cylinder  A  (taken  at 
about  140  revolutions)  to  be  subject,  in  studying  this  cylinder  at  the  beginning 
of  the  experiments. 

On  Cylinder  D  I  inscribed  the  harmonium  c'  at  a  very  high  rate,  218  revolu- 
tions. This  proved  an  unmanageable  speed,  owing  doubtless  to  mechanical 
conditions  connected  with  the  action  of  the  screw  regulating  the  supply  of 
electricity.  I  found  it  impossible  to  tune  the  phonograph  note  to  the  Ut3  fork 
in  such  a  way  as  to  give  beats  easy  to  count,  a  very  small  movement  of  the 
screw  producing  a  comparatively  large  change  in  the  pitch  of  the  phonograph 
note. 

I  then  took  a  like  inscription  on  Cylinder  E  at  184  revolutions.  This  proved 
manageable,  a  quadruple  series  of  reproductions  giving  the  following  figures  :  — 


25 

25 

25 

24 

20 

28 

25 

27 

24 

27 

25 

26 

21 

22 

28 

24?  (Whir) 

24 

20 

18 

21 

23 

24 

24 

3c  5c  7c  4c 

Total  variation  for  series  as  far  as  expressed  in  these  figures :  1  vibration  = 
7c  =  215  tone. 

In  this  cylinder  (reproduced  at  175  or  over)  there  were  two  spots  where  the 
beats  quickened  for  a  time  to  a  rate  much  above  these  figures ;  the  first  about 


THE  PHONOGRAPHIC  METHOD  41 

5"  from  the  beginning  and  lasting  perhaps  3",  the  second  about  halfway 
through  the  reproduction  and  lasting  perhaps  5".  The  first  time  I  estimated 
the  rate  of  beating  at  about  50  in  ten  seconds ;  the  second  time  they  became  a 
whir,  and  to  the  ear  the  note  was  flatted  perhaps  |  to  |  tone.  With  the  excep- 
tion of  these  two  irregularities  the  reproductions  were,  as  the  figures  show, 
extremely  correct,  their  average  variation  being  about  ^  of  a  tone.  But  at 
this  faster  rate  of  revolution  (record  184,  reproduction  175  +  )  the  progressive 
sharping  of  pitch  which  had  been  so  regular  a  phenomenon,  at  least  at  first  in 
Cylinder  B  (record  176,  reproduction  170  +  ),had  disappeared.  In  one  repro- 
duction the  phonograph  note  had  ended  (as  far  as  this  method  of  examination 
enables  us  to  judge)  on  precisely  the  same  pitch  on  which  it  had  begun,  and  in 
the  other  three  on  a  pitch  not  differing  by  more  than  2  J^  °^  a  tone. 

I  concluded  to  make  another  trial  with  Cylinder  B,  the  tone  of  which,  though 
almost  lost  to  the  ear,  might  still  be  strong  enough  to  make  beats  that  could  be 
counted.  The  point  of  interest  was  to  discover  whether,  with  a  comparatively 
fresh  battery,  the  sharping  persisted.  A  quadruple  reproduction  gave  the  fol- 
lowing figures,  the  beats  being  perfectly  distinct :  — 

SERIES  IV.     Cylinder  B  (inscription  176  revs.,  reproduction  170+  revs.) 


/ 

12 

15 

13 

16 

14 

15 

14 

15 

17 

18 

17 

18 

16 

17 

20 

19 

15 

20 

16 

16 

22 

22 

24 

23 

Individual  variations,    7c  5c  7c  5c 

Total  variation,  1.2  vibration  =  8c  =  ^  tone. 

The  variations  of  the  individual  reproductions  were  almost  identical  with 
those  of  Series  I-III,  viz.,  not  below  5c  nor  over  7c  (the  fourth  of  Series  I  was 
but  3c,  and  the  first  of  I  and  the  fifth  of  II  were  4c)  ;  and  the  total  variation 
of  the  whole  ten  minutes  was  for  the  third  time  8c  =  ^5  tone  (Series  III,  6c). 
Moreover,  in  each  reproduction  the  note  was  at  its  lowest  at  first  and  its  high- 
est at  last.  But  in  the  last  two  reproductions  there  was  a  decided  lapse  just 
before  the  end  in  the  continuity  of  the  rise.  Within  the  ten  second  spaces  the 
rate  of  the  beats  varied  slightly,  as  before,  from  these  figures,  now  hurrying 
and  now  slackening. 


42  HOPI  SONGS 

Taking  up  the  tests  again  three  days  later,  I  took  an  inscription  of  the  har- 
monium c'  on  Cylinder  F,  the  rate  of  revolution  being  made  192  per  minute 
for  comparison  with  E  at  184.  F  proved  practically  worthless,  the  tone  being 
irregular  throughout  and  changing  toward  the  end  through  a  whole  minor  third. 
From  this  whole  series  of  tests  of  rapidity  I  concluded  that  the  limits  beyond 
which  the  performance  of  the  instrument  would  begin  to  show  marked  deteri- 
oration might  be  set  at  155  and  180  revolutions  per  minute. 

Cylinder  B  (176,  170  +  )  had  then  been  taken,  and  was  used  in  my  tests  at 
very  nearly  the  most  favorable  possible  rapidity.  To  finish  these  tests  of  the 
phonograph  by  the  method  of  beats,  I  made  one  more  series  (quintuple)  with 
B,  obtaining  the  following  figures :  — 

SERIES  V.     Cylinder  B  (inscription  176,  reproduction  168  revs.) 


32 

31 

32 

24 

26 

32 

24 

32 

26 

32 

30 

28 

28 

28 

29 

32 

28 

28 

30 

29 

26 

32 

? 

? 

28 

4c  5c  3c  4c  4c 

Total  variation  of  entire  series,  1.2  vibrations  =  8c  =  fa  tone. 

The  individual  variations  averaged  even  less  than  any  yet  noted  ;  and  the 
total  variation  during  a  performance  of  about  twelve  minutes  was  exactly  what 
it  had  been  in  three  out  of  the  four  previous  series,  viz.,  8c,  or  the  25th  of  a 
tone.  The  ephemeral  hurrying  and  slowing  of  the  beats  somewhat  beyond  the 
limits  expressed  in  the  figures  also  reappeared  occasionally.  But  this  series  dif- 
fered from  the  preceding,  in  that  the  progressive  sharping  had  given  place  to 
an  irregular  variation.  At  the  same  time  I  noticed  that  in  the  last  quarter  of 
the  cylinder  the  element  of  tone  had  entirely  disappeared  in  a  scraping  noise. 
With  this  series  I  ended  my  tests  of  the  phonograph. 

In  the  earlier  reproductions  of  Cylinder  B,  if  we  take  /x  as  the  initial  tone, 
we  have  A£  increasing  to  a  maximum  of  fa  of  a  tone  as  we  take  v  farther  along 
in  the  reproduction.  This  suggests  looking  for  conditions  affecting  the  rate 
of  the  instrument,  which  progressively  change  from  beginning  to  end  of  a 
cylinder,  and  which,  if  present  in  both  inscription  and  reproduction,  are  more 
effective  in  the  one  case  than  in  the  other.  The  wax  cylinder  which  is  used 
in  the  phonograph  is  carried  on  one  end  of  a  shaft  of  about  two  and  one 
half  times  its  length.  At  the  beginning  of  an  inscription  the  needle  is  approx- 


THE  PHONOGRAPHIC  METHOD  43 

imately  equidistant  from  the  two  bearings  of  the  shaft,  and  whatever  addition 
to  the  friction  at  these  points  is  due  to  it  may  be  supposed  equally  distributed 
between  them.  At  the  close  of  an  inscription  the  needle  is  very  near,  almost 
over  the  right-hand  bearing,  and  whatever  friction  it  causes  may  be  conceived 
as  mainly  concentrated  at  this  point.  Let  it  be  admitted  that  this  gradually 
increasing  disparity  between  the  amount  of  friction  at  the  two  bearings  would 
cause  a  gradual  slowing  of  the  cylinder  as  the  needle  went  on  in  its  course;  this 
supposed  change  in  conditions  of  friction,  and  consequently  this  slowing,  would 
take  place  both  in  inscription  and  reproduction :  but  if  it  were  any  less  in 
amount  in  the  latter  case,  the  note  would  tend  to  rise  in  pitch  as  the  reproduc- 
tion went  on.  For  a  source  of  constant  pitch  imparts  to  the  phonograph  dia- 
phragm equal  numbers  of  impulses  in  equal  times;  if  now  the  cylinder  takes  a 
longer  time  to  move  through  an  equal  arc,  as  the  needle  advances  over  it  the 
indentations  it  makes  will  be  closer  together  in  later  than  in  earlier  positions 
of  its  path.  In  the  reproduction,  on  the  supposition  that  the  change  of  place 
of  the  needle  caused  no  slowing  at  all,  —  that  is,  that  a  given  arc  of  the  cylin- 
der passed  under  it  in  exactly  the  same  time  wherever  it  was,  —  since  later  in- 
dentations are  closer  together  than  earlier  ones,  the  impulses  they  communicate 
to  the  diaphragm  would  be  more  and  more  rapid  as  the  reproduction  advanced. 
What  went  in  a  constant  tone  would  emerge  a  gradually  rising  one.  But  a 
similar  effect  would  be  produced  even  supposing  the  reproducing  needle  re- 
tarded the  cylinder  somewhat,  so  long  as  this  retardation  were  less  in  amount 
than  that  of  record,  the  sharping  being  less  conspicuous  as  the  friction  of  the 
reproducing  needle  were  greater.  Now  the  inscribing  needle  is  a  plough  (that 
is,  cuts  a  furrow  through  the  wax)  and  the  reproducing  needle  is  a  harrow 
(that  is,  is  dragged  through  this  furrow),  and  the  amount  of  resistance  made 
by  the  former  to  the  turning  of  the  cylinder  must  be  much  greater  than  that 
made  by  the  latter.  Hence  we  may  assume  that  the  amount  of  slowing  which 
takes  place  as  the  needle  advances  on  the  cylinder  is  much  greater  in  inscrip- 
tion than  in  reproduction.  It  is  the  difference,  we  may  therefore  conclude,  be- 
tween these  two  retardations  that  appears  as  the  minute  upward  movement 
several  times  observed  in  the  note  of  Cylinder  B. 

The  fact  that  this  progressive  change  disappeared  in  the  last  trial  of  Cylin- 
der B  is  perhaps  not  incompatible  with  this  hypothesis  of  its  origin.  For  we 
can  interpret  the  preponderance  of  noise  in  this  reproduction  as  a  sign  of  an 
increase  of  friction  between  the  reproducing  needle  and  the  cylinder.  The 
needle  then  possessed  a  greater  power  than  at  first  to  retard  the  movement  of 
the  cylinder ;  and,  as  we  have  seen,  if  it  possesses  the  same  as  that  of  the  needle 


44  EOPI  SONGS 

of  inscription,  the  note  should  become  entirely  constant.  Nor  is  the  fact  that 
the  sharping  several  times  disappeared  in  Cylinder  E  (inscription  rate  184, 
reproduction  rate  about  175)  irreconcilable  with  the  hypothesis ;  for  with  an 
increased  momentum  the  mechanism  may  be  supposed  to  grow  less  sensitive  to 
the  delicate  changes  in  conditions  of  friction  involved  in  the  movement  of  the 
needles. 

As  to  the  hurrying  and  slowing  of  the  beats  within  the  ten  second  spaces,  it 
does  not  seem  improbable  that  these  changes  may  have  been  mainly  due  to 
very  small  variations  in  the  harmonium  note  which  was  the  basis  of  the  test, 
reflecting  the  intermittent  character  of  the  supply  of  air  from  the  bellows  of 
the  instrument. 

As  the  result  of  this  inquiry  by  the  method  of  beats  into  the  distor- 
tion of  an  interval  sequence  in  phonographic  reproduction,  we  reach 
the  following  conclusions.  With  a  storage  battery  of  the  kind  now 
commonly  used  with  the  instrument,  which  has  (a)  not  been  too  long 
used  nor  too  long  idle ;  in  the  reproduction  (6)  at  from  150  to  180 
revolutions  per  minute  of  (c)  a  fresh  inscription  made  (d)  within  the 
same  limits  of  speed,  the  phonographic  distortion  of  interval,  AJ,  will 
in  general,  as  the  component  tones  are  taken  farther  apart  in  the  in- 
scribed sequence,  gradually  increase  from  an  inappreciable  amount  to 
about  5c,  or  the  fortieth  part  of  a  tone,  this  aberration  taking  the  form 
of  a  sharping  or  heightening  of  the  later  tone.  Further,  in  immedi- 
ately successive  reproductions  of  an  inscribed  music,  corresponding 
tones  will  be  apt  to  be  given  at  least  four  or  five  times  to  within  a 
smaller  interval  still,  often  the  hundredth  part  of  a  tone  or  less ;  the 
total  range  through  which  the  performances  shift  in  pitch  meanwhile 
not  exceeding  in  general  the  twenty-fifth  part  of  a  tone. 

As  a  cylinder  is  more  used,  the  aberration,  A£,  within  individual 
performances  ceases  to  be  progressive  without  increasing  in  amount, 
this  truly  wonderful  fidelity  of  reproduction  continuing  as  long  as  the 
inscription  is  audible  at  all. 

At  rates  either  in  inscription  or  reproduction  beyond  these  limits  the 
aberration  will  be  greater,  increasing  as  they  are  farther  transcended. 
The  aberration  will  also  in  general  be  greater,  and  sometimes  markedly 


THE  PHONOGRAPHIC  METHOD  45 

so  with  batteries  which  have  been  charged  a  number  o£  days,  even  when 
little  used.  Thus  with  Battery  1,  after  disuse  of  ten  days,  the  note 
of  Cylinder  B  was  given  in  general  with  about  the  customary  height- 
ening of  one  fortieth  of  a  tone,  excepting  for  one  or  two  marked  devia- 
tions in  pitch,  generally  ephemeral  in  each  reproduction.  With  Battery 
2,  which  was  not  used  until  a  month  after  charging,  the  reproduction 
of  B  varied  continuously  through  fractions  of  a  tone  large  enough  to 
be  audible.  With  Battery  3,  also  unused  until  a  month  after  charg- 
ing, while  the  variation  could  not  in  general  be  detected  by  the  ear,  it 
was  sometimes  as  much  as  a  quarter  of  a  tone,  in  other  reproductions 
being  almost  zero.  Battery  4  gave  with  Cylinder  B  a  note  constant  to 
within  the  customary  fortieth  of  a  tone,  both  when  first  used  and  after 
an  interim  of  three  days. 

As  an  apparatus  for  the  reproduction  of  textures  of  interval,  the 
phonograph  may  fairly  be  called  an  instrument  of  precision.  The  tests 
indicate  that  under  proper  conditions,  as  notes  are  taken  farther  apart 
in  an  inscribed  sequence,  the  distortion  of  the  interval  they  form  gradu- 
ally increases  from  zero  to  a  maximum  of  about  a  fortieth  of  a  tone, 
which  is  generally  reached  only  when  they  approach  the  extremes  of  a 
complete  inscription.  If,  as  may  plausibly  be  claimed,  such  a  distor- 
tion would  always  be  either  too  small  or  too  long  in  emerging  to  be 
recognized  even  by  the  ears  of  a  Mozart,  the  phonograph  is  a  practi- 
cally perfect  means  of  reproducing  the  major  elements  of  musical  form. 


3  Behaviorof  ^ke  application  of  these  data  to  our  ultimate  inquiry, 
the  phonograph  viz.,  whether  these  notations  record  observations  of  the 
cord  and  study  same  set  of  facts  of  interval  as  were  presented  in  the  origi- 
nal performances,  involves  the  question  as  to  the  constancy 
of  rotation  of  the  phonograph  cylinder  during  both  the  inscription 
and  the  repeated  reproduction  of  this  music. 

The  same  phonograph  was  used  in  both  these  processes.  Dr.  Fewkes 
took  with  him  from  Kansas  City,  and  employed  at  the  Pueblo  for  taking 
all  these  songs,  a  single  storage  battery  of  150  amperes.  It  may  have 
been  in  use  in  all  three  or  four  hours,  a  fifth  or  sixth  part  of  the  time 


46  HOPI  SONGS 

during  which  such  a  battery  would  in  general  be  available ;  but  this  was  a 
number  of  days  after  it  had  been  charged.  During  the  above  tests  the 
reproduction  by  stale  batteries  of  an  inscription  (Cylinder  B),  giving 
with  fresh  batteries  a  note  of  the  standard  constancy,  in  one  case  (Bat- 
tery 4,  after  considerable  use  and  three  days'  idleness)  reached  the 
standard  excellence ;  in  another  case  (Battery  3,  charged  a  month) 
either  reached  it  or  approximated  (T\  tone)  to  it ;  in  a  third  case  (Bat- 
tery 1,  after  much  use  and  ten  days'  idleness)  approximated  to  the 
standard,  excepting  for  one  or  two  marked  deviations  of  pitch  in  each 
reproduction ;  and  in  a  fourth  case  (Battery  2,  charged  a  month)  gave 
a  note  varying  continuously  in  long  waves  covering  minute  fractions  of 
a  tone.  Judging  from  these  data,  although  the  revolution  of  the  cylin- 
der during  the  performances  at  the  Pueblo  may  possibly  have  reached 
the  standard  constancy,  more  probably  it  exhibited  a  greater  varia- 
tion, either  a  marked  one,  during  one  or  two  short  passages  only  of 
inscriptions,  or  a  gradual  and  inconsiderable  one  throughout  entire 
records. 

The  time  required  for  noting  these  melodies  by  the  method  I  em- 
ployed (comparison  of  each  note  with  near  semitones  of  the  harmonium) 
I  found  in  general  about  a  hundred-fold  that  taken  up  by  their  repro- 
duction at  approximately  the  same  pitch.  Nevertheless,  so  far  as  I  was 
able  to  judge,  the  rate  of  the  instrument  either  remained  or  was  kept 
by  adjustment  of  the  electrical  supply  constant  to  within  a  ratio  equiv- 
alent to  an  interval  of  about  a  tenth  of  a  tone  during  the  whole  exam- 
ination of  each  song;  and  during  that  of  the  individual  phrases  of 
the  melodies  either  exhibited  no  change  or  a  change  through  a  much 
smaller  ratio.  It  is  to  be  noted  that  the  sharping  shown  by  the  method 
of  beats  to  take  place  in  the  course  of  an  individual  reproduction  of  a 
fresh  record  involves  and,  as  it  seems  likely,  is  due  to  the  transfer  of 
.the  needle  from  one  end  of  the  cylinder  to  the  other.  We  cannot 
therefore  argue  from  this  to  a  variation  of  a  similar  amount  in  every 
two  or  three  minutes  of  a  reproduction  under  examination,  for  during 
this  time  the  needle  has  changed  its  position  but  little. 


THE  PHONOGRAPHIC  METHOD  47 

The  notes  I  made  as  to  the  changes  of  rate  of  the  phonograph  during  the 
work  of  examining  these  songs  are  in  detail  as  follows :  — 

BATTERY   5    (150    AMPERES) 

July  25.  I  began  the  notation  of  the  songs,  expecting  to  assure  myself  of 
the  constancy  of  the  phonograph  by  the  method  I  had  employed  in  studying 
the  Chinese  melodies  before  mentioned  ;  viz.,  by  returning  every  few  minutes 
to  some  conspicuous  note  at  the  beginning  of  the  record,  to  see  whether  I 
should  be  tempted  to  give  it  a  different  notation  from  that  already  chosen. 
I  carried  out  this  plan  without  making  any  notes  of  the  results  during  this 
day's  work,  which  consisted  in  the  notation  of  Snake  Songs  Nos.  1  and  2. 

July  26.  I  wrote  down  Snake  Song  No.  3,  and  made  the  following  note  of 
the  running  of  the  instrument.  "  To  write  this  out  took  over  an  hour,  and  yet 
in  going  back  to  the  initial  note  I  could  detect  no  change  from  the  written 
pitch." 

The  ratio  of  the  numbers  of  revolutions  made  by  the  cylinder  in  a  given 
time,  in  two  reproductions  of  tone  from  the  same  inscription,  is  that  of  the 
vibration  numbers  of  the  two  tones  produced.  We  may  express  this  by  saying 
that  the  ratio  of  any  two  numbers  of  revolutions  per  minute,  executed  by  the 
cylinder  at  different  times,  gives  the  interval  by  which  the  pitch  of  the  phono- 
graph differs  in  the  two  cases. 

The  counting  of  the  revolutions  of  the  cylinder  is  conveniently  effected 
by  holding  the  finger  lightly  against  a  screw-head  that  projects  from  about 
the  middle  of  the  axis.  The  number  of  touches  received  in  this  way,  during 
the  time  that  elapses  before  the  second  hand  of  a  watch  passes  again  beyond  the 
spot  in  its  dial  where  we  count  the  first  one,  exceeds  by  one  the  number  of  com- 
plete revolutions  made  by  the  cylinder  in  a  minute.  Although  the  point  from 
which  I  began  to  count  was  always  one  of  the  ten  second  marks  on  the  dial,  I 
took  the  precaution  to  wait  until  it  seemed  to  me  that  a  touch  was  closely  syn- 
chronous with  the  tick  made  by  the  watch  (marking  each  .2")  as  it  crossed 
such  a  mark.  I  found  myself  in  practice  estimating  the  fraction  of  a  revolu- 
tion often  seeming  to  take  place  between  the  last  touch  and  the  tick  of  the 
watch  that  next  took  the  hand  over  the  initial  ten  second  mark,  either  as  a 
half  revolution  (e.  g.  170.5)  or  as  less  than  a  whole  revolution  (e.g.  171  —  )  or 
as  not  quite  a  half  (e.  g.  170  +  ).  Even  with  these  efforts  at  exactness,  the 
probable  error  of  such  estimates  of  the  speed  of  the  instrument  might  easily  be 
half  a  revolution  or  more.  Assuming  it  at  half  a  revolution,  the  error  may 
be  in  each  case  either  by  excess  or  by  default.  But  it  is  only  when  it  happens 


48  HOPI  SONGS 

to  be  by  default  for  the  larger  number,  and  by  excess  for  the  smaller,  that  it 
will  lead  to  any  material  underestimate  (by  one  revolution)  of  the  interval  by 
which  the  phonograph  has  varied.  In  general,  we  may  assume  the  true  inter- 
val of  the  change  will  little  if  at  all  exceed  the  ratio  found  by  this  methoct. 

July  28.  In  studying  Snake  Song  No.  4  this  morning  I  obtained  a  speed  of 
delivery  about  the  same  as  that  of  Song  3  by  raising  the  regulator  screw 
until  the  phonograph  made  168  revolutions.  I  note,  "  When  nearly  through 
I  went  back  and  found  the  initial  note  of  the  song  still  as  written.  On  coming 
back  to  work  in  the  afternoon  I  found  the  rate  very  close  to  169.  This  sharp- 

169 
ing  through  about  the  interval          or  lOc  (  =  g\j  tone)  I  noted  still  left  the 


initial  note  of  the  piece  as  written,  nearer  c  than  c*." 

July  29,  5.10  P.  M.  The  screw  having  remained  unchanged  since  the  day 
before,  the  instrument  made  168  revolutions.  I  thereupon  wrote  down  Snake 
Song  No.  6. 

July  30,  11  A.  M.  The  screw  having  remained  untouched,  the  instrument 
began  at  167  revolutions.  To  prove  my  work  on  Song  No.  6  I  then  adjusted 
the  screw  so  that  the  instrument  made  168  revolutions,  and  found  only  one 
pianissimo  pitch  toward  the  end  and  two  rests  that  needed  a  slightly  changed 
notation.  I  then  wrote  down  Song  No.  8  at  167  revolutions. 

July  31,  11  A.  M.  On  taking  up  this  song  again  this  morning  to  prove  my 
work  of  yesterday,  I  found  the  instrument  running  at  167.  At  11.53  the  rate 
was  166  +  .  Another  count  immediately  afterward  made  it  167.  At  12.42, 
still  167.  In  the  afternoon  I  wrote  down  Malo-katcina  by  Kano  at  this  rate. 

August  2,  3.45  P.  M.  The  screw  having  remained  untouched,  I  found  the 
rate  167  +  ;  in  a  second  count,  167.  At  this  rate  I  noted  Malo-katcina  by 
Masi-umtiwa. 

August  3,  12.15  P.  M.  After  cleaning  the  instrument  without  moving  the 
screw,  the  rate  was  167  4-.  A  second  count  gave  167+  again;  and  at  this  rate 
I  began  to  note  the  Song  Coyohim-katcina.  At  the  end  of  an  hour  the  rate 
was  168.  On  returning  to  work  at  4  p.  M.  the  rate  was  169,  and  the  change 
had,  I  found,  perceptibly  altered  the  pitch  of  the  song,  the  opening  note  of 
which  I  should  have  now  written  g+  instead  of  g.  In  continuing  the  work  I 
reduced  the  rate  to  167  by  an  adjustment  of  the  screw.  At  the  end  of  two 
hours  (5.55  P.  M.)  I  found  it  again  169,  and  again  reduced  it. 

August  4,  11.45  A.  M.  The  instrument  began  at  166,  but  conceiving  that 
its  variation  of  the  day  before,  though  slight,  might  indicate  that  Battery  5 
was  becoming  exhausted,  I  sent  for  another. 


THE  PHONOGRAPHIC  METHOD  49 

BATTERY   6    (150   AMPERES) 

August  5,  9.45  A.  M.  I  adjusted  the  instrument  to  167  revolutions,  and  a 
few  minutes  later  on  another  count  found  the  rate  the  same.  During  the  no- 
tation of  Shiashtasha,  Singer  No.  1,  the  rate  rose  in  perhaps  half  an  hour  to 
169.  I  then  set  it  at  168,  and  taking  the  rate  at  the  end  of  each  staff  of  the 
notation  thereafter,  no  change  whatever  from  this  figure  revealed  itself. 

I  concluded  thenceforth  to  adopt  this  latter  method  of  keeping  track  of 
the  variations  of  the  phonograph  ;  viz.,  to  examine  and  record  its  rate  at  the 
end  of  each  staff  of  the  notation.  This  amounted  to  taking  note  of  it  about 
every  twelve  or  fifteen  minutes,  a  period  during  which  the  experiments 
with  the  tuning-fork  had  indicated  that  under  normal  conditions  the  vari- 
ation would  not  be  apt  to  amount  to  more  than  about  one  twenty-fifth  of  a 
tone.  I  carried  out  this  plan  for  all  the  rest  of  the  songs,  and  have  written 
the  rates  found  in  the  notations  at  the  points  where  they  were  taken.  In  the 
account  which  follows  they  are  given  diagrammatically.  Each  horizontal  line 
signifies  one  revolution  per  minute,  the  equivalent  (at  these  rates)  of  a  twen- 
tieth of  a  tone.  The  spaces  between  the  vertical  lines  signify  periods  generally 
something  less  than  fifteen  minutes. 

SHIASHTASHA,  SINGER  No.  1 

168 


»   M   I   Ml 


On  returning  to  work  at  4.50  p.  M.  the  rate  was  at  first  166 ;  a  few  minutes 
later,  167.  At  this  rate  I  began  the  notation  of  Shiashtasha,  Singer  No.  2, 
but  was  unable  to  complete  it  that  day. 

August  6,  10.25  A.  M.  The  instrument  began  at  177  revolutions.  To 
complete  the  notation  of  Shiashtasha,  Singer  No.  2,  I  set  it  at  167  and  from 
this  time  until  the  work  was  finished,  a  period  of  two  hours  and  a  half,  it  ran 
continuously.  The  rates  of  the  complete  notation  were  as  follows :  — 

SHIASHTASHA,  SINGER  No.  2 

5  P.  M.,  August  5  10.30  A.  M.,  August  6  1.10  P.  M. 

166 


August  7, 10.30  A.  M.  The  instrument  began  at  165,  and  of  six  counts  made 
during  the  hour  and  a  half  required  for  noting  Anoshkaey  sung  by  Lesma  but 
one  (165  +  )  varied  at  all  from  this  figure. 


50 

ANOSHKAEY  BY  LESMA 


HOPI  SONGS 


165 


August  8,  10.30  A.  M.  After  cleaning  the  instrument  it  still  made  165 
revolutions.  At  this  rate  I  began  Anoshkaey  sung  by  Polakka,  the  instru- 
ment running  continuously  from  10.30  to  1.30  and  again  a  short  time  in  the 
afternoon  to  finish  the  song. 

ANOSHKAEY  BY  POLAKKA 

10.30  A.  M. 


1.30  P.  M. 


3.35  P.  M. 


165 


August  9,  10.07  A.  M.  The  instrument  began  at  163.  I  set  it  at  166 ; 
three  minutes  later  it  was  167;  fifteen  minutes  thereafter  168.  I  thereupon 
began  the  notation  of  Maihai-katcina,  finishing  it  in  the  afternoon. 

MAIHAI-KATCINA 

10.30  A.  M.  1.20  p.  M.  3.10  p.  M. 


168 


m 


August  10,  10.15  A.  M.  This  morning  Battery  6  did  not  give  a  strong 
enough  current  to  start  the  instrument.  When  set  running  by  a  push  with  the 
hand  the  revolutions  were  166.  I  thereupon  attached  another  battery  I  had 
kept  on  hand  for  such  contingencies. 

BATTERY    7    (75    AMPERES) 

The  phonograph  began  at  167  revolutions,  the  screw  having  been  untouched. 
During  the  notation  of  Anonymous  I  the  rates  were  as  follows :  — 

ANONYMOUS  I 


10.30  A.  M. 


1.10  P.  M. 


167 


August  11,  10.30  A.  M.     Attached  a  fresh  battery  received  in  place  of  6. 

BATTERY   8    (150   AMPERES) 

The  screw  being  untouched,  the  rate  was  166.    The  rates  during  the  notation 
of  Jakwaina  were  as  follows :  — 


THE  PHONOGRAPHIC  METHOD 


51 


J 

• 

AK\ 

L0.30 

7AINA 

A.  M. 

.  4    i   ' 

1  — 

<- 

>    T    • 

H 

i 

P.  M. 

2.10 

JE  ; 

P.  M. 

F  ' 

'  ^  ' 

T  T 

— 

—  1— 

E 

—\— 

August  12,  10.35  A.  M.     After  cleaning  the  phonograph  the  rate  was  167. 
I  then  noted  Haikaya,  and  in  the  afternoon  Anonymous  II. 

HAIKAYA 


11.05  A.  M. 


12.55  p.  M. 


167 


ANONYMOUS  II 


3.30  P.  M. 


5.30  p.  M. 


166 


MMM 


Up  to  this  point  in  the  notations  the  constancy  of  running  of  the  phonograph 
had  in  general  been  little  short  of  marvelous.  Owing  to  a  slight  accident  to 
the  instrument,  which  I  did  not  at  once  discover,  the  notation  of  the  remaining 
two  songs  within  the  limits  of  variation  which  I  had  set  myself  (one  tenth 
tone)  was  accomplished  with  difficulty.1  The  details  of  rate  are  as  follows, 
the  stars  in  Sumyacoli  referring  to  points  so  designated  in  the  notations. 

SUMYACOLI 


August  13,  Battery  8 
10  A.  M. 


12.30  p.  M. 

*  * 


August  15,  Battery  10 
3.25  p.  M.         4.50  P.  M. 


166 


MANA 


Taken  again  with 
10  on  August  15 

11.35  A.  M. 


3.30  P.  M.       (+) 


166 


The  notation  of  the  songs  was  now  complete,  but  I  used  the  phonograph 
during  three  or  four  more  days  in  a  revision  of  a  few  doubtful  points,  and  in 
making  versions  by  ear  of  some  of  the  songs  I  had  not  yet  listened  to  for  this 


1  An  inspector  from  the  phonograph 
company  found  "  top  governor  brush  with 
one  wire  above  the  others,  not  allowing 
the  governor  brush  and  the  governor  flange 


to  make  a  good  contact,  which  caused  an 
irregularity  in  the  speed."  This  had  come 
about  in  cleaning  the  phonograph. 


52  HOPI  SONGS 

purpose.  During  this  time  I  used  three  fresh  batteries,  the  rate  of  the  instru- 
ment being  somewhat  more  constant  than  it  had  been  during  the  notation  of 
Sumyacoli  and  Mana. 

To  sum  up :  as  to  the  constancy  of  the  phonograph  during  the  in- 
scription of  these  melodies  in  Arizona,  and  during  the  subsequent  use 
of  these  inscriptions  for  notation,  the  following  conclusions  may  be 
drawn  from  the  data  gathered  :  — 

In  the  inscriptions:  possibly  the  standard  constancy,  but  more  prob- 
ably either  a  continuous  variation  through  ratios  equivalent  to  audible 
fractions  of  a  tone  or  an  occasional  ephemeral  and  marked  aberration. 

In  the  reproductions :  no  departure  from  constancy  during  any  song 
equivalent  to  an  interval  of  much  more  than  one  tenth  of  a  tone,  this 
change  being  in  all  cases  spread  over  a  number  of  notes,  and  gen- 
erally over  the  greater  part  of  the  song. 

From  these  conclusions  the  following  inferences  may  be  drawn  as  to 
the  faithfulness  to  their  original  intervals  of  the  reproductions  from 
which  these  notations  have  been  made:  (a)  distant  segments  of  the  re- 
produced performances  may  not  infrequently  have  been  displaced  one 
upon  another  through  an  interval  large  enough  to  be  reflected  in  a 
notation  according  to  the  method  hereafter  to  be  described ;  (6)  within 
individual  periods  of  the  songs  the  distortion  has  probably  in  general 
been  insufficient  to  affect  the  notations,  although  some  may  have  con- 
tained one  or  two  spots  of  more  or  less  marked  aberration.  That  is, 
for  the  most  part,  the  notations  of  separate  periods  of  the  performances 
do  not  differ  from  what  they  would  have  been  were  the  phonograph  an 
absolutely  perfect  instrument. 

Returning  finally  to  the  distinction  touched  upon  in  section  1,  it 
may  be  claimed  that  notations  of  primitive  performances  by  the  present 
method  are  for  the  first  time  records  of  their  facts  of  form,  a  little,  and 
yet  but  very  little,  blurred  and  distorted  by  the  medium  through 
which  they  become  accessible  to  study. 


THE  PHONOGRAPHIC  METHOD  53 

Like  the  records  of  Zuni  music,  these  which  follow  are 

4.  Method  and 

symbolism  of  the  the  result  of  an  attempt  to  judge  the  tones  delivered  by  the 
phonograph  by  means  of  the  sense  for  difference  of  pitch 
alone,  without  aid  from  the  sense  of  interval.  My  aim  has  been  to 
make  a  separate  estimate  of  the  pitch  of  each  individual  note  of  each 
performance,  through  its  comparison  with  one  or  more  of  the  series  of 
tones  at  intervals  of  a  tempered  semitone,  or  100  cents,  given  in  the 
notes  of  an  ordinary  harmonium.  This  comparison  was  made,  as  before, 
by  silencing  the  phonograph  the  moment  the  note  to  be  judged  had 
been  reached,  and  immediately  thereafter  sounding  a  harmonium  note. 
During  the  work  of  writing  down  the  Zuni  melodies,  this  comparison 
always  had  one  or  other  of  two  results :  either  there  was  one  harmonium 
note  which  at  once  impressed  me  as  the  nearest,  or  what  struck  me  was 
the  divergence  of  the  note  of  the  song  from  any  harmonium  note,  even 
the  one  which  finally  appeared  nearer  than  others.  The  lines  and  spaces 
of  the  common  musical  staff  used  with  one  accidental  afforded  in  all 
cases  a  sign  for  the  nearest  harmonium  semitone,  a  stroke  being  written 
above  this  when  the  heard  note  was  markedly  sharper,  and  below  it 
when  markedly  flatter. 

The  present  notations  were  begun  with  much  more  confidence  in  the 
phonograph,  and  after  much  more  practice  in  the  delicate  comparisons 
of  pitch  involved  in  their  method.  Neverthless,  the  voice  of  the  singer 
of  the  snake  chants  being  somewhat  harsh  and  obscure,  and  the  phono- 
graph not  having  yet  shown  its  great  constancy  through  long  periods, 
it  did  not  occur  to  me  in  the  first  eight  songs  of  the  collection  to 
attempt  anything  more  than  the  dichotomy  of  the  comparisons  made 
also  in  writing  the  Zuni  melodies.  But  in  beginning  Coyohim-katcina, 
which  was  sung  in  a  bold  and  clear  voice,  I  decided  to  attempt  another 
distinction,  by  dividing  the  notes  noticeably  nearest  to  some  one  har- 
monium semitone  into  those  immediately  recognizable  as  different  there- 
from and  those  which  might  be  identified  therewith.  Later  I  found 
myself  in  practice  dividing  the  latter  class  into  those  in  satisfactory 
and  those  in  unsatisfactory  unison  with  semitones  of  the  harmonium. 
The  symbolism  used  in  expressing  these  distinctions  was  a  modification 


54  HOPI  SONGS 

of  that  employed  in  the  Zufii  melodies,  its  application  in  the  four 
cases  of  comparison  being  as  follows :  — 

1.  Whenever  the  reproduction  was  accepted  without  difficulty  by  the 
ear  as  a  unison  with  one  of  the  harmonium  semitones,  the  note  corre- 
sponding to  the  latter  was  written  alone. 

2.  The  sign  ( - )  was  used  whenever  the  reproduction  could  by  an 
effort,  yet  not  without  effort,  be  regarded  as  in  unison  with  one  of  the 
harmonium  semitones.     In  these  instances  I  found  it  possible  to  make 
either  one  sound  higher  by  simply  choosing  that  it  should.     The  sign 
was  written  under  or  over  the  note  corresponding  to  the  harmonium 
semitone  in  question,  according  as  a  fresh  comparison  without  predeter- 
mined result  after  a  few  moments'  rest  made  the  reproduction  above  or 
below  it. 

3.  The  sign  —  was  used  whenever  it  was  impossible  either  to  regard 
the   reproduction  as  a  unison  with  any  harmonium    semitone  or  to 
regard  it  as  nearest  to  any  but  one.     The  sign  was  written  under  or 
over  the  note  corresponding  to  the  nearest  semitone,  according  as  the 
reproduction  sounded  below  or  above  this. 

4.  The  sign  =  was  used  whenever  there  was  doubt  as  to  which  of  two 
adjacent  harmonium  semitones  was  the  nearest  to  the  reproduction.    In 
these  instances  it  proved  possible  to  make  either  one  sound  nearer  by 
simply  choosing  that  it  should.     The  sign  was  written  with  the  note 
corresponding  to  that  of  the  pair  on  the  harmonium  to  which  a  fresh 
double  comparison,  after  a  few  moments,  without  predetermined  result, 
made  the  reproduction  seem  nearer,  and  over  or  under  it  according  as 
the  reproduction  sounded  above  or  below  this. 

The  suggestion  for  such  a  symbolism  is  to  be  found  in  the  use  by 
Hauptmann  and  Helmholtz  of  a  bar  under  or  over  the  letter  for  a  cer- 
tain step  in  the  diatonic  scale,  to  indicate  divergence  from  this  step  in 
the  minute  interval  of  the  comma.  Applied  in  notations  of  music,  the 
device  may  be  said  to  add  others  to  the  list  of  accidentals,  which  make 
of  our  European  notation  a  symbolism  partly  natural  and  partly  con- 
ventional. While  the  lines  and  spaces  of  the  common  musical  staff 
represent  up  and  down  in  pitch  by  higher  and  lower  on  the  written 


THE  PHONOGRAPHIC  METHOD  55 

page,  accidentals  involve  their  representation  by  symbols  on  a  level. 
Certainly  in  part,  and  not  improbably  as  a  whole,  the  above  described 
development  of  the  Zuni  symbolism  is  an  extension  of  this  conventional 
element  in  notation.  Using  the  sign  <  to  indicate  "  lower  than,"  the 
following  judgments  as  to  higher  and  lower  are  a  part  of  the  results 
of  the  comparisons  above  named  :  — 

a*<b<b<b<c. 
It  appears  very  probable  from  the  same  results  that 

a*  <  b  <  b     and     b  <  b  <  c, 

and  as  far  as  the  comparisons  make  any  inferences  possible  about  (  —  ) 
and  the  relation  of  _  to  ~  they  are  that 


b  <(b  <  b  <  b  <  b     and     a*  <  b. 
Taken  altogether  these  judgments  are  as  follows  :  — 


Thus  the  judgments  of  higher  and  lower  contained  in  and  inferrible 
from  the  special  symbolism  which  resulted  from  rny  endeavor  to  give 
the  comparison  of  this  music  with  the  harmonium  all  reasonable  exact- 
ness involves  the  recognition  of  seven  distinctions  of  pitch  to  the 
semitone. 

The  notations  made  on  this  system  of  signs  appeared  upon  a  review 
of  them  impracticably  complicated;  and  it  seemed  wiser  to  transcribe 
them  upon  another  record  which,  while  using,  as  the  first  had  done,  the 
customary  notes  and  the  customary  signs  of  time,  should  dispense 
altogether  with  the  conventional  element  commonly  represented  by 
accidentals,  and  present  every  distinction  of  above  and  below  in  pitch 
by  higher  and  lower  on  the  written  page.  To  this  end  there  was 
needed,  besides  a  hypothesis  as  to  the  order  of  the  symbols  in  pitch,  an 
assumption  restricting  the  meaning  of  the  series  to  the  steps  of  a  defi- 
nite subdivision  of  the  semitone.  The  simplest  subdivision,  that  of 
approximately  equal  intervals,  was  the  one  adopted.  The  following  nota- 
tions of  performance  are  not,  therefore,  a  simple  record  of  observation  ; 


56  HOPI  SONGS 

but  as  they  stand  involve  two  theoretic  elements,  —  interpretations  of 
the  original  comparative  observations  first  in  terms  of  higher  and  lower 
in  pitch,  and  second  in  terms  of  a  scale  of  approximate  fourteenths  of 
a  tone. 

In  the  common  notation  of  music,  the  sequence  of  lines  and  spaces 
taken  from  below  upward  has  the  significance  of  the  diatonic  series  of 
intervals  from  low  to  high.1  The  separate  systems  of  lines,  or  staves, 
are  always  fivefold,  with  extensions  on  occasion  (leger  lines),  their  dia- 
tonic meaning  being  indicated  by  writing  at  the  left  hand  end  of  one 
of  the  lines  the  symbol  (clef)  for  the  step  which  that  line  signifies.  The 
chromatic  and  enharmonic  subdivisions  of  the  diatonic  order  are  left  to 
be  indicated  by  accidentals.  For  the  expression  of  the  much  more 
minute  scale  of  fourteenths  of  a  tone  made  the  basis  of  these  records, 
without  the  employment  of  any  accidentals,  I  have  adopted  the  follow- 
ing modifications  of  the  historical  notation.  Equal  distances  up  and 
down  in  the  page  indicate  equal  intervals  in  the  corresponding  direc- 
tions in  pitch.  Thus  the  equidistant  horizontal  lines,  instead  of  indi- 
cating the  sequence  of  every  other  diatonic  step  (and  hence  including 
sometimes  a  major  third  between  adjacents  and  sometimes  a  minor 
third),  indicate  a  sequence  of  equal  intervals.  Every  other  line  is 
drawn  heavier,  these  signifying  the  sequence  of  the  tempered  semitones 
(lOOc)  incorporated  in  the  notes  of  the  harmonium.  The  intermediate 
lines  represent  the  intermediate  quarter  tones  :  (50c).  The  number  of 
lines  in  a  connected  system  or  staff  is  not  limited.  The  symbol  for  the 

1  The  diatonic  series  of  intervals  con-  uous  system  when  smaller  differences  of 
sists  of  alternate  groups  of  two  and  three  pitch  are  taken  into  account.  The  scale 
tones,  separated  by  semitones.  Since  these  with  harmonic  intervals  differs  as  follows 
terms  tone  and  semitone  are  used  with  from  that  with  tempered  tones  and  semi- 
alternative  meanings  (harmonic  and  tern-  tones, 
pered),  the  common  notation  is  an  ambig- 

cde  f  gabc 

.T.T.      S.      T      .T.T.      S. 

Cents  above  (1)  harmonic .....  0  204  386  498  702  884  1088  1200 

(2)  tempered 0  200  400  500  700  900  1100  1200 

Interval  of  discrepancy  in  fractions  of  a 

tempered  tone,  about °  sV  i1?  riir  T^  iV       ^  0 


THE  PHONOGRAPHIC  METHOD  57 

note  indicated  by  each  of  the  heavier  lines  is  written  at  its  left  hand 
end.  In  naming  the  harmonium  notes  the  white  keys  are  indicated  by 
the  usual  lettering ;  c'  signifying  the  tone  corresponding  to  about  268 
vibrations  per  second,  c"  its  next  higher  octave,  c  its  next  lower  octave, 
and  C  the  octave  below  this.  For  the  black  keys,  instead  of  either  of 
the  ordinary  derivative  names  (flat  or  sharp),  it  seemed  best  to  adopt 
a  compound  lettering,  the  sign  for  the  white  key  next  below  preceding 
that  for  the  white  key  next  above ;  e.  g.  ab  for  the  key  commonly 
called  either  a*  or  b^.  As  in  the  like  nomenclature  of  the  mariner's 
compass  this  system  might  be  applied  further,  the  quarter  tone  be- 
tween a  and  ab  being  called  aab  or  a2b,  and  that  between  ab  and  b, 
abb  or  ab2. 

The  spaces,  finally,  between  the  horizontal  lines,  instead  of  being  the 
width  of  the  head  of  an  ordinary  musical  note  as  in  the  common  nota- 
tion, are  here  made  large  enough  to  admit  of  its  taking  three  easily 
distinguishable  positions  therein.  These  are  positions  (1)  touching  the 
lower  boundary  of  the  space  only,  (2)  touching  neither  boundary,  and 
(3)  touching  the  upper  boundary  only.  There  is  thus  afforded  for  each 
of  the  fourteenths  of  a  tone  assumed  as  the  steps  in  the  scale  of  these 
notations  a  gradation  of  position  easily  distinguishable  from  every 
other;  as  appears  in  the  following  scheme  of  correspondence  :  — 


58  HOPI  SONGS 

Tone  Observed  Interpretation  Notation 

Ob= 

ab  about  TV  tone  Cl4c)  below  ab 

(-)  a 

ab  "      \  tone  (28c)      "  f 


ab          "  ^  tone  (42c)  " 
a          "  ^j  tone  (42c)  above  a 

I          «|  tone  (28c)   «« 

(I4o)  « 


ab 


\ 

The  finer  distinctions  of  pitch  relation  upon  which  this  symbolism 
of  fourteenths  of  a  tone  is  based  were  made,  as  has  been  already  stated, 
only  in  the  ninth  song  and  thereafter.  In  rewriting  in  the  new  form 
the  records  of  the  first  jeight  songs,  in  which  the  single  distinction  of 
the  Zuiii  records  was  alone  recognized,  I  have  represented  all  the  notes 
heard  as  markedly  different  from  any  harmonium  semitone  by  the  most 
easily  distinguished  among  the  intermediate  signs,  that  for  a  seventh 
tone  (28c)  difference  from  them.  In  these  songs  this  sign  therefore 
represents  a  tone  which  may  have  been  heard  as  further  removed  from 
the  nearest  semitone  than  the  position  of  the  sign  indicates,  e.  g.  (p.  48), 
the  initial  note  in  Snake  Song  No.  4  would  have  been  noted  in  the 
same  way  at  two  phonograph  rates  representing  an  interval  of  -fa 
tone. 


THE  PHONOGRAPHIC  METHOD  59 

The  review  of  these  performances  after  the  work  of  notation  showed 
them  all  to  consist  of  more  or  fewer  periods  repeated  more  or  less 
often  in  various  rhythms.  In  the  present  notations  these  periods  are 
lettered,  and  the  points  of  division  between  them  are  indicated  by  per- 
pendicular lines  across  the  staff.  These  are,  therefore,  not  bars  in  the 
ordinary  sense,  having  no  significance  in  accent  or  time.  The  accent  of 
a  note  is  here,  as  in  the  Zuni  melodies,  indicated  by  a  stroke  above  it. 
The  possibilities  of  error  in  the  matter  of  the  recognition  of  alterna- 
tions of  intensity  in  a  sequence  of  auditory  sensations  are  as  yet  largely 
unexplored,  although  a  beginning  has  been  made  at  the  inquiry.  I  am 
convinced  they  are  considerable,  and  regard  the  accent  marks  of  these 
notations  as  subject  to  much  doubt  in  many  places.  The  numbers  fre- 
quently occurring  in  the  notations  denote  the  rate  of  revolution  of  the 
phonograph  ascertained  at  that  point  in  the  work  of  writing  down  the 
performances. 

The  notation  of  a  sequence  of  intervals  by  means  of  a  system  of 
signs  for  any  fixed  interval-order  (as  the  common  chromatic  notation  is 
a  system  of  signs  for  a  series  of  semitones,  and  the  present  notation 
is  a  system  of  signs  for  a  series  of  fourteenths  of  a  tone)  must  in 
general  be  more  or  less  incorrect.  It  is  like  copying  a  tapestry  with 
worsteds  selected  in  advance  without  matching.  The  exceptional  cases 
in  which  it  may  not  present  a  garbled  version  of  the  sequence  of  inter- 
vals it  aims  to  record  will  be  those  in  which  this  happens  to  be  such  as 
might  have  been  played  on  an  instrument  tuned  to  the  series  of  inter- 
vals represented  by  the  signs.  When  the  system  is  a  tempered  one, 
such  as  the  common  chromatic  notation  or  the  present,  the  interval 
written  may  always  be  within  a  constant  interval  of  the  truth,  viz.,  half 
of  the  unit  interval  of  the  system.  The  unit  interval  of  the  common 
chromatic  symbolism  being  a  semitone,  the  limit  of  error  in  the  nota- 
tion of  the  individual  notes  of  musical  sequence  thereby  is  a  quarter 
tone.  For  purposes  of  the  general  investigation  of  musical  practice 
the  common  notation  is  therefore  far  from  a  refined  instrument ;  just  as 
with  the  alphabet  of  any  language,  but  rude  attempts  can  be  made  at 
recording  the  sounds  of  human  speech  in  general.  Nor  has  either  sys- 


60  HOPI  SONGS 

tern  of  signs  been  devised  for  this  larger  purpose,  but  for  the  registra- 
tion in  the  one  case  of  certain  special  articulate  elements,  and  in  the 
other  of  certain  musical  forms. 

The  present  modification  of  the  common  notation  reduces  this  limit 
of  error  for  individual  notes  from  a  quarter  to  the  twenty-eighth  part  of 
a  tone.  In  this  symbolism  the  record  of  any  interval  of  a  sequence 
may  then  always  be  true  to  its  original  to  within  the  fourteenth  of  a 
tone.  This  limiting  error  is  about  the  interval  of  difference  between 
the  tempered  thirds  of  our  pianos  and  harmoniums  and  the  pure  inter- 
vals as  they  can  be  given  on  wind  and  stringed  instruments.  It  might 
be,  therefore,  that  characteristics  of  musical  performance  as  delicate  as 
the  choice  of  pure  in  preference  to  tempered  intervals  should  have 
their  reflection  in  records  of  the  present  form. 

6.  Value  of  the  The  attempt  to  follow  the  musical  practice  of  non- 
n  ^ur°Pean  peoples  with  such  minuteness  must  justify  itself, 
either  on  the  ground  that  accuracy  of  observation  is  a  thing 
worthy  to  be  aimed  at  for  its  own  sake,  or  on  the  ground  that  in  this 
branch  of  research  such  a  degree  of  it  has  veritable  value  for  purposes 
of  theory.  On  the  first  point  it  may  be  remarked  that  if  exact  obser- 
vation be  itself  part  of  science  and  not  alone  prerequisite  thereto,  intrin- 
sic value  is  no  more  to  be  denied  it  in  studies  of  melody  than  in  reports 
of  the  changing  configuration  of  an  embryo  or  a  sunspot.  On  the  other 
hand,  while  the  seeing  little  points,  the  making  delicate  distinctions,  is 
indeed  a  differentia  of  excellent  from  inferior  work  in  any  department, 
these  are  little  points  with  great  bearings,  distinctions  important  though 
delicate,  else  fineness  would  be  littleness  of  mind,  Schdrfe  Spitzfindig- 
keit.  We  must  not  simply  be  on  the  watch,  Spitzen  zufinden,  but  to 
discover  hitherto  overlooked  edges  of  cleavage;  to  be  sure  these  will  in 
general  be  inconspicuous,  else  they  would  not  have  been  neglected.  In 
regard  to  non-European  music,  there  are  questions  both  interesting  and 
reasonable,  which  are  demonstrably  unanswerable  unless  by  the  aid  of 
more  delicate  observations  than  the  common  notation  is  adequate  to 
record.  Such  observation  has  therefore  theoretical  warrant.  One  such 


THE  PHONOGRAPHIC  METHOD  61 

question  is,  whether  a  given  primitive  music  recognizes  in  performance 
intervals  other  than  those  of  the  diatonic  scale.  That  this  question  is 
not  an  unreasonable  one  appears  from  the  fact  that  in  music  in  regard 
to  which  we  have  other  avenues  of  information  than  records  of  its 
products  (e.  g.  theory,  instrumental  design),  adiatonic  intervals  form  a 
recognized  element.  That  it  is  an  unanswerable  one  in  so  far  as  we 
depend  upon  observations  of  performance  taken  down  in  the  common 
notation  appears  from  the  facts  (1)  that  whatever  any  given  interval 
of  a  primitive  performance  may  be  in  reality,  when  written  in  the  chro- 
matic symbolism  it  appears  as  one  or  another  multiple  of  a  (tempered) 
semitone,  and  (2)  that  every  multiple  of  a  (tempered)  semitone  is  an 
interval  of  the  (tempered)  diatonic  scale. 

It  may,  indeed,  be  argued  that  adiatonic  intervals  are  refinements  of 
intonation  which  cannot  reasonably  be  expected  in  the  music  of  the 
unhistoric  races.  But  this  argument  is  based  on  premises  the  proof  of 
each  of  which,  if  derived  at  all  from  musical  practice,  itself  demands 
more  exact  observation  than  can  be  recorded  in  the  common  notation. 
For  a  given  span  in  pitch  will  be  a  refinement  of  notation  to  a  given 
performer  only  when  another  interval  nearly  like  it  is  already  known  to 
him,  and  an  impracticable  refinement  of  intonation  only  when  the  two 
are  to  his  musical  sense  hardly  to  be  distinguished.  The  assertion, 
therefore,  that  all  adiatonic  intervals  are  impracticable  refinements  of 
intonation  to  primitive  performers  rests  upon  the  assumptions  (1)  that 
they  recognize  diatonic  intervals,  and  (2)  that  any  interval  intermediate 
in  size  to  these  will  be  too  near  its  neighbors  in  the  diatonic  series  to 
maintain  a  separate  existence  in  the  primitive  fancy.  The  inquiry  into 
the  first  of  these  assertions  —  whether  diatonic  intervals  are  recognized 
by  primitive  performers  —  is  the  same  as  the  inquiry  condemned  on  this 
assumption,  viz.,  whether  they  recognize  other  than  diatonic  intervals. 
No  evidence  whatever,  either  upon  this  point  or  touching  the  ultra-dia- 
tonic refinement  of  the  primitive  musical  sense,  will  be  contributed  by 
any  observations  of  performance  recorded  solely  in  the  common  notation. 
Records  of  the  nearest  diatonic  intervals  to  those  which  are  actually 
formed  by  the  tones  of  given  textures  have  no  bearing  at  all  on  the 


62  HOPI  SONGS 

question  as  to  whether  or  no  it  is  these  diatonic  intervals  which  are 
aimed  at  therein.  Nor  have  records  exhibiting  only  the  distinctions  of 
pitch  which  separate  the  diatonic  intervals  any  bearing  at  all  on  the 
question  as  to  how  much  smaller  pitch  distinctions  are  appreciable  by 
the  performers  in  question.  To  answer  these  queries  from  observations 
of  musical  practice,  there  is  needed  a  system  of  notation  which  permits 
at  once  the  registry  of  adiatonic  intervals  and  of  smaller  pitch  distinc- 
tions than  the  diatonic  semitone.  In  truth,  the  opinion  that  the  more 
natural  music  of  the  un  historic  races  is  always  diatonic,  adiatonic  inter- 
vals being  artificial  products  found  among  more  civilized  peoples  only, 
may  rightly  at  present  be  held  in  suspicion,  seeing  that  the  apparatus  on 
which  we  are  mainly  dependent  in  the  study  of  their  music  (the  his- 
torical system  of  notation)  is  such  as  reveals  diatonic  intervals,  and  dia- 
tonic intervals  only,  in  any  textures  of  tone  whatever  to  which  it  may 
be  applied.  The  theoretic  bearing  of  exacter  observations  than  can  be 
expressed  in  the  common  notation  appears  from  these  considerations  to 
justify  an  effort  like  the  present  to  record  them. 


6  Trustworthy  question  as  to  the  truth  of  the  following  notations 

ness  of  the  to  the  actual  course  of  tone  of  the  phonographic  perform- 
ance from  which  they  were  made  is  the  question  as  to  the 
proportion  of  cases  in  which  a  note  of  the  reproduction  is  represented 
by  that  sign  in  the  notation  which  stands  for  the  nearest  fourteenth  tone 
to  that  note.  I  myself  feel  great  confidence  that  the  great  majority  of 
those  notes  represented  in  the  notations  either'  as  identical  with  or  as 
about  a  seventh  tone  away  from  the  harmonium  semitones  were  in  real- 
ity nearer  these  than  any  other  steps  of  the  fourteenth  tone  scale.  In 
regard  to  the  notes  represented  as  a  fourteenth  tone  from  the  semitones, 
while  I  have  an  equal  confidence  that  the  interval  was  generally  much 
less  than  a  seventh  tone,  I  recognize  that  the  fatigue  involved  in  trying 
to  hear  what  manner  of  difference  this  small  discrepancy  might  be  makes 
these  judgments  much  more  uncertain.  In  like  manner  I  have  a  consider- 
able though  a  less  confidence  that  the  notes  appearing  in  the  notations 
at  three  fourteenths  distance  from  the  harmonium  semitones  were  in  gen- 


THE  PHONOGRAPHIC  METHOD  63 

eral  over  a  seventh  tone  away,  but  how  often  they  may  have  been  nearer 
the  other  of  the  two  three-fourteenth  notes  than  the  one  noted  is  a  mat- 
ter of  some  uncertainty.  Besides  the  difficulty  of  comparing  two  closely 
similar  pitch  distances,  there  is  another  source  of  error  peculiar  to  this 
latter  class  of  cases,  which  suggested  itself  to  me  after  the  completion  of 
Shiashtasha  No.  2,  and  which  I  endeavored  to  guard  against  thereafter. 
The  nature  of  these  cases  demands  the  repeated  sounding  of  two  adjacent 
harmonium  semitones  s'and  s"  with  the  phonograph  note  p'  to  be  judged ; 
thus  p'-s',  p'-s".  The  semitone  s'  being  in  general  a  clearer  and  dis- 
tincter  tone  than  the  note  p',  it  might  happen  that  the  judgment  of 
difference  would  be  made  between  the  after  image  of  s'  and  the  new 
semitone  s"  instead  of  between  p'  and  s."  In  this  event  the  result  of 
any  individual  double  comparison  would  be  an  estimate  of  p'  as  nearer 
that  one  of  the  adjacent  semitones  which  happened  to  be  sounded  first. 
Although  it  may  seem  that  error  from  this  source  would  be  most  un- 
likely, I  felt  assured  at  the  time  that  the  danger  was  a  real  one.  In  both 
the  ( — )  and  the  =  class  of  comparisons  I  endeavored  to  eliminate  the 
influence  of  fatigue  by  pausing  after  several  trials,  and  then,  before  the 
familiarity  with  the  notes  to  be  judged  had  passed  away,  noting  with 
a  new  stress  of  attention  the  first  impression  of  the  rested  ear.  But  it 
was  more  difficult  to  get  an  opinion  that  would  stand  the  test  of  repeated 
verification  in  the  =  class  of  comparison  than  in  the  ( - )  class.  An 
indication  of  the  final  opinion  was  in  both  these  instances  sometimes 
given  by  the  fact  that,  while  as  above  noted  it  was  possible  by  an  act 
of  will  to  realize  in  perception  either  of  the  two  opposite  possibilities 
about  the  relation  of  the  notes  under  judgment,  the  resistance  of  the 
sensational  material  to  this  violence  seemed  greater  in  the  one  alterna- 
tive than  in  the  other. 

I  should  perhaps  hardly  have  attempted  these  minuter  differentiations 
( — )  and  =  of  pitch  relation  at  all  had  not  a  trial  made  in  the  course 
of  the  studies  of  Chinese  performance  above  mentioned  given  me  reason 
to  think  my  ear  might  be  trusted  to  report  a  phonographic  repro- 
duction according  to  this  general  method,  in  the  main  correctly  to 
comparatively  small  fractions  of  a  tone.  Taking  the  mean  of  several 


64  HOPI  SONGS 

judgments  of  various  repetitions  of  the  same  note  in  a  melody  given 
on  the  (specially  tuned)  harmonica!,  the  intervals  of  the  scale  of  this 
instrument  were  estimated  in  a  majority  of  cases  within  a  fourteenth 
tone  of  their  actual  span.  (See  the  appendix  to  my  paper  on  the 
Chinese  Musical  System.)  These  records  were  taken  from  the  harmo- 
nium, with  the  aid  of  the  tin  horn  commonly  employed  for  the  purpose, 
and  had,  therefore,  the  characteristic  phonographic  timbre  resulting 
from  the  use  of  this  form  of  receiver.  The  fact  that  I  was  nevertheless 
able  to  reach  conclusions  as  to  the  intervals  of  the  original  performance 
which  were  so  near  the  truth  indicates  that  the  influence  of  the  change 
from  the  timbre  of  the  original  which  occurs  in  good  phonographic 
records  upon  judgment  of  the  pitch  of  the  notes  involved  may  be  but 
slight.  In  regard  to  the  Hopi  records,  it  is  to  be  considered  that  they 
were  not  taken  with  the  tin  horn,  but  with  the  rubber  mouthpiece  used 
in  records  of  speech,  and  that  they  sound  like  what  one  would  suppose 
them  from  this  fact  to  be,  comparatively  close  approximations  to  the 
original  timbre.  An  instance  occurred  in  writing  these  songs  in  which 
the  evidences  are  that  the  note  judged  was  hardly  at  all  nearer  any 
other  fourteenth  tone  than  the  one  which  we  interpret  as  that  chosen. 
During  the  examination  of  Qoyohim-katcina  in  a  reestimate,  at  a  differ- 
ent phonograph  rate,  of  the  initial  note,  originally  judged  in  unison 
with  the  harmonium  g,  I  found  its  proper  representation  to  be  g. 
Assuming  here  a  sharping  from  g  through  the  interval  represented  by 
the  two  phonograph  rates  (which  was  calculated  after  the  judgment), 
viz.,  about  20c,  the  note  had  risen  to  a  point  very  nearly  halfway 
between  the  tones  assumed  as  the  interpretation  of  the  two  signs  ( — ) 
and  - ,  the  latter  of  which  was  chosen  to  indicate  it. 

7.  Deficiencies  Several  sources  of  inaccuracy  in,  or  uncertainty  about, 
and  improvements  these  notations  which  I  noted  or  surmised  during  my  work 
may  here  be  mentioned.  As  is  indicated  by  the  perpetual  recurrence  of 
slurs  in  the  records,  these  performances  often  have  more  the  character 
of  continuous  streams  of  sound  than  of  structures  of  discrete  notes. 
On  first  hearing,  many  passages  of  the  songs  impressed  me  as  a  kind 


THE  PHONOGRAPHIC  METHOD  65 

of  rhythmical  howling,  containing  hardly  more  than  the  adumbra- 
tion of  interval.  Any  representation  of  such  passages  as  pure  sequences 
of  notes  will  then  in  a  measure  be  defective.  Under  these  circumstances 
the  pitch  of  the  cardinal  sounds  of  the  performances,  that  is,  the  tone 
rests  in  distinction  from  tone  movements,  might  often  be  judged  some- 
what differently,  according  as  the  phonograph  was  silenced  a  moment 
earlier  or  a  moment  later.  I  question  whether  the  estimates  of  the  pitch 
of  the  high  sforzando  notes  are  much  to  be  relied  upon  unless  when 
confirmed  by  repetition,  and  perhaps  largely  from  this  cause.  The 
notations  of  quicker  passages  is  for  the  like  reason  specially  difficult 
and  specially  uncertain.  Again,  I  seemed  to  find  that,  in  the  moment 
of  silencing  it,  a  phonograph  note  drops  minimally  in  pitch.  Yet  any 
underestimate  resulting  from  this  cause  would  be  apt,  as  far  as  one  can 
see,  to  be  a  constant  and  therefore  negligible  error.  Again,  a  blunder 
at  which  I  once  or  twice  caught  myself  was  that  of  conceiving  a  clearly 
recognized  difference  between  a  harmonium  note  and  one  from  the 
phonograph  in  the  opposite  to  its  actual  sense ;  i.  e.  judging  the  wrong 
note  to  be  the  higher.  Again,  I  found  I  had  to  keep  to  one  attitude 
in  using  my  apparatus ;  for  much  change  in  the  position  of  the  head 
with  respect  to  the  phonograph  and  the  harmonium  seemed  to  shift  the 
pitch  of  the  notes  from  both  sources.  Further,  in  order  to  eliminate 
the  possible  error  from  alterations  in  the  intensity  of  the  harmonium 
notes  (^g-  tone  from  pp.  to  ff.),  the  effort  had  to  be  made  to  produce 
them  at  a  constant  (moderate)  intensity.  Upon  the  whole,  numerous 
as  are  the  sources  of  difficulty  and  error  in  an  attempt  to  study  musical 
performance  carefully  by  the  phonograph,  it  can  hardly,  I  think,  be 
denied  that  we  are  much  nearer  the  raw  material  of  the  original  sensa- 

o 

tion  in  notations  made  thus  than  in  notations  made  by  the  naked  ear. 

But  it  may  be  questioned  whether  even  this  fact  should  suffice  to 
commend  the  use  of  the  phonograph  to  students  of  primitive  music. 
For  although  we  admit  that  the  instrument  repeats  what  it  hears, 
and  that  what  it  repeats  can  be  written  down  with  an  accuracy  suffi- 
cient for  scientific  purposes,  we  may  still  impeach  the  character  of  the 
sequence  of  sound  itself  to  which  the  cylinders  were  exposed.  In  an 


66  HOPI  SONGS 

attitude  more  or  less  constrained,  perhaps  without  customary  compan- 
ionship in  the  song,  before  an  awe-inspiring  apparatus  in  rapid  motion, 
a  primitive  musician  can  hardly  be  expected,  it  may  be  claimed,  to  give 
renditions  at  the  command  of  a  stranger  which  would  be  nearly  enough 
like  his  natural  performance  to  be  worth  studying  carefully.  Yet  as 
far  as  my  experience  in  taking  phonographic  records  of  non-European 
music  goes,  it  tends  to  negative  this  critical  claim.  I  venture  to  think 
it  is  in  good  measure  founded  upon  a  wrongful  attribution  to  exotic 
peoples  of  our  European  habitudes  of  self-consciousness.  A  Kwakiutl 
Indian,  whose  performance  before  a  phonograph  I  once  heard  through 
Dr.  Boas's  kindness,  sheepish  as  was  his  air  before  beginning,  when 
once  buried  in  his  song  crooned  away  as  simply  and  unhesitatingly  as 
if  he  had  been  squatting  on  damp  stones  in  a  circle  of  his  mates  bv  a 
British  Columbian  river,  instead  of  being  seated  in  an  office  amid  inquisi- 
tive Americans.  Among  Javanese  and  Syrians  I  have  found,  as  I  had 
before  among  Chinese,  neither  constraint  nor  indifference,  but  instead 
a  very  lively  interest  in  and  delight  over  the  instrument,  and  great 
pride  at  being  selected  as  spokesmen  to  this  marvelously  docile  echo. 
Dr.  Fewkes  tells  me  that  his  experience  in  recording  the  performances  of 
the  Hopi  was  very  similar.  The  Snake  Chants  had  all  to  be  repeated 
to  the  old  priest  who  sang  them ;  and  not  until  they  had  passed  his 
censorship,  and  he  had  breathed  upon  the  cylinders,  would  he  consent 
to  give  the  records  over.  To  give  this  skeptical  surmise  much  weight 
in  the  valuation  of  the  present  notations  it  must  be  better  substantiated 
than  it  is  now.  Nor  would  distrust  of  them  involve  a  condemnation  of 
the  phonograph ;  for  if  it  is  possible  to  defeat  a  rogue's  efforts  to  ruin 
his  photograph  for  identification,  it  can  hardly  be  impossible  to  aid  a 
primitive  performer's  efforts  to  make  a  phonogram  of  his  performance 
a  true  representative  of  the  art  it  illustrates. 

Possible  improvements  of  method  which  suggested  themselves  in  the 
course  of  writing  down  these  performances  are  the  following:  Some 
entanglements  with  the  interval  sense  might  be  avoided  in  the  work  of 
notation  by  such  an  adjustment  of  the  phonograph  mechanism  as  would 
permit  the  performance  of  the  inscribed  music  backward.  This  device 


THE  PHONOGRAPHIC  METHOD  67 

might  result  in  some  such  defeat  of  our  efforts  to  comprehend  the  pre- 
sented sensation  as  supposably  occurs  when  we  look  at  a  landscape  with 
head  inverted ;  and  the  tones  composing  the  texture  might  emerge 
with  the  same  clearness  and  delicacy  that  mark  the  tints  of  a  view  seen 
upside  down.  Again,  phonographic  records  being  permanent  things 
within  limits,  the  errors  of  one  observer  might  be  detected  by  the  reno- 
tation  of  the  same  music  by  another.  A  method  radically  different 
from  the  present  would  be  that  of  writing  down  the  deliverances  of  the 
phonograph,  not  by  ear,  but  by  observing  the  rates  of  vibration  of 
the  diaphragm.  The  interpretation  of  a  graphic  record  of  the  dia- 
phragm movements  would  replace  simple  judgments  of  greater  or  less 
(tone  distance)  by  actual  measurement  (in  space),  but  if  attempted  to 
minute  intervals  would  involve  measuring  waves  to  minute  distances,  a 
process  both  laborious  and  difficult  and  presenting  its  own  possibilities 
of  error. 

In  the  recent  studies  of  non-European  music  undertaken  with  the  aid 
of  the  phonograph  in  the  Psychologisches  Institut  of  Professor  Carl 
Stumpf  of  Berlin  University,  the  instrument  of  comparison  was  the 
Appunn  tonometer,  in  effect  a  harmonium  of  narrower  range,  with 
notes  spaced  much  more  closely  (every  few  vibrations).  In  the  more 
recent  Stern  variator,  by  Max  Kohl  of  Chemnitz,  a  tone  produced  by 
a  stream  of  air  across  the  mouth  of  a  metal  bottle  can  be  varied  to  a 
vibration  or  less  by  turning  a  crank.  The  use  of  this  instrument  would 
substitute  a  method  of  likeness  for  the  method  of  difference  heretofore 
employed.  The  variable  tone  would  be  adjusted  to  unison  with  the 
phonograph  note  and  the  vibration  number  read.  The  practicability 
and  accuracy  of  such  a  device  could  be  ascertained  only  by  trial,  but  it 
would  seem  to  promise  a  determination  of  phonographic  sequences 
which  for  the  purposes  of  the  science  of  music  could  be  called  absolute. 


Ill 

NOTATIONS,  DIAGRAMS,  AND  COMMENTS 


SNAKE  SONG  NO.   1 


B  fo's. 


j 


Bier. 


72 


HOPI  SONGS 


(I)  SNAKE  SONGi  /V°  /  .    CYLINDER  33?  cct-  /  73 

J-IIO  .  -Accent  on  success  ivt  J.  Sch-fmt,  of 


A'  8 


a1 


•<» 

1        \ 

£ 

n 

fa             ' 

B       B 

ix 

i 

J° 

\ 

Sr 

I 

J 

\ 

1         \ 

dif 

1      L  r\               r^ 

1 

A           \ 

±5      S  k\                        f  ^ 

~ 

a.        j 

^                   \                          /I 

Crl 

LL         '  ^        ^  ^^                           W 

i 

'  /     ^  / 

^  ^  ^     1  /I 

r         J 

qa                                              r 

y"- 

•fb 

jy 

f 

f                                   m 

f-\ 

p\ 

df                                    K\ 

\ 

f\                                 \ 

\ 

d    t^\                              S 

\ 

"    "  \                            ^ 

»              1 

^—^  4<\    i/^-i  

AM  —  A-  V  r   /  v  1  1  1 

SNAKE  SONG  NO.  1 


73 


t, 

» 

B 

f 

*       * 

n 

f\    C\ 

rr 

Fj 

PJ     W 

p-  !/• 

\ 

\     \ 

V        ,                F           , 

U^                                                                 UN                   U^ 

zznn 

*M  i  i  n./  CC   CCEEI 

<3 


di 
d. 


Ca   //     B' 


£ 

1              1 

1 

E 

B 

1 

ti 

r 

\ 

\ 

^ 

^     -Tli 

(  \             r  \ 

1 

LiF 

^*\       u\ 

\ 

« 

*^*^    i'i^ 

\               L 

\ 

E            A 

9  mm  mm 

41  i 

ft  H 

74 


HOPI  SONGS 


B' 


Jw 


fczfi 


i 

£ 

di 


R 


EE  SEE 


iJJJJIflJJlUJJ 


COURSE   OF  TONE:   SNAKE   SONG  NO.   1 


A  A'  B1 


\  A  A 
U  V 


85 


Z3  A 

\  1 

\    /I 

A  A 

^      \  \ 

/ 

\  I 

\  /  I 

/  \  l\ 

z.        \  \ 

it           / 

\i 

\l    \ 

\l  \ 

^             V  \    . 

A        / 

w 

y  i 

i  1 

^                      \  A 

/  \       / 

\  /v 

\  A 

A 

\/  V; 

\   -J 

v/v 

\  /  V  / 

\ 

\1     ~^^ 

\^ 

M  \ 

V   V 

U- 

SNAKE  SONG  NO.  1  75 

ARGUMENT.  The  partition  of  the  base  of  the  triad  g-c  produces  a  tritonus, 
g-cd,  which  is  obviated  by  expansion  of  the  triad  to  ga— c,  revealed  again 
by  subsidence,  again  obviated,  again  revealed,  and  finally  done  away  with 
by  reintegration  of  the  base. 

THIS  song  consists  of  an  introduction,  A1  B1,  followed  by  a  complex 
rhythm  of  six  segments,  B2 r2,  once  repeated,  B5 r4.  The  move- 
ment begins  as  a  salient  subminor  triad,  the  main  feature  of  the  rhythm 
being  the  immediate  change  of  this  combination  to  a  minor  triad 
(sketched  in  B2,  carried  out  in  the  repetition  B5),  which  is  successively 
augmented  and  reconstituted  upon  a  basal  note  constant  throughout 
except  for  an  occasional  and  itself  rhythmical  sharping  by  a  sixth  tone. 
Simultaneously,  in  the  salient  thirds  at  the  close  of  the  B's,  the  basal 
note  is  duplicated,  one  representative  sharing  in  the  semitone  rise  of 
the  interior  note,  and  forming  a  tritonus  with  the  summit  note  except 
during  the  sharping  of  this  latter.  In  the  r's  before  the  augmented 
interval  (also  B2  and  r2)  the  interior  note  is  temporarily  raised  a  semi- 
tone higher  still. 

This  change  of  form  is  not  properly  modulation,  since  the  basal  note 
persists.  It  is  a  disaggregation  of  structure,  in  this  case  brought  about 
and  repaired  in  two  steps.  Out  of  the  minor  triad  into  which  the  sub- 
minor  of  the  introduction  immediately  changes,  the  duplication  of  the 
basal  note  forms  a  tritonus.  The  original  subminor  triad  supervenes 
and  frees  the  texture  of  this  unnatural  interval.  Upon  the  relaxation 
of  the  summit  note  the  tritonus  reappears,  until  in  the  final  movement 
of  the  song  in  r4  the  two  basal  notes  coalesce  to  replace  the  minor  triad 
in  which  the  rhythm  began. 

This  rhythm  passed  unnoticed  by  the  unaided  ear,  which  recognized 
no  fifths  at  all  in  the  song  proper,  and  went  quite  astray  in  grasping 
the  r's.  The  result  is  inelastic  and  vapid,  the  musical  point  of  the  song 
being  wholly  missed.  It  is  possible  that  in  other  renditions  the  same 
singer  or  others  would  betray  other  intentions  within  a  recognized 
identity  of  musical  structure.  The  notable  feature  of  the  present  per- 
formance is  the  close  repetition  of  a  change  in  form  which,  to  the 
scalar  musical  consciousness,  appears  fluid  and  lawless. 


SNAKE  SONG  NO.   2 

=y=flMf&p,     ^   ftTT  ?     •     t — ^T^      =d==^ 

^   u — E   r  r=  r    b   r — r — \ — F=h==:* — * — * — * — F- 


5 


r  r  r  r 


78 


EOPI  SONGS 


SNAKE  SO/VG  W 

J  -  »O6     Jlccerd:  on 


AV 


CYLINDER 

J  .  Sclueme 


£ 
d£ 

d. 
cd. 
c 


A2'' 


'  ^ 

•  5 

9* 

6 

fa 

jy 

< 

7» 

£       A 

•T^.                       "^    I 

Ci 

fc  r  r  r     r  r  r  r  r  r\             r  n         r 

dr 

i^ix  M          Ix  U  I   /  I    p\                   1    ^'             / 

d 

! 

crl 
en 

I 

c       L 

Q 

-*i  I  (rrrrr 

r.rrrr      rCTC 

SNAKE  SONG  NO.  S 


79 


E 


£    t» 


W 


c<l- 
c 


ft 


ds. 


•ftt 


rr  errrE 


ffffff 


80 


' 


HOPI  SONGS 

* 


1    IT                      3 

| 

3 

\ 

if\ 

I 

*  J 

L            t 

f 

rr  rr     rr  y  »**                       *  • 

J 

l*U  1  1         kL           n                                  r  D 

\           "\            1 

Ar 

\               \ 

\               \ 

\               \ 

\               \ 

fA 

\               ^            1 

41  rrrrrr 

1  1  I  I       11       11  •/ 

R^         f                                                                                   B^    / 

V 

• 

L\ 

•fn 

I 

J3 

I 

f     m         M 

\ 

n    n 

p  * 

f  q    n 

rr   Liiti      /urri/\ 

r  r 

\            \ 

di 

I            \ 

\            \ 

ri 

\            \ 

I            \ 

at      »        ^ 

\  /         | 

rr    rrrrrrr 

/i  /i            ill  rrrr 

Q 

flo_ 

a 

y**- 

\ 

[ 

f 

I 

*9 

\ 

f        . 

f  r         P 

^rr    n>Q           I  M 

rn     n 

tn    ^  u 

fFff 


H 


^  •/    i 


SNAKE  SONG  NO.  2 


A5 

air- 


90, 
9 


rr  cnra 


d, 


81 


COURSE  OF  TONE:  SNAKE  SONG  NO.  2 

Observed. 


82  HOPI  SONGS 

ARGUMENT.  An  augmented  triad,  ga-e-c,  rises  and  falls  about  its  axis,  e, 
which  then  alternates  with,  and  finally  holds,  a  pitch  a  semitone  higher,  f ; 
the  triad  rising  until  equally  divided  as  at  first,  a-f-cd,  whereupon  the  axis 
rises  another  semitone,  to  fg. 

IN  this  song  A  is  a  downward  sequence  of  two  thirds,  the  lower 
repeated,  and  B  a  rehearsal  of  the  same  combination  from  the  mediant 
instead  of  the  summit.  In  both  segments  the  lower  interval  tends 
rather  to  be  the  larger  (sometimes  a  fourth),  and  the  two  seem  executed 
each  for  itself,  independently  of  the  relation  of  their  extremes.  The 
movement  may  be  described  as  a  slow  balloon-like  play  of  augmented 
triads  about  an  interior  note  held  exactly  constant  halfway  through  the 
song,  to  be  then  alternated  with  a  pitch  a  semitone  higher,  transferred 
to  that  pitch  less  closely  held,  and  in  the  final  segment  shifted  upward 
another  semitone.  The  major  augmented  triad  of  A1  (major  third  over 
fourth)  becomes  in  A2  minor  (fourth  over  major  third),  in  A3  a  minor 
triad,  and  in  B1  virtually  a  major  triad.  In  A4  at  the  higher  level  it 
becomes  again  the  original  major  augmented  triad ;  and,  the  lower  inter- 
val being  immediately  shortened,  the  new  base  becomes  the  starting- 
point  of  the  final  upward  shift  in  the  interior  note.  This  results  from 
an  expansion  of  the  lower  interval  in  A5  like  that  in  A1,  but  opposite  in 
sense. 

While  recognizing  the  non-diatonic  character  of  this  song,  the 
unaided  ear  could  not  follow  its  serpentine  elasticity  of  form,  catching 
only  this  initial  downward  expansion  which  the  phonograph  shows  to 
have  had  no  cardinal  importance  in  the  melody. 


SNAKE  SONG  NO.  3 


*  The  dfl  sometimes  sounded  like  e :  the  a  was  uncertain  in  pitch  and  the  c'fl  sometimes  c'. 


HOPI  SONGS 


(1H)5NAKE  SON$  N9  3.  CIUNOERTBB.  «zt   170 

J=  1 1  O  Strongly  ctccerrct^d,  on. 

S<:)tr/7i-r     of   -rtcordi^      A3BC    ^ 

.  A1  V 


cdi 


ft 


r  rs  ji 


f£ 


ffffg*fi 


££ 


cd. 

c 

S 


fr 


SNAKE  SONG  NO.  3 


85 


C'                              AV, 

rn 

lr 

1  V 

n/r 

*    rr  r 

91 

h 

If  E 

n 

9 

\ 

fn                                                       * 

\ 

19                                                       t 

\ 

i                                                          * 

\ 

J 

Tn.                                      \ 

"  '  rcr    rr 

'rvr        rvr 

r 

rfc          tJS        L* 

1           p 

i 

r  r 

ri                   \ 

1 

£rt           1          rr 

\      rr 

r                    \ 

c 

^        i^ 

? 

AB 

^/ 

^lr 

y* 

p 

fa 

Jy 

r^ 

t  _ 

ir 

.    fh  * 

i 

MM                 ' 

•  p' 

pppjyfjj 

rr: 

dz  rr 

rrrrrv  rf       '  " 

ncrr 

rrrrtT  IE 

1 

<Vl 

f  fr 

rrr 

rrr 

•  /  1 

9     y 

1    1    ^                                    'f*b 

I 

AR 

\    ]/                                         IF 

......                ..    ,-  ...4- 

<fA 


i 


86 


HOPI  SONGS 


d' 


fS 


air. 


f=ffi 


i 


f 


ttfff 


*£ 


.-^ rf  . 


y 

E 

•C~                                  A 

»9 

f      -  ^ 

' 

rA"                              —  —  . 

2 

rc* 

1  * 

dt-2              » 

rrrprr 

rrrf  ^rrr  rrri* 

rrrrru 

rrrr^rrr  rrrr 

rl                              ^ 

\              f 

/Vf                    •  P  P  * 

mm* 

01         pit 

rr 

i 

B 

252 

err 

i^^i/ 

Iv 

SNAKE  SONG  NO.  3 


87 


B! 


LSC          '    N 

r' 
^ 

/r 

nlr 

rt 

I 

A             ^ 

££G  G 

i   i 

fi                    ! 

1       1 

P 

* 

^                             1 

f 

\ 

j^  ^^  • 

••f  f  PfP 

1    Ix 

PPPff 

rrrrrrt 

m 

pf9 

Cd. 

P'  ' 

1 

fv                  p 

rvv 

1- 

V 


/g 
/ 

£ 
C^ 


££ 


B 

AB 
A 


& 


HOPI  SONGS 


c' 


S 


*_£ 

r — 


£ 


<& 


££ 


At 


f 


f                              r      *" 

J                            JJF 

2 

"*                         ^t^f  o  r~~ 

n          TP* 

rrrr  Y  rr 

,     ^j 

Mil/'     II          &XUu£ 

1 

j          ; 

1                            f»f 

c4.    (                r'  ' 

«•    i                r 

Bi  JBJ»  V 

^cr          ^ 

i 

SONG  NO.  3 


89 


COURSE   OF   TONE:  SNAKE   SONG  NO.  3. 


Olrserved- . 

B1        B*      c1     A1 


ARGUMENT.  An  augmented  triad  expands  (to  d'-de)  and  contracts  (to 
c'-e)  upon  a  constant  axis,  ga,  without  changing  the  pitch  of  fourths 
pendent  and  balanced  from  the  higher  level  of  its  base,  the  latter  sup- 
porting another  pendent  fourth  at  first  attached  simply  later  by  laps. 

IN  this  song  A  consists  of  a  salient  augmented  triad,  which  is  fol- 
lowed in  B  by  a  sequence  of  a  balanced  fourth  between  two  pendent 
fourths,  C  closing  the  strophe  with  a  salient  major  third  (fourth  in  C2). 
This  general  description  applies  also  to  the  staff  notation  which  regis- 
tered minuter  features  of  intonation  only  as  indefinite  irregularities. 

In  the  phonographic  notation  the  chief  of  these  proves  a  new  type 
of  the  displacement  of  an  important  note ;  in  this  instance  the  note 
from  which  all  the  segments  start  and  to  which  A  and  C  return  ;  the 


90  HOPI  SONGS 

note  on  which  the  fourth  is  balanced  remaining  meanwhile  constant. 
The  change  in  this  axial  note  is  neither  a  partition,  as  in  No.  1,  nor  a 
progressive  shift,  as  in  No.  2,  but  an  alternation  between  two  levels, 
the  higher  judged  either  e  -  or  e  in  nineteen  repetitions  (in  Bl  e  +  ), 
the  lower  either  de+  or  de  in  eighteen  repetitions  (in  A1  de-).  The 
alternation  is  not  irregular,  but  suggests  a  rhythm  of  high  and  low 
phases  with  two  strophes  in  each. 

In  the  first  strophe  the  axis  is,  in  general,  constant  at  the  high  level, 
the  initial  segment  being  a  noteworthy  exception.  For,  in  passing 
from  this  to  the  next,  the  singer  apparently  changes  his  mind  as  to  his 
location  in  the  rhythm,  suddenly  substituting  the  high  axial  phase  for 
the  low  phase  he  had  first  chosen.  The  record  of  another  song  of  the 
series  (Shiashtasha  ;  possibly  also  the  next  song  and  others)  preserves 
like  evidence  of  the  singer  finding  himself,  or  getting  his  bearings,  in 
a  complex  rhythm  of  strophes.  In  the  second  strophe  the  axis  wavers 
between  the  levels  (A  and  B  alternately  high  and  low ;  C  low).  It  is 
constant  at  the  low  level  throughout  the  third  strophe  and  up  to  the 
closing  segment  of  the  fourth,  when  it  suddenly  regains  the  initial  high 
level,  holding  it  thenceforward. 

Meanwhile  the  intermediate  note  of  the  salient  triad  of  A  is  closely 
constant  (ga  or  ga+)  in  fourteen  out  of  fifteen  repetitions  (a 4-  in  A5 
without  putting  the  singer  astray),  and  the  triad  is  executed  in  not  far 
from  equal  intervals  above  and  below  it,  becoming  during  the  high 
phase  a  minor  sixth  and  during  the  low  phase  a  minor  and  even  a  major 
seventh  (the  upper  note  identically  d'  -  in  both  low  level  strophes). 

The  remaining  segments,  B  and  C,  of  the  song  exhibit  equal  definite- 
ness  of  structure.  C  closely  attains  the  intermediate  note  of  the  triad 
in  three  out  of  four  repetitions.  Apart  from  the  note  A  of  B3,  the 
first  four  B's  reproduce  one  another  with  great  exactness ;  and  but  for 
the  alternation  of  the  axial  note  the  last  five  reproduce  their  minutely 
complex  form  still  more  closely.  B5,  the  exception,  duplicates  the 
balanced  fourth  of  the  others  by  a  liberty  not  without  charm,  and  this 
motive  is  recalled  by  the  subsequent  lapping  of  the  pendent  fourth. 

The  unaided  European  ear  does  not  appear  to  advantage  as  audi- 


SNAKE  SONG  NO.  3  91 

ence  for  these  Pueblo  refinements.  Its  fallibility  as  an  instrument 
for  the  observation  of  exotic  music,  due  to  fatigue  and  haste,  is  illus- 
trated in  the  B  of  the  staff  notation.  Confusing  the  two  forms  of 
movement  with  which  this  segment  begins,  each  repeated  five  times  in 
the  course  of  the  song,  it  takes  the  initial  interval  (de-B)  from  one 
and  attaches  to  it  the  balanced  fourth,  as  this  interval  is  attached  in 
the  alternative  form.  None  of  the  duplications  of  the  balanced  fourth 
are  noted,  and  the  first,  in  B5,  loses  its  natural  motive  in  the  initial  de 
of  the  segment. 

The  union  in  this  song  of  close  repetition  with  delicate  alternations 
of  movement  well  illustrates  the  difference  between  freedom  and  either 
constraint  or  license.  The  singer  delivers  the  melody  with  the  lithe 
security  with  which  he  handles  the  rattlesnake  in  whose  honor  it  is 
chanted.  Armor  for  defense  and  a  scale  for  guidance  would  alike  be 
gratuitous  hindrances. 


SNAKE  SONG  NO.  4 


HOPI  SONGS 


(H)  SNAKE  SONG  N?A- 


an. 


CYLINDERS! 

J. 


ScTieme  of  record.  .  ££BV 


/A  • 


f 


ffl 


*^-    /n 


f 


fff 


££ 


14 


B- 
AB; 


QA- 


f                  U>    V,     ^              A           JX                             V,       V,                           «'      ^, 

*y 

rr 

rr 

Ib 

f.^, 

rr 

f 

1  1 

i  i^ 

'   & 

El 

1  J^ 

r/f 

£/ 

PPP  pf  t 

^      fr 

^•^ 

»»»       »      |»«y 

rrr  rty 

**      1 

hr 

rrr 

^rvirr  r  ruT 

1   U 

r  *  '  ' 

Aft 

•    M 

A            ^ 

23 

=f* 

SNAKE  SONG  NO.  4 


95 


JJ-       V 


fed 


f£fft 


ffi± 


ffl 


HE 


£££ 


AB 


M // 


.r/      f/f p       y    \  j-j        *~  SJ-. 


f  f            ft_A 

i  i 

l  B 

i  i 

1 

i    r 

H  S 

3 

i 

1 

rrr    •»  rrr  r  f  f  v 

f  T 

f  r 

f  f  V 

rrr    rr^rri   i  rp 

E  E^ 

13 

CC5 

i> 

//             ^ 

i  < 

'  X 

^y« 

Trt 

r. 

E3 

AB- 


CA- 


96 


HOPI  SONGS 


fa                ^^^ 

1 

T> 

B 

| 

II 

•>  9 

f 

j. 

d.  rrrr      rrvrrrr  rr  v 

fcrr   ffvrrrr  r  rry 

A^ 

*  LSI!        EE  EEEE    CE 

EEt    EE  SLL  E  It1 

35 

0 

An 

A 

A                                                                   ^v 

r 

£A                                                                              f 

i/ 

a 


fcs 


-^ 


rrr  rcrctrr  r 


cdi 

£ 

AB 
A 


^ 


£ 


SNAKE  SONG  NO.  4 
COURSE  OF  TONE:  SNAKE  SONG  NO.  4 


97 


A2- 6'  C' 


A» 


ARGUMENT.  The  axis  of  a  major  augmented  triad,  fg-cd-GA,  rises  by- 
successive  third  tones,  the  extremes  alternately  resisting  and  yielding  to 
the  advances. 

THIS  is  the  simplest  song  of  the  series,  consisting  of  repetitions  of  a 
salient  major  third,  generally  redundant,  from  a  reiterated  note,  every 
other  duplicated  and  punctuated  by  a  pendent  fourth,  generally  redun- 
dant also,  and  every  fourth  one  followed  by  another  in  which  the 
upper  instead  of  the  lower  note  is  reiterated.  Divided  notes  (B2  to  B4, 
A5,  A7-A10),  the  omission  of  the  duplicate  third  in  A5  and  A7,  and  the 
introduction  of  a  duplicate  in  C3  and  C5  vary  this  rudimentary  scheme. 

The  chief  formal  features  of  the  song  are  again  a  displacement  of 
its  axis  and  an  attendant  shaping  of  its  figure.  Conceiving  the  per- 
formance as  consisting  of  four  complete  strophes  introduced  by  the 
final  segment  of  a  fifth  and  closed  by  the  initial  segment  of  a  sixth, 
the  singer  raises  the  axial  note  an  approximate  third  tone  in  passing 
from  each  strophe  to  the  next,  with  one  exception  (4  to  5)  where  it 
remains  constant. 


98  EOPI  SONGS 

Within  all  but  the  opening  fragmentary  strophe  the  axis  is  either 
exactly  constant  (5  and  6)  or  mainly  so  (in  2,  once  J  tone,  five  times 
^  tone  flat ;  in  3,  once  J  tone  sharp ;  in  4,  once  ^  and  twice  £ 
tone  flat).  A  marked  exception  occurs  as  before  only  in  the  initial 
segment  of  the  song,  and  again  admits  of  interpretation  by  a  change 
in  the  singer's  conception  of  his  place  in  the  strophe,  which  he  seems 
to  imagine  at  first  completed  and  later  continued. 

The  shaping  of  the  figure  executed  results  from  the  initial  resistance 
opposed  by  the  two  outlying  notes  above  and  below,  to  the  upward 
movement  of  the  axis,  about  which  the  augmented  triad  they  form 
sways  as  in  Song  2.  Under  the  first  upward  shift  from  1  to  2  both 
boundaries  hold,  the  upper  interval  being  compressed  toward  a  major 
third  and  the  lower  stretched  beyond  a  fourth  :  from  2  to  3  both  yield, 
the  lower  at  once  by  a  semitone,  the  upper  finally  giving  way  a  semi- 
tone after  yielding  by  successive  sixth  tones :  from  3  to  4  both  hold 
again,  the  upper  interval  contracting,  the  lower  expanding ;  the  former 
exactly  righting  itself  at  the  end  of  the  strophe,  the  latter  approxi- 
mately at  the  end  of  the  next :  finally  from  5  to  6  both  boundaries 
move  with  the  axis,  the  upper  reacting  £  tone,  but  leaving  the  upper 
interval  redundant  as  at  first. 

The  interest  of  the  song  lies  in  its  stately  rhythm,  occasionally 
delicately  varied ;  and  in  this  deliberate  ascent,  as  if  from  level  to 
level  of  the  singer's  native  mesa,  with  a  pause  midway  in  each  to  rally 
loiterers.  Forced  by  the  diatonic  prison-grating  that  checkers  to  the 
European  sense  every  landscape  of  tone,  to  interpret  this  steady  dis- 
placement as  a  negligible  inaccuracy,  the  unaided  ear  reduced  to  a 
dead  level  of  monotony  a  performance  whose  uneven  plenitude  of  in- 
terval and  stealthy  upward  tread  possess  no  little  dramatic  fascination. 


SNAKE  SONG  NO.  6 


^irtb    f  ir^f-ff-r-  c  1 1»  >  rF-^-rT-rrT-ft  i*  r  i  •"'  i 

jl^^^-fS^^^^^^^paE^^r^^^ 


100 


HOPI  SONGS 


J-75- 


N-°6. 

B' 


/<ss 


Ir 


p 


i 


fc-^ 


£E 


y     » 


PcX. 


5 


B 

AB 
A 


SNAKE  SONG  NO.  6 
COURSE  OF  TONE:  SNAKE  SONG  No.  6 

7/ofed-. 


101 


D' 


B* 


62-         D2- 


ARGUMEXT.  An  augmented  tetrad  built  up,  A,  from  a  minor  third,  c'-a, 
and  an  augmented  triad,  c'-ga-e,  pendent  from  its  summit,  is  developed, 
B,  by  attaching  the  triad  to  its  upper  mediant,  a,  by  a  lap  with  the  lower, 
a-(e)de-cd,  and  then  transferred,  C,  to  its  original  base,  e-cd-GA. 

IN  this  song  a  salient  minor  third  followed  by  a  downward  triad 
spanning  a  minor  sixth  from  its  summit  (A)  is  twice  repeated ;  first 
(B)  with  the  triad  shifted  down  a  minor  third  and  attached  to  the 
third  by  a  lap,  then  (C)  with  the  whole  movement  as  thus  modified 
shifted  down  a  fourth  (the  lap  omitted  in  C2).  The  triads  are  variously 
divided,  in  B1  at  de,  in  B2  at  e  with  an  added  note,  d,  at  the  fifth,  to 
which  D2  returns  in  closing,  and  with  which  the  principal  notes  of  the 
texture  outline  two  fifths  lapping  by  a  tritonus  (a,  ga-d,  cd).  Apart 
from  these  variations,  the  repetitions  are  in  general  very  close ;  iden- 
tical between  B1  and  B2,  and  varying  widely  only  in  the  first  move- 
ment of  C  and  in  D. 

The  interest  of  this  song  does  not  lie  in  flexibility  of  structure, 
of  which  it  has  none,  unless  a  shift  be  in  preparation  in  D2,  but  in  the 
apparent  dependence  of  its  form  upon  after  images  of  previous  notes. 
The  initial  segment,  A,  epitomizes  the  composition.  The  downward 
triad  attached  to  its  topmost  note,  c',  is  in  B  attached  to  the  next 
lower,  a,  with  a  lap  reproducing  the  next  lower  (initial  and  dividing), 
ga ;  and  the  whole  movement  is  in  C  suspended  from  the  final  and 


102  HOPI  SONGS 

lowest  of  all,  e.  Each  division  of  the  triad  in  B2  repeats  (in  B1,  per- 
haps, aims  at)  a  previous  note.  The  first  fall  in  C1  is  not  to  a  previous 
note,  but  through  a  familiar  interval ;  yet  C2  appears  to  aim  at  the 
previous  ga,  and  in  both  the  triad  is  divided  on  the  previous  cd.  Con- 
servatism of  fancy  rules  in  place  of  the  roving  enterprise  of  previous 
performances. 

A  minor  sixth  can  be  attached  to  a  minor  third,  as  in  the  B's  and 
C's  of  this  song,  only  in  the  minor  diatonic  mode  with  both  major  and 
minor  seventh;  and  cannot  there  be  divided  as  in  B.  The  ear  recog- 
nized the  adiatonic  character  of  the  song,  and  the  staff  notation  is  a 
correct  rendering  of  its  general  movement. 


SNAKE  SONG  NO.  8 


:J=^: 


B 


104 


HOPI  SONGS 


(2E)5NAKE  SDNGf  N*  8.      CYLI  NDER 

i2:.-  SeTuwe  ctf  feowl  X  £  C c 


c1 


fcU-^MM 

c             k 

J              " 

* 

i 

^ 

«£. 

xJ 

( 

.1  y  A  p 

_•  -^   i 

1      1 

\         t 

L  L 

P"  *f 

Pi*  ^ 

P 

p    * 

• 

r  & 

» 

^           (x 

k  I/  " 

|^ 

EBfeS 

r 

1 

g   B 

B 

EE 

»        r\ 

C 

g 

t 

r 

5 

^\  \  ^  ^^ 

4       ^      ^y* 

m  m  m* 

J       J      3j4 

11 

JJ 

A^ 

T&-t                          / 

L3     A                                * 

:3 

£ 

B 

• 

t? 

j 

«j 

,         g 

H  I 

»           A 

P    f 

f 

»P"*,     • 

f 

P 

c     8  i 

c 

'          El 

hU 

t 

p*  ^  r 

m  ^ 

P  ^  .   ^.   4, 

P 

p 

/ 

y\^ 

P 

E 

D 

U 

\f         r  }f 

^ 

\ 

\ 

AD 

,,      Lu 

\ 

AD              | 

4*     NJ 

AI 

\ 

A   -!—  —  o 

•     »  •* 

• 

\ 

r  PP 

d  'h  a 

r  ^} 

GA^ 

Ir          j^^ 

j  jj- 

li 

A3     ; 


di 

n 

d 

fl^ 

,          , 

i      t 

r         r,  P   PI 

" 

c  f  r 

EZ          W   L    fe\ 

P  .  P    »  .     ,    .  ." 

-  g  ^ 

C       •  \ 

L^p  U      pp-^p^r  p  p 

p. 

r                        \ 

L      feu    f    U  t\  ' 

\ 

\ 

AH 

\ 

\ 

// 

A*           \              \S 

\ 

•                       ^ 

\ 

A  -4-^PU 

H1*..rt     1       ^14 

r 

SNAKE  SONG   NO.  8 


COURSE   OF  TONE:   SNAKE   SONG  NO.  8 


105 


ARGUMENT.  A  downward  tetrad  (e— cd-c-A)  of  which  the  lower  inter- 
val is  expanded  by  lapping  (to  cd-A)  is  then  augumented  through  the 
subsidence  of  the  base  (to  GA),  the  lower  interval  again  expanding  (to 
a  fourth)  by  lapping ;  and  is  later  restored  by  the  rise  of  the  base  (to  A). 

THIS  song  is  as  relaxed  and  dreamy  as  the  last  but  one  (No.  4)  is 
tense  and  expectant.  The  contrast  involves  vigor  of  delivery,  here  m. 
to  pp.,  there  f.  and  sf. ;  the  distribution  of  the  movement,  here  mainly 
confined  to  the  lower  part  of  the  tract  covered,  there  to  the  upper ;  and 
the  amplitude  of  the  intervals,  here  chiefly  minor  and  major  thirds, 
often  deficient,  there  chiefly  major  thirds  and  fourths,  often  redundant. 

The  opening  approximate  fourth  (A1)  is  the  single  bold  movement 
of  the  song,  and  the  downward  shift  characteristic  of  the  subsequent 
melody  announces  itself  as  a  ^  tone  in  the  descent  from  it.  Thereupon 
the  movement  forms  a  tetrad  out  of  a  minor  third  and  deficient  semitone 
(B1)  followed  by  a  reiterated  third,  first  simply  attached  (C1  excepting 
the  last  two  returns),  then  lapped  across  the  semitone  (C2).  A  second 
strophe  expands  the  tetrad  a  semitone  downward,  reducing  the  move- 
ment of  A  from  a  fourth  to  a  minor  third  between  semitones,  extend- 
ing B  downward  and  lapping  C4  over  C3  as  C2  had  lapped  the  first  part 
of  C1.  A  third  strophe  just  begun  restores  the  tetrad  to  its  original 
span  by  making  A  the  final  note  of  the  song. 

There  is  a  slight  unsettlement  of  pitch  in  recommencing  the  reitera- 
tion of  the  third  in  each  strophe,  the  base,  A(GA),  of  the  tetrad  being 
otherwise  almost  perfectly  constant.  Apart  from  the  initial  substitution 
of  a  fourth  for  the  subsequent  minor  third,  the  upper  limit  is  constant 


106  HOPI  SONGS 

within  a  sixth  tone.  The  lower  limit  of  the  intermediate  semitone 
varies  £  tone,  but  the  upper  limit  remains  absolutely  constant  through 
the  two  complete  strophes.  Its  third  tone  fall  in  commencing  the  third 
strophe  appears  the  faltering  announcement  of  the  end  of  the  song, 
which  forthwith  sinks  prematurely  through  the  initial  minor  third  with 
the  suddenness  of  a  falling  breeze. 

The  vivid  expression,  in  this  song,  of  depressed  emotion,  —  lassitude 
or  melancholy, —  notable  in  its  small  downward  shifts  and  expansions, 
and  in  the  narrow  timidity  of  its  intervals,  only  ephemerally  redeemed 
in  C3  and  C4,  passed  unrecognized  by  the  unaided  ear,  to  which  it  lay  in 
the  major  diatonic  key  of  D7.  Actually,  assuming  that  the  singer  meant 
a  semitone  by  his  intermediate  transitions  averaging  less  than  that  inter- 
val, it  lies  within  D^  minor  with  major  seventh.  The  distinction  of  a  tone 
in  span  between  the  opening  salient  interval  and  all  the  others,  particu- 
larly expressive  through  its  slower  delivery,  also  passed  unnoticed  ;  and 
the  final  note  was  heard  a  semitone  from  where  it  was.  Thus  unwit- 
tingly mutilated,  the  melody  lost  both  its  gleam  of  light  and  its  pervad- 
ing shadow. 


MALO-KATCINA 


BY  KANO  AND  BY  MASI-UMTIWA 


As  sung  by  Kano 


A  ff  j       L  Sf  m 

S/"  P 


(2) 


,-tLPH!-8- 
5=^^= 


At  the  points  numbered  Masi-umtiwa's  song  varied  as  follows :  — 


(2) 


s    (4)     (5)       (6) 
^^_^_fl^. 


108  HOPI  SONGS 

(EH)  MALO   KATC/NA:sungfyXANO. 


80 


>f 


A'  B '  B' 


J*  «/""0 


u 


rr      E  a     :: 


e    c    ^^ 


-Jsi 


t& 


ol 


•v* 


turfe 


rrr  R             EEEE  E 

E             / 

^             • 

\eLM.^. 

t           n  r 

•       \                                                                        , 

&(?)             U   W 

p                         r             P;          \    \ 

£                                                                     Ix                                   :^                              ^ 

- 

90. 


MALO-KATCINA 


109 


110 


HOPI  SONOS 


ftmr)  MALO 

J*  go .  Stkzmz  dfr&urrdi:  InfoodjuRi'tni^B'b  B^B? 

*jA* 


*'— 


r  iiH» 


>  60 


""             \ 

"•'             •'-/•Of 

d'            2 

1                  |                                            J^-v^             ^ 

"                               P\       P                    Et\  lv^   P 

<v'f 

'•                                      r\        r                              \  '  ?    '^ 

ifci 


a  - 

go.: 


-e- 


•  /^ 


4- 

d' 


5^ 


•air 


MALO-KATCINA 


111 


d-i* 


air- 

a. 


C\ 


L                                   mm 

j  ;     5 

gEESIM  I     . 

c 

L  \  r     \ 

r\  r\ 

Eg 

ETZZj      1 

•   \  B 

\    44V  ii 

L        >l>1    A  A 

\  JJ     i> 

*  '$2  3^ 

112  HOPI  SONGS 

COURSE   OF   TONE:   MALO-KATCINA 

O&serrecL . 


HALO-KATCINA  113 

ARGUMENT.  A  tetrad  in  a  major  reading  (in  Kano's  song  c'd'— b-a-fg  ; 
in  semitones  2.2.3.)  is  shifted  a  fourth  downward  (to  ga-fg-e— cd),  com- 
pleting the  octave  of  its  summit ;  and  returning  exchanges  (in  £)  its  own 
lower  interval  (fg-a)  for  that  (a-g)  of  a  minor  reading  (in  semitones 
2.3.2.)  and  escapes  from  the  resulting  tritonus  (in  semitones  2.2.2.)  by  an 
octave  downward  shift  from  the  new  base  (g).  The  latter  process  takes 
place  also  by  attraction  (?)  in  a  rendition  which  presents  the  minor  read- 
ing from  the  start. 

THE  outdoor  music  of  the  collection  begins  with  this  gay,  almost 
rollicking  melody,  shaded  by  both  singers  from  a  stentorian  opening 
to  a  whispered  close.  The  preceding  songs  have  warranted  the  antici- 
pation of  both  exact  repetition  and  free  variation  in  renditions  of  the 
same  air  by  different  performers ;  but  if  the  divergence  between  Kano 
and  Masi-umtiwa  is  therefore  not  surprising,  the  precision  with  which 
they  weave  the  pattern  both  follow  nevertheless  is.  In  the  diagram  of 
Kano's  song  the  notes  in  circles  embody  the  identical  order  of  intervals 
that  their  homologues  similarly  indicated  compose  in  Masi-umtiwa's 
song,  performed  a  major  third  higher.  Taking  off  a  tracing  from  one 
diagram  and  applying  it  to  the  other  so  that  the  goals  of  the  first 
downward  movement  (ending  at  fg—  in  Kano's  song)  coincide  as  a 
common  start,  the  diagrams  "  register,"  to  use  the  printer's  word,  at 
the  notes  in  circles.  The  rise  from  the  start  was  made  through  a  tone, 
the  fall  thereafter  through  a  f  tone  by  both  singers  :  both  pitched  the 
reiterated  note  before  the  high  leap  later  a  third  tone,  and  the  pass- 
ing note  from  which  it  was  taken  a  sixth  tone  above  the  start;  both 
pitched  the  climax  of  the  song  a  sixth  tone  over  a  major  sixth  above 
the  start;  both  began  their  second  downward  leap  in  B1  at  a  semitone, 
and  in  B2  at  a  f  tone  above  the  start ;  and  when  at  the  end  of  B2  they 
parted  company,  each  to  execute  his  own  coda,  both  had  reached  a  pitch 
a  sixth  tone  less  than  a  major  seventh  below.  Meanwhile  the  axis  of 
the  song  had  been  sprung  through  an  approximate  semitone  by  each 
in  his  own  way.  Such  exactness  would  be  hardly  credible  were  it  not 
substantiated  by  two  mechanical  records. 

The  song  adds  another  to  the  endlessly  varying  dramas  of  melodic 


114:  HOPI  SONGS 

discord  and  resolution  of  which  this  music  is  the  theatre.  In  Snake 
Song  No.  1  a  tritonus  is  escaped  by  an  upward  swell  of  the  figure 
(from  g-cd  in  B2  and  B5  to  ga-cd  in  C1  B3  and  C2  B6) ;  here  by  a  similar 
movement  not  actually  executed  but  mirrored  in  the  lower  octave,  — 
like  a  defeated  plan  in  the  unchanged  purpose. 

The  subject  of  these  vicissitudes  is  a  downward  tetrad  extended  by 
an  opening  flourish  of  a  tone ;  and  their  source  lies  in  the  partial  sub- 
stitution of  a  minor  reading  of  this  movement  (ending  in  a  minor 
trichord,  as  shown  in  Masi-umtiwa's  y)  for  a  major  reading  (ending  in 
a  major  trichord,  as  shown  in  Kano's  y}.  The  course  of  the  song  may 
thus  be  described:  The  theme  is  given  at  once  by  way  of  introduction 
(a)  in  a  form  hardly  recognizable,  but  showing  traces  in  each  rendition 
of  the  reading  characteristic  thereof,  and  cramped  a  semitone :  it  is 
then  sketched  (ft)  to  the  octave  (cd)  of  its  summit  (c'd'),  that  is, 
shifted  down  a  fourth ;  then  fully  revealed  in  the  two  readings  (major 
in  Kano's  y;  minor  in  Masi-umtiwa's),  to  be  quickly  withdrawn  first 
within  its  upper  three  intervals  (8),  then  its  upper  two  (8'),  to  prepare 
its  reappearance  at  the  original  pitch,  which  after  a  delayed  note  and  a 
moment's  pause  ensues  (e).  The  way  is  plain  before  Masi-umtiwa  from 
this  point,  the  c'  demanded  by  his  minor  reading  of  the  theme  already 
echoing  in  his  ears  from  the  movements  in  the  8's.  But  for  Kano  in 
the  major  reading  immediately  ensues  a  struggle,  the  pitch  it  demands, 
here  a,  yielding  at  first  (e)  to  the  after  image  of  the  previous  ga,  and 
asserting  itself  later  (£)  only  to  assume  their  relation  (a  tone)  to  the 
note  next  below.  This  compromise  springs  the  axis  of  the  song  upward 
a  semitone  from  this  point  on,  and  at  first  the  axis  alone.  Repeated 
unchanged  (77)  but  for  the  loss  of  its  lower  semitone,  the  theme  comes 
to  span  a  tritonus  (c'd'-g).  The  same  tritonus  introduces  the  quick 
development  of  the  theme  a  tone  downward  (0),  by  which  the  plunge 
in  B  is  foreshadowed,  as  in  the  like  quick  development  shifted  a  tone 
upward  (8')  the  rise  of  the  theme  in  returning  to  the  initial  pitch  was 
before  announced.  The  immediately  following  rehearsal  of  the  two 
lower  intervals  of  the  tetrad  (ff)  in  its  minor  reading  nearly  fills  the 
tritonus  field;  but  on  proceeding  to  B,  while  still  submitting  to  the  new 


MALO-KATCINA  115 

base,  the  singer  finds  ample  space  in  its  lower  octave  to  execute  a  com- 
plete tetrad  of  the  normal  dimensions. 

Force  of  example  solely,  and  no  inner  constraint  of  the  music,  seems 
to  explain  Masi-umtiwa's  assumption  of  the  identical  new  base  in  his  B's. 
The  key  to  the  structure  of  the  song  appears  in  Kano's  version,  the 
influence  of  which  upon  Masi-umtiwa  is  possibly  also  to  be  seen  in  his 
tritonus  ascent  in  0.  In  both  performances  of  B  by  both  singers  the 
notes  of  the  octave  fall  were  too  rapid  to  follow  with  entire  security 
even  in  the  phonograph,  as  some  of  the  earlier  notes  had  already  been. 
While  suspecting  that  the  appearance  of  a  chord  of  the  dominant  sev- 
enth in  this  sequence  was  a  figment  of  the  harmonic  sense,  the  ear  was 
powerless  to  penetrate  the  disguise. 

The  semitone  axial  displacement  from  A  to  B,  its  anticipation  in 
Kano's  £  to  0,  and  hence,  if  the  foregoing  auditory  explanation  of  its 
occurrence  be  correct,  a  cardinal  element  in  the  musical  content  of  the 
song,  are  unrecorded  in  the  staff  notation.  Apart  from  a  few  wholly 
recalcitrant  notes  (c',  a,  e,  A),  the  ear  made  very  easy  work  of  putting 
the  melody  into  the  diatonic  key  of  F*  major.  In  this  process  a  was 
stretched  a  semitone  beyond  the  span  given  it  by  both  singers,  and 
Kano's  adiatonic  major  reading  of  the  tetrad  was  set  aside  for  Masi- 
umtiwa's  minor  reading,  which  falls  within  diatonic  limits;  while  numer- 
ous isolated  notes  outside  the  scale  were  neglected  en  masse  as  waifs. 
This  staff  notation  well  illustrates  the  process  of  unconscious  selection 
by  which  the  ear  tends  to  retain  from  a  rapid  performance  only  such 
features  as  approximately  embody  diatonic  form,  rejecting  others,  except 
in  glaring  cases,  as  negligible  aberrations.  Through  this  innocent 
petitio  principii  the  case  for  the  diatonic  scale  is  won  in  advance. 


COY6HIM-KATCINA 

— ?f-n-    - 1/— ^p^ — V-^—V--          — ^  —  ZZpL^I -- y_^_^_\ -- ^ -- 


accel 


f   primo  tempo. 


// 


v — v- 


-V- 


E 


118 


HOPI  SONGS 


A1 

Cd'- 


KATCIJYA  . 

75- .     Scheme  o/  record. 


B'    tf    < 


I 


c 
(r 


a* 


W 


£ 


£ 
d£ 


^r  ^1         <G 

53-s 


» 


er4-i 


h- 

dr- 
a  • 

94 


A^, 


* 


B 


r  p^ 

^                             , 

^  ^  *^ 

fi 

y 

«^e*C. 

^           '         a 

B 

rr    f    C\ 

ft.                            fn. 

lit    \     w 

s 

Jn. 

C5Z2 

V  —  N            JX^V              1 

r^  i     r^\       s-\ 

vr 


fE 


£0  TOHIM-KA  TCINA 


119 


/ 1 


/ 

B 

Z5 

/  r 

, 

•   \ 

i    i                 •'i/ 

R 

r  r  n  ft     Pi                         ft 

B 

|y    I/  y         £\                                           fer 

\ 

\      \ 

I      \ 

1      « 

p,        \ 

r       r                          ^*»,*  i  I/  1^ 

f 

^     >                            A^A,  ' 

I 

pr         ./           x  C 

|£|£                           H*WK..                                        ^ 

i        1                        II 

r       . 

B 
AS 


\    i               *m  «/                                                       m*»  *m*A 

_p 

*+. 

[rlr  '                             m      ttH  1  2 

T                                  l/lx 

* 

120 


HOPI  SONGS 


df 


GOYOHIM-KATCINA 

E jff  L  Jkts^ 


121 


122 


EOPI  SONGS 


COURSE   OF  TONE:     COY6HIM-KATCINA 


Olserred. 

J  A'  B' 


p      r         «•       r     r 


QOYOHIM-KATCINA  123 

ARGUMENT.  A  minor  third  (fg-de)  introducing  an  augmented  tetrad 
(c'd'-ab-ga(g)-f)  surmounting  a  major  triad  (f-d— AB)  is  by  degrees 
depressed  into  the  triad  and  by  degrees  returns,  bringing  the  triad,  to 
its  initial  pitch  (fg-de-B),  to  which  the  tetrad  also  eventually  accom- 
modates itself  (d'-b-a(ga)-fg) . 

THIS  song  is  exceptional  in  its  level  course  (compare  Snake  Song 
No.  1,  Jakwaina,  and  Anonymous  I  and  II),  most  of  the  series  sharing 
the  downward  movement  of  Malo-katcina.  It  further  differs  from  that 
song  in  presenting  in  the  three  chief  segments  B,  C,  and  D,  a  number  of 
different  motives.  A  reiterates  a  major  third  becoming  minor,  by  way 
of  introduction ;  B  presents  a  motive  (a)  within  an  augmented  tetrad 
over  a  major  triad,  repeating  it  with  the  first  few  intervals  changed  (ft) 
and  following  it  with  a  coda  (y)  approximately  rehearsing  the  triad ; 
C  presents  another  or  more  properly  two  (8  and  e)  confined  to  the  tet- 
rad shifted  upward  an  approximate  semitone ;  D  three  more  (£,  17,  6], 
the  second  and  third  alike  and  of  coda  form,  leading  back  to  the  triad 
of  B ;  E  presents  notes  outlining  the  main  tracts  occupied  by  the 
melody. 

These  motives  are  connected  and  repeated  with  a  shift  and  play  of 
fabric  both  noteworthy  and  novel  in  type.  In  the  coda  (y')  of  the 
second  B  the  triad  suddenly  rises  a  semitone,  its  mediant  becoming  de  + , 
the  pitch  of  the  introduction  A  and  finale  E,  instead  of  de  -  as  in  y. 
Thereupon  in  the  first  motive  of  C  the  tetrad  field  likewise  rises  a 
semitone,  extending  itself  downward  again  in  the  second  motive,  e, 
returning  to  the  higher  level  in  £  of  D1  and  connecting  with  the  raised 
triad  in  0.  C2  repeats  this  process  nearly  identically  as  the  circled 
notes  show,  apart  from  a  zigzag  ascent  that  recalls  the  old  level ;  and 
is  followed  by  two  D's,  both  executing  the  triad  at  the  higher  level 
(fg(g)-de-B),  but  D2  executing  the  tetrad  within  the  lower,  D3  within 
the  higher  field.  E  adds  its  epilogue  by  indicating  the  fifth  and  the 
minor  sixth  hence  occurring  in  17'  and  77"  respectively,  together  with  a 
suggestion  of  the  resulting  compressed  and  full  forms  (y)  of  the  minor 
third  (fg)f-de. 

This  same  minor  third  was  the  introductory  interval  of  the  whole 


124  HOPI  SONGS 

melody,  after  a  long  rehearsal  as  a  major ;  and  its  reappearance  in  D3 
is  its  final  reassertion  after  reduction  to  a  tone  (y),  descent  of  a  semi- 
tone (a/),  reappearance  as  a  tone,  and  restoration  to  the  original  pitch 
(y').  The  villain  of  the  piece  is  not  far  to  seek.  The  tritonus  familiar 
in  previous  songs  presents  itself  at  the  moment  of  both  these  changes; 
in  the  first  descent  of  y  preceding  the  semitone  subsidence  in  B2  of  the 
initial  minor  third,  and  in  the  first  descent  of  y'  preceding  its  reappear- 
ance bringing  the  triad  up  with  it.  The  quarter  tone  yield  and  reac- 
tion of  the  axial  note,  de  +  ,  to  and  from  de— ,  is  nearly  synchronous 
with  the  subsidence  and  reappearance  of  the  third,  and  may  be  con- 
ceived as  sympathetic  in  origin. 

In  general  character  the  melody  is  a  lusty  minor,  the  prominence  of 
the  minor  third  adding  zest  to  its  vigorous  and  peculiar  rhythm.  The 
unaided  ear  recognized  that  the  motives  of  B  were  adiatonic  in  struc- 
ture (outlining  a  fourth  between  two  minor  thirds),  and  the  fact  is 
expressed  in  the  staff  notation.  But  by  neglecting  in  the  C's  and  major 
D's,  D1  and  D3,  the  semitone  rise  of  the  tetrad  while  remarking  that  of 
the  triad,  the  ear  brought  these  segments  within  diatonic  limits.  The 
alteration  of  the  first  and  last  trichord  of  B1  (ab-ga-f,  de-c-AB)  to 
forms  more  familiar  to  the  diatonic  consciousness  (f  being  heard  as  fg, 
c  as  d)  further  evidences  the  power  of  musical  thought  to  nullify  in 
rapid  observation  the  plain  and  even  repeated  evidence  of  sensation. 

As  in  Malo-katcina,  numerous  homologous  notes  judged  at  the  same 
pitch  bear  testimony  to  extraordinary  virtuosity  in  the  performer.  In 
the  D's  he  three  times  reaches  the  identical  de+  by  movements  twice 
spanning  a  minor  sixth  and  once  a  fifth,  as  one  might  vary  one's  steps 
down  a  familiar  trail  to  the  same  rock. 


SHIASHTASHA 

BY  SINGER  NO.  1  AND  SINGER  NO.  2 


126 


HOPI  SONGS 


(X)  5H I ASTA5  H  A  ^  Sui^  JP  / . 

J=SO        5c?L<?T7t^  ofveeovcL.  A'B*C 
<**- 


ffl 


r 


•^ 


:« 


z& 


go,. 

V 
/ 
£    • 


33 


S 


5 


^ 


SHIASHTASHA 


^ 


127 


d' 

JB1 

r         ?1 

8- 

1 

S          ±36 

fn' 

in       DE 

^ 


p 


v^1 


£ 


*± 

Ix      0s* 
Hx — JFT 


fi>- 

^: 


N 


I 


ft 


i 


128 


16$ 


UOPI  SONGS 

A2 


m 


d' 
dl' 
c' 
^ 


£ 


3 


<*=3! 


^ 


go.- 


1/C3 


SHIASHTASHA 


129 


a 


OL 
c. 


130 


# 


HOPI  SONGS 

_B3       «# 


SHIASHTASHA 


131 


I 


9 

f} 

J- 


w=§ 


77Z. 


c 
3 


/    \?lf*\ 


fyti'tifl 


132 


HOPI  SONGS 


(XI)5HIASHTA5HA 


<**      ' 


- 

»M»fv      "rrr 

f^*r* 

I^XIx  L 

y 

kkkkk         £££•!/' 

l^lft^ 

_^v 
™ 

(X  yyry       •  *^  " 

-f 

1 

,>i 

P              f 

dL 

J 

f              t 

•1 

r               |r 

I I 


a  c 


^ 


3 


SHIASHTASHA 


133 


a/  - 

<&f- 

c}  '- 

tr : 


=£ 
^ 


«fc 


5 

4 
> 


3* 

9 

* 


/r 


6£ 


AB 
A 

5* 


134 


HOPI  SONGS 


ft 


CL  V 


B  • 
AB: 


gf^1 


SHIASHTASHA 


135 


d'. 

'«'" 


£ 


£ 


«^=B 


F£F=E 

A  A  A  A 


go.- 


I 


/  v 


/ 

t 
Cli 


4 


r  f  r  C,  D 

^\  L\     u\     u 


1 


11  11  JJ  J  ^ 


136 


HOPI  SONGS 


f 

,\ 

J 

i 

E3 

f' 

^ 

B*      VA 

i^ 

r  \ 

»  • 

di 

a_ft 

/  ( 

/  \ 

x 

^  \ 

L 

\ 

j 

jr 

X  \ 

A' 

/[/ 

P 

^  w» 

1 

yj'  !x  \ 

-Vf 

X 

/•  C^" 

i/; 

c- 

1 

A 

L       i         ,                      i 

t 

\j 

/r    P     o                P\ 

ft               fy-\     <7\ 

ty      f 

£\  £               £\ 

/ 

rp 

*t  sp 

>                P» 

a  r, 

'                1    (/ 

g^^ 


c3 


d 

al 

c 

B 

A8 

A 


•rrN  ^pC.\ 

^jrx    ^  ^  i/^v 


SHIASHTASHA 


137 


£ 

di' 

d> 


C1 


m 


^\ 


P\    E\  E\        ^? 


t 


-r       \   ^ L^ \  o  '  - mm 

£    rrrr    ^    rrr       Tfr        ul- 

rrr       kuk£       r"     ul/7     ^ 


a i 


? — i 


n 

^ 


JJ 


138 


HOPI  SONGS 


f'/            y    ^           *             & 

J9 

1  '                   A 

ft 

Q 

i           \ 

,' 

'-^                 P  P        \ 

T             L  -k-\    rr 

rfr 

l//           —  f^f"S¥\      r% 

jf 

£L 

k  J^l 

'.f 

tJ/ 

1 

^» 

«o                                   \ 

1           * 

1  1   i  A          •                                                \                   Jfc 

R 

P                                                                                   •           p  pi/ 

j^.             f//l^                                          rL^lj- 

flJr        p. 

_         *^ 

Ix 

i           i               '  ^ 

r 

^^i*     r*r    "rTv 

• 

yaL              ZEE 

P                            r              f 

-.     *^          !?&'  I/ 

1                            L         r    * 

y 

E                •          '/        ^ 

4J^ 

/6 

s 

J 

p                    p«/ 

L«/ 

3 

tit 

it 

V-L- 

I/ 

d 

rA 

B 

• 

SHIASHTASHA 
COURSE   OF  TONE:  SHIASHTASHA 


139 


(For  the  observed  course  of  toue,  see  the  following  two  pages.) 

ARGUMENT.  A  triad  (d'-b-g  :  with  other  mediants)  identifies  with  its  ex- 
tremes the  mediants  of  two  major  triads  superposed  (f'-d'-ab,  ab-g-de), 
and  becoming  alternately  major  and  minor  upon  a  mediant  (b)  constant 
but  for  a  simultaneous  change  of  a  quarter  tone,  raises  and  lowers  them 
accordingly. 

THE  plasticity  of  fabric  characteristic  of  this  music  presents  itself  in 
a  new  guise  in  this  song.  The  performance  of  each  singer  consists  of 
repetitions  of  a  triple  strophe  exhibiting  two  well-marked  types,  a  major 
and  a  minor  version,  differing  in  internal  relations  of  pitch  and,  as  in 
the  last  song,  by  a  quarter  tone  variation  in  the  intonation  of  an  im- 
portant note.  The  first  singer  begins  with  the  minor  version,  and, 
following  it  with  the  major,  repeats  the  close  with  changes  toward  the 
minor  version,  which  give  this  addendum  the  aspect  of  a  connecting 
link.  Such  a  link  it  becomes  in  fact  in  the  performance  of  the  second 
singer,  who  begins  with  the  major  version,  repeats  its  close  with  like 
changes,  and  after  a  pause  recommences  with  the  minor  version  and 
proceeds  with  the  major  until  cut  short  by  the  end  of  the  cylinder. 


140 


HOPI  SONGS 
COURSE  OF  TONE:  SHIASHTASHA 


SH1ASHTASHA 
COURSE   OF   TONE:  SHIASHTASHA,   CONCLUDED 


141 


142  HOPI  SONGS 

Symbolically  expressed,  the  illustration  of  the  cycle  given  in  the  three 
performances  is  as  follows  :  — 

1st  Singer.        A.B.C.  —  A.B.C.  —  B.C. 

Minor  Major 

2d  Singer.  A.B.C. —  B.C. 

Major 

A.B.C.— A.B.C.— 

Minor  Major 

In  A  two  salient  movements  outlining  a  triad  (introductory)  descend 
to  a  movement  in  a  major  triad  (triad  of  A)  whose  mediant  is  the  base 
of  the  first  and  which  tends  to  become  a  tetrad  by  the  division  of  the 
upper  interval.  Upon  this  major  triad  B  erects  another  whose  mediant 
is  the  summit  of  the  first  and  which  tends  in  the  same  way  to  become 
a  tetrad.  C  emphasizes  the  lower  octave  of  the  summit  of  the  A  triad 
and  generally  that  of  its  mediant  also,  among  other  pitches  touched. 

The  superposed  triads  —  the  main  field  of  A  and  the  field  of  B  —  are 
both  major ;  but  that  of  the  introductory  movement  is  made  by  both 
singers  alternately  major  and  minor.  This  change  with  its  result  upon 
the  remaining  texture  constitutes  the  distinction  between  the  minor  and 
major  strophes.  The  mediant  of  the  introductory  triad  is  constant 
throughout  both  performances,  excepting  that  when  the  extremes  fall 
through  the  approximate  semitone  that  makes  the  triad  major  it  too 
falls  about  a  quarter  tone,  recovering  its  pitch  when  they  rise  to  make 
the  triad  minor.  The  accompanying  diagram  of  the  cycle  of  strophes 
presents  more  intelligently  than  can  language  the  alternately  looser 
and  closer,  minor  and  major,  connection  between  the  tracts  occupied  by 
the  main  movements  of  the  song. 


SHIASHTASHA 


143 


144  HOPI  SONGS 

The  performances  diverge  as  follows  from  the  schematic  cycle :  Singer 
No.  1  gave  all  of  the  notes  of  his  opening  strophe  a  pitch  which 
refers  them  to  the  relaxed  (minor)  version,  excepting  those  marked  (1), 
which  unequivocally  took  the  major  level.  He  opened  his  major  strophe 
with  the  junction  pitch  (ab)  of  the  minor  version ;  but  the  pitch  of 
note  (2),  while  that  of  its  minor  homologue,  is  that  of  all  the  other 
homologues  as  well,  the  A  triad  changing  to  minor  in  the  major  B's 
at  this  point.  The  modification  in  the  following  repeated  B3,  which 
seems  to  betray  thoughts  of  a  coming  relaxed  performance- of  the 
strophe,  affects  the  notes  marked  (3),  all  of  which  are  lower  than  their 
preceding  homologues.  The  variation  in  pitch  of  the  highest  notes  in 
the  different  B's  indicates  that  they  were  at  the  limit  of  the  singer's 
voice  and  renders  any  theory  of  their  intent  less  certain.  The  third  C 
is  developed  by  this  singer  as  a  finale.  It  reflects  the  major  fabric, 
excepting  that  the  note  B  which  took  both  major  and  minor  levels  in 
the  foregoing  C  is  here  pitched  unequivocally  at  B. 

Singer  No.  2  also  begins  his  performance  in  the  minor  phase,  but  has 
only  just  completed  the  A  triad  when  he  reverses  his  conception  of 
his  place  in  the  song,  and  through  the  remainder  of  the  strophe  adheres 
consistently  to  the  more  vigorous  reading.  In  the  following  repetition 
of  B  C  he  gives  three  signs  of  a  coming  relaxation :  the  lowering  of 
note  (4)  the  smaller  rise  at  (5)  and  the  reiterated  note  AB.  He  follows 
No.  1  in  the  first  and  approaches  the  minor  version  still  more  closely  in 
the  second;  while  the  note  AB  is  the  octave  of  the  junction  pitch  of 
the  minor  version.  In  beginning  this  after  his  pause  he  follows  Singer 
No.  1  and  his  own  original  start  in  giving  his  introductory  triad  the 
minor  level,  making  its  mediant  b  — ,  and  in  performing  the  lower  inter- 
val of  the  A  triad  in  the  minor  version.  But  the  upper  interval  and 
most  of  the  rest  of  the  strophe  he  raises  to  the  major  level.  The  two 
halves  of  the  A  triad  hence  part  company,  B3  reverts  to  the  minor  form 
only  at  the  note  marked  (6)  and  in  the  characteristic  minor  timidity 
of  the  rise  at  (7),  and  C3  only  in  the  initial  note  B  — .  The  final  major 
strophe  is  performed  consistently  in  the  vigorous  form  and  ends  on 


SHIASHTASHA 

the  lower  octave  of  the  initial  note  of  the  song,  raised  through  pre- 
cisely the  quarter  tone  by  which  both  singers  emphasize  the  distinction 
between  strophes  minor  and  strophes  major. 

All  three  performances  are  less  regular  than  some  of  the  other 
songs,  yet  exact  coincidences  between  them  are  not  infrequent,  as  the 
circled  notes  show,  and  close  approximations  are  numerous.  In  the 
diagrams  of  the  observed  course  the  level  of  the  actual  performance  of 
No.  1  has  been  lowered  a  semitone  to  facilitate  comparison  with  that 
of  No.  2  by  giving  the  initial  note  of  each  the  same  pitch.  It  cannot 
be  by  chance  that  in  the  final  descent  of  the  first  and  third  major  B's 
(B2  of  No.  1  and  B4  of  No.  2)  both  singers  shift  from  the  pitch  of 
their  opening  notes  (actually  different  pitches)  to  the  quarter  tone  higher 
level  which  in  the  song  of  each  has  since  represented  it ;  and  that  in 
the  remaining  major  B  (B1)  No.  2  strikes  intermediate  pitches,  in  the 
C  immediately  following  copying  No.  1  in  reflecting  the  identical  shift 
b-  to  b-f  in  the  octave  below.  These  coincidences  argue  in  both  per- 
formers a  notable  musical  endowment,  —  delicacy  of  ear,  tenacity  of 
auditory  memory,  and  pliancy  of  voice. 

Beside  ignoring  the  non-diatonic  (minor)  version  of  this  song,  the 
staff  notation  missed  the  melodic  point  of  that  it  chose.  Extending  the 
span  of  the  introductory  movement  to  a  fourth  above  the  A  triad  it 
changed  the  melody  from  a  combination  of  fifths  to  a  division  within 
an  octave.  The  musical  thought  in  which  the  contrast  between  the 
strophes  has  its  seat  was  obscured  from  the  start,  the  unchangeable 
fourth  (e'-b)  usurping  the  place  which  the  singers  had  given  the 
mutable  third.  Note  (2)  is  adiatonic  in  the  major  version  and  its  re- 
tention on  the  interior  pitch  of  the  A  triad  was  the  only  specific  recog- 
nition accorded  by  the  ear  to  the  minor  version.  Here  as  elsewhere 
the  ear  noted  and  enjoyed  a  game  flavor  in  the  performances  which  it 
was  impossible  to  imprison  in  the  staff  notation. 

Codas  like  the  C's  of  the  present  song,  consisting  mainly  of  leaps  at 
one  or  two  important  notes,  add  their  item  of  evidence  against  a 
scalar  interpretation  of  this  music;  for  it  is  in  their  finales  that 


146  HOPI  SONGS 

European  compositions  display  the  empty  scale  in  reiterations  of  the 
tonic,  dominant  and  subdominant  triads.  Likewise  the  end  of  a  play 
leaves  the  audience  of  a  theatre  with  the  framework  of  the  action,  but 
an  audience  al  fresco  with  the  performers  themselves. 


ANOSHKAEY 

BY  LESMA  AND  BY  POLAKKA 


As  sung  by  Lesma 


'• if  f  "• 


(1)     (2) 


(3)  (4) 


m 


++=&: 


f + 


(1)  or  c'jj  (2)  or  b  (3)  or  a#  (4)  or  f. 
Am 


As  sung  by  Polakka 


148 


HOPI  SONGS 


(SI)  ANOSHKAEY 

J  =  Jo  Sc)ttS77L£  of  record    A'  B ' 

4 


c'  * 
Tr~ 


?Wi 


Sf 


^ 


* 


ft 


j 


* 


5 


ft 


3 


£ 


£ 


!=ffi 


ANOSHKAEY 

c1 


Jtl 


149 


ctt- 


% 


& 


o> 


f\ R FT 

fi    E\      M  ^ 

*^  \ 


r 


t 


(XDI)  ANOSHKAEY  smgly  Rjldffc..    CYLINDER  XV. 

J  -  cOrout  So .    S<3uan*  ^record.  A'  8 ' A'B^A*  B3  B1flfBfbsA?B  7A< 

A'          • 


^ 


S 


/TV 


S 


f 


* 


*> 
/ 


fc^ 


150 


HOPI  SONGS 


•3? 


t-i 


a  -f 


ANOSHKAEY 

A3 


151 


i 


dlr- 


Sl 


J. 

& 


1 


9~1 


ANOSHKAEY 


153 


r 

i     \                                          JuQ 

\ 

a 

r!M  ~ 

i           ,                   i  fr 

R 

L  e 

PI      r 

s 

/ 

l 

E     E 

\ 

1 

U\       £\ 

\ 

« 

\          r- 

i 

I     • 

r) 

rr     PP\        P 

p 

r 

k  k\      <  H            Li 

E 

p 

r  ^ 

&-01             u\ 

E 

E 

^ 

R 

I                            \ 

\ 

\ 

l 

1                ' 

5 

r    l 

\        i  **v 

K 

r 

|   (   /     « 

<jL\ 

I/' 

g           ^^     i 

-U 

i 

H3 

i  / 

p 

rr 

u 

\ 

i 

1   L 

5 

>1        ^ 

t  AA 

ga.- 


cU 


154 


HOPI  SONGS 


cd' 

!  ^ 

c' 

rl  !/T 

R  r  t  r    J 

lr 

V    L  /  / 

'  • 

\             ^ 

dL*- 

1 

\       f~ 

1 

\    rr        i 

1 

1 

n     r  y    f     Pi 

B 

r 

1    r 

rittz    u    u 

U 

E 

^^  £ 

w            ^     ^ 

v 

'                      3 

- 

P 

*/ 

2J 

E 

^7 

*r 

/^Y^v 

• 

•** 

»  » 

J3 

rrr 

• 

• 

j:                    o                      ;P»    "^ 

U/L 

^ 

s 

^ 

y  / 

p         k 

y  // 

£                                S 

'      L           ^ 

3       '                               .-fl 

Observed 

r'A' B' 


ANOSHKAEY 
COURSE   OF  TONE:   ANOSHKAEY 

A* 


155 


BT 


156  HOPI  SONGS 

ARGUMENT.  (Polakka.)  A  trichord  (d'-b-a ;  in  A2)  is  repeated,  bal- 
anced on  its  base,  as  a  major  triad  (c'-a-f ;  in  A4  and  A6),  bearing  a 
second  (a-fg-d)  pendent  from  the  same  note ;  and  gives  place  to  a  third 
(c'-a-f),  repeated  pendent  in  like  manner  (a-fg-d)  and  reappearing  as  a 
trichord  (b-a-fg  ;  in  Ba  and  B6). 

WAYWARD  and  simple  as  this  little  melody  seems  at  first  sight,  its 
performance  by  Polakka  proves  on  closer  examination  to  exhibit,  like 
Shiashtasha,  an  elaborate  rhythm  of  two  slightly  different  readings  of 
the  two  segments.  The  attention  is  first  attracted  by  the  recurrent 
narrow  portamento  (omitted  in  A2)  suggesting  a  symmetrical  division 
of  the  opening  salient  fourth.  This  slide  then  proves  to  follow  an 
initial  division  of  the  interval,  approximating  b  in  the  three  earlier  A's 
and  c  in  the  three  later ;  and  finally  to  precede  alternate  choices  of  c 
and  b  as  the  upper  limit  of  the  movement  in  B,  the  lower  limit  tend- 
ing to  vary  inversely. 

Calling  the  A's  major  or  minor  as  the  opening  salient  trichord  is 
major  (a-c'-d';  the  three  later  A's)  or  minor  (ga)a-b-(c'd')d' :  the  earlier 
A's)  and  the  B's  major  or  minor  as  the  opening  movement  spans  a 
fifth  (c'-f  B1,  B3,  B5,  B7)  or  a  fourth  (b-fg:  B2,  B4(b-f),  B6) ;  the 
rhythm  executed  by  Polakka  may  be  symbolized  as  follows :  — 

AT  B-        B  --  B  ,  B  "I 

Minor  L  Major  Minor      Major    Minor  J 

A  TB   ,  B  -      B-/B 

Major  LMajor     Minor       Major         \Minor 

The  course  of  the  melody  may  thus  be  described :  In  A  a  movement 
in  a  salient  trichord  (a-b  (or  c')-d')  becoming  a  tetrachord  (a-b-c'-d')  is 
repeated  a  major  third  below,  expanded  to  a  major  triad  (f-a-c' :  in  A5 
beginning  from  g)  tending  likewise  to  become  a  tetrad  (f-a-ab-c');  and 
followed  by  another  occupying  the  fifth  below  the  opening  note.  In 
B  a  third  movement,  alternately  filling  the  field  of  the  transition  triad 
of  A  (f-a-c')  and  retracted  from  both  extremes  to  a  trichord  (fg  (B4f)- 
a-b),  is  repeated  as  a  triad  at  the  pitch  of  the  final  triad  of  A. 

The  song  is  throughout  unusually  irregular  in  intonation,  the  only 
pitch  often  reproduced  being  d,  the  lowest  note.  The  opening  note  of 


ANOSHKAEY  .  157 

the  first  A  has  precisely  the  pitch  of  that  of  the  last,  but  as  in  previous 
instances  the  singer  takes  time  to  find  himself  in  the  song.  The  divi- 
sion of  the  initial  interval  at  b,  a  tone  above  the  lower  fifth,  determines 
the  segment  as  minor,  most  of  the  other  notes  and  the  opening  of  B 
being  below  the  pitch  of  their  later  homologues.  The  distinction  in 
the  singer's  mind  between  the  two  forms  of  B,  major  and  minor,  is 
reflected  in  the  shift  of  pitch  twice  executed  at  the  junction  of 
the  two  movements  in  the  major  B's  (B1,  B3),  but  left  out  at  the 
corresponding  point  in  the  minor  B's  (B2,  B4,  B6).  In  the  former 
a  shift  is  necessary  in  passing  from  one  major  triad  (f-a-c')  to  the  other 
(d-fg-a),  but  the  fourth  (fg-a-b)  and  the  major  triad  (d-fg-a)  of  the 
minor  B's  fit  accurately.  The  expressive  content  of  the  song  is  per- 
haps indicated  in  the  whisper  with  which  Polakka  begins  it,  and  in  the 
sequence  of  the  minor  on  the  major  B's  like  the  fall  of  an  echo.  Even 
the  wavering  intonation  may  contribute  to  depict  the  flight  of  some- 
thing ephemeral,  or  the  destruction  of  something  fragile. 

Lesma  delivers  the  melody  robustly  and  simply,  not  even  troubling 
himself  to  finish  his  triads  in  A ;  and  makes  short  work  of  it,  breaking 
away  from  the  other  version  in  C.  His  two  A's  reflect  the  types  of 
Polakka's  performance  in  the  sequence  in  which  they  there  appear, 
minor  preceding  major.  His  B  is  major  and  contains  a  suggestion  of 
the  shift  in  pitch  made  a  feature  of  that  reading  by  Polakka. 

The  staff  notations  confused  the  two  renditions,  giving  B  major  to 
Lesma  and  B  minor  to  Polakka,  and  noting  various  sporadic  semitones 
only  in  Lesma's  rendition.  The  chief  structural  feature  of  the  melody, 
its  combination  of  the  major  triads  c'-a-f ,  and  a-fg-d,  the  summit  pitch 
of  one  being  the  interior  pitch  of  the  other,  is  adiatonic,  and  the 
fact  is  recorded  in  the  ft!  of  Lesma's  notation.  Elsewhere  the  staff 
notation  gives  a  diatonic  misrepresentation  of  the  melody  by  reducing 
the  transition  triad  to  a  tritonus  (ascribed  to  Lesma)  or  fourth  (ascribed 
to  Polakka). 


MAIHAI-KATCTNA 


•v — y- 


^-f-rt-m-m — r*    *  i  * 


^>Trlt?"f4f-f-l 

,    E  '  i    I  £a  ^-L^-FJ 


EJEEto^dE        Efa.^-^ESg 

J      ^*T — a^j       I  I  I      ^J         ^,r     I  L      I      S 


PP 


^— f-  =fi=^= :  =prV-j=  -p~^— <^i  |  r^=      !i^jSz=sii^i=^=:H 

f-^1-^-  Ebg-— -^Tg*  j  I  ^=^=3+— ^-j  T^  ^F=B 


160 


HOPI  SONGS 


(2Qr;ivtolHAI  KATCJNA. 

80        Scheme  of -record.  A'B'A*C'A*  B* 


A1  >                                                     ** 

rf 

m.                                                       * 

\                                                      l\ 

^1 

a                     B 

-1^- 


3', 

A*.  ' 


d 


;         *• 


MAIHAI-KA  TCINA 


161 


162 
at 


HOPI  SONGS. 


(I, 

9* 

3 

k 

f 

t- 

di 

d 

ed. 

c 


1  *r        \                 fr 

' 

p- 

k 

i 

rr 

v 

PP 

"\         m  m- 

w        i   ^  i  \  v^i 

.                  J.       ?»»    V     s<¥\ 

B          ES 

w      c^o      y 

g         V 

fc  ^n* 

\          \ 

^    p 

1     i       \ 

i 

\    r\    t*  \ 

f 

>  |b 

\      Q     £     A 

r 

u    i    u\       i 

E 

9     ^ 

t 

^     j    i 

Q 

A 

S 

\ 

, 

J  '    ^ 

^                                 t^b 

P 

rr, 

•     1^ 

Z  r) 

™^^.     ^ 

V 

2=1 


I 


g 


*t 


/\ 


Ss 


%: 


«£ 


MAIHAI-KA  TCINA 


163 


dk' 
&.'• 


*$-+ 


46f 


n 


w? 


0.-1 


s 


I 


cfe 


164 


1TOP7  SONGS 


MAIHAI-KA  TCINA 


165 


166 


Observed. 


HOPI  SONGS 
COURSE  OF  TONE:   MAIHAI-KATCINA 

A*  C1 


t±tf 


MAIHA1-KA  TCINA 


167 


COURSE   OF  TONE:   MAIHAI-KATCINA,   CONCLUDED 
Jfi&L. 


f 

# 

I 

j* 

£ 


ff 


tteu'Aeu -/So/ana.. 


ARGUMENT.  A  theme  based  on  a  tetrachord  (d'-c'd'-b-a)  is  repeated  after 
an  interlude,  the  tetrachord  expanded  to  a  tetrad  (d'e'-c'd'-b-ga)  ;  and 
after  a  finale  the  strophe  is  repeated,  the  tetrachord  and  tetrad  changing 
places,  the  interlude  contracted  and  the  finale  contracted  at  the  opening, 
expanded  at  the  close,  and  repeated,  further  expanded,  with  a  coda. 

GAY  follows  grave  in  this  song  as  light  chases  shadow  over  a  land- 
scape. Like  the  preceding  it  presents  an  intricate  rhythm  of  major 
and  minor  versions  of  its  three  segments,  indicated  unmistakably  but 
by  novel  and  subtle  features. 

The  main  movements  of  A4  and  the  initial  movement  of  A1  are  of 
less  span  than  those  of  A2  and  A3 ;  the  remaining  wider  movements  of 
A1  giving  it  the  ambiguity  noted  before  in  initial  segments.  The 
second  and  third  salient  movements  of  B  are  both  ampler  in  B1  than 
in  B2;  the  final  major  thirds,  fg-d  in  B1,  g-de  in  B2,are  divided  higher 
in  B1,  and  the  curious  alternation  of  pitch  at  the  close  of  B1  before 
the  leap  to  A2,  which  is  major,  ends  in  a  seventh  tone  rise,  while  the 
similar  movement  in  B2  before  the  leap  to  A4,  which  is  minor,  ends  in 
a  seventh  tone  fall.  Similar  differences  exist  in  the  C's,  differently 
combined  for  new  reasons.  The  opening  three  movements  of  C1 
following  A2  (major)  are  wider  than  those  of  C2  following  A4  (minor); 


168  HOP  I  SONGS 

while  the  closing  three  movements  of  C1  preceding  the  new  strophe  are 
narrower  than  those  of  C2  preceding  the  close  of  the  song.  The 
singer's  intent  in  both  cases  is  obvious.  The  two  strophes  present  an 
inverse  rhythm  of  A's  and  B's :  (1)  A  minor-B  major- A  major :  (2)  A 
major-B  minor-A  minor;  and  were  the  connecting  C  to  remain  major 
throughout,  there  would  be  no  change  of  sentiment  to  mark  the  passage 
to  the  new  strophe.  The  minor  close  of  C1  becomes  the  pivot  on 
which  the  performer  turns  his  fabric  to  show  it  again  in  the  reverse 
colors.  On  the  other  hand,  were  C2  to  remain  minor  throughout,  a 
contrast  between  the  final  repeated  segments  of  the  song  would  take 
the  place  of  the  more  natural  intensification  of  the  one  by  the  other. 
As  the  melody  was  delivered,  C3  enforces  C2's  lesson  of  good  the  final 
goal  of  ill,  by  a  major  opening  and  a  maximal  close;  running  on  into 
a  pianissimo  coda  of  fifths  tending  toward  octaves  that  recalls  the  old- 
time  major  close  of  minor  music. 

The  complete  rhythm  is  the  following:  — 


A1 

B1 

A2 

C1 

Minor 

Major 

Major 

Major-Minor 

A3 

B2 

A4 

C2 

Major 

Minor 

Minor 

Minor-Major 

C3 

Major-Maximal,  Coda 

The  movement  of  the  major  A's  (A2  and  A3)  outlines  a  fifth 
extended  downward  a  tone.  In  the  minor  A's  the  initial  fifth  becomes 
a  fourth  by  the  retraction  of  both  the  extremes  and  is  extended  a 
minor  third.  In  the  A's  before  the  C's  (A2  and  A4)  the  movement  is 
carried  a  fourth  lower  still.  The  base  of  the  fifth  is  touched  in  the 
third  and  fourth  movement,  of  all  the  A's,  and  the  next  semitone  higher 
appears  in  the  first  movement  of  the  minor  A's  (A1,  A4)  and  the  last 
movement  of  the  A's  before  the  C's  (A2,  A4).  In  the  first  strophe  this 
base  is  pitched  at  ga;  but  in  beginning  the  wide  sweeps  of  C1  the 
singer  twice  moves  from  about  ga  to  about  a,  and  the  latter  pitch 
becomes  the  base  of  the  fifth  in  the  second  strophe. 

The  staff  notation  contains  no  hint  of  the  alternative  forms  which  give 
this  song  its  striking  dramatic  suggestiveness.  The  point  of  the  double 
strophe  was  missed.  The  structure  of  the  melody  is  not  conspicuously 


MAIHAI-KATCINA  169 

adiatonic,  and  a  few  alterations  sufficed  to  bring  it  within  the  scale. 
The  chief  obstacle  was  the  upper  tone  of  A2  and  A3,  but  from  this  the 
anomalous  initial  minor  third  of  A1  provided  an  escape. 

A  comparison  of  C2  and  C3,  the  two  segments  of  the  song  which  are 
most  nearly  simple  repetitions  one  of  the  other,  well  illustrates  a  lesson 
of  all  this  music.  Up  to  the  point  in  each  where  the  judgments  began 
to  be  doubtful,  half  of  the  intervals  diverged  in  various  ways  at  least 
T3¥  tone  from  harmonic  standards,  yet  the  notes  diverged  the  second 
time  y1^  tone  at  most  from  their  previous  pitch  in  more  than  half 
the  cases.  In  the  interim  the  singer  had  executed  a  number  of  move- 
ments much  lower  in  pitch.  Harmonically  his  performance  was  a  se- 
ries of  gross  blunders;  melodically  it  showed  an  exactness  that  makes 
want  of  will  rather  than  want  of  skill  the  probable  interpretation  of  its 
deficiencies.  The  inference  is  that  this  singer  did  not  aim  at  intervals 
but  at  a  melody.  He  did  not  try  and  fail  to  combine  recognized  stand- 
ards of  pitch  distance  into  a  sequence,  but  successfully  followed  a  pro- 
gression by  pitch  relations  which  had  otherwise  no  precise  existence  in 
his  mind.  This  progression  was  to  him  a  familiar  habit  of  fancy  and 
voice,  very  exact  in  some  features,  structural  and  other,  and  approximate 
or  variable  elsewhere.  It  expressed  his  inclination  toward  the  intervals 
of  simple  ratio  directly  and  not  through  the  choice  of  these  or  any 
others  as  standards. 


ANONYMOUS  I 


m 


•>_  JL     J*.  JjL 

=?=£=£- 


^ 


B 


m 


•y— y- 


=  g=^^?l 


/f -•-  -•--•--•-    -*-    --  -•-  /^ 

^EEEEJ          F^l.-fet-       -ttt-    **„  B._^_acoet 


/ 


izHzh 


*-   JL  JfL     J?. 


172 


HOPI  SONGS 


ANONYIMOl/S  N?  I  CYLI  N  DER  TOOL. 

i  =  tHiaid-(jo  Scheme  of  record   A'B' 

* 


Btt 


*' 
d! 


J£-L 


£ 


Ok— £ 


S 


* 


ANONYMOUS  I 


173 


I 


ft 


s 


a 


£t=# 


174 


HOPI  SONGS 


<&' 


cd, 


u     I  I  M   LL-yLIII     *r    TV 

EJBgtHr  >££&&:?   L\     * 

a  K 

\ 

- 

P 

c 

t/ 

...  .... 

ANONYMOUS  I 


175 


9*- 


£L  hjrmo         f»  tf  o 

,n>«*     E\      - 


t 


f 


</£- 
rf.'- 

^ 


rlx  rr 

IN               \ 

rr                                    ^    uu          \ 

?     0 

[U                                                                        1     1? 

^PJfc 

^^                                                                    2E2S 

«*      x^ 

^. 


$ 


4 


<fc 


Ai 


'- 


W 


Oi 


£ 


^zr 
9  — 


M 


W 


£ 

d£ 
d. 


^ 
^ 


176 


HOPI  SONGS 


3  •* 


ANONYMOUS  I 
COURSE  OF  TONE:  ANONYMOUS  I 


177 


Olscrr&cL 


ARGUMENT.     Thirds  and  fourths  expand  and  contract  in  a  chain  (g'a'-f- 
d'(c'd')-b-fg(f)-cd). 

THIS  song  is  unusually  free  in  form ;  witness  the  extra  initial  movement 
in  B2,  the  different  endings  in  C1  and  C2,  and  many  alternative  intervals, 
the  slides  where  the  spirit  moved,  and  the  small  movements  of  approach 
and  return  to  notes  with  which  the  melody  proceeds.  The  unaided  ear 
was  helpless  to  do  otherwise  than  transform  this  variety  into  the  hum- 
drum diatonic  sequences  of  the  staff  notation.  Most  of  the  semitones 
produced  by  the  approaches  and  returns  were  neglected ;  that  noted 
after  the  climax  in  B  obtaining  its  undue  prominence  through  its  coin- 


178  HOPI  SONGS 

Observed  and  TYtfed  courses  superposed. 


cidence  with  a  semitone  of  the  chosen  key.  The  accompanying  dia- 
gram superposing  the  observed  and  noted  courses  of  the  song  shows  that 
in  eliminating  the  looseness  of  texture  in  which  its  specific  musical  charac- 
ter resides,  recurrent  notes  at  e',  d',  b,  and  a,  approximately  equidistant 
from  two  diatonic  levels,  were  either  referred  to  one  of  these  or  ignored. 
By  this  process  any  sequence  of  pitch  or  other  variable  may  be  recast 
as  a  diatonic  air,  and  a  less  distortion  will  commonly  suffice.  The 
accompanying  chart  of  the  middle  region  of  the  northern  heavens 
was  traced  from  a  small  map,  laid  off  into  twelve  equal  spaces  repre- 
senting an  octave  of  semitones  and  marked  with  a  line  connecting  the 
brightest  stars.  The  curve  at  once  suggested  a  diatonic  melody  with 
a  keynote  at  about  10°  north  declination,  —  y  and  ft  Pegasi,  which  were 
not  in  the  original  choice,  offering  themselves  for  a  tonic  close.  As  in 
the  Hopi  song,  so  here  a  single  step  of  the  scale  (dr  in  the  heavens,  de 


\  \\cwv 


;//  /  \ 


.iSg-       :>OW 


;ffl  y^ '••  ' -r 

jyfla^       \  "l  LtStff-intit 

~  A  C-x  V  f        / 


^fe^ 


\    \  USvM&t 

q-\V  /      / 

AV.\  -7-      /      m   ' 

WA  /    •  /Z3^ 


&Ale*&aran.\ 


E 


-J«4^ 


ANONYMOUS  I 


STAR  SEQUENCE 


179 


in  Anonymous  I)  is  conspicuous  by  omission.  Un- 
worthy as  this  melody  may  be  of  the  high  repute 
of  sphere  music,  the  stars  present  it  more  cor- 
rectly than  does  the  Hopi  singer  the  melody  im- 
puted to  him.  Their  average  aberration  is  less 
than  \  tone,  while  the  same  number  of  notes  at  the  beginning  of 
his  song  average  more  than  \  tone  off  the  imputed  pitch.  The  infer- 
ence is  that  diatonic  form  is  as  little  aimed  at  in  the  one  case  as  in 
the  other. 

Apart  from  prepossessions  of  scale,  the  song  appears  a  play  of  thirds 
and  fourths  expanding  and  contracting  in  all  dimensions  from  a  tone 
to  a  tritonus.  In  the  opening  movement  of  A  the  singer  outlines  the 
minor  sixth,  c'd'-f,  in  which  the  song  centres;  the  second  movement 
shifting  this  up  a  semitone  and  touching  successively  the  fifth,  c'd',  the 
fourth,  b,  and  the  minor  third,  a,  within  it.  In  beginning  B1  he  rises 
a  major  third  above  this  shifted  sixth,  descending  to  the  base  by  lapped 
and  withdrawn  thirds  and  an  augmented  fourth ;  and  by  repeating  these 
movements  in  less  pronounced  fashion  regains  the  level  of  the  opening 
movement  within  a  T!?  tone  at  f+,  emphasizing  his  permanent  return 
to  it  by  descending  to  the  octave,  cd,  of  its  summit.  In  the  climax 
which  follows  he  completes  the  upper  major  third,  f '-c'd7,  to  a  fifth,  with 
a  crowning  minor  third,  gV-fr,  and  descends  lapping  the  first  and 
withdrawing  the  second  interval,  sliding  to  f  and  returning  through 
the  initial  sixth,  c'd'-f,  in  its  turn  withdrawn  to  the  fifth,  c'd'-fg,  and 
completed  in  a  moment  to  the  octave,  cd.  The  opening  movement  of 
C1  moves  within  the  initial  sixth,  analyzing  the  upper  third  irregularly, 
and  the  closing  movement  forms  an  interlude  between  the  strophes, 


180  HOPI  SONGS 

retracing  the  boundaries  of  the  song  within  its  two  outlying  intervals. 
It  opens  the  second  strophe  upon  f  —  instead  of  f+,  the  note  having 
already  touched  the  lower  level  at  the  end  of  B1,  and  continuing  to 
oscillate  between  the  two  to  the  end  of  the  song,  where  it  drops  a  T^ 
tone  further.  Notwithstanding  this  difference  of  about  a  £  tone  in  the 
start  of  B1  and  B2  (fg+and  f-),  the  homologous  notes  in  the  first  move- 
ments of  the  two  are  almost  precisely  the  same  in  pitch,  and  in  the 
movements  before  the  climax  the  central  notes  are  identical.  In  the 
descent  from  the  climax  the  notes  of  the  approximate  semitone  f'-e'  take 
the  inverse  order  of  their  homologues  in  B1,  suggesting  a  trick  of  mem- 
ory like  that  which  has  brought  the  English  "  through  "  out  of  the 
Anglo-Saxon  "  thurh."  A  similar  inversion,  and  perhaps  of  like  origin, 
occurs  at  the  end  of  6l  in  the  next  song.  In  C2  the  singer  finally  dis- 
mounts the  initial  sixth  piece  by  piece,  as  he  had  built  it  up,  at  a 
semitone  higher  level,  in  A. 

Vagrant  as  this  melody  seems,  the  identical  pitches  attained  in  the 
course  of  the  B's  and  in  opening  the  C's  give  proof  of  no  little  vir- 
tuosity. To  repeat  without  accompaniment  a  complicated  chromatic 
sequence — for  instance,  the  second  part  of  the  Pilgrims'  Chorus  in 
"  Tannhaeuser" — and  give  any  of  the  notes  at  all  just  the  pitch  of  their 
first  performance  is  a  commendable  feat  for  a  European  singer.  Its 
accomplishment  by  this  Pueblo  musician  with  his  hyperchromatic 
melody  evidences  the  power  of  habit  when  undisturbed  by  a  scale-con- 
sciousness; but  it  also  implies  great  delicacy  of  auditory  and  muscular 
endowment.  Such  refinement  of  execution  by  an  artist  of  an  unhis- 
toric  race  is  in  no  way  unexampled.  The  early  vestiges  of  civilization 
are  full  of  evidences  of  acuteness  of  sense  and  command  of  muscle 
rarely  paralleled  in  later  times. 


JAKWAINA 

s/ 

/  I/ 


Sung  by  Wikyatewa 


«^t   w  •  B'  rn 


ri  y   L*-  -y — u-  ^u — b» 


m 


m 


*-5h 


fctfzfztff 

^  ^  I  b   b- '  UP 


Tj^^&^-r  r.r  r 


^> 


^ 


6' 


d2M 


»L  *-  /-S 


182 


EOPI  SONGS 


JAKWA  N  A 

O     Schzm&ojrsctrrd 


•  CYL;  N  PER 


JAKWAINA 


ft 


183 

c'  ./  i«.r 


Si 


i 


t 


Olr 


9* 


B 


LL  k                   P;  r          ki                        K 

irlr                              E\  h 

p\  u 

I 

\ 

,                    \ 

3                       I 

PX 

n 

I  <r^ 

p 

^-v                               1       1^1^                                 '"t- 

j 

>j»        pp^                 r  r 

f 


*=f 


184 


HOPI  SONGS 


/. 


"57 


a 


<#: 


OK 

a  - 


4 
i 
cn 

c 

lr 


lou 

*f  *~ 

f 

E 

\               • 

1             p 

p 

- 

\*\ 

•4- 

U-\                     C 

** 

.  \ 

^v— 

i 

i                  | 

P. 

2 

r 

^1* 

~r 

[fc\        !^\ 

p 

u 

L 

. 

?v 

EJ             i'  i 

E 

\                  \ 

17     Pi*,     1 

rrrrr 

i  \ 

u  , 

l/Lkk7 

EE 

U£I 

g 

U 

JAKWAINA 


185 


•tff- 


ft 


B* 


fc±i 


186 


HOPI  SONGS 


nlr        ' 

,     ...          2 

X 

1 

/ 

•                / 

, 

1 

JJ     '                 «V 

^. 

r 

n\       j 

CKL* 

K\                ' 

s 

qa. 

I 

^ 

' 

p 

1*M 

rr 

r\ 

j 

foC 

[I        .- 

1 

•   gs 

*V 

Jvfcfc 

EE      ^} 

1 

1  ^ 

/ 

1 

•f 

1  1      » 

\*t  .\  ^  i^  _  ,_,  ^    jp  *  -. 

rr    ^,vwj 

^ 

rt 

•J 

r  r  i*  rrrr  rrrrv  r 

d'- 
«{£ 
c'- 
/rl 


8 


CL 

ga 


TZ7ZT- 


9 

*' 
t    ' 

£    ' 

^; 

A." 

a- 
c  • 


s 


w    I 


Vi 


tt 


JAKWAINA 


187 


j§t 


IT 


s     \  frz- 

f^~ 


& 


b» 


33i 


=2* 


rfi 


a, 

9 

9 

1 


33ZZZE                   EHZ  ma 

1  2 

u 

1        Q 

M 

g        1                       i 

^11                                I 

* 

Pi* 

r 

l'\                                                 <B 

>    i      ii\ 

r  r- 

-777 

f*                 J^bl  -rrf        ' 

>5 

L»                           \              P 

<w*   I/" 

p                   -^               "I         1 

r 

•Hf 


5 


9  -i 


£=&^tt^ 


dt: 


&  r.  i:  c  i;  u  •/ 


188 

1*1 


/  — 

£'     • 


M-P- 

ijfc    L- 


=S=S 


1 

Q    • 

P 

<•  . 

2 

•    f             \                  r 

frrr    i 

E 

\ 

™ 

r      L                      *                              E 

K-l-L    ' 

\ 

* 

r      p                     p                              p 

P'y'/'i/ 

i 

\ 

Zr                                   '  '               ' 

rr 

p^ 

*\     uL\ 

f. 

L  k  L  k  1   Y                                       i 

H   ^b 

E 

^  IP  E-  P  If1 

\       ' 

0.                                                                                                                        . 

\ 

k 

i=m, 

3jv 


/ 
^ 


t 


4 


JAKWAINA 
COURSE  OF  TONE :  JAKWAINA 


189 


Observed. 


190 


HOPI  SONGS 
COURSE  OF  TONE :  JAKWAINA 


ARGUMENT.  A  tetrad  (a-fg-e-d)  augmenting  upward  intermittently 
(e,  triads  of  £),  anotlier  superposed  (e'-c'-b-a  :  with  other  mediants)  first 
rises  with  it  (Cl  ;  0,  6',  t)  and  then  reacts  (D1;  A.)  and  upon  the  tetrad  be- 
neath contracting  upward  (C2,  c,  £)  rises  correspondingly,  permitting  it  to 
regain  its  figure  (C2,  O-K  ;  ab-g-f-de). 

A  FANTASIA-LIKE  sequence  of  contrasted  motives  repeated  after  the 
rehearsal  of  one  segment,  B,  with  an, interlude,  D,  and  shaped  and 
finally  shifted  upward  a  semitone  in  the  process. 

The  shaping  and  shifting  may  be  followed  with  the  aid  of  the  dia- 
gram of  their  inferred  basis.  The  field  may  be  described  as  a  doubly 
divided  fourth,  a-g-fg-e,  extended  to  a  major  sixth,  b-d,  by  tones, 
b-a  and  e-d,  above  and  below,  the  lower  developing  into  the  major  third, 
e-d-c,  the  upper  capped  by  the  major  third,  d'e'-b,  and  eventually 
developing  into  the  fifth,  e'-a,  and  minor  sixth,  f'-a. 

The  movements  in  A1,  a  and  /3,  are  chiefly  confined  to  the  sixth,  b-d, 
the  final  three  notes  breaking  abruptly  into  its  swaying  movement  (to 
our  ears  with  very  much  the  air  of  "  Nicht  diese  Tone  !  ")  and  intro- 
ducing the  lively  motives  of  B,  y  and  8,  observing  the  same  limits. 
C1  is  divided  into  two  sections,  an  interlude,  77,  rehearsing  the  three 
lower  notes,  fg-e-d,  of  -the  initial  sixth,  b-d,  following  two  themes,  e 
(slow  double  time)  and  £  (quick  triple  time),  and  introducing  three 
others,  0  in  the  crowning  major  sixth,  f'-a,  9'  in  the  fifth  e'-a  prolonged 


JAKWAINA 


191 


in  a  rapid  downward  close,  and  i,  a  short  phrase  in  changed  time.  An- 
other interlude,  also  rehearsing  fg-c-d  and  adding  ga,  introduces  B2. 
During  C1  the  outlines  of  the  melody,  constant  through  A  and  B,  begin  to 
ascend  intermittently,  in  e,  the  triads  of  £,  and  the  summit  of  0  with  its 
developments  in  0'  and  t,  the  intermediate  movements  adhering  to  the 
old  level.  The  summit,  a,  of  the  initial  fourth  can  be  seen  on  its  up- 
ward way  from  6  to  t.  In  B2  the  semitone  shift  upward  to  the  new  sixth, 
c'-de,  takes  place  decisively,  although  one  note,  the  axial  fg  of  8,  clings 
to  its  original  pitch.  D1  reverts  in  \  to  the  initial  level,  executing  the 
crowning  sixth  on  the  pitches  f'-e'-d'e'-c'-b-a,  but  forthwith  ascends 
again  to  the  level  of  B2  in  two  themes,  p.  and  v,  the  second  in  triple  time, 
the  coda  o  ending  on  the  new  central  note  g.  The  ensuing  pause  marks 
the  end  of  one  performance  as  in  Shiashtasha,  A2  recommencing  a  four- 
teenth tone  below  the  opening  pitch  of  A1.  At  once  the  singer  com- 
bines upper  notes,  d',  c',  ab,  of  the  new  sixth  with  the  lower  notes,  a, 
fg,  e,  d,  and  c,  of  the  old  one ;  then,  ending  /3  on  de—  instead  of  on  the 
initial  d-,  he  shapes  B3  and  the  first  part  of  C2  in  the  opposite  way 
by  raising  lower  notes  and  holding  upper  ones,  reducing  the  span  of 
this  stage  of  the  song  by  an  approximate  semitone.  The  shift  finally 
becomes  complete  in  the  fortissimo  of  the  close  of  C2. 

The  living  prehensility  and  contractility  of  this  music  appear  at  a 
new  angle  in  the  figure  of  this  song.  Afflatus  or  caprice  raises  the  triad 
of  e  in  C1  a  semitone  above  that  of  8  and  broadens  the  main  field  of  the 


192  HOPI  SONGS 

movement  from  a  fifth  to  a  minor  sixth.  Thenceforward  the  boundaries 
of  the  melody  are  ductile  and  compressible  within  these  double  outlines. 
The  combination  of  intervals  shown  in  the  diagram  of  the  inferred 
basis  of  mutation  is  in  the  main  diatonic  and  is  approximately  expressed 
in  the  staff  notation.  The  exceptional  progressions  are  explained  by 
the  context  of  the  melody  and  confirm  the  inference  that  this  and  not 
any  independent  system  of  harmonic  relations  determines  its  course. 
The  European  musical  consciousness  consists  essentially  in  the  grasp  of  the 
complex  of  triads  shown  in  the  accompanying  diagrams  of  the  major  and 
minor  modes  of  the  diatonic  scale.  The  two  adjacent  semitones  of  0,  in- 


MAJOR  MODE.  MINOR  MODE. 

ferred  as  d'e'-e'-f ',  and  of  p,  and  v,  d-de-e,  appear  in  the  diagram  of  the 
minor  mode  as  any  two  of  the  series  E-A  (used  in  Gounod's  "  King  of 
Thule  "),  but  in  each  case  a  third  either  below  or  above  is  minor  in  the 
scale  instead  of  major  as  in  Jakwaina.  The  minor  mode  provides  .also 
three  minor  thirds  in  sequence,  GA-B-D-F,  but  not  the  four  exem- 
plified by  the  summit  and  foot  of  K  with  the  two  previous  inferred 
summits :  d  (double  minor  third),  ga  (minor  third),  b  (minor  third),  d'. 
These  progressions  accord  with  the  habitudes  of  the  singers.  The 
major  third,  dV-b  (inferred),  of  0  is  an  approach  to,  and  f  is  a  flourish 
beyond,  the  crowning  fourth,  e'-b.  In  p,  the  inferred  fifth,  b-e,  is  momen- 
tarily extended  to  a  major  sixth  by  d,  in  v  the  fourth ,  a-e,  to  a  tritonus 
by  de.  The  ga  of  K  makes  a  major  triad  of  the  fifth  just  executed,  and 
the  note  is  repeated  in  o,  similarly  dividing  the  fifth  of  p. 

Quasi-major  and  minor  readings  occur.  In  B1  8  is  a  major  triad, 
in  B2  and  B3  a  minor  triad.  The  substitution  of  c  for  the  first  d  of  ft 
in  A2  carries  on  the  ampler  movement  of  that  segment  partly  due  to 


JAKWAINA  193 

the  shift,  but  we  miss  the  lusty  adiatonic  dV  of  A1.  The  triads  of  £ 
span  approximate  fifths  in  C2  and  consist  of  two  major  thirds  spanning 
a  minor  sixth  in  C1.  Helmholtz  speaks  of  the  latter  discordant  com- 
bination (compare  Snake  Songs  Nos.  2  and  3)  as  "  sehr  lehrreich  fiir 
die  Theorie  der  Musik"  (Tonempfindungen,  p.  352)  because  consisting 
wholly  of  intervals  (c-e,  e-ab,  c-ab)  accepted  as  consonances  in  the 
tempered  scale,  and  explains  the  anomaly  by  an  unconscious  memory 
of  the  diminished  and  hence  dissonant  fourth  that  in  true  intonation 
combines  with  a  major  third  to  make  a  minor  sixth.  The  disagreeable 
effect  of  the  combination  may  also  be  explained  diatonically,  accord- 
ing to  the  diagram,  as  the  union  of  parts  of  two  triads  of  the  minor 
mode,  C-E-GA,  demanding  resolution  into  one  or  other ;  either  C  be- 
coming B  and  giving  the  dominant  triad,  or  GA  becoming  A  and  giving 
the  tonic.  In  so  far  as  this  latter  motive  enters,  the  freedom  with  which 
the  combination  is  executed  in  the  present  songs  argues  against  a 
diatonic  sense  in  the  singers. 

It  is  a  constant  temptation  to  neglect  the  anomalies  of  this  music. 
Yet  they  contain  its  secret,  as  zero  and  infinity  values  that  of  a  function. 


HAIKAYA 


4fa^ 


s=s 


tJ£-J^-Qj^-J^K== 


196 


HOPI  SONGS 


(ME)  HAI  KAYA 


of 


A-r** ± 


HAIKAYA 


197 


d'ffl1 
ed.«UJJr 


R3.1JyEU 


198 


HOPI  SONGS 


-tfl 


3 


9 

fg 


d£ 2 


<4 


COURSE  OF  TONE:   HAIKAYA 


Observed-  . 

A1  B' 


M-V 


HAIKAYA  199 

ARGUMENT.  A  tetrad  (d'e'-fg)  prefaced  by  a  tone  (d'e'-cd)  moves  down- 
ward a  fourth,  the  tone  at  first  remaining  stationary  and  holding  the 
summit  of  the  tetrad  back  a  tone  (at  c'd')  and  later  moving  downward 
itself  a  tone  (to  c'd'-b)  and  allowing  the  tetrad  to  resume  its  span  (ab-cd). 

VIGOROUS  in  outline  and  even  vociferous  in  delivery,  the  sobriety  of 
structure  of  this  little  song  is  at  the  opposite  pole  of  composition  from 
the  harlequin  design  of  Jakwaina.  Instead  of  numerous  themes  stated 
to  be  dropped,  it  presents  a  single  one  doubly  developed.  In  A  a  fourth, 
d'e'-ab,  prolonged  to  a  minor  sixth  by  the  notes  ga  and  fg,  is  expanded 
into  a  figure  whose  closing  notes  would  repeat  the  previous  close  a 
fourth  lower  were  the  last  rise  a  tone  instead  of  an  approximate  major 
third.  B  develops  this  figure  shifted  downward  a  tone,  shortening  its 
final  plunge  to  the  initial  minor  sixth,  and  ending  approximately  on  the 
same  two  pitches.  C  repeats  these  cardinal  notes  with  sforzando  leaps 
which  start  from  the  closing  sixth  (ab-cd)  of  B'andB2,  as  it  were  point- 
ing out  the  goal  attained,  and  shape  it  elastically  upward  like  the  move- 
ments which  in  the  preceding  B3  threaten  to  destroy  the  identity  of 
that  figure.  The  melody  illustrates  again  the  simultaneous  shaping 
and  expansion  of  figure  shown  in  Anoshkaey,  but  gives  the  drama  a 
different  ending,  the  restoration  of  the  figure  to  its  initial  span  taking 
place  by  the  delayed  descent  of  the  upper  note  instead  of  by  shrinkage 
both  ways. 

Of  the  two  lowest  notes  the  upper  is  the  more  constant,  only  once  in 
nine  repetitions  being  judged  to  vary  more  than  a  fourteenth  tone.  The 
•homologous  note  of  the  first  figure  of  A1  is  judged  at  precisely  the  same 
pitch  in  A2,  the  upper  notes  d'e'  +  of  the  triads  varying  a  fourteenth 
tone. 

The  final  salient  interval  of  the  two  A's  if  interpreted  according  to 
its  actual  span,  which  tends  toward  a  major  third,  would  overstep  the 
limits  of  the  key  chosen  for  the  whole  song  in  the  staff  notation  and 
is  there  registered  as  a  minor  third.  It  introduces  a  descent  through  a 
major  seventh  like  that  whose  opening  major  third  the  ear  could  not 
overlook  in  ft  of  Jakwaina,  arid  has  something  of  the  same  wild  flavor. 
The  adiatonic  opening  of  all  the  repetitions — an  approximate  d'  reached 


200  HOPI  SONGS 

by  a  leap  of  a  minor  ninth  —  has  the  like  crude  pungency  to  our  ears 
and  was  also  not  registered.  To  the  singers  these  notes  had  doubtless 
no  relief.  They  were  not  liberties  but  freedoms,  instances  not  of  license 
but  of  alternative  propriety.  They  did  not  transgress,  for  there  were 
no  bounds  to  overpass  in  the  singers'  minds  like  the  closed  diatonic 
circle,  only  ways  to  choose  between.  Their  unexpectedness  to  us  is 
the  warning  unexpectedness  of  the  turn  in  a  writer's  or  speaker's  ex- 
pression that  points  to  a  meaning  all  along  misunderstood. 


ANONYMOUS  II 


202 


HOPI  SONGS 


CmnMNONYMQOS  NS  z 


J-&O 


CYLINDER 


c1     •          **                                                                          '  -""                       '\ 

r  "i                                                    9 

>  I-  A 

\                            t 

xfi-             f                                   r    r    r 

C\                                 L\  tZU                      ^   r 

£L         EA                      k-yb-7  H                  r 

\    \                        \      \             rr  k  r 

^       \    -E^C                  r      "T 

K^ 

fl             '      SfcSLk                -              b          4 

3 

5            _     r  r                                        ^          i  t 

, 

BfltH 

5                                           -4 

2Ek 

-          \ 

BE 

t                          rri          1 

rn      \ 

rrr  rr  *               r                   ^ 

d.                     \£L  fcC«              E 

ANONYMOUS  II 


203 


v: 
<& 
^  • 


ifr 


£ 


fl 


BE 


* 


S04                                                HOPI  SONGS 
1 

//            ^ 

v                                   i/***' 

23          ^ 

•  ^  / 

~7                                    l*>y 

i               4^ 

i                G 

^ 

VI 

r. 

B 

^ 

r- 

Spi 

fa 

>P 

f  i  rr  tr 

-M 

* 

p 

'M 

f   If      Y  b    / 

5 

^ 

rn 

\    J 

kk\  ,             \  ^ 

5^^5 

r  r    \              ' 

\l      f 

M-»|»»jB 

r    r 

fl  r 

r 

z 

i 

> 

COURSE   OF  TONE:  ANONYMOUS  II 
Observed. 


s 


«** £«: 


T        r"^      rmn"y 


^rion,f 


A  /  I/ 


ANONYMOUS  II  205 

ARGUMENT.      A  trichord   (c'd'-ab-ga)   over   a   tetrachord   (ga-fg-e-de) 
exchanges  places  with  it. 

AN  ingenious  little  composition  differing  from  Haikaya  in  its  com- 
plexity and  from  Jakwaina  in  its  unity. 

The  main  field  of  the  melody  is  divided  in  A1  chiefly  as  a  minor  tri- 
chord over  a  minor  tetrachord,  and  in  A2  chiefly  as  a  minor  tetrachord 
over  a  minor  trichord.  The  resulting  expansion  in  the  closing  interval 
of  A  is  anticipated  by  alternate  wider  and  narrower  movements  redu- 
cible as  in  Maihai-katcina  to  an  inverse  rhythm.  The  sequence  is  as 
follows :  — 

A1     a  minor  —  ft  major  -  y  major  minor. 
A2     a  major  —  ft  minor  —  y  minor  major. 

The  three  slides  give  a  major  a  slower  movement,  and  this  is  continued 
at  the  summit  of  ft  minor  and  the  beginning  of  y  minor.  B  rehearses 
characteristic  notes  of  the  A's. 

A1  starts  in  a  minor  to  climb  to  the  upper  fourth,  c'd'-ga,  which  a 
major  is  to  outline,  by  the  zigzag  path  familiar  in  this  music  (compare 
C2  and  D3  in  Coyohim-katcina  and  8  in  Jakwaina),  but  divides  it  tri- 
chordally  at  ab  instead.  The  lower  fourth  it  divides  as  a  minor  tetra- 
chord by  a  semitone,  e-de,  and  a  minor  third,  fg-de,  the  division  empha- 
sized in  a  major  by  a  slide  of  approach  and  another  of  departure  being 
trichordal,  by  a  tone,  f-de.  The  fifth  (ab-de)  spanned  in  the  final 
movement  of  a  minor  becomes  in  a  major  by  a  slide  through  a  semitone, 
ab-b,  a  minor  sixth;  and  a  flourish  before  the  descent  through  this  in- 
terval lands  the  singer  on  e,  a  semitone  above  the  pitch  of  the  former 
a,  which  nevertheless  he  regains  within  a  seventh  tone  in  his  movement 
to  the  final  note.  The  two  A's  exchange  character  here,  the  bold  move- 
ment of  ft  in  A1  rising  through  a  minor  triad  to  complete  the  upper  fourth 
as  a  minor  trichord,  c'd'-ab-ga,  and  its  singularly  diffident  course  in  A2, 
ga-a-b,  reproducing  the  tetrachordal  division,  de-e-f  g,  of  the  lower  fourth 
in  a  minor.  A  slide  to  the  identical  pitch  d,  setting  a  semitone  lower 
limit  several  times  struck  to  be  immediately  withdrawn  from,  is  followed 
by  recovery  to  the  same  pitch,  fg-,  within  T8¥  tone.  The  descent  and 


206  HOPI  SONGS 

return  with  which  y  opens  are  both  wider  in  A1,  but  in  the  course  of 
that  movement  the  roles  are  again  exchanged,  the  singer  rehearsing  in 
each  case  his  initial  division  of  the  basal  fourth,  ga-de;  in  A1  the  semi- 
tone, e-de,  in  A2  the  tone,  f-de.  The  genesis  of  the  minor  third  in  the 
final  movement  of  y  is  doubtless  shown  in  A2,  where  it  approximately 
repeats  the  pitch  reached  by  the  foregoing  slide;  but  the  different 
reading  in  A1  caused  by  the  different  span  of  the  antecedent  movements 
does  not  prevent  the  singer  from  striking  the  same  final  pitch  within  a 
seventh  tone  in  the  two  A's.  B  follows,  approximately  repeating  in  the 
first  movement  the  trichordal  division  at  ab  and  f  of  the  two  fourths, 
the  latter  just  rehearsed  in  A2 ;  and  in  the  second  movement  their  tet- 
rachordal  divisions  at  b,  fg,  and  e ;  and  combines  with  them  notes  at  d 
outlining  the  lower  penumbra  of  the  main  field  of  movement. 

The  figure  of  the  song  is  conspicuously  adiatonic.  Mainly  as  the 
result  of  a  mingling  of  trichordal  and  tetrachordal  divisions,  the  pitches 
used  are  crowded  together  until  but  one  space  as  wide  as  a  tone  is  left 
unoccupied  in  either  A.  Notwithstanding  this  intricate  departure  from 
the  diatonic  norm,  the  staff  notation  records  the  song  as  one  of  the  most 
unmistakably  European  of  the  series,  electing  to  substitute  for  its  way- 
ward notes  not  always  the  nearest  semitone  of  the  key  it  suggested. 
Yet  the  flexible  grace  with  which  the  slides  of  A2  sketch  out  the  move- 
ments laid  down  with  more  particular  care  in  A1  has  not  the  air  of 
blundering.  The  song  is  no  fixed  scheme  in  the  singer's  mind,  but  a 
composite  memory  of  many  free  renditions,  as  a  folk-tale  in  the  mind 
of  the  narrator,  minute  exactness  alternating  with  wide  latitude  in  the 
recital. 


SUMYACOLI 


A// 


/ 


B/£V 


'-=a 


fz-f—r-r—f 


208 


HOPI  SONGS 


'*  00  ScK*m,£  of  -r^covcL  A1  A*  8 '  B2  B3  C' 

r,A'(6fi 


£ 


(6» 


F 


XJ  JJ 


s 


E 


30.- 
8  - 


S 


£ 


* 


fil- 

C   • 


w 


1 


SUMYACOLI 


209 


c'cll 


c' 

p 

, 

—  r 

crc 

r~ 

'  —  -Hri?  — 

E 

r\ 

Ir 

t' 

-   ^       B 

lilr 

< 
1 

fi 

| 

P 

-   < 

(\CL 

f 

\  * 

ijic 

a 

2               r^ 

J 



r"  rp^    L                   -i 

"in 

j 

*r> 

\f  f    Erg      EJHIZ 

J9 

^L,r 

i 

BLjft 

^yL       ZZ35 

j 

L- 

L 

f    4Eq 

1 

u  /  \          ^ 

£ 

i 

i/^ 

i 

r        H  i****    rrr 

f 

» 

r 

Ti 

4 

f 

r    rr  r  rr  ^  w 

dt 

[ 

t 

r  r 

^ 

/  J 

i               v        LL  ^^^^,J    2j 

A' 

r 

Cd  • 

r> 

•*% 

C. 

s^ 

*t> 

jT 

•1 

S                                     ^r 

—  ^                                                     1                   r 

k                 r 

ct' 

A 

u                                                                  .  . 

i                f         ill  * 

rvP 

rv  p,           P       FLlT  f 

j 

Eaznn       b 

J,' 

Q     3 

1  •  •- 

l^-V^v             V-x                                                    '"           P|» 

""l     n      P^\                                        V     i*H 

liTr 

•^  L;  Ir      UUL-x                                           Ixxj 

pp    «•<»                      pArr 

ur    n  p>        rr 

^>    sk  L\           BEE 

\  P  \  -  •  "     • 

ll       \ 

I    P 

3 

pi'                       i 

</» 

^ 

L           r 

*t>" 

1  1 

g                   B 

r 

g] 

t 

• 

BV- 

V 

\ 

• 

3 

E 

/  . 

> 

^  j/ 

* 

?P 

•  (f 

? 

•7 

*- 

I 

f         A 

p 

v 

a    .                 ..,-    . 

210 


HOPI  SONGS 


rfr" 

/  uu 

ii/^  ~;i»i7    • 

*   b 

A* 

tid.' 

c' 

Tj. 

'                ^ 

r 

WL 

^^  1 

P 

i 

lx  I 

B) 

IM 

u 

yL                   \        \ 

*   A 

1 

CD 

1      g 

» 

« 

ii 

'      \ 

Jv          ?P\                       s        "T 

£ 

trg   i  \j»     LA              -      <[x  - 

J 

g 

B 

r 

r   tr  r    >•                   L 

-f 

L 

tzts     ^ 

i/ 

> 

e 

l^f* 

* 

j                »  f  p 

\ 

K 

'rY 

L         r       i  Liv 

i 

lxl/1 

b              tnmiZ2E5[E 

"£ 

g 

^      —  K        r 

£ 

K 

K- 

8 

\kl          P 

f  1 

V 

E 

t 

a 

-H 

i 

J 

-*•* 

c* 

^ 

1 

Ifi^ 

•                                 ff^f 

1r    i 

^ 

1 

7   j£ 

l*f 

Q/r 

* 

1 

i           • 

s 

?r\ 

r\     1 

fn 

P 

|X 

a     a 

^j       £!/  (/ 

3 

r 

^\ 

f                  1 

y 

E 

i 

S         \       1       t  

\ 

• 

2 

STSltEE  r      fUpp^piM* 

\        rr    rr^ 

rQ     £t   E      rri  uuUfu 

«• 

|/(/ 

S-6-2- 

//* 

r 

E 

_^ 

d       -,     ,...  „                     ,,   1   '  

•^Hr 

•  »• 


SUM^ACOLI 


211 


212 


HOPI  SONGS 


<2r 


I 


-& 


•t^- 


>V1' 


0 


a 


df 


Ofocrred. 


SUMYACOLI 
COURSE  OF  TONE:  SUMYACOLI 

A* 


213 


214  HOP  I  SONGS 

ARGUMENT.  The  semitone  partition  upward  (in  (3)  of  the  mediant  (fg) 
of  a  subminor  triad  (b-(g)fg-e)  compresses  a  tetrad  (in  a)  based  on 
that  note  (c'd'-b-a-fg)  and  contracts  the  triad  to  a  tritonus  (c'd'-g,  b-f), 
both  regaining  their  span  (d'-g,  c'-f)  by  a  semitone  expansion  upward. 

THIS  song  makes  a  new  and  dramatic  use  of  the  serpentine  lift  of 
figure  characteristic  of  this  music,  traversing  the  customary  semitone  in 
a  more  than  usually  complex  way.  The  texture  is  woven  and  torn  in 
A1,  patched  in  A2,  and  displayed  whole  again  throughout  in  B  and  C. 

Downward  excursions  to  octaves  of  previous  notes  divide  A1  into 
three  movements,  (1)  a,  beginning  with  the  fifth  c'd'-fg,  (2)  /3  with 
the  fifth  b-e,  a  tone  below  and  hence  divided  into  the  fourth,  b-fg, 
over  the  tone,  fg-e,  and  (3)  /3'  repeating  the  second  with  a  coda.  In 
all  three  of  the  movements  the  two  fifths,  upper  and  lower  are  imme- 
diately made  sixths,  the  effort  in  /3  and  ft  expanding  the  tone,  e-fg,  to 
the  minor  third,  e-g;  and  causing  in  the  descent  a  duplication  of  bound- 
aries (g,  fg)  which  may  be  likened  to  a  gap  in  the  texture,  as  if  the 
widening  of  the  lower  fifth  had  been  produced  by  raising  its  upper  fourth 
a  semitone  and  leaving  the  tone  below  intact,  as  in  A2  of  Shiashtasha, 
Singer  No.  2.  The  final  note  of  A1  shows  the  influence  of  this  lift, 
being  the  octave  of  the  new  upper  boundary,  c,  of  the  lower  fifth,  ori- 
ginally b-e.  The  singer  then  traverses  his  course  again,  devoting  him- 
self to  the  orderly  adjustment  of  the  original  figure  to  the  new  internal 
boundary,  g.  He  first  reduces  the  span  of  the  movement  of  a  from 
the  original  fifth,  c'd'-fg,  toward  the  tritonus,  c'd'-g,  not  forgetting  to 
visit  the  old  boundary,  fg,  in  his  closing  downward  excursion.  There- 
upon he  rehearses  /3  and  ft',  making  the  rent  in  the  texture  more  con- 
spicuous than  before,  until  at  the  final  rise  just  before  the  coda  he 
identifies  the  upper  limit  of  the  original  tone,  fg-e,  with  the  new  lower 
boundary,  g,  of  the  original  fourth,  b-fg,  thus  closing  the  rent  by  mak- 
ing the  lower  fifth,  b-e,  also  a  tritonus,  b-f.  He  then  ends  as  before 
on  the  octave,  c,  of  the  extension  of  this  interval,  within  a  fourteenth 
one  of  the  pitch  which  closed  A1. 

The  texture  at  this  point  consists  of  the  two  original  fifths  (upper, 
c'd'-fg ;  lower,  b-e),  both  shortened  to  tritonuses  by  raising  the  same 


SUMYACOLI  215 

note,  fg,  to  g :  this  alteration  being  external  compression  (c'd'-fg  to 
c'd'-g)  in  the  case  of  the  upper  fifth  and  internal  repair  in  the  case  of 
the  lower  (b-g-fg-e  to  b-g-f ) ;  both  tracts  nevertheless  existing  as  fifths 
(d'-g ;  e'-f)  by  the  penumbral  extension  from  which  the  change  arose. 
There  remains  only  to  resolve  this  novel  kind  of  discord  —  this  unten- 
able figure  not  within  a  framework  but  of  a  framework  —  by  pro- 
ceeding to  the  suggested  fifths,  d'-g,  c'-f .  This  the  singer  does  in  the 
B's  and  C  with  a  vigor  and  iteration  that  recall  the  long  felicitations  of 
the  close  of  "  Fidelio."  The  upper  fifth,  d'-g,  is  exhibited  in  all  its  pos- 
sibilities of  charm,  divided  all  ways  by  thirds  and  fourths,  the  initial 
descent  of  B1  already  anticipating  most.  The  lower,  c-f,  is  gradually 
dismounted  interval  by  interval,  the  octave  echo  of  its  upper  limit 
becoming  the  close  of  C1  and  of  the  song,  within  a  fourteenth  tone  of 
the  pitch  at  which  it  was  first  announced  in  A1  and  at  the  identical 
pitch  with  which  it  closed  A2. 

Surprising  and  even  hardly  credible  as  this  intricacy  sounds,  the 
interpretation  does  not  depend  on  the  evidence  of  this  song  alone.  It 
is  a  link  in  a  chain  of  evidence  of  an  instinctive  preference  for  elasticity 
of  form  to  which  nearly  every  song  of  the  series  contributes.  Sepa- 
rately the  inferences  to  the  use  of  this  device  as  an  artistic  motive  seem 
doubtful;  collectively  they  seem  to  present  under  the  aspect  of  a  delib- 
erate plan  which  really  was  the  spontaneous  choice  of  the  singer. 

The  diagram  on  the  following  page  shows  the  relation  between  two 
chief  means  of  effect  in  European  music,  discord  and  modulation,  and  the 
mutation  of  figure  illustrated  again  in  Sumyacoli.  The  continuum  of 
tone  is  represented  as  a  circle,  in  which  the  octaves  of  any  given  pitch 
alternately  occupy  opposite  ends  of  a  certain  diameter,  movement 
against  the  hands  of  a  clock  being  upward.  As  in  the  previous  dia- 
grams of  the  modes,  the  diatonic  scale  is  represented  by  three  brackets 
in  contact  signifying  any  combination  of  seven  pitches  spanning  three 
fifths,  chosen  from  the  alternate  octaves  represented  by  the  points  on 
which  the  ends  and  medial  points  of  the  brackets  fall,  and  standing  for 
the  tonic,  dominant,  and  subdominant  chords  in  the  order  in  which  the 
European  musical  consciousness  finds  them  balanced. 


216 


HOPI  SONGS 


D/SCORD. 


RESOLUTION. 


K«y  of  D  Major. 


Canfl/ct 

MODULATION: 


MUTATION* 


A1,  A*an<i  B1^. 


Discord  is  any  combination  of  pitches  within  the  diatonic  scale  other 
than  the  notes  of  one  of  its  three  triads  with  their  octaves,  and  reso- 
lution the  sequence  of  some  combination  of  these  upon  the  discordant 
group.  In  the  resolution  represented,  the  upper  octave  of  the  tonic 
represents  it.  Modulation  is  a  change  in  the  conception  of  the  step 
of  the  scale  represented  by  a  given  pitch,  entailing  changes  in  the 
pitches  identified  with  other  steps  of  the  scale.  It  appears  in  the  dia- 
gram as  a  revolution  of  the  triads  about  the  axis  of  tone.  The  modu- 
lation from  D  to  Eb  is  shown  as  a  backward  rotation  (ascent)  of  the 
scale  through  15°,  Si  coming  to  occupy  the  place  of  Do.  Mutation  of 


SUMYACOLI  217 

figure  is  the  repetition  of  a  melodic  phrase  with  certain  of  its  notes 
displaced.  In  this  music  the  displacement  commonly  does  not  exceed 
a  semitone,  is  often  upward,  generally  affects  all  the  notes  approxi- 
mately of  a  certain  pitch,  and  is  apt  to  be  followed  as  it  is  in  Su- 
myacoli  by  a  similar  movement  of  the  rest  of  the  notes.  In  illus- 
tration suggested  by  the  present  song  the  interval  order  of  the  original 
movement,  in  semitones  from  below  upward,  is  5.2.3.2.2 ;  and  this  is 
shaped  to  4.2.1.3.1.2,  reverting  to  the  first  sequence  at  a  semitone 
higher  level. 

(1)  Mutation  has  points  of  resemblance  with  both  discord  and  modula- 
tion. Like  resolution,  the  restoration  of  figure  has  the  form  of  a  return, 
of  expectation  satisfied.  Commonly  it  is  like  modulation  in  altering 
the  pitch  of  the  figure.  Otherwise  it  differs  from  both.  Both  involve 
a  scale,  to  whose  structure  resolution  adjusts  divergent  combinations  of 
pitch,  and  whose  steps  modulation  shifts  from  one  pitch  to  another. 
Mutation  is  hardly  compatible  with  the  hypothesis  of  scale.  The  cen- 
tral diagram  illustrating  the  conception  of  fragmentary  modulation,  of 
zones  of  tone  simultaneously  referred  to  different  keys,  makes  its  im- 
probability visible.  Here  the  arrows  show  that  the  outlined  fragments 
of  the  scale  have  completed  their  journey,  the  black  having  theirs  still 
before  them.  (2)  Discord  and  mutation  are  mutually  independent. 
Resolution  does  not  involve  restoration,  but  might  wholly  differ  from 
either  the  discord  or  preceding  concord.  Restoration  does  not  involve 
resolution,  for  it  may  reproduce  a  discord  which  the  shaping  resolved. 
(3)  Modulation  and  mutation  are  likewise  independent,  a  modulated 
figure  being  shaped  or  not  at  will,  and  a  shaped  figure  often  reverting 
to  the  original  pitch.  (Snake  Song  Nos.  1  and  3.) 

In  these  essential  respects  mutation  of  figure  is  a  different  means  of 
musical  effect  from  either  of  those  upon  which  European  music  is 
largely  based.  The  shaping  of  minor  melody  by  repetition  in  the 
major  mode  ("  La  Marche  des  Rois"  from  the  overture  to  "L'Arle- 
sienne"  ;  "  Prayer  from  Moses  in  Egypt"),  since  it  always  affects  the 
same  steps  (often  but  one)  of  a  complex  otherwise  invariable,  instead 
of  any  note  of  varying  complexes,  is  a  special  case  of  the  device  in 


218  HOPI  SONGS 

which  the  Hopi  singers  apparently  find  an  outlet  for  their  emotional 

vivacity  and  instinct  for  novelty. 

In  the  staff  notation  Sumyacoli  is  dull,  as  mother-of-pearl  would  be 
dull  in  a  color-print.  The  gap,  g-fg,  in  the  lower  fifth  of  A  was  noted, 
and  the  upward  shift  in  B,  but  neither  the  origin  of  the  former  in  the 
penumbral  c'  of  /3  nor  the  motive  of  the  latter  in  the  two  tritonuses. 
The  pitch  of  the  upper  fifth  was  misread  and  the  final  modulation  up- 
ward represented  as  a  return  to  it  instead  of  an  ascent  from  it.  In  a 
word,  what  with  much  confidence  may  be  asserted  to  be  the  spirit  of  the 
song,  or  a  prime  essential  in  its  spirit,  does  not  survive  the  Procrustean 
mutilation  of  its  form  to  which  the  diatonic  consciousness  unwittingly 
subjects  it.  We  learn  again  the  lesson  that,  venial  fault  as  it  may  (or 
may  not)  be  in  an  agent  of  European  civilization  to  dress  non-European 
men  and  things  in  the  garb  of  Christendom  before  he  has  further  to  do 
with  them,  it  is  the  unpardonable  sin  in  a  critic  aiming  not  to  mould 
native  life  but  understand  it. 


MANA 


PP 


p^Ffvrn  SE& 

Esfr-^-E-4-  =P±V- 


[/  ^ — T~=^~LJ^U'  "^  ^  r~  ^  i  ~~^~^: 


s^ 


i' 


'/: 


^^^=H^=F^ 


220 


HOPI  SONGS 


(XX)  MAN  A  CYLINDER-JEZr 


dk 


r 

mt5  

row  

V 

•    SJ" 

A 

MM& 

r 

U 

1  * 

2    Yf 

•  r 

» 

i 

t 

r 

4JP 

g 

J  U 

^^ 

«2i 

r\ 

3 

rjc 

^  b  \ 

i  i 

JT" 

EE 

HE 

EC 

J^—  v"\ 

P^  r 

UU  | 

i-*f 

^y 

^    v^                                    1 

\^                       >.A 

I 

>v 

" 

<$ 

2 

A  A  A         \    J>1>    A 

J  3             ^^  J 

^ 

* 

^•WJ        >!>  /i  J    y 

1      1 

MANA 


221 


\                        i£/*                                        ifnt 

lofi                                        10, 

9' 


di' 

a 


dlr. 

a 


i 

H  I  k^ 

x 

•ff 

33 

^ 

E 

r 

r*5 

^^                                     V-                               1^1»1»1»1 

3 

.f.        ,^rrr           tW 

r 

\                    {/ 

;fi       f       I- 

1 

[s1           1    1    1    I/7                    1 

L'            I 
L 

7                                  1 

1 

1 

\ 

^  *f 

v       f                                           p      ' 

[/ 

n?                        \    \ 

\  

^     yl  /I  j  j 

222 


rf, 


i 


HOPI  SONGS 


-HA 


46**- 


<tt- 

dl- 
«t- 


•fL 


-4± 


m 


<Hx  >l     It   T 


^ 
d£ 


ffi 


^ 


£ 


1^9 
!»•••* 


•tffr 


-ffr 


o 


t 


i 


ft 


ft 


£* 


MANA 


223 


? 


8 


crt^no. 


2tf 


c 


^F=^ 


±fi 


=*^ 


224 


HOPI  SONGS 


COURSE   OF  TONE:   MANA 


Observed. . 


ARGUMENT.      A  tetrad  (f'-d'e'-b-a)  contracted  upward  to  a  major  tri- 
chord (f'-d'e'-b)  gives  place  to  triads  (g'-d'e'-b,  b-(ga)g-e(de)). 

THE  wailing  irregularity  of  Mana  gives  it  a  place  apart  in  the  series. 
It  presents  disjecta  membra  of  this  music,  a  passion  in  tatters. 

Two  major  triads  appear,  separated  by  a  semitone  (g'-e'-c' :  b-ga-e), 
the  upper  alternating  with  a  major  trichord  (f'-d'e'-c') ;  and  on  other 
lips  this  or  some  other  structure  might  be  more  definite.  The  present 
performance  chiefly  impresses  by  imaging  in  the  contracted  span  of 
some  movements  the  attitude  of  sorrow,  and  in  the  violence  or  aban- 
donment of  others  its  bearing. 


MANA  225 

Through  the  dissolving  form  of  the  song  three  segments  can  be 
discerned,  each  presenting  the  familiar  outlines  of  a  high  movement,  a, 
a  descent,  /?,  and  a  coda,  y  :  the  singer  closing  within  a  fourteenth  tone 
of  the  lower  octave  of  his  opening  note.  Both  the  form  of  the  song 
and  its  adherence  to  pitch  appear  more  precise  on  closer  examination. 
One  chief  refrain  is  discoverable  in  all  the  a's  ;  the  /3's  reveal  anjdentity, 
and  ft"  copies  the  close  of  y'.  The  opening  movement  of  a"  marks  out 
an  exact  major  trichord ;  a!  begins  with  a  redundant  one  at  approxi- 
mately the  same  pitch,  thereupon  modulated  upward  a  major  third  and 
repeated  a  moment  later,  its  components  in  a  new  sequence.  The 
extension  of  a  major  trichord  to  a  tetrad  by  a  pendent  tone  is  already 
illustrated  in  this  music  (Maihai-katcina,  A3,  Sumyacoli,  B2);  and  to  this 
more  complex  group  the  singer  gives  a  languid  approximation,  com- 
pressed within  a  fourth,  in  the  initial  movement  of  the  song,  forthwith 
lifting  up  his  voice  to  a  more  vigorous  reading  spread  to  a  sixth.  Ris- 
ing a  major  third,  he  then  descends  two  fourths  in  /3,  the  first  empty,  the 
second  a  nearer  approach  to  a  major  trichord  than  he  has  yet  attained. 
In  a!  he  recommences  the  tetrad  theme  at  the  pitch  and  with  the  span 
of  the  previous  bolder  rendering,  but  rests  on  its  second  interval  as  if 
without  heart  to  finish ;  and  rising  a  major  third  above  its  highest  note, 
re-performs  the  same  broken  combination,  first  in  the  more  vigorous 
and  then  in  the  more  languid  form,  after  another  moment  of  hesitation 
substituting  for  the  latter  a  varied  reading  of  the  fuller  type.  The 
same  rise  of  a  major  third  which  led  from  a  to  ft  now  leads  from  a'  to  ft ', 
the  following  descent  spanning  a  semitone  more  than  ft,  and  augment- 
ing its  time  in  a  still  larger  ratio.  The  major  triads  that  succeed  in  y', 
and  are  reflected  in  ft" ',  brighten  the  melody  for  the  moment.  Taking 
up  in  a!'  the  same  incomplete  refrain  at  the  same  pitch,  the  singer 
develops  it  into  a  minor  trichord  at  a  tone  above  (g'-e'-d')  the  same 
interval  of  advance  that  separates  the  initial  movement  of  the  song 
from  its  repetition.  Thereupon  in  ft"  he  executes  two  downward 
fourths,  not  superposed  as  in  £,  but  lapped  and  apparently  complicated 
by  a  dependence  on  previous  pitches.  The  song  ends  in  y"  upon  the 
final  major  triad  of  y  extended  nearly  to  an  octave. 


226  HOPI  SONGS 

The  alien  artistic  methods  which  Verdi  divined  and  has  idealized  in 
the  chromatic  cadences  of  "  Aida"  here  present  themselves  in  real  life. 
In  the  third  movement  of  a!  the  main  theme  is  given  in  a  form  which 
almost  exactly  reproduces  the  motive  "  Numi  pieta"  — also  a  lament  — 
from  the  first  act  of  that  opera. 

In  Mana  the  sense  of  interval  yields  to  the  need  of  utterance.  The 
melodic  intention  still  persisting  is  hardly  more  than  is  inseparable 
from  the  use  of  the  familiar  melodic  means.  The  boundary  between 
music  and  speech  is  near. 


THE  HEMENWAY  SOUTHWESTERN  EXPEDITION 

BY  BENJAMIN  IVES  OILMAN  AND  KATHARINE  H.  STONE 


THE  HEMENWAY  SOUTHWESTERN  EXPEDITION 

IN  closing  the  final  volume  of  the  Journal  of  American  Ethnology 
and  Archaeology  we  desire  to  add  the  following  account  of  the  active 
support  given  by  Mrs.  Hemenway  for  many  years  to  the  study  of 
American  history  and  archaeology. 

In  1879  Mrs.  Hemenway's  gift  toward  the  purchase  of  the  Old 
South  Church  in  Boston  made  possible  the  permanent  preservation  of 
the  building  as  a  historic  monument,  and  the  work  of  instruction  in 
American  history  since  carried  on  there  owes  its  foundation  and  main- 
tenance to  her.  In  1882  the  visit  to  Boston  of  several  Zuni  Indians 
under  the  guidance  of  the  late  Frank  Hamilton  Gushing  of  the  Bureau 
of  Ethnology,  since  1879  identified  with  the  study  of  this  people,  im- 
pressed Mrs.  Hemenway  with  the  need  of  securing  accurate  information 
about  the  tribes  of  the  Southwestern  United  States  before  it  should  be 
too  late.  At  Mrs.  Hemen way's  invitation  Mr.  Gushing  visited  the  East 
again  in  the  summer  of  1886  with  three  Zuiii  chiefs,  and  in  the  autumn 
was  commissioned  by  Mrs.  Hemenway  to  continue  the  studies  of  the 
Pueblo  Indians  which  he  had  already  carried  farther  than  any  prede- 
cessor. The  title  of  the  Hemenway  Southwestern  Archaeological  Expe- 
dition was  the  suggestion  of  Mr.  Gushing,  who  became  director  of  the 
work,  with  Mr.  Frederick  W.  Hodge,  now  of  the  Bureau  of  Ethnology, 
Dr.  J.  L.  Wortman,  of  the  Army  Medical  Museum,  and  the  well-known 
archaeologists,  Dr.  Herman  F.  C.  ten  Kate  and  Dr.  Adolf  F.  Bandelier, 
as  assistants.  In  February,  1887,  investigations  were  begun  on  the  Rio 
Salado  near  Phoenix,  Arizona,  and  early  in  1888  were  taken  up  at  Zuni. 
The  greater  part  of  the  pottery  and  other  finds  at  both  places  are  now 
included  in  the  collection  preserved  in  the  Hemenway  Room  at  the 
Peabody  Museum  of  Harvard  University.  In  1888  the  Expedition  was 
represented  at  the  Seventh  Congress  of  Americanists  in  Berlin  by  two 
of  its  advisers,  Professor  E.  S.  Morse  of  Salem  and  Mr.  Sylvester 


230  HOPI  SONGS 

Baxter  of  Boston.  A  typical  collection  of  pottery,  mostly  from  the  Rio 
Salado,  was  shown,  and  this  was  later  presented  to  the  Imperial  Ethno- 
logical Museum  in  Berlin  by  Mrs.  Hemenway.  At  this  time  Mrs.  Hemen- 
way  actively  interested  herself  in  the  preservation  of  the  remarkable 
ruin  called  Casa  Grande  in  Arizona,  and  joined  in  a  petition  to  this  end 
which  was  presented  to  Congress  on  February  4,  1889,  and  granted 
March  2,  the  ruin  being  at  present  a  national  reservation.  The  study 
of  the  history  of  the  Pueblo  tribes  occupied  Dr.  Bandelier  until  1891, 
and  a  collection  of  books  and  copies  of  MSS.  brought  together  in  the 
course  of  his  investigations  was  presented  by  Mrs.  Hemenway  to  the  Li- 
brary of  the  Peabody  Museum. 

In  July,  1889,  the  charge  of  the  Expedition  was  transferred  to  Dr. 
J.  Walter  Fewkes,  now  of  the  Bureau  of  Ethnology  in  Washington, 
already  well  known  as  naturalist  and  ethnologist.  In  the  winter  of 
1889-90  Dr.  Fewkes  was  commissioned  by  Mrs.  Hemenway  to  visit  the 
Passamaquoddy  tribe  of  Indians  in  Maine,  taking  with  him  a  phono- 
graph in  order  to  test  the  availability  of  this  instrument  as  a  means  of 
collecting  the  folk-lore  of  the  Pueblo  tribes.  The  results  obtainedvled 
to  the  inclusion  of  a  phonograph  in  the  outfit  of  the  next  expedition 
to  Zuni,  where  a  number  of  records  were  made  both  of  speech  and  song. 
The  cylinders  were  afterward  deposited  in  the  Peabody  Museum,  the 
study  of  the  songs  being  intrusted  by  Mrs.  Hemenway  to  Mr.  Benjamin 
Ives  Oilman,  now  Secretary  of  the  Museum  of  Fine  Arts  in  Boston,  at 
the  time  lecturing  at  Harvard  University  on  the  psychology  of  music. 
Durinjr  1890  and  1891  the  late  Mr.  John  G.  Owens  was  associated 

O 

with  the  Expedition.  Mr.  Owens  was  the  first  incumbent  of  a  fellow- 
ship in  American  Archaeology  and  Ethnology  instituted  by  Mrs.  Hemen- 
way in  pursuance  of  her  plans  for  the  encouragement  of  these  studies, 
and  held  the  position  until  his  death  in  Honduras  in  1893  as  chief 
executive  officer  of  the  Peabody  Museum  Expedition  to  that  country. 
In  1891  the  Expedition  removed  from  Zuni  to  the  Moqui  or  Hopi  vil- 
lages in  Arizona,  the  late  Mr.  A.  M.  Stephen,  long  a  resident  among 
the  Hopi  people,  becoming  an  assistant  in  the  work.  A  large  collection 
of  objects  gathered  here  by  Dr.  Fewkes,  including  a  number  of  phono- 


THE  HEMENWAY  SOUTHWESTERN  EXPEDITION        231 

graphic  records  of  Hopi  singing,  were  added  to  the  previous  contents 
of  the  Hemenway  Room  at  the  Peabody  Museum.  The  songs  were 
studied  by  Mr.  Oilman  and  form  the  subject  of  the  present  volume.  In 
the  winter  of  1892  and  1893  Mrs.  Hemenway  commissioned  Dr.  Fewkes 
to  take  to  Madrid  a  representative  collection  of  objects  from  the  Hopi 
Pueblos  for  exhibition  at  the  Exposicion  Historico- Americana  held  on 
the  occasion  of  the  400th  anniversary  of  the  discovery  of  America.  The 
musical  results  of  the  Expedition  were  of  great  interest  to  Mrs.  Hemen- 
way, who  in  1893  commissioned  Mr.  Gilman  to  make  a  collection  of 
phonographic  records  of  exotic  music  at  the  Columbian  Exposition  in 
Chicago.  A  number  of  cylinders  were  inscribed  with  vocal  and  instru- 
mental performances  by  Javanese,  Samoans,  Syrians,  and  Kwakiutl 
Indians,  and  have  since  been  deposited  with  the  collections  from  the 
Pueblos  at  the  Peabody  Museum. 

The  field  work  of  the  Expedition  came  to  an  end  at  Mrs.  Hemenway's 
death  in  March,  1894.    The  following  publications  record  its  results :  — 

1889.  The  Inca  Bone  and  Kindred  Formations  among  the  Ancient  Arizonians ; 
based  on  studies  of  skeletons  found  in  the  Rio  Salado,  and  given  by  Mrs. 
Hemenway  to  the  Army  Medical  Museum.     Washington   Matthews, 
Surgeon  U.  S.  A. 

American  Anthropologist,  Oct.  1,  1889,  pp.  337-345,  illustrations. 

1890.  Preliminary  Note  on  the  Origin,  Working  Hypothesis,  and  Primary 
Researches  of  the  Hemenway  Southwestern  Archaeological  Expedition. 
Frank  H.  Gushing. 

Congres   Internationale  des  Ame*ricanistes.     Berlin,  1888.     Compte 
Rendu  de  la  7me  Session.     Berlin,  1890,  pp.  151-194. 
On  an  Anatomical  Characteristic  of  the  Hyoid  Bone  of  Pre-Columbian 
Pueblo  Indians  of  Arizona,  U.  S.  A.    J.  L.  Wortman  and  Herman  F. 
C.  ten  Kate.     Ibid.,  pp.  263-270. 

The  Historical  Archives  of  the  Hemenway  Southwestern  Archaeologi- 
cal Expedition.     Adolf  F.  Bandelier.     Ibid.,  pp.  450-459. 
The  Use  of  the  Phonograph  in  the  Study  of  the  Language  of  the  Ameri- 
can Indians.     J.  Walter  Fewkes. 

American  Naturalist,  May,  1890,  pp.  495,  496. 


232  HOPI  SONGS 

A  Contribution  to  Passamaq noddy  Folk-Lore.     J.  Walter  Fewkes. 
Journal  of  American  Folk-Lore,  Dec.,  1890,  pp.  257-280.     A  pre- 
liminary account  appeared  in  "  Science,"  May  2,  1890. 

On  the  Use  of  the  Phonograph  among  the  Zuni  Indians.     J.  Walter 

Fewkes. 

American  Naturalist,  July,  1890,  pp.  687-691. 

Additional  Studies  of  Zuni  Songs  and  Rituals  with  the  Phonograph. 
J.  Walter  Fewkes. 

American  Naturalist,  Nov.,  1890,  pp.  1094-1098. 

Human  Bones  of  the  Hemenway  Collection  in  the  U.  S.  Army  Medical 
Museum.  Washington  Matthews,  Surgeon  U.  S.  A.,  Dr.  J.  L.  Wort- 
man,  and  Dr.  John  S.  Billings. 

Memoirs  of  the  National  Academy  of  Sciences.  Vol.  VI.  Washing- 
ton, 1890,  pp.  165-286,  with  59  plates. 

Contributions    to   the    History   of   the    Southwestern    Portion   of   the 
United  States.     By  Adolph  F.  Bandelier. 

Papers  of  the  Archaeological  Institute  of  America.  American  Series, 
V.  Cambridge,  1890,  206  pp.,  with  map. 

This  volume  contains  part  of  the  result  of  Mrs.  Hemenway's  commis- 
sion to  Dr.  Bandelier  and  was  published  by  the  Expedition  under  the 
auspices  of  the  Institute. 

A  Study  of  Some  Summer  Ceremonials  of  the  Zuni  and  Moki.  J. 
Walter  Fewkes. 

Bulletin  of  Essex  Institute,  July,  1890,  pp.  89-113. 
1891.  Some  Games  of  the  Zuni.     John  G.  Owens. 

Popular  Science  Monthly,  May,  1891,  10  pp.,  illus. 

Suggestions  as  to  the  Meaning  of  the  Moki  Snake  Dance.  J.  Walter 
Fewkes. 

Journal  of  American  Folk-Lore,  June,  1891,  pp.  129-138. 
A  Journal  of  American  Archaeology  and  Ethnology.    Hemenway  South- 
western Archaeological  Expedition.    Vol.1.    Boston,  1891.    Edited  by  J. 
Walter  Fewkes.     Plates  and  illustrations. 

Contents : 

1.  A  Few  Summer  Ceremonials  at  the  Zuni  Pueblo.     J.  Walter 
Fewkes.     Pp.  1-61. 

2.  Zuni  Melodies.     Benjamin  Ives  Gilman.     Pp.  65-91, 


THE  HEMENWAY  SOUTHWESTERN  EXPEDITION        233 

3.  Reconnaissance  of  Ruins  in  or  near  the  Zuni  Reservation.     J. 
Walter  Fewkes.     Pp.  95-132. 

1892.  A  Few  Tusayan  Pictographs.     J.  Walter  Fewkes. 

American  Anthropologist,  Jan.,  1892,  pp.  9-26,  with  plates. 
The  La-la-kon-ti ;  A  Tusayan  Dance.     J.  Walter  Fewkes. 

American  Anthropologist,  April,  1892,  pp.  105-129,  with  plates. 
The  Mam-zrau-tu.     J.  Walter  Fewkes  and  A.  M.  Stephen. 

American  Anthropologist,  July,  1892,  pp.  217-245,  with  plates. 
The  Na-ac-nai-ya:  a  Tusayan  Initiation  Ceremony.    J.  Walter  Fewkes. 
Observations  by  A.  M.  Stephen. 

Journal  of  American  Folk-Lore,  July,  1892,  pp.  189-217. 
The  Ceremonial  Circuit  among  the  Village  Indians  of  Northeastern 
Arizona.     J.  Walter  Fewkes.     Observations  made  jointly  with  A.  M. 
Stephen  and  J.  G.  Owens. 

Journal  of  American  Folk-Lore,  Dec.,  1892,  pp.  33-42. 
The  Wa-wa-ka-tci-na :  A  Tusayan  Foot  Race.     J.  Walter  Fewkes. 

Bulletin  of  Essex  Institute,  July,  1892,  pp.  113-133,  with  plates. 
A  Journal  of  American  Archaeology  and  Ethnology.    Vol.  II.    Boston, 
1892.     Edited  by  J.  Walter  Fewkes.     Plates  and  illus.  in  text. 

Contents : 

1.  A  Few  Summer  Ceremonials  at  the  Tusayan  Pueblos.   J.  Walter 
Fewkes.     Pp.  1-159. 

2.  Natal  Ceremonies  of  the  Hopi  Indians.     John  G.  Owens.     Pp. 
163-175. 

3.  A  Report  on  the  Present  Condition  of  a  Ruin  in  Arizona  called 
Casa  Grande.     J.  Walter  Fewkes.     Pp.  179-193. 

1893.  Prehistoric  Irrigation  in  Arizona.     F.  W.  Hodge. 

American  Anthropologist,  July,  1893,  pp.  323-330. 
A  Central  American  Ceremony  which  suggests  the  Snake  Dance  of 
the  Tusayan  Villages.     J.  Walter  Fewkes. 

American  Anthropologist,  July,  1893,  pp.  285-306,  with  plates. 
A-Wa-to-bi;     An  Archaeological    Verification  of  a  Tusayan  Legend. 
J.  Walter  Fewkes. 

American  Anthropologist,  Oct.,  1893,  pp.  363-375,  with  plates. 
The  Pa-lii-lu-kon-ti :     A  Tusayan  Ceremony.     J.  Walter  Fewkes  and 
A.  M.  Stephen. 

Journal  of  American  Folk-Lore,  Oct.,  1893,  pp.  269-282. 


234  HOPI  SONGS 

Ancient  Villages  of  Arizona.     J.  Walter  Fewkes. 

Boston  Commonwealth,  June  10,  1893. 

A  Journal  of  American  Archeology  and  Ethnology.     Vol.  III.     Bos- 
ton, 1893.     Edited  by  J.  Walter  Fewkes. 

Contents : 

1.  An  Outline  of  the  Documentary  History  of  the  Zuni   Tribe. 
Adolph  F.  Bandelier.     Pp.  1-115. 

2.  Somatological  Observations  on  the  Indians  of  the  South  West. 
H.  F.  C.  ten  Kate.     Pp.  119-144. 

The  Song  of    the  Ancient    People.     Edna   Dean  Proctor:  with    an 
introduction  by  Professor  John  Fiske  and  a  Commentary  by  Frank  H. 
Gushing.     Boston,  1893,  69  pp.,  with  11  aquatints  by  Julian  Scott. 
1893-94.  The  Group  of  Tusayan  Celebrations  called  Katcinas.     J.  Walter 
Fewkes. 

15th  Annual  Report  of  the  Bureau  of  Ethnology,  pp.  251-312. 

1894.  On  Certain  Personages  who  appear  in  a  Tusayan  Ceremony.    J.  Walter 
Fewkes. 

American  Anthropologist,  Jan.,  1894,  pp.  32-52,  with  plates. 
The  Kinship  of  a  Tanoan  Speaking  Community  in  Tusayan.     J.  Walter 
Fewkes. 

American  Anthropologist,  April,  1894,  pp.  162-167. 
Kinship  of  the  Tusayan  Villages.     J.  Walter  Fewkes. 

American  Anthropologist,  Oct.,  1894,  pp.  394-417. 
Dolls  of  the  Tusayan  Indians.     J.  Walter  Fewkes. 

Internationales  Archiv  fur  Ethnographic.     Leiden,  Bd.  VII,  1894, 

pp.  45-74,  with  plates. 

The  Walpi  Flute  Observance:  A  Study  of  Primitive   Dramatization. 
J.  Walter  Fewkes.     Observations  made  by  A.  M.  Stephen. 

Journal  of  American  Folk-Lore,  Oct.,  1894,  pp.  265-287. 
A  Journal  of  American  Archeology  and  Ethnology.     Vol.  IV.     Bos- 
ton, 1894.     Edited  by  J.  Walter  Fewkes.     Plates  and  illustrations. 

Contents : 

The    Snake     Ceremonials  at   Walpi,   pp.   1-126.     By  J.  Walter 
Fewkes,  assisted  by  A.  M.  Stephen  and  J.  G.  Owens. 

1895.  The  Tusayan  New  Fire  Ceremony.     J.  Walter  Fewkes.     Observations 
made  by  A.  M.  Stephen  and  J.  W.  Fewkes. 


THE  HEMENWAY  SOUTHWESTERN  EXPEDITION       235 

Proceedings  of  Boston  Society  of  Natural  Histoiy,  Jan.,  1895,  pp. 

422-458. 
Comparison  of  Sia  and  Tusayan  Snake  Ceremonies.     J.  Walter  Fewkes. 

Based  in  part  on  material  collected  while  connected  with  the  Hemen- 

way  Southwestern  Expedition. 

American  Anthropologist,  April,  1895,  pp.  118-141. 
Destruction  of  the  Tusayan  Monsters.     J.  Walter  Fewkes. 

Journal  of  American  Folk-Lore,  June,  1895,  pp.  132-137. 
Provisional  List  of  Annual  Ceremonies  at  Walpi.     J.  Walter  Fewkes. 

Internationales  Archiv  fiir  Ethnographic,  1895,  pp.  215-237. 
Catalogue  of  the  Hemenway  Collection  in  the  Historico-Americana  Ex- 
posicion.     Madrid,  1892.     J.  Walter  Fewkes. 

Report  of  the  United  States  Commission  to  the  Columbian  Historical 

Exposition  in  Madrid,  1892-93.    Washington,  1895,  pp.  279-304. 
The  Bandelier  Collection  of  Copies  of  Documents  relative  to  the  His- 
tory of  New  Mexico  and  Arizona.     Ibid.,  pp.  305-326. 
1896.  A  Contribution  to  Ethnobotany.     J.  Walter  Fewkes. 

American  Anthropologist,  Jan.,  1896,  pp.  14-21. 

Tusayan  Totemic  Signatures.     J.   Walter  Fewkes.     Part  of  material 
collected  by  A.  M.  Stephen. 

American  Anthropologist,  Jan.,  1897,  pp.  1-11,  with  plates. 
1908.  A  Journal  of   American  Archaeology  and  Ethnology.     Fifth  and  Con- 
cluding Volume.     Boston,  1908,  235  pp.,  with  plates. 

Contents : 

1.  Hopi  Songs.     Benjamin  Ives  Gilman.     Pp.  1-226. 

2.  The  Hemenway  Southwestern  Expedition.     Benjamin  Ives  Gil- 
man and  Katharine  H.  Stone.    Pp.  227-235. 


CAMBRIDGE  •  MASSACHUSETTS 
U   *    S   •  A 


ML        Oilman ,  Benjamin  Ives 

3557        Hopi  songs 

G56 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY 


