MUSIC  OF 
LATIN 
AMERICA 

N icol(Zs  S lofiitfishy 


ILLUSTRATED  WITH 


<9 

09 


GEORGE  G.  HARRAP  &  CO.  LTD. 
LONDON  TORONTO  BOMBAY  SYDNEY 


First  piblished  1946 
by  George  G.  Harrap  &  Co.  Ltd. 
182  High  Holborn,  London,  W.C.i 


Copyright.  All  rights  reserved. 


C  ontents 


I  PANORAMA  OF  LATIN  AMERICAN  MUSIC  i 

A  Pan  American  Fishing  Trip  i 


Composers  and  Society 

19 

Artless  Folklore 

38 

Is  Latin  America  Latin? 

64 

[I  MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

73 

Argentina 

^O' 

73 

Bolivia 

104 

Brazil 

tM 

109 

Chile 

UJ 

151 

3r, 

Colombia 

166 

Costa  Rica 

173 

Cuba 

178 

Dominican  ”  'Republic 

188 

Ecuador 

196 

Guatemala  • 

200 

Haiti 

207 

Honduras 

212 

Mexico 

214 

Nicaragua 

254 

Panama 

258 

Paraguay 

262 

Peru 

265 

El  Salvador 

279 

Uruguay 

282 

'Venezuela 

00 

GO 

Ill  DICTIONARY 
SONGS  AND 
MENTS 


CONTENTS 

OF  LATIN  AMERICAN  MUSICIANS, 
DANCES,  AND  MUSICAL  INSTRU- 


295 


^27 

INDEX 


A  cknowledgment 


To  my  friends  in  the  twenty  republics  of  Latin  America 
goes  my  gratitude  for  contributing  the  factual  data  without 
which  this  book  could  not  have  been  written.  Their  names 
appear  all  over  these  pages  in  the  form  of  quotations  from 
their  writings,  credit  lines  under  musical  illustrations,  and 
musical  autographs.  I  also  want  to  thank  Arthur  Cohn  for 
checking  up  on  dates  and  titles  of  orchestral  scores  by  Latin 
American  composers  in  the  Fleisher  Collection  in  Phila¬ 
delphia.  Translations  from  foreign  books  in  various  lan¬ 
guages  are  my  own. 


N.  S. 


Venient  mnis  saecula  sens 
Quibus  Oceanus  vincula  rerum 
Laxet  et  ingens  fateat  tellusy 
Thetis que  novos  detegat  orbeSy 
Nec  sit  terris  ultima  T hule. 


[Seneca] 


A  Pan  American  Fishing  Trip 


One  hundred  and  twenty-eight  years  ago,  the  Government  of  the  United 
States  sent  a  mission  to  South  America,  on  the  frigate  Congress,  with 
the  purpose  of  collecting  information  on  the  state  of  the  neighboring 
continent.  The  secretary  of  the  mission  was  H.  M.  Brackenridge,  who 
^bsequently  played  a  part  behind  the  scenes  in  the  drama  of  the  Monroe 
Doctrine.  In  his  account  of  the  voyage,  published  in  1819,  he  wrote:  “The 
study  of  South  American_  affairs  has  not  yet  become  fashionable  j  persons 
who  possess  the  most  minute  acquaintance  with  the  different  countries 
of  Europe  have  scarcely  given  themselves  the  trouble  to  become  familiar 
with  the  mere  geographical  outlines  of  our  great  Southern  Continent. 

.  .  .  What  is  wanted  at  present  is  not  so  much  a  work  embracing  the 
necessary  information  on  the  subject  of  South  America  generally  as  one 
that  should  create  a  desire  to  be  informed.” 

Since  Brackenridge’s  time,  many  a  weighty  volume  has  been  pub- 
hshed  dealing  with  geography,  politics,  and  economics  of  South  America, 
Central  America,  and  the  West  Indies,  the  parts  of  the  world  which  are 
conimonly  referred  to  under  the  collective  name  of  Latin  America.  But 
m  the  domain  of  the  arts,  and  more  particularly  of  music,  Latin  America 

remains  largely  a 

To  find  out  what  is  what  and  who  is  who  in  the  music  of  Latin  America 
1  undertook  a  journey  using  a  swifter  conveyance  than  Brackenridge’s 
frigate— the  airplane.  I  discovered  a  veritable  El  Dorado  of  music,  and 
this  book  embodies  my  findings.  In  my  quest  of  musical  treasure,  I  was 
greatly  helped  by  my  Latin  American  friends.  But  not  all  were  of  one 
mind  as  to  how  I  should  treat  the  subject  in  my  book.  Jose  Castaneda, 
he  Guatemalan  musician  who  excels'  in  fiery  journalism,  admonished 
me  earnestly  in  an  article  entitled  La  Pesca  Panamericanista  (Pan- 


2 


PANORAMA  OF  LATIN  AMERICAN  MUSIC 

American  Fishing  Trip)j  published  in  El  Liberal  Progresista  of  Gua¬ 
temala  City,  January  17,  1942.  He  wrote: 


A  restless  temperament,  an  explorer  by  nature,  Slonimsky  has  always  sought 
the  sources  of  the  musical  unknown.  It  is  logical,  therefore,  that  he  should  be 
wandering  in  our  lands  in  search  of  a  Pan  American  adventure.  It  is  possible 
that,  pestered  by  musicians  avid  for  publicity,  he  should  yield  and  carry  away 
an  all  too  numerous  collection  of  musical  works,  or  what  pass  for  such.  The 
danger  for  Slonimsky  lies  in  his  amiable  nature,  in  his  inability  to  reject  bluntly 
the  impostor  who  unashamedly  submits  manuscripts  to  him  for  inclusion  in  his 
programs  or  in  the  book  he  is  writing.  Let  us  hope  that  this  is  a  transitory  peril. 
Back  in  Boston,  in  the  cultural  atmosphere  of  the  learned  Northern  city,  he 
will  recover  his  critical  faculties,  and  will  again  become  the  Slonimsky  we  know, 
a  critic  of  fine  sensibility,  of  alert  judgment,  with  no  consideration  for  medi¬ 
ocrity,  His  book  should  be  something  more  than  a  congealed  catalogue.  Some¬ 
thing  more  than  mere  statistics.  It  should  give  the  candid  and  bold  view  of  one 
who  has  seen  us  at  close  range. 

In  the  meantime,  let  Slonimsky  ponder  the  gravity  of  his  undertaking.  All 
over  the  Americas,  his  book  will  be  received  with  warm  attention,  but  also  in  a 
critical  spirit.  Pan  American  fishing  should  be  done  with  a  rod,  and  not  with  a 
net.  How  gratifying  it  would  be  to  find  evidence,  on  the  pages  of  his  future 
book,  that  the  author  has  jettisoned  the  ballast  of  mediocre  production,  and 
rejected  all  compromises!  We  cannot  expect  anything  else  from  Nicolas 
Slonimsky,  the  subtle  annotator  of  modern  music. 


I  am  now  back  in  Boston,  breathing  the  cultural  air  of  the  ''learned 
Northern  city,”  but  Lam  still  unconvinced  that  Castaneda’s  rod  is  the 
proper  instrument  for  a  factual  survey.  And  now  that  my  book  is  here, 
there  are  found  in  it  all  sorts  of  fish,  multi-colored  tropical  fish  cavorting 
in  the  southern  sun,  and  common  ordinary  fish  that  will  hardly  excite 
the  palate  of  an  ichthyological  gourmet.  But  here  they  are,  all  assembled 
between  covers,  and— who  knows.?— some  of  them  may  yet  spawn  sig¬ 
nificant  caviar,  which  even  the  fastidious  Castaneda  will  find  stimulating. 

On  my  Pan-American  tour,  I  gave  a  lecture-recital  in  each  country, 
eatunng  modern  music,  including  compositions  by  native  musicians.  My 
appearances  in  the  countries  I  visited  were  presented  under  the  auspices 
0  ocal  cultural  organizations,  official,  semi-official,  and  private.*  The 


Consermtorio  Brasileiro  in  Rio  de  Taneiro 
Conservatono  Dramatko  e  Musical  in  S  Pnnln  d  ..  Janeiro 

dpi  ir,  A*  T  •  '  Brazil)  Grufo  Renomaon.  and  Amizo 

Ecuador,  Co^ono  Naconal  of  Panama,  Asoci.ci6nM  CuUura  ^ 


A  PAN  AMERICAN  FISHING  TRIP  3 

subject  of  my  lecture-recitals  was  modern  music  in  all  its  ramifications, 
udmg  such  matters  as  polytonality,  neo-classicism  and  expressionism. 
Most  of  my  talks  were  broadcast.  I  should  very  much  like  to  know  the 
psychological  reaction  of  a  dweller  of  the  Ecuadorean  Andes,  or  of  the 
n  lans  in  iNicaragua,  to  the  Klavterstuck,  Of  us  33a  of  Schoenberg,  which 
teSniqif  Programs  as  a  classical  example  of  the  twelve-tone 

I  spoke  extemporaneously,  in  Spanish,  albeit  unorthodox  as  to  gram- 

thraid"^  ^o^d^sage.  In  Brazil  I  took  a  long  shot  at  Portuguese, \ith 
he  aid  of  makeshift  linguistic  formulas  which  I  had  devised  for  the 
purpose  of  converting  Spanish  words  into  Portuguese.  The  children  of 
Oscar  Lorenzo  Fernandez,  the  Brazilian  composer,  drilled  me  in  Portu¬ 
guese  pronunciation;  they  could  not  understand  my  difficulties.  It  was 
so  simple,  so  natural  to  them  to  speak  in  Portuguese. 

for^m? 1  Fernandez  had  a  surprise 

tZ  tk  e  of  hej^-dered  me  a  diploma  which  conferred  on  me 

Professor  Honorario  of  the  Conservatorio  Brasileiro  de  Mu- 

W  I  felt  it  incumbent  upon  me  to  say  a 

few  words  in  reply,  but  here  my  Portuguese  broke  down,  and  I  had^to 
let  my  last  sentence  go  unfinished.  But  on  the  whole,  my  linguistic  venture 
was  successful.  The  morning  paper  Correio  da  Manhd  wrote  that  my 

>t„u„d.ng 

Wien  I  repeated  my  lecture  !„  Sao  Paulo,  a  lady  came  to  the  green 
room  and  comphmented  me  on  my  Portuguese.  "It  sounded  exactly  like 

ho^*”  '  T*''*  tonunendatibn  was  double-edged, 

however,  for  Marto  de  Andrade,  who  was  also  present  at  my  lecturfl 

litres”!, hsyrax. 

The  musical  tourist  in  Latin  America  is  constantly  amazed  by  the 
attention  which  the  local  press  pays  to  concert  life,  often  featuring  musical 
™ts  on  the  front  page.  When  I  played  in  Panama  City,  in  a  joint  recka 
demoted  de  Saint  Malo,  one  newspaper 

Ws  4nTr  K  rr  ^  with  these 

in  ^  r?  .  engrossed 

_ saine  pavement  which  serves  us  in 


,  panorama  of  LATIN  AMERICAN  MUSIC 

our  daily  taste!”  Incidentally,  the  Panama  concert  R«“d  hvmd^ 

and  siavAht  dollars,  a  gratifying  return,  considering  that  we  played  a 
modern  W™.  Stravinsky  s 

^M^mutives  of  Latin  American  republics  often  take  a  personal 
interest  in  musical  events.  During  the  presidency  of  the  now  exiled  Gen- 
eral  Torge  Ubico  of  Guatemala,  it  was  necessary  to  secure  a  permit  horn 
him  for  each  concert  by  a  foreign  artist.  To  .7 
such  a  permit,  I  received  a  prompt  reply,  which  I 
YOU  FOR  YOUR  FINE  ATTENTIONS  AND  AM  GRATIFIED 
THAT  YOU  REGARD  WITH  APPROBATION  THE  STATE  OF 
MUSIC  IN  GUATEMALA.  I  SALUTE  YOU.  JORGE  UBICO. 

In  San  Salvador,  the  capital  of  the  smallest  Central  American  republic, 
El  Salvador,  four  hundred  people  attended  my  concert.  This  would  be 
proportionate  to  thirty-two  thousand  people  turning  up  at  Madison 
Square  Garden  to  hear  a  talk  on  sinusoidal  vibrations  proffered  by  a 
gentleman  speaking  in  Basic  English,  embellished  with  international 
polysyllables.  The  principal  newspaper  of  San  Salvador,  El  Diario  Latino, 
devoted  four  columns  of  space  to  the  review  of  my  concert,  which  is  pro¬ 
portionate  to  thirty-six  columns  of  print  in  a  weekday  issue  of  The  New 
York  Times. 

About  halfway  through  my  talk,  a  middle-aged  man,  clad  in  khaki, 
entered  the  hall  and  sat  inconspicuously  among  the  audience.  I  heard 
someone  whisper:  "EZ  Senor  Presidente!”  It  was  General  Maximiliano 
Hernandez  Martinez,  at  that  time  Dictator-President  of  the  republic  of 
El  Salvador.  He  was  late  because,  as  he  explained  to  me  afterwards,  he 
had  been  detained  at  a  cabinet  meeting.  (El  Salvador  had  just  declared 
war  on  the  Axis  powers.)  The  Dictator-President  was  a  music  lover,  and 
used  to  play  the  drums  in  a  military  band,  but  I  felt  it  was  fortunate  that 
he  arrived  after  I  had  finished  the  Schoenberg  Elavier stuck.  Atonal  music 
does  not  usually  agree  with  absolute  rulers.  He  applauded  heartily  when 
I  played  some  piano  pieces  by  three  Salvadorean  composers,  who  were 
also  present  at  the  concert. 

In  Nicaragua,  the  newspapers  took  the  opportunity  to  express  their 
admiration  for  the  military  achievements  of  the  country  of  my  birth, 
Russia,  and  greeted  me  with  exuberant  headlines  on  the  front  page: 


You  COME  TO  Managua,  oh  Nicolas  Slonimsky,  at  the  time  when 

THE  SOUL  OF  RuSSIA  FLIES  ON  THE  HEROIC  WINGS  OF  LIBERTY  IN 


A  PAN  AMERICAN  FISHING  TRIP 


5 


DEFENSE  OF  THE  ALERT  SPIRIT  OF  DEMOCRACY -  YoU  BRING  US  A 

MESSAGE  OF  IMMORTAL  RuSSIA,  THE  RuSSIA  OF  THE  ARTS,  AND  A 

REFLECTION  OF  THE  EPICAL  ACCOMPLISHMENT  OF  A  NATION  THAT 

KNOWS  HOW  TO  PROTECT  THE  INTEGRITY  OF  HER  SACRED  SOIL - 

Be  WELCOME,  OH  NicoLAs  Slonimsky! 

In  Cuba  a  music  critic  called  me  “un  verdadero  Rey  de  la  Batuta,”  and 
since  then  I  sign  letters  to  my  Cuban  friends,  “Affectionately  yours. 
King  of  the  Baton.”  Another  Havana  critic,  outraged  by  my  ultra-modern 
programs,  said  I  was  “loco,”  and  accused  me  of  playing  a  practical  joke  on 
the  Cuban  public.  I  had  conducted  Ionization  by  Edgar  Varese,  scored 
for  instruments  of  percussion,  friction,  and  sibilation,  as  well  as  Schoen¬ 
berg’s  twelve-tone  piece,  Accornfaniment  to  a  Cinema  Picture. 

Latin  American  journalists  have  learned  from  their  Yankee  colleagues 
the  fine  art  of  sensational  reporting.  In  Rio  de  Janeiro,  an  evening  paper 
published  an  interview  with  me,  and  the  headline,  right  over  my  pic¬ 
ture,  read;  “There  Are  No  Musicians  in  South  America.”  I  was  horrified 
when  I  saw  it,  but  was  somewhat  reassured  by  the  opening  paragraph  of 
the  story,  which  explained:  “This  is  what  the  dictionaries  say,  but 
Slonimsky  believes  otherwise.” 

In  Sao  Paulo,  Brazil’s  second  largest  city,  I  told  the  reporter  of  the 
Diario  da  Noite  how  greatly  impressed  I  was  by  Villa-Lobos’  ingenious 
Bachianas  Brasileiras,  which  interpret  Bach  as  part  of  Brazilian  folklore. 
In  the  Chorale  of  the  fourth  suite  from  Bachianas  Brasileiras ,  there  is  a 
recurring  pedal  note  on  a  high  B  flat  which,  so  Villa-Lobos  explained,  is 
the  exact  reproduction  of  the  cry  of  a  jungle  bird,  the  Araponga.  I  also 
mentioned  to  the  reporter  that  I  had  never  seen  the  Araponga,  but  should 
like  to  do  so  if  there  were  one  in  captivity. 

The  story  appeared  in  the  Diario  da  Aoiitis  under  this  heading: 

CAME  TO  BRAZIL  TO  SEE  ARAPONGA 

Yankee  Composer  Introduced  Today  to  the  Bird 

That  Inspired  the  B  Flat  of  the  Bachianas  Brasileiras 

In  vivid  Portuguese  prose,  the  reporter  described  my  visit  to  the  bird 
shop  (he  even  gave  the  exact  address)  and  my  reaction  to  the  Araponga. 
It  was,  of  course,  all  pure  fiction.  I  never  saw  the  Araponga  and  am  still 
without  definite  confirmation  as  to  whether  it  actually  emits  a  high  B 
flat. 

Villa-Lobos  has  many  another  trick  up  his  inventive  sleeve.  He  has. 


6  PANORAMA  OF  LATIN  AMERICAN  MUSIC 

for  instance,  perfected  a  method  whereby  he  can  extract  melodies  from 
pictures.  He  calls  it  “millimetrization.”  He  traces  the  contours  of  the 
picture  on  graph  paper,  and  then  plots  the  melody,  a  semitone  to  a  square 
of  the  graph  in  the  vertical  direction,  and  an  eighth-note  to  a  horizontal 
unit.  Thus  an  ascending  curve  in  the  picture  results  in  a  melody  going 
up,  and  a  descending  line  produces  a  falling  musical  phrase.  An  un¬ 
dulating  landscape  is  reflected  in  a  florid  cantilena.  Villa-Lobos  has  in 
this  manner  transcribed  the  melody  of  the  New  York  sky  line,  using  a 
panoramic  photograph  supplied  by  an  American  steamship  company.  He 
harmonized  and  orchestrated  it,  and  on  his  visit  to  the  United  States  in 
1945,  conducted  the  piece  as  a  gesttxre  of  good  will  at  his  radio  debut  in 
New  York  City. 

Not  all  pictorial  material  is  suitable  for  millimetrization.  When  a  lady 
asked  Villa-Lobos  to  set  to  music  the  X-ray  picture  of  her  heart,  he 
politely  declined,  explaining  that  her  heart  was  musically  uninteresting. 
He  graciously  agreed  to  write  down  the  melody  of  my  wife,  my  child  and 
myself  at  the  breakfast  table,  from  a  photograph  I  gave  him  in  Rio  de 
Janeiro.  He  spent  over  two  hours  on  it,  and  I  can  testify  to  the  honesty 
of  his  effort.  If  the  result  is  uninspiring,  it  is  through  no  fault  of  Villa- 
Lobos.  It  must  be  that  my  family  is  simply  not  musicogenic. 

TRIBULATIONS  OF  A  MUSIC  COLLECTOR 

One  of  the  principal  objectives  of  my  tour  was  to  gather  orchestral 
manuscripts  of  Latin  American  composers  for  the  Fleisher  Collection  in 
the  Free  Library  of  Philadelphia,  founded  by  Philadelphia’s  Edwin  A. 
Fleisher.  The  scores  were  to  be  copied  by  the  WPA  Music  Copying 
Project  working  in  cooperation  with  the  Fleisher  Collection,  under  the 
supervision  of  Arthur  Cohn,  the  accomplished  and  scholarly  American 
musician,  who  is  himself  a  composer.  In  March  1943,  the  WPA  came 
to  an  end,  and  the  task  of  copying  the  scores  was  assumed  by  the  Fleisher 
Collection  on  a  grant  from  the  City  of  Philadelphia,  with  Arthur  Cohn 
as  Director  of  the  Collection. 

I  had  imagined  that  the  Latins  would  leap  at  a  chance  of  having 
their  works  preserved  in  so  respectable  a  repository.  Before  long,  I  knew 
differently.  I  found  that  I  had  to  wheedle  and  cajole  them  into  sur¬ 
rendering  their  manuscripts,  and  aU  too  often  my  blandishments  proved 
to  no  avail.  The  musicians  explained  their  reluctance  to  cooperate  by  an 
unhappy  previous  experience  with  “Yankee  promises.”  Two  or  three  com¬ 
posers  had  lost  their  scores  in  the  United  States  under  strange  circum- 


A  PAN  AMERICAN  FISHING  TRIP  7 

stances  Humberto  Allende,  the  pioneer  Chilean  modernist,  gave  the 
original  score  of  his  Escenas  Camfesinas  to  the  Chilean  Ambassador  to 
take  to  Washington,  and  it  vanished  without  trace  on  the  way.  Allende 
had  to  rewrite  the  score  from  memory,  which,  however,  proved  not 
without  benefit,  for  in  the  meantime  his  technique  of  orchestration  had 
improved  so  greatly  that  he  was  able  to  turn  out  a  much  more  competent 
piece  of  work.  Another  tale  of  woe  was  told  to  me  by  the  Chilean  com¬ 
poser  Rene  Amengual,  whose  music  was  unaccountably  mislaid  on  the 

premises  of  the  Guggenheim  Foundation  in  New  York,  never  to  be 
recovered. 

Accidents,  also,  have  been  responsible  for  the  loss  of  manuscripts 
Prospero  Bisquertt  of  Chile  lost  one  of  his  Orchestral  manuscripts  when 
on  June  7^  1927,  a  train  was  wrecked  in  the  Andes  between  Santiago  and 
Buenos  Aires,  with  the  resultant  destruction  of  the  mails  which  carried 
Bisquertt’s  score.  In  1936,  Jose  Maria  Castro  of  Argentina  forwarded 
the  score  and  parts  of  hk  Concerto  Grosso  to  Prague,  for  a  performance 
at  the  International  Festival  there.  To  gain  time,  he  sent  the  music  by 

transatlantic  airmail.  The  plane  went  down  in  mid-Atlantic,  and  all  the 
mail  was  lost. 


I  did  not,  of  course,  carry  all  the  music  on  the  plane  with  me,  but  dis¬ 
patched  a  number  of  manuscripts  ahead  by  post.  My  experiences  with 
the  postal  clerks  in  Latin  American  cities  were  nearly  as  horrible  as  a 
plane  accident  I  shall  never  forget  the  agonizing  hours  in  the  central 
post  office  of  Mexico  City,  when,  laden  with  the  collected  works  of  the 
Mexican  composer,  Arnulfo  Miramontes,  I  tried  to  persuade  the  Seho- 
rita  in  charge  to  accept  the  music  for  shipping.  She  claimed  I  had  too 
much  postage  on  the  packages,  and  that  it  was  against  the  rules  to  accept 
foreign  parcel  post  with  excess  postage.  I  finally  had  to  summon  the  chief 
of  the  parcel  post  division  in  order  to  get  the  shipment  through.  On  top 
of  all  this,  my  Mexican  scores  were  held  in  Laredo,  Texas,  for  customs 
examination,  and  it  took  the  Fleisher  librarians  several  months  to  rescue 


In  my  Pan-American  fishing  net  I  drew  in  a  number  of  manuscripts  by 
Latin  American  composers  now  dead.  In  this,  task  I  was  helped  by  the 
families  of  the  composers.  The  son  of  Ernesto  Drangosch  of  Argentina 
lent  me  his  father’s  orchestral  scores.  From  the  daughter  of  Barrozo 
JNetto,  the  Brazilian  composer  of  flavorsome  salon  music,  I  received  the 
orchestraUompositions  he  left  at  his  death  in  1941.  The  daughter  of 
Alberto  Nepomuceno,  the  pioneer  of  Brazilian  modern  music,  helped 


PANORAMA  OF  LATIN  AMERICAN  MUSIC 


me  to  secure  his  unpublished  works  for  orchestra.  This  daughter,  inci¬ 
dentally,  was  an  extraordinary  person  in  her  own  right.  Although  born 
with  only  the  left  arm,  she  studied  the  piano  and  became  well  known  as  a 
one-armed  pianist. 

A  very  important  part  of  my  catch  was  a  set  of  orchestral  manuscripts 
by  that  extraordinary  genius,  Silvestre  Revueltas,  the  Mexican,  who 
lived  his  forty  years  of  life  like  a  character  in  a  Parisian  novel,  dividing 
his  time  between  composition,  leftist  politics,  and  the  drinking  of  Mexican 
tequila,  a  beverage  which  American  tourists  call  to-kill-ya,  so  murderous 
is  its  impact.  Weakened  by  alcohol,  Revueltas’  bulky  body  succumbed  to 
an  attack  of  pneumonia  on  the  night  of  October  4,  1940,  as  his  ballet 
El  Renacuajo  Paseador  was  having  its  first  performance  at  the  Palacio 
de  Bellas  Aries.  After  his  death,  his  musical  manuscripts  were  lovingly 
collected  by  his  sister,  and  thus  preserved  for  the  future. 

As  to  music  by  living  composers,  I  applied  the  method  of  search  and 
seizure  on  the  premises.  I  recall  many  a  profitable  afternoon  in  Buenos  , 
Aires,  at  the  spacious  residential  home  of  the  octogenarian  composer  of 
nine  symphonies,  Alberto  Williams  j  at  the  cottage  of  the  gray-haired 
author  of  the  celebrated  EstrelUta,  Manuel  Ponce,  in  Chapultepecj  in 
the  tower  studio  of  the  formidable  Carlos  Chavez,  in  a  suburban  section 
of  Mexico  City  5  in  the  modern  apartment  of  the  urbane  Brazilian  com¬ 
poser,  Francisco  Mignone  in  Rio  de  Janeiro;  at  the  pleasant  little  villa 
of  Humberto  AUende  of  Chile,  filled  with  Indian  drums  and  seven-foot 
long  fifes,  along  with  modernistic  sculptures  of  Allende’s  daughter, 
Tegualda,  named  for  an  Araucanian  goddess;  at  the  house  of  Maria  de 
Baratta  in  San  Salvador,  where  she  has  assembled  a  veritable  museum 
of  Aztec  pottery;  at  the  residence  of  Luis  A.  Delgadillo  in  Managua, 
Nicaragua,  with  street-level  windows  through  which  a  wide-eyed  audi- 
watched  a  private  concert;  and  in  the  Panama  studio 
of  Alfredo  de  Saint-Malo,  where  I  had  the  shock  of  my  life  when  the  up¬ 
right  piano  all  but  disintegrated  into  dust  as  I  stepped  on  the  pedals-- 
the  termiten  having  been  at  work  there  ahead  of  me  ;  and  in  the  dentist’s 
o  ce  o  a  a  e  o^so  Leng,  the  Chilean  composer  of  romantically 
inspired  music  and  also  a  prominent  Santiago  orthodontist,  thanks  to 

One  of  the  most  exciting  experiences  on  my  tour  was  the  meeting  with 
Joao  Gomes  de  Araujo,  the  Brazilian  author  of  Mana  Petrovna,  an^era 


9 


A  PAN  AMERICAN  FISHING  TRIP 

on  a  Russian  subject  with  an  Italian  libretto.  Joao  Gomes  de  Araujo  was 
born  in  the  year  1846.  Taking  it  for  granted  that  he  was  no  longer  living, 
I  had  written,  in  advance  of  my  visit,  to  the  Conservatory  of  Sao  Paulo 
(where  Gomes  de  Araujo  used  to  teach),  inquiring  as  to  the  exact  date 
of  his  death.  Fancy  my  surprise  when,  in  reply,  I  received  a  cordial  mis¬ 
sive  from  the  ancient  man  himself,  in  which  he  wrote,  in  quaint  English; 
“It  is  a  fact  that  I  was  born  on  the  fifth  of  August,  1 846,  but  in  spite  of 
this  being  quite  a  long  existence,  I  should  say  that  I  am  still  healthy  and 
fit  for  anything.”  With  the  letter,  he  sent  me  a  musical  manuscript,  writ¬ 
ten  in  a  shaky  hand,  and  dedicated  to  me. 

Later  on,  when  I  arrived  in  Sao  Paulo,  my  first  thought  was  whether 
j6ao  Gomes  de  Araujo  was  alive.  He  was,  and  he  came  unassisted  to  see 
me  at  my  hotel.  He  wore  no  glasses,  and  I  observed  that  he  had  a  fine 
complement  of  natural  teeth.  I  paid  a  visit  to  him  at  his  own  home,  where 
he  introduced  me  to  his  aged  children  and  middle-aged  grandchildren.  It 
was  my  fervent  hope  that  he  might  live  to  see  his  hundredth  anniversary, 
August  5,  1946,  but  shortly  afterwards  I  received  word  that  the  venerable 
musician  had  succumbed;  he  died  in  Sao  Paulo  on  September  8,  194a. 

All  told,  I  brought  with  me  for  the  Fleisher  Collection  over  three 
hundred  orchestral  scores.  There  were  among  these  manuscripts  composi¬ 
tions  of  all  dimensions,  from  a  short  Gavotte  by  Manuel  Ponce,  written 
at  the  age  of  fourteen,  to  huge  symphonic  edifices  such  as  Choros  No.  11 
by  Villa-Lobos,  or  the  industrial  ballet  Mekhano  by  the  Argentine 
composer-conductor,  Juan  Jose  Castro.  There  were  compositions  in  con¬ 
ventional  style,  and  there  were  also  ultra-modern  elucubrations,  includ¬ 
ing  music  in  quarter-tones.  Numerically,  Mexico  yielded  the  richest  har¬ 
vest.  My  good  friend,  the  German-Spanish-Mexican  musicologist  Otto 
Mayer-Serra,  excoriated  me  for  carrying  away  so  much  stuff.  He  wrote  in 
Rewsta  Musical  Mexicana  on  June  7,  1942:  “When  Nicolas  Slonimsky 
eft  Mexico,  he  took  with  him  over  a  hundred  orchestral  manuscripts. 
From  his  lexicographical  viewpoint,  this  constitutes  a  veritable  triumph. 
But  when  we  examine  these  works  from  an  esthetic  angle,  we  find  that 
fully  40  per  cent  are  nothing  more  than  conservatory  exercises;  and  40 
per  cent,  though  technically  adequate,  are  conventional  in  form  and  style. 
Some  20  per  cent,  perhaps  as  little  as  10  per  cent,  represent  the  product 

ot  real  composers,  musicians  who  have  something  worthwhile  to  com¬ 
municate.” 

In  private  conversation,  Otto  Mayer-Serra  used  a  more  picturesque 


10 


PANORAMA  OF  LATIN  AMERICAN  MUSIC 


language.  He  called  my  musical  haul  basura,  garbage,  or  worse,  basura 

de  bm  gzrhRge  of  garbage.  By  obvious  inference,  I  was  a  musical 
garbage  collector. 

Otto’s  nose  was,  however,  far  less  sensitive  to  the  basura  of  the  oast 

n  Mexico  City,  I  came  across  a  stack  of  manuscripts  by  one  Hermann 
Roessler,  ^hich  j  purchased  for  the  sum  of  six  Mexican  pesos.  From  tSe 
inscriptions  on  the  music,  I  gathered  that  Roessler  was  a  German  mullan 
0  came  to  Mexico  City  with  the  Emperor  Maximilian.  The  successive 
dedicanons  of  his  compositions,  first  to  the  exalted  personages  of  the 
mperial  Court  of  Mexico,  then  to  the  victorious  generals  of  the  Fev  I 

“fir 

anchoiy  decline  of  Roessler’s  fortunes  Some  of  hlc  •  • 

printed  editiojts.  1  p,rtlc„l„ly  relished  the  cover  dirfolr®  m? 
tones  enotled  respectively  For  MamoS  Binhday  and  For  ZfJsBM 

c  r  •  ^  was  basuTd  of  the  first  water  hut  Ot-fn  iv/t 

Serra  was  fasanated  by  its  bland  naivete  Re  Z  ’  f"''*  Mayer- 

n.e  when  I  presented  the  whole  collecL  of  T  “ 

token  of  intermusicological  solidarity,  Koesslenana  to  him  as  a 

ELUSIVE  EDITIONS 

There  is  a 

always  easy  to  coCl  fruil  However,  it  is  not 

Spanish  language  that  I  have  come  t  ^  There  is  a  word  in  the 

out  of  stock.  It  greeted  me  evervwh  °  exhausted,  or 

Cuba  to  Chile,  ft 

could  not  possibly  be  of  interest  to  ^  unavailable  music 

myself,  bent  on  the  discovery  of  obsf^°^^KT^”  ^  handful  of  people  like 

had  such  esoteric  editions  become  exhausted?  material.  How 

or  only  lost  in  the  shufile.?  How  many  000^^7 sold  out, 

interested  in  purchasing  lithomanhPfl  ^  ^  ^^p’  Hr  instance,  could  be 

by  aie  lace  pLivian  SI  S” 

Sy.'”  “  ">  **8  0-  from  a  friend  ofSX-S 

On  the  eve  of  my  departure  from  Buenos  Aires  I  £„m.d  out  that  the 


A  PAN  AMERICAN  FISHING  TRIP 

full  score  of  an  orchestral  overture  by  the  late  Argentine  ci 
Celestino  Piaggio,  was  published  by  the  National  Culture  CoV^ee 
of  Argentina,  and  was  available  gratis  to  anyone  with  cultural  inteMit5«s-*^  ' 
There  was  no  way  of  knowing  that  the  Piaggio  Overture  had  been  pub- 
-  hshed,  because  copies  were  not  distributed  commercially  and  not  included 
in  any  local  music  catalogues.  I  sped  to  the  Committee,  and  got  my  copies 
at  the  last  moment.  Jr 

Similarly  unobtainable  through  regular  channels  was  an  excellent  album 
of  Brazilian  music  for  piano,  voice,  and  violin,  published  by  the  Uni¬ 
versity  of  Rio  de  Janeiro  in  1937  under  the  title  Musique  Bresilienne 
Free  copies  of  this  collection  were  given  away  to  visitors  to  the 
Brazilian  Pavilion  at  the  New  York  World’s  Fair,  but  none  leaked  out 
to  the  music  stores  either  in  Brazil  or  the  United  States.  In  fact,  when 
I  inquired  about  Musique  Bresilienne  Moderne  in  the  largest  music  store 
in  Rio  de  Janeiro,  I  was  met  with  a  puzzled  glance,  and  was  told  there 
was  no  such  album  in  existence.  It  took  me  some  time  to  trace  the  pub¬ 
lication  to  Its  source,  which  proved  to  be  the  Escola  Naciond  de  Musica 
which  sponsored  my  concert.  By  sheer  chance,  I  stumbled  upon  a  stack 
of  copies  in  the  Director’s  room,  and  claimed  a  few  copies  as  my  rightful 
share  according  to  the  law  of  “finders  keepers.”  Looking  around  for  more 
hidden  treasure,  I  unearthed,  in  the  editorial  offices  of  the  Revista 
Brasiletra  de  Mustca  in  the  same  building,  a  practically  virgin  deposit 

of  printed  scores  of  Nepomuceno’s  Symfhony  in  G,  which  had  been 
regarded  as  agotado. 

In  the  end,  I  had  collected  something  like  a  quarter  of  a  ton  of  printed 
atm  American  music,  including  popular  songs  and  salon  pieces.  I  turned 
over  my  duplicates  and  some  single  copies  to  the  Boston  Public  Library, 
where  the  music  is  now  available  for  study  in  the  Music  Department 
presided  over  by  the  cooperative  and  scholarly  Richard  G.  Appel. 

m  American  printed  editions,  it  is  even 

more  difficult  for  Latin  American  musicians  to  get  hold  of  music  by 
American  composers.  As  a  result,  the  Latin  American  conception  of  who’s 
who  in  music  in  the  United  States  is  almost  as  grotesque  as  the  popular 
notion  in  this  country  that  all  Latin  American  music  consists  of  Tangos 
and  Rumbas.  In  a  supposedly  authoritative  article  in  the  June,  ig  a  8 
issue  of  the  Revuta  Brasileira  de  Musica,  the  following  are  named  as 
representative  American  composers :  Victor  Harris,  Soward  {sic)  Brock- 

Dobson.  The  latter  is  described  as  “occupying  a  unique  place  in  the 


12  PANORAMA  OF  LATIN  AMERICAN  MUSIC 


musical  world  of  North  America  being  the  composer  of  a  number  of 
inspired  songs,  as  well  as  a  pianist,  and  singer  of  refined  taste.”  Among 
American  women  composers,  the  author  cites  Senhora  Philip  Hale ! ! 

The  most  active  music  publishing  houses  of  Latin  America  are  in 
Argentina  and  Brazil.  The  branch  of  the  Italian  Ricordi  Company  in 
Buenos  Aires  has  a  rich  and  varied  catalogue  of  music  in  all  forms,  in¬ 
cluding  operas,  orchestral  scores,  and  chamber  works  by  Argentine  com¬ 
posers,  and  also  some  Chilean  and  Uruguayan  compositions.  Other  music 
publishers  in  Argentina  are  Carlos  Lottermoser  in  Buenos  Aires,  Romano 
in  Rosario,  and  Grignola  in  Tucuman.  The  composer-members  of  the 
progressive  Grufo  Renovacion  in  Buenos  Aires  have  printed  at  their  own 
expense  some  of  their  piano  pieces  and  songs.  Alberto  Williams  main¬ 
tains  a  publishing  enterprise  named  La  Quena  (the  Quena  is  the  ancient 
flute  of  the  Incas),  under  whose  imprint  he  has  published  virtually  the 
entire  catalogue  of  his  symphonic  and  instrumental  music,  as  well  as 
piano  pieces  and  songs  by  his  daughter  Irma. 

In  Brazil,  the  largest  music  publishers  are  the  Arthur  Napoleao 
company  and  the  Brazilian  Ricordi  branch.  Together  with  lesser  firms, 
Carlos  Wehrs,  Miranda,  Vitale,  and  others,  they  have  published  thou¬ 
sands  of  Brazilian  compositions,  mostly  for  piano  and  voice,  but  also 
some  in  larger  forms. 


The  most  idealistic  music  publisher  of  Latin  America  is  beyond  doubt 
Francisco  Curt  Lange  of  Montevideo,  a  German  student  of  philosophy, 
architecture,  literature,  and  music,  who  settled  in  Uruguay  in  1923, 
qmckly  mastered  the  language,  and  launched  a  movement  which  he 
called  Americanismo  Musical,  designed  to  link  and  integrate  musical  re¬ 
search  in  the  Americas.  The  organ  of  Americanismo  Musical  is  the 
mastodontic  Boletin  Latino-Americano  de  Musica,  issued  once  every  two 
or  three  years,  which  contains  a  staggering  amount  of  material  on  Latin 
Amencan  folklore  and  various  aspects  of  native  music.  The  publication  of 
each  issue  of  Lange’s  “bulletins”  is  made  possible  by  his  extraordinary 
perseverance,  a  sort  of  musicological  fanaticism  that  overcomes  the  in¬ 
surmountable  and  breaks  down  the  stone  walls  of  public  indifference, 
in  the  words  of  a  brochure  published  in  Bogota  in  1938  on  the  occasion  of 
Langes  visit  there,  “one  must  possess  a  will  of  iron  to  organize  the 
publication  and  distribution  of  the  Boletin,  to  raise  the  necessary  money, 
and  to  maintain  the  enormous  correspondence.”  Lange’s  correspondence 

“ensured  in  astronomic  figures.  The  latest  letter  I  have  re- 
ceived  from  him  bears  the  number  13,953. 


APANAMERICANFISHINGTRIP  13 

Not  satisfied  with  his  already  varied  program  o£  activities^  Lange 
undertook  in  1940  the  formation  of  an  Inter- American  Cooperative  of 
Composers,  with  the  object  of  publishing  Latin  American  music  of  the 
noncommercial  type.  The  composers  pay  one  half  of  the  printing  ex¬ 
penses,  and  the  royalties,  if  any,  go  towards  the  publication  of  new  works. 
This  arrangement  aroused  the  ire  of  Otto  Mayer-Serra,  who  wrote  in 
Revista  Musical  Mexicana:  ^^When  apprised  of  this  condition,  the  com¬ 
posers  whom  I  have  approached  were  indignant.  We  thought  that  the 
time  when  a  musician  had  to  labor  exclusively  ad  maiorefn  Dei  gloriafyi^ 
was  definitely  past.''  But  is  it  not  better  to  work  for  the  greater  glory  of 
God  without  material  reward  than  to  sulk  forever  in  the  outer  darkness 
of  unpublished  obscurity? 

Outside  Argentina  and  Brazil,  there  are  few  music  publishing  estab¬ 
lishments.  In  Chile,  the  Faculty  of  Fine  Arts  of  the  University  of  Chile 
has  issued  piano  pieces  and  songs  by  the  Chilean  composers  Domingo 
Santa  Cruz,  Carlos  Isamitt,  Prospero  Bisquertt,  Alfonso  Leng,  Samuel 
Negrete,  Jorge  Urrutia  Blondel,  Alfonso  Letelier,  Acario  Cotapos,  Hum¬ 
berto  Allende,  his  brother  Adolfo  Allende,  and  some  others.  Unfor¬ 
tunately,  these  editions,  too,  belong  to  the  agotado  category. 

In  Peru,  the  Carlos  Brandes  Company  has  printed  some  Peruvian  music 
and  has  also  taken  over  the  representation  in  Peru  of  a  somewhat  mythical 
Parisian  firm,  A  la  Flute  de  Ran^  created  for  the  publication  of  music  by 
Peruvian  composers.  In  Mexico,  the  firm  of  Wagner  &  Levien  has  in  its 
catalogue  the  early  music  of  Chavez  and  a  large  number  of  piano  pieces 
and  songs  of  Manuel  Ponce,  none  of  which  is  now  to  be  had. 

Orchestral  scores,  chamber  music,  and  other  works  by  Carlos  Pedrell 
(nephew  of  the  Spanish  scholar  Felipe  Pedrell)  and  Alfonso  Broqua  of 
Uruguay,  who  spent  practically  all  their  lives  in  France,  have  been  pub¬ 
lished  in  Paris.  Some  composition  by  Villa-Lobos,  Humberto  Allende, 
and  Alejandro  Garcia  Caturla  of  Cuba  have  also  been  issued  by  Paris 
music  firms.  These  editions  are  available  in  the  larger  American  music 
libraries. 

In  recent  years,  American  music  publishers  have  made  a  determined 
effort  to  satisfy  public  interest  in  serious  Latin-American  music.  The 
Associated  Music  Publishers  have  taken  over  music  by  Villa-Lobos, 
Camargo  Guarnieri,  Oscar  Lorenzo  Fernandez,  and  Jose  Siqueira  of 
Brazil.  The  G.  Schirmer  Company  has  issued  a  collection  of  piano  pieces 
by  twelve  modern  Latin-American  composers,  Album  of  Latin 
American  Art  Music  f  or  Piano,  The  quarterly  Music  has  for  years 


14  PANORAMA  OF  LATIN  AMERICAN  MUSIC 

included  compositions  of  the  modern  type  by  Latin-American  composers 
such  as  Caturla  of  Cuba,  Juan  Carlos  Paz  of  Argentina,  and  Domingo 
Santa  Cruz  of  Chile.  In  October,  1942,  New  Music  put  out  a  special 
issue  of  Brazilian  piano  music  which  I  obtained  for  publication  from  the 
composers  themselves,  including  “millimetrizations”  of  the  New  York 
sky  line  and  of  a  Brazilian  mountain  chain  by  Villa-Lobos. 

The  Music  Division  of  the  Pan  American  Union  in  Washington,  under 
the  enlightened  directorship  of  the  Mexican-born  American  music 
scholar,  Charles  Seeger,  has  issued  several  informative  brochures  on 
Latin-American  music,  among  which  the  most  comprehensive  is  Musk  in 
Latin  America,  compiled  by  Charles  Seeger.  A  very  valuable  publication 
of  the  Pan  American  Union  is  the  annotated  list  Recordings  of  Latin 
American  Songs  and  Lances,  compiled  by  the  Spanish  musician,  Gustavo 
Duran.  The  booklet  contains  much  more  than  the  title  indicates,  and 
is  in  fact  a  detailed  glossary  of  Latin  American  dance  forms. 

The  most  satisfyingly  complete  bibliography  of  Latin  American  music 
is  now  available  in  A  Guide  to  Latin  American  Music  compiled  by  the 
Havana-born  American  music  scholar  Gilbert  Chase,  and  published  in 
1945  at  the  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office.  This  supplements  the  previ¬ 
ous  bibliographical  lists  compiled  by  Gilbert  Chase,  A  Partial  List  of  Latin 
American  Musk  Obtainable  in  the  United  States  and  Bibliografhy  of 
Latin  American  Musk,  both  issued  in  1942.  A  helpful  bibliography  is 
also  contained  in  the  mimeographed  brochure.  The  Musk  of  Latin  Amer¬ 
ica,  compiled  by  Benjamin  Grosbayne  and  published  in  1 943  by  the  Brook¬ 
lyn  College  Press  in  the  series  Outline  of  Lectures,  Notes  and  Refer¬ 
ences. 

A  pioneer  in  Latin  American  musicology  in  the  United  States  is  Eleanor 
Hague,  the  author  of  a  sensitively  written  little  book  Latin  American 
Musk,  Past  and  Present,  published  in  California  in  1934.*  However,  its 
ninety-eight  pages  yield  little  specific  information.  The  author  herself 
makes  no  claims  as  to  the  accuracy  or  completeness  of  the  appended  lists 
of  contemporary  musicians  and  native  songs  and  dances. 

Literature  on  Latin-American  folklore  in  the  native  languages,  Spanish 
and  Portuguese,  is  enormous  in  bulk  and  impressive  in  content.  Argentina, 
Brazil,  and  Mexico  lead  in  the  quantity  and  quality  of  research.  In  Argen¬ 
tina,  Carlos  Vega,  whose  official  title  is  Technician  of  the  Folklore  Section 
of  the  Faculty  of  Philosophy  and  Letters  at  the  Institute  of  Argentine  Lit- 

’♦'The  Fine  Arts  Press,  Santa  Ana, 


A  PAN  AMERICAN  FISHING  TRIP  15 

eraturCj  Is  the  author  of  a  novel  analytical  methodj  Fraseologta  Musi¬ 
cal^  which  is  an  annotated  Index  of  musical  patterns  found  In  classical  and 
Latin  American  music.  Vega  is  also  the  author  of  the  exhaustive  survey  of 
Argentine  dances  and  songs  presented  in  two  companion  volumesj  Danzas 
y  Canciones  Argentinas  (193^)  'Panorama  de  la  IVLusica  Pofular 
Argentina  (1944). 

The  most  complete  account  of  Brazilian  music  is  found  in  the  second 
enlarged  edition  (1942)  of  Historia  da  Mustca  Brasileira  by  Renato 
Almeida.  Brazilian  songs  and  dances  are  analyzed  in  Estudos  de  Folclore 
(1934)  by  the  late  Brazilian  folklorist  Luciano  Gallet. 

There  are  two  good  histories  of  Mexican  musicj  one  by  Miguel  Galindo 
(^933)5  other  by  Gabriel  Saldivar  (1934).  The  modern  period 

of  Mexican  music  is  intelligently  outlined  in  Panorama  de  la  Musica 
Mexicana  (1941)  by  Otto  Mayer-Serra.  Several  treatises  on  the  musical 
folklore  of  Mexico  have  been  published,  notably  El  Folklore  Musical 
de  las  Ciudades  (1930)  by  Ruben  M.  Campos,  and  El  Folklore  y  la 
Musica  Mexicana  (1928),  by  the  same  author. 

On  the  occasion  of  the  quadricentennial  of  Santiago  in  1941,  the  Uni¬ 
versity  of  Chile  published  the  first  history  of  Chilean  music,  Los  Origenes 
del  Arte  Musical  en  Chile  by  Eugenio  Pereira  Salas.  Later,  the  Uni¬ 
versity  of  Chile  issued  a  collection  of  essays  on  native  folklore,  with 
musical  examples,  under  the  title  Chile. 

Cuban  music  is  analyzed  by  the  late  Emilio  Grenet  in  his  preface  to 
the  collection  of  eighty  Cuban  songs,  Musica  Popular  Cubana,^  published 
in  1939  under  the  auspices  of  the  Secretariat  of  Agriculture  of  Cuba,  and 
printed  by  the  Southern  Music  Publishing  Company  5  but  this  is  avail¬ 
able  neither  from  the  sponsor  nor  from  the  printer.  Equally  unobtainable 
are  three  little  volumes  of  Costa  Rican  songs  and  dances  published  by 
the  government  in  San  Jose  between  1929  and  1935.  For  Panama  there 
is  an  excellent  treatise,  Tradiciones  y  Cantares  de  Panama  by  Narciso 
Garay,  the  country’s  foremost  musician,  who  left  art  for  politics  and  was 
at  one  time  foreign  minister  of  Panama.  The  folklore  of  Guatemala  is 
discussed  in  detail  by  Jesus  Castillo,  the  native  “ethnophonist,”  as  he  likes 
to  call  himself,  in  the  little  hvochxitt  La  Musica  May a-Quiche  (1941). 

The  principal  source  book  of  Peruvian  music  remains  the  French  tome, 
La  Musique  des  Incas  et  ses  Survivances  by  d’Harcourt,  published  in 
Paris  in  1926,  Rodolfo  Barbacci,  the  Argentine-born  musicologist  now 

*  Grenet  lost  his  right  arm  and  leg  when  attacked  in  swimming  by  a  shark.  He  recov¬ 
ered  and  continued  his  studies,  dying  in  19  3  9  from  an  appendectomy. 


i6  PANORAMA  OF  LATIN  AMERICAN  MUSIC 

living  in  Limaj  has  completed  a  gigantic  survey  of  Peruvian  music  (over 
one  thousand  typewritten  pages),  but  there  is  no  likelihood  of  its  ever 
being  published. 

Bolivian  folk  music  is  authoritatively  analyzed  in  the  preface  to  a 
three-volume  collection,  Aires  Naciondes  de  Bolivia  by  Teofilo  Vargas, 
printed  for  the  author  in  1940- 1941,  and  obtainable  from  him  in  his 
native  town  of  Cochabamba.  Information  on  EcuadoNs  music  is  found 
in  an  excellent  paper  by  the  Ecuadorian  composer  Segundo  Luis  Moreno, 
published  in  the  centennial  edition,  El  Ecuador  en  Cien  Anos  de  Ifh 
defendencia  (1930). 

Folk  music  of  Colombia  is  outlined  in  Folklore  Colombiano  ( 1942)  by 
the  Colombian  scholar  and  composer  Emirto  de  Lima^  and  the  cause 
of  Venezuelan  music  is  ably  presented  in  the  brochure  Contribucion  al 
Estudio  de  la  Musica  en  Venezuela  (1939)  by  Jose  Antonio  Calcaho. 

Documentation  on  the  historical  antecedents  of  Uruguay's  musical  cul¬ 
ture  is  given  in  Lauro  Ayestaran’s  important  work,  Historia  de  la 
Musica  en  El  Uruguay ^  the  first  volume  of  which,  covering  the  colonial 
period,  was  published  in  1945. 

In  Paraguay,  Juan  Carlos  Moreno  Gonzalez,  the  country's  leading 
musician,  who  has  been  active  as  a  composer  and  a  pedagogue  despite  his 
tragic  handicap  (he  lost  both  legs  in  a  street  car  accident  at  the  age  of 
thirteen),  has  prepared  a  paper  on  Paraguay’s  folk  music. 

Surprisingly  flourishing  is  the  science  of  native  musicology  in  the 
Dominican  Republic.  Musical  E)ominicano  (i939)  ^7  Florida 

de  Nolasco,  and  Del  Areito  de  Anacaona  al  Poema  F olklorico  ( 1942)  by 
the  country’s  leading  musician  and  composer,  Enrique  de  Marchena, 
present  a  panoramic  survey  of  the  field. 

The  voodoo  music  of  the  Negro  Republic  of  Haiti  has  been  the  theme 
of  fiction  and  drama.  There  is  an  excellent  book  on  the  subject  in  English, 
by  Harold  Courlander  (1939).* 

Even  tiny  El  Salvador  has  its  musical  historiographer,  Rafael  Gonzalez 
Sol,  the  author  of  the  handy  little  pamphlet,  Historia  del  Arte  de  la 
Musica  en  El  Salvador ^  published  in  San  Salvador  in  1940. 

Very  little  information  is  available  on  the  subject  of  musical  culture 
in  Honduras  and  Nicaragua.  Musical  life  in  Costa  Rica  is  described  in 
the  1942  issue  of  Educaciony  published  in  San  Jose  by  the  Association  of 
School  Supervisors. 

There  are  numerous  music  magazines  published  all  over  the  continent, 

*  The  University  of  North  Carolina  Press,  Chapel  Hill. 


17 


A  PAN  AMERICAN  FISHING  TRIP 


and  the  islands.  These  magazines  are  excellently  printed,  on  good  paper, 
and  they  carry  pictorial  and  musical  illustrations.  But  after  a  fine  start, 
they  usually  begin  to  falter,  appear  at  irregular  intervals,  sometimes 
vanish  from  sight  altogether  and  then  reappear  in  new  shapes  and  sizes. 
Thus  the  sprightly  Havana  publication,  MusicaUa,  founded  in  1927  by 
Antonio  and  Maria  de  Quevedo,  after  a  few  years  in  limbo  emerged  in 
1943  in  a  somewhat  reduced  form.  The  Revista  Brasileira  de  Muska,  a 
fine  magazine  modeled  after  the  Parisian  Revue  Muskale,  has  appeared 
sporadically  since  1932,  with  such  lapses  that  it  is  difficult  to  specify 
whether  it  is  a  quarterly,  annual,  or  biennial  publication.  The  Mexican 
magazine.  Revista  Musical  Mexkana,  launched  in  1942  as  a  fortnightly 
by  Geronimo  Baqueiro  Foster,  went  on  bravely  until  1944,  and  then  it  be¬ 
gan  to  wilt.  The  Eco  Musical  of  Buenos  Aires  has  put  out  a  few  informa¬ 
tive  issues,  but  its  periodicity  is  an  uncertain  factor.  The  Ricordi  music¬ 
publishing  firm  used  to  print  a  substantial  magazine.  La  Revista  Musical, 
which  was  discontinued  in  1930.  Later  Ricordi  published  bulletins  con¬ 
cerned  primarily  with  its  own  publications,  but  these,  too,  were  soon  given 
up.  Alberto  Williams  published  a  music  magazine.  La  Quena,  for  some 
years  in  the  1920’s  as  an  adjunct  to  his  publishing  enterprise  of  the  same 
name.  A  modern  music  magazine,  Pauta  (the  word  means  the  music 
staff),  was  published  for  a  few  months  in  Buenos  Aires  in  1939.  The 
Revista  Musical  Argentina,  which  used  to  be  published  by  Rodolfo  Bar- 
bacci  in  Buenos  Aires,  is  also  a  thing  of  the  past.  When  Barbacci  moved 

to  Lima,  he  undertook  the  publication  of  an  informative  eight-page 

Ica-IlCtj  J^BVlstd  IS/LuSiCoX  ^ 


A  Brazilian  magazine  of  modern  music,  Muska  Viva,  launched  by  the 
German  refugee  composer  of  atonal  music  Hans  Koellreutter  in  1940,  led 
a  life  of  suspended  animation  until  1943,  when  it  fluttered  and  gave  up 
^  rf  ^  ost.  An  illustrated  music  magazine,  Resenha  Musical ^  has  appeared, 

off  and  on,  in  Sao  Paulo  since  1940. 

In  Chile,  musical  periodic  literature  blossomed  forth  after  years  of  in- 


*_Barbacci  was  forced^ to  discontinue  the  publication  in  July,  1945,  and  issued  the  fol- 
owing-  pnnte  communication:  “Persons  and  musical  organizations  criticized  in  the  last 
two  issues  of  the  Rewta  Musical  Peruana,  being  un'able  to  refute  the  incontrovertible 
accusations  therein  contained,  and  fearing  the  publication  of  even  more  energetic  articles 
in  future  issues,  have  resorted  to  the  ‘democratic’  procedure  of  petitioning  the  proper 
authorities  to  suspend  the  publication  oi  Revista  Miuical  Peruana.  As  a  result  the 
^bhcation  has  been  temporarily  discontinued.  In  its  place  is  substituted  a  leaflet,  America 

Srert^f  though?  -‘’1  ‘he  advent  of  better  times 


i8  PANORAMA  OF  LATIN  AMERICAN  MUSIC 

activity  in  May,  1945,  when  two  new  magazines  made  their  appearance, 
Revista  Musical  Chilena,  a  scholarly  publication  issued  by  th^  InsHtuto 
de  Extension  Musical  in  Santiago,  and  Vida  Musical y  an  illustrated 
monthly  of  popular  appeal,  edited  by  Pablo  Garrido. 

The  Orquesta  Sinfonica  Nacional  of  Bogota,  Colombia,  issued,  in  1941 
ai»d  1942,  monthly  leaflets  entitled  simply  Musica.  In  Costa  Rica,  a  few 
issues  of  the  magazine  Revista  Musical  appeared  in  1941.  In  Ecuador,  a 
single  issue  of  Penta^Tama  (the  word  means  the  five-line  music  staff) 
was  published  some  years  ago.  In  August,  i943j  ^^e  National  Con¬ 
servatory  of  Panama  began  issuing  a  monthly  publication,  Armoma, 
edited  by  Luis  A.  Delgadillo,  the  Nicaraguan  composer  who  had  joined 
the  faculty  of  the  Panama  Conservatory.  In  Guatemala  the  AsociaciSn 
Musical  Juvenil  began  publication  in  1945  of  ^  periodical,  serv¬ 

ing  chiefly  the  interests  of  young  musicians. 

Among  Latin-American  music  journals,  the  Torfedero  Musical  of 
Buenos  Aires  is  in  a  class  by  itself.  As  the  title  indicates,  the  Torfedero 
specializes  in  musical  sniping.  It  publishes  fantastic  stories,  attacking 
everything  and  everybody  in  Argentina,  even  its  own  contributors,  as  in 
the  case  of  Argentina’s  modern  composer,  Juan  Carlos  Paz.  The  Tor¬ 
federo  accused  him  of  authoring  an  article  about  himself,  and  of  having 
induced  one  Hector  Gallac,  a  member  of  the  editorial  board  of  the  self¬ 
same  Torfedero,  to  publish  it  under  his,  Gallac’s  name,  in  the  Bolettn 
Latino- Americano  de  Musica.  Needless  to  say,  the  insinuation  is  without 
factual  foundation. 

The  general  tone  of  musical  journalism  in  Latin  America  is  highly 
emotional.  Personalities  explode  5  names  are  called.  Private  conversa¬ 
tions  and  private  letters  are  apt  to  bob  up  in  print,  much  to  the  discom¬ 
fiture  of  the  persons  concerned.  For  instance,  Rodolfo  Barbacci  prints  in 
his  book,  Anecdotes  Musicales,  the  following  story;  “When  the  com¬ 
poser  and  conductor  Nicolas  Slonimsky  was  in  Lima  in  1941,  he  looked 
over  some  music  by  the  Peruvian  composer  (here  transparent  initials  of 
the  composer  are  given).  Spotting  a  curious  passage  in  the  music,  Slonim¬ 
sky  inquired  of  the  composer:  ‘How  is  it  that  you  have  an  E  double-sharp 
in  a  piece  with  a  key-signature  in  flats?’  He  added,  ‘I’ve  never  seen  an  E 
double-sharp  in  any  piece  of  music.’  To  this  the  composer  replied:  ‘Oh, 
that  is  a  mere  detail.  The  note  may  be  taken  out  altogether.’  ”  The  story 
is  true,  but  it  put  me  in  Dutch  with  the  composer  in  question. 


COMPOSERS  AND  SOCIETY 


19 


Composers  and  Society 


The  creative  musician  occupies  an  exalted  place  in  the  social  fabric  of 
the  Latm-American  countries.  He  is  the  pride  of  the  nation.  He  serves  his 
country  by  enhancing  its  cultural  prestige.  And  he  is  given  wholehearted 
support  by  the  government.  Every  Latin-American  republic  has  a  De¬ 
partment  of  Fine  Arts,  which  regulates,  promotes,  and  finances  musical 
activities,  maintains  conservatories  and  symphony  orchestras,  sponsors 
publications  of  music,  distributes  prizes  and  medals  for  musical  works, 
and  establishes  traveling  fellowships  for  talented  musicians.  All  these 
attentions  are  lavished  on  the  deserving  artists  and  composers  with  great 
pomp  and  ostentation,  such  as  no  other  country,  with  the  possible  excep¬ 
tion  of  Russia,  displays  towards  native  talent.  Thus,  the  popular  Cuban 
composer  Ernesto  Lecuona  received  a  gold  medal  in  appreciation  of  his 
services  to  native  arts,  in  a  special  ceremony,  held  in  a  large  theater  in 

Havana,  on  February  22,  1943,  and  broadcast  over  the  government 
radio. 

^  Foreign  musicians,  too,  are  often  given  medals  and  diplomas  of  appre¬ 
ciation.  The  Italian  nineteenth-century  musician  Juan  Aberle,  who  set¬ 
tled  in  Central  America,  received  from  the  government  of  Guatemala  a 
medal  inscribed:  “To  the  Prince  of  Central  American  Music.”  After 
Aberle  s  death,  the  medal  went  to  the  Salvadorean  composer  Jesus  Alas, 
who  in  his  turn  intends  to  bequeath  it  to  the  most  deserving  musician  of 
El  Salvador. 

Posthumous  honors  are  rendered  to  the  particularly  distinguished 
musiaans.  The  ashes  of  Teresa  Carreno,  the  Venezuelan  pianist,  who 
died  in  New  York  in  1917,  were  transported  to  Caracas  with  solemn  cere¬ 
mony  and  reinterred  there  on  February  15,  1938.  The  body  of  Jaime 
Nuno,  author  of  the  Mexican  National  Anthem,  was  disinterred  from  his 
grave  in  Buffalo,  where  he  died  in  1908,  and  transferred  for  reburial  in 
Mexico  City  in  November  1942,  in  an  official  ceremony.  In  1943,  the 
Mexican  Government  paid  to  the  American  descendants  of  Nuno  the  sum 
of  368  pesos,  in  payment  of  a  long  overdue  bill  for  copying  expenses  the 

composer  had  incurred  in  1854. 

Competitions  for  the  best  musical  works  are  usually  held  on  important 
anniversaries.  Thus  on  the  occasion  of  the  centennial  of  the  Dominican 


20 


PANORAMA  OF  LATIN  AMERICAN  MUSIC 

Republic  in  February  1944,  Ae  Secretariat  of  the  Education  of  Fine 
Arts  announced  a  competition  for  native  works  in  the  field  of  literature, 
music,  and  painting,  with  the  following  prizes  (in  American  dollars,  the 
ofiicial  currency  of  the  Dominican  Republic) :  $1,000  for  a  symphony  in 
four  movements^  $600  for  a  cantata  for  chorus  and  orchestra3  $500^  for 
a  symphonic  poem  for  large  orchestra;  $200  for  a  Merengue  (Dominican 
national  dance  form) ;  $ 500  for  a  collection  of  no  fewer  than  twenty-five 
folk  songs. 

Four  symphonieSj  four  symphonic  poems,  and  four  cantatas  were  sub¬ 
mitted  for  the  contest,  not  a  bad  crop  for  a  republic  which  occupies  but  a 
portion  of  a  Caribbean  island! 

In  Cuba,  the  Ministry  of  Education  announced,  in  October,  1942,  a 
competition  for  a  symphonic  work,  a  choral  composition,  a  piece  for 
military  band  in  the  foMore  manner,  and  an  original  song  in  the  popular 
vein,  with  prizes  of  1,000,  500,  300,  and  200  Cuban  pesos. 

In  Buenos  Aires,  I  was  present  at  the  distribution  of  prizes,  impressively 
staged  in  the  hall  of  one  of  the  largest  theaters,  with  press  representatives 
and  photographers  in  attendance.  The  major  prize  winners  for  musical 
works  were  Arturo  Luzzatti,  who  received  5,000  Argentine  pesos  for  an 
oratorio^  Jacobo  Ficher,  who  got  3,500  pesos  for  his  Third  Symfhony; 
and  Alberto  Ginastera,  who  was  awarded  3,500  pesos  for  a  ballet  in  the 
native  vein.  In  addition,  a  number  of  lesser  prizes  and  fellowships  for 
travel  and  study  were  given  for  the  best  works  in  the  small  forms  and  for 
folkloric  research.  The  prizes  were  awarded  without  regard  to  the  com¬ 
mercial  possibilities  of  the  works  submitted.  There  was  also  an  encourag¬ 
ing  evidence  of  impartiality  as  to  race  and  country  of  origin:  Luzzatti  is 
an  Italian,  and  Jacobo  Ficher  is  a  Russian  Jew.  The  money  value  of  the 
prizes  was  very  high  in  relation  to  the  cost  of  living.  (The  Argentine  peso 
is  worth  25^  in  American  money.) 

The  400th  anniversary  of  the  foundation  of  Santiago  in  November, 
1941,  was  the  occasion  for  a  Music  Festival,  including  a  contest  for  the 
best  works  by  Chilean  composers.  The  prizes,  albeit  in  depreciated  Chilean 
currency  (the  Chilean  peso  was  worth  about  3^  at  the  time),  were  gen¬ 
erous:  I.  Prize  of  Honor,  for  the  best  work  in  large  forms,  25,000  pesos 5 
2,  Two  prizes,  15,000  and  10,000  pesos,  for  an  opera,  an  oratorio,  a  can¬ 
tata,  or  a  ballet  j  3.  Two  prizes,  15,000  and  10,000  pesos,  for  symphonic 
works j  4.  Five  prizes,  ranging  from  5,000  to  15,000  pesos,  for  chamber 
musicj  5.  Three  prizes,  of  10,000  pesos,  6,000  pesos,  and  4,000  pesos,  for 


21 


COMPOSERS  AND  SOCIETY 

a  collection  of  original  songs  in  the  native  mannerj  6.  Two  prizes,  3,000 

and  2jOOO  pesos,  for  vocal  compositions  suitable  for  schools  3  7.  A  prize  of 

andThHike  ^  of  popular  songs,  workers’  songs,  sport  songs. 

The  jury  was  composed  of  three  foreign  musicians:  Oscar  Lorenzo 
Fernandez,  who  was  conducting  concerts  in  Santiago  at  the  time ;  Honorio 
Siccardi,  an  Argentinian,  who  flew  from  Buenos  Aires  for  the  occasion;  and 
the  American  composer  Aaron  Copland,  who  was  touring  South  America 
as  a  musical  ambassador  of  good  will. 

So  numerous  were  the  prizes  that  the  jury  awarded  one  virtually  to 
every  musician  who  sent  in  a  piece.  Among  the  prize-winning  works  were 
compositions  in  all  genres:  music  by  modernists  such  as  Santa  Cruz,  Hum¬ 
berto  Allend^  Carlos  Isamitt,  and  Rene  Amengual;  by  romanticists,  such 
as  Prospero  Bisquertt,  Samuel  Negrete,  and  Alfonso  Letelier;  and  by 
academic  musicians  such  as  Enrique  Soro. 

7  Honor  went  to  Domingo  Santa  Cruz  for  his  Canma  ie 

Los  Rtos  de  Chile,  a  monumental  work  in  three  “madrigals,”  as  the  com¬ 
pos^  designated  the  movements.  After  the  jury’s  decision  was  made 
public,  an  extraordinary  thing  happened.  The  Committee  for  the  Fourth 
Centennid  published  a  statement  in  the  press  declaring  the  award  of  the 
Frize  of  Honor  null  and  void,  on  the  ground  that  “Senor  Santa  Cruz 
being  a  personal  friend  of  Messrs.  Oscar  Lorenzo  Fernandez  and  Honorio 
Siccard^  and  being  furthermore  instrumental,  in  his  capacity  as  Dean 
of  the  Faculty  of  Fine  Arts,  in  extending  the  invitation  to  them  to  come 
to  Chile,  had  no  moral  right  to  submit  his  music  to  the  judgment  of  these 
gentlemen.” 

As  a  matter  of  fact,  Domingo  Santa  Cruz  had  never  met  Siccardi  be¬ 
fore,  Md  as  he  told  me  later,  had  to  look  up  a  photograph  of  Siccardi  in 
one  of  my  illustrated  articles  on  South  American  composers  in  order  to 
identify  him  at  the  airport  (which  was  easy,  in  view  of  Siccardi’s  con¬ 
spicuously  bald  occiput).  Ironically  enough,  Aaron  Copland,  who  was  a 
riMd,  had  voted  in  favor  of  not  awarding  the  honor  prize  to  anyone. 

I  here  was  a  loud  outcry  against  the  Committee’s  action.  In  a  public 
^atement,  Santa  Cruz  demanded  from  the  Committee  of  the  Fourth 
Centennial  a  repudiation  of  its  decision,  threatening  to  challenge  the 
chairman  of  the  Committee,  whom  he  described  as  a  “miserable  poetaster,” 
to  an  encounter  on  the  field  of  honor,  “como  Caballeros.”  But  the  Com¬ 
mittee  stuck  to  Its  legal  right  of  final  decision,  and  when  the  prizes  were 


22 


PANORAMA  OF  LATIN  AMERICAN  MUSIC 

distributed  at  a  special  ceremony  at  the  Teatro  Municipal  in  Santiago, 
Domingo  Santa  Cruz  was  not  among  those  called  to  receive  a  diploma 
and  a  check. 


TEACHING,  PLAYING,  AND  SINGING 

Honorio  Siccardi  once  called  Buenos  Aires  “Conservatoriopolis,”  some¬ 
what  sarcastically,  for  indeed  every  music  teacher  there  puts  the  sign 
“Conservatono”  on  the  plaque  of  his  apartment.  But  it  remains  true 
none  the  less  that  there  is  a  great  popular  demand  for  musical  education, 
both  private  and  state-supported.  There  are  music  schools  and  conserva¬ 
tories  dotted  all  over  the  map  of  Latin  America. 

To  take  a  typical  musical  nation,  the  Republic  of  Colombia  has  eleven 
state-supported  conservatories,  in  Bogota,  Cali,  Medellin,  Barranquilla, 
Manizales,  Popayan,  Santa  Marta,  Pato,  Cucuta,  Bucaramanga,  and 
Ibaque.  Oddly  enough,  the  Conservatory  in  the  port  town  of  Cali,  which 
is  not  a  musical  center,  is  the  best-equipped,  not  only  in  Colombia,  but  in 
all  Latin  America.  It  is  housed  in  a  modern  building  with  spacious  studios, 
which  was  erected  at  a  cost  of  $175,000.  It  owes  its  existence  entirely  to 
the  energy  and  shrewdness  of  its  founder  and  director,  the  Colombian 
pianist-composer  Antonio  Maria  Valencia,  who  elicited  the  necessary  funds 
from  a  culturally  minded  administration.  By  contrast,  the  Conservatory 
of  Bogota,  the  capital,  occupies  a  dilapidated  colonial  building,  sadly 
lacking  in  facilities.  Its  studios  open  on  the  central  patio,  and  when  classes 
are  held  simultaneously  there  is  a  horrendous  polytonal  confusion. 

The  oldest  Latin-American  conservatory  is  the  Escola  Nacional  de 
Musica  in  Rio  de  Janeiro,  which  celebrated  its  hundredth  anniversary  in 
1941.  The  most  progressive  Conservatory  is  undoubtedly  the  Con- 
servatorio  Nacional  of  Mexico.  Carlos  Chavez,  who  was  its  director  from 
1928  to  1934  (he  received  his  appointment  at  the  age  of  twenty-eight), 
introduced  a  revolutionary  method  of  instruction,  dispensing  with  text¬ 
books  and  teaching  his  pupils  to  compose  in  all  styles,  with  particular 
attention  given  to  national  Mexican  melos  and  rhythms.  After  Chavez 
left  the  Conservatory,  his  ideas  and  progressive  policies  were  continued 
and  expanded. 

Every  sizable  city  in  Latin  America  has  its  own  symphony  orchestra 
or  a  military  band.  It  is  the  policy  of  these  orchestras  to  champion  native 
talent.  Twenty-three  works  by  Uruguayan  composers  were  given  by  the 
Montevideo  symphony  orchestra,  the  OSSODRE,  during  four  seasons, 


COMPOSERS  AND  SOCIETY  23 

1931-1934-  The  Orquesta  Sinfonica  of  Santiago,  Chile,  presented,  during 
the  five  seasons  1931-1936,  twenty-three  works  by  nine  Chilean  com 
posers.  In  the  first  five  years  of  its  existence,  1938-1943,  the  Orquesta 
Smfomca  Nactonal  de  Lima  gave  performances  of  forty-four  composi¬ 
tions  by  sixteen  Peruvians.  The  Orquesta  Filarmonica  de  Habana  gave 
during  Its  first  decade,  1924-1934,  virtually  all  the  orchestral  works  by 
the  Cuban  modernists  Caturla  and  Roldan,  and  eight  compositions  in  the 
Cuban  style  by  the  Spanish  conductor-composer  Pedro  Sanjuan,  who 
had  directed  the  orchestra  for  several  years.  At  one  of  my  concerts  with 
the  Havana  Philharmonic,  I  featured  the  first  local  performance  of  Gersh¬ 
win  s  Cuban  Overture,  based  on  the  rhythms  of  the  Rumba  and  the 
Conga. 


^  The  Orquesta  Smfonica  de  Mexico,  under  the  energetic  direction  of 
Its  founder,  Carlos  Chavez,  presented,  in  sixteen  seasons,  1928-1941 
seventy  works  by  thirty-one  Mexican  composers.  The  inaugural  concert 
of  the  symphony  orchestra  in  Ciudad  Trujillo,  capital  of  the  Dominican 
Republic,  on  October  23,  1941,  consisted  entirely  of  works  bv  ei^ht 
native  composers.  ^  ^ 

The  frequency  of  performances  of  native  works  by  Latin  American 
orchestras  IS  the  more  impressive  when  taken  in  proportion  to  the  total 
number  of  creative  musicians  in  the  country,  allowing  the  greatest  latitude 
of  professional  qualifications.  For  instance,  by  the  most  generous  count 
there  are  twenty-one  practicing  composers  in  Peru,  and  of  these,  sixteen 
have  been  represented  in  the  programs  of  the  Orquesta  Sinfonica  Nacional 


Conductors  for  local  orchestras  are  more  often  than  not  recruited  among 
native  musicians.  Armando  Carvajal,  a  Chilean  violinist,  is  the  permanent 
conductor  of  the  Orquesta  Sinfonica  de  Santiago.  Amadeo  Roldan,  the 
late  Cuban  musician,  began  as  a  violinist  in  the  Havana  Philharmonic 
and  became  its  conductor,  a  post  he  occupied  until  his  death  in  1939.  Other 
native  conductors  are  Juan  Jose  Castro  and  his  older  brother  Jose  Maria 
Castro  of  Argentina;  Guillermo  Espinosa,  the  conductor  of  the  Orquesta 
Smfomca  Nactonal  in  Bogota,  Colombia;  Emilio  Sojo,  who  conducts 
the  Orquesta  Venezuela  in  Caracas;  Jose  Marfa  Velasco  Maidana,  the 
director  of  the  Orquesta  Nacional  in  La  Paz,  Bolivia;  Carlos  Chavez,  the 
conductor  of  the  Orquesta  Sinfonica  de  Mexico-,  Herbert  de  Castro,  the 
leader  of  the  Panama  orchestra. 

Among  the  foreign  conductors  active  in  Latin  America  are  Casal  Chapf, 


24  PANORAMA  OF  LATIN  AMERICAN  MUSIC 

a  Spanish  refusee  who  is  the  conductor  o£  the  orchestra  in  Ciudad  Trujillo ; 
Lamberto  Baldi,  an  Italian,  who  leads  the  OSSODRE  orchestra  m 
Montevideo;  Theodore  Buchwald,  an  Austrian,  who  directs  the  Or- 
questa  Sinfonka  de  Lima;  and  Eugene  Szenkar,  the  well-known  Hun¬ 
garian  conductor,  who  is  now  in  charge  of  the  Orquestra  Brasiletra  in  Rio 
de  Janeiro.  Erich  Kleiber,  the  German  conductor,  divides  his  time  among 
the  orchestras  of  Santiago,  Lima,  Mexico,  and  Havana.  His  Beethoven 
cycles  are  famous. 

The  wages  of  orchestral  musicians  in  Latin  America  are  much  lower 
than  those  of  their  colleagues  in  the  United  States,  even  taking  into 
account  the  low  currency  in  relation  to  the  dollar.  As  a  consequence,  most 
Latin-American  musicians  eke  out  their  subsistence  by  playing  in  restau¬ 
rants  and  cafes.  This  in  turn  leads  to  insecure  attendance  at  rehearsals  and 
even  at  concerts.  Eugene  Szenkar  once  suffered  a  heart  attack  when  the 
oboe  player  failed  to  show  up  at  a  concert  of  the  Orquestra  Brasileira^  and 
the  incident  was  reported  in  the  press. 

When  I  conducted  the  Havana  Philharmonic  in  1933, 1  announced  my 
rehearsals  one  hour  ahead  of  the  actual  time.  I  called  the  advanced  hour 
Hora  Cubana^  and  the  real  time  Hora  Americana.  But  still  the  Cubans 
were  late! 

Latin  America  possesses  well-organized  choral  societies,  of  which  the 
Or^eon  Lamas  in  Caracas,  Venezuela,  enjoys  great  renown.  The  largest 
choral  ensemble  is  the  Brazilian  school  children’s  chorus,  numbering  sev¬ 
eral  thousand  boys  and  girls,  with  Villa-Lobos  as  conductor.  Each  year, 
on  Brazil’s  Independence  Day,  September  7,  this  chorus,  which  Villa- 
Lobos  with  his  love  for  neologisms  calls  ^^Orfheonic  Concentration^^  gives 
a  gala  performance  at  the  great  stadium  in  Rio  de  Janeiro.  Villa-Lobos  sta¬ 
tions  himself  atop  a  specially  constructed  platform  fifty  feet  high  and 
directs  the  chorus,  not  with  an  ordinary  conductor’s  baton,  but  with  flags 
of  national  colors.  Before  the  beginning  of  each  concert,  Villa-Lobos 
^^tunes  up”  the  children  by  making  them  sing  a  six-part  canon  in  thirds, 
resulting  in  a  chord  of  the  eleventh,  with  the  following  words: 

Bondade 

Realidade 

Amisade 

Sinceridade 

I^ualidade 

Lealdade 


COM POSERS  AND  SOCIETY  25 

These  words,  meaning  respectively,  goodness,  reality,  amity,  sincerity, 
equality,  and  loyalty,  form  an  acrostic,  spelling  BRASIL,  which  is  the 
proper  orfoography  in  the  Portuguese  language. 

Opera  is  universally  popular  in  Latin  America,  but  only  two  opera 
houses  maintain  regular  seasons,  the  Taatro  Colon  (which  means,  of 
rourse,  Columbus  Theater)  in  Buenos  Aires,  and  the  Teairo  Municifal 
in  Rio  de  Janeiro.  Pursuing  a  protective  national  policy,  the  Teatro  Colon 
has  produced  numerous  native  operas  and  ballets.  However,  few  of  these 
remain  in  the  repertoire,  the  maximum  number  of  performances  of  an 
opera  by  an  Argentine  composer  being  twenty-five.  A  list  of  operas  pre¬ 
sented  at  the  Teatro  Colon  during  the  first  quarter  of  a  century  of  its  ex¬ 
istence  is  given  in  the  de  luxe  volume  El  Arte  Lirico  en  el  Teatro  Colon 
1908-1Q33.  ' 

Italian  traditions  dominate  the  opera  in  Latin  America.  The  perform¬ 
ances  are  usually  in  Italian,  and  the  principal  singers  are  usually  Italians 
as  well.  Native  composers  are  apt  to  use  Italian  libretti,  even  when  the 
subject  of  the  opera  relates  to  indigenous  history  and  legend.  The  first 
significant  operatic  work  by  a  Latin-American  composer  was  II  Guaram, 
by  Carlos  Gomes,  the  Brazilian  Verdi.  The  story  of  the  opera  is  taken 
from  a  novel  of  Indian  life  by  Jose  Alencar,  a  pioneer  of  the  national 
school  of  Brazilian  literature.  Characteristically,  Gomes  read  this  novel 
not  in  the  original,  but  in  an  Italian  translation,  while  he  lived  in  Milan. 
His  opera  is  Italian  in  its  musical  idiom,  as  well  as  in  the  language  of  the 
libretto,  and  it  was  first  produced  in  Italy. 

The  opera  Malazarte,  by  the  contemporary  Brazilian  composer  Oscar 
Lorenzo  Fernandez,  was  originally  written  to  a  Portuguese  libretto  by 
the  late  Brazilian  poet,  Graga  Aranha.  The  story  deals  with  the  legendary 
master  of  black  magic  named  Malazarte  {ivom  rnalas  artes,  evil  arts), 
and  the  action  takes  place  in  colonial  Brazil.  When  the  production  was 
announced  for  September,  1941,  and  the  rehearsals  began,  it  became  in¬ 
creasingly  clear  that  the  singers,  the  majority  of  them  Italians,  could  not 
cope  with  the  text  in  the  vernacular,  and  the  libretto  had  to  be  hurriedly 
translated  into  the  language  of  all  opera  singers,  Italian. 

However,  efforts  are  being  made  by  the  nationalist  group  of  Brazilian 
writers  and  intellectuals  to  make  Brazilian  art  truly  Brazilian,  especially 
with  regard  to  the  use  of  the  Portuguese  language.  The  Congresso  da 
Lmgua  Nacional  Cantada,  which  assembled  in  Sao  Paulo  in  1937,  urged 
Brazilian  composers  to  use  Portuguese  texts  for  their  vocal  compositions. 

A  government  decree  of  January  26,  1937,  read  in  part:  “All  musical 


26  PANORAMA  OF  LATIN  AMERICAN  MUSIC 


programs  given  in  playhouses,  concert  halls,  and  theaters  in  Brazil  shall 
include  compositions  by  Brazilian  composers.” 

Radio  broadcasting  in  Latin  America  contributes  greatly  to  the  musical 
education  of  the  people.  There  are  special  radio  orchestras,  of  which  the 
best  is  the  Orquesta  Sinfonica  del  Servicio  Oficial  de  Difusion  Radio 
Electricay  or  OSSODRE,  in  Montevideo,  Uruguay.  The  best-equipped 
radio  station  in  Central  America  Is  La  Voz  de  Guatemala.  In  Mexico  there 
are  one  hundred  and  forty-nine  long-wave  and  thirteen  short-wave  radio 
stations.  There  are  one  hundred  and  eleven  radio  stations  in  Colombia. 
One  of  them,  La  Voz  del  Chocoy  is  In  the  jungle.  The  Indians  no  longer 
need  their  giant  drums  to  carry  messages  to  neighboring  villages.  They 
can  use  radio! 

Phonograph  recordings  of  popular  music  are  made  in  every  Latin- 
American  country,  but  the  recording  of  serious  music  is  handicapped  by 
an  inadequate  technical  apparatus.  Some  of  the  best  recordings  of  native 
music  made  in  Argentina  and  Brazil  have  been  taken  over  by  American 
phonograph  companies.  Among  American  recordings  of  Latin-American 
music,  made  in  the  United  States,  there  are  Victor  albums  of  symphonic 
music  by  Villa-Lobos  and  Chavez.  I  made  records  of  pieces  by  Argentine, 
Brazilian,  Chilean,  Colombian,  Peruvian,  and  Uruguayan  composers,  in 
an  album  called  South  American  Chamber  Musky  issued  by  the  Columbia 
Phonograph  Company. 


MUSICIANS  OF  ALL  RACES 

Reviewing  the  new  edition  of  a  music  dictionary,  Philip  Hale  once 
wrote:  “In  the  making  of  dictionaries  there  is  no  such  thing  as  plenary 
inspiration.”  But  in  the  life  of  a  musical  lexicographer,  there  are  mo¬ 
ments  when  little  else  but  plenary  inspiration  is  of  any  use.  Collating 
biographical  data  on  Latin-American  composers,  I  have  stumbled  upon 
numerous  discrepancies  of  vital  chronology,  not  all  of  them  accidental. 
Take,  for  instance,  the  question  of  the  birth  date  of  Villa-Lobos.  Riemann’s 
dictionary  gives  18 90 ;  Whok  Who  in  Latin  America  gives  1884.  Villa- 
Lobos  himself  hesitates  5  in  the  calendar  of  his  life  published  in  1941  in 
the  Brazilian  magazine  Musica  Vivay  he  marks  1888  as  the  year  of  his 
birth,  but  during  his  tour  of  the  United  States  in  the  spring  of  1945,  he 
gave  the  date  of  his  birth  as  1886  to  the  program  book  annotators  of  the 
orchestras  he  conducted..  But  Burle  Marx,  the  Brazilian  musician,  states 
categorically,  in  an  article  on  Villa-Lobos,  published  in  the  magazine 


27 


COMPOSERS  AND  SOCIETY 

Modern  Music,  that  Villa-Lobos  was  born  in  i88i,  and  this  date  is  gen¬ 
erally  regarded  as  correct  by  other  Brazilian  musicians.  Villa-Lobos  is 
said  to  have  been  baptized  in  the  Church  of  St.  Jose  in  Rio  de  Janeiro,  but 
my  diligent  search  through  birth  registries  of  that  church  revealed  no 
entry  on  Villa-Lobos.  Pending  the  discovery  of  documentary  proof,  I 
accept  the  date  given  by  Burle  Marx  as  the  most  consistent  with  the  known 
facts  of  Villa-Lobos’  early  life. 

The  year  of  birth  of  Carlos  Chavez  is  given  in  the  dictionaries  as  1899, 
but  Jesus  Romero,  the  Mexican  musicologist  who  has  compiled  the 
Latin-American  supplement  for  the  Dicdonario  llustrado  de  Muska, 
published  in  Spain  in  1930,  sets  the  date  one  year  back,  to  1898.  Romero 
knew  Chavez  as  a  youth,  and  claims  that  his  date  is  the  right  one.  How¬ 
ever,  in  the  absence  of  documentary  evidence,  I  retain  the  date  as  given 
by  Chavez  himself,  which  is  1899. 

The  Mexican  composer  Rafael  Tello  gave  me  the  date  of  his  birth  as 
September  5,  1872.  But  in  the  scrap  book  he  showed  me,  I  found  a  clip¬ 
ping  from  a  newspaper  P atria  of  September  8,  1883,  which  contains  a 
review  of  Tello’s  appearance  as  a  child  pianist,  giving  his  age  as  thirteen, 
which  places  his  birth  in  1870,  and  not  in  1872. 

The  year  of  birth  of  Acario  Cotapos,  the  Chilean  modernist,  is  given 
as  1886  in  the  program  of  the  International  Guild  of  Composers  in  New 
York,  when  one  of  his  works  was  performed  there  in  1923.  But  Cotapos 
himself  gives  his  birth  year  as  1889. 

Even  special  biographical  essays  cannot  be  relied  upon  for  chronological 
data.  The  Revista  Brasileira  de  Musica  has  published  two  biographical 
sketches  of  the  late  Brazilian  composer  Leopoldo  Miguez,  one  of  which 
gives  his  dates  of  birth  and  death  as  September  7,  1850,  and  September 
6. 1902  j  while  the  other  gives  September  7, 1852,  and  July  6, 1902. 

The  problem  of  Spanish  patronymics  is  a  vexatious  one.  The  mother’s 
family  name  is  usually  added  at  the  end,  but  is  not  regarded  as  a  true 
last  name.  Thus,  the  name  of  the  mother  of  Domingo  Santa  Cruz  is 
Wilson  (she  is  a  descendant  of  one  of  the  numerous  Irishmen  who  played 
an  important  part  in  Chile’s  revolution),  and  his  full  name  is  Domingo 
Santa  Cruz  Wilson.  But  he  should  be  listed  in  the  dictionaries  under  his 
father’s  name,  which  is  Santa  Cruz.  The  early  piano  pieces  of  Carlos 
Chavez  are  published  under  his  full  name,  Carlos  Chavez  Ramirez. 
Ramirez  IS  his  mother’s  family  name.  It  sometimes  happens,  however, 
that  the  mother’s  name  is  retained  rather  than  the  patronymic,  par- 


28  PANORAMA  OF  LATIN  AMERICAN  MUSIC 

tlcularly  if  the  latter  is  very  common.  For  instance,  Alejandro  Garcia 
Caturla  used  his  mother’s  name  Caturla  in  preference  to  Garcia,  which 
is  a  common  name  in  Cuba. 

Portuguese  names  present  no  such  difEculties,  because  the  father’s  name 
is  generally  used  as  last  name.  The  spelling  of  Brazilian  names  of  Spanish 
origin  varies,  as  there  is  a  tendency  to  dispense  with  unnecessary  double 
consonants.  Thus  Villa-Lobos  often  signs  his  name  Vila-Lobos,  which 
precludes  the  mispronunciation  in  the  Spanish  way,  Viya~LoboSy  or  in  the 
Argentine  manner,  where  the  double  I  is  sounded  like  2:  in  azure ^  resulting 
in  the  impossible  pronunciation  Vizha-Lobos.  Middle  names  exist  in 
Brazilian  usage,  but  are  often  omitted.  Camargo  Guarnieri  was  given  the 
middle  name  Mozart,  but  he  avoids  using  it  in  order  not  to  suggest  in¬ 
vidious  comparisons. 

There  is  also  the  matter  of  accents.  Strictly  speaking,  the  name  Chavez 
should  have  an  accent  on  the  first  syllable,  but  the  accepted  usage  dis¬ 
penses  with  it.  The  name  Fernandez  in  Spanish  has  an  acute  accent  on  the 
second  syllable;  however  Oscar  Lorenzo  Fernandez,  being  a  Brazilian, 
does  not  use  the  acute  accent  but  occasionally  puts  on  a  circumflex. 

In  the  dictionary  section  of  the  book  I  indicate,  whenever  possible,  the 
racial  origin  of  each  composer.  Carlos  Chavez  is  half  Indian,  on  his 
mother’s  side.  The  young  Mexican  musicians  Daniel  Ayala  and  Bias 
Galindo  are  Mayan  Indians.  The  late  Peruvian  composers  Teodoro 
Valcarcel  and  Daniel  Alomias  Robles  were  of  Indian  descent.  Maria 
de  Baratta  of  El  Salvador  is  the  granddaughter  of  the  last  Indian  chief 
of  the  Lenca  tribe. 

The  father  of  Alberto  Nepomuceno,  the  pioneer  of  Brazilian  music, 
was  the  natural  son  of  an  Indian  woman  and  a  Brazilian  landowner.  He 
was  named  after  Saint  Nepomuk,  on  whose  day  he  was  born.  Nepomuk 
is  the  national  Saint  of  Bohemia,  hence  the  Slavic  sound  of  Nepomuceno’s 
name. 

Negro  musicians  are  prominent  in  the  West  Indies  and  in  Brazil.  The 
Haitian  composer  Ludovic  Lamothe  has  been  called  a  “Black  Chopin.” 
Assis  Republicano,  who  is  Professor  of  Composition  at  the  Escola  Nacional 
de  Musica  in  Rio  de  Janeiro,  is  a  Negro.  Amadeo  Roldan  was  a  mulatto 
born  in  Paris  of  Cuban  parents.  Other  Latin-American  composers  are  of 
Spanish,  Italian,  Portuguese,  German,  and  French  extraction.  Most 
musicians  of  Italian  origin  live  in  the  large  cities  of  the  Atlantic  coast. 
Francisco  Mignone  of  Brazil,  Luis  Gianneo,  Honorio  Siccardi,  Nicolas 
Lamuraglia,  Pedro  Quaratino,  Gilardo  Gilardi  of  Argentina,  and 


COMPOSERS  AND  SOCIETY  29 

Eduardo  Fabini  of  Uruguay  are  native-born,  but  of  Italian  parentage. 
Camargo  Guarnien  is  half  Italian  and  half  Brazilian.  Among  the  natural¬ 
ized  Itahan-born  musicians  who  settled  in  Latin-American  countries  are 
Arturo  Luzzatti,  Pascual  de  Rogatis,  and  the  late  Gaetano  Troiani  of 
rgentina  j  Benone  Calcavecchia  of  Uruguay  5  and  the  late  Vicente  Stea 
of  Peru.  Andre  Sas,  born  in  Paris,  is  a  naturalized  Peruvian  citizen:  he 
now  prefers  to  sign  his  name  in  the  Spanish  way,  Andres  Sas.  Alfonso 
Leng  of  Chile  is  half  German  and  half  English.  His  maternal  aunt 
Carmela  Mackenna,  a  composer  in  her  own  right,  is  the  descendant  of  a 
famous  general  of  the  Chilean  Revolution,  who  was  Irish.  The  grand- 
father  of  Alberto  Williams  was  an  Englishman.  Walter  Stubbs  of  Peru 
IS  also  of  British  extraction.  Two  Russian-Jewish  musicians,  Jacobo  Ficher 
A  Jacobo  Kostakowsky  of  Mexico,  are  naturalized  citizens, 

fter  the  fall  of  Loyalist  Spam,  a  number  of  Spanish  composers  sought 
refuge  in  Latin  America.  Rodolfo  Halffter,  himself  half  German  on  his 
ather  s  side,  is  now  in  Mexico.  Julian  Bautista  has  settled  in  Buenos 
Aires.  Casal  Chapi,  the  grandson  of  the  famous  Spanish  composer  of  light 
opera  Ruperto  Chapi,  is  now  active  in  Ciudad  Trujillo,  in  the  Dominican 
Republi^c.  Jaime  Pahissa,  the  Catalan  modernist,  left  Spain  before  the  out- 
break  of  the  civil  war  and  settled  in  Argentina,  as  did  a  Spanish  musician 
of  the  older  genemtion,  Alberto  Villalba-Muhoz,  who  now  conducts  a 
ronservatoy  in  Jujuy,  Argentina.  The  great  Manuel  de  Falla  left  Spain 
in  1 939  and  now  lives  in  seclusion  in  Cordoba,  Argentina. 

The  majority  of  Latin-American  musicians  practice  other  professions 
besidej  music.  Alfonso  Leng  is  a  prominent  dentist  in  Santiago.  Jose 
Castaneda  he  of  the  vitriolic  pen,  is  Chief  of  the  Passport  Division  at 
he  Ministry  of  Foreign  Affairs  in  Guatemala.  Alejandro  Garcia  Caturla 
the  stormy  Cuban  modernist,  was  a  district  judge  in  his  native  town  of 
Remedios,  where  he  was  tragically  shot  and  killed  on  November  12, 1940 
_  y  a  CTiminal  whose  case  he  had  under  advisement.  Domingo  Santa  Cruz 
IS  a  awyer.  Carlos  Isamitt,  the  Chilean  musician  who  specializes  in 
^aucanian^folklore,  is  a  painter.  The  Peruvian  composer  Francisco 
Gonzalez  Gamarra  has_  designed  pictorial  postage  stamps  for  the  gov¬ 
ernment.  Guillermo  Uribe-Holguin,  the  foremost  musician  of  Colombia, 
isacoftee  grower. 

Often,  LatimAmerican  musicians  are  given  appointments  in  the  diplo¬ 
ma  1C  service.  Ernesto  Lecuona,  the  Cuban  composer  of  popular  Rumbas, 
as  served  as  an  attache  in  the  Cuban  legation  in  Washington.  Jose 
Asuncion  Flores,  the  originator  of  the  native  dance  Guarmia,  is  a  mem- 


30  PANORAMA  OF  LATIN  AMERICAN  MUSIC 

ber  of  the  Paraguayan  legation  in  Buenos  Aires.  Jaime  Ovalle,  the 
Brazilian  composer  of  jungle-like  incantations,  is  a  customs  officer. 

The  record  number  of  occupations  is  enjoyed  by  the  Colombian 
musician  Emirto  de  Lima.  The  complete  list  of  his  titles,  given  in  his 
book  on  Colombian  folklore,  takes  up  two  pages.  Here  are  some:  Consul 
of  Honduras  in  Barranquilla,  Envoy  Extraordinary  of  the  Republic  of 
Liberia,  Doctor  of  Music  of  the  Andhra  University  of  Vizianagaram, 
Great  Dignitary  of  the  Order  of  Charlemagne,  Holder  of  the  medal  of 
the  Society  I^a  Chanson  au  Sanatorium  of  France,  Holder  of  an  award 
of  the  SocietS  four  Actes  de  Courage  of  Belgium,  Honorary  Professor 
of  the  Music  School  in  Zacatecas,  Mexico,  Member  Correspondent  of 
the  Young  Men’s  Literary  Club  of  Monrovia,  Permanent  Delegate  of 
the  Societe  Parisienne  de  Sauvetage. 


ivjLuaiv^  IJN  Al^L.  STYLES 


There  is  a  great  diversity  of  style  among  Latin-American  composers, 
ranging  from  the  academic  to  the  ultra-modern.  Free  from  the  inhibitions 
imposed  on  European  and  North  American  composers  by  considerations 
of  economics  and  musical  politics,  and  unimpeded  by  conventional  profes¬ 
sional  training,  the  most  original  among  Latin-American  composers  create 
their  own  style,  often  improvisatory  in  character,  and  amazingly  nni;ir>. 
any  European-inspired  type  of  harmony,  melody,  or  rhythm. 

f  ^  composer.  He  experiments  with  music  unmind- 

tui  of  the  preceding  evolution  of  music  history.  His  instrumental  writ¬ 
ing  IS  often  tricky  and  requires  acrobatic  technique.  Once  Villa-Lobos 
put  a  non-existent  low  A  in  the  bassoon  part.  When  the  player  pointed  it 
out  to  him,  Villa-Lobos  remarked  cheerfully:  “All  right.  Stick  a  roll  of 
paper  into  the  tube,  and  that  will  give  you  the  extra  noted^ 

In  his  e^ly  dzys,  Carlos  Chavez  used  to  write  music  which  was  harsh 
and  unmellow.  When  I  conducted  his  chamber  orchestra  piece  Energia  at 

erts  in  Paris,  Andre  Coeuroy  described 
Oiavez  as  un  Memcmn  cruel  et  raffine  qui  cloue  les  sonorites  au  foteau 

sounre  etla  grace  delamusiqueP 

AmeriSfni!^er“f  attraction  for  Latin- 

vueltas  wrr  moments,  Silvestre  Re- 

vueltas  wrote  a  piece  entitled  ^  n  Radio.  “To  solve  this  algebraic  equa- 


COMPOSERS  AND  SOCIETY  31 

tion,”  he  explained  in  a  mocking  program  note,  “requires  profound 
knowledge  of  mathematics.”  However,  the  title  denotes  nothing  more 
abstruse  than  “Eight  by  Radio,”  for  the  piece  is  an  octet,  and  was  written 
tor  a  radio  performance  by  an  ensemble  of  eight  players. 

_  DanieJ  Ayala  of  Mexico,  a  Maya  Indian,  has  written  a  piece  called 
Radiogram,  imitating  the  Morse  code.  Francisco  Casabona,  Director  of 
the  Conservatory  of  Sao  Paulo,  composed  An  Einstein  Fable,  but  its 
harmony  style  is  quite  Euclidean.  Julio  Mata  of  Costa  Rica  is  the  author 
of  a  Smte  Abstracta.  Luis  Sandi  of  Mexico  disarms  potential  critics  by 
calling  one  of  his  orchestral  works  Suite  Banale. 

The  ultra-modernistic  and  communistic  Jose  Pomar  of  Mexico  avers 
that  his  interest  in  music  was  activated  by  his  boyhood  experiment  with 
a  tomcat,  which,  when  pulled  by  the  tail,  emitted  meows  of  different  pitch 
and  duration.  It  is  not  the  first  time  that  cats  have  provided  musical 
inspiration.  I  have  in  my  possession  a  lithograph  printed  by  Schirmer  in 
New  York  in  1869,  which  shows  an  orchestra  in  a  state  of  savage  frenzy 
the  violins  sawing  away  for  all  they  are  worth,  the  bells  ringing,  and 
the  drummer  perforating  the  bass  drum  with  his  skull.  In  the  percussion 
section  there  are  seven  cats,  marked  A,  B,  C,  D,  E,  F,  and  G,  with  a 
musician  standing  behind  and  pulling  their  tails  through  the  holes  in  a 
wooden  partition.  The  conductor  is  suspended  in  mid-air,  frantically  beat- 
ing  time  with_  both  arms  and  feet.  On  the  conductor’s  stand,  the  score 
reads:  Fr.  Liszt.”  Another  score  is  thrown  down  at  his  feet,  near  the 
podium.  It  IS  inscribed:  “Wagner.  Not  to  be  played  much  till  1995.” 
buch  was  the  cartoonist’s  idea  of  Wagner’s  music! 

Atonal  music  has  its  converts  in  Latin  America,  but  they  are  few. 
Juan  Carlos  Paz  of  Argentina  has  passed  through  four  evolutionary  styles 
of  atonal  music.  The  young  Brazilian  violinist,  Claudio  Santoro,  com¬ 
poses  exclusively  in  the  twelve-tone  technique.  The  German-Brazilian 
musician  Hans  Koellreutter  also  uses  the  system  of  composition  in  twelve 
tones.  Acario  Cotapos,  the  Chilean  modernist,  devised  a  system,  in  which 
a  thematic  phrase  consisting  of  different  notes  serves  as  a  melodic  and 
narmonic  basis  for  the  entire  composition. 

^  The  musical  leftists  of  Latin  America  are  usually  active  in  leftist  poli¬ 
tics  as  well.  Carlos  Chavez  expressed  his  political  predilections  in  such 
works  2s  Smfoma  Proletaria,  the  vocal  score  of  which  is  illustrated  with 
anti-capitahst  pictures  by  the  Mexican  painter  Diego  Rivera.  Silvestre 
Kevueltas  took  part  on  the  cultural  front  in  the  Lovalist  Government 


32  PANORAMA  OF  LATIN  AMERICAN  MUSIC 

during  the  Spanish  Civil  War,  and  wrote  a  symphonic  dedication  Ho- 
■menaje  a  Federico  Garcia  Lorca y  in  memory  of  the  Spanish  poet  mur¬ 
dered  by  the  Fascists.  The  Chilean  musician  Pablo  Garrido  was  once 
arrested  as  a  Bolshevik. 

The  impressionist  school  of  composition  has  numerous  followers  in 
Latin-American  nations  traditionally  connected  with  the  culture  and  the 
arts  of  France.  Villa-Lobos  picked  up  some  points  of  impressionist  es¬ 
thetics  during  his  sojourn  in  Paris.  Camargo  Guarnieri,  of  a  later  gen¬ 
eration,  leans  towards  the  more  austere  style  of  Gallic  neoclassicism. 
Oscar  Lorenzo  Fernandez  and  Francisco  Mignone  may  be  characterized 
as  romantic  impressionists,  somewhat  in  the  Italian  tradition.  Jose  Si- 
queira,  also  a  Brazilian  composer,  seasons  his  natural  rhapsodic  style  with 
impressionistic  spice. 

When  Manuel  Ponce  went  to  Paris  in  his  early  forties,  he  changed  his 
style  of  composition,  in  the  direction  of  greater  emphasis  on  color.  His 
symphonic  music,  most  of  which  was  produced  after  his  stay  in  Paris, 
clearly  shows  the  influence  of  impressionism.  Candelario  Huizar,  one  of 
the  most  significant  composers  of  Mexico,  adds  a  touch  of  Debussyan  and 
Ravelesque  harmonies  to  his  profoundly  nativistic  music.  The  same  may 
be  said  of  another  Mexican,  Jose  Rolon,  who  studied  in  Paris.  Guillermo 
Uribe-Holguin  of  Colombia  attended  the  class  of  Vincent  d’Indy  at  the 
Schola  Cantorum  in  Paris,  and  his  music,  though  Colombian  in  thematic 
material,  follows  the  technique  of  French  impressionism. 

The  late  Carlos  Pedrell  of  Uruguay,  who  spent  his  mature  years  in 
Paris,  is  to  all  effects  and  purposes  a  French  composer  with  a  Latin- 
American  background.  Alfonso  Broqua,  also  of  Uruguay,  is  equally 
French  in  his  musical  esthetics. 

Several  Latin-American  composers  who  do  not  follow  the  French 
impressionist  code  have  nonetheless  adopted  some  characteristically  De¬ 
bussyan  proredures  in  their  music.  Thus  Alberto  Williams,  who  is  a 
devoted  disciple  of  Cesar  Franck  (he  calls  his  own  pupils  “musical  grand¬ 
children  of  Cesar  Franck”),  makes  use  of  the  shibboleth  of  early  im¬ 
pressionism,  the  whole-tone  scale,  virtually  in  every  one  of  his  nine  sym¬ 
phonies.  Humberto  AUende  (who  had  received  a  complimentary  letter 
from  Debussy  congratulating  him  on  his  Cello  Concerto)  illustrates  the 
fall  from  the  horse  in  his  symphonic  poem,  Escenas  Camfesinas,  by  a 
c^rade  of  chromatically  descending  augmented  triads.  Prospero  Bisquertt 
of  Chile  applies  whole-tone  progressions  as  intervallic  variants  of  native- 
mspired  themes.  Eduardo  Fabini  of  Uruguay  splashes  whole-tone  scales 


^v^iviruoij.Kb  AND  SOCIETY  33 

kldlcapf  ^  of  his  symphonic  poems,  which,  glorify  the  tropical 

Romantic  and  rhapsodic  modes  of  expression  have  a  natural  appeal  to 
Latin-Amencan  musicians.  Alfonso  Leng  of  Chile  writes  music  in  a 
broociing^  quasi-Russian  manner.  The  exultant  melos  of  Jacobo  Ficher’s 
symphonies  is  ca^t  in  a  neo-romantic  mold.  Another  Latin-American 
Russian,  Jacobo  Kostakowsky  of  Mexico,  hardens  Tchaikovskian  har¬ 
monies  with  the  cement  of  dissonant  counterpoint.  An  isolated  figure  in 
Mexican  music  is  Alfonso  de  Elias,  whose  lyrical  talent  is  virtually  un- 
attected  by  contemporary  music. 

The  romantic  composers  of  Argentina  lean  towards  a  broad  operatic 
style  of  composition  even  in  purely  symphonic  music.  Constantino  Gaito 
orchestrates  his  ballet  scores  with  a  sure  hand,  in  bright  Italianate  color. 
Pascud  de  Rogatis,  Felipe  Boero,  Florio  Ugarte,  Athos  Palma,  and 
Raul  Espoile  write  operas,  often  on  native  subjects,  but  with  the  applica¬ 
tion  of  Italian  stage  technique.  In  his  symphonic  suite,  Escenas  Argentinas, 
Lopez  Buchardo  contrives  a  brilliant  kaleidoscope  of  native  rhythms. 

The  advanced  type  of  Argentine  music  is  cultivated  by  the  Gru-po 
Renovaaon,  a  vanguard  group  founded  in  1929,  whose  principal  mem- 
bers  are  Jacobo  Ficher,  Honorio  Siccardi,  Jose  Maria  Castro,  his  young 
brother,  Washington  Castro,  and  Roberto  Garcia  Morillo.  Close  to  the 
Grufo  Renovacion  in  his  musical  esthetics  is  the  young  Alberto  Ginastera, 
whose  lyrically  expressive  talent  places  him  high  among  creative  musi- 
Clans  or  nis  country. 

The  domin^t  figure  of  modern  music  in  Chile  is  Domingo  Santa  Cruz, 
^the  Chilean  Hindemith,”  as  he  has  been  dubbed,  who  writes  in  a  finely 
delineated  contrapuntal  style.  The  young  generation  of  Chilean  com¬ 
posers  follow  him  m  forming  their  modern  Chilean  school  of  composi¬ 
tion,  in  which  native  themes  are  treated  as  germinal  material  in  absolute 
musical  forms. 

^  One  of  the  most  uncompromising  modernists  was  Alejandro  Garcia 
Caturla,  the  Cuban  composer  who  studied  in  Paris,  but  never  accepted  ' 
he  necessity  of  formal  organization  in  free  composition.  He  transferred 
to  the  rnusic  staff  his  musical  impressions  of  the  Afro-Cuban  jungle,  rich 
m  colorful  variety  of  sounds  and  noises.  The  mulatto  composer  Amadeo 
Roldan  also  cultivated  Afro-Cuban  folklore  in  his  music.  After  the  death 
of  Roldan,  and  then  that  of  Caturla,  young  musicians  of  Cuba  veered 
ay  rom  the  native  Cuban  vein  and  turned  to  neoclassicism.  Several 
Of  them  have  recently  banded  together  in  a  society  nzmtd  Grufo  de 


‘34  PANORAMA  OF  LATIN  AMERICAN  MUSIC 

Renovacion  Musical^  probably  in  emulation  of  the  Grufo  Renovacion  of 
Buenos  Aires,  with  Jose  Ardevol,  a  Spanish  musician  settled  in  Havana, 
as  their  principal  mentor. 

A  curious  blend  of  primitivism  and  formalism  is  the  ballet  Nahualismo 
by  Maria  de  Baratta  of  Salvador.  The  story  is  derived  from  the  primi¬ 
tivistic  cosmogony  of  the  Nahua  people  of  Central  America,  and  the 
score  is  subtitled  Diabolus  in  Musica^  for  the  thematic  material  is  based 
on  the  interval  of  the  tritone,  the  devil  of  the  medieval  musicians. 

By  far  the  most  extraordinary  and  revolutionary  theory  of  composition 
evolved  in  Latin  America  is  Sonido  15,  the  Thirteenth  Sound,  promul¬ 
gated  by  the  Mexican-Indian  musician,  Julian  Carrillo.  He  studied  music 
in  Leipzig,  wrote  academic  overtures,  and  then  suddenly  plunged  into 
the  uncharted  seas  of  microtones.  The  name  Thirteenth  Sound  symbolizes 
the  realm  of  intervals  smaller  than  a  semitone,  thus  lying  beyond  the 
twelve  chromatic  degrees.  Carrillo’s  theory  presupposes  any  number  of 
such  microtones,  but  he  limits  himself  in  actual  composition  to  quarter- 
tones,  eighth-tones,  and  sixteenth-tones. 

The  symbolic  number  13  bobs  up  everywhere  in  Carrillo’s  writings  and 
his  social  activities.  He  is  the  honorary  chairman  of  the  Pro-Carrillo  Com¬ 
mittee  of  Thirteen.  His  magazine  Sonido  jj,  of  which  only  a  few  num¬ 
bers  were  issued  some  years  ago,  was  published  on  the  thirteenth  day  of 
each  month.  In  the  first  issue,  Carrillo  published  a  grandiloquent  manifesto 
bristling  with  exclamation  points  (and  in  Spanish  exclamation  points 
precede,  as  well  as  follow,  each  sentence) :  The  art  of  music  has  hitherto 
possessed  only  two  modes!  jThis  slavery  lasted  until  the  twentieth  cen¬ 
tury  after  Christ!  \  This  great  problem  remained  unsolved  until  the  pub¬ 
lication  of  my  Theory  of  the  Thirteenth  Sound !  j  The  Thirteenth  Sound  is 
the  point  of  departure  for  a  new  musical  generation  which  will  revolution¬ 
ize  the  art  of  music!” 

The  dedication  of  Carrillo’s  book  de  la  Revolucion  Musical 

del  Sonido  13,  published  in  1940,  is  worth  quoting  in  full:  ^Ho  the 
memory  of  the  Greek,  Terpander,  who,  six  centuries  before  Christ,  con¬ 
quered  Sounds  VI  and  VII,  and  to  that  of  a  Roman  musician,  who,  in 
the  eleventh  century  of  our  era,  conquered  Sound  VIII,  this  book  is 
dedicated  by  the  Mexican,  Julian  Carrillo,  who,  in  1895,  experimentally 
achieved  Sound  XIII,  with  which  he  closed  the  cycle  of  conquests  of 
sound  and  opened  the  portals  of  musical  infinity.”  ^ 

If  indeed  Carrillo  ''experimentally  achieved  Sound  XIII”  in  1895, 
then  he  holds  clear  priority  over  the  European  pioneers  of  quarter-tone 


COMPOSERS  AND  SOCIETY  35 

music,  none  of  whom  began  their  experiments  before  the  turn  of  the 
century. 

Apart  from  original  compositions  for  microtones,  Carrillo  has  made 
transcriptions  of  Bach  and  Beethoven  in  quarter-tones,  in  which  the  octave 
is  shrunk  to  the  tritone,  and  other  intervals  are  similarly  halved.  For  his 
music,  Carrillo  has  evolved  a  special  system  of  notation;  he  has  also  con¬ 
structed  the  Carrillophone,  on  which  microtonal  compositions  may  be 
played.  According  to  Carrillo’s  own  computations,  the  complete  edition 
of  his  Theory  of  the  Thirteenth  Sound  includes  1,193,556,232  chords, 
fiUing  14,315  volumes  of  500  pages  each.  No  publisher  has  as  yet  offered 
him  a  contract. 

Among  other  musical  inventors  in  Latin  America,  the  names  of  the 
Paraguayan-born  Angel  Menchaca  (1855-1924)  and  of  the  Colombian 
Diego  Fallon  ( 1834“!  9^5)  merit  notice.  Menchaca  constructed  a  sloping 
piano  keyboard,  enabling  the  pianist  to  perform  chromatic  glissando 
passages.  Fallon  proposed  a  syllabic  music  notation  in  which  vowels  indi¬ 
cate  metrical  divisions,  and  consonants  the  degrees  of  the  scale.  Thus,  the 
C  major  arpeggio  in  quarter-notes  is  transcribed  in  Fallon’s  notation  by 
the  vocable  Bayamb. 

The  question  now  arises,  which  of  these  Latin-American  musicians 
should  be  listed  in  a  biographical  dictionary,  so  as  to  sin  neither  on  the 
side  of  charity  nor  on  the  side  of  exclusivity.  The  local  critics  render  a 
pessimistic  judgment  on  the  state  of  music  in  their  countries.  Arturo 
Briceno  of  Venezuela  declares:  “In  the  field  of  art  Venezuela  is  the  most 
unfortunate  of  South  American  nations.”  Gustavo  Santos,  Director  of 
the  Department  of  Fine  Arts  in  Colombia,  proclaims:  ^‘We  are  a  nation 
without  music,  if  not  an  unmusical  nation.”  Luis  A.  Delgadillo  of  Nica¬ 
ragua  writes:  “It  is  painful  to  confess  that  nobody  except  myself  takes 
music  seriously  in  Nicaragua.  I  am  a  Don  Quixote  of  music,  fighting  in  a 
vacuum.”  Rafael  Coello  Ramos,  Inspector  General  of  Music  in  the  Re¬ 
public  of  Honduras,  concludes  his  survey  of  native  music  with  this  mel¬ 
ancholy  pronouncement:  “It  is  no  exaggeration  to  say  that  music  in 
Honduras  is  like  a  person  in  a  state  of  coma.”  And  Pablo  Garrido  of 
Chile  writes  a  pamphlet  with  the  significant  title,  Tragedia  del  Musico 
Chileno. 

It  was  left  to  a  German-born  Americanist,  Francisco  Curt  Lange,  to 
inspire  confidence  among  Latin-American  musicians.  ^^It  is  a  Latin- 
American  habit,”  he  wrote  in  the  statement  of  aims  and  purposes  of 
Americanismo  Musical^  “to  belittle  the  native  achievements,  and  to  dis- 


36  PANORAMA  OF  LATIN  AMERICAN  MUSIC 

miss  with  a  gesture  of  specious  candor  not  only  the  positive  values  al¬ 
ready  gained,  but  even  the  potentialities  of  cultural  achievements. 

It  is  clear  that  a  high  standard  of  selectivity  cannot  be  pursued  in  the 
account  of  a  young  art  as  yet  in  its  first  century  of  evolution.  What  if 
geographers  and  natural  scientists  should  confine  themselves  to  the  de¬ 
scription  of  picturesque  terrain  and  attractive  vegetation,  excluding  from 
their  survey  the  more  modest  specimens  of  native  flora?  The  ^outh  Ameri¬ 
can  Handbook  describes  a  stretch  of  land  along  the  Pacific  coast,  from 
Arica  to  Copiapo,  as  ^^sandy  desert,  utterly  rainless,  a  land  of  merciless 
sunshine  and  forbidding  mountains  devoid  of  vegetation.’’  Still,  the 
geographers  have  placed  this  infertile  desert  on  their  maps.  T.  Harper 
Goodspeed  in  his  book,  Plant  Hunters  in  the  Andes/^  tells  of  the  pro¬ 
longed  search  for  a  rare  tobacco  plant  named  Nicotiana  CordifoUa^  ^^a 
rather  scraggly  shrub,  possessing  a  nasty  odor  and  unpleasant  taste.” 
But  this  ^^scraggly  shrub”  was  worth  more  to  him  than  a  thousand  aro¬ 
matic  blossoms  of  the  tropics. 

In  the  spirit  of  frivolous  profundity,  I  drew  up  a  formula  expressing 
the  necessary  requirements  for  a  musician  to  be  put  on  a  geo-musical  map. 
I  called  it  a  “Formula  for  Musicological  Eligibility.”  Quantity  as  well 
as  quality  are  factors  in  my  formula.  Did  not  Dr.  Samuel  Johnson  him¬ 
self  recognize  the  value  of  a  purely  numerical  achievement?  Said  he  to 
Boswell,  commenting  on  a  contemporary  poetaster:  “To  be  sure,  he  is 
a  tree  that  cannot  produce  good  fruity  he  only  bears  crabs.  But,  sir,  a 
tree  which  produces  a  great  many  crabs  is  better  than  a  tree  which  produces 
only  a  few.” 

In  alloting  space  in  a  music  dictionary,  composers  of  music  in  larger 
forms  should  naturally  receive  preferential  treatment.  Other  things  being 
equal,  a  symphony  is  a  more  impressive  achievement  than  a  piano  sonata, 
and  an  opera  merits  more  attention  than  a  ballad.  Let  us  assign  an  arbi¬ 
trary  numerical  coefficient  to  each  musical  form,  expressing  approximately 
their  relative  values.  Let  us  take  a  song  with  piano  accompaniment  as  a 
musicological  unit.  Let  us  rate  a  piano  piece  as  worth  five  songs  (always 
regarding  quality  as  a  constant),  a  piece  of  chamber  music  equal  to 
twenty-five  songs,  a  symphony  to  fifty  songs,  and  an  opera  to  one  hundred 
songs. 

Popularity  and  mass  appeal  should  also  be  taken  into  consideration 
as  positive  factors.  Thekla  Badarczewska,  the  Polish  girl  who  wrote  that 

*  Edited  by  Howell  Davies,  Trade  and  Travel  Publications,  London,  1941. 

t  Farrar  &  Rinehart,  1941. 


COMPOSERS  AND  SOCIETY  37 

perennial  of  the  drawing-room,  A  Maiden^s  Prayer ^  was  no  female  Cho¬ 
pin,  but  her  name  is  rightfully  preserved  in  music  dictionaries.  The  com¬ 
posers  of  national  anthems  are  in  almost  every  case  musical  amateurs, 
but  their  names,  too,  are  placed  alongside  those  of  real  musicians. 

The  more  primitive  the  cultural  state,  the  more  important  looms  even 
a  mediocre  talent.  Therefore  lexicographical  eligibility  ought  to  be  meas¬ 
ured  in  the  inverse  ratio  to  the  state  of  local  culture.  Let  P  stand  for  popu¬ 
larity  and  Q  for  quality.  The  ^Tormula  for  Musicological  Eligibility” 
will  then  appear  as  follows: 

Eligibility  =  PQ  ( 100  x  Opera  +  50  x  Symphony  -f-  25  x  Chamber  Music  + 
5  X  Piano  +  i  x  Song)  Musiculture 

The  following  table  gives  the  number  of  composers  by  country  who 
are  included  in  my  biographical  panorama.  The  density  of  composers,  per 
area  and  per  population,  is  also  indicated. 


Country 

Number  of 
Composers 

Composers 

PER 

Population 

Composers 
PER  Area  in 
Square  Miles 

Argentina 

60 

1/220,000 

1/18,000 

Brazil 

41 

1/1,100,000 

1/80,000 

Mexico 

33 

1/600,000 

1/23,000 

Peru 

22 

1/320,000 

1/22,000 

Dominican  Republic 

22 

1/75,000 

1/880 

Chile 

20 

1/250,000 

1/14,000 

Cuba 

15 

1/280,000 

1/3,000 

Uruguay 

12 

1/180,000 

1/6,000 

Guatemala 

12 

1/275,000 

1/4,000 

Colombia 

10 

1/800,000 

1/44,000 

Costa  Rica 

7 

1/90,000 

i/3>3oo 

Panama 

7 

1/80,000 

0 

0 

0 

l-f 

Bolivia 

6 

1/575,000 

1/70,000 

Venezuela 

5 

1/700,000 

1/70,000 

El  Salvador 

4 

1/450,000 

I/3G00 

Honduras 

4 

1/250,000 

1/11,000 

Ecuador 

3 

T/1,000,000 

1/60,000 

Paraguay 

3 

1/350,000 

1/56,000 

Haiti^ 

3 

1/900,000 

1/3,600 

Nicaragua 

I 

1/1,380,000 

1/57,000 

All  Countries 

290 

1/443,000 

1/15,000 

38  PANORAMA  OF  LATIN  AMERICAN  MUSIC 

Apart  from  the  problem  of  lexicographical  eligibility,  there  exists,  of 
course,  the  factor  of  availability  of  information.  Although  I  used  a  liberal 
net  in  hauling  my  fish,  it  is  quite  possible  that  some  if  not  the  big_  ones, 
got  away.  I  am  reasonably  sure,  however,  that  none  did  in  the  Dominican 
Republic,  where  I  had  the  assistance  of  Jose  G.  Rammez-Peralta,  the 
Dominican  musician,  now  resident  in  New  York  Qty.  He  has  supplied 
me  with  a  list  of  every  Dominican  Tom,  Dick,  and  Harry,  complete  with 
their  biographical  data  and  samples  of  their  music. 


Artless  Folklore 


It  is  a  paradox  of  spontaneous  creative  force  that  folk  music  should  be, 
by  definition,  an  anonymous  art,  originated  by  simple  men  and  women 
without  learning,  and  yet  attaining  the  most  perfect  musical  expression 
of  the  nation’s  collective  soul.  Leon  Mera,  writing  in  the  preface  to  the 
collection  of  Ecuador’s  folklore,  Antologia  Ecuatoriana,  observes:  These 
peasants  have  no  idea  who  Rossini  or  Mozart  was,  but  they  create  their 
own  melodies  with  astounding  ease.”  The  very  old  or  blind  men  are 
often  the  best  interpreters  of  native  art.  Juan  Alvarez,  writing  in  the  1909 
issue  of  the  Argentine  publication.  Revista  de  Eerechoy  Historia  y  LetraSy 
calls  the  blind  singers  “keepers  of  the  native  tradition.”  The  Hymn  to 
the  Suny  one  of  the  noblest  Inca  airs,  was  preserved  thanks  to  the 
memory  of  a  iiy-year-old  Indian  named  Jose  Mateo  Sanchez,  who  had 
spent  all  his  life  in  a  remote  village  in  the  Andes.  Daniel  Alomias  Robles, 
the  late  Peruvian  collector  of  folklore,  wrote  down  the  music  of  the 
Hymn  from  the  lips  of  this  ancient.  He  gives  a  vivid  description  of  the 
man:  “Despite  his  advanced  age,  the  muscular  body  of  this  Indian  en¬ 
abled  him  to  walk  erect  with  the  martial  gait  of  a  soldier,  for  indeed  he 
had  served  in  tjbe  War  of  Liberation  in  1824.  The  Indians,  as  a  race, 
are  reserved  and  uncommunicative.  But  when  the  spirit  moves  them. 


ARTLESS  FOLKLORE 


39 


they  grow  eloquent.  One  day  Sanchez  invited  me  to  go  hunting.  Later, 
having  regaled  me  with  a  splendid  heron  he  had  shot  that  morning, 
he  said  to  me:  ^You  will  now  hear  the  hymn  we  sing  to  the  Sun.’  And 
he  intoned  thk  mystical  chant,  saved  from  oblivion  in  the  silent  memory 
of  an  ancient  Indian.” 

Carlos  Vega,  who  has  spent  years  traveling  in  the  mountains  and  plains 
of  South  America,  collecting  and  recording  the  ancient  folklore  of  the 
Indians,  exclaims:  ^^Cmndo  agoniza  un  anciano  analfabeto^  farece  que 
se  quema  una  bibliotecad^  (When  an  illiterate  oldster  expires,  it  seems 
a  library  is  burning.) 

Not  all  folk  songs  are  collective  creations.  Melodies  composed  by  in¬ 
dividual  authors  may  become  folk  songs  when  they  attain  the  simplicity 
and  perfection  of  spontaneous  art.  The  universally  popular  EstrelUta  was 
written  by  the  Mexican  composer  Manuel  Ponce,  and  was  published  in 
1914.  Ponce  was  abroad  at  the  time.  When  he  came  back  to  Mexico,  he 
found  that  his  melody  had  become  famous.  Ironically  enough,  EstrelUta 
has  not  earned  its  creator  any  money,  for  an  irregularity  in  the  copyright 
registry  has  permitted  the  publishers  to  reprint  it  without  paying  royalties. 

When  Villa-Lobos  was  asked:  “What  is  folklore?”  he  replied,  “I  am 
folklore!”  Elaborating,  he  added:  “A  truly  creative  musician  is  capable 
of  producing,  from  his  own  imagination,  melodies  that  are  more  authentic 
than  folklore  itself.” 

These  words  are  substantiated  not  only  in  the  genuinely  folk-like 
music  of  Villa-Lobos  himself.  Guillermo  Uribe-Holguin  of  Colombia 
has  expressed  the  innermost  spirit  of  native  folklore  in  his  T rozos  en  el 
Sentimiento  Pofular^  of  which  he  has  written  over  three  hundred. 
Camargo  Guarnieri  of  Brazil  never  resorts  to  literal  quotations  from 
folk  songs,  but  writes  original  melodies  whose  inflections  and  rhythms 
are  intensely  Brazilian,  Carlos  Chavez  reinvents  folk-like  melodies  in  the 
Mexican  manner  by  dint  of  intimate  absorption  of  Indian  melos.  Carlos 
Isamitt  of  Chile,  on  the  other  hand,  prefers  to  use  original  songs  of  the 
Araucanian  Indians  as  the  themes  of  his  delicate  instrumental  evocations. 
In  his  Trio  Brasileiro,  Oscar  Lorenzo  Fernandez  makes  use  of  four  au¬ 
thentic  Brazilian  melodies  and  five  original  inventions. 

What  are  the  characteristics  of  a  folkloric  style?  Carlos  Vega  offers  the 
following  observations,  writing  in  a  preface  to  the  collection,  Punenas 
(melodies  of  the  high  plateau)  compiled  by  Isabel  Aretz-Thiele, 

Vega’s  assistant  in  the  Cabinet  of  Native  Musicology  at  the  Argentine 
Museum  of  Natural  Sciences:  “The  musical  style  of  a  people  is  a 


40  PANORAMA  OF  LATIN  AMERICAN  MUSIC 

language,  which  must  be  learned  in  childhood,  as  natives  do.  Those  who 
have  not  received  such  early  training  must  achieve  fluency  in  the  musical 
idiom  in  the  same  way  as  in  language  study,  by  learning  grammar.  When 
a  composer  has  acquired  perfect  understanding  of  the  melo-rhythmic  pat¬ 
terns  corresponding  to  individual  words  in  a  language,  when  he  has  learned 
to  build  these  patterns  into  sentences,  and  is  able  to  construct  them  cor¬ 
rectly,  then,  and  only  then,  will  he  have  mastered  the  new  language.” 

The  songs  of  the  people  are  generally  monodic,  devoid  of  the  under¬ 
tones  of  an  implied  harmony.  The  problem  arises,  what  type  of  harmonic 
setting  is  congenial  to  the  inner  spirit  of  a  folk  song?  In  other  words, 
what  are  the  practical  rules  of  a  perfect  stylization? 

Humberto  Allende  writes:  “The  stylizer  of  folk  songs  should  not  at¬ 
tempt  to  imitate  the  popular  creation,  but  should  rather  strive  to  re-create 
the  spirit  of  these  songs.  He  should  set  his  melody  in  attractive  har¬ 
monies,  within  an  established  musical  form.”  But  by  what  yardstick  can 
we  judge  the  “attractiveness”  of  these  specially  arranged  harmonies?  A 
style  attractive  to  one  musician  may  be  utterly  repugnant  to  another.  The 
ultimate  criterion  is  the  degree  of  natural  fusion,  musical  osmosis,  that 
is  attained  betw^een  a  linear  melo-rhythmic  phrase  and  a  system  of  applied 
harmony.  In  rare  instances  this  musical  osmosis  is  effected  with  such 
inevitableness  that  the  melody,  rhythm,  and  harmony  become  one.  The 
harmonic  setting  of  Russian  songs  by  Moussorgsky,  of  Polish  dances  by 
Chopin,  of  Norwegian  modes  by  Grieg,  are  examples.  I  have  proposed 
the  term  Musical  Syncretism^^  to  describe  this  fusion  of  a  folk-inspired 
rhythmic  melody  and  applied  harmony.  The  acceptance  of  such  a  term 
would  fill  a  definite  lacuna  in  musical  esthetics. 

Urban  folklore,  as  well  as  the  folklore  of  the  countryside,  offers  ma¬ 
terial  for  creative  composition.  Humberto  Allende  has  written  an  or¬ 
chestral  suite,  La  Voz  de  las  CalleSy^hioh  features  the  musical  cries  of 
Santiago's  street  vendors,  the  fregones,  Fructuoso  Vianna  of  Brazil  takes 
the  singsong  of  the  coconut-drink  peddler  in  Rio  de  Janeiro  as  a  theme 
for  one  of  his  Ravelesque  Miniatures  for  piano,  Domingo  Santa  Cruz 
interpolates  the  imitation  of  the  Chilean  policeman's  whistle  in  his  orches¬ 
tral 

In  Havana,  the  symphony  of  pushcart  tenors  is  particularly  rich  and 
varied.  The  fiorituras  that  2-  Havana  knife-sharpener  performed  on  his 
mouth  harmonica  reminded  me  of  the  neo-Grecian  modes  of  Debussy's 
Flute  de  Pan  from  Chansons  de  Bilitis,  I  noted  down  the  tune. 


ARTLESS  FOLKLORE 


41 


Beggars,  too,  resort  to  music  to  attract  attention.  In  Mexico  City,  every 
morning  one  could  watch  a  blind  beggar  sitting  on  the  sidewalk  opposite 
the  Palacio  de  Bellas  Artes,  with  an  array  of  old  shoe-polish  tins  arranged 
in  a  semicircle  about  him.  Upon  these  tins  he  played  Mexican  airs,  using 
a  harmony  in  consecutive  thirds  or  sixths,  and  unerringly  striking  the 
proper  notes  with  his  two  wooden  millets, 

GUITARS,  FLUTES,  AND  DRUMS 

The  aboriginal  musical  instruments  of  Latin  America  are  flutes  and 
drums  5  but  it  is  the  Spanish  guitar  that  is  the  heart  of  popular  music  from 
Patagonia  to  the  Rio  Grande.  An  Uruguayan  legend  tells  of  the  birth 
of  the  guitar.  A  lonely  Gaucho  of  the  pampas,  unable  to  find  a  soulmate, 
seeks  advice  from  a  sage  of  the  land,  and  receives  from  him  “a  piece  of 
wood,  shaped  like  a  beautiful  woman’s  body,  from  whose  breasts  the 
Gaucho  moulds  poetic  ballads,  while  his  left  hand  caresses  her  shapely 
neck.” 

The  etymology  of  the  word  guitar  is  clear.  It  comes  from  the  Greek 
Kidapa  and  the  Latin  cithara.  It  is  cognate  with  the  word  zither.  Ricardo 
Munoz,  in  his  exhaustive  monograph,  Historia  de  la  Guitara,  states, 
without  corroboration,  that  the  word  guitar  comes  from  guiterna,  and 
is  of  Arabic  origin. 

Several  distinct  types  of  guitars  are  in  use  in  different  Latin  American 
countries.  The  Cuban  Tres  is,  as  the  name  implies,  a  guitar  with  only  three 
strings.  The  Cuatro  iz  a  four-string  guitar.  The  Tifle  is  a  guitar  without 
the  lower  strings  {Tifle  means  treble,  and  the  register  of  z  Tifle  guitar  is 
high).  The  name  Charango  is  used  in  some  countries  to  mean  a  simple 
home-made  guitar.  The  Brazilian  “carnival  guitar”  is  called 


+2  PANORAMA  OF  LATIN  AMERICAN  MUSIC 


Rafael  Adame,  Professor  of  the  Guitar  at  the  National  Conservatory 
of  Mexico,  is  the  author  of  the  first  Concerto  for  Guitar  and  Orchestra. 
The  full  artistic  and  musical  possibilities  of  the  guitar  as  a  solo  instru¬ 
ment  are  demonstrated  in  Manuel  Ponce’s  Concerto,  which  has  been 
widely  performed  by  the  famous  guitarist  Segovia. 

The  style  of  native  music  is  often  affected  by  the  harmony  inherent 
in  the  tuning  of  the  guitar.  Narciso  Garay  complains  that  Panama’s  folk 
music  is  circumscribed  by  the  “guitar  harmony  of  six-four  chords.”  In 
reply  to  my  question:  “What  is  your  harmonic  style.?”  an  amateur  com¬ 
poser  from  Honduras  wrote:  “I  use  chords  that  I  can  find  on  my  guitar.” 

The  harp  is  another  European  instrument  that  was  imported  into 
Latin  America  at  an  early  date  and  acquired  an  extraordinary  popularity. 
Primitive  harps  are  manufactured  by  village  Indians,  and  many  are  adept 
in  harp  playing.  Violins,  clarinets,  and  other  orchestral  instruments  were 
established  in  Latin  America  in  the  eighteenth  century. 

The  most  popular  wind  instruments  in  Latin  America  are  vertical 
flutes,  which  are  made  of  bamboo  reed  or  of  baked  clay.  There  are  also 
V-shaped  twin  flutes  with  a  single  mouthpiece,  and  a  great  variety  of  pan¬ 
pipes.  In  Bolivia,  there  is  in  existence  a  triple  panpipe  with  reeds  arranged 
in  rows  like  typewriter  keys,  and  the  range  of  these  triple  panpipes  is  often 
extended  to  a  complete  chromatic  scale. 


A  very  curious  native  instrument  is  the  nose  flute  peculiar  to  the 
Indians  of  the  Amazon  River  basin.  It  is  made  in  the  shape  of  a  disk 
and  has  perforations.  The  player  holds  the  disk  close  to  the  nostrils  and 
blows.  The  Boston  Museum  of  Fine  Arts  has  in  its  possession  a  golden 
object  manufactured  by  the  Quimbaya  Indians  of  Colombia,  which  repre¬ 
sents  a  human  figure  blowing  into  a  twin  nose  flute. 

The  group  of  percussion  instruments  of  Latin  America  is  particularly 
abundant  and  varied.  There  are  in  use  among  the  Indians  drums  made  of 
burned-out  tree  trunks,  such  as  the  Tefonaxtle  in  Mexico  and  the  Trocano 
in  Brazil.  Fruit  shells  are  used  for  scrapers,  made  by  notching  the  surface 
0  t  e  rie  gourd,  or  for  shakers,  made  by  filling  the  shells  with  hard 
pellets  or  pebbles.  Clapping  of  hands,  stamping  on  the  ground,  tapping 
a  wooden  surface  with  long  reeds,  all  these  noises  are  used  in  native  music 
accompanying  the  Indian  dances.  The  Catuquinaru  Indians  of  central 
Braz.  constrm  elabome  “earth  drams”  by  digging  a  hole  in  the  ground 
and  placing  in  it  a  hollow  trunk  of  a  palm  tree,  which  is  filled  with  rubber, 
powdered  mica,  and  fragments  of  animal  bones,  and  which  serves  as  a 

resonator  when  stamped  upon  during  the  dance. 


ARTLESS  FOLKLORE  43 

The  sizes  and  shapes  of  the  aboriginal  instruments  of  Latin  America 
vary  from  the  minuscule  to  the  gigantic.  The  longest  instrument  is  the 
Chilean  Trutruca,  a  reed  pipe  reaching  the  length  of  two  meters.  The 
largest  panpipe  is  the  Bolivian  Bajon,  which  is  made  of  spiraled  tree  bark 
cemented  by  baked  clay. 

The  loudest  native  instruments  are  the  jungle  drums  of  Brazil  and 
Paraguay.  The  softest  percussion  instrument  is  the  picturesquely  named 
Culo-en^tierra  (buttocks-in-the-ground)  used  by  the  Indians  of  Venezuela. 
The  sound  of  the  Patagonian  musical  bow  is  so  faint  that  it  cannot  be 
heard  two  steps  away.  It  is  made  of  a  piece  of  horse’s  rib,  strung  with  a 
horse  hair,  and  rubbed  with  a  condor  feather.  The  bow  is  held  by  the 
player  close  to  his  mouth,  so  that  the  oral  cavity  serves  as  a  resonator.  The 
whole  story  of  musical  bows  is  fascinatingly  told,  in  English,  in  Henry 
Balfour’s  monograph,  The  Natural  History  of  the  Musical  Bows  (Ox¬ 
ford,  1899).  Need  it  be  added  that  these  primitive  bows  have  nothing  to 
do  with  violin  bows? 

The  most  complete  manual  of  Latin-American  musical  instruments 
is  published,  surprisingly  enough,  not  in  South  America,  but  in  Sweden. 
It  is  a  richly  illustrated  volume  of  453  pages,  Musical  and  Other  Sound 
Instruments  of  the  South  American  Indians  by  Karl  Gustav  Izikowitz, 
published  in  English  in  Volume  V  (1936)  of  Kungliga  V etenskafsoch 
V itterhets-Samhallet. 

It  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  same  instrument  may  be  known 
under  different  names  in  different  countries.  Thus  the  common  Indian 
panpipe  is  called  Antara  in  Peru,  Cafador  in  Colombia,  Rondador  in 
Ecuador,  and  Sicus  in  Bolivia.  Some  native  writers  refer  to  all  panpipes 
under  the  generic  name  Zamfoha,  a  Spanish  word  which  is  probably  a 
corruption  of  Sinfonia,  But  in  Spain  the  Zampoha  is  a  bagpipe,  not  a  pan- 
pipe.  ^ 

Native  authorities  themselves  disagree  on  the  proper  nomenclature  of 
indigenous  instruments.  Thus  the  late  Teodoro  Valcarcel  of  Peru  has  in 
the  score  of  his  Inca  ballet  Suray-Surita  a  drum  with  one  membrane,  called 
Tynia.znd  one  with  two  membranes,  called  Wankar,  But  an  authoritative 
article  in  the  January,  1943,  issue  of  the  periodical  Reruanidad  mt%  the 
names  of  the  two  instruments  as  synonyms,  ^ffhe  Tynia  or  Wankar P 
According  to  the  classification  of  the  late  Luciano  Gallet,  the  Brazilian 
instrument  Ganza  is  a  hollow  cylindrical  gourd  with  a  notched  surface 
rubbed  with  a  stick  to  make  a  rasping  noise,  and  he  publishes  a  photo¬ 
graph  of  the  Ganza  in  his  book,  Estudos  de  Eolclorem  Pie  also  gives  a 


44  PANORAMA  OF  LATIN  AMERICAN  MUSIC 

description  of  the  popular  Brazilian  Chocdhoy  which  is  a  large  rattle.  But 
in  the  footnote  to  a  musical  example  in  the  same  book,  Gallet  says, 
^^Ganzdy  the  same  as  ChocalhoP  It  seems  that  the  two  names  are  used 
interchangeably  in  the  region  of  Bahia,  where  the  local  name  for  a  notched 
rasp  is  not  Ganzdy  but  AmelSy  which  in  its  turn,  means  a  shaker  elsewhere 
in  Brazil. 

Narciso  Garay,  in  his  excellent  book,  Tradiciones  y  Cantares  de  Panama y 
describes  the  local  shaker  as  ^^a  calabash  filled  with  dried  seeds,  similar 
to  the  Cuban  Guirod^  But  in  Cuba  the  Guiro  is  a  scraper,  not  a  shaker, 
which  latter  is  universally  known  as  the  Maracas, 

Great  divergence  exists  among  native  authors  in  the  orthography  of 
names  of  indigenous  instruments.  For  instance,  the  Mexican  high  drum 
Huehuetl  is  spelled  W ewetl  by  d^Harcourt  in  La  Musique  des  Incas  et 
ses  Survivances,  Both  the  spelling  Huankar  and  Wankar  are  used  for  the 
Peruvian  drum.  The  aboriginal  Indian  flute,  the  Quenay  is  sometimes 
spelled  Kena,  The  curious  orthography  Qquena  is  also  found  in  some 
sources.  The  South  American  jungle  drum,  the  BututUy  appears  in  a 
variety  of  forms,  PototOy  ButotSy  FututUy  and  in  fact  every  conceivable 
combination  of  the  consonants  P,  B,  and  F,  with  the  vowels  O  and  U. 

Latin-American  composers  make  use  of  native  instruments  in  their 
symphonic  music  for  the  sake  of  local  color.  Villa-Lobos  includes  a  bat¬ 
tery  of  Brazilian  percussion  in  his  formidable  Choros  No,  n.  In  the 
score  of  his  Smfonia  India y  Chavez  has  a  part  for  the  Mexican  water  drum, 
Jicara  de  aguay  which  consists  of  an  inverted  gourd  half-submerged  in  a 
basin  of  water.  In  his  Afro-Cuban  ballet,  La  Rebambarambay  Amadeo 
Roldan  provides  six  separate  groups  of  percussion,  and  there  is  a  solo 
for  the  Cuban  Maracas.  In  one  of  his  Ritmicasy  Roldan  features  the 
Quijada  del  Burro  (jawbone  of  an  ass),  which  is  shaken  in  the  air,  or 
struck  with  the  fist,  or  rubbed  with  a  stick  on  the  teeth  in  a  sort  of 
^dmodtntzl  gUssando, 

The  natives  hold  performers  on  the  drums  in  high  esteem.  In  the  in¬ 
terior  of  Panama,  a  virtuoso  on  the  Re'picador  (a  small  drum)  enjoys 
fame  similar  to  that  of  a  fine  pianist  or  violinist  in  large  cities.  The  Cuban 
poet  Ale  jo  Carp  entier,  in  his  article  Musica  Cub  ana  en  estos  20 
Oltimos  Anosy  published  in  the  bulletin  Conservatorio  of  March,  1944, 
cites  the  slogan  of  the  Afro-Cuban  school  of  musicians:  ^^jAbajo  la  lira! 
/Viva  el  BongoP^  Down  with  the  Lyre!  Long  live  the 
European  composers  have,  upon  occasion,  included  native  Latin- 
American  instruments  in  their  orchestral  compositions.  Prokofiev  uses  the 


ARTLESS  FOLKLORE  45 

Maracas  in  his  cantata  Alexander  Nevsky,  which  glorifies  the  victory 
of  a  thirteenth-century  Russian  warrior  over  the  Teutonic  knights,  and 
certainly  has  no  connection  with  anything  Cuban.  Edgar  Varese  lists 
several  Cuban  percussion  instruments  in  the  score  of  Ionization:  the 
Maracas,  the  Giiiro,  a  pair  of  Claves  (hardwood  bars,  held  in  a  cupped 
hand  for  resonance,  and  struck  together),  and  the  Bongos  (small  twin 
drums  held  on  the  knees  and  tapped  with  the  fingers).  The  score  of 
Stravinsky’s  Sacre  du  Printemfs  contains  a  part  for  the  Giiiro,  which 
makes  a  scratch  just  before  the  final  dash  of  the  piccolo  in  the  Danse 
Sacrale.  The  scratch  is  usually  overlooked  by  the  conductor  and  the 
players,  possibly  because  the  Guiro  is  designated,  in  French,  by  the  word 
rdfe  (rasp)  whose  meaning  may  not  be  immediately  clear. 

VOICES  OF  THE  JUNGLE 

All  sorts  of  materials  of  mineral^  vegetable,  and  animal  origin  are  used 
by  the  natives  of  Latin  America  for  the  construction  of  their  primitive 
instruments.  Jaguar  claws,  deer  hoofs,  and  specially  treated  inflated  eyes 
of  tigers  are  among  the  objects  which  serve  as  percussion  in  the  South 
American  jungle.  The  Peruvians  employ  llama  skulls  for  drums.  Mexican 
native  dancers  wear  on  their  ankles  bunches  of  dried  butterfly  cocoons 
which  they  shake  with  a  whirring  noise. 

Even  human  bones  are,  or  at  least  were,  used  by  the  Indians  for  the 
making  of  flutes  and  drums.  In  a  book  by  John  Constance  Davis,  Esq., 
published  in  London  in  1805  under  the  engaging  title.  Letters  from 
Paraguay  Written  hy  a  Gentleman  of  Liberal  Education  and  Considerable 
Property  Who,  Having  Been  Disaf fainted  in  his  Hofes  for  Haffiness 
With  a  Beloved  Female,  to  Relieve  the  Distress  of  his  Mind  Resolved  to 
Travel,  the  author  relates  a  gruesome  tale:  “Paraguay  is  a  nation  of  wild 
roving  Indians,  who  have  sworn  everlasting  hatred  to  the  Spaniards,  as 
a  proof  of  which  I  was  shown  a  musical  instrument,  somewhat  resembling 
the  pipes  of  Pan,  made  out  of  the  bones  of  one  of  the  missionaries  they 
sacrificed  among  them  some  years  ago.” 

The  ancient  Mexicans  made  use  of  human  skulls  for  drums,  and  femur 
bones  for  ratchets.  In  the  Department  of  Anthropology  at  the  National 
Museum  of  Mexico  there  are  several  specimens  of  notched  human 
femurs,  which  are  rubbed  with  a  piece  of  bone  to  produce  a  rasping  sound. 
Reproductions  of  these  human  rasps  are  found  in  the  monumental  dis¬ 
sertation  on  pre-Cortez  Mexican  msssic,  Instrumental  Precortesiano  by 
Daniel  Castaneda  and  Vicente  Mendoza,  published  in  1933.  The  National 


46  PANORAMA  OF  LATIN  AMERICAN  MUSIC 

Museum  of  Rio  de  Janeiro  has  a  trophy  trumpet  which  consists  of  a  long 
tube  ending  with  a  human  skull. 

An  amazing  tale  of  musical  necrophilia  is  related  in  the  chronicles  of 
eighteenth-century  Peru.  A  native  musician  named  Camporreal  fell  in 
love  with  an  Indian  girl,  who  died.  Stricken  with  grief,  Camporreal 
secretly  removed  the  girPs  tibia  bone  and  fashioned  it  into  a  vertical 
flute.  When  the  sense  of  bereavement  overcame  him,  he  would  take  out 
the  relic  flute  and  play  upon  it  a  melancholy  Yaravi, 

Because  primitive  musical  instruments  are  used  in  the  native  religious 
rites,  they  are  often  regarded  as  sacred  objects.  Theodor  Koch-Gruenberg, 
in  his  book  Zwei  Jahre  Unter  den  Indianerny  gives  a  graphic  description 
of  the  secret  Yurufari  ritual  observed  by  the  Indians  of  the  Amazon 
basin :  “In  the  middle  of  the  night  I  heard  mysterious  music  resembling 
a  church  organ,  which  was  interrupted  from  time  to  time  by  outbursts  of 
savage  howling.  Two  youths  who  were  standing  watch  at  the  door  of  my 
hut  motioned  me  away  when  I  attempted  to  go  out,  but  I  succeeded  in 
leaving  the  hut  despite  their  objections.  I  saw  six  native  boys  standing  In 
the  village  square  and  blowing  into  musical  instruments  of  different  shapes 
and  sizes.  Four  of  these  instruments  were  vertical  flutes,  and  two  were 
trumpets  made  of  tree  bark,  wound  in  spirals  and  held  fast  by  wooden 
hoops.  It  was  these  trumpets  that  emitted  the  eerie  bellowing  I  heard 
during  the  night  .  . 

The  Yurufari  trumpets  were  believed  by  the  natives  to  possess  magic 
powers  protecting  young  boys  against  feminine  seduction,  and  for  this 
reason  no  woman  was  allowed  to  see  the  trumpets  lest  the  spell  be  broken. 
The  taboo  was  apparently  lifted  when  travelers  and  explorers  invaded 
the  region.  Recently,  photographs  have  even  been  taken  of  the  sacred 
objects. 

Similarly  taboo  was  the  thunder  stick  of  the  Bororo  Indians  in  Brazil, 
for  it  was  supposed  to  exercise  evil  power  over  small  children.  The  thun¬ 
der  stick  is  a  wooden  rattle  swung  in  the  air  by  a  rope,  and  it  is  found 
among  the  Indians  of  North  America  as  well.^ 

The  aborigines  usually  personify  their  flutes  and  drums,  attributing 
to  them  the  masculine  or  feminine  gender.  Thus  the  Maracas  is  feminine 

^  *  A  description  of  the  world^s  “strangest  instruments  that  could  be  found’’  is  contained 
in  chapter  XI  of  Oscar  Wilde’s  novel  The  Picture  of  Dorian  Gray^  where  he  speaks  of  the 
exotic  ta^es  and  hobbies  of  the  hero.  In  Dorian  Gray’s  collection  there  are  “mysterious 
Yurufaru  of  the  Rio  Negro  Indians,  that  women  are  not  allowed  to  look  at,”  “painted 
gourds  filled  with  pebbles  that  rattled  when  they  were  shaken,”  and  other  instruments  of 
South  and  Central  America. 


ARTLESS  FOLKLORE 


47 


and  the  Guiro  masculine.  Narciso  Garay  tells  us  that  the  Cuna  Indians  of 
Panama  possess  two  species  of  the  flute  Tolo,  a  male -specimen  with  one 
hole,  and  a  female  flute  with  four  holes. 

The  social  and  political  importance  of  primitive  musical  instruments 
is  underlined  by  the  fact  that  large  drums  are  used  in  the  jungle  for 
communication  among  the  neighboring  villages.  The  eighteenth-century 
traveler  Joseph  Gumilla  reports  in  Orinoco  Ilustrado,  published  in  Madrid 
in  I745>  during  the  Indian  wars  in  Venezuela,  the  natives  made 
use  of  a  jungle  drum  that  carried  messages  to  a  distance  of  twenty-two 
kilometers.  The  Cuban  Government  at  one  time  banned  the  large  Afro- 
Cuban  drum,  the  Conga,  because  of  the  resurgence  of  what  was  termed 
“primitivismo”  among  the  Negro  population  of  the  island.  The  ominous 
beat  of  the  jungle  drum  provides  much  of  the  dramatic  effect  in  O’Neill’s 
play,  Emferor  Jones,  which  tells  the  story  of  a  Pullman  porter  who  be¬ 
came  the  ruler  of  a  Caribbean  island. 

The  practice  of  jungle  telegraphy  is  not  confined  to  the  New  World.  It 
is  of  ancient  use  among  the  natives  of  Central  Africa.  Dr.  Albert  Irwin 
Good,  writing  in  the  September  1943  issue  of  Natural  History,  cites 
messages  commonly  transmitted  by  African  signal  drums:  “Person  he 
not  go  in  house,  but  outside,”  or  “You  shall  die  by  witchcraft  tonight.” 

During  the  early  centuries  after  the  conquest  of  South  America,  the 
ecclesiastical  authorities  tried  in  vain  to  suppress  the  native  drums 
and  flutes,  which  were  regarded  as  accouterments  of  pagan  ritual.  A 
seventeeth-century  Jesuit  missionary  in  Peru  proudly  reported  to  his  su¬ 
periors  that  he  had  personally  destroyed  605  large  and  3418  small  drums 
and  flutes  in  the  Peruvian  villages.  In  1614,  the  Archbishop  of  Lima 
ordered  the  confiscation  and  destruction  of  all  Indian  musical  instru¬ 
ments  in  his  bishopric.  Those  found  in  possession  of  the  forbidden  ob¬ 
jects  were  punished  by  receiving  three  hundred  lashes  in  the  public  square, 
and  then  led  through  the  streets  on  the  back  of  a  llama. 

Despite  this  persecution,  native  music  survived,  and  eventually  found 
its  vay  into  community  life,  and  even  into  the  Church  itself.  In  a  quaint 
little  book,  Three  Vassar  Girls  in  South  America,  published  in  1870  in 
New  York,  there  is  a  picture  showing  the  performance  of  a  Mass  held 
in  a  Bolivian  church,  with  an  Indian  boy  playing  the  gigantic  pan¬ 
pipe,  to  the  accompaniment  of  an  organ. 

Christianity  and  religious  primitivism  are  combined  in  a  curious 
palimpsest  in  the  festivals  and  street  parades  celebrated  in  Latin-American 
towns  and  villages.  The  Afro-Brazilian  M.acuinba  \s  z  complex  body  of 


48  PANORAMA  OF  LATIN  AMERICAN  MUSIC 

primitive  ritual,  accompanied  by  collective  dances  and  magic  incantations. 
The  basic  African  cosmogony  is  fused  in  the  Macumba  rites^with  the 
Indian  elements,  and  over  these  is  superimposed  _  Christian  lore,  per¬ 
sonified  by  popular  saints.  The  Voodoo  ritual  of  Haiti  is  a  vast  system  of 
magical  practices,  in  which  primitive  music  is  an  integral  part.  The  Afro- 
Cuban  festival  Ndniga  is  similar  in  many  respects  to  the  Macumba  and 
the  Voodoo  rituals,  with  which  it  has  a  common  African  ancestry.  During 
the  Nanig.,  singing,  dancing,  and  the  beating  of  the  drums  go  on  for 
days,  until  the  participants  expend  the  last  drop  of  dynamic  enerp  In 
Nicaragua,  the  mystery  play,  GilegUence,  celebrated  on  St.  Jerome  s  ay, 
combines  elements  of  Christian  and  Indian  folklore.  Almost  entirely 
Christian  in  its  derivation  is  the  festive  play  Hutona  de  Moros  y 
Cristianos,  as  it  is  performed  in  El  Salvador.  It  portrays  in  pantomime 
and  dialogue  the  struggle  against  the  infidels  during  the  Crushes. 

Religious  hymns,  too,  often  comprise  native  elements.  Jose  Pacifico 
Jorge,  a  missionary  at  Ayacucho,  Peru,  published  in  1924  a  coUepp  of 
religious  songs,  Melodias  Religiosas  en  Quechua,  in  which  both  Latin 
and  the  Quechua  language  are  used,  with  Inca  chants  and  Gregorian 

melodies  sung  in  alternation.  ^  .  . 

The  influence  of  Christianity  on  the  Indian  folklore  of  Latin  America 
is  seen  in  the  names  of  native  dances,  such  as  the  Sanjuanito  oi  Ecuador, 
named  after  St.  John.  Christmas  carols  are  popular  in  Latin  American 
countries  under  local  names,  Adoracion  in  Bolivia,  Gualichadas  in  Peru, 
and  the  Esquinazo  (literally,  corner  song)  in  Chile.  Christmas  itself  is 
known  under  different  names.  It  is  Posadas  in  Mexico,  Pascms  in  Colom¬ 
bia,  and  Navidad  in  Argentina.  It  is  Eia  de  Natal  in  Brazil. 

The  sumptuous  and  gay  Carnivals  of  Latin  America  also  reflect  the 
two  elements,  Christian  and  pagan,  European  and  native.  In  his  book, 
Rio,*  Hugh  Gibson,  former  Ambassador  of  the  United  States  to  Brazil 
gives  a  word  picture  of  the  colorful  Rio  Carnival: 


There  is  one  thing  that  gives  dash  to  the  Carnival  of  Rio — the  Carnival 
songs.  Every  year,  there  is  a  fresh  supply.  Not  a  rehash  of  familiar  tunes,  bui 
something  which  is  different  from  last  year’s  songs  .  .  .  Nearly  every  day  ai 
you  drive  through  the  town,  you  see,  more  or  less  vaguely,  the  straggling  mas: 
of  wretched-looking  shanties  clinging  to  the  bare  rock  of  the  Morro  d( 
Salgueiro.  Here  is  a  little  independent  Negro  kingdom,  which  leads  a  life  o 
its  own.  Every  shanty  has  its  musician — even  if  he  has  nothing  better  than  i 
cigar  box  on  which  to  beat  out  a  rhythm.  About  New  Year  s  Day,  things  begii 

*  Copyright  1937  by  Doubleday,  Doran  and  Company,  Inc. 


ARTLESS  FOLKLORE 


49 


to  warm  up,  climatically  and  musically.  People  in  Rio  begin  to  wonder  what 
they  are  going  to  dance  to  for  four  successive  days  and  nights.  So  they  get  up 
parties  to  go  up  on  the  Morro  and  find  out.  The  song  writers  go  up  and  listen. 
If  they  find  a  promising  song,  they  buy  it,  words  and  music,  and  put  it  in  form 
for  publication. 

Huge  floats  with  sculptured  symbolic  figures  of  saints  and  clowns  are 
paraded  on  the  streets  at  Latin-American  carnivals.  Until  recently,  the 
dominating  figure  of  the  Rio  Carnival  was  Ze  Pereira,  a  large  fellow  with 
a  big  drum.  He  has  now  been  replaced  by  Momo,  the  King  of  the  Carnival. 
Villa-Lobos  makes  Momo  the  subject  of  his  composition  for  piano  and 
orchestra,  Momofrecoce,  a  precocious  Momo,  which  is  to .  say,  child 
Carnival  King.  (Villa-Lobos  telescopes  two  words,  Momo  and  frecoce, 
into  one,  as  he  does  in  his  oratorio  Vidapura,  which  looks  like  an  Indian 
name  until  it  is  split  into  its  component  parts,  Vida  Pur  a,  pure  life;  and 
in  his  redoubtable  Rudefoema,  which  means,  of  course,  a  Rude  Poem.) 

Other  days  of  the  calendar  than  Carnival  days  are  occasions  for  public 
parades  and  street  dances.  On  St.  John’s  Eve,  Brazilian  young  men  and 
girls  launch  balloons  made  of  light  cloth  and  paper  propelled  by  hot  air 
generated  by  a  piece  of  burning  wax  underneath  the  bag.  They  foUow 
the  balloons  merrily  singing: 

Cae,  cae,  balao!  Cae,  cae,  balao! 

Na  rua  do  Sabdo, 

Nao  cae,  ndo,  nao  cae,  nao,  ndo  cae} 

Cae  aqui  na  minha  mao! 


Cae,  Cae,  Balao! 


. 


p:7::  ,[y  r  I 


The  words  mean:  fall,  balloon,  but  not  in  Soap  Street.  Fall  here, 

in  my  hand.”  The  melody  of  the  Balloon  Song  is  nearly  a  century  old. 
It  is  included  in  the  interesting  little  book  Folklore  Bresilieny  by  Santa 
Anna  Nery,  published  in  Paris  in  1889.  The  game  behind  the  custom  of 
chasing  the  balloons  is  that  young  men  or  women  lucky  enough  to  catch 


so  PANORAMA  OF  LATIN  AMERICAN  MUSIC 


the  balloon  are  assured  of  success  in  love.  The  practice  was,  however 
banned  by  the  authorities  when  forest  fires  were  started  by  run-away 
balloons.  Several  Brazilian  composers  have  written  variations  on  this  tune 
and  I  wrote  a  set,  too,  under  the  title  My  Toy  Balloon.  ’ 


SCALES  AND  RHYTHMS 


The  basic  scale  of  pre-Columbian  music  is  the  pentatonic.  This  is,  of 
course,  the  five-note  scale  represented  (approximately)  by  the  five  black 
keys  of  the  piano  keyboard.  If  the  tonic  is  placed  on  F  sharp,  the  scale  is 
in  majorj  if  on  D  sharp,  in  minor.  Thus,  pre-Columbian  melodies  may 
be  adjusted  to  our  system  of  major  and  minor  keys,  and  Andre  Sas  of 
eru  makes  the  logical  deduction  that  ancient  Peruvian  chants  should  be 
liarmonized  in  a  major  key,  or  its  relative  minor. 

If  the  theory  that  Ae  Incas  are  of  Mongolian  origin  and  came  from 
Asia  has  any  foundation,  the  pentatonic  scale  would  emerge  as  the  basis 
of  both  Oriental  and  American  music.  But  even  this  theory  would  not 
account  for  the  use  of  the  pentatonic  in  Scotland.  It  is  much  more  likely 
that  the  selection  of  not  more  than  five  different  tones  in  folk  music  was 
dictated  by  the  necessity  of  clear  recognition  of  pitch,  with  wide  intervals 

I  TT  1?^  An  anthropological  hypothesis  also  sug¬ 

gests  Itself,  as  the  five  tones  of  the  primitive  scale  correspond  to  the  five 
fingers  of  the  human  hand. 

A  great  number  of  authentic  Indian  melodies  are  cast  in  the  pentatonic 
sale  After  the  conqeest.  the  Indian  sale  was  supplemented  by  two  p™! 

fcys  irhife“  ““P  p'“'S  ■''Patonlc  sale  of  our  major  and  mLr 
va?'  .  t  Segundo  Luis  Moreno  cites  two 

rhrth  ^  ^  Serent  tones,  and  the  accompaniment  is  provided  by  ^ 
^thmm  drum  beats.  When  the  melody  was  adapted  for  siLng  hy  tZ  ^ 
Spaniards,  the  scale  was  extended  to  a  complete  minor  k!y  !i2^  I 

was  harmonized  by  major  and  minor  triads. 

folk  miSmT!  f evolutionary  phases  in  Latin-American 
o  k^sic.  (i)  pure  Indian  melos  in  the  pentatonic  scale:  (2)  the  so 

tion  “mestization  of  mestiza-  I 

tion,  consisting  in  a  further  elaboration  of  the  scale  by  means  of  vrace  ^ 
notes  and  chromatic  ornamentation.  ^  ®  I 

Whde  the  pentatonic  scale  is  dominant  in  the  ancient  Indian  music  of 
South  Amerro. ,s  „„t  dre  oriy  sole  dmt  was  used.  Tho“ “  the 


Xhe  Same  Melody  Extended  to  a  Complete  Minor  Scale  and  Harmonized 

(Segundo  Luis  Moreno) 

wind  instruments  of  the  Nazca  culture  of  Peru,  which  flourished  in  the 
second  century  of  our  era,  indicates  that  chromatic,  and  possibly  ultra- 
chromatic,  tones  were  known  to  the  Indians.  And  to  this  day,  the 
Araucanian  Indians  of  the  extreme  South  use  scales  of  narrow  intervals- 
The  National  Museum  of  Costa  Rica  possesses  an  ocarina  with  six  aper¬ 
tures,  capable  of  producing  eighteen  chromatic  tones. 

The  purest  form  of  pentatonic  Indian  music  was  practiced  in  the  na- 


52  PANORAMA  OF  LATIN  AMERICAN  MUSIC 

tions  where  the  present  Indian  population  is  numerouSj  that  is  in  Peru, 
Bolivia,  Ecuador,  Mexico,  and  Central  America.  Negro  influence  is  very 
strong  in  the  dance  music  of  the  West  Indies  and  northern  Brazil.  The 
urban  folklore  of  Brazil  possesses  an  inexplicable  yet  unmistakable  afiinity 
with  Russian  popular  music  of  the  Gypsy  song  type.  In  the  spirit  of  fun, 
I  wrote  a  piece  in  which  I  combined  Russian  and  Brazilian  melo-rhythmic 
elements  and  called  the  synthetic  product  Modinha  Russo-Brasileira 
{Modinha  is  a  Brazilian  sentimental  song,  usually  in  a  minor  key).  My 
Brazilian  friends  swore  that  the  thing  was  Brazilian  to  the  core,  while  to 
a  Russian  my  Modinha  sounds  like  an  old-fashioned  Russian  Gypsy  song. 

The  ancient  Greek  modes  were  classified  according  to  the  presumed 
quality  and  character  of  each  mode,  expressing  fortitude  or  weakness, 
courage  or  effeminacy.  Similar  characterizations  of  indigenous  folk  music 
of  South  and  Central  America  have  been  offered  by  native  writers.  Luis 
Segundo  Moreno  explains  the  predominance  of  minor  keys  in  Ecuadorian 
music  by  the  bleakness  of  the  landscape: 

The  absence  of  seasons  weakens  the  stimulus  towards  progress.  The  great 
altitude  makes  respiration  difficult,  especially  in  the  early  hours  of  the  after¬ 
noon  when  the  rays  of  the  sun  beat  down  perpendicularly,  engendering  the 
sense  of  lassitude.  As  the  dweller  of  the  Sierra  contemplates  the  vastness  of  the 
scene,  a  feeling  of  infinite  solitude  pervades  him,  and  fills  him  with  profound 
melancholy  .  .  .  That  is  why  the  aborigines  of  the  Andes  have  adopted,  no 
doubt  by  instinct,  the  minor  mode,  the  wistful,  monotonous,  plaintive 
chant  .  .  ♦  This  minor  key  is  the  natural  product  of  the  geographic  con¬ 
ditions. 

The  Chilean  composer  Carlos  Isamitt  finds,  independently  from  Luis 
Segundo  Moreno,  that  the  mountainous  country  where  the  Araucanian 
Indians  live  leaves  the  imprint  of  melancholy  in  their  folk  songs.  I  was 
told  that  phonograph  records  of  Araucanian  chants,  made  by  Chilean 
ethnologists,  are  not  let  out  of  the  country  in  order  not  to  create  the  im¬ 
pression  abroad  that  the  Araucanians  are  an  unhappy  and  oppressed  race. 

Victor  Andrade,  the  Bolivian  writer,  finds  to  the  contrary  that  the 
rarefied  air  of  the  mountains  tends  to  create  an  invigorating  effect  on 
man  and  music.  He  writes  in  his  article  La  Musica^  Vox  de  la  pub¬ 

lished  in  the  Bolivian  magazine  KoUasuyo:  “The  songs  of  the  mountains 
are  generally  cast  in  the  major  keys,  responding  to  the  invigorating  air 
of  the  sacred  lake  Titicaca,  while  the  music  of  the  lowlands  is  impregnated 
with  the  nostalgia  of  the  minor  mode,  reflecting  the  melancholy  spirit 
of  the  landscaped^ 


ARTLESS  FOLKLORE 


53 


Maria  de  Baratta  writes:  ^^Topography  influences  the  character  of  the 
race  as  well  as  the  musical  soul  of  the  nation.  Central  America^  geograph¬ 
ically  and  historically  considered^  is  situated  in  the  most  favorable  posi¬ 
tion.  In  its  coastal  areas,  and  in  the  mountains,  there  is  a  racial  concentra¬ 
tion  of  custom,  idiom,  and  art.  The  song  of  the  birds,  the  rush  of  the 
wind,  the  murmur  of  the  waters,  the  roar  of  nature,  all  these  elements 
combine  to  create  the  sonorous  treasure  of  native  music.” 

Jesus  Castillo  of  Guatemala  contends  that  the  Indians  of  Central  Amer¬ 
ica  have  been  influenced  in  their  folk  songs  by  the  amazingly  vocal  and 
musically  articulate  native  bird,  the  Cenzontle,  of  the  thrush  family, 
which  sings  melodies  based  on  the  major  arpeggio.  He  cites  examples  of 
these  bird  melodies  which  he  had  noted  down  from  a  Cenzontles  in 
captivity,  arid  compares  them  to  the  tunes  of  popular  Indian  songs  and 
dances,  proving,  to  his  satisfaction,  that  the  Indians  use  the  musical 
^^technique  of  the  birds.” 


Moderate 


Tunes  of  the  Guatemalan  Bird,  the  Cenzontle  {Castillo) 


54  PANORAMA  OF  LATIN  AMERICAN  MUSIC 

The  primitive  chants  of  pre-Columbian  Indians  are  not  always  monodic. 
There  is  evidence  that  singing  in  groups,  with  the  employment  of  some 
sort  of  prearranged  harmony,  was  widely  practiced  in  some  regions  of 
South  America.  The  Memby  flutes  of  the  Guarany  Indians  were  built  in 
different  sizes  calculated  to  produce  perfect  fifths  and  octaves  when  played 
together.  Playing  in  fifths  and  octaves  is  also  common  among  the  Indians 
of  Colombia. 

The  American  librarian,  J.  M.  Coopersmith,  who  has  spent  some  time 
doing  musical  research  in  the  Dominican  Republic,  maintains  that  the 
Indians  there  sing  antiphonal  chants  dating  back  to  the  thirteenth  cen¬ 
tury.  Antiphonal  singing,  or  improvisation  in  dialogue,  is  indeed  en¬ 
countered  in  widely  separated  corners  of  the  earth,  and  in  different  eras 
of  history.  The  Gauchos  of  Argentina  perform  such  improvisations  profes¬ 
sionally  for  entertainment.  These  minstrels  of  the  pampas  are  called 
Pay  adores,  and  their  singing  dialogues  Pay  as,  or  Contrafunto  (without 
allusion,  of  course,  to  counterpoint  in  the  sense  of  a  technique  of  composi¬ 
tion)  .  In  the  Contrafunto,  the  contestants  propound  questions  which  are 
answered  in  song  and  verse,  “point  counter  point.”  In  Venezuela  the 
practice  is  known  as  Porftas,  and  in  Brazil  Desafio  (literally,  challenge). 

European  forms  acclimatized  in  Latin  America  acquire  the  unmistakable 
native  accent.  Thus  the  Viennese  Waltz  becomes  Vais  Trofical.  In- 
ddentally,  one  Latin-American  Waltz,  Sobre  las  Ohs  (Over  the  Waves), 
by  the  Mexican  composer  Juventino  Rosas,  has  become  a  universal 
favorite.  The  Schottische,  a  round  dance  in  the  character  of  a  slow  Polka, 
has  evolved  under  the  tropical  skies  into  a  slightly  syncopated  Latin- 
American  air,  unrecognizably  spelled  Chotis. 

The  Paraguayan  Polka  is  a  combination  of  three-four  and  two-four 
time.  The  Spanish  Bolero  is  in  three-four  time,  but  its  Cuban  counterpart 
is  in  two-four.  The  Brazilian  Marcha  is  not  the  military  March  of  the 
German  type,  but  a  carnival  dance  resembling  a  one-step.  The  Foxtrot, 
too,  acquires  a  native  inflection  when  transplanted  into  Latin  America. 
Some  music  publishers  in  Ecuador  have  issued  native  dances  under  the 
subtitle  Foxtrot  Incaico.  Carlos  Valderrama,  the  Peruvian  composer  of 
light  music,  names  his  dances  Paso  Inca  and  Inca  Stef.  This  desire  to 
imitate  the  product  of  Western  sophistication  reaches  the  peak  of  ab¬ 
surdity  in  the  title  of  a  Brazilian  salon  dance,  Quadrilla  Sifilitica! 

The  melo-rhythmic  components  of  Latin-American  songs  and  dances 
are  of  threefold  extraction,  Indian,  Negro  and  European.  The  Indians 


ARTLESS  FOLKLORE 


55 


contribute  the  basic  pentatonic  pattern,  the  Colonial  European  influence  is 
expressed  in  the  extension  of  the  scale  and  the  addition  of  chord  harmony, 
and  the  Negroes  add  chromatic  elaboration. 

In  meter  and  rhythm,  the  Indians  adhere  to  short  phrases,  with  long 
pauses,  and  a  monotonous  drum  beat  for  accompaniment.  The  Colonial 
rhythms  are  prevalently  Spanish,  and  are  typified  by  the  dual  meter  of 
three-four  and  six-eight,  resulting  in  characteristic  cross-rhythms  in  the 
middle  of  the  measure.  The  Negro  influence  brings  syncopation  within 
an  almost  unchanged  two-four  time.  To  summarize: 


{Aboriginal  pentatonic  melody . Indian 

Extension  to  the  seven-tone  scale . Colonial  European 

Chromatic  elaboration . Negro 

Aboriginal  rhythmic  monotony . Indian 

Rhythm  -  Dual  meter  of  6/8  and  3/4 . Colonial  European 

Syncopated  2/4  time . Negro 


A  MAP  OF  SONGS  AND  DANCES 

In  the  language  of  the  Quechua  Indians,  the  same  word  T aqui  mtms 
either  dancing  or  singing.  This  duality  of  function  is  characteristic  of  all 
Latin-American  folk  music.  Any  native  dance  is  sung,  and  any  air  may 
be  danced.  The  names  of  identical  song-dances,  however,  vary  from  region 
to  region.  Thus,  the  Chilean  national  dance,  the  Zamacueca  or  Cueca^  be¬ 
came  known  in  other  South  American  countries  as  the  Cueca  Chilendy 
or  simply  Chilena,  During  the  war  between  Peru  and  Chile  in  1879-“ 
1883,  Peruvians  changed  the  name  Chllena  to  Mariner  a  in  order  to 
avoid  mentioning  the  enemy  country,  and  also  to  honor  the  Peruvian 
Navy.  The  entire  history  of  the  Chilean  Cueca  is  told  in  excellent  detail 
in  Biografia  de  la  Cueca  by  Pablo  Garrido,  published  in  Santiago  in 
i943f 

The  etymology  of  most  Latin-American  dance  names  is  not  easy  to 
trace.  The  Argentine  dance,  El  Triunfo^  is  said  to  have  originated  after 
the  repulse  of  the  British  invasion  in  Rio  de  la  Plata,  early  in  the  nine¬ 
teenth  century,  but  this  derivation  is  not  corroborated  by  historic  evi¬ 
dence.  The  temptation  to  invent  plausible  etymologies  leads  to  such 
absurd  theories  as,  for  instance,  the  proposed  derivation  of  the  Peruvian 
Yaravi  irom  the  muezzin^s  invocation  Ya  heard  in  Moorish  mosques. 
The  ascertainable  truth  is  that  when  the  Conquistadores  heard  a  slow  and 


56  PANORAMA  OF  LATIN  AMERICAN  MUSIC 

melancholy  song,  called  in  the  native  language  Y  W,  they  chafed  it, 
Ty  assonance,  to  which  led  some  theonsts  to  conclude  that  the 

song  was  of  Arabic  or  Moorish  origin. 

The  most  celebrated  Argentine  dance,  the  Tango,  has  been  given  a 
respectable  but  entirely  spurious  pedigree  in  Webster  s  Dictionaiy .  Ar¬ 
gentine  Sp.,  dance,  fiesta,  fr.  Sp.  tango  a  gypsy  festival,  dance,  music, 
fr.  tangir  to  play  (an  instrument),  touch,  fr.  L.  See  tangent 

With  all  due  respect,  the  Tango  has  nothing  to  do  with  Latin  or  with 
tangents.  The  word  is  of  Negro  origin,  and  was  formed  as  m  imitaUon 
of  the  drum  beat,  with  a  slight  accent  on  the  second  syllable.  Tango.  Tht 
origin  of  the  Tango  is  further  clarified  in  the  important  treatise,  Com 
de  Negros  by  Vicente  Rossi,  published  in  1926  in  Cordoba,  Argentina. 

The  dances  and  songs  of  Argentina,  other  than  the  Tango,  are  of  clear 
Spanish  extraction,  as  shown  by  the  names  Bailecito,  Cmndo,Gato,  tsULo, 
Fkmeza,  and  Ranchera.  Carlos  Vega  gives  detailed  information  on 
Argentine  dances  in  an  excellent  series,  Bailes  Tradicionales  ArgenUnos, 

which  he  published  in  1 944*  ..... 

Music^ly?  the  Tango  is  an  isotope  of  the  Habanera^  with  which  it  has 

a  common' rhythmic  figure.  The  history  of  the  Habanera  itself  can  be 
traced,  surprisingly  enough,  to  the  Country  Dance  of  seventeenth-century 
England.  The.Eng]Lish  Country  Dance  became  the  Centre  danse  in  France, 
and  this  in  turn  was  Called  Contradanza  in  Spain,  or  later,  simply  TDanza. 
When  imported  by  the  Spaniards  into  Cuba,  it  became  the  Danza  Ha¬ 
banera,  that  is,  the  dance  of  Havana,  and  then  was  reintroduced  into 
Spain  as  Habanera.  During  the  Spanish-Araerican  War,  a  popular  dance 
called  Habanera  del Caje  appeared,  which  was  the  prototype  of  the  Tango. 
The  whole  genealogy  is  presented  in  the  following  chronological  table: 


Country  Dance,  England  .  . . . . .  • .  .1650 

Contredanse,  France  ....................... 1 7^^ 

Contradanza,  Spain  . . .  . .  •  •  •  1750 

Danza,  Spain  .  . . . . . .  -  .  1800 

Danza  Habanera,  Cuba  . . ................ . . .  1825 

Habanera  .  .  . . *1850 

Habanera  del  Cafe  . . . 1900 

Tango  . 1910 


The  most  famous  Habanera  is  the  one  ixom  Carmen,  Contrary  to  gen¬ 
eral  belief,  it  was  not  written  by  Bizet,  but  borrowed  by  him  from  a  song 


made  of  the  thighbone  of  a  llama.  Markings 
may  be  rudimentary  music  notations.  Early 
Chimu  period  (c.  200  B.C.). 


ARTLESS  FOLKLORE 


57 


called  El  AregUto  by  the  Spanish  composer  Sebastian  Yradier,  which 
was  published  in  Madrid  about  1 840  with  the  subtitle  Chanson  Havanmse, 

For  some  unaccountable  reason,  music  publishers  in  France,  England, 
and  the  United  States  persist  in  putting  a  spurious  tilde  over  the  n  in 
Habanera^  making  it  Habanera.  The  Funk  and  Wagnalls  Dictionary 
compounds  the  offense  by  giving  the  phonetic  transcription  o£  the  word 
as  Habanyera. 

It  is  interesting  to  observe  that  the  names  o£  Brazilian  and  Cuban 
dances  o£  Negro  origin  are,  like  the  Tango,  mostly  two-syllable  words. 
Conga y  Rumba y  JongOy  Lunduy  Sambay  strongly  suggesting  onomatopoeia. 
Tht  Rumba  became  popular  in  the  United  States  in  1929.  In  the  same 
year,  the  Brazilian  Samba  was  demonstrated  at  the  Society  o£  Dancing 
Teachers  in  New  York,  which  legislates  on  choreographical  matters. 

The  latest  Latin  American  dance  hit  is  the  ancient  Mexican  air,  the 
Bambay  which  was  taken  up  in  a'  modernized  £ast  tempo  by  the  society 
in  Mexico  City  in  1945,  and  later  spread  to  the  United  States. 

One  o£  the  most  success£ul  Brazilian  dances  o£  the  older  generation 
was  the  Maxixe.  It  is  suggested,  not  too  seriously,  by  Mario  de  Andrade 
in  his  Ensaio  sobre  Musica  Brasileira  that  the  name  comes  £rom  that  o£ 
an  actual  person,  a  Senhor  Maxixe. 

Darius  Milhaud,  who  was  an  attache  at  the  French  Embassy  in  Brazil 
during  the  first  World  War,  wrote  a  suite  of  Brazilian  impressions  en¬ 
titled  Saudades  do  Brasil.  Saudades  means  a  nostalgic  memory,  and  is  not 
the  name- of  a  native  dance  form.  Carioca  means  an  inhabitant  of  Rio  de 
Janeiro,  and  the  dance  of  that  name  stands  for  the  Samba  cariocay  that  is, 
a  Samba  played  and  danced  in  the  accepted  style  of  Rio  de  Janeiro. 

In  rare  instances,  inventive  efforts  of  individual  musicians  have  re¬ 
sulted  in  the  creation  of  a  new  dance  form.  Villa-Lobos  has  extended  the 
scope  of  the  Brazilian  dance  Choros  to  a  pan-Brazilian  synthesis  of  native 
folklore,  a  ^^Brasilojonlap  as  he  has  described  his  concept.  Jose  Asuncion 
Flores,  the  Paraguayan  musician,  has  launched  a  popular  dance  in  the 
spirit  of  the  Guarany  Indians  and  named  the  product  Guarama.  It  took 
root  in  Paraguay  and  has  become  an  acknowledged  native  form.  Not  so 
lucky  was  the  Dominican  composer,  Juan  Francisco  Garcia,  who  originated 
a  native  rhapsody  called  Sambumbia  (the  word  is  applied  to  a  plate  of  cold 
cuts,  vegetables,  and  corn) ,  which,  however,  remained  an  individual  crea¬ 
tion,  without  popular  following. 

The  musical  ballads  called  play  a  very  important  part  in 


58  PANORAMA  OF  LATIN  AMERICAN  MUSIC 

Latin  American  musical  life.  The  words  are  often  topical  and  relate  to 
political  events.  It  has  been  suggested  that  the  word  Corrido  is  derived 
from  correr,  to  run,  because  the  singer  had  to  run  for  his  life  when  caught 
in  the  process  of  reciting  a  subversive  ditty.  Corrido s  are  particularly 
popular  in  Mexico,  with  its  seething  political  life.  Numerous  topical 
Corridos  are  found  in  the  collection  Romance  y  Corrido  by  Vicente  T. 
Mendoza,  published  in  1939  in  Mexico  City. 

The  lyrics  of  Latin-American  popular  songs  of  the  commercial  type 
are  chiefly  concerned  with  love  and  passion.  Frances  A.  Wright,  Assistant 
Professor  at  the  University  of  California,  has  examined  two  thousand 
popular  Latin-American  airs,  and  found  that  every  one  of  them  contained 
the  words  el  amor  and  la  luna. 

The  Calypo  songs  of  Trinidad,  sung  in  a  curious  brand  of  English, 
often  quite  uninhibited  in  vocabulary,  have  acquired  a  sudden  popularity 
in  recent  years.  Other  islands  of  the  West  Indies  have  contributed  songs 
of  their  own.  In  Jamaica,  the  most  popular  native  dance  is  the  Mento^ 
which  resembles  a  Rumba  played  in  slow  tempo.  The  French  islands  of 
St.  Lucia  and  Martinique  have  produced  the  Beguiney  made  famous  by 
Cole  Porter’s  tune  Begin  the  Beguine,  The  French  word  beguin  means 
flirtation. 

Although  Puerto  Rico  is  a  part  of  the  United  States,  it  is  culturally 
connected  with  the  Latin-American  world  through  common  Spanish- 
American  ties.  Several  distinctive  airs  have  originated  in  Puerto  Rico, 
among  them  the  Rlena^  which  is  a  topical  ballad  similar  to  the  Mexican 
Corrido;  and  two  song-dances  in  the  Spanish  manner,  Seis  (that  is^  ^^Six,” 
from  a  six-string  guitar)  and  Mariandd. 

The  choreography  of  Latin-American  dances  varies  greatly  according 
to  region  and  time.  However,  it  is  possible  to  indicate  the  principal  types 
of  choreographic  figures,  described  in  such  terms  as  amorous  dances,  in 
which  the  partners  hold  each  other  closely,  handkerchief  dances,  in  which 
the  partners,  dancing  apart  from  each  other,  wave  handkerchiefs,  and  so 
on.  Ten  principal  categories  may  thus  be  established.  They  are  ( i )  Amo¬ 
rous  dances,  such  as  the  Rumba^  Merengue^  and  the  Tango;  (2)  Hand¬ 
kerchief  dances:  BailecitOy  MLarineray  SanjuanitOy  Zamacueca ;  (3)  Finger- 
snapping  dances :  GatOy  C hacareray  Jar  ana ;  (4)  Street  dances :  ChoroSy 
Guarachay  Gmjira;  (s)  Pursuit  dances:  Firmezay  Escondido y  Bam- 
bucOy  Jarabe;  (6)  ^(pzvt  A^sict^i  RericSnyPuntOy  Mejorana;  (7)  Rustic 
dztictsi  Rancher  ay  Pasilloy  Jorofo;{i)  Ritual  dances:  JongOy  Macumba; 


Dance  Map  of  Latin  America 


S9 


60  PANORAMA  OF  LATIN  AMERICAN  MUSIC 
(,)  OrnW  dances:  Co»««  Co)  Topical  ballads,  such  as  the 

*"°Tfmustratc  the  geographic  distribution  of  native  songs  and  danc^, 
I  drew  up  a  «geo-musical>’  map  of  Latin  Amenca  The  names  of  the 
dances  are  placed  as  nearly  as  cartographically  possible  in  their  natural 
habitat.  The  Za».«  fits  neatly  into  the  long  and  narrow  ribbon  of 
Chile  The  Tango  is  found  in  the  vicinity  of  Buenos  Aires,  and  the 
Habmera  is  placed  near  Havana.  The  Rumba,  which  originated  in  the 
underbelly  of  the  island  of  Cuba  populated  by  Negroes,  is  affixed  there. 
The  Pasillo,  which  is  popular  both  in  Colombia  and  Venezuela,  straddles 
the  two  countries.  Tiny  Panama  has  three  distinct  national  dance  forms, 
the  Mejoram,  the  Tamborito,  and  the  Punto.  I  the  Son  Guate- 

mdteco  as  best  I  could  into  the  Cartesian  oval  of  Guatemala.  The  Mexican 
dances  and  ballads,  the  Huafango,  the  Ur abe,  the  Corndo,  are  pattered 
in  Mexico  proper,  while  the  Jar  ana,  which  is  a  regional  dance  of  Yucatan, 
is  tucked  away  in  that  peninsula.  I  have  given  the  Pericon  to  Uruguay,  be¬ 
cause  it  was  in  Montevideo  that  the  Pericon  was  revived  after  long  years  of 
desuetude.  The  vast  spaces  of  Argentina  and  Brazil  afforded  me  the  op¬ 
portunity  to  populate  them  liberally  with  dance  names.  However,  in  order 
not  to  clutter  up  the  map,  I  have  left  out  obsolete  or  narrowly  regional 

dances.* 


THE  LASCIVIOUS  TANGO 

In  the  Social  History  of  Fads,  the  appearance  of  the  Tango  on  the 
world  stage  is  an  exciting  chapter.  An  exotic  product  of  the  slums  of 
Buenos  Aires,  the  Tango  was  first  revealed  to  the  worid  in  the  “Review 
of  19 1 1,”  produced  in  New  York.  But  it  was  not  until  the  early  months 
of  1 9 14,  on  the  eve  of  World  War  I,  that  the  Tango  skyrocketed  to  fame. 
All  at  once,  everybody  was  either  dancing  it  or  talking  about  it.  The  press 
of  both  hemispheres  devoted  columns  to  the  discussion  of  the  new  craze. 
Gloomy  commentators  saw  in  the  popularity  of  the  Tango  a  sign  of  moral 
decadence.  Royalty,  clergy,  and  society  were  unanimous  in  damning  the 
from  Argentina.  The  Kaiser  of  Germany,  the  King  of  Italy,  the 
Queen  of  England,  and  the  Pope,  were  all  quoted  in  the  newspapers  as 

*That  my  map  is  geo-musically  accurate  is  proved  to  my  satisfaction  by  its  repro¬ 
duction  (from  my  article  in  the  Chrutian  Science  Monitor  of  May  8,  1943)  in  the 
collection  ChiUj  published  late  in  1943  by  the  University  of  Chile  in  Santiago.  No 
credit  was  given  to  me  by  the  editors  and  cartographers  of  CMle,  and  I  hereby  hasten 
to  establish  my  priority  of  invention  lest  it  be  insinuated  that  I  got  the  idea  of  the  map 
in  this  book  from  that  reproduction  of  my  own  brainchild. 


ARTLESS  FOLKLORE 


6i 


having  expressed  their  abhorrence.  An  article  in  the  British  magazine, 
The  Gentlewoman^  described  the  Tango  as  ^^the  dance  of  moral  death,  the 
creation  and  manifestation  of  barbarism.”  Father  Bernard  Vaughan  of 
London  warned  of  dangers  lurking  at  social  gatherings  known  as  ^^Tango 
teas.”  ^Tt  is  not  what  happens  at  a  Tango  tea  that  so  much  matters,”  he 
pointed  out,  ^^as  what  happens  after  it.  I  have  been  too  long  with  human 
nature  not  to  know  that,  like  a  powder  magazine,  it  had  better  be  kept  as 
far  as  possible  fireproof.” 

The  Church  denounced  the  Tango  in  vigorous  terms.  The  Bishop  of 
Verdun  urged  all  families  “to  combat  the  Tango  which  is  a  powerful  dis¬ 
solvent  of  French  morality.”  The  Archbishop  of  Lyons  declared:  “This 
abominable  dance  kills  virtue,  and  gives  rein  to  every  appetite.”  On  Jan¬ 
uary  9th,  1914?  the  Archbishop  of  Paris  proclaimed:  “We  condemn  the 
dance  of  foreign  origin  known  as  the  Tango,  which  by  its  lascivious  nature 
offends  morality.  Christians  ought  not  in  conscience  to  take  part  in  it. 
Confessors  must  in  the  administration  of  the  sacrament  of  penance  en¬ 
force  these  orders.” 

The  Archbishop’s  proclamation  had  an  unexpected  sequel,  when  a 
New  York  dancing  teacher,  one  Stilson,  sued  the  Paris  dignitary  for 
$20,000,  claiming  that  as  a  consequence  of  the  ban  he  lost  pupils.  Later, 
Stilson  reduced  the  amount  of  his  suit  to  $4,000-  The  newspapers  failed 
to  mention  the  ultimate  outcome  of  Stilson’s  action. 

In  Boston,  Cardinal  O’Connell  looked  at  the  Tango  and  commented 
gravely:  “If  this  Tango-dancing  female  is  the  new  woman,  then  God 
spare  us  from  any  further  development  of  the  abnormal  creature.”  In 
New  York,  Rabbi  Wise  said:  “If  one  were  to  enter  a  New  York  ballroom 
after  a  ten  years’  absence,  one  would  be  struck  dumb  and  speechless  with 
disgust  at  the  degeneration  which  has  come  to  pass.” 

On  March  2,  1914,  the  Bible  Conference,  held  in  Atlanta,  Georgia, 
heard  Dr.  Campbell  Morgan,  who  declared  that  the  Tango  is  a  reversion 
to  the  ape,  and  a  confirmation  of  the  Darwin  theory. 

On  July  16,  1914,  the  Mississippi  Pearl  Button  Company  filed  an  in¬ 
junction  against  the  river  steamboat  line,  claiming  that  the  playing  of 
the  Tango  on  the  ship’s  calliope  organ  distracted  the  girls  working  in  the 
factory  of  the  Company,  causing  a  serious  drop  in  the  production  of  pearl 
buttons. 

Social  phenomena  attending  the  rise  of  the  Tango  were  many  and 
varied.  On  January  4,  1914,  The  New  York  Times  reported  in  a  feature 
article: 


62  PANORAMA  OF  LATIN  AMERICAN  MUSIC 

Since  the  Tango  became  popular,  an  extraordinary  number  of  dark-skinned 
young  men  have  appeared  in  New  York  as  teachers  of  the  Argentim^  dance, 
Ld  who  claim  to  have  come  from  South  of  the  Rio  de  k  Plata.  Doubting 
Thomases  assert  that  the  arrival  of  these  dusky  young  Tangoists  dates  from  the 
first  of  recent  Mexican  revolutions,  and  unmask  them  as  refugees  from  the 
other  side  of  the  Rio  Grande. 

A  new  criminal  profession,  that  of  the  “Tango  Pirates,”  invaded  New 
York  City  in  1915.  The  New  York  Times  of  May  30, 1915,  carried  these 
headlines: 

TANGO  PIRATES  INFEST  BROADWAY 


Afternoon  Dances  Develop  a  New  Kind  of  Parasite  Whose 
Victims  Are  the  Unguarded  Daughters  of  the  Rich 

The  story  recounted  how  “young  fellows  wearing  a  silk  hat,  tilted  at  an 
angle  of  forty-five  degrees,  cutaway  coats  and  spats”  took  advantage  of 
the  pleasure-seeking  New  York  females.  “They  never  spend  money  on 
the  girls.  The  girls  pay  for  everything,  for  the  lunches,  drinks,  motor 
cars,  etc.  All  these  Tango  pirates  are  victims  of  the  drug  habit.  They  often 
teach  the  girls  to  take  cocaine.  The  Tango  pirate  does  not  try  to  seduce 
these  rich  girls 3  he  just  wants  their  money.” 

The  importation  of  the  Tango  into  Imperial  Japan  was,  in  some  un¬ 
fathomable  manner,  a  follow-up  of  an  illicit  love  affair  between  a  scion 
of  New  York  society  and  a  married  woman,  and  involved  a  global  chase 
after  the  couple  by  a  famous  correspondent.  The  correspondent  could  not 
persuade  the  scion  to  leave  the  lady  of  his  choice.  The  couple  took  to  ap¬ 
pearing  as  Tango-dancers,  and  the  Tango  became  the  rage  of  Japan. 

Guglielmo  Ferrero,  the  great  Italian  sociologist,  commented  sagely 
upon  the  Tango: 

The  ease  with  which  these  frivolous  dances  spread  among  all  classes  of  people 
should  not  lead  us  to  unwarranted  pessimistic  deductions.  Possibly,  at  an  earlier 
period  of  history,  the  popularity  of  the  Tango  would  not  have  been  so  rapid  and 
so  universal,  and  its  devotees  would  not  have  been  so  numerous.  But  they  might 
have  gone  beyond  the  Tango  on  the  road  to  evil. 

The  medical  properties  of  the  Tango  came  under  discussion  when  Dr. 
Boehme  of  New  York  City  announced,  in  April  1914,  the  appearance  of 
a  new  disease,  the  Tango  foot,  which  he  described  as  being  akin  to  such 


ARTLESS  FOLKLORE  63 

occupational  ailments  as  housemaid’s  knee,  miner’s  elbow,  and  weaver’s 
bottom. 

A  letter  to  the  editor  of  The  New  York  Times y  published  in  the  issue 
of  February  18,  1914,  told  of  curative  powers  of  the  Tango: 

About  three  years  ago  I  began  to  suffer  severely  with  indigestion.  My 
physician  warned  me  of  the  danger  of  the  frequent  acute  attacks.  I  dieted  and 
followed  all  instructions;  the  only  result  was  that  I  was  a  nuisance  to  myself  and 
friends,  and  retained  the  ailment.  About  Christmas  time  in  19^3?  ^  decided 
to  abandon  doctors,  and  began  to  learn  the  Tango  and  other  new  dances. 
Within  two  weeks  practically  all  symptoms  of  indigestion  left  me.  When  the 
evening’s  dance  was  over,  I  would  eat  a  sandwich  and  retire  to  a  sound  dream¬ 
less  sleep.  At  the  present  time,  I  can  eat  anything,  even  the  proverbial  cobble¬ 
stones. 

Visitors  in  Argentina  are,  as  a  rule,  enchanted  and  captivated  by  the 
Tango  as  it  is  danced  in  its  land  of  birth.  Waldo  Frank  rhapsodized  after 
attending  a  Tango  in  Buenos  Aires: 

Violins,  harmonicas,  flutes,  weave  the  Tango  music,  interminable  as  the 
generations,  pulsant,  monotonous,  delicious  as  the  play  of  sex  .  .  .  The  Tango 
is  the  profoundest  folk  dance  in  the  world  .  .  .  The  choric  genius  of  three 
supremely  plastic  races — Negro,  Indian,  Spaniard — has  produced  it. 

The  Argentine  literati  are  inclined  to  spurn  the  Tango.  Leonidas 
Barletta,  the  leading  Argentine  poet  of  the  vanguard,  poured  invective 
upon  invective  on  this  most  celebrated  product  of  Argentine  folklore. 
He  wrote  in  the  Buenos  Aires  journal  Disonancias : 

The  Tango  is  a  jeremiad  of  the  effeminate  man,  the  tardy  awakening  of  a 
woman  unconscious  of  her  femininity.  It  is  the  music  of  degenerates  who  refuse 
to  don  the  proletarian  clothes,  whose  greasy-haired  women  leave  factories  for 
prostitution.  .  .  .  The  Tango  is  unhealthy.  The  sensuality  that  pervades  it 
is  that  of  inhibition,  timidity  and  fear.  The  music  of  other  nations  is  frankly 
sensual,  ingenuously  sexual.  In  the  Tango,  the  sensuality  is  deceptive, 
artificially  created. 

At  the  peak  of  anti-Tango  agitation  in  1914?  the  Argentine  Ambassador 
in  Paris  made  a  formal  declaration  that  ^^the  Tango  is  a  dance  peculiar 
to  the  houses  of  ill  fame  in  Buenos  Aires,  and  is  never  cultivated  at  re¬ 
spectable  gatherings.” 

In  July  1943,  the  Argentine  government  launched  a  campaign  for  the 


64  PANORAMA  OF  LATIN  AMERICAN  MUSIC 

^^purification  of  national  art/’  which  action  included  the  revision  of  sug¬ 
gestive  lyrics  of  popular  Tangos.  Thus  a  Tango  entitled  Tal  vez  sera 
mi  alcohol  was  denatured  to  Tal  vez  sera  tu  voz. 

The  Tango  received  its  cou^  de  grace  from  the  Russians^  when  the 
Proletarian  Musician^  the  mouthpiece  of  the  since  defunct  Russian  As¬ 
sociation  of  Proletarian  Musicians^  described  it  as  ^^the  dance  of  impotent 
men.” 


Is  Latin  America  Latin? 


Three  racial  elements  make  up  the  fabric  of  Latin- American  culture: 
Indian,  Colonial  European,  and  Negro.  White  natives  are  commonly 
called  CriolloSy  Creoles.  Often  the  adjective  Creole  is  added  to  the  title 
of  a  European  dance  or  song  acclimatized  in  Latin  America,  as  for  in¬ 
stance  Barcarola  Criolla,  The  offspring  of  an  Indian  and  a  Creole  are 
Mestizos y  and  in  Central  America,  Ladinos.  In  Brazil,  a  cross  between  the 
Portuguese  and  the  Indian  produces  the  Mameluco,  A  half-Indian,  half- 
Negro  is  a  Cafuso  in  Brazil,  and  a  Zamho  in  Spanish  America. 

In  view  of  this  racial  diversity,  is  it  proper  to  call  the  South  Americans, 
the  Central  Americans,  and  the  natives  of  the  West  Indies,  indiscrim¬ 
inately,  Latin  Americans?  The  question  is  the  subject  of  a  lively  debate. 
Dr.  Rafael  Belaunde,  former  Peruvian  ambassador  to  Chile,  declared,  in 
a  statement  to  the  American  press  made  in  September  1942,  that  the  term 
Latin  America  is  false,  for  it  implies  a  non-existent  spiritual  tie  with  Italy. 
As  a  substitute,  he  suggested  the  name  Hispanic  America,  which  would, 
according  to  Dr.  Belaunde,  also  apply  to  Portuguese  America,  inasmuch 
as  in  Roman  times  Hispania  was  the  designation  for  the  entire  Iberian 
Peninsula,  including  modern  Portugal. 

In  a  letter  to  Time  Magazine  of  November  24, 1 941 ,  a  reader  reported 
the  query  of  an  Argentine  intellectual:  ^Why  do  your  papers  call  us 
Latin  Americans?  Don’t  they  know  that  every  one  of  us  resents  that?  We 
are  Central  or  South  Americans,  not  Latin  Americans.” 

However,  the  term  Latin  America  has  the  support  of  one  of  the  most 
articulate  exponents  of  Pan  Americanism,  Luis  Quintanilla,  whose  bril- 


65 


IS  LATIN  AMERICA  LATIN? 

liant  book  on  Inter-American  affairs  is  entitled  A  Latin  American  Sfeaks. 

Haya  de  la  Torre,  the  Peruvian  intellectual  and  founder  of  the 
Alianza  Revoluclonaria  Americana^  is  in  favor  of  the  name  Indo- 
America,  pointing  out  that  Indians  are  the  only  true  Americans.  Other 
writers  of  the  same  school  of  thought  have  suggested  Amerindia.  But 
many  Latin-American  Indians  reject  the  racial  claims  of  the  Indian  birth¬ 
right.  The  late  Honduran  poet,  Romulo  Duron,  expresses  this  desire  to 
renounce  the  pre-Columbian  past  in  favor  of  the  Latin-American  present. 

tenemos  mltotes;  ballamos  Vais  o  Lanza^^  (We  have  no  more  rustic 
airsj  we  dance  the  Waltz  or  the  Danza)y  he  writes,  and  concludes:  “Al¬ 
though  Indian  blood  runs  in  my  veins,  I  feel,  think,  and  love  as  though 
I  were  Spanish.  No  Soy  Indo-Hisfano ;  Hlsfano-lndiano  soyP^ 

In  discussing  native  music,  Latin-American  writers  often  apply  the  terms 
Ibero-American  and  Hispano-American.  Francisco  Curt  Lange  calls  his 
unique  magazine  Bole  tin  Latino- Americano  de  TvLusica.  But  Otto  Mayer- 
Serra  entitles  his  sixty-page  essay  on  native  music  in  the  Enclclofedla  de 
la  Muslcay  published  in  Mexico  in  1943,  Panorama  de  la  Musica  Hisfano- 
Amerlcana,  The  Festival  of  Music  presented  in  Bogota  in  1938  was  an¬ 
nounced  as  the  Festival  Ihero- Americano. 

With  the  rising  consciousness  of  national  culture,  the  Latin  Americans 
of  the  twenty  republics  prefer  to  speak  of  the  quality  of  being  Mexi¬ 
can,  Chilean,  Peruvian,  and  so  on,  in  place  of  a  vague  Latin  Americanism. 
The  terms  Mexicanismoy  Chilenidady  Peruanidady  Brasilidadey  Centro- 
Americanismo  (comprising  the  closely  related  cultures  of  the  six  Central 
American  republics)  are  used  more  and  more  often  in  native  literature. 
The  combined  quality  of  race  and  nation  is  suggested  by  the  concept  of 
Afro-Cuhanismo.  The  description  of  Haitian  culture  as  Afro-Latin  has 
been  proposed  by  a  native  writer. 

By  a  further  extension  of  the  concept  of  a  nation,  all  elements,  in¬ 
cluding  later  European  immigrants,  are  regarded  as  national.  Thus, 
Mario  de  Andrade  declares:  ^Brazilian  music  is  national  in  its  entirety, 
whatever  ethnological  basis  may  underlie  it  .  .  .  The  criterion  of  Bra¬ 
zilian  music  should  be  not  dialectical,  but  social.” 

Carlos  Chavez  writes:  “The  music  of  the  Indians  is  Mexican  music 5 
and  also  Mexican  is  the  art  of  Spanish  extraction.  It  is  fit  and  proper  to 
regard  as  Mexican  even  the  native  operas  in  the  Italian  style,  or  the 
German-inspired  Mexican  symphonies.  Naturally,  the  state  of  being 
Mexican  does  not  qualify  an  art  product  esthetically.  Only  when  Mexican 
music  attains  artistic  quality  does  it  become  true  national  art.” 


66  PANORAMA  OF  LATIN  AMERICAN  MUSIC 

In  keeping  with  these  sentiments,  the  National  Anthems  of  the  twenty 
republics  of  Latin  America  are  regarded  by  native  musicians  as  part  of 
national  folklore.  Yet  most  of  these  hymns  are  artificial  compositions  in 
an  indifferent  Italian  or  Germanic  manner,  written  by  some  immigrant 
musician.  Thus  the  National  Anthem  of  Colombia  was  composed  by  an 
Italian  tenor  who  was  stranded  in  Bogota  after  the  failure  of  his  opera 
company.  The  Chilean  Anthem  is  the  work  of  a  Spaniard  who  had  never 
set  foot  on  Chilean  soil.  This  Anthem  superseded  the  original  Chilean 
patriotic  song  by  a  native  musician,  a  preference  that  aroused  considerable 
resentment  among  Chilean  patriots.  The  Mexican  National  Anthem  was 
the  composition  of  a  Spanish  musician  who  eventually  settled  in  the  United 
States  and  taught  music  in  Buffalo.  Juan  Aberle,  the  Italian  musician  who 
lived  in  Central  America,  was  the  author  of  the  National  Anthem  of  El 
Salvador.  Panama’s  Anthem  was  originally  a  school  song  composed  by  a 
Spanish  resident  musician,  and  entitled  Himno  Istmeno.  After  Panama’s 
separation  from  Colombia,  the  Isthmus  Hymn  became  the  National 
Anthem  of  the  new  republic.  The  Cuban  National  Anthem  was  composed 
spontaneously  by  a  local  band  leader  when  the  liberating  forces  entered 
the  village  of  Guanabacoa  during  the  Cuban  War  of  Independence. 

The  Uruguayan  Anthem  was  improvised  by  a  native  amateur  musician 
and  won  the  honor  of  becoming  the  National  Hymn  through  a  contest. 
It  is  entirely  Italian  in  its  melody  and  in  fact  closely  resembles  the 
Gondoliers’  Chorus  from  Donizetti’s  opera  Lucrezia  Borgia.  The  Ar¬ 
gentine  Anthem  was  written  by  a  music  teacher  in  Buenos  Aires.  It,  too, 
sounds  like  an  aria  from  an  old  Italian  opera.  The  Argentine  Anthem  is 
also  the  longest  of  all  Latin  American  patriotic  songs. 

The  music  of  the  original  Brazilian  Hymn  of  Independence  was  com¬ 
posed,  according  to  irrefutable  evidence,  by  the  “Constitutional  Emperor 
and  Perpetual  Defender  of  Brazil,”  Dom  Pedro  I,  upon  the  declaration 
of  independence  from  Portugal  on  September  7,  1822.  After  the  abdica¬ 
tion  of  Dom  Pedro  in  1831,  a  new  patriotic  hymn  was  composed  by  a 
professional  musician,  Francisco  Manuel  da  Silva,  and  became  the  present 
National  Anthem  of  Brazil. 

The  oldest  Latin-American  Anthem  is  the  “Venezuelan  Marseillaise,” 
Gloria  al  Bravo  Pueblo,  composed  during  the  War  of  Revolution  by  Juan 
Landaeta.  Incidentally,  the  composition  of  the  Anthem  is  often  ascribed 
to  Teresa  Carreno,  the  famous  “Valkyrie  of  the  Piano,”  who  was  of 
Venezuelan  birth.  She  did  write  a  festival  hymn  for  the  Bolivar  Centen¬ 
nial,  but  not  the  “Venezuelan  Marseillaise.” 


IS  LATIN  AMERICA  LATIN? 


67 

The  National  Anthem  o£  Costa  Rica  came  to  be  written  under  curious 
circumstances.  When,  in  1853,  t:he  envoys  of  Great  Britain  and  the  United 
States  arrived  in  San  Jose,  the  capital,  the  President  of  the  young  repub¬ 
lic,  desiring  to  impress  the  foreign  dignitaries,  resolved  to  have  a  national 
hymn  played  at  their  reception.  Since  there  was  none  In  existence,  he 
ordered  one  Manuel  Maria  Gutierrez,  reputed  to  be  the  best  musician  in 
the  country,  to  write  such  a  song.  But  Gutierrez  balked,  saying  that  he 
knew  very  little  about  writing  music.  The  President  then  caused  him  to 
be  thrown  into  jail,  and  the  poor  man  was  kept  there  until  he  managed 
to  set  down  on  paper  a  plausibly  playable  tune. 

LANDMARKS  AND  HISTORY 

Musical  culture  in  Latin  America  is  actually  more  ancient  than  In  North 
America.  The  first  music  school  in  the  New  TV’orld  was  established  in 
Texoco,  Mexico,  in  1524,  by  Pedro  de  Gante,  a  Franciscan  missionary. 
He  was  also  the  first  to  teach  the  natives  to  sing  hymns  and  use  Gregorian 
musical  notation.  The  first  book  with  music  published  in  the  Western 
Hemisphere  was  an  Ordimrium  printed  in  Mexico  in  1556,  one  hundred 
and  forty-two  years  before  the  first  book  containing  musical  notation  was 
published  in  North  America.  An  important  historical  landmark  was  the 
publication  In  Mexico  in  1604  of  a  folio  volume,  Liber  quo  IV  Passiones 
Christi  Domini  Continentur,  It  contained  original  Passion  music,  eight 
Lamentations,  and  a  Jeremiad,  composed  by  Juan  Navarro.  This  Na¬ 
varro  has  been  unwarrantedly  Identified  in  music  dictionaries  with  the 
sixteenth-century  Spanish  musician  of  the  same  name.  Gilbert  Chase  has 
cleared  up  the  matter  in  his  article,  ^^Juan  Navarro  Hispalensis  and  Juan 
Navarro  Gaditanus,”  published  in  the  April  1945  issue  of  The  Musical 
Quarterly, 

One  of  the  important  pioneers  of  ecclesiastical  music  in  Latin  America 
was  the  famous  Italian  composer  and  organist  Domenico  Zipoli.  He  died 
in  Cordoba,  Argentina,  on  January  2,  1726,  a  date  established  by  docu¬ 
mentary  evidence  in  the  monograph  by  Lauro  Ayestaran,  Domenico 
Zifoliy  El  Gran  Comfositor  y  Organista  Romano y  published  In  1941  in 
Montevideo,  Uruguay. 

The  first  Mass  celebrated  in  the  New  World  was  given  in  Santo  Do¬ 
mingo  in  1512.  The  first  native-born  composer  of  the  Western  Hemi¬ 
sphere  was  Cristobal  de  Llerana,  who  flourished  in  Santo  Domingo  in 
the  second  half  of  the  sixteenth  century.  The  first  song  to  words  in  an 
Indian  dialect  was  an  Ave  Maria  in  the  Nahuatl  language,  set  to  music 


68  PANORAMA  OF  LATIN  AMERICAN  MUSIC 

by  Hernando  Franco  in  Mexico  circa  1575.  Here  are  the  first  two  lines 
of  this  Ave  Marta: 

In  ilhmcac  cihuafille  tenantzin  dtos  in  titotefantlahtohcatzin 
Mahuel  tehuatzln  tofan  xinotlahtolti  in  titlahtlacoamme. 

The  first  revelation  of  the  existence  of  native  music  in  Latin  America 
was  the  collective  dance  that  Queen  Anacaona  staged  for  the  benefit  of 
the  Spanish  Governor  on  the  island  of  Santo  Domingo  in  the  year  1520. 
Gonzalo  Fernandez  Oviedo,  the  official  historiographer  of  Christopher 
Columbus,  describes  the  event  in  his  chronicle,  La  Historia  Natural  y 
General  de  las  Indias: 

On  this  island,  the  only  record  of  the  arts  are  songs  called  AreitoSy  which 
are  transmitted  from  generation  to  generation.  At  one  time,  when  Nicolas  de 
Ovando  ruled  the  island,  Anacaona,  the  wife  of  a  local  chief,  sang  an  Areito 
for  the  Governor,  and  three  hundred  maidens  took  part  in  the  dance,  all  of 
whom  were  the  king’s  progeny,  and  all  marriageable;  for  he  did  not  wish 
married  men  or  women  to  sing  Areitos. 

The  exact  nature  and  form  of  the  pre-Columbian  Areito  is  difficult  to 
establish.  An  example  of  the  Areito  is  found  in  Cuba  Primitiva  by  Bachiller 
y  Morales,  published  in  Havana,  Cuba,  in  1883.  But  this  melody  is  obvi¬ 
ously  a  Procrustean  adaptation  in  the  nineteenth-century  European  form, 
and  could  not  be  even  remotely  connected  with  the  tune  that  the  good 
Indian  Queen  sang  for  the  Spanish  Governor  of  Santo  Domingo. 

The  classical  Chaconne  is  said  by  some  authorities  to  be  of  New  World 
origin.  According  to  this  theory,  the  Chaconne  was  popular  in  Mexico  dur¬ 
ing  the  sixteenth  century,  and  was  known  under  the  name  Chacona  mulata 
ov  Indiana  amulatada.  Its  Mexican  version  was  a  wild  and  savage  dance, 
quite  different  from  the  stately  and  measured  air  made  familiar  by  the 
works  of  the  classics.  There  is,  of  course,  no  evidence  for  or  against  the 
theory  of  Mexican  origin  of  the  Chaconne ^  and  the  derivation  of  the  word 
itself  is  obscure. 

How  unreliable  are  the  accounts  of  native  music  by  early  travelers  in 
Latin  America,  is  demonstrated  by  Carlos  Vega,  who  has  painstakingly 
perused  the  old  books  of  exploration  in  search  of  pertinent  data.  He  has 
discovered  that  too  often  an  ostensibly  first-hand  report  on  native  danc¬ 
ing  and  singing  proves  to  be  an  undisguised  borrowing  from  an  earlier 
account,  with  considerable  geographic  mutation  in  the  process.  Thus  an 


ISLATINAMERICALATIN?  69 

Englishman,  Anthony  Helm,  writes  in  1806:  ^^At  Montevideo,  a  lively 
and  very  lascivious  dance  is  much  practiced  5  it  is  called  Calenda^  and  the 
Negroes,  as  well  as  the  Mulattoes,  whose  constitutions  are  sanguine,  are 
excessively  fond  of  it.”  This  turns  out  to  be  a  literal  translation  of  a  passage 
from  Histoire  dhm  Voyage  by  Antonio  Joseph  Pernetty,  published  in 
1763*  Pernetty’s  account,  in  its  turn,  is  taken  from  another  French  travel 
book,  Histoire  GenSrale  des  Voyages^  published  in  1746-1761,  with 
this  difference,  that  the  locale  of  the  report  is  placed  in  Santo  Domingo 
rather  than  Montevideo.  But  this  is  not  the  rock  bottom  of  the  tale,  which 
is  found  in  a  still  earlier  volume,  Nouveaux  Voyages^  published  in  1724! 

An  apparently  authentic  account  of  a  song  festival  in  Chile  is  given  by 
Frezier,  a  reputable  French  writer  who  traveled  to  South  America  early 
in  the  eighteenth  century.  His  book  was  published  in  an  English  transla¬ 
tion  in  1724,  under  the  somewhat  extensive  title:  A  Voyage  to  the  South 
Sea  and  Along  the  Coast  of  Chili  and  Peru  in  the  Y ears  iji2y  1715,  and 
lyi^y  Particularly  Describing  the  Genius  and  Constitution  of  the  In¬ 
habitants  As  Well  Indians  as  Spaniards y  Their  Customs  and  Manners y 
Their  Natural  History  y  Mines  y  Commoditiesy  Traffick  With  Euro  fey  etc. 

There  being  adorn’d  with  Feathers  of  Ostriches,  Flamencos  and  other  Birds 
of  sprightly  Colours,  stuck  round  their  Caps,  they  fell  to  singing  to  the  Sound 
of  two  instruments  made  of  a  Piece  of  Wood,  with  only  one  Hole  bored  through 
it;  blowing  in  which,  either  stronger  or  more  gently,  they  form’d  a  Sound 
more  or  less  sharp  or  flat.  They  kept  Measure  alternatively  with  a  Trumpet 
made  of  a  Bull’s  Horn,  fastened  to  the  End  of  a  long  Cane,  the  Mouth  of  which 
had  a  Pipe,  that  sounds  like  a  Trumpet.  They  fill’d  up  this  Symphony  with  some 
Strokes  of  a  Drum,  whose  heavy  and  doleful  Sound  was  answerable  enough  to 
their  Mien;  which  in  the  Height  of  their  Exclamations  had  nothing  in  it  that 
was  gay.  I  observ’d  them  attentively  on  the  Stage,  and  did  not,  during  the  whole 
Festival,  see  one  smiling  Countenance  among  them. 

The  author  goes  on  to  comment  on  the  native  dances  and  instruments: 

The  ZafateOy  a  Dance  of  Peru  and  Chili,  is  as  common  with  them  as  the 
Minuet  is  in  France;  they  call  it  the  ZafateOy  because  they  alternatively  strike 
with  the  Heel  and  the  Toes,  taking  some  Steps.  By  this  Piece  of  Musick  may  be 
discern’d  what  a  barren  Taste  they  have  in  touching  the  Harp,  the  Guitarre, 
and  the  Bandola,  which  are  almost  the  only  instruments  used  in  that  Country. 
The  two  last  are  of  the  Species  of  Guitarras,  but  the  Bandola  has  a  much 
sharper  and  louder  Sound, 


70  PANORAMA  OF  LATIN  AMERICAN  MUSIC 

Robert  Semplcj  who  traveled  in  Venezuela  early  in  the  nineteenth 
century,  does  not  conceal  his  dislike  of  the  Indian  songs.  He  reports  his 
findings  in  a  book  published  in  London  in  1812  under  the  title  Sketch 
of  the  Present  State  of  Caracas:  Including  a  Journey  from  Caracas 
Through  La  Victoria  and  Valencia  to  Puerto  Cabello. 

Some  of  the  Indians  amused  themselves  by  blowing  into  a  species  of  flute,  if 
it  can  be  so  called,  without  doubt  one  of  the  rudest  ever  sounded  by  the  human 
breath.  The  sound  was  like  that  of  the  wind  sighing  in  the  forests,  or  among 
rocks;  sometimes  rising  almost  to  a  scream,  and  then  dying  away  into  a  whisper. 
This  alternate  rise  and  fall  constituted  the  whole  of  the  music.  It  seemed  to 
afford  infinite  satisfaction  to  those  for  whose  ears  it  was  designed;  they  listened 
in  silence,  and  when  the  performers  reached  the  height  of  screaming,  all  eyes 
were  turned  towards  us  to  see  if  we  were  not  yet  touched  by  such  masterpieces 
of  melody. 

F.  Hassaurek,  who  was  the  United  States  minister  in  Ecuador  in  the 
middle  of  the  nineteenth  century,  records  his  impressions  of  the  Negro 
dances  in  Four  Years  Among  Sfanish  Americans,  published  in  New  York 
mi86S: 

The  main  part  of  the  orchestra  consists  of  the  voices  of  the  women  and 
children.  Clapping  their  hands  continually,  they  sing  a  great  variety  of  songs. 
In  musical  talent  and  taste,  these  Negroes  are  infinitely  superior  to  the  Indians. 
Their  melodies  are  neither  so  monotonous  nor  so  lifeless  as  those  of  the  abo¬ 
rigines.  On  the  contrary,  they  are  varied  and  fiery,  and  full  of  exciting  vigor. 
Their  dance  is  not  the  slow  measured  step  of  the  Indians,  but  is  peculiar  to  the 
Ethiopians  .  .  .  The  fellow  who  beats  the  drum  never  stops.  When  he  is 
treated  to  a  cup  of  rum,  someone  of  the  company  presents  it  to  his  lips,  and  he 
swallows  it  while  his  hands  continue  to  beat  the  drum.  Perspiration  pours  down 
his  face,  but  he  has  no  time  to  wipe  it  off. 

To  the  Europeans  of  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries,  America 
was  the  land  of  wonders,  natural  and  supernatural.  Kircher’s  Musurgia 
Universalis,  published  in  1 650,  contains  a  drawing  of  an  indigenous  Amer¬ 
ican  animal,  figritia  (sloth),  attributing  to  it  the  ability  to  sing  a  diatonic 
hexachord  (the  notes  accompany  the  drawing) .  Kircher  adds  significantly: 
“Whatever  music  may  exist  in  the  Americas,  is  doubtless  derived  from 
the  miraculous  vocal  scale  of  this  animal.” 

One  of  the  most  precious  souvenirs  I  brought  with  me  from  my  “Pan- 
American  Fishing  Trip”  is  a  Peruvian  figurine,  carved  from  the  thighbone 
of  a  llama,  and  representing  a  musician,  or  a  priest,  playing  on  a  vertical 


71 


IS  LATIN  AMERICA  LATIN? 

flute.  The  statuette  dates  back  to  the  early  Chimu  civilization,  about  the 
second  century  b.c.,  and  it  may  well  be  one  of  the  earliest  specirnens 
of  musical  sculpture  in  pre-Columbian  America.  There  is  on  it  a  curious 
lettering,  a  linear  tracery  that  suggests  notation.  Are  these  strange  mark¬ 
ings  nothing  more  than  dyed  cracks  in  the  bone  structure?  Or  do  they 
correspond  to  the  melody  of  some  ancient  Indian  chant?  Are  they  pnmi- 
tive  musical  symbols?  i,Quien  sabe? 


The  course  of  evolution  of  Latin  American  music,  from  the  dawn  of 
continental  civilization  to  the  present  times,  is  summarized  m  the  fol¬ 
lowing  paragraphs: 

Pre-Columbian  Cultures  (before  1492).  Primitive  musical  instincts 
expressed  in  singing  and  rhythmic  stamping.  Manufacture  of  drums  made 
of  hollow  tree  trunks  and  covered  with  animal  skins  5  scratchers  made  of 
notched  fruit  shells;  and  shakers,  or  gourds  with  dry  seed  inside.  Produc¬ 
tion  of  vertical  flutes  and  panpipes  made  of  baked  clay,  and  sonaetimes 
of  animal  and  even  human  bones.  Formation  of  the  pentatonic  scale,  pos¬ 
sibly  of  chironomic  origin,  symbolizing  the  five  digits  of  the  han  . 

Early  Centuries  of  the  Conquest  (1492-1750).  The  first  native 
festival  heard  by  Europeans,  given  by  Queen  Anacaona  in  Santo  Domngo 
in  1520.  Church  music  carried  by  the  Jesuits  to  the  natives  of  South  Amer¬ 
ica.  Determined  efforts  of  colonial  authorities  to  suppress  indigenous 
music,  with  forcible  destruction  of  drums  and  other  Indian  instrurnents. 
Gradual  amalgamation  of  native  and  European  rhythms  and  melodies 
into  new  distinctive  Latin-American  forms.  Extension  of  the  pentatonic 
scale  to  the  heptatonic,  symmetrization  of  musical  phrases,  and  intro  uc- 
tion  of  traditional  European  harmony  into  popular  music  of  Latin  Amer¬ 
ica.  Infusion  of  African  rhythms  consequent  upon  the  importation  of 

Negro  slaves. 

Formation  of  National  Cultures  ( 1 750-1900)  •  Foundation  of  con¬ 
servatories  and  music  schools.  Immigration  of  Italian  and  other  foreign 
musicians  to  South  America.  Composition  of  national  anthems,  after 
War  of  Independence. 

Modern  Era  of  Latin  American  Music  (1900-1950).  Establish¬ 
ment  of  opera  houses  in  the  principal  centers.  Organization  of  symphonic 
ensembles  under  the  direction  of  native  and  foreign  musiaans.  Foundation 


/2  PANORAMA  OF  LATIN  AMERICAN  MUSIC 

of  music  publishing  firms.  Government  subsidies  for  musical  education. 
Music  festivals  and  prize  contests  for  composers.  Emergence  of  native 
creative  composers  who  combine  in  their  music  a  deep  racial  and  national 
consciousness  with  modern  technique.  Inclusion  of  Latin  America  into  the 
commonwealth  of  universal  musical  culture  on  equal  terms  with  the  great 
schools  of  composition  of  Europe  and  North  America. 


PART  II 


Argentina 


De  sti  lumbre  dimna 

Triunfante  y  de  ambiciosos  resfetada^ 

Libre j  rica^  tranquila^  organizada^ 

Ya  brilla  la  Refublica  Argentina, 

[jUAN  CRUZ  Varela] 

dTe  llamas  la  Argentmaf  — jLa  Argentina! 
dCual  es  el  nombre  de  tu  madref  — j Gloria! 

[r.  j.  payro] 


The  name  Argentina  is  the  Latin  equivalent  of  the  Spanish  word  La  Plata, 
silver,  as  the  region  was  known  during  colonial  times.  Argentina  is  the  second 
largest  South  American  nation,  and  numbers  thirteen  and  a  half  million  inhabit¬ 
ants.  Buenos  Aires,  the  capital,  is  the  largest  South  American  city,  with  a  popu¬ 
lation  of  two  and  a  half  million. 

The  arts,  the  poetry,  and  the  music  of  Argentina  are  connected  in  the 
popular  mind  with  the  picturesque  figure  of  the  Gaucho,  the  roving  creole 
of  the  Pampas,  the  minstrel  horseman,  ever  ready  to  burst  into  song.  The 
word  Gaucho  may  have  come  from  vaqueroy  cowboy,  or  it  may  be  an 
adaptation  of  an  Indian  Araucanian  word  meaning  motherless. 

The  best  singers  among  the  Gauchos  formed  a  clan  of  Pay  adores  y  who 
supplied  entertainment  at  the  inns  and  were  rewarded  for  their  singing. 
Arturo  Torres-Rioseco  in  his  book  The  E fie  of  Latin  American  Literor 
ture  *  gives  an  illuminating  account  of  the  songs  of  the  Gaucho: 

In  his  songs  or  Payadas,  the  Gaucho  used  a  very  picturesque  style,  full  of 
objective  images  and  metaphors,  and  he  sang  his  verses  in  a  voice  warm  with 
pathos  and  emotion.  He  employed  eight-syllable  quatrains,  the  old  ballad  form, 
and  his  language  was  the  sixteenth-century  Spanish  spoken  by  the  conquerors  and 


*  Oxford  University  Press,  New  York,  1942. 

'  73' 


74 


MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 


kept  intact  in  certain  isolated  regions.  Possibly  the  most  interesting  form  of  the 
Payada  was  the  one  called  the  ContrafuntOy  which  was  performed  in  the  follow¬ 
ing  manner:  Two  Gauchos  would  sit  on  the  skulls  of  oxen,  tuning  their  guitars, 
while  bystanders  stood  around  them  in  a  circle  and  urged  them  with  yells 
and  applause  into  a  singing  match.  Then  one  singer  would  challenge  the  other 
to  explain,  for  instance,  the  origin  of  time  and  space ;  the  second  singer  would 
improvise  half  a  dozen  stanzas  and  end  by  asking  a  question  in  his  turn.  In  this 
way  they  often  passed  hours,  sometimes  days,  in  a  sport  that  was  a  real  tourna¬ 
ment  of  wit,  to  the  great  delight  of  the  spectators. 

This  art  of  the  Gauchoj  the  wonderful  ContrafuntOy  is  now  but  a  part 
of  the  national  legend.  In  the  world  of  the  airplane  and  radioj  the  Gaucho 
is  no  longer  a  solitary  figure,  alone  with  nature  and  his  poetic  soul.  His 
songs  are  now  composed  for  him  by  professional  poets,  and  the  music  he 
strums  on  his  guitar  is  that  of  the  latest  hit  from  Buenos  Aires. 

The  origin  of  a  great  number  of  Argentine  songs  and  dances  is  as¬ 
cribed,  rightly  or  wrongly,  to  the  Gaucho.  These  are  the  sentimental 
Viddita^  the  prancing  Gato^  the  lively  PericSny  the  picaresque  Escondido^ 
the  leisurely  Ranchera^  the  melancholy  Estilo,  ...  In  his  monumental 
work  Danzas  y  Canciones  Argentinas^  Carlos  Vega  cites  no  fewer  than 
130  Argentine  songs  and  dances,  and  yet  qualifies  the  list  as  ^^presumably 
incomplete.”  Arturo  C.  Schianca,  in  Historia  de  la  Musica  Argentina^ 
gives  a  detailed  description  of  38  dances  and  14  songs.  Such  is  the  wealth 
and  abundance  of  native  folk  music  in  Argentina. 

Each  of  these  numerous  songs  and  dances  possesses  a  strong  individu¬ 
ality  of  rhythmic  and  formal  structure.  Yet,  all  of  them  fall  Into  a  larger 
melorhythmic  category  which  is  unmistakably  Argentine.  The  prevailing 
meter  of  Argentine  folk  music  is  a  dual  time-signature  of  three-four  and 
six-eight,  the  latter  often  evolving  into  syncopated  duple  time.  The  titles 
usually  derive  from  the  repetition  of  a  certain  word  in  the  verse.  Thus, 
Vidala^  or  Vidalitay  is  a  word  repeated  at  the  end  of  each  refrain.  Inci¬ 
dentally,  the  w^ord  is  a  hybrid,  for  its  root,  Vida^  is  Spanish,  while  the  suffix 
la  is  a  Quechua  Indian  diminutive.  The  Vidala  is  most  often  written  in 
triple  meter,  three-four  or  three-eight,  whereas  the  Vidalita  is  usually 
in  six-eight  time. 

Estilo  is  a  nostalgic  song  inspired  by  the  vastness  of  the  land¬ 
scape.  It  consists  of  two  parts,  the  first  in  slow  two-four  or  four-four  time, 
the  second  in  lively  three-four  or  six-eight  time.  The  (which  means 
''cat”)  is  a  country  dance  performed  by  two  couples.  In  rhythm  it  re¬ 
sembles  a  very  rapid  waltz,  in  steady  quarter-notes.  A  very  popular  form 


ARGENTINA 


75 


of  the  Gato  Is  the  Gato  con  Relaciones^  that  is,  ^^Gato  with  Stories.’’  The 
stories  are  of  diversified  contentj  amorous,  philosophical,  political.  The 
dance  called  Escondido  (literally,  hidden,  for  in  it  the  female  partner 
hides  from  the  male)  belongs  to  the  Gato  type  rhythmically  and  choreo- 
graphically. 

Several  Argentine  airs,  long  obsolete,  have  been  revived  by  native 
composers  in  suites  of  dances  modeled  after  the  classical  European  suite. 
Among  these  airs,  the  best  known  are  the  Cielito  (literally  “little  heaven,” 
from  the  repetition  of  the  word  at  the  end  of  the  refrain),  and  the  Cmndo 
(from  the  refrain  in  which  the  lover  asks  “<:Cuando?”  meaning 
“When?”).  The  Cielito  is  in  waltz  time,  while  the  Cuando  resembles  a 
minuet.  Other  airs  that  are  now  being  revived  are  the  Media  Cana  (lit¬ 
erally  “semicircular  molding,”  from  the  dance  figure  in  which  the  part¬ 
ners  perform  a  semicircle),  and  the  Triunfo  (“triumph”). 

One  of  the  most  original  airs  of  Argentina  is  the  PericSn^  which  fell 
Into  desuetude,  then  was  revived  in  Montevideo,  and  finally  returned  to 
Argentina  by  way  of  Uruguay.  It  is  in  triple  time,  in  rapid  tempo,  and  in 
a  steady  rhythm  of  even  notes.  A  well-known  humorous  song,  Remedio 
(in  which  the  singer  offers  a  remedy  for  the  anguish  of  love),  is  of  the 
Pericon  type. 

Other  dances  of  Argentina,  directly  or  indirectly  associated  with  the 
Gaucho  tradition,  are  the  Firmeza  (“firmness”),  a  lively  air  in  six-eight 
time  3  the  Rancher  a  (a  ranch  dance),  which  is  a  mazurka  with  the  ac¬ 
companying  figure  In  six-eight  timej  the  Chacarera  (from  chacra^  farm), 
which  is  practically  identical  with  the  Rancher  a  and  the  ChamamS,  an 
air  in  three-four  time,  probably  of  Indian  origin,  with  an  unusual  rhythm 
consisting  of  a  group  of  triplets,  followed  by  two  groups  of  duplets,  in 
three-four  time. 

Several  Peruvian  and  Chilean  dances  have  been  acclimatized  in  Ar¬ 
gentina.  The  Rejalosa  (or,  more  correctly,  Resbalosa)  is  an  old  dance  of 
Peruvian  origin,  which  became  fashionable  in  Buenos  Aires  in  the  nine¬ 
teenth  century.  It  is  in  moderate  six-eight  time. 

The  ChAtzn  Zamacueca  (or  as  It  was  formerly  called,  Zambacueca) 
has  generated  in  Argentina  two  different  dance  forms,  the  Zamba  znd 
the  Cueca.  The  Zamba  is  a  rather  slow  air  in  six-eight  time,  popular  in 
northern  Argentina,  and  the  sometimes  called  Cueca  Chilena,  or 

simply  Chilena,  is  a  lively  and  syncopated  dance  In  three-four  time. 

Carlos  Vega  offers  an  interesting  theory  regarding  the  migration  of 
folk  songs  from  Peru  to  Argentina.  He  writes:  “Spain  communicated  with 


76 


MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 


its  South  American  colonies  through  Lima,  via  Panama.  The  manner 
of  dress,  customs,  dances,  and  music  of  the  period  flourished  in  the  Lima 
salons.  But  already  in  1700  there  was  formed  a  nucleus  of  a  more  ancient 
stock,  that  of  native  music.  As  a  consequence,  Spanish  music  underwent 
the  process  of  Peruvianization.  Soon,  all  South  America  became  similarly 
Peruvianized.  The  picaresque  dances  of  Argentina,  which  we  call  in¬ 
digenous,  are  in  reality  an  importation  from  Peru,  and  have  come  first  by 
way  of  Bolivia,  and  then  through  Chile.” 

Vega  describes  the  second  phase  of  the  process  as  the  “Argentinization” 
of  South  America:  “The  revolution  of  1810  opened  the  gates  of  Buenos 
Aires  to  Paris,  London,  and,  to  a  lesser  extent.  New  York.  Social  life  in 
Buenos  Aires  about  1816-1818  rivaled  that  of  the  most  elegant  world 
capitals.  Argentina  adopted  the  colonial  dances  and  made  them  her  own. 
Later,  these  Argentine  dances  reached  Peru,  by  way  of  Bolivia.  A  focal 
point  was  thus  created  in  Buenos  Aires,  and  soon  a  partial  Argentinization 
of  South  America  took  place.” 

A  penetrating  analysis  of  the  Gaucho  music  of  Argentina  is  found  in 
a  little-known  monograph,  Origenes  de  la  Musica  Argentina,  by  Juan 
Alvarez,  published  in  the  1909  number  of  the  Revista  de  Berecho, 
Historia  y  Letras.  He  writes: 

There  is  no  set  rule  by  which  we  can  tell  which  music  belongs  to  the  Gaucho, 
and  which  does  not.  The  Gato  seems  unmistakably  genuine ;  yet  it  is  often  em¬ 
bellished  with  variations  in  the  form  of  a  waltz  or  a  polka.  The  difficulty  is 
increased  by  the  fact  that  there  are  fewer  and  fewer  people  in  the  country  who 
are  familiar  with  native  music.  Many  Argentines  live  and  die  without  having 
ever  heard  a  Gato,  without  suspecting  that  the  Chacarera,  the  Triunjo,  the 
Firmeza,  are  products  of  our  indigenous  art  .  .  .  True,  this  music  often 
possesses  elements  alien  to  it.  There  exists,  for  instance,  a  dance  called  the 
Minuet  Federal.  Obviously,  it  is  a  European  Minuet,  “federalized”  for  the 
occasion.  For  alongside  Argentine  popular  music,  there  exists  also  official  music, 
adopted  and  made  native  by  decree.  Examples  of  such  official  music  are:  the 
National  Anthem  by  Bias  Parera,  which  used  to  be  called  Marcha  de  la  F atria, 
although  there  is  nothing  of  a  march  in  this  music;  the  Cancion  Patrioticahj 
Esteban  de  Lucca;  the  Himno  de  los  Restauradores  by  Rivera  Indarte;  the 
Marcha  Triunfal  by  Artigas, 

But  despite  the  embellishnients  and  additions,  there  is  something  in  our  music 
that  makes  it,  if  not  always,  then  nearly  always,  unmistakably  native.  A  GatOj 
embellished  with  variations  in  the  form  of  a  waltz,  is  still  a  Gato,  Our  music 
may  have  come  from  a  different  ethnic  group,  but  it  has  now  acquired  definite 
characteristics  of  this  particular  region  of  South  America.  To  question  the  au¬ 
thenticity  of  this  music  is  about  as  sensible  as  to  deny  the  Spanish  language  the 


ARGENTINA 


77 

right  to  exist  because  the  vocables  that  make  it  up  are  similar  to  the  words  of 
another  language  ...  In  this  we  follow  the  dictum  of  the  founding  fathers 
of  the  Republic,  namely  that  our  nation  fuses  into  one  race  the  energies  of  all 
men  desiring  to  live  on  Argentine  soil. 

Among  urban  airs  of  Argentina,  the  Milonga  is  the  most  important 
for  the  development  of  native  music.  It  was  originated  as  a  song  of  the 
lower  social  strata  of  Buenos  Aires,  and  held  its  popularity  until  the 
turn  of  the  century,  when  it  was  absorbed  by  the  Tango.  But  the  name 
Milonga  has  remained,  hyphenated  with- the  Tango.  Both  the  Tango 
and  the  Milonga  retain  the  characteristic  swinging  rhythm  that  first  ap¬ 
pears  in  the  Habanera. 

The  Argentine  airs  as  sung  and  played  around  Cuyo,  on  the  Chilean 
border,  possess  a  rhythmic  distinction  and  a  lyrical  quality  that  set  them 
apart  as  a  special  type  of  regional  folklore.  Alberto  Rodriguez  has  pub¬ 
lished  an  important  collection  of  traditional  dances  and  songs  of  Cuyo 
entitled  Cancionero  Cuyano  (Buenos  Aires,  1938). 

Although  there  are  few  Negroes  left  in  Argentina,  African  rhythms 
have  profoundly  affected  Argentine  popular  music.  Juan  Alvarez  writes: 
^^African  music  has  left  among  us  traces  thicker  than  blood.  Now  that 
there  are  almost  no  Negroes  in  the  country,  the  Zamba^  the  Milonga^  the 
Tango  have  developed  into  the  most  aggressive  type  of  native  music.” 

Vicente  Rossi,  in  his  informative  book,  Cosas  de  Negros  (Cordoba, 
1926),  also  supports  the  view  that  Negro  music  is  a  basic  influence  in 
Argentine  folk  songs. 

C.  J.  Videla-Rivero,  in  an  article  published  in  the  Bulletin  of  the  Pan 
American  Union,  credits  the  Negro  slaves  with  influencing  the  Gaucho 
songs : 

The  plaintiveness  of  the  Negro  found  an  echo  in  the  sadness  of  the  Gaucho, 
and  thus  Argentine  music  was  born  ,  .  .  The  Fandango  was  the  first 
materialization  of  the  Negro-Gaucho  psychological  crossing  .  ,  .  From  the 
rural  districts  it  stole  into  the  social  affairs  of  the  city’s  lower  classes,  and 
stealthily  made  its  way  to  the  middle-class  homes,  where  it  was  danced  behind 
drawn  blinds.  It  was  ready  to  assault  the  drawing  rooms  of  the  aristocracy 
when  Juan  Jose  Peralta,  Archbishop  of  Buenos  Aires,  dealt  it  a  death  blow. 
Under  pain  of  excommunication  for  those  who  dared  to  disobey,  the  Arch¬ 
bishop  banned  the  on  July  30,  1 743. 

The  history  oi  musica  culta^  or  ^^ducated  music”  in  Argentina,  begins 
with  the  Jesuits.  A  seventeenth-century  Belgian  Jesuit,  Luis  Berger,  was 
the  first  to  teach  the  Indians  to  play  the  guitar  and  the  lute.  The  Italian 


I  5’  J  J  J  I  J*  J  I 

3  I  jTjgjyjxi  I 

^  «!  =  66 

&.  J  ,  iJ  J  |7]/^  ,  J  I 

4 

J  =  144 

fau..>|  J  J  J  ij  J  J  iJ  J  J  iJ  J  I 

J-  =  84. 

?si..>6  jt3 ij  iJTij'j  imj'j  i;>j  J. 

«l  =92 

(Williams)  §  fjiji  ifnjTii 

»  3  S 

J  =80 

4 

J  =  60 

ss  I  ,  /T3  tlJin  I 

Triunfo  _ _ — 

“Si.>  e  J  I  JJ]  J  Jl  I J  J  J  1 

o 

J  =  58 

«"S^>I  rg/3  J  1/3  J^J  1/3/3  J  I  J.  , 

JTl/niJ.  J  Ji.i 

,  J.  =  66 

&ams)e  y  J  J,  |  J  J  J  J 

Examples  of  Rhythmical  Patterns  of  Some  Argentine  Dances  and  Airs,  as 
Employed  in  Free  Stylization  by  Argentine  Composers 


ARGENTINA  79 

musician  Domenico  Zipoli,  whose  name  occupies  an  important  place  in 
the  general  history  of  musicj  was  also  one  of  the  Jesuit  missionaries  in 
South  America.  Other  European  musicians,  all  of  them  members  of  the 
Jesuit  order,^  active  in  the  part  of  South  America  which  is  now  Argentina, 
were  a  Flemish  priest,  Juan  Vaseo,  and  the  Germans  Anton  Sepp,  Martin 
Schmidt,  Johann  Messner,  and  Florian  Baucke. 

Secular  music  was  not  encouraged  by  the  Jesuits.  There  is  a  record  of 
an  action  brought  against  a  Spanish  army  officer  who,  in  the  year  1650, 
was  accused  of  offending  religious  propriety,  for  ^^after  the  church  serv¬ 
ices,  he  went  to  a  wedding  and  sang  to  the  accompaniment  of  a  guitar.” 

In  the  nineteenth  century,  Buenos  Aires  became  a  musical  center  on  a 
par  with  the  cities  of  North  America.  Several  Italian  opera  companies 
visited  Argentina  early  in  the  nineteenth  century.  The  first  opera  on  an 
indigenous  subject  was  La  Indigena^  produced  in  Buenos  Aires  in  1862. 
A  performance  of  Gounod’s  opera  Faust  inspired  the  Argentine  poet 
Estanislao  Campo  to  write  a  Gaucho  version  of  the  story.  The  result  was 
an  epic  in  verse,  entitled  Fausto^  which  still  retains  its  popularity  in  Ar¬ 
gentine  literature. 

Argentina  was  the  first  South  American  country  to  adopt  a  new  Na¬ 
tional  Anthem.  It  was  the  hdarcha  Patriotica  by  Bias  Parera,  which  was 
sanctioned  by  the  General  Constituent  Assembly  of  Argentina  on  May  1 1, 
1813.  In  his  handbook.  Musk  of  the  New  Worlds  compiled  for  the 
broadcast  series  of  the  Inter-American  University  of  the  Air,  Gilbert 
Chase  describes  the  progress  of  this  first  patriotic  song  of  an  independent 
South  America  in  the  following  paragraph : 

The  Argentines  in  the  army  of  General  San  Martin,  liberator  of  Peru  and 
Chile,  carried  Parera’s  Marcha  Patriotica  to  those  countries.  It  is  recorded  that 
in  an  impressive  public  ceremony  at  Santiago  de  Chile  in  1818,  San  Martin 
himself,  preceded  by  a  fanfare  of  bugles,  electrified  the  crowds  by  singing  the 
Argentine  anthem  in  his  powerful  bass  voice.  San  Martin,  in  fact,  was  very 
partial  to  music.  He  made  his  regimental  bands  rehearse  daily  so  as  to  insure  a 
high  standard  of  execution. 

The  names  of  Amancio  Alcorta  (1805-1862),  Juan  Pedro  Esnaola 
(1808-1878),  and  Juan  Bautista  Alberdi  (1810-1884)  are  prominent 
among  Argentine  musicians  of  the  nineteenth  century.  Alberto  Williams, 
who  edited  the  Anthology  of  Argentinian  Composers,  writes  in  the  brief 
preface  to  the  first  volume,  Los  Precursor es^  containing  selected  composi¬ 
tions  by  these  three  pioneers: 


8o  MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

These  composers  cultivated  music  as  amateurs.  In  their  music  there  is  noted 
the  influence  of  Bellini  and  Rossini.  Our  musical  nationalism  appeared  in  1890. 
It  was  inspired  by  popular  elements,  and  inaugurated  a  genuinely  Argentine  art. 

Alberto  Williams  (who  incidentally  is  a  grandson  of  one  of  the  three 
^^precursorSj’^  Amancio  Alcorta)  is  probably  the  first  thoroughly  educated 
Argentine  musician  who  has  consistently  cultivated  native  forms  in  his 
music.  He  studied  with  Cesar  Franck,  and  founded,  in  1893,  a  chain  of 
Conservatories  and  music  schools  in  Argentina.  Following  his  lead,  liter¬ 
ally  hundreds  of  private  music  teachers  set  up  schools  in  Argentina.  One 
cannot  pass  a  city  block  in  Buenos  Aires  without  encountering  an  academia 
de  musica  or  a  conservatorio. 

The  twentieth  century  has  brought  about  an  extraordinary  expansion 
of  musical  activities  in  Argentina,  in  creative  composition,  education, 
opera  and  concert  activities,  music  publishing,  and  musicology.  Popular 
music  has  in  the  meantime  reached  the  dimensions  of  a  major  industry: 
some  composers  of  Tangos  have  amassed  a  small  fortune  from  their 
royalties.  The  1941  list  of  members  of  the  Sociedad  Argentina  de  Autores 
y  Compositores  de  Musica  contains  3500  names  of  composers  of  serious 
and  popular  music.  There  are  several  large  publishing  houses  in  Buenos 
Aires  and  other  Argentine  cities.  The  Ricordi  firm  alone  has  a  catalogue 
of  publications  of  native  music,  including  orchestral  scores  and  opera, 
which  rivals  great  music  publishing  firms  in  Europe  and  the  United  States. 

The  Teatro  Colony  established  in  Buenos  Aires  on  May  25,  1908,  is 
one  of  the  world^s  most  illustrious  opera  houses.  It  has  presented  famous 
singers  in  a  large  repertoire  of  classical,  romantic,  and  modern  operas,  as 
well  as  numerous  operas  and  ballets  by  Argentine  composers. 

The  orchestra  of  the  Teatro  Colon  is  probably  the  best  in  South  Amer¬ 
ica,  and  may  be  favorably  compared  to  major  American  orchestras.  An¬ 
other  Buenos  Aires  orchestra,  the  Or<puesta  F Harmonica  de  la  AsociaciSn 
del  Profesorado  Orquestal,  established  in  1894,  gives  regular  perform¬ 
ances  oi  symphonic  works.  Large  symphony  orchestras  exist  also  in 
Rosario,  Tucuman,  and  other  Argentine  towns.  Among  the  best  known 
native  conductors  are  Juan  Jose  Castro,  who  conducts  the  orchestra  of  the 
Teatro  Colon;  his  brother  Jose  Maria  Castro,  conductor  of  the  Asociacion 
del  Profesorado  Orquestal;  and  Jose  Francisco  Berrini,  who  directs  the 
Asociacion  Sinfonica  in 'Roszrio. 

The  cause  of  modern  music  in  Argentina  is  promoted  by  the  Grufo 
Renovacion^  established  on  October  22,  1929.  The  declared  aims  of  the 


ARGENTINA 


8i 


group  are  discuss  compositions  of  its  members  j  to  perform  and  to 
publish  their  best  works  5  to  arrange  performances  of  native  music  abroad  j 
and  to  discuss  publicly  the  general  subject  of  music,  with  the  intention  of 
contributing  to  the  progress  of  musical  culture.”  The  original  members 
of  the  Grufo  Renovacion  were  the  Castro  brothers,  Gilardo  Gilardi, 
Juan  Carlos  Paz,  and  Jacobo  Ficher,  a  naturalized  Russian  musician. 
Juan  Jose  Castro  and  Gilardi  withdrew  in  193^3  Honorio  Siccardi 
joined  the  Grufo  Renovacion  in  the  same  year.  In  1936,  Juan  Carlos  Paz 
left  the  group  and  founded  his  own  series  of  concerts,  Conciertos  de  la 
Nueva  Muska^  devoted  to  the  cause  of  ultra-modern  music. 

Both  the  Grufo  Renovacion  and  the  Conciertos  de  la  Nueva  Musica 
present  their  concerts  in  the  large  hall  of  the  Teatro  del  Pueblo  in  Buenos 
Aires.  The  Teatro  del  Pueblo  is  managed  by  a  cooperative  theatrical  com¬ 
pany,  which  specializes  in  modern  drama,  and  the  concerts  are  arranged 
at  the  smallest  cost,  so  that  the  price  of  admission  is  kept  down  to  one-half 
peso.  The  Grufo  Renovacion  gives  as  many  as  fifteen  concerts  during 
each  season,  which  lasts  through  the  Argentine  winter  from  March  to 
November. 

In  the  field  of  musical  science,  Argentina  is  well  ahead  of  its  sister 
republics.  As  a  part  of  the  Argentine  Museum  of  Natural  Sciences,  there 
is  in  Buenos  Aires  a  Section  of  Indigenous  Musicology,  headed  by  Carlos 
Vega,  who  has  painstakingly  collected  thousands  of  folk  melodies  of 
Argentina  and  adjacent  countries  and  has  classified  his  findings  in  a 
formidable  catalogue  of  motives  and  rhythms.  He  is  also  the  editor  of  a 
monumental  series  Fraseologia  Musical^  which  proposes  to  establish  a 
basic  classification  of  rhythmo-melodic  entities. 

The  range  of  creative  composition  in  Argentina  varies  from  ultra¬ 
conservatism  and  academism  to  the  ultra-modern  tendencies.  The  Italian 
influence  is  profound  in  Argentine  opera  and  ballet,  and  most  of  the 
native  theatrical  works  produced  at  the  Colon  reflect  this  influence.  The 
folkloric  tendency,  and  the  desire  to  utilize  native  songs  as  a  basis  for 
symphonic  and  other  works  is  manifested  among  the  younger  generation. 
But  there  exists  also  a  strong  anti-folkloric  tendency.  The  Grufo  Reno¬ 
vacion  is  the  bulwark  of  this  opposition  to  integral  folklorism.  The  group 
behind  the  Conciertos  de  la  Nueva  Musicay  led  by  Juan  Carlos  Paz,  com¬ 
poser  of  atonal  music,  goes  even  farther  towards  the  ideal  of  absolute 
music,  without  nationalistic  connotations,  and  constitutes  the  extreme 
musical  left  wing  in  Argentina. 


82 


MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 


MUSICIANS  OF  ARGENTINA 

Julian  Aguirre  (1868-1924),  the  romantic  composer,  was  taken  to 
Madrid  when  four  years  old,  in  1872J  he  studied  music  at  the  Madrid 
Conservatory.  He  returned  to  Buenos  Aires  in  1889,  and  dedicated  him¬ 
self  to  teaching  and  composing.  While  not  a  master  of  technique,  Aguirre 
possessed  a  genuine  feeling  for  native  melos  and  folklore.  His  symphonic 
suite  De  Mi  Pais  was  performed  in  Buenos  Aires  on  September  9,  1910. 
Ansermet  has  orchestrated  Aguirre’s  dances,  Huella  and  Gato,  and  he 
conducted  them  in  Buenos  Aires  on  April  6, 1930-  The  score  was  published 
by  Ricordi,  who  has  also  published  Aguirre’s  piano  pieces,  Aires  Criollos, 
Aires  Nacionales,  and  several  songs.  The  scores  of  Aguirre’s  orchestral 
dances  (in  both  the  Ansermet  arrangement  and  the  original)  and  De  Mi 
Pais  are  in  the  Fleisher  Collection  in  Philadelphia. 

Jose  Andre  (1881-1944)  was  a  composer  of  songs  and  piano  pieces, 
occasionally  flavored  with  native  rhythms.  He  was  active  primarily  as  a 
pedagogue  and  wrote  a  number  of  compositions  for  schools. 

Isabel  Aretz-Thiele,  the  composer  and  specialist  in  folklore,  was 
born  in  Buenos  Aires  in  1909.  Her  orchestral  suite  Punems  (songs  of 
the  Puna,  the  Andean  plateau)  is  characterized  by  Carlos  Vega  as  ‘‘the 
finest  specimen  of  the  Inca  style,  pentatonic  in  melody  and  harmony.” 
The  piano  reduction  of  Punenas  and  three  songs  in  native  manner,  Cueca, 
Vidala,  and  Triunfo,  are  published  by  Ricordi. 

Julian  Bautista  (1901 - )  is  a  Spanish  composer  resident  in  Buenos 

Aires.  He  studied  at  the  Madrid  Conservatory,  began  to  compose  at  an 
early  age,  and  rapidly  gained  recognition  as  one  of  the  most  brilliant 
musicians  of  new  Spain.  After  the  fall  of  the  Spanish  Republic,  he  crossed 
the  borcler,  on  foot,  to  France.  He  emigrated  to  Argentina  in  May,  1940, 
and  settled  in  Buenos  Aires.  Bautista  has  written  a  ballet,  Juerga  ( 1929)  j 
a  one-act  opera.  Interior-,  Three  Jafanese  Preludes  for  orchestra 5  Suitl 
allAnttm^  for  string  orchestraj  two  string  quartets;  piano  music;  and 
songs.  His  style  of  writing  is  terse  and  compact,  with  diatonic  harmonies 
enhanced  by  added  tones.  His  instrumentation  stresses  colorism  in  a 
neoimpressionist  manner.  The  score  of  the  Suite  alP Arnica,  published  in 
B^celona  in  a  limited  edition  in  1938,  is  in  the  Fleisher  Collection  in 
Philadelphia.  Also  published  is  his  album  of  piano  pieces.  Colores. 

Berutti  (1862-1938)  was  born  and  died  in  San  Juan.  He 
studied  music  with  his.  father.  In  1883  he  went  to  Germany,  where  he 


83 


ARGENTINA 

took  courses  at  the  Leipzig  Conservatory,  and  later  traveled  in  France 
and  Italy.  While  in  Europe  he  wrote  two  orchestral  works  on  native 
themes-  an  overture,  Los  Andes,  and  a  Sinfonk  ArgenUm.  His  operas, 
Yendetta,  Evangelma,  Tarass  Bulba,  Pamfa,  Yufanki,  Khnsse,  Hornda 
Nox  and  Los  Heroes,  follow  the  Italian  operatic  style.  Pam'pa,  Hornda 
Hoxiivom.  the  time  of  the  dictatorship  of  President  Rosas  m  Argentina), 
and  Los  Heroes  were  inspired  by  events  of  Argentine  history.  Los  Heroes 
was  performed  at  the  Teatro  Colon  on  August  23,  1 9 1 9- 

Pablo  Berutti  (1866-1916),  a  brother  of  Arturo  Berutti,  studied 
at  the  Leipzig  Conservatory,  and  upon  returning  to  Argentina  founded 
a  music  school  in  Buenos  Aires.  He  wrote  an  opera  on  a  South  American 
subject,  Cochabamba,  which  remains  unperformed. 

Felipe  Boero  ( 1884 - )  studied  with  Pablo  Berutti,  and  later  (1912- 

1914)  at  the  Paris  Conservatory.  Upon  his  return  to  Argentina,  he  de¬ 
voted  his  energies  to  teaching  and  operatic  compositions.  Of  his  operas, 
the  following  were  performed  at  the  Teatro  Colon:  Tucuman  (June  29, 
1Q18) ;  Ariana  y  Dionisios  (August  5,  1920) ;  Raquela  (June  25,  1923)  i 
Las  Bacantes  (September  19,  1925);  El  Uatrero  (July  12,  1929)  ;  and 
Sirifo  (June  8,  1937)-  The  vocal  score  of  El  Matrero  has  been  published 
bv  Ricordi,  as  well  as  numerous  songs  and  piano  pieces.  Boero  s  music, 
even  that  of  native  inspiration,  is  Italianate  and  undistinguished  in  style. 

Carlos  Lopez  Buchardo  (1881 - )  studied  in  Buenos  Aires  and 

later  went  to  Paris,  where  he  took  lessons  with  Albert  Roussel.  Upon 
his  return  to  Argentina,  he  was  appointed  director  of  the  National  Con¬ 
servatory  of  Music  in  Buenos  Aires.  In  his  compositions,  Buchardo  culti¬ 
vates  native  themes.  His  Escenas  Argentines  for  orchestra,  consisting  of 
four  movements  characteristic  of  the  Argentine 

Fiesta,  El  Arroyo,  and  Baile  y  Gauchos-&rst  performed  in  Buen^  A  es 
on  August  12,  1922,  by  Weingartner,  is  one  of  the  most  brilliant  native 
worksi  its  genL  His  opera,  El  Sueho  de  Alma,  was  produced  at  the 
Com  on  August  4.  .9-4.  The  score  of 7’ 
albums  of  songs,  and  piano  pieces  have  been  published  by  Ricordi. 

Manuel  Gomez  Carrix-lo  (1883—)  is  a 
beginning  of  his  musical  career,  was  interested  in  native  folklore.  lu  hi^ 
oS  words,  he  “strove  to  serve  the  cause  of  Argentine  rnusic,  by  accumu¬ 
lating  folkloric  material,  and  integrating  it  in  established  musical  forms. 
Of  his  orchestral  scores,  Rafsodia  Santagueha,  reflecting  the  spirit  of 


84  MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

Liszt’s  rhapsodies,  is  based  on  the  motives  of  Carrillo’s  native  province 
of  Santiago.  It  was  first  performed  in  Paris  on  February  15,  1924.  The 
orchestral  score  of  Rafsodia  Santaguena  is  in  the  Fleisher  Collection  in 
Philadelphia,  and  a  piano  reduction  is  published  by  Ricordi.  Carrillo’s 
Fiesta  Cnolla^  for  large  orchestra,  was  performed  by  the  AsociaciSn 
Sinfonica  in  Rosario,  on  July  8,  The  piano  score  is  published  by 
Ricordi.  Carrillo’s  daughter,  Maria  Ines  Gomez  Carrillo,  born  in  Buenos 
Aires  on  April  2,  1919,  is  a  talented  pianist.  She  has  also  published  some 
piano  pieces  and  songs. 

Enrique  M.  Casella  (1891 - )  is  an  Argentine  composer  who  was 

born  in  Montevideo,  Uruguay.  In  1907  he  went  to  Europe,  where  he 
studied  violin  and  composition.  He  returned  to  South  America  in  1914, 
and  settled  in  Tucuman,  where  he  founded  a  Musical  Institute.  Casella 
has  written  several  operas  on  native  subjects,  of  which  Corimayo  was  pro¬ 
duced  at  the  Teatro  Colon  on  September  20,  1926.  In  his  opera  Chasca, 
performed  in  Tucuman  on  August  28,  1939,  he  introduced  a  theatrical 
innovation  by  placing  the  orchestra,  divided  into  three  sections,  behind 
the  scenery.  Among  Casella’s  symphonic  works  are  Suite  Incaica,  per¬ 
formed  in  Tucuman  on  August  6,  1925?  and  Nahuel-Huafi,  conducted 
by  the  composer  in  Buenos  Aires  on  April  14,  1929.  He  has  also  written 
two  string  quartets,  a  Violin  Sonata,  piano  pieces,  and  songs.  The  piano 
score  of  Suite  I ncaka,  N ortenas  (five  pieces  in  a  style  of  northern  Argen¬ 
tine  folk  music)  for  piano,  and  songs  have  been  published  by  Ricordi. 

Jose  Maria  Castro  (1892 - ),  composer  and  conductor,  is  the 

brother  of  Juan  Jose  and  Washington  Castro.  He  studied  composition 
and  violoncello.  In  1931  he  was  engaged  as  conductor  of  the  AsociaciSn 
del  Profesorado  Orquestal  in  Buenos  Aires.  In  1933  he  became  conductor 
of  the  Municipal  Band  of  Buenos  Aires.  He  is  a  founding  member  of  the 
Grufo  RenovaciSn.  As  composer,  Jose  Maria  Castro  cultivates  a  style 
close  to  neoclassicism.  His  most  effective  orchestral  work  is  a  Concerto 
Grosso,  first  performed  by  the  composer  in  Buenos  Aires  on  June  ii, 
1933,  in  which  he  clothes  the  classical  form  in  modern  harmonies.  How¬ 
ever,  hss  Overture  for  a  Comic  Of  era,  performed  by  the  composer  in 
_uenos  Aires  on  November  9,  1936,  is  entirely  classical  in  treatment.  His 
t^ncerto  for  Piano  and  Orchestra,  performed  in  Buenos  Aires  on  Novem¬ 
ber  17,  1941,  IS  light  and  transparent.  His  Sonata  de  Primavera  (1941) 
for  piano  reflects  romantic  concepts.  In  the  ballet  Georgia,  frodxsced  at  the 
Peatro  Colon  on  June  2, 1939,  under  the  composer’s  direction,  Castro  em- 


ARGENTINA  gj 

ploys  a  modernistic  idiom,  abounding  in  strident,  dissonant  harmonies. 
The  score  and  parts  of  the  Concerto  Grosso,  and  of  an  early  Piano  Sonata, 
are  published  by  the  Grufo  Renovacion,  and  several  of  Castro’s  songs  are 
published  by  Ricordi.  The  orchestral  scores  of  Georgia,  the  Piano  Con¬ 
certo,  the  Overture,  and  the  Concerto  Grosso  are  in  the  Fleisher  Collec¬ 
tion  in  Philadelphia.  His  four  piano  pieces  are  included  in  the  album 
Ratiri-A.mericcifi  A,rt  I\d.usic  for  the  Riurio  (Schirmer,  1942). 

Juan  Jose  Castro  ( 1895 - ),  best  known  as  a  composer,  is  the  brother 

of  Jose  Marfa  and  Washington  Castro.  He  studied  piano  and  violin,  and 
also  composition.  In  1914  he  received  a  government  stipend  to  go  to 
Europe  for  further  study.  He  spent  five  years  in  Paris,  where  he  took 
lessons  with  Vincent  d’Indy.  Upon  his  return  to  Buenos  Aires,  he  founded 
a  quintet,  in  which  he  played  the  first  violin  and  his  brother  Jose  Marfa 
played  the  cello.  In  1928,  he  organized  a  chamber  orchestra,  Renasci- 
miento,  and  in  1930  was  engaged  as  a  conductor  at  the  Teatro  Colon. 
Since  then,  he  has  conducted  orchestras  in  the  principal  Latin  American 
republics.  In  1942  he  made  a  tour  of  the  United  States.  In  October, 
i943j  Castro  was  temporarily  removed  from  his  post  as  conductor  of  the 
Teatro  Colon  by  the  reactionary  clique  in  the  government,  as  a' result 
of  his  signing  a  manifesto  urging  the  realignment  of  Argentina,  with  the 
cause  of  democracy. 

As  composer,  Juan  Jose  Castro  is  both  versatile  and  prolific.  He  has 
written  music  in  all  genres,  except  opera.  The  style  of  his  early  composi¬ 
tions  is  marked  by  a  certain  rhapsodism,  which  he  later  abandoned  in 
favor  of  a  more  terse  and  compact  manner  of  writing.  Parallel  with  this 
transition,  Castro  adopted  a  pronounced  polyphonic  idiom,  as  contrasted 
with  the  surcharged  harmonic  style  of  his  first  period.  His  earliest  work 
was  a  Violin  Sonata  (1914)5  then  followed  a  Violoncello  Sonata  (1916)  5 
a  Piano  Sonata  (1917)5  and  a  Trio  for  violin,  clarinet,  and  piano 
(1919).  His  first  work  for  orchestra  was  a  symphonic  poem  entitled  Dans 
le  Jardin  des  Morts,  an  effective  piece  of  program  music,  in  the  French 
style.  It  was  performed  for  the  first  time  by  the  Asociacion  del  Pro- 
fesorado  Orquestal  in  Buenos  Aires  on  October  5,  1924.  Another  sym¬ 
phonic  poem,  A  Una  Madre,  fptriovmtd  in  Buenos  Aires  by  the  Colon 
Orchestra,  on  Ortober  27,  1925,  is  marked  by  a  considerable  inspissation 
of  the  harmonic  idiom,  with  some  polytonal  effects.  The  third  symphonic 
poem,  Chellah,  performed  hy  Xlxt  Asociacion  del  Profesorado  Or¬ 
questal  in  Buenos  Aires  on  September  10,  1927,  shows  the  influence  of 
Russian  colorlsm.  The  second  cycle  of  Castro’s  creative  evolution  com- 


86 


MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

prises  compositions  in  classically  defined  forms:  Suite  Breve,  first  per¬ 
formed  by  Castro’s  chamber  orchestra  on  May  ir,  19295  Suite  Inf  until 
(Children’s  Suite),  performed  by  Castro  and  the  AsociaciSn  del  Pro- 
fesorado  Orquestal  in  Buenos  Aires  on  August  24,  19293  Three  Sym- 
fhonic  Pieces,  performed  on  July  26,  1930,  by  the  AsociaciSn  del  Pro- 
fesorado  Orquestal,  Ansermet  conducting,  and  also  presented  at  the 
London  Festival  of  Contemporary  Music  in  1931 5  and  Sinfonta,  per¬ 
formed  by  the  Colon  Orchestra,  under  the  direction  of  Ansermet,  on 
July  22, 1 93 1 .  The  harmonic  and  melodic  texture  In  these  works  is  marked 
by  considerable  chromaticism,  often  approaching  atonality,  particularly 
in  the  Sinfonia.  In  his  orchestral  works  written  after  1931,  Castro  shows 
an  interest  in  cultivating  native  themes.  To  the  category  of  native-inspired 
works  belong  two  symphonies:  Sinfonia  Argentina  (conducted  by  Castro 
with  the  Colon  Orchestra  on  November  29,  1936),  and  Sinfonia  de  los 
Camfos  (performed  by  the  Colon  Orchestra,  Kleiber  conducting,  on  Octo¬ 
ber  29,  1939).  The  latter  is  in  six  atmospheric  movements,  with  solo  pas¬ 
sages  for  the  oboe,  English  horn,  French  horn,  and  trumpet.  The  Sinfo¬ 
nia  BMica,  a  lengthy  work,  first  conducted  by  the  composer  at  the 
Teatro  ColSn  on  November  15,  1932,  is  an  excursion  into  the  domain 
of  religious  music.  Among  Castro’s  theatrical  works  the  most  significant 
IS  the  ballet  Mekhano,  composed  in  1934,  and  produced  under  the  direc¬ 
tion  of  the  composer  at  the  Teatro  ColSn  on  July  17,  1937.  This,  as  the 
title  indicates,  is  the  glorification  of  the  mechanical  man,  and  the  music 
follows  the  model  established  in  similar  works  by  European  composers. 
There  is  a  relentless  rhythmic  drive,  virtually  in  unaltered  duple  meter, 
with  an  overabundance  of  special  instrumental  effects.  The  choreography 
of  the  ballet  features  a  dance  of  the  hammer,  the  injection  of  the  vital  fluid 
into  the  veins  of  the  mechanical  men  (to  the  accompaniment  of  whole-tone 
progressions),  and  a  dance  of  seduction. 

In  nontheatrical  music,  Castro  continues  to  cultivate  a  neoclassical, 
modernistically  economical  style,  of  which  his  piano  Toccata  (1940)  and 
Concerto  for  Piano  and  Orchestra  (1941)  are  the  most  successful  ex¬ 
amples.  Castro  has  written  little  for  the  voice.  Among  his  recent  vocal 
compositions  are  six  songs  to  the  text  of  Garda  Lorca,  and  Tres  Cantos 
Negros.  The  orchestral  score  of  Sinfonia  Argentina  is  published  by  Ri- 
cordi5  nine  orchestral  works  by  Castro  are  in  the  Fleisher  Collection  in 
Philadelphia.  Castro’s  piano  piece,  Danza  Guerrera,  is  induded  in  the 
supplement  to  Volume  I  of  the  Boletin  Latino-Americano  de  Musica, 
and  two  short  pieces  for  piano  are  published  by  C.  Fischer. 


ARGENTINA 


8r 

Sergio  de  Castro  (1922 - )  is  one  of  the  youngest  of  Argentina’s 

composers.  At  the  age  of  ten,  he  was  taken  to  Montevideo,  where  he 
studied  with  Guido  Santorsola.  He  returned  to  Buenos  Aires  in  1942.  He 
has  written  some  piano  music  and  songs,  in  an  unassumingly  romantic 
vein.  Two  of  his  songs  are  published  by  the  Editorial  Cooferativa  in 
Montevideo. 

Washington  Castro  ( 1909 - )  is  the  youngest  of  the  Castro  brothers. 

He  studied  violoncello  with  his  brother  Jose  Marla,  and  composition  with 
Siccardi.  Later  he  went  to  Paris,  where  he  continued  his  musical  educa¬ 
tion.  Upon  his  return  to  Argentina,  he  taught  violoncello  at  the  Municipal 
Conservatory  of  Buenos  Aires.  He  has  written  a  Piano  Sonata,  a  piano 
Suite,  and  cello  pieces.  The  score  of  his  Festive  Overture  for  chamber 
orchestra  Is  in  the  Flelsher  Collection  in  Philadelphia. 

Pedro  Valenti  Costa  (1905 - )  studied  with  Gilardi,  and  has  written 

mostly  choral  music,  some  of  which  reflects  native  melos  and  rhythms. 

Ernesto  Drangosch,  the  composer,  was  born  In  Buenos  Aires  in  1882 
and  died  there  in  1925.  He  studied  piano  and  composition  with  Alberto 
Williams  and  Julian  Aguirre  in  Buenos  Aires,  and  later  with  Bruch  and 
Humperdinck  in  Berlin.  He  returned  to  Buenos  Aires  in  1905,  and  dedi¬ 
cated  himself  to  composition  and  to  teaching.  He  composed  a  suite  for 
string  orchestra,  Suenos  de  un  Baile  (1906),  a  Concerto  for  Piano  and 
Orchestra  (1912),  and  an  orchestral  overture  of  native  inspiration,  Ober- 
tura  Criolla,  which  latter  was  performed  in  Buenos  Aires  by  Felix  Weln- 
gartner  on  September  24,  1920.  The  score  and  parts  of  the  Obertura 
Criolla  were  published  in  1939  by  the  National  Culture  Committee  in 
Buenos  Aires.  Also  published  are  Drangosch’s  Violin  Sonata,  several 
groups  of  songs,  and  a  number  of  piano  compositions,  among  them  a 
Fantasia  Quasi  Sonata,  seven  characteristic  pieces,  six  concert  Etudes,  and 
dances  in  the  native  manner.  Most  of  these  editions  are,  however,  out  of 
print.  The  scores  of  Drangosch’s  Piano  Concerto,  symphonic  suite,  and 
the  Obertura  Criolla  are  in  the  Fleisher  Collection  in  Philadelphia. 

Emilio  Dublanc  (1911^ - )  studied  piano  and  composition  at  the 

National  Conservatory  in  Buenos  Aires.  After  graduation  he  settled  in 
Mendoza,  where  he  teaches  piano.  He  has  written  a  piano  Suite,  a  Violin 
Sonata,  songs,  and  a  short  cantata  on  a  Christmas  subject. 

Raul  Espoile  (1888 - )  studied  voice,  and  on  November  21,  1922, 

gave  a  recital  of  his  own  songs  in  Buenos  Aires.  In  March,  1925,  he  was 


88  MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

appointed  inspector  of  music  in  the  public  schools  of  Argentina.  Espoile 
has  written  two  operas  in  an  Italian  manner,  but  with  native  subjects. 
FrenoSy  a  symbolic  opera  in  four  acts  portraying  an  Argentine  Faust,  in 
which  one  scene  is  set  in  a  biological  laboratory,  was  produced  at  the 
Teatro  Colon  on  June  19,  1928.  His  second  opera.  La  Ciudad  Roja,  was 
produced  on  July  17,  1936.  He  also  wrote  a  symphonic  suite,  En  la  Paz 
de  los  CamfoSy  which  was  presented  by  the  Asociacion  del  Profesorado 
Orquestal  in  Buenos  Aires  on  August  27,  1927,  and  a  symphonic  poem, 
Kuntur  (1941).  Ricordi  has  published  a  considerable  number  of  Espoile’s 
songs,  many  vocal  coihpositions  for  school  use,  and  two  arias  from  La 
Ciudad  Roja.  The  score  of  the  orchestral  suite  from  Frenos  is  in  the 
Fleisher  Collection. 

Arnaldo  d’Esposito  (1897-1945)  studied  music  with  Gaito,  Dran- 
gosch,  and  Palma.  In  1928  he  was  appointed  assistant  conductor  of  the 
Teatro  Colon  in  Buenos  Aires.  He  composed  two  ballets,  in  an  Italianate 
style,  seasoned  with  some  modernistic  harmonies,  which  have  been  per¬ 
formed  at  the  Teatro  Colon:  Rajisodia  del  Tango  (February  2,  1934) 
and  Cuento  de  Abril  (June  21,  1940).  His  one-act  opera,  Lin-Calel,  was 
produced  at  the  Teatro  Colon  on  August  12,  1941.  His  Concerto  for 
Piano  and  Orchestra  was  performed  in  Buenos  Aires  on  May  13,  1943. 

Juan  A.  Garcia  Estrada  (1895- — -)  studied  jurisprudence  in  Buenos 
Aires,  and  composition  in  Paris,  where  he  took  lessons  with  Jacques  Ibert. 
Upon  his  return  to  Argentina,  he  was  appointed  a  justice  of  the  peace, 
and  virtually  abandoned  his  musical  career.  Estrada  has  written  a  Suite 
of  symphonic  dances,  three  movements  of  which  were  performed  in  Paris 
on  February  28,  1929-  His  Elegy  and  Prelude  for  orchestra  were  per¬ 
formed  by  the  Asociacion  del  Profesorado  Musical  in  Buenos  Aires  on 
July  2,  1927.  The  scores  of  three  of  his  symphonic  numbers  are  in  the 
Fleisher  Collection  in  Philadelphia.  Estrada  has  also  written  piano  pieces 

and  songs,  in  a  conventional  harmonic  style. 

^  Jacobo  Ficher  (1896—),  a  prolific  composer,  is  a  naturalized 
Argentmej  he  was  born  in  Odessa,  Russia.  He  studied  violin  and  com¬ 
position  at  the  Leningrad  Conservatory,  and  graduated  in  1917.  In  1923 
he  emigrated  to  Argentina,  and  settled  in  Buenos  Aires.  He  played  violin 
in  theater  orchestras  in  Argentina,  and  at  the  same  time  began  to  compose. 
In  1928  he  submitted  the  score  of  his  symphonic  work  Heroic  Poem  to 
a  contest  of  the  Leningrad  Philharmonic  Orchestra,  and  it  received  the 
first  prize.  In  1937  he  received  a  Coolidge  prize  of  $500  for  his  second 


Guatemala  Department  of  Education 
Marimba  player  of  Guatemala  (a  wooden  toy) 


K 


ARGENTINA 


89 


String  Quartet.  His  Third  Symphony  was  awarded  a  prize  of  the  National 
Culture  Committee  in  Buenos  Aires  in  1941.  Ficher  is  a  founding  mem¬ 
ber  of  the  Gru-po  Renovaci6n,'2.vA  he  is  also  active  as  an  orchestral  con¬ 
ductor.  His  early  music  is  inspired  by  Hebrew  melos,  while  his  later 
compositions  reflect  a  Russian  influence.  Apart  from  three  Argentine 
dances  for  piano  composed  in  1943,  Ficher  has  made  no  attempts  to  wnte 

in  a  native  South  American  vein.  ,  r  t.  k 

Ficher  has  written  three  symphonies.  The  first,  scored  for  chamber 
orchestra,  was  first  performed  by  the  Asodacion  del  Profesorado  Or- 
questd,  in  Buenos  Aires,  on  December  8,  19321  ™der  the  composers 
direction.  The  Second  Symphony  was  written  in  1933,  under  the  impact 
of  the  Nazi  campaign  against  the  Jews.  It  is  emotional  and 
in  essence,  with  Hebraic  thematic  undertones.  It  was  conduced  by  the 
composer  in  Buenos  Aires  on  October  23,  1939-  The  Third  Symphony, 
in  iouT  classical  movements,  comes  close  to  the  symphonic  tradrtion  of 
Mahler  and  the  Russians.  The  following  symphonic  compositions  by 
Ficher  have  been  performed  in  Buenos  Aires:  Two  Poems  from  Tagore 
(December  23,  1928) ;  Sulamith  (July  20, 1929)  OuvermrePatheUque 
fMav  17,  1930);  and  Three  Symphonic  Pieces  after  the  Talmud  (Sep- 
Lmta  Kchcr  has  also  written  a  T«H„  Concerto  (.,4a), 

performed  under  the  composer’s  direction  in  Buenos  Aires  on  July 
17  1944.  He  is  the  author  of  a  ballet,  Los  Invitados  (i933)-  Ti^^er 
has  written  a  great  deal  of  chamber  music,  which  indudes  two  string 
Quartets  a  Violin  Sonata,  a  Sonatina  for  Flute  and  Piano,  and  a  Son  - 
Tfor ’clarinet  and  Piano.  Sonau  for  Viola,  f 
for  Oboe  and  Piano  (performed  on  August  6,  1942,  ^t jhe  Fes  _ 
of  the  International  Society  for  Contemporary  Music,  held  in  Cali¬ 
fornia)  ;  and  Sonatina  for  Trumpet,  Saxophone,  and 
New  Music).  Ficher’s  Three  Preludes  ior  piano  are  published  by  the 

GZpZeRenovaci6n,^nd^song,Palal.rasaMama,^spn^^^^ 

Thk  song  is  included  in  the  Columbia  album  of  South  American  Chamber 
Music  Ficher’s  Valse  and  Humoresque  for  piano  are  published  by  Carl 
HsXr,  -d  k  Fades  by  Axelrod,  “sher  ^olle^i^ 

Philaddphia  has  the  scores  of  Ficher’s  three  symphonies,  ^e  Violin  Con¬ 
certo  an  early  symphonic  suite,  the  symphonic  poem  Sulamith,  Two 
P^rom  r.go-  for  chamber  orchestra.  Three  Symphonic  Pieces 

after  the  Talmud,  and  Los  Invitados. 

ConstantmoGAiTO  (1878 - ) 

and  was  sent  to  Naples  to  study.  He  traveled  in  Europe,  and  190 


90  MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

returned  to  Buenos  AireSj  where  he  founded  a  Conservatory  of  Music 
bearing  his  name.  Since  1903  he  has  taught  music  h  the  public  schools 
of  Argentina.  As  a  composer,  Gaito^s  predilection  is  for  the  opera  and 
ballet.  He  writes  in  a  style  patterned  after  the  Italian  school  of  modern 
theater  music,  and  employing  a  large  orchestra,  with  emphasis  on  coloristic 
effects.  Most  of  Gaito’s  music  is  based  on  Argentine  folklore,  and  his 
stylizations  of  Argentine  dance  rhythms  are  effectively  contrived.  The 
following  ballets  and  operas  by  Gaito  were  produced  at  tne  Teatro  Colon: 
Petronio  (September  2,  i()i())yFlor  deNteve  (August  3, 1922),  Ollantay 
(July  23,  1926),  La  Flor  de  IrufS  (July  17,  i92'9)?  Lazaro^  (November 
I,  1929),  and  Sangre  de  las  Quit  arras  (August  17,  I932')«  His  symphonic 
poem,  El  Ombuy  was  performed  at  the  Teatro  Colon  on  October  295 192-55 
and  Danzas  F antasticas  for  orchestra  was  performed  on  March  30>  i93^* 
Gaito  is  also  the  author  of  an  oratorio,  San  Francisco  Solano y  produced 
at  the  Teatro  Colon  on  November  135  I940‘  H  this  oratorio,  based  on 
the  subject  of  Christian  proselytism  in  Argentina,  Gaito  combines  Gre¬ 
gorian  modal  melodies  with  native  folklore.  The  harmonic  idiom  is  com¬ 
plex,  including  polytonal  usages.  Ricordi  has  published  a  number  of 
Gaito’s  works,  among  them  the  Second  String  Quartet,  six  Danzas  Ameri- 
canas  for  piano,  a  piano  version  of  Danzas  F antasticas ^  and  excerpts  from 
the  operas  Ollantay  and  Sangre  de  las  Guitarras.  The  orchestral  score  of 
El  Ombu  is  in  the  Fleisher  Collection  in  Philadelphia. 

Luis  Gianneo  (1897 - )  studied  music  with  Gaito  and  Drangosch. 

In  1923  he  settled  in  Tucuman,  where  he  teaches  and  conducts  concerts 
of  the  Asociacion  Sinjontca,  From  1932-  I944  1^^  was  a  member  of  the 

Grufo  Renovacion.  As  a  composer,  Gianneo  cultivates  native  folklore  3  his 
harmonic  treatment  is  basically  tonal,  with  little  elaboration.  He  has 
written  a  symphonic  poem  T uray~T ur ay  performed  by  the  Asoci- 

acion  del  Profesorado  Orquestal  in  Buenos  Aires  on  September  21,  1929)5 
El  Tar  CO  en  Flor  (conducted  by  the  composer  with  the  Asociacion  del 
Profesorado  Orquestal  on  September  6,  193^)5  a  violin  concerto 
named  Concierto  Aymardy  based  on  themes  of  the  Aymara  Indians.  In 
1942  this  concerto  was  awarded  second  prize  at  the  contest  for  the  best 
violin  concerto  by  a  Latin  American  composer,  organized  under  the 
auspices  of  the  Fleisher  Collection  in  Philadelphia.  The  concerto  was  per¬ 
formed  in  Buenos  Aires  on  April  13,  1944.  Gianneo’s  Sinfoniettay  written 
in  homage  to  Haydn,  was  performed  in  Buenos  Aires  on  September  20, 
1943.  Gianneo  has  written  a  great  many  songs,  piano  pieces,  and  some 
chamber  music.  In  addition,  he  has  written  music  for  children,  of  which 


SX  \J  n,  1  INA 


91 

Musica  far a  Ninos ^  an  album  of  ten  effectively  stylized  airs  and  dances  in 
native  mannetj  for  piano,  has  been  published.  Also  published  are  his 
Pamfeana  y  Co f  las  for  piano,  conceived  in  the  Gaucho  style  of  Argentine 
melodies,  and  some  teaching  manuals.  The  scores  of  Gianneo’s  Ohertura 
fara  una  Comedia  Infantil  and  Concierto  Aymara  are  included  in  the 
Fleisher  Collection. 

Jose  Gil,  Spanish-born  ( 1886),  went  to  Argentina  as  a  child.  He  studied 
with  Alberto  Williams,  and  after  graduation  dedicated  himself  to  composi¬ 
tion  and  teaching.  He  is  professor  of  harmony  and  counterpoint  at  the 
National  Conservatory  in  Buenos  Aires.  Gil  has  written  some  chamber 
music,  couched  in  a  traditionally  academic  style.  In  the  native  manner,  he 
has  composed  Danzas  Argentinas  for  piano  and  string  quartet. 

Gilardo  Gilardi  (1889 - )  studied  in  Buenos  Aires  with  Pablo 

Berutti,  and  began  to  compose  at  an  early  age.  His  predilection  lies  in 
vocal  and  theater  music.  His  opera  Ilse^  produced  at  the  Teatro  Colon 
on  July  13,  1923,  was  not  retained  in  the  repertoire.  More  successful  was 
his  second  opera,  La  Leyenda  de  UrutaUy  on  the  native  legend  from  the 
early  years  of  the  conquest,  in  which  he  follows  the  Wagnerian  principle 
of  leitmotivs.  It  was  produced  at  the  Teatro  Colon  on  October  25,  1934, 
with  considerable  acclaim.  For  the  orchestra,  Gilardi  has  written  a  suite 
of  Argentine  airs  in  four  movements,  of  which  the  Preludio  and  Chacarera 
were  performed  by  the  Asociacion  del  Profesorado  Orquestal  in  Buenos 
Aires  on  July  12,  1930?  Firmeza  and  Noviando  by  the  same  organiza¬ 
tion  on  May  10, 1931.  His  orchestral  score,  Evocacion  Qukhuay  originally 
written  for  a  quartet  of  lutes,  was  performed  by  the  radio  orchestra  in 
Buenos  Aires  on  July  9,  1941.  Gilardi  was  a  founding  member  of  the 
Grufo  Renovaciony  in  1929,  but  withdrew  from  that  organization  in 
1932.  His  harmonic  idiom  has  little  that  is  original  or  modern,  and  the 
merit  of  his  music  lies  in  the  capable  stylization  of  native  melodies  and 
rhythms.  His  violin  sonata,  titled  Sonata  Popular  Argentinay  and  first 
performed  in  Buenos  Aires  on  April  i,  1939,  exemplifies  his  devotion  to 
folklore.  Only  a  few  songs  and  piano  pieces  by  Gilardi  are  published.  The 
orchestral  scores  of  Evocacion  Quichua  and  Noviando  are  in  the  Fleisher 
Collection  in  Philadelphia. 

Alberto  Ginastera  ( 1916 - ),  an  outstanding  composer  of  the  young 

generation  in  Argentina,  studied  music  with  Athos  Palma  at  the  Na¬ 
tional  Conservatory  in  Buenos  Aires,  graduating  with  honors  in  1938. 
Ginastera  began  to  compose  at  an  early  age,  adopting  a  style  economical 


92 


MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 


in  means  but  highly  concentrated  in  effect.  In  his  music,  Ginastera  cu 
tivates  folklore,  not  as  coloristic  material,  but  as  a  thematic  backgroun 
for  composition  in  established  forms.  At  the  age  of  twenty,  he  wrote 
ballet,  Pammbty  based  on  an  Indian  legend.  A  suite  from  this  ballet  ws 
performed  on  November  27,  1937?  by  the  Colon  Orchestra,  under  th 
direction  of  Juan  Jose  Castro,  and  the  ballet  in  its  entirety  was  produce 
at  the  Teatro  Colon  on  July  12,  1940.  Ginastera’s  Concierto  Argentin 
for  piano  and  orchestra  was  performed  on  July  18,  1941,  by  the  SODR] 
Orchestra  in  Montevideo.  His  Sinfoma  Portena  {Portena  is  the  adjecti^; 
of  the  port  of  Buenos  Aires)  was  performed  by  the  Colon  Orchestra,  0 
May  12,  1942.  Ginastera  has  also  written  a  ballet,  Imfreslones  de  la  Pm 
for  flute  and  string  quartet,  in  three  brief  movements — Quena^  Cancioi 
and  Dan'za — ^published  by  the  Editorial  Cooferativa  Interamericana  i 
I942j  Cantos  del  Tucuman  for  soprano,  flute,  violin,  harp,  and  tw 
drums 5  a  Psalm  for  chorus  and  orchestra^  a  Sonatina  for  Harp 5  pian 
pieces  and  songs.  His  three  Piezas  Injantiles  are  included  in  the  albur 
Latin-American  Art  Music  for  the  Piano ^  published  by  Schirmer  in  194: 
Danzas  Argentinas  for  piano  is  published  by  Durand  in  Paris 5  Tres  Piezc 
for  piano,  representing  stylizations  of  native  airs,  and  a  song,  Camion  t 
Arbol  del  Olvidoy  in  tango  rhythm,  are  published  by  Ricordi.  In  194; 
Ginastera  received  a  Guggenheim  fellowship  in  the  United  States.  Th 
orchestral  scores  of  Panambi  and  the  Concierto  Argentina  are  in  th 
Fleisher  Collection  in  Philadelphia. 

Guillermo  Graetzer  (1914 - )  is  Austrian  born^  he  studied  in  Bei 

lin  with  Hindemith.  In  1939  he  went  to  Argentina,  and  settled  in  Buenc 
Aires.  Graetzer  has  written  a  symphony,  a  Rhapsody  for  Violin  and  O] 
chestra,  and  a  piece  entitled  Music  for  an  Ensemble  of  Amateurs.  H; 
lugubrious  Danza  de  la  Muerte  y  la  Nina  was  performed  in  Buenos  Aire 
on  October  18,  1943.  His  three  toccatas  for  piano  have  been  publishe 
by  the  Editorial  Cooferativa  Interamericana  in  Montevideo. 

Pascual  Grisolia  (1904- - )  studied  composition  with  Athos  Palm? 

Grisolia  has  written  a  symphonic  poem,  Ea  Tarde  ( 1 93  8  ) ,  a  Piano  Sonatj 
and  songs. 

Carlos  Guastavino,  a  composer  of  the  young  Argentine  school,  W£ 
born  in  Santa  Fe  in  1914.  He  studied  chemical  engineering  and  pian 
in  his  home  town,  and  later  went  to  Buenos  Aires  where  he  took  lessor 
in  composition.  Guastavino  cultivates  mainly  vocal  music,  and  has  wri 
ten  some  sixty  songs  of  the  type,  with  definite  folkloric  flavor.  H 


ARGENTINA 


93 


has  also  composed  a  Sinfoma  Argentina  on  native  themes,  a  ballet  on  a 
subject  from  colonial  times  in  Argentina,  and  piano  music.  Twenty  of 
his  songs,  a  Sonatina,  and  Argentine  airs  for  piano  are  published  by 
Ricordi. 

Hector  Iglesias  Villoud  (1913 - )  studied  composition  in  Buenos 

Aires,  with  Constantino  Gaito.  In  1939?  Iglesias  Villoud  received  a  fel¬ 
lowship  from  the  National  Culture  Committee  of  Argentina  for  travel 
in  South  American  countries.  As  a  composer,  Iglesias  Villoud  cultivates 
the  folkloric  element  exclusively,  in  symphonic  works  as  well  as  in  minor 
compositions.  His  ballet  Amancay^  on  an  Indian  legend,  was  produced  at 
the  Teatro  Colon  on  November  20,  1937,  and  another  ballet,  El  Malon^ 
on  June  16,  1943’  Danzas  Argentinas  for  orchestra  were  performed 
by  the  Asociacion  Sinfonica  in  Rosario,  on  November  24, 1940.  He  has  also 
written  a  one-act  opera,  Noche  Colonial;  a  symphonic  poem,  Leyenda 
del  Lago  Andino  (based  on  the  ancient  legends  of  Lake  Titicaca  in  the 
Andes) ;  and  Escenas  Indoamericanas.  The  score  of  his  ballet  Amancay  is 
in  the  Fleisher  Collection  in  Philadelphia. 

Nicolas  Lamuraglia  (1896 - )  studied  composition  with  Athos 

Palma.  He  has  written  a  symphonic  poem,  El  Jardinero  (after  Tagore), 
which  was  performed  in  Buenos  Aires  on  July  4,  19385  a  Suite  for  piano 
and  string  orchestra,  first  performed  in  Buenos  Aires  on  September  16, 
19405  piano  pieces  and  songs.  The  score  of  the  Suite  is  in  the  Fleisher 
Collection  in  Philadelphia.  Lamuraglia  writes  in  a  romantic  vein,  with¬ 
out  striving  for  modernism,  and  with  no  recourse  to  native  themes. 

Arturo  Luzzatti  (1875 - ),  Italian-born  and  naturalized  in  Argen¬ 

tina,  is  active  in  Buenos  Aires  as  a  teacher  and  composer.  As  composer, 
Luzzatti  follows  the  Italian  romantic  school.  He  has  written,  for  or¬ 
chestra,  Le  Jar  din  Voluftueux  (performed  in  Buenos  Aires  on  Septem¬ 
ber  4,  1927),  EroSy  and  Orientale,  Luzzatti’s  oratorio,  Solomony  received 
first  prize  of  the  National  Cultural  Committee  in  October,  1941.  It  was 
performed  in  Buenos  Aires  on  May  30,  1942.  He  has  also  written  two 
operas,  Afhrodita  and  Atala^  ^xid  a  ballet,  Judith;  he  conducted  the  ballet 
on  August  18, 1938, 2.ttht  T  eatro  Colonm^Mtnos  Aires.  The  manuscript 
oi  ICe  J ardin  V oluftueux  is  in  the  Fleisher  Collection  in  Philadelphia. 

Juan  Bautista  Massa  (1885 — 1938)  began  composing  at  an  early  age, 
and  wrote  prolifically,  often  using  native  themes  in  his  music.  The  style 
of  his  writing  is  determined  by  the  influence  of  Italian  opera.  He  was 


iviuoiv.,  i  i\  injc*  i^ilPUBLICS 

particularly  successful  in  choral  composition.  For  many  years  he  was  con¬ 
ductor  of  the  Argentine  Choral  Society  in  Rosario.  Among  his  works 
are  the  operas  Zoraide  (first  performed  at  the  Teatro  Colon  on  May  15, 
1909)5  UEvaso  (produced  in  Rosario  on  June  23,  1922),  La  Magdalena 
(produced  at  the  Teatro  Colon  on  November  9,  1929)5  a  ballet,  El 
Cometa  {Teatro  Colony  November  8,  1932) ,  three  operettas,  Esmeralda 
(1903)5  Triunfo  del  Corazon  {i()io)yLa  Eterna  Historia  (1911);  also 
chamber  music,  piano  pieces,  and  songs.  His  symphonic  poem  La  Muerte 
del  Inca  (Death  of  the  Inca),  based  on  Indian  themes,  was  performed 
under  the  composer’s  direction  at  the  Teatro  Colon  on  October  15,  1932. 
He  also  wrote  two  Argentine  Suites  for  orchestra,  of  which  the  first  has 
been  published  by  Ricordi.  The  score  of  La  Muerte  del  Inca  is  in  the 
Fleisher  Collection  in  Philadelphia.  A  detailed  monograph  on  Massa  by 
Francisco  Curt  Lange  is  published  in  Volume  IV  of  the  Boletm  Latino- 
Americano  da  Musica, 

Angel  Menchaca  was  a  musical  theorist  5  he  was  born  in  Asuncion, 
Paraguay,  in  1855  and  died  in  Buenos  Aires  in  1924.  He  developed  a 
system  of  notation,  and  a  special  piano  keyboard  which  he  called  Con¬ 
tinuous  Keyboard,  on  which  the  black  keys  slope  down.  His  theories  at¬ 
tracted  some  attention  in  America  and  in  Europe.  He  summarized  his 
views  in  a  brochure,  Sistema  T eorico-Grdfico  de  la  Musicay  published  in 
1914,  and  now  out  of  print. 

Roberto  Garcia  Morillo  (1911 - )  studied  piano  and  composition 

with  Aguirre,  Juan  Jose  Castro,  Gaito,  and  others.  From  1927  to  1929 
he  lived  in  Paris.  Upon  his  return  to  Buenos  Aires,  Morillo  dedicated 
himself  to  composition  and  music  criticism.  His  early  works  disclose  a 
strong  Scriabin  influence,  while  his  later  style  comes  closer  to  Stravinsky. 
Morillo’s  music  is  determined  by  purely  acoustical  constructions,  and 
is  entirely  devoid  of  folkloristic  associations.  He  has  written  an  overture 
for  piano  and  small  orchestra,  Bersaerksy  first  performed  by  the  composer 
with  the  Ensemble  of  the  Conservatorio  Nadonaly  on  December  29, 19323 
a  Boem  for  symphony  orchestra,  performed  in  Buenos  Aires  on  October 
30,  19363  a  Piano  Concerto,  first  performed  at  the  Teatro  Co/6%  on  No¬ 
vember  7,  1 940  3  a  musical  suite  inspired  by  Goya’s  pictures,  Las  Pinturas 
Negras  de  GoySy  scored  for  piano,  violin,  cello,  flute,  clarinet,  and  bas¬ 
soon,  and  first  performed  at  the  University  of  Montevideo,  Uruguay,  on 
May  27,  1 940  3  a  Quartet  for  piano,  violin,  cello,  and  clarinet,  performed 
in  Buenos  Aires  on  June  9,  19375  Fall  of  the  House  of  Usher y  after 
Poe  3  and  a  ballet,  Harrild,  Morillo’s  piano  suite,  Confuros^  is  published 


ARGENTINA 


95 


by  the  Editorial  Interamericana  in  Montevideo;  his  early  Tres  Piezas  for 
piano  are  published  by  Ricordi ;  and  a  piano  piece,  Cancion  Triste  y  Danza 
Alegre,  is  included  in  the  album  Latin-Amerkan  Art  Music  for  the 
Piano  (Schirmer,  1942).  The  orchestral  scores  of  Morillo’s  Piano  Con¬ 
certo  and  Poem  will  be  found  in  the  Fleisher  Collection  in  Philadel¬ 


phia. 

Emilio  Napolitano  (1907 - )  studied  the  violin  and  in  1922  joined 

the  orchestra  of  the  Teatro  Colon.  He  also  took  lessons  in  composition 
with  Gaito  and  Ugarte.  His  first  work,  a  Sonata  for  Violin  and  Piano,  was 
performed  in  Buenos  Aires  on  September  25, 1936.  He  has  written  several 
songs,  in  the  native  manner,  of  which  a  Lullaby,  and  an  air,  Picaflor,  are 
published  by  Ricordi. 

Jose  de  Nito  (1887-1945)  went  to  Italy  in  1901,  and  studied  at  the 
’Conservatory  of  Naples.  Returning  to  Argentina  in  1909,  he  founded, 
in  Rosario,  the  Beethoven  Conservatory  of  Music.  Between  1921  and 
1928  he  again  traveled  in  Europe.  As  a  composer,  Nito  has  published 
several  children’s  pieces  and  some  songs  in  the  native  manner. 


Jaime  Pahissa,  a  Spanish  composer  living  in  Argentina,  was  born  in 
Barcelona  in  1880.  Largely  an  autodidact,  he  pursued  from  the  very  first 
a  quest  for  the  new  in  music.  He  is  also  one  of  the  first  composers  who 
cultivated  a  nationalist  Catalan  style,  selecting  texts  in  the  Catalan  lan¬ 
guage  for  his  songs  and  taking  part  in  the  revival  of  the  musical  folklore 
of  Catalonia.  On  November  ij,  1906,  Pahissa  presented  in  Barcelona  a 
concert  of  his  symphonic  and  chamber  music.  His  orchestral  work,  El 
Cami  (The  Path),  was  performed  in  Barcelona  on  March  21,  1909;  his 
symphonic  poem.  Nit  de  Somnis  (Night  of  Dreams),  on  April  30,  1920; 
zxvA  Sinfonietta  on  November  3,  1921.  On  October  12,  1925,  his  most 
original  score,  Monodia,  was  performed  in  Barcelona.  It  is  written  exclu¬ 
sively  in  unisons  and  octaves,  sustaining  interest  only  by  changes  of  regis¬ 
ter,  orchestral  color,  and  rhythm.  Pahissa  follows  a  diametrically  opposite 
line  of  invention  in  his  Suite  Intertond,  which  was  performed  in  Barcelona 
on  October  24,  1926.  In  this  work  he  contrasts  the  integral  dissonan 
counterpoint  of  the  first,  second,  and  fourth  movements  with  the  classical 
harmony  of  the  third  movement.  Pahissa  has  also  written 
Gala  Placida  (produced  in  Barcelona  on  January  15,  1913)1 
(produced  on  February  15,  1919),  Mananela  (produced  on  March  3  , 
1923),  and  La  Princesa  Margarita  (produced  on  February  8,  1928)  •  ^ 
scores  of  £/  Suite  Intertonal,  M^cdta  and 

lished,  and  copies  are  in  the  Fleisher  Collection  in  Philadelphia.  Also 


96  MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

published,  but  out  of  print,  are  Pahissa’s  Trio,  Violin  Sonata,  songs,  and 
piano  pieces  (in  the  latter  Pahissa  uses  interesting  chromatic  tone-clusters) . 
A  very  comprehensive  nine-page  account  of  Pahissa’s  career  is  found  in  the 
second  volume  of  the  Diccionario  de  la  Musica,  published  in  Barcelona  in 
1930.  In  1935,  Pahissa  settled  in  Buenos  Aires,  where  he  is  teaching  com¬ 
position  and  piano. 

Athos  Palma  (1891 - )  went  to  Europe  in  1904  and  studied  music 

in  Italy  and  France.  Returning  to  Argentina  in  1909,  he  devoted  him¬ 
self  to  composition  and  teaching.  He  has  written  a  one-act  opera,  Nazdah, 
on  a  subject  of  ancient  India,  which  was  produced  at  the  Teatro  Colon 
on  June  19,  1924;  a  symphonic  poem,  Los  Hijos  del  Sol,  based  on  an 
Inca^legend  and  employing  the  pentatonic  scale,  performed  at  the  Teatro 
Colon  on  November  ro,  19285  and  an  impressionistic  symphonic  poem, 
Jar  dines,  performed  on  May  4,  1930,  by  the  Asociacion  del  Profesoradl 
Orquestal  in  Buenos  Aires.  He  has  also  written  a  ballet,  Accia,  a  Piano 
Sonata,  and  songs.  Palma’s  style  of  composition  derives  its  effectiveness 
from  rich  harmonies,  somewhat  in  the  modern  Italian  manner.  There  is 
an  influence  of  Debussy  in  his  songs  La  Escuela  de  las  Flores,  which  are 
published  by  Ricordi.  Also  published  are  Palma’s  harmonizations  of  in- 
digenous  songs,  Canciones  Salterias.  The  orchestral  score  of  Los  Hijos 
del  Sol  is  in  the  Fleisher  Collection. 

^  Hector  Panizza  ( 1 875 - )  was  born  in  Buenos  Aires  and  later  studied 

piano  and  composition  at  the  Conservatory  of  Milan,  Italy.  He  has  de¬ 
voted  himself  principally  to  operatic  conducting,  and  toured  widely  in 
Europe  and  America.  Panizza’s  own  music,  entirely  academic  in  texture, 
IS  distinguished  by  a  certain  mastery  of  composition.  He  has  written  a 
cantata,  II  Fidanzato  del  Mare,  performed  in  Buenos  Aires  on  August 
jSi  sn  opera.  Medio  Evo  Latino,  produced  in  Buenos  Aires,  with 
Toscanini  conducting,  on  July  21,  1901 5  and  an  opera,  Aurora,  directed 
by  the  composer  in  Buenos  Aires,  on  September  6,  1908.  After  a  long 
period  of  time,  during  which  Panizza  composed  little,  he  wrote  a  new 
opera,  Bizancto,  which  was  produced  at  the  Teatro  Colon  on  July  25, 
1939,  under  the  composer’s  direction.  Panizza’s  Reverie  ior  violin  and 
piano,  a  song.  Chanson  Galante,  and  an  aria  from  Medio  Evo  Latino  are 
published  by  Ricordi. 

Juan  Carlos  Paz  (1897—)  studied  composition  with  Gaito.  From 
Hs  earliest  ventures  in  composition,  Paz  followed  modernistic  trends. 

e  was  one  of  the  founders  of  the  Grufo  Renovacion,  a  modern  music 


ARGENTINA 


97 

society  of  Buenos  Aires,  established  in  1929.  In  1936,  Paz  left  the  Grufo 
Renovaclon  and  founded  an  association  named  Condertos  de  la  Nueva 
Musica^  which  presents  concerts  of  new  music.  As  a  composer,  Paz  has 
undergone  several  changes  of  style.  The  first  period  (1920-1927),  char¬ 
acterized  by  neoclassical  polyphony,  comprises  nine  ballads  and  two 
sonatas  for  piano,  and  Canto  de  Navidad  for  orchestra.  The  second  period 
(1927-1934),  marked  by  atonal  melodic  idiom  and  polytonal  harmony, 
includes  Movimiento  SinfSnko  for  orchestra,  incidental  music  to  Ibsen’s 
play  Julian  the  Emferor^  Polytonal  Variations y  Three  Jazz  Movements y 
Three  Inventions  for  piano,  Sonatina  for  Clarinet  and  Piano,  Sonatina 
for  Flute  and  Clarinet  (performed  on  June  1 5,  1933,  at  the  International 
Festival  of  Contemporary  Music  in  Amsterdam),  Sonatina  for  Oboe  and 
Bassoon,  and  Overture  for  twelve  solo  instruments.  The  third  period 
(1934-1944)  is  signalized  by  the  adoption  of  the  twelve-tone  system  of 
composition.  To  it  belong  Passacaglia  for  orchestra  (performed  on  June 
1937)  ^he  Paris  Festival  of  Contemporary  Music),  four  Com- 
fosiciones  en  los  12  Tonos  for  various  instruments  j  ten  piano  pieces  on 
a  twelve-tone  theme  5  Quartet  for  violin,  clarinet,  saxophone,  and  bass 
clarinet  5  and  the  Third  Piano  Sonata.  In  the  last  few  years,  Paz  has  intro¬ 
duced  some  modifications  into  the  twelve-tone  technique. 

Paz  is  strongly  opposed  to  folkloric  ideas  in  music,  and  in  a  series  of 
articles  in  the  press  has  sharply  criticized  the  nationalistic  trends  among 
Argentine  musicians.  The  only  piece  of  descriptive  music  he  ever  wrote  is 
Pamfeanay  for  piano,  published  by  C.  Fischer.  His  Jazz  Movements  2.nd 
Inventions  for  piano  are  published  by  the  Grufo  Renovacion,  The  third 
of  the  Comfosiciones  en  los  12  Tonos y  for  clarinet  and  piano,  is  published 
hy  New  Music.  Ttn  Piano  Pieces  on  a  Twelve-Tone  Theme  are  published 
in  the  music  supplement  to  Volume  IV  of  the  Boletin  hatino- Americano 
de  Musica.Tht  Second  Ballad  for  piano  is  included  in  the  album  Latinr 
American  Art  Music  for  the  Piano  (Schirmer,  1942).  The  scores  of  Pas- 
sacaglicty  Overture  for  twelve  solo  instruments,  Movimiento  SinfonicOy 
and  a  suite  from  Julian  the  Emferor  are  in  the  Fleisher  Collection  in 
Philadelphia.  A  comprehensive  essay  on  the  music  of  Paz,  by  Francisco 
Curt  Lange,  is  published  in  Volume  IV  of  the  Boletin  Latino- Americano 
de  Musica.  An  analysis  of  Paz’s  corri^io^itiomy  La  O bra  Musical  de  Juan 
Carlos  Pazy  by  Hector  J.  Gallac,  is  included  in  Volume  I  of  the  Boletin 
Latino- Americano  de  Musica. 

Julio  Perceval,  the  Belgian-Argentine  musician,  was  born  in  Brussels 
in  1903.  He  studied  piano  and  organ  at  the  Brussels  Conservatory.  Upon 


98  ’  MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

graduation,  he  went  to  Argentina  and  was  naturalized  there  in  1930. 
Perceval  has  written  a  String  Quartet,  a  Piano  Sonata,  a  Violin  Sonata, 
a  Violoncello  Sonata,  piano  pieces,  and  several  compositions  for  the  organ. 
PercevaPs  harmonic  idiom  is  marked  by  considerable  dissonance.  His 
Danza  on  an  Argentine  theme  is  included  in  the  music  supplement  to 
Volume  IV  of  the  IvLusicd, 

Celestino  Piaggio  (1886-1931)  studied  piano  and  composition  with 
Alberto  V7illiams  and  Julian  Aguirre.  In  1908  he  was  given  a  govern¬ 
ment  fellowship  for  further  study  in  Europe.  He  took  lessons  with 
Vincent  dTndy  in  Paris,  and  in  1914  went  to  Bucharest,  Rumania,  where 
he  conducted  ‘orchestral  concerts  and  gave  piano  recitals.  He  remained 
in  Rumania  until  1921,  and  then  returned  to  Buenos  Aires,  where  he 
taught  at  the  National  Conservatory  of  Music.  Piaggio  wrote  little 
music,  all  in  a  classical  manner  without  reference  to  Argentine  folklore. 
His  Overture  in  C  minor,  composed  in  1914,  and  entirely  academic  in 
texture,  was  performed  in  Buenos  Aires  by  the  Sociedad  Argentina  de 
Conciertos  Sinjonicos  on  September  9?  19^9*  The  full  score  of  this  Over¬ 
ture  was  published  in  1939  by  the  ComisiSn  Nacional  de  Cultura, 

Alfredo  Pinto  (1891 - ),  the  Italian-Argentine  composer,  studied 

piano  and  composition  at  the  Conservatory  of  Naples.  He  went  to  Ar¬ 
gentina  in  1915,  and  gave  numerous  piano  recitals.  He  began  to  compose 
seriously  in  1929?  and  wrote  a  number  of  atmospheric  pieces  for  orchestra, 
in  an  unassuming  romantic  vein.  Of  these,  the  following  were  performed 
by  the  Asociacion  del  Profesorado  Orquestal  in  Buenos  Aires:  Nostalgias 
(August  3,  1929),  Eros  (May  31,  1930) ;  Contrastes  (August  28,  1932), 
Comentario  a  un  Canto  dannunziano  (after  d^Annunzio,  performed  on 
October  7,  i934)>  and  Pofular  Italian  Suite  (October  5,  193^)*  Ti^to  has 
also  written  an  opera  on  Argentine  themes,  El  Gualicho ^  produced  at  the 
Teatro  Colon  on  November  17,  1940.  For  a  brief  interval  in  1935,  Pinto 
was  a  member  of  the  Grufo  Renovacion.  The  score  of  his  short  symphonic 
piece,  Eros^  is  in  the  Fleisher  Collection  in  Philadelphia. 

Pascual  Quaratino  (1904 - )  went  to  Italy  in  1920,  where  he 

entered  the  Conservatory  of  Naples,  Upon  his  return  to  Buenos  Aires  in 
1928,  Quaratino  was  engaged  as  assistant  conductor  at  the  Teatro  Colony 
and  at  the  same  time  continued  to  compose.  He  has  written  a  Suite  for 
harp  and  string  orchestra  (performed  in  Buenos  Aires  on  March  26, 
1933)  5  an  orchestral  dance,  El  Rastreador  (performed  in  Buenos  Aires  on 
October  14, 1940)  5  and  a  number  of  piano  pieces  and  songs,  all  of  them  in 


ARGENTINA 


99 


the  native  vein.  Quaratino’s  Lamento  Indio ^  Tres  Canciones  ArgentinaSy 
Pamfeanay  Siestay  El  Fleckazo  for  voice  and  pianOj  Rafsodia  Argentinay 
and  Tres  Piezas  Argentinas  for  piano  are  published  by  Ricordi. 

Antonio  de  Raco  (1915 - )  is  one  of  the  younger  Argentine  com¬ 

posers.  He  studied  piano  and  composition  at  the  National  Conservatory 
in  Buenos  Aires.  He  writes  in  a  neoclassical  manner^  mostly  chamber 
music  and  songs. 

Pascual  de  Rogatis,  the  Italian-born  Argentine  composer,  was  born 
in  1881,  and  went  to  Buenos  Aires  as  a  child.  He  studied  violin  and  com¬ 
position  at  the  National  Conservatory  of  Buenos  Aires.  Three  operas  by 
Rogatis  have  been  performed  at  the  Teatro  Colon:  Anfione  e  Zeto  (July 
18,  1915))  Huemac  (July  22,  1916),  and  La  Novia  del  Hereje  (The 
Heretic’s  Bride,  performed  on  June  13,  1935).  The  first  of  these  operas 
is  on  a  classical  subject,  the  second  is  based  on  a  Mexican  legend,  and  the 
third  is  derived  from  the  colonial  era.  The  harmonic  idiom  employed  by 
Rogatis  is  that  of  the  modern  Italian  opera,  with  some  Wagnerian  over¬ 
tones.  In  1910,  Rogatis  wrote  a  symphonic  poem,  Zufajy  which  is  one 
of  the  earliest  examples  of  an  orchestral  work  employing  the  native 
rhythms  of  Argentina.  His  later  symphonic  work,  AtifaCy  performed  in 
Buenos  Aires  on  April  7,  1929,  continues  in  the  native  tradition.  A  collec¬ 
tion  of  five  songs  by  Rogatis,  Canciones  Argentinas y  and  some  piano  pieces 
have  been  published.  The  Argentine  writer  Ricardo  Rojas  summarixed 
Rogatis’  place  in  native  music  in  these  words:  ^‘His  harmony  is  perhaps 
European,  and  so  is  his  orchestra  j  but  the  origin,  the  idea,  and  the  func¬ 
tion  of  his  melodic  invention  belong  to  Argentina.” 

Luis  R.  Sammartino  (1890 - )  studied  piano  and  composition,  and 

for  many  years  acted  as  accompanist  and  operatic  coach  in  Buenos  Aires, 
He  has  composed  symphonic  music,  piano  pieces,  and  songs.  His  orches¬ 
tral  Suite  in  four  programmatic  movements  was  performed  on  October 
7,  1923,  by  the  A  so  ciacion  del  Profesorado  Orquestal  in  Buenos  Aires. 
Most  of  his  works  are  couched  in  the  traditional  European  idiom.  His 
Zamba  for  piano  is  published  by  Ricordi. 

Arturo  C.  Schianca  (1889 - ),  the  musicologist  and  composer,  is 

the  author  of  the  informative  book,  Historia  de  la  Musica  Argentinay  and 
of  numerous  dances  and  songs  in  the  native  style. 

Alfredo  Schiuma  ( 1885—)  has  written  several  operas,  in  a  com¬ 
petent  Italianate  manner,  of  which  the  following  were  produced  at  the 


100 


MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

Teatro  Colon:  Amy  Robsar  (April  24,  1920),  La  Strocchta  (April  23, 
1922),  TabarS  (August  6,  I92.5)>  and  La  Infanta  (August  12,  1941). 
The  opera  Tabard  deals  with  Indian  life  in  the  early  centuries  after  the 
conquest.  The  following  of  Schiuma’s  symphonic  works  were  performed 
by  the  AsociaciSn  del  Profesorado  Orquestal:  Symfhony  m  F  ( Jnne  ^5’ 
1928),  Pitunga  (March  31,  1929)^  and  Los  Incas  (April  26,  1931).  The 
score  of  Pitunga  is  available  in  the  Fleisher  Collection. 

Honorio  Siccardi  ( 1 897 - )  studied  music  in  Buenos  Aires  with  Pablo 

Berutti,  and  later  in  Italy  with  Malipiero.  Since  193^?  ^ 

member  of  the  Grufo  Renovacion.  Siccardi  writes  in  a  highly  concentrated 
contrapuntal  style,  often  tensely  dissonant  in  texture,  and  his  instrumental 
treatment  stresses  contrasting  colors.  He  has  written  a  cantata,  Prome¬ 
theus-,  Titeres  (Puppets)  for  various  heterophonous  instrument^  com- 
binations,  two  symphonic  poems  after  the  Argentine  epic,  Martm  ierro, 
a  Violin  Concerto;  a  Suite  for  clarinet  and  piano;  a  String  Quartet,  and 
songs.  Two  of  Siccardi’s  piano  pieces  are  included  in  the  music  supple¬ 
ment  to  Volume  IV  of  the  Boletin  Latino- Americano  de  Mustca.  ihe 
score  of  Titeres  and  the  Violin  Concerto  are  in  the  Fleisher  Collection 
in  Philadelphia. 

Lorenzo  Spena  (1874 - )i  Italian-Argentine  musician,  settled  in 

Buenos  Aires  in  1901,  and  in  1907  founded  the  Cleraenti  Conse^atory 
of  Music.  He  has  written  six  operas,  and  also  symphonic  and  chamber 
music,  in  a  competent  but  conventional  style. 

Carlos  SuFFERN  ( 1905 - )  studied  music  in  Buenos  Aires  with  Athos 

Palma  and  Constantino  Gaito.  He  began  to  compose  at  an  early  age,  and 
adopted  in  his  compositions  an  economic  and  compact  manner  of  writing, 
while  his  harmonies  are  impressionistic.  His  predilection  lies  in  miniature 
forms.  In  his  Piano  Sonata,  in  one  movement,  he  introduces  elements  of 
all  four  movements  of  the  classical  sonata.  He  has  written  a  Dialogue 
for  violin  and  piano,  a  piano  Quintet,  a  piano  Quartet,  a  suite  of  instru¬ 
mental  and  vocal  pieces,  Juegos  Rusticos.  His  piano  piece  Nostalgia  is 
published  in  the  music  supplement  to  Volume  IV  of  the  Boletin  Latmo- 
Americano  de  Musica,  and  his  Danza  is  included  in  the  album  Latm- 

AmericanArtM.usicforthePianoi^Sch.iTvcitTji^^'i')- 

Celia  Torra  (1889 - -)  was  born  in  Concepcion,  Uruguay,  and  went 

to  Buenos  Aires  at  an  early  age.  There  she  studied  with  Alberto  Williams. 
In  1909  she  went  to  Europe,  where  she  studied  the  violin.  Returning  to 


ARGENTINA 


lOI 


Buenos  Aires  in  1921,  she  dedicated  herself  to  teaching  and  choral  con¬ 
ducting  Celia  Torra  has  written  several  orchestral  works  on  native  themes, 

fpian!  Sonata,  songs,  and  choral  compositions.  She  conducted  the  first  per¬ 
formance  of  her  suite  in  three  movements,  En  Piragua  {In ^  ^  u  1’ 
ZTteio  (Cortege),  and  Fiesta  Indigena  (Native  Festival)  with  the 
OrqJesta  Sinjonica  Femenina  in  Buenos  Aires,  on  November  1937- 
The  score  of  the  suite  is  included  in  the  Fleisher  Collection  in  Phila- 

Bemucc,  (1888—)  studied  music  with  Alberto  Wil- 
liaL.  Since  ,,80  he  has  taught  composition  at  the 

ot  Buenos  Aires.  Torre  Bertucci  composed  mosdy  for  piano  and  voice, 
a  European  manner,  without  reference  to  native  foMoie. 

Gaetano  Tao.am  (.873-1948),  the  ItaliamArgentine 
bornTn  Chieti,  Italy,  and  died  in  Buenos  Aires.  He  studied  piano  and  com¬ 
position  in  Naples.  In  1898  he  emigrated  to  Argentina,  and  settW  m 
Buenos  Aires  where  he  devoted  himself  to  teachmg  and  composi  . 

« tfen  for  orchestra,  for  piano,  and  for  voice,  employing  an  agreeabl 

for  piano.  .  , 

Florio  M.  Ugarte  (1884—)  born  in  Buenos  Aires 

riVrl  in  Paris  Udoh  his  rctum  to  Argentina  in  19^3) 
young  man,  studied  n  •  P  ^  National  Conservatory  in 

taught  music  privately,  “df”” '’^.Vmitlcd  Letor  of  the  rest™ 

eX  o^e  »m^8d  prolifidli  for  orchestra,  for  the  theater,  and 
Colon.  Ugarte  compose  p  f„ilo^in2  symphonic  suites  and  sym- 

for  instruments.  He  has 
phonic  poems:  Paisafes  de  Estio  (1912), 

Entre  Saika\  was  produced  at  the  Teatro 

cf/X,  on  July  21,  ^9^0 

Td^srcL."  ,  Villllba-Muhoa  entered  the  Augusdnian  Order. 


10% 


MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 


In  1906  he  went  to  Lima,  Peru.  There  he  abandoned  the  Order,  and 
married  his  pupil,  a  pianist.  With  her,  he  settled  in  Jujuy,  Argentina, 
and  became  director  of  the  Clementi  Conservatory  of  Music.  Villalba- 
Muhoz  has  composed  a  symphonic  poem,  Los  Andes^  a  Requiem,  and  a 
number  of  piano  pieces  and  songs.  The  piano  reduction  of  his  ballet, 
Leyenda  del  Zorro  del  Rio  Xingu^  based  on  ancient  Inca  legends,  is  pub¬ 
lished  by  Ricordi, 

Alberto  Williams,  the  oldest  composer,  was  born  in  Buenos  Aires 
in  1862.  His  paternal  grandfather  was  Benjamin  Williams  of  Exeter, 
England,  and  his  maternal  grandfather  was  Amancio  Alcorta,  one  of  the 
pioneers  of  Argentine  music.  Williams  began  to  pLy  the  piano  and  to 
compose  at  the  age  of  eight.  In  1882  he  was  given  a  government  scholar¬ 
ship  for  study  in  Europe.  He  took  lessons  in  piano  with  Mathias,  a  pupil 
of  Chopin,  and  in  composition  with  Cesar  Franck.  Throughout  his  career, 
Williams  cherished  the  memory  of  his  association  with  Franck,  and  liked 
to  call  his  own  pupils  ^^musical  grandchildren  of  Franck.”  Williams  re¬ 
turned  to  Argentina  in  December,  1889?  2.nd  in  1893  founded  the  Con¬ 
servatory  bearing  his  name.  Numerous  branches  of  the  Conservatory 
were  subsequently  opened  all  over  Argentina,  and  laid  the  foundation  of 
a  considerable  fortune.  Part  of  his  income  Williams  diverted  to  his  music 
publishing  enterprise,  La  Quena,  Under  the  imprint  of  La  Quena^  in 
association  with  German  and  French  music  publishers,  Williams  has  pub¬ 
lished  virtually  the  complete  edition  of  his  compositions — full  orchestral 
scores,  chamber  music,  piano  pieces  and  songs — 112  opus  numbers  in  all. 
Alberto  Williams  is  the  most  prolific  composer  of  the  continent  j  he  has 
written  nine  symphonies,  two  symphonic  poems,  two  overtures,  four  or¬ 
chestral  suites,  three  suites  of  Argentine  dances  for  string  orchestra,  ten 
poems  for  piano,  Sonata  Argentina  for  piano,  thirteen  collections  of  Airs 
of  the  Pampas,  two  Argentine  suites  for  piano,  seven  collections  of  chil¬ 
dren’s  piano  pieces,  sixteen  waltzes,  four  mazurkas,  165  miscellaneous 
character  pieces  for  piano,  three  violin  sonatas,  a  Flute  Sonata,  a  Violon¬ 
cello  Sonata,  a  piano  Trio,  and  numerous  songs.  Besides,  Williams  is  the 
author  of  textbooks  of  elementary  theory  of  music,  harmony,  counter¬ 
point,  solfeggio,  and  musical  calligraphy.  Williams  is  also  a  poet.  One 
volume  of  his  lyric  poems  and  a  volume  of  reflections  upon  music,  Pensa- 
mientos  Sobre  la  Musica^  were  published  in  1941.  The  texts  of  Williams’ 
vocal  compositions  are  generally  his  own,  and  his  songs  are  all  written  in 
Spanish. 

In  his  early  compositions  Williams  followed  the  German  model  of 


ARGENTINA 


103 


romantic  music,  and  later,  the  precepts  of  Cesar  Franck,  particularly  in 
chamber  music.  About  1890,  Williams  composed  his  first  piece  in  the 
native  Argentine  manner,  El  Rancho  Abandonado  for  piano,  in  which 
he  stylized  the  melodic  airs  of  the  Gauchos.  Subsequently,  Williams  wrote 
a  number  of  concert  pieces  in  the  form  of  native  dances,  MilongaSy 
HueyaSy  Vidalitasy  GatoSy  Cielitos,  His  poems  and  suites  for  piano  are 
often  illustrations  of  the  Argentine  landscape,  from  tropical  scenes — as 
in  the  Poema  de  la  Selva  Primaveral — ^to  the  Antarctic — as  in  Poema 
AntartkOy  and  Poems  FueguinOy  the  latter  depicting  Tierra  del  Fuego. 

The  harmonic  idiom  of  Williams’  music  undergoes  a  considerable 
change  about  1910,  when  he  adds  to  the  Franckian  resources  the  entire 
vocabulary  of  French  Impressionism;  parallel  chord  progressions,  employ¬ 
ment  of  consecutive  fifths,  extensive  use  of  pedal  points,  passages  in  un¬ 
resolved  seconds,  and  superposition  of  tonalities.  Episodes  in  whole-tone 
scales  are  constantly  encountered  in  Williams’  symphonic  and  piano 
works.  Pictorial  and  descriptive  titles  are  assigned  to  symphonies  and  piano 
pieces,  and  each  movement  of  the  symphonies  also  bears  a  programmatic 
subtitle.  The  First  Symphony  (1907)  has  no  descriptive  title.  Symphony 
No.  2  is  entitled  La  Bruja  de  las  Montanas  (Witch  of  the  Mountains)  5 
No.  3,  La  Selva  Sagrada  (Sacred  Forest)  3  No.  4,  El  Ataja-Caminos 
(Night  Bird) ,  No,  5,  El  CorazSn  de  la  Muheca  (Heart  of  a  Doll)  j  No. 
6,  La  Muerte  del  Cometa  (Death  of  the  Comet) ,  No.  7,  Eterno  Refoso 
(Eternal  Repose)  3  No.  8,  La  Esfinge  (The  Sphinx)  3  No.  9,  Los  Batracios 
(The  Frogs).  Each  symphony  is  prefaced  with  an  original  poem,  with  a 
title  corresponding  to  that  of  the  symphony  itself. 

The  first  four  symphonies  follow  the  classical  model  of  four  move¬ 
ments.  The  form  of  the  Fifth,  Sixth,  Seventh,  Eighth,  and  Ninth  sym¬ 
phonies  is  unusual  in  that  the  middle  movement  of  each  is  ternary,  and 
contains  a  slow  movement,  a  scherzo,  and  the  recapitulation  of  the  slow 
movement.  The  First  and  Second  symphonies  were  performed  in  Buenos 
Aires,  under  the  composer’s  direction,  on  November  25, 1 907,  and  Septem¬ 
ber  9,  1910,  respectively.  The  following  symphonies  were  performed  in 
Buenos  Aires,  conducted  by  Jose  Gil:  No.  3  (December  8,  1934)5  No*  4 
(December  15,  1935),  No.  5  (November  29,  1936),  and  Nos.  6  and  7 
at  a  concert  on  the  occasion  of  Williams’  seventy-fifth  birthday,  given  on 
November  26,  1937. 

Williams’  facility  has  not  diminished  with  age.  At  seventy-six,  he  com¬ 
pleted  his  Ninth  Symphony  in  two  and  a  half  months,  between  January 
10  and  March  26, 1939. 


104  MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

Seven  of  Williams’  symphoniesj  several  symphonic  poems,  and  three 
suites  for  string  orchestra  are  in  the  Fleisher  Collection  in  Philadelphia. 

In  1938  a  complete  catalogue  of  Williams’  works  was  printed  by  'La 
Quena,  See  also  N.  Slonimsky,  ''Alberto  Williams,  the  Father  of  Ar¬ 
gentinian  Music”  {Musical  America^  January  10,  194^)* 

Williams’  daughter,  Irma  Williams,  has  written  a  number  of  piano 
pieces  and  songs,  published  in  La  Quena,  Her  style  of  composition  faith¬ 
fully  emulates  that  of  her  father. 


Bolivia 


I  Bolivia!  }La  heredera  del  gigantel 
[OLEGARIO  V.  ANDRADE] 

I  Viva  sij  viva  Bolivia! 
jCarantba  la  boliviana 
Que  tiene  tanta  salera! 
fCaramba  la  boliviana 
Que  tiene  amor  verdadero! 

[teofilo  vargas] 


Bolivia  is  often  called  the  Switzerland  of  South  America,  for,  like  Switzer¬ 
land,  it  is  landlocked  and  is  traversed  by  mighty  mountain  ranges.  Bolivia  is 
situated  between  the  Equator  and  the  Tropic  of  Capricorn.  The  climate  varies 
with  the  altitude.  La  Paz,  the  capital,  lies  at  an  altitude  of  11,910  ft-  The 
population  of  Bolivia  is  three  and  a  half  million,  the  majority  of  which  is  com¬ 
posed  of  Indians  and  Mestizos. 

The  character  of  national  music,  as  of  all  national  expression,  is  to 
some  extent  determined  by  the  geography  and  the  climate  of  the  country. 
The  case  of  Bolivia  demonstrates  this  point.  The  highlands  with  their 
bleak  landscape,  as  well  as  the  thinness  of  the  air,  are  apt  to  induce  dejec¬ 
tion  and  melancholy  j  these  characteristics  are  reflected  in  the  music  of  the 
inhabitants.  In  contrast,  the  popular  songs  of  the  Bolivian  valleys  are 
characterized  by  rhythmic  variety  and  color.  The  dance  movements  of  the 
Indians  of  the  highlands  are  slow  and  measured,  whereas  those  of  the 
inhabitants  of  the  valleys  are  rapid  and  full  of  abandon. 

The  Indian  music  of  Bolivia  is  based  on  the  pentatonic  scale.  With 
the  advent  of  the  conquistadores,  this  scale  was  extended  to  seven  tones. 


BOLIVIA 


Teofilo  Vargas,  in  the  preface  to  his  three-volume  collection 
cionales  de  Bolivia,  describes  the  mutual  influence  of  the  Indians  and*|^ 
Spanish:  “The  natives  listened  to  the  Spanish  melodies,  and  the  SpanM 
musicians,  attracted  by  the  originality  of  Incaic  chants,  assimilated  native 
melos,  even  to  the  point  of  including  native  chants  in  church  singing.  The 
ecclesiastics,  in  their  desire  to  make  propaganda  for  their  faith  by  all 
possible  means,  took  advantage  of  the  tremendous  power  exercised  by 
the  art  of  music,  and  encouraged  the  natives  to  sing  religious  hymns 
using  Incaic  modalities  in  church.” 


Bolivian  Pentatonic  Melody  {Vargas') 


The  native  art  of  Bolivia  is  expressed  in  its  purest  form  in  the  songs 
which  bear  the  generic  name  of  Aire  Indio.  The  Aire  Indio  is  not  confined 
to  any  specific  meter  or  scale,  and  consists  of  short  motives,  with  pauses 
between  phrases.  Often,  an  original  Indian  song  or  dancing  tune  is  taken 
up  by  popular  musicians  and  adapted  to  suit  modern  tastes.  Thus,  the 
Huaino,  a  typical  air  of  the  Andean  foothills,  was  originally  a  funeral 
procession  of  the  Quechua  Indians,  but  as  it  is  performed  today  by  village 
musicians  it  comes  close  to  the  American  one-step.  It  is  in  two-four  time 
and  is  played  in  a  lively  tempo.  Other  Bolivian  dances  of  the  Huaino 
type  are  the  Cacharfaya  (the  word  means  “to  say  good-bye”  in  the  lan- 
guage  of  the  Quechua  Indians)  and  the  Pasacalle  (not  to  be  confused  with 
the  classical  form  of  the  Passacaglia) .  The  Trote  ( from  Trot,  or  Foxtrot) 
^  is  a  modern  dance  of  the  pseudo- American  category. 

^  Many  native  dances  of  Bolivia  bear  descriptive  titles,  or  are  named  after 
XL  the  province  where  they  are  most  popular.  Yet  these  dances  of  different 
names  may  all  be  essentially  similar  in  character,  usually  oi  th.t  Huaino 
type.  Thus,  there  is  a  one-step  called  the  Pala^ala  (which  means  “a  crow” 
in  Quechua).  A  pantomime  of  the  bullfight  is  called  by  the  Quechua 
word  Huacatocori.  Th&  dance  Megafaquena  is  named  after  the  province 
of  Mejapaca.  There  is  also  the  Kaluyo,  which  is  a  tap  dance. 


io6  MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

Also  a  Bolivian  phenomenon,  the  hybrid  Spanish-Indian  religious  chant, 
similar  to  Christmas  carols,  and  called  Ador acton,  is  of  especial  interest. 

One  of  the  most  popular  native  dances  of  non-Bolivian  origin  is  the 
Chilean  Cueca,  or,  as  it  is  sometimes  called,  Chtlena.  But  while  the  Chdean 
Cueca  is  cast  invariably  in  a  major  key,  its  Bolivian  counterpart  is  often 
in  the  minor.  Out  of  the  twenty  Cuecas  included  in  the  collection  Mustca 
Nacional  BoUviana  by  the  Bolivian  composer  Simeon  Roncal,  eight  are 
in  a  minor  key.  Each  Cueca  has  an  introduction  of  a  few  bars.  The  Cueca 
proper  consists  of  two  sections,  the  second  being  more  lively  than  the  first. 
The  meter  is  usually  six-eight  combined  with  three-four^  as  in  the  Chilean 
Cueca,  the  Colombian  Bas'tllo  and  other  dances  of  Spanish  origin. 

The  melancholy  Yaravi  of  Peru  is  also  sung  in  Bolivia.  Teofilo  Vargas 
describes  the  Bolivian  Yaravi  in  these  words:  “The  Yaravtn  a  romantic 
lied,  a  soliloquy  of  the  soul  of  the  Indian  and  of  the  white  native,  oppressed 
by  the  brutalities  of  Spanish  despotism,  by  the  unrest  and  agitation  of  the 
republican  period,  and  by  the  solitary  existence  created  by  our  geographical 
Isolation.  Some  might  say:  ‘Why  should  we  inflict  upon  the  world  our 
sorrows,  our  distresses?’  But  what  people,  having  thrown  off  but  recent  y 
the  chains  of  slavery  under  the  tyranny  of  a  foreign  government,  would 

sing  the  joy  of  life?”  .  _ 

Bolivia  possesses  a  number  of  distinctive  indigenous  instruments,  or 
purely  Indian  origin  and  of  pre-Columbian  antiquity.  The  most  remark¬ 
able  of  these  are  the  gigantic  panpipes,  Sicus^  and  Bajones.  Antonio 
Gonzalez  Bravo,  the  Bolivian  music  scholar,  gives  this  information  on 
the  nature  of  the  instruments:  “The  Sicu,  or  Syrinx  Aymard,  is  made  up 
of  a  series  of  tubes  of  sugar  cane,  closed  on  one  end.  The  Sicu  is  played 
vertically,  by  holding  the  lower  lip  and  blowing  at  the  open  end  of  the 
tube.  The  Bajon  is  composed  of  tubes  made  of  palm-tree  leaves  over¬ 
laying  the  reed  tubes  inside.  It  combines  the  characteristics  of  the  Sicu 
and  of  the  Kkefa,  the  pre-Columbian  trumpet.  The  Bajon  is  played  by 
placing  both  lips  on  the  edge  of  the  reed  which  serves  as  a  mouthpiece,  as 
in  modern  brass  instruments.  The  Sicu  is  often  as  long  as  one  meter  and 
twenty  centimeters,  and  the  Bajon  may  be  two  meters  long.” 

Bolivian  twin  flutes,  which  are  two  vertical  flutes,  V-shaped,  with  a 
single  mouthpiece  where  the  two  reeds  join,  come  in  four  sizes,  and  are 

caUd  Taica,  Mahalta,  Lieu,  OT  Chuli. 

Other  Bolivian  instruments  are  listed  in  the  preface  to  Aires  Nacionales 
de  Bolivia  by  Teofilo  Vargas.  They  are:  the  Pumu,  which  is  a  bull  horn, 
having  a  cornet  mouthpiece,  and  which  serves  as  a  war  trumpet  of  the 


BOLIVIA 


107 


rebellious  mountain  folks,  or  as  a  postillion’s  hornj  the  Erque^  which  is 
made  of  thick,  hollow  cane;  the  Charcay  a  sort  of  primitive  wind  instru¬ 
ment;  the  Senka  Tankara,  the  Pinquillo,  and  the  Quena  which  are  flutes 
of  various  sizes;  and  a  variety  of  panpipes.  Of  the  latter,  the  paired  pan¬ 
pipes  are  the  most  interesting.  They  are  called  Sicuris  or  LaquUas,  and 
their  scales  overlap,  so  that  by  playing  the  first  note  on  one  panpipe,  and 
then  the  first  on  the  other,  the  second  on  the  first,  and  the  second  on  the 
other,  etc.,  a  complete  diatonic  scale  is  obtained.  There  are  in  existence 
Sicuris  arranged  in  triple  or  even  quadruple  rows,  somewhat  in  the  man¬ 
ner  of  organ  manuals,  and  capable  of  performing  a  chromatic  scale. 

An  ingenious  method  of  “tuning”  Bolivian  flutes  and  panpipes  is 
achieved  by  dropping  sand  in  the  tubes  to  adjust  the  length  of  the  air 
column. 

The  progress  of  musica  cuUa  in  Bolivia  has  been,  until  recently,  rather 
slow.  The  first  symphonic  organization,  the  Orquesta  Nacional  de  Con- 
ciertosy  was  established  in  La  Paz  under  the  auspices  of  the  Ministry  of 
Fine  Arts,  and  the  Bolivian  composer  Jose  Maria  Velasco  Maidana  was 
appointed  conductor.  The  inaugural  concert  took  place  on  March  14, 
1940.  The  Orchestra  makes  it  a  matter  of  policy  to  promote  Bolivian 
music,  and  performs  native  compositions  on  nearly  all  its  programs. 

MUSICIANS  OF  BOLIVIA 

Eduardo  Caba  ( 1 890 - )  of  Spanish-Italian  parentage,  studied  music 

with  his  mother,  and  in  1926  went  to  Buenos  Aires  to  complete  his  educa¬ 
tion.  He  remained  in  Buenos  Aires  until  1943,  when  he  returned  to 
Bolivia.  In  his  music,  Caba  cultivates  the  Indian  folklore  of  his  country. 
In  this  style  were  conceived  his  ballet  KollanSy  a  pantomime  Potosiy 
Quena  for  flute  and  orchestra,  eighteen  Indian  Airs  for  piano.  Leyenda 
Keshua  for  piano  is  included  in  the  music  supplement  to  Volume  IV 
of  the  Boletin  Latino-Americano  de  Musica. 

Antonio  Gonzalez  Bravo  (1885 - ),  the  composer  and  educator, 

represents  one  of  the  major  cultural  forces  in  Bolivian  music.  As  a  peda¬ 
gogue,  he  has  introduced  the  Dalcroze  method  into  Bolivian  schools. 
At  the  same  time  he  stresses  the  study  of  native  Indian  folklore.  He  is 
the  author  of  numerous  choral  compositions  for  children.  His  Trova  a 
la  Virgen  de  Cofacabana  for  female  chorus  and  orchestra  was  performed 
in  La  Paz  on  April  I,  1942. 

Simeon  Roncal  (1872 - ),  the  composer  of  popular  music,  studied 


io8  MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

piano  with  his  father,  and  played  the  organ  at  the  Cathedral  In  Sucre. 
He  has  published  an  important  collection  for  piano,  Musica  Nacional 
Bolivianay  comprising  twenty  original  CuecaSy  in  the  native  vein.  RoncaPs 
piano  piece  entitled  JazZy  which  is  also  published,  is  a  curious  reflection  of 
American  popular  music. 

Teofilo  Vargas,  the  folkloric  composer  and  music  scholar,  was  born 
in  1868.  He  was  choirmaster  of  the  Cathedral  at  Cochabamba  from  1 892 
to  1938,  and  wrote  a  Mass,  TVmo  'DioSy  for  chorus  and  orchestra.  His  piano 
pieces,  El  HuerfanOy  Susprosy  Idilloy  and  Ecos  del  Litoral  (a  battle 
piece),  have  been  published  by  the  composer.  Vargas  has  made  an  im¬ 
portant  contribution  to  Bolivian  musical  folklore  in  the  publication  of 
three  volumes  under  the  title  Aires  Nacionales  de  Bolivia  (1940)  which 
contain  harmonizations  of  authentic  melodies,  as  well  as  original  com¬ 
positions.  Vargas  admits,  however,  that  his  music  “makes  no  claim  to 
scientific  knowledge  of  harmony,  and  Is  the  product  of  a  desire  to  prove  to 
foreign  nations  the  existence  of  Bolivian  national  music.”  Vargas’  sym¬ 
phonic  overture,  La  Coronillay  was  performed  by  the  Orquesta  Sinfonica 
Nacional  of  La  Paz  on  October  24,  1942. 

Jose  Maria  Velasco  Maidana  (1899 - )  is  the  foremost  Bolivian 

composer.  He  studied  in  Buenos  Aires,  specializing  in  violin.  At  the  same 
time,  he  began  composing  music  based  on  Bolivian  folklore.  His  major 
work  is  the  ballet  Amerindiay  designed  as  a  glorification  of  the  “new  In¬ 
dian  of  tomorrow.”  Velasco  Maidana  was  invited  by  the  German  Ministry 
of  Propaganda  to  present  his  ballet  in  Berlin,  and  the  performance  took 
place  on  December  6,  1938.  When  Amerindia  was  performed  in  La  Paz 
on  May  27,  1940,  the  President  of  the  Republic  welcomed  It  in  a  special 
message  to  the  composer  as  “an  event  of  transcendent  significance  in  the 
history  of  Bolivia’s  artistic  culture.”  Velasco  Maidana  is  the  conductor  of 
the  Orquesta  Sinfonica  Nacional  in  La  Paz.  In  1943  he  toured  Peru  and 
Mexico,  where  he  presented  concerts  of  Bolivian  music.  The  following 
works  by  Velasco  Maidana  were  performed  by  the  La  Paz  Symphony 
under  his  direction:  symphonic  legend,  Cory  W ara  (October  6,  1941)5 
overture,  Lo.r  iYi;oj  del  5*0/  (February  6,  1942)  5  symphonic  poem,  Vida 
de  CSndores  (March  14,  i()42)y  Los  Huacos  {N^vil  22,  1942)5  Los 
Khusillos ‘SLiid  Cuento  Brujo  {K^nl 

Humberto  Viscarra  Monje  (1898— —)  studied  at  the  Conservatory 
of  La  Paz,  and  later  in  Italy.  He  is  the  author  of  piano  pieces  in  a  some¬ 
what  academic  manner. 


BRAZIL 


109 


Brazil 


Bondade 

Realidads 

Amisade 

Sinceridade 

Igualidads 

Lealdade 

BRASIL 

[Acrostic  by  Villa-Lobos,  used  by  him 
as  a  motto  at  the  annual  choral  festival 
on  BraziPs  Independence  Day] 


Brazil  occupies  nearly  one-half  the  area  of  South  America,  and  is  larger  than 
the  continental  territory  of  the  United  States.  The  Amazon  River,  whose  course 
lies  almost  entirely  in  Brazil,  is  the  largest  in  the  world.  Brazil  touches  every 
South  American  nation  except  Ecuador  and  Chile.  Brazil  is  the  only  Latin 
American  nation  whose  language  is  Portuguese.  Its  population  numbers  forty- 
five  million,  of  which  1,500,000  are  Indians,  and  3,000,000  Negroes.  Brazil’s 
capital,  Rio  de  Janeiro,  is  a  modern  city  of  two  million  inhabitants. 

Brazilian  folk  music  is  of  great  brilliance,  warmth,  and  vivacity.  The 
diversity  of  the  songs, — from  the  Indian  chants  and  ritual  incantations  of 
the  descendants  of  Negro  slaves  to  the  Italianized  ditties  of  the  coastal 
towns, — corresponds  to  the  diversity  of  the  natural  scene  in  BraziPs  vast 
lands.  The  threefold  racial  origins  of  Brazilian  music  relate  it  to  the  folk¬ 
lore  of  Europe,  Africa,  and  primeval  America. 

The  Indian  strain  in  Brazilian  music  was  strong  in  early  times  after 
the  conquest,  and  is  still  strong  in  the  remote  regions  of  the  Amazon 
basin.  This  aboriginal  music  was  based  upon  three  or  four  notes,  rarely 
reaching  the  complete  range  of  the  pentatonic  scale.  The  rhythm  of  the 
Indians  of  Brazil  is  monotonous,  representing  snort  phrases  separated 
by  long  holds.  The  syncopation  in  Brazilian  music  comes  from  the  Negro, 
but  this  syncopation  never  approaches  the  complexity  of  Afro-Cuban 
music.  For  one  thing,  the  down  beat  Is  always  strong  in  the  great  ma¬ 
jority  of  Brazilian  popular  songs,  and  the  basic  rhythm  of  many  Brazilian 
melodies  of  Negro  origin  is  a  sixteenth-note,  an  eighth-note,  and  a 


no 


MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

sixteenth-note.  The  repetition  ol  short  and  rapid  notes  is  also  very  com¬ 
mon  in  Afro-Brazilian  music.  The  major  mode  is  predominant  in  all 
Brazilian  folk  songs.  The  time-signature  is  two-four  in  most  Brazilian 
dances.  The  melodic  structure  of  a  typical  Brazilian  air  is  peculiar  in  that 
it  is  often  built  on  a  sequence. 

The  analysis  of  1 18  Brazilian  songs  in  the  collection  Guia  PraticOj  com¬ 
piled  by  Villa-Lobos  for  use  in  schools,  reveals  that  fully  iio  songs  are 
in  a  major  keyj  one  hundred  songs  are  in  duple  time.  Seventy-one  songs 
are  based  on  melodic  sequences.  Only  eight  songs  are  in  minors  eleven 
songs  are  in  three-four  time,  five  songs  in  six-eight,  and  one  in  five-four 
time.  Only  in  two  songs  is  the  first  beat  missing.  Rhythm  in  even  notes,  in 
rapid  tempo,  is  very  frequent. 

Mario  de  Andrade  writes  in  his  Ensaio  Sobre  Musica  Brasileira: 

Although  Brazilian  music  has  attained  an  original  ethnical  expression,  its 
sources  are  of  foreign  derivation.  It  is  Amerindian  in  a  small  percentage,  Afri¬ 
can  to  a  much  greater  degree,  and  Portuguese  in  an  overwhelmingly  large 
proportion.  Besides,  there  is  a  Spanish  influence,  mainly  in  its  Hispano- American 
aspect,  .  .  .  The  European  influence  is  revealed  not  only  through  parlor 
dances  such  as  the  Waltz,  Polka,  Mazurka,  and  the  Schottische,  but  also  in  the 
structure  of  the  Modinha,  ,  .  .  Apart  from  these  influences,  already  absorbed, 
we  must  consider  recent  contributions,  particularly  American  jazz.  The  jazz 
procedures  are  infiltrating  into  the  MaxtxSy  but,  curiously  enough,  the  poly¬ 
phonic  and  polyrhythmic  devices  of  jazz  do  not  alter  or  disfigure  the  character 
of  the  music.  ...  A  Brazilian  composer  should  derive  his  materials  and  his 
inspiration  from  native  folklore.  This  folklore,  in  its  characteristic  manifesta¬ 
tions,  reveals  the  origin  of  its  birth. 

Among  Brazilian  dances  and  songs,  the  Modinha  represents  the  purest 
European  strain.  The  word  Modinha  is  the  diminutive  of  Moda^  and  is 
directly  derived  from  Portuguese  songs  of  that  name.  The  early  Modinhas 
were  greatly  infliuenced  by  Italian  music.  Thus,  the  fifteen  songs  in  the 
collection  Modinhas  Imferiais  by  Mario  de  Andrade  (S.  Paulo,  1930), 
representing  the  style  of  the  Brazilian  Empire  (1822-1889),  are  little 
different  from  Italian  operatic  arias.  The  present-day  Modinhas  zvt 
sentimental  in  mood,  cast  mostly  in  minor  keys,  and  are  profusely  orna¬ 
mented  with  grace  notes  and  appoggiaturas.  The  harmonic  scheme  of 
the  Modinhas y  with  its  characteristic  modulation  into  the  minor  sub¬ 
dominant,  enhances  the  already  striking  melodic  affinity  existing  between 
Brazilian  sentimental  ballads  and  Russian  popular  songs,  an  affinity  that 
is  astonishing,  since  there  could  have  been  no  direct  influence. 


Brazilian  and  Russian  Melodies 


Other  Brazilian  airs  closely  related  to  European  music  are  the  T oada, 
and  perhaps  also  the  Chula.  The  Toada  is  the  Portuguese  word  for  the 
Spanish  Tonada,  and  is  simply  a  song  in  the  popular  vein.  The  Chula,  now 
rarely  heard  in  Brazil,  is  a  rustic  dance,  in  two-four  time,  and  in  a  major 
key. 

Brazilian  airs  and  dances  reflect  Negro  rhythms,  while  the  melodic 
line  usually  adheres  to  the  standard  pattern  of  a  short  symmetric  period, 
in  a  major  key  and  in  two-four  time.  The  names  of  these  dances — ^the 
Batuque,  the  Coco,  the  Congada,  the  Jon  go,  the  Lundu,  the  Maracatu, 
and  many  others — are  from  the  African  dialects  rather  than  from  any 
European  source. 

The  Batuque  has  been  popularized  in  the  concert  hall  by  Oscar  Lorenzo 
Fernandez,  whose  orchestral  dances  of  that  name  are  frequently  per¬ 
formed  by  orchestras  in  the  United  States.  The  Batuque,  also  known 
under  the  name  Batucada,  is  the  most  expressive  of  Afro-Brazilian  airs. 
It  is  danced  by  Negroes  in  a  circle,  with  much  clapping  of  hands,  beating 
on  the  drums,  and  making  noise  with  pieces  of  iron,  glass,  and  wood.  The 
basic  rhythm  is  common  to  most  Afro-Brazilian  dances,  centered  on  a 
figure  of  one  sixteenth-note,  one  eighth-note,  and  one  sixteenth-note. 

The  Congada  is  familiar  to  music  lovers  through  the  brilliant  orchestral 


1 13 


BRAZIL 


113 

version  of  the  dance  by  Francisco  Mignone.  The  word  Congada  is  de¬ 
rived  from  Congo,  a  religious  play  of  the  Brazilian  Negroes,  celebrated 
in  honor  of  Our  Lady  of  the  Rosary,  patron  saint  of  the  Negroes.  The 
Coco  is  a  dance  of  the  Batuque  type.  As  a  song,  it  comes  close  to  the 
primitive  African  incantations,  and  consists  of  short  phrases  shouted  out 
rather  than  sung.  The  Jon  go  also  harks  back  to  Africa.  In  it,  a  solo  voice 
is  accompanied  only  by  drums,  and  the  syncopation  is  violent.  The  Lundu 
is  a  song-dance  in  rapid  tempo,  sung  and  danced  to  the  accompaniment  of 
guitars.  A  variation  of  the  Lundu  is  the  Corta-Jaca,  a  rhythmic  dance  in 
rapid  movement.  Both  the  Lundu  and  the  Corta-Jaca  are  the  prototypes 
of  most  Afro-Brazilian-  dances,  and  are  probably  older  than  the  popular 
Maxixe  and  Samba, 

There  are  two  clearly  differentiated  forms  of  the  Samba,  the  rural  and 
the  urban.  The  rural  Samba  is  characterized  by  greater  syncopation  than 
the  city  Samba,  which  latter  is  less  varied  in  rhythm,  and  usually  adheres 
to  the  pattern  of  a  succession  of  even  notes  in  rapid  tempo.  In  its  ex¬ 
tremely  citified  form,  the  Samba  appears  as  the  Samba  Carioca.  It  is  a 
salon  dance,  the  word  Carioca  denoting  Rio  de  Janeiro. 

The  Samba  combines  freely  with  the  Tango,  the  Rumba,  and  the  Fox¬ 
trot,  In  such  hybrid  forms,  the  title  is  hyphenated.  The  Samba-Cangao 
(Samba-Song)  is  a  type  of  nostalgic  Serenade,  and  quite  different  in  char¬ 
acter  from  the  standard  Samba,  The  song  Brasil,  popularized  in  Disney’s 
film  Saludos  Amigos,  is  a  Samba-Cangao, 

So  universal  is  the  spread  of  the  Samba  that  virtually  all  Brazilian  airs 
and  dances  are  now  loosely  called  Sambas  by  Brazilians.  In  the  North, 
even  the  dance  halls  themselves  are  called  Sambas,  But  whatever  the 
various  forms  of  the  Samba,  its  three  principal  characteristics  are  always 
present.  They  are  the  duple  meter,  the  major  key,  and  lively  tempo. 


Brazilian  Samba 

Camargo  Guarnieri  has  given  a  perfect  stylization  of  the  urban  Samba 
in  his  third  Dansa  Brasileira.  llt  and  other  Brazilian  composers  have 


114-  MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

elevated  the  Samba  to  an  art  form,  as  distinctive  as  any  of  the  European 
dance  forms  used  in  classical  music. 

The  Max'ixe,  which  attained  immense  popularity  all  over  the  world  in 
1910-1915,  is  of  mixed  musical  parentage.  Arthur  Ramos,  in  his  Folclore 
Negro  no  Brasil^  speaks  of  the  Maxixe  as  “a  Brazilian  dance  which  has  bor¬ 
rowed  Negro  elements  from  the  Batuque  and  incorporated  the  stylization 
of  Hispano— American  and  European  music.”  Mario  de  Andrade  writes: 

In  the  Maxixe  there  are  reflected  in  a  distorted  shape  the  rhythms  of  the 
Caterete  and  other  rural  dances,  deformed  lines  from  the  Emboladas  of 
the  Northeast,  and  even  the  rhythms  of  children’s  rounds.” 

The  Oxford  Companion  to  Music  gives  the  following  description  of 
the  Maxixe:  “A  rather  strenuous  Brazilian  dance  in  two-in-a-measure 
time,  which  had  some  European  popularity  in  the  early  years  of  the  nine¬ 
teenth  century  and  then  reappeared  about  1911-1913  in  a  somewhat 
different  form  as  the  T ango.”  Apart  from  the  identification  of  the  Maxixe 
with  the  Tango,  with  which  it  has  little  in  common  except  the  time- 
signature,  there  is  in  this  definition  an  inaccurate  dating.  The  Maxixe  did 
not  appear  even  in  Brazil  before  the  last  quarter  of  the  nineteenth  cen¬ 
tury  }  the  first  mention  of  the  Maxixe  in  Brazil  was  made  in  the  Gazeta 
da  Tarde  of  January  25,  1884. 

One  of  the^most  important  manifestations  of  Brazilian  musical  folk¬ 
lore  IS  the  Choro.  It  does  not  represent  any  definite  form  of  composition, 
but  covers  a  number  of  Brazilian  airs.  Originally,  the  Choro  was  the 
name  given  to  an  ensemble  of  instruments,  African  and  European,  similar 
to  the  jazz  band,  but  antedating  the  appearance  of  jazz  in  the  United 
States.  As  in  jazz,  the  players  of  Chores  improvise  in  free  and  often  dis¬ 
sonant  counterpoint,  which  they  call  Contracanto.  By  metonymy.  Chores 
has^come  to  mean  the  music  played  by  the  Choro  ensembles,  in  plural, 
Chores.  Villa-Lobos  has  enlarged  the  meaning  of  the  word  Chores,  apply¬ 
ing  it  to  any  composition  in  the  Brazilian  manner,  from  a  guitar  solo  to 
a  symphonic  or  choral  work. 

Another  type  of  Brazilian  folklore  which  cannot  be  reduced  to  any 
definite  musical  form  is  the  Desafio.  The  word  means  a  competition,  for 
in  the  Desafio,  two  or  more  singers  contend  with  one  another  in  free 
improvisation. 

A  powerful  resource  of  Brazilian  music  is  represented  by  European  folk 
songs  acclimatized  in  Brazil.  These  airs  experience  a  sea-change,  which 
alters  their  European  inflection,  and  makes  them  truly  native  in  func¬ 
tion.  The  Brazilian  Waltz  has  little  in  common  with  its  Viennese  proto- 


BRAZIL 


“5 


type.  It  Is  languorous,  and  intertwined  with  grace-notes,  appoggiaturas, 
and  chromatic  embellishments.  The  March  becomes  the  Marcha  or 
Marchinha  (little  March),  which  is  a  lively  two-step.  The  European 
Polka  is  Brazilianized  into  a  Miudinho,  American  jazz  colors  the  Brazilian 
rhythm  of  a  Ponteio,  The  Brazilian  Tango  and  the  Tanguinho  (little 
Tango)  are  much  more  languid,  more  sentimental,  and  more  tropical,  so 
to  speak,  than  the  Argentine  Tango,  Portuguese  airs  are  similarly  in¬ 
corporated  into  Brazilian  folklore.  The  Tirana^  a  work  song  of  the 
Azores,  is  also  naturalized  in  Brazil,  where  it  approximates  the  rhythm 
of  a  Samba,  Finally,  Aboiosy  which  are  shepherds’  songs,  arhythmic  and 
wordless,  and  Pregohy  street  vendors’  cries,  add  to  the  color  of  Brazil’s 
urban  and  rural  life. 

To  these  dances  and  airs  there  may  be  added  a  long  list  of  regional 
variants,  not  always  clearly  differentiated,  and  often  representing  a 
familiar  Samba  or  a  Batuque  under  another  name.  In  the  second  edition 
(1942)  of  Renato  Almeida’s  monumental  work,  Historia  da  Musica 
Brasileiray  two  hundred  and  seventy-nine  pages  are  devoted  to  the  descrip¬ 
tion  of  various  forms  of  Brazilian  folk  music. 

Brazilian  composers,  particularly  Villa-Lobos,  Fernandez,  Mignone, 
and  Guarnieri,  have  written  numerous  compositions  in  the  style  of  native 
folk  songs,  and  by  so  doing,  have  preserved  the  indigenous  Brazilian 
rhythms  in  musical  literature.  Sometimes,  the  titles  of  their  compositions 
indicate  a  mood,  a  character,  or  a  landscape,  rather  than  a  definite  musical 
form.  For  instance,  the  Cabocloy  which  is  the  name  of  Indian  peasants, 
Indicates  music  of  rustic  character.  The  music  of  the  countryside  is  evoked 
in  Mignone’s  Lendas  Sertanejas  (Legends  of  the  Country). 

Music  for  children  is  an  integral  part  of  Brazilian  folklore.  Villa-Lobos 
has  written  a  number  of  Cirandas  (round  dances),  and,  in  the  diminutive, 
Cirandinhas.  Rodas  are  children’s  marching  songs.  The  well-known  song 
Caey  Caey  BalaOy  which  accompanies  the  game  of  sending  a  balloon  flying 
in  the  air,  Is  a  typical  example  of  Brazilian  folk  music  for  children. 

All  these  various  dance  forms,  Afro-Brazilian,  Amerindian,  and  Latin 
European,  are  represented  at  the  Carnival  of  Rio,  celebrated  annually 
in  February.  For  this  occasion  the  untamed  songs  of  the  jungle  are 
polished  up  and  reduced  to  a  singable  design.  There  commercial  song 
hits  are  made.  From  the  Carnival  of  Rio,  the  rest  of  the  Americas  learns 
what  the  Brazilian  jungle  sings. 

In  the  meantime,  the  jungle  continues  to  cultivate  its  primitive  art. 
The  Indians  hold  the  forbidding  rites  of  Yurufari.  The  Brazilian  Ne- 


ii6  MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

groes  practice  their  fetichistic  ritual  of  the  Macumba^  from  which  stem 
many  Brazilian  dances.  The  Caterete^  the  Emboladay  the  Maracatu^  the 
Chibay  the  CururUy  the  Coco  de  ZambSy  and  other  dances  establish  the  link 
between  Africa  and  Brazil.  The  Macumba  is  also  known  under  the  names 
CandombUy  BabacuSy  Catimboy  and  Pagelanga,  The  songs  of  the  M&- 
cumha  are  often  named  after  the  Afro-Brazilian  deities,  such  as  XangOy 
the  Jupiter  of  the  jungle.  Closely  connected  with  the  Macumba  is  the 
Cucumbiy  an  Afro-Brazilian  pantomime.  The  name,  often  in  its  diminu¬ 
tive  form,  Cucumbhinhoy  is  used  by  modern  Brazilian  composers  to 
designate  a  lively  syncopated  dance. 

The  most  interesting  feature  of  Afro-Brazilian  folklore  is  the  mixture 
of  jungle  elements  with  Christian  symbolism.  Such  syncretism  of  cultures 
is  observed  in  the  formation  of  the  FrevoSy  which  were  derived  from 
Christmas  plays  introduced  by  the  Jesuits  into  Brazil  in  the  sixteenth 
century,  and  variously  known  as  TernoSy  Ranchos y  or  B locos.  When  these 
plays  were  assimilated  by  the  Negro  slaves  of  the  interior,  they  acquired 
many  African  characteristics.  The  music  of  the  Frevos  is  apt  to  be  sharply 
syncopated.  When  performed  instrumentally,  the  Frevos  are  usually 
scored  for  brass  instruments.  Jose  Siqueira  has  written  a  concert  type  of 
Frevos y  for  an  ensemble  of  trumpets  and  trombones. 

Among  native  Brazilian  plays  in  which  the  Christian  element  pre¬ 
dominates,  the  most  popular  is  the  trilogy,  Pastorisy  Chegangasy  and 
Reisados,  The  Pastoris  represent  the  shepherds’  adoration  of  Christ.  The 
ChegangaSy  or  Chegangas  de  Marujos  (Arrival  of  Mariners)  are  historic 
dramas  picturing  the  adventures  of  the  great  navigators  who  discovered 
Brazil.  Elaborate  pageants  depicting  the  age  of  discovery  are  called 
Marujadas,  The  Reisados  (the  word  comes  from  Reisy  the  Kings)  com¬ 
memorate  the  pilgrimage  of  the  Magi  to  Bethlehem.  But  the  concluding 
act  of  the  Reisados y  Bumba  Meu  Boi  (My  Good  Ox),  is  pagan  in  origin, 
and  is  the  glorification  of  the  sacred  ox. 

Brazilian  folk  orchestras  possess  a  rich  choice  of  indigenous  instruments. 
Some  are  native  counterparts  of  European  instruments,  the  Violao  (gui¬ 
tar),  tht  Cavaquinha  (mandolin),  and  the  Rabeca  (violin).  But  the 
greatest  part  of  the  native  orchestra  consists  of  drums,  shakers,  and 
scrapers  of  African  origin.  There  are  drums,  bearing  different  names  in 
different  regions  of  Brazil,  such  as  the  Tambu  or  Tambory  the  Caxambu 
(bass-drum),  the  TabaquS  or  (high  drum),  tht  Trocano  {tht 

jungle  drum  made  out  of  a  hollow  tree  trunk).  Then  there  are  various 
shakers,  the  Chocalhoy  sometimes  spelled  Xocalho  or  Xucalhoy  which  is 


BRAZIL 


117 


a  metal  or  wooden  rattle  j  the  Maraca^  which  is  a  gourd  with  dry  seeds 
inside;  and  the  Chequer e  (also  called  XaquS-Xaque)j  which  is  a  double 
rattle  on  a  stick.  There  are  rasps  or  ratchets,  of  which  the  most  popular  is 
the  Reco-Reco^  a  notched  wooden  cylinder,  which  is  rubbed  with  a  stick; 
and  the  Ganzdy  usually  made  of  a  hollowed-out  bamboo  stick.  The  AdujS 
or  Pandeiro  is  the  Brazilian  tambourine.  The  Adjd  is  a  conic  metal  bell, 
and  the  A  go  go  is  an  iron  slab,  which  is  struck  with  a  metal  stick.  An  in¬ 
strument  which  is  used  at  Carnival  shows  and  called  Cuica  or  Puita  is  of 
the  animal-roar  type.  It  is  usually  made  of  a  tin  cylinder  with  a  drumhead 
on  one  end,  and  has  a  gut  string  rubbed  with  rosin  which  extends  from 
the  center  of  the  drumhead;  it  is  played  by  pulling  the  hand  tightly  over 
the  string.  It  emits  a  sound  similar  to  the  grunt  of  a  pig,  according  to  the 
description  of  a  Brazilian  author. 

The  role  of  native  percussion  instruments  in  the  primitive  rites  of 
Brazilian  Negroes  is  discussed  in  the  authoritative  article  Drums  and 
Drummers  in  Ajro-Brazilian  Cult  Life  by  Melville  J.  Herskovits,  pub¬ 
lished  in  The  Musical  Quarterly  of  July,  1944. 

Luciano  Gallet  (1893-1931),  who  was  one  of  the  first  scientific  explor¬ 
ers  of  Brazilian  folklore,  notated  the  performance  of  an  Afro-Brazilian 
village  ensemble,  which  included  the  voice,  the  clapping  of  hands 
{P almas)  J  the  drum  Tambu^  the  shaker  Chocalho^  the  tambourine  Pan- 
deirOy  and  the  bass  drum,  Caxambu  or  Bombo,  Each  instrument  has  an 
independent  rhythmic  figure,  resulting  in  an  astonishingly  rich  polyryth- 
mic  design. 

Luciano  Gallet  summarizes  the  essence  of  Brazilian  music  in  these 
words: 

Brazilian  music  was  born  from  the  fusion  of  the  elements  of  Portuguese  Latin 
melos  with  African  rhythms.  The  conjunction  of  these  elements  with  the  racial 
contribution  of  the  Indian,  the  master  of  the  continent,  has  originated  the 
musical  psychology  of  the  people  of  Brazil.  Brazil’s  musical  material,  whether 
introduced  by  the  Portuguese  or  imported  from  Africa,  is  enormously  rich  in 
form,  melody,  and  rhythm.  The  alien  materials  were  modified  in  the  new 
surroundings,  and  there  emerged  new  modalities,  which  are  now  acquiring 
shape.  This  music,  rich  in  flavor,  exuberant  in  sentiment,  and  full  of  inner  life, 
begins  to  attract  the  attention  of  foreign  music  scholars  who  are  coming  to 
Brazil  to  learn  the  new  art.  Within  a  short  period  of  time,  Brazilian  music, 
conscious  of  its  strength,  will  greatly  contribute  towards  the  affirmation  of 
Brazil’s  vitahty. 


Vozes 


The  wealth  of  Brazilian  folk  music  is  matched  by  a  similarly  flourishing 
state  of  musical  culture  in  Brazil.  The  Jesuit  missionaries  were  the  first 
to  introduce  European  music,  mostly  liturgic,  into  the  new  territory.  Secu¬ 
lar  music  was  not  long  in  following.  As  early  as  1747?  there  were  opera 
performances  in  Rio  de  Janeiro,  and  one  of  the  streets  was  called  Rua  da 
Of  era.  In  Travels  in  South  America  During  the  Years  181^-20-21 
(London,  1825),  Alexander  Caldcleugh  writes: 

The  Opera,  which  is  supported  by  an  annual  lottery,  and  afforded  to  many 
some  amusement,  was  not  conducted  in  that  way  which  an  European  audience 
would  have  demanded.  No  great  attention  to  cleanliness  was  paid,  and  it  cannot 
be  denied  that  some  of  the  Venuses  of  the  ballet  were  not  exactly  of  an  European 
tint;  but,  in  this  climate,  great  allowances  must  be  made,  and  the  first  theater 
in  South  America  must  not  be  too  severely  criticized.  The  performances  were 
alternately  Portuguese  and  Italian. 

The  same  author  describes  the  concerts  of  the  Royal  Chapel  of  Music 
at  the  Court  of  the  Emperor  of  Brazil: 


BRAZIL 


119 

In  the  opinion  of  most  persons,  the  Royal  Chapel  afforded  the  greatest  satis¬ 
faction  to  the  lovers  of  music.  Similarly  arranged  to  that  of  Lisbon  in  former 
days,  no  expense  was  spared  to  render  the  performance  fully  worthy  of  the 
subject.  Sopranos,  as  many  as  fourteen  or  fifteen,  mingled  their  peculiar  voices 
in  the  music  of  Portugallo  and  the  finest  church  composers,  forming,  on  the 
whole,  a  strain  of  melody  duly  appreciated  by  foreigners  in  particular.  Excepting 
when  the  court  was  present,  the  auditory  was  principally  composed  of  foreigners 
and  the  lowest  classes  of  society. 

Portugallo  was  Marcos  Portugal,  celebrated  Portuguese  musician, 
who  went  to  Brazil  in  1811,  and  remained  there  until  his  death  in  1830. 
His  body  was,  many  years  later,  transported  back  to  Portugal  for  burial 
there. 

^  Another  interesting  sidelight  on  the  musical  life  in  Brazil  early  in  the 
nineteenth  century  is  provided  by  the  following  advertisement  in  the 
Gazette  of  Rio  de  Janeiro  of  July  8,  1820: 

Whoever  wishes  to  purchase  a  slave  suitable  as  a  coachman,  who  can  play  on 
the  Piano  and  Marimba,  and  combines  with  a  knowledge  of  music  some 
acc^uaintance  with  the  trade  of  a  tailor,  may  apply  at  the  Apothecary^s  shop. 

Among  the  names  of  native  Brazilian  musicians  of  the  first  half  of  the 
nineteenth  century  are  Damiao  Barbosa  de  Araujo  ( 1778-1856),  violinist 
and  composer  of  religious  music;  Jose  Reboucas  (1789-1843),  who  was 
the  first  Brazilian  musician  to  study  in  Europe;  and  Jose  Mauricio  Nunes 
Garcia  (1767-1830),  mulatto  son  of  a  Portuguese  colonist  and  a  slave 
girl.  Jose  Mauricio  is  usually  regarded  as  the  father  of  Brazilian  music. 
His  models  were  Handel  and  Gluck.  He  wrote  church  music,  some  of 
which  has  been  published. 

The  progress  of  music  in  Brazil  was  in  no  small  measure  indebted  to 
the  Emperor  Pedro  I,  who  was  himself  an  amateur  composer.  An  Over¬ 
ture  from  his  opera  was  performed  in  Paris  in  1832.  Pedro  I  was  also  the 
author  of  the  Brazilian  Hymn  of  Independence,  which  he  wrote  on 
September  7,  1822,  immediately  after  he  had  declared  Brazil’s  inde¬ 
pendence  from  Portugal  and  was  proclaimed  Constitutional  Emperor. 
A  detailed  account  by  a  contemporary  writer  specifies  the  exact  time  of 
the  composition  of  the  Hymn,  between  5  ^30  nine  o’clock  in  the  eve¬ 
ning  of  September  7,  1822,  which  is  Brazil’s  Independence  Day.  Pedro  I 
is  reported  to  have  sung  the  Hymn,  accompanied  by  a  chorus,  at  a  patri¬ 
otic  gathering  in  Sao  Paulo  on  the  same  night. 

After  the  abdication  of  Pedro  I  in  1831,  a  new  patriotic  song  was 


120 


MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 


written  by  Francisco  Manuel  da  Silva  (1795-1865)5  an  educated  musi¬ 
cian  and  composer.  This  song  has  become  the  present  National  Anthem 
of  Brazil.  The  story  of  the  Hymn  of  Independence  and  the  National 
Anthem  of  Brazil  is  told  in  complete  detail  in  the  brochure,  Hino  da 
Indefendencia  e  Hino  Nacional  by  Jose  C.  Caldeira  (Sao  Paulo,  1941). 

Brazilian  music  came  of  age  with  the  advent  of  Carlos  Gomes  (1836- 
1896)3  the  only  native  composer  whose  music  has  become  part  of  the 
operatic  repertoire  all  over  the  world.  Gomes  also  exemplifies  the  tri¬ 
umph  of  Italian  influence  in  Brazilian  music.  His  celebrated  opera  11 
Guar  any  was  written  to  the  story  by  a  Brazilian  national  writer,  Jose 
Alencar,  who  was  the  James  Fenimore  Cooper  of  Brazil,  and  cultivated 
Indian  folklore  in  his  novels.  Gomes  wrote  II  Guar  any  to  a  libretto  in 
Italian,  and  the  opera  was  produced  in  Italy  before  it  was  heard  in  Brazil. 

Joao  Gomes  de  Araujo  (1846-1942),  whose  long  life  spanned  almost 
a  century,  also  followed  the  Italian  model  in  his  operatic  production.  In 
fact,  so  great  was  the  grip  of  Italian  tradition  on  Brazilian  music  in  the 
nineteenth  century  that  Luigi  Chiaffarelli,  an  Italian  musician  who  lived 
in  Brazil,  declared  in  1906:  regard  Brazil  as  a  musical  province  of 

Italy.” 

The  first  Brazilian  opera  in  the  Portuguese  language  was  A  Noite  de 
Sao  Joao  (St.  John’s  Eve)  by  Elias  Alvares  Lobo  (1834-1901),  writ¬ 
ten  to  a  story  by  Jose  Alencar,  the  author  of  II  Guar  any.  In  his  valuable 
and  informative  brochure  Relagao  das  O'peras  de  Autores  Brasileiros  (Rio 
de  Janeiro,  1938),  the  Brazilian  musicologist  Luiz  Heitor  lists  107  operas 
by  59  Brazilian  composers.  Most  of  these  operas  are  written  to  Italian 
libretti.  Fifty  operas  have  been  performed,  but  none  remained  in  the 
active  repertoire,  with  the  exception  of  the  operas  of  Carlos  Gomes.  The 
music  of  the  operas  written  before  1910  is  definitely  Italianate.  The  dis¬ 
tinctive  Brazilian  quality  is  revealed  in  the  operas  of  the  modern  school 
of  Brazilian  composers,  Villa-Lobos,  Fernandez,  Mignone,  and  a  few 
others.  But  although  the  bust  of  Villa-Lobos  graces  the  vestibule  of  the 
Rio  Opera  House,  none  of  his  operas  has  been  given.  Fernandez’s  opera 
Malazarte^  based  on  a  native  legend,  was  performed  in  1941  in  an  Italian 
translation  of  the  original  Portuguese  text  by  the  Brazilian  poet  Graga 
Aranha. 

If  nineteenth-century  Brazil  depended  on  Europe  for  its  music,  native 
musical  activities  were  nevertheless  remarkably  developed.  One  can  form 
an  idea  of  the  popular  interest  in  music  from  the  number  of  musical  or¬ 
ganizations,  societies,  and  clubs  that  flourished  in  Brazil  in  the  second 


BRAZIL 


121 


half  of  the  nineteenth  century.  In  Rio  de  Janeiro  in  the  i88o^s  there  were 
the  Beethoven  Clubj  Ricardo  Wagner  Club,  Rossini  Club,  Schubert  Club, 
Weber  Clubj  and  in  Sao  Paulo  flourished  the  Haydn  Club  and  Mendels¬ 
sohn  Club.  There  existed  also  many  German  and  French  music  societies. 
Foreign  artists  frequently  visited  Brazil.  The  Portuguese  pianist  Arthur 
Napoleao  (1843-1925)  settled  in  Brazil  and  founded  there  the  well- 
known  music  publishing  firm  bearing  his  name.  The  Spanish  musician  Jose 
Amat,  who  settled  in  Brazil  in  1848,  was  the  founder  of  the  Imperial 
Academy  of  Music.  He  published  two  albums  of  Brazilian  songs,  Melodies 
Bresiliennes  and  Les  Nuits  BrSsilienneSy  conceived  in  the  style  of  early 
Modinhas.  In  the  twentieth  century,  Darius  Milhaud,  the  French 
modernist,  who  served  as  an  attache  at  the  French  Embassy  in  Rio  de 
Janeiro,  composed  a  suite  entitled  Saudades  do  Brasil  {Saudades  means 
nostalgic  memories). 

Symphonic  music  in  Brazil  lagged  somewhat  behind  the  brilliant  flower¬ 
ing  of  Brazilian  folklore  and  creative  composition.  The  first  important 
symphonic  organization  was  the  Sociedade  de  Concertos  Sinfonicosy  estab¬ 
lished  in  Rio  de  Janeiro  in  1908,  and  conducted  by  the  Brazilian  com¬ 
poser  Francisco  Braga  until  his  retirement  in  1933.  Members  of  this 
orchestra  later  joined  the  orchestra  of  the  Opera  House,  which  has  also 
presented  numerous  symphonic  concerts.  A  new  orchestra,  named  Or- 
questra  Sinjonica  Brasileiray  was  inaugurated  in  Rio  on  July  ii,  1940, 
under  the  direction  of  the  Hungarian  conductor  Eugen  Szenkar.  In  Sao 
Paulo,  the  Sociedade  de  Concertos  Sinfonicos  was  organized  on  October  17, 
1921. 

In  the  realm  of  musical  education,  Brazil  possesses  excellent  conserva¬ 
tories  and  music  schools.  Its  oldest  musical  institution  is  the  Escola  No- 
clonal  de  Musica,  which  recently  celebrated  its  hundredth  anniversary.  It 
was  founded  on  November  27,  1841,  under  the  directorship  of  Francisco 
Manuel  da  Silva,  the  composer  of  the  Brazilian  National  Anthem.  The 
original  name  was  the  Imferial  Conservatorio  de  Musica^  which  was 
changed  to  the  Instituto  Nacional  de  Musica  after  the  fall  of  the  Empire, 
and  later  to  the  Escola  Nacional  de  Musica.  Its  present  Director  is  the 
music  educator  Antonio  Sa  Pereira,  and  its  staff  includes  prominent 
Brazilian  composers.  A  modern  conservatory,  named  the  Conservatorio 
Brasileiro  de  Musica y  W2.s  established  by  Oscar  Lorenzo  Fernandez  in 
1940  in  BSg  dtJ^ntiro.The  Conservatorio  Dramatico  e  Musical  in  Sao 
Paulo,  under  the  direction  of  Francisco  Gasabona,  is  an  important  educa- 


122  MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

tional  center.  There  are  also  conservatories  and  music  schools  in  Porto 
AlegrCj  Bahia,  and  Belem. 

A  significant  development  in  modern  musical  education  in  Brazil  was 
the  appointment  in  1932  of  Villa-Lobos  as  General  Director  of  Music 
Education.  He  has  introduced  novel  methods  of  musical  instruction, 
particularly  in  the  domain  of  choral  singing.  Among  the  subjects  Villa- 
Lobos  includes  in  the  curriculum  of  Brazilian  schools  are  Calif asia  (the 
art  of  fine  speech),  Calif onia  (the  art  of  fine  singing),  and  ^^orpheonic 
effects,’^  which  comprise  vocalization  on  consonants,  percussive  effects, 
vocal  sighs  and  so  on.  In  an  impassioned  invocation  to  St.  Cecilia,  patron 
saint  of  music,  read  over  the  radio  on  November  22,  1939,  Villa-Lobos 
expressed  his  hopes  for  the  further  progress  of  music  in  Brazil: 

Divine  Protector,  who  has  given  to  Brazil  the  gift  of  music,  who  has  exalted 
the  birds,  the  rivers,  the  waterfalls,  the  winds,  and  the  people  of  this  land  into  an 
incomparable  symphony  whose  melodies  and  harmonies  have  contributed  to  the 
formation  of  Brazil’s  soul!  Illumine  those  who  cultivate  Brazilian  music! 
Encourage  the  musicians  disappointed  in  their  musical  life!  Enlighten  public 
opinion  so  as  to  make  the  appreciation  of  Brazilian  art  possible !  Gratify  the  wish 
of  those  who  believe  music  to  be  of  national  importance,  educating  the  soul  as 
gymnastics  strengthen  and  develop  the  body!  Lend  faith  to  those  who  trust 
that  the  day  will  come  when  music  becomes  the  Sonorous  Flag  of  Universal 
Peace ! 

Musicology  is  being  fostered  in  Brazil  as  a  separate  science  thanks  to 
the  efforts  of  the  pioneers  of  Brazilian  folklore,  Luciano  Gallet,  Luiz 
Heitor,  and  Mario  de  Andrade,  who  have  published  collections  of 
Brazilian  folk  songs.  Musical  folklore  in  Brazil  is  dealt  with  by  Mario 
de  Andrade  in  his  annotated  essays,  Ensaio  sohre  Musica  Brasileira  and 
Modinhas  Imferiaisy  both  now  out  of  print.  As  to  music  history  in  Brazil, 
the  most  complete  work  is  Historia  da  Musica  Brasileira  by  Renato 
Almeida,  of  which  the  second  edition  appeared  in  1942.  It  is  a  volume  of 
507  pages,  with  151  musical  illustrations.  The  first  volume  of  Historia 
da  Musica  by  Ulysses  Paranhos  (1940)  includes  biographical  sketches 
of  modern  Brazilian  composers.  Storia  della  Musica  nel  Brasile  by  the 
Italian  musician  Vicenzo  Cernicchiaro,  published  in  Italy  in  1926,  is  an 
unsatisfactory  compilation,  in  which  nuggets  of  useful  information  are 
sunk  in  the  mire  of  rambling  accounts  of  concert  tours  by  visiting  musicians. 
Articles  on  Brazilian  music  are  featured  in  the  foremost  music  periodical 
of  Brazil,  the  Revista  Brasileira  de  Musica,  The  cause  of  Brazilian  modern- 


BRAZIL 


123 


ism  was  championed  in  the  short-lived  magazine  Musica  Viva,  published 
in  Sao  Paulo  from  1940  to  1942. 

The  precursors  of  the  modern  school  of  Brazilian  creative  composition 
were  Alexander  Levi  (1864—1892),  Leopoldo  Miguez  (1850—1902.), 
Henrique  Oswald  (1852-1931),  Glauco  Velasquez  ( 1884-1913),  and 
Alberto  Nepomuceno  ( 1864—1920).  The  true  pioneer  of  modern  Brazdian 
music  was  Alberto  Nepomuceno,  who  composed  the  first  orchestral  suite 
based  on  Brazilian  themes.  The  present  generation  of  Brazdian  com¬ 
posers  includes  many  names  already  well  known  outside  of  Brazil. 

MUSICI-A.NS  OF  BR.4ZIL 

Mario  de  Andrade  (1893-1945),  a  modern  poet  and  Brazilianist, 
greatly  contributed  to  the  development  of  native  folklore  collecting  by 
his  searching  analysis  of  the  rhythmic  and  melodic  structure  of  Brazilian 
songs  and  dances.  His  publications  include  Ensaio  sohre  IMusica  Brasileira 
(1928)  and  Modinhas  Imferiais  (193OJ  dealing  with  the  development 
of  Modinhas  during  the  Brazilian  Empire).  He  also  edited  Gallet’s 
Estudos  de  Folclore. 

Joao  Gomes  de  Araujo  (1846-1942)  died  in  Sao  Paulo,  on  Septem¬ 
ber  8, 1942,  at  the  age  of  ninety-six.  He  studied  music  at  the  Conservatory 
of  Rio  de  Janeiro,  graduating  in  1865.  In  1884  he  went  to  Italy,  where 
he  wrote  four  operas,  Edmea,  Carmosina,  B'laria  Pet-rovna  (on  a  Russian 
subject),  and  Helena.  Carmosina  was  produced  in  Milan  on  May  i,  1888, 
in  the  presence  of  Pedro  II,  Emperor  of  Brazil.  Apart  from  operas, 
Araujo  wrote,  between  1899  and  1925,  six  Symphonies,  two  Cantatas, 
six  liturgic  Masses,  sixty  songs,  piano  pieces,  and  instrumental  composi¬ 
tions.  Araujo’s  style  of  composition  was  derived  from  that  of  nineteenth- 
century  Italian  opera,  and  he  rarely  used  Brazilian  folklore  as  a  source 
of  inspiration.  The  vocal  score  of  his  opera  Maria  Petrovna  has  been 
published  by  Ricordi. 

Francisco  Braga  (1868-1945)  studied  clarinet  in  Rio  de  Janeiro, 
and  later  took  up  composition.  His  first  work  was  a  Fantasie-Ouverture 
for  orchestra  which  was  performed  at  the  inaugural  concert  of  the  Society 
of  Popular  Concerts  in  Rio  de  Janeiro  on  January  5,  1887.  Upon  the 
proclamation  of  the  Brazilian  Republic,  Francisco  Braga  composed  a 
Republican  hymn,  which  earned  him  a  two-year  travel  fellowship  from 
the  government.  Braga  went  to  Paris,  where  he  studied  with  Massenet, 
whose  music  influenced  Braga’s  own  style  of  composition  profoundly. 


124  MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

He  conducted  a  concert  o£  Brazilian  music  in  Paris,  including  his  own 
symphonic  poem,  entitled  Cauchemar  (Nightmare).  Later  he  went  to 
Germany,  where  he  studied  Wagner’s  operas,  and  composed  a  symphonic 
poem  on  Brazilian  themes,  "NLardha,  Impressed  with  the  Italian  verismOy 
Braga  attempted  the  composition  o£  an  opera  which  would  constitute  a 
Brazilian  counterpart  o£  CdvMerid  Rusticanci,  The  result  was  a  one-act 
opera,  Jufira^  in  which  an  Indian  maiden  kills  her  unfaithful  lover.  The 
opera  was  produced  in  Rio  de  Janeiro  on  March  20,  1899?  shortly  after 
Braga’s  return  to  Brazil.  He  also  composed  a  four-act  opera,  Anita  Gari¬ 
baldi  From  1908  to  1933,  Braga  conducted  the  orchestra  of  the  Sociedade 
de  Concertos  Sinjonicos  in  Rio  de  Janeiro,  and  presented  numerous 
works  by  Brazilian  composers,  as  well  as  the  classical  repertoire.  As  a  com¬ 
poser,  Braga  represents  the  romantic  tradition  in  Brazilian  music,  with  a 
harmonic  idiom  in  the  nineteenth-century  manner  and  some  reflections  of 
Wagnerian  dramatism.  His  symphonic  poems,  all  very  short,  bear  descrip¬ 
tive  titles,  PaysagCy  Insomnia y  Cauchemar y  Crefusculoy  Chant  d^ Automne. 
Braga  has  written  numerous  liturgical  works,  including  two  Masses  and  a 
Te  Deiim;  chamber  music,  songs,  and  piano  pieces.  His  Hymn  of  the  N a- 
tional  Banner  has  become  an  ofScial  patriotic  song.  His  piano  Trio  was 
published  by  the  University  of  Rio  de  Janeiro  in  1937?  some  songs 
have  been  published  by  Ricordi.  The  scores  of  NLarabdy  Cauchemar y  and 
Paysage  are  included  in  the  Fleisher  Collection  in  Philadelphia.  A  bio¬ 
graphical  brochure  by  Tapajos  Gomes,  Francisco  Bragay  was  published 
in  Rio  de  Janeiro  in  1937. 

Jose  Vieira  Brandao  (1911 - )  is  active  primarily  as  a  pianist.  He 

studied  in  Rio  de  Janeiro,  at  the  Escola  Nacional  de  Musicay  graduating 
in  1929.  In  1932  he  joined  Villa-Lobos  in  organizing  choral  singing  in 
Brazilian  schools.  Brandao  began  to  compose  in  1935*  He  has  written  a 
number  of  songs,  mostly  to  texts  expressive  of  Brazilian  folklore,  and 
several  piano  pieces.  Ten  of  his  songs  are  published.  Brandao  writes  in 
a  simple  unassuming  style  without  attempts  at  modernism. 

Walter  Burle  Marx  (1902— — ),  the  composer  and  conductor,  is  the 
son  of  a  German-Jewish  father  and  a  Brazilian  mother.  He  studied  piano 
at  the  age  of  seven  with  his  mother  and  in  1921  went  to  Berlin,  where 
he  took  lessons  in  composition  with  Reznicek,  and  in  conducting  with 
Weingartner.  In  1925-1926  Burle  Marx  gave  piano  recitals  in  Vienna, 
Berlin,  Paris,  and  Milan.  His  first  orchestral  composition,  Varia- 

timsy  md  FuguCy  was  played  at  Rostock  on  November  23,  1926.  In  1928 


BRAZIL 


125 


Burle  Marx  returned  to  Brazil  and  founded  an  orchestra  named  the 
Philharmonic  of  Rio  de  Janeiro.  He  conducted  his  Fantastic  Efisodey 
which  is  the  third  movement  of  his  Symphony,  at  the  World^s  Fair  in 
New  York  on  May  4,  1939,  and  received  great  praise  in  the  press.  Orches¬ 
tral  scores  and  parts  of  Fantastic  Efisodcy  are  available  through  the  As¬ 
sociated  Music  Publishers. 

Agostino  Cantu  is  of  Italian  extraction  5  he  was  born  in  Milan  in  1880, 
and  studied  at  the  Conservatory  of  Milan.  His  opera  II  Poeta  won  a  prize 
at  the  Sonzogno  competition  in  1902.  Subsequently  he  was  engaged  to 
teach  piano  at  the  Conservatorio  Musical  in  Sao  Paulo,  Brazil,  where  he 
settled  down  as  a  pedagogue  and  composer.  Cantu  has  written  numerous 
piano  compositions,  of  which  many  are  derived  from  Brazilian  inspiration, 
such  as  Tres  Rafsodias  Brasileirasy  Tres  Lendas  BrasileiraSy  and  Im- 
fressoes  Brasileiras,  Other  works  are  in  a  general  European  manner: 
ScherzettOy  Kermessey  Cavaliere  Araboy  Polonaise  Fantastiquey  etc.  Most 
of  these  piano  pieces  have  been  published  by  Ricordi. 

Dinora  de  Carvalho  (1905 - )  studied  piano  at  the  Conservatorio 

Musical  in  Sao  Paulo,  and  later  with  Isidor  Philipp  in  France.  She  has 
given  many  concerts  in  Brazil.  In  1932  she  took  lessons  in  composition. 
Dinora  de  Carvalho  has  written  numerous  pieces  for  piano,  particularly 
for  children,  songs,  and  Fantasia  Brasileira  for  piano  and  orchestra.  She 
emphasizes  native  color  in  her  music,  and  her  harmonic  style  follows 
some  of  Debussy^s  procedures. 

Eleazar  de  Carvalho  (1912- — )  played  the  tuba  in  the  Naval  Band 
and  studied  composition  in  the  Escola  Nacional  de  Musica  in  Rio  de 
Janeiro.  His  interest  lies  primarily  in  theater  music.  He  has  written  two 
operas,  A  Descoberta  do.  Brasil  (Discovery  of  Brazil)  and  TiradenteSy 
both  intensely  Brazilian  in  subject  matter  and  musical  treatment.  Tira- 
dentes  (literally,  tooth-puller)  was  the  nidename  of  a  Brazilian  hero  of 
the  Revolution,  who  was  a  dentist.  The  opera  was  produced  on  Inde¬ 
pendence  Day,  September  7,  1941,  at  the  Teatro  Municipal  in  Rio  de 
Janeiro.  Eleazar  de  Carvalho  writes  in  an  effective  operatic  style,  coming 
nearest  to  Puccini,  and  in  a  considerably  advanced  harmonic  idiom. 

Francisco  Casabona  (1894 - )  went  to  Italy  as  a  young  man,  and 

there  studied  at  the  Conservatory  of  Naples.  In  Italy  he  wrote  two  comic 
operas, Go  la  VitUy  which  was  produced  in  Rome  on  October  6, 19I7> 

and  Princifessa  delP Atelier y  produced  in  Naples  on  August  20,  1918. 


126 


MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

Upon  his  return  to  Brazil,  he  was  appointed  director  of  the  Conservatorio 
Musical  in  Sao  Paulo.  His  symphonic  poem  Nero  was  performed  in  Sao 
Paulo  on  January  13,  1924,  and  his  Symphony  in  D  was  presented  in  Sao 
Paulo,  the  composer  conducting,  on  September  i,  1937*  He  has  also  written 
a  symphonic  poem,  Crefusculo  Sertanejo  (Country  Twilight)  3  N oite  de 
Sao  Joao  (The  Eve  of  St.  John)  for  orchestraj  a  String  Quartet,  several 
choral  works  and  songs  5  an  album  of  piano  pieces,  Suggestions^  one  of 
which  is  entitled  An  Einstein  F able ;  a  Piano  Sonata^  a  Brazilian  suite, 
Pindoramay  etc.  Suggestions  and  Pindorama  have  been  published  by 
Ricordi,  and  some  songs  have  been  published  in  Italy. 

Luiz  CosME,  the  composer,  was  born  in  Porto  Alegre  in  1908.  He 
studied  violin  in  his  native  town,  and  in  1927  went  to  Cincinnati,  where 
he  took  lessons  in  composition.  Upon  his  return  to  Brazil,  he  devoted 
himself  to  teaching  and  composing.  His  music  is  intensely  Brazilian  in 
sentiment,  while  his  harmonic  and  contrapuntal  style  is  of  considerable 
complexity.  He  has  written  a  ballet,  Salamanca  do  Jurau,  based  on  a 
native  legend.  An  excerpt  from  this  ballet,  arranged  for  violoncello  and 
piano,  has  been  published  by  Musica  Viva  (1941).  His  song  Cangao  do 
Tio  Barnabe  (Song  of  Uncle  Barnabas)  was  published  in  1943  by  the 
Editorial  Cooferativa  Interamericana  de  Comfositores  in  Montevideo, 
and  a  violin  piece,  Mae  d^Agua  Chante  (Mother  of  Waters  Sings),  is  in¬ 
cluded  in  the  album  Musique  Bresilienne  Moderne  (Rio  de  Janeiro, 
1937).  The  Fleisher  Collection  in  Philadelphia  has  the  orchestral  score 
of  Cosme^s  Oragao  a  Teiniagua  (Oration  to  Teiniagua). 

Joao  Itibere  Da  Cunha,  the  musical  journalist  and  composer,  was 
born  in  1870.  A  man  of  cosmopolitan  culture,  he  is  chiefly  known  as  a 
commentator  on  music  in  the  Brazilian  daily  press.  As  a  composer,  he  uses 
the  nom  de  plume  Iwan  d’Hunac,  an  anagram  of  Cunha.  His  effective 
piano  pieces  in  a  humorous  manner,  Danse  Plaisante  et  Sentimentale  and 
Marche  Humoristiquey  have  been  published  by  Ricordi.  He  has  also 
written  some  dances  in  the  Afro-Brazilian  vein. 

Ernesto  Dos  Santos  ( 1891 - )  is  a  Negro  composer  of  popular  music. 

He  is  well  known  as  the  author  of  popular  Sambas y  and  also  as  a  band 
leader.  In  1917  he  made  several  appearances  in  Paris. 

Oscar  Lorenzo  Fernandez  (1897 - )  was  born  in  Rio  de  Janeiro. 

He  studied  at  th.t  Instituto  Nacional  de  Musica y  and  on  November  22, 
1923,  presented  in  Rio  de  Janeiro  the  first  concert  of  his  own  works.  In 
1924  Fernandez  received  a  municipal  prize  for  his  second  piano  trio, 


BRAZIL 


127 


entitled  Trio  Brasileiro^  which  was  subsequently  performed  on  April  26, 
1925.  On  November  17,  1925,  the  orchestra  of  the  Instituto  Nacional 
de  Musica  in  Rio  de  Janeiro  performed  his  orchestral  works  on  Brazilian 
themes,  Suite  Brasileira  and  Suite  Sinjonica  Sobre  Tres  Temas  Pofulares. 
On  November  7, 1926,  the  same  orchestra  played  his  suite  in  three  move¬ 
ments;  Crefusculo  Sertmejo  (Twilight  in  the  Country),  Cancao  m  Tarde 
(Song  in  the  Afternoon),  and  Dansa  dos  Tangaras.  Fernandez’s  next  im¬ 
portant  work  was  the  Suite  for  five  wind  instruments  (flute,  oboe,  clarinet, 
bassoon,  and  horn)  in  four  movements,  one  of  which  is  a  fugue  on  a  folk 
tune  depicting  the  jungle  creature  of  the  popular  fancy,  Sacy-Perere. 
This  Suite  was  first  performed  in  Rio  de  Janeiro  on  September  20,  1927. 
Fernandez’s  children’s  suite  for  orchestra,  Visoes  Injantis,  was  performed 
in  Rio  de  Janeiro  on  September  26,  1927.  On  September  2,  1929,  Fran¬ 
cisco  Braga  conducted  Fernandez’s  “Amerindian”  suite  I  mb  afar  a,  scored 
for  a  large  orchestra.  Its  themes  are  partly  authentic,  partly  stylized  in 
the  Indian  manner,  and  based  on  the  pentatonic  scale.  Francisco  Braga 
also  conducted  the  first  performance  of  Fernandez’s  orchestral  suite, 
Reisado  do  Pastoreio,  on  August  22,  1930.  The  suite  is  in  three  move¬ 
ments:  Pastoreio  (symbolizing  the  shepherds’  journey  to  Bethlehem), 
Toada  (a  nostalgic  song),  and  Batuque  (an  Afro-Brazilian  dance).  The 
Batuque,  with  its  propulsive  rhythm  and  effective  orchestration,  has 
become  extremely  popular  both  in  Latin  America  and  in  the  United 
States.  Another  Batuque,  from  the  opera  Malazarte,  was  performed, 
along  with  several  other  excerpts  from  the  opera,  on  October  21,  1933, 
in  Rio  de  Janeiro,  with  the  composer  conducting.  On  April  14,  1937, 
Fernandez’s  Concerto  for  Piano  and  Orchestra  was  played  for  the  first 
time  In  Rio  de  Janeiro.  His  ballet  on  Inca  themes,  entitled  Amaya,  was 
produced  by  the  Ballets  Russes  in  Rio  de  Janeiro,  on  July  9,  1939.  On 
September  30,  1941,  Fernandez  conducted  the  world  premiere  of  his 
opera  Malazarte,  produced  in  the  Italian  language  by  the  opera  company 
of  the  Teatro  Municifal  in  Rio  de  Janeiro.  The  subject  of  the  opera  is 
the  legendary  figure  of  Malazarte,  the  master  of  evil  arts  {malas  artes), 
and  the  action  unfolds  in  colonial  Brazil.  In  his  opera,  Fernandez  adopts 
the  system  of  leading  motives,  expressing  the  principal  moods  rather 
than  the  characters  of  the  drama,  namely  Destiny,  Seduction,  Love,  and 
Death.  The  musical  material  of  the  opera  is  Brazilian,  the  central  aria  of 
Malazarte  being  cast  in  the  form  of  a  nostalgic  Modinha. 

Apart  from  symphonic  and  operatic  composition,  Fernandez  has  writ¬ 
ten  prolifically  for  instruments.  In  1942  he  composed  a  Concerto  for 


128  MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

Violin  and  Orchestra,  based  on  native  themes.  Over  a  hundred  ^  piano 
pieces  and  songs  by  Fernandez  have  been  published  in  Brazil  by  Ricordi, 
Vitale,  Wehrs,  and  the  Casa  Mozart.  Virtually  all  of  these  compositions 
are  in  the  native  vein.  His  most  brilliant  piano  pieces  are  Tres  Estudos 
efn  Fornici  de  SonMtWy  published  by  Ricordi  (the  first  of  these  Estudos 
is  reprinted  in  the  album  Musique  Bresilienne  Moderns ^  1937),  Vdsa 
Suburbma  (a  slightly  ironic  interpretation  of  a  salon  waltz,  which  is 
also  included  in  Musique  Bresilienne  Moderns') ^  Moda  (published  in 
the  Brazilian  issue  of  fiew  MusiCy  October,  194^)3  humorous 

Marcha  dos  Soldadinhos  Desafinudos  (March  of  Mistuned  Little  Sol¬ 
diers).  Among  works  by  Fernandez  for  chamber  music  and  orchestra,  the 
Trio  Brasileiro  has  been  published  by  Ricordi;  the  score  and  parts  of  the 
Suite  for  five  wind  instruments  were  printed  by  the  University  of  Rio  de 
Janeiro  in  19373  2.nd  later  reissued  by  the  Associated  Music  Publishers 
in  New  York.  The  score  and  parts  of  Imbafdra  were  published  by  the 
University  of  Rio  de  Janeiro  in  1938.  The  suite  Reisado  do  Pastoreio 
has  been  published  by  Ricordi.  The  score  of  the  Batuque  from  Mcdazarte 
was  issued  by  New  Music  in  1939*  ImbufcirUy  Bc^tuquSy  Suite  Sinfonicuy 
the  Violin  Concerto,  the  Himno  de  la  Raza  (The  Hymn  of  the  Race, 
commissioned  by  the  Colombian  government  in  1939)5  orches¬ 

tral  arrangements  of  two  songs,  A  Sombra  Suave  and  NocturnOy  are  in 
the  Fleisher  Collection  in  Philadelphia.  The  scherzo  from  the  Trio  Bra- 
sileiro  and  the  song  Sanwritana  de  Floresta  are  recorded  in  the  Columbia 
album  South  American  Chamier  Music. 

Besides  his  activities  as  composer,  Fernandez  is  engaged  in  teaching 
and  conducting.  He  is  the  founder  and  director  of  the  Conservatorio 
Brasileiro  de  Musica  in  Rio  de  Janeiro.  He  has  conducted  a  number  of 
concerts  of  modern  music,  particularly  Latin  American,  in  Rio  de  Janeiro, 
and  in  1938  was  the  Brazilian  delegate  at  the  Ibero-American  Music 
Festival  in  Bogota,  Colombia. 

A  Brazilian  music  critic  has  called  Fernandez  Brasileirissimo  in  ap¬ 
preciation  of  his  devotion  to  the  spirit  of  native  folklore.  Fernandez  uses 
both  the  method  of  actual  quotation  of  popular  songs,  and  the  invention 
of  original  melodies  in  the  native  vein.  Thus,  in  the  Trio  BrasileirOy  three 
themes  are  actual  folk  melodies,  and  five  themes  are  original.  As  to 
Fernandezes  harmonic  style,  it  is  rich  and  full,  often  based  on  supporting 
pedal  points.  The  chordal  structure  does  not  transgress  the  limits  of 
enhanced  tonality.  In  his  orchestral  works,  Fernandez  rarely  resorts  to 
'the  use  of  native  instruments,  preferring  to  recreate  rhythms  and  sonori- 


BRAZIL 


129 


ties  of  Brazilian  folk  music  through  the  accepted  medium  of  European 
instrumentation. 

Agnelo  Franca  (1875 - )  is  a  music  educator  and  composer.  He  is 

the  author  of  a  textbook  on  harmony,  choral  works,  and  a  one-act  opera 
As  FarasitaSy  which  has  not  been  performed.  His  Ava  Maria  was  published 
in  1937  by  the  University  of  Rio  de  Janeiro. 

Luciano  Gallet,  the  musicologist  and  composer,  was  born  in  Rio  de 
Janeiro  in  1893,  and  died  there  in  1931.  He  studied  music  with  Henrique 
Oswald.  From  his  first  steps  in  composition  he  became  ardently  interested 
in  Brazilian  folklore.  He  essayed  successfully  unusual  combinations  in 
chamber  music,  as  in  his  Suite  for  viola,  clarinet,  violin,  and  percussion, 
and  in  another  Suite  on  Afro-Brazillan  themes  for  wood-wind  quartet. 
Villa-Lobos  conducted  Gallet’s  Suite  BucoUca  for  orchestra  on  January  20, 
1926,  in  Rio  de  Janeiro,  and  Ottorino  Respighi,  during  his  Brazilian  tour, 
presented  Gallet^s  Dansa  Brasileira  for  orchestra  on  July  6,  1928-  Six 
of  his  piano  pieces,  two  violin  pieces,  two  cello  pieces,  and  thirty-one  songs 
have  been  published.  His  annotated  collection  of  native  songs  and  dances, 
Estudos  de  Folclorey  was  published  posthumously  in  1934,  with  an  intro¬ 
ductory  biographical  sketch  of  Gallet  written  by  Mario  de  Andrade. 

Radames  Gnattali  (1906 - >)  is  of  Italian  parentage.  He  received 

elementary  musical  instruction  from  his  mother,  and  later  entered  the 
Conservatory  of  Porto  Alegre,  where  he  completed  his  studies  in  piano. 
At  the  same  time  he  began  to  compose.  He  has  written  two  concertos  and 
a  Concertino  for  piano  and  orchestra,  a  Poem  for  violin  and  orchestra,  a 
Suite  for  small  orchestra  in  five  movements  in  the  form  of  Brazilian  airs, 
and  three  Miniatures  for  chamber  orchestra.  For  chamber  music  he  has 
written  a  Violoncello  Sonata,  a  piano  Trio,  a  String  Quartet,  and  a  Con¬ 
certo  for  Violin  and  Piano  with  the  accompaniment  of  a  string  quartet.  Of 
his  piano  works  the  most  Important  is  Rafsodia  Brasileira,  based  on  four 
folk  themes.  Gnattali  has  also  written  numerous  songs.  All  of  his  music 
is  in  the  native  manner,  either  by  actual  use  of  Brazilian  folk  songs  as 
material  or  by  invention  of  original  themes  in  the  Brazilian  manner. 
Gnattali’s  Rafsodia  Brasileira  has  been  published  by  Ricordi.  His  V aha 
for  piano  is  included  in  the  collection  Musique  Bresilienne  Moderne 
(Rio  de  Janeiro,  1937),  and  his  Choro  for  piano  was  published  In  the 
Brazilian  issue  of  New  Music  (October,  1942).  GnattalRs  Second  Piano 
Concerto  was  performed  at  the  concert  of  the  Chicago  Symphony  Or¬ 
chestra  on  March  ii,  1943. 


130  MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

Carlos  GomeSj  the  opera  composer  of  world  renowrij  was  born  in 
Campinas,  Brazil,  in  1 836,  and  died  in  1 896.  His  father,  who  was  married 
four  times  and  had  twenty-five  children,  was  a  musician,  and  gave  Gomes 
elementary  instruction.  At  the  age  of  fifteen.  Gomes  composed  simple 
airs,  and  at  eighteen  wrote  a  Mass.  In  1859  he  went  to  Rio  de  Janeiro, 
where  he  entered  the  Conservatory.  His  first  work  to  be  performed  was 
a  cantata,  A  Ultima  Hot  a  do  CalvariOy  which  was  given  in  Rio  de  Janeiro 
on  August  1 6,  1 860.  In  the  following  year,  on  September  4,  1861,  Gomes’ 
first  opera,  A  Noite  do  Castelo  (Night  in  a  Castle),  was  performed.  His 
second  opera,  Joanna  de  Flandres^  was  produced  in  Rio  de  Janeiro  on 
September  15,  1863.  Both  operas  were  written  in  an  Italian  style,  and 
the  subjects  were  taken  from  the  Crusades.  In  1864,  Gomes  received  a 
stipend  from  the  Emperor  of  Brazil  to  go  to  Europe  for  further  study. 
He  settled  in  Milan,  where  he  took  private  lessons  with  Lauro  Rossi. 
In  Milan  he  wrote  his  first  work  on  a  Brazilian  subject,  the  opera  11 
Guarany,  It  was  produced  at  the  Scala  Theater  in  Milan,  on  March  19, 
187O5  and  received  great  acclaim.  II  Guarany  was  destined  to  remain  the 
most  successful  Brazilian  opera,  and  the  only  one  by  a  South  American 
composer  which  has  been  in  the  active  repertoire  of  opera  houses  the 
world  over.  II  Guarany  is  written  to  an  Italian  libretto,  after  a  Brazilian 
novel  by  Jose  Alencar,  the  central  figure  being  an  Indian  of  the  Guarany 
tribe.  But  despite  the  Brazilian  associations,  the  opera  is  Italian  in  struc¬ 
ture  and  character  of  music. 

After  a  brief  visit  to  Brazil,  where  II  Guarany  was  staged  in  Rio  de 
Janeiro  on  December  2,  1870,  Gomes  returned  to  Italy.  His  new  opera, 
Fosca^  on  a  romantic  subject  connected  with  Venetian  pirates,  was  pro¬ 
duced  at  the  Scala  in  Milan  on  February  16,  1873.  In  this  opera,  Gomes 
introduces  the  system  of  leitmotivs,  but  otherwise  the  music  has  nothing 
Wagnerian  in  it.  The  opera  Salvador  Rosa^  on  a  subject  from  Italian 
history,  was  performed  in  Genoa,  Italy,  on  March  21,  1874.  Maria  Tudor 
followed,  after  the  drama  of  Victor  Hugo.  It  was  produced  at  the  Scala 
in  Milan  on  March  27,  1879.  In  his  next  opera,  Lo  SchiavOy  Gomes 
selects  a  Brazilian  subject  dealing  with  a  romantic  union  of  a  nobleman 
and  an  Indian  slave  girl.  The  opera  was  produced  in  Rio  de  Janeiro  on 
September  27,  1889.  Gomes’  last  opera  was  Condor y  with  a  plot  some¬ 
what  resembling  that  of  Verdi’s  A'iday  and  the  action  placed  in  Samarkand. 
Condor  was  produced  in  Milan  on  February  21,  1891.  On  October  12, 
1892,  on  the  occasion  of  the  four-hundredth  anniversary  of  the  discovery 
of  America,  Gomes’  oratorio  Colombo  was  presented  at  the  Opera  of  Rio 


de  Janeiro.  Soon  afterwards,  it  was  found  that  Gomes  had  cancer  of  the 
tongue,  attributed  to  an  excess  of  smoking.  He  died  at  Belem,  Brazil, 
on  September  i6,  1896. 

In  19365  on  the  occasion  of  Gomes’  centenary,  the  Brazilian  government 
organized  celebrations  in  his  honor,  and  two  postage  stamps  with  Gomes’ 
portrait  and  a  musical  quotation  from  II  Guarany  were  issued.  In  1936, 
the  Revista  Brasileira  de  Musica  published  a  voluminous  commemorative 
issue  dedicated  to  Gomes’  life  and  works. 

Camargo  Guarnieri  (1907 - -)  is  a  Brazilian  modernist.  His  fa¬ 

ther  was  born  in  Sicily,  and  was  taken  to  Brazil  as  an  infant.  His  mother 
was  of  an  ancient  Brazilian  family.  Guarnieri  was  one  of  nine  children 
in  the  family.  He  received  instruction  in  the  rudiments  of  music  from 
his  father,  w^ho  was  a  band  flutist.  That  his  father  intended  Guarnieri  to 
be  a  musician  is  manifest  from  the  fact  that  he  gave  Guarnieri  the  middle 
name  of  Mozart,  which,  however,  Guarnieri  never  uses,  regarding  it  as 
presumptuous.  Guarnieri’s  studies  continued  at  the  Conservatory  of  Sao 
Paulo,  and  in  1938  he  was  awarded  a  government  fellov/ship  for  study 
in  Europe.  He  took  lessons  in  composition  with  Charles  Koechlin  in  har¬ 
mony,  counterpoint,  and  orchestration,  and  returned  to  Brazil  in  1940. 
In  1942  he  visited  the  United  States,  and  conducted  his  works  with  the 
Boston  Symphony  Orchestra,  and  other  American  orchestras. 

Guarnieri’s  music  is  imbued  with  Brazilian  folklore.  He  shuns  actual 
quotation  from  popular  songs,  preferring  to  re-create  the  spirit  of  Bra- 
silidade  (Brazilianism)  in  original  melodies.  As  to  treatment,  Guarnieri 
has  expressed  the  belief  that  “Brazilian  music  ought  to  be  treated  poly- 
phonically.  The  quality  of  our  folk  music,  of  its  dynamic  force,  is  such 
that  we  should  avoid  harmonization  by  chords.  .  .  Mario  de  Andrade 
has  called  Guarnieri  “the  strongest  polyphonic  composer  of  Brazil.” 

Guarnieri  has  composed  prolifically.  For  the  orchestra  he  has  written  a 
symphonic  poem,  Curugd  (the  Indian  name  of  Guarnieri’s  native  town 
of  Tiete)  3  a  symphonic  dance,  Perereca;  ten  Ponteios  (dances  in  the  rustic 
manner)  3  three  lyrical  Toadas;  Dans  a  Brasileira  (in  the  rhythm  of  the 
Samba')  3  Dansa  Selvagem  (Forest  Dance)  3  Enoantamento ;  and  Abertura 
Concertante  (Overture  Concertante,  a  composition  of  a  strongly  con¬ 
trapuntal  nature,  in  the  neoclassical  manner).  For  chamber  orchestra, 
Guarnieri  has  written  a  work  for  fifteen  instruments,  Flor  de  TremembS^ 
which  includes  in  its  scoring  the  native  instruments,  chocalhoy  reco-reco, 
and  cuica. 

For  the  theater,  Guarnieri  has  composed  a  comic  opera  in  one  act, 


132  MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

Pedro  Mdazartey  after  a  legend  of  colonial  Brazil^  and  a  “tragic  cantata, 

A  Morte  do  Aviador.  For  voice  and  orchestra,  Guarnieri  has  written 
Tres  Dansas  {Samba,  CateretS,  Maxixe),Desesferanga,  and  Tres  Poemas. 
In  addition,  he  has  written  three  concertos — for  piano,  for  violin,  and 
for  violoncello  with  orchestra.  The  Violin  Concerto  was  awarded  first 
prize  at  the  contest  for  the  best  Latin  American  composition  for  violin 
and  orchestra,  held  in  Philadelphia  in  1942'*  chamber  music,  Guar¬ 
nieri  has  written  a  piano  Trio,  a  String  Quartet,  a  group  of  four  works 
under  the  title  of  Choro  and  scored  for  wind  instruments  and  Brazilian 
percussion,  two  violin  sonatas,  and  a  Violoncello  Sonata.  Guarnieri  has  also 
written  over  seventy  songs,  and  fifteen  choral  works,  to  texts  in  Portu¬ 
guese  and  in  the  Afro-Brazilian  dialects.  His  list  of  piano  compositions 
includes  a  Toccata,  three  sonatinas,  ten  Ponteios  (also  arranged  for  or¬ 
chestra),  Dansa  Brasileira  and  Dansa  Selvagem  (which  are  the  piano 
transcriptions  of  orchestral  works),  five  compositions  for  children,  and 
three  waltzes. 

The  following  orchestral  works  by  Guarnieri  have  been  performed: 
Curuqd  (Sao  Paulo,  July  28,  1930,  Villa-Lobos  conducting).  Concerto  for 
Piano  and  Orchestra  (Sao  Paulo,  December  30,  1936,  under  the  compos¬ 
er’s  direction,  with  Souza  Lima  as  soloist),  T oada  Triste  and  Tres  Poemas 
(Sao  Paulo,  January  12, 1940,  composer  conducting),  Flor  de  Tremembe 
(Rio  de  Janeiro,  May  27,  1940),  Dansa  Brasileira  (Sao  Paulo,  March  7, 
1941,  composer  conducting),  Dansa  Selvagem  (Sao  Paulo,  July  22,  1941, 
composer  conducting),  Violin  Concerto  (Rio  de  Janeiro,  September  20, 
1942),  and  Abertura  Concertante  (Sao  Paulo,  June  2,  1943?  composer 
conducting). 

The  following  piano  pieces  by  Guarnieri  have  been  published  in  Brazil : 
Sonatina,  Ponteio  No.  i,  five  children’s  pieces,  Dansa  Brasileira,  Dansa 
Selvagem.  His  Toada  Triste  for  piano  is  included  in  the  Schirmer  col¬ 
lection  Latin-American  Art  Music  for  the  Piano  (New  York,  1942).  The 
Yalsa  for  piano  is  published  in  the  Brazilian  issue  of  New  Music  (October, 
1942).  Two  of  Guarnieri’s  songs  in  the  Afro-Brazilian  vein  are  included 
in  the  album  Musique  Bresilienne  Moderne  (Rio  de  Janeiro,  1937).  A 
song,  Macumba,  is  printed  in  the  music  supplement  to  Volume  I  of  the 
Boletin  Latino- Am^ericano  de  Musica.  The  Fleisher  Collection  in  Phila¬ 
delphia  has  the  orchestral  scores  of  the  Violin  Concerto,  three  Ponteios, 
Dansa  Brasileira,  Dansa  Selvagem,  Flor  de  Tremembe,  and  Abertura 
Concertante.  Tht  orchestral  scores  and  parts  of  Guarnieri’s  Dansa  Bra¬ 
sileira,  Flor  de  Tremembe,  Encantamento,  Abertura  Concertante,  Dansa 


BRAZIL 


m 


Selva  gem  y  Suite  Injantily  and  the  Violin  Concerto  are  available  at  the 
Associated  Music  Publishers,  in  New  York. 

Arthur  Ibere  de  Lemos  (1901 - )  went  to  London  in  19155  he 

studied  violoncello  with  John  Barbirolli  and  harmony  at  the  Royal 
Academy  of  Music.  He  also  studied  in  Berlin,  and  still  later  in  Milan. 
Ibere  de  Lemos  has  written  mostly  in  small  forms,  his  most  successful 
compositions  being  lyric  songs  of  Brazilian  inspiration.  His  harmoniza¬ 
tion  is  conventional,  and  his  stvle  derivative.  His  T hree  Pieces  for  voice 
and  piano,  Momentos  LiricoSy  and  Cangao  Arabe  have  been  published. 

Brasilio  Itibere  (1896 - )  was  born  in  Parana  and  studied  composi¬ 

tion  in  his  native  town.  From  the  very  first  he  dedicated  himself  to 
Brazilian  folklore.  He  has  written  effective  piano  pieces  and  songs  in 
the  Afro-Brazilian  manner,  depicting  the  ritualistic  dances  of  Brazilian 
Negroes.  He  has  also  written  music  in  classical  forms:  two  string  quartets, 
a  piano  Trio,  and  pieces  for  the  harpsichord,  in  which  he  adapts  Bach’s 
contrapuntal  technique  to  Brazilian  rhythms.  His  song  Cordao  de  Praia 
was  published  as  a  supplement  to  Musica  Viva  in  1940. 

Joao  Batista  Juliao  (1886 - )  is  a  composer  of  choral  music  and  educa¬ 

tional  pieces  for  schools,  who  is  active  as  a  pedagogue  in  Sao  Paulo.  His 
short  piano  pieces  and  choruses  are  published. 

Hans-Joachim  Koellreutter  (1915 - )  is  a  young  German  com¬ 

poser,  resident  in  Brazil.  He  studied  flute  and  composition,  and  gave 
concerts  as  a  flutist  all  over  Europe.  In  1937  he  settled  in  Brazil,  where 
he  is  active  as  teacher,  composer,  and  flutist.  He  has  written  a  Piano 
Sonata  5  two  violin  sonatas  5  a  Sonata  for  Flute  and  Piano  5  Inventions ,  for 
oboe,  clarinet,  and  bassoon  j  Variations  for  String  Quartet  5  and  a  set  of 
Brazilian  Poems y  scored  for  voice,  English  horn,  viola,  bass  clarinet,  and 
military  drum.  He  has  also  written  Variations  1Q40  and  Musica  ig^i 
for  full  orchestra.  In  1940  he  launched,  in  Sao  Paulo,  the  publication  of 
a  modern  periodical,  Musica  Viva.  Since  1943  Koellreutter  has  been  flutist 
in  the  Orquestra  Brasileira  in  Rio  de  Janeiro.  Koellreutter  writes  ex¬ 
clusively  in  an  atonal  idiom.  Since  1940  he  has  adopted  the  twelve-tone 
technique  according  to  Schoenberg.  The  piano  version  of  his  Musica  1^41 
has  been  published  by  the  Editorial  Cooferativa  Interamerkana  de  Corru- 
fositores  in  Montevideo,  and  Kis  Inventions  znd  Bagatelas  for  piano 
were  issued  as  a  supplement  to  Musica  Viva. 

Souza  Lima  (1898 — -),  the  pianist  and  composer,  was  born  in  Sao 
Paulo,  and  studied  piano  and  composition  in  his  native  town.  In  1919 


134  MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

he  was  given  a  government  stipend  for  a  trip  to  Paris,  where  he  studied 
at  the  Conservatory  in  the  class  of  piano  and  composition.  Upon  gradua¬ 
tion  in  1922,  he  traveled  widely  in  Europe  as  a  pianist.  Souza  Lima  has 
written  a  number  of  piano  pieces  and  songs,  as  well  as  an  orchestral  poem, 
O  Rei  Mameluco  (The  Mameluke  King).  Since  1936,  Lima  has  con¬ 
ducted  orchestral  concerts  in  Brazil.  Some  of  his  piano  music  has  been 
published  by  Ricordi. 

Francisco  Mignone,  one  of  the  foremost  Brazilian  composers,  was 
born  in  Sao  Paulo  in  1897.  He  studied  flute  with  his  father,  and  later 
piano  and  composition  at  the  Conservatory  of  Sao  Paulo.  In  1920  he 
went  to  Milan,  where  he  studied  with  Ferroni.  Mignone  began  to  com¬ 
pose  at  an  early  age,  and  from  the  very  first  turned  to  Brazilian  folklore 
for  inspiration.  Apart  from  his  serious  music,  he  has  also  written  numerous 
popular  dances  and  songs  under  the  nom  de  plume  Chico-Bororo  (after 
the  tribe  of  Bororo  Indians).  His  first  appearance  as  a  composer  took 
place  in  Sao  Paulo  on  September  9,  1918,  when  he  played  his  piano  pieces. 
On  December  16,  1918,  his  father  and  teacher  conducted  his  first  or¬ 
chestral  compositions,  Caramuru  and  Suite  Camfestre.  During  his  stay  in 
Italy  (1920-1924),  he  wrote  his  first  opera,  Contractador  dos  Diamantes, 
The  action  of  the  opera  unfolds  in  eighteenth-century  Brazil,  and  the 
central  figure  is  a  merchant  of  diamonds.  The  Congada  from  the  second 
act  of  this  opera  has  become  Mignone^s  most  successful  orchestral  piece. 
It  was  first  performed  with  the  title  Dansa  in  Sao  Paulo  on  September  lO, 
1922,  under  the  direction  of  the  composer.  The  opera  was  performed  in 
its  entirety  at  the  Teatro  Municifal  in  Rio  de  Janeiro  on  September  20, 
1924.  Mignone’s  second  opera,  Ulnnocente^  was  produced  in  Rio  de 
Janeiro  on  September  5,  1928.  The  subject  of  this  opera  is  taken  from 
Spanish  history.  Both  operas  are  written  to  Italian  libretti. 

Of  Mignone’s  numerous  symphonic  works,  the  early  scores,  Farandola 
das  Horas^  Romanza^  Dansa  das  Bruxas  (Witches’  Dance),  La  Signora 
del  FuocOy  Marcha  Triumfhaly  and  Notturno  ImfrovistOy  remain 
unperformed.  No  Sertao  (In  the  Country),  a  symphonic  dance  of  the 
Congada  type,  was  performed  in  Sao  Paulo  on  October  17,  1921.  In- 
terludo  was  performed  in  Rome,  Italy,  on  January  12,  1923.  The 
N otturno-Barcarollay  in  two  sections  connected  by  a  flute  cadenza, 
was  performed  in  Sao  Paulo  on  August  15,  1923.  On  the  same  program 
was  performed  Mignone’s  symphonic  dance  Scenas  da  Roca.  The  follow¬ 
ing  symphonic  compositions  by  Mignone’s  have  also  been  performed: 
the  symphonic  Festa  Dionisiaca^  in  Rome  on  October  24,  19235 


BRAZIL 


135 


Velha  Lenda  Sertaneja  (Old  Country  Legend),  In  Sao  Paulo  on 
March  15,  19243  Pelos  Estrados  Silenciosos  (Along  the  Silent  Paths), 
in  Sao  Paulo  on  October  19,  19243  Intermezzo  Lirico  for  orchestra,  in 
Sao  Paulo  on  May  13,  19253  a  Berceuse  for  strings,  harp,  celesta,  flutes, 
and  oboes,  Ao  Anoltecer  (Towards  Night),  on  August  16,  19253  an 
orchestral  song,  Cantiga  de  Ninary  in  Sao  Paulo  on  November  6,  19265 
and  Dansa  Asturianay  in  Sao  Paulo  on  May  18,  1930. 

Mignone  has  written  four  characteristic  Brazilian  pieces  for  piano  and 
orchestra  entitled  Fantasia  Brasileira,  The  first  was  performed  in  Sao 
Paulo  on  March  20,  1931,  Mignone  conducting3  the  second  in  Rio  de 
Janeiro  on  June  20,  1934,  Villa-Lobos  conducting3  and  the  third  and 
fourth  in  Sao  Paulo  on  May  10,  1934,  and  October  30,  1937,  respectively, 
with  the  composer  conducting.  To  the  same  period  belong  a  humorous 
symphonic  poem,  Momus  (the  nickname  of  a  popular  carnival  character, 
usually  called  Momo)y  composed  in  1929,  and  performed  by  Villa-Lobos 
in  Rio  de  Janeiro  on  April  24,  19333  and  Seguida-Mirim  (meaning  a 
^dittle  suite^^  in  the  Guarany  language),  composed  in  1931.  To  these 
works,  all  of  which  are  based  on  native  Brazilian  rhythms  and  melodies, 
should  be  added  Maxixe  (1925).  There  followed  the  ballet  Maracatu 
de  Chico-Rei  (the  Maracatu  of  the  Little  King),  produced  under  Mi- 
gnone’s  direction  in  Rio  de  Janeiro  on  October  29,  1934.  Suite  Brasileiray 
in  three  descriptive  movements,  Cucumbyzinho  (a  little  cucumbi)j 
Lenda  Sertaneja  (Country  Legend),  and  Caterete  (popular  Brazilian 
dance)  were  performed  in  Rio  de  Janeiro  by  Burle  Marx  on  Decem¬ 
ber  9,  1933.  BatucajSy  performed  in  Sao  Paulo  on  March  28,  1936,  is 
an  orchestral  dance  scored  for  modern  orchestra  with  the  inclusion  of  the 
native  instruments  reco-recoy  chocalhoy  znA  cuica,  Babaloxd  (the  name  of 
an  Afro-Brazilian  chief)  was  performed  in  Sao  Paulo  on  November  6, 
1937,  under  Mignone’s  direction.  On  June  28,  1941,  Mignone  con¬ 
ducted  in  Sao  Paulo  his  Variations  on  a  Brazilian  Theme.  Sonho  de  um 
Menino  Travesso  (Dream  of  a  Spoiled  Child)  is  an  orchestral  stylization 
of  an  animated  cartoon,  in  four  movements.  Mignone  conducted  this 
score  in  Sao  Paulo  on  October  30,  1937.  His  humorous  ballet,  O  Esfan- 
talho  (Scarecrow),  composed  in  1941,  is  scored  for  an  orchestra  includ¬ 
ing  a  steam  siren,  police  sirens,  and  a  train  whistle.  His  Ouverture  das 
Tres  Mascaras  Perdidas  (Overture  to  Three  Lost  Masks)  was  per¬ 
formed  in  Rio  de  Janeiro  on  November  28,  1936, 

Parallel  to  the  composition  of  symphonic  works  in  a  Brazilian  vein, 
Mignone  has,  since  1939,  turned  his  attention  to  music  of  social  and  re- 


MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 


136 

ligious  contentj  as  typified  by  his  Sinfonia  de  Trahalho  (Symphony  of 
Labor)  j  in  four  movements  subtitled  Song  of  the  Machine,  Song  of 
the  Family,  Song  of  the  Strong  Man,  and  Song  of  Fruitful  Work,  and 
by  Festa  das  Igrejas  (Festival  of  Churches).  Festa  das  IgrejaSy  depicting 
four  well-known  cathedrals  of  Brazil,  was  conducted  by  Mignone  with 
the  NBC  orchestra  of  New  York  City  on  April  22,  1942,  during  his  visit 
in  the  United  States.  Other  symphonic  works  to  be  noted  are  Seresta 
(Country  Serenade)  for  cello  and  orchestra,  performed  in  Rio  de  Janeiro 
on  March  31,  19395  LeilaOy  a  ballet  in  six  movements  5  and  a  symphonic 
dance,  Miudinho^  conducted  by  Mignone  in  Sao  Paulo  on  June  28,  1941. 

Among  Mignone’s  compositions  for  chamber  music,  the  most  impor¬ 
tant  is  his  Sextet  for  piano,  flute,  oboe,  clarinet,  bassoon,  and  horn.  He 
has  written  a  Violin  Sonata,  a  String  Quartet,  eight  pieces  for  violin 
and. piano,  and  three  for  violoncello  and  piano.  For  piano  solo  he  has 
written  a  Sonata,  six  Preludes,  six  Transcendental  Etudes,  and  a  great 
number  of  concert  pieces,  among  them  eleven  Brazilian  pieces  entitled 
Lenda  Sertaneja.  There  are  also  piano  versions  of  Mignone’s  orchestral 
pieces,  Danza  das  Bruxas^  Maxixey  Congaday  Cucumbyzinho y  Caterete, 
Most  of  Mignone’s  piano  pieces  and  songs  are  published  by  Ricordi, 
Carlos  Wehrs,  and  the  Casa  Mozart.  His  Sextet  has  been  printed  by  the 
University  of  Rio  de  Janeiro,  1937.  Edward  B.  Marks  in  New  York  has 
reissued  several  of  Mignone’s  Lendas  Brasileirasy  MiudinhOy  Tango 
Brasileiroy  and  other  piano  pieces.  The  following  scores  by  Mignone 
are  in  the  Fleisher  Collection  in  Philadelphia:  Fantasias  Brasileiras  No. 
2  and  No.  3?  BatucajSy  No  SertaOy  Sonho  de  um  NLenino  TravessOy  Ao 
Anoitecefy  N otturno-Barcarollay  Festa  das  Igrejasy  Plenilunioy  Suite 
Brasileiray  and  Congada.  Mignone’s  Cangao  Brasileira  for  voice  and 
piano  is  included  in  the  musical  supplement  to  Volume  I  of  tht  Boletin 
Latino-Americano  de  Musica.  It  is  recorded  in  the  album  South  American 
Chamber  Music  issued  by  Columbia. 

Mignone^s  melodic  style  is  characterized  by  great  emotional  expressive¬ 
ness.  His  harmonies  tend  towards  the  usage  of  the  modern  Italian  school 
of  composition.  The  rhythm  of  Mignone’s  music  is  characteristic  of  native 
dances,  particularly  the  Negro  dances  of  Brazil. 

Leopoldo  Miguez  (1850-1902)  studied  the  violin,  and  began  to  com¬ 
pose  rather  late,  in  1876,  when  he  wrote  a  Nupid  He  composed 

mostly  for  the  orchestra  and  the  theater.  Of  his  symphonic  works,  the 
following  are  the  more  importznt:  Symfhonyy  Parisinay  Prometheus y 
Suite  d  B Antique y  Znd  Scherzetto  Fantastico,  His  Hymn  of  the  Refublic 


BRAZIL 


537 


was  awarded  first  prize  at  the  competition  in  1889,  ^ipon  the  fall  of  the 
Empire.  In  1890  he  was  appointed  director  of  the  Instituto  N aciond  de 
Musica  in  Rio  de  Janeiro,  a  post  which  he  held  until  his  death.  Miguez 
wrote  two  operas:  Pelo  Amor  (For  the  Sake  of  Love,  to  an  episode  from 
Scottish  history)  and  Os  Sddunes  (The  Comrades,  from  the  era  of 
Caesar’s  Gallic  Wars).  The  first  was  produced  in  Rio  de  Janeiro  on 
August  24,  1897,  and  the  second  on  September  20,  1901.  Both  operas  are 
imitative  of  early  Wagner,  while  Miguez’s  symphonic  music  is  redolent 
of  German  romanticism.  The  vocal  scores  of  the  operas  were  published  in 
Germany.  The  scores  of  Parisina  and  Scherzetto  Fantastico  are  included 
in  the  Fleisher  Collection  in  Philadelphia.  See  Leofoldo  Miguez  e  o 
Instituto  N aciond  de  Musica  in  Revista  Brazileira  de  Musica^  1940. 

Radames  Mosca  (1908 - )  studied  piano  at  the  Conservatory  of 

Sao  Paulo,  and  upon  graduation  traveled  in  Brazil  as  a  pianist.  He  has 
written  a  number  of  piano  pieces,  particularly  for  children. 

Arthur  Napoleao,  the  pianist  and  music  publisher,  was  born  in  Oporto, 
Portugal,  In  1843,  ^^id  died  in  Rio  de  Janeiro  in  1925.  He  went  to  Brazil 
in  1865,  and  established  in  1868  the  music  publishing  firm  which  bears 
his  name.  He  has  also  written  some  piano  pieces  and  songs. 

Ernesto  Nazareth  (1863-1937)  was  a  composer  of  popular  music. 
Largely  self-taught,  Nazareth  had  an  instinctive  flair  for  native  music 
and  wrote  a  number  of  piano  pieces  in  the  Brazilian  vein.  His  technique 
of  writing  for  the  piano  was  influenced  by  Chopin.  Villa-Lobos  said  of 
Nazareth  that  he  is  ^^a  true  Incarnation  of  the  soul  of  musical  Brazil.” 

Alberto  Nepomuceno  (1864-1920),  the  pioneer  of  Brazilian  national 
music,  studied  piano  with  his  father  in  his  native  town  of  Fortaleza, 
and  in  Recife.  In  1880  he  went  to  Europe,  where  he  studied  organ 
and  composition  at  the  Santa  Cecilia  Academy  in  Rome,  and  later  in 
Berlin  and  in  Paris.  He  returned  to  Brazil  in  1895,  and  on  August  4, 
1895,  gave  a  concert  in  Rio  de  Janeiro,  appearing  as  organist,  pianist,  and 
composer  of  songs  to  German,  French,  and  Italian  texts.  In  Brazil  he 
wrote  a  Symphony,  Suite  Antique  for  strings,  and  a  lyric  drama,  Artemis^ 
which  was  performed  on  June  14,  1898.  To  the  same  period  belongs 
his  first  work  in  the  Brazilian  manner.  Suite  Brasileira  for  orchestra.  In 
it  Nepomuceno  used  folk  themes  of  the  Brazilian  Negroes.  The  last 
movement  is  z  Batuque,  Another  work  of  native  inspiration  was  an  in¬ 
troduction  to  the  unfinished  lyric  drama  O  Garatujay  performed  In  Rio 
de  Janeiro  on  October  26,  1904.  In  1902  Nepomuceno  was  appointed 


138  MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

director  of  the  Institute  Nacional  de  Musica^  a  post  which  he  held,  off 
and  on,  until  1916.  In  1910  he  was  delegated  to  the  Brussels  Exposition 
to  conduct  concerts  of  Brazilian  music.  He  repeated  these  concerts  in 
Geneva  and  Paris.  His  opera  Abul^  on  a  Biblical  subject,  was  presented 
in  Buenos  Aires  on  June  13,  1913.  Nepomuceno’s  music  has  been  pub¬ 
lished  by  Arthur  Napoleao:  twelve  piano  pieces,  a  piano  transcription  of 
Suite  Brasileiray  songs  and  excerpts  from  operas,  and  songs  to  French 
and  Italian  texts.  The  score  and  parts  of  Nepomuceno’s  Symphony  were 
published  posthumously  in  1937,  under  the  auspices  of  the  University  of 
Rio  de  Janeiro.  The  full  score  of  Suite  Brasileira  is  in  the  Fleisher  Collec¬ 
tion.  The  historic  role  of  Nepomuceno  is  that  he  was  the  first  who  de¬ 
terminedly  introduced  Brazilian  folk  music  into  orchestral  literature. 

Barrozo  Netto  (1881—1941)  studied  at  the  Instituto  Ndcioncil  de 
MusicUy  and  after  graduating  embarked  on  a  double  career  as  pianist  and 
composer.  In  1906,  he  was  named  professor  at  the  Instituto.  As  a  com¬ 
poser,  Netto  excels  in  shorter  forms.  Without  resorting  to  actual  quota¬ 
tions  from  folk  songs,  he  re-creates  the  spirit  of  Brazilian  folklore  in 
adeptly  contrived  rhythms.  His  best-known  piano  composition  is  NLinha 
Terra  (My  Land),  written  in  the  style  of  a  nineteenth-century  salon 
piece.  At  least  120  of  Nettops  piano  pieces  and  songs  have  been  published 
in  Brazil.  Barrozo  Netto  also  edited  a  number  of  piano  pieces  from  the 
classical  repertoire.  An  arrangement  of  NLinha  T  err  a  for  string  orchestra 
and  similar  arrangements  of  Nettops  short  compositions — Dansa  Caracte- 
risticay  Idealy  Berceusey  Moto  BerfetuOy  IntermediOy  and  — are  in  the 

Fleisher  Collection  in  Philadelphia. 

Joao  OcTAViANo  (1896 - )  studied  piano  and  composition  at  the 

Instituto  Nacional  de  Musica  in  Rio  de  Janeiro.  On  May  15,  19155  he 
presented  the  first  concert  of  his  own  works.  On  June  30,  1919,  he  con¬ 
ducted  in  Rio  de  Janeiro  the  first  performance  of  his  symphonic  poem 
Victoriay  and  on  August  30,  1920,  he  presented  his  First  Symphony.  On 
November  2,  1923,  Octaviano  conducted  his  cantata,  Poema  de  Vida 
(Poem  of  Life).  On  April  6,  1937,  the  opera  of  Rio  de  Janeiro  per¬ 
formed  Octaviano’s  one-act  opera  Iracem^ay  to  the  legend  of  romantic 
passion  induced  by  drinking  a  love  potion.  Another  opera,  Sonho  de  Uma 
Noite  de  Luar  (The  Dream  on  a  Moonlit  Night),  has  not  yet  been  per¬ 
formed.  On  June  24,  1937,  Octaviano  conducted  at  the  Teatro  Municifal 
in  Rio  de  Janeiro  his  ballet  Ondinas.  He  has  also  composed  Batuque- 
Fantasia  for  orchestra,  based  on  the  rhythms  of  the  Afro-Brazilian  jungle, 


BRAZIL 


139 


several  pieces  in  classical  forms  for  string  orchestra,  and  pieces  for  violin 
and  violoncello.  Over  a  hundred  of  his  piano  pieces  and  songs  have  been 
published  by  Arthur  Napoleao.  His  style  of  writing  is  technically  bril¬ 
liant,  while  his  harmonic  idiom  is  academic.  Of  his  many  transcriptions  of 
Brazilian  popular  songs  for  piano,  the  best  known  is  A  Casinha  Pequenina. 
Octaviano  is  also  active  as  a  musical  pedagogue,  and  is  on  the  faculty  of 
the  Escola  Naciond  de  Musica  in  Rio  de  Janeiro.  He  is  the  author  of 
several  manuals  of  theory  and  harmony. 

Henrique  Oswald  (1852-1931)  was  the  son  of  a  Swiss  named  Osch- 
wald,  who  abbreviated  his  name  to  Oswald.  Henrique  Oswald  occasion¬ 
ally  used  the  Brazilianized  form  Oswaldo.  He  studied  music  in  Florence, 
Italy,  and  for  some  years  served  in  Europe  as  a  consular  representative 
of  Brazil.  He  was  director  of  the  Instltuto  Nacional  de  Musica  in  the 
years  1903-1906.  He  composed  two  grand  operas.  La  Croce  d^Oro  and 
Le  Fate^  and  a  comic  opera  II  Neo,  They  were  never  performed.  Oswald’s 
Symphony  in  C  major  was  presented  at  the  Ibero-American  Music  Festi¬ 
val  in  Barcelona,  on  October  2,  1929.  His  Piano  Quintet  was  published 
posthumously  in  1937.  Three  of  Oswald’s  works,  the  Symphony,  Pay  sage 
d^Automne^  and  Andante  con  Variazioni  for  piano  and  orchestra,  are 
in  the  Fleisher  Collection  in  Philadelphia.  Ricordi  has  published  Oswald’s 
Serranay  a  short  piece  for  piano,  violin,  and  violoncello  based  on  Brazilian 
rhythms,  as  well  as  six  pieces  for  piano,  and  songs,  Oswald’s  best-known 
piano  composition  is  II  neigey  which  won  the  Figaro  prize  in  Paris  in  1902. 

Jaime  Ovalle  ( 1 894 - )  began  to  study  music  rather  late,  and  played 

the  violin  and  guitar  in  street  bands  of  Rio  de  Janeiro  and  other  Brazilian 
cities.  At  the  same  time  he  studied  finance,  and  in  1933  was  appointed 
financial  attache  at  the  Brazilian  embassy  in  London.  He  held  this  post 
until  1937,  when  he  returned  to  Brazil  and  took  the  job  of  a  customs  in¬ 
spector.  As  a  composer,  Ovalle  has  written  primarily  piano  pieces  and 
songs,  based  on  Afro-Brazilian  folklore.  Of  his  piano  works  the  most 
interesting  are  the  three  Legendasy  which  exploit  native  melodies  in  a 
quasi-Lisztian  virtuoso  manner.  In  the  same  vein  is  the  suite  Descobri- 
mento  do  Brasily  originally  intended  as  a  symphonic  composition  in  four 
movements.  But  it  is  in  his  songs  that  Ovalle  succeeds  most  in  bringing 
the  spirit  of  Brazilian  folklore  to  life.  BerimbaUy  a  jungle  incantation,  is 
particularly  effective.  The  three  LegendaSy  the  Descobrimento  do  Brasily 
several  short  piano  pieces,  and  a  number  of  Afro-Brazilian  songs  by  Ovalle 
have  been  published  by  Arthur  Napoleao. 


140  MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

Newton  Padua  (1894 - ),  violoncellist  and  composer,  studied  com¬ 

position  with  Francisco  Braga  and  later  went  to  Rome,  where  he  studied 
violoncello  and  church  music.  He  has  written  several  orchestral  suites 
in  the  traditional  European  style,  occasionally  using  Brazilian  themes. 

Arthur  Pereira  ( 1894 - )  went  to  Europe  in  1 9 1 5,  where  he  studied 

at  the  Conservatory  of  Naples.  Upon  his  return  to  Brazil,  he  was  ap¬ 
pointed  instructor  of  composition  at  the  Sao  Paulo  Conservatory.  He  has 
composed  very  little.  His  Sets  Pegas  Simfles  Monotonais  Sobre  Temas 
do  Folklore  Brasileiro  for  piano  has  been  published  in  Sao  Paulo. 

Assis  Republicano  (1897 - ),  the  Negro  composer,  studied  with 

Francisco  Braga  and  began  to  compose  at  an  early  age.  His  predilection 
is  for  vocal  music,  but  he  has  also  written  several  symphonic  poems, 
mostly  to  native  subjects,  although  without  emphasis  on  specific  Afro- 
Brazilian  folklore.  He  has  written  four  operas.  The  first,  O  Bandeirante 
(The  Pioneer),  was  produced  at  the  Teatro  Municifd  in  Rio  de  Janeiro 
on  October  3,  1925,  and  the  second,  A  Natividade  de  J esusy  on  March  25, 
1937.  The  third,  Amazonas y  and  the  fourth,  0  Frmitao  da  Gloria  (The 
Hermit  of  Glory),  are  as  yet  unperformed.  Among  Republicano^s  other 
works  in  large  forms  are  a  Sym'phony  of  Multitudes y  for  orchestra,  chorus, 
and  military  band,  and  ImfrovisOy  for  violoncello  and  orchestra.  In  his 
operatic  style,  Republicano  follows  the  Italian  tradition,  and  his  har¬ 
monic  idiom  is  conventional.  His  song  Magdala  has  been  published.  The 
score  of  Republicano’s  Imfroviso  is  in  the  Fleisher  Collection  in  Phila¬ 
delphia. 

Claudio  Santoro  ( 1919 - ),  the  young  violinist  and  composer,  stud¬ 

ied  composition  with  Hans-Joachim  Koellreutter,  who  initiated  him  into 
modern  music.  Santoro  has  adopted  the  twelve-tone  technique,  and  writes 
exclusively  in  absolute  forms,  without  reference  to  Brazilian  folklore.  He 
has  written  a  Symphony  for  Two  String  Orchestras,  a  Symphony  for  Two 
Pianos  and  Chamber  Orchestra,  two  violin  sonatas,  a  Sonata  for  Violin 
Solo,  a  piano  Trio,  and  Diver tmento  for  seven  instruments.  His  Sonata 
for  Violin  Solo,  in  the  strict  twelve-tone  technique,  has  been  published 
hy  Editorial  Cooferativa  Inter americana  de  Comfositores  in  Monte¬ 
video. 

Jose  SiQUEiRA  (1907 - )  was  born  in  Conceigao,  where  he  learned 

the  rudiments  of  music  from  his  father,  the  leader  of  the  local  military 
band.  Later  he  played  the  trumpet.  In  1927  he  went  to  Rio  de  Janeiro, 


where  he  studied  composition  with  Francisco  Braga  and  conducting  with 
Burle  Marx.  In  1940  he  was  appointed  administrative  director  of  the 
newly  organized  Orquestra  Brasileira^  and  conductor  of  radio  concerts 
with  that  orchestra.  In  1944  he  visited  the  United  States.  Siqueira  has 
written  prolifically,  for  the  orchestraj  for  chamber  combinations,  for 
piano,  and  for  voice.  For  the  orchestra  he  has  composed  two  overtures: 
A  Musa  em  Festa  (The  Muse  on  a  Holiday),  Visao  (Vision)  j  three 
symphonic  poems:  Os  Pescadores  (The  Fishermen),  Alvorada  Brasileira 
(Brazilian  Aubade),  0  Desfertar  de  Ariel  (The  Awakening  of  Ariel)  5 
Symphony  in  D  minor;  three  symphonic  Preludes;  a  symphonic  suite 
Cenas  do  Nordeste  Brasileiro  (Scenes  of  Northeastern  Brazil);  five 
pieces  for  string  orchestra;  four  Dansas  Brasileiras;  Frevo  for  brass  en¬ 
semble;  Elegia  for  violoncello  and  orchestra;  and  three  works  for  voice 
and  orchestra.  For  chamber  music,  Siqueira  has  written  a  piano  Trio,  a 
Violin  Sonata,  and  a  String  Quartet.  He  has  furthermore  composed  nine 
short  violin  pieces,  seven  compositions  for  violoncello,  and  sixteen  pieces 
for  piano,  as  well  as  choruses  and  songs.  Siqueira  is  particularly  successful 
in  his  Brazilian  compositions,  based  on  native  folklore.  His  style  of  writ¬ 
ing  is  rich  in  harmony,  and  his  orchestration  is  brilliant.  For  atmospheric 
effects,  Siqueira  frequently  resorts  to  parallel  chord  formations,  progres¬ 
sions  in  whole-tone  scales,  and  instrumental  cadenzas.  None  of  his  com¬ 
positions  have  been  published.  The  following  orchestral  scores  by  Siqueira 
are  in  the  Fleisher  Collection  in  Philadelphia:  Dansas  Brasileiras  No.  2 
and  No.  4;  Cenas  do  Nordeste  Brasileiro ^  Meho^  Os  Pescadores ^  O  Des- 
fertar  de  Ariel ^  and  Alvorada  Brasileira.  The  orchestral  scores  and  parts 
of  Siqueira’s  Cenas.  do  Nordeste  Brasileiro^  5  Dansas  Brasileiras^  Senzala^ 
Toada^  and  Uma  Festa  Na  Roga^  are  available  at  the  Associated  Music 
Publishers  in  New  York. 

Hekel  Tavares  (1896 - )  was  born  in  Satuba,  the  son  of  a  wealthy 

plantation  owner.  He  developed  a  predilection  for  folk  music,  and  im¬ 
provised  airs  in  the  native  manner.  Without  the  benefit  of  formal  educa¬ 
tion,  Tavares  writes  prolifically,  in  all  forms,  including  symphonic  com¬ 
position.  His  Concerto  for  Piano  and  Orchestra  bears  the  opus  number 
105.  It  is  in  three  movements,  entitled  Modinha^  Ponteioy  and  Maracatu^ 
which  represent  three  types  of  Brazilian  folk  song,  urban,  rural,  and 
Negro.  Tavares  has  also  written  a  symphonic  suite,  Andre  de  Leao  e  0 
Demonio  de  Cabelg  Encarnado  (Andre  de  Leao  and  the  Red-Haired 
Demon),  based  on  Brazilian  themes.  While  Tavareses  style  of  writing  is 


142 


MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 


ingenuous,  he  compensates  for  his  lack  of  technique  with  an  Innate  feeling 
for  Brazilian  folklore.  Several  of  his  songs  have  been  published. 

Fructuoso  ViANNA  (1896 - )  studied  piano  and  composition  with 

Henrique  Oswald  in  Rio  de  Janeiro,  and  in  1923  went  to  Paris  for  further 
study.  Upon  his  return  to  Brazil,  he  was  appointed  instructor  at  the  Con¬ 
servatory  of  Sao  Paulo.  Vianna  has  written  almost  exclusively  in  small 
forms,  for  piano  and  for  voice.  His  musical  resources  are  rooted  in 
Brazilian  folklore,  for  which  he  has  an  intimate  understanding.  His  style 
of  writing  tends  toward  impressionism,  somewhat  in  RavePs  manner. 
His  7  Miniaturas  Sobre  Temas  Brasileiros^  Dansa  de  Negros^  a  children's 
suite  for  piano,  and  several  songs  have  been  published.  His  brilliant 
Brazilian  dance  Corta-Jaca  is  included  in  the  album  M'usique  BrSsilienne 
Moderne  (Rio  de  Janeiro,  1937). 

Heitor  Villa-Lobos,  the  foremost  Brazilian  composer,  was  born  in 
Rio  de  Janeiro,  probably  in  1881,  although  the  dates  1884,  1886,  and 
1888,  are  also  given  in  some  sources.  His  father,  who  was  a  writer  and 
amateur  musician,  gave  him  his  first  instruction  in  the  elements  of  music 
at  the  age  of  six.  Soon  afterwards,  Villa-Lobos  began  to  play  on  the  viola, 
holding  it  like  a  small  violoncello,  in  vertical  position.  At  the  age  of  nine 
he  improvised  variations  on  popular  Brazilian  tunes.  His  first  organized 
composition  was  a  piece  for  guitar  which  he  called  PanquSca^  a  made-up 
word  for  pancake.  Very  early  in  life,  Villa-Lobos  played  the  violoncello 
in  the  theaters  and  cinemas  of  Rio  de  Janeiro,  and  at  the  same  time  com¬ 
posed  pieces  for  the  guitar,  piano,  voice,  and  even  for  the  orchestra.  His 
first  published  composition  was  a  salon  waltz,  but,  after  the  first  groping 
efforts,  Villa-Lobos  definitely  engaged  himself  in  the  stylization  of 
Brazilian  folklore,  with  the  purpose  of  shaping  it  into  an  art  form.  This 
has  remained  his  principal  ambition  throughout  his  career  as  composer. 

As  a  young  man,  Villa-Lobos  traveled  widely  in  the  North  and  South 
of  Brazil,  and  engaged  in  varied  pursuits,  including  working  in  a  match 
factory.  He  gave  concerts  in  the  interior  of  Brazil,  and  eagerly  collected 
folk  songs,  seeking  to  establish  the  nature  of  national  musical  resources. 
His  first  composition  in  the  Brazilian  manner  was  a  suite  for  small  or¬ 
chestra  entitled  Canticos  Sertanejos  (Country  Airs),  which  he  wrote  in 
1909.  Returning  to  Rio  de  Janeiro,  he  took  lessons  in  composition  with 
Francisco  Braga.  He  also  read  Vincent  dTndy^s  TraitS  de  Composition. 
In  1918  he  met  in  Rio  de  Janiero  the  pianist  Artur  Rubinstein  and  the 


BRAZIL 


143 

French  composer  Darius  Milhaud,  and  heard  for  the  first  time  the  piano 
music  of  Debussy,  which  produced  a  profound  impression  upon  him.  In 
1923  he  went  to  Paris  and  became  acquainted  with  the  modern  school  of 
composition.  By  that  time  he  was  already  the  author  of  a  great  many 
works  in  all  genres.  He  returned  to  Brazil  in  1927.  In  1932  Villa-Lobos 
was  appointed  Supervisor  and  Director  of  Musical  Education  in  Brazil  by 
President  Getulio  Vargas.  This  appointment  gave  Villa-Lobos  the  occasion 
to  test  his  revolutionary  theories  of  musical  instruction.  Each  year,  on 
Brazil’s  Independence  Day,  September  7,  he  conducts  an  ^^orpheonic  con¬ 
centration”  of  several  thousand  school  children,  in  a  repertoire  ranging 
from  Handel  to  popular  songs  and  patriotic  hymns.  The  vocalization  com¬ 
prises  not  only  recognizable  words,  but  the  so-called  “orpheonic  effects,” 
percussive  and  explosive  sounds,  sibilation,  and  clapping  hands.  He  has 
composed  special  rhythmic  scores  for  chorus  with  orpheonic  effects,  of 
which  the  Invocation  to  Metallurgy  is  typical.  Villa-Lobos  has  also  de¬ 
veloped  a  chironomic  system  of  solfeggio,  in  which  the  position  of  the 
fingers  indicates  degrees  of  the  scale.  Coordinated  with  this  educational 
program  is  the  publication  of  Villa-Lobos’  choral  arrangements  of  Brazil¬ 
ian  popular  songs,  in  a  volume  Guia  Pratico  (Practical  Guide),  constantly 
supplemented  by  new  editions.  In  recognition  of  the  President’s  role  in 
the  educational  program  for  Brazilian  music,  Villa-Lobos  published  a 
laudatory  pamphlet,  A  Musica  Nacionalista  no  Governo  Getulio  Vargas. 

The  creative  productivity  of  Villa-Lobos  is  very  large.  He  has  written 
operas,  oratorios,  symphonies,  symphonic  poems,  concertos,  quartets, 
trios,  sonatas,  and  a  great  number  of  piano  pieces  and  songs.  Much  of 
Villa-Lobos’  music  for  piano  and  for  voice  has  been  published,  but  many 
large  works  still  remain  in  manuscript.  It  is  difficult  to  compile' a  com¬ 
prehensive  catalogue  of  Villa-Lobos’  unpublished  works,  in  view  of 
frequent  duplication  of  material  in  compositions  bearing  different  titles. 
For  this  side  of  Villa-Lobos,  see  Some  Aspects  of  Villa-Lobos^  Principles 
of  Composition^  by  Lisa  Peppercorn,  in  the  February,  1943,  issue  of  The 
Music  Review  of  London. 

Villa-Lobos  has  written  five  operas,  Aglaia^  Izahty  Jesusy  Zoe\  and 
Malazartey  but  only  one,  Tzahty  has  been  completed  and  fully  orchestrated. 
The  opera,  written  in  1913,  shows  the  influence  of  the  Italian  verismOy 
somewhat  in  the  Puccini  tradition.  The  subject  of  Izaht  is  concerned  with 
a  Gypsy  girl  by  that  name,  who  is  a  member  of  the  Apache  gang  in  Paris. 
She  falls  in  love  with  a  viscount,  not  realizing  that  she  is  his  illegitimate 


144  MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

daughter,  and  is  saved  from  incest  when  she  dies  protecting  him  from  the 
gang.  Izaht  was  produced  in  Rio  de  Janeiro  in  oratorio  form,  without 
stage  action,  on  April  6,  1940. 

Villa-Lobos^  oratorio  Vidafura  (Vida  PuTa^  Pure  Life)  was  produced  in 
Rio  de  Janeiro  on  November  28,  1934- defined  by  Villa-Lobos  as  an 
oratorio  written  in  the  spirit  of  liturgic  music,  with  all  the  rules  and  re¬ 
strictions  that  this  type  of  music  requires.”  Villa-Lobos  has  written  five 
symphonies  and  a  Sinfonietta.  The  symphonies,  all  written  between  1916 
and  1919,  bear  symbolical  subtitles.  The  First  Symphony,  O  ImfrevistOy 
was  performed  in  Rio  de  Janeiro  on  August  30,  19205  the  Second,  not 
yet  completed,  is  subtitled  Ascension.  The  Third  Symphony  is  named 
Guerra.  It  is  scored  for  a  very  large  orchestra,  with  thirty-seven  extra  brass 
instruments,  and  was  performed  in  Rio  de  Janeiro  on  July  30,  1919. 
A  Fourth  Symphony  (Victory)  and  a  Fifth  (Peace)  exist  o^aly  in  sketches. 
The  Sinfonietta  is  based  on  two  themes  of  Mozart,  and  is  developed 
entirely  according  to  classical  precepts. 

As  a  result  of  his  travels  in  the  interior  in  19143  Villa-Lobos  wrote  an 
orchestral  suite  entitled  Dans  as  Africanas^  with  the  subtitle  Dans  as  dos 
Indios  Mestisos  do  Brasil  (Dances  of  Mestizo  Indians  of  Brazil).  The 
Suite  in  three  movements,  with  the  Afro-Brazilian  subtitles  FarrafoSy 
Kankikisy  and  KankukuSy  was  first  performed  in  Paris  on  April  5,  1928. 
Also  of  jungle  inspiration  is  Villa-Lobos’  symphonic  poem  UirafurUy 
written  in  1917,  which  depicts  nocturnal  gatherings  of  Indians  in 
the  forests.  Uirapuru  is  the  name  of  a  legendary  Indian  chief,  whose 
playing  upon  the  flute  was  said  to  exercise  irresistible  attraction  to  young 
Indian  girls.  The  symphonic  poem  Amazonas y  composed  in  1 9 1 7?  portrays 
the  experiences  of  an  Indian  virgin  alone  in  the  tropical  jungle,  pursued 
by  unseen  monsters.  The  orchestration  of  Amazonas  abounds  in  novel 
effects,  such  as  playing  on  the  string  instruments  below  the  bridge,  and 
the  use  of  harmonics  glissando.  Amazonas  was  performed  in  Paris  on 
May  30,  1929,  and  produced  something  of  a  sensation.  The  score  is  also 
arranged  for  a  ballet  under  the  title  Miremis.  To  the  same  category  of 
symphonic  compositions  on  Indian  themes  belongs  the  suite  Tres  Poemas 
Indigenas  for  voice  and  orchestra  (1926).  Suite  Indigena  Brasileira  was 
composed  in  1920.  Numerous  other  symphonic  scores,  which  Villa-Lobos 
wrote  between  1916  and  1920,  were  left  unfinished,  and  in  more  than  one 
case  the  manuscripts  were  lost.  Several  orchestral  works  were  later  con¬ 
verted  into  ballets,  which  accounts  for  the  duplication  of  some  of  the 
orchestral  scores  in  the  catalogue  of  Villa-Lobos’ works. 


BRAZIL 


145 


Not  only  the  folklore  of  the  jungle,  but  also  the  popular  songs  of  the 
carnival  and  the  historic  airs  of  colonial  Brazil  have  attracted  Villa-Lobos, 
Thus,  in  Descobrimento  do  Brasil  (Discovery  of  Brazil,  originally  written 
for  a  film  in  1936),  Villa-Lobos  depicts  the  voyage  of  discovery,  the  set¬ 
tlement,  and  the  thanksgiving.  For  his  themes,  Villa-Lobos  uses  old 
Portuguese  songs,  Indian  folk  songs,  and,  in  the  concluding  section,  a 
double  chorus  a  caff  allay  in  which  the  male  voices  sing  a  Gregorian  chant, 
while  the  female  chorus  intones  Indian  songs  in  the  Guarany  language. 
From  Descobrimento  do  Brasil  Villa-Lobos  drew  four  concert  suites,  com¬ 
prising  the  following  movements:  Introductiony  Ale-griay  Adagio  Sentv 
mentaly  Ualaloce  (Amerindian  chant),  Cascavel  (Bagatelle),  hnfressao 
Moura  (Moorish  Impression),  Imfressao  Iberica  (Iberian  Impression), 
Festa  nas  Selvas  (Festival  in  the  Forest),  Procissao  da  Cruz  (Procession 
of  the  Cross),  and  Primeira  Missa  no  Brasil  (First  Mass  in  Brazil). 

Momofrecocey  composed  by  Villa-Lobos  in  Paris  in  1929,  is  a  suite 
drawn  from  the  piano  composition  Carnaval  das  Criangas  Brasileiras 
(Carnival  of  Brazilian  Children),  and  arranged  for  piano,  orchestra,  and 
Brazilian  percussion  instruments.  The  title  is  the  telescoped  form  of 
Momo  Precocey  precocious  MomOy  or  Child  Carnival  King. 

The  most  original  contribution  of  Villa-Lobos  to  Brazilian  music  is 
a  group  of  twelve  works  entitled  Choros,  Properly,  Choros  is  a  street 
band  of  players  of  popular  songs,  but  Villa-Lobos  extends  the  name  to 
mean  any  composition  ^fin  which  the  various  aspects  of  Brazilian  music, 
Indian  and  popular,  achieve  their  synthesis.”  The  first  ChoroSy  in  the 
popular  vein,  is  written  for  the  Brazilian  guitar  {violao)  solo.  The 
second  Choros  is  a  duet  for  flute  and  clarinet,  extremely  dissonant  in 
treatment,  and  reflecting  some  characteristics  of  Brazilian  popular  song. 
Choros  No.  3  is  scored  for  several  wind  instruments  and  a  male  chorus. 
Choros  No.  4  is  a  quartet  for  brass  instruments.  Choros  No.  5,  subtitled 
Alma  Brasileira  (Brazilian  Soul),  for  piano  solo,  is  one  of  the  most 
popular  of  Villa-Lobos^  compositions.  It  is  cast  in  simple  ternary  form, 
with  an  explosively  rhythmic  middle  section  containing  a  quotation  from 
a  popular  Brazilian  song.  Choros  No.  6  is  a  lengthy  work,  scored  for  an 
unusual  combination  of  instruments,  including  the  bombardine,  guitar, 
and  native  percussion.  Choros  No.  7  is  written  for  flute,  oboe,  clarinet, 
saxophone,  bassoon,  violin,  and  violoncello.  Choros  No.  8,  No.  9,  No.  10, 
No.  II,  and  No.  12,  are  complex  works,  requiring  a  large  orchestra  and 
a  battery  of  native  percussion  instruments.  The  score  of  Choros  ASlo,  10 
includes  a  mixed  chorus,  which  intones  with  savage  intensity  a  popular 


146  MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

Brazilian  song,  Rasga  o  Coragao,  In  his  program  notes  for  Chores  No. 
10,  Villa-Lobos  writes:  ‘^^This  work  represents  the  reaction  of  a  civilized 
man  to  stark  nature  j  his  contemplation  of  the  valleys  of  the  Amazon, 
and  the  land  of  Mato  Grosso  and  Para.  The  vastness  and  majesty  of  the 
landscape  enrapture  and  captivate  him.  The  sky,  the  waters,  the  woods,  the 
birds  fascinate  him.  But  little  by  little  his  humanity  asserts  itself:  there 
are  living  people  in  this  land,  even  though  they  are  savages.  Their  music 
Is  full  of  nostalgia  and  of  lovej  their  dances  are  full  of  rhythm.  The 
Brazilian  song  Rasga  o  Coragao  Is  heard,  and  the  Brazilian  heart  beats  in 
unison  with  the  Brazilian  earth.^’  Choros  No.  1 1  is  longer  and  more  com¬ 
plicated  in  rhythm  and  harmony  than  Choros  No.  lO.  It  is  scored  for  piano 
and  large  orchestra,  and  takes  over  an  hour  to  perform.  Choros  No.  12, 
somewhat  eclectic  in  style,  is  also  written  for  a  large  orchestra,  with 
Brazilian  percussion  Instruments.  To  this  list  should  be  added  a  super¬ 
numerary  Choros  hiSy  for  violin  and  violoncello,  short  but  extremely  dif¬ 
ficult  to  play. 

Few  performances  of  these  large-scale  compositions  have  been  given. 
Choros  No.  10  w^as  performed  in  Rio  de  Janeiro  on  December  15,  1926; 
Choros  No.  8,  In  Paris  on  October  24,  1927^  Choros  No.  9  was  conducted 
by  Villa-Lobos  in  Rio  de  Janeiro  on  July  15,  19425  and  Choros  No.  6, 
together  with  Chores  No.  ii,  on  July  18,  1942.  Choros  No.  12  was  first 
performed  by  Villa-Lobos  on  his  concert  tour  in  the  United  States,  when 
he  conducted  the  Boston  Symphony  Orchestra,  on  February  23,  1945. 

Villa-Lobos  is  not  averse  to  humorous  subjects,  in  the  Gallic  manner. 
Characteristic  of  this  manner  is  his  suite  for  strings,  In  three  movements, 
Musica  T imida^  Musica  Misteriosa^  and  NLusica  Inquieta,  In  similar  vein 
is  the  suite  of  eight  pieces  for  voice  and  chamber  orchestra,  Efigrammes 
Ironiques  et  Sentiment  ales.  In  1929,  in  Paris,  Villa-Lobos  composed  Suite 
Suggestive^  subtitled  Cinemas^  in  which  he  caricatured  typical  cinema 
programs,  with  parodied  versions  of  Rossini’s  William  Tell  Overture  and 
Sousa’s  Stars  and  Strifes,  One  of  the  movements  Is  scored  for  three 
metronomes  and  two  voices,  with  the  accompaniment  of  violins,  scraping 
bows  against  the  back  of  the  instrument.  His  Saudades  da  Juventude 
(Nostalgic  Memories  of  Youth),  written  In  1940,  in  ten  short  movements, 
depicting  the  sounds  and  sights  of  the  city  streets,  is  half-humorous,  half- 
sentimental  in  character. 

Villa-Lobos  likes  unusual  titles.  His  tremendously  difficult  Concerto 
for  Violin  and  Orchestra,  in  two  movements,  Alma  Convulsa  {Corwuhtd 
Soul)  and  Contentamento^  composed  in  1920,  was  performed  in  Rio  de 


BRAZIL 


H7 

Janeiro  on  December  15,  1922.  In  1941,  Villa-Lobos  added  another 
movement  Serenidade,  and  labeled  the  whole  work  Fantasia  dos  Movi- 
mentos  Mixtos,  so  as  to  indicate  the  diversity  of  styles  inherent  in  the 
music.  His  Concerto  for  Violoncello  and  Orchestra  (1916),  however,  is 
free  of  such  connotation.  The  suite  Martirio  dos  Insectos  (Martyrdom  of 
Insects),  written  in  1916  for  violin  and  piano,  is  in  three  parts  with  fanci¬ 
ful  titles:  A  Cigarra  no  Inverno  (Cricket  in  the  Winter),  O  Vagalume  na 
Claridade  (The  Glow-worm  in  the  Light),  and  Mari-posa  na  Luz  (Butter¬ 
fly  in  the  Light). 

Villa-Lobos  combines  a  keen  sense  of  humor  with  ostentatious  science. 
He  has  developed  a  method  of  composition  which  consists  of  transferring 
the  outline  of  a  geometrical  curve,  or  a  photograph,  to  music  paper,  using 
the  resultant  melodic  line  as  a  subject  for  musical  composition.  At  the 
instigation  of  an  American  journalist,  he  projected  a  photograph  of  the 
city  of  New  York  on  music  paper,  harmonized  the  melody,  and  orches¬ 
trated  the  result.  The  orchestral  version  of  this  composition,  under  the 
title  New  Y ork  Skyline^  was  broadcast  from  Rio  de  Janeiro  on  the  occasion 
of  the  opening  of  the  Brazilian  Pavilion  at  the  New  York  World’s  Fair, 
on  April  7,  1940.  Villa-Lobos  has  similarly  harmonized  the  outline  of  the 
mountain  landscape  at  Bello  Horizonte  in  Brazil. 

His  preoccupation  with  science  has  led  Villa-Lobos  to  an  audacious,  but 
remarkably  successful  experiment,  of  applying  Bach’s  contrapuntal 
technique  to  Brazilian  folklore.  The  product  of  this  experiment  is  the  series 
of  seven  suites  named  Bachianas  Brasileiras.  The  separate  movements 
bear  double  titles,  one  Bachian  and  one  Brazilian,  as,  for  instance.  Intro¬ 
duction  {Embolada),  Prelude  {Modinha),  Chorale  {Canto  de  Sertao,  i.e. 
Country  Song),  and  Dance  {Miudinho).  In  the  second  suite,  the  fourth 
movement,  a  Toccata,  bears  the  subtitle  0  Trenzinho  do  Caifira  (Little 
Train  of  a  Rustic),  alluding  to  the  noise  of  local  trains  in  the  small  com¬ 
munities  of  Brazil’s  interior.  In  the  fourth  suite,  the  Chorale  has  a  con¬ 
stantly  repeated  B  flat  in  the  treble,  which  according  to  Villa-Lobos 
represents  the  cry  of  the  jungle  bird,  Araponga.  Bachianas  Brasileiras 
are  written  for  various  instrumental  combinations,  and  also  exist  in  piano 
form. 

In  contrast  to  his  music  governed  by  an  intellectual  idea,  Villa-Lobos’ 
numerous  compositions  for  children,  most  of  them  for  piano,  use  the  im¬ 
mediate  appeal.  His  Caixinha  de  Boas  Festas  (Little  Box  of  Holy  Night) 
is  a  fairy  tale  in  eight  pictures.  In  its  orchestral  form,  it  was  performed  in 
Rio  de  Janeiro  on  December  8,  1932.  In  1929,  ViUa-Lobos  composed  a 


MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

piano  suite  of  ten  pieces,  entitled  Francette  et  Pia^  which  depicts  the  visit 
of  a  Brazilian  Indian  boy,  Pia,  to  France,  where  he  meets  the  French 
girl,  Francette.  Carnaval  das  CrlangaSy  from  which  Villa-Lobos  drew  the 
orchestral  work  Momofrecocey  is  a  piano  suite  of  eight  pieces  illustrative 
of  carnival  scenes.  Villa-Lobos^  two  suites  of  piano  pieces.  Prole  do  BebS 
(Baby’s  Family),  are  a  musical  gallery  of  baby’s  toys  and  dolls.  They  are 
somewhat  in  the  manner  of  Debussy’s  Childrerds  Corner ^  but  much  more 
complex  in  planistic  and  harmonic  idiom.  PoUchinelle  from  Prole  do 
Bebe  No.  i  is  very  popular.  Among  his  earlier  children’s  piano  pieces, 
written  between  1914  and  1920,  are  two  series  entitled  Suite  Infantil;  a 
group  of  twelve  pieces,  Cirandinhas  (little  rounds)  j  and  a  group  of  six¬ 
teen  pieces,  Cirandas  (rounds).  The  most  popular  piece  from  Cirandas 
is  Xoy  Xoy  Passarinho  (Hey,  Hey,  Little  Bird). 

Villa-Lobos’  most  formidable  composition  for  piano  is  Rude-poema 
(Rude  Poem),  a  lengthy  work  written  in  1926  for  Artur  Rubinstein,  and 
presenting  great  technical  difficulties.  Rudepoema  has  been  orchestrated 
by  Villa-Lobos,  and  the  orchestral  version  was  performed  under  his  direc¬ 
tion  in  Rio  de  Janeiro  on  July  15,  1942.  Among  piano  compositions  in 
folkloric  vein,  the  Saudades  das  Selvas  Brasileiras  (Nostalgia  of  Brazilian 
Forests)  and  Ciclo  Brasileiro  are  the  most  expressive.  The  Cido  Brasileiro 
(1936)  is  in  four  movements,  named  BUntio  do  Cabodo  (Lament  of 
the  Peasant),  Imfressoes  Seresteiras  (Country  Impressions),  Festa  No 
Sertao  (Country  Fiesta),  and  Dansa  do  Indio  Branco  (Dance  of  a  White 
Indian).  The  piano  writing  here  is  effective  without  being  too  difficult. 
In  similar  vein  is  the  poetic  Lenda  do  Cabodo  (Tale  of  a  Peasant). 

Villa-Lobos  has  written  a  considerable  amount  of  chamber  music: 
Nonet  for  flute,  oboe,  clarinet,  saxophone,  bassoon,  harp,  celesta,  percus¬ 
sion,  and  mixed  choir  5  a  Quartet  for  flute,  saxophone,  harp,  celesta,  with 
the  addition  of  female  chorus;  five  string  quartets;  Trio  for  oboe,  clarinet, 
and  bassoon;  three  piano  trios;  two  violoncello  sonatas;  and  Sonata- 
Fantasia,  subtitled  Desesferance,  for  piano  and  violin.  In  1923  Villa- 
Lobos  wrote  a  Suite  for  voice  and  violin,  in  three  movements,  characteristic 
of  Brazilian  folklore.  The  violin  is  here  made  to  imitate  the  guitar,  while 
the  vocal  part  presents  a  percussive  recitative.  To  the  category  of  chamber 
music  also  belong  Cboros  No.  2,  No.  4,  No.  6,  No.  7,  and  Ckoros  bis.  For 
voice  and  instruments  Villa-Lobos  has  written  an  expressionist  creation, 
Poema  da  Crianga  e  Sua  Mama  (Poem  of  a  Child  and  its  Mother) . 

iLnong  vocal  works  of  Villa-Lobos,  his  twelve  are  outstanding. 

Vaned  in  form  and  mood,  these  Serestas  follow  the  idea  of  folkloric  syn- 


BRAZIL 


149 

thesis  tj^ified  by  the  Chores .  Like  the  Choros,  the  Serestas  approach  the 
Serenade  in  conception.  Historiettes  (1920)  are  impressionistic  in  char¬ 
acter.  Villa-Lobos  has  also  made  numerous  arrangements  of  popular 
Brazilian  songs,  of  which  Chansons  Ty'piques  Bresiliennes  are  the  most 
important. 

The  technique  of  composition  applied  by  Villa-Lobos  varies  from  the 
simplest  kind  of  harmony  (as  in  his  music  for  children)  to  the  ultimate  in 
complexity  (as  in  Rude-poema  or  Choros  No.  1 1 ).  Of  the  same  generation 
as  Stravinsky,  Villa-Lobos  was  not  acquainted  with,  Stravinsky’s  music 
until  19233  when  he  was  forty-two  years  old,  and  certain  parallels  of 
technical  procedures  in  his  and  Stravinsky’s  music  should  be  regarded 
as  coincidental.  During  his  Paris  period  (1923-1926),  Villa-Lobos  was 
influenced  by  the  impressionist  style  of  composition.  But  owing  to  his  lack 
of  formal  musical  education,  Villa-Lobos  was  compelled  to  rely  on  his 
own  resources  in  musical  technique.  By  predilection,  he  uses  sonorous 
harmonies,  often  supported  by  powerful  pedal  points.  Polytonality  (par¬ 
ticularly  as  typified  by  the  combination  of  C  major  with  F  sharp  major) 
is  a  frequent  device  in  Villa-Lobos’  music.  This  polytonality  is  also  im¬ 
plied  in  his  piano  writing  (as  in  Prole  do  Bebe),vf}xtn.  the  right  hand  plays 
on  the  white  keys,  and  the  left  on  the  black  keys.  For  special  effects,  Villa- 
Lobos  uses  clusters  of  chromatic  tones,  particularly  in  the  low  register  of 
the  piano.  There  is  little  polyphony  in  Villa-Lobos’  music,  and  the  contra¬ 
puntal  lines  are  usually  subordinated  to  the  harmonic  idea,  even  in  such 
contrapuntally  designed  works  as  Bachianas  Brasileiras.  The  rhythmic 
element  is  naturally  rich  and  varied.  Villa-Lobos’  orchestration  abounds 
in  color,  and  the  spirit  of  free  improvisation  pervades  the  score.  Brazilian 
native  instruments  are  used  as  a  background  rather  than  a  substitute  for 
standard  percussion. 

Villa-Lobos’  orchestral  and  chamber  music  has  been  published  by  Max 
Eschig  in  Paris,  including  Amazonas;  Dansas  Africanas;  Choros  Nos.  2, 

3)  ■4-3  73  ^3  to,  and  Choros  his;  'Nonet;  Suite  for  voice  and  violin  5  Poema 
da  Cr'mnqa  e  Sua  'Mama;  Quartet  for  flute,  saxophone,  harp,  and  celesta, 
with  female  chorus;  piano  score  of  the  Concerto  for  Violoncello  and  Or¬ 
chestra;  Trio  for  oboe,  clarinet,  and  bassoon;  piano  Trios  No.  2  and  No. 

3 ;  String  Quartets  No.  2  and  No.  3 ;  Sonata-Fantasia  for  violin  and  piano; 
Chansons  Tyfiques  Bresiliennes  (harmonizations  of  Brazilian  melodies) ; 
Rudefoema  for  'pizno y  Saudades  das  Selvas  Brasileiras  for  piano;  and  the 
s&cond  smit  oi  Prole  do  Be  be. 

The  piano  pieces  and  songs  have  been  published  by  Arthur  Napoleao  in 


150  MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

Brazil:  Carnaval  das  Criangas;  Chores  No.  5j  Cirandas;  Cirandinhas; 
Dansas  Africanas ;  Lenda  do  Cahoclo ;  Prole  do  BebS  No.  i  j  Suite  Floral; 
two  collections  entitled  Suite  Infantil;  Ciclo  Brasileiro;  Bachianas 
Brasileiras  No.  4;  Sul  America  (South  America,  based  on  folk  themes  of 
several  South  American  countries) ;  song  collections  in  Portuguese  and 
French,  among  them  Efigrammes  Ironiques  et  Sentimentales ;  His- 
toriettes;  Serestas;  Marifosa  na  Luz  for  violin  and  piano,  and  several 
arrangements  for  violin  of  original  piano  pieces;  Pequena  Suite  (Little 
Suite)  for  violoncello  and  piano,  and  also  versions  for  violoncello  of 
violin  pieces;  Chores  No.  i  for  guitar;  choral  compositions,  educational 
pieces,  etc.  Two  Preludios  for  guitar  by  Villa-Lobos  have  been  published  as 
a  supplement  to  Musica  Viva  (Sao  Paulo,  January,  1941 ).  The  New  York 
Skyhne  and  the  “millimetrization”  of  the  mountain  chain  at  Bello 
Horizonte  were  published  in  the  Brazilian  issue  of  New  Music  of 
October,  1942.  Bansa  from  Bachianas  Brasileiras  No.  4  is  included  in  the 
Schirmer  collection  Latin-American  Art  Music  for  the  Piano  (New  York, 
1942).  Several  popular  piano  pieces  by  Villa-Lobos  have  been  reissued  in 
the  United  States  by  the  Associated  Music  Publishers,  Marks,  Axelrod, 
and  others.  The  following  orchestral  scores  are  in  the  Fleisher  Collection 
in  Philadelphia:  Amazonas;  Bachianas  Brasileiras  Nos.  i,  2,  and  4* 
Caixmha  de  Boas  Festas;  Chores  Nos.  7,  8,  10,  and  ii.  Concerto  for 
Violoncello  and  Orchestra;  Descobrimento  do  Brasil;  Momofrecoce; 
Suite  for  string  orchestra;  Suite  Suggestive;  Symphony  No.  3;  and 
Fantasia  dos  Movimentos  Mixtos.  Various  pieces  by  Villa-Lobos  have 
been  recorded  in  the  slhmas  South  American  Chamber  Music  (Columbia) 
and  Festival  of  Brazilian  Music  (Columbia).  Recordings  of  Villa-Lobos’ 
chamber  music  have  also  been  made  in  Brazil. 

Several  monographs  on  Villa-Lobos  have  appeared  in  the  music  press 
See  particularly  “Brazilian  Portrait-Villa-Lobos,”  by  Burle  Marx,  pub¬ 
lished  m  Modern  Music,  October,  1939,  and  also  “A  Visit  with  Villa- 
Lobos,”  by  Nicolas  Slonimsky,  in  Musical  America,  October  10,  1941. 
Villa-Lobos’  own  autobiographical  calendar,  arranged  year  by  year  (but 
giving  his  birthday  as  1888  rather  than  1881),  was  published  in  Musica 
No.  8  (1941). 


C  hile 


*  *  .  la  F atria  Chilena^  de  mitros 
y  de  lauros  coronada  .  ,  . 

[LEONARDO  ELiz] 


Chile  occupies  a  narrow  strip  of  land  along  the  Pacific  coast  of  South  America, 
below  the  Tropic  of  Capricorn.  Chile’s  length  is  thirty  times  its  average  width. 
The  population  of  Chile  numbers  about  five  million,  of  which  one  hundred 
thousand  are  Araucanian  Indians. 

Chilean  folklore  is  primarily  Hispanic.  The  Araucanian  Indians  still 
surviving  in  the  country  are  too  few  in  number  and  too  remote  from  the 
centers  of  cultural  activities  to  exercise  a  marked  influence  on  the  national 
arts.  Araucanian  music  exists  as  a  heritage  from  the  past,  isolated  from  the 
present  trends  of  Chilean  folklore.  There  is  much  in  Araucanian  music 
which  distinguishes  it  from  that  of  other  Indian  branches.  The  Araucanian 
scales  are  not  exclusively  pentatonic,  but  contain  intervallic  divisions 
smaller  than  a  semitone.  The  Araucanian  instruments  differ  in  many  re¬ 
spects  from  those  of  other  Indians.  The  Araucanian  reed  pipe,  the  Tru- 
truca,  which  reaches  two  meters  in  length,  is  capable  of  producing  only 
one  sound,  somewhat  lugubrious  in  character.  A  smaller  reed  pipe  is 
called  the  Pijulka.  A  unique  instrument  is  the  double  musical  bow,  called 
the  KunkUlkawe,  which  consists  of  two  strips  of  wood,  or  two  animal 
bones,  bent  with  a  bowstring  and  interlocked  like  a  chain  of  two  rings. 
The  sound  is  produced  by  rubbing  on  the  bowstrings.  Other  musical 
instruments  used  by  the  Araucanians  are  the  Wada,  or  Huada,  which  is 
a  fruit  shell  filled  with  dry  seed}  the  KUllkull,  which  is  an  animal  horn, 
the  Pinkiilwe,  a  vertical  flute}  and  the  Kultrun,  a  flat  drum.  An  illus¬ 
trated  description  of  Araucanian  instruments  is  given  by  Garlos  Isamitt 
in  his  articles  published  in  Volumes  I,  III,  and  IV  of  the  Boletin  Latino- 
Americano  de  Musica. 

The  living  music  of  Chile  is  essentially  Spanish  in  its  inspiration  and 


152  MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

historic  origin.  The  most  popular  air  of  Chile  is  the  Zamacueca.  It  appeared 
in  Chile  in  1824,  possibly  by  way  of  Lima.  Its  early  popularity  is  attested 
by  the  fact  that  a  Zamacueca  was  sung  in  the  singing  lesson  scene  in  the 
opera  Barber  of  Seville ^  when  it  was  first  produced  in  Chile  about  1830. 
Up  to  185O5  the  Zamacueca  was  sometimes  called  Sambacueca.  There  is  no 
connection  between  the  Zamacueca  and  the  Brazilian  dance  Samba,  which 
is  of  Negro  origin. 

The  derivation  of  the  name  Zamacueca  is  obscure.  The  common  theory 
is  that  the  word  comes  from  the  compound  Zamba,  a  Moorish  festival, 
and  Clueca,  the  clucking  of  the  hen.  In  Bolivia  and  Argentina,  the 
Zambacueca  is  called  Cueca,  Caeca  Chilena,  or  simply  Chilena.  In  Chile 
itself,  the  shorter  name  Cueca  is  commonly  used  for  Za^nacueca,  In  Peru, 
the  Cueca  Chilena  was  very  popular  up  to  the  time  of  the  war  between 
Peru  and  Chile  in  1879,  when  the  name  of  the  dance  was  changed,  for 
patriotic  reasons,  to  the  Mariner  a,  in  honor  of  the  Peruvian  Marine  forces. 

The  Zamacueca  is  always  in  the  major  key.  Some  writers  see  in  this  a 
reflection  of  the  sunny  and  optimistic  character  of  the  Chilean  people., 
Diego  Portales,  a  powerful  Chilean  politician  of  the  early  republic,  is 
said  to  have  declared  publicly  :  would  not  exchange  the  Zamacueca  for 
the  presidency  itself.^’  Portales  never  became  president. 

The  Zamacueca  is  usually  written  in  six-eight  time,  with  the  accompani¬ 
ment  in  three-four  time.  Humberto  Allende  gives  the  following  descrip¬ 
tion  of  the  Zamacueca:  ''Neither  the  words  nor  the  music  obey  any  fixed 
rules  3  various  motives  are  freely  intermingled.  The  number  of  bars  is 
from  twenty-six  to  thirty,  and  there  is  usually  an  instrumental  introduc¬ 
tion  eight  to  ten  bars  in  length.  The  last  note  of  the  melody  is  either  the 
third  or  the  fifth  of  the  scale,  never  the  octave.’^ 

Like  most  Latin  American  airs,  the  Zamacueca  is  sung  as  well  as  danced. 
The  singing  version  is  analyzed  by  Pablo  Garrido,  in  his  monograph 
Biografta  de  la  Cueca  (Santiago,  I943)?  consisting  of  a  quatrain  cor¬ 
responding  to  the  Spanish  MLalagueha,  and  a  period  of  eight  verses 
corresponding  to  the  Seguidilla,  There  is  also  a  coda  which  summarizes 
the  salient  points  of  the  verse,  or  proffers  a  moral.  Garrido  states  also  that 
only  the  tonic  and  the  dominant  are  employed,  modulations,  particularly 
into  the  minor,  being  extremely  rare.  A  typical  Zamacueca,  entitled  Tus 
A  is  included  in  Garrido^s  monograph. 

Among  the  popular  songs  of  the  Chilean  countryside,  the  Tonada 
Chilena  enjoys  great  popularity.  It  is  a  lyrical  air,  usually  in  two  sections, 
a  slow  part  in  three-four  time,  and  a  lively  movement  in  six-eight  time. 


(  ^.£4A^  iple  /2i3<^  j 


Heitor  Villa-Lobos’  “Millimetrization”  of  ‘^Melodia  da  Montanha” 


Camargo  Guarnieri 


Domingo  Santa  Cruz 


Sjff<Aa.  ■Ventivru^  3 


Francisco  Mignone 


Manuel  Ponce 


Alberto  Williams 


iiii-JiiJf 


CHILE 


IS3 


Among  urban  songs,  the  Esquinazo,  literally  a  street  corner  song,  is  a 
serenade,  but  is  also  sung  as  a  Christmas  carol. 

The  Zafateo,  literally  a  shoe  dance,  which  is  common  to  all  Latin 
America,  has  been  popular  in  Chile  for  centuries.  In  his  book.  Relations 
du  Voyage  de  la  Mer  du  Sud,  the  French  traveler  Frezier  gives  the 
musical  notation  of  a  Zafateo  danced  in  Chile  in  1713.  The  Spanish 
Fandango,  which  was  popular  in  Chile  in  the  eighteenth  century,  incurred 
the  condemnation  of  the  ecclesiastical  authorities,  as  “an  infamous  dance, 
cultivated  in  the  low  classes,  which  leads  to  excesses  of  bestiality.”  A 
native  air,  called  Chocolate,  was  also  banned  on  account  of  its  licentious 
and  vulgar  character. 

The  once  popular  air  El  Parabien  shows  the  combined  influence  of 
Italian  opera  and  Spanish  operetta  styles.  It  is  characteristic  of  the  salon 
music  popular  in  Chile  in  the  middle  of  the  nineteenth  century. 

The  first  native-born  Chilean  composer  was  Manuel  Robles  (1780- 
1837),  the  author  of  the  first  Chilean  National  Anthem.  The  present 
Chilean  Anthem  was  written  by  the  Spanish  musician  Ramon 'Carnicer 
(1789-1855),  who  never  visited  Chile. 

The  first  German  musician  to  settle  in  Chile  was  Wilhelm  Frick.  In 
1840,  he  published  a  piano  piece  entitled  Ein  E>eutscher  Gruss  aus  Chile. 
Another  German,  Aquinas  Ried,  wrote  the  first  opera  on  a  native  subject, 


IS+  MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

Telesfora,  which  was  produced  in  Valparaiso  on  September  i8,  1846. 

Chile  ^ssesses  an  excellent  symphony  orchestra,  the  Orjuesta  Sin- 
fomca  de  Chde,  established  in  Santiago  in  1928,  under  the  direction  of  its 
permanent  conductor  Armando  Carvajal. 

The  first  Conservatory  of  Music  in  Chile  was  established  in  Santiago 
by  a  government  decree  on  October  26,  1849.  Its  history  up  to  the  year 
19 1 1  IS  presented  in  the  now  extremely  rare  edition  Resena  Historicl del 
onservatono  Nactond  de  Musica  y  Declamacion  1849  a  1911  which 

A  great  impeto  to  the  cultivation  of  native  music  in  Chile  was  given  bv 
the  formation  of  the  Instituto  de  Extension  Musicd,  founded  by  the 
government  decree  of  October  2,  1940,  with  the  Chilean  composer  Do- 
mingo  Santa  Cruz  as  Director.  Under  the  joint  auspices  of  the  University 
•  ^  XT  ^  ^  Institute,  a  national  music  festival  was  held  in  Santiago 
in  November  1941,  and  numerous  prizes  were  awarded  for  the  best 
compositions  by  Chilean  musicians.  The  University  of  Chile  has  also 
sponsored  the  publication  of  piano  pieces  and  songs  by  Chilean  composers 
and  books  on  native  music.  Of  these,  the  scholarly  volume  by  Eugedo 
Pereira  Salas,  Los  Ongenes  del  Arte  Musicd  en  Chile,  published  in  1 041 
and  an  annotated  collection  of  native  airs,  under  the  title  Chile  (Santiago’ 


ivi-uoiv-iAJMS  UF  CHILE 


Adolfo  Allende  (1890 - ),  the  music  critic  and  composer  is  the 

younger  brother  of  Humberto  Allende.  He  has  written  Zirkln^^ 

songstnfefthTtitrp?'^^  inspiration  are  Nocturne  Chileno  and  sif 
ngs  unaer  tile  title  Tdagante,  after  a  town  of  that  name. 

(imlZiT  H  T  Humberto  Allende 

K"';  ( -’“n  »nd  composido:  (  r  jos  . 

He  gave,  at  the  Conservatory,  the  first  performances  of  his  Suite  for 
S  ring  Orchestra  on  December  30,  1903,  and  an  Overture  in  G  major  on 

b^Stln  H.’  ^^^nde  received  a  prize  for  his  Symphony 

m  B  flat  in  the  competition  on  the  occasion  of  the  Centennial  of  the  ll 


CHILE  155 

dependence  of  Chile.  The  prize  money  of  1500  Chilean  pesos  enabled  him 
to  make  a  trip  to^  Europe.  He  visited  Spain,  Italy,  Switzerland,  and  Ger¬ 
many.  After  a  brief  visit  to  Paris,  he  returned  to  Chile  in  May,  19 1 1,  and 
on  May  10  he  was  named  a  member  of  the  Sociedad  de  Folklore  de  Chile. 
In  1913,  Allende  wrote  a  symphonic  suite  in  the  native  manner,  entitled 
Escenas^  Camfesmas  Chilenas,  in  three  movements:  Hacia  la  Era  (At  the 
Threshing-Floor),  A  la  Sombra  de  la  Ramada  (Under  the  Shade  of  the 
Foliage),  and  La  Trilla  a  Yeguas  (The  Equestrian  Tournament).  This 
work,  m  which  Allende  uses  some  modernistic  progressions,  such  as  whole- 
tone  scales,  aroused  the  admiration  of  Felipe  Pedrell,  who  called  Allende 
“El  f  rimer  com-positor  futuro  de  su  f  atria.”  In  1915,  Allende  composed 
a  Concerto  for  Violoncello  and  Orchestra,  the  score  of  which  he  sent  to 
Debussy,  and  received  a  cordial  reply  in  which  Debussy  commended  the 
music  for  its  rhythmic  freshness.  In  1920,  Allende  wrote  his  second  sym¬ 
phonic  poem  in  a  Chilean  style.  La  Voz  de  las  Callesy  performed  in 
Santiago  on  May  20,  1921 ;  it  is  based  on  the  tunes  of  the  street  cries  of 
Santiago  vendors  of  eggs,  lemons,  or  bottles.  In  the  score  of  La  Voz  de 
las  C alias,  Allende  makes  use  of  the  method  of  thematic  integration,  with 
the  themes  built  up  by  the  process  of  cumulation  from  melodic  fragments 
in  the  exposition,  a  method  suggested  to  Allende  by  a  designer’s  draw- 
ings  from  a  rendering,  with  the  details  filled  in  at  the  final  stage.  Between 
1917  and  1922,  Allende  wrote  twelve  piano  pieces,  Tonadas  de  Caracter 
Popilar  Chileno,  stylized  native  airs  in  harmonies  touched  with  Gallic  dis¬ 
sonance.  Three  of  these  T onadas,  arranged  for  orchestra  and  chorus  ad 
libitum,  were  performed  in  Paris  on  January  30,  1930,  with  considerable 
success.  Florent  Schmitt  found  in  the  music  ^hhe  folklore  of  the  Andes,  a 
synthesis  of  Inca  airs  and  Arabic  elements,  imported  in  times  immemorial 
by  some  Iberian  Attila.”  Emile  Vuillermoz  praised  the  “ardent  vitality” 
and  “voluptuous  rhythms”  of  the  music,  while  Louis  Aubert  was  im¬ 
pressed  by  the  ^^strangely  original  inflections,  which  at  once  surprise  and 
enchant.”  The  orchestral  version  of  three  other  Tonadas  for  large  or¬ 
chestra  without  chorus  was  performed  by  the  Orquesta  Sinfonica  de  Chile 
on  April  27,  1936.  Tonada  No.  2  was  played  in  Buenos  Aires  on  Novem¬ 
ber  23, 1 941 ,  in  a  transcription  for  twenty-two  violoncellos  and  four  double 
basses,  made  by  A.  Schiuma. 

Among  Allende’s  later  works  of  large  dimensions  are  La  Desfedida 
for  two  sopranos,  contralto,  and  large  orchestra  (performed  in  Santiago 
on  May  7, 1 934) ,  and  two  songs  for  soprano  and  orchestra  (performed  on 
July  4,  1938).  His  Concerto  in  D  major  for  Violin  and  Orchestra,  which 


156  MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

received  the  second  prize  at  the  Quadricentennial  Music  Contest  in  San¬ 
tiago  in  November,  1941,  is  more  academic  than  his  early  works.  It  was 
first  performed  in  Santiago  on  November  27,  1942. 

Ailende’s  international  connections  are  wide.  On  March  24,  1924,  he 
was  elected  a  correspondent  of  the  Folklore  Society  of  Kharkov,  Russia. 
When  he  made  a  trip  to  Europe  in  1928,  he  was  vice  president  of  the 
Chilean  delegation  at  the  International  Congress  of  Folk  Arts  in  Prague, 
and  on  July  15,  1928,  was  elected  director  and  European  representative 
of  the  League  to  Combat  Alcoholism.  In  1929  he  went  to  Europe  once 
more,  as  the  Chilean  delegate  at  the  Ibero-American  Music  Festival  in 
Barcelona.  Since  1928,  Allende  has  taught  composition  at  the  National 
Conservatory  in  Santiago.  Among  his  pupils  were  Amengual,  Letelier, 
Nunez  Navarrete,  and  Urrutia  Blondel.  Allende  is  the  author  of  Metodo 
Original  de  IniciaciSn  Musical  (1937)  in  which  modern  harmony  is 
taught  by  progressively  complex  harmonizations  of  twenty  Chilean  songs. 

The  orchestral  score  of  La  Vox  de  las  Calles  was  published  in  1922  by 
the  Chilean  Ministry  of  Education.  The  miniature  score  of  three  Tonadas 
for  orchestra  and  chorus  was  published  by  Senart  in  Paris.  Senart  has  also 
published  twelve  Tonadas  for  piano  5  a  Preludio  for  piano  3  four  Ltudes 
for  piano  3  El  Encuentro  and  Debajo  de  un  Limon  Verde  ior  soprano  and 
contralto  with  piano  accompaniment 3  and  Ave  Maria  for  soprano  and 
piano.  The  piano  score  of  the  second  movement  of  the  Cello  Concerto  is 
included  in  the  collection  Musicos  Chilenos  (Santiago,  1917).  The  Uni¬ 
versity  of  Chile  has  published  some  of  Allende’s  piano  works:  Estudios 
Nos.  5,  6,  7,  8,  and  9  3  and  six  Greek  Miniatures.  Allende^s  songs  Mientras 
Baja  la  Nieve^  El  Surtidor^  A  las  Nubesy  six  Cantos  Infantiles^  and  several 
school  choruses  have  been  published  by  the  composer.  Three  songs  and  the 
Prelude  and  Fugue  are  included  in  the  music  supplements  to  Volume 
I  and  Volume  IV  of  the  Boletin  Latino-Americano  de  Musica.  The  Eng¬ 
lish  translation  of  Allende’s  paper  on  Chilean  folk  music  is  published 
in  the  Bulletin  of  the  Pan  American  Union  for  1931.  Tres  Tonadas ^  La 
Vox  de  las  Calles^  the  Cello  Concerto,  and  the  Violin  Concerto  are  avail¬ 
able  in  the  Fleisher  Collection  in  Philadelphia. 

A  pupil  of  Allende,  Pedro  Nunez  Navarrete  has  prepared  an  extensive 
biography  of  Humberto  Allende,  which  remains  in  manuscript.  The 
September,  1945,  issue  of  Revista  Musical  Chilena  was  dedicated  to  Al¬ 
lende  when  he  received  the  National  Music  Prize  of  100,000  Chilean 
pesos.  Carlos  Isamitt  wrote  a  paper  on  Allende  in  Volume  II  of 


CHILE 


157 

the  Bolettn  TLat'mo- Americano  de  'Musica.  See  also  N.  Slonimskyj 
berto  Allende — The  First  Modernist  of  Chile,”  in  Musical  America^ 
August,  1942. 

Rene  Amengual  Astaburuaga  (1911 - )  studied  composition  with 

Humberto  Allende  at  the  National  Conservatory  in  Santiago.  His  early 
compositions,  an  orchestral  piece,  Preludio  (1934),  and  a  symphonic 
Suite  (1937)3  of  little  importance.  Beginning  with  1938,  Amengual 
shows  an  awakening  of  talent.  His  Sonatina  for  Piano  (1938),  Ravelesque 
in  spirit,  is  finely  done,  as  is  the  brilliant  Introduction  and  Allegro  for 
two  pianos  (1939).  His  Concerto  for  Piano  and  Orchestra  (1939-1941), 
written  in  a  modern  pianistic  style,  received  first  prize  at  the  music  contest 
in  Santiago  in  November,  1941,  and  was  performed  on  June  30,  1942. 
In  1943,  Amengual  made  a  trip  to  the  United  States.  AmenguaPs  Album 
Infantil  for  piano,  and  a  song,  Caricia^  have  been  published  by  the  Uni¬ 
versity  of  Chile.  Trans farencias  for  piano  is  included  in  the  music  sup¬ 
plement  to  Volume  IV  of  the  Boletin  Tatino- Americano  de  Musica 
(1938),  and  Burlesca  in  the  album  Latin-American  Art  Music  for  the 
Piano y  published  by  Schirmer  (1942).  The  score  of  AmenguaPs  com¬ 
position  for  voice  and  chamber  orchestra,  El  Vaso  (first  performed  in 
Santiago  on  August  25,  1944)  is  available  through  the  Associated  Music 
Publishers  in  New  York. 

Claudio  Arrau  (1904 - ),  the  internationally  known  pianist,  was 

born  in  Chilian,  Chile.  After  a  Conservatory  course  in  Santiago,  he  went 
to  study  in  Germany.  His  first  appearance  in  the  United  States  was  with 
the  Boston  Symphony  Orchestra  on  February  4,  1924.  Since  then  he  has 
toured  widely  in  Europe  and  in  South  America.  In  1927  he  received  the 
Grand  Prix  International  des  Pianistes  at  Geneva.  His  chief  characteristics 
as  a  pianist  are  an  unlimited  technique  and  the  extraordinary  ability  to 
digest  all  styles  of  classical  and  modern  music. 

Prospero  Bisquertt  Prado  (1881 - ),  composer,  studied  both  music 

and  military  engineering.  Between  1913  and  1923  he  was  employed  in  the 
Department  of  Domestic  Revenue,  and  later  was  manager  of  several 
business  concerns.  Among  his  early  compositions  worthy  of  mention  are 
Preludio  LiricOy  which  received  a  prize  on  the  occasion  of  the  Centennial 
of  the  Independence  of  Chile 5  Poema  Pastoril  (1918)  j  and  a  symphonic 
Primavera  Helenica  (1919).  His  first  musical  work  of  native 
background  is  Taberna  al  Amanecer  (Tavern  at  Dusk),  in  which  he  makes 


158  MUSiC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

use  of  the  rhythms  of  the  Chilean  national  dance,  Cueca,  The  work  was 
first  performed  in  Santiago  on  June  28,  1924?  ^be  manuscript  was 
subsequently  lost  when  the  trans-Andean  train  which  carried  a  shipment 
of  Chilean  music  to  Buenos  Aires  burned  on  June  7,  1927.  Bisquertt  re¬ 
vised  the  score  from  memory  in  1928.  He  went  to  Paris  in  193^?  ^be 
first  performance  of  the  new  version  took  place  there  on  December  20, 
1930.  Bisquertds  symphonic  poem  Procesion  del  Cfisto  de  Mayo  was 
performed  in  Paris  on  January  15?  I93i*  blis  symphonic  poem  Destino^ 
presented  by  the  Orquesta  Sinfonica  de  Chile  on  August  19?  ^935?  is 
characterized  by  parallel  harmonic  progressions,  using  the  whole-tone 
scale  profusely.  His  ^^symbolic  drama”  Sayeda  was  produced  at  the  T eatro 
Municipal  in  Santiago  on  September  21,  1929.  His  suite  for  orchestra, 
N ochebuena  (Christmas  Eve)  was  performed  by  the  Orquesta  Sinfonica 
de  Chile  on  July  27,  1936^  a  group  of  five  orchestral  sketches,  entitled 
MiscelaneaSy  on  June  7,  1937,  and  Dos  Emocionales  {Elegta  and  Evoca- 
cion)  on  May  22,  1943. 

Bisquertt^s  major  work  is  a  ballet  in  five  movements,  entitled  Me- 
trofolis.  The  first  movement,  Colonia^  is  a  minuet  in  the  classical  style. 
The  second,  Pregon  del  Motero  (Vendor  of  Maize),  evokes  Chilean  street 
folklore.  The  third,  Ciudad  Moderna^  is  a  tribute  to  the  machine  age. 
The  fourth  movement,  El  Botellero^  is  the  musical  characterization  of 
a  bottle  vendor.  The  fifth  and  last  movement,  En  una  Fabrica  (In  a 
Factory),  employs  special  instrumental  effects,  such  as  soundless  blowing 
in  the  trombones.  Bisquertt  has  written  a  string  quartet  in  three  move¬ 
ments  named  Aires  Chilenos.  Miscelaneas  (in  the  piano  version)  and  Tres 
Tro'zos  for  piano  have  been  published  by  the  University  of  Chile.  Trois 
Esquisses  four  Piano  (Air  Chilian  y  Marine  y  Pay  sage)  were  issued  in 
Paris  in  1930.  Fiestay  for  piano,  is  included  in  the  music  supplement  to 
Volume  IV  of  the  Boletin  Latino-Americano  de  Musica,  The  scores  of 
Taberna  al  Amanecery  DestinOy  IS! ochebuena y  and  Metrofolis  are  in  the 
Fleisher  Collection  in  Philadelphia. 

Armando  Carvajal  ( 1893 - )  studied  violin,  piano,  and  composition 

at  the  National  Conservatory  in  Santiago.  From  1915  to  1927,  he  was 
the  concert  master  in  the  opera  at  the  Municipal  Theater  at  Santiago,  and, 
at  the  same  time,  taught  violin  at  the  Conservatory.  In  1921,  he  was  ap¬ 
pointed  conductor  of  the  Orquesta  Sinfonica  de  Chile.  Virtually  all  first 
performances  of  Chilean  works  have  been  conducted  by  him.  As  a  com¬ 
poser,  he  has  written  some  children’s  pieces,  which  have  been  published 
by  the  University  of  Chile  and  by  New  Music  (1939). 


CHILE 


159 


Juan  Casanova  Vicuna  (1895 - ),  the  conductor  and  composerj  has 

since  1920  conducted  concerts  o£  symphonic  music  in  Santiago  and  Vina 
del  Mar.  Casanova’s  suite  of  four  pieces,  Cuatro  bos  qua  j  os  y  was  performed 
by  the  Orquesta  Sinjonica  da  Chile  on  May  30,  1931,  and  his  symphonic 
poem,  El  Huaso  y  El  Indio y  on  August  13,  1943. 

Acario  Cotapos  (1889 - )  studied  piano  and  composition  in  Santiago, 

and  in  1916  went  to  New  York,  where  he  took  additional  lessons  with 
ten  different  teachers,  including  Ernest  Bloch.  In  New  York  Cotapos  be¬ 
came  associated  with  the  International  Composers’  Guild,  under  whose 
auspices  his  Three  Preludes  for  Orchestra  were  performed  on  February 
8, 1925.  From  New  York,  Cotapos  went  to  Paris,  where  his  Four  Preludes 
for  Orchestra  were  given  on  May  lO,  1930,  and  Voces  de  Gesta  on  June 
21,  1933.  Cotapos  has  also  written  UAffel  de  la  Terre  (1926)  and  Le 
Eetachement  Vivant  (1928),  for  voice  and  chamber  orchestra.  Cotapos 
has  developed  a  technique  of  thematic  mottoes.  For  instance,  his  Prelude 
No.  4  for  orchestra  is  based  on  a  single  combination,  D-F-Gff-B-CJ-E- 
FJf-G,  used  both  harmonically  and  melodically.  The  only  published  music 
by  Cotapos  is  an  excerpt  from  Voces  de  Gesta y  in  a  reduction  for  voice  and 
piano,  and  a  piano  Prelude  printed  by  the  University  of  Chile  in  1938. 

Pablo  Garrido  (1905 - ),  the  conductor  and  composer,  was  born  in 

Valparaiso.  At  the  age  of  eight,  he  lost  his  right  leg  in  a  trolley  car  ac¬ 
cident,  a  handicap  which,  however,  did  not  deter  him  from  a  musical 
career.  In  1923,  he  formed  the  first  Chilean  jazz  band.  On  January  21, 
1925,  he  presented  in  Valparaiso  a  program  announced  as  a  concert  of 
futurist  music,  which  featured  works  of  European  modernists.  He  has 
traveled  widely  in  the  Americas  and  in  Europe,  associating  himself  with 
the  intellectual  and  musical  vanguard.  As  a  result  of  his  cosmopolitan 
connections,  he  was  arrested  at  Antofagasta  in  1932  on  a  charge  of  being 
a  Soviet  agent.  This  episode  forced  him  to  abandon  Valparaiso  and  to 
settle  in  Santiago,  where  he  is  now  president  of  the  Orchestral  Syndicate. 
Garrido  has  written  two  orchestral  works.  Fantasia  Submarina  for  strings 
and  piano  and  Rapodia  Chilena  for  piano  and  orchestra,  the  latter  present¬ 
ing  a  species  of  Chilean  jazz.  He  conducted  these  scores  for  the  first 
time  at  a  concert  of  his  compositions  given  in  Santiago  on  August  3,  1938. 
His  other  works  on  the  same  program  were  Ventana  de  JazZy  Interludio 
DramaticOy  Pieza  a  Cuatro y  Afunte  Afro-Cubano  (all  for  various  instru¬ 
mental  combinations),  and  five  songs.  None  of  his  compositions 
lishtd.  Fantasia  Submarima  znd  Rafsodia  Chilena  are  in  the  Fleisher 


i6o  MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

Collection.  Garrido  has  published  a  pamphlet,  Tragedia^  del  Musico 
ChilenOy  in  which  he  deplores  the  lack  of  musical  opportunities  in  Chile, 
and  an  important  monograph,  Biogra-jia  de  la  Cueca  (194^)-  Iri  March, 
1945,  he  launched  the  publication  of  a  music  periodical,  Yida  Musical. 

Carlos  IsAMiTT  (188 5 - )  both  as  painter  and  musician,  leans  towards 

nativism.  He  has  made  a  study  of  the  music  of  the  Araucanian  Indians, 
and  has  arranged  the  native  airs  in  his  Friso  Araucano,  a  collection  of  ten 
songs  of  difEerent  moods:  songs  for  a  child,  women’s  chants,  songs  of 
the  laborer  in  the  field,  music  for  games,  rituals,  and  burials.  Araucanian 
folklore  is  also  reflected  in  his  piano  sonata,  titled  Evocacion  Araucana. 
Pastorales  for  violin  and  piano  present  Araucanian  melodies  in  an  atonal 
setting.  Isamitt’s  major  work  is  a  Suite  Sinjonica  (first  performed  in 
Santiago  on  May  18,  1936),  in  three  movements  subtitled  respectively: 
Pregon  Santiaguino  (Santiago  Street  Vendor),  Se  Atraviese  un  Bosque 
(Going  through  the  V/oods),  and  W irajun,K.awellu  (Horses  Galloping), 
the  latter  being  an  Araucanian  dance,  arranged  in  dissonant  harmonies. 
The  spirit  of  Araucanian  music  pervades  Isamitt’s  ballet  El  Pozo  de  Oro, 
which  received  the  second  prize  for  a  theatrical  work  at  the  national 
contest  in  November,  1941.  Isamitt’s  piano  pieces,  Pichi  Purun  and 
Estudio,  and  a  song,  Quietud,  have  been  published  by  the  University  of 
Chile.  The  piano  version  of  Wirafun  Kawellu  is  printed  in  the  music 
supplement  to  Volume  I  of  the  Boletin  Latino-Americano  de  Musica,  and 
Estudio  No.  3  is  included  in  the  supplement  to  Volume  IV  of  that  publica¬ 
tion.  Isamitt  has  contributed  several  papers  on  Araucanian  instruments 
to  the  Boletin  and  other  publications. 

Carlos  Lavin  (1883 - )  is  a  musician  whose  major  interest  is  folk¬ 

lore.  He  spent  a  number  of  years  in  Europe,  working  in  the  libraries  of 
the  entire  continent.  He  settled  in  Barcelona,  and  contributed  a  number 
of  articles  to  Spanish  musical  publications.  In  1943,  Lavin  returned  to 
Chile,  where  he  resumed  his  research  work  in  native  folklore. 

Alfonso  Leng,  the  composer  and  dentist,  was  born  in  Santiago  in  1884. 
His  father  was  German  and  his  mother  British.  As  a  dentist,  he  has 
achieved  a  prominent  position  in  his  country,  and  has  published  a  treatise 
on  parodontia.  Leng  studied  music  with  Enrique  Soro  at  the  National 
Conservatory  of  Santiago.  His  early  works  are  songs  generally  in  the 
Schumann  tradition,  to  German  and  French  texts.  Leng’s  first  symphonic 
work  of  importance  is  La  Muerte  de  Alsino  (Alsino  is  a  Latin  American 
Icarus),  which  was  performed  in  Santiago  on  May  30,  1931.  Canto  de 


CHILE  i6i 

InviernOy  for  orchestra,  is  a  short  work  of  romantic  inspiration.  It  was 
first  performed  in  Santiago  on  May  19,  1933.  Leng^s  most  effective  work 
is  a  Fantasia  for  piano  and  orchestra,  which  employs  modern  harmony, 
and  which  concludes  on  an  unresolved  chord  of  the  tonic  seventh. 
Fantasia  was  first  performed  in  Santiago  on  August  28,  1936,  and  was 
also  played  in  London  by  the  BBC  Orchestra  on  April  10,  1941.  The 
University  of  Chile  has  published  several  of  Leng’s  pieces:  Dolor  as  y 
Four  Preludes y  Poemay  Preludio  No.  6,  Otonales  iox  piano,  and  Cima 
for  voice  and  piano.  Preludio  No.  7  for  piano  was  published  in  the  music 
supplement  to  Volume  IV  of  the  Bole  tin  Latino-Americano  de  Musica. 
The  Fleisher  Collection  in  Philadelphia  has  the  scores  of  La  Muerte  de 
Alsino  and  Fantasia. 

Alfonso  Letelier  Llona  (191a - )  studied  music  with  Humberto 

Allende  at  the  National  Conservatory,  and  at  the  same  time  enrolled 
at  the  Agricultural  College,  graduating  in  both  music  and  agronomy  in 
1935.  Letelier  began  to  compose  at  an  early  date,  and  at  the  age  of  four¬ 
teen  presented  his  Suite  for  string  orchestra  in  public  performance.  He 
then  undertook  the  composition  of  a  sacred  opera,  Maria  Magdalenay  but 
it  was  left  unfinished.  His  Dos  Canciones  for  voice  and  orchestra  were 
performed  in  Santiago  on  June  15,  1936.  His  most  mature  orchestral 
work  is  La  Vida  del  Cam'pOy  for  piano  and  orchestra,  which  received  the 
third  prize  at  the  Quadricentennial  Music  Contest  in  Santiago  in  1941, 
Letelier  writes  in  a  romantic  vein,  and  his  music  is  characterized  by 
chromatic  harmony  and  flowing  melody.  His  eight  Canciones  for  mixed 
choir  are  published  by  the  Editorial  Cooferativa  Inter americana  m  Mon¬ 
tevideo.  The  University  of  Chile  Press  has  printed  LeteliePs  Suite  Gro~ 
tesca  for  piano,  and  a  song,  Otono.  The  Fleisher  Collection  in  Philadel¬ 
phia  has  the  score  of  Vida  del  Camfo. 

Carmela  Mackenna  (1879 - ),  great-granddaughter  of  General 

Mackenna,  the  hero  of  Chilean  independence,  and  the  maternal  aunt  of 
the  Chilean  composer  Alfonso  Leng,  did  not  begin  to  study  music  until 
the  age  of  fifty,  when  she  took  lessons  with  Hans  Mersmann  in  Berlin. 
Since  1931,  she  has  written  a  number  of  compositions  distinguished  by  a 
compact  polyphonic  style:  four  Preludes  for  piano  (1931),  a  Sonata  for 
Violin  and  Piano  (1931),  a  Trio  for  flute,  violin,  and  viola  (1932),  a 
Concerto  for  Piano  and  Chamber  Orchestra  (1933)5  two  Orchesterstuecke 
(i935)>  ^  Mass  (1936),  and  a  Trio  for  violin,  viola,  and  cello  (1936). 
Her  Concerto  for  Piano  and  Chamber  Orchestra  was  performed  by  the 


i62  music  in  the  twenty  republics 

Radio  Orchestra  in  Berlin,  on  May  21,  1934.  Its  score,  privately  pub¬ 
lished  in  Germany,  is  in  the  Fleisher  Collection  in  Philadelphia. 

Hector  Melo  Goricoytia  (1899 - )  has  studied  mining  engineer¬ 

ing  as  well  as  music.  His  short  orchestral  piece,  hobo  (1923))  is  crude, 
but  some  of  his  other  music,  as,  for  instance,  La  Trilla  for  piano,  is  of 
interest.  His  piano  pieces,  bAanchas  da  Color y  were  published  in  1930* 

Samuel  Negrete  Woolcock,  the  composer,  was  born  in  Santiago  in 
1893.  (The  name  Woolcock  is  that  of  his  maternal  grandfather,  who 
was  British.)  He  studied  music  and  architecture,  and  became  a  professor 
of  music  theory  in  1920.  At  one  time,  Negrete  taught  mathematics.  His 
major  work  is  Escenas  SinfonicaSy  first  performed  by  the  Orqtcesta  Sin- 
fSnica  de  Chile  on  July  2,  1934,  and  based  on  Chilean  rhythms.  His 
harmonic  technique  is  that  of  early  Debussy  3  whole-tone  scales  are  em¬ 
ployed  for  atmospheric  effects.  Negrete  has  written  two  string  quartets 
and  several  piano  pieces,  of  which  Sender 0  has  been  published  by  the 
University  of  Chile.  Negrete^s  Danza  is  published  in  the  music  supple¬ 
ment  to  Volume  IV  of  the  Bole  tin  Latino- Americano  de  Musica,  The 
score  of  Escenas  Sinfonicas  is  included  in  the  Fleisher  Collection  in 
Philadelphia. 

Pedro  Nunez  Navarrete  (1906 - )  studied  in  Santiago  with  Hum¬ 

berto  Allende.  He  has  written  songs,  violin  pieces,  and  piano  composi¬ 
tions,  of  which  Evocacion  for  piano  is  published.  In  1939  he  wrote  a  String 
Quartet,  and  in  1941  completed  his  magnum  opus,  Sinfoma  de  los  Andes y 
a  lengthy  orchestral  score  in  four  movements  portraying  morning,  after¬ 
noon,  evening,  and  night  in  the  Andes.  The  static  harmonies  of  the  music 
are  explained  by  the  composer  as  reflecting  the  ^fimmanent  statism”  of 
the  Andean  landscape.  The  score  of  the  Sinfoma  de  los  Andes  is  included 
in  the  Fleisher  Collection  in  Philadelphia. 

Domingo  Santa  Cruz  Wilson  (1899 - )  is  well-known  as  both  com¬ 

poser  and  educator.  The  name  Wilson  is  that  of  his  maternal  ancestors.  He 
studied  law,  and  after  completing  his  studies  in  jurisprudence  he  became 
second  Secretary  of  the  Chilean  Legation  in  Spain  (1921-1924),  He  stud¬ 
ied  music  with  Enrique  Soro  (1917-1920),  and  later  with  Conrado  del 
Campo  in  Madrid.  In  1928,  he  was  appointed  professor  of  Music  History 
and  Analysis  at  the  National  Conservatory  in  Santiago.  In  1933,  he  be¬ 
came  Dean  of  the  Faculty  of  Fine  Arts  of  the  University  of  Chile.  On 
October  2,  1940,  Domingo  Santa  Cruz  was  appointed  President  of  the 


CHILE 


163 


Council  o£  the  newly  created  Instituto  de  Extension  Musical,  and  charged 
with  organization  of  musical  activities  in  Chile,  the  funds  to  be  derived 
from  a  special  tax.  Under  his  direction,  the  Faculty  of  Fine  Arts  of  the 
University  of  Chile  has  inaugurated  the  policy  of  furthering  the  cause  of 
national  music.  He  has  arranged  the  publication  of  piano  pieces  and  songs 
by  Chilean  composers,  and  supervised  recordings  of  Chilean  compositions 
by  the  Santiago  branch  of  the  Victor  Company.  Urrutia  Blondel  has  de¬ 
scribed  Domingo  Santa  Cruz  as  “a  Hercules  of  a  hundred  deeds  and  a 
thousand  worries.” 

As  a  composer,  Santa  Cruz  cultivates  a  neoclassical  type  of  composition, 
contrapuntally  conceived,  but  not  without  romantic  connotations.  As  a 
craftsman,  he  has  been  called  the  Chilean  Hindemith.  Domingo  Santa 
Cruz  has  written  in  all  genres.  His  Vinetas  for  piano  (1927),  in  four 
brief  movements  entitled  Galante,  Desolada,  Clasica,  and  Grotesca,  fol¬ 
lows  the  plan  of  a  classical  suite.  2  Canciones  for  four  voices  (1926)  are 
modern  counterparts  of  Bach’s  chorales.  5  Poemas  Tragicas  for  piano 
come  close  to  atonality.  The  last  of  these  “tragic  poems”  is  built  around 
a  persistent  B  flat,  which  is  repeated  689  times.  4  Poemas  de  Gahriela 
Mistral  (1928)  are  in  a  neoromantic  vein.  Imagenes  Infantiles  (i933)j 
in  two  series  of  four  pieces  each,  are  polytonal  pieces  for  children.  The 
String  Quartet  (1932)  Is  neoclassical  in  texture.  5  Piezas  for  violin  and 
piano,  Cancion,  Recitativo,  and  Arabesco  (1938)  are  effective  concert 
pieces.  Cantos  de  Soledad  (1936) — a  group  of  three  songs.  Dolor,  Madre 
Mia,  and  Cancion  de  Cuna — are  notable  for  their  romantic  coloring.  The 
most  characteristic  work  of  Santa  Cruz’s  neoclassical  period  Is  a  suite  for 
string  orchestra,  5  Piezas  Breves.  Composed  in  a  week’s  time,  it  was 
first  performed  by  the  Orquesta  Sinfonica  de  Chile  on  May  3tj  t937‘ 
In  a  similar  manner  are  the  Variations  in  three  movements  for  piano  and 
orchestra,  first  performed  in  Santiago  on  June  25,  1943.  The  most  sig¬ 
nificant  work  of  Domingo  Santa  Cruz  is  the  Cantata  de  los  Rios  de  Chile, 
for  chorus  and  orchestra,  in  three  parts  subtitled  Madrigals,  each  rep¬ 
resenting  a  familiar  landmark  of  the  Chilean  landscape.  The  first  Madri¬ 
gal  depicts  the  mighty  mountain  stream,  Maipo;  the  second,  the  great 
mountain  Acancagua5  and  the  third,  the  lake  country,  Valdivia.  Despite 
the  programmatic  intent,  there  are  no  quotations  from  Chilean  folklore, 
the  sole  exception  being  the  oboe  theme  In  the  second  movement,  which 
is  a  reminiscence  of  the  police  whistle  heard  by  Santa  Cruz  in  his  child¬ 
hood.  The  choral  writing  of  the  Cantata  de  los  Rios  de  Chile  Is  free  and 
unimpeded  by  the  orchestra.  The  tonality  is  enhanced  by  the  addition  of 


i64  music  in  the  TWENTY  REPUBLICS  . 

diatonic  tones  to  the  fundamental  chords.  Thus,  the  first  Madrigal  ends 
on  an  unresolved  chord  of  the  tonic  seventh. 

The  Cantata  was  awarded  the  first  prize  of  25,000  Chilean  pesos  at  the 
Santiago  Music  Contest  in  November,  1941,  but  the  award  was  declared 
void  by  the  Government  Committee  under  the  specious  pretext  that 
Domingo  Santa  Cruz,  in  his  capacity  of  Dean  of  the  Faculty  of  Fine  Arts, 
had  no  moral  right  to  submit  a  work  of  his  own,  a  decision  which  aroused 
violent  protests  on  the  part  of  the  Society  of  Chilean  Composers.  On 
November  27,  1942,  the  first  and  second  movements  of  the  Cantata  were 
performed  in  Santiago  with  great  success. 

Alfonso  Leng  gives  the  following  appreciation  of  Santa  Cruz  as  a 
musician :  ^Tn  Santa  Cruz’s  technique,  we  admire  the  extraordinary  ability 
in  moving  four,  five,  or  more  voices  with  complete  freedom  of  expression. 
This  Santa  Cruz  owes  to  his  patient  and  constant  study  of  the  polyphonic 
works  of  Bach.  We  admire,  too,  the  vigor  of  his  propulsive  rhythms,  the 
wealth  and  sobriety  of  his  harmony,  and  the  force  of  his  palpitating 
counterpoint,  which  intensifies  the  inner  drama  of  his  music.  The  art  of 
Santa  Cruz  is  truly  modern,  not  only  in  its  material,  but  also  in  its  spirit.” 

The  following  compositions  by  Santa  Cruz  have  been  published  in 
Santiago:  Vinetas^  2  CancioneSy  the  second  of  the  4  Poemas  de  Gabriela 
Mistral y  5  Poemas  Tragicas,  Cantos  de  Soledad^  and  Ima genes  Injantiles. 
Serenidad  for  piano  is  included  in  the  music  supplement  to  Volume  IV 
of  the  Boletin  hatino- Americano  de  Musica,  5  Piezas  for  violin  and  piano 
are  published  by  New  Music.  The  pieces  appeared  in  the  April,  1939, 
issue  of  New  Musky  but,  because  of  numerous  misprints,  the  edition  was 
withdrawn,  and  reissued  in  1941,  with  the  errors  corrected.  These  violin 
pieces  have  been  recorded  in  the  album  South  American  Chamber  Musky 
issued  by  Columbia  in  1941. 

Enrique  Soro  (1884— — )?  having  shown  musical  aptitude  at  an  early 
age,  was  sent  by  the  Chilean  government  to  Italy  for  study.  On  June  18, 
1903,  his  first  composition,  a  String  Quartet,  was  played  at  the  Milan 
Conservatory.  He  graduated  from  that  Conservatory  in  1904,  and  sub¬ 
sequently  gave  concerts  of  his  compositions  in  Italy  and  France.  Upon 
his  return  to  Chile  in  1905,  he  was  named  professor  of  harmony  and 
counterpoint  at  the  National  Conservatory  at  Santiago. 

Soro  has  traveled  widely  as  a  pianist,  in  South  America,  North  America, 
and  Europe,  and  up  to  1938  he  had  given  163  concerts  in  Chile  and  112 
abroad.  From  1919  to  1928,  Soro  was  director  of  the  National  Conserv¬ 
atory  of  Santiago.  In  a  eulogistic  brochure  by  Alvaro  de  Triana,  entitled 


CHILE 


165 

Una  Gloria  del  Arte  Nacional^  Soro  is  described  as  ^^the  pride  of  Chilcj 
of  America,  and  of  the  Latin  race.’’ 

The.catalogue  of  Soro’s  works  issued  in  Santiago  in  1928  gives  a  lengthy 
list  of  his  music  published  by  Schirmer  and  Ricordi,  including  fifty  pieces 
for  piano,  three  sonatas,  eighteen  songs,  a  Violin  Sonata,  three  pieces  for 
violin  with  piano  accompaniment,  a  Trio,  a  Quintet,  six  pieces  for  theater 
orchestra,  a  symphonic  Suite,  and  a  Piano  Concerto.  Among  Soro’s  un¬ 
published  works  are  an  early  String  Quartet,  a  Violin  Sonata,  and  a  Piano 
Sonata.  Of  his  orchestral  works,  Sinfoma  Romantica^  in  four  movements, 
and  Suite  Sinfonica  No.  j,  in  five  movements,  remain  in  manuscript. 
Suite  Sinfonica  No.  2  is  published  by  Ricordi.  It  is  in  five  movements  with 
romantic  titles:  Nocturno^  Recuerdo  LejanOy  Inquietude  Meditaciony  and 
Hora  NListica.  The  suite  was  first  performed  by  the  Santiago  Symphony 
Orchestra,  with  Soro  conducting,  on  May  9,  1919.  Soro’s  music  is  agree¬ 
able  to  the  ear,  and  effectively  written  for  the  instruments.  His  harmony 
and  form  are,  however,  entirely  within  academic  precepts. 

Jorge  Urrutia  Blondel  (1905 - )  studied  with  Humberto  Al- 

lende  and  Domingo  Santa  Cruz.  On  April  12,  1928,  Urrutia  became  the 
Secretary  of  the  National  Conservatory  of  Santiago,  and  in  July,  1928, 
he  received  a  scholarship  for  a  trip  to  Europe.  He  studied  with  Paul 
Dukas,  Nadia  Boulanger,  and  Charles  Koechlin  in  Paris,  and  with  Hinde¬ 
mith  in  Berlin.  Upon  his  return  to  Chile,  in  1931,  Urrutia  began  to 
compose  in  the  native  vein,  drawing  inspiration  from  Chilean  folklore. 
His  5  Coros  Infantiles  de  Car  deter  Chileno  (1938),  written  for  two  and 
three  voices,  a  caffellay  are,  in  the  words  of  Carlos  Isamitt,  ^^designed  to 
familiarize  the  children  with  the  musical  expression  of  the  people  of 
Chile,  in  the  musical  language  of  today.”  In  1941  Urrutia  wrote  a  suite 
scored  for  a  small  orchestra  of  strings,  harp,  and  celesta,  cntitltd  Estarnfas 
de  Chiley  which  received  a  prize  at  the  Music  Contest  in  Santiago  in 
November,  1941.  The  score  of  the  Estamfas  de  Chile  is  included  in  the 
Fleisher  Collection  of  Philadelphia.  Urrutia  is  also  the  author  of  a  ballet, 
La  Guitarra  d^el  Diablo  (1941),  partially  performed  in  Santiago  on 
November  27,  1942. 


i66 


MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 


Colombia 


*  .  .  hello  nombre  de  Colombia  ,  .  . 

[jOSE  JOAQUIN  OLMEDO] 


Colombia  is  the  fourth  largest  South  American  republic,  and  has  a  population 
of  nine  million,  of  which  nearly  one-third  are  of  Spanish  extraction,  one-half 
Mestizos,  and  the  rest  Negroes  and  Indians.  Colombia’s  capital,  Bogota,  is  often 
called  the  Athens  of  Latin  America,  for  its  cultivation  of  literature  and  science. 

The  musical  folklore  of  Colombia  is  derived  from  Spanish,  Negro,  and 
Indian  sources.  The  Spanish  influence  is  strongest  in  the  melodic  inflec¬ 
tion  of  country  dances.  The  Negro  element  enters  strongly  in  the  per¬ 
cussive  rhythms  of  Colombian  popular  music.  The  monotonous  chants 
of  the  Indians  survive  in  their  primeval  solemnity  in  the  interior. 

In  his  book  Folklore  Colombiano  (Barranquilla,  1942),  Emirto  de 
Lima  characterizes  Colombian  folk  music  in  these  words: 

In  Colombian  music  we  find  elements  of  the  culture  of  three  races  that  have 
passed  through  Latin  America.  Listening  to  the  beat  of  a  drum,  one  conjures 
up  a  picture  of  African  slaves  driven  down  the  coast  during  an  era  now  happily 
past.  In  the  dolorous  chants  of  the  Indians  of  the  Amazon  region,  there  is  the 
wistfulness  of  the  aborigines,  who  express  their  yearnings  in  the  melancholy 
sounds  of  the  flutes.  And  when  a  dapper  boy,  or  a  young  lady  of  Santander  or 
Cundinamarca,  picks  up  a  guitar  and  recites  a  sentimental  ballad,  one  is  trans¬ 
ported  as  if  by  magic  into  ancient  Spain.  What  a  delight  it  is  to  recapture  in 
these  rhythms,  chords,  dissonances,  accents,  and  gambols,  the  aura  of  the  old 
romance,  the  passions  and  ardors  of  bygone  days. 

The  most  characteristic  of  Colombia’s  airs  and  dances  is  the  Bamhuco. 
Its  name  points  to  African  origin,  for  there  is  a  town  in  Western  Africa 
named  Bambuk,  whence  slaves  were  first  imported  into  Colombia.  In  its 
present  form,  the  Bambuco  is  a  dance-song  in  the  characteristic  combined 
meter  of  three-four  and  six-eight,  with  an  opening  upbeat  of  three  eighth- 
notes.  In  choreography  it  is  a  “pursuit  dance,”  in  which  the  male  partner 
pursues  the  female,  until  they  unite  and  continue  the  dance  together.  The 


COLOMBIA  167 

Bamhuco  is  usually  sung  to  the  accompaniment  of  a  tl'ple  (a  three-string 
guitar)  and  bandolas  (Latin  American  lutes). 

A  Colombian  poet  finds  in  the  Bamhuco  the  combined  strains  of  Indian 
melancholy,  African  ardor,  and  Andalusian  valor: 

^  ha  jundado  aquel  aire 
la  Indiana  melancoliay 
con  la  ajricana  ardeniia^ 
y  el  guafo  andaluz  donatre. 

The  Colombian  Pasillo  is  closer  to  Spain  than  the  Bamhuco.  Like  the 
Bamhuco y  it  is  cast  in  the  dual  meter  of  three-four  and  six-eight,  but  it  is 
more  flowing,  less  sharply  accented.  Emirto  de  Lima  writes  on  the  Pasillo: 
“Its  rhythm  stresses  the  first  beat  in  the  classical  manner,  then  abandons 
itself  to  the  blandishments  of  a  tender  second  beat,  and  joyfully  explodes 
on  the  third  and  last  beat.  The  Pasillo  possesses  the  aristocracy  and  the 
distinction  of  the  WaltZy  the  light  cadence  of  the  Contradanzay  the  winged 
subtlety  of  the  Gavotte y  and  the  serene  grace  of  the  Minuet/^ 

If  the  Bamhuco  is  African,  and  the  Pasillo  is  Spanish,  the  TorhelUno 
is  Indian.  Its  rhythm  is  more  persistent,  with  the  emphasis  laid  on  the 
strong  beat.  The  meter  remains  three-four.  A  rustic  dance,  the  Porroy 
popular  in  the  province  of  Santa  Marta,  has  lately  acquired  the  rhythm 
of  a  Foxtrot,  and  has  now  spread  in  this  form  in  dance  bands. 

The  Guahinay  a  quick  dance  in  two-four,  is  popular  in  the  provincial 
towns  of  Colombia.  It  is  danced  by  couples  holding  hands.  The  GalerSny 
which  is  a  ballad  of  the  plains  of  the  interior,  should  be  mentioned.  Here 
the  melody  and  the  rhythm  are  subordinated  to  the  text,  and  follow  the 
prosody  of  the  lines  of  the  narrative.  La  Chisfay  an  old  air,  sung  to  the 
accompaniment  of  the  Gait  ay  Tamhofy  and  Guacharacay  is  still  heard  in 
the  northern  provinces. 

The  natives  of  Colombia  still  use  musical  instruments  of  the  pre- 
Columbian  era.  There  is  a  jungle  drum  ManguarSy  which  is  a  hollowed- 
out  trunk  of  a  tree.  Another  jungle  drum,  the  CununUy  is  covered  on  one 
side  with  an  animal  hide,  and  is  stood  up  vertically.  The  Bomho  has  mem¬ 
brane  covers  on  both  ends,  and  is  played  with  fingers  or  hands. 

A  curious  native  instrument  is  a  musical  bow,  the  Timhirimhay  on  which 
the  sound  is  produced  by  rubbing  the  string  with  a  wooden  stick.  The 
pitch  depends  on  the  tautness  of  the  string,  which  may  be  altered  at  will. 

The  Cuban  MaracaSy  or  shakers,  are  also  widely  used  in  Colombia  and 
are  known  under  a  variety  of  names,  Chuchoy  Alfandoquey  GuachSy 


i68 


MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 


Oi 

MW  -  mr  .MT'mmmmm  Mmm 

miHjjjn 

Colombian  Chispa  {Emlrto  de  Umd) 


Guazdy  CaranganOy  or  Sonaja,  The  indigenous  notched  gourds,  similar  to 
the  Cuban  GuirOy  are  called  Carraca  or  Guacharaca, 

Colombians  recorded  music  history  dates  back  to  a  Jesuit  priest  Jose 
Dadey  (1574-1660)  who  established  a  system  of  teaching  church  music. 
Towards  the  end  of  the  eighteenth  century  attempts  were  made  to  in¬ 
troduce  music  on  state  occasions.  An  instrumental  ensemble  called  La 
Banda  de  la  Corona  was  formed  in  Bogota  in  1784.  The  first  original 
compositions  written  in  Colombia  were  two  patriotic  songs,  La  Vencedora 
and  La  Liberadoray  the  latter  dedicated  to  Bolivar.  Early  in  the  nine¬ 
teenth  century,  European  musicians  began  to  settle  in  Colombia.  Among 
them  was  an  Englishman,  Henry  Price  (1819-1863),  a  prolific  com¬ 
poser  of  popular  songs  and  marches,  who  organized  the  first  professional 
music  school  in  Bogota  in  1847.  His  son,  George  W.  Price,  took  over  the 
direction  of  the  school  after  his  father’s  death.  In  1910,  the  Colombian 
composer,  Guillermo  Uribe-Holguin,  assumed  the  leadership  of  the  in¬ 
stitution,  which  was  then  oiEcially  renamed  Conservatorio  Nacional  de 
Muska. 

European  operatic  music  was  popularized  in  Colombia  by  Italian  opera 
companies.  An  Italian  tenor,  Oreste  Sindici,  was  the  author  of  the  Colom¬ 
bian  National  Anthem. 

The  first  opera  written  by  a  native  composer  was  Esther  by  Jose  Maria 
Ponce  de  Leon  (1846-1882),  which  was  produced  in  Bogota  on  July  2, 
1874.  Other  Colombian  musicians  of  the  nineteenth  century  whose  names 
are  preserved  in  the  musical  annals  are  Nicolas  Quevedo  Rachedell 
(1803-1874)5  Juan  Crisbstomo  Osorio  y  Ricaurte  (1836-1887),  Jose 
Joaqum  Guarin  (1825-1854),  and  Julio  Quevedo  Arvelo  (  1829-1897). 
Diego  Fallon  (1834-1905)  has  left  a  mark  upon  Colombian  musical 


COLOMBIA  169 

science  as  the  inventor  o£  a  syllabic  musical  notation  in  which  vowels  rep¬ 
resent  note  values,  and  consonants  the  degrees  of  the  scale. 

Of  the  later  generation  of  Colombian  composers,  the  names  of  Carlos 
Umana  Santaman'a  (1862-1917),  Andres  Martinez  Montoya  (1869- 
1933),  Santo  Cifuentes  (1870-1932),  and  Alejandro  Villalobos  (1875- 
1938)  are  to  be  mentioned. 

A  detailed  history  of  music  in  Colombia,  from  aboriginal  times  to 
the  twentieth  century  is  given  in  the  special  articles  in  Volume  IV  of  the 
Boletm  Latino- Americano  ie  Musicay  published  in  Bogota  in  193^;  under 
the  auspices  of  the  Ministiy  of  Education  of  Colombia,  and  under  the 
editorship  of  Francisco  Curt  Lange. 

The  first  concert  of  orchestral  music  in  Colombia  was  presented  on 
December  6,  1905,  by  a  student  orchestra  of  the  Conservatory  of  Bogota, 
under  the  direction  of  Guillermo  Uribe-Holguin.  This  ensemble  pro¬ 
vided  a  nucleus  for  a  national  symphony  orchestra,  Orquesta  Sinfonica 
Nacional,  which  was  officially  inaugurated  on  May  27,  1936,  under  the 
leadership  of  a  native  musician,  Guillermo  Espinosa.  In  August  1938, 
on  the  occasion  of  the  four-hundredth  anniversary  of  the  foundation  of 
Bogota,  the  government  of  Colombia  organized  a  Festival  of  Ibero- 
American  music,  and  engaged  several  conductors  from  other  American 
republics  to  take  part  in  concerts  of  the  Orquesta  Sinfonica  Nacional. 

Formal  music  education  is  dispensed  in  Colombia  through  music  schools 
and  Conservatories.  The  Conservatory  of  Cali,  which  occupies  a  specially 
designed  modern  building,  is  by  far  the  most  sumptuous  musical  institu¬ 
tion  in  Colombia,  and  indeed  in  all  South  America.  But  because  Cali  is 
not  the  music  center  of  the  Republic,  the  Conservatory  cannot  make  full 
use  of  its  facilities. 

An  important  adjunct  to  the  cause  of  music  education  in  Colombia  is 
the  extraordinary  development  of  radio  broadcasting.  There  are  now  in 
existence  one  hundred  and  eleven  radio  stations  scattered  all  over  the 
country,  and  reaching  to  the  heart  of  the  jungle  itself. 

MUSICIANS  OF  COLOMBIA 

Jesus  Bermudez  Silva  (1884 - )  studied  with  Uribe-Holguin,  and 

from  1910  to  1919  was  instructor  at  the  Conservatorio  Nacional  in  Bogota. 
In  1931  he  went  to  Madrid,  where,  on  March  24,  1933,  he  conducted 
his  symphonic  piece  TorbellinOy  named  after  a  traditional  Colombian 
dance.  Bermudez  Silva  has  also  written  a  Symphony  in  C,  several  or¬ 
chestral  dances  in  the  native  manner,  and  niunerous  choral  works,  all 


170 


MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

in  an  effective  but  conventional  style.  In  1942  he  was  named  director 
of  the  Conservatory  in  Tolima.  The  orchestral  score  of  Torbellino  is  in 
the  Fleisher  Collection  in  Philadelphia. 

Gabriel  Escobar  Casas  (1900 - )  was  born  in  Barranquilla  and 

studied  in  his  native  town.  He  has  composed  numerous  piano  pieces  and 
songSj  and  a  ballet,  Descubrmiento  de  America. 

Guillermo  Espinosa  (1905 - ),  after  a  brief  period  of  study  in  Bo¬ 

gota,  went  to  Europe,  where  he  took  lessons  with  Weingartner.  Later, 
Espinosa  gave  orchestral  concerts  in  Germany,  Italy,  and  Denmark.  In 
19363  he  was  appointed  conductor  of  the  newly  created  Orquesta  Sinfonica 
Nacional  in  Bogota.  Francisco  Curt  Lange  published  an  extensive  study 
on  Espinosa  and  the  orchestra  in  Volume  IV  of  the  Bolettn  'Latino- 
Americano  de  Ivlusica. 

Emirto  de  Lima  (1892 - )  studied  music  in  Europe,  and  took  a 

course  at  the  Schola  Cantorum  in  Paris  under  Vincent  dTndy.  He  has 
written  a  number  of  dances  and  airs  in  the  manner  of  Colombian  folk¬ 
lore.  He  is  also  the  author  of  a  Concerto  for  Piano  and  Orchestra,  a  String 
Quartet,  and  two  operettas.  His  treatise,  Folklore  Colombiano  (1942), 
is  an  important  source  book. 

Adolfo  Mejia  (1909 - )  was  born  in  Cartagena  de  Indias.  He  did 

his  early  studies  in  his  native  town  and  in  Bogota.  In  1938  he  went  to 
Paris,  where  he  took  a  course  in  composition  at  the  Fcole  Normale  de 
Musique.  He  returned  to  Colombia  in  1940.  He  has  written  in  various 
genres,  in  a  competent  manner.  His  Danza  Ritual  Africana  for  orchestra 
was  performed  in  Bogota  on  November  15,  1940. 

Emilio  Murillo  (1880-1942)  was  a  composer  of  popular  music.  His 
genuine  feeling  for  native  folklore  compensates  for  his  weakness  of 
technique.  He  wrote  a  number  of  Pasillos^  some  of  which  were  litho¬ 
graphed.  Several  appreciative  pages  are  devoted  to  Murillo’s  role  in 
Colombian  music  in  Cortijo’s  compendium,  La  Musica  Popular  y  los 
Musicos  Celebres  de  la  America  Latina  (Barcelona,  1919). 

Carlos  Posada-Amador  (1908 - )  studied  in  Paris  with  Nadia  Bou¬ 

langer  and  Paul  Dukas.  From  1935  to  1937,  he  was  director  of  the  Con¬ 
servatory  in  Medellin.  His  symphonic  poem,  Coronacion  del  Zifa 
en  Guatavita^  first  performed  at  the  Ibero-American  Festival  in  Bogota 
on  August  27,  1938,  portrays  the  election  of  a  new  chief  of  the  Chibcha 
Indians,  and  is  based  on  the  pentatonic  scale,  while  the  harmony  is  Wag- 


COLOMBIA 


17! 

nerlan.  His  stylizations  of  troubadour  songs,  Cinco  Canciones  Mediae- 
vales  y  for  mixed  chorus  a  caff  allay  are  published  by  the  Editorial  Co- 
oferativa  Inter americana  de  Comfositores  in  Montevideo. 

Jose  Rozo  Contreras  (1894 - ),  the  band  leader  and  composer, 

studied  in  Vienna,  where  his  first  orchestral  work,  Tierra  Colombianay 
based  on  native  themes,  was  performed  on  December  14,  1930.  Upon 
his  return  to  Bogota  in  1933,  Rozo  Contreras  was  named  director  of  the 
Banda  Nacional  of  Bogota. 

Guillermo  Uribe-Holguin  (1880 - )  is  the  leading  composer  of 

Colombia.  As  a  boy,  he  studied  the  violin  with  Narciso  Garay.  In  1905, 
he  became  instructor  of  violin  and  harmony  at  the  Academia  Nacional 
de  Musica  in  Bogota.  He  organized  a  student  orchestra,  and  conducted 
its  first  concert  on  December  6,  1905.  In  1907,  Uribe-Holguin  went  to 
Paris,  where  he  studied  with  Vincent  d’Indy  at  the  Schola  Cantorum. 
Among  his  classmates  were  Joaquin  Turina  and  Erik  Satie.  He  later 
went  to  Brussels  where  he  studied  violin  with  Cesar  Thomson.  Return¬ 
ing  to  Colombia  in  1910,  he  was  appointed  director  of  the  Academia  Na- 
cionaly  whose  name  was  now  changed  to  Conservatorio  NacionaL  He  re¬ 
sumed  the  concerts  of  the  student  orchestra,  with  which  he  performed 
altogether  252  compositions,  including  a  number  of  his  own  symphonic 
works.  In  September,  1935,  Uribe-Holguin  resigned  his  post  and  retired 
to  private  teaching,  and  to  the  administration  of  the  coffee  plantation 
which  he  owns.  In  1941,  he  published  his  autobiography,  Vida  de  un 
Musico  Colombiano. 

Uribe-Holguin  is  a  prolific  composer.  His  first  important  work  was  a 
Violin  Sonata,  which  was  performed  in  Paris  on  June  15,  1909.  His  first 
symphonic  composition,  Del  TerrunOy  a  suite  oi  character  pieces  based  on 
native  Colombian  rhythms,  was  performed  in  Bogota,  under  his  direc¬ 
tion  on  October  20,  1924.  He  conducted  his  Tres  Danzas  in  Bogota  on 
May  27,  1927.  This  suite  was  subsequently  reorchestrated,  and  per¬ 
formed  in  a  new  version  on  April  12,  1940.  Other  orchestral  works, 
performed  under  the  composer’s  direction,  are  Marcha  Festiva  (Au¬ 
gust  20,  1928),  Serenata  (October  29,  1928),  Carnavalesca  (July  8, 
1929),  Cantares  (September  2,  1929),  Villanesca  (September  i,  1930)5 
Bajo  Su  Ventana  (October  20,  i()iyO)y  Suite  Tifica  (November  21, 1932), 
and  a  symphonic  poem  Bochica  (April  12,  1940).  He  has  also  written 
a  Concerto  for  Piano  and  Orchestra  in  the  classical  manner,  performed  in 
Bogota  on  October  15,  1939,  and  a  Concerto  for  Violin  and  Orchestra. 


172 


MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 


In  the  field  of  chamber  music,  Uribe-Holguin  has  five  violin  sonatas 
and  two  suites  for  violin  and  piano,  two  violoncello  sonatas,  three  string 
quartets,  a  piano  quartet,  and  two  piano  quintets.  He  has  also  composed 
over  three  hundred  piano  pieces  under  the  general  title  Trozos  en  el 
Sentimiento  Pofulafy  which  are  couched  in  the  native  style  and  are  bril¬ 
liantly  written  for  the  instrument.  Of  the  entire  bulk  of  Uribe-Holguin’s 
output,  three  piano  preludes  have  been  published  in  New  Music^  April, 
1939.  His  early  Violin  Sonata,  published  in  Paris,  is  now  out  of  print. 

The  style  and  technique  of  Uribe-Holguin’s  music  are  impressionist, 
in  the  French  manner,  and  his  harmonic  texture  often  approaches  poly¬ 
tonality,  while  the  basic  rhythms  and  melodic  inflections  are  native  in 
derivation. 

A  detailed  biography  of  Uribe-Holguin  by  Francisco  Curt  Lange  was 
published  in  Volume  IV  of  the  Boletin  Latino-Americano  de  Musica, 
The  following  scores  of  Uribe-Holguin  are  included  in  the  Fleisher  Col¬ 
lection  in  Philadelphia:  Carnavalesca^  Tres  Danzas^  Marcha  Festival 
Serenatay  CantareSy  Bajo  Su  V entana^  Bochica,  One  of  the  Trozos  en  el 
Sentimiento  Pofular  and  a  movement  from  a  violin  Suite  are  recorded 
in  the  album  of  South  American  Chamber  Music  issued  by  Columbia. 

Antonio  Maria  Valencia  (1903 - )  studied  the  rudiments  of  music 

with  his  father  and  later  went  to  Paris  where  he  attended  the  class  of 
Vincent  dTndy  at  the  Schola  Cantorum,  In  Paris,  Valencia  presented 
piano  recitals  and  wrote  chamber  music  and  piano  pieces,  notable  for 
their  coloristic  quality.  Upon  his  return  to  Colombia,  in  1930,  he  became 
instructor  at  the  Conservatory  in  Bogota.  In  1937  he  founded  the  Con¬ 
servatory  of  Cali,  housed  in  a  specially  erected  modern  building. 


COSTA  RICA 


173 


Costa  Rica 


J Costa  Rica  es  mi  f  atria  querlda! 
[PATRIOTICA  COSTARRICENSE, 
1856] 


Costa  Rica  is  situated  between  Nicaragua  and  Panama,  and  is  the  second 
smallest  Central  American  Republic,  after  El  Salvador.  There  are  about 
650,000  inhabitants  in  Costa  Rica,  mostly  of  Spanish  stock.  Some  Indians 
survive 'in  the  coastal  regions. 

Costa  Rican  music  is  a  white  man^s  music,  and  of  all  Latin  American 
countries  is  the  least  influenced  by  either  the  Indian  or  the  Negro  culture. 
Costa  Rican  dances  and  songs  are  Spanish  in  character,  and  European  in 
melodic  structure.  It  is  only  recently  that  native  Indian  music  began  to 
attract  the  attention  of  Costa  Rican  musicians.  In  1907,  the  chief  of 
the  Talamanca  Indians  visited  San  Jose,  the  capital,  and  sang  Indian 
songs,  which  still  preserve  the  pentatonic  scale  of  pre-Columbian  America. 

In  the  January  1942  issue  of  Educaciony  organ  of  Costa  Rican  School 
Inspectors,  we  find  the  following  review  of  native  music:  ^^Our  country 
is  not  as  rich  in  folklore  as  Mexico  or  Colombia,  but  it  possesses  its  own 
musical  form  of  expression.  The  guitar,  the  accordion,  the  mandolin,  the 
marimba,  are  the  favorite  instruments  of  our  people,  and  are  found  even 
in  the  remotest  villages.  One  hears  in  the  afternoon  the  strumming  of 
the  guitar  and  the  plaintive  voice  of  the  villagers  who  seek  to  brighten 
their  leisure  with  songs.  Our  marriage  ceremonies  and  field  festivals  are 
conducted  to  the  accompaniment  of  this  music.  The  province  of  Guana- 
caste  has  given  us  that  inimitable  dance,  Punto  Guanacasteco ^  and  there 
are  other  characteristic  country  airs.” 

A  number  of  Costa  Rican  songs  and  dances  have  been  published  by 
the  Department  of  Education,  under  the  titles  Coleccion  de  Bailes  Ti- 
ficos  de  la  Provincia  de  Guanacaste  (1929)  2x1^  Coleccion  de  Canciones 
y  DanzasTipcas  (two  volumes,  1934,  and  1935).  The  first  of  these  col- 


174  MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

lections  contains  an  illuminating  essay  on  Costa  Rican  musicj  written  by 
Luis  Dobles  Segreda : 

Four  types  of  popular  music  are  represented  in  Costa  Rica:  CallejeraSy 
PatrioticaSy  PasilloSy  and  Danzas.  The  music  of  Callejeras  (literally,  street 
songs)  is  voluble.  Like  a  fickle  woman,  who  flirts  with  anyone,  the  Callejera 
assumes  a  hundred  different  forms,  at  times  drunk  with  joy,  at  others  as  sweet 
as  caramel  candy,  dissolving  in  the  mouth  and  poisoning  the  heart.  This  street 
music  is  scarcely  more  than  an  improvisation,  but  it  has  in  it  a  fragment  of  the 
village’s  soul;  it  sings,  as  if  bewitched  by  the  warm,  silent,  moonlit  night. 

Then  come  the  patriotic  songs,  in  a  more  subdued  and  more  solemn  manner, 
marking  rhythms,  exuding  tobacco  smoke  and  sweat,  gun  powder  and 
blood  .  .  .  There  is  the  Pasillo  GuanacastecOy  a  dance  quite  different  from  the 
Colombian  Pasillo.  Musically,  it  is  the  most  original  of  all,  for  in  it  the  melody 
proceeds  in  compound  binary  time,  while  the  accompaniment  goes  on  in  simple 
triple  time.  Finally  comes  the  Danza;  it  is  the  old  Danzay  differing  from  the 
Habanera  by  its  vivacious  pace  and  salty  flavor.  Technically  the  difference  lies 
ill  the  characteristic  form  of  the  accompaniment.  Sometimes,  two-four  time 
alternates  with  three-four  time.  Danza  Guanacasteca  is  a  kind  of  music  that 
inflames,  a  music  that  dreams,  laughs,  and  amuses;  but  it  also  breathes  passion, 
zest,  and  valor. 

Segreda  warns  against  an  over-critical  attitude  towards  the  homely 
native  product: 

Do  not  let  harmony  professors  examine  the  water  in  our  musical  vessel 
through  a  microscope,  lest  they  discover  ingredients  that  are  Spanish,  or  Indian, 
and  decide  that  our  music  lacks  originality  .  .  .  For,  if  the  elements  appear 
mixed,  they  are  filtered  through  the  sands  of  our  own  soil. 


Callejera,  from  Guanacaste,  Costa  Rica 


Music  history  in  Costa  Rica  begins  with  the  creation  of  the  National 
Anthem.  Its  author  was  one  Manuel  Gutierrez  (1829-1887).  The  story 
goes  that  he  was  ordered  by  the  President  of  Costa  Rica  to  write  a  patriotic 


COSTA  RICA 


175 

song,  and  when  he  pleaded  that  his  learning  was  inadequate  for  such  a 
task,  he  was  thrown  into  jail,  where  he  remained  until  the  Anthem  was 
ready.  The  first  public  performance  of  the  Anthem  was  given  in  the 
Hall  of  the  National  Assembly  in  San  Jose,  on  June  1 1,  1853. 

In  the  January  1942  issue  of  Kducacion  we  find  a  long  list  of  names 
of  Costa  Rican  musicians  of  the  last  century.  Among  these,  the  following 
are  prominent:  Rafael  Chavez  Torres  (1839-1907),  who  was  a  military 
band  leader,  and  composed  waltzes  and  funeral  marches  5  Pedro  Calderon 
Navarro  (1864-1909),  a  religious  composer;  Jose  Campabadal  (1849- 
1 905 )  ;  and  his  son  Roberto  Campabadal  (1881-1931),  who  wrote  sacred 
music  and  patriotic  songs;  Rafael  Angel  Troyo  Pacheco  (1875—1910), 
who  perished  in  the  earthquake  of  1910;  Pilar  Jimenez  Solis  (1883- 
1922)  ;  Gordiano  Morales  (1839-1917);  and  Fernando  Murillo  Rodri¬ 
guez  ( 1867-1928). 

The  dean  of  contemporary  Costa  Rican  musicians  is  Alejandro  Mo- 
nestel,  who  is  the  first  Costa  Rican  composer  who  has  used  native  folk 
songs  as  themes  for  his  works  in  established  art  forms.  Of  Costa  Rican 
musicians  of  a  later  generation,  Julio  Fonseca  is  the  romanticist  and  Julio 
Mata  the  modernist.  The  names  of  Cesar  A.  Nieto,  a  composer  of  ballet 
music,  and  that  of  Ismael  Cardona  should  also  be  mentioned. 

There  is  a  national  theater  in  San  Jose,  inaugurated  on  October  21, 
1897,  which  is  used  for  performances  by  visiting  opera  companies.  San 
Jose  has  an  excellent  military  band,  led  by  Roberto  Cantillano,  which 
gives  frequent  concerts,  featuring  compositions  by  native  musicians.  A 
National  Conservatory  of  Music  was  established  in  San  Jose  in  1942. 

The  National  Museum  of  Costa  Rica  possesses  numerous  specimens 
of  old  musical  instruments  dating  back  to  the  pre-Colombian  era.  Par¬ 
ticularly  remarkable  is  an  Ocarina  with  six  holes,  which  is  capable,  by 
combining  the  stops,  of  producing  eighteen  successive  chromatic  tones. 

Writing  in  the  October  1940  issue  of  Revista  Musical,  a  music  periodi¬ 
cal  published  under  the  auspices  of  the  Asociacion  de  Cultura  Musical 
of  San  Jose,  Julio  Fonseca  laments  the  lack  of  appreciation  of  native 
culture.  “Some  resident  foreigners,”  he  writes,  “regard  the  people  of 
Costa  Rica  as  apathetic,  devoid  of  all  interest  in  the  arts,  and  capable  of 
getting  excited  about  anything  only  under  the  influence  of  liquor.  It  is 
a  lamentable  misconception.  The  Costa  Ricans  like  entertainment  and 
appreciate  music.  This  fact  was  convincingly  demonstrated  when  the  As¬ 
sociation  of  the  National  Manufacturers  of  Alcoholic  Beverages  arranged 


176  MUSIC.  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

a  music  contestj  which  aroused  so  much  interest  that  over  two  hundred 
songs  were  sent  in  from  all  corners  of  the  Republic.” 

MUSICIANS  OF  COSTA  RICA 

Roberto  Cantillano  (1887 - ),  the  Costa  Rican  band  conductor, 

arranger,  and  composer,  was  born  in  Santo  Domingo  de  Heredia.  He 
studied  music  in  his  native  town,  and  in  1903  was  named  conductor  of  a 
provincial  military  band.  He  subsequently  played  the  second  flute  in  the 
band  of  San  Jose,  and  in  1919  became  the  conductor  of  this  band,  a  post 
which  he  occupies  at  present.  Cantillano  has  composed  a  number  of  pieces 
in  the  popular  genre.  On  March  25,  1936,  he  presented,  with  the  band 
of  San  Jose,  his  symphonic  poem  Amanecer  Guanacasteco. 

Ismael  Cardona  (1877 - )  is  both  a  violinist  and  composer.  Most  of 

his  music  consists  of  salon  pieces.  His  Suite  Miniature  in  three  movements 
{Gavot^  Idyll ^  Canzonette)  was  performed  by  the  Symphonic  Ensemble 
of  San  Jose  on  March  26,  1935.  It  is  included  in  the  Fleisher  Collection 
in  Philadelphia. 

Julio  Fonseca  (1885 - )  was,  in  1902,  sent  by  the  Costa  Rican  gov¬ 

ernment  to  Europe  for  musical  study  5  he  took  courses  at  the  Milan  Con¬ 
servatory.  Upon  his  return  to  Costa  Rica,  Fonseca  was  appointed  pro¬ 
fessor  of  music  at  the  Young  Ladies’  College  of  San  Jose,  and  organist 
at  the  Church  of  Our  Lady  of  Mercy.  The  bulk  of  Fonseca’s  musical 
production  consists  of  salon  dances,  but  he  has  also  written  for  orchestra 
and  military  band.  Fonseca  adopts  in  his  music  certain  elements  of  modern 
harmony.  In  his  Cantata  a  la  Musica  (presented  at  the  ‘^Tiesta  de  la  Raza” 
in  San  Jose  on  October  ii,  1935),  the  principal  theme  is  built  on  the 
whole-tone  scale.  At  the  concert  of  Fonseca’s  works  given  in  San  Jose 
on  December  4,  1934?  conducted  his  Suite  Trofical  for  orchestra,  based 
on  Costa  Rican  folklore.  The  score  is  included  in  the  Fleisher  Collection 
in  Philadelphia.  Some  of  Fonseca’s  salon  music  has  been  published.  Fonse¬ 
ca’s  son,  Jimmy  Fonseca,  has  a  promising  musical  gift.  His  Gran  Marcha 
de  la  Exfosicion  was  presented  by  the  Military  Band  of  San  Jose  on 
July  20,  1938. 

Julio  Mata  (1899 - )  studied  music  in  San  Jose,  and  later  went  to 

the  United  States,  where  he  took  courses  at  the  Brooklyn  Academy  of 
Music.  Mata  has  written  music  for  military  band,  for  orchestra,  and  for 
the  theater.  His  light  opera,  entitled  Toyufdn^  is  based  on  native  folklore. 
His  operetta,  Rosas  de  N orgaria^  was  presented  in  excerpts  by  the  military 


COSTA  RICA 


177 


band  of  San  Jose  on  October  14, 1936. The  same  band  performed  his  march 
'Patna  y  A  feet  os  on  August  17,  1932.  Mata^s  orchestral  Suite  Ah  s  tract  a  ^ 
performed  in  San  Jose  at  a  concert  of  Mata’s  compositions  on  May  23, 

1 94 1 5  follows  a  ^disoriented  tonality/’  according  to  the  composer’s  defi¬ 
nition.  However,  the  names  of  the  separate  movements,  Anger,  Love, 
Melancholy,  and  Joy,  imply  a  programmatic  plan.  The  Suite  Abstracta 
is  included  in  the  Fleisher  Collection  in  Philadelphia. 

Alejandro  Monestel  ( 1 865 - ),  the  composer,  studied  the  organ  and 

in  1884  became  organist  and  choirmaster  at  the  Cathedral  of  San  Jose. 
In  1902  he  went  to  the  United  States,  as  church  organist  in  Roslyn,  Long 
Island j  Brooklyn,  New  Yorkj  and  Ridgewood,  New  Jersey.  In  1937 
he  returned  to  Costa  Rica,  where,  on  July  25,  1937?  ^  concert  of  his 
works  was  presented  by  the  military  band  of  San  Jose.  Monestel  is  a 
prolific  writer  of  religious  music,  having  composed  fourteen  Masses, 
four  Requiems,  two  Ave  Marias y  two  Salve  ReginaSy  two  Tantum  ErgoSy 
as  well  as  a  communion  service  for  the  Protestant  Church.  He  is  the 
author  of  five  cantatas  on  the  life  of  Jesus  Christ  from  birth  to  resurrec¬ 
tion.  Some  of  his  religious  music  has  been  published  by  Schirmer.  His 
music  for  military  bands  is  important  as  a  means  of  popularizing  Costa 
Rican  folk  melodies.  Of  these  band  compositions,  the  Rapodia  Costch 
rricensey  first  performed  in  San  Jose  on  August  28,  1935?  two  Rapo- 
dias  Guanacastecasy  performed  respectively  on  July  25,  1937,  and  Octo¬ 
ber  20,  i937j  are  particularly  rich  in  indigenous  folklore.  Among  Mones- 
tel’s  light  pieces  for  the  orchestra  are  El  Amante  y  la  Coquetay  As  Orillas 
de  un  ArroyOy  and  6  Canciones.  These  pieces,  as  well  as  the  three  rhapso¬ 
dies  on  Costa  Rican  themes,  are  included  in  the  Fleisher  Collection  in 
Philadelphia. 

Cesar  Nieto  (1892 - ),  the  composer,  was  born  in  Barcelona,  Spain, 

went  to  Costa  Rica  in  1899,  and  became  a  Costa  Rican  citizen  in  1936. 
Nieto  is  now  conductor  of  a  choral  society  in  San  Jose.  As  a  composer,  he 
has  written  a  ballet.  La  Piedra  del  Toxily  based  on  pentatonic  Inca  themes, 
and  harmonized  in  the  traditional  nineteenth-century  style.  He  has  also 
composed  salon  music,  waltzes,  marches,  etc.  The  score  of  La  Piedra  del 
Toxil  is  included  in  the  Fleisher  Collection  in  Philadelphia. 

The  military  band  leader  and  composer  Jose  Quesada  (1894 — -) 
was  born  in  San  Rafael,  Costa  Rica.  He  studied  music  in  San  Jose,  and 
later  became  the  leader  of  a  military  band  there.  He  conducted  in  San 
Jose  the  first  performance  of  his  orchestral  piece,  El  Son  de  la  Lunay  on 


178  MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

December  20,  1930.  The  score  of  this  composition  is  in  the  Fleisher  Col¬ 
lection  in  Philadelphia.  The  band  arrangements  of  Quesada’s  two  Costa 
Rican  Dances  are  published  by  Axelrod. 


Cuba 

jOh  tierra  de  mi  amor  I  .  .  [Oh  car  a  Cuba! 

[jOSE  FORNARIS] 

iPerla  del  Mar!  jCuba  hermosa! 

[gERTRUDIS  GOMEZ  DE  AVELLANDEA  Y 

arteaga] 

I  Oh  Cuba^  nombre  dulce  indefinible ! 

[ JOAQUIN  LORENZO  LUACES] 

\Cuba^  Cubuy  que  vida  me  distCy 
Dulce  tierra  de  luz  y  hermozura! 

[josE  MARIA  Heredia] 


Cuba,  the  largest  of  the  West  Indies  islands,  has  been  called  the  Pearl  of  the 
Antilles,  the  Castle  of  Indolence,  the  Land  of  Sugar  and  Spendthrifts,  Spain’s 
Lost  Jewel,  and  the  Garden  of  Delight.  Cuba  numbers  4,300,000  inhabitants, 
of  whom  over  half  a  million  live  in  Havana.  Twenty  per  cent  of  the  population 
are  Negroes.  The  Indians  are  virtually  extinct. 

Among  Latin  American  airs  and  dances,  the  music  of  Cuba  was  the 
first  to  spread  in  Europe  and  North  America.  Tht  Habanera  (that  is,  a 
Havana  air)  became  known  a  century  ago.  More  recently  the  Rumba  has 
swept  the  world.  But  it  must  be  pointed  out  that  Cuban  popular  music 
as  performed  in  Europe  and  America  sounds  false  and  perverted  to 
native  ears.  The  late  Cuban  musicologist,  Emilio  Grenet,  writes  in  a 
preface  to  his  valuable  collection,  Musica  Popular  Cub  ana:  ^^Our  music 
has  invaded  all  lands  and  all  climes.  But  while  this  conquest  is  an  un¬ 
disputed  reality,  it  is  no  less  true  that  most  musicians  cultivating  Cuban 
music  abroad  fail  to  understand  the  nature  of  the  new  rhythms  which 
have  infiltrated  into  their  countries.  And  that  is  the  reason  why  our  sister 
nations,  the  United  States,  which  is  our  geographical  neighbor,  and  Spain, 


CUBA 


179 


which  is  our  racial  relative,  distort  the  character  of  our  music  and  invest 
it  with  an  alien  spirit  .  .  .  To  our  neighbors  to  the  north,  all  Cuban 
music  is  reduced  to  the  Rumba.  But  even  the  R^umha^  that  creature  of  our 
robust  virility,  is  diluted  and  emasculated  .  .  .  The  Spanish  are  a  step 
ahead  in  their  comprehension  of  our  music.  They  interpret  it  as  a  tropical 
siesta,  in  a  slow  cadence  of  the  Habanera  and  the  Danzon^  no  doubt  be> 
cause  these  dances  are  so  ostentatiously  Hispanic  .  . 

Two  racial  strains  combine  to  produce  Cuban  popular  music:  the 
Spanish  and  the  African.  Little  is  left  of  the  pentatonic  melos  of  the 
aboriginal  Indians.  The  Spanish  element  is  strong  in  the  rustic  airs  of 
the  interior,  while  the  Negro  influence  is  felt  in  the  city  songs.  The 
Spanish  rhythms  are  characterized  by  the  combined  six-eight  and  three- 
four  time,  while  the  Afro-Cuban  type  is  marked  by  syncopation  in  two- 
four  time.  The  typical  rhythm  of  Cuban  popular  music  is  represented 


two-bar  pattern. 


In  performance 


this  formula  is  often  transformed  into  a  group  of  five  notes, 
which  is  known  as  the  Cuban  Cinquillo.  This  cinquillo^  in  its  turn,  may 


become  shortened  into  a  group  of  three  notes, 

There  is  a  wide  divergence  in  rhythmic  interpretation  of  a  popular  song 
as  sung  by  the  peasants  of  the  interior,  and  the  slick,  jazz-like  version  of 
the  professional  musicians  in  a  Havana  cafe.  Emilio  Grenet  transcribes 
two  versions  of  a  popular  song,  Mama  Ines^  as  performed  in  the  country 
and  in  Havana.  The  first  version  is  ^^straight,”  whereas  the  second  is  con¬ 
vulsed  with  syncopation: 


“Mama  Inez,”  Straight  and  Syncopated  {Grenet) 


i8o  MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

The  distinctive  Cuban  rhythms  are  punctuated  by  a  variety  of  native 
percussion  instruments.  The  basic  rhythm  is  usually  given  by  the  Claves^ 
a  pair  of  cylindrical  wooden  blocks  struck  one  against  the  other,  with  the 
cupped  palm  of  the  hand  serving  as  the  resonator.  Fernando  Ortiz,  in  his 
essay  La  Clave  Xilofonica  de  la  Llusica  Cub  ana  ^  describes  the  sound  of 
the  Claves  as  ^^the  most  profound  emotional  expression  of  Cubans  soul.’^ 

The  Cuban  Maracasy  which  is  a  pair  of  gourds  filled  with  dry  seeds, 
and  the  GiiirOy  a  serrated  calabash,  rubbed  with  a  stick,  are  the  customary 
ingredients  of  every  native  band,  not  only  in  Cuba,  but  all  over  Latin 
America.  Then  there  is  in  Cuba  a  variety  of  primitive  drums.  Of  these, 
the  Conga  is  the  largest.  It  is  made  of  a  tree  trunk,  burned  out  inside, 
and  covered  with  a  parchment.  So  strong  is  its  sound,  that  the  Conga 
can  be  heard  for  miles  in  the  jungle.  Because  the  Conga  serves  as  a  means 
of  jungle  telegraphy  among  the  natives,  the  Cuban  government  felt 
obliged  to  forbid  its  manufacture  and  use,  to  forestall  an  outbreak  of 
native  unrest. 

A  smaller  drum  of  the  Conga  type  is  called  Enkomo.  The  Cuban  twin 
drums,  the  Bongosy  which  have  gained  great  popularity,  are  placed  on 
the  knees,  and  tapped  with  the  fingers.  The  CencerrOy  which  is  a  piece  of 
metal,  is  used  in  native  bands  as  a  bell.  The  most  unusual  instrument  in 
the  primitive  Cuban  orchestras  is  the  Quijada  del  Burro y  the  jawbone  of 
an  ass,  which  is  furnished  with  small  bells  and  used  as  a  tambourine.  A 
detailed  description  of  Cuban  percussion  instruments  is  given  by  Harold 
Courlander  in  his  monograph  on  the  subject,  published  in  the  April  1942 
issue  of  The  Musical  Quarterly. 

Among  the  native  dances  of  Cuba,  the  Spanish  element  is  strongest 
in  the  Habaneray  Guajiray  PuntOy  and  the  Guaracha.  The  Afro-Cuban 
dances  are  the  Rumbay  the  Congay  and  the  Son  Ajro-Cubano,  The  hybrid 
Spanish-African  style  is  represented  by  the  Bolero-Sony  which  is  in  two- 
four  time,  and  in  syncopated  rhythm,  whereas  the  original  Spanish  Bolero 
is  in  three-four  time. 

The  Habanera  is  characterized  by  the  unmistakable  swaying  rhythm 


inn 

4 


which  is  also  the  formula  of  the  Argentine  Tango,  The 


earliest  known  Habanera  is  El  AregUto  by  the  Spanish  composer  Yradier, 
published  in  the  1840’s  with  the  svHotitlt  Chanson  This  is  the 

Habanera  thztPhxtt  picked  up  in  Spain  and  used  in  Carmen,  Kmong 


modern  composers.  Ravel  and  Stravinsky  wrote  Habaneras  in  stylized 
adaptations. 

The  Argentine  music  scholar,  Carlos  Vega,  traces  the  origin  of  the 
Habanera  to  the  English  Country  Dance.  This  unexpected  genealogy  is 
made  extremely  plausible  by  Vega.  According  to  his  theory,  the  Country 
Dance,  which  became  Contredanse  in  France,  and  Contradanza  in  Spain, 
was  imported  into  Cuba,  where  it  was  known  as  the  Danza^  and  later  as 
the  Danza  Habanera,  Then  the  word  Danza  was  dropped,  leaving  the 
name  simply  Habanera, 

The  Guajira  takes  its  name  from  the  guajirosy  the  peasants  of  the  in¬ 
terior,  and  is  written  in  the  characteristic  Hispanic  meter  of  six-eight, 
superimposed  on  three-four.  It  is  sung  to  the  accompaniment  of  the  guitar, 
with  a  melody  not  exceeding  the  range  of  a  minor  seventh.  Close  to  the 
Guajira  in  rhythm,  melody  and  harmony,  is  the  Cuban  PuntOy  which  is 
also  related  to  the  Punto  of  Panama. 

The  Guaracha  is  an  old  Spanish-Cuban  dance  in  the  characteristic  six- 
eight  time,  alternating  with  three-four  time.  In  Cuba,  it  is  rarely  heard 
among  the  people,  but  is  popular  in  dance  bands.  There  is  a  Guaracha  in 
AubeFs  opera  La  Muette  de  P  or  tidy  written  in  1828. 

The  choreography  of  the  Cuban  dances  of  Spanish  origin  is  interesting 
in  that  the  partners  are  separated,  and  wave  handkerchiefs  at  each  other, 
without  coming  into  physical  contact.  A  special  phase  of  these  dances  is 
El  ZafateOy  from  ZafatOy  shoe.  It  is  a  tap  dance,  in  which  the  dancers 
stamp  on  the  ground  in  rapid  tempo. 

The  Danzon  was  introduced  into  Cuba  in  1879  by  a  Negro  composer, 
Miguel  Failde.  It  is  related  to  the  old  Spanish  Contradanzay  but  is  greatly 
influenced  by  African  elements.  It  is  danced  by  couples  holding  hands. 
The  Danzon  was  very  popular  for  a  time,  but  was  displaced  by  the  Sony 
a  dance-song  which  appeared  in  1916  in  the  eastern  provinces  of  Cuba. 
The  Son  is  more  highly  syncopated  than  the  Danzon  and  usually  has  an 
introduction  for  a  solo  singer.  Its  rhythmic  structure  is  usually  a  cmquilloy 
in  which  the  last  eighth-note  is  split  into  two  sixteenth-notes.  The  Son 
Afro-Cubano  is  the  extension  of  the  Sony  with  Negro  melodies  and  ritu¬ 
alistic  African  words. 

The  Rumba  and  the  Conga  are  the  characteristic  creations  of  the  Cuban 
Negroes.  In  the  slums  of  Havana,  the  Rumba  is  often  accompanied  by 
an  ensemble  made  up  of  domestic  utensils  such  as  bottles,  pans  and 
spoons. 


i82 


MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

The  rhythm  of  the  Rumha  is  variedj  often  with  a  different  pattern 
in  every  bar^  as  for  example^ 

I  r  im  1  j  nhjTin  i  n 

The  Conga  is  a  Carnival  dance,  performed  during  the  so-called  Com- 
farsas  or  parades,  and  its  rhythm  is  essentially  that  of  a  march,  the  only 
peculiarity  being  that  in  every  other  bar  the  second  beat  is  anticipated  by 
a  sixteenth-note.  The  American  boogie-vjoogie  players  often  use  the 
Conga  rhythm  as  the  basic  accompaniment  pattern. 

The  Rumba  and  the  Conga  are  often  used  as  political  campaign  songs. 
In  the  presidential  campaign  of  1924?  2,  Conga  was  used  as  a  ^^smear”  song 
against  Menocal.  Here  is  the  first  stanza:  ^Hhe  King  of  Spain  sent  a 
word  to  Menocal,  saying,  return  to  me  the  steed  you  have  no  skill  to 
mount.”  Menocal  lost  the  election. 

The  history  of  music  in  Cuba  can  be  but  sketchily  traced.  The  nine¬ 
teenth  century  in  Cuba  was  the  century  of  Italian  music.  Italian  operatic 
music  dominated  the  salons  of  Havana,  and  the  Cuban  salon  dances  of 
the  time  reflect  this  influence.  The  first  Italian  opera  company  visited 
Cuba  in  1839.  There  is  also  a  record  of  the  arrival  of  several  musicians 
from  Bohemia  in  the  year  1853,  who  presented  a  symphonic  concert  of 
classical  music  on  March  10  of  that  year.  The  first  Cuban  composer  who 
cultivated  native  themes  was  Ignacio  Cervantes  (1847-“  1905),  who  has 
been  called  ^ffhe  Glinka  of  Cuban  music.” 

Military  bands  were  formed  in  Cuban  towns  for  the  purpose  of  supply¬ 
ing  the  population  with  cultured  recreation.  Of  these  bands,  the  most 
important  is  the  Banda  de  la  Polida^  established  on  August  15,  1899* 

In  July  1922,  an  orchestral  organization,  Sinfonica  de  la 

Habanay  was  founded  under  the  directorship  of  the  Cuban  conductor  and 
composer  Gonzalo  Roig.  Two  years  later  a  rival  organization,  the  Or- 
questa  Filarmonica  de  la  Habanay  was  founded.  Its  first  concert  was  given 
on  June  8,  1924,  under  the  direction  of  the  Spanish  musician  Pedro  San- 
juan.  After  Sanjuan’s  departure,  Amadeo  Roldan  became  the  conductor, 
retaining  the  post  until  his  death  in  1939.  Massimo  Freccia,  an  Italian 
musician,  became  Roldaifls  successor  until  1944,  when  Erich  Kleiber  was 
invited  to  serve  as  principal  conductor. 

There  is  a  municipal  conservatory  in  Havana  which  provides  adequate 
musical  courses.  The  Conservatorio  Bachy  under  the  direction  of  Antonio 


CUBA 


i8s 


and  Maria  de  Quevedo,  performs  an  important  cultural  role  by  present¬ 
ing  concerts  of  classical  and  modern  works.  The  Quevedos  are  also  the 
publishers  of  the  progressive  music  periodical  Musicalia^  which  has  ap- 
pearedj  albeit  with  interruptions,  since  1927. 

The  recently  deceased  Cuban  composer  Eduardo  Sanchez  de  Fuentes 
is  the  author  of  operas  and  ballets,  as  well  as  of  popular  music,  of  which 
the  Habanera  Tu  (1890)  has  become  a  classic  in  its  genre.  The  Cuban- 
born  composer  Joaquin  Nin  y  Castellanos  spent  virtually  all  his  life  in 
Paris,  returning  to  Havana  in  1939.  His  son,  Joaquin  Nin-Culmell,  also 
a  composer,  was  born  in  Berlin,  lived  in  France,  and  eventually  settled 
in  the  United  States. 

Two  Cuban  composers,  both  of  whom  died  a  tragic  death  in  their  early 
thirties,  Amadeo  Roldan  and  Alejandro  Garcia  Caturla,  share  the  honor 
of  being  the  founders  of  the  modern  school  of  native  composition.  Both 
were  inspired  in  their  music  by  Afro-Cuban  folklore.  Roldan  was  a 
mulatto,  and  Caturla,  although  of  white  stock,  married  into  a  Negro 
family. 

The  present  tendency  of  Cuban  music  is  directed  towards  neoclassicism 
rather  than  folkloric  nationalism.  This  new  trend  is  cultivated  by  Jose 
Ardevol,  a  Spanish  musician  who  settled  in  Havana  in  1934,  and  a  group 
of  young  men  and  women  who  have  banded  together  in  a  modern  music 
society,  Grufo  de  Renovacion  Musical.  This  group  presented  its  inaugural 
concert  in  Havana  on  January  19,  1943,  in  a  program  of  works  by  Harold 
Gramatges,  Juan  Antonio  Camara,  Julian  Orbon,  Hilario  Gonzalez  Ini- 
guez,  Esther  Rodriguez,  Virginia  Fleites,  Gisela  Hernandez  Gonzalo, 
and  Edgardo  Martin. 


MUSICIANS  OF  CUBA 

Jose  Ardevol  (1911 - )  was  born  in  Barcelona,  Spain.  He  studied 

with  his  father,  a  well-known  musician,  and  appeared  as  pianist  in  con¬ 
certs  at  an  early  age.  In  1930,  he  settled  in  Havana,  where  he  founded 
a  Society  of  Chamber  Music  Concerts.  The  programs  of  these  concerts 
are  reproduced  in  Volum^e  III  of  the  Boletin  Latino-Americano  de  Mu- 
sica.  ArdevoPs  Scherzo  for  orchestra,  composed  at  the  age  of  eighteen,  was 
first  performed  by  the  Orquesta  Filarmonka  in  Havana  on  October  23, 
1932.  In  1937,  Ardevol  wrote  two  Concertos  Grosses,  and  in  1938,  a 
Concerto  for  Three  Pianos  and  Orchestra.  The  titles  of  his  works  indi¬ 
cate  the  neoclassical  trend  of  ArdevoPs  style.  He  has  also  composed  Tres 
Ricercari  ( 1936) ;  Chamber  Musk  for  Six  Instruments  (1936) ,  a  Sonata 


184  MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

for  Oboe,  Clarinet,  and  Cello  (1937)5  a  Sonata  for  Two  Flutes  and 
Viola  ( 1938) ;  and  a  Sonata  for  Two  Trumpets  and  Trombone.  The  nine 
'Peq^uen&s  Piszss  (i933)  arc  humorous  in  their  intent  5  one  of  the  pieces 
bears  the  title.  Hymn  of  2  Plus  2  Equals  4.  He  has  also  exploited  the 
resources  of  the  percussion  orchestra,  and  wrote  in  i934  a  Suite  for  thirty 
percussion  instruments.  The  score  of  this  Suite  and  that  of  ArdevoPs 
Six  Synthetic  Poems  are  included  in  the  Fleisher  Collection  in  Phila¬ 
delphia.  His  Sonatina  for  Piano  was  published  in  New  Music  in  July, 
1934- 

Juan  Antonio  Camara  (1917 - )  was  born  in  Havana.  He  studied 

music  with  Amadeo  Roldan  and  Jose  Ardevol,  and  in  1943  joined  the 
Grufo  de  Renovacion  Musical,  founded  by  a  group  of  young  Cuban 
composers.  He  writes  in  a  neoclassical  style,  emphasizing  the  contrapuntal 
aspect  of  the  music.  His  Suite  for  flute,  clarinet,  and  bassoon  was  per¬ 
formed  in  Havana  on  August  2,  i944- 

Alejandro  Garcia  Caturla,  one  of  the  most  significant  composers  of 
Cuba,  was  born  in  Remedlog.-iil',/^Q^  and  tragically  assassinated  there  on 
November  12,  1940.  He  studied  in  Havana  with  Pedro  Sanjuan,  and 
in  Paris  in  1928  with  Nfdia  Boulanger.  His  compositions  are  distin¬ 
guished  by  native  color  and  ultra-modern  harmony.  Although  of  pure 
Spanish  blood,  he  married-^'-Negro  woman,  and  in  his  creative  work  was 
inspired  by  Afro-Cuban  follclbrg;.-Hrs  orchestral  suite  5  Danzas  Cubanas, 
first  performed  by  the  Orquesta  PilaTmonica  in  Havana  on  December  9? 
1928,  shows  his  instinctive  feeling  for  native  rhythms.  In  BembS,  an 
Afro-Cuban  suite  for  fourteen  instruments,  performed  in  Paris  on  Decem¬ 
ber  21,  1929,  he  reveals  a  great  talent  for  composition  in  an  advanced 
harmonic  idiom.  Yamba-0,  a  ritualistic  symphonic  poem  for  large  or¬ 
chestra,  based  on  a  Negro  liturgy,  is  his  most  complicated  and  most  sig¬ 
nificant  work.  It  was  given  by  the  Philharmonic  Orchestra  of  Havana 
on  October  25,  1931.  La  Rumba,  performed  in  Havana  on  December  31, 
1933,  is  based  on  popular  Cuban  rhythms.  A  similar  stylization  of  Cuban 
rhythms  and  melodies  is  present  in  Caturla’s  Primera  Suite  Cubana  for 
piano  and  six  wind  instruments.  Adolfo  Salazar,  in  his  monograph  on 
Caturla  in  La  Revista  Cubana  of  January-March,  1938,  states  that  Ca¬ 
turla’s  general  esthetic  code  is  that  of  the  Cuban  Son,  characterized  by 
a  “generally  pentatonic  melody,  presented  by  an  instrument  of  a  distinct 
timbre,  in  a  tonally  indefinable  sonorous  atmosphere,  sustained  by  the 
multiplicity  of  simultaneous  rhythms  played  by  native  instruments.” 


Alberto  Williams 


Luis  Gianneo 


Cafurla’s  songs  Mari-Sabel^  Yuego  Santo ^  Bito-Manue y  TS/Lulatay  and 
Y amhamhOy  ^\2,mo  arrangements  of  the  Dan%a  del  Tambor  and  Danza 
Lucumi  from  5  Danzas  CubanaSy  and  BembS  were  published  in  Paris. 
The  Sonata  and  Prelude  for  Piano,  the  piano  version  of  Comparsay  and 
the  score  of  Primer  a  Suite  Cub  ana  are  published  by  New  Music,  Caturla’s 
piano  piece  Son  was  issued  as  a  supplement  to  the  periodical  Musicalia 
in  Havana.  The  orchestral  scores  of  Caturla’s  Danzas  CubanaSy  BembS y 
Primer  a  Suite  Cub  ana  y  Yamba-Oy  and  a  chamber  orchestra  version  of 
5  Danzas  Cubanas  are  included  in  the  Fleisher  Collection  in  Philadelphia. 
See  Nicolas  Slonimsky,  “Caturla  of  Cuba,”  in  Modern  Music  (January, 
1940). 

Virginia  Fleites  (1916 - )  studied  with  Roldan  and  Ardevolj  she 

has  written  chamber  music,  piano  pieces,  and  songs.  She  is  a  member 
of  the  Grupo  de  Renovacion  Musical  in  Havana. 

Hilario  Gonzalez  Iniguez  (1920 - ),  of  the  modern  generation, 

studied  with  Jose  Ardevol,  and  in  1943  joined  the  Grupo  de  Renovacion 
Musical y  formed  by  a  group  of  -yoimg  Cuban  composers.  Gonzalez 
Iniguez  cultivates  native  folklore  in  his  piano  pieces  and  songs. 

Harold  Gramatges  (1918— — ),  also  one  of  the  youthful  school  of 
Cuban  composers,  studied  with  Amadeo  Roldan  and  Jose  Ardevol  in 
Havana,  and  in  the  summer  of  1942  at  the  Berkshire  Academy  in  the 
•United  States,  with  Aaron  Copland.  He  has  written  music  in  various 
genres,  for  orchestra,  for  piano,  and  for  voice.  He  adheres  to  the  precepts 
of  neoclassicism,  without  injecting  elements  of  folklore.  In  association 
with  a  group  of  young  Cuban  composers  (Julian  Orbon,  Hilario  Gonzalez, 
Edgardo  Martin,  Virginia  Fleites,  Esther  Rodriguez,  and  others), 
Gramatges  founded  the  Grupo  de  Renovacion  Musical y  w^hich  presented 
its  inaugural  concert  of  chamber  music  by  its  members,  in  Havana,  on 
January  19,  1943. 

Gisela  Hernandez  (1910 - )  has  studied  with  Jose  Ardevol,  and 

in  1943  she  joined  the  Grupo  de  Renovacion  Musical  m  Havana.  She 
writes  in  a  neoclassical  manner. 

Ernesto  Lecuona  (1896 - )  began  composing  at  the  age  of  eleven, 

and  at  sixteen  was  a  teacher  at  a  Havana  music  school.  Graduating  from 
the  National  Conservatory  in  1913,  he  traveled  in  the  United  States, 
Spain,  and  France,  where  he  gave  piano  recitals.  Although  Lecuona  has 
written  works  for  the  symphony  orchestra,  it  is  in  the  field  of  popular 


i86 


MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

music  that  he  has  become  famous.  His  rumba  band,  Lecuoiia’s  Cuban 
Boys,  has  established  itself  all  over  Latin  America,  and  it  is  featured  in 
night  clubs  and  other  places  of  entertainment  as  a  type  of  popular  music, 
even  when  Lecuona  does  not  conduct  it  personally.  Of  his  songs,  Sibonejy 
Canto  Karabaliy  Say  Si  Siy  and  Malaguena  have  had  an  extraordinary 
popular  success,  and  have  sold  in  thousands  of  copies  and  recordings.  His 
piano  pieces  in  Cuban  manner  enjoy  similar  popularity.  On  October  lO, 
1943,  he  presented  at  Carnegie  Hall,  New  York,  a  concert  of  Cuban  music, 
at  which  he  gave  the  first  performance  of  his  Rafsodia  Negra  for  piano 
and  orchestra. 

Edgardo  Martin  (1915 - )  studied  with  Jose  Ardevol,  and  in 

1943  joined  the  Grufo  de  Renovacion  Musical  in  Havana. 

Joaquin  Nin  y  Castellanos  (1879 - )  v/as  born  in  Havana,  went 

to  Barcelona  at  an  early  age,  and  later  moved  to  Paris,  where  he  studied 
composition  at  the  Schola  CantoTUfyiy  and  piano  with  Moszkowski.  He 
is  particularly  interested  in  old  Spanish  music,  and  has  edited  several  col¬ 
lections  of  works  by  Spanish  composers.  As  a  composer,  Nin  writes  in  a 
Hispanized  French  style.  His  piano  pieces  and  songs  have  been  pub¬ 
lished  in  Paris.  In  i939)  Nin  returned  to  Havana.  His  son,  Joaquin  Nin- 
Culmell,  who  was  born  in  Berlin  on  September  5,  1908,  is  a  composer 
of  great  attainments.  He  lived  in  France  and  in  the  United  States,  and 
served  in  the  Cuban  Army.  In  1944  he  joined  the  faculty  of  Williams 
College. 

Julian  Orbon  is  the  youngest  of  Cuban  composers.  Born  in  Spain  on 
August  7,  1925,  he  was  taken  to  Havana  as  a  child.  He  studied  with 
Jose  Ardevol,  and  joined  the  Grufo  de  Renovacion  Musical,  His  music  is 
in  a  neoclassical  style.  His  Cafriccio  Concertante  for  chamber  orchestra 
was  performed  for  the  first  time  in  Havana  on  June  21,  1944*  Orbon  has 
also  composed  incidental  music  for  Ra  Gitanilla  of  Cervantes  and  a 
Toccata  for  piano. 

Esther  Rodriguez  (1920 - )  studied  with  Roldan  and  Ardevol,  and 

has  written  chamber  music,  choruses,  songs,  and  piano  pieces.  Her  String 
Quartet  was  performed  at  the  inaugural  concert  of  the  Grufp  de  Renova¬ 
cion  Musical  in  Havana,  of  which  she  is  a  member,  on  January  19,  1943. 

Gonzalo  Roig  (1890- - )  is  the  founder  and  permanent  conductor  of 

the  Orquesta  Sinfdnka  of  Havana.  He  has  written  a  lyric  comedy,  Cecilia 
and  numerous  songs. 


CUBA 


187 


Amadeo  Roldan  (1900-1939)5  the  Cuban  mulatto  composerj  was 
born  in  Paris.  He  studied  violin  in  Madrid,  and  composition  in  Havana 
with  Pedro  Sanjuan.  In  1924,  Roldan  was  concertmaster  of  the  Orquesta 
Filarmonica  in  Havana,  and  in  1932  succeeded  Sanjuan  as  conductor,  a 
position  he  held  up  to  the  year  of  his  death.  All  of  Roldan’s  music  is 
inspired  by  Afro-Cuban  folklore.  His  first  important  work  was  Obertura 
Sobre  T emas  Cubanos^  performed  by  the  Orquesta  Filarmonica  of  Havana 
on  November  29,  1925.  There  followed  Tres  Pequenos  Poemas^  first  per¬ 
formed  in  Havana  on  January  9, 1927.  The  first  of  these  poems,  Orientaly 
introduces  the  atmosphere  of  eastern  Cubaj  the  second  poem,  PregSuy 
is  derived  from  a  street  vendor’s  cry^  and  the  third  movement,  Fiesta 
NegrUy  is  based  on  Afro-Cuban  motives.  The  spirit  of  Negro  ritual  music 
finds  its  most  powerful  expression  in  Roldan’s  ballet  La  Rebambarambay 
in  which  he  employs  Cuban  percussion  instruments  in  six  separate  groups. 
An  orchestral  Suite  of  five  numbers  arranged  from  this  ballet  was  per¬ 
formed  by  the  Orquesta  Filarmonica  in  Havana  on  August  12,  1928. 
Roldan’s  ballet  El  Milagro  de  Anaquille  was  produced  in  Havana  on 
September  22,  1929.  Other  works  of  Roldan  inspired  by  Afro-Cuban 
rhythms  are  Danza  Negray  for  high  voice  and  seven  instruments  (first 
performed  in  Paris  on  April  23,  1929),  ChangOy  and  Poema  Negra  for 
string  quartet  (1930).  Further,  there  are  Motivos  de  Son  (1930)? 
high  voice  and  nine  instruments,  and  3  Toques  (subtitled  respectively 
De  Marchay  De  Rito,  and  De  Baile)  for  chamber  orchestra  (1931).  Of 
interest  from  the  instrumental  standpoint  are  Roldan’s  Rttmicas,  The  first 
four,  written  for  flute,  oboe,  clarinet,  bassoon,  horn,  and  piano,  were 
presented  in  Havana  on  August  3,  1930.  Ritmicas  Nos.  5  and  6  are  scored 
for  Cuban  percussion  instruments  only,  including  the  Quijada  del  Burro 
(Jawbone  of  an  Ass).  New  Music  has  published  the  orchestral  score  of 
Motivos  de  Sony  and  the  vocal  score  of  three  numbers  from  the  same 
suite.  The  scores  of  the  Obertura  Sobre  Temas  Cubanas  and  La  Rebam- 
baramha  are  included  in  the  Fleisher  Collection  in  Philadelphia. 

Eduardo  Sanchez  de  Fuentes  (1874-1944)  was  born  and  died  in 
Havana.  He  studied  piano  and  musical  theory.  At  the  age  of  eighteen 
Sanchez  de  Fuentes  wrote  his  first  piece,  a  Habanera  entitled  Tuy  which 
was  published  in  1894,  and  soon  acquired  universal  popularity.  Subse¬ 
quently  he  devoted  his  energies  to  the  cultivation  of  Cuban  national 
music.  In  19  ii  he  was  appointed  secretary  of  the  Music  Department  at 
the  Academy  of  Arts  and  Letters  in  Havana.  Sanchez  de  Fuentes  wrote 


i88 


MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

six  operas:  Yumurt  (produced  in  Havana  on  October  265  1898)^ 
Ndujrago  (after  Tennyson’s  Enoch  Arden^  produced  on  January  31, 
1901)3  La  Dolorosa  (performed  on  April  233  1910)3  Doreya  (produced 
on  February  7,  1918)3  El  Caminante  (produced  on  July  y,  1921)3  and 
Kabelia  (produced  on  June  223  1942).  His  oratorio,  Navidad,  was  per¬ 
formed  in  Havana  on  December  29,  1924,  and  his  aboriginal  Symphonic 
Poem  Anacaona  (named  after  the  sixteenth-century  Indian  Queen  of  the 
island  of  Hispaniola)  was  performed  in  Havana  on  December  2,  1928. 
His  ballet,  Dlone^  was  produced  in  Havana  on  March  4, 1940.  Among  his 
works  for  orchestra  based  on  native  folklore  are  Triftico  Cuhano,  Bocetos 
Cubanosy  and  Rafsodia  Cubana.  He  was  also  the  author  of  several  operettas 
and  numerous  songs  in  the  native  manner.  In  recognition  of  his  service 
to  Cuban  culture,  the  government  designated  April  3,  the  birthday  of 
Sanchez  de  Fuentes,  zs  El  Dta  de  la  Cancion  Cub  ana  y  to  be  celebrated 
annually  by  performances  of  Cuban  songs. 


Dominican  Republic 


Brillantesy  oro  y  rubieSy 
iRefublica  Dominicana! 
[ruben  dario] 


The  Dominican  Republic  occupies  the  eastern  two-thirds  of  the  island  of 
Santo  Domingo.  The  aboriginal  name  of  the  island  was  Quisqueya,  which 
means  ''mother  of  the  earth.”  Columbus  called  the  island  Hispaniola.  The 
population  of  the  Dominican  Republic  numbers  about  1,800,000,  of  which  35 
per  cent  are  whites,  50  per  cent  mestizos,  and  15  per  cent  Negroes.  There  are 
virtually  no  Indians  of  pure  stock  left  in  the  Dominican  Republic.  The  capi¬ 
tal  of  the  Dominican  Republic,  Santo  Domingo,  the  oldest  permanent  Euro¬ 
pean  settlement  in  the  Western  Hemisphere,  was  renamed  Ciudad  Trujillo  in 
1930,  after  the  president  of  the  republic.  Generalissimo  Rafael  L.  Trujillo 
Molina. 

Santo  Domingo  is  the  cradle  of  New  World  music.  Here  it  was  that 
a-tnbal  Queen,  Anacaona,  gave  the  earliest  demonstration  of  native 


DOMINICAN  REPUBLIC  189 

dances.  Columbus’  historiographer,  Gonzalo  Fernandez  de  Oviedo,  in 
his  Histona  General  y  Natural  de  las  Indias^  gave  a  vivid  description  of 
the  event: 

The  inhabitants  of  this  island  have  a  fine  custom  of  commemorating  ancient 
events  in  their  songs  and  dances,  which  they  call  AreitoSy  and  which  we  would 
call  singing  dances  ...  At  times,  they  combine  the  singing  with  the  playing 
of  drums  made  of  round  pieces  of  wood,  hollow  inside,  and  as  thick  as  a  man’s 
body  .  .  .  And  so,  with  drums  or  without,  they  recite  in  a  singing  tone  their 
memories  and  past  histories,  and  relate  in  these  recitations  the  deeds  of  the 
great  chieftains  .  .  .  Sometimes,  they  change  the  melody  and  step  of  the  dance, 
and  tell  a  new  story,  or  the  same  story  to  a  new  tune.  In  1520,  Queen 
Anacaona,  wife  of  a  native  chief  named  Caonabo,  danced  an  Areito;  and  in 
this  dance  more  than  three  hundred  damsels  took  part.  While  they  danced  and 
sang,  other  Indian  maidens  passed  drinks  around  to  the  dancers.  When  a  dancer 
becomes  intoxicated,  he  falls  out,  while  others  keep  dancing,  so  that  drunkenness 
sets  the  end  of  the  Areito,  This  happens  at  Areitos  celebrating  marriages,  deaths 
and  battles;  on  other  occasions,  Areitos  are  danced  without  getting  drunk. 

Further  testimony  as  to  the  native  love  for  dance  and  song  is  found  in 
Historia  de  las  Indies  by  Bartolome  de  las  Casas,  the  sixteenth  century 
Spanish  bishop  known  as  ‘‘^the  Apostle  of  the  Indians”:  “The  Indians  of 
the  island  of  Santo  Domingo  are  very  fond  of  dancing,  and  in  order  to 
keep  time  and  to  mark  step,  they  flourish  cleverly  made  rattles  with  peb¬ 
bles  inside,  which  produce  a  rather  raucous  sound.” 

Bartolome  de  las  Casas  was  also  the  first  to  give  a  performance  of  a 
religious  musical  work  in  the  New  World.  In  1510,  he  celebrated  Mass, 
with  the  participation  of  a  chorus,  in  the  church  of  the  town  of  La  Vega. 

The  first  musician  born  in  the  western  hemisphere  was  also  a  native  of 
Santo  Domingo,  Cristobal  de  Llerena,  the  organist  at  the  Cathedral  of 
Santo  Domingo  in  the  latter  part  of  the  sixteenth  century.  He  was  an 
educated  musician,  described,  in  a  letter  written  to  Philip  II  of  Spain,  as 
“a  man  of  rare  ability,  who  knows  enough  Latin  to  qualify  for  the  position 
of  Professor  at  the  University  of  Salamanca,  and  enough  music  to  be  a 
choirmaster  at  the  Chapel  of  Toledo.” 

Spanish  music  was  for  centuries  a  dominating  influence  in  Santo 
Domingo,  first  through  the  Church,  and  then  through  the  importation 
of  Spanish  popular  dances  and  the  spread  of  the  Spanish  guitar.  So  strong 
was  the  spirit  of  music-making  in  colonial  Santo  Domingo  that  in  times  of 
stress  music  had  to  be  banned  in  the  streets.  In  1813,  the  Spanish  Governor 


190  MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

of  Santo  Domingo  issued  an  order  forbidding  “the  performance  of 
serenades  and  songs  to  the  sound  of  the  guitar  after  ten  o’clock  at  night. 

With  the  importation  of  African  slaves  into  the  West  Indies,  the  songs 
and  dances  of  the  islands  began  to  acquire  a  rhythmic  accent  characteristic 
of  Negro  music.  The  extent  of  this  influence  is  disputed  by  Dominican 
musicologists.  Florida  de  Nolasco,  in  her  valuable  essay,  Muska  en  Santo 
Domingo  (Ciudad  Trujillo,  1 939) ,  writes:  “Our  songs  stem  from  Spanish 
rhythms  .  .  .  Even  should  we  admit  that  our  musical  folklore  is  the 
product  of  a  double  culture,  the  Spanish  and  the  African,  the  art  invariably 
follows  a  nobler  and  purer  strain.  Dominican  folk  music  is  Spanish  music 
adjusted  to  native  tastes,  and  it  is  only  by  accident  that  it  is  affected  by 

the  savage  African  rhythms.”  _  _  ^ 

On  the  other  hand,  the  late  Afro-Dominican  musician  Esteban  Pena 
Morell  sees  in  the  Negro  contribution  a  legitimate  part  of  the  national  art. 
Another  Dominican  musician,  Julio  Arzeno,  in  his  posthumous  book 
Del  Folklore  Musical  Dominicano  ( 1927),  writes:  “We  must  relinquish 
alien  rhythms.  We  must  become  Dominican  musicians,  not  German  or 
Puerto  Rican.  We  must  create  an  art  based  on  the  natural  and  spontaneous 
resources  of  our  vigorous  native  music.”  Enrique  de  Marchena,  the  fore¬ 
most  Dominican  music  scholar  and  composer,  in  his  book  Del  Areito^  de 
Anacaona  al  Poema  Folklorico  (1942),  asserts  that  “every  Dominican 
musician  instinctively  writes  music  that  is  Dominican.” 

The  national  “singing  dance”  of  the  Dominican  Republic  is  the 
Merengue.  It  is  a  gay  air,  symmetrically  constructed  of  two  periods  of 
sixteen  bars  each,  in  two-four  time.  The  first  section  is  usually  in  a  major 
key,  and  the  second  in  the  major  dominant,  or  in  the  relative  minor  key, 
with  the  return  to  the  original  key  indicated  in  the  cadence.  The  rhythm 
is  characterized  by  moderate  syncopation. 

The  typical  Merengue  contains  a  short  introduction,  called  Paseo,  or 
promenade,  and  interludes,  called  Jaleo.  A  detailed  description  of  the 
Merengue  is  found  in  a  paper  by  Dr.  Pedro  Henriquez  Urena,  Musica 
Pofular  de  America,  published  by  the  Biblioteca  del  Colegio  Nacional 
de  la  Universidad  de  la  Plata,  Volume  I,  I930- 

The  origin  of  the  Flerengue  is  uncertain.  Some  believe  it  was  imported 
from  Cuba  by  the  Negro  slaves,  others  that  it  originated  in  Puerto  Rico 
or  in  Haiti.  Pena  Morell  asserts  that  there  is  a  verb  Merenguearse,  to 
dance  with  great  abandon,  and  that  the  word  Merengue  is  a  noun  derived 
from  that  verb. 

Among  other  Dominican  airs,  the  Punto  Cibaeno  (a  Punto  from  the 


DOMINICAN  REPUBLIC 


191 

province  of  Cibao)  is  similar  to  the  Merenguey  but  is  cast  In  a  ternary 
form,  so  that  the  first  section  is  repeated.  The  Barcarola  Criolla  (a  native 
Barcarolla)  follows  the  European  model  with  some  slight  syncopation. 
The  Dominican  Bolero  is  identical  with  the  Cuban  Bolero y  and  is  in  two- 
four  time,  whereas  the  classical  Spanish  Bolero  is  always  in  three-four  time. 

Among  the  native  dances  now  obsolete  is  the  ManguUnay  which,  when 
played  rapidly,  resembles  a  Tarantella.  Then  there  is  a  Tonada  Ma- 
guaneray  from  the  province  of  Maguana3  the  Zafateado  MontunOy  a 
“shoe-dance,”  also  known  as  the  Sarambo;  and  the  Media-Tunay  a  lively 
air,  often  sung  by  laborers  going  to  work. 

The  topical  ballads  of  the  Dominican  Republic,  similar  to  the  Mexican 
Corridosy  are  interesting  in  that  they  often  reflect  the  popular  reaction 
to  historical  events.  The  American  intervention  of  1916,  for  instance,  is 
remembered  in  the  following  quatrain: 

Vinieron  los  Americanos 
A  cojer  la  forialezay 
Y  mataron  al  cafitan 
De  un  balazo  a  la  cabeza. 

The  “father  of  Dominican  music”  was  Juan  Bautista  Alfonseca  (i8io- 
1875).  He  was  the  first  to  make  use  of  national  folklore  in  his  music.  He 
was  also  the  author  of  the  first  National  Anthem,  Himno  de  la  In- 
defendencia.  His  pupil,  Jose  Reyes  ( 1835-1905),  continued  the  national 
tradition  established  by  Alfonseca.  Among  other  nineteenth-century 
Dominican  composers  are  Alfredo  Maximo  Soler,  who  wrote  music  in 
a  light  vein  5  Pablo  Claudio,  the  author  of  two  operas  and  over  seven 
hundred  other  works;  and  Jose  Marfa  Arredondo,  the  composer  of  a 
number  of  popular  dances. 

The  names  of  two  Dominican-born  sisters  have  been  retained  in  the 
annals  of  native  music.  One,  Julieta  Licairac  Abreu  (1890—1925),  wrote 
piano  music,  somewhat  Chopinesque  in  character.  Her  sister,  Lucila,  a 
child  prodigy,  was  born  on  February  21,  1895,  and  died  on  November 
21,  1901,  at  the  age  of  six  years  and  nine  months.  Her  naive  improvisa¬ 
tions  were  collected  and  published  by  the  family. 

The  state  of  music  in  the  Dominican  Republic  has  now  advanced  to  an 
astonishing  degree.  Ciudad  Trujillo,  the  capital,  possesses  its  own  Sym¬ 
phony  Orchestra,  which  was  inaugurated  on  October  23,  1^4.1,  under  the 
direction  of  the  Spanish  musician  Enrique  Casal  Chapf,  in  a  program  of 
works  by  native  musicians.  In  order  to  encourage  creative  composition,  the 


I9Z  MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

government  of  the  Republic  announced  a  music  contest  for  the  best  works 
in  all  genres  by  native  musicians,  held  on  the  occasion  of  the  centennial  of 
Dominican  Independence,  in  February  I944-  The  largest  prize,  for  an 

orchestral  work,  was  one  thousand  American  dollars.  .  ,  ,  , 

The  cause  of  musical  education  in  Santo  Domingo  received  further 
encouragement  with  the  establishment,  in  1941,  of  the  National  Con¬ 
servatory  of  Music.  Ciudad  Trujillo  also  possesses  a  powerful  radio  station 
HIN  y  HIlNj  with  Enrique  de  Marchena  in  charge  o£  the  musical 

^  Two  albums  of  Dominican  popular  songs  and  dances  have  been  pub¬ 
lished  in  New  York  by  the  Famous  Music  Corporation  and  the  Alpha 
Music  Company.  An  excellent  collection  of  sixty-four  Dominican  airs. 
La  Patria  en  la  Cancion,  compiled  by  Emilio  Jimenez,  was  publishe 
in  Barcelona  in  1933,  but  it  is  now  out  of  print.  Similarly  unavailable  is 
Julio  Arzeno’s  treatise  Del  Folklore  Musical  Dominicano.  An  authorita¬ 
tive  report  on  the  state  of  music  in  the  Dominican  Republic  by  J.  M. 
Coopersmith  is  published  in  the  January  and  April,  1945,  issues  of  The 

Musical  Quarterly. 


MUSICIANS  OF  THE  DOMINICAN  REPUBLIC 

One  of  the  most  prolific  of  Dominican  musicians  was  Clodomiro 
Arredondo-Miura  (1864-1935)-  He  wrote  religious  music  as  well 
as  marches,  waltzes,  and  indigenous  barcarollas.  His  son,  Horacio 
Arredondo-Sosa  (born  in  1912),  is  also  a  musician,  and  has  compiled, 
in  association  with  Jose  G.  Ramirez-Peralta,  a  collection  of  popular 
Dominican  airs  published  by  the  Alpha  Music  Corporation  m  New 
York. 

The  youthful  Bienvenido  Bustamente  (1924 - )  studied  music  with 

his  father,  Jose  Maria  Bustamente  (1867-1940)-  His  orchestral  Fantasia 
was  performed  in  his  native  city,  San  Pedro  de  Macons,  on  August  i6, 
1942,  when  the  composer  was  eighteen  years  old. 

Jose  Dolores  Ceron  (1897 - ),  a  Negro  musician,  studied  with 

Jose  de  Jesus  Ravelo  and  Pena  Morell.  Cer6n  has  wntten  popular 
music,  as  well  as  symphonic  compositions.  His  symphonic  poem  Ennqmllo 
(named  after  a  sixteenth-century  Indian  chief)  was  performed  at  the 
inaugural  concert  of  the  Orquesta  Sinfonka  Nacional  in  Ciudad  Trujillo, 
on  October  23,  1941. 


DOMINICAN  REPUBLIC 


193 


Enrique  Casal  Chapi  (1909 - ),  naturalized  in  Santo  Domingo,  came 

originally  from  Madrid  in  Spain.  His  grandfather  was  Ruperto  Casal 
Chapi,  the  well-known  composer  of  Zarzuelas.  Casal  Chap:  studied  at 
the  Madrid  Conservatory,  and  graduated  in  193^:  when  he  was  twenty- 
seven,  in  the  class  of  composition  of  Conrado  del  Campo.  He  was  active 
in  the  cultural  life  of  the  Spanish  Republic,  and  upon  the  defeat  of  the 
Loyalists  made  his  way  on  foot  to  the  French  frontier.  He  finally  found 
refuge  in  the  Dominican  Republic,  where  he  arrived  on  April  21,  1940. 
On  August  5,  1941,  he  was  appointed  conductor  of  the  newly  founded 
Qr^uesta  Sinfonica  N acional  in  Ciudad  Trujillo.  He  has  established  a 
policy  of  encouraging  native  composers,  several  of  whom  have  studied 
with  him.  Of  his  own  orchestral  works,  Casal  Chapi  has  conducted  an 
Overture  (November  30,  1942).  He  writes  in  an  advanced  modern  style, 
marked  by  technical  mastery. 

Gabriel  Del  Orbe  (1888 - ),  who  has  written  over  one  hundred 

violin  pieces,  is  a  native  of  Moca,  Santo  Domingo.  He  studied  in  Germany, 
where  he  gave  violin  recitals.  Upon  return  to  his  native  land,  he  was  ap¬ 
pointed  instructor  in  violin  at  the  Conservatory  in  Ciudad  Trujillo. 

The  composer  of  popular  music,  Juan  Bautista  Espinola  y  Reyes 
(1894-1923)  was  a  native  of  La  Vega.  He  played  the  clarinet  in  military 
bands,  and  composed  more  than  five  hundred  pieces  in  the  popular  vein— 
merengues,  waltzes,  and  barcarollas. 

Juan  Francisco  Garcia  (1892 - )  was  born  in  Santiago  de  los  Caba¬ 

lleros.  He  was  largely  self-taught,  but  acquired  a  solid  technique  of  com¬ 
position  which  enable  him  to  write  in  symphonic  forms.  His  First  Sym- 
fhony,  subtitled  Sinfonia  Quisqueya  {Quisqueya  is  the  ancient  name  of 
the  island  of  Santo  Domingo)  was  performed  in  Ciudad  Trujillo  on 
March  28,  1941,  and  his  Scherzo  Clasico  on  October  23,  1941-  Garcia’s 
Second  Symfhony  received  the  first  prize  at  the  Dominican  national 
contest  for  the  best  symphonic  composition  in  1944.  In  April,  I944>  Garcfa 
was  appointed  director  of  the  Conservatory  of  Ciudad  Trujillo.  Apart 
from  his  symphonic  works,  Garcfa  has  written  a  number  of  dances  in  the 
popular  style,  and  has  introduced  new  forms  of  native  compositions, 
Sambumbia,  or  a  Dominican  Rhapsody,  and  Melodanza,  a  melodic  dance 
in  the  native  vein.  A  collection  of  his  piano  pieces,  Ritmos  Quisqueyanos, 
was  published  in  New  York  in  192,7. 

Julio  Alberto  Hernandez  (1900 - ),  saxophonist  and  composer  of 

popular  music,  is  a  native  of  Santiago  de  los  Caballeros.  He  studied  the 


194 


MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

saxophone,  and  acquired  practical  knowledge  of  the  orchestra  as  ^  ^a^"^ 
conductor.  He  has  compiled  a  valuable  collection,  Album  de  Musica 

Nacional 

Rafael  Ignacio  (1897 - )  played  the  trumpet,  flute,  and  double- 

bass  in  military  bands,  and  later  conducted  a  dance  orchestra  called  Amores 
y  Amorios.  After  a  period  of  musical  activities  m  Ciudad  Trujillo,  the 
capital,  Rafael  Ignacio  was  appointed  in  1941  assistant  conductor  o  the 
military  band  in  Santiago  de  los  Caballeros.  Ignacio  is  the  author  0  a 
Symphony  in  C  minor,  and  Suite  FolkUrka,  based  on  native  themes.  He 
has  also  written  numerous  popular  dances  and  songs. 

Manuel  de  Jesus  Lovelace  (1871 - )  learned  the  rudiments  of 

music  by  playing  the  piccolo  in  military  bands.  He  is  the  author  of  nu¬ 
merous  popular  dances.  Of  his  larger  works,  Escenas  Dommtcanas,  for 
orchestra  in  three  movements,  reflects  the  folkways  of  Santo  Domingo. 

Enrique  de  Marchena  (1908 - )  studied  composition  with  Esteban 

Pena  Morell  in  Santo  Domingo.  Marchena’s  style  of  writing  is  romantic, 
with  touches  of  impressionistic  color.  He  has  written  over  one  hundred 
piano  pieces,  a  symphonic  poem  Arco  Iris,  and  a  Concerto  for  Violin  and 
Orchestra.  His  Suite  de  Imagenes,  in  three  movements,  inspired  by  na¬ 
tive  folklore,  was  performed  for  the  first  time  by  the  Orquesta  Naaond 
in  Ciudad  Trujillo  on  April  29,  1942-  Since  1930,  Marchena  has  been 
the  music  critic  of  Eist'm  Diario.  He  is  also  in  charge  of  the  musical  pro¬ 
grams  of  the  Dominican  radio  station  HIN  y  HI  IN  in  Ciudad  Trujillo. 
In  1943  he  made  a  lecture  tour  in  the  United  States.  In  his  book,  Del 
Areito  de  Anacaona  d  Poema  Folklorico  (1942),  Marchena  traces  the 
history  of  folk  music  in  Santo  Domingo  from  the  days  of  the  legendary 
Queen  Anacaona  to  the  present  time.  The  orchestral  score  of  Marchena  s 
Suite  de  Imagenes  is  included  in  the  Fleisher  Collection  in  Philadelphia. 

Enrique  Mejia-Arredondo  (1901- — )  studied  with  his  grandfather, 
Jose  Maria  Arredondo.  His  Symphony  in  A  major,  performed  on  October 
23,  1941,  at  the  inaugural  concert  of  the  Orquesta  Sinjonica  Nacional  in 
Ciudad  Trujillo,  has  a  program  relating  to  the  civil  war  in  Santo  Domingo 
in  1863.  His  Second  Symphony,  Sinjonta  de  LuZy  is  romantic  in  essence. 
The  symphonic  poem  Renacimiento  pictures  the  work  of  recovery  after  the 
hurricane  that  struck  the  island  on  September  3,  I930-  Evocaciones,  a 
suite  of  three  orchestral  pieces,  was  performed  in  Ciudad  Trujillo  on 


DOMINICAN  REPUBLIC 


I9S 


February  23,  1942.  While  Mejia- Arredondo’s  harmonic  style  is  not  ad¬ 
vanced,  and  the  instrumentation  is  conventional,  his  music  presents  in¬ 
terest  from  a  folkloric  standpoint.  Two  of  his  Danzas  Quisqueyanas  and 
En  el  Temflo  de  Yocari  for  piano  have  been  published  by  the  Alpha 
Corporation  in  New  York. 

Luis  E.  Mena  (1895 - )  studied  with  Jose  de  Jesus  Ravelo,  and  has 

acquired  an  adequate  technique  of  composition.  Mena  has  written  religious, 
symphonic,  and  popular  music.  For  the  orchestra,  he  has  composed  a  Sin- 
jonia  de  Juguetes,  based  on  the  themes  of  children’s  games,  an  Overture 
(performed  by  th.t  Orquesta  Sinfonica  Nacioml  in  Ciudad  Trujillo  on 
October  23,  1941),  two  symphonic  dances,  a  Sinfonia  Giocosa,  a  Suite  for 
flute  and  string  orchestra,  and  Homage  to  the  Dominican  National  An¬ 
thems,  in  which  he  incorporated  two  old  anthems,  and  the  present  official 
anthem  of  the  Republic.  Mena’s  capriccio  for  piano,  EUla,  is  published  by 
the  Alpha  Music  Corporation  in  New  York. 

Ramon  Emilio  Peralta  (1868-1941)  was  a  composer  of  popular 
music.  His  list  of  compositions  includes  twenty-five  Danzas,  seven  waltzes, 
five  mazurkas,  three  operettas,  and  also  polkas,  marches,  and  habaneras. 

Rafael  Petiton  Guzman  is  a  Dominican  who,  since  1939,  has  been  liv¬ 
ing  in  New  York.  Guzman  is  a  native  of  Salcedo,  where  he  was  born  on 
December  18,  1894.  He  has  composed  numerous  popular  dances  and  a 
Suite  Antiliana,  in  three  movements,  reflecting  the  folklore  of  Puerto 
Rico,  Cuba,  and  Santo  Domingo. 

Jose  de  Jesus  Ravelo  (1876 - )  has  written  over  two  hundred  com¬ 

positions  of  various  types,  all  in  a  traditional  European  style.  EQs  oratorio. 
La  Muerte  de  Cristo,  published  by  Schirmer,  bears  the  opus  number  144. 
It  was  performed  on  April  7,  1939,  at  the  Basilica  of  the  Santa  Maria 
Cathedral  in  Ciudad  Trujillo. 

Luis  Rivera  (1902 - )  studied  violin  and  piano.  As  a  composer,  he 

cultivates  the  native  folklore.  His  Poema  Indio  for  orchestra,  baritone,  and 
narrator  was  performed  by  the  Orquesta  Sinfonica  Nacional  in  Ciudad 
Trujillo  on  July  29, 1942.  He  has  also  written  two  Dominican  Rhapsodies 
for  piano  and  orchestra,  the  first  of  which  was  performed  in  Ciudad 
Trujillo  on  September  23,  I94i- 

Fernando  A.  Rueda  (1859-1939),  the  composer  of  salon  music,  was 
a  native  of  Santo  Domingo.  He  wrote  a  number  of  popular  dances  for 


196  MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

the  military  band,  of  which  Boda,  de  Oro,  first  performed  in  Santo 
Domingo  on  August  1 6,  1913,  is  still  widely  popular  in  the  Dominican 

Republic. 

Manuel  Simo  (1916 - )  played  in  a  military  band,  and  later  in  the 

Orquesta  Sinjonka  Nacional  in  Ciudad  Trujillo.  He  studied  with  Casal 
Chapi,  and  has  shown  interest  in  contrapuntal  constructions.  He  has  written 
short  pieces  for  piano,  and  a  symphonic  composition.  Pastoral. 

Esteban  Pena  Morell  (i894-i939)j  ^  Negro  musician,  was  born 
in  Santo  Domingo  5  died  in  Barcelona,  Spain.  He  fought  in  the  Revolution 
of  1 9 1 3 ,  and  w'as  wounded  seven  times.  At  one  time  he  played  the  bassoon 
in  the  Havana  Philharmonic  Orchestra.  He  has  written  a  symphonic 
poem,  Anacaona,  and  a  Sinjonta  Barbara  for  military  band,  in  which  he 
makes  use  of  special  percussion  effects.  His  compilation  of  native  folk 
songs,  La  Folklo-Musica  Dominicam,  was  to  have  been  published  in 
1930,  but  the  catastrophic  cyclone  that  struck  the  island  on  September 
third  of  that  year  frustrated  the  plans. 

Augusto  Vega  (1885 - )  has  written  an  orchestral  suite  based  on 

native  themes,  entitled  Folklore  Smjonko-,  an  overture,  Duarte.,  portray¬ 
ing  the  patriotic  deeds  of  a  hero  of  the  Dominican  wars  for  independence; 
an  opera.  Indigent;  and  songs. 


Ecuador 


.  .  .  Concedio  hellos  fresentes 
Providencia  a  las  gentes 
Del  Ecuador  feliz  .  .  . 

[andres  bello] 


Ecuador  takes  its  name  from  its  geographical  position  astride  the  Equator. 
The  country  presents  a  great  variety  of  climatic  and  topographical  conditions, 
from  the  jungle  lowlands  to  the  forbidding  mountain  landscapes.  Ecuador  s 
population  is  about  three  million,  the  Indians  being  in  considerable  majority.  The 
capital,  Quito,  is  one  of  the  highest  cities  in  the  world,  nearly  two  miles  up  m 

the  air. 


197 


ECUADOR 

The  folklore  of  Ecuador  is  part  of  the  ancient  culture  of  the  Andean 
plateau,  which  includes  contemporary  Peru  and  Bolivia.  Here,  the  In¬ 
dians  still  live  in  primeval  isolation  in  their  mountain  retreats.  This  isola¬ 
tion  has  largely  contributed  to  the  preservation  of  ancient  melodies,  un¬ 
trammeled  by  post-Columbian  influences.  Padre  Raimundo  M.  Monteros 
has  published  a  number  of  Indian  melodies  from  the  eastern  part  of 
Ecuador  in  a  brochure  entitled  ISdusica  Autoctona  del  Orients  Ecuatoriano 
(Quito,  1942).  The  intervallic  structure  of  most  of  these  melodies  is 
rudimentary,  and  the  pentatonic  scale  is  never  complete. 


Indian  Melodies  from  Ecuador  {Padre  Monteros) 


At  a  more  advanced  stage  of  melodic  development,  the  native  chants 
of  Ecuador  adhere  to  the  pentatonic  scale.  Many  such  melodies  are  found 
in  the  essay  on  Ecuadorian  music  by  Segundo  Luis  Moreno,  published  in 
the  second  volume  of  El  Ecuador  en  Cien  Anos  de  Inde-pendencia  (Quito, 
1930),  and  in  La  Musique  des  Incas  et  ses  Survivances  (Paris,  1925),  by 

d’Harcourt.  _  _  . 

With  the  advent  of  the  Conquistadores,  the  aboriginal  pentatonic  scale 
was  extended  to  the  seven-tone  scale.  Minor  keys  are  more  commonly 
employed  in  Ecuador’s  folk  music  than  the  major,  a  circumstance  that 
some  consider  a  sign  of  decadence.  The  historical  explanation  of  the 
prevalence  of  minor  modes  in  Ecuador’s  music  is  that  ancient  chants  of 
the  Indians  often  begin  with  the  interval  of  a  minor  third,  which  influenced 
the  formation  of  later  folk  songs  in  the  direction  of  minor  tonality. 

The  rhythm  of  Ecuador’s  folk  music  is  Hispanic  in  character.  The 
meter  is  characteristic:  it  is  dual  three-four  and  six-eight  time,  which  is 
assimilated  into  two-four  time  by  the  conversion  of  six-eight  into  two 


198 


MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

groups  of  duplets.  The  Negro  element,  so  strong  in  the  music  of  the 
West  Indies  and  Brazil,  is  here  negligible.  ^ 

The  national  air  of  Ecuador  is  the  Sanjuamto,  named  after  Ecuador  s 
patron  saint,  St.  John.  The  music  of  the  Sanjuanito  is  invariably  cast  m  a 
minor  key,  in  two-four  time.  Its  rhythm  is  characterized  by  mild  syncopa¬ 
tion,  and  the  conversion  of  a  syncopated  group  of  a  sixteenth-note,  an 
eighth-note,  and  a  sixteenth-note  into  a  triplet  figure  is  common. 

The  Pasillo,  which  is  indigenous  to  the  entire  NorA  of  the  South 
American  continent,  assumes  in  Ecuador  a  minor  tonality,  whereas  the 
Colombian  Pasillos  are  mostly  in  the  major.  The  Yarawi,  a  melancholy 
Indian  song,  is  also  heard  in  Ecuador’s  highlands. 

Other  airs  peculiar  to  Ecuador  are  the  Pasacalle  (not  to  be  confused 
with  the  classical  PassacagUa)  of  Bolivian  origin,  the  Danzante  and  the 
Guaranda,  which  are  festival  dances,  and  an  Indian  air,  the  Cachullap. 
These  airs  are  in  six-eight  or  two-four  time.  Popular  among  Ecuador’s 
Negroes  is  a  sentimental  ballad  Amor  Pino,  which  is  embellished  with 
considerable  syncopation. 

Several  hybrid  musical  forms  in  Ecuador’s  folklore  are  a  product  of 
assimilation  of  native  rhythms  and  European  dances.  Such  is,  for  instance, 
the  Pasillo-Mazurka,  which  preserves  the  character  of  the  South  American 
Pasillo,  while  retaining  the  rhythmic  cadence  of  the  Mazurka,  with  its 
typical  accent  on  the  second  beat.  The  Americanization  of  the  native 
Sanjuanito  results  in  a  ludicrous  creation  named  Foxtrot  Incaico. 

These  airs  are  sung  and  danced  to  the  accompaniment  of  the  guitar^  or 
harp.  The  typical  instrument  of  native  origin  is  the  Rondador,  a  panpipe 
made  of  a  series  of  bamboo  reeds  or  condor  feathers.  Also  popular  among 
the  natives  are  vertical  flutes,  known  under  the  generic  name  of  Pingullo. 
The  Cuban  Maracas  is  called  Chil-Chil  in  Ecuador. 

The  cultivation  of  serious  music  in  Ecuador  lags  behind  the  rich  de¬ 
velopment  of  folk  music.  An  interesting  account  of  the  status  of  music  in 
Ecuador  a  hundred  years  ago  is  found  in  Four  Years  Among  Spanish 
Americans  (New  York,  1868),  by  F.  Hassaurek,  who  served  as  United 
States  Minister  to  Ecuador.  He  writes: 

There  are  about  one  hundred  and  twenty  pianos  in  Quito,  very  indifferently 
tuned;  but  there  are  very  few  ladies  who  play  well.  The  guitar  and  the  harp 
are  great  favorites,  especially  with  the  middle  and  lower  classes;  but  a  woman 
who  plays  either  of  these  instruments  scarcely  ever  knows  a  note.  Her  stock  of 
music  is  therefore  easily  exhausted,  whenever  she  is  called  upon  for  songs. 


ECUADOR 


199 


Moreover,  they  sing  chiefly  through  the  nose,  especially  when  they  sing  one  of 
their  national  tunes. 

Some  information  of  the  history  of  music  in  Ecuador  is  found  in  the 
essay  by  Segundo  Moreno  in  the  centennial  edition  El  Ecuador  en  Cien 
Anos  de  Indefendencia,  Here  are  a  few  salient  points.  The  first  church 
organ  in  Ecuador  was  installed  in  the  Cathedral  of  Cuenca  in  1730?  is 
still  in  practical  use.  The  first  national  conservatory  was  founded  in  Quito 
by  the  government  decree  of  February  28,  1870.  Its  first  director  was 
Antonio  Neumane,  a  native-born  musician  of  German  extraction^  and 
the  author  of  EcuadoFs  National  Anthem.  The  Italian  musician  Domenico 
Brescia,  who  was  director  of  the  Conservatory  between  1903  and  191 1  and 
who  wrote  an  Ecuadorian  Symfhony y  was  the  first  to  cultivate  native 
folklore  in  serious  composition.  Among  Brescia^s  disciples,  Segundo  Luis 
Moreno  and  Luis  H.  Salgado  have  distinguished  themselves  in  the  field 
of  native-inspired  composition.  The  name  of  Pedro  Traversari,  pedagogue 
and  composer,  should  also  be  mentioned. 

MUSICIANS  OF  ECUADOR 

Segundo  Luis  Moreno  (1882 - )  in  1906  entered  the  Conservatory 

of  Quito,  where  he  studied  composition  with  Domenico  Brescia.  Having 
completed  his  studies,  he  joined  the  faculty  of  the  Conservatory  and  was 
also  appointed  leader  of  the  military  band  in  Quito.  He  has  composed 
numerous  piano  pieces  and  songs,  as  well  as  popular  dances.  For  the 
orchestra,  he  has  written  a  Preludioy  first  performed  in  Quito  on  July 
20,  1910  j  an  overture  10  de  AgostOy  performed  in  Quito  on  July  4,  19115 
an  Overture  p  de  Julio y  dedicated  to  the  leader  of  the  revolution  of  July 
9,  19255  and— his  most  important  work — Suite  Ecuatorianay  composed  in 
1922,  and  performed  in  Cuenca  on  July  24,  1940.  These  scores,  as  well 
as  a  symphonic  march,  Ea  Coronaciony  are  included  in  the  Fleisher  Collec¬ 
tion  of  Philadelphia.  Segundo  Moreno  is  the  author  of  an  exhaustive 
treatise  on  Ecuadorean  folklore  and  music  history,  in  three  large  sec¬ 
tions,  of  which  the  first  is  published  in  the  now  rare  edition,  El  Ecuador 
en  Cien  Anos  de  Indefendencia  (1930). 

Luis  H.  Salgado  (1903 - )  received  private  instruction  in  pianoforte 

and  composition  from  his  father.  In  1928  he  was  graduated  from  the 
Conservatory  of  Quito  as  a  pianist,  and  later  became  instructor  of  harmony 
and  musical  dictation  at  the  Conservatory.  Salgado  has  written  prolifically 


200 


MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

in  all  forms.  His  symphonic  suite,  Atahualfa^  or  the  Sunset  of  an  Emfire^ 
was  first  performed  in  Quito  under  his  direction  on  August  29,  1933. 
Salgado’s  style  of  composition,  while  not  advanced,  possesses  a  certain 
element  of  sophistication.  His  orchestral  dance,  Pasillo-IntermezzOy  is 
included  in  the  Fleisher  Collection  of  Philadelphia. 

Pedro  Traversari  (1874 - )  studied  in  Ecuador  and  in  Italy.  In 

1898,  he  was  engaged  by  the  Chilean  government  as  instructor  at  the 
National  Conservatory  in  Santiago.  From  1915  to  1923  he  was  director 
of  the  Quito  Conservatory.  Traversari  has  written  a  symphonic  suite, 
Glorias  Andinasy  which  he  conducted  in  Quito  on  August  14,  1930,  on 
the  occasion  of  the  Centenary  of  Ecuador’s  Independence.  He  has  further 
written  several  ^findigenous  melodramas,”  whose  titles  reflect  the  native 
folklore:  Cumanduy  or  the  Virgin  of  the  Jungle;  The  Profhecy  of  Huira- 
cochas  and  KizkiZy  or  the  Last  Exponent  of  the  Inca  Spirit,  The  style  of 
his  music  is  entirely  within  the  academic  tradition.  The  orchestral  scores 
of  Traversari’s  Triptico  Indoandino  and  Himno  Pentafonico  are  included 
in  the  Fleisher  Collection  of  Philadelphia.  Traversari  is  the  owner  of  a 
valuable  collection  of  pre-Columbian  native  instruments. 


Guatemala 

I  Guatemala  felizf 

[from  GUATEMALA’S  NATIONAL  ANTHEM] 


The  aboriginal  name  of  Guatemala  is  Quauhitemallan,  which  means  “full 
of  trees.”  Guatemala  lies  between  Honduras  and  Mexico.  Its  population 
numbers  33300,000  inhabitants,  of  which  60  per  cent  are  Indians. 

To  the  musical  world,  Guatemala  is  known  as  the  land  of  the  Marimba y 
a  picturesque  native  instrument  which  consists  of  a  series  of  bars  and  keys, 
made  of  sonorous  wood,  with  gourds  of  different  sizes  suspended  under¬ 
neath  for  resonance.  Jesus  Castillo,  the  foremost  musicologist  of  Guate¬ 
mala,  submits  as  proof  of  the  native  origin  of  the  Marimba  the  fact  that 


201 


GUATEMALA 
there  is  in  Guatemala  a  mountain  named  Chinal  Jul,  which  means,  in  the 

native  dialect,  “the  of  the  Ravines.”  „  r'  .  1 

Other  native  instruments  of  Guatemala  are  common  to  all  Oentral 
America.  They  are  the  Zu  or  Xul,  which  is  a  vertical  flute;  a  small  win 
instrument  named  Tzijolaj;  the  Chirimia,  which  is  the  general  name  tor 
clarinet-like  wind  instruments;  the  Tun  or  Tefonaxtle,  which  is  a  rurn 
made  of  a  hollowed-out  tree  trunk;  and  the  Tot,  which  is  an  mcrustated 

shell. 

Jesus  Castillo  has  classified  the  aboriginal  melodies  of  the  Quiche 
Indians  of  Guatemala  into  six  categories.  The  first  is  characterized  by  a 
progression  of  five  notes,  in  whole  tones.  The  second  and  the  third  are 
identical  with  four  notes  (the  dominant,  tonic,  supertonic,  and  mediant) 
of  the  major  scale;  the  fourth  is  a  minor  hexachord;  the  fifth  is  com¬ 
posed  of  elements  of  major  and  minor  scales;  and  the  sixth  represents  the 
descending  scale  in  the  Mixolydian  mode,  with  a  semitone  below  the  final 
note. 


Six  Basic  Types  of  Quiche  Melodies  of  Guatemala  and  Their  Scale 
Patterns  (Castillo) 


Andante 


202 


MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 


Six  Basic  Types  of  Quiche  Melodies  of  Guatemala  and  Their  Scale 
Patterns — Concluded  {Castillo) 


Castillo  propounds  an  interesting  hypothesis  regarding  the  origin  of 
some  of  these  primitive  scales,  namely  that  they  imitate  the  song  of  the 
Guatemalan  Cenzontle,  a  bird  of  the  thrush  family.  The  remarkable 
circumstance  is  that  these  birds  sing  along  the  tones  of  a  major  scale.  To 
quote  Castillo:  ^^Through  these  native  birds,  nature  has  placed  the  Indian 
in  contact  with  constructive  musical  elements.  The  song  of  these  birds 
lies  within  a  perfect  major  scale,  from  the  Dominant  to  the  Dominant, 
and  contains  intervals  of  the  second,  third,  fourth,  fifth,  and  the  sixth.  In 


203 


GUATEMALA 

the  song  of  these  birds  one  finds  syncopation,  rests,  holds,  rudimentary 
transitions  from  the  Dominant  to  the  Tonic,  and  even  modulations. 

The  present-day  popular  dances  in  Guatemala  are  mainly  nat^e  ver- 
sions  of  European  ballroom  dances.  The  only  native  air  is  Ae  Chapn, 
or  Son  GuatemaUeco,  as  it  is  also  called.  It  is  in  waltz  time,  with  cross¬ 
accentuation  resulting  through  the  superposition  of  six-eight  time  on  the 

basic  three-four  time  signature.  ^  ^  r  ■  u 

Music  history  in  Guatemala  is  not  rich  in  events  or  personalities,  bu 
some  names  have  been  retained  in  its  annals.  Guatemala’s  first  native- 
born  musician  of  merit  was  Don  Jose  Escolastico  Andrino,  who  was  active 
in  El  Salvador,  whither  he  went  about  1845.  Rafael  Gonzalez  Sol,  in  his 
Hisioria  del  Arte  de  la  Mmica  en  El  Salvador,^  quotes  the  opinion  of  a 
Guatemalan  musician  about  Andrino,  couched  in  terms  of  extravagant 
praise;  “Don  Jose  Escolastico  Andrino  was  a  colossus.  He  played  the 
violin  in  Havana,  and  he  was  also  a  great  composer.  Among  his  creations 
were  two  symphonies,  three  Masses,  and  an  opera.  The  Generous 

Mooress.”  ■  r-  ^  \  ■ 

A  nineteenth-century  harbinger  of  musical  culture  in  Central  AmerKa, 

and  in  Guatemala  in  particular,  was  the  Italian  musician  Juan  Aberle.  He 
taught  a  generation  of  native  musicians.  The  grateful  Government  be¬ 
stowed  upon  him  a  gold  medal  inscribed  “To  the  Prince  of  Central 

Americaa  Music.”  .  .  •  j  i  r-  i  4: 

The  first  native  musician  to  write  music  inspired  by  Guatemalan  tolK:- 

lore  was  Luis  Felipe  Arias,  who  possessed  a  European  education.  When 
he  was  assassinated  in  Guatemala  City  in  1904,  apparently  by  mistake,  the 
cause  of  native  music  suffered  a  setback  which  was  not  soon  ^remedied. 

The  Indian  folklore  of  Guatemala  is  cultivated  chiefly  by  Jesus  Castillo, 
who  has,  apart  from  his  musicological  labors,  written  the  first  Guatemalan 
opera  on  an  Indian  subject.  Quiche  Vinak.  Its  perforrnance  in  1924  was  a 
landmark  in  Guatemala’s  native  musical  culture.  Jesus  Castillo  has  also 
published  an  analytic  survey  of  Central  American  music  under  the  title, 
La  Musica  Maya-Quiche  ( 1941 ).  His  half-brother,  Ricardo  Castillo,  had 
the  benefit  of  musical  study  in  Paris.  He  has  written  a  suite  of  pieces, 
Guatemala,  in  which  native  rhythms  and  melodic  inflections  form  the 

thematic  foundation.  1  •  -d  m 

Technically,  the  best-equipped  native  composer  of  Guatemala  is  Kaul 
Paniagua,  whose  symphonic  poem.  The  Mayan  Legend,  2-  well- 
integrated  work  based  on  the  melo-rhythmic  elements  of  ancient  Indian 
music  of  Central  America.  Franz  Ippisch,  an  Austrian  musician  who 


204  MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

settled  in  Guatemala,  has  contributed  to  native  composition  by  selecting 
Guatemalan  Indian  themes  as  a  basis  of  his  Sinfoma  GuaterMlteca. 

Alberto  Mendoza  has  written  some  music  in  small  forms,  but  he  is 
chiefly  active  as  a  pedagogue  in  Guatemala  City.  Of  the  younger  genera¬ 
tion,  Salvador  Ley  merits  mention.  His  compositions,  however,  are  in 
the  European  manner,  without  reference  to  native  folklore. 

Jose  Molina  Pinillo  and  Felipe  Siliezar  have  written  some  instrumental 
music  in  the  native  manner.  Mariano  Valverde,  principally  known  as  a 
Marimba  player,  is  the  composer  of  popular  waltzes.  Julian  Paniagua, 
an  uncle  of  Raul  Paniagua,  has  written  songs  that  have  attained  consider¬ 
able  popularity  in  Central  America. 

In  a  class  by  himself  is  Jose  Castaneda,  an  experimenter  in  ultra-modern 
music.  In  1934  he  founded  in  Guatemala  City  an  orchestral  group 
significantly  named  Ars  Nova,  which  was  later  developed  into  a  sym¬ 
phony  orchestra  called  Orquesta  Progresista,  which  presented  its  first 
concert  on  January  7,  1936.  In  1944  the  Orquesta  Progresista  was  dis¬ 
continued,  and  a  new  organization  was  formed  in  its  place,  the  Orquesta 
F Harmonica  de  Guatemala,  which  gave  its  first  concert  on  September  8, 

1944- 

An  important  medium  of  musical  culture  and  education  is  the  radio 
station  La  Voz  de  Guatemala,  which  possesses  modern  equipment.  It 
maintains  a  regular  schedule  of  orchestral  and  instrumental  music,  and 
is  powerful  enough  to  be  heard  throughout  Central  America. 

MUSICIANS  OF  GUATEMALA 

One  of  the  first  cultured  musicians  of  Guatemala  was  Luis  Felipe  Arias 
(1870—1908)  who  was  assassinated  in  the  streets  of  Guatemala  City  on 
March  24,  1908,  possibly  by  mistake.  His  killers  were  apprehended  and 
sentenced  to  six  months  in  jail.  Arias,  whose  death  occurred  when  he  was 
thirty-eight  years  old,  was  educated  in  Europe.  He  was  active  as  a  teacher, 
and  left  several  compositions,  mostly  short  pieces.  The  orchestral  score 
of  his  Moorish  Dance  is  included  in  the  Fleisher  Collection  of  Philadel¬ 
phia. 

Jose  Castaneda  (1898 - )  is  a  versatile  musician  and  a  writer  in 

the  field  of  music.  When  Castaneda  returned  to  his  native  land,  after 
spending  some  time  in  Paris,  he  directed  for  a  brief  period  an  orchestral 
ensemble  Ars  Nova'm  Guatemala  City,  and  conducted  concerts  of  Latin 
American  music  in  New  York  at  the  World’s  Fair  in  1939.  In  his  the- 


GUATEMALA 

oretical  investigations,  Castaneda  has  developed  a  new  notation  of 
chromatic  tones,  dispensing  with  sharps  and  flats. 

Jesus  Castillo  (1877 - ),  composer  and  music  scholar,  studied  in 

his  native  city,  Quezaltenango,  and  has  always  been  devoted  to  the  cultiva¬ 
tion  of  native  music.  In  1896,  he  wrote  his  first  symphonic  work  based  on 
these  native  melodies,  ObertuTci  Indigenci.  Castillo’s  indigenous  opera 
Quiche  Vindk  was  performed  in  Guatemala  City  on  July  24,  i9‘245 
orchestration  of  Fabian  Rodriguez.  The  subject  of  the  opera  is  based  on 
the  ancient  prophecy  of  an  Indian  sorcerer  who  predicted  the  ruin  of  the 
Quiche  empire.  Later  Castillo  undertook  the  composition  of  another 
native  opera,  NictS^  and  a  ballet,  Guatema.  While  his  early  works  were 
quite  conventional  in  harmony  and  technically  inadequate,  he  later  en¬ 
larged  his  harmonic  vocabulary.  As  a  scholar,  Castillo  has  summarized  the 
results  of  his  research  in  a  brochure,  Ld  Musica  M.aya-Quiche  (194^)* 
Castillo’s  piano  pieces  from  the  suite  Pofol  Bu]  (Guatemalan  Indian 
sacred  book)  have  been  published  in  Paris.  The  following  orchestral 
works  by  Castillo  are  included  in  the  Fleisher  Collection  in  Philadelphia: 
Tecum  Overture from  the  Suite  Indlgew^  Prelude,  and  Hymn 
to  the  Sun, 

Ricardo  Castillo  (1891 - )  is  a  half-brother  of  Jesus  Castillo.  In 

19 1 1,  after  making  preliminary  studies  of  music  in  his  native  town,  Ricardo 
Castillo  went  to  Paris,  where  he  studied  with  Paul  Vidal.  During  World 
War  I,  he  enlisted  in  the  French  army,  and  in  1922  returned  to  Guate¬ 
mala.  His  compositions,  for  piano,  voice,  and  later  for  orchestra,  are  gen¬ 
erally  short  pieces,  notable  for  color  and  feeling  for  native  melos.  His 
suite  for  piano,  entitled  Gucitemdldy  was  published  in  Paris,  and  in  its 
orchestral  form  it  was  first  performed  on  November  8,  1934?  in  Guate¬ 
mala  City.  The  first  movement  of  Castillo’s  Symphony,  and  his  “sym¬ 
phonic  evocation,”  on  ancient  Mayan  themes,  were  performed  at 

the  concert  of  the  Orquesta  Filermonicd  de  Guntemci'lci^  in  Guatemala  City 
on  September  8,  1944.  The  following  orchestral  scores  by  Ricardo  Cas¬ 
tillo  are  in  the  Fleisher  Collection  of  Philadelphia:  La  Doncella  IxqulCy 
Guatemala^  La  Procesion,  and  the  Fairy  of  the  Blue  Mountain. 

Franz  Ippisch  ( 1883 - )>  Austrian  by  birth,  settled  in  Guatemala 

in  1938  5  his  flight  from  Austria  was  made  imperative  because  of  his  wife’s 
non-Aryan  background.  On  September  22,  1939?  'w^.s  named  Director 

General  de  Musicas  Marciales  in  Guatemala  City.  He  also  conducts  the 
ensemble  class  at  the  National  Conservatory  at  Guatemala  City.  Ippisch 


206  MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

is  the  composer  of  numerous  symphonic  works,  distinguished  by  a  solid 
mastery  of  the  medium,  albeit  in  an  academic  tradition.  As  a  tribute  to 
his  adopted  country,  he  composed  a  S'mjoma  Guatemaltecay  which  he 
conducted  on  September  13, 1941,  with  the  Orquesta  Progresista  of  Guate¬ 
mala  City.  Two  previous  symphonies,  a  Violin  Concerto,  an  Overture, 
much  chamber  music,  and  instrumental  pieces  belong  to  the  European 
period  of  his  career.  The  Fleisher  Collection  of  Philadelphia  has  the  fol¬ 
lowing  scores  by  Ippisch:  Concerto  for  Violin  and  Orchestra,  Eine  Lustige 
Ouverturey  three  symphonies,  Pastorale  for  cello  and  chamber  orchestra, 
Pierrots  Liebeswerberiy  and  Suite  for  String  Orchestra, 

Salvador  Ley  ( 1 907 - )  went  at  the  age  of  fifteen  to  Berlin  to  study 

piano  and  composition.  He  returned  to  Guatemala  in  I934>  ap¬ 

pointed  director  of  the  National  Conservatory  of  Music,  a  post  which  he 
held  until  1937,  and  again  since  1944.  In  1939  visited  the  United 
States,  where  he  gave  concerts  of  Latin  American  music.  As  a  composer, 
he  affects  a  modern  percussive  style.  He  has  written  a  Concertino  for 
Piano  and  Chamber  Orchestra  (1942). 

Alberto  Mendoza  (1889 - ),  educator  and  composer,  studied  with 

Luis  F.  Arias.  In  1925  Mendoza  was  appointed  director  of  the  National 
Conservatory  of  Guatemala,  a  post  which  he  held  until  i93^*  some 
time,  Mendoza  was  director  of  the  oldest  music  organization  in  Guate¬ 
mala,  the  Sociedad  Filarmonico-Religiosay  founded  in  1813*  Mendoza 
has  written  several  piano  pieces  and  songs.  Of  his  compositions  for  the 
military  band,  a  triumphal  march.  Glory  to  the  General  Garcia  Granados ^ 
has  received  a  prize. 

Jose  Molina  Pinillo  (1889 - ),  of  Guatemala  City,  studied  with 

Julian  Carrillo  in  Mexico  and  with  Scharwenka  in  Berlin.  His  Guatemalan 
Rhafsodiesy  Miniaturay  and  Cromos  NacionaleSy  written  in  an  effective  if 
conventional  manner,  are  included  in  the  Fleisher  Collection  in  Phila¬ 
delphia, 

Raul  Paniagua  (1898 - )  is  a  nephew  of  Julian  Paniagua  Martinez, 

the  composer  of  popular  music.  He  studied  piano  in  Guatemala  and  com¬ 
position  in  New  York.  Raul  Paniagua  possesses  a  solid  technique  of  com¬ 
position  in  all  forms,  and  his  feeling  for  folklore  enables  him  to  write 
effective  music  in  a  native  manner.  His  most  representative  work  is  T he 
Mayan  Legend  for  orchestra,  first  performed  by  the  National  Or¬ 
chestral  Association  of  New  York  on  February  17,  1931.  Paniagua  has 


207 


GUATEMALA 

also  written  songs  and  piano  pieces,  in  an  impressionist  style.  The  score  of 
The  Mayan  Legend  is  in  the  Fleisher  Collection  in  Philadelphia. 

Julian  Paniagua  Martinez  {1856 - ),  the  composer  of  popular 

music,  studied  violin  with  his  father,  Francisco  Paniagua.  When  he  was 
thirteen  years  old,  in  1869)  he  wrote  a  waltz  entitled  La  T os  Ferina,  which 
was  the  popular  name  of  the  epidemic  that  devastated  the  country  at  the 
time.  As  a  youth,  Paniagua  Martinez  enlisted  in  the  army  during  the  war 
with  El  Salvador,  and,  after  the  war,  conducted  the  Banda  de  Guerra  in 
Quezaltenango.  Paniagua  Martinez  is  the  owner  of  a  music  store  in 
Guatemala  City,  in  which  he  has  printed  a  dozen  of  his  popular  dances. 
The  orchestral  arrangement  of  his  waltz  Martha  is  included  in  the  Fleisher 
Collection  in  the  Free  Library  of  Philadelphia. 

Felipe  Siliezar  (1903 - )  received  his  preliminary  musical  educa¬ 

tion  in  Guatemala;  then  spent  five  years  in  New  York.  Returning  to 
Guatemala,  he  conducted  military  bands  in  provincial  towns.  Later  he 
abandoned  music  in  favor  of  commerce,  and  is  now  the  owner  of  a  general 
store  “La  Economica”  in  Antigua,  which  sells  featherweight  tropical 
shoes,  gasoline  lamps,  spectacles,  and  lottery  tickets.  The  orchestral  score 
of  Siliezar’s  suite.  Bewitching  Maya,  is  included  in  the  Fleisher  Collec¬ 
tion  in  Philadelphia. 

Mariano  Valverde  (1884 - ),  amateur  composer  and  marimba 

player,  is  a  native  of  Quezaltenango.  He  has  written  fifty-three  popular 
compositions  with  picturesque  titles,  such  as  Noche  de  Luna  en  las  Ruinas. 


Haiti 


Bing,  Hahome,  bing,  bing,  hing,  Dahome! 
Bing,  Dahome,  bing,  bing,  bing,  Dahome! 
[from  a  voodoo  song  of  Haiti] 


The  Negro  Republic  of  Haiti  occupies  the  western  third  of  the  island  of  Santo 
Domingo.  The  population,  which  numbers  about  three  million,  consists  of 
descendants  of  African  slaves.  Haiti  is  the  only  Latin  American  nation  with 
French  as  its  official  language. 


208 


MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

The  music  of  Haiti  is  a.  music  of  drums.  The  rhythms  are  African 
rather  than  Latin.  The  Latin  strain  is  revealed  only  in  civilized  songs 
of  later  date.  There  is  nothing  of  the  Indian  left  in  the  folklore  of  Haiti. 
Arthur  C.  Holly,  the  Haitian  writer,  says  in  his  book  Les  Daimons  du 
Culte  Vodu:  “We  are  Latin  Africans.  Our  Latin  culture  is  on  the  surface, 
while  the  primeval  African  strain  dominates  our  souls  .  .  .  Our  senses 
respond  naturally  to  the  syncopated  rhythms  of  the  sacred  dances  of  the 
Voodoo  ritual,  which  inspire  us  with  passion.” 

The  sound  of  the  drums  is  full  of  meaning  to  the  natives.  The  drums 
serve  as  the  telegraph  of  the  jungle,  carrying  messages  of  war  and  peace; 
they  accompany  all  great  events  of  family  and  community  life;  they 
are  religious  and  medicinal  symbols  in  the  Voodoo  rites.  In  Eugene 
O’Neill’s  drama  Em'peTor  Jonss,  the  monotonous  sound  of  the  jungle 
drums  spells  the  doom  of  the  former  Pullman  porter  who  has  become 
a  Voodoo  ruler. 

W.  B.  Seabrook  heard  classical  counterpoint  in  the  beating  of  Haitian 
drums.  He  writes  in  his  book  The  Magic  Island:  *  “It  was  not  syncopa¬ 
tion.  It  was  not  remotely  jazz.  It  was  pure  counterpoint,  like  a  Bach  fugue, 
except  that  the  core  of  it  was  slow,  unhurried,  relentless.  There  was  some¬ 
thing  cosmic  in  it,  like  the  rolling  of  mighty  waters.” 

The  playing  of  drums  together  by  native  drummers  is  polyrhythmic. 
The  smaller  drums  beat  in  fast  time,  while  the  big  drums  accentuate  the 
main  beat. 


Tchatcha 

Giiiro 

Baby  Drum 
Papa  Drum 
Mama  Drum 


s  s  5  s 


T 

3 , ,  j“ 

1  j 

3 

rj 

j  j  j  1 

"1^ 

s 

J 

n  j 

r: 

L_ 

iJ — 

_ id _ 

Polyrhythmic  Design  of  Haitian  Drum  Ensemble  {JLamothe) 


Haitian  drums  bear  picturesque  names.  Thus  the  drums  of  the  Voodoo 
ritual  are  called  Mama  Drum,  Papa  Drum,  and  Baby  Drum.  The  Mama 
Drum  is  the  largest.  Its  sound  is  reputed  to  be  capable  of  warding  off  the 

'^'  Harcourt,  Brace  &  Co.,  1929. 


HAITI 


209 


ZombieSj  the  walking  dead  of  the  popular  superstition.  Among  other 
Haitian  drums,  there  is  the  Assotofy  which  is  said  to  be  so  sensitive  that 
it  vibrates  like  the  Aeolian  harp  in  the  breeze.  There  is  a  family  of  drums 
bearing  the  generic  name  PetrOy  and  there  is  the  work  drum  Tambour- 
Travailley  and  a  unique  Tambour  Meringouiny  which  is  not  a  drum  at 
all  despite  its  name  j  it  is  a  musical  bow,  consisting  of  a  string  attached  on 
one  end  to  a  branch  of  a  tree,  and  on  the  other,  to  a  drumhead  of  cow 
hide,  which  covers  a  hole  in  the  ground.  When  the  branch  is  agitated  the 
string  vibrates.  The  hole  in  the  ground  serves  as  a  resonator. 

Like  all  islanders  of  the  West  Indies,  the  Haitians  use  gourds  filled 
with  dried  seed,  which  are  shaken  in  the  air  to  make  noise.  These  were 
the  first  native  instruments  of  the  islands  found  by  Columbus.  The  Cubans 
call  these  shakers  MaracaSy  but  in  Haiti  the  instrument  is  known  under  the 
onomatopoeic  name  Tchatcha.  The  only  wind  instrument  of  Haiti  is  a 
primitive  trumpet  called  Vaccine.  Finally,  there  are  nondescript  un¬ 
classified  noise-makers  used  by  the  natives  on  various  occasions,  make¬ 
shift  devices  manufactured  of  wood,  scrap  metal,  or  anything  that  comes 
to  hand. 

A  complete  description  of  Haitian  instruments,  with  photographs,  is 
given  in  the  authoritative  article  by  Harold  Courlander  in  the  July, 
1941,  issue  of  The  Musical  Quarterly. 

The  native  melodies  of  the  Haitian  Negroes  are  rarely  more  than 
instinctive  incantations,  alternating  between  shouts  and  mumblings, 
wherein  certain  vocables  seem  to  be  infused  with  a  ritualistic  significance. 
Melville  Herskovits,  in  his  book  Lije  in  a  Haitian  V alley y"^  gives  the  fol¬ 
lowing  account  of  native  music:  “The  musical  forms  are  almost  entirely 
African  in  rhythmic  structure,  but  European  influence  is  traceable  in 
their  melodic  line,  which  varies  from  unchanged  European  folk  melodies 
to  purely  African  songs.  In  the  use  of  the  falsetto,  however,  in  the  state¬ 
ment  of  a  theme  by  the  leader  and  its  repetition  by  the  chorus,  and  in 
the  countless  modulations  introduced  into  the  song,  the  singing  is  African.” 

European  influence  is  strongly  reflected  in  the  songs  popular  among 
the  population  of  towns  and  larger  villages,  where  contact  with  the  out¬ 
side  world  is  maintained  in  the  cosmopolitan  cafes  and  taverns.  Later  the 
gramophone  and  the  radio  brought  to  Haiti  the  folklore  of  other  lands, 
and  American  jazz. 

The  authentic  songs  and  dances  of  Haiti  relate,  to  a  greater  or  lesser 
extent,  to  the  social  and  religious  code  of  the  Voodoo,  ox  Vodouny  which 

*  Alfred  A.  Knopf,  1937. 


210 


MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 


is  the  way  the  natives  pronounce  the  word.  The  names  of  these  chants  and 
dances  indicate  a  mixture  of  African  and  French  elements.  Here  are  a 
few:  Babouley  Kay  Raday  Raray  Quittay  Bambochey  Jubay  Bumhay  LoanguSy 
SalongOy  Mousondiy  MoutchStche.  Harold  Courlander  gives  a  compre¬ 
hensive  account  of  these  dances  in  his  book  Haiti  Singing  (1939). 

The  most  popular  song-dance  of  modern  Haiti  is  the  Meringuey  which 
is  the  French  spelling  of  the  Merenguey  the  national  dance  of  the  Do¬ 
minican  Republic,  Haiti’s  neighbor.  The  Haitian  Meringue  is  often  in  the 
minor  key,  while  the  Dominican  Merengue  is  usually  in  the  major.  Then 
there  is  the  difference  in  the  language  of  the  text,  which  in  the  Haitian 
song  is  French,  in  the  Dominican,  Spanish.  Otherwise,  the  two  types  are 
identical  in  rhythm  and  in  musical  structure. 

The  Haitian  composer,  Ludovic  Lamothe,  who  has  been  called  ^The 
Black  Chopin,”  has  given  the  following  description  of  the  Meringue: 
^^Our  rhythms  are  Spanish  and  Negro,  and  our  national  dance,  the 
Meringuey  shows  the  influence  of  both  elements.  The  origin  of  the  name 
Meringue  is  uncertain.  Some  derive  it  from  the  name  of  the  French 
pastry  5  others  trace  it  to  the  Meringhay  an  African  dance  in  duple  time. 
The  Meringue  is  danced  in  the  salons  in  a  more  dignified  manner  than 
by  the  populace  in  the  streets.  There  it  is  a  veritable  earthquake  of  hips 
and  thighs,  as  in  Africa  .  .  .  The  composers  of  the  new  school  often 
include  the  Meringue  in  their  compositions.  This  usage  imparts  a  cer¬ 
tain  consistence  to  the  music,  but  also  a  certain  monotony.” 


Chanson  de  Lisette 


Three  Melodies  of  Haiti  {Bamothe^ 


HAITI 


2II 


The  unique  significance  of  Haitian  music  is  that  it  is  the  instinctive  ex¬ 
pression  of  primitive  emotions,  virtually  free  from  all  considerations  of 
measure  and  rhythm  inherent  in  organized  musical  forms.  As  such,  this 
Latin  African  art  is  a  potential  reservoir  of  new  musical  developments, 
awaiting  the  appearance  of  a  native  composer  who  will  be  able  to  con¬ 
centrate  this  inchoate  force  in  a  recognizable  musical  form,  as  Caturla  did 
in  Afro-Cuban  music  and  Villa-Lobos  in  his  Afro-Brazilian  inspirations. 
So  far,  Haiti  has  not  produced  such  a  composer.  The  first  educated 
musician  of  Haitian  birth  was  Justin  Elie,  who  spent  most  of  his  life  in 
New  York.  Another  Haitian  composer,  Occide  Jeanty,  was  a  military 
band  conductor.  Ludovic  Lamothe,  dean  of  living  Haitian  musicians,  is 
Chef  de  Musique  at  the  Governor’s  Palace  in  Haiti’s  capital,  Port  au 
Prince. 


MUSICIANS  OF  HAITI 

Justin  Elie  (1883-1931)  was  born  in  Cap  Haitien  and  died  in  New 
York  City.  He  studied  the  rudiments  of  music  in  Haiti  and  then  went 
to  Paris,  where  he  entered  the  Conservatory.  On  his  return  to  Haiti,  he 
became  interested  in  the  ceremonial  music  of  the  Voodoo  ritual,  and 
wrote  some  pieces  in  a  native  manner.  In  1922,  he  went  to  New  York,  and 
remained  there  until  his  death.  His  pieces  for  piano,  violin,  and  voice  have 
been  published  in  the  United  States.  Also  published  is  the  theater  orchestra 
arrangement  of  his  Aboriginal  Suite,  His  music  affects  an  orientalistic 
style,  and  its  harmonic  style  is  conventional. 

A  composer  whose  entire  life  of  seventy-six  years  (1860-1936)  was 
spent  in  Port-au-Prince  is  Occide  Jeanty.  He  showed  musical  ability 
at  an  early  age,  and  was  sent  to  Paris  by  the  government  to  continue  his 
studies.  Returning  to  Haiti  in  1886,  he  was  appointed  musical  director  of 
the  Republic.  He  was  also  active  as  a  conductor  of  military  bands.  He  has 
written  a  number  of  marches  in  the  Sousa  manner. 

Ludovic  Lamothe  (1882 - ),  the  Negro  composer,  is  also  a  native 

of  Port-au-Prince.  Lamothe  showed  musical  aptitude  at  an  early  age, 
and,  after  a  course  of  study  in  piano  and  elementary  harmony,  he  went 
to  Paris  in  1910,  where  he  took  lessons  at  the  Conservatory.  Returning 
to  Haiti,  Lamothe  devoted  himself  to  the  study  of  folklore.  The  simple 
charm  of  his  music  led  some  admirers  to  call  him  a  “Black  Chopin.”  He 
has  recorded  ten  of  his  piano  pieces  for  Victor,  in  an  album  entitled 
Fleurs  Haiti,  Two  piano  pieces,  Nibo  {Meringue  de  Carnavd)  and 


212 


MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

La  D anger euse  {'Meringue  Haitienne),  and  a  song,  Billet,  have  been 
printed  for  the  author  in  New  York,  Hamburg,  and  Paris,  respectively. 
Ludovic  Lamothe  is  now  Chief  of  Music  of  the  Republic  of  Haiti. 


Honduras 

jQue  dicha  tan  grande  nacer  en  Honduras  I 
[rafael  coello  ramos] 


The  word  Honduras  means  ‘‘'the  depths/’  the  name  having  been  applied  by 
Columbus  on  his  last  voyage,  when  he  found  a  great  depth  of  water  off  the 
North  coast  of  Honduras.  Honduras  borders  on  Nicaragua,  El  Salvador,  and 
Guatemala.  Its  population  numbers  about  1,100,000,  of  which  70  per  cent  are 
Mestizos  and  20  per  cent  Indians. 

Music  in  Honduras  is  in  a  rudimentary  state.  In  reply  to  a  query, 
M.  de  Adalid  y  Camera,  a  Honduran-born  musician,  and  now  a  citizen 
of  the  United  States,  writes  to  the  author:  ‘Hhere  have  never  been  in 
my  country  any  Conservatories  of  Music.  Musicians  here  are  simple 
amateurs,  without  real  musical  trainings  yet  they  do  not  lack  talent.  There 
are  at  least  fifty  such  amateurs  who  ^compose’  music,  among  them  Rafael 
Coello  Ramos,  who  has  been  teaching  solfeggio,  Ignacio  Galeano,  Fran¬ 
cisco  Diaz  Zelaya,  and  Camilo  Rivera.” 

In  their  autobiographical  notes,  the  ^^composers”  themselves  willingly 
admit  the  inadequacy  of  their  training.  Ramon  Ruiz  writes:  “I  use  only 
chords  I  can  find  on  my  guitard’  Ignacio  Galeano  complains  that  his 
addiction  to  alcohol  has  ^^rapidly  led  to  bodily  destruction  and  moral 
disintegration”  and  has  prevented  the  development  of  his  musical  talent. 

Recently  the  Inspector  General  of  Music  of  thfe  Republic,  Rafael 
Coello  Ramos,  introduced  a  system  of  music  instruction  in  public  schools, 
which  he  called  Desanalfabetizacion  Musical  Hondureiio”  (Musical 
Dis-illiteratization  of  Honduras),  but  as  he  bitterly  complains  in  his  paper 
La  Cultura  Musical  del  Pueblo  Hondureno,  published  in  Volume  IV  of 


HONDURAS 


213 

the  Boletin  Lc^tino- Americano  de  TSAusicay  has  not  been  possible  for 
me  to  extend  the  radius  of  my  activities  to  all  schools  of  the  country, 
because  I  cannot  afford  traveling  expenses  by  plane,  which  is  the  only 
possible  means  of  communication.”  “The  avalanche  of  mechanical  mu¬ 
sic,”  Coello  Ramos  continues,  “has  been  disastrous  for  Honduras.  While 
gramophones  and  radios  are  found  in  the  majority  of  homes,  pianos  and 
other  musical  instruments  are  neglected  and  unappreciated.  As  a  conse¬ 
quence,  musical  culture  has  dropped  almost  to  the  zero  point.  What  is 
needed,  besides  the  energetic  intervention  of  the  public  authorities,  is  the 
aid  of  those  who  understand  that  art  is  the  fountainhead  of  civilization.” 

Attempts  have  been  made  in  the  past  to  cultivate  music  in  Honduras. 
Jose  Trinidad  Reyes  (1797-1855)5  the  Bishop  of  Honduras,  who  was 
a  poet,  an  architect,  a  painter,  and  an  astronomer,  included  music  in  the 
educational  program  of  the  government.  In  recent  times,  a  musician 
named  Leonidas  Rodriguez  established  an  Academy  of  Music  in  Tegu¬ 
cigalpa,  the  capital  of  Honduras.  But  he  was  killed  in  an  automobile  ac¬ 
cident,  and  with  his  death  the  project  was  abandoned. 

Concert  music  in  Honduras,  apart  from  rare  visits  by  foreign  musicians, 
is  supplied  mainly  by  military  bands,  which  exist  in  every  sizable  town 
of  the  country.  The  best  military  band  is  the  one  in  Tegucigalpa,  bearing 
the  proud  appellation  of  the  Banda  de  los  Sufremos  Poderes  (Band  of 
the  Supreme  Powers). 


MUSICIANS  OF  HONDURAS 

Francisco  Diaz  Zelaya  (1898 - ),  now  conductor  of  the  Banda  de 

los  Sufremos  Poderes  in  Tegucigalpa,  is  a  native  of  Ojojana. 

The  musician  Carnilo  Rivera  (1878 - )  is  known  chiefly  as  a  con¬ 

ductor  of  military  bands  and  as  the  composer  of  numerous  popular  dances. 

Ramon  Ruiz  (1894—),  the  amateur  musician  resident  in  Honduras, 
is  a  Nicaraguan  by  birth.  He  admits  that  his  musical  equipment  is  limited 
to  the  chords  he  can  find  on  his  guitar. 

Because  of  extreme  poverty  in  his  youth,  Ignacio  Villanueva  Gale- 

ano  ( 1 885 - )  was  unable  to  devote  himself  to  serious  study,  and  instead 

practiced  music  on  a  homemade  flute.  Later  he  became  a  band  conductor. 
An  unfortunate  addiction  to  alcohol  forced  him  eventually  to  abandon 
music.  In  his  lucid  moments  Villanueva  Galeano  wrote  military  marches. 
The  score  of  his  Pan  American  Union  March  is  included  in  the  Fleisher 
Collection  in  Philadelphia. 


214 


MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 


Mexico 


A  Mexico  el  Criador  en  sus  hondade 
Le  ha  dado  un  aire  diajano  y  sereno 
[manuel  carpio] 


The  name  Mexico  comes  from  that  of  the  Aztec  war  god,  Mexitli.  The 
population  of  the  present  Republic  of  Mexico  is  about  twenty  million,  of  whom 
Indians  and  Mestizos  constitute  a  majority.  Mexico  City  numbers  a  million 
and  a  quarter  inhabitants. 

The  territory  of  Mexico  was  the  ground  on  which  the  Spanish  Con- 
quistadores  and  the  greatest  of  American  Indian  civilizations  met,  fought, 
and  fused  into  a  new  nation.  Three  successive  cultures  existed  in  Mexico 
before  the  conquest:  the  Mayas,  the  Toltecs,  and  the  Aztecs.  Of  these 
great  civilizations,  many  monuments  have  been  preserved.  We  know  a 
great  deal  about  the  religion,  the  science,  and  the  arts  of  ancient  Mexico. 
We  know  something  about  pre-conquest  music,  thanks  to  musical  in¬ 
struments  that^  have  been  preserved.  Melody,  rhythm,  and  tone-color 
were  the  media  of  musical  expression  among  ancient  Mexicans.  The 
melody  was  given  out  by  the  wind  instruments  made  of  clay;  the  rhythm 
was  punctuated  on  the  drums;  and  tone-color  was  diversified  by  the  use 
of  different  material,  different  shapes  and  sizes  of  these  instruments. 

The  structure  of  the  wind  instruments  in  use  among  ancient  Mexicans 
points  to  the  predominance  of  the  pentatonic  scale,  without  semitones,  and 
usually  with  the  minor  third  at  the  base,  la,  do,  re,  mi,  sol.  Melodies 
of  great  antiquity  are  still  sung  by  old  Indians,  who  learned  them  by 
tradition  from  their  fathers  and  grandfathers.  One  of  these  melodies, 
a  Mayan  Warriors’  song,  Los  Xtoles,  has  been  notated  by  Mexican  folk- 
lore  collectors.* 

Carlos  Chavez  has  collected  several  dance  airs  of  Mexican  Indians. 

One  of  these  airs  he  used  in  the  last  movement  of  his  symphonic  poem 
Cuatro  Soles.  r  r  > 

*  Courtesy  of  the  Music  Section  of  the  Secretariat  of  Education  of  Mexico. 


MEXICO 


215 


Los  Xtoles 


B5g 

5B9B9SS 

S  tmCSmZm 

n 

9Ml 

Ibu 

r=ssS=B 

Song  of  Mayan  Warriors  (Baqueiro  Foster) 


i^^SSBSiS 

■■ 

gsgs 

Ancient  Mexican  Dance  (^Chavez) 


The  instrumental  resources  of  ancient  Mexican  music  were  of  six  prin¬ 
cipal  types:  ( i )  Flutes,  ChiliUhtU;  and  ocarinas  and  panpipes,  TlafitzalU; 
(2)  Marine  snail  shelly  AtecocoU;  (3)  Vertical  drum,  Huehuetl;  (4) 
Horizontal  T efonaxtle ;  (5)  Calabash  rasps,  TzicahuaztU;  znd 

bone  rasps,  OmichitzicahuaztU;  (6)  Gourd  filled  with  pebbles,  AyacaztU, 

The  ChililihtU  was  a  vertical  flute  made  of  baked  clay.  Several  tubes 
joined  together  formed  a  panpipe  called  TlafitzalU.  The  tones  produced 
by  the  ChililihtU  and  by  the  TlafitzalU  never  exceed  five.  Some  native 
melodies  of  ancient  type  are  built  on  three  different  tones  only.  The 
Indians  do  not  find  their  chants  monotonous,  for  they  color  each  tone 
with  greatly  varied  dynamics  5  the  manner  of  singing  and  the  duration 
of  each  tone  provide  additional  means  of  expression. 

The  marine  snail  shell  instrument,  Atecocoliy  is  capable  of  producing 
a  low  rumbling  tone,  foreboding  and  lugubrious  in  quality.  In  his  piece 
Xochifili-M.acmlxochitly  named  after  the  Aztec  god  of  music,  flowers 
and  love,  Chavez  uses  the  trombone  in  order  to  reproduce  the  sound  of 
the  Indian  snail  shell. 

The  Huehuetl  is  a  vertical  drum,  made  of  a  hollowed  section  of  a  tree, 
and  covered  with  a  drumhead  of  animal  hide.  The  Mayan  name  for  the 


2i6 


MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 


Huehuetl  is  Zacatdn;  the  sound  of  this  word  suggests  the  rhythm  of  the 
anapest,  expressed  In  music  by  two  short  notes  and  a  long  note.  This 
rhythmic  figure,  two  sixteenth-notes  and  an  eighth-note,,  appears  in  Los 
Xtolesy  song  of  the  Maya  Warriors.  There  were  three  sizes  of  Huehuetl 
drums:  Huehuetl  proper,  which  was  of  relatively  small  sizej  Panhue- 
huetly  of  medium  size 3  and  Tlafanhuehuetly  of  large  size.  {Huehuetl 
means  drum,  Pan  means  upon,  and  Thy  instrument.) 

The  Tefonaxtle  is  the  most  important  instrument  of  the  ancient  Mexi¬ 
cans.  It  is  made  of  a  large  section  of  a  tree  trunk,  and  sometimes  of  stone. 
There  is  an  aperture  in  the  wall  of  the  trunk.  The  drum  is  placed  hori¬ 
zontally  3  the  sounds  struck  to  the  right  and  to  the  left  of  the  aperture 
differ  in  tone,  usually  by  a  minor  or  a  major  third.  The  pitch  is  as  definite 
as  that  in  the  modern  kettle-drums.  The  T efonaxtle  was  regarded  by 
the  Indians  as  a  sacred  instrument,  and  was  not  played  except  on  solemn 
occasions.  T efonaxtles  belonging  to  priests  and  Indian  chiefs  had  elabo¬ 
rate  incrustations.  An  early  Spanish  traveler  tells  of  seeing  a  Tefonaxtle 
made  of  pure  gold. 

The  rasps,  TzicahuaztU]  wer^  made  of  baked  clay,  notched  and  rubbed 
with  a  stick,  or  with  animal  and  human  bones.  There  are  in  the  National 
Museum  of  Mexico  several  specimens  of  human  femurs,  striated,  and 
rubbed  with  a  piece  of  bone.  These  human  TzicahuaztU  were  called 
OmichitzicahuaztUy  which  means  bone  noise.  Human  skulls  were  also 
used  as  resonance  boxes,  or  as  drums. 

The  AyacaztUy  now  called  Sonajas  in  Mexico,  and  Maracas  in  Brazil 
and  Cuba,  were  made  of  gourds  with  pebbles  inside. 

Other  noise-producing  instruments  used  by  Mexican  Indians  are  Casca- 
helesy  metal  jingles  with  pellets  inside  3  Tenaharisy  dried  butterfly  co¬ 
coons  worn  on  the  ankles  by  dancers  3  and  the  Jicara  de  Aguay  made  of 
half  a  fruit  shell,  inverted  and  placed  in  a  basin,  half-filled  with  water.  It 
is  played  with  sticks. 

The  ancient  instruments  of  Mexico  have  been  the  subject  of  detailed 
study.  Daniel  Castaneda  and  Vicente  T.  Mendoza  published  in  1933 
the  first  volume  of  a  monumental  work,  Instrumental  PrecortesianOySstiPn 
numerous  illustrations,  diagrams,  and  measurements  of  pre-Cortez  in¬ 
struments  in  the  National  Museum  of  Mexico,  Mexican  composers  often 
include  the  Hu,ehuetl  and  Tefonaxtle  in  their  symphonic  works  for  the 
sake  of  authentic  color.  Carlos  Chavez  uses  the  Huehuetly  tht  T efonaxtle 
in  his  Cuatro  and  the  Jicara  de  Agua  in  the  Sinfonia  India.  In  19337 
a  special  orchestra,  named  Orquesta  Mexicanay  formed  in  Mexico 


Camargo  Guarnieri 


Francisco  Mignone 


Humberto  Allende 


Domingo  Santa  Cruz 


MEXICO 


217 


City 3  with  the  specific  purpose  o£  reviving  the  old  instruments.  This 
orchestra  includes  a  variety  of  such  instruments,  the  Tefonaxtle^  Hue- 
huetly  Hear  a  de  Agua^  marine  shells,  Sonajasy  TenabariSy  various  rattles, 
such  as  GrijutianSy  JiruqmaSy  as  well  as  modern  instruments,  a  large 
harp,  a  large  guitar,  violins,  guitars,  flutes,  trumpets,  and  the  indigenous 
oboes,  Chirimlas.  Carlos  Chavez,  Daniel  Ayala,  Luis  Sandi,  Bias  Galindo, 
and  other  Mexican  composers  have  written  special  compositions  for  this 
orchestra  of  native  instruments. 

In  ancient  Mexico  music  was  part  of  religious  and  civic  ceremonies. 
Instrumental  music  also  accompanied  native  dances.  Juan  de  Torque- 
mada,  a  sixteenth-century  Spanish  missionary,  left  a  description  of  a 
typical  Indian  dance  in  old  Mexico: 

When  the  dancers  arrive  at  the  place,  they  take  their  places  to  play  the  instru¬ 
ments.  The  two  best  singers  then  begin  the  song.  A  large  drum,  played  with 
the  hands,  is  called  a  HuehuetL  The  other,  played  with  sticks  like  the  instru¬ 
ments  of  Spain,  is  called  the  Tefonaxtle.  .  .  .  Wishing  to  begin  the  dance, 
three  or  four  Indians  raise  very  shrill  whistles.  The  instruments  sound  in  a  low 
tone,  and  little  by  little  increase  in  volume.  When  the  dancers  hear  the  instru¬ 
ments  they  begin  to  sing  and  dance.  The  first  songs  go  slowly  and  in  a  deep 
tone.  When  one  song  is  finished  (and  it  seems  long  because  it  goes  very  slowly, 
though  none  lasts  over  an  hour),  the  instrument  changes  tone,  and  the  leaders 
begin  another  chant,  a  little  higher  and  more  lively.  In  this  way,  the  songs  keep 
rising,  as  though  someone  changed  from  a  bass  to  a  tenor  voice. 

In  the  early  century  of  the  Conquest,  the  Church  militantly  opposed 
ritual  dances  and  songs.  In  his  Historia  de  la  Muska  en  Mexico y  Gabriel 
Saldivar  quotes  a  report  by  a  notary  of  the  sacred  office  of  the  Inquisition 
in  the  province  of  Zapotitlan,  dated  November  8,  1623,  in  which  he  in¬ 
forms  his  superiors  of  the  continued  practice  of  ^flniquitous  and  pagan” 
dances  among  the  Yaqui  Indians,  and  recommends  the  imposition  of  a 
fine  of  500  ducats  on  the  community  and,  in  case  of  further  disobedience, 
deportation  of  the  Indians  from  their  pueblos. 

The  dances  and  songs  of  contemporary  Mexico  are  entirely  Spanish 
in  structure.  But  under  the  new  skies  these  airs  have  acquired  a  tropical 
accent.  The  Mexican  Huafango  is  ultimately  traced  to  the  Spanish  Son^ 
but  its  rhythm  is  definitely  of  the  new  world.  The  Huafango  combines 
two-four  time  with  three-four  time  and  six-eight  time,  creating  cross 
rhythms  of  great  complexity.  The  word  Huafango  is  derived  either 
from  a  native  vocable  meaning  ^^on  a  wooden  stand”  (the  Huafango  is 


MEXICO 


217 


City,  with  the  specific  purpose  of  reviving  the  old  instruments.  This 
orchestra  includes  a  variety  of  such  instruments,  the  Tefonaxtle^  Hue- 
hue  Jkara  de  AguUy  marine  shells,  SonajaSy  TenabariSy  various  rattles, 
such  as  GrijutianSy  J-iruquiaSy  as  well  as  modern  instruments,  a  large, 
harp,  a  large  guitar,  violins,  guitars,  flutes,  trumpets,  and  the  indigenous 
oboes,  Chirimtas.  Carlos  Chavez,  Daniel  Ayala,  Luis  Sandi,  Bias  Galindo, 
and  other  Mexican  composers  have  written  special  compositions  for  this 
orchestra  of  native  instruments. 

In  ancient  Mexico  music  was  part  of  religious  and  civic  ceremonies. 
Instrumental  music  also  accompanied  native  dances.  Juan  de  Torque- 
mada,  a  sixteenth-century  Spanish  missionary,  left  a  description  of  a 
typical  Indian  dance  in  old  Mexico: 

When  the  dancers  arrive  at  the  place,  they  take  their  places  to  play  the  instru¬ 
ments.  The  two  best  singers  then  begin  the  song.  A  large  drum,  played  with 
the  hands,  is  called  a  HuehuetL  The  other,  played  with  sticks  like  the  instru¬ 
ments  of  Spain,  is  called  the  Tefonaxtle,  .  .  .  Wishing  to  begin  the  dance, 
three  or  four  Indians  raise  very  shrill  whistles.  The  instruments  sound  in  a  low 
tone,  and  little  by  little  increase  in  volume.  When  the  dancers  hear  the  instru¬ 
ments  they  begin  to  sing  and  dance.  The  first  songs  go  slowly  and  in  a  deep 
tone.  When  one  song  is  finished  (and  it  seems  long  because  it  goes  very  slowly, 
though  none  lasts  over  an  hour),  the  instrument  changes  tone,  and  the  leaders 
begin  another  chant,  a  little  higher  and  more  lively.  In  this  way,  the  songs  keep 
rising,  as  though  someone  changed  from  a  bass  to  a  tenor  voice. 

In  the  early  century  of  the  Conquest,  the  Church  militantly  opposed 
ritual  dances  and  songs.  In  his  Historia  de  la  Musica  en  Mexicoy  Gabriel 
Saldivar  quotes  a  report  by  a  notary  of  the  sacred  office  of  the  Inquisition 
in  the  province  of  Zapotitlan,  dated  November  8,  1623,  in  which  he  in¬ 
forms  his  superiors  of  the  continued  practice  of  ^flniquitous  and  pagan” 
dances  among  the  Yaqui  Indians,  and  recommends  the  imposition  of  a 
fine  of  500  ducats  on  the  community  and,  in  case  of  further  disobedience, 
deportation  of  the  Indians  from  their  pueblos. 

The  dances  and  songs  of  contemporary  Mexico  are  entirely  Spanish 
in  structure.  But  under  the  new  skies  these  airs  have  acquired  a  tropical 
accent.  The  Mexican  Huafango  is  ultimately  traced  to  the  Spanish  Sony 
but  its  rhythm  is  definitely  of  the  new  world.  The  Huafango  combines 
two-four  time  with  three-four  time  and  six-eight  time,  creating  cross 
rhythms  of  great  complexity.  The  Huafango  is  derived  either 
from  a  native  vocable  meaning  ^^on  a  wooden  stand”  (the  Huafango  is 


2I8 


MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 


danced  on  a  platform)  ^  or  it  may  be  a  contraction  of  Huaxtecas  de  Pango. 
Huaxtecas  means  a  tropical  valley,  and  Pango  is  the  ancient  name  of  the 
river  Panuco.  In  colloquial  usage  the  word  Hua'pango  assumes  a  generic 
significance,  and  is  applied  to  any  Mexican  dance. 

The  Jarabe  is  a  descendant  of  the  Spanish  Zafateado^  and  its  rhythm 
resembles  that  of  the  Mazurka.  It  is  in  three-four  time,  with  occasional 
interpolations  of  six-eight  time.  Despite  its  European  derivation,  the 
Jarabe  is  stamped  with  the  Mexican  spirit.  The  word  Jarabe  means  syrup. 

The  Jar  ana  (the  word  means  merry  clatter)  is  the  characteristic  dance 
of  Yucatan,  and  is  possibly  closer  to  the  melo-rhythmic  foundation  of 
ancient  Mexican  songs  than  any  other  native  air.  The  verses  of  the  Jarana 
are  often  in  the  Mayan  language.  The  Zandunga  is  a  Mexican  air  in 
Waltz  time.  The  word  means  a  graceful  woman. 

The  most  remarkable  native  variant  of  a  Spanish  musical  form  is  the 
Mexican  Corrido.  It  is  a  development  of  the  Spanish  Romance^  in  which 
historical  or  contemporary  events,  and  often  trivial  gossip,  are  the  subject. 
One  of  the  Mexican  Corridas  comments  on  the  expropriation  of  the 
foreign  oil  companies  by  the  Mexican  government.  Vicente  T.  Mendoza 
made  a  thorough  study  in  his  valuable  book,  Romance  y  Corrida^  1939- 

The  distinctive  quality  of  Mexican  popular  airs  owes  a  great  deal  to 
the  characteristic  accompanying  band.  A  typical  Mexican  ensemble  is 
composed  of  violins,  guitars,  and  the  harp.  No  primitive  Mexican  in¬ 
struments  are  used,  yet  this  ^^Orquesta  Tifica^^  is  regarded  by  the  Mexi¬ 
cans  themselves  as  their  own.  The  orchestra  may  be  enlarged  to  include 
flutes,  clarinets  and  trumpets.  The  first  concert  of  such  a  typical  orchestra 
was  given  in  Mexico  City  on  September  30,  1884. 

The  Or  quest  a  Tifica  is  referred  to  in  Mexico  City  and  in  the  coastal 
regions  as  the  Mariachi  band.  The  origin  of  the  word  is  obscure.  Jacopo 
Dalevuelta,  in  his  book  Estamfas  de  Mexico y  suggests  that  it  is  a  corrup¬ 
tion  of  the  French  word  Mariage^  and  that  the  name  stems  from  the  time 
of  the  French  domination  during  the  short  reign  of  Emperor  Maximilian. 
The  Mariachi  bands  were  supposed  to  have  played  at  wedding  cere¬ 
monies,  hence  the  name.  The  first  verified  performance  of  a  Mariachi 
orchestra  took  place  as  late  as  1907,  when  an  ensemble  composed  of  eight 
musicians  played  at  a  reception  for  Elihu  Root  at  Cocola.  In  its  present 
form,  Mariachi  music  serves  to  entertain  the  public  in  the  Mexican  cafes 
or  accompany  dancers  and  singers  in  village  fiestas.  The  players  are  garbed 
in  Indian  'ponchos  and  wear  large-brimmed  hats.  In  these  urban  bands 
the  harp  is  excluded  and  a  trumpet  added.  The  typical  Mariachi  band 


MEXICO 


219 


consists  of  two  violins,  a  large  five-stringed  guitar  {GuitarrSn)  and  a 
trumpet.  The  repertoire  of  the  Mariachi  band  includes  Mexican  popular 
songs,  Corridos  and  Huafangos.  These  airs  are  called  generically  Sones 
Mariachiy  that  is,  Mariachi  songs.  The  Mexican  composer,  Bias  Galindo, 
has  written  a  symphonic  score  entitled  Mariachi  Aaron  Copland  uses 
the  Mariachi  type  of  harmony  and  tone  color  in  his  El  Salon  Mexico^ 
named  after  a  once  popular  night  club  in  Mexico  City. 

In  a  Mariachi  band,  the  guitar  player  takes  up  the  singing  part,  after 
an  instrumental  introduction.  The  melody  is  apt  to  be  a  short  musical 
phrase  repeated  many  times  with  slight  variations.  The  singing  line 
runs  in  parallel  thirds.  This  type  of  harmonization  is  particularly  char¬ 
acteristic  of  the  Corrido, 


Mexican  Corrido  {Mendoza) 


In  the  music  history  of  the  western  hemisphere,  Mexico  holds  the 
chronological  honor  of  being  the  country  where  the  first  book  containing 
musical  notation  was  published.  It  was  an  Ordinary  of  the  Mass,  printed 
in  Mexico  City  in  1556.  In  1604,  ^  volume  of  Gregorian  melodies  was 
printed  in  Mexico  containing  plainsong  settings  for  the  Office  of  Holy 
Week.  The  compiler  of  the  volume,  Juan  Navarro,  has  been  erroneously 
identified  with  the  famous  Spanish  musician  of  the  same  name.  However, 
documentary  evidence  has  been  uncovered  showing  that  the  Spanish  Juan 
Navarro  died  in  Palencia,  Spain,  on  September  25,  1580,  whereas  the 
licence  for  the  publication  of  the  Mexican  volume  was  issued  in  1601, 
which  proves  the  nonidentity  of  the  two  Navarros. 

The  first  music  school  in  Mexico  was  established  by  Pedro  de  Gante 
(1480-1572),  a  Flemish  musician  and  a  cousin  of  Emperor  Charles  V. 
He  founded  a  chapel  in  the  town  of  Texcoco  in  1 523  and  taught  ecclesi¬ 
astical  singing  and  musical  notation.  In  1527  he  transferred  his  school 
to  Mexico  City  and  gave  instruction  to  the  natives  and  to  the  sons  of 
Spanish  officials  in  the  art  of  instrumental  and  vocal  music.  The  natives 


220  MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

proved  to  be  apt  students.  One  Mexican  named  Sahagun  composed  36^ 
chants  in  the  Aztec  language,  one  for  every  day  of  the  year. 

European  dance  music  made  its  incursion  into  Mexico  in  1526,  wher 
Juan  Ortiz  petitioned  the  authorities  to  grant  him  permission  to  open  2 
dancing  school  “for  the  embellishment  of  the  city.’’ 

The  name  of  Hernando  Franco,  a  sixteenth-century  Spanish  musician, 
has  been  preserved  in  the  annals  of  Mexican  music  as  the  author  of  the 
first  vocal  composition  to  a  text  in  the  Aztec  language,  a  Hymn  to  the 
Virgin. 

The  eighteenth  century  was  marked  in  Mexican  music  by  the  appear¬ 
ance  of  the  first  opera  written  by  a  native.  It  was  Partenofe^  by  Manuel 
Zumaya,  produced  in  17  ii  at  the  Viceregal  Palace  in  Mexico  City.  The 
performance  was  in  Italian,  a  significant  circumstance,  for  it  presaged 
two  centuries  of  Italian  domination  in  Mexican  music. 

Towards  the  end  of  the  eighteenth  century  there  were  in  Mexico  com¬ 
posers  of  secular  music  who  wrote  in  imitation  of  Handel.  Jose  Aldana 
was  one  of  these.  He  was  the  author  of  numerous  religious  works  3  a  Mass 
of  his  composition  was  recently  uncovered  in  the  archives  and  performed 
by  Carlos  Chavez  at  the  Festival  of  Mexican  Music  at  the  Museum  of 
Modern  Art  in  New  York  City,  in  May  1940. 

Pianofortes  were  imported  into  Mexico  during  the  last  decade  of  the 
eighteenth  century.  In  1796  a  piano  manufacturing  shop  was  established 
in  Mexico  City.  Soon  it  became  fashionable  for  the  upper  classes  to  play 
the  piano  at  home.  The  era  of  musical  amateurs  had  dawned  in  Mexico 
as  it  did  in  Europe. 

In  the  meantime,  the  popularity  of  European  salon  dances  grew  stead¬ 
ily  in  Mexico.  The  authorities  took  notice  of  the  danger  to  public  morals 
in  dances  in  which  both  sexes  participated.  In  1779  such  dancing  was  for¬ 
bidden,  and  musicians  who  played  for  mixed  dancing  were  punished  by 
six  months’  imprisonment.  This  measure,  however,  could  not  stop  the 
prevalence  of  dancing. 

In  1815,  an  ecclesiastical  official  reported  that  the  Waltz  was  becoming 
widespread.  He  denounced  the  Waltz  (which  he  called  La  Balsa,  a  float¬ 
ing  raft,  a  rudderless  and  perilous  motion)  as  a  “corrupt  importation  from 
degenerate  France  .  .  .  All  of  man’s  depravity  could  not  invent  any¬ 
thing  more  pernicious,  nay,  not  even  Hell  itself  could  spawn  a  monster 
more  obscene.  Only  those  who  have  seen  the  Vais  danced  with  complete 
license  are  in  a  position  to  warn  of  its  perils.” 

The  Waltz  continued  to  enjoy  wide  popularity  during  the  entire  nine- 


MEXICO 


221 


teenth  centuryj  and  beyond.  It  was  a  Mexican,  Juventino  Rosas  (1868- 
1894),  who  gave  the  world  one  of  the  most  celebrated  Waltzes,  5obre 
las  Olas  (Over  the  Waves). 

The  staple  of  Mexican  musical  production  in  the  nineteenth  century 
was  piano  music  of  the  salon  type,  enhanced  by  a  more  or  less  adroit  imi¬ 
tation  of  Chopin  and  of  Schumann.  Among  Mexican  composers  who 
excelled  in  this  type  of  composition  three  names  stand  out,  Felipe  Villa¬ 
nueva,  Aniceto  Ortega  and  Melesio  Morales.  Villanueva  cultivated  Mexi¬ 
can  themes  in  his  numerous  salon  pieces,  and  therein  lies  his  importance 
in  the  development  of  a  national  style  of  Mexican  music.  Aniceto  Ortega 
(1823-1875),  apart  from  his  semi-popular  marches  and  waltzes,  was 
also  the  author  of  the  first  Mexican  opera  on  a  native  subject,  a  one-act 
^^musical  episode”  entitled  Guatimotzin,  The  opera  dealt  with  the  last 
days  of  the  Aztec  Empire.  Guatemoc  (or  Cuauhtemoc),  the  last  Emperor 
of  the  Aztecs,  was  the  tenor,  and  Cortez  was  the  bass.  The  opera,  which 
remains  unpublished,  is  analyzed  in  great  detail  in  Panorama  de  la 
Musica  Mexicana  by  Otto  Mayer-Serra. 

Melesio  Morales  (1838-1908)  was  the  composer  of  several  operas. 
He  also  composed  a  curious  piece  named  La  Locomotivay  written  on  the 
occasion  of  the  opening  of  a  new  railroad  and  performed  in  Mexico  City 
on  November  16,  1869.  A  contemporary  newspaper  described  the  piece 
as  ^^a  musical  imitation  introducing  new  instruments  in  order  to  repro¬ 
duce  faithfully  the  roar  of  the  steam  engine,  the  whistle  of  the  locomotive, 
and  even  the  sound  of  the  wheels  turning  on  the  rails,  all  this  mixed  with 
harmonies  so  strange  that  they  seemed  a  hymn  intoned  by  modern  giants 
in  praise  of  nineteenth-century  civilization.” 

Numerous  Italian  and  German  musicians  settled  in  Mexico  in  the 
nineteenth  century  in  the  capacity  of  teachers.  One  such  musician,  Her¬ 
mann  Roessler,  came  to  Mexico  in  the  retinue  of  Emperor  Maximilian. 
He  published  several  character  pieces  for  piano,  and  also  wrote  vocal 
music  to  texts  in  the  Aztec  language. 

The  growing  nationalism  in  Mexico  demanded  a  national  anthem.  A 
special  competition  was  held  in  1854  for  the  best  setting  of  the  hymn. 
The  winning  composer  was  Jaime  Nuno,  a  Spaniard  by  birth,  who  settled 
in  Mexico  and  eventually  went  to  the  United  States,  where  he  died.  It 
is  interesting  to  note  that  the  prize  of  2000  pesos  for  the  music  was  not 
paid  to  Nuno  by  the  Mexican  administration  of  Santa  Ana.  He  collected 
the  award  only  in  1901, 

Music  was  always  a  favorite  art  in  Mexico,  even  during  the  dictatorship 


222 


MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

of  Porfirlo  Diaz  (1877-1910).  With  the  Revolution,  new  musical  forces 
were  released  among  the  Mexican  people.  Popular  waltzes,  such  as  La 
Adelita,  became  revolutionary  airs  through  adaptation  of  special  sets  of 
words.  One  of  the  most  striking  songs  of  the  period  was  the  anonymous 
air  La  Cucaracha,  which  became  the  fighting  song  of  Pancho  Villa  during 
his  revolutionary  raids.  The  original  text  is  a  nonsense  poem  about  a  girl 
called  La  Cucaracha  (Cockroach),  who  could  no  longer  walk  because 
she  had  no  marijuana  to  smoke. 

La  Cucaracha 


The  father  of  music  education  in  Mexico  was  Jose  Mariano  Elizaga 
( 1786-1842).  He  wrote  the  first  Mexican  treatise  on  music  theory,  Ele- 
mentos  de  Musica,  published  in  1823;  founded  the  first  music  society, 
Sociedad  F Harmonica,  in  1824;  established  the  first  conservatory  of 
music,  the  Academia  Filarmonica  de  TsAexico,  in  18255  organized  the 
first  printing  press  for  publication  of  secular  music,  in  Mexico  City  in 
18265  and  assembled  the  first  symphonic  ensemble  in  Mexico,  which  he 
conducted  on  January  16, 1826,  in  a  program  that  included  his  own  Over¬ 
ture  to  the  opera  La  Italiana.  EHzaga’s  activities,  as  well  as  the  general 
musical  atmosphere  of  Mexico  in  the  nineteenth  century,  are  presented 
in  great  detail  in  the  monograph  on  him  by  Jesus  C.  Romero  (Mexico, 

1934)- 

The  Conservatorio  Nacional  de  Musica,  the  oldest  music  school  now 
existing  in  Mexico,  was  founded  in  Mexico  City  on  January  13,  1877. 
Melesio  Morales  was  the  guiding  spirit  in  the  early  years  of  the  Con¬ 
servatorio  Nacional.  He  inculcated  the  Italian  style  of  composition  almost 
to  the  exclusion  of  all  others.  This  partiality  led  to  an  open  rebellion 


MEXICO 


223 


among  his  discipleSj  six  of  whom,  headed  by  Gustavo  Campa,  founded  a 
rival  music  school  in  1887  and  championed  the  French  operatic  style  of 
composition. 

After  the  political  revolution  in  Mexico,  revolutionary  changes  also 
in  the  domain  of  the  arts  followed.  In  1928,  Carlos  Chavez,  then  a  youth 
of  twenty-nine,  was  appointed  Director  of  the  Conservatorio  Naciond  de 
Musicay  a  post  that  he  held  until  1934.  In  an  article  in  Modern  Music  of 
March,  1936,  he  describes  this  period: 

I  launched  a  detailed  program  for  the  class  in  composition  in  the  Conservatory 
of  Music  in  1931.  We  used  no  text.  The  students  worked  untiringly,  writing 
melodies  in  all  the  diatonic  modes,  in  a  melodic  scale  of  twelve  tones,  and  in  all 
the  pentatonic  scales.  Hundreds  of  melodies  were  written,  but  not  merely  as 
exercises.  We  had  instruments  in  the  classroom,  and  the  melodies  were  played 
on  them.  As  a  result,  the  young  students  wrote  melodies  with  an  amazingly 
acute  instrumental  sense. 

In  the  same  year  that  Chavez  became  the  head  of  the  Conservatorio 
Nacionaly  he  founded  the  Orquesta  Sinfonica  de  MexicOy  presenting  its 
first  concert  on  September  2,  1928.  Chavez  was  the  conductor  of  the 
orchestra  and  Silvestre  Revueltas  the  assistant  conductor.  Hernandez 
Moncada  became  assistant  conductor  in  1936.  The  Orquesta  Sinfonica 
de  Mexico  gives  weekly  concerts  on  Friday,  repeating  the  same  program 
on  the  following  Sunday.  The  considered  policy  of  the  orchestra  is  to 
perform  compositions  by  Mexican  musicians.  In  the  first  fifteen  years  of 
its  existence  (i928““i943),  the  orchestra  presented  seventy  "works  by 
thirty-one  Mexican  composers.  Recently  symphonic  organizations  have 
been  formed  in  other  cities  and  towns  of  Mexico,  notably  in  Guadalajara, 
Morelia,  and  Merida. 

Concert  life  in  Mexico  City  includes  recitals  by  visiting  and  native 
musicians.  At  the  Palacio  de  Bellas  Artes,  concerts  of  chamber  music  are 
given.  As  yet,  there  are  no  permanent  opera  companies  in  Mexico.  Per¬ 
haps  for  this  reason,  few  modern  Mexican  composers  write  operas.  In 
recent  years,  only  one  Mexican  opera  of  consequence  has  been  staged, 
Tata  Vasco  by  Bernal  Jimenez,  not  in  Mexico  City  but  in  the  provincial 
town  of  Patzcuaro.  On  the  other  hand  ballet  productions  are  numerous. 
Chavez,  Revueltas,  Ayala  and  other  modern  Mexicans  have  written  bal¬ 
lets  on  Mexican  subjects. 

Otto  Mayer-Serra,  in  his  Panorama  de  la  Musica  Mexicanay  dates  the 
modern  phase  of  Mexican  national  music  from  1912,  when,  on  July  7, 


224 


MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

Manuel  Ponce,  the  author  of  the  celebrated  EstrelUta,  gave  a  concert  of 
his  compositions  which  included  works  in  a  purely  national  vein. 

Mexican  folklore,  which  had  previously  been  regarded  as  exotic  mate¬ 
rial  to  be  treated  in  a  European  manner,  received  at  the  hands  of  Manuel 
Ponce  an  inner  interpretation  as  a  natural  form  of  art.  Chavez  and  Revuel- 
tas  continued  the  cultivation  of  Mexican  folklore  in  the  harmonic  and 
contrapuntal  technique  of  ultra-modern  music.  The  melo-rhythmic  com¬ 
plex  of  Mexican  folklore  also  serves  as  the  foundation  of  works  by  a  group 
of  Chavez’  disciples,  Daniel  Ayala,  Salvador  Contreras,  Pablo  Moncayo, 
and  Bias  Galindo.  These  four  musicians  banded  together  in  1935  into  a 
Grufo  de  los  Cuatro,  and  from  the  very  beginning  devoted  their  energies 
to  native  folklore  interpreted  in  the  contemporary  technique. 

In  the  meantime,  Mexican  musicology  has  made  great  progress.  Nu¬ 
merous  collections  of  Mexican  folk  songs  have  been  published  by  the 
Secretariat  of  Public  Education,  among  them  Musica  Oaxaquena,  which 
contains  Mamnitas  and  other  popular  songs  of  the  state  of  Oaxaca,  three 
issues  of  Sonss,  Canciones  y  Corridas  Michoacanos,  etc.  Ruben  Campos 
has  published  one  hundred  Mexican  melodies  in  his  book,  El  Folklore  y 
la  Musica  Mexicana  (351  pages,  1928).  He  also  is  the  author  of  El 
Folklore  Musical  de  las  Ciudades  (457  pages,  1930).  Both  these  books 
were  published  by  the  Mexican  Secretariat  of  Education.  The  National 
Museum  of  Mexico  has  sponsored  the  publication  of  the  descriptive 
catalogue  of  pre-Cortezian  instruments  by  Daniel  Castaneda  and  Vicente 
T.  Mendoza,  Instrumental  Precortesiano  (1933),  and  the  University  of 
Mexico  has  published  Mendoza’s  Romance  y  Corrida  (833  pages,  1939). 
Since  1930  several  histories  of  Mexican  music  have  appeared  in  print. 
Of  these,  Historia  de  la  Musica  Mejicana  by  Miguel  Galindo  (Colima, 

1933)  and  Historia  de  la  Musica  en  Mexico  by  Gabriel  Saldivar  (Mexico, 

1934)  cover  the  period  up  to  the  nineteenth  century  and  include  a  de¬ 
scription  of  ancient  instruments,  whereas  Panorama  de  la  Musica  Mexi¬ 
cana  by  Otto  Mayer-Serra  (Mexico,  1941)  deals  with  Mexican  music 
from  Independence  down  to  the  present  day. 

The  contemporary  school  of  Mexican  music  presents  a  wide  variety 
of  styles,  from  the  academic  to  the  ultra-modern.  Virtually  all  composers 
make  use  of  folklore,  either  by  quoting  from  popular  folk  songs,  or  by 
re-creating  the  melodic  and  rhythmic  character  of  native  songs  in  original 
melodies.  Chavez  quotes  Indian  themes  only  in  two  of  his  works.  Sil- 
vestre  Revueltas  (1899-1940)  wrote  music  that  was  unmistakably  Mexi¬ 
can  without  borrowing  from  folk  songs  at  all.  The  composers  of  the 


MEXICO 


225 


Grufo  de  los  Cuatro  make  use  of  actual  airs  of  the  people  only  when  mak¬ 
ing  arrangements  labeled  as  such,  as  for  instance  Sones  Mariachi  by  Bias 
Galindo.  More  literal  is  the  procedure  applied  by  Luis  Saudi,  who  leaves 
the  Indian  themes  unadorned,  adding  nothing  to  the  basic  pentatonic 
melodies.  Vicente  T.  Mendoza  and  Geronimo  Baqueiro  Foster  are  pri¬ 
marily  concerned  with  the  authenticity  of  the  melo-rhythmic  structure  of 
the  airs  and  dances  they  use  for  instrumental  arrangements. 

Candelario  Huizar  records  his  childhood  memories  in  a  symphonic 
sketch,  PueblerimSy  by  quoting  old  Indian  songs,  and  Jose  Rolon  follows 
the  same  procedure  in  his  symphonic  poem  entitled  J<?p5,  a  year  when 
he  was  a  child.  Manuel  Ponce,  in  his  symphonic  triptych,  Chafultefec^ 
presents  Mexican  folklore  in  the  Gallic  dress  of  Impressionist  writing. 
In  varying  degrees,  Juan  Leon  Mariscal,  Estanislao  Mejia,  Pedro  Mi- 
chaca,  Bernal  Jimenez,  Miguel  Meza,  and  Jimenez  Mabarak  resort  to 
the  natural  music  of  the  people  for  their  inspiration.  Alfonso  de  Elias 
sentimentalizes  the  Mexican  themes,  while  Arnulfo  Miramontes  submits 
them  to  the  process  of  formal  counterpoint. 

Rafael  Tello  makes  use  of  folklore  in  order  to  lend  an  air  of  authen¬ 
ticity  to  his  operas  and  symphonic  poems  based  on  historical  subjects. 
Jose  Vasquez  makes  occasional  reference  to  Mexican  folklore  in  his 
character  pieces.  Hernandez  Moncada,  though  professing  to  write  abso¬ 
lute  music,  borrows  native  rhythms  in  the  Finale  of  his  Symphony.  Jose 
Pomar,  the  Futurist  of  Mexican  music,  does  not  deem  it  unprofitable  to 
make  transcriptions  of  popular  dances.  Even  Julian  Carrillo,  the  re¬ 
doubtable  champion  of  quarter-tones,  delves  into  folklore  when  writing 
in  the  tempered  scale. 

Such  is  the  diversified  panorama  of  Mexican  music.  Carlos  Chavez 
has  summarized  this  diversity  in  a  terse  statement:  ^‘^The  music  of  the 
Indians  is  Mexican  music  5  but  also  Mexican  is  the  music  of  Spanish 
origin.  It  is  quite  proper  to  regard  even  the  native  Italianized  operas  or 
the  Germanized  symphonies  as  Mexican.  However,  the  state  of  being 
Mexican  does  not  necessarily  imply  high  merit.  Only  when  Mexican 
music  attains  quality,  does  it  become  true  national  art,” 

MUSICIANS  OF  MEXICO 

Rafael  Adame  (1906 — -)  studied  the  guitar  and  the  violoncello. 
Adame  was  the  first  Latin  American  musician  to  write  a  concerto  for  the 
guitar  and  orchestra.  He  performed  this  concerto  in  Mexico  City,  as  a 
soloist  with  a  symphonic  ensemble,  on  February  5,  1933.  On  July  28, 


12b  MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

1939,  he  played  the  violoncello  part  in  his  Concertino  for  Violoncello 
and  Orchestra^  performed  by  the  Orquesta  SinjSnica  de  Mexico.  These 
works  are  constructed  in  the  form  of  a  classical  suite.  In  the  native  vein, 
Adame  has  written  Sinfonia  Folklorica  for  military  band,  and  a  Con¬ 
certino  for  Guitar  and  Orchestra,  based  on  Mexican  popular  themes  of 
the  Mariachi  type.  The  manuscript  scores  of  his  Concerto  and  Concertino 
for  violoncello  and  orchestra,  as  well  as  the  Concerto  and  Concertino  for 
Guitar  and  Orchestra,  are  in  the  Fleisher  Collection  in  Philadelphia. 

Daniel  Ayala,  Mexican  composer  of  Indian  blood,  is  a  native  of 
Yucatan.  He  studied  violin  and  composition  in  Mexico  City  with  Silvestre 
Revueltas.  For  a  time  he  was  compelled  to  earn  his  living  by  playing  in 
the  night  club  Salon  Mexico.  Later  he  was  a  violinist  in  the  Orquesta 
Sinfonica  de  Mexico.  In  1940?  when  he  was  thirty-tw'’o  years  old,  he  was 
appointed  conductor  of  the  Banda  de  Policia  in  Merida,  Yucatan.  As  a 
composer,  Ayala  consistently  utilizes  the  ancestral  modes  and  rhythms 
of  the  Mayan  civilization  as  a  basis  for  original  works.  Ayala  applies  the 
modern  technique  of  composition  to  these  indigenous  subjects.  His  music 
has  been  described  as  ^^alma  nueva  de  la  cos  as  viejas^^  (the  new  soul  of 
things  old).  Ayala’s  first  important  work  in  the  native  vein  was  Uchhen 
X^Coholte  (Ancient  Cemetery),  a  symphonic  poem  based  on  a  Mayan 
legend.  It  was  performed  in  Mexico  City  on  October  13,  1933?  with  the 
orchestra  of  the  Conservatorio  Nacional  de  Mexico y  and  later,  in  ballet 
form,  on  March  6,  1936,  at  the  Palacio  de  Bellas  Artes  in  Mexico  City. 
Ayala’s  vocal  composition  U  Kayil  ChaaCy  an  incantation  for  rain,  to  the 
text  in  the  Mayan  language,  scored  for  soprano  with  a  chamber  orchestra 
and  Mexican  percussion  instruments,  was  presented  in  Mexico  City  on 
July  24,  1934.  Then  followed  a  symphonic  poem,  Tribuy  performed  by 
the  Orquesta  Sinfonica  de  Mexico y  Chavez  conducting,  on  October  18, 
1935.  It  is  in  three  movements:  En  la  Llanura  (In  the  Valley),  La 
Serpente  Negra  (The  Black  Serpent),  and  La  Danza  del  Fuego  (Dance 
of  Fire).  The  themes  of  Tribu  are  pentatonic,  and  there  are  polyrhythmic 
combinations  in  the  percussion  section,  which  includes  native  instruments. 
To  the  same  category  of  Mexican  works  belong  Ayala’s  orchestral  suite 
Paisaje  (Landscape),  performed  in  Mexico  City  on  June  2,  I93^> 
Panoramas  de  Mexico  (in  three  sections,  depicting  the  regions  of  Sonora, 
Veracruz,  and  Yucatan),  which  was  presented  by  the  Dallas,  Texas,  or¬ 
chestra  on  December  i,  1940.  Ayala’s  most  ambitious  work  in  the  Mexican 
vein  is  the  ballet  El  H  ombre  May  ay  inspired  by  the  legends  of  Mayan 
cosmogony.  It  was  played  in  symphonic  form  by  the  orchestra  of  the 


MEXICO 


227 


University  of  Mexico,  on  November  21,  1940,  under  the  composer’s  di¬ 
rection.  Ayala  has  furthermore  arranged  authentic  Mayan  themes  in  two 
suites  for  small  orchestra,  Los  Pescadores  Seris  (Fishermen  of  the  Seris 
Tribe),  and  Los  Danzanies  Yaquls  (Yaqui  Dancers),  performed  at  a 
concert  of  Ayala’s  music  given  in  Merida,  Yucatan,  on  July  31,  1942.  In 
non-Mexican  forms,  Ayala  has  written  a  piano  piece  entitled  Radiogram^ 
which  imitates  the  radio  code  signals 3  El  Grillo  (Cricket)  for  soprano 
and  a  chamber  group  j  Vidrios  Rotos  (Broken  Windows)  for  oboe,  clar¬ 
inet,  bassoon,  and  piano  j  Suite  Infantile  in  five  movements,  for  soprano 
and  chamber  orchestra  j  Cinco  Piezas  Infantiles  for  string  quartet  j  and 
songs.  In  1934,  Ayala,  together  with  Pablo  Moncayo,  Salvador  Contreras, 
and  Bias  Galindo,  formed  the  Grufo  de  los  Cuatro  (Group  of  the  Four). 
The  orchestral  scores  of  TribUy  Paisajey  and  Panoramas  de  Mexico  are 
in  the  Fleisher  Collection  in  Philadelphia. 

Geronimo  Baqueiro  Foster,  musicographer  and  composer,  studied 
music  in  Merida,  Yucatan,  and  played  flute  and  oboe  in  military  bands. 
Subsequently  he  took  a  course  in  composition  with  Julian  Carrillo  at  the 
Conservatorio  Nacional  in  Mexico  City.  For  a  number  of  years,  Baqueira 
Foster  wrote  on  music  for  newspapers.  In  1942,  at  the  age  of  forty-four, 
he  founded  an  important  music  magazine.  Revista  Musical  Mexicana, 
Baqueira  Foster  is  chiefly  interested  in  folklore,  and  his  own  compositions 
are  stylizations  or  arrangements  of  Mexican  dances  and  songs.  His  or¬ 
chestral  suite,  HuafangoSy  arranged  from  Mexican  dances  of  the  last 
three  centuries,  was  included  in  the  program  of  Mexican  music  conducted 
by  Chavez  at  the  Museum  of  Modern  Art  in  New  York  City,  in  May, 
1 940,  and  was  recorded  in  Columbia’s  album  of  Mexican  music.  The  score 
of  Huafango  No.  3  is  in  the  Fleisher  Collection  in  Philadelphia. 

Miguel  Bernal  Jimenez,  born  in  Morelia,  sang  as  a  child  in  the  choir 
at  the  Cathedral  of  Morelia.  In  1928  he  was  sent  to  Rome  to  study  at  the 
Pontifical  Institute  of  Sacred  Music,  where  he  received  the  master’s  degree 
in  organ  and  church  music.  He  returned  to  Mexico  in  1933,  when  he  was 
twenty-three  years  old,  and  was  appointed  director  of  the  School  of 
Sacred  Music  of  Morelia.  He  married  a  descendant  of  the  Mexican  Em¬ 
peror  Iturbide.  In  his  music,  Bernal  Jimenez  uses  liturgical  chants  as 
religious  folklore.  His  most  ambitious  work  of  this  nature  is  the  sym¬ 
phonic  drama  in  five  acts,  Tata  Vasco y  which  is  the  people’s  name  for  the 
first  bishop  of  Michoacan,  who  was  famous  in  Mexican  history  for  his 
charity  work  among  the  Indians,  The  thematic  material  of  Tata  Vasco 


228  MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

contains  both  Gregorian  and  primitive  Indian  elements.  The  concluding 
act  is  designed  in  the  form  of  a  symphony.  The  musical  treatment  of 
these  materials  is  eclectic,  suggesting  such  diverse  styles  as  Puccini, 
Palestrina,  and  Tchaikovsky.  Tata  Vasco  was  to  be  performed  in  1940  at 
the  Palacio  de  Bellas  Artes  in  Mexico  City,  but  at  the  last  moment  the 
government  canceled  the  performance  on  the  ground  that  the  opera 
promoted  religious  fanaticism,  which  was  contrary  to  the  spirit  of  the 
Mexican  Constitution.  The  opera  was  finally  performed  in  the  provincial 
town  of  Patzcuaro.  In  addition  to  Tata  Vasco ^  Bernal  Jimenez  has  written 
a  symphonic  poem,  Noche  en  Morelia  (Night  in  Morelia),  which  depicts 
a  scene  at  the  church,  with  the  contrasting  sounds  of  a  cabaret  orchestra 
mingling  with  the  solemnity  of  the  church  bells.  Noche  en  Morelia  was 
performed  on  August  i,  1941,  by  the  Orquesta  Sinfonica  de  Mexico y 
Chavez  conducting.  The  orchestral  scores  of  Noche  en  Morelia  and  a 
suite,  Michoacany  are  in  the  Fleisher  Collection  in  Philadelphia. 

The  composer  and  music  educator,  Gustavo  Campa,  was  a  native  of 
Mexico  City,  where  he  died,  on  October  29,  1934,  at  the  age  of  seventy- 
one.  He  studied  music  with  Melesio  Morales.  Dissatisfied  with  Morales’ 
method  of  teaching,  Campa  banded  together  with  five  other  disciples  of 
Morales  and  formed  in  1 8  87  a  rival  music  school  in  Mexico  City,  in  which 
he  championed  French  music,  to  combat  the  Italian  tradition  inculcated 
by  Morales.  From  1898  to  1914,  Campa  edited  a  progressive  music  maga¬ 
zine,  Gaceta  Musical.  Campa  wrote  an  opera,  El  Key  Poeta,  a  Mass,  and 
numerous  piano  pieces  and  songs,  all  of  them  unpublished. 

Julian  Carrillo,  the  ultra-modernist  of  Mexican  music,  is  of  Indian 
extraction.  He  was  born  in  1875,  in  Ahualulco,  and  studied  violin  at  the 
Conservatorio  Nacional  in  Mexico  City.  In  1899  Carrillo  won  a  special 
prize  offered  by  the  Dictator-President  Porfirio  Diaz  for  music  study  in 
Europe,  and  went  to  Leipzig,  where  he  studied  composition  and  played 
the  violin.  Later  he  took  courses  at  the  Conservatory  of  Ghent  in  Belgium. 
Returning  to  Mexico  in  1905,  he  gave  numerous  violin  recitals,  and  also 
appeared  as  conductor.  He  was  for  several  years  Director  of  the  Conserva- 
In  1926  he  visited  the  United  States. 

Carrillo’s  career  as  a  composer  falls  into  three  phases,  the  first  entirely 
academic  in  style,  the  second  distinctly  Mexican  in  its  inspiration  and 
romantic  in  treatment,  and  the  third  of  the  revolutionary  character, 
marked  principally  by  the  development  of  his  theory  of  fractional  tones, 
Sonido  jj.  The  academic  period  had  its  inception  during  his  studies  at 


MEXICO 


229 


Leipzig,  where  he  composed  his  First  Symphony  in.D  major,  his  Second 
Symphony  in  C  major,  a  Requiem  for  voices  and  orchestra,  two  Masses, 
four  violin  sonatas,  a  Sonata  for  Violoncello  and  Piano,  two  orchestral 
suites,  a  Piano  Quintet,  a  String  Quartet  in  E  flat,  and  a  String  Sextet.  To 
the  same  period  belong  his  two  early  operas,  M.athilda  in  four  acts  and 
Ossian  in  one  act.  The  second  period  of  Carrillo^s  creative  work  comprises 
his  three-act  opera  XuUtl^  to  the  subject  of  ancient  Mexico  5  an  opera  in 
four  acts,  entitled  Mexico  in  1810;  a  Fantasy  for  piano  and  orchestra  5 
the  orchestral  overture  8  de  Seftiembrei  and  a  symphonic  poem, 
Xochimilco  (name  of  a  pueblo  in  Mexico).  His  suite  Imfresiones  de  la 
Habana  for  orchestra  may  also  be  added  to  this  group. 

The  third  phase  overlaps  the  first  two  and  is  characterized  by  an  earnest 
inquiry  into  musical  potentialities  outside  the  framework  of  traditional 
harmony  and  scale  structure.  These  experiments  in  the  new  tonal  rela¬ 
tionships  are  exemplified  by  his  two  atonal  string  quartets.  Often  Carrillo 
applies  new  scales  to  music  of  distinctly  native  inspiration,  as,  for  instance, 
Xochimilco  (1935)?  based  on  the  progression  C,  D  flat,  E  flat,  F  flat,  G, 
A  flat,  B  double  flat,  C.  In  his  Concerto  for  Violin,  Flute,  and  Violoncello 
(1942),  Carrillo  uses  a  six-tone  scale,  C,  D  flat,  E,  F  sharp,  G,  B  flat,  C. 
But  his  most  far-reaching  innovation  is  undoubtedly  the  theory  which  he 
has  named  Sonido  15,  symbolizing  the  field  of  sounds  smaller  than  the 
twelve  semitones  of  the  tempered  scale.  The  first  formulation  of  this 
theory  dates  back  to  1895,  which  should  establish  Carrillo’s  place  as  a 
pioneer.  He  has  also  developed  a  special  number  notation  for  fractional 
intervals,  comprising  ninety-six  divisions  to  an  octave,  the  unit  being  one- 
sixteenth  of  a  tone.  The  notes  of  the  scale  are  marked  by  a  number  from 
O,  corresponding  to  C,  up  to  95,  which  corresponds  to  the  sound  one- 
sixteenth  of  a  tone  lower  than  the  octave  C.  The  octave  register  is  indicated 
by  lines  above  or  below  the  numbers.  In  order  to  clarify  the  nature  of 
fractional  tones,  Carrillo  made  transpositions  into  the  quarter-tone  system 
of  Bach’s  and  Beethoven’s  music,  by  virtue  of  which  the  octave  is  com¬ 
pressed  into  a  tritone,  with  other  intervals  similarly  halved.  Carrillo  has 
written  at  least  forty  works  for  quarter-tones,  eighth-tones  and  sixteenth- 
tones,  and  has  constructed  special  instruments  for  their  performance. 
Carrillo’s  works  in  fractional  tones  are  5  Primeras  Composicionesy  which 
include  Preludio  a  Cristobal  Colon  for  soprano,  violin,  flute,  and  guitar 
in  quarter-tones,  piccolo  in  eighth-tones,  and  harp  in  sixteenth-tones 5  Ave 
Maria  for  mixed  choirs  in  quarter-tones  and  accompanying  instruments 
in  fractional  tones  5  Tefefdn^  a  pastoral  scene  for  voices  in  quarter-tones 


230  MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

and  harp  in  sixteenth-tones;  Prelude  for  violoncello  in  quarter-tones,  ac¬ 
companied  by  an  ensemble  of  instruments  in  fractional  tones;  and  Ho]a 
ie  Album  (Album  Leaf)  for  violin,  flute,  clarinet,  and  guitar  in  quarter- 
tones,  piccolo  in  eighth-tones,  and  harp  in  sixteenth-tones;  Capriccio  for 
French  horn  in  sixteenth-tones;  and  Fantasia  Sonido  for  a  chamber 
orchestra  in  fractional  tones.  Carrillo  conducted  this  Fantasia  with  a  group 
of  specially  trained  players  in  Mexico  City  on  May  i8,  1930. 

His  Concertino  for  violin  and  guitar  in  quarter-tones,  piccolo  in  eighth- 
tones,  violoncello  in  quarter-tones  and  eighth-tones,  French  horn  and 
harp  in  sixteenth-tones,  with  the  accompaniment  of  a  normal  symphony 
orchestra,  was  performed  on  May  4,  1927,  by  the  Philadelphia  Orchestra 
under  Stokowski,  who  wrote  to  Carrillo:  “With  sixteenths  of  tone  you  are 
starting  a  new  musical  epoch.  I  want  to  be  of  service  to  this  beautiful  idea.” 
During  Carrillo’s  stay  in  the  United  States  he  published  a  magazine  in 
English  and  Spanish,  Fhe  T hirteenth  Sound,  of  which  a  few  issues  ap¬ 
peared  on  the  thirteenth  day  of  the  month.  He  has  also  written  a  song  in 
English,  “I  Think  of  You,”  for  a  soprano  singing  in  quarter-tones  to 
the  accompaniment  of  instruments  in  quarter-,  eighth-,  and  sixteenth-tones. 
In  IMexico  Carrillo  published  explanatory  pamphlets,  Pts-S ontdo 
(1930)  and  Genesis  de  la  Revolucion  Musical  del  Sonido  75  (1940). 
Preludio  a  Cristobal  Colon,  in  the  original  number  notation,  was  pub¬ 
lished  by  New  Music  in  its  issue  of  April  1944.  The  following  orchestral 
scores  are  in  the  Fleisher  Collection  in  Philadelphia:  Symphony  No.  i. 
Symphony  No.  2,  Suite  No.  i,  Imfresiones  de  Habana,  orchestral  suite 
Los  Naranjos  (Oranges),  Penumbras,  Xochimilco,  and  5  Primeras  Com- 
fosiciones  in  quarter-tones,  eighth-tones,  and  sixteenth-tones,  in  the  num¬ 
ber  notation. 

The  foremost  Mexican  composer  and  conductor  is  Carlos  Chavez,  born 
on  June  13, 1 899,  in  Mexico  City,  as  the  seventh  child  in  a  Mestizo  family 
(his  mother  was  Indian).  He  studied  the  elements  of  music  with  his 
older  brother,  IVIanuel,  and  later  took  lessons  with  Manuel  Ponce  in  piano 
and  composition.  As  early  as  1914,  when  Chavez  was  only  fifteen  years 
old,  he  composed  piano  pieces  in  the  manner  of  salon  music.  His  piano 
piece  Extase,  marked  Op.  7,  after  a  poem  of  Victor  Hugo,  shows  attempts 
at  dramatic  expression.  More  interesting  are  the  piano  pieces  Cantos 
Mexicanos,  Op.  16,  composed  in  1914,  which  include  arrangements  of 
revolutionary  Mexican  songs,  among  them  the  famous  Cucaracha.  In  1 9 1 9 
Chavez  wrote  a  full-fledged  symphony,  in  C  minor,  academic  in  structure, 
but  displaying  a  mature  technique.  In  1921  Chavez  composed  his  first 


MEXICO 


231 


Mexican  work,  a  ballet  entitled  El  Fuego  Nuevo  (The  New  Fire),  scored 
for  a  large  orchestra,  with  the  use  of  indigenous  instruments  of  percussion. 
The  writing  follows  procedures  of  Debussy  and  the  Impressionists.  The 
ballet  was  not  produced  until  November  4,  1928,  when  Chavez  conducted 
it  with  the  Or  quest  a  Sinfonica  de  Mexico. 

Related  in  spirit  to  El  Fuego  Nuevo  is  Chavez’s  indigenous  ballet 
Los  Cuatro  Soles y  symbolic  of  four  ^%uns,”  or  ages  of  earth,  air,  fire,  and 
water.  Chavez  conducted  this  work  with  the  Orquesta  Sinfonica  de 
Mexico  on  July  22,  1930.  Tierra  Mojada  (Humid  Soil),  a  short  work  for 
oboe,  English  horn,  and  chorus,  composed  in  1932,  was  performed  on 
September  6,  193^?  ^  Conservatory  concert  in  Mexico  City,  Tierra 

Mojada  is  written  after  an  impressionistic  poem,  but  the  music  possesses 
elements  that  are  Mexican  in  character. 

In  1921  Manuel  Ponce  wrote  about  Chavez  as  a  composer:  ^‘Carlos 
Chavez  is  a  rare  example  of  fecund  studiousness  which  stands  out  in  our 
environment  of  secular  laziness.  .  .  .  The  most  striking  feature  of 
Chavez’s  music  is  an  aspiration  for  modernism  and  originality,  which  is 
perfectly  justified  in  so  young  a  man.  For  Chavez  is  still  very  young, 
despite  his  appearance  of  earnestness,  and  a  little  melancholy.  He  has 
talent.  He  finds  himself  under  the  double  influence  of  romanticism  of  the 
type  of  Schumann  and  Chopin,  and  of  modernism  which  attracts  him 
with  its  glamor  of  novelty  and  exoticism.” 

In  1922  Chavez  went  to  Europe,  and  later  spent  several  years  in  New 
York.  During  these  peregrinations,  Chavez  acquired  a  taste  for  the  type 
of  abstract  and  quasi-scientific  music  that  was  the  fashion  of  the  day.  His 
compositions  written  between  1923  and  1 934  reflect  these  influences.  Some¬ 
times  he  emphasizes  the  abstraction  of  his  music  in  titles  from  geometry 
and  physics,  as  evidenced  in  PoUgonos  (Polygons)  for  piano  (1923), 
Exdgonos  (Hexagons)  for  voice  and  piano  (1924),  56  for  piano  (1925), 
Energm  for  nine  instruments  (1925,  first  performed  by  Slonimsky  in 
Paris  on  June  ii,  193 1)?  Soli  iox  oboe,  clarinet,  bassoon,  and  trumpet 
(1933),  Esfiral  (Spiral)  for  piano  and  violin  (1934),  and  the  unfinished 
orchestral  score  entitled  Pyramids.  This  period  culminated  in  the  ballet 
H.  P.  (Horsepower,  1931). 

His  compositions  in  absolute  forms,  a  Piano  Sonata  (1928),  Sonatina 
for  Violin  and  Piano  (1928),  znd  Unidad  (Unity)  for  piano  (1930), 
are  characterized  by  a  style  deliberately  angular,  sparse,  unprepossessing, 
and  almost  dialectic  in  its  uncompromising  brevity  and  compactness.  Paul 
Rosenfeld  describes  Chavez’s  piano  music  of  this  period  in  an  article 


232  MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

published  in  Modern  Music  of  May,  1932,  as  ^^a  marvel  of  contraction 
and  astringency  .  .  .  austere,  flinty,  foreshortened  .  .  .  partial  to  hol¬ 
low  octaves  and  single  unsupported  voices.”  In  the  same  spirit  of  absolute 
music,  but  with  some  concessions  to  classic  tradition,  is  the  Concerto  for 
Four  Horns.  Written  originally  in  1930,  the  Concerto  was  later  or¬ 
chestrated,  and  Chavez  conducted  it  in  Washington  on  April  ii,  1937. 

The  ballet  H.  P.  is  the  apotheosis  of  the  machine  age.  The  Mexican 
painter,  Diego  Rivera,  who  collaborated  in  the  production  of  H,  P.,  wrote: 
^Tt  is  the  unfolding  of  plastic  and  musical  deeds,  whose  connotations  are 
in  accord  with  the  rhythm  of  the  aspirations,  interests,  and  necessities  of 
our  social  existence.”  Chavez  himself  describes  H,  P.  ^^as  a  symphony  of 
the  sounds  around  us,  a  revue  of  our  times.”  As  to  musical  material,  Chavez 
states:  ^^Some  melodies  and  dances  of  the  people  may  be  encountered  in 
my  music.  However,  they  do  not  represent  the  constructive  basis  of  the 
work  but  simply  happen  to  coincide  with  my  form  of  self-expression.” 
The  program  note  of  the  ballet  further  elucidates  the  action:  ^Hhe  ballet 
H.  P.  symbolizes  the  relationship  existing  between  the  North  and  the 
Tropics.  The  Tropics  produce  raw  materials,  pineapples,  coconuts,  bananas. 
The  North  transforms  these  raw  materials  into  daily  consumers^  goods.” 
The  ballet  is  in  four  movements.  The  first,  Danza  del  H ombre  (The 
Dance  of  Man),  symbolizes  Man  as  the  creator  of  things.  The  second, 
El  Barco  (The  Ship),  depicts  the  commerce  flourishing  between  North 
and  South  America.  There  is  a  mariner’s  dance,  followed  by  a  tango,  ex¬ 
pressive  of  the  lure  of  the  South.  The  third  movement,  El  TropcOypic- 
tures  the  ship’s  stay  in  a  Southern  port.  Two  native  dances,  the  Sandunga 
and  HuafangOy  are  included  in  this  movement.  The  last  movement, 
Danza  de  los  H ombres  y  las  Mdquinas^  portrays  a  North  American  city 
with  its  skyscrapers.  The  workers  rebel  against  the  despotism  of  the  ma¬ 
chine,  and  panic  seizes  the  capitalists.  Finally  the  workers  conquer  the 
machines  and  convert  them  to  their  own  use. 

H,  P.,  composed  between  1926  and  1931,  embodies  elements  of 
Chavez’s  “geometric”  music,  as  well  as  his  Mexican  characteristics.  The 
sections  depicting  the  machine  age  are  almost  brutal  in  their  dissonance, 
while  the  tropical  music  is  rhythmically  sensuous.  H,  P.  was  performed 
as  a  symphonic  suite  on  December  4,  1931,  in  Mexico,  under  Chavez’s 
direction.  It  was  staged  as  a  ballet  by  the  Philadelphia  Grand  Opera 
Company,  under  the  direction  of  Leopold  Stokowski,  on  March  31,  1932. 
Olin  Downes,  writing  in  The  New  York  ridiculed  the  ballet  as 

“a  Gonfounding  mixture  of  Mexican  folk  tunes,  with  sounds  that  suggest 


MEXICO 


233 


the  whirring,  clicking,  and  roaring  of  machines.”  He  added:  ^^The  audi¬ 
ence  listened  and  laughed.  Perhaps  the  composer  laughed  too.  .  .  . 
Just  two  words  in  behalf  of  Chavez.  Mr.  Chavez  is  a  very  serious  man 
that  never  laughs  or  makes  jokes.  He  is  always  sad,  very  sad  indeed!” 

In  1928,  at  the  age  of  only  twenty-nine,  Chavez  was  appointed  director 
of  the  Conservatorio  Nacional  de  Muska  in  Mexico  City.  He  introduced 
new  methods  of  instruction,  putting  emphasis  on  the  importance  of  writ¬ 
ing  melody  and  melodic  counterpoint  in  all  styles:  diatonic,  chromatic,  and 
pentatonic.  Among  his  pupils  were  Daniel  Ayala,  Salvador  Contreras, 
Pablo  Moncayo,  and  Bias  Galindo.  In  1933  Chavez  relinquished  the 
direction  of  the  Conservatorio ^  and  was  appointed  on  February  21,  1933, 
Chief  of  the  Department  of  Fine  Arts,  a  post  which  he  held  for  one  year. 
In  1928  Chavez  founded  the  Orquesta  Sinfonka  de  Mexico^  of  which  he 
became  the  permanent  conductor.  In  1930  he  launched  a  new  series  of 
concerts,  Conciertos  far  a  Trabaj  adores  (Concerts  for  Workers),  at  which 
he  featured  music  of  social  consciousness. 

The  conviction  that  music  should  reflect  the  life  of  society  as  a  whole 
is  already  noticeable  in  H.  P.  It  is  made  emphatic  in  Chavez^s  Sinfonia 
Proletaria  or  Llamadas  (Calls),  which  opens  with  these  words  from  a 
revolutionary  ballad:  ^^This  is  how  the  proletarian  revolution  will  come.” 
Chavez  conducted  the  first  performance  of  the  Sinfonia  Proletaria  in 
Mexico  City  on  September  29,  1934. 

In  his  Ohertura  Refublkanay  first  performed  under  the  composeris 
direction  on  October  18,  1935,  he  quotes  several  popular  tunes  of  the 
Mexican  revolutionary  period.  His  rebellion  against  tradition  is  expressed 
in  a  semi-facetious  note  attached  to  the  score  of  the  Obertura  Refublicana: 
^Tn  naming  this  piece  an  overture  I  did  not  intend  to  convey  the  mean¬ 
ing  of  formal  construction.  I  chose  this  title  merely  because  the  sound  of 
the  word  is  pleasant.”  To  the  same  period  belongs  El  Sol,  for  chorus, 
based  on  an  original  Mexican  Corrido,  Chavez  conducted  this  work  with 
the  Orquesta  Sinfonka  de  Mexico  on  July  17,  1934. 

The  two  most  significant  orchestral  works  of  Chavez  are  Sinfonia  de 
Antigona  and  Sinfonia  India,  They  are  contrasted  in  spirit  and  treatment. 
Sinfonia  de  Antigona  was  designed  as  incidental  music  to  a  performance 
of  Sophocles^  Antigone  in  the  version  by  Jean  Cocteau,  produced  at  the 
Palacio  de  Bellas  Artes  in  Mexico  City  in  1932.  Later  Chavez  amal¬ 
gamated  this  music  into  symphonic  form  and  reorchestrated  it.  Chavez 
supplied  the  following  explanatory  note  for  the  first  performance  of 
Sinfonia  de  Antigona  given  under  his  direction  in  Mexico  City  on  Decern- 


234  MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

ber  15,  1933:  “This  is  a  piece  of  music  suggested  by  the  Greek  tragedy. 
It  is  a  symphony,  not  a  symphonic  poem,  which  is  to  say  that  the  music  is 
not  subordinated  to  any  program.  Only  the  most  rudimentary  materials 
are  made  use  of  in  the  score.  Stark  and  elemental,  this  music  can  be  made 
expressive  only  by  laconic  strength,  just  as  primitive  art  can  be  exalted 
only  by  power  that  is  also  primitive.”  The  orchestration  is  unusual,  re¬ 
quiring  diversified  wind  instruments,  including  a  bass  flute  and  a  heckel- 
phone,  as  well  as  eight  horns,  percussion,  and  two  harps.  The  work  is 
impressive  for  its  very  static  quality,  and  the  eloquent  absence  of  dynamic 
or  rhythmic  effects. 

Quite  different  in  design  and  execution  is  the  Sinfoma  India,  written  by 
Chavez  during  his  first  tour  in  the  United  States  as  conductor,  in  Decem¬ 
ber,  1935.  The  world  premiere  took  place  in  a  broadcast  performance  on 
January  23,  1936.  Chavez  subsequently  conducted  a  concert  performance 
of  Sinfoma  India  with  the  Boston  Symphony  Orchestra  on  April  10, 1936, 
and  later  in  Mexico  City  on  July  31,  1936.  As  the  title  implies,  Sinfoma 
India  is  an  expression  of  the  Indian’s  soul,  and  specifically  that  of  the 
Mexican  Indian.  In  Sinfoma  India,  Chavez  uses  three  Indian  melodies 
in  such  a  way  as  to  provide  three  basic  musical  ideas  for  three  movements 
played  without  pause.  Indigenous  Mexican  instruments,  such  as  jicara 
de  agua,  giiiro,  and  cascaheles  are  included  in  the  score,  as  a  supplement 
to  the  normal  symphony  orchestra.  A  large  assortment  of  Mexican 
instruments  is  also  used  in  Chavez’s  Aztec  composition,  Xochifili- 
Macuilxochitl  (the  name  of  the  Aztec  god  of  music),  which  he  conducted 
with  an  especially  assembled  group  of  Mexican  players  at  the  Museum 
of  Modern  Art  in  New  York  City  on  May  16,  1940.  To  approximate  the 
sound  of  the  ancient  Mexican  snail’s  shell,  Chavez  used  a  trombone. 

In  1937  Chavez  returned  to  composition  for  piano.  He  wrote  ten  Prel¬ 
udes  for  piano  solo,  quite  different  in  treatment  from  his  piano  com¬ 
positions  of  an  earlier  period.  Both  in  form  and  in  the  natural  pianism  of 
the  Preludes,  Chavez  renounced  his  former  combativeness,  and  created 
instead  the  modern  counterparts,  terse,  linear,  and  percussive,  of  Bach’s 
Preludes.  In  1938,  Chavez  embarked  on  the  composition  of  a  Piano 
Concerto,  which  he  completed  on  the  last  day  of  the  year  1940.  The  Con¬ 
certo  was  first  performed  on  January  i,  1942,  by  the  Philharmonic  Or¬ 
chestra  of  New  York.  It  is  in  three  movements,  of  which  the  first  is 
the  most  extensive.  Rather  than  use  the  traditional  sonata  form,  Chavez 
gives  to  the  piano  and  the  orchestra  two  separate  sets  of  themes,  developed 
antiphonally  until  the  concluding  section,  when  both  are  united.  The 


MEXICO 


235 


second  movement  is  lyric  in  character,  and  the  third  is  a  scherzo.  The 
writing  for  the  instrument  is  in  the  modern  percussive  manner,  which, 
however,  does  not  exclude  real  virtuosity  of  technique. 

Most  of  Chavez’s  music  has  been  published  in  the  United  States.  New 
Music  has  published  the  following:  Sonatina  for  Violin  and  Piano  (July, 
1928),  Piano  Sonata  (January,  1933),  Sfird  for  violin  and  piano  (April, 
1935),  Polygons^  Soloy  56,  BlueSy  FoXy  Paisaje,  Unidad  (October,  1936). 
Sonatina  for  Piano  was  published  by  Cos  Cob  Press  in  1930.  Schirmer  has 
published  the  Preludes  for  piano  and  a  reduction  for  two  pianos  of  the 
Piano  Concerto.  Chavez’s  orchestral  scores  are  also  available  through 
Schirmer.  The  scores  Energta  and  Soli  are  in  the  Fleisher  Collection  in 
Philadelphia.  In  Mexico,  Chavez’s  early  pieces — ExtasCy  Vais  IntimOy  and 
Cantos  Mexicanos  for  piano — were  published  in  1921  by  Wagner  and 
Levien.  The  piano  score  of  Smfonta  Proletaria  was  published  with  illustra¬ 
tions  by  Diego  Rivera  by  the  Mexican  Ministry  of  Fine  Arts  In  1934. 

A  book  by  Chavez,  Toward  a  New  Musky  in  the  English  translation  by 
Herbert  Weinstock,  was  published  In  New  York  by  Norton  (1937).  In 
this  book  Chavez  reiterates  his  faith  in  music  as  a  fluid  art  capable  of 
progress.  Much  of  the  contents  of  the  book  is  given  to  the  discussion  of 
the  potentialities  of  electrical  instruments  and  the  radio. 

In  1944,  the  Pan  American  Union  published  a  comprehensive  brochure, 
Carlos  ChaveZy  in  English  and  Spanish,  with  a  complete  catalogue  of  his 
works,  recordings,  bibliography,  and  a  biographical  article  by  Weinstock. 

Salvador  Contreras  (1912 - ),  who  belongs  to  the  vanguard  of 

Mexico’s  musicians,  studied  violin  with  Silvestre  Revueltas.  He  played 
in  the  cabarets  of  Mexico  City  and  subsequently  entered  the  Orquesta 
Sinfonka  de  Mexico y  and  took  lessons  in  composition  with  Carlos  Cha¬ 
vez.  In  1935  Contreras,  then  twenty-three,  joined  Daniel  Ayala,  Pablo 
Moncayo,  and  Bias  Galindo  to  form  a  Grufo  de  Jovenes  Comfosi- 
toreSy  later  renamed  Grufo  de  los  Cuatro.  At  the  first  concert  of  this 
group  given  in  Mexico  City  on  November  25,  1935,  Contreras  presented 
his  Sonata  for  Violin  and  Violoncello,  and  Danza  for  piano;  at  another 
concert,  on  October  15,  1936,  he  presented  a  String  Quartet  and  Tres 
Poemas  for  soprano  and  chamber  orchestra,  descriptive  of  three  geo¬ 
graphical  Mexican  scenes.  In  larger  forms,  Contreras  has  written  Muska 
fata  Orquesta  Sinjonkay  performed  by  the  Orquesta  Sinfonka  de  Mexico 
on  August  1 6, 1 94O3  and  Corridas  in  four  sections,  for  orchestra  and  chorus, 
performed  on  August  15,  1941.  The  latter  work  is  based  on  Mexican  bal¬ 
lads,  from  melodies  in  the  book  El  Romance  Esfanol  y  el  Corrido 


236 


MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 


MexicanOy  by  Vicente  Mendoza.  The  music  of  Contreras  is  markedly 
contrapuntal  in  texture,  and  the  treatment  is  that  of  modern  neoclassicism. 
In  1942,  Contreras  composed  Ohertura  en  Tiempo  de  Danza^  in  7/8  and 
5/8  time,  alternating  with  2/4  and  3/4.  The  scores  oi  Tres  Movimientos 
Sinfonicosy  Suite  for  chamber  orchestra,  and  Musica  para  Orquesta  Sin- 
fonica  are  in  the  Fleisher  Collection  in  Philadelphia. 

Alfonso  de  Elias,  of  Mexico  City,  studied  piano,  and  took  a  course  in 
composition  with  Gustavo  Campa  and  Rafael  Tello.  A  very  prolific  com¬ 
poser,  Alfonso  de  Elias  has  adopted  a  romantic  style  reminiscent  of  Brahms 
and  Tchaikovsky,  without  a  trace  of  contemporary  influence.  Among  his 
works  are  two  symphonies,  several  symphonic  poems,  string  quartets, 
pieces  for  piano,  violin,  and  violoncello,  as  well  as  vocal  compositions.  His 
^^symphonic  triptych,”  El  Jar  din  Encantado  (1924),  and  the  First  Sym¬ 
phony  (1926)  were  performed  by  the  orchestra  of  the  Conservatory  of 
Mexico,  on  October  9,  1927.  The  same  orchestra  presented  his  Variaciones 
sobre  un  T ema  MexicanOy  on  March  4,  1928,  and  the  Second  Symphony, 
on  July  I,  1935.  His  symphonic  poem  on  Mexican  themes,  Cacahuamilpay 
was  performed  by  the  Orquesta  Sinfonica  de  Mexico y  Carlos  Chavez 
conducting,  on  August  12,  1930.  Elias’  ballet  Las  Biniguendas  de 
Plata  (1933)  was  performed  In  symphonic  form  by  the  orchestra  of 
the  University  of  Mexico,  under  the  composer’s  direction,  on  November 
21,  1940.  His  Mexican  suite  TlalmanalcOy  for  strings,  clarinet,  bassoon, 
trumpet,  and  piano,  was  given  at  the  Palacio  de  Bellas  Artes  in  Mexico 
City,  on  January  22,  1937.  The  program  note  described  Elias  as  ^^till 
fascinated  by  the  sirens  of  romanticism,”  but  held  out  the  hope  that  ^^the 
sincerity  of  the  composer,  the  solidity  of  his  technique,  and  his  youth  are 
propitious  for  a  desirable  change.”  The  following  orchestral  scores  by 
Alfonso  de  Elias  are  in  the  Fleisher  Collection  in  Philadelphia:  El  Jar  din 
Encantado y  V ariaciones  sobre  un  Tema  Mexicano y  Symphony  No.  i,  Las 
Biniguendas  de  Plata y  Cacahuamilpay  and  Tlalmanalco, 

Juan  B.  Fuentes  (1869 — ~)  was  born  in  Guadalajara.  Although 
largely  self-taught,  Fuentes  has  developed  a  technique  of  composition 
based  on  the  French  nineteenth-century  musical  tradition.  He  has  pub¬ 
lished  several  manuals  on  harmony  and  solfeggi.  He  has  written  Sinfonia 
Mexicana  ior  orchestra,  in  which  folk  themes  are  used  as  thematic  ma¬ 
terial.  He  has  also  composed  for  piano  and  voice.  His  music  remains  un¬ 
published. 


MEXICO 


237 

Bias  Galindo,  who  is  of  Indian  blood,  studied  composition  at  the  Con¬ 
servatory  of  Mexico  with  Chavez,  Rolon,  and  Huizar.  In  the  summer  of 
1941,  when  he  was  thirty  years  of  age,  he  enrolled  in  the  Berkshire 
Academy,  Massachusetts,  where  he  took  lessons  with  Aaron  Copland.  In 
^93 5 j  together  with  Ayala,  Contreras,  and  Moncayo,  he  formed  a  group 
of  young  composers  knowm  as  the  Grufo  de  los  Cuatro.  His  Quartet  for 
Violoncellos  was  performed  at  the  concert  of  the  Grufo  de  los  Cuatro  in 
Mexico  City  on  October  15,  1936.  Two  of  his  ballets,  Entre  Sombras 
Anda  el  Fuego  (Among  Shadows  Walks  Fire)  and  Danza  de  las  Fuerzas 
Nuevas  (Dance  of  the  New  Forces),  were  staged  in  Mexico  City  in  1940. 
Sones  Mariachiy  for  orchestra,  illustrative  of  the  type  of  music  played  by 
the  Mexican  Mariachi  bands,  was  introduced  by  Chavez  at  the  festival 
of  Mexican  music  at  the  Museum  of  Modern  Art  in  New  York  City,  on 
May  16,  1940,  and  was  also  recorded  in  the  Columbia  album  of  Mexican 
music.  Galindo  has  also  written  a  piece  scored  exclusively  for  indigenous 
Mexican  instruments,  which  was  performed  under  the  title  Obra  far  a 
Orquesta  Mexicana  on  October  z8,  1938,  by  the  specially  assembled  or¬ 
chestra.  All  these  works  are  characterized  by  an  almost  literal  interpreta¬ 
tion  of  Mexican  folklore,  in  somewhat  crude  diatonic  harmonies.  After 
his  studies  at  the  Berkshire  Academy  in  1941,  Bias  Galindo  moderated 
his  style  in  the  direction  of  dignified  neoclassicism,  without,  however, 
relinquishing  the  characteristic  Mexican  flavor.  To  this  period  belongs  his 
Sextet  for  flute,  clarinet,  bassoon,  horn,  trumpet,  and  trombone.  His  Piano 
Concerto  in  three  movements,  written  in  1942  from  the  material  of  an 
earlier  Concertino  for  Two  Pianos,  is  Mexican  in  thematic  content,  while 
adhering  structurally  to  the  general  outline  of  classical  sonata  form.  It 
was  performed  for  the  first  time  by  the  Orquesta  SinfSnica  de  Mexico^ 
Chavez  conducting,  on  July  24,  1942.  In  1944  Galindo  wrote  a  sym¬ 
phony  and  a  piano  sonata.  The  orchestral  scores  of  Galindo’s  Preludios 
and  Danza  de  las  Fuerzas  Nuevas  are  in  the  Fleisher  Collection  in  Phila¬ 
delphia, 

Son  of  a  German  father  and  a  Spanish  mother,  Rodolfo  Halffter, 
composer  now  resident  in  Mexico,  is  a  native  of  Madrid.  His  brother, 
Ernest  Halffter,  is  a  well-known  Spanish  composer.  Both  Ernesto  and 
Rodolfo  Halffter  were  self-taught  in  composition,  and  both  were  in¬ 
fluenced  by  Manuel  de  Falla  and  Stravinsky.  Rodolfo  Halffter,  at  the 
age  of  twenty-four,  began  to  compose  in  1924,  when  he  wrote  an  orchestral 
suite.  In  1931  he  composed  a  choreographic  divertissement,  Don  Lindo 


238  MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

ie  Almeria^  which  was  performed  at  the  Barcelona  Festival  on  April  22, 
1936.  He  has  also  written  Obertura  Concertante  for  piano  and  orchestra 
(1932)5  some  piano  music,  and  songs.  After  the  outbreak  of  civil  war  in 
Spain,  Rodolfo  Halffter  became  a  meniber  of  the  Central  Musical  Council 
of  the  Spanish  Republic,  and  Chief  of  the  Music  Section  of  the  Ministry 
of  Propaganda.  When  the  Republic  fell,  he  crossed  on  foot  to  France. 
Several  of  his  musical  manuscripts,  among  them  Imfromftu  for  or¬ 
chestra  and  a  one-act  opera  after  Cervantes,  were  lost  when  a  bomb  hit 
the  house  where  he  stayed  at  the  Spanish  frontier.  Halifter  arrived  in 
Mexico  in  1939,  and  became  naturalized  as  a  Mexican  citizen.  In  Mexico 
he  wrote  a  ballet,  La  Madrugada  del  Pamdero  (The  Baker’s  Morning), 
and  Concerto  for  Violin  and  Orchestra  in  A  major,  in  four  classical  move¬ 
ments.  The  Concerto  was  performed  by  Samuel  Dushkin,  the  violinist, 
who  commissioned  the  composition  of  the  work,  and  the  Orquesta  Sin- 
fonica  de  Mexico^  Carlos  Chavez  conducting,  on  June  26,  1942.  The  style 
of  Halffter’s  music  is  marked  by  terseness  of  expression  and  compactness 
of  musical  development.  His  melos  is  rooted  in  Spanish  folklore,  and 
his  rhythmic  invention  adds  impetus  to  the  thematic  material.  His  har¬ 
monic  texture  is  basically  tonal,  with  chordal  agglomerations  at  dynam¬ 
ically  climactic  points,  and  his  counterpoint  is  free  from  formal  restraint. 
Halffter’s  piano  pieces  were  published  in  Spain.  His  Danza  de  Avila 
for  piano  is  included  in  the  series  Masters  of  Our  Day,  issued  by  Carl 
Fischer  (New  York,  1941).  Halffter  has  also  compiled  a  collection  of 
Spanish  Melodies,  Cancionero  Musical  Esfanol,  published  in  Mexico  in 
^939* 

Eduardo  Hernandez  Moncada  (1899 - )  began  to  study  music  at 

an  early  age,  and  earned  his  living  as  a  boy  playing  in  theaters  and  cinemas. 
Later  he  went  to  Mexico  City,  and  entered  the  Conservatorio  Nacional  de 
Musica,  where  he  studied  composition  with  Rafael  Tello.  At  the  same  time 
he  was  engaged  in  numerous  other  pursuits,  as  an  electrician,  book  sales¬ 
man,  and  farmer.  Hernandez  Moncada,  then  thirty-seven,  was  appointed 
assistant  conductor  of  the  Orquesta  Sinfonica  de  Mexico  in  1 936.  He  began 
to  compose  late  in  life,  and  wrote  education  pieces  for  music  schools.  His 
first  work  of  importance  was  a  symphony  in  four  movements,  which  was 
performed  for  the  first  time  by  the  Orquesta  Sififonica  de  MLexico,  on 
July  3ij  1 942-*  Entirely  academic  in  structure  and  technical  treatment, 
the  symphony  has  the  merit  of  being  an  effective  and  well-orchestrated 
composition.  The  last  movement  contains  some  Mexican  rhythms. 


MEXICO 


239 

A  very  significant  Mexican  composer  is  Candelario  Huizar,  of  Indian 
origin,  who  was  born  at  Jerez  in  1888.  He  learned  the  rudiments  of  music 
largely  by  instinct,  and  as  a  youth  played  in  military  bands.  In  1918  he 
went  to  Mexico  City,  where  he  studied  with  Gustavo  Campa.  Huizar 
began  to  compose  late  in  life,  and  has  written  exclusively  for  orchestra.  His 
music  is  imbued  with  the  spirit  of  Indian  folklore.  For  his  themes,  he 
uses  both  actual  folk  songs  and  his  original  melodies.  He  often  combines 
an  Indian  theme  in  free  counterpoint  with  its  own  variation,  in  contrasting 
instrumental  colors.  His  harmonic  texture  is  strong  and  compact.  His 
orchestration,  never  opulent,  is  individual  and  sensitive.  Huizar’s  first 
orchestral  work,  Imagenes,  written  at  the  age  of  forty-one,  was  performed 
by  the  Orquesta  Sinfonka  de  Mexico,  Chavez  conducting,  on  December 
13, 1929.  His  second  symphonic  poem,  Pueblerinas,  reflects  the  memories 
of  an  Indian  village.  It  is  one  of  Huizar’s  most  typically  Mexican  scores. 
Its  three  sections  are  based  on  authentic  themes,  one  of  which  is  a  popular 
Jarabe,  danced  usually  at  harvest  time  in  Huizar’s  native  region. 
Pueblerinas  was  performed  by  Chavez  on  November  6,  1931.  His  third 
symphonic  poem,  Surco  (literally,  plow),  depicts  a  village  fiesta,  begin¬ 
ning  with  a  pastoral  song  and  ending  in  a  parade.  Siirco  was  given  its 
first  performance  by  Chavez  on  October  25,  1935. 

Huizar  has  written  four  symphonies,  all  inspired  by  Mexican  folklore, 
but  not  textually  derivative  from  it.  The  form  of  Huizar’s  symphonies 
is  cyclic,  with  the  initial  theme  often  recapitulated  in  the  finale.  The  First 
Symphony,  performed  by  Chavez  on  November  14,  1930,  is  in  three 
movements:  Vivo,  Adagio,  Allegro  Vivo.  The  Second  Symphony  bears 
the  subtitle  Oxfaniztli,  which  is  the  Aztec  name  for  the  month  of  October. 
There  are  imitations  of  bird  calls  in  the  wood-wind  instruments,  and  the 
ancient  Aztec  drums,  tefonaxtle  and  huehuetl,  are  included  in  the  score. 
Ox-panizdi  was  performed  on  September  4,  1936,  by  the  Orquesta  Sin- 
jonica  de  Mexico,  Chavez  conducting.  Huizar’s  Third  Symphony,  per¬ 
formed  by  Chavez  on  July  29, 1938,  is  in  the  traditional  four  movements. 
The  writing  is  diatonic  without  being  confined  to  a  definite  key,  and  the 
rhythmic  element  is  very  strong.  The  Fourth  Symphony,  presented  by 
the  Orquesta  Sinfonka  de  Mexico  under  Mitropoulos  on  August  7,  1942, 
is  also  in  four  movements,  with  the  melodic  material  taken  from  folk  songs 
and  dance  airs  of  Jalisco.  The  principal  theme  of  the  slow  movement  is  a 
pentatonic  Ave  Maria  of  the  Mexican  Indians.  The  orchestral  scores  of 
Huizar’s  first  three  symphonies,  three  symphonic  poems,  and  an  orchestral 


24-0  MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

fantasy  on  the  Mexican  waltz  Sobre  las  Olas  are  in  the  Fleisher  Collection 
in  Philadelphia.  There  is  a  detailed  analysis  of  Huizar’s  music  in  Panorama 
de  la  M-usica  M.exicana  by  Otto  Mayer-Serra  (Mexico,  1941). 

The  composer,  Carlos  Jimenez  Mabarak,  was  educated  in  Belgium. 
He  studied  music  in  Brussels,  and  upon  his  return  to  Mexico  in  1937 
began  to  compose.  At  that  time  Jimenez  Mabarak  was  twenty-one  years 
old.  His  preference  is  for  Mexican  subjects,  which  he  stylizes  in  the  man¬ 
ner  of  Manuel  de  Falla.  He  has  written  a  monodrama  for  radio,  Erigona, 
a  Concerto  for  Piano  and  Orchestra,  and  several  ballet  suites,  among 
them  La  Muiieca  Pastillita  (The  Doll  Pastillita).  The  orchestral  scores 
of  two  works  by  Jimenez  Mabarak,  El  Sastrecillo  y  el  Dueno  (Little 
Tailor  and  the  Landlord)  and  a  Rondo,  are  in  the  Fleisher  Collection  in 
Philadelphia. 

Jacobo  Kostakowsky,  a  naturalized  Mexican  musician,  was  born  in 
Russia  in  1893  ^.nd  settled  in  Mexico  in  1925.  Kostakowsky  studied  violin 
in  Russia;  in  1908  he  went  to  Vienna,  where  he  took  lessons  in  composition 
with  Schoenberg.  Later  he  spent  some  time  in  Paris,  where  he  attended 
classes  of  Vincent  dTndy.  Kostakowsky  began  to  compose  late  in  life; 
all  his  major  works  date  since  1935.  His  style  is  basically  Russian,  re¬ 
flecting  the  lyricism  of  Tchaikovsky.  His  harmonic  writing  is  opulent, 
somewhat  in  the  Mahler  manner.  Kostakowsky  has  written  numerous 
works  for  orchestra.  In  recent  years  he  has  adopted  Miexican  folklore  as 
thematic  material  for  programmatic  music  and  ballets.  Several  of  his 
works  for  chamber  orchestra  have  been  performed  by  the  Orquesta  de 
Camara  of  the  Secretariat  of  Public  Education,  at  the  Palacio  de  Bellas 
Artes  in  Mexico  City,  namely:  Clarin  and  Barricada,  two  ballets  with 
chorus,  on  the  subject  of  the  Mexican  Revolution,  in  which  Kostakowsky 
quotes  five  revolutionary  songs  (August  26,  1935) ;  Estamfas  Callejeras 
(Street  Sketches,  January  22,  1937,  Revueltas  conducting);  Triangula, 
a  ballet  suite  in  four  movements  (December  9,  1937);  Marimba,  a 
capriccio  for  piano  and  orchestra  (September  6,  1939);  and  Sinfonietta 
T rofical  in  four  movements  (November  6,  1941).  Kostakowsky  has  also 
written  three  symphonic  poems,  Taxco  ( 1937),  Juventud  (1937),  Lascas 
(193^)  }  a  ballet,  Creadon  del  H ombre  (1939);  a  symphonic  suite 
in  four  movements,  El  Eomancero  Gitano  \  193^)5  Suite  N eo-Romantica 
(1941)  ;  Serenata  (  1941);  Concertino  for  Violin  and  Orchestra  (1940)  ; 
and  Concerto  for  Violin  and  Orchestra  (1942);  as  well  as  two  string 


MEXICO 


241 


quartets,  piano  pieces,  and  songs.  All  symphonic  works  by  Kostakowsky. 
are  in  the  Fleisher  Collection  in  Philadelphia. 

Juan  Leon  Mariscal,  whose  birthplace  was  Oaxaca,  studied  at  the 
Conservatorio  Nacional  in  Mexico  City  with  Julian  Carrillo.  In  1923, 
when  Mariscal  was  twenty-four  years  old,  he  received  a  government  prize 
for  a  symphonic  work  and  was  given  a  fellowship  for  study  in  Germany. 
Upon  his  return  to  Mexico  he  was  appointed  instructor  of  composition  at 
the  Conservatorio  Nacional,  Mariscal  has  written  two  symphonies,  Fanr- 
tasia  Mexicana  for  large  orchestra,  Sinfonietta,  a  Septet,  a  String  Quartet, 
piano  pieces,  and  songs.  His  most  characteristic  work  is  an  orchestral 
suite,  Tres  Estam^fas  OaxaquenaSy  in  three  movements,  depicting  land¬ 
marks  of  the  composers  native  region.  Under  the  title  Guelaguetza  this 
suite  was  performed  by  the  Orquesta  SinfSnica  Nacional^  Revueltas  con¬ 
ducting,  at  the  Palacio  de  Bellas  Artes  in  Mexico  on  June  9,  1936.  His 
First  Symphony  was  performed  by  the  Orquesta  Sinjonica  de  Mexico  on 
February  3,  1929.  The  orchestral  scores  of  Guelaguetza  and  Fantasia 
Mexicana  are  in  the  Fleisher  Collection  in  Philadelphia. 

Estanislao  Mejia  was  born  in  Tlaxcala  in  1882  and  studied  at  the 
Conservatorio  Nacional  in  Mexico  City.  His  first  important  work,  the 
opera,  Edithy  was  written  in  1918,  when  he  was  thirty-six  years  of  age. 
A  symphony  was  written  in  1921,  and  a  ballet,  Schadaniy  in  1934.  In  a 
purely  Mexican  manner  he  has  composed  Suite  Mexicana  for  orchestra, 
which  was  performed  in  Mexico  City  on  May  i,  1919.  Mejia  has  also 
published  a  manual  of  counterpoint,  canon  and  fugue.  Between  1934  and 
1938  he  was  the  director  of  the  Conservatorio  Nacional  in  Mexico  City. 
In  that  capacity,  he  continued  the  nationalist  tradition  established  by 
Chavez,  and  urged  his  students  to  use  Mexican  folk  themes  as  prime 
sources  in  their  music.  Mejia^s  compositions  have  not  been  published.  The 
score  of  his  ballet  Schadani  and  two  Trozos  Mexicanos  are  in  the  Fleisher 
Collection  in  Philadelphia. 

Vicente  T.  Mendoza,  born  in  Cholula,  specializes  in  Mexican  folklore. 
In  1907,  when  he  was  thirteen  years  old,  he  went  to  Mexico  City,  where 
he  studied  piano  and  composition  at  the  Conservatorio  Nacional  de  Musica, 
At  the  same  time  he  studied  drawing,  and  between  1912  and  1930  oc¬ 
cupied  the  post  of  a  topographer  at  the  Department  of  Forestry.  Later  he 
taught  solfeggio  at  the  Conservatorio  Nacional,  Mendoza’s  chief  interest, 
however,  lies  in  Mexican  folklore  and  in  musical  paleography.  In  col- 


242  MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

laboration  with  Daniel  Castaneda  he  has  compiled  a  valuable  treatise  on 
pre-Cortezian  instruments,  which  was  published  in  1937  under  the  title 
Instrumental  Precortesiano.  He  has  also  published  a  comparative  study, 
El  Romance  Esfanol  y  El  Corrido.Mexicano  (Mexico  City,  1939).  As  a 
composer  he  confines  himself  to  arrangements  of  Mexican  folk  songs  and 
dances.  His  orchestral  Danza  T arahumara  was  performed  by  the  Orquesta 
Sinjonka  de  Mexico  on  July  22,  1930,  Chavez  conducting.  This  score 
and  td&o  Jalisco,  Suite  Indigena,  Inupresiones  de  Estio,  and  Tierras  Solar es 
are  in  the  Fleisher  Collection  in  Philadelphia. 

Miguel  C.  Meza  is  a  native  of  San  Luis  Potosi.  He  studied  piano  and 
composition  at  the  Conservatorio  Nacional  in  Mexico  City,  and  upon 
graduation  in  I932>  when  he  was  twenty-nine  years  of  age,  he  dedicated 
himself  to  teaching,  choral  conducting,  and  composition.  Meza  has  writ¬ 
ten  several  orchestral  works,  among  them  Sinfonia  en  Estilo  Mexicano 
(Symphony  in  a  Mexican  Style),  a  symphonic  poem  entitled  Revolution, 
an  orchestral  suite,  Imfresiones,  and  a  ballet.  Las  Biniguendas  de  Plata, 
performed  by  the  Orquesta  Sinjonka  de  Mexico  on  October  4,  1935. 

Pedro  Michaca,  a  composer  who  specializes  in  theoretical  research  and 
musical  pedagogy,  comes  from  Canatlan.  Michaca  studied  with  Gustavo 
Campa  and  Manuel  Ponce  at  the  Conservatorio  Nacional  in  Mexico  City. 
In  1925  he  was  appointed  instructor  at  the  Conservatory.  In  1942 
Michaco,  then  forty-five  years  old,  compiled  an  analytical  manual  of  har¬ 
mony,  La  Evolucion  de  la  Armonia  a  T raves  del  Princifio  Ciclko-Muskal, 
in  which  he  traces  the  evolution  of  the  diatonic,  pentatonic,  and  chromatic 
scales,  with  a  supplementary  chapter  on  musical  systems  based  on  the 
division  of  the  octave  into  equal  intervals.  Michaca  has  composed  little. 
The  orchestral  score  of  his  symphonic  poem  El  Zarco  (nickname  of  a 
romantic  Mexican  bandit)  is  in  the  Fleisher  Collection  in  Philadelphia. 

Arnulfo  Miramontes  (1882 - ),  one  of  Mexico’s  most  prolific  com¬ 

posers,  is  a  native  of  Tala.  He  studied  organ  at  Aguas  Calientes,  and  in 
1907,  at  the  age  of  twenty-five,  went  to  Berlin,  where  he  took  courses  in 
piano  and  composition,  returning  to  Mexico  in  19 ii.  Miramontes  has 
written  two  operas,  two  cantatas,  twelve  orchestral  compositions,  eighteen 
religious  works,  eleven  pieces  for  organ,  forty-nine  piano  pieces,  and 
thirteen  songs.  The  subjects  of  his  operas  and  symphonic  poems  usually 
relate  to  pre-Cortezian  Mexico.  His  technique  of  composition  is  contra¬ 
puntal,  and  often  reaches  a  considerable  degree  of  linear  complexity,  while 
keeping  well  within  the  traditional  precepts  of  European  harmony.  His 


MEXICO 


243 


opera  Anahuac  was  produced  in  Mexico  on  January  285  19185  his  second 
opera,  Cihuatl^  has  not  been  performed.  Among  his  orchestral  works,  the 
following  have  been  performed  by  various  ensembles  in  Mexico  City: 
Obertura  Primavera  (September  26,  1910),  First  Symphony  (July  14, 
1916)5  Suite  Sinjonica  Mexicana  (May  15,  1918),  Revolucion  (August 
23?  ^936)5  and  a  ballet  suite.  Iris  (November  21,  1940).  The  following 
works  by  Miramontes  are  in  the  Fleisher  Collection  in  Philadelphia:  two 
symphonies.  Suite  Sinjonica  Nlexicana^  IriSy  La  Leyenda  de  los  Volcanes 
(Legend  of  the  Volcanoes,  from  the  opera  Anahuac)^  Jarabe  (Mexican 
dance),  Theme  and  Variations y  and  a  symphonic  Prelude. 

A  Mexican  composer  of  the  vanguard,  Pablo  Moncayo  began  to 
study  piano  at  the  age  of  seventeen  with  Hernandez  Moncada,  and  later 
studied  composition  with  Chavez.  To  earn  his  living  he  played  in  jazz 
orchestras  and  cabarets  in  Mexico  City,  and  later  joined  the  percussion 
section  of  the  Orquesta  Sinjonica  de  Mexico,  In  his  compositions,  Moncayo 
follows  the  precepts  established  by  Chavez,  using  indigenous  melodic 
material  in  his  music.  In  1935  Moncayo,  who  was  then  twenty-three, 
together  with  Ayala,  Contreras,  and  Galindo,  formed  the  Grufo  de  los 
CuatrOy  dedicated  to  the  cause  of  Mexican  modern  music.  Moncayo’s  piece 
for  flute  and  string  quartet,  to  an  Aztec  subject,  entitled  AmatzinaCy  was 
presented  at  the  first  concert  of  the  Grufo  de  los  CuatrOy  on  November 
^935?  Mexico  City.  His  Sonatina  for  Violin  and  Piano  and  Romanza 
for  piano  trio  were  performed  at  the  second  concert  of  the  group,  on 
October  15,  1936.  His  first  orchestral  work,  a  Mexican  dance  HuafangOy 
was  performed  by  Chavez  and  the  Orquesta  Sinjonica  de  Mexico  on 
August  15,  1941.  The  orchestral  scores  of  Moncayo’s  symphonic  dance 
Huey af  an  and  of  Amatzinac  are  in  the  Fleisher  Collection  in  Philadelphia. 

A  composer  who  was  a  firm  believer  in  the  superiority  of  the  Italian 
style,  and  who  inculcated  the  Italian  tradition  in  his  teaching,  was  Melesio 
Morales  (1838-1908),  who  died  at  San  Pedro  de  los  Pinos  at  the  age  of 
seventy.  As  a  boy,  he  showed,  talent  for  composition.  After  a  few  years’ 
study  in  Italy,  he  was  appointed  professor  of  composition  at  the  newly 
established  Conservatorio  National  (1877)  in  Mexico  City.  He  wrote 
eight  operas,  of  which  four  w^ere  produced  in  Mexico  City:  Romeo  and 
Juliet  (January  27,  1863),  Ildegonda  (January  27,  1866),  Gino  Corsini 
(July  14, 1877),  and  Cleofatra  (November  14,  1891).  He  also  composed 
a  curious  orchestral  piece,  La  Locomotivay  performed  on  November  16, 
1 869,  on  the  occasion  of  the  opening  of  a  new  railroad  in  Mexico,  Morales’ 


244  MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

piano  musicj  in  a  somewhat  Chopinesque  style,  enjoyed  a  certain  degree 
o£  popularity  in  Mexico.  See  the  bibliographical  note  on  Melesio  Morales 
by  Jesus  Romero,  in  Revista  Musical  Mexicana  of  November  7,  1943. 

Jaime  Nuno  (1824-1908),  author  of  the  Mexican  National  Anthem, 
was  born  in  Spain,  lived  in  Mexico,  and  died  in  the  United  States.  His 
body  was  exhumed  and  transferred  to  Mexico  in  November,  1942.  The 
first  performance  of  the  Anthem  took  place  at  the  Teatro  Santa  Ana  in 
Mexico,  on  September  15,  1854. 

Perhaps,  the  most  unconventional  composer  of  Mexico  is  Jose  Pomar. 
He  did  not  begin  to  compose  seriously  until  the  age  of  forty-eight  (in 
1928),  when  he  embarked  at  once  on  experimental  and  modernistic  pro¬ 
cedures.  He  also  took  part  in  leftist  political  manifestations.  Pomar  has 
written  two  ballets :  Ocho  Horasy  in  which  he  gave  an  orchestral  interpreta¬ 
tion  of  a  newspaper  plant  at  work,  and  Bestia  Par  da  (Brown  Beast),  an 
anti-Hitler  pantomime  composed  in  1 937.  He  has  also  written  Prelude  and 
Fugue  for  instruments  of  percussion  only,  performed  by  Chavez  and  the 
Orquesta  Sinfonica  de  Mexico  on  November  1 1,  1932.  His  Mexican  dance 
for  orchestra,  HuafangOy  was  performed  by  Chavez  on  November  27, 
1931.  The  scores  of  HuafangOy  Prelude  and  Fugue  and  Ocho  Horas  are 
in  the  Fleisher  Collection  in  Philadelphia. 

Manuel  Ponce  ( 1886 - )  is  the  first  Mexican  composer  to  have  writ¬ 

ten  in  a  pronounced  native  style.  He  was  born  in  Fresnillo  and  learned 
rudiments  of  music  from  his  sister.  He  made  first  attempts  to  compose  at 
the  age  of  seven,  when  he  wrote  a  little  piece  entitled  La  Marcha  del  So- 
ramfion.  At  the  age  of  twelve,  Ponce  played  the  organ  at  the  Cathedral  in 
Aguas  Calientes,  and  at  fourteen  composed  a  Gavotte y  made  famous  subse¬ 
quently  by  the  dancer  Argentina,  who  used  it  for  her  programs  all  over 
the  world.  In  1901  Ponce,  then  fifteen,  entered  the  Conservatorio  Ncu 
cional  In  Mexico  City,  and  three  years  later  was  given  an  opportunity  to 
go  to  Europe  for  further  study.  He  took  a  course  in  composition  with  En¬ 
rico  Boss!  in  Bologna,  and  In  1906  studied  piano  with  Martin  Krause  in 
Berlin.  In  1908  he  returned  to  Mexico  and  was  appointed  a  professor  of 
the  Conservatorio  NacionaL  Among  his  piano  pupils  was  Carlos  Chavez. 
On  July  7,  1912,  Manuel  Ponce  gave  a  concert  of  his  compositions,  the 
major  work  on  the  program  being  his  Concerto  for  Piano  and  Orchestra. 
The  Concerto  reveals  Ponce’s  admiration  for  Chopin’s  pianistiG  styles  in 
the  second  moYtmtnty  Andantino  Amoroso y  there  are  themes  distinctly 
Mexican  in  character.  The  occasion  marked,  according  to  the  opinion  of 


MEXICO 


245 

Otto  Mayer-Serra  {Panorama  de  la  Music  a  Mexicana^  95)  5  ^he  open¬ 

ing  phase  of  musical  nationalism  in  Mexico.  Shortly  afterwards,  Ponce 
wrote  two  Mexican  Rhapsodies  for  piano,  in  which  Mexican  themes  were 
explicitly  represented.  In  February^,  1914,  Ponce  published  an  album  of 
songs,  one  of  which  was  Estrellitay  destined  to  become  one  of  the  most  cel¬ 
ebrated  Latin  American  melodies.  Because  of  a  technical  oversight  in  the 
copyright  arrangement,  Estrellita  has  been  widely  reprinted  without  pay¬ 
ment  of  royalties  to  the  composer.  During  this  period  of  his  career  Ponce 
published  a  number  of  piano  pieces  in  the  style  of  refined  salon  music, 
waltzes,  mazurkas,  preludes,  serenades,  barcarolles,  and  berceuses,  as  well 
as  romantic  pieces  with  such  titles  as  Desire^  Album  Leaj^  Souvenky  Mel¬ 
ancholy  y  etc.  Between  1915  and  1918  Ponce  lived  in  Havana.  In  1916  he 
visited  New  York,  where  he  gave  a  recital  of  his  works.  After  a  few  years 
in  Mexico,  where  he  was  active  as  a  teacher,  he  decided  to  go  to  Paris  in 
order  to  perfect  his  technique  of  composition,  particularly  in  the  field  of 
counterpoint  and  orchestration.  In  1926,  at  the  age  of  forty,  he  joined  the 
class  of  Paul  Dukas  at  the  Ecole  Normale  de  Musique,  He  was  profoundly 
impressed  by  Dukas’  ideas  on  free  thematic  development  and  orchestral 
color.  Ponce  was  now  resolved  to  apply  the  new  technique  to  Mexican 
themes.  The  product  of  this  attempt  was  ChapultefeCy  a  symphonic  trip¬ 
tych,  named  after  the  suburb  of  Mexico  City,  where  Ponce  himself  made 
his  home.  The  separate  movements  of  the  triptych  are  entitled  Primaveray 
Nocturno  Romanticoy  and  Canto  y  Danza,  The  scoring  is  characteristically 
Gallic,  with  subtle  dynamics,  and  prominence  given  to  solo  instruments, 
particularly  in  the  wood-wind  section.  Dissatisfied  with  the  first  version 
of  the  score  (which  was  in  the  meantime  performed  by  Chavez  and  the 
Orquesta  Sinfonica  de  Mexico  on  August  25,  1929),  Ponce  rewrote  the 
work.  The  second  version,  completed  in  France  in  July,  1934,  was  per¬ 
formed  by  Chavez  on  August  24,  1934,  soon  after  Ponce’s  return  to 
Mexico.  Among  Ponce’s  other  works  of  the  same  period  were  Canto  y 
Danza  de  los  Antiguos  MexicanoSy  performed  by  the  Orquesta  del  Con- 
servatorio  Nacionaly  Revueltas  conducting,  on  October  13,  1933  j  Poema 
Elegiacoy  written  in  memory  of  a  friend,  and  performed  by  the  Orquesta 
Sinfonica  de  Mexico  on  June  28,  19355  and  Tres  Cantos  de  Tagore  for 
voice  and  orchestra,  performed  at  the  same  concert,  with  Ponce’s  wife, 
the  French  singer  Clema  Ponce,  as  soloist. 

Still  another  aspect  of  Ponce’s  career  as  a  composer  is  revealed  in  his 
Suite  en  Estilo  AntiguOy  in  four  movements,  Preludioy  Canony  Pavansy 
and  performed  by  Chavez  on  September  6,  1935.  In  this  suite 


246  MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

Ponce  reverts  to  the  classical  mode  of  expression.  The  theme  of  the 
Fughetta  is  taken  from  the  subject  of  Bach’s  E  major  fugue.  Ponce  has 
arranged  this  suite  for  a  string  trio  (violin,  viola,  and  violoncello).  In 
the  same  neoclassical  manner  is  his  Senate  en  Duo  for  violin  and  viola 
(1938).  Ponce  returns  to  Mexican  themes  in  his  “symphonic  divertis¬ 
sement”  Ferial  (1940).  Characteristically,  the  score  bears  the  dedication 
“A  Mexico.”  Ferial  is  an  orchestral  picture  of  the  Mexican  popular  festi¬ 
val,  beginning  with  a  scene  at  the  church  entrance,  and  culminating  in  a 
fiesta  with  dancing,  whistling,  and  playing  upon  the  guitar.  The  themes 
are  original,  with  the  exception  of  an  old  Mexican  song,  which  is  played 
in  the  orchestra  by  two  oboes  in  parallel  thirds,  in  imitation  of  the  Mexican 
wood  instrument  chirimia.  Ferial  was  first  performed  by  the  Orquesta 
Sinfonica  de  Mexico,  Chavez  conducting,  on  August  9,  1940.  In  1941, 
by  a  special  arrangement  between  the  Mexican  government  and  the  gov¬ 
ernments  of  several  South  American  republics,  Manuel  Ponce  made  a 
tour  by  plane  of  Argentina,  Uruguay,  Chile,  and  Peru,  conducting  con¬ 
certs  of  his  works  with  the  local  symphony  orchestras.  During  this  tour, 
Andre  Segovia,  the  Spanish  guitarist,  played  the  solo  part  in  Ponce’s 
Concierto  del  Sur  (Concerto  of  the  South),  for  guitar  and  small  orchestra. 
The  world  premiere  of  this  Concerto  took  place  in  Montevideo  on  Octo¬ 
ber  4,  1941. 

In  1942  Ponce  wrote  a  Concerto  for  Violin  and  Orchestra,  which  he 
orchestrated  in  June,  1943.  The  first  movement.  Allegro  non  troffo,  is 
in  a  soberly  classical  vein.  The  second  movement.  Andante,  is  lyrical,  and 
contains  undisguised  allusions  to  the  melody  of  Estrellita.  The  last  move¬ 
ment  is  a  free  rondo,  bearing  the  imprint  of  Mananitas,  a  type  of  popu¬ 
lar  Mexican  song.  The  Concerto  was  performed  by  the  Polish  violinist 
Henryk  Szeryng  with  the  Orquesta  Sinfonica  de  Mexico,  Chavez  con¬ 
ducting,  on  August  20,  1943. 

Ponce’s  early  piano  pieces  and  songs,  numbering  over  seventy,  were 
published  in  Mexico  by  Wagner  and  Levien,  and  are  mostly  out  of  print. 
Maurice  Senart  in  Paris  has  published  several  of  Ponce’s  compositions 
written  between  1930  and  1938:  Tres  Poemas  for  voice  and  piano.  Deux 
Poemes  de  Tagore  lor  violin  and  piano.  Preludes  for  violoncello  and 
piano,  4  Pieces  for  piano,  4  Miniatures  for  string  quartet,  Granada  and 
Da  Mort  for  voice  and  piano,  and  Sonate  en  Duo  for  violin  and  viola. 
Numerous  compositions  written  by  Ponce  for  guitar,  and  dedicated  to 
Segovia,  have  been  published  by  Schott  in  Germany,  among  them  four 
sonatas,  twenty-four  Preludes,  twenty-two  Variations,  and  dances.  Ponce’s 


MEXICO 


24.7 

Es^rellka  has  been  published  in  numerous  arrangements,  of  which  Jascha 
Heifetz’  transcription  for  violin  and  piano  is  very  popular.  Ponce’s  Dansas 
Msxicanus  for  piano  and  6  Cuficiofies  Atcdicos  have  been  published  by 
the  Editorial  Coo'perativa  Inter americana  de  Compositor es  in  Monte¬ 
video,  and  his  two  Etudes  for  piano  are  included  in  the  Schirmer  album 
Latin- American  Art  Music  for  the  Piano  (New  York,  1942).  His  or¬ 
chestral  scores,  two  piano  sonatas,  a  Violin  Sonata,  and  some  forty  songs 
remain  in  manuscript.  The  scores  of  the  following  orchestral  works  by 
Ponce  are  in  the  Fleisher  Collection  in  Philadelphia:  Gavotte^  Danse  des 
Anciens  Mexicains^  Instantaneas  Mexicanas  (Mexican  Snapshots), 
Elegiacoy  Estampas  NocturnaSy  Balada  MexicanUy  Concerto  for  Piano 
and  Orchestra,  ChapultepeCy  and  a  symphonic  suite  arranged  by  Ponce 
from  Albeniz’s  opera  Merlin. 

Silvestre  Revueltas,  the  modern  Mexicanist  of  music,  was  born  in  Du¬ 
rango  on  the  last  day  of  the  1 8oo’s,  December  3 1,  1 899.  He  studied  violin 
in  Durango,  and  from  1913  1916  took  a  course  in  composition  with 

Rafael  Tello  at  the  Conservatorio  Nacional  de  Musica  in  Mexico  City. 
In  1916  he  went  to  the  United  States,  where  he  continued  his  studies  at 
Austin,  Texas,  and  later  at  the  Chicago  Musical  College,  under  Felix 
Borowski.  He  gave  violin  recitals  in  Mexico  in  1920,  and  returned  to 
the  United  States  in  1922  to  study  violin  with  Sevcik.  From  1926  to 
1928  Revueltas  conducted  theater  orchestras  in  Texas  and  Alabama,  and 
in  1929  was  appointed  assistant  conductor  of  the  Orquesta  Sinfonica  de 
Mexico.  In  1931,  at  the  urgent  suggestion  of  Carlos  Chavez,  Revueltas 
began  to  compose.  In  1933  taught  at  the  Conservatorio  Nacional y  and 
directed  concerts  of  the  Conservatory  orchestra.  In  1936,  he  left  the  Or- 
questa  Sinfonica  de  Mexico y  and  organized  a  new  group,  the  Orquesta  Sin¬ 
fonica  Nacionaly  which  had  a  brief  existence.  In  1937,  during  the  Spanish 
civil  war,  Revueltas  went  to  Spain,  and  participated  in  the  cultural  activities 
of  the  Music  Section  of  the  Loyalist  Government.  Returning  to  Mexico, 
he  resumed  his  work  as  composer  and  conductor.  Weakened  by  a  reckless 
mode  of  life,  Revueltas  succumbed  to  an  attack  of  pneumonia,  on  the  night 
when  his  ballet  Renacuajo  Paseador  was  produced  at  the  Palacio  de  Bellas 
ArteSy  in  Mexico  City,  October  4—5,  1940. 

In  an  autobiographical  note  to  the  author,  written  in  1932,  Revueltas 
wrote:  “I  do  not  think  I  was  a  child  prodigy,  but  I  showed  some  inclina¬ 
tion  for  music  quite  early,  as  the  result  of  which  I  became  a  professional 
musician.  Contributors  to  this  were  some  teachers  of  mine  from  whom  I 
fortunately  did  not  learn  much,  due  probably  to  the  bad  habit  of  inde- 


248  MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

pendence.  I  play  the  violin,  and  I  have  given  recitals  all  over  the  country, 
but  I  found  of  no  interest  posing  as  a  virtuoso,  so  I  have  devoted  myself 
to  composition  and  conducting — perhaps,  a  better  pose.  I  like  all  kinds 
of  music.  I  can  even  stand  some  of  the  classics,  and  some  of  my  own  works, 
but  I  prefer  the  music  of  the  people  of  ranchos  and  villages  of  my  coun¬ 
try.” 

During  the  decade  1930-1940,  Revueltas  composed  prolifically.  There 
are  no  symphonies  or  symphonic  poems  on  the  list  of  his  works;  rather 
they  are  sketches,  evocations  of  moods,  or  musical  pictures  of  Mexico. 
Revueltas  could  be  sardonic  to  the  point  of  nihilism,  but  when  he  was 
emotionally  moved  he  showed  a  deep  lyrical  strain.  The  forms  in  which 
he  cast  his  music  do  not  fall  into  any  traditional  category;  they  are  ag¬ 
glutinative,  the  ideas  following  one  another  in  free  succession,  governed 
only  by  the  laws  of  contrast  and  recurrence.  The  harmonic  and  contra¬ 
puntal  texture  of  his  music  is  based  on  free  superposition  of  simple  melodic 
phrases.  His  orchestration  is  often  inspired  by  the  type  of  Mexican  popu¬ 
lar  orchestras  composed  of  violins,  trumpets,  and  drums,  reinforced  by  a 
piano.  His  scoring  is  hgter&phonous,  exploiting  instrumental  colors  of 
contrasting  qualities,  against  the  background  of  multirhythmic  percussion. 
The  folkloric  element  is  always  present  in  Revueltas’  melos,  and  part 
writing  in  characteristic  Mexican  progressions  of  parallel  thirds  enhances 
the  sense  of  local  color.  But  Revueltas  never  quotes  popular  tunes;  he 
prefers  to  re-create  the^natiye  rhythms  and  melodies  in  his  individual 
manner.  Revueltas  summed  up  his  code  of  esthetics  in  a  program  note 
for  his  “geometric  dance,”  Pianos:  “My  music  is  functional  architecture, 
which  does  not  exclude  sentiment.  Melodic  fragments  derive  from  the 
same  impulse,  the  same  emotion  as  in  my  other  works;  they  sing  in  per¬ 
sistent  rhythms,  ever  in  motion;  they  produce  sonorities  that  may  seem 
strange  because  they  are  not  common.  My  rhythms  and  sonorities  are 
reminiscent  of  other  rhythms  and  sonorities,  just  as  building  material  in 
architecture  is  identical  with  any  building  material,  but  it  serves  for  con¬ 
structions  that  are  different  in  meaning,  form,  and  expression.” 

Revueltas  decried  the  conventional  idea  of  program  music.  In  his  ex¬ 
planatory  note  to  Ventanas  (Windows),  he  wrote:  “-V entanas  is  a  com¬ 
position  without  a  program.  When  I  composed  the  music,  I  may  have 
intended  to  convey  a  definite  idea.  Now  that  several  months  have  elapsed, 
I  no  longer  recall  what  it  was.”  In  the  preface  to  his  orchestral  sketch 
Cuanahuac  (ancient  Indian  name  of  the  Mexican  resort,  Cuernavaca), 
Revueltas  makes  a  burlesque  of. “musical  tourists”:  “This  is  a  music  with- 


Jose  Rolon 


Candelario  Hufzar 


Luis  Sandi  Silvestre  Revueltas 


MEXICO 


249 


out  tourism.  In  the  orchestra,  the  hmhuetl  (Indian  drum)  is  used  as  a 
means  o£  nationalist  propaganda.  Other  instruments  in  the  score  are  even 
more  nationalistic,  but  no  attention  should  be  paid  to  them  5  it  is  all  just 
anticapitalist  agitation.” 

For  his  little  orchestral  piece  entitled  JanitziOy  Revueltas  supplied  this 
note:  ^^Janitzio  is  a  fishermen’s  island  in  Lake  Patzcuaro.  Lake  Patzcuaro 
is  filthy.  The  romantic  travelers  have  embellished  it  with  verses  and  music 
of  the  picture  postcard  type.  Not  to  be  outdone,  I  too  add  my  grain  to 
the  sandpile.  Posterity  will  undoubtedly  reward  my  contribution  to  na¬ 
tional  tourism.” 

In  a  note  on  a  composition  bearing  the  enigmatic  title  8  x  Radio  (which 
simply  means,  eight  musicians  playing  over  the  radio,  for  the  piece  was 
written  for  a  radio  octet),  Revueltas  indulges  in  some  clowning:  ^^8  x 
Radio  is  an  algebraic  equation  which  cannot  possibly  be  solved  unless  one 
possesses  profound  knowledge  of  mathematics.  The  composer  has  at¬ 
tempted  to  solve  it  by  means  of  musical  instruments,”  And  with  reference 
to  his  Musica  far  a  Charlar  (Music  for  Chatter),  Revueltas  declares; 
^^Music  that  makes  one  think  is  intolerable,  excruciating.  There  are  people 
who  like  it  3  as  to  myself,  I  adore  music  that  puts  me  to  sleep.” 

Beneath  this  good-natured  banter,  a  deep  emotion  is  often  felt.  In  lyric 
passages,  such  as  the  Cradle  Song  in  Homemje  a  Federico  Garcia  Lorca 
(Homage  to  Garcia  Lorca,  Spanish  poet  killed  by  the  Fascists),  Revueltas 
is  capable  of  sublimity.  There  is  no  facetiousness  in  his  music  descriptive 
of  Indian  life,  as  Colorines  (colored  beads,  worn  by  Indian  women),  and 
in  his  music  of  revolutionary  content.  There  is  profound  sentiment  in 
Revueltas’  score  Esquinas  (Corners):  “It  would  be  amusing  to  find  in 
this  music  the  noise  of  taxi  horns,  street  cars,  and  trucks,”  he  wrote,  “but 
unfortunately  there  is  nothing  of  that  in  it.  Rather  it  is  the  sound,  or 
perhaps  the  silence  of  the  inner  traffic  of  the  souls,  passing  by.  Conven¬ 
tional  analysis  may  discover  in  the  music  some  definite  form,  binary, 
ternary,  song-form,  etc.  That  is  of  no  consequence.  The  traffic  of  which  I 
speak  is  multiform,  without  visible  coherence.  It  is  subordinated  to  the 
rhythm  of  life,  not  to  the  distance  from  one  side  of  the  street  to  the  other.” 

Much  of  Revueltas’  music  was  written  for  children,  as  Remcmjo  Pasea- 
dor  (Pollywog  Takes  a  Stroll),  Pato  y  Camrio  (Duet  for  Duck 

and  Canary),  and  Alcandas  (Piggy  Banks).  The  complete  list  of  his 
works  with  dates  of  composition  follows:  String  Quartet  No.  i  (June, 
1930),  String  Quartet  No.  2  and  No.  3  (March,  1931),  Cuanahuac  (ver¬ 
sion  for  small  orchestra,  June,  1931  y  for  large  orchestra,  December 


250 


MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 


1932)5  Esquinas  (for  small  orchestra,  August,  1931 3  for  large  orchestra, 
October,  1933),  Duo  far  a  Pato  y  Canario  (for  small  orchestra  and  so¬ 
prano,  December,  1931),  Ventanas  (for  orchestra,  December,  1931), 
Colorines  (small  orchestra.  May,  1932),  Alcanctas  (small  orchestra,  July, 
^932)5  Toccata  (for  violin  and  seven  wind  instruments,  January,  1933), 
El Renacuajo  Paseador  (March,  1933),  5"  a;  Radio  ( 1933),  (July, 

19333  version,  December,  1936),  C aminos  (for  orchestra,  January, 
1934),  Pianos  (small  orchestra,  March,  19343  large  orchestra,  June, 
1934),  Homenaje  a  Federico  Garcia  Lorca  (for  small  orchestra,  Octo¬ 
ber,  1936)3  Caminando  (voice  with  small  orchestra,  February,  1937), 
Sensemaya^  an  Afro-Cuban  chant  (voice  with  small  orchestra,  May,  19373 
large  orchestra,  March,  193^))  Canto  de  Guerra  de  los  Frontes  Leales 
(Wir  Song  of  the  Loyalist  Fronts,  for  three  trumpets,  three  trombones, 
two  tubas,  percussion,  and  piano,  February,  1938),  and  Siete  Canciones 
(Seven  Songs,  to  poems  of  Garda  Lorca,  for  voice  and  piano,  1938). 

In  194O5  Revueltas  began  the  composition  of  a  ballet.  La  Coronela^ 
to  the  story  of  a  girl  colonel  during  the  revolutionary  movement  against 
the  dictatorship  of  Porfirio  Diaz.  The  score,  left  unfinished  at  the  death 
of  Revueltas,  was  completed  and  orchestrated  by  Bias  Galindo  and  Cande- 
lario  Huizar. 

The  following  works  by  Revueltas  were  performed  for  the  first  time 
by  the  Orquesta  Sinjonica  d'e  Mexico y  under  the  composer’s  direction: 
Esquinas  (November  20,  1931),  Ventanas  (November  4,  1932),  Cuanch 
huac  (June  2,  1933)3  Pianos  (November  5,  1934).  C aminos  was 
performed  by  Chavez  on  July  17,  1934.  Janitzio  and  8  x  Radio  were  con¬ 
ducted  by  Revueltas  on  October  13,  1933,  at  the  Palacio  de  Bellas  Artes. 
Colorines  was  performed  by  the  Pan  American  Orchestra  In  New  York, 
on  November  4,  1933,  Nicolas  Slonimsky  conducting.  Homenaje  a 
Federico  Garcia  Lorca  was  given  in  Madrid  on  September  22,  1937, 
Revueltas  conducting.  El  Renacuajo  Paseador  was  performed  on  Octo¬ 
ber  4,  1940.  La  Coronela  was  produced  posthumously  on  November  20, 
1941. 

Revueltas  wrote  music  for  the  following  films:  Redes  Vamos 

con  Pancho  Villa  (1936),  £/  Indio  (1938),  Ferrocarriles  de  Baja  Cali¬ 
fornia  (Railroads  of  Lower  California,  1938),  La  Noche  de  los  Mayas 
(The  Night  of  the  Mayas,  1939),  Bajo  el  Signo  de  la  Muerte  (Under 
the  Sign  of  Death,  1939)3  Los  de  Abajo  (Those  from  the  Lower 
Classes,  1940). 

Redes  was  presented  by  Revueltas  on  October  7,  1937,  at  the  meeting- 


MEXICO 


251 


concert  of  the  Committee  against  War  and  Fascism  in  Barcelona,  Spain. 
A  suite  from  Ferrocarriles  de  Baja  California  was  performed  under  the 
title  Musica  far  a  Charlar^  in  Mexico  City  on  December  15,  1938. 

Very  little  music  by  Revueltas  has  been  published.  Cancion  and  Al¬ 
legro  for  piano  were  published  by  C.  Fischer,  and  several  songs  have  been 
published  by  the  Editorial  Cooferativa  in  Montevideo.  The  lithographed 
orchestral  score  of  Homenaje  a  Federico  Garcia  Lorca  is  available  through 
New  Music.  The  Fleisher  Collection  in  Philadelphia  has  the  following 
scores  by  Revueltas:  AlcanciaSy  CuanahuaCy  Esquinasy  Homenaje  a  Fe¬ 
derico  Garcia  Lorcay  Musica  fara  Chariary  PlanoSy  RedeSy  Sensemayay 
Toccata,  and  8  x  Radio.  See  ^^Silvestre  Revueltas  and  Musical  Nationalism 
in  Mexico’^  by  Otto  Mayer-Serra,  in  The  Musical  Quarterly  (April, 
1941). 

Jose  Rolon  (1883 - ),  composer  of  a  number  of  symphonic  works, 

studied  music  first  under  his  father  in  Ciudad  Guzman,  Jalisco,  and  at  a 
local  music  school.  Later  he  was  sent  to  Paris,  where  he  took  lessons  with 
Moszkowski.  In  France  he  acquired  a  taste  for  modern  music,  and  was 
particularly  impressed  with  Debussy.  He  returned  to  Mexico  in  1907, 
and  founded  a  music  school  in  Guadalajara.  In  1927,  when  he  was  forty- 
four  years  old,  Rolon  went  once  more  to  Paris,  where  he  attended  classes 
of  Nadia  Boulanger  and  Paul  Dukas.  His  predilection  for  French  im¬ 
pressionist  technique  of  composition  was  further  strengthened,  but  the 
diffuseness  of  his  early  style  was  now  replaced  by  contrapuntal  and  har¬ 
monic  compactness.  His  Symphony  and  Overture  are  in  the  academic 
tradition,  but  with  his  symphonic  fairy  tale,  El  Festin  de  los  Enanos 
(Festival  of  the  Dwarfs),  Rolon  adopted  the  modern  French  technique, 
in  harmony  as  well  as  in  orchestration.  The  thematic  material  of  this  work 
is  taken  from  popular  Mexican  nursery  songs.  El  Festin  de  los  Enanos y 
composed  in  1925,  was  performed  by  the  Orquesta  del  Conservatorio  in 
Mexico  City  on  March  4,  1928,  Revueltas  conducting.  Rolon’s  Scherzo 
Sinfonico  was  performed  by  the  Orquesta  Sinfonica  de  Mexico y  Chavez 
conducting,  on  January  6,  1929,  and  the  same  orchestra  gave  the  first 
performances  of  Rolon’s  Cuauhtemoc  (January  10,  1930),  Baile  Michoa- 
cano  (July  22,  1930),  Zafotldn  (subtitled  Suite  Sinfonica  i<?95,  per¬ 
formed  on  November  4,  1932),  and  Piano  Concerto  (September  4,  1942). 
The  Baile  Michoacano  is  a  stylization  of  popular  rhythms  of  the  Michoa- 
can  state.  Cuauhtemoc  (the  name  of  the  last  Aztec  Emperor)  is  in  three 
movements,  Cortejo  y  Coronaciony  Defensa  Heroicay  and  Finahy  and 
the  melodic  structure  of  the  principal  themes  is  pentatonic.  Zafotlan  is 


252  MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

the  realm  of  the  Zapotec  Indians  of  Mexico.  The  subtitle  is  an 
allusion  to  Rolon^s  childhood  memories  of  that  year.  The  Piano  Con¬ 
certo  (which  was  originally  performed  under  the  composer’s  direction, 
with  a  local  symphonic  ensemble  in  Guadalajara,  on  January  31,  1936) 
is  written  in  a  greatly  advanced  idiom,  and  the  piano  part  is  cast  in  the 
modern  virtuoso  style.  The  Concerto  is,  however,  in  the  definite  key  of 
E  minor,  and  the  feeling  of  tonality  is  maintained  throughout.  There 
are  three  movements,  and  the  form  is  traditional.  Some  piano  pieces, 
notably  Trots  Danses  MexlcmneSy  were  published  in  Paris.  The  orchestral 
scores  of  El  Festtn  de  los  Enanos^  Zafotldn^  CuauhtemoOy  Piano  Con¬ 
certo,  and  a  symphonic  suite  from  Ballet  de  los  Gallos  are  in  the  Fleisher 
Collection  in  Philadelphia. 

Chiefly  known  for  his  essays  on  music,  Adolfo  Salazar  (1890 - ) 

is  a  Spanish  musicologist  now  resident  in  Mexico.  Born  in  Madrid,  Sala¬ 
zar’s  musical  knowledge  has  been  largely  self-taught,  although  he  did  take 
a  few  lessons  with  Manuel  de  Falla.  In  1916,  Salazar  published  his  first 
compositions,  Tres  Preludios  for  piano  and  Tres  Poemas  to  the  text  by 
Verlaine.  In  larger  forms,  he  has  written  three  symphonic  works — Paisa- 
jeSy  Estamfasy  and  Don  Juan  de  los  Injernos.  Salazar’s  book  Musica  y 
Musicos  de  Hoy  (1928)  is  widely  read.  After  the  civil  war  in  Spain, 
Salazar  settled  in  Mexico,  where  he  published  a  survey  of  European 
music,  under  the  title  La  Rosa  de  los  Vientos  en  la  Muska  Eurofea 
(1940). 

Luis  Sandi  was  born  in  1905.  He  studied  violin,  voice  and  composition 
at  the  Conservatory  of  Mexico,  and  upon  graduation  became  a  choral 
conductor.  Later  he  was  appointed  Chief  of  the  Music  Section  of  the 
Secretariat  of  Public  Instruction.  Sandi’s  own  music  is  permeated  with 
Mexican  folklore,  while  the  structural  element  of  his  works  is  on  the 
classical  side.  The  most  ambitious  of  his  folkloric  compositions  is  Nortey 
a  symphonic  suite  In  three  movements,  based  on  indigenous  melodies  of 
northern  Mexico.  The  scoring  Is  marked  by  frequent  solo  passages,  par¬ 
ticularly  in  the  wood-wind  section,  and  the  folk  themes  are  combined  in’ 
free  counterpoint.  Norte  was  performed  by  the  Orquesta  Sinfonka  de 
Mexkoy  Chzv&z  conducting,  on  August  15,  1941.  To  the  same  category 
belongs  Sandi’s  symphonic  poem,  portraying  a  village  fair.  Even 
more  literal  in  the  application  of  popular  melodies  and  rhythms  Is  Sandi’s 
composition  for  two  guitars  and  chamber  orchestra,  Las  Guar ecitas 


MEXICO 


353 


(Girls),  which  imitates  the  sonority  of  a  popular  band.  El  Venado  (Veni¬ 
son),  written  for  an  ensemble  of  Mexican  instruments,  is  based  on  themes 
of  the  Yaqui  Indians.  El  Venado  w'as  conducted  by  Sandi  with  the  Or- 
questa  Mexicana  on  October  28,  I93^)  Palacio  de  Bellas  Artes  in 

Mexico  City.  In  the  spirit  of  caricature,  Sandi  wrote  Suite  Banale  for 
small  orchestra,  which  was  performed  by  the  Radio  Orchestra  on  Jan¬ 
uary  22,  1937.  All  these  scores,  and  also  a  suite  from  Sandi’s  film  music 
La  Hoja  de  Plata  (Silver  Leaf)  are  in  the  Fleisher  Collection  in  Phila¬ 
delphia. 

Rafael  Tello  (1872 - ),  composer  and  music  educator,  studied  music 

with  his  mother  in  Mexico  City,  and  gave  his  first  piano  recital  at  the 
age  of  thirteen.  In  1896,  at  the  age  of  twenty-four,  he  became  an  instructor 
at  the  Conservatorio  Nacional,  and  fromipiy  to  1930  was  director  of  the 
new  Conservatorio  Libre.  He  then  returned  to  the  faculty  of  the  Con¬ 
servatorio  Nacional.  Tello  began  to  compose  at  the  age  of  nineteen,  and 
became  particularly  interested  in  the  problem  of  Mexican  national  opera. 
Accordingly,  he  selected  a  historic  character  as  the  central  figure  for  his 
second  opera,  Nicolas  Bravo,  which  was  produced  in  Mexico  City  on 
August  27,  1910.  His  first  opera,  Juno,  remains  unperformed.  Another 
opera.  Due  Amori,  was  produced  on  February  27,  1916.  In  1942  Tello 
wrote  a  new  operatic  work,  El  Oidor.  Tello  conducted  the  first  perform¬ 
ance  of  his  Sonata  Tragica  for  violin  and  orchestra  at  the  inaugural  con¬ 
cert  of  the  Orquesta  Sinfonica  de  Mexico,  on  September  2,  1928.  Patria 
Heroica,  an  epic  poem,  illustrating  in  four  traditional  movements  the 
events  of  a  heroic  battle,  was  performed  by  the  same  orchestra,  on 
May  16,  1930,  under  the  direction  of  Carlos  Chavez.  Tello’s  Fantasia 
for  two  pianos  and  orchestra,  written  in  a  deliberately  simple  style,  was 
performed  by  the  Orquesta  Sinfonica  de  Mexico  on  July  2,  I943- 
composer,  Tello  cultivates  a  rhapsodic  and  somewhat  discursive  style, 
often  turbulently  dynamic  at  climactic  points.  His  music  remains  in  manu¬ 
script.  The  orchestral  scores  of  his  Sonata  Tragica,  the  Overture  to  the 
opera  Nicolas  Bravo,  and  two  juvenilia  (Minuet  and  Intermezzo)  are 
in  the  Fleisher  Collection  in  Philadelphia. 

Jose  Vasquez  (1895 - ),  a  native  of  Guadalajara,  is  variously  active 

as  a  composer,  an  orchestral  conductor,  and  instructor  at  the  University  of 
Mexico.  He  studied  at  the  Conservatorio  Nacional  de  Musica,  graduating 
in  1914,  when  he  was  nineteen  years  old.  Vasquez  then  took  a  correspond- 


254  MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

ence  course  in  composition  with  the  £cole  Unlverselle  in  Paris.  An  excep¬ 
tionally  prolific  composerj  he  has  written  five  operas,  three  symphonies,  a 
ballet,  four  piano  concertos,  a  Violin  Concerto,  a  symphonic  triptych,  six 
piano  sonatas,  a  Violin  Sonata,  a  Violoncello  Sonata,  a  Trio,  two  string 
quartets,  and  eighty  songs.  The  following  operas  by  Vasquez  have  been 
performed:  CitlalU  (on  an  Aztec  subject,  November,  1922),  El  Manila- 
nn  (June,  1934)5  ^l  Ea]ah  (September  15,  1934),  and  an  opera-ballet, 
El  Vltimo  Sueno  (April,  1935).  His  Symphony  No.  i  was  performed  in 
Mexico  City,  under  the  composer’s  direction,  on  August  17,  19155  Sym¬ 
phony  No.  2,  in  December,  19225  three  piano  concertos  on  October  ii, 
18,  and  25,  i939>  respectively5  and  the  Tnftico  Sinfonico  on  May  5, 
1930,  by  the  University  orchestra,  Vasquez  conducting.  He  conducted  his 
Poema  Sinfonico  for  soprano,  chorus,  and  orchestra,  with  the  Orquesta 
Sinfonica  de  Mexico  on  November  4,  1928.  Vasquez’s  music  is  dis¬ 
tinguished  by  a  quasi-impressionist  manner  of  writing,  with  programmatic 
connotations.  His  works  remain  in  manuscript.  The  orchestral  scores  of 
the  three  piano  concertos,  the  Violin  Concerto,  Poema  Sinfonico^  and  a 
suite  of  three  sketches,  Acuarelas  de  Viaje^  are  in  the  Fleisher  Collection 
in  Philadelphia. 


Nicaragua 


I  Nicaragua^  dtvina  Nicaragua! 
[jUAN  B.  DELGADo] 


Nicaragua,  the  country  of  volcanoes  and  lakes,  lies  between  Costa  Rica  and 
Honduras.  It  is  the  largest  nation  of  Central  America  in  area.  Its  population 
numbers  about  1,400,000,  the  majority  being  mestizos. 

The  folk  music  of  Nicaragua  is  part  of  the  musical  heritage  of  the 
Maya  and  Quiche  branches  of  Central  American  Indians.  Little  of  this 
music  has  come  down  to  us,  but  some  melodies  and  rhythms  peculiar  to 
the  ancient  race  still  survive  in  remote  villages  on  the  coast. 

The  early  travelers  who  had  witnessed  the  native  dance  festivals  of 
the  Indians  of  Nicaragua  describe  them  in  contemptuous  terms,  stressing 


NICARAGUA 


255 


the  fact  that  “wine  was  there  as  plentiful  as  were  the  songs  and  the 
dances.” 

In  Lothrop’s  valuable  treatise  Pottery  of  Costa  Rica  and  Nicaragua^ 
we  find  the  English  translation  of  the  accounts  of  these  dances  by  the 
historiographer  of  ColumbuSj  Gonzalo  Fernandez  de  Oviedo  y  Valdes, 
quoted  from  La  Historia  Natural  y  General  de  las  IndiaSy  lib.  XLII, 
cap.  XI: 

One  Saturday,  on  the  twenty-ninth  day  of  August,  1528,  in  the  flaza  of 
Nicoya^  under  the  cacique  of  that  province,  Don  Alonso,  known  by  another 
name  as  Nambty  which  in  his  language  means  dog,  two  hours  before  nightfall, 
about  eighty  or  a  hundred  Indians  began  to  sing  and  dance  in  an  Areito^  in  one 
part  of  the  'plaza;  they  must  have  been  of  the  vulgar  and  plebeian  people,  because 
in  another  part  of  the  same  flaza^  the  cacique ^  with  much  enjoyment  and 
festivity,  seated  himself  on  a  duho^  or  small  bench,  and  his  chief  officials  and 
about  seventy  or  eighty  other  Indians  on  similar  dukos.  A  girl  began  to  bring 
them  drink,  in  small  gourds,  like  bowls  or  cups,  of  chichay  which  is  a  very  strong 
and  rather  acid  wine  which  they  make  of  maize,  and  which,  in  its  color, 
resembles  chicken  broth  into  which  the  yolks  of  one  or  two  eggs  have  been 
broken. 

In  the  same  section  of  Lothrop’s  volume,  we  find  a  description  by 
Benzoni  of  a  Nicaraguan  native  festival: 

Two  or  three  hundred,  or  even  three  or  four  thousand  Indians  assemble 
together,  and  having  carefully  swept  the  place  where  they  are  going  to  dance, 
one  of  them  comes  forward  to  lead  the  rest.  He  goes  nearly  always  backward, 
turning  himself  occasionally,  and  so  do  all  the  others,  by  threes  or  fours,  in 
regular  order.  Those  who  beat  the  drum  begin  to  sing  some  of  their  songs,  and 
the  man  who  leads  the  dance  is  the  first  to  answer.  Then  the  rest  do  the  same 
progressively.  Some  carry  a  fan  in  the  hand,  some  a  calabash  with  pebbles  in 
it;  some  wear  feathers  on  the  head,  others  wear  rows  of  sea-shells  on  their 
arms  and  legs;  some  raise  their  legs,  others  flourish  their  arms;  some  act  the 
blind  man,  others  pretend  to  be  lame ;  some  laugh,  others  cry ;  and  thus  with 
many  other  gestures,  and  frequent  drinh'ng  of  their  wine,  they  dance  all  day, 
and  sometimes  part  of  the  night  also. 

The  mention  of  the  “calabash  with  pebbles  in  it”  is  interesting,  for  it 
shows  the  antiquity  of  this  Indian  shaker,  which  is  now  universally  known 
as  the  Maracas,  The  contemporary  Nicaraguan  Indians  still  use  their 
ancient  instruments,  which  they  have  in  common  with  other  Central 
American  Indians.  Among  wind  instruments,  the  Chirimtay  which  is  a 


MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 


256 

primitive  darinetj  and  the  Zul^  a  primitive  flute  with  five  or  six  apertures, 
are  used  by  the  natives.  Drums  of  all  sizes  and  shapes  and  the  Marimba 
are  popular  in  Nicaragua  as  in  all  Central  America.  The  Nicaraguan  In¬ 
dians  also  have  a  primitive  monochord,  called  the  QuijongOy  in  which  a 
string  supported  by  a  movable  bridge  is  attached  on  both  ends  to  an 
oblong  sound  box.  There  is  also  the  luco^  or  a  bull-roarer,  which  is  made 
of  a  barrel  covered  with  a  drumhead,  with  a  string  passed  through  the 
membrane.  When  the  string  is  pulled,  a  peculiar  roaring  or  whining 
sound  is  made.  Some  other  Nicaraguan  instruments,  such  as  the  Cacho^ 
which  is  a  primitive  trumpet  made  of  an  animal  horn,  and  the  Chilchil^ 
a  small  bell,  are  in  use  among  the  natives. 

Among  Nicaraguans,  native  Indian  customs  and  rituals  are  combined 
with  the  Catholic  religious  rites,  resulting  in  an  interesting  amalgam  of 
cultures.  The  Nicaraguan  festival  play  known  under  the  name  Gueguence 
is  celebrated  on  St.  Jerome’s  day,  the  thirteenth  of  September.  Its  text 
represents  a  mixture  of  Spanish  with  the  indigenous  Nahuatl  dialect. 
One  of  these  plays  is  reproduced,  in  Spanish  and  Nahuatl,  in  a  book  en¬ 
titled  Gueguence y  compiled  by  D,  G.  Brinton,  and  published  in  1883  in 
Philadelphia. 

Luis  A.  Delgadillo,  the  foremost  musician  of  Nicaragua,  contributes 
these  specimens  of  native  dance  melodies:  the  Yeguecita  (little  mare,  so 
named  because  the  dancers  hold  a  wooden  model  of  a  horse’s  head)  5  Los 
CahalUtos  (little  horses)  3  and  El  Zofilote  (buzzard,  so  named  because 
the  dancers  dress  in  bird  costumes). 


La  Yeguecita 


iBSsB 

IB 

■ 

HI 

■■■■■■■ 

^|||||||||||||^^ 

■■MiHiHIl'IBHIIlS 

gs^gSas 

I 

■l| 

III 

Three  Nicaraguan  Melodies  {Delgadillo) 


NICARAGUA 


257 


Music  culture  in  Nicaragua  is  little  advanced.  The  chief  purveyor  of 
music  is  the  Banda  de  los  Sufremos  Poderes  in  Managua,  organized  in 
1914.  The  annals  of  Nicaragua  record  the  name  of  Jose  de  la  Cruz  Mena, 
a  leper  who  lived  in  isolation  and  wrote  religious  music.  His  manuscripts 
were  destroyed  after  his  death. 

Delgadillo  paints  a  melancholy  picture  of  the  present  status  of  music 
in  Nicaragua  in  an  article  in  Musica  (Bogota,  July  1941):  ^^My  com¬ 
patriots  have  little  desire  to  support  the  national  arts  5  they  are  too  pre¬ 
occupied  with  politics.  The  people  of  Nicaragua  are  musical  5  what  is 
needed  is  the  establishment  of  music  schools  and  conservatories.  The  ten 
plagues  of  Egypt  reign  in  Nicaragua.  We  are  the  Quixotes  of  music, 
victims  of  the  materialistic  environment  and  general  lassitude.” 

MUSICIANS  OF  NICARAGUA 

Nicaragua’s  foremost  composer  is  Luis  A.  Delgadillo,  whose  birth 
in  Managua  took  place  on  August  26,  1887.  Delgadillo  showed  musical 
ability  at  an  early  age,  and  was  sent  by  the  Nicaraguan  government  to 
study  in  Italy  at  the  Milan  Conservatory.  After  five  years  in  Europe, 
Delgadillo  returned  to  Nicaragua,  where  he  conducted  the  Banda  de  los 
Su'pTesnos  Bodenes  in  NIanagua  and  directed  a  music  school.  On  Septem¬ 
ber  14, 1921,  Delgadillo  conducted  in  Guatemala  the  first  performance  of 
his  Sinjonia  Centroamerica,  based  on  native  themes.  After  a  South  Amer¬ 
ican  tour,  Delgadillo  wrote  a  Sinfoma  Incaica,  which  he  conducted  in 
Caracas,  Venezuela,  on  May  20,  1927.  There  followed  an  orchestral 
suite,  Diciembre,  which  Delgadillo  performed  for  the  first  time  on  Octo¬ 
ber  20,  1929,  in  Havana,  Cuba.  After  a  trip  to  Mexico,  Delgadillo  com¬ 
posed  a  suite  on  Mexican  themes,  Teotihuacan,  performed  by  the  or¬ 
chestra  of  the  University  of  Mexico  on  October  12,  1941.  Inspired  by 
Nicaraguan  folklore  are  the  orchestral  suite  in  four  movements,  Escems 
Pastoriles,  and  Los  Tincos,  which  the  composer  presented  with  the  Or- 
questa  Sinfonica  de  Nicaragua  on  May  12,  1939.  Of  Incaic  inspiration 
are  Invocation  to  the  Moon,  Dance  to  the  Coca,  and  Yaravi  Peruano. 
La  Danza  de  Flechas  is  based  on  the  pentatonic  scale,  and  reflects  the 
ancient  modes  of  Indian  music.  A  symphonic  poem,  Tramonto  en  la 
Cumbre  (1941),  is  of  a  religious  character.  The  ballet  La  Cabeza  del 
Raid  (1942),  which  received  a  prize  from  the  Ministry  of  Public  In¬ 
struction  in  Nicaragua,  is  orientalistic  in  treatment.  Delgadillo’s  Sinf  oma 
Serrana  (1942)  is  in  a  pastoral  mood.  Of  interest  is  his  Ballet  Infantil, 
which  portrays  Felix  the  Cat  and  Mickey  Mouse.  In  addition,  Delgadillo 


258 


MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 


has  written  two  operas,  Final  de  Norma  and  Mavaltaydn,  four  operettas, 
eight  string  quartets,  three  trios,  twenty-four  Preludes  for  piano,  twenty- 
two  melodies  for  violin  and  piano,  over  fifty  songs,  and  fourteen  “ro- 
manzas”  to  the  texts  of  Ruben  Dario,  the  great  Nicaraguan  poet.  Delga¬ 
dillo’s  orchestral  manuscripts  are  in  the  Fleisher  Collection  in  Philadel¬ 
phia. 

The  few  musicians  in  Nicaragua  who  possess  some  degree  of  profes¬ 
sional  competence  are  pupils  of  Delgadillo.  In  1943  Delgadillo  went  to 
Panama  where  he  taught  at  the  National  Conservatory  of  Panama  City 
and  edited  the  music  magazine  Armonia.  In  1945  he  resigned  his  posi¬ 
tion  and  returned  to  Managua, 


Panama 


^De  do  vlene  el  cahallerof 
Viene  de  Panama, 

[lope  de  vega] 


The  Republic  of  Panama  is  situated  on  the  neck  of  land  connecting  South 
America  with  Central  America.  Its  position  is  of  the  greatest  political  importance 
because  of  the  Panama  Canal.  In  area,  Panama  is  larger  than  Costa  Rica  or  El 
Salvador,  but  smaller  than  the  other  Central  American  republics.  Panama’s 
population  numbers  about  600,000.  There  is  a  great  variety  of  races,  Indians 
living  in  the  jungle,  Negroes  on  the  coasts,  and  Americans  in  the  Panama 
Canal  Zone. 

In  spite  of  the  smallness  of  its  territory,  Panama  has  produced  a  con¬ 
siderable  variety  of  distinctive  dances  and  songs.  Panama’s  music  is 
racially  differentiated,  depending  on  the  region.  It  is  Indian  in  the  jungle 
of  the  Interior  5  it  is  Spanish-American  on  the  coasts  5  and  in  Panama  City 
it  is  as  international  as  the  port  Itself. 

A  wealth  of  information  on  the  Indian  music  of  Panama  is  provided 
in  the  exemplary  treatise  Tradiciones  y  Cantares  de  Panama  by  Panama’s 
musician-diplomat,  Narciso  Garay.  This  volume  contains  numerous  musi¬ 
cal  illustrations  and  photographs,  which  together  give  a  graphic  picture 
of  the  dances,  songs,  and  instruments  of  the  Panamanian  Indians.  Addi¬ 
tional  information  on  native  music  is  found  in  a  paper  by  Frances  Dens- 


PANAMA 


259 


more,  Music  of  the  Tula  Indians  of  Panama,  published  by  the  Smith¬ 
sonian  Institution. 

The  most  primitive  Indian  chants  of  Panama  still  retain  the  pentatonic 
structure  of  pre-Columbian  America.  Many  of  these  songs  are  part  of 
the  ritual,  and  are  invested  with  magical  power  by  the  natives.  There  is 
an  authentic  report  that  a  native  musician  has  charged,  and  collected,  as 
much  as  fifteen  dollars  for  teaching  the  Indians  a  song  supposed  to  attract 
turtles  to  the  catcher. 

The  musical  instruments  of  Panama’s  Indians  are  rudimentary  flutes 
and  drums.  European  guitars  and  violins  and  Cuban  shakers  are  in  com¬ 
mon  use.  The  violins  often  have  only  three  strings,  and  are  known  under 
the  name  Rabel.  There  are  drums  of  three  sizes:  the  Tambor  (large), 
the  Pufador  (medium),  and  the  Reficador  (small).  The  Cuban  Guiro 
is  here  called  Guachara,  while  the  Cuban  Maracas  is  sometimes  referred 
to  as  Guiro,  which  is  apt  to  create  confusion. 

The  Panamanian  guitar  is  called  the  Meforanera,  because  it  often 
accompanies  the  native  dance  Meforana.  It  is  so  tuned  that  the  harmony 
appears  in  the  form  of  a  six-four  chord,  which  influences  the  character  of 
the  harmonization. 

The  Meforana,  the  Tamborito,  and  the  Punto  are  the  typical  dance 
forms  of  Panama.  The  Tamborito  is  an  old  air,  dating  as  far  back  as  the 
seventeenth  century.  In  its  present  form,  it  is  usually  sung  by  a  woman 
soloist,  followed  by  a  chorus  singing  the  refrain.  The  singing,  as  distinct 
from  the  dance,  is  designated  by  the  word  T onada.  The  dance  is  punctu¬ 
ated  by  hand-clapping  and  a  rhythmical  beat  of  the  small  drums.  The 
Tamborito  is  written  in  a  major  key  and  in  a  lively  two-four  time.  As 
the  tempo  increases,  the  syncopated  drum  accompaniment  is  smoothed 
into  triplet  rhythms.  The  choreography  of  the  Tamborito  is  simple:  the 
partners  dance  opposite  each  other,  while  the  crowd  forms  a  circle  around 
them.  The  drummers  are  placed  within  the  circle,  next  to  the  dancers. 

The  Tamborito  has  long  been  regarded  as  a  licentious  dance.  A  native 
poet  describes  it  as  “more  enticing  than  the  nudity  of  Venus.”  There  is 
a  special,  more  sedate  type  of  the  Tamborito,  danced  in  private  homes, 
which  is  called  Tambor  de  Or  den,  or  an  orderly  Tambor  {Tambor  is  a 
frequent  abbreviation  for  Tamborito). 

The  Meforana  is  also  an  old  air,  probably  of  Spanish  origin.  In  Panama, 
it  is  played  as  an  improvisation  “en  contrapunto”  on  two  guitars,  which 
take  the  name  of  the  dance,  and  are  called  Meforaneras.  Like  the  Tam¬ 
borito,  the  Meforana  is  usually  written  in  the  major  key.  When  it  is 


26o  music  in  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

minor,  it  has  a  special  name,  the  GalUno,  The  rhythm  of  the  Mejorana 
is  dual,  and  is  determined  by  the  singing  line  which  is  in  two-four  time, 
and  an  accompanying  figure  which  is  six-eight  time.  Narciso  Garay,  how¬ 
ever,  sets  the  meter  of  the  Mejorana  as  three-eight,  six-eight,  or  nine- 
eight.  There  is  a  vocal  version  of  the  Mejorana^  called  the  Socavon^  which 
is  itself  known  under  two  different  names,  depending  on  whether  it  ends 
on  the  tonic  (in  which  case  it  is  called  the  Zafatero)  or  on  the  dominant 
(when  it  is  called  the  Mesano).  Furthermore,  there  exists  a  slow, 
Saraband-like  type  of  Mejorana^  which  is  called  Mejorana-Poncho. 

The  Mejorana  is  a  square  dance,  with  the  partners  facing  each  other. 
Two  different  dancing  steps  are  used:  the  Zafateo  (literally,  shoe  dance), 
and  the  Paseo  (the  promenade). 

The  third  characteristic  dance  form  of  Panama,  the  Punto^  is  a  rapid 
dance  maintaining  a  steady  six-eight  time,  with  a  melody  tending  towards 
two-four  time.  In  the  villages  engaged  couples  often  dance  the  PuntOy 
and  the  spectators  throw  coins  at  their  feet.  The  PuntOy  in  common  with 
other  airs  of  Panama,  is  usually  in  a  major  key.  There  exists  also  a  Punto 
in  minor,  which  is  called  the  Coco: 

Other  popular  dances  of  Panama  are  the  Tamborera  (which  is  probably 
of  Mexican  origin),  Curachay  Pindiny  PafelSny  SuestCy  Chiriquiy  and  the 
Tono,  Most  of  these  dances  adhere  to  the  rhythmic  formula  of  the  Punto, 
Narciso  Garay  cites  a  specimen  of  Chiriqui  in  three-four  time,  played  on  a 
three-stringed  violin  with  the  accompaniment  of  a  drum. 

A  group  of  Panamanian  dances  are  of  Negro  origin.  Of  these,  the 
Cumbia  is  characteristic.  It  has  been  described  as  “the  representation  of 
the  erotic  struggle  between  the  male  and  the  female.” 

Panama’s  composers  are  mostly  amateurs  who  write  popular  songs  and 
dances  for  local  bands.  Among  the  better  known  native  musicians  are 
Alberto  Galimany  and  Ricardo  Fabrega. 

In  recent  years,  steps  have  been  taken  by  the  Government  of  Panama 
to  promote  native  music  culture.  In  1940,  a  National  Conservatory  was 
established  in  Panama  City,  under  the  direction  of  the  Panamanian  violin¬ 
ist  Alfredo  de  Saint-Malo,  with  a  capable  faculty  including  foreign  mu¬ 
sicians.  Since  1943  the  Conservatory  of  Panama  has  published  a  music 
monthlyy  Armoma, 

In  Panama  City  there  is  a  symphonic  ensemble  conducted  by  Herbert 
de  Castro,  a  highly  trained  musician  who  is  also  a  composer.  Several 
military  bands  furnish  open-air  music  in  all  towns  and  villages  of  Panama. 
A  piece  originally  composed  for  the  Banda  Refublicana  hy  its  conductor, 


26i 


PANAMA 

Santos  Jorge,  and  entitled  Hiififio  has  become  the  National 

Anthem  of  the  Republic  of  Panama. 


MUSICIANS  OF  PANAMA 

The  Panamanian  musician  and  conductor,  Herbert  de  Castro 

(1^06 - ),  studied  in  Paris  with  Albert  Roussel.  In  I942'j  when  de 

Castro  was  thirty-six  years  of  age,  he  was  appointed  conductor  of  the 
newly  founded  symphony  orchestra  in  Panama.  He  has  written  some 
atmospheric  piano  pieces. 

Roque  Cordero  (1917 - )  is  a  young  Panamanian  Negro.  His  or¬ 

chestral  movement  on  native  themes,  Cafricho  Interiorano,  was  first  per¬ 
formed  by  the  Orquesta  Sinjonica  in  Panama  on  August  10,  194a.  This 
work  is  included  in  the  Fleisher  Collection  in  Philadelphia. 

The  Panamanian  composer  of  popular  music,  Ricardo  Fabrega 

(1505 - ),  is  a  native  of  Santiago  de  Veraguas.  Fabrega  has  composed 

dances  in  the  native  manner,  bearing  descriptive  titles  such  as  Una  Noche 
Trofical,  Bajo  el  Palmar,  and  Panama  Viejo. 

Alberto  Galimany,  composer  of  popular  music,  was  born  in  Villa- 
franca,  Spain,  in  1889.  Galimany  studied  at  the  Barcelona  Conservatoir, 
and  then  went  to  Panama,  where  he  was  appointed  conductor  of  the 
Banda  Refublicana,  a  post  which  he  held  until  1937.  A  theater  arrange¬ 
ment  of  Galimany’s  patriotic  piece  Panama  has  been  published  in  Barce¬ 
lona,  and  is  in  the  Fleisher  Collection  in  Philadelphia. 

Narciso  Garay  (1876 - ),  better  known  as  a  diplomat  than  as  a  mu¬ 

sician,  was  born  in  Panama  City.  He  studied  music  at  the  Musical  Institute 
in  Cartagena,  and  later  in  Bogota.  In  1897  he  went  to  Brussels,  where  he 
attended  the  Royal  Conservatory  of  Music.  He  graduated  with  a  Premier 
Prix,  and  then  took  a  course  at  the  Schola  Cantorum  in  Paris.  In  Paris  he 
published  a  Violin  Sonata.  Later  Garay  abandoned  music  for  a  diplomatic 
career,  and  was  at  one  time  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  of  the  Republic 
of  Panama.  In  1930,  he  issued  an  important  publication,  Tradiciones  y 
Cantares  de  Panama,  which  has  become  a  source  book  for  Panamanian 
folklore. 

Santos  Jorge  (1870-1941)1  author  of  the  National  Anthem  of  Pan¬ 
ama,  was 'born  in  Peralta,  Spain,  and  died  in  Panama  City.  He  settled  in 


262  MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

Panama  in  1889.  In  1897,  he  wrote  the  music  to  the  Himno  Istmeno, 
which  was  proclaimed  the  National  Anthem  of  Panama  after  the  separa¬ 
tion  of  Panama  from  Colombia  in  1903.  A  biographical  sketch  of  Santos 
Jorge  is  published  in  the  November,  1943,  issue  of  Armoma,  organ  of 
the  National  Conservatory  of  Panama. 

The  violinist,  Alfredo  de  Saint-Malo  (1898 - )  studied  at  the  Paris 

Conservatory,  and  graduated  in  1919,  when  he  was  twenty-one  years  old, 
with  a  Premier  Prix.  Saint-Malo  has  made  concert  tours  in  Europe  and 
America,  and  in  1928  played  with  Ravel  in  the  United  States.  In  1941, 
he  was  appointed  director  of  the  National  Conservatory  in  Panama  City. 


Paraguay 

I  Paraguay^  tierra  ideal^ 

Es  tu  suelo  un  jar  din  de  foemas^  amoves  y  floras! 

[from  a  popular  song] 


Paraguay,  an  inland  country,  lying  astride  the  tropic  of  Capricorn,  has  been 
called  the  Paradise  of  South  America  for  its  natural  beauty  and  the  serenity  of 
its  climate.  Paraguay  is  the  smallest  South  American  nation  in  population,  which 
numbers  scarcely  over  one  million  inhabitants,  most  of  them  Indians  of  the 
Guarany  branch. 

The  native  musical  culture  of  Paraguay  is  part  of  the  tradition  of  the 
jungle  country  in  the  heart  of  the  South  American  continent.  The  original 
music  of  the  natives  is  based  on  the  pentatonic  scale,  and,  like  all  Indian 
music,  it  is  slow  in  tempo  and  melancholy  in  mood.  Contact  with  the 
Spanish  elements  has  resulted  in  extension  of  the  original  scale  to  the 
European  seven-tone  scale,  with  the  minor  mode  predominant.  From  the 
few  extant  specimens  of  the  Guarany  music  of  Paraguay,  it  appears  that 
there  was  in  it  little  variety  of  rhythm,  and  that  each  song  was  a  suc¬ 
cession  of  musical  phrases  separated  by  cadences.  In  many  Latin  American 
countries,  the  vivacious  rhythmic  lilt  reflects  the  influence  of  the  Negro 
element,  introduced  by  the  African  slaves.  There  is  virtually  no  Negro 


PARAGUAY  263 

population  in  Paraguay,  and  consequently  the  Afro-American  elements 
are  not  present  in  the  music  of  the  natives. 

The  primitive  instruments  of  the  Guarany  Indians  are  still  in  use  among 
the  natives  of  Paraguay  and  in  the  adjoining  provinces  of  Brazil.  These 
are  wind  instruments,  made  of  grooved  pieces  of  wood  and  held  together 
by  strong  hoops,  or  vertical  flutes  made  of  sugar  cane.  The  generic  name 
of  these  wind  instruments  is  'Memby.  According  to  size  and  function, 
there  are  different  types  of  the  Memby,  called  Memby-Afara^  Memby- 
Chue,  Memby-Guazu,  and  Memby-T arard.  There  is  also  a  primitive  war 
trumpet,  the  Inubia.  Among  the  native  drums,  there  is  the  Trocano,  a 
burned-out  trunk  of  a  tree  placed  on  wooden  supports  and  struck  with 
mallets.  Other  native  drums  are  the  Matafii,  the  Mure-Mure  and  the 
Curugu.  The  native  name  of  the  Maracas  is  Mbaracd.  The  Guarany  In¬ 
dians  have  made  use  of  human  bones  for  the  manufacture  of  instruments. 
According  to  travelers’  reports,  there  were  cases  of  musical  cannibalism, 
as  when  the  Guarany  Indians  slew  the  missionaries  and  made  scrapers 
from  their  bones.  The  native  name  for  such  striated  bones,  similar  in 
function  to  the  Cuban  Guiro,  is  Congoerd. 

Pioneers  of  musical  education  in  Paraguay  were  the  Jesuit  missionaries, 
who  settled  in  South  America  in  the  sixteenth  century;  they  introduced 
church  singing  into  the  country  which  is  now  Paraguay.  Among  these 
Jesuit  musicians  was  the  celebrated  Italian  composer,  Domenico  Zipoli, 
who  died  in  Cordoba,  Argentina,  in  1726.  The  annals  of  Paraguay  also 
contain  the  name  of  one  Luis  Berger,  a  Jesuit  missionary,  who  settled 
in  Paraguay  in  1616,  and  who  was  an  accomplished  violinist  as  well  as 
a  painter  and  a  physician.  Among  the  musicians  of  Indian  origin  was 
Julian  Atirahu,  who  lived  a  century  ago  and  who  acquired  considerable 
skill  in  composition.  Among  his  pieces  is  a  minuet  which  can  be  played 
simultaneously  right  side  up  and  upside  down,  resulting  in  perfect  har¬ 
mony. 

In  the  nineteenth  century,  the  influx  of  European  salon  music,  and 
the  universal  adoption  of  the  guitar  as  the  principal  instrument  of  the 
people,  led  to  the  appearance  in  Paraguay  of  a  hybrid  type  of  popular 
music,  European  in  structure  and  harmony,  performed  in  a  “tropical” 
manner.  Under  Paraguay’s  skies,  the  Waltz,  the  Polka,  and  the  Galop 
acquire  a  new  and  peculiar  inflection.  The  Polka  Paraguay  a  follows  the 
traditional  oom-pah  beat  of  the  German  prototype,  but  its  accompaniment 
flows  in  lazy  triplets,  in  three  beats  to  a  measure  in  two-four  time.  The 
Paraguayan  Galop  may  have  the  bass  in  three-four  time,  and  the  melody 


264  MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

in  six-eight  time,  following  the  familiar  formula  of  so  many  dances  of 
Hispanic  origin. 

An  interesting  feature  of  this  type  of  Paraguayan  popular  music  is  the 
text,  which  is  often  sung  in  the  Guarany  language,  which  is  the  second 
language  of  Paraguay.  Thus,  the  Paraguayan  Cancion  is  also  known  as 
Purajhei  in  the  Guarany  language,  which,  in  contrast  to  most  Indian  dia¬ 
lects,  has  a  mellifluous  cadence  and  abounds  in  vowels. 

Recently  a  successful  attempt  was  made  by  a  Paraguayan  musician, 
Jose  Asuncion  Flores,  to  revive  the  spirit  of  the  Guarany  song  and  to 
create  a  new  form  of  popular  music  that  would  draw  on  native  melodic 
resources  rather  than  on  the  European  stock  of  music.  In  collaboration 
with  the  Paraguayan  poet  Ortiz  Guerrero,  Jose  Asuncion  Flores  initiated 
the  Guarama,  which  is  a  ballad  in  slow  waltz  time  and  usually  in  a  minor 
mode.  The  Guaramas  soon  became  popular,  and  may  now  be  regarded  as 
part  of  Paraguayan  musical  folklore.  Numerous  other  Paraguayan  com¬ 
posers  of  popular  music,  among  whom  Herminio  Gimenez  and  Emilio 
Bigi  are  the  best  known,  have  followed  the  lead  of  Jose  Asuncion  Flores 
and  have  written  Guaramas. 

The  present  state  of  music  in  Paraguay  holds  considerable  promise  for 
a  bright  future.  There  are  now  in  Asuncion  two  music  schools,  the  Escuela 
Normal  de  Musica,  under  the  direction  of  Remberto  Gimenez,  and  the 
Conservatorio  de  Musica  at  the  Ateneo,  headed  by  Juan  Carlos  Moreno 
Gonzalez. 

The  Conservatory  of  Asuncion  maintains  a  student  orchestra,  which 
gives  occasional  performances  of  classical  music.  There  is  also  a  military 
band,  the  Banda  de  Policia.  The  only  musician  in  Paraguay  who  has  at¬ 
tempted  to  write  music  in  larger  forms  is  Juan  Carlos  Moreno  Gonzalez, 
the  author  of  a  symphony  on  native  themes.  Remberto  Gimenez,  director 
of  the  Conservatory  in  Asuncion,  has  written  some  semi-popular  music. 

MUSICIANS  OF  PARAGUAY 

Jose  Asuncion  Flores  was  born  in  1904  in  Asuncion,  ran  away  from 
home  as  a  child,  and  was  placed  in  a  reform  school,  where  he  began  to 
study  nausic.  Later  he  played  the  cornet  and  the  violin  in  the  Banda  de 
in  Asuncion.  The  signal  achievement  of  Jose  Asuncion  Flores  is 
the  creation  of  a  new  type  of  native  air,  which  he  called  Guarama,  in  allu¬ 
sion  to  the  Guarany  Indians  of  Paraguay.  He  has  published  several  such 
Guaramas  in  Buenos  Aires,  where  he  now  serves  as  an  attache  at  the  Lega- 
tion  of  Paraguay.  . 


PARAGUAY 


265 

The  composer  and  educator,  Remberto  Gimenez  (1899 - ),  is  a 

native  of  Coronel  Oviedo.  He  studied  with  Alberto  Williams  in  Buenos 
Aires,  and  later  went  to  Paris  for  further  study  at  the  Schola  Cantorum, 
Upon  his  return  to  Paraguay,  he  became  director  of  the  Escuela  Normal 
de  Musica.  Gimenez  is  also  the  conductor  of  the  Asuncion  Symphony 
Orchestra.  As  a  composer,  he  has  written  a  Rafsodia  Paraguayan  and  has 
made  an  ofEcial  arrangement  of  the  National  Anthem  of  Paraguay. 

Juan  Carlos  JMoreno  (1912 - )  is  a  young  Paraguayan  who,  at  the 

age  of  thirteen,  suffered  a  street-car  accident,  which  resulted  in  the  loss 
of  both  legs.  Despite  this  grave  handicap,  Moreno  began  to  study  music, 
without  a  teacher.  In  1938,  when  he  was  twenty-six,  Moreno  went  to 
Sao  Paulo,  Brazil,  for  further  study  of  piano  and  composition.  Upon  his 
return  to  Asuncion,  he  was  appointed  director  of  the  Conservatory  of  the 
Ateneo.  Juan  Carlos  Moreno  has  written  a  piano  Trio,  a  String  Quartet, 
two  piano  sonatas,  a  Violin  Sonata,  a  symphonic  Suite  on  native  themes, 
and  several  piano  pieces.  He  possesses  an  instinctive  melodic  gift,  but 
lacks  an  adequate  technique.  His  music  is  interesting  as  the  first  attempt 
to  use  native  Paraguayan  themes  in  the  established  forms.  Three  of  his 
pieces  were  published  in  1939  by  the  Rotary  Club  of  Asuncion. 


Peru 

Dios  en  clhnas  nos  dio  vario  elemmto 
Con  que  a  las  froducciones  ntas  extranas 
El  Peru  ofrece  kosfitalario  asiento. 

[fELIPE  PARDO  y  aliaga] 


Peru  lies  in  the  tropical  zone,  just  south  of  the  Equator,  and  enjoys  a  variety 
of  climates,  dry  and  moderate  on  the  coast,  torrid  in  the  jungle,  and  bleak  and 
cold  in  the  high  Andes.  The  population  of  Peru,  the  majority  of  whose  members 
are  Indian,  numbers  about  seven  million. 

Peru  is  the  cradle  of  pre-Columbian  civilization.  The  El  Dorado  of 
the  conquistadores,  Peru  reveals  the  existence  of  treasures  more  precious 


266 


MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

than  gold;  the  pottery  of  the  Chimu  culture,  the  textiles  of  the  Nazca 
and  Tiahuanaco,  the  ivory-and-gold  sculptures  of  the  Incas,  rank  beside 
the  great  art  of  all  time.  The  music  of  ancient  Peru  has  come  down  to  us 
in  the  oral  tradition  of  the  Indians,  descendants  of  the  Incas.,  We  know 
that  Peruvian  music  was  essentially  pentatonic,  although  the  occasional 
use  of  passing  diatonic  and  even  chromatic  tones  is  not  excluded.  Then 
came  the  Spanish,  and  out  of  the  impact  of  the  two  cultures  was  generated 
a  new  hybrid  product,  the  music  of  the  mestizo,  or  mustca  chola  as  it  is 
called. 

Carlos  Raygada,  the  Peruvian  writer  on  music,  gives  a  picture  of  this 
process  in  his  essay  Panorama  Musical  del  Peru,  published  in  Volume 
II  of  the  Boletin  Latino-Americano  de  Musica: 

The  musical  system  of  the  Peruvians,  which  is  characterized  by  a  vigorous 
originality  within  the  limits  of  the  pentatonic  scale,  came  to  acquire  considerable 
emotional  power  in  its  various  modalities,  sufficient  to  serve  the  needs  of  the 
ritual  music,  love  music,  war  music,  and  funeral  music  of  our  remote  ancestors 
The  sudden  appearance  of  the  Spanish  produced  a  general  confusion,  not  only 
from  the  shock  of  the  conquest  itself,  but  also  from  the  intrusion  into  everyday 
life  of  new  human  types,  new  arms,  customs,  habits,  a  new  language,  and  even 
unknown  animals,  all  of  which  must  have  dumbfounded  the  simple  soul  of  the 
worshippers  of  the  Sun.  And  in  music,  new  scales  and  unusual  rhythms,  per¬ 
formed  on  strange  and  complex  instruments,  added  to  the  bewilderment. 

There  was  a  clash  of  sensations.  The  conquistador,  bold  warrior  that  he  was, 
avid^  for  gold  and  power,  could  hardly  be  expected  to  take  an  interest  in  the 
music  of  the  Incas,  with  its  limited  melodic  resources.  But  soon  the  Spanish 
began  to  feel  the  attraction  of  this  original  native  art.  The  result  of  the  inter¬ 
penetration  of  the  esthetic  notions  of  the  two  races  was  at  first  an  unconscious 
and  then  a  deliberate  musical  miscegenation.  But  it  was  not  absolute,  for  the 
innate  hereditary  pride  of  the  aborigines  reserved,  in  the  sacred  intimacy  of  their 
private  lives,  an  art  peculiar  to  the  race.  This  passive  resistance  made  it  possible 
to  preserve  the  aboriginal  musical  expression,,  with  its  characteristic  structural 
elements.  It  was  a  tactical  retreat;  the  hybrid  product  remained  for  the  mestizos, 
while  the  pure  Indians  kept  their  heritage  through  centuries  of  oral  tradition! 

Andre  Sas,  writing  in  Volume  I  of  the  Boletin  Latino-Americano  de 
Musica,  advances  an  interesting  theory  that  Inca  music  was  based  on  the 
fundamental  triads,  the  minor  tonic  and  major  mediant. 

A  pioneer  in  collecting  native  songs  was  Daniel  Alomias  Robles 
(1871— 194^)-  He  left,  at  his  death,  about  650  melodies  which  he  had 
gathered  in  the  towns  and  villages  of  Peru.  Only  a  few  of  these  melodies 


PERU 


267 


rn  1  , 

J  ^ 


CJdp^ 


$ 


. — ■#> 


An  Authentic  Inca  Melody  as  Harmonized  by  Andre  Sas 


have  been  published.  The  bulk  of  his  material  still  remains  in  manuscript. 
A  number  of  Incaic  melodies  from  Peru,  Bolivia  and  Ecuador  are  in¬ 
cluded  in  the  monumental  work  La  Musique  des  Incas  et  ses  Survivances 
by  M.  and  Mme.  Raoul  d^Harcourt,  which  also  gives  the  most  lucid 
exposition  of  the  tonal  foundations  of  Inca  music. 

The  music  of  the  Incas  and  their  descendants  has  been  classified  into 
three  categories:  ceremonial  music,  pertaining  to  sun  worship,  war  and 
public  events,  which  was  collectively  designated  by  the  word  Huanca; 
music  of  intimate  character,  which  went  under  the  generic  name  Harawii 
and  dance  music,  known  as  Huaino. 

These  types  of  music  have  evolved  into  contemporary  forms,  but  on 
the  whole  have  retained  their  original  character.  The  ceremonial  chants 
are  exemplified  in  Hymns  to  the  Sun,  still  heard  at  the  Indian  festivals 
in  the  highlands.  The  Harawi  type  resulted  in  the  creation  of  the  lyrical 
song  Yaravi;  and  the  Huaino  is  no  longer  a  generic  term  for  dance  music, 
but  refers  to  one  particular  dance. 

The  Yaravi  (which  is  but  a  transliteration  of  Harawi^  all  other  ingenious 
etymologies  of  the  word  to  the  contrary  notwithstanding)  is  performed  on 
a  flute,  or  sung  without  accompaniment  to  a  text  of  nostalgic  love.  The 
authentic  Yaravi  does  not  follow  any  definite  rhythmic  pattern  j  it  is 
rather  a  succession  of  musical  phrases  separated  by  long  holds.  The 
Yaravies  were  known  in  Peru  under  that  name  at  least  as  early  as  1791, 
for  in  that  year  the  Lima  publication  Mer curio  Peruano  carried  an  article 
dealing  with  ^^music  in  general,  and  Yaravies  in  particular,’^  in  which  the 
form  was  described  as  written  in  three-four  time  (which  remains  true  for 


268 


MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 


all  Yaravies  composed  by  Peruvian  musicians  in  historic  times),  and  the 
tonality  of  the  song  was  said  to  be  in  minor,  with  transitions  into  major 
when  required  by  the  change  of  mood.  The  first  native-born  composer  of 
Yaravies  was  Mariano  Melgar  (1791-1814),  who  treated  this  native 
form  as  a  romantic  Lied. 

Some  Yaravies  are  followed  by  a  very  short  rapid  movement,  which  is 
called  Fuga^  meaning  flight.  This  Fuga  is  of  course  not  connected  in  any 
way  with  the  classical  polyphonic  form  of  the  Fugue. 

The  following  expressive  Yaravi  is  quoted  by  d’Harcourt: 


Peruvian  Yaravi  {d^Harcourt) 


The  Huaino  (which  is  spelled  either  with  or  without  the  tilde  over  the 
letter  n)  is  identical  with  the  Bolivian  dance  of  the  same  name.  It  is  in 
two-four  time  and  is  usually  marked  with  syncopation. 

The  Cachua  (also  spelled  Kaswa  or  Kashwa)  is  a  round  dance  popular 
in  the  Peruvian  highlands,  danced  by  couples  holding  hands.  Like  most 
Peruvian  dances,  it  is  in  two-four  time,  usually  without  syncopation,  but 
in  straight  rhythm  of  one  eighth-note  and  two  sixteenth-notes,  or  two 
sixteenth-notes  and  one  eighth-note. 

A  unique  instance  of  an  artificial  name  applied  to  a  folk  dance  relates 
to  the  Marineray  a  Peruvian  dance  of  Hispanic  extraction,  in  dual  time 
of  three-four  and  six-eight,  and  performed  at  a  lively  tempo,  with  the 
dancers  waving  handkerchiefs.  The  Marinera  was  originally  called  Cueca 
Chilena^  or  simply  Chilena^  because  its  popularity  first  spread  into  Peru 
from  Chile.  During  the  war  between  Chile  and  Peru  in  1879-1883,  a  na¬ 
tionalist  Peruvian  writer,  Abelardo  Gamarra,  proposed  that  thtCMlena 
should  be  renamed  with  the  double  purpose  of  striking  off  the 

reminder  that  the  dance  had  come  from  the  enemy  country  and  at  the 
same  time  honoring  the  gallant  deeds  of  the  Peruvian  Navy.  The  sug- 


PERU 


269 

gestion  was  taken  up^  and  the  name  of  the  dance  has  remained  Marinera. 
Like  the  Chilean  Cueca^  it  is  danced  and  sung  in  a  lively  tempo^  and  its 
time-signature  is  three-four  or  six-eightj  depending  upon  whether  the 
first  or  the  second  of  the  two  isochronic  meters  is  predominant.  The 
partners  usually  dance  apart,  weaving  handkerchiefs,  but  the  choreography 
varies  widely  in  different  localities.  In  the  north  of  Peru,  the  Mannera 
is  often  called  T ondero.  That  at  one  time  the  Mannera  must  have  been 
considered  an  indecent  dance  is  indicated  by  the  fact  that  it  was  known 
under  the  name  Mozamda^  which  means  a  bad  girl. 

Among  comparatively  recent  dance  forms  popular  in  Peru  are  the 
Pasacalle  and  the  Tanguino.  The  Pasacalle  (literally,  passing  through  the 
street)  has  nothing  in  common  with  the  classical  PassacagUa^  but  is  a 
carnival  march,  usually  performed  by  a  brass  band.  The  Tanguino  is  a 
slow  dance  in  four-four  time  and  has  no  connection  with  the  Tango, 

Modern  American  dances  are  popular  in  Peru  as  in  other  South  Ameri¬ 
can  republics.  An  attempt  has  been  made  by  popular  composers  to  link  the 
ancient  tradition  with  the  modern  popular  dance  in  such  hybrid  creations 
as  the  Inca  Stef^  which  adapts  the  pentatonic  melos  of  the  Incas  to  the 
pace  of  an  American  Foxtrot. 

The  instruments  used  by  native  performers  for  their  dances  and  songs 
have  retained  the  chief  characteristic  of  their  Inca  prototypes.  The  most 
expressive  of  these  instruments  is  the  Quena^  or  Kena^  which  is  a  vertical 
flute,  made  of  reed  or  of  the  leg  bone  of  the  llama.  This  flute  usually 
has  five  holes,  corresponding  to  the  five  tones  of  the  pentatonic  scale. 
When,  under  the  influence  of  Spanish  music,  the  European  seven-tone 
scale  was  introduced,  the  manufacture  of  Quenas  capable  of  producing  the 
diatonic  scale  was  a  natural  consequence  of  the  “hybridization^’  of  Inca 
music.  It  must  be  stated  in  this  connection  that  cultures  more  ancient  than 
that  of  the  Incas  apparently  possessed  scales  other  than  the  pentatonic. 
Andre  Sas  has  examined  the  musical  instruments  preserved  in  the  National 
Museum  of  Archeology  in  Lima  belonging  to  the  Nazca  culture  which 
flourished  some  1500  years  ago,  and  has  found  that  the  scales  playable 
on  these  instruments  include  semitones  and  even  fractional  intervals 
smaller  than  the  semitone.  But  if  so,  what  compelled  the  Incas  to  forego 
the  more  developed  scales  of  the  Nazca  era  in  favor  of  the  humble 
pentatonic?  The  suggestion  presents  itself  that  the  Inca  culture,  super¬ 
seding  the  Nazca,  Chimu  and  Tiahuanaco  civilizations,  found  these  rich 
melodic  resources  unsuitable  to  the  austere  ideals  of  the  race,  and  de¬ 
liberately  reduced  the  number  of  tones  to  five.  Such  a  hypothesis  has  its 


270  MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

attractions,  for  it  would  tend  to  prove  that  the  Inca  art  of  music  was  not 
merely  the  instinctive  expression  of  an  untutored  mind,  but  a  rational 
selection  of  a  melodic  medium  best  suited  to  the  peculiar  needs  of  the 
people’s  religious  and  ceremonial  ritual.  Besides,  the  number  five,  sym¬ 
bolic  of  the  hand,  may  have  had  a  special  significance  in  the  conceptual 
order  of  the  Incas:  the  hand  of  Pachacamac,  the  Zeus  of  the  Incas,  appears 
in  some  of  the  extraordinary  sculptures  of  gold  and  stone  that  are  left 
as  the  heritage  of  Inca  art. 

The  Quena  is  the  most  characteristic  instrument  of  the  Peruvian  In¬ 
dians.  The  panpipe,  in  use  by  the  Indians  of  all  South  America,  is  known 
in  Peru  under  the  name  Antara.  It  consists  of  a  series  of  connected  reeds 
of  different  sizes.  The  Peruvian  ocarina,  or  Ayariche  in  the  vernacular, 
should  also  be  mentioned.  The  Peruvian  Indians  use  primitive  trumpets, 
capable  of  producing  several  harmonic  sounds.  They  are  called  the  Aylli- 
Quefa  (also  transliterated  as  Hayllai-Quifac),  and  the  Tock-Oro.  These 
trumpets  are  made  of  wood  or  baked  clay.  In  the  church  at  Pisac,  conch 
shell  trumpets  are  used  in  the  Catholic  Sunday  service. 

Of  the  drums,  the  Peruvians  have  the  Tinyciy  which  is  a  barrel  with  a 
membrane  covering  each  end.  Another  drum,  the  Huancar,  with  one 
membrane,  is  capable  of  producing  a  definite  pitch.  The  Maracas,  a  gourd 
filled  with  dry  seeds,  is  known  in  Peru  under  the  onomatopoeic  name 
Chil-Chil.  These  primitive  instruments  are  included  in  the  score  of  the 
ballet  suite  Suray-Surita  by  the  late  Indian  Peruvian  composer  Teodoro 
Valcarcel. 

During  the  early  centuries  of  the  conquest,  the  native  dances  and  in¬ 
struments  were  regarded  by  the  colonial  administration  as  potentially 
dangerous.  The ‘Church  combated  the  native  arts  on  religious  grounds. 
Thus  in  1614,  the  Archbishop  of  Lima  ordered  all  native  musical  in¬ 
struments  burned.  Any  Indian  found  in  possession  of  such  instruments 
was  to  be  given  three  hundred  lashes  and  paraded  through  the  streets  in 
a  red  shirt  riding  a  llama.  The  Jesuit  Arriaga,  in  his  report  Extirfacion 
de  la  Idolatria  del  Peru  (1621),  boasted  that  he  had  punished  679  In¬ 
dians  and  destroyed  603  large  and  3418  small  musical  instruments  in 
his  personal  punitive  expedition  across  the  land. 

Parallel  to  the  suppression  of  native  music,  attempts  were  made  by 
some  ecclesiastics  in  Peru  to  turn  the  native  art  to  Christian  use.  Thus  in 
155  ^  the  organist  of  the  Cuzco  Cathedral  wrote  a  choral  work  in  the 
pentatonic  system  of  the  Incas,  with  a  text  in  the  vernacular  glorifying 
the  Sun  God,  and  had  a  group  of  natives  sing  it  in  the  church.  There  were, 


PERU 


271 


in  the  course  of  the  centuries,  many  other  contacts  between  the  Christian 
and  native  Indian  ritual.  A  curious  product  of  this  musical  osmosis  is  the 
Guailichaday  originally  an  Inca  chant,  w^hich  is  now  sung  at  Christmas 
time  as  a  carol. 

During  the  colonial  period,  Peru,  which  then  included  the  territory  of 
Bolivia  and  Ecuador,  was  the  cultural  as  well  as  the  administrative  center 
of  Spanish  America.  Lima  was  the  arbiter  of  fashion,  and  the  phrase  ^^al 
USD  de  Lima”  was  a  mark  of  distinction. 

The  European  court  dances,  such  as  the  Minuet  and  the  Gavot,  pene¬ 
trated  into  Spanish  America  through  Lima.  The  French  traveler  Frezier, 
in  his  Relations  du  Voyage  de  la  Mer  du  Sud  (Paris,  1716),  makes 
the  earliest  references  to  a  native  dance  form,  the  Safateado  or  Zafateo^ 
a  ^^shoe  dance.”  It  is  a  lively  movement  in  three-four  time,  with  a 
rhythmic  pattern  composed  of  a  dotted  eighth-note,  a  sixteenth-note,  and 
an  eighth-note,  with  a  semi-cadence,  marked  by  an  eighth-note  and  a 
quarter-note,  in  every  fourth  bar. 

The  pioneer  among  Peruvian  composers  was  Jose  Bernardo  Alzedo 
(1798-1878)3  the  author  of  the  National  Anthem  of  Peru.  He  also 
wrote  a  number  of  patriotic  and  sentimental  songs  under  such  titles  as 
The  Parting  of  Chilean  Maidens  with  the  Peruvian  Army  of  Liberation. 
Alzedo  was  also  the  author  of  the  first  Peruvian  manual  of  music  theory, 
Filosofia  Elemental  de  Musica. 

The  first  Peruvian  composer  who  wrote  music  based  on  national  themes 
was  Jose  Maria  Valle-Riestra  ( 1859-1925),  the  author  of  the  first  native 
opera,  Ollanta.  Luis  Duncker  Lavalle  (1874-1922)  was  a  composer  of 
salon  music  in  the  popular  urban  style.  Claudio  Rebagliati  (1843-1909), 
an  Italian  musician  who  settled  in  Peru,  is  remembered  through  his  collec¬ 
tion  of  South  American  dances  published  in  Italy. 

The  most  original  Peruvian  composer  of  the  twentieth  century  was 
Teodoro  Valcarcel  (1900-1942),  a  full-blooded  Indian,  born  near  Lake 
Titicaca.  His  ballet  music  possesses  unmistakable  authenticity,  although 
his  lack  of  technique  prevented  the  full  development  of  his  talent.  The 
same  defect  is  noticeable  in  the  works  of  many  other  Peruvian  composers. 
Most  of  their  symphonic  works  are  orchestrated  by  foreign  musicians 
resident  in  Peru. 

Lima  possesses  a  National  Conservatory  and  several  private  music 
schools.  On  December  ii,  1938,  was  inaugurated  the  Orquesta  Sinfonica 
.  Nacionaly  which  performs  the  standard  repertoire  of  orchestral  literature. 
The  permanent  conductor  of  the  new  orchestra  is  the  Austrian  musician 


272  .MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

Theo  Buchwald.  In  the  first  five  years  of  its  existence,  this  orchestra  gave 
i8i  concerts  in  Lima,  of  which  117  were  broadcast,  and  presented  forty- 
four  compositions  by  Peruvian  composers. 

MUSICIANS  OF  PERU 

Rodolfo  Barbacci,  the  Argentine-Peruvian  musicologist  and  composer, 
was  born  in  Buenos  Aires  in  191 1.  He  studied  piano,  harp,  cello,  and  musi¬ 
cal  theory,  first  in  Buenos  Aires,  and  later  in  Milan,  Italy.  Upon  return 
to  Argentina,  Barbacci  published  and  edited  three  short-lived  but  infor¬ 
mative  magazines,  Revista  Musical  Argentina^  America  Musical^  and 
Clave,  In  1937  he  went  to  Peru,  where  he  played  the  harp  in  the  Orquesta 
SinfSnica  Nacional  de  Lima^  and  issued  a  valuable  bulletin,  Revista 
Musical  Peruana,  Barbacci  has  published  some  of  his  short  compositions 
for  piano,  written  in  a  modernistic  vein,  and  several  pamphlets,  La 
Nervosidad  de  los  Musicos  (1939),  Educacion  de  la  Memoria  Musical 
(1940),  and  Anecdotas  Musicales  (1942). 

Theo  Buchwald  (1902 - ),  the  Austrian  conductor  naturalized  in 

Peru,  came  originally  from  Vienna.  He  studied  piano  and  conducting. 
In  1935,  he  went  to  South  America  to  conduct  operatic  and  symphonic 
concerts.  Buchwald  was  appointed  the  first  conductor  of  the  newly  or¬ 
ganized  Orquesta  SinfSnica  Nacional  in  Lima  in  1938.  His  basic  policy 
as  conductor  is  the  constant  encouragement  of  native  Peruvian  composers, 
whose  works  figure  on  most  of  his  programs. 

The  musician  and  collector  of  musical  folklore,  Policarpio  Caballero 

(1894 - )  now  lives  in  Buenos  Aires,  but  was  born  in  Cuzco,  Peru. 

Caballero  has  traveled  extensively  in  Peru,  Bolivia,  and  Argentina,  and 
has  compiled  three  volumes  of  material  dealing  with  the  melody  and 
rhythm  of  Inca  music. 

Roberto  Carpio  Valdes  (1900 - ),  a  native  of  Arequipa,  studied 

piano  with  his  father.  He  began  to  compose  experimentally  in  1921  when 
he  was  twenty-one  years  old.  His  Suite  in  three  movements  for  piano, 
written  in  a  somewhat  modernistic  manner,  was  published  in  1942  by  the 
Editorial  Cooferativa  Interamericana  de  Comfositores  in  Montevideo. 
The  score  of  his  Prelude,  in  the  orchestration  of  Rudolph  Holzmann,  is 
in  the  Fleisher  Collection  in  Philadelphia. 

Pablo  Chavez  Aguilar  (1899— ),  whose  reputation  rests  chiefly  in 
the  field  of  religious  composing,  left  his  native  city  of  Lima  to  study  in 


PERU 


273 


Rome,  Italy.  Returning  to  Lima,  Chavez  Aguilar,  then  twenty-five  years 
old,  presented  his  Mass  for  voices  and  orchestra,  on  December  9,  1924. 
Outside  his  religious  works,  he  has  written  six  Inca  Preludes^  and  Varia¬ 
tions  on  an  Inca  theme.  Several  of  his  compositions  have  been  published. 

Alfonso  De  Silva^s  brief  life  of  not  quite  thirty-four  years  began  in 
Callao  on  December  22,  1903,  and  ended  in  Lima  on  May  7,  1937.  With¬ 
out  benefit  of  a  systematic  musical  education,  de  Silva  evolved  his  own 
method  of  composition.  His  songs,  on  the  model  of  the  German  Lied^ 
possess  lyrical  charm.  He  also  wrote  piano  and  violin  pieces.  His  music 
remains  in  manuscript.  See  Catdlogo  de  las  Obras  de  Alfonso  de  Silva 
by  Rudolph  Holzmann,  in  Boletin  Bibliogrdfico  of  the  University  of  San 
Marcos  in  Lima,  December,  1943. 

Federico  Gerdes  (1873 - )  was  born  in  Tacna,  Peru.  As  a  boy  he 

was  sent  to  Germany,  where  he  attended  classes  in  piano  and  composition 
at  the  Leipzig  Conservatory.  In  1908  he  returned  to  Peru  and  was  ap¬ 
pointed  director  of  the  National  Academy  of  Music,  a  position  he  held 
until  1944.  Gerdes  is  the  author  of  a  Festive  March  for  orchestra 
(the  score  of  which  is  deposited  in  the  Fleisher  Collection  in  Phila¬ 
delphia),  and  some  songs,  all  in  a  traditional  European  manner. 

A  Peruvian  who  is  a  painter  as  well  as  an  amateur  musician  is  Francisco 

Gonzalez  Gamarra  (1890 - ).  Both  in  his  paintings  and  in  his  music, 

Gonzalez  Gamarra  is  a  Peruanist,  and  his  art  bears  the  imprint  of  the 
Inca  tradition.  On  the  occasion  of  the  quadricentennial  of  Lima  in  1935, 
he  published  an  album  of  ^^musical  essays”  for  piano  with  chorus,  each 
of  which  depicted  a  scene  of  life  or  ritual  in  Cuzco,  the  ancient  capital  of 
the  Inca  empire.  Gonzalez  Gamarra  has  designed  two  postage  stamps 
for  the  government  of  Peru.  Several  of  his  dance  movements  have  been 
orchestrated  by  Rudolph  Holzmann,  and  the  scores  are  included  in  the 
Fleisher  Collection  in  Philadelphia. 

Rudolph  Holzmann,  German-born  composer  resident  in  Peru, 
was  born  in  1910  in  Breslau.  He  studied  violin  and  composition  in  Ger¬ 
many,  and  in  1933  went  to  Paris,  where  he  took  lessons  with  Nadia 
Boulanger.  On  April  3,  1934,  his  Suite  for  trumpet,  bass  clarinet,  saxo¬ 
phone,  and  piano  was  performed  at  the  Florence  Festival  of  Contempo¬ 
rary  Music.  After  a  brief  stay  in  Switzerland,  he  went  to  South  America, 
and  settled  in  Lima  as  a  violinist  in  the  Orquesta  Sinfonica  NacionaL  His 
Divertimento  for  piano  and  wood-wind  instruments  was  performed  by 


274  MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

that  orchestra  on  July  14,  1943.  Holzmann  cultivates  a  neoclassical  style 
in  his  music,  strongly  contrapuntal  in  texture.  Of  his  works  written  in 
Peru,  Passage  Perfetuely  for  wood-winds  and  percussion,  and  Due  Movi- 
menti^  for  orchestra,  are  available  in  the  Fleisher  Collection  in  Phila¬ 
delphia.  Holzmann  has  rendered  a  signal  service  to  Peruvian  music  by 
orchestrating  a  number  of  native  compositions  by  Peruvians  who  do  not 
possess  the  requisite  technique  of  instrumentation. 

Among  native-born  Peruvian  musicians  of  the  younger  generation  is 
Ulises  Lanao,  born  in  Callao  in  1913.  He  plays  the  violin  in  the  Orquesta 
Sinfonka  Nacional  in  Lima.  Lanao  has  written  short  pieces  in  conven¬ 
tional  style.  His  symphonic  sketch,  Estamfas  del  Cuzco  was  performed 
by  the  Orquesta  Sinfonka  Nacional  on  April  19,  194a.  The  score  is  in¬ 
cluded  in  the  Fleisher  Collection  in  Philadelphia. 

Ernesto  Lopez  Mindreau  (1890 - ),  originally  from  Chiclayo,  first 

studied  engineering  in  Lima.  In  1920,  when  he  was  thirty  years  old,  he 
went  to  Berlin  to  study  music.  He  remained  in  Germany  for  ten  years. 
Mindreau  has  written  an  opera,  Nueva  Castilla^  based  on  the  colonial 
history  of  South  America.  His  piano  pieces,  mostly  dances  and  airs  in  the 
native  manner,  have  been  published.  While  not  possessing  a  technical 
mastery,  Mindreau’s  music  shows  a  genuine  feeling  for  native  rhythms 
and  melodic  inflections. 

Enrique  Fava  Ninci,  flutist  and  composer,  is  a  naturalized  Peruvian. 
Born  in  Spezia,  Italy,  on  October  4,  1883,  he  went  to  Buenos  Aires  in 
1908,  and  later  settled  in  Lima,  where  he  is  first  flutist  in  the  Lima  Sym¬ 
phony  Orchestra.  He  has  written  a  ballet  on  Inca  themes,  several  or¬ 
chestral  overtures,  piano  pieces,  and  songs. 

Luis  Pacheco  de  Cespedes,  born  in  Lima  in  1893,  had  the  benefit  of 
a  European  musical  training.  As  a  youth  he  went  to  Paris  where  he 
studied  with  Gabriel  Faure  and  Reynaldo  Hahn.  Later,  he  conducted 
theater  orchestras  in  Monte  Carlo,  Cannes,  and  other  spas.  He  returned 
to  Lima  in  1940.  Although  his  entire  musical  career  evolved  in  France, 
Pacheco  de  Cespedes  cultivates  Peruvian  themes  in  his  music.  Among 
his  orchestral  works  of  native  inspiration  are  Danza  Sohre  un  Tema  IndiOy 
performed  by  the  Orquesta  Sinfonka  Nacional  in  Lima  on  August  7, 
19403  La  Selva  (The  Jungle),  performed  in  Lima  on  November  26, 
19423  Suite  Limena  (Lima  Suite),  produced  as  a  ballet  on  January  17, 
19423  and  Himno  al  Sol,  His  operetta  La  Mariscala  was  presented  In 


PERU 


275 


Lima  on  May  16,  1942.  In  his  technical  treatment,  Pacheco  de  Cespedes 
applies  some  devices  of  modern  music,  as  for  instance  whole-tone  scales. 

The  musical  folklorist,  Daniel  Alomia  Robles  (1871-1942),  was  of 
Indian  blood.  He  dedicated  his  entire  life  to  collecting  indigenous  songs 
of  Peru  and  Bolivia,  often  traveling  from  village  to  village  on  foot.  Be¬ 
fore  his  death,  he  had  collected  650  melodies  of  the  Inca  and  colonial 
periods,  including  the  Hirnno  al  Sol  that  Robles  first  heard  sung  by  a  1 17- 
year-old  Indian.  Robles  spent  fifteen  years  (1919-1934)  in  the  United 
States.  He  lacked  formal  knowledge,  and  most  of  his  music  had  to  be 
arranged  by  professional  musicians.  Thus,  Vicente  Stea  has  arranged,  from 
material  supplied  by  Robles,  a  symphonic  poem  El  Resurgimiento  de  los 
Andesy  which  illustrates  the  historical  events  of  the  Inca  Empire.  It  w^'as 
performed  by  the  Orquesta  Sinjonica  Nacional  of  Lima  on  July  29?  1940* 
Rudolph  Holzmann  arranged  the  orchestral  suite  El  Indioy  w^hich  was 
performed  in  Lima  on  July  29,  1941.  Holzmann’s  orchestration  of  Robles^ 
Danza  Huanca  w^as  played  in  Lima  on  October  16,  1939.  Five  melodies 
from  Robles^  collection  of  native  songs  are  quoted  in  d’Harcourt’s  La 
Musique  des  Incas  et  ses  Survivances  (Paris,  1925).  The  orchestral  scores 
of  El  IndiOy  Hirnno  al  Soly  El  Resurgimiento  de  los  AndeSy  and  orchestra¬ 
tions  of  dances  by  Robles  are  available  in  the  Fleisher  Collection  in  Phila¬ 
delphia.  An  Inca  Dance  from  Robles^  unfinished  opera,  El  Condor  Pasay 
is  included  in  the  album  Collection  Esfagnole  (New  York,  1936).  A 
complete  catalogue  of  Robles’  music,  compiled  by  Rudolph  Holzmann, 
is  published  in  the  July,  1943,  issue  of  Boletin  Bihliogrdfico  of  the  Uni¬ 
versity  of  San  Marcos  in  Lima.  A  special  memorial  issue  of  the  Argentine 
magazine  Eco  Musical  of  July,  1943,  contains  a  detailed  biography  of 
Robles. 

Carlos  Sanchez  Malaga  (1904 - )  of  Arequipa  studied  music  at 

La  Paz,  Bolivia.  He  returned  to  Peru  in  1929,  and  went  to  Lima.  Here, 
at  the  age  of  twenty-five,  he  founded  the  Conservatorio  Bach.  Sanchez 
Malaga  composes  mostly  in  smaller  forms.  His  piano  pieces,  with  such 
impressionistic  titles  as  Crefusculo  or  VisferaSy  show  a  lyrical  talent.  In 
1944,  Sanchez  Malaga  won  a  prize  at  the  National  Culture  Contest  in 
Peru  for  his  song  PalomUa  de  Nieve.  A  detailed  biographical  sketch  of 
Sanchez  Malaga  is  found  in  Who^s  Who  in  Latin  America. 

The  foremost  composer  of  Peru  is  Andre  Sas  who  was  born  in  Paris  (of 
a  Belgian  father  and  a  French  mother)  on  April  6, 1 900,  and  studied  music 
and  chemical  engineering  in  Brussels.  In  1924  he  was  engaged  by  the 


276 


MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 


Peruvian  government  as  a  violin  instructor  at  the  National  Academy  of 
Music  in  Lima.  In  1929,  Sas  and  his  wife,  the  Peruvian  pianist  Lily  Rosay, 
founded  a  private  music  school  in  Lima.  As  a  composer,  Sas  has  written 
comparatively  little,  but  his  mastery  of  the  technique  of  composition  makes 
his  pieces  an  important  contribution  to  Peruvian  music,  for  most  of  his 
music  is  based  on  native  Peruvian  melodies  and  rhythms.  His  harmonic 
structure  is  terse  and  his  melorhythmic  design  finely  proportioned. 
In  his  harmonizations  of  indigenous  melodies,  Sas  consistently  applies 
only  two  chords,  the  minor  tonic  and  the  major  mediant,  which  he  be¬ 
lieves  to  be  inherent  In  Inca  music.  Several  of  his  instrumental  suites  of 
pieces  In  the  native  Peruvian  manner  have  been  published  in  Paris  and 
Brussels,  among  them  the  following  works  for  violin  and  piano:  Re~ 
cuerdos  (1931),  Cantos  del  Peru  (1935)3  and  for  piano:  Aires  y  Danzas 
Indios  del  Peru  (1934)^  Suite  Peruana  (1935).  His  Himno  y  Danza  is 
included  in  the  album  Latin  American  Art  Music  for  the  Piano y  published 
by  Schirmer  in  1942.  Four  of  his  songs  are  published  by  the  Editorial 
Cooferativa  Inter americana  de  ComfositoreSy  in  Montevideo  (1941)- 
Quenas  for  voice,  flute,  and  harp  is  included  in  the  music  supplement  to 
Volume  IV  of  the  Boletin  Latino-Americano  de  Musica.  In  larger  forms, 
Sas  has  written  a  Rafsodia  Peruana  for  violin  and  orchestra  (the  score  of 
which  is  deposited  in  the  Fleisher  Collection  in  Philadelphia),  Himno  al 
Sol  and  Himno  y  Danza  for  orchestra,  and  a  Poema  Indio  for  orchestra.  Of 
importance  also  is  his  Sonatina  India  for  flute  and  piano,  based  on  the 
pentatonic  modes.  Cantos  del  Peru  for  violin  and  piano  has  been  recorded 
by  Columbia  In  the  album  of  South  American  Chamber  Music  (1941). 
In  the  field  of  native  musicology,  Sas  has  contributed  papers  on  ancient 
Peruvian  music  and  instruments,  published  in  the  Boletin  Latino- 
Americano  de  Musica, 

Vicente  Stea  (1884-1943)  was  a  native  of  Gioia  del  Colle  in  Italy. 
He  studied  in  Naples,  and  after  graduation  conducted  operas  in  Italy. 
He  went  to  South  America  with  an  Italian  opera  company  in  1917,  and 
settled  in  Lima,  where  he  founded  a  private  Conservatory  bearing  his 
name.  Steals  music  is  distinguished  by  lyricism  and  technical  mastery, 
while  the  style  of  his  compositions  is  Italianate,  with  some  Wagnerian 
echoes.  In  Peru,  Vicente  Stea  wrote  a  Sinfonia  Autoctonay  based  on  penta¬ 
tonic  themes  of  the  Inca  type,  and  received  for  it  a  gold  medal  at  the 
music  competition  on  the  occasion  of  the  Quadricentennial  of  Lima  in 
1935.  He  conducted  this  symphony  on  June  30,  1939,  on  the  same 
program  with  his  early  Symphony  in  G,  at  a  concert  oi  the  Orquesta 


PERU 


Sinfonica  Nacioml  in  Lima,  On  November  13,  1940,  Stea  conducted  two 
o£  his  early  works  for  small  orchestra,  Burlesca  and  Notturno^  and  his  two 
Peruvian  Dances  for  full  orchestra.  Stea  has  also  arranged  and  orches¬ 
trated,  from  the  material  supplied  by  the  Peruvian  folklorist  Robles,  a 
symphonic  poem  El  Resurgimiento  de  los  Andes.  The  scores  of  all  these 
works  are  in  the  Fieisher  Collection  in  Philadelphia.  A  complete  catalogue 
of  Steals  compositions  is  published  by  Rudolph  Holzmann  in  the  Boletin 
Bibliografico  of  San  Marcos  University  in  Lima,  December,  1943. 

Eduardo  Walter  Stubbs  du  Perron  (189 1 - )  is  a  Peruvian  composer 

of  mixed  heredity.  His  father  was  an  American  of  German  descent,  and  his 
mother  French.  In  1909,  he  went  to  Buenos  Aires  where  he  studied  with 
Alberto  Williams.  He  went  to  Paris  in  1926,  and  returned  to  Lima  in 
1940.  As  composer,  Stubbs  cultivates  Peruvian  themes.  His  harmony  and 
orchestration  are  influenced  by  Russian  music  3  one  of  his  Inca  dances  is 
subtitled  “Rimsky-Korsakov  before  the  Inca  ruins.”  Stubbs  is  the  author 
of  a  ballet,  Atahualfay  based  on  the  story  of  the  last  Emperor  of  the  Incas. 
Its  score  is  included  in  the  Fieisher  Collection  in  Philadelphia.  In  a 
traditional  manner,  Stubbs  has  written  three  symphonies  and  some  cham¬ 
ber  music. 

A  Peruvian  composer  of  Indian  parentage  was  Teodoro  Valcarcel 
( 1 900-1942 ) .  He  was  sent  to  Europe  at  the  age  of  fifteen,  and  took  lessons 
with  Felipe  Pedrell  in  Spain.  His  early  pieces  are  imitations  of  Chopin, 
with  touches  of  Debussy.  Upon  his  return  to  Peru  in  1 920,  Valcarcel  turned 
for  inspiration  to  the  native  folklore.  In  1929  he  made  another  trip  to 
Europe,  and  took  part  in  the  Ibero-American  Music  Festival  in  Barcelona. 
On  April  12,  1930,  he  presented  his  piano  works  and  songs  at  a  special 
concert  in  Paris.  Despite  ValcarcePs  lack  of  formal  technique  (until  the 
end  he  failed  to  master  orchestration,  and  possessed  little  contrapuntal 
skill),  he  succeeded  in  forming  a  style  'which  is  genuinely  Peruvian.  He 
also  attempted,  in  his  unpublished  collection  of  thirty  Cantos  de  Alma 
Vernacular y  to  create  a  native  art  form  in  the  nature  of  a  Diedy  based  on  the 
pentatonic  melos  of  the  Incas.  His  suite  oiA^sm^y  Bura'j-Suritay  published 
in  Paris  in  1939,18  an  important  contribution  to  Peruvian  music.  Several 
movements  from  Suray-Surita  were  performed  in  the  orchestration  of 
Rudolph  Holzmann  by  the  Orquesta  Sinfonica  Nacional  in  Lima  on  Octo¬ 
ber  9,  1939,  and  August  15,  1940.  Rudolph  Holzmann  has  also  orches¬ 
trated  ValcarcePs  symphonic  poem  En  las  Ruinas  del  Temflo  del  Sol 
(1940),  which  was  performed  in  Lima  on  July  28,  1942.  The  complete 


278  MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

catalogue  of  ValcarcePs  works,  prepared  by  Holzmann,  was  published  in 
the  December,  1942,  issue  of  the  Boletm  Bibliogrdfico  of  the  San  Marcos 
University  in  Lima.  Holzmann  has  also  compiled  a  detailed  analysis  of 
ValcarcePs  music  for  the  memorial  issue  of  the  Argentine  magazine  Eco 
Musical j  of  March,  1943.  The  score  of  ValcarcePs  Concierto  Indio  for 
violin  and  orchestra,  and  Holzmann’s  orchestrations  of  eight  of  ValcarcePs 
ballet  movements  are  included  in  the  Fleisher  Collection  in  Philadelphia. 

Carlos  Valderrama  ( 1 890 - )  is  best  known  as  a  composer  of  popular 

music.  Self-taught,  he  has  never  succeeded  in  mastering  the  requisite 
technique  of  composition.  In  1925,  at  the  age  of  thirty-five,  he  went  to 
New  York,  where  he  played  his  Peruvian  dances  based  on  the  pentatonic 
scale.  His  appearances  aroused  interest  because  of  the  novelty  of  the  idiom. 
Seven  of  Valderrama’s  piano  pieces  and  songs  in  the  popular  vein  have 
been  published  by  Brandes  in  Lima. 

The  first  Peruvian  composer  to  receive  a  thorough  European  education 
was  Jose  Maria  Valle-Riestra  (1859-1925).  His  opera  Ollanta^  pro¬ 
duced  in  Lima  on  December  26,  1900,  was  the  first  native  theatrical  work 
based  on  a  well-known  South  American  epic.  Another  opera,  Atahualfa^ 
based  on  the  life  of  the  last  Inca  Emperor,  remained  unfinished.  The  or¬ 
chestral  score  of  the  Coronation  March  from  Atahualfa  and  a  symphonic 
fragment  En  Oriente  have  been  published,  and  are  included  in  the  Fleisher 
Collection  in  Philadelphia.  The  style  of  Valle-Riestra’s  music  is  European 
in  essence,  but  native  pentatonic  themes  are  used  in  his  operatic  scores. 

Raoul  de  Verneuil  (1901 - ),  of  French  extraction  on  his  father’s 

side,  left  Lima  to  study  music  in  Paris,  where  he  lived  from  1925  to  1939. 
He  returned  to  Peru  via  New  York  in  1940,  and  on  November  21,  1940, 
presented  in  Lima  a  concert  of  his  works,  which  included  a  String  Quartet, 
a  Quintet  for  wind  instruments,  piano  pieces,  and  songs.  In  his  music, 
Verneuil  strives  for  modernistic  effects,  along  polytonal  lines,  while  his 
melodic  material  is  often  of  native  inspiration.  His  two  Dances  for  piano 
are  published  in  Paris.  He  has  also  written  an  Inca  Legend  for  voice  and 
eight  instruments,  and  a  Danza  Peruana  for  orchestra.  The  score  of  the 
Lanza  Peruana  is  included  in  the  Fleisher  Collection  in  Philadelphia. 


EL  SALVADOR 


279 


El  Salvador 

Siempre  noble  sono  El  Salvador  .  .  . 
[from  the  national  anthem] 


El  Salvador  is  the  smallest  of  the  Central  American  Republics,  and  the  most 
thickly  populated  one.  The  population  of  El  Salvador  numbers  about  1,800,000, 
of  which  the  majority  are  mestizos. 

The  dances  and  songs  popular  in  El  Salvador  are  common  to  all 
Central  America.  They  are  the  Danza^  the  Pasillo  and  the  Marcha,  The 
Danza  is  an  offspring  of  the  Spanish  Contradanza  and  is  ultimately  traced 
to  the  English  Country  Dance.  The  Pasillo  is  a  dance  of  Spanish  origin  and 
is  written  in  the  dual  time  signature  three-four  and  six-eight.  The  Marcha 
is  a  lively  Latin  American  version  of  the  German  military  march. 

The  native  instruments  of  the  Indians  of  El  Salvador  are  also  common 
to  all  Central  America.  The  Tun  of  El  Salvador  is  identical  with  the 
Mexican  Tefonaxtle^  and  is  made  of  a  section  of  burned-out  tree  trunk, 
with  a  quadrangular  aperture  in  the  middle.  It  is  capable  of  producing  two 
tones,  struck  to  the  right  or  to  the  left  of  the  central  aperture.  Another 
percussion  instrument,  the  Zambumhia^  is  a  snare  drum. 

The  wind  instruments  used  by  the  Indians  of  El  Salvador  are  vertical 
flutes  and  primitive  clarinets,  the  latter  known  under  the  generic  name  of 
Chirimia.  The  Marimba  is  popular  in  El  Salvador,  as  it  is  all  over  Central 
America.  Then  there  is  the  Caramba  or  Carimba.  It  is  a  curious  instru¬ 
ment,  which  consists  of  a  bow  with  a  metal  string  attached  at  both  ends  to 
a  wooden  box,  in  the  manner  of  a  monochord.  The  same  instrument  is 
known  in  Nicaragua,  where  It  is  called  the  Quijongo, 

The  Indians  of  El  Salvador  still  celebrate  their  traditional  fiestas,  some 
of  which  date  back  to  early  centuries.  One  of  these  fiestas  is  known  as 
Historia  de  Moros  y  Cristianos.  This  Historia  depicts  the  conflict  between 
the  Moors  and  the  Christians,  it  is  a  sort  of  mystery  play  borrowed  by  the 
natives  from  their  Spanish  conquerors.  The  Moors  wear  elaborate  cos- 


28o  music  in  the  twenty  republics 

tumes  and  gaudy  ornaments.  The  Christians  wear  simple  dress^  with 
floral  wreaths  for  headgear.  Both  camps  wear  masks,  blue  for  the  infidels, 
red  for  the  Christians.  They  also  carry  all  kinds  of  handy  objects,  including 
umbrellas.  The  musk  of  the  Historia  is  represented  by  a  single  melody, 
but  this  melody  changes  in  rhythm  and  tempo  according  to  the  action  of 
the  play,  and  is  alternately  gay  or  sad,  martial  or  peaceful. 

The  ^^Father  of  Salvadoran  Music’’  was  a  native  of  Guatemala  named 
Jose  Escoiastico  Andrino,  an  educated  musician  and  also  a  composer  of 
sorts.  He  settled  in  San  Salvador  in  1845.  Later  in  the  nineteenth  century, 
several  Italian  musicians  emigrated  to  El  Salvador,  among  them  the 
pianist  Gore,  the  teacher  of  a  generation  of  native  musicians,  and  Juan 
Aberle,  the  future  author  of  the  National  Anthem.  There  was  at  one 
time  a  Sociedad  Orquestal  Salvador ena^  which  numbered  a  hundred 
players.  The  director  was  an  Italian  musician,  Antonio  Gianoli.  This 
orchestra  soon  disbanded,  and  in  its  place  was  organized  the  Orquesta 
Sinfonica  de  los  Sufremos  Poderes^  which  was  succeeded  in  its  turn  by 
the  Banda  de  los  Sufremos  Poderes.  Its  present  conductor,  Alejandro 
Munoz,  has  done  good  -w*dfk*'iil;"^promoting  native  music.  He  has  also 
orchestrated  numerous  compositions  by  Maria  de  Baratta  and  other 
Salvadoran  composers.  There  is  another  good  band,  in  the  town  of  Santa 
Ana,  which  is  led  by  Domingo  Santos,  a  musician  educated  in  Europe. 

The  first  Salvadoran  to  make  use  of  native  themes  was  Wenceslao 
Garcia,  the  author  of  an  opera  entitled  Adela,  The  vocal  score  of  this  opera 
has  been  published,  but  copies  are  extremely  rare.  Among  contemporary 
composers,  Jesus  Alas,  Domingo  Santos,  and  Maria  de  Baratta  make  use 
of  native  melos  in  their  works. 

The  music  of  El  Salvador  is  summarized  in  a  valuable  compilation  by 
Dr.  Rafael  Gonzalez  Sol,  entitled  Historia  del  Arte  de  la  Musica  en  El 
Salvador  (San  Salvador,  1940).  A  hopeful  augury  for  the  future  of 
musical  research  in  El  Salvador  was  the  formation,  on  November  20, 
1941,  of  the  Committee  for  the  Study  of  Salvadoran  Folklore  under  the 
direction  of  Maria  de  Baratta,  who  has  already  collected  numerous  na¬ 
tive  melodies. 

MUSICIANS  OF  EL  SALVADOR 

Jesus  Alas  ( 1 866 - -)  studied  music  with  Juan  Aberle,  and  has  ac¬ 

quired  a  solid  technique  in  composition,  in  a  traditional  academic  manner. 
The  bulk  of  his  output  consists  of  music  for  military  band,  and  there  are 
also  violin  pieces.  On  June  18,  1929,  Alas  was  awarded  the  order  of 


Segundo  Luis  Moreno 


Teodoro  Valcarcel  on 
Tyflkp  Titicaca 


EL  SALVADOR 


281 


Merito  Artistico  by  the  National  Assembly  of  El  Salvador.  Alas  has  acted 
for  many  years  as  conductor  of  the  Banda  de  los  Supremos  Poderes  in  San 
Salvador.  The  score  of  his  Ohertura  Patriotka  is  included  in  the  Fleisher 
Collection  in  Philadelphia. 

Maria  de  Baratta  (1894 - )  is  a  composer  and  specialist  in  folklore. 

Her  great-grandfather  was  the  last  Indian  chief  of  the  tribe  of  the  Lencas, 
and  her  mother  w^as  Spanish.  Maria  de  Baratta  studied  at  the  Conservatory 
of  Bologna,  Italy,  and  later  in  San  Francisco.  Her  major  work  is  the 
ballet  Nahualismo,  based  on  the  themes  of  the  Indian  ritual  relating  to 
Nahual,  a  powerful  spirit  incarnated  in  a  serpent,  or  a  tiger.  In  the  orches¬ 
tration  by  Ricardo  Huttenrauch,  the  ballet  was  performed  by  the  Banda 
de  los  Supremos  Poderes  in  San  Salvador  on  April  19,  1936.  Ofrenda  de 
la  Elegida,  a  short  ritual  dance  for  piano,  was  performed  in  the  orchestra¬ 
tion  by  A.  Munoz,  with  the  same  orchestra,  on  September  22,  1931; 
'DanT.a  del  Incienso,  also  orchestrated  by  A.  Munoz,  was  presented  on 
August  3,  1937.  All  these  orchestrations  are  included  in  the  Fleisher 
Collection  in  Philadelphia.  Nahualismo,  Ofrenda  de  la  Elegida,  and  two 
songs,  Can-Calagui-Tunal  (Incantation  to  the  Sun)  and  Los  Tecoma- 
tillos,  are  published  by  the  composer,  with  decorative  covers  designed  by 
her  husband,  the  Italian  architect  Augusto  Baratta. 

Alejandro  Munoz  (1902 - ),  the  band  leader  and  arranger,  went 

to  Mexico  in  1921,  and  took  lessons  with  Jose  Vasquez.  Upon  his  return 
to  San  Salvador,  he  was  appointed  conductor  of  the  Banda  de  los  Supremos 
Poderes.  He  has  made  numerous  arrangements  of  compositions  by  Maria 
de  Baratta  and  other  Salvadoran  composers. 

DomingoSANTOs  ( 1892— — )  studied  in  Italy.  In  1928  he  was  appointed 
conductor  of  the  military  band  in  the  town  of  Santa  Ana  in  El  Salvador. 
He  has  written  three  piano  sonatas,  six  Requiems,  six  Funeral  Marches, 
a  Heroic  March,  and  two  overtures  entitled  Manila  and  Dorita.  Martita 
was  performed  in  San  Salvador  on  December  7?  t9^4*  Santos’  Suite  of 
four  short  pieces  for  piano  has  been  printed  in  Paris.  The  scores  of  the 
overtures  are  included  in  the  Fleisher  Collection  in  Philadelphia. 


282 


MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 


U  ruguay 

La  Reftiblica  del  Uruguay  es  un  fais  fer^ 
fectamente  civilizado, 

[from  El  Uruguay  a  traves  de  un  Siglo~\ 


Uruguay  is  the  smallest  nation  of  South  America,  but  by  European  geographic 
standards,  it  is  not  so  small:  its  area  is  larger  than  that  of  England.  The  name 
Uruguay  means  ‘‘the  river  of  birds.”  The  country  is  flat,  and  ideally  suited  for 
agriculture  and  cattle  breeding.  Uruguay’s  population  numbers  over  two 
million,  of  which  fully  one-third  lives  in  Montevideo,  the  capital.  The  aboriginal 
Indians  of  Uruguay  are  all  but  extinct. 

In  terms  of  racial  geography,  Uruguay  is  a  white  man’s  land,  and  its 
culture  has  little  of  either  the  Indian  or  the  Negro.  As  in  Argentina,  the 
people’s  musician  of  Uruguay  is  the  Gaucho,  the  wandering  minstrel  of 
the  pampas,  who  roves  the  plains  on  horseback  with  his  faithful  guitar 
slung  over  his  shoulder.  The  subject  of  the  Gaucho  songs  is  usually 
romantic  love,  but  often  these  songs  are  ballads  and  narratives  of  personal 
adventure,  similar  to  the  cowboy  songs  of  the  North  American  West. 

Musically  speaking,  Uruguay  is  a  dependency  of  Argentina.  The  songs 
and  dances  of  Argentina  are  the  folklore  of  Uruguay.  The  only  musical 
form  that  may  be  said  to  be  Uruguay’s  own  product  is  the  Pericon^  an 
old  round  dance  in  triple  time,  which  was  revived  in  1 889  by  a  Montevideo 
theatrical  company  and  has  since  regained  its  popularity. 

In  a  useful  booklet  La  Musica  en  IberoamSrica  by  Raul  A.  Buccino 
and  Luis  Benvenuto  (Buenos  Aires,  1939),  the  common  origin  of 
Uruguayan  and  Argentine  music  is  traced  to  Spain:  ^^Uruguay’s  dances 
and  songs  are  taken  from  the  wealth  of  Spain’s  music  treasury.  This  music 
became  acclimatized  in  the  coastal  provinces  of  the  old  state  of  Rio  de  la 
Plata,  and  gave  birth  to  the  popular  music  of  Uruguay  and  Argentina. 
The  TristeyCielitOy  Triunfo,  Milonga  y  Tango^  Vidala^  Pericon  and  other 
airs  and  dances  of  Uruguay  are  intimately  connected  with  the  Argentine 
airs  of  the  same  name.  Yet  this  affinity  is  not  that  of  complete  identity:  to 


URUGUAY  283 

an  attentive  ear,  a  characteristic  inflection  distinguishes  the  Uruguayan 
song  from  its  Argentine  counterpart.” 

The  accessibility  of  Uruguay  to  the  sea,  and  its  long  coast  line,  made 
the  nation  a  natural  receptacle  for  European  influences.  Italian  musicians 
began  to  settle  in  Uruguay  early  in  the  nineteenth  century.  On  May  14, 
1830,  Rossini’s  opera  UInganno  Felice  was  presented  in  Montevideo, 
with  three  members  of  an  Italian  family  of  singers,  Angelita,  Marcello, 
and  Pasquale  Tanni  taking  the  leading  parts.  In  his  interesting  book 
Cronica  de  una  T emforada  Musical  en  el  Montevideo  de  1830^  pub¬ 
lished  in  1943,  the  Uruguayan  musicologist  Lauro  Ayestaran  gives  a  cir¬ 
cumstantial  account  of  the  flourishing  musical  life  of  the  period. 

The  National  Anthem  of  Uruguay,  adopted  by  the  government  on 
July  27,  1848,  and  composed  by  one  Fernando  Quijano,  bears  testimony 
to  the  strength  of  Italian  influence.  Its  melody  has  a  striking  resemblance 
to  the  Gondoliers’  Chorus  from  Donizetti’s  Lucrezia  Borgia,  To  honor  the 
operatic  art  of  Verdi,  a  Conservatorio  Verdi  was  founded  in  Montevideo 
in  1890.  The  first  native-born  composers  of  symphonic  and  operatic  music, 
Luis  Sambucetti  (i86o-'i926)  and  Leon  Ribeiro  (i854-“i93i),  also  did 
homage  to  Italy  in  their  compositions,  which  are  entirely  in  the  Italian 
tradition. 

The  founders  of  the  modern  school  of  composition  in  Uruguay  are 
Carlos  Pedrell  and  Alfonso  Broqua.  Although  they  spent  most  of  their 
adult  years  in  France,  they  never  lost  the  feeling  for  Uruguayan  folklore, 
which  colors  much  of  their  vocal  music. 

Of  the  present-day  composers  now  living  in  Uruguay,  the  name  of 
Eduardo  Fabini  comes  first.  His  music  is  imbued  with  native  folklore, 
even  though  his  harmonic  style  is  European.  Vicente  Ascone  and  Luis 
Cluzeau  Mortet  are  composers  of  music  in  the  romantic  vein.  Of  the 
younger  set,  the  names  of  Carlos  Estrada,  Luis  Pedro  Mondino,  and 
Guido  Santorsola  should  be  mentioned.  The  child  prodigy  of  Uruguayan 
music  is  Hector  Tosar  Errecart,  born  in  1923,  whose  precocious  talent 
has  attracted  considerable  attention.  Benone  Calcavecchia  is  an  Italian 
conductor-composer,  now  living  in  Uruguay.  Ramon  Rodriguez  Socas 
is  the  author  of  numerous  operas  in  the  Italian  tradition. 

Thanks  to  a  German  scholar  naturalized  in  Uruguay,  Francisco  Curt 
Lange,  Montevideo  has  become  a  center  of  Latin  American  musicology. 
As  part  of  his  multifarious  activities  in  behalf  of  Latin  American  music, 
Lange  publishes  the  Bolettn  Latino- Americano  de  Musicuy  and  heads  a 
cooperative  music  publishing  firm,  Editorial  Cooferativa  Interamericana 


284 


MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 


de  Comfositores.  Lange  is  also  the  founder  and  director  of  the  Discoteca 
Nacional  de  Uruguay,  which  possesses  one  of  the  richest  collections  of 
phonograph  records  in  Latin  America. 

Montevideo  has  become  a  symphonic  capital  of  the  first  rank  with  the 
establishment  of  the  radio  orchestra,  Orquesta  Sinjonica  del  Servicio 
Oficial  de  DijusiSn  Radio-Electrica  (OSSODRE,  or  SODRE).  In¬ 
augurated  on  June  20,  1931,  under  the  direction  of  its  permanent  con¬ 
ductor  Lamberto  Baldi,  the  SODRE  has  presented  in  its  regular  programs 
a  number  of  first  performances  of  symphonic  works  by  Uruguayan  com¬ 
posers. 


MUSICIANS  OF  URUGUAY 

Vicente  Ascone  (1897 - )  studied  trumpet  and  composition  at  the 

Montevideo  Conservatory.  When  the  radio  orchestra  OSSODRE  was 
founded  in  1931,  he  was  engaged  as  the  first  trumpet  player.  The  OS¬ 
SODRE  has  given  performances  of  all  of  Ascone’s  major  works:  Suite 
Uruguaya  (July  ii,  Parana  Guazu  (July  25,  1931);  Farsa  Senti¬ 

mental  y  Grotesca  (September  5,  1931) ;  Cantos  del  Atardecer  (October 
14)  1933))  Nocturno  Nativo  (November  23,  1935);  and  Tres  Danzas 
(April  4,  1936).  His  Montes  de  mi  Queguay,  poems  for  voice  and  string 
quartet,  are  published  by  the  Editorial  Coo'perativa,  and  his  violin  piece. 
La  Carreta,  is  included  in  the  supplement  to  Volume  III  of  the  Boletin 
Latino-Americano  de  Musica.  The  score  of  Ascone’s  Cantos  del  Atardecer 
is  in  the  Fleisher  Collection  in  Philadelphia.  The  style  and  technique  of 
Ascone’s  music  are  entirely  within  the  bounds  of  the  European  tradition. 

A  Uruguayan  composer  who  spent  virtually  all  his  life  in  France, 

Alfonso  Broqua  (1876 - )  studied  with  Vincent  d’Indy  at  the  Schola 

Cantorum  in  Paris.  His  first  important  work  was  a  lyric  opera,  Tabare. 
There  followed  Poema  de  las  Lomas,  a  triptych  for  piano,  reflecting  the 
folkloric  motives  of  his  native  country.  In  1918,  Broqua  composed  an 
opera,  The  Southern  Cross,  on  the  subject  of  the  Spanish  conquest.  Broqua 
is  the  author  of  two  ballets,  Thelen  et  Nagoue,  based  on  Inca  themes 
( 1934))  2.nd  Isabelle  ( 1936).  In  1938  hs  completed  the  orchestral  version 
of  Preludes  of  the  Pamfas.  In  1940  Broqua  suffered  a  mental  collapse  and 
was  confined  to  a  sanitarium.  Several  of  his  songs,  Trois  Chants  de 
I  Uruguay,  Chants  du  Parana,  zsxdi  Evocaciones  Criollas  ioT  guitar,  have 
been  published  in  Paris.  Also  published  is  his  Piano  Quintet  in  G  minor. 
Broqua’s  Tango  from  the  collection  Trois  Chants  de  PUruguay  is  re¬ 
corded  in  the  album.  South  American  Chamber  Music  (Columbia,  1941). 


URUGUAY 


285 


Benone  Calcavecchia  (1886 - )y  the  Uruguayan  composer  and  con- 

ductorj  was  born  in  Caronia^  Sicily.  In  1907  he  went  to  South  America, 
and  for  a  time  played  the  trombone  in  the  military  band  of  Montevideo. 
He  began  composing  in  1922,  and  has  since  written  numerous  orchestral 
compositions,  of  which  the  following  were  performed  by  the  radio  or¬ 
chestra  OSSODRE  in  Montevideo:  Uruguay  (July  18,  1931)3 
fresiones  de  igso  (July  25,  1931)5  and  Preludio  (August  15,  I93^)- 
has  also  written  a  Hymn  to  Football^  which  was  awarded  first  prize  at  the 
contest  of  the  Football  Association  of  Uruguay  in  1927. 

Luis  Cluzeau  Mortet  (1893 - )  studied  piano  and  violin  with  his 

grandfather  in  Montevideo.  In  1931  he  joined  the  radio  orchestra  OS¬ 
SODRE  in  Montevideo  as  a  viola  player.  As  a  composer,  Cluzeau  Mortet 
leans  towards  romanticism,  and  his  unaffected  piano  pieces,  songs,  and 
short  symphonic  poems  are  melodic,  without  pretensions  at  modernism. 
His  Poema  Native  for  orchestra  was  performed  by  the  OSSODRE 
on  July  25,  1931,  and  LLanuraSy  inspired  by  the  folklore  of  the  pampas, 
on  October  14,  1933.  His  Concerto  for  String  Orchestra,  in  a  classical 
manner,  was  performed  by  the  OSSODRE  on  August  20,  1936.  The  or¬ 
chestral  score  of  Llanurasy  which  was  privately  published,  is  in  the  Fleisher 
Collection  in  Philadelphia.  Two  piano  Preludes  by  Cluzeau  Mortet  are 
included  in  the  musical  supplement  to  Volume  III  of  the  Boletin  Latino- 
Americano  de  Musicay  and  his  song  Mar  de  Luna  has  been  published  by 
the  Editorial  Cooferativa  Inter americana  de  Comfositoresm  Montevideo. 

Carlos  Estrada  (1909 - )  studied  in  Uruguay  and  later  went  to 

Paris  where  he  completed  his  musical  education  in  composition  with 
Roger-Ducasse  and  Henri  Busser.  In  19363  he  founded  a  chamber  or¬ 
chestra  in  Montevideo.  His  song  C aminos  Tristes  is  published  by  the 
Editorial  Cooferativa  Interamericana  de  Comfositores,  Estrada’s  musical 
style  is  in  the  romantic  tradition,  conventional  as  to  harmony. 

Eduardo  Fabini  (1883-— — )  was  born  in  Solis.  In  1900  he  went  to 
Brussels,  where  he  studied  violin  with  Cesar  Thomson.  Returning  to 
Uruguay  in  1905,  he  dedicated  himself  to  teaching  and  composition. 
His  first  important  work  was  a  symphonic  poem,  CamfOy  which  was  com¬ 
posed  in  1909,  and  performed  in  Montevideo  on  April  29,  1922.  It  was 
also  included  in  the  program  that  Richard  Strauss  conducted  in  1923  on 
his  South  American  tour.  Fabini’s  symphonic  poem,  Isla  de  los  Ceibos 
(the  title  means  a  clump  of  silk-cotton  trees),  reflects  native  themes.  His 
ballet  Mburucuya  (the  name  is  the  Guarany  word  for  a  luxuriant  native 


286  MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

plant)  is  also  permeated  with  native  melos.  In  the  score  of  Melga  Sinr 
fonka  {Melga  means  a  tilled  soil),  Fabini  pays  tribute  to  Montevideo  by 
spelling  its  name  in  Morse  code  rhythm.  The  following  compositions  by 
Fabini  have  been  performed  by  the  Montevideo  radio  orchestra  OS- 
SODRE:  Isla  de  los  Ceibos  (June  20,  1931)5  Melga  Sinfonka^  P atria 
Vieja  (both  on  October  ii,  1931)3  and  Tristes  (August  8,  1931).  The 
scores  of  Isla  de  los  CeiboSy  CamfOy  and  Mburucuya  are  published  by 
Ricordi,  and  are  also  available  in  the  Fleisher  Collection  of  Philadelphia. 
Isla  de  los  Ceibos  is  recorded  by  Victor.  Fabini’s  song  El  Tala  is  included 
in  the  supplement  to  Volume  I  of  the  Bolettn  Latino-Amerkano  de 
Muskay  and  his  Triste  for  piano  is  published  in  the  album  Latin- American 
Art  Music  for  the  Piano  (Schirmer,  1942).  In  a  prefatory  note  to  this 
collection,  Francisco  Curt  Lange  writes:  “Eduardo  Fabini  embodies  the 
sentiments  of  the  people  of  Uruguay.  Without  being  a  ^folkloristic’  com¬ 
poser,  he  knows  how  to  express  in  his  music  the  very  essence  of  his  native 
land.  It  should  be  noted  that  most  of  the  folk-like  themes  used  in  his 
works  are  original,  and  present  a  product  of  his  complete  assimilation  with 
the  life  of  the  nation.”  See  also  “Eduardo  Fabini,  Musico,”  Bolettn  Latino- 
Americano  de  Muskay  Volume  III. 

Francisco  Curt  Lange  (1903 - )  Is  the  foremost  Latin  American 

musicologist  j  he  was  born  in  Eilenburg,  Germany.  In  Germany  he  studied 
music,  architecture,  sociology,  and  philosophy,  and  among  his  teachers 
were  Arthur  Nikisch  and  Hermann  Abert.  Lange  emigrated  to  Uruguay 
in  1923,  rapidly  acquired  a  mastery  of  the  Spanish  language,  and  in  1933 
launched  a  movement  which  he  christened  Americanismo  Musical.  The 
most  important  product  of  his  labors  is  the  publication  of  five  voluminous 
issues  of  the  Bolettn  Latino- Americano  de  Muskay  which  constitutes  a 
veritable  archive  of  Latin  American  musicology.  In  1940,  Lange  launched 
a  cooperative  music  publishing  enterprise.  Editorial  Cooferativa  Inter- 
americana  de  Comfositoresy  which  publishes  works  by  Latin  American 
composers.  In  conjunction  with  the  Radio  Service  of  Montevideo,  he  has 
organized  a  Discotecay  a  collection  of  phonograph  records.  He  has  traveled 
widely  in  Latin  America,  and  he  visited  the  United  States  in  1939.  Apart 
from  his  extensive  monographs  in  the  Bolettny  Lange  has  published  a 
number  of  books  on  music,  literature,  and  philosophy. 

Luis  Pedro  Mondino  (1903 - -),  born  in  Montevideo,  studied  in 

Paris  with  Nadia  Boulanger.  He  has  written  a  symphonic  poem,  Fiesta 
as  well  as  piano  pieces  and  songs. 


URUGUAY 


287 


Carlos  Pedrell  (1878-1941)  studied  in  Madrid  with  his  uncle  Felipe 
Pedrell,  and  in  Paris  with  Vincent  d’Indy.  He  spent  most  of  his  life  in 
Paris,  and  it  was  there  he  died.  In  his  music,  Pedrell  adopts  an  impres¬ 
sionist  technique.  Many  of  his  songs  {Hisfaniques,  As  Orillas  del  Duero, 
Cantigas  del  Buen  Amador)  and  the  six  vocal  poems  De  Castilla  are 
stylizations  of  Spanish  rhythms  and  melodies.  But  he  has  also  written 
some  music  in  the  South  American  vein,  as  for  instance  Quatre  Chansons 
Argentines.  In  his  Montmartre,  for  voice  and  orchestra,  he  stylizes  the 
tango.  Pedrell’s  only  opera,  Ardid  de  Amor,  was  produced  at  the  Teatro 
Colon  in  Buenos  Aires  on  June  7,  1917.  His  song  Caballitos  is  recorded 
in  the  album  South  Ar}%erican  Chamber  Music  (Columbia,  1941)- 

Ramon  Rodriguez  Socas  (1890 - ),  the  composer  and  pedagogue, 

studied  at  the  Conservatory  “La  Lira,”  in  Montevideo,  of  which  he  is 
now  director.  At  the  age  of  eighteen  he  wrote  an  opera,  Alda.  He  went 
to  Italy,  to  perfect  his  technique,  and  there  composed  several  more  operas, 
among  them  Yeba,  Amor  Marinaro,  Morte  di  Amore,  Antony  Griette, 
Murinedda,  Sor  Tofano,  and  numerous  operettas.  Several  of  these  operas 
were  produced  in  Milan.  His  other  works  are  a  choral  symphonic  poem, 
El  Grito  de  Asencio;  for  orchestra,  Undinas,  Afrodita,  Bolero,  and 
Obertura  Andina  (on  an  Inca  theme). 

Guido  Santorsola  (1904 - )  was  born  in  Canosa  di  Puglia,  Italy. 

He  was  taken  to  Brazil  at  the  age  of  five,  where  he  studied  violin  and 
gave  a  recital  at  the  age  of  nine.  He  studied  composition  in  Sao  Paulo  with 
Agostino  Cantu,  and  later  with  Lamberto  Baldi.  In  1931  he  joined  the 
radio  orchestra  OSSODRE  in  Montevideo  as  first  viola  player.  Santorsola 
has  written  a  Concerto  for  chorus  without  words  and  viola  d’amore,  an 
Oratorio,  and  a  Brazilian  dance  for  orchestra.  In  chamber  music,  he  affects 
unusual  combinations:  two  double  basses  and  piano;  violin,  two  yiolas, 
and  cello;  ten  capriccios  for  violin  unaccompanied.  His  expressionistic 
vocal  composition,  Agonia,  is  published  by  the  Editorial  Cooferativa  In- 
teramericana  de  Comfositores. 

Hector  Tosar  Errecart  (1923 - )  studied  with  Lamberto  Baldi.  He 

began  to  compose  very  early,  and  at  the  age  of  nineteen  had  already  ac¬ 
cumulated  a  long  list  of  works :  an  orchestral  Toccata,  a  Sonatina,  and  two 
Etudes  for  piano;  Nocturne  and  Scherzo  for  violin,  clarinet,  and  piano; 
and  a  String  Quartet.  Tosar  Errecart  writes  in  a  neoclassical  manner,  but 
recently  he  has  begun  to  use  native  themes  in  his  music,  as  m  his  Danza 
Criolla  for  piano. 


288 


MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 


Venezuela 

jCuna  del  gran  Bolivar!  J  Venezuela! 
[OLEGARIO  V.  ANDRADE] 


Venezuela  means  “little  Venice,”  and  was  thus  named  by  the  early  colonists 
because  of  the  resemblance  of  the  cluster  of  islands  off  the  coast  to  the  Italian 
city  of  the  canals.  Venezuela  has  now  about  3,500,000  inhabitants,  including 
some  100,000  Indians.  The  capital  is  Caracas,  named  after  the  Indian  tribe  of 
Caracas. 

The  racial  ingredients  of  Venezuela’s  musical  folklore  are  the  aboriginal 
Indian,  the  Negro,  and  the  colonial  Spanish.  The  Indian  strain  is  strongest 
in  the  Orinoco  region,  where  the  Indians  have  lived  virtually  isolated 
from  the  rest  of  the  country  and  so  have  conserved  the  arts  and  crafts  of 
pre-Columbian  times  almost  without  change.  Their  songs  are  scarcely  more 
than  monotonous  chants,  intoned  to  the  accompaniment  of  primitive 
flutes  and  drums,  but  to  the  Indians  they  have  a  variety  of  meanings.  In 
a  paper  on  the  musical  folklore  of  the  Taurepan  Indians  of  Venezuela, 
published  in  Volume  IV  of  the  Boletin  Latino-Americano  de  Musica^ 
Baltasar  de  Matallana  characterizes  the  native  chants  as  possessing  “the 
unmistakable  racial  spirit  of  the  South  American  aborigines,  a  melancholy 
which  finds  its  expression  in  mournful  inflections  and  wistful  monotonous 
rhythms.” 

This  Indian  music  still  retains  its  religious  character.  Jose  Antonio 
Calcano,  in  Contribucion  al  Estudio  de  la  Musica  en  V enezuela^  tells  of 
mysterious  jungle  rites  in  which  “men  gather  together  in  darkness, 
ululating  lugubriously,  and  flagellating  themselves  to  the  accompaniment 
of  horrisonant  instruments.” 

Much  mystery  has  been  attached  to  the  existence  of  these  “horrisonant 
instruments,”  which  no  traveler  is  allowed  to  see  or  touch.  In  all  prob¬ 
ability,  these  instruments  are  jungle  drums,  capable  of  carrying  sound  to 
great  distances.  The  generic  name  of  these  drums  is  spelled  variously  as 


VENEZUELA 


289 


Botuto,  Bututo,  Bututu,  Bototo,  Fotuto,  Fututu,  Fototo,  Potuto  or 
Pututu.  Drums  of  African  origin  are  used  by  the  natives  of  Negro  extrac¬ 
tion.  These  drums  are  called  Cumaco  and  Curveta.  An  instrument  sui 
generis  is  the  FurrucOy  which  makes  a  grunting  sound  when  a  rosined  cord 
is  drawn  through  an  aperture  in  the  drumhead.  The  iFLine  is  a  squatting 
drum,  with  a  drumhead  measuring  up  to  three  feet  in  diameter  and  a  low 
body.  The  curious  Culo-en-tierra  (literally,  buttock  in  the  earth)  should 
be  mentioned.  It  consists  of  half  of  a  coconut,  which  is  covered  with  parch¬ 
ment  and  placed  in  a  small  hole  in  the  ground. 

The  wind  instruments  used  by  the  Indians  of  Venezuela  are  mostly  of 
the  flute  family.  These  flutes  are  made  of  animal  bones  or  bamboo  reeds. 

The  popular  music  of  Venezuela  is  Spanish  in  essence,  with  the  Negro 
influence  revealed  in  the  occasionally  syncopated  rhythms  and  in  the  free 
use  of  percussion  instruments.  In  an  article  on  Venezuelan  folklore  by 
Juan  Liscano,  originally  published  in  the  Bolettn  del  Instituto  Cultural 
Venezolano-Britanico  of  August  6,  1942,  and  reproduced  in  the  Revista 
Musical  Mexicana  of  May  7,  1943,  the  interdependence  of  the  Indian, 
Spanish,  and  Negro  influences  in  Venezuelan  music  is  summed  up  in  the 
following  words:  “Between  the  Negro  and  the  Indian  there  was  a  history 
of  blood  and  extermination.  Between  the  Negro  and  the  Spaniard  there  ex¬ 
isted  a  renaissance  of  artistic  and  social  forms.  Our  music  is  the  daughter  of 
Spain  and  Africa.  Like  our  soil,  it  is  rich  and  dark.  It  stems  from  the 
Spanish  guitar  and  the  Negro  drum.” 

The  purest  type  of  native  folklore  is  exemplified  by  the  Tono  Llanero, 
“the  melody  of  the  plains.”  It  is  a  dancing  song,  cast  in  a  major  or 
a  minor  mode.  Its  rhythm  is  characteristically  Spanish,  within  the  alter¬ 
nating  six-eight  and  three-four  time.  We  quote  from  such  a  Tono  (it  is 
sometimes  called  Tonada),  from  the  collection  Pequenas  Canturias  y 
Danzas  V enezolanas,  published  by  the  Radio  Caracas  in  194^' 


290 


MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

The  typical  dance  of  Venezuela  is  the  Joro'po,  usually  performed  in  a 
lively  jig-like  movement,  in  six-eight  time.  The  Venezuelan  Pasillo  is  to 
all  intents  and  purposes  identical  with  the  Colombian  Pasillo.  It  alternates 
three-four  time  and  six-eight  time,  with  resultant  cross-accents.  The 
Merengue  from  Santo  Domingo  is  also  popular  in  Venezuela,  as  is  the 
Mexican  topical  ballad,  the  Corrido.  The  Argentine  Tango  is  known  in 
Venezuela  under  a  diminutive  name,  Tanguito.  A  peculiar  humorous  song 
in  changing  rhythms  of  two  and  three  notes  to  a  beat.  La  Guasa  is  Vene¬ 
zuela  s  own  contribution  to  the  treasury  of  Latin  American  airs. 

Music  history  in  Venezuela  dates  back  to  the  eighteenth  century.  The 
following  events,  illustrating  the  development  of  musical  culture  in  Vene¬ 
zuela,  are  listed  in  Primer  Lihro  Venezolano  de  Literatura,  Ciencias  y 
Bellas  Arses y  published  in  Caracas  in  1 895 : 

1711.  The  first  organ  is  installed  in  the  Cathedral  of  Caracas. 

1725.  Music  courses  are  inaugurated  at  Caracas  University. 

1790.  Several  Austrian  musicians  settle  in  Venezuela. 

1 7  96.  The  first  pianoforte  is  imported  into  Caracas. 

1810.  A  French  opera  company  gives  performances  in  Caracas. 

1811.  On  April  19,  on  the  occasion  of  the  first  anniversary  of  the 

Revolution,  five  orchestras  composed  of  thirty  players  each 
give  concerts  in  Caracas. 

1859.  The  first  military  band  is  organized  in  Caracas. 

1868.  The  first  Conservatory  of  Music  is  opened  in  Caracas. 

1873.  On  May  4,  the  first  native  opera,  Virginia,  by  Jose  Angel 
Montero,  is  produced  in  Caracas. 

1880.  On  October  28,  the  Teatro  Municifal  is  opened  in  Caracas. 

Robert  Semple,  an  English  traveler  who  made  a  journey  to  Venezuela 
in  the  nineteenth  century,  gives  some  sidelights  on  early  musical  life  in 
Caracas  in  a  book  entitled  Sketch  of  the  Present  State  of  Caracas-,  Including 
a  Journey  from  Caracas  through  La  Victoria  and  Valencia  to  Puerto 
Cctbello  (London,  1812).  “The  audiences  are  not  difficult  to  please.  Pa¬ 
triotic  songs  are  occasionally  brought  forward,  and  the  singer  is  frecjuently 
not  only  applauded,  but  is  rewarded  by  pieces  of  money  cast  upon  the 
stage.  This  circumstance  is  sometimes  attended  by  inconvenience}  and  I 
have  seen  a  hero  obliged  to  stoop  to  avoid  a  friendly  dollar  thrown  at  his 
head.” 

The  existence  of  a  surprisingly  flourishing  school  of  native  composition 
in  the  latter  part  of  the  eighteenth  century  was  revealed  to  the  world  when 


VENEZUELA 


291 

some  three  hundred  orchestral  and  choral  manuscripts  of  the  colonial 
period  were  discovered  in  a  wooden  box  in  the  cellar  of  the  Escuela  de 
Musica  in  Caracas.  The  full  scores  of  eight  ecclesiastical  compositions  for 
chorus  and  orchestra  from  this  collection  were  published  in  1 943  by  the 
Ministry  of  National  Education  of  Venezuela,  in  collaboration  with  the 
Institute  of  Interamerican  Musicology  of  Montevideo,  Uruguay. 

The  pioneer  of  Venezuelan  music  was  Pedro  Palacios  y  Sojo,  a  priest 
who  made  a  trip  to  Rome  and  Madrid  in  order  to  collea  music  and  in¬ 
struments.  Upon  his  return  to  Caracas  in  1770,  he  founded  a  society  in 
which  the  members  were  encouraged  ^^to  play  the  game  of  ball  and  give 
concerts.”  A  younger  contemporary  of  Sojo,  Juan  Manuel  Olivares,  who 
was  a  mulatto,  composed  religious  music  in  the  style  of  Haydn.  Other  com¬ 
posers  of  the  same  period  were  Jose  Francisco  Velasquez  and  Jose  Antonio 
Caro  de  Boesi. 

A  list  of  nineteenth  century  Venezuelan  musicians  comprises  the  fol¬ 
lowing  names :  Jose  Angel  Lamas,  Cayetano  Carreho,  Juan  Jose  Landaeta, 
Lino  Gallardo,  Pedro  Nolasco  Colon,  and  Jose  Francisco  Velasquez,  Jr., 
the  son  of  the  elder  Velasquez.  Of  these,  Lamas  (1775-1814)  was  the 
most  prolific^  forty  of  his  compositions  have  been  preserved.  Carreho 
(1774-1836),  the  grandfather  of  the  famous  Venezuelan  pianist  Teresa 
Carreho,  was  Chapel  Master  at  the  Cathedral  of  Caracas.  Juan  Jose 
Landaeta  occupies  an  historic  place  in  Venezuelan  history  as  the  com¬ 
poser  of  the  patriotic  hymn  Gloria  al  Bravo  Pueblo^  which  was  pro¬ 
claimed  the  national  anthem  of  Venezuela  on  May  25,  1881.  Landaeta 
perished  during  the  earthquake  of  1812. 

The  following  Venezuelan  musicians  were  active  in  the  nineteenth  cen¬ 
tury  as  performers  and  composers:  Jose  Angel  Montero  (1839-1881), 
chorus  master  at  the  Cathedral  of  Caracas,  and  the  author  of  the  first 
native  opera  Fir (1873)5  Felipe  Larrazabal  (1816-1873),  pianist 
and  composer  of  chamber  music 5  and  Federico  Villena  (1835-1900),  a 
composer  of  piano  pieces. 

Juan  Bautista  Plaza,  in  a  paper  read  at  the  American  Musicological 
Society  on  March  27,  1942,  and  subsequently  published  in  The  Musical 
Quarterly  of  July  1942,  sums  up  the  significance  of  the  composers  of  the 
colonial  period  in  these  words: 

It  would  seem  as  though  these  men,  having  one  fine  day  discovered  music, 
devoted  themselves  earnestly  to  its  cultivation;  for  surely  it  opened  fresh  vistas 
to  them— another  New  World.  In  reality,  however,  what  they  discovered  was 


292  MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 

but  one  phase  of  music — that  is,  sacred  music.  In  this  field  they  felt  happy  and 
at  home.  As  true  descendants  of  the  Spaniards,  they  preserved  the  ardent  faith 
of  their  ancestors.  The  Church,  of  course,  welcomed  them  and  utilized  their 
services;  furthermore,  the  society  in  which  they  lived  delighted  in  their  works, 
which  could  be  understood  by  all  and  spoke  straight  to  the  heart.  The  first 
performance  of  a  new  Mass  by  Lamas  or  Carreno  must  undoubtedly  have  been 
an  important  event  to  that  provincial  society,  which,  under  the  influence  of  the 
Catholic  clergy,  lived  primarily  in  the  Church  and  for  the  Church.  The  music 
of  these  composers,  therefore,  was  closely  related  to  their  environment,  time, 
and  race. 

The  cause  of  musical  education  in  Venezuela  has  made  important  strides 
in  the  last  few  years.  Caracas  possesses  one  of  the  finest  choral  ensembles 
on  the  continent,  the  Or  f eon  Lamas  ^  which  is  led  by  Vicente  Emilio  So  jo. 
In  contrast  to  the  Venezuelan  composers  of  the  old  school,  native  musi¬ 
cians  of  the  new  generation  are  cultivating  a  national  tradition  and  using 
indigenous  melodies  and  rhythms.  Vicente  Emilio  So  jo,  Maria  Luisa 
Escobar,  Moises  Moleiro,  Juan  Bautista  Plaza  and  Juan  Lecuna  have 
all  contributed  to  the  formation  of  a  national  school. 

The  symphony  orchestra  of  Caracas  is  the  SinfSnica  Venezuela ^  con¬ 
ducted  by  Vicente  Emilio  So  jo.  Its  members  are  recruited  from  the 
graduates  of  the  Escuela  de  Musica  of  Caracas. 

The  Ministry  of  National  Education  has  inaugurated  a  plan  for  the 
publication  of  native  airs  and  dances  in  a  collection  entitled  Biblioteca 
Venezolana  de  Cultura.  Three  albums  of  songs  suitable  for  schools  were 
published  in  1940.  In  1942,  Radio  Caracas  published  three  albums  of 
national  songs  and  dances.  Choruses  and  songs  by  Vicente  Emilio  Sojo 
•have  been  published  by  the  AsociaciSn  Venezolana  de  Conciertos,  Maria 
Luisa  Escobar  has  published  some  songs  of  her  own. 

Two  Venezuelan-born  musicians  have  made  a  mark  for  themselves  in 
the  music  world,  but  neither  lived  in  Venezuela  during  adult  life.  Rey¬ 
naldo  Hahn,  the  opera  composer  of  considerable  renown,  went  to  Paris 
with  his  family  at  the  age  of  three.  Teresa  Carreno,  the  “Valkyrie  of  the 
piano^”  was  taken  to  New  York  at  the  age  of  eight. 

MUSICIANS  OF  VENEZUELA 

Maria  Luisa  Escobar  (1903—)  founded  the  Ateneo  of  Caracas,  an 
institution  dedicated  to  the  cultivation  of  the  native  arts,  in  1932.  As  a 
composer,  she  has  written  songs  and  piano  pieces,  and  a  symphony-ballet, 


VENEZUELA 


293 

Orquideas  Azules  (1941),  based  on  Venezuelan  folklore.  Her  work  as 
collector  of  Venezuelan  songs  is  described  in  the  article  “Ritmo  y  Melodia 
Natives  de  Venezuela,”  in  Volume  III  of  the  Bolettn  Latino-Americano 
de  Muska.  In  1937,  Marla  Luisa  Escobar  was  a  delegate  at  the  Interna¬ 
tional  Congress  of  Music  Education  in  Paris.  Her  songs,  Ternura  and 
Naranjas  de  Valencia,  are  published  in  Caracas. 

Juan  Lecuna  (1898 - )  was  born  in  Valencia.  After  a  study  of  the 

raiments  of  music  in  Caracas,  he  went  to  the  United  States,  where  he 
took  lessons  with  Gustave  Strube.  Lecuna  is  the  only  Venezuelan  com¬ 
poser  who  has  achieved  a  mastery  of  contemporary  technique  of  com¬ 
position.  His  four  pieces  for  piano,  Vais,  Criolla,  Joro-po,  and  Danza, 
published  in  Paris  in  1938,  are  written  in  a  native  manner.  Lecuna  has 
also  written  a  Suite  Venezolana  for  four  guitars,  a  String  Quartet,  and  a 
Piano  Concerto. 

Moises  Moleiro  (1905 - )  studied  in  Caracas  with  Vicente  Emilio 

Sojo.  In  1936,  he  was  appointed  instructor  in  piano  at  the  Escuela  de 
Musica  in  Caracas.  Moleiro’s  music,  chiefly  songs  and  short  piano  pieces 
in  rudimentary  harmony,  is  reflective  of  native  rhythms,  which  led  a 
critic  to  remark:  “En  Moleiro  palpita  Venezuela.” 

Juan  Bautista  Plaza  (1898 - ),  the  composer  and  educator,  was  born 

in  Caracas  and  received  his  primary  education  in  the  French  College 
there.  For  a  while  he  studied  medicine.  Owing  to  the  efforts  of  the 
Archbishop  of  Caracas,  he  was  sent  to  Rome  in  1920,  to  study  at  the 
Pontifical  Institute  of  Sacred  Music.  He  completed  his  education  in  1923, 
and  upon  returning  to  Venezuela  became  organist  of  the  Cathedral  of 
Caracas.  In  1924  he  was  appointed  professor  of  composition  at  the  Escuela 
de  Musica.  In  1936  he  took  charge  of  the  valuable  archive  of  the  Escuela 
de  Musica,  which  contains  manuscripts  of  music  of  the  colonial  period. 
In  1942  he  made  a  trip  to  the  United  States.  Plaza  has  written  three 
Masses,  a  Requiem,  several  Motets,  and  other  religious  works;  three 
symphonic  poems,  El  Picacho  Abrupto,  Vigilia,  Campanas  de  Pascua; 
and  a  tone  poem  for  orchestra  with  chorus.  Las  Horas,  in  commemora¬ 
tion  of  the  Centenary  of  Bolivar’s  death.  In  the  native  manner,  Plaza 
has  composed  a  Fuga  Crtolla,  the  score  of  which  is  in  the  Fleisher  Col¬ 
lection  in  Philadelphia,  and  a  Sonatina  Venezolana,  which  is  included  in 
the  collection  LafiM-Awencaw  Art  Music  jor  the  Piano  (Schirmer,  1942); 
Also  published  are  his  Seven  Venezuelan  Songs.  Regarding  his  style  of 


294 


MUSIC  IN  THE  TWENTY  REPUBLICS 


composition.  Plaza  writes:  music  is  very  uneven,  for  I  have  never 

preoccupied  myself  with  the  problem  of  enlarging  my  technical  resources, 
or  of  creating  a  personal  styleP^ 

Vicente  Emilio  Sojo  (1887 - )  is  the  conductor  of  the  Orfeon  Lamas 

of  Caracas,  which  is  one  of  the  finest  choral  organizations  in  Latin  Amer¬ 
ica.  Sojo  is  also  the  conductor  of  the  Caracas  symphony  orchestra,  Sin- 
fonica  Venezuela.  He  is  the  author  of  a  cantata,  a  Requiem,  three  Masses, 
and  numerous  vocal  works.  His  choruses,  La  Nube^  La  Coca^  Rondel 
Matinal^  Gar  gar  0  Malojo^  and  five  songs  are  published  in  Caracas. 


PART  III 


GUIDE  TO  PRONUNCIATION 


Sfanish 

h  :  always  silent. 

;  :  like  a  strong  English  h,  as  in  “Navajo.” 
ll  :  like  y,  as  in  “yes.” 
n  :  like  ny\  as  in  “canyon.” 

Indian 

Transliterations;  pronounced  as  written. 


Portuguese 

a  :  much  like  French  an  or  en^  as  in  “Jean” 
or  “entente.” 

g  :  like  French  g  or  English  r,  as  in  “say.” 
Ih  :  much  like  //i,  as  in  “million.” 
nh  :  much  like  wy,  as  in  “canyon.” 

X  :  generally  like  sh^  as  in  “fashion.” 


A 

aboio.  A  Brazilian  shepherd’s  call, 
abuelito  (little  grandpa).  An  obsolete 
dance  once  popular  in  Chile. 
acalantO.  A  Brazilian  cradle  song. 
Adame,  Rafael.  Mexican  guitarist  and 
composer  of  competently  academic  music. 
Born  in  Jalisco,  September  ii,  1906. 
See  pp.  2Z5-226. 

adja.  An  Afro-Brazilian  metal  bell, 
adjulona.  A  primitive  wind  instrument 
with  a  corrugated  leaf  for  a  reed;  used 
by  Brazilian  Indians, 
adoracion.  A  Bolivian  Christmas  carol, 
adufe  (from  Moorish).  A  Brazilian  tam¬ 
bourine. 

afofie.  A  small  Afro-Brazilian  flute, 
agidavi.  An  Afro-Brazilian  drumstick, 
agogo.  An  iron  anvil  used  as  a  percussion 
instrument  by  the  Brazilian  Negroes, 
aguinaldo,  A  Puerto  Rican  Christmas 
carol. 


Aguirre,  Julian.  Argentine  composer  of 
songs  and  piano  music  in  native  vein. 
Born  in  Buenos  Aires,  January  28,  1868; 
died  there,  August  13,  1924,  See  p.  82. 

aiapa.  A  species  of  the  Brazilian  shaker 
chocalho. 

aidje  (hippopotamus).  A  bull-roarer,  or 
thunder-stick,  of  the  Bororo  Indians 
of  Brazil. 

aire  Indio.  An  Indian  air,  characteristic  of 
Bolivia,  and  free  in  rhythm  and  form. 

alabado.  A  Mexican  regional  air. 

Alas,  Jesus.  Salvadoran  composer  of  band 
music.  Born  in  Santa  Tecla,  April  7, 
1866.  See  pp.  280-281. 

alfandoque.  A  Colombian  name  for  the 
maracas. 

Allende,  Adolfo.  Chilean  music  critic  and 
composer,  brother  of  Humberto  Allende. 
Born  in  Santiago,  August  29,  1890.  See 
p.  154. 

Allende,  Humberto.  Chilean  composer, 
pioneer  of  native  modern  music.  Born  in 


295 


296 


DICTIONARY 


Santiag:o,  June  29,  1885.  See  pp.  154- 
157* 

almirez.  A  brass  mortar  ;  used  in  Panama 
as  a  percussion  instrument, 
amele.  A  Brazilian  rattle,  similar  to  the 
chequere. 

Amengual  Astaburuaga,  Rene.  Chil¬ 
ean  composer  of  the  modern  school.  Born 
in  Santiago,  September  2,  1911.  See  p. 
157. 

amorfino.  A  popular  song  of  Ecuador,  in 
%  time. 

anata.  A  vertical  flute  of  Bolivia. 
Andrade,  Mario  de.  Brazilian  musi¬ 
cologist  and  modernistic  poet.  Born  in 
Sao  Paulo,  October  9,  1893;  died  there, 
February  25,  1945.  See  p.  123. 
Andre,  Jose.  Argentine  composer  of  songs 
in  a  romantic  vein.  Born  in  Buenos  Aires, 
January  17,  i88i;  died  there,  July  13, 
1944.  See  p.  82. 

angelitO.  An  Argentine  song  of  condo¬ 
lences  for  a  dead  child, 
angogo.  A  Brazilian  flute, 
angua.  The  mortar  water  drum  of  the 
Guarany  Indians, 
anguarai.  See  angua. 
antara.  A  Peruvian  panpipe,  made  of  reeds 
of  different  sizes  tied  together;  called 
sicu  in  Bolivia,  rondador  in  Ecuador, 
and  capador  in  Colombia, 
apanha-o-bago.  An  Afro-Brazilian  dance, 
arabicus.  The  Spanish  name  for  the 
yaravi. 

Araujo,  Joao  Gomes  de.  Brazilian  com¬ 
poser  of  Italianate  operas.  Born  in 
Pindamonhangaba,  August  5,  1846;  died 
in  Sao  Paulo,  September  8,  1942,  at  the 
age  of  ninety-six.  See  p.  123. 

Ardevol,  Jose.  Spanish-Cuban  composer 
of  neoclassical  chamber  music.  Born  in 
Barcelona,  Spain,  March  13,  19 ii,  resi¬ 
dent  in  Havana  since  1930.  See  pp.  183- 
184. 

areito.  A  pre-Columbian  air  of  the  West 
Indies. 

Aretz-Thiele,  Isabel.  Argentine  com¬ 
poser  and  specialist  in  musical  folklore. 
Born  in  Buenos  Aires,  April  13,  1909. 
See  p.  82. 

Arias,  Luis  Felipe.  Guatemalan  com- 


poser  of  character  pieces.  Born  in  Guate¬ 
mala  City  August  23,  1870;  assassinated 
there,  March  24,  1908.  See  p.  204. 
aribli.  A  Brazilian  air  similar  to  the  lundu. 
arpa-che.  A  Guatemalan  musical  bow. 
Arrau,  Claudio.  Foremost  Chilean  pian¬ 
ist.  Born  in  Chilian,  February  6,  1904. 
See  p.  157. 

Arredondo-Miura,  Clodomiro.  Do¬ 
minican  composer  of  popular  music.  Born 
in  Santo  Domingo,  March  3,  1864;  died 
there,  March  24,  1908.  See  p.  204. 
Arredondo-Sosa,  Horacio,  son  of 
Clodomiro  Arredondo-Miura.  Do¬ 
minican  composer  of  dance  music.  Born 
in  Santo  Domingo,  June  5,  1912.  See 
p.  192. 

arrullo.  The  generic  Spanish  word  for  a 
lullaby. 

Ascone,  Vicente.  Uruguayan  composer 
of  melodious  music  on  native  themes. 
Born  in  Montevideo,  August  16,  1897. 
See  p.  284. 

asson.  A  Haitian  rattle,  similar  to  the 
maracas. 

assotor.  A  Haitian  drum;  also^  a  Haitian 
dance  named  after  the  drum, 
atabal.  A  small  drum,  used  by  the  natives 
of  Central  America  and  the  West  Indies, 
atabaque.  See  tabaque. 
atecocolli.  The  Aztec  name  for  the  ca- 
racol  marine. 

auto.  Generic  designation  for  religious 
plays  with  music  introduced  into  South 
America  by  the  missionaries, 
ayacaztli.  The  ancient  Aztec  name  for  the 
maracas. 

Ayala,  Daniel.  Mexican  Indian  composei 
of  the  modern  national  school.  Born  in 
Abala,  Yucatan,  July  21,  1908.  See  pp. 
226-22y, 

ayariche.  A  Peruvian  ocarina, 
aykhori.  A  long  twin  flute  with  the  two 
reeds  tied  at  one.  end,  used  by  the  Indians 
of  the  central  plateau  in  South  America, 
aylli-quepa.  A  primitive  Peruvian  trumpet 
made  of  a  conch  shell,  capable  of  pro¬ 
ducing  two  different  tones, 
ayochicaliuaztli.  See  chicahuaztli. 
ayotl.  An  ancient  Mexican  tortoise-shell 
di*um,  played  upon  with  a  stag’s  antler. 


DICTIONARY  297 


azucena.  An  ornamented  tree  with  which 
the  Peruvian  Indians  stamp  the  rhythm 
of  Christmas  songs. 

B. 

babacue.  An  Afro-Brazilian  fetish  song, 
baboule.  A  Haitian  dance  similar  to  the 
juba. 

baby  •  drum.  The  smallest  of  Haitian 
drums. 

baguala.  An  xArgentine  song  similar  to  the 
vidala. 

baile.  A  generic  Spanish  word  for  dance, 
sometimes  specifically  salon  dances,  as 
opposed  to  danza. 

bailecito.  A  song-dance  of  Argentina  and 
Bolivia  in  %  time,  consisting  of  two  sec¬ 
tions  in  different  keys  and  usually  sung 
to  the  accompaniment  of  a  guitar, 
bajon,  A  very  large  type  of  sicus  gi- 
gantes,  consisting  of  graduated  tubes 
made  of  palm-tree  leaves  and  sugar  reeds, 
reaching  two  meters  in  length, 
balsie  tumbado.  A  low  fiat  drum  used  by 
the  natives  of  Santo  Domingo,  similar  to 
the  timbal. 

bamba.  An  old  Mexican  air  from  the 
province  of  Veracruz,  recently  modern¬ 
ized  as  a  ballroom  dance, 
bamboche.  A  Haitian  dance, 
bambuco.  The  national  dance  of  Co¬ 
lombia,  in  %  or  %  meter,  characterized 
by  cross  accents,  in  moderate  tempo, 
bambula.  A  primitive  drum  of  the  Antil¬ 
lean  Negroes ;  also  an  Afro-Antillean 
dance  in  %  time  and  syncopated  rhythm, 
named  after  the  drum, 
bandalon.  An  ancient  Mexican  string  in¬ 
strument,  similar  to  the  mandolin, 
bandola.  A  small  bandtirria. 
bandolin.  A  four-string  guitar, 
bandoneon.  Argentine  accordion, 
bandurria.  A  guitar  with  twelve  strings, 
bansa.  An  Afro-Brazilian  miisicai  bow, 
consisting  of  an  arched  bow  with  a  cord 
rubbed  by  a  piece  of  wood  or  a  bone, 
bapo.  The  maracas  of  the  Bororo  Indians 
of  Brazil. 

Baqueiro  Foster,  Gerdnimo.  Mexican 
musicologist  specializing  in  native  folk¬ 


lore.  Born  in  Hopelchen,  state  of  Cam¬ 
peche,  January  7,  1898.  See  p.  227. 
Baratta,  Maria  de.  Salvadoran  folklore 
specialist  and  composer.  Born  in  San 
Salvador,  February  27,  1894.  See  p. 
281. 

Barbacci,  Rodolfo.  Argentine-Peruvian 
musicologist  and  composer  of  modernistic 
piano  pieces.  Born  in  Buenos  Aires, 
February  28,  19 ii.  See  p.  272. 
bata.  An  Afro-Brazilian  drum. 
bata-COtO.  A  war  drum  of  the  Brazilian 
Negroes. 

bate-bau.  An  Afro-Brazilian  dance  popu¬ 
lar  in  the  region  of  Bahia,  similar  to  the 
samba. 

bate-pe.  An  Afro-Brazilian  dance  of  the 
samba  type. 

batucada.  See  batuque. 
batuque.  An  Afro-Brazilian  dance,  char¬ 
acterized  by  sharply  syncopated  rhythm 
in  duple  meter. 

Bautista,  Julian.  Spanish  composer  of  the 
modern  school,  resident  in  Argentina 
since  1940.  Born  in  Madrid,  April  21, 
1901.  See  pp.  82-83. 

beguine.  A  popular  dance  of  the  islands  of 
St.  Lucia  and  Martinique,  resembling  a 
rumba. 

bendengue.  See  jongo. 
benta.  A  musical  bow  of  the  V/est 
Indian  Negroes. 

berimbau-  A  musical  bow  of  the  Brazil¬ 
ian  Indians;  also,  a  jungle  incantation  of 
the  fetishist  ritual. 

Bermudez  Silva,  Jesus.  Colombian  com¬ 
poser  of  orchestral  and  other  music.  Bom 
in  Bogota,  December  24,  1884.  See  pp. 
169-170. 

Bernal  Jimenez,  Miguel.  Mexican  com¬ 
poser  of  operatic  and  orchestral  music  on 
native  themes.  Born  in  Morelia,  February 
16,  1910.  pp.  227-228. 
berra-boL  A  primitive  Brazilian  tbun- 
der-stick 

Berutti,' Arturo.  Argentine  composer  of 
Italianate  operas.  Born  in  San  Juan, 
March  27,  1862;  died  in  Buenos  Aires, 
January  3,  i93^‘  pp.  Sa-Ss. 
Berutti,  Pablo.  Argentine  composer  of 
piano  music  and  an  opera,  brother  of 


298 


DICTIONARY 


Arturo  Berutti.  Bom  in  San  Juan, 
September  24,  1870J  died  in  Buenos 
Aires,  1916.  See  p.  83. 
bexelac.  A  local  Mexican  name  for  the 
ayoti. 

birimbau.  See  berimbau. 

Bisquertt  Prado,  Prospero.  Chilean 
composer  of  orchestral  music  on  native 
themes.  Born  in  Santiago,  June  8,  1881. 
See  pp.  1 57-158. 

blocos.  Brazilian  religious  plays  connected 
with  Christmas, 
boali.  See  noari. 

bocana.  A  native  guitar  of  Panama,  larger 
than  the  mejoranera. 
bocina.  An  animal  horn  with  an  em¬ 
bouchure  made  of  woodj  used  by  the 
Indians  of  equatorial  America, 
bocina  huanca.  A  Venezuelan  wind  in¬ 
strument  with  a  tube  of  sugar  cane  and 
the  mouthpiece  of  animal  horn. 

Boero,  Felipe,  Argentine  composer  of 
Italianate  operas.  Born  in  Buenos  Aires, 
May  I,  1884.  See  p.  83. 
bol6-bole.  An  Afro-Brazilian  dance  popu¬ 
lar  near  Bahia. 

bolero.  A  Cuban  dance  in  %  time,  in  con¬ 
trast  to  the  Spanish  bolero  in  % 
time. 

bolero-son.  A  Cuban  air,  combining  ele¬ 
ments  of  the  Cuban  bolero  with  those 
of  the  son. 

bomba.  A  dance  of  the  Haitian  Negroes, 
bombo.  The  generic  Spanish  American 
name  for  a  bass  drum, 
bongo  (commonly  used  in  plural, 
bongos).  Cuban  twin  drums,  held  on 
the  knees  and  played  with  fingers, 
bordoriua.  A  Puerto  Rican  guitar  with 
supernumerary  strings, 
bore.  See  tore. 

bosero.  A  small  fiute  of  the  Brazilian 
Indians. 

bototo.  See  butUtU. 
botuto.  See  bututii. 

Braga,  Francisco.  Brazilian  composer  of 
the  romantic  school.  Born  in' Rio  de 
Janeiro,  April  15,  18685  died  there 
March  14,  1945.  See  pp.  123-124. 
Brandao,  Jgs6  Vieira.  Brazilian  com¬ 
poser  of  native-inspired  songs  and  piano 


pieces.  Born  in  Cambuquira,  September 
26,  19 1 1.  See  p.  124. 

Bravo,  Antonio  Gonzalez,  See  Gonza¬ 
lez  Bravo,  Antonio. 

Broqua,  Alfonso.  Uruguayan  composer 
resident  in  France.  Born  in  Montevideo, 
December  ii,  1876.  5*^^  p.  284. 
bua.  A  small  Brazilian  flute  of  the  species 
yapurutu. 

Buebardo,  Carlos  Lopez.  Argentine 
composer  of  native-inspired  orchestral 
and  vocal  music.  Born  in  Buenos  Aires, 
October  12,  1881.  p.  83. 

Buchwald,  Theo.  Austrian  conductor  of 
the  Orquesta  Sinfontca  Naciond  in  Lima. 
Born  in  Vienna,  September  27,  1902. 
See  p.  272. 

bula.  A  small  Haitian  drum, 
bull-roarer.  See  thunder-stick, 
bumba.  See  bomba, 
bumbum.  A  musical  bow  with  a  bow¬ 
string  drawn  inward  by  a  cord  passed 
through  a  small  gourd  to  the  back  of  the 
bow  5  used  by  the  Lenca  Indians  of 
Honduras. 

bure.  A  Brazilian  hunting  whistle  that 
imitates  bird  calls  5  made  of  wood,  palm 
trees,  or  animal  skulls. 

Burle  Marx,  Walter.  Brazilian  con¬ 
ductor  and  composer.  Born  in  Sao  Paulo, 
July  23,  1902.  See  pp.  124-125. 
Bustamente,  Bienvenido.  Dominican 
musician.  Born  in  San  Pedro  de  Macoris, 
February  27,  1924.  See  p.  192. 
butori.  See  button. 

button.  A  rattle  of  the  Bororo  Indians  of 
Brazil,  made  of  deer  hoofs  strung  on  a 
lace. 

bututo.  See  butUtu. 
bututd.  A  primitive  flute  of  the  South 
American  Indians  5  also^  a  stamping  tube 
struck  rhythmically  in  a  hole  in  the 
ground  5  also^  a  war  trumpet  consisting 
of  several  superposed  clay  jars.  See  dso 
pututu. 

G, 

Caba,  Eduardo.  Bolivian  composer  of 
folkloric  music.  Born  in  Potosi,  October 
13,  1890.  p.  107. 
cabaqa  (calabash) .  See  chequer^. 


DICTIONARY 


299 


Caballero,  Policarpio.  Peruvian  col¬ 
lector  of  musical  folklore.  Born  in  Cuzco, 
January  26,  1894.  See  p.  272. 
caboclinho  (little  caboclo).  A  Brazilian 
carnival  dance-song  of  a  rustic  character, 
caboclo  (peasant).  A  Brazilian  country 
dance,  nostalgic  or  gay  according  to 
mood. 

cachampa.  See  kachampa. 
cacharpaya.  A  Bolivian  carnival  dance  of 
Indian  origin. 

cacho.  A  Nicaraguan  trumpet  made  of  an 
animal  horn. 

cachua.  A  Peruvian  song-dance  in  per¬ 
sistent  %  time  without  syncopation,  in 
rapid  tempo. 

cachullapi.  An  Ecuadorian  song  of  Indian 
inspiration,  in  %  time  and  a  rather  rapid 
tempo. 

cadacada.  Shell  castanets  used  by  the 
Araucanian  Indians  in  Chile. 
cair6.  A  primitive  Brazilian  rattle  in  the 
form  of  a  cross. 

caixa  (box).  The  Portuguese  name  for  a 
snare-drum. 

caixinha  (little  box).  A  Brazilian  box 
rattle. 

caja.  A  generic  Spanish  name  for  all  kinds 
of  drums. 

calabash.  A  gourd. 

Calcavecchia,  Benone.  Italian-Uru- 
guayan  composer  of  competently  con¬ 
ventional  music.  Born  in  Caronia,  Sicily, 
June  27,  1886.  See  p.  285. 
calenda.  A  pre-Columbian  South  American 
dance. 

callejera  (street  dance).  A  popular  air  of 
Costa  Rica,  usually  in  %  time,  with  oc¬ 
casional  cross  accents, 
calypso.  Topical  ballads  in  English,  sung 
by  the  natives  of  Trinidad, 
camaliao.  A  Brazilian  country  dance. 
Camara,  Juan  Antonio.  Cuban  com¬ 
poser  of  the  modern  school.  Born  in 
Havana,  September  28,  1917.  See  p.  184. 
camisao  (literally,  a  shirt) .  Brazilian  box¬ 
like  square  drum,  struck  wdth  the  hand. 
Campa,  Gustavo-  Mexican  music  educa¬ 
tor  and  composer.  Born  in  Mexico  City, 
September  8,  1863  j  died  there,  October 
29,  1934. p.  228. 

caha  (circle).  A  choreographic  figure  in 


which  the  dancers  describe  a  complete 
circle  holding  hands.  A  half-circle  is 
called  media  cana. 

cana  verde.  A  Brazilian  dance  of  Portu¬ 
guese  origin,  in  ?4  time, 
cancion.  A  generic  Spanish  word  for  song, 
candeia  (luminosity).  A  Brazilian  country 
air  in  slow  %  time. 

candieiro  (candlestick).  A  Brazilian  air 
similar  to  the  candeia. 
candombe.  An  old  Argentine  dance  in 
mildly  syncopated  rhythm  5  now  coalesced 
with  the  Tango. 

candomble.  Afro-Brazilian  fetishist  dance, 
canoa  (canoe).  A  Brazilian  barcarolla. 
cantaletas-.  Nineteenth  century  ballads  on 
topical  subjects  once  popular  in  Santo 
Domingo. 

Cantillano,  Roberto.  Costa  Rican  com¬ 
poser  of  scmi-classical  band  pieces.  Born 
in  Santo  Domingo  de  Heredia,  March  2. 
1887.  See  p.  176. 

Cantu,  Agostino.  Italian-Brazilian  com¬ 
poser  of  romantically  colored  pieces- 
Born  in  Milan,  April  24,  1880.  See  p 
125. 

capador.  A  panpipe  of  Colombian  Indians 
made  of  reeds  of  different  sizes  tied  to 
getherj  called  antara  in  Peru,  sicu  ii 
Bolivia,  and  rondador  in  Ecuador, 
capoeira.  A  Brazilian  rustic  dance, 
caqueltrun.  An  Araucanian  drum,  relatec 
to  the  cultrun. 

carabine  (from  carabiner,  a  cavalr 
soldier).  A  military  march  once  popula: 
in  Santo  Domingo. 

caracalbo.  A  primitive  Brazilian  scratcher 
caracara.  A  primitive  Brazilian  trumpet 
caracaxa.  A  Brazilian  shaker  of  th^ 
maracas  type. 

caracol  marino.  A  conch  shell  of  Mexio 
and  Central  America, 
caramba.  See  carimba. 
carangano,  A  Colombian  name  for  th 
maracas. 

carangueijo.  A  Brazilian  dance  in  fast  ? 
time. 

carao.  An  Argentine  song-dance  of  th 
milonga  type. 

Cardona,  Ismael,  Costa  Rican  compose 
of  salon  music.  Born  in  San  Ramor 
December  5,  iZyy.  See  Tp,  176. 


300 


DICTIONARY 


carimba.  The  musical  bow  of  the  Indians 
of  El  Salvador,  consisting  of  a  long, 
thick  reed,  strung  with  a  metal  wire, 
which  is  drawn  inward  at  one-third  of 
its  length  by  a  cord  attached  to  an  in¬ 
verted  calabash  shell. 

carimbo.  A  drum  of  the  Brazilian  Ne¬ 
groes. 

carioca  (abbreviation  of  samba  ca- 
rioca).  A  samba  played  and  danced  in 
the  style  of  Rio  de  Janeiro, 
carnavalito  (little  carnival).  Argentine 
round  dance  suggesting  a  village  car¬ 
nival. 

Carpio  Valdes,  Roberto.  Peruvian  com¬ 
poser  of  piano  pieces.  Born  in  Arequipa, 
February  23,  1900.  See  p.  272. 
carraca.  The  native  Colombian  giiiro. 
carracas,  Mexican  jingle  bells,  worn  by 
the  dancers  on  the  belt, 
carrasca.  See  guacharaca. 
carretilha.  A  type  of  the  Brazilian  desa- 
fio,  usually  in  rapid  tempo  and  duple 
time. 

Carrillo,  Julian.  Mexican  composer  of 
quarter-tone  music.  Born  in  Ahualulco, 
January  28,  1875.  See  pp.  228-230. 
Carrillo,  Manuel  Gomez.  Argentine 
composer  of  native-inspired  music  in 
traditional  style.  Born  in  Santiago  del 
Estero,  March  8,  1883.  See  p.  83. 
carrizo  (reed-grass).  A  generic  name  for 
a  reed,  fife,  or  a  flute. 

Carvajal,  Armando.  Chilean  conductor 
of  the  Orquesta  Sinjonica  de  Chile,  Born 
in  Santiago,  June  7,  1893.  See  p.  158. 
Carvalho,  Dinora  de.  Brazilian  com¬ 
poser  of  piano  pieces  in  native  vein.  Born 
in  Uberaba,  June  i,  1905.  Seep.  125. 
Carvalho,  Eleazar  de.  Brazilian  com¬ 
poser  of  operatic  music.  Born  in  Forta¬ 
leza,  July  28,  19 1 2.  p,  125. 

Casabona,  Francisco.  Brazilian  com¬ 
poser  of  competent  music  in  the  Italian 
style.  Born  in  Sao  Paulo,  October  16, 
1894.  .S^tfpp,  125-126. 

Casal  Chapi,  Enrique.  See  Chapi, 

. ,  Enrique:  Casal.  ,  , 

Casanova  Vicuna,  Juan.  Chilean  con¬ 
ductor  and  composer.  Born  in  Santiago, 
December  27,  1895.  .81?^  p,  159. 

Casas,  Gabriel  Escobar.  Escobar 
Casas,  Gabriel. 


cascabeles.  Small  jingle  rattles  or  beads 
made  of  dried  fruit  shells,  clay,  or  beaten 
metal  with  pellets  inside  5  in  use  among 
Mexican  Indians. 

Casella,  Enrique  M.  Uruguayan- Argen¬ 
tine  composer  of  vocal  music  in  the 
native  manner.  Born  in  Montevideo, 
Uruguay,  August  i,  1891.  See  p.  84. 
Castaneda,  Jose.  Guatemalan  music 
theorist  and  critic.  Born  in  Guatemala 
City,  May  24,  1898.  See  pp.  204-205. 
Castillo,  Jesus.  Guatemalan  musical  folk¬ 
lorist.  Born  in  Quezaltenango,  September 
9,  1877.  See  p.  205. 

Castillo,  Ricardo.  Half-brother  of  Jesus 
Castillo.  Guatemalan  composer  of  music 
of  native  inspiration.  Born  in  Quezalte¬ 
nango,  October  i,  1891.  See  p.  205. 
Castro,  Herbert  de.  Panamanian  con¬ 
ductor.  Born  in  Panama,  January  18, 
1906.  See  pp.  260-261. 

Castro,  Jose  Maria.  Argentine  composer 
of  neo-romantic  orchestral  and  vocal 
music.  Born  in  Avellaneda,  November 
17,  1892.  5"^^  pp.  84-85. 

Castro,  Juan  Jose.  Brother  of  Jose 
Maria  Castro.  Argentine  composer- 
conductor,  writing  in  the  neo-classical 
style.  Born  in  Buenos  Aires,  March  7, 
1895.  See  pp.  85-86. 

Castro,  Sergio  de.  Argentine  composer  of 
romantic  piano  pieces.  Born  in  Buenos 
Aires,  September  15,  1922.  See  p.  87. 
Castro,  Washington.  Brother  of  Jose 
Maria  and  Juan  Jose  Castro.  Argen¬ 
tine  composer  of  neo-classical  pieces.  Born 
in  Buenos  Aires,  July  13,  1909.  See  p.  87, 
castruera.  A  Colombian  flute, 
cataca.  Brazilian  wooden  blocks,  one 
striated  and  one  plain,  that  are  rubbed 
together  to  produce  a  rasping  sound 
similar  to  that  of  the  reco-reco. 
cater ete.  A  Brazilian  rustic  air,  in  %  or 
%  time,  with  steady  rhythm  and  moderate 
tempo. 

catimbau.  catimbd. 
catimbo.  An  Indo-Brazilian  air,  in  rapid 
%  time^  often  of  fetishistic  connotations, 
popular  in  the  Brazilian  Northwest, 
catira.  A  regional  variant  of  the  caterete. 
catuquinaru  drum.  The  earth  drum  of 
the  Catuquinaru  Indians  of  Rio  Juruaj 


DICTIONARY 


SOI 


a  pit  in  the  ground,  in  which  a  hollow 
trunk  of  a  palm  tree  is  placed  on  end,  is 
filled  in  with  rubber,  hide,  powdered 
mica,  bone  fragments,  etc.,  on  which  the 
performers  stamp  to  produce  a  rumbling 
hollow  sound. 

Caturla,  Alejandro  Garcia.  Cuban  com¬ 
poser  of  ultra-modern  music  in  Afro- 
Cuban  vein.  Born  in  Remedies,  March 
7,  1906}  assassinated  there,  November 
12,  1940.  See  pp.  184-185. 

cavaquinho.  A  small  Brazilian  guitar, 
usually  with  four  strings,  popular  in 
Carnival  music. 

caxambu.  A  Brazilian  drum  5  in  orches¬ 
tral  works  of  Villa-Lobos,  caxambu  is 
described  as  a  bottle  filled  with  gravel 
and  shaken  to  produce  a  rattling  noise. 

cencerro.  A  piece  of  metal  used  in  Cuban 
popular  orchestras  as  a  bell. 

Ceron,  Jose  Dolores.  A  Negro  Domini¬ 
can  composer  of  band  music.  Born  in 
Santo  Domingo,  June  29,  1897.  See  p. 
192. 

cbacarera.  A  popular  Argentine  air  in 
alternating  %  and  %  time  and  lively 
tempo. 

cha-cha.  See  Tcha-tcha. 

chamame.  A  popular  dance  of  Argentina 
in  %  time  and  moderate  tempo,  with  a 
peculiar  rhythm  of  a  triplet  on  the  first 
beat,  followed  by  two  groups  of  eighth 
notes. 

chamarra.  An  Argentine  air  similar  to  the 
milonga. 

chamarrita.  See  chamarra. 

chanrara.  An  Andean  rattle  of  the  species 
zacapi, 

Chapi,  Enrique  Casal.  Spanish  con¬ 
ductor  and  composer,  resident  in  the 
Dominican  Republic  since  1940.  Born  in 
Madrid,  February  15,  1909.  See  193. 

charango.  An  armadillo-shell  guitar  hav¬ 
ing  from  two  to  five  strings  5  used 
throughout  Latin  America. 

charca.  A  Bolivian  wmoden  flute  of  the 
same  type  as  the  pinquillo. 

Ghavez,  Carlos.  Foremost  composer  of 
Mexico  and  conductor  of  the  Orquesta 
Sinfonka  de  Mexico.  Born  in  Mexico 
City,  June  13,  See  pp.  230-235. 


Chavez  Aguilar,  Pablo.  Peruvian  com¬ 
poser  of  religious  music.  Born  in  Lima, 
March  3,  1 899.  See  pp.  272-273. 
chayna.  A  large  quena. 
chequere.  A  Brazilian  rattle  usually  made 
of  two  metal  octohedrons  connected  by  a 
tube  and  encased  in  two  rotating,  metal 
hoops. 

cherque.  A  primitive  flute  used  by  Bolivian 
and  Peruvian  aborigines, 
chiapaneca  (from  the  province  of  Chiapas 
in  Southern  Mexico),  a  regional  variant 
,  of  the  Mexican  huapango. 
chiba.  An  Afro-Brazilian  dance, 
chicahuaztli.  A  metal  rattle  of  the  ancient 
Mexicans. 

chil-chil.  In  Nicaragua,  a  small  bell  5  in 
Ecuador  and  Peru,  a  shaker  similar  to  the 
maracas. 

chilena.  An  abbreviation  for  cueca 
chilena. 

chiliiihtli.  An  Aztec  flute  of  baked  clay, 
chinchin.  The  Guatemalan  name  for  the 
maracas. 

chirimia.  A  clarinet-like  wind  instrument 
used  by  the  Indians  of  Central  America, 
Colombia,  and  Venezuela, 
chiriqui.  A  Panamanian  air  of  the  puntO 
type,  in  %  time  and  usually  in  a  major 
key. 

chirisuya.  A  Peruvian  wind  instrument 
similar  to  the  chirimia. 
chispa.  A  Colombian  rustic  air  in  alternat¬ 
ing  rhythms  of  three  and  four  beats  to 
a  bar,  and  usually  in  a  minor  mode, 
chiuka.  A  primitive  flute  of  the  Incas 
still  in  use  among  the  Peruvian  and 
Bolivian  Indians. 

chocalho.  A  Brazilian  shaker,  consisting 
of  a  metal  sphere,  a  double  cone  filled 
with  pellets  of  metal,  or  a  gourd  with 
dried  seeds  inside. 

choquela.  A  primitive  flute  used  among 
the  Peruvian  and  Bolivian  Indians  j  <2/ jo 
an  air  played  on  the  flute, 
choro  (or  choros).  A  Brazilian  air 
characterized  by  free  improvisation,  a 
flowing  melody  and  incisive  rhythm; 
Villa-Lobos  uses  the  word  choros  to  de¬ 
note  any  musical  form  in  a  Brazilian  folk 
manner. 


302 


DICTIONARY 


chotis.  A  South  American  variant  of  the 
European  Schottische,  assuming  the 
rhythm  of  a  slightly  syncopated  Polka, 
chucalho.  See  chocalho. 
chuchas-  See  chucho. 
chucho.  The  name  in  the  Colombian 
province  of  Cundinamarca  for  the 
maracas. 

chula.  A  Brazilian  dance  song  of  Portu¬ 
guese  origin,  in  %  time  and  a  major  key. 
chulado.  See  chula. 
chuli.  A  small  twin  flute  of  Bolivia, 
chulo-phusaiia.  A  small  trumpet  made  of 
snails^  shells  j  used  by  the  Indians  of 
Bolivia  and  Peru. 

churu.  A  jingle  rattle  similar  to  the 
zacapa. 

cielito  (little  heaven).  An  old  Argentine 
air  in  lively  waltz  time, 
cielo.  See  cielito. 

cifra.  A  song  of  the  Argentine  Gauchos, 
in  %  or  %  time. 

ciranda.  A  Brazilian  children’s  round 
dance,  in  %  time  and  rapid  tempo, 
cirandinha.  A  short  ciranda. 
ciriri.  A  dance  of  the  Brazilian  jungle, 
clarin.  A  long  reed  fife  of  Central  and 
South  America. 

claves.  Cuban  cylindrical  blocks  made  of 
hard  woodj  when  they  are  struck  to¬ 
gether,  the  cupped  palm  of  the  hand  pro¬ 
vides  resonance. 

Cluzeau  Mortet,  Luis.  Uruguayan  com¬ 
poser  of  romantic  pieces  in  the  native 
style.  Born  in  Montevideo,  November 
i8,  1893.  See  p.  285. 

cobo.  A  conch  shell  in  use  among  the 
natives  of  the  island  of  Santo  Domingo, 
coco.  A  Panamanian  punto  in  a  minor 
key. 

coco.  A  Brazilian  dance  in  %  time,  with 
even  rapid  notes. 

coco  de  embolada.  See  embolada. 
coicheia.  A  Brazilian  six-line  air  in  % 
time  and  lively  tempo, 
colo.  See  kohlo. 

COmparsa.  Afro-Cuban  ritual  dance  play, 
conchas  de  tortuga.  Tortoise  shells  used 
by  the  ancient  Mexicans  as  drums, 
condicion.  A  dance  of  northern  Argentina 
with  two  sections,  the  first  in  slow  % 


time  and  the  second  in  lively  %  time. 

conga.  A  large  Cuban  drum ;  also  an  Afro- 
Cuban  dance  named  after  the  drum,  and 
characterized  by  the  extreme  violence  of 
accents  on  the  strong  beats  in  %  meter, 
with  a  rhythmic  anticipation  of  the 
second  beat  in  every  other  bar  of  a  basic 
two-measure  phrase. 

COngada.  An  Afro-Brazilian  dance  derived 
from  the  ritual  play  of  the  Negro  "slaves, 
characterized  by  highly  syncopated 
rhythm. 

Congo.  A  number  of  Haitian  dances,  the 
various  forms  of  which  are  known,  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  locality,  as  Congo  mazonne^ 
Congo  loanguCj  etc. 

congoera.  A  notched  scraper  often  made 
of  human  shinbones  5  used  by  the  Guarany 
Indians  of  Paraguay. 

contracanto.  In  Brazilian  popular  usage, 
a  second  voice  sung  in  counterpoint  to 
the  principal  melody. 

contrapunto.  A  term  used  in  Argentina 
and  other  South  American  countries  to 
designate  a  musical  dialogue  improvised 
by  two  singers  to  the  accompaniment  of  a 
guitar. 

Contreras,  Salvador.  Mexican  composer 
of  the  modern  school.  Born  in  Cueramaro, 
November  10,  1912.  See  pp.  235-236. 

conyvi.  A  small  quena. 

COplas  (couplets).  An  improvised  song  to 
a  given  tune,  popular  throughout  Latin 
America. 

cordao.  A  Brazilian  pantomime,  danced  at 
carnivals. 

Cordero,  Roque.  Panamanian  Negro 
composer.  Born  in  Panama  City,  August 
16,  1917.  See  p.  261. 

corrido.  A  folk  ballad  on  topical  subjects, 
cultivated  in  Mexico  and  other  Latin 
American  countries. 

corta-jaca.  A  Brazilian  dance-song  in  % 
time,  of  the  samba  type,  usually  with 
the  rhythmic  background  of  rapid  even 
notes. 

Cosme,  Luiz.  Brazilian  composer  of  the 
modern  school.  Born  in  Porto  Alegre, 
March  9,  1908.  See  p.  126. 

Costa,  Pedro  Valenti.  Argentin  e  com¬ 
poser  of  choral  music.  Born  in  Buenos 


DICTIONARY 


303 


AireSj  November  13,  1905.  See  p.  87. 
CotapOS,  Acario.  Chilean  composer  of 
music  in  an  advanced  modern  style.  Born 
in  Valdivia,  April  30,  1889.  See  p.  159. 
coyoli.  See  cMl-chil. 
criolla.  A  generic  term  denoting  musical 
forms  in  a  creole  or  white  native  style, 
as  in  barcarola  criolla. 

CUando.  An  Argentine  parlor  dance  re¬ 
sembling  a  minuet, 
cuatro.  A  four-string  guitar. 

Cuban  bolero.  See  bolero, 
cubarro.  A  species  of  the  Venezuelan  flute 
tura. 

CUCUmbl.  A  Brazilian  Negro  drum*,  also, 
an  Afro-Brazilian  song-pantomime  simi¬ 
lar  to  the  congada. 

cueca.  An  abbreviation  for  cueca  cMIena 
and  zamacueca ;  in  Argentina,  the 
cueca  is  a  lively  dance  in  %  time,  with 
occasional  syncopation, 
cueca  chilena.  The  Bolivian  and  Argen¬ 
tine  name  for  the  Chilean  zamacueca. 
cuica.  A  Brazilian  lion-roarer,  consisting 
of  a  drum  with  a  rosined  string  extending 
through  the  membrane,  producing  a 
raucous  noise  when  pulled  by  the  hand, 
cuilcull.  See  kullkiill. 
culo-en-tierra  (buttock-in-the-earth).  A 
tiny  drum  of  the  Venezuelan  Indians, 
made  of  a  cocoanut  covered  with  a  mem¬ 
brane,  and  played  with  two  sticks, 
cultrun.  See  kuitrun. 
cumaco.  A  large  jungle  drum  of  the 
Venezuelan  Negroes. 

cumbia.  A  dance  of  the  Panamanian 
Negroes. 

CUmbiamba.  A  Colombian  rustic  dance  in 
lively  %  time. 

cununu.  A  large  Colombian  jungle  drum, 
made  of  a  burned-out,  hollow  tree  trunk 
covered  with  a  monkey  hide, 
curacha.  A  Panamanian  air  resembling  the 
punto. 

currulao.  A  Colombian  country  dance, 
curugu.  A  drum  of  the  Brazilian  Indians, 
curuque.  A  primitive  Brazilian  trumpet, 
cururu.  A  Brazilian  jungle  dance  in  % 
time. 

curveta.  A  small  drum  of  the  Venezuelan 
Negroes. 


cuyana.  A  song  of  the  Argentine  province 
of  Cuyo,  similar  to  the  zamacueca. 

cujrvi.  See  con3rvi. 

D 

Da  Cunha,  Joao  Itibere.  Brazilian  music 
critic  and  composer.  Born  in  Rio  de 
Janeiro,  August  8,  1870.  See  p.  126. 

dadoo.  A  Venezuelan  shaker  of  the 
maracas  type. 

danza.  A  generic  Spanish  w^ord  for  dance, 
sometimes  specifically  a  rustic  dance,  as 
opposed  to  baile. 

danzante,  A  melancholy  song  of  Ecuador 
in  %  or  %  time. 

danzon.  An  Afro-Cuban  dance  in  synco¬ 
pated  rhythm. 

decima.  A  song-poem  in  ten  lines  of  verse. 

Delgadillo,  Luis  A.  Nicaraguan  com¬ 
poser  of  orchestral  and  theatrical  music 
on  native  themes.  Born  in  Managua, 
August  26,  1887.  See  pp.  256-258. 

Del  Orbe,  Gabriel.  Dominican  com¬ 
poser  of  popular  music.  Born  in  Moca, 
March  18,  1888.  See  p.  193. 

desafio.  A  freely  improvised  Brazilian 
musical  dialogue,  in  three  different  types, 
generally  in  %  time:  ligeira,  in  short 
phrases  and  rapid  tempo  5  ipartelo,  in 
recitative  style  j  carretilha,  in  vigorous 
rhythmic  movement  5  and  parcela,  in 
moderate  tempo. 

De  Silva,  Alfonso.  Peruvian  composer  of 
lyrically  inspired  songs.  Born  in  Callao, 
December  22,  19035  died  in  Lima,  May 
7,  1937.  See  p.  273. 

Diaz  Zelaya,  Francisco.  Honduran  band 
leader  and  composer  of  popular  music. 
Born  in  Ojojana,  October  6,  1898,  See 
p.  213. 

Dos  Santos,  Ernesto.  Brazilian  Negro 
composer  of  popular  music.  Born  in  Rio 
de  Janeiro,  April  5,  See  Tp.  126. 

Drangosch,  Ernesto.  Argentine  com¬ 
poser  of  instrumental  music  in  romantic 
vein.  Born  in  Buenos  Aires,  January  22, 
18825  died  there,  June  26,  1925.  See 
p.  87. 

Dublanc,  Emilio.  Argentine  composer  of 
instrumental  pieces  in  a  lyrical  manner. 


304 


DICTIONARY 


Born  in  La  Plata,  July  15,  1911.  See 
p.  87. 

Duncker  Lavalle,  Luis.  Peruvian  com¬ 
poser  of  semi-classical  song-s.  Born  in 
Arequipa,  July  15,  18745  died  there, 
October  29,  1922.  See  p.  271. 

dyadiko.  A  South  American  foot  drum, 
representing’  a  large  hollow  slab  placed 
with  its  convex  side  up,  on  which  the 
dancers  stamp. 


E 

Elias,  Alfonso  de.  Mexican  composer  of 
romantic  music  in  different  genres.  Born 
in  Mexico  City,  August  30,  1902.  See  p. 
236. 

Elie,  Justin.  Haitian  composer  of  salon 
music.  Born  in  Cap  Haitien,  September 
I,  18835  died  in  New  York  City,  Decem- 
ber  3,  1931.  See  p.  211. 

embolada  (rolling  ball).  A  Brazilian  air 
sung  and  danced  in  rapid  %  time,  in 
moderately  syncopated  rhythm. 

enkomo.  A  small  Cuban  drum. 

erque,  A  horn  with  a  movable  tube  5  used 
among  the  Indians  of  the  central  Andean 
plateau. 

erquencho.  See  erque. 

Escobar,  Maria  Luisa.  Venezuelan  com¬ 
poser  of  vocal  music  in  native  manner. 
Born  in  Valencia,  December  5,  1903. 
■S'^jtfpp.  292-293. 

Escobar  Casas,  Gabriel.  Colombian 
composer  of  songs  in  native  rhythms. 
Born  in  Barranquilla,  April  6,  1900.  See 
p.  170. 

escondido  (hidden).  An  Argentine  dance 
in  %  time  and  lively  tempo,  similar  to 
the  gato;  the  partners  hide  from  each 
other,  hence  the  name. 

Espinola  y  Reyes,  Juan  Bautista. 
Dominican  composer  of  popular  music. 
Born  in  La  Vega,  June  24,  18945  died 
there,  September  29,  1923.^5'^^  p.  193. 
Espinosa,  Guillermo.  Colombian  con¬ 
ductor  of  the  Orquesta  Sinfonica  Na~ 
cional  in  Bogota.  Born  in  Cartagena, 
January  9,  1905.  See  p.  170, 


Espoile,  Raul.  Argentine  composer  of 
Italianate  operas.  Born  in  Mercedes, 
January  25,  1888.  See  pp.  87-88. 

Esposito,  Arnaldo  d’.  Argentine  com¬ 
poser  of  theater  music.  Born  in  Buenos 
Aires,  August  30,  18975  died  there, 
August  22,  1945.  See  p.  88. 

esquinazo  (from  esquina^  corner).  A 
Chilean  serenade  in  %  time  and  moderate 
tempo. 

esquipado.  A  Brazilian  round  dance, 

estilo.  A  lyrical  Argentine  air,  usually  with 
two  sections,  the  first  in  slow  tempo  and 
/4  time,  the  second  in  a  lively  movement 
and  in  %  or  %  time. 

Estrada,  Carlos.  Uruguayan  composer  of 
lyrical  songs.  Born  in  Montevideo, 
September  15,  1909.  See  p.  285. 
Estrada,  Juan  A.  Garcia.  Argentine 
composer  of  songs  and  instrumental 
pieces.  Born  in  Buenos  Aires,  November 
8,  1 895.^$'^^  p.  88. 

estribiilo  (Spanish).  A  refrain. 

F 

Fabini,  Eduardo.  Uruguayan  composer 
of  orchestral  music  of  native  inspiration. 
Born  in  Solis,  May  18,  1883.  See  pp. 
285-286. 

Fabrega,  Ricardo.  Panamanian  com¬ 
poser  of  popular  songs  and  dances.  Born 
in  Santiago  de  Veraguas,  January  28, 
1905.  See  p.  261. 

fado.  A  Portuguese  song  popular  in  Brazil, 
similar  to  the  modinha. 

federal.  A  nineteenth-century  Argentinian 
variant  of  the  European  minuet. 

Fernandez,  Oscar  Lorenzo.  Brazilian 
composer  of  thematically  native-inspired 
orchestral,  theatrical,  and  instrumental 
music.  Born  in  Rio  de  Janeiro,  November 
4,  1897.  See  pp.  126-129. 

Ficher,  Jacobo.  Russian-Argentine  com¬ 
poser  of  neoromantic  music  in  a  pro¬ 
nounced  modern  idiom.  Born  in  Odessa, 
January  14,  1896,  resident  in  Buenos 
Aires  since  1923.  pp.  8S-89. 

firmeza  (firmness).  An  Argentine  air  in 
%  time  and  lively  tempo,  consisting  of  a 
four-bar  phrase  repeated  many  times. 


DICTIONARY 


Fleites,  Virginia.  Cuban  composer  of  tbe 
young  vanguard  group.  Bom  in  Melena 
del  Sur,  July  lo,  1916.  See  p.  185. 
Flores,  Jose  Asuncion.  Paraguayan 
composer  of  folkloric  ballads.  Born  in 
Asuncion,  August  27,  1904.  See  p.  264. 
Fonseca,  Julio.  Costa  Rican  composer  of 
semi-classical  music  on  native  themes. 
Born  in  San  Jose,  May  22,  1885.  See  p. 
176.  " 

Foster,  Geronimo  Baqueiro.  See  Ba- 
queiro  Foster,  Geronimo. 
fotuto.  See  bututu. 

Franga,  Agnelo.  Brazilian  composer  of 
choral  music-  Born  in  Valenga,  December 
14,  1875.  See  p.  129. 

frevo  (from  mispronounced  fervura^  fer¬ 
vor).  A  Brazilian  march-polka  char¬ 
acterized  by  insistent  unsyncopated 
rhythm  and  strident  instrumentation. 
Fuentes,  Juan  B.  Mexican  composer  of 
vocal  and  piano  music  in  traditional 
manner.  Born  in  Guadalajara,  March  16, 
1869.  See  p.  236. 

£uga.  The  concluding  section  of  a  yaravi, 
fungador.  A  drum  of  the  Brazilian  Ne¬ 
groes. 

furruco.  A  bull-roarer  of  the  Venezuelan 
natives,  made  of  a  barrel,  with  a  cord 
pulled  through  the  drumhead, 
fututo.  See  bututu. 
fututu.  See  bututu. 

G 

gadalovi.  A  Haitian  dance, 
gaita.  A  Colombian  vertical  fiute. 
gaita  costena.  A  Colombian  reed  flute 
used  by  the  Indians  of  the  coast, 
gaita  de  foies.  A  Brazilian  accordion. 
GaitO,  Constantino.  Argentine  com¬ 
poser  of  theater  music  in  Italian  tradition. 
Born  in  Buenos  Aires,  August  3,  1878. 
See  pp.  89-90. 

Galeano,  Ignacio  Villanueva.  See 
Villanueva  Galeano,  Ignacio, 
galeron.  A  Colombian  folk  ballad, 
Galimany,  Alberto.  Spanish-Panamanian 
composer  of  popular  music.  Bom  in 
Villafranca,  Spain,  December.  3 1 >  1889. 
Seep,26i» 


Galindo,  Bias.  Mexican  Indian 
of  the  modern  school.  Born  in  h'l* 

City,  February  3,  1911.  See  p.  237. 
Galiet,  Luciano.  Brazilian  musicologist 
and  composer  of  folkloric  music.  Born  in 
Rio  de  Janeiro,  June  28,  18935  died 
there,  October  29,  1931.  See  p.  129. 
galiino.  A  mejorana  in  a  minor  key. 
gallumba.  See  gayumba. 
galopa.  The  Paraguayan  version  of  a 
European  galop,  in  which  the  %  meter  in 
the  melody  is  combined  with  a  %  rhythm 
in  the  bass. 

ganza.  A  Brazilian  scraper,  similar  to  the 


reco-reco. 

Garay,  Narciso.  Panamanian  folklore 
collector  and  composer.  Born  in  Panama 
City,  June  12,  1876.  See  p.  261. 

Garcia,  Juan  Francisco.  Dominican 
composer  of  music  on  native  themes. 
Born  in  Santiago  de  los  Caballeros,  June 
16,  1892.  See  p.  193. 

Garrido,  Pablo.  Chilean  investigator  of 
native  folklore  and  composer.  Born  in 
Valparaiso,  March  26,  1905.  See  pp. 
159-160. 

gato.  An  Argentine  song-dance  in  rapid  % 
time  and  steady  rhythm. 

gato  con  relaciones.  A  special  type  of 
gato  in  which  the  male  partner  recites 
relaciones^  or  improvised  dialogues. 

gayumba.  A  musical  bow  of  Santo  Do¬ 
mingo,  made  of  a  flexible  piece  of  wood 
with  a  cord  attached  to  a  plank  covering 
*  a  hole  in  the  ground  5  iz/ro,  an  old  Indian 
dance  of  the  island. 

Gerdes,  Federico.  German-educated  Pe¬ 
ruvian  musician  and  pedagogue.  Born  in 
Tacna,  Peru,  May  19,  1873.  See  p.  273. 

Gianneo,  Luis.  Argentine  composer  of 
folkloric  pieces  in  a  modern  idiom.  Born 
in  Buenos  Aires,  January  9,  1897.  See  pp. 


90-91. 

Gil,  Jose.  Argentine  composer  and  peda¬ 
gogue.  Born  in  Spain,  May  29,  1886.  See 
,  p.  9i.'"A  '  ;  . 

Gilardi,  Gilardo-  Argentine  composer  of 
operas  and  ballets  in  native  manner.  Born 
in  San  Fernando,  May  25,  1889.  See 
p.  91. 


mV 


$o6 


DICTIONARY 


Gimenez,  Remberto.  Parag-uayan  com¬ 
poser  and  educator.  Born  in  Coronel 
Oviedo,  February  4,  1899.  See  p.  265. 

Ginastera,  Alberto.  Argentine  composer 
of  the  modern  school.  Born  in  Buenos 
Aires,  April  ii,  1916.  See  p.  92. 

Gnattali,  Radames.  Brazilian  composer 
of  native-inspired  music  in  a  neoromantic 
style.  Born  in  Porto  Alegre,  January  27, 
1906.  See  p.  129. 

Gomes,  Carlos.  Brazilian  opera  composer. 
Born  in  Campinas,  July  ii,  1836^  died 
in  Belem,  September  16,  1896.  See  pp. 

I  jo— 13  I. 

gongon.  An  Afro-Brazilian  drum. 

Gonzalez  Bravo,  Antonio.  Bolivian 
music  educator  and  composer  of  choral 
pieces.  Born  in  La  Paz,  September  2, 
1885.  See  p.  107. 

Gonzalez  Gamarra,  Francisco.  Peru¬ 
vian  painter  and  composer  of  folkloric 
piano  pieces.  Born  in  Cuzco,  June  4, 
1890.  See  p.  273. 

Gonzalez  Iniguez,  Hilario.  Cuban  com¬ 
poser  of  folkloric  piano  pieces  and  songs. 
Born  in  Havana,  January  24,  1920.  See 
p.  185. 

goyom.  The  Guatemalan  Indian  name  for 
the  marimba. 

Graetzer,  Guillermo.  Austrian- Argen¬ 
tine  composer  of  neoclassical  music. 
Born  in  Vienna,  September  5,  1914.  See 
p.  92. 

Gramatges,  Harold.  Cuban  composer  of 
the  vanguard  group.  Born  in  Santiago  de 
Cuba,  September  26,  1918.  See  p.  185. 

granbo.  A  Haitian  stamping  tube,  made  of 
a  bamboo  reed  and  stamped  rhythmically 
against  a  hole  in  the  ground,  covered 
with  wooden  planks. 

Grisolia,  Pascual.  Argentine  composer  of 
lyrical  pieces.  Born  in  Buenos  Aires, 
February  4,  1904.  See  p.  92. 

grijutians.  Mexican  jingles. 

guabina.  A  Colombian  song  in  %  meter 
and  quick  tempo. 

guachara.  A  primitive  scraper  in  the  form 
of  a  notched  gourd}  used  by  the  Indians 
of  Panama. 

guacliaraca.  A  Colombian  scraper,  similar 
to  the  giiiro. 


guache.  A  hollow  pipe  of  hard  wood, 
filled  with  seeds  which  make  a  rattling 
sound }  used  among  the  Colombian 
Indians. 

guaifio.  See  huaino. 
guajey.  A  gourd  filled  with  pebbles,  used 
by  the  natives  of  Santo  Domingo  as  a 
shaker,  identical  with  the  maracas. 
guajira.  A  Cuban  country  dance,  usually 
in  %  or  %  time,  sometimes  performed  in 
the  conga  manner. 

gualambo.  A  musical  bow  of  the  central 
lowlands  of  South  America, 
gualichada.  A  Peruvian  Christmas  carol, 
guamo.  See  cobo. 

guaracha.  A  lively  Cuban  song-dance  of 
Spanish  origin  in  %  time,  sometimes  per¬ 
formed  with  rumba  rhythms  in  duple 
meter. 

guaranda.  A  type  of  danzante  popular 
in  the  Guaranda  region  of  Ecuador, 
guarania  (from  Guarany  Indian).  A 
Paraguayan  dance,  usually  in  slow  waltz 
time,  created  by  Jose  Asuncion 
Flores. 

guarapo.  A  folk  ballad  once  popular  in 
Santo  Domingo. 

guarara.  An  Indo-Brazilian  species  of  the 
shaker  chocalho. 

Guarnieri,  Camargo.  Brazilian  composer 
of  folklore-inspired  music  in  a  distinct 
modern  idiom.  Born  in  Tiete,  February 
I,  1907.  See  pp.  I3I--I33. 
guasa.  A  satirical  Venezuelan  ballad  in  % 
or  %  time,  with  a  basic  rhythm  of  a  trip¬ 
let  followed  by  a  duplet. 

Guastavino,  Carlos.  Argentine  composer 
of  instrumental  and  vocal  music  in  a  neo¬ 
romantic  manner.  Born  in  Santa  Fe, 
April  5,  1914,  See  pp.  92-93. 
guayo.  A  ratchet  of  the  Indians  of  Santo 
Domingo. 

guaza.  A  Colombian  name  for  the 
maracas. 
guella.  See  hueya. 

giiiro.  A  notched  gourd  played  by  rubbing 
a  stick  on  the  surface  j  used  in  Cuba  and 
elsewhere. 

guitarra.  The  guitar  of  the  Spanish  type, 
usually  with  six  strings}  a  four-string 


DICTIONARY  3^7 


guitarra  is  called  cuatro;  a  three- 
string  type  is  the  tiple. 
guitarron.  A  large  guitar. 

Guzman,  Rafael  Petiton.  See  Petiton 
Guzman,  Rafael. 


H 

habanera.  A  Cuban  air  in  %  time  marked 
by  a  characteristic  swaying  rhythm  of  a 
dotted  eighth-note,  a  sixteenth-note,  and 
two  eighth-notes. 

hait-teatagu.  A  nasal  disc  flute.  See  tsin- 
hali. 

Halffter,  Rodolfo.  Spanish  composer  of 
instrumental  music  in  the  modern  idiom, 
resident  in  Mexico  since  1939*  ®orn  in 
Madrid,  October  30,  1900.  See  pp.  237- 
238. 

harawi.  The  alternate  spelling  for  ya- 
ravi;  also,  generic  term  embracing  the 
lyric  type  of  ancient  Inca  music, 
harpa.  The  Mexican  monochord  with  a 
tuning  pegj  similar  to  a  musical  bow 
except  that  the  rod  is  straight, 
hayllai-quipac.  See  aylli-quepa. 
hera-herajun.  A  transverse  flute  of  the 
Indians  of  Brazil. 

Hernandez,  Gisela.  Cuban  composer  of 
neoclassical  chamber  music.  Born  in 
Cardenas,  September  15,  1910.  See  p. 
185. 

Hernandez,  Julio  Alberto.  Dominican 
composer  of  popular  music.  Born  in 
Santiago  de  los  Caballeros,  September  27, 
1900.  See  p.  194. 

Hernandez  Moncada,  Eduardo.  Mexi¬ 
can  composer  of  symphonic  music  in  the 
academic  style.  Born  in  Jalapa,  Veracruz, 
September  24,  1899.  Seep.  238. 
hez6-hez6.  A  large  trumpet  with  a  cala¬ 
bash  bell  5  used  by  the  Amazon  Indians  of 
Brazil. 

Hoizmann,  Rudolph.  German-Peruvian 
composer  of  instrumental  music  in  the 
neoclassical  genre.  Born  in  Breslau,  No¬ 
vember  27,  19105  resident  in  Peru  since 
1937.  See  pp.  273-274. 
hool.  See  jul. 
horesomoi.  See  matabo. 


hororo-ate.  A  musical  bow  of  the 
Amazon  Indians. 

hountor.  A  ritual  dance  of  Haiti, 
hu.  A  large  Afro-Brazllian  drum, 
huacatocori  (bull  fight).  A  Bolivian 
carnival  dance  imitating  the  bull  fight, 
huada.  The  name  of  the  Araucanian 
Indians  of  Chile  for  the  maracas. 
huainito  (diminutive  from  huaiho).  A 
short  Peruvian  dance  derived  from  the 
Bolivian  hualho. 

huaiho.  A  lively  air  or  dance  in  %  time 
popular  in  the  Andean  region  of  South 
America  5  in  Ecuador  it  is  called  san- 
juanito. 

huajira.  Bull  horn  used  by  northern  Ar¬ 
gentine  Indians  at  festivals  j  also  native 
dance  performed  at  such  festivals, 
huanamigi.  A  musical  bow  of  the 
Amazon  region, 
huanara.  A  Bolivian  drum, 
huancar.  A  fiat  drum  of  Bolivia  and  Peru, 
covered  with  membrane  on  both  ends, 
huapango.  A  popular  Mexican  dance  in 
polyrhythmically  combined  %,  %,  and  % 
time,  and  lively  tempo, 
huaylla-quepa.  A  Peruvian  panpipe  made 
of  baked  clay. 

huayra-puhura.  A  panpipe  of  the  Indians 
of  equatorial  America, 
huehuetl.  A  Mexican  vertical  drum  made 
of  a  segment  of  hollo%ved-out  tree,  about 
50  centimeters  in  diameter  and  90  centi¬ 
meters  in  height,  and  covered  with  a  hide 
of  a  tiger  or  other  animal  5  played  with 
sticks  or  fingers, 
huella.  See  hueya. 

hueya.  An  Argentine  air  in  %  time  and 
lively  tempo. 

Huizar,  Candelario.  Mexican  composer 
of  folklore-inspired  symphonic  works  in 
an  advanced  harmonic  idiom.  Born  in 
Jerez,  February  2,  1888.  5^^?  pp.  239- 
240. 

hulero.  The  musical  bow  of  the  Mos¬ 
quito  Indians  of  Central  America,  iden¬ 
tical  with  the  carimba. 

Hunac,  Iwan.  The  nom  de  flume 
(formed  by  anagram)  of  Da  Cunha, 
Joao  Itibere. 

hunpri.  A  medium-sized  Brazilian  drum. 


3o8 


DICTIONARY 


Ibere  de  Lemos,  Arthur.  Brazilian 
composer  of  lyrical  songs  in  native  vein. 
Born  in  Belem,  June  9,  1901.  p.  133* 

ibigumbiri.  A  South  American  musical 
bow. 

ieumai.  A  Venezuelan  name  for  the 
maracas. 

Iglesias  Villoud,  Hector.  Argentine 
composer  of  ballet  music.  Born  in  San 
Nicolas,  January  31,  i9i3*‘^^^P*93* 

Ignacio,  Rafael.  Dominican  composer  of 
folkloric  dances  and  songs.  Born  in  San 
Francisco  de  Macon's,  June  15,  See 

p.  194. 

ika.  A  primitive  trumpet  consisting  of  a 
long  wooden  tube  and  emitting  a  low 
funereal  sound  j  used  by  the  Bororo 
Indians  of  Brazil. 

ilu.  A  large  wooden  drum  of  the  Brazilian 
Negroes. 

inubia.  A  war  trumpet  of  the  Guarany 
Indians  of  Paraguay, 

Ippisch,  Franz.  Austrian-Guatemalan 
composer  of  orchestral  and  chamber 
music  in  the  academic  style,  resident  in 
Guatemala  since  1938.  Born  in  Vienna, 
July  18,  1883.  See  pp.  205-206. 

ireru.  A  war  trumpet  of  the  Amazon 
Indians,  made  of  bamboo  and  furnished 
with  a  vibrating  reed. 

Isamitt,  Carlos.  Chilean  composer  of  neo¬ 
romantic  music  based  on  native  Indian 
themes.  Born  in  Rengo,  March  13,  1885. 
See  p.  160. 

Itibere,  Brasilio.  Brazilian  composer  of 
instrumental  and  vocal  music  of  folkloric 
derivation.  Born  in  Parana,  May  17, 
1896.  See  p.  133. 

Itibere  da  Cunha,  Joao.  See  Da.  Cunha, 
Joao  Itibere. 

iuke.  A  Brazilian  Indian  ^‘rhythm  baton*^ 
with  a  chocalho  tied  to  it. 


jacaranda.  A  Brazilian  country  dance, 
jaleo.  A  Spanish  air  in  %  time,  used  in 


Latin  American  dances  as  an  introduc¬ 
tion. 

janubia.  See  inubia. 
jarabe.  A  characteristic  Mexican  dance  in 
combined  %  and  %  time,  sometimes 
played  in  the  rhythm  of  a  mazurka, 
jarana.  A  typical  dance  of  Yucatan, 
Mexico,  in  combined  %  and  %  time, 
jaranita.  A  Mexican  five-string  guitar, 
used  to  accompany  the  jarana.  - 
jararaca.  See  yararaca. 

Jeanty,  Occide.  Haitian  composer  of 
military  marches.  Born  in  Port-au-Prince, 
March  16,  i86oj  died  there,  January  28, 
1936.  See  p.  21 1.  ^ 

jicara  de  agua.  A  water  drum  used  in 
Mexican  street  bands,  consisting  of  an  in¬ 
verted  half-gourd  placed  in  a  basin  of 
water  and  struck  with  a  stick. 

Jimenez  Mabarak,  Carlos.  Mexican 
composer  of  ballet  music  in  the  native 
style.  Born  in  Mexico  City,  January  31, 
1916.  See  p,  240. 

Jimenez,  Miguel  Bernal.  See  Bernal 
Jimenez,  Miguel. 

jiruquias.  A  Mexican  percussion  instru¬ 
ment. 

jongo.  An  Afro-Brazilian  air  in  %  time 
accompanied  by  drums. 

Jorge,  Santos,  Spanish-born  composer  of 
the  Panamanian  National  Anthem.  Born 
in  Peralta,  Spain,  November  i,  1870J 
died  in  Panama  City,  December  22,  1941. 
See  pp.  261-262. 

joropo.  The  typical  dance  of  Venezuela,  in 
%  or  %  time  with  steady  rhythm, 
juba.  A  smair pear-shaped  Haitian  drums 
alsOj  a  social  dance  of  Haitian  Negroes, 
named  after  the  drum, 
juco.  A  Central  American  lion-roarer,  con¬ 
sisting  of  a  barrel  covered  with  a  mem¬ 
brane  through  which  a  rosined  string  is 
passed  5  pulling  and  rubbing  the  string 
produces  sound. 

jul.  A  musical  bow  of  Central  America, 
jula-jula.  A  Bolivian  panpipe. 

Juliao,  Joao  Batista.  Brazilian  composer 
of  choral  music.  Born  in  Silveiras, 
September  19, 1886.  133. 

juque.T^^^  juco. 
jurupari.  See  yurupari. 


DICTIONARY 


309 


K 

ka.  A  Brazilian  drum  made  of  an  animal 
hide  stretched  over  a  high  wooden  barrel  j 
aho^  a  Haitian  dance, 
kachampa.  A  Peruvian  war  dance,  in 
vigorously  accented  %  time, 
kahuis.  A  long  stamping  staff  of  the  Chaco 
India'ns. 

kala.  The  flute  of  the  Cuna  Indians  of 
Panama. 

kallu  (child,  from  Aymara  Indian).  A 
small  flute  of  the  pusi-ppia  type,  and 
sounding  an  octave  higher  than  the 
taica  of  the  same  family, 
kaluyo.  A  Bolivian  shoe-tapping  dance, 
similar  to  the  Chilean  zamacueca.^ 
kambaua  (condor  bone).  A  musical 
bow  of  the  Andean  region, 
kammu.  ^ee  kamu. 

kamu.  A  native  flute  of  the  San  Bias 
district  in  Panama. 

kandiroe,  A  musical  bow  of  the  Amazon 
Indians. 

kanutitsunanikora.  A  musical  bow; 
in  use  among  the  aborigines  of  the 
Amazon  basin, 
karutana.  Zee  taquara. 
kashwa.  Zee  cachua. 
kaspichaqui.  A  primitive  flute  used  by  the 
Indians  of  the  central  plateau  of  South 
America. 

kaswa.  Zee  cachua. 
katiwu.  A  local  Brazilian  species  of  the 
tore. 

kayab.  The  Mayan  name  for  ayotl* 
ken.  A  species  of  tore, 
kena.  quena. 
keppa.  quepa. 
khayna.  Zee  chayna. 
khoana.  K  flute  of  the  pinquillo  type  used 
by  the  Indians  of  the  central  Andean 
plateau. 

kjaswa.  Zee  cachua. 
kkepa.  5'^^?  quepa. 

Koellreutter,  Hans-Joachim.  German 
composer  of  atonal  music>  resident  in 
Brazil  since  1937.  Born  in  Freiburg, 
September  2,  1915-  P*  *33* 
kohlo.  The  musical  bow  of  the  Pata- 


gonian  Indians,  made  of  a  horse^s  rib 
bone,  bent  by  a  horsehair  string,  and 
played  upon  with  a  piece  of  bone, 
kolo.  Zee  kohlo. 

korki-kala.  The  flute  of  the  Cuna  Indians 
of  Panama,  made  of  a  pelican  wing. 
Kostakowsky,  Jacobo.  Russian-Mexican 
composer  of  instrumental  music  in  an 
advanced  neoromantic  stifle.  Born  in 
Odessa,  February  5,  18935  resident  in 
Mexico  since  1925.  Zee  pp.  240-241. 
kullktili.  An  animal  horn  used  by  the 
Araucanian  Indians  of  Chile, 
kultrun.  A  low  flat  drum  used  by  the 
Araucanian  Indians  of  Chile, 
kulurina.  A  primitive  trumpet  of  the 
Amazon  Indians. 

klinkiilkawe.  An  Araucanian  twin  bow, 
consisting  of  two  interlocking  bowrs  with 
strings  rubbed  one  against  the  other,  pro¬ 
ducing  a  rasping  sound. 

L 

Lamothe,  Ludovic.  Haitian  Negro  com¬ 
poser  of  lyric  songs  in  the  native  manner. 
Born  in  Port-au-Prince,  May  12,  1882. 
Zee  pp.  2 1 1-2 1 2. 

Lamuraglia,  Nicolas.  Argentine  com¬ 
poser  of  instrumental  music  in  a  com¬ 
petently  academic  manner.  Born  in 
Buenos  Aires,  February  19,  1896.  Zee 
P-  93- 

Lanao,  Ulises.  Peruvian  composer  01 
miscellaneous  pieces  on  native  themes. 
Born  in  Callao,  October  30,  1913. 
p.  274. 

Lange,  Francisco  Curt.  Foremost  Latin 
American  musicologist.  Born  in  Eilen- 
burg,  Germany,  December  12,  19035 
resident  of  Uruguay  since  1923.  Zee  p. 
286. 

laquitas.  Zee  sicuris. 

Lavin,  Carlos.  Chilean  specialist  in 
musical  folklore  and  composer.  Born  in 
Santiago,  August  10,  18S3.  p.  160. 
le.  A  small  Afro-Brazilian  drum  of  the 
tabaque  tyqie. 

Lecuna,  Juan.  Venezuelan  composer  of 
native-inspired  pieces  in  a  modem  idiom. 


310 


DICTIONARY 


Born  in  Valencia,  Venezuela,  November 
20,  1 898.  See  p,  293. 

Lccuona,  Ernesto.  Cuban  composer  of 
popular  songs  and  dances.  Born  in 
Guanabacoa,  Cuba,  August  7,  1896.  See 
pp.  185-186. 

lenda  {legend,  in  Portuguese).  A  Brazilian 
art  form  corresponding  to  the  European 
ballade. 

Deng,  Alfonso.  Chilean  composer  of 
romantically  colored  symphonic  music 
and  songs.  Born  in  Santiago,  February  1 1, 
1884.  See  pp.  160-161. 

Letelier  Liona,  Alfonso.  Chilean  com¬ 
poser  of  vocal  and  instrumental  music. 
Born  in  Santiago,  October  4,  1912.  See 
p.  161. 

Ley,  Salvador  (real  name,  Levy). 
Guatemalan  composer  of  piano  music  in 
a  neoromantic  manner.  Born  in  Guate¬ 
mala  City,  January  2,  1907.  See  p.  206. 
lieu.  A  medium-sized  twin  flute  of  Bolivia, 
ligueira.  A  type  of  desafio,  characterized 
by  a  succession  of  short  rhythmic  phrases 
in  rapid  tempo. 

Lima,  Emirto  de.  Colombian  investi¬ 
gator  of  musical  folklore.  Born  in  Bar- 
ranquilla,  January  25,  1892.  See  p.  170. 
Lima,  Souza.  Brazilian  pianist  and  com¬ 
poser  of  piano  pieces.  Born  in  Sao  Paulo, 
March  21,  1898.  See  p.  133-134. 
limba.  A  Haitian  dance, 
llamada  (call).  A  generic  term  for  a  com¬ 
position  of  a  proclamatory  nature. 
Ilamador  (caller).  The  solo  drum,  or  the 
principal  drum  in  the  ensemble, 
ilanto  (crying).  An  Argentine  air  in  % 
time;  the  name  derives  from  a  figure  in 
the  dance  where  the  partners  press  a 
handkerchief  to  the  eyes, 
llaqui-aru.  The  Indian  name  for  a  Bo¬ 
livian  yaravi. 

loku.  A  primitive  Brazilian  flute  similar 
to  the  adjulona. 

lolkin.  An  Araucanian  cane  pipe,  on  which 
sound  is  produced  by  violent  inhalation 
of  air. 

loncomeo.  A  melancholy  song  of  the 
Araucanian  Indians  of  Patagonia, 

Lopez  Buchardo,  Carlos.  See  Bu- 
chardo,  Carlos  Lopez. 


Lopez  Mindreau,  Ernesto.  Peruvian 
composer  of  piano  pieces  in  the  native 
vein.  Born  in  Chiclayo,  June  17,  1890. 
See  p.  274. 

los  aires  (airs).  An  old  Argentine  dance 
in  rapid  %  time, 
louvor.  A  slow  Brazilian  air. 

Lovelace,  Manuel  de  Jesus.  Dominican 
composer  of  popular  music.  Born  in  Santo 
Domingo,  June  8,  1871.  6’^,?  p.  r94. 
lucumi.  An  Afro-Cuban  mass  dance, 
lundu.  An  Afro-Brazilian  air  in  time, 
greatly  varied  in  style,  from  a  melancholy 
slow  type  to  a  vigorous  rhythmic  move¬ 
ment,  with  occasional  syncopation. 
Luzzattl,  Arturo.  Italian-Argentine  com¬ 
poser  of  orchestral  music  in  a  romantic 
manner.  Born  in  Turin,  Italy,  May  24, 
1875.  P*  93* 

M 

macbete.  A  Brazilian  small  guitar,  similar 
to  the  cavaquinho. 

Miackenna,  Carmela.  Chilean  composer 
of  polyphonic  chamber  music.  Born  in 
Santiago,  July  3 1,  1879.  PP.  161-162, 
macumba.  An  Afro-Brazilian  ritual,  or 
the  music  played  at  such  a  ritual, 
magiiey.  Ancient  slit  drum  made  of  a 
hollow  tree  trunk,  once  in  use  among  the 
Indians  in  Santo  Domingo, 
mahalta.  A  Bolivian  twin  flute, 
mala  (medium-sized).  A  Peruvian  flute, 
one-third  smaller  than  the  average 
quena. 

malambo.  An  old  Argentine  dance  in  a 
lively  %  time. 

mama  drum.  A. large  Haitian  ritual  drum, 
mana-chica.  A  Brazilian  song  of  Portu- 
guese^  origin,  similar  to  the  modinha. 
mananita.  Mexican  salon  piece,  in  the  style 
of  a  serenade. 

manebai-puito.  A  native  flute  of  equa¬ 
torial  South  America, 
mandola.  A  species  of  the  mandolin, 
mandolin.  An  oval-shaped  string  instru¬ 
ment  of  the  guitar  family,  played  with  a 
plectrum,  and  usually  having  four  strings. 

mandura.  A  species  of  pandura. 
manguar^.  A  large  Colombian  drum, 


DICTIONARY 


II 


similar  to  tlie  Mexican  teponaxtle, 
made  of  a  Kollowed-out  tree  trunk  with  a 
hole  in  the  center. 

mangulina.  A  once-popular  air  of  Santo 
Domingo,  usually  of  an  amorous  nature, 
manuba.  A  Haitian  dance,  reputedly 
danced  only  by  homosexual  men. 
mapacbera.  A  regional  Mexican  drum, 
mapale.  A  Colombian  rustic  dance-song, 
maraca.  The  Brazilian  name  for  ma- 
racas. 

maracas.  A  pair  of  gourds  or  calabash 
shells  filled  with  dry  seeds  and  rhythmi¬ 
cally  shaken  wuth  both  hands  j  in  use 
all  over  Latin  America  and  the  islands 
since  pre-Columbian  times, 
maracatu.  An  Afro-Brazilian  air  in  % 
time,  played  by  an  ensemble  of  trumpets 
and  percussion. 

marcha.  The  Latin  American  counterpart 
of  the  military  march,  characterized  by 
a  faster  tempo  and  occasional  syncopa¬ 
tion. 

Marchena,  Enrique  de.  Dominican  com¬ 
poser  of  atmospheric  pieces  in  the  native 
manner.  Born  in  Santo  Domingo,  Octo¬ 
ber  13,  1908.  See  p.  194. 
marchinha  (little  march).  Brazilian  short 
march  played  at  carnival  time, 
mare.  A  primitive  Caribbean  trumpet, 
mariachi.  A  Mexican  band  consisting  of 
guitars,  violins,  and  trumpets  j  also^  the 
music  played  by  such  a  band, 
marianda.  A  Puerto  Rican  song  of  Spanish 
origin,  usually  in  %  time, 
maricuba.  A  nickname  for  the  guitar 
among  the  natives  of  the  island  of  Santo 
Domingo. 

marimacbo.  A  twin  fiute  of  the  Andean 
region,  similar  to  the  aykbori  and 
sicuris. 

marimba.  A  popular  keyboard  instrument 
played  with  mallets  5  similar  to  a 
xylophone. 

marinera.  A  lively  Peruvian  dance  in  % 
time,  identical  with  the  Chilean  cueca, 
and  renamed  marinera  in  honor  of  the 
Peruvian  Navy. 

mariquita  (diminutive  of  Maria).  An  ob¬ 
solete  Argentine  air  in  %  time  and  lively 
tempo. 


Mariscal,  Juan  Leon.  Mexican  composer 
of  symphonic  music  with  native  subject 
matter.  Born  in  Oaxaca,  August  29, 

1 899.  See  p.  241. 

marote.  An  Argentine  air  in  vigorous  ?4 
and  %  time. 

martelo.  A  Brazilian  air  in  ?4  time  and 
moderate  tempo,  often  performed  as  part 
of  the  desafio. 

Martin,  Edgardo.  Cuban  composer  of  the 
vanguard  group.  Born  in  Cienfuegos, 
October  6,  1915.  See  p.  186. 
maruga.  The  name  sometimes  used  in  Cuba 
for  maracas. 

marujada  (marine  adventure).  Brazilian 
festive  play  with  dancing  and  singing. 
Marx,  Burie.  See  Burle  Marx,  Walter. 
Massa,  Juan  Bautista.  Argentine  com¬ 
poser  of  operas  in  the  Italian  tradition. 
Born  in  Buenos  Aires,  October  29,  1885  *, 
died  in  Rosario,  March  7,  1938.  See  pp. 
93-94. 

Mata,  Julio.  Costa  Rican  composer  of 
theater  music  of  folkloric  derivation. 
Born  in  Cartago,  December  9,  1899,  See 
pp.  176-177. 

matabo.  The  primitive  bamboo  trumpet  of 
the  Amazon  Indians, 
matapu.  A  native  Paraguayan  drum, 
matraca.  A  Brazilian  wooden  rattle, 
matti-pbusana.  A  war  trumpet  used  by 
the  Aymara  Indians  in  the  central 
Andean  plateau. 

matungo.  A  set  of  iron  bars  used  for  bells 
by  the  Brazilian  Negroes, 
maxixe.  A  Brazilian  dance  of  urban  char¬ 
acter,  in  ^4  time  and  rapid  tempo  with 
slight  syncopation, 
maycbil.  See  cbil-cbil. 
mayoyo.  A  Haitian  dance, 
mazonne.  See  congo. 
mbaraca  (“^divine  calabash”)*  A  Guarany 
Indian  name  for  maracas. 
megapaquefia.  A  lively  dance  of  the 
Bolivian  province  of  Megapaca. 
media  cana.  An  obsolete  Argentine  dance 
of  urban  origin,  containing  elements  of 
the  gato,  pericon,  and  zamacueca, 
and  written  in  %  time  with  a  syncopated 
figure  in  every  other  bar, 
media  tuna.  An  old  country  dance  of  the 


312 


DICTIONARY 


Dominican  Republic,  essentially  Spanish 
in  derivation,  and  usually  in  %  time 5 
also  a  laborers’  song. 

megalo.  A  Brazilian  bull  -roarer  or 
thunder-stick. 

Mejia,  Adolfo.  Colombian  composer  of 
instrumental  pieces  in  a  native  genre. 
Born  in  Cartagena  de  Indias,  February 
5,  1909.  See  p.  170. 

Mejia,  Estanislao.  Mexican  composer  of 
symphonic  music  based  on  indigenous 
themes.  Born  in  Hueyotlipa,  November 
13,  1882.  See  p.  241. 

Mejia- Arredondo,  Enrique.  Dominican 
symphonic  composer.  Born  in  Santo  Do¬ 
mingo,  December  24,  1901.  See  pp.  194- 
195- 

mejorana.  A  traditional  air  of  Panama, 
written  in  a  major  key,  with  the  melody 
in  %  time  and  the  accompanying  figure 
in  %  time. 

mejorana-poncho.  A  slow  mejorana. 

mejoranera.  A  five-stringed  guitar  of 
Panama,  so  named  because  it  is  used  to 
accompany  the  mejorana,  Panama’s 
native  dance. 

Melo  Gorigoytia,  Hector.  Chilean  com¬ 
poser  of  atmospheric  piano  pieces.  Born 
in  Santiago,  October  30,  1899.  See  p. 
162, 

memby.  A  family  of  fiutes  used  by  Para¬ 
guayan  and  Brazilian  Indians,  sub¬ 
divided  according  to  size  and  pitch  into 
several  types:  memby-afard,  memby- 
chuij  memby-guazu^  and  me^nby- 
tarard, 

memby-apara.  See  memby. 

memby- chue.  See  memby. 

memby "guazu.  See  memby. 

memby-tarara.  See  memby. 

Mena,  Luis  E.  Dominican  composer  of 
music  in  various  genres.  Born  in  Santo 
Domingo,  November  12,  1895.  See  p. 
195- 

Menchaca,  Angel.  Argentine  musical 
theorist,  inventor  of  a  sloping  piano  key¬ 
board.  Born  in  Asuncion,  Paraguay, 
March  I,  1855;  died  in  Buenos  Aires, 
May  8,  1924.  See  p.  94. 

Mendoza,  Alberto.  Guatemalan  music 
educator  and  composer.  Born  in  Guate¬ 


mala  City,  March  30,  1889.  See  p.  206. 
Mendoza,  Vicente  T.  Mexican  folklore 
investigator  and  composer.  Born  in 
Cholula,  January  27,  1894.  See  pp.  241- 
242. 

mento.  A  native  dance  of  Jamaica,  similar 
to  the  rumba. 

merengue.  The  characteristic  national 
dance  of  the  Dominican  Republic,  in  \ 
time  with  a  syncopation  of  the  first  beat, 
meringue.  The  Haitian  name  'for  the 
merengue. 

mesano.  A  special  form  of  the  Panamanian 
air  socavon,  in  which  the  melody  ends 
on  the  dominant. 

Meza,  Miguel  C.  Mexican  composer  of 
symphonic  poems  in  the  national  style. 
Born  in  San  Luis  Potosi,  September  29, 
1903.  See  p.  242. 

Michaca,  Pedro.  Mexican  composer  and 
musical  theorist.  Born  in  Canatlan, 
November  26,  1897.  See  p.  242. 
Mignone,  Francisco.  Brazilian  composer 
of  numerous  works  of  native  inspiration, 
in  a  modernistic  neoromantic  idiom. 
Born  in  Sao  Paulo,  September  3,  1897. 
See  pp.  1 34-136. 

Miguez,  Leopoldo.  Brazilian  composer 
of  operas.  Born  in  Rio  de  Janeiro, 
September  7,  18505  died  there,  July  6, 
1902.  pp.  136-137. 
milonga.  An  Argentine  dance  in  %  time, 
once  popular  in  Buenos  Aires  but  now 
coalesced  with  the  tango  in  the  form  of 
a  milonga-tango. 

Mindreau,  Ernesto  Lopez.  See  Lopez 
Mindreau,  Ernesto, 
mine.  A  low  fiat  drum  of  the  Venezuelan 
Negroes,  played  with  two  sticks, 
mini.  The  generic  name  for  wind  instru¬ 
ments  of  the  yurupari  ritual  of  the 
Amazon  Indians. 

Miramontes,  Arnulfo.  Mexican  com¬ 
poser  of  theatrical  music  with  native 
subject  matter,  in  a  Germanic  contra¬ 
puntal  idiom.  Born  in  Tala,  July  i8, 
1882.  6"^^  pp.  242-243, 
mitote.  A  generic  name  for  a  native  air  or 
dance  of  Central  America, 
miudinho.  A  lively  Brazilian  dance  in  % 
time,  resembling  the  polka. 


DICTIONARY  3^3 


moda.  A  Brazilian  lyrical  air  of  Portuguese 
derivationj  usually  in  a  minor  key  and 
moderately  slow  %  time, 
modinha  (diminutive  of  moda).  A 
Brazilian  urban  song  of  sentimental 
character,  mostly  in  a  minor  key. 
Moleiro,  Moises.  Venezuelan  composer  of 
piano  pieces  and  songs  with  native  flavor. 
Born  in  Zaraza,  March  28,  1905.  See 
p.  2^3. 

Molina  Pinillo.  Jose.  Guatemalan  com¬ 
poser  of  chromomusical  pieces  on  native 
themes.  Born  in  Guatemala  City,  August 
28,  1889.  See  p.  206. 

Moncada,  Eduardo  Hernandez.  See 
Hernandez  Moncada,  Eduardo. 
Moncayo,  Pablo.  Mexican  composer  of 
the  vanguard  school.  Born  in  Guadala¬ 
jara,  June  29,  1912.  See  p.  243. 
Mondino,  Luis  Pedro.  Uruguayan  com¬ 
poser  of  lyric  pieces.  Born  in  Montevideo, 
November  19,  1903.  See  p.  286. 
Monestel,  Alejandro.  Costa  Rican  com¬ 
poser  of  religious  music  and  band  pieces 
on  native  subjects.  Born  in  San  Jose, 
April  26,  1865.  See  p.  177. 
monos  (monkeys).  A  Colombian  dance  in 
which  the  partners  hold  hands, 
montuno.  In  Cuban  music,  a  short  instru¬ 
mental  refrain  after  the  vocal  part. 
Morales,  Melesio.  Mexican  operatic  com¬ 
poser.  Born  in  Mexico  City,  December  4, 
18385  died  in  San  Pedro  de  los  Pinos, 
May  12,  1908.  5^^pp.  243-244- 
morao.  A  Brazilian  air  in  slow  waltz 
time. 

Moreno,  Juan  Carlos.  Paraguayan  com¬ 
poser  of  lyrical  piano  pieces.  Born  in 
Asuncion,  February  19,  1912.  See  265* 
Moreno,  Segundo  Luis.  Ecuadorian 
composer  of  folkloric  music.  Born  in 
Cotacachi,  August  3,  1882.  p.  199. 
Morillo,  Roberto  Garda.  Argentine 
composer  of  instrumental  music  in  an  ad¬ 
vanced  modern  idiom.  Born  in  Buenos 
Aires,  January  22,  1911.  See  pp.  94-9  5* 
Mosca,  Radames.  Brazilian  composer  of 
piano  pieces  and  songs.  Born  in  Sao 
Paulo,  March  8,  1908.  p.  i37* 
moundongue,  A  ritual  dance  of  the 
Haitian  Negroes. 


mozamala  (bad  girl).  A  variant  of  the 
Peruvian  marinera. 
mulungli.  An  Afro-Brazilian  drum. 

Munoz,  Alejandro,  Salvadoran  band 
leader  and  arranger.  Born  in  San  Salva¬ 
dor,  February  3,  1902.  See  p.  28 1. 
mure-rnure.  A  native  drum  of  the  Gua- 
rany  Indians  of  Paraguay. 

Murillo,  Emilio.  Colombian  composer  of 
folkloric  dances.  Born  in  Bogota,  April 
9,  18805  died  there,  August  8,  1942. 
See  p.  170. 

musical  bow.  The  generic  name  for  an 
indigenous  monochord  consisting  of  a 
pliable  rod  strung  by  a  wire  and  played 
upon  with  a  bone  stick  (South  America)  5 
or  with  the  string  divided  into  two  un¬ 
equal  parts  by  a  cord  attached  to  the 
rod,  with  a  gourd  for  a  resonator 
(Central  America). 

N 

nafiiga.  Afro-Cuban  carnival  dance. 
Napoleao,  Arthur.  Portuguese-Brazilian 
pianist  and  music  publisher.  Born  in 
Oporto,  Portugal,  March  6,  1843  )  died 
in  Rio  de  Janeiro,  May  12,  1925.  See  p. 
137. 

Napolitano,  Emilio.  Argentine  composer 
of  songs  in  a  native  vein.  Born  in  Buenos 
Aires,  November  12,  1907.  See  p.  95. 
nasal  flutes.  Disc-shaped  wind  instruments 
with  perforations,  played  by  blowing  air 
through  the  nostrils  5  in  use  among  the 
Indians  in  Brazil  and  Paraguay, 
nasisi.  The  Panamanian  maracas. 
natapu.  A  primitive  trumpet  of  the 
Brazilian  Indians. 

nau  catariiieta  (ship  Catarineta),  Bra¬ 
zilian  folk  pageant  of  the  marujada  type 
depicting  incidents  of  the  time  of  dis¬ 
covery. 

Nazareth,  Ernesto.  Brazilian  composer 
of  popular  music.  Bom  in  Branco,  March 
20,  18635  died  there,  February  i,  1937* 
See  p.  137. 

Negrete  Woolcock,  Samuel.  Chilean 
composer  of  symphonic  pieces  with 
Chilean  rhythms.  Born  in  Santiago,  De¬ 
cember  18,  1893.  See  p,  162. 


314 


DICTIONARY 


Nepomuceno,  Alberto.  Brazilian  com¬ 
poser,  pioneer  of  modern  musical  nation¬ 
alism.  Born  in  Fortaleza,  July  6,  18645 
died  in  Rio  de  Janeiro,  October  i6,  1920. 
See  p.  137. 

Netto,  Barrozo.  Prolific  Brazilian  com¬ 
poser  of  lyrical  pieces  in  native  manner. 
Born  in  Rio  de  Janeiro,  January  30, 
18815  died  there,  September  i,  1941.  See 
p.  138. 

Nieto,  Cesar.  Spanish-born  composer  of 
chromomusical  pieces.  Born  in  Barcelona, 
October  31,  1892.  See  p.  177. 

Ninci,  Enrique  Fava.  Italian-Peruvian 
flutist  and  composer.  Born  in  Spezia, 
Italy,  October  4,  1883.  See  p.  274. 

Nin  y  Castellanos,  Joaquin.  Cuban 
composer  of  colorful  Hispanic  pieces  in 
Gallic  manner.  Born  in  Havana,  Septem¬ 
ber  29,  1879.  See  p.  186. 

Nin-Culmell,  Joaquin,  Son  of  Nin  y 
Castellanos ;  composer  of  chamber 
music  in  the  modern  idiom.  Born  in 
Berlin,  Germany,  September  5,  1908. 
See  p.  186. 

NitO,  Jose  de.  Argentine  composer  of 
choral  music.  Born  in  Rosario,  November 
12,  18875  there,  August  26,  1945. 

95. 

noari.  The  primitive  trumpet  of  the  Bo- 
roro  Indians  of  Brazil,  consisting  of  a 
reed  tube  slit  longitudinally  and  stuck 
into  a  gourd  with  four  holes  in  its  side. 

nora.  A  Panamanian  vertical  flute. 

nose-flutes.  See  nasal  flutes. 

Nunez  Navarrete,  Pedro.  Chilean  com¬ 
poser  of  symphonic  pieces.  Born  in  Con- 
stitucion,  August  3,  1906.  See  p.  162. 

Nuno,  Jaime.  Author  of  the  National 
Anthem  of  Mexico.  Born  in  San  Juan  de 
las  Abadesas,  Spain,  September  8,  18245 
died  in  Auburndale,  New  York,  July  18, 
19085  body  transferred  to  Mexico  in 
October  1942.  See  p.  244. 

O 

ocarina.  A  conch  shell  or  a  clay  jar  with 
holes,  capable  of  producing  several 
sounds. 


Octaviano,  Joao.  Brazilian  composer  of 
instrumental  and  vocal  music  of  native 
inspiration.  Born  in  Porto  Alegre,  April 
22,  1896.  See  pp.  138-139. 

Ogan.  A  metal  block  used  in  Haiti  as  a 
bell. 

Omichicahuaztli  (bone  noise) .  An  ancient 
Mexican  scraper,  made  of  a  serrated 
human  bone,  usually  the  femur,  and 
rubbed  with  a  conch  shell  to  produce  a 
rasping  sound. 

omitzicahuastli.  See  omichicahuaztli. 

ondu.  The  Argentine  form  of  the  Brazilian 
lundu. 

Orbon,  Julian.  Spanish-Cuban  composer 
of  neoclassical  chamber  music.  Born  in 
Aviles,  Spain,  August  7,  19255  resident 
in  Havana  since  childhood.  See  p.  186. 

Oswald,  Henrique.  Brazilian  composer 
of  theatrical  music  in  a  romantic  tradi¬ 
tion.  Born  in  Rio  de  Janeiro  in  18525 
died  there,  June  10,  1931.  See  p.  139. 

ouay.  See  chocalho. 

oufua.  See  ufua. 

Ovalle,  Jaime.  Brazilian  composer  of 
piano  pieces  and  songs  in  Afro-Brazil ian 
rhythms.  Born  in  Belem,  August  5,  1894. 
See  p.  139. 

Oyualli.  A  Mexican  jingle  rattle  made  of 
snail  shells. 

P 

Pacheco  de  Cespedes,  Luis.  Peruvian 
composer  of  theater  music  on  Inca  sub¬ 
jects.  Born  in  Lima,  November  25,  1893. 
See  pp.  274-275. 

Padua,  Newton.  Brazilian  composer  of 
orchestral  music  on  native  themes.  Born 
in  Rio  de  Janeiro,  November  3,  1894. 
See  p.  140. 

pagelanga.  A  Brazilian  folk  pageant  of 
mixed  Christian  and  fetishist  derivation. 

Pahissa,  Jaime.  Spanish-Argentine  com¬ 
poser  of  ultra-modernist  and  innovating 
music.  Born  in  Barcelona,  October  7, 
18805  resident  in  Argentina  since  1935. 
See  -pp,  95-96. 

pala-pala.  A  Bolivian  carnival  dance. 

palito.  An  old  Argentine  air  in  %  or  % 
time,  related  to  the  gato. 


DICTIONARY 


31S 


Palma,  Athos.  Argentine  composer^  of 
theater  music  in  the  Italian  tradition. 
Born  in  Buenos  Aires,  June  7,  1891. 
p.  96. 

palmas.  The  clapping  of  hands  to  accentu¬ 
ate  the  rhythm, 
pamo.  See  pamy. 

pamy.  A  primitive  cornet  of  the  Brazilian 
Indians,  made  of  two  segments  of 
grooved-out  wood,  hooped  together  so  as 
to  form  a  tube. 

pandeiro  (Portuguese).  A  tambourine, 
pandero  (Spanish) .  A  tambourine, 
pandura.  A  species  of  bandurria. 
panhuehuetl.  A  medium-sized  hiiehuetl. 
Paniagua,  Raul.  Guatemalan  composer  of 
symphonic  music  in  a  competent  modern 
idiom.  Born  in  Guatemala  City,  February 
17,  1898.  See  pp.  206-207. 

Paniagua  Martinez,  Julian.  Guate¬ 
malan  composer  of  popular  marches  and 
songs;  uncle  of  Raul  Paniagua.  Born 
in  Guatemala  City,  September  5,  1856. 
See  p.  207. 

Panizza,  Hector.  Argentine  composer  of 

operatic  music  in  an  Italianate  manner. 
Born  in  Buenos  Aires,  August  12,  1875. 
See  p.  96. 

panna.  A  multiple  trumpet  of  the  Bororo 
Indians  of  Brazil,  consisting  of  three  or 
four  gourds  impaled  on  a  hollow  tube, 
papa  drum.  The  medium-sized  Haitian 
drum,  smaller  than  the  mama  drum, 
papelon.  A  Panamanian  song-dance  of  the 
punto  type. 

parabien.  A  Chilean  salon  dance,  in  vogue 
during  the  nineteenth  century, 
parcela.  A  form  of  Brazilian  desafio, 
sung  in  rhythmic  recitative, 
pasacalle.  A  Bolivian  serenade  in  %  or 
%  time;  also  in  Peru,  a  carnival  march, 
paseo  (promenade).  The  more  stately  sec¬ 
tion  of  the  dance,  contrasted  with  the 
zapateo. 

pasillo.  A  Latin  American  dance  of  Spanish 
derivation  in  combined  %  and  %  time, 
popular  in  Colombia  (where  it  is  also 
called  mis  del  fais) ,  Venezuela,  Ecuador, 
and  Costa  Rica. 

pasillo-mazurka.  A  pasillo  performed  in 


the  rhythm  of  a  mazurka,  with  a  slight 
accent  on  the  second  beat, 
pasodoble.  A  Latin  American  one-step  or 
march. 

pastorel.  A  ritual  dance  of  the  Haitian 
Negroes. 

pastoris  (the  shepherds).  A  Brazilian 
Christmas  pageant. 

payada.  An  improvised  song  or  a  duet  sung 
by  the  Argentine  fayadores,  itinerant 
singers. 

Paz,  Juan  Carlos.  Argentine  composer  of 
atonal  music.  Born  in  Buenos  Aires, 
August  5,  1897.  See  pp.  96-97. 

Pedrell,  Carlos.  Uruguayan  composer  of 
vocal  music  in  a  modem  Gallic  idiom. 
Born  in  Minas,  Uruguay,  October  16, 
1878;  died  in  Paris,  September  i,  194** 
See  p.  287. 

Pena  Morell,  Esteban.  Dominican  Ne¬ 
gro  musician  and  folklorist.  Born  in 
Santo  Domingo  in  18945  dkd  in  Barce¬ 
lona,  Spain,  March  6,  1939-  P*  ^9^- 
pendejo.  A  Venezuelan  drum  of  the  culo- 
en-tierra  type. 

Peralta,  Ramon  Emilio.  Dominican 
musician  of  popular  music.  Bom  in 
Santiago  de  los  Caballeros,  February  1, 
1868;  died  there,  September  7,  194^* 
See  p.  195. 

Perceval,  Julio.  Belgian-Argentine  com¬ 
poser  of  chamber  music  in  neoclassical 
vein.  Born  in  Brussels,  July  ijr  ^9^3  y 
resident  in  Argentina  since  1^2$-  See  pp. 

97-9S. 

Pereira,  Arthur.  Brazilian  composer  ot 
piano  pieces.  Born  in  Sao  Paulo,  Septem¬ 
ber  12,  1904.  See  p.  140. 
pererenga.  An  Afro-Brazilian  drum, 
pericon.  A  lively  Uruguayan  and  Argen¬ 
tine  dance  in  %  time  and  steady  rhythm. 
Petiton  Guzman,  Rafael.  Dominican 
composer  of  light  music  in  the  native 
tradition.  Bom  in  Salcedo,  December  18, 
1894-  See  p.  195. 

petro,  A  ritual  dance  of  Haiti,  named 
after  the  legendary  character  Don  Pedro; 
a  Haitian  drum. 

pezinho.  A  Brazilian  country  dance, 
pfucullu.  A  Peruvian  whistling  jar. 


ON  ARY 


316  DICTI 

pfutxi-liuancar.  A  species  o£  the  Peruvian 
drum  huancar. 

phala.  A  wooden  transverse  flute  used  by 
the  Indians  of  the  central  plateau  of  South 
America. 

phuna.  A  long  twin  wooden  flute  made  of 
two  reeds  tied  together  at  one  endj  used 
by  the  Andean  Indians, 
phusafia-matti.  See  matti-phusana. 
phutuca.  A  drum  used  by  the  Aymara 
Indians  in  the  central  Andean  plateau. 
Piaggio,  Celestino.  Argentine  composer 
of  academically  competent  music.  Born 
in  Concordia,  December  20,  i886j  died 
in  Buenos  Aires,  October  28,  1931.  See 
p.  98. 

piano  de  cuia.  See  chequere. 
pifano.  A  Peruvian  flute, 
pifulka.  An  Araucanian  Indian  primitive 
flute. 

pimpim,  A  wooden  kettledrum  of  the 
Chaco  Indians  consisting  of  a  mortar 
half-filled  with  water  and  covered  with  a 
goat  skin. 

pincollo.  See  pinquillo. 
pincullu.  See  pinquillo. 
pindin.  A  Panamanian  song-dance  of  the 
punto  type. 

pingullo.  See  pinquillo, 
pinkiilwe.  An  Araucanian  flute  of  the 
pinquillo  type, 
pinpm.  See  pimpim. 
pinquillo.  The  vertical  flute  of  the  central 
plateau  of  South  America,  similar  to,  and 
sometimes  identical  with,  the  quena, 
pinquillo  mohoceno.  A  long  flute  of  the 
pinquillo  family. 

Pinto,  Alfredo.  Italian-Argentine  com¬ 
poser  of  romantically  colored  character 
pieces.  Born  in  Mantua,  Italy,  October 
22,  1891  j  resident  in  Argentina  since 
1915.  See  p.  98. 
pinyque.  A  Haitian  dance, 
pio.  A  Brazilian  friction  instrument  consist¬ 
ing  of  a  wooden  stick  producing  a 
whistling  noise  when  rubbed  with  a  piece 
of  folded  cloth. 

pito.  The  generic  name  for  a  vertical  flute 
used  by  the  Central  American  Indians, 
piuta.  See  cuica. 

pivillca.  An  Araucanian  wind  instrument. 


Plaza,  Juan  Bautista.  Venezuelan  com¬ 
poser  of  musical  pieces  based  on  native 
rhythms.  Born  in  Caracas,  July  19,  1898. 
See  pp.  293-294. 

plena.  A  Puerto  Rican  folk  ballad,  similar 
to  the  calypso  songs  of  Trinidad, 
poari.  See  noari. 

polca  brasileira.  A  Brazilian  polka,  dif¬ 
fering  from  the  European  by  accents  on 
the  weak  beats. 

polka  paraguaya.  A  Paraguayan  version 
of  the  European  polka,  characterized  by  a 
%  melody  against  an  accompanying 
figure  of  triplets. 

Pomar,  Jose.  Mexican  composer  of 
modernistic  theater  scores.  Born  in 
Mexico  City,  June  18,  1880.  See  p.  244. 
Ponce,  Manuel.  Mexican  composer,  pio¬ 
neer  of  Mexican  musical  nationalism. 
Born  in  Fresnillo,  December  8,  1886.  See 
pp.  244-247. 

ponteio.  A  lively  Brazilian  air  in  an 
emphatic,  rhythmic  style, 
porfias.  An  improvised  instrumental  or 
vocal  dialogue  of  Venezuela,  similar  to 
the  Brazilian  desafio  and  the  Argentine 
contrapunto. 

porro.  Colombian  dance-song  usually  per¬ 
formed  in  foxtrot  time,  with  lyrics  on 
topical  matters. 

Posada- Amador,  Carlos.  Colombian 
composer  of  orchestral  and  choral  music. 
Born  in  Medellin,  April  25,  1908.  See 
pp.  170-171. 
potuto.  See  pututii. 
ppakochi.  A  small  vertical  flute,  usually 
with  only  three  apertures  j  used  in  Peru 
and  Bolivia. 

Prado,  Prospero  Bisquertt.  See  Bis- 
quertt  Prado,  Prospero. 
pregon.  The  street  vendor’s  cry. 
puicullu.  See  pinquillo. 
puita.  See  cuica. 

puja.  The  common  abbreviation  for 
pujador. 

pujador.  A  medium-sized  drum  of  Panama, 
pululu.  A  primitive  flfe  used  by  the  Indians 
of  the  central  plateau  in  South  America, 
pungacuqud.  A  primitive  Mexican 
trumpet  made  of  wood  or  baked  clay, 
punto.  In  Cuba,  Santo  Domingo,  and 


DICTIO 

Puerto  Rico,  a  song  of  Spanish  flavor  in 
either  %,  %,  or  %  time  and  free  as  to 
rhythm  j  alsOj  a  popular  air  of  Panama 
and  other  Caribbean  countries,  written  in 
a  major  key  and  %  time  and  danced  in  a 
rapid  tempo. 

punto  cibaeno.  A  provincial  Dominican 
dance  in  ^  time,  resembling  the  Pana¬ 
manian  punto. 

puraj’hei.  The  Guarany  word  for  song, 
descriptive  of  the  Paraguayan  type  of 
romantic  ballad. 

pusi-ppia.  A  primitive  flute  capable  of 
producing  four  different  notes  j  used  by 
the  Indians  of  the  South  American  alti- 
plano. 

putuca.  A  large  drum  used  by  the  Indians 
of  the  South  American  altiplano. 
pututo.  See  pututu. 

pututli.  The  primitive  trumpet  of  the 
Bolivian  Indians  j  also  synonymous  with 
bututu,  a  drum  of  South  American 
aborigines. 

puya.  Colombian  popular  dance,  in  the 
genre  of  pasillo. 

Q 

qquena.  See  quena. 

Quaratino,  Pascual.  Argentine  composer 
of  songs  and  piano  pieces  in  the  native 
genre.  Born  in  Buenos  Aires,  June  13, 
i904.T<?^  pp.  98’99* 

quena.  The  generic  name  for  a  vertical 
flute  made  of  bamboo,  baked  clay,  or 
even  gold,  usually  capable  of  producing 
the  five  notes  of  the  pentatonic  scale  5 
of  the  type  used  by  the  Incas, 
quenacho.  A  species  of  quena. 
quenali.  A  species  of  quena. 
quena-quena.  A  native  dance  of  the 
Andean  Indians  accompanied  by  the 
quena  flutes. 

quepa.  The  Peruvian  ocarina  made  of 
baked  clays  sometimes  used  synonymously 
for  quena. 

Quesada,  Jose.  Costa  Rican  composer  of 
popular  songs.  Born  in  San  Rafael,  Octo¬ 
ber  6,  1S94.  p.  X77' 
quijada  del  burro.  The  jawbone  of  an 


NARY  3^7 

ass,  varnished  and  ornamented  wdth  bells  j 
used  as  a  shaker  in  Cuban  orchestras, 
quijongo.  A  musical  bow  of  the  Central 
American  Indians,  made  of  a  long,  thick 
hollow  reed  bent  by  a  wire  attached  to 
the  ends,  and  drawn  inward  by  a  string 
connected  with  a  gourd  on  the  back  of 
the  bow. 

quilombo.  A  popular  Brazilian  ballad, 
quimbete.  An  Afro-Brazilian  dance  of  the 
batuque  type, 
quinan.  See  salongo. 
quinquecabue.  See  koMo. 
quiquiztli.  A  Mexican  conch  shell, 
quissange.  An  Afro-Brazilian  drum, 
quita.  Magic  dances  of  Haiti,  of  which  the 
best  known  are:  quita-chechiy  danced  to 
stop  the  rains  i  and  quita-moyi^  danced 
to  stop  the  dry  spell. 

R 

rabeca.  A  primitive  Brazilian  violin, 
rabel.  A  primitive  violin,  usually  with 
three  strings. 

Raco,  Antonio  de.  Argentine  composer 
of  neoclassical  music.  Born  in  Buenos 
Aires,  August  21,  1915-  P*  99* 
rada.  A  ritual  dance  of  Haiti, 
ramada.  A  rustic  Chilean  air. 
ranchera.  An  Argentine  country  dance  of 
the  ranches,  in  %  time  accompanied  by  a 
uniform  eighth-note  rhythm  in  %. 
rancho  dos  reis  (place  of  kinp).  A 
Brazilian  folk  pageant  with  music,  per¬ 
formed  at  Christmas  time, 
rara.  A  Haitian  dance, 
raspador  (from  Spanish).  The  generic 
name  for  a  scraper,  applied  to  the  giliro 

and  similar  instruments. 

Ravelo,  Jose  de  Jesiis.  Dominican  com¬ 
poser  of  religious  music.  Born  in  Santo 
Domingo,  March  21,  1876.  S^^  p.  i95- 
realejo.  A  Brazilian  carnival  accordion, 
reco-reco.  A  Brazilian  scraper,  consisting 
of  a  notched  hollow  tube  that  is  scraped 
with  a  stick. 

recortado.  A  lively  Brazilian  air  similar 
to  the  caterete. 


3i8 


DICTIONARY 


refaiosa.  An  Argentine  dance  of  Peruvian 
origin,  in  %  or  %  time  and  a  lively 
tempo. 

reisados  (from  reis,  kings).  Brazilian 
Christmas  pageant  depicting  the  Adora¬ 
tion  of  the  Magi. 

relacion.  In  Gaucho  songs,  a  refrain  added 
to  the  principal  verse  and  addressed  to 
the  female  partner,  as  in  gato  COn 
relaciones. 

remedio  (remedy).  An  Argentine  song- 
dance,  similar  to  the  pericoti,  in  steady 
%  meter  and  usually  in  a  minor  key,  with 
humorous  verses  ofiering  cure  from  love 
and  drink. 

repicador.  A  drum  which  carries  the 
principal  rhythm  in  a  street  band. 

Republicano,  Assis.  Negro  Brazilian 
composer  of  operas  with  native  subjects. 
Born  in  Porto  Alegre,  November  15, 
1897.  See  p.  140. 

requinto.  A  small  clarinet  J  in  Bolivia  a 
small  panpipe  5  and  in  the  province  of 
Cuyo,  Argentina,  a  small  twelve-stringed 
guitar. 

resbalosa.  See  refaiosa. 

Revueltas,  Silvestre.  Mexican  composer 
of  instrumental  music  in  a  distinctive 
modern  idiom  with  native  rhythms.  Born 
in  Santiago  Papasquiaro,  Durango, 
December  31,  18995  died  in  Mexico  City, 
October  5,  1940.  See  pp.  247-251. 

rhythm  batons.  Long  bamboo  sticks  used 
by  Amazon  Indians  to  stamp  the  rhythm 
in  time  with  the  dance. 

Rivera,  Camilo.  Honduran  composer  of 
band  music.  Born  in  Jesus  de  Otoro,  July 

21,  1878.  See  p.  213. 

Rivera,  Luis.  Dominican  composer  of 
band  music.  Born  in  Monte  Cristi,  June 

22,  1902,  See  p.  195. 

Robles,  Daniel  Alomia.  Peruvian  folk- 
.  lore  collector.  Born  in  Huanuco,  January 
3,  1871 5  died  at  Chosica,  near  Lima,  July 
17,  1942.  See  p,  275. 

roda  (wheel).  A  Brazilian  round,  es¬ 
pecially  a  children’s  song  in  square  time 
and  plain  unsyncopated  rhythm. 

Rodriguez,  Esther.  Cuban  composer  of 
neoclassical  music.  Born  in  Manzanillo, 
November  29,  1920.  See  p.  i86. 
Rodriguez  So cas,  Ramon.  Uruguayan 


composer  of  Italianate  operas.  Born  in 
Montevideo,  August  31,  1890.  See  p. 
287. 

Rogatis,  Pascual  de.  Italian-Argentine 
composer  of  operatic  and  symphonic 
music.  Born  in  Teora,  Italy,  May  17, 
18815  went  to  Argentina  as  a  child.  See 
P;  99- 

Roig,  Gonzalo.  Cuban  conductor  and 
composer  of  vocal  music.  Born  in  Ha¬ 
vana,  July  20,  1890.  See  p.  186. 

Roldan,  Amadeo.  Cuban  mulatto  com¬ 
poser  of  orchestral  and  vocal  music  in¬ 
spired  by  Afro-Cuban  folklore.  Born  ir 
Paris,  July  12,  19005  died  in  Havana 
March  2,  1939.  See  p.  187. 

Rolon,  Jose.  Mexican  composer  of  orches¬ 
tral  music  in  a  considerably  advancec 
modern  style.  Born  in  Ciudad  Guzman 
Jalisco,  June  22,  1883.  See  pp.  251- 
252. 

romance.  The  generic  designation  of  th( 
old-fashioned  Spanish  ballad,  the  proto¬ 
type  of  the  Latin  American  corrido. 

roncador.  An  Afro-Brazilian  drum. 

Roncal,  Simeon.  Bolivian  composer  o: 
dances  and  songs  in  the  native  manner 
Born  in  Sucre,  April  21,  1872.  See  pp 
107-108. 

rondador.  A  panpipe  of  Ecuadoriai 
Indians,  made  of  baked  clay  or  of  reed 
tied  together  5  called  antara  in  Peru 
capador  in  Colombia,  sicu  in  Bo 
livia. 

Rozo  Contreras,  Jose.  Colombian  ban< 
conductor  and  composer.  Born  ii 
Bochalema,  January  7,  1894.  See  p.  171 

Rueda,  Fernando.  Dominican  compose 
of  band  music.  Born  in  Santo  Domingo 
May  22,  1859  5  died  there,  May  25,  1939 
■See  pp.  195-196. 

Ruiz,  Ramon.  Nicaraguan-Hondurai 
amateur  musician.  Born  in  Somota 
Nicaragua,  February  28,  18945  settled  i: 
Honduras  as  a  boy.  See  p.  2 1 3. 

rum,  A  large  Afro-Brazilian  drum  of  th 
tabaque  family. 

rumba.  A  greatly  popular  Cuban  dance  o 
African  antecedents,  in  %  time,  diversi 
lied  with  poiyrhythmic  counterpoint. 

rumpi.  A  medium-sized  Afro-Brazilia: 
drum  of  the  tabaque  family. 


DICTIONARY 


319 


S 

sacabuche.  A  sackbut,  primitive  form  of 
the  slide  trombone. 

saccapa.  See  zacapa. 

Saint-Malo,  Alfredo  de.  Panamanian 
violinist.  Born  in  Panama  City,  December 
13,  1898.  See  p.  262. 

sajuriana.  See  zajuriana. 

Salazar,  Adolfo.  Spanish  musicologist 
resident  in  Mexico  since  1939.  Born  in 
Madrid,  March  6,  1890.  See  p.  252. 

Salgado,  Luis  H.  Ecuadorian  composer 
of  symphonic  music  with  native  themes. 
Born  in  Cayambe,  December  10,  1903. 
See  pp.  199-200. 

salia.  The  Incan  flute,  of  the  quena 
family. 

salliva.  A  large  salla. 

salongo.  A  ritual  dance  of  the  Haitian 
Negroes. 

samba.  A  popular  Brazilian  dance  char¬ 
acterized  by  a  rolling  rhythm  in  %  time 
with  rapid  notes  j  loosely,  any  Brazilian 
dance  in  fast  tempo. 

samba-batucada.  A  Brazilian  dance 
which  combines  the  characteristics  of  a 
samba  with  the  explosive  rhythms  of  a 
batuque. 

samba-cangao.  A  song  in  the  samba 
manner,  with  long  sustained  notes  in  the 
melody  against  the  rapid  rhythm  of  the 
accompaniment. 

Sammartino,  Luis  R.  Argentine  com¬ 
poser  of  instrumental  music  in  conven¬ 
tional  forms.  Born  in  Buenos  Aires,  April 
8,  1 890.  See  p.  99. 

Sanchez  de  Fuentes,  Eduardo.  Cuban 
composer  of  operas  and  songs  in  charac¬ 
teristically  native  rhythms.  Born  in  Ha¬ 
vana,  April  3,  18745  died  there,  Septem¬ 
ber  7,  1944.  See  pp.  187-188. 

Sanchez  Malaga,  Garlos.  Peruvian  com¬ 
poser  of  piano  pieces  and  songs.  Born  in 
Arequipa,  September  8,  1904.  See  ^.  275. 

Sandi,  Luis.  Mexican  composer  of  folk- 
lorically  colored  orchestral  and  choral 
music.  Born  in  Mexico  City,  February 
22,  1905.  See  pp.  252-253. 

sandunga.  See  zandunga. 

sanfona.  A  popular  Brazilian  name  for  the 
accordion. 


sanjuanito  (named  after  St.  John).  The 
national  dance  of  Ecuador,  in  %  time  and 
a  minor  key,  similar  to  the  Bolivian 
huaiho. 

Santa  Cruz  Wilson,  Domingo.  Chilean 
composer  of  the  national  vanguard  move¬ 
ment.  Born  in  La  Cruz,  July  5,  1899. 
See  pp.  162-1 64. 

Santoro,  Claudio.  Brazilian  composer  of 
atonal  music.  Born  in  Manaos,  November 
23,  1919.  See  p.  140. 

Santorsola,  Guido.  Italian-born  Uru¬ 
guayan  composer.  Born  in  Canosa  di 
Puglia,  November  18,  1904.  See  p.  287. 

Santos,  Domingo.  Salvadoran  composer 
of  instrumental  music  in  an  academic 
manner.  Born  in  San  Esteban,  August  4, 

1 892.  See  p.  281. 

sarambo.  A  characteristic  dance  of  the 
interior  of  Santo  Domingo,  similar  to  the 
zapateado  montuno. 

Sas,  Andre.  French-Peruvian  composer  of 
orchestral  and  chamber  music  in  a  dis¬ 
tinctive  modern  style.  Born  in  Paris, 
April  6,  1900J  resident  in  Peru  since 
1924.  See  p.  276. 

saudade.  A  Portuguese  wmrd  meaning 
nostalgic  memory,  and  used  as  a  title  for 
evocative  pieces  by  Brazilian  composers. 

Schianca,  Arturo.  Argentine  musicol¬ 
ogist  and  composer.  Born  in  Carmen  de 
Areco,  December  26,  1 889.  p.  99. 

Schiuma,  Alfredo.  Argentine  composer 
of  Italianate  operas.  Born  in  Buenos 
iVires,  June  25,  1885.  -S^^pp.  99-100. 

schote.  The  Brazilian  version  of  the 
schottische,  in  %  time  and  steady  rhythm, 
without  syncopation. 

seis.  A  Puerto  Rican  ballad  in  a  Spanish 
manner. 

senka  tankana.  A  large  Bolivian  vertical 
flute. 

seresta.  A  Brazilian  serenade  sung  to  the 
accompaniment  of  a  small  instrumental 
ensemble. 

serrote.  A  Brazilian  country  dance. 

Siccardi,  Honorio.  Argentine  composer 
of  instrumental  music  in  a  complex 
modern  idiom.  Bom  in  Buenos  Aires, 
September  13,  1897. p.  100. 

sicu,  A  Bolivian  panpipe  j  called  antara 


320 


DICTIONARY 


in  Peru,  capador  in  Colombia,  ronda- 
dor  in  Ecuador. 

sicuris.  Twin  flutes  of  the  Andean  re¬ 
gion. 

sicus  gigantes.  Bolivian  panpipes  made  of 
several  reeds  of  enormous  length,  emit¬ 
ting  a  low,  lugubrious  sound, 
sihuenta.  A  large  twin  panpipe  of  Bolivia. 
Siliezar,  Felipe.  Guatemalan  compo'ser 
of  colorful  musical  pieces.  Born  in  Guate¬ 
mala  City,  May  i,  1903.  See  p.  207. 
Silva,  Jesus  Bermudez.  See  Bermudez 
Silva,  Jesus. 

Simo,  Manuel.  Dominican  composer  of 
chamber  music  in  a  competent  manner. 
Born  in  San  Francisco  de  Macoris,  June 
30,  1916.  See  p.  196. 

Siqueira,  Jose.  Brazilian  composer  of 
numerous  orchestral  works  in  a  nativistic 
manner.  Born  in  Conceigao,  June  24, 
1907.  See  pp.  140-141. 
siquimiriqui.  An  Araucanian  Chilean 
dance,  now  extant  only  on  the  island  of 
Chiloe. 

siringa  aymara  (Aymara  syrinx).  See 
sicu. 

SOCador.  An  Afro-Brazilian  drum. 
SOCavon.  The  vocal  variant  of  the  mejo- 
rana. 

Sojo,  Vicente  Emilio.  Venezuelan 
choral  conductor  and  composer  of  vocal 
music.  Born  in  Guatme,  December  8, 
1887.  See  p.  294. 

sombrerito  (little  hat).  A  dance  of 
northern  Argentina  in  %  timej  the  name 
derives  from  a  figure  in  the  dance  where 
the  partners  deposit  their  hats, 
son  (sound).  The  generic  name  of  native 
airs  of  Cuba  and  Central  America,  de¬ 
noting  variable  melo-rhythmic  patterns 
•  according  to  locality, 
son  a£rO“Cubano.  A  Cuban  son  with 
strong  syncopation  and  percussive  instru¬ 
mentation  typical  of  Negro  songs  and 
dances. 

sonajas.  The  Mexican  name  for  the 
maracas. 

son  chapin.  See  son  guatemalteco. 
sones  mariachi.  The  generic  name  for 
airs  and  dances  performed  by  the  Mexi¬ 
can  mariachi  bands. 


son  guatemalteco  (Guatemalan  son). 
The  typical  dance  of  Guatemala  in  the 
rhythm  of  a  rapid  waltz  or  mazurka. 

Soro,  Enrique.  Chilean  composer  of 
numerous  works  of  all  genres  in  an  aca¬ 
demic  harmonic  idiom.  Born  in  Concep¬ 
cion,  July  15,  1884.  pp.  164-165. 

Spena,  Lorenzo.  Italian-Argentine  com¬ 
poser  of  operas.  Born  in  Naples,  April  29, 
1874}  resident  in  Argentina  since,  1901. 
See  p.  100. 

Stea,  Vicente.  Italian-Peruvian  composer 
of  neoromantic  orchestral  music.  Born  in 
Gioia  del  Colle,  April  19,  1884;  died  in 
Lima,  July  12,  1943.  See  pp.  276-277. 

Stubbs  du  Perron,  Eduardo  Walter. 
Peruvian  composer  of  colorful  musical 
theater  pieces.  Born  in  Lima,  December 
31,  1891.  See  p.  277. 

sueste.  A  Panamanian  air  of  the  punto 
type. 

SufTern,  Carlos.  Argentine  composer  of 
neoimpressionistic  piano  pieces  and 
chamber  music.  Born  in  Lujan,  September 
25,  1905.  See  p.  100. 

sambacueca.  See  zamacueca. 

sukcha.  A  percussion  instrument  of  the 
Peruvian  Indians  consisting  of  the  skull 
of  a  llama. 

suribi.  A  wooden  trumpet  of  the  Amazon 
Indians  consisting  of  a  tube  enclosed  in 
a  cylindrical  resonance  box. 


T 

tabaque.  An  Afro-Brazilian  drum  made  of 
a  segment  of  a  hollo  wed-out  tree  covered 
with  animal  hide, 
tacapu.  See  taquara. 
taica  (Aymara  Indian  word  for  mother). 

A  long  Bolivian  flute, 
taica-hirpa.  A  species  of  taica. 
tamaraca.  A  primitive  Brazilian  drum  of 
the  tabaque  type. 

tambo  de  criolo  (drum  of  the  native). 
An  Afro-Brazilian  song  of  the  fetishist 
ritual. 

tambor.  The  abbreviation  for  tamborito. 
tambor  (from  Spanish).  A  generic  name 
for  drums  of  all  kinds  and  sizes. 


DICTIONARY 


tambora.  A  variant  of  tambor. 
tambor  de  orden.  A  parlor  form  of  the 
rural  tamborito  in  Panama, 
tamborera.  A  Panamanian  dance  of 
Mexican  orig-in,  of  the  huapango  type, 
tamborito.  A  Panamanian  dance  of 
Spanish  origin,  usually  written  in  a 
major  key  and  in  %  time, 
tambor  surdo  (Portuguese).  A  muted 
dru"m. 

tambour  meringouin.  A  Haitian  ‘^earth 
bow,^*  consisting  of  a  string  attached  to  a 
stick  buried  in  the  earth,  which  serves  as 
the  resonance  body;  used  to  play  for  the 
meringue. 

tambour-travaille.  The  “work  drum”  of 
Haiti. 

tambu.  A  drum  of  the  Brazilian  Negroes, 
tango.  The  most  popular  Argentine  parlor 
dance  characterized  by  the  swinging 
rhythm  of  a  habanera  in  %  time;  usu¬ 
ally  in  two  sections,  the  first  in  minor,  the 
second  in  major. 

tango  brasileiro.  A  Brazilian  tango,  char¬ 
acterized  by  a  greater  syncopation  and 
chromatic  ornamentation  in  the  melody 
than  in  the  Argentine  prototype, 
tango-milonga.  The  Argentine  song- 
dance  combining  the  sentiment  of  the  old- 
fashioned  rural  milonga  with  the 
rhythm  of  the  modern  urban  tango, 
tanguinho  (diminutive  of  tango).  A 
short  tango  Brasileiro. 
tanguinO.  A  Peruvian  dance  having  little 
in  common  with  the  Argentine  tango, 
and  usually  written  in  M  time, 
tanguito.  A  Venezuelan  variant  of  the 
tango. 

taquara.  A  Brazilian  Indian  “rhythm 
baton”  or  stamping  tube,  made  of  a  long 
tube  of  sugar  cane  or  of  wood,  which  is 
struck  on  the  ground, 
tarca.  cbarca. 
tarka.  See  charca. 

tartaruga.  A  Brazilian  medium-size  drum. 
Tavares,  Hekel.  Brazilian  composer  of 
numerous  songs  and  piano  pieces  in  native 
rhythms.  Born  in  Satuba  in  1 896.  See  pp, 
141-142.,' 
tayca.  See  taica. 


321 

tcba-tcha.  A  Haitian  rattle,  similar  to  the 

maracas. 

tecsiztli.  A  Mexican  conch  shell, 
tede.  A  Peruvian  flute  made  of  an  arma¬ 
dillo  skull  and  a  bird  bone, 
teiru.  A  medium-sized  transverse  fi,ute  of 
the  Amazon  Indians  of  Brazil. 

Tello,  Rafael.  Mexican  composer  of 
academically  competent  instrumental  and 
vocal  music.  Bom  in  Mexico  City, 
September  5,  1872.  See  p.  253. 
tenabari.  A  Mexican  rattle  made  of  a 
butterfly  cocoon,  worn  on  the  ankles, 
teponabuaste.  The  Salvadoran  Indian 
name  for  teponaxtle. 
teponaxtle  (teponacao,  to  grow),  A 
horizontal  Mexican  slit  drum  made  of  a 
hollowed-out  tree  trunk,  with  two  dis¬ 
tinct  sounds  produced  by  striking  a 
wooden  mallet  on  either  side  of  a  large 
aperture  in  the  middle  of  the  trunk, 
teponaztli.  See  teponaxtle. 
ternos.  Christmas  pageant  in  Brazil, 
tetl.  The  “sonorous  stone”  of  the  Mayas, 
usually  with  a  perforation  in  the  center 
for  better  resonance. 

tetzilacatl,  A  metal  gong  of  the  ancient 
Mexicans. 

thumb  piano.  The  West  Indian  name  for 
the  marimba. 

thunder-stick.  A  thin  flat  piece  of  wood, 
swung  on  a  cord  to  produce  a  whirring 
noise. 

timbal.  In  West  Indies,  a  horizontal  drum 
covered  with  animal  hide  on  one  end,  and 
open  on  the  other. 

timbirimba.  A  Colombian  musical  bow 
played  by  rubbing  the  string  so  as  to  pro¬ 
duce  a  distinct  sound, 
tintaya.  A  form  of  tambourine  used  by  the 
Indians  of  the  South  American  altiplano. 
tinya.  A  small  flat  Peruvian  drum  with  one 
membrane. 

tiple  (treble).  A  high-pitched  guitar  with¬ 
out  the  lower  strings, 
tirana.  A  song  of  the  Azores  imported  into 
Brazil,  characterized  by  a  steady  % 
rhythm. 

tlapanhuehuetl.  A  large  huehuetl. 
tlapitzali.  An  Aztec  ocarina,  or  whistling 
jar,  made  of  baked  clay. 


$22 


DICTIONARY 


toada  (Portuguese  word  for  the  Spanish 
tonada).  A  Brazilian  air  of  flexible 
form  and  rhythm,  expressing  pensive  or 
wistful  moods. 

toboinha  sonante  (sounding  box).  The 
thunder-stick  of  the  Amazon  Indians 
of  Brazil. 

tock-oro.  A  primitive  Peruvian  trumpet 
made  of  wood  or  baked  clay,  which  pro¬ 
duces  a  sound  resembling  the  bass  clari¬ 
net. 

tolero.  A  Panamanian  vertical  flute,  usu¬ 
ally  with  five  apertures, 
tolo.  A  fife  of  the  Panamanian  Indians 
with  a  double-reed  mouthpiece, 
tomangli.  A  Central  American  musical 
bow. 

tonada  (that  which  is  sounded) .  A  generic 
Spanish  word  for  a  folk  song  of  a  medita¬ 
tive  character. 

tonada  maguanera.  A  rustic  air  of  the 
province  La  Maguana  of  Santo  Domingo, 
tondero.  A  north  Peruvian  form  of  the 
marinera. 

tono.  A  Panamanian  air  of  the  punto 
type. 

tono  llanero  (song  of  the  plains).  The 
Venezuelan  song  of  the  flatlands,  char¬ 
acterized  by  a  meditative  nostalgia, 
torbellino.  A  Colombian  dance  in  %  time, 
with  heavy  accents  on  the  strong  beat, 
tore.  A  primitive  trumpet  of  the  Brazilian 
and  Paraguayan  Indians,  made  of  sugar 
cane  or  baked  clay,  and  producing  a 
raucous,  lugubrious  sound, 
tori.  See  tore. 

torito  negro.  A  Bolivian  carnival  dance, 
imitating  a  bullfight, 
torokana.  See  trocano. 

Torra,  Celia.  Argentine  composer  of  at¬ 
mospheric  pieces  in  native  manner.  Born 
in  Concepcion,  Uruguay,  September  i8, 
See  pp.  1 00-10 1. 

Torre  Bertucci,  Jose.  Argentine  com¬ 
poser  of  piano  pieces  and  songs.  Born  in 
Buenos  Aires,  July  8,  i888.  See  p.  loi. 
Tosar  Errecart,  Hector.  Uruguayan 
composer  of  precociously  expert  chamber 
music  in  a  neoclassical  idiom.  Born  in 
Montevideo,  July  i8,  1923.  See  p.  287. 


tot.  An  incrustated  conch  shell  used  by  the 
Guatemalan  Indians  as  an  ocarina. 

tototlapitzali.  An  ancient  Mexican  bird¬ 
shaped  whistle. 

tratripnii.  A  species  of  the  vertical  flute 
quena;  also  a  dance  performed  to  the 
sound  of  the  flute. 

Traversari,  Pedro.  Ecuadorian  composer 
of  chromomusical  pieces  with  native  sub¬ 
jects.  Born  in  Quito,  July  28,  1874.  See 
p.  200. 

tres.  A  Cuban  guitar  with  three  double 
strings. 

triste.  A  melancholy  love  song  of  northern 
Argentina,  similar  in  mood  to  the  yaravi 
of  Peru  and  Bolivia. 

triunfo  (triumph) .  An  Argentine  dance  in 
lively  %  time  once  popular  in  the  rural 
regions. 

trocano.  A  horizontal  drum  of  Paraguay 
and  Brazil,  consisting  of  a  burned-out 
tree  trunk  set  on  two  wooden  tripods. 

Troiani,  Gaetano.  Italian-Argentine 
composer  of  stylized  native  dances.  Born 
in  Chieti,  Italy,  October  20,  18735  died 
in  Buenos  Aires,  September  3,  1942.  See 

p.  lOI. 

trote.  The  Bolivian  version  of  “trot,”  or 
“foxtrot.” 

trumpa.  A  species  of  musical  bow. 

trutruca.  A  long  reed  pipe  used  by  the 
Araucanian  Indians  of  Chile. 

tsin-hali.  A  nasal  ocarina  of  the  Brazilian 
Indians,  made  of  two  discs  of  a  gourd  and 
sounded  by  the  pressure  of  the  air  from 
only  one  nostril,  the  other  being  closed 
with  a  finger. 

tumba.  A  once-popular  dance  of  Santo 
Domingo,  in  the  genre  of  a  tarantella, 

tun.  The  Central  American  name  for  the 
teponaxtle. 

tuna.  A  social  form  of  the  rustic  tam- 
borito  of  Panama. 

tuncul.  The  Mayan  name  for  the  tepo¬ 
naxtle. 

tura.  The  Venezuelan  native  flute,  similar 
to  the  quena. 

tur^-maraca.  A  Brazilian  stamping  tube, 
consisting  of  a  long  reed  with  a  maraca 
tied  to  it,  which  is  struck  on  the  ground  to 
keep  time. 


DICTIONARY 


323 


turiHiiba.  A  species  of  musical  bow. 
tu-ti.  A  nickname  for  castanets  among  the 
natives  of  the  island  of  Santo  Domingo, 
tuto.  A  small  panpipe  of  the  Bolivian 
Indians. 

tzicahuaztli  (strong  noise).  A  Mexican 
notched  ratchet. 

tzijolaj.  A  Guatemalan  Indian  vertical 
flute  with  four  apertures. 

U 

ualaloce,  A  transverse  flute  of  the  Amazon 
Indians  of  Brazil. 

uapi.  A  vertical  Indo-Brazilian  drum,  con¬ 
sisting  of  a  hollow  tree  trunk  covered  on 
top  with  animal  hide, 
uaranga.  The  rhythm  baton  or  a  stamping 
tube  of  the  Amazon  Indians, 
uaraperii.  An  Indio-Brazilian  transverse 
flute. 

uatapi.  See  uapi. 
ubata.  An  Afro-Brazilian  drum, 
ufua.  A  species  of  the  trumpet  tore. 
Ugarte,  Florio  M.  Argentine  composer 
of  theatrical  music.  Born  in  Buenos  Aires, 
September  15,  1884.  See  p.  101. 
umeunga.  A  musical  bow  of  central 
Brazil  with  a  string  stopped  at  one-third 
of  its  length  by  a  cord  attached  to  the 
rod,  and  played  by  beating  with  a  stick, 
upa.  A  primitive  dance  of  the  West  Indian 
aborigines. 

Uribe-Holguin,  Guillermo.  Foremost 
composer  of  Colombia,  writing  orchestral 
and  chamber  music  in  a  neoimpressionist 
idiom  with  native  rhy’thms.  Born  in 
Bogota,  March  17,  1880.  See  pp.  171- 
I7i* 

Urrutia  Blondel,  Jorge.  Chilean  com¬ 
poser  of  choral  and  theatrical  music  on 
native  subjects.  Born  in  La  Serana, 
September  17,  1905.  See  p.  166. 
uruca.  An  Indo-Brazilian  conch  shell  used 
as  an  ocarina. 

'  V.  .. 

vaccine.  The  Haitian  bamboo  trumpet. 
Valcarcel,  Teodor o.  Peruvian  Indian 


composer  of  native-inspired  original 
music.  Born  in  Puno,  October  18,  1900  j 
died  in  Lima,  March  20,  1942.  See  pp. 
277-278. 

Valderrama,  Carlos.  Peruvian  amateur 
composer  of  dances  and  songs  with  native 
flavor.  Born  in  Trujillo,  September  4, 

1 890.  See  p.  278. 

Valencia,  Antonio  Maria.  Colombian 
composer  of  chamber  music  in  an  im¬ 
pressionist  vein.  Born  in  Cali,  November 
10,  1903.  See  p.  172. 

Valle-Riestra,  Jose  Maria.  Peruvian 
composer  of  operatic  music.  Born  in 
Lima,  November  9,  18595  died  there, 
January  25,  1925.  See  p.  278. 

vals.  A  waltz. 

vals  del  pais.  See  pasillo. 

vals  tropical.  A  tropical  variety  of  the 
European  waltz,  characterized  by  a  faster 
tempo. 

Valverde,  Mariano.  Guatemalan  ama¬ 
teur  composer  of  popular  dances.  Born  in 
Quezaltenango,  November  20,  1884.  See 
p.  207. 

vapi.  See  uapi. 

Vargas,  Teofilo.  Bolivian  folklore  col¬ 
lector  and  composer  of  dances  in  popular 
vein.  Born  in  Cochabamba,  November  3, 
1868.  See  p.  108. 

Vasquez,  Jose.  Mexican  composer  of 
orchestral  and  chamber  music  in  neo- 
romantic  manner.  Born  in  Guadalajara, 
October  4,  1895. pp.  253“254* 

vatapi.  The  same  as  vapi  and  uapi. 

Vega,  Augusto.  Dominican  composer  of 
foikloric  music  for  orchestra.  Born  in 
Puerto  Plata,  October  10,  1885.  See  p. 
196. 

Velasco  Maidana,  Jose  Maria.  Bo¬ 
livian  composer  of  vocal  and  instrumental 
music  with  native  themes.  Born  in  La 
Paz,  July  4,  1899.  See  p.  108. 

Verneuil,  Raoul  de.  Peruvian  composer 
of  modernistic  piano  pieces.  Born  in 
Lima,  April  9,  1901.  p.  278. 

Vianna,  Fnictuoso.  Brazilian  composer 
of  folksong-flavored  piano  pieces.  Bom 
in  Itajuba,  September  6,  1896.  See  p.  142. 

vidala.  A  popular  Argentine  air  in  %  or 
%  time,  and  in  moderate  tempo. 


3^4 


DICTIONARY 


vidalita.  An  Arg^entine  air  in  %  or  %  time, 
differing  from  the  vidala  as  to  rhythm  j 
the  name  comes  from  the  repetition  of  the 
word  vidalita  (little  life)  in  every  other 
line  of  the  verse. 

Villalba- Munoz,  Alberto.  Spanish- 
Argentine  composer  of  theatrical  music 
on  Spanish-American  subjects.  Born  in 
Valladolid,  November  lo,  1878.  See  pp. 
101-102. 

Villa-Lobos,  Heitor.  Foremost  com¬ 
poser  of  Brazil,  writing  prolifically  in  all 
genres,  with  native-inspired  material 
elaborated  in  an  individualized  modern 
style.  Born  in  Rio  de  Janeiro,  March  5, 
1881.  pp.  142-150. 

Villanueva  Galeano,  Ignacio.  Hon¬ 
duran  amateur  musician.  Born  in  La 
Esperanza,  February  i,  1885.  213. 

violao.  A  Brazilian  guitar. 

Viscarra  Monje,  Humberto.  Bolivian 
composer  of  piano  pieces.  Born  in  Sotaya, 
March  30,  1898.  See  p.  108. 
vodoun  drums.  See  voodoo  drums, 
voodoo  drums.  The  ritual  drums  of 
Haiti. 

VU.  See  VUVU. 
vudu.  See  voodoo. 

VUVU.  An  Afro-Brazilian  drum. 

W 

wada.  See  huada. 
wainyo.  See  huaino. 
wankar.  See  huancar. 
wayno.  See  huaino. 
wewetl.  See  huehuetl. 

Williams,  Alberto.  Argentine  composer 
of  nine  symphonies  and  numerous  other 
works  in  the  spirit  of  native  folklore. 
Born  in  Buenos  Aires,  November  23, 
1862.  See  pp.  102-104. 

■  X 

xacara.  A  type  of  popular  Brazilian 
ballad. 

xango.  A  dance  of  the  macumba  ritual, 
in  honor  of  the  Afro-Brazilian  deity 
Xango. 


xaque-xaque.  See  chequere. 
xocalho.  See  chocalho. 
xoro.  See  cboro. 

XU.  See  zul. 

xucalho.  See  chocalho. 


Y 

yapurutu.  A  vertical  flute  of  the  Amazon 
Indians  of  Brazil,  with  one  aperture  near 
the  mouthpiece  and  closed  at  the  end  by 
the  natural  knot  of  a  bamboo  reed, 
yararaca.  A  Brazilian  trumpet  made  of  a 
bamboo  tube  with  jingles  affixed  at  both 
ends. 

yaravi.  A  slow  melancholy  song  of  the 
Andean  Indians,  usually  consisting  of 
short  musical  phrases  in  a  minor  mode, 
and  with  falling  cadences, 
yegiiecita  (little  mare).  A  Nicaraguan 
folk  dance  in  which  the  dancers  hold  a 
wooden  horse’s  head. 

yoeri.  A  musical  bow  of  the  central 
lowlands  of  South  America, 
yupururo.  A  species  of  the  flute  tura. 
yurupari.  A  long  wooden  trumpet  used  in 
the  Amazon  region  j  named  after  the 
tribal  god  of  the  Amazon  Indians, 
yiiullu.  The  cascabeles  of  the  Araucanian 
Indians. 


Z 

zacapa.  An  Andean  jingle  rattle  made  of 
dried  fruit  shells. 

zacatan.  The  Mayan  name  for  the  hue¬ 
huetl. 

zajuriana.  A  variant  of  the  zamacueca, 
as  danced  in  the  province  of  Chiloe  in 
Chile. 

zamacueca.  The  national  air  of  Chile, 
in  a  major  key  and  in  %  time  alternating 
with  %  in  rapid  tempo. 

zamba.  An  Argentine  dance,  derived  from 
the  zamacueca,  in  %  time  and  moderate 
tempo. 

zambactieca.  zamacueca. 

zamba  cuyana.  See  cuyana. 


DICTIONARY 


3^5 


zambe.  An  Afro-Brazilian  drum, 
zambumbia.  A  Central  American  drum, 
zampona.  The  generic  name  for  panpipes  j 
called  antara  in  Peru,  capador  in 
Colombia,  rondador  in  Ecuador,  sicu 
in  Bolivia. 

zandunga  (graceful  woman).  An  old- 
fashioned  Mexican  air  in  waltz  time, 
zapateado.  See  zapateo* 
zapateado  montuno.  A  country  dance  of 
Santo  Domingo  in  which  the  partners 
perform  a  tap  dance. 

zapateo  (shoe  dance).  A  tap  dance,  often 
used  as  a  section  of  another  dance, 
zapatero.  A  special  type  of  the  Panamanian 
SOCavon,  in  which  the  melody  ends  on 
the  tonic  and  not  on  the  dominant. 


zapotecano.  See  marimba, 
zopilote  (buzzard).  A  Nicaraguan  folk 
dance  in  which  the  dancers  dress  like 
birds. 

ZOratalo.  A  large  transverse  flute  of  the 
Amazon  Indians  of  Brazil. 

ZU.  See  zul. 

zubak  (sounding  bone,  from  Maya).  See 
zul. 

zuholoce.  See  ualaloce. 
zul.  A  primitive  Central  American  flute, 
zumbidor.  A  Brazilian  bull-roarer,  or 
thunder- stick,  consisting  of  a  cord  and 
a  small  perforated  box  which  is  swmng  in 
the  air,  producing  a  rumbling  noise, 
zuza.  The  chocalho  of  the  Amazon 
Indians  of  Brazil. 


Index 


Note;  See  also  the  Dictionary  of  Latin  i 

Musical  Instruments. 

A 

A.  See  listing  under  main  word  o£  title 
A  la  Flute  de  Pan^  13 
A  las  Nubes  (Humberto  Allende),  156 
A  una  Madre  (Juan  Jose  Castro),  85 
AhagOi  Ely  50j  5^ 

Aberle,  Juan,  19,  66,  203,  280 
Abert,  Hermann,  286 

Abertura  Concertante  (Guarnieri),  131, 
132 

AboioSy  1 15 

Aboriginal  Suite  (Elie),  21 1 
Abreu,  Julieta  Licairac,  191 
Abreu,  Lucila,  191 
A  bill  (Nepomuceno),  138 
Academia  F Harmonica  de  Mexico y  222 
Academia  Nacional  de  Musica^  Bogota, 
171 

Academy  of  Arts  and  Letters,  Havana,  187 
Accia  (Palma),  96 

A  ccom'paniment  to  a  Cinema  Picture 
(Schoenberg),  5 

Acuarelas  de  Fia/V  (Vasquez),  254 
Adalid  y  Camera,  M.  de,  212 
Adame,  Rafael,  42 

biography  of,  225-226 
AdeLa  (Garcia),  280 
Adelitay  Lay  222 

117,  facing  p.  1 21 

Adoraciony  Bolivian  Christmas  carols,  48, 
106 

Adufe.  See  Pandeiro 

Afro-Brazilian  music,  47-4S5  109-1 17>  ^33, 
211 

Afro-Cuban  music,  33,  44>  47)  4^)  ^^9) 

179-182,183,184,1^7,211 


nerican  Musicians,  Songs  and  Dances,  and 

Afro-CubanismOy  concept  of,  65 
Afrodita  (Rodriguez  Socas),  287 
Aglaia  (Villa-Lobos),  143 
AgogOy  117,  facing  p.  121 
Agonia  ( Santo rsola),  287 
Aguas  Calientes,  Mexico,  242,  244 
Aguirre,  Julian,  87,  94,  98 
biography  of,  82 
Ahualco,  Mexico,  228 
Aires  Chilenos  (Bisquertt),  158 
Aire  Indio y  105 
Air  Chilenos  (Bisquertt),  158 
Aires  Criollos  (Aguirre),  82 
Aires  y  Danzas  Indies  del  Peru  (Sas),  276 
Aires  Nacionales  (Aguirre),  82 
Aires  Nacionales  de  Bolivia  (Vargas),  16, 
105,  106,  108 

Airs  of  the  Pampas  (Williams),  102 
Alas,  Jesus,  19,  280 
biography  of,  280-281 
Alberdi,  Juan  Bautista,  79 
Album  Infantil  ( Amengual)  ,157 
Album  of  Latin-^ American  Art  Music  for 
Piano y  The.  See  Latin-American  Art 
Music  for  the  Piano 
Album  Leaf  (Ponce),  245 
Album  de  Musica  Nacional,  Dominican 
Republic,  194 

Alcancias  (Revueltas),  249,  250 
Alcorta,  Amancio,  79,  80,  102 
Alda  (Rodriguez  Socas),  287 
Aldana,  Jose,  220 
Alencar,  Jose,  25,  120,  130 

Alexander  Nevsky  iFrokoEev)y  AS 
Alfandoque,  167-16Z 
Alfonseca,  Juan  Bautista,  191 


327 


328 


INDEX 


Alianza  Revoluctonaria  Americana^  65 
Allcnde,  Adolfo,  13 
biography  of,  154 

Allende,  Humberto,  7,  8,  13,  21,  32,  39, 
152,  161,  162,  165 
biography  of,  154-157 
musical  autograph,  facing  p.  152. 
photograph  of,  facing  p.  217 
Allende,  Tegualda,  8 

Alma  Brasileira,  See  Choros  No.  5  (Villa- 
Lobos) 

Alma  Con<vulsa  (Villa-Lobos),  146 
Almeida,  Renato,  15,  115,  122 
Along  the  Silent  Paths.  See  Pelos  Estrados 
Silenciosos 

Alpha  Music  Corporation,  192,  195 
Alvarez,  Juan,  38,  76,  77 
Alvorada  Brasileira  (Siqueira),  141 
Alzedo,  Jose  Bernardo,  271 
Almancay  (Iglesias  Villoud),  93 
Amanecer  Guanacasteco  (Cantillano),  176 
Amante  y  la  Coqueta^  El  (Monestel),  177 
Amat,  Jose,  121 
Amatzinac  (Moncayo) ,  243 
Amaya  (Fernandez),  127 
Amazonas  (Republicano),  140 
Amazonas  (Villa-Lobos),  144,  149,  150 
AmelCj  44 

Amengual  Astaburuaga,  Rene,  7,  21,  156 
biography  of,  157 
photograph  of,  facing  p.  217 
America  Musical,  272 
American  Musicological  Society,  291 
Americanismo  Musical,  movement  of,  12, 
35,  286 

Amerindia  (Velasco  Maidana),  108 
Amigos  del  Arte,  2  n 
A mor  Fino,  198 

Amor  Marinaro  (Rodriguez  Socas),  287 
A  mores  y  A  mor  to  s,  194 
Amorous  dances,  category  of,  58 
Amy  Robsar  (Schiuma),  100 
Anacaona,  Queen,  68,  71,  188-189,  194 
Anacaona  (Pena  Morell),  196 
Anacaona  (Sanchez  de  Fuentes),  188 
Andhuac  (Miramontes),  243 
Ancient  Cemetery.  See  Uchben  X^Coholte 
Andante  con  Variazioni  (Oswald),  139 
Andes,  Los  (Berutti),  83 
Andes,  Los  (Villalba-Munoz),  102 
Andhra  University,  Vizianagaram,  30 


Andrade,  Mario  de,  3,  57,  65,  110,  114, 
122,  129,  131 
biography  of,  123 
Andrade,  Olegario  V.,  288 
Andrade,  Victor,  52 
Andr6,  Jose,  biography  of,  82 
Andre  de  Ledo  e  0  Demonio  de  Cahelo 
Encarnado  (Tavares),  141 
Andrino,  Don  Jos6  Escolastico,  203,  280 
Anecdotas  Musicales  (Barbacci),  18,^272 
Anjione  e  Zeto  (Rogatis),  99 
Anita  Garibaldi  (Braga),  124 
A.nnunzio,  Gabriele  d^  music  patterned 
after,  98 

Ansermet,  Ernest,  82,  86 
Antara,  43,  270 

Anthology  of  Argentinian  Composers,  79 
Antigone  (Sophocles),  music  by  Chavez 
for,  233 

Antigua,  Guatemala,  207 
Antofagasta,  Chile,  159 
Antologia  Ecuatoriana,  38 
Antony  Griette  {B-odiigutz  Socas),  287 
Ao  Anoitecer  (Mignone),  135,  136 
Afhrodita  (Luzzatti),  93 
Appel,  Richard  G.,  1 1 
Affel  de  la  Terre,  L^  (Cotapos),  159 
Afunte  Afro-Cubano  (Garrido),  159 
Aranha,  Graga,  25,  120 
Araucanian  Indians,  39,  51,  52,  151,  160 
Araujo,  Damiao  Barbosa  de,  119 
Araujo,  Joao  Gomes  dc,  8-9,  120 
biography  of,  123 
Arco  Iris  (Marchena),  194 
Ardevol,  Josd,  34,  183,  184,  185,  186 
biography  of,  183-184 
Ardid  de  Amor  (Pedrell),  287 
Areglito,  El  (Yradier),  56,  180 
Areito,  68,  189,  255 
Arequipa,  Peru,  272,  275 
Aretz-Thiele,  Isabel,  39,  78 
biography  of,  82 
Argentina,  73-104 

dances  of,  55-56,  59,  60,  i6o-64,  72, 
73-78,  152 

folklore  of,  14-15,  20,  38,  54,  73*79) 

82,  83-84,  90,  92,  93,  97,  282-283 
music  publishing  in,  lo-n,  12,  17,  18, 
80  ■ 

musical  competitions  in,  20 
musical  culture  of,  77-81 


INDEX 


329 


Argentina  {Cont.') 

musical  education  in,  22,  80 

musicians  o£,  7,  8,  9,  10-11,  ^6,  28,  29, 

33)  37)  So,  82-104 
National  Anthem  of,  66,  76,  79 
the  opera  in,  25,  80 
phonograph  recording  in,  26 
Ponce’s  concert  tour  in,  246 
symphony  orchestra  in,  23,  24,  80 
Argentijia,  dancer,  244 
Argentine  Choral  Society,  94 
Argentine  Museum  of  Natural  Sciences,  39, 

81 

Argentine  National  Anthem,  66,  76,  79 
Argentine  Suites,  for  orchestra  (Massa),  94 
Argentinian  Composers,  Anthology  of,  79 
Ariana  y  Dionisios  (Boero),  83 
Arias,  Luis  Felipe,  203,  206 
biography  of,  204 
Armoniciy  18,  258,  260,  262 
Arrau,  Claudio,  biography  of,  157 
Arredondo,  Jose  Maria,  191,  194- 
Arredondo-Miura,  Clodomiro,  biography 

of,  192 

Arredondo-Sosa,  Horacio,  192 
Arriaga,  Jesuit  priest,  270 
Ars  Novay  204 

Arte  Lirico  en  el  Teatro  Coloitj  El,  25 

Artemis  (l^tipomuctno),  137 
Artigas,  of  Argentina,  76 
Arvelo,  Julio  Quevedo,  168 
Arzeno,  Julio,  190,  192 
As  Parasitas  (Franga),  129 
Ascension  (Villa-Lobos),  144 
Ascone,  Vicente,  28  3 
biography  of,  284 

Asociacion  de  Cultur a  Musical,  San  Jose, 

2n,  175 

Asociacion  Musical  Juvenil, 

Asociacion  del  Prof esorado  Orquestal,  See 
Orquesta  F Harmonica  de  la  Asociacion 
del  Prof  esorado  Orquestal 

Asociacion  Sinfonicaj/RosB-nOy  80,  84,  93 

Asociacion  Sinfonica,  Xucuman,  90 
Asociacion  Venezolana  de  Conciertos,  iqi 
Associated  Music  Publishers,  13,  i25>  128, 
133)  ^4t)  ISO)  ^57 

Association  of  School  Supervisors,  16 

Assotor,  zoq 

Asuncion,  Paraguay,  94)  264)  265 
Atabaque,  116 


Atahualpa  (Salgado),  200 

Atahualpa  (Stubbs),  277 

Atahualpa  (Vaile-Riestra),  278 

Ataja-Camhios,  El  (Williams),  103 

A  tala  (Luzzatti),  93 

Ate  CO  coif,  215 

Ateneo,  Caracas,  292 

Atipac  (Rogatis),  99 

Atirahu,  Julian,  263 

Atlanta,  Georgia,  61 

atonal  music,  31,  81,  229 

Auber,  Daniel  Francois,  181 

Aubert,  Louis,  155 

Aurora  (Panizza),  96 

Austin,  Texas,  247 

Austria,  musicians  in  Latin  America  from, 
24,  92,  203,  205,  271,  272 
Ave  Maria  (Humberto  Allende),  156 
Ave  Maria  (Carrillo),  229 
Ave  Maria  (Franca),  129 
Ave  Maria  (Monestel),  177 
Avellandea  y  Artega,  Gertrudis  Gomez  de, 
178 

Awakening  of  Ariel,  The.  See  Despertar  de 
A  riel,  0 

Axelrod,  music  publisher,  89,  150,  178 
Ayacucho,  Peru,  48 
Ayacaztli,  215,  216 

Ayala,  Daniel,  28,  31,  217,  223,  224,  233, 
235,  237,  243 
biography  of,  226-227 
photograph  of,  facing  p.  249 
Ayariche,  270 

Ayestaran,  Lauro,  16,  67,  283 

AylU-Quepa,  270 

Ayrnara  Indians,  90 

Aztec  culture,  214,  215,  220,  221,  239 

B 

Babacue.  Set  Macumba 

Babaloxd  (Mignone),  1% 5 
Baboule,  210 
Baby  Drum,  208 
Bacantes,  Las  ifBotTo),  %% 

Bach,  Johann  Sebastian,  5,  35)  I47) 

163,  164,  229,  234)  i4<5 
Bachianas  Brasileiras  (Villa-Lobos),  5, 
147)  149)  ^50 

Badarczewska,  Xhekla,  36 
Bagatelas  (Koellreutter),  133 


330 


INDEX 


Bahia,  Brazil,  122 

Balle  Mtchoacano  (Rolon),  251 

Bailecko^  56,  58,  78 

Baths  Tradkionales  A rgentinos  (Vega),  56 
Bajo  el  Palmar  (Fabrega),  261 
Bajo  el  Signo  de  la  Muerte  (Revueltas), 
250 

Bajo  Sii  Ventana  (Uribe-Holguin),  171, 
172 

Bajoftj  43,  106 
hajoneSy  facing  p.  56 
Balada  Mexicana  (Ponce),  247 
Baldi,  Lamberto,  24,  284,  287 
Balfour,  Henry,  43 
Ballet  de  los  Gallos  (Rolon),  252 
Ballet  Infantil  (Delgadillo),  257-258 
Ballets  Russes,  127 
Balloon  Song.  See  Cae^  Cae  Baldo 
bamba^  57 
Bamhoche^  210 
BamhucOy  58,  166-167 
Banda,  See  also  Military  Band 
Banda  de  la  Corona^  La^  168 
Banda  de  Guerra^  Quezaltenango,  207 
Banda  Nacional^  Bogota,  171 
Banda  de  Polkia,  Asuncion,  264 
Banda  de  la  Polkia^  Havana,  182 
Banda  de  Polktay  Merida,  226 
Banda  Refublkana^  Panama,  260,  261 
Banda  de  los  Sufremos  Poderes^  Managua, 
257 

Banda  de  los  Sufremos  Poderes,  San  Sal¬ 
vador,  280,  281 

Banda  de  los  Sufremos  PodereSy  Teguci¬ 
galpa,  213 

Bandeirantey  0  (Republicano),  140 
bandola,  167 

Baqueiro  Foster,  Geronimo,  17,  215,  225 
biography  of,  227 
Baratta,  Augusto,  281 
Baratta,  Maria  de,  8,  28,  34,  53,  280,  281 
biography  of,  281 
photograph  of,  facing  p.  281 
Barbacci,  Rudolfo,  15,  17,  18 
biography  of,  272 
Barber  of  Seville y  They  15a 
Barbirolli,  John,  133 
Barcarota  Criollay  6^^y 
Barcelona,  Spain,  82,  95,  139,  156,  160, 
177,  183,  186,  192,  196,  238,  251, 
261,  277 


Barletta,  Leonidas,  63 
Barranquilla,  Colombia,  22,  30,  170 
Barrkada  (Kostakowsky),  240 
BatracioSy  Los  (Williams),  103 
Batucada.  See  Batuque 
Batucaje  (Mignone),  135,  136 
Batuquey  iii,  113,  114,  115 
Batuque  (Fernandez),  127,  128 
Batuque  (Nepomuceno),  137 
Batuque^P antasia  (Octaviano),  13^ 
Baucke,  Florian,  79 
Bautista,  Julian,  29 
biography  of,  82 
BBC  Orchestra,  161 
Beethoven,  Ludwig  van,  35,  229 
Beethoven  Conservatory  of  Music,  Rosario 
95 

Begin  the  Beguine  (Porter),  58 
Beguine,  58 

Belaunde,  Dr.  Rafael,  64 
Belem,  Brazil,  122,  131 
Bello,  Andres,  196 

Bello  Horizonte,  millimetrization  of  (Villa 
Lobos),  147,  150 
Bembe  (Caturla),  184,  185 
Benvenuto,  Luis,  282 
Berceuse  (Lamothe),  210 
Berceuse  (Mignone),  135 
Berceuse  (Netto),  138 
Berger,  Luis,  77,  263 
Berimbau  (Ovalle),  139 
Berkshire  Academy,  185,  237 
Berlin,  Germany,  87,  92,  io8,  124,  133 
137,  161,  162,  165,  183,  186,  206 
244,  274 

Bermudez  Silva,  Jesus,  biography  of,  169 
170 

Bernal  Jimenez,  Miguel,  223,  225 
biography  of,  227-228 
Berrini,  Jose  Francisco,.  80 
Bersaerks  (Morillo),  94 
Berutti,  Arturo,  biography  of,  82-83 
Berutti,  Pablo,  91,  100 
biography  of,  83 
Bestia  Parda  (Pomar),  244 
Bewitching  Maya  (Siliezar),  207 
Bibliografhy  of  Latin  American  Fol 
Musky  14 

Biblioteca  del  Colegio  Nacional  de  I 
Universidad  de  la  Plata j  190 
Biblioteca  Venezolana  de  Culturay  29a 


INDEX 


331 


Big-i,  Emilio,  264 
Billet  (Lamothe),  212 
Biniguendas  de  Plutu^  Las  (Elias),  236 
Biniguendas  de  Plata^  Las  (Meza),  242 
Biografia  de  la  Cusca  (Garrido),  55>  ^S^-> 
160 

Bird,  Arthur,  ii 

Bisquertt  Prado,  Prosper©,  7,  i3>  3^ 

biography  of,  157-^5^ 

Bito-ManuS  (Caturla),  1S5 
Bizancio  (Panizza),  96 
Bizet,  Georges,  56,  180-181 
Blocos.  See  Frevos 
Blues  (Chavez),  235 

Bocetos  Cubanos  (Sanchez  de  Fuentes),  188 
Bochica  (Uribe-Holguin),  171,  17^ 

Bodas  de  Oro  (Riieda),  195-196 
Boehme,  Dr.,  62 
Boero,  Felipe,  33 
biography  of,  83 

Bogota,  Colombia,  12,  18,  22,  23,  66,  128, 
166,  168,  169,  170,  i7i>  572,  261 
Boleroy  Dominican,  191 
Bolero^  Spanish,  54>  iSo,  191 
Bolero  (Rodriguez  Socas),  287 
Bolero-Son^  54,  i  So,  19 1 
Boletin  Bibliogrdfico,  University  of  San 
Marcos,  273,  275,  277,  278 
Boletin  del  Institute  Cultural  Venezolano- 
BritanicOj  289 

Boletin  Latino -Americano  de  Muska,  12, 

18,  65,  86,  94,  97,  98,  100,  107,  i3i, 
136,  151,  156,  157,  ^58,  161,  162, 
164,  169,  170,  ^7^>  ^^3,  ^66, 

276,  283,  284,  285,  286,  288,  293 
Bolivia,  104-108 

dances  of,  76,  105-106,  152 
folklore  of,  i6,  48,  52,  104-106,  107, 
108 

musical  culture  of,  107 
musical  instruments  of,  4i>  4-3>  106-107 
musicians  of,  37,  107-108 
and  Peru,  271 

symphony  orchestra  in,  23,  107 
Bologna,  Italy,  244,  281 

Bologna  Conservatory,  281 

Bombo,  Brazilian  drum.  See  Caxambu 
Bombo,  Colombian  drum,  167  . 
bones,  human,  used  for  musical  instru¬ 
ments,  facing  p.  121 
Bowgoj,  45>  1*0 


Bororo  Indians,  46,  134 
Borowski,  Felix,  247 
Boss!,  Enrico,  244 

Boston,  Massachusetts,  2,  ii,  42^  61,  131, 
146,  157,  234 

Boston  Museum  of  Fine  Arts,  42 
Boston  Public  Library,  1 1 
Boston  Symphony  Orchestra,  131,  1465  15 7» 
234 

Botuto.  See  Bututu 

Boulanger,  Nadia,  165,  170,  184,  251,  273, 
286 

bows,  musical,  43,  15^,  167,  209,  279 
primitive,  facing  p.  89 
Brackenridge,  H.  M.,  i 
Braga,  Francisco,  121,  127,  140,  141,  14^ 
biography  of,  123-124 
Brahms,  Johannes,  236 
Brandao,  Jose  Vieira,  biography  of,  124 
Brandes,  Carlos,  Company,  13,  278 
Brasil^  113 

Brasilidade^  spirit  of,  131 
“Brasilofonia,*^  57 
Brazil,  109- 150 

choral  society  in,  24-25,  122 
dances  of,  54,  57,  595  60,  110-116 
folklore  of,  14,  iSs  395  40>  48-5^5  5^5  545 
109-117,  IZ2,  124,  126,  127-129,  131- 
132,  1335  ^345  ^375  ^387  t39,  14^5 
142,  143,  144-146 

lecture-recitals  by  Slonimsky  in,  2  n,  3 
music  publishing  in,  ii,  12,  i7>  tii, 
122-123 

musical  culture  of,  112,  117-^ ^3 
musical  instruments  of,  41,  4^5  43i  44? 
46,  116-117 

musicians  of,  7-8,  9,  25,  26,  27,  28,  29, 
305  32^5  375  123-^50 
national  anthem  of,  66,  120,  121 
nationalism  in  art  of,  25-26,  65,  122, 
137 

newspaper  interviews  with  Slonimsky  in, 
5 

the  opera  in,  25,  ii8-ii9>  120,  130 
origin  of  music  in,  graph  of,  112 
phonograph  recording  in,  26 
svmphonv  orchestra  in,  121 
Brazilian  Aubade.  See  Ahorada  BrasUeira 
Brazilian  Hymn  of  Independence,  66,  119, 
120  ,  ■ ■  ■ 
Brazilian  Poems  (Koellrcutter),  133 


INDEX 


33Z 

‘‘Brazilian  Portrait — ^Villa-Lobos’^  (Burle 
Marx),  1 50 
Brescia,  Domenico,  199 
Briceno,  Arturo,  35 
Brinton,  D.  G.,  256 
Brooklyn,  New  York,  176,  177 
Brooklyn  Academy  of  Music,  176 
Brooklyn  College  Press,  14 
Broqua,  Alfonso,  13,  32,  283 
biography  of,  284 
Bruch,  of  Germany,  87 
Bru/a  de  las  Montanas j  La  (Williams),  103 
Brussels,  Belgium,  98,  138,  171,  240,  261, 
276 

Brussels  Conservatory,  98 
Brussels  Exposition,  138 
Bucaramanga,  Colombia,  22 
Buccino,  Raul  A.,  282 
Buchardo,  Carlos  Lopez,  33,  78 
biography  of,  83 
Bucharest,  Rumania,  98 
Buchwald,  Theodore,  24,  272 
biography  of,  272 

Buenos  Aires,  Argentina,  2  n,  8,  10,  12,  17, 
18,  20,  22,  24,  25,  29,  30,  60,  63,  66, 
73>  75>  76)  77.  79.  8°.  8i,  82  fi., 
107,  108,  155,  158,  264,  265,  272, 
274,  277>  287 
bull-roarers,  256 
Bumba^  210 

Burle  Marx,  Walter,  26-27,  135,  141,  150 
biography  of,  124-125 
Burlesca  (Amengual),  157 
Buries ca  (Stea),  277 
Busser,  Henri,  285 

Bustamente,  Bienvenido,  biography  of,  192 
Bustamente,  Jose  Marfa,  192 
Butoto,  See  Bututu 
Bututu^  44,  288-289 

Caba,  Eduardo,  biography  of,  107 

Caballero,  Policarpio,  biography  of,  272 

CaballitoSy  Los,  256 

CabalUtos  (Pedrell),  287 

Cabeza  del  Ranm,  La  (Delgadillo),  257 

Caboclo,  1 15 

Cacahuamilfa  (Elias),  236 
Cacharfaya,  10$ 


Cacho,  256 

Cachua,  268 

Cachullafi,  198 

Cae,  Cae^  Baldo,  49-50,  115 

CafusOy  64 

Caixinha  de  Boas  Festas  (Villa-Lobos). 
147,  150 

Calcaho,  Jose  Antonio,  16,  288 
Calcavecchia,  Benone,  29,  283 
biography  of,  285 
Caldcleugh,  Alexander,  118-119 
Caldeira,  Jose  C.,  120 
Calenda,  69 

Cali,  Colombia,  22,  169,  172 
Cali  Conservatory,  22,  169,  17a 
California,  University  of,  58 
Callao,  Peru,  273,  274 
Callejera,  174 
Calyfso  songSy  58 
Camara,  Juan  Antonio,  183 
biography  of,  184 
Cameleon  (Lamothe),  210 
Ca?niy  El  (Pahissa),  95 
Caminando  (Revueltas),  250 
Caminante,  El  (Sanchez  de  Fuentes),  i8i 
C aminos  (Revueltas),  250 
C aminos  Tristes  (Estrada),  285 
Campa,  Gustavo,  236,  238,  242 
biography  of,  228 
Campabadal,  Jose,  175 
Campabadal,  Roberto,  175 
Cam f anas  de  Pascua  (Plaza),  293 
Campinas,  Brazil,  130 
Campo,  Estanislao,  79 
Camfo  (Fabini),  285,  286 
Camporreal,  Peruvian  musician,  46 
Campos,  Rub6n  M,,  1 5,  224 
Can-Calagui-'Tunal  (Baratta),  281 
Canatlan,  Mexico,  242 
Cangdo  Arahe  (Ibere  de  Lemos),  133 
Cangdo  Brasileira  (Mignone),  136 
Cangdo  na  Tarde  (Fernandez),  127 
Cangdo  do  Tio  Bamabe  (Cosme),  126 
Cancion  al  Arbol  del  (Ginastera^ 

9^ 

Cancion  Patriotica  (J^occz)  y  76 
Cancion  Triste  y  Danza  Alegre  (Morillo, 

■  95V  ' 

Cancionero  Cuyano  (Rodriguez),  77 
Cancionero  Musical  Esfanol  (Halffter, 
238 


INDEX 


33S 


Cancionss  (Letelier),  i6i 
Canciones  (Monestel),  177 
Canciones,  2  (Santa  Cruz),  163,  164 
Canclones  Arcuicos  (Ponce)  >  247 
Canciones  Argentinas  (Rogatis),  99 
Canciones  Medioevales  (Posada-Amador) , 

171 

Canciones  Saltenas  (Palma),  96 
CandomblL  See  Macumha 
Canosa'Mi  Puglia,  Italy,  287 
Cantares  (Uribe-Holguin),  171  >  ^7* 

Cantata  a  la  Musica  (Fonseca),  176 
Cantata  de  los  Rios  de  Chile  (Santa  Cruz), 

21,  163-164 

Canticos  Sertanejos  (Villa-Lobos),  14^ 
Cantiga  de  Ninar  (Mignone),  135 
Cantigas  del  Buen  Amador  (Pedrell),  287 
Cantillano,  Roberto,  175 
biography  o£,  176 

Canto  y  Danza  de  los  Antiguos  Mextcanos 
(Ponce),  24s 

Canto  de  Guerra  de  los  Frontes  Leales 
(Revueltas),  250 

Canto  de  Inviemo  (Leng),  1 60-1 61 

Canto  Karabali  (Lecuona),  186 

Canto  de  Navidad  (Paz),  97 

Cantos  de  Alma  Vernacular  (Valcarcel), 

277 

Cantos  del  Atardecer  (Ascone),  284 
Cantos  Inf antiles  (Humberto  Allende),  156 
Cantos  Mexicanos  (Chavez),  230,  235 
Cantos  del  Feru  (Sas),  276 
Cantos  de  Soledad  (Santa  Cruz),  163,  164 
Cantos  del  Tucumdn  (Ginastera),  92 
Cantu,  Agostino,  287 
biography  of,  125 

Cap  Haitien,  Haiti,  211 

Cafadory  43 

Cafrkcio  (Carrillo),  230 
Cafriccio  Concertante  (Orbon),  186 
Cafricho  Interiorano  (Cordero),  261 
Caracas,  Cathedral  of,  290,  291,  293 
Caracas,  Conservatory  of,  290 

Caracas,  University  of,  290  ^ 

Caracas,  Venezuela,  19,  23,  24,  257,  288, 
290,  291,  292,  293 
Carambay 

Caramuru  (Mignone),  134 
CaranganOy  167-16S 
Cardona,  Ismael,  175 

biography  of,  17^ 


Caricia  (Amengual),  157 
Carimba,  279 
Carioca,  57,  113 

Carlos  Chavez  (Pan  American  Union),  235 
Carmen  (Bizet),  56,  1 80-1 81 
Carmosina  (Araujo),  123 
Carnaval  das  Criangas  Brasileiras  (Villa- 
Lobos),  145?  ^48)  150 
Carnavalesca  (Uribe-Holguin),  i7^>  ^7®' 
Carnegie  Hall,  New  York,  186 
Carnicer,  Ramon,  153 
carnival  dances,  60,  115,  182 
carnival  songs,  48-5 o?  ^^5 
carnivals,  48-49 

Caro  de  Boesi,  Jose  Antonio,  291 

Caronia,  Sicily,  285 

Carpentier,  Ale  jo,  44 

Carpio,  Manuel,  214 

Carpio  Valdes,  Roberto,  biography  of, 

CarracUy  168 

Carreho,  Cayetano,  291,  292 
Carreho,  Teresa,  19,  66,  291,  292 
Carretay  La  (Ascone),  284 
Carrillo,  Julian,  34-35)  ^^5?  ^^7*  ^4^ 

biography  of,  228-230 
caricature  of,  facing  p.  iS3 
Carrillo,  Manuel  Gomez,  biography  of,  83- 

Carrillo,  Maria  In6s  Gomez,  84 
Carrillophone,  35 
Cartagena,  Colombia,  170,  261 
Carvajal,  Armando,  23,  154 
biography  of,  158 

Carvalho,  Dinora  de,  biography  of,  125 

Carvalho,  Eleazar  de,  biography  of,  iz, 
Casa  Mozart,  128,  136 
Casabona,  Francisco,  31,  121 
biography  of,  125-126 
Casanova  Vicuna,  Juan,  biography  of,  159 
Cascabeles,  1 16,  234,  facing  p.  120 
Casella,  Enrique  M.,  biography  of,  84 
Casinha  Pequenina,  A  (Octaviano),  139 

Castaneda,  Daniel,  4J,  216,  224,  241 

Castaneda,  Josd,  1-2,  29,  204 

biography  of,  204-205 
Castillo,  Jesus,  15.  53.  aoo,  201,  202,  203, 

■■205  ' 

biography  of,  205 

Castillo,  Ricardo,  203 
biography  of,  205 
photograph  of,  facing  p.  281 


334 


INDEX 


Castro,  Herbert  de,  23,  260 
biography  of,  261 

Castro,  Jose  Marfa,  7,  23,  33,  80,  81,  87 
biography  of,  84-85 
photograph  of,  facing  p.  1 85 
Castro,  Juan  Jose,  9,  23,  80,  81,  84,  92, 
94 

biography  of,  85-86 
photograph  of,  facing  p.  185 
Castro,  Sergeo  de,  biography  of,  87 
Castro,  Washington,  33,  84 
biography  of,  87 
Catalan  style,  95 

Catdlogo  de  las  Obras  de  Aljonso  de  Silba 
(Holzmann),  273 
Caterete^  1 1 4,  1 1 6 
Caterete  (Mignone),  135,  136 
Catholic  Church:  and  Mexican  native  arts, 
217 

and  Nicaraguan  culture,  256 
and  Peruvian  native  arts,  270-271 
and  the  Tango,  61 
Catimbo.  See  Macumba 
Catuquinaru  Indians,  42 
Caturla,  Alejandro  Garcia,  13,  14,  23,  28, 
29>  33j  i83> 
biography  of,  184-185 
caricature  of,  facing  p.  153 
‘‘Caturla  of  Cuba”  (Slonimsky),  185 
Cauchemar  (Braga),  124 
Cavaliere  Arabo  (Cantu),  125 
Cavalleria  RttsUcana^  124 
Cavaquinha^  1 1 6 
CaxambUy  116,  117,  118 
Cecilia  Valdes  (Roig),  i86 
Cenas  do  Nordeste  Brasileiro  (Siqueira), 
141 

Cenzontle,  Guatemalan  bird,  melodies  of, 
53,  202-203 

Cernicchiaro,  Vicenzo,  122 
Geron,  Jose  Dolores,  biography  of,  192 
Cervantes,  Ignacio,  182 
CkacarerUy  58,  72,  75,  76 
Chacarera  (Gilardi),  91 
Chaconncy  68 
ChamamBy  75 

Chamber  Music  for  Six  Instruments 
(Ardevol),  183 
(Roldan),  187 
Chanson  Galante  (l?2i.mzzz)  y 
Chanson  HavanaisBy  i^jy  iZo 


Chanson  de  Lisette  (Lamothe),  210 
Chansons  de  Bilitis  (Debussy),  40 
Chansons  Tyfiques  Bresiliennes  (Villa- 
Lobos),  149 

Chant  d^Automne  (Braga),  124 
Chants,  native,  50,  54,  105,  106,  166,  197, 
210,  215,  220 

Chants  du  Parana  (Broqua),  284 
Chapf,  Henrique  Casal,  23-24,  29,  191,  195 
biography  of,  193 
Chapf,  Ruperto  Casal,  29,  193 
Chapultepec,  Mexico,  8 
Chafultepec  (Ponce),  225,  245,  247 
CharangOy  41 
Char  cay  107 
Chasca  (Casella),  84 
Chase,  Gilbert,  14,  67,  79 
Chavez,  Carlos,  8,  13,  22,  23,  26,  27,  28, 
3O)  39)  44j  65,  214,  215,  216,  217, 

223,  224,  225,  226,  227,  228,  235, 

^36,  237)  23^)  ^39)  ^41)  242,  243, 

244,  245,  246,  247,  250,  251,  252, 

^  253 

biography  of,  230-235 
musical  autograph,  facing  p,  152 
photograph  of,  facing  p.  248 
Chavez,  Manuel,  230 

Chavez  Aguilar,  Pablo,  biography  of,  272- 
273 

ChegangaSy  116 

Chellahy  La  (Juan  Jose  Castro),  85 
Chequeriy  117,  facing  p.  121 
Chiaffarelli,  Luigi,  120 
Chicago  Musical  College,  247 
Chicago  Symphony  Orchestra,  129 
Chibay  1 16 
Chiclayo,  Peru,  274 
Chico-Bororo.  See  Mignone,  Francisco 
Chieti,  Italy,  loi 
Chil-Chily  198,  256,  270 
Children^  Corner  (j)thMSSY)y 
Children^  Scenes  (Troiani),  loi 
Chile,  151-165 

centennial  of,  154,  157 
dances  of,  55,  59,  60,  69,  75,  76,  106, 
*5^"i53)  2t68 

folklore  of,  15,  39,  40,  48)  5^)  55)  151- 
153,  160,  165 

music  publishing  in,  13,  17-18,  154 
musical  competitions  of,  20-22,  154,  156, 
157,  160,  162,  164,  165 


INDEX 


S35 


Chile  (ConL) 

musical  culture  in,  15 3- 154 
musical  instruments  of,  43»  2:51 
musicians  of,  7,  S,  13,  23,  26,  27,  29, 
3^)  33)  35)  37)  ^4-165 
national  anthems  of,  66,  153 
national  music  in,  163 
Peruvian  Marinera  and,  26 S 
Ponce^'s  concert  tour  in,  246 
symphony  orchestra  in,  23,  154 
Chile,  University  of,  an,  13,  15,  60  n, 
154,  156,  157,  158,  159,  161,  162, 
163 

Chile,  15,  60  n,  154 

Chilena,  See  Cueca 

ChiliUhtU,  215 

Chilian,  Chile,  157 

Chimu  culture,  266,  269 

Chirimia,  201,  217,  246,  256,  279 

Chiriqui,  260 

C  his  fa,  La,  167,  168 

Chocalho,  44,  116-117,  118,  131,  135, 
facing  p.  1 21 
Chocolate,  153 
Cholula,  Mexico,  241 
Chopin,  Frederic,  40,  102,  137,  244,  277 
choral  societies,  24-25,  122,  177,  292 
Choro  (Gnattali),  129 
Choro  (Guarnieri),  132 
Choros,  57,  58,  1 1 4,  145)  ^49 
Chores  bis  (Villa-Ix>bos),  146,  14S,  149 
Choros  No.  i-No.  12  (Villa-Lobos),  14S- 
146,  148)  149)  150 

C^drox  No.  5  (Villa-Lobos),  145,  150 
Choros  No.  ii  (Villa-Lobos),  9,  44,  145, 
146,  148,  149,  150 
Chotis,  54 

Christian  Science  Monitor,  article  by 
Sionimsky  in,  60  n 

Christianity,  influence  on  Indian  folklore 
of,  47-48,  1 16 

Christmas  carols,  48,  106,  271 
Chucho,  167-168 
Chula,  in 
Chuli,  106 

Church.  See  Catholic  Church 
Ciclo  Brasileiro  (Villa-Lobos) ,  1 48,  1 5 o 
75,  78,  282 

Cielitos  (Williams),  78,  103 
Cifuentes,  Santo,  169 
Cihuatl  (Miramontes),  243 


Cima  (Leng),  161 
Cincinnati,  Ohio,  126 

Cinco  Canciones  Medio  evales  (Posada- 
Amador),  171 

Cinco  Piezas  Infantiles  (Ayala),  227 
Cinemas,  See  Suite  Suggestive 
CirandaSy  1 1 5 

Cirandas  (Villa-Lobos),  148,  150 
Cirandinhas,  1 1 5 

Cirandinhas  (Villa-Lobos),  148,  150 
Citlalli  (Vasquez),  254 
Ciudad  Guzman,  Mexico,  251 
Ciudad  Roja,  La  (Espoile),  88 
Ciudad  Trujillo,  Dominican  Republic,  23, 
24,  29,  188,  191,  192,  193,  194,  195) 
196 

Clarin  (Kostakowsky),  240 
Claudio,  Pablo,  19 1 
Clave,  magazine,  272 

Clave  Xilofonica  de  la  Musica  Cubana,  La 
(Ortiz),  180 

Claves,  hardwood  bars,  45,  180 
dementi  Conservatory  of  Music,  100, 
102 

Cleofatra  (Morales),  243 
clubs.  See  musical  clubs 
Cluzeau  Mortet,  Luis,  283 
biography  of,  285 
Coca,  La  (Sojo),  294 
Cochabamba,  Bolivia,  16,  108 
Cochabamba  (Berutti),  83 
Coco,  III,  1 13,  260 
Coco  de  Zamhe,  1 1 6 
Cocteau,  Jean,  233 
Coeuroy,  Andre,  30 
Cohn,  Arthur,  6 

Coleccion  de  Bailes  Tificos  de  la  Provincia 
de  Guanacaste,  173,  174 
Coleccion  de  Canciones  y  Danzas  Tificas, 
173 

Collection  Esfagnale,  275 
Colombia,  166-172 

commission  to  Fernandez  by,  12S 
dances  of,  60,  106,  166-167 
folklore  of,  16,  39,  54)  ^7 

music  publishing  in,  18 
musical  culture  of,  168-169 
musical  education  in,  22,  168,  169 
musical  instruments  of,  43,  167-168 

musicians  of,  26,  29,  30,  32,  35,  37> 

' 


336 


INDEX 


Colombia  {Cont,) 

national  anthem  of,  66^  i6S 
the  opera  in,  i68 
radio  stations  in,  26,  169 
symphony  orchestra  in,  23,  169 
Colombo  (Gomes),  1 30-1 31 
Colon,  Pedro  Nolasco,  291 
Colon  Orchestra.  See  Teatro  Colon 
Colores  (Bautista),  82 
Colorines  (Revueltas),  249,  250 
Columbia  Phonog:raph  Company,  26,  12S, 
172,  227,  237,  276, 

287 

Columbus,  Christopher,  189 
Columbus  Theater.  See  Teatro  Colon 
C  omentario  a  un  Canto  dannunzumo 
(Pinto),  98 

Cometa^El  (Massa),  94 
Comision  Nacional  de  Cultura^  98 
competitions,  musical.  See  musical  competi¬ 
tions 

Com  far sa  (Caturla),  185 
composers:  emergence  of,  72 
first  of  the  native-born,  6j 
relation  to  Latin  American  society  of, 
19-38 

table  of,  by  country,  37 
use  of  folklore  by,  38-41 
use  of  native  instruments  by,  44-45 
Comfoskiones  en  los  12  Tonos  (Paz),  97 
Conceigao,  Brazil,  140 
Concepcion,  Uruguay,  100 
Concertino  (Carrillo),  230 
Concertino  for  Guitar  and  Orchestra 

(Adame),  226 

Concertino  for  Piano  and  Orchestra 

(Gnattali),  129 

Concertino  for  Two  Pianos  (Galindo), 

237 

Concertino  for  Violin  and  Orchestra 

(Kostakowsky) ,  240 

Concertino  for  Violoncello  and  Orchestra 
(Adame),  226 

Concerto,  for  chorus  (Santorsola),  287 
Concerto  for  Four  Horns  (Chavez),  232 
Concerto  Grosso  Qos6  Marfa  Castro),  7, 
84*  85 

Concerto  for  Guitar  and  Orchestra 
(Adame),  42,  225,  226 
Concerto  for  Piano  and  Chamber  Orchestra 
(Mackenna),  161 


Concerto  for  Piano  and  Orchestra:  Amen- 
gual,  157 

Jose  Marfa  Castro,  84,  85 
Juan  Jose  Castro,  86 
Chavez,  234-235 
Drangosch,  87 
Esposito,  88 
Fernandez,  127 
Galindo,  237 
Gnattali,  129 
Guarnieri,  132 
Jimenez  Mabarak,  240 
Lecuna,  293 
Lima,  170 
Morillo,  94,  95 
Ponce,  244,  247 
Rolon,  251,  252 
Soro,  165 
Tavares,  141 
Uribe-Holguin,  17s 
Vasquez,  254 

Concerto  of  the  South.  See  Concur  to  del 
Sur  (Ponce) 

Concerto  for  String  Orchestra  (Cluzeau 
Mortet),  285 

Concerto  for  Tliree  Pianos  and  Orchestra 
(Ardevol),  183 

Concerto  for  Violin  and  Orchestra:  Hum¬ 
berto  Allende,  155-156 
Fernandez,  127-128 
Ficher,  89 
Guarnieri,  132,  133 
Halffter,  238 
Ippisch,  206 
Kostakowsky,  240 
Marchena,  194 
Ponce,  246 
Siccardi,  too 
Uribe-Holguin,  171 
Vasquez,  254 

Concerto  for  Violin  and  Orchestra  (Villa- 
Lobos).  See  Fantasia  dos  Movimentos 
Mixtos 

Concerto  for  Violin  and  Piano  (Gnattali), 
129 

Concerto  for  Violoncello  and  Orchestra: 
Humberto  Allende,  1 5  5,  15  6 
Villa-Lobos,  147,  149,  150 

Concertos  Grosses  (Ardevol),  183 

Concur  to  Argentino  (Ginastera),  92 

Concierto  Aymard  (Gianneo),  90,  91 


INDEX 


337 


Concierto  Indio  (Valcarcel),  278 

Concterto  del  Sur  (Ponce),  4.2,  246 

Conciertos  de  la  Nueva  Musica^  Si,  97 

Concierto  s  far  a  TrabajadoreSy  233 

Condor  (Gomes),  130 

Condor  Pasa^  El  (Robles),  275 

conductors,  orchestral,  23-24 

Conga,  Afro-Cuban  drum,  47,  180 

Congdy  dance,  23,  57,  60,  180,  181,  182 

Congaday  iii,  113,  134 

Congada  (Mignone),  134,  136 

Congo y  A£ro-Brazilian  religious  play,  113 

Congoerdy  263 

Congressy  U.S.S.,  i 

Congresso  da  Lingua  Nacional  Cantaddy  25 
Conjures  (Morillo),  94"9S 
Conservatories,  22,  71 
Conservatorioy  bulletin,  44 
Conser^atorio  Bachy  Havana,  182 
Conservatorio  Bachy  Lima,  275 
Conservatorio  Brasileiro  de  MusicUy  Rio  de 
Janeiro,  an,  3,  121,  128 
Conservatorio  Drantatico  e  Musicaly  Sao 
Paulo,  an,  9,  121,  125,  126,  131, 
i34>  1375  14O5  142 

Conservatorio  Lihrey  Mexico  City,  253 
Conservatorio  de  Musica  of  the  Ateneo, 
264,  265 

Conservatorio  Nacionaly  Bogota,  22,  168, 

169,171,172^ 

Conservatorio  Nacionaly  Buenos  Aires,  83, 

87,  9i>  94,  101 

Conservatorio  Nacionaly  Ciudad  Xrujillo, 
192,  193 

Conservatorio  Nacionaly  Guatemala  City, 
3  n,  205,  206 

Conservatorio  Nacionaly  Havanuy  182, 

185 

Conservatorio  Nacionaly  La  Paz,  108 
Conservatorio  Nacionaly  Lima,  271 
Conservatorio  Nacionaly  Mexico  City,  22, 
42,  222,  223,  226,  227,  228,  233, 
236,  237,  238,  241,  242,  243,  244, 
247,  251,  252,  253 

Conservatorio  Nacionaly  Panama,  2  n,  1 8, 
257,  260,  262 

Conservatorio  Nacionaly  Quito,  199,  200 
Conservatorio  Nacionaly  San  Jose,  175 
Conservatorio  Nacionaly  Santiago,  iS4> 
156,  157,  158,  160,  161,  162,  164, 
165,  200 


Conservatorio  Verdiy  Montevideo,  28 3 
Conservatory.  See  listing  under  place  name 
and  Conservatorio 
Contentamento  (Villa-Lobos),  146 
Continuous  Keyboard,  94 
Contractador  dos  Diamantes  (Mignone), 

134 

ContradanzOy  56,  181,  279 
ContrafuntOy  54,  74 
Contrastes  (Pinto),  98 
Contreras,  Salvador,  224,  227,  233,  237, 
243 

biography  of,  235-236 
photograph  of,  facing  p.  249 
Contrihucion  al  Estudio  de  la  Musica  en 
Venezuela  (Calcano),  16,  288 
Coolidge  prize,  88 
Coopersmith,  J.  M.,  54,  192 
Copland,  Aaron,  21,  185,  219,  237 
Corazon  de  la  Muhecuy  El  (Williams),  103 
Corddo  de  Praia  (Itibere),  133 
Cordero,  Roque,  261 
Cordoba,  Argentina,  29,  56,  67,  263 
Corimayo  (Caselia),  84 
Coronaciony  La  (Moreno),  199 
Coronacion  del  Zifa  en  Guatavitay  La 
(Posada-Amador),  170 
Coronel  Oviedo,  Paraguay,  265 
Coroneldy  La  (Revueltas),  250 
CoronilUy  La  (Vargas),  108 
Correio  da  Manhdy  3 

CorridoSy  57-58,  60,  191,  218,  219,  233, 
290 

Corridos  (Contreras),  235 
Corta-Jacay  113 

(Vianna),  142 
(Torre),  1 01 
Cortijo,  L,  170 

Cory  Wara  (Velasco  Maidana),  108 
Cos  Cob  Press,  235 

Cosas  de  Negros  {P^osu)-,  sSy  jT 

Cosme,  Luiz,  biography  of,  126 
Costa,  Pedro  Valenti,  biography  of,  87 
Costa  Rica,  173-178 

folklore  of,  16,  i73-i74>  i75 
music  publishing  in,  1 5,  1 8 
musical  competitions  in,  175-176 
musical  culture  in,  174-175 
musical  instruments  of,  51,  173 
musicians  of,  31,  37,  176-178 
national  anthem  of,  174-175 


338 


INDEX 


Costa  Rlcctn  Dances  (Quesada),  178 
Cotapos,  Acario,  13,  27,  31 
biography  of,  159 

Country  Dance,  English,  56,  18 1,  279 
Courlander,  Harold,  16,  180,  209,  210 
covers  of  Latin  American  compositions, 
facing  p.  88 

Creadon  del  H ombre.  La  (Kostakowsky), 
240 

Creoles,  64 

Crefusculo  (Braga),  124 
Crefusculo  (Sanchez  Malaga),  275 
Crefusculo  Sertanejo  (Casabona),  126 
Crefusculo  Sertanejo  (Fernandez),  127 
Criolla  (Lecuna),  293 
Criollos,  64 

Croce  d^Oro,  La  (Oswald),  139 
Cromos  Nacionales  (Molina  Pinillo),  206 
Cronica  de  una  Temforada  Musical  en  el 
Montevideo  de  18^0  (Ayestaran),  283 
Cuanahuac  (Revueltas),  248-249,  249-250, 
251 

Cuando,  56,  75 
Cuatro,  41 

Cuatro  bosquejos  (Casanova),  159 
Cuatro  Soles  (Chavez),  214,  216,  231 
Cuauhtemoc.  See  Guatemoc 
Cuauhtemoc  (Rolon),  251,  252 
Cuba,  178-188 

concerts  by  Slonimsky  in,  5,  23,  24 
dances  of,  56,  57,  59,  60,  178-182 
folklore  of,  15,  40,  54,  178-182,  183, 
184,  187,  188,  194 
music  publishing  in,  15,  17,  183 
musical  competitions  in,  20 
musical  culture  of,  182-183 
musicians  of,  19,  23,  28,  29,  33-34,  37, 
183-188 

national  anthem  of,  66 
symphony  orchestra  of,  23,  24,  182 
Cuba  Priniitiva  (Morales),  68 
Cuban  Overture  (Gershwin),  23 
Cucaracha,  La,  222,  230 
Cucumbi,  1 16 
Cucumbizinho ,  1 1 6 
Cucumbyzinho  (Mignone),  135,  136 
Cucuta,  Colombia,  22 

Cueca,  60,  75,  106,  152,  153,  158, 

268-269 

Cueca  (Aretz-Thiele),  82 
Cueca  (Tiohni),  to  I 


Cueca  Chilena.  See  Cueca 
Cuecas  (Roncal),  108 
Cuenca,  Ecuador,  199 
Cuento  de  Abril  (Esposito),  88 
Cuento  Brujo  (Velasco  Maidana),  108 
Cueramaro,  Mexico,  235 
117,  131,  135 
Culo-en-tierra,  43,  289 
Cumaco,  289 

Cumanda,  or  the  Virgin  of  the,.  Jungle 
(Traversari),  200 
Cumbia,  260 
Cultura  Musical,  17 

Cultura  Musical  del  Pueblo  Hondureho,  La 
(Ramos),  2 12-2 13 
Cuna  Indians,  47 
Cununu,  167 
Curacha,  260 

Curugd  (Guarnieri),  131,  13s 

Curugil,  263 

Cur  uni,  1 1 6 

Curveta,  289 

Cuyo,  Argentina,  77 

Cuzco,  Peru,  272,  273 

D 

Da  Cunha,  Joao  Itibere,  biography  of,  126 
Dadey,  Jose,  1 68 

Daimons  du  Culte  Vodu,  Les  (Holly),  208 
Dalcroze  method,  107 
Dalevuelta,  Jacopo,  218 
Dallas,  Texas,  orchestra  of,  226 
Dambly,  Paul,  30 

Dance  to  the  Coca  (Delgadillo),  257 
dances,  48,  54,  55-64,  68,  69,  70,  73-78, 
105-106,  110-116,  152-153,  166-167, 
173-174,  1S8-191,  198,  203,  209-210, 
214,  215,  217-219,  254-256,  259-260, 
263-264,  267-269,  279,  282,  290 
categories  of,  58-60 
geographical  distribution  of,  59-60 
the  Tango,  56-57,  58,  60-64,  114 
Dances  of  Mestizo  Indians  of  Brazil.  See 
Dansas  Africanas 
Dangereuse,  La  (Lamothe),  212 
Dans  le  Jar  din  des  Marts  (Juan  Jos6 
Castro),  85 

D.2W-2  (Mignone).  See  Qongada  (Mi¬ 
gnone) 


INDEX 


3S9 


Dansa  Asturiana  (Mignone),  135 
Dansa  Brasileira  (ballet),  129 
Dansa  Brasileira  (Guarnieri),  113,  131, 
132,  facing  p.  152 
Dansa  Caracteristica  (Netto),  138 
Dansa  de  Negros  (Vianna),  142 
Dansa  Selvagem  (Guarnieri),  131,  132, 

133 

Dansa  do s  Tangaras  (Fernandez),  127 
Dansas  Africanas  (Villa-Lobos),  144,  149, 

150 

Dansas  Brasileiras  (Siqueira),  141 
Dansas  das  Bruxas  (Mignone),  134,  136 
Dansas  Mexicanas  (Ponce),  247 
Danse  des  Anciens  Mexicains  (Ponce),  247 
Danse  Plaisante  et  Sentimentale  (Da 
Cunha),  126 
Danza^  the,  174,  279 
Danza  (Contreras),  235 
Danza  (Lecuna),  293 
Danza  (Negrete),  162 
Danza  (Perceval),  98 
Danza  (Suffern),  100 
Danza  de  AMa  (Halffter),  238 
Danza  Criolla  (Tosar  Errecart),  287 
Danza  de  FlechaSj  La  (Delgadillo),  257 
Danza  de  las  Fuerzas  Niievas  (Galindo), 

237 

Danza  Guerrera  (Juan  Jose  Castro),  86 
Danza  Habanera^  56 
Danza  Huanca  (Robles),  275 
Dafiza  del  Incienso  (Baratta),  281 
Danza  Lucumi  (Caturla),  185 
Danza  de  la  Muerte  y  la  Nina  (Graetzcr), 
92 

Danza  Negra  (Roldan),  187 
Danza  Peruana  (Verneuil),  278 
Danza  Ritual  Africana  (Mejia),  170 
Danza  Sobre  un  Tema  Indio  (Pacheco  de 
Cespedes),  274 

Danza  del  Tambor  (Caturla),  185 
Danza  Tarakumara  (Mendoza),  242 
Danzante^  198 

Danzantes  YaqtiiSy  Los  (Ayala),  226 
Danzas  (Peralta),  195 
Danzas  Americanas  (Gaito),  90 
Danzas  Argentinas  (Gil),  91 
Danzas  Argentinas  (Ginastera),  92 
Danzas  Argentinas  (Iglesias  Villoud),  93 
Danzas  y  Canciones  Argentinas  (Vega),  15, 
74 


Danzas  Cub  anas  (Caturla),  184,  185 
Danzas  Fantasticas  (Gaito),  90 
Danzas  Quisqueyanas  (Mejia- Arredondo), 
195 

Danzon^  179,  181 
Dario,  Ruben,  1S8,  258 
Datos  Biograjicos  de  Humberto  Allende 
(Nunez  Navarrete),  156 
Davis,  John  Constance,  45 
De  Baile  (Roldan),  187 
De  Castilla  (Pedrell),  287 
De  Marcha  (Roldan),  187 
De  Mi  Pais  (Aguirre),  82 
De  mi  Tierra  (Ugarte),  101 
De  Rito  (Roldan),  187 
De  Silva,  Alfonso,  biography  of,  273 
Debajo  de  un  Limon  Verde  (Humberto 
Allende),  156 

Debussy,  Claude,  32,  125,  143,  148,  155, 
162,  231,  251,  277 

Del  Areito  de  Anacaona  al  Poema  Folk- 
lorico  (Marchena),  16,  190,  194 
Del  Campo,  Conrado,  162,  193 
Del  Folklore  Musical  Dominicano  (Ar- 
zeno),  190,  192 

Del  Orbe,  Gabriel,  biography  of,  193 
Del  Terruno  (Uribe-Holguin),  171 
Delgadillo,  Luis  A.,  8,  18,  35,  256,  257, 
260 

biography  of,  257-258 
photograph  of,  facing  p.  281 
Densmore,  Frances,  258-259 
Desafioj  54,  114 

Descoherta  do  Brazil j  A  (Eleazar  de  Car¬ 
valho),  125 

Descobrimento  do  Brasil  (Ovalle),  139 
Descobrimento  do  BrasU  (Villa-Lobos), 
145,  150 

Descubrimiento  de  America  (Escobar 
Casas),  170 

Desesferance,  Sqc  Sonata-Fantasia 

Desire  (Ponce),  245 

Desfedida,  La  (Humberto  Allende),  155 

Despertar  de  Ariely  O  (Siqueira),  141 

Destino  (Bisquertt),  158 

Detachement  VmantyLe  (Cotapos),  159 

Deutscher  Gruss  am  CMley  Ein  (F rick) , 

Deux  Poemes  de  Tagore  (Ponce),  246 
Dialoguey  for  violin  and  piano  (SufFern), 


100 


340 


INDEX 


Diario  Latino^  El^  4 
Diarto  da  Noite^  5 
Diaz,  Porfirio,  222,  228,  250 
Biaz  Zelaya,  Francisco,  212 
biography  of,  213 

Diccionario  de  la  Musica  llustrado^  27, 
96 

Dione  (Sanchez  de  Fuentes),  188 
Discoteca  Nacional  de  Uruguay^  284 
Discovery  of  Brazil.  See  Descoberta  do  Bra- 
sil^  A 

Disney,  Walt,  1 1 3 
DisonanciaSy  63 

Divertimento  (Holzmann),  273 
Divertimento  (Santoro),  140 
Dobson,  Tom,  1 1 
Doloras  (Leng),  161 
Dolorosay  La  (Sanchez  de  Fuentes),  188 
Domenico  Zifoliy  El  Gran  Compositor  y 
Organisia  Romano  (Ayestaran),  67 
Dominican  Republic,  188-196 
dances  of,  188-191,  210 
folklore  of,  i6,  54,  67,  fig,  fi9,  71,  ,g8- 
191,  194 

musical  competitions  of,  19-20,  1 91-19 2, 

193 

musical  culture  of,  191-192 
musicians  of,  29>  37>  3^>  57> 
national  anthem  of,  19 1,  195 
symphony  orchestra  of,  23,  19 1 
Dominican  Rhapsody,  the,  193,  195 
Dominican  Rhapsody  (Rivera),  195 
Don  Juan  de  los  Infernos  (Salazar),  252 
Don  Lindo  de  Aimer ia  (Halffter),  237-238 
Doncella  Ixquic,  La  (Ricardo  Castillo), 
205 

Donizetti,  Gaetano,  283 

Doreya  (Sanchez  de  Fuentes),  i88 

Dorita  (Santos),  281 

Dos  Canciones  (Letelier),  161 

Dos  Emocionales  158 

Dos  Santos,  Ernesto,  biography  of,  126 
Downes,  Olin,  232-233 
Drangosch,  Ernesto,  7,  88,  90 
biography  of,  87 

drums,  42,  43,  44>  45>  4^-47»  69,  70,  71, 
116,  117,  167,  180,  189,  208-209, 
215-216,  217,  256,  259,  263,  270, 
288-289 

Drums  and  Drummers  in  A fro-Brazilian 
Cult  Life  (Herskovits),  117 


Duarte  (Vega),  196 
Dublanc,  Emilio,  biography  of,  87 
Due  Amori  (Tello),  253 
Due  Movimenti  (Holzmann),  274 
Dukas,  Paul,  165,  170,  245,  251 
Duo  C oncer tani  (Stravinsky),  4 
Duo  para  Pato  y  Canario  (Revueltas),  249 
250 

Duran,  Gustavo,  14 
Durand,  music  publisher,  9a 
Duron,  Romulo,  65 
Dushkin,  Samuel,  238 

E 

ecclesiastical  music,  67-68,  71,  77,  79,  105, 
106,  ii8,  119,  177,  189,  219,  270- 
271,  291-292 
Eco  Musicaly  17,  275,  278 
Ecole  Normale  de  Musique^  Paris,  170,  245 
tcole  Universelley  Paris,  253 
Ecos  del  Litoral  (Vargas),  108 
Ecuador 

musical  instruments  of,  43,  198 
musicians  of,  37,  199-200 
national  anthem  of,  199 
and  Peru,  271 

Ecuador  en  Cien  A  nos  de  Indefendenciay  Ely 
16,  197,  199 

Ecuadorian  Symphony  (Brescia),  199 
Edith  (Mejia),  241 

Editorial  Cooperativa  Interamericana  de 
Compositoresy  92,  95,  126,  133,  140, 
161,  171,  247,  251,  272,  276,  283- 
284,  285,  286,  287 
Edmea  (Aranjo),  123 
“Eduardo  Fabini,  Musico,”  286 
EducaciQUy  16,  173,  175 
Educacion  de  la  Memoria  Musical 
(Barbacci),  272 

education,  musical.  See  musical  education 
8  de  Septiemhre  (Carrillo),  229 
8  X  Radio  (Revueltas),  30-31,  249,  250, 
251  ■  ,  , 

i8gs  (Rolon).  See  Zapotldn 
Eilenburg,  Germany,  286 
Bin  Deutscher  Gruss  aus  Chile  (Frick),  153 
Eine  Lustige  Ouverture  (Ippisch)  ,  206 
Einstem  Fahh,  An  31,  126 

EU  See  listing  under  main  word  of  title 
(Siqueira),  141 


INDEX 


Elegy  and  Er elude  (Estrada),  88 
Elementos  de  Musica  (Elfzaga),  222 
Elias,  Alfonso  de,  33,  225 
biography  of,  236 
Elie,  Justin,  21 1 
biography  of,  21 1 
EUla  (Mena),  195 
Eliz,  Leonardo,  1 5 1 
Elizaga,  Jose  Mariano,  222 
Emholada^  114,  116 
Emferor  Jones  (O’Neill),  47,  208 
En  Oriente  (Valle-Riestra),  278 
En  la  Paz  de  los  Campos  (Espoile),  88 
En  Piragua  (Torre),  10 1 
En  las  Ruinas  del  Templo  del  Sol 
(Valcarcel),  277 

En  el  Templo  de  Yocari  (Mejia-Ar- 
redondo),  195 

Encantamento  (Guarnieri),  131,  132 
Enciclopedia  de  la  Musica j  65 
EncuentrOy  El  (Humberto  Allende),  156 
Energia  (Chavez),  30,  231,  235 
England,  Latin  American  Composer  from, 
168 

English  Country  Dance,  56,  181,  279 
English  origin,  Latin  American  composers 
of,  29,  102 
Enkomoy  180 

Enoch  Arden  (Tennyson),  opera  by 
Sanchez  de  Fuentes  after,  188 
Enriquillo  (Ceron),  192 
Ensaio  sohre  Musica  Brasileira  (Andrade), 
57,110,122,123 

Entre  las  (Ugarte),  loi 

Entre  Somhr as  Anda  el  (Galindo), 

237 

Epic  of  Latin  American  Literature y  The 
(Torres-Rioseco),  73-74 
Epigrammes  Ironiques  et  Sentimentales 
(Villa-Lobos),  146,  150 
Erigona  (Jimenez  Mabarak),  240 
Ermitdo  da  G/om,  0  (Republicano),  140 
Eros  (Luzzatti),  93 
Eros  (Pinto),  98 
ErquSy  107 

Escenas  Argentlnas  (Buchardo),  33,  83 
Escenas  Camp esinas  Chilenas  (Allende),  7, 

155-  ^  ■  ■ 

Escenas  Eominicanas  (Lovelace),  194 
Escenas  Indoamericanas  (Iglesias  Villoud), 


S4I 

Escenas  Infantiles  (Ugarte),  loi 
Escenas  Pastoriles  (Delgadillo),  257 
Escenas  Sinjonicas  (Negrete)  ,  162 
Eschig,  Max,  149 
Escobar,  Maria  Luisa,  292 
biography  of,  292-293 
Escobar  Casas,  Gabriel,  biography  of,  170 
Escola  Nacional  de  Musicuy  Rio  de  Janeiro, 

2  0,  II,  22,  28,  I2I,  123,  124,  125, 

Escondido y  58,  74,  75 
Escuela  de  las  Flores y  La  (Palma),  96 
Escuela  de  MusicUy  Caracas,  291,  292,  293 
Escuela  Normal  de  Musica,  Asuncion,  264, 
265 

Esfinge,  La  (Williams),  103 

Esmeralda  (Massa),  94 

Esnaola,  Juan  Pedro,  79 

Espadero,  Nicolas  Ruiz,  1S2 

Espantalko,  O  (Mignone),  135 

Espinola  y  Reyes,  Juan  Bautista,  biography 

193 

Espinosa,  Guillermo,  23,  169 
biography  of,  170 
E spiral  (Chavez),  231,  235 
Espoile,  Raul,  33 
biography  of,  87-88 
Esposito,  Arnaldo  d%  biography  of,  SS 
Esquinas  (Revueltas),  249,  250,  251 
EsquinazOy  48,  153 
Estampas  (Salazar),  252 
Estampas  Callejeras  (Kostakowsky),  240 
Estampas  de  Chile  (Urrutia),  165 
Estampas  del  Cuzco  (Lanao),  274 
Estampas  Nocturnas  (Ponce),  247 
(Ponce  de  Leon),  168 
Estiloy  $6y  74,  78 
Estilo  (Troiani),  78,  loi 
Estrada,  Carlos,  283 
biography  of,  285 

Estrada,  Juan  A.  Garcia,  biography  of,  88 
EstrelUta  (Ponce),  8,  39,  224,  245,  246, 
247,  facing  p.  152 
Estudio  (Isamitt),  160 
E studios  (Humberto  Allende),  156 
Estudos  de  Folclore  (Gallet),  15,  43-44> 
123,  129 

Eterna  Historia,  La  (Massa) ,  94 
Eterno  Reposo  (Williams),  103 
(Humberto  Allende),  156 
itudes  (Ponce),  247 


342 


INDEX 


'Etudes  (Tosar  Errecart),  287 
European  inHuence,  on  Latin  American 
musical  culture,  54.-55,  64,  65, 

109,  no,  112,  114-115,  173, 

210,  263-264,  271,  283 
Evangelina  (Berutti),  83 
Evaso^  U  (Massa),  94 
Evocacion  (Nunez  Navarrete),  162 
Evocacion  Araucana  (Isamitt),  160 
Evocacion  Quichua  (Gilardi),  91 
Evocadones  (Mejia-Arredondo),  194 
Evocadones  Criollas  (Broqua),  284 
Evoludon  de  la  Armonta  a  Travis 
Prindfio  Cidico-'Muskal,  La  (Mi- 
chaca),  242 

Exdgonos  (Chavez),  231 
Exeter,  England,  102 
expressionism,  3 
Extase  (Chavez),  230,  235 
Extirfadon  de  la  Idolatria  del  Peru  (Ar¬ 
riaga),  270 


F 

Fabini,  Eduardo,  29,  32,  283 
biography  of,  285-286 
Fabreg^,  Ricardo,  260 
biography  of,  261 
Failde,  Miguel,  181 
Fairy  of  the  Blue  Mountain 
Castillo),  205 
Fall  of  the  House  of  Usher,  The  (Moriilo), 
94 

Falla,  Manuel  de,  29,  237,  240,  252 
Fallon,  Diego,  35,  168 
Famous  Music  Corporation,  192 
Fandango^  77,  153 
Fantasia  (Bustamente),  292 
Fantasia  (Leng),  161 
Fantasia  {Tt\\o)y  253 
Fantasia  Brasileira  (Dinora  de  Carvalho), 
125 

Fantasia  Brasileira  (Mignone),  135,  136 
Fantasia  Mexicana  (Mariscal),  241 
Fantasia  dos  Movimentos  Mixtos  (Villa- 
Lobos),  146-147,  150 
Fantasia  Quasi  Sonata  (Drangosch) ,  8  7 
Fantasia  Sonido  15  (Carrillo),  230 

Fantasia  Submarina  ^Gsirndo),  159 
Fantasie-Ouverture  (Braga),  123 


Fa?itastic  Efisode  (Burle  Marx),  125 
Fantasy,  for  piano  and  orchestra  (Carrillo) 
229 

Farandola  das  Horas  (Mignone),  134 
Farrafos  (Villa-Lobos),  144 
Farsa  Sentimental  y  Grotesca  (Ascone) 
284 

Fatey  Le  (Oswald),  139 
Faure,  Gabriel,  274 
Faust  (Gounod),  79 
Fausto  (Campo),  79 
Feria  (Sandi),  252 
Ferial  (Ponce),  246 

Fernandez,  Oscar  Lorenzo,  3,  13,  21,  25, 
3^}  39)  III)  115,  120,  121 
biography  of,  126-129 
photograph  of,  facing  p.  216 
Ferrero,  Guglielmo,  62 
Ferrocarriles  de  Baja  California  (Re- 
vueltas),  250,  251 
Ferroni,  of  Italy,  134 
Festa  Dionisiaca  (Mignone),  134 
Festa  das  Igrejas  (Mignone),  136 
Festin  de  los  EnanoSy  El  (Rolon),  251,  252 
Festival  of  Brazilian  Musky  1 50 
Festival  of  Churches.  See  Festa  das  Igre¬ 
jas 

Festival  of  the  Dwarfs.  See  Festin  de  los 
Enanosy  El 

Festive  March  (Gerdes),  273 
Festive  Overture  (Washington  Castro),  87 
richer,  Jacob,  20,  29,  33,  81 
biography  of,  88-89 
photograph  of,  facing  p.  1 85 
Fiesta  (Bisquertt),  158 
Fiesta  Criolla  (Carrillo),  84 
Fiesta  Indigena  (Torre),  loi 
Fiesta  Negra  (Roldan),  187 
Fiesta  Vasca  (Mondino),  286 
prize,  139 

figurine,  Peruvian,  facing  p.  56 
Filosofia  Elemental  de  Musica  (Alzedo), 
271 

Final  de  Norma  (Delgadillo),  258 
finger-snapping  dances,  category  of,  58 
Firmeza,  56,  58,  75)  7^ 

Firmeza  (Gilardi) ,  9 1 
First  Symphony.  See  Symphony  No.  i 
Fischer,  Carl,  86,  89,  97,  238,  251 
Fishermen,  The,  See  Pescadores,  Os 
S  Piezas  Breves  Cxnz),  1 6^ 


71, 

209, 


del 


(Ricardo 


INDEX 


5  Poemas  Tragicos  (Santa  Cruz),  163,  164 
5  Frimeras  Comfosiciones  (Carrillo),  229, 
230 

FlechazOj  El  (Quaratino),  99 
Fieisher,  Edwin  A.,  6 
Fleisher  Collection,  6,  7,  9,  82  ff.,  104, 
124  ff.,  156,  158,  159,  1615  162,  165, 
170,  172,  176,  177,  178,  184,  185, 

187,  194,  199,  200,  204  ff.,  213, 

226*ff.,  235  ff.,  236,  237,  240  ff., 

251  ff.,  272  ff.,  281,  284,  285,  286, 

^^93 

Fleites,  Virginia,  183 
biography  of,  185 
Fleurs  Haiti  (Lamothe),  211 
Flor  de  Irufe^  La  (Gaito),  90 
Flor  de  Nieve  (Gaito),  90 
Flor  de  Trefnembi  (Guarnieri),  131,  132 
Florence,  Italy,  139 

Florence  Festival  of  Contemporary  Music, 

273 

Flores,  Jose  Asuncion,  29-30,  57,  264 
biography  of,  264 
flute,  nasal,  facing  p.  89 
flutes,  42,  44,  45,  46,  47,  54,  70,  71,  106, 
107,  198,  215,  259,  263,  269,  279, 
289 

Folclore  Negro  no  Brasil  (Ramos),  114 
folk  music:  composers  using,  82,  83,  90,  92, 
93,  96,  102,  107,  108,  124  ff.,  155, 
160,  165,  170,  175  ff.,  183,  184,  187, 

188,  194  ff.,  21 1,  224  ff.,  232  ff.,  245, 
246,  248,  252,  257,  265,  271  ff.,  283, 
285,  286,  293 

history  of,  68-71 

literature  on,  14-16,  68-70,  122,  154, 
173,  224,  258-259,  267-268,  276 
national  anthems  as,  66-67,  79»  1 19-1^0 
scales  and  rhythms  of,  50-55,  1 04-1 05, 
109-115,  166-167,  178-182,  190,  197- 
198,  201-203,  259-260,  262,  266, 
268-270,  289 

style  for,  39-40,  42.  See  also  dances  j 
musical  instruments  j  songs 
FolhloMusica  E>omimcana^  La  (Pena 
Morell),  196 
folklore.  folk  music 
Folklore  Ere silien  (Nery),  49 
Folklore  Colombiano  (JAm2i)^  16,  166,  170 
Folklore  y  la  Musica  Mexicana^  El 
(Campos),  15,  224 


343 

Folklore  Musical  de  las  Ciudades,  El 
(Campos),  15,  224 

Folklore  Musical  Dominicano  (Nolasco), 
16 

Folklore  Sinfonico  (Vega),  196 
Folklore  Society  of  Kharkov,  Russia,  156 
Fonseca,  Jimmy,  176 
Fonseca,  Julio,  175 
biography  of,  176 

Football  Association  of  Uruguay,  musical 
competition  of,  285 

‘'Formula  for  Musicological  Eligibility,” 
36-38 

Fornaris,  Jose,  178 
Fosca  (Gomes),  130 
Fototo.  See  Bututu 
4  Miniatures  (Ponce),  246 
4  Poemas  de  Gahriela  Mistral  (Santa 
Cruz),  163,  164 
Four  Preludes  (Leng),  161 
Four  Preludes  for  Orchestra  (Cotapos), 
159 

Four  Years  Among  Spanish  Americans 
(Hassaurek),  70,  198-199 
Fox  (Chavez),  235 
Foxtrot,  54,  105,  1 1 3,  167,  269 
Foxtrot  IncaicOy  54,  198 
Franga,  Agnelo,  biography  of,  129 
France:  influence  on  Latin  American  com¬ 
posers  of,  32,  172,  2235  Latin  Ameri¬ 
can  composers  from,  275 
Francette  et  Pia  (Villa-Lobos),  148 
Francisco  Braga  (Gomes),  124 
Franck,  Cesar,  32,  80,  102,  103 
Franco,  Hernando,  68,  220 
Frank,  Waldo,  63 
Fraseologia  Musical y  14,  81 
Freccia,  Massimo,  182 
French  College,  Caracas,  293 
French  origin,  Latin  American  composers 
of,  28,  29 

Frenos  (Espoile),  88 
Fresnillo,  Mexico,  244 
Frevo  (Siqueira),  141 
FrevoSy  116 

Frezier,  of  France,  69,  153,  271 

Frick,  Wilhelm,  153 

Friso  Araucano  (Isamitt) ,  1 60 

E/  (Chavez),  231 
Fuentes,  Juan  B.,  biography  of,  236 
Fuga  Criolla  (Plaza),  293 


344  INDEX 


Funeral  Marches  (Santos),  iti 
FurrucOy  289 
Fututu,  See  Bututu 

G 

Gaceta  Musical^  228 
Gaditanus,  Juan  Navarro,  67 
Gaita^  i6y 

Gaito,  Constantino,  33,  78,  88,  90,  93,  94, 
95,  96,  100 
biography  of,  8 9-90 
Gaito  Conservatory  of  Music,  90 
Gala  Flacida  (Pahissa),  95 
Galeron^  167 
Galimany,  Alberto,  260 
biography  of,  261 

Galindo,  Bias,  28,  217,  219,  224,  225,  227, 
^  ^33>  235,  243 
biography  of,  237 
photograph  of,  facing  p.  249 
Galindo,  Miguel,  15,  224 
Gallac,  Hector  J.,  18,  97 
Gallardo,  Lino,  291 

Gallet,  Luciano,  15,  43,  117,  ng,  na, 
123 

biography  of,  129 
GallinOy  260 
Galop,  the,  263-264 
Gamarra,  Abelardo,  268 
Gante,  Pedro  de,  67,  219 
Ganzdj  43-44,  117 
Garatuja^  O  (Nepomuceno),  137 
Garay,  Narciso,  15,  42,  44,  47,  171,  258, 
260 

biography  of,  261 
Garcia,  Jos6  Mauricio  Nunes,  119 
Garcia,  Juan  Francisco,  57 
biography  of,  193 
Garcia,  Wenceslao,  280 
Gdrgaro  Malojo  (Sojo),  294 
Garrido,  Pablo,  i8,  32,  35,  55,  151,  153, 

154 

biography  of,  159-160 
photograph  of,  facing  p.  217 
56,  58,  72,  74,  75,  76,  78 
Gtf/o  (Aguirre),  82 
Gato  con  Relaciones,  75 
Gauchos,  54,  73-74,  75,  76,  77, 

281 

Gavot,  the,  271 


Gavotte  (Ponce),  9,  244,  247 
Gazeta  da  T ardcy  1 1 4 
GazettCy  Rio  de  Janeiro,  119 
Generous  MooresSy  The  (Andrino),  203 
Genesis  de  la  Revolucion  Musical  del 
Sonido  rj  (Carrillo),  34,  230 
Geneva,  Switzerland,  138,  157 
Genoa,  Italy,  130 
Gentlevjomany  They  61 
Georgia  (Jose  Maria  Castro),  84-85 
Gerdes,  Federico,  biography  of,  273 
German  origin,  Latin  American  composers 
of,  28,  29,  124,  i6o 

Germany:  influence  on  Latin  American 
music  of,  137 

musicians  in  Latin  America  from,  24, 
U3>  153-154J  221,  273,  286 
Gershwin,  George,  23 
Ghent  Conservatory,  228 
Gianneo,  Luis,  28 
biography  of,  90-91 
photograph  of,  facing  p.  184 
Gianoli,  Antonio,  280 
Gibson,  Hugh,  48 
Gil,  Jos6,  103 
biography  of,  91 
Gilardi,  Gilardo,  28,  81,  87 
biography  of,  91 
Gim6nez,  Herminio,  264 
Gimenez,  Remberto,  264 
biography  of,  265 
Ginastera,  Alberto,  20,  33 
biography  of,  91-92 
photograph  of,  facing  p,  184 
Gino  Corsini  (Morales),  243 
Gioia  del  Colle,  Italy,  276 
Gitanillay  La  (Cervantes),  music  by  Orbon 
for,  186 

Gloria  al  Bravo  Pueblo  (Landaeta),  66, 
291 

Glorias  A ndinas  (Traversari) ,  200 
Glory  to  the  General  Garcia  Granados 
(Mendoza),  206 

Gnattali,  Radames,  biography  of,  129 
Godiamo  la  (Casabona),  125 
Gomes,  Carlos,  25,  120 
biography  of,  130-1 31 
Gomes,  Tapaj os,  124 
Gonz£lez,  Juan  Carlos  Moreno,  16 
Gonzalez  Brayo,  Antonio,  106 
biography  of,  107 


INDEX 


34S 


Gonzalez  Gamarraj  Francisco,  29 
biography  of,  273 

Gonzalez  Iniguez,  Hllario,  183,  185 
biography  of,  185 
Gonzalez  Sol,  Rafael,  16,  203,  280 
Good,  Albert  Irwin,  47 
Goodspeed,  T.  Harper,  36 
Gore,  pianist,  280 

Goya  y  Lucientes,  Francisco  de,  music  in¬ 
spired  by,  94 

Graetzer,  Guillermo,  biography  of,  92 
Gramatges,  Harold,  183 
biography  of,  185 

Gran  Marcha  de  la  Exfosicion  (Jimmy 
Fonseca),  176 
Granada  (Ponce),  246 
Grand  Prix  International  des  PianisteSy  157 
Greek  Miniatures  (Humberto  Allende), 
156 

Grenet,  Emilio,  15,  178,  179 
Grieg,  Edvard,  40 
Grignola,  music  publisher,  12 
GrijutianSy  217 
GrillOy  El  (Ayala),  227 
Grisolia,  Pascual,  biography  of,  92 
Grko  de  Asencioy  El  (Rodriguez  Socas), 
287 

Grosbayne,  Benjamin,  14 
Group  of  the  Four.  See  Grufo  de  lbs  Cuairo 
Grufo  de  Jovenes  Comfositores.  See  Grufo 
de  los  Cuatro 

Grufo  de  los  Cuatro y  224,  225,  227,  235, 
237,  243 

photograph  of,  facing  p.  249 
Grufo  Renovaciony  an,  12,  33,  34,  80-81, 
84,  85,  89,  90)  9H  9^  97>  100 

Grufo  de  Renovacion  Muskaly  33-34)  1S3, 
184,  185,  186 
GuabinUy  167 
GudcharUy 

Guacharacay  16% 

Guachiy  167-168 

Guadalajara,  Mexico,  223,  236,  251,  252, 
253 

Guailkhaday  x’]  1 
GuajirUy  58,  180,  181 

GualkhadaSy  Peruvian  Christmas  carols,  48 
GualkhOyEl  (Pinto),  98 
Guanacaste,  Costa  Rica,  173,  174 
Guarachay  58,  180,  181 
Guaranduy  198 


Guaranky  29,  57,  264 

Guarany  Indians,  54,  57,  130,  262-264 

Guaredtasy  Las  (Sandi),  252 

Guarin,  Jose  Joaquin,  168 

Guarnieri,  Camargo,  13,  28,  29,  32,  39, 

^  II3)  115 

biography  of,  1 31-13  3 
musical  autograph,  facing  p.  152 
photograph  of,  facing  p.  216 
GuasUy  Luy  290 

Guastavino,  Carlos,  biography  of,  92-93 
Guatema  (Jesus  Castillo),  205 
Guatemala,  200-207 

concert  by  Slonimsky  in,  3  n,  4 
dances  of,  59,  60,  203 
folklore  of,  15,  53,  200-203 
music  publishing  in,  1 8 
musical  culture  of,  203-204 
musicians  of,  19,  29,  37,  204-207 
national  anthem  of,  200 
radio  station  of,  26,  204 
Guatemala  (Ricardo  Castillo),  203,  205 
Guatemala  City,  Guatemala,  2,  3  n,  203, 
204,  205,  206,  207 

Guatemalan  Rhafsodies  (Molina  Pinillo), 
206 

Guatemoc,  Emperor  of  the  Aztecs,  221 
Guatimotzin  (Ortega),  221 
Guazdy  167-168 
Gueguence  play,  48,  256 
Giiegilence  X $6 

Guelaguetza  (Mariscal).  See  Tres  Es- 
tamfas  Oaxaquenas 
Guerra  (Villa-Lobos),  144,  150 
Guggenheim  Foundation,  7,  92 
Guia  Pratko  (Villa-Lobos),  no,  143 
Guide  to  Latin  A merican  M usky  Ay' 14. 
Guiroy  44,  45,  47,  168,  180,  234,  259,  263 
Guitarra  del  Diablo y  La  (Urrutia),  165 
Gukarrony  219 

guitars,  41-42,  69,  116,  167,  173,  219, 
259,263, 

Gumilla,  Joseph,  47 

Gutierrez,  Manuel  Maria,  67,  174-175 

, H' 

Habanerdy  56-S7)  77)  174)  57S,  i79)  ^^o- 
181,  183 

Habanera  del  CafSy  56 


346 


INDEX 


Habaneras  (Peralta),  195 
Hague,  Eleanor,  14 
Hahn,  Reynaldo,  274,  292 
Haiti,  207-212 

folklore  of,  16,  208-210 
musicians  of,  28,  37,  21 1-2 12 
Voodoo  ritual  in,  48,  208,  209-210 
Haiti  Singing  (Courlander),  16,  210 
Hale,  Philip,  26 
Halifter,  Ernest,  237 
Halffter,  Rodolfo,  29 
biography  of,  237-238 
Hamburg,  Germany,  212 
handkerchief  dances,  category  of,  58,  18 1 
Harawi,  See  Yaravi 

Harcourt,  Raoul  44,  50,  197,  267,  268, 
275 

harps,  42,  69,  facing  p.  57 
Harrild  (Morillo),  94 
Harris,  Victor,  1 1 
Hassaurek,  F.,  70,  198 
Havana,  Cuba,  5,  17,  19,  23,  24,  34,  40- 
41,  60,  68,  182,  183,  184,  5^85)  186, 
187,  188,  245,  257 
Haydn,  Joseph,  90 
Hayllai-Quifac,  See  AylU-Quefa 
Heifetz,  Jascha,  247 
Heitor,  Luiz,  120,  122 
Helena  (Araujo),  123 
Helm,  Anthony,  69 
Heredia,  Jose  Marfa,  178 
Heretic^ s  Bride ,  The.  See  Novia  del  Hereje, 
La 

Hernandez,  Julio  Alberto,  biography  of, 
193-194 

Hernandez  Gonzola,  Gisela,  183 
biography  of,  185 

Hernandez  Moncada,  Eduardo,  223,  225, 

243 

biography  of,  238 
HeroeSj  Los  (Berutti),  83 
Heroic  March  (Santos),  281 
Heroic  Poem  (Ficher),  88 
Herskovits,  Melville  J.,  1 1 7,  209 
Hexagons.  See  Exdgonos 
Hijos  del  Soly  Los  (Palma),  96 
Hijos  del  SolyLos  (Velasco  Maidana),  108 
Himno  y  Danza  {SsLs)i  I'jS 
Hitnno  de  la  Indefendencia  ^ 

191 

Hitnnb  Istmeho  (Jorge),  66,  261,  262 


Himno  Peniafonico  (Traversari),  200 
Himno  de  la  Raza  (Fernandez),  128 
Himno  de  los  Restauradores  (Indarte),  76 
Himno  al  Soly  38,  39,  267,  275 
Himno  al  Sol  (Jesus  Castillo),  205 
Himno  al  Sol  (Pacheco  de  Cespedes),  274 
Himno  al  Sol  (Robles),  275 
Himno  al  Sol  (Sas),  276 
HINy  HIIN,  192,  194 
Hindemith,  Paul,  92,  163,  165 
Hino  da  Indefendencia  e  Hino  Nacional 
(Caldeira),  1 20 
Hispalensis,  Juan  Navarro,  67 
Hisfaniques  (Pedrell),  287 
Hispano-American,  use  of  term,  65 
Histoire  Generale  des  VoyageSy  69 
Histoire  d^un  Voyage  (Pernetty),  69 
Historia  del  Arte  de  la  Musica  en  El  Sal¬ 
vador  (Gonzalez  Sol),  16,  203,  280 
Historia  de  la  Guitara  (Munoz),  41 
Historia  de  las  Indias  (Las  Casas),  189 
Historia  de  Moros  y  CristianoSy  48,  279-280 
Historia  da  Musica  (Paranhos),  122 
Historia  de  la  Musica  Argentina  (Schi- 
anca),  74,  99 

Historia  da  Musica  Brasileira  (Almeida), 
15,  115,  122 

Historia  de  la  Musica  Mejicana  (Galindo), 
224 

Historia  de  la  Musica  en  Mexico  (Sal¬ 
divar),  217,  224 

Historia  de  la  Musica  en  El  Uruguay 
(Ayestaran),  i6 

Historia  Natural  y  General  de  las  Indias,  La 
(Oviedo),  68,  189,  255 
Historiettes  (Villa-Lobos),  149,  150 
Hoja  de  Album  (Carrillo),  230 
Hoja  de  PlatUy  La  (Sandi),  253 
Holly,  Arthur  C.,  208 
Holzmann,  Rudolph,  272,  273,  275,  277, 

^  278 

biography  of,  273-274 
Homage  to  the  Dominican  National 
Anthems  (Mena),  195 
H ombre  Mayay  El  (Ayala),  226 
Homenaje  a  Federico  Garcta  Lorca 
(Revueltas),  32,  249,  250,  251 
Honduras,  21 2-2 13 
folklore  of,  16 

musical  education  in,  212-2x3 
musicians  of,  35,  37,  42,  213 


INDEX 


HoraSj  Las  (Plaza),  293 
Horrida  Nox  (Berutti),  83 
H.P.  (Chavez),  231,  232-233 
Huacatocorij  105 

HuacoSj  Los  (Velasco  Maidana),  108 
Huadaj  1 5 1 
HuainOj  105,  267,  268 
Huancay  267 
Huancar,  43,  44,  270 
HuafahgOy  60,  217-218,  219,  232 
Huafango  (Moncayo),  243 
Huafango  (Pomar),  244 
Huafangos  (Baqueiro  Foster),  227 
Huaso  y  El  Indio,  El  (Casanova),  159 
Huehuetl,  44,  215,  216,  217,  249 
Huella  (Aguirre),  82 
Huemac  (Rogatis),  99 
Huerfano,  El  (Vargas),  108 
Hueya,  78,  103 
Hueyafdn  (Moncayo),  243 
Hueyotlipa,  Mexico,  241 
Hugo,  Victor  5  opera  by  Gomes  after,  130 
piano  piece  by  Chavez  after,  230 
Huizar,  Candelario,  32,  225,  237 
biography  of,  239-240 
photograph  of,  facing  p.  248 
“Humberto  Allende — The  First  Modernist 
of  Chile”  (Slonimsky),  157 
Humoresque  (Ficher),  89 
Humperdinck,  Engelbert,  87 
Hunac,  Iwan  d^  See  Da  Cunha,  Joao 
Itibere 

Hungary,  conductors  in  Latin  America  of, 
24,  121 

Huss,  Henry  Holden,  11 
Hiittenrauch,  Ricardo,  281 
Hymn  to  Football  (Calcavecchia),  285 
Hymn  of  the  National  Banner  (Braga), 
123,  124 

Hymn  of  the  Refublic  (Miguez),  136-137 
Hymn  to  the  Sun.  See  Hlmno  al  Sol 
Hymn  to  the  Virgin  (Franco),  220 
hymns,  48,  67 


'  I 

Ibaque,  Colombia,  22 

Ibere  de  Lemos,  Arthur,  biography  of,  133 
Ibero-American,  use  of  term,  65 


S47 

Ibero-American  Music  Festival,  Barcelona, 
139,  156,  277 

Ibero-American  Music  Festival,  Bogota, 
128,  169,  170 
Ibert,  Jacques,  88 
Ideal  (Netto),  138 
Idillo  (Vargas),  108 

Iglesias  Viiloud,  Hector,  biography  of,  93 
Ignacio,  Rafael,  biography  of,  194 
II  Fidanzato  del  Mare  (Panizza),  96 
II  Guarany  (Gomes),  25,  120,  130,  131 
II  neige  (Oswald),  139 
IlNeo  (Oswald),  139 
II  Poeta  (Cantu),  125 
Ildegonda  (Morales),  243 
lUustragdo  Musical,  17 
Use  (Gilardi)  ,  91 
Imagenes  (Huizar),  239 
Imagenes  Infantiles  (Santa  Cruz),  163,  164 
Imbafdra  (Fernandez),  127,  128 
Imperial  Academy  of  Music,  121 
Imperial  Conservatorio  de  Musica,  121,  130 
Imfresiones  (Meza),  242 
Imfresiones  de  Estio  (Mendoza),  242 
Imfresiones  de  la  Habana  (Carrillo),  229, 
230 

Imfresiones  de  igso  (Calcavecchia),  285 
Imfresiones  de  la  Puna  (Ginastera),  92 
impressionist  music,  3 ^“33?  io3>  231, 
287 

Imfressoes  Brasileiras  (Cantu),  125 
Imfrevisto,  O  (Villa-Lobos),  144 
Imfromftu  (Halifter),  238 
Imfroviso  (Republicano),  140 
In  a  Canoe.  See  En  Piragua 
Inca  Dance  (Robles),  275 
Inca  Indians,  38-39,  43,  4^j  94>  96? 

102,  10.5,  266-271,  272,  ■■273,  274, 
275,276 
Inca  Legend 

Inca  Preludes  Aguilar),  273 

Inca  Stef  (Valderrama),  54^  269 
Incas,  Los  (Schiuma ) ,  100 
Indarte,  Rivera,  76 

Indian;  contribution  to  folk  music  of  the, 
54“55>  7^1  109-110,  112, 

115-116,  117,  166-167,  173:  in  Latin 
American  culture,  64,  65 

Indian  A irs  (Caba)^  107 
Indian  music.  See  folk  music 
Indigena,  La,  qg 


348 


INDEX 


Indigena  (Vega),  196 

Indio,  El  (Revueltas),  150 

Indio,  El  (Robles),  275 

Indy,  Vincent  d’,  32,  85,  98,  142,  170,  171, 

172,  240,  284,  287 
Infanta^  La  (Schiuma),  loo 
Inganno  Felice^  U  (Rossini),  283 
Innocente,  (Mignone),  134 
Insomnia  (Braga),  124 
Instantaneas  Mexicanas  (Ponce),  247 
Institute  of  Argentine  Literature,  14-15 
Institute  of  Interamerican  Musicology,  291 
Instituto  de  Bellas  Artes^  2  n 
Institiito  Cultural  Peruano  Norte- 
AmericanOy  2  n 

Instituto  de  Extension  Musical^  18,  154, 
163 

Instituto  Nacional  de  Musica^  121,  126, 

i37»  138,  139 

Instrumental  Precortesiano  (Castaneda  and 
Mendoza),  45,  216,  224,  241-242 
instruments.  See  musical  instruments 
Inter-American  Cooperative  of  Composers, 
13 

Inter-American  University  of  the  Air,  79 
Interior  (Bautista),  82 
Interludio  Dramatico  (Garrido),  159 
Interludo  (Mignone),  134 
Intermedia  (Netto),  138 
Intermezzo  Lirico  (Mignone),  135 
International  Composers^  Guild,  27,  159 
International  Congress  of  Folk  Arts, 
Prague,  156 

International  Congress  of  Music  Education, 
Paris,  293 

International  Society  for  Contemporary 
Music,  89 

Introduction  and  Allegro  (Amengual),  157 
Inuhiay  263 

Inventions  (Koellreutter),  133 
Invitadosy  Los  89 

Invocation  to  Metallurgy  (Villa-Lobos), 
143 

Invocation  to  the  Moon  (Delgadillo),  257 
Ionization  (Varese),  5,  45 
Ippisch,  Franz,  203--204 
biography  of,  205-206 
Iracema  (Octaviano),  13  8 
/w  (Miramontes),  243 
Irish  origin,  Latin  American  composers  of, 

■  ,  '.27,  29';. 


Isabelle  (Broqua),  284 
Isamitt,  Carlos,  13,  21,  29,  39,  52,  151,  1^5 
biography  of,  i6o 

Isla  de  los  Ceibos  (Fabini),  285,  286 
Isthmus  Hymn.  See  Himno  Istmeho 
Italian  origin,  Latin  American  composers 
of,  28,  29,  107,  129 

Italy:  influence  on  Latin  American  music 
^5?  33j  ^^y  ^3}  88,  90,  93,  99^ 

120,  123,  130,  182,  222,  243,-^  283 
musicians  in  Latin  America  from,  19,  20 
24,  29,  67,  71,  93,  98,  99, 

^00,  loi, 

125,  182,  203,  221,  274,  276,  280, 
283,  287 

Itibere,  Brasilio,  biography  of,  133 
Izaht  (Villa-Lobos),  143,  144 
Izikowitz,  Karl  Gustav,  43 


J 

Jalapa,  Mexico,  238 
Jalisco,  Mexico,  folklore  of,  239 
Jalisco  (Mendoza),  242 
Jamaica,  58 

Janitzio  (Revueltas),  249,  250 
Japan,  the  Tango  in,  62 
Jarabey  58,  60,  218,  239 
Jarabe  (Miramontes),  243 
Jarana,  sZy  6oy  ziZ 
Jardin  Encantadoy  El  (Elias),  236 
Jardin  VoluftueuXy  Le  (Luzzatti),  93 
JardinerOy  El  (Lamuraglia),  93 
Jardines  (Palma),  96 
jazz,  1 14,  1 15,  159 
Jazz  (Roncal),  108 
jazz  band,  first  Chilean,  159 
Jeanty,  Decide,  21 1 
biography  of,  2 1 1 
Jerez,  Mexico,  239 

Jesuits,  77,  79,  n  6,  1 1 7,  168,  263 

Jicara  de  Agua^  44,  216,  217,  234 
Jimenez,  Emilio,  192 
Jimenez  Mabarak,  Carlos,  225 

biography  of,  240 
JirtiquiaSy  217 

Joanna  de  Flandres  (Gomes),  130 
JongOy  57,  58,  HI,  113 
Jos6  Pacffico,  48 
Jorge,  Santos,  261 
biography  of,  261-262 


INDEX 


349 


JorofOy  58,  190 
Jorofo  (Lecuna),  293 
Juba,  210 
JucOj  256 

Judith  (Luzzatti),  93 
Juerga  (Bautista),  82 
Jujuy,  Argentina,  29,  102 
Julian  the  Emferor  (Ibsen),  music  by  Paz 
for,  97 

Juliao,  Joao  Batista,  biography  of,  133 
jungle  telegraphy,  46-47,  180,  209 
Juno  (Tello),  253 
Jupira  (Braga),  124 
Juventud  (Kostakowsky),  240 

K 

Ka^  210 

Kabelia  (Sanchez  de  Fuentes),  188 
KaLuyOj  105 

Kankikis  (Villa-Lobos),  144 
Kankukus  (Villa-Lobos),  144 
Kaskwa.  See  Cachua 
Kaswa,  See  Cachua 
Kena.  See  Quena 
Kermesse  (Cantu),  125 
Kharkov,  Russia,  156 
Khrisse  (Berutti),  83 
Khusillos^  Los  (Velasco  Maidana),  108 
Kircher,  Athanasius,  70 
Kizkizy  or  the  Last  Exponent  of  the  Inca 
Spirit  (Traversari),  200 
Kkepaj  1 06 

Klavierstuckj  Opus  53a  (Schoenberg),  3,  4 
Kleiber,  Erich,  24 
Koch-Gruenberg,  Theodor,  46 
Koechlin,  Charles,  1 31,  165 
Koellreutter,  Hans- Joachim,  17,  31,  140 
biography  of,  133 
Kollana  (Caba),  107 
KollasuyOy  52 

Kostakowsky,  Jacobo,  29,  33 
biography  of,  240-241 
Krause,  Martin,  244 
Kullkilll^  151 
Kultrun^  1 5 1 
Kmikillkawe^  15 1 
Kuntur  (Espoile),  88 


L 

La.  See  listing  under  main  word  of  title 
La  Cruz  Mena,  Jose  de,  257 
‘‘La  Lira”  Conservatory,  Montevideo,  2S7 
La  Paz,  Bolivia,  23,  104,  107,  loS,  275 
La  Torre,  Haya  de,  65 
Labor,  Symphony  of.  See  Sinfonia  de 
Trabalho 
LadinoSj  64 

Lamas,  Jose  Angel,  291,  292 
Lamento  Indio  (Quaratino),  99 
Lamothe,  Ludovic,  28,  208,  210,  21 1 
biography  of,  21 1-2 12 
Lamuraglia,  Nicolas,  28 
biography  of,  93 
Lanao,  Ulises,  biography  of,  274 
Landaeta,  Juan  Jose,  56,  291 
Landscape.  See  Paisaje 
Lange,  Francisco  Curt,  12-13,  35“3^j 
94>  97)  ^70)  ^7^,  283-284, 

286 

biography  of,  286 
Laquitas.  See  Sicuris 
Larrazabal,  Felipe,  291 
Las  Casas,  Bartolome  de,  189 
Lascas  (Kostakowsky),  240 
Latin  America:  attitude  toward  music  in, 
19-38 

as  a  collective  name,  i,  64-65 
musical  history  of,  67-72 
Latin- American  Art  Music  for  the  Piano ^ 
^5)  92>  95)  97)  100)  132,  150,  157, 
247,  276,  286,  293 

Latin  American  Musicy  Past  and  Present 
(Hague),  14 

Latin  American  Speaks,  A  (Quintanilla) , 
65 

Lavalle,  Luis  Duncker,  271 
Lavin,  Carlos,  biography  of,  160 
Lazaro  (Gaito),  90 
Lecuna,  Juan,  292 
biography^of,  293  , 

Lecuona,  Ernesto,  19,  29 
biography  of,  185-186 
Lecuona’s  Cuban  Boys,  186 
Legendas  (Ovalle),  139 
Legends  of  the  Country.  See  Lendas 
Sertanejas  ■  ■ 

Leilao  (Mignone),  136 


INDEX 


3S0 

Leipzig,  Germany,  34,  83,  228,  273 
Leipzig  Conservatory,  83,  273 
Lenda  do  Cahoclo  (Villa-Lobos),  148,  150 
Lenda  Sertaneja  (Mignone),  115,  135, 
136 

Lendas  Brasileiras  (Mignone),  136,  facing 
P-  152 

Leng,  Alfonso,  8,  13,  29,  33,  161,  164 
biography  of,  1 60-1 61 
Leningrad  Conservatory,  88 
Leningrad  Philharmonic  Orchestra,  88 
Letelier  Llona,  Alfonso,  13,  21,  156  ' 
biography  of,  161 
Levi,  Alexander,  123 
Ley,  Salvador,  204 
biography  of,  206 
Leyenda  Keshua  (Caba),  107 
Leyenda  del  Lago  Andino  (Iglesias 
Villoud),  93 

Leyenda  de  Urutau,  La  (Gilardi),  91 
Leyenda  del  Zorro  del  Rio  Xingu  (Villalba- 
Muhoz),  102 

Liber  quo  IV  Passiones  Christi  Domini 
Continentur,  67 
Liberadoraj  La^  168 
Liberal  Progresista^  El^  2 
Liberia,  Republic  of,  30 
Library  of  Congress,  14 
LicUy  106 

Lied  songs,  92,  106,  268,  273,  277 
Life  in  a  Haitian  Valley  (Herskovits),  209 
Lima,  Archbishop  of,  47,  270 
Lima,  Emirto  de,  16,  30,  166,  167,  168 
biography  of,  170 

Lima,  Peru,  an,  lo,  i6,  17,  18,  23,  14, 
76,  102,  152,  271,  272,  273,  274,  275, 
276,  277,  278 
Lima,  Souza,  132 

biography  of,  13 3-1 34 
Lin-Calel  (Esposito),  88 
Liscano,  Juan,  289 
Listin  DiariOj  194 
Liszt,  Franz,  84,  139 

Llamadas  (Chavez).  See  Sinfonia  Pro- 
letaria 

Llanuras  (Cluzeau  Mortet),  285 
Llerana,  Cristobal  de,  67,  189 
Lo  Schiavo  (Gomes),  130 
Loangue^  %to 
Lobo,  Elias  Alvares,  120 
Lobo  162 


Locomotiva,  La  (Morales),  221,  243 
London,  England,  70,  76,  133,  143,  jj, 
London  Festival  of  Contemporary  Music 
86  ’ 
Lorca,  Garcia,  86,  249,  250 
Los  de  Abajo  (Revueltas),  250 
Lottermoser,  Carlos,  12 
Lovelace,  Manuel  de  Jesus,  biography  of 
194 

Luaces,  Joaquin  Lorenzo,  178 
Lucca,  Esteban  de,  76 
Lucrezia  Borgia  (Donizetti),  66,  283 
Lullaby  (Napolitano),  95 
Lundtij  57,  III,  113 
Luzzatti,  Arturo,  20,  28 
biography  of,  93 
Lyons,  Archbishop  of,  61 


M 

Mackenna,  Carmela,  29 
biography  of,  161-162 
Macumha,  47-48,  58,  116 
Macumba  (Guarnieri),  132 
Madrid,  Spain,  82,  162,  169,  187,  193, 
237>  25o>  252,  287,  291 
Madrid  Conservatory,  82,  193 
Madrigals  (Santa  Cruz),  40 
Madrugada  del  Panadero,  La  (Halifter), 
238 

Mae  d^ A gua  Chant e  (Cosme),  126 
Magdala  (Republican©),  140 
Magdalena^  La  (Massa),  94 
Magic  Islandy  The  (Seabrook),  208 
Mahaltay  106 

Maiden^ s  Prayer^  A  (Badarczewska),  37 

Malagueha  (Lecuona),  186 

Malazarte  (Fernandez),  25,  120,  127,  128 

Malazarte  (Villa-Lobos),  143 

MaloUy  El  (iglesias  Villoud),  93 

Mama  Drum,  208-209 

Mama  Ihes  (Grenet),  179 

MamelucOy  64 

Managua,  Nicaragua,  8,  257 

Managua,  University  of,  3  n 

Mahanitasy  224.,  24.6 

Manchas  de  Color  (Melo),  162 

Mandariny  El  {Vdi5qnez)y  7,^4. 

Manguariy  167 
Mangulinay  191 


INDEX 


Manizalesj  Colombia,  22 
manuscripts,  musical:  collection  of,  2,  6-12 
listings  of,  14 
publication  of,  10-14 
Mar  de  Luna  (Cluzeau  Mortet),  285 
Marabd  (Braga),  124 

MaracaSy  44,  45,  46,  117,  167,  iSo,  198, 
209,  216,  255,  259,  263,  270 
MaracatUy  1 1 1 ,  1 1 6 
Maracaiu  (Tavares),  141 
Maracatu  de  Chico-Rei  (Mignone),  135 
march,  the,  54,  115,  279 
Marchuy  the,  54,  115,  279 
Marc/ia  F  estiva  (Uribe-Holguin),  171, 
172 

Marcha  de  la  Patria.  See  Argentine 
National  Anthem 

Marcha  Patriotica.  See  Argentine  National 
Anthem 

Marcha  del  Saramfiony  La  (Ponce),  244 
Marcha  dos  Soldadinhos  (Fernandez),  128 
Marcha  Triumfhal  (Mignone),  134 
Marcha  Triunfal  (Artigas),  76 
Marche  Humoristique  (Da  Cunha),  126 
Marchena,  Enrique  de,  16,  190,  192 
biography  of,  194 
photograph  of,  facing  p.  281 
M  archinhay  115 
Mari-Sabel  (Caturla),  185 
Maria  Magdalena  (Letelier),  161 
Maria  Petrovna  (Araujo),  8-9,  123 
Maria  Tudor  (Gomes),  130 
Mariachi  (Galindo).  Stt  S ones  Mariachi 
Mariachi  bands,  218-219,  237 
Mariachi  songs,  219,  227,  237 
Marianddy  5  8 
Marianela  (Pahissa),  95 
Marimbuy  200-201,  256,  facing  p.  89 
Marimba  (Kostakowsky),  240 
Marine  (Bisquertt),  158 
MarinerUy  55,  58,  152,  268-269 
Marifosa  na  Luz  (Villa-Lobos),  150 
Mariscal,  Juan  Leon,  225 
biography  of,  241 

Mariscalay  La  (Pacheco  de  Cespedes),  274- 
275 

Marks,  Edward  B.  (publisher),  136,  150 
MarotCy  78 

(Paniagua  Martinez)  ,  207 
Martin,  Edgardo,  183,  185 
biography  of,  186 


35^ 

Martin  Fierro y  music  by  Siccardi  after, 
100 

Martinez,  Maximiliano  Hernandez,  4 
Martinique,  58 

Martirio  dos  Insectos  (Villa-Lobos),  147 
Martha  (Santos),  281 
MarujadaSy  116 
Mass  (Chavez  Aguilar),  273 
Massa,  Juan  Bautista,  biography  of,  93-94 
Massenet,  Jules,  123 
Masses  (Carrillo),  229 
Masses  (Plaza),  293 
Masses  (So jo),  294 
Masters  of  Our  Dayy  238 
Mata,  Julio,  31,  175 
biography  of,  176-177 
Matallana,  Baltasar  de,  288 
MatafUy  263 

Mathilda  (Carrillo),  229 
MatrerOy  El  (Boero),  83 
Mavaltaydn  (Delgadillo),  258 
Maximilian,  Emperor,  10 
MaxixCy  57,  no,  in,  113-114 
Maxixe  (Mignone),  135,  136 
Mayan  culture,  214,  215,  216,  218,  226- 
227,  254 

Mayan  Legend,  The  (Paniagua),  203, 
206,  207 

Mayer-Serra,  Otto,  9-10,  13,  15,  65,  221, 
223,  224,  240,  244-245,  251 
Mazur kuy  no,  198,  218 
Mbaracdy  263 

Mburucuyd  (Fabini),  285,  286 
Mebo  (Siqueira),  141 
Megafaqueha,  105 
Medellin,  Colombia,  22,  170 
Medellin  Conservatory,  170 
Media  Cana,  75 
Media-Tuna,  191 
Medio  Evo  Latino  (Panizza),  96 
Mejia,  Adolfo,  biography  of,  170 
Mejia,  Estanislao,  225 
biography  of,  241 

Mejia- Arredondo,  Enrique,  biography  of, 

194-195 

Mejorana,  58,  60,  259-260 
Mejorana-Ponchoy  260 
Mejoranera,  259 

Mekhano  (Juan  Jose  Castro),  9,  86 
Melancholy  (Ponce),  245 
Melga  Sinfonka  (Fabini),  286 


352 


INDEX 


Melg-ar,  Mariano,  268, 

Melo  Gorigoytia,  Hector,  biography  of, 
1 62 

Melodanza  (Garcia),  193 
Melodias  Religiosas  en  Quechua  (Jorge), 
48 

Melodies  Brhiliennes  (Amat),  121 
Memby  flutes,  54,  263 
Mena,  Luis  E.,  biography  of,  195 
Menchaca,  Angel,  35 
biography  of,  94 
Mendoza,  Alberto,  204 
biography  of,  206 
Mendoza,  Argentina,  87 
Mendoza,  Vicente  T.,  45,  58,  216,  218, 
219,  224,  225,  236 
biography  of,  241-242 
Menocal,  Mario  G.,  182 
Mento^  58 
Mera,  Leon,  38 
Mercuric  Peruano,  267 
MerenguCj  20,  58,  190,  191,  210,  290 
Merida,  Mexico,  223,  226,  227 
MeringhUj  210 
Meringue j  210 

Meringue  de  Carnaval  (Lamothe),  zii 
Meringue  Haitienne  (Lamothe),  212 
Merlin  (Albeniz),  suite  by  Ponce  after, 
247 

Mersmann,  Hans,  161 
Mesanoj  260 
Messner,  Johann,  79 

Mestizos,  64,  166,  212,  214,  254,  266,  279 
Metodo  Original  de  Iniciacion  Musical 
(Humberto  Allende),  156 
Metropolis  (Bisquertt),  158 
Mexican  Rhapsodies  (Ponce),  245 
Mexico,  214-254 

dances  and  ballads  of,  57-58,  59,  60,  68, 
217-219,  220-221,  222 
folklore  of,  14,  15,  41,  52,  214-219, 

'  224 

music  publishing  in,  13,  17,  67,  219,  222 
musical  culture  of,  219-225 
musical  education  in,  22,  67,  219-220, 
222-223,  228,  233 

musical  instruments  of,  42,  44,  45,  214, 
215-217,  279 

musicians  of,  7,  8,  9-10,  13,  I9>  27,  28, 

30,  3H  32j  33)  34-35)  37)  39)  42, 
225-254 


Mexico  {Cont.) 

national  anthem  of,  19,  66,  221,  224 
nationalism  in  art,  65,  221,  223-224, 
225,  241,  244-245 

orchestra  of,  23,  24,  218-219,  223- 

224 

the  opera  in,  220,  221,  223 
radio  stations  of,  26 

Mexico,  University  of,  3  n,  224,  227,  236, 
253)  254,  257 

Mexico  City,  Mexico,  8,  10,  19,  41, 
214,  216-217,  220,  221,  222,  223, 

225  ff. 

Mexico  in  iSio  (Carrillo),  229 
Meza,  Miguel  C.,  225 
biography  of,  242 
Michaca,  Pedro,  225 
biography  of,  242 
Michoacan  (Bernal  Jimenez),  228 
microtones,  34,  35.  See  also  quarter  tones 
Mientras  Baja  la  Nieve  (Humberto 
Allende),  156 

Mignone,  Francisco,  8,  28,  32,  113,  115, 
120 

biography  of,  134-136 
musical  autograph,  facing  p.  152 
photograph  of,  facing  p.  216 
Miguez,  Leopoldo,  27,  123 
biography  of,  136-137 
Milagro  de  Anaquille,  El  (Roldan),  187 
Milan,  Italy,  96,  123,  124,  125,  130,  133, 
164,  176,  257,  272 

Milan  Conservatory,  96,  125,  164,  176, 

257 

Milhaud,  Darius,  57,  12 1,  143 
Military  Band,  Montevideo,  285 
Military  Band,  Quito,  199 
Military  Band,  San  Jose,  175,  176,  177 
Military  Band,  Santa  Ana,  280,  281 
Military  Band,  Santiago  de  los  Cabelleros, 
194 

millimetrization,  6,  14,  147,  150,  facing 
p.  152 

Milonga^  77,  78,  103,  282 
Mindreau,  Ernesto  Lopez,  biography  of, 
'274. 

Mine,  289 

Minha  Terra  (Netto),  138 
(Gnattali),  129 

Miniatura  (Molina  Pinillo),  206 
Miniatures  (Vianna),  40,  142 


INDEX 


S53 


Minuet,  the,  271 
Minuet  Federal^  76 
Miramontes,  Arnulfo,  7,  225 
biography  of,  242-243 
Miranda,  music  publisher,  12 
Miremis  (Villa-Lobos),  144 
Miscelaneas  (Bisquertt),  158 
Mississippi  Pearl  Button  Company,  61 
MiudinhOj  115 
Miudinho  (Mignone),  136 
Moca,  Dominican  Republic,  193 
Moduy  no 

Moda  (Fernandez),  in, -128 
Modern  Musky  27,  150,  1S5,  223,  231 
modern  music,  school  of,  30-35,  80-81,  96- 
97,  122-123,  131,  140,  154,  159,  204, 
228,  243 

ModinJuZy  52,  no,  121,  127 
Modinha  (Tavares),  141 
Modinha  Russo-Brasileira  (Slonimsky),  52 
Modinhas  Imferiais  (Andrade),  no,  122, 
123 

Moleiro,  Moises,  292 
biography  of,  293 
Molina  Pinillo,  Jose,  204 
biography  of,  206 

Momenios  Lirkos  (Ibere  de  Lemos),  133 
Momo,  King  of  the  Carnival,  49,  135, 

145 

Momofrecoce  (Villa-Lobos),  49,  145,  148, 
150 

Momus  (Mignone),  135 
Moncayo,  Pablo,  224,  227,  233,  235,  237 
biography  of,  243 
photograph  of,  facing  p.  249 
Mondino,  Luis  Pedro,  283 
biography  of,  286 
Monestel,  Alejandro,  175 
biography  of,  177 
Monodia  (Pahissa),  95 
Monroe  Doctrine,  i 
Montero,  Jose  Angel,  290,  291 
Monteros,  Padre  Raimundo  M.,  197 
Montes  de  ml  Queguay  (Ascone),  284 
Montevideo,  University  of,  94 
Montevideo,  Uruguay,  12,  22,  24,  26,  60, 
69>  75>  84>  S7,  92,  94,  126,  133, 
140,  161,  171,  246,  247,  251,  272, 
276,  282,  283,  284,  285,  286,  287, 
291 

Montmartre  (Pedrell),  287 


Montoya,  Andres  Martinez,  169 
Moorish  Dance  (Arias),  204 
Morales,  Bachillei  y,  68 
Morales,  Gordiano,  175 
Morales,  Melesio,  221,  222,  228 
biography  of,  243-244 
Morelia,  Mexico,  223,  227 
Moreno,  Segundo  Luis,  16,  50,  51,  52,  197, 

199 

biography  of,  199 
photograph  of,  facing  p.  280 
Moreno  Gonzalez,  Juan  Carlos,  264 
biography  of,  265 
Morgan,  Dr.  Campbell,  61 
Morillo,  Roberto  Garcia,  33 
biography  of,  94-95 
Moriscuy  La  (Pahissa),  95 
Morty  La  (Ponce),  246 
Morte  di  A  more  (Rodriguez  Socas),  287 
Morte  do  Aviadory  A  (Guarnieri),  132 
Mosca,  Radames,  biography  of,  137 
Moszkowski,  Moritz,  186,  251 
Motets  (Plaza),  293 

Mother  of  Waters  Sings.  See  Mae  d?Agua 
Chant  e 

Motivos  de  Son  (Roldan),  187 
Moto  Perfetuo  (Netto),  138 
Mousondiy  210 
Moussorgsky,  Modest,  40 
Moutchetchiy  210 
Movimiento  Sinfonko  (Paz),  97 
Mozamalaj  2 

Muerte  de  AlsinOy  La  (Leng),  160,  161 
Muerte  del  Cometay  La  (Williams),  103 
Muerte  de  CristOy  La  (Ravelo),  195 
Muerte  del  IncUy  La  (Massa),  94 
Muette  de  Portkiy  La  (Auber),  181 
Mulata  (Caturla),  185 
Muheca  PastilUtay  La  (Jimenez  Mabarak) , 
240 

Municipal  Band,  Buenos  Aires,  84 
Munoz,  Alejandro,  280,  281 
biography  of,  281 
Munoz,  Ricardo,  41 
Mure-MurSy  263 

Murillo,  Emilio,  tiiography  of,  170 
Murinedda  (Rodriguez  Socas),  287 
Musa  em  Festa,  A  (Siqueira),  141 
Museum  of  Modern  Art,  New  York,  220, 
227,  234,  237 


INDEX 


3S4 

Musica  N acionalista  no  Governo  GetuUo 
Vargas,  A  (Villa-Lobos),  14.3 
music  bibliographies,  14 
music  collections,  6-12 
music  dictionary,  problems  of,  26-28,  35- 
38 

Music  for  an  Ensemble  of  Amateurs 
(Graetzer),  92 
Music  in  Latin  America,  14 
Music  of  the  New  World,  79 
music  publishing,  10-18,  67,  71-72,  80, 
^02,  137,  154,  219,  222,  283-284, 
286,  292 

Music  Review,  The,  143 
Music  of  the  Tule  Indians  of  Panama 
(Densmore),  259 
Musica  (Colombia),  18,  257 
Musica  (Guatemala),  18 
Musica,  V oz  de  la  Tierra,  La  (Andrade), 

52 

Musica  Autoctona  del  Qriente  Ecuatoriano 
(Monteros),  197 

Musica  fara  Charlar  (Revueltas),  249,  251 
Musica  Cuhana  en  estos  20  Ultimas  Ahos, 
La  (Carpentier),  44 

Musica  en  Iberoamerica,  La  (Buccino  and 
Benvenuto),  282 

Musica  I nquieta  (Villa-Lobos),  146 
Musica  Maya-Quiche,  La  (Castillo),  15, 
203,  205 

Musica  Misteriosa  (Villa-Lobos),  146 
Musica  y  Musicos  de  Hoy  (Salazar),  252 
Musica  Nacional  Boliviana,  106,  108 
Musica  (Koellreutter),  133 

Musica  fara  Ninos  (Gianneo),  91 
Musica  Oaxaqueha,  224 
Musica  fara  Orquesta  Sinfonica  (Con¬ 
treras),  235,  236 

Musica  Pofular  de  America  (Urena),  190 
Musica  Pofular  Cuhana,  15,  i7g 
Musica  Pofular  y  los  Musicos  Celebres  de 
la  America  Latina,  La  (Cortijo),  170 
Musica  en  Santo  Domingo  (Nolasco),  190 
Musica  Timida  (Villa-Lobos),  146 
Musica  Viva,  17,  26,  123,  126,  133,  150 
Musical  America,  150 
musical  autographs,  facing  p.  152 
musical  bows.  bows,  musical 
musical  clubs,  120-121 
musical  competitions,  19-22,  72,  88,  90, 
137)  154)  15^)  157)  i6o,  164, 

175-17*5,  191-192 


musical  culture,  Latin  American  history  of 
14-16,  67-72 

as  affecting  music  dictionary,  37.  See  also 
listings  under  country  names 
musical  education,  22,  26,  67,  71,  72,  77^ 
80,  82,  121-122,  143,  154,  les,  169, 
192,  212-213,  219-220,  222-223,  290, 
292 

Musical  Institute,  Cartagena,  261 
musical  instruments,  native,  41-47,  69,  71 
106-107,  116-117,  i5i>  167-168,  173, 
175,  180,  198,  200-201,  208-209, 

214,  215-217,  255-256,  259,  263, 
269-270,  279,  288-289 
Musical  and  Other  Sound  Instruments  of 
the  South  American  Indians  (Iziko- 
witz),  43 

Mitsical  Quarterly,  The,  67,  117,  180,  192, 
209,  251,  291 
musical  style,  30-35 
folkloric,  39-40,  42 
^Musical  Syncretism,^^  40 
Music  alia,  17,  183,  185 
musicians.  See  listings  under  country  names  j 
see  composers 

musicology,  14-16,  68-70,  122,  154,  173, 
224,  258-259,  267-268,  276 

Musicos  Chilenos,  1^6 
Musique  BresiUenne  Moderne,  n,  128, 
129,  132 

Musique  des  Incas  et  ses  Survivances,  La 
(d’Harcourt),  15,  44,  197,  267,  275 
Musurgia  Universalis  (Kircher),  70 
My  Land.  See  Mtnha  Terra 
My  Toy  Balloon  (Slonimsky),  50 


N 

Nahualismo  (Baratta),  34,  281 
NahueUHuafi  (Casella),  84 
Ndhiga  ritual,  48 

Naples,  Italy,  89,  95,  98,  loi,  125,  140, 
276 

Naples  Conservatory,  95,  98,  125,  140 
Napoleao,  Arthur,  12,  121,  138,  139,  149 
biography  of,  137 

Napolitano,  Emilio,  biography  of,  95 
Naranjas  de  Valencia  (Escobar),  293 
Naranjos,  Los  (Carrillo),  230 
National  Academy  of  Music,  Bogota,  171 


INDEX 


355 


National  Academy  of  Music,  Lima,  273, 
276 

National  Anthems,  66-67,  7^>  1 19-120, 
174-175,  191,  195,  199,  221,  271, 
283,  291 

National  Conservatory  of  Music.  See  Con- 
servatorio  Nacional 

National  Culture  Committee  of  Argentina, 
II,  87,  93 

National  Culture  Contest,  Peru,  275 
National  Museum  of  Archeology,  Lima, 
269 

National  Museum  of  Costa  Rica,  51,  175 
National  Museum  of  Mexico,  45,  216,  224 
National  Museum  of  Rio  de  Janeiro,  45-46 
National  Orchestral  Association,  New 
York,  206 

Native  Festival.  See  Fiesta  Indigena 
native  music.  See  folk  music 
Natwidade  de  JesuSy  A  (Republicano),  140 
Natural  History y  47 

Natural  History  of  the  Musical  BowSy  The 
(Balfour),  43 

NdufragOy  El  (Sanchez  de  Fuentes),  188 
Navarro,  Juan  de,  219 
Navarro  (Gaditanus),  Juan,  67 
Navarro  (Hispalensis),  Juan,  67 
Navarro,  Pedro  Calderon,  175 
Navidad  (Sanchez  de  Fuentes),  188 
Nazareth,  Ernesto,  biography  of,  137 
Nazca  culture,  266,  269 
Nazdah  (Palma),  96 
NBC  Symphony  Orchestra,  136 
Negrete  Woolcock,  Samuel,  i3> 
biography  of,  162 

Negro:  contribution  to  folk  music  of  the, 
54-55)  56,  57)  77)  109-xio,  111-112, 
115-116,  117,  166-167,  179,  181, 
190,  108-210,  260,  288-289 
in  Latin  American  culture,  28,  64 
neoclassicism,  3,  163,  183,  236,  237,  246, 
274 

Nepomuceno,  Alberto,  7-8,  11,  z8,  123 
biography  of,  137-138 
Nero  (Casabona),  126 
Nervosidad  de  los  MusicoSy  La  (Barbacci), 
2.72  ■ 

Netto,  Barrozo,  7 
biography  of,  138 
Neumane,  Antonio,  199 
New  Fire,  the.  See  Fuego  Nue'OOy  El 
New  Musky  i3“i4)  ^9,  97,  128,  129,  132, 


150,  158,  164,  172,  184,  185,  187, 
230,  251 

New  York,  New  York,  6,  38,  57,  70,  76, 

125,  128,  133,  136,  141,  147)  159) 

1S6,  192,  193,  195,  204,  206,  207, 

211,  212,  220,  227,  231,  234,  237, 

245,  278,  292 

and  the  Tango,  60,  61,  62,  63 
New  York  Philharmonic  Orchestra,  234 
New  York  Skyline  (Villa-Lobos),  147, 
150 

New  York  TimeSy  They  61-62,  63,  232 
Nibo  (Lamothe),  21 1 
Nicaragua,  254-258 

concert  by  Slonimsky  in,  3  n,  4-5 
folklore  of,  16,  48,  254-256,  279 
musical  culture  in,  257 
musicians  of,  8,  35,  37)  257-258 
Nicolas  Bravo  (Tello),  253 
Nkte  (Jesus  Castillo),  205 
Nieto,  Cesar  A.,  175 
biography  of,  177 
Night  of  Dreams.  See  Nit  de  Somnis 
Nikisch,  Arthur,  286 
Nin  y  Castellanos,  Joaquin,  183 
biography  of,  186 
Nin-Culmell,  Joaquin,  183,  186 
Ninci,  Enrique  Fava,  biography  of,  274 
g  de  Julio  (Moreno),  199 
Nino  Dios  (Vargas),  108 
Nit  de  Somnis  (Pahissa)  ,  95 
Nito,  Jose  de,  biography  of,  95 
iVo  (Mignone),  134,  136 

Noche  Colonialy  La  (Iglesias  Villoud),  93 
Noche  de  Luna  en  las  Ruinas  (Valverde), 
207 

Noche  de  los  MayaSy  La  (Revueltas),  250 
Noche  en  Morelia  (Bernal  Jimenez),  228 
Nochebuena  (Bisquertt),  158 
Nocturne  (Tosar  Errecart),  287 
Nocturno  (Fernandez),  128 
Nocturno  Chileno  (AdoUo  Allende),  154 
Nocturno  Native  (Ascone),  284 
Noite  de  Sao  Joao  (Casabona),  126 
Noke  de  Sao  Jodoy  A  (Lobo),  120 
Noite  do  Casieloy  A  (Gomes),  130 
Nolasco,  Flerida  de,  16,  190 

Vowit  (Villa-Lobos),  148,  149 
Norte  (Sandi),  252 
Nortenas  (Casella),  84 
Nostalgia  too 

Nostalgias  (Pinto),  98 


3S6  in 

Nostalg-ic  Memories  of  Youth.  See  Saudades 

da  Juventude 
Nottumo  (Stea),  277 

Notturno-Barcarolla  (Mignone),  134,  136 
Notturno  Imfrovisto  (Mignone),  134 
N ouveaux  VoyageSy  69 
Novia  del  Herejey  La  (Rogatis),  99 
Noviando  (Gilardi),  91 
ISiuhey  La  (Sojo),  294 
Nueva  Castilla  (Mindreau),  274 
Nuks  Bresiliennesy  Les  (Amat),  lai 
Nunez  Navarrete,  Pedro,  156 
biography  of,  162 
Nuno,  Jaime,  19,  221 
biography  of,  244 
Nuftial  March  (Miguez),  136 

O 

O.  See  listing  under  main  word  of  title 
Oaxaca,  Mexico,  224,  241 
Obertura  Andina  (Rodriguez  Socas),  287 
Ohertura  fara  una  Comedia  Injantil 
(Gianneo),  91 

Ohertura  Concertante  (Halffter),  238 
Ohertura  Criolla  (Drangosch),  87 
Obertura  Indigena  (Jesus  Castillo),  205 
Obertura  Patriotica  (Alas),  281 
Obertura  Primavera  (Miramontes),  243 
Obertura  Refublkana  (Chavez),  233 
Obertura  Sohre  Temas  Cubanos  (Roldan), 
187 

Obertura  en  TiemfodeDanza  (Contreras), 

236 

Obra  Musical  de  Juan  Carlos  PaZy  La 
(Gallac),  97 

Obra  fara  Orquesta  Mexicana  (Galindo), 

237 

ocarinas,  5I)  i75>  215,  270 

Ocho  Horas  (Pomar),  244 

O’Connell,  Cardinal,  61 

Octaviano,  Joao,  biography  of,  138-139 

Odessa,  Russia,  88,  240 

Ofrenda  de  la  Elegida  (Baratta),  281 

Oidory  £*/  (Tello),  253 

Ojojana,  Honduras,  213 
Old  Country  Legend.  See  Velha  Lenda 
Sertaneja 

Olivares,  Juan  Manuel,  291 
Ollanta  (Valle-Riestra),  271,  278 
O/iawray  (Gaito),  90 
Ombuy  El  (Gaito),  90 


)EX 

omichicahuaztlis,  facing  p.  121 

Omichkzicahuaztliy  215,  216 

Ondinas  (Octaviano),  138 

O’Neill,  Eugene,  47,  208 

opera,  25,  71,  79,  118-119,  120,  168,  220, 

233 

Oporto,  Portugal,  137 
Oragdo  a  Teiniagua  (Cosme),  126 
Oratorio  (Santorsola),  287 
Orbon,  Julian,  183,  185 
biography  of,  186 
Or  Chester stue  eke  (Mackenna),  161 
Orchestral  Syndicate,  Santiago,  159 
orchestras,  symphony,  22-24,  80,  107,  121, 
i54>  169,  182,  223 
special  radio,  26,  284 
Or  jeon  Lamas  y  24,  292,  294 
Oriental  (Roldan),  187 
Orientale  (Luzzatti),  93 
Origenes  del  Arte  Musical  en  ChiUy  Los 
(Salas),  15,  154 

Origenes  de  la  Musica  Argentina  (Al¬ 
varez),  76-77 

Orillas  del  DuerOy  A  (Pedrell),  287 
Orillas  de  un  ArroyOy  A  (Monestel),  177 
Orinoco  llustrado  (Gumilla),  47 
‘‘orpheonic  concentration,”  143 
Orquesta  de  Cdmaray  Mexico  City,  240 
Orquesta  Filarmonica  de  la  Asociacion  del 
Profesorado  Orquestal,  80,  84,  85,  86, 
88,  89,  90,  91,  96,  98,  99,  100 
Orquesta  Filarmonica  de  Guatemalay  204, 
205 

Orquesta  Filarmonica  de  la  Habanay  23,  24, 
182,  183,  184,  187,  196 
Orquesta  Mexicana y  216-217 
Orquesta  ProgresistUy  iOd\,y  206 
Orquesta  Smfonicay  Asuncion,  264,  265 
Orquesta  Sinfonicdy  Panama,  23,  260,  261 
Orquesta  Sinfonica  de  Chile y  23,  154,  155, 
158,  159,  162,  163,  165 
Orquesta  Sinfonica  Femeninay  10 1 
Orquesta  Sinfonica  de  la  Hab ana,  182,  186 
Orquesta  Sinfonica  de  MexicOy  23,  223, 
226,  228,  23I)  a33>  ^35j  =^3^1  237» 
^38,  239,  241,  242,  243,  244,  245, 
246,  247,  250,  251,  252,  253,  254 
Orquesta  Sinfonica  Nacionaly  Bogotiy  18, 
23,  169,  170 

Orquesta  Sinfonica  Nacional,  Ciudad 
Trujillo,  23-24,  191,  192,  193,  194, 
I95,T9<5 


INDEX 


357 


Orquesta  Sinfomca  Nacionalj  Lima,  23,  24, 
271,  272,  273,  274,  276-277 
Orquesta  Sinfomca  Nacional^  Mexico  City, 
241,  247 

Orquesta  Sinfonica  Nacional  de  Conciertos^ 
La  Paz,  23,  107,  108 
Orquesta  Sinfonica  de  Nicaragua^  257 
Orquesta  Sinfonica  del  Servicio  Oficial  de 
Difusion  Radio  Electrica,  See  05- 
SODRE 

Orquesta  Sinfonica  de  los  Sufremos  Foderes, 
San  Salvador,  280 
Orquesta  Tifica^  218 

Orquesta  Venezuela.  See  Sinfonica  Vene¬ 
zuela 

Orquestra  Sinfonica  Brasileira^  24,  12 1, 
133,  141 

Orquideas  Azules  (Escobar),  292-293 

Ortega,  Aniceto,  221 

Ortiz,  Fernando,  180 

Ortiz,  Juan,  220 

Os  Pescadores  (Siqueira),  141 

Os  Saldunes  (Miguez),  137 

Osorio  y  Ricaurte,  Juan  Crisostomo, 

i68 

Ossian  (Carrillo),  229 
OSSODRE,  22,  24,  26,  92,  284,  285,  286, 
287 

Oswald,  Henrique,  123,  129,  14^ 
biography  of,  139 
Otonales  (Leng),  161 
Otono  (Letelier),  i6i 
Outline  of  Lectures y  Notes  and  References, 
14 

Ouverture  Patketique  (Ficher),  89 
Ouverture  das  Tres  Mascaras  Perdidas 
(Mignone),  135 
Ovalle,  Jaime,  30 
biography  of,  39 

Overture  (Enrique  Casal  Chapi),  193 
Overture  (Mena),  195 
Overture,  for  twelve  solo  instruments 
(Paz),  97 

Overture  in  C  minor  (Piaggio),  98^ 
Overture  for  a  Comic  Of  era  (Jose  Maria 
Castro),  84,  85 

Overture  in  G  major  (Humberto  Allende), 

154  , 

Oviedo  y  Valdes,  Gonzalo  Fernandez  de, 
68,  189,  255 

Oxford  Comf anion  to  Music,  114 
Oxfaniztli  (Huizar),  239 


P 


Pacheco,  Rafael  Angel  Troyo,  175 
Pacheco  de  Cespedes,  Luis,  biography  of, 
274-275 

Padua,  Newton,  biography  of,  140 
Pagelanga.  See  Macumba 
Pahissa,  Jaime,  29 
biography  of,  95-96 
Paisaje  (Ayala),  226,  227 
Paisaje  (Chavez),  235 
Paisajes  (Salazar),  252 
Paisajes  de  Estio  (Ugarte),  loi 
P  ala- f  ala,  105 

Palabras  a  Mama  (Ficher),  89 
Palacio  de  Bellas  Artes,  8,  41,  223,  226, 
22S,  233,  236,  240,  241,  247,  250, 

253 

Palacios  y  Sojo,  Pedro,  291 
Palestrina,  style  of,  228 
Palma,  Athos,  33,  88,  91,  92,  93,  100 
biography  of,  96 
Palmas,  117,  1 1 8 

Palomita  de  Nieve  (Sanchez  Malaga),  275 
P am f a  (Berutti),  Z 2 
Pamfeana  (Paz),  97 
Pamfeana  (Quaratino),  99 
Pamfeana  y  Co f las  (Gianneo),  91 
Pan-American  Fishing  Trip  (Castaneda), 
1-2 

Pan  American  Orchestra,  250 
Pan  American  Union,  Music  Division  of, 
14,  77>  156,  235 

Pan  American  Union  March  (Villanueva 
Galeano),  213 
Panama,  258-262 

concerts  by  Slonimsky  in,  2  n,  3-4 
dances  of,  59,  60,  181,  259-260 
folklore  of,  15,  42,  258-260 
music  publishing  in,  18 
musical  culture  of,  260 
musical  instruments  of,  44^  46>  259 
musicians  of,  8,  37,  261-262 
national  anthem  of,  66,  261,  262 
orchestras  of,  23,  260 
(Galimany),  261 
Panama  City,  258,  261,  262 
Panama  Institute  for  Folkloric  Research,  18 
Panama  Viejo  (Fabrega),  261 
Panambi  (Ginastera),  92 


358 


INDEX 


Pandeiro,  117,  118 
Panhuehuetl^  216 
Paniagua,  Francisco,  207 
Paniagua,  Raul,  203,  204 
biography  of,  206-207 
Paniagua  Martinez,  Julian,  204,  206 
biography  of,  207 
Panizza,  Hector,  biography  of,  96 
Panorama  de  la  Musica  Hisfano-Americana 
(Mayer-Serra),  65 

Panorama  de  la  Musica  Mexicana  (Mayer- 
Serra),  15,  221,  223,  224,  240,  245 
Panorama  de  la  Musica  Popular  Argentina 
(Veg-a),  15 

Panorama  Musical  del  Peru  (Raygada), 
266 

Panoramas  de  Mexico  (Ayala),  226,  227 
panpipes,  42,  43,  47,  71,  106,  107,  198, 
215,  270,  facing  p.  56 
Panqueca  (Villa-Lobos),  142 
Papa  Drum,  208 
Pafelon^  260 
Parabien^  F/,  153 
Paraguay,  262-265 

dances  of,  54,  57,  263-264 
folklore  of,  16,  262-264 
musical  culture  in,  263-264 
musical  instruments  of,  43,  45,  263 
musicians  of,  29-30,  35,  37,  264-265 
national  anthem  of,  265 
orchestras  of,  264 
Parana,  Brazil,  133 
Parana  Guazu  (Ascone),  284 
Paranhos,  Ulysses,  122 
Pardo  y  Aliaga,  Felipe,  265 
Parera,  Bias,  76,  79 
Paris,  Archbishop  of,  61 
Paris,  France,  13,  30,  32,  33,  76,  83,  84, 
85,  88,  92,  97,  98,  loi,  119,  124, 
^34j  ^37  i49>  ^55j  ^5^?  158, 

^59)  i7ohF.>  183  if.,  203  ff.,  211, 
212,  231,  245,  246,  251,  252,  261, 

^  262,  265,  273  ff.,  292,  293 
Paris  Conservatory,  83,  134,  211,  261 
Paris  Festival  of  Contemporary  Music,  97 
Parisina  (Miguez) ,  1 3  6,  1 3  7 
Partenof  e  (Zumaya )  ,220 
Partial  List  of  Latin  American  Music  Ob¬ 
tainable  in  the  United  States ^  ^,14 
Pasacalle,  105,  198,  269 
PaseOj  260 


Pasillo,  58,  60,  106,  167,  174,  198,  27^^ 
290 

Pasillo  Guanacasteco,  174 
Pasillo -Intermezzo  (Salgado),  200 
Pasillo-Mazurka^  198 
Pasillo s  (Murillo),  170 
Paso  Inca  (Valderrama),  54 
Passacaglia^  the,  105,  198,  269 
Passacaglia  (Paz),  97 
Passage  Perpetual  (Holzmann),  274 
Passion  music,  67 
Pastoral  (Simo),  196 
Pastorale  (Ippisch),  206 
Pastorales  (isamitt),  160 
Pastoreio  (Fernandez),  127 
PastoriSj  1 1 6 

Patagonian  musical  bow,  43  j  facing  p.  89 
Path,  The.  See  Cami^  El 
Pato,  Colombia,  22 
P atria y  2  7 

Patria  y  Afectos  (Mata),  177 
P atria  en  la  Cancioiiy  La,  192 
Patria  Heroica  (Tello),  253 
Patria  Vieja  (Fabini),  286 
PatrioticUy  174 
Patzcuaro,  Mexico,  223,  249 
PautUy  17 

Payadas.  See  C ontrapunto 
Payadores,  54,  73-74 
Pay  as.  See  C  ontrapunto 
Payro,  R.  J.,  73 
Paysage  (Bisquertt),  158 
Pay  sage  (Braga),  124 
Paysage  dMutomne  y  iiq 

Paz,  Juan  Carlos,  14,  18,  31,  8i 
biography  of,  96-97 
photograph  of,  facing  p,  185 
Paz  (Netto)j  138 
Pedrell,  Carlos,  13,  32,  283 
biography  of,  287 
caricature  of,  facing  p.  153 
Pedrell,  Felipe,  13,  155,  277,  287 
Pedro  I,  Emperor,  66,  119 
Pedro  11,  Emperor,  123 
Pedro  Malazarte  (Guarnieri ) ,  1 3  2 
Pelo  Amor  (Miguez),  137 
Pelos  Bstrados  Silenciosos  (Mignone),  135 
Pena  Morell,  Esteban,  190,  192,  194 
biography  of,  196 

Pensamientos  Sobre  la  Musica  (Williams), 

102'  ■  .  . 


INDEX 


359 


Pentagramaj  1 8 
Penumbras  (Carrillo),  230 
Peppercorn,  Lisa,  143 
Pequena  Suite  (Villa-Lobos),  150 
Pequenas  Canturias  y  Danzas  Venezolanas, 
289 

Pequenas  Piezas  (Ardevol),  184 
Peralta,  Juan  Jose,  77 
Peralta,  Ramon  Emilio,  biography  of,  195 
Peralta,*  Spain,  261 
Perceval,  Julio,  biography  of,  97-98 
percussion  instruments,  42,  43,  44,  45,  ^6- 
47,  116-117,  180,  215-217,  256,  259, 
263,  270,  279,  288-289 
Brazilian,  facing  p.  121 
Pereira,  Antonio  Sa,  121 
Pereira*,  Arthur,  biography  of,  140 
Perereca  (Guarnieri),  13 1 
Pericon^  58,  60,  74,  75,  282 
Pernetty,  Antonio  Joseph,  69 
Peru,  265-278 

dances  of,  55,  69,  75,  76,  152,  267- 
269,  271 

folklore  of,  15-16,  38,  48,  50,  52,  265- 
271 

music  publishing  in,  10,  13,  17 
musical  competitions  in,  275,  276 
musical  culture  in,  271-272 
musical  instruments  of,  43,  45)  4^>  47) 
51,  269-270 

musicians  of,  lo,  23,  26,  28,  29,  37,  54, 
272-278 

national  anthem  of,  271 
Ponce’s  concert  tour  in,  246 
symphony  orchestra  of,  23,  271-272 
Peruafiidady  43 
Peruvian  Dances  (Stea),  277 
Peruvian  figurine,  facing  p.  56 
Pesca  PanamericanistUy  La.  See  Pan- 
American  Fishing  Trip  (Castaneda) 
Pescadores  Serisy  Los  (Ayala),  226 
Petiton-Guzman,  Rafael,  biography  of,  195 
PetrOy  209 

Petr  onto  (Gaito),  90 

Philadelphia,  Free  Library  of.  See  Fleisher 
Collection 

Philadelphia,  Pennsylvania,  musical  com¬ 
petition  in,  132 

Philadelphia  Grand  Opera  Company,  232 
Philadelphia  Symphony  Orchestra,  230 
Philharmonic  of  Rio  de  Janeiro,  125 


Philipp,  Isidor,  125 
phonograph  recording,  26 
Piaggio,  Celestino,  ii 
biography  of,  98 

Piano  Concerto.  See  Concerto  for  Piano 
and  Orchestra 

Piano  Pieces  on  a  Twelve-Tone  Theme 
(Paz),  97 

Piano  Quartet  (Suftern),  100 
Piano  Quintet  (Broqua),  284 
Piano  Quintet  (Carrillo),  229 
Piano  Quintet  (Oswald),  139 
Piano  Quintet  (Suffern),  100 
Piano  Sonata.  See  Sonata  for  Piano 
Picacho  AbruftOy  El  (Plaza),  293 
Picaflor  (Napolitano) ,  95 
Pichi  Purun  (Isamitt),  160 
Piedra  del  Toxily  La  (Nieto),  177 
Pierrots  Liebeswerben  (Ippisch),  206 
Pieza  a  Cuatro  (Garrido),  159 
Piezas y  5  (Santa  Cruz),  163,  164 
Piezas  Breves y  5  (Santa  Cruz),  163 
Piezas  Inf  untiles  (Ayala),  227 
Piezas  Infantiles  (Ginastera),  92 

Pifulkuy  1 51 

P indin y  260 

Pindorama  (Casabona),  126 
PingullOy  198 
PinkulwCy  1 5 1 
PinquillOy  107 

Pinto,  Alfredo,  biography  of,  98 
Pinturas  Negras  de  GoyUy  Las  (Morillo), 

94 

Pioneer,  The.  See  Bandeirantey  O 
Pitunga  (Schiuma)  ,  100 
Pianos  (Revueltas),  248,  250,  251 
Plant  Hunters  in  the  Andes  (Goodspeed), 
36 

Plaza,  Juan  Bautista,  291 
biography  of,  293-294 
Plena,  58 

Plenilunio  (Mignone),  136 

Poem,  for  symphony  orchestra  (Morillo), 

94)  95 

Poema  (Leng),  161 
Poefna  Antartko  (Williams),  103 
Poema  da  Crianqa  e  Sua  Mama  {Villa* 
Lobos),  148,  149 
poema  Elegiaco  (Ponce),  245,  247 
Poema  Fueguino  (Williams),  103 
Poema  Indio  (Rivera),  195 


36o 


INDEX 


Poema  Indio  (Sas),  276 
Poema  de  las  Lomas  (Broqua),  284 
Poema  Natlvo  (Cluzeau  Mortet),  285 
Poema  Negro  (Roldan),  187 
Poema  Pastoril  (Bisquertt),  157 
Poema  de  la  Selva  Prhnaveral  (Williams), 
103 

Poema  Sinfonico  (Vasquez),  254 
Poema  de  Vida  (Octaviano),  138 
Poemas  de  Gahriela  Mistral^  ^  (Santa 
Cruz),  163,  164 

Poemas  TragicoSy  5  (Santa  Cruz),  163, 
164 

Polichinelle  (Villa-Lobos),  148 
Poligonos  (Chavez),  231,  235 
politics,  in  music,  31-32,  58,  218 
Polka,  the,  no,  113,  115,  263 
Brazilian,  115 
Paraguayan,  54,  265 
Polka  Paraguay  ay  54,  263 
Polonaise  Fantastique  (Cantu),  125 
Polygons.  See  Poligonos 
Polytonal  Variations  (Paz),  97 
polytonality,  3 
Pomar,  Jose,  31,  225 
biography  of,  244 
Ponce,  Clema,  245 

Ponce,  Manuel,  8,  9,  13,  32,  39,  42,  224, 
225,  230,  242 
biography  of,  244-247 
musical  autograph,  facing  p.  152 
photograph  of,  facing  p.  248 
Ponce  de  Leon,  Jose  Maria,  168 
Ponteioy  115 
Ponteio  (Tavares),  141 
Ponteios  (Guarnieri),  131,  132 
Pontifical  Institute  of  Sacred  Music,  Rome, 
293 

Popayan,  Colombia,  22 
Pofol  Bujy  piano  pieces  by  Castillo  from, 
205 

Popular  Italian  Suite  (Pinto) ,  98 
popular  songs,  commercial,  58,  115,  186, 
278 

PorfiaSy  54 
PorrOy  167 

Port-au-Prince,  Haiti,  211 
Portales,  Diego,  152 
Porter,  Cole,  58 

Porto  Alegre,  Brazil,  122,  126,  129 
Porto  Alegre  Conservatory,  129 


Portugal,  Marcos,  119 
Portugal:  influence  on  Brazilian  music  of 
117 

musicians  in  Latin  America  from, 

1 21 

Portuguese  origin,  Latin  American  mu- 
sicians  of,  28 

Posada-Amador,  Carlos,  biography  of,  170- 
171 

Potosi  (Caba),  107  ' 

Pototo.  See  Buititu 

Pottery  of  Costa  Rica  and  Nicaragua 
(Lothrop),  255 
Potuto.  See  Buiutu 
Pozo  de  Oroy  El  (Isamitt),  160 
Prague,  Czechoslovakia,  7,  156 
Precursoresy  LoSy  79-80 
PregoeSy  115 
Pregon  (Roldan),  187 
Prelude  (Carpio  Valdes),  272 
Prelude  (Jesus  Castillo),  205 
Prelude,  for  violoncello  in  quarter-tones 
(Carrillo),  230 

Prelude  and  Fugue  (Humberto  Allende), 
156 

Prelude  and  Fugue  (Pomar),  244 
Preludes  (Chavez),  234,  235 
Preludes  (Cluzeau  Mortet),  285 
Preludes  (Delgadillo),  258 
Preludes  (Mackenna),  161 
Preludes  (Ponce),  246 
Preludes  for  Orchestra  (Cotapos),  159 
Preludes  of  the  Pamfas  (Broqua),  284 
Preludio  (Humberto  Allende),  156 
Prcludio  (Amengual),  157 
Preludio  (Calcavecchia),  285 
Preludio  (Gilardi),  91 
Preludio  (Moreno),  199 
Preludio  a  Cristobal  Colon  (Carrillo), 
229,  230 

Preludio  Lirico  (Bisquertt),  157 
Preludio s  (Galindo),  237 
Preludio s  (Leng),  161 
Preludios  (Villa-Lobos),  150 
Price,  George  W.,  168 
Price,  Henry,  168 

Primavera  Helenica  {'Bisq}jQm)y  157 
Primer  Libro  V enezolano  de  Liter aturUy 
Ciencias  y  Bellas  A rteSy  290 
Primera  Suite  Cubana  (Caturla),  184,  185 
Primer  as  Comfosicio  nes  (  Carrillo ) ,  229 


INDEX 


361 


Pnncesa  Margarita,  La  (Pahissa),  95- 
principessa  deW Atelier  (Casabona),  125 
Pro-Sonido  13  (Carrillo),  230 
Procesion,  La  (Ricardo  Castillo),  205 
Procesion  del  Cristo  de  Mayo  (Bisquertt), 

15^ 

Prokofiev,  Sergei,  44-45 

Prole  do  Bebe  (Villa-Lobos),  148,  149, 

Profetarian  Musician,  64 
Prometheus  (Miguez),  136 
Prometheus  (Siccardi),  100 
Psalm,  for  chorus  and  orchestra  (Ginas- 
tera),  92 

publishing.  See  music  publishing 
Puccini,  style  of,  228 
Pueblerinas  (Huizar),  225,  239 
Puerto  Rico,  58,  194 
Puita.  See  Cuica 
Pujador,  259 
Punehas,  39j  82 

Punto,  58,  60,  180,  181,  190,  259,  260 
Punto  Cibaeho,  1 90-1 91 
Punto  Guanacasteco,  173 
Puppets.  See  Titeres 
Purajhei,  264 

pursuit  dances,  category  of,  58,  166 
Pututu,  Bolivian  bull  horn,  106 
Pututu,  jungle  drum.  See  Bututu 
Pyramids  (Chavez),  231 


Q 

Qquena,  See  Quena 

Quadricentennial  Music  Contest,  Santiago, 
156,  161 

Quadrilla  Sifilitica,  54 

Quaratino,  Pascual,  biography  of,  98-99 

Quaratino,  Pedro,  28 

Quarter-tones,  34-3 5>  229-230 

Quartet.  See  also  String  Quartet 

Quartet  (Villa-Lobos),  148,  149 

Quartet,  piano  (Sufiern),  100 

Quartet  for  Violoncellos  (Galindo),  237 

Quatre  Chansons  Argentines  (Pedrell),  287 

Quechua  Indians,  74?  105 

Quena,  Indian  flute,  44,  107,  269-270 

Quena,  La,  12,  17,  102,  104 

Quena  (Caba),  107 


Quenas  (Sas),  276 
Quesada,  Jose,  biography  of,  177-178 
Quevedo,  Antonio  de,  17,  1 8  2-1 83 
Quevedo,  Maria  de,  17,  1S3 
Quezaltenango,  Guatemala,  205,  207 
Quiche  Indians,  201-202,  205,  254 
Quiche  Vinak  (Jesus  Castillo),  203,  205 
Quietud  (Isamitt),  160 
Quijada  del  Burro  (jawbone  of  an  ass),  44, 
180,  187 

Quijano,  Fernando,  283 

Quijongo,  256,  279 

Quimbaya  Indians,  42 

Quintanilla,  Luis,  64-65 

Quintet,  piano.  See  Piano  Quintet 

Quintet  (Soro),  165 

Quintet  (Verneuil),  278 

Quintets  (Uribe-Holguin),  172 

Quito,  Ecuador,  an,  196,  198,  199,  200 

Quitta,  210 


R 

Rabeca,  116 
Rabel,  259 

Rachedall,  Nicolas  Quevedo,  168 
racial  elements,  of  Latin  American  culture, 
27-29,  64-65,  71 

Raco,  x4ntonio  de,  biography  of,  99 
Rada,  210 

Radio  Caracas,  289,  292 
Radio  Nacional,  Quito,  2  n 
Radio  Orchestra,  Berlin,  i6a 
radio  orchestras,  26,  284 
radio  stations,  26,  169,  204 
Radiogram  ihy2l2),  11,  217 
Rajah,  El  (Vasquez)  ,  254 
Ramirez-Peralta,  Jose  G.,  38,  191 
Ramos,  Arthur,  114 
Ramos,  Rafael  Coello,  35,  21 2-213 
Ranchera,  56,  58,  74?  75 
Rancho  A bandonado,  El  (Williams),  103 
Ranchos,  See  Frems 
Rapsodia  Argentina  (Quaratino),  99 
Rafsodia  Brasileir a  (Gnattali),  129 
Rapsodia  Chilena  (Garrido),  159 
Rapsodia  Costarricense  (Monestel),  177 
Rapsodta  Cabana  (Sanchez  de  Fuentes), 
188 

Rapsodia  Negra  (Lecuona),  186 


362 


INDEX 


Rafsodia  Paraguaya  (Gimenez),  265 
Rafsodia  Peruana  (Sas),  276 
Rafsodia  Santaguena  (Carrillo),  83-84 
Rafsodia  del  Tango  (Esposito),  88 
Rafsodias  Guanacastecas  (Monestel),  177 
Raquela  (Boero),  83 
Rara^  210 

Rasga  0  CoragdOy  146 
Rastreador^  El  (Quaratino),  98 
rattles,  ancient,  facing  p.  120 
Ravel,  Maurice,  32,  40,  142,  157,  262 
Ravelo,  Jose  de  Jesus,  192,  195 
biography  of,  195 
Raygada,  Carlos,  266 
Rebagliati,  Claudio,  271 
Rehambaramba^  (Roldan),  44,  187 
Rebelion  del  A gua,  La  (Ugarte),  10 1 
Reboucas,  Jose,  119 
Reco-Reco^  117,  13 1,  135 
recordings,  phonograph,  26 
Recordings  of  Latin  American  Songs  and 
Dances^  14 
Recuerdos  (Sas),  276 
Redes  (Revueltas),  250,  251 
RefalosUy  75 

Rei  Mameluco,  O  (Lima),  134 
Reisado  do  Pastoreio  (Fernandez),  127, 
128 

ReisadoSj  1 1 6 

Relagdo  das  Of  eras  de  Autores  Brasileiros 
(Heitor),  120 

Relations  du  Voyage  de  la  Mer  du  Sud 
(Frezier),  153,  271 
Remedioj  75 

Remedies,  Cuba,  29,  184 
Renacimiento  (Mejia-Arredondo),  194 
Renacuajo  Paseador  (Revueltas),  8,  247, 
249>  =^50 
RenascimientOj  8  5 
Reficador^  259 
Republicano,  Assis,  28 
biography  of,  140 
Requiem  (Carrillo),  229 
Requiem  (Plaza),  293 
Requiem  (Sojo),  294 
Requiem  (Villalba-Munoz),  102 
Requiems  (Santos),  281 

Resbalosa,  See  Refalosa 
Resenha  Musical,  18 
Respighi,  Ottorino,  129 


Resurgimiento  de  los  Andes,  El  (Robles) 
2  75>  277 

Reverie  (Panizza),  96 
‘Review  of  1911,’’  60 
Revista  de  Arte,  17 
Revista  Brasileira  de  Musica,  u,  n-12,  17, 
27,  122,  131,  137 
Revista  Cubana,  La,  184 
Revista  de  Derecho,  Historia  y  Letras,  38,  76 
Revista  Musical  (Costa  Rica),  18,  173,' 
Revista  Musical,  La  (Ricordi),  17 
Revista  Musical  Argentina,  272 
Revista  Musical  Chilena,  i8,  154,  155 
Revista  Musical  Mexicana,  9,  13^  227, 

244,  289  * 

Revista  Musical  Peruana,  17,  272 
Revolucion  (Meza),  242 
Revolucion  (Miramontes),  243 
Revue  Musicale,  17 

Revueltas,  Silvestre,  8,  30-31,  123,  22^^ 
226,  235,  240,  241,  245,  251 
biography  of,  247-251 
photograph  of,  facing  p.  249 
Rey  Poeta,  El  (Campa),  228 
Reyes,  Jose  Trinidad,  191,  213 
Reznicek,  of  Germany,  1 24 
Rhapsody,  Dominican,  193,  195 
Rhapsody  for  Violin  and  Orchestra  (Graet- 
zer),  92 

rhythms,  of  folk  music,  50-55,  71,  1 04-105, 
109-115,  178-182,  190,  197-198,  208, 
214,  217,  218,  259,  260,  266,  268, 
289 

Ribeiro,  Leon,  283 
Ricordi  Company,  12,  17,  80 

publications  of,  82  ff.,  89,  90,  92  ff., 

123  ff.,  134,  135^  13^^ 

Ridgewood,  New  Jersey,  177 

Ried,  Aquinas,  153 

Riemann,  dictionary  of,  26 

Rio  (Gibson),  48 

Rio  Carnival,  4^“49j  115 

Rio  de  Janeiro,  Brazil,  an,  5,  8,  11,  17, 

22,  24,  25,  27,  28,  4o>  46)  57)  109, 
^^3)  iiB,  119,  121,  123  ff.,  136 
Rio  de  Janeiro,  University  of,  ii,  124,  128, 

129,  136 

Ritfnicas  (Roldan),  44,  187 

“Ritmo  y  Melodia  Nativos  de  Venezuela,” 

/  ^93 

Ritmos  Argentinos  (Troiani),  loi 


i 


■INDEX 


Ritmos  Quisqueyanos  (Garcia),  193 
ritual,  native,  46,  47-88,  208-211 
ritual  trumpet,  facing  p.  120 
Rivera,  Camilo,  212  ^ 

biography  of,  213 
Rivera,  Diego,  31,  232,  235 
Rivera,  Luis,  biography  of,  195 
Robles,  Daniel  Alomias,  28,  38-39,  266, 
277 

bio*graphy  of,  275 
Robles,  Manuel,  153 
RodaSj  1 1 5 

Rodriguez,  Alberto,  77 
Rodriguez,  Esther,  183,  185 
biography  of,  186 
Rodriguez,  Fabian,  205 
Rodriguez,  Fernando  Murillo,  175 
Rodriguez,  Leonidas,  213 
Rodriguez  Socas,  Ramon,  283 
biography  of,  287 
Roessler,  Hermann,  10,  221 
Rogatis,  Pascual  de,  29,  33 
biography  of,  99 
Roig,  Gonzalo,  182 
biography  of,  186 
Rojas,  Ricardo,  99 

Roldan,  Amadeo,  23,  28,  33,  44,  182,  183, 
184,  185,  186 
biography  of,  187 
Rolon,  Jose,  32,  225,  237 
biography  of,  251-252 
photograph  of,  facing  p.  248 
Romana,  music  publisher,  1 2 
Romance  Esfanol  y  el  Corrido  MexfcanOj 
El  (Mendoza),  58,  218,  224,  235- 
236,  242 

Romancer 0  GitanOy  El  (Kostakowsky)  ,240 
romanticism,  in  Latin  American  music,  33, 
2,36 

Rotnanza  ^  134 

Romanza  (Moncayo),  243 
Rome,  Italy,  125,  134,  137,  140,  273,  291, 
293 

Romeo  and  Juliet  (Morales)  ,243 
Romero,  Jesus  C.,  27,  222,  244 
Roncal,  Simeon,  106 
biography  of,  107-108 

43,  198,  facing  p.  57 
Rondel  Matinal  (So jo),  294 
Rondo  (Jimenez  Mabarak),  240 
Root,  Elihu,  218 


363 

Rosa  de  los  Vsentos  en  la  Musica  Eufofeay 
La  (Salazar),  252 

Rosario,  Argentina,  12,  80,  84,  93,  94,  95 
Rosas,  Juventino,  54,  221 
Rosas  de  Norgaria  (Mata),  176 
Rosay,  Lily,  276 
Rosenfeld,  Paul,  231-232 
Rbslyn,  Long  Island,  177 
Rossi,  Lauro,  130 
Rossi,  Vicente,  56,  77 
Rossini,  Gioachino,  283 
Rostock,  Germany,  124 
Rotary  Club,  Asuncion,  265 
Roussel,  Albert,  83,  261 
Royal  Academy  of  Music,  London,  133 
Royal  Chapel  of  Music,  Brazil,  118-119 
Rozo  Contreras,  Jose,  biography  of,  171 
Rubinstein,  Artur,  142,  148 
Rudefoema  (Villa-Lobos),  49,  148,  149 
Rueda,  Fernando  A.,  biography  of,  195- 
196 

Ruiz,  Ramon,  212 
biography  of,  213 

Rumba,  23,  57,  58,  60,  113,  17S,  179,  180, 
181-182 

Rumba,  La  (Caturla),  184 
Russia :  similarity  with  Latin  American  mu¬ 
sic  of,  33,  85,  no,  III,  1 12,  277 
musicians  in  Latin  America  from,  29,  88, 
240 

and  the  Tango,  64 

Russian  Association  of  Proletarian  Mu¬ 
sicians,  64 

Russian  Gypsy  songs,  52 
rustic  dances,  category  of,  58,  iii 

S 

Sucre  du  Print emfs  (Stravinsky),  45 
Sacy-Perere,  127 

Sahugun,  Mexican  musician,  220 
Saika  (Ugarte),  loi 
'  St.  Lucia,  West  Indies,  58 
Saint  Malo,  Alfredo  de,  3-4,  8,  260 
biography  of,  262 
Salamanca  do  Jurau  (Cosme),  126 
Salas,  Eugenio  Pereira,  15,  154 
Salazar,  Adolfo,  184 
biography  of,  252 
Salcedo,  Dominican  Republic,  193 
Saldivar,  Gabriel,  15,  217,  224 


364 


INDEX 


Salgado,  Luis  H.,  199 
biography  of,  199-200 
Salon  Mexico^  El  (Copland),  219 
SalongOj  210 
Saludos  Amigos y  113 
Salvador,  El,  279-281 

concerts  by  Slonimsky  in,  3  n,  4 
folklore  of,  16,  48,  279-280 
musical  culture  in,  280 
musicians  of,  8,  19,  28,  34,  37,  280- 
281 

national  anthem  of,  65,  280 
orchestras  of,  280 
Salvador  Rosa  (Gomes),  130 
Salvadoran  Folklore,  Committee  for  the 
Study  of,  280 

Salve  Regina  (Monestel),  177 
Samaritana  de  (Fernandez),  128 

Samba,  57,  60,  iii,  113-114,  115,  152 
Samba-Cangdo,  113 
Samba  Carioca,  1 1 3 
Sambacueca,  See  Cueca 
Sambas  (Dos  Santos),  126 
Sambucetti,  Luis,  283 
Sambumbia  (Garcia),  57,  193 
Sammartino,  Luis  R.,  biography  of,  99 
San  Francisco,  California,  281 
San  Francisco  Solano  (Gaito),  90 
San  Jose,  Costa  Rica,  2  n-3  n,  15,  16,  67, 
^73,  i75>  176,  177 
San  Luis  Potosi,  Mexico,  242 
San  Marcos,  University  of,  273,  275,  277, 
278 

San  Martin,  General,  79 
San  Pedro  de  Macoris,  Dominican  Re¬ 
public,  192 

San  Pedro  de  los  Pinos,  Mexico,  243 
San  Rafael,  Costa  Rica,  177 
San  Salvador,  4,  8,  281 
Sanchez,  Jose  Mateo,  38,  39 

Sanchez  de  Fuentes,  Eduardo,  183 
biography  of,  187-188 
Sanchez  Malaga,  Carlos,  biography  of, 

.  J75,  . 

Sandi,  Luis,  31,  217,  225 
biography  of,  252-253 
photograph  of  facing  p.  249 
Sandunga,  232 

Sangre  de  las  Guttarras  (Gaito),  90 
Sanjuan,  Pedro,  23,  182,  184,  187 
Sanjuanito, 

Santa  Cecilia  Academy,  Rome,  137 


Santa  Cruz  Wilson,  Domingo,  13,  14,  21- 
^  22,  27,  29,  33,  40,  154,  165 
biography  of,  162-164 
musical  autograph,  facing  p.  152 
photograph  of,  facing  p.  217 
Santa  Fe,  Argentina,  92 
Santa  Marfa  Cathedral,  Ciudad  Trujillo 

195 

Santa  Marta,  Colombia,  22 
Santamarfa,  Carlos  Umana,  169 
Santiago,  Chile,  2  n,  8,  15,  18,  20-22,  23, 
24,  29,  40,  .55,  154  ff. 

Santiago  de  los  Caballeros,  Dominican  Re¬ 
public,  193,  194 

Santiago  Papasquiaro,  Mexico,  247 
Santo  Domingo,  city  of.  See  Ciudad 
Trujillo 

Santo  Domingo,  island  of,  67,  68,  69,  71, 
188-190,  207 

Santo  Domingo  de  Heredia,  Costa  Rica, 
176 

Santoro,  Claudio,  31 
biography  of,  140 
Santorsola,  Guido,  87,  283 
biography  of,  287 
Santos,  Domingo,  280 
biography  of,  281 
Santos,  Gustavo,  35 

Sao  Paulo,  Brazil,  z  n,  3,  9,  17,  ij,  3,, 
no,  II9,  120,  I2I,  123,  125,  126, 

13I)  13^)  i33j  134)  135)  136)  137, 
140,  142,  150,  265,  287 
Safateado,  271.  See  also  Zapateo 
Sa  Pereira,  Antonio,  12 1 

Sarambo,  19 1 

Sas,  Andre,  29,  50,  266,  267,  269 
biography  of,  275-276 
photograph  of,  facing  p.  280 
Sastrecillo  y  el  Dueno,  El  (Jimenez 
Mabarak),  240 
Satie,  Erik,  171 
Satuba,  Brazil,  141 

Saudades  do  Brasil  (Milhaud),  57,  121 

(Villa-Lobos),  146 
Saudades  das  Selvas  Brasileiras  (Villa- 
Lobos),  148,  149 
(Lecuona),  1 86 
Sayeda  (Bisquertt),  158 
Scala  Theater,  130 

scales,  in  folk  music,  50-55,  71,  104-105, 
109-110,  197,  201-203,  2ti4)  262, 
z66,  269-270 


INDEX 


365 


Scarecrow.  See  O  Esfantalho 
Scenas  da  Roca  (Mignone),  134 
Scenes  of  Northeastern  Brazil.  See  Cenas  do 
Nordeste  Brasileiro 
Schadani  (Mejia),  241 
Scharwenka,  of  Germany,  206 
Scheley,  Harry  Rowe,  1 1 
Scherzetto  (Cantu),  125 
Scherzetto  Fantastico  (Miguez),  136,  137 
Schefzo  (Ardevol),  183 
Scherzo  (Tosar  Errecart),  287 
Scherzo  Clasico  (Garcia),  193 
Scherzo  Sinfonico  (Rolon),  251 
Schianca,  Arturo  C.,  74 
biography  of,  99 

Schirmer,  G.,  Company,  13,  31,  85,  92, 
100,  132,  150,  157,  165,  177,  195, 
235,  247,  276,  286,  293 
Schiuma,  Alfredo,  1 5  5 
biography  of,  99-100 
Schmidt,  Martin,  79 
Schmitt,  Florent,  155 
shoe  dance.  See  Zafateo 
Schoenberg,  Arnold,  3,  4,  5,  133,  240 
Schola  Cantorum^  Paris,  32,  170,  171,  172, 
186,  261,  265,  284 
School  of  Sacred  Music,  Morelia,  227 
Schott,  German  publisher,  246 
Schottischey  54,  no 
Schumann,  Robert,  160 
scrapers,  42,  43,  44,  45)  7^)  ^^^)  ^^^7) 

180,  215,  216,  263 
Scriabin,  Alexander,  94 
Seabrook,  W.  B.,  208 
Second  Symphony.  5*^^  Symphony  No.  2 
Secretariat  of  Public  Instruction  of  El 
Salvador,  3  n 
Seeger,  Charles,  14 
Segovia,  Andre,  42,  246 
Segreda,  Luis  Eobles,  174 
Seguida-Mirtm  (Mignone),  135 
Seisy  58 

Seh  Pegas  Simf  les  Monotonais  Sobre  Temas 
do  Folklore  Brasileiro  (Pereira),  140 
Selva y  La  (Pacheco  de  Cespedes),  274 
Selva  Sagraday  La  (Williams),  103 
Semple,  Robert,  70,  290 
Senart,  Maurice,  156,  246 
Sendero  (Negrete),  162 
Senka  TankarUy  107 
Sensemaya  (Revueltas),  250,  251 
Senzala  (Siqueira),  141 


Sepp,  Anton,  79 
Septet  (Mariscal),  241 
Serenata  (Kostakowsky),  240 
Serenata  (Uribe-Holguin),  171,  172 
Sereniiad  (Santa  Cruz),  164 
Serenidade  (Villa-Lobos),  147 
Seresta  (Mignone),  136 
Serestas  (Villa-Lobos),  148-149,  150 
Serrana  (Oswald),  139 
§evcik,  violinist,  247 

7  Miniaturas  Sobre  Temas  Brasiieiros 
(Vianna),  40,  142 

Seven  Venezuelan  Songs  (Plaza),  293 
Sextet  (Galindo),  237 
Sextet  (Mignone),  136 
shakers,  42,  44,  45,  71,  116-117,  167-168, 
180,  209,  215,  216,  259,  270 
shoe-polish  tins,  played  by  beggar,  facing 
p.  57 

Siboney  (Lecuona),  186 
Siccardi,  Honorio,  21,  22,  28,  33,  8i,  87 
biography  of,  100 
photograph  of,  facing  p.  184 
Sicurisy  107 
SicuSy  43,  47,  106 
Siesta  (Quaratino),  99 
Siete  Canciones  (Revueltas),  250 
Signora  del  FuocOy  La  (Mignone),  134 
Siliezar,  Felipe,  204 
biography  of,  207 

Silva,  Francisco  Manuel  da,  66,  120, 
121 

Silver  Leaf,  See  Ho  fa  de  PlatUy  La 
‘‘Silvestre  Revueltas  and  Musical  National¬ 
ism  in  Mexico”  (Mayer-Serra),  251 
Simo,  Manuel,  biography  of,  196 
Sindici,  Oreste,  168 
Sinfonia  (Juan  Jose  Castro),  86 
Sinfonia  de  los  Andes  (Nunez  Navarrete), 

■  ■  162 

Sinfonia  de  Antigona  (ChQ.vez)y  233-234 
Sinfonia  Argentina  (Berutti),  83 
Sinfonia  Argentina  (Juan  Jose  Castro),  86 
Sinf  onia  Argentina  (Guastavino),  93 
Sinfonia  A utoctona  (Stea),  276 
Sinfonia  Barbara  (Pena  Morell),  196 
Sinfonia  Biblica  (Juan  Jose  Castro),  86 
Sinfonia  de  los  Cantfos  (Juan  Jose  Castro), 
86 

Sinfonia  Centro  americana  (Delgadillo), 
257 

Sinfonia  en  Estilo  Mexicano  (Meza),  24^ 


366 


INDEX 


Sinfonia  Folklorka  (Adame),  226 
Sinfonia  Giocosa  (Mena),  195 
Sinfonia  Guatemalteca  (Ippisch),  204,  206 
Sinfonia  Incaica  (Delgadillo),  257 
Sinfonia  India  (Chavez),  44,  216,  233,  234 
Sinfonia  de  Juguetes  (Mena),  195 
Sinfonia  de  Luz  (Mejia-Arredondo),  194 
Sinfonia  Mexicana  (Puentes),  236 
Sinfonia  Portena  (Ginastera),  92 
Sinfonia  Prole  tar  ia  (Chavez),  31,  233,  235 
Sinfonia  Ouisqueya  (Garcia),  193 
Sinfonia  Romantica  (Soro),  165 
Sinfonia  Serrana  (Delgadillo),  257 
Sinfonia  de  Trabalho  (Mignone),  136 
Sinfonica  Y enezuela^  23,  292,  294 
Sinfonietta  (Gianneo),  90 
Sinfonietta  (Mariscal),  241 
Sinfonietta  (Pahissa),  95 
Sinfonietta  (Villa-Lobos),  144 
Sinfonietta  Tropical  (Kostakowsky),  240 
Siqueira,  Jose,  13,  32,  116 
biography  of,  140-141 
Sirifo  (Boero),  83 
Sirocchia^  La  (Schiuma),  100 
Sistema  Teorico-Grdfico  de  la  Musica 
(Menchaca),  94 

Six  Animal  Tables  (Ficher),  89 
Six  Synthetic  Poems  (Ardevol),  184 
Slonimsky,  Nicolas:  articles  by,  60  n,  150, 
157,  185 

concerts  by,  2-5,  23,  24,  30,  231,  250 
and  the  Latin  American  tour,  i-ii,  i8 
manuscripts  collected  by,  6-1 1 
phonograph  recordings  of,  26 
Smithsonian  Institution,  259 
Sobre  las  OlaSy  54,  221,  240 
Socavon^  260 

social  consciousness,  in  music,  135-136, 

^  232-233 

Sociedad  Argentina  de  Autores  y  Composi- 
tores  de  Musica ^  80 

Sociedad  Argentina  de  Concierios  Sinfonk 
COSj  98 

Sociedade  de  Concertos  SinfonicoSj  Rio  de 
Janeiro,  121,  124 

Sociedade  de  Concertos  Sinfonicos,  Sao 
Patilo,  1 21 

Sociedad  F Harmonica j  222 
Sociedad  Filarmonico-Religiosa  (Men¬ 
doza),  206 

Sociedad  de  Folklore  de  Chile^  I 


Sociedad  Orquestal  Salvadoreha^  280 
Society  of  Chamber  Music  Concerts,  Ha¬ 
vana,  183 

Society  of  Chilean  Composers,  164 
Society  of  Dancing  Teachers,  57 
Society  of  Popular  Concerts,  Rio  de 
Janeiro,  123 
SODRE.  See  OSSODRE 
Sojo,  Vicente  Emilio,  23,  292,  293 
biography  of,  294 
caricature  of,  facing  p.  153 
Solj  El  (Chavez),  233 
Soler,  Alfredo  Maximo,  19 1 
Soli  (Chavez),  231,  235 
Solis,  Pilar  Jimenez,  175 
Solis,  Uruguay,  285 
Solomon  (Luzzatti),  93 
Sombre  Suave ^  A  (Fernandez),  128 
Some  Aspects  of  Villa-Lobos^  Principles  of 
Composition  (Peppercorn),  143 
Son^  1 8 1,  184 
Spanish,  217 
Son  (Caturla),  185 
Son  Afro-Cubanoj  iSo,  181 
Son  Chapin.  See  Son  Guatemalteca 
Son  GuatemaltecOy  60,  203 
Son  de  la  Luna^  El  (Quesada),  177 
Sonajas^  167-168,  215,  216,  217,  facing  p. 
120 

Sonata  Argentina  (Williams),  102 
Sonata-Fantasia  (Villa-Lobos),  148,  149 
Sonata  for  Flute  (Williams),  102 
Sonata  for  Flute  and  Piano  (Koellreutter), 

133 

Sonata  for  Piano:  Casabona,  126 
Juan  Jose  Castro,  85 
Washington  Castro,  87 
Chavez,  231,  235 
Grisolia,  92 
Koellreutter,  133 
Moreno,  265 
Palma,  96 
Paz,  97 
Perceval,  98 
Ponce,  247 
Suffern,  100 
Torre,  101 

Sonata  Popular  Argentina  (Gilardi),  91 
.  Sonata  de  Primavera  (Jose  Marfa  Castro), 

,  84; 

Sonata  Tragica  (Tello)y  2$^ 


INDEX 


367 


Sonata  for  Viola,  Flute,  and  Piano 
(Ficher),  89 

Sonata  for  Violin:  Carrillo,  229 
Juan  Jose  Castro,  85 
Drangosch,  87 
Dublanc,  87 
richer,  89 
Garay,  261 
Guarnieri,  132 
Koellreutter,  133 
Mignone,  136 
Moreno,  265 
Pahissa,  96 
Perceval,  98 
Ponce,  247 
Siqueira,  141 
Soro,  165 

Uribe-Holguin,  171,  172 
Vasquez,  254 
Williams,  102 

Sonata  for  Violin  and  Piano  (Mackenna), 
161 

Sonata  for  Violin  and  Piano  (Napolitano), 
95 

Sonata  for  Violin  Solo  (Santoro),  140 
Sonata  for  Violin  and  Violoncello  (Con¬ 
treras),  235 

Sonata  for  Violoncello;  Juan  Jose  Castro, 

85 

Gnattali,  129 
Guarnieri,  132 
Perceval,  98 
.  Uribe-Holguin,  172 
Vasquez,  254 
Williams,  102 

Sonata  for  Violoncello  and  Piano  (Car¬ 
rillo),  229 

Sonatas  (Ardevol),  183-184 
donate  en  Duo  (Ponce),  246 
Sonatina  (Guarnieri),  132 
Sonatina  (Tosar  Errecart),  287 
Sonatina  for  Clarinet  and  Piano  (Ficher), 
89 

Sonatina  for  Clarinet  and  Piano  (Paz),  97 
Sonatina  for  Flute  and  Clarinet  (Paz),  97 
Sonatina  for  Flute  and  Piano  (Ficher),  89 
Sonatina  for  Harp  (Ginastera),  92 
Sonatina  India  (Sas),  276 
Sonatina  for  Oboe  and  Bassoon  (Paz),  97 
Sonata  for  Oboe  and  Piano  (Ficher),  89 
Sonatina  for  Piano :  Amengual,  157 


Sonatina  for  Piano:  Amengual  {Cont.) 
Ardevol,  184 
Chavez,  235 

Sonatina  for  Trumpet,  Saxophone,  and 
Piano  (Ficher),  89 
Sonatina  V enezolana  (Plaza),  293 
Sonatina  for  Violin  and  Piano  (Chavez), 
231,  235 

Sonatina  for  Violin  and  Piano  (Moncayo), 
243 

SoneSy  Canciones  y  Corridos  MtchoacanoSy 
225 

Sones  Mariachi  (Galindo),  219,  225,  237 
songs,  folk,  48-50,  ^9s  7O)  73- 

77,  104-105,  io6,  109-116,  152-153, 
166-167,  173-174,  178-182,  189-191, 
197-198,  201-203,  209-210,  214,  215, 
217-219,  255  ff.,  259-260,  262,  264, 
266-269,  275,  279,  282-283,  288  ff. 
carnival,  4S-50,  115 
in  dialogue,  54,  73-74 
first  of  the,  67-68 
religious,  48,  105,  106 
Russian  Gypsy,  52 

Sonko  de  un  Menino  Travesso  (Mignone), 
i35»  136 

Sonko  de  Uma  Noite  de  Luar  (Octaviano), 
138 

Sonido  jj,  magazine,  34,  230 
Sontdo  15,  theory  of,  34,  35,  228,  229-230 
Sonora,  Mexico,  226 
Sonzogno  competition,  125 
Sor  Tofano  (Rodriguez  Socas),  287 
Soro,  Enrique,  21,  160,  162 
biography  of,  164-165 
South  American  Chamber  Musky  26,  89, 
128,  136,  150,  164,  172,  276,  284, 
287 

South  American  Handbooky  36 
Southern  CrosSy  The  (Broqua),  284 
Southern  Music  Publishing  Company,  15 
Souvenir  (Ponce),  245 
Spain  :  the  Habanera  in,  56 

influence  on  Latin  American  music  of, 
75-76,  105,  106,  166-167,  173,  174, 
179  fiE.,  189-190,  197-198,  210,  217- 
218,  258,  259,  262  ff.,  266,  269,  282- 
283,  288,  297 

musicians  in  Latin  America  from,  23-24, 
29,  82,  91,  95,  101,  121,  177,  182, 
183,  186,  191,  193,  237,  261 


368 


INDEX 


Spain:  the  Habanera  in,  (^Cont.') 

as  origin  of  Chilean  folklore,  151-153 
Spanish  Civil  War,  32,  238 
Spanish  names,  27-28 

Spanish  origin,  Latin  American  composers 
of,  28,  107 

Spena,  Lorenzo,  biography  of,  100 
Spezia,  Italy,  274 
Spiral.  See  Esfiral 
square  dances,  category  of,  58 
Stars  and  Strifes,  parody  by  Villa-Lobos  of, 
146 

Stea,  Vicente,  29,  275 
biography  of,  276-277 
Stea  Conservatory,  276 
Stokowski,  Leopold,  230,  232 
Storia  della  Musica  nel  Brasile  (Cernic- 
chiaro),  122 
Strauss,  Richard,  285 
Stravinsky,  Igor,  4,  45,  94,  149,  237 
street  dances,  category  of,  58 
Street  Sketches.  See  Estamfas  Callejeras 
street  songs,  1 74 
String  Quartet:  Carrillo,  229 
Casabona,  126 
Contreras,  235 
Gnattali,  129 
Guarnieri,  132 
Lima,  170 
Mariscal,  241 
Mignone,  136 
Moreno,  265 
Nunez  Navarrete,  162 
Perceval,  98 
Revueltas,  249 
Rodriguez,  186 
Santa  Cruz,  163 
Siccardi,  100 
Siqueira,  141 
Soro,  164,  165 
Tosar  Errecart,  287 
Uribe-Hoiguin,  172 
Vasquez,  254 
Verneuil,  278 
Villa-Lobos,  148,  149 
String  Sextet  (Carrillo) ,  229 
Strube,  Gustave,  293 
Stubbs  du  Perron,  Eduardo  Walter,  29 
biography  of,  277 
Sucre,  Bolivia,  108 
Sueno  de  Alma,  El  (Buchardo),  83 


Suenos  de  un  Baile  (Drangosch),  87 
Sueste,  260 

Sulfern,  Carlos,  biography  of,  100 
Suggestions  (Casabona),  126 
Suite  (Amengual),  157 
Suite  (Holzmann),  273 
Suite  (Moreno),  265 

Suite,  for  chamber  orchestra  (Contreras), 
236 

Suite,  for  clarinet  and  piano  (Siccardi), 
100 

Suite,  for  five  wind  instruments  (Fernan¬ 
dez),  127,  128 

Suite,  for  flute,  clarinet,  and  bassoon 
(Camara),  184 

Suite,  for  flute  and  strings  (Mena),  195 
Suite,  for  harp  and  string  orchestra 
(Quaratino),  98 
Suite,  orchestral:  Gnattali,  129 
Roldan,  187 
Sammartino,  99 

Suite,  for  piano:  Carpio  Valdes,  272 
Washington  Castro,  87 
Dublanc,  87 
Santos,  281 

Suite,  for  piano  and  string  orchestra 
(Lamuraglia),  93 

Suite,  for  string  orchestra:  Humberto 
Allende,  154 
Ippisch,  206 
Letelier,  i6i 

Suite,  of  symphonic  dances  (Estrada),  88 
Suite,  for  thirty  percussion  instruments 
(Ardevol),  184 

Suite,  for  viola,  clarinet,  violin  and  per¬ 
cussion  (Gallet),  129 

Suite,  for  voice  and  violin  (Villa-Lobos), 
148,  149 

Suite,  for  wood-wind  quartet  (Gallet),  129 
Suite  Ahstracta  (Mata),  31,  177 
Suite  alBAntica  (Bautista),  82 
Suite  Antiliana  (Petiton  Guzman),  195 
Suite  d  P Antique  (Miguez),  136 
Suite  Antique  (Nepomuceno),  137 
Suite  Banale  (Sandi),  31,  253 
Suite  Brasileira  (Fernandez),  127 
Suite  Brasileira  (Mignone),  135,  136 
Suite  Brasileira  (Nepomuceno),  137,  13S 
Suite  Breve  (Juan  Jose  Castro),  86 
Suite  Bucolica  (Gallet),  129 
Suite  Camfestre  (Mignone),  134 


INDEX 


369 


Suite  Ecuatoriana  (Moreno),  199 
Suite  en  Estilo  Antiguo  (Ponce),  245- 
246 

Suite  Floral  (Villa-Lobos),  150 
Suite  Folklorica  (Ignacio),  194 
Suite  Grotesca  (Letelier),  161 
Suite  de  Imagenes  (Marchena),  194 
Suite  Incaica  (Casella),  84 
Suite  Indigena  (Mendoza),  242 
Suite* Indigena  (J^sus  Castillo),  205 
Suite  Indigena  Brasileira  (Villa-Lobos), 
144 

Suite  Infantil  (Ayala),  227 
Suite  Infantil  (Juan  Jose  Castro),  86 
Suite  Infantil  (Guarnieri),  133 
Suite  Infantil  (Villa-Lobos),  148,  150 
Suite  Intertonal  (Pahissa  ) ,  9  5 
Suite  Limena  (Pacheco  de  Cespedes),  274 
Suite  M exicana  (Mejia),  241 
Suite  Miniature  (Cardona),  176 
Suite  Neo-Romantica  (Kostakowsky) ,  240 
Suite  Peruana  (Sas),  276 
Suite  Sinfonica  (Isamitt),  160 
Suite  Sinfonica  (Soro),  165 
Suite  Sinfonica  iSgg  (Rolon).  See 
Zafotldn 

Suite  Sinfonica  M exicana  (Miramontes) , 

Suite  Sinfonica  Sobre  Tres  Temas  Pofulares 
(Fernandez),  127,  128 
Suite  Suggestive  (Villa-Lobos),  146,  150 
Suite  Tifica  (Uribe-Holguin),  171 

Suite  Trofical 

Suite  Uruguay  a  (Ascone),  284 
Suite  Venezolana  (Lecuna),  293 

Suites  (Williams),  102,  103 

Suites,  for  violin  and  piano  (Uribe- 
Holguin),  172 

Sul  America  (Villa-Lobos),  150 
Sulamith  (Fkher),  89 
Suray-Surita  (Valcarcel),  43,  270,  277 
Surco  (Huizar),  239 
Surtidor,  El  (Humberto  Allende),  156 
Susfiros  (Vargas),  108 
Symphonic  Ensemble  of  San  Jose,  176 
Symphonies  No.  i  and  No.  2  (Carrillo), 
229,  230 

Symphonies  No.  i  and  No.  2  (Elias),  236 
Symphonies  No.  i-No.  3  (Fkher),  20,  89 
Symphonies  No.  i  and  No.  2  (Garcia),  193 
Symphonies  No.  i~No.  4  (Huizar),  239 


Symphonies  No.  i  and  No.  2  (Mariscal), 
241 

Symphonies  No.  i~No.  3  (Vasquez),  253 
Symphonies  No.  i-*No.  5  (Villa-Lobos), 
144,  150 

Symphonies  No.  i-No.  9  (Williams),  103, 
104 

Symphony  (Ricardo  Castillo),  205 
Symphony  (Hernandez  Moncada),  238 
Symphony  (Miguez),  136 
Symphony  in  A  major  (Mejia-Arredondo), 
194 

Symphony  in  B  flat  (Humberto  Allende), 

154 

Symphony  in  C  (Bermudez  Silva),  169 
Symphony  in  C  major  (Oswald),  139 
Symphony  in  C  minor  (Chavez),  230 
Symphony  in  C  minor  (Ignacio),  194 
Symphony  in  D  (Casabona),  126 
Symphony  in  D  minor  (Siqueira),  141 
Symphony  in  F  (Schiuma),  100 
Symphony  in  G  (Nepomuceno),  11 
Symphony  in  G  (Stea),  276 
Symphony  of  Multitudes  (Republicano), 
140 

Symphony  No.  i  (Miramontes),  243 
Symphony  No.  i  (Octaviano),  138 
Symphony  orchestras.  See  orchestras,  sym¬ 
phony 

Symphony  for  Two  Pianos  and  Chamber 
Orchestra  (Santoro),  140 
Symphony  for  Two  String  Orchestras 
(Santoro),  140 
Syrinx  Aymard,  See  Sicus 

Szenkar,  Eugene,  24,  121 
Szeryng,  Henryk,  246 

T 

Tabaquej  116 

Tabari  (Broqua),  284 

Tabari  (Schiuma),  100 

Taberm  al  Amanecer  (Bisquertt) ,  157, 15  8 

Tacna,  Peru,  273 

TaicUy  106 

Tala,  El  (Fabini),  286 
Tala,  Mexico,  242 
Talagante  (Adolfo  Allende),  154 
Talamanca  Indians,  173 
Tambor,  dance.  See  Tamborito 


370 


INDEX 


Tambofj  native  drum,  ii6,  117,  iiS,  167, 

259 

Tambor  de  Or  den  ^  259 

Tamborkoy  60,  259 

Tambour  Merhigouiny  209 

Tambour-TravailUy  209 

tambourines,  117 

Tambu.  See  Tambor y  native  drum 

Tango,  56-57,  58,  60-64,  77>  7S,  ii3> 

1 15,  180,  282,  290 
Tango  Brasileiro  (Mignone),  136 
Tanguinhoy  115 
TanguinOy  269 
Tangukoy  290 
Tanni,  Angelita,  283 
Tanni,  Marcello,  283 
Tanni,  Pasquale,  283 
Tantum  Ergo  (Monestel),  177 
Tarantelluy  19 1 
Tar  ass  Bulba  (Berutti),  83 
Tarco  en  Flory  El  (Gianneo),  90 
TardCy  La  (Grisolia),  92 
Tato  Vasco  (Bernal  Jimenez),  223,  227- 
228 

Taurepan  Indians,  288 
Tavares,  Hekel,  biography  of,  1 41-142 
Tavern  at  Dusk.  See  Taberna  al  Amanecer 
Taxco  (Kostakowsky),  240 
Tchaikovsky,  Peter,  228,  236,  240 
T chatchay  209 

Teatro  Colony  Buenos  Aires,  25,  80,  81 
83,  84,  85,  86,  88,  90,  91,  92,  93,  94 
95)  9^>  9S)  99,  100,  101,  287 
Teatro  Municifaly  Caracas,  290 
Teatro  Municifaly  Rio  de  Janeiro,  25,  125 
1^7)  134)  138,  140 
Teatro  Municifaly  Santiago,  22,  158 
Teatro  del  Pueblo y  Buenos  Aires,  81 
Teatro  Santa  Anuy  Mexico,  244 
Tecomatillosy  Los  (Baratta),  281 
Tecum  Overture  (Jesus  Castillo),  205 
Tegucigalpa,  Honduras,  213 
Telesfora  (Ried),  153-154 
Telio,  Rafael,  27,  225,  236,  238,  247 
biography  of,  253 
ro  de  Agosto  (Moreno),  199 
Tenabarisy  216,  217 
Teotihuacdn  (Delgadillo),  257 
Tefefdn  (Carrillo),  229-230 
Tefonaxtlcy  42,  201,  215,  216,  217,  279 
Ternos.  See  Frevos 


Temur  a  (Escobar),  293 
tetzilacatly  facing  p.  120 
Texoco,  Mexico,  67,  219 
Thelen  et  Nagoue  (Broqua),  284 
Theme  and  Variations  (Miramontes),  243 
ThemCy  Variations  y  and  Fugue  (Burle 
Marx),  124 

Thirteenth  Sound.  See  Sonido  1 3 
36  (Chavez),  235 
Thomson,  C^sar,  171,  285 
Three  Inventions  (Paz),  97 
Three  Jafanese  Preludes  (Bautista),  8a 
Three  Jazz  Movements  (Paz),  97 
Three  Pieces  (Ibere  de  Demos),  133 
3  Piejas  (Santa  Cruz),  163,  164 
Three  PreludeSy  for  piano  (Ficher),  89 
Three  Preludes  for  Orchestra  (Cotapos), 

159 

Three  Symfhonic  Pieces  (Juan  Jose 
Castro),  86 

Three  Symfhonic  Pieces  after  the  Talmud 
(Ficher),  89 

Three  Vassar  Girls  in  South  Americay  47 
3  Toques  (Roldan),  187 
thunder  stick,  46 
Tiahuanaco  culture,  266,  269 
T terra  Colombiana  (Rozo  Contreras),  171 
T terra  Mojada  (Chavez),  231 
Tierras  Solares  (Mendoza),  24a 
Timbirimhay  167 
,  Time  Magazine,  64 
,  TincoSy  Los  (Delgadillo),  257 
Tinyay  270 
Tifley  41,  167 

,  Tiradentes  (Eleazar  de  Carvalho),  125 
Tirana y  1 1 5 

Titeres  (Siccardi),  100 
Titicaca,  Lake,  93,  271 
Tlalmanalco  (Elias),  236 
Tlafanhuehuetly  216 
Tlafkzalliy  213 
Toaduy  in 

Toada  (Fernandez),  127 
Toada  (Siqueira),  14 1 
Toada  Triste  (Guarnieri),  132 
Toadas  (Guarnieri),  131 
Toccata  (Revueltas),  250,  251 
Toccata  (Tosar  Errecart),  287 
Toccata,  for  piano  (Juan  Jose  Castro),  86 
Toccata,  for  piano  (Orbon),  i86 
Toch-Oroy  270 


INDEX 


371 


Tolima,  Colombia,  170  ^ 

Tolima  Conservatory,  170 
Tolo,  47 

Toltec  culture,  214 
Tonada,  iii,  259,  289 
Tomda  C/iilena^  152 
Tonada  Maguaneray  191 
Tonadas  (Humberto  Allende),  iS5)  ^5^ 
Tonadas  de  Cardcter  Pofular  Chileno 
(•Humberto  Allende),  155,  156 
Tondero.  See  Marinera 
Tonoj  260 
Tono  LlanerOy  289 
Torbellinoy  167 

Torbellino  (Bermudez  Silva),  169,  170 
Torfedero  Musicaly  18 
Torquemada,  Juan  de,  217 
Torra,  Celia,  biography  of,  loo-ioi 
Torre  Bertucci,  Jos6,  biography  of,  101 
Torres,  Rafael  Chavez,  175 
Torres-Rioseco,  Arturo,  73 
Tos  Ferinay  La  (Paniagua  Martinez),  207 
Tosar  Errecart,  Hector,  283 
biography  of,  287 
Toscanini,  Arturo,  96 
Toty  201 

Toward  a  New  Musk  (Chavez),  235 

Toyufdn  (Mata),  176 

Tradkiones  y  Cantares  de  Panama  (Garay), 

i5>  44>  258,  261 

Tragedia  del  Musko  Chileno  (Garrido), 
35,160 

Traite  de  Composition  (Indy),  142 
Tramonto  en  la  Cumbre  (Delgadillo),  257 
Transcendental  Etudes  (Mignone),  13^ 
Transparencias  (Amengual),  157 
Tra‘vels  in  South  America  During  the  Years 
i8ig-2o-‘2i  (Caldcleugh) ,  118-119 
Traversari,  Pedro,  199 
biography  of,  200 

Triffj,  Cuban  guitar,  41 

Tres  Canciones  A rgentinas  (Quaratino),  99 
Tres  Cantos  Negros  Omssss  Jose  Castro),  86 
Tres  Cantos  de  Tagore  (Ponce),  245 
5  Coros  Infantiles  de  Cardcter  Chileno 
(Urrutia),  165 
D^«rd:j  (Guarnieri),  1 3i 
Tres  Danzas  (Ascone),  284 
Tres  Danzas  (Uribe-Holguin) ,  17^) 

Tres  Estampas  Oaxaquefms  (Mariscal), 
241 


Tres  Estudos  em  Forma  de  Sonatina  (Fer¬ 
nandez),  128 

Tres  Lendas  Brasileiras  (Cantu),  125 
Tres  Movimientos  Sinfonkos  (Contreras), 
236 

Tres  Pequehos  Poemas  (Roldan),  187 

Tres  PiezaSy  for  piano  (Ginastera),  92 

Tres  PiezaSy  for  piano  (Morillo),  95 

Tres  Piezas  A  rgentinas  (Quaratino),  99 

Tres  Poemas  (Contreras),  235 

Tres  Poemas  (Guarnieri),  132 

Tres  Poemas  (Ponce),  246 

Tres  Poemas  (Salazar),  252 

Trez  Poemas  Indigenas  (Villa-Lobos),  144 

Tres  Preludios  (Salazar),  252 

Tres  Rapsodias  Brasileiras  (Cantu),  125 

Tres  Rkercari  (Ardevol),  183 

Tres  Trozos  (Bisquertt),  158 

Triana,  Alvaro  de,  164 

Triangulo  (Kostakowsky),  240 

Tribu  (Ayala),  226,  227 

Trilla,  La  (Melo),  162 

Trinidad,  Calypso  songs  of,  58 

Trio  (Pahissa),  96 

Trio  (Soro),  165 

Trio  (Vasquez),  254 

Trio,  for  flute,  violin,  and  viola  (Mac- 
kenna),  161 

Trio,  for  piano;  Braga,  124 
Gnattali,  129 
Guarnieri,  132 
Itibere,  133 
Moreno,  265 
Santoro,  140 
Siqueira,  141 
Williams,  102 

Trio,  for  violin,  clarinet,  and  piano  (Juan 
Jose  Castro),  85 

Trio,  for  violin,  viola,  and  cello  (Mac- 
kenna),  161 

Trio  Brasileiro  (Fernandez),  39,  126-127, 
128 

Trios  (Villa-Lobos),  i43,  i49 
Triptko  Cubano  (Sanchez  de  Fuentes),  188 
Triptko  Indoandino  (Traversari),  200 
Triptko  Sinfonko  (Vasquez),  254 
Tristey  282 

Tristes  (Fabini),  286 
Triunfoy  55,  75j  7^> 

Triunfo  (Aretz-Thiele),  78,  82 
Triunfo  del  Corazon  (Massa),  94 


372 


INDEX 


Trocanoj  42,  116,  263 
Troiani,  Gaetano,  29,  78 
biography  of,  101 

Trois  Chants  de  ^Uruguay  (Broqua),  284 
Trots  Danses  Mexicaines  (Rolon),  252 
Trois  Esquisses  four  Piano  (Bisquertt),  158 
TrotSj  105 

Trova  a  la  Virgen  de  Cofacabana  (Gon¬ 
zalez  Bravo),  107 
Trozos  Mexicanos  (Mejia),  241 
Trozos  en  el  Sentimiento  Popular  (Uribe- 
Holguin),  39,  172 

trumpets,  46,  69,  106,  209,  263,  270,  facings 
p.  120 

Trutruca,  43,  151 

Tu  (Sanchez  de  Fuentes),  183,  187 
Tucuman,  Argentina,  12,  80,  84,  90 
Tucumdn  (Boero),  83 
Tun.  See  T efonaxtle 
Turay-Turay  (Gianneo),  90 
Turina,  Joaquin,  1 71 
Tus  Amores  (Garrido),  152,  153 
2  Canciones  (Santa  Cruz),  163,  164 
Fwo  Poems  from  Tagore  (Ficher),  89 
Two  Poems  from  Tagore  (Ponce),  246 
Tynia^  43 

Tzicahuaztli^  215,  216 
Tzijolaj^  201 

.  U 

U  Kayil  Chaac  (Ayala),  226 
Ubico,  Jorge,  4 

Uchben  X^Coholte  (Ayala),  226 
Ugarte,  Florio  M.,  33,  95 
biography  of,  101 
Uirafuru  (Villa-Lobos),  144 
Ultima  Hora  do  Calvario^  A  (Gomes),  130 
tjUimo  SuenOj  El  (Vasquez),  254 
Uma  Festa  Na  Roga  (Siqueira)  ,  141 
Una  Gloria  del  Arte  Nacional  (Triana), 
165 

Una  Noche  Trofical  (Fabrega),  261 
Undinas  (Rodriguez  Socas),  287 
Unidad  (Chavez),  231,  235 
United  States:  Latin  American  conception 
of  music  in,  11-12 

publication  of  Latin  American  music  in, 
13-14,  26 

United  States  Government,  South  American 
mission  of,  i 


Urena,  Pr.  Pedro  Henriquez,  190 
Uribe-Holguin,  Guillermo,  29,  32,  39,  168, 
1 69 

biography  of,  1 71-172 
photograph  of,  facing  p.  280 
Urrutia  Blondel,  Jorge,  13,  156,  163 
biography  of,  165 
Uruguay,  282-287 

dances  of,  59,  60,  69,  75,  282 
folklore  of,  16,  41,  282-283 
music  publishing  in,  12-13,  283-284,  286 
musical  competitions  in,  285 
musical  culture  in,  283-284 
musicians  of,  13,  26,  29,  32,  37,  284-287 
national  anthem  of,  66,  283 
Ponce’s  concert  tour  in,  246 
symphony  orchestra  in,  22-23,  26,  284, 
285 

Uruguay  (Calcavecchia),  285 


V 

Vaccine,  209 

Valcarcel,  Teodoro,  28,  43?  270,  271 
biography  of,  277-278 
photograph  of,  facing  p.  280 
Valderrama,  Carlos,  54 
biography  of,  278 
Valencia,  Antonio  Maria,  22 
biography  of,  172 
Valencia,  Venezuela,  293 
Valladolid,  Spain,  10 1 
Valle-Riestra,  Jose  Maria,  10,  271 
biography  of,  278 
Valparaiso,  Chile,  159 
Vais  (Lecuna),  193 
Vais  Intimo  (Chavez),  235 
Vais  Trofical,  54 
Valsa  (Gnattali),  129 
Valsa  (Guarnieri),  132 
Valsa  Suburbana  (Fernandez),  128 
Valse  (Ficher),  89 
Valverde,  Mariano,  204 
biography  of,  207 

Vamos  con  Pancho  Villa  (Revueltas),  250 
Varela,  Juan  Cruz,  73 
Varese,  Edgar,  5,  45 
Vargas,  President  Getulio,  143 
Vargas,  Teofilo,  16,  104,  105,  106 
biography  of,  108 


INDEX 


373 


Varlaciones  sohre  un  Tema  Mexkano 
(Elias) j  236 

Variations  (Chavez  Aguilar),  273 
Variations  (Ponce),  246 
Variations,  for  piano  and  orchestra  (Santa 
Cruz),  163 

Variations  on  a  Brazilian  Theme  (Mi- 
gnone),  135 

Variations  1940  (Koellreutter) ,  133 
Variations  for  String  Quartet  (Koell¬ 
reutter),  133 
Vaseo,  Juan,  79 
Vaso,  El  (Amengual),  157 
Vasquez,  Jose,  225,  281 
biography  of,  253-254 
Vaughan,  Father  Bernard,  61 
Vega,  Augusto,  biography  of,  196 
Vega,  Carlos,  14-^5)  39>  40>  5^>  ^^3  74? 
75-76,  81,  82,  181 

Velasco  Maidana,  Jose  Maria,  23,  107 
biography  of,  108 
Velasquez,  Glauco,  123 
Velasquez,  Jose  Francisco,  291 
Velasquez,  Jr.,  Jose  Francisco,  291 
VelAa  Lenda  Sertaneja  (Mignonc),  135 
Venadoy  El  (Sandi),  252-253 
Vencedora,  La,  168 
Vendetta  (Berutti),  83 
Venezuela,  288-294 

choral  society  in,  24,  292 
dances  of,  59,  60,  290 
folklore  of,  16,  54>  288-290 
musical  culture  in,  290-292 
musical  education  in,  290,  292 
musical  instruments  of,  43,  47>  7<>> 

289 

musicians  of,  19,  35,  37>  29 ^"^94 
national  anthem  of,  66,  291 

symphony  orchestra  in,  23,  292 

Ventana  de  (Garrido),  159 
(Revueltas) ,  248,  250 
Veracruz,  Mexico,  226 
Verdi,  Giuseppe,  283 
Verdun,  Bishop  of,  61 
Verlaine,  music  by  Salazar  after,  252 
Verneuil,  Raoul  de,  biography  of,  278 
Vianna,  Fructuoso,  40 
biography  of,  142 

Victor  Phonograph  Company,  26,  163,  21 1, 
286 

Victoria  (Octaviano),  138 


Vida  del  Camfo,  La  (Letelier),  161 
Vida  de  Condor es  (Velasco  Maidana),  108 
Vida  Musical,  18,  160 
Vida  de  un  Musico  Colombiano  (Uribe- 
Holguin),  171 
Vidal,  Paul,  205 
Vidala,  74,  78,  282 
Vidala  (Aretz-Thiele),  82 
Vidalita,  74,  78 
Vidalitas  (Williams),  78,  103 
Vidafura  (Villa-Lobos),  49,  144 
Videla-Rivero,  C.  J.,  77 
Vidrios  Rotos  (Ayala),  227 
Vienna,  Austria,  124,  171,  240,  272 
Viennese  Waltz,  54,  114-115 
Vigilia  (Plaza),  293 

Villa-Lobos,  Heitor,  5-6,  9,  13,  14?  ^4)  26, 
27,  28,  30,  32,  39,  44j  49j  57>  1097 
no,  112,  113,  ii4>  II5) 

124,  129,  132,  135,  137j  i47>  ^50, 
21 1,  facing  p.  152 
biography  of,  142-150 
photograph  of,  facing  p.  2 1 6 
Villafranca,  Spain,  261 
Villalba-Munoz,  Alberto,  29 
biography  of,  101-102 
Villalobos,  Alejandro,  168 
Villanesca  (Uribe-Holguin),  171 
Villanueva,  Felipe,  221 
Villanueva  Galeano,  Ignacio,  21a 
biography  of,  213 
Villena,  Federico,  291 
Vina  del  Mar,  Chile,  159 
Vinetas  (SsLiito.  Cruz),  163,  164 
Violdo,  4.1,  1 16 

Violin  Concerto.  See  Concerto  for  Violin 
and  Orchestra 

Violin  Sonata.  See  Sonata  for  Violin 
Violoncello  Sonata.  See  Sonata  for  Violon¬ 
cello 

Virginia  (Montero),  290,  291 

Firio  (Siqueira),  14 1 

Viscarra  Monje,  Humberto,  biography  of, 
108 

‘Visit  with  Villa-Lobos,  A^’  (Slonimsky), 
150 

Visoes  Inf  antis  (Fernandez),  127 
Visferas  (Sanchez  Malaga),  275 
Vitale,  music  publisher,  12,  128 
Voces  de  Gesta  (Cotapos),  159 
Vodoun.  See  Voodoo  ritual 


374 


INDEX 


Voodoo  ritual,  48,  208,  209-210,  211 
Voz  de  las  Calles^  La  (Humberto  Allende), 
40,  155,  156 
Voz  del  ChocOy  Lay  26 
Fo25  de  Guatemala y  Luy  26,  204 
Vuillermoz,  Emile,  155 

W 

Waday  15 1 

Wag'ner  &  Levien,  13,  235,  246 
Waltz,  the,  54,  no,  1 14-1 15,  220-221,  263 
Wankar.  See  Huankar 
Washington,  D.C.,  232 
Wehrs,  Carlos,  12,  128,  136 
Weingartner,  Felix,  83,  loi,  124,  170 
Weinstock,  Herbert,  235 
West  Indies,  28,  52,  58,  64 
Weweil.  See  Huehuetl 
whistle,  ancient,  facing  p.  120 
whistling  jar,  ancient,  facing  p.  120 
Who^s  Who  in  Latin  Americay  26,  275 
William  Tell  Overturey  parody  by  Villa- 
Lobos  of,  146 

Williams,  Alberto,  8,  12,  17,  29,  32,  78, 
80,  87,  91,  98,  100,  101,  265,  277 
biography  of,  10 2- 104 
musical  autograph,  facing  p.  152 
photograph  of,  facing  p.  184 
Williams,  Benjamin,  102 
Williams,  Irma,  12,  104 
Williams  Conservatory,  102 
wind  instruments,  42,  43,  44,  45,  46,  47, 
51,  106-107,  209)  214)  215,  255- 

256,  259,  263,  269-270,  279,  289 
Wirafun  Kawellu  (Isamitt),  160 
Wise,  Rabbi,  61 

World^s  Fair,  New  York,  125,  147,  204 
WPA  Music  Copying  Project,  6 
Wright,  Frances  A.,  58 

X 

XangOy  116 

Xaque-Xaque.  See  Chequere 
Xibalha  (Ricardo  Castillo),  205 
Xoy  Xoy  Passarinho  (Villa-Lobos),  148 
Xocalho,  Sec  C ho calho 
Xochimilco  (Carrillo),  229,  230 
Xockifili-Macuilxochitl  (Chavez),  215, 
2.34 


XtoleSy  LoSy  214,  215,  216 
Xucalho.  See  Chocalho 
Xuly  201 

Xulitl  (Carrillo),  229 
Y 

Yafnha-O  (Caturla),  184,  185 

Yambambo  (Caturla),  185 

Yaqui  Dancers.  See  Danzantes  Yaquisy  Loi 

Yaqui  Indians,  253 

Yaraviy  55-56,  106,  198,  267-268 

Yaravi  Peruano  (Delgadillo),  257 

Yeba  (Rodriguez  Socas),  287 

Y egilecitay  Lay  256 

Young  Ladies’  College,  San  Jose,  176 

Yradier,  Sebastian,  56,  180 

Yucatan,  60,  218,  226 

Yumuri  (Sanchez  de  Fuentes),  188 

Yupanki  (Berutti),  83 

Yurupari  ritual,  46,  116  1 

Z 

Zacatdn.  See  Huehuetl 
Zacatecas,  Mexico,  30 
Zamacueca,  See  Cueca 
Zarnbay  75,  77,  78 
Zamba  (Sammartino),  99 
Xamboy  64 
ZambumbtUy  279 

Zamfohay  as  generic  term  folr  panpipe,  43 

ZandungUy  218 

ZapateadOy  218 

Zapateado  MontunOy  191 

Zapotec  Indians,  251-252 

ZapateOy  69,  153,  i8i,  260,  271 

ZapaterOy  260 

Zapotldn  (Rolon),  225,  251,  252 
ZarcOy  El  (Michaca),  242 
Zarzuelas  (Ruperto  Casal  Chapi),  193 
Ze  Pereira,  49 

Zipoli,  Domenico,  67,  79,  263 
Zoe  (Villa-Lobos),  143 
ZopilotBy  Ely  256 
Zoraide  (Massa),  94 

ZUy  201 
Zuly  256 

Zumaya,  Manuel,  220 
Zupay  (Rogatis),  99 

Znsjei  Jahre  unter  den  Indianern  (Koch- 
Gruenberg),  46 


Acc,  N®, 


Class 


Book  No. 


C-  ’'X;, 

dS' 


