MUSIC    IN    MEXICO 

A  Historical  Survey 


n 


A  HISTORICAL  SURVEY 


ROBERT  STEVENSON 


York 


THOMAS  Y.  CROWELL  COMPANY 


195* 

AU  rigfa  r**r*9d.  Ho  p**  a/  MM  ftoo*  m*y  to  rtfr****** 
form,  *xc*p*  by  *  r^wwr,  «wf  A**  /^  /«n»i«iiait  o  fAf    u 


Ma*uf*cturtd  in  ikt  V*it*d  St*tn  */ 

UBRARY  OF  CONCftBSS  CATALOG  CARD  NO.   S1-IOJ79 

Apollo  Edition,  197* 


PREFACE 


This  book  is  the  first  in  English  devoted  to  the  history  of  music  in 
Mexico*  Several  excellent  manuals  in  English  dealing  with  the  history 
of  the  various  other  fine  arts  in  Mexico— painting,  architecture,  and  sculp- 
ture—are now  available.  The  absence  of  a  historical  survey  of  music  in 
Mexico  is  therefore  a  conspicuous  example  of  neglect,  especially  when  it 
is  remembered  how  important  music  has  always  been  in  the  total  culture 
of  our  southern  neighbor. 

The  basic  research  which  was  a  necessary  preliminary  to  the  writing  of 
the  present  book  was  made  possible  by  a  grant  from  the  Mexican  Govern- 
ment during  1950  under  terms  of  the  Buenos  Aires  Convention  for  the 
Promotion  of  Inter-American  Cultural  Relations.  My  cordial  thanks  are 
due  the  many  officials  in  Mexico  who  made  the  traversing  of  the  road 
over  Mexico's  musical  past  a  richly  rewarding  experience.  Without  at- 
tempting an  exhaustive  list,  I  should  like  to  remember  here  Dr.  Silvio 
ZwaJa,  Director  of  the  Chapultepec  Museum,  Maestro  Carlos  Ch&vez, 
Director  of  the  Institute  National  de  Bellas  Artes,  Luis  Sandi,  Chief  of 
the  Music  Section  in  the  Institute,  Jesfo  Bal  y  Gay  of  the  Music  Section, 
Bias  Galindo,  Director  of  the  Conservators  Nacional,  Dr.  Jesfis  Romero, 
Professor  of  Music  History  in  the  Conservators,  Dr.  Gabriel  Soldfvar, 
eminent  music  historian,  Juli&n  Carrillo,  veteran  composer  and  former 
head  of  the  conservatory,  Jes6s  Estrada,  organist  of  the  Mexico  City 
Cathedral,  Juliin  Zufiiga,  organist  of  the  Guadalupe  Basilica,  Ger6nimo 
Btqueiro  F&ter,  music  critic,  Joe£  F,  Visquex,  composer,  Miguel  Bernal 
Jimenez,  director  of  the  Escuela  Superior  de  Miiaica  Sagrada  at  Morelia, 
Mr.  George  T.  Smisor,  formerly  of  the  Biblioteca  Benjamin  Franklm 
in  Mexico  City,  Mr.  Dorsey  Gaesaway  Fisher  of  the  American  Embassy, 


vi  PREFACE 

and  Miss  Dorothy  Jester  of  the  American  Embassy.  A  mere  listing  of 
names  is,  of  course,  but  a  token.  In  the  text  and  footnotes  I  have  indicated 
more  precisely  the  extent  of  my  indebtednesses,  which  are  everywhere 
extensive. 

Among  those  in  this  country  whose  aid  has  proved  invaluable  have  been 
Dr.  Lota  Spell,  pioneer  researcher  in  Mexican  music  history,  Dr.  Ethelyn 
Davis,  sociologist  and  expert  in  Mexican  antiquities,  Dr.  Steven  Barwick, 
author  of  an  authoritative  Harvard  dissertation  on  colonial  music  m 
Mexico,  Miss  Alice  Ray,  researcher  in  Puebla  music  history,  Eduardo 
Guerra,  formerly  of  Mexico  City  Union  Seminary,  Mrs.  Hallett  John- 
son, El  Paso,  Texas,  concert  manager  with  extensive  Mexican  connections, 
Mr.  Charles  Seeger,  Music  Division  Chief  of  the  Pan  American  Union, 
Dr.  Carleton  Sprague  Smith,  Music  Division  Chief  at  the  New  York 
Public  Library,  Dr.  Edmund  King  of  Princeton  University,  Mr.  Arthur 
Cohn  of  the  Philadelphia  Free  Public  Library,  and  Dr.  Thomas  E. 
Cotner  of  the  United  States  Office  of  Education  at  Washington. 

My  thanks  are  also  due  staff  members  of  several  libraries  both  in 
Mexico  and  in  the  United  States  specializing  in  Mexican  imprints:  nota- 
bly the  Biblioteca  Nacional  and  Conservatorio  National  Library  at  Mex- 
ico City  j  and  The  Huntington  and  Bancroft  Libraries  at  San  Marino  and 
Berkeley  respectively  in  California. 


CONTENTS 


1;    EARLY    ABORIGINAL    MUSIC    IN   MEXICO 

"Ancient"  Mexican  Music  at  the  Museum  of  Modern  Art.  Chang- 
ing Attitudes  Towards  Ancient  Aboriginal  Music.  The  "Aztec 
Renaissance."  Methods  Used  by  Contemporary  Scholars  in  the 
Study  of  Pre-Conquest  Music.  The  Musical  Instruments  Used  in 
Ancient  Mexico.  Testimony  of  Early  Spanish  Historians  on  the 
Character  of  Aboriginal  Music.  Contribution  of  the  Missionaries  to 
Our  Understanding  of  Indian  Culture.  Conclusions  Concerning 
Pre-Conquest  Music  Derived  from  Early  Spanish  Testimony. 
Toribio  de  Motolinia.  Bernardino  de  Sahagiin,  Francisco  Lopez 
de  Gomara.  Alonso  de  Molina.  Diego  de  Landa.  Diego  Duran, 
Geronimo  de  Mendieta.  Summaries  of  Sixteenth  Century  Opinion. 
Absence  of  Musical  Quotations  in  the  Sixteenth  Century  Chronicles 
of  Pre-Conquest  Life.  The  Melodic  System  of  the  Early  Aborigines. 
Concluding  Summary. 


2.     THE   TRANSPLANTING   OF   EUROPEAN   MUSICAL 
CULTURE  5* 

Aptitude  of  the  Indians*  Music  as  an  Aid  in  the  Process  of  Conver- 
sion. The  Resulting  Superfluity  of  Indian  Singers  and  Instrumental- 
ists. The  Musical  Achievement  of  Early  Colonial  Indian  Choirs. 
Music  Printing  During  the  Sixteenth  Century.  Description  of  Six- 
teenth Century  Mexican  Imprints  Containing  Music.  Present-Day 
Significance  of  Sixteenth  Century  Music  Imprints,  Sixteenth  Cen- 

vii 


viii  CONTENTS 

tury  Background  in  Spain.  Synopsis  of  Neo-Hispank  Polyphonic 
Development.  Neo-Hispanic  Polyphony  as  "Gebrauchsmusik."  Mu- 
sic in  Commemorative  Acts.  Sixteenth  Century  Developments  in 
Instrumental  Music.  Secular  Music. 

3.     THE    CULMINATION   AND  DECLINE   OF   NEQ-" 

HISPANIC    MUSIC  100 

Sources.  The  Printing  of  Part-Music.  The  Extent  of  the  Repertory. 
Hernando  Franco.  The  Magnificat*.  Nahuatl  Hymns.  The  Puebla 
School  of  Composers.  Music  in  Mkhoacan.  Music  in  Other  Provin- 
cial Centers.  The  Villancico  in  New  Spain.  Music  at  Mexico  City 
Cathedral  (Salazar  to  Aldana).  Reasons  for  the  Decline  of  Neo- 
Hispanic  Music.  Secular  Music  During  the  Seventeenth  and  Eight- 
eenth Centuries.  Neo-Hispanic  Folk-Music* 

4-     THE    OPERATIC    NINETEENTH    CENTURY  172 

Musk  in  Mexico  (1810)  Compared  with  Music  in  Other  Hispanic 
Colonies.  Mexican  Music  During  the  Last  Years  of  the  Viceroy- 
alty.  Music  at  the  School  of  Mines  in  Mexico  City.  Instruments  and 
Instrument  Tuning.  Dance  Types  Popular  at  the  End  of  the  Vice- 
regal Period.  Jose  Mariano  EHzaga:  A  Pioneer  During  the  Revolu- 
tionary Epoch.  Elizaga's  Printed  Works.  Elfeaga's  Successor*.  The 
Manuel  Garcia  Episode.  Foreign  Opinion  on  Musk  in  the  Young 
Republic.  Mexican  Opera  Composers  of  the  Mid-Century,  Melesio 
Morales's  One  "Mexican"  Opera.  Angela  Peraha:  'The  Mexican 
Nightingale."  Other  Mexican  Opera  Composers  of  the  Nineteenth 
Century.  Assessment  of  Nineteenth  Century  Mexican  Opera.  Salon 
Music.  Piano  Virtuosi  During  the  Latter  Half  of  the  Century. 
Ricardo  Castro:  the  Most  "Europeizante"  Nineteenth  Century 
Composer.  Religious  Musk  in  Nineteenth  Century  Mexico.  Na- 
tional and  Regional  Dances.  The  Nineteenth  Century  in  Resume*. 

5.     FULFILLMENT    DURING    THE    TWENTIETH    CBN* 
TURY  2*4 

The  Last  Porfirian  Decade.  Le  Llgmd*  d*  RwM.  Carnpa's  In- 
dictment of  the  Masses.  Juliin  Carrfllo.  Manuel  M.  Ponce.  Curios 


CONTENTS  ix 

Chavez.  Chavez's  Musical  Style.  Silvcstre  Revueltas.  Candelario 
Huizar.  Bias  Galindo.  El  Grupo  de  los  Cuatro.  Luis  Sandi.  Miguel 
Bernal  Jimenez.  Schola  Cantorumi  Nuestr*  Musica;  Mexico  en 
el  Arte.  Other  Composers.  Popular  Music  in  Mexico  Today.  For- 
eign Contributors  to  Mexican  Musical  Life.  Outlook  for  the  Future. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 

INDEX  283 


MEXICAN  CHRONOLOGY 


Mexican  history  divides  itself  into  three  principal  epochs:  (i)  the  Pre- 
Spanish,  ending  at  1521,  (2)  the  Colonial,  extending  from  1521  until 
1810,  (3)  the  Independence,  lasting  from  1810  until  the  present  time. 
Many  present-day  Mexican  historians  add  a  fourth  division  to  the  above 
three,  the  Reform  epoch  which  began  in  1910  with  the  revolt  against 
Porfirio  Diaz. 

A  table  of  dates  is  supplied  below  j  this  table  is  an  abridgment  of  a 
longer  one  found  in  Alfonso  Teja  Zabre's  Historia  de  Mfxico  (Mferico: 
Imp.  de  la  Secretaria  de  Relaciones  Exteriores,  1935)*  All  dates  are  in  the 
Christian  era, 

200-400  Rise  of  Southern  Maya  culture  in  Guatemala  and  Hon- 

duras 

500-600  Southern  Maya  culture  reaches  its  zenith  in  such  cities 

as  Copan,  Tikal,  and  Palenque 

IOOO-X200  Northern  Maya  culture  flourishes  in  Yucatan,  a  princi- 

pal center  being  Chichen-Itza 

1325  Tenochtitlan,  principal  city  of  the  Aztecs,  founded 

1418-72  Nezthutlcoyotl,  poet-king  of  Texcuco 

1440-69  Montezuma  I  ruler  in  Tenochtitlan 

1482  Work  begins  on  the  construction  of  a  great  new  temple 

»t  TenochtMin 

1487  At  consecration  ceremonies  for  new  great  temple 

20,000  captives  are  sacrificed 

1503-20  Montezuma  I!  succeeds  as  ruler  of  the  Aztec  "em- 

pire" 

1 5 1 9,  April  2 1  Cortes  arrives  tt  San  Juan  de  Uloa 

xi 


1519*  August  16 


1519,  November  7 


1520,  June  29 

1520,  June  30 

1521,  August  13 

1523,  August  30 
1525,  February 

1535 

1536,  January  7 


1553  January  25 

*573 
1608 

1642 

1692,  June  8 
1693 

1711 

1742 

1 767,  June  27 

1789 

1792 

1793 

1793-94 

1805,  October  I 

1808 

1 809,  September  9 


MEXICAN  CHRONOLOGY 

He  leaves  the  coast  and  marches  toward  Tenochtidan 
with  a  force  of  400  infantry,  16  horses,  6  cannon,  and 
1500  Indian  allies 

He  arrives  at  Tenochtitlan ;  a  week  later  he  seizes  the 
person  of  Montezmna,  overthrows  idols  in  the  great 
temple,  and  sets  up  a  cross  in  it 

Montezmna,  after  vainly  trying  to  quiet  his  people, 
is  slain 

Cortes  flees  the  city  in  disastrous  defeat:  "Noche  triste" 
Tenochtidan  surrenders;  Cuauhtemoc,  last  ruler  of  the 
Aztecs,  is  taken  prisoner 
First  Franciscan  friars  land  at  Veracruz 
Cuauhtemoc  executed  during  CorteVs  expedition  to 
Honduras  because  of  his  part  in  a  conspiracy 
Don  Antonio  de  Mendoza,  first  viceroy,  arrives 
College  of  Santa  Cruz  de  Tlatelolco  for  Indians  opens 
with  60  students  who  are  taught  reading,  writing,  Latin 
grammar,  rhetoric,  philosophy,  and  music 
Luis  de  Velasco  (I),  2nd  viceroy,  opens  University  of 
Mexico 

Work  begins  on  Cathedral  of  Mexico  (present  struc- 
ture) 

Luis  de  Velasco  (II)  inaugurates  a  large  system  of 
drainage  works  in  order  to  reclaim  Mexico  City  from 
marshland 

Juan  de  Palafox  y  Mendoza,  Bishop  of  Puebla,  named 
1 8th  viceroy 

Riot  on  account  of  corn  shortage  in  the  capital 
Mercuric    VolanU>   first  newspaper    in    New    Spain, 
founded  by  Don  Carlos  de  Siguenza  y  Gongora 
Fernando  de  Alencastre,  Duque  de  Linares,  34th  vice- 
roy 

3,900,000  inhabitants  in  Mexico 
Expulsion  of  the  Jesuits 
2nd  Conde  de  Revfllagigedo,  5ist  viceroy 
Opening  of  School  of  Mines  at  Mexico  City 
4,500,000  inhabitants  in  Mexico 
Mexico  City  has  an  approximate  population  of  135,000 
First  issue  of  Diario  de  Mexico)  a  daily  newspaper 
6,500,000  inhabitants  (Humboldt's  estimate) 
Abortive  conspiracy  at  Valladolid  (now  Morelia) 


MEXICAN  CHRONOLOGY 


1810,  September  15 
and  16 

1810,  November  26 

1811,  March  21 
1811,  July  30 
1815,  December  22 

1821,  July  30 

1822,  May  1  8 

1822,  December  2 

1823,  March  19 

1824,  October  4 
1833,  October  21 

1834 

1835,  November  7 

1836,  April  21 

1846,  March  25 

1846,  May  13 

1847,  September  14 

1848,  February  2 

1853,  November  5 
1853,  December  16 

1855,  August  9 

1856,  June  24 
1860,  December  28 


1863,  May  31 
1  863,  June  7 

1864,  May  28 

1866,  December  18 

1867,  June  I9 
1867,  July  21 

1869,  September  16 

1869 

1871,  November  8 

1  872,  July  1  8 

1876,  November  26 


Cry  for  independence  at  the  village  of  Dolores  where 
Miguel  Hidalgo  is  parish  priest:  "Grito  de  Dolores" 
Hidalgo  enters  Guadalajara 
Hidalgo  captured 
Hidalgo  executed  at  Chihuahua 
Morelos,  the  other  principal  insurrectionary  leader,  exe- 
cuted 

Juan  O'Donoju,  62nd  and  last  viceroy,  arrives 
Agustfn  Iturbide  proclaimed  emperor 
Santa  Anna  starts  a  revolt  against  Iturbide 
Iturbide  abdicates 

Constitution  of  the  Republic  of  Mexico  proclaimed 
Univerity  of  Mexico  suppressed 
7,734,292  population 

Texas  Convention  moves  separation  from  Mexico 
Santa  Anna,  captured  by  the  Texans  at  San  Jacinto, 
promises  Texas  independence 
General  Zachary  Taylor  advances  on  Matamoros 
United  States  Congress  declares  war  on  Mexico 
American  troops  occupy  Mexico  City 
Treaty  of  Guadalupe  Hidalgo,  ceding  territory  to  the 
United  States 

First  electric  telegraph  operated  in  Mexico 
Santa  Anna  proclaims  himself  a  dictator  with  the  title 
of  "Most  Serene  Highness" 
He  is  forced  to  leave  Mexico 
Secularization  of  church  property  decreed 
Laws  of  reform  closing  monasteries,  convents,  secu- 
larizing church  property,  establishing  civil  marriage 
President  Benito  Juarez  forced  to  leave  Mexico  City 
French  army  enters  Mexico  City 
Maximilian  and  Carlotta  arrive  at  Veracruz 
French  troops  begin  to  leave  Mexico 
Maximilian,  Miramon,  and  Mejia,  shot  at  Queretaro 
Benito  Juarez  reestablishes  his  government  at  Mexico 
City 

Opening  of  railroad  from  Mexico  City  to  Puebla 
8,743,614  population 
Revolt  led  by  Porfirio  Diaz 
Juarez  dies 
Diaz  president  of  Mexico 


XIV 


MEXICAN  CHRONOLOGY 


1910,  November  20 

191 1,  May  25 
191 1  July  7 
1913,  February  22 
1917,  May  i 
1920,  May  2 1 
1921 

1924,  December  I 
1934,  November  30 
1938,  March  18 
1940,  December  I 
1942,  May  28 
1946,  December  I 
1950 
1952,  December  I 


Revolt  at  Chihuahua  and  Puebla 

Diaz  leaves  Mexico  City 

Francisco  I.  Madero  enters  Mexico  City  in  triumph 

Madero  killed 

Venustiano  Carranza  president 

Carranza  killed 

14,234,780  population 

General  Plutarco  Calles  president 

General  Lazaro  Cardenas  president 

Expropriation  of  American  and  British  oil  properties 

General  A  via  Camacho  president 

War  declared  against  Germany,  Italy,  and  Japan 

Miguel  Aleman  president 

25*706,458  population 

Adolfo  Ruiz  Cortines  president 


A  GUIDE  TO  PRONUNCIATION 


Spanish  words 

a:  asin"f*ther" 

c:  as  a  k  before  a>  o,  u;  as  an  s  before  e,  i 

ch:  asina£Ain" 

e:  as  in  (Cvem" 

g:  hard  as  in  "gas"  before  *,  0,  u;  as  an  A  before 

h:  always  silent 

i:  as  in  "machine" 

j :  as  in  "Nava/o"  (like  a  strong  A) 

11:  like  y  in  "you" 

n:  like  ny  in  "canyon" 

qu:  like  k 
u: 


Indian  words  are  all  transliterations  and  are  therefore  to  be  pronounced 
according  to  the  rules  for  the  pronunciation  of  Spanish  words. 


MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

A  Historical  Survey 


EARLY  ABORIGINAL  MUSIC 
IN  MEXICO 


"ANCIENT"  MEXICAN  MUSIC  AT  THE  MUSEUM  OF  MODERN  ART 

The  first  attempt  to  present  an  organized  historical  survey  of  Mexican 
music  to  the  American  public  occurred  as  recently  as  1940.  During  May 
of  that  year  the  Museum  of  Modern  Art  in  New  York  city  sponsored  a 
series  of  programs  containing  representative  works  from  each  of  the  prin- 
cipal epochs  in  Mexican  history.  During  the  same  month  the  Columbia 
Corporation  recorded  an  album  of  selected  orchestral  pieces  from  the 
series.  The  concerts  for  those  who  heard  them,  and  later  the  recordings 
for  the  wider  public,  were  important  not  only  because  they  proved  Mexi- 
can achievements  in  music  could  match  Mexican  achievements  in  the 
other  arts.  They  were  significant  also  because  they  showed  that  Mexican 
music,  like  painting  and  sculpture  in  that  country,  had  spoken  most  power- 
fully when  inspired  by  the  aboriginal,  rather  than  the  Hispanic^  forces  in 
Mexican  cultural  tradition. 

The  selections  presented  in  the  museum  concerts  which  were  felt  most 
aptly  to  express  Mexico's  own  indigenous  spirit  were  Luis  Sandi's  Yagvi 
MusiCy  Carlos  Chivez's  D&tza  a  Genteotl  from  the  Aztec  ballet  Los  Cua- 
traSoles,  and  Chavez's  Aztec  evocation,  Xochipll^Macuilxachid.  In  this 
last  piece  Chavez,  by  using  instruments  constructed  in  facsimile  of  those 
faipwn  to  have  been  used  by  the  pre-Conquest  Mexicans,  sought  to  re- 
capture the  sonorities  that  characterized  pre-Spanish  music  Howard 
Taubman  in  describing  XocMpttlfrMpcutUspcMd  for  the  New  York  T*meb 
wrote: 


2  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

Mr.  Chavez  scored  the  work  for  copies  of  archaeological  instruments: 
flutes,  teponaztlis,  huehuetls,  rasps,  rattles,  whistles,  and  trombone.  The 
last  instrument  was  used  to  suggest  the  sound  made  by  blowing  into  a  conch 
shell.  The  result  is  a  work  of  delightful  primitive  flavor,  employing  its 
strange  instrumental  resources  with  rare  effect. 

The  music  editor  of  Time  magazine  spoke  in  similar  terms:  "Flutes 
and  pipes  shrilled  and  wailed,  a  trombone  (substituting  for  the  snail 
shell)  neighed  an  angular  melody,  to  the  spine-tingling  thrump-and-throb 
of  drums,  gourds,  rattles.  .  .  .  Xochifilli-Macuilxochitl  sounded  almost 
as  primitive  as  Stravinsky." 

Much  music  of  a  more  conventionalized  type  was,  of  course,  presented 
during  the  Museum  of  Modern  Art  Mexican  series.  In  order  to  show  the 
kind  of  music  popular  in  Mexico  during  the  nineteenth  century  two 
medleys  were  pkyed,  and  in  addition  a  Mass  for  four  voices  with  orches- 
tra by  the  colonial  composer,  Don  Jos6  Aldana,  was  sung.  But  this  Aldana 
Mass,  because  it  was  thought  -to  sound  altogether  too  much  like  some 
such  joyous  Haydn  Mass  as  the  Mariazellermesse^  was  passed  over  with 
only  a  perfunctory  gesture  in  the  press  reviews  and  was  not  released  in 
the  Columbia  album  of  recordings. 

A  study  of  the  press  comments  along  with  a  survey  of  the  numbers 
actually  recorded  proves  conclusively  that  none  of  the  colonial  or  nine- 
teenth century  music  was  most  favored.  Rather  the  music  chosen  by  critics 
and  public  with  considerable  unanimity  was  that  which  was  thought  to 
show  the  least  traces  of  European  influence.  Xochiplli-Macuilxochitl  with 
its  teponaztlis  and  huehuetls,  the  Danza  a  Centeotl  with  its  orchestrally- 
accompanied  chorus  chanting  Mazahua  melodies  in  Nahuatl  (the  lan- 
guage of  the  Aztecs),  and  Yaqtu  Music  from  the  Sonora  tribe  which 
longer  than  any  other  resisted  mission  influences,  were  the  compositions 
that  created  the  most  lasting  impressions. 

Simultaneously  with  the  historic  programs  of  Mexican  music  the 
Museum  displayed  an  exhibit  of  the  other  arts  in  Mexico.  <rWhat  really 
held  the  Manhattan  gallery-goers  spellbound  was  the  enormous  collec- 
tion of  gaunt,  contorted  monumental  stone  sculpture  by  long-forgotten 
Maya,  Toltec,  and  Olmec  craftsmen  representing  the  first  1,500  of  Mex- 
ico's 2,000  years  of  art,"  reported  Time  magazine.  And  the  art  critic, 
Edward  Jewell,  wrote  in  the  New  York  Times:  "In  both  the  pre-Spanish 
and  the  modern  periods  Mexican  art  reached  a  cultural  apogee." 

As  with  the  visual  arts,  so  with  music.  The  Museum  concerts  proved 


EARLY  ABORIGINAL  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO         3 

that  Mexican  music  constructed  along  its  most  "ancient"  lines  was  that 
which  most  strongly  appealed  to  moderns. 

CHANGING  ATTITUDES   TOWARDS   ANCIENT  ABORIGINAL   MUSIC 

If  our  new  interest  in  "Aztec"  music  after  these  1940  concerts  seems 
a  somewhat  belated  tribute  to  the  culture  of  the  aboriginal  races  who 
lived  in  Mexico,  the  reason  for  our  tardiness  is  easily  enough  explained. 
In  the  United  States  we  have  necessarily  awaited  the  lead  of  Mexican 
scholars,  most  of  whom  have  themselves  until  comparatively  recent 
times  shown  no  marked  interest  in  the  music  of  the  Aztecs,  Mayas,  or 
other  ancient  tribes  who  inhabited  Mexico  during  the  pre-Conquest  era. 

Mexican  music  historians  can  only  be  said  to  have  begun  the  sympa- 
thetic study  of  ancient  indigenous  music  during  the  I92o's.  Before  1920 
most  Mexican  writers  on  music  were  either  content  to  repeat  the  strictures 
against  Aztec  music  uttered  by  early  conquistadores  such  as  Bernal  Diaz 
del  Castillo,  or  were  willing  to  follow  the  authority,  of  later  historians 
such  as  the  eighteenth  century  Jesuit,  Francisco  Clavijero,  who  called 
Aztec  music  the  poorest  art  of  the  pre-Conquest  natives. 

Bernal  Diaz,  because  his  astonishingly  vivid  accounts  of  the  music 
played  and  sung  by  the  Aztecs  during  their  ritual  sacrifices  of  Spanish 
prisoners-of-war  were  picturesque,  was  a  favorite  authority.  Quite  natu- 
rally Aztec  music  could  have  seemed  to  Diaz  only  dismal  and  horrible. 
He  associated  it  always  with  the  memory  of  his  comrades-in-arms  sacri- 
ficed on  the  altar-stone  of  their  war-god,  Huitzilopochtli.  Even  their 
battle  music,  exciting  though  he  admitted  it  to  have  been,  could  not  have 
won  any  tributes  of  praise  from  Bernal  Diaz,  the  "true  historian"  of  all 
that  befell  the  conquerors.  Locked  in  a  life-and-death  struggle  with  the 
Aztecs  the  conquistadores  could  not  easily  have  discerned  the  higher  ele- 
ments in  the  opposing  culture,  even  had  they  wished  to  be  fair. 

A  modern  historian  comfortably  remote  from  the  scene  can  describe 
Aztec  civilization  in  terms  of  their  "well-planned  cities  with  towering 
pyramids  and  impressive  temples,"  of  their  "vast  and  brilliantly  colored 
palaces  with  extensive  apartments  and  terraces,"  of  their  "huge  market 
squares  and  continually  moving  caravans  of  traders,"  of  their  "monetary 
system  using  gold  and  copper  for  currency,"  of  their  "highly  developed 
system  of  picture  writing,"  and  of  their  "elaborate  patronage  of  the 
arts";  -1  but  what  Diaz,  who  was  closer  to  the  scene,  could  see  of  their 


4  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

patronage  of  the  arts  afforded  him  less  cause  for  rejoicing.  He  was  a 
soldier  j  and  the  references  in  his  Historia  verdadera  occur  oftenest  in  the 
midst  of  his  battle  descriptions.  His  musical  references  include  mention 
of  the  large  Aztec  war-drum  (tlapanhuehuetl),  of  their  instruments  made 
of  animal  and  human  bone  (tzicahuastli  and  omitzicahuastli),  of  their 
conch  shell  trumpets  (tepuzquiquiztli),  of  their  flutes  (tlapitzalli),  and  of 
certain  other  instruments  that  are  now  less  easily  identifiable. 

The  following  extracts,  which  are  given  in  Maudsla/s  translation, 
show  the  kind  of  contact  Bernal  Diaz  had  with  Aztec  music: 

As  we  were  retreating  we  heard  the  sound  of  the  trumpets  from  the 
great  Cue,  which  from  its  height  dominates  the  whole  city  [the  great  Cue 
was  the  principal  sacrificial  temple,  and  stood  on  the  exact  spot  where  now 
rises  the  Cathedral  of  Mexico  City] .  We  heard  also  a  drum,  a  most  dismal 
sound  indeed  it  was  ...  as  it  resounded  so  that  one  could  hear  it  two- 
leagues  off,  and  with  it  many  small  tambourines  and  shell  trumpets,  horns 
and  whistles.  At  that  moment  .  .  .  they  were  offering  the  hearts  of  ten 
of  our  comrades  and  much  blood  to  the  idols  that  I  have  mentioned.  .  .  . 

Again  there  was  sounded  the  dismal  drum  of  Huichflobos  [Huitzilo- 
pochtli] .  There  sounded  also  many  other  shells  and  horns  and  things  like 
trumpets  and  the  sound  of  them  all  was  terrifying.  We  all  looked  towards 
the  lofty  Cue  where  they  were  being  sounded,  and  saw  our  comrades 
whom  they  had  captured  when  they  defeated  Cortes  being  carried  by  force 
up  the  steps,  and  they  were  taking  them  to  be  sacrificed.  When  they  got 
them  up  to  a  small  square  where  their  accursed  idols  were  kept,  we  saw 
them  place  plumes  on  the  heads  of  many  of  them  .  .  .  and  they  forced 
them  to  dance.  After  they  had  danced  they  immediately  placed  them  on 
their  backs  on  some  narrow  stones,  and  with  stone  knives  they  sawed  open 
their  chests  and  drew  out  their  palpitating  hearts  and  offered  them  to  the 
idols.  ... 

The  Mexicans  offered  great  sacrifice  and  celebrated  festivals  every 
night  and  sounded  their  cursed  drum,  trumpets,  kettle  drums  and  shells, 
and  uttered  yells  and  howls.  Then  they  sacrificed  our  comrades.  .  .  .2 

It  is  too  much  to  expect  that  the  conquerors  who  fought  with  Cortes 
should  have  been  able  dispassionately  to  have  evaluated  Aztec  music.  The 
memory  of  their  own  battles  must  surely  have  been  too  immediate  and 
overwhelming.  On  the  other  feand  certain  sixteenth-century  missionaries 
-^he  learned  Franciscan,  Bernardino  de  Sahagtin,  for  instance,  or  the 
laborious  Dominican,  Diego  Duran— heard  Aztec  music  with  different 


EARLY  ABORIGINAL  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO         5 

ears,  and  were  therefore  able  to  render  a  more  favorable  account  of  it.  But 
the  unfavorable  comments  of  Bernal  Diaz,  rather  than  these  favorable 
accounts,  created  the  climate  of  opinion  in  which  the  older  generation  of 
Mexican  music  historians  lived  up  until  about  1920. 

As  late  as  1917  a  member  of  the  National  Conservatory  of  Music 
faculty,  Alba  Herrera  y  Ogazon,  published  under  the  official  auspices  of 
the  Direcci6n  General  de  las  Bellas  Artes  a  treatise  on  Mexican  music  en- 
titled El  Arte  Musical  en  Mexico  in  which  she  vigorously  condemned 
Aztec  music.  In  her  way  of  thinking,  Aztec  music,  since  it  exactly  ex- 
pressed the  soul  of  a  cruel  and  barbarous  people,  was  a  degenerate  expres- 
sion, and  therefore  unsuited  to  the  refined  tastes  of  civilized  Europeans. 
The  following  two  sentences  carried  the  main  drift  of  her  argument 
against  Aztec  music: 

From  the  remaining  exemplars  of  Aztec  instruments  preserved  in  the 
National  Museum  of  Mexico,  we  may  infer  that  the  music  of  the  people 
during  the  pre-Conquest  era  was  as  barbarous  and  harsh  as  were  the  cere- 
monies at  which  their  music  was  heard.  .  .  . 

The  conch-shell,  the  Mixtecan  tun,  the  teponazdi,  the  chicahuazdi,  the 
sonaja,  the  Zapotec  chirimia,  and  the  Yaqui  tambor,  are  not  instruments 
capable  of  producing  either  alone,  or  in  conjunction  with  each  other,  a 
grateful  harmony:  nor  can  the  sound  of  any  of  them  induce  a  spiritual 
response  that  is  in  harmony  with  presently  accepted  standards  of  be- 
havior. .  .  .8 

The  only  indigenous  music  she  could  praise,  on  the  other  hand,  was 
a  Tarascan  melody  which  fortuitously  resembled  a  theme  from  the  third 
movement  of  Beethoven's  Symphony  No.  7.  Her  mentor,  Gustavo  E. 
Campa,  a  former  head  of  the  National  Conservatory,  had  already  dis- 
covered the  note-for-note  resemblance  of  the  Tarascan  melody  in  ques- 
tion, and  since  it  exactly  duplicated  a  theme  already  admired  by  cultivated 
musicians  she  too  selected  it  for  conspicuous  praise.  But  this  tendency  to 
admire  nothing  in  indigenous  art  unless  some  chance  resemblance  to  a 
recognized  European  masterpiece  could  be  discovered  prevented  her,  as 
it  prevented  others  in  Mexico,  from  seeing  the  idiomatic  virtues  of 
aboriginal  art. 

After  1920,  however,  a  change  occurred.  At  a  time  when  Stravinsky's 
"primitive"  Le  Sacre  du  Printemfs  and  ProkofieflPs  "barbaric"  Suite 
Scythe  were  revolutionizing  art  concepts  in  Europe,  the  much  more 


6  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

authentic  primitivism  and  barbarism  of  native  art  in  Mexico  began  to 
win  praise  instead  of  censure.  Within  a  decade  after  the  publication  of 
Herrera  y  Ogazon's  text,  El  Arte  Musical  en  Mexico,  so  complete  a 
reversal  of  opinion  on  the  merits  of  indigenous  expression  had  taken 
place  that  Aztec  music  rather  than  being  decried  was  being  held  up  for 
the  first  time  as  the  worthiest  music  for  Mexican  composers  to  imitate. 
Qualities  in  indigenous  music  which  only  a  few  years  before  had  been 
looked  upon  as  basic  defects  suddenly  began  to  be  spoken  of  as  merits. 
Carlos  Chavez  spoke  for  the  newer  generation  when  he  said  Mexicans 
must  now  learn  to  Reconstruct  musically  the  atmosphere  of  primitive 
purity."  4 

THE  "AZTEC  RENAISSANCE" 

In  a  lecture  delivered  under  the  auspices  of  the  National  University 
of  Mexico  in  October,  1928,  Ch&vez  summarized  the  newer  ideas  on 
aboriginal  music  which  were  soon  to  become  regnant.  In  this  lecture,  en- 
titled La  Musica  Azteca,  he  advocated  a  return  to  pre-Conquest  musical 
ideals  because  pre-Spanish  music  "expressed  what  is  profoundest  and 
deepest  in  the  Mexican  soul."  As  he  saw  it  "the  musical  life  of  the 
aborigines  constitutes  [not  a  regrettable  but  rather]  the  most  important 
stage  in  the  history  of  Mexican  music."  Concerning  the  melodic  system 
of  the  Aztecs  he  said: 

The  Aztecs  showed  a  preelection  for  those  intervals  which  we  call  the 
minor  third  and  the  perfect  fifth;  their  use  of  other  intervals  was 
rare.  .  .  . 

This  type  of  interval  preference,  which  must  undoubtedly  be  taken  to 
indicate  a  deep-seated  and  intuitive  yearning  for  the  minor,  found  ap- 
propriate expression  in  modal  melodies  which  entirely  lacked  the  semitone. 
[The  pentatonic  series  which  lacks  the  semitone  was  the  type  of  five-note 
scale  used  by  most  aboriginal  American  tribes.]  Aztec  melodies  might 
begin  or  end  on  any  degree  of  the  five-note  series.  In  discussing  their  music 
one  might  therefore  appropriately  speak  of  five  different  melodic  modes, 
each  of  them  founded  on  a  different  tonic  in  the  pentatonic  series. 

Since  the  fourth  and  seventh  degrees  of  the  major  diatonic  scale  (as  we 
know  it)  were  completely  absent  from  this  music,  all  the  harmonic  implica- 
tions of  our  all-important  leading  tone  were  banished  from  Aztec  melody. 
If  it  should  seem  that  their  particular  pentatonic  system  excluded  any 


EARLY  ABORIGINAL  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO         7 

possibility  of  "modulating" — which  some  feel  to  be  a  psychological  neces- 
sity even  in  monody — we  reply  that  these  aborigines  avoided  modulation 
(in  our  sense  of  the  word)  primarily  because  modulation  was  alien  to  the 
simple  and  straightforward  spirit  of  the  Indian.  .  .  . 

For  those  whose  ears  have  become  conditioned  by  long  familiarity  with 
the  European  diatonic  system,  the  "polymodality"  of  indigenous  music 
inevitably  sounds  as  if  it  were  "polytonality."  (Polytonality  in  music  we 
might  say  is  analogous  to  the  absence  of  perspective  which  we  encounter 
in  aboriginal  painting.  The  paintings  of  the  pre-Conquest  codices  show  us 
what  this  absence  of  perspective  means.) 

It  seems  evident  that  either  the  aborigines  possessed  an  aural  predisposi- 
tion, or  that  an  ingrained  habit  of  listening  was  developed  among  them, 
which  we  today  do  not  possess.  They  were  thus  enabled  to  integrate  into 
meaningful  wholes  the  disparate  planes  of  sound  that  (in  the  European 
way  of  thinking)  clashed  in  their  music.5 

These  excerpts  are  of  value  because  they  summarize  the  findings  of 
enlightened  musical  ethnology,  but  more  especially  because  they  show 
how  completely  Mexican  musical  opinion  had  reversed  itself  during  the 
1920*8.  Characteristics  that  previously  had  been  looked  upon  as  basic 
faults  in  the  indigenous  music  of  Mexico — its  "minor  quality,"  its  "mo- 
notony," its  "simultaneous  sounding  of  different  pentatonic  melodies" 
which  are  out  of  tune  with  each  other  in  our  way  of  thinking,  its  fondness 
for  "two  or  more  rhythms  the  beats  of  which  never  coincide"— all  these 
qualities  previously  thought  of  as  crude  distortions  came  now  in  the 
1920*8  to  be  regarded  not  as  defects  but  as  virtues. 

Thus  it  happened  that  at  the  very  hour  Diego  Rivera  was  praising 
what  the  pre-Conquest  natives  had  done  in  the  visual  arts  and  calling  it 
an  achievement  actually  superior  to  that  of  their  conquerors,6  Chavez 
was  finding  similar  virtues  in  the  music  of  the  pre-Cortesian  aborigines. 
If  when  he  first  began  summoning  Mexican  musicians  to  heed  the  Aztec 
past  his  may  have  been  a  voice  crying  in  the  wilderness,  it  did  not  long 
remain  so.  He  was  so  soon  joined  by  others  in  his  own  generation,  in  fiact, 
that  to  list  their  names  would  be  to  list  nearly  every  well-known  Mexican 
composer  in  our  epoch.  Such  contemporaries  as  Daniel  Ayala,  Francisco 
Dominguez,  Bias  Galindo,  Raul  Guerrero,  Eduardo  Hernandez  Mon- 
cada,  Candelario  Huizar,  Vicente  Mendoza,  Pablo  Moncayo,  and  Luis 
Sandi,  have  all  followed  Chavez's  lead  in  extolling  the  virtues  of  indig- 
enous music,  and  in  copying  indigenous  models  wherever  possible.7 


MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 


METHODS  USED  BY   CONTEMPORARY  SCHOLARS   IN  THE  STUDY 
OF   PRE-CONQUEST   MUSIC 

The  three  lines  of  investigation  which  have  been  most  fruitfully  pur- 
sued by  Mexican  scholars  who  during  recent  years  have  studied  pre- 
Conquest  music  have  been  ( i )  the  systematic  study  of  the  musical  instru- 
ments which  such  peoples  as  the  Aztecs,  Mayas,  and  Tarascans  are  known 
to  have  used  (  2 )  the  assembling  of  opinions  on  Aztec  music  from  sixteenth- 
century  authors  who  were  friendly  to  Indian  culture  rather  than  opposed 
to  it  (3)  the  collection  of  melodies  from  certain  out-of-the-way  Indian 
groups  which  even  today  after  the  lapse  of  centuries  may  still  preserve 
in  their  music  some  of  the  basic  elements  found  in  the  pre-Cortesian  sys- 
tem. 

THE  MUSICAL   INSTRUMENTS  USED   IN  ANCIENT   MEXICO 

For  more  than  a  century  the  minute  scrutiny  of  archaeological  instru- 
ments has  been  a  favorite  method  in  the  study  of  music  from  buried  cul- 
tures. Among  the  pioneers  in '  musical  archaeology  was  the  famous 
nineteenth-century  encyclopedist  and  historian,  F.  J.  Fetis,  who  based  his 
conclusions  concerning  ancient  Egyptian  music  on  the  results  he  obtained 
from  the  study  of  Egyptian  flutes.  Using  Fetis's  methods,  such  investiga- 
tors as  F.  W.  Galpin  and  Kathleen  Schlesinger  have  in  our  own  time  con- 
ducted exhaustive  studies  in  the  music  of  the  ancient  Sumerians  and 
Babylonians,  and  in  the  music  of  the  ancient  Greeks.  The  use  such  Mexi- 
can investigators  as  Daniel  Castaneda  and  Vicente  T.  Mendoza  have 
made  of  archaeological  instruments  is  therefore  no  new  idea. 

After  prolonged  investigation  of  pre-Conquest  instruments  Castaneda 
and  Mendoza  gathered  sufficient  evidence  to  establish  the  following  con- 
clusions concerning  the  organography  of  the  aborigines  in  Mexico : 

I.  An  essential  sameness  ^prevailed  everywhere  in  the  types  of  instru- 
ments used.  Obviously  enough,  the  s^me  instrument  was  given  different 
names  in  the  different  languages  spoken  in  pre-Conquest  Mexico.  But 
the  Aztec  teponaztli  was  the  same  instrument  as  the  Maya  tunkul  and 
as  the  Zapotec  tun.  The  Aztec  tlapitzalli  was  the  same  instrument  as  the 
Tarascan  cuiraxezaqua,  and  the  Aztec  huehuetl  was  the  same  instrument 


EARLY  ABORIGINAL  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO         9 

as  the  Maya  zacatan.  This  sameness  everywhere  in  the  types  of  instru- 
ments used  seems  the  more  remarkable  when  we  stop  to  consider  the 
differences  such  ethnically  distinct  groups  as  the  Aztecs,  the  Mayas,  the 
Mixtecs,  the  Otomies,  and  the  Zapotecs,  showed  in  their  handicrafts  and 
plastic  arts.  Any  archaeologist  can  readily  discern  the  differences  between 
Zapotec  and  Otomi  pottery  5  but  not  between  Aztec  and  Tarascan  or  Aztec 
and  Maya  musical  instruments. 

II.  The  organografhy  of  fre~Conquest  music  was  static.  On  the  walls 
of  an  eighth-century  temple  at  Bonampak  (located  in  what  is  now  one  of 
the  most  inaccessible  jungles  in  the  Chiapas)  was  found  in  1947  a  series 
of  remarkably  preserved  Maya  paintings  from  the  Old  Empire  period. 
Interestingly  enough,  it  was  found  that  the  same  instruments  were  pic- 
tured on  the  walls  of  eighth  century  Bonampak  that  were  still  in  use  when 
Cortes  arrived  in  the  sixteenth  century.8  Examples  of  instruments  that 
were  pictured  on  the  temple  walls  at  Bonampak  and  that  were  still  in  use 
when  the  Spaniards  arrived  may  be  cited  here  (these  instruments  are 
listed  not  with  their  Maya  names  but  with  their  Aztec  names) :  the  ayotl 
(a  rasp  made  from  the  shell  of  a  turtle  ;  the  player  scraped  the  serrated 
shell  with  a  two-pronged  stag's  antler)  ;  the  huehuetl  (an  upright  drum 
fashioned  out  of  a  hollowed  tree  trunk;  stretched  across  the  top  of  the 
drum  was  a  jaguar  skin  which  could  be  tightened  or  loosened  to  raise  or 
lower  the  pitch;  the  player  used  his  fingers  rather  than  mallets);  the 
ayacachtU  (a  rattle  made  from  a  gourd  to  which  a  handle  was  attached; 
the  ayacachtli  resembled  the  maracas  used  in  modern  Cuban  bands). 

III.  All  p-e-Conquest  Instruments  were  either  idiofhones,  aerophones, 
or  membranof hones.  Stringed  instruments  were  entirely  unknown  in  fre- 
Cortesian  Mexico.  Among  idiophonic  instruments  the  following  were 
characteristic: 

The  tefonaztK 

Best  described  perhaps  as  a  two-keyed  xylophone,  this  instrument  in  ap- 
pearance resembled  a  wooden  barrel  enclosed  at  both  ends.  It  was  often 
covered  with  elaborate  carvings  representing  birds,  beasts,  or  grotesque  human 
heads. 

On  top  of  it  was  cut  an  HZ  shaped  incision.  The  two  tongues  created  by 
this  incision  each  sounded  different  pitches — sometimes  a  major  second  apart, 
sometimes  a  minor  or  major  third  apart,  or  sometimes  a  perfect  fourth  or  fifth 
apart.  The  hollow  interior  of  the  teponazdi  acted  as  a  resonator,  and  beneath 


io  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

the  HI  shaped  incision  was  cut  on  the  bottom  side  a  rectangular  opening. 
This  opening,  like  the  opening  of  a  piano  lid,  increased  the  volume. 

As  pictured  for  us  in  such  codices  as  the  Codex  Florentinus,  the  teponazdi 
was  usually  placed  on  some  kind  of  support  so  that  the  player  could  stand 
upright.  The  pkyer  used  a  pair  of  mallets  tipped  with  rubber.  These  mallets 
were  called  olmaxtl. 

The  Codex  Florentinus  and  Duran's  Atlas  show  teponazdis  not  only  with 
the  conventional  two  keys,  but  also  with  as  many  as  four  or  five  keys.9  Oviedo 
in  his  Historia  general  de  las  India*  (Seville,  1533)  S1"^  a  picture  of  a  three- 
keyed  teponazdi  of  Central  American  provenience.  Such  an  instrument  may 
also  have  been  known  in  Mexico  even  though  no  exemplar  survives.10 

Certain  evidence  concerning  the  use  of  multi-keyed  teponazdis  can  also  be 
derived  from  the  Cantares  en  Idioma  Mextcanof1  a  collection  of  Nahuad 
songs  written  down  shortly  after  the  Conquest.  This  evidence  is,  of  course, 
literary  and  not  strictly  archaeological.  Almost  one  hundred  of  the  Nahuad 
songs  in  this  collection  prescribed  teponazdi  accompaniment  The  directions 
for  accompaniment  were  written  in  the  form  of  headings  for  each  of  the  songs. 
Invariably  in  the  songs  prescribing  teponazdi  accompaniment,  the  directions 
called  for  more  than  two  keys  in  the  accompaniment.  Sometimes  three,  some- 
times four,  and  sometimes  even  five  different  keys  are  called  for  in  the  direc- 
tions for  teponazdi  accompaniment  which  precede  each  song. 

Either  several  two-keyed  teponazdis  were  used  conjoindy  in  the  accompani- 
ment of  each  song,  or  multi-keyed  teponazdis  similar  to  those  shown  in  the 
Codex  Florentinus  and  in  the  Atlas  of  Dur£n  were  available  for  song-accom- 
paniment 

The  omitzitahuastlt 

,  .  A  rasp  made  out  of  notched  human  or  animal  bone,  the  omitzicahuasdi  was 
the  instrument  most  frequendy  used  at  commemorative  ceremonies  for  the 
dead.  The  Spaniards  considered  its  music  to  be  "extremely  doleful."  Evidendy 
the  pitch  was  raised  and  lowered  by  scratching  the  notches  faster  or  slower, 
just  as  a  small  boy  nowadays  scratching  the  teeth  of  his  comb  with  a  coin  can 
make  a  species  of  music  with  varying  pitches. 

The  ayacachtk 

The  head  of  this  rattle  was  made  either  of  a  gourd  filled  with  dry  seeds,  or 
was  made  of  day  and  filled  with  pebbles.  In  the  codices  the  players  of  the 
ayacachdi  are  shown  usually  with  a  ratde  in  each  hand. 


EARLY  ABORIGINAL  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO       n 
Among  aerophones  the  following  types  were  notable: 

The  tlapitzall* 

A  four-hole  flute  made  of  either  clay,  reed,  or  bone,  this  instrument  was 
capable  of  producing  five  different  sounds.  If  recourse  was  had  to  overblowing 
or  half-stopping,  then  the  number  of  pitches  that  this  recorder-type  instrument 
was  capable  of  producing  exceeded  five.  Some  investigators,  such  as  H.  T. 
Cresson  12  for  instance,  have  assumed  that  Aztec  flutists  over-blew  and  half- 
stopped  as  a  matter  of  course.  If  they  did,  it  necessarily  follows  that  they  were 
able  to  play  on  their  flutes  a  more  elaborate  type  of  melody  than  the  mere 
pentatonic  type. 

An  examination  of  ancient  flutes  now  preserved  in  the  National  Museum  of 
Mexico  has  produced  several  interesting  results.  The  four  holes  were  by  no 
means  so  cut  always  that  a  pentatonic  scale  approximating  our  conventional 
d  —  *  —  g  —  a  —  b  series  was  produced.  For  purposes  of  comparison  the  five-note 
series  emitted  by  Flutes  129,  130,  131,  132,  are  shown.18  Since  the  Aztecs 
had  no  inkling  of  our  equal  temperament  system  the  pitches  given  here  repre- 
sent at  best  approximations.  In  the  case  of  Flutes  130  and  131  it  should  be 
noted  that  only  four  different  pitch-names  were  sounded. 


f          K         ~  -  ,         .         , 


Since  the  intervals  emitted  by  stopping  the  successive  holes  depart  from  the 
ideals  we  have  arrived  at  for  the  minor  third  and  major  third  in  Western 
music,  it  has  been  conjectured  that  the  Aztecs  were  familiar  with  "in-between" 
intervals — that  is  to  say,  intervals  larger  than  a  minor  third  but  smaller  than 
a  major  third.  Such  in-between  intervals  occur,  as  is  now  generally  known, 
in  the  slendro  scale  used  in  Javanese  music,  and  also  in  other  exotic  scale- 
systems. 

The  t&puzquiqtaztli 

A  conch  shell  trumpet,  this  instrument  uttered  with  ease  the  third,  fourth, 
fifth,  sixth,  and  eighth  tones  in  the  harmonic  series.  Daniel  Castaneda  examined 


12  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

a  conch  shell  trumpet  in  the  National  Museum  and  found  that  the  tones  easily 
emitted  were  a,  d',  f  #',  a',  and  d".14 


The  Aztecs  used  in  addition  to  their  conch  shell  trumpets  another  type  of 
trumpet.  This  second  type  of  trumpet,  made  of  clay  or  wood,  was  tubular  in 
shape;  trumpets  of  this  second  type  often  exceeded  two  feet  in  length.  The 
Bonampak  paintings  show  warriors  in  the  thick  of  battle  blowing  on  trumpets 
that  were  over  a  man's  arm  in  length.15 

To  the  membranophone  class  belonged  the  different  varieties  of: 
The  huehuetl 

This  instrument,  a  congener  of  the  kettledrum,  came  in  several  sizes,  each 
of  which  was  designated  by  an  appropriate  prefix,  such  as  ^<*»huehued,  or 
*/<#<whuehued.  Since  the  huehuetk  sounded  a  definite  pitch,  which  like  that 
of  the  modern  ketdedrum  could  be  raised  or  lowered  at  will  by  adjusting  the 
tightness  of  the  drumskin,  it  would  be  incorrect  to  think  of  the  huehueds  as 
simply  a  family  of  noisemakers. 

The  fact  that  the  ancient  Mexicans  lacked  stringed  instruments  need 
cause  us  no  surprise  if  we  constantly  bear  in  mind  that  none  of  the  aborig- 
inal peoples  of  either  North  or  South  America  possessed  stringed  instru- 
ments at  the  time  of  Columbus's  discovery.  Some  investigators  who  have 
given  considerable  attention  to  Aztec  and  Maya  achievements  in  mathe- 
matics, astronomy,  picture-writing,  and  the  various  plastic  arts,  have 
thought  it  strange  that  the  Aztecs  and  Mayas  never  stumbled  upon  so 
simple  an  idea  as  the  use  of  the  hunter's  bow  for  a  musical  instrument. 
But  for  one  reason  or  another,  or  for  no  reason  at  all,  they  did  not.  Just 
as  the  Nahuatl  language  may  surprise  a  beginning  student  because  it 
completely  lacked  such  consonants  as  b,  d,  f ,  g,  r,  and  v,  so  Nahuatl  music 
may  surprise  a  beginning  student  because  it  completely  lacked  string  tone. 

IV.  The  Aztecs  frequently  inscribed  their  instruments  with  carvings 
which  tell  (symbolically)  what  purposes  their  instruments  were  intended 
to  serve.  The  significance  of  the  hieratic  carvings  which  Aztec  instrument- 
makers  inscribed  on  such  instruments  as  the  teponaztli  and  huehuetl  can 


EARLY  ABORIGINAL  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO       13 

now  be  understood  only  by  scholars  who  can  decipher  the  hieroglyphs 
used  by  the  Aztecs  in  their  system  of  picture-writing. 

Eduard  Seler  has  undoubtedly  contributed  more  to  our  present-day 
understanding  of  the  hieratic  carvings  inscribed  on  Aztec  instruments 
than  has  any  other  scholar  of  our  time.  In  an  article  of  his  entitled  "The 
Wooden  Drum  of  Malinalco" 16  he  explained  the  various  carvings  in- 
scribed on  a  tlapanhuehuetl  which  he  examined  in  the  museum  at  Toluca. 
According  to  Seler,  the  carvings  on  this  particular  tlapanhuehuetl  show 
a  group  of  captured  warriors  who  are  being  forced  to  dance  to  their  own 
music,  just  prior  to  being  sacrificed.  These  carvings  on  the  Malinalco 
tlapanhuehuetl  show  the  same  type  of  scene  which  we  find  pictured  in 
Duran's  Atlas  (Trat.  1°,  Lam.  19*,  Cap.  54). 

Seler  called  attention  to  the  drawing  in  Duran's  Atlas  because  it  can 
be  readily  understood  (Duran's  picture  uses  no  glyphs).  The  Duran 
drawing  shows  several  captured  warriors  who  are  being  forced  to  dance 
to  their  own  music  before  being  dragged  off  to  the  sacrificial  stone.  Two 
captive  warriors  shake  the  ayacachtli  while  two  others  play  the  teponaztli 
and  huehuetl.  Standing  over  the  captives  and  f ordng  them  to  dance  and 
play  are  two  of  the  victorious  captors  who  carry  clubs  edged  with  obsidian 
knives. 

After  calling  attention  to  the  Duran  drawing  Seler  went  on  in  his 
article  to  show  how  the  symbols  and  glyphs  carved  on  the  Malinalco 
tlapanhuehuetl  tell  exactly  the  same  story  of  warriors  awaiting  sacrifice: 

The  carvings  on  the  Malinalco  drum  run  completely  around  the  upper 
half  of  it.  The  upper  half  is  divided  from  the  lower  half  by  a  carved  band 
running  completely  around  the  middle  of  the  drum.  The  lower  half  is  so 
cut  that  the  drum  stands  on  three  legs,  each  of  which  is  separately  carved. 

The  upper  half  of  the  drum  is  on  one  side  inscribed  with  a  carved  eagle 
and  jaguar,  representing  warriors.  The  eagle  and  the  jaguar  carry  sacri- 
ficial banners  and  face  the  sun.  The  upper  half  of  the  drum  is  on  the  other 
side  inscribed  with  a  figure  representing  Xochipflli-Macuilxochitl,  god  of 
music  and  dancing. 

Xochipilli-Macuixochitl  wears  the  feathers  of  the  coxcoxtK  bird.  He 
holds  in  his  left  hand  a  flower  and  in  his  right  hand  a  feather  fan.  Below 
his  feet  appears  the  glyph  for  music  [ducatl]  in  the  shape  of  an  ascending 
vapor.  In  close  association  with  the  glyph  for  music  appears  another  glyph 
signifying  "green  jewel,  costliness."  He  wears  on  his  sandals  the  insignia 
of  the  god  of  dancing. 


14.  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

The  raised  band  running  around  the  middle  of  the  drum  shows  the 
hieroglyph  for  war,  oil  tlachinolti.  This  raised  band  shows  five  separate 
stretches  of  rope.  These  five  stretches  signify  the  rope  that  binds  the  captive 
warriors  to  the  sacrificial  stone.  Five  shields  appear  also  on  the  raised  band 
around  the  middle  of  the  drum. 

The  three  legs  of  the  drum  show  two  jaguars  and  an  eagle.  The  jaguars 
and  eagle,  like  the  jaguar  and  eagle  on  the  upper  half  of  the  drum,  are 
shown  carrying  sacrificial  banners.  Again,  as  on  the  upper  half,  these 
signify  warriors  who  are  about  to  be  sacrificed. 

SelePs  explanation,  which  we  have  presented  in  abridged  form,  gives 
some  idea  of  the  complicated  symbols  Aztec  instrument-makers  inscribed 
on  their  huehuetls.  Their  teponaztlis  were  often  inscribed  with  hieratic 
carvings  of  equal  complexity.17 

Another  archaeologist  whose  contribution  to  our  understanding  of  the 
symbology  inscribed  on  Aztec  musical  instruments  deserves  mention  is 
the  renowned  American  ethnologist  and  archaeologist,  Marshall  H. 
Saville.  In  his  monograph,  The  Wood-Carver's  Art  in  Ancient  Mexico, 
Saville  cites  at  least  a  dozen  instruments  of  the  huehuetl  or  teponaztli 
class  scattered  in  various  museums  which  can  today  be  profitably  studied 
by  those  interested  in  the  kinds  of  symbols  ancient  Mexican  instrument- 
makers  inscribed  on  their  instruments.  Over  and  over  again  in  this  par- 
ticular monograph  he  repeats  the  statement  that  the  carvings  are  like 
pages  from  the  pre-Cortesian  codices. 

Depicting  such  things  as  "gods,  houses,  ceremonial  objects,  and 
dates,"  18  any  given  set  of  carvings  may  reveal  such  important  details 
of  information  as  the  following:  the  exact  time  and  place  the  instrument 
was  to  have  been  used  5  the  exact  part  it  was  to  have  played  in  the  cere- 
monial functions  at  which  it  was  heard  j  the  length  of  time  it  was  to  have 
been  sounded  5  the  exact  persons  who  were  designated  to  play  upon  it. 

TESTIMONY   OF   EARLY  SPANISH    HISTORIANS   ON  THE  CHARACTER 
OF  ABORIGINAL   MUSIC 

Earlier  in  our  discussion  of  research  techniques  we  listed  three  lines 
of  investigation  that  have  proved  fruitful:  the  scrutiny  of  archaeological 
instruments,  the  re-evaluation  of  early  Spanish  opinion  on  indigenous 
music,  and  the  gathering  of  melodic  fragments  from  remote  tribes.  The 
more  important  conclusions  reached  by  researchists  working  with  museum 


EARLY  ABORIGINAL  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO       15 

instruments  have  now  been  listed,  and  we  pass  therefore  to  the  second 
principal  method  of  research,  which  involves  a  re-study  of  early  Spanish 
opinion  on  aboriginal  music. 

The  lengthiest  excerpt  dealing  with  Aztec  music  which  has  thus  far 
been  translated  into  English  is  an  excerpt  from  Fray  Juan  de  Torque- 
mada's  Veinte  i  un  libros  rituales  i  Monarquia  Indiana,  the  original  edi- 
tion of  which  was  published  at  Seville  in  1615.  The  excerpt  that  has 
been  chosen  for  translation  is  Chapter  1 1  of  Book  XIV,  which  bears  the 
title,  "Of  the  manner  in  which  these  Natives  had  Dances,  and  of  the  great 
dexterity  and  conformity  they  all  had,  in  the  Dance  and  in  the  Song." 
The  English  translation  of  this  excerpt,  which  is  well  worth  reading,  can 
be  found  in  Renascent  Mexico,19  a  book  published  in  1935  under  the 
auspices  of  the  Committee  on  Cultural  Relations  with  Latin  America  5  the 
same  excerpt  can  also  be  found  in  Mexican  Music,  a  brochure  edited  by 
Herbert  Weinstock  and  published  in  1940  by  the  Museum  of  Modern 
Art  at  the  time  of  the  Chavez  concerts. 

In  the  opinion  of  Chavez  Torquemada's  description  is  of  paramount 
value  to  the  student  of  Aztec  music.  Of  Torquemada's  description  Chavez 
said:  "It  will  be  helpful  to  transcribe  the  description  .  .  .  since  nothing 
will  be  likely  to  give  with  better  authority  a  clear  general  idea  of  the 
development  of  these  arts  [music  and  dancing]  in  Mexican  antiquity."  20 
And  later  Chavez  said:  "This  narrative  of  Torquemada's  is  a  very 
important  document,  illustrating  our  understanding  of  pre-Cortesian 
music."  21 

Torquemada  (1565?-!  624),  who  is  not  to  be  confused  with  his  name- 
sake who  became  a  cardinal,  wrote  his  narrative  eighty  years  after  the 
conquest;  his  description,  because  of  its  lateness,  would  have  little  or  no 
value  were  it  not  for  the  fact  that  Torquemada,  who  was  a  Franciscan 
missionary,  relied  heavily  upon  unpublished  descriptions  of  Indian  life 
written  by  two  predecessor  Franciscan  historians— Fray  Toribio  Moto- 
linfa  (i49O?-i569),  who  was  among  the  first  missionaries  in  Mexico, 
and  Fray  Ger6nimo  de  Mendieta  ( 1525?-!  604),  who  if  not  a  missionary 
of  the  first  generation  nevertheless  wrote  a  uniquely  valuable  account  of 
Indian  life  which  he  spent  some  twenty-five  years  in  preparing.  Since 
Torquemada  relied  upon  these  two,  Motolinia  and  Mendieta,  it  therefore 
seems  advisable  to  study  not  only  the  second-hand  account  in  Monarquia 
Indiana,  but  also  the  unpublished  accounts  upon  which  he  drew  when 
compiling  his  book. 


16  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

CONTRIBUTION   OF  THE   MISSIONARIES  TO   OUR   UNDERSTANDING 
OF   INDIAN   CULTURE 

Despite  the  fact  that  "nothing  will  be  more  likely  to  give  a  clear  gen- 
eral idea  of  the  development  of  music  and  dancing  in  Mexican  antiquity" 
than  the  accounts  left  us  by  such  missionaries  as  Motolima,  Mendieta, 
and  Torquemada,  the  missionaries  as  a  group  are  often  accused  of  having 
attacked  everything  Indian.  Such  missionary  bishops  as  Zumarraga  and 
Landa,  first  bishops  of  Mexico  and  Yucatan  respectively,  are  often 
charged  with  having  "wantonly  destroyed  every  available  record  of 
Indian  culture,"  and  of  having  deliberately  set  out  to  "sow  with  Car- 
thaginian salt"  the  prostrate  Indian  mind.  This  charge  cannot  be  fully 
substantiated,  however. 

Our  understanding  of  the  Indian  codices  that  do  remain  is,  after  all, 
founded  entirely  on  the  glosses  the  missionaries  themselves  wrote  as 
marginal  explanations  of  the  pictographs.  The  marginal  annotations 
of  the  missionaries  really  provide  the  "Rosetta  stones"  without  which  we 
could  not  even  begin  to  read  the  codices.  It  is  known  that  many  codices 
collected  in  the  eighteenth  century  by  Boturini  Benaduci  perished  simply 
through  neglect,  and  the  small  number  that  now  remain  would  be 
doubled  or  tripled  if  those  that  are  known  to  have  existed  250  years  after 
the  conquest  were  still  extant.  Where  the  missionaries  themselves  failed 
to  provide  marginal  notations  (as  in  the  case  of  the  Maya  codices)  we 
still  today  cannot  read  the  picture-symbols.22 

If  a  great  many  priceless  records  were  burned  it  should  be  also  at  the 
same  time  remembered  that  missionaries  such  as  Jos6  de  Acosta  (who  was 
in  Mexico  in  1586)  argued  for  the  preservation  of  the  Indian  records. 
Acosta  in  his  Historia  natural  y  moral  de  las  Ind%asy  after  complaining 
of  the  loss  of  Maya  records,  went  on  to  say: 

The  same  has  happened  in  other  cases  where  our  people,  thinking  that  all 
is  superstition,  have  lost  many  memories  of  ancient  and  hidden  things 
which  might  have  been  used  to  no  small  advantage.  This  follows  from  a 
stupid  izeal  when  without  knowing  or  without  wishing  to  know  the  things 
of  the  Indies,  they  say  as  in  the  sealed  package,  that  everything  is  sorcery 
and  that  the  peoples  there  are  only  a  drunken  lot  and  what  can  they  know 
and  understand.  The  ones  who  have  wished  earnestly  to  be  informed  of 
these  have  found  many  things  worthy  of  consideration.28 

The  group  of  missionary  pioneers  who  did  "earnestly  wish  to  be  in* 
formed  concerning  the  things  of  the  Indies,"  and  who  did  find  "many 


EARLY  ABORIGINAL  MUSIC  IN   MEXICO       17 

things  worthy  of  consideration,"  included  not  only  Motolinia  and  Men- 
dieta,  but  also  Alonso  de  Molina,  Bernardino  de  Sahagun,  Diego  Duran, 
Alonso  Ponce,  Jose  de  Acosta,  and  others  too  numerous  for  us  to  name 
here.  Since  the  missionary  evidence  is  in  reality  all  that  we  have,  if  we 
wish  to  claim  for  Aztec  music  any  cultural  importance,  it  is  well  for  us 
to  give  the  missionaries  their  due.  Certainly  when  such  an  account  as 
Torquemada's  is  brought  forward  to  support  claims  for  Aztec  musical 
achievement,  it  is  only  fair  to  give  tribute  where  tribute  is  due  by  telling 
his  identity,  and  also  the  identity  of  the  missionaries  from  whom  he  com- 
piled his  account  of  Indian  cultural  achievements. 

The  missionaries  came  with  the  express  idea  of  living  and  working  with 
the  Indians.  They  made  it  their  business  first  to  learn  the  Indian  tongues. 
Insofar  as  they  could  possibly  do  so,  they  strove  to  understand  the  patterns 
of  Indian  life,  and  to  accommodate  their  teachings  to  the  Indian  mental- 
ity. If  not  all  as  outspoken  as  Las  Casas  in  denouncing  the  abuses  of  the 
encomienda  system,  nevertheless  they  all  befriended  the  Indian  in  his 
struggle  with  the  encomendero,  and  sought  to  alleviate  the  lot  of  the  op- 
pressed. 

The  conclusions  which  can  be  reached  on  the  basis  of  missionary  evi- 
dence concerning  indigenous  music  are,  because  of  their  friendliness,  gen- 
erally of  a  favorable  kind.  Clarity  will  perhaps  best  be  achieved  if  we 
list  first  the  general  conclusions  their  evidence  enables  us  to  reach,  and 
then  quote  the  passages  upon  which  the  conclusions  rest.  The  passages 
documenting  the  general  conclusions  will  each  be  prefaced  by  a  short 
biographical  account  of  the  author  who  wrote  the  particular  passage;  with 
certain  of  the  lengthier  passages  a  short  precis  will  be  affixed  defining  its 
contents.  Because  our  present  study  of  music  in  Mexico  is  the  first  attempt 
at  any  account  in  English,  we  have  chosen  wherever  possible  to  quote  in 
entirety  the  passages  upon  which  rest  our  conclusions,  leaving  the  reader 
freedom  to  draw  any  other  conclusions  he  chooses  from  the  basic  data 
here  supplied. 

CONCLUSIONS   CONCERNING  PRE-CONQUEST   MUSIC   DERIVED   FROM 
EARLY   SPANISH   TESTIMONY 

The  following  conclusions  (some  of  which  necessarily  duplicate  those 
already  arrived  at  through  the  study  of  archaeological  instruments)  can 
be  drawn  from  Spanish  accounts  of  Aztec  life: 

I.  Music  had  no  independent  life  of  its  own  apart  from  religious  and 


i8  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

cult  observances^  music  as  an  art  (in  our  sense  of  the  word  art)  was  a 
concept  alien  to  their  mentality. 

II.  All  musical  life  was  in  the  hands  of  a  professionalized  caste  similar 
to  the  Levitical  guild  in  ancient  Hebrew  times. 

III.  Training  of  an  extremely  rigid  kind  was  prerequisite  to  a  career 
in  music;  since  music  itself  was  always  thought  of  as  a  necessary  adjunct 
to  ritual,  absolutely  perfect  performances— such  as  only  the  most  highly 
trained  singers  and  players  could  give— were  constantly  demanded. 

IV.  Imperfectly  executed  rituals  were  thought  to  offend  rather  than 
to  appease  the  gods,  and  therefore  errors  in  the  performance  of  the  ritual 
music — such  as  missed  drum  beats — carried  the  death  penalty. 

V.  Singers  and  players,  because  of  the  important  part  music  played 
in  Aztec  life,  enjoyed  considerable  social  prestige. 

VI.  Despite  this  prestige,  however,  the  names  of  musicians  were  not 
recorded,  just  as  the  names  of  poets— unless  the  poet  were  a  royal  per- 
sonage such  as  King  Nezahualcoyotl  of  Texcuco — were  not  preserved. 

VIL  Music  was  regarded  as  essentially  a  means  of  communal  rather 
than  of  individual  expression,  and  therefore  concerted  rather  than  solo 
music  was  the  norm. 

VIII.  Instrumental  performance  was  always  conjoined  to  singing,  inso- 
far as  we  can  judge  from  the  descriptions  of  Aztec  musical  performance 
bequeathed  us  by  the  Spanish  chroniclers. 

IX.  Certain  instruments  were  thought  to  be  of  divine  origin,  and 
the  teponaztli  and  huehuetl,  for  instance,  were  even  held  to  be  gods 
temporarily  forced  to  endure  earthly  exile;  the  teponaztli  and  the 
huehuetl  were  therefore  often  treated  as  idols  as  well  as  musical  instru- 
ments. 

X.  Not  only  were  certain  instruments  thought  to  have  "mana"  in 
them — that  is  to  say,  mysterious  supernatural  powers — but  also  certain 
instruments  were  held  to  represent  symbolically  such  emotional  states  as 
joy,  delight,  or  sensual  pleasure. 

XI.  Aztec  music  communicated  states  of  feeling  that  even  the  Span- 
iards, habituated  in  alien  patterns  of  musical  expression,  could  grasp  and 
appreciate;  whereas  much  of  the  Indian  music  of  tribes  who  lived  in  the 
territory  now  embraced  by  the  United  States  meant  nothing  to  European 
ears,  Aztec  music  seems  to  have  communicated  in  many  instances  the  same 
emotions  to  Indian  and  European  listener  alike.  Thus  a  sad  song,  as  they 
conceived  it,  was  sad  not  only  in  the  opinion  of  the  Indians  who  heard  it 


EARLY  ABORIGINAL  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO       19 

and  understood  the  words,  but  also  in  the  opinion  of  the  Spaniards  who 
heard  it  and  did  not  know  the  words. 

XII.  Every  piece  of  music  was  composed  for  a  certain  time,  a  certain 
place,  and  a  certain  occasion  5  and  therefore  the  musician  needed  a  wide 
repertory  if  he  were  to  satisfy  the  demands  of  the  different  days  in  the 
religious  calendar.  The  religious  cycle  lasted  260  days,  and  just  as  the 
priests  consulted  the  omens  for  each  of  the  260  days,  so  the  players  had 
to  have  appropriate  songs  ready  for  each  of  the  different  days. 

XIII.  The  Aztecs  possessed  no  system  of  music  notation— or  if  they 
did,  none  that  the  Europeans  knew  anything  about  5  therefore  the  Aztec 
musicians  needed  prodigious  memories. 

XIV.  Musicians  not  only  learned  the  old  songs,  but  composed  new 
ones.  Creative  ability  was  prized,  especially  in  the  households  of  those 
powerful  caciques  who  were  able  to  employ  singers  to  compose  ballads 
telling  of  their  military  successes. 

XV.  Though  their  music  lacked  string  tone  and  was  predominantly 
percussive,  they  had  acute  pitch  sense  and  tuned  their  instruments  (us- 
ing their  own  system,  of  course)  with  considerable  care. 

FRAY  TORIBIO   DE   MOTOLINjA    (l49O?-l569) 

Fray  Toribio,  a  Franciscan  who  came  with  the  pioneer  missionary  group 
of  twelve,  arrived  in  1524.  The  Indians,  seeing  his  miserable  habit  and 
noting  that  he  walked  barefoot,  called  him  motolinfo,  meaning  poor. 
This  word  was  the  first  one  that  he  learned  and  he  henceforth  adopted 
it  as  his  own.  Like  Las  Casas  who  lived  to  be  ninety-two,  Pedro  de  Gante 
who  lived  to  be  ninety,  and  Sahagun  who  also  lived  to  be  ninety,  Moto- 
linia  lived  to  a  great  age.  His  two  principal  works  still  extant  were  writ- 
ten in  middle  life.  The  Historia  de  los  Indies  (finished  in  1541)  and  the 
Memoriales  (less  easily  dated,  but  presumably  written  about  the  same 
epoch  in  Motolinfa's  life)  both  remained  unpublished  until  1858  and 
1903  respectively  5  both,  however,  circulated  widely  in  manuscript  Nearly 
everything  Torquemada  said  on  aboriginal  music  was  copied  either  di- 
rectly from  Motolinfa,  or  from  Mendieta  (who  copied  Motolinia's  de- 
scription of  pre-Conquest  music)  j  Motolinia's  early  arrival  assures  au- 
.thenticity. 

Motolinja  hated  the  Spaniard  overlords  almost  as  much  as  did  the 
crusading  Las  Casasj  at  one  time  Motolinfa  was  even  accused  of  petition- 


20  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

ing  for  the  recall  of  all  Spaniards  from  Mexico  (except  the  clergy)  be- 
cause the  bad  example  and  conduct  of  the  laity  impeded  the  work  of 
conversion.  He  undoubtedly  favored  the  same  exclusion  of  traders  and 
encomenderos  that  the  Jesuits  later  favored  (and  successfully  enforced) 
in  the  famous  Paraguay  reductions. 

In  the  following  extract,  which  combines  passages  selected  from  Chap- 
ters 26  and  27  in  Part  II  of  the  Memoriales>  Motolinfa  offers  his  de- 
scription of  pre-Conquest  music  j  he  tells  how  music  functioned  in  Aztec 
life,  what  kinds  of  instruments  they  used,  how  the  Aztecs  rehearsed  their 
songs  and  dance  music  j  how  it  was  rendered  in  actual  performance,  how 
musicians  were  evalued  in  Aztec  society,  and  why  composers  enjoyed 
special  prestige. 

One  of  the  commonest  occurrences  in  this  country  were  the  festivals  of 
song  and  dance,  which  were  organized  not  only  for  the  delight  of  the 
inhabitants  themselves,  but  more  especially  to  honor  their  gods,  whom 
they  thought  well  pleased  by  such  service.  Because  they  took  their  festivals 
with  extreme  seriousness  and  set  great  store  by  them,  it  was  the  custom 
in  each  town  for  the  nobility  to  maintain  in  their  own  houses  singing- 
masters  some  of  whom  [not  only  sang  the  traditional  songs,  but]  also 
composed  new  songs  and  dances. 

Composers  skilled  in  fashioning  songs  and  ballads  were  held  in  high 
repute  and  were  everywhere  in  great  demand.  Among  singers  those  who 
possessed  deep  bass  voices  were  the  ones  most  sought  after  because  it  was 
customary  to  pitch  the  songs  all  extremely  low  at  the  frequent  private 
ritual  observances  held  inside  the  houses  of  the  principal  nobility. 

Singing  and  dancing  were  nearly  always  prominent  features  in  the 
public  fiestas  which  occurred  every  twenty  days.  ,  .  .  The  big  fiestas 
were  held  outdoors  in  the  plazas,  but  the  less  important  ones  either  in  the 
private  patios  of  the  nobility  or  indoors  in  the  houses  of  the  nobles. 

When  a  battle  victory  was  celebrated,  or  when  a  new  member  of  the 
nobility  was  created,  or  when  a  chieftain  married,  or  when  some  other 
striking  event  occurred,  the  singing-masters  composed  new  songs  especially 
for  the  occasion.  These  singing-masters  also  sang,  of  course,  the  old  songs 
appropriate  for  the  various  observances  in  honor  of  their  gods,  or  in  cele- 
bration of  historical  exploits,  or  in  praise  of  their  deceased  chieftains. 

The  angers  always  decided  what  they  were  going  to  sing  several  days 
beforehand  and  practised  diligently  on  their  songs.  In  the  large  towns 
(where  there  was  always  an  abundance  of  good  angers)  those  who  were 
to  participate  in  a  particular  fiesta  got  together  for  rehearsal  well  in  ad- 


EARLY  ABORIGINAL  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO       21 

vance,  especially  if  there  were  a  new  song  or  dance  to  be  performed,  so 
that  on  the  day  of  the  fiesta  all  might  go  off  with  smoothness  and  pro- 
priety. 

The  day  of  the  fiesta  a  large  mat  was  spread  in  the  middle  of  the  plaza, 
and  on  this  mat  they  placed  their  drums  [teponazdis  and  huehueds] .  The 
musicians  all  gathered  at  the  house  of  the  chieftain  and  there  dressed  them- 
selves for  the  fiesta.  They  came  out  of  the  lord's  house  singing  and  dancing. 
Sometimes  they  started  their  dances  in  the  early  morning  and  other  times 
at  the  hour  we  celebrate  high  mass.  At  nightfall  they  re-entered  the  chief- 
tain's house  and  there  ended  their  singing  either  soon  after  dark,  or  oc- 
casionally at  a  much  later  hour,  sometimes  even  at  midnight  [depending 
on  the  importance  of  the  fiesta  they  were  celebrating] . 

The  two  types  of  drum  were:  one,  a  tall  round  drum,  bigger  around 
than  a  man's  body,  and  between  three  and  four  feet  high.  It  was  made  of 
excellent  wood,  and  carefully  hollowed  out  inside.  The  exterior  of  the 
drum  was  painted;  over  the  top  of  it  was  stretched  a  cured  deerskin  [or 
other  animal  skin].  By  tightening  or  loosening  a  particular  skin,  the  pitch 
could  be  raised  or  lowered  within  the  limits  of  a  fifth.  The  players  changed 
its  pitch  with  the  changing  pitch  of  the  singers.  The  other  drum  cannot 
adequately  be  described  in  words  without  a  picture  at  hand  to  show  its 
appearance  [teponazdi].  This  other  drum  served  as  a  deep  counterbass; 
both  had  a  fine  sound  which  carried  a  great  distance. 

While  the  dancers  were  getting  in  position  the  players  got  ready  to 
strike  their  drums.  Two  of  the  best  singers  acted  as  song  leaders  and  gave 
the  singers  their  pitch  when  they  were  ready  to  start.  The  large  drum 
with  the  animal  drumskin  was  played  with  the  bare  hands;  but  the  other 
(like  the  drums  in  Spain)  was  played  with  sticks.  The  sticks  had,  however, 
a  different  shape  from  those  used  in  Spain. 


When  they  were  ready  to  begin  the  dance  three  or  four  sounded  some 
shrill  music  on  their  whistles,  which  was  the  signal  to  begin.  Then  the 
drumming  began  in  a  low,  mufHed  tone,  gradually  increasing  in  volume. 
Hearing  the  sound  of  the  drums  at  the  beginning  of  the  dance,  the  dancers 
[took  the  pitch  of  their  song  from  the  sound  of  the  drums,  and  then]  ** 
started  singing.  The  first  songs  were  pitched  low,  sounding  as  if  everything 
had  been  transposed  down.  Moreover  the  tempo  was  slow.  The  first  song 
had  to  do  with  the  particular  occasion  of  the  fiesta.  Two  leaders  (as  we  al- 
ready said)  always  began  the  singing,  and  the  entire  chorus  following  their 
lead  then  joined  in  singing  and  dancing.  The  whole  crowd  often  united  in  a 
dance  routine  that  would  challenge  the  skill  of  the  very  best  dancers  in 


22  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

Spain.  More  remarkable  yet  was  the  feet  that  not  only  their  feet,  but  the  en- 
tire body,  head,  arms,  and  hands,  moved  together  in  their  dances.  .  .  . 
Following  their  leaders  in  the  singing  and  drumming,  everyone  changed 
position  at  the  same  instant,  and  with  such  precision  that  the  best  Spanish 
dancers  marvelled  upon  seeing  them  in  action,  and  greatly  admired  the 
dances  of  these  people.  .  .  .  The  dancers  in  the  outside  ring  adopted 
a  beat  twice  as  fast  as  those  who  danced  in  the  inside  ring;  this  was  done 
so  that  both  outside  and  inside  circles  might  stay  together.  .  .  .  Those  in 
the  inner  circle,  perfectly  coordinating  their  movements,  shifted  their  feet 
and  bodies  more  slowly  than  those  in  the  outside  circle,  but  it  was  mar- 
vellous to  see  with  what  graceful  dignity  they  moved  their  arms. 

Each  verse  or  couplet  was  repeated  three  or  four  times.  The  whole  en- 
semble of  singing  and  playing  not  only  was  kept  in  tune,  but  the  dancing 
rigorously  followed  the  beat  of  the  music.  .  .  .  Upon  finishing  one  song, 
immediately  the  drum  pitch  was  changed,  and  everyone  stopped  singing 
while  several  measures  of  rest  intervened  in  the  singing  (although  the 
dancing  kept  going).  During  this  interval  of  time  the  drum  tuning  took 
place.  Then  the  leaders  began  another  song  somewhat  higher  in  pitch 
and  in  a  faster  tempo,  thus  ascending  the  musical  scale  as  if  a  bass  were 
to  change  by  degrees  into  a  soprano,  and  a  dance  into  a  scramble. 


At  times  they  played  their  trumpets  and  also  their  flageolets;  their 
flageolets  often  seemed  not  to  be  well  tuned  [according  to  our  ideas]. 
.  ,  .  From  the  hour  of  vespers  until  nightfall  their  songs  and  dances 
became  extremely  lively,  and  the  pitch  of  the  songs  ascended  into  a  bright 
register  so  that  the  sound  became  extremely  attractive,  somewhat  like  that 
of  our  tuneful  carols  in  fast  tempo.  .  .  .  The  crowds  were  [usually] 
immense,  and  the  sound  of  the  singing  carried  a  tremendous  distance.25 

FRAY   BERNARDINO   DE   SARACEN    (l500?-I590) 

Fray  Bernardino,  also  a  Franciscan,  pursued  his  studies  at  Salamanca 
University,  where  he  early  distinguished  himself  as  a  student  of  lan- 
guages. He  arrived  in  New  Spain  during  1529,  five  years  after  Motolima, 
and  immediately  began  studying  Nahuatl,  the  language  of  the  Aztecs. 
Although  he  lacked  the  advantages  of  boyhood  association  with  the 
Indians  which  Fray  Alonso  de  Molina  possessed  (Molina  compiled  the 
best  Nahuatl  dictionary  of  the  century),  nevertheless  he  made  up  for  a 
late  start  with  overwhelming  industry.  In  time  he  became  the  most 


EARLY  ABORIGINAL  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO       ^^ 

learned  Aztedst  of  the  century,  and  ethnology  today  owes  him  an  in- 
calculable debt.  His  Historia  General  de  las  Cosas  de  Nueva  Espana, 
which  he  originally  wrote  in  Nahuatl  about  the  year  1547,  ^d  which 
he  thirty  years  later  translated  into  Spanish,  provides  an  inestimable 
gold-mine  of  information  concerning  pre-Conquest  life. 

In  order  to  compile  this  history  he  gathered  together  a  group  of 
sachems  who  still  remembered  pre-Conquest  customs.  With  painstaking 
care  he  wrote  down  a  compendious  description  of  Indian  life  which  so 
minutely  set  forth  pre-Conquest  customs  that  Sahagun's  superiors  refused 
permission  for  it  to  circulate;  they  feared  the  younger  generation  of 
Indians  whom  they  were  trying  to  wean  away  from  idolatry  would  cap- 
ture from  it  a  vision  of  vanished  glory,  and  become  restive  for  the  o!4 
ways.  Because  the  Historia  General  de  las  Cosas  was  hidden  away,  it  was 
finally  forgotten,  and  not  until  1 829  was  it  brought  to  light  and  published. 

Like  most  of  the  first  generation  missionaries,  Sahagun  was  intensely 
interested  in  music,  and  even  taught  it  to  the  Indians  who  attended  the 
missionary  college  at  Tlatelolco.  His  comments  on  Indian  music  there- 
fore represent  a  more  informed  opinion  than  that  of  a  mere  dilettante.  He 
appreciated  Indian  music  sufficiently  to  prepare  a  collection  of  Christian 
hymns  entitled  Psalmodia  Christiana  (published  at  Mexico  City  in  1583), 
whose  words  in  Nahuatl  were  fitted  to  already  existing  Indian  tunes. 

The  first  two  excerpts  presented  here  have  to  do  with  human  sacrifices, 
and  the  part  music  played  in  the  sacrificial  system.  One  excerpt,  which 
because  of  the  interesting  story  it  tells  is  frequently  repeated  in  popular- 
ized accounts  of  Aztec  life,  concerns  a  handsome  youth.  After  a  year  of 
perfect  bliss  he  is  taken  to  the  sacrificial  altar,  and  as  he  mounts  the  steps 
he  breaks  his  flutes  5  each  flute  he  breaks  symbolizes  some  joy  or  happiness 
that  has  been  his  during  the  previous  year  of  continuous  festivity.  The 
second  excerpt  offers  a  description  of  the  sacrifice  of  a  young  maiden  5  the 
tecomopiloa,  a  musical  instrument  which  must  have  been  rare  since  archae- 
ologists have  unearthed  no  exemplars  of  it,  is  described  in  this  second  ex- 
cerpt. 

At  the  festival  of  the  sixth  month  they  sacrificed  a  handsome  youth 
whose  body  was  perfectly  proportioned.  .  .  .  They  selected  for  this  pur- 
pose the  best  looking  among  their  captives  .  .  .  and  took  great  pains  to 
choose  the  most  intelligent  .  .  .  and  one  without  the  least  physical  defect. 
The  youth  chosen  was  carefully  trained  to  play  the  flute  well,  and  taught 
.  .  .  how  to  walk  about  as  do  the  nobles  and  people  of  the  court*  .  .  . 


24  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

The  one  chosen  for  the  sacrifice  .  .  .  was  greatly  venerated  by  all  those 
who  met  him.  .  .  .  He  who  was  thus  chosen  to  die  at  the  next  great  feast 
went  through  the  streets  playing  the  flute  and  carrying  flowers.  .  .  .  On 
his  legs  he  wore  golden  bells  which  rang  at  every  step  he  took.  .  .  . 
Twenty  days  before  the  feast  .  .  .  they  married  him  to  four  beautiful 
maidens.  .  .  .  Five  days  before  the  sacrifice  they  worshipped  the  young 
man  as  one  of  their  gods.  .  .  .  [After  four  days  of  preparation,  they  at 
last]  took  him  to  a  small  and  poorly  decorated  temple  which  stood  near 
the  highway  outside  the  city.  .  .  .  Upon  reaching  the  foot  [of  the 
temple]  the  young  man  mounted  the  steps  by  himself.  As  he  mounted 
the  first  step  he  broke  one  of  the  flutes  he  had  played  during  the  past  year 
of  his  prosperity;  on  the  second  step,  another,  and  so  on  successively  until 
he  had  broken  them  all,  and  had  reached  the  summit.  There  he  was 
awaited  by  the  priests  who  were  to  kill  him,  and  these  now  grabbed  him 
and  threw  him  on  the  stone-block.  After  seeing  him  pinned  down  on  his 
back  with  feet,  hands,  and  head  securely  held,  the  priest  who  had  the 
stone  knife  buried  it  deep  in  the  victim's  breast.  Then  drawing  the  knife 
out,  the  priest  thrust  one  hand  into  the-  opening  and  tore  out  the  heart, 
which  he  at  once  offered  to  the  sun.  .  .  .  Thus  ended  the  life  of  this  un- 
fortunate youth  who  had  for  an  entire  year  been  petted  and  honored  by 
everyone.  They  said  this  sacrifice  signified  that  those  who  possessed  riches 
and  pleasures  in  their  lifetime  would  thus  end  in  poverty  and  sorrow. 
(Book  II,  Chapter  XXIV)26 

[At  the  festival  of  Veytecuflhuid]  the  dancing  and  singing  of  the 
woman  [who  was  about  to  be  sacrificed]  was  accompanied  by  the  playing 
of  an  [unusual  type  of]  teponazdi.  [Unlike  the  ordinary  teponazdi  this 
one]  had  only  one  key  on  top  [rather  than  the  customary  two  keys.  This 
single  key  on  top  was]  matched  by  a  similar  key  below  it  on  the  bottom 
side.  To  the  bottom  [key]  was  attached  a  cup  such  as  might  be  used  for 
drinking;  for  with  this  resonator  cup  the  teponazdi  produces  a  much 
stronger  sound  than  if  two  keys  [each  sounding  different  pitches]  are 
cut  out  on  top,  with  none  underneath.  [This  particular  type  of]  teponazdi 
was  called  tecomofttoa,  and  it  was  so  constructed  that  it  could  be  fitted 
under  the  armpit  of  the  musician  carrying  it  (Book  II,  Chapter 
XXVII)  2T 

From  the  next  short  excerpt  we  learn  that  the  young  nobles  in  train- 
ing for  the  priesthood  at  the  Calmecac  were  required  to  learn  vast  num- 
bers of  hymns  honoring  the  gods  in  the  Aztec  pantheon.  The  Calmecac 
was  "a  house  of  penance  and  tears,  where  nobles  were  reared  to  become 
priests  of  the  idols."  28 


EARLY  ABORIGINAL  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO       15 

The  fourteenth  rule  [of  instruction]  was  to  teach  the  boys  afl  the 
verses  of  the  songs  to  sing,  which  they  called  divine  songs;  these  verses 
were  written  in  their  books  by  signs.  (Book  III,  Chapter  VIII) 

In  the  next  passage  Sahagun  offers  a  corroborating  description  of  the 
fiestas  in  honor  of  the  godsj  since  Sahagun's  description  differs  in  only  a 
few  details  from  Motolinia's  the  passage  given  below  has  been  abridged. 
One  interesting  detail  noted  by  Sahagfin,  but  not  by  Motolinia,  has  to  do 
with  the  capital  punishment  of  musicians  who  made  mistakes  in  perform- 
ance. The  meticulous  preparation  of  the  music  cannot  be  wondered  at  if 
it  was  always  true  that  a  musician  who  erred  was  immediately  withdrawn 
from  the  ensemble  and  executed. 

One  thing  that  the  chiefs  took  great  pains  with  were  the  areitos,  the 
dances  which  were  festivals  for  the  entire  people.  The  leader  of  the  singing 
first  gave  his  instructions  to  the  singers  in  his  charge,  and  told  them  how 
to  pitch  their  voices  and  how  to  tune  them;  the  leader  also  told  them  what 
kind  of  ule  [rubber]  sticks  they  were  to  use  in  playing  the  teponazdi.  He 
also  gave  orders  for  the  steps  and  postures  that  were  to  be  used  in  danc- 
ing. .  .  . 

Then  they  proceeded  to  the  dance.  If  one  of  the  singers  made  a  mistake 
in  singing,  or  if  one  of  the  teponazdi  players  erred  in  the  execution  of  his 
part,  or  if  one  of  the  leaders  who  indicated  the  dance  routine  made  a  mis- 
take, immediately  the  chieftain  ordered  him  siezed,  and  the  next  day  had 
him  summarily  executed.  (Book  VHE,  Chapter  XXVI)  *9 

The  last  excerpt  we  offer  from  Sahagtin's  Historia  General  de  las  Cosas 
has  often  been  quoted  elsewhere  j  in  it  Sahagun  tells  some  of  the  qualifica- 
tions the  Aztecs  desired  in  an  ideal  anger. 

The  worthy  singer  has  a  clear  mind  and  a  strong  memory.  He  composes 
songs  himself  and  learns  those  of  others,  and  is  always  ready  to  impart 
[what  he  knows]  to  the  fellows  of  his  craft.  He  sings  with  a  well-trained 
voice,  and  is  careful  to  practice  in  private  before  he  appears  in  public.  The 
unworthy  singer,  on  the  other  hand,  is  ignorant  and  indolent.  .  .  .  What 
he  learns  he  will  not  communicate  to  others.  His  voice  is  hoarse  and  un- 
trained, and  he  is  at  once  envious  and  boastful.  (Book  X,  Chapter  VIII)  80 

FRANCISCO  L6PEZ  DE  06MARA  (1511-1566?) 

Gomara  has  suffered  from  the  reputation  of  having  lied.  Bernal  Diaz 
in  writing  his  "True  History"  constantly  berated  him.  Only  in  recent 


*6  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

years  has  it  been  shown  that  Diaz  himself  was  writing  more  of  a  Relation 
de  Servictos  than  a  precisely  accurate  account.  As  Diaz's  own  inflated 
reputation  for  strict  veracity  has  declined,  G6mara's  has  ascended. 

Since  Gomara  was  Cort6s's  own  personal  chaplain  after  about  1540,  it 
has  been  thought  his  information  concerning  the  conquest  came  largely 
from  the  conqueror  himself.  In  describing  the  festival  dances,  Motolinia's 
description  of  which  has  already  been  given,  Gomara  said: 

These  two  drums  [teponaztli  and  huehued]  playing  in  unison  with  the 
voices  stood  out  quite  strikingly,  and  sounded  not  at  all  badly.  The  per- 
formers sang  merry,  joyful,  and  amusing  tunes,  or  else  some  ballad  in 
praise  of  past  kings,  recounting  wars  and  such  things.  This  was  all  in 
rhymed  couplets  and  sounded  well  and  was  pleasing, 

When  it  was  at  last  time  to  begin,  eight  or  ten  men  would  blow  their 
whistles  lustily.  The  drums  were  then  beaten  very  lightly.  The  dancers 
were  not  long  in  appearing  in  rich  white,  red,  green,  and  yellow  garments 
interwoven  with  very  many  different  colors.  In  their  hands  they  carried 
bouquets  of  roses,  or  fans  of  feathers  or  of  feathers  and  gold,  while  many 
of  them  appeared  with  garlands  of  exquisitely  scented  flowers.  Many  wore 
fitted  feather-work  hoods  covering  the  head  and  shoulders,  or  else  masks 
made  to  represent  eagle,  tiger,  alligator,  and  wild  animal  heads.  Many 
times  a  thousand  dancers  would  assemble  for  this  dance  and  at  the  least 
four  hundred.  They  were  afl  leading  men,  nobles  and  even  lords.  The 
higher  the  man's  quality  the  closer  was  his  position  with  respect  to  the 
drums.  .  ,  . 

At  first  they  sang  ballads  and  move[d]  slowly.  They  played,  sang,  and 
danced  quietly  and  everything  seemed  serious,  but  when  they  became  more 
excited,  they  sang  carols  and  jolly  tunes.  The  dance  became  more  and 
more  animated  and  the  dancers  would  dance  harder  and  quicken  their 
pace.  .  ,  . 

All  those  who  have  seen  this  dance  say  it  is  a  most  interesting  thing  to 
see  and  superior  to  the  zambra  of  the  Moors,  which  is  the  best  dance  of 
which  we  have  any  knowledge  in  Spain.81 


FRAY  ALONSO  DE  MOLINA 

Molina  was  brought  to  New  Spain  as  a  small  boy  just  shortly  after 
the  Aztec  capital  fell.  His  mother,  who  was  soon  left  a  widow,  let  him 
pky  with  Indian  children,  and  Molina  therefore  grew  up  speaking  Na- 
huatl  as  a  second  tongue.  His  was  the  first  dictionary  of  the  Nahuatl 


EARLY  ABORIGINAL  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO       27 

tongue  (first  edition,  1555)5  this  dictionary,  a  Spanish-Nahuatl  and 
Nahuatl-Spanish  dictionary,  gives  us  several  useful  ideas  (i)  The  Aztecs 
had  no  word  simply  meaning  music,  as  we  use  that  termj  for  music  in 
the  limited  sense  of  singing  they  had  a  word,  but  none  for  music  as  a 
generic  term.  (2) Neither  did  they  have  a  verb  meaning  play,  in  our  sense 
of  flaying  on  an  instrument.  (3)  On  the  other  hand,  their  language  was 
immensely  rich  in  specific  nouns  such  as,  for  instance: 
song  sung  by  a  soprano  tlaptzaualiztU 
song  sung  to  compliment  someone  tecuiqueualiztli 
song  sung  to  insult  someone  tecuicuiqueualiztli 
song  sung  to  someone  else  tecuicatiliztU 

and  although  they  had  no  generic  nouns  meaning-  "musician,"  or  "player," 
their  language  was  extremely  rich  in  specific  nouns  meaning  "player  on 
the  huehuetl,"  "player  on  the  teponaztli,"  "flute-player,"  "fife-player," 
"trumpet-player,"  and  so  on.  (4)  Their  language  was  similarly  rich  in 
verbs  with  such  varied  specific  meanings  as  "to  sing  in  praise  of  someone," 
"to  sing  derisive  songs,"  "to  sing  tenderly,"  or  "to  sing  in  a  high  voice."  82 
From  Molina's  dictionary,  and  from  kter  dictionaries  of  the  Nahuatl 
tongue,  we  can  gather  ample  evidence  to  show  that  the  ancient  Mexicans 
wholly  lacked  our  abstract  idea  of  music  as  an  art — an  abstract  idea,  more- 
over, which  in  Western  civilization  originated  as  long  ago  as  Pythagoras 
and  Aristoxenus.  If  the  aboriginal  Mexicans  lacked  any  abstract  idea  of 
music,  it  is  of  course  a  well  known  fact  that  their  power  of  abstraction  in 
other  fields  was  limited  also.  Ethnologists,  however,  while  pointing  out 
the  small  number  of  abstractions  the  Mexican  aborigines  were  able  to 
make,  have  at  the  same  time  always  called  attention  to  the  profuse  num- 
ber of  concrete  ideas  they  were  able  to  verbalize.  Music,  then,  according 
to  the  ethnologists,  was  only  one  of  many  life-experiences  which  they 
valued,  but  could  not  verbalize  in  any  generic  sense. 

DIEGO  DELANDA  (1524-1579) 

Landa's  Relacidn  de  las  Cosas  de  Yucatan  is  the  most  complete  account 
we  possess  of  ancient  Maya  life.  He  has  been  described  by  the  great  Maya 
scholar,  A.  M.  Tozzer,  as  a  pioneer  social  anthropologist.  No  other  Span- 
ish writer  of  the  sixteenth  century,  with  the  exception  of  Sahagun,  so 
minutely  described  the  social  customs  of  the  pre-Conquest  aborigines.83 

The  Spanish  penetration  of  Yucatan  began  in  1526,  five  years  after 


28  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

Cortes's  conquest  of  Mexico  5  but  because  the  lure  of  gold  was  not  so 
potent  in  Yucatan  the  complete  domination  of  the  peninsula  was  dekyed 
until  twenty  years  later.  Landa's  Relation  was  written  about  1566.  Because 
of  the  burning  of  Maya  writings,  Lancia  has  been  known  as  the  Attila  of 
Maya  culture,  but  he  was  in  reality  interested  enough  in  it  to  provide  the 
only  key  we  possess  to  the  Maya  hieroglyphs. 
Landa's  enumeration  of  Maya  musical  instruments  included: 

Drums  which  they  play  with  the  hand,  and  another  drum  made  of 
hollow  wood  with  a  heavy  and  sad  sound.  They  beat  it  with  rather  a 
long  stick  with  a  certain  gum  from  a  tree  at  the  end  of  it,  and  they  have 
long  thin  trumpets  of  hollow  wood  with  long  twisted  gourds  at  the  ends. 
And  they  have  another  instrument  made  of  a  whole  tortoise  with  its 
shells,  and  having  taken  out  the  flesh,  they  strike  it  with  the  palm  of  the 
hand.84  The  sound  is  doleful  and  sad.  They  have  whistles  made  of  leg 
bones  of  deer;  great  conch  shells  and  flutes  made  of  reeds,  and  with  these 
instruments  they  make  music  for  the  dancers.85 

Landa's  description  of  the  Maya  dances  follows  his  description  of  their 
instruments.  What  he  says  about  their  dances  tallies  rather  closely  with 
Motolinfa's  and  Gomara's  descriptions  of  the  dancing  in  Tenochtitlan, 
He  says  that  men  and  women  danced  together  only  rarely.  Erotic  themes 
in  pre-Conquest  music  are  extremely  difficult  to  find. 

FRAY  DIEGO  DURAN  (1537-1588) 

Duran,  a  Dominican  missionary  who  immersed  himself  in  Indian  lore, 
was  formerly  thought  to  have  been  born  in  Mexico,  but  is  now  known 
from  an  Inquisition  document  (dated  June  14,  1587)  to  have  been  born 
in  Seville.  His  magnificent  Historia  de  las  Indias  de  Nueva  Esfana,  like 
Landa's  invaluable  Relation,  awaited  the  nineteenth  century  for  its  pub- 
lication. Duran  exactly  dated  his  manuscript  j  the  part  of  his  history  which 
we  quote  was  finished  in  1579.  The  Atlas  appearing  at  the  end  of  the 
history  is  actually  a  collection  of  pictures  showing  pre-Conquest  customs  j 
although  the  pictures  post-date  the  Conquest  they  are  considered  authentic 
records. 

In  the  extracts  below  Durin  compares  Indian  and  Spanish  musical 
praxisj  the  second  excerpt  contains  the  earliest  mention  of  the  sara- 
bande. 


EARLY  ABORIGINAL  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO       29 

The  old  nobility  all  maintained  professional  singers  who  composed 
songs  celebrating  the  important  deeds  of  their  ancestors  .  .  .  There  were 
also  singers  who  composed  sacred  songs  in  honor  of  their  idols;  these 
temple  singers  likewise  received  regular  stipends.  .  .  .  Those  who  criti- 
cize Indian  customs  might  well  reflect  that  this  custom  of  maintaining 
professional  singers  in  no  wise  differs  from  the  present-day  practice  of 
maintaining  paid  singers  in  the  royal  chapel,  or  a  band  of  musicians  in  the 
chapel  of  the  Archbishop  of  Toledo  or  of  any  other  noble  person.  In  New 
Spain  there  are  yet  today  in  certain  towns  members  of  the  native  nobility 
who  still  follow  their  ancient  custom  of  maintaining  singers.  I  myself  do 
not  think  this  old  custom  undesirable,  but  think  rather  that  it  conduces  to 
good  ends;  for  the  traditions  of  these  descendants  of  kings  and  chieftains 
are  not  unworthy.  .  .  .  Some  of  their  songs  that  I  Jiave  heard  and  some 
of  their  dances  I  have  seen  induced  in  me  feelings  of  infinite  sadness  and 
melancholy  [as  I  reflected  on  their  vanished  greatness]  .se 

Since  the  young  men  were  intensely  eager  to  learn  how  to  dance  and 
sing  well,  and  always  wished  to  be  leaders  in  the  dancing  and  singing, 
they  spent  much  time  and  effort  mastering  the  particular  types  of  body 
movement  required.  It  was  the  custom  of  the  dancers  to  dance  and  sing  at 
the  same  time.  Their  dance  movements  were  regulated  not  only  by  the  beat 
of  the  music,  but  also  by  the  pitch  of  their  singing.  .  .  .  Their  poets 
gave  each  song  and  dance  a  different  tune,  just  as  we  employ  a  different 
tune  when  we  are  singing  different  types  of  poetry  such  as  the  sonnet  or 
the  octava  nma  or  the  terceto.  Typical  of  the  pronounced  differences  en- 
countered in  their  dance  music  was  the  contrast  between  the  solemn  and 
majestic  songs  and  dances  performed  by  the  nobility,  and  the  lighter  love 
songs  danced  by  the  youths.  And  still  more  different  in  type  was  another 
dance  they  performed  which  might  have  been  derived  from  that  lascivious 
sarabande  which  our  own  people  dance  with  such  indecent  contortions  of 
the  body  and  such  lewd  grimaces.87 

FRAY  GER6NIMO  DE  MENDIETA   (1525-1604) 

Mendieta  came  to  Mexico  as  a  youth  of  nineteen,  and  immediately 
began  the  study  of  Nahuatl,  which  he  learned  to  speak  with  signal  "ele- 
gance.'7 He  was  commissioned  by  his  order  to  prepare  a  history  of  the 
Indians  and  started  the  Historic  Eclesidstica  Indiana  in  1 57 1 ;  the  pressure 
of  missionary  duties,  the  involvement  in  unforeseen  administrative  re- 
sponsibilities, and  the  interruption  caused  by  a  prolonged  journey  back 
to  Spain,  delayed  its  completion,  however,  until  1596. 

Mendieta  tells  us  (b  the  extract  offered  below)  that  the  Aztecs  as- 


30  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

cribed  a  divine  origin  to  their  two  most  important  instruments,  the 
teponaztli  and  the  huehuetl.  The  legendary  account  concerning  the  origin 
of  these  instruments  runs  like  this:  Teponaztli  and  Huehuetl  were  origi- 
nally divine  beings  dwelling  at  the  court  of  the  Sun.  A  priestly  messenger 
from  earth  invaded  the  heavenly  precincts  and  poured  forth  in  song  the 
story  of  man's  grief.  The  Sun,  however,  forbade  his  servitors  to  listen 
to  the  earthly  messenger.  Teponaztli  and  Huehuetl  disobeyed  the  Sun, 
and  for  their  disobedience  were  expelled  from  the  heavens.  They  fell 
to  earth  and  assumed  the  form  of  musical  instruments.  Ever  since  their 
expulsion  from  the  skies  they  have  assuaged  man's  grief  with  the  sound 
of  their  music. 

This  legendary  account  is  interesting  if  for  no  other  reason  than  because 
it  helps  explain  why  the  ancient  Mexicans  thought  a  magic  power  (having 
nothing  to  do  with  music)  inhered  in  their  instruments.  Since  they  thought 
the  teponaztli  and  huehuetl  were  actually  divine  beings  temporarily  con- 
demned to  earthly  exile,  they  treated  these  instruments  as  idols.  Even  to- 
day the  Indians  in  certain  out-of-the-way  places  still  hoard  their  tepo- 
naztlis, and  venerate  them  as  if  they  were  sacred  objects.  The  Church  has, 
of  course,  tried  to  extirpate  such  vestiges  of  idolatry,  but  many  con- 
temporary Indians,  like  their  pre-Conquest  forbears,  still  ascribe  mana 
to  their  teponaztlis  and  huehuetlsj  and  the  Church's  campaign  against 
idolatry  has  therefore  not  achieved  full  success. 

Rodney  Gallop  (whose  article  on  "The  Music  of  Indian  Mexico"  ap- 
peared in  the  April,  1939,  Musical  Quarterly)  reported  several  cases, 
all  of  which  he  had  seen  at  first  hand,  involving  the  superstitious  venera- 
tion of  teponaztlis.  According  to  Gallop,  "There  is  a  suspicion  of  idolatry 
in  the  reverence  paid  to  the  drums  of  San  Juan  Acingo,  Tepoztlan,  and 
Xico,  which  comes  out  even  more  strongly  in  other  parts  of  the  Sierras 
of  Puebla  and  Hidalgo."  Gallop  continued  by  citing  the  case  of  an  Aztec 
village,  named  Xolotla,  where  the  chief  sorcerer  guarded  a  teponaztli 
which  he  kept  wrapped  in  a  garment,  as  if  it  were  something  human 
needing  protection.  The  sorcerer,  furthermore,  called  his  teponaztli  by 
a  human  name.  "When  the  priest's  back  is  turned  this  drum  is  sometimes 
smuggled  into  the  village  church  and  hidden  behind  the  altar."  88 

The  legendary  account  Mendieta  gives  also  helps  us  understand  how 
the  Aztec  priests  acquired  so  terrible  a  stranglehold  on  the  Aztec  mind. 
In  this  story  of  the  bringing  of  musical  instruments  as  in  other  stories  of 
other  boons,  the  priests  always  pictured  themselves  as  the  bringers  of  every 


EARLY  ABORIGINAL  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO       31 

good  gift  man  possesses.  With  music  as  with  maize,  the  gift  of  the  gods 
was  only  secured  through  the  intercession  of  a  priest  in  sorrowing  man's 
behalf. 

For  the  details  of  the  legend  which  follows,  Mendieta  cited  the  au- 
thority of  a  pioneer  Nahuatl  grammarian,  Fray  Andres  de  Olmos. 

Seeing  that  they  were  utterly  unable  to  prevail  in  their  struggle  with 
the  newly-created  Sun,  the  old  gods  of  Teotihuacan  in  desperation  decided 
to  sacrifice  themselves.  Xolotl,  the  appointed  sacrificer,  opened  each  of 
their  breasts  with  a  large  knife  and  drew  out  the  heart;  he  then  killed 
himself.  By  their  deaths,  the  Sun's  anger  was  appeased. 

Each  god  bequeathed  his  sacred  clothing  to  a  priest  who  had  worshipped 
him.  Realizing  the  great  weight  of  their  responsibility  for  such  sacred  relics, 
the  priests  guarded  the  vestments  most  zealously.  Their  grief,  however, 
on  account  of  the  deaths  of  their  gods  was  not  assuaged  even  though  they 
now  had  in  their  possession  the  sacred  vestments.  Their  grief  instead  of 
abating,  in  time  grew  insupportable,  and  they  therefore  decided  to  under- 
take a  pilgrimage,  hoping  that  somewhere  they  might  find  solace  for  their 
anguish. 

After  wandering  about  together  for  a  time,  they  separated  and  one 
priest  traveled  toward  the  seacoast.  When  he  arrived  at  the  ocean  he  met 
there  Tezcatlipoca,  lord  of  being,  who  instructed  him  to  proceed  onward 
to  the  Court  of  the  Sun,  and  there  to  beg  the  Sun  for  musical  instruments. 
With  songs  and  musical  instruments  man  would  be  able  fittingly  to  praise 
his  new  gods. 

In  order  to  assist  him  in  this  long  journey  to  the  Court  of  the  Sun, 
various  animals  in  the  sea,  among  them  the  tortoise,  the  whale,  and  the 
sea-cow,  formed  themselves  into  a  bridge  so  that  the  griefstricken  priest 
might  pass  over  them.  When  the  priest  arrived  at  the  Court  of  the  Sun 
he  explained  the  motive  of  his  visit.  The  Sun,  however,  not  wishing  to 
diminish  his  own  retinue  of  followers,  forbade  any  of  his  servitors  to  listen 
to  the  priest's  entreaties. 

But  so  eloquently  and  earnestly  did  the  earthly  messenger  make  his 
plea  that  two  servants  of  the  Sun,  the  one  named  Huehuetl  and  the  other 
Teponazdi,  disobeyed  and  listened.  For  their  presumption  in  disobeying 
him,  the  Sun  cast  them  forth  from  his  presence  in  disgrace.  They  then 
accompanied  the  priest  in  his  return  to  earth. 

But  the  sound  of  the  huehued  and  teponazdi  must  forever  remain 
sorrowful;  because  forever  they  remember  the  sorrow  they  felt  when 
first  they  heard  the  story  of  man's  extremity,  as  the  priest  told  it  in  heaven. 
If  man's  anguish  because  the  gods  of  Teotihuacan  are  dead  has  now 


32  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

abated  and  if  instead  he  has  learned  how  to  dance  and  make  merry  in 
song  and  dance,  the  sounds  of  the  huehued  and  teponaztli  still  continue 
to  remind  him  of  the  sighs  Huehuetl  and  Teponaztli  long  ago  breathed 
in  heaven  when  first  they  heard  the  sad  entreaties  of  the  earthly  messen- 
ger.8* 

SUMMARIES  OF  SIXTEENTH  CENTURY  OPINION 

The  best  known  writer  on  Mexican  antiquities  during  the  seventeenth 
century,  Juan  de  Torquemada,  said  in  his  Monarquia  Indiana  (1615) 
little  that  had  not  already  been  said  by  his  sixteenth  century  predecessors. 
It  will  therefore  not  be  necessary  to  quote  long  passages  from  him  or 
from  such  other  later  historians  as  Boturini  Benadud  and  Clavijero,  both 
of  whom  like  Torquemada  summarized,  rather  than  adding  fresh  informa- 
tion. Torquemada  did,  however,  add  a  few  glosses  which  must  here  be 
repeated:  (i)  He  affirmed  positively  that  part-singing  of  the  kind  prac- 
tised in  Spain  was  unknown  in  Mexico  before  the  Conquest.40  (2)  He 
said  that  during  their  dances  the  Indians  always  sang  in  unison  with  the 
teponaztli  tune.41  (3)  He  stated  that  the  teponaztli  and  huehuetl  players 
during  all  the  cult  dances  but  one  were  placed  where  the  dancers  could 
see  them,  and  thus  better  follow  their  beat— the  one  exception  being  the 
dance  honoring  the  war-god,  Huitzilopochtli.  (4)  He  listed  the  instru- 
ments Montezuma  particularly  delighted  in  hearing  at  meal-time,  clay- 
flutes,  reed-flutes,  conch  shells,  bones,  and  huehuetls,  but  said  none  of 
Cortes's  men  much  cared  for  the  emperor's  favorite  music,  heard  in- 
variably at  all  the  emperor's  meals. 

Among  the  scattered  observations  on  Aztec  music  in  Boturini  Bena- 
duci's  1 746  Idea  de  una  nueva  Historia  General  the  following  is  typical : 

Not  all  of  the  songs  sung  in  honor  of  the  gods  were  accumulated  from 
past  tradition ;  the  festival  of  Xochitl,  for  instance  was  solemnized  with 
new  songs  in  which  it  was  forbidden  to  mix  anything  from  older 
songs.  .  .  .42 

In  this  short  passage,  as  in  others,  he  merely  confirmed  from  his  own 
reading  of  Nahuatl  codices  a  fact  that  Durin  had  previously  noted.  Fran- 
cisco Clavigero,  who  wrote  as  lengthily  on  pre-Conquest  music  as  Torque- 
mada, seemed  to  say  something  new  when  discussing  the  different  sizes 


EARLY  ABORIGINAL  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO       33 

of  teponaztlis,48  but  as  in  the  case  of  Torquemada's  glosses,  Clavijero's 
observation  was  founded  on  inference  rather  than  fresh  observation. 


ABSENCE  OF  MUSICAL  QUOTATIONS  IN  THE  SIXTEENTH  CENTURY 
CHRONICLES  OF  PRE-CONQUEST  LIFE 

It  is  highly  probable  that  the  missionaries  and  their  Indian  pupils 
wrote  down  various  samples  of  indigenous  melody.  Shortly  after  the 
advent  of  the  missionaries  Christian  texts  began  to  be  sung  in  such  native 
languages  as  Nahuatl  with  indigenous  tunes.  Sahagun's  Psalmodia  Chris- 
tianaf*  already  alluded  to,  comprises  just  such  a  collection  of  hymn- 
texts  in  Nahuatl,  intended  to  be  sung  with  indigenous  tunes.  This  hymn- 
book,  published  in  1583,  was  (as  he  said  in  its  preface)  a  collection  of 
hymn-texts  which  he  had  composed  several  decades  before  actual  publica- 
tion 5  furthermore,  according  to  Sahagun,  many  other  missionaries  had 
tried  the  same  expedient  of  composing  Christian  texts  in  native  languages, 
in  order  to  give  the  Indians  acceptable  words  to  sing  to  their  old  tunes. 

Acosta  writing  on  this  same  subject  said  one  of  the  popes  had  encouraged 
the  missionaries  to  retain  everything  Indian  that  did  not  conflict  with 
Christianity: 

Our  men  that  have  conversed  among  them  have  labored  to  reduce 
matters  of  our  holy  faith  to  their  tunes  >  the  which  hath  profited  well:  for 
that  they  employ  whole  days  to  rehearse  and  sing  them.  .  .  .  We  must 
therefore  conclude,  following  the  counsel  of  Pope  Gregory,  that  it  was 
very  convenient  to  leave  to  the  Indians  that  which  they  had  usually  of 
custom,  so  as  they  be  not  mingled  nor  corrupt  with  their  ancient  errors.45 

Regrettably,  however,  these  indigenous  tunes,  like  some  of  the  original 
music  composed  by  the  Indians  after  the  Spanish  arrival,*6  seem  to  have 
been  lost  irretrievably.  The  only  music  with  Nahuatl  texts  which  still 
seems  to  survive  from  the  sixteenth  century  is  polyphonic  music  com- 
posed by  Hernando  Franco,  chapelmaster  at  the  Mexico  City  Cathedral 
between  1575  and  1585.  Quite  evidently  Franco  was  not  an  Indian,  and 
therefore  we  cannot  adduce  his  polyphonic  Nahuatl  hymns  as  examples 
either  of  original  music  by  a  Mexican,  or  even  necessarily  as  examples 
of  adaptation  from  indigenous  sources. 

If  no  transcriptions  of  Aztec  melodies  noted  down  during  the  sixteenth 


34  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

century  have  come  to  light,  it  need  not  however  be  concluded  that  none 
so  transcribed  will  ever  be  found.  When  it  is  remembered  that  such  prose 
accounts  as  Sahagun's,  Motolinia's,  Duran's,  and  Mendieta's  were  not 
published  until  three  centuries  after  they  were  written,  that  the  texts  of 
the  Nahuatl  songs,  Cantares  en  Idioma  MexicanOy  were  not  published 
until  1899,  that  even  yet  no  adequate  attempt  has  been  made  to  bring 
these  pre-Conquest  songs  into  any  modern  language,  that  publication  of 
other  important  Nahuatl  texts  has  been  delayed,  and  that  numerous  manu- 
script sources  in  Indian  tongues  now  resting  in  Spanish  and  Mexican 
archives  have  scarcely  been  looked  at  by  competent  scholars,  then  it  need 
hardly  be  wondered  at  that  no  exemplars  of  Indian  musk — a  much  more 
fragile  kind  of  cultural  remains  than  writing — have  thus  far  been  brought 
forward. 

In  this  connection  it  is  pertinent  to  note  that  Francisco  de  Salinas  (1513- 
1590)  published  in  1577  a  theoretical  treatise,  De  musica  libri  seftem, 
in  which  was  transcribed  "the  first  Arab  tune  to  be  noted  in  western 
musical  notation."  Salinas  also  included  Portuguese, 'Spanish,  and  Italian 
folk-songs  in  his  De  musica.  In  Mexico  there  were  certainly  musicians  as 
adequate  as  was  Salinas  for  the  task  of  noting  down  folk-songs.  What  may 
easily  have  happened  is  simply  neglect  j  there  may  now  be  in  Spain  or 
in  Mexico  certain  unexploited  transcriptions  of  indigenous  melody  await- 
ing study  and  publication. 

Only  recently  has  it  been  discovered  that  a  pioneer  missionary  in  Cali- 
fornia, Fray  Felipe  Arroyo  de  la  Cuesta,  busied  himself  not  only  with 
compiling  a  dictionary  of  the  Mutsun  tongue  but  also  with  the  noting 
down  of  texts  and  music  of  certain  songs  sung  by  the  Indians  whom  he 
was  trying  to  convert.  It  is  extremely  probable  such  adept  musicians  as 
Fray  Pedro  de  Gante  and  Fray  Bernardino  de  Sahagun  similarly  oc- 
cupied themselves  in  sixteenth  century  Mexico.  At  the  moment  of  this 
writing,  Arroyo  de  k  Cuesta's  jottings  of  California  Indian  melody  re- 
main unexploited  in  The  Bancroft  Library  at  the  University  of  California 
in  MS.  35054.  The  neglect  of  this  source  of  Indian  melody  in  a  state 
where  every  scrap  of  historical  information  has  been  carefully  collected 
and  studied,  has  possibly  occurred  because  scholars  dealing  with  local 
history  do  not  have  time  for  peripheral  matters  j  competent  musicians,  on 
the  other  hand,  do  not  usually  have  time  or  inclination  to  go  foraging  in 
archives  devoted  to  regional  history  simply  on  the  bare  chance  that  after 


EARLY  ABORIGINAL  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO       35 

looking  through  a  hundred  manuscripts  in  obsolete  handwriting  an 
exceptional  one  with  music  will  be  found 

We  say  then  again  that  the  chances  of  discovering  even  at  this  kte 
date  a  manuscript  in  an  ecclesiastical  archive  in  Spain,  or  in  some  such 
Mexican  collection  as  the  interminable  Inquisition  file,  containing  some 
scraps  of  Indian  melody  noted  down  during  the  sixteenth  century  have 
by  no  means  been  exhausted.  Still  other  possibilities  of  arriving  at  an 
authentic  indigenous  melody  exist  The  writing  of  so-called  parody  masses 
using  secular  tunes  was  a  common  practice  during  the  sixteenth  century. 
Cristobal  de  Morales,  whose  works  were  well  known  in  sixteenth  century 
Mexico,  wrote  several.47 

Colonial  composers  in  Mexico,  such  as  Juan  de  Padilla,  also  wrote 
parody  masses  j  these  are  just  beginning  to  be  transcribed  into  modern 
notation.  Perhaps  a  complete  corpus  of  Mexican  masses  and  motets  from 
the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries  will  enable  us  to  identify  melodic 
elements  of  non-Spanish  origin  upon  which  further  deductions  concerning 
the  indigenous  musical  system  can  be  based.  Already  it  is  being  shown  that 
Padilla,  for  instance,  used  certain  melodic  progressions  which  are  hardly 
compatible  with  the  European  a  cappella  style  j  and  when  publication 
of  his  music  has  been  achieved  these  non-typical  traits  will  receive  the 
attention  due  them.  If  Miss  Alice  Ray,  to  whom  is  due  the  discovery  of 
Padilla's  parodyings,  does  not  isolate  any  Indian  motifs  in  his  music,  it  is 
entirely  possible  some  other  colonial  composer's  music  will  reveal  an 
Indian  Uhomme  arme  theme.  All  the  written  evidence  shows  the  mis- 
sionaries favored  preserving  the  Indian  tunes  wherever  possible.  Surviv- 
ing written  evidence  proves,  moreover,  that  the  Indians  who  studied  under 
such  teachers  as  Fray  Pedro  de  Gante  soon  learned  the  craft  of  music  well 
enough  to  compose  themselves,  in  certain  cases  composing  polyphonic 
music  that  excited  the  admiration  of  their  own  Spanish  mentors.  If  there 
were  among  the  Indians  individuals  who  could  compose,  certainly  there 
must  have  been  others  with  sufficient  technical  skill  to  write  down  the 
tunes  used  for  the  singing  of  such  hymns  as  those  included  in  Psalmodia 
Christiana. 

Another  as  yet  untried  method  in  the  study  of  the  Aztec  melodic 
system  which  may  conceivably  yield  fruitful  results  should  here  be  briefly 
explained.  Certain  early  Nahuatl  scholars,  such  as  the  Jesuit,  Antonio 
del  Rincon,  stressed  the  fact  that  Nahuatl  was  recited  with  a  pronounced 


36  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

up  and  down  inflection  in  the  pitch  of  successive  syllables.  Appropriate 
accent  marks,  according  to  Rincon  in  Book  V  of  his  Arte  Mexican*  (pub- 
lished in  I595),48  showed  the  rise  and  fall  of  pitch  in  successive  syllables. 
If  such  rules  of  pitch  as  Rinc6n  gives  were  applied  to  a  collection  of 
Nahuatl  songs,  C&ntares  en  Idioma  Mexicano,  for  instance,  a  graph  of 
the  rise  and  fall  in  melodic  line  could  be  traced.  The  headings  of  the 
hundred-odd  Cantares  from  this  collection  with  teponaztli  accompaniment 
tell  us  what  the  pitch  pattern  for  the  teponaztli  accompaniment  was;  the 
mating  of  a  graph  showing  the  rise  and  fall  of  the  voice  with  a  graph  of 
the  rise  and  fall  of  the  teponaztli  accompaniment  would  afford  us  in- 
valuable evidence  upon  which  to  base  our  conclusions  concerning  the 
Aztec  musical  system.  The  prevailing  shape  of  Aztec  melody  might  be 
deduced  from  such  a  study.49 

THE  MELOWC  SYSTEM  OF  THE  EARLY  ABORIGINES 

If  it  should  seem  that  such  methods  as  the  last  two  we  have  named  are 
unduly  roundabout,  we  can  only  say  in  justification  that  at  present  the 
Achilles  heel  in  all  discussions  of  the  Aztec  melodic  system  is  the  actual 
lack  of  melodies  transcribed  in  the  Conquest  period.  Because  no  melodies 
of  clearly  provable  antiquity  have  yet  come  to  light,  scholars  have  been 
forced  to  rely  for  their  specific  deductions  concerning  the  Aztec  musical 
system  upon  melodies  noted  down  as  recently  as  the  end  of  the  nineteenth 
century  and  the  beginning  of  the  twentieth  by  ethnologists  working  with 
phonograph  in  remote  sections  of  Mexico  where  it  has  been  hoped  Euro- 
pean influences  had  never  effectively  penetrated.  A  good  example  of  such 
an  ethnologist  working  with  the  aid  of  phonograph  recordings  is  furnished 
us  by  Carl  Lumholtz,  whose  Unknown  Mexico  appeared  in  two  volumes 
at  the  beginning  of  this  century  (1902).  Lumholtz's  transcriptions  of 
Huichol  and  Tarahumara  Indian  melodies  were  all  made  from  phono- 
graph recordings  made  in  the  field,  and  are  therefore  transcriptions  that 
will  withstand  the  most  rigorous  assay. 

Lumholtz  journeyed  southward  from  Bisbee,  Arizona.  He  first  visited 
Sonora  Indians,  and  then  passed  into  Chihuahua  where  he  investigated 
the  habits  of  the  isolated  Tarahumaras.  He  proceeded  thence  down  the 
western  Cordilleras  through  Durango  and  Zacatecas  into  Jalisco  where 
he  spent  considerable  time  with  the  Huicholes.  Obviously  none  of  the 
tribes  he  visited  were  descendants  of  the  Aztecs.  Even  had  they  been,  it 


EARLY  ABORIGINAL  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO       37 

is  too  much  to  suppose  that  from  1519  until  1902  the  musical  culture  of 
any  people,  however  primitive,  would  have  remained  completely  static. 
But  since  such  transcriptions  as  Lumholtx  provides  have  been  frequently 
quoted  in  illustration  of  the  aboriginal  musical  habits  of  the  Mexicans, 
we  shall  here  quote  several  musical  examples  from  him,  always  bearing 
in  mind,  however,  the  date  of  his  transcriptions,  the  source  of  his  melodies, 
and  the  unlikelihood  that  these  melodies  recapture  in  any  significant  way 
the  essential  flavor  of  pre-Conquest  music  in  Tenochtitlan,  the  proud 
heart  of  ancient  Mexico. 

The  first  three  short  melodies  given  below  were  taken  by  Lumholtz 
in  Chihuahua  during  his  stay  with  the  Tarahumarasj  prefacing  the  first 
song,  he  says: 

Although  the  Tarahumare,  as  a  rule,  has  a  harsh  and  not  very  power- 
ful singing  voice,  still  there  are  some  noteworthy  exceptions,  and  the  airs 
of  the  mtuburi  songs  are  quite  pleasing  to  the  ear.  These,  as  all  their 
dancing-songs,  are  of  great  antiquity.50 

Then  he  gives  the  following  two  rutuburi  dances: 


TWO  KUTULBUKI 


J|J  j>  ij. 


u  -  ru)  ~ 


-Sat  •  m- 


*  *m 

Li'    tfti-Ka  wu-K*. 


H  i 


I  j  j  j.  T  • 


38  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

Another  type  of  dance  popular  with  the  Tarahumaras  at  the  time 
Lumholtz  visited  them  was  the  yumari.  According  to  Lumholtz, 

The  yumari  songs  tell  that  the  Cricket  wants  to  dance;  the  Frog 
wants  to  dance  and  jump;  and  the  Blue  Heron  wants  to  fish;  the  Goat- 
sucker is  dancing,  so  is  the  Turtle,  and  the  Grey  Fox  is  whistling.  But  it  is 
characteristic  of  the  yumari  songs  that  they  generally  consist  only  of  an 
unintelligible  jargon,  or,  rather,  of  a  mere  succession  of  vocables,  which  the 
dancers  murmur. 

Unlike  the  rutuburi,  the  yumari  soon  becomes  tiresome,  in  spite  of  its 
greater  animation.  .  .  .  According  to  tradition  it  [the  yumari]  is  the 
oldest  dance.51 

Before  setting  down  a  yumari  dance  with  two  variants,  Lumholtz  ex- 
plained that  the  accent  sign  >  in  each  of  the  following  snatches  meant 
a  grunt  rather  than  musical  tone.  It  is  a  commonplace,  of  course,  that  no 
primitive  music  can  adequately  be  transcribed  in  conventional  Western 
notation.  The  manner  of  execution,  which  is  all-important,  cannot  be 
reduced  to  paper  with  our  conventional  signs. 


YUAIAfi/  J>AMf 


^^^ 


MJHr  P 


The  next  two  musical  quotations  from  Lumholtz  were  taken  by  him 
during  a  short  stay  with  the  Tepehuane  Indians  (who  lived  in  the  extreme 
southwest  corner  of  the  state  of  Chihuahua). 

TfffffUA N£  TRIBAL  5  QN$ 


EARLY  ABORIGINAL  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 
FEAST  SON$  SUNS  AT  AT?EARANC£  OF  MOXNIH$ 


39 


u- 


The  next  several  examples  which  we  take  from  Lumholtz  were  col- 
lected during  his  excursion  into  the  extreme  northwesterly  portion  of 
Jalisco  inhabited  by  the  Huichol  Indians.  If  we  judge  on  the  basis  of 
Lumholtz's  printed  examples,  this  tribe  seems  strongly  to  have  favored 
rhythmically  free  melodies  founded  on  simple  triad  arpeggios.52  Nearly 
all  Huichol  melodies  have  religious  texts.  As  might  be  expected,  both 
rain-songs  given  below  invoke  the  aid  of  gods—  the  deer-god  in  the  first 
song,  and  the  mother-eagle  goddess  in  the  second.58 


HUICHOL  KAIN 


SOJI/fS 


£££ 


0- 1* Ta-ri mt-*a-no-ti 


a-xo-ti  T*-la-  Jiu-U-f* 


S 


i  fa-    ti-fr  u-i.**-ti 


PPP  r   ,  ul  PPP  r 


Xatd 


P'  r/ 


**•*&'*&  faa  (fa  -  rae)  mt-md-na  fad  (fa-)    ta  -    hat  -  nti  - 


F  P-   f;    IJ     P  P 


**.*« 


Va-ta-  kat-  *a  -  Me     (aw; 


P  r    i 


40 


MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 


Lumholtz  tells  of  having  mightily  pleased  his  Huichol  hosts  by  learning 
several  such  rain-songs  as  the  two  just  given. 

Certain  further  excerpts  of  Huichol  melody  illustrate  what  seems  to 
be  a  rather  elaborate  scheme  of  shifting  rhythms.  One  of  these  was  sung 
at  the  hikuli  dance  in  honor  of  the  mescal  button  54  from  which  a  highly 
intoxicating  liquor  was  fermented  (and  the  eating  of  which  induces  visions 
and  ecstasies).  The  other  was  sung  at  the  religious  rites  preparatory  to  a 
deer-hunt  j  during  the  deer-hunting  season  the  hunters  ate  only  sparingly, 
but  had  constant  recourse  to  hikuli.  Since  the  hikuli  songs  and  dances 
obviously  bordered  on  frenzy,  Lumholtz  again  insists  that  he  had  made 
no  attempt  to  transcribe  them  from  actual  ceremonial  performances  where 
he  would  have  had  only  a  flickering  fire  for  light  j  these  songs  and  dances 
he  assures  us  were  all  recorded  at  the  moment  of  actual  performance  and 
then  later  transcribed.  Even  so,  our  conventional  notation  can  give  no 
idea  of  the  methods  used  in  performance. 


HIKULI  1>ANC£ 


r  r  r  f  t/  r 


m 


In  the  case  of  these  last  two  songs,  as  with  the  other  songs  transcribed 
by  Lumholtz,  he  reminds  us  that  a  principal  feature  of  actual  performance 
was  the  repetition  over  and  over  again  of  the  same  fragments  of  melody. 
From  a  Europeanized  point  of  view  this  repetition  became  infinitely 


EARLY  ABORIGINAL  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO       41 

tedious  at  times,  but  since  the  songs  were  primarily  sung  for  ritual  pur- 
poses, their  efficacy  was  thereby  enhanced 

The  Huichol  instruments  mentioned  include  the  three-legged  hollow 
cylindrical  drum  with  a  covering  of  deer-skin  upon  which  the  player 
rapped  with  his  fingers  $  the  four-hole  flute  5  and  the  notched  bone  rasp. 
Wherever  a  Huichol  song  was  sung  with  accompaniment  the  supporting 
instruments  were  usually  percussive  with  a  predominantly  rhythmic  func- 
tion to  perform.  Since  the  typical  Huichol  instruments  obviously  resemble 
the  typical  Aztec  instruments,  many  observers  have  chosen  to  draw 
parallels  between  existing  Huichol  and  non-existent  Aztec  melodies; 
this  inference  is  drawn  easily  enough:  since  the  instruments  are  demon- 
strably  similar,  why  should  not  the  melodies  sung  in  conjunction  with 
the  instruments  have  been  similar?  w 

Since  a  sampling  of  melody  from  every  tribe  visited  by  Lumholtz  would 
overcrowd  us  here,  we  now  pause  briefly  in  order  to  offer  the  general 
principles  of  indigenous  melody  which  can  be  deduced  from  the  Tara- 
humara  and  Huichol  melodies:  (i)  melodies  are  pre-eminently  penta- 
tonicj  (2)  they  are  non-expressive  in  the  Western  sense  j  (3)  they  usually 
end  on  a  note  which  we  recognize  as  a  satisfactory  tonic  j  (4)  their  range 
is  an  octave  or  a  tenthj  (5)  there  is  no  sense  of  melodic  climaxj  (6)  a 
strong  rhythmic  propulsive  force  informs  all  their  songs j  (7)  nearly  all 
are  cult  or  ritual  songs  j  (8)  dance  and  song  are  twins  in  the  native  culture 
areas. 

Lumholtz,  a  Norwegian,  was  soon  followed  by  K.  T.  Preuss,  whose 
Mexican  travels  culminated  in  a  book  entitled  Die  Nayarit-expedition, 
published  at  Leipzig  in  1912.  Preuss  worked  among  the  Cora  Indians* 
Frances  Densmore,  the  well-known  American  student  of  Indian  music, 
contributed  two  valuable  articles,  one  on  Papago  music  and  another  on 
Yaqui  music  in  1929  and  1932,  respectively.56  The  literature  on  indige- 
nous music  has  been  significantly  enriched  in  recent  years  by  such  Mexican 
authorities  as  G.  Baqueiro  F6ster,  Jesus  Romero,  and  Vicente  T.  Mendoza. 
The  Mexicans  all  agree  that  whatever  may  be  ascertained  regarding  the 
melodic  system  of  the  pre-Conquest  peoples  must  be  inferred  from  ex- 
amples recently  collected. 

One  more  sample  of  indigenous  melody  may  aptly  be  quoted  here 
before  we  take  final  leave  of  these  "modern"  melodies  on  which  theories 
regarding  ancient  indigenous  melody  have  trellised  themselves.  The  final 
example  given  below  is  presented  in  three  versions,  the  first  Baqueiro 
F6ster's  version,  the  second  Saldivart  version,  and  the  last  Mendoza's 


42  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

version.  The  melody  in  question  was  first  noted  down  by  Baqueiro  F6ster, 
who  remembered  hearing  it  as  a  child  in  Meridaj  he  assumed  it  was  a 
native  Maya  melody,  as  it  may  well  have  been.  The  title  has  been  trans- 
lated, <fRibbon  Dance,"  although  the  Maya  words  themselves  mean, 
c<Come  on,  come  on,  children,  the  sun  is  setting."  The  rhythmic  dis- 
parities in  the  following  transcriptions  probably  indicate  individual  in- 
terpretations rather  than  mere  inadvertences  in  copying. 


XtoleS 


J  JjT    • 


$*4/*l<5«66^" 


i*  * 


.. 


HjjM     I 


jl  N  'in  in  fl  )J  /n  iff]  j"]Sg 


m 


EARLY  ABORIGINAL  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO       43 

If  it  were  to  the  point  vre  could  continue  our  quotation  of  indigenous 
melodies,  as  they  have  been  picked  up  by  zealous  investigators  in  recent 
years,  ending  this  chapter  with  a  thesaurus  of  aboriginal  melodies.  An 
appendix  for  good  measure  could  then  be  added  to  the  chapter  in  which 
would  be  contained  all  the  variants  encountered  in  such  cases  as  that  of 
the  melody  just  quoted,  Xtoles.  Such  a  thesaurus  would  include  samples 
of  Otomi  melody  picked  up  by  Rodney  Gallop,60  of  Mixtec  melody  re- 
corded by  Mateo  Hernandez,61  of  Maya  melody  transcribed  by  Luis 
Sandi  and  Francisco  Dominguez  after  their  1934  visit  to  the  Chiapas;  62 
and  of  Yaqui,  Sen,  Tarahumara,  and  other  tribal  melodies  picked  up 
and  recorded  by  folklorists  in  more  recent  years  for  such  institutions  as 
the  Library  of  Congress  at  Washington.  Such  a  thesaurus  would,  how- 
ever, unduly  extend  the  chapter  $  the  ten  examples  already  given  will 
perhaps  suffice.  They  give  us  enough  evidence  so  that  we  can  form  at 
least  a  tentative  opinion  concerning  the  reiterate  melodies  still  precariously 
surviving  in  isolated  and  remote  areas  of  Mexico. 


CONCLUDING  SUMMARY 


What  can  be  made  of  these  melodies?  We  have  already  said  that 
scholars  have  used  them  in  order  to  reconstruct  the  melodic  system  and 
even  the  rhythmic  system  of  the  ancient  indigenes.  Lest  this  use  seem  un- 
duly inferential,  we  hasten  to  point  out  the  use  made  of  such  fragments 
of  ancient  Greek  melody  as  the  Delphic  Hymns  to  Apollo  (written  about 
130  B.C.)  and  of  the  so-called  Seikilos  Song  (written  still  later)  5  such 
Greek  fragments  are  nowadays  used  by  writers  who  are  attempting  to 
reconstruct  the  musical  system  in  vogue  among  the  Greeks  of  the  Peri- 
clean  age.  As  long  as  modern  scholars  permit  themselves  the  liberty  of 
using  music  of  the  late  Alexandrinian  epoch  in  their  discussions  of  music 
during  the  age  of  Aeschylus  or  Sophocles,  they  should  undoubtedly  admit 
the  equal  propriety  of  using  such  indigneous  fragments  as  Lumholtz 
collected,  in  discussions  of  the  melodic  system  in  vogue  among  the  Mexi- 
can aborigines  of  an  earlier  epoch. 

If  we  ask  the  same  question,  what  can  be  made  of  these  melodies?  this 
time,  however,  asking  it  not  as  musical  antiquarians,  but  as  practical  musi- 
cians, we  can  speak  much  more  enthusiastically  in  their  behalf.  In  a  country 
such  as  Mexico,  which  even  today  contains  a  larger  group  of  Indians 
than  of  persons  with  pure  European  blood,  the  indigenous  expressions 


44  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

in  art  and  music  assume  almost  the  value  of  national  palladiums.  As 
symbols  of  Indian  cultural  achievement  in  a  nation  so  largely  made  up 
even  yet  of  pure-blooded  Indians,  any  fragment  or  shard  of  Indian  music 
gathers  to  itself  a  spiritual  significance  that  far  transcends  its  objective 
value  in  the  eyes  of  foreign  musicians.  Only  those  who  have  troubled 
to  acquaint  themselves  with  the  divided  character  of  the  Mexican  national 
sold  can  realize  how  important  it  is  to  the  formerly  oppressed  Indian  now 
to  assert  himself  spiritually  and  artistically,  even  if  in  so  doing  he  seems 
to  stress  the  musical  value  of  aboriginal  specimens  that,  objectively  con- 
sidered, lack  transcendent  worth. 

In  the  United  States  where  a  competent  musician  such  as  Edward 
MacDowell  in  his  1890  Second  Orchestral  Suite  or  Charles  T.  Griffes  in 
his  Two  Sketches  for  String  Quartet  has  used  Indian  themes,  the  musical 
result  has  had  to  stand  on  its  own  merits  and  not  on  its  appeal  to  lineal 
descendants  of  Powhatan  and  Squanto.  In  Mexico,  however,  even  an 
Indian  name,  such  as  Candelario  Hufzar  affixed  to  his  symphony  entitled 
Oxpaniztlt— whether  Indian  themes  are  actually  used  or  not — guarantees 
a  certain  type  of  success  that  we  who  are  unfamiliar  with  the  spirit  of 
Cardenas's  Mexico  have  no  way  of  properly  anticipating.  If  a  return  to 
the  speaking  of  Nahuatl  as  a  national  language  has  not  yet  been  suggested 
in  Mexico,  it  is  certain  that  in  the  minds  of  many  leading  artists  and  musi- 
cians the  effacement  of  all  other  cultural  intrusions  that  have  occurred 
since  1519  would  be  heartily  desired,  even  if  it  meant  the  utter  annihila- 
tion of  every  monument  of  Mexican  colonial  art.  It  is  not  to  be  wondered 
at  in  such  a  climate  of  opinion  that  aboriginal  music  stimulates  enthusiasm. 

The  most  widely  known  and  the  most  universally  admired  composition 
founded  on  aboriginal  melody  is  undoubtedly  Chavez's  eleven-minute 
Sinfonta  India.  Yet  in  this  unique  achievement  it  seems  hardly  possible  to 
claim  any  greater  distinction  for  the  melodies  which  Chavez  used  than 
can  be  claimed  for  the  fragments  of  melody  Lumholtz  collected.  It  may 
be  interesting  to  compare  the  Huichol  melody  heard  at  the  opening  of 
this  one-movement  symphony  68  with  other  Huichol  melodies: 


Uf  f  ILTTLJUr  Jlcjqj'jlff  g 


EARLY  ABORIGINAL  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO       45 

Objectively  considered,  this  particular  Huichol  melody  seems  as  limited 
in  expressive  content  as  either  of  Lumholtz's  rain-songs  5  its  musical  sub- 
stance is  even  thinner  than  that  of  the  hikuli  songs  already  presented.  Not 
the  melody  itself,  but  rather  Chavez's  treatment  of  it,  impresses  the  in- 
ternational music  public. 

If  no  particularly  intriguing  charms  of  the  kind  found  everywhere  in 
European  folk-music  are  presently  discernible  in  the  Indian  themes  used 
by  Chavez  or  other  modern  Mexican  composers,  still  Indian  themes  are 
to  be  revered  and  valued  simply  because  they  constitute  symbols  of  the 
heroic  Indian  past.  Authentic  Mexican  aboriginal  music  of  the  kind  re- 
corded under  Henrietta  Yurchenco's  supervision  for  the  Library  of  Con- 
gress album  64  entitled  "Folk  Music  of  Mexico"  may  not  seem  very 
promising  raw  material  for  a  symphony,  but  since  Chavez  and  others  less 
well  known  have  shown  it  can  be  done,  this  music  deserves  to  be  highly 
regarded  if  not  for  its  intrinsic  qualities,  at  least  as  a  convenient  totem. 
A  sympathetic  hearer  will  not  count  the  hundred-odd  times  a  simple  triad 
arpeggio  may  be  sung  at  a  Huichol  Fiesta  del  Peyote,  but  will  rather 
make  a  serious  effort  at  transporting  himself  into  the  culture  area  in  which 
the  music  originated.  Only  by  so  doing  will  he  begin  to  realize  why  the 
indigenous  music  of  Mexico  is  so  much  more  highly  regarded  by  Mexico's 
serious  composers  than  are  the  innumerable  jarabes,  huapangos,  san- 
dungas,.and  bambas,  that  pass  in  this  country  as  the  only  authentic  Mexi- 
can folk-music. 

The  connecting  of  Mexico's  present-day  Indian  music  with  the  Indian 
music  of  the  pre-Conquest  past,  as  has  already  been  admitted,  may  in- 
volve us  in  an  egregious  historical  fallacy.  But  other  historical  errors  have 
proved  fruitful  of  good  result  in  music  history.  The  birth  of  opera,  for 
instance,  can  be  directly  attributed  to  a  mistaken  notion  of  Greek  drama 
and  music  in  which  certain  Florentine  gentlemen  who  gathered  at  the 
palace  of  Count  Giovanni  Bardi  during  the  late  sixteenth  century  fondly 
indulged  themselves.  They  were  certainly  as  mistaken  in  their  notions 
of  the  Greek  past  as  Columbus  was  in  1492  when  he  thought  he  had 
landed  on  the  coasts  of  Asia.  However  wrong  the  modern  Mexican  musi- 
cian may  be  in  thinking  he  has  arrived  at  a  true  understanding  of  the  Aztec 
past  by  contemplating  the  features  of  contemporary  indigenous  music, 
still  a  desirable  result  may  have  been  achieved  by  making  such  a  con- 
nection. 

Contemporary  Mexican  composers  have  been  stimulated  by  an  ideal, 


46  MUSIC   IN  MEXICO 

as  it  were,  of  a  Homeric  age  in  Mexican  music  5  and  in  their  mouths  has 
been  placed  a  rallying  cry.  As  far  as  practical  results  are  concerned  it 
hardly  matters  whether  such  ideas  on  Aztec  music  as  Chavez  has  propa- 
gated are  really  accurate  or  not;  as  long  as  they  are  accepted  and  believed 
they  deserve  considerate  attention,  whether  they  are  strictly  provable 
or  not.  Because  they  have  been  believed,  Mexican  musicians  for  the  first 
time  in  the  long  history  of  music  in  Mexico  have  ceased  pining  for  Euro- 
pean glamor,  and  instead  have  taken  a  certain  indispensable  pride  simply 
in  being  Mexican  musicians.  The  Aztec  past  has  ceased  to  be  any  longer 
a  disgraceful  and  regrettable  incident  in  national  history.  Instead  it  is  now 
regarded  as  a  moment  of  national  grandeur;  scenes  from  the  Aztec  past 
are  the  culminating  glory  of  Mexico's  history,  as  Diego  Rivera  has  painted 
them  in  his  highly  idealized  versions  of  pre-Conquest  life  now  on  view  at 
the  National  Palace. 

With  this  spirit  now  abroad,  Mexican  musicians  are  ready  to  go  back 
to  the  earliest  aboriginal  music,  and  play  a  fortissimo  da  cafo. 

NOTES 

1.  Laurence  E.  Schmeckebier,  Modern  Mexican  Art  (Minneapolis:  The  University 
of  Minnesota  Press,  1939),  p.  4- 

2.  Bernal  Diaz  del  Castillo.  The  True  History  of  the  Conquest  of  New  Spun  (Lon- 
don: The  Hakluyt  Society,  1912),  IV,  142,  I49~5O>  J54- 

3.  Alba  Herrera  y  Ogaz6n,  El  Arte  Musical  en  Mexico  (Mexico:  Direcci6n  General 
de  las  Bellas  Artes,  1917),  p-  9«  Continuing  in  the  same  strain,  she  commented: 
<cDuring  the  rites  when  hapless  victims  by  the  hundreds  were  cruelly  offered  to 
their  gods,  the  eerie  light  of  the  sacrificial  fires,  the  vivid  color  of  freshly  spilt 
human  blood,  the  ghastly  shrieks  of  the  captives,  and  the  insane  frenzy  of  the 
diabolical  priests  must  together  have  combined  to  produce  a  truly  terrifying  spec- 
tacle. The  lugubrious  accompanying  music  for  these  ceremonies  must  undoubt- 
edly-have  been  wild,  incoherent,  and  macabre;  since  in  it  was  expressed  the 
ferocious  passions  of  the  untamed  savage." 

4.  Otto  Mayer-Serra,  "Silvestre  Revueltas  and  Musical  Nationalism  in  Mexico," 
The  Musical  Quarterly ,  April,  1941,  p.  127. 

5.  Jesus  C.  Romero,  Musica  Precortesiana  (Mexico:  Talleres  Graficos  de  la  Edi- 
torial Stylo,  1947),  pp.  252-3. 

6.  Hubert  Herring  and  Herbert  Weinstocfc  (editors),  Renascent  Mexico  (New  York: 
Covici-Friede,  1935),  p.  234.  Rivera  wrote  for  this  book  a  chapter  entitled  "Plastic 
Art  in  Pre-Conquest  Mexico,"  in  which  he  gave  it  as  his  opinion  that  most  of  the 
Spaniards  who  invaded  Mexico  were  "very  close  to  living  on  the  Neolithic  level." 
The  Spaniards  were  too  c<barbarous"  to  appreciate  the  advanced  "mental  develop- 
ment" of  the  race  they  destroyed,  according  to  Rivera, 


EARLY  ABORIGINAL  MUSIC  IN   MEXICO       47 

7.  Romero,  of.  tit.,  pp.  256-7. 

8.  For  a  discussion  of  the  Bonampak  paintings  as  revelators  of  Mayan  musical  prac- 
tices, see  Vicente  T.  Mendoza,  "Musica  Indigena  de  M6xico?"  Mexico  en  el  Arte, 
1950,  IX,  58.  On  pp.  59  and  62  appear  color  reproductions  of  the  Maya  instru- 
ments in  the  Bonampak  paintings.  Because  of  the  inaccessibility  of  the  Lacanya 
Valley  (State  of  Chiapas)  where  the  Bonampak  temples  are  located,  the  Mexican 
government  commissioned  Agustin  Villagra  to  execute  full-scale  color  duplicates 
for  the  Institute  Nacional  de  Antropologia  at  Mexico  City.  For  the  story  of  the 
spectacular  Bonampak  discovery  see  Charles  M.  Wilson,  "Open  Sesame  to  the 
Maya,"  Bulletin  of  the  Pan  American  Union,  July,  1948,  pp.  376-84. 

9.  D.  G.  Brinton  in  The  Gueg&ence  .  .  .  (Philadelphia,  1883),  pp.  xxx-xxxii, 
advanced  the  theory  that  multi-keyed  teponaztlis  were  used  in  Mexico;  he  repro- 
duced in  evidence  a  picture  from  Duran's  Atlas  (Mexico,  1880),  Trat.0  2.°,  Lam.* 
6.a,  Cap.0  8.°,  showing  a  teponaztli  player  crouched  before  a  five-keyed  instru- 
ment. It  is  of  course  well  known  that  both  the  Codex  Florentinus  (issued  in  1905 
under  the  editorial  supervision  of  Francisco  del  Paso  y  Troncoso  at  Madrid)  and 
Dura*n's  Atlas  contain  post-Conquest  paintings  that  cannot  be  accepted  as  definitive 
in  minor  details;  the  paintings  in  both  clearly  show  Spanish  influence. 

10.  See  Daniel  Castaneda  and  Vicente  T.  Mendoza,  "Los  Teponaztlis  .  .  ."  and 
"Los  Percutores  Precortesianos,"  Anales  del  Museo  Nacional  de  Arqueologfa, 
Historia,  y  Etnograjia,  4*.  epoca,  Tomo  8  (Mexico,  1933),  especially  pp.  281-2. 

1 1.  Antonio  Penafiel  (editor),  Cantares  en  Idioma  Mexicano  (Mexico:  Secrctaria  de 
Fomento,  1899).  An  English  version  containing  27  of  these  cantares  (but  in  an 
unreliable  translation)  was  published  in  Daniel  G.  Brinton's  Ancient  NahuaU 
Poetry  (Philadelphia,  1890). 

12.  H.  T.  Cresson,  "Aztec  Music,"  Proceedings  of  the  Academy  of  Natural  Sciences 
of  Philadelphia,  Part  I,  1883,  pp.  86-94. 

13.  Miguel  Galindo,  Nociones  de  Historia  de  la  Musica  Mejicana  (Colima,  "El 
Dragon,"  1933),  pp.  lOO-i. 

14.  Herbert  Weinstock,  Mexican  Music  (New  York:  Museum  of  Modern  Art, 
1 940),  p.  8. 

15.  The  Bonampak  "trumpets"  were  actually  made  of  wood  rather  than  of  clay, 
and  included  what  appears  to  be  a  separate  mouthpiece.  Since  fingerholes  were 
not  shown,  only  natural  harmonics  could  have  been  produced.  The  paintings  show 
the  lips  of  the  players  tightly  pursed,  with  the  bell  of  the  "trumpet"  held  at  an 
angle  above  the  heads  of  the  players.  Undoubtedly  the  Bonampak  instrumentalists 
played  in  concert  with  each  other,  rather  than  as  soloists,  if  the  paintings  are  to 
be  trusted.  Since  the  ''trumpets"  were  made  of  wood,  a  more  nearly  equivalent 
European  instrument  would  no  doubt  be  the  now  obsolete  cornett  (zink) .  For 
further  discussion  see  Mendoza,  of.  cit.9  p.  58. 

16.  Eduard  Seler,  Collected  Works  (Englished  tinder  the  editorial  supervision  of 
J.  E.  S.  Thompson  for  the  Peabody  Museum,  Cambridge,  Mass.,  I939>>  Vo!-  HI, 
Part  2,  Section  2,  pp.  28-33. 

17.  Marshall  H.  Saville,  The  Wood-Carver's  Art  in  Ancient  Mexico  (New  York: 
Museum  of  the  American  Indian,  1925),  pp.  64-74. 

1 8.  /£**.,  p.  67- 


48  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

19.  Renascent  Mexico,  pp.  203-8. 

20.  Ibid.,  p.  203. 

21.  /£#.,  p.  208. 

22.  Sylvanus  G.  Morley,  TA*  Ancient  Maya  (Stanford  University  Press,  1946), 
pp.  261-2. 

23.  On  the  "burning  of  books,"  see  Alfred  M.  Tozzer  (ed.),  Landaus  Relation  d* 
las  Cosas  de  Yucattn  (Cambridge:  The  Peabody  Museum,  1941),  pp.  77-8. 
Acosta's  statement  appears  on  p.  78. 

24.  This  phrase  was  inserted,  along  with  several  other  explanatory  phrases,  into 
Mendieta's  transcription  of  Motolinia's  account.  See  Ger6nimo  de  Mendieta, 
Historic  Eclcsi&stica  Indiana  (Mexico:  Antigua  Libreria,  1870),  pp.  140-3. 

25.  Toribio  de  Motolinia,  Memoriales  (Mexico:  Garcia  Pimentel,    1903),  pp. 

339-43- 

26.  Bernardino  de  Sahagun,  Historic  General  de  las  Cosas  de  Nueva  Esfana  (Mexico: 
Imp.  del  Alejandre  Vald&,  Bustamente  ed.,  1829),  Tomo  I,  pp.  101-4. 

27.  Ibid.,  I,  137. 

28.  Ibid.,  I,  276. 

29.  Ibid.,  II,  314-5. 

30.  Ibid.,  Ill  (1830),  21. 

31.  Francisco  Lopez  de  Gomara,  Historic  de  Mexico,  con  el  descubrimiento  del* 
NuevaEsfana  (Antwerp,  1554),  pp.  106-7. 

32.  Alonso  de  Molina,  Vocabulario  en  lengua  Castellana  y  Mexicana  (Mexico, 

I570>  P-H- 

33.  Tozzer,  of.  cit.,  p.  vii. 

34.  From  this  statement  we  should  infer  that  the  tortoise  shell  was  more  of  a  gong 
than  a  rasp. 

35.  Tozzer,  of.  cit^  p.  93. 

36.  Diego  Durln,  Historic  de  las  India*,  II,  233. 

37.  Ibid.,  II,  230. 

38.  Among  the  instruments  Gallop  encountered  which  he  classified  as  idols  was 
a  teponaztli  "that  is  kept  mysteriously  hidden  all  year  long  at  Tepoztlan  and  played 
on  only  three  occasions  during  the  year."  The  figure  carved  on  this  teponaztli 
was  Xochipilli.  He  encountered  a  sorcerer  at  Xico  in  the  Sierra  de  Puebla  who 
guarded  a  drum  to  which  a  hymn  in  Aztec  was  sung  as  to  the  god,  Xochipilli.  See 
Musical  Quarterly,  April,  1939,  p.  218. 

39.  Mendieta,  of.  tit.,  pp.  79-80,  See  also  Gabriel  Saldivar,  Historia  de  la  Musica 
en  Mexico  (Mexico,  1934),  pp.  4-5. 

40.  Juan  de  Torquemada,  Veinte  i  un  libros  rituales  i  Monarquia  Indiana,  2nd 
edition  (Madrid:  Nicolas  Rodriguez  Franco,  1723),  I,  229. 

41.  7^^11,265. 

42.  Lorenzo  Boturini  Benaduci,  Idea  de  una  Nueva  Historia  General  de  la  America 
Septentrional  (Madrid,  1746),  p.  90. 

43.  Francisco  ClvnjtTO,  Storia  antica  del  Messico  (Cesena,  1780),  II,  178. 

44.  The  only  work  of  Sahagun  published  during  his  lifetime,  it  is  now  excessively 
rare.  A  copy  is  in  The  Huntington  Library.  When  Icazbalceta  compiled  his  1 6th 


EARLY  ABORIGINAL  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO       49 

century  bibliography,  he  was  under  the  impression  that  he  possessed  the  only  sur- 
viving copy.  See  J.  Garcia  Icazbalceta,  Obras  (Mexico:  V.  Agueros,  1896),  III, 
175.  The  hymns  in  Psalmodia  Christiana  were  all  written  at  a  considerably  earlier 
stage  in  Sahagun's  life  than  the  publication  date  of  1583  would  suggest;  it  is 
known  that  he  began  writing  them  twenty-five  years  before  they  were  published. 
Only  adequate  study  of  the  metrics  of  these  hymns  will  give  us  any  inkling  of  the 
kind  of  music  to  which  they  were  set;  the  tunes  have  all  been  lost.  The  loss  of  the 
tunes,  which  were  not  printed,  can  hardly  be  surprising  when  copies  of  the  printed 
book  have  so  precariously  survived. 

It  must  not  be  thought  that  the  words  are  paraphrases  of  the  Davidic  psalms; 
in  actuality  the  words  (as  one  can  easily  infer  from  the  numerous  wood-blocks 
that  illustrate  the  text)  are  hymns  of  devotion  to  Christ  and  to  the  saints, 
4.5.  Jose'  de  Acosta,  Historia  Natural  y  Moral  de  las  Indias  (Seville,  1590),  p.  447. 
See  also  The  Naturall  and  Morall  Historic  .  .  .  (London,  1604),  p.  492. 

46.  Concerning  the  original  music  written  by  the  Indian  converts  during  the  earliest 
Conquest  period  see  Garcia  Icazbalceta,  Coleccion  de.  Documentos  para  la  Historia 
de  Mexico  (Mexico,  Libreria  de  J.  M.  Andrade,  1858),  I,  2 10. 

47.  Morales  wrote  two  Vhomme  arme  parody  masses,  and  others  on  the  secular 
tunes,  Mille  regretz,  Cafa,  and  Tristezas  me  matan.  His  pupil,  Guerrero,  also 
wrote  parody  masses. 

48.  Antonio  del  Rincon,  Arte  Mexicans  (Mexico,  1595;  new  ed.  by  Antonio  Pena- 
fiel,  1885),  Libro  V,  capitulo  primero.  (In  Penafiel's  edition,  pp.  61— 6.) 

49.  Vicente  T.  Mendoza,  "Musica  Precolombina  de  America,"  Boletin  Latino- 
Americano  de  Musica  (Bogota,  1938),  [V,  244  ff.  Mendoza  thinks  he  found  a 
clue  to  the  prevailing  direction  of  pre-Conquest  melody;  but  his  results  have  been 
imperfectly  corroborated. 

50.  Carl  Lumholtz,  Unknown  Mexico  (New  York:  Charles  ScribnePs  Sons,  1902), 
1,338. 

51.  Ibid.y  I,  339—40.  Both  rntuburi  and  yumari  dances  have  been  linked  to  the 
same  peyote  cult  Lumholtz  later  found  a  prominent  feature  of  ceremonial  life 
among  the  Huichol  Indians  (see  his  references  to  the  hikuli  dance). 

52.  The  Huichol  melodies  recorded  in  the  "Folk  Music  of  Mexico"  album  (issued 
by  the  Library  of  Congress)  show  the  same  marked  preference  for  reiterate  melodies 
founded  on  simple  triad  arpeggios. 

53.  Lumholtz,  of.  <**.,  II,  10  and  18. 

54.  A  species  of  narcotic  cactus  plant. 

55.  Auguste  G£nin,  in  his  <cNotes  on  the  Dances,  Music,  and  Songs  of  the  Ancient 
and  Modern  Mexicans,"  Annual  Report  of  The  Smithsonian  Institution,  1920, 
pp.  657-8,  strongly  opposed  the  tendency  to  identify  present  usages  and  customs 
with  those  of  the  remote  past,  and  also  the  tendency  to  identify  the  usages  of 
one  contemporary  tribe  with  the  usages  of  another  contemporary  tribe — especially 
where  the  two  tribes  live  far  removed  from  each  other.  On  the  other  hand,  E.  Seler 
In  'The  Huichol  Indians  of  the  State  of  Jalisco"  (Coll.  Wks.y  Eng.  tr.,  Vol.  Ill, 
Pt.  3,  Sec.  2,  pp.  2  and  especially  7)  strongly  endorsed  the  use  of  parallels  be- 
tween the  Huicholes  and  the  ancient  Mexicans  in  our  endeavor  to  understand  die 


50  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

culture  of  ancient  Mexico.  Particularly  interesting  is  Seler*s  endorsement  of  the 
parallels  between  Huichol  and  Aztec  instruments — parallels,  he  points  out,  which 
extend  beyond  mere  externalities,  and  have  to  do  with  much  more  intimate  mat- 
ters, such  as  the  proper  use  of  instruments  in  religious  ceremonies.  See  also  in  this 
connection  Seler's  article  in  Globus>  lllwtrierte  Zeitschrijt  jur  Lander  und 
VSlkerkunde,  August  19,  1899,  pp.  109-12,  treating  of  the  likenesses  between 
Mexican  and  Maya  instruments. 

56.  Frances  Densmore,  Pafago  Music  (Washington,  U.S.  Govt.  Printing  Office, 
1929);  Yumanand  Yaqui  Music  (Washington,  1932). 

57.  Baqueiro  F6ster,  Revista  Musical  Mexicana,  January,  1942,  p.  16* 

58.  Saldivar,  of.  cit.y  p.  72. 

59.  Mendoza,  "Musica  Indigena  de  Mexico,"  p.  63. 

60.  Rodney  Gallop,  "Otomi  Indian  Music  from  Mexico,"  The  Musical  Quarterly  > 
January,  1940,  pp.  87-100.  Gallop  strongly  felt  that  what  indigenous  melody 
still  existed  possessed  little  artistic  worth.  Compare  his  attitude  with  that  of  Chlvez, 
who  in  his  chapter,  "The  Music  of  Mexico,"  written  for  Henry  CowelPs  sym- 
posium, American  Corn-posers  on  American  Music  (Stanford  University  Press, 
1933)>  *poke  glowingly  of  "the  knowledge  of  music  possessed  by  the  contemporary 
Indians  who  still,  in  many  regions  of  the  country,  preserve  the  manner  of  execution 
and  the  forms  of  the  most  ancient  traditions."  (p.  170) 

61.  Mendoza,  "Musica  Indigena  de  Mexico,"  p.  60. 

62.  lbU.y  p.  62. 

63.  A  short  introduction  actually  precedes  this  quotation  of  Huichol  melody.  No 
source  is  given  in  the  program  notes  supplied  by  Chavez  for  either  the  Huichol, 
Yaqui,  or  Seri  melodies  which  he  quotes  in  the  course  of  Sinjonia  India. 

64.  See  Henrietta  Yurchenco,  "Grabaci6n  de  Musica  Indigena,"  Nuestr*  Musica, 
May,  1946,  pp.  65-78.  In  contrast  with  Rodney  Gallop,  who  complained  of 
the  paucity  of  indigenous  examples,  she  stated  (p.  78):  "My  collection  of  in- 
digenous music  represents  only  a  small  sampling  of  the  vast  treasury  of  aboriginal 
melody  which  can  still  be  heard  in  out-of-the-way  places  in  Mexico  and  Guate- 
mala. Centuries  after  the  Conquest  and  after  the  initial  contact  between  Spaniard 
and  Indian,  numerous  Indian  groups  still  preserve  intact  their  ancient  musical 
culture.  ...  I  hope  the  album  which  the  Library  of  Congress  will  soon  issue 
will  (though  it  contains  only  a  small  fraction  of  the  recordings  I  have  taken)  be  of 
use  not  only  to  comparative  musicologists,  but  also  to  practical  composers,  and  also 
to  anthropologists  and  linguists." 


THE  TRANSPLANTING  OF  EUROPEAN 
MUSICAL  CULTURE 


APTITUDE  OF  THE  INDIANS 

The  amazing  speed  with  which  European  music  was  taken  up  and  mas- 
tered by  the  Indians  immediately  after  the  arrival  of  the  Conquerors  af- 
fords us  convincing  proof  of  the  innate  musicality  of  the  aborigines.  Such 
chroniclers  as  we  quoted  in  the  previous  chapter  unite  in  extolling  the 
readiness  and  talent  of  their  Indian  charges  in  mastering  the  European 
musical  system.  The  Indians  could  hardly  have  so  soon  mastered  Gre- 
gorian chant  and  so  readily  embraced  polyphonic  singing  had  they  not 
already  among  themselves  built  up  a  strong  musical  tradition.  Because  the 
Indians  showed  such  inordinate  fondness  for  the  music  the  missionaries 
brought  with  them,  the  first  bishop  of  Mexico  instructed  the  missionaries 
within  his  diocese  to  teach  music  wherever  they  went  as  "an  indispensable 
aid  in  the  process  of  conversion." 

A  number  of  Cort6s's  own  men,  as  will  later  be  shown,  were  competent 
singers  arid  instrumentalists.  Wherever  Cortes  traveled  he  carried  profes- 
sional Spanish  minstrels  along  with  his  army  in  order  to  entertain  himself 
and  his  soldiers.  The  Indians  were  everywhere  fascinated  with  the  music 
of  these  sixteenth<entury  USO  entertainers  and  began  to  imitate  them 
as  soon  as  possible.  Certain  ones  among  Cortes's  followers  who  were  gifted 
musically  began  to  teach  after  their  warring  days  had  ended,  and  a  number 
of  amusing  stories  have  descended  to  us  from  the  chroniclers  of  the 
Conquest  period  telling  how  speedily  the  Indians  wheedled  out  of  their 
masters  all  their  best  professional  secrets.  But  none  of  the  Indians  could 
have  progressed  so  rapidly  in  music  as  the  chroniclers  testify  had  they 


Si  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

not  already  been  rather  generously  endowed  with  what,  for  lack  of  a 
better  word,  is  usually  referred  to  as  "talent.* 

MUSIC  AS  AN  AID  IN  THE  PROCESS  OF  CONVERSION 

Even  at  the  moment  of  their  initial  contact  with  the  Indians  the  Span- 
iards emphasized  the  primacy  of  music  in  worship.  One  can  hardly  imagine 
today  a  group  of  three  hundred  would-be  conquistadores  stopping  their 
negotiations  with  emissaries  of  Montezuma  in  order  to  build  an  altar 
where  their  chaplain  could  not  say,  but  sing  Mass.  Bernal  Diaz,  however, 
tells  us  that  the  very  first  Sunday  after  they  set  foot  on  the  spot  later 
re-christened  Veracruz  two  Indian  governors  arrived  on  an  embassage 
from  Montezumaj  before  any  business  could  be  transacted  Cortes  or- 
dered an  altar  built,  after  the  hasty  erection  of  which  Fray  Bartolome 
de  Olmedo,  "who  was  a  fine  singer,  chanted  Mass." 1  Symbolically  this 
chanting  of  Mass  was  an  excellent  prelude  to  the  later  efforts  of  the 
missionaries  who  everywhere  they  went  sang  their  services.  What  the 
Indians  failed  to  grasp  in  words  was  at  least  partially  conveyed  in  music 

Cortes's  own  chaplains  because  of  their  duties  with  his  troops  were  un- 
able to  give  more  than  incidental  attention  to  the  Indians  5  missionaries 
specifically  assigned  to  Indian  work  soon  arrived,  however.  In  the  summer 
of  1523,  two  years  after  the  fall  of  Tenochtitlan,  the  first  three  mission- 
aries specially  picked  for  the  task  of  converting  the  Indians  arrived.  One 
had  spent  fourteen  years  as  professor  of  theology  at  the  University  of 
Parisj  another  was  a  Fleming  who  had  been  employed  in  state  business 
by  his  relative,  Charles  V,  before  his  conversion  and  joining  of  the  Fran- 
ciscan order  j  the  third  claimed  Scottish  antecedents.  All  three  had  spent 
several  years  in  a  Franciscan  house  at  Ghent  before  applying  to  Charles 
V  for  permission  to  go  as  pioneers  to  Mexico.  The  second  of  the  trio, 
Pedro  de  Gante  ( 1480?-!  572),*  was  himself  originally  a  native  of  Ghent, 
where  he  had  grown  to  maturity.  He  therefore  had  lived  in  the  atmos- 
phere which  produced  masters  such  as  Des  Pris,  de  la  Rue,  Mouton,  and 
Gombert  Fray  Juan  de  Tecto,  the  Frenchman  in  the  trio,  was  at  the 
time  the  three  asked  permission  to  go  himself  serving  as  Charles's  per- 
sonal chaplain.  The  journey  from  Ghent  to  Seville  before  embarking  was 
taken  in  Charles  V*s  company.  Charles  wherever  he  traveled  always 
carried  about  with  him  his  own  private  chapel  choir,8  which  included 
several  of  the  most  illustrious  musicians  of  the  age.  When  Pedro  later 


TRANSPLANTING  OF  EUROPEAN  CULTURE   55 

wrote  his  near-relative,  Charles  V,  claiming  the  Indians  under  his  charge 
had  already  gamed  sufficient  skill  to  rival  the  chapel  singers  in  Charles's 
own  private  chapel,  he  was  therefore  pitting  them  against  a  choir  which 
he  already  knew  to  be  superlative. 

The  first  two  or  three  years  after  their  arrival  in  Mexico  they  busied 
themselves  with  the  learning  of  Nahuatl,  the  language  of  the  Aztecs.  Fray 
Pedro  soon  founded  a  school  at  Texcuco  which  has  been  called  the  first 
school  for  the  teaching  of  European  subjects  in  America.  He  also  instigated 
the  founding  of  the  first  church  for  the  Indians,  the  Church  of  San  Jose  de 
Belem,  which  stood  not  far  from  the  present  location  of  the  famous  Ameri- 
can restaurant  in  Mexico  City,  Sanborn's  (busy  Gante  street  nearby  still  re- 
minds one  of  Pedro  de  Gante) .  The  Indian  chapel  itself  was  later  chosen 
the  scene  of  the  most  impressive  pageantry  in  sixteenth  century  Mexico. 
Because  it  was  the  finest  and  largest  church  in  the  city  (larger  than  the 
primitive  cathedral)  it  was  chosen  for  such  great  ceremonial  occasions  as 
the  commemorative  services  after  Charles  Vs  death  in  which  participated 
the  entire  civil  and  ecclesiastical  hierarchy.  Adjacent  to  the  chapel  was  a 
school  for  Indians  founded  by  Fray  Pedro  soon  after  his  removal  from 
Texcuco  to  Mexico  City. 

Although  music  was  only  one  of  several  arts  which  were  taught  in 
the  San  Francisco  school  founded  by  Fray  Pedro,  his  surviving  portraits 
all  carry  a  notice  to  the  effect  that  his  music  teaching  was  the  subject  in 
which  he  gained  his  most  phenomenal  results.4  His  own  early  background 
in  Flanders  prepared  him  for  his  role  as  music  mentor.  He  came  to  Mexico 
a  man  of  forty-odd  years,  with  a  long  background  of  exceptional  musical 
advantages.  His  own  epoch  was,  moreover,  one  during  which  church 
musicians  everywhere  throughout  Europe  looked  for  inspiration  to  the 
celebrated  Flemish  masters.  Fray  Pedro  was  assisted  in  his  music  instruc- 
tion by  others  who  were  not  Flemings,  Fray  Arnaldo  de  Bassado,  listed 
as  a  Frenchman,  and  the  venerable  Spanish  priest,  Fray  Juan  Caro,  for 
instance.5  But  they  were  all  united  in  their  belief  that  music  provided  an 
indispensable  adjunct  to  worship.  The  music  they  approved  for  instruc- 
tional purposes  included  the  finest  European  art-music  of  their  period. 

The  remarkable  success  which  Fray  Pedro  de  Gante  achieved  with  the 
Indians  may  be  ascribed  to  certain  other  factors  than  mere  goodwill:  he 
first  learned  the  Nahuatl  language  5  the  school  he  then  proceeded  to  found 
alongside  the  San  Francisco  monastery  was  modeled  on  those  maintained 
by  the  celebrated  Brethren  of  the  Common  Life  in  Flanders;  he  taught 


54  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

the  Indians  and  not  the  children  of  the  Spanish  invaders  thus  eliminating 
the  possibility  of  racial  friction.  His  importance  as  an  educator  has  been 
stressed  by  recent  historians  of  education  in  Mexico.6  The  best  tribute  he 
has  been  paid,  however,  has  been  the  widespread  adoption  given  his  educa- 
tional plan  by  other  missionaries. 

A  memorable  letter  written  in  October  of  1532,  just  nine  years  after 
the  advent  of  the  band  of  three  in  Mexico,  tells  in  Pedro's  own  words 
what  he  felt  had  been  accomplished  in  music  since  his  arrival: 

I  can  tell  Your  Majesty  [Charles  V]  without  exaggeration  that  there 
are  already  Indians  here  who  are  fully  capable  of  preaching,  teaching,  and 
writing  [in  behalf  of  the  faith] .  And  with  the  utmost  sincerity  I  can  affirm 
that  there  are  now  trained  singers  among  them  who  if  they  were  to  sing 
in  Your  Majesty's  Chapel  at  this  moment  would  do  so  well  that  perhaps 
you  would  have  to  see  them  actually  singing  in  order  to  believe  it  possible.7 

If  Pedro  had  been  alone  in  his  enthusiasm  for  music  his  labors  would 
soon  have  ended  abortively.  But  others  perceiving  his  results  whole- 
heartedly seized  upon  his  educational  plan.  Numerous  other  missionaries 
wrote  letters  describing  their  successes  in  music  education.  Fray  Martin 
de  Valencia,  leader  of  the  band  of  twelve  that  came  out  the  year  after 
Fray  Pedro's  arrival  in  Mexico,  wrote  a  letter  to  the  Emperor  in  No- 
vember of  1532,  endorsing  music  as  a  prime  aid  in  the  task  of  conversion. 
A  short  excerpt  from  this  particular  letter  will  show  why  he  valued  music 
instruction.  The  training  given  the  natives  in  music  helped  to  wean  therp 
from  their  former  beliefs  $  music  was  the  sweetening  added  to  make  their 
new  instruction  more  palatable. 

Likewise  we  take  all  the  children  of  the  caciques  (insofar  as  we  are  able 
to  get  these  nobles  to  send  us  their  children),  and  also  children  from  other 
of  the  more  influential  Indian  families.  We  take  these  children  in  order 
that  we  may  separate  them  from  heathen  influences  by  rearing  and  edu- 
cating them  in  our  monasteries.  We  devote  much  time  to  them,  teaching 
them  not  only  how  to  read  and  write,  but  also  how  to  sing  both  plainchant 
and  polyphonic  music.  We  teach  them  how  to  sing  the  canonical  hours 
and  how  to  assist  at  Mass;  and  we  strive  to  inculcate  the  highest  standards 
of  Kving  and  conduct.8 

Motolinia,  one  of  the  original  band  of  twelve  that  came  over  in  1524 
with  Fray  Martin  de  Valencia  as  leader,  gave  in  his  Htstoria  de  los  Indios 


TRANSPLANTING  OF  EUROPEAN  CULTURE    55 

several  remarkable  instances  showing  how  avidly  the  Indians  took  to  the 
music  of  the  friars. 

At  the  time  when  the  Indians  began  to  learn  the  Ave  Maria  and  the 
Pater  Noster  the  friars  in  order  to  make  the  learning  easier  and  more 
pleasurable  gave  them  these  and  other  prayers,  along  with  the  Command- 
ments, in  their  own  tongue  and  set  to  a  pleasing  plainchant  melody.  They 
were  so  eager  to  learn,  and  there  were  so  many  of  them,  that  they  fairly 
piled  up  in  the  courtyards  of  the  churches  and  shrines  and  in  their  own 
sections  of  the  town,  singing  and  learning  prayers  for  three  or  four  hours 
on  end;  and  their  haste  was  so  great  that  wherever  they  went,  by  day  or 
by  night,  one  could  hear  them  on  all  sides  singing  and  reciting  the  whole 
catechism.  The  Spaniards  were  amazed.* 

In  another  excerpt  from  his  Hisforia  de  los  Indios  he  commented  at 
length  on  the  astounding  facility  with  which  the  Indians  mastered  even 
the  most  complicated  elements  in  the  European  music  system. 

Their  understanding  is  keen,  modest,  and  quiet,  not  proud  or  showy  as 
in  other  nations.  They  learned  to  read  quickly,  both  in  Spanish  and  in  Latin, 
in  print  and  in  manuscript.  .  .  .  They  learned  to  write  in  a  short  time. 
.  .  .  The  third  year  we  started  to  teach  them  singing  and  some  people 
laughed  and  made  fun  of  it,  both  because  the  Indians  seemed  to  be  singing 
off  pitch,  and  because  they  seemed  to  have  weak  voices.  It  is  undoubtedly 
true  that  they  do  not  have  voices  as  strong  or  as  sweet  as  the  Spaniards. 
Probably  this  comes  about  because  they  go  barefooted,  with  unprotected 
chests,  and  eat  food  that  is  poor  fare.  But  since  there  are  so  many  of  them 
to  choose  from,  the  Indian  choirs  are  all  reasonably  good. 

It  was  quite  a  sight  to  see  the  first  man  who  began  to  teach  them 
[part-]  10  singing.  He  happened  to  be  an  old  friar  who  knew  scarcely  any- 
thing of  the  Indian  language,  only  Castilian,  and  he  talked  with  the  boys 
as  correctly  and  sensibly  as  if  he  were  talking  with  intelligent  Spaniards. 
Those  of  us  who  heard  him  were  beside  ourselves  with  laughter  as  we 
watched  the  boys  standing  openmouthed  to  see  what  he  meant.  It  was 
marvellous  that,  although  at  first  they  did  not  understand  a  thing  and  the 
old  man  had  no  interpreter,  in  a  short  time  they  understood  him  and 
learned  to  sing  so  that  now  there  are  many  of  them  so  skilful  that  they 
direct  choirs.  As  they  are  quick-witted  and  have  an  excellent  memory, 
most  of  what  they  sing  they  know  by  heart,  so  that  if  the  pages  get  mixed 
up  or  the  book  falls  while  they  are  singing  this  does  not  prevent  them  from 
singing  on  without  Ac  slightest  error.  Also,  if  they  lay  the  book  on  a  table, 


56  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

the  ones  who  see  it  upside  down  or  from  the  side  sing  just  as  well  as  those 
who  are  in  front  of  it.  One  of  these  Indian  singers,  an  inhabitant  of  this 
city  of  Tlaxcala,  has  composed  unaided  a  whole  Mass  which  has  been  ap- 
proved by  good  Castilian  singers  who  have  seen  it. 

Instead  of  organs  they  use  flutes  playing  in  harmony,  and  the  sound  re- 
sembles that  of  a  pipe  organ  because  of  the  large  number  of  flutes  playing 
together.  Instrumentalists  who  came  from  Spain  taught  them  how  to 
play;  so  many  instrumentalists  arrived  together  that  we  asked  them  to 
divide  themselves  up  among  the  Indian  towns  where  they  might  receive 
pay  for  their  lessons,  instead  of  becoming  a  burden  on  one  community. 
The  Indians  have  learned  to  make  chirimias  [double-reed  instruments] 
though  it  cannot  be  said  that  as  yet  they  know  how  to  produce  from  them 
a  satisfactorily  tuned  scale.  .  .  . 

Notably  to  be  valued  in  these  Indian  students  is  their  exceptionally  good 
deportment.  The  teacher  has  to  expend  very  little  effort,  for  they  are  so 
eager  to  learn  that  they  are  soon  ready  to  teach  themselves.  Indian  instruc- 
tors are  used  along  with  the  friars  in  such  schools  as  San  Francisco  de 
M&a'co  and  Santiago  de  Tktelolco.11 

Motolinfa  finished  his  history  in  February,  1541.  For  a  considerable 
period  of  time  anterior  to  its  completion  he  had  centralized  his  missionary 
activities  in  Tlaxcala,12  the  capital  of  the  province  where  Cort6s  had 
found  his  staunchest  Indian  allies.  It  was  but  natural  that  the  people  of 
this  province,  who  had  always  remained  loyal  to  the  Spanish,  should  more 
speedily  than  their  neighboring  tribes  have  acquired  a  Neo-Hispanic 
cultural  outlook.  Motolinfa  selected  the  1538  festival  of  Corpus  Christi 
at  Tlaxcala  in  order  to  illustrate  the  rather  considerable  success  the  people 
of  this  province  had  shown  in  weaving  into  the  fabric  of  their  own 
indigenous  culture  certain  Spanish  strands. 

On  the  holy  day  of  Corpus  Christi  in  the  year  1538,  the  Tlaxcaltecas 
held  a  very  solemn  festival  which  deserves  to  be  recorded,  because  I  believe 
that  if  the  Pope  and  Emperor  had  been  there  with  their  courts  they  would 
have  been  delighted.  .  .  .  This  was  the  first  day  that  the  Tlaxcaltecas 
used  the  coat  of  arms  which  the  Emperor  granted  them  when  the  town 
was  made  a  city.  This  favor  has  not  yet  been  granted  to  any  other  Indian 
town  but  this  one,  which  well  deserves  it,  for  its  people  greatly  assisted 
Don  Hernando  Cortes,  acting  for  His  Majesty.  ...  In  the  procession 
there  marched  a  large  choir  trained  to  sing  polyphonic  music  of  consider- 
able complexity;  their  singing  was  accompanied  by  music  of  flutes  which 
duplicated  the  [treble]  parts,  and  also  by  trumpets  and  drums,  sounding 
together  with  bells,  large  and  small.  Since  all  these  instruments  sounded 


TRANSPLANTING  OF  EUROPEAN  CULTURE    57 

together  at  the  moment  of  their  entering  and  at  the  moment  of  their 
leaving  the  church,  it  seemed  just  then  that  the  very  heavens  were  fall- 
ing. .  .  . 

On  the  following  Monday  they  presented  four  one-act  plays  .  .  . 
written  in  prose.  .  .  .  One  scene  ended  with  the  singing  of  Btne&ctus 
Dotnanu*  Deus  Israel. 

Motolinfa  then  proceeded  in  this  section  of  his  history  to  set  down  a 
narrative  of  the  Easter  celebration  in  Tiaxcala  the  next  year  (1539). 

These  Tlaxcaltecas  have  greatly  enlivened  the  divine  service  with  poly- 
phonic music  written  for  voices  and  for  groups  of  instruments.  They  have 
two  choirs  which  alternate  with  each  other  in  singing  the  divine  office.  Each 
choir  has  more  than  twenty  singers  j  they  have  also  two  groups  of  flutists 
who  accompany  these  choirs,  and  they  also  use  in  their  performances  the 
rebec  and  a  certain  type  of  flute  (copied  from  the  Moors)  which  aptly 
imitates  the  sound  of  the  organ.  Besides  these  they  also  have  skilful 
drummers  who  when  they  sound  their  drums  conjointly  with  the  bright, 
jingling  bells  they  carry,  create  a  delightful  effect.  .  .  . 

The  Wednesday  of  the  Easter  octave  .  .  „  they  had  a  pky  ready  to 
be  performed.  It  represented  the  fall  of  our  first  parents.  .  .  .  When 
the  angels  brought  two  garments,  very  clever  imitations  of  the  skins  of 
animals,  and  dressed  Adam  and  Eve,  the  most  striking  thing  was  to  see 
them  go  out  into  exfle  weeping,  Adam  escorted  by  three  angels  and  Eve 
by  another  three.  As  they  went  out  they  sang  together  a  polyphonic  setting 
of  the  psalm  Circumdedertmt  me?*  This  was  so  well  performed  that  no 
one  who  saw  it  could  keep  from  weeping  bitterly.  .  .  .  Consoling  the 
disconsolate  pair,  the  angels  went  off  singing,  in  parts,  by  way  of  farewell, 
a  villancico  14  whose  words  were: 

Oh,  why  did  she  eat 

— that  first  married  woman — 

Oh,  why  did  she  eat 

The  forbidden  fruit? 

That  first  married  woman 
— she  and  her  husband — 
Have  brought  Our  Lord  down 
To  a  humble  abode 
Because  they  both  ate 
The  forbidden  fruit. 

This  play  was  performed  by  the  Indians  in  their  own  tongue.1* 


58  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

Among  the  other  plays  mentioned  by  Motolinia  some  two  or  three 
seem  to  have  shown  considerable  imagination  and  skill  in  construction  j 
music,  as  he  described  them,  was  considered  a  necessary  incidental  in  all 
these  plays.  Most  of  them  were  of  the  auto  sacramental  type,  whose 
enormous  popularity  spread  from  Spain  to  New  Spam  during  the  sixteenth 
century.  The  blending  of  the  various  arts— scenic,  literary,  dramatic,  and 
musical — into  a  unified  whole  seems  to  have  been  well  contrived,  despite 
the  inexperience  of  the  Indians  who  presented  them.  Motolinia  was  under- 
standably proud  of  the  friars'  contribution  to  the  Indian  cultural  advance. 
Although  the  period  between  1519  and  1538  saw  the  decline  of  many 
artistic  customs  which  must  have  been  ideal  expressions  of  the  aboriginal 
spirit,  the  assimilation  of  Spanish  customs  compensated  at  least  partly  for 
the  loss  of  certain  older  modes  of  cultural  expression. 

The  first  bishop  of  Mexico,  Fray  Juan  de  Zumarraga  (appointed  in 
1528),  though  by  no  means  as  exclusively  concerned  with  the  problems 
of  Indian  welfare  as  was  Motolinfa,  nevertheless  applied  himself  ear- 
nestly to  the  problems  involved  in  converting  them.  Because  he  learned 
soon  after  his  arrival  in  the  New  World  that  no  inducement  had  proved 
so  alluring  to  the  Indians  as  the  music  of  the  friars,  he  wholeheartedly 
endorsed  the  program  of  music  instruction  that  Fray  Pedro  had  already 
set  up  in  the  school  attached  to  the  San  Francisco  monastery,  and  also 
encouraged  the  founding  of  several  other  schools  where  reading,  writing, 
and  especially  music,  could  be  taught  the  Indians.  He  was  not  so  successful 
as  he  would  have  desired  in  instituting  a  full  musical  program  in  the 
primitive  cathedral  j  but  he  appointed  Canon  Juan  Xuarez  (who  arrived 
in  1530)  chapel  master,16  and  for  a  quarter  of  a  century  Xuarez  labored 
with  the  Indian  youths  preparing  and  rehearsing  them  for  musical  service 
in  the  cathedral. 

Zumarraga,  despite  his  own  Franciscan  vow  of  poverty,  perfectly 
understood  the  necessity  of  paying  a  trained  resident  choir  and  hiring 
instrumentalists,  if  the  cathedral  were  properly  to  be  served.  In  order  to 
adorn  his  cathedral,  which  was  at  first  a  dependency  of  Seville  in  Spain, 
he  spent  the  whole  revenue  of  his  bishopric  during  four  years.17  His  ideal 
for  a  physical  plant  was  a  cathedral  which  in  every  detail  of  appearance 
and  appointment  would  equal  that  of  the  parent  church  at  Seville.18  In 
musical  matters  he  was  equally  ambitious.  A  letter  which  he  wrote  April 
17,  1540,  to  Charles  V,  illustrates  at  one  and  the  same  time  his  under- 
standing of  the  unusual  value  of  music  as  a  tool  for  plowing  and  furrow- 


TRANSPLANTING  OF  EUROPEAN  CULTURE    59 

ing  the  Indian  mind,  and  also  his  understanding  of  the  necessity  for  paid 
choirs. 

He  began  his  plea  for  paid  choirs  with  no  little  astuteness.  He  pointed 
out  to  the  Emperor  (Charles  V  was  more  than  usually  devout  and  ended 
his  days  in  a  monastery  at  Yuste)  that  the  Masses  appointed  for  the 
members  of  the  royal  house  and  more  particularly  for  Charles  himself 
were  celebrated  with  insufficient  solemnity.  Zumarraga's  line  of  rea- 
soning ran  thus:  "I  believe  the  deed  of  erection  for  these  Masses 
obliges  us  to  sing  them,  not  merely  recite  them.  The  Cabildo,  however, 
disagrees  with  me.  But  it  seems  to  me  that  it  is  preferable  to  err  on  the 
side  of  more  rather  than  less  in  such  important  matters.  However,  since 
there  are  insufficient  funds  to  pay  the  singers,  and  since  the  Indians  who 
are  now  singing  under  Canon  Xuarez's  direction  can  only  devote  a  small 
part  of  their  time  (for  they  must  do  outside  work),  I  appeal  to  you  for 
stipends  for  the  singers."  Zum&rraga  also  pointed  out  to  Charles  in 
this  letter  other  values  which  would  accrue  from  a  costlier  music  pro- 
gram. 

At  present  we  are  simply  singing  together  simple  music  [in  familiar 
style]  and  everyone  is  of  the  opinion  that  this  is  the  most  satisfactory  thing 
to  <Jo  since  we  have  such  gaps  in  our  choir.  Numbers  of  the  clergy  are 
absent  on  business  elsewhere  during  the  week,  and  some  that  remain  do 
not  know  how  to  sing  plainchant  properly. 

•         •         •         •        • 

Experience  has  taught  us  how  greatly  edified  the  Indians  are  by  sacred 
music;  indeed  the  fathers  who  work  directly  with  them  and  who  hear 
their  confessions  tell  us  that  more  than  by  preaching  the  Indians  are 
converted  by  the  music.  They  come  from  great  distances  in  order  to  hear 
it,  and  they  ardently  desire  not  only  to  learn  the  fundamentals  but  also 
to  become  really  proficient  in  h.  We  are  not  able  to  pay  them.  It  would 
be  well,  however,  for  those  who  sing  in  the  choir  to  be  freed  from  other 
business  so  that  the  Masses  may  be  celebrated  with  befitting  solemnity.10 

Zumarraga  did  not  simply  content  himself  with  pleas  to  the  Emperor, 
howeverj  he  himself  while  detained  in  Spain  on  a  lengthy  visit  engaged 
professional  church  musicians  and  purchased  manuscript  choirbooks  for 
use  at  Mexico  City. 

Music  having  proved  its  value  as  a  tool  in  missionary  work  among  the 
indigenes  in  the  Valley  of  Mexico,  it  was  but  natural  that  elsewhere  in 


60  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

New  Spain  the  same  emphasis  upon  music  should  have  manifested  itself. 
In  1569  Fray  Alonso  de  Paraleja  wrote  from  Guadalajara: 

We  support  an  Indian  master  in  every  religious  house  the  duties  of 
whom  consist  in  teaching  reading,  writing,  arithmetic,  and  music.  Music 
is  taught  all  those  who  wish  to  learn  it,  and  because  most  Indians  have 
a  natural  flair  for  it,  many  become  skilful  angers  and  players.  We  are 
unfortunately,  however,  unable  to  pay  them  for  their  services  in  church. 
If  Your  Majesty  would  order  these  singers  who  compose  the  choirs  of  our 
churches  and  monasteries  to  be  paid,  it  would  be  accounted  a  deed  glorious 
in  the  sight  of  God,  and  would  enhance  our  work  with  those  who  still 
remain  heathen.  A  suggested  stipend  would  be,  let  us  say,  ten  pesos  an- 
nually. 

•        -  •         •         •         • 

We  are  extremely  careful  to  sec  that  in  our  churches  and  monasteries 
tke  Office  .  .  .  is  sung  daily,  and  also  on  saints' days  to  see  that  the  Office 
is  sung  with  suitable  solemnity.  On  festival  days  polyphonic  music  is  sung, 
accompanied  by  chirimias  and  flutes,  and  the  Indians  find  all  this  ex- 
tremely attractive. 


We  are  also  careful  to  see.  that  the  Indians  know  how  to  sing  in  then- 
own  houses  at  night  [after  work  is  over]  suitable  Christian  hymns.20 

One  final  account  may  suitably  be  reproduced  here.  The  Council  of  the 
Indies,  the  supreme  governing  body  in  Spain,  sent  over  to  Mexico  in  1568 
an  inspector  whose  duties  included  the  gathering  of  reports  from  the 
various  religious  orders  on  the  progress  of  their  missionary  labors.  The 
longest  account  we  have  of  the  Indian  musicians  who  played  and  sang  in 
the  mission  churches  probably  occurs  in  the  report  prepared  by  the  Fran- 
ciscans for  this  visiting  inspector,  Licendado  Juan  de  Ovando.  The  sec- 
tion reproduced  below  carries  the  heading,  "Singers  and  Instrumentalists." 

The  Indian  singers  and  instrumentalists  who  play  in  church  gather 
together  every  day  in  order  to  rehearse  their  singing  and  playing,  using 
our  schools  for  a  place  to  practice.  We  recommend  the  continuation  of 
this  custom:  for  one  thing,  because  without  daily  practice  they  do  not 
progress  in  their  singing,  and  for  another,  because  they  soon  forget  what 
they  have  learned  already  if  they  stop  practicing.  They  can  hardly  practice 
elsewhere  than  at  our  schools. 


TRANSPLANTING  OF  EUROPEAN  CULTURE   61 

It  is  customary  in  the  towns  large  enough  to  warrant  the  stationing  of 
clergy  for  the  singers  to  divide  themselves  into  two  choirs,  and  the  players 
to  form  two  bands;  choirs  and  bands  alike  alternate  weekly  so  those  in  the 
groups  who  are  married  and  have  families  may  see  them  regularly.  Also 
they  need  every  other  week  free  so  they  earn  enough  to  pay  their  taxes. 
It  would  be  cruel  for  us  to  allow  them  to  serve  continuously  in  church, 
doing  nothing  but  singing.  They  are  all  so  long-suffering  that  we  feel 
conscience-stricken  not  to  give  them  any  financial  aid.  In  each  of  the  two 
choirs  there  are  ordinarily  fifteen  or  sixteen  Indians.  While  a  lesser  number 
might  suffice,  still  the  thinness  of  their  voices  prevents  them  from  sounding 
well  unless  there  are  at  least  that  many.  .  .  .  Finally,  it  is  their  custom  to 
sing  Mass  and  the  Divine  Office  in  all  the  churches  attached  to  monasteries. 
They  sing  plainchant  and  polyphony  with  agreeable  skill.  In  some  of  the 
more  favored  towns  where  time  and  circumstance  propitiously  unite,  they 
perform  the  Offices  of  the  church  with  as  great  solemnity  and  with  as 
impressive  music  as  can  be  encountered  in  many  of  the  Cathedral  churches 
of  Spain  itself. 

Polyphonic  music  is  the  vogue  everywhere,  and  accompaniment  of  flutes 
and  chirimias  is  common.  In  a  number  of  places  lutes  \duLzeanai\  and 
reeds  [orlos]  along  with  viols  [vihuelas  de  arco]  and  other  types  of  in- 
struments are  used.  Organs  are  also  found  in  a  number  of  places. 

The  Indians  themselves  play  all  these  instruments,  and  their  harmonious 
sounding  together  is  truly  a  wonderful  allurement  towards  Christianity  as 
far  as  the  generality  of  the  natives  is  concerned.  The  music  is  most  neces- 
sary. The  adornment  of  the  church  itself  and  all  the  beauty  of  the  music 
lifts  their  spirits  to  God  and  centers  their  minds  on  spiritual  things.  They 
are  naturally  inclined  to  be  careless  and  forgetful  unless  they  are  reminded 
of  the  unseen  by  the  seen  and  the  unheard  by  the  heard.  Because  of  their 
very  tendency  to  forget  and  to  neglect,  their  own  governors  during  the 
times  of  their  infidelity  made  a  point  of  occupying  them  incessantly  in  the 
building  of  huge  and  sumptuous  temples,  and  also  in  the  adornment  of 
them  with  numberless  beautiful  flowers;  requiring  them,  moreover,  to 
offer  gifts  of  gold  and  silver,  and  to  participate  in  endless  sacrifices  and 
ceremonies,  more  severe  and  arduous  than  those  imposed  by  the  law  of 
Moses.31 

Most  of  the  passages  thus  far  quoted  have  had  to  do  with  the  missionary 
labors  of  the  Franciscans.  Theirs  was,  of  course,  the  first  order  commis- 
sioned to  undertake  the  conversion  of  the  Indians.  The  Dominicans,  how- 
ever, arrived  in  force  during  1526,  and  the  Augustinians  followed  in  1532. 
Juan  de  Grijalva's  Cronica  de  la  Orden  de  N.  P.  S.  Agustin  en  las 
1>rovmcias  de  la  Nueva  Es-pana  .  .  .  desde  el  ano  de  1533  Aasta  el  de 


62  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

7592  contains  a  passage  in  which  music  is  endorsed  with  the  same  emphasis 
as  the  best  allurement  to  Christianity.  After  the  three  orders  already 
named,  a  fourth,  the  Society  of  Jesus,  entered  Mexico  in  1572.  Father 
P6rez  de  Rivas  (1576-1655),  a  prominent  Jesuit,  testified  a  century 
after  the  Conquest  that  in  his  experience  music  instruction  and  perform- 
ance were  still  one  of  the  best  means  of  attracting  and  holding  the  Indians. 
The  Jesuit  Indian  work  was  done  in  northwestern  Mexico  j  they  together 
with  the  Franciscans  worked  also  in  California  and  New  Mexico. 

It  is  quite  probable  the  level  of  musical  ability  declined  among  the 
missionaries  sent  out  during  the  later  colonial  period  Only  a  few  of  the 
later  missionaries  in  what  is  now  the  southwestern  part  of  the  United 
States  can  have  come  into  the  field  with  such  an  extensive  background  of 
training  as  Pedro  de  Gante.22  But  where  one  did  appear  in  California, 
Father  Arroyo  de  la  Cuesta  for  example,  musical  emphasis  was  still  found 
an  invaluable  aid  in  the  conversion  process.  Elsewhere  in  the  New  World 
during  the  later  colonial  period  music  training  when  given  by  competent 
instructors  still  proved  invaluable.  Anthony  Sepp  (who  had  received  his 
own  thorough  musical  training  at  Augsburg)  found  that  "one  secret  of 
[his]  popularity  among  the  Indians  was  his  decided  talent  and  love  for 
music."  **  Sepp's  <cbrilliant  success  in  the  musical  training  of  the  Indians" 
won  him  a  large  "harvest"  of  converts,  and  "being  the  first  to  have  in- 
troduced harps,  cornet [t]s,  clari [o Jnets,  and  organs  into  these  parts,  [he] 
has  earned  for  him  [self]  undying  praise."  24 

Many  other  notable  examples  of  missionary  success  traceable,  on  the 
human  level  at  least,  to  emotional  conditioning  through  music  can  be 
culled  from  Jesuit  missionary  documents  in  the  Archivo  General  de  la 
N acton  at  Buenos  Aires.  The  honors  that  priority  in  applying  a  successful 
missionary  technique  brings  rightfully  belong  to  Pedro  de  Gante  in 
Mexico,  however,  for  it  was  he  who  first  showed  the  way. 

THE  RESULTING  SUPERFLUITY  OF  INDIAN  SINGERS 
AND   INSTRUMENTALISTS 

The  gathering  of  further  statements  attesting  the  Mexican  Indian's 
extraordinary  fondness  for  music  would  be  an  easy  task,  simply  because 
so  many  of  the  friars  who  wrote  concerning  the  conversion  of  the  tribes 
ifl  central  Mexico  mentioned  the  role  music  played  in  winning  them  to 
Christianity.  But  if  we  understand  why  the  early  friars  so  gladly  inau- 


TRANSPLANTING  OF  EUROPEAN  CULTURE   63 

gurated  music  instruction,  we  still  perhaps  cannot  quite  understand  why 
such  large  numbers  of  Indians  gladly  undertook  careers  as  professional 
church  musicians,  especially  when  the  friars  were  not  usually  able  to  pay 
them  living  wages.  The  problem  of  oversupply  in  the  number  who  pre- 
sented themselves  for  service  as  church  musicians  was  studied  by  the 
president  of  the  famous  second  audiencia,  Bishop  Sebastian  Ramirez  de 
Fuenleal.  Fuenleal  ascribed  the  plethora  of  church  musicians  /  to  the 
prestige  they  enjoyed  among  their  fellow-Indians  by  virtue  of  their  pro- 
fession, and  2  to  the  privilege  of  exemption  from  taxation  which  they 
often  enjoyed.  Both  these  advantages  descended  to  them  from  their 
pre-Conquest  antecessors.  As  Fuenleal  remarked:  "Among  the  Indians 
[before  the  Conquest]  instrumentalists  and  singers  were  highly  esteemed, 
because  by  means  of  songs  their  musicians  preserved  the  memory  of  the 
pastj  and  not  only  was  respect  given  those  who  devoted  themselves  to 
music  but  also  the  privilege  of  exemption  from  taxation."  25 

The  first  official  notice  of  the  excessive  number  of  singers  and  instru- 
mentalists was  taken  at  the  initial  church  council  called  by  Archbishop 
Alonso  de  Montufar.  The  printed  provisions  of  this  council,  which  were 
published  in  1556,  the  year  after  the  meeting  of  the  council,  explain  what 
had  taken  place. 

The  great  excess  in  our  archdiocese  of  musical  instruments,  of  chirimfas, 
flutes,  viols,  trumpets,  and  the  great  number  of  Indians  who  spend  their 
time  in  playing  and  singing  obliges  us  to  apply  a  remedy  and  to  place  a  limit 
on  all  this  superabundance.  We  therefore  require  and  order  that  from 
henceforth  trumpets  shall  not  be  played  in  churches  during  divine  service, 
and  require  that  no  more  be  bought;  those  which  are  already  in  possession 
of  the  churches  shall  be  used  only  in  outdoor  processions,  and  not  as  ac- 
companiment for  the  liturgy.  As  for  the  chirimfas  and  flutes,  we  require 
that  they  be  stored  in  the  principal  towns  and  only  distributed  for  use  in  the 
villages  on  festival  days  of  their  patron  saints;  and  as  for  viols  and  other 
instruments,  we  request  that  these  too  be  no  longer  used;  we  urge  all  the 
clergy  to  install  organs  everywhere  so  that  indecorous  and  improper  in- 
struments may  be  banished  from  the  church.  The  organ  is  the  correct 
instrument  for  use  in  the  church,  and  we  wish  its  use  to  become  universal 
in  Mexico. 

We  charge  all  clergy  in  our  archdiocese  and  all  other  clergy  in  Mexico 
residing  outside  our  archdiocese  but  under  our  spiritual  jurisdiction,  care- 
fully to  limit  the  number  of  singers  throughout  our  jurisdiction  so  that 


64  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

no  more  than  arc  necessary  shall  continue  to  spend  their  time  simply  in 
singing.  Those  who  are  permitted  to  continue  must  be  able  to  sing  plain- 
chant  intelligently.  They  shall  sing  polyphonic  music  only  when  their 
singing  conforms  to  standards  which  we  consider  acceptable.2* 


Because  of  the  vast  number  of  churches  which  have  sprung  up  every- 
where in  our  archdiocese,  proper  regulation  has  proved  difficult.  .  .  . 
We  therefore  decree  that  only  those  which  in  the  judgment  of  the  ordinary 
seem  really  necessary  shall  be  permitted  to  continue;  the  others  shall  be 
taken  down.  Those  that  remain  shall  be  decently  equipped  with  all  the 
proper  furnishings  and  ornaments.  No  more  Indians  than  are  absolutely 
necessary  shall  be  permitted  to  become  choristers  and  custodians.  They 
should  be  few  in  number,  and  should  live  lives  that  are  without  blemish 
or  spot.  They  moreover  should  know  the  doctrines  of  our  holy  faith  and 
the  traditional  customs  of  the  church.  They  should  be  married  and  not 
bachelors,  and  they  should  be  persons  who  know  how  to  give  sound  in- 
struction in  doctrine  to  those  who  are  still  ignorant.27  .  .  .  Indian 
catechists  who  work  in  villages  where  there  are  no  priests  must  be  able 
to  sing  the  various  prayers,  so  they  can  teach  the  people.28  .  .  .  The 
Indian  singers  shall  be  examined  by  the  clergy  who  know  the  native  lan- 
guages, and  shall  not  be  permitted  to  sing  songs  that  remind  the  people 
of  their  old  idolatrous  customs;  they  shall  sing  nothing  that  savours  of 
heathenism  or  that  offends  against  sound  doctrine.29 


The  Indians  of  this  nation  continue  to  delight  on  the  kind  of  dancing, 
of  festivity,  and  of  mirth-making  which  they  delighted  in  during  the  days 
of  their  heathenism;  but  in  order  to  avoid  contamination  from  customs 
that  may  contain  seeds  of  evil,  we  ask  (as  said  the  Apostle  Paul)  that  the 
appearance  of  evil  be  avoided.80  .  .  .  Furthermore  they  shall  not  begin 
dancing  before  the  hour  of  High  Mass;  they  may  dance,  however,  during 
the  afternoon  and  in  the  evening. 

No  more  convincing  proof  need  be  given  than  these  extracts  from  the 
printed  proceedings  of  the  council  to  show  with  what  extravagance  the 
Indians  had  token  to  the  music  of  the  friars.  One  chronicler  caustically 
remarked  the  Indians  liked  Mass  best  when  it  was  an  instrumental  con- 
cert as  well.  But  churches  in  Mexico  during  this  period  were  by  no  means 
unique  in  allowing  a  wide  assortment  of  wind  and  string  instruments. 
They  were  a  commonplace  even  in  the  chapel  mu$ic  at  Charles  Vs  court 


TRANSPLANTING  OF  EUROPEAN  CULTURE    65 

His  chapel  payroll  included  salaries  for  eight  trumpeters  and  four 
drummers  81  in  addition  to  salaries  for  woodwinds  and  strings.  The  de- 
cision of  the  First  Mexican  Council  to  exclude  all  these  was,  however,  in 
line  with  the  eventual  dictates  of  Philip  II,  who  in  1572  finally  abolished 
all  instruments  from  his  chapel.82 

What  deserves  particular  notice  in  the  decisions  of  the  First  Mexican 
Council  is  not,  then,  simply  the  fact  that  instrumental  music  was  a  com- 
monplace in  the  newly  founded  churches,  but  rather  that  Indian  instru- 
mentalists and  singers  had  multiplied  beyond  reason.  Philip  II  was  not 
slow  in  adding  the  force  of  his  secular  authority  to  the  decisions  of  the 
bishops.  In  February  of  1561  he  issued  to  the  president  and  oidores  of 
the  royal  audiencia  a  cedula  which  read  in  part: 

Because  of  the  cost  of  maintaining  the  present  excessive  number,  of  in- 
strumentalists who  consume  their  time  playing  trumpets,  clarions,  chiri- 
mfas,  sackbuts,  flutes,  cornetts,  dulzainas,  fifes,  viols,  rebecs,  and  other 
kinds  of  instruments,  an  inordinate  variety  of  which  are  now  in  use  in 
the  monasteries,  .  .  .  and  because  the  number  of  musicians  and  singers 
is  reported  to  be  increasing  constantly  in  both  large  and  small  towns, 
.  .  .  and  because  very  many  of  those  reared  simply  to  sing  and  play 
on  instruments  soon  become  lazy  scoundrels  whose  morals  are  reported 
to  be  extremely  bad,  .  .  .  and  because  in  many  places  they  do  not  pay 
tribute  and  resist  lawful  authority,  we  require  a  reduction  in  the  number 
of  Indians  who  shall  be  permitted  to  occupy  themselves  as  musicians.88 

Even  Philip's  strongly  worded  cedula,  enforcing  as  it  did  the  decisions 
of  the  First  Mexican  Council,  failed  however  to  procure  the  desired  re- 
sultsj  the  Second  Mexican  Provincial  Council  meetings  in  1565,  a  decade 
after  the  First  Council,  was  again  forced  to  occupy  itself  with  the  same 
problem.  In  addressing  itself  to  Philip,  the  Second  Council  petitioned; 

Item,  that  Your  Highness  order  a  further  abatement  in  the  excessive 
number  of  Indian  singers;  .  .  .  the  small  payment  they  now  receive 
almost  always  is  insufficient  for  them  even  to  eat,  much,  less  pay  tribute.84 

.  In  general  it  would  be  correct  to  say  that  the  opinion  of  the  prelates  and 
of  the  secular  clergy  favored  throughout  the  sixteenth  century  a  drastic 
curtailment  in  the  numbers  of  Indians  whom  the  regulars,  that  is  to  say 
the  friars,  were  willing  to  place,  in  such  semi-official  church  positions  as 


66  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

janitors,  building  custodians,  church  decorators,  music  instrument  makers, 
and  pkyers  and  singers  in  church  services.  With  the  division  of  opinion 
that  existed  it  was  but  natural  that  the  friars  wherever  they  were  in  com- 
plete control  should  not  have  paid  overmuch  heed  to  the  musical  injunc- 
tions issued  by  Montufar.  Since  Montufar  was  himself  a  Dominican,  the 
members  of  his  own  order  perhaps  took  his  injunctions  seriously,  but  the 
Franciscans  and  even  the  Augustinians  seem  at  times  blandly  to  have  dis- 
regarded him.  Admirable  men  often  disagreed  on.  vital  points  of  mission- 
ary procedure  during  the  sixteenth  century  as  the  violent  disagreement  of 
such  leaders  as  Las  Casas  and  Motolinia  on  the  correct  method  of  baptiz- 
ing Indians  illustrates.  Because  of  this  possibility  of  disagreement,  then, 
one  finds  that  Indian  musical  life  did  continue  to  flourish,  at  least  in 
Franciscan  environments,  long  after  church  councils  had  ordered  an  abate- 
ment and  after  Philip  II  had  himself  intervened  in  order  to  halt  the 
excess. 

The  reasons  high  secular  and  ecclesiastical  authorities  tried  to  limit  the 
spawning  of  Indian  choirs  were  exactly  the  same  reasons  that  induced  so 
many  Indians  to  offer  themselves  as  church  musicians.  The  Indian  singers 
had  to  be  reminded  continuously,  even  as  late  as  the  end  of  the  century, 
that  they  could  no  longer  expect  the  tax  exemptions  which  their  pre- 
Conquest  forbears  had  enjoyed  And  they  had  similarly  to  be  reminded 
that,  whatever  kindnesses  had  been  done  them  by  the  friars,  in  the  minds 
of  bishops  their  place  in  God's  economy  was  as  hewers  of  wood  and 
drawers  of  water  rather  than  as  children  of  the  covenant85 

Saldfvar,  the  foremost  living  authority  on  Mexican  colonial  music, 
found  an  interesting  petition  presented  by  a  group  of  Indian  singers  who 
prayed  Viceroy  Martin  Enriquez  in  1576  for  relief  from  the  tribute, 
Enrfquez  roughly  reminded  them  that  they  must  pay  it  like  every  other 
Indian,  no  matter  how  poor  they  were  or  how  little  they  received  for  their 
services  as  church  musicians.  Saldfvar  also  unearthed  evidence  to  show 
that  the  cash  salaries  paid  a  sampling  of  1,376  Indian  singers  averaged 
during  Enriquez's  administration  only  a  little  more  than  two  pesos  an- 
nually. Even  this  munificent  cash  salary  was,  however,  begrudged  by 
Spanish  self-styled  grandees.  It  is  of  course  well-known  that  many  prel- 
ates came  to  regard  the  Mexican  church  simply  as  a  choice  haven  for 
impecunious  immigrants.  In  the  123  towns  whose  records  Saldfvar  studied 
the  average  number  of  Indian  church  musicians  was  1 1.2,  a  figure  which 
represented  in  some  cases  instrumentalists  as  well  as  singers.  Since  the 


TRANSPLANTING  OF  EUROPEAN  CULTURE   67 

towns  which  he  included  in  this  count  were  in  many  instances  mere  ham- 
lets or  villages  numbering  their  total  population  in  the  hundreds  rather 
than  thousands,  a  figure  of  eleven  musicians  for  each  is  quite  sufficient 
proof  that  Mendieta  and  Torquemada  knew  their  arithmetic  when  they 
boasted  of  the  tremendous  interest  the  Indians  took  in  music.  But  the 
average  cash  salary  paid  the  1,376  Indian  singers  whose  records  Saldivar 
studied  reached  only  about  one  percent  of  the  average  cash  salary  paid 
Spanish  and  Creole  singers  who  functioned  at  the  same  time  in  the  im- 
portant metropolitan  churches  of  New  Spain.86 

THE  MUSICAL  ACHIEVEMENT  OF  EARLY  COLONIAL  INDIAN  CHOIRS 

As  Torquemada  summed  up  the  achievement  of  sixteenth-century 
Indian  choirs  when  he  came  to  write  his  Monarquia  Indiana  (published 
in  1615)  their  record  seems  notable. 

I.  Without  receiving  any  direct  gifts  of  choirbooks,  the  Indians  never- 
theless were  able  to  create  splendid  libraries  of  church  music  by  painstak- 
ingly copying  books  brought  over  by  Zumarraga  and  his  deputies. 

After  they  had  learned  to  write,  they  then  learned  how  to  draw  lines 
on  paper  and  write  music  notes;  they  then  made  excellent  copies  both  of 
plainsong  and  of  polyphonic  music  in  large  letters  suitable  for  use  in  choirs. 
Their  copies  were  used  by  the  friars  as  well  as  by  themselves,  and  were 
beautifully  done  with  illuminated  letters  throughout. 

II.  By  sharing  among  themselves  teaching  which  certain  privileged 
ones  were  able  to  get  from  Spanish  masters,  musical  culture  of  the 
European  type  became  sufficiently  diffused  for  them  to  develop  respect- 
able choirs  even  in  their  smaller  villages. 

Nowadays  every  town  of  one  hundred  population  or  more  contains 
singers  who  have  learned  how  to  sing  the  Offices,  the  Mass,  Vespers,  and 
are  proficient  in  polyphonic  music;  competent  instrumentalists  are  also 
found  everywhere.  The  small  towns  all  have  their  supply  of  instruments, 
and  even  the  smallest  hamlets,  no  matter  how  insignificant,  have  three  or 
four  Indians  at  least  who  sing  every  day  in  church.  Especially  is  this  true 
in  the  provinces  of  Michoacan  and  Jalisco.87 

III.  Because  the  Indians  in  addition  to  making  their  own  instruments 
soon  developed  among  themselves  the  art  of  fabricating  clever  imitations 


6*  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

of  European  instruments  brought  over  by  the  invaders,  they  were  able  to 
develop  instrumental  accompanying  ensembles  with  unique  and  unfore- 
seen tone  color  possibilities. 

The  first  instruments  of  music  manufactured  here  were  flutes,  then 
oboes,  and  afterwards  viols  and  bassoons  and  cornetts.  After  a  while  there 
was  no  single  instrument  used  in  churches  which  Indians  in  the  larger 
towns  had  not  learned  to  make  and  play.  It  became  unnecessary  to  import 
any  of  these  from  Spain.  One  thing  can  be  asserted  without  fear  of  con- 
tradiction; in  afl  Christendom  there  is  nowhere  a  greater  abundance  of 
flutes,  sackbuts,  trumpets,  and  drums,  than  here  in  New  Spain.  Organs 
have  also  been  installed  here  in  nearly  all  the  churches  which  are  ad- 
ministered by  the  orders.  However,  with  these,  not  the  Indians  but  rather 
Spanish  builders  have  taken  charge  of  construction,  since  the  Indians  do 
not  have  capital  for  such  larger  enterprises.  The  Indians  make  the  organs 
under  supervision,  and  they  play  the  organs  in  our  monasteries  and  con- 
vents. The  other  instruments  which  serve  for  solace  or  delight  on  secular 
occasions  are  all  made  here  by  the  Indians,  who  also  (day  them:  rebecs, 
guitars,  trebles,  viols,  harps,  monochords.88 

IV.  The  Indian  musical  accomplishment  was  by  no  means  limited 
simply  to  clever  imitation  of  European  performance,  but  included  also 
a  certain  amount  of  original  creative  activity  in  the  European  idiom. 

With  this  I  conclude  (and  this  is  an  important  observation) :  only  a  few 
years  after  the  Indians  began  to  learn  the  chant,  they  also  began  to  com- 
pose. Their  vfllancicos,  their  polyphonic  music  in  four  parts,  certain  masses 
and  other  liturgical  works*  afl  composed  with  adroitness,  have  been  ad- 
judged superior  works  of  art  when  shown  Spanish  masters  of  composition. 
Indeed  the  Spanish  masters  often  thought  they  could  not  have  been  written 
by  Indians.39 


MUSIC  KUNTINa  DURING  THE  SIXTEENTH   CENTURY 

An  aggregate  of  approximately  220  books  are  known  to  have  been  pub- 
lished in  Mexico  during  the  sixteenth  century.  A  very  large  proportion  of 
these  sixteenth  century  Mexican  books  were  printed  in  Indian  tongues. 
Grammars,  dictionaries,  and  religious  tracts  were  published  in  at  least 
nine  different  Indian  languages— including  Nahuatl,  Otomf,  Tarasco, 
Maya,  Zapotec,  Huastec,  Mixtec,  Utlatec,  and  Chuchon.  Those  who  con- 


TRANSPLANTING  OF  EUROPEAN  CULTURE   69 

trolled  the  press  obviously  had  no  intention  of  neglecting  the  Indian.  The 
books  published  in  Spanish  included  treatises  on  navigation,  on  medicinal 
herbs,  on  surgery,  instruction  leaflets  on  how  to  teach  reading,  on  elemen- 
tary arithmetic,  records  of  notable  current  events  such  as  earthquakes, 
stories  of  voyages  and  explorations,  and  a  large  number  of  devotional 
texts. 

Of  these  220-odd  Mexican  imprints,  twelve  are  known  to  have  been 
liturgical  books  containing  music.  The  first  book  containing  music  ap- 
peared in  1556,  thirty-five  years  after  Cortes  crushed  the  Aztec  nation. 
The  remaining  eleven  of  these  dozen  Mexican  liturgical  books  contain- 
ing music  were  published  between  1560  and  1589.  Several  circumstances 
conspire  to  make  the  printing  of  a  dozen  music  books  in  Mexico  during 
the  sixteenth  century  a  notable  achievement.  During  the  half-century 
between  1550  and  1600  only  fourteen  liturgical  books  with  music  were 
published  in  Spain,  the  home  country.  During  the  entire  century,  twenty- 
'  nine  liturgical  books  with  music  were  published  in  Spain.40 

If  we  look  more  closely  at  the  publication  record  in  Spain  we  discover 
that  from  only  one  publishing  center— Toledo— were  as  many  liturgical 
books  with  music  issued  during  the  entire  century  as  were  published  in 
Mexico  City  during  the  brief  span  of  thirty-three  years  between  1556  and 
1589.  Six  such  books  were  published  in  Salamanca  (where  Francisco  de 
Salinas  occupied  the  chair  of  music  during  the  latter  years  of  the 
century).  One  each  was  published  in  Seville  (the  seat  of  the  archdiocese 
on  which  the  diocese  of  Mexico  depended  until  1546),  and  in  Madrid 
(the  newly  established  capital).  Even  Toledo  would  not  have  matched 
the  publication  record  of  Mexico  City  during  the  century  had  not  the  great 
Cardinal  Xim6nez  de  Cisneros,  a  prelate  of  vast  learning  and  Biblical 
zeal,  dedicated  himself  to  the  restoration  and  propagation  of  a  rite-^the 
Mozarabic— which  differed  from  the  more  usual  Roman  rite. 

The  number  of  books  with  music  published  in  Mexico  is  significant  not 
only  in  comparison  with  the  number  of  such  books  published  in  Spain 
during  the  same  epoch,  but  also  because  Mexico  was  the  only  Hispanic 
colony  throughout  the  entire  colonial  period  in  which  any  books  of  liturgi- 
cal music  were  printed.  Even  at  Lima  in  Peru  where  another  viceroyalty 
whose  importance  equaled  that  of  Mexico  had  its  seat,  no  music  books 
were  printed.  Printing  of  books  started  in  Lima  just  forty-five  years  after 
printing  began  in  Mexico.  In  most  other  respects,  except  the  printing  of 
music  books,  both  Lima  and  Mexico  presses  followed  a  similar  course  of 


70  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

development.  In  both  capitals  the  first  book  was  a  manual  of  Christian 
doctrine  in  an  Indian  tongue.  The  1539  Breve  y  mas  comfendiosa  doctrma 
published  at  Mexico  City  in  the  language  of  the  Aztecs  was  the  counter- 
part of  the  1584  Doctrine  Christiana  published  at  Lima  in  the  language  of 
the  Incas.  The  first  printers  in  both  capitals  were  Italians  j  printing  from 
the  beginning  in  both  capitals  was  rigidly  circumscribed  by  government 
regulations.  From  presses  in  both  capitals  flowed  a  stream  of  titles  having 
to  do  with  similar  cultural  interests.  The  literary  life  in  both  capitals 
followed  a  parallel  course  j  a  long  heroic  poem  such  as  Pedro  de  Ona's 
Arauco  domado  (1596),  published  in  Lima,  was  soon  followed  by  an- 
other similarly  ambitious  poem  on  a  New  World  theme,  Bernardo  de 
Balbuena's  Grandeza  Mexican*  (1604),  published  in  Mexico.  These 
comparisons  between  the  cultural  life  of  Mexico  and  of  the  other  Hispanic 
colony  nearest  it  in  political  importance,  Peru,  are  offered  simply  in  order 
to  reinforce  the  capital  importance  of  the  music  books  which  we  are  now 
about  to  discuss  more  specifically.  If  it  is  not  realized  that  in  no  other 
Hispanic  colony  of  the  colonial  period  were  such  publication  ventures 
involving  music  attempted;  and  if  it  is  not  realized  that  during  the 
particular  period  when  these  books  were  printed  Spain  herself  scarcely 
matched  her  colony,  New  Spain,  one  cannot  properly  appreciate  the  true 
significance  of  these  twelve  music  boob  which  are  now  submitted  for  in- 
dividual examination. 

DESCRIPTION  OF  SIXTEENTH  CENTURY  MEXICAN  IMPRINTS 
CONTAINING  MUSIC 

Four  of  the  dozen  music  books  printed  in  Mexico  before  1600  contain 
the  plainchant  portions  of  the  Mass  sung  by  the  choir  j  these  portions  in- 
clude not  only  the  Ordinary  of  the  Mass,  that  is  to  say,  the  invariable  por- 
tions such  as  the  Kyrie  eleison,  Gloria,  and  so  forth  j  but  also  the  Proper, 
that  is  to  say,  the  portions  which  change  from  day  to  day.  These  four  books 
bear  the  collective  title,  Graduate  Dominical*. 

The  word  "Donainicale"  in  the  tide  does  not  mean  "Dominican"  as  some  im- 
perfectly informed  Latinists  have  supposed.  The  Dominican  order  did  most 
certainly  import  choirbooks  during  this  particular  epoch  to  fulfill  its  own  in- 
dividual needs  in  Mexico.  A  shipment  of  forty  boxes  of  boob  to  Mexico  in 
1584  contained,  for  instance,  twelve  Dominican  liturgical  books,41  seven  of 


TRANSPLANTING  OF  EUROPEAN  CULTURE    71 

which  were  specifically  listed  as  books  published  in  Venice.  The  Dominicans 
used  an  order  of  the  Mass  which  was  their  own,  and  differed  then  as  now 
from  the  standard  Roman  arrangement  of  the  elements  in  the  Mass.  But 
their  own  individual  liturgical  needs  could  be  met  by  importing  books  into 
Mexico,  rather  than  by  undergoing  the  expense  of  printing  them  in  the  colony. 
"Dominicale"  in  the  title,  Graduate  DomtmcaUy  simply  means  that  the  choir- 
book  in  question  contains  the  plainchant  sung  in  all  Sunday  and  feast-day 
Masses. 

The  second  largest  group  among  the  dozen  with  music  printed  in 
Mexico  comprised  three  antiphonaries.  These  antiphonaries  contained 
the  plainchant  sung  during  the  canonical  hours. 

The  singing  of  the  canonical  hours,  a  practise  as  old  as  St.  Benedict,  occupies 
the  singer's  entire  day.  The  canonical  hours  include  matins  (sung  before 
dawn)  ;  kuds  (sung  at  dawn)  5  prime  (sung  shortly  after  daybreak)  ;  terce 
(sung  in  mid-morning) ;  sext  (sung  at  noon) ;  none  (sung  in  mid-afternoon) ; 
vespers  (sung  at  nightfall);  and  compline  (sung  just  before  retiring).  During 
the  canonical  hours  psalms  and  antiphons  are  sung.  These  psalms  and  antiphons 
change  from  day  to  day  and  often  from  hour  to  hour.  Moreover,  the  music 
(for  the  antiphons  especially)  is  often  extremely  florid.  Nowadays  the  hours 
are  $ung  only  in  monasteries  and  conventual  churches,  but  in  sixteenth  century 
Mexico  they  were  sung  everywhere.  In  village  churches  where  there  were  only 
six  or  seven  singers,  an  abbreviated  and  easy  Office  of  Nuestra  Senora-^  Our 
Lady,  was  sung;  42  elsewhere  the  Office  in  unabbreviated  form  was  attempted. 

The  other  seven  liturgical  books  with  music  include  two  manuals,  or 
directories,  for  the  proper  administration  of  the  sacraments;  a  missal 
(which  contains  the  music  sung  by  the  celebrant  at  Mass,  rather  than  the 
music  sung  .by  the  choir)  j  a  passion-book  (containing  in  this  particular  case 
the  music  sung  during  the  last  three  days  of  Holy  Week) ;  and  a  directory 
for  novices  who  were  being  prepared  for  the  priesthood  (containing  brief 
excerpts  of  music  for  the  priest  to  sing  at  Mass:  giving  only  a  tabloid 
version,  however,  of  all  he  was  supposed  to  sing). 

I.  The  first  of  these  twelve  books  published  in  Mexico  was  the  simplest  as 
far  as  music  was  concerned*  Its  printer  was  not  named,  but  the  date  of  pub- 
lication, 1556,  appeared  on  the  tidepage.  From  the  Latin  tide  of  this  first 
book  containing  music  one  learns  that  it  was  designed  to  serve  as  a  directory 


7i  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

of  worship  for  members  of  the  Augustinian  order;  moreover,  that  this  directory 
of  worship  had  been  purified  of  errors  which  had  crept  into  other  directories 
of  a  similar  character;  that  though  the  ceremonies  were  purified  the  chants  in 
their  old  form  were  retained.  On  its  titlepage  was  printed  the  following: 
ORDINAR1UM  /  sacn  ordtms  herernxtaru  /  sand*  Augustim  fpisco/fi  6? 
reguLam  obser/uate,  nunc  denub  /  corrcctu,  nque  f  no  secudum  /  more 
an/ttquu  /  cc/remome  fiant,  scd  se/cudu  chores  altos,  f /  Mexid.  anno  /  dm. 
7556  /  idibus  /  Ittlij. 

The  total  number  of  pages  in  this  book,  or  booklet,  amounts  to  only  eighty. 
But  a  large  number  of  essential  matters  in  the  conduct  of  public  worship  are 
included;  the  tides  of  the  first  several  chapters  will  afford  some  idea  of  the 
contents:  (i)  How  and  when  to  ring  bells,  (2)  When  to  face  the  altar,  (3) 
When  to  stand  and  when  to  sit,  (4)  The  times  for  singing,  (5)  Proper  tones 
for  benedictions  and  absolutions,  (6)  When  to  kneel  while  in  choir,  (7)  When 
to  genuflect,  (8)  When  to  bow,  (9)  Versicles,  invitatories.  The  music  scat- 
tered through  the  Ordinarium  does  not  supply  a  complete  version  of  all  that  a 
priest  should  sing  at  Mass  throughout  the  entire  year.  It  simply  gives  the  in- 
tonations which  the  priest  should  sing  at  various  classes  of  church  feasts 
throughout  the  year.  These  feasts  are  classified  under  such  conventional  head- 
ings as  "minora  simplkia,'*  "maiora  simplicia,"  "minora  semiduplicia,"  "maiora 
semiduplitia." 

As  inspection  clearly  reveals,  this  Ordmarium  was  intended  to  serve  as  an 
instruction  manual  for  young  Augustinian  seminarians  whose  destined  field  of 
service  was  Indian  work  in  Mexico.  From  it  the  seminarian  could  learn  the 
basic  rules  of  church  etiquette.  After  studying  it  he  would  know  not  only  the 
intonations  for  the  Kyries,  Glorias,  Sanctuses,  and  Agnuses,  which  he  should 
sing  at  various  classes  of  feasts^  but  he  would  know  also  how  to  form  proces- 
sions, what  colors  of  ecclesiastical  vestments  he  should  wear  throughout  the 
church  year,  how  to  swing  incense,  proper  melodic  formulas  for  the  intoning 
of  gospels,  how  to  be  a  subdeacon  or  a  deacon  at  Mass,  how  to  give  the  fax, 
what  to  do. when  the  bishop  visited  his  church.  As  an  instruction  manual  its 
virtues  are  manifest  \  rules  are  clearly  set  down  in  simple  language,  the  easiest 
rules  are  given  first  with  an  orderly  progression  towards  more  difficult  rules, 
only  the  bare,  essentials  are  stressed  with  all  superfluous  verbiage  stripped 
away. 

All  the  melodies  in  the  book  were,  as  the  titlepage  of  the  book  itself  suggested, 
several  centuries  old  at  the  time  the  book  was  compiled.  From  datings  supplied 
by  the  Solesmes  scholars  it  is  apparent  that  none  of  the  chants  printed  in  this 
1556  book  can  have  originated  later  than  the  twelfth  century.  This  Ordmanum, 
moreover,  contains  no  Creed-melodies.  But  though  Creed-melodies  are  omitted, 
the  1556  book  does  supply  melodies  for  the  lu  nussa  est  sung  by  the  priest  at 


TRANSPLANTING  OF  EUROPEAN  CULTURE    73 

the  end  of  Mass.  In  consonance  with  the  instructional  purpose  of  the  book, 
most  of  the  melodies  include^  are  of  an  easy  syllabic  rather  than  a  melisnaatic 
type. 

In  order  to  show  how  nearly  the  1556  melodies  approximate  those  printed 
in  such  an  easily  accessible  book  as  the  1934  edition  of  the  Liber  USIM&,  we 
present  below  for  comparison  the  opening  phrases  of  four  different  Kyries, 
the  first  Kyrie  in  each  pair  being  the  1556  version  and  the  second  being  the 
Solesmes  version.  The  Solesmes  monks,  of  course,  made  no  claims  to  infalli- 
bility, but  they  did  attempt  to  determine  the  exact  shape  of  a  given  melody  at 
the  time  it  was  originally  divulged.  If  a  melody  as  printed  in  1556  closely  ad- 
hered to  the  version  arrived  at  by  the  Solesmes  scholars  after  painstaking  col- 
lation, one  may  safely  say  that  the  1556  version  was  "uncorrupted."  Nearly 
all  recent  liturgiologists  have  made  a  great  point  of  the  supposed  corruption  of 
plainchant  during  the  Renaissance.  It  would  be  interesting  then  to  see  from 
a  study  of  the  melodies  as  they  appear  in  sixteenth  century  Mexican  imprints 
whether  this  corruption  was  as  universal  as  has  been  supposed. 

OrtUnmrtttmJ*//*  7r*ttc. 


t  ii  ii  riijrn  EtejE 

T     X/-r/-e  .  .  ~ «.     /*,-*». 


74  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 


-  rl  -  e .<        ...        Uf-6<m. 

Liber  lUu.a.tis ,  bib. 


U~i-  sen. 


The  building  on  Isabel  la  Catolica  Street  in  Mexico  City  now  used  to  house 
the  Biblioteca  National  was  originally  a  part  of  the  building  used  as  head- 
quarters for  the  Augustinian  order  in  New  Spain.  As  one  thinks  of  the  sixty- 
nine  Mexican  incunabula  already  shelved  as  rare  books  at  the  Biblioteca 
Nadonal,  it  would  seem  particularly  appropriate  that  a  copy  of  the  1556 
Ordmarium  should  be  among  them,  and  more  especially  as  one  thinks  of  the 
order  under  whose  auspices  this  first  music  book  appeared.  As  yet,  however,  the 
Biblioteca  Nacional  does  not  possess  a  copy.  Perhaps  in  the  future  a  copy  wfll 
come  to  light  somewhere  which  can  become  the  property  of  the  Biblioteca 
Nacional;  the  only  copy  in  the  United  States  is  one  which  was  formerly  owned 
by  a  resident  of  Titusville,  Pennsylvania,  and  which  is  now  in  the  possession 
of  the  New  York  Public  Library. 

II.  The  second  book  with  music  published  in  the  New  World  was  the 
Manual*  Sacramentorum  secundum  usum  ecclesie  Mexican?  .  .  .  printed  in 
1560  by  Juan  Pablos.  This  manual  was  by  no  means  the  manual  for  beginners 
that  the  1556  Ordmarium  was;  it  contained  354  pages,  and  its  use  was  made 
mandatory  throughout  the  archbishopric  of  Mexico  by  Montufar.  This  particu- 
lar ManuaU  did  not  present  a  liturgical  usage  drawn  from  any  one  continental 
usage.  Montufar  and  the  other  bishops  who  sat  at  the  First  Mexican  Council 
(1555)  had  no  way  of  knowing  what  kind  of  liturgical  usage  would  finally 
be  prescribed  by  the  Council  of  Trent,  then  in  adjourned  session.  The  bishops 
under  Montufar's  presidency  committed  themselves  in  1560,  then,  to  a  liturgi- 
cal use  drawn  not  from  any  one  source,  but  rather  to  an  eclectic  use  derived 
from  the  usages  of  Rome,  Tokdo,  Salamanca,  Seville,  Granada,  "y  otros." 
The  music  of  this  1560  manual  has  not  yet  been  studied  in  detail;  presumably 
it  too  was  drawn  from  a  diversity  of  sources,  and  in  order  to  locate  the  exact 
provenience  of  the  plainchant  melodies  contained  in  it,  liturgical  books  in  use 
at  the  various  named  Spanish  centers  would  need  to  be  consulted.  A  certain 
unexpected  liturgical  independence,  a  Neo-Hispanic  "Gallicanism,"  if  one  will 
call  it  that,  seems  manifest  not  only  in  this  sacramentary  "according  to  the  use 
of  the  Mexican  Church,"  but  in  several  later  liturgical  books  which  were  issued 


TRANSPLANTING  OF  EUROPEAN  CULTURE   75 

before  Pius  V's  bull  Quod  a  nobts  "swept  away  all  the  numerous  variations  and 
exuberances  then  common  in  the  Roman  Rite,  and  established  one  uniform 
Mass,  and  one  uniform  method  of  saying  Mass."  48 

HI.  In  1561  was  published  a  Mis  sale  Romanum  Ordinarium  which  has 
been  called  the  handsomest  book  issued  from  the  Mexican  press  during  the 
sixteenth  century. 

The  most  splendid  product  of  the  Mexican  press,  a  volume  whose  pre- 
eminence has  been  challenged  only  two  or  three  times  during  the  centuries 
which  have  elapsed  since  its  publication,  is  the  Missale  Romanum  Ordt- 
nariumy  printed  in  the  city  of  Mexico  in  1561.  It  is  a  magnificent  folio 
volume  of  330  leaves,  printed  in  red  and  black,  with  historiated  initials  and 
occasional  woodcut  borders.*4 

Music  printing  appears  on  52  pages  in  this  1561  JMissale.  The  notes  them- 
selves are  printed  in  black;  the  five-line  staff  in  red.  The  music,  like  that  of  the 
1556  Ordmanum^  has  been  chosen  from  the  repertory  of  simpler  chants;  both 
books  were  printed  for  the  use  of  priests  rather  than  choirs,  and  therefore  florid 
chants  were  quite  naturally  excluded.  The  majority  of  the  melodies  in  the 
1561  Missdc  are  syllabic.  Neumes  of  two  notes  appear  frequently  enough 
(podatus  and  clivis),  but  three-note  neumes  are  rare  (torculus  and  climacus). 
No  such  niceties  as  liquescent  neumes  or  the  quflisma  appear  anywhere  through- 
out the  book.  Even  so,  the  music  could  never  have  been  sung  by  a  mere  tyro 
in  plainsong.  The  kind  of  background  in  plainsong  that  clergy  in  New  Spain 
were  expected  to  have  may  be  gauged  not  only  from  the  character  of  the 
melodies  in  this  book,  but  also  from  certain  rules  already  promulgated  by  Arch- 
bishop Montufar  five  years  before  the  printing  of  this  Missal*.  In  the  1556 
ConsUtudones  del  arfobisfado  Montufar  required  that  candidates  for  minor 
orders  must  "know  the  fundamentals  of  plainchant,  and  at  the  very  least  must 
be  able  to  sight-sing  creditably."  Candidates  for  the  diaconate  were  expected 
to  show  that  they  had  mastered  all  the  rules  for  singing  set  down  in  the  breviary. 
Those  ordained  to  the  priesthood  were  required  to  demonstrate  a  still  higher 
degree  of  accomplishment  as  plainchanters.  If  these  rules  were  at  all  imple- 
mented, then  Montufar  had  a  right  to  expect  that  the  music  notes  printed  in 
the  1561  Missile  would  serve  more  than  a  mere  decorative  purpose. 

Garcfa  Icazbalceta,  the  great  Mexican  bibliographer,  compared  the  1561 
Missal  with  standard  missels  in  use  in  his  own  day.  Since  he  was  not  interested 
in  musical  problems  he  confined  his  study  to  textual  variants.45  He  found  that 
the  editors  of  the  1561  Missalt  had  selected  their  text  from  no  single  European 
source,  but  had  pieced  together  material  from  a  large  number  of  different 
sources.  Having  chosen  a  preface  or  a  postcommunion  or  other  matter,  the  edi- 
tors however  adhered  faithfully  to  the  source  from  which  they  were  at  the 


76  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

moment  copying.  Insofar  as  the  music  in  the  1561  Missale  can  be  compared 
with  the  music  in  contemporary  European  missals  the  same  thing  holds  true. 
An  exhaustive  search  has  not  been  made,  but  at  present  it  seems  certain  the 
music  editor  no  more  committed  himself  to  copying  the  music  in  toto  from  any 
single  European  source  than  did  the  editors  of  the  Mtssale  text.  What  is  perhaps 
significant,  however,  is  the  fact  that  though  eclectic  in  choosing  his  source-books, 
once  having  committed  himself  to  a  particular  melody  he  copied  it  with  utter 
fidelity.  Although  then  he  assembled  his  music  from  a  wide  variety  of  sources, 
as  do  modern  hymn-book  editors,  at  least  it  seems  that  once  having  selected 
his  source  for  a  particular  antiphon,  introit,  or  other  melody,  he  then  copied  it 
without  tinkering. 

Some  such  antiphon  as  the  one  given  below  will  show  how  faithfully  a  model 
was  copied,  once  it  had  been  selected. 


prl-m*  smi-J* -tit    n  -nil  tf*~ri-a.  My  -<&  -<t  -      »* 


-sl  -  a,  vi-d*  •  rt        5*  -fat  -    crumf  at  ~  U  -  Lu  -  ia 


(Venice, 


/' 


i  rn  f"i  j  i 


* -tern 


A*-    tl 


et  at-k-ra 


The  underlined  notes  in  the  1497  Missal  differ  from  those  in  the  1561 
Missal  -y  otherwise  these  two  examples  are  identical 


TRANSPLANTING  OF  EUROPEAN  CULTURE   77 

IV.  The  fourth  Mexican  book  with  music  was  published  seven  years  after 
Espinosa's  much-praised  Mis  sale.  In  1568  a  French  printer  named  Pedro  de 
Ocharte  published  a  Manuals  secundum  usum  Almae  EccUsiae  Mexicanae. 
This  was  the  first  music  book  published  under  a  ceiling  price  regulation.  Diego 
de  Sansores,  the  gentleman  at  whose  cost  the  book  was  printed,  was  enjoined 
not  to  sell  it  in  a  paper-back  covering  for  more  than  four  pesos  de  oro  comun. 
The  publication  of  another  book  traversing  almost  the  identical  territory  covered 
by  the  1560  Manuale  proved  necessary  in  1568  because  during  the  intervening 
eight  years  a  pontifical  commission  had  recommended  certain  revisions  of  the 
sacramentary. 

V.  The  exact  dating  of  the  next  imprint,  a  Gradual*  Donumcaley  has  proved 
difficult  because  in  the  one  extant  copy  both  title  page  and  colophon  are  miss- 
ing.46 Formerly  this  particular  mutilated  copy,  now  shelved  at  the  Biblioteca 
National  in  Mexico  City,  was  thought  (for  reasons  that  will  appear  later)  to 
have  been  printed  in  1576;  now,  however,  it  is  recognized  that  this  mutilated 
copy  was  printed  before  1572. 

VI.  The  next  two  books  were  printed  by  Pedro  de  Ocharte.  A  Frenchman 
from  Rouen,  he  had  fallen  heir  to  the  business  started  by  Juan  Paolos,  the  first 
printer  in  Mexico  (by  marrying  Pablos's  daughter).  Probably  because  he  was 
envied  and  disliked  by  certain  Spaniards  he  was  denounced  to  the  Inquisition 
at  the  very  moment  he  was  in  process  of  completing  an  order  for  one  hundred 
passion-books,  Passionaries,  ordered  by  Juan  Diego  de  Rincon,  bishop  of 
Michoacan,  and  Tarasco  linguist.  Because  Rincon's  order  was  pressing,  Ocharte 
while  still  in  prison  implored  the  printer  who  was  his  rival,  Antonio  de  Espinosa, 
to  finish  printing  these  books.  In  a  letter  to  his  wife,  Ocharte  described  the 
contents,  which  included  music  for  Maundy  Thursday,  Good  Friday,  and 
Holy  Saturday. 

The  documents  collected  by  the  Inquisition  authorities  during  their  investi- 
gation include  several  which  bear  on  Ocharte's  passion-books.  In  all  he  printed 
310  of  them,  and  for  each  one  he  asked  a  handsome  sum — twenty  pesos.41 
This  was  five  times  the  price  placed  on  his  1568  Manual*.  The  Inquisition  file 
reveals,  moreover,  who  read  proof,  who  took  charge  of  delivering  the  books 
while  Ocharte  was  in  prison,  and  even  the  name  of  the  person  who  pulled  sheets 
while  he  was  awaiting  trial.  We  know  when  Ocharte  was  apprehended,  and 
we  know  therefore  that  the  printing  of  the  Passionario  was  completed  shortly 
before  March  j,  1572.  Yet  despite  all  this  specific  information  not  one  copy  is 
extant  today.  Where  did  310  books  selling  for  such  an  extraordinary  price 
disappear?  The  story  of  the  Inquisition  trial  and  the  documents  appertaining 


78  MUSIC   IN  MEXICO 

to  it  became  known  shortly  before  the  first  World  War  when  the  Archivo 
General  de  la  Nacion  published  the  pertinent  materials.  But  no  one  had  ever 
seen  a  copy  of  the  Passionario  itself. 

Finally  in  the  late  1930*8  several  battered  sheets  of  a  Passion  According  to 
St.  John  in  plainsong  setting  were  found  in  a  tiny  Indian  village  near  Tlaxcala. 
Here  at  last  was  a  possible  fragment  from  Ocharte's  PasAonario.  Along  with 
the  eight  pages  of  passion  music  was  found  a  fragment  of  a  Graduate  Domtn*- 
caU  which  was  later  identified  as  one  of  the  issues  of  1576.  Interest  rose  in 
the  passion  fragment  A  collecter  named  Conway  and  another  named  Federico 
Gomez  de  Orozco  shared  possession  of  the  battered  sheets  which  had  been 
found.48  The  assistance  of  expert  Mexican  bibliographers  was  secured  and  the 
eight  questioned  sheets  were  finally  pronounced  authentic  fragments  of  a 
sixteenth  century  passion-book  which  could  be  none  other  than  Ocharte's,  since 
none  other  is  known  to  have  been  printed  in  Mexico  during  that  century. 
Specimens  of  type  from  the  known  Ocharte  books  proved  it  had  been  printed 
at  his  press.  His  own  letter  saying  he  had  printed  only  the  portions  of  the  pas- 
sion used  on  Maundy  Thursday,  Good  Friday,  and  Holy  Saturday  clinched 
the  matter;  the  only  Passion  narrative  that  would  be  sung  during  any  one  of 
those  three  days  would  be  the  Passion  According  to  St.  John — and  that  was 
the  gospel  portion  found  in  the  Indian  village. 

The  finding  of  these  several  sheets  demonstrated  once  more  the  hazards 
that  have  beset  Mexican  sixteenth-century  imprints.  It  is  no  wonder  that  only 
one  copy  of  the  1556  book,  one  copy  of  the  1560  book,  two  copies  of  the  1561 
book,  and  one  or  two  copies  of  certain  other  books  here  mentioned  have  come 
into  the  possession  of  libraries  in  the  United  States,  despite  the  high  prices  paid 
for  them.  The  British  Museum  and  the  Biblioteca  Nadonal  in  Madrid  have 
acquired  occasional  copies  offered  for  sale  by  private  Mexican  collectors,  but 
even  the  National  Library  in  Mexico  still  lacks  some  of  the  most  important  music 
imprints.  In  view  of  the  scattered  places  in  which  the  books  now  exist — some 
at  the  Biblioteca  Nacional  in  Mexico  City,  others  at  the  University  of  Texas 
in  the  Garcia  Icazbalceta  collection,  others  at  the  New  York  Public  Library, 
and  other  individual  items  at  the  Newberry  Library  in  Chicago,  at  the  Hunting- 
ton  Library  in  San  Marino,  and  at  the  Library  of  Congress  in  Washington — 
k  is  not  surprising  that  so  little  is  actually  known  concerning  these  Mexican 
music  imprints.  Henry  R.  Wagner,  whose  studies  in  Mexican  bibliography  are 
definitive,  has  more  than  once  called  attention  to  the  inadequate  canvassing  of 
Mexican  music  imprints,  simply  because  of  the  wide  dispersal  of  the  books  and 
the  difficulty  of  making  comparisons. 

VTL  The  next  book  with  music  has  disappeared  altogether.  We  know, 
however,  of  its  existence  through  the  same  set  of  Inquisition  documents  which 


TRANSPLANTING  OF  EUROPEAN  CULTURE    79 

revealed  the  existence  of  an  Ocharte  Passionario.  Along  with  a  passion-book, 
he  spoke  of  an  Antiphonario  Dominical  which  he  said  Espinosa  was  in  process 
of  printing  for  him  while  he  was  imprisoned.  Although  we  cannot  now  £x  an 
exact  terminal  date  for  its  completion,  it  must  have  been  finished  not  much 
later  than  the  summer  of  1572.  In  March  Ocharte  ordered  his  friend  and 
factotum,  Diego  de  Sansores,  to  give  Espinosa  all  the  paper  "de  marca  mayor" 
— of  superior  quality — which  he  had  still  at  his  shop  in  order  that  Espinosa 
might  finish  the  Antxphonario  without  delay.49  The  next  mention  of  this  par- 
ticular antiphonary  occurs  in  the  record  of  the  Cabildo  Eclesiastico  which  met  on 
February  12,  1577.  On  that  date  the  Cabildo  ordered  that  Pedro  de  Ocharte 
(whose  imprisonment  had  ended  in  1574)  be  paid  40  pesos  de  tepuzque  for 
an  antiphonary  that  had  already  been  delivered  to  the  cathedral  authorities  at 
an  earlier  unspecified  date.50 

VTII,  IX,  X.  In  1576  at  least  three  (and  possibly  four)  51  editions  of  a 
new  Gradual*  Dominicale  were  issued.  One  of  these  1576  editions  was  printed 
by  Espinosa  "at  the  charges  of  Ocharte";  Ocharte  himself  published  the  other 
two  editions  of  the  same  book.  The  issue  of  three  different  editions  of  an 
immense  book — comprising  more  than  four  hundred  large  folio  pages — all  in 
one  year  needs  explanation.  Such  a  book  printed  throughout  in  two  impressions, 
black  over  red,  with  music  of  the  more  elaborate  plainsong  variety  printed  on 
nearly  every  page,  must  have  been  hugely  expensive  to  produce.  The  pressure 
of  a  real  emergency  is  needed  if  we  are  satisfactorily  to  account  for  the  simul- 
taneous issue  of  three  editions.  No  decision  independently  made  by  the  Mexican 
hierarchy  was  responsible  for  the  sudden  and  urgent  need  for  new  choir 
books.  Rather  it  was  Pope  Pius  V's  decree  issued  in  1 57 1  concerning  the  reform 
of  the  missal  and  with  it  of  the  gradual  that  made  necessary  the  immediate 
acquisition  of  new  missals  and  graduals  everywhere.  Pius  V*s  decree  imple- 
mented liturgical  decisions  already  made  by  the  Council  of  Trent,  and  in  issu- 
ing it  he  stipulated  that  henceforth  all  liturgical  books  should  be  printed  under 
the  direct  supervision  of  the  Roman  See.  Although  the  purpose  of  this  ruling 
was  to  halt  all  liturgical  printing  undertaken  elsewhere,  Philip  II  soon  overrode 
the  stipulation  that  all  books  should  be  printed  at  Rome.  But  die  requirement 
for  new  missals  and  graduals  exactly  conforming  to  papal  requirements  stood, 
and  in  Mexico  as  elsewhere  new  books  had  immediately  to  be  procured. 

The  capacity  of  any  one  press  to  produce  new  books  within  a  given  length 
of  time  was  severely  limited  during  the  sixteenth  century.  When  a  sudden  need 
arose  for  quantity  production  of  any  one  book>  the  work  had  to  be  divided  be- 
tween two  printers.  In  England,  for  instance,  when  a  new  prayerbook  was 
adopted  by  Parliament  in  1 548,  and  its  use  throughout  the  whole  realm  became 
mandatory  on  or  before  Whitsunday  in  1549,  a  sufficient  number  of  books 


80  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

could  only  be  produced  by  dividing  the  work  between  two  printers,  Whitchurch 
and  Grafton.  In  Mexico  the  commission  for  new  graduals  was  divided  between 
Ocharte  and  Espinosa.  Ocharte  alone  may  have  produced  three  editions,  but  in 
any  event  he  undertook  two.  The  evidence  for  the  production  of  two  rests  on 
the  differing  typography  of  two  Graduates,  each  bearing  Ocharte's  name  as 
printer,  and  each  bearing  the  1 5  76  imprint  date. 

How  does  this  extraneous  information  concerning  printers  and  publication 
dates  add  significantly  to  our  knowledge  concerning  music  in  sixteenth  century 
Mexico?  In  this  fashion:  from  the  different  bits  of  information  now  assembled 
one  can  arrive  at  a  fairly  accurate  estimate  of  the  number  of  choirs  in  Mexico 
which  in  1576  were  capable  of  doing  in  elaborate  plainsong  version  the  entire 
liturgy  of  the  church.  Mendieta  and  Torquemada  boasted  of  an  incredible 
development  of  Indian  choirs.  The  evidence  pieced  together  here  proves  that 
they  were  entirely  correct  in  their  boast. 

In  1572,  as  we  have  seen,  Ocharte  stated  that  he  had  just  finished  printing 
310  Passionaries,  of  which  one  hundred  had  been  ordered  by  the  bishop  of 
Michoacan.  If  in  1572  with  no  pressure  upon  him  to  produce  more  than  one 
hundred  books  he  was  able  to  print  an  extra  210,  then  certainly  he  was  able  to 
turn  out  no  less  than  twice  310  when  he  produced  two  editions  of  the  Graduate. 
Espinosa's  contribution  of  a  third  batch  of  graduals  in  1576  means  we  should 
multiply  310,  our  test  figure,  by  three.  The  result,  930,  can  be  accepted  as  a 
minimal  figure;  probably  the  actual  number  was  in  excess  of  1,000.  Because 
all  these  1576  Graduals  were  "libros  de  facistol"  only  one  copy  for  each  choir 
was  required.  That  a  thousand  choirs  with  singers  all  trained  to  sing  the  full 
service  in  the  elaborate  plainsong  version  of  the  1576  Graduate  Donwmcale 
should  have  existed  in  New  Spain  at  that  time  seems  indeed  astounding.  In  all 
New  Spain  in  1580  there  were  only  14,711  Spaniards.52  If  every  Spaniard  in 
the  realm  had  been  singing  plainchant  there  would  have  been  scarcely  enough 
of  them  to  fill  the  choirs  for  whose  specific  use  the  1576  Graduates  were 
printed.  But  the  records  of  the  Metropolitan  church  at  Mexico  City,  as  they 
have  been  collected  by  Dr.  Lota  M.  Spell,  clearly  show  that  Spanish  singers 
were  notoriously  difficult  to  come  by;  only  a  few  of  the  cathedrals,  such  as 
those  at  Mexico  City,  at  Puebk,  and  at  Guadalajara,  can  have  used  any  Spanish 
singers  at  all.  Nearly  all  of  the  10,000  or  more  choir  singers  who  began  singing 
the  service  out  of  the  1576  Graduates  were  Indians.  Perhaps  never  at  any  time 
in  any  colony  has  so  quickly  and  thoroughly  been  applied  a  bright  polish  of 
European  musical  culture  as  in  sixteenth  century  Mexico. 

The  music  of  the  1 576  Graduate  is  substantially  the  same  music  as  that  which 
is  printed  in  current  editions  of  the  Graduate.  Copies  of  the  1576  Gradual  may 
now  be  seen  in  Mexico  at  the  Biblioteca  Nacional  (collocation  number 
)>  ^d  ft  the  United  .States  at  the  Newberry  Library  in  Chicago  and 


TRANSPLANTING  OF  EUROPEAN  CULTURE   81 

at  the  Library  of  Congress.  The  congressional  copy,  which  lacks  tide-page  and 
colophon,  differs  in  small  details  from  the  Newberry  copy  (especially  in  the  use 
of  wood-cuts) ;  the  congressional  copy  also  differs  in  certain  small  details  from 
the  Biblioteca  Nacional  copy;  each  of  the  three  copies  is  individually  different 
from  the  other  two.  But  all  three  1576  Graduate  conform  exactly  to  the 
Tridentine  decrees;  the  1571  Biblioteca  Nacional  Gradual  does  not 

XI,  XII.  Two  more  Mexican  imprints  with  music  were  published  before 
1600:  the  Psdtenum  Amfhonarium  [sic]  Sanctorale,  cum  P salmis  et 
Hymms  .  .  .  ,  printed  by  Ocharte  in  1584,  and  finally  an  Antifhonarium, 
printed  also  by  Ocharte  (1589).  Both  these  last  two  books  contain  music  for 
the  revised  breviary;  although  the  revised  breviary  had  been  announced  by 
Pius  two  years  before  the  announcement  of  the  revised  missal,  the  less  immedi- 
ate demand  for  music  for  the  Office  delayed  the  final  issue  of  antiphonaries.  In 
a  copy  of  the  1589  Anttfhonanum  now  preserved  at  the  University  of  Texas 
marginal  notations  are  given  for  an  organ  accompaniment  The  cutting  of  the 
margins  in  order  to  prepare  this  particular  copy  for  binding  has  pared  away 
some  essential  writing,  but  enough  remains  to  provide  clues  as  to  performance 
practice. 

PRESENT-DAY  SIGNIFICANCE  OF  SIXTEENTH  CENTURY 
MUSIC   IMPRINTS 

The  present-day  significance  of  these  music  imprints  can  be  summarized 
under  six  headings:  (i)  These  were  the  first  books  containing  music 
printed  in  the  New  World.  (2)  They  were  the  only  liturgical  books  with 
music  published  in  any  of  the  Spanish  colonies.  (  3)  They  provide  superb 
examples  of  the  printer's  art  in  sixteenth  century  America.  (4)  The  plain- 
chant  printed  in  them  is  less  "corrupted"  than  had  previously  been  thought 
universal  in  sixteenth  century  liturgical  books.  (5)  From  them  can  be 
ascertained  the  general  level  of  musical  culture  in  churches  of  New  Spain 
during  the  epoch.  (6)  From  circumstances  connected  with  their  publica- 
tion can  be  adduced  corroborating  evidence  concerning  the  number,  the 
geographic  spread,  and  the  performance  ability  of  Indian  choirs. 

SIXTEENTH    CENTURY   BACKGROUND   IN  SPAIN 

If  the  evidence  of  these  printed  books  shovra  that  Mexico  fully  partici- 
pated in  the  musical  culture  of  the  home  country  as  far  as  monody  was 
concerned,  the  evidence  of  the  choirbooks  preserved  in  such  cathedrals 


82  MUSIC   IN  MEXICO 

as  those  at  Mexico  City  and  Puebk  proves  the  colony  fully  participated 
in  the  polyphonic  activity  of  the  home  country.  A  brief  preliminary  out- 
line of  Spanish  polyphony  will  clarify  the  later  discussion  of  Mexican 
polyphony.  Formerly  it  was  thought  no  school  of  polyphonic  composers 
flourished  in  Spain  before  the  sixteenth  century.  The  publication  of  several 
codices  such  as  the  Calixtinus  and  the  Huelgas  has  proved,  however,  that 
Spanish  polyphony  developed  without  aid  from  exterior  influences  at  a 
much  earlier  date  than  the  older  music  historians  thought  possible. 

The  immediate  antecessors  of  the  sixteenth  century  Spanish  polypho- 
nists  were  not  only  the  Flemings  in  Philip  the  Fair's  chapel  establishment, 
and  the  Flemings  such  as  Gombert  who  spent  time  in  Spain  during 
Charles  Vs  residences  in  the  peninsula,  but  also  such  Spanish  composers 
as  those  included  in  Barbieri's  Cancionero  de  palacio.  The  advent  of  such 
an  exceptionally  meritorious  composer  as  Cristobal  de  Morales  (1500?- 
53)  was  prepared  by  the  many  earlier  Spanish  polyphonists  such  as 
Anchieta,  Penalosa,  de  k  Torre,  and  Escobar,  who  were  not  content 
simply  to  copy  the  Flemings  but  insisted  rather  upon  establishing  a  pecul- 
iarly Spanish  polyphonic  tradition.  The  most  distinguished  follower  of 
Morales  in  the  so-called  Seville  group  of  polyphonists  was  Francisco 
Guerrero  (1527-99).  In  terms  of  influence,  Morales  and  Guerrero  must 
be  accounted  the  two  most  important  Spanish  polyphonists  as  far  as  Mexico 
is  concerned.  The  works  of  these  two  were  brought  to  Mexico  in  manu- 
script copies  during  the  mid-century,  and  were  widely  dispersed.  The 
cathedral  archives  at  both  Mexico  City  and  Puebk  show  an  overwhelming 
preponderancy  of  these  two  over  all  other  Spanish  polyphonists  of  their 
epoch. 

The  reason  Tomas  Luis  de  Victoria,  even  better  known  today  than 
Morales,  is  poorly  represented  in  Mexican  church  archives  stems  from 
the  fact  he  was  not  connected  at  any  time  during  his  career  with  either  the 
parent  cathedral  of  Mexico  City — Seville,  or  the  parent  cathedral  of 
Puebk— Toledo.  Morales  and  Guerrero,  on  the  other  hand,  were  both 
natives  of  Seville,  upon  the  musical  archives  of  whose  cathedral  Mexico 
City  depended  for  manuscript  copies.  Morales,  moreover,  was  chapel- 
master  at  Toledo  after  his  return  from  Rome  in  1545. 

Some  other  background  facts  concerning  Spanish  music  during  the 
sixteenth  century  may  be  usefully  summarized:  music  theory  had  been 
expounded  in  a  remarkabfy  progressive  way  by  Ramos  de  Pareja,  a  Span- 
iard who  taught  at  Bologna  during  the  ktter  years  of  the  fifteenth  century. 
Several  Spanish  theorists  of  the  sixteenth  century  produced  distinguished 


TRANSPLANTING  OF  EUROPEAN  CULTURE    83 

works  on  musical  theory  j  numbered  among  them  were  Juan  Bermudo, 
Diego  Ortiz,  Tomas  de  Santa  Maria,  and  Francisco  de  Salinas  (whose 
pioneer  labors  as  a  collector  of  folk-songs  have  been  noted  in  the  previous 
chapter).  The  virtuoso  vihuelists  of  the  century  included  Luis  Milan 
whose  El  Maestro  (1535)  was  an  epoch-making  publication,  Narvaez, 
Fuenllana,  Pisador,  and  Daza.  Together  with  such  keyboard  artists  as 
Cabezon  and  Venegas  de  Henestrosa  these  virtuosi  succeeded  in  producing 
a  Spanish  instrumental  literature  that  has  not  been  surpassed  in  any  sub- 
sequent century. 

Historically  Spanish  music  is  seen  as  reaching  its  most  vital  epoch 
during  the  seventy-five  year  period  between  1525  and  1600.  This  period 
of  musical  vitality  therefore  exactly  coincided  with  the  age  of  Spanish 
empire-building.  The  colony  of  New  Spain  was  the  happy  recipient  of 
numerous  composers  whose  early  life  had  been  spent  in  the  orbit  of 
such  masters  as  Morales,  Guerrero,  Salinas,  and  others  of  like  notability. 
No  other  Spanish  colony — not  even  Peru — enjoyed  the  same  overflow  of 
musical  vitality  that  streamed  from  Spain  during  her  best  epoch. 

Among  the  controlling  forces  that  Hilari6n  Eslava  listed  when  he 
sought  reasons  for  the  flowering  of  Spanish  musical  culture  were  several 
which  had  their  effect  in  New  Spain  as  well. 

[When  we  think  of  the  reasons  for  the  flourishing  estate  of  Spanish 
religious  music  during  the  sixteenth  century]  we  will  do  well  to  bear  in 
mind  that  clergy  who  were  appointed  as  singers  in  chapel  and  cathedral 
establishments  were  invariably  expected  to  compose  as  well  as  sing.  .  .  . 
Moreover  we  should  remember  .  .  .  that  many  of  the  chapel  establish- 
ments in  Spain  were  [at  that  time]  heavily  endowed  with  funds  for  the 
maintenance  of  musicians;  these  [lucrative]  posts  were  awarded  in  open 
competition,  and  appointment  was  therefore  made  on  the  basis  of  true 
merit.  All  these  various  factors  should  be  borne  in  mind  if  we  wish  clearly 
to  understand  why  Spain  was  not  a  laggard  but  rather  in  the  vanguard, 
musically  speaking,  during  the  sixteenth  century.58 

SYNOPSIS  OF  NEO-HISPANIC  POLYPHONIC  DEVELOPMENT 

The  landmarks  in  the  development  of  Neo-Hispanic  polyphony  during 
the  sixteenth  century  may  profitably  be  listed  here  in  chronological  order: 

1527  Fray  Juan  Caro  begins  to  teach  the  Indians  in  the  mission  school  at 

Texcuco  how  to  sing  in  parts. 
7550  A  small  Indian  choir  trained  in  Pedro  de  Gante's  Indian  school 


84  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

sings  every  Sunday  and  feast-day  at  the  newly  established  Mexico  City 

Cathedral.  Their  more  ambitious  part-singing  is  supported  by  an  organ 

just  brought  over  from  Seville. 
7537  Bishop  Zumarraga  praises  the  skill  of  Indian  singers  who  have 

been  trained  in  part-song. 
1552  Zumarraga  commends  the  rapid  progress  his  Indian  choir  has  made 

in  the  singing  of  part-music,  and  praises  the  Indian  copyists  who  deftly 

transcribe  music  from  European  sources. 

1533  Canon  Xuarez  of  the  cathedral  staff  is  assigned  to  teach  young 
Indian  choristers  polyphonic  singing. 

1534  Zumarraga  returns  from  a  trip  to  Spain  bringing  back  with  him 
several  part-books  of  Masses  and  motets  for  the  use  of  the  growing 
cathedral  choir. 

1536  Two  cathedral  canons  are  dispatched  to  Spain,  one  of  whom  secures 
several  important  choirbooks  from  the  Seville  Cathedral,  and  the  other 
of  whom  locates  a  printer  with  music  type  who  is  willing  to  come  to 
America.54 

1538  Youths  of  Spanish  blood  are  for  the  first  time  mentioned  as  members 
of  the  Mexico  City  Cathedral  choir. 

1538  A  brilliant  festival  held  at  Tlaxcala  provides  Indian  singers  an 
opportunity  to  demonstrate  their  superior  ability  in  performing  poly- 
phonic psalms,  motets,  and  villancicos. 

7539  "Canon  Juan  Xu£rez  is  appointed  chapel  master  at  a  salary  of  20 
pesos  de  minas,  beginning  the  ist  of  February  of  this  year."  Antonio 
Ramos  is  appointed  cathedral  organist,  November  ij.55 

7540  Polyphonic  music  in  preference  to  the  prescribed  plainchant  is 
frequently  sung  in  the  Mexico  City  Cathedral.56 

1543  Diego  Perez  Gordillo  Negron,  sixteen  years  resident  in  Michoacan, 
is  singled  out  for  praise  in  an  official  letter  to  Charles  V  because  of  skill 
in  both  plainchant  and  polyphonic  music,  which  he  teaches  the  In- 
dians. 

1544  Morales's  1544  Masses  (Liber  I),  now  preserved  in  a  handwritten 
copy  at  Puebla  Cathedral,  is  the  oldest  surviving  polyphonic  music 
anywhere  to  be  encountered  in  an  existing  Mexican  archive  today. 

1554  Instrumentalists  (los  tanedores)  form  an  important  part  of  Mexico 
City's  cathedral  ensemble  5  the  salaries  of  the  instrumentalists  other 
than  the  organist  are  not,  however,  specified. 

7554  An  alumnus  of  Salamanca  University,  Lazaro  del  Alamo,  is  ap- 


TRANSPLANTING  OF  EUROPEAN  CULTURE    85 

pointed  cantor  in  the  Mexico  City  Cathedral  at  an  annual  salary  of  60 

pesos  de  oro.57 

1555  Alamo  is  promoted  to  the  chapelmastership. 
7559  The  cathedral  choir  sings  several  important  works  of  Morales  at 

a  commemoration  service  for  Charles  V.  They  also  sing  several  original 

polyphonic  compositions  by  Alamo. 
7559  The  number  of  paid  choristers  at  the  Mexico  City  Cathedral  is  set 

at  twelve.58  These  participate  in  all  daily  services. 
1560?  Archbishop  Montufar  promulgates  an  Or  den  qve  debe  obseruarse 

en  el  coro  containing  42  rules  for  the  organization  and  conduct  of  the 

cathedral  choir  at  Mexico  City.59  This  rule-book  is  modeled  after  the 

59  Constitutions  of  the  Pontifical  Choir  given  in  1 545  by  Pope  Paul  III. 
7564  Alamo  is  mentioned  as  rendering  important  and  valuable  service 

to  the  archbishop  by  composing  original  motets,  villancicos,  and  chan- 

zonetas  for  use  at  Christmas,  Easter,  and  Corpus  Christi. 
1564  A  Psalterium  secundum  sacro  sancte  Romane  ecclesie  consuetudinem 

is  published  at  Seville  (in  folio,  520  pages)  for  specific  use  of  the  Au- 

gustinians  in  Mexico. 
*57°?  Juan  de  Victoria  from  Burgos,  Spain,  is  named  Alamo's  successor 

in  the  chapelmastership. 
7570  Guerrero's  Motteta  published  by  Gardano  at  Venice  is  the  oldest 

polyphony  in  original  printed  form  still  extant  in  any  Mexican  archive. 

7574  A  play  interspersed  with  choral  and  solo  singing  is  performed  by 
the  Mexico  City  choirboys  in  honor  of  the  new  archbishop,  Moya  y 
Contreras.  This  musical  play  is  but  typical  of  many  of  its  type;  the 
choirboys  sing  at  most  important  public  functions  in  the  capital  during 
this  epoch. 

7575  Hernando  Franco,  the  first  Neo-Hispanic  composer  for  whose 
music  claims  to  lasting  importance  have  been  made,  is  appointed  chapel- 
master  at  an  annual  salary  of  600  pesos  de  oro  comun. 

7575  Moya  y  Contreras  writes  Ovando,  president  of  the  Council  of  the 
Indies,  explaining  the  difficulties  he  encounters  in  securing  cathedral 
singers  because  of  the  poor  pay  offered.  The  archbishop  complains  he 
cannot  hold  open  competition  for  the  posts  as  is  held  in  Spain,  nor  can 
he  submit  a  list  of  candidates  to  the  viceroy,  because  none  offer  them- 
selves.60 

7575  The  cathedral  orchestra  is  significantly  enlarged.61 
1582  Salaries  of  singers  are  reduced  because  of  the  mounting  costs  of  the 


86  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

new  cathedral  building  which  has  been  started.  The  singers  strike,  how- 
ever, and  the  archbishop  is  forced  to  restore  them  their  former 
wages. 

75^5  Mexican  bishops  in  conclave  enact  important  church  music  rules.63 

75^7  Fray  Alonso  Ponce,  Franciscan  Father  Commissary  visiting  from 
Spain,  is  deeply  impressed  by  the  music  he  hears  in  New  Spain  j  he 
hears  the  indigenes  singing  both  plainchant  and  polyphony. 

1589  A  catalogue  of  the  cathedral  choral  library  at  Mexico  City  made 
this  year  reveals  that  works  of  Morales,  Guerrero,  Orlando  di  Lasso, 
and  Palestrina,  are  in  the  repertory.68  Three  Masses  by  Morales  are 
sung. 

7592  Puebla,  already  an  important  center  for  sacred  music  instruction, 
limits  the  personnel  of  the  cathedral  choir  to  <(youths  born  of  Spanish 
parents."  64 

7599  A  commemoration  service  for  Philip  II  duplicating  the  pomp  and 
circumstance  of  the  1559  service  for  Charles  V  is  held  at  Mexico  City. 

A  tabulation  of  this  sort  emphasizes  the  musical  life  of  the  capital.  This 
emphasis  is,  however,  almost  inevitable  during  the  first  century.  In  the 
first  place,  Mexico  City  even  before  the  Conquest  was  the  cultural  center 
of  the  territory  dominated  by  the  Aztecs.  All  the  principal  lords  of  Mexico 
maintained  town  houses  in  Tenochtitlin  where  they  resided  during  at 
least  a  portion  of  the  year.65  Even  though  partially  destroyed  by  Cort6s, 
Tenochtitlan — now  Mexico  City — still  remained  the  capital.  In  New 
Spain,  as  in  every  other  political  entity,  the  administrative  center  attracted 
to  itself  the  leading  artists,  musicians,  and  literary  men  of  the  day. 

A  comparison  of  the  musical  time-table  in  sixteenth  century  Mexico 
with  the  European  time-table  reveals  that  the  full  apparatus  of  European 
music  culture  was  transferred  to  New  Spain  within  only  one  generation 
after  the  Conquest.  The  intimate  liaison  between  colony  and  mother 
country  never  at  any  later  time  during  the  colonial  epoch  redounded  so 
favorably  to  the  musical  advantage  of  the  colony  as  during  the  first  hun- 
dred yearsj  the  obvious  reason  is  that  Spain  herself  was  at  her  all-time 
cultural  peak  during  those  hundred  years, 

NEO-HISPANIC  POLYPHONY  AS  "OEBRAUCHSMUSIKW 

In  the  fullest  sense  of  the  term  as  Hindemith's  school  has  used  it,  all 
early  Neo-Hispanic  polyphony  was  GebraucAsmusiJ^-music  for  use.  Since 


TRANSPLANTING  OF  EUROPEAN  CULTURE    87 

the  forum  in  which  this  "music  for  use"  was  heard  seems  always  to  have 
been  some  church  occasion,  we  may  predispose  ourselves  to  a  more  favor- 
able view  of  the  remnants  which  survive  if  we  first  make  an  effort  to 
understand  the  kinds  of  use  to  which  polyphonic  music  was  put  in  Neo- 
Hispanic  church  life.  The  formal  public  worship  of  the  church  provided 
most  of  the  opportunities  available  for  the  performance  of  part-music. 
However  there  were  also  numerous  non-liturgical  occasions  sponsored  by 
the  church  such  as  processions,  public  acts  of  mourning,  welcome  cere- 
monies for  new  viceroys,  or  congratulatory  acts  staged  for  important 
public  officials,  when  polyphonic  music  was  required.  The  non-liturgical 
occasions  which  appealed  most  to  the  humbler  classes  were  without  doubt 
the  processions  where  popularized  part-music,  such  as  hymns  to  the  Virgin, 
or  villancicos  in  honor  of  the  saints,  or  chanzonetas  of  thanksgiving  were 
sung.  On  the  other  hand,  the  non-liturgical  occasions  during  which  more 
pretentious  types  of  part-music  were  attempted  were  the  welcome  cere- 
monies for  new  viceroys  or  the  acts  of  mourning  for  deceased  emperors 
such  as  Charles  V  (died  1558)  and  Philip  II  (died  1598). 

MUSIC  IN  COMMEMORATIVE  ACTS 

A  detailed  account  of  the  commemorative  pageant  honoring  the  mem- 
ory of  Charles  V  occurs  in  the  52-page  pamphlet  published  at  Mexico 
City  in  1560  entitled  Tumulo  Imperial.  Its  author,  Francisco  Cervantes 
de  Salazar,  though  not  a  musician  but  rather  a  professor  of  rhetoric  in 
the  newly  founded  (1553)  University  of  Mexico,  was  nevertheless  well 
qualified  to  discuss  the  musical  aspects  of  the  pageant.  Born  in  Toledo 
and  a  professor  in  the  University  of  Osuna  before  emigrating  to  Mexico, 
he  had  while  in  Osuna  enjoyed  the  friendship  of  so  eminent  an  authority 
as  Juan  Bermudo,  the  famous  music  theoretician,  who  not  only  held  him 
in  high  personal  esteem  but  also  asked  him  to  write  the  introduction  to 
his  1550  music  manual,  El  Arte  TripAaria.  Correspondence  between  the 
two  evidently  continued  after  Cervantes  came  to  the  New  World,  for  it 
was  at  the  latter^s  suggestion  that  Bermudo  added  a  section  of  his  original 
organ  pieces  in  the  second  (1555)  edition  of  his  well-known  treatise,  the 
Declaration  de  mstrumentos*  In  this  second  edition  Bermudo  (folio  I I3T) 
gratefully  acknowledged  the  request  for  the  addition  of  his  own  original 
compositions  which  he  had  received  from  the  New  World. 

Cervantes  de  SalazaHs  description  of  the  commemorative  ceremony 
in  Mexico  City  shows  it  to  have  been  an  occasion  when  the  colonials  set 


88  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

out  to  surpass  if  possible  the  pomp  and  drcumstance  of  the  commemorative 
acts  already  staged  at  Brussels  and  in  the  peninsula.  Because  Charles  V 
had  died  at  Yuste  in  the  odor  of  sanctity^  church  authorities  in  Mexico 
as  elsewhere  were  eager  to  do  his  memory  every  possible  homage.  Tumulo 
Imperial,  because  of  its  contemporaneity,  because  of  the  vividness  with 
which  it  describes  individual  details,  because  of  its  specific  mention  of 
performance  methods,  and  more  especially  because  of  its  references  to 
the  music  of  Cristobal  de  Morales  and  Lazaro  de  Alamo,  deserves  close 
scrutiny  by  every  student  who  would  understand  sixteenth  century  music 
in  New  Spain.  The  extracts  below  by  no  means  exhaust  the  passages  which 
might  interest  a  music  student 

Having  discussed  the  matter  with  the  audiencia  and  with  the  arch- 
bishop, the  viceroy  [Luis  de  Velasco]  decided  to  stage  the  ceremonies  in 
the  Church  of  San  Jos6  [the  first  church  erected  for  the  use  of  Indians] 
and  in  the  adjoining  patio  between  it  and  the  monastery  to  which  it  be- 
longs [San  Francisco  monastery]. 

The  Church  of  San  Jose  was  chosen  rather  than  the  cathedral  because 
the  cathedral  is  entirely  too  small  to  accommodate  any  great  throng;  and 
moreover  because  its  ceiling  is  too  low  to  permit  the  erection  of  a  suitably 
imposing  funeral  monument.  Also  the  viceregal  palace  is  so  close  to  the 
cathedral  that  a  procession  could  hardly  have  started  moving  before  it 
would  have  reached  the  cathedral  door. 

The  Order  of  the  Procession  on  the  Afternoon  of  St.  Andrews  Day 
(November  30) 

The  procession  from  the  viceregal  palace  was  divided  into  four  sections; 
in  the  first  were  the  Indians,  many  of  whom  when  they  neared  the 
monastery  broke  into  audible  sobs  (as  if  they  had  been  personally  indebted 
to  their  sovereign).  Before  the  Indian  procession  was  carried  aloft  a  cross 
covered  with  black  cloth.  Flanked  on  both  sides  with,  candles,  this  proces- 
sional cross  was  borne  aloft  before  the  governor  of  Tlaxcala;  he  was 
selected  for  this  honor  because  of  the  faithfulness  of  the  Tlaxcalans.  .  .  . 
The  Indian  governors  of  Tacuba,  Texcuco,  and  Tlaxcala,  along  with  the 
Indian  governor  of  Mexico,  all  wore  formal  mourning  attire.  Each  gov- 
ernor carried  the  standard  of  his  province  showing  on  it  a  coat  of  arms; 
the  personal  tokens  of  appreciation  sent  by  His  Majesty  to  each  of  the 
Indian  governors  were  woven  into  these  standards  with  intricate  designs 
of  gflt  and  silver  thread  running  over  a  black  background.  .  .  .  More 
than  two  hundred  caciques  marched  in  solemn  procession  with  their  gover- 


TRANSPLANTING  OF  EUROPEAN  CULTURE    89 

nors,  all  observing  ceremonious  sflence.  Approximately  two  thousand 
were  in  the  Indian  line  of  march,  including  all  the  principal  personages 
from  the  Indian  tributary  villages.  The  onlooking  Indians  who  awaited 
the  procession  in  the  patio  and  in  the  streets  adjacent  to  the  monastery 
numbered  at  least  forty  thousand.  This  tremendous  Indian  procession 
[and  the  motley  crowd  gathered  to  see  it]  was  kept  under  control  by  in- 
terpreters who  knew  their  languages  and  by  peace  officers  from  the  local 
constabulary.  Upon  arriving  at  the  monastery  patio  the  four  Indian 
governors— ^those  of  Mexico,  Tacuba,  Texcuco,  and  Tlaxcak — laid  their 
banners  at  the  four  corners  of  the  memorial  monument.  .  .  . 

The  procession  of  the  clergy  included  the  archbishop,  the  bishop  of 
Michoacan,  the  bishop  of  Nueva  Galicia,  and  provincials  of  the  Orders 
of  St.  Francis,  St.  Dominic,  and  St.  Augustine;  along  with  these  inarched 
a  host  of  inferior  clergy. 


The  dignitaries  having  finally  entered  the  Church  of  San  Jose*  and 
having  seated  themselves  (the  procession  itself  lasted  two  full  hours)  the 
vigil  proper  began.  Outside  and  inside  the  church  stood  a  huge  crowd  of 
onlookers.  The  cathedral  choirmaster  [Lazaro  del  Alamo]  began  by 
directing  one  of  his  choirs  (his  singers  were  divided  into  two  antiphonal 
choirs)  in  the  singing  of  the  invitatory,  Cvrcumdederunt  mcy  by  Cristobal 
de  Morales;  and  then  the  other  in  the  singing  of  the  psalm,  Extdumus9 
also  by  Morales.  Both  settings  by  Morales  are  polyphonic  throughout,  and 
the  choirs  sang  them  with  the  utmost  sweetness.  The  vigil  began  then  with 
a  devotional  fervor  that  elevated  the  minds  of  everyone  present. 

After  the  invitatory  eight  cope-bearers  intoned  the  first  antiphon  in 
plainchant;  the  succentor  (precentor's  assistant]  then  started  the  first 
psalm,  Verba  mea  aunbus  fercipe,  Donune,  and  the  same  eight  cope 
bearers  then  sang  the  verses  antiphonally  with  a  chorus  made  up  of  friars 
and  clergy,  carrying  it  through  with  utmost  solemnity.  After  the  psalm, 
Verba  mea,  there  followed  an  antiphon  sung  by  the  choirs  in  a  polyphonic 
setting,  and  then  another  antiphon  sung  by  the  cope-bearers  in  a  polyphonic 
setting. 

Next  the  succentor  started  the  psalm  [Domme  ne  in  jurore\  ;  when  he 
reached  the  mediation,  a  small  group  of  boys  responded  to  him  in  a  four- 
part  setting  of  the  remainder  of  the  first  psalm-verse.  The  rest  of  this  psalm 
was  antiphonally  sung  according  to  this  plan:  verses  in  plainchant  sung  by 
succentor  and  cope-bearers  in  unison  alternated  with  verses  in  polyphonic 
setting  sung  by  the  boy  choir.  This  boy  choir  was  directed  by  the 
cathedral  choirmaster  [Alamo]  who  himself  had  composed  the  music  they 


90  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

sang.  After  the  psalm,  Doming  ne  m  ]urorey  another  antiphon  and  psalm 
followed,  sung  again  in  the  same  way  with  polyphony  and  plainchant  al- 
ternating. Then  another  antiphon,  and  still  another  psalm,  in  the  middle 
of  which  last  psalm  the  cope-bearers  advanced  to  the  main  altar. 

There  the  archbishop  [Montufar]  started  the  Pater  no3ter-9  after  the 
Pater  nosier  Morales's  polyphonic  setting  of  Force  mih*  D<mune  was  sung, 
the  beauty  of  which  enthralled  everyone.  The  response  was  sung  in  plain- 
song;  the  cope-bearers  remained  at  the  main  altar  during  the  singing  of 
the  verses  of  the  response.  There  they  remained  also  during  the  second 
lesson  which  was  read  by  the  bishop  of  Michoacan  [  Vasco  de  Quiroga] . 
After  the  second  lesson  Qta  Lazarum  resuscitasti  (in  polyphonic  setting) 
was  sung;  then  the  archbishop  began  the  last  lesson.  ...  At  its  conclu- 
sion the  cope-bearers  began  the  psalm,  De  p-ofundis,  during  which  the 
clergy  and  the  friars  prepared  to  form  their  recessional.  At  the  conclusion 
of  De  p-ofandts  the  singing  of  the  response,  Libera  me,  aroused  the  deepest 
devotion.  The  response  completed,  the  archbishop  .  .  .  and  all  the  chor- 
isters .  »  .  joined  in  the  final  prayer;  the  vigil  service  thus  came  to  an 
end  with  the  profoundest  solemnity. 

Early  Mass  the  next  day  [December  I  ]  was  sung  by  thirty  friars  with 
such  great  fervor  and  pathos  that  tears  involuntarily  started  in  the  eyes  of 
those  present.  .  .  .  High  Mass  later  during  the  day  was  sung  in  a  five- 
voice  setting.66 

A  generation  later  the  exequies  of  Philip  II  provided  the  colony  with 
another  opportunity  for  an  ostentatious  display  of  public  grief.  Dr. 
Dionysio  de  Ribera  Florez,  canon  of  the  metropolitan  cathedral,  wrote 
the  official  account  in  his  Reladdn  historiada  de  las  Exequias  Funerales 
.  .  .  del  Rey  D.  Philippo  which  was  printed  in  1600.  Though  not  as 
informed  a  person,  musically  speaking,  as  Cervantes  de  Salazar,  Ribera 
Florez  nevertheless  emphasized  the  role  of  music  in  the  pageantry.  After 
the  death  of  every  subsequent  Spanish  sovereign  a  similar  public  act  was 
staged  in  Mexico,  and  then  the  account  printed  for  distribution  in  Spain 
as  well  as  the  colony.  Among  its  rare  books  the  Biblioteca  National  in 
Madrid  now  houses  a  series  of  these  accounts;  the  musical  extracts  from 
them  enable  the  reader  to  gain  an  accurate  idea  of  the  shifting  currents 
of  musical  taste  in  the  colony. 


SIXTEENTH  CENTURY  DEVELOPMENTS  IN  INSTRUMENTAL  MUSIC 

As  has  been  already  noted  in  the  chronological  synopsis,  an  orchestra 
formed  part  of  the  musical  ensemble  at  the  Mexico  City  Cathedral  as 


TRANSPLANTING  OF  EUROPEAN  CULTURE    91 

early  as  1554.  Despite  Montufar's  eagerness  to  suppress  all  instrumental 
music  except  that  of  the  organ,  orchestras  continued  to  exist  everywhere, 
even  in  his  own  cathedral.  The  very  year  Montufar's  successor,  Moya  y 
Contreras,  was  consecrated  (1574),  the  orchestra  at  the  metropolitan 
cathedral  was  further  enlarged,  and  a  director  of  instrumental  music, 
Bartolom6  de  Luna,  engaged  at  an  annual  salary  of  200  pesos.  The  next 
year  three  more  expert  instrumentalists  were  added  to  the  cathedral 
staff,  Luna's  salary  enlarged,  and  1,000  pesos  budgeted  annually  for 
instrumental  music.  Brass  as  well  as  woodwind  instruments  are  mentioned 
as  components  of  the  cathedral  orchestra  at  the  end  of  the  century.  If 
even  the  metropolitan  cathedral,  long  after  the  warning  voice  against 
noisy  and  frivolous  instruments  had  been  sounded,  still  continued  to  use 
trumpet,  trombone,  flute,  cornett,  and  harp,  small  wonder  the  less  re- 
strained parochial  churches  throughout  New  Spain  took  fullest  advantage 
of  the  implied  license. 

That  the  use  of  instruments  was  not  merely  confined  to  relief  or  variety 
is  proved  by  the  numerous  notations  scribbled  over  manuscript  copies  of 
polyphonous  and  monodic  music  still  preserved  in  such  archives  as  those 
at  the  Puebla  and  Mexico  City  cathedrals.  It  is  coming  more  and  more 
to  be  recognized,  of  course,  that  performance  practice  even  in  the  more 
influential  European  centers  was  not  exclusively  confined  to  »  caffella 
singing.  What  Michael  Praetorius  suggested  as  an  acceptable  way  of 
performing  a  double-choir  ten-voice  motet,  Quo  froferas,  by  Orlando  di 
Lasso,  although  his  evidence  dates  from  the  earliest  years  of  the  seven- 
teenth century  rather  than  from  the  years  immediately  preceding  di 
Lasso's  death  in  1594,  is  nevertheless  of  interest  here.67 

He  suggested  the  following  "orchestration"  for  the  successive  sections 
of  this  motet: 

Choir  I  Choir  H 

1.  cornett  or  voice,  with  four  trom-  I.  cornett  or  voice,  with  four  trom- 
bones bones 

2.  voices  alone  2.  cornett  and  four  trombones 

3.  voices  alone  3.  five  viols  da  bracdo 

4.  voices  alone  4.  two  flutes,  two  trombones,  bassoon 

5.  five  viols  da  bracdo  5-  flute  and  four  trombones 

6.  five  viols  da  bracdo  6.  two  flutes,  two  trombones,  bassoon 

7.  two  flutes,  two  trombones,  bassoon  7.  cornett  and  four  trombones 

Just  these  very  instruments,  as  a  matter  of  fact  (with  the  exception  of 
the  viola  da  braccio),  are  to  be  encountered  in  the  Mexico  City  orchestra 


92  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

as  early  as  1575,  evidently  performing  the  same  function  in  Franco's 
antiphonally  conceived  music.  In  Mexican  as  well  as  European  chapel 
establishments  during  the  kte  sixteenth  century 

the  chapel  master  was  left  free  to  adapt,  arrange,  and  orchestrate  the 
music.  The  written  notes  were  used  only  as  a  guide  to  an  end  result  de- 
termined by  the  conductor:  a  result  often  diverging  widely  from  the 
original  textual  significance  of  compositions. 

The  variety  of  instruments  available  in  sixteenth  century  New  Spain 
and  the  generally  high  quality  maintained  in  their  manufacture  may  be 
learned  from  a  municipal  ordinance  passed  by  the  Mexico  City  cabildo 
on  August  30, 1568,  and  confirmed  by  the  audiencia  a  month  later. 

No  carpenter,  no  engraver,  no  joiner,  no  maker  of  musical  instruments, 
shall  set  up  shop  in  this  city  or  in  its  environs  without  passing  the  officially 
prescribed  examination.  .  .  .  An  instrument-maker  must  show  by  exami- 
nation that  he  knows  how  to  construct  the  organ  [without  pedals],  the 
spinet,  the  monochord,  the  lute,  the  various  different  kinds  of  viol,  and 
the  harp;  and  he  must  know  not  only  how  to  make  these  instruments  but 
also  moist  be  able  to  demonstrate  the  correct  method  used  in  playing 
them. 

The  examination  shall  be  given  under  authority  of  the  alcalde,  and  of 
the  municipal  supervisor  of  construction.  A  fine  of  ten  pesos  shall  be  levied 
against  anyone  who  opens  a  shop  without  first  passing  his  examination. 
.  .  *  Special  care  shall  be  exercised  to  see  that  no  one  presumes  to  make 
the  various  classes  of  viols  unless  he  knows  how  to  attend  to  the  most 
minute  details  and  can  fashion  a  truly  presentable  instrument.  .  .  . 
Every  four  months  an  official  examiner  shall  overlook  the  stock  of  instru- 
ments carried  by  an  instrument-maker,  and  shall  confiscate  all  those  which 
are  faulty  in  workmanship.68 

The  enactment  of  such  an  ordinance  in  1568  (and  its  renewal  in  1585)  M 
shows  instrument-making  had  developed  into  a  thriving  industry  during 
the  latter  half  of  the  sixteenth  century.  Where  did  a  market  exist  in  New 
Spain  for  a  stready  stream  of  new  instruments?  The  springing  up  of  an 
instrument-making  industry  subject  to  legal  regulation  certainly  implies 
that  a  market  did  exist.  In  1568  Bernal  Diaz  wrote  that  it  was  not  private 
individuals  but  rather  churches  which  acquired  a  plethora  of  trumpets  (of 
the  loudest  and  shrillest  kind),  a  plentiful  supply  of  "flutes,  oboes,  sack- 


TRANSPLANTING  OF  EUROPEAN  CULTURE   93 

buts,  and  lutes,"  and  also  organs  when  financial  resources  permitted70 
With  all  the  other  evidence  that  can  be  gathered  showing  the  universal 
use  of  instruments  in  Neo-Hispanic  churches — from  foremost  cathedrals 
on  down  to  humblest  village  chapels— it  seems  obvious  that  the  sonorous 
ideal  even  during  the  so-called  golden  age  of  Neo-Hispanic  polyphony 
was  not  one  of  unaccompanied  (a  cappella)  vocalism,  but  rather  was  that  of 
%roken  music."  n 


SECULAR  MUSIC 

In  Aztec  society  (historians  now  universally  agree)  religion  swathed 
every  cultural  manifestation.  With  the  advent  of  the  missionaries  the 
Indian  was  baptized  but  not  secularized.  He  exchanged  one  mode  of  ex- 
pression for  another,  his  creative  energies  were  re-channeled,  and  instead 
of  praises  to  Huitzilopochtli  and  Texcatlipoca  he  sang  praises  to  God  and 
the  saints. 

After  the  Conquest  the  Christian  Indians  were  extremely  eager  to  exult 
in  their  new-found  religion  with  songs.  .  .  .  Don  Francisco  Placido,  lord 
of  Atzcapotzalco,  with  his  Tecpan  subjects,  celebrated  the  enthronement 
of  the  blessed  image  of  Our  Lady  of  Guadalupe  with  such  newly  composed 
songs;  he  initiated  a  custom  which  continued  for  a  century.72 

Indian  secular  art  was  not  yet  born.  If  we  wish  information  concerning 
secular  music,  as  we  designate  it,  we  must  turn  to  the  records  of  the 
Spaniards  who  came  to  Mexico,  rather  than  hoping  to  find  it  among  the 
Indians. 

Of  the  original  band  of  three  hundred  who  came  with  Cortes  from 
Cuba  in  1519,  six  were  excellent  musicians,  according  to  Bernal  Diaz, 
who  uses  such  phrases  as  "a  fine  singer,"  <<an  excellent  performer  on  the 
viol,"  "a  great  musician,"  in  describing  them  as  individuals.  A  soldier 
in  the  original  expedition,  Ortiz  by  name,  taught  dancing  and  viol-playing 
in  Mexico  after  1521. 

Diaz  tells  of  certain  other  nameless  Spanish  musicians  who  joined 
Cortfe  on  his  1524  expedition  to  Honduras. 

Cortes  brought  along  five  players  on  the  oboe,  sackbut  and  dulcimer, 
and  an  acrobat  and  another  who  did  sleight  of  hand  tricks  and  worked 
puppets.  ...  I  moist  refrain  from  telling  in  detail  all  the  hardships  we 


94  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

endured.  .  .  .  The  players  on  the  oboes,  sackbuts,  and  dulcimer,  whom 
Cortes  had  brought  with  him,  as  I  have  already  recorded,  and  who  were 
accustomed  to  dainties  in  Castile  and  knew  nothing  of  hardships,  had 
fallen  ill  through  hunger  and  made  no  music,  excepting  one  of  them,  and 
all  the  soldiers  cursed  the  sound  of  it  and  we  said  it  was  like  foxes  and 
jackals  howling  and  it  would  be  better  to  have  maize  to  eat  than  music.78 

In  several  places  Diaz  dwells  on  Cortes's  fondness  for  music.  At  a  banquet 
given  in  Cort6s7s  honor  by  the  first  viceroy,  for  instance,  "singers  at  each 
seat  of  honor,  and  trumpetry  and  all  sorts  of  instruments,  harps,  guitars, 
violas,  flutes,  dulcimers,  and  oboes"  provided  music  which  rivaled  the 
best  any  of  the  guests  had  ever  heard  at  home  in  Spain. 

Formerly  it  was  thought  that  Cort6s  introduced  a  new  dance  into  Spain 
during  his  first  visit  after  the  Conquest.  He  arrived  in  Castile  during 
December  of  1527,  weighted  with  trophies  from  Mexico,  and  bringing 
along  in  his  entourage  certain  Indian  entertainers  and  jugglers.  These 
entertainers  delighted  the  members  of  Charles  Vs  court,  and  Cortes 
forthwith  sent  them  along  with  a  lieutenant  of  his  in  order  to  display 
themselves  before  Pope  Clement  VII.  The  dance  which  some  writers 
have  thought  was  introduced  by  these  Indian  entertainers  (dance-steps, 
not  the  dance-music)  was  the  pavane  j  eventually  the  pavane  became  the 
most  important  dance-form  of  the  century.  Compan  (Dictionnaire  de 
dansey  1787)  identified  the  pavane  as  of  New  World  origin,  and  said  the 
steps  imitated  the  courtship  of  a  turkey-cock  approaching  his  hen.  Other 
writers  have  taken  up  Compan's  idea  concerning  the  origin  of  the  pavane, 
among  them  Chavez  and  Saldivar.74 

The  first  pavanes  printed  in  Spain  appeared  in  Milan's  El  Maestro 
(1535-6).  Milan,  however,  spoke  of  imitating  Italian  pavanes.  Italian 
publications  of  the  period  alternately  entitle  the  same  dances  fadovanas 
(faduanas)  and  pavanas.  The  confusion  in  dance  titles  makes  it  difficult 
to  decide  just  when  either  dance  was  actually  introduced.  Petrucd  pub- 
lished padovanas  (paduanas)  as  early  as  1508.  If  it  is  now  indiscreet  to 
accredit  Cortes's  Indians  with  any  decisive  part  in  introducing  the  pavane 
(despite  the  opinions  of  Chavez  and  Saldivar),  it  is  on  the  other  hand 
certain  that  two  other  dances  of  capital  importance  were  derived  from 
the  New  World — the  sarabande  and  the  chaconne. 

Curt  Sachs  in  his  World  History  of  the  Dance  stated  sometime  ago  that 
both  the  sarabande  and  chaconne  were  of  New  World  origin  and  offered 
ample  proof  for  his  statement.  To  the  evidence  he  presented  showing  the 


TRANSPLANTING  OF  EUROPEAN  CULTURE    95 

New  World  origin  of  these  two  dance-forms  should  now  be  added  an- 
other most  important  bit  of  fact.  Sachs  stated  legislation  prohibiting  the 
dancing  of  the  sarabande  enacted  in  1583  was  the  first  dated  reference  to 
the  sarabande.75  Actually,  however,  Diego  Duran,  the  Dominican  his- 
torian writing  a  history  of  the  Indians  whose  remarks  we  have  already  had 
occasion  to  quote,  mentioned  the  sarabande  four  years  earlier — in  1579. 
Thus,  the  first  dated  reference  to  the  sarabande  now  becomes  one  con- 
tained in  a  history  written  by  a  friar  in  Mexico.  In  a  passage  describing  the 
dances  of  the  Indians  Duran  said  they  had  one  called  the  cuecuecheuycatl 
which  was  almost  as  lewd  and  offensive  as  a  dance  "que  nuestros  natu- 
rales  usan"  called  the  zarabandaJ*  Duran's  1579  reference  dearly  shows 
that  the  sarabande,  though  danced  by  the  native-born  in  Mexico,  was 
nevertheless  not  an  Indian  dance.  The  "native-born"  would  refer  to  Span- 
iards born  in  Mexico. 

The  references  which  Sachs  collected  will  be  summarized  here.  He 
mentioned  Mariana's  imprecations  on  the  sarabande,  Cervantes's  horror 
of  it,  and  Marino's  disgust  with  it.  Giambattista  Marino  in  1623  published 
a  long  poem  entitled  L'Adone  7T  in  which  he  identified  and  described 
dances  which  he  called  twins,  the  sarabande  and  the  chaconne.  He  said  in 
both  dances  obscene  motions  and  lewd  gestures  were  used.  He  called 
down  the  wrath  of  heaven  on  the  lascivious  inventor  of  these  vulgar 
dances.  Both  dances  he  said  were  imported  from  New  Spain.  The  dancers 
he  found  pantomimed  the  ultimate  intimacies  of  the  conjugal  act.  Their 
dancing,  according  to  him,  was  accompanied  by  the  sound  of  castanets 
pkyed  by  wanton  maidens  who  alternated  the  loud  clack  of  the  castanets 
with  the  snapping  of  their  fingers,  beating  out  the  rhythm  meantime  with 
their  feet  The  men  dancers  beat  on  tambourines.  Far  from  the  staid  dances 
they  kter  became  Marino  knew  them  as  frenetic  orgies  accompanied 
only  by  noise-making  instruments. 

Sachs  listed  several  references  from  other  authors  such  as  Cervantes, 
Lope  de  Vega,  and  Quevedo  Villegas,  all  of  which  show  the  chaconne  as 
well  as  sarabande  to  have  come  from  New  Spain.  In  1599  a  certain  writer 
named  Simon  Agudo  included  in  a  farce  of  his  "an  invitation  to  go  to 
Tampico  in  Mexico  and  there  dance  the  chacona?  Lope  de  Vega  in  La 
frueba  da  los  tmigos  introduced  a  band  of  musicians.  They  are  being 
importuned  to  play.  <Tlay  what?"  they  ask.  "Play  that  chaconne  with 
the  words  beginning:  <Go  to  Tampico *," 78  comes  the  reply.  In  another 
Lope  de  Vega  comedy,  El  amante  agradecido  ( 1 6 1 8  ) ,  a  troop  of  musicians 


96  MUSIC   IN  MEXICO 

start  singing:  "A  jolly  life,  a  jolly  life  we  lead,  dancing  the  chaconne.  It 
came  over  from  the  Indies  by  mail,  and  now  it  dwells  here  in  this  house 
as  its  homej  here  it  will  live  and  die."  70 

From  a  study  of  his  references,  Sachs  came  to  believe  that  the  sarabande 
and  chaconne,  clearly  Neo-Hispanic  in  origin,  showed  negroid  influence. 
Negroes  came  along  with  the  conquistadores  j  one  of  Cort6s's  gunners  was 
a  Negro.  After  Las  Casas  suggested  substituting  Negro  labor  for  Indian 
labor  (in  order  to  save  the  Indian  population  from  extermination)  they 
were  brought  over  in  ever-increasing  numbers.  In  1 580  there  were  slightly 
less  than  15,000  Spaniards  in  New  Spain,  but  over  18,500  Negroes,  and 
almost  1,500  mulattoes.  Throughout  the  colonial  epoch  we  shall  have 
occasion  to  note  the  importance  of  negroid  influences  j  the  dance  forms  of 
the  tterra  caliente,  the  rumba,  the  bomba,  and  even  the  huapango,  all 
show  easily  recognizable  Negro  traits.80 

NOTES 

1.  Bernal  Diaz  del  Castillo,  of.  cit.y  I,  138. 

2.  For  full  biographical  details  see  J.  Garcia  Icazbalceta,  Obras  (Mexico:  Imp.  de 
V.  Agueros,  1896),  III,  5-39. 

3.  Higinio  Angles,  La  musica  en  la  Corte  de  Carlos  V  (Barcelona:  Institute  Espanol 
de  Musicologia,  1 944) ,  p.  20. 

4.  Jesus  Romero  Flores,  Iconografia  Colonial  (Mexico:  Museo  Nacional,  1940), 
p.  90. 

5.  Mendieta,  of.  cit.,  pp.  412,  414. 

6.  Ezequiel  A.  Chavez,  El  frimero  de  los  grandes  educadores  de  la  America 
(Mexico:  Editorial  Jus,  1943),  pp.  49-60. 

j.  C arias  de  Indias  (Madrid:  Ministerio  de  Fomento,  1877),  p.  52. 

8.  Ibid.,  p.  56. 

9.  J.  Garcia  Icazbalceta,  Coleccion  de  Documentos  (Mexico,  1858),  I,  50.  See  also 
E.  A.  Foster,  MotolinWs  History  of  the  Indians  of  New  Sfain  (Berkeley:  The 
Cortes  Society,  1950),  p.  52. 

10.  Col.  de  Documentos  (1858),  I,  109.  "Fray  Juan  Caro,  un  honrado  vie  jo,  el  cual 
introdujo  y  enseno  primero  en  esta  tierra  el  castellano  y  el  canto  de  organo  .  .  ." 

11.  /£*£.,  I,  209-11. 

12.  E.  A.  Foster,  of.  tit.,  p.  8. 

13.  Psalm  114.3  (Vulgate)  =  116.3   (A.V-):  "The  sorrows  of  death  compassed 
me,  and  the  pains  of  hell  gat  hold  on  me  .  .  ."  This  same  psalm  in  a  polyphonic 
setting  by  Morales  was  wing  by  the  Mexico  City  Cathedral  choir  at  the  funeral 
commemoration  for  Charles  V  in  1559.  Although  Motolinia  does  not  say  who 
composed  the  version  the  Tlaxcalans  sang,  it  might  well  also  have  been  Morales's 
setting.  (The  oldest  polyphony  of  Morales  still  extant  today  in  a  Mexican  church 
archive  is  his  Liber  mUsarum,  I,  1 544.) 


TRANSPLANTING  OF  EUROPEAN  CULTURE    97 

14.  During  this  epoch  in  Spanish  history  the  villancico  was  a  poetic  form  be- 
ginning with  a  refrain  (estribillo) ,  continuing  with  a  stanza  (copla)  which  is 
immediately  repeated,  then  the  refrain,  then  a  second  stanza  which  is  imme- 
diately   repeated,    then   the   refrain,    and    so   on.   A    diagram    of    the   form: 
E  —  OC1  —  E  —  C*C2  —  E  —  C»C»  —  E  et  cetera.  The  pattern  can  go  on 
as  long  as  desired.  The  music  fits  the  words,  of  course. 

15.  Col.  de  Documentor  (1858),  I,  79,  81-2,  84-7. 

1 6.  J,  Jesus  Estrada,  "CHsicos  de  Nueva  Espana,"  Schola  Cantorum  (Morelia), 
July,  1945,  p.  91.  The  date  of  appointment  to  the  chapelmastership  was  February 
I>  I539>  but  XuSrez  had  filled  various  musical  posts  since  his  arrival  almost  a 
decade  earlier. 

17.  Col.  de  Docum.  (1858),  I,  24-5. 

1 8.  See  Lota  M.  Spell,  "Music  in  the  Cathedral  of  Mexico  in  the  Sixteenth  Century," 
The  Hispanic  American  Historical  Review,  August,  1946,  p.  296. 

19.  P.  Mariano  Cuevas*  Documentos  Ineditos  del  Siglo  XVI  (Mexico:  Talleres 
Graficos  del  Museo  Nacional  de  Arqueologia  .  .  .  ,  1914),  pp.  98—9. 

20.  J.  Garcia  Icazbalceta,  Nueva  Coleccion  de  Documentos  'para  la  Historia  de 
Mexico  (Mexico,  Imp.  de  Francisco  Diaz  de  Leon,  1889),  II  (Codice  Francis- 
cano),p.  169. 

21.  Ibid.,  pp.  65-6. 

22.  Rafael  Montejano  y  Aguinaga,  "La  Conversion  de  los  indios  por  medio  de  la 
Musica,"  Schola  Cantorum,  September,  1947,  pp.  134—6. 

23.  Angela  Blantenburg,  "German  Missionary  Writers  in  Paraguay,"  Mid-America 
(Chicago),  January,  1947,  p.  4$n. 

24.  Ibid.,  p.  44.  (Quoted  from  a  letter  written  June  1 5,  1 729,  by  Matthias  Strobel.) 

25.  Quoted  from  Henri  Ternaux-Compans,  Voyages,  Relations  et  Memoires  .  .  .  , 
XVI,  218,  in  Montejano  y  Aguinaga,  of.  cif.,  p.  134. 

26.  Constituciones  del  arfobisfado  .  .  .  de  Tenuxtitlan  Mexico  (Mexico:  Juan 
Pablos,  1556),  fol.  YTTiii  recto  (cap.  66). 

27.  Ibid.,  f.  xix  recto. 

28.  Ibid.,  f.  xxxiii  verso. 

29.  Ibid.,  f.  xxxv  recto. 

30.  Ibid.,  f.  xxxrv  verso. 

31.  H.  Angle's,  of.  cit,,  p.  23. 

32.  Ibid.,  p.  10. 

33.  Genaro  Garcia,  Documentos  .  .  .  fora  la  Hittoria  de  Mexico  (1907),  XV, 
141-2. 

34.  Coleccion  de  Documentos  Ineditos  .  .  .  del  Arch&o  de  Indios  (Madrid,  1870), 
XIII,  287. 

35.  For  a  striking  illustration  of  the  changed  attitude  towards  the  Indian,  see  Alonso 
de  Montufar,  <<Garta  del  Arzobispo  de  Mexico  al  consejo  de  Indias  ...,'*  Anales 
del  Museo  Nacional  de  Arqueologia,  Historia  y  Etnografia>  1934,  p.  355. 

36.  Gabriel  Saldlvar,  of.  cit.,  pp.  90-94. 

37.  Juan  de  Torquemada,  Veinte  i  un  libros  rituales  i  Monarquia  Indiana  (Madrid, 
1723),  III,  214. 

38.  Ibid.,  HI,  214. 


98  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

39.  Ibid.,  Ill,  214.  Most  of  wliat  Torquemada  says  in  this  passage  comes  from 
Mendieta,  pp.  412—3. 

40.  Juan  F.  Riano,  Critical  and  Bibliographical  Notes  on  Early  Spanish  Music 
(London:  Bernard  Quaritch,  1887),  pp.  81-94. 

41.  Libros  y  Libreros  en  el  Siglo  XVI  (Mexico:  Publicaciones  del  Archive  General 
de  la  Naci6n,  1914),  pp.  263-281. 

42.  Mendieta,  of.  cit.,  p.  412. 

43.  William  R.  Bonniwell,  A  History  of  the  Dominican  Liturgy  1215-1945  (New 
York,  Joseph  F.  Wagner,  1945),  P-  *95- 

44.  Samnel  A.  Green,  A  Second  Supplementary  List  of  Early  American  Imprints 
(Cambridge  [Mass.]:  University  Press,  1899),  p.  20.  (Quotation  from  George  P. 
Winship.) 

45.  J.  Garcia  Icazbalceta,  Bibliographta  Mexicana  del  Siglo  XVI  (Mexico:  Libreria 
de  Andrade  .  .  .  ,  1886),  p.  124.  Variants  from  modern  usage  were  found  in 
the  prefaces  of  St.  John  Baptist,  St.  Francis,  St.  Augustine,  and  in  the  use  of  bene- 
diction at  requiem;  this  latter  was  a  custom  continued  by  the  Dominicans  into 
the  next  century. 

46.  Emilio  Valt6n  discovered  this  Gradual  and  dated  it  1571 ;  see  Henry  R.  Wagner, 
Nueva  Bibtiografia  Mexicana  del  Siglo  XVI  (Mexico:  Editorial  Polis,  1940), 
p.  25. 

47.  Libros  y  Libreros  en  el  Siglo  XVI,  p.  139. 

48.  H.  R.  Wagner,  of.  cit.,  p.  273. 
4Q.-Libros  y  Libreros  .  .  .  ,p.  139. 

50.  Garcia  Icazbalceta,  BibUografta  .  .  .  ,  p.  329. 

51.  Lota  M.  Spell,  of.  cit.,  p.  315,  especially  note  116.  When  Archbishop  Francisco 
Plancarte  in  1916  presented  the  Newberry  Library  in  Chicago  with  a  copy  he 
stated  he  himself  had  seen  copies  of  each  of  the  jour  editions  of  the  1 576  Gradual. 

52.  Gonzales  Aguirre  Beltran  in  his  article,  "The  Slave  Trade  in  Mexico,"  Hispanic 
American  Historical  Review,  August,  1944,  quotes  this  population  figure,  p.  414. 

53.  Hilarion  Eslava,  Musica  Religiosa  enEspana  (Madrid,  1860),  p.  63. 

54.  L.  M.  Spell,  op.  cit.,  pp.  298-9. 

55.  Ibid.,  p.  299.  Ramos,  the  organist,  had  come  from  Seville  the  previous  year.  His 
son  came  with  him  and  immediately  started  singing  in  the  choir  (p.  300). 

56.  Cuevas,  op.  cit.,  p.  98. 
5  7.  Estrada,  op.  cit.,  p.  9 1 . 

58.  Spell,  op.  cit.,  p.  305  (note  62). 

59.  Francisco  Antonio  Lorenzana,  Concilium  Mexicanum  Provinciale  HI  (Mexico: 
Typ.  Josephi  Antonii  de  Hogal,  1770),  Part  II,  pp.  115-130. 

60.  Cartes  de  Indias  (Madrid:  Ministerio  de  Fomento,  1877),  p.  192. 

61.  Spell,  op.  cit.,  pp.  310,  316. 

62.  Lorenzana,  op.  cit.  (Part  II),  **De  Magistri  Capellae  officio,  &  Cantoribus," 
pp.  66-70. 

63.  Spell,  op.  cit.,  p.  317. 

64.  Steven  Barwidc,  "Sacred  Vocal  Polyphony  in  Early  Colonial  Mexico,"  Harvard 
Ph.D.  Dissertation,  1949,  p.  60. 


TRANSPLANTING  OF  EUROPEAN  CULTURE  99 

65.  Gonzalo  Fernandez  de  Oviedo  y  Valde*s,  Historic  General  y  Natural  de  las  Indias 
(Madrid:  Imp.  de  Real  Academia  de  Historia,  1853),  HI,  304. 

66.  Cervantes  de  Salazar,  Tumulo  Imferial  dela  grand  ciudad  de  Mexico  (Mexico: 
Antonio  de  Espinosa,  1560),  folio  3  verso,  23  v.,  24  r.,  25  r.,  25  v.,  26  r.  The 
only  extant  copy  of  this  book  is  now  in  the  Huntington  Library  at  San  Marino, 
California. 

67.  See  Michael  Praetorius,  Syntagma  Musicum,  Vol.  II:  Translated  by  Harold 
Blumenfeld  (New  Haven,  194.9),  p.  ii  ff. 

68.  Juan  Francisco  del  Barrio  Lorenzot,  Ordenanzas  de  gremios  de  la  Nueva  Esfana 
(Mexico,  Direcci6n  de  Talleres  Graficos  .  .  .  ,  1920),  pp.  80-5. 

69.  According  to  Saldivar,  of.  cit.y  pp.  185-6. 

70.  Diaz  del  Castillo,  of.  cit.y  V,  266.  Sackbute  must  be  identified  as  precursor 
trombones. 

71.  Barwick,  of.  cit.y  p.  135,  states:  "Although  I  do  not  believe  that  the  texts  were 
omitted  only  in  places  where  parts  for  instruments  were  intended,  I  do  feel  that 
instruments  were  used  in  the  performance  of  this  music.  ...  I  have  noted  specific 
indications  in  some  manuscripts  as  to  which  instruments  were  to  play  the  different 
parts." 

72.  Lorenzo  Boturini  Benaduci,  Idea  de  una  nueva  Historia  General  .  .  .  ,p.  91. 

73.  Diaz  del  Castillo,  of.  cit.y  V,  16. 

74-  Herbert  Weinstock,  Mexican  Music  (1940),  p.  9  quotes  Chavez's  opinion.  For 
Saldivar's  see  his  Historia  de  la  Musica  .  .  .  ,  p.  1 59.  See  also  Grand  Dictionnaire 
Universel  du  XIX9  Siicle  (P.  Larousse,  1874),  XII,  444,  coL  3. 

75.  Curt  Sachs,  World  History  of  the  Dance  (New  York:  W.  W.  Norton,  1937), 
p.  367. 

76.  Diego  Duran,  Historia  de  las  Indias  de  Nueva  Esfana  (Mexico:  Imprenta  de 
I.  Escalante,  1880),  II,  230. 

77.  Giovanni  Battista  Marino,  L'Adone  (Turin:  G.  B.  Paravia  &  Co.,  n.d),  p.  376. 
The  stanzas  in  question  are  in  Canto  Ventecismo,  83-85. 

78.  Ricardo  del  Arco  y  Garay,  La  Sociedad  Esfanola  en  las  Qbras  Dramaticas  de 
Lofe  de  Vega  (Madrid:  Escelicer,  S.  L.,  1942),  p.  916. 

79.  Ibid.,  p.  91 5. 

80.  See  Saldivar,  of.  tit.,  "La  Influencia  Africana,"  pp.  219-229. 


THE  CULMINATION  AND  DECLINE 
OF  NEO-HISPANIC  MUSIC 


SOURCES 


The  student  of  Mexican  colonial  architecture  or  colonial  painting  will 
find  interesting  remains  almost  everywhere  he  travels  in  central  Mexico. 
From  Oaxaca  and  Merida  on  the  south  and  southeast  to  Zacatecas  and 
Durango  on  the  north  and  northwest,  and  from  Jalapa  on  the  east  to 
Guadalajara  on  the  west,  he  will  find  in  almost  every  town  of  any  size 
or  importance  a  colonial  monument  or  two  well  worth  study. 

But  with  music  the  case  is  different  Colonial  music  manuscripts  by  an 
unkind  fate  have  disappeared  nearly  everywhere,  and  in  only  the  barest 
handful  of  Mexican  centers  do  any  still  exist.  In  many  a  town  where  a 
now  disused  colonial  organ  may  sit,  still  testifying  to  the  important  role 
music  once  played  in  the  life  of  that  town,  all  music  manuscripts  and 
printed  music  books  will  have  vanished  forever.  Why  this  loss  of  colonial 
manuscripts  and  books?  The  reasons  are  principally  these:  neglect  and 
wilful  destruction. 

Priceless  music  manuscript  books  containing  the  greatest  European  and 
colonial  polyphony  of  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries  have  on 
occasion  fallen  into  the  hands  of  persons  who  knew  nothing  of  their  value. 
As  an  instance  the  so-called  Valdes  Codex  may  be  cited.  Some  years  ago 
a  priest,  Padre  Octaviano  Valdes  from  Tacubaya,  came  upon  a  group  of 
Indians  in  the  small  village  of  Cacalomacan  who  had  in  their  possession 
a  28o-page  music  manuscript  book  bound  in  worn  parchment.  Thumbing 
through  its  leaves  Padre  Vald6s  was  suddenly  startled  when  he  came 


100 


NEO-HISPANIC  MUSIC  101 

upon  the  name  of  Palestrina.  He  looked  further  through  the  book  and 
found  that  it  contained  no  less  than  five  Masses  attributed  to  Palestrina: 
Aeterna  Christi  munera,  A<ve  Regina  coelorumy  Gia  ju  chi  irfebbe  caray 
Quern  dicunt  homines,  and  Christus  resurgent.  The  Indians  who  had 
owned  the  book  thought  it  was  only  worthless  paper,  and  gladly  gave  it 
upj  one  of  them  told  the  padre  that  but  a  short  time  before  they  had 
owned  another  music  book  of  the  same  kind,  but  that  they  had  lost  it. 

When  he  took  it  back  to  Mexico  City,  Padre  Vald6s  found  that  four 
of  the  Masses  attributed  to  Palestrina  in  his  newly  acquired  codex  were 
indeed  authentic  Masses,  published  originally  in  1590,  1599,  and  1600 
collections;  but  the  fifth,  Christus  resurgent?  Is  it  a  Palestrina  Mass 
hitherto  unknown?  one  that  should  be  added  to  the  canon  of  94?  That 
question  is  still  unsolved.  But  what  of  the  other  compositions  in  Padre 
Valdes's  find?  Two  of  them  turned  out  to  be  the  only  polyphonic  pieces 
with  Aztecan  (Nahuatl)  text  still  preserved}  these  two  pieces  were  simple 
four-part  hymns  in  honor  of  the  Virgin  whose  music  later  in  this  chapter 
is  transcribed  into  modern  notation.  Other  compositions  by  early  Neo- 
Hispanic  composers  and  by  their  European  contemporaries  made  this 
book  as  exciting  a  discovery  as  the  finding  of  a  genuine  but  uncatalogued 
Stradivarius. 

If  by  chance  the  Vald6s  book  was  recovered,  many  more  of  similar 
worth  have  perished  simply  through  neglect.  And  still  other  music  books 
have  perished  during  the  periodic  storms  that  have  swept  bands  of  sol- 
diers into  such  cathedrals  as  those  at  Morelia  and  M6rida  where  they  have 
been  for  a  time  quartered,  only  to  leave  after  the  cathedral  had  been 
stripped  of  its  artistic  treasures  as  well  as  the  gold  on  the  altar.  Just  as 
during  the  period  of  Cromwellian  stress  military  occupation  of  churches 
and  cathedrals  took  a  heavy  toll  of  cultural  monuments  such  as  organs 
and  stained  glass,  so  during  the  periods  of  revolution  in  Mexico  military 
occupation  has  resulted  in  many  irreparable  losses. 

The  two  cathedrals  which  have  perhaps  suffered  least  have  been  those 
at  Puebla  and  at  Mexico  City,  and  it  is  to  these  two  principally  that  the 
traveler  in  search  of  musical  materials  from  the  colonial  period  will  go. 
The  tesoros  artlsticos  at  these  two  great  cathedrals  still  contain  enough 
NeoJffispanic  polyphony  to  afford  a  basis  for  judging  the  magnitude  of 
the  colonial  achievement  Though  perhaps  that  which  still  remains  is  in 
comparison  with  that  which  has  been  lost  a$  the  visible  part  of  an  iceberg 
is  to  the  subsurface  invisible  part,  still  the  extant  Neo-Hispanic  repertory 


MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 


is  of  sufficient  magnitude  to  warrant  judgments  concerning  style,  musical 
substance,  technique  of  composition,  and  even  performance  methods. 


THE  PRINTING  OF  PART-MUSIC 

No  Neo-Hispanic  polyphony  was  printed  during  the  colonial  epoch. 
Some  monodic  music  continued  to  be  published  in  the  seventeenth  and 
eighteenth  centuries:  the  1604  Quatuor  Passiones  by  Juan  Navarro,  the 
1725  Breve  Noticia  del  Canto  Llano  by  Manuel  Sanchez,1  and  the  1770 
Missa  Gothica  seu  Mozarabka  et  Officium  itidem  Gothicum  edited  by 
Francisco  Lorenzana,2  for  instance.  But  polyphony  was  not  published, 
partly  because  printing  of  all  types  became  inordinately  expensive  after 
1600,  and  also  of  course  because  the  market  for  some  of  the  very  difficult 
part-music  written  by  such  Neo-Hispanic  masters  as  Franco  and  Padilla 
must  have  been  quite  limited. 

It  was  not  exclusively  the  monopolistic  practices  of  the  home  country 
which  prevented  New  Spain  from  developing  a  music  printing  industry. 
Even  in  the  home  country  the  printing  of  polyphonic  music  lagged.  No 
Attaignant  or  Gardano  settled  early  Spanish  music  printing  of  part-music 
on  a  firm  basis,  and  consequently  all  of  Morales's  music  was  published 
abroad,  as  was  also  all  of  Guerrero's  sacred  music,  except  one  book.  Vic- 
toria published  his  first  Spanish  collection  as  kte  in  his  career  as- 1600. 
The  first  polyphony  published  in  the  Spanish  capital  was  Philip  Rogier*s 
book  of  Masses  (1598)5  Victoria's  Missae,  Magnificat,  Motecta,  Psalmi 
.  .  .  (1600)  was  second,  and  Alfonso  Lobo's  Liber  Primus  Missarum 
(1602)  was  third.  These  books  were  immediately  sent  over  to  Mexico, 
and  a  copy  of  Rogier's  book  is  still  preserved  at  Puebla.  Five  copies  of  the 
Lobo  1602  book  are  scattered  over  Mexico,  one  each  at  Mexico  City, 
Puebla,  Oaxaca,  Guadalajara,  and  Morelia. 

If  at  the  same  time  a  printer  of  polyphony  was  found  for  Madrid  one 
had  been  found  for  Mexico  City  an  entirely  different  story  of  Neo-His- 
panic culture  might  now  be  known.  Instead  of  only  literary  personages 
such  as  Alarc6n  and  Sor  Juana  Ines  de  la  Cruz  as  the  bright  ornaments 
of  Neo-Hispanic  culture,  we  should  perhaps  have  heard  also  of  com- 
posers such  as  Franco,  Bermudez,  and  Zumaya.  The  superlative  reputa- 
tions of  the  two  literary  figures  we  have  just  named  rest  not  upon  any  pro- 
nouncedly "Mexican"  traits  in  their  writing.  Alarcon  even  returned  to 
Spain  and  so  thoroughly  devoted  himself  to  Spanish  themes  that  without 


NEO-HISPANIC  MUSIC  103 

a  knowledge  of  his  biography  no  one  would  ever  guess  he  had  attended 
the  University  of  Mexico.  Spanish  approval  has  assured  these  two  authors 
their  international  reputations.  But  Spanish  approval  was  perforce  denied 
the  composers  we  have  named  because  their  works  have  had  no  way  of 
reaching  European  eyes. 

Even  yet  the  bulk  of  Neo-Hispanic  polyphony  seems  destined  to  re- 
main unpublished.  The  issuance  of  such  renowned  historical  editions  as 
the  Denkmaler  der  Tonkunst  in  Qsterreich  and  in  Bayern  was  in  every 
instance  promoted  in  the  same  spirit  that  a  public  monument  to  a  dead 
national  hero  is  promoted.  Logically  the  publication  of  Neo-Hispanic 
musical  monuments  now  would  redound  more  to  the  advantage  of  Spain 
than  to  the  advantage  of  Mexico.  In  this  connection  k  is  interesting  to 
note  that  the  only  large-scale  publication  venture  involving  a  Neo-His- 
panic master  currently  in  the  offing  is  being  editorially  supervised  by  a 
prominent  Spanish  expatriate  now  resident  in  Mexico.8  Although  his 
work  is  subsidized  by  the  Departamento  de  Bellas  Artes,  his  interest  in 
the  project  and  background  for  it  steins  from  his  own  Spanish  antecedents, 
undoubtedly. 

If  the  publication  of  the  total  extant  repertory  were  now  to  be  at- 
tempted, a  subsidy  of  the  magnitude  provided  for  the  Tudor  Church 
Music  ten-volume  series  by  the  Carnegie  Trust  would  be  needed.  The 
presently  known  music  from  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  century 
polyphonists  would,  according  to  informed  estimate,  involve  six  or  seven 
volumes  if  printing  in  the  style  of  Tudor  Church  Music  were  attempted 


THE  EXTENT  OF  THE  REPERTORY 

In  conspectus  the  Neo-Hispanic  polyphonic  repertory  of  the  sixteenth, 
seventeenth,  and  early  eighteenth  centuries  consists  of  the  following 
works: 4 

Hernando  Franco  (fl.  1580) 7  Magnificats,  2  Salves,  miscella- 
neous psalms,  hymns,  and  respon- 
sories 

Juan  de  Lienas  (i6th  cent.) 3  Masses  (one  a  Requiem),  a  Mag- 

nificat,  4  motets,  a  set  of  Lamenta- 
tions 

Pedro  Hernandez  and  Fructos  del  Castfllo 

(1600? )    One  motet  each 


104.  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

Pedro  Bermudez  (fl.  1605) 4  Salves  and  a  psalm 

Bernardo  de  Peralta  (1640?) Magnificat 

Francisco  Lopez  y  Capflla  (fl.  1645) 3  Masses,  2  Magnificats,  12  motets, 

a  set  of  Lamentations 
Juan  de  Padilla  (fl.  1650) 5  Masses,  5  Magnificats,  a  passion, 

miscellaneous  motets  and  vfllandcos 
Antonio  de  Salazar  (fl.  1690) 7  hymns  for  the  church  year,  2 

psalms,  miscellaneous  vfllandcos 
Manuel  Zumaya  (fl.  1720) 3  Magnificats,  2  Misereres,  2  sets 

of  Lamentations,  miscellaneous  vi- 

llandcos 

The  bunching  of  Neo-Hispanic  composers  suggests  that  the  period  of 
greatest  activity  ky  between  1575  and  1650.  During  that  particular  75- 
year  period  colonial  life  had  sufficiently  stabilized  itself  so  that  a  full 
musical  apparatus  could  be  provided  in  the  chief  centers  of  population. 
The  silver  and  gold  mines  of  the  colony  had  established  it  as  the  richest 
in  the  Spanish  empire,  and  composers  emigrated  as  readily  to  New  Spain 
as  they  have  emigrated  to  the  United  States  during  the  present  century. 

HERNANDO  FRANCO 

Although  the  lives  of  most  Neo-Hispanic  composers  remain  yet  to  be 
investigated,  Hernando  Franco  has  emerged  from  anonymity.  During  the 
early  'thirties  Jesus  Estrada,  eminent  organist  of  the  Mexico  City  Ca- 
thedral, first  began  the  laborious  task  of  transcribing  Franco's  music  into 
modern  notation.  In  1934  Saldivar  after  studying  the  Adas  del  Cabildo 
Eclesiastico  at  the  metropolitan  cathedral  published  a  valuable  summary 
of  the  information  he  found  there.  More  recently  two  American  scholars 
have  expanded  our  knowledge  of  cathedral  music  in  Mexico  during  the 
sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries,  and  have  both  discovered  new  facts 
concerning  Franco.  The  following  summary  therefore  represents  a  com- 
posite of  information  derived  from  Estrada,  Saldivar,  Lota  Spell,  and 
Steven  Barwick. 

Like  most  early  colonial  chapelmasters  at  the  Mexico  City  Cathedral, 
Franco  was  imported  from  Europe.  Although  his  birthdate  has  not  yet 
been  fixed  he  is  known  to  have  been  born  in  the  village  of  La  Serena  near 
Alcantara  5  (Alcantara  lies  on  the  Tagus  River  a  few  miles  from  the  Portu- 
guese border).  That  information  concerning  his  early  life  should  be  lack- 


NEO-HISPANIC  MUSIC  105 

ing  does  not  surprise  us  when  we  consider  that  little  or  nothing  is  known  of 
the  early  lives  of  such  more  important  composers  as  Morales  and  Guerrero. 
Franco  during  1542,  or  thereabouts,  was  in  Espinar  (approximately  23 
miles  from  Avila).  Espinar  was  the  home  of  the  Alamo  family,  and 
Franco  during  his  sojourn  there  knew  Lazaro  del  Alamo  6  who  later 
(1556)  was  to  become  chapelmaster  at  Mexico  City. 

Franco's  arrival  date  in  the  New  World,  though  like  his  birthdate  still 
uncertain,  may  have  occurred  in  1554.  The  patron  who  sponsored  his 
coming  was  a  civil  functionary,  Sedena  by  name,  an  oidor,  who  later  be- 
came rector  of  the  University  of  Mexico.  At  first  after  his  arrival  in  the 
New  World  Franco  settled  in  Guatemala,  but  soon  after  Alamo's  chapel- 
mastership  ended  (1570)  he  was  invited  to  Mexico  City.  The  invitation 
was  promoted  by  Sedena,  but  Alamo's  personal  acquaintance  may  have 
had  something  to  do  with  it. 

Franco's  immediate  predecessor  in  the  Mexico  City  chapelmastership, 
Juan  de  Victoria,  was  so  unwise  as  to  allow  his  choirboys  to  appear  in  a 
farcical  interlude  7  (December,  1574)  satirizing  the  viceroy's  taxation 
policy.  A  collector  of  the  newly  imposed  (and  thoroughly  hated)  alcabala 
tax  appeared  on  the  scene  and  tumbled  some  nude  choirboys  out  of  bed 
The  moral  taken  by  the  thoroughly  amused  audience  was  that  the  new 
tax  would  strip  everyone  naked.  For  this  little  venture  in  topical  satire  de 
Victoria  was  allowed  to  languish  a  few  days  in  prison,  and  although  the 
archbishop  soon  enough  secured  his  release,  he  either  died  shortly  there- 
after or  was  relieved  of  his  chapelmaster  responsibilities  and  retired  to 
obscurity.  In  any  event  Franco  was  engaged  as  his  successor  on  May  20, 
J575j  frith  a  stipulated  salary  of  600  pesos  de  oro  comun.8  Along  with 
him  was  hired  his  cousin,  Alonso  de  Trujillo,  who  as  precentor  was  en- 
gaged at  an  annual  salary  of  200  pesos  de  oro  comun.  These  salaries  may 
be  compared  with  the  dean's  (1,800)  pesos),  a  canon's  (1,200),  a  preb- 
endary's (840),  and  an  unbeneficed  clergyman's  (240). 

Franco  wisely  abstained  from  choirboy  plays,  thereby  avoiding  all 
danger  of  affronting  the  viceroy.  However,  his  career  did  not  move  with 
perfect  smoothness.  Within  four  years  after  his  appointment  to  the  chapel- 
mastership  he  had  incurred  such  huge  debts  that  the  ecclesiastical  cabildo 
only  saved  him  and  his  cousin,  Trujillo,  from  dire  consequences  by  order- 
ing paid  in  their  behalf  the  sum  of  500  pesos  in  partial  satisfaction  of  a 
4,OOO-peso.debt  which  these  two  had  run  up  with  the  corregidor.  The 
cabildo  in  ordering  this  joo-peso  partial  payment  noted  the  value  of 


io6  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

Franco's  services  to  the  cathedral  "and  agreed  to  take  care  of  the  bills  as 
a  special  favor."  g  The  bills  in  aggregate  equaled  Franco's  and  Trujillo's 
combined  salaries  for  five  years.  Someone  has  asked,  how  could  these 
two,  both  in  orders  (all  Spanish  church  musicians,  Morales,  Guerrero, 
Victoria,  and  all  the  rest,  were  in  orders)  have  run  up  such  huge  debts? 
The  most  often-mentioned  vice  of  the  clergy  in  New  Spain  during  this 
epoch  was  gambling.10  Since  the  cabildo  accepted  responsibility  for  the 
debts  without  demurring  no  serious  derelection  must  have  been  involved. 
A  gambling  debt  might  furnish  a  plausible  explanation  for  such  a  large 
sum. 

On  September  i,  1581,  Franco  was  appointed  a  prebendary  to  fill  a 
vacancy  left  by  the  death  of  a  certain  Manuel  de  Nova.  A  little  kter  dur- 
ing the  same  month  (September  19)  the  cabildo  quashed  a  penalty  against 
him  for  having  violated  a  holy  day.  Franco,  it  seems,  had  actually  taken 
his  young  choristers  to  a  fiesta  on. a  day  set  aside  for  remembering  the 
seven  dolors.  The  next  year,  1582,  Archbishop  Moya  y  Contreras  asked 
the  cabildo  to  reduce  the  salaries  of  singers  and  instrumentalists  because 
the  expenses  of  the  new  building  program  were  eating  up  the  arch- 
diocesan  revenues. 

When  in  July  Franco  learned  that  he  was  to  be  reduced  to  300  pesos,  a 
fifty  per  cent  reduction  in  salary,  and  his  cousin  Trujillo  also  learned  he 
was  to  be  correspondingly  reduced,  the  pair  resigned.11  Twice  again  dur- 
ing the  month  they  affirmed  to  the  cabildo  their  intention  of  quitting. 
On  July  19  Franco  even  told  the  cabildo  to  go  ahead  and  keep  the  amount 
of  his  salary  that  he  had  already  earned  during  1582  before  the  reduc- 
tion was  announced — in  a  spirit  of  bravado,  no  doubt.  With  his  musicians 
all  out  on  strike  and  no  volunteer  songbirds  to  fill  their  places,  the  arch- 
bishop a  month  later  (in  August)  changed  his  mind  on  salary  cuts  and 
asked  all  of  the  singers  to  come  back.  They  did,  but  in  February,  1583, 
a  cut  in  Franco's  salary  was  again  announced,  this  time  not  to  300  (as  had 
been  announced  the  previous  year),  but  to  400.  In  September  of  1583 
his  salary  was  mulcted  another  100  pesos  "because  he  had  failed  to  give 
the  choirboys  proper  instruction." 

Most  of  the  information  concerning  Franco  is  of  this  financial  type, 
simply  because  the  cabildo  records  dealt  so  extensively  with  money  mat- 
ters. In  May,  1584,  Franco  was  raised  to  450,  and  his  subordinates  in 
the  musical  establishment  were  all  boosted  to  what  they  had  earned  before 
any  cuts  were  made  in  1582.  But  Franco  was  enjoined  to  teach  singing 
to  the  choirboys}  he  failed  to  fulfill  his  duties  as  a  teacher,  however,  and 


NEO-HISPANIC  MUSIC  107 

later  in  the  year  50  pesos  were  taken  from  the  450  and  given  to  another 
priest  who  taught  the  choirboys  not  only  reading  and  writing,  but  also 
singing  in  addition.  In  November  of  1585  Franco  was  ailing;  on  the  22nd 
he  attended  the  last  session  of  the  cabildo  and  on  the  28th  he  died.  As 
a  mark  of  honor  he  was  buried  in  the  main  chapel  of  the  cathedral  back 
of  the  viceroy's  seat.12 

The  cathedral  in  which  Franco's  music  was  first  heard  stood  where 
the  present  sagrario  stands.  The  present  imposing  cathedral,  one  of  the 
world's  largest,  was  not  started  until  1573,"  just two  years  before  Franco 
was  hired.  During  his  incumbency,  therefore,  the  archbishop  well  needed 
every  peso  he  could  lay  hands  on$  approximately  200  workmen  were 
constantly  employed  during  the  last  quarter  of  the  century  in  the  initial 
building  operations.  The  zocalo,  where  now  rise  the  present  cathedral 
edifice,  the  Palado  Nadonal,  and  other  important  buildings,  was  then 
still  an  island,  just  as  it  had  been  since  Tenochtitlan  was  founded  in  the 
mythical  year,  1325.  Building  materials  therefore  had  to  be  brought  over 
in  canoes,  and  the  constant  hum  of  Indian  workmen  laying  the  foundation 
of  the  new  cathedral  was  a  part  of  Franco's  everyday  existence  during  his 
decade  as  chapelmaster.14 

In  his  cathedral  the  choir  sat  in  the  central  nave  surrounded  by  gilded 
railings.15  The  placement  of  the  choir  in  the  middle  of  the  central  nave 
is,  of  course,  normal  procedure  in  Spanish  cathedrals,  but  for  those  who 
have  never  seen  such  an  arrangement,  seems  novel.  The  long  central 
nave  with  a  continuous  sweep  of  vision  which  we  associate  with  Gothic 
cathedrals  was  therefore  missing  j  instead  the  choir  bisected  the  nave.  To 
the  west  of  Franco's  choir  was  the  altar  of  pardon  and  the  door  of  pardon. 
To  the  east  was  another  altar  and  door.  In  the  choir  itself  sat  not  only  the 
singers,  but  all  the  dignitaries  also.  With  their  stalls  separated,  half  on 
one  side  and  half  on  the  other,  the  choir  members  constantly  sat  facing 
each  other.  The  answering  back  and  forth  such  an  arrangement  makes 
possible  is  an  everlasting  presupposition  in  all  Neo-Hispanic  (and  Span- 
ish) polyphony. 

The  music  was  of  two  types,  of  course:  plainsong  and  polyphony,  with 
the  .precentor  in  charge  of  plainsong  and  chapelmaster  in  charge  of  po- 
lyphony. Most  sixteenth  century  music  we  now  know — such  as  Palestrina's 
Pope  Marcellus  Mass  or  his  Stabat  Mater— does  not  require  the  intoning 
of  interspersed  sections  in  plainsong.  Only  the  Mass  sections  beginning 
with  "Et  in  terra  pax"  and  cTatrem  omnipotentem"  require  plainsong 
intonations— and  those  are  usually  left  out  in  performances.  As  a  conse- 


io8 


MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 


quence,  present-day  students,  even  those  who  have  heard  some  Palestrina, 
know  nothing  of  his  or  anyone  else's  vast  numbers  of  compositions  where 
plainsong  and  polyphony  alternate.  Nearly  all  the  Neo-Hispanic  polyph- 
ony that  has  descended  to  us  is  of  the  alternating  type—  a  verse  in  plain- 
song,  then  one  in  polyphony,  one  in  plainsong,  and  one  in  polyphony, 
and  so  on.  This  alternation  back  and  forth  establishes  a  kind  of  large  duple 
rhythm  that  is  extremely  important  to  the  success  of  the  music.  This 
oscillation  between  two  antiphonal  choirs—  one  singing  a  verse  in  polyph- 
ony, the  other  a  verse  in  plainsong—  reminds  one  of  a  swinging  pendu- 
lum. Our  first  example  shows  how  this  principle  of  alternation  worked 
in  the  singing  of  a  penitential  psalm  (Psalm  VI). 


3)o  mint,  xefnfurort 


{&t4W*6J 


•  Ji  J>  A  1 1 


i.     s*  -  mi  -    **,  m      H 
JM  -tf«*  /«      /  -7»     iu  .  -  - 


p  r  p  p  P  F  P  r  p  p 

*** ***'*•-**  **3' '**'**,     yu»-*i-*m 


. 

i,  I  .ij.i  jj  i 


'.^.MP.f  P  If    ^ 


NEO-HISPANIC  MUSIC 

StJ  tu      Jo-  */•»«    ut-yut-  »««!        in 


109 


j=F*= 


-,,.* 


TM    !f   J 
^r     r*.. 


i      '7 


-6w  >i^- 


f  r  P  P  pp  p  p  p  p  p  p 


Uc-tw* 


is  J6»-&MHr-4Mi/iy«-> 


^K?*  ~ 


110 


MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

-     tu  -  tos     -ntt  • 


us: 


. 
ij---   |-j7  j  ^ 


P   -'P    f    F    F   I 


33 


-  /ua  o-  nr-A*  -  0  t^n-Mt  oar    ,s« 


- 

j 

•*• 


;R  V  v  P'K  v 


-  i*t  -     oR.-        3>o  -  /*£  - 


-  «-a-  -  -  -    new 


TWtf  0»7»  -&  ' 


H 


The  reliance  on  antiphony  as  a  prindpal  artistic  device  was  especially 
suited  to  the  texts  chosen  by  most  Neo-Hispanic  composers  whose  music 
survives.  Their  Magnificats,  their  Salves,  their  Lamentations,  and  their 
psalms,  all  employ  texts  which  seem  naturally  to  call  for  antiphonal  treat- 


NEO-HISPANIC  MUSIC  in 

ment.  It  is  a  well  known  fact  that  Hebrew  poetry,  even  in  translation, 
preserves  a  large  duple  rhythm.  Cognizance  of  this  fact  is  taken  today 
when  ministers  of  religion  in  both  Hebrew  and  Christian  denominations 
read  the  psalms  responsively.  The  very  structure  of  the  poetry  itself 
suggests  such  answering  back  and  forth.  Even  with  only  a  cursory  glance 
at  the  words  of  some  such  psalm  as  that  just  transcribed  from  Franco 
one  can  see  how  each  verse  divides  itself  naturally  into  two  balancing 
halves  and  how  each  odd-numbered  verse  alternates  with  each  even- 
numbered  verse  in  going  back  and  forth  over  a  single  idea.  The  Mag- 
nificat and  certain  other  poetic  passages  from  Scripture  show  this  same 
tendency  towards  parallelism  5  all  students  of  Hebrew  poetry  recognise 
this  structural  device  as  a  commonpkce.  Recognizing  this  basic  structure 
in  the  texts,  one  can  understand  why  the  composers  so  often  wrote  music 
that  <ctends  to  sound  like  a  striped  peppermint  bar" — to  carry  out  the 
analogy,  with  the  white  stripe  representing  the  plainsong,  and  the  red 
the  polyphony. 

Particularly  notable  in  Franco's  psalm-setting  just  given  (Mode  VIII) 
is  his  subtle  handling  of  such  words  as  morte  in  verse  5  with  the  unex- 
pected b  flat  in  the  bass,  and  his  vigorous  melisma — distributed  among  all 
the  voices — on  furore  oculos  in  verse  7.  The  ending  of  the  psalm  (not 
given)  leads  immediately  into  the  Requiem  aeternam. 

THE  MAGNIFICATS 

Franco's  most  artful  compositions  are  his  seven  Magnificats.  He  un- 
doubtedly composed  eight — one  for  each  tone — but  the  Magnificat  for 
the  Third  Tone  seems  to  have  been  lost.  In  order  properly  to  evalue  his 
achievement  it  is  necessary  to  know  something  of  the  way  Magnificats 
were  written  during  his  century.  Most  musicians  today,  if  they  know  any 
Magnificat-setting  at  all,  know  J.  S.  Bach's.  Much  more  helpful,  however, 
for  an  understanding  of  the  Magnificats  now  about  to  be  discussed, 
would  be  a  knowledge  of  Morales's  or  Guerrero's.  The  list  of  sixteenth 
century  composers  who  wrote  important  Magnificats  is  very  large  j  certain 
procedures  were  followed  by  everyone  who  wrote  them — Palestrina, 
Lassus,  de  Monte,  de  la  Rue,  Duarte  Lobo— to  name  composers  of 
different  nationalities.  According  to  a  recent  scholar's  analysis  (Carl  Heinz 
Illing  in  a  1936  doctoral  dissertation,  Zur  Techirik  der  Magnificat 
Composition  des  ;6.  Jahrhunderts) :  ( i )  the  composer  was  not  at  liberty 


112 


MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 


to  pick  his  themes  at  random  out  of  the  air  but  had  to  use  the  psalm-tone 
melodic  formulae}  (2)  each  short  section  of  the  Magnificat  had  to  end 
on  a  chord  whose  root  was  the  final  of  the  "tone"}  (3)  the  more  learned 
devices  such  as  extended  canon  or  imitation  by  inversion  were  usually 
reserved  to  the  Gloria  Patri  at  the  end. 

Palestrina  wrote  35  Magnificats,  Lassus  100,  yet  each  of  these  com- 
posers only  once  set  all  the  verses  of  the  Magnificat.16  The  common  pro- 
cedure was  to  set  alternate  verses.  Occasionally  the  odd  verses  were  set, 
but  much  more  commonly  the  even  verses  were  set.  Morales,  however, 
in  his  first  collection  of  five  Magnificats  published  at  Venice  in  1542  set  all 
dozen  verses  consecutively.  Franco  chose  to  follow  Morales's  primitive 
practice,  and  each  of  his  seven  still  preserved  Magnificats  therefore  in- 
cludes all  the  verses  consecutively  set.  It  is  known  that  Palestrina's  eight- 
part  Magnificat  (the  one  in  which  he  provided  continuous  music  for  all 
twelve  verses  of  the  Magnificat)  was  designed  for  the  Papal  Choir  as  an 
extremely  choice  work}  17  the  other  34  Magnificats  were  designed  for 
the  Julian  Choir  and  the  St.  John  Lateran  Choir — less  important  choirs. 
Franco's  settings  speak  well  for  the  pretensions  of  his  choir,  and  for  the 
seriousness  of  his  own  purpose. 

The  fidelity  with  which  Franco  followed  the  plainsong  intonations  in 
constructing  his  themes  deserves  note.  The  openings  (cantus  part)  of  his 
Magnificats  illustrate  this  fidelity. 


a-ni-ma  mt-A  .3» 
Fr**co:  M+*nii 


P  P  P.f'  P  P  Jl 


^ 


A-nt-Ma 


-  -  -  -  «V4 T-x«*r 


NEO-HISPANIC  MUSIC 


113 


That  Franco  was  but  following  the  universally  prescribed  custom  in 
generating  his  own  melodies  from  plainsong  formulae  can  be  proved  by 
comparing  his  Magnificats  with  those  of  any  other  Neo-Hispanic  com- 
posers one -may  choose  to  examine.  Below,  for  instance,  are  the  beginnings 
of  two  Magnificats  by  Lopez  y  Capilla  and  of  one  of  Bernardo  de  Peralta. 


i 


Lottl  y  CopHIa, 

Majitificat    X»*tX 


**/?# 


cat 


Efc£ 


1 


m 


a-  TtL-mA  me -a  3>» 


i  me  -a  Jo-  mi  -  nxm 


-FT 

Mum. 


a   - 


I  "ma    mi  *  , 


Having  committed  himself  to  the  traditionally  accepted  idea  that  a 
Magnificat  should  simply  ring  changes  on  an  already  thrice-familiar 
melodic  formula,  the  sixteenth  century  composer's  task  then  became  one 
of  demonstrating  his  taste  and  skill  as  a  variationist.  The  utter  familiarity 
of  the  formulae  redounded  to  his  advantage  because  it  allowed  him  to 
indulge  in  much  more  subtle  types  of  variation  than  a  modern  composer 
working  with  a  theme  the  audience  does  not  know  is  allowed.  The  vari- 
ation-devices were  of  several  types.  Palestrina  often  chose  to  intersperse 
extraneous  notes  or  rests  between  successive  essential  notes  in  the  formula. 
Henry  Coates  in  his  study  of  Palestrina  (1938)  showed  how  "each  part 
of  the  psalm  tone  generates  contrapuntal  melodies,"  18  and  gave  the 
following  example.  (The  asterisks  stand  above  notes  which  belong  to 
the  plainsong  formula.) 

Magnificat 


it  XUL  t'S0/J 


an  -  cU-  lat    Su     _ 


Franco  used  the  same  means  of  extension  by  interpolation;  the  opening 
of  the  cantus  part  in  his  Magnificat  t  shows  such  an  extension. 

A  favorite  device  with  such  Flemings  as  de  la  Rue  and  de  Monte 19 
consisted  in  stating  the  melodic  f  ormula  as  an  inner  voice  cantus  finnus  in 
long  notes.  Meanwhile  they  contrived  a  play  of  imitation  between  or 
among  surrounding  voices,  but  the  imitative  fragments  usually  were 


II4  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

melodically  unrelated  to  the  psalm-tone  formula.  Another  device  some- 
times used  consisted  in  stating  the  psalm-tone  formula  first  in  long  notes, 
then  in  successively  shorter  notes.  The  Gloria  Patri  from  Franco's  Mag- 
nificat (Tone  VIII)  shows  such  a  speed-up  in  note  values  at  the  end. 
The  Sicut  erat  from  the  same  Magnificat  shows  a  canon  worked  out  on 
the  notes  of  the  psalm  tone. 


Magnificat      ToiuyaL(^ior/aTairi) 
' 


NEO-HISPANIC  MUSIC 
T<mtlBl(Sieut  ami) 


"5 


MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 


Franco's  technical  competence  is  beyond  dispute;  if  he  has  nothing 
quite  as  elaborate  to  show  as  Palestrina's  double  canon  at  the  octave  and 
fifth  in  the  Sicut  erat  of  Magnificat  IV  (Lateran  Magnificats),  or  the 
canon  cancrizans  at  the  end  of  Magnificat  V)  or  the  canon  by  inversion  at 
the  end  of  Magnificat  VI,  neither  for  that  matter  do  Morales  or  Guerrero 
in  their  Magnificats,  The  various  refinements  that  acute  students  of  six- 
teenth century  counterpoint  have  been  led  to  expect  in  all  the  better- 


NEO-HISPANIC  MUSIC  117 

fabricated  works  of  the  period  are  certainly  there:  his  handling  of  the 
nota  cambiata  is  at  all  times  meticulous;  accented  syllables  are  always 
placed  on  notes,  or  groups  of  notes,  with  longer  values  than  weak  syllables 
in  the  same  word;  the  ambitus  of  the  voices  in  their  respective  modes  are 
carefully  preserved;  the  rhythmic  problems  involved  in  what  we  are  now 
pleased  to  call  "ties"  are  all  handled  in  approved  fashion  5  the  rhythmic 
balance  between  voices  is  well  contrived;  the  melodic  and  harmonic  pro- 
gressions will  satisfy  the  most  fastidious  text-book  theorist. 

Students  who  are  unfamiliar  with  the  convention  that  required  the 
ending  of  every  section  in  the  Magnificat  with  a  complete  or  incomplete 
chord  built  on  the  final  of  the  formula  may  perhaps  cavil  at  twelve  short 
sections  all  coming  to  rest  with  chords  on  the  same  root.  The  taking  of 
exception,  however,  to  this  procedure  is  as  anachronistic  as  the  taking  of 
exception  to  the  dances  in  a  Bach  keyboard  suite  because  they  all  "are  in 
the  same  key."  Franco,  like  most  of  his  contemporaries,  stayed  away  from 
the  "chord"  with  which  each  section  was  required  to  end  until  the  final 
cadence  in  the  section.  It  may  be  worthwhile  to  remind  those  who  are 
disposed  to  look  at  Magnificats  that  I  and  II  Tone  Magnificats  end  on  a 
D  chord  (G  if  one  flat  is  in  the  signature)  ;  III  Tone  end  on  an  A  chord; 
IV  Tone  on  E;  V  on  A;  VI  on  C  (or  F  if  one  flat  is-b  the  signature); 
VII  on  A;  and  VIII  on  G. 

In  his  Magnificats  as  in  his  other  preserved  works  he  showed  exquisite 
sensitiveness  in  his  timing  of  cadences.  In  a  long  motet  like  the  one  in 
familiar  style  he  wrote  using  Job:i6b-2i  for  a  text,  he  included  twenty 
cadences,  but  only  one — the  penultimate — comes  ta  rest  on  the  crucial 
"F-chord"  which  gives  the  Phrygian  mode  its  distinctive  flavor.  We  are 
not  anachronistically  imputing  to  him  a  chordal  sense,  and  use  the  word 
chord  simply  as  a  convenience,  but  are  commending  his  manipulation  of 
harmony  as  well  as  melody. 

His  word-painting  is  neither  more  nor  less  obtrusive  than  is  the  word- 
painting  in  such  other  polyphonists  of  his  time  as  Morales  and  Guerrero. 
As  is  well  known,  Bach  was  stimulated  by  the  Magnificat  text  to  some 
of  his  most  literal  word-painting.  Where  the  word  "omnes"  occurred  all 
the  voices  burst  in.  Where  the  word  "inanes"  occurred  two  flutes  ended 
on  an  unresolved  chord.  Nothing  quite  as  literal  as  that  should  be  expected 
from  Franco,  but  for  words  like  ^misericordia"  20  he  chooses  a  gliding 
rhythm;  for  "exaltavit"  ?1  he  chooses  an  upward  thrusting  scale-line; 


ii8  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 


for  a  phrase  like  "deposuit  potentes"  he  chooses  a  widely  skipping  bass 
line  with  an  implication  of  strong  accent.  In  order  to  see  his  word-painting 
in  its  clearest  aspect  it  is  useful  to  contrast  his  setting  of  "fecit  potentiam" 
in  the  IV  Tone  with  the  immediately  following  three-voice  "esuri- 
entes": 22  in  his  handling  of  expressive  device  it  will  be  seen  everywhere 
that  though  not  proleptically  gifted  he  always  knew  how  to  conform  to 
enlightened  usage  of  his  own  epoch. 

Perhaps  without  the  necessity  of  further  analysis  our  point  has  been 
made.  In  the  same  decade  Palestrina  was  writing  his  Magnificats 
(1575-85)  Franco  was  writing  hisj  a  comparison  of  their  Magnificats  by 
no  means  throws  discredit  upon  the  Neo-Hispanist.  One  discovers  in- 
stead that  Franco  had  mastered  the  craft  of  his  age,  and  that  he  trans- 
ported to  New  Spain  a  type  of  liturgical  music  that  compares  favorably 
with  what  was  being  heard  in  the  more  pretentious  European  chapel  es- 
tablishments. 

The  rules  formulated  by  the  Third  Mexican  Provincial  Council  (1585) 
for  the  administration  of  archdiocesan  choirs  show  the  advanced  stage  of 
musical  discipline  in  Franco's  organization.  From  a  purely  musical  point 
of  view  no  other  Mexican  church  council  has  at  any  time  passed  legisla- 
tion so  conducive  to  superior  performance  standards  as  did  the  1585 
council.  Franco  had  the  pleasure  of  seeing  the  assembled  Mexican  hier- 
archy—six bishops  and  an  archbishop— pass  a  written  rule  to  the  effect 
that  in  the  chapelmaster  was  vested  absolute  control  over  all  musical 
forces  in  the  cathedral — including  not  only  his  own  choristers  who  would 
naturally  obey  him,  but  also  including  the  clergy  whose  business  it  was 
to  sing  during  the  service.  Furthermore  all  instrumentalists  in  the  cathe- 
dral orchestra  were  by  statute  subjected  to  the  control  of  the  chapelmaster. 

Instrumentalists,  choristers,  as  well  as  clergy  who  participate  in  the 
choral  service,  must  reverently  heed  the  instructions  of  the  chapelmaster. 
...  If  he  directs  them  to  sing  with  organ  accompaniment  they  shall 
obey;  if  he  prescribes  a  descant  above  the  cantus  firmus  they  must  likewise 
obey  without  excuse  or  delay.28 

Further  regulations  passed  in  1585  concerning  fa  bordon,  alternation 
of  organ  and  choir  in  psalm  verses,  singing  of  cantus  figuratuS)  and  like 


NEO-HISPANIC  MUSIC 


119 


technical  matters,  enable  us  to  reconstruct  Francois  procedures  with  unu- 
sual precision,  despite  the  kpse  of  centuries.24 

NAHUATL  HYMNS 

Two  hymns  honoring  the  Virgin,  both  with  Aztecan  (Nahuatl)  texts, 
and  both  attributed  to  Franco,  deserve  attention  along  with  his  more 
pretentious  music. 

Pint  Na/tuatt 
YaLdis     Coctcx,  M&  *4*-3 

Tttcitati*-*  *     EAlUjrol  _       ^      »       f '?*»/' 


m 


1  ]fnnin  r 


-J — 


.  J 


a*. 


*  In  the  manuscript  the  tenor  reads  E  instead  of  F. 
**  In  the  manuscript  the  tenor  reads  G  instead  of  A. 


I2O 


MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 
Steoncl  Nahuatl  Hymn 

tf  o  4*  r&  tol     f  /*  on']  •  **l  •  9  4*  trmu&Ma 

-  -r/i.1  nf\ 


NEO-HISPANIC  MUSIC 


121 


The  text  of  both  foregoing  hymns  has  been  translated  by  the  learned 
Nahuatl  scholar,  D.  Mariano  Rojas.  The  words  of  the  first  hymn  say: 
"Celestial  Queen,  Mother  of  God,  Our  Advocate,  pray  for  us."  The 
words  of  the  second  say:  "O  Lady,  beloved  Mother  of  God,  always  virgin, 
intercede  for  us  with  Thy  beloved  Son,  Jesu  Christ,  Thou  most  beloved 
of  the  Most  High ! "  The  actual  text  of  both  hymns  in  Nahuatl  may  prove 
interesting: 

1.  In  ilhuicac  dhuapflle  tenantzin  Dios  in  titotepantkhtohcatzin.  Ma- 
huel  tehuatzin  topan  xinotlahtolti  in  tidahtlacoanime. 

2.  Dios  idazo  nantzine  cemihcac  ichpochtli  cenca  timitztotlatkuhtilk 
matopan  ximotlatolti  ixpantzinco  in  modazo  conetzin  Jesu  Cristo.  Ca 
ompa  timoyestica  in  inahuactzinco. 

As  can  readily  be  seen,  these  hymns  differ  pronouncedly  in  style  from 
Franco's  liturgical  music  with  Latin  text.  The  traits  which  noticeably  differ 
from  his  ecclesiastical  manner  include:  ( i )  an  abundance  of  parallel  fifths, 
octaves,  arid  other  forbidden  consecutivcs,  (2)  the  use  of  unprepared  and 
unresolved  dissonance,  (3)  a  constant  reliance  on  accentual  rather  than 
agogic  rhythm.  In  actual  performance  these  two  hymns  seem  much  nearer 
to  us  than  does  the  liturgical  music  j  the  jauntiness  and  carefreeness  of  the 
music  exerts  an  immediate  appeal.  Such  devices  for  the  securing  of  rhyth- 
mic vitality  as  the  hemiola  at  the  beginning  of  the  repeated  section  in  the 
first  hymn,  and  the  obtrusive  syncopations  and  frequent  repeated  notes 


12*  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

in  the  second  hymn,  are  all  sufficiently  obvious  to  make  telling  impressions 
at  first  hearing. 

Both  hymns  are  important  in  Mexican  music  history  simply  because 
they  alone  remain  among  the  vast  store  of  polyphonic  compositions  with 
Indian  language  text  that  must  have  once  existed*  If  they  are  correctly 
attributed  to  Franco,  then  he  showed  when  he  wrote  them  an  uncanny 
ability  to  doff  the  learned  sock  and  sport  it  on  the  green.  They  show  him 
in  an  unexpected  mood,  and  prove  he  knew  perfectly  well  how  to  act  the 
villano  with  the  blithest  of  the  frottola  composers. 

THE  PUEBLA  SCHOOL  OF  COMPOSERS 

Although  Mexico  City  provides  an  example  to  the  contrary,  Spanish 
colonial  policy  did  not  dedicate  itself  simply  to  the  planting  of  Spanish 
enclaves  in  populous  Indian  centers.  The  more  typical  Spanish  colonial 
procedure  involved  the  selection  of  an  entirely  new  site  such  as  Lima, 
where  a  new  city  with  a  completely  Spanish  background  might  grow  up. 
In  New  Spain  two  important  towns  were  founded  soon  after  the  Conquest 
with  the  express  purpose  of  developing  b  them  a  pure  Spanish  tradition. 
One  was  Puebla  de  los  Angeles,  the  other  Guadalajara.  In  Puebla  was 
constructed  within  a  decade  of  its  founding  by  the  audiencia  in  1531,  a 
church  so  imposing  that  Motolinia  called  it  handsomer  than  any  other  yet 
built  in  New  Spain  5  he  particularly  praised  its -three  imposing  entrances 
with  elaborate  carvings,  and  the  separation  of  the  interior  three  aisles  by 
black  porphyry  columns.25  Charles.  V  raised  his  church  to  a  cathedral  b 
1550,  granting  it  rich  privileges  with  the  intention  of  elevating  it  to  equal 
dignity  with  the  Toledo  Cathedral.20  During  the  next  century  royal  bene- 
factions lavished  on  the  Puebla  Cathedral  made  it  the  peer  of  the  metro- 
politan cathedral  itself. 

The  first  composer  of  note  at  Puebla  was  Pedro  Bermudez.  His  music 
is  the  most  rhythmically  vital  of  any  yet  discovered  by  a  Neo-Hispanic 
composer.  As  an  example  of  his  style  we  subjoin  an  excerpt  from  P&alm 
69  (Vulgate) ,  Domin*  ad  adjwandvm  me  fatina. 


NEO-HISPANIC  MUSIC 

3>om/x*  ad 
i,yi//**  5*- 5 


123 


I  I    ..  LIJ 

Jo-  »a-x* *<«*'/* 

^ 


m 


124 


MUSIC  IN 


The  powerful  rhythmic  drive  in  each  individual  voice  part  adds  im- 
measurably to  the  virility  of  Bermudez's  superb  setting.  Just  the  rhythmic 
pattern  of  the  upper  voice  alone,  for  instance,  reading  thus  : 

r  pui/lr  prpr  Irttrr  Ir  PH£f  t_r 


Efprp'lr  *  a;  rite  ti.  r  r 


is  sufficiently  endowed  with  a  life  of  its  own  to  carry  the  listener's  interest 
constantly  forward.  The  other  four  voices  have  been  assigned  equally 
propulsive  patterns. 

In  his  four  Salves  he  spoke  in  more  passionate  accents  than  Franco  had 
permitted  himself.27  Active  a  generation  after  Franco,  Bermudez  spoke 
with  an  enlarged  harmonic  vocabulary.  His  chord  of  suffering  was  the 
Italian  augmented  sixth.  In  his  first  Salve  Regina  for  four  voices  he  begins 
the  phrase,  "to  thee  we  cry,  weeping,"  with  this  melodic  inflection: 


Immediately  thereafter  occurs  this  passage: 


sus  - 


-        Ttt 


mus 


.     ***  - 


NEO-HISPANIC  MUSIC 


125 


Phrases  like  lacrimum  valle  ("vale  of  tears")  are  wrung  dry  of  sentiment 
in  Bermudez's  Salves.  Without  actually  writing  chromaticisms  he  did 
his  utmost  to  imply  them.  He  showed  a  fine  sensitivity  to  the  emotional 
impact  of  cross  relations.28 


ctt- 


o  * 


r 


m 


m 


Already  before  Bermudez's  time  (c  1605)  ^e  Puebla  choir  had 
achieved  a  reputation  not  only  in  New  Spain  but  also  in  the  homeland  as 
well.  Diego  de  Basalenque,  born  at  Salamanca  in  1577,  v™3  sent  f1"0111 
Spain  as  a  youth  to  study  among  other  subjects  music  at  Pueblaj  later 
when  he  came  to  write  a  chronicle  of  his  order  he  said  he  learned  music 
in  the  diatonic  and  chromatic  kinds  to  perfection  while  a  student  at 
Puebla.29  What  Basalenque  meant  by  diatonic  genus  music  is  clear  j  what 
he  meant  by  chromatic  genus  music  may  be  discovered  by  reading  Juan 
Bermudo's  explanation  in  his  1555  Declaration  de  mstrumentos  (Bk.  V, 
ch.  32).  Bermudo  said  (f.  138*):  "What  we  now  universally  play  and 
sing  [though  the  accidentals  are  not  written]  is  a  mixture  of  the  diatonic 
and  chromatic  kinds  of  music."  The  obligatory  use  of  organ  accompani- 
ment for  "chromatic  genus"  music  was  mentioned  in  a  tract  by  the  later 
theorist,  Eximeno.80 

The  crowning  epoch  in  Puebla's  musical  history  was  the  fourteen-year 
period  during  which  Bishop  Juan  de  Palaf  ox  y  Mendoza  ruled  the  see. 
Himself  an  intimate  of  the  Spanish  royal  house,  a  scion  of  nobility,  and 
a  devotee  of  the  fine  arts,  he  rose  to  be  viceroy  of  New  Spain  for  a  brief 
time.  His  tastes  were  always  patrician,  and  his  learning  immense.  He 
spared  no  effort  to  make  the  consecration  of  the  Puebla  Cathedral  on 
April  1 8,  1649,  t^e  most  brilliant  of  its  kind  ever  celebrated  in  the  New 
World.  In  the  official  account,  Relaci6n  y  description  del  Templo  Real  de 
la  tivdadde  la  Puebladelos  Angeles  .  ,  .  ,  y  sv  CatedraL  Q<ve  de  orden 
de  Sv  Mages  fad  acabb>  y  consagro  a  iS.de  A  Ml  de  1 640,  constant  mention 
is  made  of  a  double  choir.  His  appropriations  for  music  reached  the  un- 
precedented sum  of  14,000  pesos  annually,  a  sum  considerably  in  excess 


iz6  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

of  that  spent  anywhere  in  the  New  World  during  his  particular  epoch.81 
Because  his  lavish  spending  made  possible  a  double  choir  of  "diestros" 
—  skilled  singers  —  the  repertory  at  Puebla  was  enlarged  to  include  music 
for  two  and  three  choirs  by  Bernardo  de  Peralta  and  Juan  de  Padilla.  The 
sonorous  ideal  in  the  Puebla  Cathedral  approximated  that  of  Giovanni 
GabrielPs  Sacrae  SympAoniae;  such  a  work  as  Peralta's  twelve-voice  Mag- 
nificat, thought  to  have  been  sung  at  the  1649  dedication  ceremonies, 
while  not  of  as  Gargantuan  dimension  as  Oraxio  BenevolPs  festival  Mass 
for  the  consecration  of  the  Salzburg  Cathedral  (1628),  is  nevertheless  a 
work  of  tremendous  scope.  Foreshadowing  Bach  in  one  detail,  Peralta 
withholds  his  first  vocal  tutti  until  the  "omnes"  of  beatam  me  dicent  omnes 
generationes.  The  expressive  devices  furthermore  are  typically  early 
baroque.  Et  sanctum  nomen  is  answered  back  and  forth  in  typical  sequence 

pattern  with  this  rhythmic  pattern  f  f  f  |  f  f  *  ^erse  5  °*  t^ie  Mag- 
nificat ("misericordia")  is  assigned  the  first  choir  —  composed  of  light, 
high  voices.  Fecit  potentiam  is  hurled  between  the  choirs  in  an  effective 
sequence  involving  this  pattern:  f  p  p  f  t  I  P  •  Disfersif  superbos 

is  assigned  this  characteristic  lashing  rhythm:    p  I  £  6  6  f    f^tl 


D  &  &  f  f  ^  I  '  ^e  Gloria  moves  up  tier  on  tier  to  a  resonant  cli- 
max of  really  striking  magnificence.  The  changes  from  duple  to  triple 
and  from  triple  to  duple  meter  throughout  the  work  provide  dramatic 
relief.  On  occasion  Peralta  does  not  scruple  to  write  one  melodic  line  in 
duple  meter  and  another  simultaneously  in  triple. 

In  1  649  at  Palaf  ox's  behest  there  was  printed  at  Puebla  a  24-page  book 
of  choir  regulations:  Reglas  y  ordenanzas  del  Coro  desta  Santa  Iglesia 
Cathedral  de  la  Puebla  de  los  Angeles.  It  was  during  Palafox's  regime 
that  Juan  Gutierrez  de  Padilla  was  secured  as  Puebla  chapelmasterj  un- 
doubtedly Padilla  was  a  talent  whom  Palafox  had  personally  observed 
in  Spain  or  else  was  a  rising  light  recommended  to  Palafox  by  one  of  his 
deputies  in  Spain  (Palafox  came  over  in  1639).  Padilla's  musical  achieve- 
ment has  not  yet  been  fully  canvassed,  but  it  is  known  that  his  extant 
repertory  is  larger  than  that  of  any  other  sixteenth  or  seventeenth  century 
composer  in  Mexico.  The  first  printed  allusion  to  his  Puebla  activities 
occurs  in  the  already  cited  Relation  y  description  in  which  he  is  several 
times  mentioned  by  name,82  and  his  compositions  lauded  as  the  wonder  of 
their  time.  His  successor  as  chapelmaster  was  J-icenciado  Miguel  Mateo 


NEO-HISPANIC  MUSIC  1*7 

Dallo  y  Lana,  who  is  now  prindpally  remembered  for  his  part  in  setting 
Sor  Juana  Ines  de  la  Cruz's  Villancicos  (printed  at  Puebla  in  i69o).S8 
Padilla  himself  wrote  numerous  villandcos  in  the  vernacular,  in  addition 
to  liturgical  compositions  with  Latin  text,  but  he  did  not  have  the  good 
fortune  to  conjoin  any  of  his  villancico-music  with  words  by  as  famous 
a  figure  in  Mexican  letters  as  Sor  Juana. 

The  first  work  of  Padilla  transcribed  into  modern  score  was  a  Passion 
According  to  St.  Matthew  (Steven  Barwick:  "Sacred  Vocal  Polyphony  in 
Early  Colonial  Mexico,"  1949).  More  recently  Alice  Ray's  transcriptions 
of  the  Padilla  Masses  have  extended  our  acquaintance  with  this  fecund 
composer.  The  University  of  Southern  California  Madrigal  Choir  pio- 
neered with  the  first  performances  of  any  Padilla  music  in  this  country. 
Their  renditions  were  received  with  warmth,  and  the  immediate  impres- 
sion left  by  the  music  was  entirely  positive.  The  singers  themselves 
heartily  applauded  the  music  5  Padilla's  "orchestration"  for  voices  avoids 
the  tendency  to  thickness  that  so  much  double  choir  music  shows.  More 
than  the  sixteenth  century  music  of  Franco  it  commands  the  sympathy  of 
modern  audiences  because  a  clear  striving  for  climax  inhabits  all  the  larger 
vocal  movements. 

The  use  of  accidentals  for  the  most  part  adheres  to  normal  early  baroque 
practice  5  Jose  de  Torres's  1703  Missarum  Liber  printed  at  Madrid  (a 
book  now  in  the  Puebla  archives)  shows  a  similar  stage  of  advance  in 
the  use  of  accidentals.  But  Padilla  sometimes  intruded  accidentals  which 
call  for  a  succession  of  diminished  and  augmented  intervals  that  do  not 
fit  his  normal  practice.  It  is  known  that  on  occasion  he  parodied  his  own 
motets  in  his  Masses.34  Whether  his  more  adventurous  moments  in  the 
use  of  accidentals  point  to  some  unknown— possibly  indigenous  composi- 
tion—which he  was  at  the  moment  parodying,  remains  an  open  question. 
Such  an  explanation  has  been  suggested,  but  the  thesis  yet  lacks  con- 
firmation. 

His  St.  Matthew  Passion  was  not  a  continuous  composition,  but  rather 
provided  choral  music  for  only  the  turba  parts— that  is  to  say  the  parts 
of  the  passion  narrative  in  which  the  Jewish  or  heathen  crowd  speaks.  In 
actual  date  of  composition  Padilla's  probably  was  written  about  the  same 
time  as  Heinrich  Schtttz's  Matthaus-Passion  (1666).  The  plan  of  both 
is  analogous  5  bqth  open  with  a  choral  section  declaiming  the  title  of  the 
scripture  selection  about  to  be  read.  The  number  of  choral  sections  in 
Padilla's  Latin  passion  is  20;.in  Schutz's  vernacular  passion  the  number  is 


12$ 


MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 


23.  The  choral  sections  in  both  are  of  about  equal  length,  and  they  are 
both  interspersed  with  monodic  declamation  of  the  remaining  scriptural 
narrative.  Three  short  excerpts  are  given  below,  the  first  in  each  case 
from  Padilla,  the  second  from  Schfttz.  In  general  it  will  be  seen  that 
Padilla  resorts  to  chromaticism  to  express  emotion,  whereas  Schiitz  re- 
sorts to  rhythmic  oppositions.  Padilla's  would  engender  perhaps  a  more 
abstract  reaction,  and  Schutz's  a  more  personal.  Padilla's  is  the  more 
contemplative,  Schtitz's  the  more  participative.  In  conformity  with  his 
liturgical  purpose  Padilla  does  not  allow  himself  the  dramatic  assistance 
of  repeating  scriptural  words.  Schiitz  does,  however,  and  his  brief  vig- 
nettes no  doubt  gain  in  sharpness  because  he  repeats  words  and  phrases, 
thus  etching  them  in  the  hearer's  imagination. 

Padilla's  passion  was  written  for  Palm  Sunday,  the  traditional  day 
for  the  reading  of  the  Matthew  narrative;  Schiitz's,  on  the  other  hand, 
was  presumably  intended  for  Good  Friday,  as  was  Bach's. 


Crucify  Hm 

TactiUa.  C/3J 


ScAutz 


J.     J>  iC 


i 


r   r    f    p   & 


Hi 3  blood,  upon   its 

:ki 


Sehiitl 


^ 


-4«/4  ' 


NEO-HISPANIC  MUSIC 


129 


L*t  usstt  if  E Lias  trt 


i3o  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

Padilla's  Matthew-Passion  shows  him  at  his  simplest  and  most  "un- 
learned." His  command  of  canonic  and  fugal  device  as  exhibited  in  the 
Masses  and  Magnificats,  on  the  other  hand,  proves  him  to  have  been  past 
master  of  the  learning  of  his  epoch.  It  would  not  be  overweening  for  us 
to  set  Padilla  as  a  peer  of  any  Spanish  baroque  composer  between  Juan 
Pujol  and  Jos6  Nebra. 

The  existence  of  a  highly  developed  school  of  composers  but  accords 
with  other  evidences  showing  a  high  concentration  of  cultural  activity 
in  colonial  Puebla.  The  cathedral  grew  ever  more  sumptuous  with  the 
passing  of  years.  At  a  time  when  the  Mexico  City  Cathedral  was  begin- 
ning to  house  expensive  adornments  brought  from  such  distant  places  as 
Macao,  Puebla  Cathedral  was  being  enriched  at  equally  lavish  expense. 
Her  chroniclers  were  fond  of  listing  the  proofs  that  "this  incomparable 
cathedral"  took  second  pkce  to  none;  "its  like  cannot  be  found  elsewhere 
in  America,  not  even  at  Mexico  City."  85  The  most  significant  single  cul- 
tural asset  in  Puebla  was  the  cathedral,  no  doubt,  but  from  our  viewpoint 
equally  noteworthy  was  the  magnificent  Palafoxian  Library — probably 
the  most  important  single  library  in  all  colonial  America  during  the 
eighteenth  century.86 

MUSIC  IN  MICHOACiN 

If  Puebla  developed  a  school  of  composers  whose  music  compares 
favorably  with  the  best  homeland  product  of  the  epoch,  one  finds  evidence 
that  in  Michoacan  an  important  center  of  cultural  activity  sprang  up 
also.  The  most  notable  epoch  in  the  history  of  Michoacdn  music  would 
seem  to  be  the  eighteenth  century,  during  which  a  school  of  composers 
(whose  works  were  preserved  at  the  former  convent  o£  Santa  Rosa  de 
Santa  Maria  de  Valladolid)  was  active.  The  beginnings  of  Michoacan 
music  can,  however,  be  traced  back  to  the  sixteenth  century. 

In  1572,  as  has  already  been  shown  in  the  discussion  of  music  books 
printed  in  New  Spain  during  the  sixteenth  century,  Pedro  Ocharte — the 
Frenchman  from  Rouen — ordered  a  hundred  Pasioneros  from  his  press 
delivered  to  the  Tarasco  linguist,  Juan  Diego  de  Rincon,  then  bishop 
of  Michoacan.  These  Passionaries  included  music  for  the  last  three  days  of 
Holy  Week,  and  therefore  included  music  only  for  the  passion  narrative 
in  the  Fourth  Gospel.  In  order  to  supply  music  for  the  other  days  of 
Holy  Week  when  the  other  passion  narratives  were  read,  a  Franciscan 


NEO-HISPANIC  MUSIC  131 

residing  in  the  diocese  of  Michoadin  conceived  the  idea  of  creating  his  own 
pseudo-plainsong  setting  of  the  other  passion  narratives.  In  order  to  make 
his  projected  book  as  usable  as  possible  he  set  it  up  to  include  not  only  all 
four  passions  but  also  certain  scripture  selections  read  on  Holy  Saturday, 
namely  parts  of  Lamentations  and  the  so-called  Prayer  of  Jeremy. 

Juan  Navarro,  the  Franciscan  in  question,  was  originally  a  native  of 
Cadiz,  but  he  claimed  in  his  preface  to  the  printed  book  that  his  music 
was  written  in  the  New  World.  It  would  therefore  qualify  as  the  oldest 
printed  music  actually  composed  in  America*  The  style  of  the  music  is 
indistinguishable  from  conventional  plainsong,  but  he  stated  in  his  intro- 
duction that  he  had  actually  made  up  the  music  himself.  His  book  con- 
taining monodic  settings  of  all  four  passions  was  entitled  Liber  in  quo 
quatuor  fassiones  Christi  Domini  continentw,  and  was  published  at  Mex- 
ico City  by  the  printer  Didacus  L6pez  Davalos  in  1604.  Consisting  of  105 
numbered  leaves,  the  book  is  further  distinguished  as  the  only  Neo- 
Hispanic  imprint  exclusively  devoted  to  music  The  first  89  folios  con- 
tain the  passions,  and  the  remainder  the  Lamentations  and  Prayer  of 
Jeremy. 

Because  the  book  was  expressly  designed  to  fulfill  the  needs  of  ordinary 
churches,  the  music  enables  us  accurately  to  gauge  the  level  of  music  abil- 
ity among  priests  and  deacons  in  the  common-garden-variety  church.  That 
Navarro  was  intensely  concerned  over  the  financial  success  of  the  book 
is  proved  by  his  insertion  of  commendatory  letters  from  Dominican  and 
Augustinian  authorities  at  the  beginning  of  the  book.87  As  a  Franciscan 
he  knew  the  importance  of  securing  approbation  not  only  from  his  own 
commissary  general,  from  the  archbishop,  and  from  the  viceroy.  With- 
out these  three  licences  his  book  could  never  have  gone  to  bed  5  but  the  ap- 
probations of  the  Dominican  and  Augustinian  vicars  choral  were  clearly 
inserted  to  help  the  sale  of  the  book  among  clergy  of  those  orders.  It  is 
obvious,  therefore,  that  Navarro's  Quatuor  Passwftes  containing  music  of 
only  moderate  difficulty  was  a  book  which  he  hoped  priests  and  deacons 
everywhere  would  use,  even  if  they  belonged  to  rival  orders. 

The  book  was  ready  for  the  printer  in  1601 ;  in  that  year  the  viceroy 
gave  Navarro  "copyright"  privileges  for  twelve  years,  and  declared  a  fine 
of  1,000  Castile  ducats  against  anyone  who  presumed  to  break  the  copy- 
right on  it.  In  Navarro's  letter  dedicating  the  book  to  his  provincial  su- 
perior, he  avowed  he  took  no  time  from  his  major  enterprise  in  order  to 
compose  the  chants,  but  rather  did  them  as  a  "nocturnal  exercise."  In  the 


132  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

preface  to  the  reader  (which  follows  the  dedication)  he  wrote  an  interest- 
ing essay  on  the  history  of  music  in  the  Western  Church  5  his  frequent 
and  on  the  whole  apt  quotation  from  Scripture  and  from  patristic  authori- 
ties S8  indicates  either  his  own  extensive  reading,  or  the  easy  availability 
of  a  catena  of  well  selected  passages.  In  order  to  justify  the  time  he  had 
spent  composing  music  (an  expense  of  time  his  fellow-friars  had  evidently 
criticized)  he  reminded  them  that  according  to  Revelation  their  chief  oc- 
cupation in  heaven  would  be  musical  exercise.  He  then  continued  with  the 
following  apologia  pro  vita  sua: 

I  have  as  a  man  endeavored  to  devote  all  my  time  to  a  heavenly  work. 
.  ,  .  Whether  I  have  excelled  in  that  work  or  not,  let  others  judge. 
.  .  .  Those  who  always  disparage  the  labors  of  others  which  they  cannot 
duplicate,  and  those  who  clamor  against  the  unceasing  nightly  toil  of 
others,  are  but  asked  to  recall  the  story  of  Michal,  daughter  of  King  Saul, 
and  wife  of  David.  She  despised  David  for  his  playing  and  dancing  before 
the  Ark  of  the  Covenant,  and  for  her  gesture  of  contempt  she  was  pun- 
ished with  sterility.  Those  who  deride  the  conscientious  encfcavor  of  those 
who  devote  themselves  to  music,  and  who  rail  at  the  nightly  labor  of  others 
while  giving  themselves  to  rest,  relaxation,  and  leisurely  living,  we  say  are 
deprived  of  sweetness  of  disposition  towards  God  or  man,  and  are  in  reality 
dropping  insidious  poison.  But  just  as  David  was  not  at  all  impaired  in  his 
joyful  praise  despite  Michal's  derision  (for  he  said:  "I  shall  go  on  playing 
before  the  Lord,  and  I  shall, yet  be  more  shameless  than  I  was  hitherto, 
and  will  be  base  in  mine  own  sight,"  2  Reg.  6)  so  in  like  manner  I  shall 
also  delight  in  the  Lord  and  praise  Him  for  His  kindness.  In  His  praise 
I  shall  spend  my  time  with  carefree  mind,  overlooking  the  assembly  of 
those  who  unfeelingly  mock  and  carp  at  my  endeavof ,89 

Juan  Navarro,  the  author  of  the  work  now  under  consideration, 
Quatuor  Passiones^  was  formerly  confused  with  another  Juan  Navarro, 
a  Spanish  polyphonist  who  died  several  years  before  'the  New  World 
book  was  published.  Eitner's  Quellen-Lexkon  and  Gro*ve*s  Dictionary  are 
but  two  of  the  more  available  authorities  which  confused  the  two  men. 
Gilbert  Chase,  however,  in  an  article-  entitled  "Juan  Navarro  Hispalensis 
and  Juan  Navarro  Gaditanus"  (The  Musical  Quarterly,  April,  1945), 
disentangled  the  two  men.  The  mistake  was  a  natural  one  to  make  5  Juan 
Navarro  HispalensisT  ("of  Seville")  published  Psalmi>  Hymni,  ac  Mag- 
nificat totius  anni  at  Rome  in,  1590.  A  copy  of  this  very  1590  book  was 
preserved  in  the  Puebla  cathedral  archive^  why  should  not  Navarro  His- 


NEO-HISPANIC  MUSIC  133 

palensis  have  emigrated  to  Mexico?  Rafael  Mitjana,  who  first  confused 
the  two,  did  not  know  Juan  Navarro  Hispalensis  was  old  enough  in  1553 
to  compete  for  the  Malaga  chapelmastership  left  vacant  in  that  year  by 
Morales's  death. 

The  temptation  to  carry  over  famous  figures  from  the  Old  to  the  New 
World  still  persists,  however,  even  if  the  Navarros  have  been  forcibly 
separated  into  two  distinct  personalities.  The  most  tantalizing  identifica- 
tion now  before  the  Latin  American  world  takes  Domenico  Zipoli,  the 
great  Italian  organist  who  became  organist  of  the  Jesuit  church  at  Rome 
in  1696,  to  the  Paraguay  Jesuit  mission  in  171 6.40  But  Adolf o  Salazar,  the 
Spanish  musicographer,  thinks  it  unlikely  that  so  adept  a  musician  as 
Zipoli  ended  his  life  in  Argentinian  obscurity.41  Do  we  have  here  another 
case  of  homonymns?  And  was  the  Jose  de  Torres  who  succeeded  Zumaya 
as  chapelmaster  at  Mexico  City  in  1732  the  same  Jose  de  Torres  who 
had  already  published  a  book  of  Masses  in  Spain  and  whose  Arte  de  canto 
llano  nuevamente  corr.  y  aora  aument.  for  J.  da  Torres  was  published  at 
Madrid  in  1734?  42  The  breakdown  of  the  Navarro  identification  has  put 
everyone  on  guard,  and  no  similar  identification  in  the  future  is  likely  to 
be  accepted  without  ironclad  proof. 

But  even  if  denied  the  privilege  of  attributing  Quotuor  Possiones  to  an 
already  renowned  European  figure,  we  still  have  before  us  a  book  worthy 
of  inspection.  Navarro  though  claiming  as  his  model  the  Roman  chant, 
presented  his  book  as  an  original  creation.  It  should  be  compared  with  an 
English  redaction  of  plainsong  by  John  Marbeck,  The  Booke  of  Common 
Prater  noted  (1550).  The  music  in  both  books  is  closely  patterned  on 
traditional  plainchant,  but  there  is  enough  of  the  individual  creator  in 
both  to  justify  calling  them  original  products.  Any  melody  which  confines 
itself  to  those  intervals  found  in  Gregorian  chant,  which  adheres  to  the 
same  system  of  dominants  and  finals,  and  which  does  not  flagrantly  divide 
itself  into  rhythmic  sequences,  will  seem  to  many  in  our  own  day  scarcely 
distinguishable  from  authentic  chant  of  the  Middle  Ages  ;  nonetheless 
Navarro's  music  has  an  individual  profile  of  its  own  and  he  therefore  de- 
serves to  be  classed  as  a  creator.  If  Navarro  in  Quatuor  Passiones,  Mar- 
beck  in  The  Booke  of  Common  Prater  noted>  and  Luther  in  Deudsche 
Messey  all  wrote  melodies  that  sound  alike,  the  reason  is  sufficiently  obvi- 
ous: despite  their  denominational  differences,  they  all  cobbled  on  the  same 
musical  last. 

Navarro Js  music  is  ail  in  the  Dorian.  The  chants  are  predominantly 


134  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

syllabic,  with  only  an  occasional  eruption  into  melisma,  Melismas  are  re- 
served for  words  or  expressions  of  dramatic  intensity  (such  as,  "My  God, 
My  God,  why  hast  Thou  forsaken  Me?")*  The  punctum  is  used  for  un- 
accented syllables  in  the  text,  the  virga  for  accented  syllables.  The  neumes 
of  two  or  more  notes  used  are  the  podatus,  clivis,  scandicus,  dimacus,  and 
porrectus.  The  neumes  are  printed  in  black  over  a  red  five-line  staff,  and 
the  registration  is  often  faulty  j  certainly  it  is  poorer  than  in  the  sixteenth 
century  Espinosa  and  Ocharte  liturgical  books.  The  F-clef  on  the  middle 
line  is  the  most  common.  B-flats  and  b-naturals  are  the  only  accidentals 
used  The  four  passions  are  written  throughout  in  dialogue  form,  with  the 
priesfs  voice  as  the  higher.  Modulation,  in  the  plainsong  sense,  is  con- 
spicuously missing.  The  following  example  illustrates  Navarro's  style  in 
one  of  his  more  expansive  moments 4S  (notes  with  dashes  over  them  are 
virgas  in  the  original) : 


-       raf     ri-ji-ta-r*  **     -    cu m  ?  Vi-jl-U -U ,    tt  o  -ra   -         *• 


ut 


-       r£  -  tut 


oui  -dm 


ca-ro  au-ttm  In  -  Jir    - 


(<cWhat,  could  ye  not  watch  with  me  one  hour?  Watch  and  pray 
that  ye  enter  not  into  temptation:  the  spirit  indeed  is  willing,  but  the  flesh 
is  weak."  Matt. 


Torquemada  (1615)  noted  the  flourishing  state  of  church  music  in 
Michoacan,  and  it  therefore  appears  likely  that  enough  sales  of  Navarro's 
book  were  made  in  his  own  territory  to  return  him  the  costs  of  printing  it. 
Throughout  the  seventeenth  century  we  continue  to  encounter  sporadic 
notices  of  musical  life  in  Michoacan.  It  seems  evident  that  Indian  musi- 
cal talent  was  for  a  longer  time  encouraged  in.  such  outlying  centers  as 


NEO-HISPANIC  MUSIC  135 

Valladolid  [now  Morelia]  than  was  the  case  at  Mexico  City.  Diego  de 
Basalenque^  whose  early  studies  at  Puebk  we  have  already  mentioned, 
wrote  a  chronicle  of  Michoacan  in  which  he  told  of  two  exceptionally 
talented  Indians,  father  and  son:  the  father  brilliantly  competed  with  the 
best  Spanish  organist  of  his  time,  and  the  son  occupied  the  organist's  bench 
in  the  Valladolid  Cathedral.44 

The  eighteenth  century  school  of  composers  devoted  themselves 
largely  to  instrumental  works,  according  to  the  catalogue  supplied  by 
Miguel  Bernal  Jim6nez  in  his  1939  publication,  El  Archivo  Musical  del 
Colegio  de  Santa  Rosa  de  Santa  Maria  de  Valladolid.  He  presented  in  this 
monograph  several  excerpts  in  illustration  of  their  achievements,45  and 
he  has  promised  us  a  fuller  discussion  of  these  eighteenth  century  com- 
posers in  a  later  publication.  Whether  it  later  develops  that  all  the  listed 
composers  in  the  Santa  Rosa  archive  were  Michoacan  residents  or  not,  at 
least  the  presence  of  their  works  in  the  archive  denotes  an  advanced  musi- 
cal taste.  A  colonial  orchestra  capable  of  playing  these  works  could  hardly 
have  existed  in  Valladolid  unless  some  especially  wealthy  magnate  with 
the  generosity  and  artistic  taste  of  a  Jose  de  k  Borda  defrayed  the  ex- 
pense. According  to  Bernal  Jimenez  a  school  of  music  was  founded  in 
Valkdolid  (Morelia)  as  early  as  1743.  It  is  significant  that  the  first  im- 
portant republican  composer  in  Mexico  was  a  Morelian^-Jose  Mariano 
Elfzaga.  A  major  figure  in  nineteenth  century  Mexican  music,  Elfzaga 
could  hardly  have  outdistanced  all  his  contemporaries  in  Mexico  City 
unless  his  own  background  training  (in  Morelia)  had  been  of  quite  a  sub- 
stantial kind. 


MUSIC   IN   OTHER   PROVINCIAL   CENTERS 

Oaxaca  was  another  center  whose  records— scanty  though  they  be— 
show  that  music  of  a  pretentious  kind  was  cultivated  at  the  cathedral  dur- 
ing colonial  times.  The  best  known  of  the  Oaxaquena  chapelmasters  was 
Juan  Matfas,  an  Indian  from  the  Zapotec  village  of  Zaapedie.46  At  the 
age  of  twenty  he  dispkyed  such  phenomenal  ability  both  as  a  singer  and 
as  an  organist  that  the  then  chapelmaster  proposed  to  export  him  to  Spain 
as  a  notable  rarity  for  Spanish  royalty  to  gape  at  j  this  plan  was  frustrated, 
however,  because  shipping  at  the  moment  was  impossible  to  obtain  and  the 
chapelmaster  himself  died  soon  thereafter.  During  the  competition  for 
the  post  that  shortly  ensued,  Matfas  successfully  competed  against  "able 


,36  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

and  illustrious  competitors  from  both  the  capital  city  and  from  Puebla" 
who  offered  themselves.  Elected  by  common  acclamation,  Matias  occu- 
pied the  chapelmastership  with  distinction  for  a  space  of  fifteen  years.  His 
achievement  was  discussed  by  Guillermo  A.  Esteva  in  a  short  bulletin, 
La  Musica  Oaxaquena,  published  at  Oaxaca  in  1931.  Esteva  concluded 
that  though  Matias  was  a  seventeenth  century  composer,  his  one  surviv- 
ing composition,  a  Stabat  Mater  47  fragment,  showed  him  to  have  been 
but  slightly  interested  in  the  contrapuntal  exercises  still  popular  among 
Spanish  choral  composers  of  his  epoch.  Instead  he  wrote  for  voices  with 
organ  accompaniment  in  a  homophonic  style.  The  following  somewhat 
trivial  excerpt  shows  him  in  search  of  chromatic  color  j  this  kind  of  passage 
need  not  indicate,  however,  that  the  best  he  was  capable  of  elsewhere  was 
simply  a  succession  of  cliches. 


cu      -       JMS 


tbU 


^ 


NEO-HISPANIC  MUSIC  137 

Sporadic  notices  concerning  certain  other  seventeenth  and  eighteenth 
century  chapelmasters  at  Oaxaca  are  recoverable.  A  chapelmaster  named 
Matheo  Vallados,  for  instance,  in  1 69 1  set  several  villandcos  of  Sor  Juana 
Ines  de  la  Cruz  which  were  sung  with  great  success  on  the  morning  of 
November  25  in  the  Oaxaca  Cathedral.48  Notices  of  the  kind  that  can  be 
obtained,  however,  all  point  to  the  fact  that  in  Oaxaca,  in  Queretaro,  in 
Guadalajara,  and  elsewhere,  the  more  influential  posts  during  the  seven- 
teenth and  eighteenth  centuries  were  reserved  for  either  foreigners,  or 
in  lieu  of  them,  for  Creoles.  Certainly  no  attempt  was  made  during  the 
middle  and  later  portions  of  the  colonial  period  to  integrate  Indians  into 
the  musical  life  of  the  church,  as  there  had  been  during  the  missionary 
period.  Had  not  the  filling  of  an  important  post  by  an  Indian  grown  to  be 
a  great  rarity  during  the  second  century  after  Cortes's  conquest,  neither 
Basalenque  nor  Francisco  Burgoa  would  have  made  so  much  of  a  few 
isolated  cases  when  exceptional  Indians  did  cross  the  rigid  lines  drawn 
between  them  and  the  master  class. 

The  more  typical  mention  of  Indian  participation  in  church  music  was 
not  Burgoa's  mention  of  Matias  at  Oaxaca,  but  Don  Carlos  de  Siguenza  y 
Gongora's  mention  of  the  Indian  outdoor  dances  and  musical  concert  on 
native  instruments  which  he  saw  when  he  visited  Quer6taro  in  1675.  In- 
vited to  help  dedicate  a  church,  Sigttenza  y  Gongora,  professor  of  mathe- 
matics in  the  University  of  Mexico,  made  a  trip  up  to  Quer6taro  in  that 
year,  and  left  a  minute  description  in  his  Glorias  de  Queretaro.  What  he 
saw  the  Indians  doing  was  dancing  their  famous  toncontin  during  the 
fourth  part  of  an  elaborate  masquerade  in  honor  of  the  Virgin.49  Siguenza 
y  Gongora,  who  was  himself  profoundly  learned  in  Nahuatl,  said  they 
played  the  tlapanhuehuetl,  the  teponazdi,  the  omichicahuaztli,  the  aya- 
caztli,  the  cuauhtlapitzalli,  *<and  other  similar  instruments  suitable  to  the 
Mexican  nation."  With  these  "they  praised  the  Virgin  in  holy  songs  con- 
ceived in  a  most  elegant  style."  The  Spaniards,  on  the  other  hand,  had 
their  own  orchestra  of  "suavissimos  instrumentos"  50  that  pkyed  indoors 
during  interludes  between  readings  in  a  poetical  tourney.  Inside  the 
church  Sigiienza  y  Gongora  himself  sung  one  Mass  and  assisted  at  another 
one  sung  by  Padre  Juan  de  Robles.51  He  obviously  considered  the  Indians 
had  a  distinct  contribution  to  make— their  own  music  sung  and  danced  in 
their  own  way — but  just  as  obviously  he  thought  the  music  for  the  "main 
events"  should  be  music  pkyed  on  European  instruments  by  musicians  of 
European  stock.  Don  Carlos's  attitude  represented  the  enlightened  atti- 


I38  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

tude  of  a  colonial  who  while  a  friend  of  the  Indian,  did  not  favor  cultural 
integration.52 


THE  VILLANCICO  IN   NEW  SPAIN 

The  Neo-Hispanic  compositions  thus  far  alluded  to  in  this  chapter  use 
Latin  texts  in  nearly  every  instance.  During  the  seventeenth  and  eight- 
eenth centuries,  however,  a  large  literature  of  villancicos  sprang  up,  all 
using  Spanish  texts.  According  to  dictionary  definition  a  villancico  is  a 
Christinas  carol  or  a  metric  composition  sung  in  church  on  certain  other 
festival  occasions.  Perhaps  a  third  of  the  preserved  Neo-Hispanic  villan- 
cicos were  intended  for  use  at  Christmas  j  the  other  two-thirds  were  writ- 
ten for  other  festivals  in  the  church  year.  In  all  of  them  a  note  of  intense 
happiness  is  found  5  words  and  music  alike  breathe  an  atmosphere  of  ex- 
uberance and  exhilaration. 

In  New  Spain  all  the  villancicos  thus  far  encountered  were  intended  for 
church  usage.  The  villancico  originated,  however,  not  as  a  type  of  sacred 
song,  but  rather  as  a  type  of  secular  song.  The  earliest  printed  villancicos 
—Juan  Vasquez's  Villancicos  (Osuna,  1551 )  and  his  Recopladdn  de  soae- 
tos  y  villancicos  a  quatro  y  a  ctnco  (Seville,  1560)  5  and  the  anonymous 
villancicos  in  the  so-called  Canrionero  de  Upsala  (Venice,  1556) — treated 
sacred  themes  only  in  the  rarest  instances.  Almost  invariably  they  had  to 
do  with  the  pangs  of  love,  the  joys  of  love,  the  awakening  of  love,  or  "the 
spring  time,  the  only  pretty  ring  time,  when  birds  do  sing,  hey  ding  a 
ding,  ding."  The  melodies  "had  a  simple  folk-like  quality,  even  when 
associated  with  a  sophisticated  text  j  the  meaning  of  the  text  was  translated 
into  simple  musical  terms,  and  the  expressive  effect  never  disregarded."  M 

Because  of  the  secular  origin  of  the  villancico,  and  also  because  its  text 
even  when  pertaining  to  a  religious  subject  remained  in  the  vernacular, 
the  use  of  the  villancico  in  churches  was  discouraged  during  the  sixteenth 
century.  Philip  II  (whose  religious  austerity  is  well  known)  would  have 
none  of  it54  But  with  his  passing  in  1598,  the  villancico  gradually  in- 
truded itself,  and  during  the  seventeenth  and  eighteenth  centuries 
usurped  first  place  in  the  affections  of  the  broader  public.  In  New  Spain 
the  publication  of  villancicos  (text  only)  became  an  endemic  disease. 
Every  sainfs  day  was  celebrated  with  new  villancicos  5  these  were  sung 
at  matins,  usually,  but  during  the  latter  part  of  the  sixteenth  century  even 
so  proper  a  poetess  as  the  Jeronymite  nun,  Sor  Juana,  wrote  villancicos 


NEO-HISPANIC  MUSIC  139 

which  troped  the  Mass.  As  examples  of  her  interpolated  tropes  we  point 
to  her  expansion  of  the  Gloria  in  excelsis  (St.  Peter  Nolasco  villandcos, 
1677)  and  of  the  Ite  missa  est  (St.  Catharine  villandcos,  1691).  Because 
the  prevailing  mood  in  the  villandco  was  always  that  of  happiness,  she 
abstained  from  troping  the  sober  sections  in  the  Mass  such  as  the  Kyrie 
and  Agnus  Dei.  However  since  the  Gloria  and  Ite  both  express  triumph 
and  exaltation  she  did  not  hesitate  to  provide  Spanish  tropes  for  these 
particularly  joyous  sections.  It  must  be  confessed  her  villandcos  are 
charming  beyond  all  expectation,  and  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  that  in 
her  lifetime  during  one  fourteen-year  period  (1677-91)  demand  was  so 
great  she  published  fifteen  collections.  She,  moreover,  was  but  one  of  a 
flourishing  school  of  villandco  writers  in  New  Spain.  At  a  time  the  paper 
shortage  was  so  drastic  that  no  one  could  publish  a  scholarly  work  in  New 
Spain— not  even  the  illustrious  Siguenza  y  Gdngora  w— these  villandco 
writers,  many  of  them  mere  hacks,  were  able  to  get  their  ephemeral  jot- 
tings into  print  That  such  a  number  of  villandco  collections  could  have 
reached  print  is  proof  irrefutable  of  their  enormous  popularity. 

Because  of  Sor  Juana's  acknowledged  literary  supremacy — she  is  ac- 
knowledged to  have  been  the  most  brilliant  literary  light  in  New  Spain 
during  the  entire  colonial  period — her  villandco  collections  will  here  be 
examined  briefly.  As  a  literary  type  it  is  known  that  the  villandco  conven- 
tionally began  with  a  refrain  [estribillo]  sung  by  a  chorus,  then  proceeded 
to  a  bipartite  stanza  [capias]  sung  by  a  soloist  or  soloists,  then  to  the  re- 
frain again  by  the  chorus,  then  to  a  new  stanza  but  sung  to  the  same  music 
as  the  first  stanza,  then  to  the  refrain,  then  to  a  third  stanza  if  desired, 
then  to  the  refrain,  and  so  on  and  on,  always  ending  at  the  last  with  the 
refrain.  Sor  Juana's  villandcos  usually  follow  the  conventional  estribillo- 
coplas-estribUlo-coplas-estribillo  pattern.  But  she  imposed  upon  her  villan- 
dcos a  larger  literary  unity  by  gathering  them  almost  invariably  into 
villandco-sequences,  Everyone  knows  what  is  meant  by  a  sonnet-sequence  j 
Sor  Juana  did  not  try  to  gather  as  many  villandcos  into  a  sequence  as  most 
sonneteers  do,  but  usually  gathered  only  eight  or  nine  into  a  particular 
sequence.  Each  sequence  honored  some  chosen  saint.  The  villandcos  in 
a  particular  sequence  were  usually  distributed  with  three  sung  at  the  first 
nocturn  of  matins,  two  or  three  at  the  next  nocturn,  and  one  or  two  at  the 
third  nocturn.  If  villandcos  to  be  sung  at  Mass  were  included,  their  posi- 
tion in  the  villandco-sequence  was  at  the  end.  The  latter  villandcos  in  a 
series  were  the  longest.  Often  one  of  the  villandcos  for  the  second  noc- 


140  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

turn  would  be  called  a  jacara.  Often  the  final  villandco  in  the  entire  se- 
quence if  it  were  not  a  villandco  for  Mass  would  be  called  an  ensalada. 

Her  villancico-sequences  are  really  best  described  as  playlets,  with  each 
villancico  fulfilling  the  function  of  a  separate  scene  speeding  forward  the 
action.  The  first  two  or  three  villanticos  in  a  particular  sequence  set  the 
§tage  by  telling  whose  day  is  being  celebrated.  The  jacara,  which  she  ex- 
plains as  meaning  the  same  thing  as  a  corrido™  tells  in  jaunty  ballad 
fashion  the  story  of  an  exploit  or  group  of  exploits  by  the  saint  being 
honored  The  only  pronounced  difference  between  a  seventeenth  cen- 
tury jacara  honoring  Nolasco  and  a  twentieth  century  corrido  memori- 
alizing Zapata  is  that  one  is  a  ballad  concerning  the  exploits  of  a  religious 
figure  and  the  other  is  a  ballad  concerning  the  exploits  of  a  political  figure. 
The  ensalada  at  the  end  of  Sor  Juana's  villancico-sequences  are  medleys 
in  which  a  host  of  comic  characters  are  pushed  out  on  the  stage,  as  it  were, 
to  delight  the  audience  with  a  little  buffoonery.  In  the  ensalada  Sor  Juana 
and  her  other  contemporary  villandco-writers  often  indulged  in  slang, 
colloquialisms,  and  dialect  A  Negro  with  a  James  Whitcomb  Riley  ac- 
cent, an  Indian  with  half  his  vocabulary  composed  of  Nahuatl  words,  or  a 
university  student  who  spouts  Latin  at  every  opportunity,  were  stock 
figures  in  Sor  Juana's  ensaladas. 

Addressing  ourselves  now  to  the  Nolasco  villandcos,  sung  at  the  Mex- 
ico City  Cathedral  on  January  31,  1677,  ^th  words  by  Sor  Juana  and 
music  by  Joseph  de  Agurto  y  Loaysa,  chapelmaster  of  the  cathedral,  we 
discover  that  there  were  in  this  sequence  ten  villandcos.  Three  were 
allotted  the  first  nocturn,  three  the  second,  two  the  third,  and  two  were 
inserted  in  Mass.  The  opening  villandco  sets  the  stage  by  telling  us 
Nolasco  was  a  Frenchman  who  spent  his  life  ransoming  Christian  captives 
from  the  Moors.  The  second  and  third  in  the  first  nocturn  describe  his 
apotheosis.  The  first  and  second  for  the  second  nocturn  continue  in  the 
lyric  vein,  but  the  third— a  jacara— changes  to  the  narrative  mood. 
"Listen,"  Sor  Juana  says,  "while  I  sing  his  valiant  deeds."  Then  she  tells 
how  he  came  to  Barcelona,  how  he  formed  a  project  for  ransoming  cap- 
tives, and  how  his  exertions  were  rewarded.  The  second  villancico  for 
the  third  nocturn  introduces  in  an  ensdadilla^sL  little  medley— first  a 
Negro  who  sings  a  dance  song  while  shaking  a  gourd  In  it  he  sadly  re- 
flects that  if  only  he  were  white  he  would  be  better  treated.  He  confesses 
that  the  other  night  while  he  was  at  his  conga,57  he  had  some  wicked 
thoughts,  but  he  hopes  his  good  angel  will  pardon  him  now.  Then  he  sings 


NEO-HISPANIC  MUSIC  141 

the  estribillo  again:  Tumba,  la,  la,  la,  tumba,  la,  le,  le.  This  particular 
Negro  song  receives  as  its  title,  Porto  Rico;  the  porto  rico  was  an  ex- 
tremely popular  negroid  dance  introduced  from  the  West  Indies.  After 
this  porto  rico  a  young  university  student  spouting  Latin  phrases  honor- 
ing Nolasco  steps  forward.  Everything  he  say  in  Latin  sounds  like  some- 
thing entirely  different  and  irrelevant  in  Spanish.  His  next  door  neighbor, 
a  simple  man,  thinks  the  university  fop  is  saying  some  highly  ridiculous 
things,  such  as,  how  do  you  like  your  liquor,  where  did  you  learn  to  be  a 
warlock,  and  so  on.  Sor  Juana  carries  off  this  little  repartee  between  the 
fop  and  the  simpleton  with  real  eclat.  Then  she  brings  on  an  Indian  who 
is  a  baker.  He  sings  a  tocotfn  (the  same  thing  as  a  toncontm).58  In  it  he 
plays  a  bit  of  a  braggart,  says  if  he  had  been  Nolasco  he  wouldn't  have  paid 
ransom  to  a  Moorish  dog,  no,  he  would  have  killed  him  with  his  bare 
fists.  After  the  ensaladilk  Sor  Juana  finally  brings  her  Nolasco  villancico- 
sequence  to  a  conclusion  with  two  of  them  designed  for  the  Mass  that 
followed  matins.  Of  the  pair  of  concluding  villancicos  the  first  expands 
the  Gloria  in  excelsis,  but  the  other  has  no  obvious  relation  to  the  liturgy. 

Her  other  villandco-sequences  are  equally  fresh  and  delightful.  Her 
subject  matter  varied  5  one  was  for  Christmas,  others  were  for  such  saints 
as  Peter,  Joseph,  and  Catharine  5  she  also  wrote  several  for  special  events 
in  the  life  of  the  Virgin  Mary.  In  one  of  her  Virgin  Mary  sequences  she 
introduced  a  truly  virtuostic  villancico  founded  on  musical  puns.50  The 
Virgin  is  represented  as  the  teacher  of  a  singing  class  who  instructs  her 
pupils  to  raise  their  voices  by  successive  degrees  until  they  reach  the 
celestial.  Juana's  puns  can  hardly  be  translated,  but  are  of  this  order: 
b  flat  is  the  earthly  sound,  but  the  Virgin  raises  the  pitch  to  b  natural,  the 
heavenly  sound.  The  Virgin  shows  how  to  make  a  perfect  counterpoint 
with  the  Three  Persons  in  the  Trinity,  and  shows  how  to  lift  the  imperfect 
duple,  two-dimensioned,  earthbound  rhythm,  to  the  perfect  triple,  three- 
dimensioned,  heavenly  rhythm.  Man's  phrygian  mode  (the  Spanish  word 
frigio  is  a  pun  for  frio) — that  is  to  say,  his  frigid  mode — aroused  justly 
the  wrath  of  God,  but  as  Mary  teaches  him  to  sing  in  a  dorian  mode  (a 
dorian  punning  with  adoring)  the  divine  wrath  is  mollified. 

Her  musical  knowledge  was  gained  from  El  Melofeo  y  Maestro  by 
Pedro  Cerone,60  an  invaluable  work  published  at  Naples  in  1613,  but 
written  in  Spanish.  Her  own  annotated  copy  of  Cerone  still  survives.61 
She  may  possibly  have  known  other  musical  treatises.  The  leading  book 
shop  in  Mexico  City  in  1683  was  that  of  Paula  Benavidesj  62  an  inventory 


i42  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

of  the  stock  preserved  from  that  year  shows  two  other  titles:  El  PorquS 
de  la  musica  by  Andres  Lorente  (published  at  Alcala  de  Henares  in  1 672) 
and  Arte  de  canto  llano  by  Francisco  de  Montanos  (published  at  Madrid 
in  1648).  Both  these  other  books  are  now  recognized  as  superior  boob  of 
their  kind 5  Lorente's  book  has  been  characterized  as  "one  of  the  best 
planned  and  intelligently  executed  didactic  books  published  during  the 
baroque  epoch."  68  The  accessibility  of  these  books  in  Mexico  City  during 
the  latter  part  of  the  seventeenth  century  proves  a  certain  diffusion  of 
music  knowledge  in  the  colony;  had  there  not  been  a  rather  persistent 
demand  for  serious  theoretical  treatises  no  commercial  seller  would  have 
stocked  such  books.  Professor  I.  A.  Leonard,  an  authority  on  colonial 
culture  of  the  middle  period,  has  reminded  us  that  "colonial  readers  were 
able  to  acquire  a  wide  variety  of  the  books  that  their  relatives  enjoyed  in 
Spain,  and  .  .  .  their  opportunities  for  stimulation  in  this  respect  were 
hardly  less  than  those  of  the  Spaniards  who  remained  in  the  homeland." 
The  most  convincing  proof  of  the  rather  widespread  diffusion  of  mus- 
ical knowledge  during  Juana's  time,  however,  comes  from  an  analy- 
sis of  her  own  allusions  to  music,  and  not  from  a  study  of  booksellers' 
lists. 

Of  the  four  composers'  names  associated  with  her  villandcos,  two  were 
provincial  chapelmasters  and  two  chapelmasters  at  the  Mexico  City  Cathe- 
dral* Joseph  de  Agurto  y  Loaysa,  Mexico  City  chapelmaster,  wrote  the 
music  for  her  villandco-sequences  published  at  the  capital  city  between 
1677  ^d  1 686,  and  Antonio  de  Salazar,  Agurto  y  Loaysa's  successor,  pro- 
vided the  music  for  her  villandco  publications  at  the  capital  between 
1689  and  1691.  Salazar,  whose  music  for  two  villandcos  honoring  Ilde- 
phonsus  is  transcribed  below,  was  probably  her  only  worthy  collaborator. 
His  Latin  hymns  are  superb,  and  show  him  to  have  been  a  master  contra- 
puntalist  in  an  epoch  when  the  art  of  vocal  polyphony  was  decaying. 

His  name  is  a  common  one  in  Spanish,  but  it  has  been  suggested  that 
he  came  from  Seville,  since  certain  Salazar  compositions  are  preserved 
in  the  Seville  cathedral  archive.64  He  came  at  a  time  the  Cabildo  was 
more  than  ordinarily  eager  to  secure  a  competent  composer.  In  1682  the 
Cathedral  Cabildo  invited  applications  for  a  chapelmaster  to  succeed 
Agurto  y  Loaysa,  who  was  then  presumably  near  the  retirement  age. 
Three  competitors  appeared  for  the  post,  one  of  whom,  a  Juan  Coronado, 
•was  forced  to  withdbaw  since  he  was  adjudged  ah  incompetent  as  a  com- 


NEO-HISPANIC  MUSIC  143 

poser.  A  Nicolas  Mann  was  chosen,  but  seems  not  to  have  actually  en- 
tered upon  the  exercise  of  chapelmaster  duties  5  66  in  any  event  Salazar 
became  the  chapelmaster  in  1687  or  1688,  occupying  the  post  as  Agurto 
y  Loaysa's  immediate  successor.  Salazar  remained  for  almost  a  quarter 
century  5  he  was  followed  by  Manuel  Zumaya,  thought  to  have  been  his 
pupil.  Zumaya,  who  remained  until  1732,  in  which  year  he  removed  to 
Oaxaca,  was  the  first  Mexico  City  chapelmaster  who  we  are  certain  was 
a  Creole.60  Like  Loaysa  and  Salazar,  Zumaya  continued  to  compose  villan- 
dcos,  but  during  his  epoch  the  villancico  developed  into  a  cantata,  with 
an  opening  chorus,  interspersed  arias,  and  a  choral  finale. 

The  villandcos  of  Salazar  and  Zumaya  both  presuppose  an  orchestral 
accompaniment,  and  the  vocal  parts  therefore  represent  only  a  skeleton. 
Figured  bass  was  utilized  in  eighteenth  century  music  composed  in  Mex- 
ico,67 but  no  indication  remains  that  it  was  used  during  the  seventeenth  ; 
this  generalization  may  later  prove  ill-founded,  but  seems  accurate  now. 
The  two  villandcos  with  Salazar  music  printed  below  were  written 
for  a  celebration  on  January  23,  1691,  honoring  Ildephonsus,  an  ecclesi- 
astic of  the  seventh  century  who  wrote  in  behalf  of  the  perpetual  vir- 
ginity. His  cult  was  extremely  popular  in  Mexico.  The  sense  of  the  first 
one  runs  thus: 

Estribitto  Listen  to  our  taunt  hurled  at  the  heretic,  Helvidius,  May 
his  life  be  a  thousand  times  embittered.  Listen  while  everyone  derides  him; 
listen  while  the  heavens,  on  the  other  hand,  rejoice  at  his  discomfiture. 

C of  las  If  he  thinks  we  are  going  to  trade  insult  for  insult  this  time  he 
is  mistaken;  we  are  going  to  hit  back  three  times  for  his  every  two  times, 
because  we  already  know  he  is  a  blasphemer  and  a  scoundrel. 

The  sense  of  the  second  runs  as  follows: 

Estribille  Take  care  against  the  wfld  beast  who  stamps  the  ground  on 
the  fertile  banks  of  the  Tagus  hoping  he  will  consume  the  flock  on  the 
other  side.  But  his  evil  designs  are  known,  and  will  be  frustrated.  Bde- 
phonsus  will  rescue  his  favorite  flock. 

Coflas  K-  The  lurking  figure  of  Helvidius  can  be  discerned  in  the 
darkness  of  the  night.  He  wants  to  play  the  wolf  and  carry  off  his  victims, 
but  like  a  booby  he  gives  himself  away  with  his  wolf  howls, 

2.  Although  theTrench  beast  rages  at  the  flock,  Ildephonsus,  shepherd 


,44  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

of  the  sheep,  will  whirl  around  and  protect  them  so  that  not  even  the  purity 
of  their  wool  will  be  soiled. 

3.  Let  the  wild  beast  who  comes  raging  from  abroad  deceitfully 
wrapped  in  a  ewe's  skin  realize  his  evil  designs  are  known;  he  cannot 
spread  his  plague  in  Spanish  dominions. 

The  meaning  of  these  two  villancicos  seems  at  first  somewhat  abstruse, 
but  the  political  situation  in  1691  makes  clear  their  true  significance.  Hel- 
vidius, who  lived  sometime  before  383,  is  only  a  straw  man  set  up  to  be 
knocked  down.  Nothing  is  known  of  Helvidius's  nationality,  and  there 
is  no  reason  to  believe  he  was  French.68  But  for  the  purposes  of  the  villan- 
cicos at  hand,  Helvidius  had  to  be  a  French  heretic,  and  Ildephonsus  had 
to  be  a  Spanish  hero  protecting  the  flock  against  the  base  intruder.  The 
Tagus  river  is  mentioned  because  on  its  banks  Ildephonsus  set  up  shop, 
as  it  were,  while  he  was  writing  his  theological  treatises.  Helvidius  and 
Ildephonsus  were  merely  convenient  prototypes.  Spain  and  France  were 
at  war  in  1691,  and  for  propaganda  purposes  the  signatories  of  the  League 
of  Augsburg  (to  which  Charles  II  adhered)  labeled  their  opponent, 
Louis  XIV  as  insufficiently  firm  in  the  faith.  It  mattered  not  for  the  propa- 
ganda purposes  in  hand  that  Louis  XIV  was  at  the  particular  moment 
(1691)  thoroughly  under  the  dominance  of  a  Jesuit  confessor. 

These  villancicos  carry  therefore  a  double  meaning.  The  well-known 
Neo-Hispanist,  Alfonso  Mendez  Plancarte,  thinks  these  Ildephonsus 
verses  were  written  by  a  peninsular  poet69 


Viilancicc 

Olgtat    4tn  vt/ame* 
*  J 


,  _ 
ic  (U  Sa&uar,  *f* 


x    1    5 


Ifrp 


f'f  r-rTfrr 

Htl-ti-tfa  A*-  rt-Jt:** 


Oi  - 


is 


r    iff  Mr 


mil  6+  -Us  &*•**• 


rffirf  f 


NEO-HISPANIC  MUSIC 


F  r  !*r  E  r 

oi-g<M-Ut  ol-jfi*'Uf 


PI  r  P  T  i  r-  IT 


^ 


,     J. 


p  -*r  r1 


C'e-U 


-ju^ti  Clt -U    s^j. -U -jrt  / 


d 


C/e-^o  5€  a  -^e  - 

J  Jf  J1  .  J  i 


e/«-A.    3<ji  -  a 

*  J.  y  i ) 


prr* 

:*€-lo        vt  a.- 


i.  j? 


*t      St  a.  -U  -  9^6 

J.   J)    J        i 


3^ 


f  F 


-      to. 


J.    J  J-jJ 


nprrmirn 


^^ 


r  r 


r 


a  -    xa.    Ltk*dt 

i 


d&r 


n^ 


e 


r- 


MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 


<o^. 

We  -/r*.  — 

M—  I  

T        'i.-  =1 

Vi ilanci to  (4  r»iee5) 


J  J_J  1 


iptet 


(ipf  r  f 


a^fea 


j    ' 


FFMI  *  .r 

•fc.ntjrt-W   -rg,       n  -    *«  • »»,     y  luJf-n*-4aa*e(**p»-peT<. 


m 


NEO-HISPANIC   MUSIC 

ft    Sus    l 


H7 


££ 


P      T  r    r^ 


TFM  J  jj.   a 


T 


*••/,•  : 


?-..:t.[^  i 


^f 


-fr*i»  ^"» 

fe 


•ftfff    f«  ,    K* 


T     r 


P 


^ 


^=^^ 


^ 


::JZ^*: 


rP1   : 


^ITi^^^-i^-      '£ 
U±==£ 


Coptas 


r1 


^ 


ff 


i.          CLl   *  -br/s 


r  r 

i'-tu.  -r& 


^'pp'sr  f|f  r- 


K 


pPf'P  'f  r 


S 


r     r 

-tu-te   it, 


-     ca  de 


*   x 


^ 


^^ 


^ 


a 


J^  J 


r  f 


i4«  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

MUSIC    AT   THE  MEXICO  CITY   CATHEDRAL    (SALAZAR  TO  ALDANA) 

A  list  is  fortunately  still  extant  in  which  are  given  the  names  of  fifteen 
different  instruments  used  in  the  cathedral  orchestra  during  i69i.70  It 
is  also  known  that  these  instruments  were  used  conjointly  as  a  group 
accompanying  the  Salazar  villancicos  sung  on  June  29  of  that  year.  Pre- 
sumably the  same  instruments  were  used  in  accompanying  the  two  villan- 
cicos honoring  Ildephonsus  which  were  sung  earlier  that  same  year  (Janu- 
ary 23),  and  whose  vocal  parts  in  condensed  score  have  been  shown  above. 
This  June  29  list  has  been  found  particularly  helpful  because  it  names 
specific  instruments  j  this  list  was  the  first  which  specifically  named  the 
violin  5  it  also  mentioned  the  treble  viol,  the  tenor  viol,  and  the  rebeck. 
The  other  chordophones  named  in  the  list  were  the  bandore,  the  cittern, 
the  marine  trumpet,  and  the  harp.  The  brass  instruments  used  were  the 
clarion,  the  trumpet,  and  the  trombone.  The  only  two  woodwinds  men- 
tioned in  the  list  were  the  double-reed  chirimia,  for  which  instrument  the 
violin  is  spoken  of  as  providing  a  suitable  obbligato,  and  the  bassoon. 
Flutes  did  not  appear  in  the  1691  list,  although  it  is  conjectured  recorders 
were  still  used  in  the  cathedral  orchestra*  The  organ  is  mentioned,  but  its 
function  seems  to  have  been  relatively  unimportant  as  far  as  the  effect  of 
the  total  ensemble  was  concerned. 

The  interior  of  the  Mexico  City  Cathedral— and  now  we  speak  of  the 
present  structure— had  only  recently  been  finished  when  Salazar  became 
chapelrnaster.  The  second  solemn  dedication  of  the  cathedral  had  oc- 
curred in  1667  when  the  interior  was  completed.71  Three  years  before 
the  solemn  act  a  campanile  had  been  erected  containing  twenty  bells.72 
These  were  not  a  tuned  carillon,  but  simply  rang  peals.  When  they 
started  ringing  while  the  cathedral  orchestra  and  choir  were  performing, 
Sor  Juana  exclaimed,  "Jesus!  what  confusion!"  (ijesus,  y  que  confu- 
sion!) 7*  Any  mental  picture  which  can  be  conjured  up  of  the  flickering 
lights  illurninatingthis  vast  cathedral,  of  the  altars  served  by  richly  vested 
ckrgy*  of  t^e  fine  canvases  by  such  capable  Neo-Hispanic  painters  as  the 
two  Behaves,  the  two  Juarezes,  and  Juan  Correa,  hung  everywhere,  will 
probably  still  fell  short  of  the  actual  panoply  and  display  during  Salazart 
incumbency.  When  one  sets  his  surging  hymns  or  his  bright  and  gaudy 
vdlancicos  in  their  proper  environment,  calling  up  in  imagination  the 
sharply  differentiated  tone  colors  in  his  orchestra,  one  then  catches  some 


NEO-HISPANIC  MUSIC  149 

notion  of  the  potent  synoptic  experience  which  the  Neo-Hispanic  church 
specialized  in  providing.  The  humbler  folk  in  the  city  might  want  foodj 
in  1692,  for  instance,  a  great  corn-riot  broke  out  in  the  Mexico  City 
market.  But  Mexico  has  always  specialized  in  dramatic  contrast  The  poor 
Indian  woman  who  was  pressed  to  death  in  the  riot  on  June  8  while  the 
tintinnabulation  of  the  bells,  bells,  bells,  at  the  cathedral  blended  with  a 
gay  villancico  was  but  the  ancestor  of  a  hundred  others  who  have  perished 
while  the  band  played  on. 

Salazar's  hymns  are  hymns  in  the  Palestrina  or  Victoria  sense  of  the 
word  hymn — that  is  to  say,  polyphonic  settings  of  certain  texts  that  in 
Latin  usage  are  classified  as  hymns.  From  a  musical  standpoint  the  word 
motet  would  more  aptly  describe  a  Salazar  hymn  as  far  as  English  readers 
are  concerned.  His  hymns  were  not  at  all  intended  for  congregations, 
but  for  his  professionalized  choir  members  to  sing.  Perhaps  the  most  im- 
portant of  his  hymns  preserved  in  the  Puebla  archive  is  the  St.  James 
hymn  (St.  James  is  the  patron  saint  of  Spain).74  His  other  hymns  pre- 
served at  Puebla  include  two  for  the  Assumption  and  one  each  for 
SS.  Peter  and  Paul  and  for  St.  Joseph.  In  addition,  two  Salazar  hymns  are 
preserved  at  the  Mexico  City  Cathedral  tesoro  artistico. 

Manuel  Zumaya,  SalazaVs  successor,  was  the  first  chapelmaster  at 
Mexico  City  who  can  definitely  be  identified  as  a  Creole.  Beristain  y  Souza 
tells  us  that  Zumaya  was  born  in  Mexico,  that  he  became  a  priest,  and  that 
he  acquired  fluency  in  Italian.75  Zumaya's  musical  importance  rests  not 
so  much,  however,  on  the  fact  he  was  the  first  Mexico  City  chapelmaster 
who  can  be  proved  to  have  been  born  in  Mexico.  Rather  it  rests  on  the 
fact  he  was  the  composer  of  the  first  opera  produced  in  the  New  World, 
La  Partenofey  given  at  the  viceregal  palace  on  May  i,  171 1.  The  libretto 
was  by  Silvio  Stampiglia,  and  another  opera  using  the  same  libretto  had 
been  produced  at  Naples  in  1699  with  music  by  the  obscure  Neapolitan 
composer,  Luigi  Manzo.™  Since  it  is  difficult  to  account  for  Zumaya's  ac- 
quaintance with  this  particular  libretto  unless  he  himself  had  lived  in 
Italy,  and  more  particularly  in  Naples,  it  has  been  postulated  that  in  early 
youth  he  studied  in  Italy.  Wherever  he  may  have  acquired  his  musical 
knowledge,  he  still  is  distinguished  as  the  first  American  composer  of 
opera,  and  his  La  Partenope  is  still  distinguished  as  the  first  opera  of  any 
sort  produced  on  American  soil. 

Before  the  production  of  La  Parttnofe  he  had  already  published  an 
original  pky,  El  Rodrigo,  printed  in  1708.  After  the  arrival  of  a  new 


i5o  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

viceroy,  the  Duke  of  Linares,  Don  Fernando  de  Alencastre  Norofia  y 
Silva,  on  January  15,  1711,  Zumaya  was  immediately  pressed  into  the 
duke's  musical  service.  Beristafn  y  Souza  tells  us  that  the  duke  was  a 
devotee  of  Italian  opera.  Zumaya  was  commissioned  to  translate  Italian 
libretti,  and  to  write  new  music  for  these  libretti.  Beristafn  y  Souza  adds 
that  his  music  thoroughly  pleased  the  duke.  Zumaya  if  not  in  Italy  at 
least  somewhere  had  learned  how  to  please  him.  The  libretto  of  La  Parti- 
nofe  was  printed  with  text  in  both  Spanish  and  Italian,  and  although  the 
music  has  not  survived  it  must  have  been  thoroughly  Italianate.  Like  the 
prevailing  baroque  plots,  that  of  La  Partenope  was  intricate  in  the  ex- 
treme. Two  of  the  seven  characters  were  rival  leading  ladies— princesses. 
Their  roles  were  in  all  probability  sung  by  cathedral  choir  boys.  The  con- 
tinued production  of  operas  in  the  Italian  manner  was  inhibited  in  Mexico 
largely  through  lack  of  a  troupe.  The  first  Italian  troupe  settled  in 
Madrid  in  1703,  but  the  viceregal  court  could  not  independently  support 
a  troupe, 

Zumaya's  term  as  chapelmaster  lasted  until  1732  j  in  that  year  he  went 
to  Oaxaca  with  Tomis  Montano,  dean  of  the  Mexico  Cathedral  who  was 
elevated  to  the  bishopric  of  Oaxaca.  In  Oaxaca  Zumaya  devoted  himself 
entirely  to  religious  duties.  He  translated  a  biography  of  Sertorio  Caputo, 
a  Jesuit,  from  Italian  into  Spanish,  and  cultivated  "the  sacred  sciences." 
There  he  died  "much  lamented  by  his  parishioners."  Zumaya's  Mag- 
nificats and  villanckos  surviving  in  the  Mexico  City  tssoro  artistico  have 
not  yet  been  examined  minutely,  but  Estrada,  present  organist  at  the 
cathedral,  thinks  him  to  have  been  the  finest  Mexican  composer  of  the 
eighteenth  century.  A  villandco  transcribed  by  Saldfvar,  if  it  may  be 
taken  as  representative  of  Zumaya's  style,  shows  him  to  have  conceived 
of  the  form  not  in  terms  of  a  refrain-stanza-refrain  pattern,  but  rather 
as  a  ^miniature  cantata.  After  the  opening  tenor  solo,  in  the  example 
Saldfvar  transcribed,  the  estribillo  required  an  eight-part  double  chorus. 
Throughout  the  double  chorus  the  interior  voice  parts  seem  more  often 
designed  as  mere  harmonic  padding  than  as  independent  vocal  lines.  The 
ten  measures  between  the  one  numbered  24  and  the  one  numbered  34 
in  the  Alto  I  part  (estribillo)  provide  an  excellent  example  of  an  instru- 
mentally  conceived  inner  part,  for  instance.  But  there  are  also  imitations, 
and  in  total  effect— even  if  the  separate  vocal  parts  often  lack  a  rhythmic 
vitality  of  their  own— the  villandco  in  question  undoubtedly  conveyed  an 


NEO-HISPANIC  MUSIC  151 

impression  of  garish  brilliancy.  The  contrast  between  the  opening  tenor 
solo  (an  introduction)  and  the  estribillo  is  well  handled^  the  tenor  solo, 
with  its  supple  ternary  flow,  gives  no  hint  of  the  hammering  force  in  the 
estribillo  to  follow. 

The  whole  of  the  Zumaya  villandco  is  too  lengthy  to  set  out  here. 
Simply  as  a  sample  we  have  therefore  chosen  the  opening  tenor  solo,  fol- 
lowing it  with  several  bars  of  the  estribillo.  It  should  be  noted  that  the 
two  choirs  in  the  estribillo  are  throughout  handled  in  antiphonal  style. 
The  words  laud  Peter,  as  would  befit  his  day  in  the  church  calendar.  The 
text  is  probably  Pedro  Munoz  de  Castro's  j  he  is  known  to  have  been 
supplying  Zumaya  with  villandco-texts.  But  Castro's  lack  the  inimitable 
swing  of  Sor  Juana's.  He  left  out  the  low  comedy  characters  which  she 
was  so  fond  of  introdudng  in  her  ensaladas  at  the  end  of  her  villandco- 
sequences,  and  instead  wrote  "glosas,"  smelling  of  the  lamp. 


15* 


MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 


/*  "ill  -i  -  t*n  ~  CAC«  cii    -      ri     -   na 3. 


fstrltitl* 


YUva.ri-va.vi,- va,      O^-can-eU 


ip 


m 


vi  ~ 


frf  ffffff 

0-  JT9  -  OrtA  -  00 

jjllj  JJK  J  JE 


r  r  r  r  r  r 


NEO-HISPANIC  MUSIC  153 

Zumaya's  music,  like  that  of  several  other  Neo-Hispanic  compeers, 
seems  worthy  of  protracted  study.  For  the  music  of  some  of  his  kter 
eighteenth  century  successors  in  the  Mexico  City  chapelmastership  less 
favorable  representations  can  be  made,  however.  His  immediate  succes- 
sor was  Jose  de  Torres  (1732),  during  whose  regime  a  new  organ  of 
monumental  size  was  installed  at  the  cathedral. 

Puebla  had  in  1695  secured  a  new  organ  built  by  the  brothers  Tiburcio 
and  Felix  Sans  of  Aragon,  both  of  whom  had  been  expressly  imported 
for  the  purpose  of  building  Puebla  an  organ  suitable  for  its  musical  pre- 
tensions.77 Guadalajara  at  a  cost  of  20,000  pesos — an  enormous  figure  in 
that  day — had  secured  in  1730  a  handsomely  cased  instrument  built  by 
the  famous  maestro,  Jose  Nazarre,  containing  2,226  pipes.78  Mexico  City, 
not  to  be  outdistanced  by  any  provincial  center,  commissioned  a  new  in- 
strument of  even  larger  size.  At  the  dedication  on  August  15,  1735,  "sev- 
eral thousand"  persons  saw  Don  Juan  de  Vizarron  y  Eguiarreta,  who  was 
at  the  moment  both  archbishop  and  viceroy,  cooperate  with  the  audiencia 
in  staging  a  solemn  "act"  If  Guadalajara's  had  2,226  pipes,  Mexico's 
had  to  have  more,  and  the  total  number  was  therefore  3,350.  The  number 
of  mixture  stops  alone  reached  86.  Five  hidden  bellows  supplied  the 
necessary  wind. 

Manuel  de  San  Vicente,  whose  Exacta  DescrifciSn  de  la  Magwfica 
Gone  Mexicans  was  published  at  Cadiz,  Spain,  in  1768,  listed  this  organ, 
built  in  Mexico  City  but  under  European  supervision,  as  one  of  the 
wonders  of  the  New  World.  At  the  time  he  visited  Mexico  the  organ 
was  one  of  the  principal  daily  attractions  5  visitors  today  can  still  see  the 
tremendous  rows  of  pipes,  and  although  the  organ  is  now  no  longer  usable 
because  it  has  fallen  completely  into  disrepair,  it  takes  no  great  stretch  of 
the  imagination  to  appreciate  San  Vincente's  glowing  account.  As  he  de- 
scribetf  it,  the  organ  was  divided:  what  amounted  to  a  completely  indi- 
vidualized instrument  was  placed  on  each  side  of  the  nave.  The  two 
antiphonal  choirs  were  therefore  each  supported  by  two  antiphonal  or- 
gans, The  pipes  of  each  of  the  antiphonal  organs  were  again  subdivided 
and  housed  in  four  separate  chambers.  The  ideal  of  a  unified  instrument 
which  many  organ  builders  today  follow  was  completely  absent  from  the 
minds  of  Neo-Hispanic  builders.  Theirs  had  no  swell  shutters,  and  what- 
ever effects  of  loudness  and  softness  were  procured  on  their  organs  were 
more  the  result  of  nearness  or  distance  of  the  pipes  rather  than  of  voicing 
of  individual  ranks.  The  names  of  stops  cannot  be  readily  translated 


i54  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

into  modern  terms.  We  have  no  exact  record  of  the  stops  on  the  Mexico 
organ  when  it  was  dedicated  but  the  Gazeta  de  Mexico  carried  a  list  of 
the  Guadalajara  stops  at  the  time  of  the  Guadalajara  dedication  ceremony. 
The  list  included  "octavas,  dozenas,  quinzenas,  dedsetenas,  dednovenas, 
dmbales,  ventidocenas,  nazardos,  cornetas,  trompeta  real,  bajondllos, 
clarines,  trompeta  magna,  chirimia,  oboe,  voces  naturales  y  sictas." 79  Our 
understanding  of  the  Spanish  organ  ideal  during  the  Cabanillas  period 
is  still  in  such  a  primitive  state  that  we  have  no  exact  means  of  equating 
the  practice  of  the  early  eighteenth  century  with  our  own.  It  does  seem 
obvious,  however,  that  the  Neo-Hispanic  organ  contained  several  stops 
imitating  instruments  in  common  use  5  mixtures,  moreover,  were  as  im- 
portant (proportionately  speaking)  as  they  were  in  Bach's  Leipzig  organ 
of  the  same  period.  The  pedals  extending  through  only  one  octave  (from 
C  to  Bti)  were  not  disposed,  however,  as  a  keyboard  for  the  feet  in  Neo- 
Hispanic  organs.80  Independent  parts  were  not  written  for  the  pedals, 
which  were  actually  short  knobs.  These  knobs  though  horizontally  laid 
out  did  not  admit  of  any  rapid  foot-work,  since  they  could  be  played  only 
with  the  toes.  Obviously  legato  in  any  kind  of  moving  passage  was  out  of 
the  question. 

The  organ  cases  were  of  incomparable  richness.  In  San  Vicente's  opin- 
ion—and he  had  seen  the  best  in  Spain— the  costliness  of  the  Mexico 
City  organ  was  unparalleled.  The  top  level  of  the  pipes  stood  47  feet 
above  the  floor  of  the  choir.  In  conformity  with  the  usual  Spanish  practice 
of  the  time,  the  lips  of  the  Mexico  pipes  were  surrounded  with  brightly 
painted  faces  representing  angels.  With  his  mouth  wide  open  each 
angel  looked  as  if  any  instant  he  were  ready  to  blow.  Pal  Kelemen,  noted 
art  historian  of  our  own  time,  in  1942  wrote  an  interesting  study  of 
"Church  Organs  in  Colonial  Mexico"  5  while  he  ignored  musical  techni- 
calities, which  were  not  germane  to  his  purpose  in  writing  the  article,  he 
nevertheless  did  us  a  service  by  calling  attention  to  the  superb  craftsman- 
ship of  these  eighteenth  century  organs.  He  praised  "these  majestic  in- 
struments .  .  .  built  by  inspired  artists  and  devoted  artisans,"  which 
though  now  silenced  "are  monuments  of  hope  for  a  brighter  future  in 
which  mankind  will  recover  its  love  for  the  arts  and  for  humanitarian 
values."81 

If  the  organ  dedication  was  the  most  spectacular  event  during  his 
incumbency,  Torres  deserves  mention  also  as  a  creditable  composer  if  nbt 


NEO-HISPANIC  MUSIC  i55 

an  inspired  one.  Masses  of  his  are  preserved  at  Morelia  as  well  as  at 
Mexico.  He  favored  the  music  of  the  Italianized  Spaniard,  Domingo 
Terradellas  (1713-51)?  and  acquired  a  f-part  Mass  with  orchestral  ac- 
companiment by  him  5  as  is  the  case  with  certain  works  by  Galuppi  and 
Jommelli,82  the  only  known  score  of  the  Terradellas  Mass  is  today  pre- 
served in  Mexico.  Whether  a  unique  copy  in  Mexico  means  the  work  was 
especially  procured  for  performance  in  Mexico,  we  are  not  prepared  to 
say.  What  these  scores  do  indicate  with  certainty,  however,  is  the  active 
participation  of  the  colony  in  the  musical  life  of  the  home  country  until 
the  very  end  of  the  colonial  epoch.  The  weaknesses  that  beset  Spanish 
music  during  the  eighteenth  century  were  precisely  those  which  beset 
Mexico— the  influx  of  second-rate  Italian  musicians  exercising  the  most 
deleterious  influence.  Ignacio  Jerusalem,  who  became  chapelmaster  at 
Mexico  City  in  1764,  provides  but  one  especially  conspicuous  example  of 
a  second-rate  Italian  who,  graduating  from  the  orchestra  pit  at  the  Coliseo 
de  M6xico,  carried  into  the  cathedral  the  vapid  inanities  of  Italian  opera 
at  its  worst.  He  did  further  harm  by  selfishly  opposing  the  University 
rector  who  wanted  an  independent  university  capilla  de  mtisica  83  (sing- 
ing traditional  polyphony). 

In  contrast  with  the  insipidities  of  Jerusalem  and  Antonio  Juanas,  Jose 
Maria  Aldana  sounded  a  somewhat  fresher  note;  he  also  was  essentially 
a  theater  musician,  beginning  his  metropolitan  career  as  a  second  violinist 
in  the  Coliseo  de  M6xico  orchestra  in  1786.  During  the  1790-1  season 
he  was  advanced  to  the  directorship  of  the  Coliseo  orchestra.84  His  playing 
was  combined  with  teaching  in  the  Colegio  de  Infantes,  and  like  many  of 
his  musical  colleagues  during  the  latter  days  of  the  viceregal  period,  his 
income  was  meager.  He  is  alleged  to  have  been  chapelmaster  in  the 
cathedral,  but  if  so  his  dates  would  overlap  with  those  of  Juanas.  He  un- 
doubtedly pkyed  in  the  cathedral  orchestra,  however.  His  Mass  m  D,  re- 
vived for  the  Museum  of  Modern  Art  concerts  in  1940,  follows  the  pat- 
tern of  the  usual  Italian  Mass  of  the  late  eighteenth  century.  A  succession 
of  short  choruses  with  little  or  no  contrapuntal  writing  was  interspersed 
with  solos  and  duets.  Aldana's  Mass  started  with  an  instrumental  intro- 
duction, allegro,  followed  by  a  choral  Kyrie,  largo.  The  Christe  eleison— 
andante,  G  major,  % — contrasted  neatly  with  the  first  Kyrie.  The  second 
Kyrie  ran  no  slightest  risk  of  tiring  the  audience,  comprising  as  it  did  only 
two  measures.  The  Gloria,  a  fast  %  allegro^  was  succeeded  by  a  Laudamus 


1 56 


MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 


te,  andante  in  b  minor,  sung  as  a  solo,  but  with  no  indication  of  voice  except 
range  (a  mezzo's  range).  The  Gratias  agimus,  of  which  we  present  a  few 
sample  measures,  called  for  only  three  voice  parts,  two  trebles  and  a  bass. 
The  remaining  short  sections  need  not  be  described.  The  Sanctus  and 
Agnus  were  combined  in  a  single  skeleton  movement,  in  accordance  with 
the  musically  indefensible  practice  of  the  time.  In  this  example,  as  in  others 
of  its  immediate  epoch,  the  largo  should  doubtless  be  understood  more  in 
our  present  sense  of  moierato.  The  popularity  of  this  Mass  obviously  ex- 
tended beyond  Aldana's  own  immediate  epoch.  A  copy  of  the  manuscript 


Mass.  />  2> 


NEO-HISPANIC  MUSIC 

tu  ~*m 


157 


i 


fe 


m 


«/*  - 


s 


Pif 


i!W 


T*    -*•    -r   4 

^ 


,i ,'  .ini  'in/'i 


T 

:  -ttJW- 


V/*-ti- 


^ 


r  »  if  P  r  *  i 


EfEEg 


«*- 


made  about  1 850  is  on  dispky  in  the  library  of  the  Conservatorio  National 
at  Mexico  City*  The  copy  was  made  for  an  actual  performance  of  the  wort 
The  style  of  the  work  can  be  taken  to  have  appealed  more  to  nineteenth 
century  Mexicans  than  the  style  of  anterior  colonial  composers  such  as 
Lopez  y  Capilla  and  Padilla. 

Aldana  has  the  distinction  of  having  been  the  only  known  colonial  com- 
poser who  paid  a  musical  tribute  to  San  Felipe  de  Jesus.85  The  Virgin  of 
Guadalupe  inspired  numerous  tributes,  but  San  Felipe — the  only  canon- 
ized Mexican — next  to  none.  The  first  performance  of  Aldana's  San  Felipe 
hymn  occurred  by  a  coincidence  the  very  day  of  his  death,  February  7, 


iS8  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

1 8 10.  He  had  lived  through  an  epoch  when  bad  taste  prevailed  every- 
where in  Spanish  and  Neo-Hispanic  music.  Although  he  adapted  himself 
perforce  to  the  shallow  taste  of  his  epoch,  his  own  musical  instincts  were 
healthier  than  those  of  his  audiences. 


REASONS  FOR  THE   DECLINE   OF   NEO-HISPANIC    MUSIC 

New  Spain  during  three  centuries  was  essentially  a  cultural  outpost  of 
the  homeland.  During  Spain's  heroic  period,  music  in  the  colony  pros- 
pered. Not  only  were  works  of  Morales,  Guerrero,  and  Cabezon  8fl  im- 
mediately imported  and  performed,  but  also  excellently  trained  musicians 
from  such  universities  as  Salamanca  implanted  a  living  tradition  in  the 
New  World.  Furthermore  the  musical  standards  of  the  Mexico  and 
Puebla  cathedrals  were  deliberately  set  with  the  purpose  of  rivaling  the 
highest  standards  in  any  Spanish  cathedral. 

The  colony  developed  always  as  a  branch  growing  out  of  the  Spanish 
trunk.  When  sap  rose  in  the  trunk,  leaves  appeared  in  the  Neo-Hispanic 
branch.  But  when  the  sap  in  the  home  trunk  dried  up,  the  musical  life  of 
the  colony  lacking  any  rootage  of  its  own  necessarily  withered  also. 

No  really  effective  schools  for  imparting  music  instruction  on  a  broad 
professional  level  developed  in  Mexico,  and  the  lack  of  schools,  rather 
than  the  lack  of  musicians,  proved  ultimately  the  most  harmful  result  of 
homeland  domination.  Although  choir-schools  such  as  those  at  Mexico 
City,  Puebla,  and  Morelia  continued  to  train  adequate  cathedral  singers, 
and  although  certain  convent  music  schools  prepared  efficient  female  teach- 
ers of  music,  schools  that  could  give  sufficiently  broad  preparation  for  such 
responsibilities  as  those  of  a  chapelmaster  were  lacking.  There  is  sufficient 
presumptive  evidence  to  show  that  when  at  last  the  Mexico  City  Cathedral 
did  engage  a  chapelmaster  of  New  World  birth — Zumaya— his  musical 
credentials  had  been  gained  not  in  Mexico  but  rather  in  Italy.  Conservator- 
ies of  the  kind  Dr.  Burney  saw  during  his  visit  to  Naples,  "three  ...  for 
the  education  of  boys  who  are  intended  for  the  profession  of  music" 
(1773),  nowhere  existed  b  eighteenth  century  Mexico. 

There  tfras  a  convent  music  school  founded  in  1740  at  the  San  Miguel 
de  Belfin  Convent  in  the  capital  j  87  there  were  also  two  convent  music 
schools  outside  Mexico  City.  Bernal  Jim6nez  has  offered  evidence  show- 
mg  that  the  Colcgio  de  Santa  Rosa  Maria  founded  at  Morelia  in  1 743  was 
called  a  conservatory.88  He  also  has  shown  that  the  short-lived  Colegio 


NEO-HISPANIC  MUSIC  159 

de  San  Nicolas  founded  at  San  Luis  Potosf  in  1760  was  primarily  a  music 
school.  These  three  institutions,  however  excellent  they  may  have  been, 
only  partially  fulfilled  a  need  since  they  trained  feminine  talent.  Boys 
could  only  have  secured  professional  training  by  going  abroad. 

But  even,  however,  had  conservatories  for  men  as  well  as  women  ex- 
isted, and  had  opportunities  for  advanced  professional  training  been  freely 
available,  it  is  doubtful  that  Creoles  would  often  have  successfully  com- 
peted for  chapelmasterships  in  the  most  prestigious  locations.  With  chapel- 
masterships  in  colonial  Mexico,  as  with  conductorships  in  present-day 
America,  the  prizes  were  usually  bestowed  upon  Europeans. 

Neo-Hispanic  music  insofar  as  it  was  "high  art"  was  certainly  not  Mexi- 
can music,  if  by  Mexican  is  meant  non-European.  Even  the  Indians  who 
were  trained  to  compose  reaped  praise  only  when  their  Masses  and  villan- 
cicos  sounded  acceptable,  to  the  European  ears  of  the  friar-chroniclers. 
True,  for  conversion  purposes,  the  friars  encouraged  Indian  music,  and 
as  Siguenza  y  GSngora  in  1  675  observed  at  Queretaro,  the  Indian  musical 
contribution  continued  to  be  welcomed  at  church  feasts.  But  in  the  sense 
of  "high  art"  any  Indian  contribution  —  such  as  that  of  Juan  Matias  during 
his  exceptional  years  of  service  in  the  Oaxaca  Cathedral—  had  to  conform 
to  the  European  ideal, 

Perhaps  when  the  repertory  of  Neo-Hispanic  music  has  been  studied 
more  minutely  it  will  be  possible  to  isolate  in  the  works  of  Bermudez, 
Salazar,  and  Zumaya  traces  of  Indian  influence.  Perhaps  Padilla  used 
Indian  themes  j  but  even  if  these  traces  are  found  it  seems  categorically 
certain  the  Indian  element  was  never  intruded  for  its  own  sake.  On  the 


Mexico,  if  we  look  attentively,  we  can  see  at  the  bottom  of  the  page  some 
nopal  cactus  incongruously  shooting  up  its  stems.  Not  unless  a  person  looks 
attentively  does  he  see  the  nopal  cactus.  So  it  will  probably  be  with  Neo- 
Hispanic  music  An  attentive  student  may  find  a  non-European  theme  here 
or  there,  but  his  finding  of  it  will  be  the  reward  of  close  study. 

The  more  Indian  a  present-day  Mexican  feels  himself  to  be  the  less  in- 
terested is  he  likely  to  be  in  the  remains  of  colonial  musk.  If  the  Mexican, 
who  is  first  an  Indian,  pays  Neo-Hispanic  music  any  attention  at  all,  he  is 
likelier  to  disparage  than  praise  it  It  is  a  well  known  fact  that  one  of  the 
first  acts  of  the  Mexican  Congress  after  Independence  was  to  propose  that 
Cort6s*s  bones  be  dug  up  and  burnt.  When  any  mind  at  all  has  been  paid 
the  Neo-Hispanic  composers,  the  spirited  approach  of  many  a  Mexican 


160  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

Indian  has  been  to  dig  it  all  out  of  its  present  resting-places  in  cathedrals 
and  burn  it,  "as  Cortes's  bones  should  have  been  burnt."  Outsiders  who 
are  emotionally  uninvolved  can  admire  a  Miguel  Cabrera  painting  or  a 
Francisco  Tresguerras  church  without  bothering  mentally  to  count  the 
number  of  dead  bodies  taken  up  out  of  a  Zacatecas  silver  mine  every  time 
a  new  artistic  masterpiece  was  created  in  New  Spain,  but  the  literate  Mexi- 
can who  prides  himself  on  being  an  Indian  remembers. 

The  outsider  admiring  the  Tasco  or  the  Celaya  churches  often  does  not 
know  how  few  the  Europeans  actually  were  who  dominated  Mexico  for 
three  hundred  years.  The  total  number  of  Spaniards  who  came  during 
three  centuries  has  by  inf  ormed  historians  been  estimated  at  only  300,000. 
All  the  vast  panoply  of  New  Spain  was  created  primarily  to  glorify  the 
urges  of  the  few.  How  few  they  were  may  be  judged  by  Mexico  City 
alone,  which  contained  the  largest  concentration  of  Europeans.  Here  in 
1680  in  a  population  of  400,000  there  were  only  22,000  Spaniards  who 
effectively  controlled  the  city,  and  therefore  the  colony.89  Another  50,000 
in  the  city  were  Creoles  of  unmixed  European  blood.  Skipping  over  a 
century  one  finds  that  in  1790  the  population  of  Mexico  City  was  esti- 
mated at  only  113,000,  with  2,000  Europeans  and  65,000  pure  blooded 
Creoles.90  If  these  were  the  population  figures  in  the  capital  where  the 
greatest  concentration  of  Europeans  and  Creoles  was  to  be  found,  the  per- 
centages over  the  colony  generally  were  much  smaller.  The  Spaniard  in 
Mexko,  riding  as  he  did  on  the  backs  of  the  Indian,  the  mestizo,  and  the 
Negro,  lived  the  life  of  a  patrician.  With  their  manual  assistance  he  reared 
to  himself  such  enduring  and  pretentious  monuments  that  even  today  the 
ruins  excite  wonder  and  admiration.  But  the  Mexican  who  feels  the  throb- 
bing of  his  Indian  blood  within  him  cannot  forget  that  these  monuments 
sepukher  his  ancestors'  blood,  sweat,  and  tears. 


SECULAR   MUSIC   DURING  THE   SEVENTEENTH   AND 
EIGHTEENTH   CENTURIES 

Where  the  musical  remains  have  themselves  perished,  it  is  still  often 
possible  to  reconstruct  the  story  of  Mexican  colonial  church  music  simply 
from  reading  the  ecclesiastical  records  that  survive.  But  with  colonial  secu- 
lar music  no  such  copious  "literary"  aids  are  available  to  the  historian,  who 
most  instead  rely  escclusively  on  the  music  itself  which  survives.  Three 


NEO-HISPANIC  MUSIC  161 

tablatures  may  be  instanced  as  examples  of  what  remains.  The  first  tabla- 
ture  was  described  in  the  July  21,  1942,  issue  of  Revista  Musical  Metd- 
canay  and  in  three  successive  issues  of  that  magazine  photographic  repro- 
ductions were  given.  The  tablature  in  question  exists  today  only  in  a 
fragmentary  condition,  but  can  be  dated  at  about  1620.  The  tablature  is 
in  tetragram  for  organ,  and  follows  the  same  system  of  tablature  en- 
countered in  Francisco  Correa's  Facultad  Organica  published  at  Alcali  de 
Henares  in  1 626.  On  page  5  of  the  tablature  occurs  this  indication :  "Tiento 
de  quarto  tono,  medio  Registro,  tiple  del  Maestro  Fran.co  correa  y  son 
muy  elegantes  sus  obras  de  este  Maestro."  It  has  thus  far  proved  impos- 
sible to  collate  the  top  part  of  the  particular  tiento  in  the  Mexican  tablature 
with  any  one  of  the  fourth  tone  compositions  (listed  as  such)  in  the  Correa 
Libra  de  tientosy  recently  published  in  modern  transcription.  However, 
a  comparison  of  the  facsimile  page  in  the  Correa  volume  91  with  the 
facsimile  pages  in  the  Revista  Musical  Mexicana  92  clearly  proves  that 
the  Mexican  tablature  follows  the  same  system  of  organ  tablature.  In 
present-day  terminology  the  title  would  mean  a  "tiento  in  the  fourth  tone, 
played  on  an  8-foot  stop,  with  the  soprano  part  by  Maestro  Francisco 
Correa,  whose  works  are  extremely  elegant."  An  overly  precise  definition 
of  the  term  tiento  cannot  be  given,  but  it  was  a  contrapuntal  form  similar 
to  the  ricercar.  Cabezon's  and  Correa's  are  the  best  known  tientos.  The 
Correa  reference  in  the  Mexican  tablature  establishes  but  another  link 
with  peninsular  musical  culture.  Correa,  thought  to  have  had  Portuguese 
antecedents,  was  organist  at  the  Seville  Cathedral — parent  of  the  Mexico 
City  Cathedral.  Correa's  tientos  are  indeed  "elegant,"  as  anyone  who 
has  studied  their  style  in  the  new  edition  issued  by  the  Institute  Espanol 
de  Musicologia  must  agree.  The  enthusiasm  of  the  unknown  tablaturist 
in  Mexico  who  wrote  "son  muy  elegantes  sus  obras  de  este  Maestro" 
proves  more  than  amply  justifiable. 

This  particular  organ  tablature  contains  another  interesting  notation 
(on  page  i) :  "Esta  fanfarria  sse  llama  scala  celite,  puso  el  apellido  el 
Maestro  Antonio  carrasio,  porque  es  muy  bueno  tiento  de  octavo  tono. 
tiple  de  cabrera.  en  el  peru  fue  Maestro."  I  follow  Saldivar,  possessor  of 
this  tablature,  in  the  punctuation  of  this  sentence.  The  same  sentence  can 
clearly  be  read  in  the  photostatic  reproduction  of  this  particular  .page  in 
Revista  Musical  Mexicana,  The  reference  to  a  fanfarria  composed  by 
a  Peruvian  master,  dating  as  it  does  from  the  early  years  of  the  seventeenth 


,6*  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

century,  provides  an  interesting  musical  link  between  the  two  colonies  at  a 
very  early  date.  Transcriptions  of  this  piece  and  of  the  several  others  in 
this  particular  organ  tablature  have  been  promised  by  Saldivar. 

The  second  tablature  deserving  of  mention  is  also  in  Gabriel  Saldivar's 
possession.  The  title  of  this  second  tablature,  Metodo  de  Citara,  indicates 
its  original  purpose  as  an  instruction  book  for  the  cittern.  The  author  was 
one  Sebastian  de  Aguirre,  and  his  tablature  has  been  dated  c.  1650.  His 
book  primarily  contained  dances,  among  them  the  following:  pavana, 
fasacalk)  gallarda,  branle,  panam&,  zarabanda,  minuet*,  puertorrico  de 
la  Pueblo,  paso  de  fantasia,  portuguesa,  frames,  balona  de  bailar,  and 
morisca.  Aguirre  also  included  a  tocotin,  referred  to  as  a  "pole  dance 
around  a  hungry  tree."  This  Indian  tocotin,  according  to  Saldfvar,  is  al- 
most exclusively  pentatonic  throughout  In  Aguirre's  tablature  what  is 
probably  the  oldest  Negro  dance  also  occurs,  labeled  a  portorrico  de  los 
negros.  Lastly  there  is  a  corrido,  which  also  takes  priority  as  the  oldest 
musical  example  in  its  class.  The.  contents  of  this  book,  as  briefly  listed, 
show  its  value,  and  when  a  transcription  of  it  appears  the  musical  world 
will  better  be  able  to  appreciate  its  debt  to  Dr.  Saldfvar  for  his  discovery 
of  it.  Since  he  is  its  possessor,  any  anticipation  of  his  results  would  be 
inopportune. 

The  third  tablature  is  in  the  manuscript  division  of  the  Biblioteca  Na- 
donaL*8  A  Tablatvra  de  vihuela  dated  approximately  1740,  it  contains 
fifty  types  of  dance  music.  These  dances  occur:  jota,  fandango,  folios  es- 
pafiolas,  folios  itdianas,  sarabanda,  paspied,  coranta,  cotillon,  rigaudon, 
rondeau,  alemanda,  burro,  tarantela,  valona,  and  seguidillas.  The  most 
unusual  type  listed  is  titled  cumbees  o  cantos  negros.  Here  again  in  this 
tablature  the  powerful  impress  of  the  Negro  in  colonial  dance  types  is 
clearly  discernible.  The  cumbees  are  subtitled  cantos  en  idioma  guinea. 
In  playing  the  cumbees  the  player  is  directed  to  hit  his  vihuela  with  a 
thump  at  certain  odd  moments.  In  this  vihuela  tablature  occurs  also  a 
zarambeqves;  this  name  was  applied  to  a  five-string  variant  of  the  guitar 
mrch  favored  by  the  Negroes  in  the  hot  country. 

Attempts  at  reducing  this  Biblioteca  Nadonal  tablature  to  modern  nota- 
tion for  a  long  time  proved  futile  until  it  was  discovered  that  an  unusual 
accordatura  had  been  used  in  tuning  this  particular  wA«^Z*  ^*  #*««?.  The 
five  open  strings  sounded  these  notes:  F  (below  the  bass  clef) — C— Aflat 
— -E  Sat— B  flat.  Because  of  the  Negro  music  which  it  contains,  a  publica- 
tion of  this  vihuela  tablature  in  modem  notation  will  be  particularly  wel- 


NEO-HISPANIC  MUSIC  163 

corned.  Certain  other  features  in  the  book  enhance  its  value.  Seventeen 
movements  from  Corelli  chamber  sonatas  in  vihuela-transcription  are  con- 
tained in  it,  and  in  addition  a  complete  Sonata  de  Samuel  Trent.  Samuel 
Trent's  sonata,  comprising  a  <cpreludio,  largo,  giga,  and  alegro,"  may  be 
an  original  sonata,  or  it  may  be  a  transcription.  Since  Samuel  Trent  is  a 
figure  in  music  history  thus  far  completely  "desconocido,"  we  have  no 
slightest  means  of  guessing  how  his  music  got  into  a  colonial  tablature  in 
Mexico. 

NEO-HISPANIC  FOLK-MUSIC 

The  Spaniards  dispersed  throughout  Mexico  carried  Andalusian, 
Castilian,  Galidan,  Extremaduran,  and  Aragonese  folk-songs  with  them 
into  the  remotest  corners  of  the  colony.  The  colonizers  were  not  simply 
peninsulars"  but  on  the  contrary  represented  a  variety  of  national  tradi- 
tions in  the  peninsula  5  Aragon  and  Castile,  for  instance,  were  not  united 
until  the  end  of  the  fifteenth  century  when  Ferdinand  and  Isabella  in 
marrying  united  the  crowns.  An  amazing  diversity  of  local  traditions  from 
the  peninsula  was  introduced  into  the  New  World  colonies,  and  any  at- 
tempt to  pigeon-hole  colonial  folk-song  into  such  and  such  neat  categories 
does  violence  to  the  richness  and  diversity  of  it.  The  Mexican  scholar, 
Vicente  T.  Mendoza,  brought  out  in  1939  an  historical  study  of  the  type 
of  folksong  now  known  as  corrida.  In  the  space  of  833  pages  he  laboriously 
discussed  the  different  types  of  corrida  that  have  been  sung  at  various 
times  in  Mexico  5  he  also  discussed  the  Spanish  romance -,  or  ballad,  which 
he  defined  as  the  ancestor  of  the  Mexican  corrido.  He  found  ample  proof 
that  the  Spaniards  long  after  their  departure  from  Spain  still  continued 
in  their  romances  to  keep  alive  the  local  history  of  the  homeland  region 
from  which  they  originally  came. 

The  conquistadores  sang  folk-songs  j  Bernal  Dfaz  mentioned  several  of 
these  by  name,  such  as  those  beginning,*4 

Mira  Nero  dc  Tarpeya/a  Roma  como  se  ardia  .  .  . 
and 

Cata  Francia,  Montesinos,/cata  Paris,  la  ciudad  .  .  . 
and 

Denos  Dios  ventura  en  annas/como  al  Paladin  Roldan  .  „  . 


164  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

Francisco  de  Salinas's  De  musica  libri  seftem  ( 1 577)  provided  a  printed 
source  of  folk-song  melody,  enabling  one  to  judge  the  musical  character- 
istics of  the  sixteenth  century  folk  repertory.  Collections  of  Spanish  folk- 
poetry  (without  music)  are  to  be  found  in  such  publications  as  the  Can* 
cionero  de  Romances  (Antwerp,  1548),  the  Silva  de  Romances  (Zara- 
goza,  1550),  and  other  romancer os  of  slightly  later  date  j  all  this  balladry 
has  been  enthusiastically  kuded  by  Ramon  Menendez  Pidal,  and  several 
prominent  students  of  Spanish  literature  following  his  lead  have  devoted 
themselves  to  an  exhaustive  investigation  of  the  ballad  cycles.  The  first 
romance  known  to  have  been  published  at  Mexico  City  appeared  in  1658 
(words  only);  others  appeared  in  1709,  1717,  1724,  1734,  1764,  and 
I779-w  These  were  fugitive  publications,  usually  comprising  only  a  few 
pages,  and  the  list  of  dates  gives  no  true  idea,  perhaps,  of  the  numbers 
printed  in  Mexico.  The  wide  diffusion  of  them  is  instanced  by  the  number 
that  survived  in  peripheral  New  Mexico.  Professor  Aurelio  Espinosa  at 
the  time  he  published  his  Romancer o  Nuevo  Meccano  (1915)  had  suc- 
ceeded in  locating  ten  traditional  ballads  which  had  been  sung  in  New 
Mexico  probably  since  the  time  Juan  de  Onate,  or  at  least  since  the  recon- 
quest  under  de  Vargas  ( 1 692) .  Subsequent  investigation  brought  the  num- 
ber of  New  Mexican  romances  to  forty,  of  which  '^thirty-two  are  found 
in  Spain  and  Spanish  America  as  well  as  in  the  Sephardic  colonies  of  Amer- 
ica." w  This  wide  diffusion  of  traditional  ballads  is  the  more  remarkable 
because  very  often  in  the  remotest  spots  are  preserved  today  the  purest 
and  most  uncorrupted  versions. 

The  same  situation  exists  in  the  case  of  English  ballads  yet  preserved 
by  the  mountaineers  in  the  Appalachians,  where  until  the  juke-box  epoch, 
the  ballads  with  their  modal  tunes  were  still  sung  as  they  were  two  hun- 
dred or  more  years  ago  in  England  when  the  mountaineers'  ancestors  first 
emigrated.  In  the  Appalachians  an  uncorrupted  Barbara  Allen  would, 
however,  be  less  remarkable  than  would  an  uncorrupted  Gerineldo  in 
New  Mexico,  simply  because  in  one  place  the  English  tradition  once  es- 
tablished remained  dominant,  whereas  in  the  other  a  Spanish  tradition 
has  given  way  to  a  bilingual  culture.  For  lovers  of  folk-poetry  and  folk- 
music  a  study  of  variants  in  the  words  and  melodies  of  the  romances  known 
as  Delg&dma  (the  Cenc*  theme),  La  esposa  infiel  (unfaithful  wife), 
E&rnal  Frances  (mistaken  identity  of  the  paramour),  Don  Gato  (a  ro- 
mantic cat),  Gerineldo  (page's  love  for  a  princess),  Mambru  (arms  and 
the  man),  and  so  on,  has  provided  an  interesting  exercise.  The  oldest  of 


NEO-HISPANIC  MUSIC  165 

these  such  as  Gerineldo  and  La  batalla  de  Roncesvalles  concern  incidents 
that  happened  in  Charlemagne's  time.  Obviously  the  music  cannot  be 
uncorrupted  after  a  thousand  years,  but  if  the  words  have  not  changed 
significantly  during  several  centuries,  it  is  also  probable  that  the  tunes  are 
substantially  the  same  as  those  sung  hundreds  of  years  ago.  In  a  history 
of  Mexican  music  we  mention  these  Spanish  ballads  merely  to  emphasize 
again  the  persistence  of  Spanish  cultural  elements  among  the  descendants 
of  the  invaders.  As  one  historian  said  recently:  "Where  there  is  a  group 
of  Spaniards,  there  are  coflas;  wherever  there  is  a  Spanish  community, 
even  at  the  Antipodes,  there  spring  up  romances."  9T 

Since  romances  and  their  Mexican  successors,  corridos  and  decimas, 
were  folk-expressions  we  should  not  expect  to  find  romance-rex^:  or 
corrulo-mvsic  "high  art."  The  single  melodic  line  was  accompanied  often- 
est  by  some  such  folk-instrument  as  the  hurdy-gurdy  (vihvela  de 
rueda)  j  98  for  each  successive  stanza  the  same  tune  was  repeated.  The 
range  of  the  melodies  scarcely  ever  exceeded  a  sixth.  Closely  allied  with 
the  romances  were  their  religious  counterparts,  the  alabados.  They,  too, 
preserved  the  folk-elements — strong  accentual  rhythms,  melodies  cast 
in  sequence  patterns,  implied  tonic-dominant  harmony  everywhere.  The 
alabados  in  New  Spain  stood  in  relation  to  the  liturgical  music  of  the  day 
as  gospel  songs  of  the  Homer  Rodeheaver  type  stand  today  in  relation  to 
Randall  Thompson's  Alleluia. 

If  in  a  discussion  of  music  in  the  United  States  slightly  more  time  were 
spent  discussing  Copland's  In  the  Beginning  than  some  such  hymn  as  In 
the  Garden^  no  one  would  therefore  have  the  right  to  infer  that  In  the 
Beginning  touches  the  lives  of  as  many  as  In  the  Garden.  Charles  Seeger 
has  pleaded  eloquently  that  students  of  Latin  American  music  spend  more 
time  with  those  types  of  music  that  touch  the  lives  of  many,  than  those 
types  that  touch  the  lives  of  only  a  few.  Mr.  Seeger,  one  of  the  most 
sympathetic  students  of  folk-music  in  our  time,  wrote  in  1943: 

To  an  understanding  of  contemporary  music  activity  and  to  history, 
due  regard  for  the  mediocre,  especially  when  functioning  upon  a  very 
large  scale  is  essential.  The  contemporary  popular  commercial  idiom  holds 
the  public  attention  and  interest  of  uncounted  millions.*0 

Applying  ourselves  to  the  "mediocre"  in  colonial  music,  such  as  the 
alabados  with  their  constant  doubling  of  the  melody  in  thirds,  we  may 
be  able  to  reach  nearer  to  the  souls  of  the  commonalty.  The  "popular  com- 


i66  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

mercial  idiom"  of  any  day  will  always  be  that  idiom  which  reaches  the 
greatest  number.  Mr.  Seeger  has  therefore  spoken  justly  in  recalling 
historians  from  the  ivory  tower  of  "high  art"  to  the  more  important  busi- 
ness of  everyday  music  as  it  has  touched  the  lives  of  the  many  rather  than 
the  few. 

Because  essentially  the  music  of  Franco,  Bermudez,  Padilla,  and  the 
rest,  glorified  the  privileged  few,  it  lost  relevance  when  the  old  order  gave 
way  to  the  new.  The  musicians  of  the  new  era  after  1821  ostentatiously 
discarded  the  past  with  all  its  "outworn"  theories,  and  instead  announced 
their  intention  of  building  a  musical  culture  on  an  entirely  new  founda- 
tion. 

NOTES 

1.  Manuel  Sinchez,  Regla  de  N£J$.  Francisco  y  breve  declaration  de  sus  freceftos 
fora  su  mejor  observancia  y  facil  inteligencia  con  una  instruction  far  a  los  Novitios 
.  .  .  y  breve  explication  del  canto  llano  con  advertencies  (Mexico:  Bernardo  de 
Hogal,  1725).  Breathing  a  visible  sigh  of  relief  at  the  conclusion  of  the  section 
on  plainchant,  Sinchez  wrote  (p.  53):  "The  teaching  of  plainchant  is  not  my 
profession  and  the  writing  of  this  guide  to  plainchant  has  cost  me  such  effort  that 
only  the  precept  of  obedience  has  sustained  me  until  I  reached  a  conclusion."  Of 
interest  in  this  78-page  book  are  the  Guidonian  hands  on  pp.  52  and  58. 

2.  Francisco  Lorenzana,  Missa  Gothica  .  .  .  (Puebla:  Typis  Seminarii  Palafoxiani, 
1770).  Lorenzana,  who  became  a  cardinal  after  his  return  to  Europe,  was  inter- 
ested in  the  Mozarabic  rite.  On  pp.  69-72  Mozarabic  neuxnes  are  transcribed 
into  their  supposed  modern  equivalencies.  Between  pp.  73  and  137  a  lengthy 
disquisition  on  Mozarabic  usages  is  inserted.  Mitjana  believed  the  transliterations 
of  Mozarabic  neumes  in  this  missal  might  afford  a  clue  to  their  correct  interpreta- 
tion; no  agreement  has  yet  been  reached,  however,  on  the  exact  significance  of 
Mozarabic  neumes  despite  much  patient  research. 

3.  Jesus  Bal  y  Gay,  editor  of  the  Contionero  de  Ufsala,  co-editor  of  the  indispensable 
quarterly,  Nuestra  Musiea,  and  chief  of  the  research  section  at  Bellas  Artes,  has 
been  entrusted  with  this  important  editorial  task  involving  the  complete  known 
works  of  Juan  de  Lienas.  Bal  y  Gay  came  to  Mexico  during  the  Spanish  Revo- 
lution. He  was  the  focus  of  a  controversy  during  the  summer  of  1950  provoked 
by  his  forthright  newspaper  criticism  of  a  Mexican  performing  artist  who  failed 
to  reach  a  high  professional  standard.  His  influence  has  doubtless  been  salutary. 

4.  This  list  represents  only  those  works  whose  presence  in  the  tesoros  artisticos  of  the 
Mexico  City  and  Puebla  cathedrals  was  verifiable  in  1950. 

5.  Lota  M.  Spell,  "Music  in  the  Cathedral  of  Mexico  in  the  Sixteenth  Century," 
The  Hispanic  American  Review,  August,  1946,  p.  313. 

6.  Cristobal  Bermudez  Plata  (ed.),  Ca&ogo  de  Pasajeros  a  Indias  .  ,  .  (Sevilla, 
Imp.  de  la  Gavidia,  1946),  III,  147  {2192). 


NEO-HISPANIC  MUSIC  167 

7.  Spell,  op.  tit.,  p.  3 1 1  (note  90) ,  adequately  documents  this  amusing  transaction. 

8.  Jesus  Estrada,  "Clasicos  de  Nueva  Espana:  Ensayo  hist6rico  sobre  los  Maestros 
de  Capilla  de  la  Catedral  de  Mexico/'  Schola  Cantorum  (Morelia),  July,  1945, 
p.  101. 

9.  Steven  Barwick,  "Sacred  Vocal  Polyphony  .  .  .  ,"  p.  114. 

10.  This  habit  persisted  as  an  abuse  throughout  the  colonial  epoch:  "de  otra  parte 
del  elemento  religioso  .  .  .  produce  graves  esca"ndalos  por  la  frequencia  con 
que  era  notada  su  presencia  en  las  casas  de  juego"  (Cayetano  Alcazar  Molina,  Los 
Virreinatos  en  el  Siglo  XVHl,  Barcelona,  1945,  p.  13). 

11.  Saldivar,  of.  cit.y  p.  123. 

12.  Estrada,  of.  cit.,  p.  zoi. 

13.  La  Catedral  y  el  Sagrario  de  Mexico  (Mexico:  Departamento  Editorial  de  la 
Direccion  General  de  las  Bellas  Artes,  1917),  p.  xxv. 

14.  Ibid.y  p.  xxvi. 

15.  Ibid*>  p.  xxiv. 

1 6.  Palestrina,  Of  ere  Comfletey  XVI  (1943),  p.  323.  Concerning  LassusV  unique 
continuous  setting  of  all  the  verses,  see  Charles  Van  den  Borren,  Orlande  de  Lassus 
(Paris:  Librairie  Felix  Alcan,  1920),  p.  152. 

17.  Henry  Coates,  Palestrina  (London:  J.  M.  Dent,  1938),  p.  184. 

1 8.  I&id.y  p.  1 86. 

19.  For  modern  reprints  set  Philippi  de  Monte,  Canticum  Magnificat  (Bruges: 
Dcsclee  de  Brouwer  et  Socios,  1930)  5  and  R.  J.  van  Maldeghem,  Tresor  Musical 
.  .  .  (Brussels:  C.  Muquardt,  1893),  pp.  23  ff.  (de  la  Rue). 

20.  Barwick,  Supplement)  p.  62.  See  also  p.  100. 

21.  lbid.y  p.  44.  See  other  examples  on  pp.  64,  84,  IOI,  120. 

22.  Ibid*,  pp.  71  and  72.  The  contrasts  between  "Esurientes"  and  "Fecit  po- 
tentiam"  in  the  other  Magnificats  are  all  splendidly  conceived,  and  deserve  study. 

23.  Lorenzana,  Concilium  Mexicanum  Provincial  111  (Mexico:  Joseph  de  Hogal, 
1770),  Statuta  Ordinata,  p.  68. 

24.  Ibid.,  pp.  66-70  (especially  p.  70). 

25.  Garcia  Icazbalceta,  Coleccion  de  Documentos  fora  la  Historia  de  Mexico  (1858), 
p.  242. 

26.  Nicolas  Leon,  Bibliografia  Mexicana  del  Siglo  XV III  (1908),  pp.  199-200 
(quoting  Diego  Antonio  de  Castro's  Historia  de  la  ciudad  de  la  Puella^  Puebla, 
1746). 

27.  Barwick,  Supflementy  pp.  184-216, 

28.  Bermudez  read  a  maximum  meaning  into  every  exceptional  procedure;  see  the 
nota  cambiata,  p.  185  (meas.  1 6);  the  augmented  sixths  on  pp.  198  and  208; 
the  diminished  interval  in  the  penultimate  measure  of  p.  190;  see  also  p.  189 
(meas.  6). 

29.  Saldivar,  of.  dt.y  p.  107. 

30.  Duda  de  D.  Antonio  Exvmeno  sobre  el  Ensayo  fundamental  fractico  de  contra- 
funto  del  MJR..PM .  Fray  Juan  Bautista  Martini  .  .  .  (Madrid:  Imp.  Real, 

'797)>  P;  55- 

31.  Antonio  Tamariz  de  Carmona,  Relacion  y  deurifcion  ...  (Puebla,  1649), 


i68  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 


fol.  3ir.  In  1647,  a  y*21  *or  wkkk  «act  sums  spent  on  music  in  the  Mexico  City 
Cathedral  are  recorded,  only  5,500  pesos  were  spent.  (See  Isabel  Pope's  figures 
in  Nuestra  Music*,  V*  Trimestre  1951,  p.  23.) 

32.  Tamariz  de  Cannona,  fols.  2Or  and  31'.  Padilla  is  called  "insigne  Maestro."  His 
peninsular  antecedents  before  his  arrival  in  New  Spain  can  only  be  guessed  at 
His  later  Spanish  career  was  a  fitting  fulfillment  after  his  distinguished  service 
at  Puebla.  He  was  successively  chapelmaster  at  the  Zamora  Convent  of  San  Pablo, 
Zamora  Cathedral  (7  May  1661-27  Jan  1663)  and  Toledo  Cathedral  (7  Sep 
1663-16  Dec  1673).  An  etent  TO***  Magnificat  is  preserved  in  the  Valladolid 
archive. 

33.  J.  T.  Medina,  La  Imprenta  en  Puebla  (Santiago  de  Chile:  Imp*  Cervantes, 
1908),  pp.  84-5. 

34.  Miss  Alice  Ray  has  found  two  examples  of  parodying*. 

35.  Leon,  of.  cit.  (1908),  p.  206. 

36.  Juan  B.  Iguiniz,  "La  Biblioteca  Palafoxiana  de  Puebla,"  Andes  del  Museo 
National  de  Arfueologia,  Historic  y  Etnologia,  191  3,  p.  293. 

37.  The  letters  of  commendation  are  dated  November  24,  1601  (Dominican)  and 
November  28,  1601  (Augustinian)  ;  publication  of  Quatuor  Passiones  was,  how- 
ever, for  some  reason  held  up  three  years  after  all  the  necessary  approvals. 

38.  The  authority  of  Ambrose,  Augustine,  Gregory,  Isidore,  and  Rabanus  Maurui 
is  invoked;  Navarro  also  plentifully  quotes  Scripture. 

39.  Last  page  (unnumbered)  in  Preface  to  the  Reader. 

40.  Guillermo  Furlong,  Musicos  Argentinos  (Buenos  Aires:  Editorial   Huarpes, 
1945)»  ?•  *  *5«  Tta  first  disclosure  was  made  by  Lauro  Ayesteran  in  Zipoli,  el  gran 
competitor  y  organista  romano  del  ijoo  en  el  Rio  de  La  Plata  (Montevideo:  Imp. 
Uruguaya,  s^u,  1941).  Zipoli,  born  in  Tuscany  in  1688,  supposedly  sailed  from 
Cadiz  in  the  company  of  72  Jesuits  (1717),  and  spent  the  years,  1718-26,  in 
Cordoba,  Argentina. 

41.  Adolf  o  Salazar,  "El  Caso  de  Domenico  Zipoli,"  Nuestra  Musica  (Mexico),  May, 
1946,  pp.  80-3, 

42.  A  re-issue  of  Francisco  de  Montanos's  Arte  de  canto  llano  (Salamanca,  1610), 
with  editorial  additions  by  Jose*  de  Torres.  The  Torres  identification  is,  how- 
ever, completely  untenable. 

43.  Navarro,  Quatuor  Passiones,  folio  8T. 

44*  Diego  Basalenque,  Historia  de  la  frowncia  .  .  ,  de  Michoacan,  del  orden  de 
n.pj.  Agustin  (Mexico:  Barbedillo  y  comp.,  1  886)  ,  I,  1  24. 

45.  The  three  otherwise  unknown  composers  whose  works  seem  the  most  substantial 
were  (i)  Francisco  Moratilla  (active  as  a  villancico-composer  during  the  1720'*), 
(2)  Antonio  Rodil  (composer  of  an  Obertura  con  Violini,  Viola,  Oboe,  Tromfe 
Obligatti  t  Basso  constructed  on  the  Scarlatti-overture  pattern:  allegro-grave- 
presto,  (3)  Antonio  Sarrier  (composer  of  an  Obertura  con  VioUni,  Viola,  Oboe, 
Tromfas  e  Basso  divided  into  the  following  three  movements:  allegro-andante- 
fuga).  For  further  details  see  Miguel  Bernal  Jimenez,  Morelia  Colonial:  El 
Archwo  Musical  Del  Colegio  de  Santa  Rosa  .  .  .  (Morelia:  Ediciones  de  la 
Unzvenidad  Michoacana,  1939),  pp.  19-29. 


NEO-HISPANIC  MUSIC  169 

46.  Francisco  de  Burgoa,  Geographic*  Descripcidn  de  la  Porte  Septentrional,  del 
Polo  Artico  de  la  Amirica  (Mexico:  Publicaciones  del  Archive  General  de  la 
Nacion,  I934)>  I>  416-  Burgoa's  two-volume  description,  originally  published  at 
Mexico  City  in  1674,  contained  several  invaluable  musical  references.  See  Tomo 
II  (1934  edition),  p.  422. 

47.  Guillermo  A.  Esteva,  La  musica  Oaxaquena  (Oaxaca,  1931),  pp.  9-10.  Ac- 
cording to  Esteva  Matias  was  born  at  Coyotepec  c.  1635,  but  he  has  no  exact  date. 
The  authenticity  of  the  Stabat  Mater  fragment  must  rest  on  Esteva's  own  voucher, 

48.  J.  T.  Medina,  op.  cit.,  pp.  91-2. 

49.  Carlos  de  Siguenza  y  Gongora,  Glorias  de  Querltaro  (Mexico,  1680),  p.  51. 
For  explanation  of  these  instruments  see  our  Chapter  I,  "Early  Aboriginal  Music." 

50.  Siguenza  y  Gongora,  op.  cit.,  p.  60. 

51.  IMS.,  p.  56.  Sigiienza  y  Gongora  said  de  Robles  "sang  like  a  swan." 

52.  While  the  friars  were  still  making  conversions,  music  as  a  tool  was  eagerly  seized 
upon,  but  after  the  zeal  for  conversions  cooled,  no  one  in  authority  among  the 
Spaniards  favored  teaching  them  music.  The  Indians  during  the  eighteenth  cen- 
tury were  actually  much  worse  off  musically  than  during  the  sixteenth.  For  the 
low  estate  to  which  music  declined  among  them,  see  the  request  for  the  re- 
establishment  of  the  Indian  school,  the  Colegio  de  Santiago  Tlaltelolco;  this 
request  in  the  form  of  a  memorial  signed  by  eight  Indian  chiefs  was  presented 
to  one  of  the  archepiscopal  supervisors  in  1728.  In  part  it  read:  "The  singers 
whose  duty  among  us  it  is  to  sing  at  Mass  and  at  the  daily  office  are  [so  badly 
trained]  that  they  cause  laughter  and  contempt  for  the  divine  mysteries,  rather 
than  true  devotion  and  contrite  meditation."  (Reprinted  in  Boletin  del  Arcfovo 
de  la  Naci6ny  January-February,  1935,  p.  31.) 

53.  Isabel  Pope,  "The  Musical  Development  and  Form  of  the  Spanish  Villancico" 
Papers  of  the  American  Musicological  Society  (ip^o),  p.  15. 

54.  Higinio  Angle's,  La  Musica  EspaZola  .  .  .  (Barcelona:  Biblioteca  Central, 
1941),  p.  41.  "El  villancico  religiose  que  se  habia  practicado  en  el  siglo  XVI,  no 
obstante  la  prohibition  de  Felipe  II  .  .  ." 

55.  Irving  A.  Leonard,  Don  Carlos  de  Sigiienza  y  Gdngora:  A  Mexican  Savant  of 
the  Seventeenth  Century  (Berkeley:  University  of  California  Press,  1929),  p.  17. 

56.  Sor  Juana  In&  de  la  Cruz,  Poemas  de  la  Unica  Poetisa  Americana,  Musa  Dezima 
(Madrid:  Juan  Garcia  Infangon,  1690),  p.  271.  "Un  corrido  es  lo  mlsmo  q  una 
Xacara." 

57.  Ibid*,  p.  266.  (Coplasy  line  9.) 

58.  Another  tocotin,  even  more  astounding  than  the  Nolasco  tocotin  because  written 
throughout  in  Nahuatl,  was  inserted  in  the  second  noctorn  of  the  1687  Villancicos 
for  August  15  (Assumption).  The  metrical  scheme  in  the  Nolasco  tocotin  differs 
from  the  scheme  of  the  Assumption  tocotin.  See  Poemas  (1690),  p*  274. 

59.  Ibid^  pp*  275-6. 

60.  For  a  discussion  of  Cerone's  continuing  relevance,  see  Ruth  Mannas,  ^Cerone's 
Approach  to  the  Teaching  of  Counterpoint,"  Papers  of  the  American  Mvsieolog*- 
col  Society  (1057),  pp.  75-8°. 

6 1.  Two  facsimile  page*  showing  her  annotations  appear  in  E.  Abreu  Gomez,  Sor 


i7o  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

Jtum*  Ms  de  la  Cruz:  Bibliograjia  y  Biblioteca  (Mexico:  Monografiaa  Biblio- 
graficas,  1934.),  pp.  448~9- 

62.  I.  A.  Leonard,  "On  the  Mexican  Book  Trade,  1683,"  The  Hisfanic  American 
Historical  Review  >  August,  1947,  p.  419. 

63.  Enciclofedia  Universal  I lustrada  (Barcelona:  J.  Espasa),  XXXI,  221. 

64.  Henri  Collet,  Le  Mysticisme  Musical  Esfagnol  (Paris:  Librairie  Felix  Alcan, 
1913),  p.  248.  The  inventory  at  the  Seville  Cathedral  listing  Salazar's  name  was 
made  in  1721. 

65.  Jesus  Estrada,  "Clasicos  de  la  Nueva  Espana,"  June,  1945,  p.  90. 

66.  Jose  Mariano  Beristain  y  Souza,  Biblioteca  His'pano  Americana  Setentrional 
(Amecameca:  Colegio  Catolico,  1883),  III,  325. 

67.  For  a  facsimile  reproduction  of  an  eighteenth  century  Mexican  manuscript  with 
figured  bass,  see  Saldivar,  pp.  133—4. 

68.  Jerome  in  his  diatribe  against  Helvidius  gave  no  hint  of  the  latter's  being  any- 
thing else  than  Roman.  It  is  possible  the  writer  of  this  villancico  confused  Helvidius 
with  another  of  Jerome's  enemies,  namely,  Vigilantius.  Vigilantius  was  a  Gaul. 

69.  Mendez  Plancarte,  Poetas  Novohisfanos:  Segundo  Siglo,  Porte  Segunda  (Mexico: 
Universidad  Nacional  Autonoma,  1945),  p.  136. 

70.  Ibid.,?.  113. 

71.  Francisco  Sedano,  Noticias  de  Mexico.  .  .  .  (Mexico,  1880),  p.  83. 

72.  Ibid.,  p.  83. 

73.  For  attribution  of  the  1691  San  Pedro  Villancicos  to  Sor  Juana,  see  Gomez, 
of.  cit.,  p.  445. 

74.  The  Salazar  hymns  are  on  ff.  129,  131,  149,  150,  and  151  of  Libro  de  Coro  V 
at  Pucbla, 

75.  Beristain  y  Souza  said  that  for  the  Duke  of  Linares's  amusement  Zumaya  trans- 
lated various  Italian  libretti  and  wrote  music  for  them.  Opera  as  such  gained  a 
tardy  foothold  in  Spain ;  for  a  discussion  of  Spanish  antecedents  see  Gilbert  Chase, 
"Origins  of  the  Lyric  Theater  in  Spain,"  The  Musical  Quarterly,  July,  1939. 

76.  Francesco  Florimo,  La  Scuola  Musical e  di  Nafoli  e  i  suoi  Conservatorii  (Naples: 
Vinc.Morano,i88i),  IV,  8. 

77.  Saldivar,  p.  189. 

78.  N.  Le6n,  Eibliograjia  Mexican*  del  Siglo  XV 111  (1903),  p.  223.  Leon  re- 
printed the  Gazeta  de  Mexico;  the  account  of  the  Guadalajara  organ  appeared 
in  the  December,  1 730,  issue  of  the  Gazeta. 

79.  Ibid.,  p.  223. 

80.  English  organs  during  this  period  lacked  pedals;  many  Spanish  organs  also 
lacked  them.  The  Seville  organ  had  them,  however;  for  an  authoritative  de- 
scription  of  Spanish  organs  during  the  baroque  era  see  Albert  Merklin,  Aus  Sfaniens 
attem  Orgelbau  (Mainz:  Rhemgold-Vylag,  1939),  especially  pp.  61-2. 

81.  P*l  Kelemen,  "Church  Organs  in  Colonial  Mexico,"  Bulletin  of  the  Pan  Ameri» 
can  Union^  March,  1942,  p.  132. 

82-  Beraal  Jimenez,  of.  cit.,  pp.  44-5. 

83.  Foar  details  of  the  dispute  between  university  and  cathedral  authorities,  tee 


NEO-HISPANIC  MUSIC  171 

Isabel  Pope,  "Documentos  Relacionados  con  la  Historia  de  la  Musica  en  Mexico," 
Nuestra  Musica,  lw  Trimestre,  1951 ;  Jerusalem  carried  the  dispute  to  Spain* 

84.  Weinstock,  Mexican  Music  (1940),  p.  9. 

85.  San  Felipe  was  canonized  in  1862. 

86.  Furlong,  of.  cit.t  p.  19.  In  1586  three  Cabez6n  volumes  were  sent  to  Mexico, 
according  to  a  booklist  printed  by  Leonard. 

87.  Saldivar,  p.  145. 

88.  Miguel  Bernal  Jimenez,  "La  Musica  en  Valladolid  de  Michoacan,"  Nuestra 
Musica,  3**  Trimestre,  1951,  p.  163.  In  a  brief  dated  February  12,  1746,  Pope 
Benedict  XIV  called  the  Morelia  Colegio  de  Santa  Rosa  Maria  a  "conservatoriuin 
mulierum  et  puellarum." 

89.  I.  A.  Leonard,  of.  cit.,  p.  404. 

90.  H.  R.  Wagner,  The  Rise  of  Fernando  Cortes  (The  Cortes  Society,  1944) ,  p.  498, 
n.  1 6. 

91.  Francisco  Correa  de  Arauxo,  Libro  de  tientos  .  .  .  (Barcelona:  Institute  Espanol 
de  Musicologia,  1948),  facing  p.  33. 

92.  Revista  Musical  Mexicana,  July-August-September,  1942,  pp.  37-8,  65-6, 

IIO-I. 

93.  Collocation  number:  15-4-152.  This  tablature  is  in  pentagram. 

94.  Vicente  T.  Mendoza,  El  Romance  Esfanol  y  El  Corrido  Mexicano  (M&dco, 
Imp.  Universitaria,  1939),  p.  125. 

95.  Ibid.,  pp.  783-5* 

96.  Arthur  L.  Campa,  Sfanish  Folk-Poetry  in  New  Mexico  (Albuquerque:  Uni- 
versity of  New  Mexico  Press,  1946),  p.  29. 

97.  E.  Allison  Peers,  A  Critical  Anthology  of  Sfanish  Verse  (University  of  Cali- 
fornia Press,  1949),  p.  rmx.^ 

98.  Mendoza,  of.  cit.,  p.  28.  The  picture  on  this  page  should  be  noted. 

99.  Handbook  of  Latin  American  Studies  (Cambridge:  Harvard  University  Press, 
I943)>  P-  446. 


THE  OPERATIC  NINETEENTH 
CENTURY 


MUSIC    IN    MEXICO    (l8lO)    COMPARED   WITH    MUSIC    IN    OTHER 
HISPANIC    COLONIES 

Since  most  of  the  Spanish  colonies  in  the  New  World  revolted  during  the 
same  decade,  1 8 10-1 820,  it  has  often  been  assumed  that  culturally  as  well 
as  politically  the  colonies  had  all  reached  approximately  the  same  stage  in 
their  development  around  1810.  This  is  an  untenable  assumption,  how- 
ever. Other  colonies  were  at  the  crest  of  their  wave,  musically  speaking. 
Mexico  was  in  a  trough. 

Among  the  colonies  which  were  at  their  crest  were  Cuba  and  Venezuela. 
In  Cuba,  Esteban  Salas,  chapelmaster  at  Santiago  from  1764  until  his 
death  in  1 803,  remained  continuously  productive  throughout  the  forty- 
year  period  of  his  service,  turning  out  a  succession  of  Masses  and  other 
sacred  works  whose  quality  was  noteworthy.1  In  Venezuela  a  whole  school 
of  composers  in  Caracas,  including  one  or  two  such  as  Jos£  Lamas  and 
Cayetano  Carrefio  whose  worth  has  not  been  matched  at  any  other  period 
in  Venezuelan  history,  made  the  capital  a  respected  music  center  during 
the  immediate  pre-independence  epoch.2 

But  in  other  Hispanic  countries,  musical  life  was  at  low  ebb.  In  Argen- 
tina the  posts  of  distinction  were  all  occupied  by  foreigners  of  dubious 
merit.*  In  Peru  musical  life  in  1800  had  entered  a  purely  reproductive 
phase.  Columbia  was  actually  worse  off  (musically)  in  the  latter  part  of 
the  eighteenth  century  than  she  had  been  a  century  earlier.  For  that  matter 
it  could  almost  be  said  Columbia  was  less  advanced  musically  in  1 800  than 
in  1550 — if  we  think  for  a  moment  of  what  had  happened  in  once  proud 
Cartagena.  The  Cartagena  Cathedral  precentor,  Juan  Perez  Materano, 

17* 


THE  OPERATIC  NINETEENTH  CENTURY    173 

distinguished  himself  by  being  the  first  in  the  Americas  to  finish  a  book, 
Canto  de  organo  y  canto  llano,  which  he  craved  Charles  Vs  permission  to 
have  printed  in  1554.*  Some  of  his  admirers  even  called  him  a  second 
"Josquin."  No  one  of  equivalent  distinction  appeared  in  Columbian  musi- 
cal annals  during  the  entire  colonial  period. 

MEXICAN   MUSIC  DURING  THE   LAST   YEARS   OF   THE  VICEROYALTY 

(Mexican  music  was  unfortunately  in  a  depressed  state  at  the  end  of  the 
colonial  period^or  the  same  reasons  apparently  that  Argentinian,  Peru- 
vian, and  Columbian  music  were  depressed  at  the  same  time.  Here  are  the 
inadequacies  that  may  be  noted  in  Mexico  City  around  1800:  (i)  Even 
the  more  ambitious  composers  such  as  Manuel  Arenzana,  Soto  Carrillo, 
Luis  Medina,  and  others  mentioned  as  outstanding  in  the  columns  of  the 
Diario  de  MSxico,  devoted  themselves  not  to  the  larger  forms  of  musical 
composition  but  entirely  to  journeyman  work  on  theatrical  farces,  inter- 
ludes, and  "comedies  with  music"  (2)  Performance  standards  had  notori- 
ously declined.  (3)  Better  off  economically  than  such  a  poor  colony  as 
Venezuela,  Mexico  attracted  foreign  talent,  but  in  so  doing  lost  a  chance 
to  exploit  her  native-born  talents  needing  encouragement. 

Documentation  in  support  of  these  generalizations  will  be  offered,  first 
in  respect  to  the  operatic  situation.  The  first  opera  was  produced  at  the 
viceregal  palace  in  1711 — the  very  year  Handel's  first  opera  in  England, 
Rinaldo>  was  produced  But  the  lade  of  an  Italian  troupe  and  of  a  suitable 
playhouse  inhibited  further  operatic  experiment  after  the  Duke  of  Linares 
withdrew  his  powerful  patronage.  The  ventures  in  the  direction  of 
"opera"  during  the  last  years  of  the  century  were  commercialistic  efforts, 
all  designed  to  pay  their  way  at  the  playhouse,  the  Coliseo  Nuevo,6  and 
where  possible  to  reap  a  profit  for  the  impresario.  It  is  a  truism  in  opera 
history  that  provincial  houses  run  on  a  commercial  basis  never  have  en- 
couraged high  standards,  and  the  Coliseo  Nuevo,  insofar  as  can  now  be 
ascertained,  did  not  provide  an  exception  to  the  rule. 

The  musical  fare  at  the  Coliseo  during  the  sample  seasons  of  1805-6, 
and  1806-7,  included  predominantly  zarzuclas  of  the  bufa  type,  tona- 
dillas,  and  sainetes.  Zarzuelas,  an  idiomatic  type  in  the  Spanish  theater, 
were  produced  in  Spain  as  early  as  Lope  de  Vega's  time  (1629)  j  6  they 
differ  from  operas  in  that  spoken  dialogue  is  the  rule.  The  zarzuela  was 
usually  short— an  hour  in  length  perhaps — and  other  theatrical  fare  went 


174  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

into  a  single  evening's  entertainment.  The  tonadilla  was  a  short  skit  origi- 
nally intended  as  an  entr'acte;  T  its  purpose  was  oftenest  sharply  satirical, 
and  two  characters  were  usually  sufficient.  The  sainete  was  a  farce,  pkced 
at  the  tail-end  of  a  theatrical  evening  as  a  rule  5  almost  invariably  it  em- 
phasized the  lewd  for  the  benefit  of  the  groundlings.8  The  evening's  en- 
tertainment was  therefore  highly  diverse,  constituting  not  an  artistic  unity 
but  an  olla-podrida. 

"  The  more  substantial  offerings  of  the  1805  season  included  Cimarosa's 
El  Filosofo  Burlado,  billed  as  a  "zarzuela  bufa,"  9  Manuel  Arenzana's 
El  Extrangero,  billed  as  a  comedy  in  two  acts  with  music,10  Arenzana's 
Los  Dos  Ribales  en  amory  billed  as  a  "new  duo,"  n  and  Luis  Medina's 
Siana  y  Silvio,  billed  as  a  "bailete,"  12  but  with  singing  as  well  as  dancing. 
Cimarosa  was,  of  course,  an  international  figure,  but  his  opera  in  Mexico 
became  a  zarzuela,  with  numerous  topical  spoken  asides.  Arenzana  was 
chapelmaster  at  the  Puebla  Cathedral  in  1805-6.  Medina  (1751-1806), 
also  from  Puebla,  had  come  to  Mexico  City  in  1 770,  acquiring  in  the  capi- 
tal a  post  as  accountant  in  the  Royal  Court  of  Justice.18  His  two  daughters 
sang  in  Siana  y  Silvio,  and  he  himself  played  their  guitar  accompaniment 
The  most  notable  event  in  1 806  was  the  Mexican  premiere  of  Paisiello's 
//  barbiere  di  Siviglia,  translated  however  into  Spanish  and  presented  as 
an  "opera  bufa  en  cuatro  actos."  On  December  4, 1 806,  the  premiere  date, 
the  Diario  de  Mexico  carried  the  following  notice: 

The  orchestra  wfll  be  considerably  enlarged  in  order  to  meet  the  instru- 
mental specifications  in  this  opera.  The  interludes  wfll  consist  of  short 
Mexican  dances  [bafles  del  pafs]  in  order  not  to  lengthen  unduly  the  whole 
evening's  presentation.  The  admission  price  wfll  be  double  the  ordinary 
price  in  order  to  pay  for  the  heavy  expenses  of  this  production. 

Five  days  later  a  repeat  performance  was  staged,  with  interludes  again 
consisting  of  popular  Mexican  songs  [sonecitos  del  pais] .  The  two  foreign 
composers  whose  operas  were  pkyed  during  the  early  years  of  the  nine- 
teenth century  (before  independence  was  achieved)  were  Cimarosa  and 
Paiaello. 

The  star  system  with  the  usual  inequities  in  pay  ruled  in  the  Coliseo 
opera  troupe.  The  principal  singers  during  the  1806-7  season  were 
Dolores  Munguia  (1,600  pesos),  Josefa  Cardenas  (ipoo  pesos),  Andrfe 
Castillo  (1,500  pesos),  Victorio  Rocamora  (1,050  pesos),  and  Antonio 
Bemasoonl  (600  pesos).  Luciano  Cortes,  also  an  author,  earned  more  than 
any  of  the  other  singers  simply  because  he  wrote  pkys  a$  well  a$  sang; 


THE   OPERATIC   NINETEENTH   CENTURY     175 

his  combined  earnings  were  3,000  pesos.14  Ten  years  later  Munguia  was 
still  singing  (2,700  pesos),  as  was  Andres  Castillo  (4,38o).15  These  sala- 
ries individually  mean  little  unless  we  compare  them  with  those  of  the  or- 
chestral players,  who  received  salaries  averaging  a  third  of  the  singers' 
salaries,16  and  unless  we  take  into  consideration  the  purchasing  power  of 
the  peso.  The  singers  all  received  salaries  in  excess  of  the  top  salaries  in 
colonial  government  bureaus. 

But  in  return  for  the  large  investment  which  drove  the  Coliseo  manage- 
ment to  financial  ruin  in  i8i6,17  it  can  hardly  be  said  that  the  Mexican 
public  received  a  high  standard  of  performance  from  singers  or  orchestra. 
The  orchestra  comprised  in  1813  when  prices  were  at  a  peak,  sixteen  play- 
ers. Concerning  their  quality,  a  correspondent  of  the  Diario  de  Mexico 
wrote  in  the  February  25  and  26  (1813)  issues  the  following  statement: 

The  phief  defect  is  the  instability  of  the  beat  throughout  the  whole  or- 
chestra. .  .  .  The  trumpets  ...  the  kettledrums  .  .  .  and  the  double 
passes  .  .  .  sound  miserably.  We  must  confess,  however,  that  their  thin 
rasping  tone  and  the  poverty  of  the  whole  orchestra  is  not  entirely  the 
fault  of  the  players,  but  is  partly  due  to  the  location  of  the  orchestra.  The 
pit  is  entirely  too  small,  squeezed  between  the  stage  and  the  front  rows. 
Moreover  the  acoustical  effect  is  further  hampered  by  the  absorption  of 
sound  in  the  alleys  running  beneath  the  stage.  .  .  .  And  if  the  flute,  the 
bassoon,  and  the  clarinet  discharge  their  duties  intelligently  and  artistically, 
we  might  bespeak  greater  attention  to  the  written  notes  by  the  flutist  and 
the  bassoonist,  and  less  attempt  to  add  capricious  adornments.  The  first 
violinist  should  play  more  decisively  and  vigorously.  He  is  the  rudder  of 
the  orchestra,  and  fewer  violent  pitchings  occur  when  the  first  violinist 
from  time  to  time  indicates  the  beat;  .  .  .  mistakes  would  moreover  be 
considerably  reduced  if  more  rehearsing  were  done. 

None  of  the  singers  was  noted  as  a  vocalist.  Under  the  system  then  pre- 
vailing the  singer's  principal  asset  was  his  or  her  acting  ability,  not  vocal- 
ism.  If  frequent  objections  were  made  by  the  discerning  to  the  vocalism  of 
the  singers,  even  more  inept  was  their  musicianship  <x>nsidered  to  be. 

The  rank  favoritism  bestowed  upon  imported  players,  singers,  and  com- 
posers, was  also  a  subject  for  comment.  Manuel  Corral,  a  sycophantic 
Spaniard  whose  musical  merits  were  negligible,  forced  performances  of 
his  theatrical  pieces  because  he  stood  high  in  the  favor  of  Viceroy 
Apodaca.18  An  Italian,  Esteban  Cristiani,  a  teacher  of  piano,  succeeded  in 
having  his  jottings  taken  seriously  enough  to  reach  performance.19  Andres 
Castillo,  a  member  of  the  imported  troupe,  further  augmented  his  in- 


i76  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

come  by  composing  lurid  sainetes,  completely  devoid  of  artistic  purpose. 
When  Jose  Aldana  ventured  a  different  type  of  entertainment  he  was 
petulantly  thrust  aside.  Aldana  was  a  Mexican,  and  when  a  concerto  he 
offered  was  badly  received,  an  anonymous  letter,  signed  only,  "A  Lover 
of  Music,"  appeared  in  the  Diario  de  Mexico  (October  13,  1805): 

Please  tell  D.  Jose*  Aldana,  first  violinist  in  the  theater  orchestra,  that 
he  should  change  his  name  to  Aldani  or  Mr.  Aldam,  and  act  like  a  for- 
eigner, if  he  wants  to  gain  the  applause  that  he  deserves.  ...  Or  he 
might  consider  impersonating  a  woman.  .  .  . 

Those  who  know  something  of  the  art  of  music,  and  have  heard  him, 
know  his  merits;  but  the  greater  part  of  his  audience  has  ears  but  no 
musical  understanding,  and  so  responded  coldly  to  the  refinements  of  the 
violin  concerto  he  played  yesterday. 

MUSIC  AT  THE  SCHOOL   OF   MINES   IN   MEXICO  CITY 

If  the  Coliseo  de  M6xico  provided  no  arena  for  regular  performances 
of  first-class  music,  the  newly  opened  School  of  Mines,  built  under  the 
superintendence  of  the  renowned  neo-classicist,  Manuel  Tolsa,  did.  In  a 
"large  and  well-lighted  hall  of  the  new  school,  an  orchestra  of  uncommon 
merit"  gave  concerts  which  were  called  "academies  of  music."  20  The 
mine-owners  as  a  class  were  not  only  the  wealthiest,  but  also  the  most 
enlightened  musically  of  the  colonial  aristocracy,  if  one  can  judge  from 
their  patronage  of  these  academies.  Aldana  played  in  this  orchestra,  as  did 
also  two  other  violinists  remembered  as  better-than-average  performers, 
Vicente  Castro  and  Manuel  Delgado.  The  School  of  Mines  orchestra  was 
not,  however,  organized  on  the  Mannheim  pattern,  and  still  depended 
upon,  a  concertmaster  instead  of  a  conductor  for  the  beat.  A  mandolin 
player  and  a  guitar  player  were  regularly  enrolled  in  the  orchestra;  but 
Haydn  appears  to  have  been  a  composer  much  favored  in  the  academies. 
Amateurs  as  well  as  professional  perf onned,  and  Otto  Mayer-Serra,  his- 
torian of  Mexican  music  during  the  nineteenth  century,  points  to  the 
preponderancy  of  female  amateurs  as  an  ominous  sign. 

The  individual  performer  who  won  the  most  liberal  praise  was  the 
pianist,  Soto  Garrillo.  His  polished  performances  of  Haydn  sonatas  were 
admired,  and  he  was  considered  an  excellent  extemporizer.n  As  a  com- 
poser he  had  made  a  name  with  his  "boleros,  polonaises,  and  tonadillas." 
A  trait  in  his  playing  which  won  praise  was  his  firm  "command  of 
rhythm."  Along  with  another  pianist,  Horcasitas  by  name,21  he  helped 


THE  OPERATIC  NINETEENTH  CENTURY    177 

to  popularize  the  piano  as  the  coming  instrument  in  Mexico.  Before  long 
everyone  with  pretensions  to  culture  owned  an  instrument  of  a  kind. 
Pianos  were  not  only  imported  from  Spain  during  the  early  iSoo's  but 
were  also  manufactured  in  Mexico,  both  at  Durango  and  at  Mexico  City. 
Notices  in  the  Gaze  fa  de  Mexico  as  early  as  1793  2S  confirm  our  assertion 
of  piano-manufacture  in  Durango  and  as  early  as  I79624  of  piano- 
manufacture  in  Mexico  City. 

At  the  academies  in  the  School  of  Mines  music  history  for  the  first  time 
in  Mexico  formed  a  topic  for  learned  discussion.  A  Discurso  sobre  la 
mtisica  published  in  the  October  24,  1807,  issue  of  the  Diario  de  Mexico 
sums  up  the  ideas  on  music  history  that  were  then  entertained  among  the 
well-informed.  The  anonymous  author  of  this  "discourse"  delighted  in 
quoting  Aristotle  and  Pindar,  as  if  Aristotelian  music  theory  were  still  a 
living  reality.  The  Spanish  author  most  reverentially  referred  to  was 
Tomas  de  Iriarte  (1750-91)5  Iriarte's  didactic  poem,  La  Musica,  pro- 
vided the  author  of  the  Diario  de  Mexico  discourse  with  a  rich  lode  of 
factual  information.  On  Iriarte's  authority,  canto  llano  was  defined  as 
monodic  music  with  each  note  in  the  chant  occupying  a  beat  of  equal 
length  5  canto  figurado  as  homophonic  music  5  and  canto  de  6rgano  as 
polyphonic  or  contrapuntal  music.  Boethius's  classification  of  modes  was 
believed  still  valid.  Guido  d'Arezzo  was  listed  as  the  "inventor  of  nota- 
tion in  1025." 

The  author  of  the  Discurso  was  interested  in  the  marimba,  which  he 
considered  a  Guatemalan  instrument.  A  characteristic  feature  of  the 
marimba  in  his  opinion  was  the  placing  of  gourds  under  the  wooden  keys 
to  enforce  resonance.  He  was  interested  also  in  Franklin's  harmonica  ex- 
hibited in  Paris  "in  1765."  But  he  was  patently  in  error  in  ascribing  the 
invention  of  the  trumpet  to  one  Denner,  a  flute-maker  of  Nuremberg,  in 
1690.  Like  too  many  successor  music  historians  in  Mexico,  the  Discurso 
author  interested  himself  primarily  in  European  music,  which  he  could 
know  about  only  at  second  hand,  and  neglected  his  own  country.  The 
only  bit  of  information  he  gave  that  interests  us  now  was  his  statement  that 
the  marimba  was  an  instrument  indigenous  to  Guatemala, 


INSTRUMENTS   AND    INSTRUMENT   TUNING 

The  first  notice  of  the  tuning  of  keyed  instruments  in  equal  tempera- 
ment appears  in  a  Gazeta  de  Mexico  announcement,  November  21,  1786. 
On  that  date  Manuel  Duarte  y  Davila,  organ-builder,  and  caretaker  of 


Z78  MUSIC  IN   MEXICO 

organs  in  the  Puebla  Cathedral,  announced  he  had  introduced  at  Puebk 
a  new  system  of  tuning  invented  by  Don  F61ix  Falco  a  century  earlier 
and  successfully  tested  in  the  royal  chapel  of  Charles  II.  Falco,  according 
to  Duarte  y  Davila,  was  a  Valencian,  but  other  information  than  his  natal 
city  and  approximate  date  is  not  given  in  the  Gazeta  announcement 

The  supplying  of  small  organs  with  only  eight  or  ten  ranks  kept  Duarte 
busy  5  he  built  on  a  cost  plus  percentage  basis.25  Mariano  Placeres  at 
Durango  did  the  same  thing.  Manuel  Perez,  with  a  shop  at  Monterilla 
No.  8  in  the  capital,  frequently  advertised  small  organs  of  his  own  fabrica- 
tion for  sale  (1796-8).  After  1800  advertisements  of  imported  pianos 
began  to  appear.  The  first  pianos  actually  constructed  in  Mexico  were 
probably  those  made  by  a  German  who  chose  Adan  Miller  as  a  trade 
name.  Inquisition  records  reveal  him  to  have  been  active  as  an  instrument 
maker  at  Mexico  Gty  between  1790  and  I795.26 

In  1799  the  price  asked  for  pianos  in  Mexico  City  was  400  pesos  j  the 
same  year  the  annual  rental  of  a  house  near  the  z6calo — which  would  have 
been  considered  then  the  best  location— cost  between  500  and  600  pesos. 
Although  it  has  not  been  possible  to  find  any  advertisement  listing  Eng- 
lish pianos  before  1821,  pianos  made  in  Cartagena  (Spain)  "imitando  a 
los  Ingleses"  were  offered  as  the  most  desirable  purchases  in  i804*27  It 
is  a  well  known  fact  that  English  pianos  were  preferred  on  the  continent 
during  the  first  decades  of  the  nineteenth  century;  Beethoven,  for  in- 
stance, preferred  a  Broadwood.  After  Mexico  gained  her  independence 
and  no  longer  had  to  import  via  Spain,  English  pianos  were  always  the 
preferred  purchases  of  the  Mexican  upper  classes  until  near  the  close  of 
the  nineteenth  century. 

DANCE  TYPES   POPULAR  AT  THE   END  OF  THE  VICEREGAL   PERIOD 

All  the  dance  types  popular  at  the  close  of  the  viceregal  period— except 
the  jarabe— have  now  become  obsolete.  In  the  dance  music  which  still 
survives  from  the  opening  years  of  the  nineteenth  century  no  style  traits 
that  later  became  identified  as  peculiarly  Mexican  intruded  themselves. 
As  examples  of  late  colonial  dances  we  offer  first  a  contradanza  printed  in 
the  Diario  d*  Mexico  (July  3,  1809),  but  without  ascription  to  a  named 
composer;  then  a  Minuet  with  Variations  by  Aldana;  and  finally  a  Polaca. 
Though  all  exceedingly  charming,  not  one  of  these  three  can  truthfully 
be  said  to  exhibit  even  idiomatic  Spanish  traits,  much  less  traits  identifiable 


THE   OPERATIC  NINETEENTH  CENTURY    179 

as  precursor  Mexican.  The  contradanza  seems  more  akin  to  certain  Ger- 
man contratanzen  of  the  kte  eighteenth  century  than  to  the  contradanzas 
so  highly  popular  in  the  West  Indies  during  the  nineteenth  century.28 
The  squareness  of  the  division  into  precise  eight-bar  periods,  each  re- 
peated, is  notable  in  this  Diario  de  Mexico  contradanza. 


£ 


Cotttradaxza  (itoj) 


r 


r 


i8o 


MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 


In  Aldana's  Minuet  with  Variations  one  encounters  Mozartian  naivete. 
Surely  no  one  without  autograph  proof  would  ever  suspect  this  music  of 
having  been  written  in  Mexico,  so  alien  is  its  spirit  to  the  stereotype  of 
what  Spanish  or  Mexican  music  should  be.  The  Teutonic  influence  may 
have  reached  Mexico  in  any  of  several  ways.  Certain  direct  contacts  existed 
between  Germany  and  Mexico  during  the  late  eighteenth  century  5  the 
earliest  piano  manufacturer,  as  we  already  have  seen,  was  a  German  immi- 
grant j  German  instruments  "made  in  Augsburg"  somehow  found  their 
way  to  the  port  of  Veracruz  and  were  publicly  offered  for  sale  in  1794. 
In  addition  to  occasional  direct  contacts,  a  number  of  opportunities  existed 
for  indirect  contacts.  Iriarte,  the  most  admired  Spanish  writer  on  music 
(La  Musica,  1769,  1784),  classified  Gluck,  Haydn,  as  Jommelli  as  his 
favorite  composers  5  his  recommendation  as  far  as  Haydn's  music  was 
concerned  bore  fruit  in  Mexico — Haydn  piano  sonatas  were  pkyed  by 
Soto  Carrillo  at  the  School  of  Mines  academies.  It  is,  of  course,  a  well 
known  fact  that  kte  eighteenth  century  Spain  was  passionately  addicted 
to  Haydn  (Haydn  wrote  the  Seven  Last  Words  specifically  for  C&diz 
cathedral).80 

Aldana's  minuet  bespeaks  Mozart  more  than  Haydn  in  our  opinion,  but 
whatever  the  influence,  the  music  carries  itself  with  an  aristocratic  elegance 
not  lightly  tossed  aside.  No  Mexican  pianist  up  to  the  present  moment 
seems  to  have  interested  himself  in  pkying  it,  but  the  music  is  distinctly 
worthy  of  re-hearing.  In  the  manuscript  copy  there  are  no  marks  of  ex- 
pression. The  tempo  indication  is  given  as  "despado,"  which  may  be  inter- 
preted "leisurely,"  or  "gently."  It  is  a  notorious  fact  that  the  average 
player  of  today  faced  with  an  urtext  assumes  all  refinements  of  expression 
must  be  excluded  5  but  the  success  of  Aldana's  minuet  depends  as  surely  on 
refinements  in  performance  as  does  Mozart's  Minuet  in  D,  K.  355. 

mth  Variations 


^ 


s 


m 


^ 


THE  OPERATIC  NINETEENTH  CENTURY    181 


MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 


If  a  contredanse  and  a  minuet  seem  strangely  incongruous  in  early  nine- 
teenth century  Mexico,  even  stranger  seems  a  polonaise.  Possibly  the 
folaca  given  below  was  written  during  the  I790)s— so  thinks  Saldivar. 
Whatever  its  exact  date,  it  departs  widely  from  any  authentic  Polish  type 
known  to  us.  This  particular  -polaca  remains  anonymous,  but  Soto  Carrillo 
is  known  to  have  composed  polonaises,  and  may  be  offered  as  a  candidate 
for  authorship. 


** 


•I     M  6 


THE  OPERATIC  NINETEENTH  CENTURY     183 


n-tf    r    T 

r    k  '  r 

r  f  , 

T  —  t~y  — 

Y    1  1  !  1 

i         '      f 

J  1  !  —    \ 

f.- 

4  —  £__i  — 

While  no  one  of  these  three  examples  of  late  viceregal  musk  can  by 
any  claim  to  greatness,  nevertheless  each  has  been  worth  listing  if  only 
to  reinforce  this  important  principle:  no  literate  composer  of  the  late 
colonial  period  wrote  dances  classifiable  as  "Mexican"  dances.  True, 
"bailes  del  pais"  were  called  for  in  the  theater,  and  some  of  the  aristocracy 
fancied  the  native  tunes  of  Mexico  sufficiently  to  pay  clock-makers  the 
price  of  cutting  <csonecitos  del  pais"  on  the  musical  clocks  fashionable  in 
Mexico  as  in  Europe  around  1 8oa51  But  composers  who  possessed  enough 
technical  skill  to  note  down  their  own  inspirations— whether  their  music 
was  difficult  or  easy — disdained  the  writing  of  native-type  tunes  or  dances. 
They  preferred  to  cultivate  some  international  dance  type,  such  as  the 
contredanse,  the  minuet,  or  the  polonaise,  rather  than  to  write  a  jarabe  in 
a  local  idiom*  Only  after  independence  does  one  find  "name"  composers 
signing  their  names  tasuch  distinctively  Mexican  dance  types  as  the  jarabe. 

Certainly  the  jarabe  existed  as  a  dance  type  before  independence,  but 
every  allusion  to  it  during  the  kte  colonial  period  was  dearly  a  disparag- 
ing allusion.  The  Inquisition  authorities  took  an  exceedingly  dim  view 
of  it,  condemning  it  at  first  on  moral  grounds.  During  the  struggle  for 


i*4  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

independence  the  jarabe  earned  the  reputation  of  being  insurrectionary 
music,  and  was  therefore  banned  for  political  reasons.  The  first  dated  men- 
tion of  the  jarabe  occurred  in  I789-82  A  dance  tune  called  a  fan  fe  jarabe 
was  denounced  in  that  year  to  the  Inquisition  authorities  in  the  Puebla 
diocese.  The  words  of  the  song  were  submitted  for  examination,  and  ran 
like  this:  Hell  no  longer  exists  $  the  demons  have  ceased  to  be  j  come  then, 
my  dear,  no  one  will  damn  us.88  In  1796  another  fan  de  xarabe  was  de- 
nounced to  the  Inquisition  because  its  words  were  considered  salacious  and 
the  dance  gestures  used  while  singing  it  considered  lewd.  In  1802  the 
Inquisition  in  Mexico  City  forbade  the  dancing  of  the  jarabe,  and  issued 
a  statement  of  reasons  which  read  in  part: 

Latterly  there  has  been  introduced  amongst  us  another  type  of  dance 
called  the  jarabe  gatuno  so  indecent,  lewd,  disgraceful,  and  provocative, 
that  words  cannot  encompass  the  evil  of  it.  The  verses  and  the  accompany- 
ing actions,  movements,  and  gestures,  shoot  the  poison  of  lust  directly  into 
the  eyes,  ears,  and  senses.  That  lascivious  demon,  Asmodeus  himself 
[Tobit  3.8],  has  certainly  inspired  this  dance,  so  destructive  is  it  of  all 
Christian  morals;  but  not  only  of  religious  virtue,  even  of  the  most  ele- 
mentary decencies.  Its  obscenity  would  shock  even  the  most  debased 
Sybarite.  .  .  .  We  are  obliged  by  the  character  of  our  sacred  office, 
which  pledges  us  to  the  salvation  of  souls  by  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  to 
prohibit,  banish,  and  extirpate  this  dance.  .  .  .** 

Though  prohibited  in  1 802,  the  jarabe  continued  to  be  sung  and  danced. 
The  word  "jarabe"  actually  means  syrup.  "Pan  de  jarabe"  would  mean, 
"syrupy  bread."  Faced  with  the  same  kind  of  stopper  on  direct  sexual 
language  now  encountered  with  radio,  songsters  in  viceregal  Mexico  with 
a  legion  of  decency  at  their  throats  used  certain  substitute  words.  The 
phenomenon  of  substitute  words  is  of  course  familiar  in  many  hits  of  our 
own  epoch,  and  their  meanings  were  surely  understood  then  as  now  with- 
out benefit  of  diagrams. 

Not  only  did  the  jarabe  ordinarily  have  devious  sexual  meanings,  but 
also  the  jarabe  with  its  ambiguous  language  became  a  favorite  dance  and 
song  of  the  incipient  revolutionaries.  In  the  November  12,  1813,  deposi- 
tion taken  under  Inquisition  authority  at  Valladolid — the  testimony  being 
that  of  Joaqufn  Ponce,  cathedral  precentor— it  was  noted  by  the  examining 
officials  that  the  secret  revolutionary  song  sung  at  the  conspiratorial  meet- 
ings in  the  house  of  a  certain  Garcia  was  a  jarabe.8* 


THE  OPERATIC  NINETEENTH  CENTURY    185 

After  1 8 13  the  jarabe  was  adopted  as  the  song  and  dance  of  the  revolu- 
tionaries everywhere  throughout  Mexico.  The  oldest  surviving  jarabes 
were  written  down  during  the  flush  of  the  revolutionary  enthusiasm.  The 
few  surviving  exemplars  that  can  tentatively  be  dated  before  the  final 
achievement  of  independence  in  1821  lack  words.  Perhaps  the  oldest  is 
one  for  guitar.  Another  composed  around  1820  was  written  for  piano. 
The  time  signature  in  both  reads  %.  Though  neither  the  guitar  nor  piano 
jarabes  to  which  we  are  at  the  moment  referring  included  a  tempo  mark, 
both  were  obviously  intended  to  be  played  fast.  The  movement  of  six- 
teenths in  both  is  almost  uninterrupted.  The  piano  jarabe  indeed  looks  on 
the  page  like  a  Czerny  exercise.  The  harmonic  scheme  of  both  calls  for 
notice:  both  in  C  major,  they  tirelessly  repeat  the  same  harmonies  forever 
and  a  day— C  chord,  G  chord,  D  dominant  seventh,  G  dominant  seventh, 
then  C  again,  and  the  same  pattern  of  chord  change  repeated.  The  busy- 
ness of  the  sixteenth  notes  and  the  tedium  of  the  repetitive  harmonies 
militates  against  artistic  success  in  either  exemplar.  The  piano  jarabe  in 
particular  includes  so  much  ding-dong  repetition  that  no  musically  sensi- 
tive person  could  sincerely  praise  it  as  a  work  of  art.  But  if  neither  were 
works  of  art,  at  least  they  were  historical  landmarks,  for  later  during  the 
century  the  jarabe  was  taken  to  the  bosom  of  every  true  Mexican  com- 
poser 5  jarabes  by  J.  Antonio  Gomez  ( 1841)  or  by  Julio  Ituarte  (in  Ecos 
de  Mexico,  c.  1885)  are  perhaps  not  unworthy  of  comparison  with  Sla- 
vonic Dances  by  Dvorak  or  Norwegian  Dances  by  Grieg. 

JOS£  MARIANO  ELfZAGAI  A  PIONEER  DURING  THE  REVOLUTIONARY  EPOCH 

The  composers  in  Mexico  who  most  successfully  met  the  challenge  of 
changed  conditions  after  independence  were  those  like  Elfzaga  who 
gladly  accepted  the  new  order,  and  ceased  to  hanker  after  the  vanished 
stability  of  the  viceregal  epoch.  It  was  typical  of  Elfzaga  that  he  should 
have  been  one  of  the  first  to  drop  the  title  **Don" — mark  of  a  Spanish 
gentleman— and  adopt  the  title  "Citizen"  instead 

But  he  had  profited  from  the  advantages  of  the  old  order.  Born  in  1786 
at  Morelia,8*  from  infancy  he  was  ushered  into  a  musical  atmosphere.  His 
father,  a  music  teacher,  noticed  his  phenomenal  ear  when  he  was  only  five. 
The  news  that  he  could  toddle  to  the  keyboard  and  there  imitate  success- 
fully the  best  efforts  of  his  father's  students  was  not  slow  in  circulating. 
A  long  descriptive  artick  telling  of  the  lad's  precocity  appeared  in  the 


i86  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

Gffzeta  de  Mexico >  October  2, 1 792.  With  a  father  as  persistent  as  Leopold 
Mozart  in  advertising  his  genius,  the  child  began  to  be  talked  about  in  the 
viceroy's  presence.  The  Conde  de  Revillagigedo,  5ist  Viceroy,  a  man  of 
extraordinary  sensitivity,  immediately  wanted  to  hear  the  wonder  child. 
Sent  for,  the  child  with  his  parents  made  the  toilsome  journey  to  the 
capital.  The  gifts  of  the  wunderkind  exceeded  every  expectation,  and  the 
viceroy  offered  to  pay  the  family  expenses  if  the  father  would  permit  the 
child's  enrolment  at  the  choirschool  for  boys  attached  to  the  metropolitan 
cathedral. 

This  choirschool,  known  as  the  Colegio  de  Infantes  de  Coro  de  k  Santa 
Iglesia  Catedral,  existed  for  the  purpose  of  preparing  its  students  for 
service  as  acolytes  and  as  singers.  Its  curriculum  included  languages  as 
well  as  music.  The  Elizagas  stayed  in  the  capital,  however,  only  a  year, 
and  then  returned  to  Morelia  (then  known  as  Valladolid).  There  he  came 
under  the  tuition  of  Jose  Maria  Carrasco,  organist  of  Morelia  Cathedral, 
and  a  musician  of  unusual  worth.  The  cabildo,  recognizing  the  further 
growth  of  the  young  musician  could  best  be  promoted  by  another  year  at 
the  capital,  sent  him  back  at  the  age  of  twelve  for  a  year's  study  with  Soto 
Carrillo,  who  had  been  Carrasco's  own  teacher. 

Upon  his  return  home  after  the  year  with  Soto  Carrillo  the  cabildo 
voted  the  purchase  of  the  best  available  piano  in  Mexico  City  so  their 
youthful  prodigy  might  pass  on  the  benefits  of  his  newly  gained  knowl- 
edge. After  Carrasco  won  the  principal  organistship  at  Puebla,  a  higher 
paying  post  than  the  Morelia  first  organistship,  the  second  Morelia 
organist  became  first,  and  the  third  second,  leaving  the  third  vacant.  This 
third  organistship  fell  to  Elizaga,  who  when  he  began  occupying  it  was 
thirteen.  The  next  five  years  were  spent  in  broadening  his  general  educa- 
tion. He  studied  Latin  with  a  teacher  at  the  Valladolid  Seminary.  Torpid 
as  one  might  today  suppose  the  atmosphere  of  a  kte  colonial  seminary  to 
have  been,  the  more  probable  truth  is  that  the  atmosphere  of  this  particu- 
lar one  was  charged  with  electricity.  Hidalgo,  the  George  Washington 
of  Mexico,  was  rector  of  the  Valladolid  seminary  when  Elizaga  was  still 
in  swaddling  clothes,  and  Morelos,  the  other  principal  figure  in  Mexico's 
fight  for  independence,  was  a  fellow-townsman  of  Elfzaga's  and  had  gone 
to  school  under  Hidalgo. 

Elizaga  did  not  himself  take  a  gun,  as  did  the  priests,  Hidalgo  and 
Morelos,  who  were  leaders  in  the  revolt.  But  when  the  ktter  in  1813 
was  riding  Jiigh  oa  the  crest  of  the  revolutionary  movement,  Elizaga,  fired 


THE  OPERATIC  NINETEENTH  CENTURY    187 

with  enthusiasm,  set  a  poem  eulogizing  the  insurrectionary  Morelos  to 
music.  Contact  with  another  revolutionary  leader  resulted  from  his  en- 
gagement as  piano  tutor  for  a  girl  in  one  of  the  leading  families  of  the 
town,  Ana  Maria  Huarte.  Dona  Ana  Maria  became  the  wife  of  General 
Iturbide  who  after  the  expulsion  of  the  last  viceroy  contrived  to  have 
himself  named  first  emperor  of  Mexico.  During  his  year  of  rule— 1822 — 
he  brought  Elfzaga  to  Mexico  City  and  installed  him  as  imperial  chapel- 
master.  During  that  year  Elizaga  finished  preparing  for  the  press  a 
theoretical  treatise,  Elementos  <Le  Musica.  Though  actual  publication  did 
not  occur  until  after  Iturbide's  abdication,  nevertheless  Iturbide  had  made 
possible  its  publication. 

Elementos  de  M.us\cay  a  didactic  work,  was  but  the  first  of  Elizaga's 
contributions  to  music  life  in  the  infant  nation.  A  second  valuable  con- 
tribution was  his  leadership  in  a  philharmonic  society  founded  in  18245 
this  society's  announced  objectives  were  the  patronage  of  orchestral  con- 
certs and  the  support  of  a  conservatory.  The  conservatory  came  into  being 
the  next  year  with  a  "grand"  opening  exercise  on  Sunday  morning,  April 
17,  attended  by  the  president  of  the  republic  and  other  notables.  Elizaga's 
support  for  his  excellent  schemes  failed  him,  however,  and  after  two 
years  of  financial  struggle  he  removed  to  Guadalajara  where  the  chapel- 
mastership  promised  security.  There  he  remained  for  three  years  ( 1 827- 
30),  significantly  bettering  the  music  standards  at  the  cathedral. 

Hoping  against  hope  for  a  better  turn  in  the  capital,  he  abandoned 
Guadalajara  and  returned  to  Mexico  City  in  1830.  Private  lessons  sup- 
ported him  for  eight  years,  and  though  he  lacked  the  kind  of  powerful 
support  Iturbide  had  given  he  was  able  to  publish  at  his  own  expense 
another  didactic  work  of  capital  value,  Princifios  de  la  Annoma  y  Me- 
lodia  (1835).  In  1838  he  accepted  a  position  as  tutor  to  the  sons  of  a 
wealthy  landowner,  Echaiz  by  name,  whose  properties  had  swollen  at 
the  time  of  the  Spanish  expulsion.  This  tutorship  occupied  Elfzaga  two 
years,  after  which  his  journeying  ended  with  a  return  to  his  natal  city, 
now  re-named  Morelia  in  honor  of  the  patriot  Morelos  whom  Elizaga 
had  eulogized  in  1813.  Elfzaga's  last  years  were  spent  as  chapelmaster 
in  the  Morelia  Cathedral.  He  died  in  184.2,  aged  fifty-six. 

His  surviving  compositions  were  all  destined  for  church  usage.  Two 
Masses,  one  for  Guadalajara  and  another  for  Morelia,  a  Miserere^  a  set 
of  Lamentations,  a  set  of  Responses,  and  music  for  the  Matins  of  Trans- 
figuration survive.  His  music,  though  far  removed  from  the  austere  ideal 


i88  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

of  Pius  X's  Motu  Profrio,  nevertheless  deserves  performance  5  if  the 
liturgical  improprieties  prevent  its  being  heard  in  a  Roman  Catholic  church 
today,  still  a  Mass  of  his  (only  one  is  complete)  might  effectively  be 
presented  in  a  concert  hall.  All  of  it  calls  for  orchestral  accompaniment. 
Present-day  realities  militate  against  revival  of  his  musiq  the  assembling 
of  a  chorus  and  orchestra  is  difficult  enough  today  even  for  the  best-known 
choral  masterpieces.  But  a  recorded  performance  making  known  his  music 
to  a  wide  public  would  establish  him  as  one  of  the  indubitably  important 
New  World  composers  of  the  nineteenth  century. 

EL|ZAGA'S  PRINTED  WORKS 

The  need  for  a  music  press  was  insistently  felt  in  late  viceregal  Mexico. 
As  a  substitute  for  staff  notation  the  Diario  de  Mexico  published  in  1809 
an  article  proposing  music  printing  by  means  of  cipher,87  But  1809  was 
too  kte  a  date  to  propose  any  cipher  scheme  or  any  return  to  tablature 
systems  of  notation.  A  music  press  capable  of  executing  music  in  the  con- 
ventional staff  system  was  imperatively  needed.  Not  the  least  of  Elizaga's 
achievements  was  his  partnership  in  the  founding  of  such  a  press.  He  told 
the  story  of  its  foundation  in  the  February  2,  1826  issue  of  El  Aguila 
Mexican*: 

Citizen  Mariano  Elfzaga  has  the  honor  to  announce  to  the  public  and 
more  especiaDy  to  lovers  of  music  that  in  partnership  with  Citizen  Manuel 
Rionda  he  has  established  a  music  press — the  first  and  at  present  the  only 
enterprise  of  its  kind  in  the  Republic.  It  is  not  easy  to  understand  the 
difficulties  and  anxieties  this  project  has  cost  us  unless  one  pauses  to 
consider  just  what  is  involved  in  undertaking  a  completely  new  enterprise 
of  any  kind.  Without  expert  guidance  and  without  even  occasional  advice 
from  an  experienced  individual,  we  have  undertaken  a  project  whose 
difficulties  we  have  been  able  to  surmount  only  by  repeated  trial  and  error. 
.  .  .  Although  we  have  not  yet  been  able  to  achieve  perfection,  at  least 
the  results  satisfy  our  expectations  for  a  first,  venture.  In  token  of  the 
publisher's  interest  in  the  furtherance  of  art,  we  offer  our  fellow  citizens 
an  original  Valse  with  Variations  as  the  first  printed  work  from  our  recently 
founded  press.  [Citizen  Elizaga  composed  this  Valse  himself.]  ...  We 
have  chosen  a  small  piece  in  the  hope  an  inexpensive  composition  repro- 
duced on  Mexican  paper  made  here  at  San  Angel  would  circulate  widely, 
and  publicize  not  only  its  composer,  but  also  provide  an  earnest  of  the 
later  work  we  plan  to  accomplish.  ...  If  this  advertisement  of  the 


THE  OPERATIC  NINETEENTH  CENTURY    189 

founding  of  a  press  meets  with  a  favorable  reception,  we  plan  also  the 
establishment  of  a  music  periodical,  in  which  we  will  publish  keyboard 
pieces  and  guitar  pieces;  in  it  we  may  include  also  songs  and  duos  with 
keyboard  and  guitar  accompaniments.  We  plan  certainly  to  include  the 
best  selections  from  the  current  European  repertory.  .  .  .  The  Valse 
with  Variations  we  are  now  announcing,  and  other  music  which  will  later 
be  published,  may  be  purchased  at  Escalerillas  No.  1 2,  the  address  at  which 
the  Philharmonic  Society  is  presently  located.88 

Elizaga's  energetic  efforts  as  a  music  educator  can  fittingly  be  compared 
with  those  of  Lowell  Mason,  pioneer  music  educator  in  the  United  States. 
Both  men  realized  that  any  permanent  success  depended  upon  raising 
the  general  level  of  music  sensitivity  in  a  young  republic  Both  were  in- 
tensely interested  in  pedagogy  j  both  adopted  their  churches  as  foci  for 
their  professional  activities  in  music.  Elizaga  was  born  only  six  years 
before  Mason,  but  died  thirty  years  before  Mason.  Nevertheless  their 
epochs  of  productivity  overlapped,  Both  men  contributed  immensely  to 
the  advance  of  music  in  their  respective  countries  by  publishing  music 
textbooks.  Mason's  singing  instructors  sold  thousands  of  copies,  and  were 
used  everywhere.  Elizaga's  two  texts,  Elementos  de  Musica  ( 1823)  and 
Princifios  de  la  Armenia  .  .  .  (1835),  although  not  the  best-sellers 
Mason's  books  became,  missed  wide  popularity  only  because  he  addressed 
a  more  advanced  student  than  did  Mason. 

Books  of  a  pedagogical  nature  lack  glamor,  but  after  surveying  Elizaga's 
one  can  hardly  fail  to  praise  him  unstintingly  for  their  merits.  Elizaga 
began  his  Elementos  ( 1 823  )  with  a  preface  calling  attention  to  the  musical 
resources  of  the  young  nation.  "We  have  talents  in  our  very  midst  who 
ought  to  develop  into  Jommellis,  Tartinis,  Dusseks,  and  Haydns,  if  proper 
opportunities  for  self-development  were  afforded,"  he  pointed  out,89  But 
he  went  on  to  observe  that  "unfortunately  our  music  has  sunk  to  a  dis- 
gracefully low  level,  both  in  church  and  in  chamber  musk."  He  saw 
the  standards  of  the  late  viceregal  period  pitched  at  too  low  a  level  to 
inspire  youth.  The  root  of  the  evil  as  he  saw  it  lay  in  bad  teaching.  To 
remedy  the  evils  first  a  blow  for  freedom  from  antiquated  music  theories 
must  be  struck.4*  The  advance  of  art  he  felt  stifled  as  long  as  the  authority 
of  outdated  theorists  such  as  Kircher  continued  to  be  invoked  The  day 
of  the  Guidbnian  hand  must  end. 

Elfzaga's  remarks  on  fledgling  composers  of  his  epoch  make  interest- 
ing reading: 


190  MUSIC   IN   MEXICO 

The  bad  taste  and  the  wilderness  of  unprofitable  notes  in  so  much  of 
our  own  product  distresses  me.  .  .  .  Why  are  we  unable  to  find  Mexi- 
cans whose  works  deserve  comparison  with  those  of  Mozart  and  Bee- 
thoven? Surely  the  reason  stems  largely  from  our  improper  methods  of 
music  instruction.  Music  has  not  been  studied  from  a  properly  systematic 
point  of  view,  but  has  been  instead  encrusted  with  a  thick  overlay  of 
unprofitable  Gothk  ornaments.41 

The  respite  from  an  everlasting  round  of  daily  duties  at  the  organ  bench 
in  his  home  town  and  his  appointment  to  the  chapelmastership  of  Itur- 
bide's  short-lived  imperial  chapel  gave  him  leisure,  he  said,  to  examine 
several  systems  of  music  theory  then  before  the  public.  ccEy  chance  I  came 
upon  a  book  by  the  Abbe  D.  Antonio  Eximeno  on  the  Origin,  Progress, 
Decadence,  and  Restoration  of  Music  which  utterly  differed  from  all  the 
others.  Here  at  last  was  a  book  in  which  I  encountered  that  which  I  have 
always  desired:  a  clear,  comprehensive  system,  a  method,  a  penetrating 
analysis  of  the  various  different  aspects  of  musical  science." 

Eximeno's  Del  Origen  y  Reglas,  the  book  to  which  Elfzaga  referred, 
was  of  course  one  of  the  most  stimulating  treatments  of  music  theory 
by  any  eighteenth  century  author,  not  even  excepting  Rameau,  whom 
Elfzaga  knew  and  admired.  A  member  of  the  same  company  as  Kircher, 
Eximeno  had  been  forced  to  flee  to  Italy,  where  his  book  had  first  ap- 
peared in  Italian  (1774)  5  Elizaga  knew  the  Spanish  translation.  In  our 
own  century  Pedrell  has  devoted  an  entire  book  to  Eximeno,42  so  impor- 
tant does  he  seem  even  now  after  a  long  lapse  of  time.  Eximeno  was  pre- 
eminently an  empiric  "May  God  in  His  mercy  relieve  us,"  he  wrote, 
''from  the  continued  cleavage  between  practice  and  theory  which  defaces 
the  art  of  music."  A  sample  of  Eximeno's  vigorous  and  trenchant  style 
may  be  gathered  from  the  following  typical  quotation  from  him:  "The 
vain  expenditure  of  time  and  effort  on  writing  music  that  conforms  to 
the  theories  of  word-spinning  'authorities'  is  a  catastrophe  5  all  music  study 
should  be  founded  directly  on  the  models  of  practicing  musicians,  not  on 
the  fancies  of  theorists  whose  favorite  exercise  is  the  concatenation  of  pre- 
cepts fastened  in  the  chains  of  a  Gothic  vocabulary."  ** 

Eximeno  simulated  Elizaga  in  much  the  same  fashion  Pestalozzi 
stimulated  Lowell  Mason.  Although  EKzaga  did  not  share  Mason's  op- 
poarjamtis*  fc*  test  his  educational  philosophy  on  a  grand  scale,  still  he  did 
found  a  conservatory— 4he  first  in  the  new  republic— and  did  write  two 
useful  texts.  The  harmony  text,  which  appeared  twelve  years  after  the 


THE  OPERATIC  NINETEENTH   CENTURY    191 


Sy  covers  much  the  same  territory  a  first-year  college  text  in 
harmony  covers  today.  Dressed  up  in  an  attractive  format,  enlivened  with 
examples  from  composers  of  a  later  day,  and  provided  with  exercises  to 
test  the  student's  progress  at  the  end  of  each  unit,  the  Principios  could 
even  today  serve  as  a  useful  beginning  text  in  conventional  four-part 
harmony. 

EIJZAGA'S  SUCCESSORS 

Although  inaugurated  amid  considerable  pomp  and  ceremony,  Elizaga's 
1825  conservatory  lacked  stable  support,  and  therefore  did  not  last.  Sev- 
eral other  conservatories  were  attempted  in  Mexico  City  before  one 
which  succeeded  in  outliving  violent  political  changes  was  finally  founded 
(1866).  Elizaga's  most  important  immediate  successor  was  Jose  Antonio 
Gomez,  whose  Academia  de  Musica  (1839)  flourished  for  several  years. 
G6mez  issued  two  didactic  works,  Gramatica  Razonada  Musical  ( 1 840) 
and  Instructor  Filarmonico  (1843),  both  of  which  were  designed  for 
immediate  use  with  his  own  pupils.  During  1 853  "His  Most  Serene  High- 
ness," General  Santa  Anna,  conceived  the  plan  of  a  government  supported 
conservatory,  and  chose  the  famous  double-bassist,  Giovanni  Bottesini 
(1821-89)7  then  resident  in  Mexico,  as  organizer  of  the  faculty.44  Santa 
Anna,  however,  did  not  have  time  to  consummate  his  national  conserva- 
tory, and  only  after  the  Maximilian  episode  did  one  actually  come  into 
being. 

The  conservatory  founded  under  the  auspices  of  a  reorganized  Sociedad 
Filarmonica  Mexicana  in  1866  was  the  first  which  offered  free  instruc- 
tion.45 The  Sociedad  contributed  to  the  support  of  the  conservatory  during 
the  first  two  seasons,  and  by  governmental  consent  the  sequestrated  build- 
ings formerly  belonging  to  the  University  of  Mexico  (founded  in  1553) 
were  used  for  classes.  The  first  director  of  the  1866  conservatory,  Agustfn 
Caballero,  a  priest,  resigned  after  the  government  assumed  full  responsi- 
bility for  the  support  of  the  conservatory  in  1877.  In  the  latter  year  the 
name  was  changed  to  Conservatorio  Nacional  de  Mfisica,  and  under  this 
name  the  conservatory  has  continued  to  function  during  the  last  seventy- 
five  years. 

TTie  curriculum  of  the  1 866  conservatory  -was  for  forty  years  modeled 
on  that  of  Italian  conservatories.  Thq  programs  of  the  conservatory 
founded  by  Gomez  in  1839  and  the  conservatory  founded  by  the  So- 
ciedad Filarmonica  in  1866  followed  the  same  pattern— operatic  arias, 


i92  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

duos,  and  piano  transcriptions  of  operatic  excerpts  dominated  all  stu- 
dent and  faculty  programs.  The  subjects  of  instruction  in  1866  were: 
solfege,  piano,  strings,  woodwinds,  harmony,  instrumentation  and  or- 
chestration, composition,  Spanish  language,  French,  music  history  and 
biography,  acoustics,  physiology  of  voice,  history  of  instruments,  es- 
thetics.46 At  the  first  public  concert  given  by  the  students  in  1866  (for 
which  there  was  an  admission  charge)  selections  from  for  r  different  operas 
by  Verdi  were  performed:  Nabucodonosor,  Giovanna  d'Arco,  Macbeth, 
and  La  jorza  del  destino.  No  German  music  of  any  description  was  offered. 
On  the  other  hand,  a  Sinjonia>  previously  unheard,  by  the  precocious 
Mexican,  Joaqum  Beristain  ( 1 8 17-39),  whose  untimely  death  at  twenty- 
two  was  one  of  the  tragic  losses  of  the  nineteenth  century,  was  resurrected 
and  played  The  orchestra  for  the  occasion  was  composed  of  students,  but 
augmented  by  experienced  professionals  from  the  opera  orchestra. 

Any  scrutiny  of  curricula  at  kter  stages  during  the  nineteenth  century, 
or  any  look  at  kter  student  programs,  leads  to  but  one  conclusion:  the 
Mexican  musical  horizon  between  independence  and  the  dose  of  the 
Porfirian  epoch  (1911)  was  narrowly  confined  within  the  world  of  Italian 
opera.  Rossini,  Bellini,  Donizetti,  and  Verdi  were  the  uncontested  gods  of 
nineteenth  century  Mexican  music. 

THE  MANUEL  GARCfA  EPISODE 

The  singing  of  opera  in  Italian  did  not  begin  in  Mexico  until  after 
independence.  Cimarosa  and  Paisiello  were  sung  in  Spanish  during  the 
late  viceregal  period.  It  remained  for  Manuel  Garcia,  himself  a  native 
of  Seville,  to  popularize  Italian  opera  in  Italian.  Garcia,  fifty-two  years 
of  age  when  he  reached  Mexico,  had  triumphed  everywhere  in  Europe, 
and  came  fresh  from  successes  in  New  York  5  as  an  international  figure  he 
had  adopted  Italian  exclusively.  His  presentation  of  Rossini's  //  barbitri 
created  a  sensation,  and  his  Italian  was  accepted  naturally,  but  when  he 
turned  to  a  work  of  his  own — El  Abujary  variously  styled  a  tonadilla  or  a 
zarzuek  in  the  newspapers  of  the  period — the  public  complained  they 
could  not  understand  him.  In  El  Aguila  Mexicana  appeared  this  comment 
on  El  Abvjar  (July  13,  1827) : 

Tlic  number  of  persons  who  understand  Italian  or  who  are  content 
simply  to  enjoy  the  singing  and  the  music  without  knowing  what  is  going 


THE  OPERATIC  NINETEENTH  CENTURY    193 

on,  cannot  be  as  large  in  Mexico  as  in  Paris  or  London — certainly  the 
number  is  not  large  enough  to  pay  the  costs  of  grand  opera  here.  If  Senor 
Garcia  and  his  family  were  Italians,  there  might  be  legitimate  reason  for 
their  singing  in  Italian,  but  their  native  language  is  Spanish. 

Despite  this  commonsense  reproach,  Italian  became  during  the  1830*8 
the  only  language  in  which  opera  was  sung  in  Mexico.  Beginning  in  1831 
the  Teatro  Principal,  newly  refurbished,  housed  a  regular  annual  season 
of  Italian  opera,  with  Rossini  dominating  the  bills.  Filippo  Galli  (born 
Rome,  1783)  was  the  acknowledged  singing  star  in  Mexico,  and  Lauro 
Rossi  (born  Macerata,  Italy,  1810)  was  imported  to  write  operas  suitable 
for  the  Italian  troupe.47  The  Italians  naturally  banded  together  in  a  clique 
while  in  Mexico,  much  to  the  detriment  of  native  Mexicans. 


FOREIGN  OPINION  ON  MUSIC  IN  THE  YOUNG  REPUBLIC 

The  Spanish  policy  of  exclusion  discouraged  foreigners  from  casual 
traveling  in  Hispanic  America  during  the  kte  colonial  period.  Only  ex- 
ceptional individual  scientists  such  as  Alexander  von  Humboldt,  or  mem- 
bers of  accredited  teams,  were  permitted  to  observe  life  in  the  colonies  at 
first  hand  After  independence,  however,  a  number  of  observers  swarmed 
into  the  young  republics,  leaving  often  engaging  accounts  of  cultural  life 
in  the  nations  they  visited  One  of  the  earliest  in  Mexico  was  a  Britisher, 
Bullock  by  name,  whose  Six  Months'  Residence  and  Travels  m  Mexico 
appeared  at  London  in  1824.  According  to  Bullock,  musical  life  suffered 
intensely  in  Mexico  during  the  revolutionary  epoch.  His  pejorative  com- 
ments ran  like  these: 

Mexico  has  but  one  place  of  dramatic  exhibition;  it  is  a  building  of 
considerable  size,  .  .  .  [but]  the  orchestra  is  indifferent,  and  the  per- 
formers in  general  below  mediocrity.  .  .  .  During  the  time  of  Galvez 
[  1 785-6]  the  Coliseo  was  much  more  splendid.48 

Mme.  Calder<5n  de  k  Barca,  wife  of  the  first  Spanish  envoy  (but  herself 
of  distinguished  Scots  lineage),  was  among  the  most  perceptive  visitors 
in  the  early  years  of  the  republic  Her  entree  as  wife  of  a  ranking  diplomat 
enabled  her  to  satisfy  her  lively  curiosity,  and  her  Life  m  Mexico^  an 
extraordinarily  informative  book,  was  the  result  Because  she  herself  knew 
enough  music  to  play  Mozart  piano  sonatas  her  musical  comments  repre- 


i94  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

sented  enlightened  opinion.  Music  in  Mexico,  she  said,  was  a  sixth  sense. 
After  hearing  the  band  at  a  village  fiesta,  she  remarked,  "The  music  was 
good,  which  would  hardly  be  the  case  in  any  but  a  Mexican  village." 49 
In  1841  she  was  struck  by  the  large  number  of  pianos  everywhere.  "In 
every  part  of  Mexico,  town  or  country,  there  is  a  piano  (id  cual)  in  every 
house,  .  .  .  [and]  there  is  evidently  a  great  deal  of  musical  taste."  How- 
ever, she  went  on  to  remark:  "But  most  of  those  who  play  are  self-taught, 
and  naturally  abandon  it  very  soon,  for  want  of  encouragement  or  instruc- 
tion." w 

She  accounted  for  the  high  mortality  rate  of  musical  talent  as  "the 
melancholy  effect  produced  by  years  of  civil  war  and  unsettled  govern- 
ment." She  admitted  that  the  finest  performances  in  Mexico  were  staged 
by  the  Italian  troupe  "brought  by  Senor  Roca  to  the  Teatro  des  Gallos," 
but  she  was  none  too  happy  over  the  fact  the  same  theater  was  used 
at  one  moment  for  a  cock-fight  and  at  the  next  for  a  gala  performance  of 
Lucia  di  Lammermoor.  Her  opinion  of  the  Italian  opera  she  heard  in 
Mexico  was  distinctly  enthusiastic  in  comparison  with  the  opinions  on  an 
Italian  troupe  appearing  in  Peru  at  the  identical  moment  of  her  writing 
(1841).  Here  are  the  remarks  of  a  traveler  in  Peru  during  that  year: 

For  some  years  past  a  company  of  Italians,  settled  in  Lima,  have  given 
operatic  performances  on  a  small  scale.  One  of  them,  Signora  Pantanelli, 
is  an  excellent  singer  .  .  .  but  the  rest  are  decidedly  bad.  The  operas 
performed  are  GtuUftta  y  Romeo,  Lucia  di  Lammtrmoor,  La  Somnam- 
btday  and  //  barlnere  di  StvtgKa;  ...  a  mutilated  Norma  and  a  much 
curtailed  Semiranude.  Want  of  stage  room  is  an  obstacle  to  the  representa- 
tion of  operas.  .  .  .  The  orchestra  is  defective,  and  ought  to  be  much 
improved,  to  give  satisfaction  to  a  public  passionately  fond  of  music.51 

But  if  Mme.  Calderon  de  la  Barca  entertained  a  better  opinion  of  the 
troupe  playing  in  Mexico  than  did  the  commentator  on  Peruvian  opera, 
the  repertory  at  both  Lima  and  Mexico  Qty  consisted  of  the  same  mo- 
notonously recurring  items.  The  Italian  troupes  in  neither  city  were  in- 
terested in  encouraging  talent  in  the  countries  where  they  made  their 
livings. 

Mme.  Calder6n  de  la  Barca  complained  that  opera  invaded  even  the 
saactuary  ia  Mexico.  Concerning  the  Good  Friday  music  at  the  Mexico 
Cky  cathedral  she  wrote: 


THE  OPERATIC  NINETEENTH  CENTURY    195 

As  the  Miserere  was  to  be  performed  in  the  cathedral  kte  in  the  eve- 
ning, we  went  there,  though  with  small  hopes  of  making  our  way  through 
the  tremendous  crowd.  The  music  began  with  a  crash  .  .  .  and  such  dis- 
cordance of  instruments  and  voices,  such  confusion  worse  confounded, 
such  inharmonious  harmony,  never  before  deafened  mortal  ears.  The 
very  spheres  seemed  out  of  tune  and  rolling  and  crashing  over  each  other. 
I  could  have  cried  Miserere!  with  the  loudest;  and  in  the  midst  of  all  the 
undrilled  band  was  a  music-master  with  violin  stick  uplifted,  rushing  des- 
perately from  one  to  the  other,  in  vain  endeavoring  to  keep  time,  and 
frightened  at  the  clamour  he  himself  had  been  instrumental  in  raising. 
.  .  .  The  noise  was  so  great  as  to  be  really  alarming.  .  .  ,  The  calm 
face  of  the  Virgin  seemed  to  look  reproachfully  down.52 

She  remarked  that  during  an  outdoor  procession  on  Good  Friday  night 
"the  Host  moved  by,  and  then  a  military  band  struck  up  an  air  from 
Semtramide"  58  At  a  ceremony  she  later  attended  during  which  a  young 
girl  took  the  veil  at  the  fabulously  endowed  Convent  of  the  Incarnation, 
"the  church  was  very  brilliantly  illuminated,  and  as  we  entered,  the  band 
was  playing  one  of  Strauss's  waltzes!" M  At  a  Mass  "where  only  well 
dressed  people  were  admitted  [Santo  Domingo  Church],  the  music  was 
beautiful,  but  too  gay  for  a  church.  There  were  violins  and  wind  instru- 
ments, and  several  amateur  players."  M 

The  mania  for  Italian  opera  among  the  rich  and  well-born  in  Mexico 
produced  these  deleterious  results  during  the  nineteenth  century:  (i) 
Second-rate  Italians  siphoned  off  performance  fees.  (2)  Conservatories 
prepared  everyone  either  to  sing  in  opera,  accompany  opera,  or  write 
opera,  (3)  All  other  musical  types  were  syncretized  with  Italian  opera. 
After  surveying  the  baneful  effects  of  the  opera  craze  in  Mexico  Mme. 
Calderon  de  la  Barca  turned  with  a  hopeful  sigh  of  relief  to  the  native 
dances  of  Mexico.  In  1840  she  noted  the  following  types  of  dances: 
jarabes,  af  orrados,  enanos,  palomos,  and  zapateros.*6 

MEXICAN  OPERA  COMPOSERS  OF  THE  MIp-CENTURY 

Luis  Baca  (1826-55),  originally  from  Durango,  was  .the  first  native 
composer  of  operas  after  independence.  Neither  his  Leonor  nor  Giovanna 
di  Castiglia  was  produced,  however.  Scion  of  a  distinguished  provincial 
family,  he  enjoyed  exceptional  advantages  in  his  music  study.  He  passed 


i96  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

from  the  tuition  of  the  Durango  chapelmaster  to  Jose  Antonio  G6mez's 
newly  founded  conservatory  in  Mexico  City.  His  parents  wished  him  a 
more  stable  career  than  that  of  a  musician,  and  sent  him  in  1844  to  study 
medicine  in  Europe,  but  in  Paris  he  established  contact  with  Donizetti, 
then  a  visitor  at  the  French  capital,  and  was  by  Donizetti  encouraged  to 
continue  in  music. 

An  Ave  Maria  of  Baca's  published  in  a  sumptuous  edition  at  Paris 
(1850),  with  a  decorative  cover  showing  the  Mexico  City  Cathedral  and 
beneath  it  a  flowery  dedication  to  Gomez  (then  chapelmaster),  earned 
Baca  favorable  publicity  at  home,  especially  after  a  leading  female  opera 
star  premiered  it  in  Paris  and  the  critics  there  spoke  of  it  favorably.  Baca 
was  but  one  of  many  during  his  century— both  in  Mexico  and  the  United 
States— who  found  a  quicker  road  to  homeland  fame  through  European 
successes  than  through  any  possible  American  exertions.  Upon  Baca's 
return  to  Mexico  he  was  palpably  lauded  beyond  his  deserts,  and  had  he 
lived  beyond  his  thirtieth  year  his  European  operas  would  no  doubt  have 
been  granted  a  Mexican  hearing.  He  died,  however,  before  Mexican 
performances  could  be  pressurized  from  the  Italian  troupe. 

Cenobio  Paniagua  (1821-82)  5T  was  the  more  fortunate  Mexican  who 
finally  succeeded  in  having  an  opera  of  his,  Catalma  di  Gvisa,  given  a 
Mexican  hearing.  Like  William  Henry  Fry  who  had  the  distinction  of 
being  the  first  United  States  composer  to  gain  an  opera  performance, 
Paniagua  discovered  that  the  Italian  troupe  would  sing  his  opera  only  on 
condition  the  libretto  were  in  Italian.  Every  possible  concession  was  made 
the  performing  whims  of  the  Italian  troupers,  and  Paniagua's  opera  there- 
fore came  dangerously  near  being  a  mere  carbon  copy  of  a  Donizetti  opera. 
Paniagua  did  not  have  Fry's  personal  wealth  and  was  not  able  to  mount 
his  Catalina  di  Guisa  at  his  own  charges  j  its  first  production  therefore  had 
to  wait  fourteen  years  after  its  composition. 

Paniagua  started  as  a  violinist  in  the  Morelia  Cathedral  where  his  uncle 
conducted  the  orchestra.  When  his  uncle  removed  to  Mexico  City  he  was 
taken  along.  The  "music-master"  whose  direction  of  the  cathedral  or- 
chestra so  offended  Mme.  Calderon  de  la  Barca,  Ignado  Triujeque,  took 
an  instant  liking  to  the  young  player,  and  offered  him  a  place  in  the 
cathedral  orchestra.  If  the  orchestra  was  indeed  as- bad  as  she  thought, 
then  his  years  in  it  were  valueless  musically.  But  he  made  contacts  with 
sod^  famous  individuals  as  Bottesini  while  playing  in  it.  His  Catalina  di 
Gu*sa>  composed  in  1845,  reached  the  boards  largely  because  Paniagua 


THE  OPERATIC  NINETEENTH  CENTURY    197 

tirelessly  cultivated  his  Italian  colleagues  in  the  music  profession  during 
the  next  several  years  after  its  completion.  Catalinafs  success  was  enor- 
mous, and  Paniagua  was  repaid  his  years  of  waiting  by  a  fond  adulation 
no  other  Mexican  operatist  of  the  nineteenth  century  perhaps  duplicated. 
Around  him  drew  a  group  of  young  composers  all  hoping  to  share  the 
limelight  with  him.  His  success  with  Catalina  was  not,  however,  duplicated 
when  he  proceeded  to  mount  his  second  opera,  Pietro  d'Abano,  in  1863. 
By  this  time  he  had  organized  his  own  Mexican  troupe.  Eager  to  cash  in 
on  his  Catalina  success,  he  very  unwisely  intruded  his  own  daughter  into 
principal  roles  in  his  Mexican  troupe.  What  he  started  as  a  patriotic  ven- 
ture degenerated  into  a  mere  family  matter.  Paniagua's  reputation  also 
declined  when  the  Mexican  public  discovered  notable  similarities  between 
Catalina)  revived  in  1863,  and  an  Italian  opera,  Marcos  Viscontiy  which 
had  been  mounted  in  Mexico  the  same  year,  but  had  been  composed  in 
1855.  Forgetting  that  Paniagua  had  composed  his  Catalina  in  1845,  the 
critics  began  to  call  Paniagua  a  plagiarist.  What  they  failed  to  recognize 
sufficiently,  of  course,  was  the  fact  that  all  second-rate  Italian  opera 
tended  to  duplicate  itself. 

With  his  reputation  in  the  capital  on  the  skids,  Paniagua  decided  to 
leave  and  in  1868  removed  to  the  small  town  of  Cordoba.  His  energies 
were  there  deflected  into  religious  composition,  but  his  Stele  Palabras 
(1869),  his  Tobias  (1870),  and  his  kter  Massfes  added  nothing  to  his 
reputation.  His  last  composition  was  a  requiem,  finished  a  few  days  before 
his  death  on  November  2, 1882.  The  many  gestures  of  appreciation  after 
his  passing  hardly  obscured  the  fact  his  had  been  a  progressively  deterio- 
rating career  after  the  first  triumphal  production  of  Catalina  in  1 859.  The 
last  production  of  this  opera  occurring  in  1872  at  the  provincial  thea- 
ter in  Orizaba  was  a  sad  anticlimax  to  the  history  of  an  opera  that 
began  with  the  reputation  of  being  the  Mexican  masterworfc  of  the  cen- 
tury. 

Paniagua's  most  important  pupil  was  Melesio  Morales  (1838-1908). 
Like  his  master,  Melesio  Morales  enjoyed  for  a  brief  hour  a  resounding 
success.  His  Ildegonda,  produced  at  Mexico  City  in  1 866  and  three  years 
later  at  Florence,  Italy,  won  him  almost  as  extravagant  tributes  as  Pani- 
agua received  with  Catalina.  But  everything  he  attempted  in  the  operatic 
line  after  Ildegonda  sent  his  reputation  tobogganing  downhill,  and  when 
he  died  at  seventy  he  was  a  musical  nonentity.  Once  the  cock  of  the  walk, 
musically  speaking,  at  the  end  he  died  as  unloved  and  unwanted  as  did 


igS  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

General  Santa  Anna,  another  cock  whose  comb  no  one  wanted  to  see 
shaken  when  he  grew  old 

Born  in  Mexico  City  of  middleclass  parents,58  he  showed  musical  ap- 
titude as  a  child,  and  composed  several  small  pieces  when  he  was  only 
twelve.  He  palmed  off  one  of  his  own  compositions  as  a  mazurka  by  Thai- 
berg,  having  learned  already  as  an  adolescent  that  a  famous  composer's 
work  commanded  respect  not  accorded  a  beginner's.  When  he  revealed  his 
deception,  the  Mexican  music  public  began  to  take  serious  notice  of  his 
work.  Before  he  reached  twenty,  he  sketched  out  his  first  big  work,  the 
opera  Romeo  y  Jvlieta. 

Morales  after  re-doing  the  orchestration  three  times,  offered  it  to  the 
Maretzek  opera  troupe,  which  had  premiered  Catalina.  Unable  to  impress 
the  impresario,  Morales  turned  to  the  municipal  government  for  financial 
backing.  After  several  vain  promises,  the  municipal  government  officials 
who  had  halfheartedly  promised  their  backing  withdrew.  Only  by  the 
slenderest  thread  was  it  finally  presented  at  the  end  of  January  in  1863. 
During  his  frenetic  search  for  a  patron,  or  better,  an  angel,  Morales  found 
only  one  secure  friend,  the  singer,  Roncari.  And  Roncari  told  him  he 
never  could  hope  for  a  great  success  as  long  as  he  stayed  in  Mexico.  "You 
must  go  to  Europe.  A  prophet  is  not  without  honor,  except  in  his  own 
country." 

The  European  trip  was  not  to  materialize  until  later,  but  Morales  for 
the  next  several  years  prepared  for  it  Ildegond*  was  his  second  opera 
produced  in  Mexico.  The  story  of  its  presentation  reads  like  a  saga.  An 
insolent  Italian  impresario,  Biacchi  by  name,  refused  even  to  consider  it 
unless  Morales  personally  deposited  enough  money  to  defray  the  entire 
cost  of  production.  Desperately  eager  to  bring  it  to  a  hearing,  Morales 
through  an  intermediary  reached  Maximilian  and  received  a  guaranty 
from  him.  On  January  27,  1866,  it  was  performed.  Three  months  later 
he  left  for  Europe,  where  he  remained  three  years.  When  he  returned 
again  home  he  came  as  a  conquering  hero,  because  he  had  succeeded  in 
the  meantime  accomplishing  the  supposedly  impossible — his  Ildegonda 
had  been  performed  at  Florence  (1869).  The  glory  that  supposedly 
shone  on  Mexico  because  Ildegonda  was  successfully  presented  at  Florence 
floated  over  his  head  when  he  returned,  and  during  the  remainder  of  his 
life  he  fended  himself  surrounded  by  a  halo.  Looking  back  over  the  years, 
Morales  in  1907  said  that  "his  own  triumph  was  a  great  victory  for 
Mexican  art"  Though  undoubtedly  the  three  performances  in  Florence 


THE  OPERATIC  NINETEENTH  CENTURY    199 

were  enthusiastically  received,  still  Morales^  dinning  the  press  notices 
into  the  ears  of  his  Mexican  confreres  after  thirty  years  alienated  even  the 
ones  who  had  borne  him  home  in  triumph  when  he  first  returned 

Even  as  late  as  1907  Morales  was  still  carrying  dogeared  copies  of  the 
notices  that  had  read:  "In  resum6,  the  opera  of  Morales  was  received  with 
enthusiasm.  The  composer  was  recalled  eighteen  times  in  order  to  acknowl- 
edge applause."  M  Morales  never  let  the  Mexican  public  forget  that  the 
Florentines  had  recalled  him  eighteen  times.  As  he  told  his  own  story: 

Upon  my  return  I  founded  a  school  of  composition  based  on  the  Nea- 
politan model.  Among  my  students  have  been  some  who  accepted  my 
assistance  gladly,  but  later  proved  themselves  Judases.  .  .  .  I  have  taught 
over  three  hundred  students  during  the  past  thirty-six  years,  among  them 
Ricardo  Castro  and  Julian  Carrillo.60 

But  after  calling  the  roll  of  his  "famous"  pupils  he  concluded  that  like 
the  ten  lepers,  only  one  had  returned  to  give  thanks  to  the  physician  who 
had  healed  them. 

Morales  wrote  five  other  operas,  but  only  one,  Cleopatra,  won  a  hearty 
reception  (Teatro  Nadonal,  November  14,  1891).  Like  Paniagua  he  be- 
came interested  in  founding  a  musical  dynasty,  and  after  heroic  efforts 
gamed  a  performance  for  his  son's  opera,  Colon  en  Santo  Domingo  (Te- 
atro Nacional,  October  21, 1892).  His  own  final  effort  was  a  one-act  opera, 
Anita,  which  told  a  rather  interesting  and  compact  story  of  the  famous 
1 867  siege  of  Puebla. 

MELESIO   MORALES'S   ONE   "MEXICAN"   OPERA 

Anitay  the  libretto  of  which  (by  Enrique  Golisciani)  was  printed  in 
1903,"  has  never  been  produced,  and  yet  because  of  its  brevity  and 
meatier  musical  substance  might  yet  be  successfully  presented.  According 
to  Morales's  younger  colleagues,  the  old  maestro  was  a  Bourbon  at  heart 
— he  never  learned  anything  new,  despite  change,  and  never  forgot  any- 
thing. But  Anita  proves  he  lent  verismo  a  willing  ear.  The  instrumental 
interludes  may  not  pack  the  emotional  punch  of  Puccini's,  but  they  are  by 
no  means  undistinguished.  The  choral  music  would  be  stirring  in  the  best 
Simon  Boccanegra  fashion,  and  the  solos  and  concerted  numbers  are  all 
extremely  well  written  for  voice.  The  high  notes  would  give  the  principal 
singers  every  opportunity  to  tear  a  passion  to  tatters,  to  very  rags,  to  split 


200  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

the  ears  of  the  groundlings.  And  in  the  very  torrent,  tempest,  and  whirl- 
wind of  passion,  grand  pauses  in  the  best  melodramatic  manner  would  chill 
the  marrow.*2 

The  plot  centers  around  the  eternal  conflict  between  love  and  duty.  The 
four  principal  characters  are  Manuel,  captain  of  a  band  of  Mexican  soldiers 
fighting  Maximilian;  Anita,  his  sister;  Rodrigo,  a  Mexican  soldier  in 
love  with  herj  and  Gaston,  son  of  the  French  colonel,  D'Auvray.  The 
opera,  which  is  in  one  act,  with  two  scenes,  opens  with  a  symphonic  prelude, 
a  "sinfonia,"  depicting  the  melancholy  of  a  deserted  battlefield  at  sunset 
The  curtain  rises,  discovering  a  well-appointed  room  in  a  Puebla  mansion. 
Rodrigo  (baritone)  enters,  and  calls  for  Captain  Manuel.  Battle  music  is 
heard  outside  the  window.  Anita  (lyric  soprano)  enters,  singing  of  the 
protector  who  once  saved  her  and  Manuel,  her  brother,  from  being  mis- 
treated by  a  band  of  ruffian  insurgents  during  French  hostilities.  While 
she  sings  of  him,  Gaston,  wounded,  knocks  asking  succor.  Gaston  (tenor), 
though  son  of  the  French  colonel  now  driven  in  defeat,  has  not  made 
known  his  identity  to  Anita.  She  only  recognizes  him  for  a  protector  wear- 
ing the  officer  uniform  of  the  French  army.  Anita  gives  him  asylum.  A 
little  later  the  Mexican  soldiers  return  victorious  from  the  battle  against 
the  French,  and  Rodrigo  boasts  of  having  himself  killed  Colonel  D'Au- 
vray.  Gaston,  hiding  in  the  next  room,  hears  his  boast,  and  indiscreetly 
rushes  out.  He  is  immediately  seized  and  escorted  to  prison. 

The  second  scene  discovers  Gaston  in  prison,  guarded  by  a  henchman 
of  Manuel's.  He  sings  an  affecting  romanza  telling  his  love  for  Anita, 
and  conjuring  her  in  a  vision.  Anita,  materializing,  comes  carrying  her 
brother's  cloak  and  cap  as  disguise.  After  a  declaration  of  undying  love, 
Gaston  accepts  the  disguise.  Anita  assures  him  she  can  mollify  her 
brother,  Manuel.  Gaston  then  leaves  in  the  disguise,  but  hard  on  his 
heels  Rodrigo,  himself  in  love  with  Anita,  bursts  in.  Finding  Anita  but 
no  Gaston,  he  immediately  apprehends  the  worst,  and  grows  insane  with 
jealous  fury.  Outside  a  shot  is  heard.  Gaston  has  been  detected  in  the 
very  act  of  escaping,  and  the  disguise  is  pulled  off  him.  Furious  at  learning 
at  last  how  Anita  loved  Gaston,  Rodrigo  pulls  his  trigger  and  shoots  her. 
Manuel  rushes  in  from  the  eaves  and  bends  prostrate  over  her  body  as 
the  curtain  falls.  Then  trumpets  blare  forth  the  Mexican  national  anthem. 
Duty  has  conquered. 

Gaston  during  his  prison  romanza  had  sung:  "Glory,  what  is  glory?  An 
illusion,  a  trap!  The  most  winsome  and  inspiring  realities  of  life  are  re- 


THE  OPERATIC  NINETEENTH  CENTURY    201 

jected,  while  everything  is  sacrificed  to  this  vain  illusion  of  'glory'."  But 
Gaston  is  proved  wrong.  In  the  end  the  lesson  is  brought  strongly  home. 
Glory  and  honor  are  everything. 

Morales,  having  offended  all  the  musical  powers-that-be  in  Mexico  by 
his  lofty  egotism,  never  succeeded  b  having  his  one  opera  that  might  have 
remained  in  the  repertory  produced.  But  long  before  he  was  pushed  off 
into  a  corner  to  die  unloved,  the  official  opinion  of  the  younger  generation 
had  been  expressed  by  Gustavo  E.  Campa,  a  director  of  the  Conservatorio 
Nadonal.  Campa,  whose  personal  feelings  Morales  had  ruthlessly  tram- 
pled upon,  wrote: 

Morales  was  not  and  could  not  be  a  revolutionary  in  art.  Educated  in  a 
school  which  in  his  epoch  preserved  an  intransigently  conservative  attitude, 
he  himself  adopted  the  conservative  attitude  as  a  matter  of  principle,  and 
adhered  to  it  with  all  his  soul.  His  conservatism  was  the  root  of  his  contro- 
versy with  the  younger  generation,  and  was  the  cause  of  those  frequent 
violent  encounters  with  those  who  professed  different  artistic  ideals.  His 
conservatism  provoked  those  bitter  efforts  of  his  to  denigrate  every  new 
artistic  idea.  But  he  attempted  the  impossible.68 

And  so  the  career  of  the  one  Mexican  operatist  of  the  century  with  four 
successfully  produced  operas  in  Mexico  and  one  successfully  produced 
in  Italy  ended  with  a  fizzle  instead  of  a  grand  finale.  At  his  peak  lauded 
by  the  great  Ignado  Altamirano  (a  man  whose  literary  stature  almost 
equaled  Juarez's  political  stature),  Morales  at  the  end  won  accolades  from 
nobody,  and  crept  off  into  a  hole  where  he  could  only  sit  by  the  wall  and 
tell  sad  tales. 

ANGELA  PERALTA:  "THE  MEXICAN  NIGHTINGALE"  (1845-83) 

The  most  spectacular  performing  artist  perhaps  ever  developed  in 
Mexico  was  the  magnificent  soprano,  Angela  Peralta.  She  starred  not 
only  in  the  first  performances  of  Melesio  Morales's  Ildegonda  (January 
27, 1866)  and  his  Gino  Corsim  (July  14, 1877),  but  also  in  the  first  per- 
formance of  Aniceto  Ortega's  Gu&ttmoftdn  (September  13, 1871).  The 
very  least  of  her  activities  were,  however,  her  creations  of  the  leading 
roles  in  Mexican  operas. 

Her  parents  were  impoverished  folk  from  Puebla,*4  and  her  musical 
advancement  entirely  resulted  from  her  own  amazing  musical  gifts.  She 


202  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

sang  a  cavatina  from  Bellini's  now  forgotten  opera,  Belisarius,  so  expertly 
when  she  was  auditioned  by  the  visiting  German  celebrity,  Henriette  Son- 
tag,  that  the  latter  rapturously  threw  her  arms  about  her  and  prophesied 
an  international  future  for  her.  Tutored  by  Agustm  Balderas,  Angela 
made  huge  strides,  and  was  ready  for  a  debut  in  //  trovatore  at  the  Gran 
Teatro  Nadonal  when  she  was  but  fifteen.  So  brilliant  was  her  success  that 
funds  were  given  for  a  European  study  period.  She  went  to  Spam,  was 
dubbed  "The  Mexican  Nightingale"  straight  off  j  then  traveled  on  to 
Milan  where  after  a  short  period  of  study  she  appeared  in  May,  1862, 
as  Lucia  in  Donizetti's  opera.  She  next  sang  in  Somnambula  at  a  highly 
successful  Turin  debut.  She  then  went  as  far  afield  as  Egypt,  carrying  all 
before  her.  Upon  her  return  to  Mexico  in  1865  she  was  immediately 
taken  up  by  the  Italian  impresario,  Biacchi,  and  patronized  liberally  by 
the  Maximilianists.  So  important  was  her  appearance  to  the  success  of  any 
opera  she  consented  to  play  in  that  she  was  awarded  a  20  percent  of  the 
gross  for  every  performance. 

After  marrying  a  cousin,  she  set  off  on  another  foreign  tour,  in  1867, 
which  took  her  to  Havana,  then  to  New  York,  then  to  Madrid,  and 
thence  to  several  other  capitals.  Upon  returning  home  after  this  particular 
tour  she  decided  to  form  her  own  opera  company  in  Mexico.  She  pro- 
ceeded to  barnstorm  the  entire  republic,  including  in  her  repertory  the 
following  operas  as  mainstays:  Lucia  di  Lammermoor,  La  traviata,  Lur 
crezia  Borgia,  Dinar  a h>  La  forza  del  destino,  I  furitani,  Ruy  Bias,  Norma, 
Somnambula,  Marta*  She  played  Lucia  according  to  her  count,  1 66  times, 
and  Somnambula,  122  times. 

Around  her  was  pivoted  the  Mexican  premiere  of  the  Verdi  Requiem, 
given  October  12,  1877,  "^  memory  of  three  noble  liberators,  Juarez, 
Lincoln,  and  Thiers."  She  premiered  her  last  Mexican  opera  the  same 
year,  Gmo  Corsini,  by  Melesio  Morales.  Her  last  public  appearance  oc- 
curred at  Mazatlan  on  the  west  coast  of  Mexico,  where  on  August  23, 
1883,  she  sang  in  II  trovatore.  There  she  contracted  yellow  fever  and  died 
at  the  age  of  only  thirty-eight.  Playing  in  the  orchestra  accompanying  her 
while  she  was  on  her  last  tour  was  a  young  violinist,  Juventino  Rosas 
{ 1868-94),  who  was  later  to  compose  a  set  of  waltzes  that  has  vied  with 
the  Blue  Danube  in  international  popularity — Sobre  las  Olas.  At  the  very 
hoar  of  her  death  she  married  a  paramour  who  was  but  one  of  many  shar- 
ing her  affections  after  her  husband's  untimely  death. 

The  scandal  of  her  free  and  easy  private  life  was,  however,  soon  for- 


THE  OPERATIC  NINETEENTH  CENTURY    203 

gotten  and  only  the  memory  of  her  astounding  voice,  her  wide  repertory, 
and  her  indefatigable  energy  remained.  She  was  not  only  an  executant  j 
she  was  a  composer  besides.  Her  Album  Musical  de  Angela  Peralta  ( 1 875) 
contained  nineteen  piano  pieces,  all  of  the  salon  type.  The  titles  betray 
them:  Loin  de  toiy  El  Deseo,  Vuelta  a  la  fatrta-,  there  are  a  schottisch,  a 
polka-mazurka,  a  romanza,  a  valse,  but  no  dances  identifiably  "Mexican.'1 


OTHER  MEXICAN  OPERA  COMPOSERS  OF  THE  NINETEENTH  CENTURY 

Besides  singing  in  the  premieres  of  two  Morales  operas,  Angela  Peralta 
also  took  the  part  of  the  Aztec  princess  in  Aniceto  Ortega's  "episodic 
musical,"  Guatimotzin,  the  first  performance  of  which  was  given  Septem- 
ber 25, 1871.  Ortega,  a  gifted  amateur,  pursued  the  career  of  an  obstetri- 
cian and  in  addition  taught  medicine  at  the  national  school  of  medicine. 
But  like  Borodin,  though  he  pursued  science  as  a  career  and  art  as  a  side- 
line, his  heart  was  in  music. 

Ortega  first  came  before  the  public  as  a  composer  in  1 867  when  two  of 
his  marches,  Marcha  Zaragoza  and  Marcha  Refttblicana,  climaxed  a  patri- 
otic program  at  the  Gran  Teatro  under  auspices  of  the  Sociedad  Filar- 
monica.  Twenty  pianists  sitting  two  at  a  piano  joined  forces  with  a  military 
band  in  both  marches.65  In  October  of  the  same  year  the  Marcha  Zaragoza 
was  published  with  a  picture  of  an  eagle  clutching  victory  in  his  talons  and 
fiercely  gazing  upward  at  the  words  "Cinco  de  Mayo."  ae  The  Fifth  of 
May  was  of  course  the  day  on  which  in  1862  General  Ignacio  Zaragoza 
had  repulsed  the  French  troops  before  Puebla,  after  which  he  reported  to 
President  Juarez:  'The  national  arms  have  covered  themselves  with 
glory." 

The  choice  of  the  last  Aztec  prince  for  protagonist  in  his  short  opera  was 
undoubtedly  well  timed.  At  approximately  the  time  Ortega's  opera  was 
premiered,  Alfredo  Chavero,  a  leading  literary  light  of  the  period,  was 
engaged  in  writing  a  tribute  to  the  Aztecs,  Quetealcoatl:  Ensayo  tragico 
en  ires  actos  y  en  verso.  The  salvation  from  the  French  had  been  achieved 
because  a  Zapotec  Indian  had  willed  victory,  and  a  grateful  Mexico  looked 
to  its  Indian  ancestry  with  renewed  eyes  of  longing.  The  whole  republic 
was  astir  with  resurgent  Indianisnu  In  order  to  glorify  Cuauhtemoc  Or- 
tega's librettist  grossly  distorted  history;  Cuauhtemoc  did  not  "prefer 
death  to  dishonor"  as  the  opera  would  have  us  beHeve,  but  instead  sur- 
vived three  years  after  the  fall  of  Mexico.  But  no  matter— history  or  no 


204  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

history — the  opera  served  a  patriotic  purpose,  and  achieved  an  enormous 
success. 

Ortega  was  lauded  to  the  skies  5  as  Luis  Castillo  Ledon,  the  historian 
of  Mexican  opera,  described  his  success: 

Guatimotzin  created  a  furor  j  Ortega  achieved  a  noisier,  a  more  spon- 
taneous, and  a  more  complete  triumph  than  any  previous  opera  composer, 
not  even  excepting  Paniagua.  .  .  .  The  press  glorified  his  achievement, 
heaping  praises  upon  him  for  his  "creation"  of  a  national  opera,  ...  His 
work  perfectly  suited  the  requirements  of  his  time;  utilizing  as  had  all  its 
predecessors  Mexican  operas  the  whole  apparatus  of  Italian  opera,  .  .  . 
yet  at  the  same  time  it  appealed  to  the  patriotic  ardor  of  the  audience  by  ro- 
manticizing an  Aztec  theme.67 

Whatever  small  flecks  of  technical  incompetence  were  discerned  in  the 
score  were  hastily  blown  aside  as  of  no  importance  j  Ortega  was  spared 
criticism  his  technical  inadequacies  would  surely  have  caused  simply  be- 
cause he  sheltered  himself  under  the  name  of  being  an  amateur. 

The  other  opera  composers  who  deserve  at  least  brief  mention  because 
their  works  achieved  performance  may  be  summarily  listed:  68  Miguel 
Meneses  (Agorante,  Rey  de  la  Nubia,  July  6,  1863);  Octaviano  Valle 
{Clotilda  de  Coscena,  July  19,  1863)  j  Torres  Serratos  (Los  dos  Foscari, 
November  11,  1863)  j  Leonardo  Canales  (Pirro  da  Aragon,  July  12, 
1864);  Miguel  Planas  (Don  Qvijote  en  la  Ventana  Encantada>  May  5, 
1871),  and  Felipe  Villanueva  (Keofar,  July  29,  1893).  The  operas  of 
Ricardo  Castro  (1864-1907),  Ernesto  Elorduy  (1853-1912),  and  Gus- 
tavo E.  Campa  ( 1 863-1 934) ,  properly  belong  with  the  story  of  the  twenti- 
eth century,  but  since  all  three  were  direct  continuators  of  nineteenth  cen- 
tury operatic  traditions,  their  works  may  appropriately  be  classified  in  the 
same  school  j  all  three,  Castro,  Elorduy,  and  Campa,  were  fin-de-sifccle 
Porfirians,  rather  than  pathbreakers  in  a  new  epoch. 

ASSESSMENT  OF  NINETEENTH  CENTURY  MEXICAN  OPERA 

Before  attempting  any  overall  assessment  of  their  artistic  merits,  we 
may  first  cpunt  the  number  of  composers  of  operas,  and  the  number  of 
operas  presented.  Paniagua  with  three,  Melesio  Morales  with  four,  his 
son  with  one,  and  seven  other  operatists.of  the  nineteenth  century  with 
oae  eajqh,  yields  a  total  of  ten  opera  composers  with  fifteen  produced 


THE  OPERATIC  NINETEENTH  CENTURY    205 

operas.  To  this  might  be  added  a  lyric  drama  of  the  pianist,  Julio  Ituarte, 
El  Oltimo  Pensamiento  de  Weber?*  if  one  is  willing  to  accept  a  loose  defi- 
nition of  what  constitutes  opera.  Adding  the  fin-de-siecle  composers  we 
have  for  the  Mexican  school  thirteen  composers  of  produced  works  and 
nineteen  operas. 

The  number  of  additional  composers  who  wrote  opera,  but  had  no  luck 
at  getting  their  work  produced,  must  undoubtedly  be  large.  The  ultimate 
value  of  their  efforts  can  be  judged  fairly  perhaps  only  by  a  critic  who 
sympathizes  with  the  esthetics  of  Italian  opera.  In  so-called  informed 
circles  in  Mexico  today  the  nineteenth  century  operatists  are  laughed  out 
of  court.  But  opera  "dates"  more  quickly  than  any  other  type  of  music.  Of 
all  Verdi's  own  immediate  contemporaries  in  Italy  itself,  not  one  opera 
composer  is  still  remembered  today.  A  convenient  proof  can  be  made  by 
listing  the  composers  whom  Verdi  called  upon  to  assist  him  in  writing  a 
Requiem  honoring  Rossini  5  of  the  dozen  he  thought  worthy  of  assisting 
him  in  his  commemoration  project — Buzzola,  Bazzini,  Pedrotti,  Cagnoni, 
Rica,  Nini,  Boucheron,  Coccia,  Gaspari,  Platania,  Petrella,  and  Mabellini 
— what  one  is  so  much  as  remembered  today  even  by  name?  If  in  Italy, 
the  home  of  opera,  only  one  composer  wrote  who  still  commands  respect, 
we  should  hardly  expect  a  group  of  a  dozen  or  more  Mexican  operatists 
active  at  the  same  period  to  be  judged  strictly  on  the  lasting  qualities  of 
their  music.  Dead  it  may  be  now,  but  in  their  own  day  and  time  men  like 
Paniagua,  Melesio  Morales,  and  Ortega,  each  in  his  own  way  helped 
solidify  a  cultural  consciousness  in  the  new  republic  without  which  Mexico 
would  have  been  the  poorer. 

Their  efforts  were  certainly  the  peers  of  any  United  States  operas  writ- 
ten during  the  same  period,  and  if  we  question  the  taste  of  their  music, 
at  least  they  were  malting  it  and  far  more  of  it  (proportionately)  than  was 
being  made  at  the  same  time  in  this  country. 

SALON  MUSIC 

The  amount  of  salon  music  published  in  Mexico  between  1870  and 
1900  was  enormous.  The  catalogue  of  A*  Wagner  y  Levien  Sues.,  for 
instance,  contained  works  by  103  nineteenth  century  Mexican  salon  com- 
posers. This  firm,  which  eventually  became  the  most  important  actually 
engaged  in  the  business  of  printing  music  in  Mexico,  had  branch  houses 
in  Guadalajara,  Puebla,  Monterrey,  Veracruz,  M6rida,  and  Tampico, 


206  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

during  the  late  nineteenth  century.  Founded  by  Germans,  the  firm  neces- 
sarily underwent  reorganization  after  the  1910  Revolution.  But  this  house 
has  been  but  one  catering  to  the  demand  for  salon  pieces  by  Mexican  com- 
posers. 

At  present  the  library  of  the  Conservatorio  Nacional  contains  salon 
pieces,  mostly  in  manuscript,  of  well  over  three  hundred  nineteenth  cen- 
tury Mexican  composers.  The  titles  do  not  stimulate  minute  examination 
— most  of  them  sound  like  the  pieces  in  Angela  Peralta's  1875  Album. 
But  the  mere  listing  of  names  shows  how  many  would-be  composers  there 
were  in  Mexico  during  the  Porfirian  epoch.  They  were,  moreover,  scat- 
tered over  the  entire  republic.  In  a  study  of  music  in  Guadalajara,  Mexico's 
second  city,  Jose  G.  Montes  de  Oca  compiled  a  list  of  45  musicians  who 
were  active  in  that  city  alone  during  the  last  decade  of  the  nineteenth  cen- 
tury. Not  all  confined  their  efforts  to  mere  salon  pieces  such  as  polkas, 
valses,  schottishes,  mazurkas,  marches,  potpourris,  boleros,  pasodobles, 
meditations,  and  caprices — although  this  class  dominated.  Some  attempted 
larger  things,70  but  for  every  one  concerto  for  piano  there  were  hundreds 
of  ephemeral  jottings.  Justly  to  comprehend  what  was  happening  in 
Guadalajara  around  1900  we  should  need  to  compare  it  with  a  town  in 
the  United  States  of  comparable  size  at  the  turn  of  the  century— Buffalo, 
New  York,  for  instance.  If  there  were  45  persons  in  Buffalo  in  1900  classi- 
fiable as  "composers"  no  WPA  history  has  brought  together  a  record  of 
them.  The  composer  in  Buffalo  during  the  latter  years  of  the  century  who 
is  best  remembered  today  was,  interestingly  enough,  Jaime  Nuno  ( 1 824- 
I9O8),71  the  composer  of  the  music  for  the  Mexican  national  anthem. 
Where  records  have  been  assembled  of  would-be  composers  in  this  country 
between  1890  and  190x3  almost  invariably  the  names  have  belonged  to 
individuals  such  as  Nuno,  who  had  emigrated  from  elsewhere,  Spain  via 
Mexico  in  Nuno's  case. 

The  most  conspicuous  success  among  all  the  salon  pieces  composed  in 
Mexico  during  the  nineteenth  century  was  undoubtedly  Rosas's  Sabre  las 
Olas.  Juventino  Rosas,72  who  died  in  July,  1 894,  at  the  age  of  only  twenty- 
six,  composed  his  internationally  acclaimed  set  of  waltzes  in  1891  when 
he  was  only  twenty-three.  Why  this  one  particular  set  should  have  carried 
his  name  around  the  world,  while  other  sets,  such  as  Amelia,  Das  Pensatni- 
entas,  Floras  de  Maragarita,  or  Ilusianes  Juveniles,™  though  also  pub- 
lished by  Wagner  and  Levien  and  therefore  equally  accessible,  should  not 
have  aroused  a  ripple  of  international  interest  remains  an  unsolved  mys- 


THE  OPERATIC  NINETEENTH  CENTURY    207 

tery.  Sobre  las  Olas,  moreover,  remains  perennially  popular.  As  recently 
as  1951  when  the  moving  picture,  "The  Great  Caruso,"  was  issued  by 
Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer,  Rosas's  Sobre  las  Olas  was  made  over  into  a  song 
for  Dorothy  Caruso  (Ann  Blyth)  to  sing  in  the  film,  with  the  new  title, 
"The  Loveliest  Night  of  the  Year." 

Rosas's  own  life  has  never  been  filmed,  but  since  he  lived  a  tempestuous 
one,  the  movie  possibilities  are  great.  A  pure-blooded  Otomi  Indian,74  he 
was  born  in  the  tiny  village  of  Santa  Cruz  de  Galeana  in  the  state  of  Guana- 
juato. His  father  brought  him  to  Mexico  Gty  before  he  was  six,  and  set 
him  to  playing  violin  in  a  roaming  family  quartet,  which  consisted  of  father 
Jesus  playing  the  harp,  brother  Patrodnio  singing,  and  brother  Manuel 
playing  the  guitar.  This  family  combination  broke  up  when  Manuel  was 
killed  with  a  dagger  thrust  during  a  love-quarrel.  Juventino  then  started 
playing  the  violin  at  San  Sebastian  Church  where  his  was  also  the  chore 
of  bell-ringing.  From  bell-ringing  he  graduated  to  a  first  violinist's  desk 
in  the  opera  orchestra  accompanying  Angela  Peralta  during  her  last  tour 
of  the  republic.  He  was  with  her  at  Mazatlan  in  1883  when  she  was 
stricken  with  yellow  feverj  although  but  fifteen  at  the  time,  he  was  a 
mainstay  of  the  orchestra. 

After  her  death  Juventino  got  back  to  Mexico  City  the  best  way  he 
could,  and  arriving  in  the  capital  with  no  funds,  his  own  father  now  dead, 
and  all  other  resources  gone,  he  enlisted  in  the  army  as  a  bandsman.  Un- 
able to  endure  the  rigors  of  military  life,  he  broke  his  enlistment  before 
his  term  had  expired.  He  found  refuge  in  a  friend's  house,  where  he 
turned  out  an  enormous  number  of  salon  pieces  for  immediate  publication. 
He  found  casual  employment  as  a  violinist,  and  fell  desperately  in  love. 
Rejected  because  of  the  instability  of  his  fortunes,  he  took  ship  for  Havana 
with  a  traveling  zarzuela  company.  Soon  after  reaching  Cuba,  the  com- 
pany disbanded,  and  again  he  was  left  stranded.  He  fell  ill,  perhaps  with 
typhoid,  and  died  a  short  distance  south  of  Havana  at  Batabano. 

If  one  were  asked  to  define  the  particular  qualities  in  Sobre  las  Olas 
which  distinguish  it  from  hundreds  of  Viennese  waltzes,  the  task  might 
prove  difficult.  Actually  all  five  waltzes  in  the  Sobre  las  Olas  set  are  cast 
in  four  eight-bar  phrases,  with  cadences  of  the  most  conventional  variety 
occurring  at  the  end  of  each  phrase.  Perhaps  the  secret  of  the  popularity 
lies  simply  in  the  winsomeness  of  the  tunes.  The  tunes  in  all  five  of  the 
set  show  his  fondness  for  dapping  to  and  from  the  leading  tonej  but  he 
never  seems  gauche  doing  it.  Whatever  the  ultimate  reason  for  Sobre  las 


208  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

Olas*s  popularity,  Rosas  deserves  remembrance  as  a  successful  competitor 
on  Johann  Strauss's  own  stamping  ground.  Few  of  the  many  millions  who 
saw  "The  Great  Caruso"  realized  that  the  most  sentimental  moment  in 
the  film  was  a  song  with  music  by  a  nineteenth  century  Otomi  Indian.  Be- 
cause his  waltzes  do  not  sound  "Indian"  Mexican  music  historians  have 
treated  them  cavalierly.  But  he  deserves  better  of  them. 

In  Ruben  M.  Campos's  El  Folklore  Musical  de  las  Ctudades  are  printed 
84  other  popular  salon  type  pieces  along  with  Sobre  las  Olas.  The  enor- 
mous vogue  of  all  this  salon  repertory  in  Mexico  during  the  latter  part  of 
the  nineteenth  century  proves  how  internationally  minded  the  townspeo- 
ple were.  Their  polkas,  mazurkas,  valses,  and  schottisches  were  all  inter- 
national dance  types.  It  is  no  more  possible  to  find  a  nationalist  soul  of  the 
picturesque  sombrero  kind  in  Mexican  music  in  salon  genre  (during  the 
epoch  of  Porfirio  Diaz)  than  it  is  to  find  such  a  Mexican  soul  in  the  music 
of  Paniagua's  or  Melesio  Morales's  operas. 

PIANO  VIRTUOSI  DURING  THE  LATTER  HALF  OF  THE  CENTURY 

The  first  internationally  renowned  pianist  to  visit  Mexico  was  Henri 
Herz,  whose  appearance  occurred  in  1849— the  same  year  Vieuxtemps, 
the  famous  violinist,  toured  Mexico.  With  his  ever  watchful  eye  for 
publicity,  Herz  soon  after  his  arrival  announced  in  the  newspapers  his 
eagerness  to  compose  a  national  anthem  for  Mexico,  which  still  at  that 
moment  lacked  one.  During  August  of  that  year  a  committee  of  literary 
experts  invited  Mexican  poets  to  submit  lyrics  j  the  words  chosen  were  then 
put  to  music  by  Herz,  but  fortunately  for  Mexico,  perhaps,  his  music 
failed  to  receive  official  endorsement.  If  his  efforts  at  supplying  music  for 
a  national  anthem  failed,  his  piano  playing  at  least  left  a  lasting  impres- 
sion. 

One  who  profited  most  by  his  example  was  Tomis  Le6n  (1826-93), 
who  later  became  the  first  "professor  of  piano"  in  the  1866  Conservatorio. 
At  his  house,  in  fact,  the  idea  of  founding  a  new  national  conservatory  was 
hatched.  After  the  triumph  of  Ildegonda  a  group  of  friends  met  at  Leon's 
house  to  congratulate  Melesio  Morales  on  his  success  j  as  Morales  later 
told  the  story  of  that  epochal  meeting : 

One  evening  my  friends  were  celebrating  the  triumph  in  Leon's  house. 
.  .  .  At  an  appropriate  moment  this  speech  was  made:  "Gentlemen, 


THE  OPERATIC  NINETEENTH  CENTURY    209 

the  triumph  of  our  friend  Morales  is  a  great  victory  for  Mexican  art.  For 
his  complete  success,  I  congratulate  the  composer.  .  .  .  But  in  the  midst 
of  his  good  fortune,  we  must  confess  we  have  paid  dearly  for  the  satis- 
faction of  having  overcome  the  animosity  and  avarice  of  a  foreign  im- 
presario. In  order  that  the  same  difficulties  may  not  be  repeated,  I  propose, 
gentlemen,  that  we  found  a  school  where  Mexican  artists  will  have  a 
chance  to  prepare  themselves.  .  .  .  Only  by  training  our  own  artists 
can  we  hope  to  create  a  truly  elevated  national  art.75 

Leon  then  became  the  first  to  propagandize  extensively  in  behalf  of 
Beethoven.  He  played  his  solo  sonatas,  and  in  conjunction  with  Agustfn 
Balderas  gave  the  first  performance  of  Beethoven's  Symfhony  No.  7  (in 
four-hand  arrangement)  at  a  Sociedad  Filarmonica  concert  on  July  27, 
1 867.76  If  this  should  seem  a  rather  late  date  for  Beethoven  to  be  driving 
an  entering  wedge  in  Mexico,  it  may  be  well  for  us  to  remember  that  not 
even  in  Rome  was  the  Eroica  Symphony  heard  nor  the  Emperor  Concerto 
until  the  same  decade  when  Sgambati  premiered  them  at  the  Sala  Dante* 
To  Leon  Aniceto  Ortega  dedicated  his  Invocation  a  Beethoven,  Opus  2, 
one  of  the  most  serious  Mexican  piano  pieces  of  the  epoch  (first  performed 
in  1867). 

Leon  in  1871  pkyed  a  Beethoven  "Gran  sonata"  (opus  number  not 
designated)  at  the  second  of  two  concerts  organized  as  part  of  the  first 
Beethoven  festival  concerts  in  Mexico.71  At  these  two  festival  concerts 
Morales  conducted  first  performances  of  the  second  and  fifth  Symphonies 
with  an  orchestra  of  86  players.  The  Beethoven  Violin  Concerto  and 
Leonora  No.  3  were  also  given  first  performances  at  these  two  concerts. 
Leon's  own  publications,  brought  out  by  the  Mexican  firm  of  H,  Nagel, 
run  mostly  towards  the  salon  typej  but  the  memories  of  his  pupils  em- 
phasize his  predilection  for  the  weightier  German  composers. 

Jose  Antonio  Gomez,  as  has  already  been  noted,  brought  out  a  series 
of  bravura  variations  for  piano  using  a  jarabe  for  the  theme.  Leon  was 
the  second  to  do  the  same  thing  in  an  Jarabe  National,  published  by  the 
firm  of  Bizet  Hermanos.  Julio  Ituarte  was  the  third  to  publish  a  series 
of  variations  on  national  airs  in  Ecos  de  Mexico.  The  progress  of  nine- 
teenth century  virtuostic  ideals  is  clearly  apparent  b  these  three— Gomez's 
in  1841  moved  in  Kalkbrenner's  world  j  Ituarte's  published  by  Nagel 
about  1885  in  Liszt's, 

Julio  Ituarte  ( 1845-1905)  78  was  Leon's  best  pupil.  He  mastered  the 
Thalberg-Gottschalk-Prudent  vapidities  current  in  his  epoch  with  effort- 


210  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

less  case  and  quickly  became  the  idol  of  Mexican  aristocracy.  Although  he 
lacked  Leon's  solid  interest  in  Beethoven  and  Mozart,  he  soon  became  a 
more  talked-of  pianist  simply  because  he  catered  to  public  taste  instead  of 
forming  it.  He  composed  a  number  of  fantasias  with  such  titles  as  these: 
La  Temyestad  ("The  Tempest"),  La  Aurora  ("The  Dawn"),  El  Artista 
muere  ("The  Dying  Artist"),  Las  Golondrinas  ("The  Swallows").  He 
also  transcribed  what  was  probably  the  first  Mexican  piece  of  program 
music,  Beristam's  orchestral  fantasy,  La  Prtmavera  ("The  Spring"). 

From  1868  until  1885  he  taught  piano  at  the  conservatory.  He  gained 
some  practical  experience  with  stage  work  in  1877  when  he  prepared  the 
choristers  for  the  Peralta  premiere  of  Aida.  The  conductor  of  the  orchestra 
at  that  premiere  ostentatiously  did  without  the  score  during  the  perform- 
ance. Noting  the  tremendous  impression  this  feat  of  memory  produced, 
Ituarte  resolved  to  be  the  first  Mexican  pianist  to  perform  everything 
from  memory. 

After  resigning  his  post  at  the  conservatory  to  gain  more  time  for 
composition  he  wrote  a  two-act  zarzuela,  Sustosy  Gustos,  produced  in  1887 
with  enormous  success.  The  music  for  this  operetta  whose  action  has  to 
do  with  the  adventures  of  an  office  worker  playing  truant  on  his  pretended 
saint's  day  has  unfortunately  disappeared.  A  second  zarzuela  in  three  acts 
was  less  successful.  In  1897  after  tours  throughout  Mexico  and  Cuba  he 
returned  to  piano  teaching  at  the  conservatory.  His  opinions  concerning 
Eaderewski's  first  appearances  in  Mexico  ( 1900)  make  interesting  reading. 
The  audience  at  Paderewski's  first  concert  was  extremely  slim,  and  he 
was  criticized  harshly  in  the  Mexican  journals  for  his  excesses,  and  his 
failure  to  play  the  written  notes  and  observe  the  written  signs  for  expres- 
sion. Ituarte  said: 

Genius  does  not  have  to  submit  itself  to  die  ferule  of  mediocrity.  The 
majority  of  pianists  should  recite  the  musk  strictly  adhering  to  the  written 
notes  and  die  written  marks  of  expression.  But  the  great  artist  makes  his 
own  laws.  .  .  .  The  Polish  pianist  must  be  judged  as  a  man  apart. 

,  .  .  Those  critics  who  abuse  him  and  deem  his  style  of  execution  un- 
pardonable .  .  .  calling  it  blurred,  indistinct,  strident  at  times,  and  often 
abounding  in  wrong  notes  .  .  .  are  approaching  his  playing  with  the 
wrong  attitude.™ 

After  It&arte  the  next  virtuoso  of  distinction  was  Felipe  VUlanueva 
( 1863-93)  "k0  B*  Rosas  was  a  pure-blooded  Indian.  VUlanucva's  career 


THE  OPERATIC  NINETEENTH  CENTURY  zn 

was  cut  short  in  his  thirtieth  year,  but  not  before  he  had  written  a  copious 
amount  of  salon  music.  A  specialty  of  his  was  cross  rhythms,  the  left  hand 
in  %  while  the  right  played  in  %,  for  instance.  Several  of  his  pieces  printed 
in  Campos's  collection,  El  Folklore  de  las  Ciudades,  possess  great  charm. 
Ricardo  Castro  ( 1 864-1907)  like  Villanueva  did  not  live  to  see  the  full 
fruition  of  his  genius,  dying  in  his  forty-third  year.  But  he  became  prob- 
ably the  best  piano  virtuoso  Mexico  possessed  during  the  century. 

RICARDO  CASTRO:  THE  MOST  "EUROPEIZANTE"  NINETEENTH  CENTURY 
COMPOSER 

William  Berrien  in  discussing  "Latin  American  Music"  once  spoke  of 
Castro  as  the  most  euroferzante  of  the  nineteenth  century  composers.80 
Castro  undoubtedly  possessed  exceptional  advantages  for  the  acquiring 
of  a  Europeanized  veneer.  His  father,  a  prominent  man  of  affairs  in 
Durango,  where  Castro  was  born  February  7,  1 864,**  was  elected  to  the 
Mexican  Congress  in  1877,  and  carried  his  family  with  him  to  the  capital. 
The  thirteen  year  old  boy  had  already  learned  what  there  was  to  learn  in 
Durango,  and  was  therefore  ready  to  study  with  the  best  teachers  in  the 
conservatory.  In  1879  he  began  composition  with  Melesio  Morales,  and 
in  1 88 1  piano  with  Ituarte.  At  the  Querdtaro  Exposition  in  1882  he  won 
a  prize  and  three  years  later  he  was  sent  to  the  New  Orleans  Cotton 
Exposition  to  represent  his  republic  While  m  the  United  States  he 
traveled  further  north,  giving  rentals  in  Chicago,  Philadelphia,  and  New 
York.  When  he  returned  to  Mexico  he  joined  with  Gustavo  E.  Campa 
and  Felipe  Villanueva  in  a  new  Institute  Musical,  a  competing  conserva- 
tory with  the  national.  At  the  age  of  twenty-five  he  had  made  enough  stir 
to  win  favorable  mention  in  Felipe  PedrelPs  Ilustracion  Musical  Hisfano 
Mexicana,  published  at  Barcelona. 

He  played  the  Grieg  Concerto  at  the  Teatro  National  in  a  concert  in 
June,  1892.  Sensing  the  lack  of  any  chamber  music  tradition  in  Mexico 
he  assisted  in  organizing  a  new  Sodedad  Filarmon&a  Mexican*)  which 
sponsored  several  notable  chamber  concerts  late  in  the  >9O>s,  He  played 
in  the  Schumann  Piano  Quintet,  the  A  minor  Tschaikowsky  Piano  Trio, 
and  in  the  G  minor  Rubinstein  Piano  Trio,  cooperating  in  first  perform- 
ances of  these  particular  works  in  Mexico.  In  1 900  he  won  a  post  teaching 
composition  in  the  Conservatorio  National.  Morales,  testy  as  an  old  eagle, 
venomously  tried  to  have  his  former  pupil  ousted,  bat  unsuccessfully. 


212  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

On  November  9, 1900,  his  opera  Atzimba,  whose  libretto  had  to  do  with 
events  during  the  Spanish  conquest  of  Michoacan,  was  given  its  first  per- 
formance. 

In  1902  the  Diaz  government  gave  him  a  grant  in  the  equivalency  of 
500  francs  a  month  so  he  could  study  in  Europe.  A  further  700  pesos  for 
travel  expenses  was  provided.  In  January,  1903,  Castro  arrived  in  Paris, 
where  through  his  connections  as  a  prizewinner  from  Mexico  he  secured 
a  performance  of  his  'Cello  Concerto  on  April  6.  This  particular  concerto 
abounds  in  excellencies.  The  performer  was  M.  Loevensohn,  a  Belgian, 
who  premiered  the  work  in  Brussels  shortly  after  giving  it  a  Paris  per- 
formance. A  copy  of  it  is  to  be  seen  in  the  Fleisher  Collection  at  the  Phila- 
delphia Free  Library,  and  a  glance  at  it  will  dispel  anyone's  idea  Castro 
was  still  unformed  as  a  composer  when  he  first  went  to  Europe. 

The  first  movement,  an  allegro  moderate  in  C  minor,  contains  inspired 
writing  5  the  bridging  of  the  first  and  second  movement  with  a  'cello 
cadenza  is  a  happy  device.  The  theme  varie  (p.  39)  which  serves  as  a 
second  movement  modulates  widely  5  the  variations  are  in  the  manner  of 
character  variations  such  as  Schumann  tried  in  his  Etudes  Symfhoniques. 
The  third  movement,  a  vivo  in  C  major  (p.  79),  contains  a  reprise  of  the 
throbbing  cantabile  theme  from  the  first  movement.  If  there  are  reminis- 
cences of  Schumann  or  of  Tschaikowsky  in  it,  so  are  there  reminiscences 
of  other  composers  in  the  Elgar  and  in  the  Dvorak  'Cello  Concertos. 
Castro's  would  make  a  welcome  addition  to  the  eternal  small  round  of 
'cello  works;  the  orchestration  is  brilliant  without  being  overbearing,  and 
the  'cello  is  everywhere  treated  idiomatically.  Castro  was  especially  well 
advised  in  his  use  of  register  contrasts* 

Two  days  after  the  'Cello  Concerto  was  premiered,  Castro  gave  a  piano 
recital  at  the  Salle  Erard.  The  newspaper  reports  of  his  Parisian  per- 
formances, one  appearing  in  the  April  9, 1903,  Le  Figaro  and  the  other  in 
the  April  15, 1903,  Le  Monde  Musical f*  extravagantly  praised  him  both 
as  a  pianist  and  as  a  composer. 

While  he  was  in  Paris  Castro  took  some  lessons  with  Eugen  d' Albert, 
who  had  already  done  Mexican  music  a  service  by  playing  two  of  Vilk- 
nueva's  short  pieces  in  his  European  concert  programs.  In  May  of  1904 
Castro  played  several  times  in  Belgium,  appearing  on  the  1 7th  in  Brussels. 
He  gave  the  first  performance  of  his  Piano  Concerto,  Op.  22,  in  Antwerp 
in  a  concert  on  December  28, 1904.  Since  the  December  concert  included 
also  the  'Cello  Concerto  again*  and  in  addition  excerpts  from  Atztmtay 


THE  OPERATIC  NINETEENTH  CENTURY    213 

Castro's  three-act  opera,  we  may  profitably  quote  from  the  review  which 
appeared  in  the  January  i,  1905,  La  Federation  Artistique: M 

The  composer  gave  a  masterful  performance  of  his  Concerto  for 
Piano,  a  dashing  and  effective  work.  .  .  .  The  Concerto  for  Violoncello 
contains  themes  of  profound  beauty;  the  orchestration,  attractive  in  the 
introduction,  reveals  genuine  mastery  when  the  solo  part  begins.  The 
level  of  workmanship  is  brilliantly  sustained  in  the  andante  and  in  the  wo. 
.  .  .  [The  'cellist]  projected  this  well-contrived  work  with  maximum 
effect.  The  orchestra  also  played  Castro's  Marcha  tarasca  from  the  lyric 
drama,  Atzimba;  the  march  is  founded  on  popular  Mexican  themes  pic- 
turesquely developed.  ...  At  the  end  of  the  conceit  the  closing  scene 
from  Atzimba  (for  soloists,  mixed  chorus,  and  orchestra)  proved  a  deeply 
moving  experience.  ...  In  order  to  appreciate  Castro's  full  worth,  a 
review  of  other  concertos  for  violoncello  might  prove  a  salutary  discipline; 
certainly  his  shines  out  with  peculiar  worth  above  even  some  of  the  better 
known  ones.  .  .  . 

During  his  European  tour  Castro  visited  Germany  where  he  was  deeply 
impressed  by  the  Bayreuth  festival  performances.  He  also  entered  into  a 
contract  with  the  Leipzig  firm  of  Friedrich  Hofmeister  for  publication  of 
his  krger  works.  Hofmeister  brought  out  the  Piano  Concerto,  both  in  the 
conventional  reduction  for  second  piano  of  the  orchestra  part,  and  also 
in  full  score.  Later  the  same  firm  issued  his  second  opera,  La  Ugende  de 
Rudely  libretto  in  French.  The  Mexican  firm  of  H.  Nagel  Sucesores  pub- 
lished the  piano  score  of  Atwmba.  Three  of  Castro's  large  works  therefore 
became  available  shortly  before  his  premature  death. 

Of  the  Piano  Concerto  it  may  be  said  that  its  merits  approximate  those 
of  the  First  Piano  Concerto  by  another  American  composer  who  was 
fortunate  enough  to  establish  a  German  publishing  connection  during 
his  European  sojourn,  Edward  MacDowell.  The  larger  literature  of  the 
piano  concerto  has  resulted  in  severer  canons  of  criticism  and  Castro's 
today  seems  less  worthy  of  being  revived  than  does  his  'Cello  Concerto. 
The  opening  movement  in  A  minor,  allegro  moderatoy  allows  the  piano 
a  rather  pompous  entry  with  a  dialogue  between  a  thunderous  octave  bass 
and  high  chords  in  the  treble.  The  cantabile  duet  between  piano  and 
clarinet  (C  major)  strikes  a  better  pose.  At  letter  5  in  the  score  the  di- 
minished seventh  chord  receives  a  too  thorough  workout.  The  recapitula- 
tion proceeds  conventionally  with  the  second  theme  decoratively  pre- 


2u  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

sented  in  A  major.  As  in  the  'Cello  Concerto,  the  first  and  second  move- 
ments are  bridged  with  a  cadenza;  the  piano  cadenza,  however,  conspicu- 
ously lacks  thematic  significance.  The  second  movement,  a  large  ternary 
form,  poises  itself  between  a  B  Major  andante  and  an  A  minor  allegro 
appassionato.  The  last  movement  is  a  lively  polonaise  in  A  major.  Its 
affinities  lie  not  with  Chopin  but  with  the  von  Weber  of  the  Polacca 
brillante.  A  grandiose  at  the  dose  of  the  last  movement  recapitulates  the 
second  theme  from  the  first  movement. 

From  our  present-day  vantage  point  it  seems  the  piano  does  too  much 
in  this  concerto  j  the  solo  part  too  uniformly  carries  the  musical  substance. 
Though  the  orchestra,  which  is  standard  in  size  with  an  added  flute  and 
English  Horn  part  but  only  two  trumpets,  seems  always  well  enough 
treated  when  the  piano  ceases  playing,  its  part  otherwise  than  in  interludes 
seems  supplementary  rather  than  complimentary.  The  modulations  are 
often  as  abrupt  as  Liszt's,  and  the  Lisztian  technique  betrays  itself  in  the 
figuration.  But  if  the  technical  difficulties  are  no  greater  than  those  en- 
countered in  other  fin-de-siecle  concertos,  they  do  prove  Castro  had  mas- 
tered the  conventional  pianism  of  his  epoch.  Even  reasonably  well  pkyed 
this  concerto  would  as  well  split  the  ears  of  the  groundlings  as  the  next 
one. 

In  September,  1906,  Castro  returned  to  Mexico,  having  in  Europe 
readied  his  opera,  La  Legende  de  Rudel;  at  the  Mexican  premiere  the 
libretto  had  to  be  translated  into  Italian  for  the  benefit  of  the  everlasting 
Italians  in  Mexico.  In  January,  1907,  he  was  named  director  of  the 
Conservatorio  Nadonal,  but  unfortunately  he  died  at  the  height  of  his 
powers  in  November  of  that  same  year.  His  death  was  interpreted  as  an 
occasion  for  national  mourning,  and  during  a  three-day  period  all  higher 
educational  institutions  observed  commemorative  exercises. 

Despite  Castro's  acknowledged  achievement  in  his  own  day,  he  is  today 
regarded  with  the  same  polite  indifference  in  sophisticated  Mexican  musi- 
cal circles  that  MacDowell  is  greeted  with  in  <cadvanced"  circles  of  this 
country.  Castro,  like  MacDowell,  now  has  the  reputation  of  having  been 
somewhat  dowdyish ;  the  style  of  both  composers  has  now,  of  course,  com- 
pletely run  out  of  fashion.  Although  Castro  wrote  two  symphonies  (the 
first  finished  in  August,  1 883,  and  the  second  in  1 887)  these  are  even  less 
frequently  thought  of  today  in  Mexico  than  is  MacDowelPs  First  Indian 
Suke  in  the  United  States. 


THE  OPERATIC  NINETEENTH  CENTURY    215 


RELIGIOUS  MUSIC  IN  NINETEENTH  CENTURY  MEXICO 

As  Mme.  Calderon  de  la  Barca  found  it,  religious  music  had  become 
syncretized  with  secular  music  during  the  turbulent  years  just  before  the 
mid-century.  The  popular  villandcos  and  motetes  which  continued  to  be 
written  during  the  years  of  struggle  and  Reform  laws— with  necessary 
changes  of  title  and  text—would  find  a  safe  and  comfortable  abiding  place 
beside  the  P.  P.  Bliss  and  Ira  D.  Sankey  specialties  that  crowded  the 
popular  English  hymnals  of  the  same  epoch.  In  the  popular  alabados, 
villandcos,  and  motetes,  published  by  Ruben  M.  Campos  as  representative 
music  of  their  epoch,  lush  thirds  and  sixths  hang  with  cloying  monotony 
over  their  tunes  $  the  harmonies  are  crushingly  banal  j  and  their  most 
exalted  moments  sound  like  "lifts"  from  tenth-rate  Italian  operas.  At  mid- 
century  when  a  new  high  altar  in  utterly  execrable  taste  was  installed  in 
the  metropolitan  cathedral,  music  had  catapulted  to  a  disastrous  low  in 
the  cathedral's  history.  But  worthy  musicians  in  priest's  orders  were  not 
completely  lacking  j  Agustin  Caballero,  first  director  of  the  Conservatorio 
Nadonal  (1866),  enjoyed  the  confidence  and  respect  of  all  informed 
musicians  in  the  capital  \  84  and  there  were  others  later  such  as  Jose  G. 
Velazquez,  trained  at  Ratisbon,85  and  organist  at  the  Shrine  of  the  Virgin 
of  Guadalupe  during  the  79tfs,  who  were  respectable  musicians. 

Some  few  cathedrals  continued  to  offer  a  bare  pittance  to  musicians  after 
the  sequestration  of  property  unsettled  the  revenues  of  the  church,  though 
in  the  main  all  salaries  ceased.  Even  the  Shrine  of  the  Virgin  of  Guada- 
lupe, which  remained  affluent  during  the  more  unpropitious  moments  of 
the  century,  radically  reduced  its  scale  of  payments  to  musicians  shortly 
after  mid-century.86  The  Mexican  bishop  most  outspoken  in  his  efforts  for 
the  resuscitation  of  musical  standards  was  Bishop  RafaeLS.  Camacho  of 
Queretaro  who  during  a  twenty-year  period  ( 1 875-95)  interested  himself 
in  reform.  Under  his  guidance  the  Queretaro  School  of  Sacred  Music 
was  founded  with  Guadalupe  Velazquez  as  director,  in  February,  1892. 
The  Caecilian  influences  transmitted  through  Velazquez,  who  never 
learned  to  value  Solesmes  principles  until  they  were  forced  upon  him, 
procured  rather  pale  results,  however.  His  own  compositions,  though  not 
operatic,  reach  an  opposite  extreme  of  complete  colorlessness.87  They  also 
notably  lack  any  contrapuntal  vitality. 


MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 


NATIONAL  AND  REGIONAL  DANCES 

The  jarabe,  as  we  have  already  shown,  suffered  the  interdict  of  the 
church  during  the  late  colonial  epoch.  But  with  independence  gained,  it 
became  the  most  popular  of  the  distinctive  national  dance  types.  As  con- 
ventionally danced,  the  woman  wearing  a  china  foblana  costume  and  the 
man  wearing  a  charro  suit  enacted  a  game  of  courtship.  The  woman,  play- 
ing the  coquette,  alternately  attracted  and  repelled  her  suitor,  using 
small  and  light  rapid  tappings  of  her  feet  to  encourage  his  suit  and  then 
turning  away  at  the  crucial  moment  Frances  Toor  describes  the  con- 
ventional ending  of  the  jarabe  thus: 

At  the  end  comes  "The  Dove,"  during  which  the  man  follows  his  part- 
ner as  she  dances  around  the  broad  brim  of  his  sombrero,  imitating  the 
courtship  of  doves.  As  she  stoops  to  pick  up  the  hat,  he  passes  his  right  leg 
over  her,  and  they  finish  by  facing  the  audience  to  do  "The  Diana."  M 

Various  regional  variants  of  the  dance  were  to  be  encountered  at  the 
close  of  the  nineteenth  century,  and  the  standardization  of  the  jarabe  into 
an  urban  dance  has  caused  the  true  jarabe-enthusiast  alarm.  The  traveler 
in  Mexico  during  recent  years  has  usually  seen  a  jarabe  robbed  of  the 
spontaneity  and  freedom  of  the  older  jarabes. 

It  is  necessary  when  speaking  of  such  Mexican  dance-types  as  the 
jarabe  or  the  huapango  or  the  sandunga,  to  discriminate  between  the 
dances  themselves  and  the  dance-music  that  accompanies  them.  The 
usual  descriptions  of  these  dances  say  little  or  nothing  of  the  music,  and 
a  great  deal  about  the  costumes,  the  feet  movements,  the  body  positions, 
and  the  visual  spectacle.  The  nineteenth  century  writers  on  the  jarabe 
were  just  as  prone  to  omit  any  specific  description  of  the  music  8a  as  are 
modern  writers.  In  1861  a  Spaniard  traveling  in  Mexico,  Don  Niceto  de 
Zamacois,  wrote  a  long  panegyric  of  the  national  dance,  but  even  he,  wordy 
as  he  was,  said  nothing  about  the  actual  character  of  jarabe-music.  He 
apostrophized  the  beautiful  Mexican  women,  said  Adam  would  return 
and  eat  his  apple  again  for  the  privilege  of  seeing  a  jarabe  danced,  called 
it  a  dance  to  enliven  even  the  cold  blood  of  senators,  invited  everyone  to 
come  hear  a  Mexican  harpist  start  the  jarabe,  and  declared  it  a  better  medi- 
cine than  any  yet  known  for  all  the  ills  of  man.90  But  amid  all  his  glitter- 
ing adjectives,  no  real  description  of  the  music  occurred.  As  with  Zamacois, 


THE   OPERATIC  NINETEENTH  CENTURY    217 

so  with  the  other  writers  of  the  century.  The  reason  writers  neglected 
to  describe  the  music  perhaps  arose  from  the  fact  there  was  really  so 
little  to  say  about  it.  The  music  was  fast,  in  %  or  %  usually,  with  16  or 
24  measures  in  each  son;  the  son  was  an  individual  tune,  and  when  the 
jarabe  was  danced  five  or  more  sones  were  sung  in  succession.  The  son 
with  1 6  measures  was  divided  into  two  parts  j  the  first  eight  measures  were 
instrumental,  the  last  eight  vocal  with  accompaniment  Those  with  24 
consisted  of  three  groups  of  eight  measures,  the  first  group  instrumental, 
the  second  vocal,  the  third  instrumental. 

Any  technical  description  of  the  jarabes  that  were  printed  would  em- 
phasize the  following  points:  i  The  rhythms  were  always  spirited,  with 
an  almost  equal  distribution  of  accent  on  all  beats  of  the  measure  2  Dotted 
rhythms  and  syncopation  were  frequent  5  Feminine  endings  were  of  ap- 
proximately equal  frequency  with  masculine  endings  (at  cadences)  4  The 
major  mode  was  almost  invariably  used  5  Tonic-dominant  harmony  of  the 
most  conventional  variety  underlay  the  melodies  6  Harmonization  of  the 
melodies  in  thirds  and  sixths  (especially  thirds)  was  the  rule  7  Within 
each  individual  son  no  modulations  were  attempted  8  Simple  modulations 
from  tonic  to  dominant  or  sub-dominant  were  frequent  between  one  son 
and  the  next  p  Keys  with  only  one  or  two  accidentals — at  most — were 
the  rule  10  A  flourish  and  climax  at  the  end  of  the  whole  series  of  sones 
was  usual.  The  printed  jarabes  were  almost  always  for  piano  solo,  but 
in  actual  performance  a  combination  of  harp,  string  bass,  small  guitar, 
and  flute  provided  the  instrumental  accompaniment  for  the  dance.  Bands 
comprising  such  heterogeneous  ensembles  have  commonly  been  called 
sones  mariaches. 

The  huapango,  a  dance  indigenous  to  the  hot  country  between  Tampico 
and  Veracruz,  capriciously  alternates  rhythms  between  %  in  one  measure 
and  %  in  the  next.  The  rapid  gait  of  the  beats  and  the  alternation  of 
accents  produces  an  extremely  agitated  and  nervous  dance.  The  word 
huafango  has  been  variously  derived.  Some  etymologists  believe  it  to 
be  a  corruption  of  the  Nahuatl  cuahpanco—cvaitl,  which  means  a  piece  of 
wood,  ipan,  meaning  on  or  over,  and  coy  place.  Others  believe  it  to  be  a 
corruption  of  Huaxtecas  de  Pango  (=  Panuco).  Whatever  derivation  be 
accepted,  the  dance  itself  is  mestizo,  not  Indian.91 

A  typical  accompanying  ensemble  would  be  a  violin,  two  large  guitars, 
and  a  small  guitar.  Another  rhythmic  characteristic  to  be  noted  in  ad- 
dition to  the  shift  between  %  and  %  would  be  the  frequent  sharp  accent 


218  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

on  the  last  eighth  note  in  the  measure.  A  point  of  harmonic  interest  is 
the  frequent  use  of  interior  tonic  pedals.  The  site  for  a  huapango  ordi- 
narily is  a  wooden  platform.  Men  and  women  dance  as  couples  j  the  men 
sing,  the  women  do  not.  Frequently  all  the  singing  is  done  by  one  soloist 
in  a  high  falsetto.  The  nearest  Spanish  analogue  of  the  huapango  would 
be  the  fandango. 

The  sandunga,  a  dance  now  completely  out  of  fashion,  but  once  popular 
in  the  Isthmus  and  especially  around  Oaxaca,  was  a  slower  dance  than 
jarabe  or  huapango,  resembling  most  a  dreamy  waltz.  This  dance  was  a 
couples  dance,  with  men  and  women  facing  each  other  in  rows.  The  word 
sandunga  in  Spanish  means  'fascination,  allurement,  or  gracefulness." 
The  music  requires  no  special  remarks  j  any  moderate  waltz  in  the  minor 
mode  could  be  used  for  a  sandunga. 


THE  NINETEENTH   CENTURY   IN 

Perhaps  as  desirable  a  way  as  any  for  gaining  an  overall  perspective 
of  nineteenth  century  musical  life  in  Mexico  will  be  to  set  down  a  summary 
list  of  weaknesses  and  then,  by  way  of  contrast,  a  summary  list  of  strengths. 
The  weaknesses  were  palpable:  /  Italian  opera  was  the  consuming  passion 
2  The  piano,  while  it  became  a  universal  household  instrument,  was  not 
valued  for  its  own  sake,  but  rather  because  it  was  a  convenient  maid-of-all- 
work  5  Chamber  music  hardly  existed  4  Symphonic  music  was  unknown 
outside  Mexico  City  5  Amateurs^  rather  than  professionals,  dominated 
musical  circles  6  Musk  criticism  of  the  type  known  in  the  European  capi- 
tals after  1850  never  made  any  appearance  in  Mexico  until  after  the  end 
of  the  Porfirian  epoch. 

The  counterbalancing  strengths  may  now  be  listed:  i  The  Mexican 
public  was  avidly  musical,  in  the  sense  that  high  and  low  professed  an 
overwhelming  fondness  for  music  2  There  was  a  large  enough  public 
ready  to  buy  piano  music—  even  if  of  the  salon  type—  to  sustain  five 
publishing  houses  in  business  M  3  As  a  matter  of  principle  the  government 
accepted  music  activities  as  entitled  to  subsidy  4  A  national  conservatory 
offering  free  instruction  was  founded  5  Though  modeled  on  Italian  lines, 
a  very  large  number  of  operas  were  written  by  Mexicans  6  The  prc- 
ponderancy  of  amateurs  was  desirable  while  opportunities  for  a  livelihood 
in  serious  music  remained  as  scarce  as  they  were  during  the  century  7 
Musk  was  regarded  as  a  worthy  vocation  even  among  the  highest  classes, 


THE  OPERATIC  NINETEENTH  CENTURY    219 

which  was  not  true  in  the  United  States  8  Though  beginning  with  the 
ubiquitous  Italians  in  the  saddle,  gradually  they  were  pushed  out  along 
with  other  foreigners,  so  that  Mexicans  themselves  might  occupy  such 
prestigious  posts  as  directorships  of  conservatories,  conductorships  of 
orchestras,  and  so  on. 

Weighing  the  weaknesses  and  then  the  strengths  we  feel  justified  in 
calling  the  century  one  of  significant  advance,  musically  speaking.  As 
diverse  as  were  the  different  colorful  political  leaders  of  the  century,  they 
all  shared  one  trait  in  common — a  belief  that  music  was  important  enough 
in  national  life  to  merit  government  support  The  United  States  has  not 
yet  arrived  at  this  cardinal  principle*  A  study  of  the  careers  of  Santa  Anna, 
Maximilian,  and  Porfirio  Diaz,  to  name  only  three  diverse  political 
figures  of  the  century,  shows  that  even  at  critical  moments  in  their  ad- 
ministrations they  supported— even  if  very  poorly — professional  music 
activities. 

'  Fairly  to  judge  the  century  one  should  compare  Mexico  with  other 
Latin  countries  of  the  same  epochj  as  was  pointed  out  in  relation  to  the 
dates  when  first  performances  of  Beethoven  symphonies  occurred,  even 
in  such  a  favored  location  as  Rome,  his  works  began  to  be  performed  only 
five  years  or  so  before  their  first  orchestral  presentation  in  Mexico  City. 

Finally  one  ought  also  to  remember  that  however  welcome  Diaz  made 
the  foreign  monarchs  of  finance,  during  his  regime  considerable  progress 
was  made  in  establishing  the  vital  principle  that  Mexican  musical  op- 
portunities legitimately  belonged  to  Mexicans  themselves.  At  a  time 
when  United  States  conservatories  vied  with  each  other  in  bidding  for 
foreign  directors,  the  Conservatorio  Nadonal,  and  other  regional  music 
schools,  engaged  Mexicans  exclusively.  By  1900  Mexicans  had  decided 
to  dominate  their  own  musical  life  for  better  or  for  worse.  For  worse 
one  might  say,  looking  at  the  caliber  of  some  of  the  music  performed  and 
composed.  But  in  the  minds  of  many  Mexicans  today,  this  "worse"  stage 
was  necessary  in  order  that  a  "better"  one  might  finally  arrive. 

NOTES 


I.  Alejo  Carpeatier,  La  music*  *n  Cuba  (Mexko:  Foodo  de  Coltnn  E 

1946),  pp.  65-71. 
i.  Juan  Bauriita  Plaza,  "Mwic  in  Caracas  during  tfe  Cokmial  Perkxl, 

Quarterly,  April,  194.3,  p.  212. 
3.  Gtullermo  Fariong,  Mustcos  Arg**ti*os,  jx  170. 


220  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

4.  Jose*  Ignacio  Perdomo  Escobar,  Historia  de  la  Musica  en  Columbia  (Bogota: 
Biblioteca  Popular  .  .  .  ,  1945)>  p»  33-  The  printing,  however,  was  to  have 
been  done  in  Spain. 

5.  The  Coliseo  Nuevo,  opened  in  1753,  was  actually  the  fourth  theater  erected 
in  New  Spain.  See  Enrique  de  Olavarria  y  Ferrari,  Resena  Histdrica  del  Teatro  en 
Mexico  (Mexico:  Imprenta  "La  Europea,"  1895),  I,  28-9.  During  the  nine- 
teenth century  the  Coliseo  Nuevo,  after  refurbishing,  became  known  as  the  Teatro 
de  Mexico  or  the  Teatro  Principal.  Late  viceregal  opera  was  produced  in  this 
playhouse. 

6.  Mary  Neal  Hamilton,  Music  in  Eighteenth  Century  Spain  (Urbana:  University 
of  Illinois  Press,  1937),  p.  20.  Gilbert  Chase,  however,  has  referred  to  La  Sefaa  sin 
Amorm  genuine  opera  (Musical  Quarterly,  July,  1939,  p.  300)  ;  whether  or  not  it 
was  sung  throughout  or  interspersed  with  spoken  dialogue  cannot  perhaps  now  be 
definitely  known  since  the  music  has  long  disappeared.  At  its  inception  an  aris- 
tocratic entertainment,  the  zarzuela  became  during  the  eighteenth  century  dis- 
tinctly middle-class  entertainment. 

7.  On  tonadillas,  see  Hamilton,  of.  cit.y  pp.  4.7—9,  5  3—70. 

8.  Two  other  types  of  musical  skit  that  were  popular  in  the  late  viceregal  theaters 
were  the  loa  (a  prologue  partly  sung  and  partly  spoken),  and  the  entr ernes  (a 
burlesque  interlude  between  acts). 

9.  Diario  de  Mexico  (I,  100),  October  25,  1805. 

10.  Ibid.  (I,  236),  November  25,  1805. 

11.  Ibid.  (I,  264),  December  2,  1805. 

12.  Ibid.  (I,  264),  December  2,  1805.  For  the  story  of  Siana  y  Silvio  see  the  Diario> 
November  18,  1806.  In  an  Arcadian  setting  a  lovesick  shepherd  courted  a  coy 
shepherdess;  she  stoutly  resisted  him,  however,  until  they  both  were  overtaken 
by  storm.  The  storm  over,  she  remained  in  his  arms  for  a  happy  ending.  It  seems 
that  in  the  December,  1805,  presentation  one  of  Medina's  daughters  played  the 
shepherd,  and  the  other  the  shepherdess. 

1 3.  Medina's  obituary  appeared  in  the  Diarioy  November  1 8,  1 806. 

14.  Luciano  Corte"s  was  primer  galan  of  the  Compania  del  Coliseo  Nuevo  j  the  mem- 
bers of  the  troupe  with  their  respective  functions  are  listed  in  Olavarria  y  Ferrari, 
o?.  «*.,!,  177. 

15.  Diario  de  M&xico,  April  14,  1816. 

1 6.  Ibid.y  April  ziy  18165  in  this  issue  the  salaries  of  sixteen  orchestral  players  are 
given  "para  que  el  publico  se  entere  de  los  costos  de  csta  empresa." 

17.  The  disturbed  political  situation  in  1816  contributed  to  the  ruin  of  the  Coliseo, 

1 8.  The  Gaceta  Extraordinaria  del  Gobierno  de  Mexico,  November  4,  1817,  car- 
ried notice  of  a  march  by  Corral  dedicated  to  Apodaca  in  the  most  servile  terms. 
See  Olavarria  y  Ferrari,  I,  192-3. 

io>  Criedam's  "grande  6pera  en  tres  actos  titulada  El  Solitario,  cuyo  heroico  argu- 
mento  esta  sacado  de  k  conocida  historia  de  Carlos  el  Temerario"  was  performed 
December  2,  1824,  and  repeated  later  in  the  same  month.  See  Olavarria  y  Ferrari, 
I,  215-6. 

20.  Diario  de  Mexico^  October  24,  1807.  ^ 


THE  OPERATIC  NINETEENTH  CENTURY    221 

21.  Ibid.,  December  16,  1806. 

22.  lbti.>  November  18,  1806. 

23.  Gazeta  de  Mexico,  July  2,  1793. 

24.  Ibid.,  October  21,  1796. 

25.  Ibid.,  September  12,  1786. 

26.  Saldivar,  of.  tit.,  p.  193. 

27.  Ibid.)  p.  194  (Gazeta  de  Mexico,  XII,  200). 

28.  On  the  Cuban  contradanza,  see  Carpentier,  of.  tit.,  pp.  96—107. 

29.  Guitar  melody  in  numerical  cipher;  piano  accompaniment  added. 

30.  Haydn's  Seven  Last  Words  long  enjoyed  tremendous  popularity  in  Spain;  in 
his  own  piano  arrangement  (Op.  49)  it  became  a  favorite  with  amateurs.  De  Falla's 
first  appearance  in  public  was  as  a  performer  of  this  piano  version. 

31.  Diario  de  Mexico,  October  24,   1805.  "Andres  Madrid,  blind,  will  insert 
native  tunes  in  the  playing  rolls  of  Spanish  musical  clock*." 

32.  Saldivar,  of.  tit.,  p.  270. 

33.  Ibid.,  p.  269. 

34.  Ibid.,  p.  276. 

35.  "Conspiracion  de  Valladolid  de  1813,"  Boletin  del  ArcMoo  General  de  la 
Naci6n,  July-August-September,  1932,  p.  472. 

36.  The  biographical  details  in  this  section  are  derived  from  Jesus  (X  Romero,  Jose 
Mariano  Elizaga  (Mexico:  Ediciones  del  Palacio  de  Bellas  Artes,  1934)* 

37.  Diario  de  Mexico,  July  3,  1809  (article  by  Renato  de  Mosvos). 

38.  Reprinted  in  Romero,  of.  tit.,  pp.  106-7. 

39.  Jose*  Mariano  Elizaga,  Elementos  de  Music*  .  .  .  (Mexico:  Imprenta  del  Su- 
premo Gobierno  en  Palacio,  1823),  p.  hr. 

40.  Ibid.,  p.  vi. 

41.  "Gothic"  was  a  favorite  word  of  execration  with  Eximeno  also. 

42.  Felipe  Pedrell,  P.  Antonio  Eximeno  (Madrid:  Union  Musical  Espanola,  1920). 

43.  Antonio  Eximeno,  Duda  de  D.  Antonio  Eximeno  sobre  El  Ensayo  Fundamental 
.  .  .  (Madrid:  Imp.  Real,  1797),  p.  21. 

44.  Romero,  of.  tit.,  p.  142. 

45.  Romero,  "Historia  del  Conservatorio,"  Nuestra  Musica,  July,  1946,  p.  176. 

46.  Ibid.,  p.  175. 

47.  Rossi,  who  after  his  return  home  became  director  of  the  Milan  Conservatory, 
arrived  in  Mexico  in  January,  1836.  For  his  Mexican  career  see  Luis  Castillo 
Ledon,  "Los  Mexicanos  Autores  de  Operas,"  Anales  del  Museo  National  de 
Arqueologia,  Historia  y  Etnologfa,  1910,  p.  327. 

48.  Bullock,  pp.  169-170. 

49.  Mme.  Calderon  de  la  Barca,  Life  in  Mexico  (Everyman  Edition),  p.  354. 

50.  Ibid.,  p.  338. 

51.  J.  J.  von  Tschndi,  Travels  in  Peru  (New  York:  Wiley  &  Putnam,  1847),  pp. 
59-60.  Tschudi  (p.  71)  remarked  all  the  ladies  of  Lima  "are  passionately  fond 
of  music.  Most  of  them  play  the  piano-forte  or  the  guitar,  and  also  sing;  bat  for 
want  of  instruction  neither  their  playing  nor  their  singing  i*  above  mediocrity." 
The  curse  of  mediocre  instruction  lay  over  Mexico  and  Pern  alike. 


222  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

52.  Mme.  Calderon  de  la  Barca,  p.  139. 

53.  Ibid,y?.  137. 

54.  7&V.,  p.  198. 

55.  Ibid.,  p.  286. 

56.  Ibid.,  p.  156. 

57.  For  biographical  details,  see  Manuel  G.  Revilla,  "Cenobio  Paniagua,"  Revista 
Musical  Mexicana,  II  (1942),  17*  #•>  *<>2  ff->  2l6>  234>  251-2. 

58.  For  biographical  details  see  Ignacio  M.  Altamirano,  "D.  Melesio  Morales,"  re- 
printed in  Revisit  Musical  Mexicana,  III  (i943>>  ">  fL,  35  ff.,  63  ff.,  no  ff., 
iSoff.,  206-7,  228  ff. 

59.  Melesio  Morales,  Resena  que  Leyo  a  sus  Amigos  (Mexico,  1907),  p.  18. 

60.  The  only  significant  figure  unmentioned  in  Morales's  catalogue  of  students  was 
Gustavo  E.  Campa,  but  Morales  called  him  a  Judas  also. 

6 1.  Anita,  words  only,  published  at  Mexico  City,  Tipografia  de  "El  Tiempo." 

62.  The  vocal  score  with  piano  reduction  of  the  orchestra  is  now  in  the  possession 
of  G.  Baqueiro  Foster.  I  am  much  indebted  to  him  for  his  kind  permission  to  study 
this  and  other  inaccessible  scores  in  his  private  collection. 

63.  Gustavo  E.  Campa,  Criticas  Musical es  (Paris,  I9ll)>  P-  332- 

64.  For  a  convenient  summary  of  biographical  details  see  Otto  Mayer-Serra's  article, 
"Peralta,"  in  his  encyclopedia,  Musica  y  Musicos  It  Latino-America. 

65.  Olavarria  y  Ferrari,  III,  16. 

66.  Facsimile  opposite  p.    140  in  Mayer-Serra,  Panorama  de  la  Musica  Mexi~ 
cana  .  .  .  (Mexico:  El  Colegio  de  Mexico,  1941). 

67.  Castillo  Ledon,  of.  cit.,  p.  340. 

68.  This  list  is  supplied  by  Romero  in  "La  6pera  en  Mexico,"  La  6fera  en  Yucatan 
(Mexico:  Ediciones  "Guion  de  America,"  I94?)>  PP-  52-3- 

69.  Olavarria  y  Ferrari,  HI,  56-7. 

70.  Jose*  G.  Montes  de  Oca  in  "Retratos  Existentes  en  la  Biblioteca  Publica  de  la 
Ciadad  de  Guadalajara,"   1924  (typewritten  essay  deposited  at  the  Biblioteca 
Benjamin  Franklin,  Mexico,  D.F.),  lists  a  Concerto  for  Piano  and  Orchestra  by 
Juan  A.  Aguilar,  a  "Seven  Last  Words"  by  Abel  Loreto,  and  a  Himno  Guadalufano 
by  Tiburcio  Saucedo,  as  examples  of  the  "meatier"  compositions  by  Guadalajara 
composers  in  the  pre-World  War  I  epoch. 

71.  Jesus  Galindo  y  Villa,  "El  Himno  Nacional  Mexicano,"  Andes  lei  Museo 
Naciottal  de  Argueologia,  Historia  y  Etnografia,  1927,  p.  75. 

72.  Consult  the  article  "Rosas"  in  Musica  y  Musicos  de  Latino-America  for  a  con- 
venient summary  of  biographical  details. 

73.  These  pieces  are  preserved  in  the  Conservatorio  Nacional  Library. 

74.  Ruben  M.  Campos,  El  Folklore  f&usical  de  las  Ciudades  (Mexico:  Secretaria 
de  Educacion  Publica,  1930),  p.  183. 

75.  Melesio  Morales,  Resena  .  .  .  ,  p.  13.  Dr.  Duran  was  the  orator  of  the  occa- 
***. 

76.  Olavarria  j  Ferrari,  III,  1 1.  A  four-hand  performance  of  the  Pastoral  (with 
Ortega)  »  also  recorded. 

77.  Ibid^  III,  IOO-I, 


THE   OPERATIC  NINETEENTH  CENTURY    223 

78.  For  Ituarte's  biography  see  Manuel  G.  Revilla,  "D.  Julio  Ituarte,"  Revista 
Musical  Mexicana,  II,  83  ff.,  1 13  ff. 

79.  Ibid.,  p.  115. 

80.  William  Berrien,  "Latin  American  Music,"  Concerning  Latin  American  Cul- 
ture (New  York:  Columbia  University  Press,  1940),  p.  157.  Berrien  thought 
Castro's  "Europeanization"  was  a  shallow  veneer. 

81.  For  biographical  information  concerning  Castro  see  Romero,  Durango  en  la 
Evolucion  Musical  de  Mexico  (Mexico:  Ediciones  "Gui6n  de  America,"  1949), 
pp.  25-30. 

82.  Quoted  in  Gustavo  E.  Campa,  Criticas  Musical es,  p.  340  and  p.  345. 

83.  Ibid.,  p.  348. 

84.  Guillermo   Prieto,  Memories  de  Mis   Tiemfos   (Mexico:   Libreria  .  .  .  C. 
Bouret,  1906),  I,  101.  Prieto  echoed  the  common  opinion  concerning  Caballero's 
standing  as  musician. 

85.  Ezequiel  de  la  Isla,  "El  Padre  J.  Guadalupe  Velazquez,"  Revista  Musical  Mexi- 
canay  I,  88. 

86.  The  basilica  orchestra  in  1835  included  8  violinists,  2  clarinetists,  a  flautist, 
bassoonist,  timpanist,  and  unspecified  numbers  of  trumpeters,  'cellists,  and  string 
bassists;  see  Colegiata  de  Guadalupe:  Directorio  'para  el  gobierno  de  los  ministros 
de  orquesta  a^robado  y  mandado  observer  for  el  muy  Uustre  cabildo  de  esta  insigne 
Colegiata  de  S.  M.  de  Guadahtfe  (Mexico:  Grabado  de  la  Guadalupana,  1835). 
When  this  "lush"  organization  was  in  danger  of  extinction  the  musicians  banded 
together  in  a  Caecilian  Philharmonic  Society  (1845),  attempting  to  control  prices 
by  musicians'  union  methods.  For  the  activities  of  this  musicians'  syndicate  or- 
ganized by  Jose  »Maria  Bustamente  see  El  Siglo  XIX ,  December  3  and  4,  1845. 
Unfortunately  the  musicians  succeeded  only  in  worsening  their  economic  plight, 
especially  as  far  as  church  employment  went. 

87.  An  uninteresting  and  pallid  Ave  Maria  is  reproduced  in  Revista  Musical  Mexi- 
cana>  I,  84—5  j  also  an  equally  correct  but  dull  Ave  Moris  Stellay  p.  86. 

88.  Frances  TOOT,  "Mexican  Folk  Dances,"  Renascent  Mexico  (New  York:  Covici- 
Friede,  I935)>P-  I**- 

89.  Antonio  Garcia  Cubas,  El  Libro  de  Mis  Recuerdos  (Mexico:  Editorial  Patria 
s.a,,  n.d.),  pp.  210-1,  and  elsewhere,  does  print  the  tunes  of  various  jarabes,  but 
without  offering  any  analysis. 

90.  Gabriel  Saldivar,  El  Jarabe:  Baile  Popular  Mexicano  (Mexico:  Talleres  Grificos 
de  la  Nacion,  1937),  p.  2. 

91.  Geronimo  Baqueiro   Foster^   "El   Huapango,"  Revista  Musical  Mexican*  I 
(1942),  I74-83- 

92.  Baqueiro  F.,  "Aportacion  Musical  de  Mexico  para  formaci6n  de  la  Biblioteca 
Americana  de  Caracas:  1882-3,**  Revista  Musical  Mexicans  II  (1942),  28.  In 
addition  to  Rivera  hi  jo  y  Cia,  H.  Nagel  Suceaores,  Wagner  y  Levien,  and  D. 
Carlos  Godard,  there  was  another  firm,  Bizet  Hnos.,  making  the  five.  This  list 
of  Mexican  piano  pieces  and  songs  with  piano  accompaniment,  reaching  a  total 
of  391  items,  reveals  the  high  concentration  of  publishing  activity  during  the 
early  years  of  Porfirio  Diaz's  presidency  (the  so-called  *Torfirian"  period). 


FULFILLMENT  DURING  THE 
TWENTIETH  CENTURY 


THE  LAST  PORFIRIAN1  DECADE  (l9OI-I9Il) 

Thoroughly  drastic  changes  overtook  every  phase  of  Mexican  political, 
social,  and  cultural  life  after  the  expulsion  of  the  eighty-one-year-old 
President  Porfirio  Diaz  in  191 1.  The  Mexican  historian  of  our  own  time, 
because  of  these  drastic  changes,  tends  to  see  everything  anterior  to  191 1 
as  ancien  regime.  The  music  of  the  latter  Porfirian  years,  like  the  painting 
and  architecture,  is  nowadays  brushed  aside  as  pompous,  dowdy,  and 
insufferably  inflated.  Composers,  moreover,  who  attracted  President 
Diaz's  favorable  attention  or  who  received  prizes  at  the  hands  of  his 
lieutenants,  have  all  been  sentenced  to  obloquy  by  the  succeeding  genera- 
tion of  revolutionary  composers  for  the  crime  of  having  won  his  approval. 

Late  Porfirian  opera  has,  in  particular,  supplied  an  easy  target  for 
revolutionary  attack.  The  operas  of  Castro,  Campa,  Elorduy,  and  others, 
have  all  been  lumped  together  as  "simply  entertainment  for  the  effete 
capitalist  classes,  largely  foreign,  who  ruled  Mexico  during  Diaz's  later 
years." 

Doubtless  Gustavo  E.  Caxnpa's  1901  opera  Le  Roi  Poete— dealing  as 
it  does  with  the  life  of  a  fifteenth  century  poet-king,  Nezahualcoyotl  of 
Tezcuco — does  now  seem  mawkish  because  of  the  way  it  sugar-coated  and 
glamorized  the  Aztec  past*  The  libretto,  in  French  because  Campa  adored 
French  music  and  because  no  angers  were  supposed  to  have  wanted  to 
sing  so  commonplace  a  language  as  Spanish,  seems  a.  strange  anomaly. 
And  doubtless  Ricardo  Castro's  La  Lcgende  de  Rudel,  also  with  a  French 
libretto,  but  sung  at  the  Teatro  Arbeu  in  Mexico  City  during  October, 


DURING  THE  TWENTIETH  CENTURY        125 

1906,  in  Italian,  seems  nowadays  to  have  been  a  too  unutterably  precious 
affair. 


"LA  L&GENDE  DE  RUDELn  * 

By  what  right,  one  asks,  should  a  Mexican  opera  have  concerned  itself 
with  a  twelfth  century  Provengal  troubadour,  Rudel?  According  to  the 
opera,  Rudel,  already  bound  in  spirit  to  a  distant  ideal  of  perfect  woman- 
hood, nevertheless  plighted  his  faith  to  a  French  maiden.  As  Henri 
Brody  (Castro's  librettist)  wove  the  story,  Rudel  after  deserting  the 
hapless  S£golaine  then  took  ship  for  the  East.  En  route,  however,  the 
Almighty  invoked  a  terrible  storm,  and  the  ship  was  like  to  have  foun- 
dered because  of  his  presence  aboard.  Less  grateful  than  Jonah,  Rudel 
when  cast  ashore  blasphemed  the  Eternal  Providence.  He,  however,  was 
picked  up  and  carried  into  the  presence  of  that  paragon  of  beauty,  the 
Countess  of  Tripoli.  In  her  presence  he  sang  a  golden-throated  swan's 
demise,  and  forthwith  died  at  her  feet.  She  then  summoned  her  attendants 
to  apostrophize  in  choral  song  his  departing  spirit. 

In  this  opera  Castro  abandoned  act  divisions  and  accepted  divisions  into 
episodes  instead.  Each  episode  then  was  subdivided  into  scenes  $  the  first 
episode  (two  scenes)  was  laid  in  France,  the  second  (three  scenes)  aboard 
ship,  and  the  third  (seven  scenes)  in  Tripoli.  Rudel's  part  was  written 
for  tenor,  Segolaine's  for  soprano,  the  countess's  for  contralto,  the  ship's 
pilot's  for  baritone,  the  pilgrim's  for  baritone,  and  the  messenger's  for  high 
baritone.  Three  choruses,  one  of  pilgrims,  one  of  sailors,  and  one  of -the 
countess's  women,  also  were  called  for  in  the  score. 

Before  writing  off  "La  Legende  de  Rudel,  however,  amply  as  a  period 
piece,  one  might  well  for  the  sake  of  historical  perspective  compare  it 
with  a  famous  American  opera  premiered  the  same  year — Frederick  S. 
Converse's  attractive  but  outmoded  The  Pipe  of  Desire,  first  given  at 
Boston  on  January  31,  1906,  and  then  later  heard  in  New  York.  This 
opera,  as  is  well  known,  had  the  honor  of  being  the  first  by  an  American 
produced  at  the  Metropolitan.  Even  though  it  received  this  recognition, 
however,  it  cannot  be  said  that  a  careful  scene-by-scene  comparison  of  the 
Converse  with  the  Castro  opera  reveals  the  first  as  in  any  noticeable  way 
superior  to  the  second.  On  the  contrary,  a  careful  inspection  of  the  two 
reveals  that  Castro  had  quite  as  much  to  say  musically  as  Converse,  and 
was  technically  prepared  to  say  it. 


226  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

Because  Castro  dedicated  La  Legende  to  Don  Jos6  Ives  Limantour, 
Dfaz's  minister  of  finance,  who  was  supposed  to  have  given  the  country 
away  to  foreign  financiers,  and  because  moreover  Castro  was  patronized 
by  the  "cientificos" — a  hated  political  group — Castro's  reputation  plum- 
meted when  a  new  political  party  came  into  power.  But  even  if  not  again 
produced  after  Diaz  fell  from  power,  La  Le  genie  deserves  a  better  judg- 
ment than  has  sometimes  been  given  it.  Moments  such  as  S6golaine>s  love- 
duet  with  Rudel,  or  the  storm  scene  with  its  thunderings  and  lightnings, 
or  the  languorous  orientale,  are  flavorful  music  in  the  same  way  Saint- 
Saens's  Fif th  Piano  Concerto  with  its  trip  to  the  Nile  is  flavorful  music 
Even  if  dated,  such  music  has  the  virtue  of  typifying  an  era. 


CAMPA'S  INDICTMENT  OF  THE  MASSES 

Campa  and  Castro  by  no  means  appealed  to  the  generality  of  Mexican 
audiences.  They  were  both  distinctly  aware  of  their  limited  audiences. 
Campa  was  moreover  so  unwise  as  to  set  down  on  paper  his  unkind  opinion 
of  what  he  was  pleased  to  call  the  brute  Mexican  herd.  When  later  the 
revolution  broke,  he  could  not  be  forgiven  for  his  open-mouthed  disdain 
of  the  commoners  of  Mexico.  In  one  of  his  more  forthright  essays  he  wrote 
as  follows  concerning  the  Mexican  public-at-large: 

If  as  a  conscientious  artist  I  am  obliged  to  defer  and  bow  before  the 
opinions  and  the  almighty  caprice  of  a  heterogeneous  mass  of  people, 
unequally  educated,  and  many  with  dubious  cultural  backgrounds — a  mass 
of  people  which  is  called  "the  public"  .  .  .  — then  I  protest  volubly. 
.  „  .  We  talk  in  high-sounding  terms  of  our  appreciation  of  the  classics 
.  *  .  of  Haydn,  .  .  .  — bat  his  works  are  never  performed  amongst 
us;  of  Mozart,  .  .  .  who  has  however  never  won  the  approval  of  Mexi- 
can audiences;  ...  we  speak  of  Beethoven,  ...  but  know  his  sym- 
phonies only  in  the  poor  four-hand  reductions  that  circulate  here;  .  .  . 
we  know  nothing  of  Brahms. 

I  do  not  blame  any  one  for  this  ignorance;  but  Ido  find  in  this  ignorance 
of  truly  great  masterpieces  support  for  my  contention  that  the  publk 
cannot  competently  decide  oh  the  merits  of  the  great  masterpieces.  .  .  . 
The  public,  in  die  broadest  sense,  is  after  all  not  the  friend  of  high  art  in 
Mexico,  and  cannot  pretend  to  be.  Opera  costs  three  pesos,  sometimes 
four  or  five.  But  bullfights  cost  five  to  ten  pesos,  and  a  box  at  a  bullfight 
eighty  pesos,  and  days  before  our  bullfights  the  public  in  huge  numbers 


DURING  THE  TWENTIETH  CENTURY        ^^^ 

lines  up  to  buy  scats.  Do  they  for  operas? — hardly.  .  .  .  What  the 
Mexican  public  really  likes  is  bullfights.8 

Campa,  director  of  the  Conservatorio  Nadonal  at  the  time  he  wrote 
this  indictment,  published  it  along  with  several  other  essays  on  Mexican 
music  life  at  the  safe  distance  of  Paris  (1911),  but  if  he  unfavorably 
criticized  the  Mexican  "public"  for  preferring  bullfights  to  operas  the 
Mexican  public  reciprocated  in  disliking  him  as  a  puffed-up  follower  of 
foreign  music  fads. 


JULIAN  CARRILLO  (1875 — ) 

It  is  customary  in  discussing  Mexican  composers  to  speak  of  Melesio 
Morales  as  the  "paladin"  of  the  Italian  school  of  composition  of  Gustavo 
E.  Campa  as  the  "paladin"  of  the  French  school,  and  of  Julian  Carrillo 
as  the  "paladin"  of  the  German  school.  Although  Carrillo  was  by  no 
means  the  first  Mexican  to  write  symphonies  he  was  the  first  to  win  per- 
formances of  a  symphony  of  his  in  Germany,  and  the  first  to  undertake 
an  extensive  period  of  training  in  a  German  conservatory. 

He  was  born  in  San  Luis  Potosi,  and  early  demonstrated  talent  for  the 
violin.  At  twenty  he  enrolled  in  the  Conservatorio  Nadonal  in  the  capital, 
and  studied  harmony  with  Morales.  His  progress  was  so  rapid  in  violin- 
playing  that  President  Diaz  in  admiration  for  his  gifts  presented  him  in 
1 899  with  an  Amati  and  nominated  him  to  a  prize  for  foreign  study.  The 
same  year  Carrillo  traveled  to  Germany  and  enrolled  at  the  Leipzig 
Conservatory;  he  studied  composition  with  Jadassohn  and  conducting 
with  Hans  Sitt,  and  pkyed  under  Nikisch  in  the  Gewandhaus  orchestra. 
After  completing  the  Leipzig  course  in  1902  he  transferred  to  Ghent 
Conservatory,  where  after  another  two  years  he  won  a  prize  in  violin 
playing. 

He  was  twenty-seven  when  his  Symphony  No.  i  in  D  was  first  con- 
ceived and  performed  (Leipzig),  and  it  may  therefore  be  classed  as  a 
mature  work.  In  it,  Canillo  demonstrated  a  gift  for  broad,  sonorous 
orchestral  writing  in  the  German  romantic  vein.  As  a  historical  note,  Car- 
rillo later  appended  to  the  score  this  bit  of  fact:  "This  symphony  was  the 
first  written  by  a  Mexican  composer  that  gained  a  performance  in  Ger- 
many} a  German  orchestra  conducted  by  a  Mexican  Indian  pkyed  it.* 
A  synopsis  of  thematic  material  follows: 


228 


MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

1  No.  /,  •}*•/«! 


f  ,    ljjii- 


r    fif  F— * 


tk*  Ite 


r- 


iff  ff.f  f   |f 

^ 


E=i= 


uj 


UJ   UJiiUj  tlf 


DURING  THE  TWENTIETH  CENTURY       229 

Dedicated  to  President  Diaz,  Carrillo's  first  symphony  was  enthusi- 
astically approved  at  its  inaugural  performance  in  Mexico  under  Carlos 
J.  Meneses's  baton,  July  2, 1 905.  Immediately  after  the  Mexican  premiere 
of  his  first  symphony  Carrillo  set  to  work  on  a  second,  which  awaited 
1912,  however,  for  its  first  hearing.  The  second  was  cast  in  C  major 5  after 
a  long  slow  introduction,  longer  than  that  of  his  first  symphony,  the 
allegro  started  with  this  theme: 


The  year  before  introducing  his  second  symphony  Carrillo  was  chosen 
the  Mexican  delegate  to  the  International  Music  Congress,  and  attended 
sessions  at  Rome  and  London.  Upon  his  return  he  occupied  for  a  time  a 
central  position  in  Mexican  musical  life.  Conductor  of  what  was  called  a 
Beethoven  orchestra,  he  was  in  the  same  kind  of  advantageous  limelight 
which  later  surrounded  Chavez*  Like  Chavez  he  was  able  to  go  to  New 
York  and  there  to  divulge  his  own  music,  though  he  did  not  conduct  as 
prestigious  orchestras  as  Chavez  was  later  invited  to  conduct  in  the  United 
States.  During  the  1916-17  season,  however,  Carrillo  was  sufficiently 
active  in  and  about  New  York  to  spread  his  name  in  the  metropolitan 
dailies. 

In  1922  he  wrote  his  first  five  pieces  in  a  new  atonal  style  calling  for 
microtones.  Signaling  the  advent  of  a  new  musical  style,  Carrillo  called 
his  first  piece  in  microtones,  "Prelude  to  Columbus."  Canillo's  name  for 
his  microtone  system  has  been  Sonido  Trecey  which  means  ccthirteenth 
sound."  The  significance  of  Carrillo's  name  for  his  new  microtone  style 
is  easily  explained:  twelve  chromatic  intervals  divided  the  octave  in  the 


23o  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

old  system,  but  in  his  new  system  of  smaller  divisions,  "in-between"  notes 
must  be  inserted  into  the  conventional  chromatic  scale.  Any  "in-between" 
note  inserted  between  successive  notes  in  the  twelve-note  chromatic  scale 
is  a  "thirteenth"  sound.  Hence  the  term,  Sonido  Trace. 

Alois  Haba  in  Czechoslovakia  has  been  another  twentieth  century  com- 
poser who  has  interested  himself  in  microtones;  but  since  Carrillo  feels 
he  pioneered  before  Haba,  and  in  fact  dates  the  inception  of  his  interest 
in  microtones  as  early  as  1895,  he  does  not  wish  to  be  spoken  of  in  the 
same  breath  with  Haba.  The  notation  of  microtones,  in  particular,  Car- 
rillo feels  to  have  been  a  fresh  discovery  of  his  own.  He  has  honestly  con- 
sidered himself  an  original  inventor  of  a  new  system  of  music  notation, 
a  system  of  notation  by  numbers  instead  of  notes  on  a  five-line  staff. 

His  system  of  number  notation  works  like  this:  the  note  C  is  repre- 
sented by  the  numeral  0;  C  %  or  D  b  by  the  numeral  8;  D  by  165  D  J 
or  E  1)  by  24$  E  by  325  F  by  405  F  J  or  G  [>  by  485  and  so  forth  on  up 
the  chromatic,  scale.  In-between  pitches  are  represented  by  in-between 
numerals.  Carrillo  feels  that  for  practical  purposes  "sixteenth  of  tones" 
represent  the  ultimate  refinement  in  pitch  distinction.  The>  different  oc- 
taves in  which  a  particular  note  may  be  heard  are  in  Carrillo's  system 
indicated  by  a  system  of  dashes  above,  below,  or  through  the  numeral 
used  to  designate  the  note  in  question.  A  red  line  drawn  horizontally 
across  the  page  in  Carrillo's  system  represents  middle  C. 

As  anyone  familiar  with  organ  tablatures  already  knows,  the  system  of 
using  numerals  to  designate  notes  is  a  very  old  idea  5  Cabezon  and  Correa 
de  Arauxo  used  it.  What  is  new  about  Carrillo's  idea  is  the  potentiality 
his  system  affords  for  writing  "in-between"  pitches.  He  feels  that  the 
modern  development  of  electronic  instruments,  where  pitches  differing 
by  only  a  single  vibration  can  if  desired  be  produced,  opens  up  new 
musical  vistas.  As  yet  no  electronic  instrument  producing  "in-between" 
pitches  (except  the  theremin)  has  been  widely  exploited.  But  in  time, 
Carrillo  has  felt,  the  electronic  manufacturers  will  commercially  produce 
instruments  capable  of  sounding  middle  C  at  256  vibrations  per  second,  a 
sharper  C  only  a  cent  of  a  tone  higher,  another  two  cents  higher,  and  so 
on.  When  this  development  occurs,  he  feels  his  system  of  numeral  nota- 
tion will  prove  indispensable. 

Carrillo  has  elaborately  expounded  his  ideas  on  notation  in  a  Teoria 
Logic*,  published  by  him  in  a  handsome  private  edition.  His  disciples  in 
Mexico  regard  his  discoveries  with  much  the  same  reverence  that  Schill- 


DURING  THE  TWENTIETH  CENTURY        231 

inger's  disciples  in  the  United  States  regard  the  Schillinger  system.  Car- 
rillo's  "Sonido  13"  music  has,  moreover,  not  gone  completely  unper- 
formed. In  1931  Leopold  Stokowski  interested  himself  sufficiently  in 
"Sonido  13"  music  to  program  Carrillo's  Preludio  a  Colon-,  again  in 
1951  Stokowski  returned  to  Carrillo's  music,  giving  a  first  performance 
of  Hortzontes  in  Pittsburgh  on  November  30.  Later  in  the  same  season 
he  played  Horizontes  in  Baltimore  and  Washington  also;  Carrillo  came 
to  Washington  to  acknowledge  applause  at  the  latter  performance. 

While  devoting  himself  to  the  writing  of  music  in  fractional  tones, 
Carrillo  has  not  puristically  eschewed  other  more  conventional  types  of 
composition.  In  the  Fleisher  Collection  at  the  Free  Public  Library  in 
Philadelphia  are  deposited  scores  of  Carrillo's  tone-poem  Penumbras: 
En  el  Paseo  de  la  Reforma  ( 1930),  and  Xochimiko  ( 1935).  Penumbras 
("Half-shadows  along  the  Reforma  boulevard")  depicts  in  impressionist 
manner  a  twilight  stroll  along  Mexico  City's  most  famous  boulevard  An 
English  horn  accompanied  by  muted  strings  laced  with  harp  and  celeste 
filigree  discloses  the  ambulatory  theme.  Xochimilco  picturizes  the  famous 
floating  gardens  every  tourist  sees  while  visiting  Mexico.  Instead  of  the 
whole-tone  scale  cliches  so  rampant  in  impressionist  music,  Carrillo  builds 
his  own  arbitrary  scales  in  both  these  pieces.  In  XoMrmlco  he  exploits  a 
seven-note  scale  with  two  augmented  seconds.  The  first  theme  employs  a 
C-sharp  minor  scale,  but  with  a  flatted  fifth  degree;  the  second  theme 
employs  an  F-minor  scale,  but  also  with  a  flatted  fifth  degree. 

Carrillo,  unlike  many  composers,  has  had  time  to  devote  himself  to 
various  successful  business  enterprises,  and  therefore  has  not  been  reduced 
to  shameful  penury  in  old  age.  In  the  1920*8  he  was  able  to  relinquish 
his  Conservatorio  Nacional  teaching  connection  without  financial  detri- 
ment to  himself.  He  has  also  been  able  to  offer  his  children  exceptional 
educational  advantages.  His  daughter  has  been  a  keyboard  exponent  of 
certain  microtone  pieces  and  has  traveled  to  Europe  twice  with  her  father 
in  order  to  play  his  works  at  various  international  music  congresses. 

MANUEL  M.  PONCE  (1882-1948) 

Ponce,  internationally  renowned  as  the  composer  of  the  song,  EstrelUtay 
like  Carrillo  also  grew  to  maturity  during  the  Porfirian  epoch.  His  early 
compositions  were  as  unlike  his  later  ones  as  Stravinsky's  UQiseau  de  Feu 
is  unlike  Orpheus.  Ponce's  growth  was  perhaps  a  more  organic  growth 


232  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

than  Carrillo's,  and  unlike  the  latter,  he  attempted  no  overthrow  of  con- 
ventional notation  procedures. 

Since  his  death  in  1948,  the  Mexican  public  has  increasingly  taken 
Ponce  to  heart,  and  at  present  his  "little  star"  (Estrellita  means  "little 
star")  has  grown  into  a  great  one,  so  that  he  now  shines  perhaps  as  the 
major  star  of  Mexican  music  before  Chavez.  Honoring  his  memory,  a 
room  for  chamber  concerts  in  the  Mexico  City  National  Palace  of  Fine 
Arts  has  been  renamed  Sa la  Manuel  M.  Ponce.  Ponce's  works,  moreover, 
continue  to  receive  posthumous  publication.  In  the  second  quarterly  issue 
of  Nuestra  M6$icay  1950  series,  Dr.  Jesfis  Romero,  eminent  musicogra- 
pher,  devoted  almost  forty  pages  to  a  documentary  record  of  the  maestro's 
private  and  public  life.  The  authenticity  of  every  document  was  further- 
more checked  by  submitting  the  article  to  Ponce's  widow,  Senora  Clema 
M.  de  Ponce,  for  any  necessary  corrections.  From  an.  inspection  of  the 
data  assembled  by  Dr.  Romero  we  can  peer  into  the  inner  circumstances 
of  Ponce's  lifej  the  following  summary  is  an  attempt  at  abridging 
Romero's  forty-page  article. 

Ponce's  father,  Felipe  de  Jesus  Ponce,  had  been  a  Maximilianist,  and 
therefore  was  in  temporary  exile  from  his  home  city  when  his  famous-to-be 
son,  a  twelfth  child,  was  born  at  Fresnillo,  Zacatccas,  December  8,  1882. 
The  following  year,  however,  the  family  was  able  to  return  to  Aguascali- 
entes,  a  town  some  three  hundred  miles  northwest  of  the  capital,  which 
for  Ponce,  despite  his  later  international  wanderings,  always  remained 
"home."  At  the  age  of  nine  the  child  composed  his  first  piece,  La  Marcha 
del  Saramfion  ("The  March  of  Measles"),  written  during  an  attack  of 
the  childhood  disease.  At  ten  he  started  singing  in  a  boy  choir  at  San  Diego 
Church  in  Aguascalientes^  where  his  brother  (the  third  child)  was  priest. 
At  thirteen  he  became  assistant  organist,  and  at  fifteen  organist  in  the  same 
church.  At  eighteen  he  came  to  Mexico  City  and  spent  a  year  studying  at 
the,Conservatorio.Nadional,  but  was  dissatisfied  with  the  instruction  he 
received.  He  returned  to  Aguascalientes,  and  at  twenty  began  teaching 
solftge  in  the  local  conservatory  ("academy  of  music").  The  principal 
event  in  1903  was  a  December  concert  in  his  home  town  during  which 
he  performed  various  Bagatelles  he  had  written  before  a  group  of  visiting 
notables  from  the  capital. 

At  twenty-two  he  began  his  wider  wanderings.  He  played  in  1904  in 
Guadalajara,  San  Luis  Potosi,  and  St  Louis,  Missouri  j  and  then  took  ship 
at  New  York  in  November  of  that  year  bound  for  Europe.  When  in  Italy 


DURING  THE  TWENTIETH  CENTURY        233 

he  applied  to  Marco  Enrico  Bossi  for  tuition,  but  Bossi  refused  him,  say- 
ing: "Your  style  is  too  old-fashioned  5  your  music  would  have  been  up- 
to-date  in  1 830  but  not  in  1 905.  You  have  talent  but  have  been  improperly 
trained."  Ponce  then  studied  with  Luigi  Torchi  in  the  Liceo  Musicale  at 
Bologna.  After  a  year  in  Italy  he  went  on  to  Germany,  and  in  1906  pkyed 
the  Bach  D  major  Partita  in  a  June  18  recital  at  the  Beethoven  Hall  in 
Berlin.  At  the  end  of  1906  he  was  ready  to  return  to  Mexico  j  but  his 
German  friends  who  delighted  in  German  folk-song  insisted  he  waste  no 
further  time  in  bringing  to  light  the  folk-music  treasures  of  Mexico, 
urging  him  not  too  exclusively  to  devote  himself  to  the  "European 
classics." 

Back  in  Aguascalientes  he  set  up  a  private  studio,  but  in  July,  1908, 
was  called  to  fill  a  temporary  teaching  position  in  the  Conservatorio 
Nadonal  at  Mexico  City.  During  1 909  he  toured  with  the  Saloma  Quartet, 
alternating  his  piano  solos  with  their  string  quartets,  or  cooperating  in 
such  a  number  as  the  Dvorak  Quintet  In  January,  1910,  he  founded  a 
piano  studio  in  Mexico  City.  Among  his  first  pupils  was  Carlos  Chavez, 
who  was  eleven  in  1 9 10.  Chavez  studied  piano  four  years  with  Ponce,  and 
preserved  a  filial  affection  for  him  throughout  life.  Ponce  pioneered  in 
teaching  Debussy  in  Mexico,  and  the  first  all-Debussy  program  was  given 
by  Ponce's  pupils  on  June  24,  1912.  Chavez,  now  thirteen,  opened  the 
program  with  Claw  de  lune. 

The  first  large  work  of  Ponce  was  his  Piano  Concerto,  which  he  pre- 
miered on  July  7, 1912,  at  the  opening  concert  of  the  Qrquesta  Beethoven 
series  in  the  Teatro  Arbeu,  Julian  Carrillo  conducting.  Two  days  later 
at  an  all-Ponce  concert  in  the  same  Teatro  Arbeu  the  concerto  was  repeated 
with  Ponce  again  at  the  piano,  and  Carrillo  conducting.  During  1912  and 
'13  Ponce  was  busy  composing  his  inimitable  amciones  mexicanas;  Mar- 
chita  el  Alma  appeared  in  December,  1913,  and  the  group  from  which 
Estrellita  is  extracted  in  February,  1914.  During  these  revolutionary 
years  Ponce  tried  his  hand  not  only  at  folk-song  arrangements,  but  also 
at  essays  in  behalf  of  a  native  folk-musk  development  In  one  essay  he 
wrote: 

Our  salons  welcomed  only  foreign  music  in  1910,  such  as  Italianate 
romanzas  and  operatic  arias  transcribed  for  piano.  Their  doors  remained 
resolutely  closed  to  the  cattcion  mexicana  until  at  last  revolutionary  cannon 
in  the  north  announced  the  imminent  destruction  of  the  old  order.  .  .  . 
Amid  the  smoke  and  blood  of  battle  were  born  the  stirring  revolutionary 


234  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

songs  soon  to  be  carried  throughout  the  length  and  breadth  of  the  land. 
AdcKtay  Valentma,  and  La  Cucorachay  were  typical  revolutionary  songs 
soon  popularized  throughout  the  republic.  Nationalism  captured  music  at 
last.  Old  songs,  almost  forgotten,  but  truly  reflecting  the  national  spirit, 
were  revived,  and  new  melodies  for  new  corridos  were  composed.  Singers 
traveling  about  through  the  republic  spread  far  and  wide  the  new  national- 
ist song;  everywhere  the  idea  gained  impetus  that  the  republic  should  have 
its  own  musical  art  faithfully  mirroring  its  own  soul.4 

Ponce  went  to  Cuba  in  March,  1915,  and  remained  there  until  June, 
1917;  occasional  interruptions  included  a  trip  to  New  York  where  he 
gave  an  Aeolian  Hall  recital  of  his  own  works  on  March  27,  1916.  As 
usually  occurs  in  New  York  when  a  previously  unknown  person  attempts 
a  program  of  original  works,  scant  attention  was  paid  Ponce's  Aeolian 
Hall  concert.  For  one  or  another  reasons  Ponce  in  later  life  regretted  his 
United  States  associations.  His  Aeolian  program  occurred  in  March,  and 
the  next  June  (1916)  he  offered  his  services  to  the  Mexican  consul  in 
Havana  at  the  time  partial  mobilization  was  effected  (in  consequence  of 
the  Columbus,  New  Mexico,  incident).  He  was  not  accepted  for  duty, 
however,  because  it  was  felt  his  artistic  services  were  potentially  more 
valuable  than  his  military  services.  He  visited  his  Aguascalientes  home 
at  the  end  of  1916,  and  definitely  moved  back  to  Mexico  in  July,  1917, 
when  he  established  his  own  studio  ("Academia  Beethoven")  in  Mexico 
Qty.  In  September,  1917,  he  married  Clema  Maurel  in  the  Church  of 
Our  Lady  of  Lourdes.  In  December  he  conducted  the  Orquesta  Sinf  6nica 
Nadonal,  The  next  year  he  brought  out  his  piano  and  orchestra  Balada 
Mexican*.  In  1919  he  edited  (at  first  in  association  with  Ruben  M. 
Campos)  twelve  numbers  of  the  Revista  Musical  de  Mexico. 

Ponce  in  1925  was  named  "Professor  de  perfecdonamiento  de  piano" 
in  the  Conservatorio  Nadonal,  but  soon  after  his  nomination  he  set  out  for 
another  extended  European  trip.  He  avidly  interested  himself  in  the 
latest  trends  abroad  and  settled  in  Paris  where  he  consulted  regularly 
with  Paul  Dukas.  Marc  Pincherle  has  written  charmingly  of  the  impres- 
sions Ponce  left  on  his  numerous  friends  in  the  French  capital  during  the 
seven  years  Ponce  remained  there  before  returning  to  Mexico.  During 
this  second  extended  European  trip—Ponce's  first  having  been  made, 
as  we  saw,  during  1905-7— his  musical  style  became  immeasurably  more 
contrapuntal  and  his  rhythms  tauter.  When  he  returned  to  Mexico  in 


DURING  THE  TWENTIETH  CENTURY        235 

1932  he  came  as  an  established  European  celebrity.  He  was  immediately 
named  an  interim  Director  of  the  Conservatorio  Nadonal,  and  the  sheaf 
of  orchestral  compositions  he  brought  back  from  his  European  sojourn 
strikingly  advanced  his  musical  reputation  in  the  home  country.  On 
November  20, 1934,  Stokowski  played  a  symphonic  triptych,  C&apultepec, 
in  Carnegie  Hall,  New  York,  after  having  premiered  it  four  days  earlier 
in  Philadelphia.  In  1939  Chavez  revived  Ponce's  1912  Piano  Concerto. 
In  1941  Ponce  visited  South  America  for  the  first  time,  and  was  feted 
at  Montevideo  and  Santiago  de  Chile.  At  Montevideo  Ponce  conducted 
the  first  performance  of  a  newly  composed  work,  his  Concierto  del  Svr. 

After  another  one  of  the  many  hiatuses  that  marked  Ponce's  association 
with  the  Conservatorio  Nacional  he  resumed  teaching  there  in  1942.  On 
August  20,  1943,  his  masterly  Violin  Concerto  was  premiered  under 
Chavez's  baton  with  Henry  Szering  fulfilling  the  soloist's  role.  Again  in 
1943  Ponce  withdrew  from  the  Conservatorio  Nadonal  and  occupied  the 
chair  of  folklore  in  the  rival  Escuela  Universitaria  de  Musica.  In  1947 
(July  4)  Chavez  presented  a  Ponce  festival  concert  at  the  Pakdo  de 
Bellas  Artes,  with  the  famous  Spanish  guitarrist,  Andr6s  Segovia,  in- 
terpreting Ponce's  Concierto  del  Sur.  On  April  24,  1948,  Ponce  at  the 
age  of  sixty-five  died  from  uremic  poisoning. 

The  most  important  of  his  orchestral  works  were  Chapdtefec,  Suite  en 
esttto  antiguo,  Poema  ele^aco>  Ferial  (divertimento),  and  Cantos  y 
Danzas  de  los  Antiguos  Mexicanos.  For  solo  instrument  with  orchestra 
he  wrote  a  piano  and  a  violin  concerto.  His  published  works,  issued  by 
seven  houses,  included  over  150  separate  works.  His  publishers  were  R 
Boungiovanni  (Bologna),  Giralt  y  Anselmo  Lopez  (Havana),  Wagner  y 
Levien,  Enrique  Munguia,  and  Otto  y  Arzoz  (these  three  of  Mexico 
Qty),  Schott  (Mainz),  and  Senart  (Paris). 

He  had  a  unique  ability  to  speak  directly  to  the  masses,  and  yet  also 
to  speak,  when  he  so  desired,  in  *  sophisticated  idiom  appealing  to  the 
most  advanced  musical  mind  Accused  by  Bossi  in  1905  of  writing  in  an 
1830  style,  Ponce  in  the  1930*$  was  an  avant-garde.  He  was  able  to  change 
with  the  times.  His  conversion  to  newer  ways  of  thinking  was,  moreover, 
sincerely  felt,  and  unlike  others  whose  modernisms,  were  an  unconvincing 
veneer,  he  spoke  as  urgently  in  his  later  style  as  in  his  earlier.  The  com- 
pleteness of  his  change  in  style  may  be  gauged  from  the  following  ex- 
cerpts. The  first  is  his  1912  manner;  the  second  is  his  1943  manner: 


236 


MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

Concerto jor 


*Mi 

* 

•f 

ft 

$ 

ftuf^ 

^ 

r^- 

rfc 

=fd" 

4] 

i-j 

- 

-t 

*-r 

^*±*t± 

tp 

V 

DURING  THE  TWENTIETH  CENTURY        237 

It  should  be  understood  that  the  orchestral  integument  in  the  Violin 
Concerto  is  composed  of  highly  dissonant  contrapuntal  lines,  whereas 
that  in  the  Piano  Concerto  is  composed  of  lush  c<Rachmaninoffian"  chords. 
Not  only  did  Ponce  show  an  extraordinary  ability  to  enlarge  his  musical 
vocabulary,  but  also  he  shifted  his  "subject-matter."  In  his  1938  Musica 
Yaqui  (the  second  of  his  Instantaneas  Mexicanas)  he  affixed  a  pentatonic 
melody  of  Yaqui  origin  over  a  spare  bass  with  an  aural  result  so  diverse 
from  that  of  his  mestizo  canciones  mexicanas  that  no  one  unacquainted 
with  the  amazing  growth  of  Ponce  would  believe  it  possible  the  composer 
of  Estrellita  could  so  have  changed  his  stance.  Ponce  insisted  the  melodies 
given  below  were  original  Yaqui  music: 

Yaaui  ttfusic 


^ 


But  his  handling  of  Indian  materials  in  this  particular  "snapshot"  of 
Yaqui  life,  and  also  in  such  a  number  as  the  Danse  des  widens  m&dcams 
(premiered  under  Revueltas's  baton,  October  13,  1933),  showed  imagi- 
native insight  few  other  transcribers  of  Indian  music  have  yet  brought  to 
the  treatment  of  non-Western  f  oik-music 


CARLOS  CHAVEZ  ( 1 899 — ) 

Chavez,  deservedly  the  best  known  of  Mexican  musicians,  combines  a 
truly  amazing  range  of  abilities.  A  conductor,  a  composer,  a  pianist,  a 
musical  scholar  of  rare  ability,  an  executive  director  of  a  national  bureau 


23*  MUSIC   IN  MEXICO 

of  fine  arts — he  has  distinguished  himself  in  every  department  of  endeavor 
open  to  a  musician.5 

His  two  principal  teachers  during  adolescence  were  Ponce  and  Pedro 
Luis  Ogazon.  The  latter  was  a  devotee  of  the  Virgil  Clavier  method,  and 
if  from  Ponce  Chavez  gained  a  romantic  warmth,  from  Ogazon  he  ac- 
quired a  wholly  admirable  precision  of  finger  technique.  Because  he  started 
at  the  age  of  twelve  with  Ponce  and  continued  with  so  superior  a  peda- 
gogue as  Ogazon,  Chavez  was  spared  the  necessity  of  unlearning  what 
he  gained  during  the  crucial  years  of  adolescence. 

He  began  to  publish  in  his  early  twenties.  Still  in  print  are  such  early 
songs  as  Ecstasy  (strongly  reminiscent  of  Henri  Duparc),  and  his  ar- 
rangements of  various  songs  of  the  1910  revolution  (including  La  Cuca- 
racha).  The  words  for  Ecstasy  derive  from  Victor  Hugo's  1828  Les 
Orientates ;  the  general  thought  of  Hugo's  poem  is  "The  heavens  declare 
the  glory  of  God  and  the  firmament  showeth  forth  His  handiwork,"  and 
Chavez,  who  dedicated  his  song-setting  to  his  sister,  Estefania,  headed 
the  poem  with  a  quotation  from  the  Apocalypse  of  St.  John. 

In  1921,  the  year  in  which  Paginas  Sencillas,  Cuatro  Valsas>  and  other 
works,  began  to  appear  in  print,  Ponce  wrote  an  interesting  appraisal  of 
his  erstwhile  pupil,  which  he  published  in  the  Revista  of  the  Union  Filar- 
m6nka  de  Mexico.  Ponce,  unlike  certain  other  teachers,  never  succumbed 
to  petty  fears  of  his  former  pupil's  success,  but  on  the  contrary  welcomed 
his  progress  with  a  cheer.  In  his  1921  article  Ponce  referred  to  his  pupil 
as  Carlos  Chavez  Ramirez,  the  latter  name  being  that  of  Chavez's  mother, 
which  in  accordance  with  common  practice  in  Mexico  was  used  concur- 
rently with  his  father's: 

Carlos  Chavez  Ramirez  is  a  rare  example  of  ability  conjoined  with 
industry  .  .  .  and  he  entirely  eschews  the  "dolce  far  niente"  attitude 
so  dear  to  many  of  us  here.  .  .  .  The  first  thing  one  notices  in  his  coin- 
positions  is  a  desire  to  be  original,  which  by  all  rights  he  should  be.  Who 
does  not  wish  to  be  original  nowadays?  Debussy  with  his  intensely  personal 
mannerisms  indubitably  fascinates  our  young  composers  whose  aspirations 
go  far  beyond  a  mere  imitation  of  the  classics  and  romantics.  ...  Is  the 
Debussy  reflection  so  strong  in  Chivez  Ramirez  that  one  can  call  him  an 
imitator?  We  do  not  believe  so.  ...  There  are  obviously  certain  pro- 
cedures in  his  music  characteristic  of  the  composer  of  PelUas^  but  beneath 
tfcem  there  is  discernible  a  latent  streak  of  romanticism  and  a  lyric  strain 


DURING  THE  TWENTIETH  CENTURY        239 

that  the  immoderate  use  of  dissonances  and  the  persistent  rhythmic  intri- 
cacies cannot  hide,  .  .  . 

Carlos  Chavez  Ramirez  is  very  young,  although  he  gives  the  appear- 
ance of  being  older — of  being  a  serious  man,  in  fact,  and  a  trifle  on  the 
melancholy  side.  He  has  talent,  and  must  be  watched.  The  question  is: 
since  he  shows  influences  of  Schumann  and  Chopin,  and  yet  on  the  other 
hand  of  modernism  with  its  sparkling  novelties  and  exoticisms  also,  will 
he  choose  the  one  or  the  other  path — that  of  the  romanticists  or  that  of  the 
modernists?  Here  is  a  difficult  question,  and  the  answering  of  it  involves 
the  whole  future  of  the  young  composer*  .  .  . 

The  same  year  during  which  several  sheaves  of  songs  and  piano  works 
were  published  (by  Wagner  and  Levien,  with  G.  Schirmer  affiliation), 
Chavez  with  the  encouragement  and  blessing  of  the  dynamic  Secretary 
of  Public  Education,  Jos6  Vasconcelos,  set  about  writing  El  Fuego  Nv&uo 
—"The  New  Fire"— which  was  to  be  a  Mexican  ballet.  When  he  had 
finished  it  Chavez  with  score  under  arm  and  a  recommendation  from 
Vasconcelos  set  about  persuading  Julian  Carrillo  to  give  it  a  trial  reading 
with  his  Orquesta  Sinfonica.  For  one  reason  or  another,  Carrillo  balked 
at  giving  the  young  composer  a  chance  to  hear  his  score.  This  rebuff  was 
not  lightly  forgotten  by  Chavez.  Later  when  he  was  in  a  similar  position 
of  orchestral  authority  he  tried  to  set  a  pattern  of  receptivity  to  new 
scores.  But  Carrillo  perhaps  was  busy  with  other  matters  at  the  moment 
and  did  not  realize  he  was  rejecting  the  work  of  a  genius, 

In  1922  Chavez  married  Otilia  Ortiz,  a  woman  of  the  most  extraordi- 
nary musical  perceptivity.  Soon  after  marrying,  he  set  out  on  a  trip  to 
New  York,  and  then  went  to  Europe  where  he  visited  the  principal  conti- 
nental centers.  Ignaz  Friedman,  aboard  the  vessel  on  which  Chavez  sailed, 
took  an  interest  in  him  and  helped  him  secure  publication  of  his  Second 
Piano  Sonata  with  the  German  firm,  Bote  and  Bock.  Upon  his  return  from 
Europe  he  stayed  two  years  in  New  York,  where  he  made  invaluable 
music  contacts.  Meanwhile  J.  J.  Tablada,  writer  for  El  Unvoersaly  Mexico 
City  newspaper,  reported  Chavez's  musical  activities  so  he  would  not  be 
completely  forgotten  at  home. 

During  1925-6  Chavez  was  a  theater  organist  in  the  Teatro  dimpia 
at  Mexico  City.  He  impressed  the  orchestra  men  who  cooperated  with 
him  in  supplying  background  music  for  films,  and  later  when  a  rift  be- 
tween acfidemicos  and  jazzistes  in  the  musicians*  union  orchestra  de- 


240  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

veloped,  his  Teatro  Olimpla  colleagues  were  strong  backers  of  his  candi- 
dacy for  the  post  of  conductor.  Only  he,  they  felt,  could  supply  strong 
enough  musical  leadership  to  overcome  the  bickering  between  "academic" 
and  "jazzist"  factions  in  the  union  orchestra.  In  the  fall  of  1928  Chavez 
as  a  youth  of  twenty-nine  stepped  into  the  conductorship  of  the  Sindicato 
de  Filarmonicos  orchestra,  and  during  the  next  twenty  years  this  orchestra 
from  modest  beginnings  grew  to  be  one  of  the  most  important  in  the  New 
World. 

The  strength  of  Chavez's  leadership  resided  not  only  in  his  inherent 
musicality,  but  perhaps  equally  in  his  sound  business  sense  and  in  his  flair 
for  "creating"  news.  As  an  example  of  his  superb  ability  to  capitalize 
upon  the  newsworthy,  the  story  is  told  of  his  second  concert  with  the 
musicians'  union  orchestra  during  his  first  season  as  conductor.  At  that 
concert  he  programmed  a  suite  which  in  October,  1928,  still  had  the  ap- 
peal of  an  exciting  novelty — John  Alden  Carpenter's  Skyscraper  Suite. 
Great  was  the  indignation  that  so  strident  and  mechanistic  a  work  should 
have  intruded  itself  into  a  Mexican  orchestral  concert.  During  the  re- 
mainder of  the  month,  the  newspapers  were  filled  with  animated  criticisms. 
In  a  few  weeks  the  excitement  ran  itself  out,  but  meantime  the  lively  dis- 
cussion "gave  him  fortuitously  and  unexpectedly  the  opportunity  for 
which  he  had  vainly  fought  throughout  his  youth— that  is,  to  be  suddenly 
projected  into  the  limelight  of  public  interest."  Otto  Mayer-Serra,  who 
has  chronicled  Chavez's  life,  remarks  further  of  this  incident  that  "with 
his  extraordinary  political  instinct,  and  with  the  courage  of  a  fighter" 
Chavez  knew  how  to  turn  this  Teatro  Iris  incident,  and  other  later  in- 
cidents of  the  same  kind,  into  maximum  advantage.  Later  in  the  same 
first  season,  Chavez  again  programmed  the  Skyscraper  Suitey  but  this 
time  "by  popular  request."  Needless  to  say,  all  the  publicity  of  the  first 
hearing  stimulated  interest  in  a  second  hearing  j  and  the  house  was 
full. 

Chavez's  business  sense  was  of  paramount  value  in  the  building  of  the 
orchestra.  He  knew  from  the  start  how  to  converse  with  government 
officials,  with  prominent  diplomats,  and  with  financiers.  Although  the 
national  conservatory  had  been  supported  by  government  stipend  since 
the  administration  of  Juarez,  none  of  the  various  orchestras  playing  in 
the  national  capital  had  been  so  subsidized.  Chavez  succeeded  in  building 
the  first  stable  orchestra  in  Mexico  in  large  measure  because  he  knew  how 
to  win  government  as  well  as  private  support  for  the  enterprise.  He 


DURING  THE  TWENTIETH  CENTURY        241 

from  the  very  start  showed  his  disposition  to  make  his  orchestra  a  national 
institution;  unlike  other  conductors,  he  played  all  the  orchestral  works 
of  young  Mexican  composers  he  could  lay  hands  on.  He  furthermore 
gave  Mexican  performing  artists  ample  opportunities  to  be  heard. 

His  appointment  as  Director  of  the  Conservatorio  Nadonal  followed 
shortly  upon  his  appointment  to  the  orchestral  conductorship.  From  De- 
cember, 1928,  until  March,  1933,  and  again  for  eight  months  during 
1934,  he  occupied  the  conservatory  directorship,  and  in  that  educational 
post  exerted  himself  to  the  utmost  for  a  renascence  of  national  art.  As  an 
educator  as  well  as  in  the  role  of  conductor,  his  energy  was  a  dominant 
characteristic. 

Meanwhile  Chavez  kept  himself  abreast  every  new  development  in 
the  United  States.  The  International  Composers5  Guild  b  New  York 
began  including  his  works.  At  first  Paul  Rosenfeld  remarked  upon 
Chavez's  music  "lightly  recalling  not  only  French  impressionism  but 
German  romanticism  as  well."  Ponce  in  1921  had  remarked  on  the  same 
double  strain  of  influence.  Rosenfeld  in  his  1928  By  Way  of  Art  went  on 
to  speak  of  Chavez's  El  Fuego  Niuvo—the  music  of  which  Carrillo  would 
not  play — as  "the  very  early,  still  very  dainty  and  Debussian  forerunner 
of  Los  Cuatro  Soles"  But  Chavez  had  composed  El  Fuego  Nvevo  before 
traveling  abroad  anywhere,  and  when  he  returned  to  Mexico  after  each 
of  his  many  United  States  trips,  he  always  returned  with  a  better  under- 
standing of  the  international  rise  and  fail  of  musical  temperature.  Paul 
Rosenfeld  as  late  as  1936,  the  year  before  Chavez  conducted  the  New 
York  Philharmonic,  still  could  say:  "Chavez  is  not  a  Mexican  so  much 
as  a  North  American  composer."  But  steadily  Chavez  proceeded  to  em- 
phasize more  and  more  the  Aztec  in  himself—the  Indian  in  his  heritage — 
with  a  resultant  strengthening  of  international  sentiment  in  behalf  of 
his  music.  It  is  significant  that  his  most  "Indian"  composition,  the  Sin- 
jot&a  India,  was  composed  not  in  Mexico,  but  in  the  United  States. 

His  command  of  the  English  language,  his  intimate  acquaintance  with 
all  the  musical  great  of  this  nation,  and  especially  with  vanguardist  com- 
posers, his  oft-expressed  appreciation  for  the  achievements  of  the  United 
States-^11  these  assets  have  been  of  inestimable  advantage  to  him.  So  ar- 
dently a  friend  of  United  States  music  that  in  the  very  moment  of  a  bud- 
ding orchestral  career  he  was  willing  to  risk  a.  performance  of  the  then- 
revolutionary  Skyscraper  Suite,  he  has  never  lacked  warm  friends  from 
that  moment  in  the  cities  of  skyscrapers.  Because  United  States  visitors  in 


242  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

Mexico  have  felt  him  to  be  <ctruly  a  kindred  spirit,"  he  has  continued 
throughout  his  career  to  draw  American  tributes. 

The  first  <cbig-league"  performance  of  a  Chavez  work  in  this  country 
occurred  March  31,  1932,  when  Leopold  Stokowski  conducted  Chavez's 
ballet  with  designs  by  Diego  Rivera,  H JP.  Discussing  the  premiere  in 
The  New  York  Timesy  John  Martin  stressed  the  next  day  that  H  J>. 
("Horse-power")  entirely  lacked  plot,  and  added  "It  perhaps  seems 
less  vital  today  than  it  did  in  1926,  when  the  composer  first  conceived 
it"  He  spoke  also  of  the  music  as  being  "endlessly  contrapuntal,"  and 
complained  that  machinery  dances  had  already  "been  done  to  death." 
But  regardless  of  the  somewhat  captious  comments  made  concerning  the 
music,  Chavez's  name  had  been  brought  to  the  attention  of  the  influential 
Eastern  public,  and  thus  an  auspicious  beginning  had  been  made. 

The  publicity  before  Chivez's  first  appearance  in  New  York  as  or- 
chestra conductor  stressed  his  friendship  with  Diego  Rivera,  and  his 
desire  to  do  for  music  what  Rivera  had  done  for  painting.  His  services 
as  an  educator  were  also  stressed.  In  the  report  of  an  interview  (New 
York  Times,  January  1 6, 1936)  he  was  quoted  as  saying  Mexican  music 
has  been  "in  a  sad  way  up  to  about  a  decade  ago"— that  is  until  about  the 
time  he  took  over  the  reins  of  the  Conservatorio  NacionaL  In  his  New 
York  publicity  Chavez  around  1936  also  began  to  talk  lengthily  about 
Indian  music  Aztec  music  he  said  for  publication  "was  a  very  strong  music 
—imperative— contemplative  at  times,  but  not  romantic  and  never  plain- 
tive. It  was  music  characteristic  of  a  stoic,  combative  race."  Exactly  the 
"strong,"  "imperative"  note  was  that  which  Chavez's  music  was  intended 
to  sound,  as  it  evoked  the  memory  of  a  glorious  past 

At  the  Philadelphia  premiere  of  the  Smfoma  de  Antigona,  an  eleven- 
minute  one-movement  piece  which  today  stands  as  one  of  the  twin  pillars 
upholding  Chavez's  reputation  as  a  composer,  the  Inquirer  critic  called  it 
"too  astringent  to  be  intriguing,"  but  asserted  "it  has  definite  character." 
On  April  10, 1936,  Olin  Downes  heard  Chdvez  in  his  Boston  debut  with 
the  Boston  Orchestra.  Downes  remarked  that  Stravinsky  had  undoubtedly 
been  "useful"  to  Chavez.  Downes  compared  the  musk  with  "savage  wood 
carvings,"  and  said  the  music  was  "racial."  This  report  of  a  racial  quality 
was,  of  course,  extremely  welcome. 

As  Chavez's  debut  with  the  New  York  Philharmonic  came  closer,  his 
activities  in  Mexico  drew  more  and  more  attention.  One  writer  noted  "a 
fifth  of  the  audience  was  made  up  of  Americans"  when  Chavez  conducted 


DURING  THE  TWENTIETH  CENTURY        243 

in  Mexico  City.  New  York  Timts  readers  learned  on  November  8, 1936, 
that  "Mexican  music  has  been,  until  recently,  without  creative  impulse." 
On  February  u,  1937,  occurred  at  long  last  the  great  event  that  had 
been  so  long  heralded:  Chavez's  debut  with  the  Philharmonic.  Downes 
unqualifiedly  praised  his  conducting.  "So  far  as  euphony  and  technical 
finish  are  concerned,"  Downes  said,  "the  orchestra  surpassed  any  ac- 
complishment since  the  days  of  Toscanini."  The  Dafhnis  and  Chloe 
performance  was  called  superior  to  anything  in  its  line  attempted  that 
season  in  New  York.  But  the  Sinfoma  de  Antigona  was  less  warmly  re- 
ceived. "The  music  has  a  certain  bareness.  .  .  .  At  a  second  hearing  .  .  . 
the  work  does  not  impress  as  much  as  it  did  in  Boston  last  April  10.  Power- 
ful, elemental  things  in  it  seem  impeded  rather  than  aided  in  expression." 

The  second  week  of  Chavez's  appearances  brought  similar  notices. 
Again  it  was  agreed  his  handling  of  Debussy  and  Ravel  was  magnificent. 
But  in  his  review,  Downes  (who  was  followed  by  the  other  critics)  de- 
voted only  minimal  attention  to  a  work  which  assuredly  deserved  more 
than  the  one  slim  paragraph  out  of  a  total  of  twelve  paragraphs  in  the 
review.  The  Sinfonia  India  received  its  New  York  premiere  that  second 
week  of  Chivez's  appearances,  but  Downes  thought  it  comparatively  un- 
important, and  relegated  it  to  the  last  of  his  twelve-paragraphed  review. 
He  praised  it  as  "redolent  of  the  soil,"  but  said  it  "would  profitably  be 
cut  in  certain  places."  The  Sinjoma  India  is  a  twelve-minute  composition. 
Downes  also  spoke  of  its  "harshness  of  harmonic  setting  and  barbaric 
rhythms,"  but  the  adjective  barbaric  was,  of  course,  an  open  sesame  to 
avant-garde  approval. 

Again  in  1942  when  Dmitri  Mkropoulos  conducted  the  New  York 
premiere  of  Chavez's  Piano  Concerto  (Eugene  List,  soloist),  the  music 
was  called  "powerful,  primitive,  and  barbaric"  Noel  Straus  said,  "Indian 
music  harking  back  to  a  remote  past  obviously  forms  the  basic  material 
of  the  composition."  He  also  wrote  of  the  "unrelieved,  acute  dissonances 
in  every  measure"  hammered  out  with  an  insistence  that  "might  be  called 
an  obsession."  He  decided  it  was  consistently  cacophonous,  but  was  im- 
pressed "by  its  elemental  strength  and  originality."*  He  noted  "strange, 
brash  outbursts  of  sound,  primeval  in  effect." 

During  the  latter  years  of  the  war  Chivez  received  frequent  tributes 
from  composers  in  such  allied  nations  as  Britain  and  Russia.  But  during 
those  same  years  he  began  to  hear  louder  and  louder  protests  from  musi- 
cians in  his  own  nation  calling  him  a  "muskal  dictator."  The  force  of 


*44  MUSIC   IN  MEXICO 

these  protests  finally  caused  him  to  relinquish  his  conductorship  of  the 
great  Orquesta  Sinfonica  de  Mexico  that  he  had  so  painstakingly  built 
over  a  space  of  twenty-odd  years.  On  March  u,  1949,  Chavez's  resigna- 
tion was  regretfully  accepted  by  the  civil  association  charged  with  backing 
the  orchestra.  At  the  moment  of  his  resignation,  however,  Mexican  music 
did  not  entirely  lose  his  dynamic  and  driving  leadership.  He  continued 
as  Chief  of  the  Department  of  Fine  Arts,  a  government  bureau  charged 
with  the  fomenting  of  all  artistic  activities  in  Mexico. 

In  March,  1951,  he  returned  to  the  podium  in  Mexico  City  and  was 
clamorously  greeted.  After  a  magisterial  performance  of  the  Beethoven 
Ninth  Symphony  the  public  accorded  him  an  ovation.  When  he  resigned 
in  1949,  he  stepped  aside  so  that  younger  men  might  have  an  opportunity 
to  make  their  mark.  It  has  always  been  his  intention  to  promote  Mexican 
music,  and  not  simply  that  segment  of  it  represented  by  himself.  By  re- 
linquishing authority  for  a  space  of  two  years,  he  allowed  any  other 
contenders  to  enter  the  field.  Since,  however,  none  of  equal  stature  pre- 
sented himself,  his  services  upon  his  return  to  the  podium  were  doubly 
welcomed. 


CHAVEZ'S  MUSICAL  STYLE 

It  is  possible  to  generalize  concerning  a  particular  epoch  in  Chavez's 
creative  career,  but  not  perhaps  concerning  the  whole  of  it.  His  early 
pieces  may,  if  one  wishes,  be  discarded  as  "juvenilia"  but  since  there  is 
so  large  a  quantity  of  these  pieces  written  at  around  the  age  of  twenty,  to 
discard  them  all  tremendously  reduces  the  catalogue  of  his  works.  If  they 
are  dismissed  because  they  seem  derivative,  it  should  nevertheless  be  re- 
membered that  his  "juvenilia"  are  peculiarly  Mexican  in.  that  they  were 
written  before  he  traveled  abroad. 

The  pieces  written  during  his  first  years  abroad  bear  abstract  titles 
such  as  "Polygons,"  "Hexagons,"  "36,"  "Energy."  In  the  catalogue  of 
his  mature  works  it  is  possible  to  draw  a  distinction  between  "extramural 
works"  and  'intramural  works."  To  the  former  class  belong  his  works 
with  abstract  titles,  and  the  two  or  three  orchestral  works  which  are  now 
internationally  known  (especially  the  Sinfonia  de  Antigona  and  the  Sith 
fot»a  India).  To  the  latter  class  belong  such  works  as  Obertura  Reptbli- 
cana  aad  Llamadas;  these  latter  evince  his  interest  in  the  political  ques- 
tions, and  often  give  the  impression  of  being  "made-to-order"  music. 


DURING  THE  TWENTIETH  CENTURY        HS 

In  his  mature  style  Chavez  wrote  linear  music.  His  melodies  have 
predominantly  been  diatonic  $  and  they  have  for  the  most  part  been 
melodies  on  what  would  correspond  to  white  notes  of  the  piano.  Only 
Chavez  could  have  written  twenty  pages  of  piano  preludes  without  a 
single  note  other  than  those  that  occur  in  the  scale  of  C.  As  far  as  rhythms 
are  concerned,  his  pieces  set  a  certain  basic  unit  and  stick  to  it.  If  the  basic 
unit  is  an  eighth,  running  eighths  will  continue  throughout  the  entire  piece 
or  section  of  a  piece.  If  the  basic  unit  is  sixteenths,  running  sixteenths  will 
continue  throughout  the  entire  piece  or  section  of  a  piece.  His  rhythms 
thus  exhibit  the  kind  of  incessant  drive  which  one  finds  in  Bach's  Bran- 
denburg Concertos,  for  instance.  The  uninterrupted  eighth,  or  sixteenth, 
or  quarter  flow  may  quite  conceivably  be  handled  as  Bach  handled  such 
uninterrupted  flow— by  transferring  the  movement  from  voice  to  voice. 
But  the  incessant  flow  of  baroque  rhythms  is  a  recognizable  trait  in  many 
of  Chavez's  most  dissonant  compositions. 

A  distinctive  feature  of  his  instrumentation  is  the  heavy  battery  of 
percussion  he  customarily  includes.  Whenever  his  scores  call  for  in- 
digenous instruments,  such  as  teponaztlis,  however,  he  usually  provides 
a  cued-in  part  for  modern  analogues,  such  as  the  xylophone  in  the  case 
of  the  teponaztli.  Although  the  percussion  adds  shimmer  and  brilliancy, 
his  orchestral  palette  also  includes  bright  brass  and  woodwind  thrusts. 
His  strings  are  rarely  treated  divisiy  and  the  most  unthinkable  effect  in 
a  Chavez  orchestration  would  be  the  voluptuous  languor  of  a  divisi  chord 
from  such  a  composition  as  R.  Vaughan  Williams's  Fantasia  on  a  Theme 
of  Thomas  Tallis.  Chavez's  most  incisive  departure  from  standardized 
custom  in  the  treatment  of  the  string  choir  is  his  constantly  independent 
treatment  of  the  string  basses.  The  basses,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  are  often 
treated  as  melody-producing  instruments  that  have  no  need  of  'cello  re- 
inforcement in  order  to  sing  in  warm,  human  tones.  Were  a  further 
generalization  in  order,  we  might  say  that  Chavez's  string  parts  seem  to 
offer  fewer  challenges— as  far  as  notes  are  concerned-^than  do  either  his 
woodwind  or  brass  parts.  A  very  extended  search  would  be  necessary  in 
order  to  find  passages  demanding  the  digital  dexterity  that  any  of  the 
Strauss  tone-poems  exact. 

Since  Chavez  alone  among  Mexican  composers  has  found  a  United 
States  publisher — G.  Schirmer — for  an  important  segment  of  his  creative 
output,  analysis  of  his  piano  and  also  of  his  orchestral  style  can  easily 
be  undertaken  independently  by  any  interested  person.  The  added  avail- 


MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 


MEMO  LENTO,  J- 76 
13/nfe 


POCO  LENTO,  J  -  69 


2  POCO  LENTO,  J  -  69  13 

^-,-ri  ^-v  ^ ^  _      „  M/rJ°*      fe 


cedendo  pochiss.  \4a\l     M!jS£so 


From  Sinfoaia  It  Antigona  by  Carlos  Chivez.  Copyright  1948  by  G.  Schirmer, 
Inc.  U?ed  by  permission. 


DURING  THE  TWENTIETH  CENTURY        247 

riten. 


f  f  f  f  ,f     f  f  f  .f  ff  f  f  .f  ff  f  f 


Vk. 


248 


MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 


ability  of  records  for  the  two  fundamental  orchestral  works — the  two 
sinfonfas— gives  an  arm-chair  analyst  an  easy  opportunity  with  the  scores 
open  before  him  to  dissect  the  works.  In  order  to  assist  the  reader  in  this 
exercise,  an  analysis  of  the  first  of  these  two  symphonies  is  offered  below. 

The  Smfoma  de  Antigona,  written  at  Mexico  City  in  1933,  is  a  one- 
movement  symphony.  Though  its  structure  was  not  dictated  by  any  stereo- 
typed conception  of  "sonata-allegro"  form,  the  overall  form  of  the  movement 
may  best  be  understood  as  a  modified  sonata-allegro  preceded  by  a  slow  intro- 
duction. The  calmo  introduction  explores  two  themes,  the  first  of  which  is 
repeated  seven  times  by  the  first  bassoon;  this  laconic  three-note  theme  is  then 
transferred  successively  to  the  first  harp  and  to  the  first  violins,  the  latter  play- 
ing it  four  times  at  their  extreme  upper  limit  (in  what  would  be  the  top  octave 
of  the  piano). 


The  second  theme  in  the  introduction  is  allotted  first  to  English  Horn  and 
Viola  in  unison :  it  begins  with  a  drop  of  a  fourth. 


r 


These  two  themes,  one  chromatic  and  the  other  disjunctly  diatonic,  are  heard 
in  combination  first  at  letter  I  and  then  again  at  letter  j.  Transcribed  below  in 
short  score  is  the  passage  beginning  three  bars  before  letter  5. 


-'=      =     -- 


r  r  r  r  r  r  r  r  r  r  r  r  r  r  r   r — r  r     r 


r  r  r  r  r  r  r  r  T  r  r  r  TTT 


DURING  THE  TWENTIETH  CENTURY        249 

The  first  group  may  be  thought  of  as  comprising  the  whole  section  in  % 
time  beginning  at  letter  6  and  closing  at  p.  An  oboe  melody  so  constructed  as 
to  emphasize  the  recurring  skip  of  a  fourth  is  the  leading  theme  in  this  temfo 
moderate  section : 

tit** 


Seven  bars  of  transition  lead  into  the  second  group  commencing  at  letter  10. 
The  hecklephone  doubled  at  the  octave  by  a  piccolo  enunciates  the  following 
melody,  which  because  it  again  emphasizes  skips  of  a  fourth  bears  a  certain 
family  likeness  to  the  oboe  melody  heard  at  letter  6. 


The  section  lasting  from  16  to  18  may  be  thought  of  as  a  closing  group,  and 
1  8  to  27  may  be  regarded  as  fulfilling  the  function  of  a  development  section, 
reaching  its  sonorous  climax  two  bars  before  letter  27.  At  27  occurs  a  short 
recapitulation  of  the  thematic  material  heard  in  the  first  group,  but  with  changed 
instrumentation  so  that  what  was  heard  as  an  oboe  melody  at  letter  6  now  is 
transferred  to  Violins  I  and  II  and  Viola  in  a  three-octave  doubling.  The  coda 
extends  from  letter  52  to  the  end. 

The  movement  is  obviously  a  highly  concentrated  one.  At  the  time  the 
sinfonfa  was  conceived,  Chavez  was  concurrently  creating  incidental  music  for 
Jean  Cocteau's  "contraction"  of  the  Sophocles  drama,  Antigone.  Although  in- 
cidental music  and  sinfonfa  were  independently  gestated,  nevertheless  there 
was  a  considerable  sharing  of  thematic  material  and  of  general  mood  in  the 
two.  Ultimately  it  might  therefore  be  said  that  the  highly  concentrated  energy 
and  tautness  of  the  Cocteau  "contraction"  of  the  drama  found  its  way  into 
Chavez's  "Antigone  symphony." 

The  musical  means  whereby  Chavez  has  in  this  sinfonfa  reconstructed  the 
mood  of  the  Greek  drama  may  be  briefly  listed:  (i)  He  has  selected  as  a  pre- 
vailing tonality  the  two  E-octave  species  known  in  Greek  theory  as  dorian  and 
hypodorian,  these  two  being  the  octave  species  whose  ethos  would,  according 
to  the  definitions  of  Plato*  best  express  the  Antigone's  two  opposing  calls  of 
duty.  (2)  The  E-octave  species  with  an  ft|  (Greek  dorian)  has  been  used  for 
thematic  material  expressing  one  kind  of  duty  —  that  of  obligation  to  the  gods; 


25o  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

the  other  E-octave  species  using  fj  (Greek  hypodorian)  has  been  used  for  the- 
matic material  expressing  the  other  type  of  duty — that  of  obligation  to  the  state. 
(3)  Were  a  programme  worked  out  for  the  sinfonia  the  introduction  with  its 
pitting  of  fj  and  ft]  against  the  e-fundamental  could  be  construed  as  a  weighing 
of  both  kinds  of  duty  conjointly,  religious  and  civic;  the  first  group  as  the  appeal 
of  conscience,  the  second  group  as  the  at  first  coaxing  and  finally  brutal  call  of 
civic  duty;  and  the  recapitulation  and  coda  as  Antigone's  appeal  again  to 
conscience  as  the  only  safe  guide.  (4)  The  sections  in  the  E-f  \\  octave-species 
(Greek  dorian),  which  bear  construction  as  Antigone's  meditation  on  her  duty 
to  the  gods  (conscience),  are  cast  in  %  rhythm,  quintuple  meter  being  known 
as  that  favored  in  such  hymns  as  the  two  authentic  Delphic  Hymns  preserved 
from  Greek  antiquity. 

A  psychological  conflict  of  the  kind  Antigone  faced  can  therefore  without 
too  gross  a  distortion  be  read  in  the  musical  symbols  Chavez  has  selected.  At 
the  time  he  was  composing  this  work  he  was  already  engrossed  in  the  problems 
of  Aztec  music.  With  more  positive  information  available  on  the  character- 
istics of  Greek  music  than  Aztec,  he  set  himself  the  task  of  reconstruction. 
Again  he  returned  to  another  essay  in  the  re-creation  of  a  "Greek  mood"  in 
his  1947  suite,  "The  Daughter  of  Colchis."  In  this  latter  work,  although  he 
did  not  literally  transcribe,  nevertheless  conspicuous  likenesses  can  be  discerned 
between  two  of  Chavez's  themes  and  two  surviving  Greek  fragments.  If  it  is 
impossible  to  say  how  systematically  Chivez  has  studied  Aristoxenos  or  Aris- 
teides  it  is  at  least  certain  he  has  more  successfully  than  any  composer  of  our 
time  essayed  in  the  Sinfonia  de  Antigona  and  La  Hija  de  Colqtude  a  reconstruc- 
tion of  Greek  themes. 

Chavez's  essential  greatness  is  not,  however,  to  be  measured  simply  in 
terms  of  his  success  in  evoking  the  Greek  past,  the  Indian  past,  or  any  other 
past  He  is  emphatically  a  composer  of  our  time,  and  when  he  has  ex- 
plored antique  themes  his  purpose  has  always  been  that  of  adding  to 
present-day  musical  resources  rather  than  that  of  divorcing  himself  from 
the  immediately  contemporary.  In  order  properly  to  evalue  his  contribu- 
tion to  twentieth  century  music  it  is  moreover  necessary  to  examine  his 
whole  output.  His  Concerto  for  Piano  and  Orchestra  as  revealed  in 
Claudio  Arrau's  interpretation  is  one  of  the  two  or  three  most  vital  of 
our  epochj  his  Concerto  for  Four  Horns  is  another  strangely  powerful 
workj  his  Second  String  Quartet  as  pkyed  by  the  Roth  Quartet  is  scarcely 
less  impressive  than  Bart6k's  Second.  Judged  in  totality,  then,  Chivez's 
creative  achievement  is  seen  not  only  as  a  Mexican  achievement  of  the 


DURING  THE  TWENTIETH  CENTURY        151 

very  first  rank,  but  also  as  an  achievement  not  behind  any  thus  far 
brought  to  the  attention  of  the  public  by  any  New  World  composer. 


SILVESTRE  REVUELTAS  (1899-1940)  6 

Revueltas  was  the  product  of  a  small-town  environment.  He  was  born 
in  a  town  of  three  thousand  inhabitants  some  hundred  miles  northwest  of 
Durango,  and  spent  his  childhood  there.  Almost  before  he  could  talk  a 
violin  was  tucked  under  his  chin.  The  father  owned  a  store,  but  was  by 
no  means  affluent.  Report  has  it  that  when  he  was  seven  Silvestre  or- 
ganized an  orchestra  among  his  own  playmates,  who  were  paid  in  lumps 
of  candy  from  father  Revueltas's  store.  At  the  age  of  fourteen  Revueltas 
went  from  Durango  to  Mexico  City,  where  he  studied  violin  with  the 
distinguished  artist,  Jose  Rocabruna,  and  composition  with  Rafael  J. 
Tello. 

From  1916  until  1918  he  studied  at  St  Edward  College,  a  school  in 
Austin,  Texas.  He  there  acquired  fluency  in  English  and  proceeded 
thence  to  Chicago,  enrolling  in  Chicago  Musical  College  under  Sametini 
in  violin  and  Borowsfci  in  composition.  After  two  years  he  interrupted 
his  Chicago  studies  for  an  extended  Mexican  visit,  but  returned  in  1922 
to  finish  the  four-year  course  of  study.  During  his  second  Chicago  period 
he  made  distinguished  headway  as  a  violinist  under  Vaskv  Kochanski's 
and  Otokar  SevSk's  tuition.  During  the  1924  and  1925  seasons  he  was 
therefore  sufficiently  perfected  a  performer  to  cooperate  on  equal  terms 
with  Carlos  Chavez,  the  pair  giving  notable  first  performances  of  hitherto 
unknown  European  works  in  the  Mexican  capital  during  those  two 
years. 

The  years  1926  and  '28  were  spent  at  San  Antonio,  Texas,  and  Mobile, 
Alabama,  in  which  cities  Revueltas  served  as  theater  violinist  and  or- 
chestra conductor.  Chavez  called  him  back  to  Mexico  in  1929  to  become 
sub-director  of  the  Orquesta  Sinf6nica  de  Mexico.  After  five  years  in 
this  capacity  Revueltas  added  a  teaching  responsibility  (in  chamber  music) 
at  the  Conservatorio  NadonaL  Meanwhile  with  Chavez's  encouragement 
he  began  to  compose  a  series  of  lastingly  important  orchestral  works.  The 
first  of  these  was  a  muskal  picturization  of  the  well-known  resort  town, 
Cucrnavaca,  with  the  title,  Cuauhn&kuac  (1930).  Successive  works  fol- 
lowed with  such  titles  as  "Corners"  (  1930)  ,  "Windows"  (  193  1  )  ,  "Penny- 


252  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

Banks"  (1932),  "Bright  Colors"  (1932),  "Plains"  (1934),  all  of  which 
titles,  according  to  Revueltas  himself,  were  only  suggestive  aids  for  un- 
tutored listeners.  A  1933  piece  bore  the  enigmatic  title  SxRadio;  with  this 
title  as  with  several  others,  Revueltas  intended  nothing  very  profound. 
SxRadio  meant  simply  "eight  minutes  of  radio  music,"  7  and  was  a  piece 
commissioned  for  radio  performance  lasting  exactly  that  length  of  time. 
In  1935  Revueltas  wrote  music  for  a  famous  film,  Redes;  much  of  his 
creative  energy  during  the  final  five  years  of  his  life  was  consumed  in 
writing  movie  music,  some  of  which  is  strikingly  good  in  the  same  way 
Prokofieffs  movie  music  is. 

Revueltas  like  many  another  financially  straitened  Mexican  musician 
overburdened  himself  with  a  plethora  of  activities  in  his  mature  years. 
He  tried  to  teach  at  the  conservatory,  direct  the  students'  orchestra  there, 
conduct  a  loose  organization  known  as  the  Orquesta  Sinf  onica  Nadonal, 
compose  film  music,  assist  Chavez  in  the  OSM,  act  as  secretary  for  LEAR 
(League  of  Revolutionary  Artists  and  Writers),  besides  doing  some 
violin  playing  from  time  to  time.  All  this  busy  round  of  activity  was  not 
made  easier  by  his  devotion  to  the  interests  of  the  Spanish  Loyalists  j  in 
1937-8  he  visited  Spain,  appearing  as  conductor  of  his  own  works  at 
Madrid,  Barcelona,  and  Valencia.  The  strain  told  on  his  health,  and 
instead  of  resting  he  simply  pushed  himself  more  fiercely.  Revueltas  died 
prematurely,  with  infinite  loss  to  Mexican  music,  October  5,  1940.  At 
the  moment  of  his  death  he  was  engaged  on  a  ballet,  La  Coronela  ("The 
Colonel's  Wife")  5  Bias  Galindo  finished  it,  and  Candelario  Hufzar  or- 
chestrated it. 

Perhaps  the  most  frequently  pkyed  piece  of  his  in  this  country  has 
been  his  symphonic  poem,  Janitzio,  in  which  he  pictorialized  the  resort 
island  in  the  middle  of  Lake  Patzcuaro  (premiered  by  the  OSM  at  Teatro 
Hidalgo,  Revueltas  conducting,  December  8,  1933).  The  astounding 
gift  for  melody  Revueltas  possessed  was  perhaps  his  greatest  single  asset. 
His  melodies  are  instinct  with  life,  vibrant  with  energy.  Unlike  Chavez, 
Revueltas  never  self-denyingly  reduced  his  melodic  material  to  an  all- 
prevailing  diatonicism.  Aaron  Copland  compared  Revueltas's  spontaneity 
with  Schubert's,8  and  remarked  that  "he  composes  organically  tunes  which 
are  almost  indistinguishable  from  the  original  folk  material  itself'— the 
original  folk  material  being  mestizo  melody  of  the  kind  heard  everywhere 
along  the  highways  and  byways  of  Mexico.  His  spontaneity  and  his  easy 
assimilation  of  the  prevailing  popular  styles  enabled  him  to  achieve  in 


DURING  THE  TWENTIETH  CENTURY  *53 
his  picturization  of  such  resorts  as  Cuernavaca  and  Janitzio  peculiar  au- 
thenticity. .  . 

Copland  rightly  commended  Revueltas>s  music  for  its  gaiety,  its  wistrul- 
ness.  He  said  its  flavor  reminded  him  of  highly  spiced  Mexican  food. 
Revueltas's  typical  mood  is  that  of  a  gaudy  fiesta.  From  the  Toccata  for 
Violin  and  Small  Orchestra,  the  initial  violin  passage  is  extracted  below 
as  an  example  of  the  intense  rhythmic  energy  which  Revueltas  knew  how 
to  infuse  into  even  his  single  lines. 


Toccata  f*  fie/in 


But  he  could  also  be  as  tender  as  a  nurse  for  a  sick  child.  His  Cancion  de 
Cuna  with  text  by  the  famous  Spanish  poet,  Garcia  Lorca,  breathes  peace, 
serenity,  and  through  its  tears  speaks  of  profound  things.  The  Homenaje 
a  Garcia  Lorca  for  small  orchestra  ( 1935)  is  a  miracle  of  wistful  beauty. 
Revueltas  was  not  only  authentically  Mexican^  he  was  one  of  the  musical 
seers  of  our  generation. 

CANDELARIO  HUfZAR  (l888 — )  * 

Hufcar,  like  Revueltas,  originated  in  a  small  provinical  town:  in  his 
case,  Jerez  in  the  state  of  Zacatecas.  Son  of  a  blacksmith,  he  assisted  his 
father  at  the  forge.  But  he  resented  the  necessity  of  exactly  f ollowing  the 
paternal  trade,  and  while  still  in  early  adolescence  apprenticed  himself 
to  a  silversmith.  At  seventeen  he  commenced  study  of  the  alto  saxhorn  and 
joined  the  village  band.  A  year  later  he  moved  to  Zacatecas  so  he  could 
combine  study  of  the  horn  with  silversmithing.  At  nineteen  he  married 
a  hometown  girl  from  Jerez.  How  with  no  money,  family  responsibilities, 


254  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

and  the  background  of  modest  beginnings  which  was  his,  he  could  have 
later  achieved  such  preeminence  that  he  was  called  Mexico's  best  or- 
chestrator  and  teacher  of  orchestration  is  a  marvel.  In  1918  (at  the  age 
of  thirty)  he  at  last  got  to  Mexico  City,  there  to  enroll  in  Gustavo  E. 
Campa's  composition  class.  Ten  years  later  after  spending  the  intervening 
time  as  a  bandsman,  he  became  a  hornist  under  Chavez.  The  contact  with 
Chavez,  like  a  catalyst,  finally  brought  to  pass  a  chemical  reaction  that 
resulted  in  Hufzar's  series  of  four  symphonies,  his  tone-poem  Pueblerinasy 
and  his  string  quartet. 

The  typical  problem  Huizar  posed  himself  in  his  symphonies  was  the 
integration  of  pentatonic  Indian  material  within  the  larger  framework  of 
the  classical  sonata  form.  His  only  two  works  in  which  he  avoided  the 
formalistic  problem  of  the  classical  sonata  were  his  two  symphonic  poems, 
Imageries  (1929)  and  Surco  (1935).  Certain  pentatonic  themes,  such  as 
the  principal  ones  in  the  first  movement  of  Symphony  No.  4  (1942), 
were  literal  quotations  from  Cora  and  Huichol  melodies  j  but  in  Ox- 
paniztli  (1936),  despite  the  Aztecan  title,  the  melodies  were  of  synthetic 
facture. 

Huizar  has  won  hearty  respect  because  he  triumphed  over  seemingly 
insuperable  odds.  Starting  with  no  advantages,  he  showed  what  a  Mexican 
pulling  himself  up  by  his  own  bootstraps  could  do.  Pueblerinas  ("Village 
Girls"),  a  fresh-sounding  noisy  piece  composed  in  1931,  seems  to  be  the 
piece  of  his  which  will  continue  to  be  pkyed  oftenest,  but  his  Fourth 
Symphony  is  a  greater  work. 

BLAS  GAUNDO  (l9!0  —  )  10 


Like  Huizar,  Galindo  was  late  in  arriving  at  a  music  vocation.  More- 
over he  too  came  from  a  provincial  town,  whose  musical  atmosphere  he 
later  categorized  as  viceregal.  His  father^  a  prosperous  merchant,  lost 
heavily  during  the  revolutionary  disturbances  attendant  upon  {he  long 
struggles  initiated  by  Madero.  The  state  of  Jalisco  was  like  other  parts 
of  Mexico  torn  by  strife  all  through  the  early  'twenties,  and  Bias,  quitting 
school  in  his  natal  village  of  San  Gabriel,  Jalisco,  took  to  the  mountains, 
where  he  lived  a  wandering  life  as  a  guerrillist.  With  a  gun  slung  under 
one  arm  and  a  guitar  under  the  other,  he  was  welcome  in  any  band  of 
Indian  fighters.  His  sympathies  were,  of  course,  with  his  own  people, 
since  he  himself  is  a  full-blooded  HuichoL 


DURING  THE  TWENTIETH   CENTURY        255 

At  nineteen  he  returned  home,  and  began  his  first  systematic  study  of 
music  rudiments.  The  San  Gabriel  village  priest  invited  him  to  play  the 
church  organ,  which  he  started  doing,  finding  his  way  over  the  keys, 
however,  entirely  by  ear.  He  also  started  pkying  a  clarinet  in  the  village 
band  when  he  was  twenty,  and  because  of  his  native  musical  aptitude  was 
soon  given  an  opportunity  to  conduct  it.  Within  about  a  year's  time  he 
learned  to  read  music. 

One  day  in  May,  1931,  he  left  home  with  the  vague  idea  of  studying 
to  be  a  lawyer  at  Mexico  City.  He  hoped  that  as  a  lawyer  he  could  work 
for  social  justice.  But  when  he  reached  the  capital,  almost  penniless,  he 
happened  to  hear  Revueltas  conduct  a  nationalist  composition  at  a  Con- 
servatorio  rehearsal,  and  decided  music  should  be  his  life  work.  He  en- 
rolled, and  beginning  at  the  bottom  studied  twelve  years,  at  last  graduat- 
ing with  the  highest  certificate  offered  by  the  conservatory,  "Maestro  en 
composicion" — awarded  him  in  December,  1944.  He  was  fortunate  in 
arriving  at  a  moment  when  Chavez  was  in  the  act  of  regenerating  the 
conservatory,  and  therefore  came  immediately  under  the  master's  tute- 
lage. 

Chavez  in  his  celebrated  class  in  "musical  creation"  taught  composition 
directly,  without  requiring  long  preliminary  studies  in  the  conventional 
propaedeutics,  harmony  and  counterpoint.  Chavez's  method  started  the 
students  with  melody-creation.  Simple  melodies  were  succeeded  by  com- 
plex melodies  j  diatonic  by  twelve-tone  melodies.  Instrumentalists  were 
procured  to  play  the  single-line  melodies,  so  students  might  immediately 
hear  their  creations.  Composition  thus  became  a  unitary  experience,  with 
the  fundaments  of  instrumentation  proceeding  bilaterally  with  melody- 
creation.  After  extensive  experience  in  writing  and  hearing  melodies  sung 
and  played,  the  students  then  proceeded  to  multiple-voice  creation.  The 
linear  concept  was  thus  paramount  from  the  start,  rather  than  the  vertical 
which  conventional  harmony  induces.  Two  melodies  were  combined,  with 
instrumentalists  or  singers  realizing  at  sight  the  students'  creations.  Then 
three  melodies  were  combined,  and  later  four.  Never  was  the  practical 
subordinated  to  any  merely  theoretical  concept  of  music  creation.  Al- 
though counterpoint  was  thus  taught,  no  recourse  was  had  to  conventional 
Fuxian  principles.  Believing  that  all  music  creation  should  be  relevant 
to  the  present,  Ch&vez  never  had  recourse  to  disciplines  which  only  pre- 
pared students  to  write  in  a  dead  style. 

Galindo,  when  he  himself  came  to  be  head  of  the  conservatory,  re- 


256  MUSIC  IN   MEXICO 

membered  all  that  Chavez  had  imparted.  Under  Chavez's  own  dynamic 
leadership,  a  group  of  several  composers — including  besides  Galindo, 
Daniel  Ayala  (1908 — ),  Jose  Pablo  Moncayo  (1912 — ),  Salvador 
Contreras,  and  others — developed  vigorously.  Whether  without  his  own 
personality,  his  method  would  work  as  well  yet  remains  to  be  demon- 
strated. Much  of  the  renown  Galindo,  Ayala,  Moncayo,  and  the  rest, 
have  achieved  also  stems  from  the  fact  Chavez  as  director  of  the  OSM 
welcomed  their  endeavors  and  programmed  them  repeatedly  long  after 
they  had  ceased  being  his  personal  pupils. 

Bias  Galindo  became  acquainted  with  international  renown  entirely 
through  the  efforts  of  his  mentor.  When  preparing  his  Museum  of 
Modern  Art  concerts  Chavez  invited  Galindo  to  prepare  an  orchestral 
synthesis  of  several  popular  songs  j  the  resultant  Sones  Mariachi,  made  up 
of  the  "thirds-ian"  music  sung  and  pkyed  by  strolling  bands  re-set  for 
symphony  orchestra,  put  Galindo's  name  in  the  Columbia  Record  cata- 
logue. Later  Chavez's  good  offices  resulted  in  Galindo's  appointment  to 
summer  scholarships  at  Tanglewood,  where  he  studied  with  Copland  and 
secured  a  commission  from  the  Koussevitzky  Foundation.  A  succession 
of  desirable  events  in  Mexico  was  also  procured  through  Chavez's  interest 
Galindo's  1944-5  Cinco  Preludios  (piano)  were  published  in  1946  by 
Ediciones  Mexicanas  de  Musica.  This  was  but  the  first  of  several  issues 
by  the  same  press.  Galindo  was  also  elevated  to  the  directorship  of  the 
Conservatorio  only  four  years  after  receiving  the  certificate,  "Maestro 
en  composici6n."  Each  new  work  of  Galindo  in  the  meantime  has  been 
pkyed  either  at  the  Condertos  de  los  Lunes,  or  by  the  OSM,  or  given  a 
hearing  in  some  other  auspicious  forum. 

As  would  be  but  natural,  Galindo  has  shown  influences.  Any  interested 
observer  can  detect  likenesses  between  Galindo's  Preludes  (Ediciones 
Mexicanas)  and  Chavez's  Preludes  (G.  Schirmer).  The  insistence  upon 
white  notes,  white  notes,  and  nothing  but  white  notes  in  Galindo's  Prelude 
No.  i  cannot  but  remind  us  of  the  same  insistence  in  Chavez's  Prelude 
No.  i.  On  the  whole,  however,  Galindo  is  nowhere  near  Chavez  in  as- 
tringency.  Galindo  had  grown  to  maturity  during  an  epoch  when  Herod 
had  already  been  out-Heroded,  and  nothing  the  younger  men  could  do 
would  sound  more  outre  than  what  their  predecessors  had  done*  Wisely, 
because  he  could  not  hope  to  be  more  daring  than  the  nihilists  of  the 
'twenties,  Galindo  has  contented  himself  with  a  less  acrid  style  than 
would  have  been  internationally  acceptable  a  decade  earlier. 


DURING  THE  TWENTIETH  CENTURY        257 

He  has  demonstrated  an  almost  French  concern  for  precision  of  form. 
Both  his  Sonata  fara  violin  y  fiano  (1945)  and  Sonata  fara  violoncello  y 
pano  (1948)  are  major  works  in  his  catalogue,  and  both  are  highly  pol- 
ished structurally.  The  'Cello  Sonata  (dedicated  to  the  memory  of  Natalie 
Koussevitzky)  may  here  be  briefly  analyzed  as  a  working  model  of  his 
procedures.  There  are  three  movements  in  this  ten-minute  work,  labeled: 
I  Allegro,  II  Lento,  III  Allegro  vivace.  The  tonics  in  each  of  the  three 
movements  fall  back  progressively  in  the  circle  of  fifths  to  the  lower 
fifth;  that  is  to  say,  the  first  movement  has  A  for  its  tonic,  the  second 
(governed  by  a  phrygian  cadence)  has  D  for  its  tonic,  the  third  has  G 
for  its  tonic.  The  first  movement  deploys  its  first  and  second  subjects 
interestingly;  at  the  recapitulation  everything  goes  by  reverse— the  second 
subject  comes  first,  the  first  second.  Whereas  the  'cello  had  the  second 
subject  in  the  exposition,  at  the  recapitulation  the  piano  has  it;  similarly 
with  the  first  subject— at  the  recapitulation  roles  of  the  'cello  and  piano 
are  reversed. 

The  facets  of  Galindo's  style  which  shine  in  this  'Cello  Sonata  are  the 
same  facets  which  shine  in  his  other  works.  Listing  the  features  of  his 
style,  we  note  i  rhythmic  vivacity  is  secured  by  frequent  interpolation  of 

figures  which  run  counter  to  the  meter,  as  for  instance  JJJ  JT1  in  %, 

JH3  JT5  P3  in  %  JT]  JT3  J"!  'm  %>  ako  fey the  interpolation  °* 

occasional  measures  of  %  and  %.  2  Melodies  proceed  twice  as  often  by 
scale-step  as  by  skip;  skips  of  fourths,  fifths,  sevenths,  ninths,  are  used 
more  often  than  skips  of  thirds,  sixths.  3  Novel  melodic  lines  are  fre- 
quently created  by  distorting  simple  scale  passages;  e.  g. 


(atUtUrft) 


4  Within  a  given  section,  accidentals  occur  extremely  rarely,  and  chromati- 
cisms almost  never.  5  Pan-diatonic  harmony  prevails.  6  Abrupt  and  rather 
remote  changes  of  key-signature  occur,  such  as  from  four  sharps  to  three 
flats,  or  four  flats  to  no  accidentals.  7  Parallelisms  of  sevenths,  fifths,  and 


258  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

seconds  occur  as  freely  as  parallelisms  of  thirds.  8  Level  planes  of  emo- 
tion, with  terraced  changes  in  mood,  are  the  rule. 

Certain  features  in  Galindo's  music  do  seem  Mexican  enough j  anyone 
who  has  seen  the  terraced  farms  in  the  high  mountainous  regions  of 
Mexico  will  find  the  abrupt  changes  of  signature,  the  abrupt  changes  of 
mood  in  the  music,  and  the  abrupt  changes  of  pace  in  the  rhythmic  flow, 
reminiscent  of  the  step-like  cultivated  hillsides.  But  there  is. in  reality 
little  that  is  obviously  regional  in  most  of  Galindo's  music.  It  is  therefore 
to  be  anticipated  that  his  music  will  not  draw  to  itself  the  attention  it 
might  otherwise  receive.  The  Sones  Mariachi  sounded  enough  like  a 
curio  shop  to  attract  listeners,  as  did  also  Arroyos  (premiered  at  the  Berk- 
shire Festival,  August  17,  1942),  but  his  1942  Piano  Concerto  and  his 
1945  Noctwno  for  orchestra  sounded  no  distinctly  regional  notes.  His  is  a 
vital  message  even  in  his  most  abstract  moments,  however,  and  it  is  much 
to  be  hoped  that  recitalists  in  this  country  will  discover  his  piano  preludes, 
his  violin  and  his  'cello  sonatas. 

EL  GRUPO  DE  LOS  CUATRO  U 

During  1935,  while  Galindo  was  filling  a  temporary  music  teaching 
post  at  a  rural  normal  school  (state  of  Hidalgo),  one  of  his  former  fellow- 
classmates  from  the  conservatory  urged  him  to  return  to  the  capital  and 
help  stage  a  composition  concert.  Salvador  Contreras  was  the  initiator  of 
what  soon  came  to  be  called  El  Grufo  ie  los  Cuatro— ''the  group  of 
four."  Contreras  suggested  that  he,  Galindo,  Moncayo,  and  Ayala,  present 
a  program  showing  what  the  four  of  them  had  done  since  Chavez  had 
stopped  teaching  his  class  in  "music-creation"  (which  all  four  had  at- 
tended together).  The  uniting  of  their  forces  in  a  .November,  1935,  con- 
cert at  the  Teatro  Orientation  proved  a  happy  idea  5  a  newspaper  critic 
fathered  the  phrase  Grwpodelos  Cuatro>  and  the  four  found  attention  as  a 
group  which  might  have  been  denied  them  had  they  sought  individual 
recognition. 

The  Russian  Five  and  the  French  Six  were  groups  fresh  in  the  memory 
of  all  students  of  music  history.  Why  not  a  Mexican  Four?  The  first  con- 
cert in  which  they  consciously  appealed  to  the  public  as  "the  Four"  oc- 
curred ia  'May,  1936.  The  idea  of  "the  Four"  grew  apace.  Pictures  of  the 
four  together  were  widely  distributed  for  publicity  purposes.  The  idea 
tbat  from  such  a  group  would  come  the  music  of  the  future  was  further 


DURING  THE  TWENTIETH  CENTURY        259 

advanced  in  newspaper  and  magazine  articles.  Nicolas  Slonimsky  in  his 
Music  of  Latin  America  (published  in  1945)  introduced  English  readers 
to  "the  Four/'  and  in  various  other  publications  in  the  United  States 
during  the  subsequent  decade  the  group  was  referred  to  as  an  earnest 
of  Mexico's  musical  renascence. 

Ayala,  oldest  of  the  group,  is  a  Yucatecan.  He  often  has  called  himself 
an  autodidact.  In  1938  he  published  an  astounding  article  in  which  he 
announced  Mexico  had  no  authentic  teachers  of  conducting  or  perform- 
ance. For  his  denial  of  any  personal  indebtednesses  to  teachers  and  for  his 
sweeping  condemnation  of  the  music  teaching  profession  in  Mexico  he 
was  not  thanked.  Soon  after  publishing  this  article  he  removed  to  Morelia  j 
after  two  or  three  years  there  he  returned  home  to  Merida,  Yucatan. 
Having  at  last  arrived  home,  he  came  into  his  own.  He  was  appointed 
director  of  the  M6rida  Conservatory,  conductor  of  the  M6rida  Orchestra, 
and  conductor  of  the  Yucatecan  Band.  During  1940  he  visited  Dallas, 
Texas,  where  he  conducted  an  orchestra.  His  impressions  of  the  United 
States  were  kter  crystallized  in  a  symphonic  poem  entitled  "My  Trip  to 
the  United  States/'  premiered  at  Merida  in  1947. 

Ayala's  musical  style  is  eclectic.  At  one  moment  he  re-echoes  the 
strains  he  played  during  his  several  years  as  violinist  in  a  cabaret  orchestra. 
.At  another  he  evokes  the  primitive  Maya  past,  using  only  pentatonic 
scales.  His  better  known  works  are  Tribu  ("Tribe"),  premiered  by  Chavez 
with  the  Orquesta  Sinfonica  de  M&tico  October  1 8, 1 935  5  Paisafe  ("Land- 
scape"), an  orchestral  suite  in  three  parts  written  in  19355  Panoramas  de 
Mexico,  an  orchestral  suite  in  three  parts  ("Sonora,"  "Veracruz,"  "Yuca- 
tan") written  in  19363  Los  Yaquis  y  Los  Seris,  two  suites  employing  In- 
dian percussion  instruments  ( 1 93  8)  j  and  El  H ombre  Maya,  a  ballet  suite. 
Regional  patriotism  is  strongly  developed  in  Yucatan,  and  the  Yucatecan 
wishes  his  region  to  shine  musically.  Ayala  since  his  return  home  has 
therefore  been  enthusiastically  supported. 

Contreras,  like  Ayala,  has  been  diverted  from  his  single-minded  de- 
votion to  composition.  His  1940  Musica  far  a  Orquesta  Stnj6mcay  a  twelve- 
minute  piece,  was  premiered  by  Chavezj  the  OSM  also  played  the  first 
performance  of  Contreras^  Suite  (1947).  His  other  principal  works  in- 
clude: a  String  Quartet,  a  Violin  and  'Cello  Sonata,  and  Obertwra  en 
jonna  de  danza. 

Jos6  Pablo  Moncayo,  born  in  Guadalajara,  has  distinguished  himself  as 
conductor,  pianist,  and  composer.  His  catalogue  of  original  works  in- 


i6o  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

dudes  Tres  fiezas  fara  pano  solo  (published  by  Edidones  Mexicanas  de 
Musica),  a  1944  Sinfonietta,  a  1947  triptych  for  symphonic  orchestra 
entitled  Tres  fiezas,  an  Homenaje  a  Cervantes  ("Tribute  to  Cervantes"), 
a  Huafango,  and  music  for  a  one-act  opera,  in  three  scenes,  La  Mvlata  de 
Cordoba  (1948). 

The  story  of  the  mulatto  enchantress  who  lived  shortly  before  inde- 
pendence in  Cordoba,  the  half-way  town  between  Puebla  and  Veracruz, 
has  taken  on  almost  the  quality  of  the  legendary  in  Mexican  story-telling. 
Because  she  lived  alone,  had  no  visible  sources  of  income,  and  yet  never 
lacked  for  anything  and  was  in  fact  even  able  out  of  her  largesse  to  supply 
the  wants  of  the  poor,  she  earned  the  reputation  of  being  a  sorceress.  She 
was  haled  before  the  tribunal  of  the  Inquisition  at  Mexico  City,  but 
never  admitted  her  guilt.  When  the  Holy  Office  pronounced  she  was  in 
league  with  the  devil,  she  eluded  their  condign  punishment.  She  mys- 
teriously vanished  like  a  puff  of  smoke,  leaving  behind  only  a  cryptic 
word  on  her  cell-wall.  This  legend  supplied  the  two  librettists,  Agustfn 
Lazo  and  Xavier  Villaurrutia,  with  material  first  for  a  ballet-scenario, 
utilized  by  Bias  Galindoj  later  they  re-worked  the  material  into  a  one-act 
opera  libretto  for  Moncayo's  use.12 

Moncayo's  creative  output  has  not  been  as  profuse  as  many  of  his  friends 
had  anticipated  when  he  first  began  to  write.  The  obvious  reason  is  the 
multiplicity  of  other  money-making  activities  in  which  he  has  of  necessity 
engaged.  His  problem,  like  that  of  most  other  Mexican  composers  of 
this  century,  has  been  that  .of  the  free-lance.  His  piece  most  frequently 
played,  the  Hvafangoy  is  without  doubt  one  of  the  most  brilliant  in  the 
entire  Mexican  repertory.  If  he  can  somehow  find  time  to  add  other 
compositions  of  similar  pith  to  his  catalogue,  his  promise  will  be  justified. 
But  up  to  the  present  he  seems  destined  to  be  like  Dukas  a  one-piece 
composer  with  all  repeat  performances  listing  the  same  title. 

LUIS  SANDI  ( 1905 — )  18 

At  the  same  1948  festival  during  which  Moncayo's  one-act  opera  was 
presented,  another  one-act  opera  entitled  Carlota  was  produced.  Music 
for  the  latter  was  written  by  Luis  Sandi,  who  at  the  time  he  wrote  it  was 
Music  Chief  within  the  Department  of  Fine  Arts,  a  government  bureau. 
(He  resigned  this  post  in  the  fall  of  1951.)  His  services  to  Mexican  music 
have  thus  been  dial  in  character— he  has  been  a  creator  and  at  the  same 


DURING  THE  TWENTIETH  CENTURY        161 

time  a  coordinator  of  educational  activities  in  the  republic  His  success  in 
doing  both  is  proved  by  his  ability  to  do  two  such  diverse  things  in  the 
same  year  as  finish  an  opera  and  simultaneously  complete  a  new  edition 
of  a  music  history  school  text. 

As  an  educator  he  deserves  unstinted  praise.  He  has  prepared  not  one 
but  a  series  of  graded  texts  for  teaching  music  history  and  theory.  These 
texts  emphasize  the  role  Mexico  has  pkyed  in  the  history  of  the  art. 
Secondary  students  using  his  texts  have  learned  the  names  of  Mexico's 
chief  musicians  not  only  of  the  embalmed  past  but  also  of  dynamic  present. 
In  his  Introduction  al  Estudio  de  la  Musica,  1948  edition,  Sandi  pre- 
sented music  theory  and  history  as  a  synchronized  study.  It  is  his  belief 
that  "appreciation"  courses  for  secondary  students  should  teach  the  rudi- 
ments of  music  theory  first.  The  first  eight  units  in  his  29-unit  text  deal 
with  what  we  usually  in  the  United  States  call  "fundamentals  of  theory." 
The  tenth  and  eleventh  units  deal  with  pre-Columbian  music  in  Mexico 
and  Peru  respectively.  The  last  two  units  deal  with  colonial  and  republican 
music  in  Mexico. 

An  analysis  of  the  music  examples  in  Sandi's  texts  proves  illuminating. 
Side  by  side  with  excerpts  from  Bach,  Mozart,  Mendelssohn,  and  Mus- 
sorgsky, are  contemporary  examples  from  Revueltas  and  Stravinsky.  A 
Mexican  corrido  shares  a  place  with  the  sequence,  Victimae  PascAali. 
Marckita  el  Alma,  the  cancion  memcana  published  in  Ponce's  arrangement 
during  1913,  appears  side  by  side  with  an  Alfonso  the  Wise  canfiga.  The 
obvious  advantages  of  Sandi's  treatment  are  many:  students  do  not  find 
the  music  of  their  own  country  neglected ;  students  do  not  find  their  own 
national  music  branded  as  essentially  inferior  5  students  cover  the  whole 
sweep  of  Mexican  music  history,  devoting  as  much  attention  to  the  present 
era  as  they  do  to  past  centuries. 

It  has  long  been  known  by  educators  in  the  United  States  that  American 
composers  are  slighted  in  music  appreciation  courses.  At  least  theoretically, 
Sandi's  distribution  has  much  to  commend  it  to  authors  this  side  of  the 
Rio  Grande.  His  other  educational  theories  deserve  mention.  He  believes 
strongly  all  primary  and  secondary  emphasis  should  be  placed  on  singing, 
not  playing  of  instruments.  Elementary  emphasis  on  instruments,  he  feels, 
may  yield  good  results  in  a  country  such  as  the  United  States  where 
schools  can  rent  or  lend  instruments  to  children,  but  Mexico  is  not  able 
to  render  school  children  such  free  or  near-free  services  involving  ex- 
pensive outlays  yet.  -He  strongly  hopes  to  decentralize  music  advantages 


262  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

so  that  children  in  outlying  districts  will  share  those  children  now  possess 
only  at  Mexico  City.  He  points  to  the  number  of  important  modern  com- 
posers who  have  originated  in  remote  towns  and  villages  as  one  reason 
Mexico  must  spread  its  advantages,  since  talent  has  a  way  of  springing  up 
everywhere,  not  just  in  the  Federal  District.  He  believes  in  stimulating 
as  much  original  composition  among  elementary  and  secondary  students 
as  possible,  and  to  this  end  has  organized  frequent  school  contests  for 
creative  work. 

In  1938  he  organized  at  the  capital  the  Coro  fie  Madrigalistas>  a  choral 
group  singing  principally  a  cappella  music.  This  society  has  won  accolades 
of  praise  for  its  singing  of  Guerrero  and  Victoria,  but  true  to  his  convictions 
concerning  living  music,  he  has  conducted  his  singers  in  equally  telling 
performances  of  such  modern  Mexican  works  as  Rafael  J.  Tello's  short 
requiem,  Pequena  Misa  Funebre*  Sandi's  madrigalists  are  without  doubt 
one  of  the  foremost  a  cappella  organizations  in  Latin  America  today. 

His  own  compositions  include  a  Concertino  fara  Flauta  y  orquesta>  a 
La  Hoja  de  Plata  Suite  ("Silverplate  Suite"),  None  for  small  orchestra, 
and  Feria  ("The  Fair")  for  orchestra  with  additional  Indian  instruments. 
His  was  the  arrangement  of  Yaqui  Music  Chavez  played  in  his  May, 
1940,  concerts  in  New  York. 

MIGUEL  BERNAL  JIMENEZ  (l9!0 — ) 

Bernal  Jimenez  sang  in  the  Morelia  Cathedral  choir  as  a  child,  and 
studied  in  what  is  now  the  Escuela  Superior  Ofidal  de  Musica  Sagrada 
in  Morelia.  The  founder  of  that  school,  Jose  M.  Villasenor,  divined 
BernaPs  potentialities  in  Catholic  music,  and  sponsored  his  trip  to  Rome. 
From  1928  until  1933  Bernal  studied  at  the  Pontifical  Institute  of  Sacred 
Music,  where  he  became  a  polished  organist  and  an  expert  in  Gregorian 
music.  In  1936  Bernal  was  appointed  director  of  the  Morelia  school  where 
he  himself  had  started. 

His  compositions  since  his  return  home  have  reflected  the  local  scene. 
His  Michoacdn,  a  symphonic  suite  written  in  1940,  contains  three  move- 
ments, Alborada  (C£Daybreak"),  Canrion,  and  Corrida.  Scored  for  large 
orchestra  (eleven  woodwind  players,  four  trumpeters,  harp  and  piano,  in 
addition  to  other  standard  components),  this  suite  shows  Bernal  a  com- 
plete master  of  orchestration.  His  melodies,  prevailingly  diatonic,  are 
draped  oftenest  in  a  resplendent  gown  of  chromatic  harmony.  With 


DURING  THE  TWENTIETH   CENTURY        263 

Respighian  opulence  the  Alborada  in  the  Michoacan  Suite  develops  a  final 
fortissimo  climax  in  an  A  major  section  marked  "Grandioso."  The  Can- 
d6n  contains  a  throbbing  melody  sung  by  all  the  strings,  except  basses  5 
the  woodwind  repartee  accompanying  this  lush  melody  adds  suitable 
shimmer  to  the  total  sound.  The  Corrida  explores  a  combination  of  %'s 
and  %'s.  Three  variations  on  the  corrido  theme  are  followed  by  a  fugue 
(also  with  alternating  %  and  %  measures).  During  the  fugue  exposition 
a  liberal  use  of  accented  "wrong  notes"  in  the  counterpoints,  of  doubled 
leading  tones,  of  fifths  on  successive  beats  in  two-part  passages,  exhibit 
Bernal  in  one  of  his  rare,  wryly  humorous,  veins.  After  a  fugue  develop- 
ment a  la  Weinberger,  Bernal  pushes  forward  to  a  frenetic  climax.  At  the 
very  end  of  the  whole  affair,  the  orchestral  players  are  instructed  to 
shout,  "Viva  Michoacan!" 

In  1941  BernaPs  Noche  en  Morelia  ("Night  in  Morelia")  added  to 
his  growing  reputation  as  a  composer.  Chavez's  playing  of  this  "night- 
piece"  in  an  Orquesta  Sinfonica  de  Mexico  concert  provided  an  occasion 
for  rapturous  applause.  On  September  12,  1941,  BernaPs  opera,  Tata 
Vasco  y  which  dealt  with  the  Vasco  de  Quiroga,  first  bishop  of  Michoacan, 
was  premiered  at  Moreliaj  immediately  there  was  agitation  for  its  pres- 
entation at  the  Palado  de  Bellas  Artes  in  Mexico  City.  Plans  for  its 
presentation  in  the  capital  were  at  the  last  moment  frustrated,  however, 
since  it  was  felt  the  opera  might  stir  religious  conflict.  Unlike  Verdi,  who 
could  change  the  locale  of  Rigoletto  so  as  not  to  offend  the  Austrians, 
Bernal  could  not  change  the  locale  of  Tata  Vasco.  The  presentation  of 
Noche  en  Morelia  soon  after  the  Tata  Vasco  incident  showed,  however, 
that  Chavez  was  friendly  enough  to  Bernal's  non-religious  music. 

BernaPs  Tata  Vasco ,  despite  the  difference  in  religious  tradition  from 
which  it  springs,  shows  certain  striking  similarities  to  another  religious 
opera  of  our  time,  Vaughan  Williams's  The  Pilgrim's  Progress,  first  pre- 
sented in  1951.  Both  are  essentially  pageants  j  in  both  great  crowds  of 
people  are  handled  with  the  result  that  choral  singing  pkys  a  dominant 
role.  The  plot  interest  in  both  lags,  possibly  because  mundane  interests 
such  as  the  love  of  man  and  woman,  or  the  desire  to  achieve  power,  are 
eliminated.  The  principal  characters  seem  more  symbolic  than  actual  in 
both:  the  bishop,  shown  as  a  great  friend  and  protector  of  the  Indians, 
seems  superpersonal  because  of  his  virtue;  the  pilgrim  because  exclusively 
concerned  with  spiritual  interests  seems  also  to  live  always  in  a  transcend- 
ent world 


264  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

In  both,  musical  fragments  several  centuries  old  are  blended  with  the 
composers'  own  material.  Vaughan  Williams  used  the  hymn  tune, 
"York,"  and  Bernal  fragments  of  Gregorian  chant  for  analogous  pur- 
poses. The  extraneous  fragments  Vaughan  Williams  used  were,  however, 
better  integrated  into  the  total  score  than  were  those  Bernal  used  The 
eclecticism  of  the  latter's  style  offends  many  who  have  heard  his  opera, 
though  others  consider  it  dramatically  justifiable.  The  Tarascans  sing  neo- 
Indian  melodies,  the  clergy  Gregorian  chant,  and  the  conquistadores 
romances.  Even  if  the  music  sounds  "pasted  together,"  the  close  juxtaposi- 
tion of  opposed  styles  must  be  admitted  a  useful  means  of  inducing  ten- 
sion in  an  otherwise  static  score. 

BernaPs  ballet,  Tjmgambato,  also  with  a  religious  theme>  was  presented 
at  the  Palacio  de  Bellas  Artes  in  August,  1943.  The  ballet-plot  has  to  do 
with  the  Virgin's  displeasure  at  the  constant  internecine  warfare  of  the 
Spanish  conquering  population  during  the  seventeenth  century. 

Bernal  does  not  see  "Indianism"  as  Mexico's  only  musical  salvation.  In 
a  1941  article  he  asked  rhetorically:  "Must  we  elevate  to  a  dogma  every- 
thing done  by  indigenous  and  mestizo  music?"  14  He  went  on  to  say 
that  popular  art,  simply  because  intuitive,  was  not  therefore  beyond  im- 
provement. At  heart  he  would  seem  to  favor  the  Pedro  de  Gante  ap- 
proach to  the  Indian,  the  attitude  of  noblesse  oblige. 

During  the  1945-6  season  he  toured  the  United  States  as  organist.  In 
June,  1948,  Tata  Vasco  reduced  to  oratorio  form  was  presented  at  Madrid 
during  a  visit  sponsored  by  the  Franco  regime.15  The  Spanish  Orquesta 
Nacional  played  several  of  his  pieces  during  the  same  month.  The  Spanish 
newspapers  gave  him  much  favorable  publicity,  and  though  his  visit  was 
not  comparable  with  that  of  Revueltas's  1937-8  visit  in  a  political  sense, 
it  nevertheless  could  be  said  that  no  Mexican  since  Revueltas  had  been 
so  feted  in  the  Spanish  capital. 

SCHOLA  CANTORUMJ  NUESTRA  MtfsiCAj  M&CICO  EN  EL  ARTE 

BernaPs  services  to  musical  scholarship  include  not  only  his  reports  on 
conservatories  in  eighteenth  century  Mexico  and  on  orchestral  music  in 
his  native  Morelia,  but  also  his  editorship  of  the  monthly  magazine, 
Schola  Cantorum.  His  intention  in  this  monthly  is  twofold,  practical  and 
scholarly.  He  prints  historical  documents  pertaining  to  sacred  music  in 
Hispanic  America,  and  at  the  same  time  includes  practical  suggestions 


DURING  THE  TWENTIETH  CENTURY        265 

for  present-day  choirmasters  throughout  Latin  America.  Though  some- 
what neglected  in  United  States  libraries,  the  magazine  in  nearly  every 
issue  contains  at  least  one  article  of  lasting  worth. 

Another  music  periodical  which  from  time  to  time  has  included  articles 
of  extraordinary  value  is  the  quarterly  published  at  Mexico  City  under 
Rodolfo  Halffter's  editorship  entitled  Nuestra  Musica.  A  typical  issue 
of  this  latter  magazine  includes  one  article  having  to  do  with  the  history 
of  music  in  Mexico,  a  second  with  music  today  in  Mexico,  a  third  having 
to  do  with  music  in  another  Latin  American  republic,  and  a  fourth  dealing 
with  music  in  the  United  States  or  Europe.  The  editorial  board  includes 
Jesus  Bal  y  Gay,  Carlos  Chavez,  Bias  GaKndo,  J.  Pablo  Moncayo,  Adolfo 
Salazar,  and  Luis  Sandi.  Mexico  en  el  Arte,  a  periodical  devoted  to  the 
several  fine  arts  in  Mexico  (published  by  the  Departamento  de  Bellas 
Artes),  almost  invariably  includes  one  article  on  Mexican  music.  Both 
these  latter  magazines  are  handsomely  produced. 


OTHER  COMPOSERS 

The  vitality  of  modern  Mexican  music  is  perhaps  nowhere  better 
illustrated  than  in  the  profusion  of  composers  with  sufficient  merit  to 
win  mention  in  such  reference  manuals  as  Slonimsky's  1945  Music  of 
Latin  America.™  And  it  is  probably  true  that  where  one  such  composer 
as  Jos6  F.  Vasquez  has  engaged  the  attention  of  a  visiting  celebrity  such 
as  Stokowski,  or  Iturbi,  or  Slonimsky,  ten  other  Mexican  composers  have 
failed  to  make  such  contacts,  and  therefore  are  not  listed  in  any  catalogue 
of  names.  Vasquez,  for  instance,  showed  his  piano  concerto  to  Iturbi,  who 
wrote  across  the  face  of  the  score:  "My  impression  of  this  work  is  a  very 
favorable  onej  the  balance  between  piano  and  orchestra  seems  especially 
well  handled.  I  add  my  note  of  personal  admiration  for  Mr.  Vasquez." 
But  others  have  not  had  the  good  fortune  of  personal  contact  with 
Iturbi. 

The  Fleisher  Collection  in  the  Free  Public  Library  of  Philadelphia 
contains  thousands  of  pages  of  twentieth  century  Mexican  orchestral 
works.  Most  of  these  were  obtained  in  photographic  reproduction  by 
Slonimsky  during  his  "fishing  expedition"  in  Latin  American  musical 
waters.  Lincoln  Igou  made  this  contemporary  Mexican  orchestral  music 
in  the  Fleisher  Collection  the  subject  of  his  Ph.  D.  dissertation  offered  in 
1946  to  Northwestern  University  at  Evanston  with  the  title,  "Contem- 


266  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

porary  Symphonic  Activity  in  Mexico."  Even  after  writing  over  400  pages 
of  analyses  Dr.  Igou  did  not,  however,  feel  he  had  exhaustively  investi- 
gated the  Mexican  scores  in  the  Fleisher  Collection.  If  after  his  lengthy 
coverage  he  did  not  exhaust  the  resources  of  the  Fleisher  Collection, 
which  is  at  best  a  representative  rather  than  a  complete  gathering  of 
modern  Mexican  scores,  he  could  not  have  treated  the  whole  of  the  con- 
temporary Mexican  symphonic  repertory  without  extending  his  disserta- 
tion to  several  volumes.  That  which  he  did  investigate  was  of  sufficient 
magnitude  to  convince  him  the  modern  Mexican  repertory  is  one  of  the 
most  considerable  national  repertories  of  our  time. 


POPULAR  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO  TODAY 

The  symphonic  repertory  because  of  its  greater  artistic  pretension 
naturally  attracts  the  attention  of  scholars.  But  the  "commercial"  music 
produced  in  Mexico  today,  though  by  its  very  nature  ephemeral,  deserves 
at  least  passing  attention.  Certainly  today  in  Mexico  the  broad  populace 
knows  the  music  of  Agustfn  Lara,  Mexico's  Irving  Berlin,  far  better  than 
the  music  of  any  symphonic  composer  thus  far  named  in  this  chapter. 
Lara,  born  at  Tlacotalpan  in  the  state  of  Veracruz  in  1900,  has  made 
tremendous  sums  of  money  from  his  commercial  songs.  He  has  been 
married  to  Mexico's  Hedy  Lamarr  j  he  has  drawn  full  houses  night  after 
night  when  he  has  left  off  radio  work  for  awhile  in  order  to  act  in  playsj 
he  has  achieved  renown  throughout  the  entire  Latin  world  with  his 
records. 

Alberto  Domfnguez's  Frenesi  ("Madness"),  Consuelo  Velasquez's 
Sesame  Mucho  ("Kiss  Me  a  Lot"),  and  Lara's  Coda  Noche  un  Amor 
("Love  Every  Night")  have  made  their  composers  internationally  fa- 
mous, in  the  same  sense  that  Hoagy  Carmichael  (composer  of  "Stardust") 
is  famous.  Nothing  peculiarly  Mexican  is  to  be  encountered  in  these  com- 
mercial songs.  Cuban,  Argentinian,  and  Brazilian  rhythmic  elements  in- 
tenneshj  the  cosmopolitan  musical  atmosphere  guarantees  these  "hits" 
wider  audiences  than  the  mere  Republic  of  Mexico  could  ever  provide 
Lara,  Dominguez,  Prado,  or  Velasquez.17  The  words  are  often  extremely 
suggestive,  and  love,  kisses,  the  moon  above,  flowers,  and  love  again,  are 
the  topks  treated.  The  music  adheres  to  the  basic  tonic-dominant  pat- 
terns, and  the  melodies  are  rarely  individualized. 


DURING  THE  TWENTIETH  CENTURY        267 

FOREIGN  CONTRIBUTORS  TO  MEXICAN  MUSICAL  LIFE 

Just  as  the  various  waves  of  European  unrest  have  brought  to  the 
United  States  certain  distinguished  scholars  and  composers  during  recent 
years,  so  waves  of  unrest  in  Europe  have  brought  notable  musical  per- 
sonalities to  Mexico.  Chiefly  these  immigrants  in  Mexico  have  come  from 
Spam.  At  various  stages  in  our  recital  of  events  we  have  mentioned  Jestis 
Bal  y  Gayj  Bal  y  Gay  through  the  intermediacy  of  Professor  J.  B.  Trend 
at  Cambridge  University  made  certain  English  connections  before  com- 
ing to  Mexico.  He  is  a  composer,  musicologist,  and  music  critic  His 
Serenade  for  Strings,  published  by  Ediciones  Mexicanas,  has  frequently 
been  pkyed  by  the  Orquesta  Sinfonica  de  Mexico.  His  own  music,  like 
his  scholarly  writing,  is  formally  impeccable.  His  melodic  lines  are  al- 
ways beautifully  contrived,  and  though  never  lush  his  string  writing  is 
always  smoothly  sonorous.  Arthur  Foote's  Suite  for  Strings  in  E  and  Bal  y 
Gay's  Serenade  are  compositions  with  similar  virtues. 

Rodolf o  Halffter,  not  perhaps  as  well  known  in  Spain  as  was  his  brother, 
Ernesto,  nevertheless  occupied  a  position  in  the  forefront  of  Spanish  life. 
He  has  been  editor  of  the  Ediciones  Mexicanas  de  Musica,  editor-in-chief 
of  Nuestra  Miisicay  and  yet  has  found  time  to  continue  an  active  career  as 
composer  since  arriving  in  Mexico.  Adolfo  Salazar,  one  of  the  most  dis- 
tinguished musk  historians  of  our  epoch,  has  been  music  critic  for 
Novedades,  a  daily,  and  has  continued  a  fecund  scholar  during  his  Mexi- 
can residency. 

The  proportion  of  foreigners  contributing  to  Mexican  music  life  is 
distinctly  smaller  than  the  proportion  contributing  to  United  States  music 
life.  Each  person  who  has  come  to  Mexico  has  been  handled  as  an  in- 
dividual, and  the  guiding  principle  has  been:  no  one  shall  be  invited 
whose  presence  here  will  displace  a  Mexican.  Persons  who  have  come 
have  uniformly  been  expected  to  cooperate  rather  than  dominate,  and 
immigrants  without  prior  knowledge  of  the  language  have  been  rigor- 
ously excluded 

OUTLOOK  FOR  THE  FUTURE 

Despite  the  presence  of  a  minute  number  of  immigrant  musicians,  it 
is  nevertheless  obvious  that  the  achievements  of  the  century  have  been 


268  MUSIC  IN   MEXICO 

the  doing  not  of  these  immigrants  but  of  the  Mexicans  themselves.  With 
a  population  vastly  inferior  in  numbers  to  that  of  the  United  States — 
something  less  than  a  sixth — Mexican  creative  accomplishment  has  yef 
kept  pace  with  that  of  her  more  populous  northern  neighbor.  If  during 
our  generation  she  cannot  boast  of  Stravinsky,  Schoenberg,  and  Hinde- 
mith  as  new-found  "Mexicans,"  at  least  her  indigenous  school  can  at 
every  point  be  compared  favorably  with  the  American  indigenous  school. 
Her  achievement  of  the  immediate  past  is,  moreover,  the  best  guaranty  of 
her  continued  progress. 


CONCLUSION 


Mexico  is  a  land  with  a  dynamic,  living  music.  But  the  reconstruction 
of  the  past  makes  it  ever  clearer  that  Mexico  not  only  now,  but  through 
the  long  sweep  of  four  centuries  has  been  a  country  whose  total  musical 
contribution  places  her  in  the  forefront  of  Western  Hemisphere  republics. 
As  more  and  more  documents  bearing  on  Mexico's  musical  history  come 
to  light,  her  neighbors  on  either  side  can  confidently  anticipate  ever 
securer  reason  to  congratulate  her  on  the  achievement  of  the  past,  as  well 
as  the  promise  of  the  future. 

NOTES 

1.  Porfirio  Diaz,  from  whose  first  name  the  adjective  Porfirian  is  taken,  ruled  Mexico 
from  1876-191 1.  Nominally  he  was  president. 

2.  La  Legende  de  Rudel:  Poeme  lyrique  en  trois  forties,  Op.  27  (Leipzig:  Friedrich 
Hofmeister,  1906),  was  Castro's  second  opera,  the  first  having  been  Ateimba: 
Drama  lirico  en  tres  Actos  (Mexico:  Nagel,  Sues.,  1900).  The  Mexican  press 
notices  for  La  Legend*  were  not  uniformly  favorable.  In  Campa's  opinion  (Criticas 
Musicales,  pp.  311-2)   it  was,  however,  Castro's  best  work.  "I  do  not  know 
another  Mexican  lyric  work  so  replete  with  poetic  sentiment,  depth  of  feeling, 
so  competently  written,  and  so  continuously  inspired,"  Campa  asserted. 

3.  Gustavo  E.  Campa,  of.  cit.,  pp.  170—4. 

4.  Manuel  M.  Ponce,  Nuevos  Escritos  Musicales  (Mexico:  Editorial  Stylo,  1948), 
p.  25. 

5.  A  complete  ChaVez  bibliography  was  published  by  the  Pan  American  Union 
(Music  Series,  No.  10)  in  1944:  Carlos  Chavez:  Catalog  of  his  Works,  with  a 
Preface  by  Herbert  Weinstock.  In  dealing  with  ChaVez's  career  we  have  had 
recourse  to  certain  supplementary  materials  such  as-  Otto  Mayer-Serra's  "Carlos 
Chavez:  Una  Monografia  Critica,"  Revista  Musical  MexUana  I  (1042),  c  ff., 
35  *%  61  ff.,  and  75  ff.  " . 


DURING  THE  TWENTIETH  CENTURY        269 

A  classified  catalogue  of  Ch£vez's  composition  will  be  found  in  the  1944  Pan 
American  Union  brochure,  pp.  i-io.  To  this  1944  list  may  be  added  the  fol- 
lowing compositions: 

PUBLISHER 
OR  MS 


DATE 


TITLE 


MEDIUM 


194-3 


1943-4 


Concerto  de  Vivaldi  Orchestra 
en  Sol  menor 

Cuarteto  Doble,  Ballet  Wind  and 

for  "The  Daughter  of  String 


PLACE  AND 

DATE  OF 
PUBLICATION 


MS 


MS 


MS 

Ediciones  Mexican  as  Mexico 

de  Musica  1946 

Ediciones  Mexicanas  Mexico 

de  Musica  1951 

MS 

MS 

Ediciones  Mexicanas  Mexico 

de  Musica  ^949 

MS 

MS 


6.  For  a  bibliography  of  Revueltas's  works  and  for  additional  musical  analysis  of 
his  style  see  O.  Mayer-Serra,  "Silvestre  Revueltas  and  Musical  Nationalism  in 
Mexico,"  Musical  Quarterly,  April,  1941. 

7.  Nicolas  Slonimsky  in  Music  of  Latin  America  (New  York:  Thomas  Y.  Crowell, 
194.5),  p.  249,  says  the  title  means  that  eight  performers  are  required  for  rendition 
of  it  Both  interpretations  of  the  title  have  been  advanced,  but  in  neither  case  is 
the  significance  of  the  tide  profound. 

8.  A.  Copland,  "Mexican  Composer,"  Near  York  Times,  May  9,  1937. 

9.  For  complete  biography  see  Bias  Galindo,  "C.  Huizar,"  Nuestra  Musica,  May, 
1946  (bibliography  of  his  works  appears  on  p.  64). 

10.  For  further  biographical  details  see  Francisco  Agea,  "Bias  Galindo,"  Mexico  en 
el  Arte,  November,  1948  (bibliography  of  his  works  on  last  four  unnumbered 
pages), 

11.  For  a  detailed  study  see  B.  Galindo,  "Compositores  de  mi  Generacion,"  Nuestra 
Musica,  April,  1948.  J 

12.  Complete  text  of  libretto  in  Me&co  en  el  Arte,  August,  1948.  The  significance 
of  La  Mulata  is  discussed  in  Luis  Herrera  de  la  Fuente,  "La  6pera  de  Bellas 
Artes,"  Mexico  en  el  Arte,  September,  1948. 


Colchis" 

Quartet 

1943-4 

Third  String  Quartet 

String 

Quartet 

1946 

Canto  a  la  Tierra 

Chorus  and 

Piano 

1947 

Suite:  "La  Hija  de 

Orchestra 

Colquide" 

1947 

Toccata  for  Orchestra 

Orchestra 

1948 

Fuga 

Piano 

1949 

Homenaje  a  Chofin 

Piano 

(Etude) 

1948-50 

Concerto  for  Violin 

Violin  and 

and  Orchestra 

Orchestra 

1950 

Homenaje  a  Chofin 

Piano 

(Three  additional 

Etudes) 

27o  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

13.  For  a  more  extended  survey  of  Sandi's  works  see  C,  Chavez,  "Luis  Sandi," 
Nutstra  MuAca}  July,  1949. 

14.  0.  Mayer-Serra,  "Tata  Vasco,"  Cmmwwcd)  September  12, 1941,  p.  487, 

15.  Schoh  Ctmtorm  (Morelia,  Michoadm),  June,  1948,  p,  90* 

1 6.  Slonimsky  in  his  chapter,  "Mexico/'  of*  #/.,  listed  twenty-eight  contemporary 
Mexican  composers  whom  he  thought  worthy  of  biographical  treatment,  Of  those 
he  listed  but  whose  worb  we  have  not  selected  for  extended  analysis  the  follow- 
ing three  are  perhaps  the  most  important: 

Eduardo  Hernandez  Moncada  (1899—),  conductor  and  composer;  Carlos  Jimenez 
Mabarak  (c.  1912—),  pianist  and  composer;  and  Jose  Rolon  (1883-1945), 
symphonic  composer. 

The  names  of  the  nine  others  listed  in  his  book  were  Rafael  Adame  (1906—), 
Alfonso  de  Elias  (1902—),  Juan  B.  Fuentes  (1869—),  Juan  1*6*  Mariscal 
(1899—),  Mejia  Estanislao  (1882—),  Miguel  C.  Meza  (1903—),  Pedro  Mich- 
aca  (1897—),  Arnulfo  Miramontes  (1882—),  and  Jos£  Pomar  (1880— ),  Time 
has  yet  to  prove  the  worth  of  all  Slonimsky  listed,  but  at  least  their  profusion  is  a 
happy  augury.  Since  his  survey  other  new  talents  have  appeared  in  Mexico,  among 
them  Jose  Yves  Limantour,  brilliant  organizer  and  conductor  of  the  Jalapa 
orchestra,  and  Jesus  Ferrer,  promising  young  composer, 

The  new  composer  who  excited  perhaps  the  most  attention  during  1952  was  Luis 
Herrera  de  la  Fuente,  a  talent  who,  like  Chavez,  combines  rare  conducting  ability 
with  true  creative  instinct.  After  visiting  Mexico  in  the  autumn  of  1952,  Luigi 
DaUapiccola,  famous  Italian  composer,  stated  that  the  number  of  promising  creative 
talents  in  Mexico  today  exceeds  that  in  most  European  nations  which  he  has 
visited. 

17.  0.  Mayer-Sena,  El  Estodo  Pwmtt  It  k  Mum  M  Mtxico  (Washington: 
Pan  American  Union,  1946),  p.  22. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Since  information  on  music  in  Mexico  is  at  present  widely  dispersed,  it  has  seemed 
useful  to  list  below  certain  sources  which  contain  only  passing  references  to  music. 
We  have  chosen  to  list  such  works  because  we  have  ourselves  repeatedly  quarried 
rich  metal  from  books  and  articles  which  at  first  glance  seemed  highly  unlikely  ground 
over  which  to  prospect. 

Gilbert  Chase  in  the  section  on  "Mexico,"  pp.  157—201,  of  his  A  Guide  to  Latin 
American  Music  (Washington:  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office,  1945)  amassed 
almost  six  hundred  titles  of  articles  and  books  dealing  with  music  in  Mexico.  His 
bibliography  included  titles  of  works  in  Spanish,  English,  French,  German,  and 
Portuguese;  the  usefulness  of  his  list  was  further  enhanced  by  the  brief  annota- 
tions he  supplied.  Because  of  the  easy  availability  of  his  list,  we  have  chosen  not  to 
duplicate  it,  except  insofar  as  it  contains  titles  of  works  which  have  been  found 
positively  helpful  in  the  writing  of  our  own  book.  But  we  have  listed  a  large  num- 
ber of  titles  not  given  in  his  bibliography.  Our  additions  fall  within  the  two  follow- 
ing classes:  works  published  since  1945;  or  works  with  unpromising  tides  which 
Chase  did  not  examine,  but  which  have  proved  unexpectedly  useful.  Nearly  all 
titles  in  our  bibliography  represent  works  from  which  we  have  actually  quoted  either 
in  our  text  or  notes. 

Titles  of  musical  compositions  have  been  excluded.  In  1947  the  Conservatorio 
Nacional  at  Mexico  City  issued  a  35-page  checklist  of  Mexican  compositions  shelved 
in  its  library.  It  has  been  found  impracticable  to  reprint  that  list  here,  but  the  con- 
servatory librarian  is  prepared  to  supply  it  upon  payment  of  a  fee.  Additional  lists 
of  Mexican  compositions  may  be  obtained  from  the  following  representative  music 
publishers:  A.  Wagner  y  Levien  Sues.,  and  Ediciones  Mexicanas  de  Musica,  both 
of  M&tico,  D.F. 

Abreu  G6mez,  E.  Sor  Juana  Ms  de  la  Cruz:  Bibliografia  y  BibUoteca  (M&dco: 

Monografias  Bibliograficas,  1934). 
Acosta,  Jose  de.  Historia  Natural  y  Moral  de  las  Indias  (Seville:  Imp.  en  casa  de  luan 

de  Leon,  1590).  Reprinted  by  The  Hakluyt  Society,  1880,  in  English,  tjansla.- 

tion. 


272  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

Agea,  Francisco.  "Bias  Galindo,"  Mexico  en  el  Arte,  November,  1948. 

.  Orquesta  Sinjdnica  de  Mexico:  Notes,  1936  (I,  V),  1937  (II,  VII,  X,  XI), 

1938  (VI),  1939  (V,  X),  1942  (III,  IV,  V,  VII,  VIII,  IX,  XII,  XIII). 
Aguirre  Beltran,  Gonzales.  "The  Slave  Trade  in  Mexico,"  Hispanic  American  His- 
torical Review,  August,  1944. 
Alcazar  Molina,  Cayetano.  Los  Virreinatos  en  el  Sigh  XV I II  (Barcelona-Buenos 

Aires:  Salvat  editores,  s.a.,  1945). 
Altamirano,  Ignacio.  Discursos  de  Ignacio  M.  Altamirano  (1834-03)    (Mexico: 

Secretaria  de  Educacion  Publica,  1934). 
.  "D.  Melesio  Morales,"  Revista  Musical  Mexicana,  Jan.  7,  Feb.  7,  Mar.  7, 

and  May  7,  1943. 
Andrade,  Vicente  de  P.  Ensayo  bibliografico  mexicano  del  siglo  XVII  (Mexico: 

Imp.  del  Museo  Nacional,  1899). 
Angles,  Higinio.  La  Musica  en  la  Corte  de  Carlos  V  (Barcelona:  Institute  Espanol 

de  Musicologia,  1944). 

.  La  Musica  Espanola  .  ,  .  (Barcelona:  Biblioteca  Central,  1941). 

Arco  y  Garay,  Ricardo  del.  La  Sociedad  Espanola  en  las  Qbras  Dramaticas  de  Lope 

de  Vega  (Madrid:  Escelicer,  8.1.,  1942). 
Ayesteran,  Lauro.  Zipoli,  el  gran  compositor  y  organista  romano  del  1700  en  el  Rio 

de  La  Plata  (Montevideo:  Imp.  Uruguaya,  s.a.,  1941). 
Baker,  Theodor.  Vber  die  Musik  der  Nordamerikanischen  Wilden' (Leipzig:  Breit- 

kopf  und  Hartel,  1882). 
Baqueiro  Foster,  Ger6nimo.  "Aportaci6n  musical  de  M&rico  para  la  formacion  de 

la  biblioteca  americana  de  Caracas,  1882-1883,"  Revista  Musical  Mexicana^  July 

21,  1942. 
,  "El  secreto  arm6nico  y  modal  de  un  antiguo  aire  maya,"  Revista  Musical 

Mexicana,  January  7,  1942. 
— .  "Hernandez  Moncada,  el  compositor,"  Revista  Musical  Mexicana,  August 

21,  1942. 

-.  "El  Huapango,"  Revista  Musical  Mexicana,  April  21,  1942. 


Barrio  Lorenzot,  Juan  Francisco  del.  Ordenanzas  de  gremios  de  la  Nueva  Espana 

(Mexico:  Direccion  de  Tallcres  Grificos,  1920). 
Barwick,  Steven.  "Sacred  Vocal  Polyphony  in  Early  Colonial  Mexico,"  Harvard 

University  PAJ):  Diss.,  1949. 
Basalenque,  Diego.  Historia  de  la  provincia  .  .  .  de  Michoacdn,  del  orden  de 

NJ*<S.  Agustin  (M6nco:  Tip.  Barbedillo  y  comp.,  1886). 
Bautista  Plaza,  Juan.  "Music  in  Caracas  during  the  Colonial  Period,"  Musical  Quar- 

terly,  April,  1943. 
Beristain  y  Souza,  Jose  Mariano.  Biblioteca  Hispano  Americana  Setentrional  (Ame- 

cameca:  Colegio  Catolico,  1883). 
Bennodez  Plata,  Cristobal  (ed.).  Catalogo  de  Pasajeros  a  Indias  .  .  .  (Seville:  Imp.  • 

de  la  Gavidia,  1946). 

Bermudo,  Juan.  Declaration  de  instrumentos  (Osuna,  Juan  de  Leon,  1555). 
.  El  arte  tripharia  (Osuna,  Juan  de  Leon,  1550). 


BIBLIOGRAPHY  273 

Bernal  Jimenez,  Miguel.  El  archive  musical  del  Colegio  de  Santa  Rosa  de  Santa  Maria 
de  Valladolid  siglo  XV HI,  Morelia  Colonial  (Morelia:  Ediciones  de  la  Universidad 
Michoacana  de  San  Nicolas,  1939). 

.  "La  Musica  en  Valladolid  de  Michoacan"  Nuestra  Musica,  3er  Trimestre, 


Berrien,  William.  "Latin  American  Music,"  Concerning  Latin  American  Culture 

(New  York:  Columbia  University  Press,  1940). 
Blankenburg  Angela.  "German  Missionary  Writers  in  Paraguay,"  Mid-America 

(Chicago),  January,  1947. 
Blumenfeld,   Harold   (trans.).  Michael  Prattorius:  Syntagma  Musicum,  Vol.  II 

(New  Haven,  1949). 
Bonniwell,  William  R.  A  History  of  the  Dominican  Liturgy  1215-194$  (New 

York:  Joseph  F.  Wagner,  1945). 
Boturini  Benaduci,  Lorenzo.  Idea  de  una  nueva  Historia  General  de  la  America 

Septentrional  (Madrid:  Imp.  de  J.  de  Zuniga,  1746). 

Bowles,  Paul.  "On  Mexico's  Popular  Music,"  Modern  Music,  May-June,  1941. 
Braden,  Charles  S.  Religious  Aspects  of  the  Conquest  of  Mexico  (Durham:  Duke 

University  Press,  1930). 
Brasseur  de  Bourbourg,  Charles  Etienne.  Histoire  des  nations  civilisees  du  Mexique 

et  de  FAm&rique-centrale  (Paris:  Arthur  Bertrand,  1857). 
Bret6n  Fontecilla,  Cecilia.  "Una  obra  musical  de  Fray  Juan  Navarro,"  Schola  Can- 

torum,  August,  1942. 
Brinton,  Daniel  G.  Ancient  Nahuatl  Poetry  (Philadelphia,  1887). 

.  The  Guegueace,  A  Comedy-Ballet  (Philadelphia,  1883). 

Bullock,  William.  Six  Months?  Residence  and  Travels  in  Mexico  (London:  J.  Murray, 

1824). 

Burgoa,  Francisco  de.  Geographica  Description  de  la  Porte  Septentrional,  del  Polo 
Artico  de  la  America  (Mexico:  Publicaciones  del  Archivo  General  de  la  Nacion, 

1934). 
Caldcr6n  de  la  Barca,  Frances  Erskine.  Life  in  Mexico  during  a  residence  of  two 

years  in  that  country  (New  York:  E.  P.  Dutton,  1931). 
Campa,  Arthur  L.  Spanish  Folk-Poetry  in  New  Mexico  (Albuquerque:  University  of 

New  Mexico  Press,  1946). 

Campa,  Gustavo  K  Criticas  Musicales  (Paris:  Libreria  Paul  Ollendorff,  1911). 
Campos,  Ruben  M.  El  folklore  musical  de  las  ciudades  (Mexico1.  Secretaria  de  Edu- 

caci6n  Publica,  1930). 
.  El  folklore  y  la  musica  mexicana  (Mexico:  Sccretaria  de  Educaci6n  Publica, 

1928). 
Carpentier,  Alejo.  La  musica  en  Cuba  (Mexico:  Fondo  de  Cultura  Econ6mica, 

1946). 
Carrillo,  Juliin.  Platic&s  music&les  (Mexico,  1923). 

.  Teoria  I6gica  de  la  musica  (Mexico:  E.  Pardo  e  hijos,  1938). 

Castaneda,  Daniel.  "La  musica  y  la  revolucion  mexicana,"  Boletin  Latino-Americano 

de  Musica,  October,  1941. 


274  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

Castaneda,  Daniel.  "Una  flauta  de  la  cultura  tarasca,"  Revista  Musical  Mexicana, 

March  7,  194.2. 
Castaneda,  Daniel  and  Mendoza,  Vicente  T.  "Los  Teponaztlis  .  .  .  ,"  "Los  Per- 

cutores  Precortesianos,"  "Los  Huehuetls,"  Anales  del  Museo  National  de  Arque- 

ologiat  Historia y  Etnograjia,  cuarta  efoca>  VIII  (1933). 
.  Instrumental  frccortesiano:  Instrumentos  de  fercusidn  (Mexico:  Imp.  del 

Museo  Nacional,  1933). 
Castillo  Ledon,  Luis.  <cLos  mexicanos  autores  de  operas,"  Anales  del  Museo  National 

de  Arqueologia,  Historia  y  Etnologia,  November,  I9lo-January,  1911. 
Cervantes  de  Salazar,  Francisco.  Cronica  de  la  Nueva  Esfana  (1560)    (Madrid: 

'Hauser  y  Menet,  1914). 

.  Mexico  en  1554  (Mexico:  Universidad  Nacional  Autonoma,  1939). 

.  Tumulo  Imperial  dela  grand  tiudad  de  Mexico  (Mexico:  Antonio  de 

Espinosa,  1560). 

Chase,  Gilbert  A  Guide  to  Latin  American  Music  (Washington:  U.S.  Govt  Print- 
ing Off.,  1945). 

.  The  Music  of  Sfain  (New  York:  W.  W.  Norton,  1941). 

.  "Origins  of  the  Lyric  Theater  in  Spain,*'  Musical  Quarterly,  July,  1939. 

Chlvez,  Carlos.  "La  Musica,"  Mexico  y  la  Cultura  (M6xico:  Secretaria  de  Educacion 

Publica,  1946). 
.  'The  Music  of  Mexico,"  American  Composers  on  American  Music >  ed. 

Henry  Cowell  (Stanford,  1933). 

.  "Luis  Sandi,"  Nuesfra  Musica,  July,  1949. 

Toward  a  Neto  Music:  Music  and  Electricity  (New  York:  W.  W.  Norton, 


1937). 
Chavez,  Ezeqniel  A.  El  frimero  de  los  grandes  educadores  de  la  America  (M&dco: 

Editorial  Jus,  1 943  ) . 
Ciudad-Real,  Antonio  de.  Relation  breve  y  verdadera  de  algunascosas  .  .  .  (Madrid: 

Coll.  Doc.  Ined.  Hist,  de  Esfanay  1872-3). 

Clavijero,  Francisco.  Storia  antica  del  Messico  (Cesena:  G.  Biasini,  1780-1). 
Colegiata  de  Guadalupe.  Directorio  fora  el  gobierno  de  los  ministros  de  orquesta 

afrobado  y  mandado  observer  for  el  muy  tiustre  cabildo  de  este  insigne  Colegiata 

de  S.  M.  de  Guadalufe  (M6xico:  Grabado  de  la  Guadalupana,  1835). 
Collet,  Henri.  Le  Mysticisme Musical  Esfagnol  (Paris:  Librairie  F61ix  Alcan,  1913). 
Copland,  Aaron.  <<Mexican  Composer,"  New  York  Tmesy  May  9,  1937. 
.  <<Composcr  from  Mexico:  Carlos  Chavez,"  Our  New  Music  (New  York: 

Whittlcsey  House,  1941). 
Cnesson,  H.  T.  "Aztec  Music,"  Proceedings  of  the  Academy  of  Natural  Sciences  of 

PJtiladelfMa,  188,3  (1884). 
Cuevas,  Mariano.  Documtntos  Ineditos  del  Siglo  XVI  (Mexico:  Talleret  Graficos 

del  Museo  Nacional  de  Arqueologia  .  .  *  ,  1914). 
.  Historic  de  la  Iglesia  en  Mexico  (El  Paso,  Texas:  Editorial  "Revista 

Catfiica,"  1928).. 
Denimore,  Frances.  Pafago  Music  (Washington:  U.S.  Govt  Print.  Off.,  1929). 


BIBLIOGRAPHY  275 

.  Outrun  and  Yaqui  Music  (Washington:  U.S.  Govt  Print  Off.,  1932). 

Diario  de  Mexico.  Oct.  24,  Oct.  25,  Nov.  25,  Dec.  2,  18055  Nov.  18,  Dec  1 6, 

1806;  Oct.  24,  18075  July  3,  18095  Apr.  14,  1816* 
Diaz  del  Castillo,  Bernal.  Historic  verdadera  de  la  conquista  de  la  Nueva-Es-pana 

(Madrid:  Imp.  del  Reyno,  1632).  Issued  by  The  Hakluyt  Society  in  English 

translation  (Maudslay),  1908-16. 
Dura*n,  Diego.  Historia  de  las  Indias  de  Nueva  Espana  (Mexico:  Imp.  de  J.  M. 

Andradc  j  I.  Escalante,  1867-80). 
Elizaga,  Jose"  Mariano.  Elementos  de  Musica  (Mexico:  Imp.  del  Supremo  Gobierno 

en  Palacio,  1823). 

.  Principios  de  la  Armonia  y  de  la  Melodia  (Mexico,  1835). 

Escobar,  Jos6  Ignacio  P.  Historia  de  la  musica  en  Columbia  (Bogota:  Biblioteca  Popu- 
lar, 1945). 

Eslava,  Hilarion.  Musica  Reliposa  en  Espana  (Madrid,  1860). 
Esteva,  Guillermo  A.  La  musica  Oaxaquena  (Oaxaca:  Talleres  tipograficos  del  Go- 
bierno, 1931). 
Estrada,  Jesus.  "Cl&icos  de  Neuva  Espana:  Ensayo  hist6rico  sobre  los  Maestros  de 

Capilla  de  la  Catedral  de  Mexico,"  Schola  Cantorumy  June,  July,  1945. 
Eximeno,  Antonio.  Duda  de  Z>.  Antonio  Eximeno  sobre  el  Ensayo  fundamental  fractico 

de  contrafunto  del  M.  R.  ?.  M.  Fr.  Juan  Bautista  Martini  (Madrid:  Imp.  Real, 

1797). 
Fernandez  de  Oviedo  y  Valdfc,  Gonzalo.  Historia  General  y  Natural  de  las  Indias 

(Madrid:  Imp.  de  la  Real  Academia  de  la  Historia,  1851-5). 
Florimo,  Francesco.  La  Scuola  Musicale  di  Nafoti  e  *  suoi  Conservator^  (Naples: 

Vine.  Morano,  1881). 
Foster,  E,  A.  Motolinia*s  History  of  the  Indians  of  New  Spam  (Berkeley:  The  Cortes 

Society,  1950). 

Furlong,  Guillermo,  Musicos  Argentinof  (Buenos  Aires:  Editorial  Huarpes,  1945). 
Gaceta  Extraordinaria  del  Gobierno  de  Mexico.  November  4,  1817. 
Galindo,  Bias.  "C.  Hnizar,"  Nuestra  Musica,  May,  1946. 

,  c<Compositores  de  mi  Generaci6n,>>  Nuestra  Musica,  April,  1948. 

Galindo,  Miguel.  Nodones  de  Historia  de  la  Musica  Mejicana  I  (Colima:  Tip.  de 

«E1  Drag6n,"  1933). 
Galindo  y  ^lla,  Jesus,  "El  Himno  Nacional  Mexicano,"  Anales  jel  Museo  National 

de  Arqueologia>  Historia  y  Etnograjia>  1927. 
Gallop,  Rodney.  "The  Music  of  Indian  Mexico,"  Musical  Quarterly,  April,  1937. 

.  "Otomi  Indian  Music  from  Mexico,"  Musical  Quarterly,  January,  1940. 

Galpin,  F.  W.  "Aztec  Influence  on  American  Indian  Instruments,"  SammelbSnde 

der  internati onalen  Musikgesellschajt  (Leipzig,  1903). 
Garcia,  Genaro.  El  Clero  de  Mexico  durante  la  dominacion  esfanola  (Mexico:  Doc. 

Ined*  6  muy  Raros,  1907). 
Garcia  Cubas,  Antonio.  El  Libro  de  Mis  Recuerdos  (Mexico:  Imp.  Manuel  Le6n 

Sanchez,  1934). 
— < .  Escritos  Dkrersof  del  1870  a  1874  (Mexico:  I.  Escalante,  1874). 


276  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

Garcia  Icazbalceta,  Joaquin.  Bibliografia  Mexicana  del  Siglo  XVI  (Mexico:  Libreria 

de  Andrade,  1886). 
.  Coleccidn  de  Documentos  fora  la  Historic  de  Mexico,  Vol.  I  (Mexico: 

Librem  de  J.  M.  Andrade,  1858). 

.  Don  fray  Juan  de  Zuwarraga  (M&cico:  Andrade  y  Morales,  1881). 

.  Nueva  Colecci6n  de  Documentos  'para  la  Historia  de  Mexico,  Vol.  II 

(Mexico:  Imp.  de  Francisco  Diaz  de  Le6n,  1889). 

-.  Obras,  VoL  III  (Mexico:  Imp.  de  V.  Agueros,  1 896) . 


GazetadeMexico.Sep.  12, 1786;  July  2, 1793;  Oct.  21,  1796. 

Genin,  Auguste.  "Notes  on  the  Dances,  Music,  and  Songs  of  the  Ancient  and  Modern 

Mexicans,''  Annual  Report  of  The  Smithsonian  Institute,  1920. 
Gonzalez  Obregon,  Luis.  CroniquUlas  de  la  Nueva  Espana  (Mexico:  Ed.  Botas, 
1936). 

.  Mexico  Viejo  y  Anecd6*ico  (Mdxico:  Vda.  de  C.  Bouret,  1909). 

.  La  Vida  de  Mexico  en  1810  (Paris-Mexico:  C.  Bouret,  191 1). 

Green,  Samuel  A.  A  Second  Supplementary  List  of  Early  American  Imprints  (Cam- 
bridge, Mass.:  University  Press,  1899). 
Hamilton,  Mary  Neal.  Music  in  Eighteenth  Century  Spain  (Urbana:  University  of 

Illinois  Press,  1937). 
Hannas,  Ruth.  "Cerone's  Approach  to  the  Teaching  of  Counterpoint,"  Papers  of  the 

American  Musicological  Society,  1937. 
Herrera  y  Ogazon,  Alba.  El  Arte  Musical  en  Mexico  (Mexico:  Direccion  General  de 

las  Bellas  Artes,  1917). 
Herrera  y  Tordesiflas,  Antonio  de.  Historia  general  de  los  hechos  de  los  Castellanos 

en  las  islas  i  tierra  firma  del  mar  oceano  (Madrid:  Imp.  real,  1726). 
Herring,  Hubert  and  Weinstock,  Herbert.  Renascent  Mexico  (New  York:  Covici- 

Friede,  1935). 
Hewes,  Harry  L.  c<The  Mexican  Ballet-Symphony  CH.P/,"  Bulletin  of  the  Pan 

American  Union,  June,  1932.  •_ 
Igou,  Lincoln.  "Current  Symphonic  Activity  in  Mexico/'  Northwestern  Univ.  PhJ). 

Diss.,  1946. 
Igumiz,  Juan  B.  "La  Biblioteca  Palafoxiana  de  Puebla,"  Anales  del  Museo  Nacional 

de  Arqueolo&a,  Historia  y  Etnologia,  1913. 
ining,  Carl  Heinz.  Zur  Technik  der  Magnificat-Komposition  des  16.  Jahrhunderts 

(Wolfenbattel:  Georg  Kallmeyer  Verlag,  1936)* 
Isla,  Ezequiel  de  la.  "El  Padre  J.  Guadalupe  Velizquez,"  Revista  Musical  Mexicana, 

February  21,  1942* 
Jnana  Ines  de  la  Cruz,  SOT.  Poemas  de  la  Unica  Poetisa  Americana,  Musa  Dexima 

(Madrid:  Juan  Garcia  Infancpn,  1690). 
Kftstxwr,  Santiago  (ed.).  Francisco  Correa  de  Arauxo:  Libro  de  tientos  .  .  .  (Barce- 

lona :  Institute  Espanol  de  Mnsicologia,  1 948 ) ,  : . 

Kdemen,  Pal.  "Church  Organs  in  Colonial  Mexico,"  Bulletin  of  the  Pan  American 

Union,  March,  1942. 

KaOmann,  J.  "JFl&e*  und  pfeifen  aus  Alt-MexUco,"  Festschrift  fur  Adolf  Bastien 
(Berlin:  D.  Keimer,  1896). 


BIBLIOGRAPHY  *77 

Lach,  Robert.  "Die  musikalischen  konstruktionsprinzipien  dcr  altmexikanischen  tcm- 

pelgesSnge,"  Festschrift  fur  Johannes  Wolf  (Berlin,  1929). 
Landa,  Diego  de.  Relation  de  las  cosas  de  Yucatan  (M&xico:  Editorial  P.  Robredo, 

1938). 
Lc6n,  Nicolas.  Bibbograjia  Mexican*  del  Siglo  XVlll  (Mexico:  Imp.  de  F.  Diaz  de 

Leon,  1902-8). 
Leonard,  Irving  A.  Don  Carlos  de  Siguenza  y  G6ngora:  A  Mexican  Savant  of  the 

Seventeenth  Century  (Berkeley:  University  of  California  Press,  1929).. 
.  "On  the  Mexican  Book  Trade,  1683,"  Hispanic  American  Historical  Review, 

August,  1947. 
Lopez  de  Elizalde,  Mariano.  Tratado  de  Musica  y  Lecciones  de  Clave  (Guadalajara, 

1821). 
L6pez  de  G6mara,  Francisco.  Historia  de  Mexico^  con  el  descubrimiento  dela  Nueva 

Esfana  (Antwerp:  Juan  Steelsio,  1554).  Various  modern  reprints. 
Lorenzana,  Francisco  Antonio.  Concilium  Mexicanum  Provinciale  (Mexico:  Typ. 

Josephi  Antonii  de  Hogal,  1770). 
.  Missa  Gothica  seu  Mozarabica  et  Officium  itidem  Gothicum  (Puebla:  Typis 

SeminariiPalafoxiani,  1770). 

Lumholtz,  Carl.  Unknown  Mexico  (New  York:  Charles  Scribner*s  Sons,  1902). 
Maldeghem,  R.  J.  van.  Tresor  Musical  (Brussels:  C.  Muqnardt,  1893). 
Marino,  Gio.  Battista.  VAdone  (Turin:  G.  B.  Paravia  &  Co.,  1922). 
Martens,  Frederick  H.  "Music  in  the  Life  of  the  Aztecs,"  Musical  Quarterly,  July, 

1928. 
Mayer-Serra,  Otto.  "Carlos  Chavez:  Una  Monografia  Critica,"  Revista  Musical 

Mexicana,  Jan.  7,  Jan.  21,  Feb.  7,  and  Feb.'  21,  1942. 
,  El  Estado  Presente  de  La  Musica  en  Mexico  (Washington:  Pan  American 

Union,  1946). 
.  Musica  y  Musicos  de  Latino-America  (Mexico:  Editorial  Atlante,  suu, 

1947)- 
.  Panorama  de  la  Mtisica  Mexicana  desde  la  indefendencia  hasta  la  actualidad 

(Mexico:  El  Colegio  de  Mexico,  1941). 

— .  "Silvestre  Revueltas  and  Musical  Nationalism  in  Mexico,"  Musical  Quar- 
terly April,  1941. 

.  "Tata  Vasco,"  Commonwealy  September  12,  1941. 

Medina,  Jose  Toribio.  La  Imfrenta  en  Puebla  (Santiago  de  Chile:  Imp.  Cervantes, 

1908). 

.  Biblioteca  kisptno-americana  (Santiago  de  Chile:  1898-1907). 

M£ndez  Plancarte,  Gabriel.  Poetas  Novohis-panos:  Segundo  Siglo,  Porte  Segunda 

(Mexico:  Universidad  Nacional  Autonoma,  1945). 
Mendieta,  Geronimo  de.  Historia  Eclesiastica  Indiana  (Mexico:  Antigua  Libreria, 

1870). 
Mendoza,  Vicente  T.  El  Romance  Esfanol  y  El  Corrido  Mexicana  (Mexico:  Eds. 

de  la  Universidad  Nacional  Autonoma,  1939). 
.  "Musica  Precolombina  de  America,"  Boletin  Latino-Americano  de  Musica, 

1938. 


*78  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

Mendoza,  Vicente  T.  "Musica  Indigena  de  Mexico,"  M exico  en  el  Artey  IX,  1950. 

Merklin,  Albert.  Aw  Sfaniens  altem  Orgelbau  (Mainz:  Rheingold-Verlag,  1939). 

Mexico.  ArcAho  General  de  la  Nation.  "Conspiracion  de  Valladolid  de  1813," 
Boletin  del  Archive  General  de  la  Nation,  July-August-September,  1932. 

.  "Solicitud  para  la  reapertura  del  Colegio  de  Santiago  Tlatelolco,"  Boletin  del 

Archvuo  General,  Jan.-Feb.,  1935. 

.  Libros  y  Libreros  en  el  Siglo  XVI  (Mexico:  Publicaciones  del  Archive  Ge- 
neral de  la  Nacion,  I9H)- 

.  Arzobisfado.  "Carta  Pastoral:  Musica  Sagrada,"  Schola  Cantorum,  June, 


1945. 
.  Constitutions  del  arfobisptdo  .  .  .  de  Tenuxtitlan  Mexico  (Mexico:  Juan 

Pablos,  1556). 

-.  Conservatorio  National.  "Obras  de  Compositores  Mexicanos  que  se  guardan 


en  el  Conservatorio  Nacional  de  Musica:  Inventario  hecho  en  1947  por  la  seccion 

de  investigaciones  musicales  del  Institute  Nacional  de  Bellas  Artes."  Typewritten 

list. 
.  Defartamento  de  Bellas  Artes.  La  Catedral  y  el  Sagrario  de  Mtxico  (Mexico: 

Departamento  Editorial  de  la  Direccion  General  de  las  Bellas  Artes,  1917). 
Michaca,  Pedro.  El  nationalismo  musical  mexicano  (Mexico:  Universidad  Nacional 

de  Mexico,  1931). 
Mitjana  y  Gord6n,  Rafael  Estudios  sobre  algunos  musicos  espaioles  (Madrid: 

Sues,  de  Hernando,  1918). 

.  Francisco  Guerrero  (1528-1599)  (Madrid:  Talleres  poligraficos,  1922). 

Molina,  Alonso  de.  Vocabulario  en  lengua  castellana  y  mexicana  (M&rico:  Antonio 

de  Spinosa,  1571). 
Molina  Solfs,  J.  F.  Historic  del  descubrimiento  y  conquista  de  Yucatan  (M£rida:  Imp. 

ILCaballero,  1896). 

Montanos,  Francisco  de.  Art*  de  canto  llano  (Zaragoza,  I.  de  Ibar,  1670). 
Montejano  y  Aguinaga,  Rafael.  "La  conversi6n  de  los  indios  por  medio  de  la  musica," 

Schola  Cantorum>  September,  1947. 
Monies  de  Oca,  Jose  G.  "Retratos  Existentes  en  la  Biblioteca  Publica  de  la  Ciudad 

de  Guadalajara,"  1924.  Typewritten  essay  deposited  at  the  Biblioteca  Benjamin 

Franklin,  Mexico,  D.F. 
Montufar,  Alonso  de.  "Carta  del  Arzobispo  de  Mexico  al  Consejo  de  Indios,"  Anales 

delMuseo  National  de  Arqueologia,  Historia  y  Etnografia,  1934. 
Morales,  Melesio.  Resena  que  leyo  a  sus  amigos  en  la  celebration  de  sus  bodas  de  oro 

y  del  cuadragesimo  anwersario  de  la  fundacion  del  conservatorio  de  musica  (Mexico, 

1907). 

Morley,  Sylvanus  G.  The  Ancient  Maya  (Stanford:  Stanford  University  Press,  1946). 
Motolinia,  Toribio  de.  Memorials  (Mejico:  Garcia  Pimentel,  1903). 
Munoz  Camargo,  Diego.  Historia  de  Tlaxcala  (Mexico:  Oficina  tip.  de  la  Secretaria 

defomento,  1892). 
Navarro,  Juan,  Liber  in  quo  Quatuor  Passiones  Christi  Domini  continents  (Mexico: 

Didacw  Lopez  Davalos,  1604) . 


BIBLIOGRAPHY  279 

Olavama  7  Ferrari,  Enrique  de.  Resena  Historic^  del  Teatro  en-  Mexico  (Mexico: 

Imp.  "La  Europea,"  1895). 
Palafox  7  Mendoza,  Juan  de.  Reglas,  y  ordenanzas  del  choro  de  esta  santa  Iglesia 

Catedral  de  la  Puebla  de  los  Angeles  (1648)  (Puebla:  Joseph  Perez,  1711). 
Pan  American  Union.  Carlos  Chavez:  Catalog  of  his  Works,  with  a  Preface  by  Herbert 

Weinstock  (Washington,  1944). 

Pedrell,  Felipe.  P.  Antonio  Eximeno  (Madrid:  Union  Musical  Espanola,  1920). 
Peers,  E.  Allison.  A  Critical  Anthology  of  Spanish  Verse  (Universty  of  California 

Press,  1949). 
Penafiel,  Antonio  (ed.).  Cantares  en  Idioma  Mexicano  (M&rico:  Secretarfa  de 

Fomento,  1899). 
Philadelphia,  Penns7lvania.  The  Edwin  A.  Fleisher  Collection  of  Orchestral  Music 

in  the  Free  Library  of  Philadelphia:  A  Descriptive  Catalogue,  VoL  II  (Philadelphia, 

1945). 
Ponce,  Manuel  M.  "El  folklore  musical  mexicano,"  Revista  Musical  de  Mexico, 

September  15,  1919. 

.  "La  canci6n  mexicana,"  Revista  de  Revistas,  December  21,  1913. 

• — .  "Nuestros  Musicos:  Gustavo  E.  Campa,"  Mexico  Musical,  March,  1932. 

.  Nuevos  Escritos  Musicales  (Mexico:  Editorial  81710,  1948). 

Pope,  Isabel.  "Documentos  Relacionados  con  la  Historia  de  la  Musica  en  Mexico," 

Nuestra  Musica,  1CT  Trimestre,  1951. 
.  "The  Musical  Development  and  Form  of  the  Spanish  Villancico,"  Papers 

of  the  American  Musicological  Society  (1940). 

Preuss,  Konrad  Theodor.  Die  Nayarit-exfedition  (Leipzig:  B.  G.  Teubner,  1912). 
Prieto,  Guillermo.  Memorias  de  Mis  Ticmfos  (Mexico,  Librerfa  .  *  .  C.  Bouret, 

1906), 

Puebla  Cathedral,  Puebla,  Pue.  Comfendio  de  las  Reglas  esenciales  del  Arte  del  Canto 
llano  'para  instruccidn  de  los  infantes  del  Coro  de  la  Santa  Iglesia  Cathedral  de  la 
Puebla  de  los  Angeles  (Mexico:  Imp.  del  Gobierno  Imperial,  1822). 

Ra7,  Alice.  "Mexico  Cit7  Addresses  for  Music  Information,  1949."  TTpewritten  list 
deposited  at  Biblioteca  B.  Franklin,  Mexico,  D.F. 

Redfield,  Robert.  Tepoztlan,  a  Mexican  village;  a  study  of  folMife  (Chicago:  Uni- 
versity of  Chicago  Press,  1930). 

Revilla,  Manuel  G.  "Cenobio  Paniagua,"  Revista  Musical  Mexicana,  Oct.  21,  Nov.  7, 
Nov.  21,  Dec.  7,  Dec.  21,  1942. 

.  "D.  Julio  Ituarte,"  Revista  Musical  Mexicana,  Aug.  21,  Sept.  7,  1942. 

Riano,  Juan  F.  Critical  and  Bibliographical  Notes  on  Early  Spanish  Music  (London: 
Bernard  Quaritch,  1887). 

Ricard,  Robert.  La  Conquete  Spirituelle  du  Mexique  (Paris:  Institut  d'Ethnologie, 

1933)- 

Rincon,  Antonio  del.  Arte  Mexicana  (Mexico:  Pedro  Balli,  1595). 
Rivera  Cambas,  H.  Mexico:  Leyendasy  Costumbres  (Mexico:  Editorial  LaTac,  1945). 
Robelo,  Cecilio  A.  "Diccionario  de  Mitologia  Nahoa,"  Anales  de  Museo  National, 

Segunda  epocay.i 


280  MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

Rol6n,  Jose.  '<La  musica  aut6ctona  mexicana  y  la  t6cnica  moderna,"  Music*,  Aug.  15, 
1930. 

-."Organizaci6n  musical  de  Mexico,"  Boletin  Latino-Americano  de  Musica, 


April,  1937. 
Romero,  Jesus  C.  Durango  en  la  Evolution  Musical  de  Mexico  (Mexico:  Ediciones 

"Gui6n  de  America,*'  1949)- 

.  "Historia  del  Conservatorio,"  Nuestra  Musica,  July,  1946. 

.  Jose  Mariano  Elizaga  (Mexico:  Ediciones  del  Palacio  de  Bellas  Artes,  1934). 

-.  "La  6pera  en  Mexico,"  La  6fera  en  Yucatan  (Mexico:  Ediciones  "Gui6n 


de  America,"  1947)- 

-  .  Musica  Precortesiana  (Mexico:  Talleres  Grlficos  .  .  .  Editorial  Stylo, 

1947)- 

Romero  Flores,  Jesus.  Iconograjia  Colonial  (Mexico:  Museo  Nacional,  1940). 
Sachs,  Curt.  World  History  of  the  Dance  (New  York:  W.  W.  Norton,  1937). 
Sahagun,  Bernardino  de.  Historia  General  de  las  Cosas  de  Nueva  Esfana  (M&rico: 

Imp.  del  ciudadano  A.  Valde*s,  1829-30). 

-  -  .  Psalmodia  Christiana  .  .  .  Ordenada  en  cantor  es  6  Psalmos:  faraque  canten 

los  Indios  en  los  areytos,  que  hazen  en  las  Iglesias  (Mexico:  Pedro  Ocharte,  1583). 
Salazar,  Adolfo.  "El  Caso  de  Domenico  Zipoli,"  Nuestra  Musicay  May,  1946.     - 
Saldivar,  Gabriel.  Historia  de  la  Musica  en  Mexico:  Efocas  Precortesiana  y  Colonial 

(Mexico:  Editorial  "Cultura,"  1934). 

-  .  El  Jarabe,  baile  fofular  mexicano  (Mexico:  Talleres  graficos  de  la  naci6n, 

1937)- 
Sinchez,  Manuel.  Regla  de  N.P3.  Francisco  y  breve  declaracion  de  sus  freceftos 

fora  su  mejor  observancia  .  .  .  y  breve  explication  del  canto  llano  con  adverten* 

das  (Mexico:  Bernardo  de  Hogal,  1725). 
Sartorius,    Christian    Carl.    "Musikalische    leichenfeier   und    tanze    der   Mexiko- 

Indianer,"  Caccilia,  Vol.  VIII  (Mainz,  1828). 
Saville,  Marshall  H.  The  Wood-Carver's  Art  in  Ancient  Mexico  (New  York:  Museum 

of  the  American  Indian,  1925). 

-  .  "A  primitive  Maya  musical  instrument,"  American  Anthropologist,  VoL  X 


Schmeckebier,  Laurence  E.  Modern  Mexican  Art  (Minneapolis:  The  University  of 

Minnesota  Press,  1939). 
Sedano,  Francisco.  Noticias  de  Mexico  desde  el  ano  1756  .  .  .  en  1800  (M&dco, 

1880). 
Seeger,  Charles  (and  others).  "Music/*  Handbook  of  Latin  American  Studies  (Cam- 

bridge: Harvard  University  Press,  1936  —  ). 
Seler,  Eduard.  Collected  Worts:  Englished  under  the  editorial  supervision  of  J.  E.  S. 

Thompson  for  the  Peabody  Museum  (Cambridge,  Mass.:  1939). 
Sigftenza.y  Gongora,  Carlos  de.  Glorias  de  Queretaro  (Mexico:  Vda.  de  B.  Calderon, 


Slonimsky,  Nicolas.  Music  oj  Latin  America  (New  York:  Thomas  Y.  Crowell,  1945). 
Sosa,  Francisco.  Biografias  de  mexicanos  distinguidos  (Mexico:  Ed.  de  la  seccion  de 
fomento  mexicanc,  1  884)  . 


BIBLIOGRAPHY  281 

Spain.  Archivo  de  India*.  Coleccion  de  Documentos  Ineditos  .  .  .  del  Archive  de 

India,  Vol.  XIII  (Madrid,  1870). 
Spain.  Ministerio  de  Fomento.  Cartas  de  India*  (Madrid:  Ministerio  de  Fomento, 

1877). 
Spell,  Lota  M.  "Music  in  the  Cathedral  of  Mexico  in  the  Sixteenth  Century," 

Hispanic  American  Historical  Review,  August,  1945. 
.  ''Music  and  instruments  of  the  Aztecs:  the  beginning  of  musical  education 

in  North  America,"  Papers  and  Proceedings  of  the  Music  Teachers'  National 

Association,  1926. 
.  'The  first  teacher  of  European  music  in  America,'*  Catholic  Historical  Re- 

vieto,  October,  1922. 
.  "The  First  Music-Boob  Printed  in  America,"  Musical  Quarterly  y  January, 

1929. 
Steck,  Francis  Borgisu  Motoliniays  History  of  the  Indians  of  New  Sfa*n  (Washington, 

D.C.:  Academy  of  American  Franciscan  History,  1951). 
Suarez  de  Peralta,  Juan.  Noticias  historicas  de  la  Nueva  Esfana  (Madrid:  Imp.  de 

M.  G.  Hernandez,  1878). 
Tamariz  de  Carmona,  Antonio.  Relac&n  y  descrifcifa  del  Temflo  Real  de  la  ciudad 

de  la  Puebla  de  los  Angeles  en  la  Nueva  Esfana,  y  su  Catedral  (Puebla,  1649)  • 
Toor,  Frances.  "Mexican  Folk  Dances,"  Renascent  Mexico  (New  York:  Covici- 

Friede,  1935). 
Torquemada,  Juan  de.  Veinte  i  un  libros  rituales  i  Monarquia  Indiana  (Madrid:  N. 

Rodriguez  Franco,  1723). 
Tozzer,  Alfred  M.  (ed.)  LandJs  Relacidn  de  las  Cosas  de  Yucatan  (Cambridge:  The 

Peabody  Museum,  1941). 

Trend,  J.  B.  The  Music  of  Spanish  History  to  1600  (Oxford,  1926). 
Tschudi,  J.  J.  von.  Travels  in  Peru  during  the  years  1838-42  (New  York:  Wiley  and 

Putnam,  1847). 
Vafllant,  George  C.  Aztecs  of  Mexico  (Garden  City:  Doubleday,  Doran  &  Co., 

1940. 
Valton,  Emilio.  Imfresos  Mexicanos  del  Siglo  XVI  \lncunables  Americanos)  (Mexico: 

Imp.  Universitaria,  1935). 
Vazquez  Santa  Ana,  Higinio.  Historia  de  la  Condon  Mexicana  (Mexico:  Tallere« 

graficos  de  la  nacion,  1931). 
Wagner,  Henry  R.  Nueva  Bibliografia  Mexicana  del  Siglo  XVI  (Mexico:  Editorial 

Polis,  1940). 

.  The  Rise  of  Fernando  Cortes  (Berkeley:  The  Cortes  Society,  1944). 

Weinstock,  Herbert.  Mexican  Music  (New  York:  Museum  of  Modern  Art,  1940). 
Wilson,  Charles  M.  "Open  Sesame  to  the  Maya,"  Bulletin  of  the  Pan  American  Union, 

July,  1948. 
Yurchenco,  Henrietta.  "Grabacion  de  Mnsica  Indigena,"  Nuestra  Musica>  May,  1946. 


INDEX 


Names  and  places  are  indexed.  For  a  summary  of  topfcs  see  the  table  of  con- 
tents. 


Abreu  Gomez,  E.,  169 

Abujary  Elf  tonadflla  by  Garcia,  192 

accordatura   of  colonial  vihutla  de 

mono  (1740),  162 
Acosta,  Jose  de,  16-17 
Adame,  Rafael  (1906 — ),  270 
Ade&a  (1910  Revolutionary  song), 

234 

Aeschylus,  43 

Aeterna  Christi  munera  (Palestrina), 
101 

aforrado,  195 

Aguascalientes,  232-234 

Agudo,  Simon,  95 

AgiMa  Mexican* y  El,  1 8 8,  192 

Agirilar,  Juan  A.,  222 

Aguirre,  Sebastian  de,  162 

Agurto  y  Loaysa,  Joseph  de,  I7th 
century  Mexico  City  chapel- 
master,  142 

Aiday  210 

alabados,  165 

Alamo,   Lazaro  del,    i6th  century 


183 


Mexico  City  chapelmaster,  84, 

88-89,  I05 

Alarcon,  see  Ruiz  de  Alarcon 
Album  Musical  de  Angela  Per  die 

(1875),  203 
Alcala  de  Henares,  161 
Alcantara,  104 
Aldana,  Jose  Maria  (i  1810),  2, 

148,  ISS^S?*  J76>  *7$>  I8(>- 

182 

alemanda  (allemande),  162 
Alencastre  Norona  y  Sflva,  Fernando 

de,  34*  viceroy,  150,  173 
Altamirano,  Ignado,  201 
Ambrose,  St,  1 68 
Anchieta,  Juan  de,  82 
Angles,  Higinio,  169 
Amiay  opera  by  M.  Morales,  199, 

200-201 
An&goney  249 
Antiphonario  Dominical,  79 
Antiphonarium  (1589),  8l 
Apodaca,  Juan  de,  viceroy,  1 75 


284 


MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 


Arauco  domado  (l59&)>  7° 

Arenzana,  Manuel,  Puebla  chapel- 
master,  173-174 

areytos  (areitos),  25 

Aristode,  177 

Aristoxenus,  27,  250 

Ark  of  the  Covenant,  132 

Arrau,  Claudio,  250 

Arroyo  de  la  Cuesta,  Felipe,  34,  62 

Arte  Mexicana  (1595),  36 

Arte  Trtpharia,  El  (1550),  87 

Attaignant,  Pierre,  102 

Attila,  28 

Atzcapotzalco,  93 

AtxMnbay  opera  by  Castro,  212-213 

Augsburg  pianos  sold  at  Veracruz 
(1794),  1 80 

Augustine,  St.,  168 

Augustinian  order  in  Mexico,  musical 
contributions  made  by,  72,  85, 

131 

auto  sacramental,  58 
Ave  Regina  coelorum   (Palestrina), 

101 

ayacachtli  [ah-yah-cahch'-dee] ,  rat- 
tle, 9-10,  13,  137 

Ayala,  Daniel  (1908 — ),  7,  256, 
259 

Ayesteran,  Lauro,  168 

ayod  [ah-yohd'],  rasp,  9 

Aztec  (s)  (see  also  ayacachtli,  hue- 
hued,  Nahuad,  omitzicahuastli, 
teponazdi,  tepuzquiquizdi,  tla- 
pitzaffi),  1-36,41,  93,  101 

Aztecan  (Nahuad)  hymns,  119-122 

Baca,  Luis  (1826-1855),  195-196 
Bach,;.  S.,  in,  117,  154,  261 
bafles  del  pais,  174,  183 
Balbuena,  Bernardo  de,  70 
Agustm,  202 


balona  de  bailar,  162 

Bal  y  Gay,  Jesus,  166,  265,  267 

bamba,  45 

Bancroft  Library,  The,  34 

bandore,  148 

Baqueiro  Foster,  G.,  41-42,  222 

Bar  bier e  di  Siviglia,   II    (Paisiello), 

174  .... 
Bar tier e  di  ShngUay  II  (Rossini),  194 

Barcelona,  140 

Bardi,  Count  Giovanni,  45 

Bartok,  Bela,  250 

Barwick,  Steven,  Dr.,  98-99,   104, 

127 
Basalenque,  Diego  de,  125,  135,  137, 

168 

Bassado,  Arnaldo  de,  53 
bassoon(s),  68,  148 
Beethoven,  5,  178,  190,  209,  226 
BeUsanus  (Bellini),  202 
Bellini,  Vincenzo,  202 
Bemasconi,  Antonio,  1 74 
Benavides,  Paula,  141 
Benevoli,  Orazio  (1605-1672),  126 
Beristain,     Joaqufn     (1817-1839), 

192,  210 

Berlin,  Irving,  266 
Bermudez,  Pedro   (fl.   1605),  102, 

104,  122-124,  159 
Bermudez  Plata,  Cristobal,  166 
Bermudo,  Juan,  83,  87,  125 
Bernal  Frances y  romance,  1 74 
Bernal  Jimenez,  Miguel  (1910 — ), 

135,  262-264 
Berrien,  William,  21 1 
Biacchi,  198,  202 
Biblioteca  Nacional  (Madrid),  90 
Bibh'oteca  Nacional  {Mexico  City), 

74,  80,  162 
Bliss,  P.  P.,  215 
bolero,  176 


INDEX 


285 


Bonampak,  9,  12 

Booke    of    Common   Prater    noted. 

The,  133 

Borda,  Jose*  de  la,  135 
Borowski,  Felix,  251 
Bottesini,    Giovanni    (1821-1889), 

191,  196 
Boturini  Benaduc(c)i,  Lorenzo,  16, 

32 

Brahms,  226 
branle,  162 

Brethren  of  the  Common  Life,  53 
Breve    Noticia    del    Canto    Llano 

(1725), 102 
Breve  y  mas  compendiosa  doctnna 

0539)>7<> 
Broad  wood  pianos,  178 
"broken  music,"  93 
Buenos  Aires: 

Archivo  General  de  la  Nacion  at, 

62 

Bullock,  William,  193 
Burgoa,  Francisco  de,  137 
Burney,  Charles,  158 
burro  (dance),  162 
Bustamente,    Jose    Maria    (1777- 

1861),  223 

Caballero,  Agustin,  191,  215 
Cabanillas,  Juan  (1644-1712),  154 
Cabezon,  Antonio  de  (1510-1566), 

83,  158,  161,  230 
Cabrera,  Miguel,  160 
Cacalomacan,  100 
Caf a  Mass  (Morales),  49 
cacique,  88 
Cddiz  Cathedral,  180 
Calderon  de  la  Barca,  Mme.,  193- 

194,  196,  215 
Calixtinus  Codex,  82 
Calmecac,  24 


Camacho,  Rafael  S.,  Bishop,  215 
Campa,  Gustavo  E.  (1863-1934), 
5,  201,  204,  211,  224,  226, 

254 

campanile,  148 

Campos,  Ruben  M.,  208,  215 
Canales,      Leonardo       (Pirro      de 

Arag6n)y  204 
Canctonero  de  Palacio,  82 
Canchnero   de  Romances    (1548), 

164 

Candonero  de  Upala  (1556),  138, 

1 66 
Cantor w  en  Idoma  Mexicano,   lo, 

34,36 

canto  de  organo,  177 
canto  figurado,  177 
cantos  en  idioma  guinea,  162 
cantus  figuratus  (1585),  118 
Caputo,  Sertorio,  150 
Caracas,  172,  223 
Cardenas,  Josefa,  174 
Cardenas,  Llzaro,  Mexican  president 

(1934-1938),  44 
carillon,  148 

Carlota,  opera  by  Sandi,  260 
Caro,  Juan,  53,  83 
Carpenter,  John  Alden,  240 
Carrasco,  Jose  Maria  (1781-1845), 

186 

Carreno,  Cayetano,  172 
Carrillo,    Julian     (1875 — ),     199, 

227-231,  233,  239 
Cartagena  (Columbia),  172 
Cartagena  (Spain),  178 
Castaneda,  Daniel,  8,  1 1 
Castile,  94 

Castillo,  Andres,  174-175 
Castillo,  Ledon,  Luis,  204 
Castro,  Ricardo  (1864-1907),  199, 

204,  211-214,  224-226 


286 


Castro,  Vicente,  176 


MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 

Cocteau,  Jean,  249 


CataKna  di  Gutsa,  opera  by  Paniagua,     Codex  Florentinus,  10 


196 


Coliseo  Nuevo,  173,  175,  193,  220 


Catharine,  St.,  vfllancicos  in  honor  of     Colon  en  Santo  Domingo,  199 


(1691),  139 
Celaya,  160 


Compan,  Charles,  94 
conga,  140 


Cerone,  Pedro  (1566-1625),  141,     Conservatorio   Nacional,    157,   191- 


169 

Cervantes  Saavedra,  95 
Cervantes  de  Salazar,  Francisco,  87- 

90,99 

chaconne,  94-95 
Charlemagne,  165 
Charles  II  of  Spain,  144 


192,  206,  215,  219,  227,  231- 
232,  234-235,  241-242 
Constitudones        del        arfobispado 

(1556),  75>  159 
Constitutions    of    the    Papal    Choir 


contradanza,  178-179,  183 


Charles  V  (I  of  Spain),  52-54,  58,     Contreras,  Salvador  (1912 — ),  256, 


64,82,85-88,94,  122,  173 
charro  suit,  216 
Chase,  Gilbert,  132 
Chavero,  Alfredo,  203 
Chavez,  Carlos  (1899  —  ),  I,  6,  44, 

46,   94,   229,   232-233,    235, 


Chiapas,  9,  43 

chicahuazdi     [chee-cah-wahss'-tlee], 

5 

Chihuahua,  37-38 
china  poblana  costume,  216 
chirimfa(s),  5,  56,  65,  148 
Chopin,  214 


258-259 

convent  music  schools,  158-159 

Copland,  Aaron,  165,  252-253,  256 

coplas,  139,  165 

Cora  Indians,  41 

coranta  (courante),  162 

Corelli,    Arcangelo     (1653-1713), 

163 

cornett(s),  65,  68,  91 
Coronado,  Juan,  142 
Corral,  Manuel,  175 
Correa,  Juan,  148 
Correa    de    Arauxo,    Francisco    (c. 

1581-1663),  161,  230 


Chopin,  214  &       1581-1663),  161,  230 

Chris  tus  resurgent  Mass  (Palestrina)^  corrido,  140,  162-163,  ^5, 

I0i  Cortes,  Hernando,  4,  26,  5 1,  56, 69, 

Cimarosa,  Domenico  (1749-1801),  93,  159,  160 

i?4>  *92  CortSs,  Luciano,  174 

Circumdederunt  me,  57,  89 
citara,  162 
dttern,  148 
clarion  (s),  65,  148 
Clavijero,  Francisco,  3,  32 
Clement  VII,  Pope,  94 


cotillon,  162 
Council  of  Trent,  .74 
Cresson,  H.  T.,  11 
Cristdani,  Esteban,  175 
Cromca  de  la  Orden  de  N.  ?.  S. 
Agustin,  6l 


Clea<patray  opera  by  M,  Morales,  199     Cuatro  .Soles  y  Losy  ballet  by  Chavez, 
Coates,  Henry,  113  I 


INDEX 


287 


Cuauhtemoc,  203-204 
cuauhtlapitzalli  [kwow-dah-peet- 
sah'-yee],  137 

Cue,  4 

cuecuecheuycatl   [kway-kway-chay- 

wee'-cahtl],  tickle  dance,  95 
cuicatl     [kwee'-cahd],     glyph     for 

music,  13 
cuiraxezaqua  [kwee-rah-hay-sah'- 

kah],  Tarascan  flute,  8 
cumbees  o  cantos  negros,  162 
Czerny,  Carl  (1791-1857),  185 


Dallapiccola,  Luigi,  270 

Dallo  y  Lana,  Miguel  Mateo,  1 7th 

century    Puebla    chapelmaster, 

126 

Danza  a  Centeotl,  1-2 
Dafhnis  and  Chloe,  243 
Davalos,  Didacus  Lopez,  131 
David,  King,  132 
Daza,  Esteban  (fl.  1576),  83 
Debussy,  238,  243 
decima,  165 
Declaracion  de  instrumentos  (1555), 

87,  125 

Ddgadmay  romance,  164 
Delgado,  Manuel,  176 
Delphic  hymns,  43 
De  musica  tibri  septem  (1577),  34> 

164 
Denkmaler  der  Tonkunst  m  Bayern, 

103 
Denkmaler  der  Tonkunst  in  Osier- 

reichy  103 
Denner,     Nuremberg     flute-maker, 

177 

Densmore,  Frances,  41 
Des  Pres,  Josquin,  52,  173 
Deudsche  Messe}  133 


Diarly   de  Mexico^    173,    175-178, 
188 

Diaz,  Porfirio   (1830-1915),  208, 
212,  219,  224,  227 

Diaz  del  Castillo,  Bernal,  conquista- 
dor, 3-4,  25,  52,  92-93,  163 

Dinorahy  202 

Discurso  sobre  la  musica  (1807),  177 

Dominguez,  Alberto,  266 

Dominguez,  Francisco,  7,  43 

Don  GatOy  romance,  164 

Donizetti,  Gaetano,  192,  196 

Dos  Rtbales  en  Amory  Los,  174 

Downes,  Olin,  242-243 

drums  (see  also  huehuetl  and  dapan- 
huehuetl),  68 

Duarte  y  Davik,  Manuel,  177 

Dukas,  Paul,  234 

dulcimer,  94 

dulzainas,  6 1,  65 

Duran,  Diego  (i537~I588),  4,  10, 
1 7>  28,  32,34,95 

Durango,  36,  100,  195,  211 

piano  manufacture  at  (1793),  177 

Dussek,  189 

Dvorak,  185,  212,  233 

Echave,  Beltasar,  148 

Ecos  de  Mexico  (Ituarte),  209 

Ediciones  Mexicanas  de  Musica,  256 

Eitner,  Robert,  132 

Elementos  de  Musica  (1823),  187, 

189 

Elias,  Alfonso  de  (1902 — ),  270 
Elgar,  Edward,  212 
Elizaga,     Jose     Mariano     (1786- 

1842),  135,  185,  187-191 
El  Maestro  (i535)>  83,  94 
Elorduy,     Ernesto     (1853-1912), 

,204 
enano  (dance  type),  195 


288 


MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 


Enrfquez  de  Almanza,  Martin,  4th 

viceroy,  66 
ensalada,  140 
ensaladflla,  140 
entremes,  220 
Escobar,  Pedro  de,  82 
Eslava,  Miguel  Hilarion,  83 
Espinar  (Spain),  105 
Espinosa,  Antonio  de,  i6th  century 

printer,  77,  79-80,  134 
Espinosa,  Aurelio,  164 
Esteva,  Gufllermo  A.,  136,  169 
Estrada,  Jesus,  97,  104,  150,  167, 

170 

Estrelfaa  (Ponce),  233,  237 
estribfllo  (vfllancico),  139 
Exacta  Descrtpcion  de  la  Magnifica 

Corte  Mexicana  (1768),  153 
Eximeno  y  Pujades,  Antonio  (1729- 

1808),  125,  190 
Extr anger  oy  Ely  174 

fa  bordon  (1585),  118 

Facultad  Orgamca  (1626),  161 

Falco,  Felix,  178 

Falla,  Manuel  de,  221 

fandango,  162 

Felipe  de  Jesus,  San,  157 

Fernandez  de  Oviedo,  Gonzalo,  10, 

99 

Ferrer,  Jesus,  270 
Fetis,  F.  J.,  8 
Fiesta  del  Peyote,  45 
fifes,  65 

figured  bass,  143 
Filosofo  Burlado,  Ely  174 
First    Mexican    Provincial    Council 

(i555)>65,  74 
flageolets,  22 

Fleisher  Collection,  212,  231,  265 
flute(s),4,  11,65*68,91-92 


folias  espanolas,  162 

folias  italianas,  162 

Folklore  Musical  de  las  Ciudades^  Ely 

208 

Foote,  Arthur,  267 
Forza  del  destino.  La,  192,  202 
frances  (dance),  162 
Franco,  Hernando   (d.   1585),  33, 

85,  102-122,   l66 

Franklin,  Benjamin,  177 

Friedman,  Ignaz,  239 

frottola,  122 

Fructos  del  Castillo,  103 

Fry,  William  Henry  (1813-1864), 

196 

Fuego  Nuevo,  El,  ballet,  239 
Fuenllana,  Miguel  de  (fl.  1554),  83 
Fuentes,  Juan  B.  (1869 — ),  270 
Furlong,  Gufllermo,  168 


Gabrieli,    Giovanni     (1557-1612), 

126 

Galindo,  Bias  (1910 — ),  7,  254-258 
gallarda  (galliard),  162 
Galli,  Filippo,  193 
Gallop,  Rodney,  30,  43 
Galpin,  F.  W.,  8 
Galuppi,    Baldassare    (1706-1785), 

155 
Galvez,  Bernardo  de,  48th  viceroy, 

193 
Garcia,  Manuel  (1775-1832),  192- 

193 
Garcia  Icazbalceta,  Joaqufn,  75 

Garcia  Lorca,  253 
Gardano,  Antonio,  85,  102 
Ga%eta  de  Mexico,  154,  177,  186 
Gebrauchsmusik,  86 
Genin,  Auguste,  50 

oy  romance,  164 


INDEX 


289 


Ghent,  52 

Gia  fit  M  m'ebbe  cara  (Palestrina), 

101 
Gmo  Corsiniy  opera  by  M.  Morales, 

201,  202 

Giovanna  d'A rco  (Verdi),  192 
Giovanna  di  Castiglia,  opera  by  Luis 

Baca,  195 

Giulietta  e  Romeo  (Vaccai),  194 
Glorias  de  Queretaro>  137 
Gluck,  1 80 

Golisdani,  Enrique,  200 
G6mara,  see  Lopez  de  Gomara 
Gombert,  Nicolas,  52,  82 
Gomez,   Jose    Antonio,    185,    191, 

196,  209 

Gomez  de  Orozco,  Federico,  78 
Gottschalk,  Louis  Moreau,  209 
Graduate  Donwncaley  70,  77-80 
Grafton,  Richard,  80 
Gramatica  Razonada  Musical 

(1840),  191 
Granada,  74 

Grandeza  Mexicana  (1604),  70 
Great  Caruso ,  The,  film,  208 
Gregory  I,  Pope,  168 
Gregory  XIII,  Pope,  33 
Grieg,  185,  211 
Griffes,  Charles  T.,  44 
Grijalva,  Juan  de,  61 
Guadalajara,  60, 100,  122, 137, 154, 

187,  206 

Guadalajara  Cathedral: 
choir  singers  in,  80 
choral  archive  at,  102 
organ  (1730)  installed  in,  153 
Guanajuato,  207 
Guatemala,  105,  177 
Guatomotziny  opera  by  Ortega,  201, 

203-204 
Guerrero,  Francisco   (1527-1599), 


49,  82,  83,  85,  86,  105,  106, 

116,  117,  158 
Guerrero,  Raul,  7 
Guido  d'Arezzo,  177 
guitar,  162 

Haba,  Alois  (1893 — )>  23° 
Halffter,   Rodolfo   (1900 — ),   265, 

267 

Handel,  173 
Hannas,  Ruth,  169 
harp,  91,  94,  148 
Haydn>  2,  176,  180,  189,  226 
Helvidius,  143-144 
Hernandez,  Mateo,  43 
Hernandez,    Pedro,     i6th    century 

composer,  103 
Hernandez  Moncada,  Eduardo 

(1899—),  7^70 
Herrera  de  la  Fuente,  Luis,  270 
Herrera  y  Ogazon,  Alba,  5-6 
Herz,  Henri  (1806-1888),  208 
Hidalgo  y  Costilla,  Miguel  (1753- 

1811),  186 

Hija  de  C6lquide>  Lay  250 
Hindemith,  Paul,  86,  268 
Historia  de  las  Indias  de  Nueva 

Esfana  (Duran),  28 
Historic  de  los  Indios  (Motolinia), 

54-55 
Hiftorut  Eclesiastica  Indiana  (Mendi- 

eta),  29 
Hlstona   General   de   las   Cosas   de 

Nueva  Espana  (Sahagun),  23 
Bistoria  General  de  las  Indtas 

(Oviedo),  10 

Hofmeister,  Friedrich,  213 
L'komme  armey  35 
Hondurasr  93 
Horcasitas,  pianist,  176 
Horse  Power  (HJP.),  242 


290 


MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 


hours,  singing  of,  71 

huapango,  45,  217 

Hu&pango  (Moncayo),  260 

Huarte,  Ana  Maria,  187 

huehuetJ  [wa^-wayd],  8-9,  12-13, 

1 8,  21,  26,  30-32 

Huelgasy  El  Codex  Musical  de  las>  82 
Hugo,  Victor,  238 
Huichflobos  [Huitzilopochtli],  4 
Huicholes,  music  of,  36,  39-41,  44- 

45>  254 
Huitzilopochtli  [wee-tseel-oh-poach'- 

dee],  Aztec  war-god,  3-4,  32, 

93 
Hufzar,    Candelario    (1888 — ),    7, 

44,  254-256 

Humboldt,  Alexander  von,  193 
hurdy-gurdy  (vihuela  de  rueda),  165 

Idea  de  una  Nueva  Historia  General 
(Boturini  Benaduci),  32 

Igou,  Lincoln,  Professor,  265-266 

Iguiniz,  Juan  B.,  168 

Udephonsus,  143,  148 

Ildegonda,  opera  by  M.  Morales, 
197-198,  201,  208 

tiling,  Carl-Heinz,  in 

Inquisition  (1802),  184 

Institute  Espanol  de  Musicologia, 
161 

Instructor  Filarmomco  (1843),  I9I 

instrumentalists  in  Charles  Vs  chapel, 

65 

instrumentalists  in  Mexican  chapel 
establishments,  65,  68,  84,  91- 

93 
International  Composers*  Guild,  241 

In  the  Garden,  hymn,  165 

Iriarte,   Tomas   de    (1750-1791), 

177 
Isidore  of  Seville,  168 


Italian  augmented  sixth,  Bermudez's 

use  of  (1610),  124 
Ituarte,  Julio    (1845-1905),    185, 

205,  209-210 
Iturbi,  Jose,  265 
Iturbide,  Agustin,  emperor,  187 

j^cara,  140 

Jalisco,  36,  39,  67 

jarabe(s),  45,  183-185,  195,  209, 

216-217 

jarabe,  pan  de  (1789),  184 
jarabe  (xarabe),  pan  de  (1796),  184 
jarabe  gatuno,  184 
Jarabe  Nacional,  209 
Javanese  music,  1 1 
Jerome,  St.,  170 
Jerusalem,  Ignacio,  155 
Jewell,  Edward,  2 
Jime'nez,  Miguel  Bernal,  see  Bernal 

.    Jimenez,  Miguel 
Jimenez  Mabarak,  Carlos  (191 2 — ) , 

270 
Jommelli,  Nicola  (1714-1774), 

155,  1 80,  189 
jota,  162 
Juana  Ines  de  la  Cruz,  Sor,  102, 127, 

I37-I38>  169 

Juanas,  Antonio  (d.  1817),  155 
Juarez,  Benito  (1806—1872),  201, 

202,  240 
Juarez,  Luis,  148 
Julian  Choir,  112 

Kalkbrenner,    F.    W.    M.    (1784- 

1849),  209 
Kelemen,  Pal,  154 
Kircher,  Athanasius   (1602-1680), 

189 

KochansJd,  Vaslav,  25 1 
Koussevitzky,  256-257 


INDEX 


291 


La  batalla  de  Roncewalles,  romance, 

165 

La  cucaracha   (1910  Revolutionary 

song),  234 

La  esfosa  mfiel,  romance,  164 
Lamas,  Jose,  172 
Landa,  Diego  de  (1524-1579),  16, 

27 

Lara,  Agustin  (1900 — ),  266 
La  Rue,  Pierre  de,  52,  1 11,  1 13 
Las  Casas,  Bartolome  de,  17,  19,  66, 

96 

Lassus,  Orlandus,  86,  91,  ill, 
112 

Lateran  Choir,  St.  John,  112 

Lateran  Magnificats,  116 

Legende  de  Rudel,  Lay  opera  by  Cas- 
tro, 213-214,  225-226 

Leon,  Tomas  (1826-1893),  208- 
209 

Leonard,  L  A.,  Professor,  142,  169 

Leonory  opera  by  Luis  Baca,  195 

Levitical  singers,  18 

Liber  Usua&>  73 

Library  of  Congress,  8 1 

libros  de  facistol,  80 

Lienas,  Juan  de  (i6th  century  com- 
poser), 103,  166 

Lima,  69,  122 

Limantour,  Jose  Ives  (father),  226 

Limantour,  Jose  Yves  (son),  270 

Lincoln,  202 

List,  Eugene,  243 

Liszt,  209,  214 

loa,  220 

Lobo,  Alfonso  (1555-1610?),  102 

Lobo,  Duarte  (1540-1643),  in 

Lope  de  Vega,  95,  173 

Lopez  de  Gomara,  Francisco  (1511- 
1566),  25,  28 

Lopez  y  Capflla,  Francisco,  l?th  cen- 


tury Mexico  City  chapelmaster, 
104,113,157 

Lorente,  Andres,  142 

Lorenzana,  Frandsco  Antonio,  Arch- 
bishop, 98,  1 02,  1 66 

Loreto,  Abel,  222 

Louis  XIV,  144 

Lucia  &  Lammermoory  194,  2O2 

Lucrezta  Borgia,  202 

Lumholtz,  Carl,  36-38,  43-44 

Luna,  Bartolom£  de,  91 

lute(s),  61,  92-93 

Luther,  Martin,  133 

Macbeth  ( Verdi),  192 
MacDowell,  Edward,  44,  213-214 
Madrid,  69 
Madrigal  Choir  (University  of 

Southern  California),  127 
Magnificats  (Neo-Hispanic),  no- 

118 

Malinalco  tlapanhuehuetl,  13 
Mambruy  romance,  164 
Mannheim  influence,  176 
Manual*  Sacramentorum  ( 1 560) , 

74,77 
Manual f  secundum  tfsum  Almae  Ec- 

clestae  Mexicanae  (1568),  77 
Manzo,  Luigi,  149 
Marbeck  (Merbecke),  John,  133 
Marcha  RepubKcana  (Ortega),  203 
March*  Zaragoza  (Ortega),  203 
Marchsto  el  Alma  (Ponce),  233,  261 
Mariana,  95 
Manazellermessey  2 
marimba,  177 

Mariscal,  Juan  Leon  (1899 — ),  270 
Marin,  Nicolas,  143 
marine  trumpet,  148 
Marino,  Giambattista,  95 
Marta>  2O2 


292 


MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 


Martin,  John,  242 

Mason,  Lowell  (1792-1872),  189- 

190 

Matias,  Juan,  135,  159 
Matthaus-Passion  (Schutz),  127- 

129 
Matthew  Passion,  St.  (Padilla),  127- 

130 
Maximilian  (1832-1867),  emperor, 

191,  200,  219 
Maya(s),  8-9,  28,  259 
Mayer-Serra,  Otto,  176,  240 
Mazahua  melodies,  2 
mazurka,  208 
Medina,   Luis   (1751-1806),    173- 

174 

Mejfa,  Estanislao  (1882 — ),  270 

Mendelssohn,  261 

M6ndez  Plancarte,  Alfonso,  144 

Mendieta,  Geronimo  de  (1525- 
1604),  16-17,  29-31,  34,  67, 
80 

Mendoza,  Vicente  T.  (1894 — ),  7- 
8,  41-42,  163 

Menendez  Pidal,  Ramon,  164 

Meneses,  Carlos  J.,  229 

Meneses,  Miguel  (Agorantey  Rey  de 
la  Nubia),  204 

Merida,  100-101,  259 

Metodo  de  Citara  (1650),  162 

Metro-Gold wyn-Mayer,  207 

Mexico  City  {see  also  Tenochtidart), 
59>  69,  71,  84-87,  91,  101- 
102,  122,  133,  136,  140-141, 
H9>  '53>  155*  158/160,  176, 
178,  184,  187,  191-193,  196, 
207,  224,  231-233,  235, 
239,  243-244,  254-255,  262, 
265 

Mexico  City  Cathedral,  58-59,  84^ 
1*  101,  104-107,  118, 


140,  142-143*  *48,  150,  153- 

154,  161,  186,  194,  196 
Mexico  City  organ  (1735),  1 53^54 
Meza,  Miguel  C.  (1003 — ),  270 
Michaca,  Pedro  (1897 — )>  27° 
Michal,  132 
Michoacan,  67,  80,  84,  89-90,  130, 

134,  212,  262 

Mflan,  Luis  (fl.  1535),  83,  94 
Miller,  Adan  (piano  manufacturer  at 

Mexico  City,  1790-95),  178 
Mille  regrete  Mass  (Morales),  49 
minuete  (minuet),  162,  183 
Minuet   with    Variations    (Aldana), 

178,  180-182 
Miramontes,  Arnulfo  (1882 — ), 

270 
Missa  Gothica  seu  Mozarabica,  102 

MissaU  Romanum  (1561),  75-77 
Mitjana    y    Gordon,    Rafael,    133, 

166 

Mitropoulos,  Dmitri,  243 
Mixtecs,  9 
Molina,    Alonso   de    (1515-1585), 

17,  22,  26 
Monarquia  Indiana  (Torquemada), 

I5>  32,  67 
Moncayo,  Pablo  (1912 — ),  7,  256, 

259,  265 
inonochord,  92 
Montano,  Tomas,  dean  of  Mexico 

Cathedral,  150 
Montanos,  Francisco  de  (fl.  1587), 

142,  168 
Monte,  Philippe   de   (1522-1603), 

in,  113 

Montes  de  Oca,  Jose  G.,  206 
Montezuma  II   (1466—1520),  32, 

5,2 
Montufar,   Alonso    de,    Archbishop, 

63,  66,  74-75,  85,  90-91 


INDEX 


293 


Morales,  Cristobal  de  (1500-1553), 

35,    82-84,    86,   88-90,    105- 

106,  116-117,  158 
Morales,  Melesio  (  1  83  8-1  908  )  , 

197,  204-205,  208-209,  211 
Moratflla,  Francisco,  168 
Morelia  (formerly  Valladolid),  135, 

158,  184,  187,  196 
Morelia,    choral    archive    at,    101- 

IO2 

Morelos,  Jose  Maria  (1765-1815), 

1  86 

morisca  (dance),  162 
Motolinfa,    Toribio    Benavente    de 

(1490-1569),  15-17,   19,  28, 

34,  54,  56,  5»>  66 
Motu  Proprio  (1903),  1  88 
Mouton,  Jean  (1475-1522),  52 
Moya  y  Contreras,  Pedro  de,  Arch- 

bishop, 85,  91,  106 
Mozarabic  rite,  166 
Mozart,  Leopold,  186 
Mozart,  Wolfgang  Amadeus,   180, 


La  Midata  de  Cordoba^  opera  by 

Moncayo,  260 
Munguia,  Dolores,  diva,  174 
Munoz  de  Castro,  Pedro,  151 
Museum  of  Modern  Art  (New  York 

City),  I,  155 

MuAca  Azteca,  La  (Chavez),  6 
Mussorgsky,  261 

Nabucco  (Verdi),  192 

Nahuad  (Aztecan),  22-23,  27,  29> 

31,  33"36,44,53 
Nahuad  hymns,  119-122 
Narvaez,  Luis  de  (fl.  1538),  83 
Navarro,   Juan    (Gaditanus),    102* 


Navarro,  Juan  (Hispalensis),  132 


N ay  arit-exf  edition.  Die,  41 
Nazarre,  Jose  (organ-builder),  153 
Nebra,  Jos6  (d.  1768),  130 
Negroes  in  colonial  Mexico,  musical 

contributions  made  by,  96,  140- 

141,  162 

Neumes  in  Mexican  books,  75,  134 
Newberry  Library,  80 
New  Orleans,  21 1 
Nezahualcoyotl,  18,  224 
Nolasco,  Peter,  vfllandcos  in  honor 

of,  139-140 
Norma,  194,  2O2 
Nova,  Manuel  de,  106 
Nuestra  Mustca,  1 66 
Nueva  Galida,  89 
Nuno,  Jaime  (1824-1908),  206 

Oaxaca,  100,  135,  143,  150,  218 
Oaxaca  Cathedral,  137,  159 
oboes,  68,  92,  94 
Ocharte,  Pedro  de,  printer,  77-80, 

I3p,  134 
octava  rima,  29 

Ogaz6n,  Pedro  Luis,  238 
Olmedo,  Bartolome  de,  52 
Olmos,  Andres  de,  Fray,  31 
omitzicahxiasdi  [oh-mee-tsee-cah- 

wahss'-dee],  4,  10,  137 
Ona,  Pedro  de,  70 
Onate,  Juan  de,  164 
Orden  que  debe  observarse  en  el  coro 

(1560),  85 

Ordmanum  (1556),  72-75 

organ  (s),  63,  68, 93, 148, 153, 170, 

178 
Ortgen  y  Reglas  de  la  Musica,  Del 

(1776),  190 
orlos,  6 1 
Orquesta  Sinfonica  de  Mexico,  244, 

252,  267 


294 


MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 


Ortega,  Aniceto  (1823-1875),  2OI, 
203,  205 

Ortiz,  Diego,  83 

Ortiz,  teacher  of  dancing  and  viol- 
playing,  93 

OSM,  see  Orquesta  Sinfonica  de 
Mexico 

Osuna,  87 

Otomi(es),  9,  43 

Ovando,  Juan  de,  60,  85 

Oviedo,  see  Fernandez  de  Oviedo 

Oxfaniztli,  44 

Pablos,  Juan,  printer,  74,  77 

Paderewski,  210 

Padflla,  Juan  de  (d.  1673),  35,  104, 
126-130,  157,  159,  166 

padovanas,  94 

Paisiello,  Giovanni  (1741-1816), 
174,  192 

Palafox  y  Mendoza,  Juan  de,  Arch- 
bishop, 125-126 

Palestrina,  Giovanni  Pierluigi  da,  86, 

101,   III-II2 

palomo  (dance  type),  195 
panami  (dance),  162 
panhuehued  [pahn-way'-waytl],  12 
Paniagua,    Cenobio     (1821-1882), 

196,  198,  204-205,  208 
Papago  music,  41 
Paraguay  Reductions,  20,  133 
Paraleja,  Alonso  de,  60 
Partenope,  Lay  opera  by  Zumaya,  149 
pasacalle  (passacaglia),  162 
paso  de  fantasia,  162 
paspied  (passepied),  162 
Passionano  (1572),  77-79 
pavana  (pavane),  94,  162 
Pedrell,  Felipe  (1841-1922),  190, 

211 
Pedro  de  Gante  (l48o-i572)>  19, 


34>35>5*>53>58,  62,83,  264 
Pefialosa,  Francisco,  82 
pentatonic  series  in  Aztec  music,  6 
Peralta,  Angela  (1845-1883),  201- 

203,  206,  210 

Peralta,  Bernardo  de,  104,  113,  126 
P6rez,  Manuel  (Mexico  City  organ 

builder,  1796),  178 
Perez  de  Rivas,  62 
Perez  Gordfllo,  Diego,  84 
P£rez  Materano,  Juan    (Cartagena 

chapelmaster,  1554),  172 
Peruvian  music,  161 
Pestalozzi,  190 

Philip  II,  65-66,  79,  86-87,  9°>  J38 
Philip  the  Fair,  82 
piano  manufacture  in  Mexico,  177- 

178 

pianos  in  Mexico  in  1841,  194 
Pietro  d'AbanOy  opera  by  Paniagua, 

197 

Pincherle,  Marc,  234  . 
Pindar,  177 

Pisador,  Diego  (fl.  1552),  83 
Pius  V,  Pope,  75,  79 
PiusX,  Pope,  1 88 
Placeres,  Mariano   (Durango  organ 

builder,  1800),  178 
Placido,  Francisco,  Don,  93 
plainchant,  64,  84,  89 
Planas,  Miguel  (Don  Qwjote  en  la 

Ventana  Encantada),  204 
Polaca  (Soto  Carrfllo?),  178,  182- 

183 

polka,  208 
polonaise,  176,  183 
polytonality  in  Indian  music,  7 
Pomar,  Jose  (1880 — ),  270 
Ponce,  Alonso,  17,  86 
Ponce,  Joaquin  (Morelia  Cathedral 

precentor),  184 


INDEX 


295 


Ponce,   Manuel  M.    (1882-1948), 

231-238,  241,  261 
Pope,  Isabel,  169 
Pope  Marcellus  Mass,  107 
population  in   1680  (Mexico  City), 

160 

population  in  1790,  160 
porto  rico  (dance),  141 
portorrico  de  los  negros,  162 
portuguesa,  162 
Powhatan,  44 
Praetorius,  Michael,  91 
Preuss,  K.  T.,  41 
Principios  de  la  Armonia  y  Melodia 

(x*35),  187,  189 
Prokofieff,  Serge,  5,  252 
Psalmodia    Christiana    (1583)*    23, 

33>  35 

Psalterium     Amphonarium      (Anti- 

phonanum)  Sanctorale  (1584)? 
8l 

Psalterium    secundum    usum    sancte 
Romane  ecclesie  consuetudinem 

(1564),  85 
publishers  in   igth  century  Mexico, 

223 
Puebla,  86,  122,  136,  201 

choral  archive  at,  82,  91,  IOI-IO2 
Puebla  Cathedral,  80,  153,  158,  174, 

178 
puertorrico   de   la   Puebk    (dance), 

162 

Pujol,  Juan,  130 
/  puritan*,  2O2 
Pythagoras,  27 

Quatuor    Passiones     (1604),     IO2, 

I3r>  I33-*34 
Quern  dicunt  homines  Mass  (Pales- 

trina),  101 
Queretaro,  137,  I59>  2II>  2I5 


Quetzalcoatl:  Ensayo  Tragico^  203 

Quevedo  Villegas,  95 

Quod  a  nobis  (buU  of  Pius  V),  75 

Rabanus  Maurus,  168 

Ramirez    de    Fuenleal,     Sebastian, 

Bishop,  63 

Ramos,  Antonio  (organist),  84 
Ramos  de  Pareja,  Bartolome"  (  1440- 


Ravel,  Maurice,  243 
Ray,  AUce,  35,  127,  168 
^  rebeck  (s),  65,  148 
Recoptlacion  de  sonetos  y  villancicos 

(1560),  138 
Regtas  y  ordenanzas  del  Coro  (Pue- 

bla, 1649),  I2^ 
Rojas,  Mariano,  12  1 
Relacion  de  las  Cosas  de  Yucatan,  28 
Relation  historiada  de  las  Exequias 

Funerales  (1600),  90 
Relacion  y  description  (Puebla, 

1649),  I25'I26 
Revillagigedo,  5ist  viceroy,  186 
Revueltas,    Sflvestre    (1899-1940), 


Ribera  Florez,  Dionysio  de,  90 

rigaudon,  162 

Rinaldo,  173 

Rincon,  Antonio  del,  35 

Rincon,  Juan  Diego   de,  bishop  of 

Michoacan,  77,  130 
Rionda,  Manuel,  188 
Rivera,  Diego,  7,  46,  242 
Robles,  Juan  de,  137 
Rocamora,  Victorio,  174 
Rodeheaver,  Homerj  165 
Rodil,  Antonio,  168 
Rodngo,El  (1708),  149 
Rogier,  Philip,  102 
Rolon,  Jose  (1883-1945)^70 


298 


MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 


Taubman,  Howard,  I 

Teatro  Arbeu,  224,  233 

Teatro  des  Gallos,  1 94 

Teatro  Iris,  240 

Teatro  Olimpia,  240 

tecomopfloa  (see  teponazdi),  24 

Tecto,  Juan  de,  52 

tecuicatflizdi    [teh-kwee-kah-tee-lee'- 

sdee],  song  addressed  to  another 

person,  27 
tecuicuiqueualiztli   [teh-kwee-kwee- 

kay-wah-lee'-sdee] ,  song  sung 

to  insult  someone,  27 
tecuiqueualiztli     [teh-kwee-kay-wah- 

lee'-sdee],  song  sung  to  compli- 
ment someone,  27 
Tello,  Rafael  J.,  262 
Tenochtidan  [Teh-noach-teet- 

Iahn'],28,37,52,86,i07 
Teoria  Logica,  230 
Teotihuacan  [Tay-oh-tee-wah- 

kahn'],  31 
Tepehuane  tribe,  38 
teponazdi  [teh-poh-nah'-sdee] ,  5,  9, 

13,18,21,26,30-32,137 
Tepozdan,  30 
tepuzquiquizdi  [teh-poo-skee-kee'- 

sdee],4,  II 
terceto,  29 
Terradeflas,  Domingo  (1713- 

I750>  155 

Texcuco  (or  Texcoco),  18,  88-89 
Tezcadipoca,  Aztec  deity,  31,  93 
Thalberg,  Sigismund  (1812-1871), 

198,  209 
Thiers,  202 
Third   Mexican   Provincial  Council 

(1585),  n8 
Thompson,  Randall,  165 
TitusiHaie  (Pennsylvania),  74 
dapanhuehued  [tlah-pahn-way/- 


wayd]    (see  also  huehued),  4, 

12,  13? 

dapitzalli  [dah-peet-sah'-yee] ,  4,  8, 
II 

dapitzaualizdi  [dah-peet-sow-wah- 
lee'-sdee],  song  sung  by  a  so- 
prano, 27 

Tlaxcala,  56,  78,  88-89 

Tobias 'y  oratorio  by  Paniagua,  197 

tocotin,  137,  141,  169 

Toledo,  69,  74,  82 
Archbishop  of,  29 
Cathedral  at,  122 

Toluca  Museum,  13 

tonadflla,  174,  176 

toncontfn,  see  tocotin 

Torquemada,  Juan  de  (1564-1624), 
15-17^32,67,80,134 

Torre,  Francisco  de  la,  82 

Torres,    Jose    de,    chapelmaster    to 
Philip  V  of  Spain   (fl.  1703), 

127,  133 

Torres,  Jos£  de,  Mexico  City  chapel- 
master   (fl.   1732),   133,  153- 

154 
Torres  Serratos  (Los  dos  Foscan), 

204 

Toscanini,  Arturo,  243 
Tozzer,  A.  M.,  27 
Trawrta,  Lay  2O2 
Trent,  Samuel,  163 
Tresguerras,  Francisco,  1 60 
Tristezas  me  matan  Mass  (Morales), 

49 
Triujeque,  Ignado,  196 

trombone  (s)  (see  also  sackbut),  91, 

148 

Trovatore,  //,  202 
Trujfllo,  Alonso  de,  105-106 
trumpet (s)^  65,  68,  91,  148 
Tschaikowsky,  211-212 


INDEX 


299 


Tudor  Church  Music,  103 

Tumulo  Imperial  (1560),  87-88 

tun,  8 

tunkul,  8 

Two    Sketches   for   String   Quartet 

(Griffes),  44 
tzicahuastli  (same  as  chicahuastli),  4 

ule,  25 

tfltimo  Pensantiento  de  Weber,  El, 

lyric  drama  by  Ituarte,  205 
University  of  Mexico  (founded 

1533)^7,  I37»  I555i9i 
Unknown  Mexico  (1902),  36 

Valdes  Codex,  100 
Valencia,  Martin  de,  54 
Valentino  (1910  Revolutionary 

song},  234 

Valladolid  (Michoacan),  see  Morelia 
Vallados,  Matheo,  1  7th  century 

Oaxaca  chapelmaster,  137 
Valle,  Octaviano   (Clottlde  de  Cos- 

cena)y  204 

valona  (see  balona),  162 
Valse  with  Variations  (1826),  188 
Valton,  Ernflio,  98 
Vasco   de   Quiroga,   first  bishop  of 

Michoacan,  90,  263 
Vasconcelos,  Jose*,  239 
Vasquez,  Jose  F.  (1895  —  ),  265 
V&quez,  Juan  (i6th  century),  138 
Velasco,  Luis  de,  2nd  viceroy,  88 
Velasquez,  Consuelo,  266 
Velazquez,  Jose*  G.,  2  1  5 
Venegas    de    Henestrosa,    Luis    (fl. 


Veracruz,  52 
Verdi,  192,  205,  263 
Veytecuflhuid,  Aztec  festival,  24 


Victoria,    Juan    de    (Mexico    City 

chapelmaster,  1570),  85,  105 
Victoria,   Tomas   Luis   de    (1548- 

1611),  82,  102,  1 06 
Vieuxtemps,    Henri    (1820-1881), 

208 

vihuela(s)  de  arco,  61 
vihuela  de  mano,  162 
vihuela  de  rueda,  165 
vfflancico(s),  57,  68,  84,  97,  138, 

149,215 

Villancicos  (Osuna,  1551),  138 
Vfllanueva,     Felipe     (1862-1893), 

204,  210,  211 
violin,  148 

viols,  65,  68,  148 

Virgin  of  Guadalupe,  93,  157,  215 
Vizarron    y    Eguiarreta,    Juan    de, 
Archbishop   and   37th   viceroy, 

153 

Wagner,  Henry  R.,  78 

Wagner  y  Levien,  music  publishers, 

205,  223,  235 

Weber,  Carl  Maria  von,  214 
Weinstock,  Herbert,  15 
Whitchurch,  Edward,  80 
Williams,  R.   Vaughan,  245,  263- 

264 

Xico,  30 

Ximenez  de  Cisneros,  Cardinal,  69 

XochtpiHi-Mactttlxockitl  (Chavez) 

[Soh-chee-pee'-yec  Mah-kweel- 

soh'-cheed],  1-2 
Xochipflli-Macuilxochitl,  god  of  music 

and  dancing,  13 
Xochitl,  Aztec  festival,  32 
Xolod,  31 
Xolotla,  30 
Xtoks  (Maya  ribbon  dance),  42-43 


JOO 


Xuarez,  Juan  (i6th  century  Mexico 
City  canon),  58-59,  84 

Yaquj(s),2,4i,43 
Yaqui Music  (Ponce),  237 
Yaqui  Music  (Sandi),  1-2,  262 
Yaqtds  y  Los  Seris,  Los,  259 
Yucatan  (see  also  Mayas,  Merida), 

27-28,  259 

yumari,  Tarahumara  dance,  38 
Yurchenko,  Henrietta,  45 
Yuste,  59,  88 

Zaapeche,  135 

zacatan,  9 

Zacatecas,  36, 100,  160 

Zamacois,  Niceto  de,  Don,  216 


MUSIC  IN  MEXICO 


zambra  (Moorish  dance),  26 

Zamora,  168 

Zapata,  EmQiano,  140 

zapatero  (dance  type),  195 

Zapotecs,  9 

zarabanda,  see  sarabande 

Zaragoza,  Ignado,  203 

zarambeques,  162 

zarzuela(s),  173,  207 

Zipoli,  Domenico,  133,  168 

zocalo,  107,  178 

Zumarraga,  Juan  de,  first  bishop  of 
Mexico,  1 6,  58-59,  67,  84 

Zumaya,  Manuel  (fl,  1720),  Mexico 
City  chapelmaster  and  opera 
composer,  102,  104,  133,  143, 

158-159 


