' 7 , 


£ the  01>PnI»gira/ 

PRINCETON,  N.  J. 


Division 


Cr?\\ 


. YLL 

Section 


NOV 


t Jfolk-^oa  (Saaetg 

FOR  COLLECTING  AND  PRINTING 


RELICS  OF  POPULAR  ANTIQUITIES,  &c. 


ESTABLISHED  IN 

THE  YEAR  MDCCCLXXVIII. 


Alter  et  Idem. 


PUBLICATIONS 

OF 

THE  FOLK-LORE  SOCIETY 

LV. 


[I9°4] 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2017  with  funding  from 
Princeton  Theological  Seminary  Library 


https://archive.org/details/jamaicansongstor00jeky_0 


JAMAICAN 
SONG  AND  STORY 


AN  NANCY  STORIES,  DIGGING  SINGS,  RING 
TUNES,  AND  DANCING  TUNES 

COLLECTED  AND/EDITED  BY 

WALTER  JEKYLL: 

WITH  AN  INTRODUCTION  BY 

ALICE  WERNER, 

AND  APPENDICES  ON 

TRACES  OF  AFRICAN  MELODY  IN  JAMAICA 

BY 

C.  S.  MYERS, 

AND  ON 

ENGLISH  AIRS  AND  MOTIFS  IN  JAMAICA 

BY 

LUCY  E.  BROADWOOD. 

“A  few  brief  years  have  passed  away 

Since  Britain  drove  her  million  slaves 
Beneath  the  tropics  fiery  ray  : 

God  willed  their  freedom  ; and  to-day 

Life  blooms  above  those  island  graves!” 

Whittier 


•Pttbltalicb  for  the  (Jffolk-JjCore  ^Socicto  bo 
DAVID  NUTT,  57  — 59  LONG  ACRE 
LONDON 
1907 


GLASGOW  ! PRINTED  AT  THE  UNIVERSITY  PRESS 
BY  ROBERT  MACLEHOSE  AND  CO.  LTD. 


CONTENTS. 


PAGE 

Introduction  (Alice  Werner), ix 

Author’s  Preface, xxxix 

PAGE 

PART  I.  : ANNANCY  STORIES.  i 


1.  Annancy  and  Brother  Tiger,  7 

2.  Yung-Kyum-Pyung,  • - 11 

3.  King  Daniel,  - - 14 

4.  Tomby,  16 

5.  How  Monkey  manage  Annancy,  20 

6.  Blackbird  and  Woss-woss,  - 23 

7.  The  Three  Sisters,  - - 26 

8.  William  Tell,  ...  29 

9.  Brother  Annancy  and  Brother 

Death,  - - - -31 

10.  Mr.  Bluebeard,  35 

11.  Annancy,  Puss  and  Ratta,  - 38 

12.  Toad  and  Donkey,  - - 39 

13.  Snake  the  Postman,  - - 43 

14.  Doha, 46 

15.  Dry-Bone,  48 

16.  Annancy  and  the  Old  Lady’s 

Field,  - - - 51 

17.  Man-Crow,  54 

18.  Saylan,  - - - - 58 

19.  Annancy  and  Screech-Owl,  - 60 

20.  Annancy  and  Cow,  - - 63 

21.  Tacoma  and  the  Old- Witch 

Girl,  - - - - 65 

22.  Devil’s  Honey-Dram,  - - 68 

23.  Annancy  in  Crab  Country,  - 70 

24.  Gaulin,  73 


25.  Annancy,  Monkey  and  Tiger,  77 

26.  The  Three  Pigs,  79 

27.  Dummy,  - - - - 84 

28.  Annancy  and  Candlefly,  - 86 

29.  Parson  Puss  and  Parson  Dog,  9 1 

30.  Chicken-Hawk,  - - - 94 

31.  Pretty  Poll,  - - - - 96 

32.  Annancy  and  Hog,  - - 98 

33.  Dry-River,  - 100 

34.  Yellow  Snake,  - - - 102 

35.  Cow  and  Annancy,  - - 104 

36.  Leah  and  Tiger,  - - - 108 

37.  Timmolimmo,  - - - 114 

38.  Calcutta  Monkey  and  Annancy,  117 

39.  Open  Sesame,  - - - 120 

40.  Sea-Mahmy,  - - - 1 23 

41.  Crab  and  his  Corn-piece,  - 126 

42.  Dry-Grass  and  Fire,  - - 129 

43.  John  Crow,  - - - - 132 

44.  Tiger’s  Death,  - - - 135 

45.  The  Old  Lady  and  the  Jar,  - 137 

46.  John  Crow  and  Fowl-Hawk,  140 

47.  Finger  Quashy,  - - 143 

48.  Annancy  and  his  Fish-Pot,  - 145 

49.  Hog  and  Dog,  - - - 146 

50.  Devil  and  the  Princess,  - 148 

51.  Wheeler,  ....  152 


VI 


Contents. 


PAGE 


PART  II. 

: DIGGING  SINGS,- 

157 

PAGE 

52- 

Oh  hurrah,  boys  ! 

159 

70. 

Gold,  amber  gold, 

172 

53- 

Ho  biddybye, 

159 

7i- 

Gee  oh  mother  Mac,  - 

173 

54- 

Tell  Mr.  Linky,  - 

l60 

72. 

Leah  married  a Tuesday, 

173 

55- 

Tell  Mr.  Bell,  - 

l6l 

73- 

Cheer  me  oh  ! - 

173 

56. 

Bad  homan  oh  ! - 

162 

74- 

Me  cock  a crow,  - 

174 

57- 

Bell  a ring  a yard  oh  ! - 

162 

75- 

Oh  Selina  ! - 

174 

58. 

The  one  shirt  I have,  - 

I64 

76. 

Sambo  Lady, 

176 

59- 

J essie  cut  him  yoke, 

I64 

77- 

John  Thomas,  - - - 

177 

60. 

T’ree  acre  of  Cahffee,  - 

I65 

78. 

Whe  mumma  de  ? 

178 

61. 

Away,  away, 

166 

79- 

Toady,  .... 

179 

62. 

Wednesday  morning  before 

80. 

Me  know  the  man, 

180 

day,  .... 

167 

81. 

Minnie,  .... 

181 

63- 

Oh  Samuel  oh  ! - 

168 

82. 

You  want  to  yerry  Duppy  talk, 

182 

64. 

Oh  ’liza  oh  ! 

168 

83- 

Me  know  Sarah,  - 

183 

65- 

Aunty  Mary  oh  ! - 

I69 

84. 

Me  donkey  want  water, 

183 

66. 

Oh  me  yerry  news  ! 

170 

8S. 

A Somerset  me  barn,  - 

184 

67. 

Jes’  so  me  barn,  - 

170 

86. 

Timber  lay  down  ’pon  pit,  - 

185 

68. 

Tell  Mary  say, 

171 

87. 

Me  want  go  home, 

187 

69. 

Me  tell  them  gall, 

171 

88. 

War  down  a Monkland, 

187 

PART 

III.  : 

PAGE 

89. 

Little  Sally  Water, 

- 190 

90. 

Poor  Little  Zeddy, 

- 191 

9i- 

Whe  me  lover  de  ? 

- 192 

92. 

Ring  a diamond, 

- 194 

93- 

Carry  Banana, 

- 195 

94- 

Pass  the  ball, 

- I96 

95- 

Me  los’  me  gold  ring. 

- 197 

96. 

Old  mother  Phoebe,  - 

- 197 

97- 

Deggy, 

- I98 

98. 

Me  go  da  Galloway  Road, 

- 199 

99- 

Rosybel, 

- 200 

100. 

Bull  a pen  ho  ! - 

- 201 

IOI. 

Two  man  a road, 

- 201 

102. 

Adina  Mona, 

- 202 

103. 

Palmer, 

- 203 

PAGE 

RING  TUNES,  - - - - 190 

104.  Mother  Freeman,  - - 204 

105.  Me  have  me  goosey  a me 
yard,  ....  205 

106.  Drill  him,  Constab  ! - - 205 

107.  If  you  make  him  come  out,  206 

108.  Oh  me  Toad  oh  ! - - 207 

109.  There’s  a Black  boy  in  a 

ring,  ....  207 

no.  Johnny,  ....  209 

hi.  Me  lover  gone  a Colon  bay,  209 

1 12.  Good  morning  to  you,  mother,  210 

1 13.  Johnny  Millar,  - - - 211 

1 14.  Bahlimbo,  - - - - 212 

115.  Oh  den  Jacky,  - - - 214 

1 16.  Ha,  ha,  ha,  ha  ! - - - 214 


Contents. 


vii 


PAGE 


PART  IV.  : DANCING  TUNES  - - -216 


PAGE  I 


1 17.  When  I go  home, 

1 18.  Guava  root  a medicine, 

1 19.  Crahss-lookin’ dog  up’tairs, 

120.  Goatridge  have  some  set  a gal, 

12 1.  Me  carry  me  akee  a Linstead 

market,  .... 

122.  Since  Dora  Logan, 

123.  Fire,  Mr.  Preston,  Fire  ! 

124.  Tief  cahfifee, 

125.  P'an  me,  soldierman,  - 

126.  Manny  Clark, 

127.  Bungo  Moolatta, 

128.  Bahl,  Ada, 

129.  Rise  a roof  in  the  morning, 

130.  Oh  we  went  to  the  river, 

1 3 1 . Aunty  Jane  a call  Minnie,  - 

132.  Marty,  Marty,  - 

1 33.  What  make  you  shave  old 

Hall?  - 

134.  Run,  Moses,  run, 

135.  Wheyoudado? 

136.  Mother  William,  hold  back 

Leah,  .... 

137.  Oh,  General  Jackson  ! 

138.  Soldier,  da  go ’way,  - 

139.  Don’t  cry  too  much,  Jamaica 

gal, 

140.  Dip  them,  - 

141.  Very'  well,  very  well,  - 

142.  Oh  trial  ! - 

143.  Father,  I goin’  to  join  the 

confirmation,  - 

144.  Obeah  down  de, 

145.  The  other  day  me  waistcoat 

cut,  .... 

146.  All  them  gal  a ride  merry- 

go-round, 

147.  Merry-go-round  a go  fall 

down,  .... 

148.  Try,  dear,  don’t  tell  a lie,  - 

149.  Look  how  you  mout’,  - 

150.  Breezy  say  him  no  want 

Brown  lady, 


217 

I5I- 

218 

1 52* 

218 

1 53- 

219 

154. 

i55- 

219 

156. 

220 

r5  7- 

221 

158. 

222 

!59- 

223 

160. 

224 

161 

225 

162. 

225 

163. 

226 

164. 

227 

228 

165. 

00 

n 

N 

166. 

167. 

229 

1 68. 

230 

169. 

231 

170. 

232 

171. 

233 

172. 

234 

173- 

174. 

234 

175- 

235 

176. 

235 

*77- 

236 

178. 

237 

179. 

239 

180. 

240 

181. 

182. 

241 

183. 

184. 

242 

185. 

243 

244 

186. 

.87. 

245 

188. 

Isaac  Park  gone  a Colon,  - 245 

Matilda  de  ’pon  dyin’  bed,  246 
Mas’  Charley,  - - - 247 

Me  buggy  a sell,  - - 247 

Oh  ’zetta  Ford,  gal,  - - 248 

Birdyzeena,  - - - 249 

Me  an’  Katie  no  ’gree,  - 249 

Down-town  gal,  - - - 249 

Sal,  you  ought  to  been  ashame,  250 
Good  morning,  Mr.  Harman,  250 
Hullo  me  honey  ! - - 251 

When  murama  dere,  - - 252 

Oh  Jilly  oh  ! - - - 253 

James  Brown,  you  mahmy 
call  you,  - - - - 253 

When  I go  home,  - - 254 

P'eather,  feather,  feather,  - 254 

Quaco  Sam,  - - - 256 

Anch  a bite  me,  - - - 257 

Me  know  one  gal  a Cross 
Road,  ....  257 

Moonshine  baby,  - - 258 

I have  a news,  - 259 

Once  I was  a trav’ller,  - 260 

Oh  me  wouldn’  bawl  at  all,  - 261 

You  take  junka  ’tick,  - - 262 

Yellow  fever  come  in,  - - 262 

Jimmy  Rampy,  - - - 263 

Susan,  very  well  why  oh  ! - 264 

Bahss,  Bahss,  you  married 
you  wife,  - - - - 264 

Blackbird  a eat  puppa  corn, 
oh ! - - - - - 265 

Me  da  Coolie  sleep  on  Piazza,  265 
Notty  Shaw,  - - - 266 

You  worthless  Becca  Watson,  267 
Since  the  waggonette  come  in,  267 
Them  Gar’n  Town  people,  - 268 

Young  gal  in  Jamaica,  take 
warning,  - 270 

Me  no  min  de  a concert,  - 270 


Complain,  complain,  complain,  271 
I can’t  walk  on  the  bare  road,  27 1 


viii 


Contents. 


DANCING  TUNES  — Continued. 


PAGE 

PAGE 

189. 

Come  go  da  mountain, 

272 

1 93.  Mister  Davis  bring  somet’ing 

190. 

Amanda  Grant,  - 

2 73 

fe  we  all,  - 

275 

191. 

Last  night  I was  lying  on 

194.  A whe  the  use,  - 

275 

me  number,  - 

273 

195.  Quattywort’  of  this  ! - 

276 

192. 

Me  lassie,  me  dundooze, 

274 

196.  Mahngoose  a come, 

277 

Appendix  : 

A.  Traces  of  African  Melody  in  Jamaica — C.  S.  Myers,  - - - 279 

B.  English  Airs  and  Motifs  in  Jamaica — L.  E.  Broad  wood,  - - 285 


ERRATUM. 

Pages  3 and  5,  page-heading,  for  Introduction  read  Annancy  Stories. 


INTRODUCTION. 


Mr.  Jekyll’s  delightful  collection  of  tales  and  songs  from 
Jamaica  suggests  many  interesting  problems.  It  presents  to  us 
a network  of  interwoven  strands  of  European  and  African 
origin,  and  when  these  have  been  to  some  extent  disentangled 
we  are  confronted  with  the  further  question,  to  which  of  the 
peoples  of  the  Dark  Continent  may  the  African  element  be 
attributed  ? 

The  exact  relationship  between  the  “Negro”  and  Bantu  races, — 
which  of  them  is  the  original  and  which  the  adulterated  stock 
(in  other  words,  whether  the  adulteration  was  an  improvement 
or  the  reverse), — is  a subject  quite  beyond  my  competence  to 
discuss.  It  seems  certain  that  the  Negro  languages  (as  yet 
only  tentatively  classified)  are  as  distinct  from  the  singularly 
homogeneous  and  well-defined  Bantu  family,  as  Aryan  from 
Semitic.  Ibo,  at  one  end  of  the  area,  has  possible  Bantu 
affinities,  which  await  fuller  investigation;  the  same  thing  has  been 
conjectured  of  Bullom  and  Temne  at  the  other  end  (Sierra 
Leone) ; but  these  are  so  slight  and  as  yet  so  doubtful  that 
they  scarcely  affect  the  above  estimate. 

The  difference  in  West  Coast  and  Bantu  folk-tales  is  not  so 
marked  as  that  between  the  languages ; yet  here,  too,  along  with 
a great  deal  which  the  two  have  in  common,  we  can  pick  out 
some  features  peculiar  to  each.  And  Mr.  Jekyll’s  tales,  so  far  as 
they  can  be  supposed  to  come  from  Africa  at  all,  are  not  Bantu. 
The  name  of  “ Annancy  ” alone  is  enough  to  tell  us  that. 

Annancy,  or  Anansi  is  the  Tshi  (Ashanti)1  word  for  “spider”; 
and  the  Spider  figures  largely  in  the  folk-tales  of  the  West  Coast 

1Fanti  is  a dialect  of  this  language,  which  is  variously  called  Twi,  Cliwi, 
Otyi,  and  Ochi. 


X 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


(by  which  we  mean,  roughly,  the  coast  between  Cape  Verde 
and  Kamerun),  while,  with  some  curious  exceptions  to  be 
noted  later  on,  he  seems  to  be  absent  from  Bantu  folk-lore. 
His  place  is  there  taken  by  the  Hare  (Brer  Rabbit),  and,  in 
some  of  his  aspects,  by  the  Tortoise. 

We  find  the  “ Brer  Rabbit  ” stories  (best  known  through  Uncle 
Remus ) in  the  Middle  and  Southern  States  of  America,  where  a 
large  proportion,  at  any  rate,  of  the  negro  slaves  were  imported 
from  Lower  Guinea.  Some  personal  names  and  other  words 
preserved  among  them  ( e.g . “ goober  ” = nguba , the  ground-nut,  or 
“pea-nut”)  can  be  traced  to  the  Fiote,  or  Lower  Congo  language; 
and  some  songs  of  which  I have  seen  the  words,1  look  as  if 
they  might  be  Bantu,  but  corrupted  apparently  beyond  recognition. 

But  the  British  West  Indies  would  seem  to  have  been  chiefly 
supplied  from  Upper  Guinea,  or  the  “West  Coast”  proper  (it 
really  faces  south,  while  Loango,  Congo,  etc.,  are  the  “South-West 
Coast  ” — a point  which  is  sometimes  puzzling  to  the  uninitiated). 
Among  the  tribes  to  be  found  in  Jamaica,  Mr.  Jekyll  tells  me 
are  the  Ibo  (Lower  Niger),  Coromantin  (Gold  Coast),  Hausa, 
Mandingo,  Moko  (inland  from  Calabar),  Nago  (Yoruba),  and 
Sobo  (Lower  Niger). 

Mr.  Jekyll  furnishes  a bit  of  confirmatory  evidence  in  the 
list  of  names  (p.  156)  given  to  children  according  to  the  day 
of  the  week  on  which  they  are  born.  These  are  immediately 
recognizable  as  Tshi.  As  given  in  Christaller’s  Dictionary  of  the 
Asante  and  Fante  Language  called  Tshi  (1881),  the  boys’  names 
are  identical  or  nearly  so  (allowing  for  the  different  systems  of 
spelling)  with  those  in  Mr.  Jekylfs  list.  They  are : Kwasi, 

1 One  is  given  by  Mr.  G.  W.  Cable  in  the  Century  Magazine , xxx.  S20,  as  a 
Louisiana  Voodoo  song  : 

Heron  mande,  tigui  li  papa.  Heron  mande,  dose  dan  godo. 

Another  by  Mr.  W.  E.  Burghart  Du  Bois  in  The  Souls  of  Black  Folk , 
p.  254 — apparently  a lullaby  : 

Doba  na  coba  gene  me,  gene  me  ! 

Ben  d’  nu  li,  nu  li,  nu  li,  nu  li,  bend’le. 

I can  make  nothing  of  these.  In  the  latter  case,  uncertainty  as  to  the 
phonetic  system  adopted  complicates  the  puzzle.  One  might  be  tempted  to 
connect  the  last  two  words  with  Zulu  endhle  or  pandhlc  — outside, — but  I can 
find  nothing  else  to  support  this  resemblance,  and  such  stray  guesses  are 
unprofitable  work. 


Introduction. 


xi 


Kwadwo,  Kwabena,  Kwaku,  Kwaw  (or  Yaw),  Kofi,  Kwame. 
(Mr.  George  Macdonald,  in  The  Gold  Coast  Past  and 
Present , gives  Kwamina,  instead  of  Kwame,  probably  owing 
to  a difference  of  dialect.  The  girls’  names  are  less  easily 
recognizable,  but  a careful  scrutiny  reveals  the  interesting 
fact  that  in  some  cases  an  older  form  seems  to  have  been 
preserved  in  Jamaica.  Moreover,  the  sound  written  w by  Christ- 
aller approaches  that  of  b,  which  seems  to  be  convertible  with 
it  under  certain  conditions,  all  the  girls’  names  being  formed 
by  means  of  the  suffix  ba  = a child.  Conversely,  ekpo  in  the 
mouth  of  a West  Coast  native  sounds  to  a casual  ear  like  ekwo. 

Akosuwa[  = Akwasiba]  = Quashiba. 

Adwowa  =Jubba.  (Cf.  dw  = dj  in  “Cudjo”). 

Abeua  = Cubba. 

Akuwa  =Memba. 

Ya  [ = Yawa]  = Abba. 

Afuwa  = Fibba. 

Amma  [ = Amenenewa]  = Beniba. 

The  boys’  names  have  “ Kwa  ” ( = akoa,  a man,  slave) 
prefixed  to  that  of  the  day,  or,  more  correctly  speaking,  of  its 
presiding  genius.  These  latter  are:  Ayisi,  Adwo,  Bena,  Wuku, 
Yaw,  Afi,  Amin.  The  names  of  the  days  appear  to  be  formed 
from  them  by  the  omission  of  the  initial  A (where  it  exists),  and 
the  addition  of  the  suffix  da,  with  some  irregularities,  which  no 
doubt  a fuller  knowledge  of  the  language  would  explain : Kwasida, 
Dwoda,  Benada,  Wukuda,  Yawda,  Fida,  Memeneda  (Meminda). 
The  week  of  seven  days  does  not  seem  to  be  known  else- 
where in  Africa,  except  as  a result  of  Moslem  or  Christian 
influence.  The  Congo  week  of  four  days  is  puzzling,  till  one 
remembers  that  it,  too,  rests  on  a division  of  the  lunar  month  : 
7x4  instead  of  4 x 7.1 

The  Ts'hi,  Ewe  and  Yoruba  languages  are  genderless,  like 
the  Bantu.  (The  word  ba  has  come  to  mean  “a  daughter”  when 
appropriated  as  a suffix  to  feminine  names;  but,  properly,  it 
seems  to  mean  “a  child”  of  either  sex.)  This  fact  explains 
the  appearance  of  such  personages  as  “ Brother  Cow  ” (see  also 
Mr.  Jekyll’s  note  on  p.  107),  and  the  wild  confusion  of  pronouns 

1 R.  E.  Dennett,  Folklore  of  the  Fjort,  p.  8. 


xii  Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 

sometimes  observed  : “ Annancy  really  want  that  gal  fe  marry, 
but  he  couldn’  catch  him.” — “When  the  gal  go,  him  go  meet 
Brother  Death,” — etc. 

The  few  words  given  as  “African”  by  Mr.  Jekyll  seem  to  be 
traceable  to  Tshi.  “Massoo”  (pp.  12,  13)  is  md  so  = to  lift. 
Afu  (“hafoo,”  “afoo,”  p.  18)  is  not  in  Christaller’s  Dictionary , 
except  as  equivalent  to  “grass,”  or  “herbs”;  fnfu  is  a food 
made  from  yams  or  plantains  boiled  and  pounded  ; perhaps  there 
is  some  slight  confusion.  Nyam  is  not  “ to  eat,”  but  enam  is 
Tshi  for  “ meat,”  as  nyama  (in  some  form  or  other)  is  in  every 
Bantu  language.  The  nonsense-words  in  the  songs  may  be 
corrupted  from  Tshi  or  some  cognate  language,  but  a fuller 
knowledge  of  these  than  I possess  would  be  necessary  in  order 
to  determine  the  point. 

Transplanted  African  folk-lore  has  a peculiar  interest  of  its  own, 
and  one  is  very  glad  to  find  Mr.  Jekyll  doing  for  Jamaica  what 
Mr.  Chandler  Harris,  e.g.  has  done  for  Georgia.  But  the 
African  element  in  the  stories  before  us  is  far  less  evident  than 
in  “Uncle  Remus,”  and  is  in  many  cases  overlaid  and  inextricably 
mixed  up  with  matter  of  European  origin.  At  least  eleven  out  of 
the  fifty-one  stories  before  us  can  be  set  down  as  imported, 
directly  or  indirectly,  from  Europe.  I say  directly  or  indirectly, 
because  an  examination  of  Chatelain’s  Folk-tales  of  Angola  and 
Junod’s  Chants  et  Contes  des  Baronga  shows  that  some  tales, 
at  any  rate,  have  passed  from  Portugal  to  Africa.  Such  are 
La  file  du  Roi  (Ronga),  which  is  identical  with  Grimm’s  The 
Shoes  that  were  danced  to  pieces , and  with  the  Slovak-gypsy  story 
of  The  Three  Girls  (Groome,  Gypsy  Folk-tales , p.  14 1).  But 
in  the  absence  of  more  detailed  and  direct  evidence  than  we 
yet  possess,  it  would  be  rash  to  assume  that  they  have  passed 
to  America  by  way  of  Africa,  rather  than  that  they  have  been 
independently  transmitted. 

The  eleven  stories  above  referred  to  are  : II.  Yung-kyum-pyung, 
III.  King  Daniel,  VI.  Blackbird  and  Woss-woss,  X.  Mr.  Blue- 
beard, XVII.  Man-crow,  XVIII.  Saylan,  XXI.  Tacoma  and  the 
Old-witch  Girl,  XXVI.  The  Three  Pigs,  XXXI.  Pretty  Poll 
(another  version  of  III.),  XXXIX.  Open  Sesame  (variant  of  VI.), 
VII.  The  Three  Sisters.  But  some  of  these,  as  I hope  to  show 
presently,  also  have  genuine  African  prototypes,  and  it  is  a question 


Introduction. 


xiii 

how  far  these  fading  traditions  have  been  amalgamated  with 
fairy-tales  told  to  the  slaves  by  the  children  of  their  European 
masters.  The  last  named  is  one  of  a small  group  of  tales  (VII., 
XXIV.,  XXXIV.,  L.)  which  I cannot  help  referring  to  a common 
African  original. 

By  far  the  greater  number  of  the  stories  in  this  book,  whether, 
strictly  speaking,  “ Annancy  stories  ” or  not,  come  under  the 
heading  of  animal-stories,  and  are  of  the  same  type  as  “Uncle 
Remus,”  Junod’s  “ Roman  du  Lievre,”  and  numerous  examples 
from  various  parts  of  Africa.  It  will  be  remembered  that,  in 
most  of  these,  the  difference  between  animals  and  human  beings 
is  not  very  clearly  kept  in  view  by  the  narrators.  As  M.  Junod 
says,  “Toutes  les  betes  qui  passent  et  repassent  dans  ces  curieux 
recits  represented  des  etres  humains,  cela  va  sans  dire.  Ils 
sont  personnalises  par  un  procede  linguistique  qui  consiste  a 
mettre  devant  le  nom  de  l’animal  un  prefixe  de  la  classe  des 
hommes.”  (This  is  a point  we  must  come  back  to  later  on.) 
“ Ainsi  mpfoundla , le  lievre  ordinaire,  devient  dans  le  contes 
Noua-mpfoundla  ....  La  Rainette,  c’est  Noua-chinana,  l’Ele- 
phant,  Noua-ndlopfou  ....  Leurs  caracteres  physiques  particuliers 
sont  presents  devant  Imagination  du  conteur  pour  autant  qu’ils 
donnent  du  pittoresque  au  recit.  Mais  on  les  oublie  tout  aussi 
aisement  des  qu’ils  ne  sont  plus  essentiels  a la  narration.”  This 
feature  constantly  meets  one  in  Bantu  folk-lore  : the  hare  and 
the  elephant  hire  themselves  out  to  hoe  a man’s  garden ; the 
swallow  invites  the  cock  to  dinner  and  his  wife  prepares  the 
food,  in  the  usual  native  hut  with  the  fireplace  in  the  middle 
and  the  nsanja  staging  over  it ; the  hare’s  wife  goes  to  the 
river  to  draw  water,  and  is  caught  by  a crocodile ; the  tortoise 
carries  his  complaint  to  the  village  elders  assembled  in  the  smithy, 
and  so  on.  M.  Junod  seems  to  me  to  overrate  the  conscious 
artistic  purpose  in  the  narrators  of  these  tales  : the  native  mind 
is  quite  ready  to  assume  that  animals  think  and  act  in  much 
the  same  way  as  human  beings,  and  this  attitude  makes  it  easy 
to  forget  the  outward  distinctions  when  they  appear  as  actors 
in  a story.  No  doubt  this  haziness  of  view  is  increased  by 
the  popular  conception  of  metamorphosis  as  a possible 
occurrence  in  everyday  life.  When,  as  has  more  than 
once  been  the  case,  we  find  men  firmly  believing,  not 


XIV 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


only  that  they  can,  under  certain  circumstances,  turn  into 
animals,  but  that  they  actually  have  done  so,  we  may  expect 
them  to  think  it  quite  easy  for  animals  to  turn  into  men. 

The  prefix  given  by  the  Baronga  to  animals,  when  they  are, 
so  to  speak,  personified  in  tales,  may  seem  a slight  point,  but 
it  is  not  without  interest.  The  Yaos  in  like  manner  give  them 
the  prefix  Che  ( Che  Sungula,  the  Rabbit,  Che  Likoswe,  the 
Rat,  etc.),  which,  though  usually  translated  “ Mr.,”  is  of 
common  gender  and  used  quite  as  often  in  addressing  women 
as  men.  In  Chatelain’s  Angola  stories  the  animals  sometimes 
(not  always)  have  the  honorific  prefix  Na  or  Ngana,  “ Mr.” ; 
the  latter  is  sometimes  translated  “ Lord.”  In  Luganda  folk- 
lore the  elephant  {evjovu)  is  called  Wa  Njovu.  In  Zulu,  Ucakijana 
(to  whom  we  shall  come  back  presently)  is  the  diminutive  form 
of  icakide , the  Weasel,  put  into  the  personal  class.  I do  not 
recall  anything  similar  in  Nyanja  tales,  but  cannot  help  con- 
necting with  the  above  the  fact  that  animals,  whatever  class 
their  names  may  belong  to,  are  usually  treated  as  persons  in 
the  tales.  Not  to  be  unduly  technical,  I would  briefly  explain 
that  njobvu  (elephant)  and  ng’ona  (crocodile)  would  naturally 
take  the  pronoun  /,  but  in  the  stories  (and,  I think,  sometimes 
in  other  cases)  they  take  a,  which  belongs  to  the  first,  or  personal 
class.  Now,  the  reader  will  notice  how  often  the  animals  in 
the  stories  before  us  are  distinguished  as  “ Mr.”  or  “ Bro’er  ” 
(cf.  pp.  20,  23,  31,  86,  etc.),  though  the  Jamaica  people  seem 
to  be  less  uniformly  polite  in  this  respect  than  Uncle  Remus. 
“ Brer  Rabbit  ” is  so  familiar  as  to  be  taken  for  granted,  as  a 
rule,  without  further  question  ; but,  years  before  he  had  become 
a household  word  in  this  country,  we  find  a writer  in  Lippincott' s 
Magazine 1 remarking,  “The  dramatis  personae  are  honoured 
with  the  title  Buh , which  is  generally  supposed  to  be  an  abbrevia- 
tion of  the  word  ‘ brother,’  but  it  probably  is  a title  of  respect 
equal  to  our  ‘ Mr.’  ” The  “ but  ” seems  hardly  called  for,  since 
both  assertions  are  seemingly  true.  We  might  also  compare 
the  Zulu  u Cakijana  (1st  class),  who  is  human  or  quasi-human, 
while  i-cakide  (2nd  class)  is  the  name  for  the  Weasel. 

1 December,  1877,  p.  751.  The  article  is  one  on  “Negro  Folk-lore,”  by 
W.  Owens,  and  contains  several  stories,  some  of  these  independent  versions 
of  “ Uncle  Remus”  tales,  while  others  are  not  to  be  found  in  that  collection. 


Introduction. 


xv 


Annancy,  then,  is  the  Spider,  and  as  such  he  is  conceived  through- 
out the  folk-lore  of  West  Africa.  If  he  seems,  as  he  continually 
does,  to  take  on  a human  character,  going  to  Freetown  to  buy 
a gun  and  powder  ( Cunnie  Rabbit , p.  282),  or  applying  to  a 
“Mory  man”  for  amulets  ( ib . p.  139),  he  only  behaves  like 
all  other  animals,  as  explained  above.  A Temne  authority  (ib. 
p.  93)  maintains  that  “ Spider  was  a person  ” in  old  times,  and 
did  not  look  the  same  as  he  does  in  these  days,  “he  done  turn 
odder  kind  of  thing  now.”  But  this  looks  like  an  attempt  at 
rationalising  the  situation,  possibly  in  response  to  European 
inquiries.  The  change  of  shape  alluded  to  at  the  end  of  the 
Temne  Tar-baby  episode  is  comparatively  a minor  matter:  he 
was  formerly  “ round  lek  pusson,”  but  became  flattened  out 
through  the  beating  he  received  while  attached  to  the  Wax 
Girl.  In  the  Gold  Coast  stories,  too,  Anansi  is  quite  as  much 
a spider  as  Brer  Rabbit  is  a rabbit ; but  in  Jamaica,  though 
he  still  retains  traces  of  his  origin,  they  are  somewhat  obscured — 
so  much  so  that  Mr.  Jekyll  speaks  (pp.  4-5)  of  the  “metamorphic 
shape,  that  of  the  Spider,”  which  he  assumes,  as  though  the 
human  were  his  real  form,  the  other  only  an  occasional  disguise. 
In  “Annancy  and  Brother  Tiger”  we  find  that  he  has  to  “run 
up  a house-top  ” to  escape  the  revenge  of  the  monkeys,  which 
accounts  for  some  of  his  habits  to  this  day.  In  “Yung-kyum- 
pyung  ” (a  version  of  Rumpelstilzchen , or  Tom  Tit  Tot),  the 
only  hint  of  his  spider  character  is  contained  in  a mere  allusion 
(quite  external  to  the  story)  to  his  “ running  ’pon  him  rope.” 
In  “ Brother  Death,”  Annancy  and  all  his  family  cling  to  the 
rafters,  hoping  to  escape  from  Death  ; but  it  scarcely  seems  in 
character  that  they  should  be  incapable  of  holding  on  long. 
They  drop,  one  after  another,  Annancy  last  (p.  33).  He  is 
always  in  danger  from  Cows  (p.  107):  “Anywhere  Cow  see 
him,  he  reach  him  down  with  his  mouth  ” ; and  he  lives  in  a 
banana  branch  (p.  119)  for  fear  of  Calcutta  Monkey  and  his 
whip.  His  moral  character  is  consistently  bad  all  through ; he 
is  a “clever  thief” — greedy,  treacherous,  and  cruel,  but  intellec- 
tually he  does  not  uniformly  shine.  He  has  to  call  in  the  help 
of  a wizard  in  his  love  affairs  ; “ Monkey  was  too  clever  for 
him  ” on  more  than  one  occasion ; he  has  to  be  extricated  from 
the  slaughter-house  (p.  23)  by  Blackbird  and  his  army  of  Wasps, 


XVI 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


and  in  “Man-crow”  he  is  signally  discomfited.  In  other  cases 
his  roguery  is  successful,  and  he  is  described  as  the  greatest 
musician  and  “the  biggest  rascal  in  the  world”  (p.  62).  Much 
the  same  is  the  character  given  to  Mr.  Spider  in  “ Cunnie  Rabbit.” 
Not  one  amiable  trait  is  recorded  of  him. 

A Gold  Coast  story,1  however,  shows  him  arbitrating  between 
a Rat  and  a Panther  in  very  much  the  same  way  as  the  Yao 
Che  Sungula  settles  the  difficulty  between  the  Man  and  the 
Crocodile,2  making  the  latter  go  back  into  the  trap  whence  he 
had  too  confidingly  been  released,  in  order  to  show  how  it 
was  done.  Once  having  got  the  ungrateful  Panther  back  into 
the  trap,  the  Spider  advises  the  Rat  to  leave  him  there. 

As  there  is  a Gold  Coast  tradition  which  affirms  the  human 
race  to  be  descended  from  the  Spider,3  it  might  be  expected 
that  he  should  sometimes  appear  in  a more  favourable  light,  and 
also  that  those  peoples  who  had  lost  this  myth,  or  never  possessed 
it,  should  concentrate  their  attention  on  the  darker  side  of  his 
character.  At  the  same  time,  even  in  what  may  be  called  his 
own  home,  he  does  not  appear  as  infallible.  A very  curious 
story,  given  by  Zimmermann  in  his  Grammatical  Sketch  of  the 
Akra  or  Ga  Language , shows  us  the  Spider  and  his  son  in  the 
character  of  the  two  sisters  who  usually  figure  in  tales  of  the 
“ Holle  ” type,4  and,  strangely  enough,  it  is  the  father  who,  by 
his  wilfulness  and  indiscretion,  forfeits  the  advantages  which 
the  son  has  gained.  During  a time  of  famine  the  young  spider 
crawls  into  a rat-hole  in  search  of  a nut  which  has  rolled  into  it, 

1J.  C.  Christaller,  in  Btittner’s  Zeitschr.  fiir  Afr.  Sprachen.  M.  Rene 
Basset  says  of  a similar  story  included  in  Col.  Monteil’s  Contes  Soudanais : 
“L’Enfant  et  le  caiman  est  le  sujet  bien  connu  de  l’ingratitude  punie  que  l’on 
retrouve  dans  tous  les  pays  de  l’ancien  monde,  et  dont  M.  Kenneth  Mackenzie 
vient  d’etudier  les  diverses  variantes.”  The  idea  is  one  so  likely  to  occur 
independently  that  we  must  not  in  all  cases  resort  to  the  hypothesis  of 
borrowing. 

2 Duff  Macdonald,  Africana,  ii.  346. 

3 Ellis,  Tshi-speaking  Peoples  of  the  Gold  Coast. 

4 No.  16  in  the  Handbook  of  Folklore  (p.  122).  It  might  also  be  referred  to 
the  “ Golden  Goose  ” type  (51).  Stories  of  this  kind  are  the  Ronga  “Route 
du  Ciel,”  and  “The  Three  Women”  in  Duff  Macdonald’s  Africana.  But 
perhaps  the  tale  referred  to  in  the  text  comes  nearer  to  “ The  Two 
Hunchbacks.” 


Introduction. 


xvii 


and  there  meets  with  three  unkempt  and  unwashed  spirits,  who 
desire  him  to  peel  some  yams  and  cook  the  peelings.  He  does 
so,  and  they  are  changed  into  large  yams.  They  give  him  a 
large  basket  of  yams  to  carry  home,  and  teach  him  a spell 
which  is  not  to  be  imparted  to  any  one  else.  He  repeatedly 
obtains  supplies  from  the  same  source,  but  at  last  is  followed 
by  his  father,  who  insists  on  going  in  his  stead.  He  derides  and 
disobeys  the  spirits,  loses  his  yams,  and  is  flogged  into  the 
bargain. 

We  have  mentioned  the  comparative  absence  of  the  Spider 
from  Bantu  folk-lore.  I have  been  able  to  discover  only  two 
references  to  him  in  East  Africa,  both  to  be  found  in  Duff 
Macdonald’s  Africana.  The  first  is  in  a creation-myth  of  the 
Yaos  (i.  297),  which  informs  us  that  when  Mulungu  was  driven 
from  earth  by  the  conduct  of  mankind,  who  had  set  the  bush 
on  fire,  he  went,  being  unable  to  climb  a tree  as  the  Chameleon 
had  done,  to  call  the  Spider.  “The  spider  went  on  high  and 
returned  again,  and  said,  ‘ I have  gone  on  high  nicely,’  and 
he  said,  ‘You  now,  Mulungu,  go  on  high.’  Mulungu  then  went 
with  the  spider  on  high.  And  he  said,  ‘ When  they  die,  let  them 
come  on  high  here.’”  The  other  is  in  the  story  of  “The  Dead 
Chief  and  his  Younger  Brother”  (ii.  322) — also  Yao.  The  dead 
chief  gives  his  brother  four  bags  to  enable  him  to  overcome 
the  obstacles  which  his  enemies  put  in  his  way;  he  opens  the 
first  on  coming  to  a large  tree  in  his  path — a wood-moth  comes 
out  and  gnaws  a way  through.  From  the  second  bag  comes  out 
a manis  (scaly  ant-eater),  which  digs  a way  under  a rock,  and 
from  the  third  (which  he  opens  when  he  comes  to  the  bank  of 
a river)  a spider,  which  “went  to  the  other  side,”  and,  pre- 
sumably (though  this  is  not  expressly  stated),  made  a bridge 
with  its  web  for  him  to  cross.1 

Mr,  R.  E.  Dennett  ( Folk-lore  of  the  Fjort , p.  74)  gives  a 
Lower  Congo  story,  telling  how  the  Spider  brought  fire  down 
from  Nzambi  Mpungu  in  heaven,  and  won  the  daughter  of 
Nzambi  (Mother  Earth)  by  so  doing.  In  an  Angola  story  (Heli 

1 In  Mr.  Dudley  Kidd’s  Savage  Childhood  (published  since  the  above  was 
written),  I find  that  Zulu  (or  Pondo  ?)  boys  draw  certain  omens  from  spiders, 
in  connection  with  dreams  (p.  105),  and  that  in  Gazaland  the  rainbow  is 
called  “the  spider’s  bow”  (p.  153). 

b 


xviii  Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 

Chatelain,  p.  13 1)  the  Spider  is  mentioned  as  affording  a means 
of  communication  between  heaven  and  earth,  by  which  the  Sun’s 
maidservants  go  down  to  draw  water,  and  his  daughter  is  ulti- 
mately let  down  to  be  married  to  the  son  of  Kimanaueze.  But 
the  Spider  only  comes  in  incidentally;  it  is  the  Frog  whose 
resourcefulness  makes  the  marriage  possible.  The  notion  of  the 
spider’s  web  as  a ladder  to  heaven  is  one  that  might  occur 
independently  in  any  part  of  the  world,  and  there  is  no  need 
to  suppose  these  tales  to  be  derivatives  of  the  Hausa  one  given 
by  Schon.1 

So  far,  the  appearances  of  the  Spider  in  Bantu  folk-tales  are 
so  infrequent  as  to  be  almost  a negligible  quantity.  We  find 
him,  however,  playing  a tolerably  conspicuous  part  in  the  folk- 
lore of  the  Duala.  These,  living  in  the  German  territory  of 
the  Kamerun,  may  be  considered  the  north-western  outpost  of 
the  Bantu  race,  and  their  language,  unmistakable  in  its  general 
character,  has  departed,  perhaps  more  widely  than  any  other, 
from  the  normal  Bantu  standard.  Herr  Wilhelm  Lederbogen, 
formerly  of  the  Government  School,  Kamerun,  has  collected  a 
large  number  of  stories,  some  of  which  are  published  in  the 
Transactions  of  the  Berlin  Oriental  Seminary  (see  Afrikanische 
Studien  for  1901-1903).  These  comprise  67  “ Tierfabeln”  and 
18  tales  of  the  ordinary  mdrchen  type.  The  latter  (some  of  them 
recognizable  as  variants  of  tales  current  in  Bantu  Africa)  introduce 
animals  along  with  human  beings,  and  the  incident  of  the  Spider 
being  consulted  as  a soothsayer  repeatedly  occurs.  “ Die  Spinne 
tritt  immer  als  Wahrsagerin  auf  ” says  the  collector  in  a note. 
But  the  malignant  aspect  of  Anansi  seems  to  be  absent. 

The  late  W.  H.  J.  Bleek,  who  supposed  the  animal-stories 
which  he  had  collected  from  Hottentots  and  Bushmen  to  be 
characteristic  of  and  peculiar  to  these  races,  had  built  up  a 
somewhat  elaborate  theory,  scarcely  borne  out  by  the  facts  as 
known  to  us  to-day,  in  connection  with  this  point.  Briefly,  it 
amounted  to  this  : that  a fundamental  limitation  in  the  Bantu 
race,  which  had  prevented,  and  always  would  prevent,  their 
advancing  beyond  a certain  point,  was  denoted  by  the  absence 
of  grammatical  gender  in  their  languages,  their  supposed  incapacity 
for  personifying  nature,  and  their  worship  of  ancestors,  as  opposed 
1 Magana  Hausa , 63. 


Introduction. 


xix 


to  the  alleged  moon-worship  of  the  Hottentots.1  The  Zulus, 
he  says,  believe  that  the  spirits  of  the  dead  appear  to  them  in 
dreams,  and  also  show  themselves  to  the  waking  eye  in  the 
shape  of  animals,  usually  serpents.  “No  personification  of  the 
animal  takes  place,  however,  such  as  we  find,  for  instance,  in 
the  mythical  world  of  our  earliest  [Teutonic]  literature.  The 
imagination  of  the  ancestor-worshipper  does  not  even,  as  a rule, 
show  us  the  animal  as  possessing  the  gift  of  human  speech ; it 
is  only  supposed  to  perform  acts  well  within  its  capacity  as  an 
animal,  though  such  acts  are  considered,  in  the  case  of  individual 
animals  supposed  to  be  possessed  by  the  spirits  of  deceased 
persons,  as  emanating  from  the  spirits.”  Thus,  a serpent,  known 
by  various  tokens  to  be  an  idhlozi , may  enter  a hut  and  consume 
the  meat  left  for  it,  or  it  may  engage  in  combat  with  other  snakes 
which  must  be  supposed  to  represent  the  enemies  of  the  deceased. 
Animals  thus  revered  by  ancestor-worshippers  always  have  the 
distinguishing  characteristic  that  they  have  once  been  human 
beings ; and  spirits,  unless  they  appear  as  animals,  are  always 
invisible.  “ A personification  of  the  animal  world  (such  as  we 
find  in  our  own  fables),  or  even  of  other  things  (as  in  the 
mythologies  of  Europe),  is  utterly  absent  from  this  primitive, 
prosaic  way  of  looking  at  things.”  The  poetic  impulse  implied 
in  such  personification  can  only  arise,  in  Bleek’s  view,  among 
the  speakers  of  a sex-denoting  language.  The  linguistic  argument 
I cannot  here  reproduce  in  detail ; its  tendency  is  sufficiently 
shown  by  the  following  quotation,  which  bears  directly  on  our 
subject : 

“The  form  of  a sex-denoting  language,  by  exciting  sympathy 
even  for  creatures  not  connected  with  us  by  human  fellowship, 
leads  in  the  first  instance  to  the  humanization  of  animals,  and 
thus  especially  gives  rise  to  the  creation  of  fables.  Even  on 
the  lowest  stage  of  national  development,  we  find  the  Hottentot 
language  accompanied  by  a literature  of  fables,  for  which  we 
may  vainly  seek  a parallel  in  the  literatures  of  the  prefix-pronominal 
languages.” 

The  validity  of  Bleek’s  theory  was  seriously  doubted  by  the 
late  Dr.  C.  G.  Biittner,  in  1886,  and  the  masses  of  fresh  material 
which  have  come  to  light  during  the  last  forty  years,  have  com- 
1 See  Urspnmg  der  Spraclie  (Weimar,  1868),  pp.  xix,  xxiii  (Introduction). 


XX 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


pletely  altered  the  aspect  of  the  question.  The  Hottentot  myth 
of  the  Hare  and  the  Moon,  to  take  but  one  example,  which 
appears  among  the  Zulus  as  the  tale  of  Unkulunkulu  and  the 
Chameleon,  is  told  by  the  Anyanja  (of  the  Shire  Highlands  and 
Lake  Nyasa)  of  the  Chameleon.  The  Duala  have  the  same 
Chameleon  story;  and  there  is  a Gold  Coast  version,  in  which 
the  two  messengers  are  the  Sheep,  who  linger  on  the  way  to 
graze,  and  the  Goat,  who  arrives  first  with  the  tidings  that  man 
shall  not  return  after  death.  The  Krumen  of  the  Ivory  Coast 
say  that  Nemla  (a  small  antelope  probably  representing,  if  not 
identical  with,  the  “ Cunnie  Rabbit  ” of  Sierra  Leone),  malici- 
ously, not  accidentally,  rendered  inoperative  the  remedy  against 
death  provided  by  the  fetich  Blenyiba.  Who  is  responsible  for 
the  original  version  it  is  perhaps  impossible  to  settle.  But  there  can 
be  no  question  of  recent  borrowing ; and  supposing  that  the  Bantu 
did  derive  the  myth  from  their  predecessors  (now  represented  by 
the  remnant  of  the  Bushmen,  and  perhaps  the  Pygmies),  this  would 
surely  prove  them  at  least  capable  of  assimilating  fresh  ideas  and 
thus  advancing  beyond  the  line  so  inexorably  traced  for  them  from 
the  beginning.  It  may  be  remarked  in  passing  that  there  seems 
some  probability  of  the  Bantu  Anyanja  in  the  Shir6  district  having 
largely  absorbed,  instead  of  exterminating  as  was  elsewhere  the 
case,  a smaller-sized  race  who  previously  occupied  the  country. 
In  the  same  way,  the  Abatembu  of  the  Cape  Colony  are  the 
descendants  of  a Bantu  clan  amalgamated  with  the  Bushman  tribe 
of  the  ’Tambuka,  and  traces  of  similar  fusion  could  no  doubt  be 
discovered  elsewhere.  But  we  doubt  its  being  necessary  to  the 
introduction  of  animal-stories  into  folk-lore, — or,  in  general,  of 
ideas  connected  with  the  personification  of  nature. 

The  Zulu  tales  which  Bleek  had  before  him  present  a character 
very  different  from  that  of  the  Hottentot  beast-fables.  But  a 
comparative  study  of  Bantu  folk-lore  suggests  at  least  the  possi- 
bility that  they  may  have  been  developed  out  of  animal-stories. 
Hlakanyana  is  conceived  of  as  certainly  human,  and  reminds  us 
of  Tom  Thumb;  but  some  of  his  adventures  are  identical  with 
those  of  the  Hare,  the  Jackal,  or  Brer  Rabbit.  Cakijana  shows 
still  clearer  traces  of  animal  origin.  The  episode  of  Hlakanyana’s 
demanding  a digging-stick  in  exchange  for  the  birds  he  accuses 
his  companion  of  having  eaten,  and  the  sequence  of  exchanges 


Introduction. 


xxi 


which  culminates  in  his  acquiring  a cow,1  is  in  substance  the  same 
as  the  story  told  by  the  Anyanja  about  the  Hare  ( kalulu ) which 
was  given  in  Folk-Lore  for  Sept.  29th,  1904.  This  again  reminds 
us  of  “ The  Man  who  Lived  by  Overreaching  Others  ” (Dr. 
Elmslie  in  Folk-Lore,  vol.  iii.),  and  of  a Sukuma  story  given  by 
Herrmann,2  in  which  a boy  gives  his  grandmother  some  honey 
to  keep  for  him,  and,  coming  back  after  a time,  and  finding 
she  has  eaten  it,  makes  her  give  him  some  corn  in  exchange. 
The  corn  is  then  exchanged  for  an  egg,  the  egg  for  sticks,  the 
sticks  for  a knife,  and  the  knife  for  a cow’s  tail,  for  which,  by 
the  same  trick  as  in  Dr.  Elmslie’s  story,  he  obtains  a cow. 
There  is  no  suggestion  of  trickery  in  the  Nyanja  story,  whereas 
it  is  brought  out  very  strongly  both  in  Hlakanyana  and  the 
Sukuma  example. 

We  shall  have  occasion  to  refer,  later  on,  to  more  than  one 
instance  where  a story  is  found  in  two  forms,  one  having  animals, 
the  other  human  beings,  as  its  characters. 

The  animals  figuring  in  folk-tales  must  necessarily  vary  with  the 
locality  of  the  tale,  and  in  cases  where  a story  has  travelled  (or 
possibly  where  the  same  idea  has  arisen  independently  in  different 
places)  it  is  interesting  to  note  the  changes  in  its  dramatis  persona. 
Thus,  the  incident  of  the  race  between  the  swift  creature  and  the 
slow  seems  to  be  found  in  the  folk-lore  of  every  country.  In 
Africa  the  winner  is  always,  so  far  as  I know,  the  Tortoise,  as 
Brer  Terrapin  is  in  “ Uncle  Remus.”  The  Jamaica  version  in  the 
volume  before  us  substitutes  the  Toad,  while  the  defeated  party 
is  the  Donkey.  In  a Konde  (North  Nyasa)  variant,  the  prota- 
gonists are  the  Elephant  and  the  Tortoise,  in  a Duala  one,  the 
Ngolon  (a  large  kind  of  Antelope)  and  the  Tortoise.  Another 
version  of  the  Duala  story,  contained  in  Mdrchen  aus  Kamerun , 
by  the  late  Frau  Elli  Meinhof,  has  the  Hare  and  the  Tortoise,  but 
with  the  explanation  that  by  “hare”  is  meant  “eine  kleine  Anti- 
lopenart,  eseru  genannt.”  The  curious  thing  is  that  Njo  Dibone, 
the  native  authority  for  the  tales,  himself  suggested  the  name  of 
“hare,”  but  added  “ Hase  ist  niclit  wie  hier,3  sondern  hat  kleine 

1 McCall  Theal,  Kaffir  Folk-  Tales,  pp.  96-98. 

2 “ Afrikanische  Studien,”  1898  ( Transactions  of  the  Berlin  Oriental 
Seminary,  vol.  i.)  p.  194. 

3 He  had  been  brought  to  Europe  by  a German  naval  officer  in  1885,  and 
remained  for  some  time  an  inmate  of  Professor  Meinhofs  family. 


XXII 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


Homer.”  It  is  not  stated  whether  he  had  himself  seen  the 
European  hare,  but  apparently  he  thought  the  two  animals  so  far 
similar  that  Hase  would  be  the  nearest  available  rendering  for 
eseru.  This  may  throw  some  light  on  the  question  why  the 
Dorcatherium  gazelle,  or  possibly  the  Royal  Antelope,  Neotragus , 
is  called  “ Cunnie  Rabbit  ” in  Sierra  Leone  English. 

The  Tortoise  plays  a conspicuous  part  in  the  folk-lore  both  of 
Bantu  and  West  African  Negroes.  In  Yoruba  tradition  he  takes 
the  place  of  the  Spider  with  the  Fantis,  all  mankind  being 
descended  from  him.  Perhaps  this  is  not  strange,  when  we  con- 
sider how  much  there  is  about  him  which  would  appeal  to  the 
primitive  mind  as  uncanny  and  mysterious.  A recent  writer  in 
the  West  African  Mail 1 says  on  this  subject:  “The  original 
conception  of  the  tortoise  culminated  in  a belief  concerning  its 
attributes  that,  in  the  eyes  of  these  [Niger]  Delta  natives,  elevated 
it  to  the  sovereignty  of  the  beasts  of  the  forest.  . . . Absolutely 
harmless  and  inoffensive  in  himself,  the  tortoise  does  not  prey  on 
even  the  smallest  of  insects,  but  subsists  entirely  on  the  fallen 
fruits  of  the  forest” — or,  in  some  cases,  on  fungi.  “In  the 
gloomy  forests  of  the  Delta  there  are  only  two  enemies  capable 
of  doing  him  any  serious  harm.  The  one  is  man,  who  is  able 
to  lift  him  up  and  carry  him  bodily  away,  which,  however,  he 
does  not  do,  except  in  those  instances  in  which  the  animal  is 
regarded  as  sacred,  and  required  in  connection  with  certain 
religious  ceremonies.  His  other  and  most  dangerous  enemy  is 
the  python,  who  having  first  of  all  crushed  him  by  means  of  the 
enormous  power  of  constriction  which  it  can  apply,  swallows  him 
alive,  shell  and  all.  But  pythons  large  enough  to  do  this,  unless 
the  tortoise  happens  to  be  very  young  and  small,  are  very  scarce, 
so  that  he  has  not  much  to  apprehend  in  that  quarter.  To  the 
elephant — herbivorous,  like  himself — he  is  too  insignificant,  for 
unlike  the  mosquito  or  the  sand-fly,  he  has  no  sting ; and  although 
they  meet  in  fable,  in  real  life  the  hippopotamus  and  himself  are 
not  much  thrown  together.  From  the  leopard  or  the  bush-cat,  he 
has  nothing  to  fear,  for  their  teeth  cannot  penetrate  his  shell,  nor 
can  [their]  claws  do  him  any  damage.  Thus  it  is  that  . . . the 
tortoise  has  been  practically  immune  from  attack  and  therefore 
destruction — a fact  that  in  a great  measure  explains  his  longevity.” 

2 May  25,  1906,  p.  202. 


Introduction. 


xxm 


If  we  add  to  this  his  power  of  living  for  a long  time  without 
food,  his  silence,  the  extreme  slowness  and  caution  of  his  move- 
ments, his  instinct  of  keeping  out  of  sight,  and  the  peculiar  air 
of  dogged  determination  with  which  he  sets  about  overcoming  or 
circumventing  obstacles,  it  is  “ easy  to  understand  how  in  process 
of  time  the  word  which  stood  for  tortoise  became  a synonym  for 
cunning  and  craft,  and  a man  of  exceptional  intelligence  was  in 
this  way  known  among  the  Ibo  as  4 Mbai,’  and  among  the  Ibani 
as  4 Ekake,’  meaning  a tortoise.  For  although  he  of  the  shell-back 
was  slow,  he  was  sure,  as  the  old  Greek  Aesop  tells  us.  . . . 
This  sureness,  in  the  native  mind,  implied  doggedness  and  a fixed 
determination,  while  silence  and  secrecy  implied  mystery  and  a 
veiled  purpose  behind  which  it  is  impossible  to  get.” 

The  tortoise  of  African  folk-lore  is  sometimes,  in  fact  usually, 
the  land-tortoise  (as  implied  in  the  above  extracts),  of  which  there 
are  several  species,  living  either  in  forest-country  or  in  deserts 
like  the  Kalahari.  In  Angola,  the  story  of  44  Man  and  Turtle  ” 
(Chatelain,  p.  153 — identical  with  44  Mr.  Fox  tackles  Old  Man 
Tarrypin  ” in  44  Uncle  Remus  ”)  refers  to  a kind  which,  if  not 
aquatic,  is  evidently  amphibious.  We  find  tortoise  stories  all 
over  Negro  and  Bantu  Africa;  we  have  Temne,  Bullom,  and 
Yoruba  examples,  besides  Duala,  Konde  (Nyasa),  Yao,  Nyanja, 
Herero,  Bemba,  Congo  (Upoto),  Angola  and  Sesuto  ones.  This 
does  not  exhaust  the  list  I have  made  out,  and  further  research 
would  no  doubt  bring  to  light  many  more.  One  of  these  is  the 
well-known  44tug-of-war”  story,  which  in  “Uncle  Remus”  has  the 
title  44  Mr.  Terrapin  shows  his  strength.”  We  have  two  versions 
of  this  (agreeing  in  their  main  points)  from  the  Kamerun,  one 
told  by  the  Duala,  the  other  by  the  Yabakalaki-Bakoko  tribe. 
Here  it  is  the  Elephant  and  the  Hippopotamus  whom  the  Tortoise 
induces  to  pull  against  each  other.  The  American  Negro  sub- 
stitutes the  Bear  for  one  of  these  competitors,  and  then,  apparently 
at  a loss  for  a wild  animal  strong  enough  to  take  the  place  of  the 
other,  makes  44  Brer  Tarrypin  ” tie  44  Miss  Meadows’s  bed-cord  ” to 
a root  in  the  bed  of  the  stream.  But  it  is  interesting  to  find  two 
native  African  versions  in  which  other  animals  are  substituted  for 
the  Tortoise.  The  Temne  ( Cu?inie  Rabbit , p.  117)  gives  his  part 
to  the  Spider,  while  the  Bemba  people  (North-eastern  Rhodesia) 
make  the  Hare  the  hero  of  the  adventure.  Col.  Monteil  gives  a 


XXIV 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


Mandingo  variant,  introducing  a different  motive  for  the  contest : 
the  Hare  has  borrowed  a slave  apiece  from  the  Elephant  and  the 
Hippopotamus,  and  when  pressed  for  payment  hands  each  of  his 
competitors  in  turn  the  end  of  a rope,  with  the  words,  “Tu  n’as 
qu’a  tirer  sur  cette  corde,  le  captif  est  au  bout.” 1 

Another  Temne  story  collected  by  Miss  Cronise,  “Mr.  Turtle 
makes  a riding-horse  of  Mr.  Leopard,”  is  paralleled  by  an  Angola 
one  (Chatelain,  p.  203)  in  which  it  is  Mr.  Frog  who  plays  the 
trick  on  Mr.  Elephant.  In  the  New  World,  it  will  be  remembered 
that  Brer  Rabbit  has  usurped  the  part. 

In  M.  Rene  Basset’s  Anthology  of  African  Folk-tales 2 is  in- 
cluded a tale  about  a monkey  and  a tortoise  from  Baissac’s 
Folklore  de  Vile  Maurice  which  recalls  a Nyanja  one  obtained  by 
me  at  Blantyre  and  printed  in  the  Contemporary  Review  for 
September,  1896.  In  the  latter  it  is  the  iguana,  not  the  monkey 
who  robs  the  Tortoise  ; but  in  both,  the  Tortoise  exacts  retribution 
with  a cold-blooded  relentlessness  suggestive  of  Shylock.  A 
Brazilian  negro  story  is  also  given,  which  looks  like  a variant  of 
one  told  in  Calabar  to  account  for  the  fact  that  the  Tortoise’s 
shell  is  composed  of  separate  plates,  as  though  it  had  been  broken 
to  pieces  and  put  together  again. 

But  we  look  in  vain  for  the  tortoise  in  these  stories  of  Mr. 
Jekyll’s.  Even  in  the  race-story,  as  we  have  seen,  the  part  which 
in  Africa  is  so  peculiarly  his  own,  is  taken  by  the  Toad.  Pro- 
bably this  is  because  the  land-tortoise  is  not  found  in  Jamaica, 
and  the  great  turtle  of  the  seas  is  not  a creature  whose  ways 
would  come  under  the  daily  observation  of  the  peasantry.  In 
the  same  way  familiar  animals  have  been  substituted  for  un- 
familiar ones  in  a great  many  cases,  though  not  in  all.  Mr. 
Jekyll  thinks  “Tiger”  is  a substitute  for  “Lion,”  but  it  seems 
equally  possible  that  “ Leopard  ” is  meant.  All  over  South 
Africa,  leopards  are  called  “ tigers  ” by  Dutch,  English,  and 
Germans,  just  as  hyenas  are  called  “wolves,”  and  bustards 
“peacocks”  ( paauw ).  “Tiger”  is  used  in  the  same  sense  in 
German  Kamerun,  and  probably  elsewhere  in  West  Africa. 

1 Contes  Soudanais , p.  49. 

2 P.  425.  Another  Mauritius  negro  tale  from  the  same  source  is  identical  with 
the  Yao  one  of  the  Elephant  and  the  Hare  (Duff  Macdonald,  ii.  353)— also 
found  elsewhere  in  East  Africa. 


Introduction. 


xxv 


Lion  and  elephant  are  known — perhaps  by  genuine  tradition — 
to  Uncle  Remus ; but  they  seem  to  have  faded  from  the  recol- 
lection of  the  Jamaica  negroes ; indeed,  the  lion  is  not  found 
in  their  original  homes,  being  absent  from  the  whole  West  Coast 
as  far  as  Sierra  Leone. 

“ Brer  Rabbit,”  so  characteristic  a figure  of  Bantu  folk-lore  that 
his  adventures  are  related  from  one  side  of  Africa  to  the  other 
(though  in  the  west  he  is  less  frequently  met  with  north  of 
Angola),  only  appears  in  two  of  Mr.  Jekyll’s  stories,  in  none  of 
which  we  can  recognize  anything  of  his  traditional  character. 
In  “ Annancy  and  his  Fish-pot,”  he  is  unscrupulously  victimised 
by  Annancy,  and  subsequently  dies  of  fright  and  worry ; in 
“ Snake  the  Postman,”  he  escapes  from  Annancy’s  machinations, 
but  there  is  no  indication  that  he  could  ever  be  considered  a 
match  for  “ that  cravin’ fellah.”  In  “John  Crow  and  Fowl-hawk” 
he  is  merely  alluded  to  (p.  142,  “ This  company  was  Rabbit”). 
In  “ Dry  Bone,”  he  is  induced  by  Guinea-pig  to  carry  the  un- 
welcome load,  but  succeeds  in  passing  it  on,  for  the  time  being, 
to  Annancy.  Finally,  in  “ Gaulin,”  he  cuts  a poor  figure  as  the 
unsuccessful  suitor.  A Bantu  story  by  no  means  complimentary 
to  the  Hare’s  intelligence  is  given  by  M.  Junod,1  and  seems  to 
have  reached  Louisiana2  as  “Compair  Lapin  et  Michie  Dinde,” 
where  the  Rabbit  gets  his  head  cut  off  under  the  belief  that  the 
Turkey  has  removed  his  when  he  puts  it  under  his  wing  to  sleep. 
M.  Junod  thinks  this  must  refer  to  a second  species  of  Hare,  a 
by-word  for  stupidity,  as  the  other  is  for  cuteness ; but  it  is  at 
least  worth  noting  that  the  same  story  is  told  by  the  Basumbwa 
(south  of  Lake  Victoria)  of  the  Hen  and  the  Tiger-cat. 

Besides  Annancy  himself,  and  the  “Tiger”  already  mentioned, 
we  have,  in  these  stories,  either  domestic  or  quasi-domestic 
animals:  Cow,  Hog,  Dog,  Puss,  “Ratta,”  etc.,  or  creatures 
indigenous  to  Jamaica,  such  as  John-Crow,  Chicken-Hawk, 
Sea-Gaulin,  Candle-Fly,  Crab  and  Tarpon.  Some  stories,  for 
which  I fail  to  recall  any  exact  parallel,  either  in  Africa  or 
Europe,  may  be  of  purely  local  origin ; this  is  most  likely  to  be 
true  of  those  which  profess  to  explain  some  elementary  fact  in 

1 Chants  et  Contes , p.  135,  see  also  the  preceding  story,  and  some  remarks 
on  p.  86,  footnote  2. 

2 Alcee  Fortier,  Louisiana  Folklore,  p.  24. 


xxvi  Jamaican  Song  and  Story . 

natural  history,  such  as  the  inability  of  two  bulls  to  agree  in  one 
pasture  (“  Timmolimmo  ”),  or  the  hostility  between  dogs  and 
cats.  Even  were  this  not  so,  the  amount  of  local  colour  intro- 
duced (as  always  where  tales  are  transmitted  orally)  could 
change  them  almost  beyond  recognition.  This  often  has  a very 
quaint  effect,  as  in  “ Parson  Puss  and  Parson  Dog,”  who  are 
evidently  conceived  as  ministers  of  some  rival  Methodist  denomi- 
nations, and  in  the  references  to  weddings,  funerals,  and  dances 
possibly  ending  up  with  a free  fight,  as  in  “ Gaulin,”  “ How 
Monkey  manage  Annancy,”  “ Doba,”  etc.  Annancy’s  inviting  the 
animals  to  his  father’s  funeral  and  slaughtering  them  (with  the 
exception  of  Monkey,  who  is  too  clever  for  him)  reminds  us  of 
the  Temne  “Mr.  Leopard  fools  the  other  animals,”1  but  in  this, 
Leopard  himself  pretends  to  die.  Cunnie  Rabbit’s  test,  “ Die 
pusson  nebber  blow,”  is  less  ingenious  than  that  applied  by  Brer 
Rabbit  in  “ Uncle  Remus  ” :2  “ When  a man  go  to  see  dead  folks, 
dead  folks  allers  raises  up  der  behime  leg  en  hollers  wahoo\ ” 
(In  Mr.  Owen’s  version,  they  “grin  and  whistle.”)  In  the  Sesuto 
story3  the  Monkey  suspects  a trick  and  escapes,  when  the  Hare 
persuades  the  Lion  to  entrap  the  other  animals  by  shamming 
death.  Perhaps  the  baptism  of  the  crabs  (“Annancy  in  Crab 
Country”)  may  be  connected  with  “Mr.  Spider  initiates  the 
fowls,”4  where  the  Temne  Spider,  assuming  for  the  nonce  a quasi- 
religious character,  gathers  his  victims  together  to  celebrate  the 
Bundo  mysteries,  and  massacres  them  wholesale. 

“Annancy  and  Hog”  (XXXII.)  is  a fragmentary  story,  not 
very  easy  to  understand  as  we  have  it,  but  something  has 
evidently  dropped  out.  The  sentence  “An’  when  Hog  think 
him  done  up  Annancy  him  done  up  him  own  mother”  may 
point  to  some  original  similar  to  the  Fiote  story  given  by  Mr. 
Dennett,  in  which  the  Leopard’s  wife  is  induced  to  eat  her 
husband’s  head.5  But  in  that  case  it  is  difficult  to  understand 
the  connection  with  the  opening  incidents. 

In  “John-Crow  and  Fowl-hawk”  (XLVI.)  we  may  have  a 
reminiscence  of  the  class  of  stories  represented  by  the  Yao 
“ Kalikalanje,”  in  which  an  unborn  child  is  promised  by  the 

1 Cunnie  Rabbit,  p.  219.  2 “ Mr.  Wolf  makes  a failure.” 

3Jacottet,  p.  19.  4 Cunnie  Rabbit,  p.  133. 

5 Folklore  of  the  Fjort,  pp.  82-84. 


Introduction. 


xxvii 


mother  in  return  for  a service  rendered  her  by  some  person 
or  animal.  The  resemblance,  however,  is  not  very  marked,  and 
the  incident  is  quite  lost  sight  of  in  the  later  part  of  the  story. 

“ Annancy  and  Death  ” is  curious,  and,  as  it  stands,  not  very 
intelligible.  Death,  as  a person,  is  introduced  into  several 
African  stories,1  and  even  (in  one  from  the  Ivory  Coast)  together 
with  the  Spider,  but  none  of  these  have  anything  parallel  with 
the  one  before  us.  The  last  part,  however,  where  Annancy  and 
his  children  are  clinging  to  the  rafters,  and  Death  waiting  for 
them  below,  recalls  the  story  to  be  found  on  pp.  224-226  of 
Cunnie  Rabbit.  The  Spider  and  his  family  take  refuge  in  the 
roof  when  pursued  by  the  Leopard,  and  he  sits  on  the  ground 
and  catches  them  as  they  drop  one  by  one.  Last  of  all,  the 
wife,  Nahker,  “ he  say  he  done  tire,  en  Spider  say  : ‘ Yo’  wey 
( = who)  big  so?  Fa’  down  now,  yo’  go  get  de  trouble.’ 
Nahker  fa’  down,  Lepped  yeat  um.  Spider  he  one  lef ’ hang.” 
He  escapes,  however. 

In  “ Dummy,”  Annancy  wins  a bet  and  the  hand  of  the  King’s 
daughter  by  inducing  “ Peafowl  ” to  make  the  dumb  man  talk. 
This  “ Peafowl  ” does  by  the  sweetness  of  his  song ; but  in  a 
Duala  story  given  by  Lederbogen  as  “ Der  Tausendfuss  und 
das  stumme  Kind,”  the  means  adopted  more  nearly  resemble 
the  time-honoured  recipes  for  detecting  changelings  in  this 
country.  The  Mouse  advised  the  dumb  child’s  parents  to  con- 
sult the  Spider,  who  told  them  to  hang  up  a centipede  over  the 
fireplace,  set  on  a pot  of  water  just  underneath  it,  and  leave 
the  child  sitting  beside  the  fire.  They  did  so,  and  went  out. 
As  soon  as  the  steam  rose  from  the  water,  the  centipede,  feeling 
the  heat,  began  to  struggle,  and  the  dumb  child  watching  it 
cried  out  in  his  excitement,  “ Father  ! there  is  a centipede  going 
to  fall  into  the  pot.” 

“ William  Tell  ” is  puzzling.  There  is  no  single  point  of  contact 
between  the  owner  of  the  witch-tree  and  the  mythical  archer  of 
Europe.  It  is  most  probable  that  the  name  (a  likely  one  to  remain 
in  the  memory)  had  been  picked  up  by  some  negro  story-teller 
who  did  not  know  the  tale  belonging  to  it  and  simply  attached 

1 Kalunga  in  Angola,  Ko  by  the  Ne  Kru-men.  Some  curious  episodes 
connected  with  the  latter  are  given  by  M.  Georges  Thomann  in  his  Essai  de 
Manuel  de  la  langue  ntonla  (Paris  : E.  Leroux). 


xxviii  Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 

it  to  the  first  character  that  came  handy.  The  “ sings  ” by- 
means  of  which  Annancy  fells  the  tree  occur  frequently  in 
native  African  stories ; we  need  only  mention  the  incident  (found 
not  only  in  the  Xosa  “ Bird  that  made  Milk,”  but  in  a Duala 
tale,  and  elsewhere)  of  the  song  which  made  the  hoed  garden 
return  to  grass  and  weeds,  and  that  of  Simbubukwana’s  sister1 
who  sang  “ Have  legs,  have  arms,”  and  the  boy  who  was  with- 
out those  members  immediately  grew  them.  The  notion  of 
spells  to  be  sung,  however,  does  not  seem  to  be  confined  to 
any  country  or  race. 

I do  not  remember  any  exact  parallel  to  “ Dry  River  ” 
(XXXIII.),  but  the  incident  of  the  river  rising  is  found  in 
Africa  with  several  different  sequels.  In  a Nyanja  story  which 
I have  in  MS.,  some  children  go  out  into  the  bush  to  gather 
wild  fruit,  and  are  cut  off  on  their  return  by  the  rising  of  the 
river.  They  are  helped  across  by  “a  big  bird,  with  one  wing, 
one  eye  and  one  leg”  (one  of  the  “half-beings”2  whose  place 
in  Bantu  folk  lore  has  not  yet  been  fully  worked  out),  and 
charged  not  to  tell  who  took  them  over.  One  boy  tells  his 
mother,  and  is  drowned  on  the  next  expedition,  his  companions 
getting  across  in  safety.  In  “ The  Village  Maiden  and  the 
Cannibal”  (Mrs.  Martin’s  Basutoland , its  Legends  and  Customs ), 
the  girls  cannot  cross  the  swollen  stream  till  they  have  thrown 
a large  root  into  the  water,  and  complied  with  the  directions. 
The  last  girl,  who  is  reluctant  to  obey,  but  finally  gives  in,  is 
not  drowned,  but  she  and  her  sister  have  an  adventure  with 
cannibals  of  a not  uncommon  kind,  which  may  be  referred  to 
Mr.  Jacobs’s  “Flight  from  Witchcraft”  type.  Two  other  stories, 
a Kinga  (North-east  Nyasa)  and  a Machame  (Kilimanjaro)  one, 
have  the  same  opening  incident  (in  the  one  case,  however,  it 
is  a rock  and  not  a river  which  enlarges  itself  and  blocks  the 
way),  but  continue  in  quite  a different  way — the  girls  are  helped 
by  an  animal  (in  one  case  a jackal,  in  another  a hyena)  who 
subsequently  insists  on  marrying  one  of  them.  The  Machame 
tale,  to  which  we  shall  have  to  return  presently,  as  it  belongs 
to  the  group  to  which  we  refer  “Yellow  Snake”  and  some 

1 McCall  Theal,  p.  68. 

2 See  Junod,  Chants  et  Contes  des  Baronga,  p.  197  ; also  a note  in  Chatelain, 
Folk-tales  of  Atigola,  p.  254,  and  Callaway,  Zulu  Tales , p.  199. 


Introduction. 


xxix 


others,  goes  on  to  relate  how  the  girl  escaped  from  the  hyena’s 
village ; the  Kinga  one  takes  an  entirely  different  course. 

“ Leah  and  Tiger  ” is  one  of  the  stories  which  can  be  most 
unhesitatingly  identified  as  African ; and,  as  it  happens,  the 
examples  at  present  known  to  me  are  nearly  all  Bantu.  Perhaps 
the  closest  parallel  is  the  Suto  “Tselane”  (Jacottet,  p.  69), 1 
where,  however,  the  girl,  instead  of  being  secluded  by  her  father 
to  avoid  the  trouble  which  her  refusal  to  marry  threatens  to 
bring  upon  him,  herself  insists  on  staying  in  the  house  her 
parents  are  leaving.  As  in  the  Jamaica  version,  they  bring  her 
food  every  day,  and  sing  to  let  her  know  of  their  approach. 
The  cannibal  on  the  prowl  (represented  in  Jamaica  by  the 
“ tiger  ”)  imitates  the  mother’s  voice,  but  fails ; after  swallowing 
a red-hot  hoe,  he  succeeds  at  the  first  trial.  He  does  not 
eat  Tselane,  however,  and  so  end  the  story  with  a warning 
against  obstinacy;  he  puts  her  into  a bag  to  carry  her  home,  and 
rests  on  his  way  at  a hut,  which  proves  to  be  her  uncle’s. 

While  he  is  resting  inside  the  hut,  leaving  his  bag  outside, 

the  family  discover  the  girl  and  let  her  out,  substituting  a dog 
and  some  biting  ants.  In  other  versions  it  is  bees  and  wasps, 
or  snakes  and  toads ; but  the  result  is  always  the  same — the 
death  of  the  cannibal.  The  incident  of  swallowing  red-hot  iron 

to  soften  the  voice  is  found  also  in  “Demane  and  Demazana” 

(Theal)  and  elsewhere.  In  a curious  Masai  story,  “ The  Old 
Man  and  his  Knee  ” (Hollis,  The  Masai:  Language  and  Folklore , 
p.  153),  the  “enemies”  (not  said  to  be  cannibals)  carry  off 
the  old  man’s  two  children  by  means  of  the  same  stratagem. 
After  failing  in  the  first  attempt  they  consult  a medicine-man  to 
find  out  how  they  can  “ make  their  voices  resemble  an  old 
man’s.”  He  tells  them  merely  to  go  back,  and  eat  nothing  on 
the  road.  They  eat  a lizard  and  an  ant,  and  their  voices  do 
not  produce  the  desired  effect.  On  trying  again,  and  this  time 
complying  exactly  with  the  doctor’s  directions,  they  deceive  the 
children  and  get  the  door  opened.  This  incident  is  preserved  in 
“ Leah,”  and,  like  the  Masai  “ enemies,”  Tiger  thinks  that  such 
a trifle  as  the  guava  and  “ duckanoo  ” cannot  possibly  do  any 
harm.  The  Masai  story  concludes  with  the  killing  of  the  old 
man  by  making  him  swallow  a hot  stone — a incident  which  crops 
1 This  story  is  also  given  by  Arbousset. 


XXX 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


up  in  various  connections  in  the  Hare  stories,  but  seems  out 
of  its  place  in  this  one.  On  the  whole  (though  I do  not  like 
to  hazard  a conjecture)  it  seems  more  probable  that  the  Masai 
had  picked  up  this  tale  from  some  of  their  Bantu  neighbours 
than  that  the  Bantu  should  have  adopted  it  from  them. 

As  regards  the  imported  stories,  it  seems  reasonably  clear  that 
“ Yung-Kyum-Pyung  ” is  a “ Rumpelstiltzchen  ” story  which  has 
accidentally  become  associated  with  Annancy.  Though  the 
superstition  on  which  these  stories  are  based  exists  in  Africa 
as  well  as  in  other  parts  of  the  world,  and  is  one  of  the  factors 
in  the  custom  of  hlonipa>  I do  not  remember  any  tale  embodying 
it  in  this  form,  though  there  are  numerous  examples  of  those 
which  turn  a tabu  of  some  sort. 

“King  Daniel”  is  the  story  of  the  jealous  sister,  best  known, 
perhaps,  in  the  ballad  of  “ Binnorie.”  But  it  has  African  pro- 
totypes as  well,  though  the  resemblance  to  these  is  not  so  close, 
in  which  the  crime  is  discovered  by  the  song  of  a bird — some- 
times the  metamorphosed  heart  of  the  victim.  In  “ Masilo  and 
Masilonyane  ” and  the  Kinga  “ Die  Reiherfeder,” 1 one  brother 
(or  companion)  kills  the  other;  in  “Unyengebule  ” (Callaway)  the 
husband  kills  the  wife,  and  here  it  is  her  feather  head-dress 
which  turns  into  a bird.  “ Pretty  Poll  ” (XXXI.)  is  a variant 
of  this  story. 

Another  pair  of  variants,  apparently,  are  “ Blackbird  and 
Woss-woss”  and  “Open  Sesame.”  But  the  former  of  these,  it 
seems  to  me,  corresponds  much  more  closely  with  a Nago  story 
of  the  Lizard  and  the  Tortoise,  given  by  M.  Basset  (Contes 
populaires  d.' Afrique,  p.  217);  and  it  should  be  remembered 
that  the  Nagos  of  Yoruba  are  one  of  the  tribes  represented 
among  the  Jamaica  negroes.  The  lizard  finds  a rock  containing 
a store  of  yams,  and  overhearing  the  words  used  by  the  owner 
“ Stone,  open!"  obtains  food  for  himself  in  time  of  famine. 
He  imparts  the  secret  to  the  tortoise,  and  they  go  together, 
but  the  tortoise  lingers  behind  to  load  himself  with  all  he  can 
carry,  and  not  knowing  the  word  fails  to  get  out,  and  is 
killed  when  the  owner  returns.  He  revives,  however,  and  gets 
the  cockroach  to  stick  his  shell  together,  thus  presenting  a 

1 R.  Wolff,  “ Grammatik  der  Kingasprachen  ” ( Archiv  fiir  das  Studium 
deutschen  Kolonialsprachen , iii. ),  p.  135. 


Introduction. 


xxxi 


point  of  contact  with  other  aetiological  myths  about  the  Tortoise. 
The  rescue  by  the  army  of  wasps  I have  been  unable  to  match. 

“Man-crow”  is  the  story,  which  exists  in  so  many  variants, 
where  the  hero  is  robbed  of  the  fruit  of  his  achievement  by  an 
impostor  stepping  in  at  the  last  minute.  The  nearest  parallel 
which  occurs  to  me  is  “ Rombao  ” (probably  obtained  from  a 
Portuguese  source  by  the  Quilimane  natives  who  related  it  to 
Mr.  Duff  Macdonald),  where  the  hero  kills  the  whale  and  cuts 
out  its  tongue ; the  captain  who  finds  it  dead  claims  his  reward, 
but  is  discomfited  by  Rombao’s  appearance  with  the  tongue. 

“The  Three  Pigs”  will  be  readily  recognized  as  the  familiar 
English  story,  and  corresponds  pretty  closely  to  the  version  in 
Mr.  Jacobs’s  English  Fairy  Tales.  A version  current  among 
the  negroes  of  the  Southern  States  is  given  by  Mr.  Owens  in 
the  paper  in  Lippincotf s Magazine  already  referred  to.  This 
version,  entitled  “ Tiny  Pig,”  omits  the  two  incidents  of  the 
apple-tree  and  the  butter-churn ; but  curiously  enough  these 
appear  as  “ Buh  Rabbit  ” episodes  in  another  part  of  the  same 
paper,  the  apple-tree  having  become  a pear-tree,  and  the  churn 
a tin  mug  which  Buh  Rabbit  puts  over  his  head,  while  he  hangs 
various  articles  of  tinware  about  his  person. 

“ Sea-Mahmy  ” introduces  several  different  elements.  The 
mermaid  herself  is  probably  of  European  extraction,1  and  the 
device  by  which  Blackbird  brings  Annancy  to  the  feeding-tree 
might  be  a far-off  echo  of  the  Daedalus  and  Icarus  myth.  But 
Annancy’s  trick  for  conveying  Trapong  to  his  house  and  eating 
him  recalls  one  of  the  stock  incidents  of  Bantu  folk-lore — the 
one  where  Hlakanyana,  or  the  Hare,  or  some  other  creature, 
induces  his  dupe  to  get  burnt  or  boiled  by  pretending  to 
undergo  the  process  himself  and  to  escape  with  impunity. 
The  Suto  Hare2  commends  this  as  a device  for  attaining 
immortality — in  which  there  is  a faint  suggestion  of  Medea’s 
caldron.  I was  at  first  disposed  to  refer  this  episode  to  the 
“ Big  Klaas  and  Little  Klaas  ” (or  the  “ Getting-to-Heaven-in-a- 
Sack  ”)  group ; but  the  inducement  to  enter  the  sack,  which 
is  so  great  a point  in  these,  is  here  wanting.  It  is  found  in  a 

1 One  kind  of  duppy  is  a mermaid — but  I can  find  no  indication  that  she 
came  from  Africa. 

2Jacottet,  p.  15. 


XXX11 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


Zanzibar  story  (“Abu  Nuwasi  na  waziri  na  Sultani”)  in  Dr. 
Velten’s  collection,1  where  Abu  Nuwas  is  sewn  up  into  a sack 
to  be  thrown  into  the  sea,  and  induces  another  man  to  take 
his  place  by  saying  that  he  is  to  be  drowned  for  refusing  to 
marry  the  Sultan’s  daughter.  This  is  evidently  an  Arab  tale, 
though  I do  not  remember  it  in  the  Arabian  Nights. 

The  exotic  tales  to  be  found  in  Bantu  Africa  come  mainly 
from  two  sources — Arab  and  Portuguese.  The  former  is  exem- 
plified at  Zanzibar  and  all  down  the  Mozambique  coast;  the 
latter  in  Angola  and  Mozambique.  We  have  already  referred 
to  an  example  obtained  at  Delagoa  Bay  by  M.  Junod;  but 
“Bonaouaci”  ( Chants  et  Contes , p.  292),  though  the  names  are 
Portuguese,  and  the  local  colouring  goes  so  far  as  to  introduce 
the  Governor  of  Mozambique  in  person,  is  in  substance  identical 
with  one  of  the  “Abu  Nuwas”  stories  given  by  Dr.  Velten,  the 
incident  of  the  egg-production  being  nearly  the  same  in  both, 
as  well  as  the  two  other  impossible  tasks  set  the  hero — sewing 
a stone  and  building  a house  in  the  air.  I fancy  the  same  is 
the  case  with  “ Djiwao,”  though  the  incidents  have  been  a good 
deal  remodelled,  and  the  concluding  episode — the  boiling  of  the 
chief  Gwanazi  in  the  pot  he  had  intended  for  Djiwao,  is  the 
purely  Bantu  one  alluded  to  in  the  last  paragraph — in  a some- 
what unusual  setting.  “ Les  trois  vaisseaux,” 2 again,  is  an 
Arabian  Nights  story,  of  which  a curious  version  has  been 
obtained  at  Domasi,  probably  brought  from  the  coast  by  some 
member  of  a Yao  trading  caravan.  Mr.  Dennett’s  No.  III., 
“ How  the  wives  restored  their  husband  to  life,”  looks  like  a 
much  altered  and  localized  form  of  this.  If  so  it  might  have 
reached  the  Congo  through  the  Portuguese.  We  also  find  it  on 
the  Ivory  Coast3  where  it  might  have  come  from  an  Arab  source 
through  Mandingoes  or  Hausas. 

The  stories  of  “Fenda  Maria”  and  “ Fenda  Maria  and  her 
elder  brother  Nga  Nzua”4  (“The  Three  Citrons”  and  “Cinde- 
rella ”),  are  good  examples  of  transplanted  stories  invested  with 
local  colour  by  successive  generations  of  narrators,  till,  as 

1 Suaheli  Mdrchen , p.  154  (p.  241  in  the  German  translation). 

2 lb.  p.  3°4- 

3 See  Thomann,  op.  cit.,  “Trois  maris  pour  une  femme.” 

4Chatelain,  No.  I.  and  No.  II. 


Introduction.  xxxiii 

Mr.  Chatelain  says,  “ the  fundamental  idea  of  exotic  origin  has 
been  so  perfectly  covered  with  Angola  foliage  and  blossoms,  that 
science  alone  can  detect  the  imported  elements,  and  no  native 
would  believe  that  [these  tales]  are  not  entirely  Angolan.” 

A curious  stage  in  the  migration  of  stories  is  exemplified  by 
the  “Taal”  (or  Cape  Dutch)  versions  of  Oriental  stories 
imported  into  South  Africa  by  the  Malays,  and  existing  in 
a purely  traditional  form  among  the  coloured  people.  One 
of  these  was  printed  by  Mr.  H.  N.  Muller  in  De  Gids  for 
Jan.,  1900,  but  I think  hardly  any  attempt  has  been  made  to 
collect  them.  And  here  I may  mention  that  Herr  Seidel’s  Lieder 
und  Geschichten  der  Afrikaner 1 contains  a Nama  version  of  the 
Lear  story,  taken  down  and  translated  by  Herr  Olpp,  of  the 
Rhenish  Mission,  who  seems  quite  unaware  of  its  real  origin,  in 
spite  of  the  very  obvious  parallel  in  Grimm’s  Hausmdrchai.  He 
says  in  a note  : “ Diese  Begebenheit  kann  sich  nur  in  der  Kap- 
Kolonie  ereignet  haben  zu  einer  Zeit  in  welcher  Kolonisten  sich 
schon  angesiedelt  hatten  und  unter  den  Eingeborenen  wohnten. 
Der  Name  der  Tochter  spricht  dafur  und  enstammt  dem  Hollan- 
dischen.”  Now  the  youngest  daughter’s  name  is  “KatjeLeiro” 
— surely,  all  things  considered,  not  such  a very  far  cry  from 
Cordelia. 

It  is  interesting  to  trace  the  African  elements  in  these  imported 
tales  as  distinct  from  those  which  are  merely  derived  from  West 
Indian  surroundings.  Thus  Mr.  Bluebeard’s  three-legged  horse 
(compare  also  the  three-legged  horse  in  “ Devil  and  the  Princess  ”) 
is,  as  explained  in  the  footnote,  a “duppy”;  and  the  duppy, 
whatever  the  derivation  of  his  name,  seems  to  be  West  African  in 
origin.  Duppies  are  the  souls  of  the  dead,  “ capable  of  assuming 
various  forms  of  men  and  other  animals.”2  Some  of  these  forms 
are  monstrous,  as  the  “ three-foot  horse  ” already  alluded  to,  the 
“long-bubby  Susan,”  and  the  “rolling  calf.”  The  informant  who 
is  responsible  for  these  statements  also  says  that  “ the  duppy  in 
human  form  generally  moves  along  by  spinning  or  walking  back- 
wards.” Perhaps  this  may  explain  the  mysterious  “ Wheeler  ” 
(LI.)  who  has  his  habitation  in  a hollow  tree,  and  seizes  the  hand 
of  any  unwary  person  who  puts  it  into  the  hole.  What  he  would 

1 P-  I3S>  “ Liebe  bis  zum  Salz.” 

2 See  Folk-Lore , March,  1904,  p.  90. 

C 


XXXIV 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


have  done  if  not  requested  to  “ Wheel  me  mile  an’  distant,” 
remains  obscure ; but  apparently  the  persons  making  the 
request  are  whirled  through  the  air  and  then  dropped  at  the  place 
where  Annancy  (who  has  previously  passed  through  the  experience 
unscathed)  has  prepared  a trap  for  them.  The  story  suggests — 
though  the  resemblance  is  not  very  close — the  episode  of  “ The 
Stone  that  wore  a Beard”  in  Cunnie  Rabbit  (p.  167),  where  the 
Spider,  having  had  a narrow  escape  from  the  magic  powers  of 
the  bearded  stone  (a  transformed  “ devil  ”)  utilises  them  for  the 
destruction  of  his  acquaintances.  Those  who  remark  on  the 
peculiarity  of  the  stone  are  struck  down  unconscious,  and  Spider 
exercises  all  his  ingenuity  in  inducing  his  victims  to  say,  “ Dah 
stone  get  plenty  bear’-bear’ ! ” Cunnie  Rabbit  will  not  say  the 
words  till  Spider  has  himself  done  so,  and  has  suffered  the 
consequences;  both  are  afterwards  rescued  by  Trorkey  (Tortoise). 
Somewhat  similar  to  “Wheeler”  is  the  magic  jar  in  XLV. — 
which  might,  however,  be  due  to  a distorted  reminiscence  of 
“ Bluebeard.”  Spirits  are  often  believed  on  the  Gold  Coast  to 
take  up  their  abode  in  trees,  as  well  as  to  assume  the  form  of 
animals.  The  usual  Tshi  name  for  them  appears  to  be  bonstim 
or  bossum  : the  word  “duppy”  I have  been  unable  to  trace. 

The  method  of  divination  in  “ Mr.  Bluebeard  ” is  one  I do  not 
remember  to  have  met  with,  though  it  may  be  akin  to  the  “ magic 
mirror  of  ink.”  The  magic  drum  by  which  Calcutta  Monkey 
(XXXVIII.)  finds  out  Annancy ’s  whereabouts  is  African.  I do 
not  recall  any  parallel  story,  but  drums  are  much  used  by  witch- 
doctors and  in  ceremonial  dances,  and  in  some  cases  auguries  are 
drawn  from  their  sound.  But  Monkey  first  discovers  Annancy  to 
be  the  thief  by  cutting  the  cards,  which  of  course  is  European. 

Two  stories,  “Annancy  and  the  Old  Lady’s  Field”  (XVI.)  and 
“ Devil’s  Honeydram,”  introduce  the  incident  of  a woman  com- 
pelled to  dance  against  her  will — in  one  case  to  dance  herself  to 
death.  In  both  cases  the  music  seems  to  be  the  compelling 
power ; but  it  is  not  clear  whether,  in  “ Devil’s  Honeydram,”  the 
knowledge  (and  use  in  the  song)  of  the  woman’s  name  has  any- 
thing to  do  with  the  spell.  If  so,  the  idea  is  so  universal  that 
one  can  scarcely  refer  to  it  as  specially  African.  It  is  interesting, 
though  perhaps  scarcely  pertinent  to  the  matter  in  hand,  to  note 
that  the  Akikuyu  believe  their  images  (of  which  Mr.  Scoresby 


Introduction. 


xxxv 


Routledge  has  brought  home  specimens)  to  have  the  power,  if 
held  up  before  people,  of  compelling  them  to  dance. 

The  folk-lore  of  Jamaica,  as  given  in  the  interesting  papers 
published  in  Folk-Lore , 1904-5,  is  decidedly  of  a composite 
character.  The  negroes  have,  as  there  pointed  out  (1904,  p.  87), 
“adopted  many  of  the  most  trivial  of  English  superstitions,” 
while  at  the  same  time  preserving  some  reminiscences  of  their 
African  beliefs.  These  are  especially  seen  in  the  notions 
respecting  “ duppies,”  which  again  are  perceptibly  influenced 
by  Christian  ideas,  cf.  the  efficacy  of  the  name  of  Christ  (p.  90) 
and  the  statement  that  the  “rolling  calf”  is  the  spirit  of  a person 
not  good  enough  for  heaven  or  bad  enough  for  hell,  or  the 
recipe  of  “sitting  on  a Bible”  to  get  rid  of  a duppy.  The 
directions  for  “killing  a thief”  (p.  92)  belong  to  the  system 
(universal  throughout  Negro  and  Bantu  Africa)  of  guarding  crops 
by  means  of  “ medicine,”  or  “ fetish,”  or  whatever  one  likes  to 
call  it : the  technical  name  in  Chinyanja  is  chiwindo.  I do 
not  remember  any  of  the  particular  forms  of  chiwindo  here 
enumerated ; and  the  silver  threepence  to  be  planted  with  the 
“guinea  yam”  is  a civilized  addition,  but  the  principle  is  the 
same.  The  methods  of  “finding  out  the  thief,”  on  the  other 
hand,  which  follow  on  p.  93,  are  certainly  English — the  Bible 
and  key,  and  the  gold  ring,  hair  and  tumbler  of  water.  There 
is  a third  alternative  : — “ A curious  kind  of  smoke,  which,  when  it 
rises,  goes  to  the  house  of  the  thief,  etc.” — but  it  is  too  vaguely 
stated  to  enable  us  to  pronounce  upon  it. 

Among  funeral  customs  wTe  find  the  following  (p.  88) : “ If  a 
person  dies  where  there  are  little  children,  after  the  body  is 
put  into  the  coffin,  they  will  lift  up  each  little  child,  and  calling 
him  by  name,  pass  him  over  the  dead  body.”  According  to  a 
Sierra  Leone  paper  this  custom  is  observed  there ; but  it  is  not 
stated  by  which  of  the  tribes  who  make  up  the  extremely  mixed 
population.  It  may  even  be  found  on  investigation  that  some  of 
the  freed  slaves  brought  the  notion  back  from  the  New  World. 
The  same  authority  states  that  it  is  considered  unlucky  to  whistle, 
and  adds  the  rationalizing  explanation  that  whistling  attracts 
snakes,  lizards,  and  other  undesirable  creatures  into  the  house. 
In  Jamaica,  you  must  not  “whistle  in  the  nights,  for  duppies 
will  catch  your  voice.” 


XXXVI 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


The  proportion  of  native  and  acquired,  or  African  and 
European  ideas  in  these  superstitions  can  only  be  determined 
by  a much  more  detailed  examination  than  I can  make  here, 
and  one  based  on  fuller  materials  than  are  yet  accessible. 

In  conclusion,  I would  briefly  glance  at  five  stories  which  I 
have  grouped  together  as  derived  from  a common  African 
original,  and  which  present  several  features  of  interest,  though 
I am  unable  to  examine  them  as  much  in  detail  as  I should 
like  to  do.  These  are  “The  Three  Sisters”  (VII.),  “Gaulin” 
(XXIV.),  “Yellow  Snake”  (XXXIV.),  “John  Crow”  (XLIII.), 
and  “Devil  and  the  Princess”  (LI.).  The  type  to  which  these 
may  be  referred  resembles  the  one  registered  by  Mr.  Jacobs 
as  the  “ Robber-Bridegroom  ” ; but  the  African  prototypes  are 
certainly  indigenous,  and  it  might  seem  as  if  the  stories  Mr. 
Jacobs  had  in  view  were  late  and  comparatively  civilized  versions 
of  the  corresponding  European  and  Asiatic  ones,  the  Robber 
being  the  equivalent  of  an  earlier  wizard  or  devil,  who,  in  the 
primitive  form  of  the  story,  was  simply  an  animal  assuming  human 
shape.  The  main  incidents  of  the  type-story  are  as  follows  : 

(1)  A girl  obstinately  refuses  all  suitors. 

(2)  She  is  wooed  by  an  animal  in  human  form,  and  at  once 

accepts  him. 

(3)  She  is  warned  (usually  by  a brother)  and  disregards  the 

warning. 

(4)  She  is  about  to  be  killed  and  eaten,  but  is  saved  by  the 

brother  whose  advice  was  disregarded. 

A Nyanja  variant  of  this  story,  where  the  bridegroom  is  a 
hyena,  corresponds  very  closely  with  the  Temne  “Marry  the 
devil,  there’s  the  devil  to  pay”  ( Cunnie  Rabbit , p.  178) — even  to 
the  little  brother  who  follows  the  newly-wedded  couple,  against 
the  wishes  of  the  bride,  and  who  is  afflicted — in  the  one  case 
with  “ craw-craw,”  in  the  other  with  sore  eyes.  A translation 
of  the  Nyanja  story  may  be  found  in  the  Conte?nporary  Review 
for  September,  1896.  In  Mrs.  Dewar’s  Chinamwanga  Stories 
(p.  41)  there  is  a variant, — “ Ngoza,” — where  the  husband  is 
a lion.  In  the  Machame  story,  previously  alluded  to,  the 
hyena,  having  befriended  a girl,  marries  her,  and  she  escapes 
with  some  difficulty  from  being  eaten  by  his  relations.  Yet 
another  variant  is  “ Ngomba’s  Balloon  ” in  Mr.  Dennett’s  Folklore 


Introduction.  xxxvii 

of  the  Fjortf  Here  the  husband  is  a Mpunia  (translated 
“ murderer  ”) — apparently  a mere  human  bad  character,  and 
Ngomba  escapes  by  her  own  ingenuity. 

In  the  Jamaican  stories  it  strikes  one  that  the  idea  of  trans- 
formation is  somewhat  obscured.  We  are  told  how  “Gaulin” 
(Egret)  and  “John  Crow”  provide  themselves  with  clothes  and 
equipages — the  latter  a carriage  and  pair,  the  former  the  humbler 
local  buggy ; — and  this  seems  to  constitute  the  extent  of  their 
disguise.  Yellow  Snake  is  said  to  “change  and  fix  up  himself” — 
but  the  expression  is  vague.  Gaulin,  however,  can  only  be 
deprived  of  his  clothes  (and  so  made  to  appear  in  his  true  shape) 
by  means  of  a magic  song.  The  “ old-witch  ” brother,  who  has 
overheard  the  song,  plays  its  tune  at  the  wedding  and  thus 
exposes  the  bridegroom,  who  flies  out  at  the  door.  “ John-Crow” 
is  detected  by  a Cinderella-like  device  of  keeping  him  till  day- 
light, and  his  hurried  flight  through  the  window  (in  which  he 
scraped  the  feathers  off  his  head  on  the  broken  glass)  explains  a 
characteristic  feature  of  these  useful  but  unattractive  birds. 

In  neither  of  these  is  the  bride  in  any  danger : but  in  “Yellow 
Snake  ” her  brothers  save  her  when  already  more  than  half 
swallowed ; in  “ Devil  and  the  Princess,”  she  escapes  by  the  aid 
of  the  Devil’s  cook,  who  feeds  the  watchful  cock  on  corn  soaked 
in  rum.  In  this  story,  too,  it  is  not  the  girl’s  brother,  but  the 
“ old-witch  ” servant-boy,  who  warns  her ; and,  as  he  is  cast  into 
prison  for  his  pains,  he  has  no  hand  in  the  release.  In  two 
cases  (“Gaulin”  and  “John  Crow”)  Annancy  is  one  of  the 
unsuccessful  suitors,  and,  in  the  former,  “Rabbit”  is  another. 
(He,  apparently,  takes  no  steps  to  change  his  shape,  being  rejected 
on  the  ground  that  he  is  “only  but  a meat,”  i.e.,  an  animal.)  In 
the  Nyanja  story,  Leopard  and  Hare  are  mentioned  as  meeting 
with  refusals,  before  the  Hyena  arrives  on  the  scene.  “The 
Three  Sisters,”  while  keeping  one  or  two  points  of  the  original 
story,  is  much  altered,  and  seems  to  have  introduced  some  rather 
unintelligible  fragments  of  an  English  ballad  (as  to  which  see 
Appendix,  p.  286).  The  Snake  is  never  accepted ; and  the 
youngest  of  the  sisters,  who  answers  him  on  behalf  of  all, 
would  seem  to  represent  the  “ old-witch  ” brother  who  detects  his 
true  character.  His  “turning  into  a devil”  is  another  alien 
element — perhaps  due  to  Biblical  recollections,  and  the  con- 


xxxviii  Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


eluding  assertion  that  he  “ have  chain  round  his  waist  until  now  ” 
seems  to  refer  to  something  which  has  dropped  out,  as  there 
is  no  previous  allusion  to  a chain  in  the  story  as  it  stands.  Of 
all  the  five,  “Yellow  Snake”  is,  on  the  whole,  the  closest  to  what 
we  may  suppose  to  have  been  the  original ; “ Devil  and  the 
Princess  ” is  in  some  respects  complete,  but  has  acquired  several 
foreign  features,  and  “John  Crow”  has  quite  lost  the  charac- 
teristic conclusion.  It  is  to  be  hoped  that  we  may  one  day 
succeed  in  discovering,  if  not  all  the  African  variants  of  this 
story,  yet  enough  to  render  those  we  possess  more  intelligible, 
and  to  afford  materials  for  an  interesting  comparative  study. 


A.  Werner. 


AUTHOR’S  PREFACE. 


The  stories  and  tunes  of  this  book  are  taken  down  from 
the  mouths  of  men  and  boys  in  my  employ.  The  method 
of  procedure  has  in  every  case  been  to  sit  them  down 
to  their  recital  and  make  them  dictate  slowly ; so  the 
stories  are  in  their  ipsissima  verba.  Here  and  there,  but 
very  rarely  indeed,  I have  made  a slight  change,  and 
this  only  because  I thought  the  volume  might  find  its 
way  into  the  nursery.  The  following  list  exhausts  the 
emendations:  (i)  It  was  not  his  fat  that  Tiger  took  out 
when  he  went  bathing,  but  his  viscera  ; (2)  The  “ Tumpa- 
toe”  of  one  of  the  stories  is  “Stinking-toe”;  (3)  Dog 
always  swears,  his  favourite  expression  being,  “ There  will 
be  hell  here  to-night,”  and  the  first  line  of  one  of  the 
dance  tunes  runs  really:  “Hell  of  a dog  up’tairs”; 
(4)  “ belly  ” is  replaced  by  a prettier  equivalent. 

The  district  in  which  I live  is  that  of  the  Port  Royal 
Mountains  behind  Kingston.  Other  districts  have  other 
“ Sings,”  for  these  depend  upon  local  topics.  The 
Annancy  Stories  are,  so  far  as  I know,  more  or  less 
alike  throughout  the  island.  This  title  seems  to  include 
stories  in  which  Annancy  himself  does  not  figure  at  all, 
but  this  is  of  course  an  illegitimate  use  of  it.  The 
collection  in  this  book  is  a mere  sample  both  of  stories 
and  tunes. 

The  book  as  a whole  is  a tribute  to  my  love  for 
Jamaica  and  its  dusky  inhabitants,  with  their  winning 
ways  and  their  many  good  qualities,  among  which  is  to 
be  reckoned  that  supreme  virtue,  Cheerfulness. 


Jamaica,  Januaiy,  1906. 


W.  J. 


JAMAICAN  SONG  AND  STORY. 

PART  I.  ANNANCY  STORIES. 

When  the  hoes  stop  clicking  and  you  hear  peals  of 
laughter  from  the  field,  you  may  know  that  somebody  is 
telling  an  Annancy  story.  If  you  go  out,  you  will  find  a 
group  of  Negroes  round  the  narrator,  punctuating  all  the 
good  points  with  delighted  chuckles.  Their  sunny  faces 
are  beaming,  and  at  the  recital  of  any  special  piece  of 
knavery  on  Annancy’s  part  ordinary  means  of  expression 
fail,  and  they  fling  themselves  on  the  ground  and  wriggle 
in  convulsions  of  merriment. 

Annancy  is  a legendary  being  whose  chief  characteristic 
is  trickery.  A strong  and  good  workman,  he  is  invariably 
lazy,  and  is  only  to  be  tempted  to  honest  labour  by  the 
offer  of  a large  reward.  He  prefers  to  fill  the  bag  which 
he  always  carries,  by  fraud  or  theft.  His  appetite  is  vora- 
cious, and  nothing  comes  amiss  to  him,  cooked  or  raw. 
No  sooner  is  one  gluttonous  feast  over  than  he  is  ready  for 
another,  and  endless  are  his  shifts  and  devices  to  supply 
himself  with  food.  Sometimes  he  will  thrust  himself  upon 
an  unwilling  neighbour,  and  eat  up  all  his  breakfast.  At 
another  time  he  carries  out  his  bag  and  brings  it  home  full 
of  flesh  or  fish  obtained  by  thieving.  He  is  perfectly 
selfish,  and  knows  no  remorse  for  his  many  deeds  of  vio- 
lence, treachery  and  cruelty.  His  only  redeeming  point  is 
a sort  of  hail-fellow-well-met-ness,  which  appeals  so  much 

A 


2 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


to  his  associates  that  they  are  ready  almost,  if  not  quite, 
to  condone  his  offences. 

Annancy  has  a defect  of  speech  owing  to  a cleft  palate, 
and  pronounces  his  words  badly.  He  speaks  somewhat 
like  Punch,  through  his  nose  very  rapidly,  and  uses  the 
most  countrified  form  of  dialect.  He  cannot  say  “brother," 
and  has  to  leave  out  the  th  owing  to  the  failure  of  the 
tongue  to  meet  the  palate,  so  he  says  “ bro’er.”  He  even 
pretends  he  cannot  say  “ puss,”  and  turns  it  into  “ push.’’ 
Strings  of  little  words  he  delights  in,  such  as,  in  the  Brother 
Death  story,  the  often-repeated  “ no  mo  so  me  no  yerry,” 
an  expressive  phrase  difficult  to  render  into  good  English. 
It  means  “ I must  have  failed  to  hear.”  The  words  are 
“ no  more  so  me  no  hear,”  equivalent  to  “ it  must  be  so 
(that)  I (do)  not  hear,”  the  “ no  more  ” having  something 
of  the  force  of  the  same  words  in  the  colloquial  phrases, 
“ no  more  I do,”  “ no  more  I will.”  When,  for  instance,  to 
the  remark,  “ I thought  you  didn’t  like  the  smell  of  paint,” 
we  make  the  rejoinder  “ no  more  I do,”  Priscian  strives  in 
vain  to  disentangle  the  words  and  reduce  them  to  rule  of 
syntax,  but  they  mean  “ Well ! I do  not.”  Thus  “ no  more 
me  hear  ” would  be  “ Well ! I do  not  hear.”  The  “ so  ” 
introduces  the  hypothetical  element  and  the  “ no  ” before 
“ yerry  ” is  a reduplicated  negative. 

Thus  far  for  the  sense.  Now  for  the  pronunciation. 
The  accent  indicates  where  the  stress  of  the  voice  falls,  and 
unless  the  accent  is  caught,  the  phrase  will  not  run  off  the 
tongue.  This  is  how  it  goes : 

no  mo  | so  me  no  | yerry. 

As  an  illustration  of  the  necessity  of  right  placing  of  the 
accent,  take  the  name  of  that  town  in  Madagascar,  which 
we  so  often  saw  in  our  papers  a few  years  ago,  Antana- 
narivo. Most  of  us  just  nodded  our  heads  at  it,  but  never 
tried,  or  at  least  only  feebly,  to  articulate  it.  With  all  this 
“ an  an  ” it  was  the  same  sort  of  hopeless  business  as  the 


Introduction. 


3 


deciphering  of  the  hieroglyphics  of  those  writers  whose 
words  seem  to  be  composed  of  nothing  but  vis.  And  yet 
how  simple,  and  easy  to  say,  the  word  is  when  we  catch  the 
accent.  First“an”;  then  stop  a little;  “tanana,”  same  values 
as  traveller  ; and  finally  “ rivo.”  French  sounds  for  the 
vowels  of  course,  An-tananarivo.  This  grouping  of  accents 
is  that  which  in  music  is  known  as  rhythm.  Rightly 
grouped  they  make  musical  sense,  wrongly  grouped — and 
alas!  how  often  we  hear  it — musical  nonsense.  See  the 
stuttering  hopelessness  and  helplessness  of  an-tan-an-a — 
there  might  be  any  number  more  of  “an-an”s  to  follow,  and 
compare  with  this  the  neat  satisfying  form  Antananarivo. 
So  let  no  bungler  read  in  the  story  of  Brother  Death  “ no 
mo  so  me  no  yerry  ” with  halting  and  panting,  but  let  him 
reel  off  as  quickly  as  he  can  “ no  mo  so  me  no  yerry  ” with 
just  the  accent  that  he  would  use  in  this  phrase; — “It  is  here 
that  I want  you.”  Remember,  too,  that  the  c’s  have  the 
open  sound  of  Italian,  and  not  the  close  sound  of  English. 
So  is  exactly  like  sol  (the  musical  note)  with  the  l left  out, 
and  not  as  we  pronounce  it.  And  above  all,  speed. 

When  the  stranger  lands  in  Jamaica  and  hears  the  rapid 
rush  of  words,  and  the  soft,  open  vowels,  he  often  says : 
“ Why,  I thought  they  talked  English  here,  but  it  sounds 
like  Spanish  or  Italian!”  The  difficulty  in  understanding  a 
new  language  lies  in  the  inability  to  distinguish  the  point 
where  one  word  ends  and  the  next  begins.  The  old 
puzzle  sentence,  Caille  a haut  nid , taupe  a bas  nid,  shows 
this  very  well.  The  ear  catches  the  sound  but  fails  to 
differentiate  the  words,  and,  their  real  identity  being  dis- 
guised, the  listener  has  a sort  of  impression  of  modern 
Greek  or  Italian,  writing  these  fragments  in  his  brain 
oni,  bani. 

Just  as  hopeless  is  negro  English  to  the  new-comer,  and 
the  first  thing  to  do  is  to  set  about  learning  it.  And  well 
it  repays  investigation.  It  is  the  boast  of  the  English 
language  that  it  has  got  rid  of  so  much  superfluous 


4 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


grammatical  matter  in  the  way  of  genders,  inflections  and 
such-like  perplexities.  True,  it  has  abolished  much  that 
was  evil,  and  enables  us  to  speak  and  write  shortly  and 
to  the  point.  But  negro  English  goes  a step  further, 
and  its  form  is  still  more  concise.  Compare  these 
expressions : 


Negro. 


English. 


Corn  the  horse. 

Care  the  child. 

Him  wife  turn  fire. 

You  middle  hand. 

My  bottom  foot. 

Out  the  lamp. 

The  boy  too  trick. 

I did  him  nothing. 

See  the  ’tar  up  a ’ky. 
No  make  him  get  ’way. 
Me  go  buy. 

A door. 

Short-mout’ed. 

Bull  a broke  pen. 

Bell  a ring  a yard. 
Same  place  him  patch. 
To  warm  fire. 

You  no  give. 

Bring  come. 

A bush. 


Give  the  horse  some  com. 

Take  care  of  the  child. 

His  wife  became  a shrew. 

The  middle  of  your  hand. 

The  bottom  of  my  foot. 

Put  out  the  lamp. 

The  boy  is  very  tricky. 

I did  not  provoke  him. 

Look  at  the  star  up  in  the  sky. 

Do  not  let  him  get  away. 

I am  going  to  buy. 

Out  of  doors. 

Quick  at  repartee. 

The  bull  has  broken  out  of  the  pen. 
The  bell  is  ringing  in  the  yard. 

In  the  place  where  it  was  patched. 
T o warm  oneself  by  the  fire. 

If  you  do  not  give. 

Bring  it  here. 

In  the  bush.1 


These  are  a few  typical  sentences  out  of  a host  which  might 
be  cited  to  show  the  neat,  short  turn  they  take  in  the 
mouth  of  the  Jamaica  Negro. 

The  rapidity  of  utterance  natural  to  all  the  Blacks  is 
exaggerated  by  Annancy.  He  generally  affects,  too,  a 
falsetto  tone  as  in  “ Play  up  the  music,  play  up  the  music,” 
in  Yung-kyum-pyung.  He  has  a metamorphic  shape, 

1 These  idioms  are  very  similar  to  those  of  Cape  Dutch,  especially  as  spoken 
by  the  coloured  people,  and  may  help  to  illustrate  its  development.  Cf.  Jy  is 
te  skellum, — ek  gaan  (or  better,  Corp)  korp,  etc.  “To  warm  fire”  reminds 
one  of  the  Bantu  Ku  ot  a moto,  of  which  it  is  almost  a literal  translation.  ( A.  W. ) 


Introduction. 


5 


that  of  the  Spider.  At  one  moment  he  is  a man  “ tiefing 
(thieving)  cow,”  the  next  he  is  running  upon  his  rope  (web). 

As  he  is  the  chief  personage  in  most  of  the  stories  in 
this  book,  it  is  well  to  have  a perfectly  clear  idea  of  the 
pronunciation  of  his  name.  Unnahncy  does  not  represent 
it  badly,  but  the  first  letter  has  actually  the  sound  of  short 
French  a as  in  la.  The  accent  falls  strongly  on  the  middle 
syllable.  In  “Tacoma”  all  the  syllables  are  very  short. 
The  first  has  the  sound  of  French  ta,  and  takes  the  accent; 
co  is  something  between  English  cook  and  Italian  con , and  it 
is  impossible  to  determine  whether  to  write  the  vowel  o or 
u ; nta  again  as  in  French.  The  exact  relation  in  which 
Tacoma  stands  to  Annancy  is  obscure.  In  one  case  he  is 
described  as  Annancy’s  son,  but,  according  to  most  of  the 
stories,  he  appears  to  be  an  independent  neighbour. 

The  stories  are  obviously  derived  from  various  sources, 
the  most  primitive  being  no  doubt  those  which  are  con- 
cerned only,  or  chiefly,  with  animals.  These  may  be  of 
African  origin,  but  we  should  have  expected  to  find  the 
Elephant  and  not  the  Tiger.  I have  a suspicion  that 
Tiger  was  originally  Lion,  and  that  he  is  the  Ogre  of  Jack 
the  Giant-killer,  and  other  fairy  stories  brought  to  Jamaica 
from  England.  Ogre  would  easily  be  corrupted  to  Tiger, 
and  with  the  information,  which  might  have  been  acquired 
at  the  same  time,  that  Tiger  was  a fierce  animal  which  ate 
men,  his  name  would  find  its  way  into  stories  repeated 
from  mouth  to  mouth.  This  is,  however,  pure  conjecture. 
How  much  the  stories  vary  may  be  seen  from  the  two 
versions  of  Ali  Baba,  in  one  of  which  the  point  is  so 
entirely  lost  that  the  door  is  not  kept  shut  upon  the 
intruder. 

The  tunes  are  in  the  same  case  as  the  stories.  What  I 
take  to  be  certainly  primitive  about  them  is  the  little  short 
refrains,  like  “ Carry  him  go  ’long  ” (Dry  Bone)  and  “ Com- 
mando ” (Annancy  and  Hog).  These  suggest  tapping  on 
a drum.  Again,  the  same  influence  that  has  produced 


6 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


the  American  Plantation  Songs  is  occasionally  visible, 
as  in  “ Some  a we  da  go  to  Mount  Siney  ” (Annancy  in 
Crab  Country).  This  kind  of  patter  is  just  what  the 
Negro  likes.  Some  of  the  tunes  are  evidently  popular 
songs  of  the  day,  as,  for  instance,  the  vulgar  “ Somebody 
waiting  for  Salizon  ” (Snake  the  Postman).  But  others 
are  a puzzle,  showing  as  they  do  a high  order  of  melodic 
instinct.  Such  are  the  melodies  in  “ The  Three  Sisters  ” 
and  “ Leah,”  and  the  digging-tunes,  “ Oh,  Samuel,  Oh ! ” 
and  “Three  Acres  of  Coffee.”  These  digging-tunes  are 
very  pleasant  to  hear,  and  the  singers  are  quick  at  im- 
provising parts.  They  are  an  appropriate  accompaniment 
to  the  joyous  labour  of  this  sunny,  happy  land. 

One  more  word  with  regard  to  the  tunes.  They  gain  a 
peculiar  and  almost  indescribable  lilt  from  a peculiarity 
in  the  time-organisation  of  the  Negro.  If  you  ask  him  to 
beat  the  time  with  his  foot,  he  does  it  perfectly  regularly, 
but  just  where  the  white  man  does  not  do  it.  We  beat 
with  the  time ; he  beats  against  it.  To  make  my  mean- 
ing quite  plain,  take  common  measure.  His  first  beat 
in  the  bar  will  be  exactly  midway  between  our  first 
and  second  beats.  The  effect  of  this  peculiarity  in  their 
singing  is,  that  there  is  commonly  a feeling  of  syncopa- 
tion about  it.  The  Americans  call  it  “rag-time.” 

The  men’s  voices  are  of  extraordinary  beauty.  To 
hear  a group  chatting  is  a pure  pleasure  to  the 
ear,  quite  irrespective  of  the  funny  things  they  say ; 
and  their  remarks  are  accompanied  with  the  prettiest 
little  twirks  and  turns  of  intonation,  sometimes  on  the 
words,  sometimes  mere  vocal  ejaculations  between  them. 
The  women’s  voices  have  the  same  fine  quality  when 
they  speak  low,  but  this  they  seldom  do,  and  their 
usual  vivacious  chatter  is  anything  but  melodious. 


Annancy  and  Brother  Tiger. 


7 


I.  ANNANCY  AND  BROTHER  TIGER. 

One  day  Annancy  an’  Bro’er  Tiger  go  a river  fe  wash’kin. 
Annancy  said  to  Bro’er  Tiger : — “ Bro’er  Tiger,  as  you 
are  such  a big  man,  if  you  go  in  a de  blue  hole  with 
your  fat  you  a go  drownded,  so  you  fe  take  out  your 
fat  so  lef’  it  here.” 

Tiger  said  to  Bro’er  Annancy : — “ You  must  take  out 
fe  you  too.” 

Annancy  say : — “ You  take  out  first,  an’  me  me  take  out 
after.” 

Tiger  first  take  out. 

Annancy  say  : — “ Go  in  a hole,  Bro’er  Tiger,  an’  make 
me  see  how  you  swim  light.” 

Bro’er  Annancy  never  go  in. 

As  Tiger  was  paying  attention  to  the  swimming,  Annancy 
take  up  his  fat  an’  eat  it. 

Then  Annancy  was  so  frightened  for  Tiger,  he  leaves 
the  river  side  an’  go  to  Big  Monkey  town. 

Him  say  : — “ Bro’er  Monkey,  I hear  them  shing  a shing 
a river  side  say  : — 


Allegretto. 


-|?T- N - , ..v  ~N 

H MM 1 

„ h r*  0 j m r' 

— ! A J A 1 

f 

t “ o i s r # 1 j • 

m mm* 

44 

V £ * 0 

i 

Yesh-ter-day  this  time  me  a nyam  Ti-ger  fat, 


0 . ->-.i5n 

— [ - - - 

V 

/ r»  4 1 '-i r-- 

rvzp 

^ ^ 1 1 IM 

lt\  * 0 J m ■ m 

J J 

d d d d 1 

r * m J 

0 m 

4-?..  _ 

Yeshterday  this  time  me  a nyam  Tiger  fat,  Yeshterday  this  time  me  a 


r#- ■— M 

\-4  — 

r iMrr's 

~i — ; : — : — ; n 

> Cl J 

J \*J  JA  , y N 

m m 9 J _i  \ 

4U 

0 0 -\ — Js 

i 

i 

i 

i 

nyam  Ti-ger  fat,  Yeshterday  this  time  me  a nyam  Tiger  fat. 


8 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


The  Big  Monkey  drive  him  away,  say  they  don’t  want 
to  hear  no  song. 

So  him  leave  and  go  to  Little  Monkey  town,  an’  when 
him  go  him  said  : — 

“ Bro’er  Monkey,  I hear  one  shweet  song  a river  side 
say: — 

“Yeshterday  this  time  me  a nyam  Tiger  fat. 

Yeshterday  this  time  me  a nyam  Tiger  fat.” 

Then  Monkey  say: — "You  must  sing  the  song,  make 
we  hear.” 

Then  Annancy  commence  to  sing. 

Monkey  love  the  song  so  much  that  they  made  a ball 
a night  an’  have  the  same  song  playing. 

So  when  Annancy  hear  the  song  was  playing,  he  was 
glad  to  go  back  to  Bro’er  Tiger. 

When  him  go  to  the  river,  he  saw  Tiger  was  looking 
for  his  fat. 

Tiger  said  : — “ Bro’er  Annancy,  I can’t  find  me  fat  at  all.” 

Annancy  say  : — “ Ha  ha  ! Biddybye  I hear  them  shing 
a Little  Monkey  town  say  :— 

Yeshterday  this  time  me  a nyam  Tiger  fat. 

Yeshterday  this  time  me  a nyam  Tiger  fat. 

Bro’er  Tiger,  if  you  think  I lie,  come  make  we  go  a 
Little  Monkey  town.” 

So  he  and  Tiger  wented. 

When  them  get  to  the  place,  Annancy  tell  Tiger  they 
must  hide  in  a bush. 

Then  the  Monkey  was  dancing  an’  playing  the  same  tune. 

Tiger  hear. 

Then  Annancy  say  : — •“  Bro’er  Tiger  wha’  me  tell  you  ? 
You  no  yerry  me  tell  you  say  them  a call  you  name  up 
ya  ? ” 

An’  the  Monkey  never  cease  with  the  tune ; — 

Yeshterday  this  time  me  a nyam  Tiger  fat. 

Yeshterday  this  time  me  a nyam  Tiger  fat. 


Annartcy  and  Brother  Tiger.  9 

Then  Tiger  go  in  the  ball  an’  ask  Monkey  them  for 
his  fat. 

The  Monkey  say  they  don’t  know  nothing  name  so,  ’tis 
Mr.  Annancy  l’arn  them  the  song. 

So  Tiger  could  manage  the  Little  Monkey  them,  an’  he 
want  fe  fight  them. 

So  the  Little  Monkey  send  away  a bearer  to  Big 
Monkey  town,  an’  bring  down  a lots  of  soldiers,  an’  flog 
Bro’er  Tiger  an’  Annancy. 

So  Bro’er  Tiger  have  fe  take  bush  an’  Annancy  run  up 
a house-top. 

From  that,  Tiger  live  in  the  wood  until  now,  an’  Annancy 
in  the  house-top. 

Jack  Mantora  me  no  choose  any. 

NOTES. 

Go  a river  fe  wash  ’kin,  go  to  the  river  to  wash  their  skins.  Pronounce  fe 
like  fit  without  the  t. 
in  a de,  into  the. 

A go  drownded,  will  be  drowned. 

fe  take,  short  for  must  have  fe  take,  must  take. 

so  lef’,  and  leave. 

fe  you,  for  you,  yours. 

me  me,  I will.  Annancy  is  fond  of  these  reduplications, 
in  a hole,  in  the  hole. 

make  me  see,  let  me  see.  Make  and  let  are  always  confused, 
frighten,  frightened.  Past  participles  are  seldom  used, 
take,  eat,  leave,  go,  takes,  eats,  leaves,  goes.  This  shortening  is  always 
adopted.  If  a final  s is  used,  it  is  generally  in  the  wrong  place. 

shing  a shing,  sing  a song.  Annancy’s  lisp  will  not  always  be  printed,  but 
in  reading,  it  should  be  put  in  even  when  not  indicated. 

a river  side,  at  the  river’s  side.  The  v is  pronounced  more  like  a b,  and  the 
i in  river  has  the  sound  of  French  u. 

me  a nyam,  I was  eating,  I ate.  Nyam  is  one  of  the  few  African  words 
which  survive  in  Jamaica. 

make  we  hear,  and  let  us  hear  it. 

have  the  same  song  playing;  the  past  participle  again  avoided,  and  its 
place  supplied  by  the  present  participle.  Song  and  tune  are  interchangeable 


IO 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


terms,  and,  even  when  there  is  no  singing,  the  fiddle  speaks  words  to  those 
who  are  privileged  to  hear  ; see  “ Doha”  and  other  stories. 

Biddy  bye,  by  the  bye. 

a Little  Monkey  town,  in  Little  Monkey  town.  So  already  in  this  story 
we  have  had  a standing  for  to,  in,  the,  at,  will,  besides  being  interjected,  as 
in  me  a nyam  and  elsewhere, 
make  we  go,  let  us  go. 
in  a bush,  in  the  bush,  in  the  jungle, 
dancing  an’  playing.  No  mention  of  singing,  observe, 
a wha"  me  tell  you,  etc.  What  did  I tell  you  ? Did  you  not  hear  me  tell 
you  they  were  talking  about  you  up  here?  A good  phrase  to  illustrate  the 
use  of  the  interjected  say.  Call  you  name,  mention  your  name. 

Monkey  them  ; another  common  addition, 
nothing  name  so,  nothing  called  so. 

a bearer.  Bearers  are  important  people  in  the  Jamaica  hills  where  post- 
offices  are  few.  They  often  bear  nothing  but  a letter,  though  some  carry  loads 
too. 

Jack  Mantora,  etc.  All  Annancy  stories  end  with  these  or  similar  words. 
The  Jack  is  a member  of  the  company  to  whom  the  story  is  told,  perhaps  its 
principal  member  ; and  the  narrator  addresses  him,  and  says  : “ I do  not  pick 
you  out,  Jack,  or  any  of  your  companions,  to  be  flogged  as  Tiger  and  Annancy 
were  by  the  monkeys.”  Among  the  African  tribes  stories  we  know  are 
often  told  with  an  object.  The  Negro  is  quick  to  seize  a parable,  and  the 
point  of  a cunningly  constructed  story  directed  at  an  individual  obnoxious 
to  the  reciter  would  not  miss.  So  when  the  stories  were  merely  told  for 
diversion,  it  may  have  been  thought  good  manners  to  say : “ This  story  of 
mine  is  not  aimed  at  any  one.” 


Y ung-Kyum-Pyung. 


1 1 


II.  YUNG-KYUM-PYUNG. 

A King  had  free  daughter,  but  nobody  in  the  world  know 
their  name.  All  the  learned  man  from  all  part  of  the 
eart’  come  to  guess  them  name,  an’  no  one  could’n  guess 
them. 

Brother  Annancy  hear  of  it  an’  say : — “ Me  me  I mus’ 
have  fe  fin’  them  ya-ya  gal  name.  Not  a man  can  do  it 
abbly  no  me.” 

So  one  day  the  King  free  gal  gone  out  to  bathe,  an’ 
Brother  Annancy  make  a pretty  basket,  an’  put  it  in  a the 
house  where  he  knew  they  was  going  to  come  fe  eat  them 
vittle. 

He  leave  it  there,  an’  go  under  the  house  fe  hear  the 
name. 

When  them  come,  them  see  the  basket,  an’  it  was  the 
prettiest  something  they  ever  see  in  their  life. 

Then  the  biggest  one  cry  out : — 

Yung-kyum-pyung  ! What  a pretty  basket ! 

MargYet-Powell-Alone  ! What  a pretty  basket ! 

And  the  next  one  say  : — 

Marg’ret- Powell- Alone  ! What  a pretty  basket ! 

Eggie-Law  ! What  a pretty  basket ! 

And  the  youngest  bahl : — 

Eggie-Law  ! What  a pretty  basket,  eh  ? 

Yung-kyum-pyung  ! What  a pretty  basket,  eh  ? 

Brother  Annancy  hear  it  all  good,  an’  he  glad  so  till  him 
fly  out  a the  house  an’  gone. 

Him  go  an’  make  up  a band  of  music  with  fiddle  an’ 
drum,  an’  give  the  musicians  them  a tune  to  sing  the 
names  to. 


12 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


An’  after  a week  him  come  back. 

When  him  get  where  the  King  could  yerry,  him  give 
out : — “ Play  up  the  music,  play  up  the  music.” 

So  they  play  an’  sing 


Allegro. 


r-ftr 

s 

— 

s 

ft  f* 

M 

1 

^ - II 

v . 

_r  I — r — 

\ M 

m 

n 

.vy:_ 

TC 

11 

Yung-kyum-pyung  Eg-gie-Law  Marg’ret-Powell-A  - lone. 


After  six  times  sing  the  Queen  yerry. 

She  say : — “ Who  is  that  calling  my  daughter  name  ? ” 

An  nancy  tell  them  fe  play  all  the  better. 

Then  the  Queen  massoo  himself  from  up’tairs,  an’  t’row 
down  broke  him  neck. 

Dat  time  de  King  no  yerry,  so  Annancy  harder  to  play 
de  music  still. 

At  last  the  King  yerry,  an’  him  say Who  is  dat, 
calling  me  daughter  name  ? ” 

Annancy  let  them  sing  the  tune  over  and  over : — 


• 

-A — 

*- — P- 

:=t=JI 

Yung-kyum-pyung  Eg-gie-Law  Marg’ret-Powell-A  - lone. 


An’  the  King  t’row  himself  off  a him  t’rone  an’  lie  there 
’tiff  dead. 

Then  Annancy  go  up  an’  take  the  t’rone,  an’  marry  the 
youngest  daughter  an’  a reign. 

Annancy  is  the  wickedest  King  ever  reign.  Sometime 
him  dere,  sometime  him  gone  run  ’pon  him  rope  an  tief 
cow  fe  him  wife. 

Jack  Mantora  me  no  choose  none. 


NOTES. 

Me,  me  I urns’  have,  etc. , I will  find  out  those  girls’  names.  Anybody  else 
would  have  said: — “ Me  mus’  have  fe  find  them  ya  (those  here)  gal  name,” 
but  Annancy  likes  to  add  a few  more  syllables.  His  speech  is  Bungo  talk. 


Yung-Kyum-Pyung. 


13 


The  Jamaican  looks  down  on  the  Bungo  (rhymes  with  Mungo)  who  “no  ’peak 
good  English.” 

abbly  no  me,  except  me. 

go  under  the  house.  It  is  no  absurdity  to  the  narrator’s  mind  to  picture 
the  King’s  house  on  the  pattern  of  his  own.  This  is  a two-roomed  hut,  con- 
sisting of  the  hall  or  dining-room  and  a bedroom.  It  is  floored  with  inch- 
thick  cedar  boards  roughly  cut  and  planed,  so  that  they  never  lie  very  close. 
An  air  space  is  left  underneath,  and  anybody  who  creeps  under  the  hut  can 
hear  all  that  goes  on  above, 
bahl,  bawl. 


hear  it  all  good,  hears  everything  perfectly. 

Play  up  the  music.  He  almost  sings,  like  this  : — 


Play  up  the  mu  - sic. 


all  the  better,  all  the  harder. 


massoo  himself,  lifts  herself  up.  “ Massoo  ” is  an  African  word.  The  hall 
seems  to  have  a sort  of  gallery. 

t’row  down,  etc.,  throws  herself  down  and  breaks  her  neck.  They  always 
say  to  broke. 

Dat  time  de  King.  The  turning  of  th  into  a d or  nearly  a d is  characteristic 
of  negro  speech.  To  avoid  the  tiresomeness  of  dialect-printing,  and  for  another 
reason  to  be  mentioned  by  and  by,  this  is  not  always  indicated.  The  change 
is  introduced  occasionally  to  remind  readers  of  the  right  pronunciation, 
let  them  sing,  makes  them  sing. 


Sometime  him  dare,  sometimes  he  is  there  (at  home),  sometimes  he  goes 
and  runs  upon  his  web  and  steals  cows  for  his  wife.  Other  stories  will  show 
Annancy’s  partiality  for  beef,  or  indeed  anything  eatable, 
tief,  thieve. 


Spiders’  webs  of  any  kind  are  called  Annancy  ropes. 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


14 


III.  KING  DANIEL. 


There  was  two  young  lady  name  Miss  Wenchy  an' 
Miss  Lumpy.  The  King  Daniel  was  courtening  to  Miss 
Wenchy,  an’  the  day  when  they  was  to  get  marry  Miss 
Lumpy  carry  Miss  Wenchy  an’  show  him  a flowers  in 
the  pond.  Miss  Wenchy  go  to  pick  it,  an’  Miss  Lumpy 
shub  him  in  the  pond. 

An’  she  said  : — “ T’ank  God ! nobody  see  me.” 

Now  a Parrot  sat  up  on  a tree,  an’  jes’  as  Miss  Lumpy 
say  “ T’ank  God  ! nobody  see  me  ” the  Parrot  say  : — “ I 
see  you  dough ! ” 

Then  Miss  Lumpy  said  to  the  Parrot : — “ Do,  my 
pretty  Polly,  don’t  you  tell,  an’  I’ll  give  you  a silver 
door  an’  a golden  cage.” 

And  the  Parrot  sing: — 


Afoderato. 


TV ^ 1 >> - sr-w 

nr  & f*  — M H 

f 

■j if f-  n m 

S S + m J t mm 

L 

•J 

No,  No,  I don’t  want  it,  for  the 

3 

l 1L  ^ . .IN  _Jv 

Tit  . W # J J A K iv  w 

I N N,  1 h* 

If 

s if  b • ^ J r s k. 

1 1 1 

V 

T ^ # J ^ N 

* -*  m 

same  you  serve  an  - 0 - ther  one  you  will  serve  me  the  same. 

“ Oh  do,  my  pretty  Polly,  don’t  you  tell,  an’  I’ll  give 
you  a silver  door  an’  a golden  cage.” 

But  the  Parrot  wouldn’  stay,  and  he  fly  from  houses 


to  houses  singing  this  tune: — 

Allegro. 


-fjy  j r r — |- 



#— 

(S 

r- i~ 

•7  S 

-j-  - -0-  -|g- 

±rz  s r 

-V — ■ 

I brought,  I brought  a news  to  the  young  King  Daniel ; Miss 


King  Daniel. 


15 


S-, 

INI'* 

— 1 — 

STi 

1 

Jr  . m ^ 

#•  R 

>*  _ J 

y/TV  m ^ 

# 1 

m r ■ 

s ~ 

L.  1 

-yE  - V 12- 

^ 1 

Lumpy  kill  Miss  Wenchy  loss,  on  becount  of  young  King  Daniel. 


At  last  the  Parrot  got  to  the  table  where  the  young 
King  Daniel  was. 

An’  Miss  Lumpy  was  into  a room  crying.  Many 
pocket-handkerchief  she  got  wet  with  tears.  An’  the 
Parrot  sing  the  same  song : — “ I brought,  I brought  a 
news  to  the  young  King  Daniel ; Miss  Lumpy  kill  Miss 
Wenchy  loss  on  becount  of  young  King  Daniel.” 

Then  Miss  Lumpy  call  out : — “ Oh  drive  away  that 
nasty  bird,  for  Miss  Wenchy  head  hurting  her.” 

But  King  Daniel  wouldn’  have  it  so,  but  said  : — “ I 
heard  my  name  call.  I would  like  to  know  what  is  it.” 

An’  the  Parrot  fly  near  upon  the  King’s  shoulder  an’ 
tell  him  what  become  of  Miss  Wenchy.  An’  they  go 
an’  look  in  the  room  an’  find  her  not. 

An’  pretty  Polly  take  them  to  the  pond  an’  show 
them  where  Miss  Wenchy  is,  an’  she  was  drown. 

Then  the  King  call  Miss  Lumpy  an’  head  him  up 
into  a barrel  an’  fasten  it  up  with  tenpenny  nails,  an' 
carry  him  up  to  a high  hill  an’  let  him  go  down  the 
gully,  an’  he  drop  in  the  gully  pom-galong. 

An’  the  Parrot  laugh  Ha  ! Ha ! Ha ! Ha ! 

Jack  Mantora  me  no  choose  none. 

NOTES. 

I see  you  dough.  The  first  three  words  are  pitched  high  and  the  voice  falls 
as  low  as  possible  on  the  dough  and  dwells  upon  it. 

Do,  my  pretty  Polly,  etc.  I have  heard  this  story  many  times,  and  these 
words  never  vary.  Obviously  it  was  once  a silver  cage  with  a golden  door.1 

I brought ; brought  for  bring,  as  we  had  broke  for  break. 

1 The  well-known  and  lately-current  ballad  of  May  Colvin,  in  which  this 
incident  occurs  (though  it  is  the  false  lover,  not  the  sister,  who  is  murdered), 
has  a cage  of  gold  with  an  ivory  door.  (C.  S.  B. ) 


i6 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


loss.  It  is  doubtful  what  this  word  represents.  It  may  be  loss  or  lost. 
Observe  becount. 

I would  like  to  know  what  is  it,  I should  like  to  know  what  it  is,  what  the 
matter  is.  The  perverse  misplacing  of  these  words  strikes  a newcomer  to  the 
island.  In  questions  they  misplace  them  again  and  say  “ What  it  is?” 
find  her  not.  The  not  has  a heavy  accent, 
gully,  precipice. 

pom-galong  imitates  the  sound  of  the  barrel  as  it  goes  bumping  down.  The 
o’s  have  the  Italian  sound. 


IV.  TOMBY. 

One  day  there  was  a gal,  an’  Annancy  really  want  that 
gal  fe  marry,  but  he  couldn’  catch  him.  An’  Annancy 
ask  a old-witch  man — the  name  of  him  was  Tomby — an’ 
the  old-witch  man  had  a ’mash-up  side,  an’  him  was  the 
only  man  could  gotten  the  gal  for  Annancy.  An’  Annancy 
give  the  old-witch  man  a t’reepence  to  give  the  gal  when 
him  goin’  to  the  market  to  buy  a t’reepence  of  youricky- 
yourk.  An’  the  gal  take  the  t’reepence.  An’  as  she 
walk  along  the  pass  to  market  she  meet  up  one  of  her 
friend  call  Miss  Princess  Johnson  an’  she  said: — “Good 
mornin’  me  love,”  an’  the  answer  : — “ How  you  do,  me 
dear  ? Where  you  a come  from  now  ? ” 

An  Miss  Justina  say: — “Me  a come  from  Tomby  yard, 
an’  see  de  t’reepence  he  give  me  fe  go  buy  youricky- 
yourk.” 

“Never  you  bodder  with  somet’ing  ’tan’  so.  Gi’  ahm 

back  him  fuppence  because  him  goin’  to  turn  trouble  fe 

„ » 

you. 

“How  I manage  fe  gi’  him  the  fuppence?” 

“ When  you  go  to  the  market  come  back  tell  him  you 
no  see  no  youricky-yourk.” 

“ An’  what  you  go  go  buy,  Miss  Princess  ? ” 


*7 


Tom  by. 


“ Me  go  buy  me  little  salt  fish  an’  me  little  hafoo  yam, 
t’reepence  a red  peas  fe  make  me  soup,  quatty  ’kellion, 
gill  a garlic  to  put  with  me  little  nick-snack,  quatty  ripe 
banana,  bit  fe  Gungo  peas,  an’  me  see  if  me  can  get 
quatty  beef  bone.” 

“ Ah  ! me  missis,  Cocoanut  cheap  a market  ya.” 

“Yes,  me  love,  make  me  buy  sixpence.” 

An’  as  they  talking  they  get  to  market.  They  buy 
what  they  want  an’  turn  back,  an’  when  they  reach  up 
Princess  yard  they  tell  goodbye  an’  Justina  call  in  to 
Tomby. 

An’  Justina  bring  back  the  t’reepence  an’  sing: — 


Andante. 


T7 


r-'Tg' 


Me  go  to  market,  me  look, Tomby;  look  oh!  me 


V 

i 0 # 

-J*  1 M ^ 

1 1 J 

h - m \ j 

J • • H-  0 

J , * 

_l 

— 

-J-  "--j-: 

look, Tomby, look  oh  ! me  look, Tomby,  see  no  youricky-yourk ; Me 


~i rr v y~s  v ; 

✓ hL  / • ^ \ .xli  S V-  k.  ^ 

j is  i > c 

_ — il  , — m — - r*  v ^ 

J* 

L <d — ' — 

-C-RI 

'3  +--m- 

went  to  Lingo  Starban, ’cornful  day,  me  went  to  Lingo  Starban, ’cornful 


day,  me  went  to  Lingo  Star  - ban,  ’cornful  day. 

An’  Tomby  very  vex  as,  being  a old  witch,  he  knew 
all  what  the  gal  do  already.  An’  he  answer : — 


Allegretto. 


i 


~c  e=g= 


STS 

:*r±: 


Hm  hm  ! hm  hm  ! me  have  me  mash-up  side  gee  oh  ! a 

STS 


- '-J  A 'S.  V 

; n 

— 1— ^ 

V -P>— & ^ l ~ s ^ 

■■ 

— 

ms: 

• 

O ■■ 

him  make  you  say  Ta-ta  - lin -go  ya  you  bit  oh  ! ’cornful  day. 

E 


i8 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


An’  he  won’t  take  the  t’reepence.  Now  the  rule  is 
that  anybody  take  something  from  old-witch  an’  can’t 
give  it  back,  it  give  him  power  to  catch  him.  An’  so 
comes  it  that  Tomby  catch  Justina  an’  send  for  Mr. 
Annancy  an’  make  him  a present  to  be  a wife.  His 
name  was  Miss  Sinclair,  but  she  becomes  now  Mrs. 
Annancy  Sinclair. 

Jack  Mantora  me  no  choose  none. 

NOTES. 

Old-witch,  a person  of  either  sex  possessed  of  supernatural  powers,  not 
necessarily  old  in  years,  as  will  be  seen  in  other  stories.  The  name  “ white 
witch  ” applied  to  men  is  familiar  to  dwellers  in  the  West  of  England, 
’mash-up,  smashed  up,  wounded,  lacerated, 
youricky-yourk,  a nonsense  word  for  some  kind  of  plaster, 
pass,  path. 

Miss  Princess.  Prince  and  Princess  are  common  names  for  boys  and  girls, 
good  momin’.  This  broad  o is  always  pronounced  ah. 
yard,  a house  with  its  immediate  surroundings. 

Never  you  bodder,  don’t  you  bother  with  something  which  stands  so,  with 
that  sort  of  commission. 

ahm,  frequently  used  for  him. 

fuppence,  with  Italian  u having  a turn  towards  o,  fivepence  in  the  old 
Jamaica  coinage,  equal  to  threepence  English.  Princess  advises  the  return  of 
the  fuppence  because  it  is  going  to  get  Justina  (English  u and  Italian  i)  into 
trouble,  coming  as  it  does  from  an  old-witch.  It  would  not  be  guessed  that 
the  Jamaica  coinage  is  identical  with  that  of  England.  Such  is,  nevertheless, 
the  case  in  spite  of  these  curious  names  : 

3  farthings  i gill. 

2 gills  i quatty  (quarter  of  sixpence,  pronounced  quotty). 

2 quatties  i treppence  or  fuppence  (old  coinage). 

3 quatties  I bit. 

4 quatties  I sixpence  or  tenpence  (old  coinage). 

5 quatties,  bit-o-fuppence. 

7 quatties,  bit-o-tenpence. 

8 quatties  I shilling  or  maccaroni. 
io  quatties,  mac-o-fuppence, 

go  go  buy.  It  is  not  only  Annancy  who  uses  reduplications.  The  close 
English  o is  replaced  in  the  Negro’s  mouth  by  an  Italian  open  o. 

hafoo  (pronounced  hahfoo,  really  afoo,  an  African  word),  a kind  of  yam. 


Tomby. 


l9 


’kellion,  skellion  or  scallion,  a kind  of  onion  which  does  not  bulb. 

Gungo,  Congo.  This  pea  is  not  only  excellent  for  soup,  but  the  growing 
plant  improves  the  soil  by  introducing  nitrogen  into  it. 
ya,  do  you  hear  ? a common  ending  to  any  remark, 
tell  goodbye.  They  tell  howdy  (how  do  you  do  ?)  and  goodbye. 

Lingo  Starban.  This  should  probably  be  Lingo’s  tavern,  Lingo’s  tahvern  ; 
v and  b being  indistinguishable  as  in  Spanish  and  Russian. 

’cornful  day,  a day  of  scorning  or  flouting.  Justina  wishes  Tomby  to  believe 
that  she  tried  everywhere  to  get  some  youricky-yourk,  but  met  only  with  flouts 
and  jeers. 

Hm,  hm,  grumbling. 

a him,  it  is  him,  it  is  that  which  makes  you  say  : — “ Tatalingo,  here’s  your 
bit,”  your  three  quatties.  She  only  had  a treppence  but  the  Negro  is  above 
accuracy  as  the  Emperor  Sigismund  was  above  grammar. 

Tatalingo.  Lingo’s  name  is  now  transferred  to  Tomby.  Italian  vowels  in 
Tata.  In  “ Finger  Quashy  ” we  find  Tatafelo  as  one  of  the  cats’  names, 
make  him  a present,  make  her  (Justina)  a present  to  Annancy. 

Mrs.  Annancy  Sinclair.  They  are  not  particular  in  the  matter  of  surnames. 
A remarried  widow  is  constantly  called  by  the  surname  of  her  first  husband. 


20 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


V.  HOW  MONKEY  MANAGE  ANNANCY. 

One  day  Mr.  Annancy  an’  his  wife  sat  under  a tree  an’ 
don’t  know  that  Mr.  Monkey  was  on  the  tree.  Mr. 
Annancy  say  to  his  wife  : — “You  know  I really  want  little 
fresh.”  The  wife  say  to  Annancy: — “What  kind  a fresh?” 

“ How  you  mean,  me  wife,  fe  ax  me  dat  question  ? Any 
meat  at  all.  Me  wife,  you  know  wha’  we  fe  do.  Make  we 
get  a banana  barrel  an’  lay  it  on  de  bed,  make  him  favour 
one  man,  so  get  white  sheet  an’  yap  him  up  from  head  to 
foot,  an’  sen’  go  call  Bro’er  Cow,  Bro’er  Monkey,  Bro’er 
Sheep,  Bro’er  Goat  an’  Bro’er  Hog.  An’  when  them  come 
we  mus’  put  all  the  strange  friend  them  inside  de  house  an’ 
den  you  fe  stay  inside  de  room  wi’  dem.” 

Now  Bro’er  Annancy  send  fe  all  his  friend,  Sheep,  Goat, 
Hog,  Monkey.  Cow  was  the  minister. 

When  they  come  to  Annancy  yard  they  met  him  was 
crying. 

Parson  Cow  say  : — “ Don’t  cry  so  much,  my  good  friend, 
because  it  is  the  all  a we  road.” 

Annancy  say  :• — “ Ah,  ah ! Bro’er  Cow,  you  no  know  the 
feeling  me  have  fe  me  one  puppa.  Bro’er  Cow,  as  you  is  the 
parson,  take  you  frien’  in,  you  will  see  de  ole  man  ’pon  bed.” 

During  this  time  Mrs.  Annancy  was  inside  the  room. 
The  Reverend  Cow  went  in  to  raise  up  the  sheet. 

Mrs.  Annancy  say: — “No;  me  husban’  say  nobody  fe 
look  on  the  ole  man  face  till  in  the  morning.” 

So  Cow  don’t  rist. 

Mr.  Monkey  who  hear  all  what  Annancy  was  saying,  he 
an’  his  wife  wouldn’  go  in  the  house. 

Mr.  Annancy  say  : — “ Bro’er  Monkey,  go  inside.  Go  see 
the  last  of  the  ole  man.” 


How  Monkey  Manage  Annancy.  21 

Monkey  say : — “ No,  Bro’er  Annancy,  me  sorry  fe  you 
too  much.  If  a go  in  dere  a we  cry  whole  a night.” 

“No,  Bro’er  Monkey,  go  in,  go  keep  them  other  one 
company  for  you  are  me  nearest  frien’.” 

Monkey  never  go. 

He  has  to  left  Monkey,  for  Monkey  was  too  clever  for 
him. 

An’  by  that  time  Mr.  Annancy  hid  his  cutlass  back  of 
his  door  well  sharpen  an’  go  in  the  house  an’  shut  the  door. 
It  was  the  only  door  in  the  whole  house,  so  he  sat  back  of 
the  door  after  lock  it. 

An’  after,  Bro’er  Annancy  ask  Bro’er  Cow  to  say  a word 
of  prayer. 

During  the  praying  Annancy  was  crying. 

Hog  with  an  old  voice  say: — “Keep  up  Mr.  Annancy, 
keep  up  Mr.  Annancy.” 

He  cry  much  the  better. 

The  prayer  was  finish.  Mr.  Annancy  ask  Cow  to  raise 
a hymn. 

The  Cow  commence  with  hundred  a de  hymn,  hundred 
a de  page. 


Lagrimoso. 


—tt— t?  k 

-1  N \ 

_ I 

ifTY  P 1 ^ Pis 

A r_J  J __ 

m - -rjf  0~g 

V 

VT  T m -m 

. - ^ 

Ll 

Megullen  ho  St.  John,  megullen  ho  St. 


- - 

=t=M 

r N 

— 1 -H 

H'W 

John,  me  see  the  last  to-day  ya,  me  see  the  last,  puppagone. 


Bro’er  Annancy  want  fe  kill  Parson  Cow,  begin  with  a 
big  confusion,  say  that  him  don’t  like  that  hymn. 

During  this  time  his  door  was  well  lock,  an’  same  time 
Bro’er  Annancy  draw  his  cutlass  an’  raise  a fight,  say  that 
him  don’t  like  that  hymn. 

An’  the  poor  friend  them  didn’  have  anything  to  fight. 
He  kill  the  whole  of  them. 


22 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


In  the  morning  Monkey  laugh,  say  : — “ Bro’er  Annancy, 
If  me  min  come  in  a you  house  you  would  a do  me  the 
same.” 

Annancy  say  “ No.” 

Him  give  Monkey  a piece  of  the  meat. 

Jack  Mantora  me  no  choose  none. 

NOTES. 

fresh,  fresh  meat.  In  the  country  districts  the  only  meat  to  be  had  as  a rule 
is  ancient  salt  beef  out  of  a tub. 

favour,  look  like.  In  some  parts  of  England  the  word  is  still  used  in  this 
sense. 

met  him  was  crying,  found  him  crying. 

all  a we.  All  of  us  have  to  tread  the  road  of  death. 

one,  own. 

who  hear,  who  had  heard  previously  when  he  was  on  the  tree, 
cutlass.  Every  Negro  carries  one.  It  is  used  for  every  sort  of  purpose,  but 
seldom  murderously  as  here. 

old  voice,  voice  of  simulated  grief, 
much  the  better,  all  the  more, 
hundred  a de,  hundredth, 
me  gullen  ho,  nonsense  words, 
confusion,  quarrel. 

min,  been.  If  I had  come  in  you  would  have  done  the  same  to  me. 


Blackbird  and  IVoss-  IVoss. 


23 


VI.  BLACKBIRD  AND  WOSS-WOSS. 

One  day  there  was  a place  where  they  usual  to  kill 
plenty  of  meat.  An’  Mr.  Blackbird  has  a certain  tree, 
hiding  himself.  An’  every  cow  them  kill  Mr.  Blackbird 
see  how  them  kill  it.  An’  going  into  the  house,  the 
house  don’t  lock  with  no  key  nor  either  open  with  no 
key.  When  they  want  to  go  in  them  use  a word,  say 
“one — two — t’ree — me  no  touch  liver,”  an’  the  door  open 
himself.  An’  when  them  want  to  come  out  of  the  house 
them  use  the  same  words  “one — two — t’ree — me  no  touch 
liver.”  An’  Mr.  Blackbird  tief  them  fe  true,  an’  them 
never  find  it  out. 

An’  one  day  Mr.  Blackbird  write  his  friend  Mr.  Annancy 
to  take  a walk  with  him,  an’  him  will  show  him  where 
he  is  getting  all  these  meat.  An’  when  he  is  going  him 
tell  Mr.  Annancy  all  the  rule,  that  when  he  go  on  the 
tree  he  must  listen,  an’  him  will  hear  what  them  say  to 
open  the  door  both  going  in  an’  coming  out. 

What  Mr.  Annancy  did  ; when  he  see  the  butcher  them 
passing  with  the  meat,  Annancy  was  trembling  an’ 
saying  : — “ Look  a meat, — Look  a meat.” 

“ Bro’er  Annancy  hush  you  mout’,  you  a go  make  dem 
shot  me.” 

When  the  butcher  them  gone,  Mr.  Blackbird  come  down, 
he  an’  Mr.  Annancy,  an’  go  inside  the  house  the  very  same 
as  the  butcher  them  do,  say  “ one — two — t’ree — me  no 
touch  liver.”  As  they  go  into  the  house  Blackbird  tell 
him  that  him  mustn’t  take  no  liver.  An’  Mr.  Annancy 
took  liver  an’  put  in  his  bag.  An’  when  Blackbird  started 
out  with  the  same  word  Mr.  Annancy  left  inside  was  tying 
his  bag. 


24 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


Now  Mr.  Annancy  ready  fe  come  out  of  the  house, 
count  “one — two — t’ree-— me  no  touch  liver,’’  and  by  this 
time  he  has  the  liver  in  his  bag. 

The  door  won’t  open. 

Blackbird  call  him  “ Come  on.” 

He  say  : — “ The  door  won’t  open.” 

Then  he  count  more  than  what  he  was  to  by  get  so 
frighten.  He  say: — “One — two — t’ree — four — five — six — 
seven— eight — nine — ten — me  no  touch  liver.” 

The  door  won’t  open. 

Mr.  Blackbird  say  : — “ Look  in  your  bag,  you  must  be 
have  liver.” 

The  fellow  so  sweet-mout’  say  in  a cross  way  “ No.” 

Blackbird  leave  him. 

When  Blackbird  go  home  he  look  an’  can’t  see  Mr. 
Annancy,  so  him  fly  a bush  an’  get  up  a whole  regiment 
of  soldier.  Who  these  soldier  was,  was  Woss-Woss.  Mr. 
Blackbird  was  the  General,  march  before.  When  them 
reach  to  the  place  they  were  just  in  time,  for  the  butcher 
were  taking  Mr.  Annancy  to  go  an’  tie  him  on  a tree 
to  cut  him  with  hot  iron.  Word  of  command  was  given 
from  Mr.  Blackbird,  an’  by  the  time  the  butcher  them 
come  to  the  door  with  Mr.  Annancy  the  whole  world  of 
Woss-Woss  come  down  on  them. 

They  have  to  let  go  Mr.  Annancy.  Not  one  of  the 
butcher  could  see.  Mr.  Blackbird  soldier  gain  the  battle 
an’  get  ’way  Mr.  Annancy.  They  take  all  the  butcher 
meat  an’  carry  home.  Then  Mr.  Blackbird  take  Mr. 
Annancy  under  his  wing  an’  all  his  soldiers  an’  fly  to  his 
own  country.  From  that  day  Woss-Woss  is  a great  fighter 
until  now,  so  bird  never  do  without  them  to  guard  their  nest. 

Jack  Mantora  me  no  choose  any. 

NOTES. 

Woss-Woss.  The  West  Indian  wasp  hangs  its  paper  nest  to  the  twigs  of 
bushes  and  trees  as  a rule,  though  it  does  not  despise  the  shelter  of  the 


Blackbird  and  JVoss-Woss. 


25 


verandah.  The  wasps  live  in  colonies,  making  many  small  nests  instead  of 
one  big  one.  The  nests  are  shaped  like  the  rose  of  a watering-pot  with  the 
shank  turned  upwards. 

This  story  clearly  owes  its  origin  to  Ali  Baba.  The  conversion  of  Sesame, 
which  meant  nothing  to  the  negro,  into  one-two-three,  which  at  least  means 
something,  is  not  unnatural. 

fe  true,  literally  for  true  is  an  expressive  phrase  conveying  the  idea  of 
intensity.  It  hot  fe  true,  it  is  intensely  hot.  He  tief  fe  true,  he  steals 
terribly.  It  rain  fe  true,  it  is  raining  very  hard.  He  wort’less  fe  true, 
he  is  a regular  scamp.  He  sinnicky  fe  true,  he  is  a horrid  sneak.  His 
ears  hard  fe  true,  his  ears  are  outrageously  hard,  said  of  a boy  who  will 
not  do  as  he  is  told.  He  nyam  fe  true,  he  eats  immensely.  Lazy  fe  true, 
abominably  lazy.  Ugly  fe  true,  exceedingly  ugly.  The  water  cold  fe  true, 
the  water  is  very  cold.  White  yam  burn  fe  true,  the  white  yam  is  sadly 
burnt.  Orange  hear  fe  true,  the  oranges  bear  heavily.  Puss  catch  ratta 
fe  true,  the  cat  catches  any  amount  of  rats.  Him  favour  tiger  fe  true, 
he  looks  for  all  the  world  like  a tiger,  said  of  a man  who  has  a sullen 
expression.  Me  head  hurt  me  fe  true.  I have  a very  bad  headache.  Boot 
bum  me  fe  true,  my  boots  gall  me  dreadfully. 

by  get  so  frighten,  through  fright ; literally,  owing  to  his  getting  so  much 
frightened. 

must  be  have,  must  have. 

sweet-mout’,  sweet-mouthed,  greedy. 


26 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


VII.  THE  THREE  SISTERS. 

There  was  t’ree  sister  living  into  a house,  an’  everybody 
want  them  fe  marry,  an’  them  refuse. 

An’  one  day  a Snake  go  an’  borrow  from  his  neighbour 
long  coat  an’  burn-pan  hat  an’  the  whole  set  out  of 
clothing.  Then  he  dress  himself,  an’  him  tell  his  friends 
that  him  mus’  talk  to  those  young  lady.  An’  what  you 
think  the  fellow  does?  He  get  up  a heap  a men  to 
carry  him  to  the  young  lady  yard.  An’  when  him  got 
there  the  door  was  lock  with  an  iron  bar.  An’  when 
he  come  he  say  : — “ Please  to  open  the  door,  there  is  a 
stranger  coming  in.”  An’  he  sing  like  this : — 


Andante. 


•J  # i > ■ . _ . 

. _ __  __S 

_ 

^ N 

T/Tv  a 1 " PS-J 

1 ITNZH  n ^ ^ ^ 0 

r 1 i lx  i 

— m - * 

L*  

My  el-des’  sis-ter,  will  you  o-pen  the  door?  My  el-des’ 


— i^H P 

IN  Is  N 

” m . L 

— 

sis-ter,  will  you  open  the  door  oh?  Fair  an’  gande-low  steel. 


An’  the  eldest  one  was  going  to  open  the  door.  An’ 
the  last  one,  who  was  a old-witch,  say  to  her  sister : — 
‘‘  Don’t  open  the  door,”  an’  she  sing : — 


A ndante. 


o ..  - 

V W 

- ^ y 

— N 

its  a L 1 N ^ 

^ ' 

i I r Lr  j 

* 

^ ^ m 

d 

My  door  is  bar — with  a scotran  bar,  My  door  is 


:r  j f i Is  k k N s 

\.JL  " m m |S_JV  1 

^ *>  v v 

L M 

J ! i 

- J j r N 

! L_ 

- 

Lgj — U 

bar — with  a scotran  bar  oh,  Fair  an’  gandelow  steel. 


The  Three  Sisters. 


2 7 


Then  the  Snake  ask  again  to  the  same  tune  : — 

My  second  sister  will  you  open  the  door? 

My  second  sister  will  you  open  the  door  oh  ? 

Fair  an’  gandelow  steel. 

An’  the  youngest,  which  was  old-witch,  sing  again  : — 

My  door  is  bar  with  an  iron  bar, 

My  door  is  bar  with  an  iron  bar  oh, 

Fair  an’  gandelow  steel. 

An’  the  Snake  turn  to  a Devil,  an’  the  t’ree  sister  come 
an’  push  on  the  door  to  keep  it  from  open. 

An’  the  Devil  ask  a third  time : — 

My  youngest  sister  will  you  open  the  door? 

My  youngest  sister  will  you  open  the  door  oh  ? 

Fair  an’  gandelow  steel. 

But  the  last  sister  won’t  have  it  so,  an’  she  said  with 
a very  wrath  : — 


, ~ r 

-VB- 4= — 1 ' • • m — Fd 1 — *— 

'r.  - '-v  ? 

The  Devil  ro  - guer  than  a woman-kind,  The  Devil  ro- 


- - N V S v 

r= — n 

tl  # * 

guer  than  a woman- 

rind  oh, 

§.  • 

Fair  an’  gandelow 

:s ' 

steel. 

An’  the  Devil  get  into  a great  temper  an’  say : — 


What  is  ro  - guer  than  a woman-kind?  What  is  ro- 


/ h ! _ — 

1 , 

N \ s . 

j 

4 

} 0 

* *'  * 

- , 

L-s> 

guer  than  a woman -kind  oh  ? Fair  an’  gandelow  steel. 


Then  the  Devil  fly  from  the  step  straight  into  hell 
an  have  chain  round  his  waist  until  now. 

Jack  Mantora  me  no  choose  none. 


28 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


NOTES. 

Snake  is  pronounced  with  an  indefinite  short  vowel  between  the  s and  n, 
senake. 

burn-pan  hat,  the  tall  hat  of  civilized  towns.  The  pan  is  the  usual  cylin- 
drical tin  vessel  used  for  cooking.  When  blackened  by  fire  it  is  a burn-pan 
or  burnt  pan.  It  is  pronounced  like  French  bonne. 

Gandelow,  scotran.  The  meaning  of  these  words  is  lost. 

roguer.  This  word  is  doubtful.  Sometimes  it  sounds  like  rowgard,  at 
others  like  rowgod.  It  may  mean  “more  roguish.”  The  boy  who  gave  me 
this  story  often  quotes  this  line  from  a hymn  : 

“ To  break  the  bonds  of  cantling  sin.” 

One  day  I asked  him  to  point  it  out  in  his  hymnbook.  It  was  conquering. 
He  can  say  it  perfectly  well,  but  he  still  goes  on  with  cantling.  It  is  not 
surprising,  therefore,  that  we  cannot  recover  words  passed  from  mouth  to 
mouth  for  generations. 

womankind.  Again  it  is  doubtful  whether  this  is  a single  word  or  two 
words.  The  article  would  fix  it  as  the  latter  in  pure  English,  but  in  negro 
speech  it  goes  for  nothing. 

old-witch,  though  she  was  a young  girl : see  notes  to  No.  IV.  (Tomby). 


William  Tell. 


29 


VIII.  WILLIAM  TELL. 

Once  there  was  a man  who  name  William  Tell,  an’  him 
have  a lots  of  cow.  An’  in  the  yard  there  was  a tree,  an’ 
the  tree  no  man  can  fall  it.  Any  animal  at  all  go  under 
that  tree  it  kill  them,  an’  the  name  of  the  tree  is  Huyg. 

An’  William  Tell  wanted  the  tree  to  cut  down. 

An’  him  offer  a cow  to  any  man  that  kill  the  Huyg. 
They  shall  get  the  cow. 

An’  first  of  all  Tacoma  went  to  cut  down  the  tree,  an’ 
him  could n’  bear  the  itch,  I mean  ’cratch  of  the  tree. 

An’  William  Tell  made  a law  that  any  man  come  to 
cut  the  tree  they  must  not  ’cratch  their  ’kin  or  else  they 
would  lose  the  cow. 

An’  Mr.  Tacoma  were  very  sorry,  an’  he  was  to  leave 
the  cow  just  to  save  his  life. 

An’  that  great  man  Mr.  Annancy  heard  about  the  cow 
an’  him  got  a very  sharp  axe.  An’  when  Mr.  Annancy 
come,  William  Tell  show  him  the  cow — Annancy  glad 
when  he  see  the  cow — an’  after  he  show  Mr.  Annancy 
the  tree. 

Then  Mr.  Annancy  say  : — “ Ho,  me  good  massa,  don’t 
you  fret  of  the  tree.  If  one  sing  don’t  send  ’way  the 
tree  another  one  must  send  him  ’way.” 

An’  the  first  sing  was  : — 


Allegro. 


rf 

T"5 

j 

VV 

ffh  \ _ 

& 

r 

- 

1- 

J 1 ! ol 

Big  chip,  fly  ! little  chip,  fly ! 


He  repeat  the  word  over  an’  over,  but  the  tree  don’t 
fall  yet. 


30 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


So  him  take  up  another  sing  again  : — 

Allegro. 


An’  Mr.  Annancy  never  cease  till  him  cut  down  the 
tree  an’  receive  his  reward. 

NOTES. 

Huyg  for  Hag,  as  they  say  buyg  for  bag.  The  spelling  is  awkward  but  it 
seems  the  only  convenient  one  to  adopt.  The  sound  will  be  best  understood 
from  the  second  example.  Say  buy  and  put  a hard  g after  it.  The  Huyg 
seems  to  combine  the  qualities  of  the  Upas  and  Cow-itch  (Mucuns  pruriens). 
The  last,  a common  Jamaica  weed,  looks  like  a scarlet  runner.  It  bears  pods 
covered  with  a pretty  velvet  of  hairs  which  ‘ ‘ scratch  ” or  irritate  the  skin, 
sing.  Further  on  there  is  a collection  of  these  sings, 
show  me  your  motion,  let  me  see  you  begin  to  topple. 


Brother  Annancy  and  Brother  Death.  31 


IX.  BROTHER  ANNANCY  AND  BROTHER 
DEATH. 

One  day  Brother  Annancy  sen’  gal  Annancy  fe  go  a 
Brother  Deat’  yard  fe  go  beg  fire. 

When  the  gal  go,  him  go  meet  Brother  Deat’  dis  a eat 
fe  him  breakfas’  enough  eggs.  Brother  Deat’  give  gal 
Annancy  one.  Gal  Annancy  take  the  egg  an’,  after  eat 
done,  put  the  shell  ’pon  him  finger. 

Brother  Annancy  wait  an’  wait  but  can’t  get  the  fire, 
till  at  last  he  see  the  gal  a come. 

When  him  see  the  gal  with  the  egg  shell  ’pon  him  finger, 
him  run  an’  bit  off  the  gal  finger  slap  to  the  hand.  Him 
take  ’way  the  fire,  out  it,  an’  go  back  to  Deat’  say  : — 
“ Bro’er  Deat’,  de  fire  out.” 

Brother  Deat’  give  him  fire  an’  one  egg,  tell  him  fe 
go  home. 

“ Say,  Bro’er  Deat’,  I goin’  to  give  you  me  daughter  fe 
marry  to.” 

So  Annancy  do  marry  off  Deat’  an’  him  daughter  the 
same  day.  So  him  lef’  them  gone  for  a week,  then  come 
back  again  fe  come  see  him  son-in-law. 

When  him  come  him  say  : — “ Bro’er  Deat’,  me  son,  me 
hungry.” 

Brother  Deat’  no  ’peak. 

So  Annancy  begin  fe  talk  to  himself : “ Bro’er  Deat’  say 
me  fe  go  make  up  fire,  but  no  mo  so  me  no  yerry.” 

After  five  minutes  him  call  out : — “ Bro’er  Deat’,  me 
make  up  de  fire.” 

Deat’  no  ’peak. 

“ Bro’er  Deat’  say  me  fe  wash  de  pot,  but  no  mo  so  me 
no  yerry. 


32 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


When  the  pot  wash  done,  him  call  out : — “ Pot  wash.” 

Beat’  no  ’peak. 

“ Bro’er  Beat’  say  me  fe  to  put  him  on,  but  no  mo  so 
me  no  yerry.” 

Soon  him  say  : — “ Bro’er  Beat’,  where  de  vittle  ? ” 

Beat’  no  ’peak. 

“ Him  say  me  fe  look  somewhe  de  me  see  enough  yam, 
me  fe  peel  dem  put  dem  a fire,  but  no  mo  so  me  no  yerry.” 

Annan cy  cook  all  Beat’  food. 

When  it  boil,  him  take  it  off.  Him  say  “ Bro’er  Beat’, 
him  boil.” 

Beat’  no  ’peak. 

“ Bro’er  Beat’  say  me  fe  share,  but  no  mo  so  me  no 
yerry.” 

Annancy  eat  fe  him  share,  then  turn  back  say : — “ Bro’er 
Beat’,  you  no  come  come  eat  ? ” 

Beat’  no  ’peak. 

“ Bro’er  Beat’  say  him  no  want  none,  but  no  mo  so  me 
no  yerry.” 

So  Annancy  eat  off  all  the  food  him  one. 

Then  Beat’  get  vex  in  a him  heart,  and  him  run  into  the 
kitchen. 

“ Bro’er  Annancy  a whe  you  mean  fe  do  me,  say  a come 
you  come  fe  kill  me  ? ” 

So  Beat’  catch  Annancy  an’  say  : — “ Me  no  a go  let 
you  go  again,  no  use,  no  use.” 

Then,  after,  Beat’  carry  Annancy  in  a him  house  an’ 
leave  him,  gone  to  get  his  lance  to  kill  him. 

So,  after  Annancy  sit  a time  an’  about  to  go  away,  him 
say : — “ Bro’er  Beat’  say  me  fe  go  take  piece  a meat,  but 
no  mo  so  me  no  yerry.” 

When  Annancy  go  to  the  meat  cask,  him  see  the  cask 
full  with  meat.  Him  take  out  two  big  piece  of  meat. 
Then  he  see  fe  him  daughter  hand  with  the  missing  finger. 
Him  jump  out  of  the  house  an’  bawl  out : — “ Bro’er  Beat’, 
you  b’ute,  you  b’ute,  you  kill  me  daughter.” 


Brother  Annancy  and  Brother  Death.  33 


Deat’  catch  him  again  an’  was  going  to  kill  him,  but  the 
feller  get  ’way,  run  home  a fe  him  yard. 

Brother  Deat’  follow  him  when  him  go  home. 

Annancy  take  all  him  children  an’  go  up  a house-top,  go 
hang  up  on  the  rafter.  Brother  Deat’  come  in  a de  house, 
see  them  up  a de  house-top. 

Annancy  say  to  his  family — there  was  two  boy  an’  the 
mumma — “ Bear  up  ! If  you  drop  de  man  a dirty  de  a go 
nyam  you.” 

Here  come  one  of  the  boy  say: — “ Puppa,  me  han’ 
tired.” 

Annancy  say  : — “ Bear  up  ! ” 

The  boy  cry  out  fe  de  better. 

Annancy  say  : — “ Drop,  you  b’ute  ! No  see  you  dada 
a dirty  de  ? ” 

Him  drop. 

Deat’  take  him  and  put  him  aside. 

Five  minutes  the  other  one  say  : — “ Puppa,  me  han’ 
tired.” 

Annancy  say  again  : — “Drop,  you  b’ute!  No  see  you 
dada  a dirty  de  ? ” 

Him  drop. 

Deat’  take  him  an’  put  him  aside. 

Soon  the  wife  get  tired,  say  : — “ Me  husban’,  me  han’ 
tired.” 

Annancy  say  : — “ Bear  up,  me  good  wife  ! ” 

When  she  cry  she  couldn’  bear  no  more,  Annancy  bawl 
again  : — “ Drop  you  b’ute  ! No  see  you  husban’  a dirty 
de?” 

She  drop. 

Deat’  take  her. 

At  last  Annancy  get  tired.  Das  de  man,  Bro’er  Deat’ 
been  want.  Annancy  was  so  smart,  no  want  fe  Deat’  catch 
him,  so  he  say “ Bro’er  Deat’,  I goin’  to  drop,  an’  bein’ 
me  so  fat,  if  you  no  want  me  fat  fe  waste,  go  and  fetch 
somet’ing  fe  catch  me.” 

c 


34 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


“ What  me  can  take  fe  catch  you  ? ” 

“ Go  in  a room  you  will  see  a barrel  of  flour  an’  you  fe 
take  it  so  fe  me  drop  in  de.” 

Deat’  never  know  that  this  flour  was  temper  lime. 

Deat’  bring  the  barrel  an’,  just  as  he  fixing  it  up  under 
where  Annancy  hanging,  Annancy  drop  on  Deat’  head 
PUM,  an  jam  him  head  in  a the  temper  lime  an’  blind  him. 
So  he  an’  all  him  family  get  ’way. 

Jack  Mantora  me  no  choose  any. 

NOTES. 

dis  a eat,  just  as  he  had  eaten. 

no  mo  so  me  no  yerry,  I must  have  failed  to  hear.  See  page  3. 

Deat’  no  ’peak.  Death  won’t  speak.  The  comedy  is  well  sustained. 
Annancy  goes  through  the  various  stages  of  preparation  for  breakfast, 
pretending  that  he  is  carrying  out  orders  from  Death  which  he  fails  to  hear, 
put  him  on,  put  the  pot  on  the  fire. 

somewhe  de,  somewhere  there.  The  e’s  are  like  French  e,  and  d6  is 
said  with  a strong  accent  and  made  very  short, 
enough  yam,  plenty  of  yams, 
say  a come  you  come,  say  do  you  come, 
me  no  a go  etc.,  I am  not  going  to  let  you  go  again, 
no  use,  no  mistake  about  it  this  time, 
bawl.  Remember  to  pronounce  it  bahl. 
b’ute,  brute,  pronounced  byute  like  the  island  Bute, 
a fe  him  yard,  to  his  yard. 

a dirty  de,  etc.,  on  the  ground  there  will  eat  you. 
fe  de  better,  all  the  more. 

Das,  that’s. 

temper  lime,  tempered  lime  originally  no  doubt,  but  now  meaning  quick 
lime.  Temper,  I am  told,  means  cross.  And  in  further  explanation  my 
informant  adds  : “ You  can’t  tingle  (finger)  temper  lime  as  you  have  a mind  ; it 
cut  up  your  hand.” 

pum  with  the  shortest  possible  vowel  represents  the  thud  of  Annancy’s  fall 
upon  Death’s  head. 

The  Kitchen  is  outside  the  house,  often  at  a considerable  distance  from  it. 


Mr.  Bluebeard. 


35 


X.  MR.  BLUEBEARD. 

There  was  a man  named  Mr.  Bluebeard.  He  got  his 
wife  in  his  house  an’  he  general  catch  people  an’  lock  up 
into  a room,  an’  he  never  let  him  wife  see  that  room. 

One  day  he  went  out  to  a dinner  an’  forgot  his  key  on 
the  door.  An’  his  wife  open  the  door  an’  find  many  dead 
people  in  the  room.  Those  that  were  not  dead  said  : — 
“ Thanky,  Missis;  Thanky,  Missis.” 

An’  as  soon  as  the  live  ones  get  away,  an’  she  was  to 
lock  the  door,  the  key  drop  in  blood.  She  take  it  up  an’ 
wash  it  an’  put  it  in  the  lock.  It  drop  back  into  the  blood. 

An’  Mr.  Bluebeard  was  a old-witch  an’  know  what  was 
going  on  at  home.  An’  as  he  sat  at  dinner,  he  called  out 
to  get  his  horse  ready  at  once.  An’  they  said  to  him  : — 
“ Do,  Mr.  Bluebeard,  have  something  to  eat  before 
you  go.” 

“ No  ! get  my  horse  ready.” 

So  they  bring  it  to  him.  Now,  he  doesn’t  ride  a four- 
footed  beast,  he  ride  a t’ree-foot  horse. 

An’  he  get  on  his  horse  an’  start  off  itty-itty-hap,  itty- 
itty-hap,  until  he  get  home. 

Now,  Mrs.  Bluebeard  two  brother  was  a hunter-man  in 
the  wrood.  One  of  them  was  old-witch,  an’  he  said  : — 
“ Brother,  brother,  something  home  wrong  with  me  sister.” 

“ Get  ’way  you  little  foolish  fellah,”  said  the  biggest 
one. 

But  the  other  say  again  : — “ Brother,  brother,  something 
wrong  at  home.  Just  get  me  a white  cup  and  a white 
saucer,  and  fill  it  with  water,  and  put  it  in  the  sun,  an’  you 
will  soon  see  what  do  the  water.” 

Directly  the  water  turn  blood. 


36  Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 

An’  the  eldest  said  “ Brother,  it  is  truth,  make 
we  go.” 

An’  Mrs.  Bluebeard  was  afraid,  because  he  knew  Mr. 
Bluebeard  was  coming  fe  kill  him.  An’  he  was  calling 
continually  to  the  cook,  Miss  Anne 


Moderate. 


— & , : V:  N . 

—1 — — 

vs  A 

1 1 0 * . d 

& 

p m 

ft 

WF  W 1 , W 

g r . 

0 0 9 | ' 

2 j 32= r—?— 

* 

r 

V— 

f 

f V— 

Sister  Anne,  Sister  Anne,  Ah  ! you  see  an -y  one  is  coining? 


y \ s • p tr N ' 

V S : 

/ k H J J N J 

0 m.  G rn 

1^  M 

v J m * J m m m 

J # # 1 

* — & 

— / / / / 

f 

\ 

J 

1 

Sis-  ter  Anne,  Sis-ter  Anne,  Ah  ! you  see  an  - y one  is  coming? 


An’  Sister  Anne  answer  : — 


An’  as  she  sing  done  they  hear  Mr.  Bluebeard  coming, 
itty-itty-hap,  itty-itty-hap. 

Him  jump  straight  off  a him  t’ree-foot  beast  an’  go  in  a 
the  house,  and  catch  Mrs.  Bluebeard  by  one  of  him  plait- 
hair  an’  hold  him  by  it,  an’  said  : — “ This  is  the  last  day 
of  you.” 

An’  Mrs.  Bluebeard  said  : — “ Do,  Mr.  Bluebeard,  allow 
me  to  say  my  last  prayer.” 

But  Mr.  Bluebeard  still  hold  him  by  the  hair  while  he 
sing  : — 

Sister  Anne,  Sister  Anne,  Ah  ! you  see  any  one  is  coming  ? 

Sister  Anne,  Sister  Anne,  Ah  ! you  see  any  one  is  coming  ? 


Mr.  Bluebeard. 


37 


An’  Sister  Anne  answer  this  time  : — 


ft 


. J d 


=t*=3*= 


Oh — yes ! I see  someone  is  com-ing, 


3 

qs  i-  1* 

— | te: 

r ^ 

E_ J J * ■ » 

& 

And  the  dust  that  makes  the  grass  so  green. 


Then  Mr.  Bluebeard  took  his  sword  was  to  cut  off  him 
neck,  an’  his  two  brother  appear,  an’  the  eldest  one  going 
to  shot  after  Mr.  Bluebeard,  an’  he  was  afraid  an’  begin 
to  run  away.  But  the  young  one  wasn’t  going  to  let  him 
go  so,  an’  him  shot  PUM  and  kill  him  ’tiff  dead. 

Jack  Mantora  me  no  choose  none. 


NOTES. 

three-foot,  three-legged.1 * * *  Hand  is  used  for  arm  in  the  same  way. 
itty-itty-hap,  imitating  the  halting  gait  of  the  three-legged  horse.  The 
voice  rises  on  hap  which  is  said  with  a sharp  quick  accent.1 

fe  kill  him,  to  kill  her.  The  use  of  masculine  for  feminine  pronouns  is 
bewildering  at  first. 


1 “ The  ‘ three-foot  horse 5 is  believed  to  be  a kind  of  duppy  with  three  legs, 

hence  its  name ; and  is  able  to  gallop  faster  than  any  other  horse.  It  goes 

about  in  moonlight  nights,  and  if  it  meet  any  person  it  blows  upon  him  and 

kills  him.  It  will  never  attack  you  in  the  dark.  It  cannot  hurt  you  on  a tree.” 

Folklore  of  the  Negroes  of  Jamaica,  in  Folklore,  Vol.  XV.,  p.  91.  (C.S.B.). 


38 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


XI.  ANNANCY,  PUSS,  AND  RATTA. 

ONE  day  Annancy  an’  Puss  make  a dance,  an’  invite  Ratta 
to  the  ball.  Annancy  was  the  fiddler.  The  first  figure 
what  him  play,  the  tune  say : — 


Presto. 


—J  o 

\ 

fs  [s  > M - 

— i — 

1 

A r i 1 

^ 

1 1 . 

lYn  a 

m w W w m 

9 

9 1 1 

1*  9 

— 

— * — 

1 

9 

Yingdeyingdeying,  Yingdeyingdeying,  take  care  you  go  talk  oh. 


, 

w 

• J 

va  > > 

♦ » .V.  > -v:  1 

min’you  tattler  tongue  yingdeying,  min’you  tattler  tongue yingdeying, 


,s  ,s  » ,N  . 


min’  you  tat  - tier  tongue  ying  de  ying. 


The  second  tune  he  say  : — 


Allegro  Vivace. 


tt=^^ 

* -m 

* ->  s 

— p— 

=i? 

Lk  V--I 

Ban-dy- wichy  wich,  Ban-dy-wichy  wich,  Ban-dy-wichy  wich, 


/ _V  I]V  1 | 

frh  P , 1 

J J 

“1 

m 

1 

^ f m m s 

Timber  hang  an’ 

V * m 

fall  la  la, 

_^L  <3  m 

fall  la  la, 

J-  » 

fall  la 

Then,  as  the  Ratta  dance,  the  high  figure  whd  him 
make,  him  slide  in  the  floor  an’  him  trousies  pop.  Then 
the  shame  he  shame,  he  run  into  a hole,  an’  him  make 
Ratta  live  into  a hole  up  to  to-day  day. 

Jack  Mantora  me  no  choose  none. 


Annancy , Puss,  and  Ratta. 


39 


NOTES. 

This  story  should  be  rattled  off  as  quick  as  possible. 

Ratta,  rat  or  rats. 

Ting  de  ying  imitates  the  “ rubbing  ” of  the  fiddle,  as  they  call  it. 
take  care  you  go  talk,  mind  you  don’t  talk,  mind  your  tattling  tongue, 
figure  wh6  him  make,  caper  that  he  cuts, 
trousies  pop,  trousers  burst. 


XII.  TOAD  AND  DONKEY. 

One  day  a King  made  a race  and  have  Toad  and  Donkey 
to  be  the  racer.  An’  Toad  tell  Donkey  that  him  must 
win  the  race,  an’  Donkey  mad  when  him  yerry  so.  And 
the  race  was  twenty  mile. 

An’  Donkey  say  : — “ How  can  you  run  me  ? I have 
long  tail  an’  long  ear  an’  a very  tall  foot  too,  an’  you  a 
little  bit  a Toad.  Let  me  measure  foot  an’  see  which  one 
longer.” 

An’  Toad  say  to  Donkey: — “You  no  mind  that  man, 
but  I must  get  the  race.” 

An’  Donkey  get  very  vex  about  it. 

An’  Donkey  say  to  the  King  : — “ I ready  now  to  start 
the  race.” 

An’  the  King  made  a law  that  Donkey  is  to  bawl  at 
every  miles  that  he  might  know  where  he  got. 

Now  that  little  smart  fellah  Toad  says  to  the  King 
that  he  doesn’t  fix  up  his  business  yet,  an’  will  he  grant 
him  a little  time. 

An’  the  King  grant  him  a day,  an’  say  to  the  two  of 
them  : — “ Come  again  to-morrow.” 

An’  Donkey  wasn’t  agree,  for  he  know  that  Toad  is  a 
very  trickified  thing. 


40 


Jamaican  Sojtg  and  Story. 


But  the  King  wouldn’  hear,  an’  say  : — “ No,  to- 
morrow.” 

Now  Toad  have  twenty  picny.  An’  while  Donkey  is 
sleeping,  Toad  take  the  twenty  picny  them  along  with 
him  on  the  race-ground,  an’  to  every  milepost  Toad  leave 
one  of  his  picny  an’  tell  them  that  they  must  listen  for 
Mr.  Donkey  when  he  is  coming.  “ An’  when  you  yerry 
that  fellah  Mr.  Donkey  bawl,  you  must  bawl  too.”  An’ 
Toad  hide  one  of  his  picny  behind  every  milepost  until 
him  end  the  twenty  mile. 

So  the  race  begin. 

Donkey  was  so  glad  in  a him  heart  that  he  was  going 
to  beat  Toad  that  he  say  to  himself : — “ Tche  ! That 
little  bit  a fellah  Toad  can’t  manage  me,  so  I must  have 
plenty  of  time  to  eat  some  grass.” 

So  him  stand  by  the  way,  eat  grass  and  poke  him  head 
through  the  fence  where  he  see  some  potato-slip,  an’  try 
a taste  of  Gungo  peas.  An’  he  take  more  than  an  hour 
fe  catch  up  the  first  mile-post,  an’  as  him  get  him  bawl  : — 

Moderate. 


^ f*  * — m 

if 

\ v 1 i F 1 

r\2 ! ! 

A 

7 1 - 1 

• J * 

Ha!  Ha!  Ha ! me  more  than  Toad. 


An’  there  comes  the  first  picny  call  out : — 


Jin  - ko  - ro  - ro,  Jin-kok-kok-kok. 


An’  Donkey  quite  surprise,  an’  say  : — “ Tche  ! How  him 
manage  to  be  before  me  ? ” 

An’  he  think  : — “ Me  delay  too  long  with  that  grass, 
I must  quicker  next  mile.” 

An’  him  set  off  with  a better  speed  an’  only  stop  a 
minute  for  a drink  of  water.  An’  as  him  get  to  the  next 
post  him  bawl : — 


Toad  and  Donkey. 


4i 


Ha ! met 


An’  there  come  the  second  picny  call  out : — 


Jin  - ko  - ro  - ro,  Jin-kok-kok-kok. 


An’  Donkey  say: — “ Lah  ! Toad  travel  fe  true.  Never 
mind,  we  will  chance  it  again.” 

So  him  ’tart,  an’  when  him  reach  the  third  mile-post  him 
bawl : — 


1 • 

rs  . -x  . . , 

J p.  p S - 2 

Ah  : u 

• 9 * * * 1 

Ha!  Ha!  Ha!  me  more  than  Toad. 


An’  the  third  picny  behind  the  post  say : — 


. _i 1 __ 

1 1 1 

^ 

Jin  - ko  - ro  - ro, 


-w- 

Jin-kok-kok-kok. 


Jackass  get  vex  when  he  hear  Toad  answer  him,  an’  he 
go  fe  ’mash  Toad,  an’  Toad  being  a little  man  hide  himself 
in  a grass. 

Then  Donkey  say  : — “ Hi ! fellah  gone  ahead  ; make  I 
see  if  I can  catch  up  the  next  mile-post  before  him.”  An’ 
he  take  him  tail  an’  touch  it  like  a horsewhip  an’  begin  fe 
gallop. 

An’  him  get  to  the  fourth  mile-post  an’  bawl : — 


r~n~f 


Ha!  Ha!  Ha  ! me  more  than  Toad. 


42 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


An’  there  comes  the  fourth  picny  answer  him  : — 


Jin  - ko  - ro  - ro,  T in-kok-kok-kok. 


When  him  yerry,  him  ’tand  up  same  place  an’  trimble, 
say:— “My  goodness  King!  a whe  me  a go  do?  Make 
me  gallop  so  I knock  off  all  me  hoof  self  upon  the  hard 
hard  dirty  because  I must  beat  the  race.” 

An’  he  gallop  so  fast  than  he  ever  do  before,  until  when 
he  get  to  the  fifth  mile-post  he  was  really  tired  an’  out  of 
breath. 

But  he  just  have  enough  to  bawl : — 


\J  , * • 

V. 

* 

h r*  0 H*  m h* 

^ S 1 

i ! 1 

. C7  • .0  -mm 

Ha  ! Ha  ! Ha  ! me  more  than  Toad. 


When  he  hear : — 


Jin  - ko  - ro  - ro,  Jin-kok-kok-kok. 


This  time  he  really  mad,  an’  race  on  harder  than  ever. 
But  always  the  same  story.  Each  mile-post  he  catch  him 
bawl: — “Ha!  Ha!  Ha!  me  more  than  Toad.”  An’ 
always  come  answer  : — ■“  Jinkororo,  Jinkokkokkok.” 

An’  Donkey  begin  to  get  sad  in  his  mind  for  he  see  that 
he  lost  the  race.  So  through  Toad  smartness  Donkey  can 
never  be  racer  again. 

Jack  Mantora  me  no  choose  any. 


NOTES. 

tall  foot,  long  leg.  A tall  bridge  is  a long  one,  not  one  that  stands  high 
above  the  river. 


Toad  and  Donkey. 


43 


wasn’t  agree,  didn’t  agree.  Auxiliaries  are  a snare. 

picny.  This  is  the  almost  universal  form  of  picaninny  in  Jamaica,  varied 
occasionally  by  picany. 

Tche!  the  Pshaw!  of  books  and  the  Tush!  of  the  Psalms.  There  is  a 
world  of  contempt  in  this  ejaculation,  which  is  accompanied  by  an  upward 
jerk  of  the  chin.  The  vowel  is  that  of  French  le. 

potato-slip.  The  sweet  potato  ( Ipomcea  Batatas ) is  cultivated  by  slips  or 
cuttings.  Our  kind  of  potato  is  called  “ Irish  potato.” 

Jinkororo,  etc.  This  is  a capital  imitation  of  the  Toad’s  croaking  chuckle. 
The  second  bar  should  be  made  as  out  of  tune  as  possible  and  the  kok  is  on 
the  lowest  note  of  the  voice.  It  is  the  repeated  k’s  that  make  the  croak  so 
life-like. 

take  him  tail.  They  are  fond  of  this  expression.  Other  examples  are  : — 
“The  horse  take  him  mout’  fe  ’cratch  him  foot,”  the  horse  scratches  his  leg  with 
his  mouth.  “ Me  take  me  owny  yeye  an’  see  it,”  I saw  it  with  my  own  eyes, 
a wh6  me  a go  do  ? What  am  I going  to  do,  what  shall  I do  ? 
dirty,  ground. 


XIII.  SNAKE  THE  POSTMAN. 

One  day  Annancy  ask  Snake  to  be  his  postman. 

Snake  ask  him  how  much  he  is  going  to  pay  him. 
An’  Annancy  tell  Snake  that  he  know  he  is  a man 
love  blood,  an’  when  him  come  in  the  night  he  will  give 
him  a bite  off  his  head. 

An’  Snake  did  agree. 

An’  the  first  night  he  give  Annancy  a bite  in  his  head, 
an’  Annancy  feel  it  very  much. 

An’  the  second  night  when  Snake  is  to  come  back 
Annancy  invite  his  friend  Mr.  Rabbit.  An’  Annancy 
usual  to  sleep  out  in  the  hall.  An’  that  night,  when 
his  friend  Mr.  Rabbit  did  come,  he  move  an’  go  in  the 
room  an’  make  a very  high  bed.  An’  his  friend  Mr. 
Rabbit  didn’  know  what  Annancy  mean  to  do. 

So  Annancy  put  him  out  in  the  hall,  an’  tell  him 


44 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


that  one  of  his  cousin  is  sleeping  in  here  too,  so  he  will 
come  in  later  on ; an’  when  him  hear  him  call  he  must 
just  get  up  an’  open  the  door  an’  see  who  it  is. 

An’  when  Annancy  out  lamp  Rabbit  think  it  very 
hard,  an’  say  to  himself : — “ Bro’er  Annancy  up  to  some 
trick.” 

An’  Rabbit  wake  up  an’  begun  to  dig  a hole,  an’  him 
dig  a hole  until  him  get  outside  the  door  an’  find  him- 
self back  to  his  yard. 

When  Snake  come  in  the  night  to  get  the  other  bite 
from  Annancy  him  call  Annancy. 

Annancy  wouldn’  give  answer  as  him  being  put  Rabbit 
outside  in  the  hall,  an’  Snake  continually  calling  until 
Annancy  give  answer. 

An’  when  him  give  answer  he  begin  to  wake  Rabbit 
an’  thought  Rabbit  was  inside  the  house.  He  didn’  want 
was  to  receive  his  bite,  an’  he  begun  to  call  Rabbit 
“ Cousin  Yabbit,”  that  Rabbit  may  glad  an’  give  him 
answer.  When  him  couldn’  hear,  him  say  “ Godfather 
Yabbit.”  An’  him  call  again  “Bro’er  Yabbit,”  an’  him 
couldn’  hear  him.  An’  he  call  again  “ Puppa,  Puppa  ! ” an’ 
he  couldn’  hear. 

An’  him  light  the  lamp  an’  come  out  the  hall  an’  begin 
to  s’arch  for  Rabbit.  An’  when  him  look,  him  see  Rabbit 
dig  a heap  of  dirt  an’  come  out. 

An’  Annancy  beguns  to  cry  inside  the  house  an 
wouldn’  open  the  door.  An’  he  begin  to  complain  to 
Snake  that  the  first  bite  him  gi’  him  he  ’mash  up  the 
whole  a him  head. 

An’  Annancy  ’tudy  a ’cheme,  catch  up  a black  pot 
an’  turn  it  down  over  him  head. 

An’  as  he  put  out  him  head  Snake  bite  the  pot, 
t’ought  it’s  Annancy  him  catch.  An  the  whole  of 
Snake  mouth  was  in  sore.  An’  when  he  get  home  he 
send  back  to  Annancy  that  he  sick  an’  won’t  manage 
to  come  back  another  night. 


Snake  the  Postman. 


45 


An’  Annancy  was  very  glad  an’  send  go  tell  him  that 
himself  is  in  bed. 

An’  when  the  bearer  start  for  home  him  sing  this 
song : — 


A ndante. 


Somebody  waiting  for  Sa  - li-zon,  Takeupyourletteran’go. 


An’  from  that  day  Snake  broke  friend  with  Annancy. 
Jack  Mantora  me  no  choose  none. 

NOTES. 

The  house  would  have  two  rooms,  first  the  hall  and  then  the  inner  room  or 
bedroom.  From  Rabbit’s  burrowing  operations  it  appears  to  have  no  floor. 
This  was  a common  condition  in  the  old  times,  but  now  it  gets  rarer  and  rarer. 
Only  Coolie  (East  Indian)  houses  are  unfloored. 

him  being  put,  he  had  put. 

’tudy  a ’cheme,  studies  a scheme.  It  is  more  usual  'tudy  a plan.  This 
common,  vulgar  song  is  evidently  of  late  origin  and  probably  does  not  really 
belong  to  the  story. 


46 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


XIV.  DOBA. 


One  day  Puss  make  a ball  an’  invite  the  whole  world  of 
Ratta. 

All  the  Ratta  dress  in  long  coat  an’  silk  dress.  There 
was  t’ousand  of  them  women,  an’  men.  When  them  come 
they  bring  a little  boy  an’  the  mother  with  a young  baby. 

When  all  the  Ratta  settle,  the  door  was  shut,  an’  the 
Puss  them  have  them  junka  ’tick  secretly  in  a them  trousies’ 
foot.  They  made  a bargain  between  themselves  that,  when 
the  Ratta  deep  in  dancing,  Doba  must  out  the  lamp,  then 
the  licking-match  commence. 

When  the  music  begin,  it  sweet  Ratta  so  that  they  dance 
till  their  white  shirt-bosom  was  wet. 


The  fiddler  was  Dandy  Jimmy  Flint. 
An’  this  is  what  the  fiddle  say : — 

Allegro. 


Dobo,  Doba,  Do  - ba  no  make  de  little  one  get  ’way 


Ball  - an  - to  - ny  Bap ! twee  twee,  Ball -an  - to  - ny  Bap  ! twee  twee. 


The  boy  Ratta  take  notice  of  what  the  fiddle  say. 

Him  go  to  him  dada  an’  whisper: — “ Puppa,  you  no 
yerry  what  the  fiddle  say  ? ” 


5=^ 


is: 


Doba,  Doba, 


Do 


- ba  no  make  de 


little  one  get  ’way 


Ball  - an  - to  - ny  Bap  ! twee  twee,  Ball -an  - to  - ny  Bap  ! twee  twee. 


Doha. 


47 


The  father  say “ Get  ’way,  Sir,  you  little  fellah  you  ! 
It  the  worst  fe  carry  any  little  boy  out  fe  met.  Go,  off, 
Sir,  you  lying  fellah  ! ” 

During  this  time  the  boy  hear  what  the  music  say  in 
truth,  went  an’  dug  a hole  fe  him  an’  him  mumma. 

When  Ratta  in  hot  dancing  the  gate-man  Puss,  Mr. 
Doba,  out  the  lamp.  Then  the  junka  ’tick  fly  round  an’ 
all  the  Ratta  was  kill.  Blood  was  cover  the  floor  an’  all 
the  Puss  take  their  share. 

Only  boy  Ratta  an’  his  mumma  an’  the  young  baby,  get 
way. 

If  the  puppa  did  take  what  the  boy  say  him  wouldn’ 
dead. 

Puss  ball  was  flourish  with  meat. 

If  boy  Ratta  an’  his  mumma  didn’  get  ’way  we  wouldn’ 
have  no  Ratta  in  dis  ya-ya-world  again. 

Jack  Man  tor  a me  no  choose  any. 

NOTES. 

Ratta,  rats. 

Puss  them.  These  words  are  closely  joined  together. 

junta  ’tick,  short  sticks. 

trousies’  foot,  the  legs  of  their  trousers.  The  Negroes  are  expert  in  the  art 
of  hiding  things  about  their  person. 

Fighting  with  sticks  is  called  a licking-match. 

sweet  (a  verb),  pleased,  delighted. 

In  these  stories  the  fiddle  is  often  made  to  sing  words  which  some  have  the 
gift  of  hearing. 

Bap  ! is  the  knock  of  the  stick,  or  “ lick  of  the  stick  ” as  they  say. 

twee  twee,  the  squeak  of  the  rat. 

no  make,  don’t  let. 

it  the  worst  fe  carry,  etc.  It  is  very  troublesome  to  take  a little  boy  out 
to  a meeting.  Met,  dance,  spree,  picnic  are  convertible  terms. 

Carry  is  seldom  used  as  in  English.  They  say  : — Carry  the  mule  a pastor 
(to  the  pasture).  When  a man  carries  you  over  a river  on  his  back  he 
“crosses  you  over.” 

Doba,  long  o as  in  Dover. 


48 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


Blood  was  cover,  etc.,  the  floor  was  covered  with  blood. 

Dis  ya-ya,  the  vulgar  English  “this  here.”  Ya-ya  is  said  very  quickly. 
It  does  not  come  into  common  speech  but  is  reserved  for  Annancy  stories  and 
is  generally  found  only  in  Annancy’s  mouth. 


XV.  DRY-BONE. 

One  day  Rabbit  invite  Guinea-pig  to  his  yard. 

An’  when  Guinea-pig  go,  Rabbit  ask  Guinea-pig  to  go  an 
hunting. 

An’  Rabbit  meet  up  Dry-bone. 

An’  when  him  meet  up  Dry-bone,  him  t’row  down  his  gun 
an’  him  call  to  Guinea-pig  an’  tell  him  : — “ I meet  with  a 
luck.” 

An’  Guinea-pig  tell  Rabbit : — “ I won’t  carry  none  of  the 
Dry-bone,  but  you  must  make  me  carry  the  birds  what  we 
kill.” 

Rabbit  wasn’t  agree  to  let  him  carry  the  birds,  but 
Guinea-pig  coax  him  until  Rabbit  consent  an’  they  fix  up 
the  bargain  : Rabbit  was  to  carry  Dry-bone,  an’  Guinea-pig 
was  to  carry  the  birds. 

So  they  put  Dry-bone  into  the  bag,  an’  Rabbit  ask 
Guinea-pig  to  help  him  up. 

An’  Guinea-pig  help  him  up  an’  pick  up  the  gun  an’ 
carry  it. 

An’  they  start  home  to  their  yard. 

An’  when  Rabbit  got  half  part  the  road  he  found  the 
load  getting  heavier  an’  heavier,  an’  him  ask  Guinea-pig  to 
take  it  for  a while. 

Guinea-pig  tell  him  that  he  made  no  promise  was  to 
help  him  with  Dry-bone. 


Dry-Bone. 


49 


Rabbit  walk  on  till  the  load  get  so  heavy  him  begin  to 
cry,  say  that  him  going  to  t’row  down  Dry-bone. 

An’  Dry-bone  fasten  on  his  head  an’  begin  to  talk. 

He  say  to  Rabbit: — “You  take  me  up  you  take  up 
trouble.” 

An’  that  time  Guinea-pig  was  laughing  after  Rabbit. 

Just  then  that  cravin’  fellah  Mr.  Annancy  was  passing 
an’  see  Rabbit  with  his  load.  He  thought  that  it  was 
something  good,  an’  he  ask  Rabbit  that  he  will  help  him 
carry  it. 

An’  Rabbit  was  very  glad  to  get  relief  of  his  trouble. 

So  Annancy  take  Dry-bone  from  Rabbit  an’  put  him  on 
his  own  head. 

An’  when  Annancy  ’tart,  he  t’ought  that  Rabbit  was 
coming. 

An’  Rabbit  turn  back  an’  hide  a bush  an’  leave  the 
trouble  to  Annancy. 

When  Annancy  get  home  to  his  yard  him  find  that  it 
was  Dry-bone,  an’  it  vex  him  in  a him  heart. 

An’  Annancy  want  to  leave  Dry-bone  an’  go  away. 

An’  Dry-bone  find  out  what  Annancy  mean  to  do. 

Annancy  have  a cock  in  the  yard. 

Dry-bone  tell  him  that  him  must  watch  Annancy,  keep 
him  a yard,  an’  he  will  pay  him. 

An’  the  Cock  ask  Dry-bone  : — “ What  is  your  name  ? ” 

An  Dry-bone  say: — “’Tis  Mr.  Winkler.” 

So  Dry-bone  live  in  Annancy  yard. 

An’  one  day  Annancy  ask  him  if  him  don’t  want  to 
warm  sun. 

Dry-bone  say  : — “ Yes.” 

An’  Annancy  tell  him  that  to-morrow  he  will  put  him 
out  a door. 

Annancy  went  away  an’  make  a bargain  with  Fowl-hawk, 
that  him  have  a man  name  of  Mr.  Dry-bone,  him  must 
come  to-morrow  an’  take  him  up  an’  carry  him  an’  drop  him 
in  the  deepest  part  of  the  wood. 

D 


50  Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 

An’  so  Fowl-hawk  did  do. 

When  the  Cock  see  Fowl-hawk  take  up  Mr.  Winkler  him 
sing  out : — 


Andantino. 


\J  n — ~ — ' K 

-r> — x — 

/ 

__  r\  r\  w. 

fr 

■i  o 1 1 1 3 3 

. . m m - 

X 

1 ‘ 

V 

7 TV  * * . 

m 

*7 1 * 9 


Mister  Wink  - ler,  Winkler  comegivememepay. 

An’  Annancy  look  up  a ’ky  an’  sing : — 


A ndantino. 


ry—p 

: rn~  r~ X y — i 

M * 

^Z7  rs  i 

TJ 

Jl  \ u K 

* a 

Q 

S 

.m. 

-ii — 

-m-m-  -m 

' 1 

Carry  him  go ’long,  An  - nan-cysay  so,  Carry  him  go ’long, 


q 

t-SfitZ- 

S .. 

V;  ^ S 

V-P- 

4 

— 

s — 

3= 

fe-fe-Nqv — N 

-A= — J— ^ — J 

4? 

9 

9 



-m 

— 1 — — i- m — 

mm  -m  -m- 

Me’llpay  fe  cock,  Carry  him  go ’long,  An  - nan-cy  say  so, 


"7s  - 

s , 

Pw  1 M 

1 

r (\  o 

qv  : jST  r 

s L_  1 

| 

m-m  -m-  -m- 

- # * 

i 

Carryhimgo ’long,  Me’llpay  fe  cock,  Carry  him  go ’long. 

Jack  Mantora  me  no  choose  any. 


NOTES. 

help  him  up,  to  get  the  load  on  to  his  head.  In  this  story  and  some  others 
the  load  once  taken  up  cannot  be  put  down.  It  sticks  to  the  head  of  the 
bearer  and,  until  it  reaches  its  destination,  can  only  be  transferred  to  another 
head. 

cravin’,  craving,  greedy,  often  sounds  like  craven.  A man  who  is  cravin’ 
is  generally  cubbich,  covetous.  This  has  lost  its  original  meaning  of  desiring 
possession  of  other  people’s  things  and  is  used  only  in  the  sense  of  close-fisted. 
A cravin’  man  wants  to  get  hold  of  what  others  have  got,  a cubbich  (ends 
with  the  sound  of  rich)  one  will  not  part  with  what  he  has. 
laughing  after,  laughing  at. 

him  must  watch.  The  Cock  must  watch  Annancy  and  not  let  him  leave 
the  yard,  Dry-bone  is  helpless,  and  requires  attention. 

to  warm  sun,  to  warm  himself  in  the  sun.  So  they  have : — “ Puss  warm 
fire,”  the  cat  warms  herself  by  the  fire, 
a ’ky,  in  the  sky. 


Dry-Bone. 


5i 


He’ll  pay  fe  cock,  I will  pay  the  Cock’s  wages  which  Dry-bone  agreed  to 
give.  We  pay  a person  for  a thing,  but  the  Negro  pays  for  the  person  as  well. 

Walk,  talk,  warm,  hawk,  all  have  the  vowel  ah.  This  story  refers  to  the 
time  of  slavery.  It  is  almost  indisputable  that  in  certain  cases,  when  a slave 
was  in  a weak  state  owing  to  incurable  illness  or  old  age,  he  was  carried  out 
and  left  to  die.  To  his  pitiful  remonstrance,  “ Massa  me  no  dead  yet,”  the 
overseer  made  no  reply,  but  went  on  with  his  directions  to  the  bearers,  “ Carry 
him  go  along.”  This  kind  of  barbarity  was  not  practised  by  owners  living  in 
Jamaica.  By  them  the  slaves  were  well  treated  and  such  a thing  would  have 
been  impossible.  But  when  the  masters  went  away  they  left  the  control  in  the 
hands  of  overseers,  men  of  low  caste  who  had  neither  scruples  nor  conscience. 


XVI.  ANNANCY  AND  THE  OLD  LADY’S  FIELD. 

One  day  there  was  a old  lady  work  a very  nice  field  on  a 
rock,  an’  an  old-witch  boy  is  the  watchman. 

An’  one  day  Annancy  heard  about  the  old-witch  boy, 
an’  Annancy  send  an’  invite  him  to  his  yard.  An  when 
the  old-witch  boy  come,  Annancy  ask  him  what  his  name. 
An’  he  says  to  Annancy  that  his  name  is  John-John  Fe- 
We-Hall. 

An’  the  boy  ask  Annancy  why  him  ask  him  like  that. 

An’  Annancy  say “ Don’t  be  afraid  my  frien’,  I very 
love  you  ; that’s  why  I ask  whe  you  name.” 

An’  by  this  time  the  old  lady  didn’t  know  that  the  old- 
witch  boy  gone  to  Annancy  yard. 

An’  Annancy  have  a son  is  a very  clever  tief,  call 
Tacoma. 

An’  Annancy  made  a bargain  that,  when  him  see  John- 
John  Fe-We-Hall  come,  he  must  walk  to  the  back  door  an’ 
come  out,  an’  go  to  the  old  lady  ground  an’  destroy  the 
provision. 

An’  when  Tacoma  come  home,  Annancy  leave  John-John 
out  the  hall,  an’  tell  him  that  he  is  going  to  get  some 
breakfast  for  him. 


52 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


Now  the  old  lady  make  a law  that,  if  the  watchman  eat 
any  of  his, provision,  it  going  to  make  him  sick  in  a way 
that  he  will  find  out  if  it  is  the  same  watchman  tiefing 
him.1 

An’  being  the  boy  is  old-witch,  he  know  that  the  food 
Annancy  is  getting  ready  is  from  the  old  lady  field.  So 
when  Annancy  bring  the  breakfast  he  won’t  eat  it. 

Annancy  tell  him  that  he  must  eat  the  food,  he  mustn’t 
be  afraid. 

An’  the  boy  say  : — “ No.” 

An’  Annancy  send  an’  tell  the  old  lady  that  the  man  is 
here  clever  more  than  him. 

An’  when  the  old  lady  receive  the  message  from 
Annancy,  he  sent  to  the  ground  to  tell  the  old-witch  boy 
that  he  must  look  out  for  Mr.  Annancy,  for  him  receive  a 
chanice  from  Annancy. 

An’  this  time  the  old  lady  didn’t  know  that  the  watch- 
man is  at  Annancy  yard. 

An’  the  old-witch  boy  is  a fluter,  an’  when  the  old  lady 
want  to  dance  it’s  the  same  boy  playing  for  the  old  lady. 
An’  the  old  lady  have  a tune  which  he  is  dancing  with. 
An’  Annancy  ask  the  boy  to  play  the  tune  when  he  is 
going  home,  an’  Annancy  know  if  the  tune  play  the  old 
lady  will  dance  till  she  kill  herself. 

When  the  boy  going  home,  him  took  up  his  sing  with 
the  flute : — 


Giocoso. 


7^-K- 

5=fS 

-F-F-? 

V:  'S| o 0 J 

-T — N- 

y h- 

* 0 -1  j 

— *_j 

* *- 

Old  lady  you  too  love  dance,  torn  dem,  Old  lady  yon  too  love  dance,  turn 


3 

rrb — -ta— >s 

:.\1  N.  v.^: 

1 ^ 

• m 

=r  s 

- 

:i 

« J 

±J  d 1#—^  -J- 

— 1 

dem,  Turn  dem  make  dem  lay,  turn  dem,  Turn  dem  make  dem  lay,  turn  dem. 


1This  is  evidently  a reminiscence  of  the  “medicine”  (Nyanja,  chiwindo ) 
used  in  Africa  to  protect  gardens.  Sometimes  it  kills  the  thief,  sometimes 
makes  him  ill.  (A.  W.) 


Annancy  and  the  Old  Lady's  Field. 


53 


An’  when  the  old  lady  hear  the  sing  she  beguns  to  dance 
an’  wheel  until  she  tumble  off  the  rock  an’  dead. 

An’  Annancy  becomes  the  master  of  the  field  until  now. 
Jack  Mantora  me  no  choose  none. 


NOTES. 

A rock  would  be  a bad  place  for  a field.  Her  house  was  on  a rock  probably, 
and  her  field  or  provision-ground  elsewhere.  For  Provision-grounds  and 
their  contents  see  Digging- Sings. 

old- witch.  Join  these  words  as  closely  as  possible  wherever  they  occur. 

Fe-We-Hall.  Very  humble  houses  are  called  So-and-so  Castle  and  So- 
and-so  Hall.  Fe  we,  for  us,  our.  He  was  John  of  our  Hall. 

destroy,  take  away,  so  that  they  are  lost  to  the  owner  and  destroyed  as  far 
as  she  is  concerned. 

out  the  hall,  out  in  the  hall. 

breakfast,  the  principal  repast  of  the  day  at  twelve  o’clock. 

the  man  is  here.  They  delight  in  this  enigmatic  language.  Annancy 
speaks  of  himself.  He  sends  word  that  the  man  here  (himself)  is  more  clever 
than  her  (the  old  lady).  Straightforwardness  is  a quality  which  the  Negro 
absolutely  lacks.  If  you  try  to  get  at  the  truth  of  any  story  he  brings,  and 
cross-question  him  upon  it,  he  will  shuffle  and  change  it  little  by  little,  and 
you  cannot  fix  him  to  any  point.  Language  with  him  is  truly,  as  the  cynic 
said,  the  art  of  disguising  thought. 

chanice,  more  usually  chalice,  challenge. 

Boys  constantly  carry  their  musical  instruments  about  with  them.  The  Flute, 
a cheap  kind  of  fife,  and  the  Concertina  are  the  favourites.  They  play  as  they 
walk  along  the  road. 

The  tune,  which  is  quick,  is  sung  over  and  over  and  gets  uproariously  and 
deliriously  merry ; gasps  on  an  inward  breath,  which  there  is  no  time  to  take 
properly,  doing  duty  for  some  of  the  notes. 

The  words  are  fragments  of  a song  referring  to  fowls  and  eggs.  It  runs  : — 
Mother  Bonner  me  hen  a lay,  turn  dem, 

Them  a lay  t’ree  time  a day,  turn  dem, 

Turn  dem  make  dem  lay,  turn  dem. 


54 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


XVII.  MAN-CROW.1 

ONCE  there  was  a bird  in  the  wood  name  Man-crow, 
an’  the  world  was  in  darkness  because  of  that  bird. 

So  the  King  offer  thousands  of  pounds  to  kill  him 
to  make  the  world  in  light  again. 

An’  the  King  have  t’ree  daughter,  an’  he  promise  that, 
if  anyone  kill  Man-crow,  he  will  make  them  a very  rich 
man  an’  give  one  of  his  daughter  to  marry. 

So  t’ousands  of  soldiers  go  in  the  wood  to  kill  Man- 
crow.  An’  they  found  him  on  one  of  the  tallest  trees 
in  the  woods.  An’  no  one  could  kill  him,  an’  they 
come  home  back. 

So  there  was  a little  yawzy  fellah  call  Soliday. 

An’  he  say  to  his  grandmother : — “ Gran’mother  I am 
very  poor.  I am  going  in  the  wood  to  see  if  I can 
kill  Man-crow. 

An’  the  grandmother  answer : — “ Tche,  boy,  you  better 
go  sleep  a fireside  than  you  go  to  the  wood  fe  go 
dead.” 

“ Gran’mother,  I goin’  to  town  fe  buy  six  bow  an’ 
arrow.” 

So  he  went  to  Kingston  an’  bought  them. 

An’  when  him  return  home  he  ask  his  grandmother 
to  get  six  Johnny-cake  roast,  an’  he  put  it  in  his  namsack, 
an’  he  travel  in  the  wood. 

He  s’arch  until  he  find  the  spot  a place  where  Man- 
crow  is,  an’  he  see  Man-crow  to  the  highest  part  of  the 
tree. 

1 Cf.  the  story  of  “Rombas”  in  Duff  Macdonald’s  Africana  II.,  which 
would  seem  to  have  reached  Africa  through  the  Portuguese.  Rombas  kills  the 
whale  which  has  swallowed  the  girl,  and  removes  the  tongue.  (A.  W.) 


Man- Crow. 


55 


An’  he  call  to  him  with  this  song:- 

Andante. 


iHHi 


=E 


■0  s -s~ 


0*0 


i 


Good  marnin’ to  you,  Man-crow,  Good  marnin’  toyou.  Man- 

s' 


0 0 -0~0  ~0Z 


crow,  Goodmarnin’ toyou,  Man-crow,  How  are  you  this  marnin’? 

An’  the  bird  answer : — 


f— 

zzt5zjgzfr-_N=NrN 

3S 

— 1>  x - |v  i>  > n 

0 0 0TZ0  0 0 

0 0 0 0 .0  0 1. 

Good  marnin’ toyou,  So-li  - day,  Good  marnin’to  you,  So-li- 


=E 


M-V  1/ 

day,  Goodmarnin’ toyou,  Soli -day. 


How  are  you  this  marnin’  ? 


An’  Soliday  shot  with  his  arrow  at  Man-crow  an’  two 
of  his  feather  come  out. 

An’  Man-crow  come  down  to  the  second  bough. 

An’  Soliday  sing  again  : — - 


BE  r - E 


X-N-rN- 


0-0  0 0—0 


Good  marnin’ toyou,  Man-crow,  Good  marnin’ to  you,  Man  ■ 


i 


±z 


-F-F- 


EE 


i 


00 


crow,  Good  marnin’ toyou,  Man-crow,  How  are  you  this  marnin’? 

An’  Man-crow  answer  as  before  : — 


Good  marnin’ toyou,  So-li  - day,  Good  marnin’ toyou,  So  - li 

w 


Et2=Et2=t£ 


:*=EEi 


0 * 


zE 


day,  Goodmarnin’toyou, Soli  - day, 


How  are  you  this  marnin’  ? 


56  Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 

An’  he  fire  after  Man-crow  an’  two  more  feather  fly- 
out. 

An’  so  the  singing  an’  shotting  go  on. 

At  every  song  Man-crow  come  down  one  branch,  an' 
Soliday  fire  an  arrow  an’  knock  out  two  feather,  till  five 
arrows  gone. 

So  Brother  Annancy  was  on  a tree  watching  Soliday 
what  he  is  doing. 

An’  the  song  sing  for  the  sixth  time,  an’  Man-crow 
jump  down  one  more  branch. 

An’  Soliday  put  his  last  arrow  in  the  bow  an’  took 
good  aim  an’  shot  after  Man-crow. 

So  he  killed  him  an’  he  drop  off  the  tree. 

An’  Soliday  go  an’  pick  up  the  bird  an’  take  out  the 
golden  tongue  an’  the  golden  teeth,  an’  shove  it  in  a 
him  pocket,  an’  Soliday  come  straight  home  to  his 
grandmother. 

An’  Annancy  come  off  the  tree  an’  take  up  the  bird, 
put  ahm  a him  shoulder,  cut  through  bush  until  he  get 
to  the  King  gate,  an’  he  rakkle  at  the  gate. 

They  ask  : — “ Who  come  ? ” 

He  say: — “Me,  Mr.  Annancy.” 

An’  they  say  : — “ Come  in.” 

An’  the  King  said  : — “ What  you  want  ? ” 

“ I am  the  man  that  kill  Man-crow.” 

An’  they  take  him  in  an’  marry  him  to  one  of  the 
King  daughter  an’  make  a very  big  table  for  him  an' 
his  family. 

They  put  him  in  the  middle  of  the  table,  but  he  refuse 
from  sit  there.  He  sit  to  the  doorway  to  look  when 
Soliday  coming.  (The  King  then  do  know  that  that 
fellah  up  to  trick.)  An’  directly  Annancy  see  Soliday 
was  coming,  he  stop  eating,  ask  excuse,  “ I will  soon  be 
back.”  An’  at  that  same  time  he  gone  outside  into  the 
kitchen. 

An’  Soliday  knock  at  the  gate. 


Man-Crow. 


57 


An’  someone  answer  him  an’  ask:  — “What  you  want?  ” 

“ I am  the  boy  that  kill  Man-crow.” 

An’  they  said: — “No,  impossible!  Mr.  Annancy  kill 
Man-crow.” 

An’  he  take  out  the  golden  tongue  an’  teeth  an’  show 
it  to  the  King,  an’  ask  the  question  : — “ How  can  a bird 
live  without  teeth  an’  tongue  ? ” 

So  they  look  in  the  bird  mouth  an’  found  it  was  true. 

An’  they  call  Annancy. 

An’  Annancy  give  answer : — “ I will  soon  be  there.” 

An’  they  call  him  again. 

An’  he  shut  the  kitchen  door  an’  said  : — “ Me  no  feel 
well.” 

All  this  time  Brother  Annancy  shame,  take  him  own 
time  fe  make  hole  in  the  shingle  get  ’way. 

They  call  him  again,  they  no  yerry  him,  an’  they 
shove  the  kitchen  door. 

Annancy  lost  in  the  shingle  up  to  to-day. 

An’  the  King  marry  Soliday  to  his  daughter  an’  make 
him  to  be  one  of  the  richest  man  in  the  world. 

Jack  Mantora  me  no  choose  none. 

NOTES. 

Yawzy.  Yaws  is  a disease  very  prevalent  among  the  Negroes.  It  causes 
ulcers  to  form  on  the  soles  of  the  feet.  In  old  slave  days  every  estate  had  its 
yaws-house  for  the  accommodation  of  the  sufferers.  This  complaint  does  not 
attack  the  Whites. 

six  bow  an’  arrow,  a bow  and  six  arrows,  we  suppose. 

Johnny-cake,  journey  cake  made  of  flour  and  water  fried  in  lard. 

spot  a place,  spot  of  place,  exact  place. 

ask  excuse,  asks  to  be  excused.  Pronounce  the  s like  2. 

shame,  etc.,  was  ashamed  and  was  quietly  making  a hole  in  the  shingle  roof 
so  as  to  get  away. 


58 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


XVIII.  SAYLAN. 

There  was  a man  have  two  daughter.  One  of  the 
daughter  belongs  to  the  wife  an’  one  belongs  to  the  man. 
An’  the  wife  no  love  for  the  man  daughter,  so  they  drive  her 
away. 

An’  she  get  a sitivation  at  ten  shillings  a week,  an’  the 
work  is  to  look  after  two  horses  an’  to  cut  dry  grass  for 
them. 

An’  every  night  she  put  two  bundles  of  dry  grass  in  the 
’table. 

An’  the  mother  was  very  grudgeful  of  the  sitivation  that 
she  got. 

An’  one  night  she  carry  her  own  daughter  to  the  pastur’ 
an’  they  cut  two  bundles  of  green  grass.  An’  they  go 
secretly  to  the  horse  manger  an’  take  out  the  dry  grass  an’ 
put  the  green  grass  in  its  place. 

So  the  horse  eat  it,  an’  in  the  morning  they  dead. 

An’  the  master  of  that  horse  is  a sailor. 

The  sailor  took  the  gal  who  caring  the  horse  to  hang  her. 

An’  when  he  get  to  the  ’pot  a place  to  hang  her  he  take 
this  song : — 


A ndante. 


come  to  town  to  see  you  hang,  hang,  you  mus’ be  hang. 


An’  the  gal  cry  to  her  sister  an’  brother  an’  lover,  an’ 
they  give  her  answer : — 


Say/an. 


59 


Allegretto. 


--Q—b-fi  ,v — n — ~ 

Nr-f^-K 

-f — M 

=1 ^ 

1 

-d — H3- 

S 

r- r 1H 

tr  --  -a— 

* 

— * m 

0 

J 

_ 

Sister, youbringmesomesilverPNo,  my  child,  I bring  you  none. 


— fr-ft-A  -is- 

V 

— 

! -v 

/.  u17 

w. 1 ^ zr^  zv 

J P 

i > H 

pjy  tr  p 0 

w ~ 

zrr. 

# Lz 

T%  1 t n 

• J 

' — » 

—0 

Brother,  yon  bring  me  some  gold?  No,  my  child,  I bring  yon  none. 


r~&  t - v fx-p-qc 

-nH — 

x -i  . . 

-] 1 

rs  p 

TiV)  V n m . a 3 — p- 

0 tt  m J 

rp s 

r VM?  ‘ S 

m 0 

Lover, you bringmesome  sil-ver?  Yes,  my  dear,  Ibringyou  some. 


3 

i E5 

■"  J-.'M — x 

1 P K- 

—0 — 

— / 

- -0  • ' — 0- 

J *Z*— J- 

— 1 — 1 N 

Lover,  you  bring  me  some  gold?  Yes,  my  dear,  Ibringyou  some. 


^Tir-te- 

M 

— 1 n 

G_Z_LL 

zp 

j - 0 ~ 1 - 

^ j d 

• r r~1 

A 

F * ■ :Z  '* 

— J— L 

4 

# * 

come  to  town  to  see  you  save,  save  you  mus'  he  saved. 


An’  the  lover  bring  a buggy  an’  carry  her  off  an’  save 
her  life  at  last. 

An’  the  mumma  say  : — “You  never  better,  tuffa.” 

Jack  Man  tor  a me  no  choose  any. 

NOTES. 

This  is  quite  an  unusual  form  of  story,  but  appears  to  be  of  some  antiquity  in 
my  district,  where  it  ranks  as  an  Annancy  story.1 

caring',  taking  care  of.  This  is  so  convenient  a word  that  it  is  used  by 
everybody. 

You  never  better,  you  will  never  be  good  for  anything. 

tuffa,  with  Italian  u imitates  spitting,  a sign  of  contempt. 

1 Cf.  The  Maid  Freed  from  the  Gallows , F.  J.  Child,  Ballads , vol.  ii., 
p.  346.  (C.  S.  B.) 


6o 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


XIX.  ANNANCY  AND  SCREECH-OWL. 

ONE  day  Annancy  made  a dance,  an’  ask  ’creech-owl 
to  be  the  musician.  An’  Annancy  send  an’  invite  all 
his  friend. 

An’  when  they  come  Ratta  was  in  long  coat  an’  Guinea- 
pig  too,  for  Ratta  tell  Guineapig  they  must  wear  long  coat 
an’  they  will  get  all  the  gal  to  dance  with. 

An’  ’creech-owl  is  a great  player,  but  the  only  danger  he 
cannot  sing  in  the  day. 

An’  ’creech-owl  has  a Cock  in  his  yard,  an’  he  sent 
an’  ask  Annancy  if  he  can  bring  a friend  along  with 
him. 

An’  Annancy  send  an’  tell  him  that  ’tis  no  objectin  to 
bring  the  friend,  an’  Annancy  fell  ’creech-owl  that  he  will 
get  a lots  of  drink. 

At  that  time  Annancy  didn’t  know  the  friend  as  yet. 

So,  as  he  being  hate  ’creech-owl,  he  didn’t  wish  to  see  no 
friend  of  his. 

So  when  the  friend  come  the  friend  was  a Cock. 

An’  Annancy  was  very  sorry  for  he  knew  that  the  Cock 
going  to  crow  when  day  clean,  an’  ’creech-owl  going  to 
know  when  day  is  cleaning  an’  go  away. 

An’  Annancy  got  some  corn,  an’  get  a pint  of  ’trong  rum, 
an’  t’row  the  rum  in  the  corn,  an’  let  the  corn  soak  in  the 
rum. 

An’  when  the  Cock  call  out  to  ’creech-owl  that  he  is 
hungry,  he  says  to  Mr.  Annancy  that  he  must  treat  his 
friend  Mr.  Cock,  an’  Annancy  took  some  of  the  corn  an’ 
give  to  the  Cock. 

An’  it  so  being  that  he  love  corn,  Annancy  continually 
feed  him  with  the  corn  until  he  get  drunk  an’  fast  asleep. 


Annancy  and  Screech-Owl. 


61 


An’  Annancy  feel  very  glad  in  his  heart  that  he  is  going 
to  kill  Brother  ’creech-owl  for  his  breakfast. 

An’  when  ’creech-owl  playing,  his  mind  was  on  his  dear 
friend  Mr.  Cock,  an’  he  continually  listen  to  hear  him  crow, 
an’  he  couldn’  hear  him. 

An’  he  ask  for  him. 

Mr.  Annancy  tell  him  that  he  is  having  a rest. 

An’  ’creech-owl  play  an’  play  till  day  catch  him. 

An’  Annancy  got  a kettle  of  boiled  water  an’  dish  it  out 
an’  ask  his  friend  them  to  have  some  tea. 

An’  ’creech-owl  get  very  sad  to  see  day  catch  him. 

An’  Annancy  didn’  know  whe  make  ’creech-owl 
wouldn’  drink  the  tea. 

So  Annancy  begin  to  raise  a confusion  over  it,  say,  as  he 
won’t  drink  the  tea  he  must  made  up  him  mind  to  sarve 
him  breakfast. 

An’  ’creech-owl  began  to  cry. 

An’  the  same  time  Annancy  (that  wicked  fellah !)  take 
up  ’creech-owl  music,  an’  ask  young  ladies  an’  young 
gentlemen  to  assist  him  in  a noble  song  which  he  is  going 
to  kill  Mr.  ’creech-owl  with. 

An’  this  the  song  : — 


m m 1.0  m — r » -1-  m 0 


There’sa  blind  boy  in  a ring,  tra  la  la  la  la,  There’s  a 


* # i 1 * 0 * * 


00 


0 *0 


blind  boy  in  a ring,  tra  la  la  la  la,  There’s  a blind  boy  in  a ring, 


tra  la  la  la  la, 


He  like  su-garan’  I like  plum. 


An’  when  Annancy  sing  the  sing  done,  he  catch  up 
’creech-owl  an’  wring  off  him  neck,  an’  get  him  cook  for 
his  breakfast  an’  becomes  the  master  of  ’creech-owl’s  band 
of  music. 


62 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


An’  from  that  day  Mr.  Annancy  becomes  the  greatest 
player  an’  the  biggest  raskil  in  the  world. 

Jack  Mantora  me  no  choose  none. 

NOTES. 

the  only  danger,  the  only  danger  is.  This  omission  is  frequent. 

At  daylight,  or  soon  after,  it  is  the  custom  to  drink  tea.  This  is  generally  hot 
water  and  sugar  with,  or  more  often  without,  milk.  Sometimes  they  make 
an  infusion  of  the  leaves  of  lime,  orange,  mint,  fever-grass,  cinnamon,  pimento 
or  search-me-heart.  Coffee  and  chocolate  are  also  occasionally  used.  These 
all  grow  in  Jamaica,  but,  owing  to  its  high  price,  actual  tea  is  beyond  the 
reach  of  the  peasant.  Lime  is,  of  course,  not  the  English  tree  of  that  name, 
but  the  tropical  one  which  bears  that  small  juicy  fruit  which  is  so  much  better 
than  the  coarser  lemon.  Fever-grass  ( Andropogon  citratus ) has  the  exact 
smell  and  taste  of  lemon-scented  verbena.  Search-me-heart  ( Rhytidophyllum 
tormentosutn)  is  a pretty  wild  plant  with  leaves  of  green  velvet,  which  on  moist 
days  give  out  a delicious  aromatic  smell  much  like  Humea. 

raise  a confusion,  get  up  a quarrel.  Annancy  resorted  to  the  same  artifice 
when  he  killed  Cow  and  the  other  animals  at  the  mock  obsequies  of  his  father, 
sarve  him  breakfast,  serve  for  his  breakfast. 

The  song  will  be  found  again  among  the  dance  tunes, 
sing  the  sing  done,  finished  the  song. 

’creech-owl  sounds  like  creechole. 


Annancy  and  Cow. 


63 


XX.  ANNANCY  AND  COW. 

One  day  Annancy  tell  his  family  that  he  is  going  in  the 
wood. 

Before  he  start  he  get  some  cane-liquor  an’  pour  it 
into  a big  gourdy,  an’  he  tell  him  wife  that  “ me  gone.” 

An’  he  travel  so  till  he  meet  three  Cow. 

An’  he  tell  one  of  the  Cow  marnin’,  say  Marnin’, 
Bro’er  Cow.” 

Cow  say : — “ Marnin’,  Brother  Annancy.” 

Annancy  say : — “ Beg  you  a little  water,  Bro’er  Cow.” 

When  Annancy  get  the  water  he  said  “ The  water  no 
sweet  not ’t  all.”  An’  he  say  to  Cow  : — ■“  Come  taste  fe  me 
water.”  An’  he  no  make  Brother  Cow  know  say  a cane 
liquor  him  got. 

When  Cow  taste  it  him  lick  him  tongue. 

Annancy  say  : — “ No  say  fe  me  water  sweeter  more  than 
fe  you  ? ” 

Cow  said  “ Yes.” 

Annancy  said  “ Bro’er  Cow,  you  want  to  go  home 
with  me  becausen  me  have  it  d£  a run  like  a river  ? Bro’er 
Cow,  if  you  want  to  go  with  me  you  fe  make  me  put  one 
wiss-wiss  over  you  harn.  But,  Bro’er  Cow,  me  have  some 
picny  a me  yard,  dey  so  fooyish,  when  time  we  most  yech, 
dey  ma  go  say  ‘ Puppa  bring  Cow.’  When  them  say 
‘ Puppa  bring  Cow’  you  mus’  say  ‘ A so  him  do.’” 

Annancy  carry  Cow  into  his  yard  an’  tie  him  upon  a 
tree,  an’  tell  Cow  him  goin’  to  get  a yitty  breakfus’  for  him. 
(Annancy  ’tudy  trick  fe  nyam  Cow;  he  was  very  anxious 
for  his  beef.) 

An’  he  get  into  his  house  and  take  his  turn  pa  bill 
coming  to  Cow  force  ace  fe  chop  off  Cow’s  neck.  He  miss 


64 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


the  neck  an’  chop  the  wiss-wiss,  an’  Cow  take  him  tail  put 
on  him  back  an’  gallop  away. 

Annancy  a bawl,  a call : — “ Say,  Bro’er  Cow,  a fun  me  a 
make,  me  a drive  fly,  come  back.” 

Cow  no  a yerry  but  gallop  till  him  get  home  an’  tell  him 
wife  an’  picny,  said  Annancy  want  fe  kill  him  : — “ Thank 
God  me  get  ’way ; the  whole  family  must  sing  we  own 
tune  to-day  ya  ” : — 


f-T^sT. 3 1 m — — ] 

- \ -V  P - h*  M 9 # * 

9 T 

^ 9 9 M 9 

v , i i r.  .. 

r r r i r 

^ ^ 

-y  t r ^ 

r V V / 1 

Brother  An  - nan  - cy  tie  somebo  - dy,  Me 


‘TTJV  h V V 3 

9~~ 9 ... 

~ r 9 9 

- L?  \ 9 r ^ ^ 1 . i . 

; g \m  1 i_  1 r 



no  min  know  da  bad  me  do,  Brother  An-nan-cy  tie  somebody,  Me 


/ftS  • k t? 

? - 

r 

9 ^ 1 

(W*  | r 

g ip^ 

ITT 

9 P 

r 

> \w  j , r.  1 1 

— 



tie,  me  tie,  me  tie  oh  ! Brother  Annancy  tie  some-bo  - dy. 


Jack  Mantora  me  no  choose  none. 

NOTES. 

cane  liquor,  juice  of  sugar-cane. 

gourdy,  the  dried  shell  of  the  gourd-like  fruit  of  the  Calabash  ( Crescentia 
Cujete ). 

wiss-wiss,  withe.  There  are  many  kinds  of  these  natural  ropes  to  be  found 
in  the  bush. 

fooyish,  foolish. 

most  rech,  almost  reach,  are  just  getting  to  the  yard, 
day  ma  go  say,  they  may  go  and  say. 

A so  him  do,  so  he  does.  The  reciter  imitates  lowing  here,  the  voice  falling 
to  a deep  prolonged  note  on  the  last  word, 
carry,  lead, 
yltty,  little, 
nyam,  eat. 


Annancy  and  Cow. 


65 


tumpa,  stumpy,  short, 
force  ace,  post  haste. 

a fun  me  a make,  it’s  fun  I am  making,  I was  only  pretending, 
min,  been,  wrong  auxiliary  for  did.  I did  not  know  that  I had  done 
anything  wrong. 

Substitute  the  vowel  all  in  water,  all,  bawl,  call. 


XXI.  TACOMA  AND  THE  OLD-WITCH  GIRL. 

One  day  there  was  a old-witch  gal,  an’  Tacoma  want 
the  gal  to  marry.  An’  Tacoma  went  to  the  gal  yard 
an’  ask  the  gal  to  courten  to.  An’  the  gal  tell  Tacoma 
that  he  don’t  want  a husband  as  yet. 

So  Tacoma  get  very  sad  in  his  heart,  an’  he  comes 
home  back  to  his  yard,  an’  when  he  come  he  ’tudy  a 
plan.  An’  when  he  ’tudy  the  plan  he  fix  a day  to  go 
back  to  the  gal  yard. 

An’  Tacoma  get  a buggy,  an’  get  Ratta  for  his  Coach- 
man, an’  get  a pair  of  brown-coloured  mongoose  to  be 
the  horse. 

An’  when  Tacoma  was  going  he  sent  to  notice  the 
the  gal  that  he  is  coming  such  a day. 

An’  Tacoma  went  to  his  friend  Annancy  an’  borrow 
long  boots  an’  dress  himself  nicely,  an’  borrow  a gold 
watch  an’  chain,  an’  got  a helmet  to  his  head. 

An’  when  Tacoma  ready  he  order  his  coachman  to 
harness  up  the  horses.  An’  when  he  start  he  carry 
lots  of  present,  an’  hitch  a grey  horse  behind  the  buggy, 
an’  take  along  with  him  t’ree  pieces  of  music. 

An’  this  time  Tacoma  didn’  know  the  gal  was  a old- 
witch,  an’  all  what  Tacoma  talk  from  home  the  gal  really 
know  everything. 

E 


66 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


An’  he  reach  up  the  yard  an’  sing : — 


Moderato. 


VYW# 

k v v 

i N rs 

— 1 — J 

7m  IT  \ ✓ 1 \ ^ 

- ! 1 M J 

***  , _ . Jj-  r.  .jjf 

* * # * 

I will  makeyou  have  a present  of  a nicegold  watch,  Just  to 


.]/  icii,  v-  IS  K-  ^ 

-/I.  1 S N P rs  v , N 

V , J 

fr h * p-j -fs— ■ 

— m iH — 

m J J fM  * 

^ J m * 

aF 

wear  it  on  your  side  for  to  let  the  peo-ple  see,  If  you'll  only  be  my 


— i s — i 

--VB- — u — * — * 1 

k 

l 

-d—. 1 1 

-m — • <j 

true  lov  - er, 


If  you’ll  on  - ly  be  my  true  lov-er. 


An’  the  gal  answer : — 


No,  no,  dear,  not  for  all  yourgold  watch,  I will  never  be  yours 


N 1 1 ■ - 

s ;>  \ v --t-  - 

^2.  a h* 

_v  _ 

V 

Y IT  m • S S 1 

S m S S S 

J 

1 z 

m. — . 

• O 

true  lov-er,  I will  ne-ver  be  yours  true  lov  - er. 


An’  Tacoma  have  plenty  more  t’ing  is  to  make  a 
present  to  the  gal.  An’  he  promise  to  give  her  a nice 
silk  dress,  an’  a nice  silver  bangle,  an’  a nice  gold  egg, 
an’  a nice  grey  horse,  an’  tell  the  gal  that  everyt’ing,  which 
is  going  to  make  him  a present  to,  he  must  wear  it 
along  the  street  to  let  the  people  see,  if  you  will  only 
be  my  true  lover. 

An  the  gal  say  to  Tacoma: — “No,  for  I want  the 
best  thing  which  you  have.” 

An’  Tacoma  guess  an’  guess  an’  he  couldn'  find  out. 

An’  the  gal  say  if  Tacoma  find  out  she  will  marry 
Tacoma. 

An’  Tacoma  guess  an’  guess  until  he  made  the  gal  a 
promise  that  he  will  give  him  the  key  of  his  heart. 


Tacoma  and  the  Old-Witch  Girl. 


67 


An’  then  the  gal  was  so  glad  an’  said  to  Tacoma 
that  I’ll  ever  be  yours  true  lover. 

An’  Tacoma  sent  for  the  gal’s  parents  an’  his  parents 
an’  marry  off  the  gal,  an  from  that  day  the  gal  becomes 
Tacoma  wife. 


NOTES. 

mongoose,  see  the  note  to  the  dance  tune  “ Mahngoose  a come.” 

yours  true  lover,  always  yours.  Generally  it  is  “you”  for  “your.”  They 
say  “ this  is  yours”  correctly  and  then  add  “ and  this  is  mines.” 

t’ing  is,  things. 

which  is  going,  etc.,  which  he  is  going  to  make  her  a present  of. 

When,  commenting  on  Tacoma’s  directions,  I objected  that  the  girl  could 
not  wear  the  grey  horse,  the  boy  who  was  telling  the  story  saw  it  at  once  and 
said  : — “No,  he  must  carry  it.”  When  the  story  was  done  (it  is  reproduced 
exactly  from  his  dictation)  he  sang  all  the  missing  verses  with  the  girl’s  answer 
to  each  verse,  and  instead  of  his  usual  “carry”  which  did  not  fit  he  substi- 
tuted “ lead  it  in  the  street.”  The  singer  will  see  at  once  where  to  make  the 
necessary  alterations.  The  words  “silver  bangle”  want  four  quavers  instead 
of  two  crotchets,  and  it  will  be  worn  on  the  hand  as  they  call  the  wrist  or  any 
part  of  the  arm.  “Just  to  keep  it  in  your  hand  ” follows  “gold  egg.”  “The 
silk  dress  is  worn  ’long  the  street,”  and  after  “ the  key  of  my  heart”  comes 
“just  to  keep  it  in  your  own.”  I was  looking  out  in  this  last  verse  fora 
change  in  the  words  “for  to  let  the  people  see,”  but  none  came.  To  the  last 
verse  the  answer  is: — “Yes,  yes,  dear,  for  the  key  of  your  heart  I will  ever 
be  yours  true  lover.”  [Cf.  Baring-Gould,  Songs  of  the  West,  No.  xxii.  ; 
Fuller-Maitland  and  Broadwood,  English  County  Songs  ; and  Journal  of  the 
Folk-Song  Society,  Vol.  ii.,  pp.  85-87.  (C.  S.  B.)] 


68 


Ja7naican  Song  and  Story. 


XXII.  DEVIL’S  HONEY-DRAM. 

One  day  Devil  set  his  honey-dram  near  a river  side. 

An’  Annaney  has  a little  son  name  of  John  Wee-wee,  an’ 
when  the  boy  find  out  Devil  honey-dram  he  continually 
tiefing  all  the  dram. 

An’  Devil  couldn’  find  out  who  was  doing  it. 

An’  Devil  put  out  a reward  that  if  any  one  can  prove  who 
is  tiefing  his  dram  he  will  pay  them  a good  sum. 

An’  one  day  Annaney  miss  his  son,  an’  Annaney  guess 
that  the  little  boy  must  be  gone  to  Devil  honey-dram. 

An’  as  Annaney  being  a tief  himself  he  went  an’  s’arch 
for  the  boy.  An’  when  he  go  he  found  him  drunk  an’ 
fast  asleep.  An’  Annaney  lift  him  up  an’  bring  him 
home. 

An’  when  the  boy  got  sober,  about  three  days  after,  he 
got  so  use  to  the  dram  an’  he  went  back. 

An’  Devil  gone  out  to  hunting.  An’  when  he  was  going 
he  ask  his  mother  to  give  a heye  upon  his  dram  until  he 
come  in.  An’  the  mother  went  down  to  the  dram  an’  he 
found  the  boy  drunk  the  very  same  again. 

An’  there  was  no  one  know  the  woman  name  except  Mr. 
Annaney. 

An’  Annaney  went  an’  look  for  his  son. 

An’  when  he  go  the  woman  catch  the  boy  already  an’ 
carry  him  to  Devil  yard.  An  when  the  boy  go  the  woman 
gi’  him  some  corn  to  beat. 

An’  Annaney  went  an  see  his  son  was  beating  corn,  an’ 
he  ask  the  woman  what  the  boy  is  doing  here.  An’  the 
woman  tell  him  that  this  is  the  boy  was  tiefing  all  Devil 
honey-dram,  an’  now  him  catch  him,  an’  him  wouldn’  let 
him  go  until  the  master  come. 


Devil's  Honey-Dram.  69 

An’  Annancy  ask  the  woman  if  he  don’t  have  any  more 
corn  to  beat. 

The  foolish  woman  say: — “Yes,  Brother  Annancy,  but 
not  all  the  corn  you  going  to  beat  you  won’t  get  your  son 
till  the  master  come.” 

An’  Annancy  begin  to  fret  for  him  know  when  Devil 
come  he  won’t  have  no  more  son  again,  for  Devil  will  kill 
him  an’  eat  him. 

An’  the  woman  name  is  Matilda. 

An’  Annancy  took  the  corn  an’  begun  to  beat  an’  he 
start  to  sing  : — 


Allegretto. 


An’  the  woman  begun  to  dance  an’  wheel.  An  she  dance 
an’  dance  till  she  get  tired  an’  fall  asleep.  An’  Annancy 
(the  clever  fellah)  took  his  son  out  an’  light  Devil  house 
with  fire. 

An’  when  Devil  in  the  bush  look  an’  see  his  house  is 
burning  he  t’row  down  his  gun  an’  ’tart  a run  to  his  yard. 

Until  he  come  the  house  burn  flat  to  ground. 

An’  Devil  couldn’  find  Matilda  his  faithful  mother,  an’ 
Devil  take  to  heart  an’  dead. 

An’  Annancy  take  Devil  honey-dram  for  himself  an’ 
build  up  a house  in  Devil  own  place,  an’  from  that  day 
Mr.  Annancy  becomes  the  smartest  man. 

Jack  Mantora  me  no  choose  any. 


;o 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


NOTES. 

Honey  dram.  The  ingredients  are  honey,  water,  chewstick,  ginger  and 
rum.  When  mixed  the  dram  is  put  in  the  sun  to  ripen.  Chewstick  (Gouania 
domingensis)  is  bitter  and  takes  the  place  of  hops. 

heating  com,  i.e.  maize,  to  separate  the  grain  from  the  husks,  called  also 
huxing  com  (husking). 

When  an  animal  is  found  trespassing  it  is  brought  down  to  the  yard,  and  its 
owner  comes  to  redeem  it  by  a money  payment.  John  Wee-wee  was  brought 
in  in  the  same  way  and  according  to  custom  was  given  something  to  do  while 
he  waited. 

faithful.  A faithful  person  is  one  in  whom  confidence  is  reposed. 


XXIII.  ANNANCY  IN  CRAB  COUNTRY. 

One  day  Annancy  form  himself  as  a minister,  an’  was 
going  out  an’  preaching  about.  An’  Annancy  preach  an’ 
preach  till  he  get  in  Crab  country.  An’  Crab  them 
wouldn’  hear  Annancy  at  all. 

An’  Annancy  went  home  back,  an’  dress  himself  in 
a black  gown,  an’  get  some  red  paint  an’  redden  his 
’tummy,  an’  ask  a few  friend  to  walk  with  him. 

An  the  friend  was  Mr.  Toad  an’  Ratta  an’  Blackbird. 

An’  they  all  start. 

An’  when  Annancy  reach  to  Crab  country  he  beguns 
to  preach. 

An’  he  preach  an’  preach  till  they  wouldn’  hear  him 
again. 

An’  Annancy  hire  a house  from  Crab  to  stop  in  the 
night 

An’  Annancy,  seeing  he  couldn’  catch  them  with  his 
preaching,  made  a drum  an’  a fiddle  an’  give  Blackbird 
the  fiddle  to  play.  An  Ratta  was  playing  the  drum. 
An’  Annancy  see  that  the  music  didn’t  sufficient.  He 


Annancy  in  Crab  Country.  71 

wait,  until  the  next  day  he  made  a flute  an’  give  to 
Toad. 

An’  when  he  done  he  put  up  the  music  them  an’  got 
in  friendship  with  Crab,  an’  begun  to  do  the  same  as 
Crab  them  are  doing. 

An’  poor  Crab  didn’  know  what  Mr.  Annancy  mean. 

An’  Annancy  go  on  go  on  until  they  got  used  to 
Annancy. 

An’  when  they  got  used  to  Annancy,  Annancy  write 
out  plat-card  and  put  it  out  an’  tell  his  friend  Mr.  Crab 
that  he  is  going  to  have  a nice  baptism  at  his  house,  an’ 
tell  them  that  he  will  have  a bands  of  music  playing 
in  going  home,  an’  how  the  music  will  be  so  sweet  they 
won’t  tired  walking. 

An’  when  Annancy  start  with  his  three  friend  he  tell 
Ratta  to  roll  the  drum,  an’  Blackbird  is  to  rub  the 
fiddle  ’tring  till  it  catch  fire,  an’  Toad  is  to  blow  the 
flute  as  hard  as  he  can,  an’  he  will  be  reading  the 
tune. 

An’  he  start  like  this : — 


■J . s 

S N S 

- - --  ---  N 

/ -1  O — _ 53  \ 

O M ^ J _ 

.f  (])  V—  V;  n 

1 # m # 

p*  1 r # 1 

%J  - 0 

{=  i?  • J 

The  bands  a roll,  the  bands  a roll,  the  bands  a 


J _ s,  ^ 

V V 

<0  # ^ 9 

— 1 — pi 

1 * 1 

L«7‘  • 

^*0 

»-  0 

-I-  - tz  ^~\ 

7 

roll,  a go  to  Mount  Si-ney.  Sa  - lem  is  Zakki- 


N Kl=r  _ [1 

m i 

0 *r  0 0 

m-  - 

0 

00  i! 

low,  Some  a we  da  go  to  Mount  Si-ney. 


An’  when  Annancy  get  home  he  made  a bargain  with 
his  t’ree  friend  that  he  is  going  to  baptize  them  an’  let 
Crab  see. 

An’  when  he  baptize  them,  Crab  they  were  very  glad 
to  see  this  treat  which  Annancy  do  to  his  t’ree  friend, 


72  Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 

an’  they  say  that  they  want  Annancy  to  do  them  the 
very  same. 

An’  Annancy  tell  them  that  they  must  wait  till 
to-morrow. 

An’  Crab  them  agree. 

An’  Annancy  made  a bargain  with  his  t’ree  friend  an’ 
is  going  to  baptize  Brother  Crab  with  boiling  water. 

An’  he  get  a deep  barril  an’  order  Crab  them  that 
they  must  go  in  the  barril,  an’  Crab  they  do  so. 

At  that  time  Annancy  have  a good  pot  of  boiling 
water  an’  as  Crab  a settle  theirself  in  the  barril  Annancy 
tilt  the  pot  of  boiling  water  on  them  an’  the  whole  of 
Crab  body  get  red. 

An’  Annancy  was  very  glad  an’  said : — “ T’ank  God 
I have  got  some  of  the  clever  man  them  for  me  break- 
fus’.” 

An’  from  that  day  Annancy  was  going  about  an’  fool 
all  his  friend. 

Jack  Mantora  me  no  choose  none. 

NOTES. 

The  black  land-crab  is  a much-esteemed  delicacy.  Formerly  every  property 
had  its  crabber,  whose  duty  it  was  to  provide  crabs  for  the  house.  Since  the 
introduction  of  the  mongoose  they  have  become  scarcer. 

form  himself  as,  pretends  to  be. 

stop  in  the  night,  stop  in  for  the  night. 

put  up,  put  away. 

do  the  same,  etc.,  live  in  the  same  way  as  the  Crabs. 

plat-card,  placard  ; a rough  written  advertisement  affixed  to  the  trunk  of 
a tree.  When  there  is  a public  gathering  the  musicians  play  as  they  walk  to 
the  place  of  entertainment  and  again  as  they  leave  it. 


Gaulin. 


73 


XXIV.  GAULIN. 

One  day  there  was  an  India  woman  who  have  a daughter, 
an’  when  the  gal  born  she  born  with  a gold  ring  on  her 
finger.  An’  everybody  hear  about  it  but  they  never  see  it. 

An’  Mr.  Annancy  was  very  crave  to  got  the  gal  to  be 
his  wife. 

An’  Annancy  study  a plan  an’  take  up  his  bands  of 
music  an’  go  down  to  the  gal  yard,  an’  when  him  go  down 
they  admit  Mr.  Annancy. 

An’  when  they  admit  him  Annancy  beguns  to  play  all 
different  tune  just  to  see  if  the  gal  would  laugh  with  him. 
But  the  gal  was  very  sad,  neither  would  laugh  nor  smile, 
until  Annancy  see  there  was  no  good,  an’  tell  good  bye 
an’  go  home  back. 

Annancy  when  him  goes  home  back,  met  his  friend 
Mr.  Rabbit  in  the  road. 

Rabbit  ask  him  : — “ Brother  Annancy,  where  you  is 
cornin’  from  ? ” 

An’  Annancy  begun  to  tell  Rabbit. 

So  Rabbit  make  a bargain  with  Annancy  that  he  is 
going  to  try  his  luck. 

So  Annancy  say : — “ As  you  being  such  a clean  an’ 
white  gentleman  I think  you  will  succeed.  So  if  you 
succeed,  when  you  coming  home  back  you  must  make  me 
know ; then  you  can  take  me  to  be  your  servant.” 

That  time  Rabbit  didn’  know  what  Annancy  study. 
Annancy  mean  was  to  take  away  the  gal  from  Rabbit. 

So  Rabbit  start  to  the  yard,  an’  when  him  go  they 
admit  him  in. 

An’  the  mumma  ask  Rabbit  what  he  come  about. 

Rabbit  says  he  is  looking  for  a courtier. 

An’  the  mumma  say  to  Rabbit : — “ Oh,  my  dear  Mr. 


74 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


Rabbit,  I am  very  sorry  ! You  is  only  but  a meat,1  so  I 
can’t  give  you  my  daughter.” 

An’  Rabbit  spend  a little  time  till  he  tell  goodbye. 

Meanwhile  Annancy  wouldn’  go  home.  Him  sit  in  the 
road  till  Rabbit  coming  home  back.  An’  him  ask  Rabbit 
if  him  succeed. 

Rabbit  say  : — “ Oh  no  ! ” 

So  they  begin  to  talk.  An’  by  this  time  Sea-gaulin  was 
passing  an’  hear  what  they  are  saying. 

An’  when  Gaulin  go  home  back,  him  ’tudy  between  him- 
self that,  if  him  only  get  a bus  an’  dress  himself  tidy  an’ 
drive  to  the  gal  yard,  she’ll  sure  be  his  wife. 

An’  Sea-gaulin  goes  down,  an’  the  gal  was  very  glad 
to  see  him  an’  invite  him  inside  the  house,  an’  they  begun 
to  arrange  to  be  married. 

An’  there  was  a old-witch  boy  which  was  brother  to  the 
gal  whisper  to  her : — “ That  one  is  Gaulin.” 

An’  the  gal  say : — “ Oh  no,  it  is  my  dear  love.” 

So  the  boy  say  to  then  : — “ Never  mind,  one  day  you 
will  find  out  if  he  is  not  Mr.  Gaulin.” 

So,  when  Gaulin  tell  goodbye  an’  go  home  to  his  yard 
back,  the  boy  follow  him  an’  go  to  the  river  side  where 
Gaulin  is  fishening,  an’  he  climb  a tree  which  hung  over 
the  water. 


An’  when  Gaulin  come  down  the  river  he  ’tart  a singing: — 

Moderato. 


1 Cf.  the  Bantu  use  of  nyama  (“meat”)  for  “an  animal.”  (A.  W.) 


Gauhn. 


75 


An’  that  time  Gaulin  didn’  know  that  the  boy  was  on 
the  tree  hearing  him. 

When  he  first  sing  his  hat  fall  off. 

An’  he  sing  again  his  jacket  was  off. 

That  time  the  boy  was  seeing  every  bit. 

An’  he  sing  again  an’  his  shirt  was  off. 

Sing  an’  sing  till  the  trousies  drop  off. 

An’  as  he  done  he  find  himself  inside  the  water  begun 
to  fishening. 

An’  as  him  put  him  head  under  a stone-hole  the  boy 
come  down  off  the  tree  an’  find  himself  back  to  his  yard. 

An’  next  Wednesday  when  Gaulin  come  to  get  married, 
the  boy  provide  for  him  to  sing  that  very  same  tune  when 
they  are  on  the  cake  table. 

An  the  boy  say  : — “ Ladies  and  gentlemen  will  you  like 
to  hear  a song  ? ,’ 

An’  everybody  say  “ Yes.” 

An’  that  time  the  boy  was  a fiddler,  an’  he  tune  up  his 
violin  an’  beguns  to  play  “ My  iddy,  my  iddy  Pyang  halee.” 

Gaulin  say: — “Oh  no,  my  brother,  stop  that  tune.  That 
same  very  tune  kill  my  grandfather,  an’  when  you  sing 
it  you  let  me  remember  my  old  grandfather.” 

An’  the  boy  never  stop  sing  an’  play  till  all  Gaulin 
clothes  drop  off. 

An’  Gaulin  fly  out  the  door  mouth  an’  find  himself  right 
up  in  the  air. 

An’  from  that  day  that’s  what  make  Gaulin  fly  so  high. 

Jack  Mantora  me  no  choose  none. 

NOTES. 

Gaulin,  the  Egret.  In  stormy  weather  the  egrets  leave  the  sea-side  and  fly 
up  into  the  country  to  fish  in  the  streams.  They  are  especially  fond  of  the 
small  crabs  which  abound  in  the  mountain  rivulets.  The  words  of  the  song 
have  been  spelt  so  as  to  convey  as  nearly  as  possible  their  right  sound.  Halee 
rhymes  in  both  syllables  to  the  stali  of  the  Venetian  gondolier.  Jewahlee  is 
Jubilee  with  a different  middle  syllable.  Pyang  with  French  a made  as  short 
as  possible  is  the  Egret’s  cry.  It  should  be  accented  and  brought  out  strongly. 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


76 


When  him  goes  home  back,  as  he  was  going  home. 

white  gentleman.  This  counts  many  points  in  the  estimation  of  the  Negro. 

Babbit  spend  a little  time.  Most  characteristic.  After  the  rebuff  one 
would  have  expected  him  to  go  away  at  once,  but  that  is  not  the  Negro’s  way. 
He  is  never  abashed,  and  after  the  curtest  refusal  of  any  favour  he  has  come  to 
ask,  will  sit  on  and  talk  of  other  things,  finally  taking  his  leave  as  if  nothing 
had  happened. 

bus,  the  buggies  which  ply  for  hire  in  Kingston  are  so  called. 

Wednesday,  the  favourite  day  for  weddings.  The  bridegroom  is  accom- 
panied to  church  by  a godmother,  not  the  baptismal  one  but  another  specially 
appointed  for  the  occasion.1  They  ride  to  church,  which  is  usually  at  some  dis- 
tance from  the  yard.  The  bride  also  rides  from  her  yard,  accompanied  by  a god- 
father and  two  bridesmaids  between  the  ages  of  eight  and  eleven.  The  ceremony 
and  signing  of  the  register  over,  the  newly-wedded  couple  mount  and  gallop  to  the 
wife’s  yard,  the  rest  of  the  company  following  more  leisurely.  Arrived  there, 
the  bride  proceeds  to  put  on  her  wedding-clothes  and  the  guests  are  received 
by  the  godfather  and  given  sugar- water  and  bread.  When  the  bride  has  donned 
her  satin  gown  and  veil  (she  was  married  in  her  riding-habit)  and  with  much 
sorrow  pinched  her  feet  into  white  shoes  too  small  for  them,  the  company  sit 
down  to  the  cake  table.  This  has  upon  it  two  cakes,  two  fantastically  fashioned 
loaves  of  shewbread,  triumphs  of  the  baker’s  art  with  their  doves  and  true 
lovers’  knots,  and  three  vases  of  cut  flowers.  The  bread  is  not  eaten  then  but 
is  distributed  ( distribbled , as  they  have  it,)  to  friends  on  the  days  following  the 
wedding.  One  cake  is  cut.  A knife  and  fork  being  handed  to  a bridesmaid 
she  takes  off  the  cake-head,  which  is  a small  top  tier  or  addition  to  the  cake 
proper.  This  is  put  aside  and  afterwards  sent  to  the  officiating  minister.  The 
godfather  then  proceeds  to  the  more  serious  work  of  cutting  up  the  cake, 
giving  pieces  first  to  the  bride  and  bridegroom  and  then  to  the  guests.  The 
second  cake  is  left  intact.  Wine  is  poured  out,  and  there  are  speeches  and 
toasts  and  hymns.  Then  follows  dinner,  which  is  over  about  five  o’clock. 
They  then  begin  to  play  Sally  Water  (see  introduction  to  the  Ring  tunes) 
which  goes  on  for  an  hour  or  two,  and  as  night  falls  dancing  is  started.  This 
goes  on  all  night  and  does  not  end,  at  the  earliest,  till  dusk  on  the  following 
day,  Thursday.  It  is  often  kept  up  until  Friday  evening  or  even  until  Satur- 
day, the  dancers  and  musicians  appearing  to  require  no  rest.  The  latter  are 
well  supplied  with  rum  and  when  they  get  sleepy  they  beg  for  an  extra  tot  to 
rub  their  eyes,  which  burns  them  and  keeps  them  awake.  The  whole  of  this 
time  refreshments  are  supplied  to  the  guests,  and  as  long  as  these  hold  out  they 
do  not  disperse,  or  as  they  put  it : — “till  hungry  bite  them  they  no  go  ’way.” 

1 Is  this  a survival  of  the  African  institution  of  “sureties”  (Yao,  ngoswe, 
see  Duff  Macdonald,  I.  118),  or  “sponsors,”  who  arrange  the  marriage?  I 
am  not  sure  whether  the  custom  exists  among  Negro  as  well  as  Bantu 
tribes.  (A.  W.) 


Gaulin. 


77 


The  Sunday  after  the  wedding  is  ’turn  t’anks  (return  thanks).  The  married 
couple  and  their  friends  get  all  the  beasts,  i.e.  horses  and  mules,  they  can 
muster,  and  ride  to  church  dressed  in  their  best.  The  bride  and  bridegroom, 
attended  by  the  godfather  and  godmother,  sit  in  “ couple  bench,”  the  rest  of 
the  party  going  to  their  own  pews.  After  service  the  whole  cavalcade  gallops 
as  hard  as  it  can,  regardless  of  the  precipices  which  skirt  all  Jamaica  mountain 
paths,  up  hill  and  down  hill  to  the  husband’s  yard.  There  wine  is  provided, 
and  the  second  cake  is  cut  and  eaten.  Dinner  follows  at  three,  and  then  Sally 
Water  is  again  played  until  midnight,  when  dancing  recommences  and  goes 
on  till  four  or  five  o’clock  on  Monday  afternoon.  This  is  the  end  of  the 
festivities,  which  sometimes  cost  twenty  pounds  or  more, 
provide  for  him,  prepared  himself. 

door  mouth  includes  not  only  the  opening,  but  also  the  whole  space  just 
outside  the  door. 


XXV.  ANNANCY,  MONKEY  AND  TIGER. 

One  day  Annancy  an’  Tiger  get  in  a rum-shop,  drink  an’ 
drink,  an’  then  Monkey  commence  to  boast.  Monkey  was 
a great  boaster. 

Annancy  say  : — “ You  boast  well ; I wonder  if  you  have 
sense  as  how  you  boast.” 

Monkey  say  : — “ Get  ’way  you  foolish  fellah  you,  can 
come  an’  ask  me  if  me  have  sense.  You  go  t’rough  de 
whole  world  you  never  see  a man  a°ain  have  the  sense  I 
have.” 

Annancy  say : — “ Bro’er  Monkey,  how  many  sense  you 
have,  tell  me  ? ” 

Monkey  say  : — “ I have  dem  so  till  I can’t  count  dem  to 
you,  for  dem  de  all  over  me  body.” 

Annancy  say: — “Me  no  have  much,  only  two,  one  fe  me 
an’  one  fe  me  friend.” 

One  day  Monkey  was  travelling  an’  was  going  to  pass 
where  Tiger  live.  Annancy  was  working  on  that  same 
road. 


78 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


As  Monkey  passing,  Tiger  was  into  a stone-hole  an’ 
jump  out  on  the  fellah  an’  catch  him.  All  his  sense  was 
gone,  no  sense  to  let  him  get  ’way.  Tiger  was  so  glad, 
have  him  before  him  well  ready  to  kill. 

Here  come  the  clever  man  Mr.  Annancy. 

When  he  saw  his  friend  Monkey  in  the  hand  of  such  a 
wicked  man  he  was  frighten,  but  he  is  going  to  use  his 
sense. 

He  said: — “ Marnin’,  Bro’er  Tiger,  I see  you  catch  dat 
fellah ; I was  so  glad  to  see  you  hold  him  so  close  in  hand. 
You  must  eat  him  now.  But  before  you  eat  him  take  you 
two  hand  an’  cover  you  face  an’  kneel  down  with  you  face 
up  to  Massa  God  an’  say,  ‘T’ank  God  fe  what  I goin’  to 
receive.’  ” 

An’  so  Tiger  do. 

An’  by  the  time  Tiger  open  his  eyes  Monkey  an’ 
Annancy  was  gone. 

When  they  get  to  a distant  Annancy  said  to  Monkey : — 
“ T’ink  you  say  you  have  sense  all  over  you  ’kin,  why  you 
no  been  get  ’way  when  Bro’er  Tiger  catch  you  ? ” 

Monkey  don’t  have  nothing  to  say. 

Annancy  say: — “ Me  no  tell  you  say  me  have  two  sense, 
one  fe  me  an’  one  fe  me  friend?  Well!  a him  me  use 
to-day.” 

From  that  day  Tiger  hate  Annancy  up  to  now. 

Jack  Mantora  me  no  choose  any. 

NOTES. 

can  come  and  ask  me,  that  can  come.  The  ellipsis  is  best  explained  by- 
giving  the  sentence  another  turn  : “ Get  away  you  man  who  are  so  foolish  that 
you  can  come,”  etc. 

into  a stone-hole,  in  a cave. 

Tiger  was  so  glad,  etc.,  Tiger  was  well  pleased  and  held  him  in  his  paws 
all  ready  for  killing. 

why  you  no  been,  why  didn’t  you. 

a him  me  use,  that  is  the  one  I used. 


The  Three  Pigs. 


79 


XXVI.  THE  THREE  PIGS. 

One  day  a Hog  have  three  Pig  an’  the  three  of  them 
was  boy.  When  they  were  about  two  month  the  father 
died,  so  the  mother  grow  them  up  herself.  When  the 
Pig  them  come  to  big  young  man  the  mother  said  to 
the  first  son  : — “ Me  son,  a time  fe  you  go  an’  look  you 
own  living.” 

The  day  come  when  he  was  to  start.  The  mother  tie 
up  his  clothes  an’  give  him,  an’  said  : — “ If  you  get  work 
sen’  an’  tell  me.” 

The  Pig  start. 

As  he  was  going  he  meet  a man  with  a cart  of  hay. 

He  said : — “ Please,  sir,  you  can  give  me  that  hay  that 
I may  go  an’  build  a house?” 

The  man  give  him. 

Pig  go  an’  make  up  a house  with  his  hay,  an’  find  it 
very  warm  an’  comfortable. 

One  day  Wolf  come,  call: — “Little  Pig,  little  Pig,  let 
me  come  in.” 

Pig  say : — “ No,  no,  by  the  hair  of  my  chinnychin- 
chin. 

Wolf  said: — “I  will  huff  an’  I will  cuff  an’  blow  you 
house  down.” 

Wolf  huff  an’  cuff  an’  blow  down  the  house,  an’  go  in 
an’  eat  Pig. 

The  mother  wait  an’  can’t  get  no  letter  from  the  first 
son. 

She  send  the  other  one,  second  to  the  first,  an’  that  one 
travel  until  he  meet  a man  with  a cart  of  kindling. 

He  say  : — “ Please,  sir,  you  can  give  me  that  kindling 
that  I may  go  an’  build  a house  ? ” 


8o 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


The  man  give  him. 

He  make  up  his  house,  an’  one  day  Wolf  was  passing, 
see  that  it  was  pig  house,  call  to  him : — “ Little  Pig, 
little  Pig,  let  me  come  in.” 

Pig  say: — “No,  no,  no!  by  the  hair  of  my  chinnychin- 
chin.” 

Wolf  say : — “ I will  huff  an’  cuff  an’  will  blow  you 
house  down. 

An’  he  do  so  an’  go  in  an’  eat  Pig. 

The  mother  wait  six  months  an’  don’t  get  no  letter. 

She  said  : — “ Those  boy  must  be  get  good  work  an’ 
can’t  get  to  write.” 

The  last  son  she  said : — “ Me  own  little  son,  time  fe 
you  go  look  you  living.” 

Pig  say: — “Yes,  mumma  me  wi’  go  now.” 

She  tie  up  his  bundle  give  him  some  money  an’  kiss 
him,  say: — “You  must  try  write  me.” 

The  boy  start. 

He  travel  an’  travel  till  night  take  him.  He  has  to 
sleep  under  a stone-hole.  When  he  was  sleeping  he  get 
a dream  that  he  see  his  two  brother  was  in  a frying- 
pan.  He  was  so  frighten  he  wake  an’  start  away  the 
same  hour.  He  travel  till  day  clean.  At  about  nine 
o’clock  he  get  to  a big  road.  He  travel  on  that  road 
till  he  meet  a man  with  a cart  of  brick. 

He  said: — “Please,  sir,  you  can  give  me  that  brick 
that  I may  go  an’  build  a house  ? ” 

The  man  give  him. 

He  go  an’  make  up  a grand  house  with  the  brick. 

When  his  house  finish  Wolf  hear,  an’  come  one  day, 
call  to  Pig : — “ Little  Pig,  little  Pig,  let  me  come  in.” 

Pig  say: — “No,  no,  no!  by  the  hair  of  my  chinnychin- 
chin.” 

So  wolf  think  that  this  house  was  like  the  rest. 

He  said  : — “ I will  huff  an’  cuff  an’  will  blow  you  house 
down.” 


The  Three  Pigs. 


81 


He  try  for  one  whole  day  an’  never  succeed,  so  he 
lef’  an’  go  home  an’  ’tudy  upon  Pig. 

One  evening  he  come  an’  call  Pig  an’  tell  him  he 
know  where  there  is  a garden  of  all  sort  a t’ing,  so  Pig 
must  come  an’  let  them  take  a walk. 

Pig  ask  him  : — “ What  time  you  will  be  going  ? ” 

He  said: — “A  two  in  the  morning.” 

Pig  ’tart  eleven,  go  an’  come  back  with  all  good  food. 

At  two  Wolf  come  an’  call : — “ Little  Pig,  you  ready  ? ” 

Pig  say:' — “You  lated  ; I go  an’  come  back  already.” 

Wolf  was  so  vex  he  go  home  back.  He  didn’  want 
nothing  but  to  eat  Pig. 

He  said  a next  day : — “ Little  Pig,  I know  where  there 
is  a apple  tree  a Mr.  Simmit  garden,  make  we  go  an’ 
get  some.” 

Pig  ask: — “What  the  time?”  Wolf  say  “ T’ree.” 

Pig  go  two. 

By  Pig  was  on  the  tree  fulling  up  his  basket  here 
come  Wolf.  Pig  was  so  frighten  he  was  on  the  tree 
trimbling.  Wolf  was  quite  glad  to  think  he  was  going 
to  catch  Pig.  He  couldn’  stand  his  ground,  but  dance 
about  with  joy. 

Pig  say : — “ The  apple  is  so  sweet  that  I have  fe 
take  a good  load.  Mr.  Wolf,  you  would  like  to  taste 
one  ? ” 

Wolf  say  “Yes.” 

Pig  say: — “Let  me  see  if  you  can  run  as  that  apple?” 

Pig  throw  one  of  the  apple  far  an’  Wolf  run  after  it. 
By  the  time  he  is  come  back  Pig  get  down  off  a the 
tree,  leave  him  baskit  an’  everyt’ing,  an’  run  nearly  reach 
home. 

Wolf  was  so  sorry  when  he  come,  left  the  apple  an’ 
gone  home, 

Next  night  he  call  to  Pig  an’  tell  him  that  he  know 
where  there  will  be  a met,  so  they  must  take  a walk. 

Pig  say : — “ What  hour  ? ” Wolf  said  “ T’ree.” 

F 


82 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


Pig  start  twelve  an1  go  dance  till  two.  He  was  the 
best  dancer  an’  they  give  him  a butter-churn  as  a re- 
ward. As  he  walking  home  he  see  Wolf  at  a distant 
coming. 

He  said  : — “ My  goodness  King ! What  I going  to 
do?” 

Nevertheless  he  get  in  the  churn  a roll  down  the  hill. 

Wolf  see  the  thing.  He  run  for  his  home. 

The  next  day  he  go  an’  ask  Pig  if  he  did  go  to 
the  ball. 

Pig  said: — “Yes,  an’  as  I was  coming  home  I see  you, 
an’  was  so  frighten  I get  in  me  churn  an’  roll  down  to 
see  if  you  don’t  run.  An’  so  you  did  run,  Ha!  Ha!” 

Wolf  get  vex.  He  huff  an’  cuff  all  day  again  to  see 
if  he  could  broke  down  the  building,  but  all  he  do  he 
has  to  lef’  it. 

So  one  rain  night  he  send  his  wife  with  a young 
baby  to  see  if  Pig  would  take  her  in  by  changing  her 
voice. 

She  went  an’  call ; — “ Mr.  Pig,  please  Sir,  if  you  can 
give  a night  rest,  Sir ; for  rain,  an’  I am  from  far.” 

Pig  said  : — “ No,  I don’t  take  in  no  stranger  what- 
ever, especially  you,  Mrs.  Wolf.  You  husban’  try  an’ 
try  an’  can’t  manage,  an’  now  him  send  you  to  see  if 
you  can  kill  me.” 

Mrs.  Wolf  commence  to  climb  the  chimley. 

Pig  put  a big  copper  of  water  on  the  fire  an’,  by 
the  time  she  reach  the  top  an’  was  coming  down  the 
chimley,  she  drop  in  the  water  an’  dead,  she  an’  the 
child. 

Wolf  come  again  an’  call  Pig. 

An’  Pig  take  up  this  song: — 


Allegretto. 


=£= 


d 


Wolf,  Wolf,  Wolf ! no  use  you  try  fe  come  in, 


You 


The  Three  Pigs. 


83 


3 

r 1- 

: 

1 f5 

1 v 

-V 

L-  - » . J N 

-0- 

0 

-« 

wife  dere  da  ready  ; Ha  ! Ha  ! Ha  ! You  wanta  try  fe 


f-  * 

- 1 

::_1 fc.  1 _ ~ 

3 - # ^ 

P-13 l_J I. 

<4  0 1 

comein,  Come  Wolf,  Me  will  put  you  both  to-gether. 


Wolf  get  worser  vex,  commence  to  beat  Pig  house 
with  all  his  might  an’  couldn’  get  in.  He  climb  up  the 
chimley,  an’,  by  he  fe  get  to  the  top,  the  pot  of  boiling 
water  was  long  time  ready  waiting  for  him,  an’  he  going 
down  in  a haste  make  a slip,  drop  in  the  water. 

Pig  salt  them  an’  put  them  in  his  cask  to  soak,  an’ 
write  to  invite  his  mother  to  help  him  eat  them  for  he 
find  out  it  was  them  eat  his  two  brother.1 
Jack  Mantora  me  no  choose  none. 

NOTES. 

Pig  them.  Read  these  words  together,  not,  Pig — them  come. 

you  can  give,  can  you  give. 

huff,  scratch  with  the  hoof. 

kindling,  small  wood  to  light  fires  with. 

day  clean.  Day  is  clean  when  you  can  see  to  walk. 

big  road,  one  that  is  what  the  Italians  call  carozzabile,  carriageable.  In 
the  hills  of  Jamaica  the  roads  are  for  the  most  part  mere  mule  tracks. 

Simmit,  Smith, 
make  we  go,  let  us  go. 

What  the  time  ? at  what  time  ? 

By  Pig,  as  Pig. 

fulling,  trimbling,  always  so. 

when  he  come,  etc. , when  he  came  back  to  the  tree,  that  he  left  the  apples 
and  went  home, 
met,  meeting,  ball, 
da  ready,  already, 
by  he  fe  get,  by  the  time  he  got. 
cask  to  soak.  Salt  meat  is  kept  in  a tub  of  brine. 

1Cf.  Joseph  Jacobs,  English  Fairy  Tales , No.  xiv.,  and  note,  p.  233. 
(C.  S.  B.) 


84 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


XXVII.  DUMMY. 

There  was  a man  couldn’  talk,  called  Dummy. 

One  day  Annancy  bet  the  King  he  going  to  make 
Dummy  talk. 

So  the  King  say : — “ If  you  make  Dummy  talk  I will 
give  you  one  of  my  daughter  fe  marry.” 

Well,  Annancy  went  to  Hog,  ask  him  “ Bro’er  Hog  if 
I carry  you  fe  Dummy,  whe  you  wi’  say  ? ” 

Hog  say : — “ Me  wi’  say  ugh ! ugh  ! ” 

Annancy  say: — You  won’t  do.” 

He  went  to  Goat : — “ Bro’er  Goat,  if  I carry  you  fe 
Dummy,  whe  wi’  you  say  ? ” 

“Me  wi’  say  Meh — eh — eh  ! ” 

“ You  won’t  do.” 

So  he  went  to  fowl. 

Fowl  say  : — ■“  Me  wi’  say  Clk  ! Clk  ! Clk  ! ” 

“You  won’t  do.” 

So  he  went  to  Bro’er  Peafowl  an’  ask  him  : — “ What  you 
will  say  if  me  carry  you  fe  Dummy  ? ” 

Peafowl  say  : — “ Me  wi’  say  :■ — 


Andante. 


rf 

— V 

/ ( » — ^ M # * 

0 1 

• . L 1 9 d J 1 in 



^ 1 

Chirry-way,  Chirry-way,  Chir-ry  - 


—7  — v 1 ~ _ s.  r - 1 

b*  M . 

M — I 

r ui  □ _l„ 

^ AJ  J INN 

_J  1 I 

* £ 

* J * 

— 1— J 

way  dem  de,  Chirry-way,  Constan’  dead  to-day,  Chirry-way. 


Then  Annancy  say  : — “ A you  me  wanty.”  1 

1 See  the  story  of  Tangalomlibo  in  Torrend,  Comparative  Grammar  of 
S.  African  Bantu  Languages,  p.  319,  where  the  cock  is  chosen  as  messenger, 
when  the  ox  and  goat  are  rejected.  (A.  W. ) 


Dummy. 


85 


So  Annancy  beg  Bro’er  Peafowl  he  must  come  with  him 
to  Dummy. 

An’  when  Dummy  hear  the  tune  it  sweet  him  so,  he 
commence  to  shake  him  head  an’  hum. 

So  them  went  to  the  King  yard,  Peafowl  before,  Dummy 
in  the  middle,  Annancy  dd  a back. 

An’  as  they  reach  up  Annancy  say  “ Wheugh ! ” being 
him  breat’  gone  an’  him  tired,  but  peafowl  never  cease  with 
the  song. 

When  Annancy  got  him  breat’  he  say  to  the  King : — 
“ Master  me  a come,  me  a go  make  Dummy  talk.” 

Then  the  King  say : — “ I will  like  to  hear  Dummy  talk.” 

An’  Peafowl  sing  an’  sing,  an’  make  all  sort  of  figure 
before  Dummy. 

Dummy  commence  to  shake  him  head  two  t’ree  time  de 
way  de  song  sweet  him. 

At  last  Dummy  begin  to  hum. 

As  Peafowl  see  him  commence  to  hum,  Peafowl  make  a 
sudden  spring,  went  up  to  Dummy  with  a great  flourish, 
an’  at  last  Dummy  sing  right  out  the  same  as  Peafowl : — 


An’  Annancy  get  the  bet  an’  the  King  marry  him  off. 
An’  Annancy  give  Peafowl  gold  all  over  his  body  an’  six 
quarts  of  corn.  From  that  Peafowl  cover  all  over  with 
gold. 


NOTES. 

Whe  you  wi’  say,  what  will  you  say  ? 
sweet  him  so,  pleased  him  so  much. 
Constan’,  Constance. 


86 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


XXVIII.  ANNANCY  AND  CANDLEFLY. 

One  day  Annancy  go  to  Brother  Candlefly  yard  fe  fire. 

When  him  go  Candlefly  give  him  fire  an’  tell  him  to 
wait  an’  he  will  go  give  him  a few  eggs. 

When  Annancy  get  the  eggs  he  go  home  with  the  fire. 

The  next  day  he  go  back  fe  fire  an’  Candlefly  give  him 
more  eggs. 

Annancy  go  till  him  get  halfway,  out  the  fire  an’  turn 
back. 

When  him  come  him  say : — “ Bro’er  Candlefly,  the  fire 
out ; give  me  some  more.” 

When  Candlefly  give  him  the  fire,  him  wait  an’  wait  to 
see  if  him  can  get  more  eggs.  Candlefly  never  give  him 
one. 

Annancy  say: — “Bro’er  Candlefly,  the  fire  a burn  me, 
please  give  me  one  egg  make  me  wet  me  han’,  fe  make  it 
better.” 

Candlefly  give  him  one  an’  tell  him  to  come  an’  he  will 
carry  him  where  any  amount  of  egg  da,  “ But  you  must 
not  come  till  close  a night.” 

Annancy  don’t  wait  till  night,  go  about  midday.  When 
him  go  him  get  a long  bag  ready.  Every  minute  him 
come  out  of  the  house  an’  look  on  sun.  Annancy  couldn’ 
tarry  but  only  praying  to  see  if  night  can  come. 

When  night  come  Candlefly  get  ready  an’  tell  Annancy 
to  stay  aback.  Them  travel  till  at  last  them  get.  (An- 
nancy going  to  play  out  Candlefly.) 

Every  gash  Candlefly  gash  an’  see  a egg  going  to  pick 
it  up,  Annancy  say  : — “A  me  first  see  ahm.” 

Candlefly  gash  again  : Annancy  take  away  every  one 
till  him  bag  full.  Candlefly  don’t  get  one.  So  as  Annancy 


Annancy  and  Candlefiy.  87 

such  a strong  man  Candlefly  compel  was  to  lef’  without 
say  a word. 

But  Annancy  going  to  feel  the  blow. 

After  Candlefly  gone  with  the  light  Annancy  couldn’  find 
nowhere  to  put  his  foot. 

Annancy  say  : — “ Poor  me  boy,  I mus’  try  see  if  I can 
fin’  the  way.” 

Annancy  start. 

Him  travel  till  him  go  an’  buck  on  a house.  The  way 
the  night  was  so  dark  he  never  see  the  house,  he  just  buck 
on  it. 

He  don’t  know  whose  house  it  was  but  him  call 
“ Godfather ! ” 

The  person  answer  : — “ Who  is  that  calling  ? ” 

Him  say: — ‘‘Annancy,  you  godson,  bring  some  eggs  fe 
>> 

you. 

During  this  time  Annancy  never  know  that  it  was  Tiger 
who  him  hate  so  much. 

When  the  door  open  there  come  Brother  Tiger. 

Annancy  say  : — “Marnin’,  Godfather  Tiger.” 

Tiger  say  : — “ Come  in.” 

Same  time  Tiger  send  his  wife  to  go  an’  put  on  the  copper 
on  the  fire. 

So  them  boil  the  whole  barrel-bag  of  eggs. 

When  the  eggs  boil  Tiger  ask  Annancy  if  him  want  any. 

The  frighten  in  him,  him  say  “ No.” 

So  Tiger  eat  the  whole  bag  of  eggs,  he  an’  his  wife  an’ 
children. 

To  find  out  if  Annancy  want  any  of  the  eggs  Tiger  tell 
him  wife  fe  lef’  two  of  the  good  shell.  So  Tiger  get  a lobters 
an’  put  with  the  egg  shell. 

When  Annancy  go  in  to  sleep,  Annancy  see  these  two 
eggs,  don’t  know  that  it  was  shell.  Tiger  know  how  the 
fellah  love  eggs. 

When  lamp  out  Annancy  ’tretch  him  hand  to  catch  the 
«ggs. 


88 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


Lobters  paw  give  him  a good  bite.  Him  jump.  Then 
Tiger  know  that  it  was  the  egg  the  fellah  want. 

Tiger  ask  :• — “ What  the  matter  Mr.  Annancy  ? ” 

“ No  dog-flea  a bit  me  up  so,  sir  ? Me  never  see  place 
have  dog-flea  like  a you  yard.” 

Tiger  gone  back  to  sleep. 

Five  minute  more  Annancy  cry  out : — “ Lahd  ! me  never 
see  place  have  dog-flea  like  a you  yard.” 

During  this  time  he  was  trying  to  get  the  egg-shell.  So 
he  try  an’  try  the  whole  night  an’  never  get. 

When  day  light  Tiger  say “ Me  son,  me  sorry  to  see 
dog-flea  bit  you  so  last  night.  You  is  the  first  man  come 
here  a me  house  say  dog-flea  bit  you.” 

Annancy  say  : — “ Godfather,  I don’t  get  a rest  from  I go 
to  bed  till  now.” 

Tiger  wife  get  tea  an’  give  him,  so  he  get  ready. 

Tiger  say : — “ Go  a me  goat-pen,  you  see  one  goat,  fetch 
him  ya  fe  me  before  you  go.” 

Annancy  go.  When  him  go  he  see  a big  he-goat,  him 
beard  was  a yard  long.  Annancy  catch  the  beard,  lift  him 
up  t’row  him  a ground,  take  a big  stick  begin  to  beat  him, 
give  bup ! bup ! say: — “You  b’ute ! a you  master  nyam 
all  me  egg  never  give  me  so  so  one  self.” 

Him  beat  him  so  till  the  goat  form  ’tiff  dead.  Now  this 
was  Tiger  all  the  time.  Annancy  leave  him  gone  to  see 
if  he  can  get  any  knife  to  cut  him  up. 

By  Annancy  come  back  him  don’t  see  no  goat,  only  a 
big  old  man  standing  up.  Him  put  after  him.  Annancy 
run  back  to  Tiger  yard.  The  man  was  after  him. 
Annancy  see  a gourdy,  run  right  in  it.  Tiger  lost  the 
fellah. 

Well ! Tiger  take  his  gourdy  going  fe  water. 

Annancy,  knowing  that  Tiger  mother  was  sick,  as  Tiger 
get  half  way  with  the  gourdy  on  his  head  Annancy  call  out  of 
the  gourdy  mouth : — “ Bro’er  Tiger,  you  mumma  dead  a 
house  from  yeshterday.” 


Annancy  and  Candlefly. 


89 


Tiger  stop,  him  listen,  him  can’t  hear. 

He  make  a move. 

Annancy  bawl  out  again  : — “ Bro’er  Tiger,  you  mumma 
dead  a house  from  yeshterday.” 

Tiger  stop,  him  listen,  him  can’t  hear. 

He  go  on  again,  he  hear  the  voice  again. 

He  throw  down  the  gourdy. 

Annancy  get  out,  said  to  Tiger: — “You  b’ute!  if  you  been 
broke  me  foot  you  wouldn’  min’  me  wife  and  picny.” 

Tiger  hear  the  voice  but  never  see  a soul. 

Him  run  gone  home  to  see  if  his  mother  dead.  When 
he  go  his  mother  was  still  alive. 

Annancy  go  home  an’  go  to  Candlefly  yard  tell  him 
say: — “I  never  will  be  cravin’  again,  ya,  Bro’er?  you  fe  carry 
me  again.  An’  Candlefly  say  “ Yes.” 

Every  day  Annancy  come.  Candlefly  wife  say  : — “ Him 
gone  long  time.” 

Annancy  never  get  to  go  with  Candlefly  again,  an’  he 
don’t  know  the  place. 

Jack  Mantora  me  no  choose  any. 

NOTES. 

Candlefly.  Among  the  smaller  fire-flies  which  twinkle  all  the  year  rushes, 
in  the  summer  months,  the  great  Candlefly.  It  makes  a roaring  sound  with 
its  strong,  swift  flight,  and  is  a strange  and  splendid  object.  It  has  three  lights, 
two  looking  like  eyes,  and  a larger  and  much  more  brilliant  one  underneath  the 
thorax.  When  at  rest  only  the  eye  lights  shine,  but  with  the  spread  of  its 
wings  a shutter  is  drawn  back  and  discloses  the  abdominal  light.  The  insect, 
which  is  the  size  of  a cockchafer  but  rather  longer,  is  commonly  called  Big 
Winky  or  Peeny. 

da,  is  pronounced  like  Italian. 

look  on  sun,  looks  at  the  sun  to  see  if  it  is  sinking. 

a back,  behind. 

get,  get  to  the  place. 

gash,  flash.  Lightning  is  said  to  gash.  As  explained  above,  this  gashing  of 
the  great  light  of  the  Candlefly  is  continuous  while  it  is  in  flight,  but  ceases  as 
soon  as  it  rests. 

buck  on,  run  against.  A horse  bucks,  here,  when  he  stumbles.  A man  bucks 


90 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


his  toe  when  he  knocks  his  naked  foot  against  a stone,  and  women  fight  (men 
too  for  that  matter)  by  bucking  with  their  heads. 

Marnin’.  Good  morning  and  good  evening  are  used  as  salutations  without 
reference  to  the  actual  time  of  day. 

barrel-bag,  a bag  of  the  capacity  of  a flour  barrel. 

the  frighten,  etc.,  owing  to  the  fright  which  was  in  him  he  said  “No.” 

fe  lef’,  to  leave. 

lobters.  This  transposition  of  letters  has  a ludicrous  effect  on  the  word, 
paw,  pronounced  pah  very  broadly. 

Fleas  are  always  called  dog-fleas,  or  rather  dahg-fleas. 

tea,  the  morning  sugar-water,  is  the  signal  that  it  is  time  for  the  guest  to  be 
soon  moving  on.  Generally,  however,  he  is  given  something  to  do  before 
he  goes, 
ya,  here. 

so  so  one  self,  even  one. 
form,  pretended. 

Him  put  after  him.  The  old  man  put  (ran)  after  Annancy. 

You  couldn’  mind,  etc.  This  piece  of  pleasantry  is  common.  When  two 
men  are  doing  anything  that  requires  care  to  avoid  accident,  such  as  moving  a 
heavy  stone,  one  says  to  the  other  : — “ No  kill  me  ya,  you  couldn’  min’  me 
wife  an’  picny,”  you  can’t  support  my  wife  and  children. 

ya,  do  you  hear?  Which  is  also  its  meaning  in  the  preceding  note.  Just 
now  ya  meant  ‘ here.’ 


Parson  Puss  and  Parson  Dog. 


9i 


XXIX.  PARSON  PUSS  AND  PARSON  DOG. 

One  day  Toad  was  courting  for  a long  time  to  a very 
pretty  India  gal,  an’  Toad  didn’  want  marry  the  gal.  An’ 
him  didn’  want  the  gal  was  to  leave  him  but  to  live 
without  married. 

An’  Puss  was  Toad  parson.  An’  the  mother  send  an’ 
call  Puss,  an’  when  Parson  Puss  come,  the  mother  lay  the 
matter  before  Parson  Puss. 

An’  Parson  Puss  call  Toad  one  of  his  lovely  member  in  the 
church,  an’  him  didn’  want  Toad  was  to  leave  his  church. 
An’  Parson  Puss  talk  until  Toad  agree  to  married  the  gal. 

An’  Dog  himself  was  a parson. 

So  Toad  send  out  a invitation  to  all  his  countrywoman 
an’  countryman,  an’  invite  Tacoma  an’  his  families,  an’ 
likewise  invite  his  friend  Mr.  Annancy  an’  his  families. 
An’  when  him  done  Toad  invite  Parson  Dog. 

An’  the  day  when  Toad  is  to  married  Parson  Puss  come 
to  married  Toad. 

An’  Parson  Dog  come  with  his  gown  was  to  take  away 
the  business  from  Parson  Puss. 

But  Toad  say  : — “ Oh  no  ! he  will  like  to  give  his  Parson 
the  preference.” 

An’  Dog  say: — “Yes,  I must  have  it.  If  not  will  be 
mossiful  fight  to-day.” 

Puss  wife,  was  the  organ-player,  say  : — “ What  a man  fe 
swear ! ” 

An’  Parson  Puss  say  to  Toad  mother-in-law: — “You 
don’t  mustn’t  listen  what  that  fellah  Parson  Dog  is  saying. 
He  so  tief,  as  soon  as  they  ’tick  the  hog  he  will  soon 
forget  all  this  for  he  has  to  go  an’  lick  blood,  so  when  he 
gone  I will  marry  my  member  Toad.” 


92 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story . 


An’  so  Dog  did  go  away. 

Until  he  come  back  Parson  Puss  marry  off  Toad. 

An’  when  they  eat  cake  done,  then  Parson  Puss  ask  the 
young  ladies  them  to  let  them  go  an’  play  in  the  ring,  an’ 
so  they  did  do. 

That  time  Parson  Dog  didn’  know  what  was  doning, 
but  soon  he  hear  this  sing  : — 

A llegretto. 


c— trsaar*— - n 

s 

i-’--  n~i — 

— # Au 

S-..JV  -V 

J—J X* 

X?  * » 2 

f( 

\ It  1!  A 

_ IA_  — 

mm* 

05 

J.  —m  ” - 

-U 1>  > y 

When  you  see  a hug  - ly  man,  When  you  see  a hug-  ly  man, 


=5 

— ^ — fv— 

— — ET-Tg-  1 | 

w 

y-*-*— J J »-  # r 

* J- 

m 

9 

\ 

-m — m — m u 

When  you  see  a hug-lyman,  Ne-ver  make  him  mar-ry  you. 

An’  as  him  hear  him  hold  up  one  of  him  foot  an’  listen. 
An’  he  come  nearer  an’  hear  again : — 


Par-son  Dog  won’t  married  me,  Cut  your  eye  an’  pass  him. 


Then  Parson  Dog  shake  him  head,  run  come. 

An’  as  he  run  come  he  meet  Parson  Puss  was  wheeling 
all  the  gal. 

Parson  Dog  get  very  vex  an’  he  bear  an’  bear. 

But  as  he  hear  plain  how  the  sing  go,  an’  see  that  some 
of  the  gal  Puss  was  wheeling  began  to  laugh  after  him, 
say: — “No  see  how  him  mout’  long,”  Parson  Dog  get 
fairly  upstarted  till  him  run  in  the  ring  an’  palm  Puss  an 
begin  to  fight  him. 

An’,  as  Parson  Puss  feel  Parson  Dog  ’trength  more  than 
fe  him,  him  look  for  a very  tall  tree  an’  run  right  upon  it  to 
save  his  life. 


Parson  Puss  and  Parson  Dog.  93 

An’  from  that  day  that  why  Dog  an’  Puss  can’t  ’gree 
until  now. 

Jack  Mantora  me  no  choose  any. 

NOTES. 

lovely  member.  A certain  amount  of  blarney  is  supposed  to  be  admissible 
to  keep  your  sheep  from  straying  to  a rival’s  flock. 

to  married  Toad.  Though  they  sometimes  say  marry  (see  the  first  song) 
they  prefer  married.  The  d before  the  T of  Toad  is  very  awkward  to 
pronounce,  yet  the  reciter,  whose  normal  speech  is  of  the  laziest,  like  that  of 
all  his  kindred,  got  it  out  quite  plainly. 

mossiful,  unmerciful.  Dog  really  used  a bad  word  here,  which  is  always 
put  in  his  mouth.  He  uses  the  same  word  in  “ Finger  Quashy.”  So  much 
does  it  belong  to  him  that  it  occurs  as  a descriptive  adjective  to  the  dog  in 
the  tune  for  the  third  Quadrille  figure,  which  will  be  found  among  the  dance 
tunes.  The  word  is  not  really  very  bad,  but  it  was  not  considered  appropriate 
to  a book  which  may  find  its  way  into  the  nursery,  so  in  every  case  another 
one  is  substituted. 

’tick,  stick.  The  pig  was  killed  for  the  wedding  festivities,  which  were  only 
just  beginning.  See  note  on  weddings  in  “Gaulin.” 
play  in  the  ring,  play  Sally  Water,  see  Ring  Tunes, 
doning,  being  done. 

never  make  him  marry  you,  never  let  him,  etc. 

cut  your  eye,  turn  your  eye  aside.  Where  we  use  transitive  cut  they  put 
intransitive  cut  eye. 
wheeling,  turning  them  in  the  dance, 
run  come,  came  running  up. 

bear  an’  bear,  was  patient  for  a while.  A picturesque  way  of  describing 
Dog’s  self-restraint.  He  bears  it  and  he  bears  it  again. 

no  see,  etc.,  don’t  you  see  how  long  his  mouth  is.  This  is  always  the  joke 
about  Dog.  About  Puss  it  is  “ You  face  too  (very)  short.  Cut  off  half 
inch  you  don’t  have  nose.” 
upstarted,  angry, 
palm,  touch  or  hold  with  the  hand, 
fe  him,  his. 


94 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


XXX.  CHICKEN-HAWK. 

Once  a lady  have  t’ree  daughter.  One  of  the  daughter,  the 
youngest  one,  born  with  a gold  teet’.  The  other  sisters 
h’ard  of  the  teet’  an’  ask  their  sister  to  show  them  the  teet’, 
but  she  never  would  show  them. 

One  day  they  get  Monkey  an’  Goat  to  come  an’  dance  to 
let  the  sister  laugh.  They  make  all  sort  of  mechanic.  She 
never  laugh  all  the  dance  Monkey  an’  Goat  was  dancing. 

Those  other  two  pay  her  so  much  to  see  the  teet’.  She 
won’t  show  them. 

So  the  second  sister  tell  the  big  one  say  : — “ Sister,  let 
we  go  make  bargain  with  Chicken-hawk  to  try  if  we  can  see 
the  teet’.” 

So  they  did  go  an’  see  Chicken-hawk  about  it  an’  pay 
Chicken-hawk  so  much. 

The  day  come  when  they  fix  up  to  go  to  the  river. 

Chicken-hawk  was  on  a tree. 

So  they  gone  to  swim  for  a long  time,  the  big  sister  them 
swimming  an’  laughing  in  the  water  for  the  little  one  to 
laugh  for  them  to  see  the  teet’,  but  she  never  laugh. 

During  that  time  Chicken-hawk  took  up  all  three  of  them 
clothes  an’  gone  on  a high  tree  where  them  can  see  him. 

When  the  sister  know  that  Chicken-hawk  took  the  clothes 


they  came  out  of  the  water  all  t’ree  of  them. 
All  the  clothes  was  gone. 

The  first  sister  commence  fe  sing : — 


r ~ 

r-  

1 ' 1 m 

m H 

.ZEE  tc  _ ' 1 _ 

N (S 

J . -1  _ \ s 

_ I J m 

9 J 

W 

— d— 

Chicken -hahk  oh  ! Chicken  - hahk  oh  ! give  me  me 


ry— — 1 r 

— 

l 1 

. J J ^ W w_ 

"XL  I'h — w I — r “IV  \ 

L S _N 

n r 

_ 1 

us 

• • 

it 

L«_ J J 

CJ  A 

Chicken-hahk  oh  ! Chicken-hahkoh  ! Chicken-hahk  ! 


frock. 


Ch  icken  -Hawk. 


95 


An’  Chicken-hawk  bring  come. 

The  next  sister  do  the  same  an’  get  her  frock. 

Here  comes  the  youngest  one.  She  shut  up  her  mouth 
an’  was  calling  from  her  t’roat : — 


Hm — - - hm — - hm — 


y „ n „ ----- 

. . 

1 1 

II 

— ^4— f 

i s N 

L II 

4r  - - - * d. 

r~*  • * a> 

« 0 

hm — - - hm — - - hm — 


Chicken-hawk  never  give  her. 

When  the  big  sister  see  that  she  won’t  call  for  them  to 
see  the  teet’  they  leave  her,  an’  she  become  'fraid  an’  call 
out : — 


0 


S N 


a 0 


Chicken  - hahk  oh  ! Chicken  - hahk  oh  ! 


give  me  me 


M 1 

• 1 t 

i n 

is 

f 

y zz  0 1 t N N 

s s 

'LL  S S 

8 

_AL 

tt  a 

— J V1 

» a 0 

E22. II 

frock.  Chicken -hahk  oh  ! Chicken-hahk  oh  ! Chicken-hahk. 


An’  the  big  sister  run  come  an  see  the  golden  teet’  an’ 
was  so  glad. 

They  go  home  an’  tell  their  mother  that  we  have  gain 
the  battle  an’  have  seen  the  gold  teet’. 

From  that  day  we  see  gold  teet’  until  now. 


mechanic,  antics, 
so  much,  a sum  of  money. 


NOTES. 


96 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


XXXI.  PRETTY  POLL. 

Once  a Duke  have  a sarvant.  So  this  sarvant  was  courting 
to  a young  man  for  a long  time. 

So  one  day  another  friend  come  to  see  the  Duke.  So  he 
love  the  Duke  sarvant  an’  the  Duke  sarvant  love  him.  So 
this  man  ask  the  Duke  for  her. 

The  Duke  say  : — - “No,  she  is  courting  already.” 

So  the  friend  was  sorry. 

The  gal  tell  the  young  man  say: — “ Me  love  you,  an’  if 
you  going  to  marry  me  I will  lef  my  lover  an’  come.” 

The  young  man  say : — “ How  you  will  manage  that  the 
Duke  not  going  to  allow  it  ? ” 

The  gal  say:—  “You  look  out.” 

So  one  evening,  when  the  gal  lover  come  home,  she  ask 
him  to  let  them  go  for  a walk  far  away.  “ I am  going  to 
show  you  a very  pretty  place.” 

During  this  time  the  gal  know  where  a well  was,  so  she 
is  going  to  shub  him  into  the  well. 

As  they  reach  to  the  place  they  see  a pretty  flowers  in 
the  well. 

So  they  was  looking  at  the  flowers. 

As  she  see  that  her  lover  was  gazing  at  the  flowers  she 
just  shub  him  right  in  the  well  an’  said: — “ T’ank  God! 
me  going  to  get  that  pretty  young  man.” 

During  this  time  there  was  a Parrot  on  a tree  seeing  all 
that  was  going  on,  cry  out : — 


home;  you  have  yourdearestlover  an’  cast  him  down  to  the  well. 


Pretty  Poll. 


97 


The  gal  look  up  an’  see  the  Parrot. 
She  get  frighten,  call  to  Poll : — 


Allegretto. 


-1 

*>- 

m # 

K 

/ 

' 11  If  Z 

V 

m"  . - g 1“ 

l 1 

9 Li  r J 

V 

y eS  g 9 # - . 

jr ^ 

i 

r r V 

Come,  Prpt-ty  Poll,  come!  There  is  a house  of 


gold  an’  sil  - ver  be -fore  you 


sit  ’pon 


tree. 


Poll  sing  : — 


Adagio. 


-jz  

v S 1 srr 

h- 

•v  i rMV  . w . 

— p-- 

frn  Ti  71  /i  _ 1 

j 1 

.1  V - 

m — i'n  i> 



m ^ 

• * 0 L 

# ,J 

Tree  I barn,  Treelmustbe  staytillmy  time  come  to  die. 


An’  Poll  commence  to  fly  from  tree  to  tree  an’  she  was 
following  him  till  they  get  out  to  a village.  Poll  was  still 
singing  an’  she  was  begging. 

Poll  fly  from  house  to  house  till  he  get  on  the  Duke  house 
an’  sing. 

The  gal  was  crying. 

The  Duke  hear,  send  out  man  an’  they  listen  until  them 
hear  what  Poll  said,  an’  them  catch  the  gal  an’  chop  off  her 
head. 

An’  Poll  get  good  care. 

Jack  Mantora  me  no  choose  any. 


NOTES. 

This  is  another  version  of  the  “ King  Daniel  ” story, 
before  you  sit,  instead  of  your  sitting. 

Tree  I barn,  etc.  On  a tree  I was  born,  on  a tree  I must  stay. 


G 


98 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


XXXII.  ANNANCY  AND  HOG. 

One  day  Annancy  an’  him  grandmamma  go  to  a ground. 
Annancy  left  him  fife. 

When  him  coming  home,  he  an’  his  grandmamma,  he 
said : — “ Gran’mumma  you  know  I leave  my  fife  at 

_ „ y yy 

groun . 

Him  grandmamma  say  “ Me  son  a know  you  well. 
You  is  a very  bad  boy.  Go  for  it  but  don’t  play.” 
When  Annancy  coming  home  he  play : — 


Vivace. 


O 

- ^ — is- 

M J ! 

X IX  1 

'TnT  't  ' 1 1 — i 

j * ^ 

m T r I 

=t= 

m m m — -1 

None  a we,  none  a we  com-man-do 


t , i . - 

— ; 

. . . ..  s. 

L_Z  .!  1 ! __  1 * Z3  ^ ^ 

1 m 

• J 

/ W W 

id — j — 

— 

Sair  - ey  gone  home  com-man-do  Yah  - ka  Yah  - ky 


\j 

N 

X —IS.  - 

1 

m m 

P p 

m 1 

fny  r 

~Y w — 

d 1 

V V 1 1 

! 

/ I 

T 

-=T=P=I  1 

Yak  commando,  Suck  your  mother  bone  commando. 


An’  as  he  play  he  meet  Hog. 

Hog  say : — “ Brother,  a you  a play  da  sweet  sweet 
tune.” 

Annancy  say: — “No,  Bro’er.” 

Hog  say : — “ Play,  make  me  hear.” 

Annancy  play  twee,  twee,  twee,  all  wrong  note. 

Hog  say: — “Tche!  you  can’t  play.” 

Hog  gone  round  short  pass. 

As  Hog  go  round  short  pass,  him  buck  the  boy 
was  playing  the  tune. 


Annancy  and  Hog. 


99 


Hog  say: — “ Bro’er  Annancy  I think  a you  a play, 
you  beggar,  you  light  fe  me  dinner,  you  libber  fe  me 
dog.” 

An’  Hog  carry  home  Annancy  an’  goin’  to  do  him 
up  for  him  dinner. 

An’  when  Hog  think  him  done  up  Annancy  him  done 
up  him  own  mother. 

An’  that  made  Hog  nasty  feeder  up  to  to-day. 

Jack  Mantora  me  no  choose  none. 

NOTES. 

ground,  a provision  ground  where  yams,  etc.,  are  grown.  They  often 
pronounce  it  grun,  rhyming  to  run  but  even  shorter. 

a leave,  I leave. 

This  tune  has  a bobbin,  see  Digging  sings.  Nonsense  words  of  course. 

commando,  pronounced  common  doe. 

yah,  with  French  a. 

pass,  path.  It  no  doubt  should  be  gone  down  short  pass.  The  paths 
circle  round  the  steep  mountain  sides  and  short  cuts  connect  the  loops. 

buck,  stumbles  on,  meet. 

you  light,  etc.  Your  lights  for  my  dinner,  your  liver  for  my  dog. 


IOO 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


XXXIII.  DRY  RIVER. 

Once  a man  have  t’ree  daughter.  Dem  go  go  pick 
wacky. 

When  dem  a come,  dem  come  to  a river  having  no 
water. 

Dem  meet  a old  man  beg  dem  a wacky. 

The  two  biggest  one  give  the  old  man  two  wacky, 
one  each,  an’  the  little  one  wouldn’  give  any. 

An’  the  old  man  sing : — 


Allegro. 


-Jfc— fi— ,j a— sr 

- v~ -=N=q 

s 

1— 

~m — m 

\-l X — 1 

— 0 — A — 0 — 0 

— .*_3 — 

0*--' 

You  no  give  me  one  wacky  you  can’t  pass,  You  no 


• Q 

— i — ST 

s — 

1 P M V 

p ' ^ \ ^ P 

f;  t r“-  — r*- — S — r — 1 

J J 1 S 

% 

1 

» 

1 

ft 

ft 

^ • 

- — -V- 

-L— — — m — — 

give  me  one  wacky  you  can’t  pass,  You  no  give  me  one  wacky  you 


=^=F=J^ 

0 — 

V"  v s 

S 

"n 

f— 

-F — F — 

-U-U 

r-  ’i 

VtA-iA 



can’t  pass,  Dry  River  will  comean’ takeyou ’way.  Draw  me  nearer, 


s— N~ 

p 

0 rn 

# 

^ ^ - 

r 

0 0 0 p ^ 

fr 

5 m m 

# r 

o 

Lr 

31 

« J 

z 

. O- 

V — 

/ — : r — 

-V  V V 1 ■ 

Draw  me  near,  Dry  Ri  - ver  will  come  an’  take  you ’way. 


An’  the  little  one  won’t  give. 

An’  the  two  big  sister  want  to  give  two  more  of  their 
wacky  to  the  old  man;  but  the  old  man  say: — “No,  the 
little  one  must  give  me  one  of  fe  her  wacky.” 

An’  she  won’t  give. 

So  the  old  man  sing  the  sing  again. 


i 


Dry  River. 


IOI 


An’  still  the  little  one  won’t  give,  until  at  last  the 
river  come  down  carry  him  gone. 

From  that  day  people  drowning. 

Jack  Mantora  me  no  choose  none. 

NOTES. 

In  the  heavy  rains  of  October  and  May  the  rivers  rise  suddenly,  and  an 
insignificant  stream  or  dry  river-bed  becomes  a raging  torrent.  Travellers 
are  delayed  in  the  Seasons,  as  these  rainy  times  are  called,  owing  to  the  fords 
becoming  impassable.  This  happens  now  less  frequently  than  formerly,  not 
because  the  rivers  do  not  ‘ come  down  ’ but  because  many  of  them  are  bridged. 

wacky  (French  a with  a t rn  to  o,  almost  “wocky”),  guava.  This  fruit 
which  makes  the  well-known  jelly  is  wild.  It  is  the  size  of  a small  apple, 
and  has  a delicious  scent  when  ripe  and  yellow.  Raw,  however,  it  is  not  a 
good  fruit.  The  flavour  is  coarse  and  the  pulp  is  full  of  very  hard  seeds,  which 
must  be  swallowed  whole. 

when  dem  a come,  when  they  reach  the  place  where  the  wackies  are  they 
come  to  a river. 

old  man  beg,  etc.,  old  man  who  asks  them  for  a wacky.  Much  of  the 
conciseness  of  negro  speech  is  due  to  the  suppression  of  relatives  and 
prepositions. 

you  no  give,  if  you  do  not  give. 


102 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


XXXIV.  YELLOW  SNAKE. 

Once  a woman,  name  Miss  Winky,  have  four  children, 
three  son  an’  one  daughter.  The  son  them  was  hunter- 
man  and  the  youngest  son  was  old-witch.  This  sister 
never  can  find  her  fancy.  Everybody  come  she  say : 
“ Lard,  this  one  hugly,  me  no  like  him  at  all ! ” 

Till  one  day  she  an’  the  mother  an’  old-witch  boy 
was  at  home. 

Snake  was  on  a journey,  get  to  a rum-shop.  Talking 
an’  talking  they  bring  up  some  talk  about  this  gal,  that 
everybody  go  for  her  she  refuse. 

Snake  say  : — “ Is  she  a pretty  gal  ? ” 

They  say: — “Yes,  man,  she  is  a beauty  to  look  at.” 

Snake  said  : — “ I bet  anything  I get  that  gal.” 

Snake  change  an’  fix  up  himself  an’  go  to  the  yard. 

When  he  go  he  said  : — “ Good  day,  Miss  Winky,  I 
come  to  ask  you  for  your  daughter.” 

The  gal,  was  in  the  room,  run  out  to  see  if  it  is  a 
pretty  man. 

As  she  come  out  she  said  : — “ Mamma,  this  is  my  love, 
no  one  else.” 

So  Snake  was  invite  in  the  house. 

The  mother  said  : — “ Well,  as  you  get  your  fancy  I 
am  going  to  married  you.” 

So  the  next  day  they  go  an’  get  marry. 

After  dinner  Snake  get  ready,  an’  the  gal  mother  tie 
up  all  her  clothes  an’  they  start. 

They  travel  the  whole  night  until  daylight  an’  never 
could  get,  till  about  midday  they  reach  the  place.  It 
was  a big  stone-hole. 

Snake  carry  her  under,  put  her  to  sit  down. 


Yellow  Snake. 


103 


An’  after  Snake  get  a good  rest  he  commence  to 
swallow  her. 

On  the  meantime  the  old-witch  boy,  name  of  Cawly, 
know  all  what  was  going  on  in  the  wood,  tell  his  two 
elder  brother  to  come  “an’  let  us  go  hunting  for  I hear 
the  voice  of  my  dear  beloved  sister  crying  for  me  in 
the  wood.” 

The  two  brother  said: — “You  always  goin’  on  with 
your  foolishness.” 

He  said  : — “ Never  mind,  come  let  us  go  an’  see.” 

So  they  start  an’  they  walk  like  beast,  till  at  last  they 
nearly  reach  where  they  could  hear  the  sister. 

They  hear  a voice  : — 


A ndante. 


rJ 

^ 9 " — 9' 

==^=^=F===! 

y *-3.-  L ' : 

■ -- 



Fe  me  Caw-ly  Caw-ly  oh!  - If  no 


r 1 

El 

— 1 

i 

l 

9-9-9 

huntermannocomehere  oh  ! - YallaSnake will  swallowme. 


Snake,  fe  all  him  mout’  full,  get  to  say  : — “ Me  will 
swallow  you  till  you  mumma  no  fin’  piece  of  you  bone.” 

The  brother  come  close  to  the  place,  climb  upon  the 
stone. 

They  hear  the  voice  plainer,  come  down  off  the  stone 
an’  see  that  Snake  leave  but  the  head  of  their  sister. 

They  go  down  on  Snake  an’  kill  him  an’  split  him 
an’  take  out  their  sister  an’  carry  her  home. 

From  that  day  she  never  marry  again  for  she  feel 
the  hand  of  marry. 

So  everybody  that  pick  too  much  will  come  off  the 
same  way. 

Jack  Mantora  me  no  choose  none. 


104 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


NOTES. 

Snake,  pronounced  in  two  syllables,  Se-nake  with  the  exact  value  of  vowels 
in  the  French  words  ce  n’est  que,  and  of  course  stopping  at  the  k sound  of  the  q. 

Tie  up  all  her  clothes,  in  a bundle  which  she  would  carry  on  her  head. 

get,  get  to  Snake’s  home. 

beast.  This  is  the  generic  name  for  a beast  of  burden,  horse,  mule,  or 
donkey. 

fe  all,  although. 

get  to  say,  managed  to  say. 

fe  me,  my. 

feel  the  hand  of  marry,  a biblical  expression.  She  felt  the  hand  of 
matrimony,  and  behold  it  was  heavy. 


XXXV.  COW  AND  ANNANCY. 

One  day  Annancy  was  passing  Cow  pastur’,  saw  the 
whole  of  them  was  cleaning  their  teeth  with  chewstick. 

He  was  so  frighten  for  Cow,  he  stay  outside  the  pastur’ 
on  a tree  an’  call  to  Cow,  telling  them  howdy. 

Cow  never  answer  him,  so  he  get  worser  frighten. 

He  said  to  himself : — “ If  I give  them  piece  of  cane, 
fool  them  say  it  is  my  chewstick,  they  might  a come 
friend  with  me.” 

So  Cow  them  go  out  in  the  night  to  feed. 

An’  when  them  gone  Annancy  go  an’  get  his  side- 
bag  full  with  cane  as  quick  as  he  can.  An’  when  him 
come  Cow  them  gone  away  for  the  whole  night,  so  he 
climb  the  tree  an’  sleep  on  the  tree  until  daylight. 

An’  when  the  sun  begin  to  hot  the  Cow  come  under 
the  tree  fe  throw  up  their  food  fe  eat  it  back.  Same 
time  Cow  cleaning  him  teeth  with  the  chewstick. 

Presently  the  papa  Cow  see  a big  piece  of  something 
drop  out  of  the  tree. 


Cow  and  Annancy.  105 

He  look  up  see  Annancy,  call  to  him  : — “ What  you 
doing  de  ? ” 

Annancy  say  : — “ Me  bring  piesh  a chewshtick  fe  you.” 

Cow  take  up  the  cane  begin  to  chew.  Instead  of 
cleaning  teeth  he  was  swallowing  both  juice  an’  trash. 

Cow  say: — “Him  sweet;  you  no  hab  no  more  de 
now  ? ” 

Annancy  say  “Yes.” 

Cow  call  him  down  from  the  tree. 

When  he  come  down  he  give  everybody  piece  of  the 
cane,  tell  them  that  it  is  fe  him  chewstick. 

During  this  time  he  have  a big  bottle  of  cane-juice, 
ask  Cow  if  him  want  a taste. 

Cow  take  a taste,  he  done  the  whole  bottle  of  it. 

So  they  all  get  in  friend  with  Annancy. 

An’  Annancy  invite  Cow  to  go  home  with  him,  an’ 
he  will  show  him  where  he  get  such  good  chewstick. 

Cow  say  : — “ You  no  have  nobody  a you  yard.” 

Annancy  say  “Yes.” 

Cow  say  : — “ Me  shame  fe  go.” 

Annancy  say : — “ Make  me  go  home  an’  sen’  dem 
’way.” 

Annancy  go  home,  tell  all  his  friend  them  must  look 
out,  him  going  to  fetch  Cow,  ya. 

Them  say : — “ If  you  bring  Cow  you  we  will  never 
trust  you  the  longest  day  we  live. 

Annancy  say  : — “ Look  out.” 

He  take  a rope.  When  he  go  back  he  tell  Cow  that 
him  no  see  nobody  a yard,  so  Cow  must  come  make 
dem  go. 

Cow  say,  “ Yes.” 

Them  ’tart. 

Annancy  tell  Cow  that  as  he  is  such  a coward  man 
him  have  a piece  of  rope,  Cow  must  make  him  put  it 
on  his  neck,  afraid  a when  him  a go  the  picny  them 
go  see  him,  go  make  noise,  you  go  turn  back. 


io6  Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 

Annancy  say : “ Bro’er  Cow,  when  you  go  near  me 
yard,  if  you  yerry  them  picny  a make  noise  no  frighten, 
fan  you  tail  with  strength.” 

When  them  get  to  where  all  the  friend  an’  children 
could  see  him,  him  call  to  them  : — “ A da  come,  no 
see  me  frien’  a come  tell  you  howdy.”  He  turn  to 
Cow  said  : — “ Fan  you  tail,  no  min’  dem  people. 

At  last  them  reach  the  yard. 

Annancy  have  a big  tree  at  the  front  of  his  house.  He 
tell  Cow “ Bro’er  Cow,  stay  ya,  make  me  go  look  after 
the  house;  me  wife  no  know,  say  me  a bring  ’tranger  ya, 
so  we  can’t  carry  you  in  so,  so  you  can  fan  you  tail  as 
much.” 

During  this  time  Annancy  gone  to  get  all  his  tool 
sharpen  to  kill  Cow.  He  left  his  biggest  son  to  watch 
Cow  but  he  can’t  trust  the  boy.  Every  minute  he  come 
to  look  if  Cow  is  there. 

The  first  time  he  come  an’  look  he  say  to  Cow : — 
“ Fan  you  tail.” 

When  the  thing  them  nearly  done  sharp  he  come 
back,  see  Cow  was  fanning  his  tail. 

He  said  to  Cow: — “You  Cow,  you  no  yerry  me  say 
‘ No  fan  you  tail  a me  yard  ? ’ ” 

Cow  fan  fe  the  better. 

He  come  with  his  bill,  said  to  Cow  : — “ If  you  no 
’top  fan  you  tail  either  you  kill  me  or  me  kill  you.” 

Cow  won’t  stop. 

He  say  to  one  of  the  friend “ Now,  now,  sir,  you 
see  how  that  man  a frighten  me  picny  a me  yard,  him 
mout’  so  hugly.” 

Him  come  up  nearer  to  Cow  say: — “If  you  no  ’top 
fan  you  tail  somet’ing  mus’  done.” 

Cow  won’t  stop,  seeing  the  fly  a trouble  him. 

Annancy  set  a run  with  his  bill  chop  at  Cow  neck. 

Cow  draw  back  his  head,  the  bill  catch  the  rope,  set 
Cow  free,  so  he  run  for  his  life. 


Cow  and  Annancy. 


107 


Annancy  say: — “ Come  back,  Bro’er  Cow,  a fun  me 
a make  wi’  you,  simple  little  fun,  you  run  gone  home.” 
But  Cow  was  flying  for  his  home  an’  never  stop. 
Annancy  take  up  this  song  : — 


Allegro. 


has  - ty  kill  me  dead  oh  ! 


Lard 


Lard 


Lard  ! Lard  ! has  - ty  kill  me  dead  oh  ! 


'--0-^- 0- 

*-0 — 0—0 — 0 — ' 

Poor  me  boy  oh!  a whe  me  a go  do?  Me  put  me  pot  a 


y , p -v- 

— 

r 

ii  m h* 

1 > 

iflyP  p 1 1 J 

0-  0 

H— r 

m 0 <i>  a : 

— 

fire  fe  boil  Cow  liver,  but  has-ty  kill  me  dead. 


From  that  day  Annancy  never  can  go  where  Cow  is. 
Anywhere  Cow  see  him  he  reach  him  down  with  his 
mouth. 

Jack  M ant  or  a me  no  choose  any. 


NOTES. 

We  have  had  this  story  already  in  another  form  (Annancy  and  Cow,  No.  20). 
chewstick,  a common  climber.  A piece  of  the  stem  about  the  thickness  of 
a pencil  is  cut  and  makes  a sort  of  soapy  froth  as  it  is  chewed.  It  has  an 
agreeable  bitter  taste  and  is  used  to  clean  the  teeth, 
howdy,  how  do  you  do  ? 
cane,  sugar-cane, 
fool  them,  take  them  in,  delude. 

side-bag.  Everybody  has  his  side-bag  or  namsack  (knapsack), 
papa,  pronunciation  something  between  puppa  and  poppa,  with  slight  accent 
on  the  first  syllable.  Cows  in  Jamaica  are  of  both  sexes. 

dd  there;  the  e is  that  of  “debt”  lengthened.  French  “est”  gives  it 
exactly.  Whe  has  the  same  e. 

trash,  the  fibre.  Trash  is  any  kind  of  refuse,  such  as  shells  of  peas,  husks 
of  maize,  the  remains  of  Cassada  after  the  starch  is  washed  out,  withered 
banana  leaves,  the  outside  pulp  which  encloses  the  coffee  beans,  etc.,  etc. 
ya  sometimes  means  here , sometimes  do  you  hear? 


io8 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


rope,  pronounced  ro-up.  So  gate  becomes  ge-ut  (French  6),  goat,  go-ut 
(Italian  o),  much  as  in  some  provincial  districts  in  England, 
a da  come,  I am  coming, 
carry,  lead. 

as  much,  as  much  as  you  like. 

a fun  me  a make,  I was  pretending.  A man  is  said  to  make  fun  when  he  is 
only  pretending  to  work,  what  schoolboys  call  “ sugaring.” 
hasty,  haste,  i.e.  your  hurrying  away. 

hungry  kill  me  is  a common  expression  meaning  “ I am  very  hungry.” 
Here  hasty  is  substituted  for  hungry.  Your  hasting  away  will  leave  me  with- 
out food,  and  hunger  will  kill  me. 


XXXVI.  LEAH  AND  TIGER. 

There  was  a man  an’  his  wife  got  one  daughter,  only 
the  one  picny  they  got.  An’  many  a people  come  for  her 
to  courten  to  her,  an’  she  refuse,  an’  she  would  stay  a 
world  without  marry. 

An’  the  father  said  to  the  wife:  — “Them  people  usual 
trouble  me  with  my  own  daughter  ; we  must  do  some- 
thing to  get  her  out  of  them  sight.” 

An’  the  both  of  them  agree  to  make  up  a very  big 
house  in  the  wood  to  lef’  the  daughter  there  where 
nobody  wouldn’  see  him. 

An’  the  father  said  to  the  wife : — “ When  the  house 
done  you  mus’  carry  him  breakfas’  every  twelve  o’clock 
an’  dinner  at  four.” 

An  mumma  say: — “Yes,  me  dear,  I think  so  better.” 

An’  they  take  Leah  an’  walk  with  her  all  night  an’ 
lodge  her  into  the  house  before  daylight. 

An’  at  the  meantime  Leah  got  a very  valuable  ring 
on  one  of  her  finger,  a very  pretty  young  woman  too, 
though  me  never  see  him. 

Mumma  tell  him  that  when  him  going  to  bed  he  must 
always  say  him  prayers.  An’  she  tell  her  that,  when 


Leah  and  Tiger. 


109 


she  re’ch  the  hillside  she  sing  the  song,  she  must  know 
a him  honey  a come.  An’  this  the  song  : — 


A llegretto. 


f-yS 

t&r-V  - 

N=f*= 

s-f- 

-9 — 

0 

** 

=,. =1 

• 

-m 

=J-*- 

d- 

=*=^= 

Le  - ah!  Le  - ah  ! ting -a  - ling,  You  no  yer  - ry  you 


ting -a  - ling,  Su-gar  de  a door,  ting  - a - ling. 


An’  this  time  Tiger  was  under  the  house  hear  all  the 
bargain. 

An’  Tiger  lie  down  very  ’teady.  (Some  days  to  come 
he  must  get  meat  fe  eat  a this  bush.) 

Then  mumraa  go  away,  next  day  come  back  with 
him  daughter  breakfas’,  an’  ’tart  the  tune  from  hillside 
to  the  spot  of  place  where  the  house  is.  An’  the  door 
was  double  double  double  latch.  An’  the  tune  ’tarted. 

An’  the  gal  open  the  door  an’  mumma  come  in  give 
her  her  breakfast,  an’  make  very  much  of  each  others, 
an’  eat  done  an’  tell  goodbye. 

When  the  mumma  gone  Tiger  creep  out  of  the  house 
with  a great  rolling  of  voice,  can’t  ’tan’  him  heel.  He 
go  down  to  see  Brother  Blacksmit’  if  he  would  do  a 
kind  favour  for  him. 

An’  Brother  Blacksmit’  say : — “ What  sort  of  favour 
I can  do  for  you  ? ” 

An’  Tiger  say  him  see  a very  nice  meat  a bush,  him 
want  go  eat  it  then,  so  me  want  sweet  voice  fe  sing 
like  a him  mumma. 

Then  Brother  Blacksmit’  put  the  iron  a fire,  make  him 
red  hot,  so  tell  him  open  him  mout’.  Blacksmit’  poke 


no  Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 

ahm  down  his  t’roat,  heap  of  smoke  come  out  a him 
’tomach. 

When  him  finish  he  tell  him  mus’  sing  make  him  hear. 

So  Tiger  sing,  an’  true  him  voice  sound  so  good. 

Then  Blacksmit’  say  : — “ Min’  mustn’  eat  no  duckanoo 
nor  guava  by  the  way,  else  you  voice  turn  rough  again.” 

Tiger  gone  making  his  way  fe  go  eat  the  gal  fe 
meat.  He  was  very  hard  on  his  journey  going  on.  As 
he  get  halfway  he  see  guava  an’  duckanoo,  an’  being 
him  so  thirsty  he  say  “ Make  me  nyam  ahm,  nothing 
goin’  to  do  me  voice.” 

He  nyam  until  he  unrestful  an’  come  his  voice  after 
was  like  groun’  t’under. 

“ Well,”  he  say,  “ never  min’ ; by  the  time  me  re’ch 
up  me  voice  will  come  good.” 

So  he  lay  down  under  the  floor  waiting  for  twelve 
o’clock  when  the  mother  usual  come. 

An’  when  it  nearly  come  ’pon  twelve  Tiger  creep  out 
under  the  floor  commence  to  sing  : — 


Leah  ! Leah  ! tingaling, 

You  no  yerry  you  honey,  tingaling? 

You  sugar  de  a door,  tingaling, 

You  honey  de  a door,  tingaling. 

An’  Leah  say  : • — “ He  ! He ! it  is  not  my  mother  dat.” 

An’  Tiger  shame,  gone  under  the  house  back,  voice  too 
coarse. 

Presently  his  mother  is  up,  sing  with  a very  sweet 
voice  :■ — 

Leah  ! Leah  ! tingaling, 

You  no  yerry  you  honey,  tingaling? 

Honey  de  a door,  tingaling, 

Sugar  de  a door,  tingaling. 

An’  the  door  open,  an’  she  go  in  give  her  daughter  him 
breakfas’. 


Leah  and  Tiger 


1 1 1 


An’  her  daughter  hug  her  up  an’  kiss  her,  an’  he  com- 
mence to  tell  her  mother  that  him  hear  a great  rolling  like 
groun’  shaking  while  ago  outside,  an’  it  make  her  frighten 
to  deat’.  She  tell  her  mumma  she  would  like  to  go  home 
with  her  back. 

The  mother  refuse  from  do  so,  an’  lef’  an  gone 
home,  tell  the  father  what  happen  with  Leah  in  the 
bush. 

An’  puppa  say : — “ What  make  you  lef’  me  daughter  a 
bush  ? Go  back  for  him  to-night.” 

Mamma  say : — ■“  No  danger  wi’  me  daughter,  me  wi’ 
carry  him  dinner  four  o’clock,  lef’  him  come  back.” 

Next  day  Tiger  ’tart  to  Blacksmit’  fe  run  iron  down 
him  t’roat  back.  Blacksmit’  get  vex,  tell  him  he  going 
to  lick  him  down  with  the  iron,  for  his  ears  hard. 

Tiger  said  : — “ Do  Bro’er  Blacksmit’,  me  yerry  all  whe 
you  tell  me  this  time.” 

An’  Blacksmit’  put  the  iron  two  hour  a fire  an’  shub 
him  down  Tiger  t’roat.  Tiger  can’t  take  him  ground, 
iron  too  hot. 

When  he  done  with  him  he  tell  him  to  sing  make  him 
hear,  an’  beg  him  anything  that  him  see  in  the  way  must 
make  him  yeye  pass  it. 

An’  Tiger  say: — “Yes,  so  me  going  do.” 

Him  shut  him  yeye  now,  take  the  whole  a road  for 
himself,  say : — “ Me  boy  never  would  a nyam  nothing 
more  a pass : sweet,  sweet  meat  like  a that  so  a bush  me 
could  a lef’  ahm  so  ? ” 

He  was  very  hurry  to  the  house,  an’  just  before  twelve 
o’clock  he  commence  to  sing,  an’  this  time  his  voice 
sound  well. 

Leah  open  the  door,  t’ought  it  was  her  mother,  an’ 
Tiger  jump  right  in  an’  eat  the  whole  of  Leah,  lef  one 
finger  with  the  ring. 

Him  eat  done,  half  shut  the  door  an’  go  back  a him 
bed  under  the  house. 


I 12 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


Leah  mumma  come  fe  sing  now : — 

Leah  ! Leah  ! tingaling, 

Yo  no  yerry  you  honey,  tingaling  ? 

You  sugar  de  a door,  tingaling, 

You  honey  de  a door,  tingaling. 

An’  nobody  answer  her. 

She  sing  two  time  more : nobody  answer. 

An’  she  shub  the  door  an’  go  inside  to  find  only  one 
finger  of  her  daughter. 

An’  him  put  him  hand  on  him  head,  bahl,  then  go  home 
to  him  husband,  tell  him  husband  him  daughter  dead, 
something  eat  every  bit. 

Him  say: — “Me  no  min  tell  you  fe  bring  home  me 
daughter:  you  will  have  fe  find  ahm  gi’  me.  Then  if  you 
know  whe  good  fe  you  just  bring  him  go,”  catch  up  one 
big  junka  ’tick  an’  lick  down  the  wife. 

An’  after  the  wife  dead  the  man  take  to  heart  an’ 
dead. 

That  make  you  see  woman  ears  hard  up  to  to-day. 
They  want  mus’  man  fe  carry  them  anywhere  they 
told  fe  go.  A him  make  them  something  a happen  a 
this  world  up  to  to-day  day. 

jack  Mantora  me  710  choose  none. 

NOTES. 

usual,  are  wont. 

when  she  re’ch,  when  she  (the  mother)  reaches  the  hillside  and  she  sings 
the  song,  she  (the  girl)  will  know  that  his  (her)  honey  has  come. 

tingaling.  Some  tellers  of  this  story  have  it  tindalinda. 

’teady,  steady,  with  a peculiar  vowel  like  a dull  French  eu. 

him  daughter  breakfas’,  came  back  with  her  daughter’s  breakfast  and 
began  to  sing  when  she  reached  the  hillside  overlooking  the  house,  and  went 
on  singing  till  she  got  to  the  house. 

An’  the  tune  ’tarted.  The  reciter  sings  it  here. 

out  of  the  house,  out  from  under  the  house.  See  note  to  “ Yung-kyum- 
pyung.” 

rolling,  roaring. 


Leah  and  Tiger. 


1 1 3 


can't  ’tan’  him  heel,  can’t  stand  on  his  heel.  See,  further  on,  can’t  take 
him  ground.  Both  mean  that  Tiger  cannot  stand  still, 
a bush,  in  the  bush, 
ahm,  him,  it. 

true  him  voice,  really  his  voice  sounds  very  well.  Only,  true  means  what 
it  says,  truly,  and  does  not  imply  the  reservation  at  which  it  really  hints. 
Tiger’s  voice  did  sound  very  well, 
duckanoo,  a kind  of  mango. 

going  to  do  ; eating  the  fruit  is  not  going  to  do  my  voice  any  harm, 
until  he  unrestful.  He  ate  too  much. 

groun'  t'under,  ground  thunder.  It  is  often  difficult  to  distinguish  between 
distant  thunder  and  an  earthquake. 

Tiger  growls  on  a low  note,  and  says  the  words  very  fast. 

He  ! He  ! French  e as  in  whe  and  de. 
groun’shaking,  earthquake, 
from  do  so,  refuses  to  do  what  she  asks, 
down  him  t’roat  back,  down  his  throat  again. 

Blacksmith  was  vexed  because  Tiger  had  eaten  fruit  on  the  previous 
occasion.  His  ears  had  been  hard,  i.e.  he  had  acted  against  orders. 

make  him  yeye  pass  it,  let  his  eye  run  over  it  without  desiring  to  eat  it. 
take  the  whole  a road,  staggering  along,  first  to  one  side  and  then  to  the 
other. 

a pass,  in  the  path,  on  the  journey. 

put  him  hand  on  him  head,  an  expressive  action  indicating  horror  and 
bewilderment. 

bahl,  bawl,  cry  out. 

me  no  min  tell,  me  no  been  tell,  didn’t  I tell  you  ? 

you  will  have  fe  find  ahm  gi’  me  ; when  anything  is  lost,  they  say : — You 
will  have  to  find  it  and  give  it  to  me. 

a him,  etc.,  it  is  that  (their  ears  being  so  hard)  that  makes  this  sort  of  thing 
happen. 


H 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


1 14 


XXXVII.  TIMMOLIMMO. 

ONCE  there  was  a Bull  live  in  a pastur’.  He  make  a law 
that  every  young  Cow  born,  if  it  is  a Bull,  they  must  kill 
it.  So  the  Cow  them  hear  what  the  master  said.  The 
Bull  name  was  Timmolimmo. 

So  one  day  one  of  the  Cow  have  baby  an’  find  out  that 
this  child  was  a boy.  She  take  him  an’  go  to  a deep 
bush  an’  hide  her  child  in  a stone-hole,  an’  feed  him  till 
him  was  growing  an’  begun  to  talk. 

The  place  where  the  mother  was  taking  water  when 
she  was  at  the  pastur’  was  a mile  from  the  hiding  hole, 
an’  she  has  nowhere  to  take  water  but  there. 

So  every  day  she  go  an’  fetch  water  to  her  son. 

One  day  when  the  boy  was  six  months  old  she  carry 
him  to  the  place  where  she  taking  water,  an’  hide  till 
the  master  come  drink  an’  gone.  Then  she  give  her 
son  water,  and  after  she  take  him  home  back. 

An’  when  another  six  month  come  she  take  him  back  to 
the  place  an’  show  him  the  father  footprint,  an’  commence 
to  tell  the  son  why  him  have  to  hide  in  the  bush  is 
because  the  father  would  kill  you  if  he  see  you. 

The  boy  said  to  his  mother : — “ A so  all  right,  when 
me  come  big  man  I going  to  go  an’  have  a fight  with 
him.” 

The  mumma  say: — “No,  me  son,  nobody  can’t  fight 
him.” 

So  the  mother  take  the  boy  home  back  till  another 
six  months  when  the  boy  catch  a year  an’  a half. 

Then  they  go  again  an’  the  boy  ask  if  he  no  can  fight. 

The  mother  say : — “ Come,  make  me  measure  you 
foot.” 


Timmolimmo. 


1 1 5 

When  he  go  put  his  foot  in  his  father  footprint  it  was 
about  two  inch  short. 

He  go  home. 

After  six  month  more  he  come  back,  he  alone,  measure 
his  foot  in  his  father  one.  It  want  half  inch  to  catch. 

Him  gone  home  back  for  six  more  month. 

So  one  day  him  get  up,  tell  his  mumma  that  I am 
going  to  fight  me  puppa. 

The  mother  say  “ No,”  but  him  rist  an’  go. 

When  him  go  to  the  place  he  measure  his  foot.  It 
was  one  inch  wider. 

Him  say: — “I  am  going  fe  the  battle.” 

Him  come  back,  tell  his  mumma  that  him  going  to 
fight  puppa.  So  him  go  on  till  him  get  where  his  father 
can  hear  him,  an’  sing  out: — 


Maestoso. 


nr — v r 

- 

' # ^ 

'W  £ ~ 

■J 

* , 

A 

Timmo  - limrno,  man  dere,  Timmo  - limmo,  man 


y i ; — 

S ...  w _ 

_ 

1 

f/n  i ! i ! 

■ n ■ 

w • a - 

i 

dere,  Come  down  make  we  bat  - tie,  man  dere. 


One  of  the  Cow  call  say : — “ Master,  Master,  I hear 
some  one  calling  your  name.” 

“ No,  no,  not  a man  can  call  my  name.” 

The  son  give  out  again  : — 

“ Timmolimmo,  man  dere, 

Timmolimmo,  man  dere, 

Come  down,  make  we  battle, 

Man  dere.” 

Timmolimmo  yerry. 

Him  make  one  jump,  him  jump  half  mile. 

The  son  make  one,  him  go  one  mile. 

So  they  meet  at  a cross-pass. 


1 16 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


As  the  father  come  him  lift  the  son  with  his  horn, 
send  him  half  mile  in  the  air. 

The  son  drop  on  his  four  leg. 

The  son  lift  the  puppa,  send  him  three  quarter  mile. 

As  him  drop,  one  foot  gone. 

The  puppa  stand  on  the  t’ree  foot  send  the  son  up 
again  in  the  air. 

The  son  drop  on  four  foot. 

The  son  send  him  up  again,  him  come  down  on  two. 

Him  stand  on  the  two,  send  the  son. 

Him  come  down  on  four. 

The  son  send  him  up  again,  an’  him  come  down 
on  one. 

The  puppa  stand  on  the  one  foot  an’  send  the  son, 
an’  the  son  come  down  on  four. 

An’  the  son  send  him  up,  an’  him  come  down  on  him 
side  an’  broke  him  neck. 

The  son  go  home  to  his  mother  an’  tell  him  that  he 
has  gain  the  battle,  so  they  must  come  go  in  the 
pastur’  an’  him  reign. 

From  that  two  Bull  never  ’gree  in  one  pastur’. 

Jack  Mantora  me  no  choose  none. 

NOTES. 

list,  risks  it. 

dere,  pronounced  day-er,  the  French  vowel  quite  abandoned. 

cross-pass,  cross-path. 

foot,  leg. 


Calcutta  Monkey  and  A nnancy. 


117 


XXXVIII.  CALCUTTA  MONKEY  AND 
ANNANCY. 

One  day  Calcutta  Monkey  work  a very  large  field  of  corn, 
an’  when  the  corn  commence  to  ripe  Monkey  beguns  to 
miss  the  corn,  an’  him  couldn’  find  out  who  was  tiefing  the 
corn,  an’  the  robbing  continually  going  on. 

Till  one  day  Monkey  went  to  Annancy  yard  an’  suspish 
upon  Annancy.  An’  Annancy  get  very  short  an’  ready  to 
fight  Calcutta  Monkey. 

An’  Monkey  say  to  Annancy  he  won’t  fight  him  but  he 
will  soon  know  who  is  tiefing  the  corn. 

An’  same  time  Annancy  say  to  Monkey “ I bet  it  is 
that  big-voice  Mr.  Tiger.” 

An’  Monkey  say  he  won’t  judge  no  one  again  but  will 
find  out. 

An’  him  went  home  back  to  his  yard  an’  cut  his  card. 
An’  when  he  cut  the  card  he  sees  no  man  on  the  card  but 
Mr.  Annancy,  an’  Monkey  think  it  very  hard  to  himself 
that  Annancy  wouldn’  own  it. 

An’  the  next  day  he  went  to  the  ground  an’  he  find  the 
robbing  was  going  on.  An’  he  met  Annancy  on  the  road 
an’  he  said  to  Annancy  he  well  know  who  tiefing  the  corn. 

An’  Monkey  send  a challis  to  Annancy  an’  tell  him  that 
if  him  cut  the  card  again  an’  find  him  in  the  card  he  going 
to  give  him  a terrible  flogging. 

An’  when  Annancy  hear  about  the  flogging  he  get  a 
little  frighten,  an’  him  stop  off  the  robbing  for  about  two 
days.  The  day  to  make  t’ree  Annancy  couldn’  bear  no 
longer  an’  he  beguns  again  to  tief  the  corn. 

An’  Monkey  made  up  a drum  an’  got  a hunting-whip. 

An’  next  day  when  Monkey  go  back  to  the  ground  an’ 


1 1 8 Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 

find  the  corn  tiefing  he  goes  home  to  his  yard,  an’  take  up 
his  drum  an’  his  hunting-whip  an’  start  looking  for 
Annancy. 

An’  when  he  going  he  beguns  to  knock  the  drum 
ribbim-bim-bim,  “Annancy  no  dere,”  ribbim-bim-bim, 
“ Annancy  no  dere.” 

An’  that  time  Annancy  went  an’  climb  a cullabunka 
tree. 

Annancy  hide  himself  in  the  heart,  an’  as  Monkey  get 
to  the  tree  he  sound  the  drum  say : — -ribbim-bim-bim, 
“ Annancy  dere.” 

An’  he  put  down  the  drum  an’  wrap  the  whip  round  his 
neck  an’  climb  the  tree  an’  give  Annancy  a good  flogging, 
an’  Annancy  run  off  the  tree  an’  say  that  he  wont  do  it 
again. 

Till  a few  days  after  Annancy  broke  in  the  corn-piece 
again,  begun  to  tief  the  corn  like  witch. 

An’  Monkey  go  into  the  ground  an’  see  the  tiefing.  An’ 
he  went  home  an’  look  over  his  card. 

He  sees  no  one  again  but  Mr.  Annancy,  an’  he  took  up 
his  drum  an’  his  whip  to  look  for  Annancy  again  to  flog 
him. 

An’  this  time  Tiger  have  a very  large  banana-walk. 

Annancy  wented  there  an’  look  for  one  very  large  bunch 
of  banana  an’  go  in  the  heart  of  the  bunch  an’  hide  himself, 

An’  as  Monkey  ’tart  playing  the  drum  again  he  get  to 
the  banana-walk.  An’  as  he  get  to  the  spot  he  sound  the 
drum  say  : — ribbim-bim-bim,  “ Annancy  here.” 

But  this  time  Monkey  an’  Tiger  can’t  agree,  an’  this 
banana  is  for  Tiger. 

Monkey  has  to  leave  Annancy  an’  goes  home  back. 

An’  Tacoma  says  to  Monkey,  if  him  want  to  catch  Mr. 
Annancy  he  can  catch  him  for  him.  An’  Monkey  was 
very  glad. 

An’  Tacoma  made  a dance  an’  send  an’  invite  Mr. 
Annancy. 


Calcutta  Monkey  and  A nnancy.  1 1 9 

An’  when  Annancy  come  to  the  gate  Annancy  mind 
tell  him  that  Calcutta  Monkey  is  there,  an’  he  only  ’tand 
to  the  gate  an’  wave  his  hand  to  the  ladies  inside, 
say  : — “ Good  evening,  ladies  all  ” ; an’  he  turn  right  back 
an’  go  in  the  banana  heart  an’  take  it  for  his  own 
dwelling. 

An’  from  that  day  Annancy  live  in  banana  bunch  up 
to  now. 

Jack  M ant  or  a me  no  choose  any. 

NOTES. 

suspish  upon,  suspect.  They  also  use  suspish  alone,  a delightful  word. 

cut  his  card.  Monkey  is  clearly  an  Obeah-man,  a dealer  in  the  black  art. 

ribbim-bim-bim,  etc.,  half  sung,  with  strong  even  rhythm. 

euUabunka,  a kind  of  Palm. 

banana-walk,  technical  name  for  a banana  plantation. 

is  for  Tiger,  belongs  to  Tiger. 


I 20 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


XXXIX.  OPEN  SESAME. 

One  day  there  was  a very  hard  time,  an’  Annancy  an' 
his  family  was  dying  for  hungry. 

An’  there  was  a regiment  of  soldier  find  out  a silver 
mine. 

An’  when  they  find  it  out  they  made  a very  large 
house. 

An’  they  move  the  money  an’  put  it  in  the  house,  an’ 
when  they  are  moving  it  they  t’ought  that  nobody  see 
them. 

What  that  smart  fellah  Mr.  Tacoma  does. 

He  hide  himself  on  a tree,  seeing  them  when  they 
passing  with  the  money. 

An’  when  they  reach  to  the  house,  the  house  work 
with  no  key,  an’  they  has  a certain  word  to  use  when 
they  want  the  door  to  open.  They  say  “ Open  Sesame.” 

An’  they  go  in  an’  t’row  in  the  money,  an’  when  they 
coming  out  of  the  house  they  say  “ Shut  Sesame,”  and 
the  door  lock. 

An’  Tacoma  hear  what  they  say. 

An’  he  go  home  an’  harness  up  his  cart  with  his  mule 
an’  drive  to  the  house. 

An’  when  he  go  him  use  the  same  word  an’  the  door 
open.  An’  he  go  in  an’  load  the  cart,  an,  when  he  load 
done  he  drive  home. 

When  he  come  home  he  want  to  measure  the  money 
an’  he  couldn’  get  no  quart  pot,  an’  he  sent  to  his 
neighbour  Mr.  Annancy  an’  borrow  his  quart  pot. 

An’  continually  so  he  go  an’  come  back,  him  still 
borrowing  Annancy  quart  pot. 

An’  Annancy  think  it  very  hard,  say : — “ Somet’ing 


Open  Sesame. 


i 2 r 


Bro’er  Tacoma  is  measuring.”  An’  Annancy  want  to 
know  what  it  is. 

A second  day  when  Tacoma  sent  for  the  quart  pot 
again  Annancy  ’tudy  a plan. 

When  Tacoma  come  him  give  it  to  him,  an’  as  Tacoma 
reach  his  yard  don’t  begin  measure  yet,  Annancy  tell 
one  of  his  picny  that  they  must  go  a Bro’er  Tacoma 
yard  an’  tell  him  that  him  really  want  the  quart  pot, 
must  make  haste  make  haste  send  it  at  once. 

An’  when  the  picny  go  he  tell  him  must  look  an’  see 
what  Bro’er  Tacoma  measuring.  An’  he  couldn’  find 
out. 

An’  a third  day  him  sent  to  the  shop  an’  buy  penny 
half-penny  white  flour,  an’  when  him  gone  home  he 
make  it  to  paste  an’  piecen  the  quart  pot  bottom  inside, 
an’  said  to  himself : — “ Anyt’ing  Bro’er  Tacoma  measure, 
whether  fe  rice  or  gungo  or  flour,  or  either  money,  one 
must  fasten  in  the  flour.” 

An’  when  Tacoma  come  back  he  sent  for  the  quart 
pot. 

An’  when  Tacoma  measure  done  he  send  it  back. 
An’  as  he  send  it  a very  large  two  an’  sixpence  piece 
fasten  in  the  flour. 

An’  Annancy  say : — “ T’ank  God  I find  out  what 
Bro’er  Tacoma  doing  with  my  quart  pot.” 

An’  same  time  he  goes  to  Tacoma  yard  an’  begins 
to  cry  upon  Tacoma  that  Bro’er  Tacoma  must  carry 
him  an’  show  him  where  he  get  the  money. 

Tacoma  didn’  agree. 

Annancy  cry  an’  cry  till  him  tell  him  that  he  must 
get  a cart  an’  a mule  to-morrow  evening,  an’  when  him 
passing  he  will  call  to  him. 

An’  Annancy  couldn’  wait,  an’  him  harness  up  his 
cart  from  morning  an’  watching  out  for  Brother 
Tacoma. 

An’  he  watch  an’  watch  till  Tacoma  come. 


122 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


When  Tacoma  was  coming  he  lash  him  whip,  an’ 
as  he  lash,  Annancy  lash  his  own  too. 

An’  they  started. 

An’  when  they  get  to  the  house  Tacoma  say  “ Open 
Sesame,”  an’  the  door  open. 

An’  they  run  the  cart  up  to  the  door  mout’  an’  load 
it,  an’  they  come  out  an’  drive  home. 

An’  by  the  time  Tacoma  get  home  to  his  yard 
Annancy  t’row  out  his  money  an’  turn  back  again. 

An’  when  he  go  he  use  the  same  very  word  an’  the 
door  open. 

Annancy  load  his  cart  an’  when  him  coming  home 
he  meet  Tacoma  on  the  road  an’  through  his  strongy 
yeye  an’  his  ungratefulness  he  want  to  shoot  Tacoma 
cart  a gully  an’  to  kill  his  mule,  that  him  one  may  be 
the  master  of  the  bank. 

An’  Annancy  made  a sing  when  he  is  coming 
home ; — 


Andante. 


0 4 0 0~ 


jsspt 


\ 


=33 


_ -*s- 

Right  t’rongh,  right  t'rongh  de  rocky  road,  oh  Charley  Marley  call  yon,  Mid  a 


-^-1  * * \ * 

fks  ft  d m — > > 

fn — f* 

-w — * * - 

rock,  mid  a rock,  mid  a 

rock,  me  Char-ley 

— 1— 

Char-ley  Mar-le 

V 1/  -1 

y call  yon;  Oh  de 

— i — v-i 

|\ < V 

-fri-i J — -m V- 

A ::=r 

— r IV 

|V-I  -tp-F=S_£f-  . 

• J m 

e 0 * 

— 1 -J  M «— 

L_ 

L# U 

han’-some  gal  are  no  fe  yon  one ; Oh  Cnarley  Mar  - ley  call  yon. 


NOTES. 

Here  is  another  story  founded  on  Ali  Baba,  which  differs  considerably 
from  the  previous  one  of  “ Blackbird  and  Woss-woss.”  The  chief  peculiarity 
of  this  version  is  that  the  entrapping  through  forgetfulness  of  the  password 
is  altogether  lost. 

Hard  time.  This  refers  to  the  months  of  June  and  July  when  pro- 
visions are  scarce.  The  old  yams  are  done  and  the  new  ones  are  not  in 


Open  Sesame . 


123 


yet.  Subsistence  has  to  be  eked  out  with  a few  sweet  potatoes  and  the 
mangoes,  which  are  abundant  in  these  months,  and  go  on  till  the  October 
rains  bring  back  a season  of  plenty. 

so  he  go,  as  he  goes. 

piecen,  a nice  word.  They  use  it  also  in  speaking  of  the  patching  of 
old  clothes. 

lash  him  whip,  crack  his  whip  as  a signal. 

strongy  yeye,  covetousness.  To  give  the  pronunciation  a y has  to  be 
tacked  on  to  strong. 

him  one,  he  alone. 

The  exact  application  of  the  song  is  doubtful.  The  end  is  pretty  clear, 
meaning : — all  the  good  things  are  not  for  you  alone,  Tacoma.  It  will 
be  observed  in  this  and  some  other  stories  that  Jack  Mantora,  etc.,  is 
omitted.  That  is  because  they  have  no  tragic  termination. 


XL.  SEA-MAHMY. 

One  day,  height  a hungry  time,  Blackbird  have  a 
feedin’  tree  in  a sea.  An’  every  day  Blackbird  go  an’ 
feed. 

Annancy  say  unto  Blackbird  : — “ Please,  Bro’er  Black- 
bird, please  carry  me  over  a you  feedin’  tree.” 

Blackbird  say  unto  Annancy  : — “ Bro’er  Annancy,  you 
so  cravin’  you  goin’  to  eat  every  bit  from  me.” 

He  say: — “No,  Bro’er  Blackbird  I won’  do  it.” 

Brother  Blackbird  say  unto  Annancy : — “ A you  no 
have  no  wing,  how  you  a go  ? ” 

Well ! Blackbird  take  out  two  of  him  tail  feather, 
’tick  upon  Annancy.  He  pick  out  two  of  him  wing 
feather,  ’tick  upon  Annancy.  He  take  two  feather  out 
of  him  back  again,  ’tick  upon  Annancy  ; two  feather  out 
of  him  belly  feather,  ’tick  upon  Annancy. 

Well ! Blackbird  an’  Annancy  fly  in  a the  sea  upon 
the  feedin’  tree. 


124 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


Every  feedin’  Blackbird  go  fe  pick,  Annancy  say  that 
one  a fe  him. 

Blackbird  go  upon  the  next  limb,  Annancy  say  a fe 
him. 

Blackbird  go  upon  the  t’ird  limb,  Annancy  say  a fe 
him. 

Till  Annancy  eat  a good  tummy-full. 

Annancy  drop  asleep  upon  the  tree. 

Well ! Blackbird  take  time,  pick  out  all  the  feather 
back,  an’  Blackbird  fly  away. 

When  Annancy  wake  out  of  sleep  he  say : — “ Make 
me  fly.” 

He  can’t  fly. 

He  broke  a branch  off  a the  tree,  t’row  in  the  sea. 
The  branch  swim. 

Annancy  say  if  the  branch  swim  him  will  swim,  an’ 
he  jump  off  a the  tree,  drop  in  the  sea  an’  sink. 

An’  when  he  go  down  a sea  bottom  he  meet  Sea- 
mahmy. 

He  said  to  Sea-mahmy “ Mumraa,  mother  tell  me 
me  have  a cousin  down  a sea  bottom,  ya.” 

Sea-mahmy  say : — “ I going  to  see  if  me  and  you  are 
cousin.” 

Sea-mahmy  put  a pan  of  sand  in  the  fire  for  well 
hot.  When  him  get  hot  he  take  it  off  a the  fire,  give  to 
Brother  Annancy  for  drink  it  off. 

Brother  Annancy  say “ Cousin  Sea-mahmy,  it  don’ 
hot  enough.  Put  it  out  a de  sun  fe  make  it  hot  more.” 

After  him  put  it  out  a the  sun  then  he  say : — “ Cousin 
Sea-mahmy,  I think  it  hot  now.” 

An’  Sea-mahmy  say: — “Well  you  must  drink  it  off 
an’  make  I see  if  you  an’  me  are  cousin.” 

An’  Annancy  do  drink  it  off. 

Annancy  spend  free  day  down  a sea  bottom. 

Well ! the  next  day  Sea-mahmy  said  to  him  : — 11  Whe 
you  going  to  come  out.  ” 


Sea-Mahmy. 


125 


Him  said  : — “ Cousin  Sea-mahmy,  sen’  one  of  you  son 
fe  carry  me  out  a lan’.” 

Sea-mahmy  give  him  one  of  him  son,  the  name  of 
that  son  call  Trapong. 

Well!  Trapong  an’  Annancy  travel,  make  middle  in 
a sea. 

Sea-mahmy  call 


Adagio. 


— 1 ~ 

T ra-pong,  T ra-pong,  fetch  back  ’tranger  man,  come  back. 


An’  Trapong  say:- — “’Top,  Brother  Annancy,  I think 
I hear  my  mother  calling  me  back.” 

Annancy  say: — “No,  make  way!  War  de  ’pon  sea!” 

An’  Trapong  sail  with  Annancy  on  him  back  till  they 
reach  shore. 

When  they  go  to  shore  he  say : — “ Bro’er  Trapong, 
take  dis  bag  weigh  me,  see  whe  me  weigh.” 

Trapong  lift  him  up,  say: — “Yes,  Brother  Annancy 
you  heavy.” 

So  Annancy  come  back  out  of  the  bag. 

He  say: — “Bro’er  Trapong,  you  come  in  make  I 
weigh  you  see.” 

Trapong  went  into  the  bag. 

He  tie  Trapong,  tie  tight. 

Trapong  say : — “ Brother  Annancy  you  a tie  me  too 
’trong.” 

He  say: — “Me  no  a tie  you  fe  see  if  you  heavy?” 

Trapong  say  to  Brother  Annancy: — “Me  heavy?” 

Annancy  say: — “You  heavy  oh!  You  light  oh!  You 
heavy  enough  fe  me  wife  pot.”  An’  for  all  the  bahl 
Trapong  a bahl  he  gone  back  to  him  house  an’  Annancy 
eat  him. 

Jack  Man  torn  me  no  choose  none. 


126 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


NOTES. 

height,  in  the  height  of,  at  the  worst  of. 

Sea-mahmy,  Mermaid. 

feedin’  tree.  It  was  a duckanoo  mango  according  to  some  accounts. 
Annancy  behaves  just  as  he  did  with  Candlefly  and  the  eggs. 

The  connecting  wells  of  this  story,  which  take  the  place  of  the  artds 
and  sos  of  other  narrators  are  said  with  a little  upward  turn  of  the  voice. 
Whd  you  going.  Whe  (what)  seems  to  be  doing  duty  for  how  here. 
Trapong,  tarpon,  the  famous  sporting  fish  of  Florida  and  Santa  Catalina, 
common  also  in  Jamaica. 

make  middle  in  a sea,  get  to  the  middle  of  the  sea. 

No,  make  way!  Annancy  shouts  this  out. 

The  outrageous  confidence  trick  which  follows  necessitates  a Jack  Mantora. 


XLL  CRAB  AND  HIS  CORN-PIECE. 

One  day  Brother  Crab  work  a lovely  field  of  corn. 

An’  when  the  corns  beguns  to  ripe  Crab  begin  to  lose 
the  corn,  an’  he  couldn’  find  out  who  was  tiefing  it. 

An’  he  get  Annancy  to  be  a watchman  for  tief. 

An’  this  arrangement  make  between  Annancy.  Crab 
tell  him  that  he  will  come  in  the  night  and  see  if  he  is 
watching.  An’  Annancy  wasn’  agree  at  first. 

Him  stand  for  a good  time  an’  study : an  when  he 
study  he  tell  Crab  yes  that  he  can  come. 

An’  when  Crab  gone  he  sent  an’  call  his  friend  Mr. 
Tacoma  an’  tell  him  that  Bro’er  Crab  leave  him  here  to 
watch  over  the  corn,  an’  say  that  he  is  going  to  come 
back  in  the  night  to  see  if  he  is  watching.  An’  as  Crab 
being  ’fraid  of  Tacoma  Annancy  tell  him  that  he  must 
set  a watch  in  the  road  for  Crab  an’  catch  him. 

That  time  Ratta  was  hearing  Annancy  bargain  which 


Crab  and  his  Corn-Piece. 


127 


he  is  making  with  Tacoma.  An’  he  went  home  an’  tell 
Crab  that  he  mustn’  go  to  the  corn-piece  in  the  night  for 
Tacoma  going  to  catch  him. 

An’  so  Crab  did  hear  Ratta. 

An’  him  send  an’  discharge  Annancy. 

An’  Annancy  was  very  sorry,  an’  same  time  he  goes 
to  Crab  an’  he  ask  Crab  what  he  done. 

Crab  tell  him  that  he  mustn’  mind,  he  must  leave  the 
work,  he  is  going  to  get  another  man  to  watch. 

An’  Annancy  did  leave,  an’  Crab  give  the  job  to 
Ratta. 

An’,  as  that  wicked  man  Mr.  Annancy  know  that 
Ratta  frighten  for  Puss,  he  sent  an’  tell  Puss  that  he 
must  go  in  Bro’er  Crab  corn-piece  an’  keep  a good 
watch  for  Ratta  an’  catch  him  an’  eat  him. 

An’  that  time  Candlefly  was  hearing  Annancy  what  he 
is  telling  Puss  to  do  Ratta,  an’  he  went  an’  tell  Ratta 
that  he  must  leave  the  work,  an’  if  he  don’t  leave  it  he 
going  to  lose  his  life. 

At  that  time  Ratta  get  very  ’fraid  an’  send  an’  give 
up  his  discharge  to  Crab. 

When  Ratta  gone  Crab  couldn’  get  no  one  to  watch 
the  corn  again,  an’  he  consider  to  himself  that  he  knows 
two  friend  very  love  corn  an’  the  meal  likewise. 

An’  the  two  friend  was  Mr.  Dog  an’  Mr.  Cock. 

An’  he  sent  an’  call  them  an’  they  did  come. 

When  they  come  he  tell  them  that  he  have  a piece  of 
corn  an’  he  can’t  get  none,  tief  is  eating  out  the  whole. 

An’  he  says  to  Dog  that  him  know  he  is  a very  good 
watchman,  an’  same  time  Cock  say  to  Crab  that  him 
watch  as  any  soldier. 

An’  Crab  was  very  glad,  say: — “You  is  the  two  man 
that  I want.” 

An’  they  says  to  Crab  that  they  won’t  charge  no 
money,  but  when  the  corn  came  in  Cock  is  to  get  his 
share  of  dry  corn  an’  Dog  get  his  share  of  meal. 


128 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


An’  Cock  ask  Crab  to  give  him  a gun. 

An’  Crab  didn’  have  a gun,  an’  he  give  Cock  a flute 
an’  give  Dog  a drum,  an’  tell  them  .that  anyone  catch 
a tief  they  must  play  an’  let  him  hear. 

An’  Cock  tell  Crab  that  he  can’t  sleep  on  the  ground, 
an’  he  wants  to  know  if  there  is  any  tree  in  the  corn- 
piece,  an’  Crab  say  “Yes.” 

So  Cock  an’  Dog  started. 

An’  when  they  go  Cock  fly  upon  the  tree  an’  Dog 
pick  up  the  corn  trash  which  they  cut  already  an’  make 
a very  soft  bed  an’  get  into  it,  an’  Dog  lie  down  until 
he  fall  asleep. 

An’  Cock  sing 


Allegretto. 


When  the  tief  come  Dog  didn’  know.  An’  Cock,  as 
he  being  a brave  soldier,  he  caught  the  tief.  An’  when 
he  catch  the  tief  he  start  a tune  in  his  flute : — 


Andantino. 


~ , ...  -N  N 

V 

k «>  _*=• N N > 

S M - j J _ 

Wt\  V A 1 1 1 1 i 

v i m m m 

t se  * * w 

You  Mis  - ter  Crab  oh  ! You  Mis  - ter 

r-  rail. 




i 

, n 

~ -4  A 

1 J 1- 

ffn  ™ « J 1 0 \ ** 

r ■ 1 * 

^ - 41 

~0 

Crab  oh  ! Da  me  same  one  catch  de  tief  oh  ! Benga  - day. 


Crab  and  his  Corn-Piece. 


129 


An’  as  Dog  being  love  sleep  an’  don’t  watch  to  the 
end  he  lose  his  reward. 

An’  Cock  by  him  catch  the  tief  takes  the  corn. 

NOTES. 

arrangement  between  Annancy;  no  misprint.  Between  may  stand  for 
with,  or  there  may  be  an  ellipsis  of  the  words  and  Crab. 

he  mustn’  mind.  This  is  likely  to  convey  a wrong  idea.  Crab  was 
not  trying  to  soothe  his  feelings,  but  was  speaking  angrily.  What  he  said 
was: — “Never  you  mind,  etc.” 


XLII.  DRY-GRASS  AND  FIRE. 

One  day  Brother  Dry-grass  an’  Fire  get  in  confusion. 

So  Fire  tell  his  frien’  Annancy  (not  knowing  that 
Annancy  an’  Dry-grass  was  better  friend) : — “ Brother 
Annancy  I going  to  burn  that  fellah  Dry-grass  to- 
morrow.” 

Annancy  say : — “ When  you  a go  you  fe  call  me  a 
yard.  I goin’  to  make  one  shell.  When  we  nearly  get 
to  the  place  we  blow,  make  the  fellah  know  that  man 
a come.” 

During  this  time  Annancy  make  bargain  with  Water 
that  any  time  he  hear  the  shell  blow  him  must  come 
down  like  rain. 

So  Fire  reach  up  an’  as  the  shell  blow  he  see  rain 
coming  down. 

So  Fire  has  to  go  home. 

Water  tell  him  say  that  Annancy  tell  him  that  you 
are  going  to  fight  Dry-grass,  so  I must  come  an’  help 
to  see  if  we  can  manage  you. 

1 


130  Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 

Fire  say : — “ A so  ! That  fellah  Annancy  I going  at 
his  yard.” 

So  Fire  walk  at  Annancy  yard  an’  tell  him  : — “ Brother 
Annancy  I going  to  come  an’  see  you  next  week.” 

Annancy  say:— “Yes,  Bro’er  Fire,  with  all  pleasure.” 

Fire  tell  him  that  he  must  put  all  his  clothes  a door 
to  make  him  find  out  the  yard  for  I don’t  want  to  lost 
the  way. 

So  Fire  gone. 

Annancy  wife  said  : — “ Me  husband,  send  go  stop  Fire 
from  come  a you  place.” 

Annancy  say:— -“No,  me  wife,  a me  best  frien’  so  him 
have  free  come.” 

Just  before  the  time  Fire  was  appoint  to  come, 
Annancy  go  to  Brother  Tiger,  an’  as  him  walk  into 
the  house  he  saw  some  clothes. 

An’  he  pick  up  the  clothes  an’  say : — “ See,  Bro’er 
Tiger,  how  you  clothes  damp,  you  must  have  fe  put 
dem  a sun.” 

So  Tiger  hang  out  all  his  clothes  on  a line  before 
the  door  mout’. 

An’  presently  Fire  was  coming  like  a lion  bringing 
Breeze  with  him. 

When  Fire  see  all  the  clothes  he  say  to  Breeze : — 
“ See  that  fellah  Annancy  yard.” 

So  Breeze  blow  harder  an’  come  with  a speed.  An’ 
Fire  make  a jump  till  he  nearly  got  to  the  yard. 

Tiger  hear  the  speed  Fire  was  coming,  call  to  him  : — 
“ Turn  back,  you  red-face  fellah,  me  no  want  you 
company.” 

Fire  was  coming  down  more  and  more. 

Tiger  bawl  fe  Fire  a stop,  but  Fire  coming  for  the 
better. 

So  Fire  get  in  the  yard  an’  burn  all  Tiger  clothes 
an’  house,  an’  turn  right  home  back. 

Annancy  laugh,  an’  sing: — 


Dry-Grass  and  Fire. 


I3I 


A llegretto. 


% 


=P=^: 


b i; 


I * 


*—*  ■:  r- 


Mewifesay  menofe  in-vite  Fire,  Brether  Fire  bring 


i 


Breeze  oh ! Fire  de  ’pon  lan’  Fire, 


Fire  de  ’pon  lan’  Fire. 


-b~-  r i 


-*  - • 


*-V- 


Heburnup  all  Tiger  yard,  ha  ha! 


Brether  Fire  an’ 


ill 


r» 


Breeze  oh  ! Fire  de  ’pon  lan’  Fire, 

Jack  Mantora  me  no  choose  any. 


Fire  de  ’pon  lan’  Fire. 


NOTE. 

The  shell  looks  like  a very  small  cowhorn  and  gives  a similar  sound 
when  blown.  It  is  used  as  a signal  for  a variety  of  purposes.  It  sum- 
mons to  work  and  marks  the  hour  of  release.  When  a train  of  mules  is 
nearing  a sharp  turn  in  the  road,  the  head  muleman  blows  a fanfare  to 
give  warning  of  his  approach.  The  shell  is  in  fact  to  the  mule-track 
what  the  whistle  is  to  the  railroad.  Imitation  shells  are  sometimes  made  of 
bamboo.  It  was  perhaps  one  of  these  that  Annancy  made. 


132 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


XLIII.  JOHN  CROW. 

One  day  there  was  a lady  who  have  but  only  one 
daughter,  an’  Mr.  Tacoma  hear  about  the  gal  an’  he 
went  to  court  the  gal. 

An’  when  Tacoma  go  the  gal  wouldn’  receive  Tacoma. 

An’  the  mother  was  really  vex. 

As  the  mother  being  a old  lady,  when  Tacoma  going 
Tacoma  carry  a brass  mortar  to  made  it  a present  to 
the  old  lady  to  beat  her  fee-fee.  An’  when  the  old 
lady  see  the  brass  mortar  he  really  want  the  mortar. 

But  Tacoma  said  to  her  if  him  don’t  get  the  gal  he 
not  going  to  leave  the  mortar. 

An’  the  gal  ’treat  away  himself  inside  the  room  an’ 
hide. 

An’  Tacoma  feel  very  sorry  an’  he  return  home 
back. 

When  he  goes  home  he  tell  Annancy  about  the  gal, 
an’  Annancy  get  a concentina  he  going  to  carry  down 
make  a present  to  the  gal. 

An’  Annancy  say  if  the  gal  can  only  take  the  concentina 
from  him  the  gal  must  be  his  wife. 

An’  when  Annancy  go  down  Annancy  was  playing. 

The  gal  wouldn’  receive  Annancy  in. 

An’  when  the  mumma  hear,  the  music  was  so  sweet 
she  commence  to  dance  ; an’  said  to  the  daughter,  this 
is  the  son-in-law  him  want,  for  he  can  get  him  own 
dance  any  time  him  ready. 

Not  for  all  Mr.  Annancy  playing  the  gal  wouldn’ 
receive  Annancy,  until  Annancy  has  to  go  home  back. 

When  that  ugly  fellah  Mr.  John  Crow  hear  it  he  study 
between  himself  an’  get  a carriage  with  his  pair  of 


John  Crow.  133 

horses  an’  his  coachman,  an’  the  carpet  in  the  carriage 
was  a gold  carpet. 

An’  John  Crow  said  between  himself  when  him  put 
on  him  watch  an’  chain  an’  his  coat  an’  shoes,  if  him 
don’t  bring  that  gal  home  believe  him  no  Mr.  Goldman. 

An’  John  Crow  drive  away. 

An’  when  him  get  to  a distant  to  a look-out,  the 
gal  was  at  his  window  sitting  down,  an’  as  him  look, 
him  see  Mr.  Goldman  was  driving  coming. 

An’  him  holloa  to  him  mumma  : — “ Mumma,  mumma, 
my  dear  love  is  coming.” 

An’  as  John  Crow  reach  the  yard  the  gal  was  out 
an’  sling  Mr.  Goldman  out  the  carriage  an’  escort  him 
right  into  the  house. 

An’  after  John  Crow  introduce  himself  to  the  gal  that 
his  name  is  Mr.  Goldman. 

An’  when  John  Crow  tell  the  gal  so,  the  gal  have  a 
old-witch  brother  an’  says  to  his  sister  that  that  man 
is  John  Crow. 

An’  the  gal  get  vex  an’  say : — “ Oh  no,  don’t  use 
a word  like  that ; it  is  my  dear  Mr.  Goldman.” 

An’  when  the  mumma  come  the  gal  introduce  him  to 
Mr.  Goldman,  an’  tell  him  that  his  dear  love  just  come 
now. 

An’  Mr.  Goldman  fix  a time  when  to  come  back 
an’  get  married,  and  the  mother  was  agree,  an’  the  gal 
was  very  glad  too. 

An’,  when  they  settle  that,  John  Crow  drive  back  to 
his  yard. 

An’  when  he  is  coming  back  the  next  night  he  brought 
a old-witch  boy  with  him  an’  hide  him  half  part  of  the 
road  near  the  yard,  an’  tell  him  that  as  he  see  day 
clearing,  he  must  call  him  that  he  may  got  home  before 
day  clear. 

An’  he  reach  the  yard  an’  spend  the  night  in  a very 
joyful  dance. 


134 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story . 


So  it  getting  near  day  an’  the  boy  sing 

Allegro. 


LLjp".  ^ J '"| 

i—. ■—  -|V--K-T—1 — n 

J_»_.  t-fc.  t *=±£= 

-m- " H ■ *-■  4i 

Mis-  ter  Gold-man  oh  ! Gold-man  oh  ! Day  da  clean  oh ! 


An’  when  the  boy  sing  out  the  people  them  inside 
the  house  hear. 

An’  when  they  hear  they  say “ Stop ! Stop ! Stop  ! 
some  one  is  calling  Mr.  Goldman.” 

An’  the  dance  so  sweet  Mr.  Goldman  he  wouldn’  stop 
to  listen.  He  only  says “ Oh  don’t  listen  to  that 
foolish  boy.”  An’  when  him  use  the  word  him  one  in 
the  ring  wheeling  all  the  gal  them. 


An’  that  time  him  hear  a sing  :■ 

Allegro. 


■ — - — — >v r: — z — — . 

v rn 

tzt  pr-s  m _ ryz* zr* 

\ 

1 L__ 

I 1 

jy  a ^ l m 

m m, m 

m.  m...  a 

Poor  mir  - ry  - bim  - bim  rib  - birr,  • by  - biin  - bins,  Gold 


r-fih r , . . . " : n 

**  J M *M  M 8 1 !•%  1"%  <M 

t m—  J— 1 ~r  n qv  f ; 1 “r 

v.±_ 0 m 

ip-  "r  1 d ip  mm 

man  a wheel  him  gal,  Gold  - man  a wheel  dem. 


An’  when  him  wheel  all  the  gal  him  look  outside  the 
door  an’  see  that  day  catch  him ; so  him  cry  excuse 
an’  went  up’tairs. 

An’  when  he  go  up  he  take  a piece  of  meat  an’  look 
for  a broken  sash  an’  ’queeze  himself  though. 

An’  as  him  go  though,  the  sash  ’crape  off  the  whole 
of  him  back  head,  an’  from  that  day  every  John  Crow 
born  with  a peel  head. 

Jack  Mantora  me  no  choose  none. 

NOTES. 

fee-fee,  food. 

’treat  away  himself,  retreats,  retires. 

concentina,  always  with  this  n. 


John  Crow. 


135 


him  ready,  she  is  ready  for  it,  wants  it. 
a look-out,  a place  visible  from  the  house, 
sling,  hand,  with  a notion  of  vigorous  action, 
an’  says,  who  says. 

a word,  often  a sentence  of  several  words, 
tell  him,  tell  her  mother, 
sweet,  pleased. 

when  him  use  the  word,  as  he  said  this, 
excuse,  to  be  excused  ; pronounce  the  s like  z. 

John  Crow  is  the  vulture-like  scavenger  bird  of  Jamaica,  and  has  a 
peeled  (bald)  head. 


XLIV.  TIGER’S  DEATH. 

One  day  Mr.  Annancy  an’  Monkey  made  a bargain  to 
kill  Tiger,  an’  they  didn’  know  how  to  make  the  con- 
fusion for  Tiger  was  Monkey  godfather. 

An’  being  Monkey  have  more  strength  than  Annancy, 
Annancy  try  to  keep  close  Monkey  an’  wouldn’  leave 
Monkey  company  at  all  by  he  afraid  for  Tiger. 

Until  one  day  Annancy  went  to  river  an’  catch  some 
fish,  an’  send  an’  call  Brother  Monkey  to  come  an’  help 
him  enjoy  the  fish. 

An’  when  the  breakfast  ready,  instead  of  Mr.  Monkey 
come,  it  was  that  cravin’  man  Mr.  Tiger  who  Annancy 
really  hate,  an’  to  every  piece  of  the  fish  Annancy  take 
up  to  put  in  his  mouth,  Tiger  take  away  every  bit  an’ 
never  cease  till  him  finish  the  whole. 

An’  when  Mr.  Annancy  friend  who  he  invite  come, 
there  was  none  of  the  fish  to  give  him. 

An’  as  Monkey  being  love  fish  he  began  to  cuss  his 
godfather  Tiger. 


136  Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 

An’  that  time  Puss  was  passing  when  the  confusion 
occurred. 

An’  they  go  on  an’  go  on  till  Puss  laugh.  An’  as 
Puss  laugh  Tiger  get  worser  vex  an’  begun  to  cuss  Puss, 
an’  Puss  said  to  Monkey : — “ Come,  make  we  beat  him 
off  to  deat’.” 

An’  Monkey  wasn’  agree  to  beat  his  godfather,  but 
Annancy  an’  Puss  force  him. 

An’  Tiger  get  cross  begun  to  lick,  an’  the  first  man 
him  lick  was  his  godson.  An’  then  as  him  lick  him  god- 
son Puss  catch  a fire  ’tick,  an’  Annancy  catch  up  a mortar 
’tick,  an’  they  never  cease  murder  Tiger  till  they  kill  him. 

An’  they  ’kin  Tiger  an’  just  going  to  share. 

An’  there  comes  a singing  from  the  tree  : — 


A llegretto. 


do,  a whe  fe  do  oh  ! Tiger  dead  al  - ready. 


An’  all  the  look  Monkey  an’  Annancy  look,  they  never 
find  the  person  that  was  singing. 

So  they  salt  Tiger. 

Then  Peafowl  come  down  in  the  yard  say : — “ Good 
evening  Mr.  Annancy  an’  Mr.  Monkey,  I am  very  hungry. 
I was  on  a long  journey  bring  a message  to  Tiger  that 
him  wife  dead,  but  Tiger  dead  already.” 


Tiger  s Death 


1 37 


So  the  whole  of  them  stop  an’  eat  of  Tiger. 

Peafowl  never  go  back  with  no  answer  to  report,  for 
Puss  an’  Monkey  an’  Annancy  give  Peafowl  gold  not  to 
talk  that  they  kill  Tiger. 

So  Peafowl  never  can  be  a poor  man  for  he  keep  the 
t’ree  friend  secret. 

Jack  Mantora  me  no  choose  any. 


NOTES. 


confusion,  quarrel,  which  was  to  be  made  the  pretext  for  killing  Tiger, 
whe  fe  do,  what  to  do?  what  is  to  be  done?  To  this  question  the  implied 
answer  is  “ Nothing.”  So  the  phrase  means  : — “ It  can’t  be  helped. 


XLV.  THE  OLD  LADY  AND  THE  JAR. 

A OLD  lady  have  two  son,  one  name  Dory  Dunn  an’ 
one  name  Tumpa  Toe,  an’  Tumpa  Toe  an’  Dory  Dunn 
is  a hunterman. 

Well,  they  give  them  mumma  enough  things  an’  say: — 
“ Mumma,  I am  going  a wood,  don’  interfere  with  that 
Jar  in  my  room.” 

When  them  gone  old  lady  say : — “ I wonder  what  my 
son  have  in  that  Jar  say  me  no  fe  touch.” 

Old  lady  go  an’  shub  him  hand  inside  in  the  Jar. 

The  Jar  hold  old  lady. 

Old  Lady  say 

A ndantino. 


Tumpa  Toe,  Lord  ! 


Dory  Dunn  oh, 


Lord  ! 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


138 

An’  the  Jar  say: — 

Allegro. 


H 

f-  u ft — 

1 N; — V+ — 1 1 1 1 — 

fs-  — N — 1 — 

—4 -T-T-  ' 

m 1 1 f-a 

K ^ ^ 1 — K ^ ^ 1 — K 

0 w—m  S — 

XT 


Mum-ma  longu  - be  - lo,  turn  tul -la-lul  - la-lum  turn. 

An’  the  Jar  fire  him  from  the  room  to  the  hall. 

An’  when  him  reach  to  the  hall  him  say : — 

“Tumpa  Toe,  Lord! 

Dory  Dunn  oh,  Lord  ! ” 

Jar  say:— 

“ Mumma  longubelo 
Turn  tullalullalum  turn.” 

An’  all  this  time  the  Jar  holding  him  by  the  hand 
an’  can’t  let  him  go. 

An’  the  Jar  t’row  him  outside  a door. 

When  him  get  out  a door  old  lady  say:— 

“Tumpa  Toe,  Lord! 

Dory  Dunn  oh,  Lord  ! ” 

Jar  say:— 

“ Mumma  longubelo 
Turn  tullalullalum  turn.” 

Jar  hold  him  ’till. 

Jar  fire  him  to  seaside  now. 

An’  he  got  one  daughter  a seaside. 

The  daughter  say  : — 


Larghetto. 


1 J ; k > 

— — 

, 1 k k 

, 

7 

1-*- 

1 

if 

S v A \ 

. 

7 tfc 

J f 0 

<*  > 

# 

Do  my  Jar,  Do  my  Jar,  will  you  save,  will  you  save  my  mother  life! 


Jar  say: — 

Maestoso. 


— y . 

. 

1 IN  ISM 

n 

1 ' 

# 

w 

W T-T 

- u 

s, 

J 

1 _# 

r 

r .m  * 

n 

:W  ~ .—ra-T 

A * 

. 

-U- 

/- 

XOJ 

Old  la-dy  touoh  me,  old  lady  ton  oh  me,  you  never  will  see  him  no  more. 


139 


The  Old  Lady  and  the  Jar. 


The  daughter  say  — 

Larghetto. 


! 

7 

rz>  m 

m 

1 m*  rv  N . 

y p t 

1 

m 

tt  1 n 

i: 

t 

J 

# s 

1 ' 

Do  my  Jar,  Do  my  Jar ! I will 


— N- 

\ 

r 

, ! 

|V~  N ~N 

f 

. # m 

• .J 

_ i 1 

\ 

m 

1 

l 

« 

• 

give  you  some  sil  - ver  fe  save  my  mo-ther  life. 

Jar  say:— 


A ndante. 


The  Jar  fire  him  in  a sea. 

Jack  Mantora  7ne  no  choose  none. 


NOTES. 

Tumpa,  stump.  A man  who  has  lost  his  arm  is  called  a tumpa-hand 
man. 

enough  things,  plenty  of  things  to  eat. 

In  these  curiously  simple  tunes,  if  tunes  they  can  be  called,  it  is  most 
important  to  mark  the  time  and  to  pay  great  attention  to  the  lengths  of 
the  notes.  To  hear  them  sing,  or  rather  say,  “ Lord  ! ” is  the  most  laugh- 
able thing.  The  first  one  begins  on  a note  rather  below  the  C of  Toe,  and 
slides  downwards  ending  with  an  expiring  grunt  on  a very  low  note  of 
the  voice.  The  second  one  is  done  in  the  same  way,  but  is,  all  the  way 
through,  a little  lower  than  the  first.  The  point  is  to  let  the  breath  go 
with  the  sliding  note  instead  of  holding  it  as  in  singing. 

longubelo.  The  first  syllable  is  pronounced  as  in  English,  and  the  rest 
of  the  vowels  are  Italian,  the  e being  rather  more  narrowed,  but  never 
quite  reaching  to  the  sound  of  hale. 

turn  tuUaluilalum  turn.  Strong  accent  on  the  tuH  and  clean  neatly 
cut  syllables.  Italian  vowels. 

mumma.  The  u between  Italian  u and  Italian  o. 


140 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


fire  him,  throws  her.  Yet  not  quite  “throws,”  for  the  Jar  never  lets  her 
hand  go.  Fire  ’tone  is  the  usual  expression  for  throwing  stones.-  The 
Jar  fires  her  first  from  the  bedroom  to  the  living-room  (hall),  next  from 
the  hall  to  the  yard,  then  from  the  yard  to  the  seaside,  and  all  the  time 
it  holds  her  by  the  hand. 


XLVI,  JOHN  CROW  AND  FOWL-HAWK. 

One  day  Fowl-hawk  go  to  John  Crow  yard  an’  tell  him 
that  him  fe  come  have  a walk  with  me  to  a country  for 
something  promise  there  to  me. 

“ One  day  I go  out  an’  in  my  way  I pass  a river.  As 
I come  to  the  river  I meet  Fowl.  Him  ask  me  to  help 
him  up,  an’  the  baby  any  time  him  bora  I must  come 
for  it  Well  my  dear  sir,  the  baby  born  ; an’  when  I go, 
Fowl  say  him  never  make  a promise  with  me.  Look 
you,  sir,  if  you  see  the  picny,  nice  fresh  fe  we  mouth, 
an’  a no  the  one,  but  him  hab  more.  So  you  will  get  a 
good  bag  of  fresh,  but  the  country  danger  home.” 

John  Crow  say Me  yerry  dat  place  hab  bad  name, 
me  no  want  go.” 

Hawk  say: — “You  too  fool,  we  a man!  we’ll  get  ’way, 
me  son,  if  them  want  to  catch  we.  When  me  go  de  the 
first  time  me  go  slam  in  a Fowl  yard.  Me  an’  him  stay 
a whole  day  a quarrel,  an’  me  no  dead.  Come,  me  good 
friend,  make  we  go.” 

Them  start. 

Them  fly  an’  fly  till  them  get  over  the  country. 

Hawk  say: — “Brother  John,  we  get  over  the  place. 
Look  down  yonder,  look  fresh ! ” 

John  Crow  say  Me  no  go  down  de.” 

Hawk  say : — “ A so  ! you  too  fool ! Come  make  we 
go  down  little  more.” 

Them  go  down  till  them  pitch  on  a tree. 


« 


John  Crozv  and  Fowl- Hawk.  141 

Hawk  say : — “ Brother,  you  see  them  better.  I da  go 
sing  make  them  know  say  me  a come.” 

John  Crow  say: — -“If  them  yerry  you,  dem  no  will 
kill  we ! ” 

“ No,  all  time  me  go  down  me  an’  Fowl  a good  friend, 
no  mo’  the  little  quarrel  we  have.” 

Hawk  call  out : — “ See  me  ya  me  da  come,  me  da 
come  to  the  bargain,  me  da  come,  come ; twillinky 
twing  ping  ya,  me  da  come.” 

Fowl  hear,  tell  him  picny  dem  fe  go  hide. 

So  Dog  was  a gunner  man,  an’  him  an’  Fowl  a good 
friend,  for  Fowl  always  give  him  good  treatment. 

So  Fowl  go  an’  tell  Dog  say : — “ Danger  ! hawk  a come 
fe  me  daughter,  so  me  a beg  you  fe  come  a yard  an’ 
shot  him  fe  me  when  him  come.” 

Dog  come,  an’  him  an’  Fowl  hide. 

Hawk  said  to  John  Crow: — “ Come  make  we  go  down.” 

John  Crow  say  “No.” 

Hawk  say: — “Hungry  will  burn  you  back.” 

John  Crow  say “ Me  no  trust,  me  wi’  wait  ’pon  God 
leisure.” 

Hawk  say: — “All  time  you  wait  ’pon  God  fe  give  you 
you  will  never  get ; no  see  me  a man  no  wait  ’pon  no 
man  ? Me  go  look  what  me  know  me  want,  but  me  if 
I get  anyt’ing  I never  give  you  little  piece  self,  you 
foolish  fellow  you  ! I gone.” 

Hawk  start  the  singing  again  going  down : — “ See  me 
ya,  me  da  come,  twillinky  twing  ping  ya.” 

By  Hawk  get  down  Dog  hit  him  bam. 

Hawk  dead. 

John  Crow  laugh  “ Ha  ha!  let  me  pull  me  rusty  bosom 
shirt  an’  put  on  me  gown  an’  go  down  to  see  what  do 
that  fellah.” 

John  Crow  go  down. 

As  him  get  on  Fowl-hawk  find  that  him  was  dead  him 
say : — “ T’ank  God,  ha,  ha  ! ” 


142 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


John  Crow  dig  out  the  two  eye  and  say: — “A  this  eye 
the  fellah  take  a see,”  an’  put  it  in  his  pocket  an’  turn 
on  eating. 

Dog  look,  an’  say  to  Fowl:— “You  finish  with  that 
one,  so,  sister,  any  time  them  come  you  send  an’  call  me. 
I can’t  stop,  I am  very  vex.  I send  out  my  son  yesterday 
an’  Puss  meet  him  on  the  road  an’  beat  him  an’  take 
’way  the  money  that  I give  him  to  give  Brother  Monkey. 
Him  tell  me  son  say  him  have  a old  grudge  fe  me  an’ 
him  can’t  get  to  beat  me,  so  him  will  beat  all  me  picny. 
So,  sister,  I ha  da  go  home,  will  be  blue  fire  when  I 
catch  Puss.” 

When  Dog  go  to  Puss  yard  an’  call  him,  Dog  ask  Puss 
for  a drink  of  water  an’  a piece  of  fire. 

Puss  say : — “ Go  ’way  from  me  gate,  I know  whe  you 
come  about.” 

Dog  say  : — “ Ah,  me  man,  will  be  blue  fire ! ” 

Puss  gate  was  lock,  for  Puss  have  company  the  day. 
This  company  was  Rabbit. 

Dog  say : — “ I want  to  see  you.” 

Puss  say: — “Go  ’way  I tell  you,  you  mout’  long  like 
a devil  fork.” 

Dog  broke  the  gate  an’  go  in. 

Puss  lock  up  his  house,  an’  stay  inside  an’  cuss  Dog 
till  Dog  has  to  go  home. 

An’  Monkey  say  him  will  get  the  money  from  Puss 
for  them  is  good  friend. 

So  Dog  go  home  to  his  yard  an’  have  a hatred  for 
Puss  till  death. 

Jack  Mantora  me  710  choose  any. 

NOTES. 

help  him  up,  with  his  head-load. 

fresh,  fresh  meat. 

a no  the  one,  etc.,  he  has  not  only  one,  he  has  several. 

danger  home,  is  very  dangerous. 


John  Crow  and  Fowl- Hawk. 


H3 


over  the  country,  over  the  place. 

see  me  ya,  etc.,  see  me  here,  I am  coming. 

twUUngky  twing  ping  ya,  a good  imitation  of  the  Hawk’s  vengeful 
shriek.  Strong  accent  on  the  ya. 

bam,  French  a,  English  m,  imitating  the  discharge  of  the  gun. 
what  do  that  fellah,  what  has  befallen  that  fellow. 


XLVII.  FINGER  QUASHY. 

One  day  Dog  invite  four  Puss  to  dinner.  They  were 
good  friend.  One  of  the  Puss  name  was  Tatafelo,  one 
name  Finger  Quashy,  one  name  J ack-no-me-touch.  The 
last  one  was  Tumpy  John  because  he  has  no  tail. 

When  them  come,  all  the  Puss  was  In  long  coat  an’ 
burn-pan  hat.  Dog  was  in  trousies  an’  shirt. 

An’  Dog  tell  them  all  howdy  very  friendly,  foP  he 
didn’  know  what  Finger  Quashy  doing  him. 

An’  Finger  Quashy  quite  glad  fe  see  how  Dog  look 
friendly  an’  please,  an’  didn’  have  no  t’ought  that  him 
was  tiefing  fe  him  pear. 

So  the  whole  of  them  sit  down,  Dog  making  a com- 
plain to  them  that,  so  he  get  a pear  an  put  it  to  ripe, 
by  the  time  he  ready  for  it  him  don’t  see  none. 

An’  Finger  Quashy  was  doing  It. 

An’  Finger  Quashy  jump  up  tell  Dog: — “Mr.  Dog, 
me  no  tell  you  all  time  say  you  want  one  watchman  ? a 
da’  fellow  Ratta  a tief  you  pear.  Last  night  me  dream 
say  me  see  you  put  me  fe  watchman  an’  me  catch  the 
fellah,  so  you  better  put  me  fe  guard  you  house  from 
that  tiefing  Mr.  Ratta.” 

Dog  was  quite  agree. 

Dog  said : — “ After  dinner  I will  tell  you  better.” 

Quashy  said  “Yes.” 


144  Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 

So  Dog  lef  them  gone  to  get  dinner. 

By  Dog  gone,  Quashy  come  out  of  the  house,  go  into 
Dog  buttery,  see  two  green  pear,  take  them  out  go  hide 
them. 

Ratta  see  him  go  over  the  kitchen  cry  out: — “Why, 
why,  why ! Quashy  take  you  pear ; you  no  yerry  ? 
Quashy  take  ahm  gone.” 

By  Dog  get  in  the  house  Quashy  was  in  already  sit- 
ting down  look  quite  meek  an’  christianable. 

Dog  lef’  them  go  see  if  his  pear  was  there. 

When  he  go  there  was  none,  an’  Dog  don’t  like  noth- 
ing as  his  pear  an’  bone,  an’  he  get  vex,  take  all  the 
dinner  t’row  it  ’way,  go  in  the  house  take  down  his  ’tick. 

By  the  time  Dog  fe  lick  one  of  the  Puss  everybody 
was  on  a tree  on  the  far  side  of  Dog  yard. 

Dog  swear  all  sort  of  bad  word  fe  the  one  that  take 
him  green  pear. 

Everybody  say  : — “ Thank  God  me  no  eat  green  pear.” 

Finger  Quashy  said  : — “ Lard  ! what  a man  fe  swear ! ” 

Dog  see  that  he  couldn’  manage  to  catch  Puss,  leave 
and  go  away. 

An’  as  Dog  turn  round,  his  son  playing  with  fire  burn 
his  house  an’  all  his  clothes. 

From  that  day  Dog  hate  Puss  till  now,  for  it  is  Puss 
cause  him  to  have  one  suit  till  him  dead. 

Jack  Mantora  me  no  choose  none. 

NOTES. 

Tatafelo,  Italian  a,  the  other  vowels  English. 

Pear,  i.e.  the  West  Indian  pear,  a delicious  vegetable. 

tell  you  better,  make  the  final  arrangement. 

Why,  why,  why ! squeaked  like  a rat. 

by  the  time  Dog  fe  lick,  as  Dog  was  going  to  strike. 

everybody,  used  also  of  inanimate  objects.  They  say  : — “ I going  to 
water  cabbage,  tomato,  everybody.” 

T’ank  God,  etc.,  a favourite  form  of  exculpation,  which,  however,  does 
not  necessarily  imply  innocence. 


Annancy  and  his  Fish-Pot. 


H5 


XLVIII.  ANNANCY  AND  HIS  FISH-POT. 

ONE  day  Brother  Annancy  always  set  him  fish-pot 
in  a river  ober  a failin’  fe  catch  jonga.  Tacoma  usual 
to  go  an’  knock  it. 

An’  Annancy  set  watch  into  a river  corner,  an’  Tacoma 
come  fe  knock  it ; he  didn’  know  Brother  Annancy  hide 
there  fe  watchin’  him. 

As  Tacoma  go  over  de  fish-pot  Brother  Annancy 
chuck  him  down,  an’  Tacoma  catch  in  de  fish-pot. 

Annancy  go  beg  Brother  Rabbit  say “ Bro’er  Yabbit, 
me  fish-pot  catch  a big  fish,  come  an’  help  me  knock 
it,  me  one  can’t  manage  it,  Bro’er  Yabbit.” 

Brother  Annancy  an’  Brother  Rabbit  went  to  the  river. 

Annancy  say: — “Bro’er  Yabbit,  me  feel  me  tummy 
hurt  me  dis  marnin’,  no  able  fe  put  me  foot  in  de  cold 
water,  see  if  you  one  can  manage  fe  take  out  de  fish-pot.” 

Brother  Rabbit  go  an’  take  it  out  till  he  nearly  make 
shore  with  the  fish-pot. 

Annancy  say: — “ Bery  well,  you  kill  Brother  Tacoma! 
Bery  well,  you  kill  Brother  Tacoma!” 

Then  Brother  Rabbit  commence  to  cry  now,  an’  the 
frettenation  in  a Rabbit  he  say  he  kill  somebody  an’  he 
know  they  going  to  hang  him,  an’  next  day  Rabbit  dead. 

Then  the  case  didn’  try  again. 

Jack  Mantora  me  no  choose  none. 

NOTES. 

fish-pot,  made  of  bamboo  strips  and  looking  like  a lobster-pot. 

jonga,  the  smallest  of  the  three  kinds  of  crawfish  which  abound  in  the 
streams  and  rivers  of  Jamaica. 

knock,  empty. 

K 


146 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


tummy  ; a less  pretty  word  is  really  used.  Annancy  squeaks  his  words 
more  than  usual  here. 

Bery  well,  etc. , in  f rhythm  J [ J J \ J J J and  he  claps 
his  hands  to  the  measure  twice  in  the  bar. 

frettenation,  probably  fright,  but  may  have  something  to  do  with  fretting. 
Owing  to  Rabbit’s  fright,  he  says  that  he  has  killed  a man.  Rabbit,  through 
fright,  says  that  he  has  killed  a man.  These  elliptical  expressions  are  hard  to 
understand  until  one  has  heard  them  often, 
try  again,  try  after  all. 


XLIX.  HOG  AND  DOG. 

One  day  Hog  was  going  out  to  look  work,  an’  Hog 
name  was  Cuddy. 

An’  he  got  out  an’  walk  all  about  an’  couldn’  get  no 
work. 

An’  when  he  come  home  Ratta  employ  him  to  keep 
watch  for  him  when  Broder  Puss  is  coming. 

An’  Hog  ask  Rat  how  much  is  his  pay. 

An’  Rat  tell  him  that  he  will  give  him  t’ree  an’  six- 
pence a week  but  he  must  find  himself  every  t’ing  to 
eat  an’  drink. 

An’  Hog  didn’  agree.  But  as  the  time  being  so  hard 
he  says  he  will  bear  with  Ratta  till  the  week  out. 

An’  when  the  week  done  Ratta  pay  Hog,  an’  Ratta 
t’ought  that  Hog  was  still  keeping  watch  for  him. 

So  Ratta  go  out,  an’  when  he  come  back  he  didn’ 
fin’  Hog. 

An’  him  say: — Wasn’  God,  Puss  would  broke  in  on  him. 

An’  him  cuss  Hog  that  Hog  would  walk  an’  never  get 
no  work,  an’  some  which  worse  than  Hog  will  laugh 
after  him. 

An’  Hog  start  one  morning  to  look  work. 


Hog  and  Dog. 


147 


What  that  fellah  Mr.  Dog  done  Hog. 

As  he,  being  a market-keeper,  he  set  down  at  the 
market  gate  an’  see  Hog  was  passing,  an’  he  ask  Hog 
where  he  is  going. 

Hog  tell  him  that  he  is  going  to  look  a little  work. 

Same  time  Dog  burst  out  a laugh.  An’  as  he  burst 
out  a laugh  he  ask  Hog  t’ought  he  was  working  with 
Ratta. 

An’  Hog  feel  so  shame  to  himself  till  he  wouldn’ 
answer  Dog. 

An’  Dog  laugh  after  Hog  with  this  sing : — 


Allegro. 


* S 

— 

If— » 

^ — N 

-F 

y a * . • * 

F^~ 1 

* * # 

-0  * 

T-  -~1~  ~ 

Time  get  so  hard  Hog  an’ all  a look  work,  Dog  sit  down  a 


rj/"  TVx 

, 

— Ns..’ 

rn — 

_/S.  # J 

s j -zn 

J 1 ” 

.__J  - ^ a H 

0 • 

P 9 0 

U — 

market  gate  an’  go  laugh  at  a Hog  distress ; me  ra-rabum  Cuddy  de  da 


(l  v -v-s  s 

-1  jN  ~ fii 

i-  j"  S=4 S 

l9-  • 

-0 

door,  me  rarabum  Cud-dy  de  da  door,  me  rarabum  Cud-dy  de  da  door. 


An’  Dog  sing  an’  sing  an’  sing  till  Hog  get  vex  an’ 
come  home  back. 

An’  from  that  day  that’s  why  Hog  must  always  hate 
Dog  until  now. 

Jack  Mantora  me  no  choose  none. 


NOTES. 

Cuddy,  short  for  Cordelia, 
wasn’  God,  if  it  wasn’t  for  God. 
rarabum,  nonsense  word,  Italian  vowels. 
d6  da  door,  is  at  door,  is  out  of  doors. 


148 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


L.  DEVIL  AND  THE  PRINCESS. 

Once  a King  has  a daughter,  an’  that  gal  was  a pet  to 
her  father. 

So  one  day  a Prince  come  to  ask  for  her. 

The  father  love  the  young  man,  but  the  gal  say : — 
“ Puppa,  me  don’t  like  him.”  So  the  father  promise  her 
that  anybody  she  see  she  like  he  will  agree  to  it. 

So  one  night  a good  friend  of  the  King  made  a dance 
an’  invite  the  young  Princess  to  the  ball. 

This  man  who  made  the  dance  invite  all  classes  of 
people.  So  he  invite  Devil  too,  but  they  don’t  know 
that  it  was  Devil. 

When  all  the  guests  come  everybody  give  their  name. 
Devil  give  his  name  Mr.  Winkler.  So  the  ball  com- 
menced. 

Devil  see  the  gal.  He  went  an’  ask  her  if  she  wish 
to  dance  with  him. 

The  gal  was  so  glad  say: — “Yes,  sir,  for  I love  you 
the  most.” 

When  they  dance  till  daylight  the  gal  don’t  want  to 
lef’  Devil. 

She  say  to  Devil : — “ Come  have  a walk  home  with  me.” 

Devil  say : — “Yes,  I would  go,  but  I am  a man  have 
such  a great  business,  I has  to  go  home  very  soon  to 
seek  after  it.” 

The  gal  say : — “ Come  go  home  with  me  you  will  get 
me  to  marry,  for  my  father  is  a King.” 

An’  as  Devil  hear  about  marry  he  go  home  with  the 
gal. 

When  she  get  to  the  house  she  call  to  her  father : — 
“ Puppa,  here  come  my  lover,  I have  found  him  at  last.” 


Devil  and  the  Princess. 


149 


So  the  servant-boy  was  an  old-witch,  said: — “Young 
mistress,  you  know  that  man  is  Devil?” 

The  gal  get  vex,  begin  to  cry. 

She  go  to  her  father  crying,  tell  him  “ the  servant-boy 
cuss  me  most  shameful.” 

The  father  get  upstarted,  come  out  to  the  boy,  don’t 
ask  the  boy  nothing,  catch  the  boy  an’  put  him  in 
prison. 

They  take  Mr  Winkler  in  the  palace,  an’  the  father 
fix  up  an’  they  get  marry. 

After  Mr.  Winkler  get  marry  he  said  : — “ I am  ready 
to  go.” 

The  King  say : — “ No,  I can’t  send  away  my  one 
daughter.  You  must  stay  and  I will  make  you  a King 
too.” 

Mr.  Winkler  say  “No.” 

During  this  time  they  don’t  know  that  it  was  Devil,  for 
when  the  boy  tell  them  they  get  vex. 

Devil  marry  ten  time  an’  he  eat  all  his  wife,  so  he 
was  going  to  eat  this  Princess  too. 

So,  as  he  was  so  anxious  to  go,  the  gal  have  to  go 
with  him. 

When  they  ready  to  start  the  father  give  them  a long 
bag  full  with  money.  Devil  get  a boatman  an’  they 
start. 

They  sail  four  days  before  they  get  to  their  home. 

When  the  gal  get  there  she  go  meet  a old  lady  in 
the  house.  This  lady  was  Devil  cook. 

As  he  got  in  he  said  to  the  cook : — “ I have  got  a 
good  fat  meat  for  the  party.” 

So  Devil  go  an’  lock  up  the  gal  in  a bar,  an’  lef 
the  old  lady  to  watch  if  the  gal  is  going  to  get  ’way. 
He  lef  a Cock  that  any  time  the  old  lady  say  that  the 
gal  get  ’way  he  must  call,  an’  him  lef’  a bag  of  corn  to 
feed  the  Cock  that  he  may  keep  good  watch. 

The  old  lady  say  “Yes.” 


150  Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 

Devil  ready  to  start,  order  his  t’ree-foot  horse  saddle, 
for  he  is  going  to  invite  his  friend  to  come  an’  help 
him  eat  the  gal. 

He  start,  deeble-a-bup,  deeble-a-bup. 

As  he  get  about  a mile  the  old  lady  go  in  to  the 
gal,  take  her  out  an’  tell  her  that  her  husband  is  Devil 
an’  he  is  going  to  eat  you. 

The  gal  begin  to  cry. 

The  old  lady  say “ Don’t  cry,  I love  you  an’  I 
going  to  let  you  go,  but  the  Cock  is  a watchman ; he 
will  see  you,  an’  if  he  see  you  he  will  call  for  his  master, 
but  never  min’  I will  try.” 

The  old  lady  get  ten  quart  of  the  corn  an’  a gallon 
of  rum,  soak  the  corn  in  it  for  about  a hour,  an’  after 
give  it  to  the  Cock. 

An’  the  Cock  eat  the  whole  evening  till  night,  an’, 
after  him  finish  eat,  him  drop  asleep. 

The  old  lady  get  a boatman  an’  pay  him  an’  he  take 
the  gal  over  the  sea. 

When  day  nearly  light  the  Cock  wake  an’  go  to  look 
if  he  see  the  gal  through  a hole.  When  he  look  the  gal 
was  gone.  Him  go  to  the  cook  an’  ask. 

The  lady  said  : — “ Him  gone,  an’  I was  calling  you  an’ 
you  never  wake.” 


Then  Cock  sing  out : — - 

Allegro. 


wake  go  look  a hole — the  gal  was  gone. 


Devil  and  the  Princess. 


151 

Mr.  Winkler  hear  an’  was  coming  like  lighten  with  his 
t’ree-foot  horse,  deeble-a-bup,  deeble-a-bup. 

He  call  out: — “Me  coming”,  deeble-a-bup,  “Me  com- 
ing”, deeble-a-bup. 

At  last  he  reach  the  yard  an’  see  the  gal  gone.  He 
get  a canoe  an’  start  after  her,  an’  by  next  day  light  he 
see  the  gal  boat  was  far  away. 

He  call  out : — “ Sairey  de  ’pon  sea,  Sairey  de  ’pon  sea, 
come  back  darling,  you  husband  de  come  fe  you.” 

When  the  gal  look  he  say : — “ Shub  ahead,  boatman, 
do,  to  save  me  life ! ” 

An’  by  the  time  they  get  a land  Devil  was  near  them. 

An’  the  boatman  shot  off  a piece  of  Devil  canoe  an’ 
water  get  in,  so  Devil  has  to  go  home  back. 

An’  when  the  gal  go  home,  tell  her  father  what  was 
her  life,  the  father  say: — “Don’t  marry  again  to  nobody, 
not  if  even  the  King.” 

An’  the  father  take  her  in  an’  give  her  servant  to  look 
after  her. 

Jack  Mantora  me  no  choose  any. 

NOTES. 

cuss,  abuse.  It  does  not  imply  swearing.  To  swear  is  to  cuss  bad  word. 

in  a bar,  a barred-up  room. 

deeble-a-bup,  the  sound  of  the  three-legged  horse’s  step.  Compare  the 
itty-itty-hap  o,  “Mr.  Bluebeard.” 

The  Cook  adopts  Annancy’s  device  in  “ Annancy  and  Screech-owl.” 

coocoorico.  The  Cock’s  crow  is  excellent.  The  Negro  is  very  clever 
in  his  imitation  of  animals. 

a bole,  at  the  hole,  through  the  hole. 

canoe,  pronounced  with  accent  on  the  first  syllable  and  French  a. 


152 


Jamaican  Song  ana  Story. 


LI.  WHEELER. 

One  day  Puss  was  going  out  on  a journey,  an’  he  travel 
till  he  reach  to  a river  mouth.  An’  as  Puss  being  afraid 
for  water  he  couldn’  cross  the  river. 

An’  Puss  has  to  stop  for  two  day  an’  one  night,  an’ 
Puss  climb  a tree  which  hang  over  the  water. 

An’  Mr.  Annancy  was  fishening. 

An’  Annancy  fishening  till  him  come  where  Puss  was, 
an’  Puss  didn’  call  to  Annancy. 

An’  same  time  Annancy  meet  up  a licking  ’tump  a 
river  side.  Annancy  lick,  him  lick,  him  lick,  him  lick 
outside  till  him  sen’  him  han’  inside. 

An’  when  Annancy  shub  him  hand  him  feel  something 
hold  him. 

An’  Annancy  get  very  frighten  an’  pull  fe  get  him 
hand  out,  an’  him  couldn’  get  ’way. 

An’  Annancy  ask  the  question  Who  hold  me  ? ” 

An’  a voice  in  a the  ’tump  said : — “ Me,  Wheeler.” 

An’  Annancy  said  to  him  must  wheel  him  make  him  see. 

An’  him  wheel  Mr.  Annancy  mile  an’  distant. 

An’  when  Annancy  drop  he  didn’  dead,  an’  he  said : — 
“ T’ank  God  ! I met  with  a little  accident,  but  I see  it 
going  to  be  a living  for  me  an’  me  family.” 

An’  Mr.  Annancy  went  home  an’  get  some  lovely  iron 
peg,  an’  when  him  come  he  plant  them  in  the  river 
course  to  the  very  spot  which  him  did  drop. 

That  time  Puss  seeing  all  wliat  Mr  Annancy  is  doing. 

Annancy  leave,  an’  come  where  Wheeler  is,  an’  keep 
himself  very  quiet,  an’  presently  Peafowl  was  passing. 

An’  Annancy  call  upon  him  say: — “ Bro’er  Peafowl,  a 
living  is  here  for  me  an’  you.” 


Wheeler. 


*53 


An’  Peafowl  ask  him  what  is  it. 

An’  he  take  Peafowl  an’  carry  him  where  Wheeler  is, 
and  he  says : — Bro’er  Peafowl,  you  see  that  hole.  As 
you  hand  is  so  long,  don’t  be  afraid,  just  shub  you  hand 
in  there  now  an’  you  will  find  something  grand.” 

An’  as  Peafowl  shub  in  him  hand  Wheeler  hold  him. 

An’  Annancy  tell  him  that  he  must  pull. 

An’  when  him  pull  he  couldn’  get  ’way. 

An’  Mr.  Annancy  feel  very  proud  an’  happy  till  he 
laugh  with  joy  in  his  heart. 

An’  when  him  done  laugh  him  tell  Peafowl  to  say: — 
“ Who  hold  me  here  ? ” 

An’  Wheeler  say  : — “ Me,  Wheeler.” 

Annancy  tell  him  to  say: — “Wheel  me  mile  an’  distant.” 

An’  him  wheel  Peafowl  an’  dash  him  on  the  iron  peg, 
an’  Mr.  Annancy  went  an’  pick  him  up  an’  put  him  in 
his  bag. 

An’  him  went  back  to  his  old  place  a bush  an’  sat  quiet. 

That  time  Puss  was  seeing  all  this. 

Ratta  was  passing,  an’  as  Annancy  see  him  Annancy 
said  to  him : — “ I’s  all  you  deeshent  man  I like  to  see. 

An’  Ratta  ask  him  : — “ What  for  ? ” 

An’  Annancy  say  : — “ Don’t  be  afraid ; a living  is  here 
for  you  an’  me.” 

An’  he  carry  Ratta  an’  show  him  the  ’tump. 

An’  when  him  show  Ratta,  Ratta  ask  him  if  this  is 
the  living. 

Annancy  say : — “ No  shub  you  han’,  man,  in  the  hole, 
an’  you  will  fin’  a living.” 

An’  as  Ratta  shub  him  hand  Wheeler  hold  him. 

An’  Annancy  tell  him  that  he  must  pull. 

Him  say  he  can’t  get  ’way. 

Annancy  tell  him  to  ask  : — “ Who  hold  me  ? ” 

“ Me,  Wheeler.” 

Annancy  tell  him  must  say: — “Wheel  me  mile  an’ 
distant.” 


154  Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 

An’  he  wheel  Ratta  an’  dash  him  on  the  iron  peg 
again. 

Annancy  went  an’  pick  him  up  an’  put  him  in  his 
bag,  an’  go  back  same  place. 

After,  Puss  come  down  off  the  tree  an’  walk  through 
the  bush  an’  go  down  the  river  a little  ways  an’  then 
turn  up  back,  coming  up  very  meek  an’  poorly. 

Annancy  so  glad  to  see  Bro’er  Puss  him  say: — 
“Walk  up  my  bold  friend  Mr.  Puss.  Come  an’  see  the 
living  which  is  here  for  me  an’  you.” 

An’  Puss  playing  as  to  say  that  he  didn’  know  noth- 
ing at  all  about  it. 

An’  Mr.  Annancy  begin  to  show  Puss  the  ’tump,  an’ 
he  tell  Puss  to  shub  him  hand  in  the  hole. 

When  Annancy  show  Puss  the  hole,  Puss  say  that 
him  don’  see  it. 

Annancy  get  vex  and  say : — “ Shub  you  han’  you  so, 
man  ! Shub  you  han’  you  so,  man  ! There,  there ! 

An’  Puss  put  him  hand  another  way,  playing  to  say 
he  don’  see  it.  An’  he  go  on,  go  on,  till  Annancy  make 
a flourish  with  him  own  hand,  an’  Annancy  hand  slip  in 
the  hole  an’  Wheeler  catch  him. 

An’  Annancy  begin  to  cry  as  him  know  the  danger 
which  is  down  below. 

An’  him  cry  out : — “ Do,  me  good  Bro’er  Push,  jus’ 
run  a river  course ; you  will  see  some  iron  peg,  pull  them 
up  for  me.” 

An’  Puss  begin  fe  walk  in  him  sinnicky  way,  an’  hide 
a bush  where  Annancy  can’t  see. 

When  Puss  come,  him  say  him  pull  them. 

Annancy  wouldn’  believe,  an’  crying  still  say: — “Bro’er 
Push,  mus’  go  an’  fetch  one  come  make  me  see.” 

Puss  go,  an’  when  him  come  back  him  come  with- 
out it. 

Annancy  ask  him  where  is  it. 

Him  tell  Annancy  that  it  too  heavy,  an’  him  roll  it  ’way. 


Wheeler. 


155 


An’  Annancy,  still  crying,  wouldn’  believe.  An’  he 
begin  to  call  Puss  Godfather  Push,  an’  beg  him  hard : — 
“Do,  me  good  Godfather  Push,  just  you  jump  pull 
dem.” 

An’  him  go  on,  go  on,  till  him  believe  Puss,  an’  him 
ask  the  question: — “Who  hold  me?” 

“Me,  Wheeler.” 

“ Wheel  me  mile  an’  distant.” 

An’  Annancy  fly  by  the  air  an’  drop  slam  on  his  own 
trap. 

An’  Puss  walk  down  an’  pick  up  Annancy,  an’  put 
him  in  the  bag  with  Peafowl  an’  Ratta  an’  carry  off  all 
the  living  with  a jolly  song : — 


Allegretto. 


w _ s 

^ p »> 

- N 

1 X "It  £j  1 ! 1 

^ J 

J S 

rfjy  t 4_  0 — 0 S 0 

rnj  • 1 

J 9 • m 

■ ' 

0 ,-_rn 

L- — — 

* 

Poor  me  lit  - tie  Cub-ba  boy,  barn  day  no  Cub-ba  ? 


^ — = 

^ s - ■ 

• -j 

& 

• m • • 

Me  da  go  da  Vay  - lum,  barn  day  no  Cub-ba? 


Jack  Mantora  me  no  choose  none. 


NOTES. 

licking  ’tump,  a tree  stump  with  bees  in  it.  The  honey  trickling  out 
makes  a licking-stump  of  it. 

lick,  him  lick,  him  lick.  These  words  are  run  closely  together,  then  a 
pause,  and  then  him  lick  outside.  Pause  again,  after  which  the  sentence 
finishes. 

wheel,  to  cause  to  turn  or  spin.  I have  no  clue  to  Mr.  Wheeler. 

mile  an’  distant,  to  the  distance  of  a mile. 

Is  all  you,  etc.,  it’s  all  you  decent  men. 

What  for  ? Ratta  was  suspicious  of  \nnancy’s  flattery. 

poorly,  poor  in  spirit,  meek. 

sinnicky,  sneaky. 

Bro’er  Push,  must  go,  you  must  go. 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


156 

barn  day  no  Cubba?  is  not  my  born-day  (birthday)  Cubba.  Children 
used  to  be  named  according  to  the  day  of  the  week  on  which  they  were 
born. 


Day. 

Boys. 

Girls. 

Sunday. 

Quashy. 

Quashiba. 

Monday. 

Cudjo. 

Jubba. 

Tuesday. 

Cubbenna. 

Cubba. 

Wednesday. 

Quaco. 

Memba. 

Thursday. 

Qua. 

Abba. 

Friday. 

Cuffy. 

Fibba. 

Saturday. 

Quamin. 

Beniba. 

According  to  this  list,  Cubba  is  a girl’s  name,  but  it  is  perhaps  short  for 
Cubbenna. 

me  da  go  da  Vaylum,  I am  going  to  Vaylum. 


PART  II.  DIGGING-SINGS. 


The  Negroes  when  they  get  together  never  stop 
chattering  and  laughing.  They  have  a keen  sense  of 
the  ludicrous,  and  give  a funny  turn  to  their  stories  as 
they  relate  the  common  incidents  of  daily  life.  The 
doings  of  their  neighbours  form  the  chief  topic  of  con- 
versation here  as  in  most  places,  and  any  local  event 
of  special  importance  is  told  over  and  over.  Presently, 
after  repeated  telling,  the  story,  or  part  of  it,  is  set  to 
one  of  their  dance  tunes,  and  tune  and  words  henceforth 
belong  to  one  another.  This  is  the  origin  of  the  songs 
which  follow.  With  the  explanatory  notes  attached 
to  them  it  is  hoped  that  they  will  afford  some  insight 
into  the  peasant  life  of  Jamaica. 

The  tunes  fall  into  two  main  divisions,  “dancing-tunes” 
and  “ digging-sings,”  and  besides  the  formal  dances,  whose 
steps  are  thoroughly  known,  there  is  an  informal  kind 
called  “playing  in  de  ring.”  It  may  be  described  as 
dancing  mixed  with  horse-play.  It  was  in  this  kind  of 
romping  that  Parson  Puss  took  part  in  the  Annancy 
story  (No.  XXIX.),  and  perhaps  it  was  hardly  the  thing 
for  the  cloth ! Ring  tunes  begin  anywhere  and  anyhow, 
and  do  not  necessarily  conform  to  the  eight-bar  rhythm 
of  the  more  regular  dance  tunes. 

To  the  other  class  of  songs  belong  the  “ digging-sings  ” 
used,  together  with  rum,  as  an  accompaniment  to  field 
labour.  In  March  it  is  time  to  think  of  getting  the  land 


158  Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 

ready  for  planting.  So,  having  rented  a piece  of  hillside 
from  a neighbour,  if  he  has  none  of  his  own,  the  Jamaican 
begins  to  clear  the  ground.  The  biggest  of  the  trees  fall 
to  the  axe,  and  the  brushwood,  or  bush,  as  it  is  called,  is 
chopped  down  with  the  cutlass,  a few  rod-like  saplings 
being  left  here  and  there  to  serve  as  supports  for  the 
yams,  which  will  by  and  by  climb  them  like  hops.  After 
a few  days’  exposure  to  the  sun,  he  burns  all  the  top 
and  lop  that  lies  on  the  ground,  which  is  then  ready  for 
digging.  He  now  calls  in  some  of  his  friends  to  help 
him  dig  yam-hills — so  the  phrase  runs.  What  they  dig 
is,  of  course,  holes,  to  begin  with.  The  loose  soil  is  then 
piled  up  into  small  mounds  in  which  the  yam  heads  will 
be  placed.  The  object  of  the  mound  is  to  enable  the 
proprietor  to  see  easily  at  any  time  how  the  tuber  is 
getting  on,  by  just  “gravelling”  it  with  his  hand.  As 
the  hills  are  being  dug,  the  rum  bottle  circulates,  and  the 
digging-sings,  which  began  quietly  enough,  get  more  and 
more  lively.  The  Negro  is  cheery  at  all  times,  but  when 
well  primed  with  liquor  he  is  hilarious.  Nothing  more 
joyous  can  be  imagined  than  a good  “ digging-sing  ” 
from  twenty  throats,  with  the  pickers — so  they  call  their 
pickaxes — falling  in  regular  beat.  The  pickers  work  faster 
and  faster  to  the  strains  of  a rousing  “ Oh,  Samwel,  oh ! ” 
or  “ The  one  shirt  I have  ratta  cut  ahm.”  One  man 
starts  or  “ raises  ” the  tune  and  the  others  come  in  with 
the  “ bobbin,”  the  short  refrain  of  one  or  two  words 
which  does  duty  for  chorus.  The  chief  singer  is  usually 
the  wag  of  the  party,  and  his  improvised  sallies  are 
greeted  with  laughter  and  an  occasional  “ hi,”  which 
begins  on  a falsetto  note  and  slides  downwards,  expres- 
sing amusement  and  delight  very  plainly. 


Digging-  Sings. 


159 


LII. 


Here  is  a specimen : — 


Allegro. 


[y 

0 0 3 r 1 n 

f—j— • w~  ! 

dz**  § 3 zip 

::  / S * 

Oh  Miss  Nancy  Ray,  Oh  hur-rah  boys  ! Oh  Miss  Nancy  Ray, 


$ IT- "I 7 

, n 

/r  "if  1 1 

-I 

1 

L f rh  * J 

> fSTS  rs  TN  T\  i>  [X 

1 ** 

1 

0 ^ * -0 

0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 

0 -*  0-J 

3 3 


Oh  hur-rah  boys  ! Nancy  Banana  da  broke  man  heart,  Oh  hurrah  boys  ! 


Nancy  Banana  da  broke  man  heart,  Oh  hurrah  boys  ! O Miss  Nancy  Ray, 


- • - n 

rn 

i # — r 1 

I I I 

• i 1 

L XSx T J 



L r r Lr # 

D m J 

■ .V  * - - « 

LJ — 

11 

Oh  hur  - rah  boys  ! Oh  Miss  Nan-cy  Ray,  Oh  hur  - rah  boys  ! 


The  bobbin  is  “ Oh  hurrah  boys  ! ” and  a good  swinging 
one  it  is.  If  the  bobbin  is  well  taken  up  each  sing  lasts 
for  about  five  minutes,  and  the  raiser  of  the  tune  prides 
himself  on  the  number  of  “turnings”  or  slight  variations 
he  can  give  it.  He  also  improvises  words  as  he  goes 
on.  Such  a sally  as  changing  Miss  Rag’s  name  to  Banana 
would  be  met  with  laughter  when  it  was  first  heard. 

(“  Da  broke  man  heart  ” means  “ has  broken  a man’s 
heart.”) 


LI  II. 

The  next  example  is  a type  of  many  of  the  sings. 
It  turns  on  a piece  of  local  gossip.  The  “ at  last  ” is 
significant  and  points  to  Catherine  being  an  old  offender. 
The  proffered  sympathy  is  hardly  sincere. 


i6o 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


Allegro. 


~y  •» 

— S,  ~ 

0 - m _ 

i is  w 

TnT  4 

V 

1 J S 

•v  v 

'1  ” V 

sL 

_ 

— * - 0 

m-m- 

Ho  biddy-bye,  biddybye  me  yerry  the  talk  biddy -bye,  say 


^ -js— N— ^ 

— fe — ^ 

— P>-— ^ -g- — kt 

-m-  -m- 

Cat’rine  gone  a prison  bid-dy  - bye  poor — me  Cat’rine 


—y — 

IV  \ v 

— I 

V p \ 

N»  V. 

J 9 r~ 

! V.  !V 

_ 



% 

* 

j 

0 

oh  biddy  - bye  Cat’rine  gone  at  last  biddy  - bye. 


Here  is  the  story  in  plain  English,  “ deep  English  ” as 
the  Negro  calls  it,  not  understanding  it  well : — “ Oh  by 
the  bye  I hear  a report  that  Catherine  has  gone  to 
prison.  My  poor  Catherine  ! ” 

(For  “say”  read  “which  says.”  “Biddybye”  is  the 
bobbin. 


LIV. 


We  come  now  to  one  which  refers  to  labouring 


life 


Allegro. 


Tell  Mis-ter  Link-y  me  want  go,  hm  ! lim  ! 


oh — — — 


55  S 


00 


0 m 


0 0 


am 


Ben  - ji-man  ! Bar-ra  - rap  Bar-ra-rap  Bar-ra  - rap  me  Ben  - ji  - 

r7\ 


oh- 


— Ben  - ji  - man  ! 


The  men  are  in  the  field  watching  the  sun  which  is 
getting  low.  They  begin  to  think  the  head-man,  Mr. 


Digging- Sings. 


1 6 1 


Linky,  is  forgetting  how  time  goes.  He  should  be  giving 
the  signal  to  “ knock  off  work.”  So  one  of  the  gang, 
meaning  Mr.  Linky  to  hear,  says  to  his  neighbour : — 
“Benjamin,  tell  Mr.  Linky  I want  to  go.”  “ Hm,  hm ! ” 
with  closed  lips,  means  a great  deal.  It  is  a sort 
of  good-natured  remonstrance.  Always  Benjiman  for 
Benjamin  and  the  Barraraps  culminate  in  a sharp 
final  staccato  rap.  This  has  a longer  bobbin  “ Oh 
Benjiman  ! ” 


LV. 


The  next  might  easily  be  mistaken  for  something  of 
the  same  sort : — 

Allegro. 


* A — 

^ — Ni — Ni — >5 — ^ — V 

m 

F3L; 

> — p — p — p — p — p. 

*0*9* 

* _m  • 

*7 


Tell  Mister  Bell  me  go  plant  co-co,  Tell  Mister  Bell  me  go 


plant  co  - co,  T ell  Mister  Bell  me  go  plant  coco,  tuppence  a quart  fe 


1 

[— 1 n 



h — i — v— — 

L? «J 

flour  ! Flour  Flour  Flour  Flour  ! tuppence  a quart  fe  flour  ! 


Mr.  Bell  is,  however,  the  keeper  of  a country  shop. 
“Tell  Mr.  Bell  I am  going  to  plant  cocoes.  Threepence 
a quart  for  shop  flour ! No,  it’s  too  much  expense.” 
(“Too  much  expense”  is  a favourite  phrase.) 

The  accent  which  the  music  gives  to  the  word  coco 
is  not  the  right  one.  It  should  be  on  the  first 
syllable. 

“Fuppence”  is  fivepence,  but  means  threepence.  This 
is  the  survival  of  an  old  coinage  in  which  sixpence  was 
called  tenpence.  The  u in  “fuppence”  is  an  Italian  u 

L 


i62 


Jamaican  Song  arid  Story. 


with  a turn  towards  an  open  o.  It  sounds  more  like 
fourpence  than  fippence. 

“ Plant  coco  ” is  the  bobbin,  but  a gang  who  were 
inspired  not  to  leave  too  much  to  the  raiser  of  the  tune, 
would  take  upon  themselves  to  add  “ Fuppence  a quart 
fe  flour.”  (“  Fe,”  sounded  “ fy,”  with  short  y as  in 
“ very.”) 


LVI. 

The  next  has  again  a well-defined  bobbin  in  “ nyam 
an’  cry,”  and  hereafter  no  reference  will  be  made  to  this 
feature,  which  by  now  must  be  thoroughly  understood. 
Where  it  appears  to  be  wanting,  the  whole  sing  is  sung 
in  chorus. 


Allegretto. 


ar  ■j'Ttt- 

\*  •-  4 

— r k — i — -N 

:± 

Badhoman  oh  ! 

o » it 

4= 

— — t 

)ad  homan  oh  ! n 

yam  an’  cry,  me 

n V \ 

— f 

d 

r J -P  -\ 

A — St 

-m 

1— — I — m — 

-m- 

1 1— 1 u 

co  - co  no  ripe,  nyam  an’  cry,  me  ha-foo  no  ripe,  nyam  an’  cry. 


The  man  is  “ working  his  provision  ground,”  and  his 
wife  is  always  saying  she  has  not  got  enough  to  eat. 
She  is  a bad  woman,  who  does  nothing  but  “ nyam  an’ 
cry,”  eat  and  call  for  more,  and  my  cocoes  are  not  ready 
to  dig  and  my  Afoo  (Italian  a,  ahfoo)  yam  is  not  ready 
either.  (There  are  as  many  different  kinds  of  yams  as 
there  are  of  potatoes.) 


LVI  I. 


Continuing  with  subjects  connected  with  field-work,  we 
come  now  to  a sing  which  must  have  originated  in  old 


Digging-  S ings. 


163 

slavery  days,  when  ringing  a bell  was  the  signal  for 
beginning  and  knocking-off  work  : — 


Andante. 


Bell  oh,  Bell  oh,  Bell  a ring  a yard  oh  ! oh — De  - 


\r- 

[5 — 1" — r— 

s s N \ 

— 1 — 1 — 

1 |s  jL-fs- 

m=f| 

Z_ | 

* * * -1 

L*— J-1 

— — — — — m — 

m — 1 

gay,  Bell  a ring  a yard  oh ! Baboon  roll  de  drum  oh, 


~ ■}  V V-V 

— 

— 

I 

/ 

* m 

1 

& — 

f 

5 m _ 9 m 

a 



! 1 1 v 

V 

• 

1 * — 

— S — 

V— 

1 — 1 — 

— m—S — J— L 

Monkey  rub  de  fid  - die,  oh — — — Bell  a ring  a yard  oh  ! 

The  bell  is  ringing  up  at  the  house,  says  one  of  the 
slaves  to  Degay  the  head-man,  and  we  want  our  break- 
fast ; and  another,  seeing  Degay  look  cross  at  anybody 
presuming  to  make  suggestions  to  him,  tries  to  make  him 
laugh  with  the  piece  of  nonsense  that  follows.  We  shall 
meet  with  Degay  or  Deggy,  for  there  is  some  doubt 
about  his  name,  again.  It  will  be  thought  that  either 
the  word  Baboon  is  misplaced  or  the  barring  is  wrong, 
but  it  is  not  so.  The  negro  is  careless  of  accent,  as  of 
many  things.  Here  he  likes  to  have  it  on  the  first 
syllable,  which  he  lengthens  to  “ bah.”  “ Rubbing  ” a fiddle 
conveys  the  exact  idea  of  the  way  they  play  it.  Holding 
it  not  up  to  the  chin  but  resting  on  the  biceps,  they  rub 
a short  bow  backwards  and  forwards  across  the  strings. 
If  one  of  these  is  tuned  it  is  considered  quite  satisfactory, 
and  the  rest  make  a sort  of  mild  bagpipe  accompaniment. 
Time  is  no  object. 

(“Bell  a ring”  may  mean  either  “The  bell  is  ringing” 
or  “ The  bell  has  rung.”  “ A yard,”  in  the  yard.  The 
immediate  surroundings  of  the  house  are  called  the  yard. 
They  seldom  speak  of  going  to  a friend’s  house.  They 
say  they  are  going  to  his  yard.) 


164 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


LVIII. 


Breakfast  is  at  twelve  o’clock,  and  after  a short  rest 
work  goes  on  again.  A shower  starts  a new  train  of 
thought 


Rain,  rain  oh  ! Rain,  rain  oh  fall  down  an’  wet  me  up. 


“ The  rats  have  cut  my  only  shirt  with  their  teeth.  I 
put  in  a patch  and  they  bit  it  through  again  in  the 
same  place,  so  when  the  rain  came  down  it  made  me 
very  wet.” 

(The  broad  “ ahm  ” (for  him,  it),  is  more  used  now  by 
the  Coolies  than  the  Negroes.  “Ratta”  is  both  singular 
and  plural.  When  I first  heard  the  word  I thought  it 
referred  to  a terrier.  “ Same  place  him  patch  ” — in  the 
same  place  where  it  was  patched,  just  where  it  was 
patched.) 


LIX. 


The  kindly  sun  comes  out,  the  shirts  are  dry,  and  an 
amorous  youth,  with  that  absence  of  self-consciousness 
which  is  characteristic  of  the  race,  begins : — 


Allegro. 


T1 


Jes-sie  cut  him  yoke  suit  me, 


J es  - sie  cut  him 


Digging-  S ings. 


165 


I 


V /- 


m 


3 


yoke  suit  me, 


So  - so  wahk  him  wahk  suit  me, 


i 


35 


* — * 


Jes-sie  cut  him  yoke  suit  me, 


-j  . .-fee 


oh  — — 


suit 


% 


b-  -i  :p- 


£ 


me, 


oh 


-v- 

suit  me, 


V 

— 1 « 

-0 

4 

— 

43T 

— suit  me, 


Jes-sie  cut  him  yoke  suit  me. 


Broadly  this  means: — “all  that  Jessie  does  is  right 
in  my  eyes.  She  dresses  perfectly,  but  it  is  enough  for 
me  to  see  her  walk  to  adore  her.  Jessie  cuts  her  yoke” 
— technical  term  of  modistes  and  tailors  I am  told — “ to 
suit  my  taste.” 

(“  So-so  walk  him  walk,”  is  literally : — “ the  mere  walk 
that  she  walks  with  suits  me.”  They  are  fond  of  this 
repetition  of  a word,  first  as  noun  and  then  as  verb. 
Thus  they  will  say : — Me  like  the  play  him  play  : — It 
sweet  me  to  see  the  dance  him  dance  : — The  talk  him  talk 
was  foolishness : — The  ride  him  ride,  him  boast  about  it.) 


LX. 


“ Three  acres  of  Coffee  ” which  follows,  is  more  interest- 
ing musically. 


A ndante. 


i 


V — ft a 


-/-v- 


T’ree  a -ere  of  CahfFee,  Four  a - ere  of  bare  lan’, 


I 


=0^3=3 


3-J  J 


— I ' ' V 

T’ree  a - ere  of  Cahffee,  Why  you  no  come  come  ask  fe  me  ? Mum- 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


166 


ma  ho  me  love  the  man,  Why  you  no  come  come  ask  fe  me  ? 


The  boy  has  been  telling  the  girl  of  his  worldly  pos- 
sessions, but  has  not  made  any  offer  of  marriage.  She 
is  thinking  it  all  over.  “ So  you  have  got  three  acres 
of  coffee  and  four  acres  of  bare  land,  then  why  don’t 
you  come  and  ask  for  me  ? ” 

“ Bare  ” land  is  good  land  which  has  not  yet  been  taken 
into  cultivation.  The  first  money  a poor  boy  earns  he 
spends  in  boots,  which  are  the  outward  and  visible  sign 
of  being  well-to-do.  They  hurt  him,  “ burn  him  ” as  he 
says,  but  no  matter.  Next  he  buys  a piece  of  land. 
This  is  probably  in  bush,  covered  that  is  with  the  rough 
growth  of  grass,  bushes  and  trees  that  so  quickly  springs 
up  in  the  tropics.  He  clears  and  plants  it  piece  by 
piece,  as  opportunity  offers  and  inclination  suggests. 


LXI. 


They  are  clever  at  inventing  nonsense  words  to  run 
easily  off  the  tongue.  For  instance : — 

Andante.  Allegretto. 


—9-, N-i 

V m 

' • * E 

0 

A - way,  away  oui  oui  Madame.  I 


never  see  the  sight  of  Robart,  I never  see  the  sight  of  F’edrick,  Ding 


dogaraggaway,  Ding  dogaraggaway,  Ding  dogaraggaway,  Ding  dong. 


(“Away”  is  clearly  a corruption  of  oui  oui) 


Digging-Sings. 


167 


LX  1 1. 

They  like  to  complain  of  their  little  ailments,  as  thus: 


Allegro. 


Wednesday  morning  be-fore  day,  Wednesday  morning  before 


day,  Wednesday  morning  be  - fore  day,  me  ma’am,  me 


Dv 

/ 

1 A I 

4 

n * 

1 

feel  me  head  a hurt  me. 

If  a man  happens  to  hurt  himself,  he  sends  or  brings 
the  most  exaggerated  account  of  the  accident.  If  it  is 
a cut  on  the  hand,  he  “ nearly  chop  him  hand  off.”  If 
there  is  a trickle  of  blood,  “ the  whole  place  running  in 
blood.”  In  my  early  days  in  Jamaica  my  boy  Robert 
came  rushing  up  with  gestures  expressing  the  utmost 
consternation,  and  gasped  out  “ Rufus  hang ! ” Rufus 
was  the  pony.  “He  dead?”  I asked.  “’Tiff  dead!”  was  the 
reply.  We  were  doing  a piece  of  important  planting 
in  the  garden,  and  I said  “ Well ! as  he’s  dead  there’s 
nothing  to  be  done,  and  we’ll  go  on  with  this  job.” 
Two  or  three  hours  later,  to  my  surprise,  I saw  Robert 
carrying  grass  towards  the  stable.  “ What  are  you  doing 
with  the  grass,  Robert  ? ” 

“ It  for  Rufus.” 

“ But  Rufus  dead.” 

“ No  ! he  don’t  dead  again,”  which  meant  that  he  was 
still  alive.  When  I went  to  see,  I found  him  rather 
exhausted  with  his  struggling — he  had  fallen  on  the 


i68 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


hill-side  and  got  entangled  in  the  rope— but  not  very 
bad,  and  by  next  day  he  had  quite  recovered. 

This  kind  of  exaggeration  enters  into  all  their  talk. 
Once,  travelling  in  a tram-car,  there  was  a slight  acci- 
dent. The  car  just  touched  the  shaft  of  a passing  carriage 
and  broke  it.  One  man  said  to  his  neighbour,  “ See  dat  ? 
de  buggy  ’mash  to  pieces.” 

“ All  gone  to  snuff,”  replied  the  other. 


LXIII. 

Here  are  two  different  versions  of  the  same  sing.  The 
chord  of  the  seventh  held  on  by  the  voices  sounds  well. 


Allegro. 


- 1 

— — t#=f=| j — 

a 

Oh  Sam  - wel 


oh  ! 


Oh  Sam  - wel 


oh  ! 


kt 


Oh  Sam  -wel 


oh  ! Oh  Sam-wel  oh  ! Samwel,  the 


(They  never  tell  lies  about  people  here,  but  always 
upon  people.  “Turn  whole  house  a me  door,”  turns  the 
whole  house  out  of  doors,  upside  down  as  we  should 
say.) 


LXIV. 


Allegro. 




IglZZ 

1 H 

=4=2= 

— -J 

tf— 4-  A 

4= 

-G 

Oh  ’ll  - za  oh ! Oh  ’li  - za  oh  ! 


Digging -Sings.  1 69 


— 1 1— I 

w 

___ 

— U- 

— \ — 

#=5b 

-I  1 ~ 

-& — — 

rj LZ| 

Oh  ’li  - za  oh ! Oh  ’li  - za  oh ! ’li  - za 


N v - „ - _ 

f 

p=f=  s-siy  -rp=i 

— 1 

; | 

lb 

l — / • # 0*0  ~~ 

— 

1 1- 

Ld 

’pread  you  coat  make  I lie  down  de 

under  the 

Bu  - sha 

tahl. 

“Coat”  is  petticoat.  I am  told  that  ’liza  could  take 
off  a petticoat  and  still  be  quite  properly  dressed. 

“ Make  I lie  down,”  etc.,  i.e.,  let  me  lie  down  under 
the  Butcher’s  Stall.  This  is  the  name  of  a precipice  just 
below  my  house.  Horses  have  several  times  fallen  over 
it  and  been  killed.  They  then  become  butcher’s  meat 
for  the  John  Crows,  the  vulture-like  birds  which  are  so 
useful  as  scavengers. 


LXV. 

We  do  not  get  many  songs  of  the  American  planta- 
tion type  like  the  following : — 


Allegro. 

*3E 


— B * * 


=3=E 


:#'  ~T9:z. 


H 


Aunt  - y Ma  - ry  oh  ! 


S w~  * • 

Aunt  - y Ma  - ry  oh  ! 


Aunt  - y Ma  - ry  oh 


Aunt  - y Ma  - ry  oh  ! 


£ 


Aunt  - y Ma  - ry  oh  ! 


Aunt  - y Ma  - ry  oh  ! 


EgL  > #*» 





Aunt  - y Ma  - ry  Thomas,  O meet  me  a cross  road. 


(Cross  roads  are  always  a favourite  place  of  meeting, 
and  a rum  shop  is  generally  to  be  found  there.) 


170 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


This  is  a monotonous  form,  and  I am  glad  the  musical 
bent  of  our  people  turns  in  another  direction. 

LXVI. 

See  how  superior  this  truly  Jamaican  form  is: — 

Allegretto. 


Oh  ! me  yer  - ry  news,  me  yer  - ry, 


Oh!meyer-ry  news,  me 


00 


0 0 


ysL^s~: 


0 » 


yerry,  Married  homan  a pull  him  ring  me  yerry  Him  put  ahm  a wine 

fe-ts 


=q= 


N!- 


NX 


ri  0 0. 


1SW-P- 


glass — me  yerry 


Oh  ! me  yerry  news — me  yerry. 


Local  scandal  again.  “ I hear  news  ; a married  woman 
has  pulled  off  her  wedding  ring  and  put  it  in  a wine- 
glass,” the  first  convenient  receptacle  she  saw. 


LXVII. 


It  was  some  time  before  an  explanation  was  forth- 


coming for  the  next 

Allegretto. 


Jes’  so  me  barn, 


so  me  barn, 


you  can 


g: 


\y~--g 


wear  - y long  boot, 


jes 


so  me  barn. 


The  words  mean: — “I  was  born  just  so;  you  can  wear 
long  boots,  boots  that  come  high  up  the  leg.”  A girl, 
who  has  not  money  enough  to  buy  boots,  is  envious 
of  a companion  who  is  wearing  them.  She  says : — " I 


Digging -Sings. 


171 

was  born,  just  as  you  were,  poor.  Yet  you  have  got 
long  boots,  while  I must  put  up  with  ‘ bulldogs,’  rope- 
soled  slippers.  Where  did  you  get  the  money  to  pay 
for  your  boots?  Did  you  tief  it,  or  what?” 

LXVIII. 

In  the  example  that  follows,  a girl  has  been  left  to 
look  after  her  little  brother,  and  somebody  reports  that 
she  has  been  “ ill-treating,”  i.e.  beating  him.  So  the 
message  is  sent  back : — 


Andante. 


Tell  Mary  say,  no  do  Johnny  so.  Oh  ! 


-S-flL* 

-1 V s 

J 1 p.  w 

✓ -*5  p ^ 

1 — s s , s 

IT  ~ 

# # # 

m V 

1 — i — 

-1  m 

Lp 

Tell  Mary  say,  no  do  John-ny  so. 


“Tell  Mary  she  is  not  to  do  Johnny  so.”  “To  do  a 
person  something”  is  to  do  them  an  injury.  “ He  so 
crahss”  (cross),  a boy  will  say  of  his  master,  “ and  I done 
him  nothing,”  or  “ I never  do  him  one  def  ting,”  a single 
thing.  “Def”  is  emphatic,  but  is  not  a “swear-word.” 

“Say”  is  often  added  in  places  where  it  is  not  at  all 
wanted.  It  occurs  again  in  : — 


LXIX. 


Allegro. 


Me  tellthemgalaPortlan’  Gap  Min’  Dallas  man  oh 


me  amber 


F (m  -f-o-  ^ s X 

I 

s s 

- 

1— 

' * 

-•  m J m # 

he  ! me  amber 

CJ 

he  ! 

# m 

me  amber 

ho  ! tell  them 

say. 

172 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


“ I tell  the  girls  at  Portland  Gap  ‘ Mind  Dallas  men.’  ” 
Portland  Gap  is  in  the  Blue  Mountains ; Dallas  in  the 
Port  Royal  Mountains  between  the  Blue  Mountains  and 
the  sea. 

(The  exclamatory  “he”  has  the  Italian  vowel,  hard  for 
some  English  ears  to  catch.  It  is  nearly  but  not  quite 
“ hay.”) 

The  significance  of  “amber”  is  lost.  This  word  occurs 
again  in  the  pleasant  flowing  melody  which  stands  next, 
and  the  boy  who  gave  it  me  explained  its  meaning  quite 
correctly,  saying  it  “stood  for  yellow.” 


LXX. 

Allegro. 


. , 

ft " 

1 

laX  v-  .0 

. 1 1 

.-m-  \ r 

m 

_ 

* 

— — 4P 

——Z 

I — 

Gold  oh  ! Gold  oh  ! Gold  arn-ber  gold  oh  ! Gold  de  a me 


yard  oh  ! Gold  am  - ber  gold  oh  ! Sell  doubloon  a joint  oh  ! 


1 Nr 

=1 

7-  T=F 

s ; 

—I 

ly-  j...  J-*_ 

— m — 

* # r- 

— m— 

Gold  am  ber  gold  oh  ! fe  me  gold  a sunlight  gold  ! Gold  am-ber 


=fs: 

J ■ |v 

— fH — - 

— . v 

— t — 1 — n 

M 

45 

— — m 

— 

J - s . -II 

gold  oh  ! fe  me  gold  no  copper  gold  ! Gold  am  -ber  gold  oh  ! 


“Gold  is  in  my  yard,”  perhaps  buried,  but  also  per- 
haps in  the  house,  yard  often  including  it.  “ My  gold  is 
sunlight  gold,  none  of  your  rascally  copper  stuff.” 

The  doubloon  is  a large  gold  piece  worth  sixty-four 
shillings.  It  has  long  been  out  of  use  and  few  people 
in  Jamaica  have  seen  one. 

(“  Fe  me,”  for  me,  often  does  duty  for  “ my.”  “ This  a 
fe  me  hoe,”  this  is  my  hoe;  “take  fe  you  panicle,”  take 


Diggmg-  Sings. 


1 73 


your  panicle,  the  tin  mug  out  of  which  the  morning 
sugar-water  is  drunk.) 


LXXI. 


No.  7 1,  “Gee  oh  John  Tom”  is  a brisk  and  vigorous 
sing  till  it  gets  to  “a  me  lassie  gone”  where  the  little 
tinge  of  sadness  is  given  by  simple  means,  again  the 
right  thing  in  the  right  place,  good  art. 


Vivace. 


Gee  oh  Mother  Mac,  Gee  oh  John  Tom  ; Gee  oh  Mother  Mac> 


Gee  oh  John  Tom  ; 


V S 


0 0 


a me  lassie  gone, 


Gee  oh  John  Tom. 


0 


LXXII. 

Here  is  something  very  short : — 


A ndante. 


n 

s 

p ^ 

— 1 

& ^ 

O J 

o a 

v-  s 

L-MZ_ — _{ j 



0 

Oh — — — Oh — — Leah  married  a Tuesday. 


On  asking  if  that  was  all,  Levi,  the  contributor,  said  : — 
“ It  no  have  no  more  corner,”  it  hasn’t  any  more  corners, 
or  “ turnings  ” as  they  generally  say,  what  we  call  varia- 
tions. Levi  likes  to  cut  everything  short  and  rattle  it 
through  with  lightning  speed.  He  it  was  who  gave  me 
that  little  gem  of  an  Annancy  story  about  the  rats  and 
their  trousers  (No.  XI.),  and  this  is  his: — 


LXXIII. 


A llegro. 


Cheer  me  oh  ! Cheer  me  oh  ! Cheer  me  oh 


My  will  fight  fe  you, 


174 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


LXXIV. 

In  imitating  animals  the  negro  is  clever.  He  moos 
like  a cow,  grunts  like  a pig,  whinnies  like  a horse, 
besides  the  minor  accomplishments  of  miauling  and 
barking.  Even  trammelled  by  music  this  cock’s  crow  is 
good : — 


Allegro. 


F? 



: V 1 

' N m m m- 

4 

^ — m — S-*-1 

1 k * • 

- * y-7-^=Szd 

Me  cock  a crow — coo-coo  - ri  - co,  before  day  him  a 


— Q -y'f) 1 ^ 

ns Is 

r- ! s 

n 

t 

- _J  

_|  N J 

J*  J 

1 \ -1 

£ v-  o 1.  w 

1 J • i # # 

• . , 1 v 

_ 1 |A  J 

V 

7 K m | N 

L# — * J* 

* ✓ 

N 

crow — coo  -coo-ri-co,  him  a crow  fe  me  wake — coo-coo  - ri-co. 


(Sound  the  i short  as  in  rich.) 


LXXV. 


Now  we  come  to  a tragedy.  Selina  is  drowned,  and 
they  sing  smoothly  and  flowingly  : — 

Allegretto. 


\J  /»  — _ 

" \ NT  ' 

_ \)  jl2  « \ 

P _i  •=!  ^ 

V 

i o r Jj 

; ; i ^ 

. N _N-  11  1 -- 

7 0'  - 

Oh — Se  - li-na  ! Oh — Se  - li-na  ! 

0 

r -r-s 

El 

V-l 

— ] 

— 

John  Crow  de  a riv-ersidea  call  fe  Se-li-na 


Oh  poor  Se- 


li-na  ! 


Duppyan’ alia  call  fe  Se-li-na  ! Oh  poor  Se-li-na. 


Everybody  in  Jamaica  believes  m Duppy,  and  many 
women  and  children  will  not  go  out  at  night  for  fear 
of  meeting  one. 


Digging-  S mgs. 


175 


A man,  they  say,  has  two  spirits,  one  from  God  and 
the  other  not  from  God.  The  one  from  God  is  good, 
and  the  one  not  from  God  may  be  either  good  or  bad. 
During  sleep,  these  spirits  leave  the  body  and  go  to 
other  people’s  houses  in  search  of  food.  Being  shadows 
themselves,  they  feed  on  the  shadow  of  food  and  on  the 
smell  of  food.  They  are  seldom  far  apart,  and  the 
heavenly  spirit  can  always  prevent  the  earthly  spirit 
from  doing  harm.  At  death  the  God-given  spirit  flies 
up  upon  a tree,  and  goes  to  heaven  the  third  day.  The 
other  spirit  remains  on  earth  as  Duppy.  Its  abiding  place 
is  the  grave  of  the  dead  man,  but  it  wanders  about  at 
night  as  it  did  when  he  was  alive.  A good  Duppy  will 
watch  over  and  protect  the  living.  A bad  Duppy  tries 
to  frighten  and  harm  people,  which  it  is  able  to  do  now 
that  it  has  lost  the  restraining  influence  of  its  former 
companion,  the  heavenly  spirit.  It  can  assume  any  sort 
of  shape,  appearing  sometimes  as  a man,  sometimes  as 
an  animal.  If  it  is  a very  bad  Duppy,  it  makes  the  place 
where  it  is  unbearably  hot.  The  Negro  believes  that  he 
can  put  a bad  Duppy  upon  another  person.1  He  proceeds 
as  follows  : — Going  to  the  grave  at  midnight,  he  scoops 
a small  hollow  in  the  ground  and  puts  in  some  rice, 
sprinkling  it  with  sugar-water,  a mixture  of  water  and 
moist  cane-sugar.  He  then  directs  Duppy  to  visit  the 
person  whose  name  he  mentions,  and  goes  away  without 
looking  behind  him.  The  person  on  whom  Duppy  is 
put  becomes  “ tearing  mad,”  and  it  requires  a ten-pound 
fee  to  “ take  the  shadow  off.”  How  to  do  this  is  the  Obeah- 
man’s  secret.  A Duppy  of  one’s  own  family  is  worse 
than  a stranger’s,  and  the  “ baddest  ” of  all  is  Coolie 
Duppy.  One  of  the  most  dreaded  Duppies  is  “ Rolling 
{i.e.  roaring)  Calf.”  It  goes  about  making  a hideous  noise, 
and  clanking  a chain.  “ If  Rolling  Calf  catch  you,  give 

1 [Cf.  Miss  Kingsley,  The  Fetish  View  of  the  Human  Soul,  in  Folk-Lore, 
vol.  viii.,  p.  138  ; also  R.  E.  Dennett,  Bavili  Notes,  ibid.,  vol.  xvi.,  p.  371.] 


176 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


you  one  lick,  you  dead.”  Your  only  chance  is  to  run, 
and  you  must  keep  on  “ cutting  ten  ” (making  the  sign 
of  the  cross),  and  the  pursuing  monster  has  to  go  round 
that  place  ten  times.  “ Shop-keeper  and  butcher,”  so 
goes  local  tradition,  “ tief  too  much  (rob  their  customers 
very  much)  and  when  they  dead  they  turn  Rolling  Calf.” 

Those  who  are  born  with  a caul  can  see  Duppy.  So 
can  those  who  rub  their  faces  with  the  rheum  from  the 
eye  of  a horse  or  dog,  and  those  who  cut  their  eye- 
lashes. Every  Duppy  walks  two  feet  above  the  ground, 
floating  in  the  air.  If  a child  is  not  christened  before  it 
is  six  months  old,  Duppy  will  carry  it  away  into  the 
bush.  To  avoid  this,  a Bible  and  pair  of  scissors  are 
laid  on  the  child’s  pillow.  The  scissors  are  a protection, 
owing  to  their  cross-like  form. 

Such  are  the  main  beliefs  with  regard  to  this  remark- 
able superstition  of  Duppy  on  earth.1 

This,  however,  is  not  all.  At  the  day  of  judgment 
the  two  spirits  will  be  reunited  to  the  body,  and  in  many 
cases  the  God-given  spirit  will  go  to  hell  after  all.  I 
often  ask  my  boys  which  of  these  three  is  themselves  ? 
Is  it  the  body  ? Is  it  the  heavenly  spirit  ? Is  it  the 
earthly  spirit  ? But  they  do  not  understand  the  question 
and  have  no  sort  of  reply.  When  I ask  if  it  is  not 
hard  that  the  heavenly  spirit  after  its  sojourn  in  heaven 
should  go  to  hell,  they  laugh. 

LXXVI. 

Leaving  the  religious,  we  come  now  to,  what  Jamaica 
considers  more  important,  the  colour  question  : — 

Allegretto. 

=^==»=pS====^=^=fe==i==3C==p= 
^^-Er= 

Sam  - bo  la  - dy  ho  ! Sam  - bo,  Sam  - bo  la  - dy 

1 [See  Folk-Lore  of  the  Negroes  of  Jamaica , in  Folk-Lore , vol.  xv.,  pp.  S7, 
206,  450,  and  vol.  xvi.,  p.  68.] 


Digging-  Sings. 


1 77 


— 

f 

TH 

lL 

N. 

% f . — =f^ 

0 m 

m * 

- K- 

- * 

-J -1- P— 

ho  ! Sam  - bo,  Sam  - bo  no  like  black  man,  Sam  - bo, 


—fird? N — Nr 

-i — 

ns  ^ ^ v 

rq “TT! 

9 J 

— V.  ~v 

P - J h, 

2 * 

9 -A  P 

m 9 9 0 N 

! ' P _1_J 

/ 

0 0 — 

h- 

* m 

0-1 

Sambo  want  white  man,  Sambo,  Sambo  no  get  white  man,  Sambo, 


Sambo  no  want  man  a - gain,  Sambo,  Sambo  la-dy  oh  ! Sambo. 


A Sambo  is  the  child  of  a brown  mother  and  a black 
father,  brown  being  a cross  between  black  and  white. 
The  Sambo  lady,  very  proud  of  the  strain  of  white  in 
her  blood,  turns  up  her  nose  at  the  black  man.  She 
wants  a white  man  for  a husband.  Failing  to  find  one, 
she  will  not  marry  at  all. 


LXXVII. 


“Oh  John  Thomas!”  is  a favourite  digging-sing  at 
Goatridge,  twenty-two  miles  from  Kingston  : — 

Allegro. 


J .i  ‘ " 

_ 

' * ~ T — # — T — 

rS  Am 

I J 

j j r r 

— ==t — 

9 e - 

T— 

Oh  ! John  Thomas,  Oh  ! John  Thomas,  Oh  ! John  Thomas, 


"ft'  L it  I N N - - 

^ 's  ex 

— is — is 1 — 1 

W^—. Id"  * 

Oh  ! John  Thomas,  We  all  a combo  - low,  John  Thomas,  Me 


go  da’lev-en  mile,  John  Thomas,  Me  see  one  gal  me 


□ 

/ 

x i 

\ s 

( 

4 1 

: 

* a 

%J  _0 

love,  John  Thomas, 


Me  court  her  all  the  way,  John 
M 


1 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


—y  k 

fS 

„ v | 

i iN v 

fS  rN  n- 

' Iff)  v 

1 

w • ^ n n i i 

! ! "i  ' r 

W d a 

* 

-0  * 

Thomas,  Me  come  a Banghe  - son,  John  Thomas,  Me 


—it,  ' |> — IS  Is-- 

— t — 

iO 

Ns  \ — 

1 1 " TV 

TT)  ; m 0 m 

r \ 

... 

.31 1 p 

-4 — 

m w 

0 i 

— * * »-■ 

buy  one  quattie  bread,  John  Thomas,  Me  part  it  right  in 


i 


& 


V 


0 0 


two,  John  Thomas,  Me  give  her  the  biggest  piece,  John 


fags 


isrjs: 


0 0 


EHF 


Thomas,  and  a war  - ra  more  you  want,  John  Thomas  ? 


“ Combolow  ” is  comrade  oh  ! 

“ Da  ’leven  mile,”  to  Eleven-miles,  the  half-way- 
halting  place  between  Goatridge  and  Kingston. 

When  he  gets  to  Bangheson’s  shop  he  buys  a quattie 
(pronounce  quotty,  penny  halfpenny,  quarter  of  sixpence) 
loaf,  and  what  more  do  you  want,  John  Thomas? 

The  quattie  bread  weighs  eight  ounces  only.  It  is 
therefore  a dear  and  much  esteemed  luxury. 


LXXVIII. 

Sambo,  that  we  had  just  now,  is  the  shortest  of 


bobbins.  Here  we  have  a long  one  of  four  bars. 

A 11  perm 


Whe  mum-ma  de?  Whe  mum-ma  de  oh?  Come  go  da 


1 

. 

^=d=^; 

0 -W— , 

1 

. # 

-m- 

. 4 ..  i _ 

Lo'-  - 0 - 

* V- 

’ta-tion,  you  see  mumma  de  ; Him  take  half  a day,  him  a 


=t=j-  r~  “ I ' - 

— 1 1 

IT— F— r— I*'  - 

J=fcsl= 

workse-ven  dol-lar,  Come  go  da  ’ta-tion  you  see  mumma  d6. 


Digging-Sings. 


179 


Mamma  has  got  into  trouble,  owing  to  a failing 
unhappily  too  common  in  Jamaica,  inability  to  distinguish 
between  what  is  mine  and  what  is  yours.  Her  pay  for 
half  a day  was  a “bit”  (fourpence  halfpenny)  and  she 
has  managed  to  “ work  ” (sarcastic  use  of  the  word,  for  it 
means  to  get  by  working)  seven  dollars — twenty-eight 
shillings — and  has  been  taken  to  the  police  station. 

“Whe  mumma  de,”  literally,  “where  mamma  is?”  This 
has  been  already  noted  as  the  usual  form  of  question. 
The  vowel  in  whe,  de,  is  the  French  e.  We  have  the 
sound  in  English  in  the  words,  debt,  west  and  many 
others,  but  we  always  make  it  very  short,  and  when  it  is 
lengthened,  as  it  should  be  here,  it  generally  changes  in 
English  mouths  to  the  a of  date,  waste,  which  is  wrong. 

The  C sharp  on  the  word  “ de  ” is  peculiar  and 
striking. 

The  second  “de”  stands  for  “there.” 


LXXIX. 


There  is  something  pleasantly  simple  and  naive  about 
the  planting-sing  : — 


Vivace. 


. 

|-|  A— V 

— j j 

— 1 — 7— 

r— 1 V V, 

Mr* 

m m — * — 

* 

-|— r— 

* n 

Dm 

plant  me  peas  fe  go  court  me  gal,  court  me  gal  fe  go 


m 


j 1 -A 


show  mum-ma, 


mum-ma  de  one  a go  tell  me  yes, 


pup- 


i8o 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


min’  you  - ’self,  min’  you  - ’self  make  I plant  me  corn. 


“Mind  yourself,  little  Toad,  let  me  plant  my  corn.” 
So  sings  the  boy  as  he  brings  down  his  digger  with 
a forcible  thrust.  The  digger  has  been  described  as  an 
earth-chisel,  and  a very  good  description  it  is.  It  makes 
a long  slit  in  the  ground  into  which  the  maize  grains  or 
peas  are  dropped.  Maize  is  always  known  as  “ corn.” 
Peas,  which  are  also  called  Red  Peas,  are  the  “ beans  ” 
of  America,  familiar  at  home  under  the  name  of  French 
beans.  We  eat  them  not  only  green  in  the  usual  way, 
but  also  make  excellent  soup  of  the  dried  ripe  beans. 
The  boy  is  thinking  of  the  reward  of  his  labour.  “ I am 
planting  my  corn.  Some  will  be  eaten  green,  some  left 
to  ripen.  That  will  be  sold.  Then  I shall  buy  peas, 
plant  them,  and  when  they  are  ready  for  market  get 
sixpence  a quart  for  them,  if  I am  lucky.  Then  I shall 
be  rich  enough  to  walk  with  a girl.  I shall  pick  out  a 
nice  one  that  mamma  will  approve  of.  She  will  be  the 
one  to  say  ‘ yes,  me  son,’  but  puppa  always  crabbed, 
and  him  going  to  tell  me  no  bodder  with  it,  gal  too 
much  expense.” 


LXXX. 


When  known  details  run  dry,  the  following  gives  full 
play  to  the  inventive  faculty : — 


Allegretto. 


know  the  man. 


Name  John  Wat 


Me  know  the  man  oh 


Digging - S mgs. 


1 8 1 


/ -----  . - v jV  . J 

7 N 

' 

T7  5 n S.  1 up 

N 

— 1 |S“1  fs 

\ J 

J J J' J— 1 

'J,  iJ:-1 

L • * ' • 1 

know  the  man ; him  come  from  Bread  Lane,  know  the  man ; him  ride  one  grey  mule, 


7 

1 •/  --fc-te- 

fc- 

4 

> iP-  - ® !y  - d • • 

49  # & 

m -m  -m-  ~ 

# •— 3 

know  the  man ; the  mule  name  Vic  oh ! know  the  man ; him  have  one  tumpa  toe, 


f} — T Tt- T -qs 

_2_J$  \ j b ■K— , q^dfc 

-m-  ^ 

4 * * - * 1 N . W » 

know  the  man  ; him  come  a Mister  Thomson,  know  the  man,  fe  go 


i Q 

r— i 

r/r  r r* 

.ns  . 

PS 

Ltr  - - * 

m 

— 

-m 

1— — 

- m - -m 

.y ' - 

sell  him  grey  mule,  know  the  man;  he  no  make  no  sale  oh! 


know  the  man,  me  know  the  man, 


j 


know  the  man.1 


Other  bars  of  this  air  have  an  inclination  to  f time 
besides  those  indicated. 

It  will  be  observed  that  repeat  marks  have  only  been 
put  to  the  first  sing.  It  was  not  considered  necessary 
to  continue  them.  The  various  “turnings”  of  the  tunes 
may  be  put  in  any  order.  The  negroes  themselves 
never  put  them  twice  in  the  same  sequence. 


LXXXI. 


Andante. 


— 


Min-nie, 


Min-nie, 


los’  me  boar ; 


1“The”  always  tends  to  the  pronunciation  “ de,”  but  it  has  not  been 
thought  advisable  to  write  it  so  as  this  might  render  it  liable  to  confusion 
with  “ de,”  meaning  “is,”  with  its  differently  sounded  vowel.  Moreover, 
it  is  not  quite  a true  d,  but  has  a pretty  lisping  sound  intermediate  between 
th  and  d. 


182 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


“ I have  lost  my  boar,  Minnie.  He’s  a broken-legged 
boar  and  has  got  a blind  eye,”  and  so  on  through  all 
the  defects  or  excellences  that  a boar  might,  could, 
should  or  would  have. 

There  could  not  be  a greater  contrast  to  this  sombre 
“Minnie”  than  the  gay: — 

LXXXII. 


Vivace. 


Come  go  da 


You  want  to  yer-ry  Duppy  talk  oh 


You  want  to  yer-ry  Duppy  talk  oh  ! Come  go  da  riv -er  before 


—9~r\> 

S 

J . s 

~frr>  v r>  1 r 

9 0 

* * ^ 

day,  an’  you  will  yer  - ry  them  laugh  oh ! 


Come  go  da  riv  - er  be -fore  day;  You  want  to  yer-ry  Duppy 


talk  oh ! Come  go  da  riv  - er  be  - fore  day. 


Digging-  5 ings.  1 8 3 

“ If  you  want  to  hear  Duppy  talk,  go  to  the  river 
before  day.” 


LXXXIII. 

Now  the  colour  question  crops  up  again.  The  Sambo 
lady,  it  may  be  remembered,  wanted  a white  man  and 
nothing  but  a white  man.  Sarah  can  do  with  a Sambo 
man,  from  which  we  may  infer  that  Sarah  was  black. 


Allegro. 


LXXXIV. 


The  pickers  fall  with  slashing  strokes  to: — 

A llegro. 


rub  him  down  Joe,  rub  him  down  Joe;  Me 


donkey  like  a peeny,  rub  him  down  Joe,  rub  him  down  Joe,  Joe, 


184 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


rub  him  down  J oe  ; 


E 


Me  Jackass  gone  a pound, 


bring  him  come  J oe, 


bring  him  come  J oe,  bring  him  come  Joe  ; Me  donkey  full  of  ca  - pers 


— IN  !Vn 

^ [y  | 1 - 

1 1 1 

\ V 1 j ~ 

-m—m  0 

1 

Li5 

V~ mm  -m — m 

9 — 

i-m — m — m — -m 

rub  him  down  Joe,  rub  him  down  Joe,  Joe,  rub  him  down  Joe. 


“Peeny”  is  the  Candlefly,  which  shines  like  my  donkey’s 
coat.  “Bring  come”  for  “bring”  is  very  common,  and 
in  the  same  way  they  say  “carry  go,”  the  “come”  and 
“go”  indicating  the  direction  of  motion. 


LXXXV. 

“ Bring  dem  come  ” is  the  title  of  the  next  sing.  It 
is  in  a curious  minor  mode,  almost  F minor,  but  wanting 
the  leading  note,  which  is  replaced  by  E flat. 


Allegro. 


rj 

t •,  .» 

s 

— 

— 

h zy z 1 

9 9 W 9 

I 1 

t v ft  a m 

\-  fcr  t , 

: 

. VL 

L 

m m 

V 

A So-mer-set  me  barn,  bring  dem  come, 


a 

- N Nijv^v=' 

_1 

m m 

1 — * ' 

bring  dem  make  me  bat  - ter  dem,  bring  dem  come,  me  would 


z M — - — S._  > 

--  N S - 1- 

r— j : 

=1  - # d 

'■-m * m 

:» ge.  d 

take  me  pick  - er  bat  - ter  dem,  bring  dem  come.  A 


^ m..  m J * 

* P-  i 1 — ; 

=1 v_sd 

- v ✓ ' ' - 

-f  ■ ' 1^ d 

» 

H 

1 

1 

lL 

Wo-burn  Lawn  me  barn,  bring  dem  come,  I will 


iS5 


Digging-  Sings. 


like  to  see  dem  bat-  ter  me. 


like  to  see  dem  bat-  ter  me,  bring  dem  come,  A 


k - - 

| 

Lc 

1 I 

1ST 

/ V 

■| 

0 # 

0 

- -■  / -J 

Goat  - ridge  me  barn,  bring  dem  come,  I 


want  to  see  dem  jos  - tie  me,  bring  dem  come. 


This  is  a digging  contest.  The  Somerset  men  challenge 
their  neighbours.  Whoever  digs  most  yam-hills  in  a 
given  time  is  to  be  the  winner.  Every  man  is  confident 
that  he  will  hold  out  longer  than  every  other,  and  boasts 
like  Goliath.  “ I was  born  at  Somerset ; bring  the 
strangers,  bring  them,  let  me  beat  them  ; I will  take  my 
pickaxe  and  beat  them — I was  born  at  Woburn  Lawn  ; 
I should  like  to  see  them  beat  me.”  Honour  and  glory 
is  the  sole  reward,  but  that  counts  for  a great  deal.  It 
is  so  gratifying  to  hear  the  others  say  “ Lah  ! that  man 
dig  hill,  ya.” 

(“Jostle”  has  the  same  meaning  as  “batter.”  When 
two  ponies  race,  the  riders  try  to  jostle  and  foul  each 
other.) 


LXXXVI. 


The  next  is  really  a woodcutter’s  sing,  but  it  is  used 
also  for  digging  : — 

Allegro. 


-J  .>  - , 

[— — ! 

— ; ; 

N n 

- — 

rj 

(q)  4-* — £—t3-- 



-ef1 ^ If — If — 

U 

M “ 

Tim  - ber  lay  down  ’pon  pit,  Tim  - ber  ; cut  ’im 


•~y , - 

| — -j — 

' 1 

J 

_ V J 

M N 

1 1 1 

if  # 

m J 

SSiV T'  • 

S ~ ’ 

- €>  1 

make  we  go  ’way,  Tim-ber  ; 


me  want  go  ’way  ya  soon, 


1 86 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


Jf-u — 1 — i — 

-1  - 

— 1 — ; — 1 — 

W 'W 

-P 

1 

-W-.. m m. 

T* tt  m 

-J f— 

0 0 

\ — i — 

•s>_ 

Tim-ber  ; tim-ber  lay  down  ’pon  pit,  Tim-ber  ; tim-ber, 


| j 

-J 

^ — 

p— ! 1 — 

1 — 

T — 

9 m 

& 

- — L- 

f 0 

9 9 U 

go  home,  Timber  ; tim  - ber  lay  down  ’pon  pit,  Tim-ber. 


“ Lie  down  on  the  pit,  timber.  Cut  it,  and  let  us  go 
away.  I want  to  go  away  soon,  do  you  hear?  Drive 
(lash)  the  saw  hard.” 

The  pit  is  not  really  a pit.  The  sawing  is  done  where 
the  tree  falls.  A rough  scaffolding  is  made  and  the  log 
is  rolled  up  to  lie  on  the  top  of  it.  The  bottom  sawyer 
stands  upon  the  ground. 

The  West  Indian  cedar  is  not  a fir  but  a deciduous 
tree  ( Cedrela  odorata),  which  looks  like  a hickory  or 
walnut.  It  grows  in  the  hills,  and  its  lightness  and 
durability  make  it  very  useful.  Most  people  know  it  in 
the  shape  of  cigar-boxes. 

The  rest  bars  are  sort  of  pauses  for  breath.  It  will  be 
seen  that  they  break  the  rhythm.  Throwing  the  accent 
on  “go,”  in  “go  ’way,”  is  characteristic.  We  should  put 
it  on  “ ’way.” 


Digging- Sings. 


1 87 


LXXXVII. 


Listen  how  restless  and  unfinished  this  sounds  : — 

Allegretto. 


Me  want  go  home  a yard  oh  ! me  want  go  home  a yard  oh  ! me 


i 


i 


want  go  home  a yard  oh  ! me  want  go  home  a yard  oh  ! a 


r— p— ■ wz...\.0  . -]  -..x- 


v 


Gua  - va  Ridge  me  barn  oh  ! me  want  go  home  a yard  oh  ! mum- 


ma  me  want  come  home  oh  ! me  want  go  home  a yard  oh  ! 


poor  me  boy  me  want  go  home,  me  want  go  home  a yard  oh  ! 


Teach-er  Bai  - ley  crahss  ’pon  me,  me  want  go  home  a yard  oh  ! 


LXXXVIII. 

The  last  example  refers  to  the  rebellion  of  1865. 
Several  whites  were  murdered,  and  the  survivors  are  of 
opinion  that  their  lives  were  saved  by  the  prompt  action 
of  Governor  Eyre,  who  proclaimed  martial  law  and 
restored  order  by  severe  measures : — 


Andante. 


War  down  a Monk-land,  war  down  a Mor- ant  Bay, 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


188 


- ----- r 



✓ ^ ' u w — 

~ n r ~ 

f m 9 nJ 

-JZS  r ]}  h—  v 

r 0 Lr  \f 

1 — ir — b — r — 1 

.SZ  ^ t r _ 

C / 7 * 

4= — 1= 

war  down  a Chiggerfoot,  the  Queen  never  know.  War,  war, 


I 


35= 


oh  ! 


- m 

War  oh  ! heavy  war 


oh  ! Soldiers 


Soldiers  from  Newcastle 


x ^ ^ ^ 

— ~ — — ; — — — 

~9  m m 

..n  J 

• i P ^ 

Til  v U **  m 

H 9 9 -j  m— 

■tr.  u ! ^ 

c r | 

come  down  a Monkland  with  gun  an’  sword  fe  kill  sinner  oh  ! 


- 9 ,b — 

i 

/L-  'tX  ’m  O 

=^==1 

-Fs— N— | ! 

ltf 1 — i — 

— | 1 j JJ 

-m-  -m-  -9- 

War,  war,  war  oh ! War  oh  ! heavy  war  oh  ! 


The  places  mentioned  are  in  the  parish  (corresponding 
to  English  county),  of  St.  Thomas,  except  Newcastle, 
the  hill  cantonment  of  the  white  troops,  which  is  in  the 
next  parish  of  St.  Andrew.  “ Chiggerfoot  ” takes  its 
name  from  the  chigoe,  chigger,  or  jigger,  the  minute 
flea  which  burrows  into  the  foot.  It  is  interesting  to  see 
that  this  contemporary  comment  by  the  blacks  describes 
the  rebels  as  sinners.  Further  on,  No.  CXXXVII., 
will  be  found  another  view,  in  which  they  pose  as 
aggrieved  persons.  It  shows  that  there  was  a loyal  as 
well  as  a disloyal  party. 

The  reader  has  now  had  enough  examples  of  digging- 
sings  to  show  their  nature  and  variety.  The  Negro  is 
never  at  a loss  for  words,  and  the  masters  and  overseers 
of  the  estate  on  which  he  generally  labours,  Bushas  as 
he  calls  them — a word  said  to  be  derived  from  Pasha — 
are  often  satirised.  The  gangs  on  private  estates  are 
under  a head-man,  who  is  responsible  to  the  Busha.  The 
Busha  is  a white  or  coloured  man  as  a rule — coloured  in 
Jamaica  meaning  mixed  white  and  black — and  he  is 
responsible  to  the  master  or  owner.  The  workers  have 
to  be  carefully  looked  after,  for  like  other  people  the 


189 


Digging-  Sings. 

Negro  will  not  do  more  work  than  he  can  help.  Only 
when  he  is  working  for  himself  will  he  “ let  out,”  as  he 
describes  it,  the  whole  of  his  splendid  strength.  It  is 
a mistake  to  suppose  that  the  black  man  is  either 
stupid  or  lazy.  When  he  has  an  incentive  to  work  he 
is  industrious,  and  will  do  as  much  in  one  day  in  his 
own  field  as  he  will  in  two  for  an  employer  who  pays 
him.  In  selecting  land  for  planting  his  sagacity  is 
remarkable,  and  he  knows  just  where  it  will  “ come,” 
as  he  says,  guinea  yam  or  white  yam,  and  where  coffee 
will  succeed  and  where  fail.  It  is  a pleasure  to  see 
their  provision-grounds,  the  miscellaneous  crop  looks  so 
thriving.  “Provisions”  embrace  all  eatables,  such  as  yam, 
sweet  potato,  coco  ( colocasia ),  sugar  cane,  beans  of  various 
kinds,  maize  (or  simply  “ corn,”  as  we  call  it,  having  no 
other),  okra  ( hibiscus  escnlentus),  cassada  ( manihot  utilis- 
sima),  plantain,  banana,  arrowroot,  pindar  ( arachis  hypogoea , 
a ground-nut),  pumpkin,  tomato  and  cabbage. 


PART  III.  RING  TUNES. 

That  informal  kind  of  dancing,  referred  to  in  some  of 
the  Annancy  stories,  known  as  “ playing  in  the  ring  ” or 
“Sally  Water”  has  its  origin  in  English  children’s  games. 
Sometimes  it  is  merely  a case  of  hunting  the  slipper  or 
of  finding  a key  passed  from  hand  to  hand,  but  more 
often  what  begins  in  playing  ends  in  dancing.  The 
nature  of  this  playing  in  the  ring  will  be  best  under- 
stood from  examples. 


LXXXIX. 


First,  as  giving  its  name  to  the  whole,  must  stand  : — 


A ndante. 


w : : _ . v ■ 

^ — i — 

r~ r i 

i 

0000 

- 

e — 

— — * — 

Lit  - tie  Sal  - ly  Wa  - ter  sprinkle  in  the  sau  - cer  ; 


—\r—y- v 

is  ns 

re  N 

1 P 

^ , 

S ^ 

s 

v 

t ^ .0  0 m 

0 • m 



-j — j — 0 

□ 

A m m 

Rise,  Sal  - ly,  rise  an’  wipe  your  weep-ing  eyes.  Sal  - ly 


turn  to  the  East,  Sal  - ly  turn  to  the  West,  Sal  - ly 


|=j^- 

0 

s V ^ ■ 

=1 1— 

iq  f*'  ' II 

m 0 9 

• - 0 

-J— 1 - — 11 

turn  to  the  ver  - y one  you  like  the 


best. 


i9i 


Ring  Tunes. 


A llegro. 


m m * 


On  the  car  - pet  you  must  be  hap-py  as 


the  grass-bird 


R| 

Tj-  — N “ S N — 

- — » — - — f — 

-f-  — -j  -f*- 

w 

} -?"*  - * ~ * -■ 

/ / / ' - 

> — J = 

on  the  tree,  Rise  an’  stand  up  on  your  leg  an’ 


=jfc=h~— r: — v S — ^ 

. 

ns  is  a 

si 

/ 

J J zS  m 

f 

yV  ry *  1 * J m zj  ~ % - 

— p -p 13'  1 

1 

A 

> ■ # 0 0 

Lm — m m 

choose  the  one  that  you  like  the  best.  Now  you  mar-ried  I 


AT -T ...  . 

../Za  .u i\  __X  _j  . 

\ jS  ~|S  V 

V-jV-— 

® ’AAA 

. * a a: 

* <’  * • — ] 

*7 


give  you  joy,  first  a gal  an’  second  a boy  ; Sev-en  year  after, 


3 

^ ~ V,  Sv,  \ > > 

s ~f*~-  * -hX — ^ — T — 1 \ 

yV-Tr:**  ^ ^ ^ * 

V. 9 — m m m — 0 Am — m 

sev  - en  year  to  come,  give  her  a kiss  an’  send  her  out. 


The  boys  and  girls  join  hands  and  form  a ring. 
One— the  sex  is  immaterial — crouches  in  the  middle  and 
personates  Sally  Water.  At  the  words  “Rise,  Sally, 
rise,”  he  or  she  slowly  rises  to  an  erect  position, 
brushing  away  imaginary  tears,  turns  first  one  way  and 
then  another,  and  chooses  a partner  out  of  the  ring. 
Where  the  tempo  changes,  they  wheel — a rapid  turning 
dance — and  after  the  wheeling,  the  partner  is  left  inside 
the  ring  and  becomes  Sally  Water.1 


XC. 


Another  form  of  this  Ring  tune  is  : — 


Andante. 


H , — jS — N — V- 


-i , 


Poor  lit  - tie  Zed  - dy  they  put  him  in  the  cor  - ner  ! 


1 For  a discussion  of  this  game,  perhaps  the  best-known  and  most  widely- 

spread  of  all  English  singing  games,  see  A.  B.  Gomme,  Traditional  Games , 

vol.  ii. , p.  149. 


192 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


Nr— 

1 

-V  V 

* h r. . m 3 ' r* 

17  ~ 

(9 

n — S > — r*- 

: i w 

m * 

Rise,  Zed  - dy,  rise  an’  wipe  your  weeping  eyes  ; Zed  - dy, 


r N 

fs— 

-N ri 

-V'  -b.  J ' * 

—!  M s IS 

J ^ 

JnT  v m d \ 

• 1 N J 

* » 

m 1 N 



V — 

. 

turn  to  the  East;  Zed  - dy,  turn  to  the  West;  Zed-dy, 


turn  to  the  ver  - y one  you  like  the  best. 


XCI. 


The  negro  is  a born  actor,  and  to  give  emphasis  to 
his  words  by  appropriate  gestures  comes  naturally  to 
him.  The  little  comedy  which  follows  suits  him  to 
perfection  : — 


Allegretto. 


■ / — O ~ \ s.  __ 

. £-/  & a | ' 

- (- 

is 

_!  1 

1 1 

\ 

• t ✓ m 

r 

- m m — 

Whe  me  lov  - er  de?  See  - mya,  see  - mya.  Me 


— , — ^ ^ 

— 1— ^ ^ 

! ' 

-J ^ 

1 1 |^_ 

• » 

1 i^-P* 

'-m m-m-1 

lov-ergonea  sea?  See-mya,  see-mya.  Me  no  see  me  lov- er 


Jr — | 

□ |S 

+~- 

| 1 _^s 

1 1 s 

J.  d 

LJ J— 

% 

« 

« 

« 

L 

J ' - 

ya.  See-mya,  see-mya.  Him  gone  a Col-on  bay.  See- 


mya,  see-mya.  Go  fin’youlov-er  now.  See-mya,  see- 


mya. 


h > N : 


m 


No  make  no  ’tu  - pid  de. 


See  - mya, 


see  - mya. 


See  - mya, 


• .v-'l 


Fool  dem  let  dem  go. 


see  - mya. 


Me  lov-er 


Ring  Tunes. 


193 


come  back.  See- mya,  see-mya.  Go  take  you  lov  - er 


iztt  : • x — !S — s.  . : 

LfnX q . 1 _ K 

| 1 \ 

r 

p 0 S J 

1 V 

•#=3 

H 

L#l 

L# — — — A- 

dr1 

now.  See-mya,  see-mya.  Wheel  him  make  me  see.  See- 


' v v - S . ' 

— 1 H ' 

(m  -\ 

l 

P PJ 

d ... 

' 1 ' P 

-l  J - 

* 

■ m — m — ^ — J — 

-m 

-J J- 

mya,  see-mya.  Throw  a kiss  to  him.  See-mya,  see- 


— 1 1 "x — \ - 11 

-i — p — II 

1 

a 

n ~ s 

1 p 

m =P- 

— 1 J — 

-m H 

mya.  Wheel  him  let  him  go.  See-mya,  see-mya.1 


A ring  is  formed,  and  a girl  is  put  in  the  middle. 
She  asks: — “Where  is  my  lover?”  and  the  ring  answers 
in  chorus : — “ See  him  here.”  “ Has  my  lover  gone  to 
sea  ? ” and  the  answer  comes  again  : — “ See  him  here.” 
The  gal  goes  on  : — “ I do  not  see  my  lover ; has  he 
gone  to  Colon  bay  ? ” and  then,  as  though  speaking  to 
herself : — “ Go,  find  your  lover  now.  There  ! don’t  pre- 
tend to  be  stupid.”  At  this  point  she  takes  the  hand  of 
a boy  in  the  ring  as  if  she  were  going  to  dance  with 
him,  but  immediately  pushes  him  back,  and  says,  still 
speaking  to  herself : — “ Fool  them,  let  them  go.”  Then 
simulating  contrition  and  breaking  the  hitherto  even 
rhythm  : — “ My  lover,  come  back  ! ” At  “ Go  take  your 
lover  now”  she  goes  again  to  the  same  boy,  takes  him 
out  of  the  ring-circle  and  dances  with  him.  They  wheel 
at  the  words  “ Wheel  him  make  me  see,”  which  mean, 
41  Let  me  see  you  wheel  him.”  Finally  at  “ Wheel  him 
let  him  go”  they  part  hands. 

Frequent  references  will  be  found  to  Colon.  Jamaica 
labourers  used  to  go  there  in  large  numbers  to  work  on 
the  Panama  canal. 

'To  avoid  the  tiresomeness  of  contraction  marks,  “see  him  ya”  has  been 
•written  in  one  word.  It  sounds  exactly  like  senior  with  an  m instead  of  an  n. 

N 


194 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


XCII. 

To  the  same  class  belongs : — 


Allegro  molto. 


Ring  a dia  - mond,  ring  a dia  - mond,  Why  oh 


r H — h 

• J 

4= 

=M=t 

L m—m 

W 

=r i~ 

-# 

ring  a diamond.  Get  in  the  ring  you’ll  find  one  Sam-bo  boy. 


Why  oh  ring  a diamond.  Me  look  me  da  look  me  no 


find  one  Sambo  boy.  Why  oh  ring  a diamond.  Me 


r # 

— i — H 1 — 

1— 

H i 

-m — m — m — 

fr-^r. 

H — 

=d — 

find  me  diamond,  me  find  me  dia-mond.  WTiy  oh 


This  tune  has  a beautiful  swing.  In  many  bars  it  is 
almost  impossible  to  distinguish  whether  the  tune  is 
triple  or  duple.  Much  license  may  be  allowed  in  the 
direction  of  the  latter  to  a good  timist,  but  the  general 


Ring  Tunes. 


195 


impression  of  triple  time  must  be  kept.  The  “ Sambo 
boy”  bar  must  be  sung  very  smoothly.  It  is  neither 
quite  as  it  is  written  the  first  time  nor  quite  as  it  occurs 
in  the  second,  but  just  between  the  two.  Three  even 

crotchets  with  judicious  tempo  rubato  would  give  it.  It 

will  be  understood  that  these  tunes  are  sung  antiphonally. 
In  this  one  the  leaders,  who  know  the  tune  and  words 
well,  sing  the  first  four  bars  and  the  next  four  belong 

to  the  chorus,  after  which  the  leaders  take  it  up  again, 

and  so  on. 

There  is  an  opportunity  here  for  a little  harmless 
“chaff”  about  colour.  The  diamond  chosen  is  a black 
diamond,  the  blacker  the  better.  The  ring  forms  round 
him  joining  hands,  and  one  girl  is  pushed  in  to  look  for 
the  Sambo  boy.  She  says : — “ I look,  I am  looking,  I 
don’t  find  a Sambo  boy”  (i.e.  a quarter  black).  At  last 
she  finds  her  diamond,  either  the  boy  inside  the  ring 
or  one  of  those  who  circle  round  him,  and  they  dance 
together,  wheeling  and  letting  go  hands  at  the  words 
“wheel,”  “let  go.” 

“Why”  is  an  ejaculation,  probably  the  same  as  Hi! 


XCIII. 


Another  chorus  tune  of  the  same  kind  is : — 

Tempo  di  Vaise. 


The  gal  ov  - er  yon  - der  car-ry  ba  - na -na, 


.-JL-  "it  rr  . 

■ 

— 1 1 1 — 

=1  • 

gal  oh!  gal  oh!  car-ry  ba  - na-na.  A nine-hand  ba- 


na- na,  car-ry  ba  - na-na,  a Chi-ney  ba  - na-na, 


196 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


[=0dfca*= 

— 1 — 1 — 1 — 

/ 

I -1  1 

S d m 

=] 

-j H 

— 1 1 — 

Sj 

r— 

# — 0 — 0 — 

car  - ry  ba  - 

J-tTrSi 

Lm — m — d — 

na  - na.  You 

find  the  ba 

H 1 

L+- r — 

na  - na  ? 

1-d — m — # 

car-ry  ba 

— 

- 

v 

Mf*1?  -t  ! 

H — — 1 

- 

{ 

Y IT  11  ! I ! 

d d m 

1 1 j 

Ml 

L ***  — 

a m 0—1 

-m—m 1 

na-na.  You  tief  the  ba  - na-na?  car  - ry  ba  - na  - na. 


The  girl  is  supposed  to  be  carrying  a bunch  of 
bananas  on  her  head,  and  the  singers  are  commenting 
upon  it  and  asking  the  girl  questions,  as  they  do  here 
at  a distance  of  half-a-mile.  “ Look ! It  is  a nine-hand 
banana.  No,  a China  banana.  Did  you  find  it  ? Did 
you  steal  it?” 

Banana  bunches  are  reckoned  by  the  number  of 
hands  they  contain,  the  separate  bananas  being  called 
fingers.  Nine-hand  is  a convenient  market  size.  The 
China  banana  is  a stout  low  kind  which  withstands 
wind  : the  fruit  is,  however,  coarse. 

The  signal  for  taking  a partner  is  given  by  the  words 
“You  find  the  banana?” 


XCIV. 

In  the  next  there  is  no  dancing.  The  ring  closes  up 
tight,  shoulder  to  shoulder.  Hands  behind  the  back 
pass  the  ball  round  and  round,  and  the  girl  inside  the 
ring  tries  to  find  it.  The  person  with  whom  it  is  found 
has  to  go  into  the  ring  and  turn  seeker. 


Allegro. 


1 

/T  / * # • - J J zp 

1 p p 

im  \j , m - d 

1 1 d * d 

-1 

[ I 

— j 0 — — — — 

Pass  the  ball  an’ the  ball  goin’ round,  the  ball  goin’ round  an’ the 


r-y : V v x S 

1 ” 1 * 1 



[Tax  w ^ j r ^ ^ ^ w ~ * _tz 

— d 

. ^ ^ ^ ^ • 1 

— 0—A.  — 

key  can’t  find,  Mo-ther,  ho-ney,  oh  ! the  ball  goin’  round. 


Ring  Times. 


197 


l-  - v ■ 

=K=I 

N IN p; — 

(t 

— j * 1 

— 3— E - 

y-  v j.  * ^ • 

Jour -ney,  ball,  jour  - ney,  ball, 

5 E c c V 1 

our 

ney,  ball,  jour  - ney, 

=\  1 

-r P 

dt  z— » • * — * 0 

^ i 

— - 

m- 

Mo  - ther,  ho  - ney,  oh ! the  ball  can’t  find. 


The  conventional  “gwine”  for  “going”  hardly  represents 
it,  only  the  0 is  pronounced  so  short  that  the  word 
becomes  practically  one  syllable.  In  the  dance  tunes  we 
shall  come  across  the  word  “ dying  ” shortened  in  the 
same  way. 


XCV. 

A variation  of  this  is  obtained  by  putting  a ring  on 


a cord  and  sliding  it  along.  The  tune  is  : — 

Allegretto. 


XCVI. 

In  “Mother  Phoebe”  again  there  is  no  dancing: — 


Andantino. 


'si  x V A 

Sh 

. 

“ i) 1 ^ r^T^  1 ” 

r-  r p pr 

V 

—m — m — m — # 

. d 

— — m — 

m 1 

Old  moder  Phcebe,  how  happy  you  be  When  you  sit  under  the 


198 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


J ~ v - " . 

r~— i 

\ ns  k Is  N 

~1S IS IS 1 fV 

JoS—  . .pzzj  AZZJ  ^ NpJ J 

— p pv— j n 

m > 

L^i — s — m — 9- — —* — 

Jin  - ni  - per  tree,  oh  the  Jin  - ni  - per  tree  so  sweet. 


!=£-$-  ^ _jv  V— S - 

— i> ' s.  ~p  1 

/ 

T-  " P P " ; J 

— f*> — >s — fs — hs- 

'm  2 m — W P 

Take  this  old  hat  an’  keep  your  head  warm,  Three  an’  four  kisses  will 


y rr  1\  . 

— 1 n 

-/L  * N v- . -|S»—  ^ _ S 

S Ps  V Nr- 

^ p p— 1 J 

■^h h — H 

_ 2 2 0 - O' 

* — H 

do  you  no  harm,  It  will  do  a great  good  fe  you. 


Here  the  girl  inside  the  ring  takes  a hat  or  cap  and 
after  several  feints  puts  it  on  somebody’s  head,  and  that 
person  has  then  to  take  her  place  in  the  ring. 


XCVII. 


More  lively  is  the  joyous  : — 

Allegro  jnolto. 


y V III 

I 

JV  iN  m 

-r>  iv 

A L LJ 

| 

p j m . 

m d ; 

ifn  A 

m 1 

I • 9 

w rt  _ r~ 

9 [7  ' 

1 

Do, 

do,  do, 

do,  do, 

3eg-gy,  Deg-gy  house  a go 

3 

l-\ — r— - 

-K- 

-N-  N n -M 

_J 

* .. 

i~m  -J — 

— 1 V—m — 

'-m m 

s 1 

m 

burn  down,  do,  De  Gay.  Deg-gy  whe  you  would  a do  de 


do,  De  Gay  ? Deg  - gy  dood  an’  doo  - dess  do,  De 


=1= 

=r  - 

-t 1 

— 1 v— 

- 1 ' V :,s 

#=7=J  - 

• cj 

— 1 P- 

* ; # 

r 

1 

Gay.  Deg-gy  go  roun’,  Deg  - gy  do  De  - gay.  An’  a 


7 

*- N. — S. — : 

1 

1 

- 4 p p 

m Lj -J — 

H 

-J 

—4 

cutch-y  fe  Deg-gy  do  De  - gay,  an’  a wheel  an’  let  go 


tl  -N- 

—\ 

— Nr 

fp==B 

-J  - 

— **^  _ 

“*  -J  ±j 

L©L_ — JI 

do,  De  Gay.  Deg-gy  house  a burn  down  do,  De  Gay. 


Ring  Tunes. 


199 


The  boy  inside  the  ring  “ makes  all  sort  of  flourish,” 
dancing  and  posturing  by  himself.  The  word  “ cutchy  ” 
is  accompanied  by  a deep  curtsey,  on  rising  from  which  he 
takes  a girl  out  of  the  ring  and  wheels  her.  Deggy 
or  Degay,  has  occurred  already  in  No.  LVII.  Whether 
it  is  his  own  house  that  is  burning,  or  somebody  else’s,  it 
is  impossible  to  conjecture.  Observe  the  varying  accent 
on  the  name.  In  taking  down  this  song  I first  wrote 
“doodan  doodess,”  thinking  they  were  nonsense  words 
suggested  by  the  repetition  of  do,  do,  do,  but  on  asking 
further  about  them  was  told  that  “ dood  ” is  a “ risky 
beau-man,”  a smart  well-dressed  young  fellow.  So  it  is 
the  American  “dude”  and  its  female  counterpart  “dudess” 
which  here  take  the  place  of  the  usual  “ gal  and  boy.” 


XCVIII. 


The  latter  we  find  in  : 


Allegretto. 


3 

* m - - 

s - 

"V 

* 4 J 

ZM  0 0 0 0 

— 3 — — 

' ✓ v — 

Me  go  da  Galloway  road,  Gal  an’  boy  them  a broke  rock 




— N; — TS — — iv- 

4 

4 1 : 

— p P 1 V— 

m — a — *—J — 

* * » *- 

— P — P— 1 p- 

* * 2- 

stone,  Broke  them  one  by  one  gal  an’  boy,  Broke  them  two  by 


two  gal  an’  boy, 


p P P J P \ 

P V v.  V P 

1 B-_«— N ! 

0 e> 3 * 0 -a  - 

3 3 "" 

* 4 0 0 * J 

Take  up  the  one  that  you  like  gal  an’  boy,  Ah  ! 


this  here  one  me  like  gal  an’  boy,  broke  them  t’row  them  down  gal  an’  boy. 


I go  to  Galloway  road  (where  there  is  a quarry). 
Girls  and  boys  are  breaking  stones.  They  break  them 
one  by  one.  They  break  them  two  by  two,  etc.  Choosing 
stones  suggests  choosing  partners. 


200 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


XCIX. 


We  come  across  “dude”  again  in  : — 

Allegro. 


■ 

-m— h*  ■ 

Ei 

*l) 

Ros-y-bel 

)h-— 

*=*= 

why 

ifil 

oh  ! R 

J J ^ | 

os-y-bel  oh — 

-*—d- 

why 

U-— 

l-d 

oh  ! 

[~VTP rn — 

— rnsrl— 

rs  ’ i 

| " 

P P J 

1 2 i 

□3?  V -m-Jf  * 

-d—d—d—d- 

— 

• M _ 

Ros-y-bel  let  go  Mister  Por-ter  son,  Ros-y-bel  oh—  why 


[~9tv — 

.m*  rs  rs  r 1 1 

Sfl\  v p 

L P J 1 J 

_ J 

v7  ¥ m 

mj  & 

l—.  , „ ■ . — i-gpi IB L 

d — d — 

-m 

a 

4 

— 

oh  ! Ros  - y - bel  cock  cock  crow  da  yard,  Ros  - y - bel 


F#*fc=l 

V 

— 

f . #' 

-*—m 

\—m — 

i 

i i 

u 

« 

LI 

-m— 

i 

=£± 



oh—  why  oh!  Ros-y-bel  let  go  Mister  Por-ter  son, 


4 

-r-H 

3S 

sJ 

> m m 

LJ- 

m 

h Lr-^ 

H — 1 

Ros-y-bel  oh—  why  oh!  Ros-y-bel  oh—  why  oh! 


r nsr-. 

— 1— — 

1 'r~ 

I " 

S S 

j |_ 

JU.\  V J2 J 0 

— j— I 

^ . 1 _ J 

ISiil ’ m - 

* ~s 

-d — * 

m m 

m m 

Ros-y-bel  oh—  why  oh — - Ros-y-  bel  wheelhim  doodjes’ 


r-9-dp 

srn 

—j— 

N 

^ 1 

1 1 

D \ I . 



J ! — 

. p 1 J J J 

d 

aczr ^ 

• * -j*—. 

d - — — 

L m — d — 

now,  Ros-y-bel  oh—  why  oh!  Ros-y-bel  cock  cock 


iv 

1 KT-X- 

— tH — hM- 

-=H-:7=F 

■ V S.  f 

-~d J- J- 

:=t=E= 



crow  you  no  know,  Ros-y-bel  oh — why  oh!  Ros-y-bel 


-tr-rn 

1 

— 

' i 

r/ 

— Sr 

— i 

■ 

._j  . 1 

{( 

— r — 

4 

-m—J 

_4_j J 

v. 

t -v-_j 

t=a 

zmz  ” 

m 0 

j i 

wheelhim  let  him  go,  Ros-y-bel  oh — why  oh! 


Ring  Tunes. 


201 


C. 

The  play  in  the  next  is  rough,  and  the  holders  of 
hands  in  the  ring  must  have  strong  wrists. 


Andante. 


1 t 1 p -IV  i 

n \ — is — r 

F. 

* 0 

-J pj J m — ^1 — — ! 

9 9 9 1-0  0 

9 m — m — s — 

Me  da  le  le  le,  me  da  le  le  16,  Bull  a pen 


□r  . v -is:  ~rs— s — 

f\ 

X 

^ lc  ■ ^ r\ 

1 rs  N 1 P J P 

f( 

) 

^2 2 9 2 

1 T 2 2 9 ^2 

L m 

u a 

• * • 9 

9 o 

ho  ! gin  - ger  - ly  ! the  bull  a broke  pen  ! gin-ger  - ly  ! A Mount  Siney 


bull ! ginger-ly  ! A Galloway  bull ! ginger -ly  ! bull  a broke  pen  ! gingerly  1 


Two  strong  young  fellows  personate  the  bulls.  One  is 
inside  the  ring  and  the  other  outside.  They  paw  the 
ground  and  moo  at  each  other  but  must  not  fight  unless 
they  can  break  the  ring.  When  the  ring  is  broken  at 
last  by  a determined  rush,  one  of  the  bulls  is  sometimes 
seized  with  panic  and  jumps  back  into  the  pen  (ring)  where 
he  is  safe.  The  fight,  if  it  does  take  place,  is  not  a very 
serious  affair,  the  cowmen  soon  coming  up  with  their 
ropes  (handkerchiefs)  which  they  throw  over  the  bulls’ 
heads  and  so  draw  them  apart1 

(Me  da  de  would  mean  Me  is  there,  I am  there.  Le 
is  substituted  for  euphony,  being  probably  suggested  by 
the  last  syllable  of  “gingerly.”) 

CL 


Another  rough  game  is  : — 

Allegro. 


-1  «>  - 

s ns 

_ V 

S is  ~T 

r»  «>  \ r\  N 

M 

P . 

p-~1 — 

J 1 

m n 

J d — n- 

dSzd n 9 m * 

3C 

Two  man  a road,  Crom-an-ty  boy,  Two  man  a road, 


1fCf.  “Bull  in  the  Park,”  Gomme,  Traditional  Games,  vol.  i.  p.  50.] 


202 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


~_TV — V ^ 

— 1 =4— 

— 

\ 1 

s'  4- 

— 

# # # 

M. 

^ 

fight  for  you  la  - dy  ! Two  man  a road,  down  town  picny, 

as) — 


ate; 


Two  man  a road,  fight  for  you  la  - dy  ! Two  man  a road, 


|S — |% — i — 

' N-— 

n— k 

— i i 

— I \- 1 

— 0 — m — 

j 

L Le>  • 

H-=U 

Crom-an-ty  win  oh ! Two  man  a road,  Crom-an-ty  win. 


A line  of  girls  stretches  along  each  side  of  the  road 
and  in  front  of  them  stand  the  two  combatants  armed 
with  sticks.  One  is  a Coromanti  (one  of  the  African 
tribes)  and  the  other  a Kingston  or  down-town  boy. 
“ Fight  for  your  ladies  ” cry  the  respective  lines  to 
their  champions.  Whoever  can  disable  the  other  and 
snatch  one  of  his  girls  across  the  road  is  the  winner.  A 
mock  doctor  comes  to  bind  up  the  wounds. 


CII. 


“ Adina  Mona,”  with  its  Italian-sounding  words,  is 
noisy,  but  not  so  rough  : — 

Tempo  di  Valse. 


i 


* ' 


Ho  ! A - din  - a Mon  - a, 


A - din  - a Mon  - a, 


-t'-i  r 

-4z=d__J= 

f=f=H 

# 

l>hJ — 

~ \ ■ *—* 

-m- 

Jl * 

-1 1 

% 


cutch-y  fe  gran’-ma  ; A - din  - a Mon  - a,  Me  tell  Nan  - a 

m 


:jrT^p=F 


1 


m m 


A - din  - a Mon  - a, 


Na  - na  no  want  it ; 


Ring  Times. 


203 


K t— 

— 

— 1 — !-h»-p-h= 

• _ # p 

-0- 

- 0 

EEEEEZj 

A - din  - a Mon -a,  Me  beg  Na  - na  wahter  ; A - din  - a 


=J 

2-t — ) — [-=- 

3 ' 

^ p\  k 

— -i  f p -1  r-  11 

r*  • J n 

=3 

3=^ 

-0- 

Mon  - a,  Him  give  me  dirty  wahter,  A-din  - a Mon-a. 


Here  they  stand  face  to  face  in  separate  couples.  At  the 
beginning  of  one  bar  the  boys  knock  their  hands  upon 
their  thighs,  and  at  the  beginning  of  the  next  bar  clap 
them  against  those  of  their  partners,  as  in  the  first 
motion  of  the  game  of  Clip-clap.  As  they  do  this  the 
boys  walk  backwards,  occasionally  wheeling,  and  making, 
as  they  say,  “ all  manner  of  flourish.” 


cm. 

“Palmer”  affords  an  opportunity  for  individual  dis- 
play : — 


Allegro  giocoso. 


31 

=j N— ( — 

~l — |— p- 

A 

~0—m 1 1 

— m — m — 

3 * 00 

-0- ✓ 

0 — 0 — 1 — 

Pal-mer,  youjust  from  town,  Palmer,  oh — William  Palmer! 


3 

— 0 0—0 — P — 0 — 

— — J -M* 

~:==j=F~ 

E 17  p— g-g-  ? .V 

& 

00 

0 0 L— 

Pal  - mer,you  just  from  town,  Pal-mer,  oh — William  Pal-mer  ! 


Rjjffi-,.  , . 0 

=i=Fn — f-t-= 

J f**  h> 

— 1 — I ~ K 

—'—tat 

0 

-J—2-rr 

Show  me  the  figure  whe  you  bring,  Palmer,  oh — William  Pal-mer  ! 


r— r—±- 

- J N1S-H  j r~ 

iT 1 

Lj_ 

q-  0 0 1 m 9 ~ 

-0-S 

Dat  de  no  style  at  ahl,  Pal-mer,  oh — William  Pal-mer ! 


204 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


l~Vy  * m 

— i 

-wep-- 

1 j — 

14 

\ 

w- — m — 

m — m — 

— , — j 1^—  ^ 

-z\  , * * 

‘—j  J r 

Pal  - mer, you  just  from  town,  Palmer,  oh — William  Pal-mer  ! 


. 

1—  ■ r- 

1 i 

* k 

m m m 

* m 

% pv 

P 1 1 

i d 

i — r 

LM_L_ 

L 

m — m — 

— 1 • 

d 

Put  on  de  style  now  more.  Palmer,  oh — William  Pal-mer  ! 


Palmer  has  just  come  back  to  his  mountain  home 
from  Kingston,  and  is  urged  to  show  the  latest  step  for 
a quadrille  figure  or  other  dance.  His  companions  affect 
surprise.  What ! is  that  all  ? Oh,  Palmer,  that’s  not 
style ! 


CIV. 

Very  popular  is  the  next  one 


A llegro. 


Mo  - ther  Free  - man,  a whe  me  Gun  - go  d6? 

=f*= 


Not  a one  can  sow  me  Gun -go  ; Fe  me  Gun -go,  da  precious  Gun- 


i 


-H  J J I 1 


go, 


Not  a one  can  sow  me  Gun  - go ; 


All  the 


35” 


gal  them  a go  dead  ’way  ’pon  me, 


Not  a one  can  sow  me  Gun  - 


..  ^ n.s 


w* 


-f8— 


go- 


All  the  boy  a go  dead  ’way  ’pon  me, 


Not  a one  can  sow  me  Gun  - go. 


Ring  Tunes. 


205 


Mother  Freeman,  where  is  my  Gungo  (a  kind  of  pea)? 

No  one  will  sow  my  Gungo,  or  perhaps  rather: — 
Will  no  one  sow  my  Gungo  ? For  my  Gungo  is  precious 
Gungo. 

As  they  sing  and  dance,  the  boys  pretend  to  faint, 
and  fall  into  the  arms  of  the  girls.  When  the  words 
change,  the  girls  fall  into  the  arms  of  the  boys,  who 
catch  them.  “ Dead  ’way  ’pon  me,”  besides  meaning  to 
faint,  has  a slang  interpretation  equivalertt  to : “ All  the 
girls  are  death  upon  me.” 


CV. 


The  following  is  perhaps  a sly  allusion  to  some  dull- 
witted  boy : — 

Allegretto. 


szs 

— 1 d — 

-ffo t-X 

J 

-d  ^ — a 

1— 1- 

-f* — I 

r _i. 

Jig 

"r 

& 

Me  have  me  goosey  a me  yard,  Me  no  call  Bar-ny  clever.  Go 


1 \ 4VN  \ 

j ~~i 

— =1 = 

1 1 —m — J 

— m — m m — 0 — 

m 

bring  me  goosey  a me  yard,  Me  no  call  Bar-ny  cle-ver. 


ir**  - < N-S  s, 

II 

f 

n 1 n 

1 1 ! d — 

rD  I r- 

s - - - * 0 J— 

I m 0 - 

—j  ) 1 j 

e 9 - 

— 

Wheel  me  goosey  make  me  see  oh  ! Me  no  call  Bar-ny  cle-ver. 


Thick  sour  milk  allowed  to  stand  and  curdle  is  called 
“ barnyclebber  ” [Irish  word,  F.Y.P.]. 

CVI. 


Here  we  have  a reference  to  the  too  common  practice 
of  stealing,  which  is  treated  more  as  a joke  than  a crime: — 
Allegretto. 


f — f— =- 

F, 

PS- 

» W~ S3 W 

W 4 

* v L 

Drill  him,  Constab,  drill  him ; Drill  him,  Constab,  drill  him  ; She 


206 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


=3 

K K 

k 

1-  = 

-4 — p 

m — m — ■*- 

tief  her  mo-ther  shill-ing  fe  go  buy  Sap -a  - dill  - a. 


- =) 

r— — r*— 

* f~  h? 

r 1 

• — J — J— 

r r *1  ■?- 

1 

r — £ \~r 

r 

=t= 

Buy  Sap  - a - dill  - a,  buy  Sap  - a - dill  - a ; You 


: — 

— s 

s 

" m 

□ zp 

Is  iS 

i ~iv  N 

p 

f(\  9 

S j - 

Z^  P V _v 

1 

V 7 

m m J — 

-J  — -m — •— 

go  an’  tief  the  shill  - ing  fe  go  buy  Sap  - a - dill  - a. 


«•  # n 

— — — fs-N- 

1 i r m * 

m 

9 I i 

~W  9 m 9 

f(h  \r  \,  f 

r \r  ' 

r 

r r i r 

C=K pV  - 

7 

Wheelhim,  Constab,  wheelhim ; Wheelhim,  Con -stab,  wheelhim  ; Him 


=3MF ^ S s 

--  c 

— N IS  ^ - 

m 0 

i 

— j m 9 

-m — m — 1 

tief  him  mo-ther  shill-ing  fe  go  buy  Sap  - a - dill  - a. 


A girl  is  the  delinquent  and  the  “ Constab  ” (constable, 
pronounce  con  as  in  constant)  is  inside  the  ring  with  her, 
lightly  beating  her  with  a twig  or  pocket-handkerchief. 
When  one  has  been  marched  round  and  wheeled,  he 
“sends  her  out”  and  takes  another. 

Sapadilla  is  really  a fruit  something  like  a medlar,  but 
the  name  is  given  to  all  sorts  of  fruit,  notably  Granadilla. 


CVII. 

Another  “flogging”  tune,  but  without  any  dancing,  is  : — 

A llegro. 

If  you  make  him  come  out  I will  kill  you  to  - 


— 

, 

1 

! i , 

i — 5— — « 

1 

-J — 

— 1 1 

%) 

* 9 

, m 

“ 

L-fcJ 

night  ya,  Why  do,  me  Na  - na,  do  ! 


Ring  Tunes. 


20  7 


A girl  is  in  the  ring  and  a boy  is  flogging  her  with  a 
whip.  The  boy  says  to  the  holders  of  the  ring  : — “ If  you 
let  her  come  out  I will  kill  you  to-night,  do  you  hear?” 
The  girl  is  going  round,  begging  to  be  released,  with 
the  appeal  to  each  one: — “Oh  do,  my  Nana!”  that  is> 
“ Do  let  me  out.” 


CVIII. 

The  most  laughable  antics,  “ mechanic  ” as  they  call  it, 
are  indulged  in  in  the  next  : — 


Andantino. 


-fjz  h h t 

# m =F 

^ \ — i — — i — i — 

m. 

s=— r~~ s 



-4— 1 * 

-L-m 

Oh  me  Toad  oh  ! Come  a - long,  Toad  - eye  ; 


Oh  me  Toad  oh  ! Come  a - long,  me  Toad  • y boy  ; 


3 

* - m 

— N * Ns f— 



V d dzzM 

— 

^ — T — 

-r— » 

'-m 

Come  a-long,  Toad  - eye;  Come  a - long,  me  Toad-y  boy; 


— \y~i ^ — — I r ; 1 n 

b.  _ j 

& m 

- rv 

' - : — 

azrtz « 

v 

L 

4 1 

d t 

' d 

-m 

_ m a 

Oh  me  Toad  oh  ! Come  a - long,  Toad -eye. 


Each  girl  has  a “Toad”  in  front  of  her  to  protect  her. 
The  Toads  jump  about,  and  the  one  who  can  get  past 
the  other  and  capture  his  girl,  wins.  Jamaican  toads,  or 
at  least  the  small  kind,  hop  like  the  frogs  of  cooler 
countries. 


CIX. 

The  first  half  of  the  tune  which  follows  occurs  in  the 
story  of  Annancy  and  Screech-owl  (No.  XIX.)  : — 


208 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


Allegro. 


d d 


-d — »~ 

There’s  a black  boy  in  a ring,  tra  la  la  la 


=s=fs 


la,  There’s  a black  boy  in  a ring,  tra  la  la  la 


m 


-S_ts— rs= 


3s- 


* 0- 


la,  There’s  a black  boy  in  a ring,  tra  la  la  la 


i 

— 

r^i 

J J 

>iTv  it  m i ! m — ~ ~ i zn 

i 

L-aJ U 

la,  He  like  su  - gar  an’  I like  plum. 


Wheel  an’  take  you  pard  - ner,  jump  sha  - ma  - dor  ! 


d -J- 

Wheel  an’  take  you  pard  - ner,  jump  sha  - ma  - dor  ! 


m 


Wheel  an’  take  you  pard  - ner,  jump  sha-ma-dor! 


For 


he  like  su  - gar  an’  I like  plum. 


The  boy  inside  the  ring  chooses  his  partner,  whom  he 
leaves  there  after  the  dance.  She  obtains  release  by 
choosing  another  partner,  whom  she  leaves  behind.  So 
there  is  alternately  a boy  and  a girl  in  the  ring, 

“Shamador”  is  possibly  a corruption  of  “ camerado.” 


Ring  Times. 


209 


CX. 

The  next  is  an  old  tune  which  is  going  out  of  fashion. 
It  is  still  remembered  in  my  district,  but  nobody  can  tell 
me  how  it  is  danced. 


Allegretto. 


—9- ; jr q — s; — | 

~W — m ^ 

\ — , 

\>\P 

| 

V 

frr\  v 1)  0 J 9 

J 9 "~9 

p 

V 7 * tl  9 

9 

-J  ’ 

L-J 

J— 1 

John-ny,  John-ny,  da  whar-ra  fe  din-ner?  Three  slice  a 


_v_..  v:ziS.. 

/[  r rs 

x i> 

S P 

% \ 

I 

\ 

1 _ P 

vy - w w w m 

m 

cf  m 

~ 0 

■S— — u 

lil  - ly  bit  a dumpling,  Me  Johnny  come  roll  the  board. 


“Da  wharra”  literally  means  “is  what.”  What  is  there 
for  dinner  ? Three  slices  and  a little  bit  of  dumpling.  I 
tried  to  find  out  whether  they  were  slices  of  dumpling 
or  slices  of  something  else,  but  no  one  could  tell  me 
that.  The  dumplings  are  plain  flour  and  water,  innocent 
of  suet.  They  are  very  popular,  and  are  eaten  with  a 
morsel  of  salt  fish  or  meat.  Johnny  is  invited  to  come 
and  roll  them  on  the  board. 


CXI. 


We  all  know  the  next  tune  : — 

Allegretto. 


r-f> 

v \ S— tNt. 

r f" — P" — 

P \ m 

0 0^ 

frh  a x 

0 

9 9 ~ 

vy  -4-  | ^ 

d 0 9 

V — £ 

Me  lov  - er  gone  a Co  - Ion  Bay,  Co  - Ion  Bay, 


v s'  S _N 

m m PPP 

d r * *~m  y - 

aL  1 m * 

. J .-S' 

Colon  Bay,  Me  lov  - er  gone  a Co  - Ion  Bay  With  a handsome  concen- 


fr 

p — 

— 

v - 

T.N-^vq 

— 1 

v — - 

s — 

V 

± 

E__k 

« 

ps— 

T * 4 

— — 0 

ti  - na.  Oh  what  is  your  in  - ten  - tion,  in  - ten  - tion,  in  - 
O 


210 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


—&T 1 T 

r s, N r 

S ft; 

-Is  "T*— is 

N T*  J J 

^3  J v 

ffh  v . m 1 _lv 

J m * m 

W # f 

m m m \ 

vl/  m n ^ 

-M. 

ten  - tion?  Oh  what  is  your  in  - ten  - tion?  My  in  - ten-tion  is  to 


—9- , ^ f.  K _.  „ 

— — — 



£ IE ~ 

J 

3 a r j 

ftsv  ^ 1 , 1 Lt  irf 

^ X , ~ 0 

* * — £ 

r * V 

M 

mar-ry  you.  I will  married  to  you,  I will  married  to  you,  I will 


_ 0 , n ^ N N ^ 

/f  r>  J J 1 2 IN. 

j*  p 0 

r 1 0 J r*  J 

t n\  v * * s J r J 

ar  u r • * m 

Ply  • m m 

w r * # ^ teg 

. > > p 

married  to  you,  I will  married  to  you,  I will  married  to  you,  I will 


— Or, — \ ^r— te~ 

H* — * — n r 

p 3 1 . 

N 

frh  v n 

. m * j » 

m m m P 

tW—  E= 

g * 

* ■ a ■ 

a1 a 

mar-ried  to  you  With  a hand -some  con  - cen  - ti  - na. 


(Levi  always  sings  : — “ What  is  your  retention,  retention, 
retention  ? ”) 

In  “ I will  married  to  you  ” the  wheeling  becomes  a 
giddy  business,  at  least  to  the  onlooker.  The  dancers 
never  seem  to  feel  it,  nor  do  they  appear  to  mind  the 
heat.  They  simply  stream  with  perspiration  and  put 
their  handkerchiefs  round  their  necks  to  save  their  white 
collars. 


CXII. 

A little  breathing  time  is  given  by  :■ 


A ndantino. 


o,  L 

-qs 

s=qs ~ 

s — 

=qs — v— N=ts= 

— \— 

-m m 

« # 

— i — p — i — j — 

Good  morn-ing  to  you,  mo-ther  ; Good  morn- ing  to  you, 


K — ~v — v — S- 

— p — p — p — 

-i--_  - 

da a 

*=N 

— # 

— p — p — p — 1 — 

J a : 

daugh-ter;  What  is  your  in  - ten  - tion?  I want  to  be  a 


ps— 

V 

— Ps  C s — S' 

_>T  h K _i 

. _P  N 



p P ' 

P ft  J 

m '' J 

l 1 

— : 

• * d 

* — J — 

a * m 

teach  - er.  You  shan’t  be  a teach  - er.  I bound  to  be  a 


Ring  Tunes. 


2 I I 


=fS: 


teach  - er.  Jump  sha  - ma  - dor,  me  dar 


ling. 


£ 


IN  IV 


E N £ 


* # 


What  is  your  in  - ten  - tion  ? I goin’  to  be  a doc  - tor.  You 
A 


v±E 


:S=V 


=JV=?v=i£ 


=1 N-E 


S _ J — *: 


0~e 


~m — « 

shan’t  be  a doc  - tor.  I bound  to  be  a doc  - tor.  You 


£ 


EE 


N -N 


# 


shan’t  be  a doc  - tor.  I will  be  a doc  - tor. 


iH 


Jump  Sha  - ma  - dor,  me  dar 


ling. 


There  is  no  dancing  here.  The  mother  walks  round 
inside  the  ring,  the  various  members  of  which  she 
addresses  in  turn.  “You  shan’t”  is  emphasised  by  an 
uplifted  arm  swept  vigorously  downwards  and  a stamp 
of  the  foot.  The  answers  go  through  the  various 
professions  until  it  is  felt  that  there  is  a want  of  some- 
thing more  exciting,  which  is  supplied  by  : — 


CXIII. 


Allegro. 


-1/tT 

1 

- ■ N 

— x ^ — |S — j — 

—m — ^ — 

l^r_ 

2^«s> — ! * e a , 

° * t,  • 

# 

-V—V-- 

r\  u. 

One  John-ny  Mil-ler  he  was 

liv  - ing  Wa-ter 

Lane 

an’  he 

-f * m S m 

-m 

- 

w= 

-E  r i r $=£=a 

■c~  r i 

— r 

wheel  right  roun’  an’  the  la  - dies  drop. 


212 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


"J /TV  , 

> w ST 

p — 

-IGXJL J HS 

[S 

\ 

_w ms J 

9 4 

9 9 ~ 9 ~ 

One  on  the  right  an5  the  o - ther  on  the  left,  a 

n’ 

le 

..  -ii.  — __ 

/ 

f 

si/  r 

l r r 

--9 r- 

JL 

— i — i — 

4 k- 

11 — r 

1 U 

wheel  right  roun’  an’  the  la  - dies  drop. 


The  tune  is  again  familiar.  A boy  takes  two  girls 
out  of  the  circle,  leaves  one  in  the  middle  and  wheels 
the  other.  Having  dropped  her  he  wheels  the  second 
one.  The  wheeling  over,  she  is  dropped.  These  two 
then  resume  their  places  in  the  circle,  and  the  boy  takes 
out  two  more. 

“Water  Lane.”  Kingston  lies  on  ground  sloping  evenly 
to  the  sea.  It  is  laid  out  on  the  American  plan  in  parallel 
streets.  A broad  “ Street  ” alternates  with  a narrower 
“ Lane.”  The  lanes  pointing  to  the  sea  have  water  running 
down  them  and  are  called  Water  Lanes. 


CXIV. 

The  next  is  used  both  as  a Ring-tune  and  for  the 
favourite  Fifth  Figure  of  the  Quadrilles  : — 


Allegro. 


Ring  Tunes. 


213 


~ ~ =Pv 

-0 — m 0 

— A — 

0^ 

— 

— d— 

— 

" 0 

. 

*-• — . 

-J 

0 

lim  - bo.  The  gal  no  wait  at  all,  Bah  - lim  - bo. 


I 

—I  1 - 

■4 

1: 

r 

* 

i 

..j  -N. 

LJ — J — 

Me  ride,  me  ride,  me  ride,  Bah  - lim  - bo.  Me 


-jgv- r=p=T2=jV 

| 

1 1 

fMr  " — W — 0 0 0 at  — 

~ d ^ 

— — H 

-r  jv 

-i— a i—d—}— 

vl/ 

m.  m 

0 

catch  her  on  the  way,  Bah  -lim  - bo.  Mebahssher  all  the 


r-9-H> ; — 1 s 

-1 — |N— N — S — fs 

“1 1 

/L  ft  k v 

1 1 h-  _ M ^ A-1  3 ^ 1 S. 

. ^ n r.  71 

ngy  -»  • „ -i  , — , — r ..._  r-r: m— 

way,  Bah  - lim  • bo.  The  mumma  say  me  rude,  Bah- 


— \r~ 

S — rs — N — 

, 

/ 

R T7  1 

1 1 

y j j 

r n 

0 0 0 j r 

1 iS 

V 

' & 

0 

Ld^ — 

\-0 0 — 

lim  - bo.  But  that  no  rude  at  all,  Bah  - lim  - bo. 


F=f-d^=lfc] 

H v- 

— 1 1 — - 

— 

9 • 9 m 

— 5- 

» 

' \ 

Jj 

For  wo-man  cloth  so  cheap,  Bah  - lim  - bo. 


r-f-b 1 N-^n 

■A 

1 

— ( 1 

{Pi> " [/  * * — a — 

a P- 

m 

J 

* J 

Two  yard  fe  bit,  Bah  - lim  - bo.  Man  cloth  so 


dear,  Bah  - lim  - bo.  One  pound  a yard,  Bah  - lim  - bo. 


“ Bahlimbo  ” is  a nick-name  for  a cheap  sort  of  cloth,  i.e. 
fabric  of  any  kind.  In  Africa  calicoes  are  called  limbo. 
The  “ two  yards  fe  bit  ” kind  is  calico  print.  A “ bit  ” is 
fourpence  halfpenny.  “Bahss”  means  buss,  kiss. 

White  people  pronounce  Morant  as  it  is  spelt,  but  the 
Blacks  always  put  the  accent  on  the  first  syllable,  and 
usually  call  it  Morrum. 


214 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


CXV. 

As  the  time  for  dancing  approaches  (see  note  on 
weddings  in  “ Gaulin  ” p.  76)  the  ring  breaks  up,  and 
there  is  a lively  marching  tune  or  two,  such  as  : — 


Vivace. 


• rs 

s 

/ 

^ Lj 

9 r 

i # m m 

A 

) 4 

• 9 \ \ w 

J S.  V. 

V 

dL_ 

1 

• g !>  G 

Oh  den  Jack  - y me  knee  da  go  ben'  a 


i 


oh  me  knee  da  go  ben’  a palm  palm. 


palm  palm  : 


The  couples  with  the  right  arm  of  one  partner  locked 
tightly  into  the  left  of  the  other  march  about  bending 
their  knees  at  rhythmical  intervals,  presenting  the  most 
ridiculous  appearance.  The  tune  has  an  infectious  gaiety 
about  it  as  its  sections  are  sung  over  and  over  and 
interchanged.  If  you  repeat  them  as  often  as  they  do, 
you  will  feel  stealing  over  you  that  kind  of  intoxication 
which  the  Dancing  Dervishes  experience. 


CXVI. 

There  is  a great  deal  of  laughing  over  “Jacky,”  which 
suggests : — 

Vivace. 


-P-  iN-P  M—fpv 

1 s d * 

pr  p 

When  me  get  a Mis-ter  Walker  gate,  Me  will  laugh,  ha,  ha,  ha, 


P 


£ 


& 


*=■  i 


4F 


ha  ! Me  will  laugh  he,  he,  h£,  he  ! Me  will  laugh — ha,  ha  ! Me  will 


Ring  Tunes. 


215 


laugh  qua,  qua,  qua,  qua!  Me  will  laugh — ha,  ha!  Me  will 


Hf# m ^ r. 

fS  IS 

w IP 

TtS._  J r # J N > 

N s 1 II 

d J J 

□ r II 

V 

f ..  # JS  m 

* * m -J-  U 

laugh  ha,  ha,  ha,  ha,  ha,  ha,  ha,  ha ! Me  will  laugh  ha,  ha  ! 


At  the  marks  * a return  is  made  to  the  first  four 
bars,  always  substituting  a new  name  for  Walker,  and 
the  tune  has  many  more  “turnings”  besides  the  ones 
noted. 

A sufficient  selection  of  Ring  tunes  has  now  been 
given  to  show  their  character.  The  number  might  be 
indefinitely  increased.  Every  district  has  its  own,  and 
while  some  old  favourites  remain,  new  ones  are  constantly 
in  process  of  making.  These  supply,  or  more  than  supply, 
the  gaps  caused  by  those  which  drop  out. 


PART  IV.  DANCING  TUNES. 

Turning  now  to  the  Dancing  tunes,  the  chief 
difference  to  be  noted  is  that  they  show  a more  marked 
departure  from  what  may  be  called  the  Jamaican  type 
of  melody.  Sailors  bring  popular  songs  to  the  seaports, 
and  from  there  they  spread  into  the  country.  For  a 
time  some  of  the  original  words  are  kept,  but  before 
long  they  get  changed.  The  change  is  partly  due  to 
that  corruption  of  the  text  which  naturally  takes  place 
as  the  songs  pass  from  mouth  to  mouth,  but  mainly  to 
the  fact  that  the  words,  referring  as  they  do  to  English 
topics,  have  no  interest  here.  So  we  generally  find  that 
the  tunes  are  refitted  with  a complete  set  of  new  words, 
describing  some  incident  which  has  lately  happened  in 
the  district,  or  some  detail  of  daily  life.  When  these 
reflect,  as  they  often  do,  upon  the  characters  of  indi- 
viduals the  names  have  been  changed  and  all  evidence 
pointing  to  the  locality  destroyed.  The  same  course 
has  been  pursued  where  it  is  thought  the  susceptibilities 
of  persons  or  their  relations  might  possibly  be  offended, 
even  when  there  is  nothing  mentioned  to  their  discredit. 

The  music  consists  of  three  “ flutes  ” (fifes),  two 
tambourines  and  a big  drum.  This  is  the  professional 
element,  which  is  reinforced  by  amateurs.  One  brings  a 
cassada-grater,  looking  like  a bread-grater ; this,  rubbed 
with  the  handle  of  a spoon,  makes  a very  efficient 
crackling  accompaniment.  Another  produces  the  jaw- 
bone of  a horse,  the  teeth  of  which  rattle  when  it  is 


Dancing  Ttmes. 


217 


shaken.  A third  has  detached  from  its  leather  one  of 
his  stirrup-irons,  and  is  hanging  it  on  a string  to  do 
duty  as  a triangle.  The  top  of  the  music  is  not  always 
supplied  by  fifes.  Sometimes  there  will  be  two  fiddles, 
sometimes  a concertina,  or,  what  is  more  approved, 
because  it  has  “ bigger  voice,”  a fiutina.  On  asking  to 
see  this  strange  instrument  I was  shown  the  familiar 
accordion. 

Their  chief  dances  are  the  Valse,  Polka,  Schottische,  and 
Quadrilles  in  five  figures,  of  which  the  fifth  figure  is  the 
most  popular,  or  as  they  would  say  “ sweet  them  most.” 
This  figure  goes  either  to  | or  f time.  The  f figures 
of  the  Quadrilles  are  often  used  for  Polka,  and  Polka 
and  Schottische  tunes  are  always  interchangeable,  the 
only  difference  being  that  the  Schottische  requires  a 
slower  time. 


CXVII. 

The  ball  opens  with  a set  of  Quadrilles : — 


1st  Figure. 


FV 

r>  , 

\ N X sr- 



~1 

% 

E==Ea=gg= 

When 

* * e J 

I go  home  I 

— & 

will 

* - # 3.  « 

tell  me  mum-ma, 

J-d 

When  I go  home  I will  tell  me  mum  - ma, 


i~>  \ v \ — 1 

- . j r r r • 49 

LT?\  T m Lr  Lr  Lr  j m 

* » j'  0 n S>  ^ ; 

t$£== — £=^=7=1 

0 & ' 

When  I go  home  I will  tell  me  mum  - ma  That  the 


. - 

\ 'S  \ 

A . r S \ p 1 J 1 

ii 

i« 

« 

« 

u 

gals  in  Jam  - ai  - ca  won’t  leave  me  a - lone. 


This  is  the  production  of  a white  musician  to  whom 
the  black  girls  were  especially  attentive. 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


218 


CXVIII. 


Guava  root  a med  - i - cine  fe  go  cure  all  the  young  gal  fe  - ver. 

A decoction  of  the  root  of  the  Guava  is  used  in  cases 


of  fever. 

“ Medicine  ” is  pronounced  so  as  to  rhyme  with  Edison. 


CXIX. 


37-7/  Figure. 


¥ 4F7t  - VA 



v 

■ ift  if  0 ! 9 d 

m > 1 

9 9m 

1 n j 



& 

J1 

Crahss-lookin’  dog  up  - ’tairs,  Crahss-lookin’  dog  up  - ’tairs  ; I 


\ & % if  Is  ^ Is  Is  N 

r s fs  \ v , 

. v 'V 1 1 

3 3 3 3 ! 

TV  j J N 

> ! VI 

inT  * m 9 m * m 

w & ! 

1 * 1 m 

LW  m 

'CM  m 9 

— 9. m — 1 

lift  up  me  foot  an’  I hit  him  a kick  an’ him  roll  up  him  tail  an’ 


tii 


f— -j- 


What  you  fe  do  with  that  ? 


What  you  fe  do  with  that  ? 


I meet  him  up-’tairsan’  I 


ry  s s n 's — v . 

r 2T  ^4  . N rP 

V \ P A 

rr?T\  tt  I a m # ^ I _J  ' 1 n 

1 1 

Lxaz  m ~ . # 

9 •-  * — 9 

'-M  . n 

hit  him  a kick  an’  he  roll  up  him  tail  an’  run. 


See  note  to  “Parson  Puss  and  Parson  Dog”  (p.  93), 
also  Author’s  Preface. 


Dancing  Tunes. 


219 


CXX. 


4 th  Figure. 


— t/  Sjj.  .» 

• > • 

:qs=r  t*  , 

• J f # m 

d ^ J P* 

ffh  ~ 4 

• p 17  , f 

d J 

1W_ — 

* w d 

Goatridge  have  some  set  a gal  So  - so  shirt  them 


can’t  wash.  Give  me  back  me  soap  an’  blue, 


Give  me  back  me  soap  an’  blue,  Give  me  back  me 


soap  an’  ’tarch,  So  - so  shirt  them  can’t  wash. 


Goatridge  is  the  name  of  a neighbouring  hamlet. 
When  a boy  “ gives  out  his  shirts  to  wash  ” he  also 
provides  the  girl  with  soap,  blue  and  starch. 

So-so  means  even.  It  also  means  only,  as  : — “ I get 
so-so  potato  fe  nyam,”  I only  got  potatoes  to  eat. 

“ Shirt  ” is  pronounced  almost  “ shut.” 


CXXI. 


5 th  Figure. 


lH-G— 1st- 

d=  rN  ' 

r=^=H=J — 

s 

*7 


Me  car  - ry  me  a - kee  a Lin  - stead  mar-ket, 


=fs=£=|s= 


Not  a quat-ty  worth  sell.  Oh  what  a los  - ses  ! 


[=04*  _____  -v  — 

r-N  |S-~ r — k— 

Vi 

/ns- r 

•H  M fS- 

iffy  ^ 1 S 

-- 

1 1 1 ' 

m # # J j 

4/-  J.  d— 

LJ^ ^ 

# - 

Not  a quat-ty  worth  sell. 


Me  car  - ry  me  a - kee  a 


220 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


n i-  rs  rs 

v w V 

— 

~ ° |v  I 

. . "2-  i S ■ M 

"1  \ \ " N H 

' " r p*  ] N 

f 

s if  ^ 9 4 & \ 

— ! ! J 

9 • 1 \ 

L 

m S J a 9 

*'•  4 ' * e 

XT 


Lin -stead  market.  Not  a quatty  worth  sell.  Oh  not  a 


\ —J  fit.  f. 



W jV  S V 

(rr\  IT  i J ■ N 1 1 

1 \ A J p 

1 — 1 — ■ 

LJLUZ  J J 1 

J S J 

~ -9  .J.  9 ~ — 9 

light,  not  a bite!  Not  a quat  - ty  worth  sell. 


The  Akee  ( Cupania  edulis),  pronounced  acky,  is  a hand- 
some tree  producing  something  which  one  hardly  knows 
whether  to  call  a fruit  or  a vegetable.  Besides  the  edible 
part,  the  beautiful  scarlet  capsule  contains  a substance 
which  is  poisonous.  Deaths  by  misadventure  through 
carelessness  in  its  preparation  for  table  occur  every 
year. 

The  time  of  these  Quadrille  tunes  will  be  pretty 
accurately  judged.  They  would  all  come  under  Allegro 
except  the  First,  which  is  slower  than  the  others,  and  it 
might  be  headed  Allegretto  or  even  Andantino.  The 
Third  figure  is  not  much  used,  and  many  dancers  do 
not  know  the  step.  Its  place  is  generally  supplied  by 
one  of  the  other  figures.  The  most  popular  of  all  is 
the  Fifth,  of  which  we  have  many  examples  to  give. 
The  step  is  regulated  by  two  beats  in  the  bar  of  six, 
so  we  find  that  they  dance  it  also  to  time,  as  for 
instance  : — 


CXXII. 


5 th  Figure. 


Since  Dor  - a Lo  - gan  a wahk  with  Gal  - la  - woss,  The 


V—-. 

. s A ' 

F- 

K fW. 0 ^ 

£=  £ ‘ 

— p — P1 — 

-9 9 

C — ^~d 

-S — 9 

-J  '■  - 

0 

* — ==1 — 

man  them  a beat  them  wife  with  junk-a  ’tick.  Why,  why, 


Dancing  Dines. 


221 


* 

~ M A > 

P 0 1 J 

it9 

why,  A - mil  - y ! Bring  back  me  dumpling,  yah?  A - mil -y!  No 


/ v K v. 

N 

^ — N-fn 

9 P 9 j 0 

fn  J J 

fs > 

0 & Zj  0 

fj  " 

0 s * — 

tt2 — 1 

dog,  no  puss,  no  fowl,  A - mil  - y.  Bring  back  me  dumpling, 


. -N 

X p ~ s, r — 

Is  ip  fs  _ \ 

A J s.  ,N  J 

J 1 

[s  ^ r* . & . 1 

L- — — 0 * 

hd  — 0) 

yah?1  A - mil  - y.  No  dog,  no  puss,  no  fowl,  A-mil-y. 


=^L_# 

— 

— fs 

w~Z 

o m 

zi  ... — fe  . ^ 

4r  ** 

Fetch 

V 

back 

me 

dump  - ling, 

L— — P* 0 11 

-0- 

yah  ? A - mil  - y. 

This  has  to  go  very  fast,  indeed  as  fast  as  the  words 
of  the  second  bar  can  be  spoken.  It  will  be  found  then 
to  correspond  to  a moderate  Allegro  in  six  time  counted 
in  two. 

Two  stories  are  mixed  up  here.  One  of  the  girl  who 
walks  with  the  Gallawoss— -a  Lizard  with  a gold  eye 
and  an  undeserved  reputation  for  biting — which  leads  to 
an  age  the  reverse  of  golden,  when  the  men  beat  their 
wives  with  junka  (short)  sticks.  And  the  other,  of  some 
incident  connected  with  breakfast  in  the  field,  when 
Amily  ate  somebody’s  dumpling  and  laid  the  blame  on 
the  usual  scapegoat,  the  cat. 


CXXIII. 

The  rapid  speed  necessitated  by  some  forms  of  f time 
just  suits  the  following : — 

5 th  Figure. 


Fire,  Mister  Pres-ton,  Fire!  Fi-er  down  the  lane!  Then 

luYah?”=:Do  you  hear? 


222 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


¥5 


S 55 


> i 


send  the  bri-gade  fe  go  out  the  fire,  The  bri-gade  can’t  out  the 


P 


7EI7S  * J"  £=1*— * 


fire. 


Fire,  Mis  - ter  Pres  - ton  ! Fire,  Mis  - ter  Pres  - ton  ! 


§ 


=N — 0 


Fi  - er  down  the  lane  ! 


Fire,  Mis  - ter  Pres  - ton  ! 


Fire,  Mis  - ter  Pres  - ton  ! Fi  - er  down  the  lane  ! 


CXXIV. 


Where  the  beat  is  in  crotchets  it  sounds  unduly 
slow  : — 

5 th  Figure. 


i 


Tief  cahf  - fee, 


Tief  cahf  - fee, 


Tief  cahf  - 


I 


-N  S V 


* • 


Z0  i, 


* * >- 


fee,  Be  - nig  - na  Field,  fe  go  buy  silk  dress,  Fe  go  show  them  Gardon 


7- 

\ *S  ^ S 

1 

S — N 

- \ N s~  > 

t 

1 *=) 

• ^ 

S -N- 

* 

_# — 0 0*... : 

boy,  fe  go  show  them  Gardon  boy,  fe  go  show  them  Gardon 

— Is*  --X  "X  --P*- 


boy,  Be  - nig  - na  Field,  you  tief  cahf  - fee. 


Dancing  Tunes. 


223 


Benigna1 * * *  Field  steals  some  coffee  to  get  money  to  buy 
a silk  dress  to  show  off  to  the  Gardon  boys.  (Gardon 
is  a place,  not  a family.) 


CXXV. 


5 th  Figure. 


F? 

:N*  zN  "s  -S] 

2 iS—  ;vQl  r 

-m-  <o- 

O 9 ** 

Fan  me,  sol-dierman,  fan  me;  Fan  me,  sol-dierman, 


t-9~. 

w 

s s 

n — n 

— S 

fK  f y y- n r 

. s 

m 9 S 1 

AMr  a n 

u0  0 0 * 

I 

fan  me;  Fan  me,  sol-dierman,  fan  me  oh! 


— tn — v v 

. , 

1 “N  \ A 1 

-ftr?  > - w 

"J  1 \ 

j 0 

WZ-9 * 

Gal,  you  char -ac  - ter  gone!  Sake  a ten  shilling  shahl, 


y y S X 

N S r ' 

TfiT  1 

Vl7 

1 J d 

£>  # e a .1 

0 

m m ~ 

Sake  a ten  shill  -ing  shahl,  Sake  a ten  shill  -ing 


shahl  oh  ! Make  me  char  - ac  - ter  gone. 


1 Other  unusual  girls’  names  are  Ambrogine,  Ateline,  Irene,  Melmorine. 
These  rhyme  with  Queen.  The  same  Italian  i is  found  in  Elgiva,  Seppelita, 

Barnita,  Justina,  aud  the  English  i in  Alvira,  Marina.  The  next  are  all 
accented,  like  the  last  six,  on  the  penultimate  ; Etilda,  Iota,  Clarista, 

Pastora,  Barzella,  Zedilla,  Amanda,  Agarta  (evidently  a variant  of  Agatha), 

Timinetia  (like  Polynesia),  Cherryana,  Indiana.  Then  there  is  Hettybel, 

and  one  girl  has  this  astonishing  combination — Ataria  (rhymes  with  Samaria), 
Azadell  (?  Isabel). 


224 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


CXXVI. 

Schottische. 


- $ — y - 

N 

» r - m 

=|  1 J** 

-m P- 

— • ** 

=J=t= 

Manny  Clark  a you  da  man ! Manny  Clark  a you  da  man ! 


9tI? — i — fe— fe-*.  x 

—i  S£  fc" 

P )*,  FN  N v 

ffj) 17  p r.  m * j 

1 w ^ 

J Is!  J I N 

yv  v # * „ > 

=1 «&*= 

* m*  * „ 

So  so  ride  you  ride  a Ginger  Piece,  All  the  gal  them  a dead  fe 


35 


f — 2 f5 


V - 

you.  Oh  you  take  ’not-ta  boil  soup,  take  salt  fish  ’tick  in  it, 


J?  L^i >> — “fe — fe — fe — S; 

- S — N— ^ ^ 

F - N-=*q 

JyS-y  * . g*  g*  J— 

-m — 0 — * — m — - — 

Lfe— fe  -fe  - -J 

Gal,  you  want  fe  come  kill  me  ? Oh  you  take  ’notta  a boil  soup, 


ip 


fe  4-*— •— •— »■  J 


take  salt  fish  ’tick  in  it,  Gal,  you  want  fe  come  kill  me  ? 


Manny  Clark,  a popular  player  of  dance  tunes,  goes  to 
Ginger  Piece  and  is  overwhelmed  with  attentions  by  the 
girls.  He  addresses  himself  as  follows : — “ Manny  Clark, 
you  are  the  man ! You  just  ride  to  Ginger  Piece  and 
all  the  girls  are  dying  for  you.”  Then,  turning  to  one 
of  them,  he  adds : — “ Oh,  you  boil  the  soup  with  your 
best,  taking  Anatto  and  salt  fish  to  stick  into  it.  Do 
you  want  to  kill  me  with  kindness  ? ” 

Anatto  gives  a rich  yellow  colour  to  the  soup.  Salt 
fish  (stockfish)  is  one  of  the  principal  articles  of  diet  of 
the  peasantry. 


Dancing  Dines. 


225 


CXXVII. 


Schotiische. 


^ \ S S — P 


Bun  - go  Moo-lat  - ta,  Bun  -goMoo-lat  - ta,  Who  de  go 


=J 

h ft 1ST p* St K- 

s ^ K 

4 

yP— - 

* '-2- 

* * J*m  J 

married  you?  You  hand  full  a ring  an’ you  can’t  do  a t’ing, 


— 1 n 

ts  fi;  & r is 

r • -^V 

M V 

^ 1 iN 

9.9  9 * 

Who  de  go  married  you?  Me  give  you  me  shirt  fe  wash,  You 


Fj 

V 

* - - * * • 

=S=  m “^=r 

--i  * 

burn  up  me  shirt  with  i - ron,  You  hand  full  a ring  an’  you 


can’t  do  a t’ing, 


^ s.  N v n 

1 U 

II  II 

9 u 

Who  de  go  mar  - ried  you  ? 


“You  Bungo  Mulatto,  who  is  going  to  marry  you? 
Your  ring-bedecked  fingers  can’t  do  anything.  When  I 
gave  you  my  shirt  to  wash  you  burned  it  with  an  over- 
hot iron.” 

Bungo  (rhymes  with  Mungo)  means  a rough  un- 
civilized African. 

A Mulatto  is  the  child  of  two  Brown  parents,  Brown 
being  the  offspring  of  Black  and  White.  He  has  rather 
a yellow  skin. 


CXXVIII. 


5 th  Figure. 


s 


Ad  • a you  must 
P 


l 

<L> 

a 

bahl, 


Baht 


226 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 




- \ 

— r~ 

— i 

1 m ^ —p, 

-f fix  17 " L 

* i 

p 

AT 

Bahl,  Ad  - a you  must  bahl, 


fr—\ 

IS  f* S \ | ; — 

L-  rt  J h*  .... 

p J i p s- 

— ^ N — s — - — 

T 

T)  v * 1 

m m 9 m M 1 

[S ^ f«r- 

\ 

V 

m m i * 

l_j — m — * J — 

Bahl,  Ad  - a you  must  bahl,  Ad  - a you  must 


~~7 , v s~ 

— 1 

\ v 

VTT  fc  pS 

J 1 

1 . 

fm  17  - m 

j 

1^-  1 

\sy  p m 9 

* 

r* a/ ~ 0 — 

3 

^ 

bahl  till  the  cock  say  coo  - coo  - coo  - coo  - ry  co. 


Ada  has  been  naughty  and  has  been  shut  up  for  a 
night  in  the  dark.  The  poor  little  thing  is  “bawling,” 
crying  out  in  terror  of  the  nameless  horrors  of  the 
night. 


CXXIX. 
2nd  Figure. 


r r r s. 

VP  fr  Zy 

_ s ~s  ^ 

J J J > > 

wr\v  a 

> 

1 i 1 

s i 

* 0 , 

0 m 

— 1 0 d 

Rise  a roof  in  the  morn-ing,  Rise  a roof  in  the 


— 0~U V “V  7KT" 

V V 

J — 3.—J 

*7 


morn-ing;  Tell  all  the  nig -ger  them  to  come,  come,  come, 


n 

A 

F ✓ , V # 

P 

m * -J  -J—J  d -J—ar 

Rise  a roof  in  the  morning.  The  Monkey  and  the  Baboon  them  was 


— i?  i b -u  v n_  v r 

— S N S -r- 

V ... 

p p 

f r V v r* 

^ Lz  i 

^ n 

J L 

~m i 

# » 9 

P P 

«7 


sit -ting  on  the  wall,  Rise  a roof  in  the  morn-ing ; 


A?  r?  ' >_fr, 

A - 

R-  - - * 551 

-k 

k r1 W ym 

^ T: 

I an’  my  wife  can  - not  a - gree, 


Rise  a roof  in  the 


Dancing  Tunes. 


227 


§1 


. ■>  [.  S ".fr.-.s — fc: 

-* — ra-.— mi  «-« 


-n— 


morn-ing.  She  ’pread  me  bed  on  the  dir  - ty  floor, 


Rise  a roof  in  the  morning  ; For  De  - vil  made  the  wo-man  an’ 


/ Iff  ^ M 

„ - - * 

— \ — \ 

/ - — V ~ ' 

m * ' 

God  made  man,  Rise  a roof  in  the  morn  - ing. 


“Rise  a roof”  seems  to  mean,  as  far  as  I can  under- 
stand the  explanation,  “ raise  the  roof  ” ; as  we  might 
say,  “ row  enough  to  blow  the  roof  off.” 

“ Baboon  ” always  has  this  accent  on  the  first  syllable 
and  a French  a. 

The  Blacks  do  not  mind  calling  themselves  niggers, 
but  a White  man  must  not  call  them  so.  To  say 
“black  nehgher”  is  an  offence  not  to  be  forgiven.  The 
word  is  used  again  quite  kindly  in  the  following : — 


cxxx. 


T 


ICS. 


* 4 Ev. 

— • — # 

Oh  we 


:=j  " ' 'N 

Q=i- 

went  to 


the  riv  - er  an’  we  couldn’  get  a - 


cross,  We  jump  on  the  nig -ger  back  we  think  it  was  a 


horse.1  Then  Ste  - phen,  Ste  - phen,  Ste  - phen 


boy,  Ste  - phen,  Ste  - phen,  poor  Ste  - phen  ! 


JA  last  reminder  to  pronounce  “acrahss,”  “harse.”  The  Negro  rejects 
the  sound  aw  altogether  and  always  changes  it  to  ah. 


228 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


A party  get  to  one  of  the  bends  of  Four-and-twenty 
River,  so  called  because  the  road  crosses  and  recrosses 
it  twenty-four  times.  Stephen  carries  them  all  over. 


CXXXI. 


Polka. 


— N m „ 

| M w ^ 

1 P m * 

_4m  * /t  3 ^ 

^ 

! n ^ 

m _l 



JLl/  ? _ & 

^ m—. — ^ 

AT 

f > 

Aun-ty  Jane  a call  Min 

n # ..  . 

nie, 

- w~ 

Min- 

nie  won’t  go  ’peak  to 

-ffjL  . 

/ 11  1 1 M 

\ ' V. 

r*  n v 

! 

JCA Z 1 S» 

I N IS  S 

i : S P* 

J ; , 

1 

J is  i 

- 

him;  Aun-ty  Jane  a call  Min-nie,  Min-nie  won’t  go  ’peak  to  him. 


Aunty  Jane  does  not  want  Minnie  to  keep  company 
with  the  boys  at  Sandy  Hill.  Of  course  Minnie  wants 
to  go,  and  she  does  go.  Aunty  Jane  sets  off  to  bring 
her  home.  When  she  reaches  Sandy  Hill  she  calls. 
Minnie  hears,  but  will  not  go  and  speak  to  her.  She 
hides  in  the  coffee-store  by  wrapping  herself  in  a crocus 
bag  or  sack.  “Crocus”  is  a rough  cheap  material. 
Coffee  ready  for  market  is  put  in  the  finer  and  smaller 
canvas  bags. 


CXXXII. 

Valse. 


|#5T#=j- 

— =H 

— 1 

— 1 1 1— 

— 1 F— 

pees 

”V7 Cl 

* * * - 

L<d 

Mar  - ty,  Mar  - ty,  mewan-ty  go  home, 


Mar  - ty 


Dancing  Tunes. 


229 


— j— 

v-fy 

1 1 ' 

1 ■ > 

— 1 — 1 

— [ — tv  si 

e 

— I — 1 — 

— 0 — 0 — 

& 

-A — • 

[-pi m—D\ 

Mar  - ty,  me  wan-ty  go  home,  Mar  - ty,  Mar  - ty,  me 


wan-ty  go  home,  Me  wan-ty  go  home  back  a yard. 


— y m r— „ ^ 

1 

<0  ,W 

1 t"* 

' 

if  \ _ ir  L ■ r 

m d 

0 JT 

zj 

1 

cf 

• 

Tell  me  mum  - ma  say  me  want-y  come  home,  Me  want-y  come 


R( 

j — i 

r-| — r 

_£  a»  & 

l—i 

} 

rJ— 

fl j 1 

home,  Me  want  - y come  home,  Tell  me  mum  - ma  say  me 


— 1 — i h 



— | 1 h- 

-I  | 

n 

r~/n  ^ — J ! — 

— 1 — p — J — 

—0 * J 

— \ 1 1 — 

1 

ti9h== — * — 1= 

-A . 

want  - y come  home,  Me  want  - y come  home  back  a yard. 


Martin  has  been  flogging  his  wife — not  an  unusual 
condition  of  things — and  she  wants  to  go  home  to  her 
mother.  He  will  take  her  message  quite  loyally.  The 
matter  will  be  arranged  and  they  will  be  good  friends 
living  apart.  Before  long  she  will  go  back  to  him  of 
her  own  accord.  They  make  up  their  quarrels  as 
quickly  as  they  fall  into  them. 


CXXXIII. 

5 th  Figure. 


—1/ >-X 

Nv 

r - 

ML  _ 

1 

s 

^ - ~ — n — 

~fca A- 

iA 

% X*  * 

S 5*  5>  J r3- 

4^  -J 

■ J?  0 * — 

— 

0 

c 

<s  - * - * 

What  make  you  shave  old  Hall,  Rosie  F owler  ? What  make  you  shave  old 


: 

-K4 — 

1 

V ^ 

V. — & 

- 0 - -0-  -0-  - 0 - & 

s s . »-■ 

- 0 - m 

What  make  you  shave  old  Hall,  Ro  - sie  Fow  - ler? 


Hall? 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


230 


Bar-ber  have  two  teeth  a him  mout’,  Them  sweet  like  a su  - gar  - plum. 


Rosie  Fowler  left  old  Hall  for  Mr.  Barber,  and  being 
remonstrated  with,  shaved  him,  i.e.  gave  him  a good 
beating. 


CXXXIV. 

Mazurka. 


1 

H ! 1 — 

7 

♦ > 

I 1 

1 J _J 

\ A - 

J J 

1 1 p P 

& * ir 

r 

V 

4— #— * 

c 

Run,  Mos  - es,  run,  Mis -ter  Walk  - er  da  come; 


2 -___ 

— 1 



MT\  1 

~m  ' p~ j 

J 

1 : is  sr~ 

— m 0 

: <? 

i 1 1 

Run,  Mos  - es,  run,  Mis -ter  Walk-er  da  come.  If  you 


=3 

t — 3 — q 

| 

— ^ ». 1 1 

m 

=£=1*4-- 3 

buck  your  right  foot,  buck  your  left  foot,  Nev-er  try  lookback;  If  you 


— ’J-  _____  , . s. 

p _ r . 

in) 

N _}s  1 

1 

'iJ-B 

* 

• 

_ 

buck  your  right  foot,  buck  your  left  foot,  Nev-er  try  look  back. 


To  “buck”  is  to  strike,  and  the  word  is  applied  to  a 
stumbling  horse,  who  is  said  to  buck  his  foot  against  a 
stone,  or  simply  to  buck.  It  also  means  to  butt  with 
the  head  and  is  most  likely  a corruption  of  this  word. 
Bucking,  or  charging  stag-fashion  with  the  head,  is  the 
favourite  way  for  women  to  fight.  Here  is  an  account 
of  such  a contest : — 


231 


Dancing  Tunes. 


CXXXV. 

5 th  Figure. 


Whe  you  da  do  ? Whe  you  da  do  ? Whe  you  da  do  make 


i 


^35 


] 


Sa  - rah  buck  you  ? Whe  you  da  do  ? Whe  you  da  do  ? 


Whe  you  da  do  make  Sa  - rah  buck  you ? A-de-la  dajumpbut 


T _zv  ps  v . 

' - -V  ZX  _ 

T7 

$ zP  ! x \ 

V 

• J 

g"  e f- 

a> 

l — m m — 

Sa  - rah  buck  him,  A-de-la  da  jump  but  Sa  - rah  buck  him, 


A-de-la  dajump  but  Sa  - rah  buck  him.  Whe  you  da  do  make 


—p 

3 

o 

- - * 1 

^ Sd 

f(T)  \ V Iv 

x ^ s 1 “ - 

n 

— 

f-J  £ * 

—0 

0 - 

Sa  - rah  buck  you?  You  A-de-la  ho — you  ought  to  shame  ! 


—p  3 

: 3 

# & & & _T 

#S  J / . * 

— '-5  £-0-J 

You  A-de-la  ho — you  ought  to  shame  ! You  A-de-la  ho — 




V 

^ s,  in:  ^ n1  ^ 

> rs — 

Jxzs 

X ^ |x  n 

~m  & ~ 

P- 

— p p — x 

X 

« » # 

you  ought  to  shame ! WTa6  you  da  do  make  Sa  - rah  buck  you  ? 


Fights  between  women  are  by  no  means  uncommon. 
This  was  a case  of  cherchez  I'hovnne.  The  ladies  both 
wanted  to  marry  the  same  man.  The  “sing”  was 
evidently  composed  by  one  of  Sarah’s  partisans  for  the 


232  Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 

words  are “ What  did  you  do  to  make  Sarah  buck 
you?  Adela  jumped,  but  Sarah  bucked  her.  You, 
Adela,  oh  you  ought  to  be  ashamed ! ” Adela’s  sideway 
jump  was  not  quick  enough  to  save  her  from  Sarah’s 
head. 

“ Whe  you  da  do  ? ” literally,  What  you  is  do  ? for 
What  you  did  do  ? meaning  What  did  you  do  ? So,  if 
they  were  trying  to  talk  “deep  English,”  for  “Adela  da 
jump”  they  would  substitute  “Adela  is  jump”  and  think 
it  was  quite  right. 


CXXXVI. 


5 tk  Figure. 


~\t  n 

V \ \ v 

' ~ "Tv 



( ) V 

p 1 . 1 . \ 

1 S3 V P 

m * r 1 m 

in  <>  v p 

^2  & & 

J 1 .P  J 

A;?— J 

- - a 

0 • 0-  0 

T~ 1?  J—'  U ■: 

Mother  William  hold  back  Le  - ah!  Mother  William  hold  back  Le  - 


r-y K-n 

? ^ S ^ ~ v • 

I 

>r  eg  . p 

'TflY  r n 

1 m & ZJ  w 1 

J lip 

Ak-1"  ,s’ 

y 0 <* 

* • • 

ah  ! Me  tell  you  say  hold  back  Le  - ah ! Hold 


— C / 

—1 v \ V , 

M , -V 

^ k 

fCn  N p s ^ v 

' r 

m m * # 

>#=*=3= 

=1  - 0 

00  * 

0 0 v y-  -»-•  -0- 

back  Le  - ah  let  go  Jane  Ann  ! Den  a Le  - ah  Le  - ah  dead 


— 

T*"  N ] 

7 

^ M N P 

Z&  & P P a 

^ J 1 p J 

r 1 1 

* J 

} 0 . —A  0— 

tJ=Z_t2=£=£=fc=d 

V 0 

’way,  Den  a Le  - ah  Le  - ah  dead ’way,  Let  go  Jane  Ann! 


go  Jane  Ann  ! Hold  back  Le  - ah, 


go  Jane  Ann ! 


This  is  sung  agitato  and  pulsates  with  excitement. 
We  see  the  bustling,  restless  action — Mother  Williams 
holding  Leah,  who  is  frantic  to  get  at  Jane  Ann,  and 
who  faints  with  exhaustion  as  she  struggles  to  escape 


Dancing  Tunes.  233 

from  the  strong  arms  thrown  round  her.  “Let  go  Jane 
Ann!”  cry  the  bystanders,  which  means: — Make  Jane 
Ann  go  away,  get  her  out  of  Leah’s  sight. 


CXXXVII. 


This  seems  a fitting  moment  to  introduce  : — 
4 th  Figure. 


■r 

2—^ , 

^ 

a j hc»~  | 

t-4-J — jjajjaj — 

0 * 

Oh  Gen-er  - al  Jack-son!  Oh  Gen-er-al  Jack-son! 


Oh  Gen-er-al  Jack -son! 


Oh  you  kill  all  the  Black  man  them  ! 


1 


Oh  what  a wrongful  judgment ! Oh  what  a wrongful 


-x — i 
Jt=£== 


judgment ! 


v 

' S-  1 

Af: ) — J — • — N N 

9 -m-  -0- 

\ 1 

• • 

d a>  0 0 

^=3 

0 

Oh  what  a wrongful  judgment ! You  kill  all  the  Black  man  them. 


ry 

p 

— 

- - — 

fry  .N  . ,N  \ S 

S , 

^ ^ — / — 

7- ' 3 

Oh  what  a aw  - ful  mourning  ! Oh  what  a aw  - ful  mourning  ! 


N j.  5;  n N 

:-sr--Krg~- 

i-  A 

LJ— 1 » — 

* • « 

f 

r , 

T® 

Oh  what  a aw  - ful  mourning  You  bring  on  St.  Thomas  peo-ple  ! 


This  is  the  other  side  of  the  question,  referred  to  in 
the  Digging  Sing,  No.  88.  It  is  the  rebellion  of  1865 
again,  from  the  point  of  view  of  that  section  of  the 
Blacks  who  considered  themselves  aggrieved  at  the 
measures  taken  for  its  suppression. 


234 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


CXXXVIII. 


We  get  a glimpse  of  the  doings  of  the  soldiery  in 
peaceable  times  in  : — 

5 th  Figure. 


The  soldiers  are  shifting  their  quarters.  As  they  are 
apt  to  be  rather  riotous  on  the  night  before  departure, 
the  owner  of  the  bull-dog  is  advised  to  unchain  him  so 
that  he  may  guard  her  property  more  effectually. 


CXXXIX. 

There  is  also  a tender  side  to  the  parting: — 


4 th  Figure. 


Don’t  cry  too  much,  Ja 


gal,  First  West  will  soon  come 


Dancing  Tunes. 


235 


i 


it r" 


»— » — 1 -f.-:.:^ — > » »H 


back  a - gain.  Don’t  cry  too  much,  Ja  - mai  - ca  gal,  Se-cond 


West  is  gone  to  the  war. 


E—  V — 

Don’t  cry  too  much,  don’t 


cry  too  much,  First  West  will  come  and  cheer  you  up.  Don’t 


*=35:  N ^ 


m * 


0 g / • m 


cry  too  much,  Ja  - mai-ca  gal,  Se-cond  West  is  gone  to  the  war. 


CXL. 

A few  years  ago  Jamaica  boasted  of  water  as  effica- 
cious as  that  of  Mecca  in  the  opinion  of  some  people. 
It  seems  to  have  lost  its  repute  in  these  sceptical  days  : — 

A^th  Figure. 


i 


— S S s- 

4 . »_»  » 


Dip  them,  Mis  - ter  Bed  - ward,  dip  them, 


i 


0 0 •mg 


Dip  them  in  the  heal-ing  stream;  Some  come  with  jack-ass,  some 


I 


-ft  ■ 


come  with  bus,  Dip  them  in  the  heal  - ing  stream. 


CXLI. 

It  says  much  for  the  expertness  of  the  dancers  that 
they  can  fit  the  same  steps  to  tunes  of  such  varying 
accent  as  the  two  last  examples  present.  Here  is  another 
which  differs  again  : — 


236 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


yth  Figure. 


l2 0 

o ^ ^ 

1 N S S'  ft  ‘ 

r 

42 — £—2.-2 

^ * 0 J * : 

Ver  - y well,  ver  - y well,  Mis  - ter  Col  - lin  now.  An’  him 


y - s > s — s 

— s c S 

=N_  > -S  N 

& 2 * 2 

..>"N  \ 

■ J—*—J  - 

leave  an’  join  Sab-ba  - tar  - ian  bands,  An’ him  lose  the  whole  of  his 


~x r ^ i k.  k w : 

' 1 C 

S V 

in  1 1 J 

Jlr—J & ® 

•7  ^ 

— 0 * 

* * — -J — 

mem  - bers  now,  Oh  then  poor  Sab  - ba  - tar  - ian  bands  ! 


Mr.  Collin  was  a minister  who  told  his  flock  that  he 
had  made  a mistake  in  keeping  Sunday  holy,  and  that 
for  the  future  he  would  have  service  on  Saturday  and 
the  people  were  to  come  to  church  on  that  day  and 
work  on  Sunday.  The  “sing”  suggests  that  his  con- 
gregation was  not  persuaded  by  his  arguments. 


CXLII. 


The  light-hearted  way  in  which  the  Negro  turns 
serious  things  into  fun  is  well  illustrated  by: — 

A^th  Figure. 


Oh  tri  - al ! Great  tre  - ve  - la  - tion  chil-dren  ho ! 


i 


35 


Tri  - al ! We’re  bound  to  leave  this  world.  Bap-tis’,  Bap-tis’, 


Baptis’till  I die.  I been  grown  up  in  the  Baptis’ side  an’ die  under  Baptis’ 


Dancing  Tunes. 


237 


=1 

<9  • 

■v  v_  . 

4^  r 

=r  ^ " 

^ — W - 

«/  -m- 

rule. 

Oh ' tri  - 

al ! Great  tre  - ve  - 

la  - tion  children 

*1 — V 


Tri  - al ! We’re  bound  to  leave  this  world.  Church-light,  Church-light, 


K 

/ 

w1  h > v 

ii 

\ \ \ ^ ^ 

N 

S S N 

If 

t J — 3 r F*- 

1 ' J 

X 

y 9 9 - s j 

0 & 

Church-light  till  I die,  I been  grown  up  in  the  Church-light  side  an’ 


t/ 

IV 

<9  • P pt 

49  1 - S_Z]S_  - 

I [~~ 

■■  AW 

— 

0 9 

0 m 0 <S> 

9 

-0- 

• ■ * 

die  un-der  Church-light  rule.  Oh!  tri  - al ! Great  tre-ve  - 


'~y  ' > . 

- 

V I'M 

.15).  S..T  J W S 

i n -p- 

LW —-  a 

-J  

*■  * 9 

* T/* 

- ! 

la  - tion  children  ho!  Tri-al!We’ie  bound  to  leave  this  world. 


And  so  on  through  all  the  sects  and  persuasions, 
Wesleyan,  etc.,  etc.,  among  them  Mettetis  (Methodist). 

There  is  no  doubt  about  the  word  being  trevelation,  a 
mixture  of  Revelation,  one  of  their  favourite  books  in 
the  Bible,  and  tribulation,  for  which  it  is  intended.  The 
wrong  phrasing  of  two  notes  to  “ bound  ” is  as  they 
give  it.  We  should  allow  only  one. 


CXLIII. 

Every  district  has  its  rival  churches  and  the  various 
ministers  have  to  humour  their  congregations,  and  not 
preach  too  hard  things  to  them,  so  as  to  keep  them 
from  deserting  to  the  enemy. 


2nd  Figure. 


A 

^ Is* 

“VjT  v_ 

r 

pr1#— 

d — te — te 

— (*> — ■ Sj— ^ ^ 

A- 

Fa-ther, 

* 9 9 -9  -0  jg*  ■ ^ 

I goin’  to  join  the  con  - fir  - 

ma  - tion. 

No,  me 

238 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


r~tr  fiif — \ — fis  ->  ->  . 

r 7T  ^TL  1 r*  P s s 

■ ^ [S  ^ ^ 

ft)  It  0 0 S 0 H J ^ !S 

LiiJ/ B a — — 

cji: ' : 0 _ 0 

son,  you  must  have  a lit  - tie  pa  - tien’,  Why  I 


* S5-.SS-:5!  ^ 

m -S' * * * * ha> * ^ 

you  to  have  a lit  - tie  pa  - tien’, 


You  must  go  an’  read  the  Rev  - e - la  - tion. 


r-Q  S.'.fr 



f 

X X*  N X s. 

V 

It  p X X > C 

P “P  1 W 0 

LAi 

/ J J — J S > 

« j 

^ ^ ~ ^ 0 - ~ 

heard  from  my  old  gen  - er  - a - tion  That  they 

nev  - er  go  an’  join  the  con  - fir  - ma  - tion,  For  they 


£7 


did  - n’  have  that  great  oc  - ca  - sion  To 


a.  % . x x jx  _x  x x w * 

X X 

L/T  ^ rn  m m m ^ X 

m _ * 0 0 - 0 0 -0  j . 

L 

leave  an’  go  an’  join  the  con  - fir  - ma  - tion. 


It  will  have  been  observed  that  rhyming  is  the  last 
thing  sought  after.  Here,  however,  we  have  a genius 
who  has  set  his  mind  upon  it  with  some  success. 
Patience,  as  pronounced  by  the  Jamaican  without  the 
final  letters,  is  a good  and  new  rhyme  to  the  rest.  In 
the  old  days  of  slavery,  says  the  father,  they  did  not 
have  the  occasion  {i.e.  opportunity)  to  leave  their  work 
to  go  and  be  confirmed. 

The  Black  man  is  such  an  accomplished  actor  that 
he  can  assume  any  character.  In  these  sings  he  throws 
off-  the  stage  trappings  and  shows  his  real  attitude 


Dancing  Times.  239 

towards  religion,  his  indifference  and  levity.  He  does 
not  take  it  as  a serious  matter  at  all,  and  it  has  no 
effect  upon  his  daily  life.  To  go  to  church  is  a mark  of 
respectability.  To  obtain  that  mark  is  one  of  his  reasons 
for  going.  The  other  reason  is  to  show  his  clothes  and 
his  boots.  He  will  talk  like  a saint  for  the  mere  pleasure 
of  rolling  out  words,  and  the  ministers  have  to  pretend 
to  believe  something  of  what  he  says.  They  are  not, 
however,  really  deceived,  and  will  tell  you  in  private 
with  a sigh  that  Christianity  makes  no  progress ; it  is 
profession  without  practice.  Of  the  Negro’s  real  religion, 
which  is  bound  up  with  Obeah,  we  get  hardly  a hint 
in  the  sings.  This  is  what  we  should  expect.  Some 
things  lie  too  deep  for  words  and  a man’s  religion  is 
one  of  them.  One  general  reference  I have  been  able 
to  find,  and  one  particular  one,  and  that  is  all.  Here 
is  the  first : — 


CXLIV. 


5 th  Figure. 


■ 

J 0 ^ . 

■ ■ — K,  ~ V ~ 

v s I 

<9  • H r 

ft 

. 1 J ....  L 40 

V 

7.  y / 1 

& 0 : XT'  ^ 

* * 

m 

O - beah  down  de  why  oh  ! O - beah  down  de, 


P ® * 

0 • _j 

N _ 

-4- 

s r 1 r 

! ! 1 

v-M — V — | 

~v  9 J " ' 

L*— 1 *— J— 

L_J 

O - beah  down  de  why  oh  ! O- beah  down  de. 


7 

. G _J  \ % 

v 

i 

' — -r  J J * 0 0 

✓ * a 

#3  -0  0 

— 

Gib  - er  - al-tar  is  a well  fine  place  but  O-beah  down  de, 


'i  ^ _ . ■ ... 

ft  _ 

_ w.-  > 

fa)  v .S  N 1 N 

TT  0-* 

* m 

LJ-*— ]— J 



Gib- er  - al-tar  is  a well  fine  place  but  O-beah  down  de. 


240 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


CXLV. 

And  here  the  second  : — 


5 th  Figure. 


R 

i— fS Ps 

-m — N N— 

— N — N * — * 

-g 

> -4-  *— 

0 0 / Ja— 

1 -4— 

0 P 

Lj  .. 0-V — 

The  o - ther  day  me  waist-coat  cut,  The  o - ther  day  me 


=fs= 

s— » . 0 

~fv  -fs 

0 ' 0 s -S s 

0 - 0 

— 

La 4*3 — 

waist -coat  cut,  The  o - ther  day  me  waist-coat  cut,  What  a 


„ 

dr 

77S  V 

[S  S ^ ^ ^ ^ 

Jc 

y IT  _v 

_ V J _P 

1 I p 

V 

7 zp 

P S p! 

0-0  0 0 0 0 

t y 

-m- 

pain 

-m- 

an  grief  to 

& 

me. 

9 

I spend  me  inon-ey  but  the 

F 

* - - 

7=S-.-V-  . fc- 

■=^F=fSr7_-  ' 

-*=i^ 

-9-  • 

-m m m — m 

— m — m- 

1* 

beggar  don’t  dead,  I spend  me  money  but  the  beggar  don’t  dead,  I 


All  me  money  gone  like  butter  ’gainst  sun,  All  me  money  gone  like 


I->“ 3SS: 


but -ter ’gainst  sun,  What  a pain  an’  grief  to  me! 


pi 


0*0*  # 


Sake  of  the  man  me  live  ’pon  tree,  Sake  of  the  man  me  live  ’pon  tree, 


4s  S 

m1*  -p 

P H 

J J V __N 

" 1" 

® 0 0 0 0 0 - 

m * p -ps  ^ 

-m-  -m-  -m- 

g~ 

-m-  -m- 

Sake  of  the  man  me  live ’pon  tree,  What  a pain  an’ grief  to  me! 


Dancing  Tunes.  241 

Obeah  (pronounced  in  two  syllables,  Ob-ya,  with 
short  Italian  vowels)  is  the  dark  blot  upon  this  fair 
island  of  Jamaica.  In  every  district  there  is  an  Obeah- 
man,  or  Bush-doctor,  as  he  is  often  called,  from  his 
supposed  knowledge  of  herb  simples.  He  is  by  no 
means  the  innocent  person  which  this  latter  designation 
would  seem  to  imply.  He  deals  in  magic  and  sorcery 
of  all  descriptions,  and  there  is  not  a Black  man  who 
does  not  believe  in  his  powers.  They  consult  him  on 
every  conceivable  business  and  he  gets  heavy  fees. 
He  will  secure  a man  the  favour  of  his  master  so  that 
he  shall  not  lose  his  place,  or  help  him  to  revenge  a 
wrong,  real  or  fancied.  And  herein  lies  the  danger. 
The  puerilities  of  inefficacious  charms  and  mysterious 
ceremonies  with  which  he  deludes  his  clients  are  not 
all.  He  keeps  poison  in  his  bag,  and  for  sufficient 
reward  arsenic  has  been  obtained  to  put  in  the  liqueur, 
or  ground  glass  for  the  coffee.  The  Government  attempts 
in  vain  to  stamp  out  the  evil. 

The  story  of  the  last  sing  is  briefly  this.  A has  a friend 
who  is  an  Obeah-man.  From  him  he  gets  Obeah  to 
injure  an  enemy  B.  The  enemy  does  not  suffer.  So  A 
says  his  waistcoat  is  torn,  a figurative  way  of  expressing 
the  fact  that  he  is  beaten,  B’s  Obeah  turning  out  to  be 
stronger  than  A’s  and  able  to  repel  it.  Having  indis- 
creetly talked  about  what  he  meant  to  do  to  B,  B reports 
him  to  the  police,  and  he  has  to  abscond  and  seek 
shelter  in  the  bush  till  the  matter  blows  over. 


CXLVI. 

It  is  a pleasure  to  be  able  to  leave  the  hypocrisy  of 
Negro  Christianity,  and  the  lurid  atmosphere  of  Obeah 
and  to  return  to  every-day  amusements. 

Q 


242 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


§th  Figure. 


r -fire. 

— 1 |V  N N--V 

“TVts-fM — C 

Pi  J N 

P \ V w ^ 

1 (fa  . IT  ^ 

■ 0 0 0 irzjf 

w 9 w P 

. w 2 r p \ p 

m 

— • m a m 

All  them  gal  a ride  merry-go-round,  Me  no  see  no  gal  like  a 


s— f — — -| — ^ 

--1 s 4 

aj J a 

s 

^ 

—ad * ^ a 

K-i 

«#-  * 

P — 1 ! 1 

* 

dem  ya.  Ride  him,  ride  him,  ride  him,  ride  him, 


~~l  — 1 rs  . 1 — 

“n  PS 1 Ts — 

IP  □ □ 1 > 

1 H ! P 

ft 

y if  t>  0 \ 

l 1 H 

.AL 

7 9 * 

Ride  him  round  the  town,  Ride  him,  ride  him, 


_y  j __v j 

V 1 V . __ 

1 

-A  p 1 

I | s 

1 

1 I I 

VI/  ^ mr 

m 0 0 m 

1 

ride  him,  ride  him,  Ride  him  round  the  town. 


The  merry-go-round  is  popular.  “ I never  saw  such 
girls,”  says  an  admiring  bystander.  Literally,  “ I have 
not  seen  any  girls  like  those  (here)  girls.”  A neighbour 
of  mine  used  to  be  made  very  angry  when  he  first  came 
to  Jamaica  because  when  he  asked  “Have  you  seen 
so-and-so?”  the  answer  always  was  “I  don’t  see  him.” 
This  is  good  negro  English  for  “ I haven’t  seen  him.” 
It  does  not  mean,  as  he  thought,  “ I don’t  see  him  now,” 
and  the  poor  boy  could  not  understand  why  his  master 
got  so  “crahss.” 


CXLVII. 

5 th  Figure. 


\'\J  if~* 

L/.  h X ) TN  \ w ....  . . 1 _J 

__J 

1 ' . 1 

| 1 

-J 0 . 

- -1  . # •— 1 

Mer  - ry  - go-round  a go  fall  down,  fall  down,  fall  down, 


| 0.  ■>  jS  s,  _ s 

\ \ \ i_  p 

*3  ~^S-  -m-  • 

— 1 -P — — — j — 0 

0 

Mer  - ry  - go-round  a go  fall  down,  Sake  a de  worth-less 


Dancing  Tunes. 


243 


— • ■ N”  s.  ~ ‘ ___  . __  11 

v r 9 s m J iv  v \ p S v 

_ is 

# II 

try  to  sit  down  good,  Mer-ry  - go-round  a go  fall  down. 


Grammar  nowhere  as  usual.  It  was  not  the  Merry- 
go-round  that  was  going  to  fall  down,  but  the  worthless 
(; i.e . bad)  rider  who  was  going  to  fall  off.  “Try  to  sit 
down  good  ” is  an  exhortation  to  hold  on  well.  This 
curious  use  of  “try”  is  found  again  in: — 


CXLVIII. 

Mazurka. 


Try,  dear,  don’t  tell  a lie,  Try,  dear,  don’t  tell  a lie, 


— y — 1 — — 1 — 

— 1 — 

HV 

S m 

s 

1. 

1 

— p — — -1 — 

~m P • — 

w 

• - 

1 

d* 

IV 

it 

Try,  dear,  don’t  tell  a lie,  For  I willnev-er  mar  - ry  you. 


~ 9 — s — S S — N s — 's 

— 

ryV 

\ s s 

/ ^ r1  -!  — +■  ^ ' 

•-< 

P P m 

* 0 • S- 

j 

S — m — — 

# J J 

1 

Try  an”peak  the  truth  me 

dear, 

Try  an’  ’peak  the  truth  me 

-Gt- 

dear, 

Try an”peak  the  truth  me  dear,  An’  youshallget  the  ring  me  dear. 


2 44 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


CXLIX. 

Here  are  two  more  references  to  the  colour  question : — 


1st  Figure. 


F=* 

f-jL, — fl n — fs — s — -fs— = — = — 

— N — N — IS — N — — — — 

k 

-A A A A =1 ^ — 

Look  how  you  mout’, 


s 

IsjEdEESEESi  * ■ -fcrgbjcfgEg: 


Look  how  you  mout’, 


Look  how  you  mout’ fe  go  kiss  moo-lat  - ta.  Look  how  you  mout’, 


4s- N ^-*3* 


Look  how  you  mout’,  Look  how  you  mout’  like  a pan. 


CL. 

V a Is  e. 


— & ; Jr  __  o " . j ‘ 

1 ! ( 

1 

/ 

II  i 

fr 

? A t m 

i * 

V 

T 1 zL 9 

'0 

Breez  - y 

say  him  no 

want  Brown 

la  - dy, 

F-JL  l>,  ,-^=q 

-j-— |' 1- 

=1 f- 

, , 

***=2  --  =■ 

9 9 . 0 

O' 0 

Breez  - y say  him  no  want  Brown  la  - dy, 


-y-r?  n — 

— i — 

(fry  " p 1 | s3 

1 

vy  K J 9 

w w 

^ 0 

• 

Breez  - y say  him  no  want  Brown  la  - dy, 


0 rb - , — i 1— — i 

j 

-pyr  p 1 i 

J.  J S 

i . 1 

•7  m' 

* 

0 

j 9— 

Af  - ter  - ward  him  go  take  Brown  la  - dy. 


r#-r» — 

' 

— i 

— 

I 

It'S  I7  ft  33 

• 

1 

ry  • 

— 

^ # 

Why ! Why ! Why,  Breez  - y ! Why ! Why ! 


Dancing  Tunes . 


245 


□ — 

, 

1 

/ 

am 1 r 

1 

1 t- 

-ft 

y v p — <r) j — 

— 1 r — 

CJ 

1 1 

0 

^ m 

L_^ 

Why,  Breez  - y ! Why  ! Why  ! Why,  Breez  - y ! 


— p— 1? 

— 1 — — 

1 i 

J 

1 _J  t- 

~~  i T 

! 2 w 

. J 1 

ja> . — j J — 

1*  0 — 

a 

Lip # u 

Think  you  say  you  no  want  Brown  la  - dy. 


CLI. 


Here  are  three  sings  referring  to  Colon,  the  port  of 
disembarkation  for  labourers  on  the  Panama  Canal : — 

5 th  Figure. 


■— 

-y-P  -K  • ' 

P P p 7 ! 1 

0 0 0 

&=^=t 

— 

I - saac  Park  gone  a Co  - Ion,  I - saac  Park 


F=jj 

\ Si >5 X-C— 0— 

=P=£=j 

It f V ~ V S S ' 

k 

=S a • 

. 

gone  a Co  - Ion,  I - saac  Park  gone  a Co  - Ion, 


■—’}  ? tv  — V . 

V 

— fH — 

/ 

!X  m 

1 m 

TT 

W'—  ,7 2 — w 2 

1 P|  1 

0 9 

t * 0 . 0 tf 

* 

Co  - Ion  boat  a go  kill  them  boy.  Co  - Ion  bo  - low 1 


-•7  ? . . _ 

\ - ps — 

— : : : r 

N Ni  iS  \ *4  m 

Tit  17  P n p p 

^ 1 1 

Sr  Sr 

J J J J 1 1 

— . — 0 — 0 — 0 — 0 

— 

a a c e 

gone  a Co  - Ion,  Co-Ion  bo-low  gone  a Co -Ion, 


— J ft  ~iv i -K  ■ . \ . : 

f 

S S S |S  M 

p -j  m _ -m- 

^ p P “p 1 P 

V 

) m * 

0 0 0 

*7 


Co  - Ion  bo  - low  gone  a Co  - Ion, 


nr , rr  y ^v  v 

S HI  ^ 

riaT  ft _ m 0 a " 

> : .... 

r\y  * m + a?...  _ 

- m m S ,J 

Co  - Ion  boat  a go  kill  them  boy. 


It  was  not  the  boat  from  Kingston  to  Colon  that 
killed  the  boys ; the  deaths  took  place  on  the  other 

1 Bolow,  comrade. 


246  Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 

side.  Many  were  due  to  fever,  but  more,  if  the  stories 
current  here  are  true,  to  organised  assassination.  The 
wages  were  very  large,  and  when  a Jamaica  boy  has 
money  in  his  pocket  he  gets  “ boastify.”  This  annoyed 
the  low-class  mongrels.  A Coolie  who  was  there  described 
to  me  the  proceedings  of  one  night,  when  the  ’panish  (by 
which  is  meant  any  straight-haired  people)  went  out  in 
a band  and  murdered  every  woolly-haired  man  they  met. 
They  began  at  one  end  of  the  camp,  a straight  line  of 
barrack  huts.  Some  of  the  victims  were  shot  through 
the  windows,  others  slashed  with  cutlasses.  Where  there 
were  no  lights  the  assassins  passed  their  hands  over  the 
strangers’  heads,  and  if  they  felt  wool,  revolver  or  cutlass 
did  its  work.  Straight-haired  Coolies,  that  is  to  say, 
East  Indians,  were  allowed  to  go  unharmed. 


CLII. 


5 th  Figure. 


When  anybody  is  very  ill  all  the  members  of  the 
family,  including  quite  distant  relatives,  think  it  incumbent 


Dancing  Tunes. 


247 


upon  them  to  go  to  the  sick  person’s  yard.  They  crowd 
into  the  house  and  sick-room  and  pour  out  a clatter  of 
talk. 

Colabra  (Culebra)  is  a place  near  Colon.  Matilda  must 
have  been  an  old  Jamaica  acquaintance  who  had  gone 
over  to  settle  there. 


CLIII. 

5 th  Figure. 


zO  .3  H 0 V 

X — - >_  n 

“X  i 

■YfhH — Y F** — 

^ j r>— 

S \ m m 

<P  s 

* m 

1— — m 

1 

Mas’  Char  - ley  say  want  kiss  Mat  - ty, 


3 

_ ~ 6;  X 

S 

# *4  . ^ IV 

|s  ps  ps^  q 

V, 

's  v p y r Ze  Lr  y 

4 s>  y p 

y 1 A & 

: d 

Kiss  with  a will-ing  mind,  Me  ra  - ra-  bum  why ! Colon  money 


7 x & — X 

“Is  Psips, 

1 

P !S  m 

— 11 

TfTTv  W ~ # V . 0 

s 

1 11 

7 ^ - r m 

-0-  3 

-* 

11 

done,  Me  ra  - ra  - bum  why!  Col -on  mon-ey  done. 


“ Me  rarabum  ” is  a nonsense  phrase  equivalent  to 
“ my  boy.”  “ My  boy,  hi ! the  money  I made  at  Colon 
is  done ! ” 


CLIV. 

Here  is  the  lament  of  an  out-of-work  cabdriver : — 
5 th  Figure. 


Fg 

V “X  X s 

=?=d^=:F=?=: 

£?X--  £ / 

uCj’  .r-^-  *p 

-*=J±=J=*= 

3^, 

Me  bug  - gy  a sell  fe  eight  an’  six  - pence 


248 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


— 1?— ^ X r k: X— 



— 1 w — 

zz  .1  lT  • X n 

^ & * m 

fc\  ' v m 1 3 m 

J SS  , W 

m 1 / 

VT * W 9 

t J 

□ v ^ 

eight  an’  six-pence,  Whe  me  a go  get  fe  drive  ? Me 


■ j 9-j-b— 

v 

9 -X" 

— I r 

. m 

js  js'is  ^ [\  "P 

~r  r m 

i .. 

m 

' 

m * 

bug-gy  sell  at  last,  poor  me  boy ! Whe  me  a go  get  fe  drive  ? Me 


=1 

1 —¥  - =fs=! 

— 1 — =.-  ■ 

-J— ' 

bug-gy  sell  at  last,  poor  me  boy ! Whe  me  a go  get  fe  drive? 


CLV. 


The  words  of  the  next  dance  have  a certain  interest, 
but  the  tune  is  poor : — 

Polka. 


L 

7 

z Z7  S r* 

m mm 

# 0 jv  _ _ N 

i _fc- 

fr 

r r p ! 

1 L 

- — V-V^ 

Liz — k — « — ^ — 

L_^ 

Oh  ’zet  - ta  Ford,  gal,  you  name  no  worth  a cuss  ! 


r7  - - . v 

v N X 

■j— r— 

L# 

=fcdz 

-m 

— m — m — m — 

— ] — F— 

Tiefbigbig  hog,  Putahmin  a jar.  Pic-ca-ny  da  cry, 


~«-l  ~V 

— 1—  L-T 

L*p m — 

V N 

1 

If 

• * 

— H— : 

-J- 

Sit  down  whole  a day,  You  tief  big  big  hog,  Nyam  ahm  out  a door. 


The  girl  stole  the  pig,  killed  it,  cut  it  up  and  put  the 
meat  into  a jar.  This  was  done  out  in  the  bush,  far 
away  from  her  yard,  and  took  the  whole  day.  Meanwhile 
her  poor  little  babies  were  starving  at  home,  having 
been  left  without  any  one  to  look  after  them. 


Dancing  Tunes. 


249 


CLVI. 


There  is  an  idyllic  simplicity  about  the  following : — 
5 th  Figure. 


F? 

■ 

If 

tj 

A 

" Jt  N V 3s  ,s  1 

* * * * 

/ - " * * 

Bir  - dy  - zee  - na,  Bir  - dy  - zee  - na,  Come  make  we  go  da 


% 

=^— ^ 

i -S  :-N 

0 -0 

> - *—  / - 

-0 * 0 

Champong  mar  - ket,  Come  make  we  go,  dear,  Come  make  we  go,  dear, 


y "S'  g -S 

fnv  j 0 9 r 

\ S \ \ 

-W_.f ✓ rn 

Come  make  we  go  da  Cham  - pong  mar  - ket. 


CLVII. 


5 th  Figure. 


If  you  t’ink  a lie,  Ifyout’inka  lie,  Look  in  a Ka-tie  yeye. 


CLVI  II. 

Water  seems  formerly  to  have  been  scarce  in  King- 
ston, judging  by  the  following : — 

5 th  Figure. 


- J *»  r V >. 

v 

S Si  s 

p _p  p 

. H N S “S 

-4—d-  J 

'yt—  n.  # mm 

' * . 

Down  town  gal  no  have  no  wa  - ter  to  wash  them  head  to 


250 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


“N,  p — fY-> 

— — 

».  w k ». 

-1  ’ 1 " 1 - 

r~N  N N,  V 

0 0 • m 

-j \ ic 

\L — — — — — 

TUSH* 

keep  them  clean.  Down  town  gal  no  have  no  wa  - ter  to  wash  them  head  to 


s s — s . 

j 

V_  k _JS  N \ m ! ! -J  S 

rj 

m m \ N 

frv  v ! J 1 I \ * * ! 

m ' 

' - « . # 0 : c 

. _ . 9 

keep  them  clean.  Why!  Why!  Why!  Take  them  gal  in  charge. 


S K-f— ^ 

N ■, 

r? 

-■  S % 

ft 

ir  - & 

. . 

v 

j 

n m m 

JL 

Why!  Why!  Why!  po- lice -man,  Take  them  gal  in  charge. 


CLIX. 


The  policeman  is  not  always  on  the  spot  when  he  is 
wanted  : — 


4 th  Figure. 


—y  •»  v gg i — » v 

~i  j 

> k Z 25  X l m * J ; X 

J 

-f7V-p  A & . ~ 0 1 W 

T7  a 

c V- - * - 

Sal  you  ought  to  been  a - shame ! You 


■ 

i—\ 4S — -N X — 1 — ^ — — N- — 

s 

If 

L 

J 

rv-F 4— J*  -J*1— J- H 1 P iS  1 -0 

-F — f m — w — 

3S 

t 1 * *’  • * m a 0 

t V * 

tief  Mis -ter  Dix  - on  Brah-ma,  You  nyamahm  a Yaws-house1 


lev  - el,  Sal  - ly  ought  to  been  a - shame. 


In  this  country  any  plot  of  ground  that  is  moderately 
flat  is  called  a level. 


CLX. 


4 th  Figure. 


k ..  „ ^ 

■ X S N N t ^ . X p- 

^ 

> 

tttv  ™ — a v 

V-J 

w 4= — r>- 

CM U 0 0 

0 0 

_J 

Good  morn-ing,  Mis  - ter  Har  - man,  How  are  you  this 
1 Yaws,  see  p.  57- 


Dancing  Times. 


251 


K V W V 

r : ■ 

N v qs, 

7 

N N \ N 

_ 

~2 >.q: v.. 

1 1 ! 1 

._!>  9 9 

• j rp 

V 

t m * 

w m w 

# 

— m 

* * - 

morning?  I brought  a ser  - i - ous  corn-plain  a - bout  the  old  Bar 


badian.  What  a-bout  the  ’badian?  Him  shirt  has  no  bor-der,  Him 


r~g- ; r r- 

r ~N  S 

\ s U 

.ft ft 1^  . JV  . 

- -N.  N y I 

~ftT)  l7- 

1 9 9 

r ! n H 

. w cznj  S S 

L~d 

* * m 0 

# 0 II 

face  fav-our  mar  - lan,  Come  give  me  me  one  an’  ninepence. 


The  singer  goes  to  Mr.  Harman,  who  is  employing  the 
Barbadian  (whom  he  accuses  of  wearing  a ragged  shirt 
and  having  a face  like  a marlingspike),  to  try  and  get 
some  money  which  the  latter  owes  the  complainant. 
This  is  an  excellent  example  in  short  of  an  inter- 
view between  two  Black  men.  Of  the  sixteen  bars  four 
are  occupied  with  salutation,  four  with  complaint,  and 
four  with  abuse.  Two  are  given  to  a question  as  to 
the  cause  of  complaint  which  receives  no  answer,  and 
two  to  a demand  for  money  owed  by  another  person. 
So  we  have  three-quarters  of  the  interview  devoted  in 
equal  parts  to  compliment,  complaint,  and  abuse ; one- 
eighth  to  an  attempt  on  the  part  of  the  person  inter- 
viewed to  discover  what  is  amiss ; and  one-eighth  to  a 
demand  for  money  from  the  wrong  man. 


CLXI. 


The  lovers’  quarrel  which  comes  next  is  evidently  not 
serious : — 


5 th  Figure. 


— r» ~ 

. IS P* s 

S.  N J _X  j 

# 0 m — w 

m -m  + J J 

* — f—  / 

9 9 d » 

Hul-lo  me  hon  - ey  ! Hul-lo  me  su  - gar  ! Hul-lo  me  old  time 


252 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


1 177 K 

ft  s -p* — f*- 

* m 

w r m 

f 

Y v w 

~m  S A5  • " m 

1 V 

LI 1 # 

^ ? 

7 * V — 

S 

gal!  Oh  den,  gal,  if  you  love  me,  Why  don’t  you  write  me  ? 


tJ 

-ft—  F- 

* 

— -m — im * 

fU 

}- — • m — * 

— wt wt K K 

Hul-lo  me  old  time  gal!  Hul-lo  me  hon-ey  ! Hul-lo  me  su  - gar  ! 


=! 

ft — te— K ^ Nr~ 

K 

if  & 

K-j? pi — pi — — 1^— 

— j -S 

-p — F — p — P — ^ — *3 — * — - 

g i?  ft* 

Hul-lo  me  old  time  boy  ! Oh  den,  boy,  I wouldn’  married  you, 


— / rs  — g s i" — tk 

, 

/ 

W W 

1 S*  1 

f 

\ P & S S m s 

A 1 

A 

* * i * 

w 

Not  for  a far  - din’,  Hul-lo  me  old  time  boy! 


CLXII. 


5 th  Figure. 


Xf  L m — 

P j? 

p F 

l(t\  l7  4 i 

^ i ^ i i 1 

r hj 

_ n a ? . >7775 

L>  ^ 

«/  t 

When  rr 

r'  r-  — p-  ^ ^ r r 

lumma  dare  you  say  you  sick,  Dis  mum-n 

ia  gone 

tzli  K F — . # M 

\ ft  ^ Is  s 

N ft  J H 

- --  ^ 1 

vl/  ' >» 

& . P J L7 

* • # 

you  get  bet-ter,  ’tan’  ’teady  till  him  come  ’tan’  ’teady, 


- v t - ^ - 

7 

_ h > s ‘ i%  s. , _ 

S ft  S H 

fr 

Y P i r * m S s 

P 1 

V 

> 0 4 • r 

ZM  • 0 * 

’tan’  ’tead  - y till  him  come  ’tan’  ’tead  - y. 


When  mamma  tells  her  daughter  to  take  her  hoe  and 
come  out  into  the  field  she  feigns  sickness.  Her  brother 
comes  in  and  finds  her  quite  well.  “ All  right,”  he  says, 
“just  (dis)  you  stand  steady  (’teudy,  French  eu),  just 
you  wait  till  she  comes  home  and  you  will  get  a 
flogging.” 


Dancing  Tunes. 


253 


CLXIII. 

We  never  go  far  without  meeting  some  story  about 
petty  thieving : — 

5 th  Figure. 

— m— <L 


vw 


1 »'~d~ 


m — ir 


ii! 


Oh  Jil-ly  oh!  how  you  man-age  a jump  the  win-dow? 

$i-~ ! -frjg 


— s- 


:fc=fe 


te  -te  -£= 


£- 


— * * 


Oh  Jil-ly  oh!  how  you  man-age  a jump  the  window?  Doc-tor 


^ ^ - - 5S=^j’E>:„s# 

w—m — 1 — -m — m — m — m— h>- 


1 


d d~ 


Tut=3t 


Clark  a one  an’  tan-ner,  Ma-jor  Black  a two  an’  six,  Mis-ter 


Nel- son  three  an’  six,  How  you  manage  a jump  the  win-dow? 


J illy  had  been  “tiefing”  money  and  made  her  escape 
by  jumping  out  of  window.  “ Tanner,”  for  sixpence,  is 
common  in  English  slang  but  not  here.  It  seems  to 
have  been  derived  in  this  case  from  the  White  soldiers 
at  Newcastle. 


CLXIV. 


5 th  Figure. 


-=l — 

* > 

— 

-d 

f & 

-m- 

— j — 1 

0 *> — 

J ames  Brown,  you  mahmy  call  you.  J ames  Brown  a shakehim  shoulder. 


■ J ~ w — Z — 

V \ 

— > — V " 

/ 

s*  pn s *2 

S ! f 

V 

Is 

Tr 

S TT  ! !*  ^ 

1 m 1, 

TP S P 

' 1 

ji 

j m w <p  ^ ~ 

# ^ * 

* m 

' - J : 

Sake  a the  young  gal  but-terdore, James  Brown  a shake  him  shoulder. 


254 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


To  express  dissent  they  do  not  shake  their  heads  but 
wriggle  the  whole  of  their  bodies.  It  is  a most  expres- 
sive action. 

A butterdore,  more  properly  butter-dough,  is  a kind 
of  cake. 


CLXV. 

The  next  repeats  the  idea  of  No.  CXVIII.,  but  in  the 
mouth  of  a girl. 

A.th  Figure. 


E 


When  I go  home  I will  tell  me  mum-ma  say, 


=3 

ilp ^ s 

s=N= 

1 — 

y &:  - 0 . o 

i 

% 

V 

When  I go  home  I will  tell  me  mum-ma  say, 


0 0 


When  I go  home  I will  tell  me  mum-ma  say  That  the 


-|N  -A  ■■ 


— * 

boy  in  the  coun  - try  love  me  ver  - y much. 


CLXVI. 


The  next  is  the  only  example  of  pure  fiction  that  I 
have  met  with  : — 


5 th  Figure. 


Feather,  feather,  feather, 


EE 

-m- 

Ba  - by  da  born  with 


Dancing  Tunes. 

o 


255 


P 


feather.  You  cut  off  the  fowl  head  an’ boil  it  in  a ’tew- pan, 


Ba-by  da  born  with  feather. 


■m- 9 9 


g — hJ— J 


Feather, 


feather  oh  ! 


Ba-by  da  born  with  feather. 


You  cut  off  the  fowl  head  an’ 


$ 


«-  s s s s s n s 

m m m m 


at=S= 


X L 

pq 

■ S - 

^ ^ • I 

boil  it  with  the  feather,  So  the  ba-by  go  born  with  feather. 


i 


■V  V-  \f 


hear  the  news  as  I re’ch  to  Hagley  Gap,  Say  ba  - by  da  born  with 


Ba-by  can  born  with  feather. 


Something  me  nev  - er  hear, 


I.  ^ ^ s % s s s 


0 . ..0 0 0 


r~\ 

Something  me  nev-er  hear  that  Ba-by  can  born  with  feather. 


All  the  other  sings  are  chronicles  of  true  events,  and 
it  is  an  exceptional  case  to  find  one  purely  the  offspring 


256 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


of  imagination  like  this  one.  The  compiler  of  the  words 
could  not  get  quite  free  of  actuality;  he  puts  in  Hagley 
Gap,  which  is  the  name  of  a pass  through  the  hills.  I 
once  asked  why  it  was  so  called  and  was  told  because 
it  was  a hugly  place.  The  cooking  described  savours  of 
Obeah. 


CLXVII. 

2nd  Figure. 


_!/  *>  -.w 

S,  ^ X 

py  ' ^ ^ ~ ^ 

f(T)  A S ^ 'as 

..  J S 

. w it  J et  9 

When  the  rain  an’  the  breeze  an’  the  storm  an’  the  sun  I 


— ^ ^ — s — 

N \ -. 

tiijz: ]/. m 

— 1 P — ^ — 1 N — 

v-m — m — # — m ^ 

nev-er  see  a man  like  Qua  - co  Sam,  He  live  in  the  sun  as 


F3 

' S,  -V  •<>  * 

- * - 

<?  .0  s 

=h — fs 1 

Er-s?*  ■ 

t ’ / 

1- 1— 

m m 

well  as  the  rain,  I nev-er  see  a man  like  Qua  - co  Sam. 


Qua -co  Sam  was  a 


lit -tie  bit  a man,  I nev-er  see  a man  like  a 


Eg 

> * 

t J 

/ * 

Qua-co  Sam,  Forhe 

-m- 

nev-  er  build  a house  but  he 

* * i?^=: 

live  as  an  - y man,  I 

nev  - er  see 


a fun  - ny  man  as  Qua 


co 


Sam. 


Dancing  Times. 


257 


CLXVIII. 


5 th  Figure. 


. J/  * > is  is  is  s 

-V — Pv  rs 

■ 

J J : 

-is 

-JZX A J J J 

J » p 

L _ 

<L_  Pfc  ^ ^ ^ 

" m 0 

— 

L— — 4 

Anch  a bite  me  a me  back  gul  - ly,  gul  - ly ; 


3 

III 

* , 

-p-==^ 



- , — 

- 

k~ 



Anch  a bite  me  a me  back  gul  - ly,  gul  - ly  ; Anch  a bite  me 


S 

=F=- 

-0-- 

tH 

=4v  3s 

0 5 

P*- 

a 

m 

me  back  g 

ul 

Iy, 

0 

gul 

1 

ly ; ’c 

^ * 

ratch  me 

— 

back,  me  will 

i — 

h — M 

-J— 

r j -T  hnhnhv 

4>— |N_ 

^0 

ma 

• m m- 

ke  one  shirt  fe 

— m — 

-0-m 

you  fe 

you. 

— L — \ -0- — 0 

Anch  a 

bite  me, 

Anch  a bi 

te  me 

—y 

_r  r P * 

0 0 

—-FS  fV-  r:  - 

■ * m 

m 0 * P 

W>'  / g / / 

/ / / / 

L^—u *—± 

L— — 0 

Anch  a bite  me,  Anch  a bite  me,  Anch  a bite  me  a me  back  gul  - 


—j — 

n 

n 

\ 

1 ^ 

\ 

f(T\  m 

> s 

p : 

s 

VJ 7 m 

+J  ~ -0 

-0 

- • -• 

# r - 

ly,  gul  - ly  ; ’cratch  me  back  me  will  make  one  shirt  fe  you. 


Small  black  ants  often  swarm  on  the  orange-trees, 
and  the  pickers,  who  do  not  use  ladders  but  climb  the 
branches,  get  covered  with  them.  We  all  know  that 
place  in  the  “gully”  or  furrow  of  the  back  which  we 
cannot  reach  ourselves. 


CLXIX. 


Afth  Figure. 


s v y 

j 

0 0 

P P— 

-0-  -0- 

# * 

* m — m — 

Me  know  one  gal  a Cross  Road,  Name  of  Lu  - cy 


R 


258 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


r XT 

■"IV 

LXo}  p 

. N P , ~js  ^ 

m 0 0 

* m -P r- 

i_^ 0 0 m — m — 

Ban  - ker,  Him  boil  the  long  long  cab  - bage  bush,  Him  go 


-TL ^ 

\ \ m 0 m 

.tin  j 

— V ~ \ ■ 

Ash* 

-0-  0 

*- 

long  like  a sai  - lor  nanchor.  Fol-lowme,  fol-low  me,  You  no 


— 9 ■ _ 

— x k — ~v 

r 

N r _ 

-m — m — m — — 

— s 

— -fr  J. 

— — y- 

see  whe  the  gal 

a 

fol  - low  me, 

Fol 

0 * - 

- low  me, 

then 

l IS — -0 

> s 

N- 

. 

4 

p — Is — 

— m 

g-P-J 

^ 

- 

— m if L 

fol  - low  me,  You  no 

see  whe  the  gal  a 

-d-  -m- 

fol  - low  me. 

The  story  of  the  foregoing  sing  is  this : — Lucy  asked  a 
fiddler  and  his  friend  to  breakfast.  The  cooking  was  bad. 
The  boiled  bananas,  which  should  have  been  light  brown, 
were  black,  and  the  cabbage  was  not  done  enough,  so 
that  it  was  ropy  or  “ long,”  as  they  aptly  describe  it. 
For  these  shortcomings  the  fiddler  “put  her  a sing,” 
i.e.  put  her  into  a sing. 


CLXX. 

Schottische. 


y 1 * » v h v N 

- v S v 

■ . S- s 

L — 1 fs~ r — 

/ k Z fK  ! IS  ! . . 

N 1 \ 

\ _ m 

f'N  v 7 * 0 

# ! . 1 _ 

LX # 

312  •'!  0 0 

. 0 — 0 

■ * - 7 — 

Moonshine  baby,  don’t  you  cry,  Mumma  will  bring  somet’ing  fe  you, 


\ i .Is  - _ Is  « 

^_qs  fs  qs 

— 1^— Is— ,St3— 

} — m — 

A'  . -4 * p.-  4 

' A 

-4P  3 

0 0 # 

Some  fe  you,  Some  fe  me,  Fe  we  go  boil  wi’  dir  - ty  pot. 

This  is  a hit  at  another  careless  cook  who  had  dis- 


regarded the  time-honoured  rule,  “ First  wash  your  pot.” 
A moonshine  baby  is  a pretty  baby. 


Dancing  Times. 


259 


CLXXI. 

2nd  Figure. 


lil 


-fV--N  -N-- fg 


0 — 0 


P=  •- 


have  a news  to  tell  you  all  a 

E^EE=^ 


bout  the  Mowitahl 


s 


men, 


Time  is  harder  ev  - ’ry  day  an’  harder  yet  to 


k J - M 

-- V X X X 

— |S-  fs~  fs 

j*  j'  jp  0 

' m — 0 — 0 — 

:0  "J  wt=Z= 

come.  They  made  a dance  on  Fri-  day  night  an’  failed  to  pay  the 


f 


ss-tf 

drummer, 


■s  ,N  ft  * :i 


IS 

Say  that  they  all  was  need  of  money 


to 


buy  up  their  August  pork.  Don’t  let  them  go  free,  drummer  ! 


IP 


& 


n ^ . 


Don’t  let  them  go  free,  drummer  ! For  your  fin-ger  cost  money  to 


tick  - le  the  poor  goat  - ’kin. 


Not  if  the  pork  ev  - en 


E5Er-*_*: 


ft  V ^ 


VS 


E£EE*EE*E^ 


f8-- r— r 


purchase  self  Take  it  away  for  your  labour,  For  your  finger 


m 


J-'-Jf-Ji-q-JE 


cost  money 


tick  - le  the  poor  goat  - ’kin. 


The  first  of  August  (Ahgust  as  they  call  it)  is  the 
anniversary  of  Emancipation  Day,  and  is  a time  of 

1 Mowitahl  = Mowatt  Hall. 


260  Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 

feasting  and  rejoicing.  As  in  the  case  of  wedding 
festivities,  they  do  not  limit  themselves  to  one  day, 
and  holiday-making  goes  on  for  a week  or  longer. 

The  goat-skin  drum  is  pitied  for  the  thumping  it  gets. 
So  a man  will  often  stroke  his  picker  (pickaxe)  and 
say  : — “ He  no  a come  out  if  he  t’ought  him  face 
would  a jam  so  a dirty,”  he  would  not  have  come  out 
if  he  had  thought  his  face  was  going  to  be  thrust  so 
hard  into  the  ground. 

“Self”  is  a redundant  word.  It  strengthens  “even  if.” 


CLXXII. 

2nd  Figure. 


i 


3= 


i * -0 


s->-9 


0 0 


=£=*= 


Once  I was  a trav’ller,  trav  - ’Her  ov  - er  the 


I 


mountain,  I near  - ly  dead  for  wa  - ter  but  a 


$ 


& 


• — « — =*5^ 


-0—0 


3E 


±Z 


young  gal  show  me  the  fountain.  Why,  why  me  pic-ny! 


You  shall  be  me  wife.  Show  me  you  mammy  an’  you  daddy,  An’ 


.N,N"  ,N! 


you  shall  be  me  wife.  I have  a - nother  sis  - ter,  she 


blind  she  can  - not  see,  But,  if  you  wish  to  court  her, 


Dancing  Tunes. 


261 


i 


1 


jgEgl 


BE 


BE 


3= 


you  can  come  with  me.  Why,  why  me  picny  ! you  shall  be  me  wife. 


i 


£=£=&■ 


# * *- 


Show  me  you  mammy  an’ you  daddy,  An’  you  shall  be  me  wife. 


When  a Black  man  says  he  is  nearly  dead  for  water 
he  only  means  that  he  is  rather  thirsty. 

This  sing  is  of  an  unusual  form  and  suggests  a foreign 
origin. 


CLXXIII. 

Here,  on  the  contrary,  is  something  typically 
Jamaican  : — 


5 th  Figure. 


=7 

2-u— yt — 1 

S N N ^ 

=3 

-3 = ' 

1 

% 

W*  4 - : ^ 

* • • „ 





~J ^ 

i . JN 

Oh  ! me 

wouldn’  bawl  at 

all, 

L-#— * 1 

Oh  ! me 

i £ V > s v 

1 



1 

yv-  J d J _j> 

— 1 

— ^ 

j br-. 

=1  q 

i_i 1 

wouldn’  bawl  at  all,  Oh  ! me  wouldn’  bawl  at  all, 


For  the  po-lice-man  come  tell  a lie  ’pon  me. 


A boy  who  has  been  arrested,  conscious  of  his  innocence, 
does  not  go  through  the  usual  pantomime  of  shrieks  and 
tears.  The  policeman  (observe  the  accent  on  the  word) 
told  a lie  about  me,  he  says. 


262 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


CLXXIV. 

Thoroughly  Jamaican  too,  as  to  its  words  at  least,  is: — 


Jig- 


Whe  you  a go  do,  Bir-die  ? Whe  you  a go  do  ? 


This  is  a remonstrance  addressed  by  a mother  to  her 
daughter  who  has  taken  up  a short  stick  to  beat  her. 
“It  is  true,”  she  says,  that  I am  but  a lean  dog,  but  when 
the  lean  dog  is  dead  what  are  you  going  to  do  ? ” 
(. Maugre , French  maigre , pronounced  mahgher.) 


CLXXV. 


John  Canoe  dance. 


s 

-1  -K  V 

3 f 

L_  ..  j_ 

f- 

0--  0 0-_ 

Yellow  fe  - ver  come  in,  Me  can’t  walk  a - gain  ; Him 


broke  me  hand,  him  broke  me  foot,  Me  can’t  walk  a - 


gain. 


The  “John  Canoe”  are  masked  dancers  very  agile  in 
their  movements.  Yellow  fever  is  now  happily  rare  in 


Dancing  Tunes. 


263 


Jamaica.  “ It  has  come  and  caught  me,”  says  the  patient, 
“and  broken  my  arms  and  legs  so  that  I really  can’t  walk.” 

“ Again  ” has  a curious  use  here,  which  is  perhaps  better 
shown  by  the  following  illustration.  A man  was  reported 
to  be  dead.  Next  day  came  the  intelligence: — “He 
don’t  dead  again,”  he  is  not  dead  after  all,  he  is  not 
really  dead.  Compare  No.  LXII. 


CLXXVI. 


Schottische. 


oh!  Jimmy  Rampy  a come  oh,  Sal  oh!  Some  a 


wash  him  foot,  some  a comb  him  hair,  Some  a put  him  to  bed, 


— ^ 

==»r 

~9 j 

t7  ^ 

— 

-L-l 

— 0 ^ — 

4- 

* 2 

p ' ' 

put  him  to  bed 

oh, 

Sal  oh  ! 

Jimmy 

Rampy  a 

come 

oh!  Sal  oh!  Jim-my  Rampy  a come  oh,  Sal 


R( 

F --  s,— 

N v is  -*| 

' # r 

-»  m ■ m m 

_ - * J 

oh  ! Some  a wash  him  foot,  some  a comb  him  hair,  Some  a 


put  him  to  bed,  put  him  to  bed  oh,  Sal  oh  ! 


“Sal  oh!”  is  perhaps  a corruption  of  Salut.  Tradition 
associates  a curtsey  with  the  word. 


264 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


CLXXVII. 


The  next  calls  to  mind  the  Ring  tune  (No.  XC.), 
“ Rosybel  oh,  why  oh  ! ” 

5 th  Figure. 


\~y~rv — n-r 

e 

! 

^ A fv  V 

• ■ V - 

-~r  Ij  p 

f/T\  " p a 

* - 

m S J J 

* 0 0 

-V — k— 1 J — &—\ 

Sus  - an  ve  - ry  well,  why  oh  ! Sus  - an  ve  - ry 


~f-cy — s — • 

=1  . A 

.TIS  V P "J  • , 

i r w ^ 

J P P 

w m d J 

well,  why  oh  ! Sus  - an  chop  bo  - low  with  turn  - bier, 


3 

1 

1 

-fr-ift-N — V 

\ s 

0 0 0 

s — 

n 

— v- — m 

V e 

—jd— # — 1 

L#--- m m 

* 

Sus  - an  chop  bo  - low  with  turn  - bier,  Sus  - an  go  chop  bo  - 


-k. 5T- 

is  N 

V 

h i. 

\ ^ IV  V 

P ^ ^ 

1m  v p 

m P P 

• * - J — 

< < 

0 m 0 

low  with  turn  - bier,  Sus  - an  go  chop  bo  - low  with  turn  - bier. 


A case  of  assault  with  a broken  piece  of  glass.  Here 
is  something  more  serious  : — 


CLXXVIII. 


1st  Figure. 


Bahss,  Bahss,  you  married  you  wife  ; Bahss,  Bahss,  you 


married  you  wife ; Bahss,  Bahss,  you  married  you  wife,  You  married  you  wife  an’ 


->  N : :>  ^=3X33=35  » S | 

— S — 0-  • * — L- 0 — 0 0 - 0 1 — 0~- — 1 3 


kill  him  a - gain.  You  take  up  you  wife  an’ carry  him  to  church,  You 


Dancing  Tunes. 


265 


take  up  you  wife  an’  carry  him  to  church,  You  take  up  you  wife  an’ 


R| 

Is  - 

i ■ r-  1 

carry  him  to  church,  An’  af  - ter  - ward  you  kill  her  a-gain.1 


CLXXIX. 

The  next  is  a pretty  lullaby,  which  they  call  a Nursing 
sing  : — 


Andantino. 


corn,  oh  ! Come  go  da  mountain,  go  drive  them,  Blackbird  a eat  puppa 


corn,  oh  1 Blackbird  a eat  pup  - pa  corn. 


CLXXX. 

Schottische. 


-tv- 


1 


& 


=fc= 


Me  da  Coo  - lie  sleep  on  piaz 


za  with  me 


wrap- per  round  me  shoul-der,  Me  da  Coo  - lie  sleep  on 


piaz  - za  with  me  wrap  - per  round  me  shoulder. 

1 Bahss,  Boss.  “ Carry  him  ” is  in  two  syllables,  sounding  like  ca-yim. 


266 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


“ Me  da,”  literally,  “ I is,”  I am. 

The  piazza,  which  is  not  pronounced  in  the  Italian 
way  but  nearly  rhymes  with  razor,  is  the  long  narrow 
entrance-room  of  Jamaican  houses.  A wrapper  is  a large 
piece  of  linen  which  serves  all  sorts  of  purposes.  It  is 
used  as  an  article  of  clothing  both  by  day  and  night, 
and  also  makes  a convenient  bag  for  rice. 

Many  of  the  East  Indian  Coolies,  originally  brought  over 
to  work  on  plantations,  have  now  settled  in  Jamaica. 


CLXXXI. 

Schottische. 


-jt  ^ H -9- — — 

— . > 

4= — ft — ^ 

3= 

* - 

— I ^ K 

10  9 

— m 

m — — — P* — 

-m- 

h*  * 

Not-ty  Shaw,  you  bet  - ter  go  home;  Not-ty 


9 m*?  • „ 

• J 

y ? M 4 s 

1 m m 

/ $ Z ^ 

Shaw,  you  belter  go  home ; Notty,  run  in  the  garden  an’ 


y 1 p.  V . . ^ s.  jS 

fftcr  ft  U 1 . , 0 9 > n 

S N S " 

-w  v r 'p  # • 2^=2— 

» 

A.  J l=d*=l 

pick  a bunch  of  flowers ; Notty  Shaw,  you  bet  - ter  go 


— p 

r * 1 m IN 

N w _s  ~ isms 

k ' r.  M 

, R K Is  S IS 

s rs  1 r J 

* • /*  > - 

H ! w 9 

0 -—0  

home;  Notty  Shaw,  you  mother  want  you  service  ; Notty 


fr"  ub, Js*  5|  ^ ^ ^ > 1 N S ~ ^ s 

■ m — 0-  *—9 — 0 — 

• • 9 2 2 * 9 ^70—9 

Shaw,  you  mother  want  you  service  ; Notty,  go  in  the  garden  you 


— x. 

9 ~ ~ -m- 

=3=^  ■ 

9 771 

see  abunch  of  rose  ; Notty  Shaw,  you  better  go  home. 


“Notty”  is  short  for  Nathaniel. 

“ Rose  ” means  any  kind  of  flowers.  When  they  want 
to  indicate  what  we  call  roses  they  say  “ sweet-rose.” 


Dancing  Tunes. 


267 


CLXXXII. 


1st  Figure. 


write  you  name  an’  t’row  it  a pass, Them  write  you  name  an’  t’row  it  a pass, Them 
1= 


i 


m — m — m — F F a — m 

g= 


-F 


write  you  name  an’  t’row  it  a pass,  you  ought  to  been  a - shame. 


A familiar  tune,  I think  a mixture  of  two. 

To  write  disparaging  remarks  on  paper,  which  is 
then  thrown  in  the  “pass”  (path,  road),  for  anybody  to 
pick  up  and  read,  is  a common  trick.  The  epithet 
“worthless”  seems  to  imply  that  Becca  was  not  altogether 
free  from  blame.  They  seldom  say  “ bad.”  It  is  almost 
always  “ worthless.” 


CLXXXIII. 


5 th  Figure. 


— ..  \ 

=^=EA 

Since  the  waggonette  come  in  Par  - ker  take  to  heart 


— [ p-=r 

s s ^ 1 : — ^ w-i 

•»-  j-  v s*- 

J— J=iP=P=^  * • -----  3 - 


dead,  Since  the  waggonette  come  in  Parker  take  to  heart  dead. 


268 


Javiaican  Song  and  Story. 


£ 


EI53EE3; 


SE 


g d 


-P-^r 


Nev  - er  mind  con-duc-tor, 


Par  - ker  take  to  heart  dead. 


Nev-er  mind  con-duc-tor, 


Par-ker  take  to  heart  dead. 


The  reference  is  to  a local  enterprise,  the  Waggonette 
Company.  It  unfortunately  failed,  and  the  death  of  a 
person  interested  in  its  success,  happening  immediately 
after,  is  attributed  to  the  failure.  For  “ come  in  ” we 
should  say  “were  taken  off.” 


CLXXXIV. 


Schottische  or  4, th  Figure. 


3 

m 1 

9 =4-* 

1* 

-1- — j 

mm  m m 

Them  Gar’n  Town  people  them  call  me  follow-line,  Them  Gar’n  Town 


people  them  call  me  follow-line,  Them  Gar’n  Town  people  them  call  me 


-9 

=j  , - »■  M ^ 

follow-line,  Somebody  dy  - ing  here  ev-’ry  day.  A ten  pound 


or  - der  him  kill  me  pardner,  A ten  pound  or- der  him  kill  me 


pardner,  A ten  pound  order  him  kill  me  pardner  For  somebody 


Dancing  Tunes. 


269 


dy  - ing  here  ev’ry  day.  Den  number  nine  tunnel  I would  not 


work  de,  Den  number  nine  tunnel  I would  not  work  de,  Den  number 


nine  tunnel  I would  not  work  de  For  somebody  dying  here  ev’ry  day. 


An  incident,  or  perhaps  it  were  better  to  say  an 
accident,  in  the  making  of  the  road  to  Newcastle.  A 
man  who  undertook  a piece  of  contract  work  for  £\o 
was  killed  by  a falling  stone.  The  so-called  tunnels  are 
cuttings.  Number  nine  had  a very  bad  reputation. 

Gordon  Town  is  a hamlet  nine  miles  from  Kingston. 
The  driving  road  ends  there,  and  access  to  the  mountain 
district  beyond  is  obtained  only  by  mule  tracks. 

Strangers  are  called  “ follow-line  ” because,  as  they  come 
down  from  their  homes  in  the  higher  hills,  they  walk  in 
strings.  No  Black  man  or  woman  ever  goes  alone  if  he 
can  help  it.  He  always  hitches  on  to  somebody  else, 
and  the  string  increases  in  length  as  it  passes  along. 
This  walking  in  Indian  file  is  necessitated  by  the  narrow- 
ness of  the  track,  which  is  seldom  wide  enough  for  two 
to  walk  abreast. 

The  tune  has  the  character  of  a march  rather  than  of 
a dance,  but  I am  assured  it  is  used  for  a Schottische, 
which  has  a somewhat  slower  measure  than  a Polka,  and 
for  Fourth  Figure.  Their  cleverness  in  adapting  the 
same  steps  to  different  rhythms  has  been  already  com- 
mented on. 


2JO 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


CLXXXV. 


The  last  of  our  tragedies,  a murder  this  time,  is 
chronicled  in : — 

2nd  Figure. 


Yovrng  gal  in  Ja  - mai-ca  take  warn-ing,  Never 


_/L  "&•  "X  v ^ ^ 

— 1-  -M 

s~ 

Tj 

0 0 0 J 0. 

leave  your  mother  house  a-lone,  For  that  was  the  cause  why 


F=*= 

-J » * ^ 1-^ 

1 S 

y • 

Al-ice  get  her  d 

eath  while 

* — 0 - 0-  -m. j ^ 

driving  in  the  May  Pen 

U — ^ 

cyar. 

“The  May  Pen  cyar”  is  a tramway  which  runs  to  May 
Pen,  the  cemetery  of  Kingston. 

CLXXXVI. 


4 th  Figure. 


Me  no  min  de  a concert  the  night  When  Martha  an’  Pompey  catch  a 


. -X  J 

w 

^1 

0— 

-0 

fight.  Da  Martha  da  Pompey,  Da  Martha  da  Pompey  catch  a fight. 


“ Me  no  min  de,”  literally,  “ I not  been  there,”  I was 
not  there.  Nobody  hearing  these  words  for  the  first 
time  would  ever  suspect  that  they  were  English.  People 
are  always  said  to  “catch  fight”  when  they  come  to  blows. 

Few  of  the  old  classical  slave  names  like  Pompey 


now  survive. 


Dancing  Tunes. 


271 


CLXXXVII. 

1st  Figure. 




=; — 

— 1 S3 V 

rfK  t 0 . 

-\  ■■  s — • — 

i 

E EE  p 

Complain  complain  complain.  Complain  a - bout  me  one,  Me 


daddycomplain,memahmycomplain,  Complain  about  me  one. 


“ Me  one,”  i.e.  “ only  me.”  Everlasting  complaints, 
always  about  me ! (What  child  does  not  suffer  in  this 
way?)  In  Negro  speech  complain  stands  for  complaint 
as  well  as  for  the  verb. 


CLXXXVIII. 

2nd  Figure. 

Elderly  readers  will  recognise  a popular  song  of  thirty 
years  ago  in  the  following : — 


N~  tr  r 

K] ST 

1 fc-r  — i 

N 1 ^ Si'ZN  L m ® 

r rTr  & m..  * 

-f-  r ] 

L3nZ __  tfc “ 

tr= 

• ■>  • ' 

ar 

L 

I can’t  walk  on  the  bare  road,  cyart  man,  I can’t  walk  at  all ; 


2=K=t2= 


E 

W__  ^ ~j^~ 


m 


=fs= 


V 

V 

=6^ 

=T=P-=| 

— P m 

m 

9 •- 

3=3 

When  I re-member,  When  I remember,  When  I remember  them. 


s N 3 * ! * # • * 

Iff*  » f 

-m 

=3^ 

Oh  Captain  Ba  - ker,  I never  can  walk  a - gain,  For 


when  I remember  the  cyart  man,  cyart  man,  When  I remember  them. 


272 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


These  words  taken  as  a whole  refer  to  the  carts  of 
the  United  Fruit  Company  of  which  Captain  Baker  is 
the  manager.  In  defiance  of  rules  girls  may  be  seen 
perched  on  top  of  the  bunches  of  bananas  in  the  laden 
carts. 


CLXXXIX. 


5 th  Figure. 


d 

^ i i ' v iv,  ~ fc  — — \~0  a 0 - ~ 

— N, — fc-fc  |S  ^ 

4 

' ' ' * " 

Comego  da  mountain,  Come  go  da  mountain,  Come  go  da  mountain  go 


—y  7 f. 

■ S V.  ~ * N 

v k « 1 -'J 

* / * * - 

* a - 

* m 0 • - ‘ 

pick  co -co  fin  - ger,  Busha  Webb  an’ alia  pick  co-co  fin  - ger, 


y ? - * s - 

\ 

■ 

s s 

V 

s 

s ^ m 

It  v V n _ s ^ J _ v _ 4 

1 



v - 

CW  , -■  ■■  - --------- 

— 0 — 

-m — 0 

BushaWebban’all  a pick  co-co  fin  - ger  ; Pick  co-co  fin  - ger, 


f—9-  p & ^ 

— s 

h , II 

J 9 J 3 

- - C— ft  II 

i-w  -i 

* / — » 

Lg  T.  T g*  J 0 LI 

Pick  co-co  fin  - ger,  Come  go  da  mountain  go  pick  co-co  fin  - ger. 


“ Come  let  us  go  to  the  mountain  and  dig  cocoes. 
Overseer  Webb  and  everybody  is  digging  them.”  A 
plan  often  adopted  is  to  dig  round  the  root,  search  for 
the  tubers,  pick  them  off  and  then  push  back  the  soil. 
This  may  be  the  picking  referred  to,  only  the  tubers  do 
not  look  like  fingers.  They  are  the  shape  of  a peg-top. 

Another  suggestion  is  that  the  fingers  are  the  young 
rolled-up  leaves  which  are  picked  before  they  expand 
for  spinach.  This  variety  of  interpretation,  coupled  with 
the  fact  that  the  word  finger , always  applied  to  bananas, 
is  never  used  in  speaking  of  cocoes,  points  to  this  being 
a very  old  sing. 


Dancing  Times. 


2 73 


cxc. 

Valse. 


— 0 — - 

— 1 

1 — 

/ 

at  J ■-  1 

. 7- 

f 

s:  * ' a - 

L J 

7 ’ as  p 

d = — 

A - man-da  Grant,  me  yer  - ry  your  name, 


1 .. 

/ 

, r*  h 

1 . ... 

M- 

s P P 

s 

1 J 

1 1 

\ 

7 * a 

0 a 

<2  ~ 

L© 

yer  - ry  your  name  a bam  - boo  root.  Why ! 


— a— 1? 1 

— 1 r— 

— 1 

1 — 

H -j 

“i  >■ 

Vrz>  » 

f(T\  7 & _ — 

! 

CJ>. 

rj 

-i 

-i — 

Why  ! me  yer-ry  your  name,  Why ! Why ! yer-ry  your 


— 1 — — 

q 

I 

1 ^ 

zfc 

- J 

. ; 

V 

0 — 

gJ 

name,  Me  yer  - ry  your  name  a bam  - boo  root. 


Amanda  stole  some  money  and  hid  it  at  the  foot  of 
a bamboo. 


CXCI. 


2nd  Figure. 


~y  ‘» 

. — — — . > X 

> ^ ^ ^ ^ h"n 

fn 

'N  ^ ^ cr- 

f?h  ^ /i  — n.  - 

- 



Jqz,  rt 

# 

■!  g » 

Last  night  I was  ly  - ing  on  me  num  - ber,  An’  a 


— -b — 5 — Q — h — e 0 

— Ts — Si S*- 

— - — — 

=d— 

f — J — 

fool-ish  man  come  wake  me  out  of  slum-ber,  Say  Why  oh  ! 


* s » 


Why  oh  ! I nev-er  see  a woman  dancing  with  a wooden  leg. 


Bammerlichy,  bammerlichy,  bamby,  Bammerlichy,  bammerlichy, 


S 


274 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


bam-by, 


Bammerlichy,  bammerlichy,  bam-by, 


J'i — 

— 

V ^ ^ W 

A JO IN  I . “S  T* ^ 

' - ~ ^ ^ » - - 

— 0 — » — 

see  a wo  - man  danc-ing  with  a wooden  leg. 


The  scene  is  laid  in  the  People’s  Shelter  at  Kingston 
which  has  numbered  sleeping-berths. 

At  “ Bammerlichy  ” etc.  the  dancers  imitate  the  stiff 
action  of  a wooden  leg. 


CXCII. 


5 th  Figure. 


=ij 

3— 

5=1 

Sr 

) — ± J 

# * 9 * 

1 

a 

Me  las  - sie  me  dun  - dooze,  me  dun-dooze  come  kiss 


, - r 

Js_..  ^ s v 

|S 

J iS 

-R  fs  ns  is 

^ fS  ^ N 

0 & J J J 

d <m 

m ^ m 

J d d * 

me,  The  kiss  that  you  give  me  it  rest  on  me  mind  till  it 


— — s. N 

\ s 

— 

— s.  !r 

/ 

Ps 

ff 

A W ~ 

m 

d l 

\ \ \ m . d 

t : 9 . . 

'-9  9 9 13 

give  me  the  ay  - go.  When  we  mar  - ried  an’ 


— & ~v  ~ „ 

— 

— \ S>  , KT 

:_N  ~.N— sr  s 

J— ^ 

W hr  m m d . . 

'a  m 

r - - - m 

set-tied  down  we  have  no  cause  to 

say, 

For  as 

soon  as  the  par-son 

— 1 a 

‘ V 

A # 

!=*  9 

#-  • • j 

-9 -1— ■ 

pass  up  the  sen  - tence  noth  - ing  to  part  us. 


“ Dundooze  ” (or  dundoze,  for  it  is  rather  hard  to  catch 
the  vowel)  is  a term  of  endearment.  Others  are,  honey, 
lover,  sugar,  sweety,  marvel,  bolow,  bahzoon. 

“ Aygo  ” is  ague  ; “ say,”  perhaps,  sunder. 


Dancing  Tunes. 


275 


CXCIII. 

The  next  conveys  an  appreciative  reference  to  a pro- 
prietor who  is  a large  employer  of  labour. 

Polka. 


if  ^ 

^ V 

— N 

> l 

a 

^ ..a  1%  ~ rs^ 

7 

— =5 

m # * — 1 

Mis  - ter  Dav  - is  bring  some  - t’ing  fe  we  all, 


V 

/ 

^ INI 

b r v 

P P 

4r- 

i ^ 9 _JN 

V 

/ S 2 d 

m J 

* m 

# 

~d'  dr'  -• 

L 

< 

Mis  - ter  Dav  - is  bring  some  - t’ing  fe  we  all.  Oh  him 


Z— P 0 

m * -t 

9 m -m -m— 

T IS  ~ 

4 

y->^?-p-Zr 

y V-X 

P P — P— 

* ha U — 

*0  s 

■r  r 

V- 1 / — y — 

y 

— 1* — ? — 

— * — m 

1 u 

bring  black  gal,  An’  him  bring  brown  gal,  An’  him  bring  yaller  gal  an’  all. 


CXCIV. 


5 th  Figure. 


turn  back,  you  brute,  Turn  back  married  man,  married  man  a dog. 


276 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


CXCV. 

4 th  Figure. 


The  boy  has  run  up  a score  at  the  shop  and  professes 
astonishment  at  the  items  and  the  total.  Black  trusts 
White  more  than  Brown. 


CXCVI. 

We  end  with  the  pretty  flowing  melody  : — 
Schottische. 


yj 

*—m 

— 1 KT-S 

-a* ^ . 

— 

— 

-1 — F— 

-N 

~V 

) 4: 

— 

m 

* » 



-J  • • m - 

Mahngoose  a come,  Dory,  Mahngoose  a come.  All  them  gal  are 


Ty  STT 

— i r 

ns 

/V  v v P 1 

| P - P 

| w m 

JV  P 

fm  P S J 

| 1 

m p J 

W m 

J 

dead  fe  Do-ry,  Mahngoose  a come.  Come  back  me  dear  Do-ry, 


—y- ^ , 

J _ s 

/f  ^ \ 

I h* 

S S S S!  S K.  \ ' 

IT  VJl- 

| _T  S 

1 1 

LJ 1- 

d-d -d—d- 

- # * 

« * # 

=1 : 

Come  back  me  dear.  All  them  gal  are  dead  fe  Dory,  Mahngoose  a come. 


The  mongoose  was  introduced  into  Jamaica  to  kill 
the  rats.  Unfortunately  rats  sleep  in  the  day  and  the 


Dancing  Tunes. 


2 77 


mongoose  sleeps  at  night,  so  they  never  met.  How  the 
mongoose  took  instead  to  killing  chickens  has  been  often 
told.  Dory  is  having  a private  interview  with  a girl  who 
has  another  admirer.  This  man  has  announced  his  intention 
of  chastising  Dory.  “ Mongoose  has  come  ” is  a precon- 
certed formula  which  means,  “ the  other  man  has  come, 
Dory,  look  out ! ” When  a gang  of  labourers  is  working 
and  one  of  them  catches  sight  of  his  master  in  the 
distance,  he  will  sing  this  song  and  the  others  understand 
that  they  must  pretend  to  be  busy. 


The  End. 


Note. — [Accidentally  omitted  on  page  77  : Cf.  Nos.  56,  67,  132,  133). 

Marriage  is,  unhappily,  often  a failure.  The  woman,  in  marrying,  has 
attained  the  goal  of  her  ambition.  Now  that  she  is  Mrs.  Smith  she  “ sits 
down  ” and  refuses  to  help  her  husband,  provision-ground  food  is  not  good 
enough  for  her,  and  she  is  always  calling  out  for  a new  frock.  In  a few 
years  the  couple  separate  and  the  home  is  broken  up,  with  disastrous 
consequences  to  the  children.  In  the  old  days  the  custom  was  to  defer 
the  ceremony  (as  Constantine  deferred  his  baptism)  to  a very  late  period. 
This  plan  worked  very  well.  The  couple  did  not  marry  till  they  knew 
for  certain  that  they  suited  each  other,  and  often  their  well-brought-up 
children  and  grandchildren  danced  at  the  wedding. 


APPENDIX . 

A.  Traces  of  African  Melody  in  Jamaica. 

I have  been  asked  to  read  through  this  book  in  proof,  with 
the  object  of  ascertaining  whether  the  Jamaican  songs  bear  any 
traces  of  an  African  origin. 

Unfortunately,  it  must  be  confessed  at  the  outset  that  our 
knowledge  of  African  music  is  scantier  than  that  of  almost  any 
other  kind  of  primitive  music.  In  other  regions  of  the  globe 
the  phonograph  has  been  effectively  utilised  in  acquiring  accurate 
records  of  songs  and  dances.  These  records  have  been  brought 
back  to  Europe,  where  they  have  been  studied  at  leisure  and 
their  peculiarities  of  interval  and  rhythm  have  been  precisely 
determined. 

But  in  the  case  of  African  music  (apart  from  a few  imper- 
fectly studied  records  in  my  own  possession)  we  have  to  rely 
entirely  on  the  versions  which  travellers  have  taken  down  for 
us  in  the  field.  We  have  to  assume,  in  the  first  place,  the 
correctness  of  their  ‘musical  ear,’  and  in  the  second  place,  the 
possibility  of  expressing  in  European  notation  those  delicate 
shades  of  pitch  and  time  in  which  the  characteristics  of  primitive 
music  so  essentially  consist.  And  both  these  are  unwarrantable 
assumptions. 

However,  from  our  study  of  comparative  music  elsewhere,  we 
may  make  one  statement  with  certainty,  namely,  that  an  African 
music  does  not  exist.  There  must  be  almost  as  many  styles 
of  native  music  in  Africa  as  in  Europe — varieties  differing  not 
only  broadly  in  general  form  and  structure,  but  also  more 
minutely  in  the  intervals  and  rhythms  which  are  employed. 

I have  been  informed  by  travellers  in  West  Africa  that  sur- 
prising differences  occur  in  the  degree  of  development  of  musical 


A ppendix. 


279 


art  even  in  closely  neighbouring  regions.  In  one  district  hardly 
any  music  is  to  be  heard  at  all ; in  another  the  music  is  most 
uncouth ; in  a third  it  is  highly  agreeable  to  the  European  ear ; 
while  some  parts  of  West  Africa  have  advanced  to  the  stage 
of  part-singing. 

The  most  erroneous  notions  have  been  expressed  as  to  the 
nature  of  African  music.  I have  seen  it  stated  that  African 
songs  consist  in  a gradual  descent  from  a higher  to  a lower 
pitched  note.  That  this  is  far  from  being  usually  the  case  is 
shown  in  the  following  specimens,  which  I have  gathered  from 
various  narratives  of  African  travel. 


I. 

Boat  Song.  Congo  District. 


J J^l  fmfm  J- 

OiS.  j_j  , 

III. 

Song  of  Bawili  Women. 


, _ 

1* 

i±\  vj  y~ ^ w vsr  r 1 

t J 

^ ! — — * — 4 

=3= 

^ — u 

IV. 

Funeral  Song.  A ngola. 


Q , 0 

1 

— 1 — 1 — 

1 N ~ tr 

— 3— 

4 — 

a 

— 

V ^ 

f 

28o 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


V. 


Song.  Angola. 


~p  w~  r 

— r 

p — 

gj  | I 

m p' 

1 

P*  M 

- cj  m 1 

-Xdx  /J 

“X L i 

i 

1 

"1  "h  11 

C 1 UX--  IXXXZZE 

VI. 


Song.  M.  Balunda. 


) 0 ~ r n S H 

— i — 

wrr  ^ 1 

L:fzh  /i 

W 9 

/ ^±! 

— mi 

■\  

u__  U 

VII. 


Dance- Song.  M.  Balunda, 


_ _ 1 

— 1 — 

/ » T 

P 1 

P- " m 

a *p 

0 

r d 

V/  1 

T7 

— 

■1 

VIII. 

Boat  Song.  Guinea  Coast. 


J 9 

p * # i n : 

^ r r ^ r n d 1 r m \ 

l\  i | r | m 

L-si 

l—i UJ j-  * 

IX. 


Song.  I.  of  Bimbia. 


Songs  I.  and  II.  from  La  route  du  Tchad.  Jean  Dybowski.  Paris.  1S93. 
pp.  198-9. 

Songs  III. -VII.  from  Aus  Wcst-Afrika.  Hermann  Soyaux.  Leipzig.  1879. 
Song  VIII.  from  Einige  Notizen  iiber  Bonny.  Gottingen.  1848. 

Song  IX.  from  A Naixative  of  the  Expedition  ...  to  the  River  Niger, 
London.  1848. 


Appendix. 


281 


A great  deal  might  be  said  about  the  general  character  of 
these  songs,  e.g.  the  simplicity  and  brevity  of  the  phrases,  and  the 
fondness  for  triple  measure. 

But  I pass  on  to  consider  three  very  interesting  examples  of 
Jamaican  music  which,  thanks  to  my  friend  Mr.  N.  W.  Thomas, 
I have  found  recorded  in  1688  in  Sir  Hans  Sloane’s  Voyage  to 
Jamaica.  “ Upon  one  of  the  Festivals  where  a great  many  of 
the  Negro  Musicians  were  gathered  together,”  he  writes,  “ I 
desired  Mr.  Baptiste,  the  best  musician  there,  to  take  the  words 
they  sung  and  set  them  to  Musick  which  follows.” 


X. 


Angola  Song. 


n »'0  1 

m JT  / k ! ! "W  W 1 

I 1 

Hobaognion 

& 

Hobaognion 

\yJ ! r5  " 

m m mV  m P T 

m m r 

111  r * P Tj'  1 

±L±r^ 

1 * 

Ho-ba  Ho  - ba  - ognion  - ognion. 


XI. 


Papa  Song. 


-a — =£==*  )=f~v4  =fcn 

• ' • . • * 1 V'v 

XII. 

Koromanti  Songs. 


282 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


=j 

i * **  . * m • . 

r-f=H 



1— 

— 

4 

Jtt 

C 

-m 

U 

Loud. 


^ p—™  !^***'  ’’j 

r—  i , i 

# P 

1 _ •• 

H 1*1 

• pr^— 

f\  * « • ^ • | 

* 

<9  * ^ • r 

j 

i r 

_J_J  ' 

w 1 

vf  V -g 

-*-  1 

Soft. 


~~Q  P * jr  W 

t * * - » 

-f- ■? L — L P H — ^ — * * — 9 - 

ZT-  * * O • I*  -•—  - 

'v/  — - ! — ! 1 l~ 1 - -- 

«y  1 “■■'  1 1 

[ 

3 

P-  s 

p p -1-lf 

E.  * SsT^^P: 

-1 — lf-*s-k- 

1 

ij-fr  J 

0 1 ; 1 



A- 

LI — 

0 J^J 

Ll*- 

- \mim  1 1 

58  4% 

r* 

& ._  # 

— 

Vi — 

7L  if  M #^r  i * r * 

0 

. #zr  1 # 1 -• ^ „ 1 

1 

-ffi  pri  r i— k-i 

HH-rr-r  ■-+ 

V-tf- 

-m — 

Meri  Bonbo  mich  langa 


meri  wd  langa. 


fiL  * » a 

— ["-f** — 

^FFIH-  it  is"  ^1  1 ■ -M 

- mm0 

^ J „ 

ifT  ^ 1 1 r 

r - * Wm 

-1 — 1 — #- 

r#f]i — r^H — -M— 1 

- * * 

M # 

# r i * r * • 

r 

-f(S s ~m  • * * ~ 

r_  _ 1 1 r 

r 1 p 

Iff  - ^ 

■ 1 ! 1 1 1 

Appendix. 


From  A Voyage  to  . . . Jamaica  ...  by  Hans  Sloane,  M.D.  London. 
1707.  Vol.  i.  pp.  1,  li. 


The  words  of  these  songs  are  Hobaognion,  ognion  and  Meri 
Bonbo  tnich  langa  meri  wd  langa.  Sir  Hans  Sloane  observes 
that  the  Jamaican  negroes  of  that  time  had  their  native  instru- 
ments : (i)  gourds  with  necks  and  strung  with  horsehair,  (ii)  a 
“ hollow’d  Timber  covered  with  Parchment,”  having  a bow  for 
its  neck,  the  strings  tied  longer  or  shorter. 

These  songs,  however  inaccurately  recorded,  are  of  the  greatest 
value  for  the  hint  they  give  us  of  Jamaican  music  as  it  existed 
over  two  centuries  ago.  It  will  be  observed  that  the  songs  are 
named  ‘Angola’  and  ‘ Koromanti,’  according  to  their  African 
provenance.  In  the  present  collection  of  modern  songs,  reference 
is  made  in  Song  Cl.  to  Koromanti  (‘  Cromanty  ’).  So,  too,  the 
word  ‘ Bungo  ’ in  Song  CXXVI.  no  doubt  refers  to  the  large 
Bongo  district  of  Africa  (cf.  ‘Bungo  talk,’  p.  12,  n.). 

We  can  hardly  expect  to  find  considerable  traces  of  this 
aboriginal  African  music  after  two  centuries  of  missionary  and 
of  trade  influence.  African  travellers  have  repeatedly  told  us 
how  prone  the  negro  is  to  introduce  fresh  tunes  from  other 
villages  and  to  adapt  them  to  his  own  purposes.  Indeed,  the 
contaminating  influence  which  the  Arabs  and  Portuguese  have 
exercised  upon  primitive  African  music  makes  the  study  of  the 
latter  especially  difficult. 

But  a community  does  not  adopt  exotic  music  without  at  the 
same  time  exercising  selection.  Those  melodies  have  the  greatest 
chance  of  success  which,  to  some  degree  at  least,  follow  the 
current  canons  of  public  taste.  Revolutionary  innovations  are 


284  Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 

rare.  The  gradual  changes  in  taste  which  take  place  are  the 
result  of  such  selective  adoption  of  foreign  music  as  we  have 
indicated. 

There  is  one  feature  in  the  above-quoted  ‘ Angola  ’ song 
which  is  also  shared  by  the  modern  songs  of  this  collection, 
namely,  the  presence  of  ‘bobbins’  or  short  refrains. 

The  simplicity  in  structure  of  the  songs  is  still  a feature  of 
Jamaican  music.  I may  be  allowed  to  call  attention  to  the 
repetition  of  single  phrases  in  Song  XVIII.  and  to  the  building 
up  of  simple  phrases  in  Songs  LXXVII.  and  LXXIX. 

I had  hoped  that  some  light  might  be  thrown  on  the  antiquity 
of  certain  songs  by  the  presence  of  nonsense  words ; but  in  this 
I was  disappointed. 

I quite  agree  with  Miss  Broadwood  (see  next  page)  that 
the  majority  of  the  songs  are  of  European  origin.  The  negroes 
have  learnt  them  from  hearing  sailors’  chanties  or  they  have 
adopted  hymn  tunes. 

But  adoption  always  involves  adaptation.  A song  is  modified 
to  suit  the  current  canons  of  taste.  In  Song  L.  I observe 
‘ Home,  Sweet  Home  ’ and  (in  the  latter  half)  a hymn  tune 
which  I frequently  heard  in  the  Torres  Straits.  Song  CXXXIX. 
is  doubtless  1 The  British  Grenadiers.’  But  it,  again,  has  not 
been  adopted  without  modification. 

Needless  to  say,  a detailed  study  of  these  modifications  would 
throw  light  on  the  characteristics  of  modern  Jamaican  music. 

In  Song  XXXI.  a typical  non-European  modification  is  the 
insertion  of  an  extra  (the  fifth)  bar,  so  that  the  phrase  consists 
of  nine  bars.  The  five  time  in  Song  XI.,  the  change  of  accent 
at  the  close  of  Song  XXIV.  and  in  Song  XLI.,  are  no  doubt 
the  expression  of  African  delight  in  the  complexities  of  rhythm. 

In  the  already-quoted  ‘ Koromanti  song,’  we  may  observe  the 
curious  temporary  change  of  rhythm  in  the  second  air,  and 
the  characteristic  measure  which  prevails  throughout  the  third 
air  with  its  syncopation  and  almost  baffling  changes.  Such 
features  are  precisely  what  we  should  expect  to  meet  with 
among  a primitive  people  who  more  than  two  centuries  ago 
doubtless  possessed  in  a still  higher  degree  that  delight  in 
complication  of  rhythm  which  according  to  Mr.  Jekyll  (p.  6) 


Appendix. 


285 

persists  among  their  descendants  of  to-day.  For  a more  detailed 
study  of  this  aspect  of  the  subject  I may  perhaps  refer  enquirers 
to  my  “ Study  of  Rhythm  in  Primitive  People  ” (. British  Jour7ial 
of  Psychology , vol.  i.  pp.  397-406). 

The  present  taste  and  preferences  of  the  Jamaican  negroes 
may  perhaps  be  gauged  by  the  similarities  and  differences  in 
the  first  bars  of  Songs  LXIII.,  LXIV.,  and  LXXVIII.,  by  the 
similarity  of  Songs  I.  and  VIII.,  XV.  and  XXVII.,  and  of  the 
bobbins  in  LIV.  and  LXVIII. 

But  it  is  not  my  intention  to  make  a detailed  analysis  of 
the  songs  of  the  present  volume.  My  object  has  been  rather 
to  emphasize  our  present  ignorance  of  African  music,  and  to 
indicate  the  lines  ' along  which  a more  intimate  acquaintance 
with  African  and  Jamaican  songs  may  be  expected  to  lead  to 
conclusions  as  to  their  relation  to  one  another. 

C.  S.  Myers. 


B.  English  Airs  and  Motifs  in  Jamaica. 

By  far  the  greater  part  of  these  Jamaican  tunes  and  song- 
words  seem  to  be  reminiscences,  or  imitations,  of  European 
sailors’  “ chanties  ” of  the  modern  class ; or  of  trivial  British 
nursery-jingles  adapted,  as  all  such  jingles  become  adapted. 

Except  in  the  cases  specified  below,  I have  not  found  one 
Jamaican  tune  which  is  e?itirely  like  any  one  English  or 
European  tune  that  I happen  to  know.  But  unrecorded  folk- 
tunes  are  essentially  fluid,  and  pass  through  endless  trans- 
formations. In  all  countries  any  one  traditional  ballad  may 
be  sung  to  dozens  of  distinct  traditional  tunes,  each  of  these 
again  having  variants.  It  is  therefore  quite  possible  that 
versions  of  some  of  the  older-sounding  Jamaican  airs  are 
being  sung  unrecorded  at  this  moment  in  the  British  Islands 
or  elsewhere. 

I note  below  such  instances  of  modal  tunes  as  occur  in 
this  collection.  I should  perhaps  explain  that  by  “ Modes  ” are 
meant  those  ancient  scales  (other  than  our  major  and  minor 
scales)  which  amongst  European  composers  fell  into  disuse  at 
the  beginning  of  the  17th  century,  but  which  survive  still 


286  Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 

in  the  ancient  Church  Music  (popularly  called  “ Gregorian  ”)r 
and  in  the  Folk  Music  of  most  European  countries,  and 
notably  that  of  the  British  Isles. 

III.  King  Daniel,  p.  14. 

Cf.  the  old  ballads  “May  Colvin”  and  “Young  Hunting.” 
In  the  latter  the  parrot  reveals  a murder.  In  both  ballads  the 
lady  makes  the  same  promises  to  the  bird  (see  Child’s  English 
and  Scottish  Popiclar  Ballads'). 

VII.  The  Three  Sisters,  p.  26. 

Although  the  story  of  the  monster  outwitted  by  the  maiden 
he  tries  to  carry  off  is  an  almost  world-wide  motifs  and  is 
found  in  Africa  among  other  countries,  this  particular  version 
has  evidently  been  in  contact  with  European  (English  or  Scottish) 
sources.  This  is  shown  not  only  by  the  fact  that  the  suitor 
proves  to  be  the  Devil,  but  by  the  question  and  answer  (mis- 
placed by  the  story-teller) : 

“ What  is  roguer  than  a womankind  ? ” 

“ The  Devil  is  roguer  than  a womankind.” 

This  riddle  appears  in  three  versions  of  the  ballad  of  “The 
Three  Sisters,”  otherwise  “ The  Elfin  Knight,”  or  “ Riddles  wisely 
Expounded  ” (Child,  English  and  Scottish  Popular  Ballads , vol. 
i.  pp.  1-6),  as: 

“ O what  is  greener  than  the  grass  ? 

Or  what  is  worse  than  e’er  woman  was  ? ” 

“ O poison’s  greener  than  the  grass, 

And  the  Devil’s  worse  than  e’er  woman  was.  . . .” 

“ As  soon  as  she  the  fiend  did  name, 

He  flew  away  in  a blazing  flame,” 
says  one  version,  but  in  the  rest  there  is  no  disenchantment,, 
and  the  youngest  sister  wins  the  visitor  as  her  husband  by  her 
ready  wit  in  replying,  which  Professor  Child  (Additions  and 
Corrections , vol.  v.  p.  283),  thinks  a modernization  of  the 
original  story.  He  quotes  a manuscript  version  taken  from 
a book  of  Henry  VI. ’s  time,  wherein  the  “Elfin  Knight”  is 
the  foul  fiend  himself  undisguised. 

For  similar  survivals  of  Riddle  Songs  and  Tales  see  “There 
was  a Lady  in  the  West”  and  “Scarborough  Fair”  in  English 


Appendix. 


287 


County  Songs,  and  Kidson’s  Traditional  Tunes,  and  “ The 
Lover’s  Task  ” in  Songs  of  the  West,  etc. 

The  tune  is  evidently  an  old  ballad  air.  It  is  in  the  Aeolian 
Mode. 

XVII.  Man  Crow,  p.  54. 

The  tune  is  the  same  as  that  sung  in  Worcestershire  by 
children  to  “ A finger  and  thumb  keep  moving.” 

XVIII.  Saylan,  p.  59. 

This  is  a version  of  “ The  Maid  freed  from  the  Gallows,” 
“The  Golden  Ball,”  or  “The  Prickly  Bush.”  For  the  latter 
see  English  County  Songs.  Child  gives  very  exhaustive  notes 
on  the  story  and  its  variants;  also  a tune,  noted  in  North 
Carolina,  “ The  Prickly  Bush  ” has  a tune  quite  unlike  Child’s, 
and  the  Jamaican  air  is  quite  distinct  from  both. 

XXI.  Tacoma  and  the  Old  Witch  Girl,  p.  65. 

Cf.  “ The  Keys  of  Heaven  ” in  English  County  Songs,  “ Blue 
Muslin  ” in  Songs  of  the  West,  and  “ Madam  I will  gi’e  you,” 
etc.,  in  fournal  of  the  Folk-Song  Society,  No.  7.  All  these  airs 
are  distinct  from  each  other,  and  from  the  Jamaican  tune. 
XXIX.  Parson  Puss  and  Parson  Dog,  p.  91. 

This  tune  is  the  first  half  of  the  old  French  air  “ Ah,  vous 
dirai-je,  Maman  ? ” used  so  often  by  English  children  in  their 
games.  See  note  in  Moffat  and  Kidson’s  Children's  Songs  and 
Ga?nes  of  Long  Ago,  p.  42.  Other  adaptations  of  the  same  tune 
are  CXVI.  (p.  2x5),  CLXXVII.  (p.  264),  and  CLXXXIX.  (p.  272). 
XXXI.  Pretty  Poll,  p.  96. 

Cf.  “ King  Daniel.”  This  is  again  the  story  of  “ May  Colvin  ” 
or  “ The  Outlandish  Knight.”  The  tune  “ Come,  pretty  Poll  ” 
here  given  is  rather  reminiscent  of  one  traditional  air  to  the 
ballad  sung  still  in  different  parts  of  England  (where  numerous 
tunes  to  the  favourite  story  have  been  noted).  See  “ The 
Outlandish  Knight  ” in  Songs  of  Northern  E?igland  (Stokoe 
and  Reay)  for  the  type  of  tune  referred  to,  but  plentiful 
variants  from  Hertfordshire,  the  West  of  England,  Yorkshire, 
etc.,  exist  in  MS. 

XXXVI.  Leah  and  Tiger,  p.  108. 

The  tune  is  in  the  Aeolian  Mode. 


288 


Jamaican  Song  and  Story. 


LXIII.  Oh,  Samuel,  oh,  p.  168. 

This  tune  is  in  the  Mixolydian  Mode. 

LXXXVIII.  War  down  a Monkland,  p.  187. 

The  tune  is  in  the  Dorian  Mode.  By  far  the  most  interest- 
ing tune  in  this  collection.  It  is  a fine  Dorian  air,  I should 
think  an  old  traditional  tune  imported  by  English  or  Irish. 

There  are  slight  modal  influences  in  other  tunes,  viz. : “ Bad 
homan  oh,”  “ Bell  oh,”  “ A Somerset  me  barn,”  “ Whe  me 
loon  de,”  “ Me  da  li,”  and  “ Since  Dora  Logan  a wahk  with 
Gallawoss  ” (Nos.  56,  57,  85,  91,  100,  T22). 

CXI.,  p.  209. 

This  tune  is  a variant  of  the  well-known  children’s  game-song, 
“Here  come  three  Dukes  a-riding.” 

CXIX.,  p.  218. 

The  tune  is  a variant  of  one  commonly  sung  in  the  North 
of  England  and  in  various  parts  of  Scotland,  to  a children’s 
game,  “ Hullaballoo  bailie,”  in  which  reference  is  made  to 
lifting  the  right  foot  and  the  left  foot. 

CXXVII.,  p.  225. 

This  air  is  the  first  part  of  the  tune  of  “O  dem  Golden 
Slippers,”  the  negro  revival  song  of  some  twenty  years  ago. 
CXXX.,  p.  227. 

This  is  a reminiscence  of  the  Scotch  dance-tune  usually  sung 
to  the  words  “ There’s  nae  luck  aboot  the  hoose.” 

CLXXVIII.,  p.  264. 

This  is  a well-known  old  English  dance-tune,  known  also  in 
Scotland. 

CLXXXII.,  p.  267. 

The  second  part  of  this  tune  is  merely  a reminiscence  of 
“ We  won’t  go  home  till  morning.” 

CLXXXVII.,  p.  271. 

This  tune  is  the  first  part  of  a very  commonplace  modern 
Italian  popular  composition  called  “ La  Mandolinata,”  played 
on  every  conceivable  instrument,  and  sung  also,  about  the  year 
1876  and  for  some  years  afterwards. 


L.  E.  Broadwood. 


