


^)f-iir^^i^.^ ^..^y^^'^iift^':^-] 



' ■■''3:w^iiW£a:rr:Sl£^i^^ 




CORNELL 

UNIVERSITY 

LIBRARY 




p. 






ML 460.B87"" ""'""'''' ^"•"'' 




3 1924 022 445 849 




'f D h 



Cornell University 
Library 



The original of this book is in 
the Cornell University Library. 

There are no known copyright restrictions in 
the United States on the use of the text. 



http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924022445849 



MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 



AND THEIR HOMES 



BY 



MARY E. BROWN AND WM. ADAMS BROWN 



WITH 



TWO HUNDRED AND SEVENTY ILLUSTRATIONS IN PEN AND INK 

BY WM. ADAMS BROWN 



THE WHOLE FORMING 



A COMPLETE CATALOGUE OF THE COLLECTION OF MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 

NOW IN THE POSSESSION OF MRS. J. CROSBY BROWN 

OF NEW YORK 



NEW YORK 
DODD, MEAD AND COMPANY 

1888 



K^ 



Copyright, iSS8, 
By DODD, mead AND COMPANY. 



All riirhis reserved. 



Press of J. J. Little & Co., 
Astor Place, New York. 



ICo the iDne 



WHO HAS NOT ONLY GIVEN THE TRUE KEYNOTE TO OUR 

HOME, BUT WHOSE FIRM YET GENTLE TOUCH 

HAS RESOLVED ALL ITS TRANSIENT 

DISCORDS INTO HARMONY, 



Ihis Booh 



IS AFFECTIONATELY DEDICATED BY 
HIS WIFE AND ELDEST SON. 



PREFACE. 



^^HE present volume consists of two parts, distinct, yet complementary. 
The first is a complete catalogue of the collection of musical 
instruments in the possession of Mrs. John Crosby Brown of 
New York, consisting of a drawing and description of each of the two hun- 
dred and sixty-six specimens in that collection. To this catalogue has been 
added a series of explanatory essays on subjects connected with the music 
and musical instruments of savage and Oriental peoples. The history of 
European instruments has often been treated by competent authorities. But 
no comprehensive work on the musical instruments of the East and of 
savage races has yet appeared. Special subjects, indeed, have been treated 
with great learning and fulness. But such monographs, as a rule, are 
inaccessible to the general reader. The sections devoted to the musical 
instruments of different countries in the general histories of music, are of 
very unequal value ; some going into unnecessary detail, while others are 
superficial and unsatisfactory. The magnificent work of Hipkins and Gibb, 
on " Musical Instruments, Rare, Historic, and Unique," devotes only nine of 
its fifty plates to extra-European countries. The best single volume on the 
subject in question is still Engel's " Catalogue of the Musical Instruments 
in the South Kensington Museum." But this work, while indispensable to 
the student, is not adapted for general use. In the very nature of the 
case, the treatment lacks unity, and many of the most important points are 
passed over without notice. 

The present book, while far from claiming to give an exhaustive account 



vi Preface. 

of all the musical instruments of Oriental and savage races, aims to put 
within the reach of the general reader the most important facts connected 
with this interesting subject. 

In the plan of the work as originally conceived, the composition of the 
letterpress was undertaken by Mrs. Brown, while the present writer was to 
be responsible only for the drawings and the accompanying descriptions. 
The following words, written by Mrs. Brown as a preface, six months ago, 
will explain at once the origin of the book and its design as first contem- 
plated : — 

" Some years ago I became very much interested in the subject of 
musical instruments, and a friend kindly procured for me from Florence two 
or three fine old specimens. To these, others were added from time to time, 
until I found myself really aspiring to make a collection, in which the more 
important instruments of the different countries of the world should all be 
represented. With the growth of this collection came naturally a desire for 
definite intormation both as to the instruments themselves, and the music 
of the countries from which they came. Finding that no one book con- 
tained the desired material, I was forced to gather it from many scattered 
sources, — volumes of travel and history, as well as of more special musical 
research. The results of my reading and study were embodied for my own 
use in a series of short papers. It has occurred to me that these sketches, 
designed primarily for my own reference, might be helpful to others, who, 
though interested in the subject, may not have the time or the opportunity 
to collect the information for themselves. They are fragmentary and incom- 
plete in character, consisting largely of quotations from the best authorities, 
to whom full credit is given. In the words of Montaigne, ' I have here 
only made a nosegay of culled flowers, and have brought nothing of my 
own but the thread that ties them toeether.' 

" In view of the many applications which have been made by those 
interested in musical subjects, for a description of the instruments in my 
possession, it seemed very important to prepare a careful catalogue of the 



Preface. vii 

collection. Accurate drawings have been made of each instrument by my 
son ; and it is believed that these illustrations, with the accompanying 
descriptions, will prove a valuable contribution to the study of the history 
of musical instruments, which, in this country, is still in its infancy. The 
most important collections of this kind in the United States — those of 
the National Museum in Washington, and of the Conservatory of Music 
in Boston, as well as the Drexel Collection in the Metropolitan Museum in 
New York — are still uncatalogued. It is hoped that the present volume may 
serve as a stimulus both to the speedy carrying out of this important work, 
and to the making of more complete collections, both private and national. 

" I wish in this connection to express my great indebtedness to the 
many friends who have assisted me in making this collection, and especially 
to those missionaries in distant lands who have secured and forwarded many 
of the most valuable specimens, often at great expense of time and trouble. 
I desire also to express my obligation to my friend Miss Ella Russel, who 
has not only assisted me in my musical studies, but who has been their real 
inspiration." 

Since these words were written, it has been found necessary in some 
respects to modify the original plan of the book. Circumstances having 
rendered it impossible for my mother to continue the preparation of the 
sketches above referred to, the completion of the letterpress as well as of 
the illustrations fell into my hands. As the work progressed, I became 
convinced of the advisability of a somewhat more comprehensive and careful 
treatment than had at first been contemplated. I was obliged, therefore, 
largely to re-write the earlier chapters, in order to make them conform to 
the method of treatment employed in the latter part of the work. 

It is believed that the book in its present form will fill a useful place 
in musical literature. It does not lay claim to the merit of original research, 
the time and circumstances of the writer having rendered this impossible. 
At the same time, all accessible authorities have been conscientiously con- 
sulted ; and a free use has been made of several manuscript sources, of 



viii Preface. 

which special acknowledgment will be made in the proper place. For the 
convenience of those who may desire for special purposes to verify any of 
the statements made in the text, full references have been given in foot- 
notes ; and a complete list of authorities quoted has been added at the back 
of the book. It has been the aim of the writer to make more than a 
mere compilation. While for convenience the separate chapters have been 
arranged in sets corresponding to the divisions of the catalogue, it will be 
found that they form by themselves a connected whole. For a reason which 
has already been explained, the subject of European instruments has been 
passed over in silence. The musical instruments of the ancient Assyrians, 
Egyptians, and Hebrews, as well as of the Greeks and Romans, have like- 
wise been passed by without notice, as not properly falling within the scope 
of the present work. With these exceptions, the writer has aimed to give 
some account of the principal musical instruments in use the world over, — 
particular attention being given to those specimens which are represented 
in the catalogue. A brief account of the character, history, and place of 
music in each of the more important extra-European countries, has been 
given in a special chapter. 

An additional word of explanation is needed as to the chapters on 
savage music and musical instruments. The interest and importance of this 
subject are so great, that I need not apologize for devoting to it consid- 
erable space. In the chapter on savage music, I acknowledge my special 
indebtedness to Mr. J. F. Rowbotham, who has brought together in the first 
volume of his " History of Music " a vast number of suggestive examples, 
in illustration of the ingenious theory there developed. In the later chap- 
ters I have relied more upon my own independent reading. The chapter 
on the instruments of North America especially contains a considerable 
amount of information which has never before appeared in print. 

The drawings of the catalogue were originally undertaken solely for 
private use, and without any idea of publication. As they were made at 
different times during a period extending over more than three years, there 



Preface. ix 

are necessarily many inequalities in the accuracy and the artistic quality 
of the work. Such corrections as were possible have, however, been faith- 
fully made. Not a few of the instruments have been redrawn specially for 
the book. Slight inaccuracies in the representation, which could not other- 
wise be corrected, have been noticed as far as possible in the accompanying 
description. 

It has not been possible to follow any uniform system in the spelling 
of names. Whenever possible, I have used the anglicized form given by 
Engel, adding in parentheses the more exact spelling. In very many instances, 
however, where the instrument is not mentioned by Engel, I have been 
forced to rely upon the best authorities at my command. In conflicting 
cases, I have regularly employed the simpler form. Thus, in the case of 
Hindu names, I have preferred the forms given by Meadows Taylor to those 
of Fetis or Tagore. In many instances I have taken the spelling given in the 
written label accompanying a special instrument. Cases where verification was 
doubtful have been noticed in foot-notes. In not a few instances it has been 
impossible to assign any name. 

No one can be more conscious than the writer of the imperfect quality 
of his work. The inherent difficulty of the subject, the impossibility of 
obtaining accurate information on many conflicting points, and, above all, 
the limited time at his disposal, must stand as excuse for all shortcomings. 

In addition to the general acknowledgments made by Mrs. Brown, I 
desire to express my special indebtedness to the many friends who have 
kindly assisted me in my work. Many of the facts stated have been drawn 
from letters received from all parts of the world, which it is impossible to 
acknowledge in detail. I wish, however, particularly to express my obliga- 
tion to the Rajah Sourindro Mohun Tagore of Calcutta, India, for kindly 
furnishing me with copies of his valuable treatises on Hindu music; to 
Takenobu Kikuchy of Japan, for the use of a manuscript paper on "Japanese 
Instruments of Popular Music ; " to Dr. Robert O. Sweeny of St. Paul, 
Minn., for valuable information in reference to the music and instruments of 



Preface. 



the Dakota Indians ; and to Professor Albert S. Bickmore of the American 

Museum of Natural History in this city, for kindly giving me access to the 

unpublished catalogue of the Emmons Collection of Alaskan curiosities. I 

desire also specially to thank my friend Mr. Gaylord S. White, for valuable 

help in the verification of references, in the making of the index, and with 

the proofs. 

WM. ADAMS BROWN. 

New York, November, iS88. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS. 



CHINA. 
I. Chinese Music 13 

Its general character. — Associated with religion and morality. — Traditional 
history of Chinese music. — Destruction of musical books and instruments by 
Huang Ti in 246 B.C. — Later revival of musical interest. — Chinese opinion 
of European music. — Theory of Chinese Music. — The LUs. — The pen- 
tatonic scale. — Notation and time. — The music of tlie present day. — 
Ritual music. — Popular, or theatrical, music. — Blind musicians. — Stationary 
character of Chinese music. 

II. Chinese Musical Instruments 28 

Classification according to qualities of sound. — Instruments of skin. — Drums. 
■ — Tambourine. — Instruments of stone. — King, or stone-chime. — Single 
sonorous stone. — Flutes. — Conch trumpet. — Instruments of metal. — 
Bells and bell-cliimes. — Gongs. — Trumpets. — Instruments of silk. — Kin. — 
Se. — Pepa. — San-Heen. — Yue-Kin. — Violins. — Yang-Kin. — Instruments 
of wood. — Chu. — Yu. — Mu-Yu. — Castanets. — Instruments of bamboo. 

— Pai-hao. — Flutes. — Oboe. — Instruments of gourd. — Cheng, or mouth- 
organ. — Instruments of baked earth. — Ocarina. 

JAPAN AND COREA. 

III. Japanese Music 59 

Recent attempt to introduce European music into Japan. — General popularity 
of music. — Mythological origin of Japanese music. — Outline of its history. 

— Contrast between Japanese and Chinese music. — Notation. — Four classes 
of Japanese musicians. — The Feki-bhnd. — The singing-girls. 

IV. Musical Instruments of Japan 69 

Perfect and imperfect instruments. — Instruments of the Ainos. — Stringed 
instruments. — Koto. — Samisen. — Kokiu. — Biwa. — Wind instruments. — 
Flutes. — Pandean pipes. — Oboes. — Sho. — Conch trumpet. — Instruments 
of percussion. — Drums. — Gongs. — Cymbals. — Castanets. — Xylophone. 

— Mokugyo. 

V. Musical Instruments of Corea 79 

Relation of Corean music to that of Japan. — Similarity to Chinese. — Nallari. 

— Popularity of music. — Not used in religious ceremonies. — Orchestral 
performances. — Description of instruments. 

xi 



xii Table of Contents. 

PAGE 

INDIA. 

VI. Hindu Music 9^ 

Imaginative character. — Difficulties. — Mythological associations. — Antiq- 
uity. — ■ Early character and history. — Bards. — Deterioration of later music. 

— Theory of Hindu music. — The Srutis, or subdivisions of the octave. — The 
thirty-six keys. — Rags and Raginis. — Time and notation. — State of music 
at the present day. — Orchestral performances. — The Bayaderes. — Local 
variations in character of music. — Hindu songs. 

VII. Instruments oi'- India io6 

Variety and beauty. — Defects in construction. — Divided by the Hindus into 
four classes. — Tut, or stringed instruments. — Vina. — Tamboura. — Tou- 
mourah. — Sitar. — Rabab. — India the home of the violin. — Ravanastron. — 
Omerti, Sarinda, Sarungee, and Chikara. — Understrung violins. — Instru- 
ments of percussion. — Bitiit, or instruments of skin. — Drums. — Mridung, 
Pukhwaj, Dhol, Dholkee, and Tubla. — Kettledrums. — Tambourines. — 
Gliiin, or instruments of metal. — -Gongs. — Bells. — Cymbals and castanets. 

— Sooghiir, or wind instruments. — Bansee, or flute. — Flageolets. — Oboes. — 
Bagpipe. — Poongi, or snake-charmer's pipe. — Nose-flute. — Nyastaranga. 

— Horns and trumpets. 

SIAM AND BURMAH. 
VIII. Music and Instruments of Siam 131 

Siamese band at International Inventions Exhibition. — Character of Siamese 
music. — Scale — Lack of notation. — Musical guilds. — Private orchestras. 

— Popularity of music. — Musical instruments. — Orchestral combinations. — • 
Ranat. — Khong Yai, or gong-organ. — Drums. — Cymbals and castanets. 
Ta'Khay, or alligator. — Violins. — Flutes. — Phan, or Pandean pipes. 

IX. Music and Instruments of Burmah 140 

Popularity of music. — Musical drama. — Scale. — Training of a musician. — 
Musical instruments. — Harp. — Violins. — Megyoung. — Cocoanut banjo. — 
Puloay, or flute. — Pattala, or harmonicon. — Gongs and cymbals. — Castanets. 

— Drums. — Kyee-wain, or drum-organ. — Orchestral combinations. 

ARABIA, SYRIA, AND NORTH AFRICA. 
X. Music of the Arabs 167 

Influence on European music. — Arabic poetry. — Early music. — yVttitude of 
Mohammed. — Outline of later history. — Influence of conquest of Persia. — 
Bagdad as a musical centre. — Celebrated singers. — Theoretical treatises. — ■ 
Alfarabi. — Theory of Arabic music. — Scale. — Subdivisions of octave. 

— Effect on European ear. — Arbitrary scales. — Time and notation. — Music 
at the present' day. — Songs. — AwaUm, or singing-girls. — Alateeyeh. — 
Improvisers. — Dancing-girls. — Instrumental music. 



Table of Contents. xiil 

PAGE 

XI. Musical Instruments of the Arabs 183 

Importance of the subject. — Stringed instruments. — Lute. — Tambouras. — 
Kuitra. — Gunibry. — Kissar. — Kanoon, or dulcimer. — Santir. — Violins. 

— Kemangeh and Rebab. — Wind instruments. — Nay, or flute. — Flageolets. 

— Oboes. — • Double pipes. — Zummarah and Arghool. — Bagpipe. — Nefyr, 
or trumpet. — Instruments of percussion. — Drums. — Naggarah. — Large 
kettledrums. — Dervish drum. — Darabukkeh. — Tambourine. — Cymbals 
and castanets. 

PERSIA AND TURKEY. 
XII. Music of the Persians and Turks 213 

Reason for connecting the two. — Lack of information as to early character 
of Persian music. — Bass-reliefs of Tackt-i-Bostan. — Music in the time of 
the Sassanides. — Different theories concerning early musical system of Per- 
sians. — Period of the Caliphs. — Turks receive their present music from 
Persia. — Present condition of music in Persia. — Universal popularity. — 
Persian songs. — Greeks the best musicians of Turkey. — Jaiiissaiy music. 

— Whirling Dervishes. 

XIII. Instruments of the Persians and Turks 222 

Chang, or Persian harp. — Gud. — Schtareh, or guitar. — Tar. — Sitar. — Stiz. 

— Kamancha, or violin. — Rebab. — Wind instruments. — Instruments of 
percussion. — Turkish instruments. — Fellahee. — Kemangeh. — Wind instru- 
ments and instruments of percussion. 

AFRICA. 

XIV. Savage Music 237 

Importance of the subject. — Necessity for a speedy study. — Scope and 
difficulties. — Fondness of savage man for music. — -Wide diffusion of musical 
instruments. — Theory of Rowbotham. — Vocal music. — Character of savage 
songs. — ■ Monotony. — Rhythmic element in savage music. — Importance of 
the dance. — Fondness of savage man for singing, illustrated by examples. — 
Instruments of percussion the earliest. — Development of drum. — Mytholo- 
gical associations. — Development of harmonicon illustrated by examples. — 
Wind instruments. — The horn, the instrument of war. — The flute, the instru- 
ment of love. — The syrinx. — Stringed instruments. — Importance in musical 
history. — Development. — Sanko of Ashantees. — Bow instrument of Bechu- 
anas and Bongo. — Examples of savage harmony. 

XV. Instruments of the African Tribes 257 

Fondness of negroes for music. — Songs. — Stringed instruments widely dif- 
fused. — Possibly derived from Egypt. — Example of similar transfer in case 
of nose-flute. — Instruments of percussion. — Drums. — Rattles, cymbals, and 



xiv Table of Contents. 



PAGE 



castanets. — Marimba. — Zanze. — Wind instruments. — Flutes, whistles, and 
flageolets. — Wooden trumpets. — Horns. — Goura of Bushmen. — Bagpipes. 

— Stringed instruments. — Musical bow of Kaffres and Zulus. — Zeze, or 
banjo. — Nanga. — Harps. — Curious stringed instrument from Congo River. 

— Kinanda. — Mittoo lyre. — Resemblance to Nubian kissar. — Guitars. — 
Violins. — Orchestral combinations. 



NORTH AMERICA. 

XVI. Music of the North American Indians 291 

Difficulty of subject. — Different grades of musical development. — Indian 
poetry. — Indian fondness for nature. — Songs. — Rhythmic character. — • 
Importance of the dance. — Different varieties. — Songs and instruments of 
medicine-men. — Northern minstrels. — Instrumental music. — Orchestral 
performances of Dakotas. 

XVII. Instruments of North America 301 

Instruments of Alaska. — Drums. — Rattles. — Stringed instrument. — Instru- 
ments of British .'\merica. — Wind instruments of the Haidas. — Instruments 
of the Dakotas. — Drums. — Rattles. — Tappers. — Moose-call. — Love-flute, 
or flageolet. — War-whistle. — Instruments of the Apaches. — Flutes. — 
Violins. — Instruments of the Pueblos. — Dance rattles. — Notched stick. 
— Instruments of Mexico. — Aztec remains. — Creole instruments of Cuba. 

CENTRAL AND SOUTH AMERICA, AND OCEANICA. 

XVIII. Instruments of Central and South America, and Oceanica . .323 

The subject not yet thoroughly investigated. — Instruments of Central 
America. — Rattles. — Marimba. — Instruments of South America. — Peruvian 
remains. — Use of sonorous stone. — Drum. — Fife. — Rattle-box. — Bone 
flute. — Pandean pipes. — Wooden trumpets. — Botuto. — Ture. — Ocean- 
ica. — Papuan drum. — Nose-flute. — Conch-shell. — Concluding remarks. 



LIST OF AUTHORITIES 367 

INDEX 



o 



71 



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 



PAGE 

Musical Instruments of China 3 

San-Heen. — Yue-Kin. — Sona. — Pepa. — Kin. — Pai-pan. — Yang- Kin. — 
Ur-Heen. — Pang-Kou. — King. — Tliai-pang-kou. — Cheng. — T'i-ch'in. — 
Chi-sian. — Hai-lo. — La-pa. — Ti-tzu. — Pi"-a. 

Musical Instruments of Japan 47 

Sono-Koto. — Kokiu. — Samisen. — Biwa. — Shakuhachi. — Aino Jew's-harp. 
— Taiko. — 0-Tzudzumi and Ko-Tzudzumi. — Sho. — Mokkine. — Shichiriki. 
— Shinobuye. — Riyuteki. — Kagura-Taiko. — Rappakai. — Mokugyo. 

Musical Instruments of Corea 55 

Nallari. — Yang-Kuni. — Komounko. — Haggum. — T'oungsyo. — Saihwang. — 
Chang-Gou. 

Musical Instruments of India 85 

Soorsringa. — Tamboura. — Flute and flageolets. — Castanets. — Zitty. — 
Toomerie Nagassaran. — Head drum. — Drum. — Pukhwaj. — Vina. — Drum. 
— Poongi. 

Musical Instruments of Siam 125 

Ranat. — Klong Khek. — Taphone. 

Musical Instruments of Burmah 127 

Soung. — Cymbals. — Puloay. — Oboe. — Drum. — Cocoanut banjo. — Kyeezee. 

Musical Instruments of Arabia 151 

Guitar. — Kemangeh. — Gunibry. — Hand-drum. — Derbouka. 

Musical Instruments of Syria 153 

Oud. — Bizug. — Faggeishah. — Naggarah. — Derbouka. — Tambourine. — 
Mijwiz. — Urgun. — Minjairah. — Nay. 

XV 



xvi List of Illustrations. 

PAGE 

Musical Instruments of Palestine i57 

Rebab. — Guitar. — Trumpet. — Flute. — Naggarah. — Kettledrum. — Der- 
bouka. 

Musical Instruments of Egypt i6i 

Dervish drum. — Kissar. — Rebab. 

Musical Instruments of Algiers 163 

Kuitra. — Rebab. — Gunibry. — Raita. — Gasba. — Bendir. — Tar. 

Musical Instruments of Persia 201 

Sitar. — Tar. — Suz. — Kamancha. — Kouvval. — Shepherd's fife. — Shaberba. 

— Dombeg. 

Musical Instruments of Turkey 205 

Kanoon. — Santir. — Tambouras. — Tanbour Kebyr Tourky. — Kemangeh. — 
Gliaida. — Zourna. — Ge'le'-Masha. — Flutes and flageolets. — Cymbals. 

— Fellahee. — Dervish drum. — Darabouka. — Daira. 

Musical Instruments of Africa 231 

Zanze. — Drum. — Marimbas. — Zulu stringed instrument. — Zeze. — Two- 
stringed Zeze. — Drums. — Cymbals. — Trumpet. 

Musical Instruments of North America 275 

Conjuror's drum. — Conjuror's rattles. — Other rattles. — Bracelet rattle. — 
Long flute. — Horn tapper. — Love-flute.— -Apache violins. — Apache flutes. 

— Gourd rattles. — Turtle rattle. — Notched-stick rattle. — Sheep-bell. — 
Haida rattles. — Squak. — Moose-call. 

Musical Instruments of Alaska 283 

Ke'-l-yau. — Rude stringed instrument. — Hand-drum. 

Musical Instruments of Mexico 285 

Guitar. — Pottery bell. — Bandolon. — Harp. — Notched stick. — Aztec 
whistles. — Earthen whistle. 

Musical Instruments of Cuba 289 

Cacha. — Maruga. — Guiro. — Tin Guiro. — Tohona. 

Musical Instruments of Central America 317. 

Rattle. — Marimba. 



List of Illustrations. xvli 

PACE 

Musical Instruments of South America 319 

Rattle-box. — Pandean pipes. — Flute. — El Pito. — Tambean. 

Musical Instruments of Oceanica 321 

Arpa. — Mbita ni Tangi. — Conch shell. 

Musical Instruments of Europe 333 

Lute. — Violin. — Clarionet. — Dulcimer. — Streichzither. — Tambouritza. — 
Sclavonic bagpipe. — Mountain horn. — Scotch bagpipe. 

Musical Instruments of France 337 

Vielle. — Archilute. — Pochette. — Tambour. — Harpe. — Tambourin a cordes. 

— Trompette. — Flute Palissy. — Viole d'amour. 

Musical Instruments of Germany 341 

Taschengeige. — Nagelgeige. — Fagott. — Clavichord. 

Musical Instruments of Russia 343 

Balalaika. — Torban. — Balalaikas. — Tamboura. — Guitar. — Oboe. — Bagpipe. 

— Oboe. — Flageolet. — Drum. 

Musical Instruments of Greece 349 

Cav6nto. — Bouzouki. — Lyra. — Flutes. — Clarionet. — Floyera. 

Musical Instruments of Italy 351 

Mandolins. — Lyre. — Serpentine. — Mandohn. — Terzina. — Guitar Battente. 

— Shepherd's pipe. — Harp. — Calascione. 

Musical Instruments of Spain 357 

Mandora. — Clarionet. — Tambourine. — Drum. — Castanets. — Psaltery. 

Musical Instruments of Madeira and Teneriffe 359 

Machete de Braga. — Machete Rajao. — Viola de Arame. — Viola Franceza. 

— Guitarra. — Castanholas. — Pandeiro. — Tamboril. — Pito Pastoril. 

Musical Instruments. — Miscellaneous 365 

Drum. — Rattle. — Flute. — Clarionet. 



CHINA. 




3ke (e-^^ cohere')* v/itC sx\3^i<^ J\^x\ <'n 



^ 



Z.^o> 



n\ 



or ,jV(ooT\ 
pairs 

people - 
oC, /3 f'n. 






<X, 1^ in; CDi^m. /^ ''n . 

especv^Wy A+ m-a^ma^e <fnTer- 
.5 ib icsle ^^^^^ 



J{ Veru o)^ 

(Jr»^U//\ officer, 
>Sreatest ^)cK- 

ivy^c^ c,F,a,c. 



a 



or 



J J a 1 1 a n ^ 1/ 1 1 a r" , 



?, ^ 



6 



X, 3 ft; 
or OcKoljr 5 




(i) 



Sp€ civnen ^ 

X. 3 ft; 
ness Z )n . 



m^ 








of re) 






oC. //f in, ^5^e>resh W7ar^ 1 -^ In. 




8. ^: 






or 



jcreicfvi f\arp<i chore). 




Played v/it/^ ■fv/'o Uy/Cf ^llPS 

^r\o MrceAa/r . cS'^'ny^ 
i)iAm. ^f ke^Ch 2, In . 

l/r- Jieen - secor^d 






\ree 




\0 




'J 

W. Jan 



\/ooC . oL. 11- in 



2).; 



"1 ''Z 






JC/ - 



(5 . 2. //£ ' 



j*/-2yn'^ -iff, 6 (ix. -^ 



o'fjcK's . 2- //:r 'H- 




A ^^^ 



11 iru 



"1 






'^- ^2}/' or '^onorcv^ sU^^ 



}j 



J[ str^s^W 



jpecnnen ( W^ " l '^^ '"^ ^ "'j, ^ f^^^^l'^ -"^^"^ 



9^ -frairie c«f vV^c?^ [H, l<jin] 



^ru 



1^. (^_n 



^ 



'6 ^ ^ 







J) // 'n- 



^r^fej 




■furr\t s he^ w^t/?f 
7h£' note 5 are 



*J-^ri^^^ by sfcpp\ 






c3j 


- 

d 


i,re 


ITI - 




5 





/b- 7^1 -^(' 



21 ; ^ 



CO CD2^if\v\- si\e\\. 

oC. 2^ lr( ; 3) i>"£ 171, f 
oC, or ()ov/ 2,1 in , 




er5 







J-.6e IS- 7 6- '1^ ^ i i IT- II '0 '3 



7 



8 6 



oC. /^j li^ ; -^. ^- 'n. 






'. J~U1 - lo, 







or 



C^n^/^ Jron^pet 



bi 



joUi 






I 



^ 





lon^ 5lic)m^/ +-6e 5.Ve5 four n.te^ , 

X. ifK 8 (n. 



I 






6il 



il. Pi'-^^ 



ilute, d. If-} 



(to) 







(-') 




Ji. cf 
Lfl-. I 





/>, 



MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS AND THEIR HOMES. 



L 
CHINESE MUSIC. 




^MN Brande's Dictionary of Arts and Sciences," says Mr. 
fe* Elson, " the whole fabric of Chinese music is swept 



aw^ay in one short sentence, at the close of which the 
compiler curtly says, ' We ought, perhaps, to apologize for saying 
so nnich of it.' ' No right-minded and just reader," Mr. Elson 
goes on to say, " will echo so flippant an opinion : a nation which 
more than four thousand years ago had studied music as an 
abstract science, and which understood the laws of musical proportion 
centuries before Pythagoras was born, certainly deserves more 
than a passing notice from the musical historian, no matter how 
barbarous its present music may seem." 

It is proposed in this chapter briefly to consider Chinese music, 
its character and its history, and to try to discover whether the 
subject be indeed as hopeless as most Europeans are apt to suppose. 

The Chinese, as a nation, delight in what appeals to the senses, — 
vivid color, original form, and striking sound. Their music, there- 
fore, is characterized by little of the spiritual. " To the Chinese, 
mere sensuous delight in tone presents such attractions, that their 
musical system is occupied mainly wdth the analysis and classification 

' Curiosities of Music, p. 114. 

13 



14 Mttsical Instruvieiits and their Homes. 

of the different qualities of Sound, and only secondarily with those 
sequences of Sounds which we call Notes." ' 

The same tendency appears also in other branches of their art. 
Thus, in their painting, they lay great stress upon brilliancy of color 
and general effect, and comparatively little on correctness of outline 
and accuracy of detail. As the latter art has been called a play with 
color, so their music may be described as a fanciful play with sound.^ 
The Chinese are skilful in all species of manufacture, and their 
dexterity and originality are shown in their musical instruments as 
well as in other directions. Their instruments have many strange 
forms ; such, for instance, as birds' eggs, writing-tablets, and even 
tigers. Many of them are richly carved, and ornamented with 
streamers, tassels, and canopies. Indeed, they seem designed to 
gratify the eye with their form and color, quite as much as the ear 
with their tones. ^ 

The musical history of the Chinese carries us back to days of 
remote antiquity. Even in the very earliest times they are said to 
have made thorough investigations in the science of music, but in 
" that inventive inspiration which is the soul of art " "• they have 
shown themselves lamentably deficient. In their inability to supple- 
ment knowledge by execution, in the outrunning of the speculative 
over the practical faculties, we see a touch of the real character of 
"the people who were acquainted with gunpowder but never invented 
a gun, who knew of the polarity of the magnetic needle and yet 
never thought of employing it as a compass." ^ Up to a certain 
point, they succeed in mastering all knowledge of a subject that can 
be acquired by industry and observation. Beyond this, however, 
even in an art like music, they cannot go.*^ 

The Chinese, as well as the Greeks and other ancient nations, 
speak of the mysterious influence of music. One of their writers 

' Rowbotham : History of Music, vol. i. p. 285. = Ibid., p. 309. ' jj^jj^ p^ ^^^ 4 Elson, p. 114. 

5 Ro\vl)oth.im, i. p. 301. (. NLUimaiin : History of Music, ed. Ouseley, vol. i. p. 10. 



Chinese Miisie. i 5 

declares that it has its cradle in the heart of man. It is the 
essence of the harmony existing between heaven, earth, and man.' 
With the Chinaman, therefore, music is closely associated with 
religion. " The Chinese," says Naumann, " builds his world upon 
the harmonious action of the heavens and earth ; regards the 
animation of all nature, the movement of the stars, and the change 
of the seasons, as a grand ' world music,' in which every thing keeps 
steadfastly in its appointed course, teaching mankind thereby a 
wholesome lesson." ^ He associates his music, therefore, with virtue 
and morality. The different notes of the scale represent to him 
moral precepts. Confucius himself is reported to have said, 
" Music gives a finish to the character, which has first been 
established by rules of propriety." And, again, " Wouldst thou 
know if a people be well governed, if its manners be good or 
bad, examine the music it practises." ^ He himself wrote a 
song-book, which Riickert, the celebrated German poet, translated 
in the year 1833.'^ In the later days of his wanderings, when one 
of his disciples remonstrated with him for continuing to sing and 
play as usual, even in the days of his poverty and starvation, he 
replied, " The wise man seeks by music to strengthen the weakness 
of his soul, the thoughtless one uses it to stifle his fears." '" 

The Chinese base all sciences on music, and at one time the 
purity of its prevailing type was considered to be the test of 
the virtues of the reigning sovereign. Even to-day the Imperial 
Board at Pekin still keeps a close watch over new compositions, 
in order, as far as possible, to preserve the style of the ancient 
music. 

A few facts from the traditional history of Chinese music may 
not be without interest. The art is said to have been invented 
by the Emperor Fu Hsi, 2852 B.C.*^ Those readers, however, 

' Van Aalst: Chinese Music, p. 4. = Naumann, i. p. S. ' Ambros: Geschichte der Musik, i. p. 517. 

* Naumann, i. p. 10. ^ Elson, p. 125. <■ Van Aalst, p. 4. 



1 6 Musical Instnivients and their Hofjies. 

who are sceptical as to the accuracy of this statement, may adopt 
without fear of contradiction their own theory of its origin. 

According to Van Aalst/ the first invaders of China (supposed 
to have come from a region south of the Caspian Sea) undoubt- 
edly brought with them some knowledge of music. The aborigines 
themselves had some kind of musical system, and the one was 
grafted upon the other. At first music was not regulated by any 
fixed laws ; but each emperor had his own system, which did not 
always agree with that of his predecessor. Beginning, however, 
with Huang Ti, or the Yellow Emperor, the Chinese King Alfred, 
about 2700 B.C., music assumed its characteristic form. A certain 
note was taken as the base ; various musical intervals Avere fixed, 
and received names. Music is said to have become a necessity of 
the State, and a key to good government. This supposed connection 
of music with the State is shown by the names of the notes of 
the oldest musical scale. The lowest note, F, was called Emperor ; 
G, prime minister ; A, loyal subjects ; C, state of affairs ; D, mirror 
of the world, etc." 

In the year 2284 B.C., a certain Kouei was appointed censor 
of music by the Emperor Shun (Chun), and the instructions he 
received from the latter are certainly very sensible. " Music 
should follow the sense of the words." " It should be simple and 
unaffected." " Music is an expression of the soul of the musician." ^ 
It is extremely difficult for us now to realize that such directions 
were ever applied to Chinese music. 

Many interesting stories have been preserved concerning the 
power of the early musicians. Kouei himself, a thousand years 
before the assumed era of Orpheus, said, " When I play upon my 
King, the animals range themselves spell-bound with melody before 
me." Of another performer we are told, that " his music was so 
sweet, the very stars of heaven drew near to listen." 

'\"an Aalst, p. 4. '^ Naumann, i. p. S. ^ Y^i^^w, p. 122. 



Chinese Music. 1 7 

This idea of the effect of music 011 the beasts and the stars 
corresponds closely with similar ideas which we meet with later 
in India and Greece. 

The Great Shun, about 2255 B.C., composed the piece called 
" Ta Shao." This melody is said to have so delighted Confucius, 
sixteen hundred years later, that for three months " he did not 
know the taste of meat," saying he was not aware composers could 
reach such a pinnacle of perfection.' Unfortunately, of this ancient 
music nothing now remains but the most abstruse theories. 

It is probable that the early Chinese music, like that of the 
Greeks, was chiefly employed in regulating the movement of 
dances and song. Indeed, the idea still continues, that music 
without poetry is not music at all.^ In spite of this fact, however, 
there is very little variety in the rhythm employed by the Chinese, 
and the even measure in which most of their melodies are com- 
posed sounds monotonous to our ears. " Their sense for uncouth 
rhythm may, perhaps, partly explain their predilection for instru- 
ments of percussion, a preference for which is always indicative of 
a low musical organization, while a love for stringed instruments 
evinces a higher order of mind."^ 

The year 246 B.C. marks the most important date in the 
history of Chinese music. In this year the Emperor She Huang 
Ti ordered all books to be destroyed, excepting those on medicine, 
divination, and agriculture. Musical treatises and instruments 
shared the common fate. In proclaiming this edict, he gave as his 
reason, that these ancient books, etc., were not suited to the times, 
and their study caused people to neglect agriculture, which he 
considered the only substantial basis for the happiness of a nation, 
and thus gave them leisure to censure the reigning sovereign, and 
consequently fostered disobedience and rebellion. After this whole- 
sale destruction, a long night of ignorance rested on the country, 

' Van Aalst, p. 4. ° Van Aalst, p. 5. ' Naumann, i. p. 13. 



1 8 Musical Instruments and their Homes. 

and little or nothing survived of the ancient music but the noise 
of tinkling bells and dancers' drums." 

Under subsequent dynasties, some old books and instruments 
were discovered, and great efforts were made to regain that which 
had been lost. Though the position of music was afterwards 
re-established, we meet many complaints from the writers of that 
era, about 140 B.C., to the effect that the art of regulating the 
heart, as they expressed it, by its means, was irretrievably lost, and 
that it only served to inflame the baser passions. 

Pere Amiot tells us that in the eleventh or twelfth century 
Tsai-yu studied deeply to place music upon a secure footing, and 
his researches into the proportions of tones are said to have led 
him to the same results that were afterwards discovered by the 
best acousticians of Europe."" If this be indeed true, we can only 
regret that his discoveries did not have more practical effect upon 
his fellow-countrymen. 

A strange change has taken place in the ideas of this people, 
who are supposed to be so unchangeable. The musical art, once 
held in such honor, is now deemed the lowest calling. ^ Profes- 
sional musicians are looked upon with contempt, and their ranks 
are recruited from the poorest classes. But we must not, therefore, 
imagine that the people no longer care for music. The ceremonies 
connected with birth, marriage, and worship are all accompanied by 
music, though respectable Chinese do not consider it dignified to 
perform in person, even as amateurs. The streets are full of 
bands, mostly composed of blind men, who offer their services from 
house to house. 

Although several attempts have been made to introduce 
European music into China, they have all failed ; and the Chinese 
pity us for what they consider our inferiority, for they believe their 
music to be the first in the world. Pere Amiot, who was a very 

■ Van Aalst, p. 5. - Elson, p. 135, 3 Van Aalst, p. 6. 



Chmese Music. 19 

fair performer upon the flute and the clavichord, once asked some 
Chinese musicians how they liked European music. They 
answered in their most polite way, that " Western melodies were 
not made for their ears, nor their ears for Western melodies." ' 



THEORY OF CHINESE MUSIC. 

According to the Chinese, music rests upon two fundamental 
principles, — the spiritual, or immaterial, principle, represented by 
the sound or essence of music ; and the substantial, or material, 
principle, represented by the instruments themselves." 

Their first step in the science of musical acoustics was the 
discovery of what they call the Lus, which they consider the 
basis of all their music. These are a series of tones, twelve in 
number, nearly identical with our chromatic gamut. The history 
of the Llis runs back into the age of fable. It is probable that 
the division of the octave into twelve notes was suggested by the 
combination of twelve pieces of bamboo of different lengths. The 
name Lu was originally applied to these twelve tubes, the longest 
of which measured nine inches ; but the term is now used to 
designate not only the instruments, but the notes which they 
produce. Various causes have been assigned for this division. It 
is possible that it was suggested by the different tones in the 
voices of men and women ; in the songs of birds, as of the magic 
Feng, a sort of phoenix, and its mate Hoang, or even in the 
roll of the waves of the Yellow River.^ Fable tells us that 
the discovery was made by Ling-Lun about B.C. 2500, perhaps 
accidentally, as he was cutting and experimenting with pieces of 
bamboo. 

At first, the Liis were carefully selected pieces of bamboo ; but 
afterwards they were made of copper, of marble, or even of jade, 

' Elsnn, p. 138. ^ Van Aalst, p. 5. ^ Van Aalst, p. 7. 



20 



Musical Instniments and their Homes. 



materials less affected by atmospheric changes. The tubes were 
all of the same thickness and diameter, but of different lengths, 
and were closed at one end. The original Lus were never used 
for playing, but only for regulating instruments, and giving a 
uniform pitch to their music. It may be well to mention, in this 
connection, that the pitch now in use in China is considerably 
higher than our own. 

In spite of the early date assigned by Chinese musicians for 
the discovery of the Liis, only five notes of the scale were in 
general use before B.C. 1300." These corresponded to F, G, A, 
C, and D of our scale." Afterwards the two notes E and B were 
added. Chinese theorists speak of this period as the beginning 
of the decadence of their musical system. Naumann tells us that 
" the enlargement of the scale from five to seven tones was owing 
to the insertion of the two half-tones E and B, which were called 
' leaders ' and ' mediators.' " " These appellations," he continues, 
" proceed from a very fine musical instinct, as indeed E and B are 
' leaders ' to F and C ; and they possess, also, for the modern 
cultivated ear, the quality of resolving themselves into the half-tone 
above, acting at the same time as mediators, and filling up the 
void between D and F, A and C." -^ The scale formed by the 
insertion of these two notes is as follows : F, G, A, B, C, D, E, F ; 
or if we follow Van Aalst,-^ and assume C as corresponding to 
Kiiug, or the keynote, C, D, E, F^ G, A, B, C. This differs from 
our scale in that the first half-tone falls between the fourth and 
fifth, instead of the third and fourth notes. With the rise of the 
Yiian dynasty in the fourteenth century, the invading Mongols 
introduced into China a new scale and system of notation. The 
latter, being simpler than that in former use, found favor with the 
Chinese; but the Mongol scale, in which the position of the half- 
tones corresponded to that in our own, created no little confusion. 

' Van Aalst, p. 14. ^ Ambros, i. p. 514. = Naumann, i. p. 9. ^ Van Aalst, p. 15. 



Chiitese Music. 



21 



Kublai Khan, indeed, endeavored to obviate the difficulty by 
introducing a scale of eight distinct tones, in which both F and 
F" should have a place; but such a device naturally had little 
result. In the fifteenth century the Chinese returned to their 
original pentatonic scale (F, G, A, C, D),' to which, in spite of one 
or two attempts to revive the old Yuan scale, they have been 
faithful ever since. ^ 

Theoretically, indeed, we find a vast variety of combinations in 
Chinese music. The books recognize no less than eighty-four 
scales,^ each one of which has some philosophical signification. In 
practice, however, as has been said, the Chinese use only the 
pentatonic scale. They never trespass beyond the limit of fourteen 
sounds, finding within this compass an immense variety of tunes, 
to which Chinese ears alone can become accustomed.** 

The music of the Chinese, like their language, is written in 
vertical rows of characters from right to left. The keynote is 
indicated by stating to what Lit the piece corresponds. The 
modern Chinese have a special sign for nearly every note in their 
melodic system. " Their characters not only express the sounds, but 
also indicate the pitch; that is, their position in the gamut.""* In 
the case of several notes of the scale, however, there is no way of 
distinguishing them from their respective octaves. This defect has 
been partially remedied by the affixing of little signs to indicate 
the octave higher ; but the use of this device is by no means 
universal. 

The most serious defect in Chinese notation, however, is the lack 
of any sign to indicate the duration of a note. Certain arbitrary 
devices are indeed employed. Thus, for instance, some notes may 
be written larger than others, to emphasize them ; or a space may be 

' A correct idea of the pentatonic scale may be obtained by taking the five black notes on the piano, beginning 
with FiJ (Engel: Musical Instruments in South Kensington Museum, p. 53). 

"^ Van Aalst, pp. 15, 16. ^ Naumann, i. p. 10. ■* Van Aalst, p. 17. 



2 2 Musical Instruments and their Homes. 

left between two notes, to indicate a rest ; or, again, small dots may 
be written after certain notes, to increase their value. But no 
uniform system is employed. Even the best Chinese musician, 
therefore, can " only conjecture the general form of a written piece 
shown him for the first time : to be able to decipher it, he must 
first Jiear it played!' ' Tunes, therefore, are learned by tradition ; 
and so much is left to the taste of the performer, that, after a lapse 
of time, they become entirely altered. 

" The only measure scientifically recognized by the Chinese 
theorists is that in four time. In practice, however, several measures 
are admitted, especially that in three time." ' 

Many theories have been advanced to explain why the Chinese 
use the pentatonic scale. Perhaps the most plausible is drawn 
from the fact that children instinctively raise the scale by whole 
tones instead of semi-tones. The Chinese, in the childhood of 
their national life, had the same habit, which they have not yet 
outgrown. The Chinese scale " being composed of irregular 
intervals, and having no leading notes (without which there is 
no possible modality), may be said to be neither major nor 
minor, but to participate of the two. Chinese melodies are not 
majestic, martial, sprightly, entrancing, as is our music in the 
major mode ; and they lack the softness, the tenderness, the plain- 
tive sadness of our minor airs."" When, however, their music is 
expressed in our notes, and played on our instruments, it becomes 
major or minor, and is less disagreeable to Western ears ; but 
Chinese tunes so disguised are no longer Chinese. 

We find a curious resemblance between some Scotch and 
Chinese airs. Probably the former have remnants of the pentatonic 
scale. 

' Van Aalst, p. i8. ^ Van Aalst, p. 22. 



Chinese Mtisic. 23 



THE MUSIC OF THE PRESENT DAY. 

The Chinese music of the present day may be divided into 
two kinds, — ritual, or sacred, music, which is passably sweet ; and 
theatrical, or popular, music. The former is the only scientific 
music of China. It includes all music performed at court or at 
religious ceremonies. 

During the summer or autumn, lucky days are chosen for 
the worship of Confucius and spirits of departed sages. The 
Emperor attends in person, or, if unable to do so, sends a prime 
minister as substitute. One special hymn is always sung in 
honor of Confucius. According to a decree issued A.D. 1743, the 
same words and music are always used, the only difference being 
a change of Lii, or keynote. In all great ceremonies, — the most 
important and characteristic of which is that in memory of 
ancestors, — songs are used, but no female voices are allowed. The 
music of this august ceremonial is entirely written in whole notes, 
without any change of rhythm whatever. It is rather monotonous, 
than distressing, to our ears. The Lii is chosen which corresponds 
to the moon at the time of the ceremony. A remarkable peculiarity 
of Chinese worship is a belief that the spirits in whose honor the 
ceremony is performed descend from heaven to receive the offerings 
prepared for them. The music is always accompanied by a very 
grave kind of dancing. " With us," the Chinese assert proudly, 
" all is done calmly and without precipitation." ' 

At all grand festivals, the pitch, or keynote, of the hymn is 
given by the stroke of the bell or bell-chime. After that the lute 
sounds its note, which is taken up by all the other instruments 
except the stone chime. That is struck after the others, in order 
to receive the sound and to transmit it to the second note. At the 

' La Fage : Des Chinois, p. 269, quoted by Elson, p. 170. 



24 Musical Instruments and their Ho7nes. 

end of a verse, a drum is beaten three times, and answered by a 
second drum, after which the bell-chime gives the note again, and 
the next verse begins. When the hymn is finished, the head 
of the Yu, or tiger-box, is struck once, and a stick passed rapidly 
along the projections of its back. It is easy to imagine that a 
ceremony performed during the quiet hours of the night, with 
all these curious and imposing accompaniments, is really well 
worth seeing. 

In all the many festivals of the Chinese, music plays an impor- 
tant part. The eclipse of the moon is celebrated with more than 
ordinarily discordant music. This is done to frighten away the 
dragon which is supposed to be devouring the orb of night. On 
such occasions, special prominence is given to instruments of 
percussion. 

Popular, or theatrical, music includes, besides theatrical music 
proper, of which I shall not attempt to speak here,' the performances 
of street orchestras and single itinerant musicians, together with 
all ballads and street-songs. In its performance the following 
instruments are used : The moon-shaped guitar, the three-stringed 
guitar, the two-stringed violin, flutes, clarionets, drums, castanets, 
etc.; all of which play, or try to play, in unison. Though little 
practised as a recreation in China, the popularity of music is 
proved by the number of musicians who parade the streets, 
and by the constant singing of children, servants, peddlers, and 
passers-by. 

Professional musicians, like actors, usually belong to the 
poorer classes of society. The upper classes generally keep their 
private troops of musicians, whom they own almost as slaves. 
Servants possessing musical talent command far higher remunera- 
tion than those without it. All family festivals are celebrated by 
music. Wandering minstrels keep a mental record of the birth- 

" For information on this subject, see the chapter in Elson on The Chinese Theatre and Dances, p. 176 sq. 



Chinese Musie. 25 

days of every individual for miles around; and when such d. fete 
occurs, the family may rely upon the appearance of the musicians 
without previous notice. Music is also played at funerals, though 
the friends of the deceased are not allowed to perform. For 
months after, indeed, etiquette forbids them even to touch a musical 
instrument. 

At Pekin most of the musicians are blind. Indeed, all ancient 
tradition describes musicians as blind. The intellectual Chinese 
Prince Tsai-yu finds a reason for this remarkable tradition in the 
following fact. The ancient musicians, he relates, closed their 
eyes while performing, so that no exterior object should engage 
their attention; and it was from this habit that people gave them 
the name of blind. This is certainly a charming poetical metaphor, 
and the Chinese musical traditions and theories abound in such 
ingenious ideas. In Canton, also, most of the female musicians 
are blind, except those of doubtful character who live in flower- 
boats. When women participate in orchestral music, they do it in 
a manner rather astonishing to us, for they generally play the 
wind instruments. This singular custom of allowing the weaker . 
sex to play the parts requiring the stronger lungs was quite 
universal among ancient nations. At present, however, women 
seldom assist at concerts; the instrumental music as well as the 
singing being performed almost wholly by men. 

In spite of the fact that the Chinese carry their music into every 
department of social life, it can never make any real progress, for 
musical martinets are continually exclaiming against, any change 
in the style of composition. In China, precisely as formerly in 
ancient Egypt, no changes are possible. The music for each and 
every event is as carefully prescribed and adhered to as is the cut 
of garments or the exchange of civilities among this precise people. 
The musical scale, once perfected, has been preserved by the national 
religion from all change, and the Chinese of to-day sing the same 



2 6 Musical InstrumeJtts and their Homes. 

melodies which were familiar to Confucius in the sixth century 
before Christ. The same conservatism which has hitherto refused 
admittance to our Western civilization has walled in their musical 
culture. One of the nine tribunals which have charge of the general 
affairs of the empire supervises the musical rites and ceremonies. 
The mandarins of music rank higher than those of mathematics, 
and have their college in the enclosure of the Imperial Palace. We 
are told that the library at Pekin contains no less than four hundred 
and eighty-two works on the subject of music alone. 

It may be interesting to note, in this connection, that Amiot, 
Barrow, and others complain of a want of appreciation of Chinese 
music on the part of foreigners. The surprisingly profound 
combinations of this musical system deluded them into a belief 
that the practice of the Chinese was as perfect as their theory. Of 
a similar opinion was Gladisch, a German savant, who died a few 
years ago, who succeeded in proving the intimate connection 
between the oldest Chinese theories and the philosophic conceptions 
about music of the great Greek teacher Pythagoras. 

If we ask why Chinese music does not produce a better 
impression upon foreigners, the natural answer is, because it is 
not adapted to them. First, the instruments are not constructed 
with the precision of European instruments ; second, the melodies 
are always in unison, and always equally loud ; and, third, the 
intervals of the Chinese scale, being unlike those to which we are 
accustomed, sound discordant to our ears.' The melodies are 
neither major nor minor, but float between the two in a way that 
is very distressing. Indeed, musically, as well as ethnologically and 
philologically, the Chinese are a series of contradictions, and differ 
from all our preconceived notions of right and propriety. For 
many centuries music has been popular among them, and yet there 
has been no such thing as musical progress. In the absence of 

' Van Aalst, p. 84. 



Chmese M 21 sic. 27 

a staff, a clef, sharps, flats, rests, and signs to indicate the measure, 
or the length of notes, or to distinguish a note from its octave, 
major and minor scales, crescendi and diminuendi, harmony or parts, 
it is not surprising that Chinese music compares unfavorably with 
the music of the West. 



/- 



11. 



CHINESE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS. 




^lEARLY every instrument known to cultured Europe has 



its rude prototype in China ; for its catalogue embraces 
over four hundred different kinds, of which one hundred 
and fifty are still in use. These may be divided into two general 
classes, — those employed in religious ceremonials, which are 
considered sacred ; and those used in popular music. 

According to the Chinese, there are eight different kinds of 
musical sound in nature, each having a well-marked and peculiar 
characteristic. These are : — 



First 














the sound of Skin. 


Second 














the sound of Stone. 


Third 














the sound of Metal. 


Fourth 














the sound of Silk. 


Fifth 














the sound of Wood. 


Sixth 














the sound of Bamboo. 


Seventh 














the sound of Gourd. 


Eighth 














the sound of Baked Earth 



Man has utilized all of these substances for musical purposes, 
and has fashioned : — 
Skin into drums. 
Stone into stone chimes. 
Metal into bells, gongs, etc. 
Silk into stringed instruments. 

Wood into castanets and vibrating instruments. 
28 



Chijiese Mitsical lnstru7neiits. 29 

Bamboo into flutes. 
Gourds into mouth-organs. 
Baked earth into horns. 

We shall consider the instruments under each of these heads 
separately. 

I. INSTRUMENTS OF SKIN. 

From the most primitive times the Chinese have been acquainted 
with instruments of percussion, in which the tanned skin of animals 
was the vibrating medium. In spite of this fact, however, they do 
not seem to have invented the drum ; but the idea was probably 
derived by them from the natives of Central Asia. The first 
drums were made of baked clay. Wood was, however, employed 
very early for constructing the body of the instrument. While 
we have no authoritative evidence in the ancient writings as to 
the kind of wood used, tradition mentions cedar, mulberry, and 
sandal-wood. 

The Chinese name for drum is Kou. No less than eight 
different kinds are found, varying in minute points of construction, 
as in having a longer or a fuller barrel, or in general shape, or even 
in the method of beating. The Chinese drums differ from our 
European instruments in that the heads are fastened on by nails, 
and cannot, like ours, be changed in pitch by the tightening of 
braced cords. They are generally very richly and grotesquely 
ornamented, even to the stands upon which they rest. 

It is not necessary to describe in detail each of the eight 
varieties, but a few of the most important may be mentioned. 

The Ying Kou is a large drum, suspended perpendicularly in 
a frame by four rings, and beaten on the upper surface with two 
sticks. Another large drum is the Kin Ko7i, five feet in diameter, 
and placed horizontally upon a pedestal which raises it about six 
feet from the ground. Both of these drums, as also the Tsu Kou, 



30 Musical Instruments mid their Homes. 

— a somewhat smaller variety, not unlike the Kin Kou, — are used 
in the Confucian ceremonies, and are beaten responsively in the 
service. The Tao Kou has a handle passing through the barrel. 
Two balls are suspended from the sides, which strike against 
the head as the drum is twirled. Two such drums are used 
in the Confucian ceremonies, placed, respectively, one on the 
east and the other on the west side of the room. In earlier 
times, there was a form of Tao Kou which consisted of several 
drums hung together on a frame, each having but a single head, 
which was struck by the balls as it revolved. Such drums 
have, however, quite passed out of use. Still another kind of 
drum, called, respectively, Po Kou and Fo7i Kou according as it 
is struck by the right or the left hand, has its barrel filled with 
" the husk of rice, which has been beaten from the grain in a 
mortar." This drum, therefore, modifies the pure sound of skin 
by the admixture of the sound of rice, " which is a subordinate 
sound of nature, and does not come into the universal gamut." ' 
Moreover, the head of this drum is not only tanned, but boiled for 
a long time in pure water. Its sound, therefore, is marvellously 
sweet and mellow. The drums used in popular music are of 
various kinds. The Pang Kou {stt Fig. ii) is small and flat, and 
stands upon a slender wooden tripod. Another variety is the 
T/mi-pang-kou, a species of hand drum (Fig. 13). The CJii-sian, 
or tambourine, is in common use (Fig. 16). 

The Chinese use drums for various other purposes besides 
music, as to announce persons desiring audience, and to give the 
hour of the night. The itinerant vender uses a small form of 
the Tao Kou to make known his whereabouts. In time of war, 
the drum is relied upon to excite warriors to deeds of valor. Its 
most important function, however, is in connection with religious 
ceremonies. It is used by the priests to drive away evil spirits, 

' Rowbotham, i. p. 2S7. 



Ckmese Mtisical Instrufueiits. 



J 



I 



and attract good ones. In all the great temples of Confucius, the 
drum plays an important part, and most of the eight varieties 
mentioned above are specially employed for ceremonial purposes. 
They are generally found in pairs, one at each side of the hall of 
the temple, and are beaten three or more times at the end of each 
verse in the service. On special occasions, as during the presence 
of the emperor, the drums are mufiled, which is done by covering 
the instruments with ornamented draperies of cloth, which absorb 
part of the sound. 

II. INSTRUMENTS OF STONE. 

The use of sonorous stone for musical purposes is peculiar to 
China, where, however, instruments of this kind are very highly 
esteemed. " The Sound of Stone," says Rowbotham, ' " is extolled 
by Chinese theorists as one of the most beautiful of all the 
sounds." Its place is midway between the Sound of Metal and 
the Sound of Wood ; being " less tart and rasping than the Sound 
of Metal, and much brighter than the Sound of Wood, — more 
brilliant and sweet than either." The Chinese use stone in the 
construction of several different instruments, the most important 
of which is the Kijig, or great stone chime, which is presently to 
be described. The stone chiefly used for this instrument is called 
Yu. It has never been accurately analyzed, but closely resembles 
marble in appearance. It is probably a species of agate, into the 
composition of which iron is said to enter to a certain extent. 
The best specimens of this stone are picked up from the ground 
near the banks of the River See ; others are found near the 
mountain streams and torrents of Yun-nam. It is thought that 
their peculiar clearness and purity of tone are due to their long 
exposure to the sun and to atmospheric changes. The size of the 

■ I. p. 2S7. 



^=\ 



32 Musical Ifistntvicnts and their Homes. 

stones rarely exceeds two feet. Those which Amiot ' saw at the 
Imperial Palace were three feet eight inches in height, and were 
considered unique. The Yu is very hard, and is polished like agate 
and the precious stones. Its specific gravity is also very high, so 
much so that specimens which do not appear too heavy for a single 
man to handle require four men to move them. The different stones 
vary greatly in color, and, according to Rowbotham,^ are valued 
quite as much for their color, as for their tone. The timbre, indeed, 
is said to vary with the color ; but this explanation he considers 
as an afterthought. The whey-colored Yu is considered the best ; 
then light blue, sky blue, indigo blue, light yellow, orange, dark red, 
and pale green, in the order named. In different centuries, however, 
the favorite color is said to have varied. Specimens of uniform 
color, without shades or streaks, are most highly prized, though 
those in which live colors blend are also esteemed. " The Chinese 
consider the Yu specially valuable for musical purposes, because 
it always retains exactly the same pitch. All other musical 
instruments, they say, are in this respect unreliable ; but the tone 
of the Yu is neither influenced by cold nor heat, nor by humidity 
nor dryness." ^ Beside the Yu, there are three other species of 
sonorous stone in use in China. 

As has been said, the most important instrument of the stone 
class is the King, or great stone chime, used only in court and 
religious ceremonies. The more modern form of this instrument, 
and the one now in general use, is called Pien-King. This consists 
of sixteen stones cut in the general shape of a carpenter's square, 
and suspended in two rows of eight, one above the other, in a 
handsomely decorated frame. The individual stones vary in 
thickness : the thicker the stone, the deeper the sound. Though 
the tones in the different stone chimes correspond to the twelve 
Liis with the four immediately above or below, the chimes themselves 

' Essai siir les pierres sonores, quoted by Elson, p. 146. ^ i. p. 310. ^ Engel, p. 47. 



Chinese Musical htstruments. -i^-}^ 

vary in pitch, some being higher than others. Even the best stones 
fail to give a complete octave. In carving and manipulation, they 
require most skilful handling, lest the pitch be affected. When 
out of tune, however, a stone can be either flattened by taking a 
thin slice off the back, or sharpened by cutting a piece from the 
end. The skill of the performer is shown in the degree of shading 
he imparts to the tones by varying the force of his blows. 

The King is a very ancient instrument. According to Engel," 
the Chinese records testify to the existence of highly prized Kings, 
as long ago as 2200 B.C. ; and in an outbuilding of one of the 
temples there are still to be seen ten sonorous stones, said to 
have been cut three thousand years ago. In past centuries the 
different stones of the King were cut into curious shapes, as of 
animals, fishes, etc. The angular shape already mentioned was, 
however, the earliest, and has been retained in the modern Pien 
King, though even to-day other shapes are to be found. At one 
time, the art of making Kings was lost for many years ; but in 32 
B.C. a complete set was found in a pond where it had been 
thrown in the general destruction 246 B.C.^ This has served as a 
model for modern instruments. There is one of these Kings 
in each Confucian temple and Imperial place of worship, and 
doubtless the Imperial palace and residences contain many of the 
best kind. It is, however, impossible to find a complete Pien King 
for sale, though separate stones may easily be obtained. Of all 
instruments, the Chinese claim that the King blends best with the 
human voice. Their chronicles teem with praises of this peculiar 
instrument. Confucius is said to have been thrown into ecstasy 
on hearing it for the first time. So highly was it prized, that 
two thousand years before Christ we read of musical stones 
being received as tribute. Their use was forbidden to any but 
emperors. We are, however, forced to rely on our imagination for 

' p. 46. '^ Vail Aalst, p. 48. 



34 Musical Instniincnts and their Homes. 

an idea of the mellow tones of these musical stones, which are 
said to be softer and sweeter than any gong or silver bell. 

Next to the Pien King in importance is the Tse King, or 
single sonorous stone. This, like the stones of the Pien King, is 
usually cut in the shape of a carpenter's square ; the side which 
is struck by the performer's hammer measuring two feet and a 
quarter, and the other side one foot and three-quarters. It is 
suspended from a frame by a cord passing through a hole bored at 
the apex. Like the other stone chimes, it is used only at religious 
ceremonies. It stands outside the temple, and is used to give a 
single note at the end of each verse in the service.' 

Besides its use in the chimes just described, the Chinese employ 
stone in the construction of certain wind instruments. Yu-ty and 
Yn-/isiao are the names of two flutes made of this material. The 
object in using stone for this purpose is to avoid the change of 
temperature to which bamboo is liable. 

The Hai-lo, or conch-trumpet (Fig. 17), is, for convenience, 
classified by Van Aalst under the head of stone instruments. Its 
use is principally confined to soldiers and watchmen, with whom 
it serves the same purpose as the bugle with us. 

III. INSTRUMENTS OF METAL. 

Far the most important under this head are the various bells 
and bell-chimes, though gongs, cymbals, and trumpets are also found. 
The use of bells in China dates back to the earliest ages ; and we 
find mention of them as early as 2697 B.C., when the Emperor 
Hoang-Ti ordered Ling-Lun to cast twelve bells to agree with the 
twelve Lus and the five sounds. The ancient bells were principally 
made of copper, alloyed with tin, in the proportion of six to one. 
Their original use seems to have been analogous to that of our 

■ Fig. 12 shows a small specimen. It is, however, of irregular shape, and is probably for private use. 



Chinese M^tsical Instnanents. 35 

tuning-fork or pitch-pipe, for which purpose they are still employed 
in the Confucian temples. But they very early began to be 
used, either singly or united into chimes, in court and religious 
ceremonials. 

The Chinese name for bell is Chung. In general, we may 
distinguish two varieties, — those with clappers, and those without. 
The former were used for military and other purposes, and were called 
To. Their existence from a very early date has been clearly proved. 
There is on record a wish of Confucius that he might be " a wooden- 
tongued bell of heaven," — in other words, according to Engel,' "a 
herald of heaven to proclaim the divine purposes to the multitude ; " 
— bells of this kind being frequently used to precede proclamations. 
" At present, however, the To is used only by Bonzes to mark the 
rhythm of their prayers." ^ To this class of tongued bells also 
belong the Feng-Lmg, or wind bells, hung from the eaves of pagodas, 
to the clappers of which streamers are attached, which are swung 
by the wind. The more common and important variety of Chung, 
however, is without clapper, and is sounded by a wooden mallet. 
Bells of this kind may be seen of every size, from those weighing 
more than fifty tons down to the very smallest. Thus the great 
bell in the temple at Pekin is fifty-five feet in diameter, twenty 
feet high, and weighs fifty-three tons. These bells are used in 
two general ways, corresponding to the two varieties of King, — 
the first, like the Po-Chung, being single bells suspended in a frame, 
corresponding to the single sonorous stone ; and the second, or Piejt- 
Chimg, being united into a chime of sixteen bells, tuned to accord 
with the Llis, and corresponding to the Pien-King, or great stone 
chime. The two latter instruments, indeed, are always found 
together in the Confucian temples. "They are necessary, one to 
the other ; the bell-chime sounds, and the stone-chime answers. "^ 

In addition to the bells which have been mentioned, a brief refer- 

' p. 50. " Van Aalst, p. 57. ^ Van Aalst, p. 55, 



^6 Musical Instrtuneiits and their Hoines. 

ence to the Hiiien-C/iuiig may not be out of place. This was a very 
ancient form of bell, of a peculiar oval shape, and ornamented with 
raised knobs of metal, of such a character, that, by striking them 
successively with a wooden mallet, the notes of the entire musical 
scale might be obtained. The largest of these bells were about 
twenty inches in length. They were covered with curious and 
mystical figures, every one of which was supposed to have some 
hidden meaning. They have, however, entirely passed out of use.' 

It is not necessary to describe at any length the Lo, or Chinese 
gong. This instrument is cast " in the shape of a platter or a 
Chinese straw hat with large brim, " - and varies greatly in size. 
Its use is very general, — to announce visitors, to sound retreat, to 
drive away evil spirits, and in time of eclipse " to frighten the 
heavenly dog when about to devour the moon." "" Occasionally a 
number of individual Los are united into an instrument known as 
the Yun-lo, or gong chime. This is used at court, mainly on joyful 
occasions, and also not infrequently among the common people 
in wedding and funeral processions. 

It is unnecessary to do more than mention by name the Po, or 
cymbals; the La-pa, or long-trumpet (Fig. i8), not unlike our 
trombone ; and the Hao-fung, a long, cylindrical instrument, " in 
arrangement and form not unlike a telescope," and " having a sliding 
tube which can be drawn out when wanted for use." ^ 



IV. INSTRUMENTS OF SILK. 

Silk holds a place among the most ancient natural substances 
employed for musical purposes. Pere Amiot has preserved for us 
the statement that 'silk was applied to music before it was to 
manufactures.''' The first sounds are said to have been produced 

■ Engel, p. 49. 2 Van Aalst, p. 57. 

' Van Aalst, p. 5S. •• Amiot : Memoires concernant I'histoire . . . des Chinois, vi. p. 62. 



Chinese Musical htstruments. 37 

by twisting- silken threads into cords, and twanging them with the 
fingers. Little by little men began to notice that the sound so 
produced gave definite musical notes. " The cords were then 
pegged down on a flat board, and the number of threads in each cord 
counted, so as to preserve the note unaltered for the future. Next 
the board was gradually curved to bring the strings together, 
and the number of strings was limited to seven." ' The instrument 
thus formed was called the Kin (Ch'in), and is the most ancient and 
highly esteemed of all Chinese stringed instruments. The name 
Lung-Kin \\-ould seem to imply that the aboriginal inhabitants were 
acquainted with this instrument before the arrival of the present 
Chinese.- 

The Kin (Fig. 6) is pre-eminently the instrument of the educated 
classes, as its name, " the scholar's lute," implies. Confucius and 
the sages of antiquity are said to have played it, and it is therefore 
considered sacred to men of letters. Its use is, however, at present 
confined to imperial and religious ceremonies, where it is considered 
very important. Six Kins are found in each Confucian temple, three 
on each side of the hall. 

Three varieties of Kiji are in use, varying considerably in size. 
The largest are five feet six inches long. The strings, as has been 
said, are seven in number, and are tuned as follows : G, A, C, D, E, 
G, A, — thus giving only five distinct tones. The thickest string 
is composed of two hundred and forty threads of silk. The Kin is 
an extremely difficult instrument to play. The mastery of each 
air requires months of application. This may account for the fact 
that at the present day it seems to be going out of general use. 

Another instrument of the same species is called Se (Che). This 
is nine feet long, and has twenty-five strings, each having a separate 

' Rowbotham, i., p. 291. 

^ The Lung were a powerful people inhabiting a portion of north-west China. The first use of the Kin is 
probably traceable to them. 



1 



8 M^isical Instrmnents and their Homes. 



movable bridge. The Se corresponds very closely to the Japanese 
Sono-Koto (see Figs, i and 3 under Japan). Originally, the 
number of strings of the Se is said to have been fifty. It is 
recorded that once, when a certain Miss Su performed upon this 
instrument before the Emperor Huang Ti, he was so impressed 
by its strains, and rendered so sorrowful, that he ordered the 
number of strings to be reduced from fifty to twenty-five.' 
The sound of the Se is extolled by Pere Amiot ' as superior to 
that of any European clavichord, and in it the sound of silk attains 
its highest perfection. Like the Kin, the Se is used in the 
Confucian temples, where the number ordinarily to be found is 
four. The music for both instruments is written in the simplest 
manner, but the players are expected to embellish their parts to 
the utmost extent of their skill. In early times the Chinese 
connected the dimensions, the form, and the number of strings of 
both the Kin and the Se, with certain principles in nature. Thus, 
the original length of the Kin (^^ inches) corresponds to the number 
of days in the year ; the original number of strings (five), to the 
number of elements. The upper part was made round, to represent 
the firmament; the lower part fiat, to represent the ground. The 
very name " Kin " signifies " to guard from ; " and it is thought to 
have been so called because its music was considered so pure that 
it checked the evil passions, and protected both player and hearer 
from all harm. The Chinese have, moreover, given to each position 
of the hand in playing some appropriate name connected with their 
study of nature. One is a butterfly flitting over a flower ; another, 
a bird catching a cicada on the wing ; a third, a flower floating on 
the water ; and so on up to thirty-three positions. 

We shall consider next the stringed instruments used in popular 
music. These are of two general classes, — the guitar class and the 
fiddle class. Under the first head we find three different kinds. 

' Van Aalst, p. 62. = vi. p. 60. 



CJiinesc Musical Instrtujients. 39 

First, the Pepa (P'ip'a), or balloon guitar (Figs. 4, 5), which 
corresponds in outline to the harp of Pythagoras. This has four 
silk strings, said to represent the four seasons. It closely resembles 
the Japanese Biwa. To play it ^vell requires great delicacy of touch, 
as most of the notes are played in tremolo. Second, the San Heen 
(San-Hsien) (Fig. i), or three-stringed guitar. This has a narrow, 
cylindrical body covered with snake-skin, and is played with the 
fingers or with a plectrum. It is ordinarily made of swan-wood 
brought to China from Siam and Tonquin. This is a hard wood, 
like our cherry. Third, the Yue-Kin (Yue-ch'in), or moon guitar 
(Fig. 2), so called because the shape of the body resembles the 
full moon. This is sometimes strung with copper as well as silk. 
All three of these are popular instruments, and are never employed 
in connection with religious ceremonies. They are used in orchestral 
playing, and to accompany ballads and songs in the streets and other 
places, and are often played by blind people. 

We find many instruments of the violin family in China. One 
of the most important of these is the Hu Kin (Hu-ch'in), which is 
most popular in the neighborhood of Pekin. This has a hollow, 
cylindrical body, the upper end of which is covered with snake- 
skin, while the lower is left open. The body is pierced by a long 
arm, to which are attached four silk strings, and the bow passes 
between the strings and the instrument. Sometimes the body is 
made of a round tube of bamboo, of wood, or of copper. It is of 
various sizes, the smallest having only two strings. 

The Ur-Heen (Erh-hsien), or two-stringed violin (Figs. 9, 10), 
is made on the same principle, and is found all over China. The 
form of the body varies, sometimes consisting of only half a 
cocoanut-shell (Fig. 15). The strings are tuned at an interval of 
a fifth. The lower classes are very fond of the fiddle, as it is not 
difficult to learn, except the management of the bow, which requires 
considerable practice. Mr. G. Tradescant Lay has advanced the 



40 Mitsical Instr2i]]icnts and their Iloines. 

theory that the Ur-Heen is the ancestor of our own violin ; but 
the best authorities do not support this opinion, attributing the 
origin of our violin to India. 

One more instrument remains to be described. This is the 
Yang-Kin, or foreign harpsichord (Fig. 8), the use of which is by no 
means peculiar to China, as it is found also in Syria, Turkey, and 
Egypt. This is an instrument of the zither family, consisting of 
a rectangular or oval box about two feet long, one foot broad, and 
four inches high. It has sixteen sets of metallic strings (sometimes 
fourteen), arranged in sets of two, three, or four to each note, 
decreasing in length from the base upwards. These pass over two 
metal bridges, and are fastened on both sides with nails. They 
are beaten with two light strips of bamboo ; and, when well played, 
the instrument produces very agreeable sounds. 



V. INSTRUMENTS OF WOOD. 

The time of the introduction of wooden instruments is unknown, 
but it must have been very early. Those in use to-day are four 
in number. 

The Chu is a sort of rectangular box, broader at the top than 
at the bottom, and beaten with a hammer from the inside. One 
is found in each Confucian temple. 

The Yu is in the form of a crouching tiger, resting on a 
rectangular box. It is about three feet and a half long. Upon 
its back are projections resembling the teeth of a saw. It is 
used in the Confucian temples. " At the end of each strophe, the 
attendant strikes the tiger three times on the head, and rapidly 
passes his stick three times along the projections on the back." ' 
It is thought by some that the tiger represents the empire of 
man over the animal creation. 

' Van Aalst, p. 74. 



Chinese Mtisical Insti'iuiicnts. 



41 



The Mu-Yit, or "wooden fish," is a hollow block of wood shaped 
somewhat like a skull, and painted red. " It is used by priests to 
mark time in the recitation of prayers, when begging from door 
to door, or in performing their ceremonies." ' 

The Pai-pan, or castanets (Fig. 7), " are two small slabs of a 
kind of red wood, attached together with silk cord, on which a third 
slab of the same kind of wood is struck to beat time." ' They are 
used in popular orchestras.' Another kind of castanet is called 
Shon-pan, and is used in the Confucian ceremonies. 

VI. INSTRUMENTS OF BAMBOO. 

At first thought, it may seem strange to distinguish bamboo 
from wood; but, according to Chinese ideas, there is a great difference 
between the two substances. Rowbotham calls attention to the 
fact that bamboo, by its very nature, lends itself most easily to 
musical uses. " The hollow tubing between one knot and the 
other, the distance between each knot, and the proportions of the 
distances, the hardness of the cane, etc., all seem to invite man to 
blow into it ; and the instruments made of bamboo were, by conse- 
quence, the earliest that were invented, and served as pitch-pipes for 
tuning the other instruments, especially those of silk."^ But 
bamboo has a special importance in Chinese music, because the 
Chinese scale was founded upon the succession of sounds obtained 
from a series of bamboo pipes. 

In spite of this fact, however, this unpractical people "were a 
long time in discovering that a tube pierced at different places may 
be made to produce as many sounds as there are holes, by merely 
stopping those holes, one after the other." ^ The ancient Chinese 
used a separate tube to obtain each musical sound. Thus we have 
seen that the original Liis were obtained by a series of separate 

' Van Aalst, p. 74. ^ Rowbotham, i. p. 295. ' Van Aalst, p. 69. 



42 



Musical Instruments and their Homes. 



pipes. Their first instrument of bamboo, therefore, was the Pai-hao, 
which consisted of " a collection of ten tubes, gradually decreasing 
in length, and connected together in a rough manner by silk 
cord." ' It was only in comparatively recent times that they began 
to fashion single bamboos into flutes. 

The instruments of bamboo are of three general kinds : — 

First, the Pai-Jiao (Pai-hsiao), or pipes. The number of these 
pipes, originally ten, was subsequently increased to twelve, and 
later to sixteen, which is the present number. These tubes corre- 
spond to the twelve Liis, and the first four Liis of the grave series.' 
They are arranged upon an ornamented frame, the form of which 
is supposed to typify the phoenix with wings outspread. The use 
of the Pai-hao is confined to ritual ceremonies. 

Second, the Ty, or flute. There are many varieties of this instru- 
ment, which it is unnecessary to describe. The most common is 
the Ti-tzu (Figs. 19, 20). This is a tube bound round with waxed 
silk, and often ornamented with tassels. It has six finger-holes, 
and two holes for the breath. The pitch varies according as the 
wind passes through one or the other of the latter. The hole not 
in use is covered with a thin membrane. The Ti-tzu is indis- 
pensable in every Chinese orchestra. It is very popular, being 
used constantly at weddings and funerals, and " various other 
occasions, both joyous and mournful." ' It is a favorite instrument 
for solos. "^ 

The flutes used in religious ceremonies differ in no respect from 
the common flutes, save that the former are adorned at the ends 
with a dragon's head and tail. Hence they are called " dragon 
flutes " {Lnng-ti). 

It remains only to mention the Sona, or Chinese clarionet 
(Fig. 3). This is a small instrument, having a reed mouthpiece 
not unlike that of a European oboe. It gives a most shrill and 

• Van Aalsl, p. 69. ^ Van Aalst, p. 72. ' Another variety of flute is sliown in Fig. 21. 



Chinese Musical Instruments. 43 

piercing sound, quite unendurable to Western ears. In spite of 

this fact, however, it is one of the commonest and most popular 

of Chinese instruments. No wedding or funeral procession is 
considered complete without the Sona. 

VII. INSTRUMENTS OF GOURD. 

Under this head we have the Cheng (Sheng), or Chinese mouth- 
organ (Fig. 14). This is one of the most ancient of Chinese 
instruments, going back to mythical ages. It consists of a 
body of gourd, which is fitted with a wooden mouthpiece, and 
into which are inserted seventeen bamboo pipes, varying in length. 
Thus in this instrument we do not have the sound of gourd in 
its purity, but combined with the sounds of bamboo, wood, and 
metal. For the sound of the pipes is produced " by means of the 
vibration of a little tongue of metal, which is fitted, by means of 
beeswax, in the lower end of each pipe."' The Cheng, according 
to Dr. Eastlake, is the most perfect of Chinese instruments, both 
in sweetness of tone and delicacy of construction. Its use is 
confined to the Confucian ceremonies, in which six Chengs are used. 
It is played by sucking in the breath ; and long-continued playing 
is said to bring on inflammation of the lungs and bronchial tubes, 
so that no good performer lives more than forty years. The prin- 
ciple embodied in this instrument is really that of our grand organ. 
" Indeed," says Dr. Eastlake, " according to various writers, the 
introduction of the Cheng into Europe led to the invention of 
the accordion and the harmonium." " The same instrument is found 
in Japan under the name of Sho. 

' Rowbotham, i. p. 295. "= Quoted by Van Aalst, p. 82. 



44 Musical Instruments and their Homes. 

VIII. INSTRUMENTS OF BAKED EARTH. 

Under this head we have the Hsuan, a species of ocarina 
said to have been invented in the year 2700 before our era. This 
consists of " a reddish yellow cone of baked clay or porcelain, 
ornamented with designs of dragons, clouds, etc., and pierced with 
six holes, — one at the apex to blow through, three in front, and two 
behind." ' The tones of the Hslian conform to the pentatonic scale. 
It is almost impossible to procure a specimen of this instrument, 
the use of which is confined to the Confucian ceremonies, and for 
an idea of which we are obliged to rely upon Chinese accounts. The 
tact that baked earth was very early used to form the bodies of 
instruments of percussion has already been mentioned. 

Van Aalst, p. 83. 



JAPAN AND COREA. 










of. 2.] 1 '^ . 



6.)v ^'f '^. ^' if 
S 







3 C50n0-J4^0, -/(e rer^se.f.f-^^' '^S^^o 



f. 






S-. 







3- m, v\/i^)i2 



l/?^^rs, 



i 



W^l'/^ 2k S v^ aH /'lee - 







' c)M K ^^^i^M oC, /-(^i- Z^',^ D. Im. -A prii^ifi'v'e J^tu 






t^. 



Sc^]e: C", E,r; g: A^ B. 



7- 4— 

8. Xan<o - 



I Jew^/ ^A>-p 



v/. 7- m 



^ru 










Q . - JzU^ZUri-^ l 

or Urce Jzuhn/Yn \ ^ 







10 



J3€^^el^ V(7? two Woohzv, ^ruTnc^Kcl^s. 





'3^v 



?'" 



j6. JaiKo - 



es^S 



^ 6 



7' S^^P-P- 




(/aj 



f ra, - J^i'<^< 



} 



sec) h 






aKM 



^nli also in relV^U'uj Cfremonces 




or nei 01- ^or^ 
D , 6 ;>i 



fo^ 



{ i&. J\oj<u_q\(o , 




ur ses 



t 



pur p 



of 6aj 



U 



y{oo'^t'n -f/'^^ 



or 



(<(n2) 



"t/fe ^uh]Ls\- prtesfc While recl^(lvcj /^€/r pr^\cerr 



b\\ € "("A P 



j^r €3,C/C ^ (.jllc^Ud . >f. /'f lA. V^'2. in, v». q 



in. 




1, 




Vhen Q lr\ CI 



/.i6i., >^^<?.,^^M^^ ^''K - -^''PJ '^l 



»v'o c 6 



w^o J I 






11 

c entre 
vv' (3 J (T rj 






br'\ h a ^ r j ^'\\i t^ Wit'(\ 



AiciYvn\ e/'. 5'^ m.V/ Tin 



/ 



J/aqa^ Viol) 



^- -^^Si^^^ Viol) VI. W'loJ , 



6x| a pie C € 



e^^ 



15 y ^'^'^ 

Yepre(e.y\r '^ fho 4 . «c,2.0iy 




f"^^ 



0- 



£ Ac) 3^ 



In 







L 2\i CI uere} , 
ire /)el^ 



I? I- (-■' 3^ tr> (> o . 



,-( 



S ^' '/^' ^- '^ 



' J c -at U u /? I. -a Y e -J (>-( 



■^ 







^-? '^ 



<=^. if/-. 3j -H 



a J u 1- J 

Wi>^ 
/9 1 e c e 

7). oj- 



5. £/\^<] 



Jou 



6e ,\l"er| 



-J^n^ 



J 











III. 

JAPANESE MUSIC. 

jT is only within the last thirty years that the islands of 
Japan have been open to intercourse with Western nations. 
During that period they have made immense progress in 
government, in industries, and in science; but until very recent 
years Western civilization has had but little influence upon their 
music. It has often been remarked that the Japanese are not an 
inventive, but an imitative people. They have imported our rail- 
roads, our telegraphs, our school-system. It should therefore cause 
no great surprise, that, within the last few years, this great movement 
should have reached the art of music also. Our familiar melodies 
may now be heard whistled on every street-corner of Yokohama, 
and that with great accuracy; for the Japanese is blessed with a 
very true ear.' Nor is this movement popular only. In the year 
1878 the Government, recognizing the important sphere played by 
the musical art in the education of a people, appointed a commission 
to inquire into the character of European music, and its fitness 
for introduction into the school -system of Japan. In 1880 a 
national institute of music was opened in connection with the 
normal school of Tokio, and the services of Mr. Luther Whiting 
Mason secured as instructor of music. The aim of the institute 
was threefold : " First, the compilation and composition of pieces, 
taking the best out of both European and Oriental music,"' with 
a special view to discover which system was best adapted for use in 

' Japanese Music and Musical Instruments. Musical Herald, May, 1SS7. 
^ Extracts from the report of S. Isawa, Tokio, Japan, p. 2. 

59 



6o Musical Instruments and their Homes. 

Japan ; " second, to train special students who shall be fitted to 
undertake the improvement of our music in the future; third, 
to introduce the new music into schools, so as to test its adaptability." 
For the past eight years this work has been carried on, not without 
the accomplishment of great results." In view of these facts, the 
future of Japanese music is at present a question of special interest 
to the student. The Japanese themselves are divided in opinion. 
While many admit the superiority of European music, and favor 
its introduction in its purity, a strong party oppose this on the 
ground that the music, like the language of a people, is the develop- 
ment and outgrowth of their national life through many ages, and 
that it would be as difficult to change the mother tongue of a people 
as to alter their music." It has been the aim of the commission to 
combine what is best in each of these views. How far they will 
succeed in their attempt, must be left to the future to decide. A 
recent writer in "The Musical Herald" speaks as follows, in reference 
to the future of Japanese music: "That it will be an exquisitely 
finished reproduction of our own, can scarcely admit a doubt. That 
a new and quaint flavor will be found in the original music which 
shall be produced, is, of course, to be expected. Whether a great 
and original Japanese school shall soon appear, is less certain."^ In 
any case, it is certainly to be hoped that the undoubted beauties of 
the native music may be cultivated and enriched by further study, 
rather than that a mere servile imitation of our own should be 
introduced. Whatever the future may bring in this direction, no 
lover of music can fail to be interested in a brief consideration of 
the past history and present condition of music in Japan. 

The average European who has had the opportunity of listening 
to a Japanese orchestra may smile at the idea of their music having 

' The military music of Japan i^ said to have been entirely remodelled on the European plan; and musical 
instruction, both vocal and instrumental, finds a place in the curriculum of several of the schools. 
= Isawa, pp. I, 2. ^ May, 1SS7. 



yapaiicse Music. 6i 

any real value. Miss Bird, indeed, compares her sensations on one 
such occasion to those caused by an attack of acute neuralgia.' But 
here again, as in the case of China, it must be remembered that the 
lack of appreciation is mutual. Dr. Miiller was on one occasion told 
by a Japanese noble, that, while European music might be all very 
well for women, coolies, and children, no well-educated Japanese 
could endure it.^ Music is, after all, a matter of the emotions rather 
than the intellect ; and when a Japanese, all insensible to the charms 
of Rossini and Bellini, is melted to tears by the melodies of his 
country, we must agree with M. Kraus ^ in admitting the true and 
legitimate influence of music, however incapable our ears may be of 
appreciating it. In the Japanese civilization, as in the Chinese, 
music has been for centuries one of the chief factors. It takes a 
prominent place in all ceremonies, both religious and secular, and 
plays a no less important part in private life. At every corner one 
meets improvisators, who accompany themselves upon the Saniise^i. 
At his arrival in a strange village, the traveller is sure to be greeted 
by female musicians, with whose melodies he may be entertained 
during his repast. Street bands are as numerous as in China, and 
the use of musical instruments, among the people in general, much 
more universal. Unlike the sister kingdom, Japan considers it no 
disgrace for her subjects to perform in person. Especially is the 
contrast noticeable in the case of women, all classes of whom are 
proficient in music. Scarcely a house which does not possess a 
musical instrument of some kind ; and even the humblest bride does 
not consider her trousseau complete without a Samisen, the guitar 
of the country, and, if possible, a Koto.'' 

The Japanese mythology attributes to music a divine origin. 
According to their tradition, Amaterasu, the goddess of the sun, 
offended by the other divinities, hid herself in a cave, which she 

• Unbeaten Tracks in Japan, vol. ii. p. 212. ■ Kraus : La Musique au Japon, p. II. 

3 p. 12. "' Kraus, p. 15. 



62 Musical InstriLments and tJieir Homes. 

obstinately refused to leave until charmed thence by the sound of 
music, which the gods, desolated by her absence, had invented to 
lure her from her retreat.' So much for the traditional origin of 
Japanese music. The historical question is not quite so simple. 
Most writers agree in tracing the origin of Japanese music 
to China. Whatever may have been true of the music of the 
aboriginal inhabitants of Japan, of which nothing now is known, 
certain it is that no one can fail to be struck by the marked 
similarity between the present classical Japanese music and that of 
China. The instruments of the two countries, also, are largely 
identical. It is true that recent Japanese students of the question, 
as S. Isawa," trace the ultimate origin of the music of their country 
to Hindustan. But if this be true at all, it is so only indirectly, as 
the roots of Chinese music itself may be traced to India. Unques- 
tionably, the direct source of the present music of Japan must be 
found in the sister kingdoms of China and Corea. The date of 
the first introduction of these musical influences cannot be exactly 
determined. The relations between Japan and Corea date back two 
thousand years, but the first authentic mention of musical relations 
between the two countries occurs in the year 453 A.D. In this 
year " the King of Shiragi (in Corea), being deeply grieved at the 
news [of the death of the Emperor of Japan], sent eighty ships full 
of presents, with eighty musicians of different kinds," etc.^ From 
this time certainly, if not from an earlier, the Japanese were 
acquainted with the music of Corea. It seems, however, to have 
made slow progress at first. With the introduction of Buddhism, 
in 552, a great impulse was given to the study of music. Under the 
regency of Prince Shotoku, himself a sincere believer in Buddhism, 
the people were commanded to learn music; and it is said that 
when this prince overthrew Moriganodaijin, " he led on his army to 
the tune of ' Bairo,' a piece of classical music." * 

' Kraus, p. 12. = Report, p. 54. ' Isawa, p. 54. •< Isawa, p. 55. 



yapanese Alusic. 63 

At the beginning of the seventh century, communication was 
first opened between Japan and China; and, from this time on, 
intercourse between the two countries became frequent and intimate. 
As a result, " the flood of Chinese civilization at once inundated 
the land." ' In no sphere was the effect of this more noticeable 
than in that of music. The Chinese classical music was adopted 
bodily, and many of the present Japanese instruments were 
doubtless introduced at this time. From this time dates the ereat 
popularity of music in Japan. No public or private rites could be 
performed Avithout it. Even the emperors not unfrequently 
distinguished themselves in this branch of art. Unfortunately 
this period of musical prosperity was destined to be of short 
duration. With the beginning of the tenth century, the relations 
between China and Japan again became strained. Japanese 
students could no longer enter China ; and with the cessation of 
the former intercourse, seem to have ceased also most of its effects. 
The study of classical music was discontinued. And to this day, 
while retaining unchanged the theory of music as received from 
China, Japanese musicians have done little or nothing to increase 
or improve their knowledge of it. Japan can boast no such library 
of theoretical works on music as is to be found in China. 

Popular music happily did not share the above fate. Though, 
like the classical music, derived directly from Chinese sources, it 
seems only to have been brought into greater prominence by that 
cessation of intercourse which proved so nearly fatal to the latter. 
Moreover, the Japanese, freed from the iron rules which had 
previously fettered him, seems, from this time on, to have developed 
his music along new and original lines. Not troubling himself 
much about theory, he yet introduced much variety into his practice, 
and produced a music which has a marked individuality of its own. 
The Japanese are a practical people, and their attention was given 

' Isawa, p. 56. 



64 Musical Instruments and their Hoines. 

primarily to the production of new and pleasing effects of sound. 
It will be impossible here to follow the vicissitudes in this musical 
development. At different times, difterent types of music appear 
to have been most popular. Singing received great attention from 
the earliest times. The introduction of the drama was comparatively 
recent, the present form of the theatre not dating back more than a 
century.' It will be sufficient for our purpose to call attention to 
certain marked contrasts between the present music of Japan, and 
that of China. I have spoken already of the fact that in Japan 
music is an art, rather than a science, and that the Japanese has 
done nothing in the development of a theory of music. Officially, 
to be sure, he accepts the Chinese pentatonic scale, and links with 
it various mystical associations. Thus, for instance, Kui, the tonic, 
means a temple ; Sho, the second, a trade, and so forth. Each 
month is supposed to have its corresponding tone, and legend asserts 
that with the varying months the wind also changes its key. The 
keynote being given, the remaining notes of the scale are 
obtained by a somewhat obscure process of computation, supposed 
to prove some mysterious connection between the musical system 
and the order of nature.'' But of all this the practical musician 
knows nothing. He does not even adhere to the pentatonic scale. 
" The tuning of the Koto (the Chinese Kin) yields a scale unlike 
that of the Kin, in that the fifth (of the pentatonic) is sharped." ^ 
Recent experiments have proved that the scale now employed 
by Japanese musicians coincides essentially with our European 
chromatic scale. Mr. Mason, after repeated trials, was unable to 
detect any difference in tonality between Japanese music and our 
own, but only a difference in the method of tonal combinations.-* 
Still another contrast must be remarked between the music of 
Japan and that of China. The former is less sensuous than 
the latter. Mere brilliancy of sound presents less attraction to the 

' Isawa, p. 59. = Kraiis, p. 34. ' Musical Herald, .-\pril, 1SS7. " Isaw.i, p. 14. 



Japanese Music. 65 

Japanese than to his Chinese brother.' This contrast appears, also, 
in other sides of his life, as in the comparatively quiet color of his 
garments. 

The Japanese possess for their sacred music alone a relatively 
complete system of musical notation.^ In works intended for 
stringed instruments, they indicate by a number the string to be 
used ; and in like manner, in the case of wind instruments, by a 
series of numbers, the holes to be closed by the fingers. Accidentals 
are indicated by little marks by the side of the note, which mean 
that the finger must be raised or lowered. The duration of a note 
may be indicated in two ways : first, by leaving between the signs 
of the different notes (written one above the other), a space larger 
or smaller, according to the greater or less value of the note ; 
second, by placing to the right of the musical sign indicating the 
note, a whole, half, or quarter circle, according as the note is 
intended for a whole, half, or quarter note. The Japanese have no 
sie^ns to indicate the time. Most of the melodies with which 
travellers have made us familiar are in four-four or two-four time. 

In secular music, certain monosyllables, varying according to the 
instrument to be played, are added to the sign of the note, to 
indicate the movement to be given. Thus, in the case of wind 
instruments, the syllable ra is used, repeated thus, rarara, ra, vara? 

The Japanese, like the Chinese, write their music in vertical 
lines, from right to left. In vocal music, the words are written to 
the left of the lines. Musical compositions are generally written 
so as to be played either with or without the accompaniment of 
the voice or a second instrument. In the former case, the song is 
always written in unison, and is regarded as an accessory to the 
leading instrument. In the latter, the second instrument preserves 
throughout the piece the interval assumed at the beginning. In 
secular music, however, there are exceptions to this rule. 

' Rowbotham, i. 318. " Kraus, p. 37. ' Kraus, p. 38. 



66 Musical Instruments and their Homes. 

Japanese musicians are divided into four classes or corporations, 
some of which are invested with a public character, meeting at 
certain fixed periods in accordance with their regulations, and taking 
part in great ceremonies, both religious and secular. Others devote 
themselves to the service of individuals, receiving .compensation 
according to their personal skill. The iirst class, called Gakkunine, 
take rank with the most distinguished personages in the state, 
even the Damios themselves having formerly been eligible for 
membership. This class devote themselves exclusively to sacred 
music, and in their midst is to be found all the theoretical musical 
knowledge which still exists in Japan. Its members are all 
distinguished instrumentalists, and the orchestra of the Mikado 
is recruited from their ranks. This orchestra still renders at 
certain seasons the ancient music of Japan. The words which 
originally accompanied this music have long ago been lost^ and 
even the names of the pieces are unknown.' 

The second class, called Gueni'n, rank with the merchants, and, 
with the occasional exception of some skilled Koto player, are 
ignorant of musical theory. The Guenin perform secular music 
exclusively, and to their numbers belong the orchestra of the grand 
prince. 

The third class consists of blind men, and is highly esteemed. 
They form a close corporation, self-supporting, and with independent 
officers. In former days they enjoyed exceptional privileges, and even 
now their chief receives an annual pension of 4,300 tael, and has 
the power of life and death over his subordinates." Each member 
of the corporation works with his hands at some trade, and turns 
over his earnings to the common treasurer. A romantic legend is 
connected with the origin of the society. Feki, a prince, fell in 
conflict with Joritomo, the Japanese Mars. His faithful general 
was taken prisoner, and treated with such magnanimity by his 

■ Kraus, p. 26. = Kraiis, p. 28. 



yapanese Music. ^J 

captor, that, unwilling to seem ungrateful, and yet unable to endure 
without rage the sight of the hand that had slain his master, he 
plucked out his own eyes and presented them to his captor. 
Astonished at such courage, Joritomo immediately restored him to 
liberty. He became a musician, and the founder of the society in 
question, to which he gave the name of his beloved prince.' The 
services of the Feki-blind, as they are called, are in great demand ; 
they are found in the ranks of the court musicians, and they take 
part also in ceremonies both religious and secular, in festivals and 
weddings, and in processions. Their favorite instrument is the 
Biwa. 

The fourth class, which is also the most numerous, consists of 
those women who devote themselves to music and song. Its 
members are little esteemed, and forbidden to take part in sacred 
music. Yet they are found on every street corner. No sight is 
more familiar in Japan than the Gheko (Gueschia), or singing-girl, 
and her Samisen. To its accompaniment she will sing you all the 
popular songs of the day, with perhaps some romantic legend 
founded upon the past history of Japan. In spite of the 
temptations to which such a career is exposed, the Ghekos are 
generally girls of good character; and it is no uncommon thing for 
them to amass a snug little portion, and to find a good husband 
in whose company to pass the rest of their days. 

In time past, these four classes were subdivided into innumerable 
corporations. Even to-day each has its grand master, who has 
the right to confer rewards and honorary distinctions. Of these 
the most appreciated is the right to tune the first string of the 
instrument an octave higher or lower than the required tone.' 

The theatre, in spite of its comparatively recent origin, is 
extremely popular in Japan ; and, in connection with this, the 
orchestra plays an important part. The representations last all 

' Kraus, p. 27. '^ Kraus, p. 29. 



68 Musical Instruments and their Homes. 

day, and consist of a sort of variety show, including often a comedy, 
a tragedy, an opera with a ballet, and concluding with the 
performance of a melodrama based on some historical subject. 
In martial scenes the effect is increased by the free use of the 
Taiko, or bass drum. 

Music does not play as important a part in connection with 
religious ceremonies and processions as in China, though its use 
on such occasions is very general. The chanting of the Buddhist 
priests in their services is said to be very impressive. Each man 
chants "not on a given key, but on that which best suits his 
natural voice." The effect of this blurred and massive body of 
sound is said to be very good, creating an impression, not unlike 
that produced by a large congregation when repeating the Lord's 
Prayer in unison. The chanting is often accompanied by the free 
use of gongs and drums.' In all such ceremonies, and especially 
in the religious processions, the drum plays an important part. 
Indeed, the Japanese fully shares the fondness of the Chinese for 
instruments of percussion. There has been preserved a picture 
of a Japanese orchestra in which six instruments of this kind 
are balanced against a single flute. ^ 

I have already spoken of the fondness of the Japanese for 
singing. The song has a place in all departments of his life. 
The Gheko has no monopoly of it. It is no uncommon thing to 
hear laborers singing at their work. The Japanese, being an 
agglutinative language, lends itself charmingly to song ; though " the 
strained and ear-rending falsetto, which all singers affect, witnesses 
a barbaric taste, which a better knowledge, and especially an 
acquaintance with harmony, will speedily expunge." ^ Here, at 
all events, may be found a promising field for the early labors of 
the institute. 

' Elson, p. 210, - Siebold : Pantheon of Nipon, Part €., plates. ' Musical llerald, June, 1887. 



IV. 

MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS OF 

JAPAN. 

T has been asserted that the instruments of Japan, while 
resembling, in general appearance, their Chinese proto- 
types, are much cruder/ Rowbotham goes so far as to 
say that if a Japanese lute were placed by the side of a Chinese 
one, it would appear like the work of some schoolboy who had 
tried his hand at carpentering in the holidays.' Such at least has 
not been the experience of the present writer. The Japanese 
instruments which make part of the present collection certainly 
compare very favorably, as to finish and workmanship, with those 
of Chinese make. Nor is this an isolated experience. Fetis ^ 
speaks of the Japanese instruments which had come under his 
observation, as having a remarkable finish. This, indeed, is only 
what might be expected of a people, the neatness of whose work- 
manship is well known in every market of the world. 

In considering the instruments of Japan, the student is con- 
fronted by no such eightfold division as has been remarked in 
the case of China. The Japanese cares little whether the sounds 
to which he listens are produced by wood, skin, or clay. It is 
enough for him if they be pleasing to his ear. He divides his 
instruments simply into two great classes, — perfect and imperfect. 
Perfect instruments are those used for sacred music : all others are 
imperfect. This distinction, while doubtless satisfactory enough 

' Elson, p. 202. ^ Vol. i. p. 319. ' Histoire Generale de la Musique, vol. i. p. 82. 

69 



70 Musical Instruments and their Homes. 

to the Japanese, is not so well adapted for the present purpose, 
inasmuch as the two classes often differ only in minute points of 
construction and ornamentation, in the character of their strings," 
or, at most, in the method of tuning. For the present, therefore, 
this distinction may be ignored ; and we may content ourselves 
with the time-honored division into stringed instruments, wind 
instruments, and instruments of percussion. 

Before taking up Japanese instruments proper, a word may be 
in place as to those which still survive among the Ainos, or 
aboriginal inhabitants, numbers of whom are to be found in the 
island of Yesso. Their ideas of religion are crude and indistinct, 
and their general state of civilization very low.^ Much musical 
proficiency is not therefore to be expected. Miss Bird has, how- 
ever, given an account of two instruments which she saw among 
them. The first was a sort of rude guitar, with three, five, or 
six strings, made of the sinews of whales cast up upon the 
shore. The second (Fig. 7) consisted of "a thin piece of wood, 
about five inches long and two and a half inches broad,^ with a 
pointed wooden tongue, about two lines in breadth and sixteen 
in length, fixed in the middle, and grooved on three sides. The 
wood is held before the mouth, and the tongue is set in motion 
by the vibration of the breath in singing." The sound is not 
unlike that of a jew's-harp, though less penetrating. It is not easy 
to obtain a specimen, as the people are unwilling to part with 
them, owing to the difficulty of obtaining pieces of wood which 
will stand the necessary fine splitting. 

' Those used for sacred instruments are manufactured at Kioto, and are very expensive. Tlie otliers are 
mostly manufactured at Yeddo. 

^ Unbeaten Tracks in Japan, vol. ii. p. 103. 

3 The specimen represented in Fig. 7 is not more than three-eighths of an inch broad. 



Musical Instruments of yapan. 7 1 

STRINGED INSTRUMENTS. 

Returning to Japanese instruments proper, we begin our 
consideration with the division of stringed instruments. Of these 
the four most important are the Koto, the Samisen, the Kokiu, 
and the Biiva. 

The name Koto is applied to a large family of instruments, 
varying greatly in size, construction, and number of strings, from 
the Summa-Koto with its single string, to the Sono-Koto which 
has thirteen. A full account of the difterent varieties is given by 
Kraus, in his chapter on the stringed instruments of Japan.' It 
will be sufficient here to mention a few of the most important. 
An interesting legend is connected with the Summa-Koto just 
mentioned, to the effect that it was invented by a certain noble 
banished to the province of Summa (Souma), who, for want of 
better materials, constructed a rude instrument out of his hat and 
a bit of cord.^ I pass over various varieties of Koto, strung 
respectively w4th two, three, five, and six strings (of which the 
latter, called IVangong, is supposed to be of celestial origin, and 
is used exclusively for sacred music ^), to speak of the Schikenkin, 
or Kinno-Koto.'^ This instrument corresponds to the Kin, or 
scholar's lute, of China.^ Like the Kin, it has a body of lacquered 
wood, and is strung with seven silken strings, passing over a 
common bridge. Though, like the Wangong, a perfect instrument, 
it does not boast a celestial origin. The story of its introduction 
into Japan is as follows: In the year 331 A.D., a certain old 
ship, having become waterlogged, was taken to pieces, and the 
wood burned to extract the salt. Out of the burnt fragments, 
certain Corean workmen constructed a number of Kins, and from 
that time dates the acquaintance of the Japanese Avith this 

' La Musique au Japon, chap. vi. "" Kraus, p. 62. ^ Kraus, p. 63. * Kraus, p. 64. 

* See Fig. 6, under China. 



72 Mtisical Iiistntvients and their Homes. 

instrument. By far the most important instrument of the Koto 

family is the Soiw-Koto (Figs, i and 3), also called Tsukushi-Koto, 

from the place of its supposed origin.' In general appearance, it 

corresponds to the Che of China, though having a less number 

of strings. This instrument is constantly used both for solo and 

orchestral playing. In the latter case it is considered the base 

of the orchestra. In a Sono-Koto of regulation size, the body 

should be six feet long, ten inches broad, and three inches thick. 

It should be made of Kiri wood (Pawlonia Imperialis), a tree 

the blossoms of which form the household crest of the Mikado. 

This wood, which is almost white naturally, is first charred, and 

then rubbed with straw rope, — a process which brings the natural 

marking into beautiful prominence. The Koto should be strung 

with thirteen strings of silk, saturated with wax, each passing 

over a separate movable bridge. In playing, the performer sits 

cross-legged before his instrument, and picks the strings with the 

ends of his fingers, protected with little ivory-tipped plectra.- For 

travelling purposes, a smaller size of the instrument is employed 

(Fig. i). The perfect Koto differs from the imperfect only in 

richness of ornamentation. There is no regular single tuning for 

the Sono-Koto. At least five are generally accepted. None 

of the established tunings gives regular diatonic progression;^ 

though in one of them, if the second string be assumed as the 

tonic, the relations of the several tones are essentially the same 

as in the natural minor scale.-* 

Next to be considered are the instruments of the guitar 
family, of which the most important is the Saniisen (Siamisen) 
(Fig. 4). This instrument is the one most generally used in 
Japan. The place of its origin is disputed ; some claiming that 
it was imported from Loo-choo, others from " an old country of 
Europe," ^ though the latter seems impossible. It has a body 

' Isawa, p. 60. ° Kiigel, p. [97. ' Alusical Herald, July, 1887. * Isawa, p. 20. ' Isawa, p. 59. 



Mitsical Instrtmieitts of yapait. 



7 







of wood, covered on both sides with cat-skin, and protected on the 
side nearest the player by a guard of cloth. The handle is of 
hard wood, long and thin, and the strings, three in number, of gut. 
It is played with a large plectrum of ivory, tortoise-shell, or wood. 
It may be tuned in five different ways. Like the guitar, the 
Samisen is most frequently used to accompany singing. As has 
been said, it is the instrument par excellence of the Gheko. 
Beside the Samisen, there are found in Japan various other 
instruments of the guitar family, for a detailed description of 
which the reader is referred to M. Kraus. The San-Heen and 
Yue-Kin of China re-appear in the sister kingdom. 

Next in order come the violins, of which class the Kokiu 
(Fig. 2) is the representative. This instrument is not unlike the 
Samisen in appearance, though much smaller. It has four strings 
of gut, and is played with a long horsehair bow (called Kioti). 
The instrument is held perpendicularly in the left hand, the neck 
uppermost, and the body resting on the lap. The bow is grasped 
with the right hand, in such manner that the hairs may be 
tightened or loosened at pleasure, between the fourth and fifth 
fingers. In spite of this clumsy method of bowing, it is said to 
yield tones which are remarkably sonorous and good. Like the 
Samisen, the Kokiu is said to have been introduced from Loo-choo, 
whither it was imported from China. The Kokiu has received 
the hearty praise of European writers as the king of Japanese 
instruments. Whatever may be true of the comparative merit 
of the other instruments of the two countries, the superiority of 
the Kokiu over the best Chinese violin must be admitted. It is 
therefore a pleasure to hear that the Musical Commission has 
recommended, that, with the pianoforte and organ, the Koto and 
the Kokiu should have a place in the curriculum of the institute, 
and in ordinary school instruction. Experiments for improving 

' Isawa, p. 59. 



74 Musical Instntineitts and their Homes. 

its construction have already been made ; and, by substituting a 
sounding-board of Kiri wood for the customary cat-skin, a much 
finer quality of tone has been secured. Beside the Kokiu, we find 
in use in Japan the ordinary violins of China and Corea. The 
former is used especially in connection with theatrical performances. 
It remains only to speak of the Biwa (Fig. 5), or lute, as it 
has sometimes been called. This instrument, which is said to 
have originated in Hindustan,' is identical with the Chinese Pepa, 
or balloon guitar. It has an oval shape, not unlike that of the 
lute, but its body is much less deep. One of the most beautiful 
lakes of Japan, near Kioto, is called Biwa Lake, from the fact 
that the outline of its shores resembles the body of that 
instrument. The Biwa has four silk strings, which, like those of 
the Samisen and the Koto, admit of a variety of tunings. It is 
used both for classical and popular music. In the former case, it 
has four frets, and is played with a small plectrum ; in the latter 
it has five frets, and is played with a large plectrum. In this case 
it is called Heike-Biwa ; the name being derived from a celebrated 
piece of music several hundred years old, supposed to be the 
ancestor of the present drama.^ I have already mentioned the fact 
that the Biwa is the favorite instrument of the Feki-Blind. 

WIND INSTRUMENTS. 

Of these the most important is the flute, called Fiiye (Fouye) 
or Teki. This is a very ancient instrument, dating back to 
the most remote times. According to the code compiled by the 
forty-third emperor Mommu, the flute was the only instrument of 
music in use in his time.^ A Japanese legend relates that a 
certain famous player of the Fuye, having hidden himself in a cave 
to escape the consequences of a crime, was approached by an 

' Isawa, p. 5S. ^ Isawa, p. 59. ^ Js^^va, p. 55. 



Musical Instruments of yapan. 75 

immense serpent. Terrified at tlie sight, the wretched man seized 
his instrument, and, as a last farewell to life, began to play one 
of the popular melodies of the day. To his surprise the monster 
stopped, listened a while with pleased attention, and at length 
retired, without doing the frightened musician the least harm.' 
From this time dates the belief that the Fuye has power to 
charm serpents and other venomous beasts. There are many 
varieties of the flute in Japan, both traverse and vertical. Two 
of the most common forms are shown in Figs. 14 and 15. 
The ordinary flute consists of a bamboo tube, with a hole 
for the breath near the top, and seven finger-holes near the base. 
These holes are made oblong, in such a way, that, by closing them 
more or less completely, the player can modify the tone produced. 
In the Riyuteki, the body of the instrument is wound with a series 
of layers of black cord. A more primitive instrument is the 
Shakuhachi.^ This is a vertical flute, consisting of a thick tube of 
bamboo about two feet long, having four holes in front and one 
behind. It is said to be very difficult to play. Legend attributes 
its origin to a sect of wandering Buddhist monks. To the family 
of vertical flutes belong also the Seounofttye, or Pan pipes, consisting 
of a series of twelve bamboo tubes of unequal lengths; and the 
Shichiriki (Fig. 13), a single bamboo about seven inches long, which 
has seven holes in front and two behind. The latter is furnished 
with a reed mouthpiece, and is said to yield an astonishingly 
shrill and piercing sound.^ The Ti-tzu of China is also found in 
Japan ; and the Sona, or oboe, re-appears under the name of 
Heang-ti. For a description of any further varieties, the reader 
is again referred to the work of M. Kraus. I shall refer to but two 
other wind instruments. The first of these is the 5//^ (Fig. 11), or 
mouth-organ, which is identical with the Chinese Cheng, and the 
construction of which need not therefore be described here. It is 

' Kraus, p. 49. ^ Fig. 6. ' Musical Herald, July, 1S87. 



76 Musical Instruments and their Homes. 

interesting to remark, that, when considering the fitness of various 
Japanese instruments for educational purposes, the Musical 
Commission rejected the Sho on the ground of the difficulty 
experienced in its manufacture, and the impossibility of keeping it 
properly tuned.' In connection with the last point. Miss Bird 
speaks of a concert which she attended, in which the player of the 
Sho was obliged constantly to warm his instrument at a brazier 
of coals, which stood conveniently near." Mr. Isawa mentions a 
third objection to the popular use of the Sho, which, while obvious 
enough, sounds somewhat strange to our ears. The trouble consists, 
he says, in the fact that the musician cannot sing and blow at 
the same time.^ It is unnecessary to do more than mention the 
Rappakai, or conch trumpet (Fig. 17). This, like the similar 
Chinese instrument, is used as a war horn. When not in use, it is 
carried in a sort of bag or net of cord. It is employed also at 
religious festivals ; and there exists in Japan an order of so-called 
" mountain priests," who use a rude shell trumpet to excite the 
charitable disposition of the traveller. 

INSTRUMENTS OF PERCUSSION. 

Last, but certainly not least, in the opinion of the Japanese, 
come the instruments of percussion. Of these there are a great 
variety, which may easily be classified under three heads, according 
as the resounding substance consists of skin, metal, or wood. 
To the first category belong the drums proper, to the second 
the gongs and cymbals, and to the third the castanets and 
xylophone. The Japanese name for drum is Taiko, so called 
after a celebrated ancient warrior. The ordinary form of this 
instrument is represented in Fig. 8. It consists of a frame of 
wood covered with two projecting surfaces of skin. The latter 

' Isawa, p. 47. 2 Vol. ii, p. 210. ^ p_ ^-,_ 



Musical Instrttments of yapan. j^j 

are connected by a cord of silk, by tightening which the tension 
of the skin may be increased. The whole hangs upon a wooden 
frame, and is beaten with two wooden drum-sticks. 0-Tzudziimi' 
and Ko-Tzudzunii (Tossoumi) are the names of two hand-drums. 
In form they somewhat resemble an hour-glass ; the body being of 
wood, and the heads of skin, united, as in the Taiko, by a cord 
of silk. The former is slightly the larger. It is held between 
the left shoulder and the side, and beaten with the fingers of the 
right hand. The Ko-Tzudzumi is held on the right shoulder by 
the left hand, and is beaten with the fingers of the right hand. 
Of the larger drums, the most important is the Jamagairou-guine- 
taico; or great war-drum, the body of which is made of the hollowed 
trunk of a tree. The sides are covered with tough skin, which 
is fastened to the frame with round-headed nails. The whole is 
suspended by three iron rings in a circular wooden frame, and 
beaten with two wooden drum-sticks. Similar in appearance is 
the Kagtira-Taiko (Fig. i6), a large drum which is used in the 
Buddhist temples. 

It will be unnecessary to do more than mention the second 
class of instruments of percussion. The Japanese gong is called 
Doo, and it appears in different sizes and in various shapes. 
Some of these are quite elaborate, such as shields, fishes, tortoises, 
etc. The most common form consists of a circle of bronze hung 
in a frame of wood, and beaten with a single large drum-stick. 
Several kinds of Nihdihagi, or cymbals, are also found. The 
" mountain priests " also use a small instrument resembling an 
Egyptian sistrum, consisting of a staff with a copper head, to 
which are fastened four copper rings, which give a tinkling 
sound on being shaken. 

Of wooden instruments, castanets are the most common. These 
are of different sizes, and are used both in sacred and profane 

' See Fig. 9. ^ Kraus, p. 79. 



78 Musical Iiistnnnents and their Homes. 

music. The Mokkine (Fig. 12) is a kind of xylophone, consisting 
of sixteen wooden keys of unequal length, fastened with nails 
across the top of a hollow box of wood. It is played with two 
wooden-tipped drum-sticks. In this connection also may be 
mentioned the Mokitgyo, a hollow wooden drum, painted red, which 
the Buddhist priests use to accompany their prayers. This seems 
to be connected with the Mu-Yii of China, which the priest carries 
with him as he begs from door to door. 




V. 
MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS OF COREA. 

N most histories of music, Corea is passed over without 
notice. The omission is probably to be explained partly 
from the fact of the utter absence of all reliable information 
on the subject, and partly from the idea that the music of Corea 
is only a copy, on a less extended scale, of that of China. While 
the latter is undoubtedly true to a large extent, there are yet 
marked differences in the character and position of music in the 
two countries. Through the kindness of the Rev. G. W. Gilmore, 
for two years resident in Corea, I am able to add some facts to 
the current knowledge of the subject. 

The geographical position of Corea has had a marked effect 
upon its history. Midway between the powerful nations of China 
and Japan, it has been prevented from attaining any great and 
independent development. Its best blood and intellect were drained 
away centuries ago to feed the latter country, and the flourishing 
condition of Japan to-day is the best witness to the early prosperity 
of Corea. I have already called attention to the fact that the 
present musical system of the Japanese, as well as many of their 
instruments, first came to them through this channel. This 
intimate historical connection has led me to classify the instruments 
of Corea with those of Japan, rather than with those of China, 
as might otherwise seem most natural. 

The music of Corea is undoubtedly founded on that of China. 
Unlike that of the Japanese, it seems to have varied little in 
character from the early days. The Corean still uses the pentatonic 

79 



8o Musical Instnnnents and their Homes. 

scale ; and his use of whole tones only, and the consequent absence 
of all modulation in his music, recall what we have learned of the 
Middle Kingdom, far more than the present music of Japan. Of 
harmony, it is unnecessary to say, the Corean knows nothing. 
Like the Chinaman, he delights in sound, in and of itself. It is 
not surprising, therefore, that his favorite instrument should be 
the Nallari, or clarionet. This instrument, like the Sona of China, 
is described by Europeans as having an unendurably shrill and 
piercing sound. Yet it is the constant companion of the Coreans, 
indoors and out. Nothing is more common than to see one of 
them starting out for a stroll with his Nallari under his arm. 
The tones of this instrument, as played by the wandering musicians 
of the day, will gather a crowd of eager listeners in an incredibly 
short space of time. It is always played as a solo instrument, for 
the excellent reason, that, if used in concerted music, its tones 
would hopelessly drown those of all the rest of the band. 

Music is popular with all classes of the Coreans. It is true 
that the more wealthy and respectable people share the Chinese 
idea that it is undignified to take part in instrumental music, and 
prefer to listen to the performances of paid musicians rather than 
to play themselves. But the common people have no such feeling. 
Those who can afford it have their own instruments, and delight 
to play upon them. Singing is popular with both sexes, and among 
all classes of the people. Women, however, seldom take part in 
instrumental music, the Corean orchestra being composed entirely 
of men. 

Strangely enough, music seems to have little place in the religious 
rites of the Coreans. Whereas in China it forms the basis of 
all the Confucian ritual, it is never used in the Confucian temples 
of Corea. The Buddhist monks, it is true, like their brethren of 
China, use a small wooden drum to attract the attention of way- 
farers, and to invite alms. But this seems to be all. Even in 



Musical InstrtLVients of Corea. 8i 

connection with the theatrical representations which are conducted 
by the Buddhists, and which are patronized only by the lower 
classes, music is seldom employed. 

Orchestral performances are, however, common in private houses, 
especially at dances and dinner-parties. In the latter case, the 
players usually occupy a room adjoining that in which the feast is 
held. On such occasions the instruments most commonly used are 
the Komounko, the Haggum (or violin), flutes, and the large drum 
Chang Gou. Sometimes, but rarely, the Yang-Kum is added. 

The most characteristic instrument of Corea is the Komounko 
(Fig. 3). This was probably the direct ancestor of the Japanese 
instruments of the Koto family. It differs from the ordinary Koto, 
however, in several marked particulars. Whereas in the latter all 
the strings pass over movable bridges, this is the case with only 
three of the six strings of the former. The three middle strings pass 
over a series of fixed frets raised a considerable distance above the 
surface of the sounding-board. The latter, as in all instruments of 
the same class, consists of a thin hollow frame of wood. The cords 
at the extremity of the sounding-board are used for tightening the 
strings. Their ends are left long for ornamental purposes. In 
playing, the body of the Komounko is usually held across the lap, 
while the cords are thrown carelessly over the performer's shoulder. 

The Yang-Kuni (Fig. 2), while a smaller instrument than the 
Yang-Kin of China, is practically the same, and needs no special 
description here. 

The Haggum (Fig. 4), or violin, is the same in principle with the 
Chinese Ur Heen. As in that instrument, the bow passes inside, 
between the strings and the handle. The specimen in the present 
collection is a very beautiful one, comparing favorably in finish with 
the best of the Chinese and Japanese instruments. 

Of wind instruments, the Nallari has already been described. 
The T'owigsyb, or flute, is one of the commonest Corean instru- 



82 Musical Instruments and their Homes. 

ments. Several varieties of this are found. The specimens in the 
present collection (Figs. 5 and 6) are comparatively rude, consisting 
only of a bamboo tube pierced by four or five frnger-holes. Others, 
however, are more elaborate, being neatly wound with layers of cord, 
as is common in the Ti-tzu (Fig. 19) of China. It is not easy to 
obtain a specimen of this kind. A blind musician, from whom 
Mr. Gilmore attempted to buy such a T'oungsyo, answered that he 
would give it to him if the latter would engage to support him 
during the rest of his natural life ; meaning thereby that he was 
entirely dependent upon his flute for his livelihood. 

The SaiJiwang of Corea corresponds to the Cheng of China and 
the Shd of Japan. The present specimen (Fig. 7) is an exceedingly 
beautiful one, and especially valuable because the instrument is 
now comparatively rare in Corea. 

This completes the list of the wind instruments of Corea. 
Within the last five years, however, some brass bugles have been 
introduced from America, which are played before the king in his 
progress from place to place. 

The most important of the Corean drums is shown in Fig. 8. 
This consists of a frame of hollow wood, in the shape of an hour- 
glass. It is covered on one end with horse-hide, and on the other 
with cow-hide. The heads are not fastened to the body, but are 
held in place by a series of cords which pass diagonally from one 
head to the other, and by shortening which the tension of the skin 
may be increased. The Chang Gou is beaten on one head with 
a stick, and on the other with the fingers. A skilful player varies 
the tone by beating now on the top, now on the edge, and again 
between the two, and by using alternately the fingers of his hand 
and the entire fists. In this way very elaborate effects may be 
produced. 

A second variety of drum in common use differs little in shape 
from our ordinary kettledrum. 



INDIA. 







y/oo d 



>.} 



h e J () 1. c ^ - V cXXo w 




"f(ree. of 



(3/ 



■ (^) 







v/i+(r /Vorv. ^ v/(^c 
Ar\£> one f^f 



ffo. r i'5 



^ 



r^5 5 



X*. 2- 



f- i\ . 




8. 'Zx^j (Tinl{i] ^^j^>Pe 



tudc 



6:.. 



of Ion 'I ^5 "^ 



'5 

f Wo o 2) , 



-\-W f p^ 5 







Wo c) 








'H., 






p er ^or vv^ e 







r-, 




6v/ ^ core) , ^ a-Jj '"t^^ 



r (0 un 



^ Ke /^ 



e 2^ 



1 :;: •)< 6 IK 



o 



/jrt;rv \ ^,e 



ITn. ji;Kf\\V2^( Drum. J^e - ^o^xr tr^ 



-2.^ 



a. 



I. 






'J 



w 



,-|7^ i^ri/:^^ o/- J-K.rv. 



cC. T~<^ 



X). ri 



A^-2.3r3,< 



13. m2\'3( . 4 ^^^ °{ follow ^2.n^6 



ow fc^n^feoo, -/-^ ^/; ,-,^ 2vn 



)^. 



Ib- 
















-f I X e<^ 6)-( J 






S 



^Uyin^ , /J" 



I X e 






Z (37^ 



7i 



'\Cro 




5S ^^^ 



^ 



t? t/^ 






.y/,^ 






'!Pai>^te^ v/ih/^ 6ar\^j- cf 



- rp. 



D.7i ,n 




l)r^^^i■ Color. ^(.IO,r^ 



} OOW Ci\ (or -Ma4 0t/()i.) -/l 

eh3 of v^//^|o/^ 1^ /Oierc 
piece, an<^ i>^ W^ic^ 






VI. 
HINDU MUSIC 

HE peninsula of Hindustan covers an immense area, and 
embraces a wide range of climate, — from the extreme cold 
of the Himalayas, to the tropical heat of Ceylon. It is 
inhabited by a vast number of different tribes and races. The 
Hindu proper jostles against the Turk, the Persian, the Rajpoot, 
and the Sikh. Every grade of civilization is represented, — from 
the savage tribes still dwelling among the hill regions, and in the 
jungle, to the high-caste and highly cultured Brahmin. Nor is there 
any greater uniformity of religion. The Brahmin, the Buddhist, the 
Mohammedan, and the Christian are found side by side. It is not 
strange that a country, including such varieties of climate, race, 
civilization, and religion, should offer rare opportunities for the 
musical student. 

In passing from China and Japan to India, it becomes apparent 
at once that here music must occupy a very different footing, finding 
in " the country of the lotus-flower and the gazelle " a far more 
congenial soil than among the prosaic and unemotional peoples of 
the North. The contrast between the two is indeed a striking one. 
While the Chinaman makes of his music a matter of science, and an 
agency for moral improvement, with the Hindu it is pre-eminently 
a thing of the emotions. " Science has nothing to do with it ; its 
only vocation is to delight the imagination." ' Even the theory of 
Hindu music is wrapped in a cloud of mystical and romantic legends. 
The very names of the early musical treatises, such as " The Sea of 

' Ambros, i. p. 471. 

91 



92 Mttsical Instntme7its and their Homes. 

Emotions," "The Mirror of Melodies," suggest an unbounded play 
of the fancy. 

In entering upon this attractive field, the student is confronted 
with a twofold difficulty, resulting partly from the inherent obscurity 
of the subject, and partly from the lack of reliable sources of informa- 
tion. Of the many ancient treatises on music, only a few have as yet 
been translated from the Sanscrit ; and even these suffer from the 
fact that none of the translators were professed musicians. To this 
cause is doubtless to be attributed the confused, inaccurate, and 
unsatisfactory way in which Hindu music is treated in many of 
the musical histories. 

The name Hindu is applied to the descendants of that branch 
of the Aryan family which in prehistoric times overran the Indian 
peninsula, subjugating the original inhabitants, and implanting upon 
this foreign soil the old Aryan civilization. The language of this 
people was Sanscrit ; their religion, a form of polytheism. In the 
centuries which have intervened between that time and our own, 
the Sanscrit, from a living, has become a dead language ; and the 
early polytheism, with its cheerful nature-worship, has given place 
to Brahminism, with its iron law of caste. It will not be surprising, 
therefore, to find that the music of this people has undergone a 
like change. 

The Hindus attribute to their music a divine origin. The 
legend runs as follows : After Brahma had lain in the ^g'g three 
thousand billion four hundred million years, he split it by the 
force of his thought, and out of the two halves made heaven and 
earth. He then created Manu, who brought forth from chaos 
"ten heavenly sages." These in their turn created heaven, the 
gods, and, with other good and evil spirits, the Gandharven and 
Apsarasen, or genii of song and dance. The latter became the 
musicians of the gods.' But this is not all. The gods themselves 

' Naumann, i. p. 21 ; Anibros, i. p. 473. 



Hi7tdu Music. 93 

are represented as musicians. " Nareda is the inventor of the 
Vina, the principal musical instrument of Hindustan. Saraswati 
— the consort of Brahma — is the goddess of music as well as 
of speech ; to her is attributed the invention of the systematic 
arrangement of the sounds into a musical scale. She is repre- 
sented seated on a peacock, and playing on a stringed instrument 
of the lute kind. Brahma himself we find depicted as a vigorous 
man with four handsome heads, beating with his hands upon a 
small drum ; and Vishnu, in his incarnation as Krishna, is repre- 
sented as a beautiful youth playing upon a flute. . . . Ganesa, 
the god of wisdom, is represented as a man with the head of 
an elephant, holding a Tamboura in his hands." ' Similar 
mythological associations are connected with all parts of their 
theory of music. 

The Sanscrit treatises carry Hindu music back as far as that 
of Egypt and China. Indeed, the opinion has been advanced by 
some scholars that India was civilized before either of these 
nations, and was the root from which their civilization sprang. 
Whatever may be the truth of this theory, it is probable, that, in 
very early times, there was a marked similarity between the music 
of all three of these countries. "" Willard ' has drawn out at some 
length the comparison between the music of the Hindus and that 
of the early Greeks, which was principally derived from Egypt. 
He calls attention to " the same rhythmical measure ; the same 
subdivision of semitones into minor divisions ; the same noisy 
method of beating time, not only with the hand, but also with 
instruments of percussion, — melody without harmony, in its present 
acceptation, — and the similarity of the effects said to have been 
produced by the music of the two nations." I have elsewhere called 
attention to the theory of S. Isawa, which attributes the origin of 

' Engel, p. 53. ° Ambros, i. p. 475. 

^ The Music of Hindustan, p. 33, in Tagore's Hindu Music from Various Authors. 



94 MtLsical Instrtime7tts and their Homes. 

the music of China and Japan to India. Whatever may be the 
truth of this theory, the identity of the Chinese pentatonic scale with 
the oldest of the Hindu scales seems to be established.' But leaving 
the speculations suggested by these facts to the student of com- 
parative history, I shall now attempt to give a brief account of some 
of the most important facts in the history of Hindu music. The 
connection between music and poetry seems to have been very close 
in the early days of Hindu history. The Rigveda itself, the oldest 
literary monument which has come down to us, contains hymns 
to the gods, and songs of praise and victory.'' These hymns, which 
were intended to be set to music,^ certainly date back as far as 
1500 B.C. (probably earlier), though they were not committed to 
writing until a later date. They introduce us to a patriarchal state 
of society, in which the father of the family is also the priest, and 
in which women are held in exceptional honor."* The latter devote 
themselves to music and the dance. Poetesses also arise from 
among their number. In these early days the poet is also the 
composer, producing not only songs and hymns, but also the music 
to which they are to be sung. The same connection between 
music and poetry continued down to later times. The early bards, 
or Rishis, were held in great reverence. Their favorite instrument 
was the Vina, and to its accompaniment they sang their own com- 
positions and the sacred songs of the gods.5 The ancient Brahmins 
threatened with excommunication any of their tribe who should 
betray the sacred writings or Shasters to any but members of the 
elect.^ Thus protected by the power of religious associations, 
the purity of Hindu music seemed to be assured. But here again, 
as in the case of China, w^e meet with a defection from the old 
standard. A crowd of upstart musicians sprang up, envious of the 
fame and reverence enjoyed by the masters of the art. Unac- 

' Naumann, i. p. 21. - Ambros, i. p. 476. 3 Naumann, i. p. 20. 

" ^"^'i^' "■ P- '88. s Rowbotham, ii. p. 7. <> Willard, p. 27, ed. cit. 



HindiL Alusic. 05 

quainted with the ancient theories of music, and not havino- access 
to the sources of such information, their productions were but poor 
imitations of the classic models. Though often writing verses and 
setting them to music, they were not true poets like the old Rishis." 
In character, as Avell as in art, they fell below the older musicians. 
They sought to influence the passions by their performances, instead 
of ministering to the higher faculty. Music was prostituted to 
licentious uses, and its professors became known as the most 
immoral of men. Under these circumstances, men of honor would 
have nothing more to do with the musical profession. Those who 
still devoted themselves to such subjects confined their attention 
to the theory of the ancient music. In India, as in Japan, the theory 
and practice of music were thoroughly divorced. It is difficult 
to-day to find anywhere in Hindustan a man who is versed in both 
branches of the art. The only trace of the old music which survives, 
save the Sanscrit treatises to which reference has been made, is the 
popular belief, that, " to be a great musician, a man must live retired 
from the world, like a Jogee." ^ 

The time at which this deterioration in the musical art began 
cannot be exactly determined. But, unquestionably, the process 
was greatly accelerated by the Mohammedan conquests of the 
eleventh century. From this time on, the arts and sciences, purely 
Hindu, began to decline. Music proved no exception. The Arabs 
brought with them many of their native instruments, and the 
character of their music undoubtedly exercised no small influence 
upon that of Hindustan. Indeed, the similarity between the 
present Indian melodies, and those of Persia and Arabia, has often 
been remarked. ^ 

' Willard, pp. 27, 28. ^ Ibid., p. 29. ' Naumann, i. p. 28. 



96 Musical htstruments and their Homes. 



THEORY OF HINDU MUSIC. 

The general term for music in Hindustan is Sangita (Sungeet). 
The word is derived from the Sanscrit, and refers to the union of 
song, stringed instruments, and dancing. Native authors, however, 
divide Sangita into seven parts. The first treats of musical tones 
and their subdivisions ; the second, of melody ; the third, of time 
and measure ; the fourth, of dancing ; the fifth, of poetry ; the sixth, 
of expression and gesture ; and the seventh, of the manner of 
performing on different instruments.' 

The gamut is called Swaragaiiia, or Surgum, the name being 
derived from the first four notes of the scale, — sa, ri, ga, ma? The 
number of tones in the simple scale is the same as that in our 
own.3 But here the similarity ends. For the Hindu, not content 
with the more simple division into half notes, subdivides his scale 
into still smaller intervals. These are called Srutis ; and twenty- 
two of them make up an octave. The exact definition of these 
Srutis has given endless trouble to the students of Hindu music. 
According to the Sanscrit of the Sangita Ratnavali, " every distinct 
audible sound is a Sruti." + Again, " a Sruti is formed by the 
smallest intervals of sound perceivable by the ear. It is of twenty- 
two kinds," each of which, by the way, has its special name. 
These twenty-two Srutis are combined in the Hindu scale in the 
following way : Between the first two notes are inserted four 
Srutis ; between the second and third, three ; between the third 
and fourth, corresponding to our half tone, two ; between the fourth 
and fifth, and fifth and sixth, respectively, four ; between the 
sixth and seventh, three ; and between the seventh and eighth, 
corresponding to our second half tone, two. Here we are confronted 



' Willard, p, 37. - Fetis, ii. p. 205, Willard, p. 39. 

-' It is characteristic that the Uindu personifies his seven notes under the form of beautiful nymphs. 

■* Tagore: Hindu Music, p. 353. 



Hindu Music. 97 

with the point of the difficulty. If, with Fctis," Ambros,= Naumann,^ 
and most European students of the question, we assume the 
twenty-two Srutis to be of equal value, we have a scale in which 
only the first and fourth correspond to our European scale, and 
which, therefore, " if not mathematically, is musically quite an 
impossibility."-* If, with the Rajah Tagore, and the Hindu author- 
ities, who certainly ought to know, we assume the Srutis to be of 
unequal value, — being equal in certain fixed cases to a quarter, 
and in others to a third, of a tone,' — we have a scale in which 
the mathematical difficulties are no less formidable than were the 
musical difficulties in the preceding. We must leave the reader 
to make choice between the two theories, the comparative truth of 
which can only be determined by a series of accurate musical 
experiments. Whichever may prove to be the true one, certain it 
is that, in practice, the scale used by the Hindu musicians to-day 
differs in no degree from our own. This being the case, it makes 
little practical difference whether, with Ambros,"" we hold that this 
results from the unconscious correction demanded by the ear of 
the performer ; or with Tagore, impatient at the mathematics 
of European critics, maintain that the scale now in use is really 
the true scale of Hindu theory. 

Starting, then, with the seven fundamental tones as given, the 
Hindu theorists combined these elements, according to three general 
principles, so as to form thirty-six distinct keys. These principles 
consisted, first, in successively assuming each different tone of the 
scale as the base ; second, in increasing or diminishing certain of 
the intervals between the notes by a Sruti ; and third, in arbitrarily 
suppressing certain notes of the scale.^ The origin of the thirty-six 
keys is attributed by the Hindu mythology to Krishna, "who 

I ii. p. 205. ^ i. p. 480. ^ i. p. 21. '' Naumann, i. p. 22. 

5 Tagore. Hindu Music, p. 355. See, also, by tlie same author, The Twenty-two Musical Srutis of the Hindus, 

PP- 29, 

* The scales of the keys thus formed are printed in full by Fetis in his Histoire de la Musique, ii. pp. 215-219. 



98 Musical Instriniients and tJicir I I 01 lies. 

l3rought forth from his five heads five keys named Raga, to which 
his consort Parbuti added the sixth. In addition to these, Brahma 
himself created thirty subsidiary l<eys called Raginis." ' This 
moderate number, however, was apparently far from satisfying the 
Hindu imagination ; for at the time when Krishna dwelt upon 
the earth as a shepherd boy, they asserted the existence of sixteen 
thousand keys, which had been invented by as many Gopis, or 
shepherdesses, each anxious to secure for herself the affection of 
the charming youth. Theoretically, indeed, this conception is less 
preposterous than it might appear ; for the rigid carrying out of the 
principles laid down above would, indeed, yield a result not less 
remarkable. But we are not recjuired to subject the pretty story 
to any such dry test. The Hindu mythology soon reduced the 
sixteen thousand keys to nine hundred and sixty, and these again to 
thirty-six. Even this number proved too many; and Soma, one 
of the most distinguished ancient musicians, puts the number of 
those keys which are suitable for practical purposes at twenty-three.^ 
It is with no little diffidence that I approach the subject of the 
Hindu Rags (or Ragas) and Raginis. Rajah Tagore flatly asserts 
that the English language contains no word which corresponds to 
the Hindu Raga? The word has sometimes been defined as a 
certain musical mode;'' but this definition is inaccurate, the true 
word for mode being That? To each That there may be more than 
one Rag corresponding. Neither is the word t^ine, w^hich has been 
proposed, quite satisfactory. Perhaps we cannot do better than 
follow the example of Mr. Hipkins, who defines Raga "as a melody 
type founded upon the intervals of a mode, and having a succession 
of notes so arranged as to excite a feeling of the mind."^ The 
original Rags were six in number, corresponding to the six primary 

' Nauniann, i. p. 23. - Ibid., i. p. 22. ' Hindu Music, p. 345. 

■* So Sir William Jones : On the Musical Modes of the Hindoos, p. 142, in Tagore's Hindu Music. 
^ Willard, p. 64. ^ Musical Instruments, p. 84. 



Hindu Music. 99 

keys ; and the Raginis were thirty, corresponding to the thirty 
secondary keys. These are divided into various classes, according 
to the combinations of notes which enter into them. They are 
regarded with great reverence by musicians. From these original 
Rags, the number of which is regarded as fixed and unalterable, a 
number of compound Rags have been derived. Most of these are 
of comparatively modern date, and may fairly be described by our 
word tune. The fable relating to the origin of the Rags is as 
follows : The six Ragas, children of Brahma and Saraswati, were 
genii, who presided over the principal passions. Each of these was 
married to five Raginis, or nymphs, who presided over the secondary 
passions. To each of these corresponded one of the thirty-six 
original Rags and Raginis, and all succeeding ones were their 
offspring. 

Many interesting fables have been handed down to us as to 
the effect of these early Rags. With each season of the year was 
associated its special melody, and even to-day it is considered a mark 
of great musical ignorance for a person to ask for the performance of 
a spring Rag in autumn, or vice versa. The day and the night 
also had their appropriate Rags. In all this, we see traces of the 
early nature-worship of our Aryan ancestors. It is related that 
on a certain occasion a celebrated musician sang the night Rag at 
mid-day ; and so great was the power of the music, that darkness 
immediately extended as far as the sound of his voice reached. 
Other Rags had the power to produce rain, fire, and other natural 
phenomena. By the timely use of the first of these, a female singer 
is said to have saved Bengal from drought and famine. Perhaps 
the most interesting legend is connected with the fire Rag. The 
emperor Akber, it is related, anxious to test the power of this Rag, 
ordered one of his musicians to sing it. The unfortunate man tried 
in vain to excuse himself. He finally yielded to the request, and, 
having bidden farewell to his family, placed himself up to his neck 



loo Mtisical Instruvients and their Homes. 

in the waters of the River Jumna, and began to sing. As the song 
proceeded, the water began to boil ; and, in insupportable agony, the 
musician begged to be allowed to stop. But the emperor was 
inexorable. When the fatal song was renewed, flames burst forth 
with violence from the wretched man's body; and, immersed in water 
as he was, he was reduced to ashes. Such mighty power was 
attributed to music by the Hindu legends. But, alas ! when we 
inquire to-day for the miracle-working Ragas, we are referred from 
Bengal to Cashmere, and from Cashmere again to Bengal, all in 
vain. These magic melodies have been hopelessly lost.' 

Having endeavored in this imperfect way to give an account 
ot the musical scale of the Hindus, with its subdivisions and 
derived keys, and of the Rags,' or ancient melodies, I shall dwell 
very briefly on the time, the pitch, and the notation employed in 
their music. 

It has been asserted that Hindu music has nothing which 
corresponds exactly to what we call the musical measure,^ but that 
instead it is characterized by a certain rhythm incapable of being 
brought under the laws of musical time. This view has been 
sufficiently disproved by Fetis. " Not only," says this distinguished 
author, "did the inhabitants of India possess from the most 
ancient times words to express the duration of time in music, but 
they had also signs intended to represent the partial intervals which 
divide a certain unit of time considered as type of the measure." ^ 
Unquestionably the metre in which the earliest Vedic hymns were 
written had an effect upon the rhythm of the accompanying 
music. Many of these hymns lend themselves easily to musical 

^ Elson, p. 14. 

^ The Rags and Raginis of the present day are described by Willard as having the four following character- 
istics: (I) They are short, lengthened Ijy repetitions and variations. (2) They partake of the nature of arondo; the 
piece invariably concluding with the first strain, and sometimes ^vith the first bar. (3) A bar, measure, or number 
of measures, is frequently repeated, with slight variations, almost „,/ /./,. (4) Much liberty is allowed with respect 
to pauses, which may be lengthened at pleasure, provided the time be not disturbed, (p. 62.) 

3 Willard, p. 46. 4 \^ p_ 2,, 



Hindu Music. loi 

arrangement ; others, however, are not so manageable, and must 
have been chanted in a sort of recitative. Hence may, perhaps, 
have arisen the idea that in these early melodies the musical 
measure had no place. For a full discussion of this point, the 
reader must be referred to the interesting chapter of Fetis.' 

The present melodies of Hindustan are subject to the same 
laws of musical value as our own ; but, in their execution, much 
greater liberty is given to the performer, who now hastens, now 
retards, certain passages, and, again, prolongs or shortens individual 
notes, in such a way as to express with most force the sentiment 
of the accompanying words. This freedom has given no little 
trouble to those European musicians who have tried to reduce 
Indian melodies to our musical notation. William Hamilton 
Bird, who at the end of the last century devoted nineteen years 
to the study of Indian music, speaks as follows : " The Raugnies 
[Raginis] are so void of meaning, and of any degree of regularity, 
that it is impossible to bring them into a form for performance 
by any singers but those of their country (Hindustan) ; and they 
appear to be the efforts of men enraptured by words, to which they 
have added notes as their fancy and amorous flights have dictated." ^ 

"The musicians of Hindustan never appear to have had any 
determined pitch by which their instruments were regulated ; each 
person tuning his own to a certain height, adapted by guess to the 
power of the instrument and quality of the strings, the capacity 
of the voice intended to be accompanied, and other adventitious 
circumstances." ^ 

I do not propose here to enter at any length into the subject 
of the early musical notation of the Hindus. The Sanscrit char- 
acters which represent the names of the seven notes are also signs 
of musical notation. " By substituting long vowels, the time of 
each note is doubled ; and other marks are used for a further 

' ii. chap. iii. pp. 224 seq. ' Quoted by Fetis, ii. p. 231. ^ Engel : Study of National Music, p. 46. 



I02 Musical Instruments and their Homes. 

elono-ation of them. The octaves above and below the mean scale, 
the connection and acceleration of notes, the graces of execution, 
or manners of fingering the instrument, are expressed very clearly 
by small circles or ellipses, by little chains, by curves, by straight 
lines (horizontal or perpendicular), and by crescents, all in various 
positions. The close of a strain is distinguished by a lotus-flower." ' 
The exact interpretation of many of these signs, however, is still 
doubtful ; and, in the opinion of Fetis,^ the secrets of Hindu 
notation will never be penetrated by Europeans. 

It is more than doubtful whether the present music of Hindu- 
stan resembles in any degree the ancient music which has just 
been described. The changes which have taken place in the last 
eleven centuries, the successive invasions which have desolated 
this unhappy country, have sufficed to sweep away many of the 
traces of its early music. Yet, in the opinion of the best authorities, 
many of the native instruments of India have come down to us 
almost unchanged ; and, in a people with whom tradition has 
so much power, it is possible that the style of the melodies may 
have undergone less variation than might seem likely at first 
thought. In any case, it is interesting to notice that in the last 
few years there has been a remarkable revival of interest in the 
old music of Hindustan. In this praiseworthy effort, no one 
deserves more credit than the Rajah Sourindro Mohun Tagore, 
whose learned and valuable words on the theory of Hindu music 
have done much to arouse the interest of European students in 
this much neglected field. However successful such efforts may 
be in restoring to our knowledge the ancient music of the Vedas, 
certain it is that the Hindu music of to-day will merit a more 
careful consideration than it has yet received at the hands of 
Europeans. To a brief notice of this subject will be devoted 
the few concluding pages of this chapter. 

' Sir William Jones, ed. cit., p. 140. ^ jj_ p_ 2c\, 



Hindu Music. 103 

Of the Hindu music of the present day, European writers have 
expressed very different opinions. While some of the more 
superficial have dismissed it with a sneer as barbarous and 
uncouth, the majority have expressed, in no measured terms, their 
admiration for the beauty of the Hindu melodies. Not a few 
travellers have spoken with unqualified praise of the orchestral 
performances which it was their fortune to hear in India. The 
latter, indeed, are often very elaborate. Engel ' mentions the fact 
that Dr. Campbell once heard an orchestra of more than fifty 
instruments at one of the theatrical performances in Nepal. The 
musical drama plays a part of no little importance in the life of 
India. The Hindu theatre boasts a high antiquity, probably dating 
back to the third century before Christ." Like the older Greek 
plays, the early representations were, undoubtedly, based on mytho- 
logical subjects, and consisted of a union of poetry, music, and 
dance. Even to-day mythological representations are common in 
Hindustan ; and we are told that the entrance upon the stage of 
the wise god Ganesa, with his fat paunch and elephant head, is the 
occasion for no little merriment among the audience. ^ 

In Hindustan, as in almost every nation of the world, we find 
an intimate union between music and religion. The Brahmin has 
no monopoly of it. In the old Buddhist temples, we find near the 
entrance a gallery which was evidently used for musical instru- 
ments.3 At the present day this union finds its impersonation in 
the Bayaderes. These are maidens whose lives are given to music 
and the dance. They are divided into two classes. Those of the 
first class are called Devadasi, or slaves of the gods. They are 
maidens free from all bodily defects, who have been devoted by 
their parents to the service of the temple, and who live within the 
sacred precincts. They take part in the processions and festivities 

' Musical Instruments in South Kensington Museum, p. 135. ' Ambros, i. p. 476. 

5 Ibid. p. 477. 



I04 Mttsical Instrunieiits and their Homes. 

of the god whom they serve, chanting choruses in his praise, and 
dancing before his image.' The Bayaderes of the second class 
occupy an inferior position, and take the place of itinerant musicians, 
performing either in public places or at private entertainments, as 
their services may be required. 

" There are two systems of music in vogue in India at the 
present day, — the Karnatik, or southern system; and the Hin- 
dustani, or northern. The latter is chiefly in the hands of 
Mohammedan professors, who appear to have borrowed from the 
Arabian and Persian systems. The Karnatik is more melodious, 
and possesses fewer traces of foreign innovation." ' Even in 
different provinces, the style of music varies widely ; and the 
character of a melody, no less clearly than the dialect in which it 
is sung, will serve to indicate the part of India to which it belongs. 
Many of the Hindu songs are very beautiful, both as to poetry and 
melody. They vary greatly in character according to the subjects 
with which they deal. Some celebrate the loves of Krishna ; others, 
the valor of heroes ; others still, the pleasures of wine. The love- 
song is especially popular in Hindustan. Strange as it may appear 
to our sense, the first advances in affairs of the heart invariably 
come from the weaker sex. This, perhaps, is only natural in a 
country where polygamy is the prevailing system. In such 
a society, it is the man and not the woman who is supposed to 
dispense the favors of Eros. The general tenor of the love-songs 
of India is, therefore, that of supplication on the part of women to 
their lovers, real or imaginary, or of lamentation over the obstacles 
which prevent their meeting the beloved object. 

It is in the field of pure melody that the music of the Hindus 
excels. Of harmony, in our acceptation of the word, they know 
little. In this lack consists the chief difi^erence in character between 
the music of Hindustan and that of Europe. The former may 

' i'^'aumanii, i. p. 33. b Hipkins, p. 85. 



Hinchi Music. 105 

well be called the music of the imagination, as opposed to our own 
which is pre-eminently the music of the intellect. The Chinese, the 
Hindus, and the Europeans represent, indeed, three distinct stages 
of musical development. In the Chinese, with his drums and 
cymbals, his uncouth and monotonous rhythm, we have a music 
purely sensuous, delighting in musical sounds, in and of themselves. 
In the Hindu, we rise higher, and find the melody, with its infinite 
and pleasing variations, appealing to the imaginative faculty of man. 
In the European, with his complicated harmony underlying, yet not 
obscuring, the leading musical thought, we reach the highest musical 
stage, in which, to the pleasure of the ear and of the imagination, 
is added that loftier enjoyment which comes from the exercise of 
the highest mental powers. 





M" 


n 


% 


p) 


\^ 


^, 


PS/' 




i^' 










VII. 
INSTRUMENTS OF INDIA. 

HE student of musical instruments finds in India a rich 
field, not only on account of the vast number of specimens 
which it aftords him, but also because of the beauty and 
variety of their forms. Some of these, the ancient sculptures and 
paintings at Ajunta show to have remained unchanged for the 
last two thousand years ; others have been slowly perfected from 
time to time, to suit the special requirements of the music of the 
day ; others, again, are of comparatively recent origin. 

It is not easy to draw the line of distinction accurately between 
these three classes. There is said to exist in the Sanscrit a treatise 
entitled " Sangita Rathnakara," which contains a full description of 
the Indian instruments in existence at the time of its composition.' 
But until this has been made accessible to European readers, we 
can only speak with comparative certainty on the point in question. 

India is the cradle of many European instruments, as well as 
of many of those of other nations. To the Hindus we are indebted 
for our knowledge of the principle of sympathetic vibration as 
applied to stringed instruments ; and most students are agreed 

Note, — It is a matter of I'egret to the writer, that, owing to circumstances beyond 
control, a very beautiful and complete collection of Indian instruments, with which it 
was hoped to illustrate the present chapter, had not arrived at the time set for publica- 
tion. The instruments, thus unfortunately delayed, would have derived added interest, 
from the fact that they were very carefully and kindly selected for the present purpose 
by the Rajah Sourindro Tagore, the most competent living authority on the music of 

Hindustan. 

' Fetis, ii. p. 274. 

106 



Instrttvients of India. 107 

that the king of all our instruments — the violin — had its first 
rude progenitor on the banks of the Ganges. 

In spite of the undoubted beauty of many of the instruments 
of Hindustan, we find serious defects in the construction of most of 
those in use at the present day. These defects are of two kinds ; 
resulting, first, from the unsuitable nature of the material employed, 
and, second, from actual faults of construction.' 

In the choice of material, pecuniary considerations play an 
important part; and the evil resulting from this unfortunate economy 
is exaggerated by the ignorance of those engaged in the manufac- 
ture. There are in India few, if any, professional instrument 
makers. The work is generally intrusted to carpenters, and other 
general artificers, who, even if they possessed the necessary ability, 
"could not afford to waste their time in experiments for the 
improvement of musical instruments ; the number rather than 
the quality of which would insure the greater gain." - Therefore, we 
are told, the better musicians prefer to patch up and repair the 
old instruments which have been handed down to them from their 
ancestors, rather than to attempt the construction of new ones, of 
the correct proportion of which they are entirely ignorant. Willard 
has preserved an interesting story,^ illustrating the ignorance of 
many of the Hindus as to the effect produced on the quality of the 
tone of an instrument by the material employed in its construction. 
A certain Rajah, delighted with the performances of a favorite 
player upon the Sarungee, presented him with a silver instrument 
upon which to perform in his presence ; supposing, doubtless, that 
if such beautiful strains could be produced upon a common fiddle 
of wood, much more striking would be the effect of an instrument 
made of the more precious substance."* 

' Willard, p. 90. ' Ibid., p. 91. ' Ibid., p. 92. 

4 These remarks, it is only fair to say, while of general, are not of universal application. In certain parts of 
India may be found instruments which compare favorably, as to material and finish, with the best productions 
of the West. The reader is referred especially to the beautiful illustrations presented by Fetis, of the instruments of 
Benares, to some of which special reference will be made later. 



io8 Musical Instruments and their Homes. 

The Hindus divide their musical instruments into four classes. 
The first, called Tut, includes all stringed instruments, and is 
again subdivided into two classes {Augulistata and Dhamtstatd): 
the former including the instruments of the guitar family, like the 
Sitar, the Tamboiira, and the Vina ; and the latter the instruments 
of the violin family, like the Santiigee and the C/iitsara. The 
second class is called Bitut, and includes all instruments of percus- 
sion in which skin forms the vibrating medium ; while the third, 
called GJmn, consists of those instruments of percussion in which 
the vibrating medium is furnished by metal. The last class, called 
SoogJiur, consists of wind instruments.' I shall consider each of 
these classes in succession. 

I. As the King may be said to be the representative instrument 
of China, and the Koto of Japan, so the Vina (Fig. 13) stands forth 
as the national instrument of India. Reference has already been 
made to the fact that its invention is attributed to Nareda, the son 
of Brahma and Saraswati, who, indeed, in most illustrations, is 
represented as playing upon this instrument. For the following 
quotation from the ancient poem " Magha," we are indebted to Sir 
William Jones. " Nareda once sat at his Vina, wrapped in deep 
contemplation, when suddenly the gently moving zephyrs drew 
forth from the strings sounds that enchanted his ear, and which, 
proceeding in regular rhythm, varied continually, becoming at each 
change still more and more beautiful." '^ 

The antiquity of the Vina is undoubtedly very great. In the 
celebrated Sanscrit treatise of Soma, a chapter is devoted to its 
description. At the present day there are several varieties to be 
found in India. That in use in Bengal seems to differ very little 
from the ancient representations which have come down to us. It 
is thus described by Francis Fowke : ^ " The Been [Vina] is a fretted 

■ I have followed the names given by WiUard, p. 93. = Quoted in Naumann, i. p. 20. 

^ On the Vina, or India lyre, p. 194, in Tagore's Hindu Music. 



Instrufnents of hidia. 109 

instrument of the guitar kind. The finger-board is twenty-one and 
six-eighths inches long. A little beyond each end of the finger-board 
are two large gourds, and beyond these arc the pegs and tail-piece 
which hold the wires. The whole length of the instrument is three 
feet seven inches. . . . The gourds are very large, about fourteen 
inches in diameter, and have a round piece cut out of the bottom 
about five inches in diameter. The finger-board is about two inches 
wide. The wires are seven in number, and consist of two steel ones, 
very close together, in the right side, four brass ones on the finger- 
board, and one brass one on the left side." They are tuned as 
follows : The two steel strings on the right (treble), to A and its 
octave below ; the four brass strings in the centre (bass), to D, A, 
E, and C, respectively ; and the brass string on the left (also bass), 
to A. 

The frets are nineteen in number, varying in length from one and 
one-eighth inch to seven-eighths of an inch. They are fastened to 
the board with wax by the performer himself, who, in this arrange- 
ment, is guided entirely by ear. Any little inaccuracy is corrected 
by the pressure of the fingers. Indeed, in long notes, the player is 
very apt purposely to vary the pressure ; thus producing an effect 
not unlike the close shake on a violin, though, owing to the extent 
of the variation, which seems often not less than half a tone, far 
less agreeable to our ears. 

In playing, " the Been is held over the left shoulder ; the upper 
gourd resting upon that shoulder, and the lower one upon the right 
knee." The frets are stopped with the left hand, the first and second 
fingers being principally used. The little finger is sometimes used 
to strike the left-hand string. The fingers of the right hand are 
used to strike the remaining strings. The four strings on the finger- 
board are played by the first and second fingers, protected with little 
wire caps. The strings on the right side are played by the fourth 
and fifth fingers. The third finger is never used. 



I lO 



Musical InstnLinents cmd their Homes. 



This, according to Fowke's description, is the Vina of Bengal, 
or classical Vina. The specimen in the present collection (Fig. 13) 
differs from the foregoing in that it has eight strings instead of 
seven, of which five pass over the frets on the finger-board. Of the 
proper tuning of the additional string, the writer is ignorant. The 
frets, moreover, are twenty-two in number, instead of nineteen. 
In all other respects the instruments are identical. 

A more modern form of the Vina is that of Benares, more 
properly called Been. The upper half of this instrument is not 
unlike that of the one which has just been described ; but instead of 
the lower gourd, the instrument terminates in a pear-shaped body 
not unlike that of a Tamboura. The strings are eleven in number; 
two of the pegs being inserted in the left side of the handle, and the 
remaining nine in the right side. The latter are set at regular 
intervals, the first being only a short distance removed from the 
body. The frets are twenty-two in number, and, unlike those of 
the ordinary Vina, are fixed. They give the regular chromatic scale, 
save that the notes F and G are lacking in the upper octave. The 
two strings on the left side are played with the fingers of the left 
hand, and the three following with the fingers of the right hand. 
The remaining six are not touched by the fingers at all, but sound 
from sympathetic vibration. 

In the Province of Delhi there is found a third variety of Vina, 
differing considerably from both of those which have been described. 
This is not more than a foot and a half long. It has three strings, 
which pass over seven movable frets. The resonant gourds are 
wanting. 

Another important instrument of the first class is the Tamboura, 
or Tumboora. This is one of the most ancient instruments of India. 
Its primitive name is unknown, as the word " Tamboura " is of 
Arabic origin ; but it may, perhaps, be derived from the proper name 
of one of the Gandharvas, or divine musicians of Hindu mythology.' 

' Fetis, ii. p. 2S1. 



Iitstruments of India. 



1 1 1 



There are two chief varieties of Tamboura. The first is a kind of 
rude guitar, with a long, thin handle and body of wood covered on 
both sides with snake-skin. It is strung with three strings, which 
pass through a little ivory bridge about three-quarters of the distance 
up the handle. This rude instrument, which to-day is found only 
in the hands of itinerant musicians of the lowest character, has 
played no mean part in the musical history of the world. " In this 
instrument," says Fetis, "we must, perhaps, recognize the earliest 
Aryan conception of a sounding body with vibrating strings, and see 
in it the source of the instrument of the same kind, so frequently 
met with in Egyptian antiquities." ' In its simple form may prob- 
ably be found the prototype of all the Persian and Arabian 
instruments of the Tamboura family. At a later period its use 
was introduced into China, where it is now played under the name 
of San Heen. (See Fig. i, China.) 

The more common form of the Tamboura differs considerably 
from that which has just been described. The body of this is 
usually made of two-thirds of a large gourd, the top of which 
is covered with a thin board. It has a long, slender handle, without 
frets, ordinarily bent back at the head." It is strung with four wire 
strings, — one of brass, and the other three of steel. Sometimes it 
has but three strings. " It is tuned to one chord in whatever key 
is required, — generally of C, — and the finger passes rapidly across 
the strings ; or the notes are played separately or quickly, so as to 
form the chord in vibration." ^ The Tamboura, like the Samisen 
of Japan, is used principally to accompany singing, and especially 
to fill up the pauses between the strains. It is employed equally by 
Hindus and Mohammedans. The accompaniment is generally of 
the most simple kind, as the singer prefers to trust as far as possible 
to the charms of his voice alone* 

' ii. p. 282. ^ This is not the case, however, with the specimen (Fig. 2) in the present collection. 

^ Capt. Meadows Taylor: On Col. French's Collection of Indian Musical Instruments, p. 253, in Tagore's 
Hindu Music. 

'' Ibid., p. 254. 



1 12 



Musical Instruments and their Homes. 



In the province of Delhi we find an instrument called 
ToumouraJi, which, while having a name very similar to the 
preceding, seems in construction rather to belong to the family of 
Vinas. It has a long, thin handle, and a body somewhat resembling 
that of the Vina of Benares, though more pointed at the bottom. 
It is strung with wire strings, of which three are played with the 
fingers, and the rest sound from sympathetic vibration." 

One of the most important instruments of the guitar class in 
India is the Sitar. This is said by Willard ' to have been invented 
by Umeer Khosro (Amir Khusru), who lived in the thirteenth 
century. According to Tagore,^ however, the instrument existed 
long before Khosro's time, under the name of Tritantri Vina; 
and he was responsible only for its improvement, and for giving it 
its present name. The word Sitar itself is of Persian origin, and 
means three-stringed {Seh, three ; and Tar, a string).'^ Varieties are 
found, however, with five and seven as well as three strings. The 
ordinary Sitar has five strings, of which three are of steel, and two 
of brass. It has eighteen movable frets, by changing the position of 
which the key may be altered. Its capacity for execution is consid- 
erable, especially in chromatic passages. It is almost always used 
for solo purposes, though Capt. Taylor = speaks of having heard 
it used by Rajpoot minstrels to accompany their songs. 

The several varieties of the Sitar differ greatly in form as well 
as in the number of strings. Two of the most beautiful are the 
Sitar of Benares and the Sitar of Dekan-Dedjapour. The former 
of these is remarkable, from the fact that two of its seven strings 
are attached to the same peg, and tuned in unison. It has a long 
handle with seventeen frets, and the shape of the body is not unlike 
that of the lower half of the European guitar. The Sitar of Dekan- 

' There is a beautiful drawing of the Toumourah on p. 2S4 of vol. ii. of Fetis. ^ p. 98. 

^ Short Notices of Hindu Musical Instruments, p. 40. See also Hipkins, p. 83. ■* Fetis, ii. p. 289. 

^ Hindu Music, p. 254. 



Instriiments of India. 1 1 3 

Dcdjapour, indeed, is shaped almost exactly like our guitar.' Like 
that of Benares, it has six pegs and seven strings. Variations of 
the Sitar are the Kuchwa, the Soorsringa, and the Taoosee. The 
first is described by Capt. Taylor as differing from the ordinary 
Sitar, " not only in respect to size and power, but in having two 
strings only to play upon, tuned in thirds, from strings in the centre, 
which are tuned to the chord of the key or primary note ; and two 
smaller strings at the side, which represent a high octave, and can 
be struck as necessary."^ The Soorsringa (Fig. i) has sixteen frets 
and eight strings ; " six from the top and two at the sides, which 
lie under those played upon, and are used in combination with 
them for peculiar resonant effects." ^ Both of these instruments are 
rare. The Taoosee has seventeen frets with six playing strings. 
Below these are eleven or twelve strings of fine wire, tuned to 
eleven separate notes in the direct scale, and sounding from 
sympathetic vibration. 

The Rabab or Rubab, as its name indicates, is probably of foreign 
origin. Unlike the instruments of the same name, so common in 
Syria, Egypt, and Arabia, it does not belong to the violin, but to 
the guitar class. Fetis conjectures that it may have been turned 
from its original use. In shape, the present Rabab somewhat 
resembles the Spanish guitar, though the body is deeper. It has 
six playing strings and seven sympathetic strings. It is much used 
in Persia, Afghanistan, and the north-west provinces of India.+ 

There are no indigenous instruments of the harp family in 
Hindustan, though a few have been introduced from Burmah. 

We shall next consider the instruments of the violin class. In 
India, as has already been said, we find the origin of " that powerful 
interpreter of musical sentiment called the bow." ' In vain we 
search among the ruins of the ancient monuments of Assyria, 

■ See Fetis, ii. p. 289 (Fig. 44). ' Hindu Music, p. 255. ' Taylor, p. 255. 

■• Tagore : Short Notices, etc., p. 32. = -petis,, ii. p. 291. 



1 1 4 Musical Instruments and tJieir Homes. 

Egypt, Greece, and Rome, for any traces of it. All attempts to 
identify it with the plectrum have failed. " Statues, bass-reliefs, 
and the paintings on Greek vases, show us innumerable representa- 
tions of the plectrum ; and in all these we see only a piece of wood, 
bone, or ivory, either terminated by a hook with which to pluck 
the strings, or intended to strike them with its back." ' Beyond 
question, India is the cradle of the violin; and the rude Hu-chin of 
China and the royal Stradivarius are alike derived from that 
common source. " This," says Fetis,' " is no matter of conjecture, 
for the Sanscrit has names both for the bow and for the sonorous 
bodies intended to vibrate beneath its stroke." For the bow itself, 
we find three distinct names (Kona, Garika, and Parivadas). While 
the exact epoch at which these words were first used cannot be 
determined, they are certainly very old, dating back probably two 
thousand years, at least. 

The oldest of the strmged instruments played with a bow is the 
Ravanastron (Rabanastron). This consists of a hollow wooden 
cylinder, four inches long by two inches in diameter, the top of which 
is covered with snake-skin. It has a long wooden handle, slightly 
curved back at the upper end, in the rear of which are inserted two 
long wooden pegs. The two strings are made of the intestines of 
the gazelle, and pass over a long, low wooden bridge. The bow is of 
bamboo and horsehair. The use of this instrument has lontj since 
been abandoned to the lowest class of the population, and to the poor 
Buddhist monks, who carry it with them as they go from door to door 
asking for alms. In China, however, the same instrument appears 
under the name of Ur-Iieeu (Fig. 9), and its use is very general. 

Of a later origin than the Ravanastrom is the Onierti (Amrita), 
a rude fiddle in which the body is formed of half a cocoanut-shell 
covered with gazelle-skin. This instrument also, like the Ravan- 

' Fetis, ii. p. 291. Engel, while dissenting from tliis opinion, and believing the bow to have been developed 
from the plectrum, adds, " Howbeit, it is not improbable that the fiddle-bow originated in India, and came thence 
to us through Persia and Arabia. Also the ancient Greeks and K^omans may have had it." (See his learned 
discussion in The Violin Family, pp. 5-12.) 



Instruments of India. 1 1 5 

astron, has passed into China.' Rude as such forms appear to us 
now, surely none were more pregnant with mighty possibilities. 
From the Ravanastron to the Stradivarius the road is a long one, 
and with many turnings ; but it cannot be mistaken. 

Of the other instruments of the violin class, the most important 
are the Sarinda (or Saroh ^), the Sarungee, and the Chikara. 
Compared with the Ravanastron, these are of relatively modern 
origin, though the Sarinda certainly dates back farther than the 
eleventh century.^ The lower part of this instrument is covered 
with gazelle-skin ; while the upper part, which is crescent-shaped, 
is left open, so that the whole interior of the instrument is visible. 
The strings are three in number, passing over a bridge of medium 
height. 

The Sarungee is the ordinary violin of India. We find several 
shapes of this instrument. In that of Benares, the face somewhat 
resembles that of one of our own violins, in which the upper third 
has been removed. The body, however, is rounder and fuller, 
gradually diminishing at the upper end to form the handle. It 
has three strings of gut, and five sympathetic strings of wire.^ 
Another form of the Sarungee has an oblong body, and is strung 
with four gut and eleven wire strings. The two lowest are tuned 
to Khuruj, or the keynote, and the others to a perfect fourth. In 
playing, it is held in front of the body like our violoncello. The 
hairs of the bow are very loose, and are tightened by the hand in 
playing. The tone of this instrument is very sweet, and it is often 
used by the Hindu Nautch girls to accompany their songs.' Many 
Europeans have remarked upon the power and quality of the 
Sarungee. Capt. Taylor states that a friend of his, " an excellent 

' A very good idea of the Omerti may be obtained from Fig. 15, under China. 

^ For a clear idea of this somewliat complicated instrument, the reader is referred to the beautiful drawing in 
Fetis, ii. p. 296. 

3 Fetis, ii. p. 295. '' Fetis considers this the most perfect of all the Hindu instruments. 

5 Tagore : Short Notices, etc., p. 33. 



ii6 Musical Instniincnts and their Ho7nes. 

musician and violin player, used to prefer one of these instruments 
to his own violin for concerted pieces, in which the violin took a 
soprano part." ' The Sarrooda is a somewhat larger form of this 
instrument, which takes the part of tenor or second fiddle in 
concerted music. In Madras we find also a kind of bass viol, 
called Kunjerry^ 

The Chikara is the ordinary fiddle of the common people. It 
is " mostly to be seen in the hands of strolling- players, or 
mendicants, reciters of short plays or poems, and ballad singers." ^ 
Its strings are generally of horsehair.* Fetis also mentions a large 
variety of Chikara found in the province of Madras, which has four 
strings, of which three are played by the bow, and the fourth, which 
passes over the side of the bridge, is sounded by the fingers.' 

The Indian instruments with understrung wires are of special 
interest, as they undoubtedly explain the origin of those European 
instruments, in which, as in the Viole d'Amour^ and Baryton of the 
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, and the Norwegian violin of 
the present day, the tones of the ordinary strings of gut are 
re-enforced by the sympathetic vibration of a series of fine wire 
strings passing beneath the others, and tuned at harmonic intervals. 
In the opinion of Fetis, ^ the knowledge of this principle passed 
from India to Constantinople, whence, in the seventeenth century, 
it penetrated into Hungary and Bohemia, and so was carried to 
the rest of Europe. 

II. Instruments of percussion have always been very popular 
in India. As long ago as the beginning of our era, Strabo 
mentioned the fact, that, when the Indian kings went out to hunt, 

■ Hindu Music, p. 257. = Fetis, ii. p. 299, ^ Taylor, p. 257. 

'' Tagore: Sliort Notices, etc., p. 5. 

= Fig. 2 in the present collection so closely resembles the drawing of this Chikara, given by Fetis on p. 2S7 of 
his Histoire, that I have been tempted so to classify it in the catalogue. It is probable, however, that the similarity 
is deceptive, and that Fig. 2 is rightly catalogued as a simple Tamboura. 

^ See Fig. 9, France, in which specimen, however, the understrung wires are wanting. ' ii. p. 298. 



Instrujnents of htdia. 1 1 7 

they were preceded by a band of drummers and cymbal-players.' 
The same fondness for instruments of percussion still distinguishes 
the Hindu people. In his " Short Notices of Hindu Musical 
Instruments," the Rajah Tagore mentions no less than sixty-five 
different varieties of instruments of percussion. y\n exhaustive 
description of all these, even if possible, would only weary the 
reader. I shall therefore confine my notice to a few of the more 
important. 

As has been said, the Hindus divide their instruments of 
percussion into two classes, one of which includes all those which 
are covered with skin, and the other all those in which metal forms 
the vibrating medium. 

The most ancient of the Hindu drums is the Mridmig 
(M'ridang). This is "a hollow cylinder of wood resembling a cask, 
open at both the ends, which are covered with crude goat's-skin of 
different thicknesses, so as to produce different sounds. One end 
has likewise a coating of a composition made of resin, oil, etc., 
applied to the inside, and is tightened with leather braces like our 
drums."" Fig. 14 is probably a kind of Mridung. The DJwl and 
the Dholkee are common forms of drum ; the latter, or " little 
drum," differing from the Mridung in that it is a lighter and more 
delicate instrument, and is braced with cords instead of leather 
straps. These instruments are principally used by amateurs, and 
are either " played by hand as accompaniment to the voice, or struck 
with a stick when in concert with pipes or loud instruments." ^ 

The Piikhwaj (Fig. 12) is the standard drum of India. It is 
ordinarily about a foot and a half long, and nine inches in diameter. 
It has two heads of skin, — one tenor and one bass, — which are 
tuned by tightening or loosening the side cords. A piece of dough 
is usually put under the bass side, which tempers the skin and keeps 
it in tune. The Pukhwaj is sometimes beaten with rubber-tipped 

' Strabo, xv. i, 55, quoted by Ambros, i. p. 474. = Willard, p. 95. ' Taylor, p. 259. 



1 1 8 Mttsical Instrtunents and their Hojnes. 

drumsticks, but more often with the pahns and fingers of the hand. 
It is used both to accompany the voice and also in concerted music, 
and, in the hands of an expert player, is said to yield remarkable 
effects.' 

The Tttbla is also a very popular drum. The body of this is 
usually made of copper. It is always played in pairs, ^ one tenor 
and one bass. It is held in place by a cloth, which passes round 
the waist, and is beaten with the fingers. It gives a mellow and 
delicate tone, and, together with the Sarungee, is the instrument 
par excellence of the Hindu dancing-girl. 

Other varieties of drum, called Dak and Hoodook, are principally 
used by " ballad singers, mendicants, and the like." 

The family of kettledrums is well represented in India. They 
are found of all sizes, from the Nobtit, or great kettledrum, with 
its deep, mellow tone, which has given its name to a species of 
orchestral music, to the Bahya and yUla, which are played by the 
village musicians. 

The tambourine family also is extremely popular. Of these 
the Duff and the Dayra are the most common. They are beaten 
both with the hand and with sticks, and their players are said to 
be very expert. The tambourine is used in processions and festivals 
of all sorts, and every little village is provided with at least one 
such instrument with which to sound the alarm in case of attack.^ 

III. The second class of instruments of percussion, and the 
third of the four classes into which the Hindus divide their 
instruments, is that of gongs, bells, cymbals, and the like. The 
first, called Thalia, are used principally in temple music, or as calls 
to sacrifice at different hours of the day. Professional religious 
mendicants also use a form of gong, especially those who are 
accompanied by performing bulls and goats. A great gong, called 
Kansi, is used in the Brahmin temples. The bell, or Giinte, also 

' Taylor, p. 260. = Ibid, p. 259. 



Instrinnents of India. 1 1 9 

plays an important part in Hindu ceremonies. Both male and 
female dancers wear a string of small bells tied round the leg above 
the ankle. These Goongooroos, or ankle bells, give a faint clashing 
sound as the feet move, serving to keep the time, and forming 
a not unpleasant accompaniment to the dance-music. They are 
regarded as the symbols of the dancer's profession, and are, to a 
certain extent, held sacred. After a dancer has once been solemnly 
invested with these bells, it is impossible for him or her ever 
to abandon the profession so adopted. So much is this the case, 
that, when a Hindu desires to express that a person has taken an 
irrevocable step, he speaks of him as " having tied on the bells." 

I will not attempt to describe the various kinds of cymbals 
and castanets which are found in India. The former are made 
principally of silver or bell-metal, and, in the north of India, are 
frequently used in religious ceremonies. Capt. Taylor ' mentions 
a small cymbal used in the south of India, consisting of two cups 
of bell-metal, united by a cord, which, in the hands of an adept 
player, are said to yield remarkable effects. Castanets, both of 
wood and metal, are in common use. Those used by the Bayaderes 
in their dances are made of metal, and are called Tal (Fig. 7). In 
India, also, we find the cradle of the instruments of the xylophone 
and harmonicon family, whence their use has passed into Siam 
(see Fig. i) and Burmah, and even into China and Japan (Fig. 12). 
Of these the most important has seventeen keys, and is called 
Kinnery.^ 

IV. Last of all I shall consider the wind instruments of India. 
The flute {Bansee or Bansulee) was formerly a very favorite instru- 
ment, and in mythological days is said to have produced wonderful 
effects in the hands of the god Krishna. It is little used to-day by 
professional musicians, though its employment in certain ceremonies 
is customary. Especially is this the case at the feast of Nila-Pooja, 

' Taylor, p. 244. " Fetis, ii. p. 308. 



I20 Musical Instmnnents and tJieir Homes. 



wl 



dien the bigots run sharp-pointed iron rods through their tongues, 
and through the muscuLar part of the breast, the back, the arm, 
the skin of the forehead, etc., and dance with stretched cords 
passed through the integuments of the sides." ' It is also said 
that the Bansee is used with remarkable effect in the taming of 
elephants. 

There are a number of instruments of the flageolet family in 
India, three of which are represented in Figs. 4, 5, and 6. The 
AlgJiosaJi (Algooja) of Bengal belongs to this class. Still more 
numerous and important are the Oboes. Of these the oldest is 
the Ottii (Otou), which is used to accompany the dance of the 
Bayaderes. This instrument is a simple tube without finger-holes, 
and yields but a single tone. Its players are said to have the 
remarkable faculty of holding the breath and prolonging the tone 
almost indefinitely." A more important instrument of this family 
is the 1 oonierie Nagassaran (Fig. 9), which has twelve finger-holes, 
and is made of wood mounted with brass. It is found in the 
province of Madras. Other instruments, differing only in size and 
in the number of finger-holes, are the Zounia, the Shena (Shanai, 
Soo-nai), the MiLkha, etc.^ The use of these instruments is almost 
universal. "They are, in fact, the only regular out-door instruments 
of Indian music, and are employed on all occasions, whether in 
domestic or public religious ceremonials, processions in festivals, 
temple music, and the like. ... In the Mahratta country, the 
simple melodies of the people, joyous or plaintive, are performed 
with a style of execution which is often surprising; and combina- 
tions of musical effect are introduced which are equally curious 
and interesting."'^ 

Several varieties of bagpipe are found in India. A rude 
specimen, the Zitty (or Titthi), of Madras, is shown in Fig. 8. 
Somewhat similar in appearance is the Poongi (or Magoudi, Fig. 

' Solvyns : The Costume of Indostaii, plate xxviii. - Fetis, ii. p. 301. ' Kngel, p. iCS. * Taylor, p. 250. 



Instruments of India. \ 2 \ 

15), a peculiar instrument used by the snake-charmers. This 
consists of a hollow gourd, in which are inserted two bamboo pipes, 
which are fastened by wax or some resinous substance. The 
performer blows through a mouthpiece cut in the end of the gourd, 
opposite to the pipes. Although both the latter are furnished with 
finger-holes, only one of them is used in playing ; the holes of the 
other, which serves as a drone, being mostly closed with wax. The 
Poongi is capable of producing about nine different notes. Strange 
as it may appear, competent witnesses testify to the remarkable 
effect produced upon all kinds of snakes, and especially upon the 
cobra, by the plaintive tones of this instrument. 

A variety of the Poongi, called Tooinerie, is played by the nose 
instead of the mouth. Indeed, according to certain writers, the use 
of the nose-flute originated in Hindustan, and was thence carried to 
the Fiji Islands ' and other places, where it is now found. The 
explanation of its origin is to be found "in the religious doctrine 
of the Brahmins, that a person of superior caste is defiled by 
touching with his mouth any thing which has been touched by the 
mouth of an inferior." ^ In this connection we may mention another 
curious instrument of Hindustan. This is the Nyastaranga (or 
Upanga), consisting of a pair of pipes, the extremities of which are 
placed on the throat, upon the vocal chords, and which, when 
breathed upon strongly, produce a clear, reedy note.^ The same 
effect is produced by placing them upon the cheeks or the nostrils. 

The brass instruments of India are principally horns and 
trumpets. The former are of various sizes and shapes, and are used 
principally for signals, watch-setting, processions, and temple services. 
Wailing blasts for the dead are played upon them, as well at the 
funerals of Hindus of the lowest caste as at the cremation of Hindu 
princes.* The most important of the numerous trumpets is the 
Kurna, which is used chiefly in religious festivals and processions. 

' See Oceanica, Fig. 2. = Kiigel, p. 166. ^ Tagore : Short Notices, etc., p. 28. '' Taylor, p. 247. 



12 2 



Mtisical Instruments and their Homes. 



It yields only a few hoarse bass notes. It is considered by the 
Brahmins as the most ancient of all musical instruments, and its 
sound is supposed to be especially pleasing to the gods. The 
Tootoore is a small tenor trumpet, used for like purposes and on 
like occasions with the Kurna.' As in China and Japan, so in India 
also, we find a rude conch trumpet, which is " sounded during 
religious ceremonials, in processions of Hindu worship, and before 
idols." ^ 

Here I conclude my account of the musical instruments of 
Hindustan. While far from claiming to have exhausted the field, 
I may yet hope that the survey has been complete enough to give 
the reader some idea of the wealth of invention and resource shown 
by this wonderful people in this most interesting field. In spite of 
all that has been written on the subject, much still remains to be 
learned concerning the musical instruments of India. If the 
present chapter shall succeed in arousing any new interest in 
this important subject, it will not have been written in vain. 

' Other forms of trumpet are described by Fetis on pp. 304, 305. " Taylor, p. 262. 



SIAM AND BURMAH. 




Yo«)\J e<) Oh 'Ike. 
upper jc/rf-2^ce ^ a.ix'^ 




di/ferext hofe. ??J^ey are, t^a^Uh 



hi. a,+ c^kIit^. II ^ 

3 Jl(J\oj^e(7k-'P'o/;^^) 





(^) 






lY l6 iV i.,,1. ,-iv. 

v^c^ Aon xo7\f silly t;/jo»y a 






rc^ 




vJOUnq, JjO\t- S^'\^^^ f^'Xro . jTJe 4oc)v|- v/o 



o d w' [Irk 



"fciu.: K e c 



\ 




-^vjii'nrrr-Tj-jj^ 



^ 6 



cC , op 6 o3 Y ^^ 'u • ■) 



^/ /^^hcile 3 t;, ^ \^/.6~,'r. 



A. H- 



m 



Z. CymW^. J^^R 







'a.ir 



n 



J 



^c'C o 



'/ 



6ra<!c , J) ^o^ 1^ . 



■L 



o 






^ {J^Ot. Woof) J With TCe<) Tnocf/T. 



^. '^£ 'n. 





J ^ e U c 
'^oT^ e 



^'r^e 






^a.^:)^ 0(^ ^ C0C0 3^y^UJ~ 




H: 



3,5 -^Wc 



v/ 



irt S'^^i-Kq^ 



oC. i^i 



i-K - li.f: 



ir\ 



1. jfvj eezgt . i I 




y 



Woo^ei; Tna^lUf, Y''^^<^S ^ cl^\)r a.'K^ ()r 










VIII. 
MUSIC AND INSTRUMENTS OF SIAM. 

N his chapter on the music of Indo-China, Fetis ' laments 
the lack of accurate information on the whole subject of 
the music of Siam, Burmah, and the neighboring countries, 
and expresses the hope that in the near future a closer acquaintance 
with the music of these peoples may render possible a more 
satisfactory treatment of the subject. It is only very recently that 
this hope has seen its fulfilment, as far as Siam is concerned. 
At the International Inventions Exhibition, held at South 
Kensington, London, in 1885, there were exhibited, through the 
kindness of the king of Siam, specimens of all the principal musical 
instruments in use in that country ; and a well-trained Siamese 
orchestra gave those interested in the subject an opportunity to 
hear and study many of the most interesting Siamese melodies. 
The information contained in the following chapter is largely 
drawn from a little pamphlet, published in connection with this 
exhibition, entitled " Notes on Siamese Musical Instruments." 
The writer begins by calling attention to the almost universal 
ignorance which prevails among Europeans as to the whole 
subject of Eastern music. "To most of those that gazed at 
the Siamese performers," he remarks, "such music was wholly 
unintelligible. It seemed, no doubt, to them as though fitful shreds 
of melody were wantonly immersed in waves of riotous sound. 
The press, which in these days employs men of great experience 

' ii. p. 348. 



132 



Musical Instrtmients and their Homes. 



and culture, spoke of the band in accents of compassionate good- 
nature. The public, to whom this music came as a surprise, 
flocked to each performance with the highest expectations ; but 
the great majority left with an impression that they had listened 
to the capricious volubility of a strange confusion of sound."' In 
spite, however, of the little favor which it found in the ears of its 
Western hearers, in the opinion of Mr. Alexander Ellis' — a very 
competent authority — Siamese music must take a high rank in the 
scale of that of extra-European nations. Not only do we find in 
the national music of the Siamese evidences of a very advanced 
musical development, but the character of their musical instruments, 
no less than the elaborate nature of their orchestral performances, 
bears witness to a remarkable state of musical proficiency. 

The music of Siam is far more closely allied in character to 
that of Hindustan than to that of China. Unlike their neicrhbors, 
the Anamese and Javanese, who use the pentatonic scale, ^ the 
Siamese have seven notes in their scale. " The ideal Siamese 
scale," says Mr. Ellis, " is an equal division of the octave into 
seven parts : so that there are no semi-tones and no tones, when 
the instrument is properly tuned, but only intervals a trifle less 
than one and three-quarter semi-tones ; for seven of these would 
give twelve and a quarter semi-tones, just over an octave."-* The 
same name is applied by the Siamese both to a note and to its 
octave. " There are three octaves, or rather septimes of seven 
notes, called upper, middle, and lower septime. The eighth note 
is reckoned as part of the next septime." ^ Before beginning, the 
conductor announces in what septime the piece is to be played. 

In spite of their fondness for music, the Siamese have not 
developed any musical notation. "All their music is learned by 
ear, — a method of teaching which is considered safer and more 

PP- S, 9- ^ Quoted in Notes on Siamese Musical Instruments, p. 26. 

3 Fetis, ii. p. 332. 1 Quoted as above, p. 24. s Ibid., p. 23. 



M^Lsic and InstrtLvients of Siam. 133 

expeditious. Music thus learned is handed down traditionally, but 
not necessarily from father to son." ' A good ear and a prodigious 
memory are, therefore, in Siam, the two indispensable requisites 
for a successful musician. The boys begin to study music at a 
very early age, and devote themselves to the pursuit of their art 
with remarkable assiduity. We are told that the " skill, nicety 
of execution and precision, both as regards time and rhythm," 
displayed by a skilful Siamese in playing his national instruments, 
may well excite the surprise of even the best European performer. 

There are, in Siam, musical societies, or guilds, which profess 
to train musicians for public and other performances. But they 
are not very prosperous, owing to the competition of private 
orchestras. The latter absorb all the best musical talent ; and we 
are told that there is no little rivalry, among those who can afford 
it, for the possession of the best band. In Siam, however, the 
happy practice obtains, among the noblemen and other wealthy 
and distinguished persons, of admitting the general public to their 
private concerts, when any thing of special merit is to be performed. 
In this way the musical taste is kept from degenerating. The 
Siamese are, indeed, a thoroughly musical people. Not only has 
music a prominent place in theatrical performances, and at all 
public feasts and shows, but almost every house has its Ranat ; 
and the number of other instruments is limited only by the means 
of the householder. Women, as well as men, are accustomed to 
play on some instrument. Singing is also popular with both 
sexes, both as a recreation and as a profession. Many of their 
songs have a melancholy and plaintive character, whereas their 
orchestral music is usually sprightly and cheerful.' Chorus singing 
is frequent, but is always in unison. Indeed, Siamese music is no 
exception to the general rule which we have thus far seen character- 
izing all the nations of the East. Of harmony they know nothing ; 

■ Ellis, quoted in Notes on Siamese Musical Instruments, p. 24. ^ Fetis, i. p. 342. 



134 Mttsical histruments and their Homes. 

and the effect produced by the performance of a Siamese orchestra 
has been compared, by Mr. Ellis, to that probably produced upon 
the contemporaries of Daniel, when they " heard ' the sound of the 
cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, dulcimer, and all kinds of 
music' playing together, and relying for their effects not on harmony, 
but on diversity of quality of tone for the same note, or its octave." 
"We may thus learn to see," continues Mr. Ellis, "that extensive 
pieces of music can be put together, with a full appreciation of 
parts to a whole, relying solely upon melody without harmony, 
and come to understand that the latter art, however indispensable 
to modern European music, is not essential to the existence or 
enjoyment of music in general." ' 

SIAMESE INSTRUMENTS.* 

The Siamese distinguish two general kinds of instruments, — 
Mahoree, or " light-sounding " instruments, which are principally 
used for in-door performances ; and Bhimbhat, or " heavy-sounding " 
instruments, which are used for out-door purposes. These are also 
the names of the two principal orchestras of Siam. The Mahoree, 
which performs in-door music of the highest class, consists of seven 
stringed instruments, three wind instruments, and eleven instruments 
of percussion, — twenty-one in all. The Bhimbhat, which corresponds 
to our brass band, and which gives a far greater volume of sound, 
is composed entirely of wind instruments and instruments of 
percussion, combined in the proportion of three to sixteen. The 
very large preponderance of the latter strikingly reminds us 

Note. — The writer regrets that the illustrations which accompany this chapter 
and the following should be so incomplete. Those who are interested in pursuing the 
subject further are referred to the excellent illustrations in the little pamphlet referred 
to on Siamese Musical Instruments. Hipkins also devotes plates 44 and 45 of his 
elaborate work to the subject of Siamese instruments. 

' Quoted in Notes on Siamese Musical Instruments, p. 26. 



Music and Listrtmients of Siani. 135 

of the neighboring countries of China and Japan. Other forms of 
orchestra are the Klong Khek, which is composed partly of Malay 
instruments ; and the Lao Phan, the instruments of which are 
peculiar to the North of Siam. 

The characteristic instrument of Siam is the Ranat, or har- 
monicon (Fig. i). There are four varieties of this instrument, of 
which two are made of metal (Ranat Thong and Ranat Lek), and 
two of wood (Ranat Ek and Ranat T'hoom). "The principal 
instrument of the Siamese," writes Mr. Ellis, " by which all others 
are regulated, is the Ranat Ek, or treble wooden harmonicon. 
This consists of bars of wood, slightly rounded on the upper 
surface, suspended by strings passing through their nodes, and 
strung over what may be called the elevated prow and stem of an 
ornamental boat or cradle, which serves as a resonance chamber, and 
also as a storage place for the bars themselves when rolled up, 
and the hammers by which they are struck. The wooden bars are 
tuned roughly by measurement, and hollowing out at the back 
between the nodes as in the Javese gambangs,' and more accurately 
by sticking lumps of wax mixed with lead and oil to the under parts 
of the bars beyond the nodes. The intonation depends especially 
on these tuning lumps. In attaching these lumps, the Siamese 
tuner seems to be guided solely by ear ; and the peculiar intention 
of their scale rendering this very difficult, the result obtained is by 
no means always perfect." ^ 

The Ranat T'hoom differs from the Ranat Ek only in being an 
octave lower. The latter is the treble instrument, the former the 
bass. 

The only difference between the two metal harmonicons, the 
Ranat Lek and Ranat Thong, is as follows : The first has seventeen 
keys made of iron, and the second has twenty-one keys of brass. 
" The bars [of these instruments] are not strung, but rest on a ledge 

' A kind of harmonicon. ^ Quoted in Notes on Siamese Musical Instruments, pp. 13, 14. 



136 Musical Instruments and their Homes. 

passing under the nodes." ' They are tuned by filing the keys, and 
retain their pitch better than the wooden harmonicons. 

Instruments of the gong class are very popular in Siam. Not 
only do we find many single gongs, differing very slightly from those 
in use in China, but the Siamese combine a number of individual 
gongs into a peculiar instrument called Klwng Yai. This consists 
of a circular frame-work, in which are suspended by strings sixteen 
gongs made of an alloy of brass. In the middle of the circle "the 
player squats, so that he can reach the whole scale, which, on 
account of the width of the Khongs, would be too long if displayed 
in one line like the bars of the Ranat. The sound [of the gongs] 
is bell-like, but, like [that of] bells, full of inharmonic proper tones. 
They are tuned by lumps, like those of the Ranat, placed inside 
the bell." ' A smaller instrument of the same kind, called KJiong 
Lek, is made up of twenty-one gongs. 

Among the many varieties of drum used by the Siamese, the 
following may be mentioned : First, the Tatot Pote, a small hand- 
drum principally used in the Laos states ; second, the Taphone 
(Ta-P'ohn) (Fig. 3), a larger hand-drum, not unlike a small keg, 
which, when played, is set horizontally upon a stand ; third, the 
long drum, or Song-ndh, a third variety of hand-drum, of a narrow, 
cylindrical shape; fourth, the Tlione, a small vase-shaped hand- 
drum, like the Arab Darabukkeh. Of the drums which are beaten 
by sticks, the most important are the Klong Khek, or Malay drum 
(Fig. 2), and the Klong Yai, or kettledrums. The latter are of 
a very large size, and are played in pairs. They " are tilted slightly, 
so as to be easily played by one performer with a drumstick in each 
hand, like our kettledrums. They have a sweet, musical tone. 
They are tuned by placing, or sticking, a handful of mashed boiled 
rice at the bottom of the drum." 3 

Other instruments of percussion in common use are cymbals 

■ Ellis, quoted in Notes on Siamese Musical Instruments, p. 15. ^ Ibid,, p. i6. ^ Ibid., p. 19. 



Mtisic mtd histruvients of Suim. 1 3 7 

and castanets. The name for the former is Cliarp. A small pair 
of metal castanets, called C/img, is used by the conductor of an 
orchestra to keep time during the performance. 

The most characteristic stringed instrument of Siam is the 
TdKhay (Tuk-Kay), or " alligator." This instrument " has some- 
thing like a guitar body, and is placed on the ground, the player 
squatting beside it. He touches the strings on the frets with his 
left hand, and sounds the string by a plectrum,' like a large ivory 
tooth, which is fastened to his fingers, and drawn rapidly back- 
wards and forwards across the string, so as to produce an almost 
continuous tone, which is not unlike that of a violoncello." ' 
Another instrument of the guitar family is called Kra Chapee. 
This is played with a small piece of horn, and yields fourteen 
notes. 

The most important instrument of the violin family is the Saw 
Tai. " It has a heart-shaped body, wdth a very long neck and 
a foot, both cylindrical ; the former carrying the pegs for the 
strings, the latter forming a rest for the instrument when played. 
The musician squats cross-legged, and holds the Saw Tai at a 
slight slope. The foot is about twelve inches long, pointed, and 
sometimes of ivory, beautifully carved." ^ The Saw Tai is usually 
strung with three strings of silk cord, which are close together at 
the upper end, " where they pass under a ligature round the top, 
and then on to the pegs." Like the Rebab and the Chinese fiddles, 
it has no finger-board. " The length of the string is, therefore, not 
limited, as on the violin, by pinching it between the fingers and 
the finger-board, but by pressing with the whole width of the 
finger on the strings ; and, as this can be done with very different 
weight, the note is not constant for the same length of string. 
The string, also, not being sharply limited, the tone is not crisp 
and well-defined, but rather hazy. Still, considerable execution 

' Ellis, quoted in Notes on Siamese Musical Instruments, p. i6. ^ Ibid., p. 3i. 



u8 Musical Instruments and their Homes. 



J 



is possible." " It is played with a bow larger than that of our 
European double bass. Another kind of three-stringed violin is 
called Saw Sa7nsai. The Sazv Duang and Saw Oo are two- 
stringed violins, differing only in size. They closely resemble the 
ordinary Chinese fiddle (see Fig. 9, China). 

The principal wind instruments used in Siam are flutes. Of 
these the most important is the Pee, which may be made either 
of marble, ivory, or ebony. " This is a species of harsh oboe, fit 
only for playing in the open air. Its effect is that of a very 
powerful bagpipe. It is a reed instrument, rather thick, with six 
holes, in groups of four and two, with a considerable space between 
the two groups : but only three of the first four are covered with 
the fingers of the left hand ; the fourth hole is covered with the 
forefinger of the right hand." ' Another similar instrument is 
the Peec/iawar, or Java flute, which has seven holes, and is gener- 
ally made of ivory. Flutes of bamboo, with eight and ten holes 
respectively, are also in use. The Siamese have also a kind of flute, 
called Klui, in which the pitch may be altered by covering one of 
the holes with a membrane. 

A curious solo instrument is found in the northern part of Siam, 
and in the Laos states. This is the P/ian, a kind of Pandean pipes, 
almost exactly similar to that played by the natives of British 
Guiana (see Fig. 2, South America). The pipes of this instrument 
are " at least four feet long ; and it is blown, or sucked, at a hole 
coming from the ivory cross band, against which the palms of the 
hands rest to hold it in position, while the fingers touch the holes 
in the pipes, which allow the reeds to sound, just as in the Chinese 
Sheng." ^ 

This completes the list of the principal Siamese instruments. 
It may be interesting, in conclusion, to notice the manner in which 
they are combined in orchestral playing. In the ordinary band 

' Ellis, quoted in Notes on Siamese Musical Instruments, p. 21. = Ibid., p. 17. 



Music and Instruments of Siam. 139 

(Mahoree) the disposition of the instruments is as follows : In front 
are placed the Ranats ; in the rear, the wind and stringed instru- 
ments, save the Ta'Khay, or "alligator," which is to the left of the 
audience. The middle row is composed of the drums and gong 
organs (Klong Yai). In the midst of the orchestra, but slightly to 
the left, stands the conductor, regulating the time by the tinkling 
tones of his C/iiiig.^ 

' Set: the interesting diagram on p. 23 of Notes on Siamese ]\Iusical Instruments. 



IX. 

MUSIC AND INSTRUMENTS OF 

BURMAH. 

HE Burmese, like the Siamese, are a distinctly musical 
people. Both men and women are in the habit of singing 
at their work. Almost every one can play some instrument. 
As in Siam, every noble supports his private orchestra, to the 
performances of which the common people are freely admitted. 
Music takes a prominent place in the processions and ceremonies 
which attend every important event of life. The sacrificial rites in 
the Buddhist temples are accompanied by solemn chanting on the 
part of the priests, and by the dancing of chosen maidens, like 
the Bayaderes of Hindustan, to the tune of the oboe and of drums. 
As in the latter country, so here, also, the musical drama is very 
popular.' The Burmese plays, or operas as they should strictly be 
called, consist of a combination of acting, singing, dancing, and 
orchestral accompaniment. The dialogue is usually declaimed in 
a sort of recitative, not unlike that in our modern opera. It is 
occasionally interrupted by short airs, or by orchestral passages. 
The subject of the play is usually mythological, the adventures of 
the hero Rama being especially popular." 

The Burmese scale, like the Siamese, consists of seven distinct 
tones. Accurate experiments are, however, needed to determine the 
exact intervals between these tones.^ The scale given by Fetis,^ 

' For a description, with c|uotations, of a Burmese play, see Engel : Musical Myths and Facts, vol. ii. pp. 15S sc;j. 
See also Shway Yoe : The Eurman, vol. i. chap, x.xi.x. pp. 342 scq. 

- Fc-tis, ii. p. 334. 3 ji^i^i _ p^ ,^g^ 

140 



MtLsic and Instrznnents of Bztrmah. 141 

on the authority of Col. Symes, is only approximately correct. 
Whatever may be true of the theoretical scale, that used in practice 
probably differs little from our own.' 

We are told that the royal library at the capital contains a 
number of theoretical works on music. None of these, however, 
have yet been rendered accessible to European students, nor is it 
probable that the natives themselves are any more familiar with 
their contents. Whatever may have been true of their remote 
ancestors, the modern Burmese, like the Siamese, have no musical 
notation. Tunes are handed down by ear from generation to 
generation. There are not even any professional music-teachers. 
When a man desires to become a musician, he begins by " diligently 
listening to the performance of a good band. By and by he enters 
the village orchestra as a clapper-player, and so learns the time 
and the peculiarities of various tunes. . . . As a natural consequence, 
there are occasionally variations, and, indeed, every Puloay (or flute) 
player, has his own particular mannerisms ; but these are never so 
great as to materially alter the character of the air." ^ Still greater 
variations are common in vocal music. " Each ' prince ' or ' princess ' 
has individual peculiarities in the way of trills and staccatos 
introduced into the legitimate air." ^ When a young man desires 
to become a vocalist, he attaches himself to some singer of 
acknowledged reputation, follows him about, and endeavors to 
master his style, or at least his repertory. The profession of court- 
singer, while honorable, is not without perils, as it is considered 
treasonable to sing a new song before the king. We are told that 
the great singer Moung Thah Byaw was several times condemned to 
death for carelessly transgressing this law. On each occasion, how- 
ever, he so charmed his executioners by the sweetness of his songs, 

■ See the tuning of the Burmese harp (Fig. i), taken from Engel : Musical Instruments in the South Kensington 
Museum, p. 175. 

" Yoe, ii. p. 9. ^ Ibid., p. 13. 



142 Musical Instruments and their Homes. 

that they secretly spared his life, and executed a less gifted but more 
hapless mortal in his place. For some time after his supposed 
execution, he preserved a judicious retirement ; but at the next 
palace fete, when the king was bitterly regretting his hasty decision, 
who should appear, to the unspeakable delight of the company, but 
the supposed dead man. 



BURMESE INSTRUMENTS. 

The instrument par excellence of Burmah is the harp (Fig. i). 
This is called Soung (Fetis : Soum), and is found principally in the 
kingdom of Ava (Northern Burmah). In shape it " somewhat 
resembles a canoe with a deck." ' The body is made of light wood, 
hollowed, and usually covered with tough buffalo-hide. Its length 
varies from two to five feet. It has a neck, or handle, of hard wood, 
gracefully curved, and tapering at the end. The strings are of silk, 
usually thirteen in number, neatly twisted, and fastened to the 
handle by tasselled cords.' It is tuned by pushing the strings up 
and down the handle, thus increasing or diminishing the tension. ^ 
The Soung is principally used to accompany the voice, though 
occasionally, also, as a solo instrument. Its tone is very sweet, even 
to European ears. In playing, it is " held across the lap, the curved 
neck being to the left ; the performer passes his hand round it, 
and over the strings. . . . [He] occasionally produces a semi-tone, 
by applying a finger of the left hand to a string near its end, which 
has the effect of shortening it. He, however, generally twangs the 
strings with both hands." ^ The use of the Soung is said to be 
confined to young men.^ 

' Engel, p. 174. 

= These tassels are used for tightening the cords in such a way as to explain - what has long puzzled antiquarians 
— the use of similar tassels found in Egyptian and Assyrian sculptures. 
^ For tuning, see Fig. i. 
" Engel, p. 175. s Yoe, ii. p. 11. 



Music and Instru7nents of Burma h. 143 

A second kind of harp is found principally in the southern 
part of Burmah. This is rectangular on three sides, the top being 
inclined at a moderate angle. It is about three feet high by a 
foot and a half long, and is furnished with twenty-five or twenty-six 
wire strings.' 

There are several instruments of the violin class in Burmah. 
Of these the most important is the Thro or Tarau (Turr). In 
appearance it is not unlike our own violin,' though the finger-board 
is shorter in proportion to the body of the instrument. The top 
of the handle is usually elaborately carved. The Thro has three 
strings, and is played with a large bow not unlike that of our bass 
viol. Its tone is nasal and unpleasant to our ears. It is often used 
to accompany the voice, in which case it always plays in unison, 
filling up the pauses, however, with more or less extended interludes. ^ 
The Sarinda (Saroh) of Hindustan is also found in Burmah; 
though, instead of three strings, the Burmese instrument has ten, — 
four of gut, which are played by the bow, and six sympathetic wire 
strings. Fetis also mentions^ a small three-stringed fiddle, in which 
the finger-board is very short and defective. 

The Ta'Khay of Siam re-appears in Burmah under the name of 
Megyonng. It is usually about four feet long, and shaped like an 
alligator. A specimen described by Engel ^ was painted red and 
gilt, and furnished with a pair of glass eyes. The three silken 
strings pass over two bridges, one being placed near the head, and 
the other near the tail. The frets are ten in number, set at regular 
intervals on the back of the alligator. The tuning pegs are situated 
in the tail. The Megyoung, like the Ta'Khay of Siam, is used in 
orchestral performances, and its players are said often to exhibit 
surprising dexterity. 

A sort of rude banjo, made of cocoanut-shell, with a handle 

' For a drawing, see Fetis, ii. p. 335. ^ See Fetis, li. p. 337. =■ Engel, p. 314. 

* ii- P- 337- ' P- ■74- 



144 M^isical Instruments and their Hornes. 

of bamboo, and two wire strings (Fig. 6), is used by the snake- 
charmers, who manage to extract from it quite ehaborate tunes. 

The principal wind instruments of Burmah are flutes and oboes. 
The flute (Fig. 3) is called Puloay. It is a simple bamboo tube 
with seven finger-holes. The best Puloay player, we are told,' 
always leads the orchestra. The oboe (Fig. 4) is also an important 
instrument in concerted music. It usually consists of a wooden 
tube with seven finger-holes, fitted with a reed mouthpiece, and a 
bell-shaped base of brass. Its tone is shrill and piercing. Engel ^ 
.also mentions several "wind instruments of zinc and copper, chiefly 
in twisted serpent form."^ 

The Burmese instruments of percussion are many and various. 
The Ranat of Siam is popular in Burmah, where it is known as 
Pattala, or PatolaJif' Several sizes are found. One described by 
Engel 5 was four and a half feet long, and had twenty-three bamboo 
keys. The instrument is " played with one or two little sticks 
about eighteen inches in length, and terminating in a rather 
thick ball made of cloth." It is said that an old Pattala, " though 
its materials are of no value, ... is prized by the owner like 
a good old Cremona, and he can rarely be induced to part 
with it."*^ 

Gongs and cymbals of various kinds are found in Burmah. 
The former are combined into an instrument called Kyee-wain, 
corresponding to the Klong-yai, or gong-organ, of Siam. The 
Kyee-wain usually contains fifteen gongs, or rather metal plates, 

' Voe, ii. p. II. = p. 2Q5. 

^ In this connection, I qtiote the following interesting statement : 

"As regards the Ijrass wind instruments of the Hindus and Burmese, twisted like serpents and other reptiles, 
it is said that in the beginning of the present century, some London instrument-makers took to manufacturing such 
grote.sque-looking trumpets for exportation to the East. In order to meet the taste of the intended purchasers, they 
made these articles e.xactly after Asiatic patterns. It is, therefore, not impossible that among the brass wind instru- 
ments brought from Asia to England, and exhibited as Eastern curiosities, there may be occasionally a specimen 
whose real birthplace is in the neighborhood of its present abode." — Engel, Appendix, p. 379. 

' The name Patola is incorrectly applied by Fetis to an instrument which seems to resemble the Megyoung. 
P- ''"'S- <■ Capt. Henry Vule, quoted by Engel, p. 176. 



Music and Instruments of Burmah. 145 

hung in a circular frame of wood. It is played with two little 
sticks, the performer being seated in the middle of the frame. It 
is considered an essential part of a Burmese orchestra ; and every 
respectable theatre possesses two, one of which is played on each 
side of the stage. The cymbals are of two principal sizes, called 
respectively Ya-gwin (" big cymbals ") and Than-hwm (" small 
cymbals ") (Fig. 2). A curious instrument of metal is the Kyee-zee 
(Fig. 7), consisting of a plate of sonorous brass of triangular shape. 
This is used by the righteous Buddhists to attract attention to their 
offerings, and, in general, by heads of families on their way to the 
pagoda. It " is suspended by a string to a stick carried over 
the shoulder ; and as the sounds vibrate, rise and fall, quicken and 
die away, with the winding or unwinding of the cord, those who 
intend to keep the duty day well make ready for a start for the 
pagoda." ' The Burmese have also a small bell called KJiew, which, 
like the Feng-Ling of China, is suspended from the roofs of the 
Buddhist temples. A thin plate of metal in the shape of a leaf is 
attached to the clapper, and the wind setting the former in motion 
causes the bell to ring. 

We find in Burmah a kind of gigantic bamboo castanet, called 
WaJdeKhoJit, which is sometimes no less than five feet long. 
"These castanets are always in the hands of the most recently 
joined, and therefore most zealous, members of the band, and 
are clapped together with an energy which usually makes them 
unduly prominent."' They play an important part in theatrical 
orchestras. 

There are several kinds of drums in Burmah, but they differ 
little from those which have already been described under the head of 
India. One of the most common is shown in Fig. 5. It is made 
of hollowed wood, covered at the upper end with skin, and is one of 
a series of nine of different sizes. A number of individual drums 

' Yoe, i. p. 259. - Ibid., ii. p. ii. 



146 Musical Instnnnents and their Homes. 

are combined by the Burmese to form an instrument called Seing- 
weiug, corresponding to the Kyee-wain, or gong-organ, to which 
reference has been made. The Seing-weing is described as "an 
elaborately carved circular wooden frame, painted in parts, standing 
between two and three feet high, and five feet or more in diameter. 
Round the inside of this are hung drums of graduated sizes, which 
are struck with the hands of the performer, who sits in the middle. 
The alternate dry and saturated state of the atmosphere renders 
constant tuning necessary ; and this is effected by tightening the 
drum-heads, and also by smearing on with the fingers a paste 
made of burnt rice-husk. The music produced is rather thin in 
itself, but by no means unpleasing." " This ponderous instrument, 
together with the Kyee-wain, is usually carried about in a cart ; " the 
owner keeping perpetual guard over them, sitting in the centre, 
cheroot in mouth, for they cost a very considerable sum of money." ' 
In processions, however, if we are to believe Rowbotham,- the 
drum-organ is sometimes moved in a much clumsier way. " The 
hoop, with its drums attached to it, is carried by two men, one at 
the front and the other at the back, like chair-men carrying a sedan 
chair, but without the poles ; and the player shuffles along in the 
inside of the hoop as Ijest he can, playing as he goes." " This," 
continues Rowbotham, " must be very difficult to do ; for he has to 
turn round and round to strike his drums, and still keep moving 
along inside his hoop at the rate of the procession." 

So much for the instruments of Burmah. As to their 
combination for orchestral purposes, what has been said in 
reference to Siam applies also here. The ordinary Burmese 
orchestra includes both the drum and the gong organ, together with 
individual drums, gongs, cymbals, and castanets ; the Pattala, or 
harmonicon ; and several flutes and oboes. In a full orchestra, 
stringed instruments may also be used; but in any case we remark 

' Voe, ii. p. lo. = i, p. 315, 



Mttsic and histriiments of BTirmah. i^^j 

the great preponderance of instruments of percussion. Indeed, 
Rowbotham quotes Clement Williams as authority for the statement 
that many of the small Burmese bands are composed altogether of 
instruments of percussion, without the assistance of a single wind 
or stringed instrument.' 

' Through TJurmah to Siam, quoted by Rowbotham, i. p. 315. 



ARABIA, SYRIA, AND NORTH AFRICA. 




'^i toKf S'c^uare^of Woo} 
1^^- 6c[ -(refr, J^t 

















of- v/Cdz Wool J 1^e S /^^n^l 



1. 



s. 



if of wire, ^^^ ^ i '\ ^ 



Vi 







^^■IT^ ^ 5 




Twrje^ 



//a 




u 




In 


.^vc) 


Wiff 


'n 


(^^''^j J 


(p 


.XV ic 




/ 


Ml 


/k. vZ/f/n 




J'lX 


vv'tre 




1/ 'n, 


>v: i .\ . 



3, Tlj.jiiii^Afx 




a^uUe ^^^t^ "Brass v/(T^ /^ea.^ ^^ 5^i'v\ . "Pi^Xye^ 



iT, ytr^Oi)( \ ( ^it^oKKef^ 



}(%nc) - Drc/ 



n 










6. J 3^T>^ u r I r ^ e . D q m 

7. 4lj«^ 



<n 



3). 1 '» 




C7JU b I 



PUy.^ 



<L. "i in. 



w{ile fix- 



2, <Jo\x. Die ptpe 

J 



'5 1 



L/' 



J^fluf^f 



le c (» 



e rv I a. ^ Cj e ^ 



S: 



^I'x finoer- ^oUc ^^-^l U^^<j^^ 3j^/-- 2- />i. 

Q. jVjin U"^A( > C^l 4 pipe., cC,•^il^. 

J »^ ....J,|.Mi,-,«;ai»,.i),i,i«^«i,»...."..i<., uniak...,,. »„.i,iijiii,a ma „m'5» (y 



oC. zfK <^ i•^. 







U^'" 



Woolt-y^ -fr^yr^c^ eivWlv ® 




v/iti 



/. 



^in<?W (^^ ■t/CitiC J^^'K^ "f 



1. 








V\< ^ (-fv . 0^. <pf ^^w/ I fU. II In 



U'j/jl- \/oc»i. ffcO Co»/e.re<i w^iY/T 



3 






"i^m pe 




Ja^^^V 6^f'^J^ fe/er, x^^tt {.Us n^Kr Use 







1>.-^ i\. 



CQ -^'najl ^ooilc ^ruyr\. 



v/00 h 



i 




J), r 








O r 2^c ^ co\Je re.) 




of v^oo ^ . Or J I - 
S^yur\ q v^/l^/^ 

(fori (n 



9^eil^, ^^^e cello , cori^i^f,^^ of 

' ■fr2,yy\e d/ vo/iJoJ, covered w/'^ 5'^"'^- o^. ^ '^ »>> . 











oL . r- 6 V/ 




V. H- />v 



/V- /K 



3. 



'f 



f^rf 



^3. 



^e . ^a.5 -h/o sfr-iiv^ji oj: 



W< iT In . 




V. ^a'i h 







'{ 



KoUr 

5T S^S^i, //'fe 






i(i 



ijy iVrr^.y^^ 



e -l-Q^ /^oU \"r floret H) - 



J 



i/' 



^ ^e e d 



'Xour 



p{t)rC€\ 



>)a 



°^- / j^. 2 ;^^ 



i'lr 



6 3en^/r Xrv 



j-'no- £ ^ - ^fl| e r oT. n 








'n ere ^.j-e 1/^e r?j<£;7^ ^^\re. 
ViiJ^ fi^n^f of >-e^ ^t^'h ^rczy^. J^c 






X. 
MUSIC OF THE ARABS. 

HE influence of the Arabs upon the world of European 
life and thought has been, perhaps, even greater than that 
which they have exerted upon the political history of 
Europe. The Saracens, it is true, never succeeded in maintaining 
a permanent footing in Spain ; but their influence still lives, not 
only in the gorgeous tracery of the Alhambra, but in the arts and 
sciences, which in the tenth and eleventh centuries passed from that 
country to the rest of Europe. The geographical changes produced 
by the Crusades were, to be sure, not great ; but the world of new 
ideas, brought back from the East by the returning crusaders, was 
a factor of the very highest importance in the future development 
of the European nations. Not only in the fields of science, art, 
and medicine, is Europe indebted to the Arab for stimulus and 
instruction : in the sphere of music, also, the latter exercised no slight 
influence upon the former. The lute, the guitar, and the rebec, 
not to speak of other instruments which will be noticed later, 
were undoubtedly derived by the Europeans direct from the Oud, 
the Kuitra, and the Rebab of the Arabs.' In view of these facts, the 
subject of the present chapter should be of exceptional interest 
to the musical student. 

The history of Arabic music may be divided into two great 
sections, — the first extending from the earliest times to the conquest 
of Persia, in the seventh century ; and the second, from that time to 
our own. 

' Engel, p. 63. 

167 



1 68 Musical I list mm cuts and their Homes. 

"The musical endowments of the Arabians," says Naumann,' 
" were undoubtedly of a very high order, and, indeed, such as were 
only to be expected from a people so peculiarly developed as 
were these children of the desert." Their enjoyment of nature was 
remarkably keen, — a never-failing sign of a music-loving people. 
Accordingly we find in their poetry a preference for rhyme as 
distinguished from metre. It is lyric rather than epic. " Even 
when the epic or dramatic element is paramount, the lyrical 
is never entirely eliminated ; and in such exceptional instances is 
shown its innate musical tendency." ' From the very earliest times, 
the Arabs have been a nation of poets ; ' but their music seems 
to have been slow in developing. One of their own authors says, 
that, before their acquaintance with Islamism, the wandering Arabs 
had poetry, but no music.^ In those early days their songs were 
simple and rude. " All their music and song consisted in the cries 
with which they drove their camels, so that their so-called singers 
were known also as Hadi (drivers)." -* But whatever may have been 
true of the wandering children of the desert, whose life was isolated 
from all connection with the outside world, and who retained their 
primitive customs unchanged for centuries, far different was the 
case with the rich cities of Arabia Felix. In the life of its pros- 
perous and cultivated traders, music played an important part. Of 
the exact character of this music, we are ignorant ; but it probably 
differed little from that of the neighboring cities of Egypt.' The 
ancients undoubtedly referred to the inhabitants of this part of 
Arabia, when they attributed to the Arabs the invention of the 
Greek monochord. Although this derivation was probably mistaken, 

' i- P- S7. ^ Fetis, ii. p. 6. ^ Ambros, i. p. 427. 

" Ibid. Yet we hear from Zenobius that the Arab shepherds, while watching their flocl<s at night, were 
accustomed to pass the time by playing upon a long flute. Moreover, we know that some of the early Arab chiefs 
had female singers, whom they esteemed of the highest value. The Arab proverb, "singing like the two locusts of 
Moawijah," recalls two of the most celebrated singers of this class, whom their master was accustomed to speak 
of as his locusts. 

^ Ambros, i. p. 428. 



Music of the Arabs. 169 

and the monochord should be traced to Assyria/ the suggestion is 
interesting as bearing witness to an advanced stage of musical 
development among the Arabs, even at that early date. Certain it 
is, that in Menander's time an Arabian flute was not only known, 
but also popular, in Greece. 

Perhaps nothing is more remarkable, in connection with the 
music of Arabia, than the fact that it seems to have developed with 
very little reference to, or aid from, religion. To this cause 
Naumann attributes the fact that with the Arabs music never 
rose into a real art, as with their neighbors and kinsmen the 
Israelites." Mohammed himself was opposed to music, probably 
looking upon it as enervating and beneath the dignity of a true 
man, — an idea which still survives among the Egyptians of 
the present day.^ Although the Koran nowhere contains any 
definite reference to music, Arabic tradition tells us that it was 
expressly condemned by the Prophet. " Singing and hearing 
songs," he said, " cause hypocrisy to grow in the heart, like as 
water promoteth the growth of corn." ^ Musical instruments he 
declared to be among the most prominent means employed by the 
Devil to seduce man, — an idea which is the foundation of many 
later Arabic legends. 5 Though himself a man of marked poetic 
spirit, in several places in the Koran he repels the charge of being 
a poet. "We have not taught him [Mohammed] poetry," he 
exclaims, " nor was it proper for him." '' And again we read : " And 
the poets do those follow who go astray." ^ 

■ Ambros, i. p. 426. ^ i- P- S6. ^ Lane : Modern Egyptians, ii. p. 57. 

^ Lane's edition of the Arabian Nights, i. p. 200; Note on Music. = Ibid., p. 201 ; cf. story of Ibraheem. 

<■ chap, xxxvi. 69; Palmer's tr., ii. p. 167. 

' chap. xxvi. 224, ed. cit. ii. p. 99 ; cf. also chap. xxi. 5, ii. p. 46. 

The Koran itself is written in rhythmical language, and many of its verses end with a rhyme. Mohammed's 
denial of poetic ability must, therefore, be explained on the ground of his desire to prevent himself from being 
identified with the wandering bards of the day. " Amongst a people who believed firmly in witchcraft and sooth- 
saying, and who, though passionately fond of poetry, believed that every poet had his familiar spirit who inspired 
his utterances, it was no wonder that the prophet should be taken for a 'soothsayer,' for 'one possessed with an evil 
spirit,' or for 'an infatuated poet.' " — Palmer, Intro., i. p. 56. 



I70 Musical Instruments and their Ho7nes. 

Some of the caliphs who succeeded were, however, much less 
rigid in their ideas. Many of the Ommiads and Abbassides were 
not only fond of music, but were themselves the authors of melodies. 
In spite of the position of the Prophet, later teachers found a way 
to reconcile the practice of music with the precept of their religion ; 
and to-day, not only is music used at religious ceremonies in 
Mohammedan countries,' especially by the dervishes, but the Koran 
itself is chanted in the schools.' So impossible does it seem for 
any people utterly to divorce music from the service of religion. 
It is a striking fact, that, strongly as Mohammed set his face against 
music, it was only after his time, when the Arabs, under the mighty 
impulse which he had imparted, began to come into contact with 
the surrounding civilizations, that music rose to any real importance 
among them. Though, in the early days, here and there a chief 
may ha\'e delighted himself with the songs of a female slave ; 
though, even in the time of Mohammed himself, we are told that 
the Koraish marched out to meet the followers of the Prophet 
at the battle of Ohod to the accompaniment of the songs and 
tambourines of their women, — it was only in later days that the idea 
gained ground, that music was worth study as an art, that a man 
might honorably devote himself to it ; it was only under this new 
impulse that the two sisters. Music and Poetry, who in early 
Arabic history had been separated, were finally united ; and the 
poet might become also the composer, — not only writing, but 
also setting to music and singing his own productions. This 
remarkable change is only part of the marvellous transformation 
which took place in the Arab people when they entered upon that 
career of conquest which has not ceased to be the wonder of the 
world. It is, therefore, only fitting that the second great epoch in 
the history of Arabic music should begin with the conquest of 
Persia. 

' For a full account of the religious music of the Arabs, see Fetis, ii. p. 90 seq. 
^ Lane : Modern Egyptians, ii. p. 57. 



Music of the Arabs. 1 7 1 

Even before the conquest, we are told, the Arabs had some 
acquaintance with the music of Persia. In the last quarter of the 
seventh century, the lute is said to have been brought to Mecca by 
an Arab musician named Nadr Ben Kelde, who had studied music 
at the Persian court.' Such cases, however, were only isolated. 
But when the caliphs finally established themselves in the court of 
Chosroes, they succeeded not only to the temporal power of the 
Persian princes, but also to the arts and sciences of the great people 
whom they had conquered. " With surprising quickness," says 
Ambros, " the sons of the desert caught up the homogeneous Oriental 
culture of the conquered land, — yes, in the course of the four 
centuries of their rule, surpassed their teachers." ^ And this was 
pre-eminently true of their music. "The theory of music which 
they received from the Persians, they developed richly ; and so 
thoroughly, that they themselves on their side could become 
teachers of the Persians. From that time on, Persian and Arabian 
music went on, like two streams flowing side by side and united ; 
and the history of art cannot, therefore, well consider them 
separately." ^ 

Here, however, we are confronted with an interesting problem. 
What was the exact state of music in Persia at the time of the 
Arab conquest ? How much of the present Arabic system did 
the conquerors bring with them, and how much did they receive 
from their Persian masters ? What were the differences in theory 
and in practice between the two systems, or were they practically 
identical ? These questions are easier to ask than to answer. 
Fetis holds that the two systems were essentially different, not 
only in minor points, but in the structure and division of the octave ; 
and that the development of the Arabic theory, while stimulated, 

' Engel, p, 60, Rowbotham, however, attributes its introduction to Ebn Musiddschidsch. See iii. p. 525 seq^ 
where a number of interesting stories are given of the early Arab minstrels. 
^ i. p. 43°. 



172 Musical Instruments and their Homes. 

was little modified by the Persian system.' He maintains, that, 
for centuries after the conquest, the two musics still existed, side 
by side, but yet essentially distinct.^ The greater number of 
musical historians, however, including the latest and most reliable, 
hold essentially the position of Ambros,^ that, whatever may have 
been true of the early music of Persia, after the seventh century 
it became practically identical with that of the Arabs. This position 
I have followed in the present chapter, leaving to be discussed at 
a later time the few facts which have come down to us from the 
early history of Persian music. 

In the eighth and ninth centuries, Bagdad was the great musical 
centre of the day. Persian singers flocked in crowds to the court 
of the caliphs. Poets and musicians alike received munificent 
rewards. "On all sides," says Fetis, "were heard the voices of male 
and female singers, accompanied by the tamboura and by the lute. 
They were the delight of the palaces of Bagdad, Damascus, and 
Aleppo in Asia ; of Cordova, of Toledo, and of Granada in Spain." "■ 
The celebrated names which have come down to us from this period 
must be numbered by hundreds.^ Many interesting stories have 
been preserved of the skill of these early musicians. Haroun al 
Raschid, we are told, was moved by the performance of the singer 
Ishak el Mosilee to forgive a favorite concubine, who had in some 
way offended him.*^ The father of this same Ishak, Ibraheem by 
name, received from the caliph a monthly pension of ten thousand 
dirhems, in addition to a present of a hundred and fifty thou- 
sand dirhems on the occasion of his entering the latter's service.' 
This Ibraheem had a pupil, Mukharik, of whom even more won- 
derful tales are related. On one occasion, having been captivated by 
the beauty of a female slave, he is said to have made his way into 

" ii- PP- 33- 39- Mi. p. 369. M. p. 430. " ii. p. ii. 

^ See Fetis, ii. p. 13 seq., for an account of some of the most distinguished. '' Ambros, 1. p. 429. 

' Lane : Ai'aljian Niglits, i. [j. 202. 



Miisic of the Arabs. ijt^ 

the house of her owner, and there to have so charmed the master 
and his guests by his singing, that they all sprang to their feet and 
kissed his head. He then sang a second air, and a third ; and " their 
reason almost fled, from ecstasy." The master of the house, learning 
who he was, gave him as a reward the girl of whom he \x2.s 
enamoured ; the other guests adding a bountiful sum of money. 
When the caliph, who had been angry at the long absence of his 
favorite singer, heard the story, he laughed, and added to the 
amount already received by the singer the sum of one hundred 
thousand dirhems.' Equally remarkable stories are told of the skill 
of the celebrated Alfarabi. The reputation of the latter was so 
great, that he was summoned from his home in Spain to perform 
before the caliph at Bagdad. Fearing lest he should be retained 
at court, and so never see his native land again, he made the 
journey secretly and in disguise. He succeeded in gaining 
admittance to the presence of the caliph without being recognized, 
and received permission to try his skill upon the lute. The story 
of what followed is thus given by Engel : - " Scarcely had he 
commenced his performance in a certain musical mode, when 
he set all his audience laughing aloud, notwithstanding the efforts 
of the courtiers to suppress so unbecoming an exhibition of mirth 
in the presence of the caliph. In truth, even the caliph himself 
was compelled to burst out into a fit of laughter. Presently the 
performer changed to another mode ; and the effect was, that 
immediately all his hearers began to sigh, and soon tears of 
sadness replaced the previous tears of mirth. Again he played in 
another mode, which excited his audience to such a rage that they 
would have fought each other, if he, seeing the danger, had not 
directly gone over to an appeasing mode. After this wonderful 
exhibition of his skill, Alfarabi concluded in a mode which had 
the effect of making his listeners fall into a profound sleep, during 

' See Lane ■. Arabian Nights, i. p. 203, where the anecdote is given at length. " p. 64. 



I 74 Musical Instntvicnts and their Homes. 

which he took his departure." These and a host of like stories bear 
witness to the wonderful effects attributed by the Arabs to these 
early musicians.' 

Ikit not only did musical practice reach a wonderful perfection 
at the Court of the Caliphs : no less marked was the attention given 
to the theory of music. Not only do we find a number of theoretical 
works by professed musicians, such as the " Book of Sounds " of 
Chalil, and the "Theory of Composition" of El Kindi, but men in 
other departments of life began to interest themselves in musical 
studies. Especially interesting are the treatises of a number of 
medical men, such as Achmed ben Mohammed who lived in the 
middle of the ninth century, and Ibnol Heisem who lived in 
the eleventh. The latter wrote a treatise on " The Influence 
of Musical Melodies on the Souls of Animals." The most 
remarkable man of this class was the celebrated physician 
Avicenna. He first recognized the power of music as a remedy 
for cases of mental derangement.^ The thought of the moral 
influence of music also was familiar to the Arabs. We read that 
Hadji Chalfa taught that "the soul which has been ravished by 
melody longs to behold higher beings, to share in a purer world ; 
so that even spirits which are darkened by the grossness of the 
body are by it prepared for, and rendered susceptible of, intercourse 
with the figures of light which stand before the throne of the 
Almighty." ^ 

An attempt was made by Alfarabi, in the tenth century, to 
establish a connection between the musical theory of the Arabs 
and that of the Greeks, and to refashion the music of the former 
after the model of the latter. Happily, or unhappily, this attempt 
proved unsuccessful ; and for some time longer Arabic music 

' See Rowl50tham, iii. p. 517 seq. ; also 520 seq., for a description of a musical festival at the court of Haroun 
al Raschid. 

=^ Naumann, i. p. 92. 3 Quoted by Ambros, i. p. 468. 



Music of the Arabs. \ 7 5 

continued to follow natural lines in its development. In the 
fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, however, it had to sustain a new 
attack. At this time " certain doctrinaires of New Persia, in 
conjunction with their Arabian colleagues, succeeded in destroying 
what little there remained of practical utility in the Mussulman 
theory. They abandoned the hard-won octave, substituting for it 
a number of useless keys, and reverted anew to the tetrachord and 
pentachord. At the same time, free invention was interdicted, and 
the disciples of the tonal art were ordered to keep strictly \vithin 
the limits of the theory. Thus all inspiration was checked, and 
its products discarded unless they bore the brand of scholasticism ; 
and only those phrases were deemed worthy of acceptance which 
were formed by the interweaving of a number of short and rigidly 
prescribed tone-formulae." ' These theorists especially emphasized 
musical expression, and assigned to each sentiment its peculiar key, 
in which alone corresponding melodies could be composed.- At 
a somewhat later period, if we are to believe Ambros," still further 
confusion was caused by the attempt to introduce into Arabic music 
our own scale of seven whole, and five half, tones. The difficulties 
caused by this were not only practical, but theoretical ; for the Arabs, 
like the ancient Hindus, began to represent the relations of the 
scale in pictorial forms, personifying the various notes under the 
figure of the elements, the planets, day and night, etc., — a procedure 
which tended only to obscure and confuse, even if it did not destroy, 
their former theory. 

" Under such circumstances," says Naumann, " one can only 
regard it as a piece of good fortune that the people began to treat 
the theory of their teachers with disdain. In defiance of arbitrary 
rules, they improvised songs, responsive to their inner promptings, 
accompanying themselves according to their own inclination. 
Naturally the divergence of the people from any recognized system 

■ Nauniann, i. p. 92. ' Ambros, i. p. 443. 



1/6 M^isLcal Instruvients and their Homes. 

was as powerless to create a perfect art as the dogmatic professors 
who affected contempt for the unrestrained outpourings of national 
sentiment. To this schism between abstract theory and intuitive 
practice, we owe a number of songs, dances, and marches, possessing 
a peculiar and even romantic charm characteristic of the Arabs, 
Bedouins, Saracens, and Moors, and exhibiting their great aptitude 
for music." ' 

I do not propose to weary my readers with a long account of 
the theory of Arabic music," but shall confine my attention to a few 
of the most important points. "With the Arabs," says Ambros, 
" music developed in a characteristic way ; and their theory of music 
is not behind that of the Greeks in subtle penetration. It is even 
more difficult, because in them correct views of musical principles 
run off into all kinds of fantastic. Oriental, transcendental tracery ; 
just as, in the Koran, lofty ideas of religion and morality are 
overgrown, almost to the point of being unrecognizable, with 
all sorts of fantastic stories in the spirit of the Thousand and 
One Nights." ^ 

Many attempts have been made, both in ancient and modern 
times, to trace a connection between the theory of Arabic music 
and that of the Greeks. Certain it is that there is a marked 
similarity between the old Arabic scale (D, E, F", G, A, B, C, D) 
and the Phrygian scale of the Greeks. Possibly this similarity 
may be explained on the theory that the music of the Arabs was 
founded on the remnants of some old Asiatic system.^ But the 
whole question is an obscure one. The Arabs divided the scale in 
two ways: First, at G, into two parts, — the first of four notes 
(tctrachord), and the second of five notes (pentachord) ; and second, 
also at G (omitting the final D), into two united tetrachords. In 

■ i.p. 93, 

^ For full information on this subject, the reader is referred to the learned discussions of Fetis, Ambros, and 
Rowbotham. 

' i- P- 425- " Ibid., p. 431. 



Mttsic of the Arabs. i 7 7 

this case, the last note, C, became " the root of new tetrachords, and 
each tone and half-tone the basis of new scales." ' 

The Arabs divided each whole tone into three equal divisions. 
Seventeen of these made up the octave, a third tone taking the 
place of the half-tone in our scale. Their musical system embraced 
forty of these small intervals, the total compass being a little over 
two octaves. In theory they recognize still smaller intervals." Many 
attempts have been made to account for the peculiar subdivisions 
of the Arabic scale.^ According to Naumann, it " may, perhaps, be 
attributable to their nasal method of singing, and the habit of 
gliding from note to note." "* The intervals of the Arabic scale are 
disagreeable to the European ear, and many travellers have 
complained of the discordant character of their music ; yet familiarity 
seems, in this case, to breed the reverse of contempt. The noted 
Arabic scholar. Lane, who spent many years in Egypt, speaks with 
unqualified praise of the performances of the female singers of that 
country.' Still more striking is the experience of Salvador Daniel, 
quoted at length by Fetis. " At first," says this excellent musician, 
" like every one else, I could perceive nothing but an awful 
charivari, destitute of melody or of measure. Nevertheless, by 
force of habit, — or, if you like it better, by a sort of education of the 
ear, — there came a day when I could distinguish something like an 
air. I tried to note it down, but could not succeed : the tonality and 
the measure always escaped me. . . . 

" Yet, where I heard only noise, the Arabs found an agreeable 
melody, in which their voices often joined ; where I could not find 
any regular time, the dance forced me to admit that there was one. 

' Naumann, p. 89. - Ambros, i. p. 433. 

^ Clement, the recent French historian of music, who is inclined to receive with allowance the learned 
theories of his predecessors, while admitting that in practice the Arab musicians employ minute intervals of sound, 
is inclined to be sceptical as to the exact and scientific nature of these divisions. — Histoire de la Musiquc, p. 6i. 

■• i. p. 89. 

5 Modern Egyptians, ii. p. 60. "I have heard the most celebrated Awalim in Cairo," he says, "and have 
been more charmed with their songs than . . . with any other music that I have ever enjoyed." 



lyS NUisical Instrunicitts and their Homes. 

In this difference of sensation there was an interesting problem. 
I attempted to get to the bottom of it. With that end, I associated 
with native musicians ; I studied with them, in order to account to 
myself for a sensation which others experienced, and yet which did 
not touch me in the least. 

" I am now passionately fond of the music of the Arabs. It is 
no longer the pleasure of a conquered difficulty that I seek. I desire 
my share of the delights which Arabic music furnishes to those who 
understand it. In fact, in order to judge the music of the Arabs, 
it is necessary to understand it ; just as to appreciate at their true 
value the beauties of a language, one must be a master of it. Now, 
the music of the Arabs is a music by itself, resting upon altogether 
different laws from those which govern our musical system. We 
must accustom ourselves to their scales, or rather to their keys, and 
that laying aside all our own ideas of tonality." ' Other similar 
instances could be added.'' 

I do not propose to enter upon the intricate combinations of 
the Arabic theory. " By a simple and combined augmentation 
of the notes of the tetrachord (called ' Thabaka '), the Arabians 
obtained the great number of eighty-four scales,^' twelve of which 
were selected as the principal keys. We find, therefore, with them, 
just as with so many other nations of antiquity, practical and 
impractical scales. When an Arabic theorist satisfied himself of 
the uselessness of one of his arbitrarily concocted scales, he silenced 
his doubts in that truly stolid Oriental manner, with ' God knows 
it."' + 

According to Fetis,' the Arabic theorists have failed properly 

to discriminate in their treatises between movement that is to 

say, the greater or less rapidity of execution — and measure. Their 
different hesedschi do not vary in regular, but in irregular, proportion. 

■ The passage is quoted in full by Fetis, ii. pp. 26, 27. = See Fetis, ii. p. 27, foot-note. 

' The ^vhole eighty-four are printed in full by Fetis, pp. 43-48. 4 Naumann, i. p. 89. = ii. p. 65. 



MtLsic of the Arabs. 179 

They correspond rather to our terms largo, andante, allegretto, etc., 
than to what we understand by musical measure. Thus, in a given 
time, the fast hesedschi has seventeen beats ; the next slower has ten ; 
the next, eight ; and the slowest of all, six. In practice, however, 
most of the Arabic melodies with which we are acquainted are 
composed either in four-four, two-four, three-four, or six-eight time.' 
The Arabs delight especially in mixed measure, which they employ 
in dancing-music, alternating one kind of measure with another ; 
" as two-four with three-four, or four-four with iive-four, giving 
one bar to each in turn." ' 

It is only in comparatively recent times that the Arabs hit upon 
the device of representing the notes of the scale by the letters of the 
alphabet. 3 Practically, however, no use is made of this discovery. 
Tunes are handed down by ear from one musician to another, and 
tradition is the sole guide as to the method of execution. All 
music is played in unison, harmony being regarded " not only as 
a superfluous, but even as a disturbing, element." '' 

Such is a brief account of the chief characteristics of Arabic 
music, as it was in the days of Haroun al Raschid, and as it still 
continues among all the peoples over whom this wonderful race has 
extended its sway. I shall conclude this chapter with a few remarks 
on the present state of music in Arabic countries. ^ 

Singing is extremely popular with all classes. " Mothers soothe 
their infants with plaintive lullabies ; children accompany their 
games with melodious rhymes ; . . . the muezzin chants the call 
to prayers five times a day from the top of the minaret ; and the 
church-beadle in similar tones exhorts to matins as he passes along 

" Fetis, ii. p. 64. ^ Van Lennep : Bible Lands, p. 606. ^ Ambros, i. p. 446. 

'' Ambros, i. p. 447. Naumann (i. p. 90) dissents from this opinion, but is not sustained by his English editor, 
Sir Gore Ouseley. 

' Under this head I mean to include Arabia proper, Syria, Palestine, and the surrounding regions, and the 
north coast of Africa, including Egypt and the Barbary States. The music of the Turks will, for convenience, be 
considered with that of Persia. 



i8o Musical Instritnients and their Homes. 

the streets at early dawn, the pavement resounding to the strokes 
of his heavy stick. The venders of all manner of eatables and 
drinkables, and indeed of every species of manufacture, extol their 
wares in musical cadences. . . . Among all sects, the rite of baptism 
or of circumcision, of marriage or burial, is accompanied by music 
and singing." ' Travellers often while away their journey with 
a song. " In short," concludes Van Lennep,' " no opportunity is 
lost by these people to gratify their natural fondness for music." 
Many of the Arab songs are soft and plaintive in character. Others, 
however, arc cheerful and sprightly, such as those of the " Egyptians 
of the Nile valley, who go out in the quiet of the evening to meet 
the returning fishermen with jubilant songs and merry dances." ^ 
Most Arab melodies are simple, but (save those of wandering 
Bedouins, which still preserve their early character unchanged) so 
overlaid with trills and ornaments as to be almost unrecognizable. 
These ornaments and variations are improvised by each singer for 
himself, and constitute the chief charm of the performance to the 
audience. 

"The Oriental voice is naturally extremely fine, and is often raised 
to the falsetto." -' Good singers are highly esteemed, and receive 
remuneration, which, if less extravagant than that given to the 
favorites of the old caliphs, is still very handsome. In Egypt there 
is a class of female singers, called Awalim (singular, Almeh), whose 
performances are extremely popular. A good Almeh will often 
receive two hundred and fifty dollars for singing at the evening 
entertainment of some wealthy man. So enthusiastic are the 
auditors on such occasions, that they frequently lavish upon 
the singer more than they can really afford.^ When a party of 
men are present, the singer sits at a window in the harem, concealed 
from sight by a screen of lattice-work. Some of the Awalim also 

' Van Lennep, p. 619; c£. also Lane, ii. p. 57, ' Naumann, p. 96. 

' Van Lennep, p. 606. 4 L^nc : Modern Egyptians, ii. p. 60. 



Music of the Arabs. i8i 

perform instrumental music, and those of an inferior class some- 
times dance in the harem. They are not, however, to be confounded 
with the common dancing-girls, — a mistake which has often been 
made by travellers.' The male professional musicians of Egypt 
are called Alateeyeh. They are both vocal and instrumental 
performers. They are generally a dissolute set of fellows, and, 
when hired to amuse the company at a grand entertainment, are 
" usually supplied with brandy and other spirituous liquors, which 
they sometimes drink until they can no longer sing nor strike a 
chord." ^ 

We find also in Mohammedan countries a number of wandering 
bards, or improvisers, who compose extempore verses for the 
amusement of the crowd gathered in the street or at some cafe. 
They usually accompany themselves upon a rude sort of violoncello 
with one string, called Rebab esh-shaer, or "poet's viol."^ Their 
performances are extremely popular. 

The professional dancing-girls, or Ghawazee, of Egypt, accompany 
their performances with little castanets of brass, in the use of which 
they are very skilful. They are usually accompanied also by 
musicians (mostly of the same tribe), whose instruments are " the 
Kemangeh, or the Rebab wdth the Tar, or the Darabukkeh with 
the Zummarah, or the Zemr. The Tar is usually in the hands of 
an old woman." "* 

Though respectable Moslems rarely perform instrumental music, 
they are very fond of listening to it. Orchestral performances are 
common, both in public and private. The instruments most 
frequently used for such purposes are the Nay (or flute), the 
Kemangeh (or violin), the Tamboura, the Oud, the Kanoon, and 
the Santir. Sometimes also the Darabukkeh is added. For 



■ Lane : Modern Egyptians, ii. p. 60. " Ibid, ii. p. 59. 

3 Engel, p. 211. For a fuller description of tliese improvisers, see Fetis, ii. p. 104, and Van Lennep, p. 621. 

■* Lane, ii. p. 87. 



i82 Musical Instruments and their Homes. 

the music which is performed in the public cafes, the Nay, the 
Kemangch, the Tamboura, and the Tar generally suflice. It is 
worth remarking, that, in the instrumental music of the Arabs, the 
place of honor is given to the strings. This bears witness to an 
advanced stage of musical development ; such, indeed, as is only to 
be expected among a people with whom poetry and song are as 
highly esteemed as they are among the followers of Mohammed. 



XI. 

MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS OF THE 

ARABS. 

lESEWETTER, in his learned treatise on the music of 
the Arabs, gives the names of over two hundred musical 
instruments which have been in use among them, either in 
ancient or modern times. Even this number does not exhaust the 
list, for the Spanish historians mention many which are not 
included in the above number." No other people of the Orient 
have shown such a predilection for instrumental music, or have 
carried it to so high a point of development.^ We hear of their 
having thirty-two kinds of lute, twelve kinds of dulcimer, fourteen 
instruments of the violin family, twenty-eight double pipes, twenty- 
two oboes, eighteen trumpets, five bagpipes, etc. ; not to mention at 
least thirty instruments which are known to us only by name. Out 
of so extensive a list, it will be possible to select for consideration 
here only the most important. We shall take up first the stringed 
instruments of the Arabs ; second, their wind instruments ; and 
third, their instruments of percussion. 

I. " The crown of the Arabian instruments," says Ambros,^ " is 
the lute." This is called Oud (Fig. i, Syria), or, with the article, 
el Olid, meaning literally " wood." The Arabs attribute its invention 
to Pythagoras, though this idea seems to be entirely without 
foundation.^ Less open to doubt, however, is the statement, found 
in many of their writers, that they first derived their acquaintance 

' Engel, p. 63. ^ Ambros, i. p. 466. ^ i. p. 458. '' Fetis, ii. p. 107. 

183 



184 Musical Instntments and their Homes. 

with the lute from the Persians. The learned theory of Kiesewetter, 

that the latter took their idea of the instrument from drawings 

on Egyptian monuments, while attractive, cannot be regarded as 

proved.' For centuries the lute has been popular with Arabian 

musicians. It was the favorite instrument in the time of the 

Abbassides. At the time of the conquest, it was introduced into 

Spain by the invading Saracens, and thence passed into the rest 

of Europe. Even the name " lute " is an exact reproduction of the 

Arabic " el Oud." The praises of the lute have been sung by many 

Arabic poets. It was by the strains of this instrument that 

Mukharik so charmed his auditors, that he received as a reward 

the slave girl whom he loved.^ Upon the lute, we are told, Aboo- 

Murrah (the Devil) played so exquisitely, on one occasion, in the 

hearing of the celebrated musician Ibraheem, that it seemed to him 

that " the lute spoke in his hands with an eloquent Arab tongue." ^ 

Originally the lute had but four strings. Alfarabi has preserved 
to us a careful description of this instrument as it existed in the 
tenth century. According to his account, there were two methods 
of tuning the lute, and of regulating the divisions on the finger- 
board. The oldest method gave the diatonic scale, whereas the 
other produced twenty-eight smaller intervals, " called, by Farabi, 
melodic intervals." These intervals followed the Persian division 
into quarter-tones.'* Another variety of lute, with five strings, was 
also found in Farabi's time. Later, however, the number of strings 
was increased. To-day, the ordinary lute has fourteen strings, tuned 

' Ambros, i. p. 459. " See p. 172. 

' Lane: Arabian Nights, i. p. 201. "The Arabs," says Naumann (i. p. in), "attribute to the lute, their chief 
instrument, miraculous powers of healing. Their philosophers clann to see in it a reflection of nature, and liken the 
highest of its four strings to fire, the two middle ones to air and water, and the lowest to the earth. The}' further 
add, that a musician should not play without pursuing some systematic method of procedure: for instance, 
starting from the lowest string, the melody should speak comfort to the hearer ; this should be succeeded by a song 
of love, gradually giving place to a seductive dance-rhythm, and concluding with sounds inviting to peaceful 
slumber." 

" Fetis, ii. p. 108. 



Musical Instnmients of the Arabs. 185 

in pairs. This is the case with the Egyptian lute, in which the 
strings are made of lamb's gut.' The Syrian lute has but twelve 
strings, — four of wire, and eight of gut (see Fig. i, Syria). The 
form of the modern Arab lute differs little from that of our own. 
It is usually from twenty-five to thirty inches long, and some 
fourteen inches in diameter. A representative specimen, described 
by Lane in his " Modern Egyptians," - was made of fine deal, with 
edges and neck of ebony. To prevent the wood from being worn 
away by the plectrum, a piece of fish-skin was glued across the 
face beneath the strings. The Oud is held across the performer's 
lap, like our guitar, and is played with a small plectrum, sometimes 
of steel, and sometimes of the quill of an eagle.^ The tuning of 
the Egyptian instrument is thus given by Lane : * Taking the lowest 
pair of strings as the tonic, the second pair is tuned to the fifth, the 
third to the seventh, and the others to the second, fourth, sixth, 
and third. 

Next we shall consider the instruments of the mandolin and 
guitar family. Far the most important under this head are the 
Tambouras. We have already met the Tamboura in India; and I 
there called attention to the suggestion of Fetis, that all the Persian 
and Arabian instruments of this class were originally derived from 
that country. Whether this be true or not, the name Tambotwa 
is certainly Arabic, and the instrument has been for centuries one 
of the most common in all Mohammedan countries. Its use has 
passed from the Turks into Europe, and many popular Greek and 
Roumanian instruments belong to this class. Very many different 
kinds are found, varying greatly both in size, shape, and number of 
strings. Numerous specimens are included in the present collection. 
I refer especially to Figs. 2 under Syria, i and 3 under Persia, 
3 to 7 under Turkey, and i and 2 under Greece. I will not attempt 

■ Lane : Modern Egyptians, ii. p. 68. - li. p. 67. 

3 Naumann, i. p. loS. '' Modern Egyptians, ii. p. 68. 



i86 MtLsical Instruments and their Homes. 

to distino-uish all the different varieties, but will only mention two" 
or three of the most important. 

Even in Alfarabi's time two different kinds of Tamboura Avere 
in common use. That most used in Arabia was the Tamboura of 
Bagdad, which had but two strings. The Tamboura of Khorassan, 
or Persian Tamboura, was, however, a more elaborate instrument. 
Its form and dimensions varied according to the locality. Its 
strings were tuned in pairs, and the frets on the finger-board were 
numerous. In some instruments, also, they were movable, as is 
the case with most of those in use to-day.' 

Almost all the Tambouras of the present day are alike in having 
an oval body, and a long, thin handle. The largest and most 
important is the Tanbour Kebyr Toiirky, or great Turkish Tam- 
boura (Fig. 7, Turkey). The use of this instrument is common in 
Egypt and in Turkey, where the Turks have adopted it from the 
Persians. The body is rounded in shape, the face forming an 
almost complete circle. The handle is very thin and long, that in 
the present collection being three feet and a quarter long. The 
diameter of the head is thirteen inches. It is strung with eight wire 
strings, and is furnished with a large number of movable frets of gut 
(generally thirty-five),- by the use of which the small intervals of the 
Arab scale may be produced. Its tuning is given in connection with 
the illustration. 

In the most common form of the Tamboura, the body is 
pear-shaped. This is the case with the Tanbour Charqy 
(Oriental Tamboura), Tanbour Boiilgliary (Bulgarian Tamboura), 
Tanbour Bouao?irk (great Tamboura), and Tanbour BagJilama 
(small Tamboura).3 The Tanbour Charqy and the Tanbour 
Boulghary have four strings each, the Tanbour Bouzourk has 
either six or ten, and the Tanbour Baghlama either four or six.-* 

' See the elaborate account given by Fetis, ii. p. 112 seq. 

- The present specimen has, however, only twenty-three frets. ^ Engel, p. 209. 

* For a full description of each of these varieties, the reader is referred to Fetis, ii. pp. 1 19-127. 



Musical Insti^uments of the Arabs. 187 

The Bizug of Syria (Fig-. 2) is a Tamboura with seventeen frets 
and six strings. 

The Arabs of Algiers have a sort of guitar, called Kuifra, which 
is often very elaborate and graceful. The specimen in the present 
collection (Fig. i) is beautifully inlaid with mother-of-pearl. It has 
four pairs of catgut strings, and is played with a small plectrum of 
tortoise-shell. A smaller variety is also found, which has only three 
pairs of strings.' The body is sometimes made of the shell of a 
tortoise. 

The Arabs of the North of Africa, as well as those of Arabia 
proper, have also a small stringed instrument, called Gunibry 
(Kuniberi), which somewhat resembles a banjo. Two specimens of 
this are included in the present collection (Fig. 3, Algiers ; Fig. 3, 
Arabia). In the Algerian specimen, the body is made of the shell 
of a tortoise. The handle is of rough wood, without frets. Two 
strings of gut pass over a low bridge, and are tuned at the top by 
two rude pegs of wood. In the Arabian Gunibry, the body is made 
of half a gourd covered with sheepskin. It is decorated with a 
number of little strips of leather, to which are attached small shells. 
The strings are two in number, also of catgut, and the handle 
resembles that of the Algerian instrument. The Gunibry is played 
with a small plectrum, usually consisting of half a split quill. 

A curious instrument of the guitar family is shown in Fig. i, 
under Arabia. The body of this consists of a rectangular frame 
of wood, covered with red plush, and decorated with a border of 
shells. Its head is covered with skin, in the surface of which 
a square hole has been cut just below the bridge. The strings are 
of gut, two in number, and are fastened at the lower end to a 
piece of wood, which projects a little beyond the edge of the opening 
referred to. The handle is round, without frets, as in the case of 
the Gunibry ; and the strings are fastened directly to the handle 

' Engel, p. 307. 



1 88 Musical Instmments and their Homes. 

by a leather band, without the use of tuning- pegs of any kind. A 
rough bridge of wood raises the strings a little above the surface 
of the sounding-board. 

Another interesting instrument is the Kissar of Egypt (Fig. 2) 
and Nubia. This is not strictly an Arabian instrument, but I speak 
of it here for convenience. The modern Egyptians call it " Qytdrah 
bavbaryeJi, which indicates that it is considered the national 
instrument of the Barabras, or Berbers, who are believed to be 
descendants of the original inhabitants of Egypt." ' The body 
is circular in shape, and made of leather stretched over a frame of 
wood. From this project, at an angle, two pieces of wood, which 
are united by a third at the top, thus making the appearance of 
the instrument not unlike that of the modern lyre. The strings are 
of gut, five in number, and are fastened at intervals to the cross- 
bar at the top. Curiously enough, they are tuned to the pentatonic 
scale, — a fact which attests the great antiquity of the instrument. 
In the specimen in the present collection, three of the strings 
are wanting. " Such," says Fetis, " is the ancient lyre ; such is the 
instrument with which were produced the marvellous effects of 
the music of the Greeks." ^ 

One of the most important of the Arabic stringed instruments is 
the Kanoon (Kanun, Oanon), or dulcimer (Fig. i, Turkey). This 
is interesting, not only because of its beauty of form and power of 
musical execution, and of the important part which it plays in the 
music of the Arabs, but also because it is the model from which 
were derived all the European instruments of the same family.^ 

The name Kanoon " is from the Greek k'ai^wy, or from the same 
origin, and has the same signification ; that is, ' rule,' ' law,' 
' custom.' " ■* The ordinary form of the instrument is as follows : 
The body is in the shape of a trapezoid, in which the diagonal 

' Engel : Music of the Most Ancient Nations, p. 157. =^ ii. p. 133. 

3 Ambros, i. p. 460. " Lane, ii. p. 64. 



MiLsical Iiistrtt7nents of the Arabs. 189 

forms a very acute angle with the longest side. The greatest length 
varies from about three feet to three feet and a half, and the breadth 
from fourteen to sixteen inches. The depth is a little over two 
inches. It may be made of various kinds of wood. Walnut is 
commonly used in Egypt; but in a fine specimen, deal, beech, and 
poplar wood are also employed." The face of the specimen in the 
present collection, which is Turkish, is very beautifully carved. 
A piece of fish-skin, nine inches wide, is ordinarily glued over the 
lower part of the face, upon which the bridge rests.' Two (some- 
times three) openings in the sounding-board increase the resonance. 
The strings are usually of lamb's-gut, and are tuned by pegs either 
of wood or metal. They may be either seventy-two or seventy-five 
in number.-' In either case, they are tuned in sets of three each,^ 
giving, therefore, only twenty-four or twenty-five distinct notes, as 
the case may be. It is played with two plectra, one of which 
is attached to the forefinger of each hand. Each plectrum consists 
of a small piece of buffalo-horn, which is held in place by a ring or 
thimble of brass or silver, which passes over the finger.* The 
instrument is held across the knees of the performer. It is used 
both for solo and concerted music, and is extremely popular in the 
harems of Turkey to-day. Lane speaks in the highest terms of 
the effects produced by this instrument. 

A less elaborate form of dulcimer is the Santir. This differs 
little from the instruments of the same family which are found all 
over Asia, even in China and Corea. The strings of the Santir 
are of wire, and are tuned by means of metal keys, as in the modern 
zither. In the specimen described by Eetis, the strings are thirty- 
six in number, and are tuned in sets of two each, so as to produce 
eighteen distinct notes.' In that in the present collection, however, 

' Lane, ii. p. 64. 

^ A smaller variety is found in Algiers, which has sixty-three strings. Fetis, ii. p. 130. 
^ For tuning, see Engel : Musical Instruments in the South Kensington Museum, p. 208. 
■* Lane, ii. p. 66. ' ii. p. 132. 



1 90 Musical Instnnimits and their Homes. 



w 



'hich is Turkish, the number of strings is doubled. In this 
instrument, four strings instead of two are tuned in unison. The 
strings pass over a series of movable bridges, not unlike chessmen, 
which are arranged in two rows, so as to divide the instrument into 
three parts, as in some European dulcimers (see Fig. 4, Europe). 
They are struck with little wooden hammers. The Santir is not 
found in Egypt ; but it is played at Bagdad and at Damascus/ and 
is especially popular in Turkey. 

It remains to consider the stringed instruments of the violin 
family. These may all be classified under two heads : First, the 
Kemangehs ; and second, the Rebdbs. 

The name KemangeJi is of Persian origin, and signifies a " bow- 
instrument." Both name and instrument were derived by the Arabs 
from Persia (see Persia, Fig. 4). The most common form of 
Kemangeh is the Kemangeh agouz (Fig. 2, Arabia). Its total length 
is a little over three feet. The body is usually made of three-fourths 
of a cocoanut-shell, and is pierced with many small holes. The 
face is covered with fish-skin, upon which rests the bridge. Below 
the body projects a long foot of iron, which rests upon the ground, 
and supports the instrument, as in our violoncello. The ordinary 
Kemangeh has two thick strings of horse-hair, each consisting of 
about sixty hairs. At the lower end these are fastened to an iron 
ring just below the body, and at the upper to two short pieces 
of lamb's-gut, by which they are attached to the wooden tuning-pegs. 
Just below the junction of the horse-hair and the gut strings, a 
double band of leather passes round the neck of the instrument 
outside the strings. The bow is nearly three feet long, and is 
usually of ash. " The horse-hairs, passed through a hole at the head 
of the bow-stick, and secured by a knot, and attached at the other 
end to an iron ring, are tightened or slackened by a band of leather, 
which passes through the ring just mentioned, and through another 

' Fetis, ii. p. 131. 



Musical Insti'uvients of the Arabs. 1 9 1 

ring at the foot of the bow."" In playing, the bow is held in the 
right hand, between the thumb and first finger; the second, third, 
and fourth fingers passing between the strings and the wood. In 
passing the bow from one string to another, the performer usually 
turns the instrument an angle of about sixty degrees." As might 
be expected from the above description, the tones of the Kemangeh 
are " dull, hoarse, and confused." ^ It is, however, extremely popular 
with the Arabs, especially in Egypt and Syria. It is an indispensable 
part of every orchestra ; its player usually sitting opposite to the 
player of the Kanoon, or on his right hand. 

Other varieties of the Kemangeh are mentioned by Fetis.'* The 
Kemangeh Farkh is a smaller form of that which has just been 
described. The Kemangeh Ronniy resembles our own violin in 
shape. It is strung sometimes with twelve, sometimes with 
fourteen, strings. A second form of the Kemangeh Roumy has a 
long, narrow body, in which the handle is made of the continuation 
of the same piece of wood. It is usually about a foot and a half 
long, and has four strings of gut. The Kemangeh of the Turks 
will be described later. 

The Rebab or Rabdb (Fig. i, Palestine; Fig. 3, Egypt) is one 
of the most ancient of the Arab stringed instruments. Unlike the 
Kemangeh, which was derived from Persia, it probably originated 
with the Arabs themselves. ^ Two kinds of Rebab are found in 
Mohammedan countries to-day. They differ only in the number 
of strings, — the Rebab esh moganny^ox "singer's Rebab," having 
two ; while the Rebab esh shaer, or " poet's Rebab," has but one. 
In both the body is formed of a square frame of wood, covered on 
both sides with skin. In some cases, however, as in the Egyptian 
specimen in the present collection, the back is left open as in the 
modern banjo. The Rebab, like the Kemangeh, has a long iron 

' Lane, p. 6[. ' Ibid., p. 63. ^ Fetis, ii. p. 137. 

* ii. pp. 138-142. ' Fetis, ii. p. 144. 



192 Musical Instntvients and their Homes. 

foot, by which it is supported. Its strings are of horse-hair, and 
fastened as in the Kemangeh. The bow also resembles that of the 
latter instrument. Its compass is narrow, extending only from 
D to B.' It is never employed in orchestral music, but is used 
to accompany singing and reciting. I have already mentioned 
the fact that the Rebab esh sha'er is the favorite instrument of the 
Egyptian improvisers. According to Naumann,'' the Rebab was 
introduced by the Arabs into Southern Europe in the eighth and 
ninth centuries, and may be regarded as the precursor of many 
of our modern stringed instruments. In the twelfth century, we 
meet with it " as the Rebek, or Rebec, of the Provengal troubadours, 
who imported it from the East during the Crusades." ^ 

The Rebab of Algiers (Fig. 2), though having the same name as 
the preceding, is really a different instrument. Its body is made of 
\vood, and is short and narrow. That of the present specimen 
is shaped in imitation of a fish. The strings are of gut, — two in 
number, — and are played with a short curved bow. 

II. The wind instruments of the Arabs are many and various. 
Only the most important can be mentioned here. 

The Arab name for flute is Nay (Fig. 10, Syria; Fig. 4, 
Palestine). Many varieties are found, differing both in size and 
in construction. Some are adapted to render thirds of a tone, others 
only half tones. Different Nays are tuned in different keys. So, 
also, different classes have their special Nay. Thus we distinguish 
the Dervish Nay, the Nay of the beggars, etc. As a result of 
this extreme diversity, few musicians can play more than four or 
five of the different varieties. The celebrated Mohammed Kachoueh 
of Cairo is reported to have been able to play on eight difi"erent 
kinds, but his case was exceptional.^ The two most common varieties 

' Ambrus, i. p. 461. = ; p jq-, 

" i. p. 107. It should, however, \,<t said that the European rebec was probably derived not from the Arab, but 
from the Persian form of the instrument, which is described later. 
•* Fetis, ii. p. J 54. 



Musical Instruvients oj ike Arabs. 193 

are the Nay-cha/i, or "large Nay," which has seven holes, — six in front 
and one behind (Fig. 10, Syria); and the Nay-giref, or "little Nay," 
which has eight holes, — six in front, one behind, and one on the side. 
The Nay of Palestine (Fig. 4) has seven holes in front, one behind, 
and one on each side near the top. When not in use, it is usually 
carried in a case of hollowed wood. The Nay is neither a traverse 
nor a vertical flute ; but the extremity is placed against the lips at 
an oblique angle, the performer " blowing through a very small 
aperture of the lips against the edge of the orifice of the tube, and 
directing the wind chiefiy within the tube. By blowing with more 
or less force, sounds are produced an octave higher or lower. In 
the hands of a good performer, the Nay yields fine, mellow tones ; 
but it requires much practice to sound it well." ' 

Various instruments of the vertical flute and flageolet families 
are found. To the former class belong the MinjairaJi of Syria 
(Fig. 9), and the Gasba of Algiers (Fig. 5). Both are simple reed 
pipes, each having six finger-holes. To the latter class belongs the 
Shaberba (Chabbabeh), a Persian instrument (Fig. 7), which is also 
found among the Arabs. This has eight finger-holes, — seven in front, 
and one behind. According to Villoteau,' the Shaberba can produce 
with great ease intervals of a third (sometimes also of a quarter) of 
a tone. 

Instruments of the oboe family are very common among the 
Arabs. The ordinary name in Arabia and Asia Minor is Zourna 
(Sourna) (Fig. 10, Turkey). The Egyptian Zemr and the Algerian 
Rdita (Fig. 4) are other names for the same instrument. The oboe 
is a very old Arabic instrument, several varieties having been 
described by Alfarabi, under the name of Sournay, as early as the 
tenth century. The form commonly found at the present day 
consists of a tube of wood pierced with eight large finger-holes 
(seven in front, and one behind), and five (sometimes seven) small 

■ Lane, ii. p. 70. ^ Quoted by Fetis, ii. p. 153. 



194 Miisical I]isti-2nnents and tJieir Homes. 

holes near the base. At the top of the tube, just below the mouth- 
piece, is fastened a movable neck of wood, the lower end of which 
projects down some distance into the interior of the instrument. 
This is cut in a peculiar way, so that, when placed in one position, 
it allows the air to pass freely through all the holes ; and when 
turned to another, it closes the top hole, together with the eighth 
hole in the rear. In this way the pitch may be altered. When the 
top holes are closed, the small holes near the base come into use. 
The Zourna is furnished with a reed mouthpiece, such as is found 
in all instruments of the oboe family. Three different sizes are 
found. Fig. 3, under Palestine, which is catalogued as a trumpet, 
is probably an oboe of the largest size. 

Another form of oboe, called Eraqyeh, is probably of Persian 
origin." This has nine fimger-holes, — seven in front, and two 
behind, — and is composed of a single piece of wood. Its compass 
is a little over an octave, and it produces intervals of a quarter of 
a tone. 

Several double reed pipes are found among the Arabs. Such 
are the Ziiminarah and Arghool of Egypt, and the Mijwiz and 
Urgun (Irghun) of Syria (Figs. 7 and 8). The Zummarah consists 
of two parallel pipes from ten to fourteen inches long, each of which 
is pierced with six finger-holes, and furnished with a movable 
mouthpiece of split wood. (See illustration of Mijwiz.) The player 
takes both of these mouthpieces quite within his lips, and blows 
while fingering the holes. The sound is harsh and disagreeable. 
The Zummarah is frequently used by the Egyptian boatmen as 
an accompaniment to their Darabukkehs, or earthen drums.^ The 
Mijwiz of Syria is only another name for the same instrument. 
A more striking instrument is the Arghool, or Irghun. This 
resembles the bagpipe in having only one of its tubes pierced with 
finger-holes, the other serving as a drone. The mouthpiece is the 

' Fetis, ii- p. 150 seq. ^ Lane : Modern Egyptians, ii. p. 74. 



Mttsical Instruments of the Arabs. 195 

same as in the Zummarah. The characteristic feature of the Arfhool 

o 

is the fact that it has three movable pieces of different length, by the 
addition of one or more of which the length of the longer tube may 
be increased, and the pitch consecjuently altered. The different 
sections are connected by cords, to prevent them from being lost or 
displaced. The total length of the Arghool, when increased by all 
three pieces, is a little over three feet. Its tone, as might be 
expected, resembles that of the bagpipe. Like the Zummarah, it 
is a favorite instrument with the Egyptian boatmen. 

A rude bagpipe, called Ziiniinarah Bi-soau, is also occasionally 
seen in Egypt. Its bag is made of a small goat's-skin.' 

The Nefyr, or Arab trumpet, is of special interest, as it was 
probably the ancestor of all the brass wind instruments of modern 
Europe. " From the most ancient times," says Ambros,^ " the 
peoples of the North were led forth to battle, not to the blast of 
trumpets, but to the noise of wild-sounding horns, — of whose horrible 
roaring the old writers cannot say enough, — and to the harping of 
their bards, and the singing of the war-song." It was only through 
the Saracens of Spain, and later through the returning Crusaders, 
that the Europeans were made acquainted with the military music 
of the Arabs. The latter brought back with them the knowledge of 
the Nefyr, and the other military instruments of the Arabs, which, 
in turn, became the foundation of the military music of modern 
Europe. 

The Nefyr is a long, straight tube of brass, with bell and mouth- 
piece resembling that of our own trumpet. Its compass is consider- 
able; but it is used rather to emphasize the rhythm of the war-music, 
than to give any distinct air. " In the midst of the horrible hubbub 
produced by the drums of all kinds, the kettledrums, castanets, and 
other noisy instruments, in their military processions, the Arab 

■ Lane, ii. p. 74. The same instrument seems to be described by Fetis under tire name of Souqqarali 
(ii. p. 160). ' i- P- 465- 



196 Musical Instnniicnts and their Homes. 

trumpeters content themselves with sending forth the shrillest 
possible sounds at random, and without concerning themselves 
about the discords which they produce." ' 

Another trumpet, called Cheipoiir, used by the Arabs of Asia 
Minor, is principally interesting " because it resembles the trumpet 
played by an Assyrian warrior on a bass-relief of Nineveh, and the 
Hebrew trumpet represented on the Arch of Titus at Rome." ^ 

III. Finally we consider the instruments of percussion of the 
Arabs. These, while not playing relatively so important a part 
as those of most of the other nations which we have been con- 
sidering, are yet numerous and interesting. 

One of the most characteristic of the Arab drums is the 
Naggarah ■' (Nakkarah, pi. Nakakeer). (See Fig. 4, Palestine, and 
Fig. 4, Syria). This consists of a pair of small drums, something 
like the Indian Tublas. They are ordinarily made of copper, and 
covered with skin. The Palestinian specimen in the present 
collection is, however, made of china. The heads are beaten with 
a pair of little wooden sticks. Larger varieties are also in common 
use. Such are the great Nakakeer, or kettledrums, which are carried 
in the religious processions in Cairo and other large cities. These 
are of unequal dimensions ; the diameter of the larger being at least 
two feet, while that of the smaller is less than a foot and a half. 
"They are placed upon a camel, attached to the fore part of the 
saddle upon which the person who beats them rides. The larger 
is placed on the right." ^ A single kettledrum of the same kind is 
called Tad/ Shamee, or " Syrian drum " (Fig. 6, Palestine). It 
is usually from a foot to a foot and a half in diameter, and is 
suspended by a string passing round the neck of the performer. 
It is beaten with two slender sticks.* 



" Fetis, ii. p, 156. 2 Ibid., p. 157. 

' According to Engel (p. 63), the European Naker was derived from tliis instrument. 

"* Lane, ii. }i. 72. 



Musical Instruments of the Arabs. 197 

To the family of kettledrums belon'^s, also, the Baz, or dervish 
drum (Fig. i, Egypt; Fig. 21, Turkey), which is usually about six or 
seven inches in diameter. This is used by the dervishes in religious 
processions and in begging. It is " held in the left hand by a little 
projection in the centre of the back, and beaten by the right hand 
with a short leathern strap or a stick." ' 

The Tabl Beledee, or " country drum," of Egypt resembles our 
ordinary military drum, but is not so deep. It is hung obliquely in 
front of the body, and is beaten with a stick." A drum of similar 
character is the Davool, or " bass drum." ' This is beaten on one 
side with a peculiarly shaped thick drumstick, and on the other with 
a " long, thin, tapering rod, which touches at once the entire length 
of the opposite surface." 

The Arabs have a peculiar kind of hand-drum, called Dara- 
bukkeh 3 (Darabouka, Derbouka, Dirbukkeh). This has a vase- 
shaped body, sometimes made of pottery and sometimes of wood, 
and open at the bottom. The top is covered with fish-skin. Four 
specimens are found in the present collection (Fig. 5, Arabia ; Fig. 5, 
Syria ; Fig. 7, Palestine ; and Fig. 22, Turkey). The first three are 
made of pottery ; the fourth, which is a handsomer specimen, of 
wood. The wooden Darabukkeh is commonly found in the harems 
of persons of moderate wealth, and is used by the women for their 
diversion. The body is often beautifully decorated with mother-of- 
pearl and tortoise-shell. The Darabukkeh is held under the left 
arm, and is beaten with both hands. The player varies the tone by 
striking the head, now on the middle, and now near the edge.'^ The 
earthen Darabukkehs are most frequently used by mountebanks, 
jugglers, and the w^andering musicians who accompany the dancing- 
girls. ^ The boatmen of the Nile also use an earthen Darabukkeh 
of large size. 

' Lane, ii. p. 72. ° Van Lennep, p. 608. 

^ The form of this drum is very ancient. According to Van Lennep, it " has been found in Egyptian tombs, and 
is represented on Egyptian and Assyrian monuments." 

■* Lane, p. 74. ' Fetis, ii. p. 164. 



198 Musical InstrtLments and their Homes. 

The ordinary tambourine of the Arabs is called Tar (Fig. 6, 
Syria ; Fig. 7, Algiers). It is usually from nine inches to a foot in 
diameter, and is furnished with five sets of brass clappers. It is 
a favorite instrument in the harem. A smaller tambourine, called 
Rikk, is often used at private concerts. The Bendir (Bendyr) of 
Algiers (Fig. 6) is really a large tambourine. This has no clappers ; 
but across the back of the head are stretched five strings of gut, to 
increase the resonance, as in our own snare-drum. 

Cymbals and castanets are in common use among the Arabs. 
The former are used in military music, and by the dervishes in 
religious processions. The latter are called Sagai, and are used by 
the public dancers, both male and female. They are usually made 
of brass. Each dancer has two pairs of these instruments, which are 
fastened by loops of string to the thumb and second finger,' and 
are beaten together with greater or less rapidity, so as to keep time 
with the motions of the dancer. A set of Syrian castanets, called 
Faggeishah, is shown in Fig. 3, under Syria. 

' Lane, p. 72. 



PERSIA AND TURKEY. 




I. 







pUy^^ VA/t(^ ^ f^^U i ^hcWo^ of 
Va.x a.n^ lr2,ss. "^-^f^-m J), of Kea^a 

'^o(\tr of- pea^i-/ 




'IV. 




?'n. 



/-K 



-^^5 -j^j'/e V2re i'fr^v^ 
D, of {^O ]i 'n^ Jt yi'v 



^, 







i:- 



6. 



7 



^. of 6ov/ //A, /I / 

Witf\ deWs , M-n<Ji 
3in d Come. 

Qjl\e pf\erc) S ^{^ 

Qjf\ aper ^ a , or 

- — / 

of jlAQColet. -//as 




T^e rural ^opuUh'^^ 

- ^ih^S of VV'irc 



] In, ^'^, 



7 



ir^ 




8 











0^ Uak^ Weal ^ ^t^oh {^ollu 
-f 1- f 1 j e - J /^ e 1 1 or c / 1 /f r. 





f^icC a^rc fvi^e^ In ^^'j'^T^. ^^ *^e Tr^JHe Are 



^^ 



5- 



. Ju'^rt^rrjei^t'c 



v'aT^^ouraL 






7 :[ll\i 




our /|eour 



S Wire {rritya s 
C ircvl ^r I 




Skoul h 



8- J(ejn An g e/T - 









?(xje^ W 



[{■C A Uv/ -T. /^ £ 



"> 



w. /n . Jh- ^ ' 



a jh 2a3a . "Bx^^Dioe 



'0, 



Zourna . Oboe. , Vi2\3e ^ 

/iv/e yiej >|€:ir 1^e 

vV/j^k(^ are VAC 



U^e 



is t"o 




() 



e a^lfei- 



[f. 




II 






Bell - Jon 



of ^ y )r| 6 i I r , 



Tt-o 



II - 



(^y) or iUQ e(3leh 



^f ^"^^^^S 






j\e Secoyx } Skou] <j 







t(e j^r^f-, 6 at ct /^^^ 



1^. ^h^.U &j)2l^3, f.ro^a(.h^ o^e^ ^3 



^^Sf^yt 



5 




D. 2 ]n 



Cohere} v/ i f^ ^i<i\-^. 







^/. ^yer//cf 



11 




^ ^ ^- -^ . 3 / /n . 

71 _ ^ '1 , 




]]1 . J3ra<rr , co/ere^ 



^/<in . D. 6" i^ 



c <3 v/ e r e 6 

13. i/aiVa . 






n 











XII. 

MUSIC OF THE PERSIANS AND 

TURKS. 

HAVE elsewhere spoken of the intimate connection, both 
historical and theoretical, between the music of the 
Persians and that of the Arabs. The same remarks may 
be applied with equal truth to the relation between Persian music 
and that of the Turks. The latter, like the Arabs, not only received 
from the Persians most of their musical instruments, but were 
profoundly influenced by them in their theory of music also. Yet 
the musical history of the Arabs and that of the Turks differs in 
one very important respect. Strongly as the former were stimulated 
by the advanced musical culture which they found among the 
Persians, it was only to the development and modification of a 
music which was already their own. The Persian system and that 
of the Arabs acted and re-acted upon each other, and produced 
a new music, the roots of which cannot be exclusively traced to 
either. The Turks, on the other hand, when in their turn they 
conquered the Persians, seem to have adopted bodily the musical 
system of their new subjects. Their music, therefore, unlike that 
of the Arabs, does not demand a separate treatment, but may 
properly be classified with that of the Persians. 

Little information has come down to us concerning the character 
or history of the music of the ancient Persians. We know that 
hymns had a place in the religious rites of the followers of Zoroaster, 
and that the rough shepherds of Medea were fond of listening to 
the simple music of a rude flute or pipe.' In the rich cities of 
Persia the art undoubtedly reached a high state of development 

' Ambros, i. p. 393. '213 



2 14 Musical Instriiiiicnts and their Homes. 

at an early date. According to Ambros/ the music performed at 
the courts of Susa and Persepolis, where the Great King felt himself 
the successor of the mighty monarchs of Nineveh and Babylon, 
probably resembled in character that of Assyria and Babylonia. 
We hear from AtheucTusr that Darius had in his harem no less 
than three hundred and twenty-nine female musicians. Xenophon 
also, in his " Anabasis," speaks of the myriad female musicians 
of the Persian king. But these few facts form almost the sum of 
our knowledge of the music of I^ersia before the Christian era. 

In the time of the Sassanides, music was employed in all the 
festivities of the Persian Court. The celebrated bass-reliefs of 
Tackt-i-Bostan, supposed to date from the latter half of the sixth 
century, A.D., shed some interesting light upon the state of music 
at that time. These sculptures are thus described by Engel : ^ 
" They form the ornaments of two lofty arches, and consist of 
representations of field sports and aquatic amusements. Some 
boats are filled with women playing upon harps. ... In one of the 
boats is seated a man in an ornamental dress, with a halo round 
his head, who is receiving an arrow from one of his attendants ; 
while a female, who is sitting near him, plays on a Trigonon. 
Towards the top of the bass-relief is represented a stage, on wdiich 
are performers on small, straight trumpets and little hand-drums ; 
six harpers ; and four other musicians, apparently females, — the first 
of whom plays a flute, the second a sort of Pandean pipe, the 
third an instrument which is too much defaced to be recognizable, 
and the fourth a bagpipe." The use of music to accompany the 
hunt recalls what we have heard in a previous chapter of the practice 
of the early Indian kings. In the time of Khosrau (Chosroes) 
Parviz, we hear of wonderful singers, "whose voices surpassed in 
sweetness the song of the nightingale." ' Especially celebrated was 
a certain Barbud, whose singing was so sweet that no heart could 
withstand it.^ The high esteem in wdiich music was held at this 

■ i. p. 393- = xiii. S7, quoted by Ambros, i. p. 393. 3 p. 5S. 4 Ambros, i. p. 429. 



Mtisic of the Persiaits ajtd Turks. 2 1 5 

time is attested by the story of the dream of Chosroes. The latter, 
having been banished from the court of his father Hormizd, had 
fallen into a deep despondency, when one night his grandfather, 
Nushirvan the Just, appeared to him in his sleep. " Why are you 
sorrowful, my son ? " he said. " Dismiss your care ; for you shall 
have for your possession four things, each one of which is worth 
as much as the government of Iran. For the horse which you have 
lost, you shall receive two others, whose names will be Schabdiz 
(dark) and Giilgun (rose-color). The nails of your favorite harper 
are worn away : you shall have in his place two others, whose like 
the world does not contain, and whose names will be Barbud and 
Nekisa. The third gift will be a painter, more skilful than Mani 
of Chin. But the last gift will be Schirin, the fairest of women, 
whose beauty casts the sun into the shade." ' This story well 
illustrates the esteem in which music was held by the Persians, 
when they succumbed to the irresistible onset of the followers of 
Mohammed. The history of Persian music after the Arab conquest 
has already been outlined. 

Unfortunately no definite information has reached us as to the 
character of the early musical system of the Persians. Neither in 
the Zend nor the Parsee has any musical treatise been preserved ^ 
corresponding to the Sanscrit treatises from which is drawn our 
knowledge of the music of the Hindus. The field is therefore 
open for the speculations of the musical historians. According to 
AmbroS;^ as we have seen, the music of the early Persians, like their 
architecture, preserved the traditions of the old Assyrian culture. 
Fetis, however, in his history,-* propounds and defends at consider- 
able length the theory that the music of the ancient Persians 
closely resembled that of their Aryan kinsmen the Hindus. This 
resemblance he traces not only in points purely theoretical, — such 
as their mystical association of the notes of the scale, etc., with the 

' Ambros, i. p. 430. ° Fetis, ii. p. 351. 

3 i. p. 429. '- ii. p. 351 seq. 



2 1 6 Mtisical Instruvients and their Homes. 

various powers of nature,' ^ but even in the construction and 
divisions of the octave. Whereas the Hindus divided the octave 
into twenty-two Sruti, the Persians, according to Fetis, divided 
it into twenty-four intervals, differing in value according to their 
position.^ Their keynote, or base, was A, and their system 
embraced forty-nine sounds. By a system of combination, resem- 
bling that employed by the Hindus, they obtained the number of 
eighty-four keys, some principal and others secondary. Yet this 
combination must be traced to a comparatively late date ; for the 
scales of these keys are founded, not on the old Persian division 
into fourth tones, but on the later Arabic intervals of third tones. 
No better proof could be desired of the impossibility of distinguishing 
between the musical systems of the two peoples after the time of 
their union.* 

* Note. — Those who are interested in pursuing the subject further are referred to 
Fetis (ii. hvre vi.), where the whole argument for the division of the Persian octave into 
twenty-four intervals is very fully and ingeniously presented. Wo. lays down the theory 
(p. 358 scq.) that the music both of the Hindus and the Persians was originally based 
upon a scale made up of quarter-tone intervals ; and that "the division of the octave into 
twenty-two Srutis, as set forth by the Hindu theorists, instead of twenty-four intervals 
a little smaller, was a change of the original tonality brought about by time." " More- 
over," he continues, "it must not be forgotten, that, from the very nature of these 
conceptions of little intervals of sound, variations in their form must have been frequent, 
and, as a matter of fact, were so. The differences in the conformation and character of 
the keys of the music of India, as found in the different provinces, give us the proof 
of this. The same was true in Persia, according to the testimony of Farabi ; and we 
shall find the plainest demonstration of it in the fact of the introduction of the third tone 
among the elements of tonality among the Persians, at the time of the conquest of their 
country by the Arabs." I have already mentioned the fact, that, according to P'etis, 
traces of the old Persian division into quarter-tones survived in certain provinces long 
after the Arab conquest, — a fact which is attested by the divisions of the handles of 
some of their stringed instruments (ii. p. 370). It must be said that Clement considers 
the theory of Fetis utterly without foundation. "It seems to me," he says, "that these 
subdivisions of tone had but a single object, — that of making the intonation of one half- 
tone slide over to that of the half-tone following or preceding ; an effect analogous to 
that obtained by players of the violin and the guitar. Moreover, the comparatively little 
importance attached by the Orientals to simultaneous sounds, to harmony, and especially 
to counterpoint, makes them concentrate their attention upon the variation and nice 
expression of melodic effects." {Histoire de la Musiqiic, p. 79.) 

■ ii- p- 371 -f?- ^ ii. p. 353. 



Music of the Persians and Tttrks. 2 1 7 

The period of the caliphs was the golden age of Persian music. 
I have already spoken of the prominent place held by Persian 
musicians at the court at Bagdad. But after the power of the 
caliphate began to wane, and Persia fell under the domination of 
the Seljuk Turks, and later of the Mongols, the history of Persian 
music is enveloped in a long obscurity. The first certain fact 
which has come down to us is in connection with the capture of 
Bagdad by Amurath IV., in 1638. At this time, five Persian 
musicians were taken back by the conqueror to Constantinople. 
From these the Turks learned the musical system of the Persians, 
and their passionate and plaintive melodies.' An interesting story is 
told of Amurath (whose reputation is any thing but an enviable one), 
to the effect, that, during the execution of the barbarous sentence 
which condemned to death thirty thousand of the gallant defenders 
of the captured city, he was approached by the celebrated Persian 
musician Schah-Kuli. The latter, accompanying himself with his 
harp, began to sing in so touching a way of the misfortunes of 
Bagdad and its inhabitants, that Amurath was moved to tears, and 
ordered the carnae^e to cease.'' Whether we choose to believe this 
story or not, it is certain that this Schah-Kuli was one of the five 
musicians whom Amurath carried back to Constantinople in order 
to instruct his people in the system of Persian music. 

Thus were the Turks made acquainted with the music of Persia. 
According to Fetis,^ they long preserved the old Persian tradition of 
the division of the octave into twenty-four intervals. Whether this 
be true or not, it is certain that the system in use among the Turks 
of the present day is practically identical with that Persian-Arabian 
system which has been described in a previous chapter. One 
interesting point of difference should, however, be mentioned. 
Whereas the base, or keynote, of each of the eighty-four scales of 
the Persians is A, that of their pupils, the Turks, is one note 
lower, or G. 

' Fetis, ii. p. 389. " Ibid., p. 353. 



2 1 8 Musical Instrmnejits and their Homes. 

The remarks which have ah-cady been made as to the present 
state of music among the Arabs apply largely also to the modern 
Persians and Turks. A few additional points of interest may be 
added. In Persia, to-day, music is extremely popular among all 
classes. Those who can afford it have troops of paid musicians 
attached to their service. Sir William Ouseley, the well-known 
traveller, speaks frequently of having been entertained after dinner 
with music, both instrumental and vocal. In describing one such 
occasion, he says, " After we had sat about an hour, a 7mrza, who in 
his [the minister's] absence received guests, called for the musicians ; 
and a band of saziiideh, or instrumental performers, immediately 
assembled, — the most excellent that Teheran, or perhaps any other 
Persian city, could afford. With these was one man who exerted 
his voice only. The instruments were two KemancheJi [or violins] ; 
. . . one Santyr, or dulcimer, the wire strings of which were struck 
with little crooked sticks ; one SchtareJi, or guitar; and two Daireh, 
or tambourines. All the performers occasionally joined their voices 
to the tones of the instruments ; and the man who led this band 
(playing on the Kcmancheh) seemed, at some passages, to be 
delighted and inspired both by the words and music, which was 
of a solemn or rather plaintive kind, and, I confess, gratified me 
exceedingly." ' But not only is music popular among the wealthy 
and educated Persians : all classes of the people are fond of it. 
Wandering musicians are found everywhere who play the Kemangeh, 
the Tamboura, and the Schtareh. At Teheran, Ouseley heard on 
all sides the sound of musical instruments, which continued till 
quite late at night. The police, who are otherwise extremely strict, 
and arrest any one found in the street after a certain hour, are 
lenient in all matters where music is concerned." Especially popular 
is music at all social reunions or family festivals. It has an 

' Travels in Various Countries of the East, more particularly Persia, iii. p. 350. 
- Fetis, ii. p. 415. 



Music of the Persians and Turks. 2 1 9 

important place in marriage festivities. Wlien the bride is escorted 
to tlie bath on the morning of the wedding, the procession of women 
is preceded by six or eight musicians playing the oboe, the flute, 
and the drum. The marriage feast is accompanied by convivial 
songs, and the tones of the Kemangeh and the Schtareh.' 

The Persians, as a rule, have the finest voices in the East. 
They are free from the nasal tone so common, and so disagreeable, 
among the people of Western Asia, of Egypt, and of North Africa." 
" The guttural tones are more softened by the Persian singers than 
by the Arabs. They sing with more taste, more expression ; and 
the ornaments of their melodies are less numerous, and better 
adapted to the character of the phrases." ' European travellers 
commonly speak with pleasure of the Persian songs. Yet we must 
not suppose that the Persian melodies differ altogether in character 
from those of the Arabs, which have been described. Ouseley 
speaks of the tunes which he heard, as being " little more than a 
succession of trills and shakes." ^ It seems, in truth, as if what 
to our ear appears but superfluous ornament, is to the Oriental a 
necessary part of true music. 

In Persia, as in other Mohammedan countries, music has an 
important place in the service of the mosques, as well as in the 
monasteries of the dervishes. The voices of the Persian dervishes 
are especially fine. Some real virtuosos are found among them, 
whose services are eagerly sought by the rich and great. They are 
especially celebrated for their love-songs, which they are said to 
render with remarkable, and in some cases even with dangerous, 
effect.* 

In general, we may say, that, in spite of the many shocks to 
which the Persians have been subjected, both by conquest and 
otherwise, and the consequent changes in the character of their 
music, they have yet preserved a musical organization superior both 

' Fetis, ii. p. 415. '^ Ibid., p. 412. ^ Quoted by Fetis, ii. p. J90. ■* Fetis, ii. p. 394. 



2 20 M2Lsical Instyitvients and their Homes. 

to that of the Arabs and that of the Turks. This superiority is 
evident, not only in the works of their poets, and in the composition 
of their songs, but also in the character of their execution, both 
vocal and instrumental.' 

I need add but a word as to the present state of music in Turkey. 
What has been said as to the music of the Arabs applies here even 
more closely than to what precedes. Up to the time of the Greek 
revolution, the most able musicians of Turkey were Greeks of 
Constantinople and of Smyrna." Many of the Persian instruments 
have, indeed, passed through the Turks to the modern Greeks. 
(See Greece, Figs, i, 2, 3, and 6 '). Indeed, the relation of the two 
latter peoples in musical history is not unlike that existing at an 
earlier time between the I^ersians and the Arabs. 

Singing is popular with the Turks, as with all Mohammedan 
peoples. The favorite songs have to do either with love or with 
• war. Those of the former class are usually accompanied by the 
Tamboura Bouzourk. 

Instrumental music is common, both within doors and without. 
In the former case, it is exclusively performed by female slaves.-* 
The lute, the tamboura, and the tambourine are the instruments 
most commonly used in the harems of Turkey, and, with the 
castanets of the dancers, seem to possess a peculiar charm for 
the stolid and dreamy Turk.5 The music of the cafes and the 
streets does not differ essentially in character from that in all 
other Mohammedan countries. 

For their military, or Janissary, music, the Turks employ a 
special group of percussion and wind instruments. " Belonging to 

' Fetis, ii. p. 416. 

^ Many of the most popular Turkish songs of the present day are of Greek composition. The favorite singer 
of the Sultan Mahmoud was a Greek named Chiveli-Oglou Zorgaki. Fetis, ii. p. 395. 

5 Fig. 6, catalogued as a clarionet, is really an oboe. It differs from the Zourna only in having seven small 
holes near the base, instead of five. 

" Musical ability greatly increases the value of a slave. 5 Naumann, i. p. 94. 



Music of the Persians and Titrks. 221 

this class are ' Mohammed's standard,' the national instrument of 
the Turks, consisting of a brass frame with numerous bells, carried 
on a long, perpendicular pole, the point of which is surmounted 
by the crescent and the well-known streamers of horsehair ; an 
elongated roll-drum, narrowed towards the base ; a big drum, 
triangle, metal clappers, shrill piccolos and oboes, trumpets and 
horns, — forming an ensemble most effective and warlike."' 

The whirling dervishes of Constantinople accompany their 
performances not only with the voice, but also with the plaintive 
tones of the Nay, or flute. They devote themselves especially to 
the study of this instrument, and are considered the most skilful 
flute-players of Turkey. It is interesting to notice in this connection 
that they were once banished from Constantinople on the ground 
that they introduced music into the Mohammedan worship ; but 
they were subsequently restored by the Sultan, on claiming that the 
Koran contained nothing to forbid the use of song or of the flute 
in connection with prayer or religious exercises." 

■ Naumann, i. p. 109. " Fetis, ii. p. 398. 




XIII. 

INSTRUMENTS OF THE PERSIANS 

AND TURKS. 

IFTER what has already been said, it may seem superfluous 
to devote a separate chapter to the instruments of the 

I Persians and the Turks. I shall therefore confine myself 
strictly to the points which have not already been touched upon, 
and to the few additional statements which may seem necessary in 
further explanation of the drawings in the Catalogue. 

I. INSTRUMENTS OF PERSIA. 

In olden times, the harp, Chang, was a favorite instrument with 
the Persians.' It is represented on the bass-relief of Tackt-i-Bostan, 
to which reference has already been made. According to this 
representation, its shape was triangular ; the frame consisting of 
two pieces of wood united at a right angle. The form of the Chang 
continued essentially unchanged down to comparatively modern 
times. Drawings of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries show 
us a form of the instrument in which one arm is gracefully curved ; 
but in these, as in the earlier representation, the front pillar is 
wanting."" The use of the Chang passed from the Persians to the 
Arabs, who gave it the name of Junk, and to the Turks, as is 
shown by an interesting illustration of the seventeenth century.^ 
At the present day, however, the harp has almost entirely gone out 
of use among all these peoples. 

' Engel, p. 58. ^ Lane: Arabian Nights, i. p. 205. ^ Engel, p. 60. 

222 



Instruments of the Persians and Turks. 223 

The stringed instruments now in use in Persia are the Oud (or 
lute), the Schtareh (or guitar), the Tar, various kinds of Tamboura, 
the Santir, the Kemangeh, and the Rebab. The first has ahxady 
been sufficiently described. Unfortunately, owing to the difficulties 
experienced in fingering the lute, it is now rarely found among the 
Persians. It is seldom or never mentioned by modern travellers. 
The Sc/itare/i, or guitar, corresponds to the Kuitra (or Oitarah) of 
the Arabs and Moors. This instrument Fetis believes to have 
been received by the Persians from the Arabs, as the name is not 
of Persian origin. The Tar (Fig. 2), although classified by Fetis 
with the Tambouras {Tamboura Boiisoiirk), seems rather to belong 
to the guitar family. The name Tar signifies literally "a string." 
The body of the instrument is made of wood, covered with thin 
skin or parchment, through which, in some cases, the colors of the 
ornamented handle are clearly discernible. (See Fig. 6, Russia.) 
The handle is often beautifully inlaid. The Tar has twenty-four 
frets of gut. It is strung with five wire strings, two of steel and 
three of brass, tuned to three distinct tones, and is played Avith a 
small plectrum of wax and brass. It is the most popular instrument 
among the Persians of the present day.' 

The Sitar (or Seh-Tar) (Fig. i) is a small instrument of the 
Tamboura family, strung with five wire strings, and played with 
the finger-nail of the right forefinger." It has nineteen frets of gut. 
The derivation of the name has been already explained in connection 
with the Indian instrument of the same name. Formerly the 
Persian Sitar was even more popular than the Tar. The Siiz 
(Fig. 3) is a larger Tamboura, also with five wire strings. It is 
played with a small wooden plectrum, and yields an exceedingly 

' The same instrument is described by Engel (p. 157) under the name of Ujuk, or Qitar. 

^ The similarity of the names Silar, Qitar, and Schtareh, together with the fact that the Tar in the present 
collection is an instrument of the guitar family proper, and not a Tamboura, would incline me to think that the names 
of the Tar and the Sitar should be exchanged, had not the specimens been carefully labelled, as in the Catalogue, 
by the gentleman through whose kindness they were secured. 



2 24 Mtisical Instruments and their Homes. 

clear and pleasing tone. Its frets are fourteen in number, and, like 
those of the Tar and the Sitar, are formed by little bands of gut 
passing round the handle. The Tamboura is used in Persia, as 
elsewhere, to accompany the voice in singing. 

The Santir is a popular instrument with the Persians. As we 
have seen, it formed part of the orchestra described by Ouseley. 

The Persian Kamancha (Kemangeh), or violin (Fig. 4), is of 
exceptional interest, as it is the ancestor of all the Arabic 
instruments of the same name. A representative specimen is thus 
described by Sir William Ouseley : It was made at Shiraz, " of tut, 
or mulberry-tree wood ; the body, about eight inches in diameter, 
globular, except at the upper part, over which was stretched and 
fixed by glue a covering of parchment. It had three strings of 
twisted sheep-gut, and a bridge placed obliquely. A straight piece 
of iron strengthened the whole instrument, from the knob below, 
through the neck to the hollow which received the three pegs. It 
was carried hanging from the shoulder by a leathern strap." The 
total length of the instrument was nearly three feet. " The bow 
was a mere switch about two feet and a half long, to which was 
fastened at the end some black horsehair; at the other end, this hair 
was connected by a brass ring with a piece of leather seven or eight 
inches long. The ring was managed with the second and third 
fingers of the performer's right hand ; and, by its means, he 
contracted or relaxed the bow, which was occasionally rubbed on 
a bit of wax or rosin stuck above the pegs." ' The specimen in the 
present collection (Fig. 4) is a ruder variety, found principally 
among the rural population. The bow is less than two feet long. 
Though the body of the Kamancha is usually made of wood, a 
hollow gourd or the shell of a cocoanut is often used for the 
purpose, especially in the cheaper instruments. The Kamancha is 
often used in Persia to accompany the voice. " Many Persian 

' Ouseley, quoted by Engel, p. 15S. 



histruments of the Persians and Tttrks. 225 

singers," says Fctis,' " prefer the accompaniment of the Kemangeh 
to that of any other instrument for leading the voice, because its 
intonation is more easily perceptible and more sustained." It is 
also frequently used to accompany the dance. In the latter case, 
"the dancing-girl does not sing the air herself, but it is sung by 
another woman or by a young boy." 

The Rebab found in Persia resembles that of Algiers and 
Morocco far more than that of Arabia and Egypt. It is an almost 
exact counterpart of the rebec, formerly popular in Western 
Europe.^ 

Fetis mentions also a small two-stringed violin used by the 
wandering musicians of Central Persia, in which the body is formed 
by a cocoanut-shell covered with a thin piece of wood. 

The wind instruments of Persia do not require special notice. 
The Nay, or flute ; the Zourna, or oboe ; the Shaberba (Chabbabeh), 
or flageolet (Fig. 7), and the bagpipe have all been sufficiently 
noticed. A rude shepherd's pipe, or fife, is shown in Fig. 6. 

Of instruments of percussion, the tambourine is one of the most 
popular. Several varieties are found, one of the largest of which 
is the Kouwal (Fig. 5). Drums, castanets, and cymbals are also 
common. A curious hand-drum, called Dombeg, is shown in 
Fig. 8. This is really a kind of Darabukkeh, made of heavy wood, 
with a head of skin. It is beaten with the flat of the fingers of both 
hands, and is very popular, being especially used to accompany 
social dances and singing. Another common drum is the Dohl, 
which is described by Ouseley ^ as a wooden cylinder covered at each 
end with parchment, one of the heads of which is drawn so tight as 
to give a tone an octave higher than the other. 

' ii. p. 407. ^ Engel, p. 310. ' Quoted by Fetis, ii. p. 410. 



2 26 Musical Instruments and their Homes. 

II. INSTRUMENTS OF TURKEY. 

The Santir and Kanoon are both popular in Turkey. The latter 
(Fig. i) is the favorite instrument in the harems of the wealthy 
classes. It has already been sufficiently described. 

Instruments of the Tamboura family are found in Turkey in 
great variety. Five different kinds are shown in Figs. 3 to 7.' 

A rude instrument of the guitar family, called Fellahee, is shown 
in Fig. 20. The body consists of an octagonal frame of wood, 
covered with parchment. The strings — live in number — are of 
coarse gut. 

The Kemangeh of the Turks (Fig. 8) seems to call for special 
notice. This is not an instrument of the violoncello class, like the 
Kamancha of the Persians and the Kemangeh of the Arabs, but an 
instrument of the violin class, much more nearly resembling in 
general shape the Rebab of Persia and of Algiers. It has a shallow 
body of wood, decreasing in width at the upper end to form the 
finger-board, and having two sound-holes near the bottom, just below 
the bridge. The strings are three in number, either all of gut, or, 
as in the present specimen, two of gut and one of wire. They are 
attached to three long tuning-pegs of wood or ivory. The total 
length of the instrument is less than a foot and a half. The same 
instrument appears in Greece under the name of Lyra (Fig. 3). The 
latter, however, has five strings instead of three. 

The wind instruments of the Turks are many and various. The 
most important are the Zourna and the Nay. Many instruments 
of the flageolet family are also found. (See Figs. 12-18.) The 
Ghdida, or Turkish bagpipe, is shown in Fig. 9. The Nefyr, or 
trumpet, has already been described. 

' Figs. 3 and 4 have each fourteen frets of gut. Fig. 5 has seventeen frets of gut, and seven raised wooden 
frets upon the body of the instrument. Fig. 6 has twenty-three frets of gut, and ten raised wooden frets. The 
Taiihonr Kdyr Tunrky lias already been described. 



Instruments of the Persians and Turks. 227 

The instruments of percussion of the Turks are those in 
general use in Mohammedan countries, — drums of various kinds, 
tambourines, cymbals, and castanets. The Gele-Masha, or bell- 
tongs (Fig. 11), is a kind of cymbal, consisting of a frame of iron 
furnished with clappers of brass. I have already referred to the 
character and variety of the instruments of percussion used by 
the Turks in their military, or Janissary, music. 



AFRICA. 




3^r\re 




box. of UqO' v/oa^ 






>roh l<(^e'vs A.re rnuc^ Worn. 
(^ e d oy ^te} VitA a ru ^ c 
j-leH v/if'A tl^e 'f inhere f 




-/ 



{• 



/< 



^jj 



ae VI 



6ot]C /J'^nc^r 






.'7 Jfe^ fry l/l 6r^f-lon 6\/ 'V/C 



3. 3n 



2ri ; 1^2^^? of foit^ru 



00 ^e ^ in 6e Coi/c re 3 




red a)\<J 



iwe colore ^ 



"/ Urje /^c^i 7 \yy.j .J ^T^^aiU /Jea.3 % k. 



^, 




i 



3.nn\b3^. c-kWei 



Jr, 



Jn 



h ""a^ "^^^'^y ^-i^^is ^r -TT^GiU. 




m ^n /(a.iT| 6 .-v-r^e K5?out(^ ^^5^ Cc5a5^ cf Ji^Vca, 

ere ^5^ ^''f^ '*"^i°" 



fv/( 




f.ec.j 






6, 



^rX'Sk v/(3(3^ I l2,C() horizon! a, Uv OTy 1/J^? 
















2-1. (vv . 



7 /Cexe (/z-etzcj - f'^°^ 
15 \f- 







^ 'V,. -ID, S /V. 




^ Vi\y\ a Wo 
J). ] /k 







•J^ /Ty. J>. .Tdv, 



1 1 . L_v Tn (a\ r- 



7 









<J r t/ m c . oL . "2 '**" 



oV ^;fr-(ca. «^e erv^ Uol^cr^ . ct. If. ^ '>v. 




XIV. 
SAVAGE MUSIC 

N the whole history of music, no branch is more interest- 
ing and important than that which deals with the first 
rude beginnings of the art, as found among the savage 
races which still form so large a proportion of the inhabitants of 
Africa, South America, and the islands of the sea. In the rude 
songs and monotonous rhythm of these sons of nature, we may 
find much that sheds light upon many an otherwise dark page 
in the history of music. Especially interesting, for the suggestion 
which it affords, is a study of the savage instruments of music. 
Beside these earliest attempts of man to turn to the service of 
melody the inanimate things which he found about him, the rude 
instruments which we have been considering among the peoples 
of the East seem finished and perfect. 

There is a special reason for directing the immediate attention 
of the music-loving world to this interesting subject. The study 
of the savage instruments of music must be undertaken at once, 
or it will be too late. Already many of these witnesses to the early 
musical history of man have been destroyed by the advancing 
march of so-called civilization. The accordion is replacing the 
Marimba in Central Africa. The native instruments of Microne- 
sia and Melanesia have almost entirely disappeared. Dr. Otto 
Finsch, who was endeavoring to make a collection of the instru- 
ments of these islands, on asking a native where he could obtain 
a specimen of a certain instrument, received the following suggest- 
ive answer : " No more Pagolo ; Pagolo dead — the Jew's harp has 



238 Musical I list nunc Ills and their Homes. 

killed him." The same statement holds true in reference to the 
instruments of our own Indians. They are rapidly disappearing, 
and in a few years it will be impossible to obtain any more speci- 
mens. 

This being the case, the savage instruments in the present 
collection have a special interest, and I need not apologize for 
devoting to them a somewhat extended consideration. For con- 
venience I have divided them into three groups. First, the instru- 
ments of the African tribes; second, the instruments of the North 
American Indians (including the Eskimos of Alaska on the north, 
and the natives of Mexico on the south) ; and, third, the instru- 
ments of Central America, South America, and Oceanica.' The 
specimens in the first group, while few in number, are important 
and representative. The second group contains more than thirty 
fine specimens. The third, I regret to say, contains only a few 
relatively unimportant specimens. 

Before taking up the special consideration of each of these three 
groups, some introductory remarks on the general character and 
history of savage music may not be out of place. The subject, 
while most interesting, is an intensely difficult one. This is true 
for two reasons : first, because of the immense amount of ground 
to be covered ; and, second, because of the difficulty of obtaining 
exact information. The Eskimos of Greenland and of Alaska ; the 
rude natives of Northern Siberia ; the Indians of British America 
and of the United States ; the natives of Mexico, Central America, 
and of the vast and still partially unexplored tracts of South 
America; the hundreds of tribes of Central and Southern Africa; 
the degraded natives of Australia, and the more intelligent inhab- 
itants of New Zealand; the natives of the Malay Archipelago; 
and last, but not least, the dwellers in the thousand islands of 
the Pacific— all these fall legitimately within the scope of such 
an inquiry as the present. It is true that we have no lack of 

■ Under this general tern. I include Australia, New Zealand, Melanesia, Micronesia, and Polvuesia. 



Savage MiLsic. 239 

information, either as to the music or the musical instruments 
of many of these races. Almost every book of travel contains 
at least some mention of the musical customs of the people of 
whom it treats, but much of such information is worthless, either 
because of its insufficiency or of its inaccuracy. Travellers are 
too apt to dismiss the subject with some such sentence as the 
following : " What they call music seems to be very popular 
among them. Great bands of men, playing on various uncouth 
instruments, made night hideous to us for weeks." 

In the present chapter I shall attempt only to state such broad 
principles as to the character of savage music, and the general line 
which it has taken in its development, as may fairly be regarded 
as established. 

The love of music seems to be inborn in man. It is found 
in the rudest and most savage tribes, no less real and no less 
intense than in the cultivated inhabitants of Europe. Indeed, I 
think it may almost be said that a love for music is more widely 
diffused among savage than among civilized men. By this I 
mean that a greater proportion of individuals in uncivilized 
countries are affected by what to them is music than of those in 
civilized countries. Music is a real power in the life of the sav- 
age. It seems to make little difference where we look. The 
degraded inhabitants of Western Australia are passionately fond 
of singing. " To a sulky old native," says George Grey, " his 
song is what a quid of tobacco is to a sailor. Is he angry, 
he sings, — is he glad, he sings, — is he hungry, he sings, — if he 
is full, provided he is not so full as to be in a state of stupor, 
he sings more lustily than ever." ' The Fiji Islanders are pas- 
sionately fond of music and dancing — taking as much delight 
in their rude conch-shells and Pandean pipes as the cultivated 
Europeans in the performances of the best orchestra. The orches- 
tral performances of the Dakota Indians of North America last 

' Grey : Journals of Two Expeditions ... in North West and Western Australia, ii, p. 299. 



240 Mnsica/ Iiistnuncnts and their Homes. 

for weeks. Nowhere is the love for music so highly developed 
as in the African negro. It is found among the cannibal tribes 
no less than in those most advanced in civilization. Schwein- 
furth has preserved a horrible story of a sight he once saw among 
the Niam-Niams. A father of a family sat in the door of his 
hut, playing softly upon the mandolin, while hard by an old 
woman was preparing a meal of a little child's . flesh.' The 
inhabitants of Dahomey, we are told, delight in " singing, dancing, 
and cutting off heads." ' The last account of the death of Major 
Barttelot attributes its immediate cause to his attempting to inter- 
fere with the singing and drumming of some Manyemas, by which, 
as it was carried on both morning and evening, he had been much 
annoyed. '^ Burton ^ says of the music of the Krumen : " It is 
monotonous to a degree, yet they delight in it, and often after a 
long and fatiguing day's march, will ask permission to ' make play,' 
and dance and sing till midnight. When hoeing the ground, they 
do it to the sound of music ; in fact, everything is cheered with a 
song. The traveller should never forget to carry a tom-tom, or 
some similar instrument, which will shorten his journey by a fair 
quarter." Such examples could be indefinitely multiplied, but 
these may suffice. 

It is doubtless impossible satisfactorily to penetrate the veil of 
obscurity which hides from our sight the early musical history of 
man. Go back as far as we may, we cannot find a time when 
he did not have musical instruments of some kind. Among the 
relics of the cavemen of France, two bone whistles or flutes have 
been discovered — carrying back our acquaintance with the music of 
primitive man to prehistoric times. There is scarcely a savage 
tribe on the face of the earth to-day which does not possess musi- 
cal instruments of some description.' According to Engel,'^ " there 

' The Heart of Africa, ii. p. 22.4. = Forbes : Dahomey and the Dahomans, i. p. ig. 

'■N. y. Times, Oct, iS, iSSS. -"West Africa, ii. p. 31. 

' The only l<nown exceptions are the Veddahs of Ceylon, the tMincopies of the Andamans, and the inhaliitants 
of Tierra del Fuego. (Rowbotham, i. Introduction, p. xiii.) *■ Musical Instruments, p i 



Savage Music. 241 

exist even at the present day some savage tribes in Australia and 
South America, who, although they have no more than the five 
first numerals of their language, and are thereby unable to count 
the fingers of both hands together, nevertheless possess musical 
instruments of their own contrivance, with which they accompany 
their songs and dances." 

Although it is impossible to lay down any invariable rule for 
the development of savage music, we may yet accept with con- 
fidence the general lines proposed and ably defended by Mr. 
Rowbotham in the first volume of his History of Music. Accord- 
ing to his ingenious theory, the first instruments to be invented 
were instruments of percussion ; the second, wind instruments, and 
the last, stringed instruments. Vocal music preceded instrumental, 
and developed side by side with it. Without following out this 
theory in detail, it will yet be convenient for me to group what 
I have to say on the subject of savage music about the four 
heads thus suggested. I shall consider first the vocal music of 
savage men ; second, their instruments of percussion ; third, their 
wind instruments ; and, fourth, their stringed instruments. 

I. VOCAL MUSIC. 

According to Engel, ' " The origin of vocal music may be sur- 
mised to be coeval with, if not antecedent to, that of language." 
It is possible to find men who have no musical instruments, but 
it is impossible to find any man, however degraded, who does 
not sing. This is true even of the Mincopies, the Veddahs, and 
the Fuegians, with whom musical instruments are unknown." The 
origin of song is wrapped in the same impenetrable mystery 
which conceals the origin of language. At some time man began 
to sing. That we know, and that is all we know. 

If we examine the songs of the savage races of the present 

^ p. I. -Rowbotham, i., p. 71- 



242 



Musical Instnuiicnts and their Homes. 



day, we shall find that while differing in many respects, they are 
almost all marked by two characteristic features. The first is a 
decided prominence of the rhythmic as opposed to the melodic ele- 
ment, and the second is a certain monotony which results from 
the fact that most of them are contained within a very narrow 
compass, and have consequently little room for variety. Thus the 
songs of the Tierra del Fuegians are really chants intoned upon 
a single note. Similar songs are found among the Fiji Islanders 
and the North American Indians. The Brazilians have songs 
entirely composed in two notes, and the same is true of certain 
tribes of Africa.' Examples of songs with three notes are com- 
mon. Rowbotham' gives instances from the Fijians, the Nubians, 
the Samoans, and the negroes of South America. The Malays, 
like the Chinese, use the pentatonic scale, and are therefore rela- 
tively far advanced in musical development. In general, we may 
say that the number of distinct tones used by any savage tribe 
in the construction of their melodies forms a very fair index of 
the point of musical advancement which they have reached. 

The monotonous character of savage melodies has been 
remarked by many travellers. The songs of the West Australians 
are described by Grey^^ as being short, "containing generally 
only one or two ideas, and one constantly repeated over and over 
again in a manner doubtless grating to the untutored ear of a 
European, but to one skilled in Australian music, lulling- and 
harmonious in the extreme, and producing much the same efi'ect 
as the singing of a nurse upon a child." Williams,^ in referring 
to the musical performances of the Fiji Islanders, speaks of the 
song by which the monotonous beating of their drums is accom- 
panied, as being "often very dull." Schweinfurth= says of one of 
the Niam-Niam stringed instruments that " its music is very monot- 
onous, and it is very difficult to distinguish any actual melody 

■ Rowbotham, i. p. 92. = pp. 95-97. 3ii. p. 300. 4 Fiji and the Fijians, p. 141. 

5ii. p. 30. 



Savage Music. 243 

in it." Similar testimonies could easily be multiplied. We must, 
however, be careful not to press our generalization too far. Many 
of the songs of the negroes of Africa have clearly-marked and not 
unpleasing melodies. Thus Burton' speaks of the natives of 
East Africa as being "admirable timists, and no mean tunists," 
and Bowdich' says of the Ashantees that " their airs have a 
sweetness and animation beyond any barbarous composition " 
he ever heard. The effect of many of the African songs is, 
moreover, not a little increased by marked variations in the 
expression with which they are rendered. A good example of 
such changes of expression is given by Schweinfurth in describ- 
ing the singing of the Bongo. " It consists," he says, " of a bab- 
bling recitative, which at one time suggests the yelping of a 
dog, and at another the lowing of a cow, whilst it is broken 
ever and again by the gabbling of a string of words, which are 
huddled up one into another. The commencement of a measure 
will always be with a lively air, and every one, without distinction 
of age or sex, will begin yelling, bellowing and screeching with 
all their strength ; gradually the surging of the voices will tone 
down, the rapid time moderate, and the song be hushed into a 
wailing, melancholy strain. Thus it sinks into a very dirge, such 
as might be chanted at the grave, and might be interpreted as 
representative of a leaden and a frowning sky, when all at once, 
without note of warning, there bursts forth the full fury of the 
negro throats; shrill and thrilling is the outcry, and the contrast 
is as vivid as sunshine in the midst of rain." ^ 

I have spoken of the prominence of the rhythmic element in 
savage music. This is almost universally recognized by travellers. 
The sense for time seems to have been highly developed in man 
long before he had the faintest conception of what we call mel- 
ody. The rude chants upon a single note of the Fuegians and 

"Lake Regions of Central Africa, ii. p. 291. = Mission from Cape Coast Castle to Ashantee, p. 361. 

3i. p. 289. 



2 44 Musical Instiiniicnts and t/icir Homes. 

the North American Indians derive a certain life and meaning 
from their clearly-marked and often-varied rhythm. In the devel- 
opment of this rhythmic sense in man, the dance certainly played 
an important part. As a matter of fact we find among savage 
peoples, especially the lowest, an intimate connection between 
the song and the dance. Many of the most characteristic savage 
melodies are dance songs. "The wild, painted warrior," says 
Ambros, " breaks out in song before the battle — gives expres- 
sion to his contempt for his enemy, his assurance of victory, in 
words which he chants in improvised fashion, the rhythm of the 
regular tones compelling his limbs to harmonious movement — 
swinging his club, he dances his war dance. Here the arts 
lie in the germ undivided, and only at a higher stage of devel- 
opment do they separate into Poetry, Music and the Drama."' 
Here, of course, we are interested only in tracing the influence 
of the dance on the history of music proper. This Rowbotham 
considers to have been very great, not only in the earlier stages 
of which we have been speaking, when the range was narrow, 
and its effect was purely rhythmic, but in the later also, when the 
compass of five or six notes had been reached. " The dance," 
he says, " has introduced a lot of artificial elements whose ten- 
dency would be to gain in complexity every day, and ever more 
and more to deflect song from that primitive form in which it 
left the bosom of speech." ^^ But an extended consideration of 
this interesting question would carry us beyond the proper limits 
of the present chapter. 

What was said above as to the fondness of savage man for 
music in general applies with special force to vocal music. Sing- 
ing seems to the savage the natural vehicle for the expression 
of his emotions. If we are to believe George Grey, the old 
Australian, who sits in the door of his hut, furiously brandish- 

' Geschichte der Musik, i. p. 537. For an interesting practical example, see George Grey's account of the 
war-song of an old Australian chief, ii. p. 300 scq. 2- q 



Savage Music. 245 

ing his spear, and singing of his neighbor, who has insulted 
him: 

" I'll spear his liver, 
I'll spear his lights, 
I'll spear his heart, 
I'll spear his thigh," etc., 

this old native, I say, seems to derive a very real comfort and 
satisfaction from the performance. Passing to the other extreme, 
we find among the Niam-Niams minstrels who " are as sparing 
of their voices as a worn-out prima doiiiia."' And not only is 
the song popular as an individual recreation ; chorus singing also is 
common all over Africa. Among the Ashantees, who are rela- 
tively highly developed in musical culture, women never perform 
instrumental music, but both sexes alike join in singing choruses. 
The dirges of the Ashantee w^omen, we are told, excite them to 
such a frenzy that their singing becomes little more than a mix- 
ture of yells and screeches, bidding defiance to all musical nota- 
tion,' but they are none the less the natural and real expression of 
the grief of this excitable people. The Bamanwato " dance and 
sing nearly every night, keeping up their revels till next day."^ 
Among the Fiji Islanders " nocturnal serenading is practised by 
companies of men or women." ^ An original use of the song is 
described by Cranz.' At the time when he wrote his history 
(1765) the natives of Greenland used to settle their quarrels by a 
sort of musical duel. "When one Greenlander thinks he has been 
offended by another," says Cranz, " he does not allow any spite 
or anger to be detected, still less any spirit of revenge ; but he 
prepares a satirical song, which he repeats over and over in the 
presence of his household, and especially of the women-folk, danc- 
ing as he sings, until they all know it by heart. He then lets it 
be known in the whole neighborhood that he proposes to sing at 

'Schvveinfurth, i. p. 445, = Bowdicli, p. 364 jvi/. 

3 Chapman : Travels in South Africa, i. p. 271. ■• Williams, p. 140. 

5 Historic von Grimland, p, 231 seq. 



246 Musical Insti-uiiicnts and tJicir I Ionics. 

the expense of his adversary." The neighbors being assembled 
and the offending party with them, the injured man stands forth 
in the midst and sings his song, dancing and beating his drum the 
while, his family joining in the chorus. Each witty personality is 
received with laughter and applause. His opponent then answers 
in a song of like kind, and the spectators sit as umpires upon 
the whole performance. " He who has the last word," concludes 
Cranz, " has won the case, and from that time on is looked upon 
as worthy of no little consideration." Further instances of the 
important part played by the song in savage life will come 
under consideration in another connection. 

II. INSTRUMENTS OF PERCUSSION. 

The special instruments of percussion of the different savage 
races will be noticed in the proper place. I shall confine myself 
here to a few remarks on the general subject. There is little doubt 
that instruments of this kind were the first to be invented by man. 
The natives of West Australia accompany their dances by clap- 
ping their hands and stamping their feet upon the ground.' 
The natives of Central Australia beat two pieces of stick 
together or two green branches." A still nearer approach to 
the instrument proper is found in the use of their spear-boards 
by the West Australians. Grey thus describes their perform- 
ances : " A rounded stick is held in its centre, and its ends 
alternately struck against the flat board with which they throw 
their spears. Although this appears so simple," he continues, 
" it requires some practice, and by young men, who desire the 
reputation of being exquisites, to play it is considered to be a 
very necessary accomplishment."^ The step from these rude forms 
to the finished drum is a long one, and we cannot here trace 

' Grey, ii. p, 305. The same is true of the Andaman Islanders, who may, therefore, in strictness be removed 
from the list of tliose who have no musical instruments. (Rowbotham, i. 22) 

2 Kowbotham, i. p. 22, jj; , ^^. 



Savage Music. 247 

the development through the inverted bowls of the Sandwich 
Islanders and the hollowed logs of the Fijians" to the final 
form in which the hollow body is covered with a resounding 
head of skin. 

It is a curious fact that many different races attribute to the 
drum a divine origin, or at least regard it with superstitious awe. 
" A hundred years ago it could be said that ' the Drum was the 
only object of worship from the Orinoco to the La Plata.'"" 
Even to-day, drum, or rather rattle-worship, "is to be found in full 
vitality in the interior of Brazil." The Laplanders have a similar 
veneration for the drum. " Without his drum," says Rowbotham, 
" the Lapland sorcerer was powerless, but with it, and by its aid 
alone, he could do all his wonders He could project his soul 
to far distant countries, send it riding through the air or travelling 
under the earth, while his body lay in a trance in Lapland ; he 
could predict the future, especially could he foretell ' what the 
success in hunting will be ' ; ' if a tame reindeer be lost, he can 
tell how they may get him again ' ; he could predict whether the 
net-fishing would be successful, or even if a sick man would 
recover." ' The legends of the North American Indians carry 
back the drum to the time of the Deluge. The Greenlanders 
use it to conjure up spirits, the Samoyedes to drive them 
away.^ In view of these facts, it is only natural to find that 
one of the chief uses to which the drum is put among the 
savages of the Western world, is to assist the mysterious rites of 
the sorcerers and medicine men. But even among the Indians 
and the Laplanders, it is by no means confined to such uses. 
It is employed to accompany singing and the dance, and is an 
important part of whatever orchestral performances may take place. 

It is wonderful what an effect the sound of the drum has upon 
the savage, and what meaning he is able to put into its monoto- 

' Rowbotham, i. p. 24. ^ Rowbotham, i. p. 7. '^ i. p. 11. 

■iCranz : Historie von Cninland, p. 271 ; Rowbotham, i. p. 15. 



248 Musical I list rum cuts and their Homes. 

nous tone. It animates the warrior to deeds of bravery, and 
enables the lover to express the depth of his emotion. The 
Eskimos use the drum to give expression to their passions.' The 
Manganjas of Africa employ it "to express their joy and grief." ^ 
" In the Marquesas we read of mammoth drums fifteen feet in 
height, whose sound resembles thunder, and with two rows of 
these playing in their midst from morning till night, the people 
will lie feasting under the trees for days together."' The Amer- 
ican brave believes he can show his affection by the force of his 
beating. " Hear my drum," he cries to his absent love, " though 
you be at the uttermost part of the earth, hear my drum." And 
again, "Do you 1 in dei' stand \N\i2X my drum says?"-* 

It would be interesting to trace the growth of the different 
instruments of percussion ; to follow the development of the rattle, 
the bell, the cymbals, and the harmonicon, as evidenced by the 
various specimens, more or less rude, which are found among 
different savage races to-day. But such an undertaking will carry 
us too far. I will therefore confine myself to but a single illus- 
tration. Perhaps no better example could be taken of the gradual 
growth of the conception of a musical instrument than that of 
the harmonicon or xylophone. One of the crudest forms of this 
is to be found in the Augrenuit of the inhabitants of New Britain. 
This consists of two pieces of wood, dried by artificial means, and 
hardened by being held in the fire as long as possible. They 
are of unequal size, the larger being burnt on one side 
only, and the other on both. They are slightly curved in shape. 
The manner of playing the Angremut is thus described by M. 
Kraus : " The islanders of New Britain," he says, " dig in the sand 
during the night a trench which is longer than it is wide, and 
pointed at both extremities. One of them then seats himself 
across this trench, and the two Angremuts are placed across it 

■ Rowbotham, i. p. 30. = Livingstone, quoted by Rowbotliam, i. p. 30. f Rowbothara. i. p. 141. 

■t Sclioolcraft, quoted by Rowbotliam, i. p. 31. 



S(77'age Music. 249 

symmetrically, and struck [with two little rounded sticks], thus 
producing sounds, which, if we may believe the account of travel- 
lers who have visited these islands, are anything but agreeable." " 
Strangely enough a halo of mystery surrounds this somewhat 
simple contrivance. Women are never allowed to see the Angre- 
mut. It is only played in the dead of night, and the specimens 
sold to Dr. Finsch for the museum at Florence were brought to 
him at night " carefully enveloped in leaves, so that the women 
might not see them." = A somewhat similar form of the instru- 
ment is found among some of the natives of East Africa. Fig. 5, 
in the present collection, is a very interesting specimen of this 
kind. It consists of five rude pieces of wood, flattened on the top, 
which are placed across two pieces of fresh-cut banana wood, laid 
side by side upon the ground. They are beaten with two short 
wooden drumsticks. In this instrument, as in the Angremut of 
New Britain, we see the first crude attempts to increase the simple 
sound of the wood by the support of some kind of resonant body. 
The further development of this idea is shown in two more 
finished specimens in the Catalogue (Fig. 4, Africa, and Fig. 2, 
Central America). In the first of these the resonant bodies are 
supplied by gourds, two of which are fastened, by a resinous 
substance, under each of the twelve flat wooden keys of the instru- 
ment. The whole is surrounded by a frame of wood, and is 
suspended at the performer's waist by a cord passing round his 
neck. In the Guatemalan specimen, the resonant bodies are sup- 
plied by pieces of hollow wood. The number of keys in this 
instrument is much greater than in the preceding, being no less 

' Kraus : Musical Instruments of Micronesia and Melanesia. This treatise is in Italian, As I have access 
only to a manuscript translation, I am unable to give a more definite reference. 

= Ibid. A similar mystery surrounds the _/7/;7//(?;7>, or wooden trumpet of the Brazilian Indians. "Women 
are never permitted to see it. So stringent is this law that any woman ol'jtaining a sight of it is put to death — 
usually by poison. No youths are allowed to see it, until they have been subjected to a series of initiatory fastings 
and scourgings. The Jiiruparis is usually kept hidden in the bed of some stream, deep in the forest ; and no one 
dires to drink out of that sanctified stream, or to bathe in its water. At feasts Vne. Jtiy2iparis is brought out during 
the night, and is blown outside the houses of entertainment." Engel, p. 72. 



2sO 



Musical Instruincnts and their Homes. 



than twenty-eight. The whole rests upon a large frame of wood, 
and is beaten with rubber-tipped drumsticks, sometimes as many 
as three persons performing at the same time. 

III. WIND INSTRUMENTS. 

Wind instruments imply a stage of development more 
advanced than that which is satisfied simply with instruments 
of percussion. The question how the idea of their use first 
originated, while an interesting one, need not concern us here. 
We shall content ourselves with certain general observations as 
to the nature and the use of the wind instruments found at 
present among savage peoples. These may be divided into two 
great classes — the horn class and the pipe class. The question 
which was the earliest is still an open one, but I am inclined 
to follow Mr. Rowbotham in assigning the first place to the 
horns. The most simple instrument of this kind, and the one 
from which all the others may well have been developed, is the 
conch-shell. This is found to-day among savage peoples all 
over the world, especially in the islands of the Pacific. In Africa 
we find the negroes using trumpets of horn or ivory. Instru- 
ments of wood are also common. The Indians who live alone 
the banks of the Orinoco have wooden trumpets nearly seven 
feet long." The use of instruments of this class seems to be con- 
fined to w^arlike purposes. The savages who from time to time 
attacked Orellana on his expedition down the Maranon, " almost 
invariably preluded their onset by a tremendous din of horns and 
trumpets. The Muras, who were the scourge of the colonists in 
South America, would always perform a wild overture on horns 
before commencing their attack. The people of the Orinoco used 
horns for a similar purpose. The Samoans blow conch-shells as a 
prelude to the war. The savages of Guiana commence their 

■ Engel, p. 72. 



Savage Music. 251 

attacks with a screech of horns and trumpets."' The effect pro- 
duced by some of these wild war-horns is really frightful. Ellis 
says of the conch-shells of the Samoans that their sound is the 
most " horrific " he has ever heard." 

When we turn to the instruments of the pipe family, we find 
a marked contrast. If the horn is pre-eminently the instrument of 
war, the flute is, par excellence, the instrument of love. Row- 
botham has gathered a most formidable collection of testimonies 
which go to prove that Shakespeare's " lascivious piping of the 
flute " was no idle term.^ I will quote but one of them. " ' In 
the island of Formosa,' says an old Dutch voyager, ' they do not 
buy their wives with moneys ; and the fathers and mothers are in 
nowise consulted. But the young man appeareth for many days 
before the hut of his sweetheart, and playeth on a flute or little 
pipe, till she hath given her consent to espouse him, or told him 
he may depart for she will have none of him.'"* A similar cus- 
tom obtains among many tribes of the North American Indians. 

The history of the flute is an interesting one, from the simple 
reed with its single note, through such intermediate stages as the 
rude pipe found among the Ashantees of Africa, which has three 
holes, and the flute of the Apache Indians (Fig. 15, North 
America), which has four, to such a finished instrument as 
the love flute of the Dakotas (Fig. 10, North America). We 
have seen, in the case of China, how long a time passed 
before even the first step in this development was taken, 
and the Chinaman learned that by cutting a single bamboo 
it might be made to produce more than one note. In 
like manner the savage, when he wished to produce more than 
one tone, cut two or three different reeds and placed them side 
by side. In this way must be explained the origin of the 
Syrinx, or Pandean pipe. This is one of the most common 
of savage instruments. It is found both in South America and 

■ Rowbotham, i. p. 37. = Quoted by Rowbotliam, i. p. 39. 3 See p. 47 scq. 4 Rovvbotham, i. p. 47. 



25 2 Musical Iiistruuicnts and their Homes. 

among the inhabitants of Polynesia. The length of the reeds of 
which it is composed varies from a few inches to four or f^ve 
feet. A study of some of these syrinxes goes to confirm what 
has already been said about the narrow compass of early sav- 
age melodies. Fetis ' gives an example of a Polynesian syrinx 
of nine pipes, in which the range extends only from B^ to F, 

the exact order of notes being as follows : F, D, C, B!^, C, 

E^ D, B', D. The examples given by Rowbotham^ have, how- 
ever, a considerably wider range. " One of these syrinxes," says 
this writer, " is to us as good as a piece of savage music 
noted down by the savage himself, and by examining the melody 
which is made by blowing it from end to end, we can see 
clearly enough what sort of melodic ideal floated in the head of 
the man who made it." ' 

The interesting question of the origin of the nose-flute will 
be touched upon in another connection. 

IV. STRINGED INSTRUMENTS. 

With stringed instruments we reach the last and highest stage 
in the history of musical instruments. The first rude beginnings 
of this kind found among savage races are therefore of excep- 
tional interest. Many theories have been advanced to account 
for the invention of the first stringed instruments, but none of 
them are thoroughly satisfactory. Rowbotham" believes that they 
first came into use as instruments of accompaniment, and as a 
matter of fact we find them used chiefly by those peoples among 
whom the chant or song is most highly developed. With the 
invention of the strings begins the period of " real musical cult- 
ure." Through hearing melodies played upon the instrument, 
the discovery was made that this alone, even without the voice, 
was able to satisfy man's innate longing for music. " And 

'i. p. 17. = i. p. 58. 3i. p. 57. +i. p. 161. 



Savage Music. 253 

so instrumental music branches off from vocal music, and music 
first fully separates itself from poetry." ' 

In its primitive form the stringed instrument is nothing but 
" a string or two stretched over a board or a stick." " Thus the 
Fijians, we are told, have " a little Jew's harp which they twang 
with their fingers." 3 Out of this rude form were developed alike 
the Kin of China, the Vina of Hindustan, the Lute of Persia, and 
the Harp of Egypt. But here again, as in the case of the flute, 
the road from the first rude beginning to the finished instrument 
is a long one. And just as among wind instruments the syrinx, 
in which each reed gives a distinct tone, preceded the flute, in 
which a number of tones are produced by a single reed, so in the 
first stringed instruments each string probably gave but a single 
note, and it was only later that man hit upon the idea of increas- 
ing the number of notes produced by a single string by the 
stopping of frets. ^ An interesting instance, showing how strong, 
even among comparatively advanced tribes, is the association 
between the individual string and the single tone which it is 
supposed to produce, is given by Bowdich in describing the Sanko 
of the Ashantees. This is " a narrow box, the open top of which 
is covered with alligator or antelope skin. A bridge is raised on 
this, over which eight strings [of vegetable fibre] are conducted to 
the end of a long stick fastened to the forepart of the box, and 
thickly notched," = and the strings are raised or depressed into 
these notches as occasion requires. The strings are tuned quite at 

' Ambros, i. p. 540. = Rowbotham, i. p. 161. ' Williams, quoted by Rowbotham, i. p. 143. 

•• " The stopping of the Lute's strings," says Rowbotham (i. p. 165), " was found out as soon as the Lute got a 
neck, for in the primitive form of a piece of straight board with strings lying over it, there was no likelihood that 
the art of stopping would be discovered, but the instrument would be played as we should play an ^diolian harp 
nowadays (which indeed it very much resembled), or as the Chinese play their Lute [the Kin] at the present day, 
resting on the knee, or on some artificial support, or perhaps on the left arm, while the thumb of the right hand 
steadied it underneath, and the four fingers twanged the strings. But when, for convenience of holding, one end of 
the instrument was made narrower, so as to be grasped by the left hand, directly, I say, the left hand went round 
the strings, it could not help pressing them sometimes as it held them, and the difference of tone which the pressure 
caused would be at once noticed, and in course of time would be acted on. And this was how the Lute's strings 
got to be stopped." ^ p. 361. 



2 54 Musical Instruments and their Homes. 

random. On one occasion, out of curiosity, Bowdich changed the 
tunino- of some of the strings of the Sanko, and then called the 
attention of the player to the fact that they now gave a different 
tone. But the mind of the native seemed to be quite unable to 
grasp the idea. " I put the same string," he said ; " it must be the 
same tune." ' Yet although in strictness, instruments the strings 
of which produced only a single tone must have preceded those 
in which the number of tones of each string could be increased 
by stopping, we find examples of the latter even among people 
of comparatively low development. The Bechuanas, says Chapman, 
have " a musical bow with a hollow calabash attached to one end, 
on which is stretched a twisted string made of sinews, on which 
the performer strikes with a thin stick, nwdifyijig the tones ivitlt 
liis fingers by running ttieni along ttie string^ " This is a selfish 
kind of music," he continues, " intended more for their own gratifi- 
cation than for that of an audience, who can scarcely hear anything 
of it, while the performer, having the one end of the bow con- 
stantly between his teeth, the sounds vibrate powerfully to his 
own ears, and are lost on the bystanders." = The same instrument 
is found among the Bushmen. A modification of the idea is 
found among the Bongo. " This consists of a bow of bamboo, 
with the string tightly strained across it, and this is struck by 
a slender slip of split bamboo." ' As in the Bechuana instrument, 
one end of the bow is held in the teeth. The resonant gourd, 
however, is wanting. " Performers may often be seen sitting for 
an hour together with an instrument of this sort: they stick one 
end of the bow into the ground, and fasten the string over a 
cavity covered with bark, which opens into an aperture for the 

■ p. 361. The example, to be sure, does not quite cover the case. The idea that without altering the length 
of a string it may be made to yield different tones by increasing or diminishing its tension is quite distinct from the 
idea that different tones may be obtained from the same string by increasing or diminishing its length. The latter 
principle the Ashantees seem already to have grasped. Yet the story is instructive as showing us how the mind of 
savage man works on such questions. 

" '■ P- 271. -< Schweinfurlli, i, p. 2S7. 



Savage Music. 255 

escape of the sound. They pass one hand from one part of the 
bow to the other, and with the other they play upon the string 
with the bamboo twig, and produce a considerable variety of 
buzzing and humming airs, which are really rather pretty." ^ The 
principle of stopping reaches its full development in the Ztzt or 
banjo (Fig. 4, Africa), which will be described later. 

It does not fall within the scope of the present chapter to 
follow the ingenious theory of Mr. Rowbotham as to the develop- 
ment of the different forms of the stringed instrument. After 
showing how savage man constructed the first rude lute, and 
how out of that was developed the Lyre, he goes on to show how 
" they each gave birth to a firstborn ; and the Lute gave birth to 
the Harp, and the Lyre to the Dulcimer ; or, in other words, the 
Lute got its increase in power by increasing the size and ten- 
sion of the strings themselves, the Lyre got it by increasing the 
force with which they were struck."' The theory is interesting, but 
after all only tentative, and to be accepted with caution. In the 
early history of music, as in other branches of the history of prim- 
itive civilization, we find many facts that seem conflicting and hard 
to reconcile. A study of the savage musical instruments sheds light 
on many otherwise obscure points, but it leaves the darkness 
which covers others all the more impenetrable. For the present, 
at least, we must be content to leave much unexplained. I can- 
not better close this chapter than by calling attention to but one 
of the many seeming contradictions which meet us in this inter- 
esting but baffling field. 

We are accustomed to think of harmony as peculiarly the 
characteristic of modern European music. Even to the most 
highly civilized nations of the East, it seems to be practically 
unknown. Not only does the matter-of-fact Chinaman, and the 

' Schweinfurth, i. p. 287. " This," he continues, " is quite a common pastime with the lads who are put in 
charge of the goats. I have seen them apply themselves very earnestly and with obvious interest to their musical 
practice, and the ingenious use to which they apply the simplest means for obtaining harmonious tones testifies to 
their penetration into the secrets of the theory of sound." ^i. p. 164. 



256 Musical Instninients and their Homes. 

practical Japanese care nothing- for it, but even the imaginative 
Hindu contents himself with the delights of pure melody. The 
Arabs themselves, who have carried the development of the 
strings to a point of perfection higher than that found among 
any other extra-European nation, while acquainted with some of 
the principles of harmony, regard it, as we have seen, rather as a 
" disturbing element." In view of these facts, we should surely 
expect to find in the music of savage peoples examples of melody 
only. Yet while this is true as a rule, we are confronted by a 
number of interesting and puzzling exceptions. Thus the Ashan- 
tees produce thirds, and even, occasionally, fifths, on their rude 
flutes.' "The harmonies which they [the Niam-NiamsJ elicit from 
their favorite instrument, the mandolin, seem almost to thrill 
through the chords of their inmost nature." ' But the most 
interesting case is that of the New Zealanders. Here " for 
unknown ages a combination of simple thirds in a short vocal 
strain has been known "^' — a fact which may indeed illustrate, as 
Mr. Elson phrases it, " the force of accident in the rise of music," 
but which I prefer to recognize as the first faint utterings of that 
higher sense in man, which, after lying dormant in the human 
constitution for centuries, has at last voiced itself in the wonder- 
ful harmonies of a Beethoven and a Wagner. 

■ Bowdich, p. 361. 2 Schweinfurth, ii. p. 29. 

3 Elson : Curiosities of Music, p. 233 ; Aml-)ros, i. p. 545. Still other e.xamples of savage harmony are 
given by Rowbotham, i. pp. 168, 169. 



XV. 

INSTRUMENTS OF THE AFRICAN 

TRIBES. 

'^^^^HE remarks which have already been made as to the 
fondness of savage man for music apply with special 
force to the African negro. Not only does this love 
characterize him in his native land and among his own people, 
but he carries it with him wherever he goes. The negroes of 
our own Southern States are a case in point. Some one has 
ventured the prediction that at some future time, when the Afri- 
can race shall have attained a stage of civilization not inferior 
to that of the European nations, they will become " the most 
universally and thoroughly musical race on the face of the globe." 

But whatever may take place in the future, we must be con- 
tent to-day to study these musical capabilities in the germ. 
Compared with the savages of the Western world, the negroes 
are relatively far advanced in musical development. Many of 
their melodies are clearly marked and pleasing." Passionately 
fond of singing and the dance, says Ambros," they have the 
faculty of striking up jolly dance-songs, which, following the 
natural intervals of their horns and trumpets, bring out with 
marked emphasis the significance of the tonic triad as well as 
of the dominant. The first beginnings of harmony among the 
Ashantees have already been noticed. 

When we turn to consider the musical instruments of the 

■ Note especially the examples given by Ambros, i. p. 546. - Ibid. 



258 Musical Instruments and their Homes. 

African tribes, we find that almost all of them possess at least 
some form of the stringed instrument. Now, the stringed instru- 
ment, as we have seen, indicates a relatively high stage of 
musical advancement. Yet here we find it among a people who 
are still pure savages. This presents an interesting problem for 
the musical historian. Mr. Rowbotham tells us that he under- 
took to make a catalogue of the diff"erent African tribes, with 
a view to discover "whether the absence of stringed instruments 
prevailed in the centre, the north, or in what direction it might 
be, of the continent. It seemed to me," he says,' " from the 
tale this catalogue told, that the tribes in the lowest state of 
musical development — that is, those who have not yet acquired 
the use of stringed instruments — were principally in the East of 
the continent, and the East of the Central part of it. But this 
tabulation I was obliged to discard, owing to the conflicting 
accounts of travellers." The problem is still further complicated 
by the fact that some tribes who possess stringed instruments 
seem to be entirely unacquainted with wind instruments. In 
view of these facts, the ingenious theory has been advanced by 
Mr. Rowbotham, that as " the art of smelting metals was passed 
down from the ancient Egyptians through the negroes on their 
borders, and from thence spread through the whole continent 
of Africa," so in like manner the negroes derived their acquaint- 
ance with stringed instruments from the Egyptians." Nor is 
this theory by any means without the support of facts. The 
African harps are remarkably like those of ancient Egypt in 
shape. Especially striking is the evidence of the Nanga of 
the Soudan. This instrument, which is " a peculiar cross 
between the lute and the harp," is an exact copy of one of the 
most characteristic of the Egyptian instruments. Nor are the 
points of resemblance confined to stringed instruments alone. 
" The negroes of the Soudan call their drums by the same 

■Appendix A, i. p. 185. = i. p. jgg. 



Instruments of tJie Afiican Tribes. 259 

name as the ancient Egyptians, Daltika, and the drums are pre- 
cisely identical." ' In further confirmation of his theory that 
the stringed instrument has been " prematurely " introduced 
among the negroes, Mr. Rowbotham cites the use to which it is 
put by most of them. " For it is generally used as a mere idle 
instrument, and often fitted with keys of iron, or struck with rods 
like a dulcimer, and has pieces of shells and tin hung to it, to 
make a jingling accompaniment. It serves the same office which 
the pipe does among other savages — to accompany the dance or 
to amuse the ear ; but as to being an instrument for poets, as to 
being the companion of bards and minstrels, we do not find any 
such fate has befallen the Lyre of Africa. So we prefer to con- 
sider it a premature importation from civilized neighbors, which 
has not taken root and flourished, because the new possessors were 
not prepared to receive it."' 

Examples of similar transfers of musical instruments from 
people in one stage of civilization to those in a lower are very 
common in musical history. An interesting case in point is that 
of the nose-flute, the use of which was probably carried from 
India, its original home, through Siam to Borneo ; thence " across 
to Fiji, the Society, Friendly and Hervey groups, and down to 
New Zealand, while it has even been met with in North Austra- 
lia, where it had probably been brought by Malay trading canoes 
from the other islands."^ Not to refer to the many cases of 
similar transfers which have already been touched upon in the 
history of Eastern musical instruments, we may find a number of 
interesting examples within Africa itself. Thus Burton'' speaks of 
the instruments of the natives of the Lake regions of Central 
Africa, as being " all of foreign invention, imported from various 
regions, Madagascar and the coast." 

•Rowbotham, i, p. 187, where other instances also are given. The resemblance between the Mittoo lyre and 
the Nubian Kissar will be noticed later. = Ibid. 

3 E. B. Tylor, Macmillan's Magazine, May, 1S82, p, 81. 4 Lake Regions of Central Africa, ii. p. 291. 



2 6o Musical Instruments and their Homes. 

The general statement of Mr. Rowbotham as to the use of 
the lyre in Africa, while doubtless true in the main, must be 
corrected by several very interesting exceptions. Thus the Niam- 
Niams of the Soudan have a class of professional bards or min- 
strels, called Nzangah, who use a combination of harp and man- 
dolin,' " the thin jingling of which accords perfectly well with the 
nasal humming of the minstrel's recitative.'" Nor are such 
bards found among the Niam-Niams alone. "Under minor 
differences of aspect, these men may be found nearly everywhere 
in Africa." ^ Unlike the bards of the Northern nations, they are 
looked upon with contempt by their hearers, as the name 
HasJiash (buffoon), applied to them by the Arabs of the Soudan, 
well indicates.^ 

In taking up the special consideration of the African instru- 
ments, we shall find it convenient to follow an order the reverse 
of that employed in considering the instruments of the Eastern 
nations. I shall, therefore, first give some account of the instru- 
ments of percussion of the negroes; second, of their wind instru- 
ments, and, last of all, of their stringed instruments. 

I. INSTRUMENTS OF PERCUSSION. 

In approaching the subject of the African instruments of per- 
cussion, we are embarrassed by the richness of the material. A 
full catalogue would embrace almost every kind of resonant con- 
trivance that the brain of man can conceive. The Ashantees, 
says Bowdich,'' use in their music " drums, castanets, gong-gongs, 
flat sticks, rattles, and, even old brass pans." The Wajiji, an 
East African tribe, have a rude tom-tom made of " a pair of 
foolscap-shaped plates of thin iron, joined at the apices and con- 
nected at the bases by a solid cross-bar of the same metal." ' 

' Schweinfurth, Heart of Africa, i. p. 446. ^Ibid., ii p. 30. 

3 The Niam-Niam Nzangah, signifying prostitute, is still more expressive. 

■•Mission from Cape Coast Castle to Ashantee, p. 363. 5 Burton. Lake Regions, etc., ii. p. 98. 



Instruments of the African Tribes. 261 

Upon this they beat with a muffled stick " with painful persever- 
ance." The Niam-Niams have an instrument which has been 
described by Colonel Long as " a Sinon-like wooden horse, that 
was beaten on its sides with drumsticks."' The inhabitants of 
Dahomey ornament their drums with skulls. In the great pro- 
cession of the King's Wealth, which Forbes witnessed in 1850, 
there passed " twenty men carrying the royal drums, one orna- 
mented with twenty human skulls," " six men carrying a drum, 
ornamented with twelve human skulls," etc' In another similar 
procession, the same traveller saw thirty women carrying a single 
drum ornamented with twenty-four skulls.' Fig. 3, in the. present 
collection, shows a pottery drum, the head of which is said to be 
covered with human skin. Sir Samuel Baker was once quar- 
tered near the town of Masindi, where dwelt Kabba Rega, King 
of the Unyori. One evening, after a somewhat unusual stillness, 
he was startled by " the deep tones of a nogara or drum. This 
ceased in a moment ; and then came a burst of terrific noise, 
which caused every man in camp to rush to his post. It was a 
din, caused by many thousands yelling and shrieking like maniacs. 
At least a thousand drums were beating ; horns, whistles and 
every instrument which could add to the confusion was blowing 
and sounding, yet no human being was visible." ** Upon being 
informed by the dragoman that the purpose of this terrific com- 
motion was to " make Imn afraid',' Sir Samuel ordered his own 
regimental band to strike up their loudest — a proceeding which 
had the happy result of causing the horrible din to cease. These 
examples, which might be indefinitely multiplied, sufficiently 
illustrate the variety, both in character and in use, of the African 
instruments of percussion. A few of the more important kinds, 
however, call for special description. 

" The drum," says Burton, = " is ever the favorite instrument 

'Long, Central Africa, p. 278. ' = Dahomey and the Dahonians, ii p. 217. 

3ii. p. 237. "Elson. p. 276. 5 Lake Regions, etc., ii. p. 294. 



262 Musical Iiistruiiients and their Homes. 

with the African, who uses it as the alarum of war, the promise 
of mirth, the token of hospitality, and the cure of disease : with- 
out drumming life would indeed be a blank." The largest of 
the African drums is called Ngonia Kit. It is described as 
" the hollowed hole of a mkenga, or other soft tree, with a 
cylindrical solid projection from the bottom, which holds it 
upright when planted in the ground. The instrument is from 
three to five feet in length, with a diameter of from one to 
two feet ; the outside is protected with a net-work of strong 
cord. Over the head is stretched a rough parchment made of 
calf's skin, and a cap of green hide, mounted when loose, and 
afterwards shrunken by exposure to fire, protects the bottom. 
It is vigorously beaten with the fist, and sometimes with coarse 
sticks." ' The Niam-Niams and Monbuttoo of the Soudan have 
large signal drums of somewhat similar shape. " They stand 
sometimes upon four and sometimes upon two feet, and are like 
the instruments which are seen upon the West Coast." = One 
of these drums is probably referred to in the " Sinon-like wooden 
horse " mentioned above. Many smaller wooden drums are also 
found. Some are "shaped like an hour-glass or a double ' dara- 
bukkah,' and provided with a head of iguana skin."^ Schwein- 
furth^ describes one of the Monbuttoo drums as being " of a 
semicircular shape, very compressed and fitted with a handle at 
the top; the opening for the sound is below, and the instru- 
ment may be compared to a flattened bell." Two forms of 
drum very common on the East Coast are shown in Figs. 9 
and 10. 

I have already referred to the drums of the Ashantees. These 
are usually made of the hollowed trunk of a tree, open at one 
end and covered with skin on the other. They are of two 
sizes. The largest are borne on the head of a man, and struck 

■ Burton, ii, p. 295. Drums of this kind are found among the Bongo. (See Schweinfurth, i. p. 288.) 
'Schweinfurth, ii, p. 113. 3 Burton, ii. p. 295. 4 ii. p. 113. 



Instruments of the African Tribes. 26 



d 



by one or more followers ; the smaller are strung round the 
neck or rest on the ground. The former are beaten with sticks, 
shaped like a " crochet rest " ; the latter are played with the 
fingers.' The most highly esteemed of the Ashantee drums are 
covered with leopard skin, and played, like a tambourine, with 
two fingers. 

The Bushmen use, to accompany their dances, a peculiar water- 
drum, which is " merely a wooden bowl into which a little water 
has been poured, and over which a skin is tightly drawn." ' 

The Saiije, or rattle, is found among many African tribes. It 
usually consists of a gourd filled with pebbles. It is used chiefly 
by women and children, and by the Mganga, or rain-maker.^ At 
the great festivals of the Bongo, says Schweinfurth," " women 
and children by the hundred fill gourd-flasks with little stones, and 
rattle them away as if they were churning butter ; or again at other 
times they will get some sticks or dry fagots and strike them 
together with the greatest energy." In some cases hollow gourds 
are used as drums, and beaten with sticks.^ The negroes of the 
Soudan have a kind of cymbals (Fig. 11), consisting of two thin 
plates of iron, with leather handles, which they use to accompany 
the beating of their heavy drums. I have already referred to 
the fact that the Ashantees use brass pots as instruments of per- 
cussion. 

Two of the most important of the African instruments of percus- 
sion still remain to be noticed. The first of these is the Marimba ; 
the second the Zanze. The Marimba, which is also called MiJiairibi, 

' Bowdich, p. 363. 

- Elson, p. 256. This drum " is struck regularly in time with the movements of the dancer ; the latter, when 
partially exhausted, falls upon the floor, but still singing and kicking in time with the music ; after a short rest of 
this description, he jumps up and continues as at first. When utterly exhausted, he retires among the spectators, 
and, unfastening his leg rattles, hands them to the next dancer. The music to this odd performance is not in unison. 
The dancer sings one air, the spectators another, and the drum gives a species of ' ground bass' to the whole." This, 
therefore, is another interesting instance where an acquaintance with harmony is found among a people in all 
other respects most degraded. 

3 Burton, ii. p. 295. 4 i, p. 288. s Burton, ii. p. 295. 



264 Musical Iiistrunients and tJicir Homes. 

Timbila, or Ba/afo, according to the part of the country in which 
it is found, is one of the commonest of African instruments. Its 
ruder forms have been sufficiently described in the previous chapter. 
A representative specimen of this kind, from the East Coast of 
Africa, is shown in Fig. 5. The perfected Marimba is thus 
described by Engel : ' It has twelve keys, made of " slabs of 
sonorous wood, beneath which are fastened, by means of a dark- 
colored cement, twelve gourds, to increase the sound. In each 
gourd are two holes, one of which is at the top, and the other at 
the side. The latter is covered with a delicate film, to promote 
the sonorousness. Several African travellers have noticed this 
curious acoustic contrivance. Du Chaillu says that the film con- 
sists of the skin of a spider ; Livingstone mentions spider's web 
being applied to instruments of this kind, used by certain native 
tribes in Southern Africa." The Marimba is a favorite instrument, 
both of the negroes and of the Kaffres. A fine specimen is 
shown in Fig. 4. In this, however, the resonant body, instead of 
being furnished by a single gourd under each key, consists of 
two, a larger and a smaller, which are fastened together with resin, 
so as to form the shape of a figure eight. As has already been 
said, the instrument is suspended at the waist by a cord passing 
round the neck, and is beaten by two rubber-tipped drumsticks. 

The Zanze (Figs, i and 2) consists of a hollow wooden box, 
the top of which is furnished with a number of iron toneues, which 
are set in vibration by the thumbs of the player. In the first of 
these specimens, the keys are twenty-three in number; in the 
second, only eleven. Both pass over a low iron bridge, which 
raises them from the wooden surface, and causes them to vibrate 
clearly. Instruments of this kind are common all over Africa. 
The Zanze proper is found among the negro tribes of upper and 
lower Guinea. "Similar instruments are the Kassangah of Dela- 
goa Bay and the neighboring district. Southeastern Africa; the 

' p. 156. 



Instruments of the African Tribes. 265 

Ibeka of the Balakai, a negro tribe in Western Africa, near the 
Gaboon River ; the Anibira, popular at Mozambique, Hast Africa ; 
the VissandscJii, at Congo and Benguela, and others." ' In some 
of these the tongues are made of iron ; in others of hard wood. 
In several of them they are so inserted as to allow of their being 
pushed deeper into the wood, or drawn out to a greater length, 
at pleasure. Engel suggests that this may be " an expedient for 
the purpose of tuning them in conformity with any particular 
melody which the performer wishes to play, and which, as the 
negro melodies are generally very short, he may produce by means 
of the tongues thus arranged, if he vibrates them in succession, 
meanwhile observing the rhythm of the melody." ' Among the 
Banabea, the body of the instrument consists of a fiat piece of 
wood placed inside of a large gourd, which acts as a sounding- 
board.^ The Ooinpoochwa of the Ashantees, described by Bowdich, " 
seems to be a sort of rude Zanze with five wooden keys. 

II. WIND INSTRUMENTS. 

The wind instruments of the negroes are not nearly as numer- 
ous or important as their instruments of percussion. As we have 
already seen, there are not a few tribes which have no wind 
instruments at all. Those which are found are chiefly flutes, 
whistles, horns, and trumpets. 

The Dliete or Kidete, used by many tribes of the interior, is 
described by Burton = as " a hollowed holcus-cane, pierced with four 
holes at the further end ; the mouth-piece is not stopped in any 
way, and the instrument is played upon solely by the lips, a drone 
being sometimes supplied by the voice." The reed flute of the 
Ashantees, with three holes, has been more than once referred to. 
The Karague, a tribe of Central Africa, have a kind of flageolet, 
beside certain " reed instruments made in telescopic fashion." ^ 

' Engel, p. 297. = Ibid. 3 Chapman, i. p. 272. ' p. 363. 5 ;i. p. 293. (• Elson, p. 262. 



2 66 Musical Instnimcnts and their Homes. 

The Bechuanas also have reeds "with which they make a very 
monotonous and discordant noise at their moonlight dances.'" 
The Mittoo are many of them quite skilful players of the flute, 
and have been described by Nubian travellers as "equal to the 
best Prankish (European) performers who reside in Cairo." ^ The 
Kaffres have a rude flute or flageolet, but their favorite instrument 
is an "ear-piercing whistle," with but a single note.^ Among the 
Bongo " the youngsters, down to the small boys, are all musicians. 
Without much trouble and with the most meagre materials, they 
contrive to make Httle flutes."-* 

The Bongo have also some large trumpets called Manyinyee. 
These are huge wooden tubes varying in length from four to five 
feet, " closed at the extremity, and ornamented with carved work 
representing a man's head, which not unfrequently is adorned with 
a couple of horns. The other end of the stem is open, and in 
an upper compartment towards the figure of the head is the ori- 
fice into which the performer blows with all his might. There 
is another form of Manyinyee which is made like a huge wine- 
bottle ; in order to play upon it the musician takes it between his 
knees, like a violoncello, and when the build of the instrument is 
too cumbrous, he has to bend over it, as it lies on the ground." ^ 
The Mittoo substitute for the wooden trumpet of the Bongo, a 
long gourd flask with holes in the side.' The people of the 
East Coast have a " huge bassoon of black wood," called SiwaJ 

One of the most important of the negro instruments is the 
horn. This is made either of horn or of ivory, and is of several 
kinds. "The Barghnmi is made by cutting an oblong hole, 
about the size of a man's nail, within two or three inches of the 
tip of a koodoo, an oryx, or a goat's horn, Avhich for effect and 
appearance is sometimes capped with a bit of cane, whence pro- 
jects a long zebra's or giraff"e's tail."' By altering the force of the 

' Chapman, i. p. 271. = Elson, p. 26S. 3 Elson, pp. 253, 255. 4 Schweinfurth, i. p. 2S7. 

5 Schweinfurth, i. p. 288. (■ Ibid., p. 412. ^ Burton, ii, p. 293. s Burton, ii. p. 294. 



Iiisti'unicnts of the African Tribes. 267 

breath, it may be made to yield four or five notes. Its tone is 
not unlike that of a French hunting-horn. The Ashantees have 
a similar horn made of ivory' (see Fig. 12). The Bongo have a 
number of signal-horns made of the horns of different antelopes. 
" These are called Mangoal, and have three holes like small 
flutes, and in tone are not unlike fifes." ' They have also a long, 
narrow wooden pipe, called Mburrah, " which has a widened air- 
chamber close to the mouth-piece, very similar to the ivory 
signal-horns which are frequently to be seen in all the negro 
countries." ^ 

The King of the Monbuttoo is said to have horn-men " who 
can modulate their tones from infinite tenderness to the sound of 
a lion's roar; and can perform upon a horn so cumbrous that it 
can scarcely be held passages of runs, trills and shakes which 
would be difficult upon a flute." ' 

A curious wind instrument is described by Burton. =^ This 
consists of " a gourd a few inches in circumference, drilled with 
many little apertures ; the breath passes through one hole, and 
certain notes are produced by stopping others with the fingers." 
It yields " loud, shrill, ear-piercing quavers," somewhat resembling 
those of the European piccolo. Another curious instrument is 
the Gotira of the Bushmen. This is shaped like a bow, but 
has a piece of quill inserted at one end of the string. This 
quill is blown in the same manner as an ordinary Jew's harp. 
A modified form of the same instrument, called youm-jotim, is 
used by the women. This, however, is not played by the 
breath, but struck by a stick, the performer catching it up 
quickly and putting it to her ear in order to catch the vibra- 
tions.^ 

The negroes of the Congo have a kind of rude bagpipe, with 
a shrill and piercing tone.' The Ashantees also have a bag- 

'Bowdich, p. 361. = Schweinfurth, i. p. 289. 'Ibid. -lElsoii, p. 268. 

5 ii. p. 294. 'Elson, p. 257. ? Ambros, i. p. 547. 



2 68 Musical Instruments and their Homes. 

pipe, in which, however, the drone is rarely heard/ This com- 
pletes the list of the principal African wind instruments. 



III. STRINGED INSTRUMENTS. 

The commonest of the African stringed instruments is the 
musical bow, which has already been described. This is found 
both in the centre and the south of the continent. It is used 
by the Bongo of the Soudan, the Bechuanas, the Kaffres, and 
the Zulus. Its form differs according to the locality. The Kaf- 
fre instrument is nearly five feet long, and is furnished with a 
resonant gourd. That of the Zulus, which is called Gubo, has 
no gourd, and is less than two feet long (see Fig. 6). Those of 
the Bechuanas and of the Bongo have been sufficiently described. 

One of the most important instruments of the East Coast is 
the Zeze (Tzetze) or banjo (Figs. 7 and 8). This is thus described 
by Burton : ' " The sounding-board is a large hollow gourd, open 
below; on the upper part, fastened by strings that pass through 
drilled holes, is a conical piece of gourd, cleft longitudinally to 
admit the arm or handle, which projects at a right angle. The 
arm is made of light wood from eighteen inches to two feet 
in length ; the left-hand extremity has three frets formed by 
two notches with intervals, and thus the total range is of six 
notes. A single string made of nwndo, the fibre of the mwate, 
or raphia-palm, is tied to a knob of wood projecting from the 
dexter extremity of the handle; thence it passes over a bridge 
of bent quill, which for tuning is raised or depressed, and lastly, 
it is secured round another knob at the end beyond the frets. 
Sometimes, to form a bass or drone, a second string is similarly 
attached along the side of the arm, whilst the treble runs along 
the top." 3 

One of the most characteristic of African stringed instruments 

'Bowdich, p. 361. =n. p. 292. 3 So in Fig. 8. 



Instniniciits of fJic African Tribes. 269 

is the Nanga, or harp, of the Niam-Niams, to which reference 
has already been made. This is described by Schweinfurth ' as 
being " something between a harp and a mandohn. It resem- 
bles the former," he says, " in the vertical arrangement of its 
strings, whilst, in common with the mandolin, it has a sounding- 
board, a neck, and screws for tightening the strings. The sound- 
ing-board is constructed on strict acoustic principles. It has two 
apertures ; it is carved out of wood, and on the upper side is 
covered by a piece of skin ; the strings are tightly stretched by 
means of pegs, and are sometimes made of fine threads of bast, 
and sometimes of the long wiry hairs from the tail of the 
giraffe." The music of the Nanga is described as very monoto- 
nous, and it is difficult to distinguish any actual melody in it. 
Yet Schweinfurth declares that he has not unfrequently " seen 
friends marching about arm-in-arm, wrapped in the mutual enjoy- 
ment of their performance, and beating time to every note by 
nodding their heads." ' 

Other instruments of the harp family are found in Western 
Africa. The Oinbi of the Bakalai " is made of thin pieces of a 
resonant wood, covered with leather prepared from the ear of 
an elephant, or with snake, gazelle or goat skin. It has eight 
stringfs cut from the dried root of some tree"^ The Bouloii of 
the negroes of Senegambia has ten strings, and " long tuning 
pegs of a peculiar shape." ■* Other harps from the same region 
have respectively seven and eighteen strings.^ 

A curious stringed instrument from the Congo River, West 
Africa, is contained in the American Museum of Natural History 
of this city. This has a narrow wooden body, ornamented at the 
upper end with two small horns. Five strings of vegetable fibre 
pass over a low wooden bridge, and are attached to as many 
curved rods of bamboo which project some two feet above the 
body, taking the place of the single handle of the Nanga or 

'ii. p. 30. = Ibid. 3 Engel, p. 15T. ■> Ibid. 5 Muiigo Pai-1<, cpioted by Engel, p. 151. 



2 70 Musical Instruments and their Homes. 

Niam-Niam harp. A small movable loop is passed about each 
rod and its appropriate string, about five inches below their point 
of juncture, thus increasing the tension of the string, as in the 
Chinese violins. (See Figs. 9 and 10, China.) 

The tribes in the neighborhood of Kilwa, south of Lake 
Nyassa, have an instrument called Kinanda. This is " a shallow 
box cut out of a single plank, thirteen inches long by five or six 
HI breadth, and about two inches in depth : eleven or twelve 
strings are drawn tightly over the hollow.'" The instrument is 
placed upon the lap and played with the fingers of both hands. 
" A combination of the Zeze and Kinanda is made by binding a 
dwarf hollow box with its numerous strings to the open top of a 
large circular gourd, which then acts as a sounding-board." ' The 
Saiilzo of the Ashantees has already been described. 

The Mittoo of the Soudan have a rude lyre which remarkably 
resembles the Kissar of the Nubians (Egypt, Fig. 2). The 
sounding-board of this is quadrangular, covered with skin, with 
a circular sound-hole at each corner. It has five strings, which 
pass over a bridge made of " the large shell of the Anodont mus- 
sel," and are fastened at regular intervals to a cross-bar at the 
top.3 

Several instruments of the guitar family are found in Africa. 
Thus the Karague have " a kind of guitar," in which six of the 
seven strings accord perfectly with our diatonic scale, only the 
seventh being discordant.-* The Lol^aiiga of Madagascar is 
described as " a kind of native guitar," with four strings and a 
wooden body grotesquely carved, painted and decorated with 
feathers. The Rev. Wm. Ellis relates that he has often seen more 
than a hundred men dragging a single tree past his house, 
" keeping time with the Lokanga played on the way before 
them." ' 

'Burton, ii. p. 293. = Ibid. ' Schweinfurlh (i. p. 413) gives a picture of this lyre. 

■tElson, p. 263. ^Quoted by Engel, p. 151. 



Instnnucnts of the African Tribes. 2 7 1 

A few negro tribes possess a sort of rude violin. Thus some 
of the tribes of the Western Interior have an instrument in which 
the body is made of a gourd with a deerskin top, pierced with 
two sound-holes. It has a single string of cow's hair, and is 
played with a bow of the same material.' A similar instrument, 
which Major Laing heard played by a Griot or royal musician, at 
Semira, was strung with a horse-hair string, and had a compass 
of about four tones." 

So much for the instruments of the negroes of Africa. The 
character of their concerted music has already been sufficiently 
indicated by what has preceded. I cannot do better in closing 
than to quote the following eloquent description from Schwein- 
furth of one of the performances at the great festivals of the 
Bongo. "On those occasions," says this traveller,^ "the orches- 
tral results might fairly be described as cat's music run wild. 
Unwearied thumping of drums, the bellowings of gigantic trum- 
pets, for the manufacture of which great stems of trees come 
into requisition, interchanged by fits and starts with the shriller 
blasts of some smaller horns, make up the burden of the unearthly 
hubbub which re-echoes miles away along the desert." Yet it 
would not be fair to judge all negro concerts from this descrip- 
tion. The performances of the Karague, a tribe of the Lake 
region of Central Africa, are described as being far less barbarous 
than those of most of the other tribes of the interior. Speke " 
gives an interesting picture of one of these concerts in which 
seven performers are represented as taking part. One of them 
plays upon a harp with seven strings, a second upon a flute, a 
third upon a trumpet, and a fourth upon a Marimba. The fifth 
beats an enormous kettle-drum, while a pair of smaller drums are 
beaten by each of the two remaining performers. Who shall say 

'Bowdich, p. 363. =Ambros, i. p. 548, ^ i. p. 288. 

"Journal of the Discovery of the Source of the Nile, p. 212. Fetis (i. p. 38) reproduces this picture on 
a larger scale. 



272 Musical InstruiJicnts and their Homes. 

that such a representation as this does not bear witness to a 
musical sense quite as ad\'anced as that evidenced by a certain 
Japanese picture already referred to," in which six instruments of 
percussion are balanced against a single flute ? 

' Siebold : Nippon, vol. ii., Plates, Pt. IV., No. XI. 



NORTH AMERICA. 




c 



I, L<?n 1 uror 






n I uror <; 
CO a c V n c . 



c Ver e 




of f^\^<^YY^'Ahy<L 




^^— c) 

> / ■ ) ^ ( 'y \ J 

V^ ^ ^-^ I ^ ^ o r^ ^ and 

^ ft) ^)e 



ofy'6. i'^ppy^ 



"'3 '^ 



€ Ve r 5 




J -J -Vr -^ [i_ATf^ut^,~ 5 2ii<^j yrto-2,r 






Y^C a^re. ^o^sUtych 



6. R attle Sh<iK 



/TV.. 



7 £race]£t Rattle 



6a fy f of fin 

Or e/i^ci* /id.] 




Rattle ( JH^oa, - r/p^- 1^ 

(5) Ji. 2.^ .'rv. 



9 



Its coTryc 7(SS 
J-forrc Ja^p/3er 



If 



'1 

6la^c) e of ^ 



a. 

to 



( 



a^-ZO - 2L<3 



'^ 






2-1^ m 



A 

r I s K ly i^/' o'^ 



10. o[o/e J^iube , (^c^tcryKo^- s^^^ ^ K' - Y^P'j 



■\ SD ecx 



e s 



3 



Qe.s 



v/ 



Jyo <-j ur\ Q 




\t\o[%jr\ 



001 



r\a Witl^ouf T/Ci'i ''n.S'^''''^^'A\ • 



cJ Instrument 



r'^y 



'dinm^fS 



II. 



yToU 



H ^ Woo '^ 



^^^^^J ^V^'^^ /j.rse/^air. "PUi^e} 



1 



l-h 



13. 

IS-. 




of ^ ij-lere nt co - 

koles y\e^^- f\e -fop , a^<3 "/-v/o 

cC. '1 'n . D -^ i-^ . -n)-izaT^^. Ver^ rare. 



7- 



nstrun^et^tc 

Jour)) A ^ttie , 
0^ ^00)) '=^•71 




If^e 



Heil 



05 



u ied An^ on 



■r/fe z: 



t'ms 






f nv. 



'n 



^ev 




7) 



C ir> /O ;\ h V, 



J), i~ 






^-n ce s 






8, 



1 



f{s^^r 



> 



Mexico , A Trite o[ JueU<?S^ :ft) accoTrio^nv 



^ u I 



Xo 



%h^ , 








a, C r S s 

JVe vv .^f ex I c 



i■^|c;< 



cC, 'Hm 



1 







uvrec) 



f'^v 



n H Te s 
D. ) in , 



ff:^t\ hie of 



6" i7\ ^ ^ 7 '">> 



flrry 



i 



11 



M^ 






- /Tv . O- 3 ;n . 



erica 



I-^. 



C 1-0 w^ 


^.ttU , 


C(^^r- 


:Br>;^/; 


c5q^^K , 




l)xy\cc J \3<ltlc ^ 



repre 5 enfinc? Y/^e 



s^sself in^ I'^nr ^ ^^'i^. Col, '^ ■ '^ 



in 



/l 3^ L J A Jn ^ U n 



fl3,) 



2 s~ 



2i ru ^ 
jy{ oc^e Call , hA^^^^e 




73 n hi J if Colc/)r|6i^ 



Trx^iainj; '^^^'s^'J A^'^^e . C^^^^U, c^./fU>.D.^ 







^€ ^e ^3 , 0(- J/Ch 



2^. (.ot\a C(3y-^ 



vef /jIl|' Dr^iJ 








<(. Ifh H in. 



yv: '5" I m. 







I. 



ouitar 




'^' . ^'"^ ^^^^ j^^^ .n ar- 
o fr u n q W 1 1 C i, 



c ro 



^5- ^rrvnj w,tf^ .e„ 



^^JS 'j J^^. ^. ^^A. ^,^, 



^' ^i I1^. 



1 



/P 



3. 



Mors [\\, 




^n 



^1 ^ 



U \\r Oh-U 

5 Wir 



re. sh~]y^Q, 






vP. 



Mj -/Uje^ v//)^ 



^^\^ll ^lec^^^ ^ ^j:, ^ 







iSfV" ''A 



W'l-r e. 5^itioc 



J/ 

Vepre cent" 3^ 




5". S^^ A 



pe^f (-f, Ij^l. 3 In , »C, 3 -ff, ^ , ;, , VVT 



)1 ohf^c^ shci{ A Xireh 6 \r 



lb' J 1^. 



^( 






c5^n^' 



:b 



2k I 



J 




d 



c^r'^' 



fu 



^' )) ^- CA 5tgC >V7 ^istiec jyji^^c of cUy, J^t^n^ 



'n 




J C oUl^O 2^C 3,r\ . cC. c. /^ ,', 



pro 6 2k6lv ^^0 ^^^ 






"\ 




\ /<inJ of J\2,r\C\ ^ or ri>.tll(i ^ tr^^U 

(:^5fiiu CAY , ^'K /;^r^ 

U^e^ Gv| '^<\<? Cy€oU ^^ Colored 




:i. 



"S^ru^ 91 



■3^ 



5, JL'iro 3. 



Wi/l{ y^otcf^^r m cot 





Ucsi 



^. Jutro 



h 



)T^-a.^ 



dC, l( in. Creole . 
loixt} "^Vl ^Oi^t"^ 

jf(c/< ir i'^: ^ a. pec) , 



'^ccc)r| p 3^K^ t^e 5'c/l^2^r. X. /6 ,; 



6^ 







a \/oo^eu i(?p 



ffe /^e^aj Co/ereT v/,>^ (^,Ve . ^- '3 'k , v. a ,\ 



XVI. 

MUSIC OF THE NORTH AMERICAN 

INDIANS. 

O part of the history of savage music is more interestin 



.■-.^■.^■J^iy^A'TOT 






K-j ■fj^T);=r^->> 



S) 



than that which treats of the music of the various Indian 
tribes of North America. Yet perhaps there is no subject 
in all musical history of which so little is known. " One of the 
first things we hear of the Indians, after their discovery," says 
Schoolcraft, " is their proneness to singing and dancing. But how- 
ever characteristic these traits may be, and we think they are 
eminently so, it has fallen to the lot of but few to put on record 
specimens which may be appealed to as evidences of the current 
opinion on these heads. With favorable opportunities of observa- 
tion among the tribes, we have but to add our testimony to the 
difficulties of making collections in these departments which shall 
not compromise the intellectual character of the tribes, whose efforts 
are always oral, and very commonly extemporaneous." ' These 
words were written forty years ago by the best living authority on 
all matters connected with the North American Indians. I can 
only attempt here to give the reader a general idea of the rich 
field which still waits to be explored. 

As in the case of the negroes of Africa, so among the various 
Indian tribes of North America, we find very different degrees 
of musical development. While it may be said with confidence 
that all Indians are fond of music of some kind, the character of 

' The Indian in his Wigwam, p. 221. 



292 Musical Listnnnciifs and their Homes. 

that music varies greatly with the locality and the tribe. The 
rude natives of Alaska content themselves with rattles and drums. 
As we proceed southward, wind instruments come into use. The 
Haidas of the west coast of British America have a great variety 
of rude wooden pipes and flutes. Among the Sioux or Dakotas 
we find flageolets with six and seven finger-holes. Whereas, with 
many other tribes, musical instruments are used only to accompany 
singing and the dance, the orchestral performances of the Dakotas 
are quite elaborate. The Apaches possess a rude violin with one 
string, while the Pueblos of New Mexico are contented chiefly 
with instruments of percussion. Scarcely less marked are the 
differences in the character of the songs of the various tribes. 
Some are extremely monotonous, and contained within a very 
narrow compass. The range of others is no less than two octaves. 
In general we may say that the character of the music of any 
particular tribe is a very fair index of its general development. 

In view of such differences, it is difficult to make any satisfac- 
tory generalizations on the subject of Indian music. The remarks 
in the present chapter are necessarily of this character; and unless 
it is otherwise stated, are to be taken as applying chiefly to those 
tribes which, like the Sioux and the Apaches, have reached a 
relatively high state of musical development. 

The North American Indian is naturally a poet. His war 
songs "contain flights of the finest heroic sentiment, clothed in 
poetic imagery."' The addresses of his orators abound in eloquent 
and poetic thought. He is a wonderfully close observer of nature. 
" He pays a religious attention to every sound that strikes upon his 
ear; when the leaves softly shaken by the evening breeze, seem 
to sigh through the air, or when the tempest, bursting forth with 
fury, shakes the gigantic trees that crack like frail reeds. The 
chirping of birds, the cry of the wild beasts— in a word, all those 
sweet, grave, or imposing voices that animate the wilderness, are 

I Schoolcraft, p. 221. 



Mtisic of tJic North Aiiiciican hidians. 293 

so many musical lessons which he easily remembers." ' The great 
storehouse of his imagery is the heavens. " The clouds, the 
planets, the sun and moon, the phenomena of lightning, thunder, 
electricity, aerial sounds, electric or atmospheric, and the endless 
variety produced in the heavens by light and shade, and by ele- 
mental action, — these constitute the fruitful themes of allusion in 
his songs or poetic chants." ' 

The poetry of the Indian's nature finds special expression in 
his love songs. " When the son of a chief wishes to get married," 
says Domenech,^ " he takes his flute and goes at night towards 
the cabin wherein she rests whom he has chosen for his future 
spouse. He begins by playing a melancholy tune ; then he sings 
words of his own composition, which enumerate the charms of his 
beloved. He compares her to the sweet perfume of the wild 
flowers, to the pure water that flows from the rocks, to the grace- 
ful trees of the forests, and to the verdant banks of the river in 
which she bathes. He afterwards promises her a long series of 
happy days in his wigwam, until the hour when they should 
depart for the enchanted prairies where joy is without end. 
When the songs are ended, he commences with airs on the flute, 
which render as well as possible the sentiments that animate 
him." 

It is very difficult to reproduce in English the spirit of these 
Indian songs. The following specimen has, however, been very 
happily rendered by Domenech, and will serve excellently to 
illustrate the remarks that precede. It is the serenade of a 
young Indian to his beloved. 

" My dove's eye, listen to the sound of my flute ; 
Hearken to the voice of my songs, it is my voice. 
Do not blush : all thy thoughts are known to me. 
I have my magic shield, thou canst not escape. 

' Domenech : Seven Years' Residence in the Great Deserts of North America, ii. p. 146. 
= Schoolcraft, p. 224. ' ii. p. 14S. 



2 94 Musical Instruments and their Homes. 

"I shall always draw thee to me, even shouldest thou be 
In the most distant isle, beyond the great lakes. 

"The Great Spirit is for me, my betrothed. 
Hearken to the voice of my songs, it is my voice." " 

I quote also from the same author the following interesting 
experience in further illustration of what has been said as to the 
fondness of the Indian for nature, and its effect upon his musical 
conceptions. The writer had on one occasion taken refuge 
from a violent storm in an Indian wigwam. " Our host," he 
says, " was an Indian, with sparkling eyes, clad with a certain 
elegance, and wrapped majestically in a large fur cloak. Seated 
close to the fire, which cast a reddish gleam through the interior 
of his wigwam, he felt himself all at once seized with an irresist- 
ible desire to imitate the convulsions of nature and to sing his 
impressions. So, taking hold of a drum which hung near his 
bed, he beat a slight rolling resembling the distant sounds of 
the approaching storm ; then raising his voice to a shrill treble, 
which he knew how to soften when he pleased, he imitated the 
whistling of the air, the creaking of the branches dashing against 
one another, and the particular sound produced by dead leaves 
when accumulated in compact masses on the ground. By degrees 
the rollings of the drum became more frequent and louder, the 
chants more sonorous and shrill, and at last our Indian shrieked, 
howled and roared in a most frightful manner; he struggled and 
struck his instrument with extraordinary rapidity. It was a real 
tempest, to which nothing was wanting, not even the dismal howl- 
ing of the dogs, nor the bellowing of the affrighted buffaloes. 
One could not possibly carry further the talent of imitation." = 

The songs of the Indian are the natural expression of his 
feelings. Every event in life is celebrated with its appropriate 
song. The medicine man sings, or rather chants, as he performs 

■ Domenech, ii. p. 148. .-■ ;; p j^y 



Music of the North American Indians. 295 

his mysterious rites ; the chief incites his followers to battle with 
a song ; the warriors sing as they rush into the fray ; the hunters 
console themselves by singing for ill success in the chase ; the 
mother sings as she rocks her infant to sleep ; the youth 
expresses the depth of his affection by a song. " There is no 
feast and no religious ceremony among them," says Schoolcraft/ 
" which is not attended with dancing and songs." The character 
of special songs naturally varies greatly with the occasion. " The 
Indian chants," says Domenech," " are generally monotonous reci- 
tations stamped with a vague sadness, a kind of wailings in a 
minor key, which it would be impossible to translate literally 
without mutilating them or stripping them of their principal 
interest." They are usually improvised for the occasion. Thus, 
when warriors returning from an unsuccessful expedition desire 
to console themselves by singing, " the cleverest extemporize 
music and couplets, and at the end of each stanza all the com- 
pany repeat the first or the first two verses, in a tone full of 
languor and originality." ^ The death-chant for a fallen warrior 
is always an improvisation, " dictated by the circumstances which 
have inspired it." ■* The sacred or religious chants of the Indians 
are described by Domenech as being incoherent and fantastic. 
" Generally speaking," he says,^ " the second stanza appears to 
have no connection with the first, and the sound which unites 
them, when there is one, remains in the singer's mind." Far 
different is the character of the Indian war-songs. When a chief 
wishes to attack a neighboring tribe, he enlists the voluntary 
services of his warriors by couriers. " Then, in a preparatory 
ceremony, he extemporizes a few stanzas of lively, energetic 
poetry, which he sings with a fiery enthusiasm, gesticulating and 
accompanying himself with drums and raqnettes^ ^ A song of this 
kind must be anything but monotonous. Schoolcraft' has pre- 

' Indian in his Wigwam, p. 222. ^ ii. p. 149. ^ Il)i(l 

■» Ibid. ii. p. 162. 5 ii. p. 151. ''i.e., rattles. Domenech. ii. p 155. 

^ Information respecting the History, Condition, etc., of the Indian Tribes of tlie United States, vol. v. p. 562. 



296 Musical Insfnimcnts and tJicir Homes. 

served the words and the music of a Chippewa war-song, in which 
the range of notes was ahiiost two octaves. 

A striking feature of the Indian songs is their rhythmic char- 
acter. This is only what we might be led to expect, both from 
the fondness of the Indian for instruments of percussion, and the 
important place in his life occupied by the dance. 

"It is certain," says Schoolcraft,' "that the Indian ear is exact 
in noting musical sounds and in marking and beating time. But 
little observation at their dances will be sufficient to establish this 
fact. Nor is it less certain, by attention to the philology of their 
language, that they are exact in their laws of euphony and syllabi- 
cal quantity. How this remark may consist with the use of 
unmeasured and fluctuating poetry in their songs it may require 
studied attention to answer. It is to be observed, however, that 
these songs are rather recited or chanted than sung. . . . Most 
of the graver pieces which have been written out are arranged in 
metres of sixes, sevens, and eights. The lighter chants are in 
threes and fours, and consist of iambics and trochees irregularly." 

Among the Ahts of Vancouver Island, " the required expression 
is usually given by uttering the sounds in quick or slow suc- 
cession, rather than by any attempt at musical cadence." ° Yet 
the accuracy of their ear is attested by the fact that after a few 
hearings they are able to reproduce perfectly both the notes and 
the expression of European songs. 

The Indians accompany most of their songs with the free use 
of instruments of percussion, especially the drum and the rattle. 
Catlin speaks of the use of drums by the Sioux to accompany 
" their numerous and never-ending songs of amusement, thanks- 
giving, and medicine, or nietair ^ The same traveller witnessed 
some voluntary tortures at a certain religious ceremony of the 
Mandans, during part of which the music was furnished by " four 

■ Indian in his Wigwam, p. 225. = Sproat : Scenes and Studies of Savage Life, p. 64. 

' Illustrations of the Manners, Customs, etc., of the North American Indians, i. p. 241. 



Music of the North Aincrican Indians. 297 

very aged and patriarchal looking men, " who sang at the highest 
possible pitch, accompanying themselves by " thumping with mal- 
lets or drumsticks " upon four sacks full of water, while a fifth 
" brandished and shook the ceti-ua-dces, or rattles." ' Even those 
tribes which possess numerous and comparatively perfect wind 
instruments use them only for solo purposes, never as instruments 
of accompaniment." The Indian lover precedes his song by a pre- 
lude upon the flute, but he relies for his most potent effects upon 
the unaided charms of his voice. Whether the Apaches use their 
violin as an instrument of accompaniment or not I am unable to 
state, though the former would seem probable. 

One of the most potent factors in the life of the Indian is 
the dance. Singing and dancing are so closely connected in his 
thought, that it is almost impossible to separate them. " Danc- 
ing," says Schoolcraft, " is interwoven throughout the whole 
texture of Indian society, so that there is scarcely an event, 
important or trivial, private or public, which is not connected, 
more or less intimately, with this rite. The instances where sing- 
ing is adopted, without dancing, are nearly all confined to occur- 
rences of a domestic character." =' The dance is practised both as 
a religious ceremony and a secular amusement. " Thanks are 
thus expressed for success in hunting, for triumphs in war, and 
for ordinary providential cares. Public opinion is called to 
pressing objects by a dance, at which addresses are made, and 
moral instruction is given to the young, in the case of their being 
assembled at social feasts and dances. Dancing is indeed the 
common resource whenever the mass of the Indian mind is to 
be acted on."" It is almost invariably accompanied by the beat- 
ing of drums and the shaking of rattles, as well as by the singing 
of the performers. The Apache dances, which last from sunrise 

' i. p. 165. 

= An exception, however, must be made in tlie case of the whistle, which is often used in orchestral music. 

3 Indian in his Wigwam, p. 222. 'Ibid. p. 222. 



29S Musical Instniincufs and their Homes. 

to sunset, are accompanied by the beating of drums and tom- 
toms. " Old squaws and young children dance till they can 
stand it no longer, and cease from exhaustion and fatigue ; a ces- 
sation of but a few moments, and they are up and at it again." ' 
Among some tribes a notched stick is used to keep time, which 
is " drawn on a resisting medium, being supported by a reversed 
])an or the shell of a gourd." ' A curious dance of the Moquis of 
New Mexico, in which twenty men and twenty women, all fantas- 
tically dressed, took part, is thus described by Schoolcraft.' The 
pertormers carried in their hands gourds filled Avith small peb- 
bles, which they rattled to keep time to the dancing. " They all 
furnished their own music, and a most strange sound it was, 
resembling very much the noise, on a large scale, of a swarm of 
blue-bottle flies in an empty hogshead. Each one was rolling 
out aw, aw, aw, in a deep bass tone ; and the sound coming 
through a hollow visor, produced the effect described." At the 
dances of the Ahts of Vancouver Island, " the spectators sing, and 
beat time on their wooden dishes and bearskin drums."" In some 
cases, the performers join in the song themselves.^ The ordinary 
dances of the Indian tribes of the United States are too well 
known to need description. 

One of the most important figures in connection with Indian 
music is that of the prophet or medicine man. " These men," says 
Schoolcraft,' " more than any other class, have cultivated their 
national songs and dances, and may be regarded as the skalds or 
poets of the tribes. They are generally the composers of the 
songs, and the leaders in the dance and ceremonies, and it is 
found that their memories are the best stored, not only with the 
sacred songs and chants, but also with the traditions and general 
lore of the tribes." Their special instruments are the drum and 

' Schwatka : Among the Apaches ; Century Mlagazine, May, 1S87. 

= Schoolcraft: Information respecting . . . the Indian Tribes, ii. p. 514. ? Ibid iv p 83 

' ^P™"'' P- ^^- = Ib'^- P- 67. ^ Indian m his Wigwam, p. 222! 



Music of the North American Indians. 299 

the rattle. The use of the former by the sorcerers of Lapland 
and Greenland has already been referred to.' The Shamans or 
conjurers of Alaska have drums sometimes three feet in diameter, 
and rattles of a peculiar shape and construction, presently to be 
described. Among the Ahts are found sorcerers whose perform- 
ances are thus described by Sproat:' "The whole gamut of the 
most frightful noises which the human voice, the collision of hard 
substances, and the beating of bearskin drums can produce, is 
run up and down by them with ease. The howling of the Aht 
sorcerers is perfectly demoniacal ; no wild beast could utter sounds 
so calculated to strike sudden terror into the heart." The per- 
formances of the medicine men of the Indian tribes of the United 
States are too familiar to need description here. 

In this connection I may mention a class of bards or minstrels 
found among the Indians of the west coast of British America. 
" In almost every tribe," says Sproat,^ " there is an old man who 
sings war-chants and songs of praise at public feasts. One old 
man from Klah-oh-quaht Sound, blind from age, accompanied by 
his two sons who lead him about, visits the different tribes of his 
own nation, the Aht, every summer. ... On landing at a camp, 
this gray-haired minstrel praises the tribe and the chief, and makes 
a song to which they listen quite pleased, and some one, whose 
benevolence or whose vanity has been touched, gives him a pres- 
ent." Though in reality one of the richest men in the tribe, he 
sings in quite pathetic fashion of his poverty. " I have come far," 
he says, "and am old, and will need blankets for the winter." 
This venerable beggar will sing for an hour at a time, if enough 
gifts are forthcoming. If not, he asks for them "in most unbard- 
like manner." 

A word in conclusion as to the instrumental music of the 
Indians. As might be expected, this occupies a relatively unim- 

' Schoolcraft (Information, etc., i. p. 425) gives a drawing of a Lapland sorcerer's drum, on which are 
inscribed no less than 150 talismanic figures. ° p. 170. ^ P- ^4- 



300 Musical Instruments and their Homes. 

portant place. I have already stated that wind instruments are 
principally used for solo purposes, the most important being the 
love-flute or flageolet, the moose-call, and the war-fife/ The drum 
also, though usually associated with the voice, is occasionally used 
as a solo instrument. Orchestral performances are common, but 
almost always take place in connection with singing and dancing. 
On such occasions, as has already been said, instruments of per- 
cussion are principally used. In the Dakota orchestra, however, 
wind instruments have an important place. A full band usually 
consists of three drums, from three to twelve wind instruments, 
from three to twenty different kinds of rattles, and as many tap- 
pers.' The performances of such an orchestra often continue for 
days and weeks at a time. I have been informed by Dr. Sweeny 
that he once heard a tune two weeks long, which had already been 
going on ten days before he arrived at the performance, and lasted 
three weeks after he left. The impression produced upon his ear 
by this lengthy entertainment was anything but pleasing. " It 
seemed to me," he remarked in describing his impressions after- 
wards, " that the less harmony there was among the instruments, 
the more there was among the performers." Yet he speaks in 
emphatic terms of the rhythmic character of the whole performance. 
This testimony, therefore, goes to confirm the fact which has already 
been established, that the distinguishing characteristic of savage 
music, wherever found, whether in the islands of the Pacific, the 
interior of Africa, or among the mountains and prairies of our 
own continent, is a prominence of the rhythmic as contrasted 
with the melodic element. 

■ A special description of each of these will be given in the following chapter. 
^ The nature of the tapper will be explained in the following chapter. 



XVII. 

MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS OF NORTH 

AMERICA. 

N taking up the subject of the musical instruments of 
North America, I shall consider, first, the instruments of 
Alaska ; second, those of the Indians of British America ; 
third, those of the tribes of the United States, especially of the 
Dakotas, the Apaches, and the Pueblos, and finally those of the 
natives of Mexico. 

I. The only instrument of the Eskimos who live along the 
north coast of Alaska is the drum. This consists of a circle of 
wood, usually between twelve and eighteen inches in diameter, 
over which a head of skin is tightly stretched and lashed with a 
cord of braided sinews. Two specimens of this kind are shown in 
Figs. I and 3. In the first, called Ke'-l-yau, the handle is formed 
of a piece of bone, fastened to the hoop with whalebone. In the 
second, the handle is of wood, and is held in place by a cord of 
sinews. The instrument is held in the left hand, and played by 
beating the back of the hoop with a stick. Similar drums are 
found among almost all northern peoples, especially among the 
Laplanders and the Greenlanders. In describing the dances of the 
latter, Cranz says : " Their only instrument is the drum, which is 
made of a circle of wood or of whalebone, about two fingers 
broad, covered on one side only with a thin piece of hide, or of 
the skin of the whale's tongue. It is somewhat oval in shape, 
about a foot and a half in diameter, and is furnished with a 
handle by which to hold it. This the Greenlander takes in his 



302 Musical Instruments and their Homes. 

left hand, and beats with a httle stick upon the under surface of 
the hoop, skipping- up a Httle way into the air at every stroke, 
yet so as never to move from one spot, and making all sorts of 
wonderful motions with his head and with his whole body — and 
all this in four-four time, two strokes of the drum falling to 
every quarter beat."' At the same time he sings of the seal-hunt, 
celebrates the deeds of his ancestors, or expresses his joy at the 
return of the sun, the voices of the bystanders furnishing a sort 
of running accompaniment to the whole. 

Passing now to the Indians proper, we find that the more 
northern tribes are contented solely with instruments of percussion. 
It is true that among the Thlinkets various wind instruments may 
be found, but in the opinion of the best authorities' these have all 
been introduced from the more southern tribes. The native instru- 
ments of the Alaskan Indian are the drum and the rattle. The 
first consists either of a wooden box or of skin stretched on a 
circular frame of wood.^ " The drum," says Lieut. Emmons, " is 
an important feature in the practice of Shamanism, "* as indeed it 
is present on all ceremonial occasions to accompany the songs and 
chants." Its size varies greatly. A large Shaman's drum from 
Chilcat, contained in the American Museum of Natural History, is 
not less than three feet in diameter, while the same collection 
contains also a small specimen which is not more than seven 
inches in diameter. The drumstick of the former is made of a 
thin piece of wood bent back at the end so as to form a loop, and 
ornamented with eagle's feathers. 

The rattle plays an important part in the music and in the life 
of the Alaskan Indian. It is used by the Shamans in their mys- 
terious rites and by the chiefs in their dances. " From the earliest 
accounts we have of the natives of the northwest coast," says 

' Historic von Groiiland, p. 229 

= So Lieut. Enimnns, in tine unpublished Catalogue of his valuable collection in the American Museum of 
Natural History, New York City. 

3 Emmons. 4 The Shaman is the Alaskan prophet or medicine man. 



Musical Instrtiments of Noith America. 303 

Lieut. Emmons, " rattles in their various forms are used on all 
occasions of ceremony and dancing, and so ancient is this use that 
they can account for them only as something that their ancestors 
have handed down to them. The following tradition was given 
by a Sitka native : ' In the first days of life an old man with 
his nephew lived in the Nass River country. The nephew was 
idle and worthless, and would spend his days sleeping and sitting 
about. At last the uncle became provoked, and put an axe in 
the nephew's hand, and sent him out in the wood to cut down a 
tree for fire-wood. The boy wandered out, and having selected 
a large tree, felled it, and commenced splitting it up, when in the 
centre he discovered a box, and upon opening it found a rattle, 
waist cloth, and other dancing materials. These he took back to 
the old man, who immediately put them into use, and from these 
all others were copied by visitors.' " ' 

There are many different varieties of the rattle. That used by 
the chiefs in their dances seems to be conventional in form. " It 
is generally in the form of a crow, the under half carved to repre- 
sent an owl, and on the back a dead man with protruding tongue, 
and such other figures as the frog, land otter, kingfisher, etc." ' In 
general dances the rattle is used not only by the chiefs, but also 
by all the members of the tribe, men, women, and children alike. 

The rattle is an indispensable part of the Shaman's furnishing. 
He uses it both in his exhibition dances, and when treating the 
sick. In its construction he follows his own fancy. Sometimes 
it is carved " to represent the crow, or the oyster-catcher, and on 
the outside the land otter, mountain goat, mink, devil-fish, and 
the witches and spirits, all of which are supposed to assist him 
in his practice." It is usually ornamented with the skin of the 
ermine. Some of the Shaman rattles represent Knsh-tar-kar, or 
"Spirit of the drowned," a creature midway between man and 
otter, who cannot sing, but only whistle, and is supposed to be 

' Catalogue. = Ibid. Cf. the Haida Rattle, Fig. 23, North America. 



304 iMusical Instruments and their Homes. 

always playin.^ tricks on mortals. Many of the Shaman rattles 
are very old, some being supposed to date back more than a hun- 
dred years. . 

A curious rattle from Rasbonisky, Alaska, is represented m 
Fig. 2 (Miscellaneous). This consists of a long stick ornamented 
with feathers, to which is attached, by a cord of sinews, a small 
wooden box filled with pebbles.' Its use is confined to religious 

ceremonies. 

In addition to the drum and the rattle, the Shamans use in 
their ceremonies a number of wooden sticks. These are distributed 
to the various members of the Shaman's family, and are beaten by 
them upon the floor of the house in which he is to practise, as 
an accompaniment to the drum and the chant of the Shaman 

himself ' 

A rude stringed instrument from Yac-a-tat, Alaska, is repre- 
sented in Fig. 2. The body of this is made of thin pieces of 
wood, neatly fastened together, and painted or stained with a 
variety of rude figures in red and blue. Two strings pass over a 
low bridge and are fastened to the handle by a single key. 
Although this instrument was obtained from a tribe of Indians 
who are rarely visited by a white man, it seems quite inconceivable 
that a form so far advanced, and so entirely unparalleled among 
the instruments found in other parts of Alaska, should have been 
developed by these Indians without external assistance. It is 
probably a rude copy of a European instrument carried to that 
region by some white man years ago.^ 

^ Not seeds, as erroneously stated in the description accompanying the drawing. - Emmons. 

3 Though there is no evidence that it is intended to be played with a bow, I incline to think it copied after a 
violin, which instrument it resembles in general shape, especiaiiy in the handle. 

Note. — While this volume was passing through the press, I received, through the kindness of Mr. Fdliott F. 
Shepard, two stringed instruments of similar character from the same locality. The larger was two feet long by 
ten inches broad, and the smaller one foot long by five inches broad. Both alike were strung with two strings, each 
of wliich, however, was attached to its special peg. Tl j gentleman who forwarded the specimens expresses the 
opinion that the Indian who made them " must have seen something of the kind on some whaler or some Russian 
vessel when they had possession of the country," thus confirming the opinion expressed above. 



Musical Instniniciits of Nortli America. 305 

II. As we move southward and reach the tribes of the west 
coast of British America, we find them using- drums and rattles of 
the same kind as their northern neighbors. Thus the dance-rattles 
of the Haida Indians of British Columbia (Fig;s. 22 and 23) are 
almost identical with those which have been described as found 
among the Thlinkets of Alaska. The bearskin drums of the Ahts 
have already been referred to. We find also among the Haida 
Indians a great number of curious wooden pipes and wind instru- 
ments. These are of different kinds and shapes, varying in length 
from a few inches to two or three feet. One of the smaller 
specimens is shown in Fig. 24. This consists of a funnel-shaped 
piece of wood, about seven inches long, through the interior of 
which run three nearly parallel holes, which come together at the 
top, and are furnished with a common mouth-piece. Other instru- 
ments of the same kind are found of various lengths, some with 
a single opening, others with more than one ; some consisting of 
a single tube, others branching out at the base into two : all alike 
are furnished with a mouth-piece of split wood, made on the prin- 
ciple of the oboe.' The mouth-piece of the specimen in the present 
collection has unfortunately been lost. Besides pipes of this kind, 
the Haidas possess also a small instrument with two tubes on 
the syrinx principle, and a well-constructed flute with four finger- 
holes. The Emmons collection contains also a very curious wind 
instrument, in which the wind, instead of being furnished by the 
breath of the performer, is supplied by the action of a small bel- 
lows of wood and skin. 

III. Turning now to the Indian tribes of the United States, I 
take up first the instruments of the Sioux or Dakotas. These 
consist of drums, rattles, tappers, whistles, flutes, and flageolets. 

The Sioux drums rarely exceed eighteen inches in diameter. 
They are of three kinds : the war drum, the medicine man's drum, 
and the common drum. The first consists of a frame of wood, 

" A large number of these instruments are contained in the Emmons collection of Alaskan curiosities. 



3o6 Musical Instruments and their Homes. 

furnished with a single head of skin. In order to secure the 
proper or approved tone, the head is moistened. " The effect," 
says Dr. Sweeny,' " is particularly weird and awful ; the sound 
seems as if it were smothered, and yet pervades the air — you feel 
it as much as hear it. It can be heard in the woods a long 
distance, and yet when you are close to it, it seems as far away 
as ever." The war drum is usually painted black, or at least 
decorated on the sides and back with mysterious black figures. 
It is beaten with a curved drumstick of the same shape as that 
used by the Shamans of Alaska. The Indians attribute to this 
drum a great antiquity, and claim that it has not changed in form 
since the earliest days. 

The conjurer's or medicine man's drum is shown in Fig. i. 
This has two heads, which are usually profusely smeared with ver- 
milion. It rarely exceeds a foot in diameter. It is never moist- 
ened, like the war drum, and is beaten with a drumstick of wood, 
with a head of hollow rawhide. 

The common or layman's drum may be of two kinds. In the 
first, which differs little in shape from our own drum, the frame 
consists of an empty keg covered on both sides with skin. The 
second differs from the conjurer's drum only in being larger and 
thicker. A fine specimen of this kind, with a remarkably soft and 
sweet tone, is shown in Fig. i (Miscellaneous). The common 
drum is usually undecorated, or at least only with a few mysteri- 
ous pictographs, the meaning of which is known only to the artist 
who makes them. So great is the popularity of this instrument, 
that on entering an Indian village at any time, the traveller will 
be almost sure to be greeted by the tones of at least two or 
three of these drums. " The fact is," remarks Dr. Sweeny, 
" Indians are nervous and excitable, and when one of them feels 
the need of a sedative, he takes his drum, pulls down and fastens 

■ I quote here and elsewhere from an unpublished paper by Dr. Sweeny, of St. Paul, Minn., which he has 
very kindly furnished me for the present purpose. 



Musical Iiistniments of North America. 307 

the door-curtain of his lodge, to let the world know he is engaged 
and not to be disturbed, retires to the seat of honor (furthest from 
the door), and with his drum between his knees, pounds and sings 
himself into the desired condition of placidity and enjoyable state 
of health." 

Hardly second in importance to the drum in the estimation of 
the Sioux is the rattle. It would be quite impossible even to 
enumerate all the different varieties of this instrument. All sorts 
of materials are used in its construction — wood, bits of copper 
and tin, bells, thimbles, pieces of horn, elk tusks, deer toes, bones, 
wampum, quills, turtle shells, and even the rattles of the rattle- 
snake. Three rather picturesque specimens are shown in Figs. 4, 
5 and 6. Fig. 7 is a bracelet rattle, consisting of a piece of raw- 
hide, to which are attached bits of tin and bone. This is fastened 
about the wrist, and gives a rhythmic sound, as the hand is moved 
up and down in regular time. 

The most important of the Sioux rattles is that of the conjurer 
or medicine man. This he usually makes himself with very dark 
and mysterious ceremonies. Special rattles are prepared for special 
occasions, each having somewhere about it an image or images of 
the special Wa-kon (spirit), who is supposed to preside over the 
performance at which it is to be used. The most common form 
of the conjurer's rattle is shown in Fig. 3. " This is made of 
rawhide, stretched over a tightly-blown bladder, which contains 
pebbles and charms of various kinds, and some red-colored objects 
(for red is the sacred or mysterious color) which impart Wa-kon, 
and make it efficacious ' medicine.' " ' Another form of the con- 
jurer's rattle is shown in Fig. 2. 

One of the most important instruments in the Sioux orchestra 
is the Tapper. This is the name given by Dr. Sweeny to " a 
smooth, hard rod about twelve or eighteen inches long, held 
lightly with the fingers of the right hand, and tapped briskly upon 

■ Sweeny. 



3o8 Musical lustniiucnts and tJicir Homes. 

some sonorous object, such as the back of a bow, a pipe-stem, 
the blade of a tomahawk or a buffalo rib. The tapper is made 
sometimes of wood and sometimes of horn (Fig. 9). In some 
-cases it consists of a single rod; in others, of a double, or even 
of a triple one. The triple tapper gives to the note a peculiar 
shake. The intervals between the blows are short yet distinctly 
appreciable, and in the lift and motion to the right, the springing 
together of the rods repeats the notes in a softer tone and 
different key. The object upon which the tapper is struck also 
gives out its peculiar tone, so there are several distinct notes 
produced at a single stroke." ' By moving the forefinger up the 
blade of the tomahawk, towards the edge, the note is sharpened, 
and by taking the finger from the blade a low and ringing note 
results. The effect produced by ten or twelve of these tappers, 
combined with a number of rattles, drums and whistles, and with 
the chanting of many low-pitched voices, must certainly be very 
curious and striking. 

It remains to consider the wind instruments of the Sioux. 
One of the most peculiar of these is the Long Flute or Moose- 
Call [He-ha-kha-zo-zo) (Fig. 8), the notes of which are supposed 
to resemble " the whistling tones of the love-sick elk." This 
instrument is from three to four feet in length. " It has no keys 
or holes, except where the reed is placed, which is made of birch 
bark, and secured to the body of the wooden instrument by glue 
and finely-wrapped sinews. The compass is about an octave, and 
the scale is ascended by the force of the breath. On the water it 
can be heard a long distance, and its sound is very sweet, but 
rather melancholy and depressing when heard in the twilight still- 
ness." ° 

The Love-flute [Cho-tonkd) of the Dakotas has been more 

' Sweeny. 

= Ibid. This seems to be the same instrument referred to by Catlin as the " mystery whistle." whose 
peculiarly sweet tone could be elicited only by the Indians themselves (North American Indians, Letter 30). 



Musical Instruments of North America. 309 

than once referred to. (See Fig. 10.) This is a " kind of iiageolet 
without a reed," which produces a " clear, distinct, mellow, vibratory 
note." It is made of a single piece of wood, and is furnished 
with six finger-holes. Melodies produced by the performers upon 
this instrument are said by Dr. Sweeny to resemble in character 
many Scotch and Irish airs. No young Indian ever goes wooing 
without the Cho-tonka. Standing before the cabin of his lady- 
love, he will blow " for hours together and from day to day." " 
The use of this instrument is common to many other tribes. An 
Apache specimen is shown in Fig. 14. In some cases it is made 
of two pieces of wood, instead of one. Thus the Pib-be-gwim , 
described by Schoolcraft," consists of " semi-cylindrical pieces of 
cedar glued together. Often they are further bound together by 
rings of pewter. The Chippewas frequently draw a snake's skin 
over the cedar tube." The number of finger-holes varies from 
five to seven. 

The last of the Sioux wind instruments is a rude whistle 
made of a hollow bone, with two or three holes, varying in size 
and tone to suit the taste of the performer. This is a very 
popular instrument, forming a necessary part of every Sioux 
orchestra. " Other whistles are made of bones, quills and wooden 
cylinders (used as a boy blows over the end of a key), sometimes 
singly and sometimes in pairs or three," ^ but never more than 
three together. 

Catlin mentions also a war-whistle, which is used exclusively 
by the chiefs. This is made of a piece of bone, and may be blown 
through either end indifferently. It yields two distinct tones, 
according as it is blown through one end or the other.'' 

'Catlin, Letter 30, where the same instrument is described as the Winnebago Courting Flute. 

^ii. p. 514. 3 Sweeny. 

"t North American Indians, Letter 30. The same instrument is described by Domenech (ii. p. 139), who says 
that it is usually carried suspended from the neck or underclothes. By blowing at one end, you draw from it a shrill 
note, which serves as the signal for attack, and by blowing at the other extremity, the instrument produces a softer 
sound, which indicates the rallying or the retreat. 



3IO Musical Instruments and their Homes. 

The drums, rattles, and wind instruments of the Apaches of 
Arizona are similar in character to those of the Sioux. A small 
flute, consisting of a reed pierced with four finger-holes, two in 
the middle and two near the top, is shown in Fig. 15. This is, 
however, very rare, and it is almost impossible to procure a 
specimen. 

The Apaches also possess a small violin, with a single string. 
(See I-igs. 11, 12,' and 13.) The body is made of a piece of soft 
wood, rounded and hollowed, and usually ornamented with simple 
figures or with bands of different colors. A narrow opening in 
the lower part, directly beneath the string, serves as a sound hole. 
The length of the body varies from twelve to fifteen inches. The 
string is made of a number of horse-hairs, passing over a little 
bridge at the lower end, and fastened to a small round piece of 
wood, which passes through the upper part of the body and serves 
as a key. The small specimen (Fig. 11) has no bridge, but instead 
is furnished with two such keys, one at each end. The bow, which 
rarely exceeds ten inches in length, is furnished with a coarse 
string of horsehair. 

The instruments of the Pueblos of Arizona and New Mexico 
are principally rattles of different kinds, though Domenech = speaks 
of the Moquis^ as using a "pastoral flute." The most common form 
of rattle is a gourd filled with small stones. (See Figs. 16, 17, and 
18.) In their dances they often keep time by moving a wand of 
willow along the unequal surface of a notched stick. (See Fig. 19, 
also Fig. 5, Mexico.^) Fig. 20 is probably a leg rattle. This is 
made of the shell of a turtle, to which are attached by strips of 
rawhide a number of bits of bone, horn, etc. It is fastened above 
the knee by a cord of rawhide, and like the dancing-bells of the 
Hindus, sounds in time with the motions of the dancer's body. 

Fig. 21 represents a rude bell made out of the horn of a Rocky 

■ Fig. 12, though coming from Florida, is probably of Apache origin. = ii. p. 139. 

5 A tribe of Tueblos. < The same principle has already been noticed in the Vu or tiger-box of China. 



Mtisical Ijistmnnents of North America. 3 1 1 

Mountain sheep. The clapper consists of a small stone fastened 
to the end of a strip of rawhide. 

IV. In considering the musical instruments of Mexico, we must 
distinguish three different classes. The first consists of those which 
have been introduced by the European invaders. To this class 
belong Figs, i, 3, and 4, in the Catalogue. The second consists 
of the instruments of native origin now in actual use. Of these, 
drums and rattles are the most common. Pottery whistles, flutes, 
and bells are also found. (See Fig. 2.) Engel ' also mentions a 
long wooden trumpet called Acocotl, or Clarin. " This consists of a 
very thin tube, from eight to ten feet in length, and generally not 
quite straight, but with some irregular curves. This tube, which 
is often not thicker than a couple of inches in diameter, terminates 
at one end in a sort of ' bell,' and has at the other end a small 
mouth-piece, resembling in shape that of a clarionet. The tube is 
made of the dry stalk of a plant which is common in Mexico, 
and which likewise the Indians call Acocotl. The most singular 
characteristic of the instrument is, that the performer does not blow 
into it, but inhales the air through it, or rather he produces the 
sound by sucking the mouth-piece. It is said to require strong 
lungs to perform on the Acocotl effectively, according to Indian 
notions of taste." 

The third class of Mexican musical instruments consists of the 
relics which have been preserved in the various mounds and pyra- 
mids of the Aztecs. To this class belong the specimens shown in 
Figs. 6 to 9. I cannot attempt here to discuss the interesting 
subject of the music of the Aztecs,^ but will content myself with 
remarking that this wonderful people undoubtedly possessed a great 
variety both of wind instruments and instruments of percussion. 
Most of the specimens which have come down to us are of the 
former class, consisting principally of flutes and whistles of pot- 

' Musical Instruments, etc., p. 73. 

= For information on this subject the reader is referred to Engel, pp. 65-89, and Rowbotham, i. pp. 327-342. 



3 I 2 Musical Instrmnents and their Homes. 

tery or bone. These are found of all possible shapes, — some with 
finger-holes and some without. The following interesting pas- 
sage from Rowbotham will give the reader some idea of the variety 
in the character and the form of these early Mexican instruments : ' 
" They made their whistles," he says, " in the shape of birds, ' 
frogs, men's heads ; their teponaztlis, even the ordinary ones, were 
covered with carvings, but the teponaztlis used in war — the war 
drums, as we should call them — were cut in the figure of a man 
crouching on his knees; his back was the drum, and he had eyes 
of bone and beautifully braided hair, ear-rings, necklaces, and 
boat-shaped shoes on his feet, all carved in a mulberry-colored 
wood, and highly burnished. And while other nations have been 
content to make their tambourines of a round frame covered 
with a piece of skin, the Mexicans made theirs in the form of 
a snake biting a tortoise's head. The snake was coiled up in 
three coils on the tortoise's back, and the arch of its neck served 
as a handle, and the belly of the tortoise served as the tam- 
bourine, being made of a flat slice of tortoise shell (the rest of 
the tortoise was of wood) and struck by the right hand, while the 
instrument itself was held by the left. And here was a peculiar 
thing about these snakes and tortoise tambourines : there were holes 
in the tortoise's back which served as stops, and were covered by 
the fingers. So delicate an ear had the Mexicans for all the 
shades of percussional sounds, that they could appreciate the vari- 
ation caused by the stopping and unstopping of a hole in the body 
of a tambourine no bigger than the hole of an ordinary flut^ 
stop. And they had rattles made in the shape of a snake crush- 
ing a toad in its coils; and things very much like the Chinese 
egg-instruments,^ that were really flageolets with two mouth-pieces, 
that could play a bass and a treble at the same time; and pipes 
and rattles combined in the form of three human heads, support- 

" '• P- 336. = See Fig, 9. 

3 A reference is proiiably intended to the Hsuan or Ocarina. (See p. 44.) 



Musical Instnmieiits of North America. 313 

ing a pedestal — the pedestal was the pipe, and the heads, which 
were filled with stones, were the rattles." 

This passage will give the reader some idea of the wealth 
of invention displayed by the Aztecs in the construction of their 
musical instruments. It is to be hoped that the interesting place 
occupied by this extraordinary people in musical history may soon 
be recognized by American students, and that our musical litera- 
ture may speedily be enriched by a monograph on Aztec music 
worthy of the importance of the subject. 

It is unnecessary to add anything here as to the musical 
instruments used by the negroes of Cuba, and of the West Indies 
generally. These are principally drums and rattles of various 
kinds. Some of the most important forms are shown in the Cata- 
logue, to which the reader is referred for a sufficient description. 



CENTRAL AND SOUTH AMERICA, 
AND OCEANICA. 



' \ 



A ! 1* 



\\MM k0hi, ' 




1. M 



O O d \[ 



Jk e o o ^ \f 



<^<'r( f -3^ i'ta J ^ -f- 



ev*^ 



-A\<) I ar^ c c7^ 



eA^f'erYi Co^f^ 'i^t<;'2^. oC. 5'/) 




601 






^ 



if 5 uj-e 
ly\ c re ^j' e t/J^ re-j 1^ a.-ry ee 



irt^/^ic/T Are 




PU^e/ 



vi/'ood TO 



^ # if' 
rr ^ T I 'Krcc 

•£■ (ft-. S. m. N. ^jf. f,^. )<,^j ^^^^ ^^^^ 1^ ^^ ^ 



IIT) € . 



'>>. 




f v/o J e n 



iry t(^e I -r^ tenor of v/ZT'^/T 



iT^ A koiiov/ pice 

3. i'lu^g , >v^^c)e 0^ 



3 f.njer-(ol^ 



7ni 



'^^5 




50 -k^ to ^ro 









TO 



L'A. 



ftj 






u n J 1 - 



i" J2vm^ 



^ f /na er - ToUc . X. i>X'A. 




mo I a 



!X-L±I\ 



T)r. 



vtv J 'yrv'2<()<f ^\r 'if^e 



7)\ J I 






u\ 1) . §" in« 








A 



D 



Z. 



rp2y . -Uruvn. 



'h 



•3 J- ''(e Cro Co ^ lie . 
c^. 3/ ,n . J), ^(n . Sulf of- 




n\ e 2k. . 



^,> 



_2\i v /'2,na c . -^^5^ 







'f 






vJ o h . 7f^ 



•'^ a p t^ a. . -A^ 






t, ' 



"'Ce JT-^ic'i^t^ \<'l^ . 



J?. >^ 






3, C 






J "" " "^ Trv ^ I 9^ . 



arc o f "tt^t. 



^ ee 






"/ -+fe 



XVIII. 

INSTRUMENTS OF CENTRAL AND 
SOUTH AMERICA AND OCEANICA. 

HE subject of the musical instruments of South America, 
Australia, and the various islands of the Pacific has 
never been satisfactorily treated. Indeed, I doubt whether 
the materials for such a treatment are in existence. It would 
be necessary to gather the requisite information from a very large 
number of scattered, inaccurate, and insufficient sources. The time 
at the writer's disposal has been so limited as to render such 
an attempt out of the question. I shall, therefore, add to the 
general statements made in the chapter on savage music only 
such special facts as may seem necessary in further explanation 
of the drawings in the Catalogue. 

The native instruments of Central America, like those of 
Mexico, are chiefly drums, rattles, whistles, and flutes. A small 
rattle from Costa Rica is shown in Fig. i. This consists of a 
gourd filled with pebbles. The handle is made of a small bone, 
and is held in place by a cord of sinews. The Marimba (Fig. 
2) has already been described. It is interesting as furnishing 
another case of the migration of a musical instrument from one 
part of the world to another. The Marimba, as we have seen, 
is an African instrument, yet it has been introduced by the negroes 
into Guatemala, where it is extremely popular, being looked upon 
by the natives as the national instrument. 

The musical instruments of South America are many and 
varied. Like those of Mexico, they may be divided into three 



324 Musical Instnnnents and their Homes. 



c 



lasses : first, those of native origin ; second, those of European 
introduction; and, third, the musical relics which have come 
down from the older civilization of Peru. These last resem- 
ble in character the remains of the Aztecs of Mexico. They con- 
sist principally of drums, rattles, pipes, flutes and whistles.' Sin- 
gularly enough, the Peruvians, like the Chinese, seem to have 
employed stone for musical purposes. " The traveller G. T. 
Vigne," says Engel,= "saw among the Indian antiquities preserved 
in the town of Cuzco, in Peru, a musical instrument of green 
sonorous stone, about a foot long, and an inch and a half wide, 
flat-sided, pointed at both ends, and arched at the back, where 
it was about a quarter of an inch thick, whence it diminished to 
an edge, like the blade of a knife. ... In the middle of 
the back was a small hole, through which a piece of string was 
passed ; and when suspended and struck by any hard substance, 
a singularly musical note was produced." 

The character of the instruments in present use among the 
natives of South America varies widely according to the tribe 
and the locality. The most important are drums, rattles, flutes, 
whistles, trumpets and Pandean pipes. A few representative 
specimens are shown in the Catalogue. 

Fig. 5 represents an Indian drum from Carthagena, Colom- 
bia. It is made of a single piece of cork wood, hollowed and 
covered with a head of skin, which is held in place by a rope made 
of the bark of the same tree. A number of wooden wedges are 
inserted between this rope and the body of the drum, so that by 
pushing these in further the tension of the skin may be increased. 

Fig. 4 shows a rude fife with four finger-holes, from the same 
locality. The mouth-piece is furnished with a tongue of split 
wood, after the fashion of the Syrian Mijwiz. (See Fig. 7, Syria.) 

A curious rattle from one of the remote valleys of the Andes 
is shown in Fig. i. This consists of a round wooden box, about 

' For further information on this subject, see Engel : Musical Instruments, etc, p. 65, seq. - Ibid. p. 81. 



Central and South America and Oceanica. 325 

nine inches long, in the interior of which a number of wooden 
pins are crossed at right angles, in such a way as to obstruct 
the free motion of the seed with which the box is filled. It is 
used to accompany singing and dancing, and the eftects pro- 
duced by a skilful performer are said to be quite remarkable. 

Fig. 3 shows a small wind instrument, made of a piece of 
hollowed bone. It has four finger-holes, and is ornamented with 
a number of carved lines. 

One of the most important instruments of South America is 
the Syrinx, or Pandean pipes. This is a very ancient instrument, 
a number of specimens having been discovered among the relics 
of the early Peruvians. The name given by them to this instru- 
ment was Huayra-p2tJnira. Two interesting specimens are 
described by Engel.' The first consists of " fourteen reed pipes, 
of a brownish color, tied together in two rows by means of thread 
so as to form a double set of seven reeds. Both sets are almost 
exactly of the same dimension, and are placed side by side. 
The shortest of these reeds measure three inches, and the longest 
six and a half inches. In one set they are open at the bottom, 
and in the other they are closed. Consequently octaves are pro- 
duced." The range of each set of pipes is ten notes. The other 
specimen is still more interesting. This is made of " a greenish 
stone, which is a species of talc. It contains eight pipes. . . . 
Its height is five and three-eighths inches, and its width six and 
a quarter inches. Four of the tubes have small lateral finger- 
holes, which, when closed, lower the pitch a semi-tone. These 
holes are on the second, fourth, sixth and seventh pipe. . . 
The other tubes have unalterable tones." ' The following is the 
succession of notes produced : E, F, F* G, G^*, A, C, C^f, D, E, 
F,A. 

Very different in character is the modern specimen from 
British Guiana, shown in Fig. 2. This consists of fourteen reed 

■ p. 70. 2 Ibid. 



326 Musical Instruments and their Homes. 

pipes, arranged in sets of two, and varying in length from four 
feet two inches to five feet ten inches. These are set in a hol- 
lowed and rounded piece of wood, one end of which is furnished 
with a hole for the breath. The hands of the performer rest 
against the sides of this, while the fingers cover a series of small 
holes in the pipes, just above the wooden handle. The instru- 
ment is held and played like the Chinese Cheng. As has 
already been remarked,' a form almost identical is found in the 
north of Siam and in Laos. 

The wooden trumpets of the different Indian tribes of South 
America have been already more than once referred to. Although 
no specimen is represented in the Catalogue, I may mention par- 
ticularly the Botiito, the Jitrupans and the TurL The first is 
used by a number of tribes in the vicinity of the Orinoco, and is 
regarded as an object of great veneration. " To be initiated into 
the mysteries of the Botuto," says Humboldt," " it is requisite to 
be of pure morals, and to have lived single. The initiated are 
subjected to flagellations, fastings, and other painful exercises." 
The number of these sacred trumpets, however, is very small. 
The Juruparis has already been described in another connection. 
The Ture is common to many Indian tribes on the river Amazon, 
who use it chiefly in war. " It is made of a long and thick bam- 
boo, and there is a split reed in the mouth-piece. It therefore 
partakes rather of the nature of an oboe or clarionet. Its tone is 
described as loud and harsh. The Ture is especially used by the 
sentinels of predatory hordes, who, mounted on a lofty tree, give 
the signal of attack to their comrades." ^ The conch is also used 
as a trumpet by many South American tribes. 

I need add but a word as to the three specimens catalogued 
under the head of Oceanica. The first is a hand-drum from the 
Gulf of Papua, New Guinea. The Papuans possess both wind 
instruments and instruments of percussion, the forms of many of 

'p. 138. = Quoted by Engel, p. 75. 'Engel, p. 73. 



Central and South America and Oceanica. 327 

which are quite elaborate. The drum (Fig. i) is a case in point. 
It is carved out of a single piece of wood, and represents the 
head and jaws of the crocodile. The head is made of snake skin. 
It is about two feet and a half long, and is held by a wooden 
handle in the centre. 

Fig. 2 represents a nose-flute from Fiji. It is twenty-seven 
inches long and about two inches in diameter, and is pierced with 
six small holes, five in front and one at the back. Of the former, 
one is situated at each end, and the other three at nearly equal 
distances between the two. It is ornamented with a number of 
charred lines and figures of various kinds. The origin of the 
nose-flute has already been explained. It ought, however, in fair- 
ness to be said, that while the theory given seems to the present 
writer the most probable one, opinions are divided on the ques- 
tion. Mr. Rowbotham, for instance, believes the nose-flute to be 
indigenous to the many islands where it is now found, and bases 
upon the fact of its wide diffusion the somewhat remarkable 
theory that the flute was first played through the nose.' But 
whatever may be the correct explanation of the origin of the nose- 
flute, it is certainly one of the commonest instruments among the 
islanders of the Pacific. I quote from Ellis,° the following inter- 
esting description of its form as found in the Sandwich Islands : 
"The Vivo or flute," he says, "was the most agreeable instrument 
used by the islanders. It was usually a bamboo cane, about an 
inch in diameter, and twelve or eighteen inches long. The joint 
in the cane formed one end of the flute ; the aperture through 
which it was blown was close to the end ; it seldom had more 
than four other holes, three on the upper side covered with the 
fingers, and one beneath, against which the thumb was placed. 
Sometimes, however, there were four holes on the upper side. It 
was occasionally plain, but more frequently ornamented by being 
partially scorched, or burned with a hot stone, or having fine and 

•i. p. 60. = Polynesian Researches, i. p. igV- 



328 Musical Instruments and t heir Homes. 

beautifully plaited strings of human hair wound round it, alter- 
nately with rings of braided sennit. It Avas not blown from the 
mouth, but the nostril. The performer usually placed the thumb 
of the right hand upon the right nostril, applied the aperture of 
the flute, which he held with the fingers of his right hand, to the 
other nostril, and, moving his fingers on the holes, produced his 
music. The sound was soft and not unpleasant, though the notes 
were few ; it was generally played in a plaintive strain, though 
frequently used as an accompaniment to their pehes, or songs." 

The conch trumpet (Fig. 3) has already been so often referred 
to that it may seem unnecessary to linger over it here. I venture, 
however, to quote from Ellis the following description of a vari- 
ation of the common form, which is found among the Sandwich 
Islanders. " The largest shells," he says, " were usually selected 
for this purpose, and were sometimes above a foot in length, 
and seven or eight inches in diameter at the mouth. In order 
to facilitate the blowing of this trumpet, they made a perforation 
about an inch in diameter, near the apex of the shell. Into this 
they inserted a bamboo cane about three feet in length, which 
was secured by binding it to the shell with fine braid ; the aperture 
was rendered air-tight by cementing the outsides of it with a resin- 
ous gum from the bread-fruit tree. These shells were blown when 
a procession walked to the temple, or their warriors marched to 
battle, at the inauguration of the king, during the worship of the 
temple, or when a tabu or restriction was imposed in the name 
of the gods. . . . The sound is extremely loud, but the most 
monotonous and dismal that it is possible to imagine." ' 

Here I must bring this short chapter to a close. I cannot, 
however, refrain from repeating in this place the hope already 
expressed, that the rich field which I have been able to sketch 
only in outline may soon receive the attention of competent and 

■ Ellis, i p. Iy6. 



Central and South America and Oceanica. 329 

scholarly investigators. When the subject of savage music shall 
have been conscientiously studied and definite results obtained, I 
feel confident that no branch of anthropological science will be 
found more full of suggestion and interest, not only to the special 
musical student, but to all those who are interested in the history 
of art, of civilization, and of humanity. 



EUROPE. 




urope 



P 



I, Vi'olin ^jo^err|. 



%e, ^oh 



Srrvvt 



5 




5 ro /5p e() up , 

/lord ^ 
cr ell W 







in 

+0 1/fe 


















s, j!\ii^h^\ 



5- ^j^j|^_e . S cotcC 



^. of loA^ecf p/i3e 3 fl_ 






oC^ui'j XVT jJ\e 



3, -i_o£_/r^^ 








af- 7/je W'feel o)fey- 



-Accor^ina -he 



fr^ ({< IL'S 



in - 



JS 



^r. 



3^5 1^ W 



|^^ -jtf-l.hai 



-^. ^A, f /n, >/. 



1 



i?l 'n . 



1 



Violin. 
CJo - c yWe) 

^^^] OOUr, Drum. 

'h^ree l'jC^^i- a,c t er/j f ic 
^J Pro/eiAce , H. 2.1 ,;,, X), 13 I- 







i. "1 




fr^-m ty 4 let 










V 



vy , 
€ 



'rj5^i'7T|e^i"C 






5; M^T^t . ^(nc'enf, >^a<er^ )^ :v ^ , ^f^^'ff^r an^ 3r 



c5tr 



Ur\o W'Vti 



■f. 



JJ 



"]^^y 



r. 



IJ JT'-mji ir^ ^11^ L^ oh ^ui- , ^n) 5- 



0-|^ (il^{ co\ere} v/ifjf w'irs. 



H. 3 f^ 



^cf^' 



O' 



6. Jarnfe 



i^urii 



."\ 



c£H<e 



ir e ^ f- e C ^ W^ / 



21 Coroe 



c a. r r e 

oloc^if 1717 , oC. 2-f/- 3 

8 Ji»tf Plkj ^u , 



L'n Var 



v'e 1- 



■J 



9. VTole y> [n^gi;r. 




fi^e jfnn.5_ 






T'^^^W ^^lfl^^AllY immmE ^^ 




fjA/m/jiMM 






X)- 



1. JTaqej 9iA.11 (^^'^' 




Wo 



3, II iv>. -n^j 



3. ^jiH" , ^ 





eF ^^ 



3^ ^ \V . 



?U\jc2 w'ltl^ 



Xv'iii 7/ Cerxi- u 



rxT u\-\ 



J 



m. 






-h: f^ 'n 



>v^ ^/^ p I e c e 



br^S 








\x^^\\ 












an._ 






/TO.. 



p^a.j^n'f-j. oC. 2.^ ,rv. <^r- e.a.f-ej- f V. 6' m . 



7- 




e^^l. TUciru 



^r^5 3 . cC. 3^ ,^_ vV. J7,;, . v^ 






Oboe • BaSxi- oj- <} 3^r/c 

'n /ronf ^n^ one 6e^M^J. -/^[o/^6(e 

'^^ ^'^''^^ f'^^^ ^^^ ''^•■'-j /fo;.y ^ay ^e c?rjrc).<i4m 



8 



£a 



10 



II 



-3C-^- ■ ^^^ ^^5 n^^^ 'f K'^^ 







ane 



e/| in <3 . cL, ^ ^ IK 



r\ 



// 



IVV 



I). /^ in , 2>rc/rv^^f,ciC5 '"^L anc)///. 




of I e^ci^, X. 3 jL l,'>y. _ )«^f^ 






vVii-e 5^^inj5- 







A 



^- 












>r> ^c i'^ 2.1 \y^'^^rury^^e)^i^. 



^f 



^^/ 



ir€ 



5fr,n^ 



1. JM^^J^TV. JnU,^ /'^/^ v^ 
3. oCvre. Irlf^ '^^ ^^'^J i" ^ 




p g r\ T 1 y\ 







5: 



2<n 



<]ol 



\Y\. 7r|l3,ic^ WihC Tndf/Ter of- 



sir u no ^' ^(^' 




an 



<) 



JK3.p ol V . J-frun ^ 



'f-S.rj 6u^ fi/)i^j 




<^. ^'r/h 







3 






Yi c -^ tar c 



J. 5urU_ 



J5. 10 IH. 






U'Ce "l/^e ■h-^fl c^eni '^f ^ ' - 



J5- 



8. 




of. JS"m. 
VV. Urn. 



ff2.r 






)). 




■fere crn\ ^ 



if 






^ 



"r 3v r- 1 -f 1 



6e c: aur e <? 



^ 



-'^Tr^ cj u r a. 



5 



<^ 



3^n^ 



•S" f )-L/ 7n e n t~ Te/^ - 






L<r) 




6 a t- 



S ^T-i r\ a e^ 



3 



f 






i'.Vr 



1^ e I L y /'^ . 



1 e c e 



<? n *■ ■a.r^ e c) 



cCeiA^t/^ ; ^f/-. |(5£ ,'»^ _ 5'rea-f^j^ \l/(Jt/r ; II- i", 
Woc6. -~y(e -fCrez Wire ^frm^^ ^r^ i-i/an-f' 



jfnnj 3 



a- 









JC, 1^ ''ii 



v^. 



iaic/ -^0 ^^^^ ^'"^^ f''''^ 








re 



^f 






ec five \ 



^J '/ 



6" 'Anli 6, 













"hi a^€ of 



^. yi'oU fr^nc 



of Jii w'ooi. 
3 of Y/^re 



Ji]e ^liC\ft- ^oor inrf ^Drr^e^/■. 



re r^eci-\\/e W 
i/t3 -f.rJ^ An) S^^'''^^ /.J(nj, /('^U 2ift) Cello. 



\ ^evjsch ^i/^t-fef- C^t-\-er Don)(n^ 



S. Juit^rra^ , J^^}t 0^ VcYj olJ Til w'ood(X^or. 



^' oefe 



"j) 



t/: 



r a v/m-c j^'^'^^'is , 5^^ ^n ^ 




o(. T-ji-. lin . V: II, 



n- 



6. C^^^^ ta^n^ oUj - 

7. -^ 9kT ) d giro . 




an J ire 



I>. 'J 'n 



i2Ltr\ Oourine 






Co^^cr j'^jlfj, 






y'^T 



C^ ( 



5- 




ejierlf fe 



I-/ ^ l»i, D. 13 in 

piece Oj^ U^}, ^W^c) /Colfc ly^ 




3. 5^^^t 



t(e r-ea.r, ^^£\^ ^(e 6^5^, ^. 1 fl-. y{ .^ , D. 1 .'^ 



MISCELLANEOUS. 




Drum . ^fori(^ JJn^enc^r^ 



Jr\^ I '3^n 



c[. 






c^M a_A u ^an 



(^fe 



2, ^-xHU 




# 



//(le^ v\/(>/r jee<}^ ^ f^S- 
() c c r -^-h e h W i f~C -f^af/TerC 



^. ./ ^ 



<3X / ' 'n . 



^^■^f'H. 



Ic 



Kei-, 



^; 



yVe 



'K ^ ^{^a ni5 k'v ^ •^'-^J<2.. ^ereiV^j 
A Vfrv 



^. Ctari\?T\et. Jl4vi/ ^,^^[ 



cfn ^(.aK(^. A Vfr\r oIJ ^^P^'^' ''"l^'n, • °^- '1'^'^' 



5 



5L^n^- -^n ol^ 



<p 1; c \ TYi e r\ 



oC. Z(^ li 



LIST OF AUTHORITIES. 



Ambros (A. \V.). Geschichte der Musik. Dritter ganzlich umgearbeitete Auflage. Vol. I. 
Leipzig, 1887. 

Amiot (Joseph). De la Musique des Chinois, tant anciens que modernes. 4to. Paris, 1780. 
Vol. VI. of M^moires concernant I'histoire, les sciences, les arts, les mceurs, les usages, etc., 
des Chinois, par les missionaires de Pekin. 

Sur les Pierres Sonores. Appendix to his treatise " De la Musique des Chinois." Paris, 1780. 

Anonymous. Japanese Music and Musical Instruments. Musical Herald, April, May, June, and 
July, 1887, Boston. 

Notes on Siamese Musical Instruments. London, 1885. 

Barrow (John). Travels in China. London, 1S04. 

Bird (Isabella L.). Unbeaten Tracks in Japan: an Account of Travels on Horseback in the 
Interior. 2 vols. New York, no date. 

Bird (Willlam Hamilton). The Oriental Miscellany; being a Collection of the most Favorite Airs 
of Hindostan, compiled and adapted for the Harpsichord, etc. Calcutta, 1789. 

Bowdich (T. Edward). Mission from Cape Coast Castle to Ashantee, London, 1819. 

Burton (Richard F.). The Lake Regions of Central Africa. 2 vols. London, i860. 

Wanderings in West Africa from Liverpool to Fernando Po, by a F. R. G. S. 2 vols. London, 

1863. 

Catlin (George) . Illustrations of the Manners and Condition of the North American Indians ; with 
Letters and Notes, etc., during eight years of Travel and Adventure. 2 vols. London, 1857. 

Chapman (James). Travels in the Interior of South Africa. 2 vols. London, 1868. 

Clement (Felix). Histoire de la Musique, depuis les temps les plus anciens jusqu'a nos jours. 
Paris, 1885. 

Cranz (David). Historie von Gronland, enthaltend die Beschreibung des Landes und der Ein- 
wohner, etc. ; insbesondere die Geschichte der dortigen Mission der Evangelischen Bruder in 
Neu-Herrnhut und Lichtenfels. Barby und Leipzig, 1765. 

Daniel (F. Salvador). La Musique Arabe, ses rapports avec la Musique Grecque et le Chant 
Gr^gorien. Algiers, 1863. 

Domenech (Abbe Em.). Seven Years' Residence in the Great Deserts of North America. 2 vols. 
London, i860. 

367 



-> 



68 Lis^ of Authorities. 



Eastlake (F. Warrington). Article on the Sheng, China Review, August, 1882. 

Ellis (Alexander J.). Appendix to a paper on "The Musical Scales of Various Nations," 
published in the Journal of tiie Society of Arts, Oct. 30, 1S85. London. 

Ellis (William). Polynesian Researches during a Residence of nearly Eight Years in the Society 
and Sandwich Islands. Second edition. 4 vols. London, 1832-1836. 

Elson (Louis C). Curiosities of Music: a Collection of Facts not generally known regarding the 
Music of Ancient and Sa\'age Nations. Boston, 1880. 

Engel (Carl). An Introduction to the Study of National Music. London, 1866. 

Descriptive Catalogue of the Musical Instruments in the South Kensington Museum. Second 

edition. London, 1S74. 

Musical Myths and Facts. 2 vols. London, 1876. 

Researches into the Early History of the Violin Family. London, 1883. 

The Music of the most Ancient Nations, particularly of the Assyrians, Egyptians, and Hebrews. 

London, 1864. 

Fetis (F. J.) Histoire G^n^rale de la Musique, depuis les temps Ics plus anciens jusqu'a nos jours. 
5 vols. Paris, 1869. 

Forbes (Frederick E.). Dahomey and the Dahomans ; being the Journals of two Missions to the 
King of Dahomey, and Residence at his Capital in the years 1849 and 1850. 2 vols. London, 
1851. 

Fowke (Francis). On the Vina, or Indian Lyre (pp. 193-197 in Tagore's "Hindu Music from 
Various Authors " ). 

Grey (George). Journals of Two Expeditions of Discovery in North-western and Western Australia, 
during the years 1837, 1S38, and 1839. 2 vols. London, 1841. 

Hipkins (A. J.). Musical Instruments, Historic, Rare, and Unique. Folio. Edinburgh, 1888. 

Isawa (S.). Extracts from the Report of S. Isawa, Director of the Institute of Music, on the Result 
of the Investigations concerning Music, undertaken by order of the Department of Education. 
Tokio, no date. 

Jones (Sir Willlam). On the Musical Modes of the Hindus (pp. 125-160 in Tagore's "Hindu 
Music from Various Authors "). 

Kiesewetter (R. G.). Die Musik der Araber nach Originalquellen dargestellt. Leipzig, 

1842. 

Kraus (Alexandre, fils). Di Alcuni Strumenti Musicali della Micronesia e della Melanesia, regalati 
al Museo Nazionale d'Antropologia e di Etnologia dal Dott. Otto Finsch. Estratto dall' 
Archivio per F Antropologia e la Etnologia, Vol. XVII., Fascicolo 1°, 1887. 

La Musique au Japon. 2'"= (Edition. Florence, 1879. 

Lane (Edward William). An Account of the Manners and Customs of the Modern Egyptians. 
Fifth edition, edited by his nephew, Edward Stanley Poole. 2 vols. London, 1871. 

The Thousand and One Nights, commonly called in England The Arabian Nights' Entertain- 
ments. A new translation from the Arabic, with copious notes. A new edition, edited by 
Edward Stanley Poole. 3 vols. London, 18S3. 



List of AzttJwritics. 369 

Lay (G. Tradescant) . The Chinese as they are : their Moral, Social, and Literary Character. 
London, 1S41. 

Long (Charles Chaille). Central Africa: Naked Truths about Naked People. An account of 
expeditions to the Lake Victoria Nyanza, etc. London, 1876. 

Naumann (Emil). The History of Music. Translated by F. Praeger. Edited by the Rev. Sir 
F. A. Gore Ouseley, Bart. 2 vols. London, no date. 

Ouseley (Sir Willia.m). Travels in Various Countries of the East, more particularly Persia. 3 vols. 
London, 1819. 

Palmer (E. H.). The Qur'an. Translated by. 2 vols. (Vols. VL and IX. in Max Muller's 
"Sacred Books of the East.") London, 1880. 

Rowbotham (John Frederick). A History of Music. 3 vols. I^ondon, 1S85. 

Schoolcraft (Henry R.). Information respecting the History, Condition, and Prospects of the 
Indian Tribes of the United States ; collected and prepared under the Bureau of Indian Affairs. 
Published by authority of Congress. 6 vols., 410. Philadelphia, i860. 

The Indian in his Wigwam ; or. Characteristics of the Red Race of America. From original 

Notes and Manuscripts. New York, 1848. 

Schwatka (Frederick). Among the Apaches. Century Magazine, Md.y, 1887. New York. 

Schweinfurth (Georg). The Heart of Africa: Three Years' Tra\els and Adventures in the 
Unexplored Regions of Central Africa, from 1S6S to 187 1. Translated by Ellen E. Frewer. 
2 vols. New York, 1874. 

Siebold (Ph. Fr. von). Nippon; Archiv zur Beschreibung von Japan und dessen neben, und 
Schutslandern, etc. 2 vols. 4to, with 2 vols. fol. of plates (Part IV. plates i.-xii., inclusive, on 
Japanese musical instruments). Leyden, 1832. 

Solvyns (Balt.). The Costume of Indostan, elucidated by sixty colored engravings, with descrip- 
tions in English and French, taken in the years 1798 and 1799. Folio. London, 1830. 

Speke (John H.anning). Journal of the Discovery of the Source of the Nile. Edinburgh and 
London, 1863. 

Sproat (Gilbert Malcolm). Scenes and Studies of Savage Life. London, 1868. 

Tagore (R.^jah Sourindro Mohun). Hindu Music from Various Authors. Compiled by. 
Second edition. Calcutta, 1882. 

Hindu Music. Reprinted from the Hindu Patriot, Sept. 7, 1874 (pp. 339-397 in Tagore's 

" Hindu Music from Various Authors "). 

Short Notices of Hindu Musical Instruments. Calcutta, 1S77. 

The Twenty-two Musical Srutis of the Hindus. Calcutta, 1882. 

Taylor (Meadows). Description of a Collection of Indian Musical Instruments, presented to the 
Royal Irish Academy by Col. P. T. French (pp. 243-273 in "Tagore's Hmdu Music from 
Various Authors "). 

Tylor(E. B.). The Study of Customs. Macmillan's Magazine, \\.z.y, \'&'&2. London. 

Van Aalst (J. A.). Chinese Music. Shanghai and London, 1884. 

Van Lennep (Henry J.). Bible Lands: their Modern Customs and Manners, illustrative of 
Scripture. New York, 1875. 



3 70 List of Authorities. 



3 

Villoteau. Description Historique, Technique et Litteraire des Instrumens de Musique des 
Orientaux. Contained in Vol. XIII. of " Description de I'Egypte ; ou, Recneil des Observations 
et des Reclierclies (jui ont tSte faites en Egypte pendant I'expedition de I'armee frangaise." 
2""= edition. Paris, 1S23. 

Willard (N. Augustus). A Treatise on the Music of Hindustan (pp. 1-122 in Tagore's "Hindu 
Music from Various Authors "). 

Williams (Thom.as). Fiji and the Fijians. London, 1S70. 

Yoe (Sh\v,-\y). The Burman ; his Life and Notions. 2 vols. London, 1882. 

Yule (Henry). A Narrative of the Mission sent by the Governor-General of India to the Court of 
Ava. London, 1S5S. 



INDEX. 



Names of Musical Instrumefits in Italics. 



Abbassides and Music, 170. 

Achmed Ben Mohammed. 174. 

^tf ft;// (Mexican trumpet), 311. 

African tribes, instruments of, 257-272. 

Wide diffusion of stringed instruments, 25S ; prob- 
ably derived from Egypt, 258 ; reasons for this 
opinion, 258; instruments of percussion, 260-265; 
great variety, 260, 261 ; drums, 262, 263 ; rattles, 
263 ; Marimba, 263 ; Zaiize, 264 ; wind instru- 
ments, 265-268 ; stringed instruments, 268-271 ; 
Zeze, 268 ; harps, 26g ; lyre, 270 ; violins, 271 ; 
orchestral performances of Bongo, 271 ; of Kara- 
gue, 271. 

Ahts, bards of, 299. 
dances of, 298. 
music of, 2g6. 
sorcerers of, 299. 

Ainos, aboriginal inhabitants of Japan, 70. 

Ajunta, 106. 

Akber, Emperor, 99. 

Alateeyeh, Egyptian professional musicians, iSi. 

Alfarabi, Arab musician, 174, 193 ; wonderful skill of, 

173- 

Alghosah (India), 120. 

Al^ooja ; see Alghosah. 

Amaterasu, Sun-goddess of Japan, 61. 

Ainbira (Africa), 265. 

Atnrita ; see Omerti. 

Amurath IV., 217. 

Angyemut (New Britain), 248 ; superstition concerning, 
249. 

Angulistata, class of Hindu instruments, 108. 

Apaches, dances of, 298. 

Apache, flute, 310. 

love-flute, 309. 
violin, 310. 

Apsarasen, 92. 

Arab music, 167-182. 

Influence upon European music, 167 ; musical 
development of Arabs, 168 ; music not associated 
with religion, 169 ; opposition of Mohammed to. 
169; Caliphs more lenient to, 170; influence of 
conquest of Persia, 171 ; music in 8th and 9th 
centuries in Bagdad, 172 ; tales of wonderful skill 
of Arab musicians, 172, 173 ; theory of music 



studied under the Caliphs, 174 ; moral influence 
of music, 174 ; attempts to remodel theory of, 175 ; 
schism between theory and practice, 176 ; scale, 
177 ; failure to distinguish between movement 
and measure, 178 ; time, 179 ; notation, 179 ; pres- 
ent state of music, 179-182 ; popularity of, 179 ; 
vocal music, 180, 181 ; music of bards, dancing 
girls, etc., iSi. 

Arab musical instruments, 183-198. 

Over two hundred different varieties, 183 ; stringed 
instruments, 183-192 ; violins, igo-192 ; wind in- 
struments, T92-T96 ; instruments of percussion, 196-- 
198. 

Arab musical theory, relation to Greek, 174, 176. 

Arghool (Egypt), 194. 

Ashantee airs. 243. 

choruses, 245. 

dirges, 245. 

instruments, 253, 256,260, 262, 263, 265, 267. 

Avicenna, 174. 

Awalim, Egyptian female singers, 180. 

Aztec instruments, 311-313. 

Bagdad, musical centre in 8th and 9th centuries, 172 ; 

capture of, 217. 
Bagpipe, Arab, 195. 

Ashantee, 267. 

Hindu (Madras), 120. 

negro (Congo), 267. 

in Persian bass-reliefs, 214. 

Turkish (Ghaida), 226. 
Bahya (India), 118. 
Bakalai, 269. 

Baked earth, Chinese instruments of, 44. 
Balafo (African Slarimba), 264. 
Bamanwato, 245. 

Bamboo, Chinese instruments of, 41, 
Banabea, 265. 
Banjo, African {Zczc), 268. 
Bansee (India). 119. 
Banstilee ; see Bansee. 
Barbud, old Persian singer, 214.215. 
Bards among JN. A. Indians, 299. 
Barghumi (African horn), 266. 
Barttelot, Major, death of, 240. 



372 



Index, 



Bayaderes (Hindu), 103. 
Baz (Egypt and Turkey), 197. 
Bechuanas, inslruments of, 254, 266. 
Been (Vina, India), 108, no. 
Bell-clnme, Chinese, 35. 
Bells, Burmese, 145. 
Chinese, 35, 36. 
Hindu, IiS, irg. 
Pueblo Indian, 310. 
Bcndir (Algiers), IgS, 
Bendy r ; see Bendir. 
Bhimbhat, Siamese orchestra, 134. 
Bitut, class of Hindu instruments. 108. 
Biwa (Japan), 39, 74. 
Bizug (Syria), 1S7. 
Bone whistles of cavemen, 240. 
Bongo, instruments of, 254, 263, 266, 267. 

singing of, 243. 
Bonzes, use of J'o by, 35. 
Botiito (S. America), 326. 
Boulou (African harp), 269. 
Bow, musical (Bechuana), 254. 
(Bongo), 254. 
(KaiYre), 268. 
(Zulu), 268. 
Bracelet rattle (Siou.x), 307. 
Brahma, 92, 99. 

Bugles, American, in Corea, 82. 
Burmese instruments, 142-147; stringed, 142, 143; wind, 

144 ; percussion, 144-147. 
Burmese music, 140-142. 

popularity of, 140 ; musical drama, 140 ; scale, 140; 
no notation, 141 ; musical instruction, 141- 
Bushmen, instruments of, 254, 263, 267. 

Castanets, Arab, 181, 198. 
Burmese, 145. 
Chinese, 41. 
Hindu, 119. 
Japanese, 77. 
Siamese, 137. 
Cavemen of France, musical instruments of, 240. 
Central America, instruments of, 323, 
Chabbabeh ; see Sluiberba. 
Chalil, 194. 
Chang (Persia), 222. 
Chang Gou (Corea), 81, 82. 
Charp (Siam), 137. 
Che (China), 37. 
Cheipottr (Arabl, 196. 
Cheng (China), 43, 75. 
Chikara (India), 115. 
Ch'itz ; see Kin. 
Chinese music, 13-27. 

traditional history, 15; origin according to Van 
Aalst, 16 ; traditional effect of early music, 16 ; con- 
nection with the dance, 17 ; rhythm of, 17 ; failure 
to introduce European music, i8 ; theory of, 19; 



the Liis, Tg ; pentatonic scale, 20 ; new scale and 
notation introduced by Mongols, 20 ; notation, 21 ; 
of the present day, 23; popular or theatrical, 24; 
professional musicians, 24 ; progress practically im- 
possible, 25 ; works on, contained in library at 
Pekin, 26. 
Chinese musical instruments, 28-44. 

destruction of, by Emperor She Huang Ti, 17 ; 
divided according to eight kinds of musical sound 
in nature, 28 ; materials used for, 28, 29 ; of skin, 
29 ; of stone, 31 ; of metal, 34 ; their use in Con- 
fucian temples, 35 ; of silk, 36 ; Kins used in Con- 
fucian temples, 37 ; of wood, 40 ; of bamboo, 41 ; 
of gourd, 43 ; of baked earth, 44. 
Ching (Siam), 137. 
Chippewas, love-flute of, 309. 
war song of, 296. 
Chi-sian (China), 30. 
Cho-tonka (Sioux)/ see Love-flute. 
Chrosroes, dream of, 215. 
Chu (China), 40. 
Cltn}ig {Q,h\T\^), 35. 
Clarin ; see Aeoeoll. 

Conch-shell, primitive type of trumpet, 250. 
Conch-trumpet, Chinese, 34. 
Hindu, 122. 
Japanese, 76. 
Sandwich Island, 328. 
South American, 326. 
Confucius, 15, 17, 35. 
Conjurer's drum (Sioux), 306. 
Conjurer's rattle (Sioux), 307. 
Corean music, 79, 80. 

lack of information upon, 79 ; origin and character, 
79, 80 ; popularity of, 80 ; small place in religious 
rites, 80. 
Corean musical instruments. Si, 82 ; stringed instru- 
ments. Si ; wind instruments, 81; instruments of 
percussion, 82. 
Courting-flute (Formosa), 251. 

(N. A. Indian) ; see Love-flute. 
Cuba, instruments of, 313. 
Cymbals, Arab, 198. 

Burmese, 145. 
Chinese, 36. 
Hindu, 119. 
Japanese, 77. 
Siamese, 137. 
Soudan, 263. 
Turkish, 277. 

Dahomey, 240. 

Daireh (Persia), 218. 

Dak (India), 117. 

Dakotas, orchestral performances of, 239, 300. 

Daliika (negro drum), 259. 

Dance among N. A. Indians, 297. 

Dance, effect on development of music, 244. 



Index. 



m 



Dance-rattles (Haida'), 305. 

(Thlinket), 303. 
Dance-songs (negro), 257. 
Darabouka ; see Darabtikkeh. 
Darabukkch (Arab), 197. 
Darius, 214. 
Davadasi (Hindu), 103. 
Davool (Arab), 197. 
Dayra (India), 118. 
Derboiika ; see Darabukkch. 
Dervishes, Persian, 219. 
Turlcish, 221. 
Dhanustata, class of Hindu instruments, 108. 
Chcte (African flute), 265. 
ZJ/ic/ (India), 117. 
Dkolkee (India), I17. 
Dirbukkeh ; see Darabukkeh. 
j9i>/// (Persia), 225. 
Z'o/Hfe^ (Persia), 225. 
Doo (Japan). 77. 
Drums, African, 259, 261-263. 

Alaskan, 301, 302. 

Arab, 196, 197. 

Aztec, 312. 

Burmese, 145. 

Ciiinese, 29-31. 

Greenland, 301. 

Hindu, 117, 118. 

Japanese, 76. 

Lapland, 247. 

North American, 247. 

Persian, 225. 

Sioux, 306. 

South American, 324. 

superstitions concerning, 247. 

uses of, 24S. 
Drum organ (Burmese), 146. 
Duel, musical, of Greenlanders, 245. 
Duff{.\\\A\A), 118. 

Eeh-na-dees (N. A. Indian), 297. 
El Kindi, 174. 
E'raqyeh (Arab), 194. 
Erh-hsien, see Ur-Heeh. 
Eskimos of Alaska, 301. 

Faggeishdh (Syria), 198. 

Feki, mythological Japanese prince, 66. 

Feki-blind, class of Japanese musicians, 66. 

Fellahee (Turkey), 226. 

Feng, Chinese phoenix, 19. 

Feng-Ling (China). 35. 

Fife (S. America), 324. 

Fiji Islanders, 239, 242, 245, 253, 327. 

Flageolet, African. 265. 

Aztec, 312. 

Hindu (Alghosak), 120. 

N- A. Indian (Cho-tanka'), 309. 



Flageolet, Persian (Shaberba), 193. 
Flute, Apache, 310. 

Arab [Nay), 192, 193. 

Ashanlee, 265. 

Aztec, 311. 

Bongo, 266. 

Burmese, 144. 

Chinese (Ty), 42. 

Hindu {Bansee), 119. 

Japanese, 74, 75 . 

Mittoo, 266. 

Moqui, 310, 

Siamese, 138. 

the instrument of love, 251. 
Fou Kou (China), 30. 
Fouye ; see Fiiye. 
Fu Hsi, Emperor, 15. 
Fuye (Japan), 74. 

Gakkunine, first class of Japanese musicians, 66 

Gambangs, Javese, 135. 

Gandharven, 92. 

Ganesa, 93, 103. 

Gasbd (Algiers), 193. 

Ge'le'-Masha (Turkey), 227. 

Gha'ida (Turkey), 226. 

Ghawazee, Egyptian dancing girls, 181. 

Ghekos (Gueschia), Japanese singing-girls, 67. 

Ghun, class of Hindu instruments, 108. 

Gongs, Burmese, 144. 

Chinese (Zo), 36. 
Hindu {Thalia), 118. 
Japanese {Doo). 77. 

Siamese. 136. 
Gong-chime, Chinese ( Yun-lo), 36. 
Gong organ, 'Rwrm&'ie (ICyee-waiti), 144. 
Siamese {Klong Vai), 136. 
Goongooroos (India). 119. 
Gopis, 98. 

Goura (Bu.shmen), 267. 
Gourd, Chinese instruments of. 43. 
Greek instruments (modern) derived from Persia, 220. 
Greek musical theory, relation to Arabic, 176. 
Greek musicians in Turkey, 220. 
Greenlanders, drums of, 301. 
songs of, 245. 
Gubo, Zulu (musical bovjf), 268. 
Guenin, second class of Japanese musicians, 66. 
Gueschia, see Ghekos. 
Guilds, musical, Siamese. 133. 
Gunibry (Arabia), 187. 
Guitar, African, 270. 

Arabian {R'ldtra), 187. 

Chinese (San-Heen), 39. 
( Yue-Kin). 39. 

European, origin of, 167. 

Hindu (Si far), T12. 

Japanese (Samisen), 72. 



374 



o 



Index. 



Guitar, Persian {Schlarch). '2.1'},. 
{Tar), 223. 
Turkish (F,'llalu-e), 226. 
Gunlc (India), liS. 

Iladi (Arab singers), 168. 
Hadji Chalfa, 174. 
Hagguni (Corea), Si. 
Haida Indians, instruments of, 305. 
Ilai-lo (Cliina), 34. 
Hao'tiing (Cliina), 36. 
Harems of Turkey, music in, 220, 
Harmonicon, African {Mariiiibii), 249, 264. 
Burmese {Pal/ala), 144. 
Central American, 249. 
Hindu (Kinnery), 119. 
Japanese (A'Jokkiin^, 78. 
Micronesian (Angrennit), 249. 
Siamese (Jianal), 135. 
Harmonicon, development of, 24S-250. 
Harmony, savage, instances of, 256. 
Harouu al Raschid, 172. 
Harps, African, 269. 
Harp, Arab (JunH), 222. 

Burmese iySoitng), 142. 
Niam-Niam {h'anga), 25S, 269. 
Persian {Chang). 214, 222. 
Hashash ; sa Nzangah. 
Heang-ii (Japan), 75. 
Hebrew trumpet, 196. 
llc-lia-kha-zo-zo (Sioux) ; scl Moose Call. 
Heike-Biwa (Japan), 76. 
Hindu music, gi-105. 

contrast with Chinese and Japanese, 91 ; obscurity 
of, and lack of information respecting, 92 ; divine 
origin, 92 ; antiquity of, 93 ; compared with early 
Greek music, 93 ; history proper, 94 ; religious 
association and purity of, 94 ; deterioration from 
early standard, 94 ; prostituted to licentious uses, 
95 ; theory and practice divorced, 95 ; influence 
of Mohammedan conquests, 95 ; theory of. 96 ; 
Sangita, 96 ; division of Sangita, 96 ; Srutis, 96 ; 
scale, 96 ; keys, 97 ; Ragas, 98 ; fabulous origin of 
the Ragas, 99 ; fables as to effect of early Ragas, 
99 ; measure, 100 ; pitch, lOI ; notation, loi ; 
ancient and modern music compared, 102 ; musi- 
cal drama, 103 ; religious music, 103 ; Bayaderes, 
103 ; systems of music, 104 ; son.gs, 104 ; melody 
and harmony, 104. 
Hindu musical instruments, 106-122. 

vast number and variety, 106 ; defects of, 107 ; 
four classes of, 108 ; stringed instruments, loS- 
116 ; oricin of principle of understrung wires, 116 ; 
instruments of percussion (skin), 116-118 ; instru- 
ments of percussion (metal), 118-119 ; wind instru- 
ments, 119-122. 
Hindustani system of music, 104. 
Hoang-Ti, Emperor, 34. 



Iloodoak (India), 117. 

Ilormizd, 215. 

Horn, the instrument of war, 250. 

Horns, African, 266, 267. 

risiian (China), 44. 

Huang Ti (the Yellow Emperor), 16, 38. 

Hu-Cli'hi ; see Hu-Kin. 

Huayja-Puhura (South America), 325. 

Huieit-Chung (China), 36. 

Hu-A'in (Hu-ch'in) (China), 39. 

Ilicka (Africa), 265. 

Ibnol Heisem, 174, 

Ibraheem, 184. 

Imperial Board of Music at Pekin, 15. 

India, instruments of, sec Hindu musical instruments. 

India, music of ; see Hindu music. 

Institute of Music, Tokio, organization and aim, 59. 

International Inventions Exhibition, 131. 

Irghitn ; see Urgnn. 

Ishak el Mosilee, 172. 

Jainagair'ii-guine-iaico (Japan), 77. 
Janissary music, 220. 
Japanese music, 59-68. 

introduction of European music, 59 ; popularity, 

61 ; mythological origin, 5i ; origin traced to China 
and Corea, 62 ; assigned by Isawa to Hindustan, 

62 ; impulse given by Buddhism, 62 ; direct Chi- 
nese influence on, 63 ; stationary character of 
classical music, 63 ; character of popular music, 

63 ; contrasted with Chinese music, 64 ; scale, 64 ; 
notation, 65 ; musicians organized in four classes, 

66 ; tradition respecting Feki-blind, 67 ; theatre, 

67 ; religions music, 68 ; vocal music, 68, 
Japanese musical instruments, 69-7S. 

resemblance to Chinese, 69 ; division of, 69 ; 
stringed instruments, 71-74 ; wind instruments, 
74-76 ; instruments of percussion, 76—78. 

Jew's harp (Aino), 70. 

Jew's harp of Fijians, 253. 

Jilla (India), 118. 

Jogee, 95. 

Joritomo, Japanese Mars, 66. 

JoLim-joum (Bushmen), 267. 

Jumna, river of India, 100. 

luriipayis (South America), 249. 

Kaffres, 264, 266. 
Kagiira J^aiko (Japan), 77. 
Kanidncha (Persia), 224. 
Kansi (India), 118. 
Ivaiwon (Arabia!, i83. 
(Turkey), 226. 
Kamin ; see Kanooii. 
Karague, 265, 270. 

Karnatik, system of Hindu music, 104. 
Kassaiigali (Africa), 264. 



Inde. 



X. 



375 



Ke'-l-yau (Eskimo drum), 301. 
Keinancheh ; see Kamancha. 
Keiiiangeh a'gouz (Arab), igo. 
Kemangeh Farkli (Arab), 191. 
Kemangeh Roumy (h\ah), igi. 
Kemangeh (Persia) ; see Kamancha. 
Kemangeh (Turkey), 22O. 
Kettle drums, Arab, 196, igy. 
Hindu, Ii8. 
Siamese, 136. 
Kheui (Burmah), 145. 
Khong Lek (?>\a.VLi), 136. 
Khong Yai (Siam), 136. 
Khosrau Parviz, 214. 
Khosro, Umeer, 112. 
Kidete ; see D'hete. 
Kin (Cli'in), Cliina, 37. 
Kin KoH (China), 29. 
Kinanda (Africa), 270. 
A'/«,^ (China), 31. 

traditional effect of, 16. 
Kinnery (India), 119. 
Kinno-Koto (Japan), 71. 
^/j-j-ar (Egypt), 188. 

tuned to pentatonic scale, 188. 
Klong Khek (Siam), 136. 
Klong Khek, Siamese orchestra, 135. 
Klong Yai (Siam), 136. 
Klui (Siam), 138. 
Kokiti (Japan), 73. 
Komounko (Corea), 81. 

Koran, contains no reference to music, i6g, 221. 
Koto (Japan), 61, 71. 
Ko-Tsudziimi {Tossumi), Japan, 77. 
Kou (China), 29. 

Kouei, or the Chinese Orpheus, 16. 
^02<TOa/ (Persia), 225. 
Kra Chapee (Siam), 137. 
Krishna, 93, 97, 104. 
Krumen, music of, 240. 
Kublai Khan, 21. 
Ktichwa (India), 113. 
Kuitra (Arab), 187. 
Kunjerry (^■i.&x^.'i), 116. 
Kurna (India), 121. 
Kyee-wain (Burmah), 144. 
Kyee-zee (Burmah), 145. 

Lao Phan, Siamese Orchestra, 135. 

La-pa (China), 36. 

Lapland drums, 247. 

Lay, G. Tradescant, theory of, respecting violin, 40. 

Leg rattle (Moqui), 310. 

Ling-Lun, 19, 34. 

Lo (China), 36. 

Lokanga (Madagascar), 270. 

Long flute (Sioux) ; see Moose Call. 

Love-flute, Apache, 310. 



Love-flute, Sioux, 309. 

use in courting, 293. 
Love-song, North American Indian, 293. 
Lnng-kin (China), 37. 
Lung-ti (Cliina), 42. 
Llis, Chinese. 19. 
Lute, Arab, 183. 

development of, 184. 

miraculous powers attributed to, 184. 

wonderful effects produced by, 184. 

tuning, 185. 

European, origin of, 167. "■ 

Japanese [Biwa), 74. 

Persian (Oud), 223. 
Lyra (Greece), 226. 
Lyre, Mittoo, 270. 

Magoudi (Poongi, India), 120. 
Mahoree, Siamese orchestra, 134. 
Alangoai {'Bongo horn), 267. 
Mandan Indians, 296. 
Mandarins of music, 26. 
Manu, 92. 
Manyemas, 240. 

Afanyinyee (Bongo trumpet), 266. 
Maiimba (Harmonicon), African (East), 249, 264. 

(Southeast), 249. 
Guatemalan, 249, 323. 
Mason, Luther Whiting, instructor of music in National 

Institute of Tokio, 59. 
Mburrah (Bongo pipe), 267. 
Medicine man, Alaskan ; see Shaman. 

North American Indian, importance in 
connection with music, 298. 
Medicine man's drum ; see conjurer's dram, 
rattle ; see conjurer's rattle. 
Alegyoung (Yivec'ca'iA^), 143. 
Metal, Chinese instruments of, 34. 
Mexico, instruments of, 311. 
Mganga (African rain-maker), 263. 
Alijwiz (Syria), 194. 
Mihambi (African jMatimba), 264. 
Mmcopies, 240, 241. 
Minjairah (Syria), 193. 
Minstrels, Niam-Niam, 245, 260. 
Mittoo. 266, 270. 

Mohammed, opposed to music, i6g. 
Mohammed's standard, national instrument of Turkey, 

220. 
Alokkinc (Japan), 77. 
Mokugyo, (Japan), 78. 

Resemblance to Chinese A/it-Yn, 78. 
Mommu, Emperor, 74. 
Monbuttoo, 262, 267. 
Monochord, Greek, derivation of. 168. 
Moose Call (Sioux), 308. 
Moquis, 310 ; dances of, 29S. 
Moung Thah Byaw, Burmese court singer, 141- 



J 



76 



Inde: 



X. 



Mouth organ, Chinese, 43. 

Corean, 82. 

Japanese, 75. 
Mukha (India), 120. 
Mukharik, Arab musician, 184. 

wonderful skill of, 172. 
Music, love of, inborn in man, 239. 

power of, in life of savage, 239. 
Musical bow ; see Bow, musical. 
Muras, 250. 
Mu-Yii (China), 41. 
M'ridang ; see Mridung. 
Mrid?ing- (India.), 117. 

Nadr Ben Kelde, 171. 

NaggaraJi (Arab), 196. 

Nakakeer, plural of Nakkarah, g.v. 

Nakkarah ; see Naggarah. 

Nallari (Corea), 80. 

Nanga (Niam-Niam harp), 258, 269. 

Nareda, inventor of f-'/wa, 93. 

Nay (Arab), 192. 
(Persia), 225. 
(Turkey), 226. 
used by dervishes of Turkey, 221. 

Nay-chah (Arab), 193. 

Nay-giref (kx3!a), 193. 

Nefyr {hx-A>), 195. 

(Turkey), 226. 

New Zealanders, 256. 

Ngoma Kit (African drum), 262. 

Niam-Niams, 240, 245, 256, 260, 262, 269. 

A^ihoihagi (Japan), 77. 

Nila Pooja, Hindu feast of, iig. 

7\^o*«(/ (India), 117. 

Nogara (African drum), 261. 

North American Indians, music of, 291-300. 

obscurity of the subject, 291 ; poetic nature of the 
Indian, 293 ; translation of love-song, 293 ; vocal 
music, 293 ; instruments of percussion in accompani- 
ment, 296 ; wind instruments only used for solo 
purposes, 297 ; dancing, 297 ; medicine man, 298 ; 
sorcerers of Ahts, 299 ; bards, 299 ; instrumental 
music, 299 : unimportant place, 230 ; orchestral 
performances, 230. 

North America, musical instruments of, 301-313. 

Eskimo drums, 301 : instruments of Alaskan 
Indians, 302 ; drums, 302 ; rattles, 302 ; legend of 
origin of rattle, 303; stringed instrument from Yac-a- 
tat, 304 ; instruments of British America, 305 ; wind 
instruments of Haida Indians, 305 ; instruments 
of the Sioux or Dakotas, 305-309 ; of the Apaches, 
310 ; of the Pueblos, 310 ; native instruments of 
Mexico, 311 ; Aztec musical instruments, 312 ; in- 
struments of the negroes of Cuba, 313. 

Nose-flute, 259, 327. 
origin of, 121. 

Notation ; see under Music of particular country. 



Notched stick (Moqui), 310. 
Nushirvan, the Just, 215. 
iVyastaranga (India), 121. 
Nzangah (Niam-Niam minstrels), 260. 

Oboe, Arab {Zourna), 193. 
Burmese, 144. 
Chinese {Sena), 42. 
Corean (Nallari), 80. 
Hindu {Ottu), 120. 
Japanese (Heang- Ti), 75. 
Persian, 225. 
Siamese, 138. 
Turkish, 226. 
Oceanica, instruments of, 326-329. 
Ombi (African harp), 269. 
Omerti (India), 114. 
Ommiads and music, 170. 
Oompoochwa (Ashantee), 265. 
Orchestra, Arab, iSl. 

Burmese, 146. 
Hindu, 103. 
Japanese, 68. 

North American Indian, 300. 
Persian, 21S. 
Siamese, 131, 134, 135. 
Orchestral performances of Bongo, 270. 
Dakotas, 239. 
Karague, 270. 
Orellana, 250. 
0»a'(Arab), 183. 

(Persia), 223. 
Otou ; see Otti(. 
Ottu (India), 120. 
O- Tzudzunii ( Tossuvii) Japan, 77. 

Pagolo (New Britain), 237. 

Pai-hao (China), 42. 

Pai-hsaio ; see Pai-hao. 

Pai-pan (China), 41. 

Pandean pipes (Syrinx), Chinese, 41. 

Japanese, 75. 

Peruvian, 325. 

Polynesian, 252. 

Siamese, 138. 

South American, 325. 

in Persian bass-reliefs, 214. 

origin of, 251. 
Pang Kou (China), 30. 
Parbuti, consort of Krishna, 98. 
Patolah ; see Pattala. 
Pattala (Eurmah), 144. 
Pee (Siam), 138. 
Peechaioar (Siam), 138. 
Pentatonic Scale (Chinese), 20. 

identified with oldest Hindu scale, 94. 
found in Corea, 79. 
used by Malays, 242. 



IiidcA 



?>77 



Pepa (China), 3g, 

Percussion, savage instruments of, 246. 

Persian instrumtnts, 222-225. 

harp, 222 ; stringed instruments, 223-225 ; wind 
instruments, 225 ; instruments of percussion, 225. 

Persian music, 213-22T. 

relation to Turkish, 213 ; ancient Persian music, 
213, 214 ; music in time of the Sassanides, 214; 
early system, 215 ; scale, 216 ; music in period of 
the Caliphs, 217 ; present state of, 218-220 ; vocal 
music, 219 ; religious music, 219 ; superiority to 
Arab and Turkish music, 219, 220. 

J'hdn (Siam), 138. 

Pib-be-gwun (N. A. Indian flageolet), 309. 

Pieii-Cliuiig (China), 35. 

Pien-King (China), 32. 

P'ip'a ; see Pepa. 

Po (China), 36. 

Po-Chiing {<Z\ivna), 35. 

Poet's Rebab (Arab), 191. 

Poongi (India), 120. 

Pottery whistles, Aztec, 311, 312. 

Pou-Kou (China), 30. 

Private orchestras, Siamese, 133. 

Pueblos, 298, 310. 

Pukh'ivaj (\x\A\&), 117. 

Puloay (Burmah), 144. 

Pythagoras, 183. 

Qdnon; see Kanoon. 

Qitar (Persia) ; see Tar. 

Qytdrah barbaryeh (Kissar, Egypt), 188. 

Pabdb ; see Hebdb. 
Rabab (India), 113. 
Rabanastion ; see Ravanastron. 
Raga (Rag) ; see Rags. 
Raginis (Hindu melodies), 98. 
Rags (Hindu), definition of, 98. 
fabulous origin of, 99. 
miraculous powers of, gg. 
Ra'ita (Algiers), 193. 
Ranat (Siam), 133, 135. 
Ranat Ek (Siam), 135. 
Ranat Lek (Smm), 135. 
Ranat Thong (Siam), 135. 
Ranat T'koom (Siam), 135. 
Rappakai (Japan), 76. 

Rathnakara, Sangita ; see Sangita Rathnakara. 
Ratnavali, Sangita ; see Sangita Ratnavali. 
Rattles, African, 263. 

Alaskan, 303, 304. 

Shaman's, 303. 
Central American, 323. 
Pueblo, 310. 
Sioux, 307. 

Conjurer's, 307. 
South American, 324. 



Rattles, legendary origin of, 303. 

worshipped in Brazil, 247. 
Ravanastron (India), 114. 
Rebdb (Arab), 191. 

(Persia), 225. 
Rebdb esJi moganny (Ars.\S), 191. 
Rebdb esh sha'er (Arab), 181, igi. 
Rebec, origin of, 167. 
Reed instruments of Karague, 265. 

of Bechuanas, 266. 
Rhythm in savai^e music, 243, 300. 

in North American Indian songs, 296. 
Rigveda, 94. 
Rikk (Arab), 198. 
Rishis, early bards of India, 94. 
Riyuteki (Japan), 75. 

Rowbotham, J. F., theory of, 241, 244, 255, 258, 327. 
Rubab ; see Rabab. 
Ruckert, translator of Confucius' song-book, 15. 

Sagat (Arab), 198. 

Saihwang{(i(ix'ici), 82. 

Samisen (Japan), 61, 72. 

Samoans, 250. 

Sangita, g6. 

Sangita Rathnakara, Sanscrit musical treatise, 106. 

Sangita Ratnavali, g6. 

San-Heen (China), 39. 

re-appears in Japan, 73. 

corresponds to Hindu Tamboura, ill. 

San-Hsie}i ; see San-Heen, 

Sanje (rattle), Africa, 263. 

Sanko of Ashantees, 253. 

^ab/zV (Arab), i8g. 
(Persia), 223. 
(Turkey), 226. 

Santyr J see Santir. 

Saraswati, Hindu goddess of music, g3, gg. 

Sarinda (India), 115. 

(Burmah), 143, 

Saroh ; see Sarinda. 

Sarrooda (India), 116. 

Sarungee (India), 115. 

Savage music, 237 256. 

love of music inborn, 239 ; vocal music, 241-246 ; 
monotony of savage songs, 242 ; exceptions, 243 ; 
rhythmic element in savage music, 243 ; effect of 
the dance, 244 ; importance of singing in savage 
life, 244-246 ; savage musical instruments, 246- 
256 ; examples of savage harmony, 256. 
Savage musical instruments. 

rapid disappearance of, 237 ; necessity for imme- 
diate study, 237 ; wide diffusion of musical instru- 
ments, 240 ; theory of Rowbotham, 241 ; instru- 
ments of percussion, 246-250; rude forms, 246; 
superstitions connected with drum, 247 ; develop- 
ment of harmonicon, 248-250 ; wind instruments, 
250-252 ; the horn family, 250 ; the pipe family. 



378 



Index. 



251 ; development of the flute, 251 ; the syrinx, 
251; stringed instruments, 252-255; importance 
in musical history, 252 ; primitive form, 253 ; Sanko 
of Ashantees, 253 ; development of principle of 
stopping, 254. 

Saw Diiaug (Siam), 138. 

Saw Oo (Siam', 138. 

Saw Sanisai (Siam), 138. 

Saw Tai (Siam), 137. 

Sazindeh, Persian musicians, 218. 

Scale ; see under Music of particular country. 

Schah-Kuli, Persian musician, 217. 

ScJiikenkin (Japan), 71. 

Scholar's lute {Kin), China, 37. 

Schlan-Ii (Persia), 21S, 223. 

Se (China), 37. 

Sch- Tar ; see Si/ar. 

Seing-weiiig (Burmah), 145. 

Scounofiiye (Japan), 75. 

Serenades of Fijians, 245. 

Shaberba (Arab), 193. 
(Persia), 225. 

Shakuhachi (]3.-^axi), 75. 

Shaman (Alaskan medicine man), 302, 303, 304. 

Shanai ; see Shcna. 

Shasters, Hindu sacred writings, 94. 

She Huang Ti, emperor, 17. 

Shena (India), 120. 

Shepherd's fife (Persia), 225. 

Shichiriki (Japan), 75. 

Shiragi (Corea), King of, 62. 

Sho (Japan), 43, 75. 

Sho2t-pan (China), 41. 

Shotoku, Prince, commands study of music, 62. 

Shun, Chinese Emperor, 16, 17. 

Siamese band in London, 131. 

Siamese iirstruments, 134-139. 

two classes of, 134 ; Mahoree, or indoor orchestra, 
134 ; Bhimbhat or indoor orchestra, 134 ; Klong 
Khek, Malay orchestra, 135 ; Lao Phan, 135 ; in- 
struments of percussion, 135-137 ; stringed instru- 
ments, 137, 138 ; wind instruments, 138 ; arrange- 
ment of orchestra, 138. 

Siamese music, 131- 134. 

lack of information concerning, 131 ; high quality 
of, 132 ; allied to that of Hindustan, 132 ; scale, 132; 
absence of notation, 132 ; requisites for success in, 
133 ; musical guilds, 133; private orchestras, 133 ; 
fondness of Siamese for, 133 ; character of songs, 
133 ; absence of harmony, 133. 

Silk, Chinese instruments of, 36. 

Singer's Rebab (Arab), 191. 

Sioux, instruments of, 305-309. 

Sitar (India), 112. 
(Persia), 223. 

Siwa (African bassoon), 266. 

Skin, Chinese instruments of, 29. 

Soma, ancient Hindu musician, 98, 108. 



Sana (China), 42. 

re-appears in Japan, 75. 
Song-7iah (Siam), 136. 
Songs, African, 243. 

Arab, 170. 

Australian, 239, 242, 244. 

Brazilian, 242. 

Burmese, 141. 

Fiji, 242. 

Hindu, 104. 

Japanese, 68. 

negroes (S. America), 242. 

N. American Indian, 242, 293, 296. 

Nubian, 242. 

Persian, 219. 

Samoan, 242. 

.Siamese, 133. 

Tierra del Fuegians, 242. 

Turkish, 220. 
Sono-Koto (Japan), 38, 72. 
Sonorous stone (China), 31. 
(Peru), 324. 
Sooghur, class of Hindu instruments, 108. 
Soo-nal ; see Shena. 
Soorsringa (India), 113. 
Soicerers, Aht, 299. 

Lapland, 247. 
Sown ; see Soung. 
Soung (Burmah), 142. 
Sonrna ; see Zozirna. 
Sournay (Arab), 193. 

South America, instruments of, 323-326 ; division of, 
323 ; sonorous stone, 324 ; drums, 324 ; fifes, 324 ; 
rattle box, 324 ; syrinx, 325 ; wooden trumpets, 
326. 
Sruti, divisions of Hindu scale, 96. 
Stone, Chinese instruments of, 31. 
Stringed instrument (Alaska), 304. 

from Congo River, 269. 
primitive form of, 253. 
Sum ma Koto (Japan), 71. 
Surgum, Hindo gamut, 96. 
Siiz (Persia), 223. 
Swaragama, see Surgum. 
Syrinx ; see Pandean Pipes. 

Tabl Bckdee {¥,gjft), 197. 
Tabl Shainee (Arab), ig6. 
Tackt-i-Bostan, bass-reliefs of, 214. 
Taiko (Japan), 68, 76. 
Ta' Khay (Siam), 137. 

found in Burmah, 143. 
ro/ (India), 119. 
Taht /'o/.- (Siam), 136. 
Tamboiira (Arab), 185. 

wide diffusion of, 185. 

many varieties of, 185. 

described by Alfarabi, 186. 



Index 



379 



Tamboura (India), no. 
(Persia), 223. 
(Turkey), 226. 
Tamboura Bouzourk (Turkey), 220. 
Tambourine, Arab, ig8. 

Ashantee, 263. 
Aztec, 312. 
Chinese, 30. 
Hindu, 118. 
Persian, 225. 
Syrian, 198. 
Tanbour Bagklaina (Arab). 186. 
Boul^hary (Arab), 186. 
Bouzourk (Arab), 186. 
Charqy (Arab), 186. 
Kehyr Tourky (Arab), 186. 
Tao Kou (Cliina), 30. 
Taoosee (India), 113. 
Tap/tone (Siamese), 136. 
Ta-p' ohn; see Taphone. 
Tapper (Sioux), 307. 
Tdr (Arab), 198. 
Tar (Persia), 223. 
Tarau ; see Thro. 
Ta Shao, a Chinese melody, 17. 
Teki (Japan), 74. 
Teponaztlis (Aztec drums), 312. 
Thai-pang'kott (China), 30. 
Thalia (India), 118. 
Than-hwin (Burmah), 145. 
That, Hindu mode, g8. 
Theory of Arabic music, 176. 
Chinese music, 19. 
Hindu music, g6. 
Persian music, 216. 
Thlinkets (Alaskan tribe), 302. 
Thone (Siam), 136. 
Thro (Burmah), 143. 
Tierra del Fuegians, 240, 241. 

songs of, 242. 
Timbila (African Maritnba), 264. 
Titthi ; see Zitty. 
Ti-tzu (China), 42. 

re-appears in Japan, 75. 
To (China), 35. 
Toomerie (India), 121. 
Toomerie Nagassaran (Madras), T20. 
Tootoore (India), 121. 
Toumourah (India), 112. 
T'oungsyo (Corea), 81. 
Ttigonon, old Persian instrument, 214. 
Tritantri Vina, 112. 
Trumpets, Arab (Nefyr), 195. 

Bongo (Manyinyee), 266. 
Chinese (La-pa), 36. 
Hindu (Kurna), 121. 
Mexican (Acocotl), 311. 
Mittoo, 266. 



Trumpets, South American, 250, 326. 

Tsai-yu, Prince, acoustic discoveries, 18. 

Tse King (China), 34. 

Tsu Kou (China), 29. 

Tsukushi-Kolo (Japan), 72. 

Tubla (India), 117. 

Tuk-kay ; see Ta'Khay. 

Tur^Ci. America), 326. 

Turkish instruments, 226, 227. 

stringed instruments, 226 ; wind instruments, 226 ; 

instruments of percussion, 227. 
Turkish music, 217, 220, 221. 

derived from Persia, 217; present state of, 220; 

vocal music, 220 ; military or Janissary music, 220. 
Turr ; see Thro. 

Tut, class of Hindu instruments, 108. 
Ty (China), 42. 
Tzetze ; see Zeze. 

Ujuk (Persia) ; see Tar. 
Unyori, 261. 
Upanga (India), 121. 
Urgun (Syria), 194. 
Ur-Heen (China), 39. 

correspondence to Hindu Ravanastron, 114. 

Veddahs of Ceylon, 240, 241. 
Vina (India), 108. 

invented by Nareda, 93. 

favorite instrument of the early bards of India, 94. 
Violins, African, 270. 

Apache, 310. 

Arabian, 190. 

Burmese, 143. 

Chinese, 39. 

Corean, 81. 

Greek, 226. 

Hindu, 113-116. 

Japanese, 73. 

Persian, 223. 

Siamese, 137. 

Turkish, 226. 
Violin, origin of the, 40. 

India, the cradle of, 114. 
Vishnu, 93. 

Vissandshi (Africa), 265. 
Vivo (Sandwich Islands), 327. 
Vocal music, origin of, 241. 

Wahle khoht (JiMXxaabv), 145. 
Wajiji, 260, 
Wangong (Japan), 71. 

War-whistle (North American Indians), 309. 
Water-drum (Bushman), 263. 
Whistles, Aztec, 312. 
Kaffre, 266. 
Sioux, 309. 
Winnebago courting-flute, 309. 



;8o 



Wood, Chinese instrumenls <>f, 40. 



Ya-gic'in (Burmah), 145. 

Yang-Kin (China), 40. 

Yang-A'nni (Corea), Si. 
Yellow Emperor, the (Huang Ti), 16. 

Ymg Kon (China), 29. 
Yu (musical stone). 31. 

Yii (wooden instrument), China, 40, 

Yue-CkHn ; see Yiie-Kin. 

Yue-Kin (China), 39. 

re-appears in Japan, 73. 

Yu-hsiao (China), 34. 

Yiin-lo[Oi\\xvz), 36, 

Yii-ty (China), 34. 



Index. 



Xenophon, 214. 
Xylophone; sec Harmonicon. 

Zanze (Africa), 264. 
Zemr (Egypt), 193. 
Zczc (African banjo), 268. 
Zilty (Madras), 120, 
Zoroaster, 213. 
Zotirna (Arab), 193. 

(India), 120. 

(Persia), 225. 

(Turkey), 226. 
Zummara]i (Egyptl, 194- 
Zummarah-bi-soan (Arab), 195. 



