Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 



" '-4 



< 



^lUi 



) 

V 



MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS IN THE 

{ SOUTH KENSINGTON MUSEUM 



; 3 



SCIENCE AND ART DEPARTMENT 

OF THE COMMITTEE OF COUNCIL ON EDUCATION, 

SOUTH KENSINGTON MUSEUM. 



DESCRIPTIVE CATALOGUE 

OF THE 

MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 

IN THE 

SOUTH KENSINGTON MUSEUM. 

Preceded by an EJfay an the Hiftory if Mufical Infirumenii. 

By carl ENGEL. 

second edition. 



LONDON: 

PRINTED BY GEORGE E. EYRE AND WILLIAM SPOTTISWOODE, 

PKINTIIU TO THE QUEBn's MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY. 

FOR HER MAJESTY'S STATIONERY OFFICE. 

1874. 



CONTENTS. 



Introduction .--*--• 

An Essay on the History op Musical Instrumbnti 

Prehiftoric Relics ---... 

Mufical Inflnunents of the Ancient Egyptians . . . 

Mufical Inftruments of the AfTyrians . . ^ . 

Mufical Inftruments of the Hebrews - - . . 

Mufical Inftruments of the Greeks . . . . 

Mufical Inlh-uments of the Etrufcans and Romans 
Mufical Inflruments of the Chinefe . . . . 

Mufical Inflniments of the Hindus . . » . 

Mufical Infb-uments of the Perfians and Arabs . - . 

Mufical Infhiiments of the American Indians ... 

Mufical Inflniments of European nations during the Middle Ages - 
Post-Mediaeval Mufical Inftruments . . . . 

Catalogue -------- 

African Countries .-.--. 

Afiatic Countries ---..- 

The Caucafus, and neighbouring Diflridb - - - - 

Turkey - - - - - - -- 

Roumania ------- 

Mufical Inflniments^ moftly antiquated^ of European countries 
Mexican Antiquities ------ 

Appendix No. i. — Mufical Inflniments lent for Exhibition 

Appendix No. 2. — Some Account of the Special Exhibition of Ancient 
Mufical Inflruments in the South Kenfington Muieum, Anno 1872 - 

Index of Numbers ------- 

General Index ------- 



Page 
I 

9 

9 
II 

21 

a? 

3+ 

40 
+6 

53 

57 

65 
89 

119 

»39 
H« 

'57 

202 
207 
2:i7 
22^ 

285 

287 

347 
381 

383 



28741. 



LIST OF ILLVSTRJTIONS. 



6. 

8. 



r«g. 

t. Italian Spinet^ ornamented with pre- 
cious ftooes. Made by Anni- 
bale de! Rofli of Milan, in the 
year 1577. — Frontitpkce. 

%, A Pre-hiftoric Whiftle - 

3. Harp with Ten Stringt, Ancient 

Egyptian - - 

4. Harp with Thirteen Strings, An- 

cient Egypdan 

5. Triangular Harp of the Ancient 
Egyptians ... 

Kind of Trigonon 
Lyres held horizontally - 
Lyre held perpendicularly 
9. Four-ftringed Inftrument, home 
upon the Shoulder of the Per- 
lomcr ■ • - 

10. An Ancient Egyptian Concert 

11. An Ancient Egyptian Flute Concert 
I a. Military Band, Andent Egyptian - 

13. Three Tambourines and a Dara- 

bouka of the Ancient Egyptians 

14. Siftra, Ancient Egyptian - 

15. Proceffion of Aflyrian Muficians to 

meet the Conquerors return- 
ing from Battle 

16. An AiTyrian Inftrument of 

Trigonon fpecies 

17. AITyrian Lyres, Tambourine, 

Cymbals ... 

18. Aflyrian Tamboura 

19. AiTyrian Drums . - . 

20. Hebrew Coins with the Lyre 

2 1 . Hebrew fquare-fhaped Lyre 

22. The fuppofed Hebrew Lyre of Beni 

HaiTan ... 

23. Ancient Bagpipe from Tarfus, 

Cilicia ... 

24. Grecian Harp and Lyres - 

25. Grecian Lyres ... 

26. Trigonon ... 

27. A fpecies of Trigonon 

28. Diaulos .... 

29. Etrufcan Comu ... 

30. Organum hydraulicum 

31. Roman Lyre ... 

32. The fuppofed Pfalterium - 



the 



and 



*g« 


F5g. 


Page 




33. Trigonum, Roman 


4* 




- 34. Tibic pares, Roman 


41 




35. Tibis pares with the Capiftruro - 


43 




36. Roman Girl playing the Tibia 


44 


10 


37. The Tuba, Cornu, and Lituus 


44 




38. Crotala, Roman ... 


45 


12 


39. King, Chinese ... 


47 




40. Pien-tchung, Chineie 


49 


13 


41. Hiuen-tchung ... 


49 




42. Ou, Chinefe ... 


50 


H 


43. Tchou, Chine(e ... 


5i 


'4 


44. Kin-kou, Chineie 


5* 


14 


45. Hiuen - . . - 


52 


15 


46. Vina, Hinduflan . - - 


55 




47. Perfian Chang, VP* Century 


58 




48. Perfian Bagpipe, Vl*^ Century 


58 


i5 


49. Perfian Harps, about A.D. 1400 - 


59 


16 


50. Turkiih Harp, XVII* Century - 


59 


18 


51. El-oud, or Lute . - - 


61 


>9 


52. Kanoon ... 


61 




53. Perfian Santir 


62 


20 


54. Nay - - - - 


63 


21 


55. Whiftlesof the Astecs - 


66 




56. Antique IHpe from Central America 


66 




57. Pipes of the Axtecs 


67 


22 


58. A Pipe of the Aztecs 


68 




59. Antique Peruyian Bone-Flute 


69 


as 


60. Huayra-puhura of the Inca Peru- 






vians . - - - 


70 


*4 


61. Huayra-puhura of the Inca Peru- 




25 


vians- - - . 


7« 


26 


62. Trumpet of the Indians in the 




28 


Vicinity of the Orinoco 


72 


28 


63. Juniparis, South America 

64. Antique Trumpets of the Indians 


73 


30 


in Guiana ... 


74 




65. Teponaztli of the Aztecs - 


77 


3a 


66. Antique Drum from Hifpaniola 


78 


35 


67. Antique Bell of the Inca Peru- 




36 


vians - - . - - 


81 


37 


r,8. Yotlof the Aztecs 


81 


38 


69. A Clufler of fmall Bells of the 




39 


Aztecs 


81 


40 


70. Cithara, IX* Century 


90 


4' 


71. Triangular Pfalterium, «»*• Cen- 




4» 


tury .... 


9* 


42 


72. Square Pfalterium, IX* Century - 


9« 



Liifi of Illujlrations. 



• • 



Vll 



Hg. Page 

73. Gthan, JX*^ Century - - 92 

74. Nablum, IX*^ Century - - 92 

75. A Specie! of Citole, IX»^ Century 93 

76. Anglo-Saxon Harp, XP** Century 94 

77. Harp, IX«^ Century - - 95 

78. Early Irifh Harp - - 95 

79. German Rotte, IX*^ Century - 96 

80. Rotta, VIP^ Century - - 97 

81. An IriiH Rotta, X*^ Century - 98 

82. Crowd, Engliih; about the XIU*^ 

Century - - "99 

83. French Crout, XP^ Century . 100 

84. Anglo-Saxon Fiddle, Xl*'* Century loi 

85. German Fiddle, IX*^ Century - loi 

86. Organiftrum, IX^ Century - io3 

87. Monochord, IX*^ Century - 104 

88. Single Chorus, X^ Century - 105 

89. Double Chorus, X^^ Century - 105 

90. Chorus, IX*^ Century • - 106 

91. A Species of Syrinx, XI^ Century 107 

92. Sackbut, IX^ Century - - 107 

93. Pneumatic Organ, IV*^ Century - 108 

94. Organ, XU^ Century - - 109 

95. Regal, XV*^ Century - - no 

96. Cymbalum, IX*^ Century - iiz 

97. Cymbahim, IX^ Century - in 

98. Bunibulum, IX^ Century - in 

99. Bas-relief from the Abbey of St. 

Georges de Bofcherville - 11 3 
100. Mufical Performers repreiented on 

the Portico della Gloria of The 

Church of Santiago da Com- 

poftella - - - ii5 
loi. Front of the Minftrels* Gallery, 

Exeter Cathedral - - zi8 

102. Lute, XVI*** Century • - 120 
io3. Viola da Gamba, EngUA, XVIPI' 

Century ... 123 
104. Recorder, EngUfli, XVIPi^ Cen- 

tuiy - - - - 124 

Th» Departmtnt ofScienct and Art it tndebttd fo Mr. John MvaitAYyor tAe loan of Sixtten H^oodcuts, 

illustrating the Ancient Egyptian and Assyrian Ltstntments. 



Fig. 




Page 


105. Scotch Bagpipe, XVIII'*' Century - 


125 


106. Irifli Bagpipe, XVI*^ Century 


- 


126 


107. Carillon, The Netherlands 


- 


131 


108. Rebab ... 


. 


143 


109. Tabl Shamee - 


- 


144 


no. Nubian KifTar - 


. 


148 


in. Nanga ; a Negro Harp - 


• 


i5o 


112. Negro Ivory Trumpet - 


- 


«53 


113. Marimba, Africa 


- 


155 


IZ4. Yue-kin, China 


. 


179 


115. San-heen, China 


- 


181 


116. Cheng; a Chinefe Organ 


. 


187 


117. ChineieDrum 


. 


189 


118. Yun-lo, China - 


. 


193 


119. Biva, Japan 


- 


»95 


120. Taki-goto, Japan 


- 


196 


121. Santir 


- 


205 


122. Kemangeh 


- 


210 


123. Rebab efh-Sha*er 


. 


211 


124. Kobfa ... 


m 


219 


125. OUphant 


- 


228 


126. Comet a Bouquin 


- 


23o 


127. Vielle - 


- 


233 


128. Chitarrone 


. 


H5 


129. Archlute 


- 


246 


130. Zither 


. 


256 


131. Viola di Bardone 


. 


264 


1 32. Virginal 


- 


269 


133. Engliih Spinet - 


- 


276 


134. Handel*s Harpfichord 


- 


280 


135, Violin, Englifh. Dated 1578. 




Lent by the Earl of Warwick 


. 


288 


136. Pib-gorn, Welfli 


• 


293 


137. Crwth, Welfh- 


- 


294 


138. Zanxe, Weflem Aftica - 


- 


297 




- 


3o6 


140. KaiTo ; a Negro Inftrument 


. 


3o8 


141. Bafs Flute, Engliih 


* 


3*9 


142. Nail Violin 


- 


343 


143. German Clayichord 


- 


356 



PHOTOGRJPHS, 



Chinefe Mufical Inffaruments 
Harp} French - - . 

Machete, Quinterna and Pandurina - 
Virginal} Italian . . - 

Clavicembalo ; Italian 
Organ Pofitive } German - 



Facing Pkge 
184 
238 
248 
270 
278 
284 



LIST OF DONORS. 



HIS HIGHNESS THE KHEDIVE OF 

EGYPT. 
THE DUKE OF LEINSf £R. 
MRS. BAYLEY. 
MESSRS. BROADWOOD. 
MR. C. CABBAN. 
MR. W. CARPENTER. 
MR. G. J. CHESTER. 
THE DIRECTORS OF THE ALEXAN- 

DRA PALACE COMPANY. 

MR. C. ENGEL. 

THE INDIAN DEPARTMENT OF THE 
ANNUAL INTERNATIONAL EX- 
HIBITION, 187s. 

MESSRS. KIRKMAN. 



LIEUTENANT MCEUEN, R.N. 

MR. G. MOFFAT. 

MR. T. MUIR. 

MISS NEWBERY. 

OFFICERS of the 4TN DRAGOON 
GUARDS. 

SIR F. GORE OUSELEY. 

MRS. E. RICHARDS. 

MR. F. SLOWAK. 

ARCHDEACON SAURIN. 

CAP FAIN J. STUART. 

CAPTAIN VANSITTART, R.N. 

MONS. J. B. VUILLAUME. 

SIR CHARLES WHEATSTONE. 



LIST OF LENDERS. 



MR. T. BLACKMORE. 

MR. R. BURCHETT. 

SIGNOR CASTELLANI. 

MESSRS. CHAPPELL ft CO. 

THE EDINBURGH MUSEUM OF 
SCIENCE AND ART. 

MR. C. ENGEL. 

MR. C. WYNNE FINCH. 

MR. MARCUS FLOWERS. 

SIR BARTLE FRERE, K.C.B. 

MR. J. FURLEY. 

MISS GLOVER. 

MR. J. HARE. 

REV. H. R. HAWEIS. 



MR. J. HILLIER. 
MESSRS. HOPKINSON. 
MRS. JAMES. 

LADY LLANOVER. 
MRS. READ. 

MESSRS. RUDALL, ROSE, CARTE, 
& CO. 

MAJOR E. B. SLADEN. 

MESSRS. SPEECHLY AND INGRAM 

MR. W. TAYLOR. 

MR. C. H. THORPE. 

The EARL OF WARWICK. 

MESSRS. C. WHEATSTONE & CO. 

MR. H. WILLETT. 



INTRODUCTION. 



USIC, in however primitive a ftage of development it may 
be with fome nations, is the moft univerfally appreciated 
of the Fine Arts, The origin of Vocal mufic may be 
furmifed to have been coeval with, if not antecedent to, 
jl that of language ; and the conftru^ton of mufical inftni- 
ments evidently dates with the earlicft inventions which fuggefted 
themfelves to human ingenuity. There exift even at the prefent day 
fome ravage tribes, in Auftralia and South America, who, although 
they have no more than the five firft numerals in their language, and 
are thereby unable to count the fingers of both hands together, never- 
thelefs polTefs mufical inftruments of their own contrivance, with which 
they accompany their fongs and dances. 

Wood, metal, and the hide of animals, are the moft common fub- 
ftances ufed in the conftnuEtion of mufical inftruments. In tropical 
countries bamboo, or fome fimilar kind of cane, and gourds, are cfpecially 
made ufe of for this purpofe. Bone, horn, glafs, pottery, flabs of fonorous 
ftone, — in feft, almoft all vibrating matter has the ingenuity of man 
contrived to employ in producing mufic. The ftrings of inftruments 
are made of the hair of animals, of fillc, the runners of creeping plants, 
the fibrous roots of certain trees, of cane, ca^t (which implies not only 
the gut of the cat, but alfo of the goat, lamb, camel, and fome other 
animals], metal, &c. 

The mode in which individual nations or tribes are in the habit of 
embellilhing their mufical inftruments is fometlmes as chara<£leriftic as 
it is fingular. The negroes in feverat diftridls of Weftern Afi-ica affix 
to their drums human (kulls. A war-trumpet of the king of Aftiantee, 
which was brought to England, is furrounded by human jawbones. 



IntroduSlion. 



The Maories in New T^^sBasA carve around the mouth-hole of their 
trumpets a figure intended, it is faid, to reprefent female lips. The 
materials for ornamentation chiefly employed by favages, are bright 
colours, beads, (hells, grafles, the bark of trees, feathers, ftones, gilding, 
pieces of looking-glafs inlaid like mofaic, &c. Uncivilized nations are 
fure to confider anything which is bright and glittering ornamental^ 
efpecially if it is alfo fcarce. Captain l^uckey faw in Congo a negro 
inftrument which was ornamented with part of the broken frame of a 
looking-glafs, to which were affixed in a femicircle a number of brafs 
buttons with the head of Louis XVI. on them, — perhaps a relic of 
fome French failor drowned near the coaft years ago. 

Again, mufical inftruments are not unfrequently formed in the 
fhape of certain animals. Thus, a kind of harmonicon of the Chinefe 
reprefents the figure of a crouching tiger. The Burmefe pofTefs a 
ftringed inftrument in the fhape of an alligator. Even more gro* 
tefque are the imitations of various beafts adopted by the Javanefe. 
The natives of New Guinea have a fingularly fhaped drum, terminating 
in the head of a reptile. A wooden rattle reprefenting a bird is a 
favourite inftrument of the Indians of Nootka Sound, North-weftern 
America. In fliort, not only the inner conftrudtion of the inftruments, 
and their peculiar quality of found, exhibit in moft nations certain 
diftin£tive charaderiftics, but the fame is alfo in great meafure the cafe 
with their outward appearance. 

An arrangement of the various kinds of mufical inftruments in a 
regular order, beginning with that kind which is the moft univerfally 
known, and progreffing gradually to the leaft ufual, gives the following 
refults : — 

Inftruments of Percuffion of indefinite ibnoroufnefs, or, in other 
words, pulfatile inftruments which have not a found of a fixed pitch, — 
as the drum, rattle, caftanets, &c. — ^are moft univerfal. 

Wind Inftruments of the flute kind, — including pipes, whiftles, 
flutes, Pandean pipes, &c. — are alfo to be found almofl everywhere. 

Much the fame is the cafe with Wind Inftruments of the trumpet 
kind. Thefe are often made of the horns, bones, and tufks of animals ; 
but alfo frequently of vegetable fubftances, and of metal. 

Inftruments of Percuffion of definite fonoroufnefs are chiefly met 
with in China, Japan, Burmah, Siam, and Java. They not unfre- 
quently contain a feries of tones produced by flabs of wood, or metal, 
which are beaten with a fort of hammer, as our harmonicon is played. 

Stringed Inftruments without a finger-board, or any fimilai* con- 
trivance which enables the performer to produce .a number of different 



IntroduEiton. 



tones on one ftring, are generally found among nations whofe mufical 
accomplifhments have emerged from the earlieft ftate of infancy. The 
firings are twanged with the fingers or with a piece of wood, horn, 
metal, or any other fuitable fubflance ferving as a pleSirum ; or tbe firings 
are made to vibrate by being beaten with a hammer, as our dulcimer 
is played. 

Wind Inflruments with reeds^ i.^., fuch inilruments as are blown 
through a fingle or double piece of vibrating cane, flraw, or flmilar 
fubftance, — like our hautboy, bafToon, and clarinet, — are chiefly met 
with in European countries. They are, however, alfo conflruded in 
feveral Afiatic countries, in Egypt, the Barbary States, &c. 

Stringed Inflruments provided with a finger-board, on which different 
tones are producible on one firing by the performer (hortening the fame 
more or lefs, — as on the guitar, violin, &c. — are met with almofl ex- 
clufively among nations in a fomewhat advanced flage of mufical pro- 
grefs. Such as are played with a bow are the leafl univerfal ; they are, 
however, known to the Chinefe, Japanefe, Hindus, Perfians, Arabs, 
and a few other nations, befides thofe of Europe and their defcendants 
in extra-European countries. 

Wind Inflruments of the organ kind, — i.^,, fuch as are conflruded 
of a number of tubes which can be founded together by means of a 
common mouthpiece, or fome fimilar contrivance, and upon which 
therefore chords, and combinations of chords, or harmony, can be pro- 
duced, — are comparatively of rare occurrence. Some interefling 
fpecimens of them exifl in China, Japan, Laos, and Siam. 

Befides thefe various kinds of found-producing means employed 
in mufical performances, a few others, lefs widely difFufed, could be 
pointed out, which are of a conflrudion not reprefented in any of our 
well known European fpecimens. For inflance, fome extra-European 
nations have peculiar Inflruments of Fridion, which can hardly be 
clafTed with our Inflruments of Percuffion. Again, there are certain 
contrivances in which a number of firings are caufed to vibrate by a 
current of air, much as is the cafe with the ^olian harp ; which might 
with equal propriety be confidered either as flringed inflruments, or as 
wind inflruments. In fhort, our ufual claflification of all the various 
fpecies into three diffa'nfl divifions, viz., Stringed Inflruments^ Wind 
Inflruments^ and Injtruments of Percujfton^ is not tenable if we extend 
our refearches over the whole globe. 

The collection defcribed in the prefent catalogue contains feveral 
foreign inflruments which cannot fail to prove .interefling to the 



IntroduSiion. 



mufician. Recent inveftigations have more and more elicited the fad 
that the muflc of every nation exhibits fome diftindive charaderiftics 
which may afford valuable hints to him as a compofer or performer. A 
familiarity with the popular fongs of different countries is advifable for 
him on account of the remarkable originality of the airs. They moftly 
fpring fi-om the heart ; hence the natural and true expreffion, the 
delightful health and vigour by which they are generally diflinguifhed. 
Our more artificial compofitions are, on the other hand, not unfre- 
quently deficient in thefe charms, becaufe they often emanate from the 
fingers, or the pen, rather than from the heart Howbeit, the pre- 
dominance of expreffive melody and effedive rh)rthm over harmonious 
combinations, fo ufual in the popular compofitions of foreign nations^ 
would alone fuffice to recommend them to the careful attention of our 
modern muficians. 

The fame may be faid with regard to the furprifing variety in con- 
flru6tion and in manner of expreffion prevailing in the popular fongs 
and dance-tunes of different countries. Indeed, every nation's mufical 
effufions exhibit a character peculiarly their own, with which the 
mufician would find it advantageous to familiarize himfelf. 

Now, it will eafily be underflood that an acquaintance with the 
mufical inflruments of a nation conveys a more corred idea than 
could otherwife be obtained of the charaderiflic features of the nation's 
mufical compofitions. Furthermore, in many inflances the con- 
flrudlion of the inflruments reveals to us the nature of the mufical 
intervals, fcales, modulations and fuch like noteworthy fa6ts. True, 
inquiries like thefe have hitherto not received from muficians the atten- 
tion which they deferve. The adepts in mofl other arts are in this 
refped in advance. They are convinced that ufeful information may 
be gathered by invefligating the productions of art even of uncivilized 
nations, and by thus tracing the gradual progrefs of an art from its 
mofl primitive infancy to its highefl degree of development. Perhaps 
the colledlion of inflruments defcribed in the following pages will in 
fome meafure contribute to eflablifh this convi6tion more univerfally 
alfo among the children of Jubal. 

Again, from an examination of the mufical inflruments of foreign 
nations, we may derive valuable hints for the improvement of our own 
inflruments ; or even for the invention of new ones. Several principles 
of conflrudion have thus been adopted by us from Eaflern nations, 
For inflance, the free reed ufed in the Harmonium, or ** Orgue 
expreffif," is an importation from China. The organ builder, Kratzen- 
ftein, who lived in St. Peterfburg during the reign of Catharine IL, 



IntroduEiion. 



happened to fee the Chinefe inftrument cheng^ which is of this con- 
ftnidtion, and it fuggefted to him, about the end of the laft century, to 
apply the free reed to certain organ flops. At the prefent day, inflru- 
ments of the harmonium clafs have become fuch univerfal favourites 
in Weftern Europe as almoft to vie in popularity with the pianoforte. 

Several other well-authenticated inftances could be cited in which 
one inftrument has fuggefted the conftru6lion of another of a fuperior 
kind. The prototype of our pianoforte was evidently the dulcimer, 
known at an early time to the Arabs and Perfians, who call it fantir. 
One of the old names given to the dulcimer by European nations is 
cimbaL The Poles at the prefent day call it cymbaly^ and the Magyars 
in Hungary, cimbalom* The clavicembalo^ the predeceflbr of the 
pianoforte, was in fad nothing but a cembalo with a key-board attached 
to it ; and fome of the old clavicembali^ ftill preferved, exhibit the 
trapezium fliape, the round hole in the middle of the found-board and 
other peculiarities of the old dulcimer. Again, the gradual development 
of the dulcimer from a rude contrivance, conflfting merely of a wooden 
board acrofs which a few ftrings are ftretched, is diftindly traceable 
by a reference to the mufical inftruments of nations in different ftages 
of civilization. The fame is the cafe with our highly perfeded harp, 
of which curious fpecimens, reprefenting the inftrument in its moft 
primitive condition, are ftill to be found among feveral barbarous tribes. 
We might perhaps infer from its ftiape that it originally confifted ot 
nothing more than an elaftic ftick bent by a ftring. The Damaras, a 
native tribe of South-Weftern Afi'ica, actually ufe their bow occa- 
fionally as a mufical inftrument, when they are not engaged in war or 
in the chafe. They tighten the ftring nearly in the middle by means 
of a leathern thong, whereby they obtain two diftin<fi founds, which, 
for want of a found-board, are of courfe very weak, and fcarcely 
audible to anyone but the performer. Some neighbouring tribes^ 
however, pofTefs a mufical inftrument very fimilar in appearance to the 
bow, to which they attach a gourd, hollowed, and open at the top, 
which ferves as a found-board. Again, other African tribes have a 
fimilar inftrument, fuperior in conftru6tion only inafmuch as it contains 
more than one ftring, and is provided with a found-board conflfting of 
a fuitable piece of fonorous wood. In fhort, the more improved we 
find thefe contrivances, the clofer they approach our harp. And it 
could be fhown, if this were requifite for the purpofe of the prefent 
efTay, that much the fame gradual progrefs towards perfe6kion, which 
we obferve in the African harp, is traceable ia the harps of feveral 
nations in different parts of the world. 



IntroduSiion. 



Moreover, the prefent coUedion of mufical inftruments deferves the 
attention of the ethnologift as much as of the mufician. Indeed, this 
may be aiTerted of national mufic in general ; for it gives us an infight 
into the heart of man, reveals to us the feelings and prediledions of the 
different races on the globe, and affords us a clue to the natural affinity 
which exifls between different £unilies of men. 

Again, the collection is likely to prove interefling taken in a hif- 
torical point of view. Vifitors of an archaeological turn of mind will 
find among the antiquated inflruments feveral fpecimens which were in 
common ufe in England at the time of Queen Elizabeth, and which 
are not unfrequently mentioned in our claffical literature of that period. 
In many inflances, the paflages in which allufion is made to them can 
hardly be underflood, if we are unacquainted with the (hape and con- 
flru6lion of the inflruments. Furthermore, thefe relics of bygone times 
bring, fo to fay, before our eyes the manners and cufloms of our fore- 
fathers, and aflift us in underflanding them corre<^ly. 

It wiU be feen that the modification which our orcheflra has 
undergone in the courfe of fcarcely more than a century, is great indeed. 
Mofl of the inflruments which were highly popular about a hundred 
years ^o, have either fallen into difufe, or are now fo much altered 
that they may almofl be confidered as new inventions. Among Afiatic 
nations, on the other hand, we meet with feveral inflruments which 
have retained inta£l through many centuries their old conflrudion and 
outward appearance. In the prefent catalogue will be found notices 
of fome inflruments, flill in popular ufe in Egypt and Weflern Afia, 
which are precifely like certain fpecimens reprefented on ancient monu- 
ments dating from a period of about three thoufand years ago. By a 
reference to the Eaflern inflruments of the prefent time we obtain 
therefore a key for invefligating the ancient Egyptian and Affyrian 
reprefentations of mufical performances ; and, likewife, for appreciating 
more exadly the Biblical records refpeding the mufic of the Hebrews. 
Perhaps, thefe evidences will convey to fome inquirers a lefs high 
opinion than they have hitherto entertained, regarding the mufical 
accomplifhments of the Hebrew bands in the folemn proceffions of 
King David, or in Solomon's temple ; but the opinion will be* all the 
nearer to the truth. 

There is another point of interefl about the coUedion, which mufl 
not be left unnoticed. Several inflruments are remarkable on account 
of their elegant fhape and tafleful ornamentation. This is efpecially 
the cafe with certain fpecimens fi'om Afiatic countries. The beautiful 



IntroduElton. 



defigns with which they are embellifhed may afford valuable patterns 
for ftudy and for adoption in works of art. 

It has been thought advifable thus briefly to indicate the various 
purpofes for which the prefent collection of mufical inftruments is 
likely to prove inftru£iive, iince the plan adopted in the compilation 
of the catalogue is thereby explained* The aim of the compiler has 
been to facilitate a furvey of the inftruments of each nation individually, 
as well as of the whole coUedion, and efpecially to impart fuch infor- 
mation on the fubjed as he thought moft likely to intereft viiitors in 
general. Some ftatements may, at a firft glance, appear unimportant ; 
but, as they are ftatements of afcertained fa6ls, they ought not to be 
difregarded by earneft inquirers. At all events, if in muiical invefti- 
gadons greater attention had been given to fa6ts apparently of little 
moment than has generally been the cafe^ much light would long fince 
have been thrown upon feveral interefting queftions which are ftill 
involved in darknefs. 



AN ESSAY 

ON THE HISTORY OF MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS. 




SATISFACTORY account of all the mufical inftruments 
from the earlieft time known to us, would require much 
more fpace than can here be afforded. In the prefent 
eiTay therefore only a concife hiftorical furvey has been 
attempted. It is, however, hoped that the illuftrations 
interfperfed throughout the text, will to the intelligent reader elucidate 
many fa6):s, which, for the reafon ftated, are touched upon but curforily. 

Pre-historic Relics. 

Several mufical inflruments, dating from periods anterior to the 
Chriflian era, have been difcovered during the prefent century, preferved 
almofl inta£i:. Among thefe curious relics of high antiquity is a little 
pipe with two finger-holes, which has been found in the ruins of Babylon, 
Birs-i-Nimroud, and which, when blown into, ftill emits tones that cannot 
have been more clear and diflin6l at the time when the inflrument had 
jufl been formed of clay and baked by its conflrudor. Even more 
furprifing is the prefervation of fome ilringed inflruments, fpecies of 
harps, which have been brought to light from fepulchres of the ancient 
Egyptians. 

Still, thefe inflruments might almofl be regarded as belonging to 
modern times, if we compare their antiquity with that of a certain 
mufical relic which has recently been exhumed in France, and which 
was conflruded by the inhabitants of the country in an age when the 
fauna of France included among the Herbivora the reindeer, the rhino- 
ceros, the mammoth, the aurochs {Bifon europaus) ; and among the 
Carnivora the hysena, the bear, and the cave-lion {Felis fpelaa). With 
other rude works of art of primaeval man which have been found in 
the caverns of the department of Dordogne (the ancient province of 
Perigord), occurs a fmall bone, fbmewhat lefs than two inches in length, 

M.I. B 



Hg. 1.— A PtM-w 



in which is a hole, evidently bored by means of one of thofe little 
Arnt knives which man conftru£te<l before his acquaintance with the 
employment of metal for tools and weapons. Many of thefe flints were 
found in the fame place with the bones. Only about half a dozen of 
the bones, of which a confiderable number have been exhumed, polTcfs 
the artificial hole. {See F^. 2.) 

M. Lartet ('Cavemes du Perigord, objcts graves ct Iculptcs des 
temps pre-hiftoriques dans I'Europe occidentale,' Paris 1864] furmifes 
the perforated bone to have been ufed by the aborigines as a whiftle 
in hunting animals. It is the firll digital phalanx of a ruminant, drilled 
to a certain depth by a fmooth cylindrical bore, on its lower furface 
near the expanded upper articu- 
lation. On applying it to the 
lower lip and blowing into it, a 
(hrill found is yielded. Three of 
thefe phalanges are of reindeer, 
one is of chamois. Sir Charles 
Lyell (' The Geological Evidences 
of the Antiquity of Man,' London 1863) mentions among the pre- 
hiiloric remains difcovered in a fepulchral grotto near the town of 
Aurignac in the department of Haute-Garonne, Southern France, 
" eighteen fmall, round, and flat plates of a white tbeUy fubftance, 
•' made of fome fpccies of cockle {Cardium)^ pierced through the 
'* middle as if for being ftrung into a bracelet." And M. Lartet 
found in the fame grotto the tufk of a cave-bear, carved and perforated 
lengthwlfe as if for fufpenfion as an ornament or amulet. Again, 
among the relics which have been brought to light from the cave 
of Lombrive, in the department of Ariege, alfo in the South of 
France, of which an account has been publilbed by MM. Rames, 
Garrigou, and Filhol, occur feveral eye-teeth of the d(^ which have a 
hole drilled into them near the root. Probably they alfo yield founds 
like thofe reindeer bones, or like the tube of a key. Still, there remains 
hardly a doubt that the inftrument in queftion was conftru^ed for no 
other purpofc than that of ferving as a whiAle for conveying lignals. 
This is the opinion of all fovans who have carefully inveftigated the 
pre-hiftoric relics. Another whiftle, — or rather a pipe, for it has three 
finger-holes, by means of which different tones could be produced, — 
was found in a bury ing-pl ace, dating from the ftone period, which 
is fituated in the vicinity of Poitiers in France. M. Lartet and 
Dr. Camus of Paris had a caft made of this pipe, which they fent to 
M. Fetis, who has given an illuftration of it in his • Hiftoire generale 
de la Mufique.' The pipe is rudely conftnidted from a fragment of 



Hifiory of Mujical Infiruments. 1 1 



ftag's-horn. It is blown at the end, like a fiute a hecy and the three 
finger-holes are placed equidiftantly. Four diftinft tones muft have 
been eafily obtainable on it : the loweft, when all the finger-holes were 
covered ; the other three, by opening the finger-holes fucceffively. 
From the charader of the ftone utenfils and weapons difcovered with 
this pipe, it is conjectured that the burying-place from which it was 
exhumed dates from the lateft time of the ftone age. Therefore, how- 
ever old it may be, it is a more recent contrivance than the reindeer-bone 
whittle firom the cavern of Perigord. 

Musical Instruments of the Ancient Egyptians. 

The moft ancient nations hiftorically known pofTeiTed mufical 
inftruments which, though in acouftic conftru£kion greatly inferior to 
our own, exhibit a degree of perfedion which could have been attained 
only after a long period of cultivation. Many nations or tribes of the 
prefent day have not yet reached this ftage of mufical progrefs. 

As regards the inftruments of the ancient Egyptians we now poflefs 
perhaps more detailed information than of thofe appertaining to any 
other nation of antiquity. This information we owe efpecially to the 
exadnefs with which the inftruments are depi£ked in fculptures and 
paintings. Whoever has examined thefe interefting monuments with 
even ordinary care, cannot but be convinced that the reprefentations 
which they exhibit, are faithful tranfcripts from life. Moreover, if there 
remained any doubt refpeding the accuracy of the reprefentations of 
the mufical inftruments, it might be difpelled by moft reliable evidence. 
Several fpecimens have been difcovered in tombs preferved in a more 
or lefs perfed condition. 

The Egyptians polTefTed various kinds of harps, fome of which 
were elegantly fhaped and taftefuUy ornamented. The largeft were 
about 6^ feet high ; and the fmall ones firequently had fome fort of 
ftand which enabled the performer to play upon the inftrument while 
ftanding. The name of the harp was hunu Its frame had no front 
pillar ; the tenfion of the ftrings therefore cannot have been anything 
like fo ftrong as on our prefent harp. [See the Ancient Egyptian 
Concert, Fig. lo.) 

The Egyptian harps moft remarkable for elegance of form and 
elaborate decoration are the two which were firft noticed by Jthe 
traveller Bruce, who found them painted in frefco on the wall of 
an ancient fepulchre at Thebes, which is fuppofed to be the tomb 
of Ramefes III., who reigned about 1250 B.C. Bruce's difcovery 
firft became known to the mufical world through a letter addrelTed 

B 2 



1 2 An EJfay on the 

by him to Dr. Bumey, which, accompanied by a drawing of one of 
thefe harps, without the figure of the performer, was publifbcd in the 
firft volume of Burney's ' Hiftory of Mulic' Soon afterwards, engrav- 
ings of both inftrumcnts appeared in Brucc's ' Travels,' vol. I. The 
diicovery created fenfation among muHcians. The &ift that at fo 
remote an age the Egyptians Qiould have polTcfred harps which vie 
with our own in elegance and beauty of form, appeared to fome fo 
incredible that the correfinefs of Bruce's rcprcfentations was greatly 
doubted. Sketches of the &me harps, taken fubfequently and at diffe- 
rent times from the frefcoes, have been publiflied, all of which differ 
more or lefs from each other in appearance and in the number of 
firings. The engravings Figs. 3 and 4 reprefent " Bruce's Harps " 
as they appear in Sir G. Wilklnfon's * Manners and Cufloms of the 
Ancient Egyptians.* 



61. AnaiNT Ecvrrun. 



Hijiory of Mujtcal Injlruments. 1 3 

A kind of triangular harp of the Egyptians was difcovered in a 
well-prefcrved condition and is now deposited in the Louvre. It has 
twenty-one ftrings, — a greater number than is generally reprefented on 
the monuments. In the engraving Fig. 5 is fhown the manner tn 
which the llrings were Aliened on the triangular harp. All thefe 
inftruments, however much they diftered from each other in form, had 
one peculiarity in common, — the abfence of the fore pillar. Moreover, 
the Egyptians had various kinds of the Tfigonon as well as various 
kinds of Lyres. The Trigonon ought perhaps more properly to be 
clafTed with the lyre than with the harp, becaufe it partakes more of 
the chara<3er of the former inllrument. A curious ftringed inftrument 
of a femicircular fhape was difcovered in the year 1823 at Thebes, It 
was mounted with twenty ftrings of catgut (probably made of the 



14 



An EJfay on the 



jntellines of the camel), which ftill emitted found when made to 
vibrate. Its wooden frame was covered with red leather. It had no 
tuning-pegs. The ftrings were affixed to the upper part of the frame. 



Tig. 6. — Kn(» or Tuoohoh. 

and were tuned by being wound round a ftraight rod, which was 
inferted into the lower part of the frame. The inllniment was there- 
fore a kind of Trigonon. 




RoanoMTALLT. AnctntT EcTrriKK. 



Hifiory of Mufical Inflruments. 1 5 

As regards the Lyre, fome kinds were held perpendicularly, inftead 
of honzontally, when played upon. The firings were twanged with 
the lingers, or with a ple£lrum, made of bone, ivory, or wood. The 
ple£trum was ufually affixed to a cord fufpended from the frame. 
The frame was not unfrequently ornamented with the carved head of 
the horfe, gazelle, or fome other favourite animal. Two lyres like 
that reprefcnted in the engraving Fig. 8, have been found in a remark- 
ably perfeS Hate of prefervation, and are now in the Mufeums of 
Berlin and Leyden. That in the Berlin Mufeum is two fcet high \ 
its body is about ten inches high, and about fifteen inches broad. It 
appears to have had originally thirteen firings. That in the Leyden 
Mufeum is flmilar, but fmaller. Thefe lyres are entirely of wood, 
and the frame is made longer on one fide than on the other, for 
the purpofe of tuning the inllniment by Aiding the firings upwards or 
downwards to obtain the pitch required. 

A peculiar infirument with four firings (Fig. 9) was, when played 
upofl, carried by the performer on his fhoulder. Some portions of this 



infirument may be feen in the Britiih Mufeum. It was made entirely 
of wood, except that the body was covered with parchment. Another 
curious infirument of this kind, of which remains have been preferved, 
much refembles in conflrudion the Negro Nanga. {Stt Fig. iii.) 



An Ejfay on the 




Hijiory of Mujical Injiruments. 1 7 

The nofre^ a kind of guitar (Fig. lo) was almoft identical in con- 
ftrucSlion with the Tamboura at the prefent day in ufe among feveral 
Eaftern nations. It was evidently a great favourite with the ancient 
Egyptians. A figure of it is found among their hieroglyphs, fignifying 
^^good/' It occurs in reprefentations of concerts dating earlier than 
from B.C. 1500. The nofre afFords the beft proof that the Egyptians 
had made confiderable progrefs in mufic at a very early age ; fince it 
{bows that they underflood how to produce on a few firings, by means 
of the finger-board, a greater number of notes than were obtainable 
even on their harps. The inflrument had two or four firings, was 
played with a ple£trum, and appears to have been fbmetimes, if not 
always, provided with frets. In the Britifh Mufeum is a fragment of 
a frefco, obtained from a tomb in the Weflern Hills of Thebes, on 
which two female performers on the Nofre are reprefented. The 
painter has diflincSlIy indicated the frets. There is alfo in the Britifh 
Mufeum a fmall Egyptian vafe in terra-cotta, from Thebes, 8| inches 
high, which reprefents a female playing a Nofre, whereon the frets are 
diflin£lly marked over the whole neck, even where it extends over the 
body. If this be a feithful reprefentadon of the finger-board, — and 
there is no reafon to doubt its fidelity, — a great number of flridlly 
defined intervals mufl have been obtainable upon each firing. 

The Egyptians pofTefTed alfo a kind of lute, or a Nofre with a fhort 
neck. A fpecimen was found at Thebes in a dilapidated condition, 
without tuning-pegs, or indications of its ever having had any. The 
upper part of the body was of parchment. 

Small pipes of the Egyptians have been difcovered, made of reed, 
with three, four, five, or more finger-holes. Above a dozen may be 
feen in the Leyden Mufeum. There are alfo interefling examples in 
the Britifh Mufeum ; one of which has feven holes burnt in at the fide. 
Two flraws were found with it of nearly the fame length as the pipe, 
which is about one foot long. In fome other pipes pieces of a kind of 
thick flraw have alfo been found inferted into the tube, obvioufly 
ferving for a fimilar purpofe as the reed in our oboe or clarionet. 

The pbi^ a fingle flute, was of confiderable length, and the per- 
former appears to have been obliged to extend his arms almofl at full 
length in order to reach the furthefl finger-hole. As Jebi is alfo the 
name of the leg-bone (like the Latin tibia)^ it may be fuppofed that the 
Egyptian flute was originally made of bone. Thofe, however, which 
have been found are of wood or reed. 

The reprefentation of a flute-concert. Fig. 11, is from one of the 
tombs in the Pyramids of Gizeh, and dates, according to Lepfius, from 



An EJfay on the 




Hijiory of Mufical Injiruments. 1 9 

the Fifth Dynafty; it muft, therefore, be earlier than B.C. 2000. 
Eight muflcians are performing on Autes. Three of them, one behind 
the other, are kneeling and holding their flutes in exactly the fame 
manner. Facing thefe are three others, in a precifely iimilar pofition. 
A feventh is Htting on the ground to the left of the fix, with his back 
turned towards them, but alfo in the a£l of blowing his flute, like the 
others. An eighth is ftanding at the right fide of the group, with his 
&ce turned towards them, holding his flute before him with both hands, 
as if he were going to put it to his mouth, or had juft left off playing. 
He is clothed, while the others have only a narrow girdle round their 
oins. Perhaps he is the dire^or of this lingular band, or the fih per- 
former who is waiting for the termination of the tutti before renewing 
his part of the performance. And does not the dlviflon of the players 
into two fets, focing each other, fu^eft the poJlibility that the inftru- 
ments were claflcd fomewhat like the flrft and fecond violins, or the 
flautB prima and fiauU fecunda, of our orcheftras } The occafional 
employment of the interval of the third, or the fifth, as accompani- 
ment to the melody, is not unufual even with nations lefs advanced in 
mufic than were the ancient Egyptians. 

The Double-Pipe, the name of which was mam (Fig. 10), appears 
to have been a very popular inftrument, to conclude from the frequency 
of its occurrence in the reprefentations of mufical performances. 
Furthermore, the Egyptians had, as far as is known to us, two kinds 
of trumpets ; three kinds of tambourines, or little hand drums ; three 
kinds of drums, chiefly barrel-fbaped ; and various kinds of gongs, 
bells, cymbals, and caftanets. The military band reprefented in the 
engraving Fig. 12 conflfts of Ave muficians, — viz., a trumpeter; a 



— MtLtTAir Bakd. AHaiHT EcTrTlA^ 



20 An EJfay on tlie 

drummer ; a performer on an inllrumenc which is fu much obliterated 
that its real charader cannot be determined, but which to judge from 
its form and (ize mull have been of importance in a milit^ band \ and 
two perfons who are claihing together each a pair of cyUndrical maces 
or crotala. 

The trumpet appears to have been ufually of brafs. A peculiar 
wind-inftrument, fomcwhat the Oiape of a champagne bottle, occurs 
only once in the reprefentations tranfmitted to us. It appears to be a 
kind of trumpet perhaps made of pottery or wood. 

The Egyptian drum fliown in the Military Band (Fig. 12) was 
from two to three feet in length, covered with parchment at both ends, 
and braced by cords. The perfiMiner carried it before him, generally 
by means of a band over his flioulder, while he was beating it with his 
hands on both ends. Of another kind of drum an a£lual fpecimcn has 
been found in the excavations made in the year 1823 at Thebes. It 
was 1 1 fi;et high and two feet broad, and had cords for bracing it. 
A piece of catgut encircled each end of the drum, being wound round 
each cord, by means of which the cords could be tightened or llackened 
at pleafure, by pufhing the two bands of catgut towards or from each 
other. It was beaten with two drumfticks flightly bent. The Egyp- 
tians had alfo ftraight drumfticks with a handle, and a knob at the end. 
The Berlin Mufeum pofTelTes fome of thefe. 

The third kind of drum was almoft identical with the darabouia (or 
darahukhK) of the modern Egyptians. The Tambourine was either 
round, like that which is at the prefent time in ufe in Europe as well 
as in the Eaft ; or it was of an oblong fquare fliape, flightly incurved 
on the four fides. Two inflruments of this defcription, and one of 
the common kind are reprefented in the engraving Fig. 13. 



Hijlory of Mufical Injlruments. 2 1 




The Slftnim confifted of a frame of bronze or brafs into which 
three or four metal bars were loofely inferted, fo as to produce a jingling 
noife when the inftrument was ihaken. The 
bars were often made in the form of fnakes, 
or they terminated in the head of a goofe. Not 
unfrequently a few metal rings were ftrung on 
the bars, to increafe the noife. The frame 
was fometimes ornamented with the figure of 
a cat. The largeft fiftra which have been 
found are about i8 inches in length, and the 
fmalleft about nine inches. The iiftrum was 
principally ufed by females in religious per- ^ 

e T T- • r n n ^*8- I4-— SlSTHA. AnCIENT 

rormances. its Jc^gyptian name vf^&fejhejh, Egyptian. 

The Egyptian cymbals clofely refembled our own in fhape. There 
are two pairs of them in the Britifh Mufeum. One pair was found 
in a coffin enclofing the mummy of Ankhhape, a facred mufician, and 
is depofited in the fam« cafe with the mummy and coffin. Among 
the Egyptian antiquities in the Britifli Mufeum are alfo feveral fmall 
bells of bronze. The largeft is 2^ inches in height, and the fmalleft 
three-quarters of an inch. Some of them have a hole at the fide near 
the top wherein the clapper was faftened. 




Musical Instruments of the Assyrians. 

Our acquaintance with the Aflyrian inftruments has been derived 
almoft entirely from the famous bas-reliefs which have been excavated 
from the mounds of Nimroud, Khorfabad, and Kouyunjik, (ituated near 
the river Tigris in the vicinity of the town of Moful in Afiatic Turkey. 

The Aflyrian Harp was about four feet high, and appears of larger 
flze than it acSlually was, on account of the ornamental appendages 
which were affixed to the lower part of its frame. It muft have been 
but light in weight, fmce we find it not unfrequently reprefented in the 
hands of perfons who are playing upon it while they arc dancing. 
Like all the Oriental harps, modern as well as ancient, it was not 
provided with a front pillar. The upper portion of the frame contained 
the found-holes, fomewhat in the ftiape of an hour-glafs. Below them 
were the fcrews, or tuning-pegs, arranged in regular order. The ftrings 
were perhaps made of filk, like thofe which the Burmefe ufe at the 
prefent time on their harps ; or they may have been of catgut, which 
y^as ufed by the ancient Egyptians. 



An EJfay on the 



Hiflory of Mufical Infiruments. 23 

The engraving Fig. 15 reprefents the largeft aflemblage of Aflyrian 
muficians which has been difcovered. It confifts of eleven per- 
formers upon inllruments, belides a chorus of fingers. The firft 
mufician, — probably the leader of the band, as he marches alone at 
the head of the proceffion, — is playing upon a harp. Behind him are 
two men, — one with a dulcimer and the other with a double-pipe ; then 
follow two men with harps. Next come fix female muficians, four of 
whom are playing upon harps, while one is blowing a double-pipe and 
another is beating a fmall hand-drum covered only at the top. Clofe 
behind the intirumental performers are the fingers, conlifting of a chorus 
of females and children. They are clapping their hands in time with 
the mufic, and fome of the muficians are dancing to the meafure. 
One of the female fingers is holding her hand to her throat In the fame 
manner as the women in Syria, Arabia, and Perfia are in the habit of 
doing at the prelcnt day when producing, on leftive occafions, thofe 
peculiarly fhrill founds of rejoicing which have been repeatedly noticed 
by Oriental travellers. 

The dulcimer is in too imperfoi^ a lUte on the bas-relief to 
familiarize us with its conftnidion. The flab reprefenting the pro- 



— An Anvil ah Ii 



24 



An EJfay on the 



ceflion, in which it occurs, has been injured ; the defcdt, which ex- 
tended over a portion of the dulcimer, has been repaired, and it cannot 
be faid that in repaiiing it much mufical knowledge has been evinced. 
Some inveftigators are of opinion that the fculpture originally repre- 
fented an inftrument of the Trigonon fpecies like the one {hown in 
Fig. i6. But this is doubdiil; for the lower portion of the frame, 
which is well prefervcd, has a different form from that of the latter, 
and is marked with a number of dots, evidently intended for tuning- 
pegs, which on the latter are placed on the front pillar. 

The inftrument of the Trigonon fpecies was held horizontally, and 
was twanged with a rather long ple£trum llightly bent at (he end at 
which it was held by the performer. It is of frequent occurrence on 
the bas-reliefs. A number of them appear to have been generally 
played together. At any rate, we find almoft invariably on the monu- 
ments two together, evidently implying " more than one," *' a number." 
The left hand of the performer (Fig. i6) fccms to have been occupied 
in cheeking the vibration of the ftrings when its difcontinuance was 
required. From the pofition of the ftrings, the performer could not 
have ftruck them as thofe of the dulcimer are ftmck. If he did not 
twang them, he may have drawn the plectrum acrofs them. Indeed, 
for twanging, a Ihort ple^rum would have been more pra^ical, con- 




Hijiory of Mufical Infiruments. 



25 



fidering that the firings are placed horizontally one above the other at 
I'egular diftances. It is therefore by no means improbable that we have 
here a rude prototype of the violin bow. 

The Lyre occurs in three different forms, and is held horizontally 
in playing, or at leaft nearly fo. 
Its front bar was generally either 
oblique or (lightly curved. The 
ftrings were tied round the bar 
fo as to allow of their being 
pufhed upwards or downwards. 
In the former cafe the tendon of 
the ftrings increafes, and the 
notes become therefore higher ; 
on the other hand, if the ftrings 
are puflied lower down, the pitch 
of the notes muft become deeper. 
The lyre was played with a fmall 
plecSlnim, as well as with the 
fingers. 

The Aflyrian Tamboura (Fig, 
18) refembled the nofre of the 
ancient Egyptians. Perhaps it 
had only two ftrings to which 
were affixed the two tafTels which 
are feen hanging down from the 
neck. 




Fig. 18. — AssYKXAN Tambouka. 



The Double- pipe appears to have been more common with the 
Aflyrians than the fingle pipe. The latter does not occur on the 
monuments, but it muft have preceded the double-pipe. The Aflyrians 
may very likely have pofTefTed feveral popular inftruments with which 
we have not become acquainted, becaufe they were not ufed in fuch 
performances and ceremonies as are reprefented on the fculptures. 

The Aflyrian Trumpet was very fimilar to the Egyptian one fliown 
in the engraving, Fig. I9. Furthermore, we meet with three kinds of 
drums, of which one kir/ \% efpecially noteworthy on account of its 
odd fhape, fomewhat reiembling a fugar-loaf (Fig. 19) ; with \ the 
tambourine ; with two kinds of cymbals ; and with bells, of which a 
confiderable number have been found in the mound of Nimroud. 
Thefe bells, which have greatly withftood the devaftation of time, are 
but fmall in fize, the largeft of them being only 3^ inches in height 
and 2^ inches in diameter. Moft of them have a hole at the top, in 



M.I. 



26 



An EJfay on the 



which probably the clapper was bftcned. They are made of copper 
mixed with 14 per cent, of tin. 





Fl|. 19.— AMYtUH DiVWI. 



Inftnimental mufic was ufed by the Aflyrians and Babylonians in 
their religious obfervanccs. This is obvious from the fculpturcs, and 
is to fome extent confirmed by the mode of woHhip paid by com- 
mand of king Nebuchadnezzar to the golden image, which is fuppoled 
to have been Baal : — ** Then an herald cried aloud, To you it is com- 
" manded, O people, nations, and languages, that at what time ye hear 
*' the found of the cornet, flute, harp, fackbut, pfaltery, dulcimer, and all 
*' kinds of mufick, ye fall down and worfhip the golden image that 
*' Nebuchadnezzar the king hath fet up." (Dan. iii. 4, 5.) 

We (ball prefently endeavour to afcertain in how fiir the names of 
the inftruments adopted in the Englifii veifion coincide with thofe given 
in the original text, Suflice it here to draw attention to the multi- 
^oufneTs of the Babylonian orcheftra in facred performances. 

The kings appear to have m^ntained at their courts mufical bands, 
whofe office it was to perform fecular mufic at certain times of the day, 



Hifiory of Mufical Injiruments. ^ 2 7 

or on fixed occafions. Of king Darius the Mede we are told that, 
when he had caft Daniel into the den of lionSi he ^^ went to his palace, 
^^ and paflfed the night failing, neither were inftruments of mufick 
^' brought before him '' (Dan. vi. i8) ^ from which we may conclude 
that his band was in the habit of playing before him in the evening. 

A fimilar cuftom prevailed alfo at the Court of Jerufalem, at leaft 
in the time of David and Solomon ; both of whom appear to have had 
their royal private bands, befides a large number of fingers and inftru- 
mental performers of facred mufic, who were engaged in the Temple. 



Musical Instruments of the Hebrews. 

As regards the mufical inftruments of the Hebrews, we are from 
biblical records acquainted with the names of many of them ; but 
reliable reprefentations are ftill wanting, and it is chiefly from an 
examination of the ancient Egyptian and Aflyrian inftruments that we 
can conjecSlure almoft to a certainty of their conftrucSlion and capabilities. 
From various indications, which it would be too circumftantial here to 
point out, we may furmil» the Hebrews to have pofTefled the following 
inftruments : — 

The Harp. — There cannot be a doubt that the Hebrews pofTeflfed 
the harp, feeing that it was a common inftrument among the Egyptians 
and Aflyrians. But it is uncertain which of the Hebrew names of the 
ftringed inftruments occurring in the Bible really defignates the harp. 

The Dulcimer. — Some writers on Hebrew mufic confider the 
nibel to have been a kind of dulcimer ; others conjecSlure the fame of 
the pfanterin mentioned in the book of Daniel, — a name which appears 
to be fynonymous with the pfalterion of the Greeks, and from which 
alfb the prefent Oriental dulcimer, fantir^ may have been derived. 
Some of the inftruments mentioned in the book of Daniel may have 
been fynonymous with (bme which occur in other parts of the Bible 
under Hebrew names, — the names given in Daniel being Chaldaean. 
The afor was a ten-ftringed inftrument played with a ple£trum, and 
is fuppofed to have borne fome refemblance to the neheL Perhaps it 
was in appearance fimilar to the AfTyrian inftrument Fig. i6, which 
is defcribed as a fpecies of Trigonon. 

The Lyre. — This inftrument is reprefented on fome Hebrew 

coins generally afcribed to Simon Maccabstus, who lived in the fecond 

c 1 



28 An EJfay on the 

century before the Chriftisui era. There are fcveral of them in the 
Britifli Mufeum ; fome are of lilvcr, and the others of copper. On 
three of them are lyres with three ftrings, another has one with fire, 
and another one with fix ftrings. The body of the lyre appears in two 
different fli^>es, as Ibown in the engraving Fig. 10, which exhibits 





Fig. lo. — Huuw Coim with thi Ly«i. 

three copper coins which are in the Britifli Mufeum. The two fides 
of the firame appear to have been made of the horns of animals, or 
they may have been of wood formed in imitation of two horns, which 
originally were ufed. Lyres thus conftrufted arc 
\ ftili found in Abyffinia. The Hebrew fquare> 
r fliaped lyre. Fig. 2 1 , of the time of Simon Mac- 
cabxus, is probably identical with the fjalttrlm. 
The kinnar, the kvourite inftrument of King 
David, was moft likely a lyre^ if not a fmail 
triangular harp. The lyre was evidently an 
untverfally known and ^voured inftrument 
among ancient Eaftern nations. Being more 
fimple in conftrudion than moft other ftringed 
inftniments, it undoubtedly preceded them in 
andqui^. The tinner is mentioned in the Bible 
as the oldeft ftringed inftrument, and as the inven- 
_ tion of Jubal. Even if the name of one particular 

■iiAriD Lvu. ftringed inftrument is here ufed for ftringed in- 

ftniments in general, which may poffibly be the 
cafe, it is only reafonable to fuppofe that the oldeft and moft univcrfally 
known ftrinj^ed inftrument would be mentioned as a reprefentativc of 
the whole clafs rather than any other. Befides, the kinnor was a light 
and cafily portable inftrument ; King David, according to the Rabbinic 
records, ufed to fufpend it during the night over hii pillow. All its 
ufes mentioned in the Bible are efpecially applicable to the lyre. 
And the refemblance oi the word kinntr to kilhera^ kijfar^ and fimilar 



Hifiory of Mufical Injiruments. 29 

names known to denote the lyre, alfo tends to confirm the fuppofition 
that it refers to this inftrument or to a kind of Trigonon. It is, 
however, not likely that the inftruments of the Hebrews, — indeed their 
mufic altogether, — ihould have remained entirely unchanged during a 
period of many centuries. Some modifications were likely to occur 
even fi-om accidental caufes \ fuch, for inftance, as the unpremeditated 
invention of fome inftrument, or the influence of neighbouring nations, 
as the Aflyrians, when the Hebrews came into clofer cbnta£l with them. 
Thus may be explained why the accounts of the Hebrew inftruments 
given by Jofephus, who lived in the firft century of the Chriftian era, 
are not in exa£l accordance with thofe in the Bible. The lyres at the 
time of Simon Maccabaeus may probably be different from thofe which 
were in ufe about a thoufand years earlier, or at the time of David 
and Solomon, when the art of mufic with the Hebrews was in its 
zenith. 

There appears to be a probability that a Hebrew lyre of the time 
of Jofeph (about 1700 B.C.). is reprefented on an ancient Egyptian 
painting difcovered in a tomb at Beni HaiTan, — which is the name of 
certain grottoes on the eaftern bank of the Nile. Sir Gardner Wilkin- 
fon in his ^ Manners and Cuftoms of the Ancient Egyptians * obferves : 
^^ If, when we become better acquainted with the interpretation of 
^^ hieroglyphics, the ^ Strangers * at Beni HaiTan fliould prove to be the 
" arrival of Jacob's femily in Egypt, we may examine the Jewifli lyre 
^^ drawn by an Egyptian artift. That this event took place about the 
** period when the inmate of the tomb lived is highly probable — at 
^^ leaft, if I am corre£l in confidering Ofirtafen I. to be the Pharaoh 
^^ the patron of Jofeph ; and it remains for us to decide whether the 
difagreement in the number of peribns here introduced — ^thirty-fcvcn 
being written over them in hieroglyphics — is a fufficient obje<Sion 
for their indentity. It will. not be foreign to the prefent fubje£l to 
^^ introduce thofe figures which are curious, if only confidered as 
^^ illuftrative of ancient cuftoms at that early period, and which will be 
^^ looked upon with unbounded intereft (hould they ever be found to 
,** refer to the Jews. The firft figure is an Egyptian fcribe, who 
^^ prefents an account of their arrival to a perfon feated, the owner of 
^^ the tomb, and one of the principal officers of the reigning Pharaoh. 
" The next, alfo an Egyptian, ufliers them into his prefencQ ; and two 
^^ advance, bringing prefents, the wild goat or ibex, and the gazelle, 
** the prod unions of their country. Four men, carrying bows and 
^^ clubs, follow^ leading an afs on which two children are placed in 
^^ panniers, accompanied by a boy and four women ; and, laft of all. 



cc 
cc 
cc 



30 An EJfay on the 



^* another afs laden, and (wo mcn^-one holding a bow and club, the 
" other a lyre, which he plays with a pleftrum. All the men have 
" beards, contrary to the cuftom of the Egyptians, but very general in 
" the £all at that period, and noticed as a peculiarity of foreign 
" uncivilized nations throughout their fculptures. The men have 
" iandals, the women a fort of boot reaching to the ankle — both which 
*' were worn by many Afiatic people. The lyre is rude, and differs a 
'* little in form from thofc generally ufed in Egypt." In the engraving 
Fig. 22 the lyre-player, another man, and fome ftrange animals from 
this group, are reprefented. 



VWVf< 



The Tamboitra. — Minnm, machaiaih^ and neiel are ufually 
fuppofed to be the names of inllruments of the lute or guitar kind. 
Afinai/rty however, appears more likely to imply ftringed inftruments in 
general, than any panicular inftrument. 

The Single Pipe. — Chalil and Htiei were the names of the 
Hebrew pipes or flutes. 

The Double Pipe. — Probably the mijhrekitha mentioned in 
Daniel. The mijhrokitha is reprefented in the drawings of our 
Hiftories of Mufic as a fmall organ, confifting of feven pipes placed in 
a box, with a mouthpiece for blowing. But the fhape of the pipes and 



Hijiory of Mufical Injiruments. 3 1 

■- ■ ■ 111 ■ - .. 11 ' " ■ ' ' I ■ 

of the box, as well as the row of keys for the fingers exhibited in the 
reprefentation of the mijhrokitha have too much of the European type 
not to fuggeft that they are probably a produ£l of the imagination. Re* 
fpecSling the illuftrations of Hebrew inftruments which ufually accom- 
pany hiftorical treatifes on mufic, and commentaries on the Bible, it 
ought to be borne in mind that moft of them are merely the offspring 
ofconjedures founded on fome obfcure hints in the Bible, or vague 
.accounts by the Rabbins. 

The Syrinx or Pandean Pipe. — Probably the ugab^ which in 
the Englifh authorized verfion of the Bible is rendered ^^ organ." 

The Bagpipe. — The word Jumphoniaj which occurs in the book of 
Daniel, is, by Forkel and others, fuppofed to denote a bagpipe. It is 
remarkable that at the prefent day the bagpipe is called by the Italian 
peafantry Zampogna. Another Hebrew inftrument, the magrephaj 
generally defcribed as an organ, was more likely only a kind of bagpipe. 
The magrepha is not mentioned in the Bible, but is defcribed in the 
Talmud. In tracSl Erachin it is recorded to have been a powerful 
organ which flood in the temple at Jerufalem, and cohfifled of a cafe 
or wind-cheft, with ten holes, containing ten pipes. Each pipe was 
capable of emitting ten different founds, by means of finger-holes, or 
fbme fimilar contrivance : thus one hundred different founds could be 
produced on this inflrument. Further, the magrepha ' is faid to have 
been provided with two pairs of bellows, and with ten keys, by means 
of which it was played with the fingers. Its tpne was, according to 
the Rabbinic accounts, fo loud that it could be heard at an incredibly 
long diflance from the temple. However, PfeifFer, one of the beft 
authorities on Hebrew mufic, is of opinion that the magrepha was a 
large kettle-drum which flood between the porch of the temple and the 
altar, and which was flruck to afTemble the priefls to prayer, and 
the Levites to the performance of facred fongs, as well as to announce 
the approach of lepers for purification. Again, Saalfchiitz, another 
careful inquirer, declares this to be an error, which he fuppofes to have 
arifen from PfeifFer having been mifled by the name magrepha^ being 
alfo applied to another inflrument, likewife ufed in the temple. This, 
however, was not a muficd inflrument at all, but a large fire-{bovel 
ufed in removing the cinders and aihes from the altar and temple. In 
the Talmud, tra£l Thamid, it is flated that it was the cuflom for the 
Levite, at a fixed time, after having ufed the (hovel, to throw it down 
between the altar and the porch, thereby producing a loud noife, which 
was heard at a great diflance from the temple, and ferved to inform the 
people who approached how hx the religious obfervances had proceeded. 



32 An EJfay on the 

In {hort, it appears uncertain whether the much-lauded magrepfia was a 
bagpipe, an organ, a kettle-drum, or a fire-fhovel. Of the real nature 
of the Hebrew bagpipe perhaps fome 
idea may be fonned from a Syrinx 
with bellows (Fig. 23) which has been 
found rcprefcntcd on one of the an- 
cient terra-cottas excavated in Tarfus, 
I Afia Minor, fome years (ince. Thefc 
remains are believed to be about 
2000 years old, judging from the 
figures upon them, and from fome 
coins ftruck about zoo years B.C. 
having been found embedded with 
them. We have therefore bclbrc us, 
Fig. 2].— Akciint Bjicriri raou Taiidi, probably, the olded reprefentation of 
^"='*- a bagpipe hitherto difcovcred. 

The Trumpet. — ^Thrce kinds arc mentioned in the Bible, viz, : 
the iertny the Jhofhar^ and the chatzaxtrah. The firft two were more 
or lefs curved, and might properly be confidcrcd as horns. Moft 
commentators are of opinion that the keren — made of ram's bom — 
was almoft identical with the JhephaTy the only difference being that the 
latter was more curved than the former. Th^Jhephar Is efpecially 
remarkable as being the only Hebrew mufical inllrument which has 
been preferved to the prefent day in the religious Terviccs of the Jews. 
It is ftill blown in the Tynagogue, as in time of old, at the Jewifli 
New Year's feflival, according to the command of Mofes (Numb. 
xxix. i). The chatzoztrah was a (Iraight trumpet, about two feet 
in length, and was fometimes made of filver (Numb. x. 2}. 

The Drum. — There can be no doubt that the Hebrews had 
fcveral kinds of drums. We know, however, only of the toph, which 
appears to have been a tambourine, or a Tmall hand-drum like the 
Egyptian darabouka reprefented in the engraving. Fig. 13. 

In the Englifh verlion of the fiible it is rendered timbrel or tabrtl. 
This inftrument was efpecially ufed in proceJIions, on occafions of 
rejoicing, and frequently by females. We find it in the hands of 
Miriam, when fbe was celebrating with the Ifraelitilh women in fongs 
of joy the deftruSion of Pharaoh's hoft (Exod. xv. 20} ; and in the 
hands of Jephtha's daughter, when (he went out to welcome her lather 
(Judges xi. 34). There exifts at the prefent day in the Eaft a fmall 
hand-drum, called doff!, diff, or aduft — a name which appears to be 
fynonymous with the Hebrew loph. 



Hiftory of Mufical Inftruments. 3 3 



The Sistrum. — Winer, Saalfchiitz, and feveral other commen- 
tators are of opinion that the menaaneim^ mentioned in 2 Sam. vi. 5, 
denotes the fiftrum. In the Englifh Bible the word is rendered 
cymbals. 

Cymbals. — The txeltxelim^ metxilloth^ and metzUthaimj appear to 
have been cymbals, or fimilar metallic inftruments of percuffion, differ- 
ing in fhape and found. 

Bells. — The little bells on the robe of the high-prieft were called 
phaamm. Small golden bells were attached to the lower part of the 
robes of the high-prieft in his facred miniftrations (£xod. xxviii. 
33> 34> ^^^ Ecclus. xlv. 9). The Jews have, at the prefent day, 
in their fynagogues fmall bells attached to the Rolls of the Law con- 
taining the Pentateuch, — ^a kind of ornamentation which * is fuppofed 
to have been in ufe from time immemorial. No other Hebrew bells 
are known. However, in Zech. xiv. 20, ** bells of the horfes " are 
mentioned, which probably were (aftened on the bridle or upon the 
forehead of the horfes, as we find them at the prefent day in many 
countries. In fbme of the Ailyrian bas-reliefs horfes are reprefented 
wearing on the neck a little bell with a clapper. It may have been a 
ufual cuftom alfo with the Hebrews to decorate their horfes in this 
manner. 

Befides the names of Hebrew inftruments already given, there 
occur feveral others in the Old Teftament, upon the real meaning 
of which much diverflty of opinion prevails, yobel (Exod. xix. 13; 
Jos. vi. 4, 5, 6, 8, 13) is by fome commentators clafTed with the 
trumpets, but is by others believed to defignate a loud and cheerful 
blaft of the trumpet, ufed on particular occafions. If Jobel (from 
which jubilare is fuppofed to be derived) is identical with the name 
Jubal^ the inventor of mufical inftruments, it would appear that the 
Hebrews appreciated pre-eminently the exhilarating power of mufic. 
Shalijhim is fuppofed to denote a triangle. Nechihth^ gittithy and 
machalathy which occur in the headings of Pfalms v., viii., liii., 
Ixxxi., Ixxxiv., Ixxxviii., are alfo by fome commentators fuppofed to 
be mufical inftruments. Nechiloth is faid to have been a flute, and 
gittith and machalath to have been ftringed inftruments. Again, others 
maintain that the words denote peculiar modes of performance, or 
certain favourite melodies to which the pfalms were directed to be 
fung, or chanted. Machol (Exod. xv. 20; xxxii. 19; Judg. xi. 34; 
xxi. 21 ; I. Kings iv. 31 ; Pfalms xxx. Jl ; cxlix. 3 ; cl. 4 ; Song 
of Sol. vii. I ; Jerem. xxxi. 4, 13 ; Lament, v. 15) is in the opinion 
of fome writers, a kind of flute, efpecially ufed in accompanying 
dances, but is more generally believed to fignify the da^ce itfelf. 



34 ^^ -^Jf^y ^^ ^^ 



According to the recfords of the Rabbins, the Hebrews in the time 
of D^vid and Solon^on poiTefled thirty-fix different mufical inftruments. 
In the Bible, however, only about half that number are mentioned. 

Moft nations of antiquity afcribed the invention of their mufical 
(inftruments to their ^s, or to certain fuper-human beings. The 
.Hebrews attributed it to man. At any rate Jubal is mentioned as 
^' the &ther of all fuch as handle the harp and organ ** (/. r. performers 
[on ftringed-inftruments and wind inftruments). As inftruments of per- 
cuffion are almoft invariably in ufe long before people are led to con- 
.ftru(^ ftringed and wind inftruments it might perhaps be furmifed that 
, Jubal was not regarded as the inventor of all the Hebrew inftruments, 
but rather as the iirft profei&onal cultivator of inftrumental mufic. 



Musical Instruments of the Greeks. 

Many mufical inftruments of the ancient Greeks are known to us 
by name ; but, refpec^ing th^ir exadl conftru£iion and capabilities, 
there ftill prevails almoft as much diverfity of opinion as is the cafe 
with thofc of the Hebrews. 

It is generally believed that the Greeks derived their mufical 
fyftem from the Egyptians. Pythagoras and other philofophers and 
'theorifts are (aid to have ftudied mufic in Egypt. It would, however, 
appear that the Egyptian influence upon Greece, as hx as regards this 
art, has been overrated. Not only have the more pcrfcd Egyptian 
inftruments, — fuch as the larger harps, the tamboura, — never been 
much in favour with the Greeks ; but almoft all the ftringed inftru- 
ments which the Greeks poiTefTed are ftated to have been originally 
derived from Afia. Strabo (Book x., c. 3) fays : *'Thofe who regard 
^^ the whole of Afia, as far as India, as confecrated to Bacchus, point 
'*' to that country as the origin of a great portion of the prefent mufic. 
" One author fpeaks of ' ftriking forcibly the Afiatic kithara,' another 
" calls the pipes Berecynthian and Phrygian. Some of the inftruments 
^^ alfo have foreign names, as Nabla, Sambuka, Barbiton, Magadis, 
'* and many others." 

We know at prefent little more of these inftruments than that they 
•were in ufe in Greece. Of the Magadis it is even not fatisfadorily 
afcertained whether it was a ftringed or a wind inftrument. The 
other three are known to have been ftringed inftruments. But they 
9 .cannot have been anything like fuch univerfal fevourites as the lyre, 

fince this inftrument, — and perhaps the trigonon^ are almoft the only 



Hifiory of Mufical Inflruments. 35 

ftringed inftrumenCs reprcfcntcd in the Greek paintings on pottery and 
Dthcr monumental records. If, as might perhaps be fuggefled, their 
tafte for beauty of form induced the Greeks to reprefent the elegant 
lyre in preference to other ftringed inllruments, we might at leafl 
cxpeft to meet with the harp, — an inftrument which equals, if it does 
not furpafs, the lyre in elegance of form. 

The reprefentation of Polyhymnia with a harp, depided on a 
fplendid Greek vafe now in the Munich Mufeum, may be noted as 
an exceptional inftance. This valuable relic dates from the time of 
Alexander the Great. The inftrumciit refembles in conftru&ion as 
well as in fhape the Aflyrian harp. It has thirteen firings, Poly- 
hymnia is touching them with both hands, ufing the right hand for 
the treble and the lelt for the bafs. She it feated, holding the inftru- 
ment in her lap. (Fig. 24.] Even the little tuning-p^, which in 



Fig. 14. — GuciAH Hjur amb Lvkh, 

number are not in accordance with the ftnngs, are placed on the 
found-board at the upper pan of the frame, exaAly as on the Alfyrian 
harp. If then we have here the Greek harp, it was more likely an 
importation from Alia than from Egypt. In {hurt, as far as can be 
afcertalned, the mod complete of the Greek inftrumcnts appear to 
be of Aliatic origin. Efpccially from the nations who inhabited Alia 
Minor the Greeks are flated to have adopted feverat of their popular 
-ones; and it would appear that nearly every one of thefe nations 



36 



j4n EJfay on the 



excelled in the ufc of fomc particulu inflrument. Thus wc read of 
the (hort aod fhrilUrounding pipes of the Carians ; of the Phrygian 
paftoral flute, confifting of feveral tubes united j of the three-ftringcd 
iiihara of the Lydians ; and fo on. 

The Greeks called the harp Unyra, and this may be the reaibn why 
in the Englifli tranflauon of the Bible the itHnar of the Hebrews, the 
^vourtte inftrumcnt of King David, ts rendered harp. 





Fio. xj.— -Gkciah Lnn. 



The Greeks had Lyres of various kinds, more or left differing in 
conftru£Hon, form, and fize, and diftinguiflied by different names, fuch 
as fyra^ kithara^ cbelys^ pharminx, etc. Lyra appears to have implied 
inftruments of this clals in general, and alfo the lyre with a body oval 
at the bafe, and held upon the lap or in the arms of the performer ; 
while the kiihara had a fquare bale and was held againft the breaft. 



Hijiory of Mufical Inflruments. 3 7 

Thefe diftinSions have, however, not been &tis&£torily afcenained. 
The ehtljs was a fmall lyre with the body made of the fhell of a tor- 
toife, or of wood in imitation of the tortoifc. The pkorminx was a 
large lyre. Like the kitkara^ it was ufed, at an early period, ilngly, 
for accompanying recitations. It is, however, recorded that the kithara 
was employed for folo-performances as early as b.c. 700. 

The delign on the Grecian vafe at Mimich, already alluded to, 
reprelents the Nine Mules, of which three arc given in the engraving. 
Fig. 24, viz., Polyhymnia with the harp, and Kalliope and Erato with 
lyres. Various kinds of lyres, more or lefs ornamented, are Ihown 
in the engraving. Fig. 25. It will be obferved that fome are provided 
with a bridge, while others are without it. The largcll ones were held 
on or between- the knees, or were attached to the left arm by means 
of a band, to enable the performer to ufe his hands without impediment. 
The ftrings, made of ca^ut or finew, were more ufually twanged with 
a pUktrm than merely with the lingers. The pUktren was a fliort ftem 
of ivoiy or metal pointed at both ends. 

A fragment of a Greek lyre, which was found in a tomb near 
Athens, is depofitcd in the Britilb Mufeum. The two pieces confti- 
tuting its frame are of wood. Their length is about 18 inches, and 
the length of the crolT-bar at the top is about 9 inches. Tlie inftru- 
ment is, however, in a condition too dilapidated and imperfed to be of 
any eflential uTe to the mufical inquirer. 



fig. 16.— TtlOOHOH. 



38 An EJfay on the 

The triganan conlifted originally of an angular frame, to which the 
-firings were affixed (Fig. 26]. In the courie of time a third bar was 
added to relift the tenlion of the firings, and its triangular frame re- 
sembled in Ibape the Greek Delta. Subfequently it was ftill further 
improved, the upper bar of the frame 
being made (lightly curved, whereby 
the inftrument chained greater firength 
and more elegance of form (Fig. 27). 

The magadii^ alfo called ptktit-, had 
twenty firings, which were tuned in 
odaves, and therefore produced only 
ten tones. It appears to have been a 
fort of dulcimer, but reliable information 
refpe3ing its confirudion is wanting. 
There appears to have been alfo a fort 
of bagpipe in ufe, called magadti, of 
which nothing certain is known. Pofli- 
ri( 17.— A Srictu or Thoohdk. bly, the lame name may have been 
applied to two different inftruments. 
The epigtnion refembled the magaiiiy but it had forty firings, pro- 
bably producing twenty tones, each tone having two firings in unifon 
or in o<^ves. 

The harbilan was likewife a ftringed infirument of this kind. The 
fambyit is recorded to have been invented by Ibykos, b.c. 540. The 
fimmikan had 35 firings, and derived its name from its inventor, Simos, 
who lived about B.C. 800. It probably was a kind of dulcimer. The 
nabla had only two firings. It probably refembled the nthtl of the 
Hebrews, of which but little is known with certainty. The pandoura 
is fuppofed to have been a kind of lute with three firings. Several of 
the inftruments jufi noticed were uTed in Greece, chiefly by muficiapis 
who had immigrated from Afia ; they can therefore hardly be conftderccl 
as national muftcal infiruments of the Greeks. 

The Monochord had, as its name implieSj only a Tingle firing, and 
was ufed in teaching Tinging and the laws of acoufiics. 

The flute, aulcs^ which was a highly popular infirument, differed 
in conftruiSion from the flutes and pipes of the ancient Egyptians. 
Inftead of being blown through a hole at the fide near the top, it was 
held like a flageolet, and a vibrating reed was inferted into the mouth- 
piece, fo that it might be more properly defcribed as a kind of oboe or 
clarionet. However, the Greeks delignated by the name of auhi all 
wind-infiruments of the flute and oboe kind, fome of which were 



Hifiory of Mufical Infirutnents. 39 

conftruited like the flageolet or like our antiquated fiutt a btc. The 
Angle flute was called nunauloiy and the double one diaulei. Remark- 
able is the phtrbtia^ a bandage of leather tied over the mouth of the 
flutift (Fig. 35). The pherhtia had 
two holes into which the tubes were 
infertcd. It may have fcrved for a 
twofold purpole ; namely, to aflbrd the 
performer greater iacility in holding 
the inftrument tn its proper poUtion, 
and to increafe his power of blowing 
into the tube. For the purpofe of 
arranging the intervals of the fcale 
according to the character of the muHc 
which was to be performed, little plugs 
were ufed to clofe certain finger-holes. 
A diauloi, which was found in a tomb 
at Athens, is in the firitilh Mufeum. 
The wood of which it is made feems 
to be cedar. The tubes are fifteen 
inches in length. Each tube has a 
feparate mouth-piece and fix finger- 
holes, five of which are at the upper f^ jg _diauloi. 
lide, and one is underneath. 

The fjrinXy or Pandean pipe, bad from three to nine tubes, but 
fcvcn was the ufual number. The fl;raight trumpet, yi/^iB*, and the 
curved horn, ktras, made of brafs, were ufed exclufively in war. The 
fmall hand-drum, called tympamn^ refemblcd in fhapc our tambourine^ 
but was covered with parchment at the back as well as at the front. 
The iymbala were made of metal, and relembled our fmall cymbals. 
The krotala were almoft identical with our caflanets, and were made of 
wood or metal. 

It is unneceflary to recount the well-known mythological traditions 
of the ancients (Romans as well as Greeks) referring to the origin of 
their &vourite mufical inftruments. Suffice it to notice one or two. 
Hermes (Mercury) was believed to have invented the lyra^ and Apollo 
the iithara. The invention of the trumpet and flute was attributed to 
Athena (Minerva) i and that of thej^r/njr to Pan. 



4© An EJfay on the 



Musical Ikstrumints of thb Etroscahs and Romans. 

The Romans are recordeJ to have derived Ibme of their moft 
popular inftrumcnts originally from the Etrufcans, — a people which 
at an early period excelled all other Italian nations in the cultivation of 
the arts as well as in focial rcAnement, and which poflclTed mulical 
inftrumcnts llmilar to thofe of the Greeks. It tnuft, however, be 
remembered that many of the vafes and other fpccimens of art which 
have been found in Etrufcan tombs, and on which delineations of lyres 
and other inftruments occur, are fuppofcd to be produfiions of Greek 
anifts, whofe works were obtained from Greece by the Etrufcans, or 
who were induced to fettle in Etruria. 

The flutes of the Etrufcans were not unfrequendy made of ivory ; 
thofe ufed in religious facrifices were of box-wood, of a fpccies of the 
lotus, of afs' bone, bronze and fdver. A bronze Autc, fomewhat 
refembling our flageolet, has been found in a tomb ; likewife a huge 
trumpet of bronze. An Etnifcan fwtfu, which is depoltted in the 
Britifb Mufcum (Fig. 29), meafurcs about four feet in length. 



T^^. ig. — EnvKAH Cmhv. 

To the Etrufcans is alfo attributed the invention of the Hydraulic 
Organ. The Greeks poflelTcd, however, a fimilar contrivance, which 
they called hydrauloi^ i.t. water-flute, and which probably was identical 
with the organum hydraulicum of the Romans, The inftrument ought 
more properly to be regarded as a pneumatic organ (or wind-organ), 
for the found was produced by the current of air through the pipes, — 
the water applied ferving merely to give the neceflary preffure to the 
bellows and to regulate their a£tion. There is no poUtive proof that 



Hijiory of Mufical Inflruments. 41 



keys were ufai, as on our organ — or rather, as the large wooden keys 
of our organ-pedal, with the omilfion of the fe mi- tones,— although the 
hydraulic oi^n is thus depided in fomc illuftrations given in the 
Hiftones ofMulic by Hawkins, Forkel, and others. Thefe illuftrations 
have not been made from a£tual fpecimens, but merely from the rather 
obfcure defcriptions by ancient writers, tranfmitted to us. The pipes 
were probably caufcd to found by means of ftops, fomewhat refembling 
thofe on our organ, which were drawn out or puflicd in. The con- 
AruAioR was evidently but a primitive contrivance, contained in a cafe 
which could be carried by one or two perfons, and which was placed 
on a table. The higheft degree of perfection which the hydraulic organ 
obtained with the ancients is probably fliown in a rcprefentation on a 
coin of the Emperor Nero, in the BritiQi Mufeum, for it dates as late 
as the firft century of the Chriftian era 
(Fig. 30). Only ten pipes are given 
to it, and there is no indication of any 
key board, which would probably have 
been Oiown had it exifted. The man 
{landing at the llde and holding a laurel 
leaf in his hand, is furmifed to reprefcnt 
a viftor in the exhibitions of the circus 
or the amphitheatre. The hydraulic 
organ probably was played on fuch 
occalions ; and the medal containing 

an impreflion of it, may have been ng. jo.— Oiganum Hvduuucuw, 
beftowed upon the vii^or. 

During the time of the Republic, and efpecJally fubfequently under 
the reign of the Emperors, the Romans adopted many new inftrumcnti 
from Greece, Egypt, and even from Weft- 
ern Alia ; without, however, clTeDtially 
improving any of their importations. 

Their moft favourite llringed inftru- 
ment was the lyre, of which they had 
various kinds, called, according to their 
form, and arrangement of firings lyra, 
eithara, chelys^ Ujludo, fidis (or fidts)^ and 

eomu. Thename«r««wasgivenro thelyre ; 

when the fides of the frame terminated at 
the top in the {hape of two horns. '' 

The barbital was a kind of lyre with 
a large body, which gave the inftrument Fig. ji.— Rohan Lyu. 
fomewhat the (hape of the Welfli crwth. 



42 An Ejfay on the 

The pfalterium was a kind of lyre of an oblong fquare fhape. Like 
moft of the Roman lyres, it was played with a rather large plednim. 
The ilmple inftrument fliown in the engraving, Fig. 32, is fuppofed 
to be the pfallerium. The reprefentation from which it has been taken 
was found in Herculaneum. Some hiftorians defcribe the pfalterium as 
an inflrument of the lute kind j but this appears improbable ; moft 
likely it Was the Ajuarc lyre. 

The trigmum was the fame as the Greek triganen, and was 
probably originally derived from Egypt. It is recorded that a certain 
mufician of the name of Alexander Alexandrinus was fo admirable a 
performer upon it, that when exhibiting his Hull in Rome, he created 
the greateft y»r«rr. The name of the performer implies that he was a 
native of Alexandria j hts inftrument therefore, perhaps, more refembled 
the Egyptian ttigonum. Fig. 6, than the Roman. Sophocles calls the 




fig' 3J' — TtmmnM. Rohak. 

trigonum a Phrygian inftrument. A reprefentation of a fpectmen with 
a front pillar like that fliown in the woodcut. Fig. 33, has been found 
in Herculaneum. Lefs common, and derived from Afta, were the 
fambuca and nabliOy the cxad conftru^ion of which is, however, 
unknown. 

The flute, tibiay wag originally made of the fliin bone, and had a 
mouth-hole, and four finger-holes. Its (hape was retained even when, 
at a later period, it was conftruSed of other fubftances than bone. 
The tibia gingrtna conlifted of a long and thin tube of reed with a 
mouth-hole at the fide of one end. The tibia obliqua and tibia vafia 



Hiflory of Mufical Inftruments. 43 

were provided with mouth-pieces affixed at a right angle to the tube, — 
a contrivance Ibmewhat fimilar to that on our balToon. The tibia hnga 
was efpecially uled in religious worlhip. The iibia atrva was curved 
at its broadeft end. The tibia ligula appears to have refembled our 
flageolet. The ealaraus was nothing more than a Ample pipe cut ofF 
the idnd of reed which the ancients ufed as a pen for writing. 

The Romans had double flutes as well as fingle flutes. The double 
flute conlifted of two tubes united, either lb as to have a mouth-piece 
in common, oi to have each a feparate mouth-ptece. If the tubes were 
exa£Uy alike, the double flute was called Tibite farts ; if they were 
different from each other, Tibite imparu. Little plugs, or ftoppers, 
were inferted into the finger holes to regulate the order of intervals. 
The tibia was made in various fhapcs. The tibia dtxtra was uAiallj 




Tig. J4.— Tiii« Paru. Rohan. 



^'S- 3S-— Tnia Paui, « 



n Tn CAMtniiM. 



conflnided of the upper and thinner part of a reed ; and the tibia 
finiftra^ of the lower and broader part. The performers ufed alfo the 
tapiftrtim^ — a bandage round the cheeks, identica] with the phtrbtia 
of the Greeks. 



44 



An EJfay on the 



Hg. 36- 



Tlie Britilb Mufeum contains a mofaic figure of a Roman girl playing 
the tibia^ which Is ftatcd to have been dirinterrei], in the year 1823, on 
theVia Appia, a famous ancient road in Italy (Fig. 36). Here the 
haimoSf or mouth-piece, fomewhat rcfcmbling the rccd of our oboe, is 
dillin<^ly fliown. The finger-holes, probably four, are not indicated, 
although they undoubtedly exifted on the inllrument. 

Furthermore, the Romans had two kinds of Pandean pipes, viz. the 
fyrinx and the fijiula. The bagpipe, tibia utricularis, is faid to have 
been a favourite inftniment of the empen»- Nero. 

The cemu was a large horn of bronze, curved. The performer 
held it under his arm with the broad end upwards over his fhoulder. 



^1— 



Flj. J7.— Th> Tuba, Coin 



Hijiory of Mufical Ififlruments. 45 

The tuba was a ftrajght trumpet. Both the eomu and the tuba 
were employed in war to convey fignals. The fame was the cafe 
with the iuccina, — originally a conch Ihell, and afterwards a ftmple 
horn of an animal, — and the liluus^ which was bent at the broad end^ 
but otherwife ftraight. The lituus fomewhat refembled the German 
Zinke. 

The tympanum refembled the tambourine, and was beaten like the 
latter with the hands. Among the Roman Inftniments of PercuJSon 
deferves to be noticed the fcabiiium, which confiAed of two plates 
combined by means of a fort of hinge. The fcabiiium was l^ened 
under the foot and trodden in time, to produce certain rhythmical 
elFeds in mufical performances. The cymbalum confifted of two metal 
plates fimilar to our cymbals. The erolala and the crufmata were kinds 
of caftanets, the former being oblong and of a larger fize than the latter. 



jj".— CxoTALA, Roman. 

The Romans had alfo a triangulum^ which refembled the triangle occa- 
fionally ufcd in our orcheftra. The Jiftram they derived from Egypt 
with the introdu£lion of the worfliip of Ifis. Metal bells, arranged 
according to a regular order of intervals, and placed in a frame, were 
called tlntinnabula. The crtpitaculum appears to have been a fome- 
what fimilar contrivance on a hoop with a handle. 

Through the Greeks and Romans we have the firft well-authenti- 
cated proof of mufical inftruments having been introduced into Europe 
from Afia. The Romans, in their conquefls, undoubtedly made their 



46 An EJfay on the 



muflcal inftruments known, to fomc extent, alfo in Wcftem Europe. 
Bat the Greeks and Romans are not the only nations which introduced 
Eaftem inftruments into Europe. The Phoenicians, at an early period, 
colonized Sardinia, and traces of them are ftiU to be found on that 
ifland. Among thefe is a peculiarly conftrufted double-pipe called 
Uonedda or launedda. Again, at a much later period the Arabs intro- 
duced feveral of their inftruments into Spain, from which country they 
became known in France, Germany, and England. Alfo the Crufaders, 
during the nth and 12th centuries, may have helped to familiarize the 
Weftern European nations with inftruments of the Eaft. 



Musical Instruments of th£ Chinese. 

Allowing for any exaggeration as to chronology, natural to the 
lively imagination of Afiadcs, there is no reafon to doubt that the 
Chinefe poiTefled long before our Chriftian era feveral of their popular 
mufical inftruments to which they attribute a fabuloufly high antiquity. 
Among the Chinefe we meet with an ancient tradition, according to 
which they obtained their mufical fcale from a miraculous bird, called 
Foung-hoang, which appears to have been a fort of Phoenix. When 
Confucius, the famous philofopher of the Chinefe, who lived about 
B.C. 500, happened to hear on a certain occafion fome divine Chinefe 
mufic, he became fo greatly enraptured that he could not take any food 
for three months afterwards. The founds which produced this efFe£l 
were thofe of Kouei, the Orpheus of the Chinefe, whofe performance 
on the king^ — a kind of harmonicon conftrudled of flabs of fonorous 
ftone — would draw wild animals around him, and make them fubfer- 
vient to his will. As regards the invention of mufical inftruments, the 
Chinefe have various traditions. In one of thefe we are told that the 
origin of fome of their moft popular inftruments dates from the period 
when China was under the dominion of heavenly fpirits, called Ki. 
Another affigns the invention of feveral ftringed inftruments to the 
great Fohi, called " The Son of Heaven," who was the founder of the 
Chinefe empire, and who lived about B.C. 3000, which was long after 
the dominion of the Ki, or fpirits. Again, another tradition holds that 
the moft important inftruments, and fyftematic arrangements of founds, 
are an invention of Niuva, a fupematural female, who lived at the 
time of Fohi, and who was a virgin-mother. 

According to their hiftorical records, the Chinefe poflefTed their 
much-efteemed king 2200 years before our Chriftian era, and employed 



Hijiory of Mufical Infiruments. 47 

it for accompanying facred fongs of pnufe. It was regarded as a facred 
inftrument. During religious obfervances, at the folemn moment when 
the king was founded, flicks of incenfe were burnt. It was, likewife, 
played before the emperor, early in the morning when he awoke. The 
Chincfe have long fmce conflru^ed various kinds of the king^ by uling 



Fi|. J9.— King. Chihui. 

different fpecies or ftones. Their moft &mous ftone felefted for this 
purpofe is called yu. It is not only very fonorous but alfo beautiful in 
appearance. The yu is found in mountain ftreams and crevices of 
rocks. The largeft fpecimens found meafure from two to three feet 
in diameter, but of this fize fpecimens rarely occur. The yu is 
very hard and heavy. Some European mineralogitls, to whom the 
miflionaries tranfmitted fpecimens for examination, pronounce it to be 
a fpecies of agate. It is found of different colours, and the Chinefe 
appear to have preferred in dif^rent centuries particular colours for the 
king. At the middle of the laft century, for inftance, the (afbionable 
colour of the yu ufed for the kingi played at the court in Peking, was 
white, refembling whey ; although the blue, red, yellow, and green 
ftones of this kind were likewife much efteemed, efpccially if they were 
of uniform colour without fliades or ftreaks. 

The Chinefe confider the yu particularly valuable for mufical pur- 
pofes, becaufe it always retains exactly the fame pitch. All other 



48 An EJfay on the 



mufical inftruments, they fay, are in this refped unreliable ; but the 
tone of the yu is neither influenced by cold nor heat, nor by humidity, 
nor dryncfs. 

There are, beftdes the yv, three other fpecies of fonorous ftone 
efteemed in China. Of thefe the hiang^ch is efpecially noteworthy on 
account of its metallic found. 

The ftones ufed for the king have been cut during different centuries 
in various grotefque (hapes. Some reprefent animals : — as, for inftance, a 
bat with outftretched wings ; two fiihes placed ftde by fide. Others are 
cut in the ihape of an ancient Chinefe belL I'he angular ihape ihown 
in the engraving, Fig. 39, appears to be the oldeft, and is ftill retained in 
the ornamented ftones of the pien-king^ which is a more modern inftru- 
ment than the king. The tones of the pien-king are attuned according 
to the Chinefe intervals called /u, of which there are twelve in the 
compafs of an o6lave. The fame is the cafe with the other Chinefe 
inftruments of this clafs. They vary, however, in pitch. The pitch 
of the foung'king^ for inftance, is four intervals lower than that of the 
pien^king. 

Sonorous ftones have always been ufed by the Chinefe also fingly, 
as rhythmical inftruments. Such a fingle ftone is called tfe-king. 
Probably certain curious relics belonging to a temple in Peking, ereded 
for the worfhip of Confucius, ferve a fimilar purpofe. In one of the 
outbuildings of the temple are ten fonorous ftones, (haped like drums, 
which are afTerted to have been cut about three thoufand years ago. 
The very ancient Chinefe chara6lers engraven upon them arc nearly 
obliterated. 

It may not be out of place to notice here that alfo of the fonorous 
ftones of European countries we poifefs fome curious old records. Pliny 
mentions the chaUophonos {i.e. ^^ founding like metal ") as a black ftone 
which, when ftruck, clinks like brafs. This is probably identical with 
our clinkftone, or phonolite, generally of a greylfh colour, which, when 
ftruck with a hammer, produces a metallic found. Pliny recommends 
tragic a£tors to carry the chaUophonos about them ; but he does not fay 
what advantage they may expedi to derive therefrom. Perhaps the 
advice is only offered to poor adlors who have nothing better to chink 
in their pockets. The chaUophonos appears to refemble the Chinefe 
fonorous ftone hiang-chgy which is alfo found of a black colour. 

The ancient Chinefe had feveral kinds of bells, frequently arranged 
in fets, fo as to conftltute a mufical fcale. The Chinefe name for the 
bell is tchung. At an early period they had a fomewhat fquare-fhaped 
bell called te-tchung. Like other ancient Chinefe bells, it was made 
of copper alloyed with tin, the proportion being one pound of tin to 
fix of copper. 



Hifiory of Mujscal Injiruments. 49 

The ti-tchungy which is alfo known by the name of piaa^ was 
principally ufed to indicate the time and divilions in mufical per- 
formances. It had a fixed pitch of found, and fcveral of thefe bells, 
attuned to a certain order of intervals, were not unfrcquently ranged in 
a regular fucceffion, thus forming a mufical inftrument which was 
called pitn-tchuttg (Fig. 40). The mufica] fcale of the fixteen bells 




Fig. 40. — PitN- 



which the pltn-tchung contained, was the fame as that of the king 
before mentioned. 

The hiiun-tchung was, according to 
popular tradition, already enumerated with 
the antique inftruments at the time of 
Confijcius. It came into popular ufe during 
the Han dynafty (from B.C. 200 until 
A.D. 200^. It was of a peculiar oval 
Ihape, and had nearly the fame quaint 
ornamentation as the te-tekung ; this con- 
fifted of fymbolical figures. There were 
four divifions on it, each containing nine 
mammals. Its mouth was crelcent-fliaped. 
Every ligure on it had a deep meaning 
referring to the feafons and to the myAeries 
of the Buddhift religion. The largeft ^'8- 4i.-H:«iN-n:H«No. 



50 An EJfay on the 

hiuen-tchung was about twenty inches in length ; like the li-tchung^ it 
was founded by means of a linall wooden mallet with an oval knob. 
None of the bells of this defcription had a clapper. It would, how- 
ever, appear that the Chinefe had at an early period Ibme kind of bell 
provided with a wooden tongue. It was u&d for military purpoles as 
wcU as for calling the people together when an imperial mellenger bad 
to promulgate his fovereign's commands. An expreffion of Confucius 
is recorded to the tSe& that he wiflied to be *' A wooden-toi^ed bell 
of Heaven," i.e. a herald of heaven to proclaim the divine purpofes 
to the multitude. 

Again, the Chinefe employed in ancient times a bell for the &me 
purpofe for which we ule the tuning-fork or pitch-pipe ; and this bell 
ferved alfo as a certain meafure and weight commonly required in bufi- 
ne6 tranla<ftions. One fpecimen appears to have been kept in a royal 
hall, or temple, to be referred to as a ftandard for the others. 

The ykng-hiang was a kind of wood-harmonicon. It contained 
fixteen wooden flabs of an oblong-fquare ihape, fufpended in a wooden 
frame elegantly decorated. The flabs were arranged in two tiers, one 
above the other, and were all of equal length and breadth, but differed 
in chicknefs. 

The tchoung-tou confifted of twelve flips of bamboo and was ufed 
for beating time and for rhythmical purpofes. The flips being banded 
together at one end could be expanded fomewhat like a fan. The 
Chinefe ftate that they ufed the tchoung-tou for writing upon before they 
invented paper. 

The 9Uy likewife an ancient Chinefe inflrument of percuffion, but 
ftill in ufe> is made of wood in the fliape of a crouching tiger. It is 
hollow, and along its back arc about twenty fmall pieces of metal, 



Fig. 41. — Ov. CHiNtft. 



Hijiory of Mujical Injiruments. 5 1 

pointed, and in appearance not unlike the teeth of a faw. The per- 
former ftrikes them with a fort of pleftrum refembling a brufh, or with 
a fmall ftick called tchen. Occafionally the ou is made with pieces of 
metal ihaped like reeds. Indeed, there appear to be feveral varieties of 
this inftrument, as may be furmifed from one of its figures, tranfmitted 
to us reprefendng a cat, or fome fuch member of the feline fpecies. 

The ancient ou was conftrudted with only fix tones which were 
attuned thus,— 3/J g^ a^ r, </,yi The inflrument appears to have be- 
come deteriorated in the courfe of time ; for, although it has gradually 
acquired as many as twenty-feven pieces of metal, it evidently ferves at 
the prefent day more for the produdion of rhythmical noife than for 
the execution of any melody. The ou is made of a fpecies of wood called 
kieou or tfteou. The tiger refls generally on a hollow wooden pedeflal, 
about three feet fix inches long, which ferves as a foundboard. 

The tchou^ likewife an inflrument of percuffion, was made of the 
wood of a tree called kieou-mou^ the flem of which refcmbles that of the 
pine, and whofe foliage is much like that of the cyprefs. It was con- 
flruiSled of boards about three-quarters of an 
inch in thicknefs. In the middle of one of 
the fides was an aperture into which the hand 
was pafTed for the purpofe of holding the 
handle of a wooden hammer, the end of which 
entered into a hole fituated in the bottom of 
the tchmi* The handle was kept in its place 
by means of a wooden pin, on which it moved „. ^ 

right and left when the inttrument was Itruck 

with the hammer. The Chinefe afcribe to the tchou a very high an- 
tiquity, as they almofl invariably do with any invention of theirs 
whenever the date of its origin is unknown to them. 

The po-fou was a drum, about one foot four inches in length, and 
feven inches in diameter. It had a parchment at each end, which 
was prepared in a peculiar way by being boiled in water. The po-fou 
ufed to be partly filled with a preparation made from the hufk of rice. 
This was done to mellow the found. The Chinefe name for the drum 
is kou. The ancient Chinefe had various kinds of drums, fome of 
which were elaborately and grotefquely ornamented. 

The kin^kou^ a large drum fixed on a pedeflal which raifes it above 
fix feet from the ground, (Fig. 44), is embellifhed with fymbolical 
defigns. A fimilar drum on which natural phenomena are depided, is 
called lei-kou ; and another of the kind, with figures of certain birds and 
beafls which are regarded as fymbols of long life, is called /ing^kouj and 
alfo ku'hm* 




52 



An Effay on the 



T'lSRiS, 



Fig. 44. — KlH-KCD. CHINtU. 



The flutes, ';>j"t and Uhi were generJly made of bamboo. The 
han-tfii was a Pandean pipe containing twelve tubes of bamboo. The 
fiae^ likewife a Pandean pipe, contained fixteen tubes. The fai-fias 
differed from the fiai inafmuch as the tubes were inferted into an 
oddly-lhaped cafe highly ornamented with grotefque defigns and filJccn 
append^es. 

Furthermore, the Chinefe conftru£led, at a very early period, a curious 
wind-inftrument, called hiuen. It was made of baked clay, and had five 
finger-holes, three of which were placed on one fide and two on the 
oppofite fide (Fig. 45). Its tones were in conformity with the pentatonic 




Hijiory of Mujical Injiruments. 5 3 

fcale. T*he reader unacquainted with the pentatonic fcale may afcertain 
its charader by playing on the pianoforte the fcale of C major with the 
omiffion of f and b (the fourth and feventh) ; or by ftriking the black 
keys in regular fucceffion from f-fharp to the next f-fliarp above or 
below. 

Another curious wind-inftrument of high antiquity, the cheng^ is 
ftill in ufe {See Fig. Ii6). Formerly it had either 13, 19, or 24 tubes, 
placed in a calabafh ; and a long curved tube ferved as a mouth-piece. 
In olden time it was called yu. 

The ancient ftringed inftruments, the kin and che^ were of the dul- 
cimer kind. They are ftill in ufe, and there are fpecimens of them in 
the Mufeum. Some account of them will be found in the Catalogue. 

The Buddhifts introduced from Thibet into China their god of 
mufic, who is reprefented as a rather jovial-looking man, with a 
mouftache and an imperial, playing the pepa^ 3, kind of lute with four 
niken ftrings. The Kalmuks, in the vicinity of the Cafpian Sea, adore 
the fame divinity, called Maidari. The Kalmuks are Buddhifts. They 
invaded Ruffia in the thirteenth century. In China the Buddhift reli- 
gion obtained a footing during the firft century of our Chriftian era. 
Thefe fa£ts point to a high antiquity for the idol Maidari, the divine 
mufician. 

Perhaps fome interefting information refpeding the ancient Chinefe 
mufical inftruments may be gathered from the famous ruins of the 
Buddhift temples Ongcor-^JVat and Ongcor-Thom^ in Cambodia. Thefe 
fplendid ruins are fuppofed to be above two thoufand years old. At any 
rate, the circumftance of their age not being known to the Cambodians 
fuggefts a high antiquity. On the baf-reliefs with which thefe temples 
were enriched, are figured mufical inftruments, which European tra- 
vellers defcribe as ^^ flutes, organs, trumpets, and drums, refembling 
** thofe of the Chinefe." Faithful fketches of thefe reprefentations 
might, very likely, afford valuable hints to the ftudent of mufical hiftory. 



Musical Instruments of the Hindus. 

In the Brahmin mythology of the Hindus the god Nareda is the 
inventor of the vinoy the principal national inftrument of Hinduftan. 
Sarafwati, the confort of Brahma, may be regarded as the Minerva of 
the Hindus. She is the goddefs of mufic as well as of fpeech ; to her 
is attributed the invention of the fyftematic arrangement of the founds 
into a mufical fcale. She is reprefented feated on a peacock and playir.t^ 
on a ftringed inftrument of the lut^ kind. Brahma himfelf we fii.d 



54 An EJfay on the 

— — - I ^M^i -Mil- T r - r M M ■■ w ^m - 

depidled as a vigorous man with four handfome heads, beating with his 
hands upon a fmall drum ; and Vifhnu, in his incarnation as Kriihna, 
is reprefented as a beautiful youth playing upon a flute. The Hindus 
conftru£l a peculiar kind of flute, which they confider as the £ivourite 
inftrument of Krifhna. Furthermore, they have the divinity Ganefa^ 
the god of Wifdom, who is reprefented as a man with the head of an 
elephant, holding a tamhoura in his hands. 

It is a fuggeftive fadl that we find among feveral nations in different 
parts of the world an ancient tradition, according to which their moft 
popular ftringed inftrument was originally derived from the water. 

In Hindu mythology the god Nareda invented the vina — ^the prin- 
cipal national inftrument of Hinduftan — which has alfo the name each*-- 
hapty fignifying a tortoife {tefludo). Moreover, nara denotes in Sanfkrit 
" water," and Narada^ or Nareda^ *' The Giver of Water." 

Like Nareda, fo Nereus and his fifty daughters, the Nereides, men- 
tioned in Greek mythology, were renowned for their mufical accom- 
plifhments. 

The ^Scandinavian god Odin, the originator of magic fongs, is 
mentioned as the ruler of the fea, and as fuch he had the name of 
Nikarr. In the depth of the fea he played the harp with his fubordinate 
fpirits, who occafionally came up to the fur&ce of the water to teach 
fome favoured human being their wonderful inftrument. 

Wainamoinen, the divine player on the Finnifh iantikj according 
to the Kafewala, the old national Epos of the Finns, conftru£ked his 
inftrument of fifh-bones. The frame he made out of the bones of the 
pike ; and the teeth of the pike he ufed for the tuning-pegs. 

Hermes, it will be remembered, made his lyre, the chefysj of a 
tortoife-fhell. 

Jacob Grimm, in his work on German Mythology, points out an 
old tradition, preferved in Swedifh and Scotch national ballads, of a 
(kilfiil harper who conftru£ls his inftrument out of the bones of a young 
girl drowned by a wicked woman. Her fingers he ufes for the tuning 
fcrews, and her golden hair for the ftrings. The harper plays, and his 
mufic kills the murderefs. A fimilar ftory is told in the old Iflandic 
national fongs j and the fame tradition has been found ftill preferved in 
the Faroe Iflands, as well as in Norway and Denmark. 

May not the agreeable impreffion produced by the rhythmical flow 
of the waves, and the foothing murmur of running water, have led 
various nations, independently of each other, to the widefpread con- 
ception that they obtained their favourite inftrument of mufic from the 
water ? Or is this notion traceable to a common fource, dating from 
a pre-hiftoric age, — perhaps from the early period when the Aryan race 
is furmifed to have difRifed its lore through various countries i Or did 



Hifiory of Muficai Injiruments. 5 5 

it originate in the old belief of the world, with all its charms and 
delights, having arifen from a chaos in which water conllituted the 
predominant element \ 

Howbeit, Nareda, the Giver of Water, was evidently alfo the ruler 
of the clouds ; and Odin had his throne in the Ikies. Indeed, many 
of the mulical water-fpirits appear to have been originally confidered 
as rain deides. Their mufic may therefore be regarded as derived 
from the clouds rather than from the Tea. In (hort, the traditions 
refpe^ing fpirits and water are not in contradiction to the opinion of 
the ancient Hindus, that mufrc is of heavenly origin, but rather tend 
to fupport this opinion. 

The earlieft mulical inftniments of the Hindus on record, have, 
almoft all of them, remained as far as is known, in popular ufe until the 
prcfent day scarcely altered. Belides thefe, the Hindus poflefs feveral 
Arabic and Perfran inftruments, which are of comparatively modern 
date in Hlnduftan, they evidently having been introduced into Chat 
countiy Icarcely a thou^d years ago, at the time of the Mahomedan 
irruption. There is a treatife on mufic extant, written in Sanfkrit, 
which contains a defcription of the ancient inftruments. Its title is 
S&npta rathnakara. If, as may be hoped, it will be tranflated by a 
Sanlkric fcholar who is at the fame time a good mulician, we Ihall 
probably be enabled to afcertain more exadly which of the Hindu 
inftruments of the prefent day are of comparatively modem origin. 



56 An EJfay on the 



The Vina is undoubtedly of high antiquity. It has feven wire 
ftrings, and movable frets which are generally ^ened with wax. Two 
hollowed gourds, often taftefully ornamented, are affixed to it for the 
purpofe of increafing the fonoroufnefs. There are feveral kinds of 
the vina in different diftridis \ but the kind reprefented in the illuftration, 
Fig. 46, is regarded as the oldeft. The performer here fliown is 
Jeewan Shah, a celebrated virtuofo on the vina, who lived about a 
hundred years ago. The Hindus divided their mufical fcale into 
intervals fmaller than our femitones. They adopted twenty-two inter- 
vals, called yra//, in the compafs of an o6lave. Thefruti may therefore 
be compared to our chromatic intervals. But, from an old treatife, 
written by Soma, it is evident that the common fcale of the Hindus had 
much the character of the pentatonic order of intervals. As the frets 
of the vina are movable, the performer can eafily regulate them ac- 
cording to the fcale, or mode, which he requires for his mufic. 

The harp, change has become almoft obfolete. If fome Hindu 
drawings of it can be relied upon, it had at an early time a triangular 
frame, and was in conftrudion as well as in (hape and fize almoft 
identical with the AfTyrian harp. 

The Hindus claim to have invented the violin bow. They maintain 
that the ravanajiron^ one of their old inih-uments played with the bow, 
was invented about five thoufand years ago, by Ravanon, a mighty king 
of Ceylon. However this may be, there is a great probability that the 
fiddle bow originated in Hinduftan ; for, Sanfkrit fcholars inform us 
that there are names for it in works which cannot be lefs than from 
1500 to 2000 years old. Thefe Sanfkrit names are kona^ garika^ and 
parivadas. The kona is defcribed as the rudeft kind of bow, confifting 
of a cane, perhaps without any hair. It may have been made rough 
either by fmall incifions, or by the application of fome kind of rofin. 
Howbeit, anyone may convince himfelf that a ftring — efpecially if it 
is of filk, as the ftrings of Afiatic inftruments frequently are — may be 
made to found by the fTi£tion of a long rod like that in the hand of the 
AfTyrian mufician, Fig. 16, drawn over it like a bow. The non-occur- 
rence of any inftrument played with a bow on the monuments of the 
nations of antiquity is by no means fo fure a proof as has generally been 
fuppofed, that the bow was unknown. The fiddle, in its primitive 
condition, muft have been a poor contrivance. It probably was 
defpifed by players who could produce better tones with greater facility, 
by twanging the ftrings with their fingers, or with a pleSrum. Thus it 
may have remained through many centuries without experiencing any 
material improvement. It muft alfo be borne in mind that the monu- 
ments tranfmitted to us chiefly reprefent hiftorical events, religious 
ceremonies, and royal entertainments. On fuch occafions inftruments 



Hijiory of Mujical Injiruments. 5 7 



of a certain kind only were ufed, and thefe we find reprefented ; 
while others, which may have been even more common, never occur. 
In two thoufand years time people will poffibly maintain that fome highly 
perfeded inftrument popular with them was entirely unknown to us, 
becaufe it is at prefent in fo primitive a condition, that no one hardly 
notices it. If the ravanajiron was an importation of the Mahomedans, 
it would moft likely bear fome refemblance to the Arabian and Perfian 
inftruments, and it would be found rather in the hands of the higher dalles, 
in the towns ; whereas it is principally met with among the lower order 
of people, in ifolated and mountainous diftri6ls. Moreover, it is remark- 
able that the moft fimple kind of reeuanaftron^ — there are now-a-days 
fome varieties of this inftrument, — is almoft identical with the Chinefe 
fiddle called ur-heen. This fpecies has only two ftrings, and its 
body confifts of a fmall block of wood, hollowed out, and covered 
with the (kin of a ferpent. The ur-heen has not been mentioned among 
the moft ancient inftruments of the Chinefe, fmce there is no evidence 
of its having been known in Chma before the introduction of the 
Buddhift religion into that country. From indications, which to point 
out would lead too far here, it would appear that feveral inftruments 
found in China originated in Hinduftan. From Hinduftan and Thibet 
they feem to have been gradually difFufed, more or lefs altered in the 
courfe of time, in the Eaft as far as Japan. 

Another curious Hindu inftrument, probably of very high antiquity, 
is the poongij alfo called toumrie and magoudi. It confifts of a gourd, 
or of the Cuddos nut, hollowed, into which two pipes are inferted. 
The poongi therefore fomewhat refembles in appearance a bagpipe. 
It is generally ufed by the Sampuris^ or fnake charmers, who play upon 
It when they exhibit the antics of the Cobra di Capello. The name 
magoudi^ given in fome diftridis to this inftrument, rather tends to 
corroborate the opinion of fome mufical hiftorians that the magadis of 
the ancient Greeks was a fort of double-pipe, or bagpipe. 

Many inftruments of Hinduftan are known by different names in 
different diftrifts ; and, befides, there are varieties of them. On the 
whole, the Hindus pofTefs about fifty inftruments. To defcribe them 
properly would fill a volume. Some, which are in the Mufeum, will 
be found noticed in the Catalogue. 



Musical Instruments of the Persians and Arabs. 

Of the mufical inftruments of the ancient Perfians, before the 
Chriftian era, fcarcely anything is known. It may, however, be fur- 

M.I. E 



58 



An EJfay on the 



mifed that they clofely refembled thofe of the AflTyrians, and probably 
alfo thofe of the Hebrews. 

The harp, change in olden time a favourite inftrument of the 
Perfians, has gradually fallen into difuetude. The illuftration of a 
fmall harp given in the woodcut Fig. 47 has been (ketched from the 
celebrated old fculptures which exift on a ftupendous rock, called 
Tackt-iBostan, fttuated in the vicinity of the town of Kermanihah. 
Thefe fculptures are faid to have been executed during the lifetime of 
the Perfian monarch Khofroo Purviz, towards the end of the fixth 
century of the Chriftian era. They form the ornaments of two lofty 
arches, and confift of reprefentations of field fports and aquatic amufe- 
ments. Some boats are filled with women playing upon harps, like 
that (hown in the engraving Fig. 47. In one of the boats is feated 




\ 



nn-ifrnr^ 




Fig. 4''. — Persian Chang. 
VP"* Century. 



Fig. 4S — Persian Bagpipe. 
VI**" Century. 



a man in an ornamental drefs, with a halo round his head, who is 
receiving an arrow from one of his attendants ; while a female, who is 
fitting near him, plays on a Trigonon. Towards the top of the bas- 
relief is reprefented a ftage on which are performers on fmall ftraight 
trumpets, and little hand drums ; fix harpers ; and four other mufi- 
cians, apparently females, — the firft of whom plays a flute ; the fecond, 
a fort of Pandean pipe ; the third, an inftrument which is too much 
defaced to be recognizable ; and the fourth, a bagpipe (Fig. 48). Two 
harps of a peculiar fhapa were copied by Sir Gore Oufely from Perfian 
manufcripts about 400 years old (Fig. 49). They refemble, in the prin- 
ciple on which they are conftrufted, all other Oriental harps. There 
exifted evidently various kinds of the chang. It may be remarked here 
that the inftrument tfchenk (or chang) in ufe at the prefent day in Perfia, 
refembles a dulcimer rather than a harp. The Arabs adopted the 



Hifiory of Mufical Injiruments. 59 



harp from the Perfians, and called it juni. An interefting reprcfen- 
tation uf a Turkifh wnman playing the harp {Fig. 50) Ikecchcd Irom 



6o An EJfay on the 



life by Melchior Lorich, in the feventeenth century, probably exhibits 
an old Perfian chang \ for the Turks derived their muftc principally 
from Perfia. Here we have an introduction into Europe of the 
Oriental frame without a front pillar. 

The Perfians appear to have adopted, at an early period, fmaller 
mufical intervals than femitones. When the Arabs conquered Perfia, 
(A.D. 641) the Perfians had already attained a higher degree of civili- 
zation than their conquerors. The latter found in Perfia the cultivation 
of mufic confiderably in advance of, and the mufical inftruments 
fuperior to their own. They foon adopted the Perfian inftruments, and 
there can be no doubt that the mufical fyftem exhibited by the earlieft 
Arab writers whofe works on the theory of mufic have been preferved, 
was bafed upon an older fyftem of the Perfians. In thefe works the 
oftave is divided into feventeen one-third-Unei^ — intervals which are 
ftill made ufe of in the Eaft. Some of the Arabian inftruments are 
conftru£led fo as to enable the performer to produce thefe intervals 
with exadtnefs. The frets on the lute and tamboura, for inftance, are 
regulated with a view to this objedi. 

The Arabs had, however, to fome extent, become acquainted with 
the Perfian inftruments before the time of their conqueft of Perfia. 
An Arab mufician of the name of Nadr Ben el-Hares Ben Kelde, is 
recorded as having been (ent to the Perfian king Khofroo Purviz, in the 
fixth century, for the purpofe of learning Perfian finging, and perform- 
ing on the lute. Through him, it is faid, the lute was brought to 
IVlekka. Saib Chatir, the fon of a Perfian, is recorded as the firft 
performer on the lute in Medina, A.D. 682 ; and of an Arab lutift, 
£bn Soreidfch, from Mekka, A.D. 683, it is efpecially mentioned that 
he played in the Perfian ftyle, evidently the fuperior one. The lute, 
el'Oud^ had before the tenth century only four ftrings, or four pairs 
producing four tones, each tone having two ftrings tuned in unifon. 
About the tenth century a ftring for a fifth tone was added. The 
ftrings were made of filk neatly twifted. The neck of the inftrument 
was provided with frets of ftring, which were carefully regulated ac- 
cording to the fyftem of feventeen intervals in the compafs of an o6lave 
before mentioned. The ftiape of the inftrument was the fame as that 
fliown in the engraving. Fig. 51, which reprefents a modern Egyptian 
playing on the el-oud. Other favourite ftringed inftruments were : the 
tamboura^ a kind of lute with a long neck, and the kanoon^ a kind of 
dulcimer, ftrung with lamb's gut ftrings (generally three in unifon for 
each tone) and played upon with two little ple£lra which the performer 
had faftened to his fingers (Fig. 52). The kanoon is likewife ftill in 
ufe in countries inhabited by Mahomedans. The engraving, Fig. 53, 



Hijiory of Mufical Injlruments. 6 1 



Rg Ji. — Ei-ovp, OK Lim. 



Fig. S». Kahoon. 

reprefents an old PerRzn fantiry the prototype of our dulcimer, mounted 
with wire firings, and played upon with two (lightly curved fticks. The 
illuftration is Uken from a Perfian painting in Teheran. 

Al-Farabi, one of the earUell Arabian mufical theories Icnown, who 
lived in the beginning of the tenth century, does not allude to the 
fiddle-bow. This is noteworthy inafmuch as it fcems in fome meafurc 
Xo fupport the opinion maintained by fome hiftorians that the bow 



62 An Ejfay on the 



Fig S3. — PutiiAN Santi». 

originated in England or Wales. Unfortunately we pofTefs no exa^ 
defcriptions of the Pcrfian and Arabian inftruments between the tenth 
and fourteenth centuries, otherwife we fhould probably have earlier 
accounts of fome inllrument of the violin kind in Perfla. Afh-Qiakandit 
who lived in Spain about A.D. 1200, mentions the rebah^ which may 
have been in ufe for centuries without having been thought worthy of 
notice, on account of its rudenefs. Pcrfian theorills of the fourteenth 



Hijiory of Mujical Injiruments. 6 3 



ccntuiy mention two inllruinents of the violin clafs, viz., the rthab and 
the itmangth. As regards the kemoHgek^ the Arabs thcmfelves affert 
dut they obtained it trom Perfia, and their llaiement appears all the 
more worthy of belief Trom the hSt that both names, rtbab and iemangek 
are originally Perfian. 

The May^ a flute (Fig. 54) and the yitrwijy, a fpscies of oboe, arc Hil! 
popular in the Halt. 



The Arabs mud have been inde^tigablc conflrui^ors of mufical 
inllruments. Kiefcwctter (who wrote a diflertation on the mulic of 
the Arabs, in co-operation with the diftinguifhed Oriental fcholar 
Freiherr Hammer-Pu^ftall) gives a lift of above two hundred names 
of Arabian inftruments, and this lift does not include many known to 
us through Spanifti hiftorians. A careful inveftigation of the mufical 
inftruments of the Arabs during their fojourn in Spain is particularly 
interefting to the ftudent of media:val mufic, inafmuch as it reveals the 
Eaftern origin of many inftruments which are generally regarded as 
European inventions. Introduced into Spain by the Saracens and the 
Moors, thev were gradually difFufed towards northern Europe. The 
Englifti, for inftance, adopted not only the Moorifti Dance {" Morrice 
Dance") but alfo the kuitra {"^'ttern") the el-oud ("lute"), the 
rehab ("rebec"), the nakkarah ("naker"), and feveral others. In 
an old Cornilh facred drama, furmifed to date from the fourteenth 



64. An EJfay on the 



century, we have in an enumeration of mufical inftrumcnts the nakrys^ 
defignating *' kettle-drums." It muft be remembered that the Cornifh 
language, which has now become obfolete, was nearly akin to the 
Welfli. Indeed, names of mufical instruments derived from the Moors 
in Spain, occur in almoft every European language. 

Moreover, fanciful (lories are traditionally preferved among the 
Arabs teftifying to the wonderful effefts they afcribed to the power of 
their inftrumental performances. One example will fuffice. Al-Farabi 
had acquired his proficiency in Spain, in one of the fchools at Cordova, 
which flouriihed as early as towards the end of the ninth century. 
The reputation of Al-Farabi became fo great, that ultimately it 
extended to Ada. The mighty Caliph of Bagdad himfelf deiired to 
hear the celebrated mufician, and fent meflengers to Spain with inftruc- 
tions to offer rich prefents to him and to convey him to the Caliph's 
court. But Al-Farabi feared that if he went he (hould be retained in 
Afia, and fhould never again fee his home to which he felt deeply 
attached. However, at laft he refolved to difguife himfelf, and to 
undertake the journey which promifed him a rich harveft. Drefled in 
a mean coftume, he made unrecognized his appearance at the court 
juft at the time when the mighty Caliph was being entertained with 
his daily concert. Al-Farabi, unknown to everyone was permitted to 
exhibit his fkill on the lute. Scarcely had he commenced his perform- 
ance, in a certain mufical mode, when he fet all his audience laughing 
aloud, notwithftanding the efforts of the courtiers to fupprefs fo un- 
becoming an exhibition of mirth in the prefence of the Caliph. In 
truth, even the Caliph himfelf was compelled to burft out into a fit of 
laughter. Prefently the performer changed to another mode, and the 
effect was, that immediately all his hearers began to figh, and foon 
tears of fadnefs replaced the previous tears of mirth. Again he played 
in another mode, which excited his audience to fuch a rage that they 
would have fought each other if he, feeing the danger, had not dircftly 
gone over to an appeafing mode. After this wonderful exhibition of 
his (kill Al-Farabi concluded in a mode which had the effeft of making 
his lifteners fall into a profound (leep, during which he took his 
departure. 

It will be feen that this incident is almoft identical with one re- 
corded as having happened about twelve hundred years earlier at the 
court of Alexander the Great, and which forms the fubjeft of Dryden's 
fine poem * Alexander's Feaft.' The diftinguifhed flutift Timotheus 
playing before Alexander, fucceffively aroufed and fubdued different 
pa(Hons by changing the mufical modes durihg his performance, exa<^ly 
in the fame way as did Al-Farabi more than a thoufand years later. 



Hijiory of Mufical Injiruments. 65 



Musical Instruments of the American Indians. 

If the preferved antiquities of the American Indians, dating from a 
period anterior to our difcovery of the Weftern Hemifphere, pofTefs an 
extraordinary intereft inafmuch as they afford reliable evidence of the 
degree of progrefs which the aborigines had attained in the cultivation 
of the arts, and in their fociai condition before they came in contad with 
Europeans, it muft be admitted that the ancient muiical inftruments 
of the American Indians are alfo worthy of examination. Several of 
them are conftru6^ed in a manner which, in fome degree, reveals the 
charadterillics of the mufical fyftem prevalent among the- people who 
ufed the inftruments. And, although moft of thefe interefting relics, 
which have been obtained from tombs and other hiding-places, may 
not be of great antiquity, it has been fatisfad^orily afcertained that they 
are genuine contrivances of the Indians before they were influenced by 
European civilization. 

Some account of thefe relics is therefore likely to prove of intereft 
alfo to the ethnologift, efpecially as feveral fadts, which will be ftated, 
may perhaps be found of afSftance in elucidating the ftill unfolved 
problem as to the probable original connedlion of the American abori- 
gines with Aiiatic races. 

Among the inftruments of the Aztecs in Mexico, and of the Inca 
Peruvians, none have been found fo frequently, and have been preferved 
in their former condition fo unaltered, as pipes and flutes. They are 
generally made of pottery or of bone, fubftances which are unfuitable 
for the conftrudlion of moft other inftruments, but which are remarkably 
well qualified to withftand the decaying influence of time. There is, 
therefore, no reafon to furmife from the frequent occurrence of fuch 
inftruments that they were more common than fome other kinds of 
which fpecimens have rarely been difcovered. 

The Mexicans pofTefTed a fmall whiftle formed of baked clay, a 
conflderable number of which have been found. Some fpecimens are 
Angularly grotefque in ftiape, reprefenting caricatures of the human face 
and figure, birds, beafts, and flowers. Some were provided at the top * 
with a finger-hole which, when it was clofed, altered the pitch of the 
found, fo that two difl^erent tones were producible on the inftrument. 

Others had a little ball of baked clay lying loofe infide the air- 
chamber. When the inftrument was blown the current of air fet the 
ball in a vibrating motion, thereby caufing a ftirill and whirring found. 



66 ^n EJfay on the 

A Hmilar contrivance is fomctimcs made ufe of by our fponfmen for 
conveying lignals. The Mexican whiflle moft likely fervcd principally 
the fame purpofe, but it may poflibiy have been ufed alfo in mufical 
emertainmems. In the RufTian Horn Band each mufician is reflri^ed 



Fij. ss— Whhtus at thi Ames. 

to a fingle tone ; and fimtlar combinations of perlbrmera,— only, of couf fe, 
much more rude, — have been witnelTcd by travellers among Tome tribes 
in Africa and America. Sir Robert Schomburglc, for inftance, mentions 
a concert of this defcription as a common entertainment of the Warrau 
Indians in Guiana. 

Rather more complete than the above fpecimens are fame of the 
whiftles and fmall pipes which have been found in graves of the Indians 
of Chiriqui in Central America. The one which is reprefented in the 
accompanying engraving, Fig. 56, appears, to judge from the fomewhat 
obfcure defcription tranimitted to us, to pofTefs about half a dozen tones. 
It is of pottery, painted in red and black on a cream-coloured ground. 



Hijlory of Mujical Injiruments. 67 



Its length is ahout five inches. Among the inflruments of this Itind 
from Central America, the moft complete ones have four finger-holes. 
By means of three of the holes the following four founds (including the 
found which is produced when none of the holes are clofed) can be 



emitted : ^- J J ""J TJ ^ .^ The fourth finger-hole, when clofed, has 

the effeA of lowering the pitch a femltone. By a particular procels 
two or three lower notes are obtainable. 

The pipe of the Aztecs which is called by the Mexican Spaniards 
pitOy fomewhat refembled our flageolet. Its material was a reddilh 
pottery, and it was provided with four finger-holes. Although, among 
about half a dozen fpecimens, which the writer of this effay has 
examined, fume are confiderably larger than others, they all have, 
fingularly enough, the fame pitch of found. The fmatleft is about fix 
inches in length, and the larged about nine inches. Several pilot have 
been found in a remarkably well-prefer ved condition. They are eafy 
to blow, and their order of intervals is in conformity with the pentatonic 



fcalc, thus ^ l' V~ •*y £ r | — '"T The ufual ftiape of the pita is that 



reprcfemed in the engraving, Fig. 57, which exhibits the upper fide of 



one pipe, and a fide view of another. A fpecimen of a lefs common 
Ihape (Fig. 58] is in the firitifti Mufeum. Indications fugeeltive of the 



68 An EJfay on the 




Fig. 58. — A Pipe or the Aztecs. 

popular eftimation in which the flute (or perhaps^ more flridlly fpeaking, 
the pipe) was held by the Aztecs are not wanting. It was played in 
religious obfervances, and we find it referred to allegorically in orations 
delivered on folemn occaiions. For inftance, at the religious feftival 
which was held in honour of Tezcatlepoca, — a divinity depi£led as a 
handfome youth, and confidered fecond only to the Supreme Being — a 
young man was facrificed who in preparation for the folemn ceremony 
had been inftru£led, befides in certain prefcribed rites which he had to 
obferve, alfo in the art of playing the flute. Twenty days before his 
death, four young girl?, named after the principal goddefles, were given 
to him as companions. And when the awful hour arrived in which he 
was to be facrificed, and he afcended the temple, he obferved the 
eftabli(hed fymbolical rite of breaking a flute on each of the fteps. 

Again, at the public ceremonies which took place on the acceffion 
of a prince to the throne, the new monarch addreflfed a prayer to the 
Divinity, in which occurred the following allegorical expreilion : — ** I 
am thy flute ; reveal to me thy will \ breathe into me thy breath like 
into a flute, as thou haft done to my predeceflbrs on the throne. As 
thou haft opened their eyes, their ears, and their mouth to utter 
what is good, fo likewife do to me. I refign myfelf entirely to thy 
guidance." Similar fentences occur in the orations addrefled to the 
monarch. In reading them one can hardly fail to be reminded of 
Hamlet's reflections addreflfed to Guildenftern, when the fervile courtier 
exprefl!es his inability to " govern the ventages " of the pipe, and to 
make the inftrument ** difcourfe moft eloquent mufic," which the 
prince bids him to do. 

M. de Caftelnau, in his ^ Expedition dans TAmerique,' gives among 
the illuftrations of obje£ls difcovered in ancient Peruvian tombs, a flute 
made of a human bone. It has four finger-holes at its upper furface, 
and appears to have been blown into at one end. Two bone-flutes, 
in appearance fimilar to the engraving given by M. de Caftelnau, which 
have been difinterred at Truxillo, are depofited in the Britifh Mufeum. 
They are about fix inches in length, and each is provided with five 
finger-holes. One of thefe has all the holes at its upper fide, and one of 
the holes is confiderably fmaller than the reft. This fpecimen (Fig. 59) 
is ornamented with fome fimple defigns in black. 



Hiftory of Mufical Injlruments. 69 




Fig. 59. — ANTlgUE PSRUVIAN BoNE- FLUTE. 

The other has four holes at its upper fide, and one underneath, the 
latter being placed near to the end at which the inftrument evidently 
was blown. In the aperture of this end fome remains of a hardened 
pafte, or refinous fubilance, are ftill preferved. This fubftance pro- 
bably was inferted for the purpofe of narrowing the end of the tube, in 
order to facilitate the producing of the founds. The fame contrivance 
is ftill reforted to in the conftru£lion of the bone-flutes by fome Indian 
tribes in Guiana. The bones of flain enemies appear to have been 
confidered efpecially appropriate for fuch flutes. Ignatius Molina relates 
of the Araucanians that whenever they had been fuccefsful in battle, 
it was their pra6lice to facrifice one of the captives to the manes of 
their warriors flain by the enemy. Having killed the unhappy prifoner, 
they made flutes of his bones, danced and ^^ thundered out their dread- 
ful war-fongs, accompanied by the mournful founds of thefe horrid 
inftruments." And Alonfo de Ovalie fays of the Indians in Chili : 
** Their flutes, which they play upon in their dances, are made of the, 
bones of the Spaniards and other enemies whom they have overcome 
in war. This they do by way of triumph and glory for their viAory. 
They make them likewife of bones of animals ; but the warriors 
dance only to the flutes made of their enemies." The Mexicans 
and Peruvians obvioufly poflefled a great variety of pipes and flutes, 
fome of which are ftill in ufe among certain Indian tribes. Thofe 
which were found in the famous ruins at Palenque are depofited in the 
Mufeum in Mexico. They are : — The cuyvi^ a pipe on which only 
five tones were producible ; the huayllaca^ a fort of flageolet ; the 
pinculluy a flute ; and the chayna^ which is defcribed by Rivero and 
Tfchudi as ^^ a flute whofe lugubrious and melancholy tones filled the 
heart with indefcribable fadnefs, and brought involuntary tears into 
the eyes." It was perhaps, properly fpeaking, a kind of oboe. At 
any rate^ the jaina^ conftrudled at the prefent day by fome Indian tribes 
in Peru, is defcribed by travellers as being provided with a reed ; and 
the jaina is probably the fame inftrument which the ancient Peruvians 
called quena^ and the Mexicans chayna. 

Moreover, the Peruvians had the fyrinx, which they called huayra- 
puhura. Some clue to the meaning of this name may be gathered fi-om 
the word huayra^ which fignifies "air." The huayra-puhura was made 



yo 



An EJfay on the 



of cane, and alfo of (lone. Sometimes an embroidery of needlc-work 
was attached to it as an ornament. One fpecimen which has been 
dilinterrcd is adorned with twelve figures precirciy refembling Maltefe 
crolTes. However, the crofs is a tigure which may be fuppofed to 
fuggell itfelf very naturally ; and it is therefore not fo furprifing, as it 
may appear at a firft glance, that the American Indians ufed it not 
unfrequentty in deligns and fculptures before they came in conta£t with 
ChriHians. 

The Britilh Mufeum polTelTes a huayra-puhura 
(Fig. 60) confifting of fourteen reed pipes, of a 
browntfh colour, tied together in two rows, by means 
of thread, fo as to form a double fet of feven reeds. 
Both fets are almofl; exactly of the fame dimeiifion, 
and are placed fide by fide. The (horted of thefc 
reeds meafure ihree inches, and the longell fix inches 
and a half. In one fet they are open at the bottom, 
and in the other they are clofed. Coiife<(uendy, 
oflavcs are produced. The reader is probably aware 
that the clofing of a pipe at the end raifes its pitch 
an oitavc. Thus, in our organ, the fo-called Stopped 
Diapafon, a fet of clofed pipes, requires tubes of only 
half the length of thofe which conditute the Open 
Diapafon, although both thefe Hops produce tones in 
the fame pitch, — the only difference between them 
Fig- 6o-— Hmav»a- being the quality of found, which in the former is 
i-HCA PttuvuNt. lefs bright than in the latter. 



The tones yielded by the huayra-puhura in quellion are as follows : 
TTie higheft oftave is indiftin^t, owing to fome 



injury done to the fhorteft tubes \ but, fuJHcient evidence remains to (how 
that the intervals were purpofely arranged according to the pentatonic 
fcale. This interefting relic was brought to light from a tomb at Arica. 
Another huayra-puhura-, likewife (lill yielding founds, was difcovered 
placed over a corpfe in a Peruvian tomb, and was procured by the 
French Genera) Paroiflien. This inftrument is made of a greeniih (tone, 
which is a fpecies of talc. It contains eight pipes. The Berlin Mu- 
feum poiTeffes a plaifler caft taken from this curious relic. Its height 
is 5| inches, and its width 6^ inches. Four of the tubes have fmall 
lateral finger-holes, which, when clofed, lower the pitch a femitone. 



Hifiory of Mufical Injiruments. 7 1 

Thefe holes are on the fecond, fourth, Hxth, and feventh pipe, as 
Ibown in the engraving. Fig. 6i, When the holes are open, the tones 

^; and when they are clofed \ 

The other tubes have unalterable tones. The following notation ex- 
hibits all the tones producible on the inftrumenC : 



The mufician is likely to fpeculate what could have induced the 
Peruvians to adopt (o llrange a fcries of intervals. Indeed, it feems 
rather arbitrary than premeditated. 



Fig. 61.— HuAVnA-riTHUKA or the I^CA Peruvians. 

However, if — as appe£.rs not improbable — the Peruvians confidered 
thofe tones which are produced by clofing the lateral holes, as additional 
intervals only, a variety of fcales, or kinds of modes, may have been 
contrived by the admiffion of one or oiher of thefe tones among the 
eflential ones. At any rate, to conjeflure from fome remarks of 
GarcilafTo de la Vega, and other hiflorians, the Peruvians appear to 
have ufed different orders of intervals for different kinds of tunes, in a 
way fimilar to what we find to be the cafe with certain Afiatic nations. 
We are told for inllance, " Each poem, or fong, had its appropriate 
tune, and they could not put two different fongs to one tunc ; and this 
was why the enamoured gallant, making mufic at night on his flute, 
with the tune which belonged to it, told the lady and all the world the 
joy or forrow of his foul, the favour or ill-will which he poffeffed ; fo 
that it might be faid that he fpoke by the flute." Thus alfo the Hindus 
have certain tunes for certain feafons and fixed occifions, and likewife 
a number of diflerent modes, or fcales, ufed for particular kinds of fungs. 



72 An EJfay on tJie 

Trumpets are often mentioned by hiltorians who have recorded the 
manners and cuftoms of the Indians at the time of the difcovery of 
America. There are, however, fcarcciy any reliable illuftracions of 
thefe inftruments tranfmitied to us. The Conch was frequently ufwl 
as a trumpet for conveying fignals in war. 

The engraving, Fig. 62, reprefents a kind of trumpet made of wood, 
and nearly feven feet in length, which Gumilla found among the Indians 
in the vicinity of the Orinoco. It fomcwhat refembles the jurupar'n, a 



rig. 6l._TKUMnT or the Ikdiani in tki Vicinitv or the Oiinoco. 

mvHerious indrument of the Indians on the Rio Haupes, a tributary 
of the Rio Negro, South America. The juruparit is regarded as an 
objcft of great veneration. Women arc never permitted to fee it. So 
ftringent is this law, that any woman obtaining a light of it is put 
to death, — ufually by poifon. No youths are allowed to fee it until 
they have been fubjefled to a feries of initiatory fallings and fcourg- 
ings. The juruparh is ufually kept hidden in the bed of fome ftream, 
deep in the forefl ; and no one dares to drink out of that fandtified 
ftream, or to bathe in its water. At feafls the juruparit is brought 
out during the night, and is blown outfide the houfes of entertain- 
ment. The inner portion of the inflrument conftfts of a tube made 
o( flips of the Paxiaba palm ( Triartta exorrhi%a). When the Indians 
are about to ufe the inftrument, they nearly clofe the upper end of the 
tube with clay, and tie above the oblong fquare hole, ftiown in the 
engraving, Fig. 63, a portion of the leaf of the Uaruma, one of the 
arrow-root family. Round the tube are wrapped long ftrips of the 
tough bark of the Jcbaru (^Par'ivoa graadifisra), a Ceafdl-piiicous tree. 
This covering defcends in folds below the tube. The length of the 
inftrument is from four to five feet. The prefent illuftration, which 
exhibits iht juruparit with its cover and without it, has been taken from 
a fpecimen in the Mufeum at Kew Gardens. The myfteries connefted 
with this trumpet are evidently old tradition from the Indian ancefturs. 
Jurupari means " Demon " ; and with feveral Indian tribes on the 
Amazon river cuftoms and ceremonies ftill prevail in honour of Jurupart. 



Hijlory of Mujical Inftruments. 73 



Fig. iy — Jniuruti. Sudtn Ahuica. 

The Caroados, an Indian tribe in Brazil, have a war trumpet which 
clofely rcfembles the juruparis. With this people it is the cuHom 
fox the chief to give on his war trumpet the (ignal for battle, and to 
continue blowing as long as he wilhes the battle to laft. As foon 
as he difcontinues blowing his trumpet, his warriors will leave off* 
fighting. During the battle he is generally ftanding on a hill ; or, if 
there is no hill near, he will place bimfelf on a tree, lirom which he will 
convey {ignals to his people. The trumpet is made of wood, and its 
found is defcribed by travellers as very deep, but rather pleafant. The 
found is eafily produced, and its continuance docs not require much 
exertion ; but a peculiar vibration of the lips is neceflary, which requires 
practice. 

Another trumpet, the turi, is common with many Indian tribes on 
the river Amazon, who ufc it chiefly in war. It is made of a long and 
thick bamboo, and there is a fplit reed in the mouthpiece. It there- 
fore partakes rather of the chara<Aer of an oboe or clarinet. Its tone 
is defcribed as loud and hadh. The turi is efpecially ufed by the 
fentinels of predatory hordes, who, mounted on a lofty tree, give the 
flgnal of attack to their comrades. 

Again, the aborigines in Mexico have a curious contrivance of this 
kind, the acecotly now more ufually called clann. The former word 
is its old Indian name, and the latter appears to have been fatt given 
to the inflrument by the Spaniards. The ancttl confids of a very thin 
tube, from eight to ten feet in length, and generally not quite ftraight, 
but with fome irregular curves. This tube, which is often not thicker 
than a couple of inches in diameter, terminates at one end in a fort 
of " bell," and has at the other end a fmall mouthpiece refembling 
in Ihape that of a clarinet. The tube is made of the dry Italic of a 
plant which is common tn Mexico, and which likewife the Indians 
call aacBtl. The moft Angular charafteriHic of the inflrument is that 



74 ^^ mp^y ^^ ^he 

the performer does not blow into it, but inhales the air through it, — 
or rather, he produces the found by fucking the mouthpiece. It is faid 
to require llrong lungs to perform on the aeocatl efle^ively according 
to Indian notions of tafte. 

The name of the Peruvian trumpet was cqueppa. Acofta mentions 
a wind inftrument of the Peruvians, called choismia^ which had a bright 
and ftirrJng quality of found, like a trumpet. In his defcription of a 
religious facritice, at which the chief of a tribe ufed to throw gold and 
precious jewels into a river, or lake, as an oflering to the prote<£ling 
water- fpirits, Acofta mentions vocal performances, the fubjeds of which 
referred to the ancient hiftory of the country, to the gods, to heroes, 
and to battles and other memorable events, which in this way were 
tranfmitted from generadon to generation. At the entrance to the 
dwelling of the chief were ftationed two naked old Indians, one on 
each fide the door, both playing the cheiimia. Herrera mentions that 
the Indians in Cuba ufed to blow horns, producing exceedingly loud 
founds. Likewife the Indians in Ecuador employed horns, or trumpets, 
in their Warlike exploits. 

The botuto (Fig. 64), which Gumilla faw ufed by fome tribes near 
the river Orinoco, was evidently an ancient Indian contrivance, but 



Hijiory of Mufical Injiruments. 7 5 



appears to have fallen almoft into oblivion during the laft two centuries. 
It was made of baked clay, and was commonly from three to four feet 
long. However, fome trumpets of this kind were of enormous fize. 
The botuto with two bellies was ufually made thicker than that with 
three bellies, and emitted a deeper found, which is defcribed as having 
been really terrific. Thefe trumpets were ufed on occafions of mourning 
and funeral dances. 

Alexander von Humboldt faw the botuto among fome Indian tribes 
near the river Orinoco. He obferved that its guardianfhip is generally 
confided to fome old Indians who pretend to be better inftruftcd in 
divine things than others, and who found it under the palm trees to 
make them bear abundance of fruit. ** On the bank of the Orinoco," 
Humboldt fays in his Travels to the EquinocStial Regions of America, 
*^ there exifl no idols, as among all the nations who have remained 
feithful to the firft worfhip of nature ; but the botuto^ the facred trumpet, 
is an objed of veneration. To be initiated into the myflertes of the 
botutOy it is requifite to be of pure morals, and to have lived fingle. 
The initiated are fubjeded to flagellations, fallings, ahd other painful 
exercifes. There are but a fmall number of thefe facred trumpets. 
The moft anciently celebrated is that upon a hill near the confluence 
of the Tomo and the Guainia. It is pretended that this inilrument 
is heard at once on the banks of the Tuamini and at the MifHon 
of San Miguel de Davipe, a diftance of ten leagues. Father Cerefo 
afTured me that the Indians fpeak of the botuto of Tomo as an obje£t 
of worfhip common to many furrounding tribes. Fruit and intoxi- 
cating liquors are placed befide the facred trumpet. Sometimes the 
Great Spirit himfelf makes the botuto refound ; fomecimes he is content 
to manifefl his will through him to whom the keeping of the inflru- 
ment is entrufled. Thefe juggleries being very ancient, — from the 
fathers of our fathers, fay the Indians, — we mufl not be furprifed 
that fome unbelievers are already to be found ; but they exprefs their 
difbelief in the myfteries of the botuto only in whifpers. Women are 
not permitted to fee this marvellous inftrument, and are excluded from 
all the ceremonies of this worfhip. If a woman have the misfortune to 
fee the trumpet, fhe is put to death without mercy." 

Befides thofe which have been noticed, other antique wind-inftru- 
ments of the Indians are mentioned by hiflorians \ but the defcriptions 
given of them are too fuperficial to convey a diftin£t notion as to their 
form and purport. Moreover, feveral of thefe contrivances fcarcely 
deferve to be clafTed with mufical inftruments. This may, for inflance, 
.be faid of certain mufical jars, or earthen vefTels producing founds, which 

F 1 



76 An EJfay on the 



the Peruvians conftruded for their amufement. Thefe veiTels were made 
double. Rivero and Tfchudi obferve : — " They were made in fuch 
perfedion that, when they were filled with a liquid, the air, efcaping 
through the opening left for that purpofe, produced founds at times very 
mulical. Thefe founds fometimes imitated the voice of the animal 
which was reprefented by the principal part of the veiTel, as in a 
beautiful fpecimen we have feen which reprefents a cat, and which, 
upon receiving water through the upper opening, produces a found 
fimilar to the mewing of that animal. We have in our pofTeffion a 
veffel of black clay, which perfedlly imitates the whiftle of the thrufli." 
A fimilar contrivance of the Indians in Chili, preferved in the Mufeum 
at Santiago, is defcribed by the traveller S. S. Hill as follows : — ^* It 
confifls of two earthen vefTels in the form of our india-rubber bottles, 
but fomewhat larger, with a flat tube from four to fix inches in length, 
uniting their necks near the top and flightly curved upwards, and with 
a fmall hole on the upper fide one third of the length of the tube from 
one fide of the necks. To produce the founds the bottles were filled 
with water and fufpended to the bough of a tree, or to a beam, by a 
firing attached to the middle of the curved tube, and then fwung 
backwards and forwards in fuch a manner as to caufe each end to be 
alternately the highefl and lowefl, fo that the water might pafs backwards 
knd forwards from one bottle to the other through the tube between 
them. By this means foothing founds were produced, which, it is faid, 
were employed to lull to repofe the drowfy chiefs who ufually flept 
away the hottefl hours of the day. In the meantime, as the bottles 
were porous, the water within them diminifhed by evaporation, and 
the found died gradually away." 

Again, the Indians in the fouthern diflrid of Venezuela ufed to 
conflrud: an earthen vefTel with two fockets in which two tubes were 
inferted. By blowing through the tubes, they obtained founds which 
Gumilla defcribes as exceedingly lugubrious and mournful. 

As regards inflruments of percuflion, a kind of drum deferves fpecial 
notice on account of the ingenuity evinced in its conflrudion. The 
Mexicans called it teponaztli. They generally made it of a fingle block 
of very hard wood, fomewhat oblong fquare in (hape, which they 
hollowed, leaving at each end a folid piece about three or four inches 
in thicknefs, and at its upper fide a kind of found-board about a quarter 
of an inch in thicknefs. In this found-board, if it may be called fo, 
they made three inciflons ; namely, two running parallel fome diflance 
lengthwife of the drum, and a third running acrofs from one of thefe to 
the other jufl in the centre. By this means they obtained two vibrating 



Hijiory of Mufical Injlruments, 77 

tongues of wood, which when beaten with a fticlc, produced founds as 
clearly defined as arc thofc of our kettle drums. By making one of the 
tongues thinner than the other, they enfured two different founds, the 
pitch of which they were enabled to regulate by Otaving off more or lefs 
of the wood. The bottom of the drum they cut almoft entirely open. 
The traveller, M. Nebel, was told by archicologilts in Mexico that thefe 
inflruments always contained the interval of a third, but on examining 
feveral fpecimens which he faw in Mufeums, he found fome in which 
the two founds ftood towards each other in the relation of a fourth i 
while in others they conflituted a fifth, in others a fixth, and in fome 
even an oi^ave. This is noteworthy inafmuch as it points to a con- 
fbrmi^ with our diatonic feries of intervals, excepting the feventh. 



Fig. Sj. — TtPOKAITLI or THI AlTICI. 

The lepsntixtii was generally carved with various ^cifiil and 
ingenious defigns. It was beaten with two drumfticks covered at the 
end with an elaflic gum, called ule, which was obtained from the milky 
juice extraded from the Mexican Ule-trec. Some of thefe drums were 
fofmall that they u fed to be carried on a firing, or flrap^ fufpended 
round the neck of the player ; others, again, meafured upwards of five 
fi:et in length, and their found was fo powerful that it could be heard at 
a diftance of three miles. In fome rare inflances a fpecimen of the 



yS An EJfay on the 




tiponaztli is ftill preferved by the Indians in Mexico, efpecially among 
tribes who have been comparatively but little afFeded by intercourfe 
with their European aggreflbrs. Herr Heller faw fuch an inftrument 
in the hands of the Indians of Huatufco, — a village near Mirador in the 
Tierra templada. or temperate region occupying the (lopes of the 
Cordilleras. He fays that the people regard it as a (acred objed, and 
that they beat it only on certain days of the year ; but that they could 
give him no reafon for adhering to thofe days. Perhaps a reference to 
the exa£t times of the celebration of the Aztecs religious feftivals, as 
recorded by Spani(h writers, might aiFord fome clue to this queftion. 
At all events, it is not improbable that the Indians (hould have pre* 
ferved with the tiponaztii fome remains of the folemn ceremonies of 
their heathen anceftors in which this inftrument was efpecially employed. 
Its found is defcribed as fo very loud as to be diftindily audible at an 
incredibly great diftance. This phenomenon, which has been noticed 
by feveral travellers, ipay perhaps be owing in fome meafure to the 
condition of the atmofphere in Mexico. 

Inftruments of percuflion conftruc- 
ted on a principle more or lefs (imilar 
to the tepofiaztli were in ufe in feveral 
other parts of America, befides in Mex- 
ico. Oviedo (^ La Hyftoria general de 
las Indias i' Salamanca 1547) gives a 
drawing of a drum from San Domingo, 
which, as it (hows diftinflly both the 
Fig. 66 — Antique Drum from upper and under fide of the inftrument, 

IS here mlerted. (rig. 00.) 
Valefco mentions among the works of art, or handicraft, which were 
obferved with the Indians of Quito, a large drum made of a (olid piece 
of wood, hollowed, and provided at the upper furface with two narrow 
openings of a curved figure. This inftrument appears to have been 
nearly identical in conftru6tion with the large war-drum of the Indians 
in Northern Guiana, which, according to the drawing given in Gumilla's 
^ £1 Orinoco iluftrado,' had three ferpentine incifions, and muft have 
yielded more than two different founds, becaufe the windings produce 
feveral fmall fegments of wood each conftituting a kind of vibrating 
tongue. This war-drum was of fo enormous a fize that it required to 
be hung on a beam which refted horizontally on two poles ftuck into the 
ground.' Thus fufpended it was beaten with two drumfticks, not very 
different in appearance to thofe ufed in our military bands ; but the 
drummer was almoft hidden by the huge machine upon which he was 
labouring. 




Hijlory of Mufical Injiruments. 79 



The largeft kind of Mexican teponaxtli appears to have been 
generally of a cylindrical fhape. Clavigero (^ Storia antica del Mef&co/ 
Cefena 1780) gives a drawing of fuch an inftrument. Moreover^ 
drums conftrudted of fkin, or parchment, in combination with wood, 
were not unknown to the Indians. Of this defcription was, for inftance 
the htuhuetl of the Aztecs in Mexico, which confifted, according to 
Clavigero, of a wooden cylinder fomewhat above three feet in height, 
curioufly carved and painted, and covered at the top with carefully 
prepared deer-fkin. And, what appears the moil remarkable, the 
parchment, we are told, could be tightened or flackened by means of 
cords in nearly the fame way as this is done on our own drum. The 
huehtutl was not beaten with drumfticks, but merely ftruck with 
the fingers, and much dexterity was required to ftrike it in the 
proper manner. Oviedo ftates that the Indians in Cuba had drums 
which were ftretched with human (kin. And Bernal Diaz relates that 
when he was with Cortes in Mexico, thev afcended together the Teocalli 
(^' Houfe of God '*) a large temple in which human facrifices were 
offered by the aborigines ; and there the Spanifh vifitors faw a large 
drum which was made, Diaz tells us, with (kins of great ferpents. 
This ^^ hellifh inflrument," as he calls it, produced, when ftruck, a 
doleful found which was fo awfully loud that it could be beard at a 
diftance of two leagues. Clavigero, in his work on Mexico before 
noticed, has publifhed an engraving of the huehuetly which bears fo 
remarkable a refemblance to certain European drums, that one might 
be inclined to regard it as unreliable if Clavigero's defcription of the 
inftrument were not in every material point in accordance with it, 
Neverthelefs, it is by no means improbable that the drawing was made 
from the defcription, and not from an a6iual inftrument. 

The name of the Peruvian drum was huanca. Moreover, the 
Peruvians had also an inftrument of percuffion, called chhilchilesy which 
appears to have been a fort of tambourine. 

The rattle was like wife popular with the Indians before the dif- 
covery of America. The Mexicans called it ajacaxtli. In conftruflioii 
it was fimilar to the rattle at the prefent day commonly ufed by the 
Indians. It was oval or round in fhape, and appears to have been 
ufually made of a gourd into which holes were pierced, and to which a 
wooden handle was affixed. A number of little pebbles were enclofed 
in the hollowed gourd. However, the ajacaxtli alfo made of pottery. 
The little balls in the ajacaxtli of pottery, enclofed as they are, may 
at a firft glance appear a puzzle. Probably when the rattle was 
being formed, they were attached to the infide as (lightly as poflible ; 



8o An EJfay on the 

and after the clay had been baked, they were detached by means of 
an implement paiTed through the holes. 

On certain occafions the chieft, and other perfons of rank and 
influence among the Aztecs, performed folemn and graceful dances. 
In preparation thereto they drefTed themfelves in fplendid garments, 
adorning themfelves with bracelets, earrings, and flmilar ornaments of 
gold and jewels, as well as with precious and beautiful feathers. And 
while they were dancing thus arrayed they held in one hand a fhield 
and in the other the ajacaxtU^ which they fhook in rhythmical agreement 
with the finging to which they regulated their fleps. One of thefe 
dances, called tocotiny which partook of a facred charafler, is faid to 
have retained its popularity for a confiderable time even after the Spaniih 
fubjugation of the Indians. 

The Tezcucans, (or Acolhuans) belonged to the fame race as the 
Aztecs, whom, however, they furpafTed in knowledge and focial re- 
finement. Nezahualcoyod, a wife monarch of the Tezcucans, abhorred 
human facrifices, and ereded a large temple which he dedicated to 
'^ The Unknown God, the Caufe of Caufes." This edifice had a 
tower nine ftories high, on the top of which were placed a number of 
mufical inftruments of various kinds, which were ufed to fummon the 
worfhippers to prayer. Refpecdng thefe inflruments, efpecial mention is 
made of a fonorous metal which was ftruck with a mallet. This is flated 
in a hiflorical eflay written by Ixtlilxochitl, a native of Mexico and of 
royal defcent, who lived in the beginning of the feventeenth century, 
and who may be fuppofed to have been familiar with the mufical 
praSices of his countrymen. But whether the fonorous metal alluded to 
was a gong or a bell, is not clear from the vague record tranfmitted to us. 
That the bell was known to the Peruvians appears to be no longer 
doubtful, fince a fmall fpecimen has been found in one of the old 
Peruvian tombs. This interefting relic is now depofited in the mufeum 
at Lima. M. de Caflelnau has publifhed a drawing of it, which is 
here reproduced (Fig. 67). This little bell is of copper. The 
Peruvians called their bells chanrares; but it remains queflionable 
whether this name did not defignate rather the (b-called horfe bells, 
which were certainly known to the Mexicans, who called them yotl. 
It is noteworthy that thefe yotl are found figured in the pi£^iire-writings 
reprefenting the various objeds which the Aztecs ufed to pay as tribute 
to their sovereigns. The colledion of Mexican antiquities in the 
Britifh Mufeum contains a clufter of yotl-bells (Fig. 69), which are 
different in (hape from thofe juft noticed. Being nearly round, they 
clofely refemble the Schellen which the Germans are in the habit of 



Hsjiory of Mufical Infiruments, 8 1 

affixing to their horfcs, particularly in the winter when they are driving 
their noifelels fledges. 



Fi|. 67. — Antisdi BiiL or Tut Ihca Puidvmni. 



Fig. £i. — YoTL or THi Amn. Fig. 6g. — A Clu<tu or imali 

Buu or THI Acnci. 

A^n, in South America, fonoroui ftones are not unknown, and 
were uled in olden dme for muAcal purpofes. The traveller G. T. Vigne 
&w among the Indian antiquities preferved in the town of Cuzco, in 
Peru *' a mufical inftrument of green fonorous ftonc, about a foot long, 
and an inch and a half wide, flat-fided, pointed at both ends, and 
arched at the back, where it was about a quarter of an inch thick, 
whence it diminifhed to an edge, like the blade of 2 knife .... 
In the middle of the back was a fmall hole, through which a piece 
of ftring was paflcd ; and when fufpended and ftruck by any hard 
fubftance, a fingularly muHcal note was produced." Humboldt men- 
tions the Amazon-ftone, which, on being Aruck hy a hard fubftance 
yields a metallic found. It was formerly cut by the American Indians 



8 2 An EJfay on the 

into very thin plates, perforated in the centre, and fufpended by a 
ftring. Thefe plates were remarkably fonorous. However, the ftone is 
not, as might be conje&ured from its name, found exclufively near the 
Amazon River. The name was given to it as well as to the river by 
the Arft European vifitors to America, in allufion to the female warriors, 
refpe£ling whom ftrange ftories are told. The natives pretending, 
according to an ancient tradition, that the ftone can>e from the country 
of '* Women without hufbands," or '' Women living alone." The 
Amazon-ftone, according to Humboldt, appears to have belonged to 
the facred ftones to which the Indians offered divine worfhip. 

As regards the ancient ftringed inftruments of the American Indians, 
our information is indeed but fcanty. Clavigero fays that the Mexicans 
were entirely unacquainted with ftringed inftruments, — a ftatement, the 
corrednefe of which is queftionable, confidering the ftage of civilization 
to which thefe people had attained. At any rate, we generally find 
one or other kind of fuch inftruments with nations whofe intelle£lual 
progrefs and focial condition are decidedly inferior. The Aztecs had 
many claims to the charadter of a civilized community. Moreover, 
the Tezcucans were even more advanced in the cultivation of the arts 
and fciences than the Aztecs. ** The beft hiftories,** Prefcott obferves, 
^* the beft poems, the beft code of laws, the pureft dialed^, were all 
allowed to be Tezcucan. The Aztecs rivalled their neighbours in 
fplendour of living, and even in the magnificence of their ftrudures. 
They difplayed a pomp and oftentatious pageantry, truly Afiatic." 
Unfortunately hiftorians are fometimes not fufficiently difcerning in 
their communications refpe£ling mufical queftions. J. Ranking, in 
defcribing the grandeur of the eftabliihment maintained by Monte- 
zuma, fays that during the repafts of this monarch *^ there was mufic 
of fiddle, flute, fnail-ftiell, a kettle-drum, and other ftrange inftru- 
ments.*' But as this writer does not indicate the fource whence he. 
drew his information refpedling Montezuma's orcheftra including the 
fiddle, the ftatement deferves fcarcely a pafHng notice. There are, iii 
fa£l, no reliable indications that the Indians were acquainted with any 
inftrument played with the bow, and if Montezuma had adually fome 
kind of violin in his royal band, he much more likely obtained it from 
the Spaniards than from his anceftors. 

The Peruvians pofTefTed a ftringed inftrument, called tinya^ which 
was provided with five or feven ftrings. To conjecture from the unfatis- 
faiStory account of it tranfmitted to us, the tinya appears to have been 
a kind of guitar. Confidering the fragility of the materials of which 
fuch inftruments are generally conftrudled, it is perhaps not furprifing 



Hijlory of Mujical Injiruments. 8 3 



that we do not meet with any fpecimens of them in the Mufeums of 
American antiquities. 

A few remarks will not be out of place here referring to the mufical 
performances of the ancient Indians \ flnce an acquaintance with the 
nature of the performances is likely to afford additional affiftance in 
appreciating ^he charaAeriftics of the inftruments. 

In Peru, where the military fyftem was carefully organifed, each 
dividon of the army had its trumpeters, called cqueppacamayoy and its 
drummers, called huancarcamayo. Whenever the Inca, or monarch, 
returned with his troops victorious from battle, his firft zSt was to 
repair to the temple of the Sun, in order to offer up thankfgiving ; and, 
after the conclufion of this folemn ceremony, the people celebrated the 
glorious event with feftivities, of which mufic and dancing conilituted 
a principal part. Indeed, mufical performances appear to have been 
confidered indifpenfable on occafions of public celebrations. Frequent 
mention is made of them by hiftorians who have defcribed the feftivals 
annually obferved by the Peruvians ; as, for inftance, the Raymij a great 
feftival in honour of the Sun, which was held in the fummer folftice, 
and which conilituted the principal religious public folemnity. Like* 
wife, the Situa^ a feftival celebrated at the autumnal equinox, in which^ 
as in the Raymi, the mufical entertainments and public rejoicings were 
preceded by a general faft. The words raymi and ajitua fignify ^^ folemn 
dance " and " great dance " ; and from the frequency of their occurrence 
in conne6iion with the names of the months, it would appear that 
mufic and dancing muft have conftituted the favourite paftimes of the 
Peruvians all the year round. Moreover, this impreflion is fupported 
by hiftorical records. 

About the month of OAober the Peruvians celebrated a folemn feaft 
in honour of the dead, on which occafion they executed lugubrious 
fongs and plaintive inftrumental mufic. Compofitions of a flmilar 
character were performed on occafion of the deceafe of a monarch. 
As foon as it was made known to the people that their Inca had been 
^^ called home to the manfions of his father the Sun,** they prepared to 
celebrate his obfequies with becoming folemnity. Prefcott, in his 
graphic defcription of thefe obfervances, fays : *' At ftated intervals, 
for a year, the people affembled to renew the expreffions of their 
forrow ; proceflions were made difplaying the banner of the departed 
monarch ; bards and minftrejs were appointed to chronicle his achieve- 
ments, and their fongs continued to be rehearfed at high feftivals in 
the prefence of the reigning monarch, — thus ftimulating the living 
by the glorious example of the dead." The Peruvians had alfo par* 



84 An EJfay on the 

ticular agricultural fongs, which they were in the habit of Tinging 
while engaged in tilling the lands of the Inca. To cultivate the fields 
of the monarch was a duty which devolved upon the whole nation. 
The fubjed of thefe fongs, or rather hymns, referred efpecially to the 
noble deeds and glorious achievements of the Inca and his dynafty. 
While thus finging, the labourers regulated their work to the rhythm 
of the muAc, thereby enfuring a pleafant excitement and a ftimulant 
in their occupation, like foldiers regulating their fteps to the mufic of 
the military band. Thefe hymns pleafed the Spanifh invaders (o greatly 
that they not only adopted feveral of them, but alfo compofed fome in a 
fimilar form and ftyle. This appears, however, to have been the cafe 
rather with the poetry than with the mufic. 

The name of the Peruvian elegiac fongs was haravi. Some tunes 
of thefe fongs, pronounced to be genuine fpecimens, have been pub- 
lifhed in recent works ; but their genuinenefs appears queftionable. 
At all events they muft have been much tampered with, as they 
exhibit exa£Uy the form of the Spanifh bolero. Even allowing that 
the melodies of thefe compofitions have been derived from Peruvian 
harivaris^ it is impoffible to determine with any degree of ceruinty 
how much in them has been retained of the original tunes, and how 
much has been fupplied befides the harmony, which is entirely an 
addition of the European arranger. The Peruvians had minflrels, 
called haravecs (/.^., ^^ inventors "), whofe occupation it was to com- 
pofe and to recite the haravis. Befides thefe minflrels, or bards, they 
had a clafs of poets, called amautas (i.^., ^^ wife men '*}, to whom was 
principally confided the ofEce of recording the national annals, and who 
compofed dramatic works as well as feflive fongs. 

Acofla (* Hifloria natural y moral de las Indias '; Sevilla, 1590), 
mentions as the mofl popular dances of the American Indians, the 
taquiy the areytos^ and the mitotes. The taqui was a Peruvian dance, 
juid appears to be the fame which is called by fome hiftorians cachua. 
This dance, which is flill performed by the Indians in Peru, is of a 
lively character, and contains various figures requiring great agility and 
dexterity. The areytos were dances as well as fongs of the aborigines 
of San Domingo and other Wefl Indian iflands. According to Oviedo 
they fomewhat refembled the rural dances of Spain. They fometimes 
partook of a facred characSter ; but more ufually the fubjedl treated in 
them referred to hiflorical events, or to love, or to warlike purfuits. 
The mitoteSj which were the favourite dances of the Mexicans, are 
defcribed as having confifled chiefly of folemn and graceful figures ; 
however, if reliance may be placed on the illuflrations publifhed in the 



Hijiory of Mufical Injiruments. 8 5 

Englifh tranflation of Herrera's hiftorical work (London, 1725), there 
muft have been fome mitotes in which folemnity and gracefulnefs were 
caft afide ; for we fee one dancer (landing on the (boulders of another, 
and fuch like uncouth excentricities. Mexicans of rank maintained 
profeffional dancers for their private entertainment. The royal dancers 
retained at the court of Montezuma muft have been verv numerous, 
(ince it is recorded that they occupied a particular diftri£l of the capital 
which was appropriated to them exclufively. In certain dances the 
performers wore mafks reprefenting the heads of animals. 

The Mexicans pofleiTed a clafs of fongs which ferved as a record of 
hiftorical events. Furthermore they had war-fongs, love-fongs, and other 
fecular vocal compofltions, as well as facred chants, in the pra<E):ice of 
which boys were inftru£ked by the priefts in order that they might aiSft in 
the mufical performances of the temple. It appertained to the office of 
the priefts to burn incenfe, and to perform mufic in the temple at ftated 
times of the day. The commencement of the religious obfervances, 
which took place regularly at funrife, at mid-day, at funfet, and at mid- 
night, was announced by flgnals blown on trumpets and pipes. Perfons 
of high pofltion retained in their fervice profeOional muficians, whofe 
duty it was to compofe ballads, and to perform vocal mudc with in- 
ftrumental accompaniment. Moreover, the nobles themfelves, — nay, 
even the monarch, not unfrequently delighted in compofmg ballads 
and odes. 

Efpecially noticeable is the inftitution termed * Council of Mufic,' 
which the wife monarch Nezahualcoyotl founded in Tezcuco. This 
inftitution was not intended exclufively for promoting the cultivation 
of mufic ; its aim comprifed the advancement of various arts, and of 
(ciences fuch as hiftory, aftronomy, etc. In fad, it was an academy 
for general education. Probably no better evidence could be cited 
teftifying to the remarkable intellectual attainments of the Mexican 
Indians before the difcovery of America, than this Council of Mufic. 
Although in fome refpe£ts it appears to have refembled the ^ Board of 
Mufic * of the Chinefe, it was planned on a more enlightened and 
more comprehenfive principle. The Chinefe * Board of Mufic,' 
called ro PoOj is an office connedled with the Le PoOy or ^ Board of 
Rites,' eftablifhed by the Imperial government at Peking. The 
principal obje£l of the Board of Rites is to control the ritual obfer- 
vances of the celeftial empire. Thefe obfervances are divided into 
five clafTes relating to the ceremonies to be performed on occafions of 
facrifices offered to the gods ; of feftivals and certain court folemnities ; 
of military reviews ; of prefentations, congratulations, marriages, deaths. 



86 An EJfay on the 

burials, — in fhort, concerning almoft every poiSble event in focial 
and public life. How narrow a fpirit does this Imperial guardianihip 
over prefcribed form and etiquette evince, if compared with the love for 
intellectual progrefs which animated the Tezcucan monarch in efta- 
bliihing his Council of Mu(ic. 

The reader is probably aware that in one of the various hypothefes 
which have been advanced refpeding the Afiatic origin of the American 
Indians, China is affigned to them as their ancient home. Some 
hiftorians furmife them to be emigrants from Mongolia, Thibet, or 
Hinduftan ; others maintain that they are the' oflFspring of Phoenician 
colonifts who fettled in Central America. Even more curious are the 
arguments of certain inquirers who have no doubt whatever that the 
anceftors of the American Indians were the loft ten tribes of Ifrael, of 
which flnce about the time of the Babylonian captivity hiftory is filent. 
Whatever may be thought as to which particular one of thefe fpecula- 
tions hits the truth, they certainly have all proved ufeful in fo far as 
they have made ethnologifts more exafbly acquainted with the habits 
and predilections of the American aborigines than would otherwife have / 
been the case. For, as the advocates of each hypothefis have carefully 
collected and adduced every evidence they were able to obtain tending 
to fupport their views, the refult is that, fo to fay, no ftone has been 
left unturned. Neverthelefs, any fuch hints as fuggeft themfelves from 
an examination of mufical inftruments have hitherto remained un- 
heeded. It may therefore perhaps intereft the reader to have his 
attention drawn to a few fuggeftive fimilarities occurring between 
inftruments of the American Indians and of certain nations inhabiting 
the Eaftern hemifphere. 

We have feen that the Mexican pipe and. the Peruvian fyrinx 
were purpofely conftruCted fo as to produce the intervals .of the penta- 
tonic fcale only. Moreover, there are fome additional indications of 
this fcale having been in ufe with the American Indians. For inftance, 
the mufic of the Peruvian dance cachua is defcribed by Rivero and 
Tfchudi as having been very (imilar to fome Scotch national dances ; 
and the moft confpicuous charaCteriftics of the Scotch tunes are occa- 
fioned by the frequently exclufive employment of intervals appertaining 
to the pentatonic fcale. Precifely the fame feries of intervals we find 
adopted on certain Chinefe inftruments, and indications are not wanting 
of the pentatonic fcale having been popular among various races in Afia 
at a remote period. The feries of intervals appertaining to the Chiriqui 
pipe, mentioned page 66, confifted of a femitone and two whole tones, 
like the tetrachord of the ancient Greeks. 



Hijlory of Mufical Injlruments. 8 7 



In the Peruvian huayra'-puhura made of talc, fome of the pipes 
pofTefs lateral holes. This contrivance, which is rather unufual, occurs 
on the Chinefe cheng. 

The chayna^ mentioned page 6g, feems to have been provided with 
a reed, like the oboe. In Hinduftan we find a fpecies of oboe called 
Jhihna. The turi of the Indian tribes on the river Amazon, mentioned 
page 73, reminds us of the trumpets toone^ or tootooreey of the Hindus. 
The name appears to have been known alfo to the Arabs ; but there is 
no indication whatever of its having been tranfmitted to the Peninfula 
by the Moors, and afterwards to South America by the Portuguele and 
Spaniards. 

The wooden tongues in the drum teponaztli may be confidered as a 
contrivance exclufively of the ancient American Indians. Neverthelefs 
a conftrudlion nearly akin to it may be obferved in certain drums of the 
Tonga Iflanders, of the Feejee lilanders, and of the natives of fome 
iilands in Torres Strait. Likewife fome negro tribes in Weflern and 
Central Africa have certain inflrumcnts of percuffion which are con- 
flru£led on a principle fbmewhat reminding us of the teponaxtU* 

The method of bracing the drum by means of cords, as exhibited 
in the hiuhuetl of the Mexican Indians, is evidently of very high 
antiquity in the £afl. It was known to the ancient Egyptians. 

Rattles, Pandean pipes made of reed, and Conch trumpets, are 
found almoil ^1 over the world, wherever the materials of which they 
are conflru£ted are eafily obtainable. Still, it may be noteworthy that 
the Mexicans employed the Conch trumpet in their religious obfer- 
vances apparently in much the fame way as it is made ufe of in the 
Buddhifl worfhip of the Thibetans and Kalmuks. 

As regards the fonorous metal in the great temple at Tezcuco, 
certain inquirers are fure that it was a gong. But it mufl be borne in 
mind that thefe inquirers detedfc everywhere traces proving an invafion 
of the Mongols, which they maintain to have happened about fix 
hundred years ago. Had they been acquainted with the little Peruvian 
bell. Fig. 67, they would have had more tangible mufical evidence in 
fupport of tlieir theory than the fuppofed gong ; for this bell certainly 
bears a fuggeflive refemblance to the little hand-bell which the Buddhifls 
in Central Afia ufe in their religious ceremonies. 

The Peruvians interpolated certain fongs of theirs, efpecially thofe 
which they were in the habit of finging while cultivating the fields of 
the Inca, with the word hailli^ which fignified " Triumph." As the 
fubjed of thefe compofitions was principally the glorification of the 
Inca, the burden hailU is perhaps all the more likely to remind Euro* 



88 An EJfay on the 

peans of the Hebrew hallelujah. Moreover, Adair, who lived among 
the Indians of North America during a period of about forty years, 
mentions fome other words which he found ufed as burdens in hymns 
fung on folemn occafions, and which appeared to him to correfpond 
with certain Hebrew words of a facred import. 

As regards the muilcal accomplifliments of the Indian tribes at the 
prefent day, they are hx beloiV the ftandard which we have found 
among the anceftors of thefe people. A period of three hundred years 
of oppreffion has evidently had the efFed of fubduing the melodious 
expreffions of happinefs and contentednefs which in former times appear 
to have been quite as prevalent with the Indians as they generally are 
with independent and flouriOiing nations. The innate talent for mufic 
evinced by thofe of the North American Indians who were converted 
to Chriftianity foon after the emigration of the Puritans to New England, 
is very favourably commented on by fome old writers. In the year 
1 66 1 John Elliot, a clergyman whom in the hiftory of American church 
muiic we find named ^^The Apoflle of the Indians," publiOied a 
tranilation of the Pialms into Indian verie, made by him, and entitled 
IVame Ketoohomae Uketoohomaongajh David. The finging of thefe 
metrical Pfalms by the Indian converts in their places of worihip 
appears to have been a£lually fuperior to the facred vocal performances 
of their Chriflian brethren from Europe \ for, in the hiftorical records 
we find it defcribed by (everal witneiTes as ^^ excellent " and ^* moil 
ravifhing.*' 

In other parts of America the Roman Catholic prieils from Spain 
did not negledl to turn to account the fufceptibility of the Indians for 
mufic. Thus, in Central America the Dominicans compofed as early 
as in the middle of the fixteenth century a facred poem in the Guate- 
malian dialed, containing a narrative of the mofl important events 
recorded in the Bible. This produdion they fang to the natives, and 
to enhance the efFe6l, they accompanied the finging with mufical 
inflruments. The alluring mufic foon captivated the heart of a power- 
ful and fierce Cazique, who was thus induced to adopt the doArines 
embodied in the compofition, and to difFufe them among his fubjeds, 
who lilcewife delighted in the performances* In Peru a fimilar experi- 
ment, refortcd to by the priefls who accompanied Pizarro's expe- 
dition, proved equally fuccefsflil. They dramatized certain fcenes in 
the life of Chrift, and reprefented them with mufic, which fo greatly 
fafcinated the idolatrous Indians that many of them readily embraced 
the new faith. Nor are thefe entertainments difpenfed with even at 
the prefent day by the Indian Chriflians, efpecially in the village churches 



Hijlory of Mujical Injiruments. 89 

of the Sierra in Peru ; and as feveral religious ceremonies have been 
retained by thefe people from their heathen forefathers, it may be fur- 
mifed that their facred mufical performances alfo retain much of their 
ancient heathen charafler. 

Moft of the muflcal inftruments found among the American Indians 
at the prefent day, are evidently genuine old Indian contrivances as 
they exifted long before the difcovery of America. Take, for inftance, 
the peculiarly fhaped rattles, drums, flutes, and whittles of the North 
American Indians, of which fome fpecimens depofited in the Mufeum 
are defcribed in the Catalogue. A few African inftruments, introduced 
by the Negro flaves, are now occafionally found in the hands of the 
Indians, and have been, by fome travellers, erroneoufly defcribed as 
genuine Indian inventions. This is, for inftance, the cafe with the 
African marimba^ which has become rather popular with the natives 
of Guatemala, Central America \. but fuch adaptations are eafily 
difcernible. 



Musical Instrumknts or European Nations during the 

Middle Ages. 

Many reprefentations of mufical inftruments of the middle ages have 
been preferved in old manufcripts, as well as in fculptures and paintings 
forming ornamental portions of churches and fimilar edifices. Valuable 
fa£ks and hints are obtainable from thefe evidences, provided they are 
judicioufly feledled and carefully examined. The fubjed is, however, 
fo yaft that only a few obfervations on the moft interefting inftruments 
can be offered here. 

Unfortunately there ftill prevails much uncertainty refpe£ling feveral • 
of the earlieft reprefentations as to the precife century from which they 
date, and there is reafon to furmife that in fome inftances the archseo- 
logical zeal of mufical inveftigators has afSgned a higher antiquity to 
fuch difcoveries than can be fatisfadlorily proved. 

Thus much appears certain, the moft ancient European inftruments 
known to us were in form and conftrudtion more like thofe of Afiatic 
nations than was the cafe with later ones. Before a nation has attained 
to a rather high degree of civilization, its progrefs in the cultivation 
of mufic, as an art, is very flow indeed. The inftruments found at 
the prefent day in Afia are fcarcely fuperior to thofe which were in ufe 

M.I. o 



QO An EJfay on the 

among Oriental nations about three thoufand years ago. It is, there- 
fore, perhaps not Airpriiing that no material improvement is perceptible 
in the conftru&ion of the inftruments of European countries during the 
lapfe of nearly a thoufand years. True, reliable evidences referring 
to the iirft five or fix centuries of the Chriftian era, are indeed but 
fcanty ; indications are, however, not wanting which may help the 
refleding mufician. 

There are fome early monuments of Chriftian art dating from the 
fourth century in which the lyre is reprefented. In one of them Chrift 
is depi6ted as Apollo touching the lyre. This inftrument occurs at an 
early period in Weftern Europe ufed in popular paftimes. In an 
Anglo-Saxon manufcript of the ninth century, in the Britifh Mufeum 
(Cleopatra C. VIIL) are the figures of two gleemen, one playing the 
lyre and the other a double-pipe. An illuftration of thefe performers 
in concert is given in Strutt's ' Sports and Paftimes of the People of 
England.' M. de CoufTemaker has publifhed in the ^ Annales Archeo- 
logiques', Paris 1845, the figure of a crowned perfonage playing the 
lyre, which he found in a manufcript of the ninth or tenth century, in 
the library at Angers. The player twangs the ftrings with his fingers, 
while the Anglo-Saxon gleeman before mentioned ufes a ple6lrum. 




Fig. 70. — CiTHARA. IX**' Century. 

Cithara was a name applied to feveral ftringed inftruments greatly 
varying in form, power of found, and compafs. The illuftration, 
« Fig. 70, reprefents a cithara like thofe copied by the Abbot Martinus 
Gerbert from a manufcript of the ninth century. The manufcript was 
formerly in the library of the monaftery of St. Blafius in the Black 
Foreft, in Germany. When in the year 1768 the monaftery of 
St. Blafius was deftroyed by fire, this valuable book perifhed in the 
flames ; fortunately, however, the Abbot Gerbert pofTefTed tracings of 
the illuftrations, which were faved from deftrudtion. He publifhed 
them, in the year 1774, in his work *De Cantu et Mufica facra.' 
Several illuftrations in the following pages, it will be feen, have been 
derived from this interefting fource. As the older works on mufic 
were generally written in Latin, we do not learn from them the popular 



Hijlory of Mufical Injlruments. 91 

names of the inftniments j the writers merely adopted Aich Latin names 
as they thought the moft appropriate. Thus, for inftance, a very 
Hmple Aringed inftniment of a triangular Jhape (Fig. 71}, and a Ibme- 
what (imilar one of a fquarc fliapc (Fig. 72], were both defignated by 
the name oi pfaller'ium. 



Fig, 71.— T»MNCUi«i PiALTiaiUH. IX'^ Century. (St. Bliliui.) 



Fi(. 71.— SeuAii PfALTniDH, IX'* Cenlurj. (St. Blifiui.) 



92 



An EJfay on the 



A^tn, a ftringed inftniment much refembling the triangular pCtl- 
terium we find called cithara (Fig. 73). 




This inflrumetit is evidently an improvcmciit upon the pfalterium, 
in fo &r as it has a Ibit of found-board at the top. Scarcely better, 
with r^ard to acouftics, appears to have been the inftniment defignated 
as nablum (Fig. 74), which is depided in a nianufcript of the ninth 
century at Angers, 



Fig. 74- — Kailuh. IX*^ Centuiy. (Angtn.) 



A fmall pfalterium with ftrings placed over a Ibund-board (Fig. 75), 
was apparently the prototype of the t'tuUy — a kind of dulcimer which 



Hiftory of Mufical Infiruments. 93 

was played with the fingers. The names were not only often vaguely 
applied t^ the mediaeval writers, but they changed alfo in almoft every 
century. The pCUterium, or p&lterion (Italian ^//^W», Englifh pfalttry)^ 
of the fourteenth centuiy and later, had the trapezium Qiape of the 
dulcimer. 



F1|. ^S.—A. Sracua or Cmtt. iX*^ Cennry. (Si. Btiliiu.) 



The Anglo-Saxons frequently accompanied their vocal effufions 
widi a harp, more or lels triangular in ihape, — an inftrument which 
may be confidered rather as conftituting the tranfidon of the lyre into 
the harp. A very fimilar inflniment was known to the ancient Eaftem 
nations long before the Chriftian era. 

The reprefeiitation of King David playing the harp (Fig. 76) ia 
from an Anglo-Saxon manufcript of the beginning of the eleventh 



94 -^« ^Jf^y ^^ ^^^ 



Fig. 76.— Anclo-Sakob Hittr. XI'" Ceniury. 

century, in the Britilh Mufeutn. The harp was dpecially popular in 
central and northern Europe. It was the ^vourite inftrument of the 
German and Celtic Bards, and of the Sczandinavian SlcaJds. In the 
illuftration from the manufcript of the monaflery of St. Blafius (Fig. 77], 
twelve ftrings and two found holes are given to it. A harp Similar in 
form and fize, but without the front pillar, was known to the ancient 
Egyptians. Perhaps the addition was alfo non-exiftant in the earlieft 
Ipecimens appertaining to European nations. At any rate, a fculptured 
figure of a fmall harp conllruded like the harps of the ancient Eaftern 
nations has heen difcovered in the old church of Ullard in the county of 
Kilkenny in Ireland. Of this curious relic, which is faid to date from 
a period anterior to the year A.D. 800, a &c-fimile, taken from Bunt- 
ing's • Ancient Mufic of Ireland,' is here given (Fig. 78). As Bunting 
was the tirft who drew attention to this fculpcure, his account of it may 
intereft the reader. ** The drawing," he feys, " is taken from one oi 
the ornamental compartments of a fculptured crofs, at the old church 
of Ullard. From the ftyle of the workmanlhip, as well as from the 
worn condition of the crofs, it feems older than the iimilar monu- 
ment at Monafterboice, which is known to have been fet up before 
the year 830. The fculpturc is rude; the circular rim which binds 



Hijlory of Mujical Injiruments. 95 



Fig. 77.-HHr. W* Century. (St. Blafiut.) 



Fig. 78. — E«(i,Y ImsH Ha»». 



96 An EJfay on the 

the arms of the crofs together is not {Mcrccd in the quadrants, and 
many of the figures originally in relievo are now whoUy abraded. It 
is difficult to determine whether the number of ftrings reprelcnted is 
fix or> feven i but, as has been already remarked, accuracy in this 
refpcd cannot be expe^ed either in fculpturcs or in many picturelque 
drawings." Moreover, the Finns had a harp {harpUy kanteU) with 
a fimilar frame, devoid of a front pillar, until the commencement of the 
prcfent century- 
One of the moll tnterefling ftringed inftruments of the Middle Ages 
is the retta (German, rettei Englilh, rote). It was founded by twang- 
ing the ftrings, and alfo by the application of the bow. The iirft 
method was, of courfe, the older one. There can hardly be a doubt 
that, when the bow came into ufe, it was applied to certain popular 
inllruments which previoufly had been treated like the cithara or the 
pja/terium. The Hindus at the prefent day ufe their furada Ibmetimes 
as a lute and femetimes as a fiddle. We do, in fomc meafure, the 
fame with the violin by playing occafionally pixxieata. The retta 



r.g. ;9,-Gt.ii(*N RoTTi. IX-i-Centuiyf (St. Blifiui.) 

depi^cd in the manufcript of the monaftery of St. Blafius is called tn 
Abbot Gerbert's work cithara tiutonica, while the harp is called ctthara 
angliea ; from which it would appear that the former was regarded 
as pre-eminently a German inftrument. Poffibly its name may have 
been originally chretta^ and the continental nations may have adopted 
it from the Celtic races of the Britifh Iflcs, dropping the guttural found. 



Hiftory of Mufical Infiruments. 97 

This hypothecs is, however, one of thofe which have been advanced 
by fomc mufical hiftorians wichout any ^tis^Aory evidence. 



Fig, lo.— RfOTA. Vll" Century. (Britilh MufeumO 

The rcprcfentation of King David playing on the ntia (Fig. 80}, 
is from a Pfalter of the feventh century in the Britilh Mufcum (Con. 
MSS. Vefp. A. I). According to tradition, this Plalter is one of the 
manufcripts which were fcnt by Pope Gregory to St. Auguftine. The 
inftrument much refembles the lyre in the hand of the mufician, Ftg. 22, 
who is fuppofed to be a Hebrew of the time of Jofepb. In the retta 
the ancient Afiatic lyre is eafily recc^nlzable. An illumination of the 
Royal Pfalmift playing the ratta fbnns the frontifpiece of a MS. volume 
of the eighth century preferved in the Cathedral Library of Durham. 
This manufcnpt, which contains the Commentaries of the Pfalms by 
Caffiodorus, was written, according to tradition, by the Venerable Bede. 
However this may be, the illumination is mufically intercfting inafmuch 
as it rcprefents a ratia of an oblong fquare fliape like that juft noticed, 



98 



An EJfay on the 



and refembling the Welfh crwth. It has only five firings, which the 
performer twangs with his fingers. Again, a very interefting repre- 
fentation of King David with a kind of rotta occurs in a MS. Pfalter 
of the tenth century, in the Britifh Mufeum (Vitellius F. XL). The 
manufcript has been much injured by a fire in the year 1731. Never- 
thelefs, Mr. J. O. Weftwood has fucceeded, with great care, and with 
the aid of a magnifying glafs, in making out the lines of the figure. As 
it has been afcertained that the Pfalter is written in the Irifh femiuncial 
charader (fee ^ The Archaeological Journal of the Archaeological Infti- 
^ tution of Great Britain and Ireland,' London, 1850), it is highly pro- 
bable that che kind of rotta (Fig. 81), reprefents the Irifli cionar cruit^ 




Fig. 81. — An Irish Rotta. X*** Century. (Britifli Mufeum.) 



which was played by twanging the firings, and alfo by the application 
of a bow. Unfortunately we pofTefs no well-authenticated reprefenta- 



Hiflory of Mufical Infiruments, 99 

non of tfac Welfli cnoth of an eariy period ; othcrwifc wc Ihould in all 
probabOi^ find it [dayed with the fingers, or with a plednim. Vciundus 
Fortunatus, an lulian who lived in the fecond half of the fixth cen- 
tury, mentions in a poem the " Chrotta Britanna." He docs not, how- 
ever, zDude to the bow, and there is no reaTon to fuppofe that it exiJled 
in England. Howbeit, the Welfli crwth (Anglo-Saxon, ctWA ; Englifli, 
trawd)^ b only known as a fpecies of fiddle, clofcly rcfcmbling the rtffto, 
but having a fingerboard in the middle of the open frame, and being 
Jhung with only a few fhings ; while the ratta had fomedmcs above 
twenty firings. It may intereft the reader to examine the form of the 
erwthy Fig. 137. Edward Jones, in his 'Mulical and Poetical Relicks 
of the Wcllh Bards,' records that the Welfh had before this kind of 
crwth a thrce-ftringed one called 'Crwth Trithant,' which was, he fays, 
** a fort of violin, or more properly a rebeck." This three-flringed 
crwth was chiefly ufed by the inferior clafs of bards. It probably was 
the Moorifb fiddle which is ftiU the favourite Jnftrument of the itinerant 
bards of the Bretons in France, who call it relvi. The Bretons, it will 
be remembered, are clofe kinfmen of the Wellb. 

A player on the crwth, or crowd (a crowder) bom a baf-relief on 
the under part of the feats of the choir in Worcefler Cathedral (Fig. 82), 



Fig. Si. — Crowd. Enclmh. About the XIIl'*' Century. 

dates from the twelfth or thirteenth century. M. de Couflemaker, in 
* Annales Archeologiques,' Tome III., has publtfhed an engraving of a 
player on a chrBita, or a craut as he calls the inftrument, which he 
copied from a maiiufcrlpt in the Bibliothcque Royale at Paris, and which 



lOO 



An EJfay on the 



he pronounces to be of the eleventh century (Fig. Z"^ The player 
wears a crown on his head. In the original illuftration fome muficians 




1 



Fig. 83.— FuENCH Crout. XI*** Century. (Parit.) 



placed at his fide are performing on the pfalterium and other inftru- 
tnents. They are figured with uncovered heads; whence M. de 
Couflemaker concludes that the crout was confidered by the artift who 
drew the figures as the nobleft inftrument of thofe reprefented. It was 
probably identical with the rotta of the fame century on the continent. 
In an annotation to Allain de Lille's ^ De Plandu Naturae/ a manu- 
fcript of the thirteenth century, it is ftated that the vioely or fitokj 
was formerly called de roetj and that it was a very popular inftru- 
ment. Again, in a vocabulary of the year 1419, noticed by Ferdinand 
Wolf in his work * Ueber die Lais, Sequenzen und Leiche/ Heidel- 
berg, 184!) the rott is defcribed as a figilla [viol], and is mentioned 
together with the rebula [rebec]. 



Hiftory of Mujical Inftruments. i o i 

An interefting drawing of an Anglo-Saxon fiddle, — or fithtUy as it 
was called, — is given in a manufcript of the eleventh century prefervcd 
in the Britifti Mufcum (Cotton MSS., Tiberius, c. VI). The inftru- 
ment is of a pear Ihape. It has four ftrings. The bridge is not indi- 
cated (Fig. 84). A German jiddle of the ninth century, copied by 
Abbot Gerbert from the manufcript of St. Blafius, has only one ftrii^ 
(F^. 85). It is called lyra. Ahnoft precifely the lame inftrument. 



Fig. S4. — AMCLO-SaXON FlPDU. Pig. S5. — GlKMAH FlDDU. 

XI" Centoiy. (BridA Murnim.) IX" Cennirr. {St. BUGu.) 

provided with only one ftring, is rcprefented in an Anglo-Saxon Pfalter 
of the eleventh century, in the Britifh Mufcum. Literal records of the 
employment of the fiddle-bow in Gennany in the twelfth and thirteenth 
centuries are not wanting. For inftance, in the famous * NibeJungenlied,* 
Volker, the bold warrior and gentle minftrel, is delcribed as wielding 
the fiddle-bow not Ie& dexterouQy than the fword. And in < Chronicon 
piduratum Brunfwicenfe ' of the year 1203, the following " Wunder- 
teeclccn " (miraculous fign) is recorded as having occurred in the village 
ofOflemer near Stendal: "On Wedncfday in Whitfun-week, while 
the parfon was fiddling to his peaJants who were dancing, there came 
a flafh of lightning and ftrucit the parfbn's arm which held the fiddle- 
bow, and lolled XXIV people on the fpot." (The German record 
is as follows : ** In duflcm Jare gefchah ein Wundeneecken by Stendal 



I0 2 An EJfay on the 



in dem Dorppe gehrten OfTemer, dar fat de Parner des Midweckens 
in den Pingxflen und veddelte fynen Buren to dem Danfe, da quam 
ein Donrefchlag unde fchloch dem Parner fynen Arm aiF mit dem 
Veddelbogen unde XXIV Liide tod up dem Tyn.**) 

Among the oldeft reprefentations of performers on inflruments of 
the violin kind found in England thofe deferve to be noticed which 
are painted on the interior of the roof of Peterborough Cathedral. 
They are iaid to date from the twelfth century. One of thefe figures 
is particularly interefting on account of the furprifing refemblance which 
his inftrument bears to our prefent violin. Not only the incurvations 
on the fides of the body, but alfo the two found-holes are nearly identical 
in fhape with thofe made at the prefent day. Refpeding the reliance 
to be placed on fuch evidence, it is neceflaiy to ftate that the roof of 
Peterborough Cathedral is recorded to have been conftru<^ed between 
the years 1 177 and 1194, during the prefidency of the Abbot Benedid, 
and that the ceiling, having been retouched about the year 1788, was 
thoroughly repaired in the year 1835. Although we find it aflerted 
that *^ the greateft care was taken to retain every part, or to reftore it 
to its original ftate, fo that the figures, even where retouched, are in 
efFed the fame as when firft painted,'* it, neverthelefs, remains a 
debatable queftion whether the reftorers have not admitted, perhaps 
unintentionally, fome flight alterations, and have thereby fbmewhat 
modemifed the original appearance of the inftruments. A flight touch 
with the brufli at the found-holes, the fcrews, or the curvatures, 
would fuffice to produce modifications which might to the artift appear 
as being only a renovation of the original reprefentation, but which to 
the mufical inveftigator greatly impair the value of the evidence. At 
any rate, in renovating eftaced or indiftind portions of the original 
delineations, the reftorers might eafily be too much influenced by fuch 
notions as they acquired from a reference to inftruments of their own 
time. Sculptures are, therefore, perhaps generally more reliable in 
evidence than frefcoes. 

The conftru£lion of the organijlrum (Fig. 86), requires but little 
explanation. A glance at the finger-board reveals at once that the 
different tones were obtained by raifing the keys placed on the neck 
under the ftrings, and that the keys were raifed by means of the 
handles at the fide of the neck. Of the two bridges ftiown on the body, 
the one fituated neareft the middle was formed by a wheel in the infide, 
which projected through the found-board. The wheel, which flightly 
touched the ftrings vibrated them by fridlion when turned by the handle 
at the end. The order of intervals was f, ^, ^,yj g^ j, b'-Jlat^ b^natural^ 
Cn Thefe were obtainable on the higheft ftring. The other two ftrings. 



Hijiory of Mujical Injiruments. 103 



Fig. 16.— OiGANKTiVM. IX'" Century. (St. Bbfius.) 



104 -^^ m^y °" ^^^ 



there is reafon to fuppofe, were generally tuned a fifth and an o6tave 
below the higheft. The trganiftrum may be regarded as the predccelTor 
of the hurdy-gurdy. It was a rather cumbrous contrivance. Two 
perfons feem to have been required to found it, one to turn the handle, 
and the other to manage the keys. Thus it is generally reprefented 
in medisval concerts. About the thirteenth century the argani/tnim 
acquired the name of Jympheaia or chifinit, Alfo the names lyra and 
viiUa were in courle of time applied to it. In no kind of nomenclature 
perhaps have people been lefs- careful than in that of their mu(ical 
inftruments. In the fifteenth century the organiftrum, or hurdy-gurdy, 
was alfo called rota, Joannes Cochlxus ('Tetrachordum Mufices 
Joannis Coclei,' Numberg 1512) fays that the rota is chiefly ufed by 
blind beggars, and he efpccially mentions the wheel infide. Some 
modern inquirers have thus been led to conjcdure that the ratta, or rote 
before delcnbed, which was in &£t quite a different inftrument, muft 
have been a hurdy-gurdy. 



Fig. 87,— MOHOCHUKD 



Hijiory of Mufical Inflruments. 105 

The monachord (Fig. 87} was mounted with a Angle ftring flretched 
over two bridges which were fixed on an oblong box. The ftring 
could be tightened or flackened hy means of a tuning fcrew inlened 
into one end of the box. The intervals of the fcale were marlccd on 
the fide, and were r^uUted by a fort of movable bridge placed beneath 
the ftring when required. As might be expected, the monochord was 
chiefly ufed by theoiifts ; for any mufical performance it was but little 
fuitable. About a thoufand years ago, when this monochord was in 
ufe, the mufical fcale was diatonic, with the exception of the interval 
of the feventh, which was chromatic inafmuch as both b-Jiat and 
h-natural formed part of the fcale. The following notation exhibits 
the compafs as well as the order of intervals adhered to about the tenth 
century. 



This ought to be borne in mind in examining the reprefentations of 
mufical Inftruments tranfmitted to us from that period. 

As regards the wind inftruments popular during the Middle Ages, 
fome were of quaint form as well as of rude conftru^ion. 

The charui, or charm^ was conftni^ed with one tube (Fig. 88) or 
with two tubes (Fig. 89). There were feveral varieties of this inftru- 




Fig. Sg.— SiHCLi Cmnv*. X^Centuty. Fig, 89.— Doulu Cho«o». X"* Ccnlurr, 

ment. The illuftration. Fig. go, exhibits a chorus conftrufled with a 
bladder into which the tube is inferted. Alfo (kin was ufed inftead 
of bladder. Sometimes it was the fldn of a pig, in which the (hape 
of the animal was retained. This kind of ckarus refembled the bag- 
pipe ; another kind refembled the peongi of the Hindus, mentioned 
page 57. Furthermore, the name cherui was alfo applied to certain 
ftringed inftruments. One of thefe had much the form of the eitharay 
Fig. 70. It appears, however, probable that chsrut or chom originally 
defignated a horn (Hebrew, Keren; Greek, Ktras; Latin, cemu). 



io6 j4n EJfay on the 

The flutes of the Middle Ages were blown at the end, like the 
flageolet. The double flute has been already mentioned. An interefting 
drawing of a player on the double flute of the eleventh century occurs 
in a MS. in the Bibliothetjuc Royale, Paris. 



Fig. 90.— Choid). IX"* Centuiy. (St. BMui.) 

Of the j^'''"'* there arc extant fome illuftrations of the ninth and 
tenth centuries, which exhibit the inftmment with a number of Cubes 
tied leather, juft like the Pandean pipe Itill in ufe. In one fpecimen, 
depicted in a manufcript of the eleventh century in the Bibliotheque 
Royale, Paris, the tubes were inferted into a bowl-fhaped box (Fig. 91}. 
This is probably the frtfteU, fretil, or fretiau, which in the twelfth 
and thirteenth centuries was in favour with the French Menecriers. 



Hijiory of Mufical Injiruments. 107 



Some large Anglo-Saxon trumpets are depicted in a manufcript of 
the eighth century in the Britifh Mufeum. The largeft kind of trumpet 
was placed on a ftand when blown. Of the oUphant^ or hunting horn, 
(bme fine fpecimens, which are in the South Kenfington Mufeum, will 
be found defcribed in the Catalogue. 




Fig. 91. — A SPKcns or Syrinx. XP*^ Century. (Bibliotheque Royale, Paris.) 

The faMut (Fig. 92) probably made of metal, could be drawn out 
to alter the pitch of found. . 



t 



r 



i 




Tig. 92.— Sackbijt. IX*^ Century. (From a MS. in Boulogne.) 

H 2 



io8 



An EJfay on the 



The fackbut o£ the ninth century had, however, a very different 
(hape to that in ufe about three centuries ago. The latter much more 
refembled the prefent trombone. The Germans call the trombone 
pofaune^ — a name the original meaning of which is unknown, but which 
may poffibly be a corruption of buccina^ fince we find it by old German 
writers called bujin. The name fackbut is fuppofed to be a corruption 
o^fambuca. The French, about the fifteenth century, called \t facqueboute 
and faquebutte. 

The mofl important wind inflrument, — in &£i, the king of all the 
mufical inflruments, is the organ. 

The pneumatic organ is fculptured on an obelifk which was ereded 
in Conflantinople under Theodofius the Great, towards the end of the 
fourth century. (Fig. 93.) The bellows were prefTed by men (landing 




Fig. 93. — Pneumatic Organ. IV**» Century. (Conftandnople.) 

on them. This interefling monument alfo exhibits performers on the 
double flute. Alfo the hydraulic organ^ which we have found among 
the Ancients, and which is recorded to have been already known about 
two hundred years before the Chriflian era, was, according to fome 
flatements, occafionally employed in churches during the earlier cen- 
turies of the Middle Ages. Probably it was more frequently heard 
in fecular entertainments, for which it was more fuitable. At the 
beginning of the fourteenth century it appears to have been entirely 
fupplanted by the pneumatic organ. The earliefl organs had only 
about a dozen pipes. The largefl, which were made about nine 
hundred years ago, had only three odaves, in which the chromatic 
intervals did not occur. Some progrefs in the conflruftion of the 
organ is exhibited in an illuflration dating from the twelfth century, 
in a MS. Pfalter of Eadwine, preferved in the library of Trinity 
College, Cambridge. The inflrument (Fig. 94) has ten pipes,— or 
perhaps fourteen, as four of them appear to be double pipes. It re- 
quired four men exerting all their power to produce the necefTary wind, 
and two men to play the inflrument. Moreover, both players are 
depidled alfo bufily engaged in direi^ing the blowers about the proper 
fupply of wind. Six men and only fourteen pipes ! It muft be admitted 



Hifiory of Mufical Inflruments. 109 



Fig. 94.— OiGAN. Xll* Century, (dm bridge.) 

that (ince the twelfth century fome progrefs has been made, at all events, 
in the conftruftion of the organ. 

The pedal is generally believed to have been invented by Bemhard, 
a German, who lived .in Venice, about the year 1470. There are, 
however, indications extant pointing to an earlier date of its invention. 
Perhaps Bemhard was the firll who, by adopting a more practicable 
conftruftion, made the pedal more generally known. On the earlieft 
organs the keys of the finger-board were of enormous fize, compared 
with thofe of the prefent day, — lb that a finger-board with only nine 
keys had a breadth of from four to five feet. The organift llruck the 
keys down with his fiti, as is done in playing the carillon^ Hill in ufe 
on the Continent, of which prefently fome account will be given. 
The ftatemcnt commonly found in hiftorical difTertations on the organ, 
that the old German appellation Orgilfchlager (" Organ-beater ") denoting 
the oiganift, arofe from this method of playing, may be corfe£^, but it 
is doubtful, fince alfo the lute player had a fimilar appellation, he being 
called Lautenfchlager {i.e. *' Lute-beater ") although he vibrated the 
ftrings merely with his fingers. 

Of the little portable organ, known as the regal^ or regahy often 
taftefolly daped and embellifhed, fome interefting fculptured reprelen- 
tations are (till extant in the old ecclefiaftical edifices of England and 
Scotland. There is, for inftance, in Beverley Minfter a figure of a 
man playing on a fingle regal, or a regal provided with only one fet of 
pipes i and, in Melrofe Abbey, the figure of an angel holding in his 



no An EJfay on the 

arms a double regal, the pipes of which are in two fets. The re^ 
generally had Iceys liice thofe of the organ, but fmallcr. A painting by 
Melozzo da Forii, who lived in the fifteenth century, contains a regal 
which has keys of a peculiar fbape, rather refembling the piftons of 
certain bra6 inftrtjments. The illuftration (Fig. 95) has been drawn 



Fig. 95.— RlCAL. XV" Cenfury. 

from the painting alluded to, which U in the National Gallery. To 
avoid milapprehenfion, it is necefTary to mention that the name regal 
(or rtgals, rigtli) was alfo applied to an inftrumcnt of percuffion with 
fonorous flabs of wood. This contrivance was, in Ihort, a kind of 
harmonica, refembling in dape, as well as in the principle of its con- 
firuftion, the little glalT-harnionica, a mere toy, in which flips of gla& 
are arranged according to our mufical fcale. There is a drawing of 
a regal of this kind in the plates belonging to the ' Encyclopedie 
methodique,' Tome III., Paris, 1784. In England it appears to have 
been ftill known in the beginning of the eighteenth century, Graffineau, 
in his Mufical Didtionary, London, 1740, delcribes the "Rigols" as 
" a kind of mufical inftrument confining of fcveral fticks bound 
together, only feparated by beads. It makes a tolerable harmony, 
being well llnick with a ball at the end of a Hick." In the earlier 
centuries of the Middle Ages there appear to have been Ibme inftru- 
ments of perculBon in lavour to which Graffineau's expreflion " a 
tolerable harmony " would fcarcely have been applicable. Drums, of 
courfe, were known, and their rhythmical nolfe muft have been foft 



Hijiory of Mujical Inftruments. 1 1 1 

mulic, if compared with the (hrill founds of the cymbalum (Fig. 96) a 
contriTance contifting of a number of metal plates fufpended on cords, fo 
that tttf:/ could be clalhed together fimultaneoull)' ; or with the clangour 
of the tymbalum conftru^ed with bells inftead of plates (Fig. 97) ; 



Hg. 96.— Cthialitm. DC'" Century. Fig. 97.— Cymaldm. IX" Century. 

(St. Blaliui.) (St. Bbfiiu.) 



or with the piercing noife of the iuniiulum, or bambukm (Fig. 98) an 
inftrument which confifted of an angular frame, to which were loofely 
attached metal plates of various fliapcs and flzes. The lower part of 
the frame conftituted the handle. To produce the noife it cvideiwly 
wa$ fhaken fomcwhat lilte the Siftrum of the ancient Egyptians. 



112 An Ejfay on the 

The triangle nearly refembled the inftrument of this name in ufe at 
the prefent day ; it was, however, more elegant in fliape, and had fome 
metal ornamentation in the middle. « 

The tintinnabulum confifted of a number of bells arranged in regular 
order and fufpended in a frame. 

Refpeding the orcheftras, or mufical bands, reprefented on monu- 
ments of the Middle Ages, there can hardly be a doubt that the artifts 
who made them were not unfrequently led by their imagination rather 
than by an adherence to a£lual fa£l. It is, however, not likely that 
they introduced into fuch reprefentations inftruments that were never 
admitted in the orcheftras which they depi£led, and which would have 
appeared inappropriate to the contemporaries of the artifts. An exami- 
nation of one or two of the orcheftras may therefore find a place here, 
efpecially as they throw fome additional light upon the charaderiftics 
of the inftrumental mufic of mediaeval time. 

A very interefting group of mufical performers, dating, it is faid, 
from the end of the eleventh century, is preferved in a baf-relief which 
formerly ornamented the Abbey of St. Georges de Bofcherville near 
Rouen^ and which is now removed to the Mufeum of Rouen. The 
Abbey of Bofcherville was founded in the year 1066 by Raoul Sire de 
Tancarville. The orcheftra alluded to, (Fig. 99), comprifes twelve 
performers, moft of whom wear a crown. The firft of them plays 
upon a vielli^ or viol, which he holds between his knees as the violon- 
cello is held. His inftrument is fcarcely as large as the fmalleft viola 
da gamba. By his fide are a royal lady and her attendant, the former 
playing on an organtfirum of which the latter is turning the wheel. 
Next to thefe is reprefented a performer on 2ifyrinx of the kind ftiown 
in the engraving Fig. 91; and next to him a performer on a ftringed 
inftrument refembling a lute, which, however, is too much dilapidated 
to be recognizable. Then we have a mufician with a fmall ftringed 
inftrument refembling the nablum^ Fig. 74. The next mufician, alfo 
reprefented as a royal perfonage, plays on a fmall fpecies of harp. 
Then follows a crowned mufician playing the v/V/fe, which he holds in 
almoft precifely the fame manner as the violin is held. Again, another, 
likewife crowned, plays upon a harp, ufing with the right hand a 
plectrum, and with the left hand merely his fingers. The laft two 
performers, apparently a nobleman and a gentlewoman, are engaged in 
ftriking the tintinnabulum^ — a fet of bells in a fi'ame. 

In this group of crowned and refpedable minftrels the fculptor has 
introduced a tumbler ftanding on his head, perhaps the vocalift of the 
company, as he has no inftrument to play upon. Very likely the 
fculptor defired to fymbolize the hilarious efFe£ls which mufic is 



Hiftory of Mufical Inftruments. 




1 14 An EJfay on the 



capable of producing, as well as its elevating influence upon the devotional 
feelings. 

The two pofitions in which we find here the vielle held is worthy 
of notice, inafmuch as it refers the inquirer further back than might 
be expeded for the origin of our peculiar method of holding the 
violin, and the violoncello, in playing. There were feveral kinds of 
the vielle in ufe diflFering in fize and in compafs of found. The moft 
common number of its firings was five. It was tuned in various ways, 
according to the particular kind of vielle. One kind had a firing which 

^ ** ^ running at the fide of the finger- 



was tuned to the note 



^ 



board inflead of over it ; this firing was, therefore, only capable of 
producing a fingle tone. The four other firings were tuned thus, — 



s^f 



Two other fpecies, on which all the firings 
were placed over the finger-board, were tuned, — 




The contrivance of placing a firing or two at the fide of the 
finger-board is evidently very old, and was al(b gradually adopted on 
other inflruments of the violin clafs of a fomewhat later period than 
that of the vielle ; for inflance, on the lira di braccio of the Italians. It 
was likewife adopted on the lute, to obtain a fuller power in the bafs ^ 
and hence arofe the theorbo^ the arch-lute^ and other varieties of the old 
lute. 

A grand afTemblage of mufical performers (Fig. 100) is reprefented 
on the Portico della Gloria of the famous Pilgrimage Church of Santiago 
da Compoflella, in Spain. This Triple Portal, which is flated by an 
infcription on the lintel to have been executed by one Maflcr Mateo, in 
the year 1188, confifts of a large femicircular arch, with a fmaller arch 
on either fide. The central arch is filled by a tympanum, on which 
are numerous figures in high relief, the principal being a colofTal feated 
figure of our Blefled Lord, furrounded by figures of the Evangelifls and 
of Angels bearing the inflruments of His Paflion ; the refl of the fpace 
being filled up by a number of fmall figures reprefenting the blefTed. 
Around the tympanum are twenty-four life-fized feated figures, repre- 
fenting the twenty-four Elders feen by St. John in the Apocalypfe, each 
with an inftrument of mufic. Thefe inflruments are carefully repre- 
fented, and are of great interefl as fhowing thofe in ufe in Spain at about 
the twelfth century. 



Hijlory of Mufical Injiruments. 115 




•J 



a 

< 

Q 
O 
< 

& 

M 
X 

U 

M 
X 
h 



o b 

61 

M *^ 

r »^ 

C/3 

M 
K X 



3 



■« 



2 

o 

t 



< 
u 



o 
o 






1 1 6 An EJfay on the 



Below the central figure in the tympanum is another, Uttle inferior 
in fize, of St. James (Sant Jago), the patron (aint of the church and of 
Spain. This figure is fupported by a beautifiilly-carved pillar repre- 
fenting the Tree of Jeffe, and retting on figures of crouching beafts. 
The piers on either fide reft on fimilar crouching beafts, and are 
furmounted by figures of the Twelve Apoftles. On one of the fmaller 
arches is reprefented Purgatory, the fouls being confined by a broad 
band, from which they are releafed by angels, who place them among 
the blefled in the centre ; on the other arch the loft fouls are reprefented 
as being carried away by demons. 

A caft of this fculpture is in the South Kenfington Mufeum. It 
was made at Santiago by Signor Dominic Brucciani, for the Mufeum, 
by the ipecial permifiion of the authorities of the Cathedral. 

In examining the group of muficians on this fculpture, the reader 
will probably recognize feveral inftruments in their hands, which are 
identical with certain ones with which we have already become 
acquainted in the preceding pages. The organijirum^ played by two 
perfons, is placed in the centre of the group, perhaps owing to its 
being the largeft of the inftruments rather than that it was diftinguiftied 
by any fuperiority in found or mufical efFedil. The ornamental defigns, 
exhibited on its body and neck, were perhaps on the a£tual inftrument 
carved in wood. Alfo the hurdygurdy was, (bme centuries ago, not 
unfi'equently highly embelliflied. 

Befides the fmall harp feen in the hands of the eighth and nine- 
teenth muficians, which is in form nearly identical with the Anglo- 
Saxon harp already noticed, — ^we find a fmall triangular harp, vnthout 
a front-pillar, held on the lap by the fifth and eighteenth muficians. 

The falterio^ on the lap of the tenth and feventeenth muficians, refem- 
bles the dulcimer, but is played with the fingers inftead of with hammers. 

The moft interefting inftrument in this orcheftra is, however, the 
vlhuela^ or Spanifli viol, of the twelfth century. The firft, fecond, 
third, fixth, feventh, ninth, twentieth, twenty-fecond, twenty-third, and 
twenty-fourth muficians are depided with a vihuela which bears a clofe 
refemblance to the rebec. The inftrument is reprefented with three 
ftrings, although in one or two inftances five tuning-pegs are indicated. 
A large fpecies of vihuela is given to the eleventh, fourteenth, fifteenth, 
and fixteenth muficians. This inftrument differs from the rebec in as 
jfar as its body is broader and has incurvations at the fides. Alfo the 
found-holes are different in form and pofition. 

The bow does not occur with any of thefe viols. But, as will be 
obferved, the muficians are not reprefented in the ad of playing ; they 



Hijiory of Mufical Inftruments. 117 



are tuning and preparing for the performance. The fecond of them is 
adjufting the bridge of his inftrument. Perhaps, therefore, the fculptor 
thought himfelf juftified in omitting the bow, which, exhibited in the 
hands of fo many players would have impaired the artiftic efFe£t of the 
fcene. However this may be, the Spaniards, certainly about a century 
later than the time when this fculpture was made, had feveral kinds of 
the vihuela^ with fome of which the bow was not ufed. The vihuela de 
arcQ^ played with a bow, was ftrung with four, five, or fix ftrings. 
The vihuela de penola was ftrung with wire ftrings which were ufually 
ftruck with a quill. A large kind of vihuela de arco was called citola 
albordada. The rebec, which had three ftrings, was called rabe morifco. 
Not a few of the Spanifli inftruments of that period had names derived 
fi'om the Arabic. 

The Minftrels' Gallery of Exeter Cathedral dates from the fourteenth 
century. It was conftrufted in the reign of Edward III. for the 
accommodation of muficians engaged in performances on occafions of 
fblemn celebrations. Its front is divided into twelve niches, each of 
which contains a winged figure, or an angel, playing on an inftrument 
of mufic. (Fig. 1 01.) There is a caft of this famous fculpture in the 
South Kenfington Mufeum. The inftruments are fo much dilapidated 
that ibme of them cannot be clearly recognized ; but, as tar as is 
afcertainable, they appear to be as follows: — i. The cittern. It 
pofiibly may have been intended for the lute, but its ftiape more refembles 
the old Englifli cittern, ftrung with wire. 2. The bagpipe. 3. The 
clarion^ a fmall trumpet having a flirill (bund. 4. The rebec. 5. The 
pfaltery. 6. The fyrinx. 7. The fackbut. 8. The regals. 9. The 
gitterrijZ fmall guitar ftrung with catgut. 10. The^^Zw. 11. The 
timbrel. It refembles our prefent tambourine, and has a double row of 
gingles. 12. Cymbals. 

Moft of thefe inftruments have been already noticed in the preceding 
pages. The Jhabn^ or Jhawm^ was a pipe with a reed in the mouth- 
hole. An old drawing reprefents it with a rather wide bell ; in the 
fculptures this fliape of the bell is generally not apparent, but moft of 
thefe monuments have fuffered from the tooth of time. In Germany, 
where the ftialm was cdl\ed /chalmey^ it clofely refembled the zamr^ or 
xournoy of the Arabs, from whom it was probably derived. Its reed 
was protedled by a cover having an orifice at the top through which 
the inftrument was blown. However, from its name, evidently derived 
from calamus^ it might be conjectured that the Romans introduced it 
into Weftern Europe. 

The wait was an Englifli wind inftrument of the fame conftru£tion. 
If it differed in any refpeft from the Jhabn^ the difference confifted 



ii8 



An EJfay on the 




Hijiory of Mufical Inftruments. 119 



probably in the fize only. The wait obtained its name from being 
ufed principally by watchmen, or waights^ to proclaim the time of night. 
Such were the poor anceftors of our fine oboe and clarinet. 



PoST-MEDI^VAL MuSICAL INSTRUMENTS. 



Attention muft now be drawn to fome inftruments which originated 
during the Middle Ages, but which attained their higheft popularity at 
a fomewhat later period. 

The lute^ for inftance, was about three hundred years ago almoft 
as popular as is at the prefent day the pianoforte. Originally it 
had eight thin catgut ftrings arranged in four pairs, each pair being 
tuned in unifbn ; (b that its open ftrings produced four tones. In 
the courfe of time more ftrings were added. Until the fixteenth 
century twelve was the largeft number, or rather, fix pairs. How- 
ever, eleven was for fome centuries the moft ufual number of ftrings. 
Thefe produced fix tones, fince they were arranged in five pairs and 
a fingle ftring. The latter, called the chanter elU^ was the higheft. 
According to Thomas Mace, the Englifli lute in common ufe 
during the feventeenth century had twenty-four ftrings, arranged in 
twelve pairs, of which fix pairs ran over the finger-board, and the other 
fix by the fide of it. This lute was therefore, more properly fpeaking, 
a theorbo. The neck of the lute, and alfb of the theorbo, had frets 
confifting of catgut ftrings tightly faftened round it at the proper 
diftances required for enfuring a chromatic fucceffion of intervals. The 
illuftration. Fig. 102, reprefents a lute-player of the fixteenth century. 
The frets are not indicated in the old engraving from which the illuftra- 
tion has been taken. The order of tones adopted for the open ftrings 
varied in different centuries and countries. This was alfo the cafe with 
the notation of lute mufic. The moft common practice was to write 
the mufic on fix lines, the upper line reprefenting the firft ftring -, the 
fecond line, the fecond ftring, and fo on ; and to mark with letters on 
the lines the frets at which the fingers ought to be placed — a indicating 
the open ftring, b the firft fret, c the fecond fret, and fo on. 

The lute was made of various fizes, according to the purpofe for 
which it was intended in performance. The treble-lute was of the 



An EJfay on the 




Hijiory of Mujical Injlruments. 



121 



fmalleft dimenfions, and the bafs-lute of the largeft. The theorbo^ or 
double-necked lute, which appears to have come into ufe during the 
fixteenth century, had, in addition to the firings fituated over the finger- 
board, a number of others running at the left fide of the finger-board, 
which could not be fhortened by the fingers, and which produced the 
baft tones. The largeft kinds of theorbo were the archlute and the 
chitarrone. 

It is, however, unnecefTary to enter here into a detailed defcription 
of any inftruments which have been popular during the laft three 
centuries, fince the Mufeum contains fpecimens of many of them of 
which fome account is given in the Catalogue. Suffice it to refer the 
reader to the illuftrations of the cither, virginal, fpinet, clavichord, 
harpfichord, and other antiquated inftruments much efteemed by our 
forefathers. 

Thofe who examine thefe old relics will probably wifti to know 
fomething about their quality of tone, ** How do they found ? Might 
** they ftill be made eflFeftive in our prefent ftate of the art ? *' are ques- 
tions which naturally occur to the mufical inquirer having fuch inftru- 
ments brought before him. A few words bearing on thefe queftions 
may therefore not be out of place here. 

It is generally and juftly admitted that in no other branch of the art 
of mufic has greater progrefs been made fince the laft century than in 
the conftniftion of mufical inftruments. Neverthelefs, there are thofe 
who think that we have alfo loft fomething here which might with 
advantage be reftored. Our various inftruments, by being more and 
more perfefted, are becoming too much alike in quality of found, or in 
that charadler of tone which the French call timbre^ and the Germans 
Klangfarbe^ and which Profeffor Tyndall in his ' Leftures on Sound ' 
has tranflated clang-tint. Every mufical compofer knows how much 
more fuitable one clang-tint is for the expreffion of a certain emotion 
than another. Our old inftruments, imperfeft though they were in 
many refpefts, poflfefled this variety of clang-tint to a high degree. 
Neither were they on this account lefs capable of expreffion than the 
modern ones. That no improvement has been made during the laft 
two centuries in inftruments of the violin clafs is a well-known fadt. 
As to lutes and cithers the prefent colleftion contains fpecimens fo rich 
and mellow in tone as to caufe muficians to regret that thefe kinds of 
inftruments have entirely fallen into oblivion. 

Moreover, as regards beauty in appearance, our antiquated inftru- 
ments were fuperior to our prefent ones. Indeed, we have now fcarcely 

M.I. I 



' 



12 2 y4n EJfay on the 



a mufical inftrument which can be called beautiful. The old lutes, 
cithers, viols, dulcimers, &c. are not only elegant in ihape, but are 
alio often uftefuUy ornamented with carvings, deflgns in marquetry, and 
painting. 

It is, however, unneceffary to enlarge upon thefe queftions, fmce 
the prefent coUedlion afFords fufEcient evidence for the inquirer to judge 
how far the above flatements are well founded. 

The player on the viola da gamboy at the time of the Common- 
wealth, ihown in the engraving. Fig. 103, is a reduced copy of an 
illuftration in ^ The Divifion Violifl, or an Introdudlion to the Playing 
upon a Ground, by Chriftopher Simpfon,' London, 1659. ^^ ihows 
exadlly how the frets were regulated, and how the bow was held. The 
moft popular inftruments played with a bow, at that time, were the 
trebli-violy the tenor-violy and the bafs-vioL The laft two were real 
Viola da Gambas, being held between the knees like the Violoncello. 
The lyra-viol was played from a notation fimilar to that ufed for the 
lute. 

It was ufual for viol players to have ** a cheft of viols," a cafe 
containing four or more viols, of different flzes. Thus, Thomas Mare, 
in his directions for the ufe of the viol, ' Muflck's Monument,' London, 
1676, remarks, '' Your beft provifion, and moft complete, will be a 
good cheft of viols, fix in number, viz., two bafles, two tenors, and 
two trebles, all truly and proportionably fuited." The violift, to be 
properly furniflied with his requirements, had therefore to fupply himfelf 
with a larger ftock of inftruments than the violinift of the prefent day. 

That there was, in the time of Shakefpeare, a mufical inftrument 
called recorder^ is undoubtedly known to moft readers from the ftage 
direction in Hamlet : Re-enter players with recorders. But not many 
are likely to have ever feen a recorder, as it has now become very 
fcarce. An illuftration of this inftrument is therefore here fubmitted 
(Fig. 104). It has been copied from 'The Genteel Companion; 
Being exa£): Directions for the Recorder : With a Collection of the 
beft and neweft Tunes and Grounds extant ; Carefully compofed and 
gathered by Humphry Salter, London, 1683.' 

From an old ftory alluding to the inftrument, found in old jeft 
books, it might be conjeCtured that there was adually no difFerence 
between the recorder and the common Jlute-a-bec : — " A merrie Re- 
corder of London miftaking the name of one Pepper, call'd him 
Piper : whereunto the partie excepting, and faying. Sir, you miftake. 



Hijiory of Mufical Injlruments. 123 



Fig. 103— Viola da Gamba. Englift. XVII* Centuij. 

my name is Pepper, not Piper ; hee anfwcred. Why, what dii^rcncc 
is there, I pray thee, between Piper in Latin and Pepper in Englifli I 
is it not all one f No, Sir, reply'd the other, there is even as much 
difference betweenc them as is between a Pipe and a Recorder." 

Neverthelefs, there appears to have been Ibme dillerence, inafmuch 
as the rtcsrdtr had at one fide, near the mouth-piece, a hole which was 
covered with a thin bladder, — a contrivance adopted for the purpofe of 
afTefting the quality of found. 

The Jhalm,facibut, dukimer, pfaltery^ and other inftruments popular 
in Etigland at the time of the Reformation, the names of which were 
adopted in the Englifli tranllatton of the Bible for certain Hebrew and 



124 An EJfay on the 



Fig. .04— RicOKDU. Englilh. XVII'" Ontury. 

Greek inftruments mentioned in the original text, have been already 
alluded to. No doubt they gradually underwent fome modifications in 
the courTe of almoft every century. The pipt and tabar, — the latter a 
little hand-drum, — were not unfrequently played together by the (ame 
perfon. The cuftom is found depifled on fculptures and paintings of 
the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries. The Germans ufed for this pur- 
pofe a fmall pipe, called fcbwegil, which had only three finger-holes 
placed clofe tt^cther at the lower end of the tube. The (hrillnefs of 
the found of the fckwegtl may have been fomewhat relieved by the 
rhythmical accompaniment of the little drum. Perhaps this com- 
bination fuggefls itfelf naturally ; at any rate, we find it alfo among the 
American Indians. In Bolivia, thofe of the aborigines who have 
adopted the Roman Catholic ^ith, are permitted to introduce, on 
certain religious feftivals, fome of their ancient ceremonies. On thefe 
occafions they not unfrequently exhibit themfelves adorned with moD 
grotefque head-drelTcs, and playing upon rude inftruments of mufic j 
and amongft them may generally be witnelTed a zealous performer on 
the pipe and tabor. 



Hijlory of Mujical Injiruments. 125 

The tagpipt appears to have been from time immemorial a fpecial 
^vourite inftrument with the Celtic races ; but it was perhaps quite as 
much admired by the Slavonic nations. In 
Poland, and In the Ukraine, it ufed to be 
made of the whole fkin of the goat, in which 
the fliape of the animal, whenever the bag- 
pipe was expanded with air, appeared fully 
retained, exhibiting even the head with the 
horns i hence the bagpipe was called iofoj 
which llgnifies a goat. 

Confidering the high reputation which 
the bagpipe ftill enjoys in the North of 
Britain, it may intereft the reader to fee 
a drawing of the Scotch bagpipe of the 
eighteenth century (Fig. 105). It is a re- 
duced copy of an iilullration given in ' Mullcal 
Memoirs of Scotland, by Sir John Graham 
Dalyell,' Edinburgh, 1849. This is a fpeci- 
men of the Great Highland Bagpipe, dating 
from the year 1745. The animating found 
of the bagpipe upon the Scotchman is graphi- 
cally illuHrated in fome old military records, 
of which the following may ferve as an 
example : — '* At the battle of Quebec, in 
the year 1759, while the Britifli troops were 
retreating in great diforder, the General com- 
plained to a field officer in Frafer's regiment 
of the bad behaviour of his corps. ' Sir,' laid 

the officer with fome warmth, * you did very wrong in fiarbidding the 
pipers to play this morning : nothing encourages the Highlanders fo 
much in the day of battle i and even now they would be of fome ufe,' 
' Let them blow like the devil then,' replied the General, ' if it will 
bring back the men.' The pipers were then ordered to play a favourite 
martial air, and the Highlanders, the moment they heard the mufic, 
returned and formed with alacrity in the rear." 

The woodcut. Fig. 106, reprelents an Irifh bagpipe of the fixteenth 
century, in the hands of a player who marches in front of a band of 
Infurgents. It is copied from an illuftratlon given in " The Image of 
Irelande, with a difcouerie of Woodkarne, wherein is moil liuely 
exprefTed the nature and qualitie of the faied wilde Irifbe Woodkarne, 
their notable aptnelTe, celeritie and pronefTc to Rebellion, and by way 



126 An EJfay on the 

of argumente is manifefted their ori^nall, and ofi^pring, their defcent 
and Pedigree," &c., by John Dcrncke, London, 1581. 



Fig. 106. — UiiH BAoriPi. XVI'' Centary. 

The minftrel warrior fupplies the air to the bag from his mouth. 
As regards the employment oF bellows with the bagpipe, Jolcph Walker 
(* Hiftorical Memoirs of the IriOi Bards,' London, 1784, p. 78) 
remarks, " It was referved for the IriQi to take it from the mouth, and 
to give it its prefent complicated form, that is, two fhort drones and a 
long one, with a chanter, all of which are tilled by a pair of fmall 
bellows, inflated by a compreflive motion of the arm." There is, how- 
ever, no evidence of bellows having been ufed with the bagpipe in 
Ireland at fo early a period as is known to have been the cafe in France 
and Italy. Howbeit, the bagpipe is evidently of high antiquity in 
Ireland, and is alluded to in Irifh poetry and profe faid to date fix>m the 
tenth century. A pig gravely engaged in playing the bagpipe is repre- 
fented in an illuminated Irilh manufcript, compiled in the year 1300. 
Similar figures we find fculptured in Scotland and England on old 



Hijlory of Mujical hijiruments. 127 



ecclefiaftical edifices (Melrofe Abbey, Ripon Cathedral, Beverie/ 
Minfter, &c.), where they certainly appear an inappropriate decoration* 

Some further account of the bagpipe will be found in the fubfequent 
pages of the Catalogue. 

The hell has always been (b much in popular favour in England 
that (bme account of it muft not be omitted in the prefent efTay. Paul 
Hentzner, a German, who vifited England in the year 1598, records 
in his Journal : *< The people are vailly fond of great noifes that fill 
the ear, fuch as the firing of cannon, drums, and the ringing of 
bells ; fo that in London it is common for a number of them that 
have got a glafs in their heads to go -up into fome belfry, and ring the 
bells for hours together for the fake of exercife." This may be ex- 
aggeration, — ^not unufual with traveUers. It is, however, a h& that bell- 
ringing has been a favourite amufement with Englifhmen for centuries. 

The bell, in its various fhapes, and in its many afTociations with 
popular ufages, ofFers indeed a wide field for invefligation. The Chris- 
tian church bell was, according to common tradition, invented by 
Paulinus, bifhop of Nola, in Italy, who lived about A.D. 400. He 
may poflibly have introduced it into European countries ; but evidence 
is not wanting in proof of fimilar bells having been known in Afia at 
a much earlier period. In ^Auli Apronii Vermehrte Reifebefchrei- 
bung,' Franco-Porto, 1724, we read that there was formerly in a 
tower at Nola tn old bell which had the reputation of being the 
firft bell made for the Chriftian church. This interefling relic, to 
whofe founds the people afcribed certain miraculous powers, is de- 
fcribed as having been of a peculiar fhape, and as having had holes 
at the top. Confidering that the larger bells of Afiatic countries are 
frequently open at the top, it appears not improbable that Paulinus im- 
ported one of thefe, or that he had one made in imitation of a fpecimen 
obtained from the Eaft. 

The largeft bells extant in European countries, and probably in the 
whole world, are to be found in Ruflia. Thefe huge inftruments 
remain ftationary when being founded, or at leaft are very rarely fwung. 
The celebrated bell in Mofcow, known by the name of Cxar Kolokol^ 
is the moil ponderous of all. Its weight is 443,772 pounds ; its height 
21 feet 4 inches^ its diameter, 22 feet 5 inches; and its thicknefs, 
23 inches. It was caft in the year 1653. In the year 1737 it fell to 
the ground from the fcafFolding by which it was fufpended, whereby 
it fuftained a fradlure. The Emperor Nicholas caufed it to be dug out 
of the ground into which it had partially funk, and raifed it, in the year 
1837, on the pedeflal of granite on which it now refts. It ftands at 
the foot of the famous Ivan Veliki, or ' Tower of John the Great,* 



128 An EJfay on the 

which is fituate in the Kremlin. The Ivan Veliki rifes to the height 
of 209 feet, and is furmounted by a gilded dome. This tower contains 
feveral fine-toned bells, the largeft of which weighs 127,836 pounds, 
and is therefore only about one-third the weight of Czar Kolokol, or 

* The Monarch.* The great bell at Erfurt weighs 28,224 pounds ; 
that of St. Peter's at Rome, 18,607 pounds ; ' Great Tom ' in Oxford, 
17,000 pounds \ the great bell of St. Paul's, London, 11,474 pounds; 

* Great Tom * of Lincoln, 9,894 pounds. 

The way in which church bells are fufpended and faflened, fb as to 
permit of their being made to vibrate in the mofl efFedive manner, 
without damaging by their vibration the building in which they are 
placed, is in fome countries very peculiar. The Italian campanile^ 
or tower of bells, is not unfrequently feparated from the church 
itfelf. The campanile at Cremona, which is the highefl in Italy, 
has an elevation of 395 feet. In Spain, a celebrated campanile^ 
belonging to the Cathedral at Seville, is 350 feet high', and is three 
hundred years old. Refpe£ting the Englifh belfry^ it is noteworthy that, 
in the opinion of (bme inquirers, the term has been derived from bell^ 
and the Anglo-Saxon, y^/WM ( German, yriV</^), which means ** peace"; 
— while others trace it to the French heffroi^ which in old French is 
helfroity and which during the Middle Ages was a term applied to a 
certain fcafFolding in the fhape of a tower placed on wheels. This 
machine, on the top of which the royal ftandard was hoifled, ferved in 
warfare as a watch-tower, or a ftation for fcrudnizing the enemy. At 
the foot of the mail on which the ftandard was difplayed, a prieft 
celebrated every morning Holy Mafs. The heffroi is iaid to have origi- 
nally been tranfmitted into France and other European countries from 
Italy, where it was called carroccto. Bonanni, in his ' Defcrizione degl' 
Iftromenti Armonici d' ogni Genere,' gives an illuftration of the 
carroccio. It was moved on four wheels. The bell, which was called 
martinellay was placed in the middle, juft beneath the ftandard, and was 
rung by means of a rope to convey fignals ; in fa£l, it ferved much the 
fame purpofe as the trumpet at the prefent day. Refpe£ling the word 
beffroiy it may be added that fome writers believe it to have been derived 
from effroi^ *' terror," becaufe the bell was ufed to give the alarm. 
However this may be, we certainly find in fome of the French Mufical 
Diftionaries the term beffroi applied to the tam-tamy or gongy which in 
modern times is occafionally introducefd in the orcheftral fcore for 
the purpofe "of producing'terri fie efFefts. 

In Servian the church bells are often hung in a frame-work of timber 
built near the weft end of the church. The Turks, during their 
dominion in that country, did not allow the ufe of bells, and it was 



Hijiory of Mufical Injiruments. 129 

only later, after the prohibition became relaxed, that this eredion was 
added. The Turks, like all adherents to the Iflam religion, are averfe 
to the ufe of bells for (ummoning the people to prayer, and employ 
inftead. the Muezzin, who afcends the minaret at ftated times, and 
recites the duty of worfhip. The new churches in Servia, which were 
built alter the Turks had fomewhat loft their fway over the country, are 
generally provided with a belfiy over the weft entrance. The Turkifti 
government has, however, recently become more tolerant on this point, 
and the found of the Chriftian church bell may now be heard in fome 
towns of Afla Minor as well as in European countries under Turkifli 
dominion. 

In Zante and other iflands of Greece the belfry is ufually feparate 
from the church. The reafon aftigned by the Greeks for having 
adopted this plan is that in cafe of an earthquake the bells are likely to 
fall, and, were they placed in a tower, would deftroy the roof of the 
church, and might caufe the deftrudlion of the whole building. Alfo 
in Ruflia a fpecial edifice for the bells is generally feparate from the 
church. It is called kolokolnik. Moreover, in the Ruffian villages the 
bells are not unfrequently hung in the branches of an oak-tree near 
the church. In Iceland the bell is ufually placed in the lych-gate 
leading to the grave-yard. 

The infcriptions on church bells are fometimes fo quaint, and in 
fome countries fo charaderiftic, that a colle£):ion of them would pro- 
bably be not lefs entertaining than the publifhed colledlions of epitaphs 
from graveftones. 

The curfew (or couvre-feu) ufed formerly to be tolled in England 
in obedience to a ftringent law, faid to have been made by William the 
Conqueror. A fimilar cuftom appears, however, to have been obferved 
in England as well as on the Continent before the Norman Conqueft. 
The booming of the curfew intimated to the people that they fhould 
cover up their fires, put out their lights, and go to bed. Eight o'clock 
appears to have been the ufual time fixed by the Government for this 
manifeftation of paternal care by means of the curfew. 

Tempting as it might be to point out fome curious refemblances 
between old ufages of this kind not yet quite extinft in Europe, and 
thofe of Afiatic nations, the fubjeft hardly falls within the fcope of the 
prefent inquiry. 

The Sandlus-bell, ufed by the Roman Catholics in the celebration 
of the Mafs, has its counterpart in the ghunta^ a little hand-bell which 
the Brahminic priefts in Hinduftan have ufed from time immemorial in 
their religious ceremonies. 



1 30 An EJfay on the 



The Morris (or Morrice) dance, in which the performers wear 
bells on their garments, was fome centuries ago a favourite dance in 
England, and is even at the prefent day occafionally performed in (bme 
diftridis of the country, efpecially on May-day. This dance is evidently 
derived from the Arabs. It is the Morifco, or Moorifh dance, which 
from Spain gradually found its way into other European countries, more 
or lefs modified. 

The idea of forming of a number of bells a mufical inftrument fuch 
as the carillon^ is by fome inquirers furmifed to have fuggefted itfelf firft 
to the Englifh and Dutch ; but what we have feen in Afiatic countries 
fufEciently refutes this conjedure. Moreover, not only the Romans 
employed varioufly arranged and attuned bells, but alfo among the 
Etrufcan antiquities an inftrument has been difcovered which is con- 
ftruded of a number of bronze vefTels placed in a row on a metal rod. 
Likewife, numerous bells varying in flze and tone, have been found 
in Etrufcan tombs. Among the later contrivances of this kind in 
European countries deferve to be noticed the fets of bells fufpended in 
a wooden frame which occur in reprefentations of mufical performances 
dating from the Middle Ages. We have already obferved a noble 
perfonage of the eleventh century performing on fuch an inftrument 
(See engraving. Fig. 99), and the Britifti Mufeum pofTefTes a manu- 
fcript of the fourteenth century in which King David is depicted 
holding in each hand a hammer with which he ftrikes upon bells of 
different dimenfions, which are fufpended on a wooden ftand. 

It may be fuppofed that the device of playing tunes by means o\ 
bells merely fwung by the hand, is alfo of ancient date. The Lanca- 
fl\ire bell-ringers deferve a paffing notice here, fince their manner ot 
performing may be confidered as peculiarly appertaining to Englifti 
national mufic. Each of the ringers conftituting the band manages 
two bells, holding one in either hand. Thus, an aifemblage of feven 
ringers infures fourteen different tones ; and as each ringer may change 
his two notes by fubftituting two other bells if required, even compofi- 
tions with various modulations, and of a fomewhat intricate character, 
are executable, — provided the ringers are good timeifts ; for, each has, 
of courfe, to take care to fall in with his note, juft as a member of the 
RufEan Horn Band contributes his fingle note whenever it occurs in 
the mufical compofition being performed. 

Peal-ringing is another paftime of the kind which may be regarded 
as pre-eminently national to England. The bells conftituting a peal 
are frequently of the number of eight, attuned to the diatonic fcale. 
Alfo peals of ten bells, and even of twelve, are occafionally formed. 
A peculiar feature of peal-ringing is that the bells, which are provided 



Hijiory of Mujical Injiruments. 131 



Fig. 107.— Cahillon, The NelhcrlanJs. 

with clappers, arc generally fwung fo forcibly as to raife the mouth 
completely upwards. The largefl; peal, and one of the fineft, is at 
Exeter Cathedral. Another celebrated one is that of St. Margaret's, 
Leicefter, which confids of ten bells. Peal-ringing appears to be of 
an early date in England. Egelric, Abbot of Croyland, who lived at 
the time of King Edgar, is recorded to have caft, about the year 960, 
a fet of fix bells ; but it is lilcewife recorded that his predeceObr, 
ThurketuI, had led the way to this fancy. In the year 1456 a fine. 



132 An EJfay on the 



and at that time unufually large peal, confifting of five bells, was fent 
by Pope Calixt III. to King's College, Cambridge, where it was in 
ufe for about three centuries. At the time of Queen Elizabeth the art 
of ringing was evidently much cultivated. 

The carillon (Fig. 107) is efpecially popular in the Netherlands and 
Belgium, but is alfo found in Germany, Italy, and ibme other European 
countries. It is generally placed in the church tower, but alfo fome- 
times in other public edifices. The flatement repeated by feveral 
writers that the firft carillon was invented in the year 1481 in the town 
of Alofl in Belgium, is unreliable, for the town of Bruges in the province 
of Flanders claims to have pofTefTed fimilar chimes in the year 1300. 
There are, however, two kinds of carillons in ufe on the continent, 
viz. : clock chimes, which are moved by machinery, like a felf-ading 
barrel-organ ; and fuch as are provided with a fet of keys, by means 
of which the tunes are played by a mufician. The carillon in the 
^ Parochial-Kirche ' at Berlin, which is one of the fineft in Germany, 
contains thirty-feven bells. It is provided with a hollow cylinder of 
wrought iron, which is worked by heavy weights. The bells are ftruck 
in the infide with hammers. By means of the cylinder, and the 
mechanifm connected with it, it plays a number of chorales without 
further affiflance ; for, the cylinder is perforated with little holes into 
which are inferted the iron pins required for the produ6iion of any 
particular tunes which it is intended to perform at fixed hours. This 
carillon is likewife provided with a key-board for the hands, and with 
a pedal, which together place at the difpofal of the performer a compafs 
of rather more than three o6iaves. The keys of the manual are metal 
rods fomewhat above a foot in length. The performer prefTes them 
down with the palms of his hand. The keys of the pedal are of wood j 
thefe, efpecially, require in their treatment a confiderable exertion. 
This carillon was cafl in Amfterdam in the year 17 14. The per- 
formance on fuch an inflrument requires not only great dexterity, but 
alfo a confiderable phyfical power. It is aflonifhing how rapidly 
pafTages can be executed upon it by the player, who is generally the 
organift of the church in which he afts as carilloneur. When engaged 
in the lafl-named capacity, he ufually wears leathern gloves to proted 
his fingers, as they are otherwife apt to become ill fit for the more 
delicate treatment of the organ. 

Some of the r^7r//&«j in Holland and Belgium are very large; that 
of the Cathedral at Antwerp contains nearly a hundred bells. Dr. 
Burney, in his journal entitled * The Prefent State of Mufic in Germany, 
the Netherlands, &c., London 1775,' has given a rather amufing 
account of the exertions of the carilloneurs which he witnefTed at Ghent 



Hijlory of Mufical Injiruments. 133 



and Amfterdam. In the laft-named city he afcended the tower of the 
Stad'-huySj or town-hall, to obferve the performer at work; after a 
quarter of an hour's furious playing, the carilloneur^ having worked 
himfelf into a profiife perfpiration, put on his night-cap and faid that 
he was forced to go to bed the inftant it was over, to recover himfelf, 
he being fo much exhaufted as to be utterly unable to fpeak. 

The want of a contrivance in the carillon for flopping the vibration, 
has the eiFed of making rapid pafTages, if heard near, (bund as a con- 
fufed noife ; only at fome diftance are they tolerable. However, it 
muft be remembered that the carillon is intended efpecially to be heard 
from a diflance. Succeffions of tones which, if heard together, form 
a confbnant chord, and which have fome duration, are evidently the 
mofl fuitable for this inftrument. 

Indeed, every mufical inflrument poflefles certain charaderiilics 
which render it efpecially fuitable for the production of fome particular 
efFedls. The invention of a new inflrument of mufic has, therefore, 
not unfrequently led to the adoption of new efFedls in compofitions. 
Take, for inflance, the pianoforte, which was invented in the beginning 
of the eighteenth century, and which has now obtained a popularity 
greater than any other inftrument of mufic probably ever obtained. Its 
charaderiflics infpired our great compofers — and among them efpecially 
Beethoven in his Sonatas — to the invention of efFedls, or exprefSons^ 
which cannot be properly rendered on any other inflrument, however 
fuperior in feme refpe£ts it may be to the pianoforte. Thus alfo the 
great improvements in the conflrudion of our brafs inflruments, which 
have been made during the prefent century, and the invention of feveral 
new brafs inflruments, have evidently been not without influence upon 
the conceptions difplayed in our modern orcheflral works. 

In concluding this efTay, a few remarks mufl be fubmitted to the 
reader refpe£ting the combinations of various inflruments in mufical 
performances. Without beflowing fome attention upon this fubje£t, 
it is in many inflances hardly poiSble to form an opinion as to the efFedts 
which any particular inflrument is capable of producing. Many inflru- 
ments, — nay, it may be faid by far the greater number, are fcarcely 
ever ufed fingly, but generally in combination with at leaft one or two 
others ; moreover, they frequently form part of a band, or orcheflra, of 
fome kind. It may eafily be underflood that they require to be con- 
fidered efpecially with reference to their capabilities in their mofl ufual 
connexion with others. Take, for inflance, the kettle-drums, thefe are 
capable only of producing two deep founds which by themfelves are 
mufically all but ufelefs \ yet, what admirable efFedts have our great 
compofers achieved by means of kettle-drums in their orcheflral works ! 



1 34 An EJfay on the 



Again, it muft be borne in mind that generally, if two or more 
inftruments of a different kind are played together in unifbn, or in 
odaves, a quality of (bund is produced which is very difierent from any 
quality of found peculiar to each of thefe inilruments fingle. This i2& 
can hardly have efcaped the notice of the attentive liflener to an 
orcheilral compofition, even if he has never occupied himfelf with the 
reading of Scores. 

Again, many inflruments pofTefs diftind qualities of found in their 
feveral odaves. Thus, the clarinet may be faid to have three different 
regiflers, viz. : the high regifler, the tones of which are bright and 
piercing ; the medium regifler, having tones which are full and mellow ; 
and the low regifter, the tones of which are veiled and fombre. It is 
not generally the cafe that the different regiflers of an inflrument are 
equally valuable, or that one is ufed as commonly in performances as 
another. Not unfrequendy certain tones are more difficult to produce 
than others, and are for this reafbn lefs commonly put in requifition. 

Such h.&.% have to be taken into account in eftimating the capa- 
bilities of inflruments appertaining to foreign nations, which have 
hitherto been all but unknown to our muflcians, as is the cafe with 
many of thofe defcribed in this work. 

A furvey of the various kinds of orcheflras in vogue at the prefent 
day in different parts of the world, might be interefling and infinitive 
to muficians. It ought, however, to comprife alfo the mofl chara£ter- 
iflic mufical bands popular among uncivilized and femi-civilized races. 
A brief allufion to one or two, by way of example, will fuffice. 

The Buddhifls in Tibet have evidently a decided predile6lion for 
loud performances in their religious worfhip. Captain Turner wit- 
neffed a facred concert of this defcription by a band forming part of 
a folemn proceffion. He fays '* Firfl were ten perfbns with huge trum- 
pets, which they founded refling one end upon the ground ; next 
followed twenty men with large tabors, a fort of drum about three 
feet in diameter, fixed by the fide upon a pedeflal and beaten by a 
long elaflic curved iron j then came twenty men with cymbals, and 
two with the fea-fhell, here termed chaunk. Having entered the mofl 
fpacious and open flreet, they began to arrange themfelves in order. 
The trumpets took their flation upon the right, next to them the 
chaunks^ and then the tabors ; the cymbals were in front. The 
Lama, having a wand in one hand, and in the other a cafket or 
brazier of incenfe, flood before the whole band, appearing with his 
wand to mark the time and to give them words, which all, except 
the inflrumental performers, chanted to the mufic. I obferved that 
the performance of this ceremony continued for nearly half an hour, 



Hijiory of Mujical Injiruments. 135 

- ■■■■ ,■■-■■■■ ■ ^■■ ■■ ■ -^ 

when the proceifion moved on." (* An Account of the EmbafTy to 
the Court of the Tefhoo Lama in Tibet,' London, 1800.) 

Again, very peculiar are the two orcheftras, one placed at each fide 
of the fcene, which are generally found in a Burmefe theatre of the 
better clafs, and of which, like the orcheftra of the Buddhift temple 
juft alluded to, we are enabled to form a tolerably exacSt idea, fince we 
poflefs feveral drawings of the fingular muficians faithfully copied from 
nature by recent travellers. 

The Javanefe have an orcheftra called gamalan^ which confifts of a 
number of curious inftruments moftly belonging to the harmonicon clafs. 

Among the Hindus we meet with the renowned nobut^ — ^a band 
formed principally of inftruments efpecially fuited for martial mufic. 
Various other kinds of Hindu orcheftras could be pointed out, fbme of 
which are evidently, in so hx as regards the number of performers 
employed, fcarcely furpafied by the largeft of our own ufual combinations 
of inftruments. Dr. CampbeU witnefTed In Nepal the performance of 
a Hindu drama, the orcheftra attendant on which comprifed upwards 
of fifty muficians playing a great variety of inftruments. 

In ftiort, almoft every nation poflfeflres its own chara£leriftic bands, 
and among many nations are to be found various kinds, each being 
afligned to the occafions for which it is thought moft appropriate. 
Thus, it would be poffible to arrange a feries of illuftrations of concerts 
in ufe in different countries at the prefent day, which would exhibit the 
orcheftra in its different ftages of development, from the moft primitive, 
being formed entirely of the rudeft pulfatile inftruments, to the moft 
refined, in which delicately expreffive ftringed and wind inftruments are 
predominant. 

It will eafily be underftood that the mufical compofer might derive 
efl^ential advantage from an examination of thefe various combinations 
of found-producing means. Berlioz, in his treatife on Inftrumentation, 
evidently entertains the fame opinion, for in defcribing a complete 
orcheftra, as he maintains it ought to be conftituted in order to be 
properly qualified for the production of great Symphonies, and other 
elaborate compofitions, he includes feveral inftruments appertaining to 
Afiatic nations. Moreover, our claffical compofers have occafionally 
with great felicity reforted to the admiflion of foreign inftruments into 
a fcore for the purpofe of ftamping a compofition more forcibly with 
certain charadleriftic features. Furthermore, in cafes where fuch a 
proceeding appeared impradiicable on account of the obftacles which it 
might interpofe in the execution of the mufic, they have not unfrequently 
fucceeded in rendering the peculiarities of foreign bands by means of 
our own ufual inftruments as happily as the nature of thefe would 



136 An EJfay on the 



permit. Interefting examples of this kind are the &mous dance of 
the Scythians in Gluck's ' Iphigenia in Tauris,' and the overture of 
Mozart's * Die Entfiihrung aus dem Serail,* Opera compofers might 
probably derive valuable fuggeftions for dramatic efFeds from an ac- 
quaintance with the great variety of extra-European orcheftras. 

Our art of inftrumentation has in a fhort time undergone modi- 
fications fo confiderable that feveral inftruments to which our grand- 
fathers liflened with rapture, have been expelled from the orcheflra, 
and are fcarcely known to many of our prefent muflcians. Who 
now-a-day plays the viola iTamore^ the viola da gamba^ or certain other 
inftruments which Sebaftian Bach employed in his admirable works ? 
Mozart, not longer than about forty years after Handel had compofed 
the Meffiah, deemed it advifable to add to the inftrumentation of this 
immortal oratorio, becaufe Mozart juftly concluded that if Handel had 
fcored his work forty years later, he would not have failed to turn to 
account the progrefs made in inftrumentation. To a fimilar proceeding 
fome of Gluck's wonderful operas have more recently been fubjeiSled. 
And although fome fmcere admirers of thofe mafters difapprove of thefe 
innovations, either from an amiable reverence for the great claflical 
compofers, or perhaps from a lefs juftifiable fpirit of confervatifm, — the 
majority of our beft muflcians are convinced of the defirablenefs of fuch 
reforms, provided the alterations and additions are made by men who 
are competent to accomplifh the tafk in ftrift agreement with the fpirit 
of the original compofition which they revife. 

It is a curious faft that while travellers generally defcribe the mufical 
bands of foreign nations as being often unpleafantly loud, the nations 
to whom the bands appertain, exprefs very much the fame opinion 
refpefting our inftrumental performances. Nay, what appears ftill 
more remarkable, a reference to the hiftory of our own mufic (hows 
that whenever a compofer adopted a fuller inftrumentation than his 
predecefTors, he was generally fure to incur the cenfure of fincere 
critics. Even Mozart did not efcape being accufed of producing too 
much noife with the orcheftra. Indeed, we pofTefs in our mufical 
literature amufing evidences of the unwarrantable extent to which in 
matters of tafte the power of cuftom is capable of warping the judgment ! 
Scarcely had the mufical tafte become reconciled to the inftrumentation 
of Mozart, Beethoven, and Weber, when Spontini horrified the con- 
fervatives by employing in his operas an unprecedented power of brafs 
inftruments. At the prefent day the outcry againft Spontini's and 
Meyerbeer's loud inftrumentation has been filenced by the monfter 
orcheftras of Berlioz, Wagner, and others. Still, it muft be evident to 
an unbiafTed judge that in no other branch of the art of mufic ^^s been 



Hijicry of Mujical Injiruments. 137 



made greater progrefs during the prefent century than in the conftrudion 
and combination of inftruments. 

A large orcheftra is not neceflarily louder than a fmall one ; for 
the degree of loudnefs produced depends not fo much upon the number 
of the inftruments conftituting the orcheftra, as upon the manner in 
which they are ufed together. A (imultaneous blending of all the 
inftruments is only occafionally required by the compofer who knows 
how to avail himfelf of the variety in quality of found which is at his 
command for the expreffion of different emotions. Beiides, only a few 
inftruments played together may produce greater harfiinefs than when 
fbme others are added. A loud paflage in unifon for ftringed inftru* 
ments alone is likely to found more powerful than would be the cafe 
with the addition of flutes, or other inftruments of a mellow quality of 
found. Even the notorioufly loud brafs inftruments are capable of, and 
are adually in a high degree fuited for expreiSng the moft tender mufical 
conceptions. What lover of muflc has not been enchanted by the foft 
notes of Oberon's magic horn, and by the exquifltely delicate phrafes 
for trumpets and horns occurring in the Adagio of Weber's overture to 
Oberon ! 

It would, however, be erroneous to fuppofe that extraordinarily 
large bands are entirely ai modem contrivance of highly civilized nations. 
There are accounts on record of mufical performances among nations 
of antiquity, from which it is evident that the noife of the inftruments 
can fcarcely have been lefs deafening than any which our monfter bands 
are capable of producing. The Hebrews, for inftance, had at the 
folemn dedication of Solomon's temple a large number of performers, — 
coniifting of the Levites, who were finging as well as playing upon 
various ftringed inftruments and inftruments of percuffion ; while one 
hundred and twenty priefts were blowing trumpets (II. Chron., 
V. 12, 13, 14). Nor are fuch combinations of voices and ftunning 
inftruments uncommon with extra-European nations at the prefent day, 
efpecially when ibme popular feftivity invites to public hilarity and 
exultation. The Negroes in the kingdom of Dahomey, Weftern 
Africa, obferve in the courfe of the year certain prefcribed rites, at fome 
of which the mufical bands employed confift of about fifty trumpeters 
whofe trumpets are made of elephants' tuflcs, and of about the fame 
number of drummers. But as thefe bands perform in the open air, 
they may be lefs an infliction to a refined ear than fmaller ones which 
are fometimes clamorous indoors, not fo far off* as Dahomey. 

It has been thought unadvifable, as occafioning unneceflary repeti- 
tions, to enlarge this effay by detailed accounts of our own inftruments 

M.I. K 



138 An EJfay on Mufical Infiruments. 

in ufe at the prefent day, fince fome deicriptive and hiftorical notices of 
them are given in the Catalogue, where they are required in examining 
the exhibited fpecimens to which they refer. By confulting the Indek 
the reader may eaflly find any fiirther information refpeding the piano- 
forte, harp, violin, flute, oboe, clarinet, and other infiruments at prefent 
in popular ufe. 

Imperfe£t though this efTay may be, it will probably have convinced 
the reader that a reference to the hiflory of the muflc of different 
nations elucidates many fa(^s illuflrative of our own mufical infiruments, 
which to the unprepared obferver mufl appear mifly and impenetrable. 
In truth, it is with this fludy as with any other fcientific purfuit. The 
unaf&fled eye fees only £unt nebulas where with the aid of the telefcope 
bright flars are revealed. 



CATALOGUE. 



K 1 



AFRICAN COUNTRIES. 



HE principal mufical inftniments of the modem 
Egyptians were introduced into Africa by the 
Arabs. Indeed, moft of thefe inftruments are to 
be Ibund wherever the Mohammedan religion has 
been eftabliihed. Befides Egypt, the prefent col- 
__ le£tiDn contains inftniments chiefly from Nubia, 
Sennaar, Kordofan, Eaftern Soudan, and from the regions of the Bahr- 
el-Abiad, or White Nile. Several of thefe fpecimens are in popular ufe 
among the Negro and Kafir tribes in almoft every diftri£t of Alrica. 



1757. '6g. 
IISTRUM. Bronze frame with foiir bars loofely 
y inferted. At the top of the frame a repre- 
^ fentation of a cat. Modern imitation of ancient 
/\ Egyptian. L. of the inftrument y-J in. ; L. of 
the longeft bar 6 J in, ; of the ftiorteft bar 5 J in. 

The name given to the liftrum by the ancient Egyptians vras/e/bejh. 
The inftrument was ufed in religious performances, and occurs not 
unfrequently on the Egyptian monuments depi^ed in the hands of 
females who were " holy women," or prieftefles officiating in the 
temple. The noife produced by Ihaldng the fiftrum was fuppofed to 
drive away evil fpirits, or to counteract their noxious influence. A 
Hmilar inftrument, called /ana/el, is ftill at the prefent day ufed for 
precifely the fame purpofe by the priefts of a Chriftian fed in Abyffinia. 



142 Catalogue of Mufical Injlruments. 

The fiftrum may properly be claiTed with the inftniments of per- 
cuffioii) having evidently been ufed for producing a rhythmical accom- 
paniment to facred fongs. 

689. '6^. 

OUD. Wood, inlaid with ftained woods, mother-of-pearl, 
and bone ; eight tuning pegs. The ftrings are arranged 
in four pairs, each pair being tuned in unifon, and are ufually 
made of lamb's gut Egypt. Modem. L. 3 ft, W. i ft. o^ in. 
^ (Given by His Highnefs the Khedive of Egypt.) 

The Oudy or with the Arab article prefixed to it, eP oud^ was 
brought by the Moors to Spain, where it is ftill known as the laud. 
From Spain it was introduced into other European countries, and 
experienced various modifications. The French called it luth^ the 
Italians liuto^ the Germans laute^ and the Englifh lute. The Oud is 
generally provided with frets made of cords of gut, which are wound 
round the neck at fixed diflances from each other fb as to enfure the 
intervals according to the mufical fcale of the Arabs, which contains 
fnialler intervals than our femitones. 

The Egyptian Oud is ufually mounted with fourteen firings, which 
are tuned in feven unifons, thus : — 




1^ 



*= 



ZX 



-^3- 



TT 



i 



The firings are twanged with a pledrum made of the hard portion 
of an eagle's or vulture's feather, and called rychet-en-nefer. 



688. '6g. 

REBAB. Wood, ornamented with perforated brafs, &c. ; 
two firings. Egypt and Barbary States. Modern. 
L. I ft 7 in. (Given by His Highnefs the Khedive of Egypt.) 

The rebaby an Arab inflrument of the violin clafs, is efpecially ufed 
for accompanying the voice. It was a favourite inflrument of the 
Moors in Spain, where it is fWl occafionally found amongft the country 
people, who call it rabel^ or arrabel. In other European countries it 
was formerly known as rebebe^ reberbe^ rebejbe^ rubebe^ rebec^ or by fome 
fimilar name ; and it underwent feveral modifications in its fhape. The 



African, 143 

Engljfh rtbic, or rebeck^ had gencrall)' three ftrings. Moreover the 
Periians have a three-ftringed rtbab. There are at the prefent day 



Fig. log.— RlBAB. 

feveral kinds of this inftniment in ufe in the Eaft, matcridly^ difiering in 



692. ^6^. 

ARGHOOL. A kind of double reed pipe, rudely orna- 
mented with a defign fcratched upon the furface. Egypt. 
Modern. L. 4 ft. 8-J in. (Given by His Highnefs the Khedive 
of Egypt) 

Each tube contains a iittlc vibrating tongue of cane, 
The arghool is occafionally played by the boatmen on the Nile. 
One of its reeds, which is much longer than the other, fcrves as a 
drone. The Egyptians have three kinds of arghool^ which are diftin- 
guifhed from each other chiefly by their difFerent fixes, and by the 
number of movable pieces of reed conftituting the tubes. 

I561. '71. 

WHISTLE. Plafter, in the fliape of a rudely-formed 
animal. Ufed by the children at Cairo. Similar 
objefts are made in Spain. Egypt. 1870. L. 3^ in., H. 
2-| in. (Given by G. J. Chefter, Efq.) 



144 Catalogue of Mufical Infiruments. 
678. '69. 

TABL Shamee. Small kettle-drum. Egypt. Mcxiern. 
H. 6 in., Diam. 1 ft 2 in. (Given by His Highnefs the 
Khedive of Egypt.) 

The name tabl Jhamee^ fignifying * Syrian drum,' indicates that this 
kind of drum was probably introduced into Egypt from Weftern Alia. 
It is ufually made of tinned copper, with a parchment face. 

The Egyptians ufe the tabl Jhamtt efpecially in bridal proceffions, 
and on (imilar feftive occafions. The performer carries it fufpended 
from his neck, and beats it with two flender fticks. The ha%y aUb 
called tabl tl mufahhir^ is a fmall drum of this kind ufed by the 



Fg. 1119. — Tail Shamu. 

Mulahhir, or crier, who during the nights of Ramadan (the fall 
annually obferved by Che Muflims) recites religious and congratulator)- 
fentences before the houfes of the wealthier people, for which he 
receives gratuities. The bax is alio ufed by the Derviihes in thor 



.African. 145 

religious dances, called * Zikrs.' The drummer holds it in the left 
hand by a little projection in the centre of the back, and beats it with a 
ihort leathern ftrap, or with a ftick. 



NAKRAZAN. Kettle-drums. Egypt. Modern. H. 6in., 
Diam. 9 in, (Given by His Highnefs the Khedive of 
Egypt.) 

« 

The Egyptians have feveral kinds of ketde-drums. The nakk&rah 
(in plural, nakakeer)^ is generally ufed in pairs, efpecially at religious 
proceffions in pilgrimages, and on fimilar occafions. A pair of thefe 
large drums are attached to the fore part of the faddle of a camel, upon 
which the drummer rides. They are made of copper ; and that which 
is placed on the right fide of the performer is fomewhat larger than the 
other. They are beaten with drum-flicks, called kadabbah. The 
nakrazan are of middle fize. The found of the Egyptian ketde-drums, 
although their pitch is to fome degree determinable, much partakes of 
the character of found of a common drum. 



6y6. '6g. 

PAIR of Drums and Stick. The drums made of fkins 
flretched over earthen veflels, which are pointed at the 
bottom, and ornamented with rude defigns in green. Modem. 
Larger drum, L. 1 1 in., Diam. 6f in. Smaller drum, L. 8^ in., 
Diam. 4.^ in. (Given by His Highnefs the Khedive of 
Egypt.) 

There are to be found in Egypt, and other diflrids of North-eailern 
Africa, drums of various forms made of earthenware, and provided with 
an elongation by which they are held. 

670. '69. 

TABL. Drum, formed of fkin flretched over a veflel made 
of clay. Modern. H. 6 in., Diam. iif in. (Given by 
His Highnefs the Khedive of Egypt.) 



146 Catalogue of Mufical Injlruments. 



Rudely-conftruded drums of this (hape are common in diiFerent 
diftrifts of North-eaftern Africa. The name tahl is applied by the 
Arab-Egyptians to the drum in general ; the common Egyptian drum 
is called tahl heledee. 



671. '69. 

TABL. Drum, made of earthenware and fkin. Modern. 
H. 4^ in., Diam. 7f in. (Given by His Highnefs the 
Khedive of Egypt.) 



6^2. '69. 

TABL. Drum, with three holes in its circumference ; inlaid 
withfhell. Modern. H. 8^ in., Diam. 10^ in. (Given 
by His Highnefs the Khedive of Egypt.) 

The native tribes of Eaftern Africa inhabiting diftri^ls fouth of 
Egypt have various kinds of drums, made of baked clay, which are ufed 
by the Negroes as well as by the Arab defcendants. 



^12>^ '69. 

DARABOUKA. Drum Modern. H. e\ in., Diam. 
7 in. (Given by His Highnefs the Khedive of Egypt.) 

The darahouka^ or darahukkeh^ is a drum having a projcftion below, 
which ferves as a handle. There are various kinds of the darahouka. 
The prefent fpecimen is called in AbyfBnia and the neighbouring 
diftridts, kobero. 



675. '69. 

BAZ. In (hape like the kettledrum {tabl fliamee) depifted 
on page 144, but made of wood. Egypt. Modern. 
H. 4^ in., Diam. 8f in. (Given by His Highnefs the Khedive 
of Egypt) 



African. 147 



TABL. Drum formed of a fkin rudely ftretched over a 
hollowed block of wood. Modern. L. i ft. 7J in., 
Diam. i ft of in. (Given by His Highnefs the Khedive of 
Egypt.) 

D/ums of diis defcription are common in different parts of Eaftern 
Africa. 



664. '69. 

TABL. Drum. Modern. L. i ft. 7^ in., Diam. 10 in. 
(Given by His Highnefs the Khedive of Egypt.) 



TABL. Drum. Modern. L. i ft. 7 in., Diam. 9J in. 
(Given by His Highnefs the Khedive of Egypt.) 



691. '69. 

RIKK. Small tambourine, rudely conftrudted of wood and 
fkin ; ten pairs of brafs plates. Modern. Diam. 8 in., 
H. o\ in. (Given by His Highnefs the Khedive of Egypt.) 

The fmall tambourine of the Egyptians is generally covered with 
the (kin of the ** Bayard," a fifli of the genus Silurus, which is alfo 
ufed in the darahouka. The common tambourine of the Egyptians, 
called tar^ is generally about twelve inches in diameter, and its frame is 
ufually inlaid with mother-of-pearl, tortoife-fhell, and ivory, or white 
bone. It has ten pairs of brafs plates, circular in fbape, loofely attached 
to the frame by means of wires, of which each pair has one paiSng 
through the centre. The parchment is of goat's (kin. Different 
(bunds are produced by the performer ftriking the parchment with . his 
fingers in the middle or towards the edge. Similar tambourines are 
known in the diftri(^s fouth of Egypt, and in Soudan. 



148 Catalogue of Mufical Injiruments. 



666. '69. 

KISSAR. Round body of wood and Ikin ; five ftrings. 
Modern. L. i ft. 9^ in. (Given by His Highnefs the 
Khedive of Egypt) 

The kijfar^ or iijfaray is to be found in Nubia, Kordotkn, Abyffinia, 
and fome other diftrifis of Eaftcrn Africa. The Nubian kijfar is tuned 
according to the pentatonic fcale, — i.e., the feries of intervals which is 
reprefented by the black keys of the pianoforte, or by the diatonic fcale 
with the omiflton of the intervals of theyaiirtA mijiveitlh. The tones, 
of the Nubian kiffar are — 



The firings are made of the inteftines of the camel. They are 
vibrated with the liters, and by means of a ple^rum, made of a piece 



10.— No 11 AH Kn>Ai. 



African. 149 



of leather or horn, and faftened with a cord to the inftrument. The 
performer ufes the pledrum and his fingers either alternately, or to- 
gether. The Abyffinians have a ten-ftringed inftrument of this kind, 
called hagana. The Egyptians called the kijfar ** Gytarah harharyeh^* 
which indicates that they confider it the national inftrument of the 
Barabras, or Berbers, who are fuppofed to be defcendants of the original 
inhabitants of Egypt. The kijfar is certainly one of the moft ancient 
ftringed inftruments known. It is reprefented on the ancient Egyptian 
and Aflyrian monuments, and was probably alfo popular among the 
Hebrews. The Greeks had various kinds of this inftrument, more or 
lefs differing in form and fize, and diftinguiihed by different names, fuch 
as kithara^ lyra^ phorminx, &c. 



668. '69. 

KISSAR. Round body of wood and Ikin; five ftrings. 
Modern. L. 2 ft. 5 in. (Given by His Highnefs the 
Khedive of Egypt. ) 

66g. '6g. 

KISSAR. Round body of wood and flcin ; five ftrings. 
Modern. L. 2 ft. 6 in. (Given by His Highnefs the 
Khedive of Egypt.) 

« 

66y. '6g. 

KISSAR. The body fquare-ftiaped ; five ftrings. Modern. 
L. I ft. 8^ in. (Given by His Highnefs the Khedive 
of Egypt) 

The kijar with a Iquare^fliaped body is lefs common than that with 
a round body. 

690. '69. 

NANGA. Negro harp, of the Niam-Niams, a tribe in 
the vicinity of the Bahr-el- Abiad. The body is of 
hollowed wood covered with flcin, and the wooden neck termi- 



150 Catalogue of Mufical Inflruments. 

nates in a carved head with two horns. Five ftrings of gut, 
tuning pegs of wood, and two found-holes in the (kin covering 
the body. L. meafured perpendicularly, 3 ft. 6 in. (Given 
by His Highnefs the Khedive of Egypt.) 



In fome diftri£ts of Eaftcrn Africa this inllrumem is called rahahah. 

The ftrings are made of the inteftines of the camel, or of the fmews 
of the legs of the giraffe. The latter kind of ftrings is efpecially valued 
by the Arab fettlers in Eaftcrn Africa. 

The ancient Egyptians had a fmall kind of harp which, to judge ftom 
the reprefentations, and from the remains of a fpecimen prefcrved 
among the Egyptian antiquities in 'the Britilh Mufeum, was in con- 
ftruftion, ftiape, and fize, identical with the »a»ga. The Egyptian 
performer carried it, however, in a peculiar and rather inconvenient 
manner on his (houlder ; and the negro, fitting down, holds it in his lap 
with the neck upwards. 



African. 151 

Turning to Weftern Africa, we there, likewife, meet with fome 
curious inftruments of the* harp kind. The omhiy a rude harp of the 
Bakalai, one of the numerous negro tribes near the equator, is made of 
thin pieces of a refbnant wood, covered with leather prepared from 
the ear of an elephant, or with fnake, gazelle, or goat fkin. It has 
only eight firings, cut from the dried root of fome tree. The houlou 
of the negroes in Senegambia is conftruded of fomewhat larger dimen- 
fions, has ten firings and long tuning pegs of a peculiar fhape. Mungo 
Park enumerates, among the popular inflruments which he faw in Sene* 
gambia, the e-korroy ^^ a large harp with eighteen firings," and the 
Jimbingy ** a fmall harp with feven firings." Again, a harp with feven 
firings, called banoy is mentioned as an inflrument of the Vei negroes 
by the miffionary S. W. Koelle (* Outlines of a Grammar of the Vei 
Language, 'together with a Vei-Englifh Vocabulary *). The Vei 
negroes dwell north of Liberia in Guinea. The name banioy given in 
Senegambia to an inflrument of the guitar kind, may, perhaps, be iden- 
tical with the Vei bana^ and alfo with the banjo^ which appears to be 
the Senegambian bania imported by the negro flaves into America, 



^74. 7^- 

LOKANGA. Wood; grotefquely carved, painted, and 
decorated with feathers. The under part of the body 
coated with reeds (.?), held together by lattice- work. Four- 
flringed. Madagafcar* 19th century. L. 3 ft. i in., W. 
9I in. (Bought, i/. ioj.) 

The Rev. William Ellis (* Madagafcar Revifited,' London, 1867), 
remarks : ^^ I faw an aged minflrel fitting under a funny bank accom- 
panying a Malagafy fong with one of the befl-toned lokangas I had 
heard I have often feen more than a hundred men drag- 
ging a fingle tree pafl my houfe keeping time with the bkanga played 
on the way before them, while a young chief has every now and then 
jumped upon the log, and by fhouts and gefliculations urged them on. 
The lokanga is a kind of native guitar.' 



99 



NEGRO Trumpet. Made of the horn of an animal. 
Modern. L. meafured in a flraight line, i ft. 5f in. 
(Given by His Highnefs the Khedive of Egypt.) 



152 Catalogue of Mujical Injiruments. 

Trumpets made of the horn of the antelope, gazelle, and of a fmall 
(pedes of buf&lo, are common in different parts of Africa. The larger 
inftruments of this kind have a far-carrying found, and are ufed in the 
defert to give the alarm among friendly tribes, in cafe of an attack. 
Small horns of the antelope, or the gazelle, are carried fufpended to a 
firing round the neck, and are blown by the rain*makers to attra<^ or 
drive away the clouds, at the option of thefe men. Captain Speke met 
near the fburces of the Nile with a renowned rain-maker who, when- 
ever his attempts to' bring down the defired rain proved unfuccefsflil, 
told the people that the caufe of the delay was their having given him 
too few prefents. Thus the fhrewd wizard continued extorting and 
trumpeting until the rain fet in and flayed his exa<^ions. 



683. '6g 

NEGRO Trumpet Made of the horn of an animal. 
Modern. L. 2 ft. (Given by His Highnefs the Khe- 
dive of Egypt.) 

684. '6g. 

NEGRO Trumpet. Made of the horn of an animal ; the 
mouth-hole is at the fide. Modern. L. i ft. i\ in. 
(Given by His Highnefs the Khedive of Egypt.) 



685. '6g. 

NEGRO Trumpet. Made of the horn of an animal. 
Modern. L. i ft. 4 in. (Given by His Highnefs the 
Khedive of Egypt.) 



686. '69. 

NEGRO Trumpet. Made of the horn of an animal. 
Modern. L. i ft. 4^ in. (Given by His Highnefs the 
Khedive of Egypt.) 



African. 



153 



687. '69. 

NEGRO Trumpet. Made of the horn of an animal. 
Modern. L. 2 ft. 8 in. (Given by His Highnefs the 
Khedive of Egypt.) 

A trumpet of this defcription is called in Bornu, magum ; in Tim- 
bu£too tesinfak ; in Upper Guinea, buro ; in Abyffinia, gand^ and ghenta. 
A common name for a trumpet in AbyfSnia, and neighbouring diftridls, 
is malakat. 



679. '69. 



NEGRO Trumpet. Ivory. Modern. L. i ft. y^ 
(Given by His Highnefs the Khedive of Egypt.) 



i in. 




u. c. 



Fig. 112. — Negro Ivory Trumpkt. 

L 



154 Catalogue of Mujical Injiruments. 

This is a popular inftrument in Senegambia and Guinea as well as 
in Central and Eaftern Africa. The tu(k of the elephant is carefully 
hollowed, and a mouth-hole is cut in the inner fide towards the narrow 
end. Some of thefe trumpets are of enormous fize, and of great 
power of found. The negroes in Upper Guinea not unfrequently 
colour the ivory with a matter faid to be a preparation of the blood of 
fowls, or fheep. Alfo other modes of embellifhing this trumpet are 
reforted to, fuch as carving, affixing bones of flain enemies, &c. The 
ivory trumpet is known by different names. In Angola it is called 
pongay or apunga ; in Congo, embuchi ; and by the Ibos, a negro tribe 
in Upper Guinea, oukpwe. In Afhantee, and fome other diftri£ls of 
North-weftern Africa, every chief has his trumpeter, who announces 
the approach of his lord by a fpecial fignal, which has a meaning well- 
known to the people. For inftance, the fignal of one chief means *' I 
am a great king's fon ; " that of another, " No one dares trouble me," 
and fo on. When Bowdich vifited Afhantee, the flourifh blown by 
the king's trumpeters was interpreted to him as proclaiming the fentence 
** I pafs all kings in the world." 



680. '69. 

NEGRO Trumpet. Ivory. From the regions of the 
White Nile. Modern. L. (meafured from end to end) 
5 ft. o| in. (Given by His Highnefe the Khedive of Egypt.) 

The large ivory trumpet is ufed by the Niam-Niams, and other 
negro tribes, for tranfmitting fignals in time of war. 

681. '6i). 

NEGRO Trumpet Made of the tulk of an animal, and 
covered with fkin. Modern. L. i ft. 1 1 in. (Given 
by His Highnefs the Khedive of Egypt) 

1080. '68. 

« 

MARIMBA, or Balafo. fVeft Coaft of Africa. Modern. 
L. 3 ft. 2 in. Greateft W. i ft. 6^ in. Smalleft W. 
I ft i^ in. Depth 6 in. With it are two fticks with knobs 



African, 155 

of caoutchouc, relembling drumftlcks. L. of the fticks 
1 ft. o^ in. The performer carries the inftniment over his 
fhoulders by means of a ftrip of cloth. The gourds fufpended 
under the flabs ferve as a found-board. (Given by Lieutenant 
McEuen, R.N.) 



F]g. 113.— MjkUMiA. Airica. 

The tones produced by ftriking the wooden flabs are — 



Major Laing, in defcribing the ceremonies of lamentation which he 
witnefled the negroes of Kooranko, eaft of Sierra Leone, obferving on 
the death of a chief, and in which the people performed vocal and 
inftrumental mufic during a whole night, fays that at daybreak he was 
awakened by " the deep tones of a large Balafo, which refounded through 
the flill morning air in a manner truly folemn." 



156 Catalogue of Mujtcal Injlruments. 



MARIMBA. South-eaftern Africa. Modern. L. 3 ft. 6 in., 
B. about I ft. 8 in. (Given by Captain J. Stuart.) 
Depofited in the Educational Department 

The inftrument has twelve (labs of a ibnorous wood, beneath 
which are fattened, by means of a dark-coloured cement, twelve 
gourds, to increafe the (bund. In each gourd are two holes, one of 
which is at the top, and the other at the fide. The latter is covered 
with a delicate film, to promote the fonoroufnefs. Several Afi-ican 
travellers have noticed this curious acouftic contrivance. Du Chaillu 
fays that the film confifts of the (kin of a fpider ; Livingftone mentions 
fpiders' web being applied to inftruments of this kind ufed by certain 
native tribes in Southern Africa. The marimba is a favourite inftru- 
ment of the Negroes as well as of the Kafirs. 



ASIATIC COUNTRIES. 

•J Afia Minor, and other diftrifls of Weftern Afia, we find 
the Arab inftruments, which are moftlj derived originally 
from Pcrfia. The Hindus poflefs feveral of thefe, bcfides 
many which they already had before the Arab conquefts. 
The fiumnefe and Siamcle have fomc peculiar inftruments 
which refcmble thofe popular among the natives of the 
Indian Archipelago, The Chinefe and Japanefe inftru- 
ments bear a remarkable refemblance to each other, not only in 
conftru^ion, but in feveral inftances alio in name. 




936. '69. 
I JUK. A kind of guitar with five firings of thin 
wire. Wood, inlaid with coloured woods, gold, 
and ivory mofaics, the furface of the body con- 
lifting of a thin parchment refembhng bladder. 
PerJia{Shiraz). Modern. L. 3 ft, W. 8 in. (Bought, Paris 
Exhibition, 1867, 9/. I2J.) 

This inftrument is alfo called ptar. 



939- 73- 

KEMANGEH. Three-ftringed ; played with a bow. 
With defigns in gold on a green ground. Perfia. 
About 1 800. L. 3 ft. \ in., Diam. 8 in. (Given by Sir F. 
Gore Oufeley.) 



158 Catalogue of Mujical Injiruments. 



The Perfian kemangeh (or kamooncheh) is defcribed by Sir William 
Oufeley (' Travels in various Countries of the Eaft, more particularly 
Perfia/ London, 18 19) as follows : — ^^ The kemangeh^ found in almoft 
every town, afforded me frequent entertainment. That which I firft 
faw was in the hands of Mohammed Carabaghi, a poor fellow who 
fometimes vifited our camp. His kemangeh^ made at Shiraz, was of tut 
or mulberry-tree wood -, the body, about eight inches in diameter, 
globular, except at the upper part, over which was ftretched and fixed 
by glue a covering of parchment. It had three firings of twifled iheep- 
gut, and a bridge placed obliquely. A flraight piece of iron flrength- 
ened the whole inflrument from the knob below through the neck to 
the hollow which received the three pegs. It was carried hanging from 
the fhoulder by a leathern flrap. Its length was nearly three feet from 
the wooden ball at the top to the iron knob or button which refled 
on the ground. The bow was a mere fwitch, about two feet and a 
half long, to which was faflened at one end fbme black horfehair ; at 
the other end this hair was connedled, by a brafs ring, with a piece of 
leather feven or eight inches long. The ring was managed with the 
fecond and third finger of the performer's right hand, and by its means 
he contra6ted or relaxed the bow, which was occafionally rubbed on a 
bit of wax or rofin fluck above the pegs. The performer generally 

combines his voice with the tones of this inflrument The 

kemangeh is of various materials. I have feen one, of which the body 
was merely a hollow gourd j and another, of which every part was 
richly inlaid and ornamented. ^ Some,' fays Abdalcader [the author 
of an old Treatife on Perfian mufic, written in the yfear 14 18], ' form 
the body of the kemangeh from the fhell of a cocoa-nut, fixing on it 
hair-firings ; but many, from wood, over which they faflen filken 
firings.' By another writer, the tut or mulberry wood is recommended 
as befl adapted to the filken firings, from a fuppofed fympathy between 
that tree and the produce of thofe infe<5ls which feed on its leaves ; it 
is, however, in many refpe£ts the fittefl, and therefore mofl generally 
ufed for the body of the kemangeh. Sometimes the body is made of 
the girdu or walnut-tree wood." 



940. 7s. 

KEMANGEH. Three-flringed. Played with a bow. 
With defigns in gold on a green ground. Parchment 
belly. Perjta. About 1800. L. 2 ft. 6f in., Diam. 7 J in. 
(Given by Sir F. Gore Oufeley.) 



AJiatic. 159 

CHABBABEH. A kind of flageolet, with feven finger- 
holes above and one below. Black wood, turned. Perjia. 
Modem. L. i ft. if in. (Bought, Paris Exhibition, 1867, 

I2J.) 

The Perfians and Arabs have about ten kinds of flutes, called nay^ 
/.^•, '' a reed," becaufe they were originally made of reed ; and they 
have feveral inftruments of the flageolet fpecies, called fouffarah. 



1606. '7:2. 

VINA. A black wooden bar, with wire firings, fupported 
on movable bridges. Two empty gourds aflixed under 
the bar. India {Bombay). L. 4 ft. 2 in., H. i ft. 5 in. 
(Bought from the Annual International Exhibition, 1872, 4/.) 

Moft of the bridges are miffing, likewife feme of the tuning pegs, 
of which there were originally four for the firings paffing over the 
bridges, and three for the firings paffing by the fide of the finger- 
board. 

Some account of the vina has been given in the preceding efTay on 
the hiflory of mufical inflruments, p. 56. 

There are feveral fpecimens of the vina popular in different diflrifts 
of Hinduflan, fuch as the vina of Delhi, the vina of Benares, &c. 
Some of thefe bear but litde refemblance with the prefent fpecies, which 
is fuppofed to be the oldefl, and is certainly the mofl fimple in con- 
flru<^ion. Although by way of diftin£lion defignated as the vina of 
Bengal, it is popular all over India. AUufion is made to it in the ancient 
claffical literature of the Hindus ; there are old delineations of it extant 
in painting and fculpture ; and popular tradition affigns to it a divine 
origin. It is alfo called heen^ but the latter name applies more properly 
to the vina of Benares, which appears to be an oflFspring of, and an 
improvement upon the prefent one. 

The vina is made of various fizes, and is provided with a greater or 
fmaller number of frets or bridges. Mofl commonly it is about three 
feet and a half in length, and has nineteen frets made of brafs. Two 
large gourds, meafuring above twelve inches in diameter, are appended 
to the ir.flrument, each about ten inches diflant from either end. They 



1 6o Catalogue of Mufical Injiruments. 



are cut open at the bottom, the hole being round and about five inches 
in diameter. The finger-board is about two inches wide. The firings, 
feven in number, are of thin wire, and are flretched by means of feven 
large tuning pegs fituated towards the upper end of the infirument. 
Only four of the firings run over the finger-board. Thefe are of 
brafs wire. The other firings confifl of one of brafs wire, which is on 
the left fide of the finger-board ; and two of fteel wire, which are on 
the right fide of the finger-board. The two lafl mentioned are placed 
clofe together, and are tuned in odaves. The firings which run at 
the fide of the finger-board cannot be ihortened by the player, as 
they are beyond the frets. The firings are tuned in the following 
intervals : — 

On the Right Side. On the Fingee-board. On the Left Side. 




:£X 



it^^^-rr'^- f.dt^^^ 



The frets are about an inch high. They are faflened with wax, and 
the performer alters their pofition whenever he wifhes to play, in another 
mode or fcale than that according to which he finds them regulated. 
In playing, the vina is held obliquely acrofs the breafl, with one of the 
gourds over the left ihoulder and the other under the right arm, as 
fhown in the illuflration fig. 46. The frets are flopped with the left 
hand, and the firfl and fecond fingers principally are ufed. Of the four 
firings running over the finger-board, only the firfl and fecond (count- 
ing from the right) are, as a general rule, thus treated ; the third and 
fourth being feldom founded otherwife than as an open firing. The 
performer occafionally ufes the little finger of his left hand to flrike the 
brafs firing — 



.d. 



fituated at the left fide of the finger-board. He rarely makes ufe of the 
third finger of his left hand for flopping the frets. However, a fkilful 
player can fhift his hand up and down the finger-board with great 
dexterity. 

The right hand is ufed for twanging the firings. For this purpofe 
the firfl and fecond fingers of the performer's right hand are provided 
each with a little ple(5lrum, made of wire, or of the large fcales of a fifh, 
and faflened on with fprings, or tied down with thread ; which is put on 
the end of the finger like a thimble. The two fingers fupplied with 
ple6lra flrike the firings which are on the finger-board ; the third finger 
is not ufed at all \ the little finger flrikes the two firings on the right 
fide of the finger-board. 



AJiatic. 1 6 1 



The order of intervals in which the feven firings of the vina are 
tuned is too peculiar to be left unnoticed. It will be obferved that fix 
of the open ftrings produce together the common chord of A-major — 



^^ 



The Hindus are generally fuppofed to be devoid of fufceptibility for 
harmony in mufic. But the performers on the vtna muft often have 
been impreflfed with this concord, and they muft have appreciated its 
efFe<^, otherwife they would hardly have adopted it on their favourite 
inftrument. 

Although, as far as may be gathered from an examination of the 
fpecimens of the vina fent to England, it is difficult to endorfe the ex- 
preffions of admiration for the inftrument by fbme writers on Hindu 
mufic, it is only proper they (hould not be entirely ignored here. 
Captain Auguftus Willard (* A Treatife on the Mufic of Hindooftan,' 
Calcutta, 1834, p. 85) remarks : — "It is an inftrument of the greateft 
capacity and power, and a really fuperior vina in the hands of an expert 
performer is perhaps little inferior to a fine-toned pianoforte ; and indeed 
for Hindooftanee mufic the beft devifed, and calculated to be adapted 
to all pradical modifications. Although the vina has a finger board 
and frets, it is not ftridlly confined in its intonation, as a guitar or piano- 
forte or an organ is, for it is fo delicate an inftrument that the flighteft 
difference in the prefTure of the finger, or of its diftance fi'om the frets, 
will caufe a fenfible variation in the tone, of which a good performer 
avails himfelf. Hence refults that beautiful nicety of juft intonation in 
every mode, which charms the mufical ear." Again, Colonel Meadows 
Taylor (' Proceedings of the Royal Irifh Academy,' Dublin, 1864, 
p. 1 14) calls the vina " an inftrument of much power and fweetnefs," 
and remarks : — ** To hear fo as to underftand any really claffical Hindu 
mufic, it fhould be played upon this inftrument ; and I have occafionally 
met with fbme very learned and accomplifhed performers, principally 
from My fore and the fouth of India." 



I. '68. 

TAMBOUR A. The body made of a gourd ; four tuning 
pegs. India. Modern. L. 4 ft 2^ in., W. 1 ft. i^ in. 
(Given by Mr. W. Carpenter.) 



1 6 2 Catalogue of Mufical Injiruments. 

The tamboura or tanbour is to be found in Periia, Afiadc Turkey, and 
Egypt, as well as in Hinduftan. Its firings are of wire, and are vibrated 
by means of a pledlrum made of tortoifefhell, or of a vulture's feather, 
or fome other fuitable fubftance. Its neck is very long, and its body is 
often beautifully ornamented. The Hindu tamboura is generally formed 
of a large gourd, which is lacquered, and has tafleful defigns in gold 
and rich colours. It is difplayed in the rooms of the wealthier clafTes. 

The tamboura was known to the Aflyrians and Egyptians about 
three thoufand years ago. The Egyptians called it nofre^ — a name 
which through the language of the Copts has been afcertained to be 
identical with nebeL The Hebrews had evidently feveral fpecies of 
nebel ; for one fpecies is diflinguifhed in the Biblical records by the 
name of nebel afor^ implying a ten-flringed inflrument. However, it 
would be hazardous to afTume that the nebel mufl have been a tamboura 
becaufe of the identity of the name nebel and nofre. 



1614. 'yz. 

JANTAR. A rude ftringed inflrument, confifling of a 
wooden frame fitted on an empty gourd. Two tuning- 
pegs. Three frets, rudely cut, near the upper end of the neck. 
India {Bombay). L. i ft. ii^^in., H. 8 in. (Bought from 
the Annual International Exhibition, 1872, 5J.) 

The jantar is identical with the tzetze of Zanzibar and the herrauou 
of Madagafcar, but it has two firings, while the txetze and herrauou are 
one-flringed. 



16^1. 'jz. 

EKULTAR A. Bamboo fhaft fitted into an empty gourd. 
One-flringed. India {Bombay). L. 3 f t. 6 in., Diam. 
of gourd, 10^ in. (Bought from the Annual International 
Exhibition, 1872^ 10s.) 

Ufed by wandering beggars called waghrees^ who, begging their bread 
from door to door, invoke bleffings on the head of the houfe, and 
accompany their words with a touch of the firing. 



AJiatic. 163 

TOONTOONEE. Wooden veffel, bucket-fhaped, and 
painted, to which is fitted a tube of wood. One-ftringed. 
India {Madras), H. 2 ft. 4^ in., Diam. of veffel, 7^ in. 
(Bought from the Annual International Exhibition, 1872, 

lOJ.) 

The toontoonetj an inftrument peculiar to the Hindus, is ufed by the 
mendicants and common ballad Angers in the Deccan, who accompany 
their recitations with the fingle tone which only it is capable of pro- 
ducing. They twang the folitary firing of thin fleel wire with which it 
is fining with the finger or with a pledlrum, being a quiil, or a piece of 
bone or ivory. The body of the toontoonee is of wood, with the excep- 
tion of the bottom, which is of prepared fkin. The top of the body 
is open. The neck is either a flick or a wooden tube, having a 
tuning-peg at the upper end. The firing runs fi*om the tuning-peg 
through the body, or cylinder, as it may more properly be called, 
through a hole in the middle of the bottom, under which it is &flened 
by means of a fmall piece of cloth or leather, which prevents its being 
drawn back through the hole when the tuning-peg is turned for the 
purpofe of tightening the firing. The Hindu ballad-finger or beggar, 
as the cafe may be, feflens the toontoonee before his breafl, with the piece 
of thick and rough cord which is generally affixed to the cylinder, and 
which at the fame time ferves to attach the flick conflituting the neck 
to the lower portion of the Inflrument. He flrikes the firing rapidly 
to obtain as much as poffible a fuflained tone. This tone ferves as the 
fundamental note or the Tonic to the tune or recitation of the finger. 
By means of the tuning-peg he can, of courfe, eafily fcrew it to any 
pitch convenient for his vocal efFufions. The toontoonee exhibits an 
acouilic phenomenon, which although it may be obferved on feveral 
other mufical inflruments, appears on this one efpecially remarkable. 
On the firing being vibrated, and the inflrument waved in different 
dire£lionst be^re the hearer, the pitch of found is lowered or raifed 
according to the more or lefs degree in which the open part of the 
cylinder is turned towards him, and the vibration of the air in it is 
confequently interfered with. It does not, however, appear that the 
Hindu muficians make ufe of this peculiarity of the toontoonee^ and it 
could hardly be of interefl in an xilhetic point of view. But the 
fbnorous and agreeable quality of found produced by means of the 
firing vibrating the column of air in the cylinder with its parchment 



164 Catalogue of Mujical Injlruments. 



bottom might fuggeft the conftru£tion of a fuperior inftrument with a 
number of firings manufa£tured on the fame principle as the toontoonee, 

KEMANGEH (or Kamancha). The body of wood, ribbed 
and collared with bone inlaid in black ; the belly 
covered with fkin. Three catgut firings and feven fympathetic 
wire ftrings. India {Kaflimeer). L. 3 ft. 5^ in., Diam. 10 in. 
(Bought from the Annual International Exhibition, 1872, 

l/. lOJ.) 

The bow belonging to it is miffing. 

1624. 'y%. 

CHIKARAH. Stringed inftrument played with a bow. 
Wood ; the belly covered with fkin. Three catgut 
ftrings and nine fympathetic wire ftrings beneath them. India 
{Oudh). L. of inftrument, i ft. 9 in., L. of bow, i ft. 8f in. 
(Bought from the Annual International Exhibition, 1872, i/.) 

397- '71- 

SARINDA. Bengalefe violin. Wood ; the furface carved 
with a defign, and the upper part terminating in a rudely- 
formed bird. Three ftrings. India. 1 8th century. L. 24! in., 
W. 8| in. (Bought, 4/.) 

937- ^7S' 

SARINDA. Bengalefe violin. India. L. 2 ft. 5 in., 
DIam. 5 in. (Given by Sir F. Gore Oufeley.) 

1609. '72. 

ALGOOJA. Flageolet. Brown wood. India {Tanjore). 
L. 8 J in. (Bought from the Annual International 
Exhibition, 1872, is. 6d.) 



Afiatic. 165 

The Hindus have a variety of wooden pipes conftru£led like our 
flageolet, fome of which have only four finger-holes placed towards the 
further end. A fmall fpecies, the hanfee or banfulee^ is coniidered the 
fevourite inftrument of the god Kriflina, who is often reprefented play- 
ing it. J. Tod (^ Annals and Antiquities of Rajaft'han,' London, 
1829, vol. i. p. 538) remarks : " As Muralidhara, or * The Flute- 
holder,' Kaniya, is the god of mufic, and in giving him the fliepherd's 
reed inftead of the vinay or lyre, we may conjecture that the Ample 
bamboo {bhans) which formed the firft flute {bhanjli) was in ufe before 
the chataraj the Grecian kithara, the firft invented lyre of Apollo." 
Kriihna is often reprefented playing upon a flute with a mouth-hole at 
the fide like the German flute. This appears to be an innovation 
adopted by the artifts. The flute of Krifhna was blown at the end, 
probably originally without any plug. 

1613. '7:}. 

BANSEE, alfo called Banfree. Flute. Wood painted with 
quatrefoil ornament in various colours. India i^Bom^ 
bay), L. i ft. if in. (Bought from the Annual International 
Exhibition, 1872, is.) 

The banfee is ufed in many of the Hindu ceremonies. Bait. Solvyns 
(*The Coftume of Hinduftan,' London, 1804) fays that it is played 
efpecially at the feaft of Nila-Pooja, *' when the bigots at that ceremony 
run iharp pointed iron rods through their tongues, and through the 
mufcular part of their breaft, through the back, the arm, the (kin of 
the forehead, &c., and when they are dancing with ftretched cords 
paflTed through the integuments of the fides in the manner of ietons.'' 
In Ceylon, wild elephants when captured are tamed by means of the 
banfee. Sir J. Emerfon Tennent (*The Wild Elephant,* London, 
1867, p. 141) remarks : '*The mellow notes of a Kandyan ivory flute, 
which was played at a diftance, had a ftriking efFe£t upon one or more 
of them ; they turned their heads in the direction from which the mufic 
came, expanded their broad ears, and were evidently foothed by the 
plaintive founds . . . On looking to the graphic defcription which 
is given by Aelian of the exploits which he witnefl!ed as performed by 
the elephants exhibited at Rome, it is remarkable how very large a fhare 
of their training appears to have been afcribed to the employment of 
mufic. Phile, in the account which he has given of the elephant's fond- 
nefs for mufic, would almoft feem to have verfified the profe narrative 
of Aelian." 



1 6 6 Catalogue of Mujical Infiruments. 



POONGL A fpherical gourd with a horn mouth-piece, 
and with two tubes of bamboo. India (Madras). L. 
I ft. 5 in. Diam. of gourd 4^ in. (Bought from the Annual 
International Exhibition, 1872, 5/.) 

The poongiy al(b called toomerie^ magoudiy and papanafem-magoudi^ 
confifts of a hollowed gourd into which two pipes are inferted and tightly 
faftened by means of wax or fome black refinous fubftance. Infide 
the gourd are two vibrating neds faftened to the ends of the two pipes. 
Thefe reeds are made by incifions into two fmaU tubes, exadlly in the 
fame way in which the vibrating tongues of the Arabian arghool are cut. 
To keep the vibrating tongues (lighdy raifed, one or two hairs are 
drawn under them. The performer blows into the (ingle tube which 
is oppoiite to the tubes with finger-holes. One of the tubes has 
generally feven open finger-holes ; on the other, which is a drone, 
moft of the finger-holes are generally flopped with wax. The holes 
ferve for altering the pitch of the drone if required. As a rule, the 
drone is in unifon with the tone emitted by the tube with open finger- 
holes if all are uncovered. The poongi is capable of producing about 
nine different tones. Simple plaintive airs are played upon it. The 
inftrument is never ufed in combination with others, except with the 
drum ; in faS, it belongs almoft exclufively to the Sampuris or (hake 
charmers, and to the profeffional jugglers and acrobats of Hinduftan. 

Sir William Oufeley (* Oriental CoUedions,' London, 1797) ^^^1^ 
the poongi " Toomerie," and fays that by the latter name it is commonly 
known in the Deccan, where it is not unfrequently conftrufted of a 
Cuddos nut, inftead of a gourd. It would, however, appear that the 
name toomerie is ufually given to a fpecies of poongi which is founded 
by the breath through one of the noftrils inftead of the mouth. In 
Hinduftan the ufe of the nofe flute originated in the religious do<Slrine 
of the Brahmins that a perfon of fuperior cafte is defiled by touching 
with his mouth anything which has been touched by the mouth of 
an inferior. But is it really the cafe that ferpents can be enticed by 
the found of the poongi? The ftatements of feveral obfervers, who 
may be relied upon, leave hardly any doubt about it. The fad appears 
all the more inexplicable fince the peculiar quality of the found of the 
poongi is by no means enticing ; perhaps the ferpents miftake it for the 
quacking of ducklings for which they may have a tafte. 

Colonel Meadows Taylor (' Proceedings of the Royal Irifh Academy,' 
vol. ix., Dublin, 1865) %s : " By the fnake charmers a few notes 



AJiatic. 167 



only are played, which feemed to have the efFe<5l of roufing the fnakes 
to be exhibited, ufually Cobra di CapeUos, to a£tion ; and as the 
reptiles raife themfelves on their tails, expand their hoods, and wave 
themfelves to and fro, the player becomes more excited, while the 
motion of the (hakes is accelerated by the rapidity of the mufic. So alfo 
in feats of jugglery or Height of hand, the poongi^ accompanied by a 
finall drum, feems to affift the performer, efpecially when throwing 
knives or balls into the air, catching them in fuccef&on, and throwing 
them up again. I think there is no doubt that the tones of this 
inftriiment have an effeft upon all fnakes, efpecially cobras, though this 
is denied by many. As an inftance of this, I may mention that one very 
large cobra, which frequented my garden at Ellichpoor, and of which 
everyone was in dread, was caught by ibme profei&onal ihake-charmers 
in my prefence by means of the poongi. It was played at firft very 
foftly before the aloe bufh, underneath which the fnake lived in a hole ; 
gradually the performer increafed the tone and time of his playing, and 
as the (hake (bowed its head he retreated gently till it was fairly outfide, 
and ereded itfelf in a defiant manner. At that moment another man 
ftepped dexteroufly behind, and while the (hake's attention was ab(brbed 
by the player, threw a heavy blanket upon it, feizing it by the head 
under the jaws. The head was then pinned down by a forked ftick, 
and the fangs and teeth extra£led by (Irong pincers. The fnake was 
then turned loofe, apparently completed cowed and exhaufted, and 
finally transferred to a ba(ket for education as a performer. There was 
no miftake as to the identity of the reptile, for a portion of its tail had 
been (hot off in an attempt to deftroy it. The fame men afterwards 
drew fnakes from the thatch of my houfe, all of which feem to obey the 
^(cination of the poongi,** 

The fufceptibility of fnakes for mufical founds appears all the more 
(ingular confidering that they have no ears, at leaft no external auditory 
organ. But they have fome internal ftru£lure ferving for the purpofe of 
hearing. Such an car does not indicate the enjoyment of an acute fenfe of 
hearing. Perhaps, if it were otherwife, fnakes would not be fafcinated 
by the found of the poongi. 



ZOURNA. A kind of oboe. Painted wood, with feven 
finger-holes above, and one below. The zourna has 
ufually a mouthpiece, confifting of a brafs tube, on which a reed 



1 6 8 Catalogue of Mufical Injiruments. 

is ftuck. India. Modern. L. lof in., Diam. 3 in. (Bought, 
Exhibition of 185 1, 5J.) 

1622. '72. 

TOOMERIE Nagaflaran. Dark wood ; brafs mounted 
Twelve finger-holes. India {Madras), L. i ft. 8^ in., 
Diam. of bell, jf in. (Bought from the Annual International 
Exhibition, 1872, 15 J.) 

In no other country are inftruments of the oboe &mily fb numerous 
as in Hinduftan. They are diftinguiflied from each other by different 
names, fuch as xmrna {or furnd*'e\ Jhena {ox Jhdna-i)^ ottu^ nagajfaran^ 
mukhdy mukhavinai^ &c. Moft of thefe varieties, popular in different 
parts of Hinduftan, are diftinguiflied from each other chiefly by their 
fize, and the number of their finger-holes. On the toomerie nagajfaran 
eight finger-holes are placed in a row, and two on either fide of them. 

1623. 7^- 

HANUMUNTA Ottu. Hard wooden tube; partly 
covered with leather ; the bell of brafs, ornamented 
with a ring of carved cobras. India {Madras). L. 2 ft, \ in., 
Diam. of bell 3^ in. (Bought from the Annual International 
Exhibition, 1872, i/.) 

The hanumunta ottuy a Hindu oboe, refembling the zournay has but 
two finger-holes placed oppofite to each other near the lower end of 
the tube. Thefe holes are generally flopped with plugs of cotton, fo 
that the inftrument produces only a fingle tone, which, however, may 
be altered in pitch by removing the plugs. The Hindus have different 
kinds of the ottUy which are ufed as drones, called holar cha foor^ in com- 
bination with other inftruments of the oboe &mily. The drone being 
fuftained without intermiilion has the effe£l of the drone of a bagpipe. 
The ottu can be tuned to any key which the leading inftruments require 
by altering the pofition of the mouthpiece or reed. 

1617. 'yz. 

PANCHAMA Ottu. Brafs; gadroons on bell. India 
{Madras). L. 2 ft. i^ ia, Diam. of bell 3^ in. 
(Bought from the Annual International Exhibition, 1872, lis.) 



AJiatic. 169 

The panchama ottu is a fmall ftraight trumpet entirely of one piece. 
Precifely the fame inftrument, but of a large fize, is the kurnoy popular 
with the Hindus. 

O^INGEE. An inftrument of the trumpet kind. Made 
><I/ from a twifted goat's horn. India {Oudh). L. 8 in. 

(Given by the Indian Department of the Annual International 

Exhibition, 1872.) 

This inftrument is ufed by Hindu Fakirs, Mahommedan monks 
and hermits. The Jingee of Nepaul is made entirely of copper, and is 
compofed of four pieces, which when put together give it the fhape 
of a cow's horn. Moreover, a brafs horn called feeng is univerfal 
throughout Hinduftan, and is eipecially ufed by the lower caftes of 
people. Not only in the towns, but in every village of Central and 
Southern India it is the function of the watchmen to blow the feeng at 
funfet, and again during the night when they go their ftated rounds. 

1619. '7^. 

TARAI. Trumpet. Brafs. India {Madras). L. 
9 ft. 3^ in., Diam. of bell 4^ in. (Bought from the 
Annual International Exhibition, 1872, 2/. is.) 

It is an old cuftom with the pious Hindus to blow upon the tarai at 
the interment or cremation of their dead, and likewife when they offer 
viands and other oblations to their defunfl. The tarai is alio called 
tooree. 



1607. '7^. 

RAMSINGA, or Komboo. Brafs trumpet. Serpentine. 
India {Madras). L. 3 ft. 8 in., W. of bell 7^ in. 
(Bought from the Annual International Exhibition, 1872, 
i/. 2 J. 6d.) 

The fhape of the ramfinga clofely refembles that of the ancient 
Scandinavian lure. In Nepaul this trumpet, or rather horn, is called 
nurjinghy and alfo kamfa. It is often made of a large fize. Sturdy lungs 



M.I. M 



170 Catalogue of Mujical Injlruments. 



are required to produce its full tone ; hence it is lefs frequently met with 
among the inhabitants of the flat countries of Hinduftan than among 
the robuft dwellers in mountainous diftrifls. In Nepaul it is fometimes 
embellifhed with defigns in a red colour. 



161^. 'yz. 

SURYAPRABAI. Tambourine ; ftretched on a circular 
iron hoop, with curved handle. India ( Madras). 
Diam. 9^ in. (Bought from the Annual International Exhibi- 
tion, 1872, lOJ.) 

The common drums of the tambourine kind popular in Hinduftan 
are the dayra^ duff^ iuffdi^ do^ hulkya^ &c. The Hindus in beating 
thefe inftruments generally ufe litde fticks as well as the hands. The 
dayra confifts of a circular frame, either of wood or of metal, covered 
with parchment. It is generally about twelve inches in diameter. 
The performer thrufts the thumb of his left hand into a noofe which 
pafTes through a hole in the frame ; and having thus a fupport for his 
right hand, which he places fomewhat above the centre of the inftru- 
ment, he preflfes the knuckle of his middle finger on the infide whenever 
he wifhes to produce a higher pitch of found. The Hindu duff is 
generally an odagonal frame of wood, about three feet in diameter and 
fix inches in depth, covered on one fide with parchment. It has on the 
other fide a net-work of thin ftrips of leather affixed for the purpofe of 
counteracting the ftrefs of the parchment. It is ufually ftruck with 
the fingers of the right hand, and occafionally with a rather long 
fwitch, which the performer holds perpendicularly over the inftrument 
between the fore finger and middle finger of his left hand. 



1615. '72. 

TAL, or Jalar. Two little cymbals of white copper, with 
conneding cord. India {Bombay). Diam. q.\ in. 
(Bought from the Annual International Exhibition, 187a, 5J.) 

In Hinduftan we meet with cymbals varying in fize from that of 
a tea-cup to the dimenflons of a wafhing bafin. They are made of 
mixed metals, the chief of which is denominated Phulia^ and is com- 
pofed of zinc, copper, and tin, in various proportions according to the 



AJiatic. 171 



tone intended for the cymbal. The fmalleft cymbals, called munjeeray 
are in the form of two cups. They are ftruck together outfide, infide, 
and upon their edges, in order to produce rhythmical founds in accord- 
ance with the vocal or inflrumental mufic which they accompany. 
Other cymbals common in Hinduilan are C2X\tijhanj, Some of thefe * 
are rather large, and emit a found more like that of a gong than like the 
tinkling and clicking peculiar to the fmall ones. The Hindus, efpecially 
in the northern diftrids of India, very frequently introduce cymbals 
into religious ceremonies. At folemn proceffions in honour of the gods, 
as well as at marriage celebrations, at feaftings, and on like occafions, 
thejhanj are confidered by many almoft indifpenfable. 

The name tal given to the prefent cymbals alludes probably to their 
gong-like fhape. At any rate, thalla is the common name for the gong 
in Hinduftan, which is made of various fizes. 



1611. '72. 

KURTAR. Caftanets ; a pair. Hard wood with carved 
foliage border. With bells. India (^Madras). L. 
7 in. (Bought from the Annual International Exhibition, 
1872, 2s. 6d.) 

1616. 'yz. 

CHEEPLAYO. Two wooden ftaves, rudely carved, 
holding each four brafs difcs, fufpended. India 
{Bombay). L. 1 1 in., Diam. of difc 2f in. (Bought from the 
Annuallnternational Exhibition, 187*2, 15J.) 

1626. '72. 

CHEEPLAYO. Two. Wooden handles, holding each 
fix brafs difcs, fufpended, and bells. India {Madras). 
L. 10 in. (Bought from the Annual International Exhibition, 
1872, 7 J. 6d.) 

Two are held between the thumb and the fingers of each hand, 
and clafhed together. Hindu devotees ufe them. 

M 2 



172 Catalogue of Mujical Injiruments. 



1610. 'y2. 

MURCHANG. Iron. India {Oudh). L. 5f in. 
(Bought from the Annual International Exhibition, 
1872, IS, 6d.) 

The murchang^ or fimply called chang (" harp") is made of different 
forms and fizes. It is nearly identical with the European Jew's harp. 
The tongue generally projeds behind the bow in a ftrong fteel (pike, by 
which the inftrument is held firmly to the mouth. In Cutch it is not 
unfrequently accompanied by a fmall drum, or by cymbals, to mark the 
time. The murchang is alfo common in Thibet, and in Burmah. 
The Chinefe keou-kin is very fimilar to the murchang. The term keou 
means mouth, and kin is the name of a Chinefe flringed inftrument 
more refembling the dulcimer than the harp. The defignation of keou' 
kin therefore, is rather " mouth-dulcimer " than " mouth-harp." The 
Chinefe regard the keou-kin as being of high antiquity ; but they thus 
regard any of their inftruments the origin of which is unknown to them. 
Confidering how widely the Jew's harp is difFufed over Afia, it appears 
not probable that it was originally introduced from Europe. There is 
hardly any mufical inftrument extant which Afiatic nations have adopted 
fi-om Europe ; while, on the other hand, many of our inftruments are 
evidently of Afiatic origin. 

The natives of New Guinea conftru<5l a fort of Jew's harp of bam- 
boo, called daruhiriy and a fimilar inftrument has been found among the 
natives of New Ireland. Furthermore, the natives of the Ifland of 
Timor, the MacaflTars in Celebes, the Dyaks in Borneo, the Marianne 
Iflanders, and the Battahs in Sumatra, pofifefs contrivances of their own 
invention, which may be clafled with the Jew's harp. 

The common Crembalum (Englifli, yew^s harpy Jevfs trump; 
French, guimhardey rebute^ trompe ; IxzYxdiXiy fpaJfa'Pen%ierOy tromba ; 
German, maultrommely brummeifen ; Dutch, mondtrommel; Danifti, 
mundharpe ; Swedifh, mungiga ; Polifti, dremla)^ although generally a 
mere plaything for children, is capable of producing charming cfiefls, 
and there have been feveral accompliftied performers on it, whofe 
execution elicited the admiration of muficians of refined tafte. Its 
Engliih name is perhaps a corruption of jaw's-harp, becaufe it is held 
between the teeth when played upon. The inftrument is, however, 
in Germany alfo known by the defignation of fudenharfe. As it was 
called in England in olden time '* Jew's trump," and as it was evidently 
regarded as a mere toy, the term Jew may be a corruption of the 
Frenchy^tt, 2ijeu'trompe implying a toy-trumpet. 



AJiatic. 173 



Howbeit, the aftonifhing performances by Koch, Eulenftein, 
Scheibler, and others, have done much to raife the inftrument in the 
eftimation of lovers of muflc. Koch's proficiency on the inftrument 
became firft known when he was a common foldier in Magdeburg, 
about the year 1785. One of his moft admired performances condfted 
of a kind of defcriptive mufic, depicting a funeral proceffion with the 
tolling of bells, into which he introduced a popular old German dirge, 
fb that it was heard firft as founding from a long diftance, and then as 
if a chorus of mourners gradually approached and paiTed by. Another 
remarkable performer, Eulenftein, a native of Wirtemberg, came in the 
beginning of the prefent century to London, where he played in public 
concerts. 

With the fiindamental tone any of the tones can be made diftindlly 
audible on the Jew^s harp which are producible on the fimple tube of 
a trumpet, or the harmonics foftly founding with the fundamental 
tone of a vibrating ftring. This is achieved by modifying the cavity 
of the mouth, and confequently the air which it enclofes. Thus the 
intervals conftituting the major chord are eafily obtainable ; likewife 
the interval of the minor feventh, which is, however, fomewhat too flat. 
Owing to the abfence of the minor third of the fundamental tone, com- 
pofitions in a minor key are not fo well fuited for the inftrument as thofe 
in a major key. To remedy this imperfedlion, and alfo to obtain the 
tones required for modulations into various other keys, accompliflied 
performers have reforted to the expedient of ufing two or more Jew's 
harps in combination, each having a fundamental tone of its own, and 
confequently different harmonics. Such a combination is called aura, 
Scheibler of Crefeld in Germany, in the beginning of the prefent century, 
affixed as many as twenty Jew's harps of different pitch on a difc, with 
their round ends towards the centre, fo that the tongues diverged like 
rays. His fkilful performance on the aura Is faid to have produced a 
magic efFedl upon a large audience in a concert room. 



Z9S' 71 



MEGYOUNG. Wood ; in the form of an alligator, with 
carved head, feet, and conventional ornament. Three 
ftrings. The tuning pegs are not the original ones. Burmah. 
1 8th century. L. 4 ft. z\ ^"-^^ W. 6 in. Bought, 8/. 



174 Catalogue of Mujical Injiruments. 

The megymng or megoum^ a favourite ftringed inftrument of the 
Burmefe, is alfo found in Siam, where it is called tuk-kay^ meaning 
« The Lizard." 



1618. '7^. 

MEGYOUNG. Wood; in the form of an alligator. 
Coloured red, and gilt, with glafs eyes. Three ftrings. 
Briti/h Burmah. L. 4 ft., H. 6\ in. (Bought from the 
Annual International Exhibition, 1872, 2/. losJ) 

The megyoung is ufually conftru£led as follows : — Its long b<$dy is a 
hollow cylinder. • It has a ibund-hole confifting of a long incifion in the 
bottom of the body running lengthwife. Its three filken ftrings reft on 
two bridges, one being placed near the head, and the other near the tail. 
The ftrings run over ten frets made of a hard wood and affixed to the 
back of the alligator at regular diftances. The three tuning-pegs are 
fttuated at the tail, and meafure about eight inches in length. 

The performer places the megyoung before him on the ground, and 
vibrates the ftrings with his fingers. The inftrument is ufed in the Bur- 
mefe full orcheftra, which generally accompanies dramatic reprefentations 
and fimilar entertainments. Some Burmefe muficians, it is (aid, per- 
form upon the megyoung with furprifing dexterity, eipecially when 
extemporizing preludes and interludes to their fongs. 



1608. 'yz. 

SOUNG. Boat-fhaped harp, on coloured wooden ftand, 
carved as a negro boy. Thirteen ftrings. Briti/h 
Burmah. L. 3 ft, H. with ftand 3 ft, 2 in. (Bought from 
the Annual International Exhibition, 4/. 6s.) 

The moft noteworthy harp in ufe in Afiatic countries is the/oung^ 
alfo called fauny tfoung-gouk^ and thembogyoung. It is made of various 
fizes, generally meafuring from two to five feet in length. The body is 
of a light wood hollowed and varni(hed, generally black with defigns in 
gilding. Its fliape fomewhat refembles a canoe with a deck. Its 
found-board is generally formed of buffalo leather. At the extremity of 
the body a neck, made of a hard wood, is neatly faftened. The neck 



AJiatic. 175 



tapers towards the end, and riling, curves over the body. The body 
has generally two (bund-holes, one on each fide of the firings. 

T\i^foung is ufually mounted with thirteen firings of filk. Some- 
times wire is ufed inflead of filk \ but this is an innovation. The 
filken firings are neatly twifled, and rubbed with a refinous fubflance. 
TafTeled cords, attached to the ends of the firings and wound round 
the curved neck, are of afGflance in tuning thtfoung^ which is done by 
pufhing the firings upwards or downwards, fo that the curvature of the 
neck increafes or diminifhes the tenfion. 

The firings are tuned in the following order of intervals : — 



The foungy when played upon, is held acrofs the lap, the curved 
neck being to the left ; the performer pafTes his right hand round it, and 
over the firings. Its found is defcribed as pleafant, even by European 
auditors in Burmah. The foung is, however, more frequently ufed in 
accompanying vocal mufic than in folo performances. The performer 
occafionally produces a femitone by applying a finger of the left hand 
to a firing near the end, which has the efFe£l of fhortening it. He, 
however, generally twangs the firings with both hands. 



1629. yz. 

PAT-MA. Large drum. Wood, bound lengthwife with 
flrips of fkin. Briti/h Burmah. L. 2 ft. \ in., Diam- 
I ft. 1 1 in. (Bought from the Annual International Exhibi- 
tion, 1872, i/. lOS.) 

This drum, as alfo the other mufical inflruments from Britifh 
Burmah here mentioned, were manufactured at Pazoongdoung, the 
Burmefe quarter of the town of Rangoon. 



16^8. '7^. 

BONDOUNG. Long drum. Wood, bound lengthwife 
with flrips of fkin. Briti/h Burmah. L. 3 ft., Diam. 
8 in. (Bought from the Annual International Exhibition, 
1872, lis.) 



176 Catalogue of Mujical Injiruments. 



1630. yz. 

P ATTALA, or Patolah. Wooden harmonicon. The 
cafe painted black and red, and gilt ; carved in low re- 
lief with dragons, birds, and tracery. Britijh Burmah. H. 
I ft. 9 in., L. 2 ft. 8 in. (Bought from the Annual Inter- 
national Exhibition, 1872, 5/. 5 J.) 

The pattala contains fonorous flips of wood or bamboo, fixteen or 
eighteen in number, of graduated lengths, the largeft of which is from 
twelve to fifteen inches long, and two inches broad. They are ftrung 
on a double cord, and are fufpended over an open founding-box re- 
fembling a trough, or a boat. The roundifh outfide of the bamboos 
is uppermoft. They retain their original thicknefs at their ends, but 
are thinned and fcooped out towards the middle \ and it is by this 
method of thinning and hollowing them that the required pitch of tone 
for each is obtained. The pattala is played with one or two little 
fticks, about eighteen inches in length, and terminating in a rather thick 
ball made of cloth. A pattala containing twenty-three tones meafures 
about four feet and a half in length, and produces the following diatonic 
fuccefEon of intervals : — 



^Mj , i j.iJJfrTO 



^ffi 




The found is mellow and pleafing. Captain Henry Yule (* A Narra- 
rative of the Million fent by the Governor-General of India to the 
Court of Ava,' London, 1858), remarks : "Though its materials are 
of no value, a good old pattala is prized by the owner like a good old 
Cremona, and he can rarely be induced to part with it." 



1632. '7^. 

PAT-TSHAING. Hoop of wood, carved with bands of 
pomegranate and foliage ornament, and leaf borders 
coloured red ; containing twenty-one drums of graduated fizes. 
Fringe of coloured cloth Vandykes. Britijh Burmah. Diam. 



AJiatic. 177 

4 ft. 9 in., H. a ft 7 in. (Bought from the Annual Inter- 
national Exhibition, 1872, 15/. loj.) 

The pat'tjhaing generally contains fixteen, eighteen, or twenty-one 
drums, which are fufpended vertically around the interior of the frame ; 
(o that the fmalleft, which is about two and a half inches in diameter, 
is placed at the right fide of the entrance, and the largeft, which is 
about ten inches in diameter, at the left. The entrance confifts of a 
fmall opening in the frame, which can be clofed. The drums have 
fixed tones. Their pitch is regulated by means of a little moid clay, 
which is applied to the centre of the parchmejit with the fweep of the 
thumb. The performer, fquatted in the centre, beats the drum with 
his fingers and palms, and occafionally ufes also a little drum-flick. 
The names, tjhain^ ^'»^> tfine^fein, zndjhingy by which the inflrument 
is defignated, are evidently mere abbreviations of pat-tjhaingy wfltten or 
pronounced in different ways. 

The pat'tjhaing is often employed in the orcheflra accompanying 
a Burmefe dramatic performance. It is alfo ufed in proceffions, being 
carried by two men, whilfl the performer fhuffles along in the infide, 
playing as he goes. He is faid to evince, not unfrequently, much fkill 
and dexterity. 



1631. '7^. 

KYEE-WAIN. Two concentric circles of wood, between 
which are fufpended fifteen metal plates refembling 
cymbals, graduated in fize and tone. The outer circle is 
carved in openwork with pomegranate ornament in black wood. 
Britijh Burmah. Diam. 4 ft. 3 in., H. i ft. i^ in. (Bought 
from the Annual International Exhibition, 1872, 10/.) 

The kyee-wain is one of the principal inflruments employed in a 
Burmefe full orcheflra. The performer feated within the frame flrikes 
the plates with two fmall flicks, about fix inches long and an inch in 
diameter, which are covered at the end with leather or cloth. In a 
Burmefe theatre of any pretenfion to refpedlability, there are generally, 
befides wind inflruments and caflanets, two kyee-wainsy one of which is 
placed on each fide of the fcene. Moreover, there are fome varieties of 
this inflrument in Burmah. One or other kind of kyee-wain is a 
popular inflrument in almofl every diflricSi: of Further-India. 



178 Catalogue of Mujical Injiruments. 



6 and 6a. '70. 

UR-HEEN and Bow. A fpecies of fiddle. Wood, with 
two ftrings. The body covered at the top with the 
fkin of the tatiy a fnake of the Boa family. The bow is of cane 
and horfehair. China. Modern, L. 2 ft !2:J- in., Diam. of 
body 3 in., L. of bow 24^ in. (Given by the Diredors of the 
Alexandra Palace Company.) 



7 and ya. '70. 

UR-HEEN and Bow. A fpecies of fiddle. Wood, with 
two filken ftrings. The bow of cane and horfehair. 
China. Modern. L. 23:^ in., Diam. of body 3^ in., L. of 
bow 24!^ in. (Given by the DireAors of the Alexandra Palace 
Company.) 

The ftrings are tuned in the interval of a fifth from each other. 
Tradefcant Lay (* The Chinefe as They Are,' London, 1 841) re- 
marks : " The hairs of the bow pafs between the ftrings, which, as 
the ftrings are very near to each other, conftitutes the chief difficulty in 
playing. It requires long practice to enable the learner to prefs the bow 
kirXy upon one without touching the other, and thus mingling the tone 
defired with (bme extraneous noife of the moft grating defcription. 
Out of this wretched thing performers contrive fometimes to draw 
founds of great brilliancy, fo that I have heartily wiflied them a better 
tool for their pains. Such is the refult of much practice." 



5 and 5^. '70. 

YErYIN and Bow. A fpecies of fiddle. The body, 
apparently formed of a fegment of the ftiell of fome 
fruit, is open at the back. Two ftrings. The bow of cane and 
horfehair. China. Modern. L. 3 ft. 4 in., Diam. of the 
body 4^ in., L. of bow 2 ft. 2 in. (Given by the DireAors of 
the Alexandra Palace Company.) 



AJiatk. 179 



936- ^72>' 



YE-YIN. A fpecies of 6ddle. China. Modem. L. 
2 ft. 5 in., Diam. 5 in. (Given by Sir F. Gore Oufeley.) 



1. 70. 

YUE-KIN or " Moon Guitar." Wood, with four filken 
ftrings, arranged in two purs, each pmr tuned in unifon. 
China. Modern. L. 24-^ in., Diam. 14 in. (Given by the 
Diredors of the Alexandra Palace Company.) 



Fig. 114.— Ym-iiH. Chini. 



YUE-KIN. China, Modern. L. a ft. 4J in., Diam. 
145 in. (Given by Sir F. Gore Oufeley.) 



1 8o Catalogue of Mujical Injiruments. 

The yue-kin is tuned in the interval of a fifth, thus : — 




Tradefcant Lay (' The Chinefe as They Arc, London, 1841) relates : 
^' As the firings are (hort, the found is fmart and keen, and muft be 
drawn out by forcibly ftriking the ftring with the nail or with a plec- 
trum of wood or metal. I once faw a mufician at one of the ftrolling 
theatres, who difplayed a great deal of execution upon the yue-kiriy with 
a very pleafing eiFed. On another occafion it was ufed as an ac- 
companiment to the ur-heeity and as the mufician underftood his 
bufine6, the refult had fomething particularly exhilarating about iL" 



2. 70. 

PEPA. Wood, with fmall plaques of incifed ivory, and 
four filken ftrings. Principally ufed by Chinefe ladies. 
China. Modern. L. 3 ft jf in., greateft W. \2\ in. (Given 
by the Direftors of the Alexandra Palace Company.) 



393- '71- 

PEPA. Wood, the top of the neck carved with a bat. 
Fluted tuning pegs. In the interior is a pendulum or 
founding fpring. The finger-board is wanting. China. 
Modern. L. a ft 11^ in., W. 9! in. (Bought, 3/.) 



934- 73' 

PEPA. China. Modern. L. 3 ft., W. 9^ in. (Given 
by Sir F. Gore Oufeley.) 

The pepa is tuned in the intervals of a fourth, a whole tone, and a 
fourth, fo that the outer ftrings are odlaves to each other, thus : — 








AJiatic. 1 8 1 



4- 7°- 

SAN-HEEN. Wood, three filken ftrings. The body 
covered on both fides with the fltin of a fiiake. China. 
Modern. L. 3 ft 2 in., greateft W. of body 6 in. (Given by 
the Diretftors of the Alexandra Palace Company.) 



9iS- 73- 

""^ AN-HEEN. China. Modern. L. 2 ft. II in., W. 
!5 5i in. (Given by Sir F. Gore Oufeley.) 

Tbe/an-htm is tuned in two fourths, thus : — 



1 8 2 Catalogue of Mufical Injiruments. 

lo. '70. 

YANG-KIN. A dulcimer. Lacquered wood, with carved 
jade plaques over the found holes. The thin brafs wires 
are ftruck with two fmall wooden hammers of peculiar fhape. 
In a drawer is a fmall brafs tuning hammer. China. Modern. 
L. 2 ft. 4 in., W. 10 in. (Given by the Direftors of the 
Alexandra Palace Company.) 

As the yang'iin is not mentioned in the older Chinefe treatifes on 
mufical inftruments, it is probably of comparatively modern origin, — 
perhaps a modification of the fantiry which is known in Hinduftan, as 
well as in Weftern Afia. 



9. 70. 

TCHK Wood, mounted with bone. Sixteen thin brafs 
wires. The movable bridges belonging to the inftru- 
ment are wanting. China. Modern. L. 3 ft. 2^ in., W. 
8^ in. (Given by the Direftors of the Alexandra Palace 
Company.) 



3- 70. 

KIN or '* Scholar's Lute." Wood, lacquered, and inlaid 
with mother-of-pearl. Seven firings of filk. China. 
Modern. L. 4 ft. o^ in., W. 7^ in. (Given by the Direiftors 
of the Alexandra Palace Company.) 



13. '70. 

TY. A flute. Bamboo, with ivory tips. Ten finger- 
holes on the upper part and two oppofite placed near 
together towards the lower end. China. Modern. L. 



AJiatk. 183 

2 ft. 2^ in. (Given by the Direftors of the Alexandra Palace 
Company.) 

The genera] name for the flute is in Chinefe Jiao or feaou. The ty 
is blown like the flute traverfiere or German flute. It is generally pro- 
vided with ten finger-holes and two mouth-holes. One of the mouth- 
holes is fituated nearer to the centre of the tube than the other, and is 
covered with a film when not ufed. By means of this fecond mouth- 
hole a higher pitch is obtainable. Two of the finger-holes are alfo 
often covered with a film, fo that only the pentatonic intervals are 
producible. When all the finger-holes are open, the order of intervals 
is diatonic. There is a large ty and a fmall one in popular ufe. The 
order of intervals generally adopted on the large ty is the following, 
which may be tranfpofed to a higher pitch by ufing the fecond mouth- 
hole : — 




jjjjjgix 



The notes — 



f 



are, however, alfo obtainable by means of two finger-holes which are 
placed oppofite to each other at the further end. Tradefcant Lay 
('The Chinefe as They Are,' London, 1841, p. 197) fays : — "The 
flute is ufed only for folos, and appears to be regarded as having an 
appropriate connexion with religious rites. In one of the temples at 
Canton a flute player ftood by the altar, and while the ceremonies of 
worihip were in progrefs he blew a foft and melancholy air as an 
integral part of the fervice." 



14. 70. 

TY. A flute. Bamboo, ftained and varniftied. Five 
finger-holes on the upper part, and three oppofite. 
China. Modern. (Given by the Direftors of the Alexandra 
Palace Company.) 

978. 'yz. 

TY. A flute. Bamboo, bound at intervals with filk, and 
tipped with bone and horn. China. 19th century. 
L. 2 ft. 3 in. (Given by Mifs Newbery.) 



1 8^ Catalogue of Mufical Injiruments. 



15. 70. 

YO. A flute a bee. Seven finger-holes on the upper 
part, and two oppofite. The feventh finger-hole, which 
is placed at a greater diftance from the fixth than is the diftance 
between the others, is covered with a thin bladder. China. 
Modern. L. 14^ in. (Given by the Direftors of the Alexandra 
Palace Company.) 



20. 70. 

HEANG-TEIH. A kind of oboe. The^ tube of wood 
with brafs mouthpiece and brafs bell. Seven finger- 
holes on the upper part and two oppofite. China. Modern. 
L. 1 2^ in., diam. of bell 3^ in. (Given by the Direftors of 
the Alexandra Palace Company.) 

The inftrument is blown through a litde double reedy which is ftuck 
upon the brafs mouth-tube. 

The heang-teih is ufed at marriage entertainments, in funeral procef- 
fions, and on moft other occafions of joy or forrow. It is a favourite 
inftrument with the Chinefe. Its found is loud and harfh, — at any rate 
to European ears ; the Chinefe are fatd to be charmed by it. There 
are generally two loops on the bell of the heang-teih^ to which filken 
ornaments are attached. 



19. 70. 



HEANG-TEIH. A kind of oboe. The tube of wood, 
with brafs mouthpiece and brafs bell. Seven finger- 
holes on the upper part and one oppofite. China. Modern. 
L. 1 9f in., diam. of bell 5f in. (Given by the Direftors of the 
Alexandra Palace Company.) 



H 



"4 



V. 



AJiatic. 



185 



21. 70. 

HWANG-TEIH. Brafs trumpet. With three fliding 
tubes. Principally ufed in funeral proceffions. China. 
Modern. L., when drawn out, j ft 8 in., when contraded, 
ii\ in., diam. of bell 5^ in. (Given by the Diredors of the 
Alexandra Palace Company.) 

The hwang^teth is made either of thin fheet brafs or of copper, and 
refembles our trombone in as far as its ftem is capable of being length- 
ened and fhortened at the will of the player. The tung-keo^ another 
Chinefe brafs wind inftrument, is of a conftru£^ion fimilar to the hwang^ 
teihj the difference between the two inflruments confifting chiefly in the 
pofition of the bell, which in the tung-keo is turned upwards by means 
of a crook expanding into the bell. The flem of the tung-keo is com- 
pofed of two tubes, one of which can be drawn within the other. 
There are, moreover, two varieties of this inftrument differing in fize. 
Both yield mournful founds. 

The mouth-piece of the hwang-teih is curious on account of its 
flatnefs. It is not concave like any which are ufed at the prefent day 
in European countries \ and it is remarkably broad and thin. A Chinefe 
who played upon one of thefe inftruments in London took the whole 
difc in his mouth and placed it againft his gums, inftead of placing it 
againft the lips ; but it may be doubted whether this is the eftablifhed 
Chinefe method of blowing the hwang-teih. 



7701. '61. 

ITWANG-TEIH. Brafs trumpet. With three fliding 
A tubes. China. Modern. L., when open, 4 ft. 2 in. 
(Bought, 3/. los.) 



16. '70. 



HWANG-TEIH. Brafs trumpet. With two fliding 
tubes. China. Modern. L., when drawn out, 

M. I. N 



1 8 6 Catalogue of Mujical Injiruments. 



3 ft i^ in,, when contrafted, 20 in., diam. of bell, 3I in. 
(Given by the Direftors of the Alexandra Palace Company.) 



i24. 70. 

CONCH Trumpet. A conch fhell, ufed as a trumpet by 
the Buddhift priefts in China, in their religious cere- 
monies. China. Modern. L. ii^in. (Given by the Direftors 
of the Alexandra Palace Company.) 

The oldeft and moft univerfally known trumpets are evidently thofe 
which are made of a large fhell, or of the horn of an animal. The 
former is, as might be expe£ted, more generally found on iflands and 
in thofe diftridts of a continent which have a fea-coaft. The conch 
is ufually blown through a fmall hole which has been drilled for this 
purpofe through the fpiral end. In fbme inftances we find the hole 
provided with an artificial proje<5lion made of wood or fome other 
fuitable fubflance j or a tube is inferted to facilitate the blowing. 



51:2. '68. 

CHENG. Containing 17 pipes of fmall bamboo reeds, 
arranged in five fets, each fet having pipes of equal 
length. Mofl of the pipes have a finger-hole on the lower part 
of the outer fide ; two of them have it on the inner fide. The 
pipes are inferted in an air-chefl, fo as to leave an open fpace 
in one portion of the circle in which they are ranged. The 
performer places his thumb in this opening, in order to cover 
the finger-holes of the infide when required. The air-chefl is a 
bowl made of a gourd, or of wood, and lacquered generally 
black. The cheng contains free reeds^ or metal tongues, which 
vibrate and found when the finger-holes are clofed. China. 
Modern. H. i ft. 5:^^ in., W, (including the mouthpiece) 4:^ in. 
(Given by Mr. Engel.) 



Afiatk. 187 

This is one of the oldeft inftniments of the 
Chinefe Hill in ufe, and may be regarded as the 
moft ancient fpecies of organ with which we are 
exactly acquainted. Formerly it was made with 
a long fpout for a mouthpiece, which gave it the 
appearance of an old-fa(bioned coiFee-pot, The 
eheng is alio popular in Japan ; and a fimilarly- 
conftrufted inftrument, though different in out- 
ward appearance, is the hum of Burmah and 
Siam. The Siamefc call their hiem " The Laos 
organ," which indicates that they confider it to 
have been originally derived by them from Laos. 
Moreover, there dcfervcs to be noticed another 
Chinefe inflrument of this kind, fimple in con- 
flniftion, which probably reprefents the chtng in 
its moft primitive condition. It is to be found 
among the Meaou-tfze, or mountaineers, who 
are fuppofed to be the aboriginal inhabitants of 
China. They call it fang. This fpecies has no 
bowl, or air-cheft ; it rather refembles the Pan- 
pipe, but is founded by means of a common 
mouthpiece confiding of a tube, which is placed 
at a right angle acrofs the pipes. The Chinefe 
affert that the cheng was ufed in olden time in 
the religious rites performed in honour of Con- 
fucius. Tradefcant Lay, in his account of the 
Chinefe, calls it " Jubal's organ," and remarks, ^\!,'J^^o^^„' * 
*' this feems to be the embryo of our multiform 
and magnificent organ." 

8. '70. 

CHENG. Containing 17 bamboo canes, the two longeft 
of which are tipped with bone. The canes are inferted 
in a wooden chamber with an ivory mounted mouthpiece, and 
are feftened together with a band of horn. Infide the tubes 
are fmall vibrating tongues. China. Modern. L, i6f in., 
W. 4 in. (Given by the Directors of the Alexandra Palace 
Company.) 

The cheng with feventcen tubes is generally fo conflrufted as to 
emit thirteen tones, — four of the tubes, being filent, merely fervc to 



1 8 8 Catalogue of Mufical Injiruments. 

ftrengthen the pofidon of the others. The tones are produced by 
clofing the finger-holes at the lower ends of the tubes, and by blowing 
into, or inhaling through the mouthpiece. The following are the tones 
of the tubes in fucceffive order : — 




w^^ 



In ancient time the cheng with thirteen (bunding tubes was tuned to 
yield the following tones : — 




r^^^j^rrrji^ 



The arrangement of the tones on the old cheng with twcnty-four 
tubes, and likewife on that with nineteen tubes, was not lefs ftrange than 
that given in the laft notation of the cheng with thirteen tubes. It will, 
however, be obferved that this notation contains the intervals of the 
chromatic fcale, while the previous notation exhibits the pentatonic 
fcale. 



977- 7^- 

CHENG. Formed of a clutter of feventeen fhort bamboo 
canes, moftly tipped with ftained bone, fattened together 
by a band of horn, and inferted into a wooden chamber with 
ivory mouth-piece. China. 19th century. L. 17 in., W. 
4-J in. (Given by Mifs Newbery.) 



CHENG. China. L. 17 in. W. 4 in. 
Sir F. Gore Oufeley.) 



(Given by 



2Sy 25a, and 2Sb. '70. 

KOU. A drum, with a pair of drumtticks of painted 
wood and leather. Sufpended by rings in a wooden 
frame. China. Modern. H. of frame 24^ in., diam. of 



Afiatk. 189 

drum 1 8 in., L, of drumfticks 1 1 in. (Given by the Dlrctaors 
of the Alexandra Palace Company.) 

The Chinefe conftru<^ Ibme large and highly ornamented drums 
called km. One kind, placed between four pillars, is ufed cfpecially 
in theatrical performances. The drummer, in order to be enabled to 
ftrike it at die top, mounts a platform conneSed with this drum. 
Another kind, which is highly ornamented, is raifed on a pillar with 
four feet, on each of which is the figure of a fabulous animal. Above 
this drum is a canopy made of filk embroidered with gold. A recent 
traveller in China relates that he faw in one of the fkmous Buddhift 
temples at Pootoo, in the vicinity of Ningpo, a " big-bellied drum," 
ten feet in diameter, fixed on crofs-beams about twelve feet from the 
ground. 



26, 36a, and 26&. '70. 

KOU. A fmall drum refembling a tambourine, with a 
drumftick. The inftrument refts on an expanding 
tripod ftand of bamboo. China. Modern. Diam. lof in., 
H. of ftand 2 ft. 3|- in. (Given by the Direftors of the 
Alexandra Palace Company.) 



I go Catalogue of Mufical Injiruments. 

This drum, which is covered with horfe^hide, is made ufe of by 
the Chinefe on the ftage, for the purpofe of accompanying the voices 
of the Angers. Another little drum, confifting of a frame of wood 
covered with pig-(kin, and refting on three legs, is ufed by the 
Buddhifts in certain facred performances. Large drums are frequently 
fufpended in the temples of the Chinefe, and are occaiionally beaten 
by the priefts inftead of faying prayers. 



1 8 to i8i. '70. 

KOU. A fmall drum. Wood, covered with pig-fkin. 
With two pairs of cane fticks for beating it China. 
Modern. Diam. 8^ in., L. of fticks lof in. (Given by the 
Direftors of the Alexandra Palace Company.) 



j^S to 2^d. '70. 

PAN. A piece of wood, with a groove cut nearly through 
its fubftance, and four bamboo fticks. A rude inftru- 
ment of percuflion. China. Modern. L. 6^ in., L. of fticks 
I of in. (Given by the Direftors of the Alexandra Palace 
Company.) 

The Chinefe caftanets, called pan^ are made of a hard wood re- 
fembling mahogany. The moft plain ones, the cha-pan^ or pih-pan^ 
are ufed by beggars, who in the ftreet, before the (hop doors, vigoroufly 
clatter them until they are relieved by fome trifling alms, ufually the 
fmall copper coin called cafh. Thefe fupplicants, who are often blind 
men, however, frequently ufe two fimple fticks of bamboo for the 
fame purpofe. 

2,y. '70. 

CHA-PAN. Chinefe caftanets. Three pieces of hard 
wood refembling rofewood. Principally ufed by beggars. 
China. Modern. L. 10^ in. (Given by the Diredors of the 
Alexandra Palace Company.) 



Afiatic. 191 

\% and \2,a. '70. 

INSTRUMENT of Percuffion. Wood, hollowed, carved, 
pjunted red, and partly gilt, with wooden ftick for percuf- 
fion. Chinefe. Modern. Diam. 7 in., L. of ftick 10 in. 
(Given by the Direftors of the Alexandra Palace Company.) 

This inftrument is ufed in the Buddhift temples in China. It not 
unfrequently confifts of a block of wood fhaped like a human (kull, 
and is beaten at certain ftages during the religious ceremonies. More- 
over, the Buddhift priefts ufe it in combination with other inftruments 
of percuffion for accompanying their facred fongs, which they perform 
fometimes by refponding to each other, and fometimes by uniting their 
voices. 



^9^. 70. 

LO. A gong. With a wooden beater. China. Modern. 
Diam. 6 in., L. of beater 7^ in. (Given by the DireAors 
of the Alexandra Palace Company.) 

The gong is a favourite inftrument of percuffion with feveral 
Eaftern nations. It occurs of various (hapes, being in fome inftances 
very fimilar to a cymbal, and in other inftances without the cavity 
in the middle commonly appertaining to the latter inftrument. 



877. '68. 

LO. A gong. With an infcription in Chinefe. China. 
About 1830. H. 3 ft. 10 in., W. 2 ft. 10 in. (Given 
by the officers of the 4th Dragoon Guards.) 

The tranflation of the infcription is — 

*' A Prefentation to the Keo Sang Monaftery. In the Manchow 
Dynafty, on the 15th lucky day of the firft month of the twelfth year 
of Taue Kwong, the tried Scholars with the Buddhift Priefts devoutly 
joined together to ereS this Tablet." 

" We defire that the merits of thofe who raifed this Tablet may 
be widely extended to the whole world, and that all who believe the 



* 

192 Catalogue of Mujical Injiruments. 

Buddhift dodtrine may hear the good tidings. Im taou ning. Taouning 
Rar. Taou ning far Bogiar. Thefe are the Buddhift words." 

" Thefe are the believers or difciples of Buddha : " — [Here follows 
a lift of 41 names.] 

** Thefe are the names of the friars :" — [Here follows a lift of 17 
names.] 



17 and lya. '70. 

LO-TSEIH. A fmall gong, fufpended in a brafs ring with 
a handle of black horn. With a fmall bamboo beater, 
having a knob at one end. China. Modern. L. 12 in., 
diam. of gong 6 in. (Given by the Direftors of the Alexandra 
Palace Company.) 



30. 70. 

TUNG-LO. A gong, attached to a piece of wood for 
fufpenfion. China, Modern. Diam. 3f in. (Given 
by the Direftors of the Alexandra Palace Company.) 

The tung-by as well as the lo-tfeih^ is efpecially ufed in the temple 
but alfo by the fervants walking before a mandarin ; and likewife at 
private theatrical entertainments. The particularly fonorous quality of 
the tung'b is afTerted to be owing to an unufually large proportion 
of tin in combination with copper. It is an old cuftom with the 
Chinefe for fervants in attendance on a mandarin, when their lord is 
being carried in a fedan, to walk in front with gongs and to found 
them, in order to give notice of the approach of the great man. A 
certain number of ftrokes denoting the exad rank of the officer is 
repeated at intervals. 



II. 70. 

YUN-LO. Carved upright frame of wood, with plaques of 
carved ivory on the bafe (one plaque miffing). Ten fmall 
metal plates are fufpended between the bars of the frame. China. 
Modern. H. 2 ft 4 in., W. i gf in., diam. of the largeft plate 



AJiatic, 



193 



4f in. (Given by the Direftors of the Alexandra Palace 
Company.) 




Fig. 118. — YuN-LO. China. 



The plates of the yun-lo are founded by means of a fmall bamboo 
flick, 7 or 8 inches in length. They are all of nearly the fame 
diameter; but they vary in thicknefs, and confequently in pitch of 
tone. They are attuned in the following peculiar order of mufical 
intervals : — 



f — 

g — 
e — 



c 

a— d 
b-flat - 
e-flat - 



b-natural 
f-fharp. 



The tone which correfponds to our f is the normal tone of the 
Chinefe pentatonic fcale. The tones f^ g, a, r, rf, which on the yun-lo 
are found clofe to each other, belong to this fcale. I'he other tones of 
the yun-loj — h-Jlat^ b-natural^ e^ e^fiat^ and f-Jharp^ — enable the per- 
former to produce the fame fcale in different keys. For inflance, it 
may be tranfpofed thus : — f, g, a, c, d ; c, d, e, g, a ; d^ e.^f-Jharf^ a^b} 
b'fat^c^d^fjg^Scc. 

The yun-lo is ufed efpecially by the Buddhifl priefls in their &cred 



ceremonies. 



94 Catalogue of Mufical Injiruntents. 



Z2,. 70. 

SEAOU-PO. Cymbals, pair of. Metal. China. Modern. 
Diam. 1 2^ in. (Given by the Direftors of the Alexandra 
Palace Company.) 



^3. 70. 

SEAOU-PO. Cymbals, pair of. Metal. China. Modern. 
Diam. 8 in. (Given by the Direftors of the Alexandra 
Palace Company.) 

Cymbals are, indeed, widely difFufed, efpecially among Afiatic 
nations. They occur of very fmall dimenfions, in which cafe they 
refemble fome kinds of caftanets ; but as they are conftrudled of metal, 
the found emitted by them is generally more definite and acute. 



838. '6g. 

BIVA. A kind of lute. The body is of wood, lacquered 
black, and ornamented with a band of Japanefe defign 
in gold lacquer. Four firings, and two very fmall found holes. 
Japan. Modern. L. 2 ft. 4 in. (Bought, Paris Exhibition, 
1867, ^4^0 

The performer twangs the firings with a pledrum. The biva is 
almoft identical with the Chinefe pepa^ which has four ftrings of filk 
and is provided with frets. 

839. '6g. 

TAKI-GOTO. Bamboo, with 13 ftrings of filk neatly 
twifted. The body ornamented with embroidered work, 
and painted with infcriptions, flowers, and foliage ; in the centre 
is carved an open fan. Gilt, ornamented with painted foliage, 
and having taflels at each end. Japan. Modern. L. 6 ft. 
(Bought, Paris Exhibition, 1867, ^6/.) 



Afiatic. 



19s 




Catalogue of Mujical Inflruments. 




AJiatic. 



197 



The Japanefe have feveral inftruments of the dulcimer clafs, called 
goto^ or koto. The taki-goto is provided with thirteen movable bridges, 
by means of which the pitch of the firings is regulated. The bridges 
are of wood, and about %\ inches in height. According to Meijlan 
(* Japan voogefteld in Schetfen,' Amfterdam, 1830), the goto is tuned 
in the following chromatic order of intervals : — 




Some fpecies of the goto are played with ple£lra affixed to the 
fingers \ and there are different fucceffions of intervals adopted in the 
tuning of the feveral fpecies. 

The chromatic fucceffion is probably more ufually adopted on the 
jamato-goto than on the taki^goto ; for the latter is known to be generally 
tuned in the following pentatonic order : — 




T^^ 



1 



f J bJ r 't r "^ E 



The taki'goto is learnt chiefly by Japanefe ladies moving in the 
upper circles of fociety. It is a rather expenfive inftrument, and 
requires much pradice. The performer places it on the floor, and, 
fitting in the ufual Japanefe attitude, bends over it and twangs the 
firings with her fingers, the tips of which are encafed in ple^ra^ re- 
fembling thimbles, which terminate with a little projecting piece of ivory 
in fize and form like the finger nail. 



885. '69. 

SIME-DAIKO. Small drum. The body in lacquer ware, 
ornamented with embQfled flowers and foliage in gold. 
Two deal drumfticks in cafe, and a folding ftand. Japan. 
Modern. Diam. 1 ft. i^ in., H. 5f in. (Bought, Paris Exhi- 
bition, 1867, 8/.) 

The general name in Japanefe for the drum is daiko. 'The Japanefe 
have a great variety of drums, fome of which are ufed at religious 
ceremonies in the temple. The Jime-daiko is fufpended in a wooden 
frame by means of filken cords, and is beaten on its upper part with 
fticks. 



198 Catalogue of Mujical Injiruments. 



lOZgc. '71. 

KIEN. Gong. Bronze. Sufpended in a wooden frame. 
Japan. i8th century. H. of gong 2 ft., W. 
2 ft. 3 in.' With infcriptions in Japanefe on both fides. 
(Bought [with other bronze objefts], 115/.) 

This gong, which is not unlike a copper kettle open at the bottom, 
is founded by being beaten with a ftick. 

The Japanefe have different kinds of gongs. The tjantjan refembles 
a copper bafin. The foeligane coniifts of two metal baiins fuipended 
by cords on a frame compofed of a pole and two crofs-fticks. The 
Japanefe ufe gongs in the fervice of the temple, in procef&ons, at 
funerals, and on feveral other (blemn occaiions. 

The Japanefe, as well as the Chinefe, pofTefs fuperbly ornamented 
gongs raifed on a ftand. Thofe of the Japanefe are perhaps the mofl 
magnificent. 

1036. '71. 

BELL. Bronze, chafed with borders, and infcriptions 
within panels, the upper part decorated with bofles, with 
handle formed of two conjoined dragons' heads. From a 
deflroyed temple in Japan. Old Japanefe. H. 4 ft 2 in., diam. 
a ft 2 in. (Bought, 44/.) 

The Japanefe employ large bells in their Buddhift worlhip. There 
is a famous bell, richly engraved, in a kind of belfry connected with 
a temple near Hakodadi, which is ftruck, at different hours of the 
day, with a heavy wooden mallet ; and its found is faid to be particu 
larly fonorous, mellow, and far-carrjring. Another celebrated Japanefe 
bell is placed on a high hill near the town of Yokohama. It is 
fufpended in a wooden (bed, clofe to a temple. A thick pole, afHxed 
to the rafters, is drawn backwards, and then, by being let loofe, is 
made to rebound fo as to hit the bell fideways in the ufual manner. 
This bell is admired throughout the country, and pi(5tures repre- 
fenting it are fold on the fpot to the vifitors, who have to afccnd a 
long flight of narrow fteps before they reach its flation on the fummit 
of the hill. Moreover, alfo fmall bells are ufed by the Buddhifl 
priefts in Japan while officiating in the temple, — jufl as is the cafe 
in China, Thibet, and other diflriAs of the Afiatic continent, and alfo 
in the Roman Catholic church in European countries. 



Afiatic. 199 

1037. '71. 

BELL. Bronze, chafed with borders, with infcriptions and 
raifed figures within panels, the upper part decorated 
with bofles, with handle formed of two conjoined dragons* 
heads. From a deftroyed temple in Japan. Old Japanefe. 
H. 3 ft. 10^ in., diam. 2 ft. (Bought, 41/. lOJ. 6d.) 



10^8. '71. 

BELL. Bronze, chafed with borders and infcriptions within 
panels, the upper part decorated with bofles, with handle 
formed of two conjoined dragons' heads. From a deftroyed 
temple in Japan. Old Japanefe. H. 4 ft. 8 in., diam. 
2 ft. 6^ in. (Bought, 55/.) 

494. 'yz. 

INSTRUMENT of Percuflion, founded by the wind. 
Copper openwork, dome-fhape, in imitation of apple 
fprigs with filver bloflbms ; with filk tafl*els and knot for fuf- 
penfion, and twelve white metal and gilt leaves hanging down 
by filk cords. Japan. 1 9th century. Diam. 8 in. (Bought, 

5/. lOJ.) 

When the inftrument is expofed to the wind, the metal leaves are 
caufed to touch each othtfr, whereby filvery and remarkably pure founds 
are produced, continually changing in the degree of loudnefs according 
to the greater or lefs force of the percuffion. 

Although all the ^olian mufical inftruments might not improperly 
be regarded as wind inftruments, mufically they belong to three different 
clafles, viz., ft ringed inftruments, wind inftruments, and inftruments of 
percuflion. Several of thefe contrivances are very ingenious and in- 
terefting. It would require much fpace to notice the various iSolian 
harps, flutes, cymbals, and bells conftrufted by different nations. Suffice 
it to point out fome curious inftruments of the kind invented by Afiatic 
nations. 



200 Catalogue of Mujical Infiruments. 



The Chinefe conftrud kites in various grotefque forms, reprefenting 
fifhes, butterflies, tigers, dragons, ferpents, from ten to thirty feet in 
length, men failing through the air, &c., which, by means of round 
holes fupplied with vibrating cords, are made to produce ^olian mufic. 

The Stiens, a £ivage tribe dwelling in the mountainous diftrid of 
Siam, fend up kites to which they attach an inftrument fomewhat 
refembling a bow, which when agitated by the wind produces (bunds 
defcribed by a European traveller as ^^ fweet and melodious." 

A curious inftrument of the ^olian kind is conftnifted by the 
natives of the Malay Peninfula, who call it bulu-parindu (^^ the languifh- 
ing bamboo") or bulu^ribut (" the bamboo of the ftorm "). It confifts 
of a bamboo cane, rough from the jungle, meafuring from 30 to 40 feet 
in length, which is perforated with holes, and ftuck in the ground Its 
efFe£^s are defcribed as fafcinadng, fbme of the founds being *^ foft and 
liquid like the tones of a flute, and others full like thofe of an organ." 
The natives of the Malay Peninfula alfo make out of the fmaller bamboos 
a number of pipes which they ftring together and expofe fb as to be 
founded by the pafling wind. Furthermore, they conftruA a kind of 
^olian harp, coniifting of a long thick piece of bamboo fplit between 
the knots (b as to refemble the ftrings of a harp, which they hang on 
the tops of the higheft trees in the foreft in fuch a pofition that the wind 
as it fweeps by, vibrates the cords. 

Even more extraordinary is the contrivance of found-producing 
arrows invented by the Chinefe. The arrow has at the point a horn- 
tube, which is perforated with a hole. When difcharged from the bow, 
it, while paf&ng through the air, produces a tone. But whether the 
Chinefe contrive to (hoot a tune in the air, has not been afcertained by 
European byftanders. 

In England the invention of the ^olian harp is generally attributed 
to Dunflan, Archbifhop of Canterbury, who, according to an old 
tradition, conftru<£led about the middle of the lOth century an ^olian 
harp, which he hung againft a crevice in a wall, to caufe the wind 
pafling the crevice to vibrate the ftrings. The foft and gentle founds 
thus emitted by an inftrument untouched by human hand fb greatly 
aftonifhed and awed the people, that they accufed Dunftan of forcery. 
If this tradition may be relied upon, the iEqlian harp mufl have been 
unknown in England before the loth century, or, if it had been prc- 
vioufly known, it muft have fallen into oblivion, juft as was the cafe in 
the 17th century when Pope brought it anew before the Englifh people. 

Moft probably the inftrument was known in Afia long before the 
Chriftian era. Sir James Emerfon Tennent (' Ceylon, an Account of 
the Ifland, phyfical and topographical,' London, 1859) quotes a pafTage 



AJiatic. 2 o I 



from the Mahavanfo, a (acred and hiftorical book of the Singhalefe, 
which is as follows : ^^ The king, Prakrama, built a palace at the city 
of PoUanarrua, and the ftoneworks were carved in the fhape of flowers 
and creeping plants, with golden networks which gave harmonious 
founds, as if they were moved by the wind.*' Sir William Jones (' On 
the Gods of Greece, Italy, and India,' Afiatic Refearches, vol. i., 
Calcutta, 1788) mentions that in the poem entitled Magha, the inven- 
tion of the Hindu vina is thus alluded to : ^^ Nareda fat watching 
from time to time his large vina^ which, by the impulfe of the breeze 
yielded tones that pierced fucceffively the regions of his ear, and pro- 
ceeded by mufical intervals." Again, according to Rabbinic tradition. 
King David's harp founded at midnight, its firings being vibrated by 
the north wind, and King David was in the habit of fufpending it during 
the night over his couch. This fo-called harp, the Hebrew kinnor^ 
was probably a fpecies of lyre. Incredible as it may appear that King 
David fhould have had a current of air over his couch ftrong enough 
to caufe his kinnor to found, the tradition is neverthelefs noteworthy, 
inafmuch as it indicates an early acquaintance in the Eail with the 
phenomenon exhibited by the iSolian harp. 



M. I 



THE CAUCASUS, 

AND NEIGHBOURING DISTRICTS. 

[ HE majority of the various tribes of the Caucafus 

^ have bards, called Kikoaicoa, who recite in verfe old 

llories, &iry tales, and occafionally extempore poetry, 

i accompanying their vocal efiufions with a three- 

' ftringed kind of guitar, called balalaika. The Su- 

^ anets, a people dwelling in the higheft of the in- 

of the Caucafus, have a rude ftringed inftrument, 

called ifchtngjir^ which they play at funerals to accompany their 

fongs of lamentation. It is, however, alfo ufed on other occafions, 

and appears to be almoft identical with the harp of the OfTetes. 

The Circaflians have fome peculiar inftruments of their own. In 

the diftrii^s to the fouth of the Caucafus, or in Trans- Caucalia, the 

inftniments moftly refemble thofe of Perfia and Turkey. 



ARP of the Ofletes. With twelve firings of 

horle-hair, ten black, and the two longefl white, 

each ftring confifting of from fix to eight hairs. 

Modern. W. 2 ft., H. i ft. 10 in. (Bought, 

Paris Exhibition, 1867, i/. 8j.) 

The Ofletes, or Ofletines, are an Indo-Germanic race dwelling in 
Central Caucafus. They call themfelves Iron ; Ofeti Is the name 
given to them by the Georgians, and other neighbouring nations. 



Caucajiany &^c. 203 

Their little harp is efpecially interefting, on account of its refemblance 
to fbme inftruments of this clafs reprefented on monuments of Eaftem 
nations, dating from about a thoufand years before the Chriftian era. 
I'he fore pillar, which in our harp ferves to refift the teniion of the 
firings, is wanting; and the fame was the cafe with the ancient 
Oriental harp, and is fo ftill with moft harps found in Aiiatic countries. 



989. '69. 

BAGHLAMA, A fmall kind of tambouray with four 
firings of thin wire, and frets made of gut dyed red. 
The body is of wood, ornamented with mother-of-pearl and 
tinfeL Modern. L. i ft 8f in. (Bought, Paris Exhibition, 
1867, ^^- ^9'^' ^^0 

There are feveral varieties of this inftrument to be found in the 
Caucafus and adjacent countries. The firings are twanged with a 
quill. 



990. ^6g. 

BAGHLAMA. A fmall kind of tamhoura^ with four 
firings of thin wire, and frets made of gut Wood, 
inlaid with bone and mother-of-pearl. Modern. L. i ft 6^ in. 
(Bought, Paris Exhibition, 1867, 16 J. loi.) 



99^^ '69. 

CIRCASSIAN Violin and Bow. Wood, with two firings 
of horfe-hair. In the middle of the body fome fmall 
found holes are pierced. Modern. L. 2 ft 2^ in. (Bought, 
Paris Exhibition, 1867, 5^. 8^.) 

The bow belonging to the CircafSan violin is much curved, and is 

ft rung with hair taken from the tail of the horfe, as is likewife the cafe 

with the two (rarely three) firings on the infirument. This fpecies of 

o 2 



2 04 Catalogue of Mufical Injiruments. 



violin fomewhat refembles the guf%la which has been in ufe by moft of 
the Slavonic trrbes in Europe from an early period. The gufxla has, 
however, only one ftring of horfehair. 



999- '^9- 

SKRUIBKA, or Kemangeh roumy. Wood, inlaid with 
mother-of-pearl and bone. Caucqfus. Modern. L. 
I ft. 7 in. (Bought, Paris Exhibition, 1867, ^^- ^•^- 6^0 

This inftrument, which in fhape refembles our antiquated rebec^ is 
conftruded on the principle of our viole ^ amour ^ now lilcewife fallen 
into oblivion. It has three firings of filk, which are played upon with 
a bow ; and three other firings, of thin wire, which are drawn through 
the bridge and run beneath the fllken firings. The wire firings merely 
ferve to increafe the fonoroufnefs of the upper firings vibrated by the 
bow. It is a well-known fa£l, that if of two fonorous bodies tuned in 
unifon, or in odaves, one is made to found, the other will alfo vibrate, 
and will found without being touched. The Hindus efpecially have 
many flringed inflruments in which fympathetic founds are employed. 
The Turks have a fpecimen called ^»/ keman^ which is conflrudted 
on this principle, and which refembles the Caucafian inflrument under 
notice. Kemangeh roumy fignifies '' Greek viol." 

Skruibka is the name by which the Ruffians denote the violin in 
general. In the flringed inflruments of European nations the ufe of 
f)'mpathetic tones has almofl entirely been difcarded, efpecially fince the 
found-board has been conflru<Sted on more acouflic principles and con<- 
tinually improved. 



991. 59. 

SANTIR. A kind of dulcimer. Wood, inlaid with 
mother-of-pearl. It contains twenty-five fets of wire 
firings, each fet confifling of four firings which are tuned in 
unifon. In the middle are two rows of movable bridges, by 
means of which the pitch of the firings is regulated. The 
bridges, which fomewhat refemble chefTmen, are made of wood, 
painted red and green, and have at the top a fmall flrip of brafs 
on which the firings refl. The tuning-pegs are on the right 



Caucajtan^ &'c. 



205 



fide of the found-board Georgia. Modern. H. 2^ in., 
greateft L. 1 ft. 4I in. (Bought, Paris Exhibition, 1867, 
2/. los. Ofd.) 



Th&fantir is played with two little hammers, jull as is the cafe 
with the dulcimer. Its name may poffibly be a corruption of pfatttr ion ; 
for, according to the ftatement of fome writers, it was Formerly called 
by the Copts in Egypt pifalurian. However this may be, the prefcnt 
fpecimen cannot &il to prove efpecially interefting to the mufical 
hillorian if compared with the fine fpecimen of an Italian dulcimer of 
the feventeenth century exhibited among the antiquated inftruments in 
the prefcnt collection {Jet 264. '6b, page 235}. The refemblance 
which thefc two Inftruments bear to each other is very remarkable, 

Thtfantir is one of the oldeft-known mufical Inftruments of the 
Perlians and Arabs. The Hindus, likcwife, have a dulcimer of this 
kind, called far mundal^ which is, however, not played with hammers 
but with a plectrum. The far mundal refcmbles the kanoon in Umpe, 
but it is ftrung with wire, and may be regarded as holding a middle place 
between the fantir and ianaan. 

The Egyptian fantir has thirty-fix ftrings, which are arranged iii 
eighteen pairs lb as to produce the following tones : — 



The peculiar conftru^ion of a handfomeytf«//> which was fent from 
Turkey to the Internationa] Exhibition, London, 1862, may be briefly 
defcribed as follows : —Trapezium ftiape ; depth, 2 ft. 11 in. ; width in 
front, 2 ft. II ill. Two round found-holes taitefully cmbtlliflied. Urals 



2o6 Catalogue of Mujical Injiruments. 

wire firings. One hundred and four tuning pegs of iron, (bmewhat 
refembling thofe on our pianoforte. On the found-board two long 
bridges of brafs, over and under which the ftrings run. In addition to 
thefe bridges, two fmall wooden ones, viz., one for the two loweft ftrings 
and one for the fix higheft ftrings. Moft of the groups of ftrings con- 
fift of fix tuned in unifon, only the groups for the deepeft tones have 
fewer ftrings, fo that the one hundred and four ftrings produce only 
nineteen tones. 



TURKEY. 



~ "JOST of the mufical inllruments of the Turks are 
nearly identical with thofe of the Arabs and Perfians. 
Moreover, the Turks have a popular tradition ac- 
cording to which their mufic attained the d^ree of 
perfeflion, which they alcribe to it, through the in- 
fluence of a great compofer and performer who 
came from Bagdad. They relate that when Amu- 
rath IV. conquered Bagdad, which happened in the year 1638, he 
commanded that 30,000 inhabitants fliould be flain before his eyes. At 
the moment when the foldicrs commenced executing the order of the 
cruel fultan, there appeared before him Shah-Kuli known as the Perfian 
Orpheus. The bard ftrikes his harp and fings ; and fo touchingly does 
he ling and play that the fultan, moved to tears, pardons everyone, and 
takes Shah-Kuli and four other Perfian muficians with him to Con- 
ftantinople, to refine his people. Shah-Kuli's femous fong, * The 
Conquefl of Bagdad,' is (till known in Turkey. 

The mufical inftruments of the Turks are chiefly made in Con- 
ftandnople. The woods principally ufed in their conflruftion are from 
the towns of Ifmid and Bartan in Afia Minor ; and alfo from Abafa in 
Trans-Caucafia. Rofewood and ebony are imported from India, and 
mahogany from America. The copper and (ilver ufed in the con- 
ftru£lion and ornamentation of the inftruments are obtained from the 
mines of Tokat in Alia Minor, Samakow in Bulgaria, and fome other 
places. The tortoife-lhcll, mother-of-pearl, and ivory are imported 
from Egypt, and from Yemen and Hedjaz in Arabia. The buffalo 
horn comes from Gallipoli and Ifmid. The gut firings are principally 
labricated in the towns of Kaifariyeh and Kiankary in Afia Minor. 
The cymbals (called in Turkifh Z//), in the fabrication of which the 
Turks excel, are chiefly made in Conflantinople. The brothers Keurope 
of that city export annually about 1,300 pairs of zHs into Weftern 
European countries, and even as &r as to America. The price is 
about 3or. the pair. 



2o8 Catalogue of Mufical Infiruments, 

Turkllh inftruments of percuflion have long fince been introduced 
into Weftern European orcheftras, efpe daily into military bands. 
" JanilTary Mufic" was to fome extent adopted in Germany about the 
middle of the laft century. The JanifTaries, it will be remembered, 
were the foot-guards of the Sultan until the year 1IJ26. The King of 
Pruflia, Frederick II., after having organifed fuch a military band, 
ordered it to perform before Achmet EfFendi, the Turkilh ambaflador 
at Berlin. Achmet Effendi, fmiling, Ihoolt his head and faid, " That 
is notTurkilb." Whereupon the King fent exprellly to Conftantinople 
iix genuine Turkifli muficians, in order to enfure the charaSerillics of 
the JanifTaty band diretS from the fource. The Auftrians may have 
had good opportunities of learning this kind of mufic firom their TurkJih 
aggreflbrs, who, towards the end of the feventeenth century, pulbed fo 
fer forwards from Hungary as actually to befiegc Vienna, and to terrify 
with their martial ftrains the peaceable citizens. 



1032. '69. 

ANOON. The front and fides are inlaid with 
patterns In mother-of-pearl. Modem. Greateft 
L. 3 ft. if in., greateft W. i ft. 3I in. (Bought, 
Paris Exhibition, 1867, 24/. i8j.) 

The kamon^ or ganan, an inflrument efpecially appertaining to the 
Arabs and Pcrfians, is, like the fantir, a kind of dulcimer evidently of 
high antiquity in the Eaft. The kanooa differs from t]\e fantir not only 
in form, but alfo in the circum(tance that its ftrings are of gut (generally 
made of the inteflines of the lamb), and are twanged with two fmall 
phlfra, one attached to the fore-finger of each hand ; while the ftrings 
of the/in/;> are of wire, and are ftruck with two little fticks. In Turkey, 
the ianeon is a favourite inftrument with the ladies in the Seraglio, and 
in the hareems of the wealthy clafles. They ufe pleura made of tortoifc- 
fliell, pointed with cocoa-nut (bell. Sometimes the pledlra are made of 
filver. 

The kanoon is generally mounted with feventy-five gut ftrings, 
which produce twenty-five tones, each tone having three ftrings in 



Turkijh. 209 



unilbn. The inftrument is tuned according to the following order of 
intervals : — 



^^^^ j ^^7T^*Tr'-j',^g^ 



'^ii,, ,jjjiurr»r^ 



The prefent fpecimen has feventy-two ftrings, producing twenty-four 
tones ; and a fine kanoon from Turkey which was in the International 
Exhibition, London, 1862, had alfo feventy-two ftrings, arranged in 
unifons of three. 



576. >2. 

TANBOUR Kebyr Tourky. The body bulbous, of 
wood ftriped with ivory, with inlay of tortoife-fhell and 
mother-of-pearl. The neck with catgut frets. Eight ivory 
tuning-pegs. Thin wire ftrings. Made in the i8th century. 
L. 4 ft. 5f in., Diam. I2| in* (Bought, 12/.) 

The tanbour^ or tamboura^ may be regarded as the eaftern man- 
doline. There are various kinds of this handfome inftrument in ufe, 
differing in (hape, fize, and in the number of ftrings. The body is 
generally of an oval fhape, or rather pear-fhaped. Of this form are, 
for inftance, the tanbour bouxourk (*' great tamboura"); the tanbour 
boulghary ('' Bulgarian tamboura ") ; the tanbour baghlama (" fmall 
tamboura") ; the tanbour charqy (" oriental tamboura.") 

The body of the tanbour kebyr tourky ("large Turkifh tamboura ") 
is circular in fhape. The open ftrings produce four tones, of which 
one is a unifon, and three are oftaves, thus : — 



^— r-y— — 



lucj — cr 



The ftrings are twanged with a pledtrum made of tortoife-fhell, and 
called %akhmeh.. 

The tanbour kebyr tourky has generally thirty-five frets of thin cat- 
gut (or lambgut), each of which is wound four times tightly round the 
neck. The frets are placed at diftances from each other calculated to 
fecure a feries of one-third tones according to the Arabic fcale. 



2 1 o Catalogue of Mufical Injiruments. 



loii. '6g. 

SAZ. A fmall kind of tambour a ^ like the baghlama noticed 
page 203, with frets made of gut Inlaid with various 
woods, tortoife-ftiell, ivory, and mother-of-pearl ; the fix tuning 
pegs ornamented with filver. Modern. L. i ft. 11 in. 
(Bought, Paris Exhibition, 1867, 3'- ^•^- 3^-) 

The fax is chiefly ufed by the Sho'araj i.e. '' Poets,** who are 
itinerant muficians and bards of the Muflulmans. 



lOIO. '69. 

DOUBLE Saz. Inlaid with various woods and mother- 
of-pearl. Seven tuning-pegs, metal firings, and frets 
made of gut. Modern. L. i ft. 7 in. (Bought, Paris Ex- 
hibition, 1867, 2L Ss. yd.) 



1009. '69. 

KEMANGEH. A fpecies of violin, with three firings of 
gut, long tuning-pegs of ivory, and two found holes 
behind the bridge. The back and upper portion are orna- 
mented with tortoife-fhell inlaid with ivory, and the back is 
decorated with a large rofette. Modern. L. i ft. 4 in., L. of 
the tuning-pegs, 6 in. (Bought, Paris Exhibition, 1867, 
7/. ^s. gd.) 




Fig. 122. KZMANGIH. 



The name kemangeh fignifies an inflrument which is played with a 
bow ; and there arc various kinds of the kemangeh in ufe among Mo- 
hammedan nations. Some kinds are of confiderable fize, and refl on 



Turhp, 211 

the ground while they are played. The ktmangth a'gmt^ tor iiilUnce, 
is fu[qxirted on an iron rod, and the perforroeT aJluminga fitting pollute, 
holds the inftniment before him, (bmewhat in the fame manner as our 
violoncello is held. 



1 03 1. '69. 

REBAB efh-Sha'er. The body confifts of a wooden frame, 
over which a parchment is ftretched ; one ftring of 
white horfc-hair. The inftrument terminates in an iron foot, 
on which it refts. Modern. L. 3 ft. 2^ in. (Bought, Paris 
Exhibition, 1867, i/. i8j. 6d.) 



Fig. II). RUA* ««-Sh.V.. 

TTie rebab ejh-^a'er, 01 the " Poet's viol," is an indrument of the 
Arabs as well as of the Turks. In Egypt it ii generally ufcd in the 
cofiee houfes to accompany the recitations of the " Sha'er " ur p«>ct 
(plural *' Sho'ara "), who entertains the (obacco-fmoldng and co^ec- 
fipping guefts with a romance. His relation is intcrrpcrfed with piKtry, 
which be chants; and after each verfe he playt a little interlude on hii 
inftrument. The romance ufually recited ife " The Lifeof Ab<H>-/eyd ;" 



2 14- Catalogue of Mujical Injlruments. 



oppofite fide towards the upper end of the tube. In addition to thefe 
finger-holes there are five fmall holes fituated near the lower end. 
Thefe fmall holes are only occafionally ufed, when the pitch of the 
inftrument is altered. The alteration of the pitch is eiFedled by means 
of the neck of the zoumaj which confifts of a wooden cylinder fitted 
into the tube. A portion of the cylinder is cut out at one fide, and if 
this incifed portion is placed in the dire£lion of the finger-holes the 
paflage of the air is admitted to all of them j but if the cylinder is 
turned, h that its folid fide is in the dire(^ion of the finger-holes, two of 
them and the hole for the thumb are clofed by it. In the latter cafe the 
fmall holes alluded to are made ufe of. In the top of the wooden 
cylinder is inferted a fmaU tube of metal, upon which a fmall doubU-reed 
— generally made of the ftem of the dourrah^ a fpecies of maize — is 
ftuck, and tightly faftened by means of threads. Placed over the metal 
tube is a difc of ivory, ebony, or fome other hard wood, with a hole in 
the middle. The player does not vibrate the reed between his lips, as 
is done on our oboe ; he takes the reed and the tube into his mouth as 
far as the difc, againft which he prefles his lips. In covering the finger- 
holes he does not ufe the tips of the fingers, but the firft joints. The 
compafs of the middle-fized or common zourna is — 



^% *^ ^s.^\ 




rf'^^,« r rT^'^ 



.plfrTT-r^^t gj 



The treatment of the feveral fpecies of zourna is much the fame ; 
he who can play one can play all. 



10^7. '6g. 

GHAIDA. Bagpipe. The woodwork inlaid with metal, 
r and ornamented with a taffel formed of ftring and glafs 
beads. Modern. (Bought, Paris Exhibition, 1867, ^S-^O 

The bagpipe {ItsXvsji^ cornamufa^ mufetta^ piva^ zampogna ; French, 
comemufe^mufette ; G^vmzn^fackpfeife^dudelfack; Ru&zny wolynka^ iofa ; 
Foli{hydudy; FinniQiy pilai ; Scotch {Gzelic), piob mhor ; Wc\{hjpibau; 
Perfian, ne'i ambanah ; Arab-Egyptian, zouggarahy zummarah bi-foan^ 
is an inftrument of high antiquity, and is' very univerfally diffufed, 
efpecially in Europe and Afia. In Scotland and Ireland it is regarded 
as an old national inftrument. Some centuries ago it appears to have 



Turkijh. 215 



been alfo very popular in fome counties of England, Shakfpeare alludes 
to the Lincolnfliire bagpipe, in Henry the Fourth, Part !• 

FaL 'Sblood, I am as melancholy as a gib-cat or a lugged bear. 

P. Hen, Or an old lion, or a lover's lute. 

FaL Yea, or the drone of a Lincolnfhire bagpipe. 



1028. '69. 

« ■ 

GHAIDA. Bagpipe, in three parts. The wood-work 
mounted in bone, and ornamented with metal inlaid ; 
the pipes contain vibrating tongues. Modern. (Bought, Paris 
Exhibition, 1867, 14J. 6d.) 



1012. ^6g. 

DAIRA. Tambourine, with five pairs of metal plates. 
The frame- work is of tortoife-fhell, inlaid with mother- 
of-pearl. Modern. Diam. 13^ in. (Bought, Paris Exhibition, 
1867, 8/.) 

The tambourine is one of the moft univerfally-^voured kinds of 
drum ; at leaft, moft nations poflefs a fomewhat fimilar inftrument, 
containing only one parchment inftead of two. The tambourine common 
in moft European countries confifts of a rim made of wood, generally 
from two to three inches in breadth, and about fifteen inches in dia- 
meter. Faftened to the rim at regular diftances, and in pairs, are fmall 
plates of brafs. They are fixed loofely, fo that they (hake when the 
parchment ftretched in the rim is made to vibrate. The performer 
holds the inftrument in his left hand, and employs his right hand in 
beating the parchment, or in rubbing it with the fore-finger or the 
thumb. By rubbing it, a whirring and jingling noife is produced owing 
to the vibration of the brafs plates. Expert performers, befides, increafe 
the efFeft by a dexterous manner of turning the tambourine while they 
are ftriking it ; by toffing it occafionally into the air, and catching it 
again ^ by making it fpin on the point of the little finger ; and by fimilar 
exhibitions of agility and fkill. 

The name '* Tambour de Bafque,'* by which this inftrument is 
commonly known in France, was given to it, it is faid, becaufe the 



2 1 6 Catalogue of Mujical Injlruments. 



people in Bifcay ufe this drum efpecially. Probably it came in its 
prefent and more perfedl conftru£lion originally from Spain. A more 
Ample kind, undoubtedly was common in European countries long 
before the Arab invafion of Spain. The tambourine - occurs in repre- 
fentations of the ancient Egyptian and Aflyrian inftniments. 

At the end of the laft century it was not unufual in France for 
ladies of the higheft families to praflife the tambourine, and to difplay 
2Xfoiree5 their graceful dexterity and charming attitudes in handling the 
inftrument, which was ufually played in combination with the pianoforte 
or the harp. 



ROUMANIA. 




T| HE national mufic of the Wallachians and Moldavians 
exhibits fome charaderiftic features which are 
chiefly owing to the peculiar rhythm, and to the 
prevalence of certain fucceifions of mufical inter- 
vals. It is efpecially the frequent occurrence of 
the interval called the fuperfluous fecand^ which 
contributes to give the mufic of Roumania a 
peculiar ftamp of its own. Many of the Wallachian airs are very 
expreffive and beautiful \ and, when compared with the Scotch, Irifli, 
and other national airs well-known in England, they afford an interefting 
example of the diverfity of expreffion revealed in the popular mufic of 
different races. 

The itinerant mufical bands in Wallachia are called lautari^ the word 
for ** mufician " being lautar ; the performers conflituting a band are 
often gipfies. In Bucharefl and its vicinity their little orcheftra gene- 
rally confifls of a Pandean pipe, three or four violins, and the kobfa, — 
a kind of lute, a fpecimen of which is in this colled ion. Befides the 
airs of the popular fbngs the lautari generally perform fpirited dance 
tunes, and of thefe principally the hora^ the national dance of Roumania, 
of which they have feveral beautiful compofitions. 



961. '69. 

OUNTAIN Horn. Wood bound with brafs. 
Roumanian. Modern. L. 7 ft. 11 in. (Bought, 
Paris Exhibition, 1867, i6j.) 

Horns, or rather trumpets, of this defcription are to be 
found in many countries, efpecially in mountainous diftrids, where they 




M.I. 



2 1 8 Catalogue of Mujical Injlruments. 



are ufed by the herdfmen to convey fignals, and to beguile their monoto- 
nous hours of leiAire. The Swedes have an inftrument of this kind, called 
lure. The alp~horn of the Swifs is known to many Englifli travellers 
on the Continent. H err van Hiigel ('Kafchmir und das Reich der 
Siek,' Stuttgart, 1840) relates that in the north of Hinduftan, efpecially 
in the Himalaya mountains, the herdfmen conftrudl a long trumpet from 
the Lilium giganteum, A ftalk of this plant, meafured by him, was 
nine feet in length. The founds produced by the Hindus on this tube 
reminded the traveller of the alp^horn of Switzerland. Alfo the Indians 
in fome parts of South America conftru6l a fimilar inftrument. 



962. '69. 

MOUNTAIN Horn. Wood bound with brafs. Rou- 
manian. Modern. L. 7 ft 5 in. (Bought, Paris 
Exhibition, 1867, i6j.) 

I'he Mountain Horn of Roumania and Tran(ylvania is almoft 
identical in {hape with the flightly-curved alp-horn of the Swifs in the 
Bernefe Oberland. The compafs of found is made the fame as that 
of our fimple trumpet. On this inftrument as well as on the horn the 
uppery is neither tX2iQ\y f-natural nov f-Jharp^ for it is too high for the 
former and too low for the latter. Thus, in the following ftrains, which 
the Swifs are in the habit of blowing on the alp-horn^ the notes marked 
with a Jharp found in reality as an interval between f and f-Jharp, 



t^/ r^f^tf rr-ti 




The ftrains blown by the Wallachian herdfmen on their mountain 
horn are fimilar to thofe blown by the Swifs on the alp-horn, owing to 
the natural tones of the inftruments. 



Roumanian. 



219 



958. '69. 

KOBSA. A kind of lute. Wood painted. Ten firings, 
of which nine are of catgut, and one of fdk covered with 
thin wire. With a pleiftrum confiding of a quill ornamented 
with filken taffels. Roumanian. Modern. L. ai in., W. 
II in., depth of the body, 8f in. (Bought, Paris Exhibition, 
1867, 12/.) 



Fig. 114.— KoBiA. 

A rpecies of kobfa with eight llrings is an old popular inftniment of 
the Ruffians. Ltkewife the Poles had formerly a iebfa (or kobza). It 
was made of cornel wood, and had only three ftrings. When the 
bmous warrior Prince Korecki of Poland was made prifoncr by the 
Turks, about A.D. 1600, he, on entering Conllantinople with his 
followers, played upon the kobfa, to confole his companions in mis- 
fortune, and to fuftain his felf-poffeffion. And for a long time afterwards 
the Poles had the faying " As brave as Korecki." 



960. ^6g. 

SYRINX, Wood painted. Containing 25 tubes arranged 
in a curve. Roumanian. Modern. 12J in. by lof in. 
(Bought, Paris Exhibition, 1867, 8j.) 

The Syrinx, or Pandean pipe, is fo univerfally ditfufed that it would 
be eafier to name the countries in which it is not to be found than 



2 20 Catalogue of Mujical Injlruments. 



thofe in which it is common. The prefent fpecimen from Roumania 
differs from moft others with refped to fhape ; the tubes are generally 
fixed together in a flraight line inftead of in a curve. The^yr/ifx was 
known to the American Indians before our diicovery of the Weflem 
Hemifphere.* Well-preferved fpecimens have been found in tombs of 
the Inca Peruvians. It is probably the ugab of the Hebrews mentioned 
in the Old Teilament. At any rate, it deferves to be clafled with the 
mofl ancient wind-inftruments ftill in ufe. 

DUTKA. Bagpipe, in four parts. The woodwork inlaid 
with metal, and ornamented with various coloured 
fringes and fpangles. Roumanian. Modern. L. 2 ft. 4 in. 
(Bought, Paris Exhibition, 1867, i/. Ss.) 

965. '69. 

DUTKA. Bagpipe, in three parts. The woodwork inlaid 
with lead. Roumanian. Modern. L. 2i^in. (Bought, 
Paris Exhibition, 1867, '^•^- ^od.) 

g66. '6g. 

DUTKA. Bagpipe, ornamented with beads and taflels. 
Roumanian. Modern. L. 2 ft. 10 in. (Bought, Paris 
Exhibition, 1867, ^^' 10 J.) 

g6y. '6g. 

FLAGEOLET. Made of wood. Six finger-holes. 
Roumanian. Modern. L. 14^ in. (Bought, Paris 
Exhibition, 1867, ^^i/.) 

964. '69. 

FLUTE. In three pieces. Stained wood bound with 
ivory ; the finger-holes encircled with red colour. 
Roumanian. Modern. L. 2 ft. 5^ in. (Bought, Paris 
Exhibition, 1867, Ss.) 



Roumanian. 221 

968. '69. 

SZOPELK A, A kind of hautboy, or Eaftern zournay with 
a brafs tube for the mouth-piece, and fifteen finger-holes, 
feven of which are fmaller than the others. Roumanian. 
Modern. L. 15 in. (Bought, Paris Exhibition, 1867, ^od.) 

The fzopelka is alfo a popular inftrument in Southern Ruffia, where 
it is generally made of elder wood. 

9S9' '69. 

TAMBOURINE. The frame is of wood bound with 
brafs. Six pairs of metal plates, and four pairs of little 
fleigh-bells are loofely attached to the rim. Roumanian. 
Modern. Diam. j6^ in., H. 2f in. (Bought, Paris Exhibi- 
tion, 1867, ^'0 



MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS, 

MOSTLY ANTIQUATED, OF £UROPEAK COOKTRIES. 



HERE prevails among mufical antiquities a conridcr- 
able divcrfity of opinion as to the exadt nature of 
feveral of the mufical inftruments foimerly in ufe 
in England and on the continent of Wellern 
Europe. One writer defcribes a certain inftrument 
as a drum tvhich another is fure was a b^pipe, 
and of which a third has not the lead doubt that it 
could have been nothing elfe but a fiddle. This confuflon is owing, 
it would appear, chiefly to the following caufe. 

It happened not unfirequently in olden time, — as is alfb fometime 
the cafe in our day, — that when a mufical inArument fell into difufe, 
its name was applied to another of a later invention, though perhaps 
very different in conftruflion from the former. The pfalterium, for 
inllance, depi£ted in old manufcripts of the Middle Ages, was a fmall 
kind of harp ; but in the courfe of time its name was transferred to a 
kind of dulcimer, the conftru£tion of which may have been partly 
fuggefted by its old namefake. The nU, likewile an inftrument of the 
Middle Ages, is by Ibme writers defcribed as a kind of guitar ; while 
others afTert it to have been a hurdy-gurdy (alfo called by old writers 
fyra mtndicorum), and to have derived its name from its being con- 
ftrufled with a wheel (rota). Very probably both ftatemencs are 
correft. The French gave the name of vieile to the hurdy-gurdy as 
well as to the viol, — moll likely on account of fome refemblance in the 
outward appearance of the two inftruments. Inllances in which two 
inftruments of different conllru£tion are named alike, merely becaufe 
ihey are fimilar in fliape, occur even in the prefent century. Thus, 
the German name of the harpfichord, Fliigel, is now applied to the 
grand piano, the mechanifm of which is totally different from that of 
the harpfichord. Sometimes the manner of producing the founds was 



r 



European. 223 

evidently the caufe of the fame name being given to inftruments of a 
different clafs. Thus, the timpanon^ an antiquated ftringed inftrument 
of the Italians, and the timpani^ or kettle drums, have nothing in 
common except that they are vibrated by means of flicks having a knob 
at one end. The word cimbal is ufed, as has already been ftated, by 
fome nations for the dulcimer, which is beaten like moft inftruments 
of percuffion, whilft cymbals are inftruments of metal employed in our 
orcheftra, and efpecially in our military bands ; the Italians giving the 
name of cimbalo alfo to the tambourine, or Tambour de Bafque. 

Befides, it was evidently in former times a ufual practice with 
inftrument makers, whenever they introduced fome flight alteration in a 
popular inftrument, to give their fabrication a new name, often fele£ted 
with much more regard to bufinefs than to art and truth. Thus, we 
have many names, fuch 2s\lavicytherium^ virginal^ oSavina^ harpjichord^ 
fpinet^ clavicymbalj gravicymbalum^ — all applying to inftruments almoft 
exa£lly alike in conftrudlton^ the difference being chiefly in their 
ftiape. 

As another fburce of confufion may be noticed the cuftom in vogue 
fome centuries ago of conftrudling moft kinds of wind and ftringed 
inftruments in fets of four, in order to make them correfpond with the 
four human voices, treble, alto, tenor, and bafs. Thus, there were 
four flutes, differing greatly in fize, compafs, and outward appearance. 
The fame was the cafe with inftruments of the violin clafs ; thefe are 
not unfrequently mentioned by old writers as thus conftituting '* a cheft 
of viols.** 

T^hefe fa£ls muft not be loft fight of in an examination of any 
antiquated mufical inftrument preferved from paft centuries \ otherwife 
the refult is likely to be perplexing if compared with a defcription of a 
fpecimen bearing the fame name, which is given in fome old book. 
Moreover, it is alfb evident that former writers occafionally noticed an 
inftrument by a wrong name, juft as it fometimes happens at the prefent 
day even with very intelligent writers. 

The moft effedlual means of difpelling the apparent contradictions 
and difcrepancies alluded to, is afforded by a colledion of the actual 
inftruments, like that here exhibited. In order to &cilitate this objedl, 
fome modern inftruments are noticed in the following lift with the 
obfolete ones of which they bear the names, or of which they are the 
offspring. 



2 24 Catalogue of Mufical Injlruments, 



1650-1650C. '71. 

HISTLES. Four. Glazed earthenware, blue 
and yellow, in ftiapc of jars. Auftrian {Znaim 
in Moravia). Various dimenfions. From the 
Annua! International Exhibition, 1 87 1 . (Given 



by Franz Slowak, Efq.) 



105-105^. 71. 

WHISTLES. Eight Earthenware, fix glazed and two 
unglazed, in form of horfemen, &c. Spanijh {^Andujar). 
1870. Various dimenfions. (Bought, is. 2d.) 



FLAUTO Dolce, 
carved in low relief. 



7469. '61. 

Flute. Ivory, decorated with foliage 
Italian. Signed and dated, 
I* I ft. 6^ in. (Bought, 



"Anciuti a Milan, 1740.' 
1/. 4;. o.d.) 

The Fbuto dolce (French Jiute t/auet, and JiiU a bee), much in ufc 
iovat centuries ago, was made of various lengths. The Germans 
called it pkchJtiUf i.e. a flute with a plug in the mouth-hole. That 
which emitted the deepeft tones, or the Bafs Flute, had the following 
compag : — 



The Tenor Flute had this compaTs : — 



The Bafs Flute was of fo great a length that, in order to enable 
the performer to reach the iinger-holes, a bent tube was affixed to the 
mouth-hole, fomcwhat fimilar to thai of die baflbon. The moft 



European. 225 

common Jllute a bee was made with fix finger-holes, and its compafs 
embraced fomewhat more than two odaves, thus : — 



Several of the finger-holes required to be only partly covered in order 
to produce the defired tone. There was often a key on this inftrument 
in addition to the finger-holes. This flute was much in favour in 
England 5 hence it was called in France ** Flute d'Angleterre." It 
has gradually been fupplanted by the " Flute traverfiere,*' or " German 
Flute," T\iQ flageolet y the fmalleft flute a bec^ was formerly played in 
England even by ladies. Pepys, in his Diary (March ift, 1666), 
records : — " Being returned home, I find Greeting, the flageolet-mafler, 
come, and teaching my wife j and I do think my wife will take pleafure 
in it, and it will be eaiy for her, and pleafant." 

The flageolet was made of various fizes. Pepys (Diary, January 
20th, 1667) records: — *' To Drumbleby^s, the pipe-maker, there to 
advife about the making of a flageolet to go low and foft ; and he do 
(how me a way which do do, and alio a faihion of having two pipes of 
the fame note fattened together, fo as I can play on one and then echo 
it upon the other, which is mighty pretty." 

1 124. '6g. 

FLAUTO Dolce, or Flute a bee. Tortoife fliell, inlaid with 
gold pique. Italian. 17th century. From the colleftion 
of the compofer Roflini. L. i ft. 8 in. (Bought, 24/.) 

1 1 27. '6g. 

OBOK Carved ivory. Made by Anciuti, of Milan. 
Italian. i8th century. This inftrument was formerly 
in the poffeflSon of the compofer Roflini. L. i ft, 9^ in. 
(Bought, 40/.) 

The moft noteworthy kinds of the hautboy at the time of Handel 
and Sebaftian Bach are, — the oboe da caccia^ which is identical with the 
Como Inglefe (Englijh homy Cor jtnglais)^ a large hautboy ftill occafionally 
employed in the orcheftra, and the oboe (Tamorey or oboe luongOy which 
has fallen into oblivion. The pitch of the oboe (Tamore was a minor 



2 26 Catalogue of Mujical Injlruments. 

third lower than that of the common hautboy, or choe piccolo ; and its 
found, owing to the narrownefs of the bore at its further end, was rather 
weak, but particularly fweet. 

808. '69. 

OBOR Old fpecies of hautboy. Boxwood, carved with 
a defign of figures and foliage. Ten finger holes and 
three keys ; fome of the finger-holes are placed fide by fide in 
pairs. On the tube is flamped the German name ** W. Bcuker." 
Italian. 17th century. L. i ft. 10 J ia (Bought, Paris 
Exhibition, 1867, 12/.) 

The precurfor of this inftrument was evidently the Inmbardino^ or 
chalumeau. The bombardino^ alfo called in Italian bombardo piccolo^ was 
a fmall bombardo^ an inflrument of the hautboy kind, about three 
centuries ago much in ufe on the continent. 

The Germans called the bombardo ^^ Pommer,*' which appears to be 
a corruption of the Italian name. The bombardo was made of various 
fizes, and with a greater or fmaller number of finger-holes and keys. 
That which produced the bafs tones was fometimes of an enormous 
length, and wais blown through a bent tube, like the bafToon, the 
invention of which it is faid to have fuggefled. 

Thefmallefl inflrrument of this kind, called chalumeau [bora calamus^ 

<« a reed "), is flill qccafionally to be found among the peaiantry in the 

Tyrol and fome other parts of the Continent. The Germans call it 

fchalmey^ and the Italians piffero pajlorale. In England it was formerly 

called ^^m/wi or Jhalm. 

The hautboy^ which is an offspring of the chalumeau called bombar- 
dino^ came into more general ufe about the year 1720. 

The clarinet^ likewife an inftrument of this clafs, is faid to have 
been invented by Denner, in Niirnberg, about the year 1700. The 
clarinet has only a fingle vibrating reed in the mouth-piece ; the hautboy 
has a double one. 

637. '7:?. 

BASSOON, fpecies of. Bound with brafs, with brafs keys, 
and complete with mouth-piece and reed of the period. 
Engli/h. Late i8th or early 19th century. L. 4 ft. ^ in. 
(Given by Mr. T. Cabban.) 



European. 227 

The invention of the hajfoon (Italian, fagotto ; French, boffin ; 
German, fagott) is afcribed to Afranio, a canon of Ferrara, who con- 
ftruded the firft in the year 1 539. The inftrument was, however, an 
improved bombardo rather than a new invention. As early as the year 
1550, the celebrated wind-inftrument maker Schnitzer, in Niirnberg, 
manufactured bafToons which were confldered as very complete. 

Various baflbons of fmall dimenfions in ufe about two centuries ago, 
and earlier (the dolclano^ quartfagott^ quintfagott^ tenor-baffoon^ corthol^ 
&c.), are now antiquated. The compafs of our prefent common 
balToon extends above three oftaves, thus : — 




The largeft fpecies, called double-bafToon [contra-fagotto) founds an 
o<3ave lower than the common one ; it, therefore, extends a fourth 
lower than the four-ftringed double-bafs, and is, in fad, the deepeft- 
toned inftrument in our orcheftra. Beethoven has employed the double- 
baflbon efFedlively in the famous duet of Leonore and Rocco digging 
the grave of Floreftan, in his opera Fidelio ; likewife in his C-minor 
and Choral fymphonies. 

In the lift of mufical inftruments of Sir Thomas Kytfbn, of Hen- 
grave Hall, about the year 1600, recorded in the * Hiftory and Antiquities 
of Hengrave, Suffolk,' by John Gage, London, 1822, is mentioned 
'* A Curtail," which was probably the corthol or French courtaut^ an 
early kind of ballbon, a fpecimen of which, dating from the fifteenth 
century, is preferved in the Confervatoire de Mufique at Paris. Ac- 
cording to Prsetorius (anno 16 19) the fagotto piccolo^ a fmall fpecies of 
baflbon, was called in England ^n^/f corthol. 



» ^- 



7953- ^^• 

OLIPHANT. Ivory. Carved with interlaced ornament, 
containing beafts and birds. Byzantine, i ith century. 
L. 2 ft. I in., diam. 5^ in. (Bought, Soltikoif CoUeftion, 

The oliphant was ufed in the Middle Ages by the knights for con- 
veying fignals in war and in the chafe ; and by the warders of caftles 
for announcing the arrival of ftrangers of diftindion, or for giving the 



2 2 8 Catalogue of Mufical Injiruments. 

alarm in cafe of danger. It was, befides, not unfrequendy made ufe 
of as a drinking veflfel at feafts; and, probably for this reaibn chiefly, 
it was often richly ornamented with precious metals and elaborate 
carvings. The oliphant evidently derived its name from the circum- 
ftance of its being very ufually made of ivory ; at all events, the 
elephant is called by old writers olifaunt^ ollivant^ and olyfaunce. As 
regards the cuftom of ufing mufical horns as drinking vefTels on feftive 
occafions, we find in Brand's * Popular Antiquities ' that it formerly 
prevailed in England on the firft of May. 



7954. '62. 

OLIPHANT. Ivory. Carved with foliage and hunting 
fubjedls ; mounted in filver. German. 1 5th century. 
L. 2 ft. 2 in., diam. 5 in. (Bought, SoltikofF ColIeAion, 
265/.) (See the engraving, Fig. 125.) 




Fig. 125. — Oliphant. 



8035. '6z. 



OLIPHANT. Ivory. Plain furface encircled by two 
raifed bands carved with figures of men and animals in 
low relief Byzantine. 1 1 th century. L. i ft. 9 in., diam. 
4^ in. (Bought, 35/.) 



1274. 72. 

HUNTING Horn. Ivory; curved, with two filver 
bands and rings, and a brafs wire chain for fufpenfion. 
German. Early 1 8th century. L. between extremities 8^ in. 
(Bought, lOJ.) 



European. 229 

HUNTING Horn. Ebony; ftraight, carved in relief 
with dogs chafing deer, and with foliage. On one 
fide is a gilt cruciform plate with remains of a ring for fufpen- 
fion. German. 17th century. L. \\\ in., greateft Diam. 
if in. (Bought, 2/.) 



1602. ^ss^ 

HUNTING Horn. Iron. Embofled with fcroll foliage. 
German. i6th century. L. 12 in. Alfo an eleftro- 
type reproduction of the fame by MeflTrs. Franchi and Son. 



'57. 16. 

HUNTING Horn. Semicircular, with two gilt mounts 
ornamented with arabesques in relief. Electrotype 
reproduftion, by MeflTrs, Franchi and Son,, from the original, in 
ivory, in the poflfefllion of A. Fountaine, Efq. Italian. i6th 
century. Diam. 1 5 in. 



810. '72. 

FORESTER'S Horn. Copper, with brafs bell and horn 
mouth- piece. Leathern ftraps attached. Englijh. 17th 
century. L. 40 in. (Given by G. MoflFat, Efq.) 



1 123. '69. 

CORNETTO Curvo. Ivory. Six finger-holes on one 
fide ; and a feventh, for the thumb of the left hand, on 
the oppofite fide. Italian. i6th century. L. i ft. 9^ in. 
(Bought, 10/.)' 



230 Catalogue of Mujical Injlruments. 



The cornetto curve (German xinken^ French comet a bouquin) was 
generally made of wood covered with black leather. Its compafs 
ufualJy comprifed fifteen tones, the lowefl of which was — 



There were, however, in ufe inftruments of this kind of various fizes. 
The prefent fpecimen is one of the (hialler kinds. In Germany the 
zinken was flill employed in the beginning of the eighteenth century 
by the town bands in playing chorales, on certain occafions, on the 
tower of the parifh church. 



73' '65. 

CORNET a Bouquin. (Italian, cornetto curvo.) Ivory 
carved on one fide in low relief with cupids engaged in 
hunting. On this fide is a finger-hole for the thumb. On the 
oppofite fide are fix finger-holes. French. About 1550. L. 
I ft 1^ in. (Bought, Pourtales Colledlion, 42/.) (See Fig. 
126.) 




Fig. 126. — Cornet a Bouquin. 



Although the %inken is blown through a mouth-tube fomewhat 
fimilar to that of the trumpet, it has finger-holes like a flute. Its found 
is harfh, and would be unpleafant in a room, but the zinken was intended 
for the open air, and for performing chorales on the towers of churches, 
fo that all the people in the town could hear the folemn mufic. They 
were, in fa<St, compelled to hear, for it vibrated through the air over 
their heads like the church bells themfelves. Thus the zinken may 
have ferved its purpofe well in olden time, notwithftanding its harfhnefs 
of found. 



European. 231 



394- 71- 

MUSETTE. A bagpipe. Velvet bag with filk trim- 
mings, the pipes of ivory with white metal keys. 
French. i8th century. L. of bag 23 in., L. of longeft pipe 
11^ in. (Bought, 10/.) 

A little pair of bellows belonging to this bagpipe is wanting. 

According to Merienne, who lived in the beginning of the feven- 
teenth century, the mufetu had at his time attained to a (bmewhat high 
degree of perfedion in France, and the (weetnefs of its found is warmly 
commended by him. He gives a drawing of a mufetu with only one 
chanter, which had apertures for twelve tones, befides fome double 
apertures, and valves opened by keys. The mufette^ as it was con- 
ftruded in France more than a century ago, coniifts of a bag made of 
fbeep's fkin, of two chanters (French, chaluneaux)^ which are of 
different lengths, and are fupplied with keys ; of a drone (French, 
bourdon) with feveral reeds ; and of a pair of bellows. The moft 
remarkable part is the bourdon. It is, properly fpeaking, a combination 
of four drones, fince four reeds are contained in a barrel. The French 
had, about two or three centuries ago, another bagpipe provided with 
bellows. This inftrument, which was called loure^ and of which bdt 
little is known, may have been a mufetu of a more Ample conftrudion 
than that juft defcribed. The names loure and mufette were alfo given 
to French dances ufually performed to the mufic of the bagpipes. 
Handel and Sebaftian Bach have written (bme very fine compoiitions in 
imitation of thefe dance tunes. In the bafs accompaniment the tonic, 
or the dominant, is generally fuilained during the extent of a muAcal 
phrafe, to imitate the effect of a drone. 

The brothers Chedevilje are confidered as the moft diftinguifhed 
players on the mufette which France has poflfefTed. The elder brother, 
Efprit-Philippe Chedeville, was engaged in the year 1725 at the Opera 
in Paris as ^ Joueur de Mufette.' He, as well as his younger brother, 
Nicolas Chedeville, publifhed feveral compofitions for bagpipes and 
hurdy-gurdies. 

Another bagpipe with bellows, the fourdeline^ which was ufed in 
France about three centuries ago, is, according to Merfenne, of Italian 
origin. I'he Italians call it furdelina^ and it was formerly popular, 
efpecially in Naples. 



232 Catalogue of Mufical Injiruments. 

GLASS Harmonica. Modern. Made by E. Pohl, in 
Bohemia. L. 4 ft I in., H. 3 ft. (Bought, 15/. 15J.) 
Depofited in the Educational Department. 

The Glafs Harmonica coniifts of a feries of glafs bells, which are 
affixed in regular order to an iron fptndle lying horizontally in a cafe, 
and which by fimple machinery are fet in motion by the feet. The 
found is produced by the performer moiftening his fingers and preffing 
them on the bells while thefe are rotating. 

The Glafs Harmonica is an invention of Benjamin Franklin, the 
celebrated American. It fuggefted itfelf to him while witneffing an 
Iriibman performing on a fet of drinking glafles in (bme tavern. In a 
letter of his to Padre Beccaria, in Turin, dated July 13th, 1762, which 
contains a detailed account of his invention, and which has been 
publifhed in the colledion of his works, he fays : — ** In honour of 
your mufical language I have borrowed from it the name of this 
inftrument, calling it ArmonicaJ** Franklin prefented his inventjpn to 
a mufical family of the name of Davies, with whom he was related. 
Mifs Marianne Davies performed on the inftrument at public concerts 
in London, Paris, Vienna, and Florence, and the fafcinating purity of 
the (bund, as well as her fkilful execution, were greatly admired. How- 
ever, the conftant pradice fo much weakened her nerves, that (he was, after 
fome years, compelled to relinquifh the cultivation of mufic altogether. 
Alfo the German compofer Naumann, an enthufiaftic admirer of the 
Glafs Harmonica, found it neceifary to reftriiSt himfelf in pradlifing it, 
on account of its injurious efFed upon the nerves. 

Various attempts have been made further to improve Franklin's 
invention. Thus, it has been provided with a bow, in order to obtain 
the found by fridion, as on the violin ; and alfo with little pegs having 
at the end a fmall pad formed of fponge, and with a key-board like the 
pianoforte. But none of thefe expedients have proved fo efFe£^ive as 
the original method of vibrating the glafTes with the moiftened fingers ; 
at leaft, this is declared by moft judges to be the beft means of modifying 
the found for various degrees of loudnefs and expreffion. 

Soon after its invention the Glafs Harmonica appears to have pro- 
duced (bme fenfation in fafhionable circles in London ; for in the 
* Vicar of Wakefield,* written in the year 1761, Dr. Primrofe, relating 
the vifit of the two fine ladies from town, (ays, ** The two ladies threw 
my girls quite into the fhade ; for they would talk of nothing but high 
life, and high-lived company, with other fa(hionable topics, fuch as 
pictures, tafte, Shakefpeare, and the mufical gla(res." 



European, 233 

220. '66. 

VIELLR (¥j\gV\(h, hurdy-gurdy ; Gttrmn, leyer or bauern- 
leyer ; Italian, lira ruftica, or lira ledefca.) Wood, 
lacquered and decorated, in black outlines and occasional 
colour, with hunting Icenes and araberques ; alfo with the 
arms of France, and crowned monogram of Henri 11. on back 
and front. Ten keys and fix tuning-pegs. The key-board 
and keys of ebony and ivory ; near the handle are monograms 
of Catharine de' Medicis. French. About 15J0. L., in- 
cluding handle, i ft. loj in., W. 8J in. (Bought, 127/.) (Sec 
Fig. 127.) 



95- /O- 

VIELLE. A hurdy-gurdy. Inlaid with tortoife-ftiell and 
gold pique work, and fet with paftes. The handle 
formed of a female figure of carved ivory and wood. French. 
i8th century. L. aij in., W. 5-^ in. Bought, 31/. ioj. 

364. '64. 

VIELLEL Hurdy-gurdy. Dark wood, with foliated orna- 
ment in low relief; ten keys and five pegs. French. 
About 1680. L., including handle, 1 ft. 8 in., W. 6| in, 
(Bought, 8/.) 

The hurdy-gurdy is Dill in ufe, efpecially among the itinerant 
Savoyards, who perform in the ftreets of London and Paris. Itc found 



2 34 Catalogue of Mujical Injiruments. 



is produced by fri£lion, caufed by a wheel againft catgut ftrings ; and it 
is played by means of a key-board. Of the organiftrum^ a large kind 
of hurdy-gurdy, a reprefentation is given, page 103 (Fig. 86), derived 
from a manufcript of the ninth century. The organtfirum had three 
ftrings, producing three different tones, which appear to have confifted 
of the tonic, fifth, and oftave. Thefe three intervals founded fimul- 
taneoufly. However painful a facceflion of thefe comljined tones may 
appear to us, it is well known that at the time of Hucbald, A.D. 900, it 
was admired. If a conclufion may be drawn from fuch hiftorical &ds, 
it feems not at all improbable that there may come a time when many of 
the harmonious contrivances admired at the prefent day will be found 
as objectionable as we now find thofe confecutive fifths and odlaves of 
Hucbald. Only expreflive melody remains always beautiful, for it is 
natural, dired^ from the heart, and therefore eternally true. 



577' 7^- 

VIELLE. Hurdy-gurdy. Wood, with marquetry of plain 
and coloured ivory and mother-of-pearl. The neck is 
diapered and terminates in a carved female head. Signed by 
Varquain of Paris, and dated 1742. French. 1 8th century. 
L. 26 in., W. 10. (Bought, 12/.) 

About the middle of the eighteenth century the hurdy-gurdy was 
played at public concerts in Paris, and even ladies pradtifed it occafionally. 
Charles Baton, a diftinguifhed virtuofo on the hurdy-gurdy, extended Its 
compafs to that of the flute, and introduced other improvements, of 
which he publifhed an account, in the year 1752, entitled * Memoire 
fur la Vielle en D-la-re, dans lequel on rend compte des raifons qui ont 
engage a la fiiire, et dont I'extrait a ete prefence a la reine.' Henri 
Baton, the celebrated virtuofo on the mufetU^ was an elder brother of 
Charles Baton. 

The French made the hurdy-gurdy in the fhape of the lute as well 
as in that of the guitar. The vielle en luth has the fiiller tone of the 
two ; however, a good vielle en guitare is confidered fweeter in tone. 

The following titles of compofitions, now very fcarce, which were 
publifhed in Paris during the firft half of the eighteenth century, convey 
an idea of the former employment of the hurdy-gurdy in combination with 
other inftruments : — * Les Pantomimes Italiennes danfees a TAcademie 
Royale de Mufique j mifes pour la Mufette, Vielle, Flute traverfiere et 



European. 235 

. — - ■ 

Hautbois, par Moniieur Chedeville, Cadet, Hautbois de la Chambre du 
Rois ; Paris. Concerts Champetres pour les Mufettes, Vieles, Fluttes, et 
Hautbois, avec la Bafle ; par Mr Chedeville TAine, Hautbois de la 
Chambre du Roy, Paris. Deuxieme Oeuvre de M^ Braun, contenant 
fix Suites a deux Muzettes, qui conviennent aux Vieles, Flutes a bee, 
Traverfieres, et Hautbois ; Paris, 1740. Trente-troifieme Oeuvre de 
Mf Boifmortier, contenant fix Gentillefles, en trois parties, pour la 
Mufette, la Viele, et la BafTe i Paris, I73i, Huitieme Oeuvre de 
Mr Naudot, contenant Six Fetes Ruftiques pour les Mufettes, Vieles, 
Flutes, Hautbois et Violino, avec la BafTe \ Paris,' &c. 



^264. '66. 

DULCIMER. The frame of wood, carved, gilt, and 
painted with an armorial fliield in front. With twenty- 
fix fets of metal ftrings. Italian. 17th century. Width 
of front, 2 ft. 8^ in., depth of fide, i ft jf in. (Bought, 

Moft of the fets contain five ftrings tuned in unifon ; thofe which 
are the longeft contain four ftrings. Moft of the ftrings run over two 
bridges ; the four fliorteft have only one bridge, which is placed in 
the middle. The inftrument is played with two little hammers, like 
the fantir^ defcribed at page 205. The Italians had formerly dulcimers 
of various kinds, — as for inftance, thc/alterio (Englifti pfaltery or fawtry\ 
the citoli^ the ttmpanon. The falterio was ufually played with ple£fra 
affixed to the fingers ; but the Italians had alfo a falterio tedefco^ or 
** German dulcimer," which was played with two litde hammers. 

In England the dulcimer contained, even as late as the eighteenth 
century, only the intervals of the diatonic fcale, extending to three 
octaves, thus : — 



-■v,.f^rfi'r'^j ',^ ^^trrr^r^ 



The Englifli dulcimer was ufually mounted with about fifty ftrings, 
moft of the tones having two ftrings tuned in unifon. The German 
dulcimer, called hackbret^ was tuned, about the end of the eighteenth 
century, according to the chromatic fcale. The hammers were covered 
at one end with hard leather, and at the other end with foft leather, or 



fi » 



236 Catalogue of Mufical Injiruments. 



with felt. This contrivance enabled the performer to play eflFedively 
forte and piano. The dulcimer ftill in ufe with the gipfies in Hungary 
and Traniylvania is of the fame conftrudiion. 



4. '69. 

DULCIMER. Wood, painted and gilt. Italian. 17th 
century. Greateft W. 2 ft loj in., fmalleft W. i ft 5 in. 
Oblique L. i ft. 4 in. (Bought, 20/.) 



147. '69. 

DULCIMER. Italian. 17th century. Greateft W. 
2 ft 2^ in., fmalleft W. i ft. i J in. Oblique L. 
I ft. i^ in. (Bought, 2/. lOJ.) 



4087. 'S7' 

HARP. Wood, carved and gilt in the ftyle of Gouthiere, 
and decorated with oak foliage and acorns ; at the top 
of the pillar is a figure of a cupid. French. Period of 
Louis XVI. H. 5 ft. 3 in., W. 2 ft 6 in. (Bought, 16/.) 

The fmall harp of the middle ages of Central and Weftern Europe, 
depifted in old fculptures and paintings, generally exhibits the front>bar 
of its frame fomewhat bent outwardly, much as is the cafe with the 
Irifh clarfeth. Gradually the number of its ftrings was increafed ; and, 
likewife the ftrength of the frame for refifting the teniion of the ftrings. 
The front-bar of our harp is ftraight, or a front-pillar. Until the 
fcvcnteenth century only the diatonic feries of intervals was properly 
obtainable on the inftrumcnt. The performer had, however, a method 
of producing occafionally a femitone by preffing the finger againft the 
ftring towards the end, much in the fame manner in which the Burmefe 
produce chromatic intervals on the foung. Towards the end of the 
feventeenth century the Tyrolian harp makers adopted litde plates with 
hooks, which could be moved fo as to prels upon the ftrings, and there- 



European. 237 

by fhorten them, for the produdiion of the femitones, more rapidly 
and unerringly than could be done by the fingers. The compafs of the 
harp extended at that time to four o£laves, generally — 

^ . ., f . , ^ 

From ^ 




The hooks were firft introduced between the ftrings c-dyf-g^ and g-a ; 
which enabled the performer to obtain the tones c-Jharp^ d-Jharp^f-Jharp^ 
g'Jharpy and a-Jharp^ or d-Jlat^ ^'flot^ gfi^^^ a-jiat^ and h-Jiat. This 
contrivance was gradually more perfected by placing a hook between 
every firing. The hooks could be regulated to enfure the diatonic 
fcale of any major or minor key in which the piece to be performed 
was compofed. But, if modulations occurred in the piece necefStating 
the introduction of another fcale than that previoufly prepared, the 
hooks had to be re-arranged. As this had to be done in the courfe of a 
piece with the hands which were otherwife fufficiently engaged, the pro- 
cedure often proved troublefome, and an interruption in the execution. 

This inconvenience was, in great meafure, obviated by the invention 
of the Pedal-Harp (German Pedal- Harfe)^ in the year 1720, byHoch- 
brucker, in Donauworth, Bavaria. At the foot of the frame he at- 
tached five pedals, afterwards increafed to feven, which, through the 
channel of the hollow front pillar, were connected with the mechanifm 
at the top of the frame, by means of which the hooks are caufed to 
touch the firings. In Hochbrucker's pedal harp, each interval of the 
diatonic fcale has a pedal, which, when ufed, raifes it a femitone in 
all its o£laves fimultaneoufly. Thus, if the pedal which alters f into 
f'Jharp is ufed, it ads upon all the / firings in the fame way. The 
compafs extends to five odaves and a fixth, thus : — 




Without the employment of the pedals the firings give the diatonic fcale 
of E-flat-major. 

In the year 1810, Sebaflien Erard, in Paris, greatly improved the 
pedal harp by his invention of the double mouvementj which enables the 
performer to raife each diatonic interval of C-flat-major, in which the 



238 Catalogue of Mufical Injiruments. 

harp is tuned, either one or two femitones at pleafure. Erard's Double- 
A£Uon Harp embraces fix octaves and a fourth, thus : — 

I 

XT' — i: 





The firft a£tion of the (even pedals fucceffively caufes the fcale of C- 
flat-major to be transformed into the fcales of G-flat, D-flat, A-flat, 
£-flat, B-flat, F and C-major ; and the (econd action enfures the (bales 
of G, D, A, E, B, F-(harp, and C-(harp-major. 



4449. 58. 

HARP. Wood, fculptured with cupids, feftoons, &c. ; 
painted with arabefques, and gilt. French, Period of 
Louis XVI. H. 5 ft 3 in., W. 2 ft 6 in. (Bought, 4/. ioj.) 

HARP. Wood, carved and gilt, the pillar decorated with 
wreaths of flowers and trophies of mufical inftruments ; 
at the foot two cocks, at the top a mafk furmounted by a 
terminal figure of a cupid. The founding-board painted with 
male and female figures refting on clouds and playing on 
various mufical inftruments. French. Period of Louis XVI. 
Said to have belonged to Queen Marie Antoinette. H. 5 ft 5 in., 
W. 2 ft. 8 in. (Given by Sir Charles Wheatftone.) 



16. '71. 

HARP. Wood ; the pillar and top carved with flowers 
and feftoons, the founding-board painted with land- 
fcapes and trophies. French. About 1770-80. H. 5 ft 3^ in., 
W. 2 ft. 6 in. (Given by Mrs. E. Richards.) 



European. 239 

1740. '66. 

HARP. Carved work of faces, malks, &c., by Grinling 
Gibbons. Stated to have belonged to Charles II. 
En^lijb. About 1670. L. of front pillar 6 ft. 3^ in., L. of 
body, 4 ft. 5 in. (Given by Meflrs. Jofeph Kirkman and Son.) 



$2. II. 

THE Harp of Brian Boiroimhe. (Plafter caft.) The 
original, of wood mounted with filver and fet with 
cryftals, is in the Mufeum of Trinity College, Dublin. Ancient 
Irijh. H. 3 ft. a in., W. i ft. 7 in. 

The inftrument from which this caft has been taken is of extra- 
ordinarily good workmanfhip. The founding-board is of oak, and the 
frame of red fally. The extremity of the higheft part of the frame in 
front is capped with filver finely wrought and chifelled, and contains 
a large cryftal fet in filver, beneath which was another ftone, now 
loft. The ornamental knobs, or buttons, at the fides of this part of 
the inftrument are of filver. On the front pillar are the arms of the 
O'Brien families, chafed in filver, viz., the bloody hand fupported by 
lions. On the fides of the front pillar, within two circles, are two 
Irifli wolf dogs, cut in wood. The holes in the founding-board, into 
which the ftrings enter, are neatly ornamented with efcutcheons of 
brafs carved and gilt. The large foiinding-holes have been ornamented, 
probably with filver, as the ornaments have been abftrafted. The 
foot-piece is broken off, and the parts to which it was joined are much 
decayed. The inftrument has twenty-nine ftrings. 

The chief intereft attached to this harp confifts in its having originally 
belonged, it is believed, to Brian Boiroimhe, the famous Irifli monarch, 
who came to the throne in the year looi, and who, having vanquiflied 
the intruding Danes and Northmen, applied his energies to repairing 
the ravages committed by them, and in promoting the profperity and 
fecial improvement of his people. As he is known to have been 
greatly devoted to mufic, *' Brian the Brave " is ufually depicted in 
the attitude of leaning on the harp. 

As regards the inftrument in queftion, the following tradition has 
been tranfmitted to us : — 

Brian Boiroimhe's harp, together with his crown and other regalia, 
was taken by Donagh, his fon, to Rome (to which place Donagh fled 



240 Catalogue of Mufical Injiruments. 

after having murdered his brother Teige), and prefented by him to the 
Pope, in order to obtain abfolution. Adrian the Fourth, a later Pope 
(by name Brakfpeare, and an Englifliman), alleged this circumftance as 
one of his principal titles to the fovereignty of Ireland, in his bull 
transferring that kingdom to King Henry the Second. Thefe treafures 
were depofited in the Vatican until Pope Leo X. fent the harp to King 
Henry the Eighth, with the title of Defender of the Faith, retaining 
the crown, which was of maffive gold. Henry the Eighth had the 
harp adopted in the national arms of Ireland, and reprefented on the 
Irifh coins. Setting, however, no particular value on Brian Boiroimhe's 
harp prefented to him by the Pope, he gave it to the firft Earl of 
Clanricarde, in whofe family it remained till the beginning of the 
eighteenth century, when it came by a lady of the De Burgh family 
into that of MacMahon, of Clonagh in the county of Clare. After 
the death of MacMahon it pafled into the polTeffion of Counfellor 
Macnamara, of Limerick; and finally, in 1782, it was prefented by 
the Right Hon. William Conyngham to Trinity College Mufeum, 
Dublin. 

According to another tradition, this harp belonged originally to 
the illuftrious (ept of O'Neil, who fiouriflied in the fourteenth century. 

The Irifli name for *' harp *' is clarfeth. 



616. 'yz. 

IRISH Harp (Clarfeth). Wood, of plain conftruftion, 
with forty-one wire firings. Old Irijh. Date unknown. 
H. 4 ft. 4 in., W. 3 ft. 7 in. (Given by the Ven. Archdeacon 
Saurin.) 

This interefting inftrument belonged formerly to a celebrated Irifh 
harper. A ftmilar one, which is in the pofleffion of the Marquefs of 
Kildare, bears the date 1671. 

Confidering the fcarcity of the old Iri{h clarfeth^ mention may be 
made of a fine fpecimen formerly in the coUedion of Irifli antiquities 
belonging to Thomas Crofton Croker, from which it was purchafed, in 
the year 1854, at an auftion in London, by Thomas Bateman, Efq. 
It bears on its front the infcription, Made by John Kelly for the Rev. 
Charles Bvnworth Baltdaniely i734. At the contentions or meetings 
of the bards of Ireland, between the years 1730 and 1750, which were 
generally held at Bruree, county Limerick, the Rev. Charles Bunworth 
was five times chofen umpire, or prefident. Although this harp is not 
of high antiquity, it is an interefling example of the ancient form and 



European. 241 

conftru£lion, and likewife of the ancient manner of ornamenting the in- 
ftrument. A wood engraving of it, from a drawing by Maclife, is given 
in ^ A Deicriptive Catalogue of the Antiquities and Mifcellaneous Ob- 
je£ls preferved in the Mufeum of Thomas Bateman, at Lomberdale 
Houfe, Derbyfhirc/ Bakewell, 1855. ^^ account of the Irifli harps 
depodted in the Mufeum of Dublin is to be found in ^ A Deicriptive 
Catalogue of the Antiquities in the Mufeum of the , Royal Irifli Aca- 
demy,' by W. R. Wilde, Dublin, 1863. The illuftrations of the Irifli 
harp in the works of Bunting and fimilar writers may be fuppofed to 
be known to muflcians. 

The number of firings appears to have been greater on the older 
fpecimens recorded than on the later ones. Praetorius, in his ^ Syn- 
tagma muflcum,' &c., vol. ii., Wolfenbiittel, 1619, gives an illuftra- 
tion of the Irifli harp, in which it is reprefented with forty-three firings. 
He defcribes the inflrument as having a pleafant refonance, and being 
conflrufted with a confiderable degree of ingenuity. The illuflration 
exhibits the fame fhape, with the fore-bar bent outwards, which is 
fhown in the prefent fpecimen. 

Some harps after the model of the old Irifh clarfeth^ which are 
painted and gilt, were made in Dublin in the beginning of the prefent 
century. 

1 1 25. '6g, 

LUTE. (Italian liuto.) Wood and ivory. The finger- 
board of marquetry of rofewood. The head flands at a 
right angle with the neck. It has twenty-one firings, forming 
ten pairs, and a fingle one, which is the highefl firing. Italian 
{Venice). Beginning of the 17th century. H. 2 ft. 8 in., W. 
I ft. (Bought, 40/.) 

The Eaflern origin of the lute has already been noticed in the 
defcription of the Egyptian oud^ page 142. 

The mofl noteworthy books of inflrudlion for the lute are by 
Johannes Judenkunig, Vienna, 1523; Hans Gerle, Niirnberg, 1533 ; 
Adrien le Roy, Paris, 1551 ; Jean Baptifle Befardus, Cologne, 1603; 
Fran9ois Campion, Paris, 17 10; Erenfl Gottlieb Baron, Niirnberg, 
1727. *Mufick's Monument,' by Thomas Mace, London, 1676, 
contains inflruftions on the lute, theorbo, and viol, with engravings. 
The mofl popular Englifh inflruftion book for the lute appears to have 
been a tranflation of Le Roy's work, of which a copy preferved in 



244 Catalogue of Mufical Infiruments. 



The chitarrone is a theorbo with an extraordinarily long neck, by 
which the length of the eight bafs ftrings is confiderably increafed. 
The largeft inftruments of this kind were made fome centuries ago, in 
Rome. They were ufed in the theatre for accompanying the voice, 
before the Clavicembalo, or Harpfichord, was introduced for this 
purpofe. The fineft inftruments of the lute kind were made in Italy, 
efpecially at Bologna, Rome, Venice, and Padua. Many of the manu- 
fa£lurers in Italy were, however, foreigners. Evelyn, in his Diary 
(May 21, 1645), Speaking of Bologna, fays, ^^This place has alfo been 
celebrated for lutes made by the old mafters, Mollen [Maler ?], Hans 
Frey, and Nicholas Sconvelt, which were of extraordinary price ; the 
workmen were chiefly Germans." One of the earlieft and moft cele- 
brated of thefe makers was Lucas Maler (or ^' Laux Maler " as he in- 
fcribed his name on his inftruments). He lived at Bologna about 1415. 

Other celebrated lute-makers were : — Ludwig Porgt, in Regen(burg, 
1525. Hans Gerle, in Niirnberg, 1520. Hans Neufiedler, in Niirnberg, 
1550. Sebaftian Raufgler, about 1 590. Bueckenbergor Buchenberg, in 
Rome, about 1610. Hans Fichthold, a German, whofe place of abode 
is not known, about 1610 ; his lutes, the backs of which are made with 
narrow ftrips of wood, in the Italian manner, were formerly much prized 
by connoifTeurs. Paul Belami, in Paris, about 16 12, probably an Italian. 
His lutes were highly valued. Joachim Tielke, in Hamburg, about 
1600. Antonio Coftaro in Rome, about 16 15. Chriftofilo Rochi in 
Padua, about 1620. Sebaftian Rochi in Venice, about 1620. Clays von 
Pommerft)ach, Cologne, probably during the fixteenth century. Mag- 
nus TiefFenbrucker, Vendelino TiefFenbrucker, and Leonhard TiefFen- 
brucker, in Venice, during the fixteenth century ; their lutes were rather 
flat and long in body. Vendelino Venere, in Venice, fixteenth century. 
Michael Hartung, in Padua, about 1620 ; he was a pupil of Leonhard 
TiefFenbrucker. Raphael Meft, about 1630 ; a diftinguiflied pupil of 
Michael Hartung, in Padua. Johann Chriftian HoflFmann, in Leipzig, 
about 1720 ; his lutes were exported to Holland and England. Martin 
Schott, in Prague, feventeenth century. Sebaftian Rauch, in Prague, 
feventeenth century. Matthaeus Hummel, in Niirnberg, feventeenth 
century. Schelle in Niirnberg, about 1700. His lutes were much 
valued, not only in Germany, but alfo in other European countries. 



59^9- '59- 

CHITARRONE. A theorbo. Wood, inlaid with ebony, 
ivory, and coloured woods. Two fets of wooden tuning- 



Europi 



>ean, 24.5 

pegs, the lower containing twelve, and the higher eight. The 
inftrument had wire ftrings. Italian. Infcribed infide " An- 
drea Taus in Siena, i6ai." L. 5 ft. 4 in., W. i ft. i\ in. 
(Bought, 2/.) 

Bonanni, in his 'Cabinetto Armonico,' Rome, 1722, gives a draw- 
ing of a chitarront which has a fomewhat Ihort neck, and only two 
ftrings; and he mentions it as an inftrument of the ItaJian country- 
people. It appears therefore probable that the name chitarrone was 
applied to diflercnt inftruments in different centuries ; or that the con- 
ftru£tion of the Romifti tiarba called chitarrone was in fome meafure 
fug^efted by that of the two-ftringed one. Several chitarront were 
generally played tt^ether in operatic mufic. At the mulical perform- 
ances in Florence, during the marriage feftivities of the Grand Dulce 
Don Ferdinando Medici with Madama Chriftiana di Loreno, in the 
year 1589, the orcheftra confifted of the following inftni 

Lcuti groifi e piccolr. 

Chitarroni. 

Lire. 

Archiviolata Lira. 

Cetera. 

Mandoia. 

Salterio. 

Arpe. 

Violino [alfo called Violina]. 

Sopranin di Viola. 

Tenor di Viola, 

Baffo di Viola. 

Sotto-BafTo di Viola. 

Viola baftarda. 

Travcrfe. 

Tromboni. 

Cornetti. 

Organo di pivette. 



Fig. i»!, — CnTTAiiioHr. 



246 Catalogue of Muficai Injiruments. 



Another inftance of the employment of the chltarront in the 
orcheftra is recorded in a lift of the mufical inftruments ufed in the 
performance of the opera of Orfeo, compofed by Claudio Monteverde, 
in the year 1607. The orchellra confilled of: Duoi graviccmbani; 
duoi contrabafli da viola; dieci viole da brazzo; un arpa doppia; 
duoi violini piccoli alia Francefe ; duoi chitarroni; duoi oi^ani di 
legno ; tre baffi da gamba ; quatro tromboni ; un regale ; duoi cor- 
netti ; un Aautina alle vigefima feconda ; un clarino con tre trombe 
Ibrdine. 



4274- '56- 

ARCHLUTE. (Italian, arciliuto ; French, archiluth ; 
German, erzlaute.) Wood, inlaid with ivory and tortoife- 
fhell, engraved. Two fets of tuning- pegs, the lower containing 
fourteen, and the higher ten. On the middle of the neck is an 



European. 247 

oval plate of mother-of-pearl, bearing the German infcription, 
Gott der Herr ift Sonne und Schield (" God, the Lord, is fun and 
fhield *'). German {Hamburg). By Jacobus Heinrich Goldt. 
About 1700. L. 4 ft. 5 in., W. i ft. 2 in. (Bought, 8/.) 

The archlute is a large theorbo with a peculiar arrangement 
of the- firings. Several of them were doubled, the additional firing 
being tuned an oftave higher than the other. The procefs of tuning 
fuch inftruments was evidently troublefome and tedious. Matthe- 
fon, the quaint contemporary of Handel, in his ' Das Neu-erofFnete 
Orcheftre,' Hamburg, 17 13, remarks: — " If a lutenift attains the 
age of eighty, you may be fure he has tuned fixty years j and the 
worft of it is that among a hundred players, efpecially of the amateurs, 
fcarcely two are capable of tuning with accuracy. Now there is 
fomething amifs with the Arings ; now with the frets \ and now again 
with the fcrews ; (b that I have been told that in Paris it cofts as 
miich money to keep a lute as to keep a horfe." Alfo Mace, an 
enthufiaflic admirer of the lute, teftifies to the difficulty of keeping the 
inftrument in proper condition \ for his treatife on the lute and theorbo 
(contained in ' Mufick's Monument,* London, 1676) is replete with 
rules for ftringing, tuning, cleaning, repairing, &c. And, as regards 
preferving the inftrument, he gives the advice — " You ihall do well, 
ever when you lay it by in the day-time, to put it into a bed that is 
conftantly ufed, between the rug and blanket." 



QUINTERNA, or Chiterna. Ornamented with tortoife- 
fhell, mythological figures in ivory, and precious ftones. 
Ten ftrings of catgut, arranged in five pairs. On the fide 
of the neck is the infcription — " Joachim Tielke in Hamburgy 
1539." German. Firft half of i6th century. L. 2 ft. i in., 
W. 9^ in. (Bought, 30/.) 



50^. '68. 

MANDOLINE. (Italian, mandolino.) Wood, ornamented 
with tortoife-fhell and mother-of-pearl. Metal frets ; 



248 Catalogue of Mujical Injiruments. 



eight tuning-pegs. Italian {Neapolitan). Dated 1772. L. 
I ft. 7^ in., W. 5f in. (Bought, 7/. 7J.) 

There ufed to be in Italy various kinds of mandolines, of which the 
Milanefe and the Neapolitan were the moft common. The firft-named 
had ufually ten ftrings, conftituting five pairs. The Neapolitan mando- 
lino had eight firings, conftituting four pairs, each pair being tuned in 
unifon, as follows : — 



^^ 



i 



X 



The ftrings for the loweft tone, GG, were of catgut covered with 
filver wire ; thofe for DD, were of brafs \ thofe for AA, of fteel j and 
the higheft, for EE, of thin catgut. The ftrings were ufually twanged 
with a quill. Mozart, in his ^ Don Giovanni,' has made ufe of the 
Neapolitan mandolino in the ferenade ; but, as the inftrument has fallen 
into difufe, at leaft in moft countries except Italy, the part written 
for it by Mozart is now generally played on the violin, pizzicato. 
The mandolino is now often ftrung with catgut ftrings. 

It refembles a diminutive lute ; but its finger-board has metal frets, 
and its ftrings are faftened to little ivory pins at the end of the body, 
inftead of being looped through holes in the bridge. The convex back 
of the mandoline is deeper than that of the lute. It is one of the 
handfomeft muftcal inftruments. 

Fouchetti publifhed in Paris in the year 1770 a ^Methodepour 
apprendre a jouer facilement de la mandoline a quatre ou a fix cordes.' 
Other inftru£lion books for the mandoline, now fcarce, are : Leone, 
' Methode raifonnee pour pafTer du Violon a la Mandoline,' Paris, 1783. 
Denis, 'Methode pour apprendre la Mandoline,' Paris, 1792. Borto- 
lazzi, ' Anweifung die Mandoline von felbft zu erlernen,' Leipzig, 
1805. 

503. '68. 

PANDURINA. Wood, with back of ivory and ebony, 
the neck terminating in a carved head. Twelve tuning- 
pegs ; metal frets. The two loweft ftrings are covered with 
wire ; the two next are of catgut, and the others are of metal. 
Two ftrings are always tuned in unifon. Italian. 17th century. 
L. I ft. 10 in., W. 6 in. (Bought, 4/. 15J.) 



rAXDUEI-VV. 
ci, XVr. Century. 



r 



European. 249 

504. '68. 

PANDURINA. Wood, the back and front inlaid with 
ivory and tortoife-fhelL Seven tuning-pegs. A fine 
fpecimen, but without firings and frets. The frets were pro- 
bably of catgut, as was often the cafe with inftruments of the 
lute kind. Italian. 17th century. L. i ft. 7^ in., W. 4^- in. 
(Bought, 4/.) 

219. ^66. 

PANDURINA. Beechwood, carved with ftrap and foliage 
work, having in the centre a group of Juno, Diana, and 
Venus ; on the back of the neck is a Medufa's head in relief. 
Seven tuning-pegs. French. About 1570. L. i ft. 4 J in., 
W. 4^ in. (Bought, 139/. ioj.) 



7754. '62. 

PANDURINA. Marquetry of wood and ivory in alternate 
bands. Twelve tuning-pegs. Italian. i6th century. 
L. I ft. 8 in., W. 5^ in. (Bought, 3/.) 

The Italians had various inftruments of this kind, in ihape re- 
fembling the lute. Of this defcription are, for inftance, the mandora^ 
mandorina^ and mandolino. The mandora had ufually for each tone two 
ftrings, which were of catgut and wire ; and there were eight pairs 
of them. The mandorina had four wire ftrings, ufually tuned as 
follows : — 



^— * 



The mandoUno has already been defcribed. It differs ftom the pan* 
durina chiefly in having a rounder and deeper body, and in having the 
tuning-pegs placed at the back of the head ; while the pandurina has a 
fort of fcroll, with the tuning-pegs iituated fideways, iimilar to the old 
Engliih cither. 

M. I. R 



A 



250 Catalogue of Mufical Injiruments. 

1737. '69. 

HARP-LUTE. Wood, with ornamentation of painted 
flowers. Engli/h. About 1 800. L. 2 ft. 8^ in., W. 
I ft. if in. (Bought, 3/.) 

The harp'lutey an invention of Edward Light, of London, about 
the year 1798, has twelve catgut ftrings, which are tuned in the follow- 
ing order : — 



ni^fr'r ^ ±L_^ m 



This was their adual found ; but it was the cuftom to write them 
in the key of C-major, thus : — 




4iJ J J ■! ^ -'L^^ 



They, therefore, (bunded a major-fixth lower than they were 
written. Some of the ftrings were provided with movable ftops, by 
means of which they could be raifed a femitone at the pleafure of the 
performer. The harp-lute was efpecially intended for accompanying 
vocal mufic ; it has not, however, at any time been much in popular 
favour. 

i7> ^7^' '7S- 

HARP-LUTE. Wciiod, varnifhed black and gilt. Twelve 
firings, ten of which are of catgut, and two of filk 
covered with wire. Made by " Edward Light, Foley Place, 
London." In cafe. Englijh. About 1800. H. 2 ft. 8f in., 
W. ijf in. (Bought, 3/.) 

In the year 1816, Edward Light took out a patent for a ftringed 
inftrument in ihape and conftrudlion ftmilar to the harp-lute^ but 
having a finger-board for all the ftrings. This improved harp-lute he 
called the Britijh harp-lute^ or the Britijh lute. In the fpecification 
defining the peculiarities of the Britijh lute^ the patentee aflerts that 
** it is capable of performing any piece of mufic in different keys with 
more eafe and corrednefs than is the common harp-lute.'* The moft 
complete inftrument of this kind, invented by Edward Light, was called 



European. 251 

by him the dital harp. " Ditals, or thumb-keys," he (ays, " are certain 
pieces of mechanifm, each of which, when prefTed upon, will produce 
the depreffion of a ftop-ring, or eye, which draws the firing of the harp- 
lute down upon a fret. • • . This mechanifm has the property of 
holding the ftring faft in fuch pofttion as long as may be required after 
the prefTure of the finger or thumb is removed , or the prefTure may be 
removed in an inflant by a touch of the thumb on the fame button or 
key." The harp-lute has only a few of thefe ditals, while on the dital 
harp each firing is provided with one, which raifes it a femitone. 



201. '72. 

DOUBLE HARP-GUITAR. In fhape fomewhat rc- 
fembling a harp. Rofewood and other woods. Con- 
ftruded for two fets of firings, together 1 2, of catgut and of 
filk covered with wire. Made by John Frederick Grofjean, 
in London. Engli/h. About 1840. H. aft. iif in., W. 
16 J in. (Bought, 2/. 12s. 6d.) 

This inflrument contains two finger-boards, each being flrung with 
fix firings, arranged like thofe of the guitar. It exhibits one of the 
many unfuccefsful attempts to improve the guiur, or to render it more 
complete, which were made in the beginning of the prefent century 
when the guitar was flill in vogue. A fimilar inflrument with two 
finger-boards, and even with three, was made in the fhape of the 
ancient lyre. 

The hijfex^ a fort of double guitar, invented by Vanhecke, of Paris, 
and manufactured by the harp-maker Nadermann, Paris, about the year 
1770, had two fets of firings, each fet containing fix firings ; hence its 
name biffix. Only one fet had a finger-board ; the other fet was placed 
near the finger-board, and therefore could only be ufed as open firings. 
The compafs embraced three odlaves and a half. Vanhecke publifhed 
an inflrudlion book for the biffix. 

In the year 1837, J. F. Grofjean, a harp-maker in London, the 
manu&£lurer of the prefent double harp-guitar^ took out a patent for a 
very fingular invention for improving the quality of found of the harp, 
and ^^ applicable to all other mufical flringed inflruments." As this 
invention has been applied to the prefent inflrument, the following ac- 
count of it may be interefling to muficians : '' My improvement," 
the inventor fays, ^^ conflfls in applying vitrified or cryflallized matters 
to founding-boards, and other furfaces of harps and other flringed in- 
flruments, whereby I am enabled to obtain greater fiillnefs and richnefs 

R 2 



252 Catalogue of Mufical Injiruments. 



of tone to the fame than when made according to the ordinary modes 
now in praftice." Powdered glafs ground very fine is fifted evenly 
over the founding-board, which has previoufly been warmed and coated 
with cement, thus cauiing the founding-board ^^ to refemble a grotto 
with irregular cryftallizcd furfaces, producing a very peculiar efFed to 
the fulnefs and beauty of the found of the inftruments fo improved/* 

In the double harp-guitar under notice, the preparation alluded to is 
attached to the under fide of the found-board, which may be feen 
through the found-hole near the bottom of the frame, and which has 
the appearance of being lined with fand-paper. The fonoroufnefs of 
the inftrument fufficiently proves that the ftufF, — whatever may be its 
efficacy, — has at any rate the negative merit of not impairing the vibra- 
tion of the found-board. 

Several attempts have been made during the prefent century, in 
England as well as on the continent, to enfure a fine and fiiU tone on 
ftringed inftruments by means of fbme extraneous application to the 
found-board ; but it would not be eaiy to point out a more extraordinary 
expedient than that exhibited by the prefent double harp^guitar. 

soy. '68. 

CASTANETS. Ebony. Modern. L. 2f in. (Bought, 

Inftruments of the caftanet clafs, — or crotala^ as the ancients called 
them, — are fo numerous and various that even a notice of the moft 
remarkable ones would require much fpace. Among European 
countries it is in Spain efpecially that cajianets are highly popular ; and 
from thence evidently other European nations have adopted them, at 
any rate in the {hape in which they are at prefent generally ufed. The 
name alfo is Spaniih, and originated, it is fuppofed, from the inftrument 
being made of the wood of the cheftnut tree, cajiana. It may, how- 
ever, be obferved that the Arabs have the word Kas^ fignifying " a 
vafe,*' which they apply to certain inftruments of the crotala fpecies. 

508. '68. 

CASTANETS. Ebony. Modern. L. af in. (Bought, 

509. '68. 

CASTANETS. Ivory. Modern. L. 2| in. (Bought, 
3^0 



European. 253 

y^S6. '61. 

GUITAR. (Spanifh, guitarra ; Italian, chitarra ; French, 
guitare,) Wood, inlaid with marquetry of ivory, ebony, 
and mother-of-pearl. Metal frets. There are indications of 
its having been mounted with five fets of firings ; four fets 
contained three ftrings each, and one fet contained four ftrings, 
which were tuned in unifon. Italian. About 1550. L. 
2 ft. II in., W. 10^ in. (Bought, 6/.) 

The guitar is evidently an importation from the Eaft, but it has 
undergone various modifications fince its adoption by European nations. 
It was an inflrument of the Moors in Spain, and became known in 
France about the nth century. The French called it formerly 
guiterney and the Englifh gittern^ ghittern^ and gythorn. At an early 
period it probably had the oval fhape of the kuitra^ flill in ufe by the 
Arab muficians in Tunis and Algiers. In Spain it had formerly alfo 
the name of vihuela. An inflrudtion book for this inflrument, pub- 
lifhed at Salamanca in the year 1552, bears the tide, ^ Pifador (D.), 
Libro de cifi'a para taner vihuela ;' and in England, at the time of 
Henry VIII., we find it occafionally called '^the Spanifh viol.*' 

Inflru6lion books for the old Spanifh guitar have been written by : — 
Ludovico Milan, Valencia, 15345 Sixtus Kargel, Mayence, 1569; 
Joannes Carolus, Lerida, 1626 5 Pietro Milioni, Rome, 1638 ; Lucas 
Ruiz de Ribayaz, Madrid, 1672, &c. The number of guitar fchools 
publifhed during the lafl century is enormous. Germany alone con- 
tributed above fifty. 

The guitar was a fafhionable inflrument in England, played by ladies, 
in the time of Charles II. On the Continent it generally had ten cat- 
gut firings, of which two were always tuned in unifon. At the prefent 
day it has fix firings, the lowefl two of which are of filk covered with 
filver wire, and the others are of catgut. They are tuned as follows : — 



3 



W=^ 



The found is, however, an oftave lower than the notation ; hence 
the guitar accompaniment is more efFedive with a foprano voice than 
with a tenor voice, and the leafl with a bafs voice, on account of its 
coincidence with the compafs of the male voices. 

An old Portuguefe guitar, dating from about the year 1600, which is 
flill in a well-preferved condition, has twelve firings, which are arranged 






254 Catalogue of Mufical Injiruments. 



fo that the higher fix are in fets of two, and the lower fix in fets of 
three. As the firings of each fet are tuned in unifon, five tones are 
produced by the open firings. This guitar has three found-holes, the 
head is turned backwardsi fomewhat like the head of the lute, and the 
frets are of catgut, as they ufed likewife to be on the lute. 

389. '71. 

GUITAR. Rofewood back, inlaid with lighter woods in 
radiating and zig-zag lines, and diaper pattern, with 
infcription d rafael vallejo me hizo en baza, 1789; the 
founding board of pine, with the Royal Arms of Spain, and 
floral ornament inlaid in rofewood, and with infcription soy 
del rey don CARLOS iiii Q^ D* o® m' A* (/.f., Quc Dios guardc 
muchos anos). Made for Charles IV. of Spain. Spanijh. i8th 
century. L. 3 ft. 2 in., W. iif in. (Bought, 5/.) 

This guitar has the peculiar contrivance of twenty wire firings 
being placed on the left fide, in addition to the catgut firings, of which 
there are twelve. The firings are arranged in pairs, tuned in unifon ; 
thofe of catgut, therefore, produce (ix tones, and thofe of wire, ten. 

390. '71. 

GUITAR. Rofewood, inlaid with ivory, the founding 
board of pine inlaid with ivory and rofewood. French, 
Middle of i8th century. L. 2 ft. 1 1^ in., W. 9^ in. (Bought, 
4/.) 

GUITAR. Decorated with mythological figures and other 
ornament in tortoife-ftiell, mother-of-pearl, and ivory. 
In leather cafe, ftudded with brafs nails. Prench (?). 17th 
century. L. 3 ft 4f in., W. ii| in. (Bought, 53/.) 

183. '6g. 

MACHETR A fmall fpecies of guitar, with four gut 
firings. Wood, made in the fliape of a fifli. Madeira. 



European, 255 

Modern. L. i ft. 10^ in., greateft W. 6f in. (Given by Mr. 
T. Muir.) 

The Machete is alfo popular in Portugal, where it generally has the 
ihape of a diminutive guitar. 

Machete is likewife the name of a kind of dagger which the Portu- 
guefe peafents formerly ufed to wear at the girdle. 

*' Five inftruments in the fhape of filh/* are mentioned among the 
mufical inftruments of Thomas Britton, the famous fmall-coal man, in 
the catalogue of his efFeds, which were fold by public audion after his 
death in 17 14. The five inftruments were probably machetes^ unleis 
they were pochettesy like one in the fliape of a fifh which is in the Liceo 
Comunale di Mufica at Bologna. 

MACHETE. Wood, in form of a fifh. Five firings. 
Madeira. Early 19th century. L. 25^ in., W. 7^ in. 
(Bought, 2/.) 

The furface is incifed to reprefent the fcales of a fifli. 

ZITHER. Wood, inlaid. Ten ivory tuning-pegs; wire 
ft rings in pairs, tuned in unifon ; ornamented found-hole 
in the middle. The back is flat, the neck has metal frets. 
German. i6th century. L. 2 ft. if in., W. 8f in. (Bought, 
3/.) (See Fig. 130.) 

The old German %ither (^zitter^ either), of which the prefent inftru- 
ment is a fpecimen, contained four, five, fix, or even more, pairs of 
wire ftrings, each pair being tuned in unifon. The zithers with five 
and fix pairs of ftrings were the moft common. The former was tuned 
as follows : — 




It was, however, very ufual to have for the loweft tones fingle 
ftrings covered with thin wire. 

The ftrings were twanged with a quill, or with a piece of whale- 
bone. The cithern J ot cittern, which during the 1 6th and 17 th cen- 



256 Catalogue of Mufical Inflruments. 

turics was a popular inftrument in England, where it was often played 
in the barbers' fliops, had four pairs of wire firings. 

Its top generally terminated in a grotefquely-carved human head. 
The cithers made in England during the eighteenth century have 
generally at the top Tome inlaid ornamentation in ivory, aiother-of-pearl, 
or fancy wood. 

Although not well fuited for the performance of harmonious com- 
binations, Unce its wire firings are twanged with a quill, and therefore 
only fuch chords can be properly produced as arc on firings following 
each other in uninterrupted fuccelBon, the cither, neverthelefs, pofleffes 
confiderable charms. Its found, which is crifp and clear when the 
firings are twanged near the found-hole, affumes a particularly foft and 
fwect quality when they are twanged clofe to the bridge. Thus pleafant 



Fig. J 30 ZlTHU. 

eiFeifts are obtainable. True, modifications in quality of found, by 
vibrating the firings more or lefs near to the end, are obtainable on any 
firinged infirument. They are alfo particularly efFeflive on the lute ; 
and, likcwife, on the violin and other infiruments played with a bow ; 
but the cither pre<eminently invites to their employment. 



European. 257 



This fpecies of %iiher is ftill to be found in fome parts of Germany, 
particularly in mountainous diftrids \ but the horizontal zither j in which 
the finger-board is at the fide of the found-board, is now the moft in 
vogue. 

There are feveral conjectures as to the derivation of the German 
name zither or zitter. Some fuppofe it to be from *' zittem" on 
account of the peculiarly trembling found of the inftrument. During 
the firft centuries of the Chriftian era the word cythera {cithara) implied 
almoft any ftringed inftrument, efpecially if the firings were twanged 
with a ple£brum, or with the fingers. It is alfo noteworthy, though 
perhaps only as a fingular coincidence, that the Perfians and Hindus 
have a three-flringed fpecies of zither^ which they call Jitar^ from the 
Perfian word Ji^ *' three," and tary '' a firing." The Hindu Jitar is, 
however, now ufually mounted with five firings. 

The chara6leriflics of the Englifh cither about the year 1600 may 
be afcertained from ^ New Citharen LefTons, with perfed Tunings of 
the fame, from four* courfe of firings to four-teene courfe, euen to tris 
the fharpefl teeth of Enuie, with lefTons of all fortes, and methodicall 
Inflrudions for all ProfefTors and Practitioners of the Citharen. By 
Thomas Robinfon, Student in all the liberall Sciences,' London, 1609. 
The title page is adorned with an engraving reprefenting a Bijuga 
Cither, mounted with feven pairs of firings over the finger-board, and 
feven fingle firings at the fide of the neck, as on the theorbo. The 
inflruClion is conveyed in the form of dialogue between *' SchoUer " 
and ^^ Mafler." There is alfo an illuflration of the common cither, 
with only four pairs of firings, or eight firings producing four unifons. 
Another curious book on the Englifh cither, publifhed by John Play- 
ford, is entitled, ^ Mufick's Delight \ containing new and pleafant 
LefTons on the Cithern,' London, 1666. 



CETERA. Maple-wood, flained, the body carved with 
overlapping rofettes and other ornament ; the found- 
board of flained deal with perforated tracery, infcribed at back 
" Auguflinus Citaroedus Urbinas, mdlxxxii." Italian. Late 
i6th century. L. 3 ft. if in., W. 12 in. (Bought, 8/.) 

This interefling old cither had originally thirteen tuning-pegs, of 
which, however, two only flill remain. 



258 Catalogue of Mufical Inftruments. 

KEYED-CITHER. Wood, mounted with gilt metal 
and tortoife-ftiell. With Prefton's tuning machine. 
Englifh. 1 8th century. L. 2 ft. 3 J in., W. \i\ in. In 
wooden cafe, covered with ftamped leather. (Given by Mrs. 
Bay ley.) 

Six keys, like thofe of the pianoforte, are placed in alitde box, which 
is fcrewed on over the firings, fo that the hammers ftrike the firings 
from above. 

In England, Chriflian Claufs took out a patent, in the year 1783, 
for the application of fuch a contrivance, which, as he declares it to be 
his own invention, probably differed fomewhat from the prefent one. 

642, '69. 

ZITHER (alfo called Schlagzither). In cafe. The inflru- 
ment is of rofewood, inlaid with brafs, mother-of-pearl, 
and ivory. The cafe contains three brafs boxes for firings, a 
brufh, two pairs of nippers, key, tuning-key, and cleaner. 
Bavarian. Modern. L. of inflrument, i ft. 8 in., W. i f t i in., 
H. 2 in. (Bought, Paris Exhibition, 1867, 6^- ^x.) 

This horizontal fpecies of zither^ which bears but little refemblance 
to its namefake jufl defcribed, has recently come into fafhion, efpecially 
in the fouth of Germany ; but it is not exadlly a modern invention, for, 
in a lefs perfedl flate of conflru£lion it has long been a favourite inflru- 
ment of the country people in Auflria, Styria, Bohemia, Bavaria, and 
the Tyrol. It is now mofl ufually made with 30 firings, of which 
four are on the finger-board, and are ufed for playing the melody ; 26 
firings ferve for playing the accompaniment. The firings are of fleel 
wire, brafs wire, brafs wire covered with filver, catgut, filk covered 
with filver wire, and filk covered with copper wire. The four firings 
for the finger-board are tuned thus : — 



^ 



3 



The performer places the inflrument before him on a table ; and he 
has attached to the thumb of his right hand a pledlrum made of filver 



European. 259 

wire, or of German filver, with which he ftrikes the melody firings j 
while the other fingers of his right hand flrike the accompaniment 
firings. There are zithers with more and with fewer firings than the 
fpecimen thus defcribed. 

Three kinds of the horizontal zither are at the prefent day con- 
flruded in Germany, the fchlagzither^ the liederxither^ and the Jireich- 
zither. The lafl-named is played with a bow ; the others are intended 
for playing tunes, and for accompanying the voice. 



641. '6g. 

STREICHZITHER and Bow, in Cafe. A fmall inflru- 
ment, three-flringed, and played with a bow. The body 
is of rofewood, inlaid with ivory ; the firings are of metal. It 
has three fmall feet with points of metal, and is placed on a 
table when it is played. Bavarian {Munich). Modern. By 
Max Amberger. L. i ft. 7^ in., W. 10^ in. (Bought, Paris 
Exhibition, 1867, 3^- ^^-^O 



V 



643. '69. 

lOLIN. German. Modern. L. 2 ft. (Bought, Paris 
Exhibition, 1867, ^^j.) 

Of the flringed inflruments ufed in our orcheflra, the violin is the 
one which has been longefl preferved entirely unaltered. Its name 
(Italian, vioUno)^ a diminutive of violoy fuggefls that our tenor [viola di 
braccio) is the older inflrument of the two. The viol^ in ufe about 
three centuries ago, was however fomewhat different in fhape. As the 
oldefl-known inflruments played with a bow, which in European 
countries preceded the violin, may be mentioned : — The rebec^ which, 
it appears, was firfl popular in Spain ; the crwth of the Weifh ; the 
fidla of the Norwegian, which, in fhape fomewhat refembled the crwth j 
and which, with fome flight modifications, is flill occafionally to be 
found in Iceland, where it is called langfpiel ; and the fithele of the 
Anglo-Saxons, derived originally from Germany. A reprefentation of 
the Anglo-Saxon fithele^ contained in a manufcript of the eleventh 
century, preferved in the Britifh Mufeum, exhibits a four-flringed fiddle 
of a pear fhape ; or, to fpeak more exa£lly, refembling the half of a 
pear divided longitudinally. A flill earlier reprefentation of a fiddle, 



26o Catalogue of Mujical Injiruments. 



almoft identical with the foregoing, but having only one ftring, is given 
in Martinus Gerbert's * De Cantu et Muiica Sacra.' The manufcript 
from which this illuftration has been derived, is fuppofed to date from 
the eighth or ninth century. In Germany, the oval, or rather pear- 
like form of the Anglo-Saxon fithek was ftill preferved, although fome- 
what modified, as late as the (ixteenth century, in the Geige^ of which 
ibme engravings are given in Martin Agricola's ^ Mufica inftrumentalis,* 
Wittcmberg, 1545. 

Such were the inftruments from which our violin has gradually been 
developed, until it attained, in the feventeenth century, that degree of 
perfedion which has never fince been furpalTed. The violin makers 
whofe inftruments are ftill moft highly valued, are, — Antonio Amati, 
who(e moft flourifliing period dates between the years 1592 and 1619 ; 
Nicolo Amati, the nephew of the preceding, 1 662-1 692 ; Giufeppe 
Guarneri, 1690-1707; Antonio Stradivari, 1700-1725; and Jakob 
Stainer, 1650-1670. All thefe celebrated makers, except Jakob Stainer, 
were Italians, living at Cremona. Jakob Stainer (or Jacobus Steiner), 
was a native of Abfom, a village near Innft)ruck in the Tyrol. No 
other works of art have probably experienced fb great an increafe in 
price as the violins of thefe celebrated makers. Stainer ufed himfelf to 
carry his violins to the monafteries fituated in the neighbourhood of 
Abibm, where he lived. He fold them at I2J. apiece. It was not 
until after his death that his workmanfliip was duly appreciated. A 
violin by Jofeph Guarnerius, fetched in London, 700 guineas ; perhaps 
the largeft fum which has ever been given for a violin. 



34. '6g. 

VIOLIN and Bow. Carved with fcrollwork, and the royal 
ihield and fupporters. Said to have belonged to King 
James L Engli/h. Early 17th century. L. i ft 1 1 J in., W. 
8 in., L. of bow 2 ft. 4^ in. (Bought, 15/.) 



V 



499. '68. 

lOLIN. German. Modern. (Bought, Paris Exhibition, 
1867, 4/.) 



European. 261 



V 



541- 7^- 

lOLIN Bow. Steel. Manufaftured and given by Mons. 
J. B. Vuillaume* French. 1871. L. 2 ft. 5 in. 



There are feveral celebrated violin bow makers, but the bows moft 
coveted are thofe by Francois Tourte, Lupot, Edward and John Dodd, 
and Vuillaume. Francois Tourte, in Paris, during the fecond half of 
the eighteenth century, and in the beginning of the prefent century, 
charged about 12/. each for fome of his bows. Edward Dodd, who 
died in London in the year 18 10, — it is faid, at the age of 105, — was 
the father of John Dodd, whofe bows are more highly efteemed than 
thofe of his father. 



10. 71. 

MINIATURE Violin. Wood, with carved head; the 
lower part of the back inlaid with coloured woods, 
reprefenting mediaeval buildings. German (?). 17th century. 
L. I2f in., W. 3^ in. (Bought, 2/. 5J.) 

The body of this fmall violin is of about the fize of a pochette ; but 
the inftrument differs from the pochette inafmuch as the neck is of the 
fame proportion to the body as that of a violin 5 while the neck of the 
pochette is confiderably longer in proportion to its body. 



519-519*. '72. 

SORDINO (French pochette) with Bow. The belly wood, 
the reft ivory, with carved female head. The bow alfo 
ivory. By " Dimanche Drouyn a Paris." In ftamped and gilt 
leather cafe. French. 17th or early i8th century. L. 15 in., 
L. of bow, 15 in. (Bought, i/. loj.) 

The inftrument is boat-fhaped. The mme fordino is alfo occafion- 
ally applied to the Kit, made in the fliape of a violin. The dancing- 
mafters carried it in their pocket, hence its French name, pochette^ and 
its German name, tajchengeige. 



262 Catalogue of Mujical Injiruments. 



7360. '61. 

VIOLA-DA-GAMBA. Wood, the head carved with 

foliated fcrollwork, and terminating in a female buft. 

The finger-board inlaid witti marquetry of ivory, &c. Six 

tuning-pegs. Italian. About 1600. L. 4 ft., W. i ft. 2 in. 
(Bought, 4/. lis.) 

* The viola da gamba (French, bajfe de viole ; German, kniegeige)^ 
derives its name from its being held between the knees of the performer. 
It was the predeceffor of the violoncello, and was made with frets. It 
ufually had fix firings which gave the following tones : — 



w. 



?=^ — MU ^ 



4 

Towards the end of the feventeenth century a feventh ftring was 
added, faid to have been firfl ufed by the French virtuofo, Marais, who 
alfo had the three lowefl firings covered with wire. His innovations 
were, however, not generally adopted. 

The viola da gamba was a favourite inflrument in England at the 
time of Queen Elizabeth, and even ladies played it occafionally. In 
England it was called bafe violy and alfo viol-de-gambo. Sir Toby 
Belch, in Shakefpeare's * Twelfth Night,' fays of Sir Andrew 
Aguecheek : — 

*' He plays o* the viol-de-gamboys, and fpeaks three or four lan- 
guages word for word without book, and hath all the good gifts of 



nature." 



Among the Englifh public performers on the viola da gamba are re- 
corded a Mrs. Sarah Ottey, in the year 1723, and a Mifs Ford in 1760. 
Carl Friedrich Abel, a German, who lived in London during the 
latter half of the eighteenth century, was the lafl performer of celebrity 
on this inflrument. Johann Sebaflian Bach has employed it in his 
admirable ' PafEonfmufik des Matthaeus * ; and there are fonie fine 
' Suites,' flill occafionally to be met with, compofed for it by M. de 
Caix d'Herveloix, publifhed in the year 17 10. The tone of the viola 
da gamba is rather nafal, but fweet and expreffive ; indeed, it is to be 
regretted that this charming inflrument has fallen into difufe. There 
is, however, a gamba flop in the organ, which refembles the famous 
vox humana flop, and which has recently been much favoured by organ 
builders. 



European. 263 

The violoncello came into competition with the viola da gamha at 
the beginning of the eighteenth century, and has now entirely fuper- 
feded its predecelTor. 



1298, [^98^. '71. 

VIOLA-DA-GAMBA, with Bow. Wood, inlaid with 
ivory and with figures of Apollo, Venus, Mercury, and 
Diana, in mother-o'-pearl, the back of the neck having inferted 
in it a piece of ivory finely perforated ; fix ftrings and four 
tuning-pegs (two miffing). Infcribed infide " Martin Voigt in 
Hamburgo me fecit, 1726." Said to have belonged to Haydn. 
German. L. 4 ft. i in., W. i4f in., L. of bow, 2 ft. yf in. 
(Bought, 60/.) 

398, 398 J- >i. 

VIOLA - DA - GAMBA. Altered into a violoncello. 
Sycamore (?) wood, with carved medallion of the Im- 
perial arms; the finger-board, which terminates in a carved 
female head, is of ebony inlaid with ivory and pearl. Wooden 
cafe, covered with ftamped leather. German. 17th century. 
L. 4 ft. I in., W. 15^ in. (Bought, 16/.) 

Although the back and fides of the viola-da -gamba were occafionally 
made of fome other wood, a fpecies of maple, called air-wood by the 
Englifh makers of the feventeenth century, was confidered the moft 
fuitable for enfuring a fine quality of found. Moreover, the body was 
not always made flanting towards the finger-board, but fometimes 
rounded like that of the violin. An illuftration of a fmall viola-da-gamba 
of this (hape is given in C. Simpfon*s * The Divifion Violift,' Lon- 
don, 1659. '^^^ viola-di-fpala^ ufed about the year 1700, was nothing 
more than a viola-da-gamba of this defcription, which gradually merged 
into a fmall violoncello by the fubflitution of four ftrings for fix, and 
the omifiion of the frets. The viola-di-fpala was carried by the per- 
former before him partly refting on his (boulder ; hence its name. On 
the continent the violoncello aUb was not unfrequendy carried by the 
performer in proceffions. 



2 04 Catalogue of Mufical Inftruments. 



115, 115a, h, c. '65. 

VIOLA di Bardone, Alfo called viola di bordone, and 
baryton. The finger-board is carved in open fret-work 
terminating in three lions' heads ; above the bridge are two 
figures of negroes, carved and gilt. At one fide of the finger- 
board is the infcription — *• Joachim Tielke in Hamburg fecit. 
Anno, 1686." German {Hamburg). By J. Tielke, Signed 
and dated 1686. L. 4 ft 6 in., W. i ft. 4J in. Alfo two 
bows, and a wrefi;, or tuning key of metal. (Bought, 40/,) 



European. 265 

This inftrumcnt has fix firings of catgut, which are tuned by means 
of wooden pegs, and are played with a bow ; and beneath thefe it has 
twenty-two metal firings, which ferve as fympathetic firings, like thofe 
defcribed, page 204. The fympathetic firings are wound round iron 
tuning-pegs . placed near the top of the neck ; and they run down, 
partly under the finger-board and partly at its fide, extending to the 
bridge, where they are faflened to little pins placed in an oblique line 
beneath the bridge. The body of the inflrument has at each fide two 
indentations, and is flat at the back. The two found-holes are remark- 
able for their old-fafhioned fhape. 

The viola di hardone was often mounted with feven catgut firings, 
inflead of fix ; and they were tuned as follows : — 



a r - I . f'=\ 



% 



^^ 



The number of metal firings likewife varied. Some old writers 
mention from fixteen to twenty, and others as many as forty- four. 
Thefe firings were arranged in a diatonic fucceffion, the lowefl of them 
emittin the tone — 



^ 



^ 



They ferved, however, not only as fympathetic firings, but were occa- 
fionally twanged with the thumb of the left hand, to produce eiFe£ls 
refembling thofe of the lute. The mofl accomplifhed performers on 
the viola di hardone were Anton Lidl of Vienna (to whom is fome- 
times erroneoufly afcribed the invention of this inflrument) and Karl 
Franz, a mufician of the band of Prince Eflerhazy, about the middle 
of the lafl century. Lidl played on the viola di hardone in concerts in 
England during the year 1776. Joachim Tielke of Hamburg, the 
manufadurer of the fpecimen in the Mufeum, of which an illuflration 
is here given, was an inflrument maker whofe lutes were much efleemed 
on account of their fine tone, and their elegant ornamentation. He 
made them of ebony inlaid with ivory, mother-of-pearl, filver, and gold. 
A fmall viola di hardone by Tielke, dated 1687, which fome years ago 
was exhibited at the Society of Antiquaries in London, had fix catgut 
firings, and only eleven wire firings. 

Jofeph Haydn wrote fixty-three compofitions for the viola di hardone 
by order of Prince Eflerhazy, who was himfelf a performer on this 
inflrument, and who admired it greatly. Its tone is foft and very ex- 

M. I. s 



266 Catalogue of Mujical Injiruments. 



preflive, but rather tremulous ; owing to this quality, probably, it was 
alfo called viola di fagotto. It never became very popular, fince its 
rather complicated conftrudion offered too piany difficulties in its 
treatment. In Germany it was generally called baryton. 



1444, 1444^. 70. 

VIOLA di Bardone, or Baryton, with Bow. The neck of 
carved and pierced box-wood, terminating in a figure of 
Apollo playing the lyre ; the finger-board of ivory, engraved, 
and inlaid with ebony and tortoife-ihell, with figures of Jupiter 
and Juno, and a female playing on the lute. Infcribed '' Jaques 
Sainprae, A Berlin.'* Said to have belonged to Quanz, mufic 
mailer of Frederick the Great German. 17 th century. L. 
4 ft. 6 in., W. 16 J in., L. of bow 2 ft. 2^ in. (Bought, 75/.) 

The name baryton has been alfo applied to a fmall violoncello, and 
to fome other inflruments ; and likewife to that regifler of the human 
voice which lies between the bafs and tenor. The term bardone is a 
corruption of the Italian bordone. Indeed, fome old writers call the 
inftrument viola di bordoney and its French name is viole de bourdon^ evi- 
dently on account of its wire firings producing the found of a drone 
[bourdon). However, the learned F. W. Marpurg (* Hiflorifch-Kritifche 
Beytrage Zur Auf nahme der Mufik,' Berlin, 1756, vol. ii.) records that 
it was originally called viole de pardon^ and that it was invented in Eng- 
land by a prifoner condemned to be hanged, who in confideration of his 
invention was pardoned. Extravagant flories have occafionally been fet 
afloat to explain the names of certain mufical inflruments the real 
meaning of which is uncertain. 

John Playford, in his * Mufick's Recreation on the Viol Lyra-way,' 
London, 1661, defcribesa lyra-viol^ the invention of which he afligns to 
Daniel Farunt, as a viola-da-gamba *' flrung with Lute firings and Wire 
firings, the one above the other. The wire firings were conveyed 
through a hollow pafTage made in the neck of the viol by a bridge of 
about half-an-inch. Thefe were fo laid that they were equivalent to 
thofe above, and were tun'd unifons to thofe above; fo that by the 
finking of thofe firings above with the bow, a found was drawn from 
thofe of wire underneath, which made it very harmonious. Of this fort 
of Viols I have feen many ; but Time and Difufe has fet them afide»'* 



European. 267 

From this ftatement it would appear that an inftrument very fimilar 
to the viola di bardone was known in England about the middle of the 
feventeenth century. 



487. '7Z. 

DOUBLE-BASS, with Bow. Known as ''The Giant" 
Three-ftringed. Prefented to the Duke of Leinfter by 
the late Dragonetti. In wooden cafe. Italian. 17th century. 
L. 8 ft. 7 in., W. 3 ft. 6 in., L. of bow, 2 ft 3 in. (Given 
by the Duke of Leinfter.) 

The double-bafs (Italian, contrahajfo^ violono ; French, contre^bajfey 
violone ; German, grojji bafs-geige^ contrabafi) is either four-ftringed or 
three-ftringed. The four-ftringed double-bafe is efpecially ufed in 
Germany, and is tuned in fourths, thus : — 



s 



-^ 



Id 



m 



■^ 



Three-ftringed ones are, however, not uncommon in Germany, efpe- 
cially in the fouth, and are generally ufed in Italy, France, and England. 
The three-ftringed double-bafs is ufually tuned in fifths, thus : — 



5 



-^- 



-^- 



-€^ 



In England, however, it is tuned in fourths, thus : — 

fl' r-i 



Z3: 



It muft be remembered that the found is an o&z\t lower than is indi- 
cated by the notation. 

The predecefTors of the double-bafs were five-ftringed and fix- 
ftringed. They refembled the viola-da-gamba in fliape, and had frets 
on the finger-board. 

The ufual mechanifm applied to the fcrews of the double-bafs for 
faciUtating its tuning is a comparatively modern contrivance. It was 
invented by C. L. Bachmann in Berlin, about the year 1778. Before 
that time the fcrews were turned by means of an iron key conftruded 
for the purpofe. 

8 2 



268 Catalogue of Mujical Injiruments. 



Dragonetti, the celebrated virtuofo on the double-bafs, came to 
England in the year 1794. His favourite inftrument, upon which he 
played in public concerts, was a ^ Gafpar di Salo/ which he obtained 
from the Convent of St. Pietro at Vicenza, and which he never could 
be induced to part with, although 800/., it is faid, was offered him for 
it by one of his rich and enthufiaftic pupils in England. After the 
death of Dragonetti this bafs, and another valuable one by Stradiuarius, 
were (ent back to Italy, he having bequeathed them in his will to the 
town of Venice. Dragonetti died in the year 1846 at his houfe in 
Leicefter Square, at the age of 83. A year before his death he was ft ill 
able to affift in the public performances at the Beethoven Feftival in 
Bonn. His friend H. Philipps mentions in his ^ Mufical Recolle£tions/ 
that the ends of Dragonetti's fingers had gradually become quite flat and 
deformed from playing. 

Some double-bafTes of extraordinary large fize are known to have 
been made in England. William Gardiner (^ Mufic and Friends,' 
London, 1838, p. 70) mentions fuch an inftrument, made by Martin in 
Leicefter, which he faw in the year 1786, and which, if his ftatement 
may be relied upon, ^^ was of fuch height that Mr. Martin was obliged 
to cut a hole in the ceiling to let the head through ; fo that it was 
tuned by going upftairs into the room above.'* 



430. 7^- 

NAIL-VIOLIN. (German, nagelgeige^ nagelharmonikay 
eifenvioline.) Mahogany; circular, with three found- 
holes, and forty -nine pins. There are brafs pegs for fifteen 
fympathetic firings, which are mifTing. French. i8th century. 
Diam. ijf in. (Given by Monfieur Vuillaume, Paris.) 

The oldeft nail-violins^ dating from about the year 1740, were made 
without fympathetic ftrings. Thefe ftrings, intended to increafe the fo- 
noroufnefs, are of thin brafs wire. Senal in Vienna, about the year 1 780, 
improved the inftrument, and excelled as a virtuofo on it. Trager in 
Bernburg, in the year 1791, made it of an oblong*fquare fhape, added a 
keyboard to it, and called it nagelclavier. In Trager's inftrument the 
fri^ion was, however, not produced by a bow, but by a linen band coated 
with refin. 

The iron nails, or pins, of the nail-violin^ which are founded by the 
fridion of a bow, gradually dimlnifh in length and thicknefs from the 



European, 269 

loweft to the highefl tone. When ftruck in regular fucceffion they 

produce thi^ chromatic Tcale. The pins j'ielding the diatonic intervals 

ore ftraight, and thofe for the chromatic intervals are llightly curved at 
the top. 



4265. '$y. 

VIRGINAL. Ebony, enriched with applique open-work 
tracery, in filver ; in the under fide of the lid is a mirror, 
German, About 1600. L. i ft. 6^ in., W. 11 in. (Bought, 
4^0 



The inflrument has metal firings, one for each tone, which arc 
twanged by means of fmall portions of quill, attached to flips of wood 
called " jacks," and provided with thin metal fprings. Its conftru£):ion 
is therefbre fimilar to that of the fpinet and harpfichord. Its compals 
embraces three oitaves and a whole tone, thus : — 



But the pitch of the inftrument was probably originally higher than 
indicated by the notation. The higheft femitone, G-fharp, is omitted. 
CrowquilJs were moft commonly ufed in the conltrudlion of fuch inflru- 
ments ; but other materials, as for inftance leather, whalebone, and 
even elaftic ftrips of metal, were occafionaJly adopted inftead. 



270 Catalogue of Mufical Injiruments. 

The virginal is (aid to have obtained its name from having been 
intended efpecially to be played by young ladies. The ftatement of 
fome writers that it was called virginal in compliment to Queen 
Elizabeth, is refuted by the fadl of its being mentioned among the 
mufical inftruments of King Henry VIII. in the beginning of the 
fixteenth century. Probably the name was originally given to it in 
honour of the Virgin Mary, fince the virginal was ufed by the nuns for 
accompanying their h}rmns addreffed to the Holy Virgin. It was made 
of various fizes, but generally fmall in comparifon with our fquare 
pianoforte. The Italians, about three hundred years ago, conf):ru6led 
a fmall portable inftrument of this kind, which they called ottavino (or 
o£favina) becaufe its pitch was an odlave higher than that of the clavi- 
cembalo^ or harpflchord. 

Queen Elizabeth was a performer on the virginal as well as on the 
lute. Sir James Melville, the Scotch ambaflador, records in his 
memoirs an interview with Queen Elizabeth, in the year 1564, in 
in which he heard her play upon the virginal : — '' Then fche afked 
wither the Quen [Mary of Scotland] or fche played beft. In that I 
gaif hir the prayfe." During the Shakefperian age a virginal generally 
ftood in the barbers' (hops for the amufement of the cuftomers. The 
inftrument had evidently retained its popularity at the time of the Great 
Fire cf London ; for Pepys (Diary, September 2, 1666) records: — 
'^ River full of lighters and boats taking in goods, and good goods 
fwimming in the water ; and only I obferved that hardly one lighter or 
boat in three that had the goods of a houfe in, but there was a pair of 
virginalls in it." 



402. 72. 

VIRGINAL. In ftamped and gilt leather cafe, decorated 
internally with panels containing reprefentations of in- 
cidents in claflical mythology, and other ornaments in coloured 
glafs, and with plaques of filver foliage and enamel on copper ; 
the key-board of forty-five keys, and other parts, enamelled in a 
fimilar manner. Made at Murano, near Venice. Said to have 
belonged to Elizabeth, Queen of Bohemia, daughter of James I. 
Italian. End of i6th century. L, 4 ft. 11^ in., H. 10 in., 
Depth, 16^ in. (Bought, 140/.) 



I 



European. 271 

An Italian fpinetta of an oblong-iquare fhape. In England a fpinet 
of this fhape was commonly called a virginal, or rather ^^ a payre of 
virginalls," according to writers of the feventeenth century. 

VIRGINAL. Outer covering of oak. The infide painted, 
reprefenting Adam and Eve in Paradife ; a fea fight ; 
hunters of the 17 th century. Engli/h. 17 th century. In- 
fcribed '* John Loofemore fecit, 1655." H- 3 ^^* ^ ^"'^ 
L. 5 ft. 8^ in., W. 20^ in. (Bought, 52/. ioj.) 

The compafs of this virginal embraces four oCtaves and a whole- 
tone, thus : — 



BI ^ - " ^ 



John Loofemore, Stephen Keen, and Adam Leverfidge were the 
moft fkilful Englifh virginal makers of the feventeenth century. A 
virginal made by Adam Leverfidge in the year 1666, which is ftill 
extant, meafures 5 feet 2 inches in length and 20 inches in width. 
The infide of the cover and the woodwork about the found-board are 
ornamented with paintings. 

The firfi book of mufic for the virginal publiflied in England is 
entided : ^ Parthenia, or Maydenhead of the firft Muficke that ever was 
printed for the Virgi nails ; compofed by three femous mafters, William 
Byrde, Dr. John Bull, and Orlando Gibbons, Gentilmen of his Ma- 
jeftie's moft Illuftrious Chappell. Ingraven by William Hole.' It was 
publiflied in London in the year 161 1. 

:?i8. '70. 

OTTAVINO. An Italian Spinet, fomewhat refembling 
the Virginal. Compafs, jf oftaves. Painted wooden 
cafe. The back of the key-board ornamented with figures in 
etched gold. The infide of the lid painted with a fhip in full 
fail, and marine deities, dancing figures, and mufical trophies ; 
faid to be by Federigo Zucchero. Italian. Late i6th 
century. L. 2 ft. 3^ in., W. 17 in. (Bought, 20/.) 



272 Catalogue of Mufical Injiruments. 

The fhape of this little fpinet differs from the oblong-fquare /hape of 
the little virginal, inafmuch as the right fide is longer than the left fide. 
The lower keys are white and the upper ones are black. There is only 
one firing for each tone, and the mechanifm, or ^' adion," is with quills 
like that of the harpfichord. The found-board has a found-hole in the 
middle. The compafs embraces three od^ves and a fixth, thus : — 






i 



The pitch was probably an octave or a fifth higher than indicated in 
the notation ^ but this is not exa<5lly afcertainable fince the firings are 
loofened or wanting. 



809. '6g. 

SPINET. Wood and ivory, ornamented with jafpar, 
agate, and other decorative flones, and fet with lapis- 
lazuli, pearls, garnets, &c. Italian. Made by Annibale dei 
RofTi of Milan, 1 577. L. in front 4 ft. 9 J in. (Bought, 
Paris Exhibition, 1867, 1,200/.) 

Z#//? of the Decorative Stones^ ^c. on this Inftrument. 

857 turquoifes, fmall. 
361 pearls, fmall. 



3 lapis 


lazuli 


i| X i^ in. 


Round. 


6 „ 


?i 


I X 1 in. 


9) 


^S .. 


>i 


j X f in. 


Flat. 


2 „ 


i> 


2 X f in. 


j> 


8 „ 


»i 


i^ X i in. 


>» 


20 ,, 


>? 


2| X ^in. 


i> 


8 „ 


>> 


1 X 1 in. 


Round. 


18 „ 


» 


i X 1 in. 


>5 


10 „ 


>» 


\ in. diameter 


• 
• 


I » 


>i 


H. I in., diam. ^ in. 


2t „ 


» 


^ in. X i in. 




5 amethyfls. 


I in. X f in. 




23 


>» 


fmaller. 




10 topazes (q 


uartz) I in. x 


1 in. 


48 >i 




,, fmaller. 








European. 273 



6 carnelians, | in. x f in. 

40 emeralds, fmall. 

32 fapphires, fmall. 
117 garnets, final]. 
242 rubies and garnets, fmaller. 

4 cryftals (foiled) i in. x | in. 

5 agates (pink) i in. x f in. 

4 „ (celadon) i in. x ^ in. 
19 agates and jafpers, i in. x f in. 

2 jafpers (variegated) 2^ in. x ^ in. 
i8 „ ,, 1^ in. X i in. 

4 >> >» i »n« X \ in. (pedeftals). 

28 „ (red) 2i in, x \ in. 



Total - 1,928 

This fpinet in (hape refembles the dulcimer. {See the frontifpiece.) 
It is open at the top, inftead of being covered with a lid. It has a 
round and ornamented found-hole in the middle of the ibund-board. 
There is only one ftring for each tone. The compaft embraces four 
o£laves and a femitone, thus : — 

_^ 




Over the key-board is the infcription : — '^ Anniballis de Roxis Mediola- 
nenfes MDLXXVII." The following extraft from ' La NobUita di 
Milano,* 4to. Milano, 1595, lib. v., cap. viii., p. 18, refers to this 
inftrument. 

'^ Degno di lode fu Annibal RofTo, per efier ftato il primo inuentore 
di rimodernare i clauicordi in quella forma moderna, come hoggidi fl 
veggono. Quefto virtuofo fece fra gli altri lauori un clauicordo di rara 
bellezza e bonta con i tafti tutti di pietre preciofe e di vaghiiBmi orna- 
menti, che fu venduto per fcudi cinquecento, e lo poi&ede il dotto e 
virtuofifs. illuftre Sig. Carlo Trivultio. £. Ferrante, fuo figliuolo, va 
tuttavia iniitando il padre e trouando nuove inuentioni ne clauicordi, 
doue ne vien lodato." 

{Tranjlation. ) 

** Hannibal Roflb was worthy of praife, fince he was the firft to 
modernize clavichords into the (hape in which we now fee them. This 



2 74 Catalogue of Mufical Injiruments. 



fkilful maker conftrufled among other works a clavichord of uncommon 
beauty and excellence, with the keys all of precious ftones, and with 
the moft elegant ornaments. This inftrument was fold for 500 crowns, 
and is now in the pofleffion of the learned and refined nobleman Signor 
Carlo Trivulzio. Ferrante, his fon, goes on in all refpeds in imitation 
of his father, and makes frefh improvements in clavichords, thereby 
gaining himfelf a name." 

It will be obferved that in this old record the inftrument is called 
clavicordo. There evidently prevailed, fbme centuries ago, much vague- 
nefs in the defignation of certain ftringed inftruments with a key-board. 
The term clavichord feems to have not unfrequently been applied to any 
ftringed inftrument with a key-board, no matter what its interior con- 
ftruftion might be. Johann Walther, in his ' Muficalifches Lexicon,' 
Leipzig, 1732, defcribes the virginal (or '* Virginale," as he calls it), 
in thefe words : — " Ein Clavier vors Frauenzimmer *' {a clavichord for 
ladies). The following brief explanation of the difference between the 
fpinet and the clavichord may therefore be of intereft to fome inquirers. 

Tht fpinet {ItaXviJij fpinetta or fpinetto ; Frcnchj epinette)^ is iaid to 
have derived its name from the little quill {fpina) ufed in its mechanifm, 
which is the fame as that of the harpfichord and the virginal, defcribed 
before. 

The more commonly-known fpinet refembles in (hape the harpfi- 
chord and the grand-piano. It is, however, fmaller than the harpfichord, 
and its key-board is placed in a fbmewhat oblique direction. The tone 
of the fpinet was generally ^ fifth higher than that of the harpfichord. 

The clavichord (Italian, clavicordo ; German, clavier ^ or klavier)^ 
differs from the fpinet inafmuch as it is of an oblong-fquare (hape, and 
efpecially in its being conftrudted with fo-called tangents^ 1.^., metal pins 
which prefs under the ftrings when the keys are ftruck. The ftrings 
are of thin brafs wire. The oldeft fpecimens of the clavichord ftill extant 
are from three to four feet in length, and about two feet in width. The 
lower keys are black, and the upper ones are white. There is only a 
fingle ftring for each tone and its upper femitone ; thus, there is but one 
ftring for Cand C-Jharp^ and likewife for D and D-Jharpy and fo on. The 
femitone is produced by a fecond tangent, which touches the ftring at a 
place a little diftant from that at which it is touched by the tangent pro- 
ducing the whole-tone. On being prefTed under the ftring, the tangent 
divides it into two vibrating parts, one of which is confiderably longer than 
the other and gives the found. The other part is too (hort to be 
diftinftly audible, and therefore does not very perceptibly interfere with 
the clearnefs of the found. Moreover, its vibration is checked by a 
ftrip of cloth interlaced with the ftrings. It will eafily be underftood 



European. 275 

that of the two tangents, the one which moft (hortens the founding part 
of the firing, muft produce a tone of a higher pitch than the other. 

Such was the conftruftion of the clavichord until about the year 
1700, when it was improved in fo far as that each key was fupplied with 
a feparate firing. The clavichord is pre-eminently a German inflru- 
ment. Although now almofl entirely fupplanted by the pianoforte it is 
flill occafionally to be met with in the houfe of the German village 
fchoolmafler, and of the country parfbn. Though but weak in found, 
it admits of much expref&on ; and mofl of the German claffical com- 
pofers who lived before the invention of the pianoforte preferred the 
clavichord to the harpfichord. In England it has never become popular. 
Confidering the fimplicity of its conflru£lion, it might be furmifed that 
the price of a clavichord was generally very moderate. In the latter 
half of the i8th century the prices charged for fuch inflruments by 
fome of the befl manufacturers were as follows : — Carl Lemme, in 
Brunfwick, made clavichords of various qualities, which fetched firom 
three to twelve Louis d'ors a-piece ; he alfo made, for exportation to 
Batavia, clavichords with a compreiTed founding-board, invented by 
his father in the year 1771 ; Kramer, in 'Gottingen, charged from 
four to fourteen Louis d'ors, according to fize and finifh \ and Wil- 
helmi, in CafTel, charged from twenty to fifty thalers, — from about 3/. 
to 7/. lOJ, 



156. '69. 

SPINET. This inflrument is in dimenfions, mechanifm, 
and compafs, precifely like that by Annibale jufl defcribed. 
It bears the infcription — Opvs Anibalis Mediolanenfts y MDLV. 
Italian. i6th century. L. 5 ft., W. i ft. 9 in. (Bought, 
150/.) 



^55' '69. 

SPINET. In fhape and conflrudion fimilar to the pre- 
ceding inflrument. It bears the infcription — Marci 
Jadrae MDLXVIII. Italian. 1 6th century. L.4ft9fin., 
W. I ft. 7 in. (Bought,- 150/.) 



276 Catalogue of Mujical Injiruments. 



* PINET. Compafs, five odaves : — 



Conftruifted with " jacks and quills." Each tone has but one 
firing, according to the ufual ftringing of the fpinet. Englijh. 
Latter half of the 17th century. Made by Thomas Hitch- 
cock.* L., obliquely, 6 ft., W., in front, 4 ft. (Bought, 5/.) 
Depofited in the Educational Department. (See the engraving. 
Fig- ^33-) 



6007. '59. 

CLAVICEMBALO. (Englifli, harp/tchord ; German, 
Flugel; French, Clavecin.) In wooden cafe, the exterior 
painted with flowers, and the interior with the fubjeift of Apollo 
and the Mufes, and with rich arabefque ornamentation. Italian. 

' The manufaaory of Thomas Hitchcock muA have been vei? pioduilirc, if we my judge 
froni the number infcribed over the key-boitd of the inftniment, which ii " 1484," and muft 
not be milbken for the date of ihe minu^Oure of chii f]Hnet. 



European. 277 

Signed and dated, '* Joanes Antonius BafFo, Venetus, 1574." 
L. 7 ft. 4 in., W. 3 ft., depth 9^ in. (Bought, 6/. 7J.) 

The compafs of this inftrument is nearly four o£laves and a half, as 
follows : — 




The clavicembalo (often defignated merely cembalo) is called in German 
*' Fliigel," on account of its (hape fomewhat refembling the wing of a 
bird. The largeft cUruicembali formerly in ufe generally had a compafs 
of five o£laves, thus : — 



Si 



t 



Each tone had three ftrings, fometimes even four, which were in unifon, 
with the exception of one which founded an oftave higher. The 
inftrument was ufually fupplied with fome ftops by means of which the 
quality of found could in ibme meafure be modified. Furthermore, it 
was fi'equendy made with two key-boards, one for the loud and another 
for the foft tones. The harpfichord made in England was precifely of 
the fame conftruflion. In fa<St, the beft harpfichord makers in England 
were emigrants from the continent, and the founders of fome of the 
great pianoforte manufaftories ftill flourifliing in London. Burkhardt 
Tfchudi, for inftance, a harpfichord maker from Switzerland, was the 
founder of Broad wood's celebrated man u&6lory, which dates from the 
year 1732. Kirkman, a German (who, before he eftabliflied himfelf 
in England wrote his name Kirchmann) fold his harpfichords in London, 
according to the German Mufical Almanack for the year 1782, at the 
price of from 60/. to 90/. apiece. In the beginning of the eighteenth 
century many of the harpfichords made in England had, according to 
Graffineau (Mufical Dictionary, London 1740), a compafs of only four 
odaves, thus : — 




278 Catalogue of Mujical In/lruments. 



However, already as early as in the i6th and 17th centuries, harj>- 
fichords or clavlcembalt^ of a fuperior quality, manufaftured in Antwerp 
by Hans Ruckers and his fons Jean and Andreas, were imported into 
England. The inftruments of thefe celebrated Antwerp manufadurers 
were taftefully embelliflied, and the beft Dutch painters not unfrequently 
enriched them with devices. The confequence has been, that after the 
invention of the pianoforte, many of thefe old harpfichords were taken 
to pieces in order to preferve the valuable panels. The price of a fine 
harpfichord by Ruckers, about the year 1770, was 120/. 

The old clavicembalo by Antonio BafFo, of Venice, here exhibited, 
has flips of prepared leather inftead of the ufual crowquills, which fhows 
that the ftatement of fbme writers as to Pafcal Tafkin in Paris being 
the firft to ufe leather is erroneous. Tafkin, in conftrudling in the year 
1 768, the " Clavecin a peau de buffle," merely revived an old invention, 
which, however, he feems to have much improved. He made a clavecin 
with three key-boards, two of which were connefted with adlions 
conftrufted of crowquills, and the third with an a£lion of leather. 
The modification in quality of found thereby obtained was greatly 
admired. 

The invention of the clavicembalo as well as of the clavicordo^ is by 
fome old writers afcribed to Guido Aretinus (or Guido d'Arezzo), the 
famous monk who is recorded to have invented, in the year 1025, 
the Solmifation, and alfo to have firft conceived the idea of employing 
lines and dots in the notation of muAcal founds. Unauthentic though 
the tradition may be which af&gns to Guido the invention of the 
ftringed inftruments with a key-board, it appears very probable that 
fbme rude kind of clavichord was firft conftruded about his time, or 
foon after. 

The pianoforte, which now has entirely fuperfeded the harpfichord, 
was firft conftru<5ted at the beginning of the 1 8th century, in Italy and 
Germany. About the year 1767 it was firom Germany introduced into 
England ; but the Englifb muficians for a confiderable period obje<^ed 
to it, and preferred to retain the harpfichord. 



1 121. '69. 

CLAVECIN. French. Made by Pafcal Tafkin, at Paris, 
in the year 1786. The cafe highly ornamented with 
Japanefe figures and gilding. The keys are fmaller than the 
ufual fize ; the lower ones are of ebony, and the upper ones of 



European. 279 

ivory. Compafs, five 0(5taves and a femi-tone. Each tone has 
two firings. H. 2 ft. 9^ in., W. 2 ft. 7 in., L. 6 ft. i in. 
(Bought, 80/.) 

Conftrufted with crowquills inftead of the prepared leather which 
Pafcal Tafkin is known to have ufed. But it may be feen at a glance 
that the mechaniftn has recently been reftored ; the crowquills may, 
therefore, have been fubftituted for the worn-out leather. 



1079. '68. 

HANDEL'S Harpfichord. Cafe of deal, black japanned ; 
with internal ornament of flowers painted, and infcrip- 
tions in gold. Made by Andreas Ruckers, of Antwerp, 165 1. 
H. 3 ft., L. of top, 6 ft. 8 in., W. 3 ft. (Given by Meflrs. 
Broad wood.) 

The following documentary evidence of this inftrument's authen- 
ticity as Handel's harpfichord has been tranfmitted by Meflrs. Broad- 
wood : — 

"33, Great Pulteney Street, London, 
1 8th November 1868. 

" Handel's harpfichord was bought by us of Mr. Hooper, a piano- 
forte tuner at Winchefter, in 1852. He had obtained it from Dr. 
Chard, the Cathedral organift of that city, who had taken pains to 
prove it to be the fame inflrument which Handel had left by will to his 
friend and amanuenfis» Chriflopher Smith. In Handel's will, dated 
June 1750, was the bequefl : — *I give and bequeath to Chriflopher 
Smith my large harpfichord, my little houfe-organ, my mufic books, 
and 500/. flerling;' and in a codicil, dated 6th of Augufl 1756: *I 
give to Chriflopher Smith 1,500/. additional to the legacy already given 
to him in my will.' Dr. Chard wrote to the Rev. George Coxe of 
Twyford (Re£lor of St. Michael's, Winchefter) to obtain his teftimony 
to the identity of this harpfichord with the ' Large Harpfichord* of 
the will. Mr. Coxe was nearly related to Smith, and had frequently 
heard him play upon it. On the 13th of May 1842, and in the 
prefence of witnefTes, Mr. Coxe confirmed this. Dr. Chard ftates in 
the document figned by Mr. Coxe, that this harpfichord was left with 
a large coUedion of Handel's MSS. by Chriftopher Smith to his ftep- 
daughter, the Dowager Lady Rivers, who parted with it to Mr. 
Wickham, a furgeon, who, in his turn, parted with it to the Rev, 



28o Catalogue of Mujtcal Injlruments. 



European. 281 

Mr. Hawtrey, Prebendary of Winchefter, after whofe death it came 
into the polTeffion of Dr. Chard. 

This interefting relic of Handel is alfo worthy of notice from having 
been one of the beft-conftru£led inftruments of the celebrated harpfi- 
chord makers, the Ruckers family of Antwerp. It is not remarkable 
for any beauty of decoration beyond the conventional ornamentation of 
the period ; but the ftrudure fhows great fkill in the manufa<5iure, and 
that the harpii chord had become nearly perfected in the middle of the 
feventeenth century. 

The two key-boards were ufed for variety of tone. The lower 
key-board, the jacks of which adled upon two fets of firings in unifon, 
and one fet an odlave higher, was the louder in tone ; the upper key- 
board, ading on one fet of ftrings only, was the fofter. But the lower 
key-board could be made to a£l upon one fet of ftrings only, by means 
of ftops drawn out by the hand of the performer. In touching the 
keys, a diftindlive quality of tone may ftill be recognized, particularly 
in the higher notes, a reedy but foft and delicate timbre teftifying to the 
former beauty of the inftrument. It may be alTumed as certain that 
the keys are not of Handel's time. We do not know when the prefent 
key-boards were put, or by whom, but the ftyle of the white and black 
keys is undoubtedly modern. Neither can it be doubted that there 
were originally keys in keeping with the faOiion of the harpfichord, 
which we may fuppofe to have been worn out, to account for the 
fubftitution of thofe exifting. The cafe of deal, black japanned, the 
brafs hinges, the ornamentation, and the mottoes are original. Infide 
the top is infcribed, — 

Sic tranftt Gloria Mundi ; 

on the flap or folding of the top, — 

Mufica Donum Dei ; 

and on the flip of wood above the upper keys, — 

m 

Andreas Ruckers me fecit ^ Antwerpia^ 1651. 

There is a date on the founding-board ^ 165 1,' and in the ornamental 
found-hole are the initials ' A. R.' Among the flowers reprefented on 
the founding-board may be feen a concert of monkeys, one beating 
time, another playing the viol da gamba, etc. A third motto exifted 
until about fifteen years ago — A£ia Virum Probant, This was rubbed 
oflF by a workman engaged in mending the lock-board (upon which this 
motto was), which had been fplit. 

As a mufical inftrument, this harpfichord has lived its life. It is 
not now capable of being tuned, and any attempt to improve the accord 

M.I. T 



282 Catalogue of Mujical Injiruments. 



of it might prove difaftrous by the founding-board giving way altogether. 
It is, therefore, of confequence to the prefervation of the woodwork 
that tuning fhould not be attempted. 

John Broadwood and Sons." 



Letter to the Rev. G. Coxe, Twyford, Re£lor of St. Michael's, 

Wincheften 



(C 



My dear Sir, 

Will you oblige me by certifying (if I am corred) the follow- 
ing :— 

The celebrated Mr. Smith (or Schmidt) was Handel's private 
friend, and amanuenfis. This faid Mr. Smith was prefented by Handel 
with his favourite fine double-keyed harpfichord, made by the befl 
maker of the day, Andreas Ruckers of Antwerpia, 1651. This faid 
inflrument you have heard repeatedly Mr. Smith play on. Mr. Smith 
was father-in-law to you as well as your fifler, the late Dowager Lady 
Rivers ; and at his death the faid harpfichord, together with a large 
colIe£lion of Handel's oratorios, etc., etc., MSS., came into the hands 
of the Dowager Lady Rivers. This inflrument was parted with to a 
Mr. Wickham, furgeon, who parted with it to the Rev. W. Hawtrey, 
Prebendary of Winchefler Cathedral, upon the death of whom I pur- 
chafed it at the fale of his efFe£ts ; and in my pofTefBon it flill remains. 
Is not this the identical inflrument now fpoken of? Your early anfwer 
to thefe queries, as the only living witnefs, will oblige. 

Dear Sir, 

Yours faithfully, 

G. W. Chard. 

P.S. — Will you oblige me by certifying on this fheet of paper, and 
returning it ? 

Anjwer. 

I certify that the above flatement is corred, as far as my knowledge 
goes. 

George Coxe, 

Twyford, May 13th, 1842. 

Witnefs to the above fignature — 

Sufanna Gregg, 
James Harris." 



European. 28 3 

1739- '69- 

HARPSICHORD. Black and gold Japan-work cafe. 
The found-board ornamented with paintings of birds, 
fruit, and flowers. The interior edge of the cafe and the front 
ornamented with tracing in white, on a black ground. The 
infide of the cover ornamented with paintings of Bacchanals and 
grapes. Made by Ruckers, of Antwerp. Date 1639. L- 
5 ft. 8 in., greatefl: breadth, 2 ft. 6^ in. (Given by Meflrs. 
Jofeph Kirkman and Son.) 

This inftrument was formerly the property of George III., and was 
removed from Buckingham Palace when Jacobus Kirkman fent a new 
harpfichord for Queen Charlotte. The a6tion and keys were deftroyed 
at a fire which occurred at MelTrs. Kirkman's manu&6tory in the year 

1853- 

629. '68. 

SERINETTR Bird organ. Beech wood veneered with 
fatin wood and inlaid with marquetry of coloured woods 
reprefenting mufical inftruments and foliage. Mounted in gilt 
metal. French. 17th century. H. %\ in., L. 11^ in., W. 
9 in. (Bought, 50/.) 

The /frinetu was formerly ufed in France by ladies to teach airs to 
little Hnging birds, efpecially to a kind of fifldn or canary, called in 
F rench ferin ; hence the name of the inftrument. 



2. '6y. 

ORGAN Pofitive. Chamber organ. In wooden cafe, 
carved, painted, and gilt, in renaiflance ftyle. On the 
infide of the (butters are painted in tempera the Difmiflal of 
Hagar, and the Sacrifice . by Abraham ; and above the pipes an 
open-work ornament, with a medallion portrait and fiiield of 
John George, Duke of Saxony. The pipes are made of paper ; 

T Z 



284 Catalogue of Mufical Infiruments. 

three ftops. German. i6th century. H. 3 ft. 9^ in., W. 
2 ft. 3^ in. (Bought, 40/.) 

Organ pipes are ufually made of wood, or of a compofition of tin 
and lead, which is called pipe-metal \ but fome centuries ago they were 
alfo made of copper, brafs, filver, gold, alabafter, glafi, clay, and 
occafionally of paper. 

The celebrated organ builder, Eugenius Cafparini, made, in the 
feventeenth century, at Vienna, an organ with fix ftops, all the pipes of 
which were of paper ; and the Emperor Leopold I. gave him for this 
work of art 1,000 ducats and a golden fnuiF-box containing the emperor's 
portrait. 

To enter at any length into the hiftory of the organ would require 
much fpace, and is hardly compatible with the objedl of the prefent 
catalogue. A few curfory remarks muft therefore fuffice. 

The organ pojitive is diftinguifhed from the organ portative in fo far 
that the former was a larger inftrument, generally placed on a table and 
blown by an attendant, while the latter was carried about by the 
performer in religious proceffions and on fuch-like occafions. 

In Englaiid fome rude fpecies of organ is faid to have been ufed in 
public worfhip as early as about the middle of the feventh century. It 
was, however, on the continent, principally in Germany, that almoft 
all the important improvements originated which gradually brought the 
organ to its prefent high degree of perfe<Slion. Many old organs of fine 
workmanfhip are ftill extant in the churches of Germany. During 
the 1 8th century efpecially feveral large organs of deferved celebrity 
were built in that country; fuffice it to inftance thofe of the brothers 
Andreas and Gottfried Silbermann. In England the important inven- 
tions of the continental builders were not readily adopted. Recently, 
however, feveral huge organs of very fine workmanfhip have been 
conftrufted in England, chiefly for ufe in concert rooms, or public* 
halls. 

The regal^ often mentioned in Englifli literature of the time of 
Shakefpeare, and earlier, was a fmall organ portative. There was till 
about the end of the laft century a ** Tuner of the Regals," in the 
Chapel Royal St. James's, with a falary of 56/. The name regal is 
fuppofed to have been derived from rigabelloj a mufical inftrument of 
which fcarcely more is known than that it was played in the churches 
of Italy before the introduction of the organ. 

The expreffion " a payre of regalls," ufed by writers fome centuries 
ago, evidently implies only a fingle inftrument. Thus alfo the virginal 
is not unfrequently mentioned as " a payre of virginalls." Moreover, 



It 



Mexican Antiquities. 285 



it appears that the regal was occafionally made with two fets of pipes, 
fo as to conftitute a double organ of its kind. 

In the following lines from Sir W. Leighton's * Teares or Lamenta- 
tions of a Sorrowful Soule/ London, 1613, this little organ is mentioned 
in combination with other curious inftruments now antiquated, moft of 
which will be found in the prefent coUedlion : — 

" Praife him upon the claricoales, 
The lute and flmfonie : 
With the dulfemers and the regalls, 
Sweete fittrons melody." 




MEXICAN ANTIQUITIES. • 

1384-84^. '64. 

HISTLES. Three ; in the form of heads of ani- 
mals. Terra-cotta. Ancient Mexican. (Given 
by Captain Vanfittart, R.N.) 



1385. '64. 

WHISTLE. Model of a bird. Terra-cotta. L. 3 in. 
Ancient Mexican. (Given by Captain Vanfittart, 
R.N.) 

The illuftration. Fig. 55, exhibits three fuch whiftles which weic 
conftrudied by the Aztecs. Some of thefe contrivances may be 
regarded rather as pipes than as mere whiftles, fmce they yield about 
four tones, fb that fome Ample tune can be played on them. The 
enclofure of a loofe ball, which is occafionally found in the whiftles of 
the Aztecs, was evidendy effe<5led in the fame way as that of the balls 
in the earthenware rattle, ajacaxtli^ noticed above, page 79. 

Thefe relics are particularly interefting when compared with the 
litde pipe of baked clay which was found in the ruins of Babylon^ 
Birs'i'Nimrotidy and which is now in the Mufeum of the Royal Afiatic 
Society, London. This pipe appears alfo to be intended to reprefent 
the head of an animal, and bears altogether much refemblance with the 



2 86 Catalogue of Mujical Injiruments. 



ancient American whiftle. It meafures about three inches in length, 
and has two finger-holes fituate fide by fide, and confequently equidiflant 
from the end at which it is blown. The oppofite end has no opening ; 
the inftrument in this re(pe£l refembles a whifUe. By fome little con- 
trivance about five tones are obtainable, but the natural tones of the 
inflrument are only the tonic, the third, and the fifth. If both finger- 
holes are clofed it produces the tonic, if only one of them is dofed it 
produces the third, and if both are open it produces the fifth. More- 
over, it is remarkable that the third obtained by clofing the left finger- 
hole is about a quarter-tone lower than the third obtained by clofing the 
right finger-hole. This interefling Babylonian relic is in as well- 
preferved condition as any of the Aztec whiilles, notwithflanding its 
high antiquity. A notation of the tones producible on the latter is 
given in the preceding EfTay on the Hiflory of Mufical Inftruments, 
page 67. 



APPENDIX No. I. 



INSTRUMENTS LENT FOR EXHIBITION. 



Boxwood> carved with woodland ^enes. 
'/h. Dated, 1578. (Lent by the Earl of 
wick.) 

violin is {lad to have been given by Queen Eliza- 
beth to the Earl of Leicefter, and the anns of both thefc perlbnages are 
engraved on lilver on the finger-board. The inftniment is mentioned 
by Hawkins and alfo by Burney ; the former gives a drawing of it in 
his ' Hiftory of Mufic,' London, 1776, vol. iv, p. 34.2. He lays, "At 
a fale by au6tion of the late Duke of Dorfet's efFe£ts a. violin was bought, 
appearing to have been made in the year 1578, which, though of 3 
very fmgular form, and encumbered with a profufion of carving, was 
elTentially the very &me inftrument with the four-ftringed violin. The 
dimenfions of the inftniment are as follows : — From the extremity of 
the tail-pin to the dragon's head, two feet ; length of the belly thirteen 
inches. Over the pins is a Alver gilt plate that turns upon a hinge, 
and opens from the nut downwards ; thereon are engraved the arms 
of England, and under them, encircled by a garter, with the ufual 
motto, the bear and ragged ftafF, and an earl's coronet at the top. 
The bear and ragged ftafF was the cognizance of the Ncvils, Earls of 
Warwick. Robert Dudley, Earl of Letcefter, who derived his pedigree 
from them, took it for his crcft (fee Fuller's ' Worthies of Warwick- 
lb ire,' p. 118). This agrees with a tradition concerning it, that the 
inftrument was originally Queen Elizabeth's, and that fhe gave it to 
her favourite, the Earl of Leicefter, which is not improbable, feeing 



2 88 Catalogue of Mufical Injtruments. 



Appendix. 289 

that her arms are alfo upon it. In the tail-pin is inferted a gilt filver 
ftud, to which the tail-piece is looped, with a lion's face curioufly 
wrought on the top ; this is fecured by a nut which fcrews to it on 
the under fide of the inftrument, whereon are engraven thefe letters 

and figures I P fuppofed to fignlfy the year when it was made and the 

78 

initials of the maker's name. The fubjed of the carving on the 
deepefl part, and on the fide above prefented to view, is a man with an 
axe flanding on the giound, and working upon fome feUen branches of 
an oak tree. On the oppofite part are reprefented hogs under an oak 
tree, and a man beating down acorns \ the refl of the carving is foliage ; 
the whole is in alto relievo. Under the carving is a foil of tinfel or 
filver gilt. The back of the inflrument is not curved, but forms a very 
obtufe angle^ and from the bottom of the back, extending to the back 
of the dragon's head, the carving, which is very bold, confifls of oak 
foliage. Notwithflanding the exquifite workmanfhip of it the inflru- 
ment produces but a clofe and fluggifh tone, which, confidering the 
profufion of ornament, and the quantity of wood with which it is 
encumbered, is not to be wondered at." 

Burney, in his ^ Hiflory of Mufic,' London, 1789, vol. iii. p. 16, 
fays : '* The inflrument is at prefent the property of Mr. Bremner, 
in the Strand. It is very curioufly carved, but the feveral parts are fo 
thick, and loaded with ornaments, that it has not more tone than a 
mute, or violin with a fbrdine ; and the neck, which is too thick for 
the grafp of the hand, has a hole cut in it for the thumb of the player, 
by which the hand is fo confined as to be rendered incapable of (hifting, 
fo that nothing can be performed upon this inflrument but what lies 
within the reach of the hand in its firfl pofition." 

It has been fuggefled that this violin is the work of J. Pemberton, 
a maker of fome celebrity in London about the jrear 1580 ; but there 
feems to be no other indication in fupport of this opinion than the 
initials above mentioned. On the other hand, we have the opinion of 
an authority that the wood carving is fome centuries older than the 
upper portion of the inflrument, and that it dates from about 1330. 
This violin may therefore be a reconflruftion of an older inflrument of 
the violin kind. 

The Mufeum contains alfo an ele6lrotype reproduction of this 
interefling relic, which has been made by MefDrs. Franchi and Son. 



290 Catalogue of Mufical Injiruments. 



HARPSICHORD. Painted and gilt cafe with carved 
legs. The painted decoration confifls of medallions 
containing fubjeds referring to mufic and paftoral life, con- 
neAed by defigns of flowers and birds. French or Italian. 
17th century. (Lent by a gentleman.) 



SPINET. Englifli. Made by Jofeph Mahoon. About 
the middle of the 17th century. Compafs, five odaves, 
thus : — 







f 



(Lent by C. H. Thorpe, Efq.) Depofited in the Educational 
Department. 



MINIATURE Virginal. Combined with a little cabinet. 
Ebony, inlaid with ivory. Compafs, three oftaves 
and two femitones. (Lent by Signor Caftellani.) 



HARP. Conftrufted fo as to admit of being tuned by 
either hand ; made by the inventor Dizi, in the early 
part of the 19th century. (Lent by C. H. Thorpe, Efq.) 



HARP, carved, and painted with landfcape fubjefts, 
trophies of mufical inftruments, &c., and flowers. 
French. About 1750. (Lent by Mrs. Jackfon.) 



Appendix. 291 



TRIPLE Harp, Welfh. i8th century. (Lent by Lady 
Llano ver.) - 

This harp (WeMh, telyn) is the work of John Richards, of 
Rhiwabon, a Welfh harp-maker of reputation during the firft half of 
the eighteenth century. He made the harp of John Parry of Rhiwabon, 
the famous blind Welfh harper, and the original of Gray's ' Bard,' and 
he was fo celebrated for the combs of his harps that "Old Parry's 
Curve" became proverbial in Wales from the harps built by John 
Richards for Blind Parry. 

The inflrument is triple-flrlnged, or in other words, it has three 
rows of firings. The two outer rows are tuned in unifon, according to 
the diatonic fcale, and the inner row contains the chromatic tones. The 
chief advantage of having the two outer rows in unifon, or two founds 
for each interval of the diatonic fcale, appears to be that it enables the 
performer to fuflain a tone at pleafure for any length of time by flriking 
the two firings which are in unifon alternately in regular and rapid 
fucceffion. Of courfe the tone cannot in this way be (b equally fuflained 
as on a violin or flute ; it rather partakes of the nature of the pro- 
longed found which pianifls produce by means of the repetition a£lion 
on the pianoforte, a kind of tremolo which, as is well known, Thalberg 
has often made ufe of in '' finging " a melody on the pianoforte. No 
doubt the old Welfh harpers mufl have required much pradice to enable 
them to produce a continuous found which did not tremble exceffively, 
and the evident difficulty in acquiring the knack may be the reafon 
why we find the efFefl fo little employed in the Welfh mufic for the 
harp by Edward Jones and others of the laft century, when the triple 
flringed telyn was flill in popular favour. 

The introdu£lion of fpecial firings on the harp for the chromatic 
intervals, fo as to enable the performer to produce them without the 
expedient of fhortening the firings with his fingers, or by means of a 
mechanifm, appears to have fuggefled itfelf fome centuries ago to feveral 
nations. A harp with the compafs of above fix odaves, like our prefent 
one, if it were conflrudled with the chromatic firings between the 
diatonic ones, would be too broad, and the firings would neceflarily be 
fb clofe together as to render it extremely difficult to play. Attempts to 
conflrufl a harp with chromatic firings have, however, been occafionally 
made. Of this defcription was, for inflance, the chromatifche harfe^ 
conflru£led in the year 1804 by Pfranger, a phyfician in Schleufingen, 
Germany. Its compafs embraced five o6laves. The firings for the 



292 Catalogue of Mujical Injiruments. 



chromatic intervals were of a diiFerent colour from thofc conftituting 
the diatonic fcale, and were placed lower in the frame than the latter. 
Perhaps this contrivance fuggefted itfelf to its manufefturer from his 
having become acquainted with the Wel(h triple harp. We find, how- 
ever, as early as in the year 1605, Luca Antonio Euftachio, a cham- 
berlain of Pope Paul v., recorded as the inventor of a harp with three 
firings for each tone, which perhaps was likewifc to fome extent an 
imitation of the old Wclfh triple harp. 



SORDINO or Pochette. Wood, with carved female head 
at the top. Four firings. In a leathern cafe. French. 
Dated 1647. (Lent by J. Hare, Efq.) 



H 



UNTING Horn. i6th century • (Lent by Signor 
Caflellani.) 



z 



INKEN. Wood, coated with leather. German. 17 th 
century. (Lent byR. Burchett, Efq.) 



The Italians call it cornetto curve. A (hort defcription of this inftru- 
mem has ahready been given, page 230. In Shakefpeare's ^ Merchant 
of Venice' (Aft II., Scene 5) Shylock fpeaks of " the vile fqueaking of 
the wry-neck'd fife," probably referring to the cornetto curvo (German, 
krummer zinken). The cornetto diritto (German, gerader xinken) dif- 
fered from it only inafmuch as it was ftraight like a flute. Each 
had ufually (even finger-holes. The mouth-piece, which refembled 
that of the trumpet, was often made in one piece with the inftru- 
ment. The fmalleft fpecies of zinJten called cornettino^ the tone of 
which was rather fhrill, was often played on the continent in the ftreets 
during public feftivities and in procei&ons. 



H 



AND BelL Silver gilt ; the upper part covered with 
openwork ornament jewelled and enamelled, and fur- 



Appendix. 293 



mounted by a ftatuette of a man blowing a horn. German. 
17th century. (Lent by J. Furley, Efq.) 



PIB-GORN, or Hornpipe, An inftrument of the oboe 
family. In the infide is a reed. JVelJh. Early i8th 
century. (Lent by C. Wynne Finch, Efq.) 




Fig. 136. PiB-OORN. Wclfli. 

The pibgorn was formerly popular with the ruftics in Wales. It is 
made of horn, meafures about i8 inches in length, and has feven finger- 
holes. The reed concealed within it refembles the reed of the hautboy. 
The pibgorn is ftill occafionally met with in the Ifle of Anglefea, where 
it is played by the fhepherds. A fpecies of country dance, termed 
hornpipe J originally derived its name from being commonly danced to 
this inftrument, pibgorn fignifying hornpipe. Edward Jones (' Mutical 
and Poetical Relicks of the WeHh Bards,' London, 1794) mentions 
another Welfh inftrument of this kind, " a fort of pipe ufed in fome 
parts of South Wales, called cornicyll (from cornig^ 2l diminutive of com) 
which has a concealed reed on the fame principle as the pibgorn^ and 
the mouth-piece fcrews off in order to introduce the reed j in other 
refpeds this inftrument is made like a common clarinet." From this 
account it would appear that the cornicyll was provided with a fingle 
reed, and not with a double reed like that of the pibgorn. 

The Jlockhom^ which the paftoral people in Scotland formerly con- 
ftruded, is fimilar to the Welfli pibgorn. In the * Complaynt of 
Scodand,' which was written in the year 1548, we find the comepipe 
enumerated among the paftoral inftruments played by eight fhepherds : 
" The fyrft had ane drone bagpipe, the nyxt hed ane pipe maid of 
ane bleddir and of ane reid, the third playit on ane trump, the feyerd 
on ane corne pipe, the fyfth playit on ane pipe maid of ane gait home, 
the fext playt on ane recordar, the fevint plait on ane fiddil, and the 
laft plait on ane quhiffel." 



294 Catalogue of Mufical Injiruments. 

CRWTH. An inftroment of the fiddle kind formerly 
popular in Wales, but now almoll fallen into oblivion. 
It was played with a bow, and twanged with the thumb of 
the left hand. (Lent by C. Wynne Finch, Efq.) 




This mxith was found in the Ifle of Anglefca. It had the following 
infcription on a label in the infide : — 

Maid in the paris of 

anirhengel by Richard 

Evans Inftruments maker 

In the year 1742. 

It is, however, probably older than the date here given, and may 
have been only repaired by Richard Evans. Another repair it has 
undergone in the year 1871, but efpecial care has been taken to rcftore 
it cxaftly to its original condition. This interefting inllrumem is cut 
out of one block of wood, excepting the belly, which is glued on. Its 
dimenfions are : length, 22 inches ; width, 9^ inches ; depth, 2 inches. 



Appendix. 295 

The finger-board is 10 J inches long. The belly has two circular found- 
holes, as fhown in the annexed engraving. The top of the bridge is 
very flat, and as the fides of the crwth are without incurvations, it is 
almoft impoffible to apply the bow to any ftring fingly. From its 
peculiar arrangement in the tuning of the firings it would appear that 
two ftrings, conftituting an o£lave, were ufually intended to be founded 
together. The crwth is ftrung with fix catgut ftrings, two of which 
run at the fide of the finger-board, and are therefore unalterable during 
the performance. The ftrings are tuned as follows : — 



m 



The two ftrings for g and its oftave, which run at the fide of the 
finger-board, are generally vibrated with the thumb of the left hand, and 
ferve chiefly as an accompaniment to the tones produced on the other 
ftrings by the bow. The crwth has no found-poft ; however, one foot 
of the bridge in fome meafure ferves for it by extending through one 
of the found-holes fo as to reft on the back infide the inftrument. 
The other foot of the bridge, which is proportionally ftiorter, is placed 
on the found-board near the other found-hole. The pofition of the 
bridge is not at right angles with the fides of the body, but ibmewhat 
oblique. 

Some account of the antiquity of xh^ crwth is given in the preceding 
Efliky on the Hiftory of Mufical Inftruments, page 99. Towards the 
end of the i8th century there was ftill a fkilfiil player on the crwth to 
be met with in Wales. At the prefent day it feems to have been 
entirely fuperfeded by the violin. 



SOUNG. A harp. Carved and gilded body and neck. 
Silken ftringSi On carved wood ftand. Burme/e. (Lent 
by Henry Willett, Efq.) 



N 



INE wind inftruments, of zinc and copper, chiefly in 
twitted ferpent form. Burme/e. From the Edinburgh 



296 Catalogue of Mufical Injiruments. 

Mufeum of Science and Art. Lent. I'hefe inftruments were 
brought to Edinburgh by an officer of the Britifh Expedition in 
the Burmefe war of 1824-25. 



TRUMPET. Formed of a human thigh-bone. Ufed by 
the Bhooteas as a facred inftrument. (Lent by William 
Tayler, Efq.) 

Similar trumpets are ufed in the temples by the Lamas or Buddhift 
priefts of Sikkim, Himalaya. The thigh-bone is perforated through 
both condyles. It is very often the bone of a lama, and is coniidered 
valuable in proportion to its length. "It is reported at Darjeeling," 
Dr. Hooker (' Himalayan Journal,' London 1854) remarks, '* that one 
of the firft Europeans buried at this ftation, being a tall man, was 
difinterred by the refurre£lionift Bhooteas for the fake of his trumpet 
bones." It is (bmetimes taftefiilly mounted with (liver. Alfo the Lamas 
of the Kalmucks in the South of Ruffia ufe, according to Julius Klaproth, 
fuch a trumpet in their religious ceremonies. They call it gangurthy 
and it is generally made of the long arm-bone of a flain enemy. 



TOOTOOREE. A trumpet. In common ufe in the 
temples in Bombay. Indian. Modern. (Lent by Sir 
Bartle Frere, K.C.B.) 

The Brahmins, or priefts attached to Hindu temples, ufe feveral 
kinds of trumpets in religious proceifions, and in feftivals in honour of 
their divinities. The largeft kind is called kurna. 



TZETZE. An inftrument of the Somali, Eaft Africa, 
South of Abyflinia. Modern. It is formed of a carved 
ftick, a gourd, and a fingle ftring. (Lent by Sir Bartle Frere, 
K.C.B.) 



Appendix. 297 

The t%et%e is alfo to be found in Zanzibar and other diftrifts of 
caftern Africa. Its firing is generally made of the fibre of the Raphia 
Palm, and by means of the frets fix different tones are producible on 
mofl of thefe inllruments. 



ZANZE. A wooden box, carved, and having at the top 
a number of iron tongues which the performer vibrates 
with his thumbs. Wefiern Africa. (Lent by Henry Willett, 
Efq.) 



Rude inftruments made of vibrating tongues, either of hard fonorous 
wood or of metal, are efpecially common with the negroes. The xhhtu, 
Qxfanfay is to be found principally among the Negro tribes of upper and 
lower Guinea. Similar inftruments are the kaffangah at Delagoa Bay 
and in the neighbouring diftrid, South-eaftern Africa ; the tbeka of 



298 Catalogue of Mujical Injiruments. 



the Bakalai, a Negro tribe in Weftem Africa near the Gaboon river ; 
the ambira^ popular at Mozambique, Eaft Africa -, the vijfandfchiy at 
Congo and Benguela ; and others. As regards the ufual arrangement 
of mufical intervals on this clafs of inftruments, the fpecimens which 
have been brought to Europe are rarely in a condition to enlighten 
the inquirer. In feveral of them the tongues were inferted fo as to 
allow their being pufhed deeper into the wood, or drawn out to a 
greater length, at pleafure. Perhaps this is an expedient for the 
purpofe of tuning them in conformity with any particular melody which 
the performer wifhes to play, and which, as the Negro melodies are 
generally very fhort, he may produce by means of the tongues thus 
arranged, if he vibrates them in fuccefSon, meanwhile obferving the 
rhythm of the melody. At any rate, there are other inftruments among 
uncivilized nations in which the tones appear to be regulated with this 
objed rather than for the introdudion of a regular mufical fcale. 



REBAB ; alfo called kemangeh. With bow, ornamented. 
Two-ftringed. The body of wood, over which parch- 
ment is ftretched, with carved neck, and recurved head. The 
bow incifed and inlaid with pieces of coloured cloth under glafs. 
Province of Suz, Southern Morocco. 19th century. (Lent by 
T. Blackmore, Efq.) 



FLUTE and Tobacco Pipe, combined. Formed of a 
cocoa-nut fhell with two engraved canes. Obtained 
from an itinerant mufician at Fez, Northern Morocco. (Lent 
by T. Blackmore, Efq.) 



DERBOUKA (or Darabouka). A fmall fpecies of hand- 
drum. Painted earthenware, vafe-fhaped ; the top 
covered with painted bladder. It is played by ftriking with 



Appendix. 299 

the fingers. Tetuan, Northern Morocco. 1 9th century. (Lent 
by T. Blackmore, Efq. 



TEBEL (or Tabl.) Drum. Formed of a cylinder of 
glazed earthenware with blue decoration, one end 
covered with bladder. From Fez, Northern Morocco. (Lent 
by T. Blackmore, Efq.) 



TOBILETS. Double Drum. Formed of two earthen 
jars covered with hide, and united by thongs of the 
fame material. From Fez, Northern Morocco. (Lent by 
T. Blackmore, Efq.) 



DAIKO. Drum. Wood ; the fides covered with parch- 
ment painted with dragons. Japanefe. 19th century 
(Lent by Marcus Flowers, Efq.) 



GUNIBRY. An inftrument of the tamboura family. 
With pleftrum. Two-ftringed. The body of wood, 
over which parchment is ftretched. Morocco. (Lent by T. 
Blackmore, Efq.) 



GONG. Large, bronze, with central bofs. Northern Shan 
States^ Afia. (Lent by Major E. B. Sladen.) 



GONG. White metal. Ufed by the Shans and Burmefc. 
(Lent by Major £• B. Sladen.) 



U 2 



300 Catalogue of Mujical Injlrutnents. 

GONG. Small. White metal, with central bofs. Northern 
Shan States. (Lent by Major E. B. Sladen.) 

GONGS. Two, white metal. Chine/e. (Lent by William 
Tayler, Efq.) 



B 



ELL. Bronze, fufpended in carved wooden frame. 
Chine/e. (Lent by William Tayler, Efq.) 



BELl^. Bronze and iron. Burmeje. (Lent by William 
Tayler, Efq.) 

Thefe bells are fufpended from the roofs ot the Buddhift temples. 
Attached to the clapper is a thin metal plate fhaped like a leaf. A 
moderate current of air is fufficient to caufe the bell to ring. The 
cuftom of adorning the temples with thefe bells is evidently very ancient. 
Sir Stamford RafBes found fuch a bell in the ruins of a temple in Java. 
Marco Polo, who travelled in Afla during the fecond half of the 13th 
century, (aw in a town of Burmah called Mien, which is fuppofed to 
have been Ava, two towers of pyramidical fhape, conftrufled of marble, 
which flood near the fepulchre of a king ; each tower terminated in a 
ball, around which were fufpended fmall bells, defcribed by Marco Polo 
as being of gold and fllver, but which mofl likely were of bronze gilt. 
When agitated by the wind they made a continual tinkling. A recent 
traveller in China defcribes a Pagoda in the vicinity of Shanghai as 
follows: ^^ It confifls of eight flories, each about 15 feet in height, 
making with the dome and ball its total elevation 150 feet. Its fhape 
is octagonal, and each flory is provided with a covered verandah, having 
a projefting roof, at the corners of which are hung fmall bells of different 
tones, and as there are 64 of them, which are kept in almofl conflant 
motion by the wind, the found they produce is exceedingly pleafing, 
gready refembling the wild i^lolian harp." 



BELL. Mixed metal, with handle in form of the Dorje^ or 
facred thunderbolt. Nepaukfe. (Lent by William 
Tayler, Efq.) 



Appendix. 301 

The fcepter (dorje^ i.e. *^ thunderbolt '*) is held in the hand by 
the Buddhift prieft during prayer. The ritualiftic inftruments of the 
Buddhift prieft in Lad^k, or Middle Thibet, are three, viz. : the bell, 
drilbu ; the fcepter, dorji i and the prayer-cylinder, mani^hhoo-khor 
(i.e. " the precious religious wheel "). The drilbu is tinkled during 
the performance of daily fervice. It is depifted in the left hand of the 
great Lama, Skyobba Jigten, of the red fe£t ; and it is placed on the 
throne at the feet of the great Dalai Lama, Navang Lozang. 



BELLS. Five, facred, brafs. Indian. (Lent by William 
Tayler, Efq.) 

Thefe hand-bells are of the kind called ghunta ufed by the Brahminic 
priefts. Scarcely any facrifice or oblation is performed by them in the 
temple without a preliminary tinkling of the ghunta^ which is repeated 
at certain intervals according to the ritual. The handle of the ghunta 
not unfi-equently reprefents the figure of Hanumun, one of the Hindu 
deities. 



DRUM. Engli/h. Modern. (Lent by Meflrs. Rudall, 
Rofe, Carte, and Co.) Depofited in the Educational 
Department. 

CONCERTINA. With twenty-four keys. Engli/h. 
Modern. (Lent by Meflrs. C. Wheatftone and Co.) 
Depofited in the Educational Department 

CONCERTINA. With forty-eight keys. Engli/h. 
Modern. (Lent by MeflTrs. C. Wheatftone and Co.) 
Depofited in the Educational Department. 

ORGAN Accordion. Invented by Hafkin. Engli/h. 
Modern. (Lent by MeflTrs. Chappell and Co.) Depo- 
fited in the Educational Department. 



f 



302 Catalogue of Mufical Injiruments. 



COTTAGE Harmonium. In oak cafe. Englifh. Modern. 
(Lent by Meflrs. Chappell and Co.) Depofited in the 
Educational Department. 

HARMONIUM. Poliihed deal. Four oftaves. As 
ufed in Swedifti fchools, and cofting in that country 
4/. 14J. 5^. Made by A. G. Wildgren, of Stockholm. From 
the Swedifh School Houfe in the International Exhibition of 
1 87 1. Depofited in the Educational Department. 

HARMONIUM. In mahogany cafe. Five oftaves. 
Engli/h. Modern. (Lent by Mr. J. Hillier.) Depo- 
fited in the Educational Department. 

CHROMATIC Harmonium. Rofewood. Peculiarly 
conftrufted keyboard, "fhowing the twenty-four pro- 
greflions. The common method is (t^n at the back of the 
inftrument in connexion with the keys." Englijh, Modern. 
(Lent by Mrs. Read.) Depofited in the Educational Depart- 
ment. 

SOL-FA Harmonicon. Invented by Mifs Glover. In- 
tended as an afiiftance in learning finging, and the theory 
of mufic. Engli/h. Modern. (Lent by Mifs Glover.) De- 
pofited in the Educational Department. 

CHROMATIC Pianoforte. Rofewood. Peculiarly con- 
fl:ru6led key-board, in which the keys are difl:inguifhed 
by diiFerent colours. Intended to facilitate the playing in the 
different major and minor keys. Engli/h. Modern. (Lent 
by Mrs. Read.) Depofited in the Educational Department. 



Appendix. 303 



BIJOU Pianoforte. In polifhed afhwood cafe. Englijh. 
Modern. (Lent by Meffrs. J. and J. Hopkinfon.) 
Depofited in the Educational Department. 

PIANOFORTE. With check aftion. In black walnut 
cafe. Engli/h. Modern. (Lent by Meffrs. Chappell 
and Co.) Depofited in the Educational Department 



PIANOFORTE (called by its maker '^ Euphonicon ") . 
Steward's patent. The cafe is rofewood. The ftrings 
are ftretched on an iron frame, which rifes upward in harp-like 
fhape, and behind which are three found-boards of fatin-wood, 
in form fomewhat refembling that of the violin. Engli/h. 
About 1840. (Lent by the Rev. H. R. Haweis.) 

In the year 1841, John Steward took out a patent for ** applying 
to the pianoforte found-boards on frames, and affixing fuch frames at 
intervals to the iron frame which bears the flratn of the firings. In 
the inilance fhown there are three found-boards, the treble, the tenor, 
and the bafs, the latter being confiderably larger than either of the others, 
and fitted to the largefl compartment of the frame.' 



9i 



ORGAN Pipes. A feleftion in illuflration of their manu- 
faftare, fhowing the middle C pipe of each flop. 
Englifli. Modern. (Lent by Meffrs. Speechly and Ingram.) 
Depofited in the Educational Department. 



304 Catalogue of Mujical Injiruments. 



INSTRUMENTS LENT BT MR. CARL ENGEL. 



Purpose of the Collection. 

HIS collet^ion was formed for the purpofe of illuftrating 

the charaifleriAics of the mufical inftruments which 

were ufed by our forefathers, and which are now 

fallen into oblivion. The colleif^ion comprifes the moft 

popular kinds from the time of Queen Elizabeth until 

the beginning of the prefent century. The inftruments are, with a few 

exceptions, in their original condition. Wherever an alteration has 

been made by modern hands it will be pointed out in the following 

account. Unimpaired fpecimens of fome kinds are, indeed, now rarely 

met with ; generally, they have been altered in the courfe of time to 

fit them to modern requirements ; and thofe which have efcaped 

modernization are, in fome inftances, in fo dilapidated a condition as 

not to allow of being ftrung and played upon in the old way. It may, 

therefore, be interefting to muficians to examine the prefent colle3ion. 

The fpecia] aim has been to illuftrate the various clafles of ftnnged 
intlruments. Not only were the flringed inllruments more univerfally 
employed, in focial circles, than the wind inftruments and the intlru- 
ments of percufBon, but they are al(b, on the whole, the mofl important 
in mufical performances. At any rate, it is efpecially through an 
acquaintance with the ftringed inftruments of our ancellors that we are 
able to obtain an accurate imprelBon of the charaifteri flics of the inflru- 
mental performances of the olden time. 

In the belief that further refearches will more and more eflablifh 
the opinion that by far the greater number of our mufical inllrumcnts 
had their origin in the Eafl, feveral rude intlruments have been placed 
in the collection, belonging to Afiatic and other extra-European nations, 
which will enable anyone interelled in this queflion to form his own 
opinion upon it. Thefe foreign intlruments will be defcribed Artl, 
in order to fliow the gradual progrefs from primitive to elaborate con- 
trivances. 



Appendix. 305 

EXTRA-EUROPEAN INSTRUMENTS. 

(i.) 
ONE-FLUTE of the Caribi Indians in Guiana. 
Confifts merely of the bone of a jaguar, into 
which three finger-holes have been bored. The 
mouth-hole, which is at one end, is partly 
filled with a dark cement to narrow the aperture. A tuft of 
bright-coloured feathers is generally attached, by way of orna- 
ment, to a firing tied to the bone. South American. Modern. 

This inftrument has at all events the merit of being the leaft pre- 
tentious one in the colle£lion. The ancient American Indians not 
unfrequently ufed the bones of flain enemies for fuch flutes \ and (bme 
tribes in South America are faid to have preferved this cuftom even to 
the prefent day. 




D 



(156.) 

ANCING Rattles of the Indians in the vicinity of the 
river Amazon, Brazil. 

They are made of a fpecies of nut, a number of which are hollowed 
and fufpended on a cord to be hung over the fhoulders. By way of 
embelliihment fome bright feathers and the tail of a quadruped are 
interfperfed between the nuts. 

(146.) 

BELAPELLA. A rattle of the Indians of Vancouver 
Ifland, North'WeJiern America. Of wood, formed in 
imitation of a bird, and painted with diflFerent colours. Con- 
taining pebbles. Ufed by the ** Medicine men." 

(I47-) 

BELAPELLA. A rattle of the Indians of Vancouver 
Ifland. Of wood, formed in imitation of a fifli, and 
coloured. North-wejlern America. 



3o6 Catalogue of Mufical Injlruments. 



SAKASAKA. A rattle of the Negroes of Santa Lucia, 
Weft Indies. Ornamented with fome rude defigns cut on 
the furface. It contains in the infide a number of fmail red 
berries of an oval ftiape, known as Jamboo berries. 



(62.) 

MAROUVANE. Bamboo inftrument from Madagqfcar. 
L, I ft. 9 in. The feven ftrings are cut out of the 
bark of the bamboo, and are raifed by bridges confifting of little 
plugs of wood. 




Fig. 139. — Maioutan^. Madagalcar. 

The marouvane^ alio called valiha^ has often affixed beneath it a 
palm leaf, in the fliape of a bafket, which is perhaps intended to ferve 
as a found-board. The tone is, however, as might be expeded from 
the nature of the ftrings, by no means brilliant. But, as regards out- 
ward appearance, the marouvane deferves to be clafTed with the moft 
fingular muiical inftruments. The natives of Madagafcar are faid to 
be as much fafcinated by its (bund as the Swifs are by the found of the 
Alphorn. Similar inftruments are the foufounou^ or akaduy conftruiled 
by the natives of the ifiand of Timor, and the gendang hoeloe of the 
Battahs in Sumatra. Alfo the Dyaks in Borneo conftru£l a ftringed 
inftrument of bamboo which refembles the marouvane. 



GUNIBRY. A rather primitive inftrument of the guitar 
kind, played with a quill fpHt in two. Its body confifts 



Appendix. 307 

of the half of a bottle-pumpkin covered with fheep's fkin, and 
its two ftrings are of catgut. Morocco. Modern. 

The gunibry is alfo found in Algiers, where it is faid to have been 
introduced from Morocco. 



(3-) 

GUNIBRY. The body confifts of the Ihell of a tortoife, 
Morocco. -Modern. 

This contrivance is not uncommon, and is Evidently of high 
antiquity. Hennes made his lyre of a tortoife which he found near 
the Nile. 



(4) 

SMALL Kuitra. Like the gunibry an inftrument of the 
Arab defcendants in Northern Africa^ chiefly ufed in 
Tunis. It has three pairs of catgut ftrings. Modern. 

The larger and more common kuitra^ popular in Tunis, has four 
pairs of ftrings. Each pair is tuned in unifon, and the Inftrument is 
played with a little pleftrum. The body of the prefent fpecimen con- 
fifts of the ftiell of a tortoife. 



(63) 

INGOMBA. A negro drum from Lower Guinea, Wejlern 
Africa. Made of the ftem of a palm tree 6 ft. 6 in. long. 
Covered at both ends with the fkin of an elephant's ear. 



(I35-) 

VALGA. From Congo, Weftern Africa. It has five 
ftrings, made of a vegetable fibre, which are tuned by 
being wound round five canes inferted in the body. L. 3 ft. 



3o8 Catalogue of Mujical Injlruments. 

The valga is known by different names in difFerenc didri^ of 
Weftcrn Africa. In Bcnguela it is called kiffumha, and near the 
Gaboon river, vaambtt. 



(5) 

KASSO. A negro tnftniment. The body made of a huge 
pumpkin, the ftrings of the tough fibres of a creeping 
plant Senegambia. Modern. 

One or two of the firings, which were broken, have been replaced 
by caigut ftrings. 



s,a — Kasso. a Nfgro Inftiui 



(6.) 

SANCHO. The body of wood covered with fnake's flcin. 
Senegambia. Modern. 



Appendix. 309 

It has ivory tuning pegs not unlike thofe of a violin, and there is an 
F-hole on one fide of the body ; from which one might conclude that 
the negro manufacturer of this inftrument had taken a hint ti'om feeing 
a European fiddle. Generally, xh^fancho is tuned by means of movable 
rings, like the kajfo. At leaft, fuch is the contrivance of feveral of 
thefe inftruments which have been brought to England from diflFerent 
parts of Weftern Africa. 



TAMBOURA baghlama. Four wire ftrings, which are 
twanged with a pledrum. Egyptian. Modern. 

The tamboura baghlama may be regarded as the Eaftern mandoline. 
BaghlaTna fignifies ^^ fmall,'' and this inftrument is the fmalleft-fized 
tamboura. 

Various kinds of the tamboura are to be found in Egypt, Afiatic 
Turkey, Perfia, and Hinduftan. 



(134-) 

ABYSSINIAN Fiddle, with bow. The whole inftrument 
IS cut out of one block of wood. Seven catgut ftrings. 

There are fbme mufical inftruments to be found on the eaftern 
coaft of Africa which probably were derived originally from Hinduftan. 
The prefent fiddle, which in ftiape bears fome refemblance to the 
chikarah of the Hindus, was brought to England by a foldier engaged 
in the Abyfiinian war, and confiites the ftatement of Bruce and fome 
other travellers, that the Abyffinians pofiefled no inftruments of the 
violin clafs. 

(143-) 

REBAB. Per/tan. Probably of the prefent century. 
The body cut out of a fingle piece of wood, is rudely 
ornamented with a pattern which is burnt on it. The inftru- 
ment has three ftrings of catgut, which near the top run 
through holes, and are faftened at the back to the tuning- 
pegs. 



3 1 o Catalogue of Mufical Injlruments. 



This rebab is an exa£t counterpart of the rebec formerly popular in 
Weftern Europe. 



{79-) 

KEMANGEH a'gouz. With bow. Egyptian. A fpecies 
of Eaftern violoncello, with two firings made of horfe- 
hair. The body confifts of the ihell of a cocoa-nut, covered 
at the top with a bladder, and perforated at the back with a 
number of found- holes. 



(80.) 

SAMSIEN. With a large pledrum of a white wood. Japan. 
Its three firings are of filk. The body is fquare, and is 
covered in front and at the back with parchment. 

The famfien is played efpecially by the Japanefe ladies, and is as 
great a favourite with them as the lute was formerly with us. 

It is ufually tuned in the following order of intervals : — 



3^ 



^ 



and alfo thus : — 




but fometimes 



*"^=- ^p 



^ 



i 



^ 




(8.) 

YUE-KIN, or " Moon-guitar." Mounted with four filken 
firings, which are arranged in two pairs, each pair being 
in unifon. The two tones thereby produced are tuned in the 
interval of a fifth from each other. Chine/e. Modern. 

This grotefquely-fhaped inflrument is a favourite one of the Chinefe. 
The Canton pronunciation of yue-kin is yuet^kur/iy and this may be the 
reafon why fome European travellers in China have called the inflru- 
ment gut'komm. The wood of which it is made is called by the 



Appendix. 311 

CYiUick Jivan-che. The ftrings are twanged with a pleftrum, or with 
the nails, which, it will be remembered, are grown by the Chinefe to 
an extravagant length. 



(9-) 
A 7UE-KIN. Strung with catgut ftrings. Chinefe. Modern. 

The employment of catgut ftrings is probably an innovation, fince 
we find in the old defcriptions which the Chinefe poflefs of their mufical 
inftruments only filken and wire ftrings mentioned as being ufed by 
them. 



(10.) 

PEPA. Made of a wood called wootung. The four ftrings, 
which are of filk, are tuned in the intervals of fourths 
ftom each other. Chinefe. Modern, 

Chiefly played by the Chinefe ladies. As a curiofity, it may be 
mentioned that both the pepa and the yue^kin have generally fome loofe 
and tinkling metal infide, which is probably intended to produce a 
rhythmical eiFe£t when the inftrument is occafionally ihaken while it is 
being played. 

(11.) 

^* AN-HEEN. Made of a hard wood calledywtf», imported 
kZ^ into China from Siam and Tonquin. The body is covered, 
at the back as well as in front, with the ikin of a fnake, called 
tan. Its three ftrings are of filk, and are tuned in the intervals 
of fourths to each other. Chinefe. Modern. 

A £ivourite inftrument of the Chinefe. It is noteworthy that, 
although the two femi-tones of the diatonic fcale are producible on the 
fan-heen^ pepa^ and yue-kin^ the Chinefe generally avoid them in their 
performances. Like the Malayfian Iflanders, the Chinefe have a 
natural predileAion for that feries of intervals which may be called the 
Pentatonic Scale, becaufe it contains only five different intervals in the 
compafs of an o£lave. 



312 Catalogue of Mufical Injiruments, 



(l2.) 

TCHE, or Xfang. Mounted with fixteen thin wire firings, 
which are placed over fixteen movable bridges. Chine/e. 
Modern. 

The Chinefe have feveral kinds of tche. Thofe ufed in former 
times had not the large tuning-pegs found on the prefent fpecimen, 
and had fewer firings. The fpecies here exhibited is played with the 
fingers. 

(13) 

YANG-KIN. Played with two little flicks of a rather 
peculiar fhape. It has two bridges, and is mounted with 
very thin brafs firings, which are placed fo as to run alternately 
through one of the two bridges and over the other. Chinefe. 
Modern. 

The reiemblance of the yang-kin to our dulcimer, and to the fantir 
of die Arabs and Perfians, is very remarkable, and fuggefls various 
conjectures as to its origin. 

(14.) 

KIN, or " Scholar's Lute." Made of the wootung wood 
(Dryandria condifolid). It is lacquered ; and there are 
two apertures below, ferving as found- holes. Its firings, of 
which there are feven, are of filk. Chine/e. Modern. 

The kin bears no refemblance to a lute, and the name ^' fcholar's 
lute " appears rather inappropriate ; it is, however, generally fo de- 
fignated by European travellers in China, perhaps becaufe it is efpecially 
played by Chinefe fcholars and philofophers. 

When the Chinefe fcholar feels inclined to play upon his kin he 
takes the inflrument out of its cafe and places it upon a table, fo that 
the long filken taflfels, which are attached to the tuning-pegs beneath, 
hang down over the edge of the tabic. He then tunes the firings in a 
feries of intervals in the following order : — 

-4-^ 



3a? 



^ 



Appendix. 313 

adopting the pitch according to his fancy. He twangs the firings with 
his fingers, and obtains the tones which he requires by preffing the 
firings down at the places indicated by little fluds of mother-of-pearl. 

The kin was the favourite inftrument of the philofopher Con- 
fucius. 



(15) 

URH-HEEN. A Chinefe fiddle. Generally has only two 
firings; the prefent fpecimen has four. Its body is 
covered at the top with the fkin of the fnake called tan^ a fmall 
fpecies of the genus Boa. Chinefe. Modern. 

As an oddity it may be pointed out that the bow is atuched to 
the firings in fuch a manner that the hair pafTes between them. It 
is faid, and may eafily be believed, that the Chinefe violinifls have to 
pra^ife very affiduoufly before they can wield with dexterity the bow 
thus placed. 

(13^-) 

HIUEN-TCHUNG. Antique Chinefe bell. Suppofed 
to be very old. (See Fig. 41.) 

The Chinefe mandarins are as zealous coIle£lors of antiquities as 
any Englifhman, and it is (aid that occafionally clever reproduAions 
of fcarce archaeological curioflties are provided for them by cunning 
Chinefe artificers. 



(16.) 

THRO, or ^arau. Burmefe violin. The thro has three 
firings, as was the cafe with our rebec of olden time and 
as in the prefent day the rebab of the nations of Arab defcent 
is often flrung. The top of the finger-board is ornamented 
with carvings in wood, and with a figure in ivory of a little idol. 
The firings are of filk. Burmeje. Modern. 

Nafal as Its tone may appear to us, the thro is certainly a fuperior 
contrivance if compared with the urh-hen of the Chinefe. From an 

M.I. X 



314 Catalogue of Mujical Injiruments. 

examination of a MS. colle£tion of about thirty popular Burmefe tunes, 
as they are ufually played on the thro^ written down by an Englilli 
gentleman refiding in Rangoon, it would appear that when the Burmefe 
mufician accompanies his vocal effufions with the throy he plays the 
melody in unifon with his voice, indulging, however, occafionally in 
more or lefs extended interludes, performed as a folo on the inftrument 
between the ftrophes of his fong. 

(175.) 

THRO. Burmefe violin* The head elaborately carved. 
Three filken firings. Burmefe. Made probably in the 
1 8th century, if not earlier. 

(151-) 

KHEW. A fmall bell. Burmefe. 19th century. To 
the clapper is attached a thin plate of metal, gilt, in 
the form of a leaf. A number of thefe bells are generally 
fufpended from the roofs or projedions of the different ftories 
of the Buddhift temples. The wind moving the leaf caufes 
the clapper to ftrike the bell. The found of the khew is 
remarkably clear and fuftained. 

(61.) 

SARINDA; alfo called chihikong. A Hindu violin with 
three firings. It is made of a fingle block of wood, 
hollowed and carved. The upper part of the body is left 
partially open, and is partially covered with Ikin refembling 
bladder, generally from a fpecies of gazelle. Indian. 



(144.) 

CHIKARAH. Indian (from Bombay). An inftrument 
of the violin clais. It is cut out of a fingle block of 
wood, which, when rubbed or damped, emits a peculiar aromatic 



Appendix. 315 

fcent. The belly is of parchment. Three catgut firings, 
beneath which are placed feven thin wire firings. 



(145-) 

SARUNGI. Indian (from Bombay). An inftrument of 
the violin clafs. Four catgut ftrings, and beneath them 
thirteen ^' fympathetic " firings of thin brafs wire. 

The performer on Ae/arungi does not prefs the ca^t firings down 
upon the finger-board, but touches them at the fide with his fingers to 
produce the tones which he defires. When played upon, the farungi 
is not held like our violin ; the performer places it before his breaft in a 
nearly perpendicular diredion. 



(17.) 

SITAR. Five wire firings. Originally ihtjitar wad made 
with three firings ; hence its name. The body is made 
of a gourd and of cocoa wood. The neck has movable frets, 
which enable the performer to alter the order of intervals or the 
mufical fcale whenever he finds it expedient. In playing, the 
mufician twangs the firings with a little pleftrum called mizraby 
which is made of a piece of wire curioufly twified, and which 
he has attached to the forefinger of his right hand. Indian. 
Modern. 

There are, it is fiud, among the profeffional muficians in Hinduftan 
Jitar players who enrapture their auditory as much as any fiafhionable 
virtuofo in Europe. 



(153.) 

NAGARAH. A drum formed of an earthenware bowl, 
over which hide is firetched. Indian (from Surat). 
Diam. at the top, 16 in., H. 6\ in. 



X % 



3 1 6 Catalogue of Mufical Injiruments. 



(18.) 

RANAT. A harmonicon. Siamefe. Modern. The nine- 
teen flabs of fonorous wood, when vibrated by being 
ftruck with the ftick belonging to the inftrument, produce the 
following tones :• 



^ 



jji iJiJ^ffr nrt^^ 



It will be obferved that the ranat has the diatonic fcale, which is 
not the cafe with feveral inftruments of this kind common in Java 
and other Malayfian iflands. Thefe have ufually the pentatonic 
fcale, i.e.y the diatonic intervals with the exception of the two femi- 
tones. 



EUROPEAN INSTRUMENTS. 

Moft of thefe are, as has already been intimated, long fince out 
of fafhion, but the names of them are ^miliar to mufical inquirers, 
being mentioned not unfrequently in our claffical literature ; and fome 
of the inftruments were, two or three centuries ago, as popular as the 
pianoforte and the harmonium are at the prefent time. 

Pulsatile and Wind Instruments. 

(74.) 

ECHELETTE. French. 1 8th century. It has twenty- 
two flabs of a hard wood, which, when ftruck with 
the little mallets belonging to it, give the following tones : — 



jrjjjjiJiJ'fir-i'TfTM 



It will be obferved that the loweft tone (produced by the longeft 
and thinneft flab) is the dominant of C-major, and that the upper 
arrangement of intervals is according to the icale of G-major. 



Appendix. 317 



(64.) 

SMALL Flageolet. Englijh. With feven finger-holes, 
greatly varying in fize for the fake of infuring a correft 
intonation. 



. (65.) 

DOUBLE Flageolet, Englijh. Beginning of the prefent 
century. Made by Bainbridge, London. 

In the year 1819, Bainbridge took out a patent for the conftrudlion 
of fuch inftniments. According to a ftatement in the ^ Harmonicon,' 
London, 1830, he invented in the year 1804, ^^a mode, with the 
affiftance of keys, to fix two of his fingle flageolets together, or rather 
two bodies in one head, which became exceedingly fefhionable ; for, 
mufic in two parts from — 




to 



could be eafily performed on this double flageolet. 



99 



{66.) 

TRIPLE Flageolet. Englijh. Beginning of the prefent 
century. Made by Bainbridge. 

Lefs common than the double flageolet, but equally ufelefs for 
mufical performances of the prefent day. The ' Harmonicon,* London, 
1830, records : — "Within thefe few years Mr. Bainbridge has added 
a bafs joint to his double flageolet, the compafs of which is from — 

55^^ to ^= 



and the tone refembles the lower notes on a German flute. The effeft 
produced by the combination of three notes is very good and mellifluous. 
The bafs joint is fixed at the back of the double flageolet, and the breath 



3 1 8 Catalogue of Mufical Infiruments. 

is conveyed by means of a tube ; and by the introdudion of what are 
termed ftop-keys, a folo, duet, or trio may be inftantaneoufly performed. 
The bafs notes are produced by keys prefled with the thumb of the left 
hand." The writer remarks that ^^ this inftrument being purely 
Englifh, I confider it deferving of being recorded as a very ingenious 



invention." 



(67.) 

FLUTE a bee. Englijh. About 1700. Boxwood and 
ivory. L. i ft. 6 in. Eight finger-holes^ and without 
any key. 



T 



ENOR Flute. German. About the year 1600. L. 
2 ft. 9 in. Seven finger-holes and one key. 



(68.) 

BASS Flute. Englijh. About 1650. (See the engraving. 
Fig. 141.) With a brafs tube for blowing the inftru- 
ment. Six finger-holes, and one brafs key at the upper fide, 
and one finger-hole for the thumb at the oppofite fide. L. 
3 ft. 8 in. 

The bafs flute had not unfrequendy a wooden cylinder inferted in 
the lower end of the tube, about two feet in length, terminating in a 
round knob. Its purpofe was to prevent die tube touching the ground 
when die performer was feated. This contrivance accounts for the bafs 
flute having generally a large hole at the fide near the lower end, which 
evidently ferved as a fubftitute for the hole at die end clofed by the 
cylinder or tail-piece. Including this cylinder, the bafs flute meafures 
nearly fix feet in length. A number of performers playing in concert 
on flutes of fuch enormous dimenfions muft have been a radier im- 
pofing fight. But the eflFed produced by the performance, however 
beautiful the mufic may have been, would certainly appear at die prefent 
day fomewhat ludicrous, confidering die weaknefs of the found emitted 
by thefe huge flutes. 

In the inventory of the collection of mufical inftruments which 
belonged to King Henry VIII., compiled by Philip van Wilder, a Dutch 



Appendix. 319 

lute-player in the fervice of the Iting, the manufcript of which is pre- 
fcrved in the Britifli Mufeum, we find entered ; " Flutes called Pilgrims' 
Staves i a great bafe recorder j two bale recorders of walnut." 



Fig. 141. — Bah Flvti. EngliOi. 
(69.) 

SERPENT. Engliflt. Beginning of the prefent century. 
Wood, covered with leather. Several brafs keys, and a 
brals tube for blowing the inftrument. Made by Gerock 
Wolf, in London. 

The invention of the Jtrpent is attributed to Edme Guillaume, a 
canon of Auxerie in France, anno 1590. It was, however, no new 



3 20 Catalogue of Mufical Infirutnents. 

invention, properly fpeaking, but merely an improvement upon the old 
bafs'zinken^ the management of which was rendered more convenient 
by giving a ferpentine winding to the tube. This inftrument fubfequently 
became rather popular. It was ufed in military bands and in proceffions 
until about the middle of the prefent century. The French made ufe 
of it alfo in church to fupport the voices. Towards the end of the 
eighteenth century it appears to have ftill been a common fubftitute for 
the organ in France. Dr. Burncy, in his 'Journal/ London, 1773, 
ftates that he frequently met with it in the churches of that country, and 
he exprefles a more favourable opinion of its fuitablenefs for promoting 
edification than might have been expelled ({"om a refined mufician : — 
'^ It gives the tone in chanting, and plays the bafs when they fing in 
parts. It is often ill-played, but if judicioufly ufed would have a good 
efFed. It is, however, in general overblown, and too powerful for the 
voices it accompanies ; otherwife, it mixes with them better than the 
organ, as it can augment or diminifh a found with more delicacy, and is 
lefs likely to overpower or deflroy, by a bad temperament, that perfed 
one of which the voice only is capable." 



(70.) 

HORN. Made in the fhape of the Roman cornu. Englijh. 
About 1 7cx>. This horn, which is of brafs, terminates 
in the head of a ferpent. It is probably the '* lelard " (or 
lizard) mentioned by Englifh writers about two hundred years 
ago. 

A " lezarden " is recorded among the mufical inflruments of Sir 
Thomas Kytfon of Hengrave Hall, about the year 1600 (* The 
Hiflory and Antiquities of Hengrave, Suffolk, by John Gage,' London, 
1822). 

(130.) 

ALPHORN. Of birchwood ; neatly covered with birch- 
bark. Switzerland. L. 8 ft. i in. Made by M. von 
Euw in Biirgy, Rigi Kulm, Canton Swyz. The tube is 
ftraight 

There are three forms of the Alphorn. That of the prefent in- 
ftrument is ufed in the Cantons AppenzcU and Swyz. The Alphorn 



Appendix. 321 

with a thicker tube than this one, and fomewhat curved at the broadeft 
end, is ufed principally in the Bernefe Oberland. The third form, 
probably a rather modern adoption to render the inftrument more handy, 
is that refembling the trumpet, as the tube is wound feveral times round 
in an oval fhape. This kind of Alphorn is chiefly ufed in the Cantons 
Uri, Unterwalden, and Swyz* 

(78.) 

BORDER Bagpipe. Englijh. From Northumberland. 
With bellows. Four drones. The chanter is of cocoa 
wood, neatly made, and provided with brafs keys. 



Lutes, Guitars, and similar Instruments. 

All of thefe have catgut firings, and, except one or two kinds, are 
twanged with the fingers inflead of a ple£lrum. 



(19.) 

LUTE, or Teftudo Theorbata. Double neck and thirteen 
firings. Englijh. About 1650. 



9* 



This inflrument refembles the figure of the ^' Old Englifh Lute 
given by Thomas Mace in his ^ Mufick's Monuments,' London, 
1676. Mace fays: *' The theorboe is no other than which we calPd 
the Old Englifh Lute." On the theorbo ufed on the continent, how- 
ever, the neck for the bafs firings was much longer than it is on the 
prefent fpecimen. The firings for the higher tones, except the highefl 
of all, are arranged in pairs, each pair being tuned in uniibn. The 
highefl firing was called the chanterelle^ becaufe it was chiefly ufed for 
playing the melody, while the others were ufed for the accompaniment. 



(149-) 

LUTE. French. 17th century. The neck has been 
altered in the i8th century. 



32 2 Catalogue of Mufical Infiruments, 



LUTE. Italian, About 1580. From an old infcription 
infide, now greatly obliteratedj it would appear that this 
lute was made by Magnus Tieflfenbrucker In Venice. 

In fome old German books we find it mentioned that this fpecies of 
lute, — ^with the body inlaid with ivory and various woods, with a thick 
and heavy head for the tuning-pegs, and three (bund-holes placed 
behind the firings, — ^was chiefly made in Rome, and was therefore 
called the ^^ Roman Lute/' In the prefent fpecimen fome of the ivory 
work has been reflored ; in all other refpedls it is in its original 
condition. 

It may not be out of place here to fay a few words refpeding 
the &mily of TiefFenbrucker, which may perhaps afford a hint to 
muficians interefled in the hiflory of the violin. 

There lived in Venice in the latter half of the fixteenth, and 
beginning of the feventeenth century, three celebrated Jute makers of 
this &mily, viz., Magnus, Vendelino, and Leonardo TiefFenbrucker. 
The name is evidently German, and it appears very probable that they 
came to Italy from the Tyrol, like Jacob Stainer and fome other cele- 
brated inflrument makers. Now, we find that the name of the earliefl 
violin maker in Italy, whofe infiruments are flill highly appreciated, 
was Gafpard DuifFoprugcar. Scarcely more is known of this celebrated 
maker than that he was born in the Tyrol, and lived in Bologna about 
the year 15 lo. Further inquiries may perhaps elicit that his name, 
properly fpelt, was TiefFenbrucker, and that he belonged to the above 
family. About three centuries ago, as is well-known, orthography was 
rather unfetded, and even the names of perfons were not unfrequently 
written in different ways. Indeed this was flill the cafe in the lafl 
century. Handel wrote his name in Italy Handel, in Germany Handel, 
and in England Hmidd. Gluck wrote himfelf in Germany Gl^t'ck. 
Furthermore, it may be furmifed that all the TiefFenbruckers were 
makers of violins as well as of lutes. It evidently was in their time 
ufual for men following their occupation to combine the making of 
infiruments of the violin clafs with that of lutes. In France, at the 
prefent day, the violin makers are called luthiers. 

In fupport of the above fuppofition may be cited the infcription 
Magno Dieffopruchar a Venetia 1 612, in a lute depofited in the Liceo 
Comunale di Mufica at Bologna, and another infcription with the name 
of the fame maker fpelt flightly differently, viz., Magno Dieffbprukhar 



Appendix. 323 

a Virntia 1607, in an old Italian lute belonging to Prince Moriz 
Lobkowitz in Eifenberg, Bohemia. 



LUTE. German. Made by Jacobus Heinrich Goldt in 
Hamburgh Anno 1 7 1 2. 

According to an infcription infide, it was altered, in the year 1753. 
To judge from the holes in the old bridge ftiU retained it had originally 
twenty-one firings. By the alteration it has aflumed more the character 
of a guitar. 

LUTE. Italian. Early 15th century. This inftrumcnt 
is efpecially interefting, inafmuch as it has attained 
the venerable age of four hundred and fifty years. It is the 
work of Laux (or Lucas) Maler, a German, who lived in 
Bologna about 141 5, and who may be confidered as the Amati 
of the old lute makers. 

At the time when Thomas Mace wrote his book before-mentioned, 
which, it muft be remembered, Mras two hundred years ago, when the 
value of money was fix times higher than it is at the prefent day,— • 
the lutes of Laux Maler were in high repute, and ^^ pittifiiU old, batter'd, 
crack'd things '' as they were, according to Mace, they fetched as much 
as a hundred pounds a-piece. 

The prefent (pecimen is in a found ftate of prefervation. Nothing 
has been altered on it except the tuning-pegs, — brafs and ivory fcrews 
having been fubftituted for the original pegs. This contrivance, as 
well as a painting of flowers on the foundboard, is probably not older 
than about a hundred years. The cracks on its pear-fiiaped body have 
been carefully mended, — not recently, but evidently whenever they oc- 
curred in the courfe of centuries. Its tone is remarkably fine, having an 
exquifite fonoroufnefs and mellownefs of found. It evidently had origi- 
nally thinner firings, arranged in pairs, as may be feen by the holes in 
the bridge. But this arrangement could not now well be reflored on 
account of the fubflitution of the tuning machine above referred to. 
The places where fbme of the ancient tuning-pegs were fixed are flill 
difcernible. The knob at one fide of the body ferved for placing the 



324 Catalogue of Mufical Infiruments. 

inftrument againft a table. It was the cuftom of lute players, efpecially 
at ail early time, to reft the inftrument againft a table inftead of holding 
it faft by means of a band flung round the (boulders. 

Through the found-hole may be feen the name of Laux Maler 
exactly correfponding with the fac-fimile of Maler's autograph given 
in Gottlieb Baron's work on the lute, entitled, ' Unterfuchung des 
Inftruments der Lauten,' Niirnberg, 1727. The wood and vamiih 
are of the kind ufed by the celebrated Cremona violin makers. Since 
lutes went out of fafliion many valuable ones have been cut to pieces 
for the purpofe of ufing the wood in reftoring valuable Cremona 
violins ; and this is one of the reafbns why they are now fo fcarce. 
But the chief reafon of the fcarcenefs of Laux Maler's lutes is un- 
doubtedly the length of time which has elapfed fince they were made. 



(86.) 

THEORBO. Italian. 17th century. Twenty-four ftrings. 
Ornamented (bund-hole. 



(171-) 

ARCHLUTE. Italian. Made by Bueckenberg, Rome, 
1 6 19. Bueckenberg, a German by birth, was one of 
the moft celebrated lute makers in Italy. He made the back 
of the lute with narrower flips of wood than moft other 
makers, and his lutes have generally three ornamented found- 
holes. 

The prefent archlute has a mechanifm by means of which any one 
of the bafs ftrings by the fide of the finger-board can be raifed a femi- 
tone in pitch. 



(170.) 

CHITARRONE. Large Roman theorbo. With mar- 
quetry, and ornamented found-holes. Italian. Made 
by Bueckenberg in Rome, anno 16 14. 



Appendix. 325 



THEORBINO. A fmaU Theorbo. Sixteen ftrings, fix of 
which run befide the finger-board. Englifli. 17th 
century. 

GUITARE. The ftrings, as was often the cafe, are 
arranged in pairs tuned in unifon. French. 17th 
century. The work of Voboam, a celebrated lute maker of the 
time of Louis XIV. 

The bridge on this inftrument is a modern fubftitution, calculated 
for fix ftrings. The addition of a fixth ftring on the guitar is com- 
paratively modern, apd is (aid to have originated in Germany about 
the year 1780. The fixth ftring which was added was the loweft 
one, e. 

to) 

MACH^ITR A fmall guitar with four ftrings. Portu- 
guefe. 1 8 th century.^ 

The machete is ftill played in Madeira as well as in Portugal, and 
feems, likewife, to have been formerly occafionally ufed in England. 
The tone of the prefent fpecimen is remarkably voluminous and fono- 
rous, confidering the fize of the inftrument. 



QUINTERNA, or Chiterna. A fpecies of guitar, fome- 
what refembling a violin in fliape, with three pairs of 
catgut ftrings, and two fingle ftrings covered with wire. Frets 
of catgut Italian. 17th century.* 

U(ed about two centuries ago, efpecially in Italy, by the lower orders 
of muficians and comedians for accompanying their vocal performances. 



^ See alfo page 254. ' See alfo page 147. 



326 Catalogue of Mufical Infirutnents. 



It was played with the fingers inftead of a pledrum* There is a label 
infide with the inicription — Antonius Bachmann Kanigl : Prnis : Hofin- 
Jirumententnacher in Birliny 1 769 ; but it is not likely that Antonius 
Bachmann was the maker of this inftrument. It probably dates from 
the feventeenth century. Bachmann had a reputation not only as a 
maker of new inftruments but alfo as a fuccefsfiil repairer of old ones. 



LYRE-GUITARE. Its form is an imitation of the lyra of 
the ancients, with the addition of a finger-board in the 
middle. It is, in facSt, nothing but a guitar in the fhape of 
Apollo's lyre. French. Period of Louis XV. 

During the latter half of the laft century the lyn^guitan was rather 
patronifed in Paris, efpecially by the ladies, becaufe playing oil it was 
thought to look gracefiil. However, owing to the inconvenience of 
holding it on the lap, and to its poflTeffing no real advantage over the 
guitar, it was gradually abandoned, while the guitar retained its place. 

(7^0 

LYRErGUITARE. French. Said to have belonged to 
Queen Marie Antoinette. 

The documents in evidence that Marie Antoinette ufed to play 
upon it when (he was imprifoned, were brought with the inftrument 
fi-om France by Captain Weftbrook, but are now miffing. 

GUITAR-LYRE. In its conftruftion almoft identical with 
the French lyre-guitare (No. 27). Engli/h. Made by 
R. Womum, Wigmore Street, London, about 1770. 



H 



(29) 

ARP-GUITAR. Englijh. End of 1 8th century. 



Appendix, 327 



(141-) 

HARP-GUITAR. Englijh. About 1800. Eight- 
ftringed. Painted with flowers, &;c. On the finger- 
board is the infcription Clemen ft et Co., London. 



H 



(30.) 

ARP-THEORBO. Engli/h. Made by Walker, about 
1800. 



The harp-guitar and harp-theorbo were manufiidured in England 
with the intention of improving the found of the guitar and theorbo by 
adopting for them the body of the harp. 

There was another invention of this kind, called the harp-lute^ 
which in (hape was exa£t]y like the inftrument next defcribed.^ 



D 



ITAL Harp, Engli/h. Recorded to have been invented 
by Edward light, London, about the year 1 800. 



Dr. Bufby, in his ^Concert Room and Orcheftra Anecdotes,' 
London, 1825, defcribes this inftrument as follows : — " The dital harp 
(fo called from the Italian word dita^ fingers, — the adion or machinery 
by which the femi-tones are eiFeded being preflTed by the finger inftead 
of the foot), though not unlike the harp-lute in form, is totally different 
in the arrangement of its ftrings, in the method of performing on it, and 
in its general eiFe£t. This inftrument is ftrong in tone, tuned precifely 
as is the pedal harp, and is alfo played upon with both hands, the only 
difference being that, in the way it is held the order of the ftrings is 
inverted, the longeft or bafs ftrings being neareft to the performer, — a 
convenience eiFe£led by a fimple litde machine attached to each ftring, 
for which the inventor obtained a patent. The dital harp may be 
played on in all the ufual harp keys, and every femi-tone may be ex- 
preflTed at pleafure. Its compafs has the extent of three o£bves, that 



1 See alfo page a5o. 



328 Catalogue of Mufical Inftruments. 



is, from £-flat below the ba& clef to £-flat in alt. Its tone is of a 
dulcet quality; and unqueftionably, the pedal-harp excepted, this 
inftrument is the moft eligible accompaniment to the human voice." 



HARP- VENTURA. Invented at the beginning of the 
prefent century by Signer Angelo Benedetto Ventura, 
profefTor of mufic, and teacher of the guitar and harp-lute to 
the Princefs Charlotte of Wales. 

Ventura exhibited his invention at the National Repofitory, Royal 
Mews, Charing Crofs, where he played upon it in public. It is, of 
courfe, not to be expeded that the harp-ventura ttioxiM vie in quality of 
found with an old Italian inftrument ; and as to its ornamentation of 
turde-fliell and gilding, the mufician is likely to be more pleafed with 
feeing the unadorned fiddle-wood, with the famous varnifh upon it, 
clear as cryftal, which diftinguifhes the inftruments of the Cremona 
makers. 



Cithers, Panduras, and similar Instruments. 

One of the moft popular inftruments in domeftic circles about 
three hundred years ago was the Cither, alfo mentioned by the old 
writers as Cithern, Cittern, Cythorn, &c. It muft be remem- 
bered that the name of Cithara was formerly applied to various ftringed 
inftruments, but efpecially to fuch as had wire ftrings which were 
twanged with a ple^rum^ ufually made of a quill or a piece of whalebone. 



(33-) 

CITHER. A fpecimen of the kind which in England was 
commonly found in barbers' fhops, &c. It is provided 
with a peculiar contrivance for tuning the ftrings by means 
of a watch-key. On the ftrings is placed a Capo-tafto^ a 
contrivance which enabled the performer to raife the pitch 



Appendix, 



329 



inftantly, and to play in difFerent keys with equal facility. 
Englifli. About 1700. 



CITHER. Englijh. Made by Remerus Lieflem, London, 
1756. 

(34) 

CITHER. Ornamented. German. End of the 17th 
century. 

Strange enough, the fix tones produced by the open firings were 
ufually tuned m an order which made the third tone higher than the 
fourth (counting from the lowefl upwards), thus : — 

1 . . . . 




^ 



3 



This fuccef&on of intervals was probably adopted becaufe when the 
firings were flruck with the quill from the lowefl upwards (as was 
ufually done) the third of the major chord would be heard before the 
o^avey which would heighten the efFedl. 

The old Englifh cittern with four double firings of wire, in ufe at 
the time of Shakefpeare, was tuned in a fomewhat fimilar way ; for its 
intervals were generally arranged thus : — 



t 



i 



But afterwards, when the larger fpecies of cither, alfb called " The 
Englifh Guitar," came into vogue, we find the following tuning 
adopted : — 



^ 



^ 



This order of intervals is indicated near the tuning pegs on fome of 
the inflruments preferved from the i8th century by the letters C, E, G, 
C, E, G. Moreover, it is alfo given as the proper arrangement of 
the firings in Tanfur's Mufical Grammar and Didlionary, Stokefley, 
1770. 



M.I. 



330 Catalogue of Mufical Inflruments. 



CITHARA. A cither with fix pairs of firings. Inlaid 
with mother-of-pearl, tortoife-fhell, and ivory. Provided 
with a CapO'taJio of ivory. Portuguefe. Made by Joan Viera 
da Silva, at Ufbon, about i ycx). 

(36.) 

SMALL Cither. The open firings produce only five tones. 
Specimens of this kind are now very fcarce. Englijh. 
About 1700. 

Michael Praetorius, in his *Theatriun Inftrumentorum/ WolfF- 
enbuttel, 1620, gives a drawing of this fpecies of cither. He calls it 
Klein Englifch Zitterkin {i.e.y " The finall Englifh cithern "), from 
which it would appear that the Germans confidered this inftrument as 
of Englifh origin. 

{37^) 

GROSS-CITHER. A fpecimen of the Bijuga Cither. 
Seventeen wire ftrings, eight of which are placed near 
the finger-board ; the others, which extend to the higher fet of 
tuning-pegs, ferving for the bafs notes, run at the fide of the 
finger-board. German, 1 6th century. 

The Bijuga Cither (or Cithara Bijuga) has, as its name implies, a 
double neck. Merfenne, in his ^ Harmonicorum Libri xii.,' publifhed 
in 1648, calls alfo the theorbo by this name, becaufe it had a double 
neck ; but the theorbo is, properly fpeaking, a lute, and not a cither. 

About a hundred years ago, this inflrument (No. 37) came into the 
pofTeffion of a citizen of Niirnberg, who has placed his name in the 
infide. Afterwards it was in a mufeum of antiquities at Vienna. 

(38) 

LARGE Bijuga Cither. Back and fides fatinwood. Sixteen 
firings. Englifh. 1 7th century. (The " Rofe " in the 
found-hole modern.) 

Called in Germany xwolfchorige cither^ becaufe its open firings, the 
highefi of which are in pairs tuned in unifon, give twelve different 
tones. Five of thcfe are unalterable during the performance, as they 



Appendix. 331 

are befide the finger-board. This fpecies of cither is probably the 
poliphant mentioned as a favourite inflrument of Queen Elizabeth. 
Playibrd, in his ^ Introdudion to the Art of Deicant,' London, 1683, 
while extolling the mufical accomplifhments of Queen Elizabeth, 
remarks, ^' I have been informed by an ancient muiician and her fervant 
that (he did often recreate herfelf on an excellent inflrument called 
poliphant, not much unlike a lute, but fining with wire." We pofTefs 
no reliable information refpeding this poliphant (polyphon ?), but there 
appears to be reafon to fuppofe that it was the large fpecies of cither 
here reprefented. 

The modem German ^ther (alfb written zitter and cither)^ which 
has not long been introduced into England from Bavaria and Auflria, 
is a very different inflrument from any of thofe jufl noticed. It rather 
refembles the dulcimer in fhape, and is placed on a table to be played. 
This horizontal cither was known to our fore&thers about three 
hundred years ago ; only it was lefs pretentious in fize and in power of 
found than it is at the prefent day. The Germans called it fcheidholt. 
It is flill to be found, in its old oblong fhape, among the country people 
in fome diflrids of Germany and France, near to Switzerland. 

(14^-) 

BIJUGA Cither. Inlaid with mother-of-pearl, ivory, and 
ebony. French. 1 8th century. 

This elegant fpecies of cither, conflruAed like the theorbo, but 
having a flat back, was evidently often in France flrung with catgut 
inflead of wire, and played with the fingers like the theorbo. It is 
probably the £une inflrument which by fome old French writers is called 
pandorey a name which^in different centuries and among different nations 
has been applied to various inftruments, the firings of which are vibrated 
by being twanged with the fingers or with a plenum. 

{7S') 

T) I JUGA Cither. French. Made in Paris. About 1 7 50. 

BUCHR French. (German, Scheidholt.) From Val 
d'Ajol, in the Vofges mountains in France. Beginning 
of the prefent century. 



Y» 



332 Catalogue of Mujical Injiruments. 

At the prefent day the people twang it with a quill \ but in olden 
time it was played thus : — The performer, having placed the inftrument 
on a table, twanged the firings with the thumb of his right hand, while 
he ufed his left hand in preffing down, by means of a little ftick, thofe 
firings which are placed over the frets, and which, being tuned in 
unifon, ferve for producing the melody. The other firings, tuned a 
Hfih lower, were dccafionally flruck as an accompaniment. 

Primitive in conflru£lion, and imperfed for our prefent mufical 
performances as the yrA^idCA^/r is, it neverthelefs is interefling, not only 
on account of its popularity three centuries ago, but alfo becaufe it is 
the prototype of the horizontal cither, which has come fomewhat in 
vogue in the prefent century. 



B 



ELL Harp, Made by John Simcock in Bath. Engli/k. 
About 17CX). L. I ft. 8 in. 

It has fixteen tones, which are tuned as follows : — 



f ^jjjirr i t^^^r'rrr jj 



Each tone is produced by three thin brafs firings tuned in unifon. 
The firings are founded by means of two little pledlra, or quills, of 
which the performer faflens one on the thumb of each hand. The two 
wooden handles, one on each fide of the inflrument, are for holding 
the bell-harp while fwinging it during the performance, to produce the 
eiFe£l of a diflant bell. The defcription of the bell-harp as given by 
Graf&neau, in his Mufical Dictionary, London, 1740, is not quite in 
accordance with that of the prefent fpecimen. He fays, ^^It is a 
mufical inflrument of the firing kind, thus called either becaufe fhaped 
like a bell, or by reafon the common players thereon fwing it about as 
a bell on its bias, it being hung on a firing, and refled againfl them 
for that purpofe. Its length is about three feet, its found-board is 
ufually of the fame wood as that of the fpinet or harpfichord, having a 
rofe carved in the middle } its firings are of brafs or fleel wire, fixed at 
one end, and flretched acrois the found-board by fcrews fixed at the 
other end next the player. The number of firings is not fixed ; fome- 
times more, fometimes lefs. They are flruck with the thumb only of 
each hand ; the right hand plays the treble, the left hand the bafs ; but 
the thumbs are armed with a little wire pin, or needle, in order to draw 



Appendix. . 333 

the found the clearer. It takes in the compafe of three or four o£bves, 
according to the number of ftrings." 

In reality the bell-harp is nearly identical with the pialterium made 
about three hundred years ago, which the performer held on his lap, 
and inflead of ftriking the ftrings with flicks, as in playing the dul- 
cimer, he twanged them with pledlra. The maker of the prefent 
fpecimen advertizes himfelf on a label in another bell-harp : — " John 
Simcock, in the Right Honourable the Earl of Ancram's regiment of 
Dragoons, and in Captain Bell's troop, makes, mends, and fells the 
Engliih harp \ alfo inftru£ts gentlemen in the beft mode of playing that 
inftrument." According to Sir John Graham, in his ^ Mufical Memoirs 
of Scotland,' the nobleman referred to is William fecond Marquis of 
Lothian, who was appointed Colonel of the feventh regiment of Dragoons 
in 1696, and Colonel of the third regiment of Foot-guards in 1707. Is 
it not likely that Simcock gave to the inftrument the name of bell-harp 
rather in compliment to his fuperior, Captain Bell, than with the intention 
of alluding to the mufical efFeds peculiar to the bell ? 

He evidently conftru£ted varieties of the inftrument. In a fpecimen 
which is ftill extant, the higheft tones have each four ftrings tuned in 
unifbn; the others have three, except the deepeft, which is produced 
by a fingle ftring covered with wire. This inftrument has twenty-four 
tones, which are arranged in the following peculiar order, counting from 
the left to the right of the bell-harp : — 



fejitrtf' r^rn.r^ d^.i.r"^r.-rrj i 



The notation is marked in the inftrument. 



(40.) 

PANDURA. Played with a quill like a cither. Italian. 
About 1700. 

The Pandura was imported from the South of Italy, efpecially from 
Naples. Bonanni, in his ^ Gabinetto armonico,' Roma, 1722, gives a 
drawing of it. 

Another curious inftrument with wire ftrings, admired by our 
anceftors, was the pandore. There feem to have been formerly three 
differently fhaped inftruments in ufe in England, called by very much 
the fame name, viz., the Italian pandura^ the Englifh pandore^ and the 
handoer. The laft-named is recorded to have been invented about the 
year 1560 by one John Rofe, ^^ a citizen of London, living in 



334 Catalogue of Mufical Inflruments. 

Bridewell ;" but it is in reality only a pandura with fome modifications 
in fhape, as were alfo the orpheoreon^ the pemrcon^ and fome other 
kinds of cithers of that period, which evidently did not become very 
popular. 

(41.) 

PANDORE. Played with a quill like the cither. Englifli. 
17th century. 

The Pandore appears to have been rather popular in England about 
three hundred years ago, and it was evidently tuned much in the fame 
way as the cither ; for in ibme old books of inftrudtion for the latter 
inftrument the pandore is mentioned as if the treatment of the two were 
almoft the fame. 

(4^) 

BANDURIA. Often ftrung with wire inftead of catgut, 
and played with a pleftrum generally made of tortoife- 
fhell. Spani/h. 1 8th century. • 

The Spanifh peafants call their ruflic guitar vihuela ; and it appears 
probable that the *' gittrons that are called Spanifli vialls," mentioned 
in the lift of mufical inftruments of Henry VIII. (Harl. MSS. 1419, 
p. 202) were fmall guitars of this defcription. 

(101.) 

BANDURIA. A Spanifli inftrument of the Mandoline 
kind ; but moft likely made in England. Beginning of 
the prefent century. Rofewood, inlaid with yew, mother-of- 
pearl, &c. Machine head. Three ornamented found-holes. 
Twelve ftrings of catgut arranged in pairs. To be played with 
a plecStrum. 

(43) 
A yr ANDOLINO. Italian {Naples). 1 8th century.^ 

Mozart ufed an inftrument of this defcription in the ferenade in 
Don Giovanni. 



^ See alfo page 247. 



Appendix. 335 

(72.) 

MANDOLINO. In its old Italian leathern cafe, Infide 
the inftrument is the infcription Vincentius Vinaccio fecit 
NeapoUy Sito Nella Calata de Spitaktto -^.D. 1785. 

{97') 

MANDOLINO. Italian. About 1700. Rofewood 
inlaid with ivory, tortoife-ftiell, and mother-of-pearl. 
In front, a figure of Apollo under a canopy, and other 
embellifhments in mother-of-pearl. Silver frets. An orna- 
mented found-hole covered with glafs. A figure made of 
mother-of-pearl inlaid near the bridge contains the engraved 
initials A.G.y which may be thofe of the maker of the inftru- 
ment, poffibly Andreas Guarnerius. This fine mandoline is of 
the fcarce kind called ^^ Milanefe Mandoline," and alfo '^ Man- 
durina.'* It has twelve wire ftrings, which are arranged in pdrs 
and produce fix tones; while the more common Neapolitan 
mandoline has eight ftrings, conftituting four pairs. 

(44-) 

MANDOLA. Italian. Made by Gio. Battifta at Naples, 
in 1 70 1. L. 2 ft 1 1 in., depth of body, 10 in. Sixteen 
ftrings arranged in eight pairs, or unifons. 

The mandolay which is much fcarcer than the mandolinoy is alfo 
called mandura or mandora^ and about three centuries ago was alfo made 
of a fmaller fize and with fewer ftrings. Like the mandolino it was 
played with a pledtrum. In fa£l, the mandola is exa£Uy like the 
mandolino in fhape, but of the fize of a large lute. The purpofe of the 
little plate of tortoifefliell, or fome other fuitable fubftance, placed on 
the found-board beneath the ftrings between the found-board and the 
bridge, is to prevent the foi?nd-board being fcratched by the pledlrum. 
The tone of the mandola here exhibited is very fine, and may well caufe 
the mufician to regret that the inftrument has fallen into difufe. 



336 Catalogue of Mufical Inftruments. 



Viols, Violins, and other Instruments played with 

A Bow. 

(116.) 

• 

VIOLA-DA.GAMBA, Englijh. 17th century. Carved 
head. Six-ftringed. Infide is the inrcription, Richard 
MeareSy without Bijhopjgate^ near to Sir Paul Finders^ London^ 
Fecit 1677. 

(45.) 

VIOLA-DA-GAMBA. Inlaid with mythological repre* 
fentations and other ornamentation in ivory, mothei^of- 
pearl, tortoife-fhell, &c. Made about the year 1580, probably 
in Hamburg. 

The Aibftitudon of a machine for the original tuning-pegs is 
modern ; otherwife the inftrument is in its original condition. There 
could be no difficulty in reftoring the tuning-pegs, which probably were 
of ivory, perhaps ornamented at the top, with a fmall jewel correfpond- 
ing with thofe ftill to be feen on the neck. 

Before this inftrument came into the prefent collection it was in the 
pofleffion of Mr. Simon Andrew Forfter. In the work cntided * The 
Hiftory of the Violin and other Inftruments played on with the Bow,' 
by W. Sandys and S. A. Forfter, London, 1864, there will be found 
two reprefentations of this inftrument, with fome information refpedbing 
its hiftory. Having mentioned Corelli's violin, made in the year 1578, 
and the celebrated violin which Queen Elizabeth gave to the Earl of 
Leicefter, the writers proceed as follows : — '' One of the writers of this 
work has» in his pofleffion a very handfome viol-da-gamba of about this 
date, richly inlaid and ornamented, purchafed from the late Mr. John 
Cawfe, the artift, but we have been unable to afcertaiti the previous 
owners. The body is about the fize of a modern violoncello, and it 
has frets. It is altogether fo fine a fpecimen of this clafs of inftru- 
ments that we have had photographs, from which our illuftrations are 
taken. When the lamented Prince Confort, on the i6th of April 1845, 



Appendix. 337 

being the diredor for the evening of the Ancient Concert, had fome 
mufic of the fixteenth century performed on inftruments of that period, 
fome of which were fent over by M. Feds from BruiTels for the 
purpofe, Mr. Cawfe lent this viol-da-gamba, which was played on by 
Mr. Richard Hatton. In the courfe of the evening he was defired to 
attend and (how the inftrument to the Queen, who examined it 
carefully, and expreffed herfelf much pleafed with it.'' 

This inftrument was probably made by Tielke in Hamburgh. 
There are two inftruments of the guitar kind made by Joachim Tielke, 
which were highly ornamented with mythological figures and precious 
ftones, almoft exadtly like the prefent viola da gamba } one of thefe 
inftruments dated, according to an engraved infcription, from the middle 
of the fixteenth century, and the other dated more than a century later. 
The Tielke family was very celebrated, and we find in old German 
books glowing accounts of their magnificent lutes ornamented with 
elaborate defigns in filver, gold, and jewels. It appears, therefore, 
probable, that the name of Joachim Tielke was kept up through feveral 
generations, juft as is now done by mufical inftrument makers who 
have obtained a high reputation ; and thus the apparent difcrepancy in 
the dates of Joachim Tielke's works, above noticed, may perhaps be 
fadsfadorily accounted for. 

Attention muft alfo be drawn to the old viola da gamba bow, placed 
near this inftrument. Such a bow is now extremely fcarce ; but it 
may be known to mufical inquirers firom reprefentations in fome old 
pidtures. It was held in a peculiar manner, as may be feen in the 
illuftradon. Fig. 103, copied firom ' The Divifion Viol,* by Chriftopher 
Simpfbn, London, 1667, which nearly correfponds with the rule given 
by John Playfbrd in his ' Brief Introduction to the Art of Defcant,' 
London, 1683: — "Hold the bow betwixt the ends of your thumb 
and forefinger, an inch below the nut, the thumb and forefinger 
refting on the wood, the ends of your fecond and third fingers ftaid 
upon the hair, by which you may poife and keep up your bow. 
Your bow being thus fixed, you muft draw it over one ftring, and then 
another, in a right angle, about two or three inches above the bridge, 
making each feveral ftring yield a clear found without touching the 
other." 

As to tuning, Playford gives the following fingular rule : — ** When 
you begin to tune, raife your treble or fmalleft ftring as high as con- 
veniently it will bear without breaking. Then ftop only yoxxx fecond or 
fmall mean in -F, and tune it till it agree in unifon with your treble open. 
That done, ftop your third in -F, and make it agree with your fecond 
open. Then ftop your fourth in £, and make it agree with your third 



338 Catalogue of Mufical Infiruments. 



open. Then ftop your fifih in F^ and make it agree with your fourth 
open. And laftly, ftop your Jixth in /*, and make it agree with your 
fifth open. This being exadly done, you will find your viol in tune 
according to the rule of the Gam-ut^** 



(46.) 

SEVEN-STRINGED Viola da Gamba. Italian. Second 
half of the 1 7th century. 

The oldeft viola da gambas had generally fix ftrings, and were pro- 
vided with firets. 

■ 

The innovation of ufing feven ftrings came into vogue through the 
French mufician Marais. When the violoncello began to fupplant the 
viola da*gamba, in the eighteenth century, many a fine-toned gamba 
was transformed into a violoncello by an alteration of the finger-board 
and the adoption of four ftrings. 



T 



(148.) 

ENOR-VIOL. Englijk 17th century. 



The tenor-viol^ 2l fmall viola da gamba, has fix ftrings, which are 
tuned a fourth higher than thofe of the ba/s-violj or the larger kind of 
viola da gamba. John Playford, in ^ A Brief Introduflion to the Art 
of Defcant,' London, 1683, remarks, ^^ The tenor-viol is an excellent 
inward part, and much ufed in confort, efpecially in Fantafies and Ayres 
of 3, 4, 5, and 6 parts." 



(140.) 

COUNTER-TENOR.VIOL. Englijh. 17th century. 
Infide is the infcription, Henry Jay, in Southwarke, 
1667. Finely carved fcroU. The belly has, befides the ufual 
two found-holes, an oval hole in the middle, with an ornamental 
rofe. Six-ftringed. Catgut frets. It was probably tuned a 



Appendix. 339 

fifth higher than the viola da gamba. The back of the body 
has a peculiar curve towards the end. Probably the inftrument 
was intended to reft on the fhoulder when played. 



(119.) 

TREBLE-VIOL Engli/h. About 1700. Carved head. 
Six ftrings. Catgut frets. It was tuned an oftave 
higher than the viola da gamba. 



{77') 

VIOLA d'Amore. Italian. 17th century. Old-fafhioned 
fliape. Seven catgut ftrings; underneath them feven 
ftrings of thin fteel wire. 

Meyerbeer, Berlioz, and feme other compofers of the prefent century, 
have endeavoured to revive the ufe of this inftrument in the orcheftra on 
account of the iweetnefs of its tone. The feven wire ftrings placed 
underneath the catgut ftrings are tuned in unifon or in o£bves with 
the latter, to increafe the fonoroufiiefs by flightly vibrating when the 
bow is drawn over the catgut ftrings. The ** (ympathedc ftrings," 
as they are called, fhould be of very thin fteel wire. It is now almoft 
impoffible to procure fuch thin fteel ftrings as were formerly ufed on 
this inftrument, as well as on the cither or pandore, and as are ftill ufed 
by the Hindus on their tamboura. When the King of Oude vifited 
London, he could not find fteel wire thin enough to replace the broken 
ftrings of his tamboura. 

The viola iamon is ufually tuned in the following intervals : — 



'"■ ,. T I- i J ^^ 



But it was formerly the cuftom to adopt occafionally another feries of 
intervals, in accordance with the major or minor key in which the 
compofition, wherein the viola d'amore had to take part, was written. 

Burney (*Hiftory of Mufic,* vol. iv. p. 257), in recording that 
Attilio Ariofti— or *' Padre Attilio," as he was ufually called — played the 
viola JP amove in London in the year 17 16 between the a<3s of an opera. 



340 Catalogue of Mufical Infiruments. 

remarks : ^^ This was the firft time that fuch an inftrument had been 
heard in England." From this ftatement it would appear that the viola 
tanwre had, about the year 1700, Men fo entirely into oblivion in 
England that foreigners could introduce it as a new inftrument. John 
Playford defcribes its conftru£tion in his ^ Mufick's Recreation on the 
Viol Lyra-way,' London, 1661. 



VIOLA d'Amore. Strung entirely with wire. A curioufly 
conftruded head with a carved female buft. Probably 
Englifli. 17th century. 

The viola (Tamore ftrung entirely with wire appears to have been a 
novelty to Evelyn, for he records in his Diary of November 20, 1679, 
'* I dined with Mr. Slingfby, Matter of the Mint, with my wife, invited 
to hear mufic, which was exquifitely performed by four of the moft 
renowned mafters : Du Prue, a Frenchman, on the lute ; Signor Bar- 
tholomeo, an Italian, on the harpfichord ; Nicholao, on the violin ; but 
above all, for its fweetnefs and novelty, the viol eTamore of five wire 
firings played on with a bow, being but an ordinary violin played on 
lyre-way by a German." Matthefon (* Das Neu-ErofFnete Orcheftre,* 
Hamburg, 17 13) defcribes the viola (T amove as being mounted with four 
wire ftrings, and with one catgut ftring for the higheft tone. He fays 
that it was ufually tuned according to the common chord of C-major or 
C-minor, thus : — 



f^ 



^^ 



Matthefon praifes its fweetnefs of found, but does not mention the 
fympathetic ftrings. The transformation of the wire-ftrung viola 
iamore into the fo-called pfaltery or fultana, which has no fympathetic 
ftrings, is indicated in the following ftatement by Sir John Graham 
Dalyell (* Mufical Memoirs of Scotland,' Edinburgh, 1849), "The 
inftrument was firft introduced in public in London during the year 
17 15, when it was heard between the afts of an opera. It was known 
in Scodand in the middle of the century, and a tafte for it was probably 
encouraged by the performance of Paflerini, an Italian refident in Edin- 
burgh, in the year 1752, when it was faid to be a new inftrument called 



Appendix. 341 

v/d// tTamour. Paflerini was manager of the Gentleman's and St. Cecilia 
Concert, where he and his wife had a permanent engagement as (killed 
muficians. He played folos and accompanied finging with the inftrument. 
Perhaps the vioU JPamour underwent feveral modifications, as its name 
was changed to pfaltery^ in the belief of its being the ancient inftrument 
fo denominated, which is quite different according to moft authorities, 
not belonging to the fidicinal tribe. In 1754 a concert for the new 
inftrument called the pfaltery was announced for Signor Carufi's benefit 
concert in Edinburgh, and performed by Paiquali, another Italian 
mufician, alfo refident there. From its (oft and fimple nature it was 
eulogifed in 1762 as unequalled for delicacy and fweetne(s. I knew a 
lady many years ago in Edinburgh who played melodies with great 
delicacy on this inftrument, which was ftrung with wire, and had frets 
on the finger-board." From the(e accounts it would appear that the 
viola tamore ftrung entirely with wire was not much u(ed in England 
before the year 1700, although it evidently exifted in this country in the 
feventeenth century. 



(48.) 

SORDINO. The body of tortoife-fhell. With a carved 
head of wood and ivory. Italian. About 1600. Length 
of the entire inftrument, 14 in. 



About three hundred years ago the Jordino was kept by gentlemen in 
a little ca(e re(embling a pen cafe, which they put in the pocket when 
they went to a finging party ; and they ufed the inftrument for infuring 
corre£l intonation while finging madrigals and catches. Kircher, in his 
^ Mufurgia Univerfalis,' Romae, 1650, calls it linterculusj no doubt from 
its refemblance to a fmall boat. 



(50.) 

VIOLETTA Piccbla. The fmalleft kind of the old viol 
inftruments, fhaped with a flanting neck like the viola 
da gamba, or bafs viol. This fmall fpecies of treble viol was 
called by the French Haute-contre. Italian. 17th century. 



342 Catalogue of Mufical Infiruments. 



(51.) 

FIVE-STRINGED Viol, CaUed by the French Qjiinton. 
Labelled infide with the infcription, Antonius Gragnani 
fecit ^ Anno 1741. Italian. i8th century. With it is placed 
a fluted bow made by Betts in the i8th century. 

Betts and Dodd are the Englifh makers whofe bows are held in the 
higheft efteem. 



SIX-STRINGED Viol. Called by the French Par-deffus. 
French. 17th century. 

With this inftrument is placed an old-&(hioned bow of the kind 
known in England as the CorelU-baw* It has no fcrew for tightening 
or flackening the hair, and is altogether different in (hape from our 
prefent violin bow. 



VIOLIN. The work, if we may rely on the label infide, 
of Gafpar di Salo, the celebrated Italian maker, whofe 
inftruments date from about 1560 to 16 10. 

Varnifh and colour are nearly gone, but the tone of this inftrument 
is far better than its appearance indicates. 



(54.) 

lOLIN. Oblong. Englijh. Beginning of the iWi 
century. 

A curiofity in its way, and worthy of examination, if only as an 
evidence that the ufual form of the violin is the beft hitherto diicovered 
for the acoufUc perfection of the inftrument. 



V 



Appendix. 



343 



\ 7IOLIN, German. i6th century. 

A very old^faihioned fhape of the inftruments of the viol cla&. 



SULTANA (or Pfaltery, Cither-Viol.) Played with a 
bow, like the violin. Irifli. Made by Thomas Perry, 
Dublin, 1767. 

Perry made larger inftruments of this kind, mounted with pairs of 
wire firings, like the old Englifli cittern. 

The idea of ufing the bow with inftruments of the cither kind is 
old ; it has been taken up again recently in Germany, as is exemplified 
by the Jireich%ither^ a modern inftrument from Bavaria, previoufly 
defcribed. (See p. 259.) 



NAIL-VIOLIN. The firft inftrument of this defcription 
was invented by a German mufician, Johann Wilde, 
living in St. Peterfburg about the year 1 740. 





Fig. 14s. — ^Nazl Violin. 

« 

One evening, after returning home from a concert, Wilde, in 
hanging his violin bow on a nail, accidentally produced a tone by 



344 Catalogue of Mufical Injiruments. 

drawing the hair of the bow over the metal, whereupon he conceived 
the idea of conftrudling a mufical inftrument of nails. And that he has 
fucceeded in producing a fine-toned, if not a pradicaUy recommendable 
inflrument, will probably be granted by all who draw the large black- 
haired bow over the iron pins. The bow is befl made with black 
hair, for white hair is fofter, and does not ^^ bite " (b well for fuch an 
iron fiddle. It mufl alfo be plentifully fupplied with refin to make it 
bite well. The performer holds the inftrument in his left hand, placing 
his fingers in the hole beneath. 

Probably, owing to the quality of its found, the nail-violin is alfo 
called nail harmonica (German, Nagel-harmonika). Several attempts 
have been made in Germany further to perfe£t it. 



Dulcimers, Organ-Hurdygurdy, &c. 

(58.) 

DULCIMER. With movable bridges like the dulcimer 
(Jantir) of Eaflem nations. Engli/h. Made, according 
to an infcription infide, at Old Wefton, Huntingdon/hire, in 
1846. 

Modern as this fpecimen is, it is of the old flamp, and may be 
regarded as a faithful reprefentadon of the dulcimer mentioned in the 
Englifh tranflation of the Bible. It need hardly be added that the 
tranflators of the Bible, unacquainted with the mufical inflruments 
mentioned in the original text, adopted for them the names of thofe in 
ufe in their day which appeared to them to correfpond mofl nearly with 
thofe of the Hebrews and Greeks. The dulcimer has evidently not 
undergone any material alteration fmce the time of the tranflation of the 
Scriptures. 



(59-) 

SALTERIO. Italian. Made by Antonio Bcrtifece at 
Florence, in the year 1745. 

It may be found interefling to compare this Italian dulcimer with 
the Englifh one jufl noticed, and with the Chinefe yang^kin defcribed 
on page 312. 



Appendix. 345 



(169.) 

ORGAN-HURDYGURDY. (French, vielU organifee.) 
Engliflu About 1750. 

This inftrument was made by a Frenchman living in London. 
Some portions of it have been reftored in the prefent century. In 
England the vieUe organifie was alfo called, rather inappropriately, 
*' flute-cimbal." The organ portion has two ftops, and can be dif- 
engaged from the hurdygurdy, fo that either may be played feparately or 
both together. 

(104.) 

MONOCHORD for tuning the Harpfichord. Englijh. 
1 8th century. With a label bearing the infcriptlon, 
Longman and Broderifs Patent Tanning Machine. 

A fimilar contrivance was patented in England by Wardhaugh 
Thompfon in the year 1787. The mechanifm is contained in an 
oblong-fquare wooden box, in which a wire ftring is ftretched from end 
to end, and fupported at two points by bridges. The ftring refts on a 
movable jack intermediate between the two bridges. A Aider moves by 
the a£lion of a rack and pinion, worked by a winch along a brafs frame 
at the bottom of the box. A '* brafs chop," a£led on by a fpring above 
it, preftes the ftring down on a bridge or crofs pillar, and thus defines 
its length. A fcale and an index are attached to the box* The 
directions given for tuning the harpfichord, fpinet, &c., are as follows : 
'' Put the ftring of the machine to concert pitch by a C tuning fork, 
placing the Aide fo as to give the ftring its full length, after which tune 
the loweft note of the following fcale in unifon with it, and proceed by 
transferring the Aider in its natural progreflion from fpace to (pace, 
tuning each interval agreeable to the. notes, or tones, marked thereon to 
the end of the fcale, after which tune the odtaves afcending from C to 
the higheft note, and then by odaves defcending from B to the loweft 



note." 



M.I. 



346 Catalogue of Mujical Injlruments. 

• 

A few words are here added to plead for the protection of fuch 
antiquated mufical inftruments as may have efcaped deftruflion, from 
carelefs expofure to duft and damp, or other caufes of injury. It is 
furprifing how fbon mulical inftruments become fcarce when they are 
no longer in popular demand. How feldom is a harpfichord now feen ! 
Yet it was ftill in favour as recently as at the beginning of the prefent 
century. Wind inftruments are, on the whole, more durable than 
ftringed inftruments ; and fearches in likely places might perhaps lead 
to the recovery of fome interefting fpecimens of the fackbut^ Jhalm^ 
recorder^ and fuchlike trumpets and pipes mentioned by Shakeipeare and 
other writers, but now to moft people known by name only. Perhaps 
fome well-preferved relics of this kind may ftill be ftowed away in the 
lumber rooms of old manfions ; and this hint may poffibly have the 
eiFe(5l of refcuing a few from oblivion. Are there not in fome of 
the cathedrals ftore rooms cont^ning relics of articles which were ufed 
in religious performances before the time of the Reformation ? Surely, 
fome fuch objefls muft have efcaped demolition by religious enthufiafts. 
Among thefe relics may poffibly be found the regah^ a portable organ 
which was ufed by the Roman Catholics in their proceffions. How- 
beit, the careful prefervation of any mufical antiquities cannot but be 
advocated by everyone interefted in the hiftory of the art of mufic. 




APPENDIX No. 2. 



SOME ACCOUNT OF THE SPECIAL EXHIBITION 
OF ANCIENT MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS IN THE 
SOUTH KENSINGTON MUSEUM, ANNO 1872. 




N the month of Auguft 1871 it was decided by the Right 
Honourable the Lords of the Committee of Her Majefty's 
Moft Honourable Privy Council on Education, aiTembled at 
the South Kenfington Mufeum, that an Exhibition of Mufical 
Inftruments made before the year 1800, together with draw^ 
ings and cafts of ancient inftruments, fhould be opened in the month 
of June 1872. 

The delign owed its origin, in fome meafure, to the arrangement 
adopted for the London International Exhibition of the year 1872. It 
muft be remembered that in the feries of London International Exhi- 
bitions which commenced in 187 1, there are certain manufactures 
affigned to each year's exhibition. In the year 1872 modern mufical 
inftruments, exemplifying their lateft improvements, conftituted one of 
the fpecialities. 

The Committee for promoting the Special Exhibition of Ancient 
Mufical Inftruments confifted of — H.R.H. the Duke of Edinburgh, 
K.G. ; the Duke of Leinfter ; the Marquefs of Exeter ; the Marquefs of 
Weftminfter, K.G. ; the Earl of Warwick ; the Earl of Wilton j 
the Lord Gerald Fitzgerald ; the Hon, Seymour Egerton j the Right 
Hon. Sir John Pakington, Bart., M.P., G.C.B. j the Rev. Sir 
Frederic G. Oufeley, Bart. ; Sir Coutts Lindfay, Bart. ; Sir John 
Harington, Bart. ; Sir Robert Stewart, Bart. ; Sir M. D. Wyatt 5 Sir 
Julius Benedict ; Sir George Elvey ; Sir Sterndale Bennett j Sir John 



Z 2 



348 special Exhibition of Mufical Injiruments. 

Gofs ; Mr. Francefco Berger ; Mr. W. T. Beft 5 Mr. W. Broad-^ 
wood ; Mr. A. Chappell ; Mr. Cheyne \ Mr. Cole, C.B. ; Mr. 
W. G. Cufins 5 Profeffor J. Ella ; Mr. Carl Engel ; Mr. G. Grove ; 
Mr. John Hullah j Mr. Henry Leflie; Dr. Charles Maclean; Pro- 
feffor Oakeley ; Mr. P. Cunliffe Owen ; Mr. J. F. Puttick ; Mr. 
Redgrave, R. A. ; Dr. Rimbault ; Mr. A. Sullivan \ Mr. R. Thomp- 
fon i Mr. G. F. Watts, R.A. ; M. Ambroife Thomas, Diredlor of 
the Confervatoire at Paris j M. G. Berger ; M. Gallay ; M. Le- 
comte ; M. Vuillaume ; Signor G. Gafpari, of the Confervatoire at 
Bologna ; Mr. Alan Cole, Secretary. 

The Executive Committee appointed confifted of — H.R.H. the 
Duke of Edinburgh ; the Lord Gerald Fitzgerald ; Mr. Henry Leflie ; 
Mr. Philip Cunliffe Owen 5 and Mr. Alan Cole, Secretary. A 
French fub-committee was appointed in Paris, confiding of M. Gallay, 
M. Georges Berger, M. Lecomte, who afted as Secretary^ and M. Vuil- 
laume, who was invited to fuperintend the arrangement of the Italian 
ftringed inftruments. 

The projeft was readily taken up by private coUeftors, as might be 
expected, not only in England, but alfo on the continent. Moreover, the 
South Kenfington Mufeum had in its permanent colled^ion an excellent 
nucleus for the foundation of the Special Exhibition. The number of 
exhibitors amounted to about one hundred and thirty. 

A catalogue was prepared. It contains an Introdudion in which 
an account is given of the principal colle£lions of muflcal inftruments 
which have been formed in different countries. Some inaccuracies 
in the catalogue, owing to the neceffity of its being in print before 
the opening of the Exhibition, when not all the inftruments defcribed 
had arrived, have been reftified in a revifed edition, of which, a number 
of copies were printed for diftribucion among the lenders. This edition 
contains photographs of interefting inftruments which were exhibited. 

After the labours of the Committee had refulted in the formation 
of a remarkable collection, the Exhibition was opened on Saturday 
June I, and continued open until the end of September. A collection 
of mufical antiquities fo comprehenflve and valuable had probably 
never before been brought together under one roof. It is, however, 
unneceffary to expatiate on this queftion, fmce the reader may judge 
of the extent of the collection from the following furvey. 

It contained upwards of five hundred inftruments, arranged in eight 
claffes, viz. : — 

Clafs I. Stringed inftruments provided with a key-board. 
Clafs 2. Stringed inftruments played with a bow. 
Clafs 3. Harps, lutes, guitars, cithers, dulcimers, &c. 



Appendix. 349 

Clafs 4. Trumpets, horns, and fimilar wind inftruments. 

Clafs 5. Flutes, oboes, and flmilar wind inftruments. 

Clafs 6. Organs, and other inftruments containing organ pipes 

or tongues of metal. 
Clafs 7. Mifcellaneous inftruments. 
Clafs 8. Ethnological fe£lion. 

As thefe claiTes are examined feparately in the following pages, it 
would be fuperfluous to give here any explanation of the arrangement 
adopted in the catalogue. 



CLASS I. 
Stringed Instruments provided with a Key-board. 

The inftruments with a key-board here gathered together, amount- 
ing to above forty in number, conflfted chiefly of fuch as have their 
ftrings made to vibrate by means of quills, or ftmilar contrivances, 
which ferve as pUSfra. Of this conftru£lion, and therefore of the 
fame family, although widely different from each other in outward 
appearance as well as in certain points of mechanifm, are the fpinet, 
the virginal, and the harpAchord (Italian, clavicembalo; French, clavecin ; 
German, clavicymbel oxflUget), 

The fmall Italian fpinet of the i6th century was reprefented by 
fome very interefting fpecimens. Thefe fpinets, in fhape not unlike the 
dulcimer, are open at the top and have no ftand. Probably they were 
originally kept in a cafe, as was alfo the falterio or Italian dulcimer. 
When wanted for ufe, the inftrument was taken out of its cafe and 
placed upon a table. 

There were exhibited (bme Englifh virginals of the ufual oblong- 
fquare fhape. One of thefe bears the infcription Jofeph Loofemore 
fecit 1655. Another, lent by Mr. H. Gill of Nottingham, was made 
by Thomas White in the year 1653, and is decorated with Jacobin 
ornaments in relief, and with a rudely-painted reprefentation of Orpheus 
on the folding lid. 

Mr. C. M. Holdich, Iflington, exhibited a virginal, probably Englifh, 
which bears the infcription Lodovicvs Growelvs me fecit 1600. The lid 
is painted with biblical fubje£ls. 

Although in England the name Virginal was given principally to 
the oblong-fquare fpinet, it would appear that any fmall fpinet intended 
for ladies was thus defignated. Queen Elizabeth's virginal, exhibited by 
Mr. Charles Grefley, The Clofe, Lichfield, rather refembles in fhape the 



3 50 Special Exhibition of Mujical Injiruments. 

Italian fpinets of the i6th centuiy by Annibal dei Roffi, and Marcus. 
Its cafe, made of cedar, is covered with crimfon Genoa velvet, upon 
which are three ancient gilt locks finely engraved. The infide of the 
cafe is lined with ftrong yellow tabby filk. The whole is in a high ftate 
of prefervation, light and portable, being five feet long, fixteen inches 
wide, and feven inches deep. The front is covered entirely with gold, 
having a border round the infide two inches and a half broad. There 
are fifty keys with jacks and quills ; thirty of them are of ebony tipped 
with gold, and the femitone-keys (twenty in number) are inlaid with 
filver, ivory, and different kinds of wood, each key confifling of about 
250 pieces. The royal arms of Queen Elizabeth at one end are mofl 
exquifitely emblazoned ; at the other end is a dove, rifing luna- 
crowned, holding in its right foot a fceptre, and {landing upon an 
oak tree cooped and eradicated. The painting is done upon gold 
with carmine-lake and ultramarine, and the ornaments are minutely 
engraven upon gold, which gives the inflrument a very beautiful 
appearance. This virginal was purchafed at Dudley in Worcefler- 
fhire about the year 1840, by the late Rev. J. M. Grefley, from a 
perfon who faid that it came from Fiiherwick. According to an account 
in the Gentleman's Magazine of 18 15, it formerly belonged to Lord 
Chichefler, at whofe fale, at Fiiherwick, it was bought in the year 1803, 
by Mr. Jonas Child, a painter at Dudley. 

There are, it is faid, feveral virginals once belonging to Queen 
Elizabeth flill extant in different parts of England. Queen Elizabeth 
was notorioufly fond of mufic, and nothing is more likely than that 
fome of her mufical inflruments have been carefully preferved, although 
their hiflory may not be exa£^ly traceable. 

A miniature fpinet, or virginal, lent by M. Cefar Snoeck, bears the 
infcription, " Paulus Steiniche me fecit, Anno 1657." It refembles 
the ottavinoy of which alfo fome fpecimens were exhibited. 

The larger inflrument of the kind under confideration, which in 
England was known by the name of fpinet, fomewhat refembles the 
harpfichord in fhape, and has a fland. The Exhibition contained 
fome fpecimens, which had been reflored to a playable condition. 
The fpinet of this odd-looking fhape, oblique at one fide, was alfo in 
ufe on the continent, whence it may have been originally introduced 
into England, fince many of the Englifh harpfichord makers were 
foreigners. 

MefFrs. Ktrkman exhibited an Englifh fpinet, made by Pleyer, about 
1710 to 1720. It has a compafs of 4^ oflaves ; its lower keys are 
black, and the others are white. Strange enough, the lafl two upper- 



Appendix. 351 

keys in the bafs are divided fo as to produce demi-iemitones, or 
quarter-tones. 

Sir Sterndale Bennett lent an Englifli fpinet of the 17th century, 
made by Thomas Hitchcock. It has been carefully reftored. 

A French epinette^ probably made in the beginning of the i8th 
century, difplayed in its outward ^appearance much more elegance and 
embellifhment than the Englifh fpinets, its decoration being in vermilion, 
blue, and gold, with raifed Japanefe figures. 

Of the clavicytherium^ or the upright fpinet (French, clavecin 
vertical) there was only one fppcimen, exhibited by M. Laconi of 
Paris. Its cafe, ornamented with paintings of Orpheus, &c., refted 
vertically on a gilt ftand. This kind of fpinet appears to have 
been formerly known alfo in England. In the Inventory of King 
Henry VIII.'s mufical inftruments we find mentioned " A pair of new 
long Virginalls made*harp-fa{hion, of Cipres, with keys of ivory, having 
the King's arms crowned and fupported by his Grace's beaftes within a 
garter gilt, (landing over the keys ; " this was probably a cktvicytherium. 
The inftrument had originally a ftop, or regifter, which would caufe 
the firings to be twanged by fmall brafs hooks, whereby a quality of 
found was produced refembling that of the harp ; hence the name 
** arpichordy* by which Prsetorius in his ' Syntagma Muficum,' &c., 
Wolfenbiittel, 16 19, defcribes the clavicytherium. 

It mufl be remembered that about three centuries ago the various 
fpinets, more or lefs differing from each other in fhape, and alfo in the 
pofition of the firings, — fome kinds having the firings running acrofs, 
and others obliquely, — were diflinguifhed by names which were not 
always flri(Slly adhered to. During the i6th century the common 
fpinet was called in Germany fymphonia^ — a name which was formerly 
applied alfo to other mufical ihflruments, and which evidently was ufed 
much in the fame fenfe as the Greeks ufed the word organon. Again, 
during the 17th and i8th centuries, the fpinet was called in Germany 
fimply Das Inftrument^ and the fame name was afterwards ufed to 
defignate the fquare pianoforte. The German clavicymhahm^ alfo 
called gravicymbalum^ had the fhape of a grand-piano, and was provided 
with two or more firings for each tone. It was, in fa£l, the harpfi- 
chord of the Englifh, and the clavecin of the French, 

There were fome fine fpecimens of the continental harpfichord in 
the Exhibition, among which are deferving of fpecial mention : — 

A clavicembalo of the 17th century, lent by Le Comte de Sartiges. 
To this gorgeous inflrument, which is faid to have belonged to Donna 



352 Special Exhibition of Mujical Injirutnents. 

Olympia Maildachini Pamphyli, fifter-in-law of Pope Innocent X., are 
attached feveral large figures, carved in wood and gilt, which reprefent 
allegorically the power of mufic. 

A clavicembalo of the 17th century, faid to have belonged to Queen 
Chriftina of Sweden. Ornamentation of bronze gilt on a red ground. 

A French clavecin with double row of keys, dated 1612, and 
further infcribed "Mis a ravellement par Pafcal Tafldn a Paris 1774." 
It is painted with fcenes of the period of Louis XIV., by Vander 
Meulen, and is faid to have formerly belonged to Mane Antoinette. 
Lent by Vifcount Powerfcourt. 

A clavecin^ made in the year 1779 by Sebaftian Erard in Paris, the 
founder of the great pianoforte manufactory, who came from StrafT- 
burg. This neatly-made harpfichord, which, we are told, '* created 
fenfation in Paris," has four rows of jacks, three of which are with 
crowquills and one is with bufF leather. Lent by Madame Erard. 

Two harpfichords made by Andreas Ruckers at Antwerp, dating 
from the years 1639 and 1651, require to be mentioned here as in- 
terefting fpecimens of workmanfhip of the moft celebrated harpfichord 
maker of the 17th century; but as they belong to the Mufeum, the 
reader may be referred to the defcription of them in the Catalogue. 

The Exhibition contained two large Englifli harpfichords of 
Kirkman's manufadlure, which have been reftored to their original 
playable condition. One of them bears the infcription, ^^ Jacobus 
Kirkman, London, 1772 > " and the other, " Jofephus Kirkman, London, 
1798." They are fpecimens of the fo-called double-harpfichord, or 
full grand harpfichord, with two key-boards, fix flops, and two pedals. 
One of 'them is provided with a Venetian fwell, which by means of 
one of the pedals will open and clofe like the fwell of an organ. In 
the year 1769 Burkat Shudi (Burkhardt Tfchudi) took out a patent in 
London for a kind of Venetian fwell, by which the loudnefs of the 
harpfichord could be regulated at pleafure. This was, however, hardly 
to be regarded as a new invention, fince a fimilar contrivance was com- 
mon enough on the organ, and the continental organs not unfrequently 
had a fo-called Echo, or pipes placed in a box, which the player could 
open or clofe at will. 

As the directions for ufing the ftops and pedals of the Englifh 
double-harpfichord afford an infight into the capabilities of the inilru- 
ment, they may find a place here : — 

Firji Unifon — Pull out firft flop on right hand. This flop ads on 
both rows of keys. Second UniJin-^Pufh in fecond flop on right hand. 
This flop afls on the lower row of keys only. OSfave Stop — Pufh in 



Appendix. 



353 



firft ftop on left hand. This ftop adis on the lower row of keys only. 
Lute Stop — Pulh in fecond ftop on left hand. This ftop a<3s on the 
upper row of keys only. Buff Stop — Pufli in third ftop on left hand. 
This ftop 2iAs on lute ftop and firft unifon. . Left Pedal Stop — Pufli 
forward fingle ftop on left hand. This ftop will put on the o£lave ftop 
and the firft unifon ftop. Lefi Pedal — Will take off the oftave ftop 
and the firft unifon ftop, and will put on the lute ftop. Right Pedal — 
Works Venetian fwell. To obtain Half Power — Pull out the firft 
unifon ftop, and pufli in the oftave ftop. To obtain Full Power — Pull 
out the firft unifon ftop, and pufli in the fecond unifon ftop and the 
odave ftop. 

By means of the various combinations of ftops and pedals above 
twenty different modifications of found are obtainable. The ftrings are 
remarkably thin compared with thofe ufed at the prefent day on the 
pianoforte, which commences in the treble with ftrings of about the 
thicknefs with which the harpfichord finiflies in the bafs. 

The following are the numbers of the gauge of the ftrings required. 
It will be obferved that the lowcA f-Jbarp is omitted on the inftrument. 

Unifon Stops and Lute Stop. 



'3 " Brafs Wirr. 



^ 



? 




I 



8 



_>' 




Steel Wire. 



J 





r ^f"f^^r%^^fe- 



1 



Steel Wire. 



J 



354 Special Exhibition of Mujical Injiruments. 



0£bive Stop. 






i u f ffp- f f ^ f ^ ^ 



Steel Wire. 



p £ ^ p tt|> ^ »!>- -f- f ^ f^ J^-fe 



J 




i 



L 



Steel Wire. 



J 



A remarkably fine-toned Englifh barplichord, ftill in a playable 
condition, may be mentioned here. It has two rows of keys. Over 
the higher keyboard is the infcription Jacobus et Abraham Kirkman^ 
fecerunt 1773. It has fix ftops and two pedals. The cover of the cafe 
is divided into two parts, one of which can be raifed by means of the 
pedal for the right foot ; thus the crefcendo and decrefcendo are produced. 
Only the lute ftop has crowquills ; the other ftops have fmall pieces of 
prepared leather. The fubftitution of leather for quills caufes the found 
more to refemble that of the pianoforte, and produces a pleafant contraft 
when the lute ftop with its crowquills is ufed alternately with the other 
ftops. The variety of colour of found obtainable by the combination 
of different ftops is very efFeftive. This inftrument exhibits probably 
the higheft degree of perfeftion ever attained in the conftrudion 
of the harpfichord, although it was not until the beginning of the 
prefent century that the manufaflure of harpfichords was entirely dif- 
continued in England. 

J. Peter Milchmayer, in Mayence, conftru£led about the year 1780 
a harpfichord with three key- boards, on which, it is recorded, 250 



Appendix, 355 

changes of found could be produced ; but this contrivance appears to 
have proved of as little pra6lical value for mufical performances as the 
Jrchicembalo^ with quarter-tones invented in the fixteenth century by 
Nicola Vicentino ; or the complicated Clavicymbalum perfeHum^ which 
Praetorius faw in the beginning of the feventeenth century at Prague. 

There were only two clavichords in the Exhibition. Of one of thefe, 
lent by the Rev. C. B. Riddell, Harrietfliam Reftory, Maidftone, it is 
faid ^^ that it belonged to Handel, and that it was ufed by him for 
compofmg on journeys." It dates from the year 1726, and was pro- 
bably made in Germany. It meafures only thirty-two inches in length 
and ten inches in width \ it has no ftand, and was evidently intended to 
be placed on a table or on the lap when it was to be played upon. The 
other clavichord, a much larger inftrument, was made towards the 
end of the laft century in Einbeck, a fmall town near Hanover ; it has 
two firings for each tone. 

The clavichord and the hurdy-gurdy are, it would appear, the oldeft 
ftringed inftruments with keys. The clavichord was, about a thoufand 
years ago, a monochord with fome rude keys attached to tangents^ which 
may be regarded as bridges or frets. By means of them it was poffible 
to produce a feries of tones on a Angle firing, fince the pitch of found 
depended upon the diflance of the place at which the tangent touched 
the firing. Thus, as many tones were obtained from one firing as there 
were tangents under that firing, — almofl precifely as is flill the cafe with 
the hurdy-gurdy. In the beginning of the eighteenth century the 
clavichord was in Germany flill often made with firings for the diatonic 
fcale only, the chromatic tones being produced by additional tangents. 
At the time of Handel and J. S. Bach the compafs of the clavichord^ 
as well as of the clavicembalo in Germany, ufually comprifed only four 
oftaves, thus : — 






1 



Not until towards the end of the eighteenth century was it extended 
to five oftaves, thus : — 



3±i: 




The clavichord is oblong-fquare in fhape, as fhown in the annexed 
engraving, Fig. 143, which repreferits a fpecimen, dating from the 



356 special Exhibition of Mujical Injiruments. 

eighteenth century, manufadlured in Germany, where it is called 
klavier. 




Fig. 143. — Gkrman Clavichorb. 

The fimple conftruftion of the clavichord permits a delicacy of 
touch very agreeable to muficians who appreciate refinement of ex- 
prefGon far more highly than brilliancy of tone. The very fbftnefs 
and unpretentioufnefs of its found, combined with its remarkable power 
of expreiSon, might well render the inflrument ufeful to muficians 
even at the prefent day, notwithftanding the progrefs which has been 
made in many refpedls as regards other {(ringed inflruments with keys. 
No wonder that at a time when the pianoforte was in its infancy, our 
great mufical compofers fhould have preferred in their ftudies the ufe of 
the clavichord to that of the harpfichord, on which modifications of 
exprefSon are obtained not fo much by the touch as by means of ftops 
and pedals. It is well-known that J. S. Bach was efpecially fond of 
the clavichord, and Handel likewife appears to have confidered it parti- 
cularly fuitable for practice, to lay a good foundation for the treatment 
of the harpfichord and organ. In the * Autobiography of Mrs. Delany,' 
edited by Lady Llanover, we are told that Mr. Granville pofTefTed a 
mufic book given to him by Handel, entitled * Krieger (Johann) Or- 
ganiften und Chori Mufici Diredlore in Zittau, Anmuthige Clavier- 
Uebung, Niirnberg, 1699,' in which Mr. Granville, from converfation 
with Handel, has written the following memorandum : ^^ The book is 
by one of the celebrated organ-players in Germany. Mr. Handel in 
his youth formed himfelf a good deal on his plan, and faid that Krieger 
was one of the beft writers of his time for the organ ; and, to form a 
good player, but the clavichord muft be made ufe of by beginners 
inftead of organ or harpfichord." 



Appendix. 357 

At any rate it cannot but be interefting to mudcians to play on the 
clavichord the old precious Suites by Bach and other great mafters as 
they were intended to be played. 

Several expedients have been reforted to for the purpofe of obtaining 
different qualities of found on the clavichord. For inftance, a fo- 
called lute flop was contrived as follows : — The tangents, having been 
made of about twice the ufual width, were covered one half of their 
width with cloth or leather, and the key*board was conftrudled fo that 
it could be drawn flightly forward or pufhed in by means of a flop. 
When the covered part of the tangent was caufed to flrike under 
the firing the found produced fomewhat refembled that of the lute. 
Again, to increafe the loudnefs and fonoroufnefs of the clavichord, 
Gottfried Silbermann of Freiberg conflru£led, in the beginning of the 
eighteenth century, an inflrument of this kind, in which the firings 
were of twice the ufual length, and the tangents were placed in the 
middle, fo that when a firing was flruck, two tones in unifbn were 
produced. Silbermann called his invention Cembal i Amour ^ — a name 
hardly appropriate, fince the mechanifm did not refemble that of the 
clavicembalo, but was a£lually the fame as that of the clavichord. 

As regards the Pianoforte^ it cannot be faid that the old fpecimens 
which were in the Exhibition fufficed to illuflrate its earlier hiflory. 

The invention of the pianoforte was formerly afcribed to Chrifloph 
Gottlieb Schroter, who, in the year 1721, prefented to the King of 
Saxony a fmall model of fuch an inflrument, which he is faid to have 
invented in the year 17 17. But the claim of Germany to having 
originated the pianoforte is contefled by Italy, France, and England. 
In Italy, Bartolomeo Criflofali at Florence fubflituted, in the beginning 
of the eighteenth century, little hammers for the jacks and quills in the 
clavicembalo^ an invention which he called cembalo a martelletti^ and of 
which Scipione MaiFei has given an account in ^ Giornale dei Letterati 
d' Italia,' publifhed at Venice in the year 171 1. In France, Marius, a 
manufadlurer of mufical inflruments in Paris, made (according to M. 
Fetis) in the year 17 16, three models of a clavecin a maillets^'m which the 
firings were vibrated by being flruck with hammers. As regards the 
claim of England to be the country which produced the firfl pianoforte, 
a certain Father Wood, an Englifh monk at Rome, is recorded to have 
pofTefTed in the beginning of the eighteenth century a fpinet conflrufted 
with hammers inflead of quills ; but as it is likewife recorded that he 
brought it to England from Italy, it probably was made after Bartolomeo 
Criflofali's device. It is, however, quite pofEble that the adoption of 
hammers fuggefled itfelf at the fame time to different perfons indepen- 
dently, when, in confequence of the progrefs which inftrumental mufic 



358 special Exhibition of Mujical Injiruments. 

had made, the want of power of found in the clavichord, and the 
inefficiency of the harpfichord for yielding ^/^n^ 2xA forte by the touch, 
became more generally felt. 

Whatever may be thought of the apparently conflifting evidence 
recorded as to the real inventor of the pianoforte, thus much is certain : 
C. G. Schroter's model was adopted by his compatriot, the famous maker, 
Gottfried Silbermann, who improved upon it, and thus Schroter's model 
conftituted the foundation of the mechanifm which has been gradually 
more and more perfected in England and France as well as in Germany. 
Schroter ftates, in a publifhed account of his invention, that the employ- 
ment of hammers firft fuggefted itfelf to him when witneffing Pantaleon 
Hebenftreit's wonderful execution on the dulcimer. This dulcimer 
was a fuperior inftrument of its kind. Pantaleon Hebenftreit had it 
expreflly conftru6led according to his plan. The common German 
dulcimer was at that time of a trapezium fhape, about two feet in width 
in front and four feet in length ; that of Pantaleon Hebenftreit was of 
double the fize, and had two found-boards oppolite to each other, one 
of which was mounted with wire and the other with cutgut covered with 
wire. Having attained an aftounding dexterity in performing upon his 
inftrument, he went, in 1705, to Paris, and played before King 
Louis XIV. The King was fo greatly pleafed with the performance that 
he gave the inftrument Hebenftreit's Chriftian nzme^ Pantaleon ; and by 
this name it became known in Germany. The hO, that the pianoforte 
was alfo at firft called pantaleon^ or pantalon^ corroborates the ftatement 
of Schroter that the application of hammers to the clavicembalo occurred 
to him when he heard Hebenftreit, hammering upon the pantaleon^ 
produce charming efFefts by ftriking with different degrees of force. 

Thus a fecond time the dulcimer ferved a fpeculadve mind as a 
guide to the invention of a fuperior inftrument with a key-board. The 
firft inftrument with a key-board derived from the dulcimer was the 
clavicembalo, — or a dulcimer {cimbal) with keys (claves) and ple£lra. 

A long time elapfed after the invention of the pianoforte before the 
inftrument gained a footing in England. This is perhaps not furprifing, 
confidering the high degree of perfe6lion which the harpfichord had 
attained. Befides, the favourite compofitions written for the harpfichord 
were not exactly adapted for the new inftrument. An old play-bill ftill 
extant, of the Theatre Royal in Covent Garden, announcing that on 
the i6th of May 1767, after the firft aft of the Beggar's Opera, 
** Mifs Brickler will fing a favourite Song from ' Judith,' accompanied 
by Mr. Dibdin on a new inftrument called Piano- Forte," clearly ftiows 
that in 1767 the pianoforte was ftill but little known in London. In 
h£ky it was not until towards the end of the eighteenth century, when 



Appendix. 359 

Clementi, and other diftinguifhed pianifts and compofers of mufic 
expreflly calculated for the " new inftrument/* difplayed its efFeSs, that 
the pianoforte became an eftablifhed favourite with the public. 

The moil noteworthy pianofortes in the Exhibition were the 
following : — 

A fmall fquare pianoforte by Johannes Pohlman, London, 1767, 
lent by the Marquefs of Exeter. This is one of the earlieft fpecimens 
made in England. The compofer Gluck had a pianoforte by J. 
Pohlman, dating from the year 1772, which he ufed in writing his 
opera ^ Armida.' 

A' fmall fquare pianoforte by Zumpe and Mayer, London, 1776, 
lent by Mr. C. K. Salaman. The inftrument has a lute flop and a 
vibration ftop; 

A fmall fquare pianoforte with the infcription Meincke Meyer et Pieter 
Meyer fecerunt^ Amjierdam^ but fuppofed to have been made by Longman 
and Broderip in London, towards the end of the eighteenth century. 
Longman and Broderip not unfrequently manu&<Elured pianofortes by 
order of Dutch dealers, who removed the original flip of wood above 
the key-board containing the names of the makers, and replaced it by 
one bearing their own name. 

Madame Erard of Paris exhibited an early French fquare pianoforte, 
which was made by Sebaftian Erard for Queen Marie Antoinette. 

Her Majefty Queen Viftoria contributed a fine fquare pianoforte of 
the eighteenth century, and alfo a grand piano by Erard, which, though 
of modern conftrudlion, was interefting from an antiquarian point of 
view, on account of its decorations, the cafe being embelliihed with old 
French paintings on a ground of gold. 



CLASS n. 

Stringed Instruments Played with a Bow. 

This clafe comprifed above 150 inftruments, including the largeft 
aflemblage of fpecimens of the old Cremona mafters which perhaps has 
ever been brought together. 

The predeceflbrs of our prefent inftruments played with a bow,— 
the treble viol, viola da gamba, &c., — were provided with frets on the 
finger-board, like the lute, and had generally fix ftrings. The body 
was ufually made flanting towards the neck, and the back was flat. 

The boat-lhaped form of the fordino refembles the ancient rebec. 
Some of the fordini exhibited were remarkably pretty, efpecially thofe 



360 special Exhibition of Mujical Injlruments. 



lent by M. Jubinal, of Paris, which are made of tortoife-ihell and ivory, 
with a finely-carved head. Thefe little inftniments are kept in their 
old cafes, fomewhat refembling a pen-cafe, which are taftefuUy orna- 
mented vi'xth Jleurs-de-lys^ ice. 

Mr. J. Talbot, Cordier Hill, Guernfey, exhibited an Italian fordino 
made by Mauhias Albanus, 1680. Another Italhn fordino of the feven- 
teenth century, lent by Mr. C. J. Read, Salifbury, meafures only 
fixteen inches in length. The Italians ufed to call the fordino alfo 
rebecchinoy and violino picciola a la francefe. The laft-named appellation 
rather indicates that the inftrument was regarded in Italy as particularly 
national to the French. But, although it may have been introduced 
into Italy from France, it moft likely was derived originally from the 
Moors in Spain. It is now alfo often called pochette^ or kit ; but thefe 
names more ufually defignate a diminutive violin, of which there were 
alfo (bme interefting fpecimens exhibited, as, for inftance : Pochette, 
made by N. Remy, of Paris, eighteenth century, lent by Mr. C. J. 
Read ; Pochette^ ebony and ivory, with carved head, lent by M. Jubinal ; 
Kitj lent by Mr. J. Gordon Smith ; &c. 

A curious fpecimen of a violin of an old type, not much larger than 
a pochette^ was exhibited by Mr, George H. M. Muntz, Birchfield, 
Birmingham. The inftrument may be confidered as illuftrating the 
tranfition of the rebec into the violin. It was made by Pietro Zanure 
in Brefcia in the year 1509. Its lides are (lightly incurved, and it is 
mounted with four ftrings ; but it has only a fingle found-hole, which 
is of a circular form, and is. placed in the centre, as on the lute or guitar. 
It has a found-poft, but no bafs-bar, and its tone is defcribed by its owner 
as refembling that of the oboe. A rather unfightly adjun£l attached to 
the end is probably a comparatively modern addition, defigned to enable 
the performer to hold the inftrument with greater eafe, as the violin is 
held. 

Among the antiquated viols exhibited deferve to be noticed — An 
Italian violetta piccolo ; a French par-dejfus ; a French quinton ; an 
Englifli Treble viol. Counter-tenor viol, and Tenor viol. 

The viola d*amore was reprefented by about half a dozen fpecimens, 
including one lent by Mr. Jofeph Lidel, which was made in the 
year 17 19, and which formerly belonged to the Prince-Biftiop of Salz- 
burg, whofe coat of arms is gilded on the front. The back of this 
inftrument is carved out of a folid piece of wood. 

A viola d'amorej made about the year 1660, probably Italian, which 
was exhibited by Profeflbr Oakeley, is noteworthy inafmuch as it is 
without the ufual fympathetic wire ftrings. It has, however, the ufual 
feven cat-gut ftrings, and the carved head of Amor which charafterize 



Appendix. 361 

the viola iamore. It may be remarked here that there are alfo fpeci- 
mens extant which have only five cat-gut firings, with eight wire firings 
under them. Some fuch inflruments of a yellowifh colour were made 
by Jakob Rauch in Manheim during the firfl half of the eighteenth 
century, 

A fine fpecimen of the cither- viol {pfahery)^ but out of repair, was 
exhibited by the Marquefs of Exeter. It is probably of Englifh manu- 
fa<Slure, dating from about the middle of the eighteenth century. 

Befides the fine viola' da gambas belonging to the Mufeum, there 
were in the Exhibition fome Englifh ones by Barak Norman. One of 
thefe is dated 1696. Another, with the infcription Barak Norman^ at 
the Bafe Viol in Saint Pauts Alley ^ London^ fecit 1690, has fome fine 
carving upon it ; 1)ut, unfortunately, it is no longer in its original condi* 
tion, it having been altered to be ufed as a violoncello. A fmall fpecimen 
of the viola da gamha^ exhibited by Lord G. Fitzgerald, was probably 
made in England during the fecond half of the feventeenth century. 

It is feldom that one meets with a feven-flringed viola da gamha. 
There were, however, two fpecimens of it in the Exhibition, one of 
which, a remarkably fine inflrument, of Italian workmanfhip, with a 
well-carved head, was lent by M. Gallay, of Paris. Unhappily, an 
attempt had been made by a modern hand to improve it by adding 
fympathetic wire firings. 

The viola da gamha was made occasionally with fewer firings than 
fix. Four-flringed ones met with at the prefent day are almofl invariably 
altered fix-flringed ones, on which the neck has been narrowed and the 
head fhortened, fb that the inflrument may be ufed as a fmall violoncello. 
An Englifh viola da gamha with only four firings, which evidently has 
never been tampered with, and which is in a well-preferved condition, 
bears the infcription John Baker^ Oxon^ 1688. In the four-flringed 
viola da gamba the invention of the violoncello appears to be anticipated ; 
the fix-flringed one, however, befl exhibits the chara£leriflic features 
of the immediate predecefTor of the violoncello. Not fb powerful as 
its offspring, and therefore lefs fuited for our prefent orcheflra, it is 
really a charming inflrument for folo performance in a private room. 
A good player can, fo to fay, fing upon it, and the arrangement of its 
firings and frets facilitates the execution of fuccef&ons of chords. In 
fa£l, harmonious combinations are of frequent occurrence in the com- 
pofitions which our anceflors wrote for the viola da gamha. 

The viola di hardone may be regarded as a large viola ffamore. 
There were two fine fpecimens of this fcarce inflrument in the Exhibi- 
tion ; they belong to the Mufeum, and are defcribed in the prefent 
Catalogue. 

M.I. A A 



362 special Exhibition of Mujical Injlrutnents. 

Furthermore, the Welih crwth was reprefented by a fpecimen lent 
by Mr. C. Wynne Finch, 

We now proceed to thofe inftruments played with a bow which are 
at the prefent day in pra6tical ufe. They muft be feen and heard to be 
properly appreciated. However, a notice of Aich as moft deferved the 
attention of the vifltors will aflift the reader in forming a corred opinion 
of the excellence of a collection comprifing a large number of violins, 
violas, and violoncellos of &mous Italian makers. 

Violins. 

A Gafpard DuifFoprugcar, 15 12, lent by Signor Francalucci ; there 
may be a doubt whether this violin is really of the maker to whom it is 
ai&gned, but it certainly is an excellent inftrument of the earlieft period. 

A Nicholas Amad, lent by M. Gallay, of Paris ; a very fine violin. 

An Antonius and Hieronymus Amati, 1628, lent by Mr. C. J. 
Read, Salifbury ; large pattern, amber varnifh ; a fine fpecimen. 

An Antonius Stradiuarius, 1734, lent by Mr. W. A. TyfTen 
Amhurfl, Didlington Hall, Norfolk. 

A Stradiuarius, about 1690, lent by M. Georges Chanot, London. 

A Stradiuarius, 1723, lent by H.R.H. the Duke of Cambridge; 
purchafedby H.R.H. the late Duke of Cambridge from Count Platen, 
of Hanover, who had bought it from Stradiuarius ; grand pattern. 

A Stradiuarius, 1732, lent by Mr. John H. Arkwright, Hampton 
Court, Leominfter ; a fpecimen of the grand pattern ; purchafed from 
Signor Platti for 200/. ; from the Caftelbani collection in Naples. 

A Stradiuarius, 1686, lent by the Rev. Henry Cooper Key, Stretton 
Redory, Hereford ; refembling the Amati model. 

A Stradiuarius, 1725, lent by M. Eugene Lecomte, Paris ; grand 
pattern ; remarkably fine. 

A Stradiuarius, 17 12, lent by Mr. Andrew Fountaine, Merton Hall, 
near Norwich. This fmall violin, made for a child's ufe, is a very 
charaderiflic fpecimen of the maker's befl period. 

A Stradiuarius, 1709, named " La Pucdle," the property of M. 
Glandaz, lent through M. Vuillaume, of Paris ; a very fine inflrument ; 
fplendid varnifh. 

A Stradiuarius, 17 16, named " Le Meffie," lent by M. Vuillaume. 
This beautifiil violin, of its maker's befl period, is in an admirably 
well-preferved condition. Its owner, M. Jean Baptifle Vuillaume, 
the celebrated violin maker, points out that it has fcarcely been played 
upon at all, and that it is in precifely the fame condition in which it 
pafTed from the hands of Antonius Stradiuarius, more than a century 
and a half ago. He adds that the excellent quality of found of this 



Appendix. 363 



inftrument refutes the prevailing notion that the fuperiority of tone of 
the old Italian violins is in great meafure owing to their having been for 
many years in conftant ufe. This violin was bought, in the year 1760, 
by Le Comte Cozio de Salabue, after whole deceafe it was fold to Luigi 
Tarifio, a great connoifTeur and colledor of old violins. Tarifio kept it 
in his pofTeffion, as a precious treafure, until his death in the year 1854. 
It is faid that he could rarely be prevailed upon to (how it to anyone, 
for fear that he might by tempted to fell it M. Vuillaume recently 
declined an offer of 6oo/. for this violin. 

A Stradiuarius, lent by Mr. John Hart, London ; very fine. 

A Jofeph Guamerius, 1734, named ^^ Violin du Diable," becaufe 
it was played by M. Saint Leon in Paris with much effed in an opera 
of that name. This very fine violin is the property of Madame Fleury, 
who lent it through M. Vuillaume. 

A Jofeph Guamerius, I735> lent by M. Louis d'Egville, London. 

A Jofeph Guamerius, 1734, lent by Mr. W. A. Tyffen Amhurft. 

A Jofeph Guamerius, made for - a child at the beft period of the 
maker ; lent by Mr. Andrew Fountaine. 

A Jofeph, fon of A. Guamerius, 1684, 1^^^ ^Y H.R.H. the Duke 
of Edinburgh ; given to H.R.H. the Duke of Edinburgh by the late 
Baron Goldfchmidt 

A Ruggeri, 1 704, lent by M. Gallay. 

A Carlo Bergonzi, 1727, lent by Mr. J. Hart. 
- A Maggini, lent by Mr. J. H. Arkwright ; handibme double pur- 
fiing, ornamented back ; purchafed from Mr. Blagrove for 50/. 

A Jacobus 'Stainer, 1695 ; fmall, with a lion's head carved on the 
icroU ; lent by H.R.H. the Duke of Edinburgh. Formerly the pro- 
perty of the late Duke of Cambridge, and given to H.R.H. the Duke 
of Edinburgh by H.R.H. the Duke of Cambridge. 

Faffing over feveral extravagances, — ^uch as a violin of filver, made at 
Cawnpore, Eaft India, in the year 1781, and until recently in Signor 
Mario's mufeum at Florence ; an old violin, the ihape of which is pecu- 
liar, being fiat, without fides ; a highly interefting violin, which is faid 
to have been given by Queen Elizabeth to the Earl of Leicefter, and 
which is defcribed in the prefent Catalogue (page 287), — ^we now 
proceed to the 

Violas. 

A Joan Karlino, Bfefcia, faid to be of the year 1452, lent by 
M. G. Chanot 

A Linaro, Venice, 1563, lent by Signor Francalucci. 

An Amati, lent by Her Majefty the Queen } reduced firom a viol. 
With paintings on the back : to the left a figure of St. John the Baptift, 

A A 2 



364 special Exhibition of Mufical Injiruments. 

with the lamb ; in the centre a coat of arms ; to the right another 
figure, nearly obliterated by ufe, Infcrtption round the fides : Ecce 
Agnus Dei J Guilia Maria Bernardi. This inftrument, like feveral other 
noble violas exhibited, has, unfortunately, been cut down at the fides, 
to render it more convenient for modern ufe. 

A Nicholas Amati, 1620, lent by Mr. Willet L. Adye, Packpool 
Houfe, Ryde. Painting on the back. Purchafed in Venice in the 
year 1793, from the noble family of Radetti. Its dimenfions were 
reduced in 18 11, for General Kidd, by J. Dodds, St. Martin's Lane. 

An Amati, lent by Mr. J. Hart ; fine, but has been reduced. 

A Montagnana, Venice, about 1738, lent by Madame Rifler. 

A Jacobus Stainer, 1660, lent by Signor Piatti ; as fine a (pecimen 
as poffible of its maker's work. It was purchafed at the fale of the 
Count Caefar de Caftelbarco. 

H.R.H. the Duke of Edinburgh exhibited a viola faid to have 
belonged to Handel, and bought in New Zealand. Confidering that 
Handel played for fome years a fecond fiddle in the orcheftra of the 
Opera Houfe at Hamburg, it appears not at all improbable that he kept 
in his pofleffion an inftrument or two of the violin kind ; and con- 
fidering likewife that in European countries no ftone has been left 
unturned in ranfacking for valuable old fiddles, it may poffibly be that 
there is a better chance of hunting for them fuccefsfully in New 
Zealand than at home. 

Violoncellos, 

An Andreas Amati, 1572 5 lent by the Rev. Alex. H. Bridges, 
Beddington Houfe, near Croydon, Surrey ; fine purfling \ painted at 
back and fides. 

An Antonius and Hieronymus Amati, 161 5 -, lent by the Rev. 
John Blow, Goodmanham, Market- Weighton, Yorkfliire. 

A San£lus Seraphino, Venice, about 1730 ; lent by Mr. H. B. 
Heath, London ; one of the fineft (pecimens of this maker known. 

A David Techier, Venice, about 1700 ; lent by Mr. Thomas 
Faulconer 5 very fine. 

A Jofeph, fon of Andreas, Guamerius, 1702 ; lent by H.R.H. the 
Duke of Edinburgh, by whom it was bought in New Zealand. 

An Antonius Stradiuarius, 1730 ; lent by Mr. Frederick Pawle, 
Northhoole, Reigate ; a magnificent fpecimen. 

An Antonius Stradiuarius, 1725 ; lent by M. Gallay, Paris ; a mag- 
nificent fpecimen. The viciifitudes which this violoncello has experienced 
are, if rumour may be trufted, rather extraordinary. M. G. Chanot, 



Appendix. 365 

fenior, violin-maker in Paris, during an excurfion to Spain, happened to 
fee the belly of this bafs hanging up with other odds and ends in the (hop 
window of Ortega, a fiddle mender in Madrid. Chanot, who at a glance 
appreciated its value, went in and bought it for about forty fiancs. Having 
fecured the precious fragment, he afked Ortega where it came from« 
Ortega replied that he took it from an old violoncello which a lady of 
rank refiding in the neighbourhood of Madrid had fent to him to be 
repaired. As there were fo many cracks in the belly, he had fubftituted 
for it a nice new one of his own making. Chanot carried the belly 
away with him to Paris and placed it among the treafures in his (hop. 
There ic was feen, fome time after, by Luigi Tariflo, the enthufiaftic 
Italian coUedor before mentioned, who was charmed with it, and 
bought it from Chanot for a thoufand francs. Having afcertained 
that the violoncello to which this fragment originally belonged was 
in the poiTeilion of a lady living near Madrid, Tarifio at once fet out to 
Spain. Arrived at Madrid, he called firft upon Ortega to learn the 
exadl addrefs of the lady, and how beft to proceed. Now, the lady, 
when (he became aware that a gentleman had travelled a long way to 
look after her old bafs with a view of purchafing it, thought, of courfe, 
that it muft be worth a great deal of money, and therefore faid that (he 
had no wi(h to fell it ; (he would, however, give it to him for four 
thoufand francs. Tarifio was only too glad to pay the fum ; and 
having fecured the bafs, he carried it triumphantly to Paris. The 
firfl thing he did was to have the new belly removed and the old 
cracked one reinftated. After its reftoration M. Gallay bought the 
inflrument for 20,000 francs (800/.). 

Double Bajfes, 

Among the double bafTes in the Exhibition deferving fpecial mention, 
were : — 

A Bajfo di Camera^ lent by Her Majefty the Queen. Suppofed to 
be by Domenico Montagnana of Venice, about 1725 ; bequeathed to 
H.R.H, the Prince Confort by Signor Dragonetti ; very fine. 

A Gafpar di Salo, Brefcia, 1580 ; lent by the Rev. G. Leigh Blake, 
Buriton, Petersfield j a fine fpecimen, formerly the property of Signor 
Dragonetti. 

A Gafpar di Salo, 1590, lent by Mr. John Hart j a fmall bafs in 
a good ftate of prefervation. 

Two double bafTes aligned to Gafpar di Salo, probably by Mag- 
gini ; lent by Mrs. Salomons, London j formerly belonging to Signor 
Dragonetti. 



366 special Exhibition of Mufical Injiruments. 

A double bais affigned to Gafpar di Salo, probably by Maggini, lent 
by the Duke of Leinfter. 

A huge double bafs, given to the Mufeum by the Duke of 
Leinfter s &c. 

The Exhibition alfo contained feveral beautifid violin bows by 
Tourte and other celebrated bow makers. Likewife fome taftefully- 
{baped and ornamented cafes, originally made for the old inftruments to 
which they belong. 

As regards the old Engliih violins, tenors, and violoncellos, thofe 
by Benjamin Banks, Edmund Aireton, Richard Duke, William Forfter, 
and other makers of the eighteenth century, were fufficiently repre- 
fented \ likewife the gambas by Barak Norman, dating from the feven- 
teenth century. There are, however, feveral other Englifh makers, 
formerly much efteemed, of whofe manufadure fome well-preferved 
inftruments may be ftill in exiftence, as, for inftance : — Thomas Urqu- 
hart, feventeenth century ^ Edward Pamphilon, feventeenth century; 
Daniel Parker, beginning of eighteenth century, &c. Thomas Mace, 
in his ' Mufick's Monument,' London, 1676, (ays that ^^ of viols and 
bafles there are no better in the world than thofe of Aldred, Jay, and 
Smith ; yet the higheft in efteem are Bolles and Rofs. One bafi by 
Bolles I have known vsdued at lOo/." And he adds, ^^ Thefe were 
old, but we have now very excellent good workmen, who, no doubt, 
can work as well as thofe, if they be io well paid for their work as they 
were." Alfo the manufadlure of lutes, theorbos, and cithers was, 
about two centuries ago, affiduoufly carried on in England. This is 
well known to mufical antiquarians ; but the fuperiority of the Italian 
inftruments has fomewhat obfcured the indigenous ones. Would it 
not be advifable to fave as a memorial at leaft one or two fpecimens of 
each antiquated kind of Englifh workmanfhip and art formerly popular 
in the Britiih Ifies ? 

CLASS IIL 
Harps, Lutes, Guitars, Cithers, Dulcimers, &c. 

On fome of the inftruments included in this clafs the found is pro- 
duced by twanging the ftrings with the fingers : — harp^ lute^ theorbo^ 
guitar^ Sec. j on others, by twanging the ftrings with a quill, or other 
kind of pleftrum : — cither^ mandolincy &c. j and again on others, by 
ftriking the ftrings with little hammers : — dulcimer y &c. 

Among the harps exhibited were fome French ones taftefully orna- 
mented, dating from the feventeenth and eighteenth centuries. 



Appendix. 367 

Lady Llanover exhibited a Welih triple harp, which is ftill in the 
Mufeum. (See above, page 291.) 

Of the Iriih haq), ftrung with wire inftead of catgut, an interefting 
fpecimen, made anno 1671, was exhibited by the Marquefs of KUdare, 
Carton, Maynooth ; and another, by Archdeacon Saurin, Segoe, 
Portadown. The latter has fubfequently been prefented to the Mufeum. 
(See above, page 240.) 

A valuable wreck of an old Irifh harp, dating from the year 1621, 
was lent by Robert Marriott Dalway, Efq., M.P., Bella Hill, Carrick- 
fergus, Ireland. Only two pieces are remaining, the found-board being 
loft. The one piece called the Harmonic Curve is of yew, and the 
carving upon it is very fine. The bow, or fore-bar, is probably of 
fallow, and is nicely carved. This harp is fuppofed to have had fifty- 
two ftrings. A notice of it will be found in Bunting's Colledlion of 
the Ancient Mufic of Ireland, vol. i., London, 1809. Bunting re- 
marks, *^ The inftrument, in truth, deferves the epithet claimed by the 
infcription on itfelf. Ego fum Rigina Cithararum** He cites the infcrip- 
tions which are in the Irifh language, and fuggefts that many more were 
probably contained on the found-board. As to the purport of the in- 
icriptions, he fays, ^^ Every part of the remaining fragments is covered 
with infcriptions in Latin and in the Irifh charadler ; the former con- 
taining mottoes and the name of the maker [Donatus Filius Thadei] ; 
the latter, the year in which it was made [A.D. 162 ij and the fervants' 
names of the houfehold, &c. According to an old cuftom, the inftru- 
ment is fuppofed to be animated \ and, among other matters, it informs 
us of the names of the two harpers who had produced the fineft mufic 
on it. Thefe were, it feems, Giolla Patrick M'Credan, and Diarmad 
M'Credan." 

The Irifh and Scotch harpers twanged the firings of their harps, 
which were of brafs, with their nails. They allowed their nails to 
grow, for the purpofe, to a confiderable length, and they trimmed them, 
making them fomewhat pointed, like the quills of the harpflchord. 

There were two bell-harps in the Exhibition, one of which is flill 
in the Mufeum, and is defcribed in the prefent Catalogue. 

A harpanetta {arpanetta^ arpa doppid) was lent by M. Cefar Snoeck 
of Renaix, Belgium. Two centuries ago, and earlier, popular on the 
continent, the harpanetta has now become quite antiquated. In 
Germany it is called 5/nVzA<jf/^ (from ^/Vz, "pointed,") becaufe it is 
pointed at the top ; and alfo Davidjharfe^ from an unauthenticated 
notion that it is the fpecies of harp upon which King David played. 
It might rather be claffed with the dulcimer. It has two found-boards, 
— one ftrung with thin fteel wire, and the other with brafs wire. When 



i 



368 special Exhibition of Mufical Injiruments. 

played it is placed vertically on a table, fo that the ibund-board con- 
taining the fteel wire firings, which yield the higher tones, is to the 
right of the player, and the found-board containing the brafs firings, 
which yield the deeper tones, is to the left. The performer ufed to 
twang the firings with his nails or with filver thimbles having a little 
point at the end, which he put on his finger-ends. The harpanetta 
was generally of fmall dimenfions, being about three feet in height, but 
it was mounted with a great number of firings, which were arranged 
in groups of two or three tuned in unifbn. Its compafs embraced 
about four o£laves, and its quality of found fomewhat refembled that of 
the old cither. M. Cefar Snoeck's fpecimen being unflrung, its mufical 
qualifications could not be afcertained. 

The lute was not fo well reprefented as its offspring the theorbo. 
There were, however, fome fine fpecimens of Italian workmanfhip* 
Towards the end of the feventeenth century the lute appears to have 
come to be regarded as fomewhat out of fafhion in England. At 
any rate, Thomas Mace, in his ^ Mufick's Monument,' London^ 
1676, prefaces his Inflrudions in Lute-playing with a dialogue written 
in doggerel verfe, in which the lute complains of being negledled, 
becaufe — 

*^ The world is grown fo flight \ full of new Angles, 
And takes their chief delight in fingle-fangles. 
With fiddle-noifes, pipes of Bartholmew." 

It is, therefore, perhaps not fo furprifing as it may have appeared to 
fome vifitors, that there was only one Englifh lute in the Exhibition. 
Befides, it is an inflrument of too delicate conflru6lion long to with- 
fland the tooth of time. 

It would take more fpace than can here be afforded to fpecify the 
handfome guitars, mandolines, and pandurinas which were exhibited. 

The Marquis of Exeter lent a cither^ very old-fafhioned in fhape, 
which was probably made in London about the year 1700. Another 
cither, with the infcription Remerus Liejfem^ London^ '756, may be 
noticed as affording evidence of the old-fafhioned fhape having been 
occafionally adopted by Englifh makers even as late as the middle of 
the eighteenth century. The body has feveral incurvations at the fides. 
Athanafius Kircher, in his * Mufurgia,' Rome, 1650, gives an illuflra- 
tion of a fimilarly-fhaped cither, which he calls the common cither. 
The Englifh Orpheoron, or Orpharion, and the Penorcon alfo had 
incurvations like thofe of the inflrument in queflion. 

Sir Digby Wyatt lent an Englifh Keyed-cither, on which fix keys 
are placed in a little box above the firings, and the hammers flrike the 
firings fi-om above j and ProfefTor Oakeley, Edinburgh Univerfity, lent 



Appendix. 369 

another Englifh Keyed-citlier, on which fix keys are'placed by the fide 
of the ftrings, and are conneded with a mechanifm infide the inftru- 
ment, which caufes the hammers to ftrike the firings from below through 
the found-hole. The idea of applying keys, like thofe of the pianoforte, 
to the cither, and thus flriking the firings with hammers inflead of 
twanging them with a quill, originated in Germany. Various patents 
were taken out in London by German and* Englifh manufacturers re- 
relating to this^ invention, which, however, proved to be of but little 
pradical advantage. 

A cetera^ or Italian cither, probably of the feventeenth century, lent 
by M. Cefar Snoeck, deferves fpecial mention. This interefling inflru- 
ment is of the kind with which the Improvifatori ufed to accompany 
their efFufions. The top terminates in a finely-carved figure, and the 
body is flattened towards the end. It is mounted with twelve wire 
firings, which are placed in pairs, and produce fix tones. The taflefuUy- 
carved little tuning-pegs are inferted in a fomewhat oblique pofition above 
the top of the finger-board. 

Another cetera was lent by M. Vuillaume, who defcribes it as being 
the work of Antonius Stradiuarius, dating from the year 1700, and a 
label in the infide affigns it to that maker. The carving of the head, 
reprefenting Diana, is very fine, and the inflrument is in excellent 
condition. 

It may be remarked here that the French term cijlre or Jijire does 
not defignate the cetera exclufively, but is applied to any cither. 

A fingular evidence of the popularity of the cither, or ciflre, on 
the continent, at a remote period, is preferved in the family name of 
Ciflerman, defignating a performer on this inflrument, or perhaps a 
cither maker. No doubt, the fame occupation beipg often carried on in 
a family through feveral generations, the family derived its name from 
the occupation which it was known to purfue. Thus we find in 
Germany the names Pfeifer (a piper), Wedeler (a fiddler), Ludeman 
(a lutenifl, or perhaps a lute maker), Hornemann (a horn-blower) \ and 
in England, Piper, Harper, Chalmer (player on the fhalm), Crowther 
(player on the crwth or crowd), and others. Edmond Vander Straeten, 
in his publication of the old documents relating to the mufic of the 
Netherlands, entitled ^ La Mufique aux Pays-Bas avant le XIX® Siecle,' 
BrufTels, 1867, mentions fome old &mily names of this kind found in 
Belgium and Holland, as, for inflance, Ciflerman, Vander Luute, De 
Vedelaere (fiddler), De Harpeneer, Sacqueboute (trombone-player), 
Akar (nakar-player, drummer). 

There remains to be recorded a fine difplay of Italian dulcimers in- 
corporated in the prefent clafs. Suffice it here to draw attention to 



370 Special Exhibition of Mufical Infiruments. 

the taftefiil carvmg, gilding, and painting on ibme of them. They are 
of the feventeenth and eighteenth centuries. 

In England the dulcimer had already fallen into neglefb in the 
beginning of the eighteenth century. James Graffineau, in his ^ Mu- 
fical Di£lionary/ London, 1740, remarks that ^^ it is not much ufed 
except among puppet-{hows." Still, its tone is fweet, and really charm- 
ing, if the player underftahds how properly to ufe the foft-leathered and 
hard-leathered ends of the hammers. But it is too fimplean inftrument 
for the performance of elaborate compofitions. 



CLASS IV. 

Trumpets, Horns, and similar Wind Instruments. 

Inftniments of the trumpet kind, — ufed not only in mufical per- 
formances, but alio for conveying fignals in war, or in the chafe, or for 
directing gangs of labourers at their work, or for fimilar purpofes, — ^are 
to be found in almoft every part of the world, and are of great variety. 
True, many of them may be called horns, if only fuch inftruments of 
this kind deferve to be regarded as trumpets the tube of which does 
not increafe in thicknefs, or but (lightly (b, in its whole length. The 
aperture, however, generally terminates in fome fort of expanfion, 
called the bell. But, in a wider fenfe, all the inftruments in queftion 
may be faid to belong to the trumpet £imily. 

Colonel A. Lane Fox lent a bronze trumpet, which was found with 
four others, two of which have fide-holes, in Drumabeft Bog, parifh of 
Kilraughts, county Antrim, Ireland, in the year 1840. The dimen- 
fions of this trumpet, which is figured in the ^ Ulfter Journal of 
Archaeology,* are : — Length of curve, 2 ft. 1 1 in. ; diftance fix)m point 
to point, I ft. II I in. ; diameter at large end, 2^ in.; diameter at 
fmall end, i^ in. ; diameter of ring, i^ in. Colonel A. Lane Fox 
alfo lent a portion of a bronze trumpet which was found in draining at 
Kanturk, county Cork, Ireland. Mr. John Davidfon lent a bronze 
trumpet, faid to have been dug up near Antrim, in Ireland, which 
meafures above five feet in length, and is probably a Danifh lure of the 
eighth or ninth century. The Royal Mufeuni of Northern Antiquities 
at Copenhagen pofiefles feveral ancient Scandinavian trumpets of this 
{hape, above fix feet in length. The ferpentine winding given to the 
tube enabled the trumpeter to carry the inftrument by holding it under 
his left arm and acrofe his back, fo that the bell, which he held with 
his right hand, was turned towards his right hip. The Mufeum at 
Copenhagen contains fome old trumpets made of gold. One of 



Appendix. 371 



thefe was found, in the year 1639, ^ Tondern in Slefvig, by a 
young peaiant girl, who one evening on her way home remarked it 
flicking up out of the ground by the road-fide. Bronze trumpets 
of mediaeval time, excavated from bogs or mofTes in Ireland, are 
preferved in the Royal Irifh Academy at Dublin. 

Prince Charles of Hohenzollem-Sigmaringen lent five old German 
trumpets, fo noble and martial looking that even the fight of them is 
invigorating. They date from the feventeenth century. Two of them 
were made by Johann Leonard Ehe in Niimberg ; one by Hieronymus 
Stark, in Niirnberg, anno 1669; another by Chriflopher Frank ; and an- 
other by Magnus Wolf. Prince Charles of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen 
alfo lent a German Waldhom^ or Jagdhorn (Italian, Corno da caccia; 
French, Cor de Chajfe\ made in the year 1688, by Wilhelm Haas, a 
maker whofe trumpets, which were ufually ornamented with angels' 
heads, had a high reputation in Germany during the eighteenth century. 
The town of Niirnberg was diflinguifhed for its makers of brafs inflru- 
ments as well as for its makers of lutes and viols. Schnitzer in Niirn- 
berg, towards the end of the fixteenth century, manufactured trumpets 
inlaid with fUver and gold, which were purchafed by the German 
princes and high ecclefiaflics. Still earlier, about the year 1520, 
Hans Meufchel in Niirnberg, made fine trombones, (aid to have been 
entirely of filver, and his reputation extended as far as to Italy. Pope 
Leo X. fummoned him to Rome, commanded him to conflrud fome 
trombones of filver, and rewarded him handfomely. The employment 
of filver in the conflrudion of fuch inflruments was, however, not new. 
The municipality of the city of Ghent, in Belgium, pofTefTes iilver 
trumpets which date from the fifteenth century. Moreover, long 
before our Chriflian era, the eaflern nations appear to have conflrudted 
trumpets of this precious metal. Mofes made, according to Numb. x. 2, 
two trumpets of filver *' of a whole piece." 

During the eighteenth century the tube of the German military 
trumpet generally meafured eight feet in length. The French trumpet 
was finaller, and its pitch was a minor-third higher than the German. 
Still finaUer was the fhort Englifh trumpet, called tromha piccoky the 
pitch of which was a fourth higher than that of the German trumpet. 

A fine trumpet, probably of Englifh workmanfhip, about the year 
1700, was exhibited by Mr. Thomas Harper, who, in a note forwarded 
with it, remarks: "The length of the tube is 85 inches, being 16 
inches longer than the trumpet of the prefent time, — fuggeflive of the 
rife in the pitch." 

Her Majefly the Queen lent two German Bugle-horns, made at 
Hanover, about the year 1800. Alfo two filver trumpets with banners 



372 Special Exhibition of Mufical Infiruments. 

bearing the royal arms attached to them. Thefe State trumpets are 
from St. James's Palace. One of them, evidently made in the reign of 
George III., has the infcription of the ^maker's name, William ShaWy 
Red Lion Street ^ Holhorn^ engraven on it. In the year 1824, John 
Shaw, moft likely a fon of William Shaw, took out a patent for 
** tranfverfe fpring Aides for trumpets, trombones, French horns, 
bugles, and every other inftrument of the like nature." 

During the i8th century the Court of the EleSor of Saxony and 
(bme other German courts of the higheft clafs, kept eight trumpeters 
and a kettle-drummer, while the fmaller courts reftrided themfelves 
to four trumpeters and a ketde-drummer. The principal duties of 
thefe men were to meet the ambafladors coming to an audience; 
to carry the invitati6ns to high perfons to dine with the Sovereign ; and 
to perform during the banquet. The King of Poland and Eledor of 
Saxony, about the year 1700, had twelve trumpeters and two kettle- 
drummers for this purpofe. So had alfo Queen Elizabeth. Paul 
Hentzner, a German who vifited the Englifh Court in the year 1598, 
records in his journal that he went to the royal palace at Greenwich 
to fee the Queen. On her dinner being brought in " twelve trumpets 
and two kettle-drums made the hall ring for half-an-hour together." 

There requires to be put on record an aflfemblage of fpecimens, 
varying in fize, of the German (or perhaps Dutch) zinien, lent by 
M. Cefar Snoeck; and a pair of forefters' horns, probably of the i8th 
century, lent by Mr. J. Gordon Smith, which are of hexagonal fhape 
and have fllver mountings figured with objects of the chafe. 



CLASS V. 
Flutes, Oboes, and similar Wind Instruments. 

The moft interefting flutes in the Exhibition were the following : — 
A French flageolet, engraved iron, period of Louis Xlll. (firft half 
of 17th century) ; lent by M. Jubinal. — A flageolet, made by Holtzapfel 
in Paris, probably about 1790; ebony or ftained wood, and ivory j 
a fllver key ; lent by Mr. G. F. Ducombe. — A flute a bee of carved 
ivory, probably French, about 1600 ; lent by M. Jubinal. — An 
Englifh flute a bee (in F) of ivory and filver, made about the year 1700 j 
lent by Mr. J. Gordon Smith.— An Englifh flute a bee (in B-flat) of 
ivory and fllver, made by Stanefby, jun., 1740 j lent by Mr. J. Gordon 
Smith. — An Englifh recorder, 17th century. It clofely refembles the 
flute in the hands of the player. Fig. 104. Near the top, about an inch 
from the mouth-hole, is iituated a hole covered with thin bladder, like 



Appendix. 373 



gold-beater's fkin. The objcft of this contrivance was to render the 
found, by means of the vibration of the delicate film, more tender and 
fomewhat reedy, like that of the oboe. This recorder is of black-ftained 
wood. It has fix finger-holes at the upper furface, one at the fide 
towards the end, and one for the thumb oppofite to the row of fix. 
Length, 26 inches. — A flauto dolce, or an Italian flute a bee, made 
by Anciuti in Milan, anno 1740. This fine inflrument belongs to the 
Mufeum, and is defcribed in the prefent Catalogue, p. 224. — A flute 
traverfiere, made of porcelain, faid to have belonged to King Charles II.; 
lent by Mr. Thomas Warner, Crumpfall Green, near Manchefler. It 
has three centre pieces of different fizes, by the change of which the 
pitch is altered. — Some German tenor flutes and ba(s flutes; fbme 
double and triple flageolets, &c. 

Of inflruments which have a vibrating reed inferted in the tube, the 
following may be recorded: — An Englifh horn [Oboe da caccia^ or 
Cor Anglais)^ made of red cedar, by Thomas Stanefby, jun., 1740 ; lent 
by Mr. J. Gordon Smith. — An Englifh horn with two keys, made by 
T. Cottier, London ; lent by MefTrs. J. and R. Glen of Edinburgh. — A 
Welfh hornpipe lent by Mr. C. Wynne Finch. (See the engraving. 
Fig. 136.) — A Stock-horn or Scotch hornpipe, lent by Mr. J. Gordon 
Smith. This inflrument, which is now very fcarce, refembles the pih^ 
gorn of the Welfh. Allan Ramfay in * The Gentle Shepherd,' 
publifhed in the year 1725, alludes to the Stock-horn : — 

** When I begin to tune my flock and horn, 
Wi' a' her face fhe fhaws a cauldrife fcorn. 
Lafl night, I play'd, — ye never heard fic fpite ! 
O^er Bogie was the fpring and her delyte ; — 
Yet tauntingly fhe at her couiin fpeer'd, 
* Gif fhe could tell what tune I play'd ?' and fneer'd. 
Flocks, wander where ye like, I dinna care, 
I'll break my reed, and never whifUe mair !" 

It mufl be admitted that, on the whole, the old fhalm family was 
not fufEciendy reprefented. The mufical antiquarian would have liked 
to have feen fome well-preferved fpecimens of the hombardo (German, 
pommer)^ the cormorm (German, krummhorn)^ the dulcian^ a fmall bafToon, 
and feveral others. 

Of the bagpipe there was a better difplay, as may be feen from the 
following enumeration of noteworthy fpecimens : — A fmall Cumberland 
bagpipe, made about the year 1790 ; lignum-vitse and ivory. — A North- 
umberland bagpipe, made about the year 1 800 ; of ebony and filver, 
the chanter being of ivory " This inflrument," its owner remarks, 



3 74 Special Exhibition of Mufical Inflruments. 

^^ differs from other bagpipes inasmuch as it can be played perfedly 
in tune, and alio in that the flopping is performed by lifting only 
one finger at a time, — a method known in Northumberland as clofe- 
fingering." — A very old Border bagpipe, fUver-mounted, lent by 
Meffrs. J. and R. Glen of Edinburgh.— A Scotch highland bagpipe, 
bearing the date 1409 ; lent by Meffrs. J. and R. Glen. It has two 
drones fet in one ftock, and is carved in the Celtic ftyle. — ^Three 
French mufettes of the period of Louis XIV., with ivory tubes ; lent by 
M. Jubinal. — A Calabrian bagpipe {zampognd) of the 1 8th centuiy, 
rudely carved ; lent by Meflrs. J. and R. Glen. — An Irilh bagpipe of 
ebony and fllver. — A fragment of an ancient Englifh bagpipe, confiflii|g 
of a bone with feven finger-holes ; and an ancient Chanter or Melody- 
pipe of unufual form, with a double tube, and with curioufly-arranged 
finger-holes ; this chanter probably belonged to a Lincolnfliire or other 
extin£l Englifh bagpipe. 

Colonel A. Lane Fox lent a fhiall whiftle with a bladder attached to 
it, which was brought to England firom the north-wefl coafl of America. 
It is carried by the Indians under the arm, and prefled to imitate 
the noife of a wild duck, which is thus decoyed. This fpecies of 
bagpipe is curious as being the moil primitive one in the Exhibition ; 
but it is probably a comparatively modern contrivance of the American 
Indians. At the time of the difcovery of America the Indians were, 
as far as is known, unacquainted with the bagpipe. 

Profeffor Oakeley lent a flucco cafl of the Peruvian kuayra-puhura. 
(See Fig. 61.) Furthermore, the Exhibition contained a cafe with 
fome pre-hifloric reindeer bones from the Cavernes du Perigord, which are 
fuppofed to have been ufed as whiflles. (See Fig. 2.) 



CLASS VI. 

Organs, and other Instruments containing Organ Pipes, 

OR Tongues of Metal. 

This clafs contained only about a dozen inftruments, mofl of which, 
however, were fb interefling as to deferve mention here. 

The Mufeum contributed a German chamber organ of the i6th 
century, of which a defcription is given in the prefent Catalogue. 

Mr. R. Wrench, Surbiton, lent an Englifh chamber organ built by 
Bernhard Schmidt, or ^' Father Smith," as he was called in England. 
The inflrument has ten flops. It probably dates fi-om the year 1670. 

J. Snowdon Henry, Efq., M.P., Eafl Dene, Bonchurch, lent a 
German chamber organ made by HofFheimer in the year 1592. This 



Appendix. 375 

maker refided perhaps in Salzburg. At any rate, a diftinguiihed organ 
player of the fiune name lived in Salzburg in the i6th century. 

Mr. H. W. Jones lent an organ, faid to have belonged to Handel, 
ornamented with fome fine carving faid to be by Grinling Gibbons. 

Mr. C. A. Howell lent a German organ of the 17th century, inlaid 
with defigns in various coloured woods. 

Signor Caftellani in Rome lent an Italian organ which bears the 
infcription Domemcus Antonionus RoJJt Neapolitanus Organarius fecit 
1763. This interefting inftrument was formerly in a chapel in the 
ifland of Ifchia. 

The regal^ox organ portative, was reprefented by a fpecimen belong- 
ing to Mr. Wyndham S. Portal, Malfhanger, Bafingftoke. The cafe 
of this little organ is in the {hape of a book, and the pipes have reeds 
or vibrating tongues of metal. According to the ftatement of its 
owner, it dates from the 15th century. However, Johann Gottfried 
Walther, in his ^ Mufikalifches Lexicon,' Leipzig, 1732, affigns the 
invention of the regal made in the (hape of a book to Georg Voll, 
an organ-builder in Niirnberg, about the middle of the i6th century. 
Alfo Jakob Adlung, a very careful inquirer, afcribes it to G. Voll. 
He fays, ^^ Such a regal exadly reprefents a book folio fize, from eight 
to twelve inches in thicknefs. It is opened in the middle, like a book. 
The interior contains at each fide the key-board, which mufl: be taken 
out of the cover, and mufl: be accurately adjufted. Under the key- 
board are the wind-chefl and the pipes, which are very fmall. By 
reverfing the book-cover and attaching it to the end of the works, the 
bellows are obtained. The book meafures about eighteen inches in 
breadth." This defcription from Adlung's ^ Mufica Mechanica Orga- 
noedi,' Berlin, 1768, accords on the whole with the prefent fpecimen. 
The Germans called fuch a regal Bihelregal^ becaufe it was intended to 
reprefent a Bible in appearance. 

The claviorganumy or organ-harpfichord, confifh of an organ and a 
harpfichord (or a fpinet) combined. Either can be played feparately or 
with the other together. The feparadon and the union are efleded by 
means of a flop or a pedal. The claviorganum was, fome centuries 
ago, not uncommon. It enables the performer to fuflain the found at 
pleafure, which on the harpfichord is as little poffible as on the piano- 
forte. A claviorganum exhibited by Mrs Luard Selby, the Mote, Tun- 
bridge, Kent, affords evidence of a higher antiquity of inflruments of 
this kind than might perhaps be expeded. It bears the infcription, 
Lodowicos Threwes me fecit ^ IS79« There is fcarcely more remaining 
of this interefling relic than the outer cafe ; but this is fb elaborately 
finifhed that, if the mechanifm was conflru£led with equal care and 



376 special Exhibition of Mufical Infiruments. 

fuccefs, it muft have been a Aiperior inftniment. The maker is un- 
known in mufical hiftory. Perhaps he belonged to the family of Treu 
(alfo written Trew), muiicians of repute in Anfpach about the year 
1600. 

An Englifh claviorganum^ which was lent by Mr. Ch. Pillow, of 
Chichefter, bears the infcription. Orange Londini^ A,D. 1745. Its 
length is nine feet and an inch. It has two key-boards. , Compafs, 
five odaves, with the omiffion of the lowed femitone f-(barp. The 
harpflchord portion has a firft unifon ftop, a fecond uniibn ftop, an 
o£lave ftop, and a lute ftop. The organ portion has fix flops, viz., 
twelfth bafs, twelfth treble, principal bafs, principal treble, open diapa- 
fon, flopt diapafon. When exhibited, it was much out of repair, and 
not in a playable condition. 

The old fancy of a combination of the organ with the clavicembalo, 
and alfo with the clavichord, reappears in modern time in the conftruc- 
tion of the organ-pianoj and the piam-harmoniumj — infiruments which 
prove to be of but little practical ufe. The quality of fouild of the 
harmonium, as well as of the organ, is too chara£leriflic and individual 
to blend efFe£lively with that of the pianoforte. 

An organ-hurdygurdyj and a handfomely-ornamentedy^/^///^, which 
were exhibited in this Clafs, are flill in the Mufeum, and are defcribed 
in the prefent Catalogue. 



CLASS VII. 
Miscellaneous Instruments. 

This clafs was made up by a heterogeneous afTemblage of infiru- 
ments, none of which would have been in its proper place in any of the 
preceding clafTes. 

Here were exhibited the beautiful fpecimens of the French hurdy- 
gurdy, or vielUy dating from the fixteenth and feventeenth centuries, 
which belong to the Mufeum. 

ProfefTor Oakeley, Edinburgh Univerfity, lent an old Englifh hurdy- 
gurdy, and a curious old Englifh tambourine (date unknown) with a 
number of bells attached to it. 

Her Majefly the Queen lent a German Halbmondy probably obtained 
from Hanover, about the year 1800. There are about twenty bells 
attached to it, and it is furmounted by a crefcent. The German Halb^ 
mond or SchelUnbaum (French, Pavilion chimis)y ufed in military bands, 
appears to have been originally borrowed from the Turkifh Janiflary 
mufic. 



Appendix. 377 

M. Jubinal of Paris lent a tambourine of the time of Louis XIII. ; 
a pair of caftanets of the time of Louis XIII. ; five elegant conduAor's 
batons ; and a lozenge box in the form of a violin, in iron, of the time 
of Louis XIIL 

There were four nail-violins in the prefent clafs, two of which had 
fympathetic ftrings of very thin brafs wire. Furthermore, the following 
are noteworthy : — A metronome made by James ConclifFe, Liverpool, 
1798 ; a metronome made by Pridgen, York, eighteenth century; two 
old tuning forks, one of which is faid to have belonged to Handel \ an 
old ^iolian harp of peculiar conftrudion \ an Englifh monochord of the 
eighteenth century, ufed for tuning the harpfichord ; &c. 

This may be the place to notice fome illuftrations of mufical inftru- 
ments. The Liceo Comunale di Mufica, at Bologna poflrefles above 
fiity inftruments, and it contributed to the Exhibition photographs of 
thirty-five of them. The moft remarkable ones are : — An Italian 
cither (cetera) of the beginning of the fixteenth century. — An archlute 
(arciliuto)y vikh the infcription, " Hieronymus Brenfius Bonon." — A 
chitarroney ** In Padova Uvendelio Veneto, 1609." — A chitarrone^ 
"Matteo Selles alia Corona in Venitia, 1639." A theorbo, " Hans 
Frei in Bologna, 1597." — A lute, *' Magno Stegher in Venetia." — 
A lute, "Magno Dieffopruchar a Venetia, 16 12." This lute has 
fourteen tuning-pegs, and the ftrings are arranged in feven pairs, 
each pair being tuned in unifbn. The maker evidently belonged 
to the TicfFenbrucker family alluded to above, page 322. — Several 
marine trumpets, one of which bears the infcription, ** Pieter Rom- 
bouts, Amfterdam 17 . ." The marine trumpet {tromba marina) 
is a ftringed inftrument played with a bow. Owing to a peculiar con- 
ftrudion of the bridge its fingle ftring produces a found refembling that 
of the trumpet. The old German name for the marine trumpet is 
Trumbfcheit, This inftrument was about feven feet long, and very 
narrow ; its ftring was thick, and the performer did not prefs it down, 
but touched it lightly with his finger to produce the harmonics. — A 
viola da braccioy " Hieronymus Brenfius Bonon." — A viola da gamba^ 
*' Aptonius Bononienfis." — Kfordino^ *' Baptifta Breflano," fuppofed to 
date from the end of the fifteenth century \ its fhape is peculiar, fome- 
what refembling that of the machete^ reprefenting a fi(h ; it has four 
ftrings. — A violin," Carolus Tononi fecit, Bononiae [Bologna] 17 17," 
the head of which refembles that of a cither- viol. — A viola ^amore^ 
" Mattias Griefler, Lauten- und Geigenmacher in Infl)rugg, anno 1727." 
— ^Two curious old harps. — An old tenor flute meafuring in length 
about three feet. — An oboe da caccia. — Some curious double flutes. — 
Cornettiy or zinienj of diflFerent dimenfions. — An archicembalo. This 

M.I. B B 



378 special Exhibition of Mujical Injiruments. 

is a kind of harpfichord with four rows of keys, made after the inven- 
tion of Nicola Vicentino, and defcribed in his work, * L*Antica MuAca 
ridotta alia moderna prattica,' Rome, 1555. The compafs of this 
archicembalo comprifes only four oftaves, but each o<Save is divided 
into thirty-one intervals, forming in all 124 keys. It was made by 
Vito Trafuntino, a Venetian, who lived towards the end of the fixteenth 
century, and who added a Tetracordo to it, to facilitate the tuning of its 
minute intervals. However, the archicembalo was probably not the 
firft inftrument of the harpfichord kind which contained an enharmonic 
arrangement of intervals. The clavicymbalum perfeftum, alfo called 
univerfalclavicymbel, which Praetorius ftates he faw in Prague, and 
which was likewife of the fixteenth century, was of a fimilar conftruc- 
tion. Later we find the fubdivifion alfo applied to the fquare pianoforte. 
There is fuch a pianoforte ftill extant which was made by J. Zumpe in 
London, in the year 1766. 

One of the moft fingular inftruments in the colledion of the Liceo 
Comunale di Mufica, at Bologna, is the cornamufay which confifts of 
five pipes inferted into a crofs-tube through which they are founded. 
Four of the pipes ferve as drones, and the fifth, which is the largeft, 
is provided with finger-holes, like the chanter of a bagpipe. The inftru- 
ment has, however, no bag, although it is probably the predeceflTor of 
the fpecies of bagpipe called cornamufa^ and moft likely had reeds. An 
illuftration of a cornamufa of this defcription may be found in the 
* Mufurgia,* by Athanafius Kircher, Rome, 1750. 

CLASS VIIL 

Ethnological Section. 

The fo-called Ethnological Seftion was amply fupplied with curious 
contrivances from all parts of the world. Moft of them were probably 
made in the prefent century. They are, however, precifely fimilar to 
thofe which have been in ufe for centuries with the nations or tribes to 
which they appertain. 

Her Majefty the Queen contributed largely to this Clafs. There 
were about forty extra-European inftruments from Windfor Caftle. 

The great variety of the mufical inftruments of the Hindus was 
well illuftrated by a feledlion from the fpecimens belonging to the Eaft 
India Mufeum in London, and lent by authority of his Grace the 
Secretary of State for India. 

Unfortunately many of thefe quaint-looking obje£ls are conftrufted 
of materials fo fragile that they are eafily injured. It is not often that 



Appendix. 379 

one fees a xnuiical inftrument from Hinduftan in a perfedUy found 
condition. 

As regards the brafs wind inftruments of the Hindus and Burmefe, 
twifted like ferpents and other reptiles, it is faid that in the beginning of 
the prefent century fome London inftrument makers took to manufac- 
turing fuch grotefque- looking trumpets for exportation to the Eaft. In 
order to meet the tafte of the intended purchafers, they made thefe 
articles exa£)^]y after Afiatic patterns ; it is, therefore, not impoflible 
that among the brafs wind inftruments brought from Aiia to England, 
and exhibited as Eaftern curiofities, there may be occafionally a fpecimen 
whofe real birthplace is in the neighbourhood of its prefent abode. 

The Ethnological Se£lion contained alfb grotefquely-fhaped negro 
inftruments, fome of which were " adorned " with human ' fkuUs and 
jaw-bones ; Polynefian nofe-flutes ; and other fuch fanciful conceptions 
of uncivilifed nations. 

Several of the ftringed inftruments exhibited in this Clafs had been 
altered, evidently with the intention of improving them, and of adapting 
them to European ufe. Ethnologically, fuch an altered inftrument 
poflefles no intereft, and muilcally it does not come up to the European 
model in imitation of which it has been reconftru£led. 

A more detailed record of the contents of Clafs VIII. is hardly 
required here, coniidering that the Ethnological Se6tion was of iecondaiy 
importance in the Special Exhibition of Ancient Mufical Inftruments. 



B B 2 



38i 



INDEX OF NUMBERS. 



The left two Numbers indicate the year in tobieb each tbjeO has been atqiurei. 
In the cafe of Repreduaions theft numbers are futfirft. 



Regifter No. 


Page. 


Regifter No. 


Page. 


Regifter No. 


Page. 


I. '68. 


161 


26. '70. 


189 


391- '71. 


242 


I. '70. 


179 


26tf. '70. 


189 


39^- '71. 


^^1 


2. '6-]. 


283 


26^. '70. 


189 


393- '71- 


180 


2. '70. 


180 


27. *70. 


190 


394- '71. 


231 


3- '70. 


182 


28. *70. 


190 


395- *7i. 


173 


4. '69. 


236 


28tf.'7o. 


190 


396. '71. 


255 


4. '70. 


181 


i%b. '70. 


190 


397. '71- 


164 


5. '70. 


178 


28f. '70. 


190 


398. *7i. 


263 


5^- '70. 


178 


48^/.'7o. 


190 


398ii.'7i. 


263 


6. '70. 


178 


29^. *7o. 


191 


402. '72. 


270 


6tf. '70. 


178 


30. '70. 


192 


430. '72. 


268 


7. '70. 


178 


34. '69. 


260 


487. '72. 


267 


la. '70. 


178 


35- '67. 


^55 


494. '72. 


199 


8. '70. 


187 


37. '70. 


258 


499. '68. 


260 


9. '70. 


182 


37- *73. 


250 


502. '68. 


248 


9. '71. 


^43 


37^- "11^ 


250 


503. ^ii%. 


248 


10. *7o. 


182 


73. '65. 


230 


504. '68. 


249 


10. '71. 


261 


95. '70. 


233 


507. '68. 


252 


'52. 11. 


239 


105. '71. 


224 


508. '68. 


252 


II. '70. 


192 


105^?. '71. 


224 


509. *68. 


252 


12. '70. 


191 


105^. '71. 


224 


512. '68. 


186 


I2tf. '70. 


191 


io5r. '71. 


224 


519. '72. 


261 


13. '70. 


182 


105^/. '71. 


224 


5i9ii.'72. 


261 


14. '70. 


183 


105^. '71. 


224 


5 1 9^. '7 2. 


261 


15. '52. 


167 


io5/:'7i. 


224 


541. '72. 


261 


15. '70. 


184 


105^. '71. 


224 


576. '72. 


209 


'57. 16. 


229 


115. '65. 


264 


577- '72. 


234 


16. '70. 


185 


ii5<7. *65. 


264 


616. '72. 


240 


16. '71. 


238 


115^. '65. 


264 


629. '68. 


283 


17. '70. 


192 


1 1 5r. '65. 


264 


637. '72. 


226 


i7tf. '70. 


192 


147. '69. 


236 


641. '69. 


259 


18. '70. 


190 


155. '69. 


275 


642. '69. 


258 


1 %a, '70, 


190 


156, '69. 


^75 


643. '69. 


259 


1 8i. '70. 


190 


183. '69. 


254 


663. '69. 


^M 


19. '70. 


184 


201. '72. 


251 


664. '69. 


H7 


20. '70. 


184 


218. '70. 


271 


665. '69. 


H7 


21. '70. 


185 


219. ^(i6. 


249 


666. '69. 


148 


22. '70. 


194 


220. '66. 


^IZ 


667. '69. 


149 


23. '70. 


194 


264. '66. 


^35 


668. '69. 


149 


24. '70. 


186 


274. '72. 


15^ 


669. '69. 


149 


25. *7o. 


188 


364. '64. 


^33 


670. '69. 


H5 


25tf.'70. 


188 


389. '71. 


254 


671. '69. 


146 


25i.'7o. 


188 


390. '71. 


254 1 


672. '69. 


146 



382 



Index of Numbers. 



Reglfter No. 



Page. 



673 
675 
676 

6j6 
6'j6a 

e-jj 
678 
679 
680 
681 
682 
683 
684 
685 

686 
687 
688 
689 
690 
691 
692 
808 
809 
810 
813 
838 
839 

885 
927 

933 
934 
935 
936 
936 

937 

938 

939 
940 

958 

959 
960 

961 

962 

963 
964 

967 
968 

977 



6g. 
69. 
69. 

72- 
72. 

69. 

69. 

69. 

69. 

69. 

69. 

69. 

69. 

69. 

69. 

69. 

69. 

69. 

69. 

69. 

69. 

69. 

69. 

72. 

73- 
69. 

69. 

68. 

69. 

73- 

73- 

73- 
69. 

73- 
73- 
73- 

73- 

73- 
69. 

69. 

69. 

69. 

69. 

69. 

69. 

69. 

69. 

69, 

69. 

72. 



146 
146 

HS 

254 
254 

HS 

144 

"53 

154 

»54 

151 
152 

152 

152 

152 

»53 
142 

142 

149 

H7 

H3 
226 

272 

229 

271 

194 

194 

191 

197 

»59 
179 

180 

181 

157 

»79 
164 

188 

»57 
158 

219 

221 

219 

217 

218 

220 

220 

220 

220 

220 

221 
188 



Regifter No. 



Page. 



978 
989 
990 
991 
992 

993 

999 
009 

010 

oil 

012 

013 

014 

015 

016 

017 

018 

019 

025^ 

027 

028 

028 

031 

032 

036 

037 
079 

080 

121 

122 

123 

124 

12s 
126 
127 

255 
274 

298 

298/7. 

384- 
384^. 

384^. 

385. 

444- 
444^. 

561. 

602. 

606. 

607. 

608. 



72- 
69. 

69. 

69. 

69. 

69. 

69. 

69. 

69. 

69. 

69. 

69. 

69. 

69. 

69. 

69. 

69. 

69. 

7»- 
69. 

69. 

7»- 
69. 

69. 

71. 

71- 
68. 

68. 

69. 

69. 

69. 

69. 

69. 

69. 

69. 

72. 

72. 

7^- 

71. 
64. 

64. 

64. 
64. 
70. 
70. 

7^- 

SS- 
72. 

72. 

72. 



183 
203 
203 
204 
203 
202 
204 
210 
210 
210 
215 
212 
213 
213 

2*3 

213 
212 

212 

198 

214 

215 

199 

211 
208 
198 
199 
279 

154 
278 

247 
229 

225 

241 

243 
225 

229 

228 

263 

263 

285 

285 

285 

285 

266 

266 

H3 

229 

»59 
169 

174 



Regifter No. 



Page. 



1609. 


.'72. 


1610. 


.'7^. 


161 1. 


.'72. 


161 2, 


.'72. 


1613 


.'72. 


1614. 


.'72. 


1615. 


.'72. 


1616. 


' ^2. 


1617. 


■ ^72. 


1618. 


.'72. 


1619. 


.'72. 


1620 


■ '72. 


1 62 1 


. '72. 


1622. 


■ '72. 


1623. 


. '72. 


1624. 


. '72. 


1625. 


'72. 


1626. 


. '72. 


1627. 


. '72. 


1628 


. '72. 


1629. 


'72. 


1630, 


.'72. 


163I. 


*72. 


1632, 


'72. 


1633. 


•72. 


1650, 


'71. 


165O1 


7. '71. 


1650^ 


J. '71. 


1650^ 


r.'7i. 


1737- 


'69. 


1739- 


. '69. 


1740. 


. '66. 


1757 


. '69. 


4087 


.'57. 


4265 


.'57. 


4274 


.'56. 


4449 


.'58. 


5989 


.'59- 


6007 


.'59. 


7356 


. '61. 


7360 


. '61. 


7469 


. '61. 


7701 


. '61. 


7754 


. '62. 


7755 


. '62. 


7756 


. '62. 


7953 


. '62. 


7954 


. '62. 


8035 


. '62. 


8531 


.•63. 



164 

172 

171 

170 

165 

162 

170 

171 
168 

174 

169 
163 
162 

168 
168 

164 

166 
171 

164 

175 
175 

176 

^77 
176 

169 

224 

224 

224 

224 

250 

283 

239 
141 

236 

269 

246 

238 

245 

276 

253 
262 

224 

185 

249 

243 
242 

227 

228 

228 

238 



383 



GENERAL INDEX. 



A. 



9> 



» 



Abel, viola da gamba player 
Abyflinian drum 

fiddle . 
lyre 
„ trumpet 
Academy of the ancient Mexicans 
Acocotl, Mexican . 
Ad lung, on the regal . » 
Adrien le Roy, on the lute 
Adufe, Arabian 

iColian harp .... 
„ ,y in the Special Exhibl 

bition .... 
Airanioy inventor of the baffoon 
AiHcan inflruments 
Agricola, his illuftrations of the Geige 
Alreton, violin maker 
Ajacaxtli, of the Aztecs . 
Akadu, infbument of Timor 
Albanus, violin maker . 
Aldred, viol maker 
Alexander Alexandrinus, trigonon 

player . • 
Al-Farabi, Arabian muficlan 
Algooja, Indian flageolet < 
Alphorn, Swiis 
Amati, violin maker 

violins in the Special Exhibition 

violas „ 

„ violoncellos „ 
Amautas, Inca Peruvian . 
Amazon-ftone 
Ambira, Negro inftrument 
American Indians, their mufical in- 

ftruments ..... 65 

Anciuti, inflrument maker . 224, 225 

Anglo-Saxon fiddle . . . loi 

„ harp ... 93 

„ trumpet • t . 107 



» 



f> 



99 



» 



Page 
262 
146 
309 
149 

153 
85 
73 

375 
241 

32 

200 

377 
227 

141 

260 

366 

79 
306 

360 

366 

42 

61 

164 

218, 320 

260 

362 

363 
364 

84 

8x 

297 



Page 

Annibale del Rofii, fpinet maker 272, 275 

Antiquated inftruments, their qualities 
of found 

Antiquated inftruments in the Mu- 
seum .... 222 

Antonius Bononienfis, viol maker 

Apunga, Negro trumpet . 

Arabs, their mufical fcale 
„ their inftruments . 

Archicembalo 

Archlute .... 

Archiluth .... 

Arciliuto .... 

Areytos, Inca Peruvian . 

Arghool, Egyptian . 
„ Turkiih . 

Armonica, glafs harmonica 

Arpa doppia .... 



Arpanetta 
Arpichord 
Arrabel, Spanifh 
Aihantee war trumpet 
Afiatic inftruments 
Afitua, Inca Peruvian 
Afor, Hebrew 
Aflyrian inftruments 

mufical band 

bells .» 

double-pipe 

drums 

dulcimer 

harp 

lyre 

tamboura 

trigonon 

trumpet 
Attilio, player on the viola d*amore 
AuloSy ancient Grecian . 
Aura, German inftrument 
Aztecs, their inftruments 

„ their whlftles In the Mufeum 



>9 

99 
99 
99 
99 
9} 
99 



121 
304 

377 

i54 
60 

57 

377 
246, 324 

246 



173 



246 

84 

H3 
213 

232 

367 
367 

351 

142 

154 

157 
83 

162 

6 

23 

25 

»5 
26 

23 

21 
24 

15 

24 

25 

339 
38 

173 

65 
285 



384 



General Index. 











Page 


B. 




Battifta, mandoline maker 




335 




Bauemleyer, German 




233 




Page 


B'^y Egyptian drum 


144 


,146 


Babylon, pipe from the ruins of 


. 9,285 


Been, Hindu inftrument . 




159 


Babylonian orcheftra 


26 


Beffroi ,....< 




128 


Bach, J. S., his employment of the 


1 


Belami, lute maker 




244 


viola da gamba 


262 


Belapella, American Indian 




305 


„ „ his clavichord mufic 


356 


Belfry ..... 




128 


Bachmann, Antonius, inftrument 


t 


Bellows, of the bagpipe . 


126, 


► 131 


maker .... 


267, 326 


„ of the organ 




108 


BafTo, inftrument maker . 


277 


Bells, AfTyrian 




25 


Bagana, Abyflinian 


149 


„ ancient Egyptian . 




21 


Baghlama, tamboura 


2o3, 309 


„ „ Hebrew . 




33 


Bagpipe of American Indians . 


374 


„ of the Aztecs, America . 




80 


Bagpipe, ancient, in Afia Minor 


3» 


„ Burmefe 


30OJ 


»3i4 


„ ancient Grecian 


38 


„ Chinefe •48, 49, 


300, 


. 3«3 


„ ancient Hebrew 


3» 


„ Engliih 




127 


„ ancient Roman . 


44 


„ German . . . , 




292 


„ Engliih . 


321 


„ Grecian 




129 


„ French 


231 


„ Indian 




301 


„ Irifh 


126 


„ Italian 




127 


„ Perfian 


58 


„ Japanefe 




198 


„ Roumanian 


220 


„ Ruilian 


"7j 


, 129 


„ Rulfian . . . , 


125 


„ Servian 




128 


„ Scotch . . . . 


125 


Bell-harp .... 




332 


„ Turkish . . . . 


214 


Bell-ringers, Engliih 


127, 


» 130 


„ various names of the . 


214 


Beni HaiTan, ancient lyre of . 




29 


Bagpipes in the Special Exhibition 


373 


Bergonzi, Carlo, violin maker . 




363 


Bainbridge, flute maker . 


317 


Bernhard, organ builder . 




109 


Baker, John, viol maker . 


36i 


Berlioz, his treatife on inilrumenta- 






Balafo, African 


154 


tion 




'35 


Balalaika, Caucafian 


202 


Bertifece, dulcimer maker 




344 


Band«er, Engliih . 


333 


Befardus, on the lute 




241 


Bands, extra-European 


134 


Betts, bow maker . . . , 




342 


Banduria, Spanifh . 


334 


Beuker, inilrument maker 




226 


Bania, Negro inibrument . 


151 


Bibelregal, German 




375 


Banjo, inftrument . 


151 


Bijou pianoforte . . . , 




3o3 


Banks, Benjamin, violin maker 


366 


Bijuga-cither . 257, 


330j 


. 331 


Banfee, Hindu flute 


165 


Bird-organ .... 




283 


Banfree, Hindu flute 


i65 


BiiTex, double guitar 




251 


Banfulee, Hindu flute 


i65 


Biva, Japanefe . . . , 




194 


Barbiton, ancient Grecian 


■ 34,38 


Bolero, Spaniih dance 




84 


Barbitos, ancient Roman . 


41 


BoUes, viol maker . 




366 


Bards, ancient American . 


83 


Bombardino . . . . . 




226 


Baron, on the lute . 


»4i» 314 


Bombardo .... 




226 


Baryton .... 


266 


Bombardo piccolo . . . . 




226 


Bafs flute .... 


224,318 


Bombulom, mediaeval 




III 


Bafllaute, German . . . . 


243 


Bonanni, his Cablnetto Armonico 




245 


Bafs viol, Engliih . 


122,338 


Bondoung, Burmefe 




>75 


BalTe de viole, French 


262 


Border bagpipe 




321 


Baflbn, French 


227 


Bordone . . . . , 




266 


BafToon, Englifh 


226 


Borlolazzi, on the mandoline . « 


\ 


248 


Baton, Charles and Henri 


234 


Bofcherville, fculpture from 


\ 


1 

"3 



General Index. 



385 





Page 




Page 


Botuto, of the American Indiana 


74 


Carillon . . . . 


109, i3i 


Boulou, Negro harp 


151 


Carroccio 


128 


Bourdon .... 


23i, 266 


Cafparini, organ builder . 


284 


Bow, of the viola da Gamba . 


337 


Caftanets, ancient Egyptian 


20 


„ old-faihioned 


342 


„ „ Grecian 


39 


„ of the violin . . . , 


261 


„ „ Roman . 


45 


„ in the Special Exhibition 


366 


„ Chinefe . . . . 


190 


„ of the nail-violin . 


344 


„ European 


252 


Brenfius, lute maker 


. 377 


„ Hindu . . . , 


171 


Breflano, viol maker 


377 


Catgut ftrings . . . . 


I, i5o 


Brian Boiroimhe, his harp 


239 


Caucafian inftruments 


202 


Britiih lute .... 


250 


Cembalo, clavicembalo . 


277 


Britton, Thomas, his inftruments 


ass 


Cembal d'Amour . . . , 


357 


Broadwood, Meflrs., communicatior 




Cetera, Italian . . 257, 


369, 377 


from, refpe^ling Handefs harpfi' 




Chabbabeh, Perfian 


159 


chord .... 


279 


Chalcophonos, fonorous ftone . 


48 


Brummeifen, German 


172 


Chalil, Hebrew 


30 


Buccina, ancient Roman 


45 


Chalumeau . . . . , 


226 


Buche, French 


331 


Chalumeaux, of the mufette . 


23l 


Buchenberg, lute maker . 


244 


Chamber organ 


283, 374 


Buddhifts, their god of mufic . 


53 


Chang, Hindu harp 


56 


„ their facred trumpet 


296 


„ Perfian harp 


58 


Bueckenbergi lute maker . 


244,324 


„ murchang . . . . 


172 


Bugle horn .... 


371 


Chanrares, Peruvian bells 


80 


Bulgarian tamboura 


209 


Chanter, of the bagpipe . . 


23l 


Bulu-parindu, Malayfian . 


200 


Chanterelle of the lute • 


321 


Bulu-ribut, Malayfian 


200 


Cha-pan, Chinefe . 


190 


Buni, ancient Egyptian harp . 


II 


Charles II., king, harp flated to hav( 




Bunibulum, mediaeval 


III 


belonged to him . 


239 


Burmefe bells 


300, 314 


„ flute fbted to have be- 




„ drums . . . . 


175 


longed to him . 


373 


„ (binged inftruments 


173, 295 


Chatzozerah, Hebrew 


32 


y, trumpets . . . . 


29s 


Chaunk, Thibet . . . . 


134 


„ violin . . . . 


3i3 


Chayna, ancient Mexican 


69 


Burney, his account of the ferpcnt 


320 


Che, Chinefe 


53 


Buro, Negro trumpet 


153 


Chedeville, joueur de mufette . 


231,235 


Buiby on the dital harp . 


327 


Cheeplayo, Indian . . . , 


171 






Chelys, ancient Grecian . 


36, 41 






Cheng, ancient Chinefe . 


53 


c. 




„ modern „ 


. 5, 186 




Chhilchiles, ancient Peruvian . 


79 






Chifonie, mediaeval 


104 


Cachua, Peruvian dance . 


86 


Chihikong, Hindu . 


314 


Caix d'Herveloix, viola da gamba 


I 


Chikarah, „ . . . 


164,314 


player .... 


262 


Chinefe bells . . .48, 


300, 313 


Calamus, ancient Roman . 43, 


117, 226 


„ caflanets . . . . 


190 


Cambodian, ancient fculptures 


f 


„ cymbals . 


194 


mufical inftruments . 


53 


„ fiddle . .57, 


178, 3' 3 


Campanile .... 


128 


„ infbuments, ancient 


46 


Campion, Fran9ot8 . 


241 


,y „ modern . 


178-194 


Capiftrum, ancient Roman 


43 


„ „ of'ftones . 


46 


Capo-tafto .... 


328, 33o 


„ mufical academy . 


85 


Caribi Indians, their flutes 


305 


„ „ myths . 


46 



386 



General Index. 





Page 




Pa£e 


Chinefe mufical fcale 


. 53,86 


Conch-trumpet, Chinefe . 


186 


Chiriqui Indians, their flutes 


66 


„ Roman . 


45 


Chitarra, lulian 


. 253 


„ from Thibet . 


134 


Chitarrone, Italian . . . 243, 


244, 324 


ConcliiFe, metronome maker . 


377 


Chiterna, German . 


247, 325 


Confucius, his love for mufic . 


. 46, 5o 


Choifmia, ancient Peruvian 


74 


ContrabaiTo . . . . , 


267 


Choron, medisval . 


105 


Contra-fagotto 


227 


Chorus, mediaeval . 


io5 


Contre-bafTe .... 


267 


Chromatic harmonium . 


302 


Copts, their dulcimer 


205 


„ pianoforte 


302 


Cor Anglais .... 


"5,373 


Chromatlfche harfe 


291 


CordeChafTe 


371 


Chrotta, mediaeval . 


. 96,99 


Corelli^bow 


342 


Cilicia, ancient bagpipe of 


32 


Cormorne, inflrument 


373 


Cimbal 


223 


Cornamufa, bagpipe 


214 


Cimbalo, Italian 


223 


„ in the Liceo Comunale dl 




Cionar emit, Irlfh . 


98 


Mufica, Bologna 


378 


Circaflian violin 


2o3 


Cornemufe, French 


214 


Ciftre, French 


369 


Corneplpe, Scotch . 


293 


Cithara, ancient Roman . 


41 


Cornet a bouquin, French 


230 


„ mediaeval . 


■ 90> 9» 


Cornettlno, Italian . . . . 


292 


„ Portuguefe 


33o 


Cornetto curvo, Italian . 


229, 292 


» bijuga 


330 


„ diritto, Italian . 


292 


Cither 


255, 328 


Cornicyll, Welfh inflrumcnt . 


293 


„ Englifli 


330 


Corno da caccia . . . . 


37* 


„ German 


3^9 


Corno, Inglefe . . . , 


225 


„ Italian 


257, 369 


Cornu, Etrufcan and Roman . 40 


,44,105 


Cither-viol .... 


343 


Corthol, kind of bafToon 


227 


Citola albordada, Spanifh . 


117 


Coftaro, lute maker 


244 


Citole, mediaeval . 


93 


Cottage harmonium 


. 3o» 


Cittern, cither 


255, 328 


Cottier, inftrument maker 


373 


Clang-tint .... 


121 


Counter- tenor- viol . . . . 


338 


Clarin, Mexican 


73 


Courtaut, French , . . . 


227 


Clarinet, clarionet . 


226 


Cqueppa, ancient Peruvian 


74 


Clarion .... 


117 


Cqueppacamayo, ancient Peruvian 


83 


Clarfcth, Irifh harp 


240 


Crang, inftrument maker 


376 


Claufs, inftrument maker 


. 158 


Crepitaculum, ancient Roman . 


45 


Clavecin, harpfichord 


076 


Crlflofali, fuppofed inventor of the 




„ vertical . 


• 351 


pianoforte 


357 


Clavicembalo .... 


176 


Crotala, ancient Roman . 


45 


„ in the Special Exhibi 




Crout, French 


99 


tion 


. 351 


Crowd, Englifh . . . . 


99 


Clavichord .... 


274 


Crufmata, ancient Roman 


45 


„ in the Special Exhibition 355 


Crwth, Welfh ... 98 


» 99, 194 


Clavier, German . 


274 


Curfew 


129 


Clavlcymbalum perfedlum 


. 378 


Curtail, Englifh . . . , 


227 


Clavicytherium 


223,351 


Cuyvi, ancient Mexican pipe . 


69 


Claviorganum 


375 


Cymbals, AfTyrian . 


25 


Clays von Pommern)ach, lute maker 


244. 


„ ancient Egyptian 


21 


Clement! and Co., harp- guitar . 


317 


„ ancient Grecian 


39 


Coins, Hebrew, with the lyre . 


28 


„ Chinefe . . . . 


194 


Combinations of inflruments . 


133 


„ Hebrew . 


33 


Concertina .... 


301 


„ Turkifli . 


207 


Conch-trumpet, American 


7* 


Cymbalum, mediaeval 


III 



General Index. 



387 



Cythera, mediaeval . 
Cythorn, cither 



D. 

Dahomey, mufical bands in 

Daiko, Japancfe drum 

Daira, tamboorine . 

DalycU, Sir J. G., on the viola 

d amore . • « • 
Damaras, their primitive mufical in 

ftrument ... * 
Dances, ancient, of America . 
Dancing rattles, American Indian 
Daniel, Book of, mufical inftruments 

mentioned in . . . 
Darabouka, drum, ancient Egyptian 
y, „ modern . 

„ „ from Morocco 

Darabukkeh .... 
Darubiri, New Guinea 
Davidfharfe, German 
Dayra, Hindu 
Denis, on the mandoline . 
Denner, inventor of the clarinet 
Derbouka, darabouka 
Derviihes, their zikrs 
Diaulos, ancient Grecian . 
Dieffoprughar, lute maker 
DifF, hand-drum 
Dital harp .... 
Di2i, harp maker . 
Do, Hindu tambourine . 
Dodd, violin-bov7 maker . 
DofF, drum .... 



Page 
328 



1 37 
97, 299 

215 

340 

5 
84 

305 

26, 27 

20 

146, 147 

298 

146 

172 

367 
170 

248 

226 

. 298 

H5 

39 

322, 377 

32 

251,327 

290 

170 

261 



Dolciano, bafToon . 
Dordogne, prehiftoric whiftles from 
Double-adtion harp . 
Double-bafs .... 
Double-baffcs in the Special Exhibi- 
tion 365 

Double baflbon .... 227 
Double flageolet, Englifli . . "5*317 

Double flute, medixval . . . 106 

Double harp-guitar . . . . 251 

Double mouvcment, Erard's invention 237 

Double pipe, Aflyrian ... 25 

ancient Egyptian . . 19 

modern Egyptian . 143 

Grecian . . - 39 

Hebrew ... 30 



99 



I) 



)> 



3* 
227, 373 

9 

238 
267 



%i 



ly 



>f 



)» 



>» 



♦> 



)) 



»> 



fj 



»» 



Page 
Double pipe, Roman ... 43 

„ Sardinian ... 46 

Dragonetti, virtuofo on the double- 
bafs ...... 268 

Dramatic performances, facred, in 

Peru 88 

Drcmla, Polifli . . . 172 

Drilbu, Buddhift hand-bell . . 3oi 
Drone, bourdon .... 266 
Drones of the bagpipe . . 231 

Drone-pipes of the Hindus . . 168 

Drums, Aflyrian . . . . 25 

Chincfe . . . .51, 188 

ancient Egyptian . . 19, 20 

modern Egyptian . 144 

Hebrew .... 32 

Hindu . . . . 315 
Japanele . . . . 197 
firom Morocco . . ^98, 299 

negro . . . 146, 307 

Englifli . . . . 301 
of the American Indians . 76 

Dudelfack, German . . . 214 
Duduk, flageolet . . . • . 212 

Dudy, Polifli 214 

Duff, Hindu tambourine . . . 170 

DuB^de, Hindu . . . . 170 
Duiffuprugcar, violin maker . 322, 362 

Duke, violin maker . . 366 

Dulcian, dolciano . . . 227,373 

Dulcimer . . . 235, 344 

Aifyrian . . . 23 

Egyptian . . . . 205 
Englifli . . 344, 370 

Georgian . . . 204 

Hebrew .... 27 

Turkifli . . . . 20 5 

conftru£led by Hebenftreit . 358 

Dunflan, Archbifliop of Canterbury, 

reputed inventor of the ^olian 

harp ...... 

Dutka, WalUchian .... 



>> 
n 



200 
220 



E. 

Ebn Soreidfch, Arabian lute player 
Echelette, French . 
Egelric, abbot of Croyland 
Egyptian, ancient, inftruments 

bells . 

caftanets 



)> 



i» 



» 



60 

316 

i3i 

6 

19,21 

19 



388 



General Index. 







Page 






Page 


Egyptian^ ancient, cymbals 


20 


Etnifcan flutes 


• • 


40 


n 


„ drums . 


. 19, 20 


„ horn 


« • 


40 


ft 


„ flutes . 


. 18, 19 


„ water-organ 


■ • 


40 


M 


„ harps . 


II 


Euphonicon, pianoforte . 


• » 


303 


tf 


ff gong* . 


19 


European infbuments, of the 


Middle 




If 


f> lyres . 


14 


Ages .... 


■ • 


89 


9> 


„ tambourines 


19 


„ „ poft-mediaeval 


119 


» 


„ trigonon 


14 


Eufhchlo, inventor of a triple 


harp . 


292 


tf 


„ trumpets 


19 


Evans, Richard, Welih inftrument 




M 


„ fifhiim 


. 21, 141 


maker 


• • 


294 


If 


„ ftringed inftrumentF 1 1 


Evelyn, his notice of the lute 


• • 


244 


)} 


„ flute concert 


18 


„ „ of the viola d'amore 


340 


» 


„ military band 


19 








» 


„ nofre . 


17 








» 


modem (hinged inftruments 142 


F. 






If 


„ bagpipe 


214 






If 


„ drums . 


144,145 








» 


„ flutes . 


143 


Fagotto, bafToon 


• 


227 


£he, trumpet maker 


. . 371 


„ piccolo 


■ 


227 


Eifenvioline, nail-violin . 


268 


Fagott, German 


• • 


227 


£-korro, negro inftrument 


i5i 


Fang-hiang, Chinefe 


• • 


S^ 


Elizabeth, Queen, mufical inftrt 


iments 


Farunt, fuppofed inventor of the lyra- 






of her tim 


e . 304 


viol .... 




266 


If 


,, her poliphant 


33i 


Father Smith, organ builder 




374 


>i 


„ her violin 


287 


Fichthold, lute maker 




244 


If 


„ her virginal . 


349 


Fidb, ancient Roman 




41 


fi 


,, her mufical a 


ccom- 


Fiddle, Abylfinian . 




309 




plifhments 


270, 33 1 


„ Anglo-Saxon 




lOI 


Elliot, John, his hymns . 


88 


„ Chineie 




178 


£l-oud 


, Arabian lute 


60 


„ early Engliih reprefentadons 




Embuchi, African trumpet 


154 


of it 




lOI 


EngUih bagpipe 


215,373 


„ early German 




lOI 


f> 


bells . 


127 


„ Hindu 


164, 314 


ff 


beU-harp . 


332 


„ Perfian 




309 


>t 


flageolet . 


225, 3x7 


„ WcUh 




293 


a 


harpfichord 


277,352 


Fidla, Norwegian . 




^54 


If 


lute . 


321 


Figella, viol . . - . 




100 


» 


organ 


108,284,374 


Finnlfh kantele 




96 


»f 


fmall cither 


33o 


FiftuU, ancient Roman . 




44 


>f 


fpinet 


290, 350 


Fithele, Anglo-Saxon fiddle 




259 


If 


trumpet 


37X,37i 


Flageolet, Engliih . 


»»5. 


► 317 


19 


virginal 


a70»a7i. 349 


„ Hindu . 




164 


If 


viols . 

• 


336, 338, 340 


,, Perfian . 




»59 


If 


viol makers 


366 


„ Turkiih . 




212 


>f 


inftruments in the S 


>pecial 


„ Wallachian 




220 




Exhibition 349- 


-352, 359-372 


„ in the Special Exhibition . 


37* 


Englifli horn . . . . 


225, 373 


Flauto dolce . 


• ■ 


224 


Epigonion, ancient Grecian 


38 


Fliigel, German 


222 


1*77 


Epinette, fpinet 


*74>35i 


Flute, Arabian 




63 


Erard, 


S., pianoforte maker 


. 352 


„ AfTyrian 




15 


Erard*{ 


( pedal-harp . 


237 


„ Chinefe 




5» 


Erzlaute, German . 


246 


ti Egyptian, ancient . 




«7 


Ethnology and national mufic . 


6 


„ Etrufcan 




40 



General Index. 



389 





Page 






Page 


Flute, Grecian, ancient . 


38 


German organ 




374 


,, ofKiiihna . . . . 


54, 165 


„ trumpet ... 




371 


„ mediaeval . . . . 


106 


Ghaida, Turkiih . 




214 


,, Mexican . . . . 


68 


Ghenta, Abyffinian 




153 


„ from Morocco 


198 


Ghirif, Turkiih . 




212 


„ Peruvian . . . . 


69 


Ghittern, guitar 




»53 


„ Wallachian . . . . 


220 


Ghunta, Hindu bell 


• 


129 


Flute d'Angleterre . . . . 


225 


Gipfy bands, mufical 




117,236 


Flute a bee . 224, ; 


Ji«, 37a 


Gitcem, guiur 




*53 


Flute douce . . . . . 


224 


Gittith, Hebrew . 




33 


Flute traverfiere . . . . 


225 


Gittron, fmall guitar 




334 


Flutes in the Special Exhibition 


37» 


Glafs harmonica 




232 


„ tenor and baft 


318 


Glover, Mifs, her Sol-fa harmonicon 


302 


„ ancient Egyptian conce^ of . 


. 17 


Goldt, H., lute maker . 




247, 323 


Flute-cimbal 


345 


Gong, tam-tam 




128 


Forefters* horns . . • ' 


129, 372 


„ Burmefe 




299 


Forfter, S. A., on the viola da gamba 


336 


„ Chinefe 




191,300 


„ W., violin maker 


366 


„ Japanefe 




198 


Fouchetti, on the mandoline . 


248 


„ fuppofed ancient Mexican 




87 


France, prehiftoric relics from . 


10 


Goto, Japanefe 




>97 


Frank, Ch., trumpet maker 


371 


Gragnani, Antonius, viol maker 




342 


Franklm, inventor of the glafs-har- 




Graffineau on the bell-harp 




33a 


monica 


232 


„ on the dulcimer 




370 


Franz, Karl, virtuolo on the viola di 




„ on the harpfichord . 




277 


bardone .... 


265 


Gravicymbalum 




223 


Free reed in wind inftruments . 


5 


Grecian, ancient, caflanets 




39 


French inftruments 231, 233, 278, 


326, 341 


„ cymbals . 




39 


Freftele, medieval . . . . 


106 


„ double pipe 




39 


Fredau, medisval . . . . 


106 


„ flute 




39 


Frey, Hans, lute maker . 


144, 377 


„ hand-drum 
„ harp . 
„ hydraulos . 
„ lyre .... 




39 

35 
40 

35 


G. 




„ fyrinx 

„ trumpet . 




39 
39 


Gamalan, Javanefe 


135 


„ various flringed infhuments 


38 


Gand, Abyflinian trumpet 


'53 


GriefTer, violin maker 




377 


Ganefa, Hindu deity 


54 


Grofjean, inflrument maker 




251 


Gangurih, trumpet of the Kalmucks 


296 


Grofs-cither, German 




330 


Gardiner, W., his account of a hugt 




GrofTe bafs-geige . 




267 


double bals 


268 


Guarnerius, violin maker 




260 


Gafpar di Salo, double-bafles by 


268, 365 


„ his violins in the Speci; 


il 


Gendang boeloe, Sumatra 


306 


Exhibition .... 




363 


George III., King, his harpfichord 


283 


Guido d*Arezzo, fuppofed inventor ( 


)f 


Georgian dulcimer • 


204 


fhinged inflruments with a 


kc, 


1^ 


Gerader Zinken, German 


292 


board .... 




278 


Gerbert, Martinus . 


90 


Guillaume, inventor of the Serpent 


319 


Gerle, Hans, lutenift 


241,244 


Guimbarde, French 




172 


German bagpipe 


214 


Guitar 




^53, »54 


„ dulcimer . 


*35 


Guitare, French 


»53 


» a54» 3*5 


„ flute. 


225 


Guitarra, Spanlfh . 




»53> a54 


„ grofs-cither 


330 


Guitar-lyre, Englifh 




326 


„ harpanetta 


367 


Gunibry, Morocco . 


.29s 


h 306, 307 



390 



General Index. 





Page 






Page 


Gytarah barbaryeh . 


149 


Harpfichord, ftrings of the 


• 


353 


Gythorn, guitar 


a53>»54 


„ machine for tuning it , 


345 






Harpfichords in the Special 


Exhibi- 








tion .... 




351 


V V 




Harpu, Finni/h 




96 


H. 




Harp- theorbo 




3*7 






Harp-ventura 




, 318 


Haas, W., trumpet maker 


371 


Hartung, lute maker 




244 


Hackbret, German . 


a35 


Haflcin, his organ -accordion 




301 


Hailli, Inca Peruvian 


87 


Hautboy 




226 


Halbmondy German 


376 


Haute-contre, viol . 




341 


Hammers for the dulcimer 


236,358 


Haydn, J., his compofitions 


for th< 




Hand-bell, German 


292 


viola di bardone . 




265 


„ Indian . 


301 


Heang-teih, Chinefe 




184 


Handel, on the clavichord 


356 


Hcbenftreit, dulcimer player 




358 


„ inftruments in the Spccia 


1 


Hebrew, inftruments 




6 


Exhibition ftated to have belongec 


i 


„ bagpipe . 




3" 


to him : 




„ bells. 




33 


Clavichord 


355 


„ cymbals . 




33 


Harpfichord . 


279 


„ double pipe 




30 


Organ .... 


375 


„ drum 




32 


Tuning-fork . 


377 


„ dulcimer . 




17 


Viola .... 


364 


„ harp 




27 


Hanumunta ottu, Hindu . 


168 


„ lyre . 




27 


Haravi, Inca Peruvian 


84 


„ orcheiha . 




>37 


Harmonicon, Chinefe 


46 


» pipe 




30 


„ Siamefe 


316 


„ tamboura . 




30 


Harmonium .... 


302 


„ trumpet . 




32 


Harp, AiTyrian 


21 


„ fiftrum 




33 


„ ancient Egyptian . 


II 


„ fyrinx 




3« 


„ Finni/h 


96 


Heem, Burmese 




187 


„ Hebrew 


27 


Henry VIII., king, his mufical inftru- 




„ Hindu .... 


56 


ments 


3'«, 


334» 351 


„ Perfian .... 


58 


Hermes^ Mercury . 


• 


• 39.54 


„ Turkifli 


59 


Herrauou, Madagafcar . 


• < 


162 


„ French .... 


236 


Herveloix, vioU da gamba player 


262 


,y German 


237 


Hiang-che, Chinefe 


• . 


48 


„ of the Offetes 


202 


Hindu inftruments, ancient 


. 1 


53 


„ Welfli .... 


291 


„ „ modern 159-173, 


296, 314 


„ Irifli . . . .94 


, 95, 240 


„ mountain horn 


. * 


218 


„ of Brian Boiroimhe . 


*39 


Hitchcock, Thomas, fpinet maker 


^76, 35» 


,, Anglo-Saxon . 


93 


Hiuen, Chinefe inftrument 




52 


„ Engllfli 


239 


Hiuen-tchung, Chinefe bell 




. 49> 3i3 


„ CaucaHan . . . * 


202 


Hochbrucker*6 pedal harp 




237 


,, its primitive conftruf^ion . 


5 


HofHieimer, organ builder 




374 


„ invention of . 


54 


Hoffmann, lute maker . 




244 


„ by Dizi 


290 


Holar cha foor, Hindu 




168 


Harpanctta .... 


. 367 


Holmos of the tibia 




44 


Harp-guitar .... 


326, 327 


Holtzapfel, flute maker . 




37» 


„ double . . . , 


251 


Hora, Wallachian . 




217 


Harp-lute 


250 


Horn, cornu , 




320 


Harpfichord, Engllfh 


279 


„ bugle . 




371 


„ HandePs . 


297 


„ Grecian, ancient 




39 



General Index, 



391 



Horn, Hebrew 

,, of herdfaien} Roumania 
Hornpipe, Scotch . 
„ Wclfli . 
Hottemann, theorbo player 
Huanca, ancient Peruvian 
Huancarcamayo, ancient Peruvian 
Huayllaca, ancient Mexican 
Huayra-puhura, PeniWan iyrinx 
Hucbald, his coniccutive fifths 
Huehuetl, of the Aztecs . 
Hulkya, Hindoo tambourine 
Hummel, Matthatus, lute maker 
Hunting horn 
Hurdy-gurdy .... 

„ organiftrum 
Hwang-teih, Chinefe 
Hydraulic organ 
Hydraulos, water-flute 
Hymnsy American Indian 

ancient Peruvian . 



» 



Page 

3* 
217 

373 
293 

242 

79 

83 
69 

69 

234 

79 
170 

244 

228, 292 

233 

102 

185 

40, 108 
40 
88 
84 



I. 



Ibeca, Negro inftrument . . . 297 
Inca Peruvians, their flutes . 69 
Indian inftruments, ancient 53 
„ „ modern . 159 
„ „ in the Special Ex- 
hibition 378 

Indian, American, inftruments . . 65 

Ingomba, Negro drum . . 307 

Inftruments, mufical, claflified . . 2 
„ „ their various 

qualities of found . . . 121 
Inftruments introduced from Afia into 

Europe 45 

Inftruments in the Special Exhibition 348 
Inftruments, Abyflinian 146, 149, 153, 309 



91 

>t 
»» 
>» 

99 

99 

I) 
»> 
>• 



African 
Arabian 
Afladc 
Aflyrian 
Burmefe 
Caucafian 
Chinefe, ancient . 
Chinefe, modern . 
Egyptian, ancient . 
Egyptian, modern . 
Englifli 
Etrufcan 



I73i 



141 

57 

157 

6 

^95* 313 
202 

46 

178 

6 

142 

349> 366 
40 



Page 
Inftruments, French .231, 233, 278, 326 
German . 330, 367, 371, 374 



»♦ 
>» 
If 
}i 

99 
ft 

» 

99 
»> 
99 
»> 
99 
»> 
»» 
99 
9t 
» 

99 

»» 



Grec'ian, ancient 

Hebrew 

Hindu 

Iriih . 

Italian 

Japanefe 

Medieval . 

Mexican, ancient 

Negro 

Nubian 

Perfian 

Peruvian, ancient 

Pre-hiftoric . 

Roman 

Roumanian . 

Ruflian 

Scotch 

Siamefe 

Turkifh 

Wallachian 



34 
. 6,^7 

• 53»i59 

139» 367, 370 

324, 341, 359 

194, i99> 310 
89 

. 65, 285 

i4»i 307 
148 

• 57, 157 

79 

9 
41 

217 

127, 204, 214 

86, 373i 374 

174, 316 

205, 207, 209, 212 

• . 217 

214, 291, 293, 294 



125 



Wclfli 

Inftrumentation, antiquated 136, 245, 246 

„ modern , . , 133 

Irifli harp 239, 240, 367 

„ bronze trumpet . , . 370 

Italian inftruments . . 224, 241, 359 



J. 



Jagdhorn, German . 
Jaina, Peruvian 
Jalar, Hindu 
Jamato-goto, Japanefe 
JaniflTary mufic 
Jan tar, Hindu 
Japanefe inftruments 



371 
69 

170 

197 

208, 376 

162 

194-201, 299, 3 10 



Jars, found-producing, of the Inca 
Peruvians . 

Jay, Henry, viol maker 

Jew's harp , , 

Jew's trump . 

Jhanj, Hind^ cymbals 

Jobcl, Hebrew 

Jones, Edward, his Welfli harp mufic 
,. „ his account of the 

Wclfli hornpipe . . . . 

Jubal, inventor of Hebrew mufical 

inflruments 

• • t 

Judenkunig, on the lute . 



75 

338, 366 

172 

172 

171 

33 
291 

293 

*8,33 
241 



392 



General Index, 



Junk, Arabian • 
Jurupari8| American Indian 



K. 

Kadabbah, Egyptian 
Kamancha 
Kamfa, Nepaulefe . 
Kanoon, Arabian . 

„ Egyptian . 

„ Turkifli . 
Kantele, Tinniih 
Kargel, Sixtus, on the guitar . 
Karlino, Joan, of Brcfcia 
Kaihmeer, inftrument from 
KaiTangah, Negro inftrument . 
Kaflb, Negro inftrument 
Keen, Stephen, virginal maker 
Kelly, John, Irifli harp maker . 
Kemangeh, Perfian 
„ Turkiih 

Kemangeh a* gouz . 
Kemangeh a* gou«, Egyptian . 
Kemangeh, from Morocco 
Kemangeh roumy . 
Keou-kin, Chinefe 
Keras, ancient Grecian 
Keren, Hebrew horn 
Kettle-drums 

f» Egyptian . 
Keyed-Cither 
Khew, Burmefe bell 
Kien, Japanefe gong 
Kikoakoa, Caucafian bard 
Kin, Chinefe . . . .53, 
King, Chinefe 
Kin-kou, Chinefe . 
Kinnor, Hebrew 
Kinyra, ancient Grecian . 
Kircher, Athanafius, on the cither 
Kirkman, inftrument maker . 

„ his double harpfichord 

KiiTar, Nubian 

Klftumba, Negro inftrument . 
Kit, Englifh .... 
Klthara, ancient Grecian 
Klavier, German . 
Kniegeige, viola da gamba 
Koan-tfce, Chinefe 
Kobero, Abyfiinian 
Kobfa, Wallachian . 



Page 
59 



145 
164 
169 

61 

60 

208 
54,06 

253 
363 
164 
297 
3o8 
271 
240 

i57 
210 

211 

310 

298 

204 

172 

39, io5 

32, io5 

64, 133 
144, 145 

258 

314 

198 

202 

182, 3l2 

46 

51 

28, 201 

36 

368 

277 

35a 
28, 148 

3o8 

261, 360 

34, 36, 39 

274 

262 

52 

146 
2x9 



p»«c 


169 


ai4 


197 


. 51, 188, 189 


275 


4 


. 54, 165 


39 


292 


373 


253, 307 


169, 296 


171 


177 


. . 39 



Komboo, Hindu 
Koia, Ruffian 
Koto, Japanefe 
Kou, Chinefe 
Kramer, clavichord maker 
Kratzenftein, organ builder 
Kriihna, Ifindu deity 
Krotala, ancient Grecian . 
Krummer Zinken, German 
Krummhorn, German 
Kuitra, Arabian guitar 
Kuma, Hindu trumpet . 
Kurtar, Hindoo cafbnets . 
Kyee-wain, Burmele 
Kymbala, ancient Grecian 



L. 



Lancafhire bell-ringers 1 3o 

Langipiel, Icelandic . . 259 

Laos organ 187 

Laud, Spanifh . . 142 

Launedda, double pipe ... 46 

Lautari, Wallachian . 2x7 

Laute, German . . 142 

I«ei-kou, Chinefe . . . 51 
Leighton, Sir W., his enumeration 

of mufical infhuments . . 285 

Lemme, clavichord maker 275 

Leone, on the mandoline 248 

Lcrida, on the guitar . . 253 

Le Roy, on the lute 24X 

Leverfidge, virginal maker . 271 

Leyer, German . . . 233 
Liceo Comunale de Mufica at Bo- 
logna, its ancient muftcal inftru- 

ments 377 

Lidl, viola di bardone player . . 265 

Liederzither, German . . 259 

LiefTem, cither maker . . . 329 
Light, inffarument maker . . 25o, 327 

Linaro, viola maker . . 363 

Ling-kou, Chinefe . . . . 51 

Linterculus, fordino . . 341 

Lionedda, doable pipe ... 46 

Lituus, ancient Roman ... 44 

Lira di braccio . . . . 1x4 

Lira ruflica 233 

Lira tedefca 233 

Liuto, Italian . . . . 142, 241 

Lizard, Englifh . . 3 20 



General Index. 



393 





Page 


Lizard, Siamefe 


174 


Lo, Chinefe gong . 


191 


Lo-tfeih, Chinefe . 


19% 


Longman and Broderip*8 tuning 


; ma- 


chine . . . . 


. . 345 


Lokanga, Madagaicar 


i5i 


Loofemore, virginal maker 


ayi 


Lou-kou, Chinefe . 


5i 


Loure, French 


a3i 


La, mafical interrals, Chinefe . 


. . 48 


Lupot, VioUn-bow maker 


x6i 


Lare, Scandinavian 


169, 370 


Lute, Arabian 


60 


„ ancient Egyptian 


17 


„ early European 


119 


f, Englifli . 


3ai, 368 


„ French . 


14* 


' „ Gcnnan • • 


i4» 


„ Italian . . . . 


241, 322 


„ Hebrew 


3o 


„ Wallachian . 


219 


), mfbudion books for the 


241 


Lute makers . 


244 


Luth, French 


14a 


Lyra mendicorum . 


, 222 


Lyra-viol . . . . 


266 


LyrCy of Hermes 


307 


„ Aflyrian 


25 


„ Egyptian 


14 


„ Grecian 


. . 36,39 


„ Hebrew 


27 


Lyre-guitare, French 


326 



M. 

Mace, Thomas, on the lute 241, 247, 323 
„ „ on yiols . . . 122 
,, „ on Englifb Inftrument 

makers 3^6 

Machalath, Hebrew ... 3o 

Machete, Portuguefe . 254, 325 

Machol, Hebrew . . 33 

Madagafcar, inftruments from . i5l, 3o6 

Magadis, Grecian . . . 34, 38 

Magaudi, Hindu . . 57, 166 

Maggini, violin maker . . . 363 
„ his double-baiTes in the Special 

Exhibition 365 

Magrepha, Hebrew . . 3 1 

Magum, Negro tnmipet . . i53 

Mahoon, fpinet maker . 290 

M.I. C 



Maidari, mufical deity of the Kal 

mucks .... 
Malakat, Abyffinian trumpet . 
Maler, Laux, lute maker . 
Mam, ancient Egyptian . 
Mandola, Italian . 
Mandolino, Neapolitan • 247, 

„ Milanefe 
Mandura, mandora 
Mandurina, mandorina . 
Mantagnana, Domenico, his BaiTo d 

Camera in the Special Exhibition 
Marais, viola da gamba player . 
Marcus Jadra, fpinet maker 
Marimba, African infbument . 

„ American 
Marine trumpet 
Marius, fuppofed inventor of the 

pianoforte .... 
Marouvane, Madagidcar . • 
Marpurg, on the viola di bardone 
Matthefbn, on the lute . 

„ on the viola d^amore 

Maultrommel, German . 
Meares, Richard, viol maker . 
Mediseval mufical infbruments . 
Megoum, Burmefe 
Megyoung, Burmefe 
Menaaneim, Hebrew 
Merfenne, on the bijuga cither 
Meft, lute maker . 
Metronomes in the Special ExhiU- 

tion ..... 
Metsilloth, Hebrew 
Metzilthaim, Hebrew 
Meufchel, trombone maker 
Mexican, ancient inftruments . 

„ whiftles in the Mufeum 
Milan, on the guitar 
Milanefe mandoline 
Milchmayer, harplichord maker 
Milioni, on the guitar 
Miniature violin . . . 

„ viripnal . 
Minnim, Hebrew . 
Minftrels, ancient American 
Minftrels* Gallery, Exeter Cathedral 
Mifhrokitlia, Hebrew 
Mitotes, ancient Peruvian 
Modes, mufical, of the Hindus 

„ „ of the Inca Peruvians 

Moldavian mufic . 
Monaulos, ancient Grecian 



Page 

53 

153 
244, 323 

335 
334, 335 

335 
249, 335 
249, 335 

36s 

338 

275 

1549 i56 

89 

377 

357 
3o6 

266 

247 

340 

172 

336 

89 

174 
173 

33 

330 

244 

377 
33 

33 

371 

65 
285 

253 

335 

354 

253 

261 

290 

3o 

83 

117 

3o 

84 

71 

71 
217 

39 



394 



General Index, 





Page 




Page 


Mondtrommel, Dutch 


172 


Negro trumpets 


152 


Monochord, of the ancients 


38 


„ various inftruments 


i4»> 307 


„ mediaeval 


loS 


„ inftruments in the Special Ex- 


„ for tuning the h 


arpfi- 


hibition .... 


379 


chord . . . . 


34S 


Nei ambanah, Perfian bagpipe . 


. 58, 214 


Montezuma, his orcheftra • 


82 


Nekeb, Hebrew 


3o 


Moon-guitar, Chinefe 


179 


Neufiedler, Hans, lute maker . 


a44 


Moors, their mufical inftrument 


. . 63 


Nobut, Ifindu 


135 


Morrice dance 


.' 130 


Nofte, ancient Egyptian . 


. I7» 162 


Mountain horn 


217 


Norman, Barak, inftrument maker 361, 366 


Mukha, Hindu inftrument 


168 


North American Indians, thdr 


mu' 


Mukhavinai, Hindu 


168 


fical inftruments 


89 


Mundharpe, Dantih 


172 


Nofe flutes .... 


x66, 379 


Mungiga, Swediih . 


172 


Nubian lyre .... 


X48 


Munjeera, Hindu . 


171 


Nurfingh, Nepaulefe 


169 


Murchang, Hindu . 


172 






Mufetta, Italian 


214 






Mufette, French . 


214, 23l 


^0^, 




,y players on the . 


234 


0. 




„ compofidons for the . 


234 






Mufettes in the Special Ezhibiti 


on . 374 


Oboe, Arabian 


63 


Mufical feftivaliy ancient Peru?' 


ian . 83 


„ ancient American . 


60 


■ 




„ kind of, fuppofed to have been 






knovm to the ancient 


Egyp- 


N. 




dans 


17 




„ Grecian, ancient . 


38 






„ Chinefe . 


184 


Nabla, Grecian 


34 


„ Hindu 


167 


Nablum, mediaeval 


. 92, 112 


„ Italian 


22s 


Nadermann, harp maker . 


25l 


„ Wallachian . 


■J 
221 


Nagarah, Hindu drum 


. . 315 


Oboed'amore 


225 


NagaiTaran, Hindu 


168 


Oboe da cacda 


225, 373 


Nagelclavier . 


268 


Oboe luongo .... 


225 


Nagelgeige, nail-violin 


268, 343 


Oboe piccolo .... 


226 


Nagel harmonika . 


268, 344 


Odavina, fpinet . 


270, 271 


Nail-harmonica 


268, 344 


Odin, Scandinavian deity 


54 


Nail-violin . 


268, 343 


Olifaunt, mediaeval 


228 


Nakakeer, kettle-drums . 


. . 145 


Oliphant, mediaeval 


107, 227 


Nakkarah, drum . 


. 63, 145 


Ollivant 


228 


Nakarsan, Egyptian 


. . 14S 


Olyfaunce 


228 


Nanga, Negro harp 


149 


Ombi, Negro harp . 


iSi 


Nareda, inventor of the Vina 


. 53, 54, 201 


Orcheftra, Babylonian 


27 


National mufic 


4 


„ Burmefe 


133 


Nay, flute 


. 63, 159 


„ Hebrew 


. 27, 136 


„ its embouchure • 


212 


„ Hindu . 


>3S 


Neapolitan mandoline 


334 


y, American, ancient 


82 


Nebel, Hebrew 


. 27, 3o, 162 


„ Italian, fizteenth cei 


itury . 245 


Nechiloth, Hebrew 


33 


„ Italian, feventeenth c 


entury 246 


Negro mufical band 


. . 137 


„ modem, monfter 


136 


,, balafb . 


. . 154 


Organ 


108, 283 


„ drums . 


146 


„ fuppofed Hebrew , 


• 3o> 3« 


„ harps . 


149, i5i 


„ hydraulic 


. 40, 108 


„ marimba > . 


154 


„ medieval 


X08 



General Index. 



395 





Page 




Page 


Organ portative 


184 


Pemberton, violin maker 


289 


Organ pofidve 


283 


Penorcon .... 


.334, 368 


Organ, ferinctte 


283 


Pentatonic fcale 


.52,311 


Organ-accordion 


301 


Pcpa, Chinefe . . .53, 


180, 3ii 


Organ-harpfichord . 


375 


Pepys, his notice of the flageolet 


225 


Organ-hardygurdy . 


345 


„ „ „ virginal 


270 


Organ -piano .... 


. 376 


Peruvian flutes, ancient . 


69 


Organ pipes in the Mufeum 


303 


Perflan inftruments of percuflion 




Organs in the Special Exhibition 


374 


ancient . . 


\ 57 


Organiftnim, hurdy. "1 

gufdy. / • »«*»"»» 


116,134 


„ „ modern . 
» » bagpipe . 


157 
. 58, 214 


Organum hydraulicom 


40 


,, ,, mufical fcale 


60 


Orphanoo, Englifli . 


241, 368 


90 WW 

Perry, violin maker 


343 


Orpbeoreon .... 


334 


Peruvian inftruments, ancient . 


79 


OfleteSy their harp . 


202 


Pfbmger, inventor of the chromatifchc 


' w 


Ottavino, ipinet 


271 


harfc 


201 


Otta, Hindu inftniment . 


168 


Phaamon, Hebrew bells . 


33 


On, Chinefe inftmment . 


5o 


Phorbeia, ancient Grecian 


39 


Oady lute, Arabian 

^9 • 


60 


Phorminz, ancient Grecian 


36 


t» w Egyptian 


142 


Pianoforte, its origin 


5>357 


Oukpwe, Negro ivory trumpet 


»54 


Kanofbrtes in the Muieum 


3o2, 3o3 






„ in the Special Exhibition . 


359 






Piano -harmonium . . . . 


376 


p. 




Piao, Chinefe bell . . . . 


49 






Pibau, WHfh. 


214 


Pai-fiao, Chinefe . . . . 


5* 


Pibgorn, WcUh . . . . 


293 


Pamphilon, violin maker 


366 


Pien-king, Chinefe 


48 


P^, Chinefe caftanets 


190 


Pien-tchung, Chinefe 


49 


Psin, inventor of the fyrinx 


39 


Pif!aro paftorale . . . « 


226 


Panchama ottu, Hindu . 


168 


Pih-pan, Chinefe . . . . 


190 


Pandean pipe, iyrinz 


39 


Pilai, Finnifli . . . . 


214 


„ „ Chinefe 


52 


PincuUu, ancient Mexican flute 


69 


„ „ Hebrew . 


31 


I^ob mhor, Scotch bagpipe 


125, 214 


n „ mediaeval . 


106 


Pipe, Aflfyrian . . . . 


^5 


„ ,, Peruvian . 


69 


„ Babylonian . . . . 


9,285 


„ „ Roumanian 


219 


„ Egyptian, ancient . 


17 


Pandora 


242 


„ Hebrew . . . . 


30 


Pandore . . 331, 


333, 334 


„ Central American . 


h(i 


P^douniy ancient Grecian 


38 


„ Mexican . . . . 


65 


Pandura, Italian .... 


333 


„ pre-hiftoric . . . . 


9 


Pandurina, Italian . . . . 


248 


Fipe and tabor . . . . 


124 


Pantilon 


358 


Pifador, his inftrudion book for the 




Papanafem-magoudi, Hindu 


166 


vlhuela 


253 


Parker, Daniel, violin maker . 


366 


Pifalterium of the Copts 


205 


Parry's harp, Welih 


291 


Pito, Mexican .. . . . 


67 


Pat-ma, Burmefe . . . . 


«75 


Piva, bagpipe . . . . 


214 


P^tolah, Burmefe . . . . 


176 


Playfbrd, John, on the cither • 


257 


Pattala, Burmefe . . . . 


176 


„ „ on the poliphant 


33« 


Pat-tfiiaing, Burmefe 


176 


„ „ on the lyra viol 


266 


Pavilion chinois . . . . 


376 


„ „ on the tenor viol 


338 


Peal-ringing 


i3o 


„ „ on the viola d*amore 


340 


Pedal-harp 


237 


„ „ on tuning the viol . 


337 


Pektis, Grecian . . . . 


38 


Pleura for the Kanoon . 


208 



M.I. 



D D 



396 



General Index. 



Ple£bon, Grecian . 
Pledrum^ Roman . 
A0yrian 



» 



»f 



)9 






99 



Chinefe . 
Egyptian 
Japanefe 
for the lute 
for the fitar 
Pleyer, fpinet maker 
Plochflbte, German 
Pneumatic organ . 
Pochette, French . 

), fordino . 

„ in the fhape of a fiih 
Pochettes in the Special Exhibition 
Po-fbu, Chinefe 
Pohlman, pianoforte maker 
Poliphant 
Polifli bagpipe 
Pommer, German . 
Pommeribach, Clays von, 
Ponga, ivory trumpet 
Poongi, Hindu 
Popular fongs 
Porgt, lute maker . 
Portuguefe cichara . 

„ guitar . 
Pofaune, trombone 
Prztorius on the zither 

„ on the lri(h harp 
Pre-hiftoric whiftles 
Pridgen, metronome maker 
Pialteiion, Greek, ancient 
Pfalterium 

„ mediaeval 

„ dulcimer 
Pfaltery, cither-viol 
Pfanterin, Hebrew . 



lute 



Page 

37 
4» 

24 

5i 

IS>4» 
194, 19S 

141 

3>5 

35o 

214 

40, 108 

261 

292 

36o 
5i 

359 
33i 

214 

226, 373 



maker 



244 

1 54 
57, 166 

4 



244 
330 
253 
108 
33o 
241 

9 

377 
27 

42 

9« 

205 

34i» 343. 361 
27 



Q. 



j^anon, kanoon 

J^itar, Perfian 

j^uanz, mufic mafter of Frederick the 

Great .... 
(luartfagott, German 
^ena, Peruvian . 
J^uinterna, chiterna 
guintfegott, German 
Qutnton, viol 



208 
157 

266 

227 

69 

H7y 3*5 
227 

342 



Rababah, African . 
Rabebe, mediaeval . 
Rabel, Spanifh 
Rabe morifco, Spaniih 
Ramfinga, Hindu . 
Ranat, Siamefe 

Rattles of the American Indians, 
ancient .... 



modem 



» 



» 



Ranch, Sebaftian, lute maker 
Rauche, lute maker 
Raufgler, lute maker 
Ravanaftron, Hindu 
Raymi, Inca Peruvian 
Rebab, Arabian 

„ Perlian 

„ from Morocco 
Rebab efh-Sha*er, poet's viol 
Rebcbe, medizval . 
Rebec, fiddle 
Rebecchino . 
Reberbe, medizval 
Rebefbe, mediaeval 
Rebub, rebec 
Rebuce, French 
Recorder, Engliih 
Reed in the cheng 
oboe 



>9 



» 



116, 



poongi 
„ zourna 

Reed wind inflruments, ancient 

Egyptian . . . 
Regal, regals . 

„ Bibelregal . 
Remy, violin maker 
Richards, Welfh harp maker 
Rigols .... 
Rikk, Egyptian 
Robinfon, Thomas, lutenift 

,f „ his book on the 

cither . 
Rochi, Chriilofilo, lute maker 

„ Sebaftian, lute maker • 
Roman, ancient mufical inftruments 

„ hydraulic organ . . 
Rombouts, inftrument maker . 
Rofe, inventor of the bandoer . 
Rofs, viol maker . . . 
Roffi, Antonius, organ builder . 
RofTo, Annibaly fpinet maker . 



Page 
i5o 
142 
I4» 
117 
169 
316 

79 

3«>5 
244 

243 

»4t 

56 

«3 
62, 142 

309 
298 

211 

142 

117,142 

360 

142 

142 

100 

172 

122 

186 

226 

166 

167 

17 
109, 284 

375 
360 

291 

110 

147 
242 

257 
244 
244 

41 

41 

377 
333 

366 

375 
272, 275 



General Index, 



397 



Roti, mediaeval 

Rote 

Rotta 

Roumania, mafic i)f 
Ruckers, harpfichord makers . 

,y inftruments in the Mufeum 
Ruggeriy Tioliii maker 
Ruiz de Ribayaz, on the guitar 
Ruflian bagpipe . • 

bells .... 

horn band . 

violin 



» 



» 



ft 



Page 
104 

222 

96 

217 

278 

279, 283 

363 
253 
214 
127 
66 
204 



s. 



Sackbut, mediaeval . 

Sackpfeife, German 

Sacqueboute, trombone 

Sacred dramas in Peru 

Saib Chatir, Arabian lute player 

Sainpra, Jaques 

Sakafaka, rattle 

SalpinSy Grecian 

Salter, on the recorder 

Salterio, Italian 

Salterio tedefco 

Sambuca, Roman . 

Sambuka, Grecian . 

Sambyke, Grecian . 

Sampuris, fnake charmers 

Samfien, Japancfe . 

Sanafel, Abylfinian . 

Sancho, African 

Sandtus bell . 

San^s Seraphino, violin maker 

Sang, Chinefe 

San-heen, Chinefe . 

Sanfa, Negro inftrument 

Santiago da Compoftella 

from 
Santir, Arabian 
Egyptian 
Georgian 
Perfian 

,, Turkiih 
Saquebutte, trombone 
Sarafwati, Hindu goddefs of mufic 
Sarinda, Hindu 
Sar mundaly I^ndu 
Saningiy Hindu 
Saun, Burmeie 



» 



» 



it 



fculptu: 



re 



108 
214 
108 
88 
60 
266 
3o6 

39 
122 

344 

235 

42, 108 

34 
38 
57, 166 
3 10 
141 
3o8 
129 
364 

187 
181, 3ii 

297 

"5 
27,61 

205 

204 

62 
2o5 
108 

S3 

164,314 

205 

3i5 

»74 



» 



» 



Page 

Saz, Turkiih 210 

Scabillum, Roman .... 45 

Scale, Arabian .... 60 

Chinefe . . . 52 

Hindu 56 

„ pentatonic . . . 52 

Schalmey, German 117,226 

Scheidholt, German . . 33 1 

Schelle, lute maker 
Schellenbaum^ German . 
Schlagtither, German 
Schmidt, Bernhard, organ builder 
Schnitzer, inftrument maker . 
Scholar's lute, Chinefe . 
Schott, lute maker 
Schroter, fuppofed inventor of the 

pianoforte .... 
Schwegel, German . 
Sconvel^ Nicholas, lute maker 
Scotch bagpipe 

bagpipes in the Special Exhi 

bition 
harp .... 
hornpipe 
ftockhorn . 
tunes . 
Sculptures of mufical in- 
ftruments 

Sculptures of mediaeval or- 1 r o 

cheftras. . . ./ ^ 



n 



n 



9> 



n 



)) 



:} 



a44 
376 
258 

374 
227 

182, 312 

244 



357 
124 

^44 
214 



I2Sj 



374 
367 
373 
373 
86 



II, 21, 102. 112 



Scaou, Chinefe 
Seaou-po, Chinefe . 
Sebi, ancient Egyptian 
Seeng, Hindu 
Sein, Burmefe 
Sellas, Matteo, lute maker 
Senal, player on the nail- violin 
Serinette, bird organ 
Serpent, Englifh 
„ French 
Seiheih, ancient Egyptian 
Shah-Kuli, Perfian mufician 
Shakefpeare, his allufion to the bag- 



II 



II 



pipe 

II II 

netto curvo 



rr rr n 

di gamba 
Shaliihim, Hebrew . 
Shalm, oboe . 
Shaw, trumpet maker 
Shawm, mediaeval . 
Shena, Hindu 



^43; 



cor 



viola 



21 



183 
194 

17 
169 

177 

377 
268 

283 

319 

3ao 
,141 

207 

215 
292 



262 

33 

117,226 

37* 
117, 226 

87, 168 



398 



General Index. 



Page 

IT! 

211 

277, 352 
316 

174 
52,183 



»> 



19 



Shing, Burmefe 

Sho'ara, bards 

Shophar, Hebrew . 

Shudi, inftrument maker 

Siamefe harmonlcon 

,, (hinged inftrument 

Siao, Chinefe . 

Silberman, inftrument maker, hii 
cembal d'amour . 
his organs 
his pianofortes 

Simbing, Negro inftrument 

Simcock, maker of the bell-harp 

Sime-daiko, Japanefe 

Simmikon, Grecian 

Simpfon, his Divinon-Violift . 

Sine Keman, Turkifh 

Singee, Hindu 

Single corthol, Englifti 

Siftre, cither .... 

Siftrum, ancient Egyptian 
9f a Hebrew 

yt )i Roman 

Sitar, Hindu . 
„ Perfian . 

Situa, Inca Peruvian 

Skruibka, Ruffian . 

Smith, HandeFs amanuenfis 

„ " Father Smith," organ builder 
„ viol maker . 

Snake charmer's flute, Hindu . 

Soeligane, Japanefe . 

Sol-fa harmonicon . 

Soma, Hindu mufical theorift . 

Sordino, or pochette 261, 

„ in the Special Exhibition 

Souftarah, Perfian . 

Sound, various qualities of, on mufical 
inftruments . . . 121 

Sound-board, curious method of im- 
proving it 251 

Soung, Burmefe harp . . > 74, 295 

Soung-king, Chinefe ... 48 

Sourdeline, French . . 231 

Sou(bunou, of Timor . 306 

Spanifhviol .... 116,253 



357 
284 

358 

332 
197 

38 
263, 337 
204 
169 
227 
369 
21, 141 

33 
45 

315 

257 

83 
204 

279 

374 
366 

166 

198 

302 

56 

341 
3S9 

159 



»33 



292, 



SpalTa-penziero, Italian 
Special Exhibition of ancient mufical 
inftruments .... 
„ „ ftringed inftru- 

ments provided with a key- board . 
y> „ ftringed inftru- 

ments played with a bow 



172 

347 
349 
359 



Special Exhibition, harps, lutes, guitars, 
cithers, dulcimers, &c. 

„ „ trumpets, horns, 

and fimilar wind inftruments 

„ „ flutes, oboes, and 

fimilar wind inftruments 

,. „ organs and other 

inftruments containing organ pipes 
or tongues of metal . 

„ „ mifcellaneous 

inftruments .... 

,, „ Ethnological fedion 

Spinet ..... 

„ Englifti .... 

Spinets in the Special Exhibition 
Spitzharfe, arpanetta 
Square pianoforte . . . , 
Square fpine^ virginal 
Sruti, mufical intervals of the Hindus 
Stainer, J., violin maker . 



Page 



366 



370 
372 



374 

376 

378 

272-276 

290 

350 

367 

359 
269, 349 

56 
260 



» 



*» 



)t 



his inftruments in the 

Special Exhibition 363, 364 

Stanefl)y, wind inftrument maker 372, 373 

Stark, trumpet maker . 371 

Stegher, lute maker . 377 

Steiniche, fpinet maker . 350 

Steward, John, his pianoforte . . 303 

Stock-horn, Scotch 373 

Stones, fonorous, American . 81 

„ n Chinefe . 47 

„ „ European 48 

Stradiuarius, violin maker . 260 

his violins in the Special 

Exhibition . 362, 363 

his violoncellos in the 

Special Exhibition . 364 

„ double-bafs by 268 

Streichzither, German 259, 343 

Strings, various kinds ... i 

„ of the harpfichord . 353 

Suanets, their harp . 202 

Sultana, p(altery . 343 

Sumphonia, inftrument . . . 3^i 

„ Hebrew ... 3l 

Surdelina, Italian . . 231 

Suma*-e, Hindu . . . 168 

Surnay, Arabian . . ' . . 63 

Suroda, Hindu .... 96 

Suryaprabai, Hindu . . 170 

Swifs alphorn .... 320 

Sympathetic ftrings . 204, 265, 266, 339 

Symphonia, medixval . . . 104 

Syrian drum 144 



General Index, 



399 





Page 


Syrinx, Grcdan 


39 


„ Hebrew 


3i 


y, mediaeyal • 


io6 


J, Peruvian 


70 


„ Roman 


44 


„ Roomanian 


219 


Szopelica, Ruffian , 


221 



T. 



Tabl, drum, Egyptian 


146 


„ „ from Morocco 


299 


„ . beledee, Egyptian . 


146 


y, el mufahhir, Egyptian . 


144 


„ ihamee, Egyptian . 


M4 


Tabor 


124 


Tackt-i-Boftan, fculptures of . 


58 


Taki-goto, Japaneie 


194 


Tal, Hindu .... 


170 


Tamboura, Arabian 


60 


„ Aflyrian 


as 


„ ancient Egyptian 


17 


,, Hebrew ... 


30 


„ Indian . . . . 


161 


„ Turkiih 


209 


„ baghlama 


2o3, 309 


Tambour de Bafque 


21 5, 223 


Tambourine, Aflyrian 


*5 


» Egyptian, ancient 


19,20 


„ 1, modern 


147 


„ Englifh 


376 


„ French 


377 


„ Grecian, ancient . 


39 


„ Hindu 


170 


„ Turkifh . 


215 


„ Wallachian 


221 


Tam-tam . . . . < 


128 


Tanbour, tamboura 


162 


Tanbour baghlama . . . . 


209 


„ boulghary . 


209 


„ bouzourk . . . . 


209 


,, charqy . . . . 


209 


„ kebyr tourky 


209 


Tangents in the clavichord 


274 


Taqui, ancient Peruvian . 


84 


Tarai, Hindu .... 


169 


Tarau, Burmefe 


3«3 


Tarifio, Luigi, coUe^or of violins 


363, 365 


Tafchengeige, German . 


261 


Tafkin, Pafcal, inftrument maker 


278 


Taus, lute maker . 


*45 


Tche, Chinele^ute 


5* 



Page 
Tche, Chinefe ftringed inftrument 182, 312 

5« 

S« 

s« 

so 

48 

299 

364 

291 
227 

318, 373 

122 



»> 



t) 



224, 



Tchen, Chinefe plectrum 
Tchenk, Perfian harp 
Tchou, Chinefe 
Tchoung-tou, Chinefe 
Tchung, Chinefe bell 
Tebel, Morocco 
Techier, violin maker 
Telyn, Wel(h harp . 
Tenor baflfoon 

flute 

viol 
Tenors in the Special Exhibition 
Teponaztii of the Aztecs 
Tefinfak, Abyilinian 
Teftudo, Roman 
Teftudo theorbata . 
Te-tchung, Chinefe 
Tetrachord . 
Thalia, Hindu 
Thebes, celebrated harps of 
Thembogyoung, Burmefe 
Theorbe, French 
Theorbino 
Theorbo 

„ Englifh 
Thompfon, inventor of a tuning ma 

chine 
Threwes, inftrument maker 
Thro, Burmefe 
Tibia, ancient Roman 
Tibia curva and Hgula 

dextra and finiftra . 

gingrina 

obliqua and vafca . 

utricularis 
Tibiae pares and impares . 
Tieflfenbrucker, Leonhard, lute maker 244, 32a 

y, Magnus, lute maker . 244 

„ Vendelino, lute maker 244 

Tielke, Joachim, inftru- 1 , , 

ment maker . .} «47, »64. .65, 337 

Tintinnabula, Roman 

Tintinnabulum, mediaeval 

Tinya, ftringed inftrument of the Inca 

Peruvians . 
Tiorba, Italian 
Tjantjan, Japanefe 
Tobilets, double drum 
Tononi, Carolus, violin maker 
Toomerie, Hindu . 
Toomerie Nagaflaran, Hindu 
Toontoonee, Hindu 



»> 



f) 



}> 



f» 



363 
76 

153 
4« 

3*1 

48 
86 

171 

II 

»74 
24s 

325 
242, 324 

321 

345 

375 

3"3 
17,42 

43 
43 
43 
43 
44 
43 



45 
112 



82 
242 
198 
299 

377 

57, 166 

168 

163 



400 



General Index, 



t9 



ff 



l> 



» 



f> 



9» 



n 



>9 



>9 



99 



>» 



7> 



» 



71 



M 



»> 



Page 
87, 169 
296 
32 
261 
268 
378 

339 
112 



Tooree, Hindu . . • 
Tootooree, Hindu . 
Toph, Hebrew 
Tourte, violin bow maJcer 
Trager, inventor of the Nagelclavier 
Trafuntino, inftnuncnt maker . 
Treble-viol .... 
Triangle, mediaeval 

Triangulum, ancient Roman . 45 

Trigonon, AfTyrian . . . . 23 

„ ancient Egyptian . . 13 

„ ancient Grecian . . 38 

Trigonumy ancient Roman . . 42 

Triple flageolet, Englifh . . . 317 

„ harp, Welih . . 291 

Tromba, Italian . 172 

„ marina .... 377 

„ piccola . . . . 371 

Trombone, German • . . 371 

„ mediaeval . . . 108 

Trompe, French . . . . 172 

Trumbfcheit, tromba marina . . 377 

Trumpets, Aflyrian . . 25 

of the Bhooteas . . 296 

Burmefe . 295 

Egyptian, ancient . . 19,20 
EngUih . . . 371, 372 

German . . . 371 

Grecian, ancient -. . 39 

Hebrew ... 32 

Hindu .... 296 

Irifli .... 370 

Negro . . 152 

Roman, ancient . 44 

Scandinavian . . 370 

of the American Indians . 72 

of the Anglo-Saxons . 107 

Tfang, Chinefe . . . . 3'* 

Tfchengjir of the Suaneta . . 202 
Tfchudi,Burkhardt, inftrumcnt maker 277,352 

Tfeing, Burmefe . . . . 1 77 

Tfe-king, Chinefe .... 48 

Tfluin, Burmefe . . . 177 

Tfinc, Burmefe . . . . 177 

Tuba, ancient Roman ... 44 

Tung-keo, Chinefe . . . 185 

Tung-lo, Chinefe . . . 19a 

Tuning machine .... 345 

Tuk-kay, Siamefe . . . 1 74 

Ture, American Indian . . . 73 

Turkifh cymbals .... 207 

dulcimer .... 205 

flute 212 



Turkifh tamboura . 
Ty, Chmefe . 
Tympanon, ancient Grecian 
Tympanum, ancient Roman 
Tseltzelim, Hebrew 
Tzetze, African • 



u. 



Page 
209 
52,182 

39 

45 

33 
162,296 



Ugab, Hebrew 


. 3»,*»o 


Ujuk, Perftan 


157 


Univerfalclavicymbel 


. . 378 


Upright fpinet 


. . 351 


Urbinas, Auguftinus Citaroedus 


257 


Ur-heen, Chinefe . 


178,313 


„ its fuppofed origin 


57 


Urquhart, violin maker . 


366 


UvendelJo Veneto, lute maker 


. 377 



V. 

Valga, Negro inflrument . 
Vanhecke, inventor of the bifTex 
Venere, Vendelino, lute maker 
Ventura, teacher of the harp-lute 
Veffels, mufical, of the American 

Indians .... 
Vicentino, inventor of the archicem 

balo 

Viera da Silva, infbumcnt maker 
Vielle, viol, mediaeval . 112, 

Viellc, hurdy-gurdy 

compofidons for 

the 
vtrtuofo on the 



,, 



» 



>, 



ji 



99 



>» 



99 

en guitare 
en luth 
organifee 
Vihucla, Spanifh 
Vina, Hindu . 
Vincentius Venaccio, mandoline 

maker 
Viol, mediaeval 
treble . 
counter-tenor 
tenor . 
bafs « 

haute-contre, French 
Lyra-way, Englifh . 



112, 



» 



» 



t> 



99 



}} 



307 
251 

244 
328 

75 

378 

330 
114, 222 

^33 

234 
a 34 
134 
234 

345 
116,253 

53,159 



„ 



335 
114, 116 

339 
338 

338 
338 

341 
266 



General Index, 



401 







Page 


Viol, par-deflus, French . 


342 


f> < 


juinton, French 


34» 


Viola, 


tenor, in the Special Exhibitior 


i 363 


Viola, 


d*amore . ' . 


339 


9i 


ftrung with wire . 


340 


i9 


in the Special Exhibition 


36o 


t> 


di bardone . . . . 


264 


if 


di braccio . . . < 


259 


i9 


di Agotto , 


266 


n 


da gamba, in the Special Ex- 






hibition . 


36i 


9* 


„ Englifli 


122, 336 


if 


„ German 262, 


263, 336 


n 


„ Italian 


262 


a 


„ feven-ftringed 


338,361 


n 


„ four-ftringed 


36i 


a 


„ played by ladies 


262 


19 


di rpala 


263 


Viole d^amour, viola d*amore . 


204, 341 


>» 


de bourdon . 


266 


Violetta piccola 


341 


Violin, its fuppolcd Eaftern origin 


56 


i* 


Abyflinian . 


309 


a 


Burmefe 


. 3'3 


n 


Chinefe . 


178 


» 


Circaffian . 


203 


a 


German 


259 


a 


Hindu 


164,314 


a 


Ruffian 


204 


ii 


Turklih 


204,210 


a 


offilver 


363 


a 


given by Queen Elizabeth to 




the Earl of Leicefter . 


287 


Violin bow, Hindu 


56 


a 


„ old-fa/hioned 


342 


ti 


„ modern 


261 


Violina picciola a la francefe . 


36o 


Violins in the Mufeum . 


259,342 


ii 


in the Special Exhibition 


362 


Violone, double-bafs 


267 


Violoncello, its origin 


263 


Violoncellos in the Special Exhibition 364 


Virginal . . . 269 


f 270, 271 


ii 


mufic for the 


271 


Virginals in the Special Exhibition 


349 


Viffandfchi, Negro inftrument 


297 


Voigt, Martin, viol maker 


263 


VoU, 


, Georg, regal maker 


375 


Vox humana, organ regifter 


262 


Vuillaume, J. B.y violin maker 


261 



w. 





Page 


Wainambinen, Finniih demi-god 


54 


Wait, mediaeval . . . . 


117 


Waldhorn, German 


371 


Walker, inftrument maker 


3»7 


Wallachian mufic . . . . 


217 


„ bagpipe 


220 


„ flute . . . . 


220 


„ lute . . . . 


219 


„ mountain horn 


217 


„ oboe . . . . 


221 


„ tambourine . 


221 


„ fyrinx . . . . 


219 


Walther, on the regal 


375 


„ on the virginal . 


274 


Wambee, Negro inftrument 


3o8 


Warrau Indians, their mufical per- 




formances .... 


66 


WeUh bagpipe 


214 


„ cornicyll 


293 


„ crwth 


294 


„ harp, teljrn . 


294 


„ hornpipe, pibgorn . 


293 


Whittles, prc-hiftoric 


9 


„ Auftrian, modem 


224 


„ Babylonian, ancient . 


285 


a Egyptian, modem 


143 


„ Mexican, ancient 


. 65, 285 


„ Spanifh . 


224 


Wilde, inventor of the nail violin 


343 


Wildgren, inftrument maker . 


302 


Wilhelmi, clavichord maker . 


. 275 


Wolf, Magnus, trumpet maker 


. 371 


Wolynka, Ruffian bagpipe 


214 


Womum, inftrument maker . 


326 



Y. 



Yang-kin, Chinefe dulcimer 


182,312 


Ye-yin, Chinefe fiddle . 


178 


Yo, Chinefe flute . 


. 52,184 


Yo Poo, Chinefe . 


85 


Yotl of the Aztecs . 


80 


Yu, fonorous ftone, Chinefe , 


47 


Yue-kin, Chinefe . 


179, 3io 


Yun-lo, Chinefe , 


192 



402 



General Index. 



z. 




Page 


Zampogna, Italian bagpipe 




ai4» 374 


Zamr, Arabian 




117 


Zanure, viol maker 




360 


ZjltizCj Negro inftrument 




297 


Zikrs, of the Dcrvifhes 




145 


Zil,Turkifli . 




207 


Zinken, German . 


230, 


292, 372 


Zither, cither 


ass, 


158, 331 



Zitterlein, fmall cither 
Zouggarah, Egyptian 
2^urna, Eaftern oboe 

,y Hindu 
Zourna, Vezirii 
Zummarah, double pipe 

„ bi-foan 

Zumpe, his pianoforte with demi- 

femitones 

2^mpe and Mayer, pianolbrtie makers 
Zwblfchbrige cither, German . 



Page 

330 
214 

117 

167 
213 
213 
214 

378 
359 
339 



LONDON: 

Printed by George Edward Eyre and William Spottiswoode, 
Printers to the Queen*8 moft Excellent Majefty. 

For Her Majefty's Stationery Office. 

[9644. — 1000 & 25.-3/74.] 



r\/Ait 5^'-^ 



rV/'-i-C^cr-' 



