UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA,  SAN  DIEGO 


3  1822  02605  9733 


^^^^^^^Bi                       T.:at]iJCTB 

HKI 

^^^^^^^Wj                   ^  ^nl 

NDENGY 


:^ 


zf 


3  1822  02605  9733 


A    TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 


A  TROPICAL 
DEPENDENCY 

An  Outline  of  the  Ancient 
History  of  the  Western  Soudan 
with  an  Account  of  the  Modern 
Settlement  of  Northern   Nigeria 


BY 


FLORA    L.    SHAW 

(LADY   LUGARD) 


llonDon 
JAMES    NISBET    ^    CO.,    LIMITED 
2t    BERNERS   STREET 

1905 


Printed  by  Ballantyne,  Hanson  &  Co. 
At  the  Ballantyne  Press 


\ 


TO 

^MT   HUSBAND 


CONTENTS 


I.  Introductory 

II.  Conquest    of    North    Ap^rica    and    Spain    by    the 
Arabs 

III.  Arab  Civilisation  in  Spain 

IV.  The  Empire  of  "The  Two  Shores". 
V.  African  Rule  in  Spain       .... 

VI.  Decline  of  Mohammedan  Power  in  Spain 
VII.  Spanish  Arabs  in  Africa    .... 
VIII.  The  Soudanese  States        .... 
IX.  Negroland  and  the  Western  Arabs 

X.  Berber  and  Black 

XL  The  Trade  of  Ghana  .... 

XII.  Morabite  Conquest  of  the  Soudan  . 

XIII.  Ghana  and  Timbuctoo         .... 

XIV.  The  Mellestine 

XV.  Mansa  Musa 

XVI.  Ibn  Batuta  in  Melle  .... 

XVII.  Administration  of  the  Mellestine  . 
XVIII.  Meeting  of  Eastern  and  Western  Influence  upon 
the  Niger      ...... 

XIX.  Rise  of  the  Songhay  Empire     ... 
XX.  Military  Conquests  of  Sonni  Ali     . 
XXI.  AsKiA  Mohammed  Abou  Bekr     ... 
XXII.  Songhay  under  Askia  the  Great 

XXIII.  Songhay  under  Askia  the  Great  {conti7iued) 

XXIV.  The  Later  Askias 

XXV.  Ancient     Connection     of     Haussaland    with 

Valley  of  the  Nile      .... 
XXVI.  The  Pharaohs  in  Haussaland   . 
XXVII.  The  Haussa  States     ..... 
XXVIII.  The  Domination  of  Kano 


PAGE 
I 

24 

31 
50 
58 
67 

73 
78 

83 

90 

100 

107 

113 

117 
122 
129 

T42 

153 
163 

174 
181 
190 
199 
21 1 

218 

227 
236 
245 


Vlll 


CONTENTS 


CHAP. 

XXIX.  Haussaland  to  the  End  of  the  Eighteenth  Cen- 
tury   ....... 

XXX.    BORNU 

XXXI.  Condition    of  the   Soudan   at  the    End   of    the 

Sixteenth  Century   .... 
XXXII.  The  Moorish  Conquest   .... 

XXXIII.  The  Soudan  under  the  Moors 

XXXIV.  The  Soudan  Closed  to  the  Western  World 
XXXV.  Europe  in  West  Africa    .... 

XXXVI.  The  European  Slave  Trade    . 
XXXVII.  England  and  France  on  the  Lower  Niger 
XXXVIII.  The  Royal  Niger  Company  . 
XXXIX.  Transfer  of  Niger  Company's  Territories  to  th 
Crown         ...... 

XL.  Origin  of  the  Fulani      .... 

XLI.  Rise  of  the  Fulani  in  the  Soudan 
XLII.  Sultan  Bello   ...... 

XLIII.  Northern  Nigeria  under  Fulani  Rule 

XLIV.  Sla\'E-raiding 

XLV.  The  Establishment  of  British  Administration 
XLVI.  Military  Occupation  of  the  Southern  Emirates 

and  Bornu  ..... 

XLVII.  Conquest  of  Sokoto  and  Kano 
XLVIII.  British  Policy  in  Northern  Nigeria     . 
XLIX.  Nigeria  under  British  Rule  :   Slavery  . 
L.  Nigeria  under  British  Rule  :   Taxation 
LI.  Nigeria  under  British  Rule:  Justice  and  Gene 
RAL  Reorganisation    .... 
LII.  Economic  Resources  of  Northern  Nigeria 
LI II.  The  Development  of  Trade  . 


258 
268 

282 
296 
306 

315 
322 

333 
348 
356 

366 

373 
381 
390 

399 
408 

417 

426 
438 
449 
460 
466 

476 

485 
491 


INDEX 


501 


"^ 


A  TROPICAL  DEPENDENCY 


CHAPTER  I 

INTRODUCTORY 

It  has  become  the  habit  of  the  British  mind  to  think  of 
the  British  Empire  as  a  white  empire.  But,  as  a  matter  of 
fact,  we  all  know  that  ours  is  not  a  white  empire.  Out 
of  an  estimated  population  of  413,000,000,  only  52,000,000, 
or  one  In  eight,  are  white.  Out  of  a  territory  of  16,000,000 
square  miles,  which  extends  ^^eK,^  quarter  of  the  globe, 
about  4,000,000  square  mile^^<?br  a^yarter  of  the  whole, 
lies  within  the  tropics.  r    o    »     / 

The  administration  <^  jtMs^goarter  of  the  Empire 
cannot  be  conducted  on  the  ^uirciple  of  self-government 
as  that  phrase  is  underwood  J^  white  men.  It  must  be 
more  or  less  in  the  natureVn"  an  autocracy  which  leaves 
with  the  rulers  full  responsibility  for  the  prosperity  of  the 
ruled.  The  administration  of  India,  where  this  aspect  of 
the  question  has  been  long  appreciated,  is  among  the 
successes  of  which  the  British  people  is  most  justly  proud. 
The  work  done  by  England  in  Egypt  is  another  proof 
of  our  capacity  for  autocratic  rule.  We  are  justified 
therefore  In  thinking  of  ourselves  as  a  people  who  may 
face  with  reasonable  hopes  of  success  still  vaster  questions 
of  tropical  administration. 

We  stand  now  at  an  interesting  moment  in  our  history. 
The  most  pressing  questions  which  are  connected  with 
the  self-governing  colonies  would  seem  to  have  been 
settled ;  attention  and  interest  are  set  free  to  turn  them- 
selves towards  other    channels  ;  and  simultaneously   with 

A 


2  A   TROPICAL   DEPENDENCY 

this  liberation  of  public  sympathy  the  direction  of  a  new 
development  is  indicated  by  circumstances  of  almost 
irresistible  significance. 

Within  the  last  five-and-twenty  years  we  have  acquired 
in  tropical  Africa  alone  territories  of  which  the  area 
exceeds  by  one-half  the  whole  extent  of  British  India. 
These,  and  othtr  colonies  and  dependencies  which  lie 
within  the  tropics,  now  call  for  some  of  the  same 
care  and  attention  which  have  helped  to  make  India 
what  it   is. 

In  nearly  all  the  tropical  colonies  there  is  much  fertile 
land  which  already  produces  some  of  the  most  necessary 
and  valuable  raw  materials  of  trade.  Cotton,  silk,  rice, 
rubber,  sugar,  coffee,  tea,  oils,  drugs,  dyes  and  spices,  gold 
and  gems,  and  other  important  elements  of  civilised 
industry,  are  home,  products  of  our  tropics.  But  in  very 
few  of  the  colonies  have  these  products  been  developed  to 
anything  approaching  the  natural  capacity  of  their  sources 
of  origin.  In  many  parts  of  the  colonies  the  resources  of 
nature  have  not  been  cultivated  at  all.  Valuable  com- 
modities produce  themselves  and  grow  wild  —  unsown, 
unreaped.  The  increase  which  might  result  to  British 
trade  by  a  mere  opening  of  the  markets  that  lie  as  yet 
unapproached  within  the  Empire,  is  past  calculation. 
Such  opening  would  necessarily  be  reciprocal  in  its  action, 
and  every  market  of  supply  over  which  our  administration 
extended  would  automatically  become  a  market  of  con- 
sumption for  manufactured  goods.  At  home  the  very 
prosperity  of  our  trade  creates  a  demand  for  expansion. 
And  these  potential  markets  are  our  own.  We  may  do 
as  we  will  within  them. 

The  cultivation  of  our  tropical  lands  involves,  we  are 
sometimes  told,  questions  of  transport  and  labour  which 
are  too  difficult  to  touch.  Of  these  the  question  of 
transport  within  the  limits  of  our  own  colonies  and 
protectorates  is  very  largely  a  question  of  money,  and 
its  difficulties  may  easily  be  made  to  disappear  whenever 
a  real  demand  for  transport  shall  arise.     The  question  of 


INTRODUCTORY  3 

labour  is  more  serious.  Tropical  labour  is  coloured  labour, 
and  we  have  not  yet  faced  the  question  of  organising  free 
coloured  labour.  But  that  this  question  has  not  yet  been 
faced  is  not  a  reason  why  the  difficulties  attending  it 
should  be  regarded  as  insurmountable.  They  must  be 
reckoned  among  the  most  interesting  problems  of  tropical 
administration. 

The  industrial  development  of  ancient  civilisations  was 
largely  based  on  slavery,  and,  from  the  earliest  periods 
of  which  history  has  any  record,  countries  lying  within 
the  tropics — always  prolific  of  population — were  raided  to 
supply  the  slave-markets  of  the  world.  It  was  thought 
worth  while  in  the  great  days  of  Egypt,  Persia,  Greece, 
Rome,  and  mediaeval  Spain,  to  be  at  the  expense  of 
sending  caravans  into  the  Soudan  for  slaves,  who  had 
to  be  hunted  and  caught  in  the  tropical  regions  further 
south.  Notwithstanding  the  cost  of  the  overland  journey, 
the  expense  and  waste  of  slave-hunting,  and  the  large 
percentage  of  deaths  which  occurred  in  transit,  the  labour 
of  Africa  was  considered  valuable  enough  to  be  worth 
transporting  to  any  market  in  which  it  was  required.  The 
trade  was  continued  through  the  Middle  Ages,  and  under 
modern  conditions  of  steam  shipping  and  travelling  it  was 
still  found  worth  while  less  than  fifty  years  ago  to  carry 
African  labour  to  America. 

We  have  abolished  slavery,  and,  as  a  consequence,  it 
has  been  assumed  that  the  labour  which  once  supplied 
the  great  industries  of  the  world  has  ceased  to  have  any 
value. 

This  is  a  curious  anomaly,  for  which,  however,  many 
explanatory  reasons  might  be  produced.  Coloured  labour, 
without  the  control  which  the  master  exercises  over  the 
slave,  has  its  peculiar  difficulties.  In  the  face  of  them 
the  civilised  communities  of  the  Western  world  have 
abandoned  the  use  of  coloured  labour,  and  the  intro- 
duction of  industrial  and  agricultural  machinery,  which 
began  almost  coincidently  with  the  abolition  of  slavery, 
has    minimised    the  consequences   of  the  loss.     The  fact 


4  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

is  not  altered  that  African  labour  had  through  many- 
ages  of  the  world's  history  a  very  high  marketable  value. 
That  this  labour  still  exists,  that  it  is  native  to  an  im- 
mense area  of  the  tropical  colonies,  and  that  it  will 
rapidly  increase  in  volume  under  the  conditions  of  peace 
and  security  introduced  by  British  administration,  are 
factors  of  great  importance  in  considering  the  possible 
development  of  the  resources  of  these  colonies.  To 
construct  a  bridge  between  the  old  system  of  civilisation 
and  the  new,  by  finding  means  to  organise  as  free  labour 
the  labour  which  preceding  generations  could  only  use 
enslaved,  would  be  to  lead  the  way  in  a  very  sensible 
advance  beyond  the  first  and  necessary  step  of  the  aboli- 
tion of  slavery. 

In  speaking  of  ancient  civilisations,  I  have  not  men- 
tioned the  ancient  civilisations  of  the  Far  East,  where  in- 
dustry is  believed  to  have  been  first  carried  to  the  highest 
pitch.  The  industries  of  the  Far  East  were  supplied 
with  other  than  African  labour.  From  the  earliest  times 
the  Chinese  have  been  famed  for  manual  dexterity,  and 
Eastern  industries  have  been  based  upon  yellow  labour. 
Yellow  labour  was  carried  to  a  far  higher  degree  of 
perfection  than  black  labour  ever  seems  to  have  attained, 
and  yellow  labour  has  never  been  thrown  out  of  employ- 
ment. The  products  of  its  industries  were  always  largely 
imported  by  the  nations  which  owned  black  slaves.  It 
retains  to-day  the  dexterity  for  which  it  was  famous 
in  the  period  of  the  Pharaohs,  But  the  kingdoms  of 
the  East  having  risen  earlier  to  a  condition  of  cohesion 
in  which  they  were  able  to  protect  their  subjects,  and 
having  also  from  a  very  early  period  maintained  the 
policy  of  exclusion  practised  by  Egypt  in  its  greatest 
days,  yellow  labour  has  never  been  used  to  supply  the 
slave-markets  of  the  West.  Western  communities  have 
felt  the  same  repugnance  to  the  employment  of  free 
Chinese  labour  that  they  felt  to  the  employment  of  free 
African  labour,  and  we  have  had  to  wait  for  the  present 
conjunction   of    events    in    order    to    see    yellow    labour. 


INTRODUCTORY  5 

under  the  direction  of  intelligence  as  acute  as  any 
intelligence  of  the  West,  prepare  to  enter  into  com- 
petition with  white  labour  in  the  industrial  markets  of 
the  world. 

That  Japan,  which  has  now  established  its  military 
and  naval  ascendancy  on  the  shores  of  the  Pacific,  will 
proceed  to  the  fuller  development  of  its  industrial  re- 
sources, is  scarcely  doubtful.  The  labour  of  China  is 
under  its  hand.  We  have  therefore  an  additional  reason 
to  take  stock  of  our  imperial  and  of  our  industrial  position. 
We  have  within  our  Empire  a  body  of  coloured  labour 
greater  than  any  which  Japan  can  at  present  command. 
There  is  nothing  to  prevent  us  from  attracting  by  immi- 
gration as  much  more  as  we  please.  But  in  order  to  use 
our  own,  or  to  attract  more  with  profit  to  the  Empire, 
we  must  face  the  whole  question  of  tropical  administra- 
tion. We  must  study  with  an  open  mind  the  thorny 
questions  of  native  labour.  We  must  prepare  and  make 
known  those  parts  of  hitherto  undeveloped  colonies  to 
which  it  may  be  considered  desirable  to  attract  labour. 
We  must  introduce  systems  of  transport  by  means  of 
which  not  only  the  fruits  of  labour  but  labour  itself  may 
be  able  to  circulate  within  the  Empire.  We  must,  no 
doubt,  in  many  instances  recast  our  local  labour  laws. 
We  must  frankly  recognise  the  fact  that  labour  is  the 
foundation  upon  which  development  rests. 

We  may  at  the  same  time  have  the  .satisfaction,  even 
in  our  earliest  beginnings,  of  knowing  that  the  develop- 
ment of  the  tropical  colonies,  if  we  undertake  it  seriously, 
will  not  end  with  industrial  development.  There  are 
many  sides  to  the  history  of  nations,  and  in  the  attempt 
to  introduce  order  and  industry  into  the  at  present  un- 
civilised areas  of  many  of  our  tropical  possessions,  we 
shall  no  doubt  meet  with  innate  powers  unsuspected 
now,  that  in  more  favourable  conditions  may  blossom 
into  life. 

Our  fathers,  by  a  self-denying  ordinance,  did  what  they 
could  to  set  the  subject  populations   free.      It  was   nobly 


6  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

conceived,  and  civilisation  has  profited  by  the  step  in 
human  progress  that  was  made.  But  the  actual  enjoy- 
ment of  freedom  is  still  far  from  the  African  native. 
If  we  could  realise  the  dream  of  abolition  by  carrying 
freedom  to  every  village,  and  so  direct  our  administra- 
tion that  under  it  the  use  of  liberty  would  be  learned, 
we  should  be  filling  a  place  that  any  nation  might  be 
proud  to  hold  in  the  annals  of  civilisation.  It  is  not 
a  mere  unworthy  dream  of  gain  which  turns  our  eyes 
towards  the  tropics.  It  is  a  great  opportunity  which 
seems  to  be  presenting  itself  in  national  life,  one  which 
affords  scope  for  the  best  qualities  and  highest  talents 
that  we  can  command. 

It  is  not,  therefore,  surprising  that  interest  in  tropical 
questions  should  of  late  have  become  more  general,  and 
it  is  only  when  we  begin  to  think  about  them  that  we 
realise  how  very  little  we  know  of  some  of  our  newer 
possessions  in  the  tropics.  A  recognition  of  this  ignor- 
ance on  my  own  part  in  relation  to  the  interior  of  West 
Africa  has  led  me  to  study  such  authorities  as  I  could 
find,  and,  with  a  very  profound  sense  of  my  own  incom- 
petence in  dealing  with  a  subject  which  demands  the 
care  and  attention  of  an  accomplished  Oriental  scholar,  I 
have  put  together  a  little  account  of  the  general  move- 
ment of  civilisation  in  the  Western  Soudan  which  may 
perhaps  serve  rather  as  a  basis  for  future  criticism  than 
for  any  of  the  permanent  purposes  of  history.  Fresh 
information  comes  almost  daily  to  light  in  the  territories 
occupied  by  civilised  powers,  which  will  doubtless  elucidate 
many  points  now  left  obscure,  and  rectify  mistaken  con- 
clusions. In  the  meantime,  what  I  have  been  able  to 
gather,  in  part  from  original  manuscripts,  but  chiefly  from 
translations  of  Arab  historians,  may  interest  some  of 
those  who,  like  myself,  desire  to  have  a  connected  idea 
of  the  civilisations  which  have  preceded  our  own  in  our 
lately  acquired  territories  in  the  interior  of  West  Africa. 
I  am,  of  course,  chiefly  concerned  with  the  territories  of 
the  protectorate  lying  on  the  watershed  of  the  Niger  and 


INTRODUCTORY  7 

the  Benue,  of  which  the  administration  was  only  assumed 
by  the  British  Government  on  the  ist  of  January  1900, 
By  this  occupation  an  entirely  new  chapter  has  been 
opened  in  the  relations  of  Great  Britain  with  West 
Africa. 

Nigeria — as  we  call  our  latest  dependency — is  not 
properly  a  name.  It  cannot  be  found  upon  a  map  that  is 
ten  years  old.  It  is  only  an  English  expression  which  has 
been  made  to  comprehend  a  number  of  native  states  cover- 
ing about  500,000  square  miles  of  territory  in  that  part  of 
the  world  which  we  call  the  Western  Soudan.  Ancient 
geographers  called  the  same  section  of  Africa  sometimes 
Soudan,  sometimes  Ethiopia,  sometimes  Nigritia,  some- 
times Tekrour,  sometimes  and  more  often  Genewah  or 
Genowah — which,  by  the  European  custom  of  throwing 
the  accent  to  the  fore  part  of  the  word,  has  become 
Guinea ;  sometimes  they  called  it  simply  Negroland. 
Always,  and  in  every  form,  their  name  for  it  meant  the 
Land  of  the  Blacks.  Genowah,  pronounced  with  a  hard 
G,  is  a  native  word  signifying  "black."  It  is  so  generally 
used  to  designate  blacks  that  at  the  present  day,  among 
the  Arabs  of  Egypt  and  the  Moors  of  Morocco — that  is, 
at  both  exits  from  the  desert — I  have  myself  heard  it 
applied  to  the  negroes  of  the  Soudan.  From  the  earliest 
periods  of  which  we  have  any  knowledge,  Blackland  has 
stretched,  as  it  stretches  now,  from  the  west  coast  of 
Africa  to  the  east,  along  that  line  of  successive  waterways 
which  begins  with  the  mouth  of  the  Senegal,  and  ends 
only  at  the  southern  mouth  of  the  Red  Sea. 

If  the  north  of  Africa  be  considered  as  a  whole  it 
divides  itself  into  three  great  main  sections,  all  of  which 
run,  like  the  Land  of  the  Blacks,  east  and  west.  There 
is  first,  outside  the  tropics  and  within  the  zone  of  winter 
rains,  the  historic  coast  strip  stretching  along  the  Medi- 
terranean shore  from  the  mouths  of  the  Nile  to  Cape 
Spartel.  A  range  of  mountains  at  its  back  receding 
towards  the  western  end  separates  it  from  the  deserts 
and  gives  to   its  fertile   lands  the  shelter  and   the  water 


8  A   TROPICAL   DEPENDENCY 

which  they  need.  These  mountains  have  been  as  the 
stronghold  of  civilisation  to  the  coast.  Behind  them  on 
the  southern  slopes  there  is  a  belt  of  land  on  which  the 
date  palm  flourishes,  salt  mines  abound,  and  flocks  and 
herds  can  find  subsistence.  In  this  belt  there  are  even 
spots  of  great  fertility,  and  there  are  parts  in  which  it 
widens,  spreading  with  fertile  promontories  into  the  desert. 
But  in  its  nature  this  southern  face  of  the  hills,  known  to 
the  ancients  as  the  Land  of  Dates,  is  but  an  offshoot  of 
the  coast  strip. 

It  merires  soon  into  the  deserts  of  the  rainless  zone 
which  form  the  second  great  section  of  North  Africa. 
From  the  Atlantic  coast  to  the  Nile  these  deserts,  under 
different  names,  succeed  each  other  across  the  continent 
in  a  broad  belt  of  desolation.  Upon  the  map  they  cover 
an  area  of  between  ten  and  fifteen  degrees  of  latitude. 
At  their  narrowest  parts  the  caravans  which  traverse 
them  count  upon  a  march  of  fifty  days.  They  are  in 
part  composed  of  drifting  sand,  through  v/hich  only  long 
practised  local  guides  can  find  their  way  ;  they  are  prac- 
tically waterless,  and  it  is  of  course  only  in  places  where 
springs  are  known  to  exist  that  the  passage  of  them  is 
possible.  Marmol,  a  Spanish  writer  of  the  sixteenth 
century,  gives  an  interesting  description  of  how  these 
wells  were  preserved  in  his  day.  "  They  are,"  he  says, 
"walled  inside  with  camels'  bones  for  want  of  stones,  and 
they  are  also  covered  with  camels'  skins  lest  the  shifting 
sands  should  blow  over  them  and  fill  them  up.  The 
natural  consequence  is  that  even  when  there  the  wells 
are  often  hidden,  and  the  traveller  may  die  of  thirst  within 
a  few  feet  of  water." 

With  the  hot  sands  of  the  deserts  the  continent  passes 
into  the  tropics,  and  here  again  a  natural  barrier  marks 
the  third  great  division  of  North  Africa.  A  straight  line 
drawn  upon  the  seventeenth  parallel  of  latitude  will  mark 
the  edge  of  the  zone  of  summer  rains.  Slightly  to  the 
south  of  it  may  be  traced  the  great  water-belt  formed  by 
the   courses   of  the    Senegal,  the    Niger,  the    Benue,   the 


INTRODUCTORY  9 

rivers  of  Haussaland,  Lake  Chad,  the  Shari,  the  lakes  and 
rivers  of  Wadai  and  Darfour,  the  Bahr  el  Gazal,  and  the 
sources  of  the  Nile,  which,  with  their  network  of  tribu- 
taries, fertilise  the  land  from  the  Atlantic  Ocean  to  the 
mountains  of  Abyssinia.  Other  great  lakes  and  rivers 
traverse  the  continent  farther  south.  The  waterways  that 
I  have  named  suffice,  with  the  Nile,  to  arrest  the  advance 
of  the  northern  deserts  and  to  place  round  them  a  border 
of  luxuriant  vegetation. 

Thus  in  silent  prehistoric  ages  the  rough  outlines  of 
the  destiny  of  North  Africa  were  traced.  There  was  a 
fertile  strip  in  the  temperate  zone,  and  near  an  easily 
navigable  sea  ;  there  was  a  great  barren  strip  in  the 
waterless  desert  near  to  nothing  which  could  encourage 
human  occupation  ;  there  was  another  fertile  strip  in  the 
tropic  zone  well  watered,  but  sealess — save  at  its  western 
and  eastern  extremities,  where  on  the  western  coast  a 
lack  of  good  harbourage  discouraged  navigation — miasmic, 
of  a  climate  very  different  from  that  of  the  strip  upon  the 
northern  coast ;  and,  running  north  and  south,  connecting 
these  three  which  lay  parallel  to  one  another,  there  was 
the  wonderfully  fertilised  Valley  of  the  Nile. 

It  was  almost  a  foregone  conclusion  that  one  race 
should  inhabit  the  coast  and  a  wholly  different  race  the 
tropics  ;  and  that  civilisation  of  a  no  less  different  sort 
should  spring  up  in  both  zones.  Separated  as  they 
were  by  the  deserts,  it  was  natural  that  connection 
between  them  should  be  maintained  by  that  Valley  of 
the  Nile  which  has  made  itself  immortal  in  the  name 
of  Egypt. 

It  is  accordingly  to  Egypt  that  we  look  for  all  our 
earliest  information  concerning  the  Land  of  Blacks,  and 
it  is  to  Egypt,  and  through  Egypt  to  Asia  Minor  and 
Arabia,  that  the  blacks  themselves  trace  their  oldest 
traditions. 

As  it  is  impossible  to  appreciate  the  position  of  Western 
Negroland  in  the  history  of  the  world  without  reference 
to  the  movements  of  other  civilisations  by  which  it  was 


lo  A   TROPICAL   DEPENDENCY 

influenced,  it  may  be  useful,  at  the  risk  of  repeating  very- 
familiar  facts,  briefly  to  recall  some  of  the  commonly 
accepted  dates  relating  to  the  rise  and  fall  of  the  early 
civilisations  of  the  Mediterranean. 

The  great  period  of  Egyptian  civilisation,  including 
that  of  the  southern  end  of  the  Nile  Valley,  under  its 
Ethiopian,  Coptic,  and  Libyan  Pharaohs,  extends  from 
an  antiquity  which  recent  excavations  tend  to  show  ever 
more  remote,  to  the  conquest  of  Egypt  by  Cambyses, 
King  of  Persia,  B.C.  527.  Egypt  then  became  a  province 
of  the  Persian  Empire.  It  was  in  the  early  period,  before 
the  time  of  Herodotus  and  Cambyses,  that  Egypt  would 
seem  to  have  given  the  first  inspiration  of  civilised  life 
to  Western  Negroland.  It  remained  a  dependency  of 
the  Persian  Empire  for  two  hundred  years,  but  during 
the  whole  period  was  constantly  at  war  with  its  conquerors. 
In  332  B.C.  Egypt  was  invaded  by  Alexander  of  Macedon 
as  a  part  of  his  campaign  against  Persia.  It  submitted 
willingly,  and  on  his  death  in  321  the  dynasty  of  the 
Ptolemies  was  founded  and  continued,  until,  on  the  death 
of  Cleopatra,  who  was  the  last  sovereign  of  that  dynasty, 
Egypt  became  a  Roman  province,  B.C.  30.  On  the 
division  of  the  Roman  Empire  it  was  included  in  the 
•Prefecture  of  the  East,  and  it  remained  a  province  of 
the  Byzantine  Empire  until  it  was  conquered  by  the 
Arabs  in  638  a.d. 

The  civilisation  of  the  Phoenicians,  contemporary  at 
least  in  part  with  the  history  of  Egypt,  dates  also  from  the 
earliest  periods  of  which  civil  history  has  any  record. 
The  Phoenicians  are  believed  to  have  migrated  from 
Erythrea  on  the  coast  of  the  Red  Sea,  about  the  year 
2000  B.C.,  to  the  Mediterranean,  where  they  were  first 
established  on  a  strip  of  Syria  between  the  chain  of 
Lebanon  and  the  sea,  and  afterwards  took  possession  of  a 
portion  of  Greece,  of  some  of  the  islands  of  the  Medi- 
terranean, and  of  the  principal  promontories  along  the 
coast  of  Africa  to  the  Straits  of  Gibraltar,  and  as  far  down 
the  western  coast  as  the  mouths  of  the  Senegal.     They 


INTRODUCTORY  ii 

also  colonised  Spain  and  spread  up  the  coast  of  Western 
Europe,  navigating  as  far  as  the  Baltic  and  the  English 
Channel.  They  were  never  permitted  to  have  a  colony 
on  the  Egyptian  coast,  because  it  was  a  fundamental 
maxim  of  the  early  Egyptians  to  suffer  no  vessel  to  enter 
the  mouths  of  the  Nile  ;  but  the  Phoenicians  had  a  large 
settlement  in  the  very  heart  of  Egypt  itself — an  entire 
quarter  of  Memphis  being  devoted  to  them.  Tyre  and 
Sidon  on  the  Syrian  coast  were  among  the  most  famous 
of  their  early  cities.  The  overthrow  of  Sidon  by  Joshua, 
it  will  be  remembered,  took  place  about  1400  years  before 
Christ.  Carthage,  of  later  growth,  is  believed  to  have 
been  founded  about  853  B.C.  Other  Phoenician  cities  on 
the  coast  of  Africa  were  of  far  greater  antiquity  than 
Carthaofe,  and  Phoenician  trade  in  the  Gulf  of  Sallee  on 
the  west  coast  of  Morocco  was  famous  for  many  centuries 
before  the  Romans  gave  to  that  part  of  the  coast  the  name 
of  Sinus  Emporicus,  or  Merchants'  Bay. 

An  even  more  interesting  maritime  trade  than  that 
of  the  Phoenicians  with  the  West  seems  to  be  clearly 
established  as  having  existed  from  a  very  early  period 
between  the  coasts  of  the  Persian  and  Arabian  Gulfs,  the 
east  coast  of  Africa  as  far  south  as  Delagoa  Bay,  and 
possibly  to  the  southern  coast  of  the  African  continent, 
the  western  coast  of  India  as  far  south  as  Ceylon — the 
Taprobane  of  the  ancients — and  beyond  Ceylon  to  China. 
By  means  of  this  commerce  intercourse  between  India 
and  Africa  was  regularly  carried  on  during  the  earliest 
Egyptian  era.  The  Ethiopian  ports  for  the  Indian  trade 
were  Azab  and  Adule  within  the  Straits  of  Bab-el-Mandeb 
on  the  Red  Sea ;  and  the  Phoenicians,  after  their  land 
trade  had  penetrated  to  India,  had  colonies  upon  the 
Persian  and  Arabian  Gulfs.  They  also  fitted  out  ships  at 
Suez  for  the  navigation  of  the  Southern  seas.  The  three 
well-known  names  of  Thule,  Tarshish,  and  Ophir,  would 
appear  to  have  been  used  generically  to  indicate  these 
three  fields  of  maritime  activity — Thule  covering  the 
Atlantic    ports,  Tarshish  the    Mediterranean,  and    Ophir 


12  A   TROPICAL   DEPENDENCY 

those  of  the  Southern  seas.  It  may  be  interesting  in 
this  connection  to  note  that  the  words  which  are  trans- 
lated in  the  EngHsh  version  of  the  Bible  as  "ivory, 
apes,  and  peacocks,"  are  not  Hebrew  but  Tamyl  words — 
a  circumstance  which  serves  to  confirm  historic  evidence 
that  the  commerce  of  Solomon  extended  at  least  as  far 
as  Ceylon.  The  participation  of  the  Phoenicians  in  the 
trade  of  Ophir  seems  to  have  dated  from  the  period  of 
their  friendship  with  the  Jews  under  Solomon,  or  about 
looo  years  before  Christ,  but  the  trade  itself  was  much 
older. 

Through  a  considerable  portion  of  their  history  the 
Phoenicians  appear  to  have  acted  as  commercial  agents 
for  Egypt.  It  was  by  the  orders  of  Necho,  King  of 
Egypt,  that  about  the  year  612  B.C.  Phoenician  sailors, 
playing  for  this  famous  king  a  part  analogous  to  that 
which  Columbus  played  2000  years  later  for  Ferdinand 
and  Isabella  of  Spain,  started  from  the  Red  Sea  to 
explore  the  Southern  Ocean,  and,  according  to  the  tradi- 
tion related  by  Herodotus,  proved  the  fact  that  Africa  was 
surrounded  by  water  on  all  sides  but  the  strip  of  land 
which  bound  her  to  Asia,  arriving  in  the  third  year  from 
their  departure  once  more  in  Egypt  by  way  of  the  Straits 
of  Gibraltar.  As  they  sailed,  it  is  related  that  they  landed 
on  the  coasts,  sowing  the  land  and  waiting  for  harvests. 
Thus  a  tradition  of  them  lingers  on  the  west  coast  as 
well  as  on  the  east ;  and  to  them  it  is  in  some  quarters 
believed  that  the  legend  of  the  first  white  men  in  Western 
Negroland  may  be  traced.  It  is  the  fashion  to  doubt  this 
statement  of  Herodotus  with  regard  to  the  circumnaviga- 
tion of  Africa  ;  but,  in  the  light  of  many  remarkable  facts 
concerning  African  history  which  have  of  late  become 
known,  it  may  be  worth  while  to  remember  that  the 
achievement  spoken  of,  if  it  really  occurred,  would  have 
been  almost  within  the  memory  of  an  old  man  at  the  time 
at  which  Herodotus  wrote.  Carthage  had  intercourse 
across  the  desert  with  Negroland,  and  drew  thence  its 
supply    of   elephants,    as    well     as    gold    and     carbuncles. 


INTRODUCTORY  13 

Later  accounts  of  the  immense  quantities  of  gold  which 
abounded  in  Negroland  render  it  not  improbable  that 
some  of  the  gold  so  lavishly  used  by  Phoenician  artificers 
in  the  decoration  of  Solomon's  Temple  may  have  been 
brought  from  the  Valley  of  the  Niger. 

Greek  influence  in  Africa  was  much  later  than  that  of 
Egypt  and  Phoenicia,  and  the  colony  of  Cyrene,  which 
afterwards  became  the  province  of  Cyrenaica,  between  the 
borders  of  what  is  now  Tripoli  and  Egypt,  was  not  founded 
till  620  B.C.,  about  100  years  before  the  conquest  of  Egypt 
by  Cambyses.  It  became  subject  to  Egypt  in  323,  and 
afterwards  shared  in  her  fortunes. 

Libyan,  or,  as  we  should  call  them,  Berber  tribes,  held 
the  extreme  west,  or  divided  it  with  the  Carthaginian 
colonies  until  the  conquest  of  the  northern  region  by  the 
Romans,  during  the  two  hundred  years  which  immediately 
preceded  the  birth  of  Christ.  It  may  be  remembered  that 
Scipio  received  the  surname  of  Africanus  in  recognition 
of  his  triumph  over  Hannibal  in  the  year  202  B.C.  Africa 
proper,  the  territory  owned  by  Carthage  which  corresponds 
to  the  modern  Tunis,  was  created  a  Roman  province  in 
146  B.C.  But  Egypt  and  Cyrenaica  did  not  become  Roman 
provinces  until  30  B.C.  Mauritania,  in  the  north-western 
corner,  also  became  a  Roman  province  in  t,^  b.c.  When 
the  Romans  completed  the  nominal  conquest  of  Africa, 
they  divided  it  into  six  provinces,  of  which  Ethiopia  or 
Negroland  was  one.  But  though  the  northern  strip  was 
well  known  to  them,  and  flourished  under  their  rule,  and 
they  made  some  military  expeditions  to  the  south,  they 
had  little  if  any  recorded  intercourse  with  Negroland. 

Thus  from  the  earliest  dawn  of  Western  history  the 
northern  coast  strip  of  Africa  was  the  scene  of  civilised 
occupation.  The  introduction  of  the  previously  existing 
Berber  or  Libyan  inhabitants  into  Africa  belongs,  says 
Ibn  Khaldun,  their  great  historian,  to  "a  period  so  remote 
that  God  only  knows  tlie  epoch  of  it."  And  as  one  race 
of  conquerors  displaced  another,  there  was  a  perpetual 
pressure    driving    the    Libyan    inhabitants    with    the    dis- 


14  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

possessed  peoples  across  the  borders.  The  natural  bor- 
ders were  the  hills,  and  the  hunted  populations  taking 
refuge  in  them  were  forced  down  the  southern  slopes 
upon  the  deserts.  Gradually  through  the  ages  the  deserts 
became  the  home  of  nomad  peoples,  who  learned,  wander- 
ing upon  the  inhospitable  face  of  their  drifting  sands,  to 
pluck  subsistence  from  widely  scattered  patches  of  fertility. 
These  wandering  tribes,  known  under  many  names,  from 
the  Toucouleurs,  Tuaregs,  Kabyls,  Amozighs  of  the  West, 
to  the  Tibboos,  Berdoas,  and  others  of  the  eastern  borders 
of  the  desert,  are  generally  classed  as  Berbers.  It  is 
under  the  name  of  Berbers  that  they  are  most  frequently 
alluded  to  by  Arab  historians,  from  whom,  at  a  much 
later  period,  we  derive  our  principal  knowledge  of  them. 
Between  the  coast  strip  and  Negroland  the  desert  itself 
became  in  this  manner  sparsely  inhabited  by  a  race  which, 
though  it  is  held  to  have  had  one  Libyan  origin,  suffered 
in  the  course  of  history  so  many  invasions  and  infusions 
of  new  blood,  that  it  has  broken  into  almost  countlessly 
diverse  tribes,  cherishing  many  and  widely  differing 
traditions. 

Speaking  in  roughly  general  terms,  the  Berbers  are  a 
white  people  who,  having  a  tradition  that  they  once  were 
Christian,  now  profess  Mohammedanism.  North  Africa, 
in  the  centuries  which  elapsed  between  the  birth  of  Christ 
and  the  appearance  of  Mohammed,  was  the  favoured  home 
of  Christianity.  The  names  of  its  saints  and  martyrs  stand 
high  upon  Christian  rolls.  St.  Cyprian  suffered  at  Car- 
thage. St.  Augustine  was  born  at  Hippo.  Tertullian 
and  Lactantius,  if  they  were  not  African,  bore  eloquent 
testimony  to  the  fervour  of  the  African  Church.  In  the 
many  contests  of  early  Christian  councils  it  was  the  African 
divines  who  finally  triumphed  and  gave  to  Christianity  its 
Western  form.  The  African,  like  the  Syrian  desert,  was 
at  one  time  honeycombed  with  the  cells  of  hermits  and 
self-torturing  monks.  There  was  no  heresy  that  had  not 
its  counterblast  in  Africa.  Proselytism  was  perhaps  no- 
where more  active.     There  is,  therefore,  nothing  to  sur- 


INTRODUCTORY  15 

prise  us  in  the  Christian  tradition  of  the  Berber  tribes. 
They  have  presumably  been,  in  turn,  of  the  reHgion  of 
every  great  invader.  Their  language  has  been  classed 
among  the  Hamitic  languages,  but  they  have  traditions 
of  Arabian  descent.  One  among  many  stories  of  their 
original  introduction  into  Africa  is  that  five  colonies  were 
introduced  from  Arabia  Felix  by  a  certain  leader  Ifrikiah, 
or  Afrikiah,  who  gave  his  name  to  the  continent ;  and  that 
from  these  are  descended  no  less  than  six  hundred  clans  of 
Berbers.  Amongst  their  many  tribes  is  not,  however,  to 
be  counted  a  race  wholly  distinct  from  the  Berbers,  but 
also  nomad  in  the  eastern  desert,  who  are  said  by  those 
learned  in  these  matters  to  be  the  true  gypsy  of  the  East. 
The  tradition  of  the  Zingari,  as  they  are  found  in  Northern 
Africa,  is  that  they  came  originally  from  India.  This 
tradition  is  to  be  met  with  again,  though  faintly  and  un- 
certainly recalled,  amongst  some  of  the  races  of  Western 
Negroland. 

While  the  northern  strip  pressed  thus  upon  the  desert, 
the  desert,  there  can  be  little  doubt,  pressed  equally 
upon  the  fertile  belt  to  the  south.  Quite  indirectly 
the  influence  of  Tyre  and  Sidon,  Rome  and  Carthage, 
must  have  been  brought  to  bear  from  the  very  earliest 
periods  upon  Negroland.  But  besides  this  indirect  in- 
fluence of  pressure  by  the  superior  race  along  the  whole 
course  of  their  borders — an  influence  which,  as  will  pre- 
sently be  seen,  was  very  potent  in  modifying  the  char- 
acter of  the  leading  black  races  of  Negroland — there  were 
also  channels  of  direct  influence  which,  though  Europe 
has  ceased  to  use  them,  remain  unchanged  to  this  day. 
These  are  the  caravan  routes  across  the  desert.  Nature 
laid  them  down,  and  has  marked  them  by  certain  spots 
where  water  can  be  obtained.  The  springs  have  not 
changed  their  position  within  any  period  of  which  history 
has  preserved  a  record,  and  it  is  an  interesting  illustration 
of  the  continuity  of  custom  which  strikes  the  imagination 
in  these  remote  regions  of  the  earth,  that  the  roads  trodden 
by   the    caravans   which    this   year  visit   Kano  and   Tim- 


i6  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

buctoo,  are  the  same  which  offered  themselves  to  the 
first  civilised  footprints  that  crossed  the  desert. 

There  are  two  principal  roads  across  the  desert,  one 
through  Tripoli  and  the  Fezzan  running  due  south  to- 
wards what  is  now  Nigeria,  taking  the  shape  of  a  forked 
stick,  to  rest  upon  Lake  Chad  and  the  Niger;  the  other 
throueh  Morocco,  runninof  acjain  due  south  towards  Tim- 
buctoo  and  the  western  end  of  Negroland.  These  two 
roads,  as  a  glance  at  the  map  will  show,  mark  the  two 
narrowest  parts  at  which  the  desert  can  be  crossed,  for 
in  both  instances  the  fertile  land  of  the  coast  strip  runs 
down  in  important  promontories  into  the  arid  sands. 
Both  these  roads  were  counted  as  a  fifty  days'  journey 
from  edge  to  edge  of  fertile  land.  They  are,  I  believe, 
so  counted  still.  It  hardly  needs  to  be  added  that  one 
was  the  channel  of  Eastern  and  the  other  of  Western 
influence  upon  Negroland. 

It  is  difficult  now,  when  we  are  accustomed  to  regard 
the  west  coast  ports  as  the  natural  channels  of  entrance 
into  the  Western  Soudan,  to  remember  that  throughout 
the  early  history  of  Europe,  and  up  to  the  period  of  the 
discovery  of  the  passage  of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  at 
the  end  of  the  fifteenth  century,  the  approach  to  Negroland 
was  by  land.  In  the  early  periods  of  African  history 
the  navigation  of  the  Atlantic  was  for  all  practical  pur- 
poses unknown.  Equatorial  Africa  faced  civilisation  on 
the  north.  It  looked  northwards  for  all  its  finest  inspira- 
tion. The  south  represented  to  it  only  barbarism  and 
obscurity.  This  fact,  although  difficult  now  for  the  ima- 
gination to  grasp,  is  of  first  importance  in  endeavouring 
to  construct  any  true  conception  of  Soudanese  history. 
The  Soudan  was  regarded  as  occupying  the  edge  of  the 
then  known  world.  Homer,  first  of  Europeans  to  men- 
tion it,  speaks  of  the  Ethiopians  as  "the  farthest  removed 
of  men,  and  separated  into  two  divisions."  Later  Greek 
writers,  borrowing  their  information  from  Egypt,  carry 
the  description  somewhat  further,  and  characterise  the  two 
divisions  as  Western  and   Eastern — the  Eastern    occupy- 


INTRODUCTORY  17 

ing  the  countries  eastward  of  the  Nile,  and  the  Western 
stretching  from  the  western  shores  of  that  river  to  the 
Atlantic  coast.  One  of  these  divisions,  we  have  to 
acknowledge,  was  perhaps  itself  the  original  source  of 
the  civilisation  which  has  through  Egypt  permeated  the 
Western  world.  Both  divisions  alike  faced  north,  and 
had  their  frontage  to  the  great  civilisations  of  their  day, 
along  what  may  be  described  as  the  shore  of  the  desert, 
fringing  the  17th  parallel  of  north  latitude.  Across  this 
desert  the  native  camel  was  the  ship  which  bore  their 
merchandise  and  maintained  their  intercourse  with  outer 
life.  The  caravan  roads  were  the  trade  routes  marked 
for  them  as  clearly  as  the  trade  winds  marked  the  route 
to  be  taken  on  the  ocean  by  later  sailing  ships.  The 
tonnage  of  the  big  caravans  was  greater  than  the  tonnage 
of  the  vessels  by  which  at  a  subsequent  period  Drake 
and  Magellan  circumnavigated  the  globe,  and  England, 
Portugal,  and  Holland  maintained  a  prosperous  trade 
with  the  East  Indies.  It  was  sufficient  for  the  purposes 
of  a  considerable  commerce,  and  there  can  be  no  doubt 
that  from  a  very  early  period  the  communities  of  the 
coast  were  in  close  and  constant  communication  with 
Negroland. 

When  the  history  of  Negroland  comes  to  be  written 
in  detail,  it  may  be  found  that  the  kingdoms  lying  towards 
the  eastern  end  of  the  Soudan  were  the  home  of  races 
who  inspired,  rather  than  of  races  who  received,  the 
traditions  of  civilisation  associated  for  us  with  the  name 
of  ancient  Egypt.  For  they  cover  on  either  side  of  the 
Upper  Nile,  between  the  latitudes  of  10°  and  17°,  terri- 
tories in  which  are  found  monuments  more  ancient  than 
the  oldest  Egyptian  monuments.  If  this  should  prove  to 
be  the  case,  and  the  civilised  world  be  forced  to  recog- 
nise in  a  black  people  the  fount  of  its  original  enlighten- 
ment, it  may  happen  that  we  shall  have  to  revise  entirely 
our  view  of  the  black  races,  and  regard  those  who  now 
exist  as  the  decadent  representatives  of  an  almost  for- 
gotten era,  rather  than  as  the  embryonic  possibility  of  an 

B 


i8  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

era  yet  to  come.  Be  this  as  it  may,  the  traditions  of  the 
Eastern  Soudan  of  the  present  day  would  seem  to  be 
derived  from  the  same  sources  as  those  of  Egypt  and 
Arabia,  while  the  nations  lying  towards  the  western  end 
of  the  fertile  belt  have  been  more  strongly  imbued  with 
the  influence  of  the  Western  Arabs,  who  in  comparatively 
modern  times  carried  civilisation  into  Spain.  This  theory, 
amply  illustrated  by  the  history  of  the  Western  Soudan, 
receives  further  support  from  the  philological  studies  of 
M.  Fresnel,  who  asserts  that  the  alphabet  of  the  Eastern 
Soudan  is  the  regular  alphabet  of  Arabia,  while  the 
alphabet  of  the  Western  Soudan  is  the  alphabet  of 
Morocco. 

In  addition  to  the  influence  of  the  Western  Arabs,  there 
was,  at  a  period  shortly  after  the  Hegira,  an  immigration 
from  Arabia  under  a  leader  called  Abou  Zett,  which  appears 
to  have  crossed  the  Red  Sea  at  the  Straits  of  Bab-el- 
Mandeb,  and  to  have  spread  westward  along  the  fertile 
belt.  The  tradition  of  this  immigration  is  vivid  in  Kor- 
dofan,  Darfour,  and  Wadai.  It  is  said  to  have  extended 
through  the  entire  belt  of  Negroland,  and,  as  a  later 
chapter  will  show,  some  members  of  it  are  believed  to 
have  reached  the  bend  of  the  Middle  Niger,  but  the 
tradition  grows  fainter  in  the  territories  west  of  Chad. 

The  influence  of  Egypt,  also  perceptible  in  the  Western 
Soudan,  is  naturally  strongest  in  the  territories  which  lie 
nearest  to  the  eastern  caravan  route  across  the  desert. 
The  meeting  ground  in  which  it  would  appear  to  have 
overlapped  with  the  more  modern  influence  of  the  Western 
Arabs  may  perhaps  be  placed  geographically  upon  the 
Bend  of  the  Niger.  Es-Sadi,  a  native  writer  born  in 
Timbuctoo  in  the  sixteenth  century,  states  in  his  "  History 
of  the  Soudan"  that  "the  town  of  Kuka  was  in  exist- 
ence under  the  Pharaohs."  The  only  town  of  Kuka  now 
known  to  us  is  in  Bornu,  but  as  late  as  the  sixteenth 
century  a.d.  there  were  two  Kukas,  one  of  them  on  the 
middle  Niger — and  it  is  to  this  latter  Kuka  that  Es- 
Sadi  refers. 


Sj- 


INTRODUCTORY  19 

In  any  case  this  neighbourhood  has  a  special  interest, 
for  the  first  spot  in  Negroland  of  which   European  history 
preserves  any  record  would  seem  to  have  been  the  site  of 
this  very  Kuka,  or  Kaougha,  which  stood  near  the  present 
Gao.     Herodotus,  writing  something  more  than  five  hundred 
years  before  Christ,  gives  an  account  in  his  second  book 
of  an  attempt  which  was  made  by  certain  Nasamonians, 
occupying  the  territory  on  the  Mediterranean  coast  behind 
Tripoli,  to  penetrate  into  the  desert  by  the  eastern  road, 
afterwards  so  well  known  and  used  by  the  caravan  trade  of 
Negroland  and  the  coast.     According  to  his  account  there 
were  among  these  people  "  certain  daring  youths,  sons  of 
powerful  men,  who,  having  reached  man's   estate,  formed 
many  extravagant  plans,  and  chose  five  of  their  number  by 
lot  to  explore  the  deserts  of  Libya  to  see  if  they  could 
make  any  further  discovery  than  those  who  had  penetrated 
the    furthest."     The   Nasamonians  related  that  when  the 
young  men    deputed    by   their    companions  set   out,   well 
furnished    with    water   and    provisions,    they    passed    first 
through  the  inhabited  country,  and  having  traversed  this 
they  came  to  the  region  infested  by  wild  beasts,  and  after 
this  they  crossed  the  desert,  making  their  way  towards  the 
west  ;  and  when  they  had  traversed  much  sandy  ground 
during  a  journey  of  many  days  they  at  length  saw  some 
trees  growing  in  a  plain,  and  that  they  approached  and 
began   to  gather  the    fruit  that  grew  on  the  trees ;   and 
while    they    were   gathering   it,    some    "  diminutive    men, 
less    than  men  of  middle  stature,  came  up,"  and,   having 
seized  them,  carried  them  away.     The  diminutive  men  con- 
ducted them  through  vast  morasses,  and  when  they  had 
passed  these  they  came  to  "  a  city  in  which  all  the  inhabi- 
tants were  of  the  same  size  as  their  conductors,  and  black 
in  colour  ;  and  by  the  city  flowed  a  great  river  running 
from  the  west  to  the  east,  and  crocodiles  were  seen  in  it." 

Herodotus  does  not  mention  the  date  of  this  discovery 
of  the  Niger  by  the  Nasamonians.  It  may  have  taken 
place  before  or  after  the  reported  circumnavigation  of 
the  continent  by  the  Phoenicians.     It  may  have  happened 


20  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

within  the  memory  of  those  who  related  the  facts,  or  it 
may  have  been  a  tradition  of  much  earher  events.  In 
the  incidents  of  the  discovery  there  is  an  indication 
which  the  further  history  of  Negroland  supports,  that 
the  races  which  now  inhabit  equatorial  regions  further 
south,  at  one  time  extended  towards  the  northern  edge 
of  the  fertile  belt.  The  "diminutive  men,"  whose  city 
existed  on  the  middle  Niger  some  hundreds  of  years 
before  Christ,  are  presumably  the  dwarfs  who  in  our 
own  day  were  found  by  Stanley  in  the  Congo  forests. 
Their  displacement  illustrates  the  movement  under  the 
influence  of  which  the  aboriginal  inhabitants  of  the  fertile 
belt  were  pushed  backwards  towards  equatorial  Africa  by 
that  pressure  of  superior  races  from  the  desert  of  which 
I  have  spoken.  Greek  historians  of  a  later  date  than 
Herodotus  establish  the  fact  that  between  the  purely 
black  people  known  as  the  Western  Ethiopians,  and 
the  Mauritanian  inhabitants  of  the  north-western  corner 
of  Africa,  there  were  tribes,  known  as  the  Pharusii  and 
the  Nigretes,  who  used  bows  and  arrows,  and  had  chariots 
armed  with  scythes.  The  description  of  the  Nigretes,  who 
evidently  knew  at  least  the  use  of  iron,  would  appear  to 
imply  a  somewhat  superior  race  occupying  a  position 
between  the  black  dwarfs  and  the  Northern  Libyans. 
Thus  it  would  seem  that  in  quite  ancient  times  the  exist- 
ence of  different  races  within  the  belt  of  Negroland  was 
established.  There  were  evidently  superior  and  inferior 
tribes  ;  and  without  attempting  to  follow  the  question  in 
detail,  it  is  interesting,  though  not  surprising,  to  observe 
that  along  the  whole  line  of  the  fertile  belt  the  superior 
races,  modified  by  intercourse  with  the  white  pressure  from 
the  north,  gradually  established  themselves  in  possession 
of  the  uplands  bordering  more  nearly  upon  the  desert 
and  civilisation,  while  the  inferior  races  were  driven  back 
towards  the  then  impenetrable  regions  of  barbarism  and 
equatorial  Africa.  This  movement  of  all  that  was  inferior 
towards  the  south  is  a  fact  of  supreme  importance  to  the 
subsequent  history  of  the  Negro  belt. 


INTRODUCTORY  21 

In  the  later  history  given  to  us  by  Arab  records  of 
every  one  of  the  superior  black  kingdoms  which  established 
themselves  upon  the  borders  of  the  desert  from  Kordofan 
to  the  Atlantic,  there  is  to  be  found  at  some  point  in  the 
description  the  information  that  to  the  south  of  this  country 
lies  the  country  of  the  "  Lem-Lems,"  or  it  may  be  of  the 
"Yem-yems,"  or  the  "  Dem-dems,"  or  the  "  Rem-rems," 
or  the  "  Gnem-gnems,"  and  after  the  double  name  comes 
invariably  the  same  explanation,  "who  eat  men."  In  fol- 
lowing the  history  of  kingdom  after  kingdom  it  becomes 
clear  that  a  belt  of  cannibalism,  of  which  the  Nyam-nyams 
of  the  Congo  may  be  counted  among  the  present  survivors, 
extended  along  the  south  of  the  Negro  belt  across  the 
whole  breadth  of  Africa.  M.  de  Lauture,  a  French  writer 
of  much  knowledge  and  acquaintance  with  his  subject, 
takes  the  latitude  of  10°  north  as  forming  in  his  day, 
1853,  the  northern  limits  of  habitation  of  the  debased 
pagan  negro.  Between  10°  and  17°  he  places  the  finer 
races,  which  he  qualifies  generally  as  Mussulman  negroes. 
To-day  I  believe  it  will  be  found  that  there  has  been  a 
still  further  recession  southwards  of  the  inferior  races,  and 
9°  north  would  perhaps  be  nearer  to  the  limit  of  their 
northern  extension.  It  is  interesting  to  observe  that 
Northern  Nigeria  stretches  from  7°  to  14°,  thus  including 
within  its  limits  both  classes  of  natives. 

The  modern  history  of  Negroland  may  be  said  to  date 
from  the  period  at  which  it  accepted  the  Moslem  religion, 
but  the  finer  black  races  had  established  their  domination 
over  the  inferior,  and  ruled  by  force  of  superior  intelligence 
and  cultivation  long  before  that  time.  Es-Sadi,  the  same 
writer  who  speaks  of  Kuka  as  a  town  which  existed  in  the 
days  of  the  Pharaohs,  speaks  also  in  turning  to  the  west 
of  a  kingdom  extending  to  the  Atlantic  Ocean  of  which 
Ghana  was  the  capital,  and  adds :  "  They  say  that  twenty- 
two  white  kings  had  reigned  over  this  country  before 
the  year  of  the  Hegira.  Their  origin  is  unknown."  It 
is  also  in  this  neighbourhood,  about  the  sources  of  the 
Senegal,  that  the  original  home  in  Africa  of  the  Fulani, 


22  A   TROPICAL   DEPENDENCY 

who  count  as  a  partly  white  race,  is  placed.  The  move- 
ment of  this  remarkable  people  in  Africa  within  historic 
time  has  unquestionably  been  from  west  to  east,  but  this 
does  not  preclude  the  theory  of  some  more  remote  eastern 
origin  which  may  have  preceded  their  African  immigration. 
Whether  Phoenician,  Egyptian,  Indian,  or  simply  Arab, 
they  are  evidently  a  race  distinct  from  the  negroid  and 
other  black  types  by  which  they  have  been  surrounded, 
and  notwithstanding  the  marked  effect  produced  on  some 
portions  of  their  people  by  intermarriage  with  negro 
women,  they  have  kept  the  distinctive  qualifications  of 
their  race  through  a  known  period  of  two  thousand  years. 
The  Fulah  of  to-day  is  as  distinct  from  the  pure  Negro 
as  was  the  first  Fulah  of  whom  we  have  record.  How 
long  they  may  have  existed  in  Africa  before  any  record 
of  them  was  made  it  is  with  our  present  knowledge  im- 
possible to  say.  The  Haussa  and  the  Songhay  are  other 
races  which,  though  black,  are  absolutely  distinct  from 
the  pure  negro  type. 

In  accepting  as  an  historic  fact  the  gradual  migration 
southwards  of  all  that  was  least  valuable  in  the  elements 
composing  the  mixed  and  widely  varying  populations  of 
the  Negro  belt,  it  is  to  be  also  recognised  that  this 
migration,  though  doubtless  accentuated  by  the  outside 
pressure  of  civilisation  from  the  north,  was  a  natural 
movement  initiated  by  the  native  populations  and  carried 
on  by  them  throughout  the  known  period  of  their  history. 
Not  only  were  the  uplands  bordering  upon  the  desert 
the  most  desirable  portions  of  the  Negro  belt,  and  as  such 
likely  to  pass  into  the  hands  of  the  strongest  who  could 
hold  them,  but,  as  they  were  also  the  healthiest,  the 
races  which  inhabited  them  were  maintained  by  climatic 
conditions  on  a  higher  platform  of  mental  and  moral 
activity  than  the  more  supine  inhabitants  of  the  denser 
tropical  regions  to  the  south.  Hence  every  cause,  natural 
and  artificial  alike,  has  combined  to  the  one  end,  of 
establishing  the  superior  races  in  the  northern  and  the 
inferior  races  in  the  southern  portions  of  the  fertile  belt. 


INTRODUCTORY  23 

The  result  as  we  see  it  to-day  is  strikingly  illustrated 
in  British  territory  by  a  journey  from  the  Niger  mouth 
to  Sokoto.  The  river  in  its  windings  makes  a  sectional 
cut  of  which  the  general  direction  is  from  north  to  south, 
and  leaving  the  nude  savage  of  the  coast  to  prowl  in 
dusky  nakedness  through  the  mangrove  swamps  of 
Southern  Nigeria  at  its  mouths,  the  traveller  who  enters 
the  river  sees  the  natives  on  the  banks  ever  increasing 
in  decency  and  dignity  as  the  latitude  recedes  from  the 
equator.  At  Lokoja  no  native  is  unclothed.  A  little 
farther  north,  at  Bida,  where  the  town  is  approached  by 
avenues  of  trees,  and  native  brass  and  glass  manufactures 
add  to  the  usual  industries,  Moorish  dress  is  already 
common.  In  the  markets  of  Sokoto  and  Kano  the  scene 
is  as  varied  and  as  dignified  as  in  any  market  of  the 
Mediterranean  coast. 


CHAPTER    II 

CONQUEST   OF   NORTH   AFRICA  AND   SPAIN 
BY   THE   ARABS 

The  Roman  occupation  brings  the  history  of  North  Africa 
to  the  Christian  era.  The  subsequent  decline  of  the 
Roman  Empire  was  marked  by  a  corresponding  decline 
of  the  Roman  colonies  in  Africa.  The  Vandals,  who 
occupied  Spain  and  gave  it  its  name  of  Vandalusia  or 
Andalusia,  followed  the  Romans  and  effected  establish- 
ments upon  the  coast.  But  they  left  the  interior  untouched, 
and  the  conquest  which  was  of  supreme  interest  to 
Negroland  was  that  which  was  carried  out  in  the  seventh 
century  of  the  Christian  era  by  the  Arabs. 

The  Arabs  conquered  Egypt  in  638,  and  their  victorious 
forces  spread  rapidly,  as  was  to  be  expected,  across  the 
provinces  of  North  Africa.  And,  as  might  also  be  expected, 
they  did  not  occupy  the  prosperous  northern  provinces 
without  endeavouring  to  find  out  something  of  what  lay 
behind  them  in  the  desert.  Tripoli  was  taken  by  them 
in  643,  and  expeditions  were  immediately  sent  across  the 
hills  to  the  slopes  upon  the  south  and  as  far  as  Wadan 
in  the  western  desert.  A  very  little  later,  666,  Okbar 
ibn  Nafe  made  a  military  progress  of  a  still  more  complete 
description,  and  inquiring  always  of  the  inhabitants  of 
each  conquered  tribe — "What  lies  beyond  you?"  he 
marched  as  far  as  Kawar,  the  country  of  the  Tibboos 
to  the  north  of  Lake  Chad,  which  to  this  day  does  not 
appear  to  be  substantially  altered  from  the  condition  in 
which  he  found  it.  The  people  of  Kawar,  either  not 
knowing  or  not  choosing  to  tell  that  there  was  anything 
beyond    them,    replied    in    answer    to    his   questions    that 

"4 


NORTH    AFRICA    AND    SPAIN  25 

the  country  beyond  was  unknown.  He  turned  back  to 
Tripoli,  and  thus  just  missed  entering  the  fertile  belt. 
Fifteen  years  later,  681,  the  same  Okbar  attacked  the 
south-western  part  of  Morocco,  a  very  fruitful  district  then 
occupied  by  Europeans  and  Christian  Berbers,  and  made 
himself  master  of  the  whole.  The  principal  town,  Medina 
Niffis,  is  spoken  of  by  Arab  historians  as  a  town  of  great 
antiquity.  It  lies,  however,  on  the  other  side  of  the 
mountains  which  separate  Morocco  from  the  desert,  and 
he  still  did  not  enter  the  fertile  belt  of  Negroland.  But 
Okbar  was  only  a  forerunner  of  the  more  celebrated 
Musa  Nosseyr,  who  was  appointed  Governor  of  Africa 
under  the  Caliphs  in  698,  and  made  his  administration 
for  ever  famous  by  that  Arab  conquest  of  Spain  which 
so  profoundly  affected  the  civilisation  of  the  West. 

It  is  interesting,  and  important  to  the  history  of  North 
Africa,  that  Musa  did  not  immediately  undertake  the  inva- 
sion of  Spain.  Upwards  of  ten  years  elapsed,  during 
which  he  had  time  to  make  his  presence  felt  in  the 
province  which  was  at  that  time  known  by  the  name 
of  Afrikyah,  or,  as  it  was  more  generally  spelt,  Ifrikyah. 
This  province  of  the  Arab  domination  corresponded  not 
to  Africa  as  we  know  it,  but  to  the  Carthaginian  and 
Roman  Province  of  Africa  Propria,  which  stretched  from 
Barca  to  the  borders  of  Morocco  and  extended  south- 
ward to  the  edge  of  the  desert.  It  held  the  head  of 
the  eastern  road  into  the  desert  through  the  Fezzan, 
while  the  head  of  the  western  road  through  Morocco 
appears,  notwithstanding  Okbar's  partial  conquests,  to 
have  remained  in  the  hands  of  the  Europeans  and 
Christian  Berbers  who  held  the  country  which  corre- 
sponds to  the  modern  Morocco. 

Musa's  first  act  on  arriving  at  Cairouan  to  take  up 
the  governorship,  was  to  make  a  speech  to  his  soldiers 
which,  interpreted  by  the  light  of  succeeding  events,  had 
almost  a  prophetic  note:  "I  know  well,"  he  said,  "what 
sort  of  commander  you  want,"  and  after  describing  to 
them  an    ideal    soldier    "doubly   cautious    after   victories, 


26  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

doubly  brave  after  defeat,  trusting  ever  in  the  righteous- 
ness of  his  cause,"  he  lifted  his  hands  to  the  mountains 
in  the  shadow  of  which  they  stood,  and  cried  :  "  You  may 
safely  rely  upon  me  as  your  commander,  for  I  shall  seize 
every  opportunity  of  leading  you  on  to  victory  ;  and,  by 
Allah !  I  will  not  cease  making  incursions  into  yonder 
high  mountains  and  attacking  the  strong  passes  leading 
into  them,  until  God  has  depressed  their  summits,  reduced 
their  strength,  and  granted  the  Moslems  the  victory.  I 
shall  lead  you  on  until  God  Almighty  makes  us  the 
masters  of  all  or  part  of  the  territories  lying  beyond 
them,  and  until  we  have  subdued  the  countries  which 
His  immutable  decrees  have  already  allotted  to  us." 

His  own  province  was  far  from  being  at  that  time 
in  a  state  of  complete  subjection.  His  first  campaign 
was  against  the  Berbers  of  Arwah,  who  made  forays 
towards  Cairouan.  He  overthrew  them  and  took  looo 
prisoners.  These  were  the  first  Berber  captives  taken 
to  Cairouan.  Then  he  sent  one  of  his  sons  against  the 
tribes.  His  son  was  successful,  and  returned  with  100,000 
captives.  He  sent  another  son  in  another  direction,  who 
was  successful,  and  returned  with  100,000  captives.  He 
himself  went  in  a  third  direction,  and  was  successful,  and 
returned  with  another  100,000  captives.  In  all,  upwards 
of  300,000  captives  resulted  from  this  campaign.  The 
Caliph,  we  are  told,  would  hardly  believe  it  when  he 
was  informed  that  his  fifth  of  the  captives  amounted  to 
60,000.  Musa,  encouraged  by  his  success,  despatched 
his  troops  farther  and  farther  into  the  desert.  The 
Western  Berber  tribes  of  the  Hawara,  the  Zenatah 
Kotamah,  and  even  as  far  south  as  the  Senhajah,  were 
in  turn  taken  by  surprise.  He  fought  with  them — in  the 
words  of  his  historian — "battles  of  extermination,  he 
killed  myriads  of  them,  and  made  a  surprising  number 
of  prisoners,  with  great  booty  of  cattle,  grain,  and  articles 
of  dress."  These  conquests  took  place  in  the  years  699 
and  700  A.D.  The  fame  of  Musa  spread  so  far  and 
wide    that    all    soldiers    desired    to    serve    under    him    in 


NORTH    AFRICA   AND    SPAIN  27 

Africa,  and  the  numbers  of  his  army  increased  so  much 
that  they  were  doubled.  Conflict  was  constantly  renewed 
with  the  more  warlike  of  the  desert  tribes,  but  "God  was 
pleased  to  permit  that  the  Moslems  should  have  every- 
where the  victory."  By  the  year  702,  Musa  was  joined 
by  the  van  of  the  Egyptian  army,  and  a  great  battle  was 
then  fought  in  the  west,  in  which  the  Berbers  were  com- 
manded by  their  famous  king  Koseylah.  The  Moslems 
were  entirely  victorious,  and  with  the  spoils  there  were 
taken  from  the  Berbers  "innumerable  maidens  inestim- 
able by  their  beauty  and  accomplishments."  The  maidens 
were  distributed  amongst  the  soldiers  as  wives.  This 
battle  was  ;the  prelude  of  many  further  'African  con- 
quests, including  the  conquest  of  the  territory  of  Morre- 
kosh.  (The  town  of  Morrekosh  or  Morocco  was  not 
founded  till  near  the  end  of  the  eleventh  century.) 

The  territory  of  Northern  Africa  being  conquered,  and 
Arab  armies  driving  all  before  them  to  the  southern 
edges  of  the  desert,  where,  as  will  presently  be  seen,  the 
harried  tribes  found  refuge  in  the  fruitful  plains  of  Negro- 
land,  Musa  turned  his  ambition  to  the  sea.  He  ordered 
the  building  of  a  dockyard  at  Tunis,  and  himself  sailed 
thither.  From  the  moment  of  the  completion  of  the  dock- 
yard the  port  of  Tunis  became  "a  place  of  safety  for 
ships  when  the  winds  blew  at  sea  and  the  waves  were 
high."  Musa  ordered  the  construction  of  a  hundred 
vessels,  and  in  these  preparations  passed  the  remainder 
of  the  year  703. 

In  the  year  704  all  the  best  of  his  army  embarked  in 
an  expedition  which  was  called  "The  Expedition  of  the 
Nobles."     They  spoiled  Sicily  and  returned  safe. 

In  705  another  [expedition  against  the  Berbers  was 
followed  by  their  total  submission.  In  the  same  year 
Syracuse  was  attacked  by  sea  and  spoiled.  Three  years 
afterwards  Sardinia  was  attacked  and  immense  spoil  taken. 
A  great  expedition  inland  to  the  territory  to  the  south  of 
Morocco,  lying  on  the  slopes  of  the  mountains  between 
it  and  the  desert,  and  commanding  the  western  road  to 


28  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

Negroland,  resulted  in  the  submission  of  that  country. 
There  was  also  a  sea  expedition  to  Majorca,  which  was 
conquered. 

By  this  time  (708)  Musa  was  fairly  master  by  sea 
and  land  of  the  whole  of  North  Africa  from  the  Mediter- 
ranean to  the  borders  of  Negroland.  His  influence  upon 
the  Berber  tribes  whom  he  displaced  or  overthrew  was 
twofold.  One  effect  of  his  conquests  was  to  drive  them 
from  their  old  habitations  in  the  fruitful  northern  edge  of 
the  desert  to  find  new  habitations  in  the  no  less  fruitful 
but  already  occupied  southern  edge,  where  to  make  room 
for  them  disturbance  was  necessarily  produced  among  the 
existing  black  populations.  The  other  effect  was  in  an 
exactly  opposite  direction.  It  was  to  draw  them  into  the 
circle  of  Arab  influence  and  even  to  incorporate  them 
with  the  nation  of  their  conquerors.  It  is  related  of  Musa 
that  on  his  return  to  Egypt  at  a  later  period  he  was  on 
one  occasion  asked  by  the  Sultan  to  describe  the  various 
peoples  whom  he  had  conquered.  It  came  to  the  turn  of 
the  Berbers,  and  of  them  he  said  :  "  The  Berbers,  O 
Commander  of  the  Faithful,  are  of  all  foreign  nations  the 
people  who  resemble  most  the  Arabs  in  impetuosity, 
corporal  strength,  endurance,  military  science,  generosity, 
only  that  they  are,  O  Commander  of  the  Faithful,  the 
most  treacherous  people  upon  earth."  The  Berbers  them- 
selves had  various  traditions  purporting  to  show  that  they 
were  sprung  from  the  same  stock  as  the  Arabs.  It  has 
already  been  seen  that  the  innumerable  maidens  who 
were  taken  with  the  spoils  of  Musa's  many  conquests  were 
regarded  as  ''inestimable  by  their  beauty  and  accomplish- 
ments," and  were  distributed  among  his  soldiers  for  wives. 
Musa's  own  sons  had  sons  by  Berber  wives  who  rose  to 
high  repute.  But  it  was  not  only  by  intermarriage,  nor 
by  the  revival  of  traditions  of  a  common  stock,  that  the 
two  races  were  mixed.  It  was  also  Musa's  habit  to  spend 
the  immense  sums  with  which  the  Sultan  rewarded  his 
victories  largely  in  the  purchase  of  captured  Berbers. 
This   he   did,   his   biographer   relates,    in   the   interests   of 


NORTH    AFRICA    AND    SPAIN  29 

religion.  "  Whenever  after  a  victory  there  were  a  number 
of  slaves  put  up  for  sale,  he  used  to  buy  all  those  who, 
he  thought,  would  willingly  embrace  Islam,  who  were  of 
noble  origin,  and  who  looked,  besides,  as  if  they  were 
active  young  men.  To  these  he  first  proposed  the  em- 
bracing of  Islam,  and  if,  after  cleansing  their  under- 
standing and  making  them  fit  to  receive  the  sublime 
truths,  they  were  converted  to  the  best  of  religions,  and 
their  conversion  was  a  sincere  one,  he  would  then,  by  way 
of  putting  their  abilities  to  trial,  employ  them.  If  they 
evinced  good  dispositions  and  talents  he  would  instantly 
grant  them  their  liberty,  appoint  them  to  high  commands 
in  his  army,  and  promote  them  according  to  their  merits." 
If  they  showed  no  good  dispositions,  he  returned  them 
to  the  common  stock  of  captives  belonging  to  the  army. 

The  effect  of  such  a  system  in  bringing  about  an 
amalgamation  of  the  two  races  and  in  inducing  the  accept- 
ance of  Mohammedanism  by  the  Berbers  does  not  need  to 
be  insisted  upon.  The  races  became  by  degrees  so  mixed 
that  in  many  cases  the  Berber  could  hardly  be  distinguished 
from  the  Arab  nor  the  Arab  from  the  Berber.  In  all 
that  was  subsequently  done  by  the  Arabs  leading  Berbers 
had  their  share. 

The  amalgamation  of  the  Arab  and  the  Berber  peoples, 
which  could  not  have  taken  place  but  for  the  similarity  in 
their  dispositions  noted  by  Musa,  was  very  shortly  to  be 
illustrated  in  that  conquest  of  Spain  which  has  left  Musa's 
name  enshrined  in  the  sacred  places  of  Arab  history. 

Having  assured  himself  of  the  necessary  command  of 
the  sea,  Musa  sent  "the  Berber  Tarik,  one  of  his  freed- 
men,"  to  possess  himself  of  Tangiers  and  the  strong  places 
of  the  neighbouring  districts  with  a  view  to  crossing  over 
into  Spain.  Tarik  accordingly  marched  thither  and  took 
the  strong  places  and  cities  of  those  Berbers.  This  being 
done,  Tarik  wrote  to  his  master,  "Musa,  I  have  found 
here  six  vessels."  Musa  told  him  to  take  them  and  to  sail 
for  Spain.  Tarik  did  so  in  the  year  710,  and  was  joined 
by  Musa  himself  in  the  year  711.     As  is  well  known,  the 


30  A   TROPICAL   DEPENDENCY 

mountain  by  which  the  expedition  entered  Europe  bears 
to  this  day  the  name  of  the  military  commander — the 
Mountain  of  Tarik,  Jebr  el  Tarik  or  Gibraltar — while  the 
spot,  a  little  further  along  the  coast,  on  which  a  lesser 
detachment  landed,  is  known  as  Tarifa  from  the  name  of 
its  leader  Tarif,  another  of  Musa's  Berber  freedmen. 
What  is  not  perhaps  so  generally  recognised  is  that  the 
men  who  led  this  civilising  expedition  into  Spain  were  of 
the  same  race  as  those  who,  driven  by  the  same  compellin,g 
cause  to  another  fate,  carried  the  banner  of  civilisation  into 
Negroland.  The  capacity  for  taking  high  command  which 
Musa  recognised  in  the  Berbers  was  a  capacity  of  race 
which  was  sure  to  find  its  satisfaction  under  circumstances 
of  the  most  diverse  kind.  North  or  south,  it  mattered 
little  in  which  direction  they  were  forced  by  the  resistless 
pressure  of  a  higher  fate.  Alike  in  Spain  and  Negroland, 
where  they  went  in  misfortune  they  were  to  remain  in 
triumph,  until  that  mysterious  decadence  which  attends  the 
fate  of  peoples  marked  them  for  decay. 


CHAPTER    III 

ARAB   CIVILISATION   IN   SPAIN 

The  fascinating  story  of  the  conquest  of  Spain  by  the 
Arabs  and  of  the  development  of  a  civiHsation  far  in 
advance  of  anything  known  at  the  time  to  Western 
Europe,  Hes  outside  the  scope  of  this  book.  Yet  the  his- 
tory of  Negroland  and  of  Spain  were  in  their  early  days 
so  closely  interwoven  through  the  links  of  the  Arab  and 
Berber  connection  that  the  records  of  Arab  civilisation 
are  not  altogether  foreign  to  the  history  of  West  Africa. 

The  conquest  took  place  at  the  beginning  of  the  eighth 
century,  and  was  for  all  ordinary  purposes  complete.  It 
was  carried  out  almost  entirely  by  Berber  troops  whom 
Musa  continued  to  convert,  to  organise,  and  to  draft  into 
Spain.  Tangiers,  which  had  always  been  a  Berber 
stronghold,  became  for  this  purpose  his  military  head- 
quarters, and  he  was  enabled  perpetually  to  recruit  his 
conquering  armies  with  fresh  troops.  Tarik  took  12,000 
of  these  converts  with  him  on  his  first  landing.  There 
was  a  tradition  lingering  from  the  Greek  occupation  of  the 
country  that  Spain  would  be  conquered  only  "by  two 
nations  composed  of  peoples  unaccustomed  to  the  luxuries 
of  life,  hardened  by  privation  and  fatigue."  The  Arabs 
and  the  Andalusians  alike  translated  the  prophecy  to  apply 
to  the  Arabs  and  the  Berbers.  "  For  a  long  period,"  says 
one  of  their  historians,  "  the  Berbers  and  Andalusians 
had  hated  each  other  across  the  Straits,  but  Berbers 
being  more  in  want  of  Andalusians  than  these  were  of 
them,  owing  to  certain  necessaries  not  to  be  procured  in 
Africa,  which  were  imported  from  Andalus,  communi- 
cation  necessarily   existed    between    the    people   of   both 


32  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

countries."  The  Berbers  had  long  wanted  Spain  :  Spain 
had  long  feared  the  Berbers.  The  conquest  of  Spain  was 
therefore  to  some  extent  regarded  as  a  fulfilment  of  the 
destiny  of  both  nations. 

But  while  the  Berbers  claimed  to  be  of  the  same  stock 
as  the  Arabs,  and  were  admitted,  as  has  been  seen,  to 
some  degree  of  comradeship,  they  were  at  a  very  inferior 
stage  of  civilisation.  The  sense  of  difference  of  the  culti- 
vated Arabs  was  expressed  by  a  comic  poet,  who  suffered 
under  a  subsequent  Berber  dynasty  for  his  readiness  of 
speech.  "  I  saw  Adam  in  my  dream,"  he  makes  one  of 
his  characters  declare,  "and  I  said  to  him,  'Oh,  Father 
of  Mankind !  Men  generally  agree  that  the  Berbers 
are  descended  from  thee.'  '  Yes,'  replied  Adam,  *  it  is 
true,  but  none  dispute  that  Eve  was  at  that  time 
divorced  from  me.' "  Brothers,  but  brothers  of  divorce, 
very  fairly  represents  the  relation  which  for  a  long  time 
existed  between  Berber  and  Arab. 

Shortly  after  the  whole  of  Spain  was  reduced  there 
was  a  general  Arab  migration  to  it,  and  it  was  with  this 
Arab  migration  that  the  high  civilisation  came.  For 
about  fifty  years  the  Berbers  in  fitful  revolution  struggled 
against  the  Arabs  for  the  sole  possession  of  a  country 
which  they  claimed  that  they  and  they  alone  had  won. 
The  conflict  between  the  dynasties  of  the  Ommeyades  and 
the  Abbassides  in  the  East  gave  opportunities  for  the  dis- 
affected in  Spain.  But  about  the  middle  of  the  eighth 
century,  when  the  Abbassides  succeeded  in  overthrowing 
the  dynasty  of  the  Ommeyades  in  the  East  and  possessing 
themselves  of  the  Caliphate,  one  son  of  the  Ommeyades 
escaped  into  North  Africa,  and,  after  many  adventures, 
established  himself  under  the  name  of  Abdurrahman  I. 
upon  the  throne  of  his  fathers  in  Spain.  He  ascended  the 
throne  in  757,  thus  separating  the  Caliphate  of  the  East 
from  the  Caliphate  of  the  West,  and  brilliantly  opened  the 
chapter  of  cultivated  Arab  rule  in  the  West. 

The  dynasty  of  the  Ommeyades  lasted  in  Spain  for  up- 
wards of  two  hundred  and  fifty  years,  and  may  be  thought 


ARAB    CIVILISATION    IN    SPAIN  33 

of  as  coming  to  an  end,  in  power  at  least,  about  the  year 
1000  A.D.  ;  when,  after  an  interval  of  misrule,  it  was  suc- 
ceeded in  the  latter  part  of  the  eleventh  century,  that  is, 
shortly  after  the  Norman  conquest  of  England,  by  the 
purely  Berber  dynasty  of  the  Almoravides.  During  the 
first  two  centuries  of  the  rule  of  the  Ommeyades  the  Arab 
dominion  in  Spain  reached  its  highest  point.  The  court 
of  Abdurrahman  and  his  successors  became  the  centre  of 
all  the  art,  the  learning,  the  refinement,  and  the  elegance 
of  the  known  world.  Commerce  brought  to  the  shores  of 
Spain  the  best  productions  of  every  land.  Science  was 
honoured.  Arab  travellers  penetrated  to  the  furthest  limits 
of  the  Eastern  hemisphere.  All  that  India  and  China  had 
to  teach  was  known  to  them. 

They  had  a  common  saying  that  "  Science  came  down 
from  heaven  and  lodged  itself  in  three  different  parts  of 
man's  body  :  in  the  brain  among  the  Greeks  ;  in  the  hands 
among  the  Chinese  ;  and  in  the  tongue  among  the  Arabs." 
Unfortunate  in  the  fate  that  subsequently  befell  them,  the 
Arabs  were  fortunate  in  this,  that  during  the  period  of 
their  prosperity  they  had  historians  and  poets  capable 
of  preserving  for  posterity  records  of  the  high  level  of 
civilisation  that  was  reached.  Religious  fanaticism,  which 
made  a  duty  at  a  later  period  of  sweeping  the  infidel  out 
of  Spain,  made  it  no  less  a  matter  of  conscience  to  destroy 
the  admirable  literature  which  centuries  of  enlightenment 
had  amassed  in  the  libraries  of  his  forefathers.  Fortu- 
nately, however,  the  writings  were  so  copious  that  many 
escaped  destruction,  and  the  industry  of  modern  research 
has  brought  again  to  light  learning  which  was  indignantly 
rejected  by  the  religious  Europe  of  the  Middle  Ages. 

To  appreciate  in  any  degree  the  debt  which  Europe 
owes  to  the  Arab  civilisation  of  Spain,  we  have  to  re- 
member the  condition  of  barbarous  ignorance,  sloth,  and 
superstition  in  which  the  Continent  was  plunged  after  the 
break-up  of  the  Roman  Empire.  What  the  Berber  was  to 
North  Africa,  such  was  the  Scythian,  in  the  many  divisions 
of  Goths,  Gauls,  Huns,  &c.,  to  Europe.     What  the  culti- 

c 


34  A   TROPICAL   DEPENDENCY 

vated  northern  strip  lying  between  the  mountains  and  the 
sea  was  to  North  Africa,  such  on  the  Continent  of  Europe 
was  the  strip  lying  also  between  the  mountains  and  the 
sea  which  is  known  to  us  under  the  names  of  Italy,  Spain, 
and  Greece.  To  both  these  famous  districts  the  Mediter- 
ranean had  given  life  and  the  mountains  defence.  Beyond 
the  mountains,  equally  on  the  north  and  on  the  south, 
countless  hordes  of  nomads  unacquainted  with  the  gentler 
arts  of  civilisation,  but  vigorous  and  active  in  their  bar- 
barism, awaited  nothing  but  the  opportunity  of  conquest. 
The  Scythians  and  the  Berbers  were,  in  their  original  con- 
dition, pastoral  tribes  of  migratory  habits,  feeding  exclu- 
sively on  meat  and  milk,  and  clothing  themselves  in  the 
skins  of  animals.  Of  many  of  them  it  is  said  that  they 
had  never  even  seen  bread  ;  this,  as  well  on  the  plains 
of  Europe  and  Asia  as  in  the  African  desert.  They  had 
no  dwelling-houses  and  no  domestic  arts.  Leather  tents 
or  straw  huts  served  all  their  temporary  purpose.  But 
they  were  hardy,  abstemious,  expert  riders,  brave,  brutal, 
and  proficient  in  all  the  ruder  military  virtues.  Nothing 
strikes  the  student  of  Berber  history  more  than  the  re- 
semblance to  be  noted  between  the  characteristics  of 
the  Berber  tribes  and  the  descriptive  traits  recorded  by 
Tacitus,  and  quoted  by  Gibbon  from  earlier  authors,  of 
the  primitive  inhabitants  of  Northern  Europe.  The  can- 
nibalism which  distinguished  the  extreme  barbarism  of 
Africa  was  not  wanting,  as  we  know,  among  the  abori- 
ginals of  Northern   Germany. 

In  Europe  the  decadence  of  Rome  and  the  downfall 
of  the  Byzantine  Empire  gave  opportunity  for  the  northern 
tribes  to  possess  themselves  of  all  the  outlying  terri- 
tories of  the  Empire,  and  from  the  forced  wedlock  of  deca- 
dence and  barbarism  the  states  of  modern  Europe  took 
their  rise. 

In  Africa  the  strong  intellectual  impulse  of  the  Jews 
and  Saracens  dominated  the  brute  forces  of  barbarism  by 
which  it  was  surrounded,  and  the  southern  tribes,  instead 
of  conquering,  became  the  instruments  of  conquest  directed 


ARAB    CIVILISATION    IN    SPAIN  35 

by  a  higher  mind.  While  Europe  fell  to  the  level  of  her 
conquerors,  Arabian  civilisation  rose,  and,  spreading 
through  Africa  to  Spain,  it  maintained  for  the  Western 
world  the  moral  ideals  and  the  intellectual  enliofhtenment 
which,  without  the  refuge  afforded  them  in  Spain,  had 
perhaps  been  wholly  lost. 

Medieval  Arabian  achievements  in  the  higher  paths  of 
learning  are  well  known.  There  is  no  branch  of  scientific 
development  among  the  Western  nations  upon  which  the 
Arabs  have  not  set  their  mark,  either  by  original  research, 
or  by  the  service  which  they  rendered  in  transmitting  to 
their  European  posterity  the  learning  accumulated  by 
other  generations  in  other  lands.  They  initiated  the 
Renaissance  in  Europe  by  preserving  and  translating  at 
a  much  earlier  period  the  great  works  of  the  Greeks. 
They  gave  a  vivifying  impulse  to  all  the  intellectual  life 
of  the  West  by  introducing  to  it  the  hoarded  knowledge 
of  the  East.  In  mathematics  they  imported  much  from 
India,  amongst  other  things  the  numerals  known  to  us  as 
"Arabic"  numerals,  and  with  them  the  advantages  of  the 
decimal  system.  The  word  cypher,  with  all  its  deriva- 
tions, is  an  Arabic  word.  They  translated  from  the  Greek 
Euclid  and  the  earlier  geometers ;  but  it  was  to  the 
original  studies  of  an  Arab  geometer — Ben  Musa — of  the 
ninth  century,  that  Europe  owed  its  use  of  the  improved 
science  to  which  the  Arabs  gave  its  modern  name  of 
algebra.  Ben  Musa  was  the  inventor  of  the  common 
method  of  solving  quadratic  equations,  as  well  as  of  the 
substitution  of  sines  for  chords  in  trigonometry.  His 
system  was  the  system  commonly  adopted  by  the  Arab 
schools.  The  Arabs  were  ardent  students  of  mathematics, 
and  a  long  list  of  astronomers  and  physicists,  from  Al 
Maimon,  who  determined  the  obliquity  of  the  ecliptic  in 
830 ;  through  Ebn  Junis,  who  constructed  the  Hakemite 
tables  of  the  stars  in  1008 ;  Avicenna,  the  well-known 
physician  and  philosopher,  who  wrote,  amongst  other 
things,  in  the  early  part  of  the  eleventh  century,  an 
encyclopaedia  of  human   knowledge    in    twenty    volumes ; 


36  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

Al  Gazzali,  who  in  1058  was  the  forerunner  of  Descartes  ; 
Al-Hazen,  the  optician,  who  estabhshed  the  modern  theory 
of  vision,  basing  it  on  clear  anatomical  and  geometrical 
evidence,  and  who  was  the  first  to  trace,  about  the  year 
1 100,  the  curvilinear  path  of  rays  of  light  through  the 
air,  deducing  from  his  theory  of  refraction  a  determina- 
tion of  the  height  of  the  atmosphere  ;  to  El  Idrisi,  the 
geographer  of  Roger  of  Sicily  ;  the  famous  Averrhoes,  the 
commentator  of  Aristotle,  who  lived  at  the  end  of  the 
twelfth  century  ;  and  the  brilliant  schools  of  medicine  and 
surgery  which  adorned  the  thirteenth  century  :  all  serve 
to  demonstrate  that  in  the  application  of  the  abstract 
principles  of  science  to  natural  phenomena,  the  Arabs 
luminously  opened  the  path  of  modern  progress.  Their 
studies  in  chemistry  were  profound.  Geber,  or  Djajar, 
who  lived  in  the  ninth  century,  and  of  whom  Roger 
Bacon  speaks  at  a  much  later  period  as  the  niagister 
magistrorunt  of  chemical  science,  was  the  first  to  describe 
nitric  acid  and  aqua  regia.  Before  him  chemistry  had 
no  stronger  acid  than  concentrated  vinegar.  The  pro- 
perties and  preparation  of  sulphuric  acid  and  phosphorus 
soon  followed.  For  the  composition  of  gunpowder  we 
get  towards  the  end  of  the  eighth  century  the  following 
prescription:  "Pulverise  on  a  marble  mortar  one  pound 
of  sulphur,  two  of  charcoal,  and  six  of  saltpetre."  Any 
one  who  may  have  visited  the  royal  gunpowder  works 
at  Waltham  Abbey  will  know  how  little  the  prescription 
has  altered,  except  in  varying  proportions,  to  the  present 
day.  In  geology,  also,  Arabian  investigations  were  on  the 
sound  path  of  reason.  Avicenna  says  of  mountains  that 
they  may  be  due  to  two  different  causes.  "  Either  they 
are  the  effect  of  upheavals  of  the  crust  of  the  earth  .  .  . 
or  they  are  the  effect  of  water  which,  cutting  for  itself  a 
new  route,  has  denuded  the  valleys,  the  strata  being  of 
different  kinds — some  soft,  some  hard."  The  Arabs  were 
early  acquainted  with  the  properties  of  the  magnet  and 
the  theory  of  gravitation.  True  conceptions  of  geology 
and  astronomy  led   naturally  to  truer  conceptions  of  the 


ARAB   CIVILISATION    IN    SPAIN  37 

age  of  the  earth  and  the  lapse  of  historic  time  than 
have  ever  prevailed  before  the  scientific  era  of  the 
present  day. 

History  and  geography  were  no  less  brilliantly  repre- 
sented than  the  natural  sciences.  Ibn  Said,  who  wrote  in 
the  middle  of  the  thirteenth  century,  has  preserved  for  us 
a  vivid  description  of  the  attainments  of  the  Arabs  of 
Spain.  There  is  no  department  of  science  or  literature 
in  which  he  does  not  claim  pre-eminence  for  them,  and 
supports  his  claim  by  lists  of  names,  strange  now  to  the 
European  ear,  but,  if  we  may  judge  by  the  manner  in 
which  they  are  introduced,  familiar  enough  to  the  learned 
of  his  time.  Ibn  Said  himself  is  described  by  his  suc- 
cessors as  "  the  truthful  historian."  He  was  the  descendant 
of  a  line  of  distinguished  men,  and  tells  us  that  the  history 
of  Andalusia,  which  he  carried  down  to  the  year  1247,  had 
taken  no  less  than  125  years  to  write  and  six  authors  to 
complete  it.  It  was  conceived  and  carried  to  a  certain 
stage  by  his  great-grandfather  ;  it  was  taken  further  by  his 
grandfather ;  his  two  great-uncles  worked  upon  it ;  then 
•'  came  my  father  Musa,  who  certainly  was  the  most 
learned  and  experienced  of  all  my  ancestors  in  these 
matters";  finally,  Ibn  Said  himself  completed  the  work. 
It  is  said  that  a  better  history  of  Andalusia  was  never 
written.  Contemporary  with  the  earlier  part  of  this  com- 
position was  the  geography  of  El  Idrisi,  who  wrote  about 
the  year  11 53.  Nearly  the  whole  of  this  work  is  still 
extant.  For  the  purpose  of  contrasting  the  state  of 
knowledge  of  Arabic  Spain  with  the  ignorance  of  the 
Christian  countries  of  the  North,  who  had  yet  to  wait 
nearly  four  hundred  years  for  a  true  knowledge  of  the 
conformation  of  the  earth,  the  following  passage  from  it 
may  be  quoted  : — 

"What  results  from  the  opinion  of  philosophers, 
learned  men,  and  those  skilled  in  observation  of  the 
heavenly  bodies,  is  that  the  world  is  round  as  a  sphere, 
of  which  the  waters  are  adherent  and  maintained  upon 
its  surface  by    natural  equilibrium.      It  is  surrounded  by 


38  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

air,  and  all  created  bodies  are  stable  on  its  surface,  the 
earth  drawing  to  itself  all  that  is  heavy  in  the  same  way 
as  a  magnet  attracts  iron.  The  terrestrial  globe  is  divided 
into  two  equal  parts  by  the  equinoctial  line.  The  circum- 
ference of  the  earth  is  divided  into  360  degrees  each  of 
25  parasangs.  This  is  the  Indian  calculation.  .  .  .  From 
the  equinoctial  line  to  each  pole  there  are  90  degrees,  but 
there  is  no  habitable  land  farther  north  than  the  64th 
degree."  The  earth,  he  says  elsewhere,  is  essentially 
round,  but  not  of  a  perfect  rotundity,  being  somewhat 
depressed  at  the  poles.  His  description  of  the  countries 
upon  the  earth,  including  England  to  the  west  and  China 
to  the  east,  is  extraordinarily  full,  and  in  many  essential 
particulars  remains  accurate  to  the  present  day.  America 
alone  appears  to  have  been  unknown  to  the  Arabs,  and 
when  we  remember  that  modern  Europe  had  to  wait  for  the 
journey  of  Magellan  round  the  world  in  the  opening  years 
of  the  sixteenth  century  to  be  quite  sure  of  the  shape 
of  the  globe,  we  must  admit  that  in  the  learning  of  the 
Arabs  of  Spain,  Negroland  had  sources  of  information 
far  purer  than  any  of  which  England  at  that  time  could 
boast. 

In  every  branch  of  science  the  theoretic  conquests  of 
the  Arabs  gave  practical  results.  Spectacles  and  telescopes 
resulted  from  their  study  of  optics.  Ebn  Junis,  the  astro- 
nomer, was  the  first  to  apply  the  pendulum  about  the  year 
1000  to  the  measure  of  time,  and  from  his  abstruse  studies 
in  astronomy  clocks  became  a  domestic  possession.  The 
use  of  the  astrolabe  and  the  compass,  revived  again  at  a 
later  period  in  Europe,  were  common  to  Arab  navigation. 
Gunpowder  has  already  been  mentioned  as  a  result  of 
chemistry,  and  military  science  was  revolutionised  by  the 
introduction  of  artillery  and  firearms.  Improvement  in 
agriculture  and  the  introduction  and  acclimatisation  of  new 
plants  were  an  even  more  important  result  of  the  same 
study,  combined  with  that  of  botany,  to  which  the  Arabs 
were  passionately  addicted.  Studies  in  the  effects  of  drugs 
and  the  nature  of  plants  were  the  basis  of  their  medicine, 


ARAB    CIVILISATION    IN    SPAIN  39 

while  physiology  and  anatomy  gave  to  their  surgical  schools 
the  wide  renown  which  they  enjoyed. 

For  seven  centuries  the  medical  schools  of  Europe 
owed  everything  they  knew  to  Arabian  research.  The 
Arabic  impression  is  still  to  be  traced  in  the  derivation  of 
such  words  as  syrup,  julep,  &c.  Vivisection  as  well  as 
dissection  of  dead  bodies  was  practised  in  their  anatomical 
schools,  and  women  as  well  as  men  were  trained  to  per- 
form some  of  the  most  delicate  surgical  operations.  Their 
studies  of  the  functions  of  the  human  body  and  the  cure 
of  its  diseases  enabled  them  to  establish  hygienic  systems 
which  were  perhaps  among  the  greatest  of  the  many  boons 
which  they  conferred  upon  medieval  Europe.  Every  court 
and  household  of  importance  had  at  one  time  its  Jewish  or 
Saracen  physician.  Amongst  other  very  eminent  names 
may  be  quoted  for  surgery  Albucasis  of  Cordova,  and  for 
medicine  Ibn  Zohr. 

Ibn   Zohr,   more   generally  known   as    Avenzoar,   was 
regarded    as  the  great   authority    in    Moorish    pharmacy. 
He   lived    in  the    first   half  of  the    twelfth    century,   and 
was  contemporary  of  another  and  almost  equally  eminent 
physician,  Al  Far.     A  story   is  told  of  these  two  which 
is  not  without  application  to  the  dietetic  controversies  of 
the  present  day.      Ibn  Zohr  was  very  fond  of  green  figs, 
and  ate  them  freely.     Al  Far  never  ate  them,  and  he  used 
to  say  to  Ibn  Zohr:  "If  you  eat  figs  to  that  extent  you 
will  have  a  very  bad  abscess."     Ibn  Zohr  replied  :  "  If  you 
don't  eat  them  you   will   be  subject  to  fever  and  die  of 
constipation."      Ibn   Zohr  was  right.     Al   Far  had   fever 
and   died   of  constipation.      But  Al    Far  was  also   right. 
Shortly  after  Al  Ear's  death,  Ibn  Zohr  was  attacked  by  a 
bad  abscess  and  died  of  it  in  Seville  in  1 161.     The  daughter 
and  granddaughter  of  this    Ibn   Zohr  were   both  accom- 
plished female  doctors.     Avempace  was  another  physician 
of  the   twelfth  century  whose    reputation  was  European. 
Averrhoes,  also  deeply  versed  in  medicine,  was  a  personal 
friend  of  Ibn  Zohr. 

In  the  higher  departments  of  jurisprudence  and  poli- 


40  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

tical  economy,  as  well  as  in  the  literary  fields  of  grammar, 
logic,  poetry,  and  biography,  the  Arabian  schools  excelled. 
Their  schools,  colleges,  and  universities  were  the  resort 
of  the  learned  of  all  nations  ;  but  it  was  perhaps  specially 
in  the  material  development  of  their  civilisation  that  their 
prosperity  had  its  most  direct  effect  in  stimulating  com- 
mercial intercourse  with  Negroland. 

An  Arab  historian,  writing  in  the  sixteenth  century, 
says  of  Cordova,  where  Abdurrahman  I.  established  his 
court :  "  One  thing  is  certain,  namely,  that  trade  and 
agriculture  flourished  in  this  place  during  the  reigns  of 
the  sons  of  Ommeyah,  in  a  degree  which  has  scarcely 
been  witnessed  in  any  city  of  the  world.  Its  market 
was  always  over-stocked  with  the  fruits  of  the  land,  the 
productions  of  every  district,  and  the  best  of  every  country. 
No  robe,  however  costly,  no  drug,  however  scarce,  no 
jewel,  however  precious,  no  rarity  of  distant  and  unknown 
lands,  but  was  to  be  procured  in  the  bazaar  of  Cordova, 
and  found  hundreds  of  purchasers."  There  were  471 
mosques  and  300  public  baths,  of  which  the  numbers 
afterwards  increased.  One  "trustworthy  writer"  counted 
the  number  of  houses  under  the  Caliph  Al  Mansur,  and 
found  63,000  of  the  "great  and  noble,  and  200,077  ^^ 
the  common  people "  ;  there  were  at  the  same  time  up- 
wards of  80,000  shops.  Water  from  the  mountains  was 
conveyed  to  the  royal  palace  of  Cordova,  and  "thence 
distributed  through  every  corner  and  quarter  of  the 
city  by  means  of  leaden  pipes  into  basins  of  different 
shapes,  made  of  the  purest  gold,  the  finest  silver,  or 
plated  brass,  as  well  as  into  vast  lakes,  curious  tanks, 
amazing  reservoirs,  and  fountains  of  Grecian  marble 
beautifully  carved." 

The  town  in  the  time  of  the  Ommeyades  measured 
twenty-four  miles  by  six,  the  greater  part  of  which  area  was 
covered  by  mosques,  palaces,  and  the  houses  of  the  great 
standing  in  beautiful  gardens.  These  houses  were  palaces 
of  luxury,  magnificently  decorated,  cooled  in  summer  by 
ingeniously    arranged    draughts    of  fresh   air  drawn   from 


1 


ARAB   CIVILISATION    IN    SPAIN  41 

the  garden  over  beds  of  jdowers  chosen  for  their  perfume, 
warmed  in  winter  by  hot  air  conveyed  through  pipes 
bedded  in  the  walls.  There  were  bath-rooms  supplied 
with  hot  and  cold  water.  There  were  boudoirs,  drawing- 
rooms,  libraries,  halls,  corridors,  and  galleries  lighted  by 
windows  of  clear  and  coloured  glass.  Clusters  of  columns 
of  marble,  either  plain  or  incrusted  with  more  precious 
substances,  supported  roofs  of  mosaic  and  gold.  The 
walls  were  decorated  with  mosaics,  or  covered  with  arab- 
esque and  floral  paintings.  The  furniture  was  of  the  most 
precious  and  varied  description.  It  was  made  of  sandal 
and  citron  and  other  woods  brought  from  the  tropics,  and 
curiously  inlaid  with  mother-of-pearl,  ivory,  silver,  and  gold. 
There  were  tables  of  gold,  set  with  emeralds,  rubies, 
and  pearls.  In  winter  the  walls  were  hung  with  tapestry, 
the  floors  were  covered  with  thick  Persian  carpets,  of  which 
the  most  magnificent  were  embroidered  with  gold  and 
pearls.  There  were  luxurious  couches  piled  with  pillows. 
Vases  of  porcelain  and  crystal  were  filled  with  flowers. 
Rare  and  curious  objects  from  all  parts  of  the  world  were 
brought  together  to  satisfy  the  eye  and  taste.  In  the 
evening  the  rooms  were  lit  by  wax  candles,  which  were 
distributed  by  groups  of  hundreds  in  chandeliers  that 
hung  from  the  ceilings.  Great  skill  and  taste  were  de- 
voted to  the  design  and  workmanship  of  these  chandeliers. 
They  were  often  made  from  the  metal  found  in  the 
bells  of  Christian  churches,  and  when  this  was  the  case, 
there  seems  to  have  been  a  special  pleasure  in  designing 
them  for  use  in  the  mosques.  One  famous  chandelier  is 
mentioned  which  held  no  less  than  1804  candles.  The 
gardens  in  which  the  great  houses  stood  are  described 
by  every  writer  in  terms  of  rapture.  Bowers  of  roses  ; 
orange  and  pomegranate  groves ;  shaded  walks,  over 
which  lemon-trees  were  trained,  so  that  the  fruit  when 
ripe  "hung  down  like  little  lamps"  ;  successions  of  colour 
and  perfume,  to  procure  which  plants  were  brought  from 
all  parts  of  the  world.  Sometimes,  to  please  a  favourite 
wife,   a  whole  hillside  would  be  planted  with  her  chosen 


42  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

colour.  The  use  of  water  was  thoroughly  understood. 
Fountains,  cascades,  and  lakes  gave  coolness  and  mois- 
ture to  the  air,  and  also  provided  opportunities  for  the 
keeping  of  fish  and  the  special  cultivation  of  water-plants. 
Garden  fruits  and  vegetables  were  cultivated  in  rare 
perfection  and  variety.  In  the  gardens  there  were  laby- 
rinths, and  marble  playing-courts.  There  were  menageries 
of  curious  animals,  and  aviaries  of  foreign  birds.  Botany, 
horticulture,  zoology,  and  ornithology  were  passions  no 
less  of  the  learned  than  of  the  rich. 

In  the  town  of  Cordova,  for  a  distance  of  ten  miles, 
the  streets  were  lit  at  night  by  lamps  placed  close  to 
one  another.  The  descriptions  of  the  mosques  and  build- 
ings of  Cordova — including  the  famous  mosque  with  the 
360  arches,  and  the  even  more  famous  palace  of  Azzahra, 
which  took  forty  years  to  build,  and  contained  the  Hall 
of  the  Caliphs,  roofed  in  pure  gold,  and  lighted  at  will 
by  fountains  of  quicksilver,  which,  when  they  were  set 
in  motion,  caused  the  room  "to  look  in  an  instant  as  if 
it  were  traversed  by  flashes  of  lightning  " — are  so  elaborate 
as  to  fill  many  volumes.  The  size  of  the  Azzahra  palace 
may  be  imagined  from  the  fact  that  it  had  15,000  doors. 
It  had  amongst  its  many  beauties  remarkable  fountains 
and  terraces  of  polished  marble,  which  overhung  "match- 
less gardens."  It  was  filled  with  works  of  art,  and,  ac- 
cording to  one  writer,  it  was  such  that  "travellers  from 
distant  lands,  men  of  all  ranks,  following  various  religions, 
princes,  ambassadors,  merchants,  pilgrims,  theologians, 
and  poets,  who  were  conversant  with  edifices  of  this 
kind,  and  had  surveyed  this,  all  agreed  that  they  had 
never  seen  in  the  course  of  their  travels  anything  that 
could  be  compared  to  it." 

The  other  cities  of  the  Arabs  in  Spain  were  no  less 
remarkable.  In  the  garden  of  one  of  the  palaces  of 
Toledo  there  was  an  artificial  lake,  in  the  centre  of  which 
there  was  a  kiosk  of  stained  glass  adorned  with  gold. 
"  The  architect  so  contrived  this  that  by  certain  geo- 
metrical rules  the  water  of  the  lake  was  made  to  ascend 


ARAB   CIVILISATION    IN    SPAIN  43 

to  the  top  of  the  dome,  and  then,  dropping  at  both  sides, 
join  the  waters  of  the  lake.  In  this  room  the  Sultan  could 
sit  untouched  by  the  water,  which  fell  everywhere  round 
him,  and  refreshed  the  air  in  the  hot  season.  Sometimes, 
too,  wax  tapers  were  lighted  within  the  room,  producing 
an  admirable  effect  on  the  transparent  walls  of  the  kiosk." 
It  is  worth  remembering  that  glass  was  not  introduced  into 
English  domestic  architecture  until  the  reign  of  Queen 
Elizabeth,  and  that  the  period  at  which  this  kiosk  is  de- 
scribed was  contemporary  with  the  Saxon  Heptarchy. 

Seville,  with  its  famous  gardens,  its  noble  squares, 
its  great  observatory,  its  suspension  bridge,  was  regarded 
as  one  of  the  most  important  of  Arab  towns.  Granada 
was  the  Damascus  of  Andalusia,  very  famous  under  the 
Almohade  Sultans.  Malaga,  with  its  numerous  towers, 
had  the  advantages  of  land  and  sea.  It  was  famous  very 
early  in  its  history  for  the  manufacture  of  forbidden  wine. 
Its  oil  and  its  figs  were  known  all  over  the  world,  so  were 
its  silks,  especially  the  brocades,  for  which  it  had  beautiful 
designs.  Its  export  trade  extended  to  India  and  China. 
Almeria  was  another  of  the  rich  coast  towns.  It  had  a 
dockyard  in  which  very  fine  vessels  were  built.  It  was, 
according  to  an  Arab  author,  Ash-shakandi,  the  "greatest 
mart  in  Andalusia  :  Christians  of  all  nations  came  to  its 
port  to  buy  and  sell,  and  they  had  factories  established  in 
it,  where  they  loaded  their  vessels  with  such  goods  as 
they  wanted,  owing  to  which,  and  to  its  being  a  very 
opulent  and  large  city,  filled  with  passengers  and  mer- 
chants, the  produce  of  the  tithe  imposed  upon  the  goods 
and  paid  by  the  Christian  merchants  amounted  to  very 
considerable  sums,  and  exceeded  that  collected  in  any 
other  seaport." 

Almeria  gained  this  trade  largely  by  its  famous  manu- 
factures of  silk,  and  especially  of  brocades  and  damasks 
and  tissues  of  gold  and  silver.  Thousands  of  hands  were 
engaged  in  each  branch  of  the  silk  trade.  It  was  also 
famous  for  the  manufacture  of  pottery  and  glass  and  what 
we  should  in  the  present  day  call  hardware.     Ships  from 


44  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

the  East  brought  to  its  ports  all  the  finest  wares  of  India 
and  China.  "  Almeria,"  says  the  author  already  quoted, 
"is  an  opulent  and  magnificent  city,  whose  fame  has 
spread  far  and  wide.  God  has  endowed  its  inhabitants 
with  various  gifts,  such  as  a  temperate  climate  and 
abundance  of  fruits ;  they  are  handsome,  well  -  made, 
good-natured,  very  hospitable,  very  much  attached  to 
their  friends,  and  are  above  all  things  very  refined  in 
their  manners,  and  very  elegant  in  their  dress.  Its  coast 
is  the  finest  in  all  the  Mediterranean  as  well  as  the  safest 
and  the  most  frequented."  Its  inhabitants  were  said  to 
be  the  wealthiest  in  all  Andalusia,  and  they  would  appear 
to  have  somehow  solved  the  problem  of  creating  a  manu- 
facturing town  without  loss  of  beauty,  for  all  authors  vie 
with  one  another  in  extolling  the  charm  and  picturesque- 
ness  of  the  town.  It  had  no  less  than  a  thousand  public 
baths,  and  for  forty  miles  the  course  of  the  river,  "  which 
contributed  no  little  to  the  ornament  of  the  city  and  the 
environs,"  was  "through  orchards,  gardens,  and  groves, 
where  singing  birds  delight  with  their  harmony  the  ears 
of  the  traveller." 

All  the  towns  of  the  Arabs  had  public  gardens  planted 
with  groves  of  fine  orange,  pomegranate,  and  other  trees, 
of  which  the  remains  are  still  to  be  seen  in  the  Alamedas 
of  Southern  Spain.  Abdurrahman  I.  was  "passionately 
fond  of  flowers."  He  planted  beautiful  gardens,  to  which 
he  brought  all  kinds  of  rare  and  exotic  plants  and  fine 
trees  from  foreign  countries.  He  introduced  good  systems 
of  irrigation.  His  passion  for  flowers  and  plants  led  him 
to  send  agents  to  Syria,  India,  and  other  countries  with 
a  commission  to  procure  him  all  sorts  of  seeds  and  plants, 
many  of  which  he  successfully  acclimatised  in  the  royal 
gardens,  and  this  custom,  followed  by  his  successors  and 
adopted  by  the  rich,  led  to  the  introduction  of  many  fruits 
and  plants  previously  unknown  even  to  cultivated  Rome. 
Among  these,  cotton,  rice,  the  sugar-cane,  the  pome- 
granate, and  the  peach  may  be  mentioned,  but  many  of 
our  garden  vegetables  have  also  come  to  us  from  the  same 


ARAB    CIVILISATION    IN    SPAIN  45 

source.  It  may  be  worth  noting  that  the  peach,  to  which  we 
are  in  the  habit  of  attributing  a  Persian  origin,  was  found 
by  the  Persians,  according  to  Strabo,  in  the  eastern  part 
of  Negroland,  where  it  was  cultivated  by  the  Ethiopians 
at  the  period  of  the  conquest  of  Egypt  by  Cambyses. 
It  does  not  seem  to  be  native  to  Negroland,  and  the 
presumption  is  that  it  may  have  been  introduced  into  the 
valley  of  the  Nile  from  India.  Nevertheless  we  may 
accept  it  as  a  pleasant  fruit  of  the  early  intercourse  of 
Egypt  with  Negroland. 

Amone  the  vepfetables  which  we  owe  to  the  Arab 
passion  for  gardening  is  asparagus.  This  was  introduced 
somewhat  later  than  the  peach  by  a  certain  courtier  and 
epicure  of  the  name  of  Zaryab,  who  came  to  Andalusia  in 
821.  This  Zaryab,  who,  like  Tarik,  Tarif,  and  others,  was 
a  freedman,  was  a  celebrated  musician.  He  improved  the 
lute,  adding  a  fifth  string  to  the  four  which  up  to  his  time 
had  sufficed,  and  founded  a  great  school  of  music.  He 
was  renowned  throughout  Spain,  enjoyed  a  public  pension, 
and  on  one  occasion,  when  he  came  to  Cordova,  the  Sultan 
himself,  to  show  the  respect  which  he  held  to  be  due  to 
talent,  rode  out  to  meet  him.  Zaryab  appears  to  have 
been  a  remarkable  as  well  as  an  extraordinarily  popular 
person.  He  was  not  only  talented  but  learned.  He  was 
an  astronomer  and  geographer.  He  had  a  prodigious 
memory.  "  He  was,  moreover,  gifted  with  so  much  pene- 
tration and  wit,  he  had  so  deep  an  acquaintance  with  the 
various  branches  of  polite  literature,  he  possessed  in  so 
eminent  a  degree  the  charms  of  polite  conversation  and 
the  talents  requisite  to  entertain  an  audience  .  .  .  that 
there  never  was  either  before  or  after  him  a  man  of  his 
profession  who  was  more  generally  beloved  and  admired. 
Kings  and  great  people  took  him  for  a  pattern  of  manners 
and  education,  and  his  name  became  for  ever  celebrated 
among  the  inhabitants  of  Andalusia." 

Zaryab,  who  is  worth  quoting  individually  as  having 
been  evidently  a  leader  of  fashion  in  the  most  civilised 
court  of  Europe  in  the  early  half  of  the  ninth  century, 


46  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

appears  to  have  disdained  no  detail  of  daily  life.  Aspara- 
gus is  not  the  only  dish  which  he  added  to  the  menus  of 
his  day.  He  was  fastidious  about  cooking,  and  invented 
many  good  things.  He  also  introduced  the  fashion  of 
being  served  on  crystal  instead  of  on  gold  or  silver,  with 
other  refinements  of  the  table.  The  manufacture  of  glass 
was  introduced  into  Spain  by  an  Arab  of  the  name  of 
Furnas  at  about  this  period.  Zaryab  also  set  the  fashion 
of  changing  dress  for  four  seasons  of  the  year  instead  of 
for  only  two,  as  was  the  custom  before  his  day.  The 
curious  in  such  matters  may  read  in  the  Arab  chronicles 
what  was  worn — silks  and  muslins,  wadded  clothes  and 
furs,  according  to  the  time  of  year.  The  ladies  were 
also  extremely  fond  of  jewels,  and  wore  even  jewelled 
shoes,  for  which  they  would  give  as  much  as  £\20  a 
pair.  But  in  dress  as  in  food,  Zaryab  specially  valued  the 
refinement  of  cleanliness.  Before  his  time  the  Kings  of 
Andalusia,  we  are  told,  used  to  have  their  clothes  washed 
in  water  of  roses  and  other  garden  flowers,  the  conse- 
quence of  which  was  that  they  never  looked  quite  clean. 
Zaryab  taught  them  a  method  in  which,  by  adding  salt 
to  the  mixture,  "the  linen  could  be  made  clear  and 
white."  The  chronicle  gravely  records  that  the  "  experi- 
ment having  been  tried,  every  one  approved  of  it,"  and 
Zaryab  was  much  praised  for  the  invention.  It  was  the 
reputation  of  the  Arabs  that  they  were  "the  cleanest 
people  upon  earth  "  in  all  that  related  to  their  person,  dress, 
beds,  and  the  interior  of  their  houses.  Indeed,  we  are 
told,  "they  carried  cleanliness  so  far  that  it  was  not  an 
uncommon  thing  for  a  man  of  the  lower  classes  to  spend 
his  last  coin  in  soap  instead  of  buying  food  for  his  daily 
consumption,  and  thus  go  without  his  dinner  rather  than 
appear  in  public  in  dirty  clothes."  By  way  of  contrast 
in  habits  we  may  recall  certain  Irish  earls,  who,  towards 
the  end  of  the  Desmond  rebellion  about  1581,  are  described 
as  sleeping  with  their  ladies  and  all  their  servants  in  a 
hall  so  dirty  as  to  be  "not  fit  for  a  hog  cote,"  while  the 
only  toilet  that  the  ladies  made  in  the  morning  was  "to 


ARAB    CIVILISATION    IN    SPAIN  47 

get  up  and  shake  their  ears."  Zaryab  flourished  some  seven 
centuries  before  the  ladies  whose  toilet  was  so  simple.  He 
was  the  contemporary  of  Egbert  and  Charlemagne. 

The  contrast  between  Arab  civilisation  and  the  civilisa- 
tion of  Northern  Europe  of  that  date  is  sharply  accentuated 
by  the  fact  that,  while  the  literature  of  the  Arabs  was  such 
as  to  remain  for  our  instruction  to  this  day,  Charlemagne, 
the  greatest  monarch  of  the  West,  could  not  write.  Spain 
under  the  Arabs  truly  deserved,  as  we  have  seen,  its  name 
as  the  "  noble  repository  "  of  learning.  One  of  the  four 
principal  things  in  which  Cordova  was  said  to  surpass  all 
other  cities  was  "the  sciences  therein  cultivated."  It  was 
reputed  to  be  the  city  of  the  earth  where  the  greatest 
number  of  books  was  to  be  found,  One  of  the  Ommeyade 
Sultans  was  "  so  fond  of  books  that  he  is  said  to  have 
converted  Andalusia  into  a  great  market  whereto  the 
literary  productions  of  every  clime  were  brought  imme- 
diately for  sale."  He  also  collected  round  him,  and 
employed  in  his  own  palace,  the  most  skilful  men  of  his 
time  in  binding,  transcribing,  and  illuminating  books.  He 
amassed  such  literary  treasures  as  no  sovereign  before  or 
after  him,  to  the  knowledge  of  his  biographers,  had  ever 
possessed.  It  is  said  of  him  that  he  was  so  fond  of 
reading  that  he  preferred  the  pleasure  of  perusing  his 
books  to  all  the  enjoyments  which  royalty  could  afford. 
He  himself  wrote  a  voluminous  history  of  Andalusia. 
His  collection  of  books  founded  the  great  library  of 
Cordova,  which  remained  until  the  taking  of  the  city  by 
the  Berbers  in  a.d.  ioio.  The  catalogue  alone  consisted 
of  forty-four  volumes. 

Every  wealthy  man  in  Cordova  had  his  own  library. 
To  such  an  extent  did  this  rage  for  collection  increase,  says 
Ibn  Said,  that  any  man  in  a  prominent  position  considered 
himself  obliged  to  have  a  library  of  his  own,  and  would 
spare  no  trouble  or  expense  in  collecting  books.  Books 
were  an  expensive  luxury  too.  A  story  is  told  of  a 
certain  writer,  richer  in  learning  than  in  other  goods, 
greatly  desiring  a  book,  and  watching  for  it  daily  in  the 


48  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

market  till  it  came,  "a  beautiful  copy,  elegantly  written." 
He  immediately  bid  for  it  and  increased  his  bidding,  but 
to  his  great  disappointment  he  was  outbid,  though  the 
price  was  beyond  the  value  of  the  book.  The  book  went 
to  his  competitor.  He  approached  to  congratulate  the 
learned  owner,  but  the  man  who  had  acquired  it  said  : 
"  I  am  no  Doctor  ;  neither  do  I  know  what  the  contents 
of  the  book  are  ;  but  I  am  making  a  library,  and  there  is 
a  vacant  space  which,  as  my  means  are  ample,  I  resolved 
to  fill  with  this  volume."  The  reader  echoes  with  sym- 
pathy the  reply  of  the  Doctor:  "It  is  ever  so;  he  gets 
the  nut  who  has  no  teeth." 

Cordova  was  not  singular  in  its  literary  reputation. 
All  the  great  towns  had  good  libraries,  and  the  Arabs 
in  Andalusia  had  a  handwriting  of  their  own  which  they 
adopted  at  some  period  subsequent  to  their  arrival  in 
Spain.  It  has  already  been  mentioned  that  one  of  the 
distinctions  by  which  it  has  been  made  possible  to  learned 
French  research  to  trace  the  different  origin  of  the 
civilisation  of  Eastern  and  Western  Negroland  is  the 
employment  of  the  Eastern  alphabet  of  Arabia  and  Egypt 
in  the  one,  and  the  Western  alphabet  of  Morocco  and 
Spain  in  the  other.  In  addition  to  the  geometricians, 
astronomers,  geographers,  mechanicians,  botanists,  chemists, 
physicians,  who  appear  to  have  collected  all  that  was 
known  in  Asia  as  well  as  Europe,  and  who  wrote  volumin- 
ously— the  works  of  many  of  them  amounting  to  fifty  and 
sixty  volumes — every  branch  of  literature  was  represented. 
There  were  histories,  essays,  poems  ;  there  were  treatises 
upon  arithmetic,  grammar,  poetry,  rhetoric,  canon  and 
civil  law,  jurisprudence,  logic.  Lists  of  distinguished 
writers  have  been  preserved  in  biographical  dictionaries 
which  have  escaped  destruction,  and  it  is  therefore  pos- 
sible to  some  extent  to  reconstruct  the  intellectual  life  of 
the  day.  It  would  appear  to  have  been  active,  charming, 
polished.  The  Arabs  claimed  for  their  children  and  their 
women  that  they  had  a  natural  gift  for  poetry,  narrative, 
and    repartee.       They   appear    to   have    had    a   sufficient 


ARAB    CIVILISATION    IN    SPAIN  49 

number  of  poets  to  furnish  matter  for  biographies  of 
poets,  of  which  one  is  mentioned  as  having  been  in  ten 
volumes.  Philosophy,  theology,  metaphysics,  were  richyl 
represented,  and  fiction  was  not  neglected. 

The  minor  arts,  as  we  have  seen,  were  warmly 
encouraged.  Seville,  which  was  the  special  home  of 
music,  had  a  large  export  trade  in  musical  instruments, 
which  it  sent  to  Africa.  In  this  town  it  was  said  that 
every  musical  instrument  was  to  be  obtained.  Toledo 
was  the  centre  of  steel  and  metal  work.  In  Cordova, 
the  famous  Cordovan  leather,  of  which  the  skins  were 
imported  from  Negroland,  was  worked  into  many  designs 
and  extensively  used  in  beautiful  book  bindings.  All 
the  arts  to  which  elaborate  architecture  and  luxurious 
domestic  life  gave  rise  were,  of  course,  highly  developed. 
Painting  appears  to  have  been  restricted  chiefly  to  decora- 
tive work,  but  we  are  repeatedly  told  that  the  palaces  of 
southern  Spain  were  filled  with  works  of  art. 

It  is  interesting  to  note  that  in  the  great  days  of 
Mohammedan  Spain,  Arabian  women  were  not  confined^ 
as  in  the  East,  to  harems,  but  appeared  freely  in  public 
and  took  their  share  in  all  the  intellectual,  literary,  and 
even  scientific  movements  of  the  day.  Women  held 
schools  in  some  of  the  principal  towns.  There  were 
women  poets,  historians,  and  philosophers,  as  well  as 
women  surgeons  and  doctors. 

A  national  life,  so  varied  and  active,  having  a  commerce 
which  reached  to  the  confines  of  the  known  world,  naturally 
drew  material  for  its  consumption  from  every  source  with 
which  it  was  acquainted.  Negroland  offered  to  Saracen 
Spain  many  of  the  same  sources  of  supply  which  our 
tropical  colonies  offer  to  us,  and  it  will  presently  be  seen 
how  deeply  the  development  of  Negroland  was  affected  by 
the  high  civilisation  of  the  Peninsula. 


D 


CHAPTER    IV 

THE    EMPIRE   OF   "THE   TWO    SHORES" 

The  dynasty  of  the  Ommeyades  lasted  nominally  in  Spain 
until  the  year  103 1  ;  but  the  visible  decay  of  its  power 
may  be  placed  about  the  year  1000. 

Abdurrahman  III.,  one  of  the  greatest  of  the  Western 
Caliphs,  reigned  for  fifty  years,  between  the  dates  of  911 
and  961  A.D.  He  was  the  first  to  assume  the  title  of 
Commander  of  the  Faithful  in  the  West,  and  his  reign 
may  be  taken  as  marking  the  highest  epoch  of  Moham- 
medan authority  in  Europe.  The  Christian  nations  of 
the  North  represented  to  the  Mohammedans  of  that  day 
nothing  more  than  barbarism,  and  in  levying  successful 
war  upon  them,  Abdurrahman  took  the  place  of  the 
champion  of  civilisation.  Every  year  he  renewed  his 
attacks.  He  carried  war  by  land  across  the  Pyrenees, 
and  his  fleets  dominated  the  Mediterranean. 

"In  this  manner,"  says  his  chronicler,  "the  Moslems 
subdued  the  country  of  the  Franks  beyond  the  utmost 
limits  reached  during  the  reigns  of  his  predecessors.  The 
Christian  nations  beyond  the  Pyrenees  extended  to  him 
the  hand  of  submission,  and  their  kings  sent  costly  presents 
to  conciliate  his  favour.  Even  the  kings  of  Rome,  Con- 
stantinople, Germany,  Sclavonia,  and  other  distant  parts, 
sent  ambassadors  asking  for  peace  and  suspension  of 
hostilities,  and  offering  to  agree  to  any  conditions  which 
he  should  dictate."  The  most  elaborate  receptions  were 
accorded  to  these  embassies,  and  it  is  rather  interesting 
to  note  incidentally  in  a  description  of  the  reception  of 
the  embassy  from  Constantinople,  which  took  place  with 
extraordinary  magnificence  in  the  year  949,  that  amongst 


THE  EMPIRE  OF  "THE  TWO  SHORES"       51 

other  things  brought  by  the  ambassadors  there  was  a 
letter  enclosed  in  a  gold  case,  with  a  portrait  of  the 
Emperor  Constantine,  "admirably  executed"  in  stained 
glass, 

Abdurrahman,  moved,  it  is  said,  by  the  consideration 
that  he  could  not  afford  to  have  any  hostile  power  so  close 
to  the  borders  of  Spain  as  Western  Africa,  subdued  also 
a  great  portion  of  Africa.  He  thus  established  the  power 
of  the  Western  Caliphate  from  the  borders  of  Negroland 
to  the  Pyrenees,  and  this  double  kingdom  was  known 
by  the  name  of  Adouatein,  or  "  The  Two  Shores."  In 
the  course  of  all  his  wars  he  suffered  but  one  serious 
defeat,  and  he  had  the  surname  of  "the  Victorious." 
"  Never,"  it  is  said,  "  was  the  Mohammedan  Empire  more 
prosperous  than  during  his  reign.  Commerce  and  agri- 
culture flourished  ;  the  sciences  and  arts  received  a  new 
impulse,  and  the  revenue  was  increased  tenfold."  It  was 
under  this  Abdurrahman  that  cotton  manufacture  was 
first  established  in  Europe  in  the  year  930.  The  Arabs 
also  introduced  the  art  of  printing  calicoes  from  wooden 
blocks. 

Abdurrahman  is  described  as  the  mildest  and  most 
enlightened  sovereign  that  ever  ruled.  His  meekness, 
his  generosity,  and  his  love  of  justice  became  proverbial. 
None  of  his  ancestors  surpassed  him  in  courage  in  the 
field ;  he  was  fond  of  science,  and  the  patron  of  the 
learned,  with  w  hom  he  loved  to  converse,  spending  those 
hours  that  he  stole  from  the  arduous  labours  of  the  ad- 
ministration in  literary  meetings,  to  which  all  the  eminent 
poets  and  learned  men  of  his  court  were  admitted. 

It  is  an  interesting  comment  on  this  half-century  of 
glory  and  prosperity  that,  after  Abdurrahman's  death,  a 
paper  was  found  in  his  own  handwriting,  in  which  those 
days  that  he  had  spent  in  happiness  were  carefully  noted 
down,  and,  on  numbering  them,  they  were  found  to  amount 
to  fourteen  ! 

Before  the  nominal  end  of  the  Ommeyade  dynasty  a 
usurper,    Al   Mansur,   "called    in    Berbers  and   Zenatahs, 


52  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

whom  he  divided  into  companies  according  to  their  tribes," 
and  made  himself  Sultan.  Al  Mansur  became  one  of  the 
great  Caliphs,  and  established  a  splendid  dominion  in 
Western  Africa.  But  the  fact  that  he  was  a  usurper  held 
in  power  by  African  tribes  introduced  a  dangerous  element 
of  disruption  into  the  body-politic  of  the  Caliphate  in 
Spain.  The  Berbers  of  Africa  began  to  recognise  their 
power.  The  descendants  of  the  original  Berbers  who, 
with  the  Arabs,  had  effected  the  conquest  of  Spain,  were 
growing  soft  with  the  pleasures  and  the  luxury  of  a  high 
civilisation.  Their  ruder  brothers  in  Africa  had  kept 
their  vigour,  and  began  to  realise  the  possibilities  which 
it  opened  to  them.  A  great  African  revolt  was  organised, 
the  result  of  which  was  that  Al  Mansur  gave  Fez  in 
sovereignty  to  the  Berber  chiefs  of  the  Zenatah  tribes, 
together  with  a  good  bit  of  Western  Africa,  including  the 
southern  province  of  what  we  now  call  Morocco.  Side 
by  side  with  the  dominion  of  the  Caliphs,  local  sovereign- 
ties in  Africa  acquired  importance,  and  the  ambitions  thus 
partially  gratified  were  not  long  limited  to  Africa. 

Al  Mansur  died  in  1002,  and  Arab  historians  are  in 
practical  agreement  that  from  this  time  the  Mohammedan 
Empire  in  Spain  began  to  show  signs  of  decay.  Perpetual 
claimants  of  the  throne  of  the  Caliphs  employed  African 
troops  in  Spain.  Between  1020  and  1030  the  whole  of 
Andalusia  submitted  with  revolts  and  civil  wars  to  the 
Berbers.  It  became  the  habit  of  the  reigning  Caliph  to 
employ  a  black  bodyguard  drawn  from  Negroland,  and, 
instead  of  maintaining  the  old  attitude  of  united  hostility 
to  the  Christians  on  their  northern  borders,  each  faction 
in  turn  called  in  Christian  help. 

It  was  not  long  before  the  Christian  armies  dominated 
the  situation.  The  limits  of  the  Arab  Empire  became 
narrower,  and  the  power  of  the  Caliphs  was  broken. 
Cordova,  Granada,  Malaga,  Seville,  became  separate 
principalities.  Here  is  a  view  of  the  situation  as  pre- 
sented by  an  Arab  historian  of  the  sixteenth  century  :  "  In 
Africa   as  well   as   in    Andalusia  the   possessions    of   the 


THE  EMPIRE  OF  "THE  TWO  SHORES"      53 

Ummeyah  were  broken  up  into  petty  provinces,  thus 
giving  an  opportunity  to  the  cruel  enemy  of  God  to  attack 
in  detail  the  divided  Moslems,  and  to  expel  them  at  last 
from  those  countries  which  they  had  so  long  held  in  their 
power."  Alfonso  VI.  took  Toledo  in  1081.  In  the 
following  year  Al  Mutammed,  the  Arab  king  of  Seville, 
refused  to  pay  him  tribute,  and  Alfonso  swore  to  drive  the 
Arabs  into  the  sea  at  Gibraltar.  In  this  extremity  Al 
Mutammed  looked  across  the  straits  for  help,  and  Africa 
once  more  intervened  directly  in  the  affairs  of  Spain. 

To  understand  the  position  which  had  been  reached  in 
Africa,  it  is  necessary  to  go  back  for  a  few  years.  It  has 
been  mentioned  that  of  the  two  main  roads  by  which  com- 
munication between  Negroland  and  Northern  Africa  was 
maintained,  one  lay  across  the  western  deserts  in  a  direc- 
tion almost  due  south  of  the  territory  now  known  as 
Morocco.  The  consequence  of  many  wars  in  Northern 
Africa  had  been  to  force  down  certain  Berber  tribes  upon 
the  western  confines  of  Negroland.  "  From  time  im- 
memorial," says  Ibn  Khaldun,  "  the  Molet-themim  (or 
Wearers  of  the  Veil)  had  been  in  the  Sandy  Desert.  As 
brave  as  they  were  wild,  they  had  never  bowed  under  a 
foreign  yoke.  Having  increased  their  numbers  in  the 
vast  plains  of  the  desert,  they  formed  several  tribes — the 
Goddala,  the  Lemtunah,  the  Messonfah,  the  Outzila,  the 
Tuareg,  the  Zegowah,  and  the  Lamta.  These  people 
were  all  brothers  of  the  Senajah,  who  lived  between  the 
Atlantic  and  Ghadames,"  that  is,  in  the  western  half  of 
Northern  Africa. 

The  Lemtunah  were  already  a  powerful  nation  obeying 
hereditary  kings  when  the  Omrneyade  dynasty  reigned  in 
Spain,  and  the  western  portion  of  the  desert  over  which  they 
ruled  was  known  as  the  "  Desert  Empire."  At  that  time 
also  the  Negro  nations  of  the  West  were  very  powerful, 
but  at  a  later  period,  after  the  Lemtunahs  had  subdued 
the  lesser  tribes,  the  Western  kingdom  of  the  Negroes 
began  to  decay.  The  Lemtunah  made  war  upon  them  and 
forced  them  partially  to  accept  Islam.     Under  Tiloutan,  a 


54  A   TROPICAL   DEPENDENCY 

Lemtunah  king  who  died  in  the  year  837,  the  Desert 
Empire  reached  its  height.  Twenty  Negro  kings  paid 
tribute  to  him.  It  is  said  of  his  kingdom  that  the  cHmate 
was  so  healthy  that  men  commonly  reached  in  it  the  age 
of  eighty.  The  sons  and  successors  of  Tiloutan  reigned 
successfully  until  the  year  918,  when  the  dynasty  was 
overthrown  by  the  Senajah.  After  this  there  was  confu- 
sion mixed  with  conquest  for  about  1 20  years,  until  there 
came  to  the  throne  a  Senajah  ruler  of  the  name  of  Yahya, 
under  whom  there  took  place  a  union  of  the  tribes  which 
resulted  in  the  foundation  of  the  Empire  of  Morocco. 

In  1048  Yahya  made  the  pilgrimage  to  Mecca,  and 
brought  back  with  him  for  the  instruction  of  his  people  a 
religious  teacher,  Ibn  Yasin.  The  united  tribes  had  never 
wholly  abandoned  the  nomad  habits  of  their  ancestors. 
They  were  a  hardy,  active  people,  who  had  kept  the 
abstemious  customs  of  the  desert.  Their  principal  wealth 
consisted  in  their  flocks.  They  were  among  those  of 
whom  it  was  said  that  many  of  them  passed  their  lives 
without  ever  seeing  bread.  They  had  long  since  em- 
braced Islam,  but  they  had  apparently  strayed  from  the 
true  path,  and  the  reformation  preached  by  Ibn  Yasin  was 
stern.  Severe  penalties  were  imposed  on  wrong-doing. 
The  man  who  told  a  lie  was  beaten  with  eighty  strokes  ; 
the  man  who  drank  wine  was  beaten  with  eighty  strokes  ; 
serious  offences  were  more  heavily  punished  ;  and  every 
stranger  who  joined  the  sect  was  required  to  forfeit 
one-third  of  his  property  by  way  of  redemption  for  any 
injustice  by  which  he  might  have  acquired  the  rest. 

The  pressure  of  these  doctrines  in  application  produced 
a  revolt.  Ibn  Yasin  with  a  few  of  his  followers  with- 
drew to  an  island  in  the  Senegal,  the  river  which  formed 
the  southern  frontier  of  the  Desert  Kingdom,  Here  he 
practised  in  rigid  seclusion  all  he  taught.  The  fame  of 
his  doctrine  spread  through  the  West,  and  thousands 
flocked  to  him,  till  at  last,  seeing  the  number  of  his 
followers  daily  increase,  he  declared  to  them  that  it  was 
not  enough  to  accept  the  truth  themselves,  they  must  also 


THE  EMPIRE  OF  "THE  TWO  SHORES"      55 

constrain  the  world  to  accept  it.  He  gave  to  his  disciples 
the  name  of  "  Morabites,"  or  "Champions  of  the  Faith," 
afterwards  known  as  "  Al  Moravides,"  and  proceeded  to 
preach  a  Holy  War.  To  "maintain  the  truth,  to  repress 
injustice,  and  to  abolish  all  taxes  not  based  on  law  "  was 
the  formula  of  faith  with  which  this  relicrious  movement 
started  from  the  extreme  south  of  the  then  known  Western 
world.  The  Emir  Yahya  assumed  command,  and  under 
his  leadership  the  Almoravides  began  that  triumphant 
march  to  the  north  which  was  to  end  only  on  the  throne 
of  Spain.  Yahya  died  in  1056  after  a  successful  campaign 
which  established  his  power  in  South- Western  Morocco. 
He  was  succeeded  by  his  brother  Abou  Bekr,  who  led  the 
Almoravides  to  further  conquest.  Their  dominion  spread 
across  the  Atlas  Mountains  to  the  sea,  and  they  subdued 
all  the  territory  to  the  western  coast. 

In  1 06 1  dissensions  breaking  out  amongst  the  tribes  in 
the  south,  Abou  Bekr  returned  to  his  Desert  Kingdom, 
leaving  his  cousin  Yusuf  Tachefin  in  command  in  the 
north.  This  proved  to  be  a  final  division.  Abou  Bekr 
succeeded  in  reconciling  his  unruly  tribes,  and  to  give  an 
outlet  to  their  energies  he  led  them  to  the  conquest  of 
Negroland,  the  northern  border  of  which  he  overran  for 
a  distance  of  ninety  days'  march  from  his  own  territory. 
This  should  have  carried  him  to  the  Haussa  States.  But 
he  returned  no  more  to  take  command  in  the  north.  In 
the  year  1062  Yusuf  laid  the  foundation  of  the  town  of 
Morocco  with  his  own  hands,  and  not  long  afterwards 
declared  the  independence  of  the  northern  kingdom  of 
which  it  was  to  become  the  capital.  Abou  Bekr  acquiesced, 
and  Yusuf,  left  to  himself,  continued  the  conquest  of  North- 
Western  Africa.  By  the  year  1082  he  had  long  been  the 
supreme  ruler  of  that  portion  of  the  world.  His  court  had 
begun  to  attract  the  learning  and  civilisation  which  civil 
war  was  driving  out  of  Spain,  and  we  are  told  that  it  was 
filled  with  Arabs  from  the  frontier  towns  which  had  sub- 
mitted to  Alfonso.  These  men,  "with  tears  in  their  eyes 
and  sorrow  in  their  hearts,  had  come  to  Yusuf  to  implore 


56  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

his  protection."  It  was  to  this  court  and  to  this  man  that 
Al  Mutammed  of  Seville  came  in  1083  to  ask  for  help 
against  the  Christians. 

Yusuf  is  described  as  a  "  wise  and  shrewd  man,  neither 
too  prompt  in  his  determinations,  nor  too  slow  in  carrying 
them  into  effect."  He  had  passed  the  greater  part  of  his 
life  in  his  native  deserts  exposed  to  hunger  and  privation, 
and  had  no  taste  for  a  life  of  pleasure.  It  is  expressly  said 
of  him  that  he  did  not  speak  Arabic.  When,  therefore,  he 
consented  to  cross  over  to  Spain,  and  in  the  course  of  time 
drove  back  the  Christians  and  established  once  more  a 
supreme  Sultan  upon  the  throne  of  Andalusia,  his  con- 
quest and  the  dynasty  which  he  founded  must  be  regarded 
as  an  African  conquest  and  an  African  dynasty.  The 
Almoravides  ruling  in  Spain  were  identically  the  same 
race  as  that  which,  moving  from  the  West,  imposed  Islam 
on  the  races  of  Negroland,  and  established  kingdoms,  of 
which  we  shall  presently  hear,  along  the  courses  of  the 
Niger  and  the  Senegal. 

It  is  stated  that  when  Yusuf  crossed  to  Spain  there 
was  no  tribe  of  the  western  desert  that  was  not  represented 
in  his  army,  and  it  was  the  first  time  that  the  people  of 
Spain  had  ever  seen  camels  used  for  the  purpose  of 
mounting  cavalry.  Forming  part  of  the  army  which 
fought  at  Zalakah  in  1086  there  were  also  some  thousands 
of  blacks  armed  with  Indian  swords  and  short  spears, 
and  shields  covered  with  hippopotamus  hide.  This  battle 
drove  the  Christian  forces  out  of  southern  Spain  and  laid 
the  foundation  of  Yusuf's  Spanish  Empire.  When,  after 
fighting  it,  Yusuf  marched  to  Seville,  the  comforts  and 
luxury  of  that  town,  far  from  raising  in  his  mind  the 
admiration  and  astonishment  that  might  have  been  ex- 
pected, impressed  him  with  very  different  sentiments.  His 
councillors  and  courtiers  pointed  out  to  him  the  advan- 
tages which  power  conferred  in  a  civilised  country.  "  It 
strikes  me,"  he  replied,  "that  this  man  (meaning  the  King 
of  Seville)  is  throwing  away  the  power  which  has  been 
placed  in  his  hands.      Instead   of  giving  his  attention  to 


THE   EMPIRE  OF  "THE  TWO  SHORES"      57 

the  good  administration  and  defence  of  his  kingdom,  he 
thinks  of  nothing  else  than  satisfying  the  cravings  of  his 
passions." 

Not  long  afterwards,  when  Yusuf  had  returned  to  Africa, 
his  generals  informed  him  that  the  whole  of  the  fighting 
against  the  Christians  was  left  to  them,  while  the  Kings 
of  Andalusia  remained  sunk  in  pleasure  and  sloth.  They 
asked  for  his  instructions,  and  were  ordered  to  conquer 
the  Kings  of  Andalusia,  and  to  appoint  to  every  city  or 
town  as  it  fell  into  their  power  a  governor  from  among 
the  officers  of  Yusufs  army.  Town  after  town  fell  to 
the  army  of  the  Almoravides,  till  Seville  itself  was  taken, 
and  the  King  sent  a  prisoner  into  Africa,  where  he  died 
in   1095. 

Yusuf  died  in  11 06.  His  son  succeeded  to  the  Sul- 
tanate of  North  Africa  and  Spain  ;  and  the  Almoravide 
dynasty  continued  to  reign  with  a  double  court,  one  in 
Africa  and  one  in  Spain,  the  Sultan  residing  alternately 
in  either  until  the  African  dominion  was  overthrown  in 
1 142,  and  the  Spanish  dominion  three  years  later,  in  1 145. 
The  last  Almoravide  sovereign  of  Africa  and  Spain  was, 
according  to  Ibn  Khaldun,  executed  in  the  presence  of 
the  Almohade  conqueror  in  1147.  During  the  whole  of 
this  period,  as  under  the  dynasty  of  the  Ommeyades, 
intercourse  between  Spain  and  Negroland  was  freely 
maintained. 


CHAPTER   V 

AFRICAN    RULE    IN    SPAIN 

Although  the  Almoravides  on  their  first  entrance  into 
Spain  came  as  reformers  from  the  desert,  preaching  a 
stern  doctrine  of  abnegation,  they  yielded  rapidly  to  the 
seduction  of  Spanish  luxury,  and  in  little  more  than  half  a 
century  they  are  spoken  of  by  Arab  historians  as  having 
become  soft  and  effeminate  like  their  predecessors.  The 
probability  is  that  the  body  of  the  Moors  in  Spain  re- 
mained what  they  had  been  before  the  Almoravide  in- 
vasion, and  the  course  of  history  was  not  altered,  but  only 
delayed,  by  the  African  conquest. 

In  the  same  spirit  of  religious  reform  which  had  stirred 
the  founder  of  the  Almoravide  sect,  a  Mahdi  arose  in  the 
early  part  of  the  twelfth  century  in  the  northern  provinces 
of  Ifrikiah,  and  preached  a  doctrine  so  stringent  that  he 
excited  a  revolt  among  the  populace,  and  was  obliged  to 
fly  from  the  anger  of  the  Sultan.  He  appeared  first  in 
Bugia  in  1 1 18,  and  preached  his  ascetic  reforms  in  Telem- 
9an,  Fez,  Mequinez,  and  Morocco.  Everywhere  he  excited 
the  anger  of  the  people,  and  towards  1121  he  withdrew 
into  the  desert,  where  gradually  disciples  began  to  join  him 
in  great  numbers.  The  authorities  persecuted  him  here 
also,  and  he  then  called  upon  the  Mesmudian  Berbers  to 
rally  to  his  cause,  to  defend  his  person,  and  to  declare  a 
Holy  War  in  defence  of  the  doctrine  of  the  Unity  of  God. 
He  declared  himself  to  be  the  Mahdi,  and  he  gave  to 
his  followers  the  title  of  Almohades  or  Unitarians.  He 
entrenched  himself  in  the  Mountain  of  Tinmelel  in  the 
southern  fastnesses  of  the  Atlas  chain,  and  this  spot 
remained  the  stronghold  of  the  sect  until  their  final  ex- 


AFRICAN    RULE    IN    SPAIN  59 

tinction  as  a  political  power  about  a  hundred  years  later. 
The  original  Mahdi  died  in  11 28,  but  this  event  had  little 
effect  upon  the  sect.  In  11 30  a  war  began  between  the 
Almohades  and  the  Almoravides  in  Africa,  which  ended 
in  1 147  by  the  capture  of  Morocco  and  the  execution  of 
the  reigning  Almoravide  sovereign. 

No  sooner  was  the  province  of  Morocco  subdued  than 
the  Almohades  crossed  into  Spain,  and  after  a  determined 
contest  with  the  Christian  armies,  who  were  only  with  the 
greatest  difficulty  prevented  from  taking  Cordova,  Mussul- 
man Spain  swore  fealty  in  11 50  to  the  Almohades.  Thus 
for  a  second  time  a  purely  African  dynasty  reigned  upon  the 
most  civilised  throne  of  Europe.  This  same  Almohade  con- 
queror reconstructed  the  Moorish  fleet,  and  added  to  it  no 
less  than  460  vessels.  His  reign,  which  lasted  until  1163, 
was  a  period  of  constant  war,  during  which  he  was  com- 
pelled to  put  out  all  his  strength  against  the  Christians. 
He  succeeded  in  holding  his  own  with  difficulty,  and  his 
successor  united  all  the  tribes  of  North  Africa  in  a  Holy 
War  against  the  "infidels  of  Spain."  It  is  curious  to  read 
in  the  Arab  chronicles  the  history  of  the  Crusades  told 
from  the  other  side.  It  will  be  remembered  that  the 
famous  Saladin  took  Jerusalem  in  1187.  In  1189  this 
Caliph  of  the  Eastern  Arabs  appealed  to  the  reigning 
Almohade  Caliph  of  the  West,  El  Mansour,  to  assist  with 
his  maritime  forces  in  the  sieges  of  Acre,  Tyre,  and  Tripoli, 
and  according  to  one  historian  180  ships  sent  by  the 
African  Sultan  prevented  the  Christians  from  landing  in 
Syria. 

Under  the  great  Almohade  sovereigns  the  glory  of  the 
Arabs  in  Spain  was  well  maintained.  Monuments  of  their 
civil  activity  remain  in  the  Castle  of  Gibraltar,  which  they 
built  in  1160,  and  in  the  great  mosque  of  Seville,  which 
was  begun  in  1183.  The  Giralda  or  tower  of  Seville — 
not,  alas  !  now  perhaps  to  be  spoken  of  as  existing — was 
built  as  an  observatory  under  the  superintendence  of  the 
mathematician  Geber  in  11 96.  The  Almoravides  had 
fixed    their    Spanish   Court    at    Seville.     The  Almohades 


6o  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

imported  to  their  African  Court  in  Morocco  workmen 
from  all  parts  of  Spain.  Ibn  Said  describes  Morocco  in 
the  thirteenth  century  as  the  "  Baghdad  of  the  West," 
and  says  that  it  was  never  so  prosperous  as  under  the 
early  Almohadcs.  Both  dynasties  had  two  courts,  one 
in  Africa  and  one  in  Spain.  Thus,  whatever  was  the 
prosperity  or  greatness  of  one  part  of  their  empire,  it  was 
shared  by  the  other,  and  under  the  Almohades  there  was 
a  shifting  towards  the  African  centre. 

A  good  deal  of  jealousy  seems  to  have  existed  between 
the  natives  of  the  "  Two  Shores"  as  to  the  merits  of  their 
respective  territories.  A  certain  distinguished  citizen  of 
Tangier,  Abu  Yahya,  arguing  on  one  occasion  with  the 
Sheikh  Ash-shakandi  of  Cordova — who  flourished  under 
the  later  Almohades  and  died  1231 — on  the  advantages  of 
their  respective  countries,  provoked  Ash-shakandi  to  say  : 
"  Were  it  not  for  Andalusia,  Africa,  thy  country,  would 
never  have  been  known."  "  Do  you  really  mean,"  replied 
the  African,  "to  say  that  excellency  and  power  reside 
anywhere  in  such  degree  as  amongst  us  ?  Prove  it ! " 
The  Caliph,  who  was  listening  to  the  dispute,  interposed. 
He  said  that  it  was  too  serious  to  be  decided  by  extempore 
speaking,  and  ordered  each  disputant  to  put  his  views  in 
writing.  Hence  the  celebrated  epistle  of  Ash-shakandi, 
written  under  the  last  of  the  Almohades,  to  which  we  are 
indebted  for  a  great  deal  of  contemporary  information. 
It  states  the  case  for  the  civilisation  of  the  Spanish  half 
of  the  empire.  Unfortunately  the  counter-statement  of 
Abu  Yahya,  maintaining  the  claims  of  the  African  half, 
has  not  been  preserved. 

"  He  pretends  to  make  Africa  superior  to  Andalusia!" 
exclaims  Ash-shakandi  in  derision  of  his  opponent.  "  It 
is  as  much  as  to  say  that  the  left  hand  is  better  than  the 
right,  and  that  night  is  lighter  than  day."  No  claim  is 
allowed  to  be  based  on  the  fact  that  the  Sultans  of  the  day 
kept  their  chief  court  in  Africa.  "We  too,"  says  Ash- 
shakandi,  "  have  had  our  Sultans,"  and  he  speaks  of  the 
Ommeyades    as   "  Sultans  who  succeeded   each   other  as 


AFRICAN    RULE    IN    SPAIN  6i 

pearls  in  a  necklace  united  by  the  thread."  The  break-up 
of  their  empire  was  as  the  cutting  of  the  string.  As  the 
Ommeyades  are  the  objects  of  his  panegyric,  so  the 
Africans  are  of  his  disdain.  Yusuf  Tachefin,  the  founder 
of  the  Almoravides,  owed  his  fame,  he  says,  wholly  to 
Al  Mutammed,  King  of  Seville.  "Otherwise,  I  ask  you, 
would  he  have  been  known,  ignorant  and  rude  Bedowi  as 
he  was  ?  "  Among  the  limitations  of  Yusuf  it  is  recounted 
that  on  various  occasions  he  jeered  at  the  poets  and  their 
fine  metaphors,  declaring  that  he  understood  nothing  of 
their  writings  except  that  the  writers  wanted  bread  1 
But  Ash-shakandi  proceeds:  "Since  Africa  dares  to  dis- 
pute the  superiority  in  the  sciences,  can  you  produce  such 
men  as  these  .-* "  He  then  gives  a  list  of  scholars  eminent 
in  the  ranks  of  science,  philosophy,  and  literature,  which  is 
now  valuable  for  the  service  it  renders  in  rescuing  the 
names  of  great  men  from  oblivion  and  preserving  a  record 
of  their  works.  This  list  contains  geometers,  philosophers, 
theologians,  historians,  men  distinguished  in  philology, 
literature,  geography,  medicine,  and  all  the  natural  sciences, 
also  grammarians,  musicians,  poets,  and  orators.  Ash- 
shakandi  also  distinguishes  the  scholar  kings  of  the  lesser 
courts  of  Spain,  men  who  could  still  devote  their  minds 
with  ardour  to  the  study  of  science  in  the  midst  of  all  the 
tumult  of  civil  war. 

He  proceeds  to  the  description  of  Spain  itself,  its 
principal  towns  and  monuments.  Much  that  was  said  of 
Cordova  in  a  previous  chapter  was  taken  from  this  epistle. 
Though  himself  a  native  of  Cordova,  he  says  of  Seville, 
where  the  later  court  of  the  Almoravides  and  Almohades 
was  fixed,  that  it  was  one  of  the  finest  cities  of  Spain,  and 
praises  at  great  length  its  magnificent  buildings, — especially 
the  famous  mosque — its  good  streets,  its  spacious  dwelling- 
houses, — of  which  the  courtyards  were  planted  with  orange, 
citron,  lemon,  and  other  fruit-trees — and  its  generally 
excellent  arrangements.  The  river  at  Seville  was  navig- 
able for  large  vessels,  and  was  always  filled  with  pleasure 
boats  kept   by  the   inhabitants  of  the  town,    "who  were 


62  A    TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

very  luxurious  and  dissipated."  It  was  held  to  be  a 
delightful  boating  river.  The  environs  of  Seville  were 
very  picturesque — olives,  figs,  and  sugar-cane  abounded, 
and  the  banks  of  the  river  were  covered  with  fruit-trees 
"formino  a  sort  of  canopy,  so  that  it  was  possible  to  sail 
sheltered  from  the  rays  of  the  sun,  and  listening  to  the 
melody  of  singing-birds  along  the  banks."  The  river  ran 
for  a  course  of  thirty  miles  through  clusters  of  buildings 
and  farmhouses,  high  towers  and  strong  castles,  forming 
a  continued  city.  The  mildness  of  the  temperature,  the 
purity  of  the  air,  the  abundance  of  provisions  and  com- 
modities which  were  to  be  found  in  its  markets,  made  it  an 
agreeable  place  of  residence.  There  was  a  saying,  common 
in  Andalusia,  "  If  thou  seekest  for  bird's  milk,  by  Allah  ! 
thou  shall  find  it  in  Seville."  The  love  of  music  of  its 
inhabitants  has  been  already  mentioned.  They  were, 
Ash-shakandi  says,  "the  merriest  people  upon  earth, 
always  singing,  playing  on  instruments,  and  drinking  wine, 
which  among  them  is  not  considered  forbidden  so  long  as 
it  is  used  with  moderation."  Amongst  its  many  manu- 
factures Seville  was  as  famous  for  oil  as  Malaga  was  for 
wine.  Beja,  a  town  in  its  territory,  was  famous  for  its 
cotton  manufactures. 

Other  Spanish  towns — Granada  with  its  magnificent 
chestnut  trees,  Toledo,  Valencia  rich  in  trade  and  noted 
for  the  paper  manufactories  of  Xatina  in  its  neighbourhood  ; 
Jaen,  so  famous  for  its  silk  manufactures  that  it  was  called 
"Jaen  of  the  Silk"  ;  Murcia,  Xeres,  Malaga,  Lisbon,  each 
famous  for  their  special  products ;  Saragossa,  afterwards 
the  seat  of  Empire  of  the  Huddites,  in  which  there  was  a 
wonderful  palace  with  a  golden  hall  of  extraordinary  beauty 
of  design  and  workmanship,  and  many  more,  are  described 
by  Ash-shakandi  in  detail  enough  to  present  a  vivid  picture 
of  the  wealth,  importance,  and  refinement  of  civilisation 
which  distinguished  the  Spain  of  the  thirteenth  century. 
If  his  opponents  in  the  literary  contest  had  anything  like 
the  same  account  to  give  of  the  African  half  of  the  Arab 
Empire,  the  condition  of  this  portion  of  the  Western  world 


AFRICAN    RULE    IN    SPAIN  63 

under  the  African  dynasties  which  administered  it  for 
nearly  two  hundred  years,  must  have  been  extraordinarily 
prosperous. 

We  may  add  to  Ash-shakandi's  account  a  statement  of 
Ibn  Said,  made  also  in  the  thirteenth  century,  that  in  his 
day  Andalusia  was  "  so  thickly  populated  that  if  a  traveller 
goes  any  distance  through  it  he  will  find  at  every  step  on 
his  road  hamlets,  farms,  towns,  orchards,  and  cultivated 
fields,  and  will  never  meet,  as  is  more  or  less  the  case  in 
other  cultivated  countries,  with  large  tracts  of  uncultivated 
land  or  desert.  This,  united  to  the  habit  of  the  Andalusians, 
who,  instead  of  living  together  as  the  Egyptians  do, 
grouped  in  towns  and  villages,  prefer  dwelling  in  cottages 
and  rural  establishments  in  the  midst  of  the  fields,  by  the 
side  of  brooks,  and  on  the  declivities  of  mountains,  gives 
altogether  to  the  country  an  aspect  of  comfort  and  pros- 
perity for  which  the  traveller  will  look  in  vain  elsewhere. 
Their  houses,  too,  which  they  are  continually  white-washing 
inside  and  out,  look  exceedingly  well  by  the  side  of  the 
green  trees." 

This  picture  of  country  life  speaks  much  for  the  general 
order  and  security  which  prevailed,  and  indicates  that  the 
measures  taken  by  Almoravide  and  Almohade  sovereigns 
to  mamtain  a  general  respect  for  law  had  been  successful. 
During  the  disorders  preceding  the  Almoravide  conquest 
brigandage  had  become  rife,  and  a  quaint  story  is  told  of 
a  certain  brigand,  Greyhawk  by  name,  who  was  brought 
before  Al  Mutammed,  King  of  Seville.  This  Greyhawk, 
having  committed  atrocious  crimes,  was  condemned  to  be 
crucified,  and  while  he  hung  on  the  cross  watched  by  his 
devoted  wife  and  daughter,  he  managed  still  to  beguile  an 
unwary  traveller  into  leaving  his  laden  mule  to  search  for 
treasure  in  a  well,  upon  which  Greyhawk  instructed  his 
wife  to  make  off  with  the  mule  and  its  burden.  The 
traveller  meanwhile  died  in  the  well,  and  Greyhawk  was 
taken  down  from  the  cross  and  brought  again  before  the 
King.  "Tell  me,  O  Greyhawk,"  said  the  King,  "how 
couldst  thou  be  guilty  of  such  a  crime  as  that  now  imputed 


64  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

to  thee,  being  as  it  were  under  the  very  clutch  of  death  ?  " 
"  O  King,"  rephed  the  robber,  "  if  thou  knewest  how 
strongly  nature  impels  me  to  the  perpetration  of  such  acts, 
and  how  great  is  the  pleasure  I  enjoy  while  I  commit 
them,  I  have  no  doubt  but  that  thou  wouldest  relinquish 
the  royal  power  and  embrace  my  profession." 

That  story  and  the  state  of  affairs  which  it  illustrates 
belong,  however,  to  another  period.  The  reign  of  the 
Almohade  el  Mansur,  which  lasted  till  12 14,  marks  the 
greatest  period  of  Almohade  prosperity.  It  was  during 
this  reign,  in  the  year  1195,  that  the  three  Christian  kings 
of  Arragon,  Castile,  and  Leon  were  overthrown  in  the 
celebrated  battle  of  Alarcos,  at  which  it  was  said  that  the 
loss  of  the  Christians  amounted  to  146,000  men,  besides 
30,000  prisoners  and  an  incredible  amount  of  spoil.  It 
would  seem  to  be  after  this  battle,  though  it  is  variously 
related  and  placed  by  some  historians  in  the  reign  of  one 
of  the  Almoravide  sovereigns,  that  the  Christian  population 
of  Granada,  accused  of  intriguing  with  the  governments 
of  Christian  Spain,  was  transported  by  the  Moors  in  a 
body  to  Africa  and  settled  by  thousands  in  Mequinez, 
Sallee,  and  other  towns  of  the  western  coast.  An  Arab 
historian  who  visited  Sallee  in  the  year  1360  says  that  at 
that  time  the  town  of  Rabat,  not  far  distant,  was  almost 
wholly  inhabited  by  families  from  Granada. 

Thus  began  in  the  twelfth  century,  after  a  long  period 
of  African  domination  in  Spain,  a  reaction  of  Europe 
upon  Africa  which  has  continued  to  the  present  day. 
This  expulsion  of  the  Christians  from  Granada  may  be 
taken  as  the  first  of  the  great  religious  expulsions  for 
which  Spain  became  famous  in  later  years.  It  is  just 
to  remember  that  the  system  was  initiated  by  the  Moors, 
and  it  is  perhaps  worth  noting  that  the  celebrated  Aver- 
rhoes,  one  of  the  most  famous  among  the  many  names 
associated  with  the  enlightenment  which  Arab  civilisation 
spread  through  the  dark  ages  of  medieval  Europe,  was 
so  warm  an  advocate  of  the  measure,  that  he  took  the 
trouble  to  cross  from  the  Spanish  Court  to  the  Court  of 


AFRICAN    RULE    IN    SPAIN  65 

Morocco  for  the  purpose  of  urging  his  views  upon  the 
Sultan.  He  appears  to  have  spent  a  considerable  part 
of  his  life  at  the  court  of  Morocco,  which  was  at  that 
time  a  centre  of  learning.  He  died  there  in  1198,  and, 
in  recording  his  death,  Morocco  is  mentioned  as  "the 
capital "  of  Adouatein.  The  mere  existence  of  this 
geographical  expression,  used,  as  has  been  said,  by  the 
Arabs  to  signify  the  two  kingdoms  of  Spain  and  Africa, 
shows  how  very  closely  the  interests  of  the  two  countries 
had  become  bound  together.  In  connection  with  the 
residence  of  the  learned  Averrhoes  at  the  court  of  El 
Mansur  in  Africa,  it  may  be  worth  mentioning  that  the 
praises  of  the  same  sovereign  were  sung  in  his  court  at 
Seville  by  the  "  learned  and  celebrated  poet,  a  black  of 
Soudan,  Abu  Ishak  Ibrahim  al  Kanemi."  The  circum- 
stance, though  slight,  is  interesting,  as  serving  to  show 
that  at  the  end  of  the  twelfth  century  Negroland  con- 
tributed, not  only  its  commercial  wares,  but  also  its  quota 
of  art  to  the  stores  of  Europe. 

From  the  beginning  of  the  thirteenth  century  onward, 
the  decay  of  the  Mussulman  power  in  Spain  is  marked. 
The  Christian  Powers  made  constant  and  successful  on- 
slaughts upon  the  Almohade  possessions.  Town  after 
town  of  importance  fell  into  their  hands.  They  were 
assisted  by  internal  divisions  among  the  Mussulmans ; 
and  in  1230,  after  nearly  a  century  of  brilliant  rule,  the 
Almohade  dynasty  was  brought  to  an  end  by  the  deposi- 
tion of  the  reigning  sovereign.  The  Moslem  portion  of 
the  continent  declared  itself  independent  under  Ibn  Hud, 
also  a  leader  of  African  origin.  Valencia  fell  into  Chris- 
tian hands,  1238;  Cordova,  1239;  Seville,  1260.  A  little 
later  the  whole  of  the  Moslem  population  was  driven  to 
the  coast  between  Ronda,  iu  the  west,  and  Almeria,  in  the 
east.  In  Africa  the  province  of  Ifrikiah,  which  stretched 
at  one  period  from  the  confines  of  Egypt  to  those  of 
Morocco,  at  the  same  time  declared  itself  independent 
under  a  Sultan  of  the  Hafside  dynasty.  In  1269  the 
Merinites  possessed  themselves  of  the  throne  of  Morocco 

E 


66  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

and  its  surrounding  provinces,  and  fixed  their  capital  at 
Fez.  When  nothing  was  left  to  the  Almohades  but 
Tafilet  and  a  small  part  of  Ifrikiah,  they  returned  to  their 
stronghold  of  Tinmelel,  to  maintain  for  a  few  years  only 
a  "  phantom  Caliph,"  Ishak,  last  of  his  race,  who,  when 
the  successful  siege  of  Tafilet  in  1274  had  given  all  that 
remained  of  Moroccan  soil  to  the  Merinites,  was  brought 
before  the  ruling  sovereign  of  that  dynasty  and  executed. 
It  is  interesting  to  note  that  at  this  siege  of  Tafilet,  which 
put  an  end  to  even  such  empty  pretence  as  still  remained 
of  the  Dual  Empire  of  Spain  and  Africa,  mention  is  made 
of  the  use  of  firearms,  or  "fire-engines,"  which  threw  out 
iron  gravel.  The  shot,  it  is  said,  was  forced  from  the 
piece  by  means  of  a  burning  powder,  "of  which  the  sin- 
gular properties  work  effects  that  rival  the  power  of  the 
Creator." 


CHAPTER    VI 
DECLINE   OF   MOHAMMEDAN   POWER   IN   SPAIN 

Thus,  before  the  end  of  the  thirteenth  century,  the  dual 
Mohammedan  Empire  of  "Adouatein,"  or  "The  Two 
Shores,"  had  ceased  to  exist,  and  in  its  place  there 
had  grown  up  three  distinct  Moslem  powers.  In  Spain 
the  Huddites,  who  afterwards  fell  under  the  Hafside 
leadership  of  the  celebrated  Ibn  Ahmar,  the  builder  of 
the  Alhambra,  formed  a  Moslem  kingdom  within  the 
restricted  limits  still  left  to  them,  scarcely  extending  be- 
yond the  province  of  Granada.  Upon  the  northern  coast 
of  Africa,  in  the  ancient  province  of  Africa  Propria,  or 
Ifrikiah,  embracing  Tunis  and  Tripoli,  and  henceforward 
generally  known  as  Barbary,  an  independent  Hafside 
dynasty  was  established,  of  which  the  subsequent  history 
is  one  long  succession  of  war.  In  Morocco  the  dynasty 
of  the  Merinites,  ever  at  war  with  the  Hafsides  of  the 
coast,  was  to  hold  its  own  until,  at  the  beginning  of  the 
sixteenth  century,  it  was  overthrown  by  the  Sherifs,  whose 
descendants  now  reign  in  Morocco.  Almost  simultane- 
ously with  this  break-up  of  the  Caliphate  of  the  West,  the 
Caliphate  of  the  East  was  overthrown  by  the  Tartars 
in    1258. 

Notwithstanding  the  ceaseless  wars  to  which  all  these 
dynasties  were  exposed,  the  Courts  of  Tunis,  Fez,  and 
Granada  maintained  a  high  reputation  for  learning,  re- 
finement, and  civilisation.  The  most  brilliant  period  of 
Arab  domination  had  come  to  an  end,  but  the  Arabs 
continued  for  two  hundred  years  to  represent  the  highest 
standard   of  knowledge  and  enlightenment  which  existed 

in    modern   Europe.     Their  universities  were   the   founts 

67 


68  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

of  learning  to  which  Christian  ignorance  went  for  its 
early  education.  Their  courts  were  homes  envied  openly 
by  the  most  distinguished  of  European  kings.  Among 
the  celebrated  pupils  of  Arab  teachers,  Roger  Bacon, 
Peter  the  Venerable,  Pope  Sylvester  II.,  are  illustrious 
names  which  occur  at  once  to  the  memory,  and  up  to 
the  end  of  the  fifteenth  century  there  was  scarcely  a  man 
of  eminence  or  learning  in  the  schools  of  England,  France, 
or  Italy,  whose  biography,  when  it  has  been  preserved, 
does  not  acknowledge  the  debt  which  he  owed  directly 
or  indirectly  to  Arab  learning.  Arabian  knowledge  of 
the  physical  conditions  of  the  Universe  remained  far  in 
advance  of  anything  known  to  Europe  until  near  the 
end  of  the  fifteenth  and  the  beginning  of  the  sixteenth 
centuries.  The  entire  medical  faculty  of  the  Continent 
was  trained  in  Arab  schools.  That  they  maintained  this 
high  place  in  the  front  rank  of  science  through  all  the 
decadence  of  their  later  history,  is  sufficiently  illustrated 
by  the  fact  that  when,  at  the  moment  of  the  final  ex- 
pulsion of  the  Moors  from  Spain,  the  Catholic  Cardinal 
Ximenes  ordered  the  destruction  of  the  libraries  of 
Granada,  he  reserved  from  the  general  condemnation 
three  hundred  medical  works,  to  which  Europe  recognised 
its  obligation. 

There  is  no  department  of  our  daily  life  upon  which 
the  Arabs  have  not  left  their  mark.  Not  only  our 
learning,  our  laws,  our  justice,  our  naval  and  military 
science,  our  agriculture,  our  commerce,  our  manufacturing 
industries,  have  been  profoundly  impressed  by  Arab 
influence  maintained  in  Europe  for  upwards  of  800  years, 
but  our  daily  customs,  our  domestic  life,  have  been  no 
less  intimately  touched.  It  is  from  the  Arabs  of  Spain 
that  we  have  learned  to  wash,  to  dress,  to  cook,  to  garden. 
They  improved  our  musical  instruments  ;  they  gave  us 
new  poetic  metres ;  they  gave  us  the  imaginative  pleasures 
of  narrative  fiction.  From  them  France  and  Italy 
borrowed  the  lighter  play  of  wit  and  repartee,  which  has 
since  radiated  through  the  northern   races.      From  them 


DECLINE    OF    MOHAMMEDAN    POWER      69 

modern  Europe  learned  to  associate  with  the  emotions 
of  love  the  grace  and  joy  of  cultivated  life.  It  was  from 
their  hands  that  the  growing  life  of  the  young  nations 
of  the  West  received  its  happiest  direction.  We  have 
but  to  turn  to  the  vocabularies  of  Europe  and  to  trace 
in  them  the  many  important  words  of  Arabic  origin  in 
order  to  appreciate  to  some  extent  the  debt  of  which  we 
have  lost  sight. 

I  have  no  intention  of  entering  into  the  history  of 
Spain  during  the  centuries  which  led  to  the  conquest  of 
Granada  by  Ferdinand  and  Isabella,  and  the  final  expulsion 
of  the  Arabs  from  Europe  in  1502.  My  purpose  in  briefly 
relating  the  outlines  of  the  Arab-African  conquest  of  Spain 
has  been  merely  to  indicate  the  nature  of  the  national  life 
to  which  Negroland  owed  the  impulse  of  its  medieval 
civilisation.  If  the  impression  made  by  Arab- African 
civilisation  upon  Europe  has  been  indelible,  it  is  only 
natural  that  the  same  impression  should  have  been  strong 
upon  the  nations  which  were  brought  in  contact  with  it 
— even  though  in  some  instances  they  were  of  a  wholly 
different  race — in  the  continent  from  which  it  sprang. 

Here  is  a  picture  quoted  by  Ibn  Said,  the  "truthful 
historian,"  to  whom  allusion  has  been  already  made,  from 
a  previous  writer,  the  truth  of  whose  words  he  endorses, 
of  the  immediate  effect  upon  Africa  of  the  downfall  of 
the  Almohade  dynasty  in  Spain.  Ibn  Said  was  born  in 
Granada  in  12 14;  he  died  in  Tunis  in  1287,  and  was 
therefore  a  personal  witness  of  the  condition  of  things 
which  he  describes. 

"Africa,"  he  quotes,  "may  be  said  to  have  derived  its 
present  wealth  and  importance,  and  its  extent  of  commerce, 
from  Andalusians  settling  in  it.  For  when  God  Almighty 
was  pleased  to  send  down  on  their  country  the  last 
disastrous  civil  war,  thousands  of  its  inhabitants,  of  all 
classes  and  professions,  sought  a  refuge  in  Africa  and 
spread  over  Maghreb  el  Aksa  (Morocco),  and  Africa 
Propria  (Barbary),  settling  wherever  they  found  comfort 
or  employment.      Labourers  and  country  people   took  to 


70  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

the  same  occupations  which  they  had  left  in  Andalusia. 
They  formed  intimacies  with  the  inhabitants,  discovered 
springs,  made  them  available  for  the  irrigation  of  their 
fields,  planted  trees,  introduced  water-mills,  and  other 
useful  inventions.  In  short,  they  taught  the  African 
farmers  many  things  whereof  they  had  never  heard,  and 
showed  them  the  use  of  excellent  practices  whereof  they 
were  completely  ignorant.  Through  their  means  the 
countries  where  they  fixed  their  residence  became  at  once 
prosperous  and  rich,  and  the  inhabitants  saw  their  wealth 
increase  rapidly,  as  well  as  their  comfort  and  enjoyments. 
.  .  There  was  no  district  in  Africa  wherein  some  of  the 
principal  authorities  were  not  Andalusians.  .  .  .  But  it 
was  in  the  class  of  operatives  and  workmen  in  all  sorts 
of  handicrafts  that  Africa  derived  the  most  advantage 
from  the  tides  of  emigration  setting  towards  its  shores." 

Ibn  Ghalib,  from  whom  the  quotation  is  made,  wrote 
at  an  earlier  period  than  Ibn  Said.  After  making  the 
quotation,  Ibn  Said  continues:  "Perhaps  some  of  my 
readers,  in  perusing  the  accounts  I  have  just  given  in  the 
words  of  Ibn  Ghalib  of  the  revolution  created  by  the 
Andalusian  emigration  in  the  trade  and  agriculture  of 
Africa,  will  say  to  themselves :  '  This  author  was  un- 
doubtedly partial  towards  his  countrymen,  and  he  exag- 
gerated their  merits '  ;  but  let  them  plunge  into  his  book, 
let  them  weigh  every  one  of  his  expressions,  and  com- 
pare his  narrative  with  those  of  other  writers,  and  they 
will  soon  feel  convinced  that  he  spoke  the  truth." 

Of  these  same  Andalusians  the  author,  Ibn  Ghalib, 
who  is  quoted,  says,  at  an  earlier  period  :  "  They  are 
Arabs  by  descent,  in  pride,  in  the  haughtiness  of  their 
temper,  the  devotion  of  their  minds,  the  goodness  of  their 
hearts,  and  the  purity  of  their  intentions.  They  resemble 
them  in  their  abhorrence  of  everything  that  is  cruel 
or  oppressive,  in  their  inability  to  endure  subjection  or 
contempt,  and  in  the  liberal  expenditure  of  whatever  they 
possess.  They  are  Indians  in  their  love  of  learning,  as 
well  as  in  their  assiduous  cultivation  of  science,  their  firm 


DECLINE    OF    MOHAMMEDAN    POWER      71 

adherence  to  its  principles,  and  the  scrupulous  attention 
with  which  they  transmit  to  their  posterity  its  invaluable 
secrets.  They  are  like  the  people  of  Baghdad  in  cleanli- 
ness of  person  and  beauty  of  form,  in  elegance  of  manners, 
mildness  of  disposition,  subtlety  of  mind,  power  of  thought, 
extent  of  memory,  and  universality  of  talent.  They  are 
Turks  in  their  aptitude  for  war,  their  deep  acquaintance 
with  every  one  of  its  stratagems,  and  their  skilful  pre- 
paration of  the  weapons  and  machines  used  in  it,  as 
well  as  their  extreme  care  and  foresight  in  all  matters 
concerning  it.  They  have  been  further  compared  with 
the  Chinese  for  the  delicacy  of  their  work,  the  subtlety 
of  their  manufactures,  and  their  dexterity  in  imitating  all 
sorts  of  figures.  And,  lastly,  it  is  generally  asserted  that 
they  are  of  all  nations  that  which  most  resembles  the 
Greeks  in  their  knowledge  of  the  physical  and  natural 
sciences,  their  ability  in  discovering  waters  hidden  in  the 
bowels  of  the  earth  and  bringing  them  to  the  surface  ; 
their  acquaintance  with  the  various  species  of  trees  and 
plants  and  their  several  fruits,  their  industry  in  the  pruning 
and  grafting  of  trees,  the  arrangement  and  distribution 
of  gardens,  the  treatment  of  plants  and  flowers,  and  all 
and  every  one  of  the  branches  of  agriculture.  Upon  this 
last  subject  their  proficiency  is  proverbial.  The  Anda- 
lusians,  moreover,  are  the  most  patient  of  men  and  the 
fittest  to  endure  fatigue." 

Such  was  the  estimate  made  by  contemporary  writers 
of  the  people  whom  civil  war  and  religious  intolerance 
drove  from  the  cities  of  southern  Spain,  to  spread  through 
the  northern  part  of  Africa  and  to  found  new  homes  upon 
its  shores.  But  to  these  descriptions  it  may  be  well,  in 
this  place,  to  add  another,  made  a  hundred  years  later, 
by  a  very  competent  historian,  who,  looking  from  a  dis- 
tance at  the  events  which  had  taken  place,  was  perhaps 
able  to  form  a  truer  opinion  of  the  causes  of  the  national 
downfall.  Ibn  Khaldun,  who  was  born  at  Tunis  in  1332, 
and  died  in  Egypt  in  1406,  and  whose  "  History  of  the 
Berbers"  is  held  to  contain  the  most  authentic  information 


72  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

of  the  internal  history  of  North  Africa,  thus  summarises, 
on  his  opening  page,  the  fate  of  the  Arab  nation  to  which 
he  belonged  :  "  Raised  to  the  height  of  power  in  Asia 
Minor  under  the  dynasty  of  the  Ommeyades,  formidable  still 
under  that  of  the  Abbassides,  attaining  the  highest  fortune 
in  Spain  under  the  second  dynasty  of  the  Ommeyades, 
the  Arabs  found  themselves  in  possession  of  such  glory 
and  prosperity  as  had  never  been  the  lot  of  another  people. 
Surrounded  by  luxury  and  devoted  to  pleasure,  they 
yielded  to  the  seductions  of  idleness,  and,  tasting  the 
delights  of  life,  they  fell  into  a  long  sleep  under  the 
shadow  of  glory  and  of  peace.  Then  the  soldier  was 
no  longer  to  be  distinguished  from  the  artisan,  except  by 
his  ineptitude  for  work ;  their  hardy  habits  were  gone, 
and  they  were  overthrown,  not  in  the  first  instance  by 
strangers,  but  by  their  own  Caliphs.  They  were  enslaved, 
then  broken  and  dispersed." 

Allowing  for  the  somewhat  over-flowery  rhetoric  of 
Arabian  writers,  the  facts  would  seem  to  justify  both  sides 
of  this  description.  The  later  decadence  of  the  Arabs, 
when,  after  the  final  expulsion  of  1502,  they  entirely  lost 
touch  with  the  progressive  life  of  Europe,  can  only  be 
accounted  for  on  the  assumption  that  they  had,  as  Ibn 
Khaldun  perceived,  lost  their  early  vitality,  and  that  they 
carried  with  them  into  Africa  the  elements  of  their  own 
decay.  They  were  overthrown,  not,  in  the  first  instance, 
by  strangers,  but  by  themselves. 

Yet,  without  a  doubt,  their  influence  upon  Africa, 
when  the  civil  wars  first  drove  them  out  of  Spain,  was 
that  described  by  Ibn  Said. 


CHAPTER   VII 
SPANISH   ARABS   IN   AFRICA 

From  the  break-up  of  the  Arab  Empire  of  "  The  Two 
Shores"  in  the  middle  of  the  thirteenth  century  to  the 
moment  of  the  final  severance  of  North  Africa  from 
Europe  in  the  sixteenth  century,  the  growth  and  spread 
of  civilisation  in  the  independent  kingdoms  of  North 
Africa  was  very  marked.  Throughout  the  dark  period 
of  the  Middle  Ages,  when  the  Catholic  Church  was  assert- 
ing its  claim  to  dominate  the  conscience  of  the  Western 
World,  and  to  direct  not  only  the  action  but  the  thought 
of  Christendom,  all  that  was  independent,  all  that  was 
progressive,  all  that  was  persecuted  for  conscience'  sake, 
took  refuge  in  the  courts  of  Africa.  Art,  science,  poetry, 
and  wit  found  congenial  homes  in  the  orange-shaded 
arcades  of  the  colleges  of  Fez,  in  the  palaces  of  Morocco, 
and  in  the  exquisite  gardens  of  Tripoli  and  Tunis. 

The  charm  of  life  which  had  been  so  sedulously  culti- 
vated in  the  Mohammedan  towns  of  Spain  was  transported 
to  the  coast  of  Africa.  The  beautiful  palaces  of  southern 
Spain  were  reconstructed  upon  African  soil.  The  gardens 
of  El-Mostancer,  a  Hafside  sovereign  of  Tunis  who 
reigned  from  1252  to  1277,  rivalled  those  of  the  Omme- 
yades  in  Cordova.  After  describing  the  beauties  of  the 
gardens,  Ibn  Khaldun  says  of  the  court  of  this  monarch, 
that  it  was  always  filled  with  distinguished  persons. 
"Here,"  he  says,  "were  to  be  seen  numbers  of  Anda- 
lusians,  amongst  them  distinguished  poets  and  other  elo- 
quent writers,  illustrious  men  of  science,  magnanimous 
princes,  intrepid  warriors."  Here,  too,  we  may  note,  in 
the  year  1237,  amidst  all  the  brilliancy  of  such  surround- 


74  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

ings,  a  deputation  from  the  king  of  the  black  countries 
of  Bornu  and  Kanem,  who  sent  amongst  other  gifts  a 
giraffe,  which  so  interested  and  delighted  the  inhabitants 
of  Tunis  that  it  excited  the  greatest  enthusiasm. 

At  Fez,  which  now  became  the  capital  of  the  Merinite 
sovereigns,  beautiful  palaces  and  gardens  were  constructed, 
and  the  life  of  the  higher  nobility  was  conducted  with 
much  state.  Learning  also  was  encouraged,  and  it  is 
interesting  to  observe,  as  the  result  of  a  "Holy  War" 
successfully  carried  on  against  the  Christians  in  Spain  by 
one  of  the  greatest  of  the  Merinite  sovereigns  of  Morocco, 
that  among  the  conditions  of  peace  imposed  by  the  Mos- 
lem kino;  was  the  surrender  of  all  scientific  works  which 
had  fallen  into  the  hands  of  the  Christians  in  the  capture 
of  Mussulman  towns.  Unfortunately  only  about  iioo 
volumes  had  been  saved.  These  were  afterwards  con- 
veyed to  the   University  of  Fez. 

Ibn  Khaldun  says  that  literature  presently  declined 
at  the  court  of  Fez,  owing  to  the  too  great  materialism 
of  the  Merinite  sovereigns.  This  was  not  the  opinion 
of  the  celebrated  traveller  Ibn  Batuta,  but  Ibn  Khaldun 
was  probably  the  better  judge. 

Ibn  Batuta,  who,  like  Ibn  Khaldun,  was  born  in  North 
Africa  of  Arab  parents,  though  about  thirty  years  earlier 
(1303),  distinguished  himself  by  spending  five-and-twenty 
years  in  travel,  which  extended  over  the  greater  part  of  the 
known  world,  and  included  Europe,  India,  China,  and 
Thibet.  He  entered  the  "white  town  of  Fez"  on  the  8th 
of  November  1349,  and  decided  there  to  lay  aside  his 
pilgrim's  staff,  because,  for  reasons  which  he  sets  forth  at 
length,  his  judgment  was  convinced  that  the  noble  country 
over  which  its  sovereign  ruled  was  the  best  country  and 
the  best  administered  of  all  those  that  he  had  visited. 
Here  he  found  the  conditions  of  life  better  than  in  any  other 
country.  Food  was  more  plentiful,  varied,  and  cheap  ;  life 
and  property  were  more  secure,  law  was  milder,  justice  was 
more  assured,  charity  more  fully  organised,  religion  more 
truly   maintained,    and    literature,   science,    and    art    more 


SPANISH    ARABS    IN    AFRICA  75 

honoured  than  in  any  other  centre  of  civilisation.  He 
mentions,  in  regard  to  the  organised  charities  of  the 
country,  that  free  hospitals  were  constructed  and  endowed 
in  every  town  of  the  kingdom.  As  regards  the  endowment 
of  science  and  literature,  he  describes  the  great  College  of 
Fez  as  having  "  no  parallel  in  the  known  world  for  size, 
beauty,  and  magnificence."  He  speaks  of  the  deep  interest 
taken  by  the  sovereign  in  all  that  related  to  science  and 
literature,  the  very  considerable  literary  achievements  of 
the  sovereign  himself,  and  of  the  generous  protection  which 
he  gave  to  all  persons  who  were  devoted  to  the  study  of 
science.  Here  also,  before  the  date  of  Ibn  Batuta's  visit, 
we  are  brought  into  touch  in  the  year  1338  with  the 
political  life  of  the  Negro  kingdom  of  Melle.  Mansa  Musa, 
a  black  sovereign,  of  whom  we  shall  presently  hear  more, 
and  the  seat  of  whose  empire  was  in  the  territory  now 
known  as  the  Bend  of  the  Niger,  sent  an  embassy  on  the 
occasion  of  the  conquest  of  Telem^an  by  the  Merinites  to 
congratulate  the  Merinite  sovereign,  who  was  his  nearest 
white  neighbour.  His  embassy  was  accompanied  by  an 
interpreter  from  Masina  in  the  Upper  Niger,  where  the 
Fulanis  had  then  a  principal  seat  of  occupation.  Abou  el 
Ha^en — the  king  so  warmly  praised  a  few  years  later  by 
Ibn  Batuta — received  them  very  cordially,  and  sent  back 
by  their  hands  a  very  handsome  present  to  Mansa  Musa. 

In  the  lists  which  are  given  of  the  presents  exchanged 
between  monarchs  on  state  occasions,  interesting  glimpses 
of  the  condition  of  the  nations  concerned  may  be  obtained. 
The  present  made  by  Abou  el  Hagen  to  Mansa  Musa  is 
not  described,  but  here  is  the  description  of  a  present  sent 
by  him  to  the  reigning  Sultan  of  Egypt  on  the  same 
occasion  of  the  taking  of  Telem^an  from  the  Hafsides 
in   1337. 

First  on  the  list  is  placed  a  copy  of  the  Koran  written 
by  the  monarch's  own  hand,  and  most  beautifully  bound  at 
Fez.  The  binding,  which  is  described  in  great  detail,  was 
made  of  ebony,  ivory,  and  sandalwood,  "  inlaid  with  admir- 
able art,"  and  decorated  with  fillets  of  gold  and  pearls  and 


76  A    TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

rubies.  There  was  also  an  outside  leather  case,  which  was 
solidly  worked  and  decorated  with  fillets  of  gold.  Next 
after  the  book  there  came  upon  the  list  five  hundred 
thorouorhbred  horses,  of  which  the  saddles  were  em- 
broidered  in  gold  and  silver,  and  of  which  the  bridles  and 
bits  were  some  of  them  of  pure  gold  and  some  of  them 
plated.  Also  there  were  five  hundred  loads  of  objects 
made  in  Morocco — or  Maghreb,  as  the  portion  of  Africa 
now  known  to  us  as  Morocco  was  then  called.  There 
were  arms,  and  beautiful  woollen  stuffs  ;  cloaks,  robes, 
burnooses  ;  turbans,  striped  and  plain  stuffs  of  silk  and 
wool ;  silks  plain  and  in  colours,  embroidered  and  brocaded 
with  gold.  Also  shields  brought  from  the  countries  of 
the  desert,  made  of  the  skin  of  the  lamt,  and  "  covered 
with  that  famous  varnish  which  renders  them  so  hard." 
Also  many  pieces  of  furniture  "  which  is  made  in  Maghreb 
and  much  sought  after  in  the  East." 

A  country  which  can  count  all  these  objects  amongst 
its  manufactures  is  evidently  in  a  very  fairly  high  condition 
of  industrial  prosperity.  A  monarch  who  can  transcribe  a 
copy  of  the  Koran  in  his  own  hand  in  such  a  manner  as  to 
render  it  worthy  of  being  placed  in  so  precious  a  binding 
at  the  head  of  a  present  of  this  value  must  evidently  have 
at  least  some  appreciation  of  the  charms  of  literature.  It 
is  said  of  Abou  el  Ha9en  that  he  performed  the  feat  of 
transcribing  the  Koran  with  his  own  hand  three  times. 

After  this  conquest  of  Telemcan  intercourse  between 
Morocco  and  Negroland  appears  to  have  increased,  which 
is  not  unnatural,  as  already  a  very  considerable  trade 
existed  between  Telem9an,  which  was  one  of  the  principal 
ports  of  embarkation  for  Spain,  and  the  countries  of  the 
Negro  belt.  The  king  of  Melle  was  at  that  time  the 
greatest  of  the  black  sovereigns,  and  Abou  el  Ha^en, 
desiring  to  cultivate  pleasant  relations  with  him,  sent  him 
an  embassy  with  handsome  presents,  a  compliment  which 
in  1360  the  reigning  king  of  Melle  returned  to  Abou  el 
Haven's  successor.  Unfortunately  the  details  of  this 
present   are   not   recorded.      It  is  only  stated  that   Mansa 


SPANISH    ARABS    IN    AFRICA  77 

Suleiman  of  Melle,  "  wishing  to  return  the  good  treatment 
of  the  Merinite  sovereign,  collected  various  products  of 
his  country,  all  extremely  rare  and  curious,  and  sent  them 
to  Fez."  He  also  added  to  his  presents  a  giraffe,  which 
gave  great  pleasure  to  the  Court  of  Fez.  The  embassy 
was  received  with  the  greatest  possible  honour  at  Fez,  the 
place  being  thronged  and  people  standing  on  each  other's 
shoulders  in  the  crowd  to  see — while  the  Sultan,  seated  in 
his  golden  kiosk,  received  and  returned  the  assurances  of 
friendship  sent  to  him  by  the  black  king. 

An  incident  of  the  developed  intercourse  between 
Morocco  and  Negroland  which  is  of  more  interest  to 
posterity  than  the  exchange  of  presents  between  their 
respective  sovereigns,  was  the  decision  arrived  at  by  Ibn 
Batuta  to  take  up  again  his  pilgrim's  staff,  and  quitting 
the  lettered  luxury  of  Fez,  to  add  another  chapter  to  his 
travels  by  journeying  through  Negroland.  He  accordingly 
crossed  the  frontier  of  Morocco  on  his  southward  journey 
on  February  18,  1352,  and  spent  upwards  of  eighteen 
months  in  a  journey  through  the  principal  countries  of  the 
Nigerian  watershed,  re-entering  the  kingdom  of  Morocco 
in  December  of  1353.  The  record  of  this  journey,  which 
he  has  added  to  the  four  volumes  of  his  travels,  is  especially 
interesting,  as  giving  a  picture  of  the  Negroland  of  that 
day  written  from  personal  observation.  The  earlier  Arab 
writers,  from  whom  our  information  is  principally  drawn, 
were  not  themselves  personally  acquainted  with  the 
countries  of  which  they  write.  They  described  them 
generally  from  the  hearsay  of  travellers  and  traders,  and 
though  this  has  its  value  as  representing  the  volume  of 
common  knowledge  which  existed  concerning  Negroland, 
other  descriptions  lack  the  vividness  which  Ibn  Batuta 
gives  to  his. 


CHAPTER   VIII 

THE     SOUDANESE    STATES 

We  come  now  to  the  history  of  Negroland  itself,  which 
began  to  be  known  in  its  relatively  modern  development 
from  about  the  period  of  the  Arab  conquest  of  Africa 
and  Spain.  The  sources  of  information  regarding  it  are 
mainly  Arab,  and  the  earliest  records  which  have  been 
preserved  carry  us  only  vaguely  back  beyond  the  seventh 
century  of  the  Christian  era.  The  records  which  exist 
make  it  clear  that  the  Empire  of  the  Two  Shores  estab- 
lished by  the  Arabs  in  North  Africa  and  Spain  was  the 
commercial  field  of  Negroland.  This  was  also  the  case 
with  the  territories  included  in  the  dominion  of  the 
Eastern  Caliphate,  and  intercourse  was  frequent  between 
the  principal  countries  of  Negroland  and  the  towns  of 
North  Africa,  Spain,  Egypt,  Syria,  and  Arabia.  Negro- 
land was  therefore  in  closer  touch  than  many  of  the 
countries  of  Northern  Europe  with  the  highest  civilisa- 
tion of  the  period,  and  the  effect  of  this  closer  relation 
is  of  course  traceable  in  its  history.  Throughout  the 
whole  period  it  would  seem  that  the  ancient  tradition  of 
civilisation,  which  had  come  to  it  from  the  East,  so  far 
prevailed  that  the  kingdoms  of  Negroland  were  disposed 
to  acknowledge  the  political  supremacy  of  the  Eastern, 
rather  than  of  the  Western  Caliphate.  More  than  once 
in  later  times  there  are  instances  of  their  sovereigns 
accepting  investiture  from  the  Sultan  of  Egypt,  even 
after  the  overthrow  of  the  Caliphate  by  the  Turks.  But 
their  intellectual  and  commercial  intercourse  would  appear 
to   have   been  more  active  with   the  West  than  with  the 

East ;   and   in   tracing   the   course   of  civilisation   in   their 

78 


THE    SOUDANESE    STATES  79 

kingdoms  from  the  seventh  to  the  seventeenth  century, 
at  which  latter  period  the  whole  underwent  a  chaotic 
change,  it  is  to  be  observed  that  the  tide  of  progress 
spreads  steadily  from  the  West  eastward,  not  from  the 
East  westward.  In  saying  this  I  allude  especially  to 
those  countries  to  the  west  of  Lake  Chad,  which,  taken 
collectively,  may  be  said  to  form  the  Western  Soudan. 
There  is  one  other  general  observation  which  it  is,  I 
think,  interesting  to  make  with  regard  to  the  civilising 
influence  exercised  by  the  Empire  of  the  Two  Shores 
upon  Negroland.  It  is  that  between  the  seventh  and 
the  seventeenth  centuries,  though  there  were  many  local 
wars  and  conquests  of  black  kingdoms  by  Berbers  and 
Berber  kingdoms  by  blacks,  there  was  never  any  military 
conquest  made  or  attempted  by  Spanish  Arabs  of  the 
black  countries  with  which  they  traded.  At  the  begin- 
ning of  the  seventeenth  century,  when  the  Spanish  Arabs 
had  themselves  been  expelled  from  Europe,  this  policy 
was  reversed  with  disastrous  results,  and  the  conquest 
of  the  country  by  the  decadent  Moors  put  an  end  to  the 
prosperity  of  Negroland. 

In  order  to  follow  with  any  interest  the  historic  de- 
velopment of  this  little  known  portion  of  the  world,  it  is 
well  to  glance  at  a  map  of  Africa  and  note  the  more 
salient  physical  features  which  have  to  some  extent  de- 
termined here,  as  they  determine  elsewhere,  the  political 
distribution  of  the  country.  It  has  already  been  men- 
tioned that  the  latitude  of  17°  N.  may  be  taken  as  the 
edge  of  the  summer  rains,  and  that  between  10°  and  17° 
all  the  finest  races  of  this  part  of  Africa  are  to  be  found. 
This  is  M.  de  Lauture's  limit  of  distribution.  Later 
experience  would  lead  us  perhaps  to  draw  the  southern 
line  a  little  lower.  Probably  the  parallel  of  9°  would  be 
found  more  accurate.  If  two  blue  pencil  lines  be  drawn 
upon  these  parallels  on  a  map  of  north-west  Africa,  it  will 
be  seen  that  they  include  within  their  limits  the  whole 
course  of  the  Senegal  from  its  rise  in  the  mountains 
north  of  Sierra  Leone  to  its  mouth  in  the  Atlantic  Ocean, 


8o  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

and  the  course  of  the  Upper  and  Middle  Niger  from  its 
rise  in  the  same  mountains  to  its  most  northerly  bend, 
almost  on  the  parallel  of  17°,  and  its  descent  in  a  south- 
easterly direction  to  that  fall  in  its  bed  which  has  been 
rendered  famous  by  Mungo  Park's  death  in  the  rapids 
which  are  caused  by  it  near  Boussa.  The  same  limits 
include  Lake  Chad  and  all  the  tributaries  which  drain 
to  it  from  the  highlands  of  the  Haussa  States.  It  will 
be  observed  that  towards  the  northern  portion  of  this 
territory  the  country  has  a  general  tendency  to  open  into 
level  plains ;  while  towards  the  southern  portion  hilly 
regions,  drawing  together,  form  a  natural  dividing-line 
from  the  countries  of  the  coast.  It  will  also  be  observed 
that  the  line  drawn  upon  the  parallel  of  9°  excludes  from  the 
area  occupied  by  the  fine  races  every  one  of  those  territories 
hitherto  occupied  by  the  nations  of  modern  Europe  in 
the  maritime  settlements  made  upon  the  southern  portion 
of  the  coast,  except  the  French  settlement  of  the  Senegal. 

It  becomes  apparent,  in  looking  broadly  at  the  lines 
thus  traced  upon  the  map,  that  the  country  which  lies 
between  them  is  cut  by  its  main  watercourses  into  four 
principal  divisions.  There  is  the  territory  lying  south- 
west of  the  Senegal,  between  the  course  of  that  river 
and  the  sea ;  there  is  the  country  lying  north-east  of  the 
Senegal,  between  that  river  and  the  Niger  to  the  point 
where  the  Niger  presses  upon  the  desert  at  Timbuctoo  ; 
there  is  the  country  lying  south  of  the  Niger  enclosed 
in  the  bend  of  the  river,  and  generally  known  now  by 
the  geographical  expression — the  Bend  of  the  Niger ;  and 
there  is  the  country  stretching  from  the  eastern  bank  of 
the  Niger  to  Lake  Chad.  Allowing  something  for  the 
always  too  arbitrary  nature  of  geographical  boundaries, 
it  will  be  found  that  the  history  of  Negroland  tends  also 
to  group  itself  within  these  four  divisions. 

The  very  earliest  records  which  we  have  in  point  of 
date,  exclusive  of  the  tradition  of  ancient  Egypt  in  the 
East,  relate  to  the  north-east  of  the  Senegal,  between  that 
river  and    the    Niger.      This   territory   was   known   by  a 


THE    SOUDANESE    STATES  8i 

confusingly  different  number  of  names  ;  but  the  name  of 
its  principal  town,  and  the  name  by  which  the  territory 
itself  was  most  generally  known  in  the  first  days  of  its 
medieval  prosperity,  was  Ghana  or  Ghanata.  At  a  later 
date  the  territory  was  called  Walata,  and  the  principal 
town  became  Aiwalatin. 

We  are  told  that  white  kings  had  reigned  over  Ghana 
before  the  year  of  the  Hegira  ;  but  when  the  Arabs  visited 
the  country  in  the  eighth  century  they  found  it  in  the  pos- 
session of  a  black  monarch,  to  whom  the  Berbers  or  white 
people  of  the  more  northerly  desert  towns  paid  tribute. 
The  town  of  Ghana  lay  towards  the  eastern  portion  of 
this  district,  and  at  one  time  the  territory  over  which  it 
ruled  extended  to  the  sea. 

The  district  to  the  south-west  of  the  Senegal,  between 
that  river  and  the  sea,  is  regarded  by  early  writers  as  the 
original  place  of  settlement  of  the  Fulani  in  Africa.  The 
Djolfs,  who  inhabited  it  during  the  Arab  period,  are  de- 
scribed in  the  Tarikh-es-Soudan  as  "the  best  of  men." 
"  By  their  acts  and  their  character,"  the  author  says, 
"they  differ  essentially  from  all  the  other  Fulanis.  God 
by  a  special  grace  has  endowed  them  with  a  generous 
nature,  and  He  inspires  in  them  fine  actions  and  conduct 
worthy  of  all  praise.  For  valour  and  bravery  they  have 
no  equal.  ,  .  .  In  all  that  we  have  ever  heard  about  them, 
loyalty  and  fidelity  to  their  engagements  appear  to  be 
innate,  and  to  have  reached  the  highest  expression  in 
them."  It  will  be  noticed  that  this  praise  of  the  Djolfs 
is  given  at  the  implied  expense  of  "all  other  Fulanis." 
There  can  be  no  doubt  that  from  the  beginning  of  their 
history  there  has  been  a  wide  variation  in  the  endowments 
of  this  people.  They  are,  however,  so  remarkable,  and 
from  our  earliest  knowledge  of  them  have  maintained  the 
character  of  their  own  race  so  exclusively  of  the  life  and 
history  of  the  other  races  of  the  Soudan,  that  the  account 
of  their  progress  as  a  ruling  power  from  the  extreme 
western  corner  upon  the  Atlantic  coast,  in  which  we  first 
hear  of  them,  to  the  eastern  regions  between  the  Niger 

F 


82  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

and  Lake  Chad,  where,  at  the  beginning  of  the  nineteenth 
century,  they  established  their  domination  over  the  Haussa 
states,  will  best  be  given  later  in  a  separate  chapter. 

The  history  of  Ghana  and  of  the  Empire  of  Melle 
which  superseded  it  constitute  the  two  first  chapters  of  the 
native  history  of  Negroland.  Melle,  which  extended  at 
one  period  of  its  history  over  the  territory  of  Ghana  and 
also  over  the  Bend  of  the  Niger,  gives  way  in  its  turn  to 
the  extraordinarily  interesting  history  of  Songhay — an 
empire  which  from  the  middle  of  the  fifteenth  to  the  end 
of  the  sixteenth  centuries  extended  over  the  entire  Bend 
of  the  Niger,  and  even  carried  its  domination  for  a  time 
to  the  Atlantic  on  one  side  and  to  Lake  Chad  upon  the 
other.  Contemporaneously  with  the  rise  of  Melle  and 
Songhay,  the  Haussa  States  and  Bornu  rose  to  prosperity 
between  the  Niger  and  Lake  Chad,  while  the  native 
states  of  Nupe,  Borgu,  Mossi,  and  some  others,  appear 
to  have  maintained  an  independent  existence  from  a 
period  of  considerable  antiquity  upon  the  Niger.  To 
the  south  of  these  territories,  during  the  whole  period  of 
which  we  have  the  record  of  their  history,  the  country 
was  inhabited  in  a  continuous  belt  by  Pagan  cannibals. 

As  civilisation  in  the  medieval  epoch  of  Negro  history 
would  seem  to  have  arisen  in  the  west,  and  gradually  to 
have  crept  across  towards  the  east,  meeting,  in  the  Bend 
of  the  Niger  and  the  Haussa  States,  that  other  wave  of 
civilising  influence  which  in  earlier  days  had  inspired  its 
life  from  the  east,  so  it  will  not  be  surprising  to  find 
that  decadence  spreads  also  along  the  same  path  and 
in  the  same  historic  order.  When  the  Arabs  first 
visited  Negroland  by  the  western  route  in  the  eighth 
and  ninth  centuries  of  our  era,  they  found  the  black 
kings  of  Ghana  in  the  height  of  their  prosperity.  The 
countries  bordering  upon  Lake  Chad  are  then  spoken 
of  contemptuously  as  the  "  country  of  the  idolaters." 
But  the  black  kings  of  Ghana  had  long  passed  into 
oblivion  when  Edris,  one  of  the  greatest  of  the  kings  of 
Bornu,  was  making  gunpowder  for  the  muskets  of  his  army 
t  a  period  contemporary  with  Queen  Elizabeth. 


CHAPTER    IX 

NEGROLAND   AND   THE   WESTERN    ARABS 

It  has  already  been  mentioned  that  the  whole  of  the  Fez- 
zan  and  the  south-western  province  of  what  is  now  Morocco 
were  conquered  by  the  Arab  general,  Okbar,  in  the  middle 
of  the  seventh  century,  but  that  he  did  not  penetrate  at 
either  end  of  the  Western  Soudan  to  the  territories  of  the 
fertile  belt.  There  was  not  for  nearly  a  thousand  years 
any  direct  military  conquest  of  these  territories  by  the 
Arabs.  But  the  Berber  tribes,  dispossessed  and  driven 
southwards  by  the  Arabs,  made  room  for  themselves  at 
different  periods  in  the  fertile  belt,  and  in  doing  so  neces- 
sarily fought  with  and  overthrew  or  were  overthrown  by 
the  blacks.  As  in  the  case  of  the  conquest  of  the  British 
Isles  by  Saxons,  Danes,  and  Normans,  this  resulted  in  a 
very  great  admixture  of  blood,  and  though  the  black  strain 
would  seem  generally  to  have  prevailed  in  point  of  colour, 
the  characteristics  of  the  races  occupying  the  fertile  belt 
were  in  the  course  of  centuries  so  modified  that  in  speak- 
ing of  them  it  will  perhaps  be  more  accurate  to  employ 
the  word  "  black  "  than  the  in  many  ways  misleading  term 
of  "  negro." 

The  true  negro  is  hardly  to  be  found  amongst  these 
races  of  the  northern  inland  belt — the  cast  of  face, 
even  when  jet  black  in  colour,  being  frequently  European 
in  form,  with  the  high  nose,  thin  lips,  and  deep-set  eyes, 
characteristic  still  of  the  Arab  of  the  Mediterranean  coast. 
The  aristocratic  thin  hand,  and  the  slight,  somewhat  square 
shoulders  of  the  Arab  of  the  coast  are  also  frequently 
noticeable.     As  a  consequence  of  many  invasions  from  the 

north  this  blood    no   doubt  penetrated  as  far   as   climatic 

83 


84  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

conditions  would  allow.  I  shall  also  hope  to  show  that 
from  any  time  of  which  history  has  note,  the  northern  belt 
of  the  Soudan  has  been  occupied  by  races  of  a  higher 
than  negroid  type.  The  operation  of  these  types  upon  the 
purely  negroid  races  was  to  drive  them  southwards  into 
the  tropical  swamps  of  the  coast  belt  in  which  the  higher 
type  could  not  live. 

The  pressure  of  the  tribes  of  the  desert  upon  Negro- 
land  dates  of  course  from  a  very  much  earlier  period 
than  the  Arab  conquest  of  North  Africa,  but  it  was 
renewed  and  accentuated  by  that  conquest.  The  earliest 
Arab  writer  who  is  known  to  make  any  allusion  to  Arab 
dealings  with  Negroland  in  the  west  is  Abd  el  Hakem, 
who  died  in  Egypt  in  Syo,  but  he  merely  alludes  to  a 
military  expedition  against  the  Berbers  in  the  south-west, 
undertaken  about  the  year  720,  which  reached  the  Soudan 
and  brought  back  as  much  gold  as  the  soldiers  wanted. 
The  next  writer  in  point  of  date  whose  writings  have 
been  preserved  is  Ibn  Haukal,  the  geographer,  who  wrote 
about  the  year  930.  But  he  confines  his  writings  chiefly 
to  "those  lands  which  are  the  seat  of  Islam  and  the  resi- 
dence of  true  believers,"  and  though  these  extended  in  the 
tenth  century  from  Spain  to  China,  through  Trans-Oxiana, 
Tibet,  and  Hindostan,  the  black  countries  of  the  Western 
Soudan  are  regarded  as  being  still  at  that  date  outside 
the  pale.  "  As  for  the  Land  of  Blacks  in  West  Africa," 
he  says,  "  I  make  but  slight  mention  of  them,  because 
naturally  loving  wisdom,  ingenuity,  religion,  justice,  and 
regular  government,  how  could  I  notice  such  people  as 
those  or  exalt  them  by  inserting  an  account  of  their 
countries."  It  is  evident  that  this  haughty  writer  had 
but  a  small  acquaintance  with  the  Land  of  the  Blacks 
which  he  despises,  and  that  he  knew  only  its  northern 
edge.  "The  Land  of  the  Blacks,"  he  says,  "is  a  very 
extensive  region,  but  extremely  dry.  In  the  mountains  of 
it  are  to  be  found  all  the  fruits  which  the  Mohammedan 
world  produces."  He  tells  us  also  that  it  extends  to  the 
ocean   on    the    south    and    is    bordered    on    the    north   by 


NEGROLAND   AND   WESTERN    ARABS     85 

deserts  which  reach  across  Africa  to  Zanzibar.  In  his 
day  the  Tripoli-Fezzan  route  would  appear  to  have  been 
closed.  "  Whatsoever  they  get,"  he  says,  "  comes  to  them 
from  the  western  side,  because  of  the  difficulty  of  entering 
their  country  from  any  other  quarter." 

This  scant  notice  is  only  interesting  as  showing  that, 
although  intercourse  with  the  Arabs  had  already  begun  by 
the  western  route,  it  was  not  in  the  middle  of  the  tenth 
century  sufficiently  active  to  be  regarded  in  the  higher 
circles  of  the  learned  as  having  serious  importance. 

The  step  from  this  writer  to  the  next  who  has  pre- 
served for  us  any  contemporary  knowledge  of  Negroland, 
is  the  more  remarkable.  Ibn  Haukal  died  in  968.  Just  a 
hundred  years  later,  in  1067,  a  book  was  written  that  gives 
us  a  description  as  vivid  as  the  description  of  Ibn  Haukal 
is  bare.  The  name  of  the  book  is  usually  translated  as 
"  Roads  and  Realms."  It  treats  of  the  whole  of  North 
Africa,  but  of  Negroland  in  special  detail,  and  the  intimate 
knowledge  which  it  displays  serves  to  indicate  the  develop- 
ment of  intercourse  with  the  Soudan  which  must  have 
taken  place  under  the  Ommeyades.  The  author,  whose 
long  Arabic  name  is  usually  shortened  to  El  Bekri,  was 
the  son  of  a  prince  of  Huelva,  who,  as  a  consequence 
of  civil  war  in  Spain,  sold  his  principality  to  the 
Prince  of  Seville  in  or  about  the  year  1051.  He  then 
went  as  a  rich  man  to  live  at  Cordova,  taking  with 
him  his  son,  the  famous  El  Bekri.  The  exact  date  of 
El  Bekri's  birth  is  doubtful,  but  the  best  authorities  put 
it  at  1028.  It  was  the  moment  of  the  break-up  of  the 
Ommeyade  power  in  Spain,  when  petty  courts  were  estab- 
lishing themselves  in  the  principal  towns.  On  the  northern 
frontier  of  Mohammedan  Spain  the  Christians,  gaining 
daily  strength,  were  before  the  end  of  the  century  to  be 
led  to  victory  by  the  immortal  Cid,  while  in  the  far  south 
of  Western  Africa  that  army  of  the  Al  Moravides  was 
drawing  together  upon  the  banks  of  the  Senegal,  which 
was  first  to  bring  regeneration  to  unconscious  Spain. 

In  the  meantime  the  life  of  the  pleasant  courts,  which 


86  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

the  weakness  of  the  declining  power  of  the  Ommeyades 
had  permitted  to  erect  themselves  into  independence,  was 
gay,  cultivated,  splendid,  and  refined.  El  Bekri  knew 
them  all.  After  his  father's  death  in  1066  he  went  to 
that  of  Almeria,  then  one  of  the  first  cities  in  importance 
of  Southern  Spain.  It  is  claimed  by  some  Arab  writers 
that  the  commercial  greatness  of  the  Italian  republics  had 
its  foundation  in  trade  with  Almeria,  and  through  Almeria 
with  the  East.  In  Almeria  El  Bekri  was  the  favoured 
guest  of  El  Mutassim,  the  reigning  prince.  From  Almeria 
he  afterwards  went  to  take  up  his  residence  at  Seville, 
the  home  of  art  and  science,  where  also  he  was  honoured 
of  the  great.  He  loved  the  good  things  of  life  ;  he  enjoyed 
the  society  of  the  learned,  and,  eminent  among  all  that 
was  most  eminent  of  his  day,  he  was  remarkable  for  his 
own  great  attainments  and  intellectual  industry.  He  died 
in  1094.  It  is  not  recorded  of  him  that  he  ever  left 
Spain.  It  is  true  that  his  geographical  works  can  there- 
fore only  be  regarded  as  compilations,  but  this  renders 
them  for  our  purpose  in  one  sense  the  more  important, 
as  serving  to  show  how  much  was  known  at  that  time 
of  West  Africa  in  the  cultivated  circles  of  the  courts  of 
Spain. 

It  is  evident  from  El  Bekri's  account  that  the  trade 
of  the  Soudan  with  Spain  and  the  countries  of  the  Medi- 
terranean coast  had  for  a  long  time  been  important  enough 
to  attract  attention  and  interest.  He  notes  the  two  prin- 
cipal caravan  roads  into  the  western  and  eastern  end  of 
the  Soudan,  but  describes  the  western  road  by  Morocco 
and  Tafilet  as  being  that  in  most  frequent  use.  Kanem, 
lying  at  the  eastern  end  of  the  Western  Soudan,  is  to  him 
a  "country  of  idolaters  very  difficult  to  reach,"  while  the 
country  to  the  south  of  Morocco  is  evidently  as  well 
known  as  the  provinces  of  Spain. 

Tafilet — known  to  the  Arabs  and  always  spoken  of 
under  the  name  of  Sidjilmessa,  the  last  town  at  which 
the  road  to  the  Soudan  left  the  fertile  territories  of 
Morocco — was,   according    to    El    Bekri,    founded    in    the 


NEGROLAND  AND  WESTERN  ARABS  87 

year  757  of  our  era.  He  describes  it  as  being  situated 
at  the  junction  of  several  streams,  in  a  plain  of  which  the 
soil  was  impregnated  with  salt  and  was  extraordinarily 
fertile.  Among  their  crops  the  people  grew  "  Chinese 
wheat."  The  town  was  large,  containing  some  very 
splendid  buildings,  and  was  surrounded  by  extensive 
suburbs  and  gardens.  Grapes,  dates,  and  all  kinds  of 
fruits  were  very  plentiful,  and  amongst  other  industries 
the  town  was  celebrated  for  drying  raisins.  There  was 
a  gold  currency,  and  it  was  regarded  as  a  peculiarity  that 
gold  pieces  at  Sidjilmessa  were  received  by  count  and 
not  by  weight. 

The  founder  and  first  governor  of  this  town  was  black. 
It  seems  contrary  to  modern  ideas  that  white  people 
should  under  any  circumstances  consent  to  be  ruled  by 
blacks,  but  it  will  be  seen  that  in  the  history  of  the 
Western  Soudan  this  objection  was  not  universally  felt. 
Instances  are  common,  especially  in  the  western  portions 
of  the  territory  of  the  Soudan,  of  Berbers  paying  tribute 
to  black  sovereigns.  The  Fulani,  who  counted  them- 
selves a  white  race,  were  constantly  subject  to  black 
rulers,  and  it  is  related  of  the  black  women  of  one  of 
the  kingdoms  of  the  Soudan,  that  when  their  monarch 
was  overthrown  by  a  contemporary  Berber  king,  they, 
"  too  proud  to  allow  themselves  to  fall  into  the  hands  of 
white  men,"  preferred  to  commit  suicide. 

Sidjilmessa  was  already  Mohammedan  in  El  Bekri's 
time.  It  was  the  meeting-place  of  many  roads  :  those 
leading  from  Wargelan  and  other  places  in  the  Barbary 
States  which  were  marts  of  the  trade  of  the  Soudan,  and 
also  from  Morocco,  Telem9an,  and  the  coast.  For  all 
these  roads  it  formed  the  most  westerly  entrance  to  the 
desert. 

From  Sidjilmessa  to  Ghana  in  the  Land  of  Blacks 
there  was  a  march  of  nearly  two  months  to  be  made 
across  a  practically  uninhabited  desert.  Throughout  this 
vast  region  only  nomad  tribes  were  in  El  Bekri's  day  to 
be   met  with,   having,    he   says,    no   town   for  their  head- 


88  A    TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

quarters,  with  the  exception  of  the  Wadi  Dra,  at  five 
days'  distance  from  Sidjilmessa,  which  was  the  meeting- 
point  of  the  Masmouda  Berbers,  a  fraction  of  the  Senajah 
tribe.  For  the  accurate  geography  of  this  road  the  reader 
who  is  interested  should  refer  to  Cooley's  "  Negroland  of 
the  Arabs,"  in  which  he  will  find  a  learned  and  most  care- 
ful examination  of  the  ancient  geography  of  the  country. 
From  the  conclusions  drawn  by  Cooley  it  would  seem 
quite  clear  that  the  road  described  by  El  Bekri  coincides 
almost  exactly  with  that  shown  in  modern  maps  as  con- 
necting El  Harib  on  the  south-western  frontier  of  Morocco 
with  Timbuctoo,  via  Mabruk,  which  encampment  Cooley 
identifies  with  the  Audoghast  of  the  Arabs.  The  only 
difference  would  appear  to  have  been  that  the  meeting- 
point  of  Tamedelt  mentioned  by  El  Bekri  as  being  eleven 
days  west  of  Sidjilmessa,  was  slightly  to  the  west  of  El 
Harib.  Cooley  fixes  it  at  lat.  28°  45'  N.,  long.  7°  10'  W. 
Dr.  Barth  disagrees  with  Cooley,  and  would  place  Audo- 
ghast somewhat  to  the  west  of  Mabruk. 

To  reach  Negroland  by  the  western  route  there  were, 
however,  two  possible  variants  of  the  road,  both  of  which 
have  been  so  accurately  described  by  El  Bekri,  and  after 
him  by  Ibn  Batuta  and  other  travellers,  as  to  leave  little 
room  for  doubt  as  to  their  direction  ;  one  led  via  Audo- 
ghast, the  other,  as  pursued  by  Ibn  Batuta  at  a  later 
date,  ran  more  directly  south  via  Tegazza  to  Aiwalatin  or 
Walata.  Both  would  appear  to  have  been  equally  well 
known  and  equally  used  from  the  earliest  times.  Both 
required  a  journey  of  about  two  months  from  Sidjilmessa  ; 
but  the  one  skirted  the  western  and  the  other  the  eastern 
border  of  the  desert  of  Tizer  or  Ayawad.  Both  traversed 
the  desert,  using  as  guides  the  nomad  Berbers  of  the 
locality.  Ibn  Batuta  describes  the  portion  of  it  just  north 
of  Aiwalatin  as  "  a  vast  plain,  beautiful  and  bright,  of 
which  the  air  is  so  invigorating  that  the  spirits  rise  and 
the  lungs  dilate."  It  is,  however,  quite  waterless  for 
many  days,  and  in  order  to  reach  Aiwalatin  the  custom 
was  to  send  a  practised  guide  seven  days  ahead  to  give 


NEGROLAND  AND  WESTERN  ARABS   89 

warning  of  the  approach  of  a  caravan,  which  messengers 
from  the  town  were  then  sent  to  meet,  carrying  water 
into  the  desert  for  a  four  days'  march.  Without  this 
precaution  caravans  frequently  perished  of  thirst.  Like 
all  great  plains  in  which  the  mirage  is  common,  this  desert 
had  the  reputation  of  being  haunted  by  demons.  On  the 
more  westerly  route,  at  a  distance  of  twenty  days  from 
Sidjilmessa,  lay  the  great  salt-mine  of  Tegazza,  which  is 
described  in  detail  by  every  writer. 


CHAPTER  X 

BERBER  AND  BLACK 


These  two  roads,  forming  together  the  great  western 
caravan  route  to  the  Soudan,  led  each  to  a  separate 
and  typical  objective.  The  stopping-place  of  the  easterly 
branch  was  Audoghast ;  the  stopping-place  of  the  more 
westerly  branch  was  Aiwalatin.  Audoghast  was  about 
fifteen  days  north  of  the  present  position  of  Timbuctoo. 
It  lay,  therefore,  between  21°  and  22°  N.  lat.,  and 
whether  Cooley  or  Barth  is  right  as  to  its  exact  position, 
it  was  well  outside  the  belt  of  the  Soudan  proper,  while 
Aiwalatin,  or  Walata,  between  the  seventeenth  and 
eighteenth  parallels,  lay  on  the  edge  of  the  summer  rains, 
and  was  the  frontier  town,  and  at  one  time  the  capital  of 
the  ofreat  black  king-dom  of  Ghana.  These  two  towns 
represented  two  elements  in  the  life  of  the  Soudan,  and 
are  therefore  worth  dwelling  upon.  The  one  represented 
the  Berber,  the  other  the  black,  element,  which  are  to  be 
found  constantly  side  by  side.  Audoghast  was  a  type  of 
the  Berber  state,  lying  not  in  but  on  the  northern  edge 
of  the  Soudan,  fronting  the  black  races  and  having 
intercourse  with  them,  but  preserving  a  semi-separate 
existence.  Aiwalatin  was  a  type  of  the  purely  black 
state  lying  in  the  heart  of  the  fertile  belt.  Each  of 
these  states  in  turn  would  seem  to  have  paid  tribute 
to  the  other ;  each  in  turn  was  ruled  by  princes  of 
the  opposing  race  ;  each  had  its  periods  of  independence. 
The  Soudanese  author  of  the  Tarikh-es- Soudan  tells 
us  that  forty-four  white  princes  had  ruled  over  Ghana 
before  the  great  black  princes  arose.  In  the  early  part 
of    the    eleventh    century    Audoghast    was    tributary    to 


BERBER    AXD    BLACK  91 

Ghana,  and  was  ruled,  as   Sidjilmessa  had  once  been,  by 
a  black  prince. 

El  Bekri  has  preserved  an  interesting  description  of 
both  towns  as  they  were  known  to  the  travellers  and 
merchants  of  Mohammedan  Spain. 

Before  reaching  Audoghast,  he  tells  us,  the  pure  desert 
of  drifting  sand  gave  way  to  sandy  but  wooded  uplands, 
where  a  succession  of  wells  furnished  an  ample  water 
supply.  Amongst  these  woods  a  rubber  or  gum  tree  was 
plentiful,  of  which  the  produce  was  exported  to  Spain, 
and  much  used  in  the  manufacture  of  silk.  From  these 
wooded  uplands  the  road  led  down  to  Audoghast,  which 
was  a  large  and  thickly  populated  town,  built  in  a  sandy 
plain  and  surrounded  by  gardens  and  date-groves.  Its 
pastures  were  well  stocked  with  sheep  and  cattle,  and 
meat  was  very  plentiful,  but  wheat  was  cultivated  as  a 
garden  crop.  The  rich  alone  indulged  themselves  in  the 
use  of  it.  The  common  grain,  used  by  the  people  was 
dourra.  Fields  of  henna  bore  heavy  crops.  The  town  had 
several  mosques  and  other  fine  public  buildings,  and  the 
houses  generally  were  "very  elegant."  The  people  were 
rich  and  lived  in  great  comfort.  There  was  a  large  and 
extremely  busy  market,  where,  notwithstanding  the  dis- 
tance, wheat,  fruit,  sugar,  and  dried  raisins  from  the 
Mohammedan  countries  were  regularly  sent.  Honey, 
which  was  very  plentiful,  came  from  Negroland.  Luxu- 
ries of  all  kinds  were  to  be  obtained  for  gold  dust,  which 
was  the  medium  of  exchange.  There  was  no  proper 
currency.  Amongst  the  trade  imports  El  Bekri  mentions 
worked  copper  and  dress  stuffs,  and  amongst  the  exports 
amber  and  refined  g:old  run  into  the  form  of  ofold  wire. 
The  refined  gold  of  Audoghast  had  the  reputation  of  being 
purer  than  that  of  any  other  country  in  the  world.  The 
population  of  Audoghast  was  very  mixed,  but  was  mainly 
Berber,  consisting  of  natives  from  the  Barbary  coasts  and 
members  of  the  surrounding  Berber  tribes.  There  were 
also  to  be  seen,  El  Bekri  says,  but  in  smaller  numbers, 
people  from  all  the  great  ^Mussulman  towns  o\   Spain,  and 


92  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

amongst  the  white  women  many  were  remarkable  for  their 
beauty.  The  service  of  the  households  would  appear  to 
have  been  done  by  negroes,  and  the  rich  merchants 
of  Audoghast  owned  sometimes  as  many  as  a  thousand 
slaves.  There  were  especially  clever  negress  cooks  who 
were  worth  ^loo  apiece,  and  who  knew  how  to  prepare 
most  appetising  dishes,  the  flesh  of  camel  calves  stewed 
with  truffles,  maccaroni  dressed  with  honey,  nut  cakes, 
and  all  kinds  of  sweetmeats. 

Between  the  years  961  and  971,  that  is,  a  hundred 
years  earlier  than  the  date  of  El  Bekri's  writing,  Audo- 
ghast formed  the  centre  of  a  Berber  state  which  was  ruled 
by  a  prince  of  the  Senajah  tribe  whose  name  was  Tin 
Yeroutan.  More  than  twenty  black  kings  acknowledged 
his  rule  and  paid  tribute  to  him,  and  his  empire  extended 
over  an  inhabited  country  which  it  required  two  months  to 
march  through  from  end  to  end.  He  was  able  to  put  in 
the  field  an  army  of  no  less  than  100,000  men  mounted 
upon  trained  camels.  When  the  King  of  Macina,  a 
Berber  frontier  state  situated  south  of  his  territory  upon 
the  Niger,  asked  for  help  against  a  powerful  black  neigh- 
bour, he  sent  him  50,000  mounted  men.  The  whole 
country  from  Audoghast  to  the  Atlantic  coast  was  in  those 
days  in  the  possession  of  the  Berbers.  Certain  tribes, 
amongst  whom  were  the  Beni  Goddala  and  the  Lemtunah, 
destined  afterwards  to  give  the  dynasty  of  the  Almora- 
vides  to  Spain,  retained  their  independence  on  the  western 
coast,  and  as  nomads  continued  for  a  long  time  to  haunt 
the  more  westerly  of  the  two  roads  to  Negroland.  All 
these  tribes  of  the  desert  wore  the  double  veil,  the  nicab, 
which  concealed  the  upper  part  of  the  face,  and  the  litham, 
which  concealed  the  lower  in  such  a  way  that  only  the 
orbit  of  the  eyes  was  visible.  "Never,"  El  Bekri  says, 
"  in  any  circumstances  did  they  take  off  the  veil,  and  if 
by  accident  a  man's  veil  had  been  taken  off  he  would 
have  been  quite  unrecognisable  by  his  parents."  When  it 
happened  in  battle  to  a  warrior  the  body  could  not  be 
identified.      "The  veil,"  he  adds,  "is  a  thing  which  they 


BERBER    AXD    BLACK  93 

no  more  take  off  than  their  skins,  and  to  men  who  do  not 
dress  as  they  do  they  apply  the  nickname  of  '  fly-traps.' '" 

The  Berber  Tin  Yeroutan  had  ruled  in  Audoghast  a 
hundred  years  before  El  Bekri  wrote,  and  in  that  time 
much  had  happened.  The  black  kingdom  of  Ghana, 
already  famous  in  the  eighth  centun,',  had  risen  in  pros- 
perity and  importance,  and  had  spread  northwards, 
conquering  amongst  other  territories  the  kingdom  of 
Audoghast.  In  the  year  1054  the  town  of  Audoghast. 
still  rich  and  flourishing,  not  only  acknowledged  the  rule 
of  Ghana  and  paid  tribute,  but  was  also  a  place  of 
residence  of  the  black  monarch.  But  in  the  followingr 
year,  1055,  the  Almoravides,  already  setting  out  upon 
their  northward  march,  made  a  first  example  of  this  town. 
They  took  it  by  assault  and  sacked  and  pillaged  it,  ex- 
posing it  to  every  horror  of  barbaric  warfare,  and  it  is 
especially  stated  that  "  they  treated  the  population  of 
Audog-hast  with  this  extreme  ris^our  because  the  town 
had  acknowledged  the  sovereignty  of  the  black  king  of 
Ghana.  ' 

The  actual  position  of  the  town  of  Ghana,  of  which  no 
certain  trace  now  remains,  has  been  much  disputed.  Leo 
Africanus,  by  a  careless  phrase,  confused  it  with  the  town 
of  Kajio,  upwards  of  1200  miles  distant  in  the  Haussa 
States,  and  as  a  consequence,  in  the  ver}-  unenlightened 
condition  of  European  knowledge,  the  traditions  of  the 
one  town  were  commonly  associated  with  the  other  until 
Cooley,  in  his  "  Xegroland  of  the  Arabs,"  demonstrated 
once  and  for  all  the  absurdity  of  such  a  geographical 
transposition.  That  the  town  of  Ghana  was  somewhere 
in  the  west,  situated  between  the  Niger  and  the  sea,  and 
near  to  the  issue  of  the  western  caravan  road  from 
Morocco,  is  not  questioned.  The  exact  locality  is  un- 
certain, but  it  is  generally  held  that  it  was  some  days  to 
the  south-west  of  Timbuctoo.  Taking  into  consideration 
that  it  is  constantly  spoken  of  as  the  capital  of  the  kingdom 
of  Ghana  or  Ghanata,  and  that  that  capital  is  also  some- 
times spoken  of  as   Biru  and  Walata,  Ghanata  and  Walata 


94  A    TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

beino-  interchangeable,  and  that  Walata,  Biru,  and  Aiwa- 
latin  are  one,  also  noting  the  points  of  resemblance  between 
the  geographical  description  given  by  El  Bekri  of  the 
position  of  Ghana,  and  by  Ibn  Batuta  300  years  later  of 
Aiwakitin,  it  scarcely  seems  to  be  doubtful  that  the  Ghana 
of  the  eighth  century  was  identical  with  the  Aiwalatin  of 
the  fourteenth,  and  with  the  Walata  of  to-day. 

We  learn  by  extracts  from  a  Haussa  record,  of  which 
the  orio'inal  has  unfortunately  been  destroyed,  that  the 
people  of  Ghana  were  anciently  known  by  the  name  of 
Towrooth  or  Taurud,  and  that  they  claimed  to  have  come 
from  the  territory  lying  between  the  Tigris  and  the 
Euphrates.  In  other  words,  they  claimed  descent  from 
the  Assyrians  or  the  Babylonians,  both  peoples  who  had 
their  orio-in  in  the  Taurus  Mountains,  and  reached  their 
hicrhest  development  in  the  Valley  of  the  Euphrates  and 
the  Tigris.  If  the  migration  of  the  people  of  Ghana 
formed  part  of  the  movement  impelled  by  the  Chaldean 
conquest  of  Babylon,  this  would  carry  their  settlement  in 
Africa  back  to  the  seventh  century  before  Christ.  It  may 
have  been  much  earlier.  When  Alexander  the  Great  took 
Babylon,  he  sent  back  for  the  information  of  Aristotle 
records  of  Babylonian  astronomical  observations  extend- 
ing over  1903  years. 

Among  the  peoples  ruled  by  Ghana  in  the  Arab 
period,  one  of  the  most  important  was  known  by  the 
name  of  Ungara,  Wangara,  or  Wakore,  of  whom  many 
were  Fulani.  The  Wangara,  at  a  later  date,  migrated 
eastward  into  the  Haussa  States.  This  people  claimed 
on  their  part  to  have  descended  from  the  Persians.  When, 
at  a  later  period,  they  moved  eastward  from  Ghana  to 
Haussaland,  the  province  which  they  founded  was  called 
indifferently  Wangara  or  Ungara.  It  is,  therefore,  in- 
teresting to  find  that  in  the  Ramayana,  the  Indian  epic, 
a  Rajah  of  Ungar  is  mentioned  among,  those  who  paid 
tribute  to  the  famous  Desaratha.  Commentators  who 
were  in  no  way  concerned  with  African  history,  have 
agreed  that  Ungar  must  have  been  a  province  of  Persia 


BERBER    AND    BLACK  95 

on  the  northern  frontier  of  India.  We  get,  therefore, 
somewhere  about  the  time  of  Moses  a  spot  in  Persia 
whence  the  Wangara  may  have  originated.  The  fact 
that  Persian  influence  extended  at  a  very  early  period 
to  the  black  countries  of  Africa  is  also  attested  by  the 
ruins  of  Persepolis,  where  amongst  the  bas-reliefs  believed 
to  have  been  carved  in  commemoration  of  the  glories  of 
Cyrus  and  his  immediate  successors,  there  is  one  which 
shows  the  king  in  the  act  of  receiving  tribute  from  the 
ambassadors  of  subject  nations,  and  amongst  them  there 
is  a  negro.  Niebuhr  tells  us  that  the  profile  is  unmistak- 
able, and  that  the  hair  of  the  negro  is  so  carefully  carved 
that  it  is  impossible  to  mistake  it  for  the  hair  of  an  Asiatic. 
Cambyses,  son  of  Cyrus,  conquered  Egypt  in  527  B.C., 
and  his  army  perished  in  marching  into  Ethiopia.  There 
is  nothing  impossible  in  the  supposition  that  fragments 
of  that  defeated  army  may  have  remained  and  settled  in 
the  Soudan. 

Further  information  of  the  remote  antiquity  of  Ghana 
seems  unfortunately  to  be  at  present  unattainable.  So 
far  as  we  are  aware,  no  monuments  remain  to  confirm 
the  traditions  of  the  people.  I  give  these  surmises,  there- 
fore, for  what  they  may  be  worth,  and  have  myself  found 
nothing  to  connect  the  Taurud  of  Ghana  with  the  ancient 
Babylonians  except  two  characteristics  mentioned  by 
El  Bekri :  one  is  that  they  were  workers  in  gems,  the 
other  is  that  their  notables  indulged  a  passion  for  fine 
dogs.  Both  of  these,  as  we  know,  were  also  charac- 
teristics of  the  people  of  Babylon. 

We  are  on  safer  ground  when  we  return  to  the 
medieval  records  of  Arab  writers. 

In  the  years  1067  Ghana  was  still  the  principal  black 
kingdom  of  the  Western  Soudan.  The  name  of  its 
reigning  sovereign  was  Tenkamenin,  who  ascended  the 
throne  in  the  year  1062,  in  succession  to  his  maternal 
uncle,  Beci.  It  was  the  custom  amongst  these  blacks 
for  the  succession  to  go  always  to  the  son  of  the  king's 
sister. 


96  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

The  town  of  Ghana,  which,  after  the  sack  of  Audoghast 
by  the  Almoravides,  became  the  royal  residence  of  the 
kings,  was  composed,  according  to  El  Bekri,  of  two  towns 
situated  in  a  plain.  One  town  was  Mussulman  and  the 
other  pagan.  The  king  himself  was  a  pagan,  and  lived 
in  the  pagan  town.  The  Mussulman  town  was  very 
large,  and  contained  no  less  than  twelve  mosques.  All 
these  mosques  had  their  i7nanis,  their  nioweddins,  and 
their  salaried  readers.  There  were  also  schools  and 
centres  of  learning,  and  according  to  the  author  of  the 
Tarikh-es-Soucimiy  the  town,  besides  being  the  meeting- 
place  of  commercial  caravans  from  all  parts  of  the  world, 
was  "the  resort  of  the  learned,  the  rich,  and  the  pious 
of  all  nations."  They  came,  he  says,  from  Egypt,  from 
Augila,  from  the  Fezzan,  from  Ghadames,  from  Taouat, 
from  Dra,  from  Sidjilmessa,  from  Sus,  from  Bitou,  and 
other  places.  This  account  is  fully  borne  out  by  later 
writers.  El  Edrisi,  writing  in  1153,  describes  the  king's 
residence  as  being  a  well-built  castle,  thoroughly  fortified, 
decorated  inside  with  sculptures  and  pictures,  and  having 
glass  windows.  El  Bekri  makes  no  mention  of  glass,  but 
says  that  the  king's  residence  in  the  pagan  town  consisted 
of  a  "castle"  surrounded  by  native  huts.  He  mentions 
that  the  buildings  generally  were  composed  of  stone  and 
acacia  wood.  The  native  town  was  six  miles  distant  from 
the  Mussulman  town,  but  the  w^hole  space  was  covered 
by  suburbs,  consisting  of  stone  houses  standing  in  gardens. 
In  the  native  town  there  w^as  one  mosque  for  the  use  of 
Mohammedans  occupied  on  duty  round  the  king.  The 
king's  principal  ministers  and  advisers  were  at  this  time 
Mohammedans,  and  he  and  his  heir-presumptive  wore 
Mohammedan  dress,  but  the  religion  of  the  country  was 
still  devoutly  pagan,  and  all  other  persons  of  native  religion, 
except  the  king  and  his  heir,  wore  robes  of  cotton,  silk,  or 
brocade,  according  to  their  means.  The  local  religion, 
evidently  different  from  the  paganism  now  practised  among 
the  lower  class  tribes  upon  the  coast,  had  yet  certain  points 
of  resemblance. 


BERBER   AND    BLACK  97 

The  royal  town,  says  El  Bekri,  was  surrounded  by 
groves  jealously  guarded,  which  were  sacred  to  the  worship 
of  the  gods.  Here  dwelt  the  priests  who  directed  religious 
worship.  No  other  person  was  allowed  to  enter  or  to 
know  anything  of  what  happened  within  their  precincts. 
Here  were  the  idols  of  the  nation.  Here  also  were  the 
tombs  of  the  kings,  and  the  royal  prisons,  in  which,  if  a 
man  were  once  confined,  he  was  never  heard  of  again. 
From  the  description  of  royal  funerals  it  may  be  inferred 
that  a  new  grove  was  planted  for  each  tomb.  On  the 
death  of  a  king,  the  custom  was  to  construct  a  great  dome 
of  wood  on  the  spot  which  was  to  serve  as  his  tomb.  The 
body  was  then  laid  upon  a  couch  covered  with  drapery 
and  cushions,  and  placed  within  the  dome.  Round  the 
dead  were  laid  his  decorations,  his  arms,  the  dishes  and 
cups  from  which  he  was  in  the  habit  of  eating  and  drink- 
ing, and  various  kinds  of  food  and  drink.  With  the  body 
of  the  sovereign  were  enclosed  several  of  his  cooks  and 
attendants.  The  edifice  was  covered  with  cloth  and  mats. 
The  assembled  multitudes  then  threw  earth  upon  the  tomb 
until  a  great  hill  was  formed.  When  this  was  done  the 
monument  was  secured  from  defilement^By^  ditch  which 
left  only  one  passage  of  approach,  ^^gf^fices^sto  the  dead 
were  also  made.  v"  / 

This  system  of  burial  recalls  ^d^sci^ibtion  given  by 
Macrizi,  in  his  "  Historical  Descriptidrj^^loFEgypt,"  of  the 
burial  of  Misraim,  who  died  seven  hun(3/ed  years  after  the 
Flood,  and  who  is  said  to  have  given  the  ancient  name 
of  "Misr"  to  Lower  Egypt.  Misraim  being  dead,  they 
prepared  for  him,  INIacrizi  tells  us,  a  hollow  place  most 
richly  decorated,  with  a  pedestal  in  the  midst  of  it.  On 
the  pedestal  they  engraved  an  inscription:  "He  never 
worshipped  idols,  neither  was  he  ever  old,  nor  sick,  nor 
downcast,  nor  morose.  His  strength  was  in  the  Most 
High  God."  The  body,  in  a  coffin  of  marble  and  gold, 
was  laid  near  the  pedestal,  and  on  the  pedestal — of  which, 
perhaps,  the  translation  should  be  platform — was  heaped 
every  kind  of  precious  possession,  emeralds,  pearls,  gold, 

G 


98  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

talismans,  perfumes,  &c.  The  whole  was  then  covered 
with  rocks,  over  which  earth  was  heaped,  between  two 
mountains,  and  his  son  took  the  reins  of  government. 

The  descent  from  this  form  of  sepulture  to  that  of 
Ghana,  and  again  from  that  of  Ghana  to  that  now  practised 
among  the  fetish  worshippers  of  the  coast,  is  illustrative  of 
the  decadence  which  an  ideal  may  undergo  as  it  passes 
from  its  original  source  into  the  keeping  of  lower  orders 
of  comprehension. 

Magic  and  trial  by  ordeal  were  also  in  use  among  the 
people  of  Ghana.  El  Bekri  is  the  latest  of  the  Arab 
authors  who  refers  to  these  native  rites.  Shortly  after  the 
period  at  which  he  wrote  the  whole  country  would  appear 
to  have  become  Mohammedan. 

Ten  days  to  the  south  of  Ghana  was  the  country  of 
tl5b  Lem-Lems  or  cannibals,  whom  it  was  the  custom  to 
raid  for  slaves.  Within  the  kingdom  there  was  a  district 
of  which  the  inhabitants  were  naked  pagans,  very  expert 
in  the  use  of  the  bow  and  arrow.  There  was  another 
district  entirely  inhabited  by  the  descendants  of  the  soldiers 
sent  by  the  Ommeyade  Arabs  against  Ghana  in  the  first 
years  of  the  Hegira.  These  people  kept  their  light  com- 
plexions and  the  fine  features  of  their  race. 

In  nearly  all  the  important  towns  of  the  country, 
Mussulman  traders  from  the  countries  of  the  north  were  to 
be  met.  In  some  of  the  towns  Mussulmans  did  not  take 
up  their  residence,  but  they  were  always  well  received. 

Tenkamenin,  besides  having  already  adopted  Moham- 
medan dress,  was  much  governed  by  Mohammedan  opinion. 
He  is  described  as  the  master  of  a  vast  empire,  and  of  a 
power  which  rendered  him  very  formidable.  He  could  put 
in  the  field  an  army  of  200,000  men,  of  whom  more  than 
40,000  were  armed  with  bows  and  arrows.  The  wealth  of 
the  country  was  very  great.  The  soil  was  fertile,  and 
gave  generally  two  crops  a  year.  Gold  was  abundant. 
The  custom,  according  to  El  Bekri,  was  that  all  nuggets 
found  in  the  mines  of  the  Empire  belonged  to  the 
sovereign,  while  the  public  was  allowed  to  keep  the  gold 


BERBER   AND    BLACK  99 

dust.  "Without  this  precaution,"  El  Bekri  gravely 
states,  "gold  would  become  so  abundant  that  it  would 
have  hardly  any  value."  The  nuggets  found  in  the  mines 
of  Ghana  varied  usually  in  weight  from  an  ounce  to  a 
pound  ;  some  were  much  larger.  The  king  had  one  which 
weighed  thirty  pounds.  There  was  a  part  of  the  country 
called  El  Ferouin,  in  which  gold  was  so  plentiful  and 
salt  so  scarce,  that  salt  was  sold  for  its  weight  in  gold. 
The  king  had  further  sources  of  wealth  in  a  very  large 
customs  revenue  raised  on  salt,  copper,  and  foreign 
merchandise. 

When  he  gave  audience  to  the  people,  Tenkamenin 
appeared  in  great  state,  seated  under  a  pavilion  round 
which  were  ranged  ten  horses  caparisoned  in  gold. 
Behind  him  were  ten  pages  bearing  shields  and  swords 
mounted  in  gold.  On  his  right  stood  "  the  sons  of  the 
princes  of  the  Empire,  magnificently  dressed."  The 
governor  of  the  town  and  all  the  ministers  sat  upon  the 
ground  before  the  king.  The  door  of  the  pavilion  was 
guarded  by  pure-bred  dogs,  whose  collars  were  of  gold 
and  silver,  with  bells  of  the  same  metal.  It  was  the 
custom  for  these  dogs  never  to  leave  the  spot  occupied 
by  the  king.  On  the  days  of  audience  the  grievances  of 
the  people  were  inquired  into  by  the  king.  El  Bekri 
tells  us  little  of  the  system  of  justice  of  the  country, 
except  that  it  was  organised  by  the  Mohammedan 
ministers  of  the  king. 

Mohammedanism  had  made  such  evident  progress  in 
the  middle  of  the  eleventh  century,  that  it  is  not  surprising 
to  learn  a  century  later  from  El  Idrisi,  that  the  King  of 
Ghana  and  the  notables  of  his  day  were  Mohammedan, 
and  that  the  king  accepted  investiture  from  the  Eastern 
Caliph.  There  had,  however,  intervened  between  the 
period  of  the  two  writers  a  Mohammedan  conquest  of 
which  we  have  yet  to  hear. 


CHAPTER    XI 
THE   TRADE    OF   GHANA 

The  constant  allusions  made  by  early  writers  to  the  trade 
of  Ghana  leave  no  doubt  that  its  commercial  relations 
with  the  outside  world  had  already  become  very  important 
during  the  period  in  which  the  Ommeyades  ruled  in  Spain. 
Gold,  slaves,  skins,  ivory,  kola-nuts,  gums,  honey,  corn, 
and  cotton,  are  among  the  articles  of  export  which  are 
most  frequently  named.  Hardly  a  town  is  mentioned 
in  the  states  of  Northern  and  North- Western  Africa  of 
which  it  is  not  said  that  it  carried  on  trade  with  the 
Soudan.  Augila,  in  the  back  country  of  Tripoli,  War- 
gelan  or  Wargla,  in  the  back  country  of  Algiers,  with 
Sidjilmessa  in  the  back  country  of  Morocco,  were  all 
known  by  the  name  of  "Gates  of  the  Desert."  Augila 
was  the  special  entrance  of  the  trade  with  Egypt  and  the 
East ;  Sidjilmessa,  which  was  the  entrance  for  the  trade 
of  the  West,  has  already  been  described  ;  Wargelan,  which 
lies  on  the  parallel  of  Bugia,  is  specially  mentioned  as 
being  inhabited  by  very  rich  merchants,  who  made  their 
fortunes  from  the  gold  of  the  Soudan,  brought  to  War- 
gelan in  the  form  of  gold  dust,  and  "coined"  there  for 
export.  From  Wargelan  to  Ghana  was,  we  are  told,  a 
journey  of  thirty  days. 

At  a  somewhat  later  date,  towards  the  end  of  the 
jjeriod  of  the  Ommeyades,  we  have  a  circumstantial 
account  of  how  the  ancestors  of  the  historian  Al  Makkari 
carried  on  a  trade  between  Europe  and  the  Soudan,  by 
which  the  fortunes  of  the  house  of  Makkari  were  laid.  An 
ancestor  of  his,  writing  in  the  fourteenth  century,  says  : 
"  From  time  immemorial  my  family  had  exercised  the  pro- 


THE    TRADE    OF    GHANA  loi 

fession  of  commerce  in  the  countries  where  they  settled, 
deriving  no  small  share  of  influence  and  riches  from  it. 
They  furrowed  the  sands  of  the  desert  in  all  directions  ; 
they  dug  wells  and  facilitated  travelling  in  the  Sahara, 
thus  affording  security  to  merchants  and  travellers.  They 
took  a  drum,  and  marching  always  preceded  by  a  banner, 
they  headed  the  numerous  caravans  which  from  time  to 
time  penetrated  into  the  country  of  the  blacks.  .   .   ." 

A  certain  Abdurrahman,  one  of  the  family,  having 
died  and  left  behind  him  five  sons,  "  they  determined 
upon  forming  a  partnership,  carrying  on  the  trade  con- 
jointly, and  dividing  between  themselves  the  profits  of 
their  mercantile  speculations."  They  accordingly  threw 
together  in  a  "common  fund  all  their  father's  inheritance, 
and  having  held  a  consultation  together  as  to  the  means 
of  carrying  on  the  trade  to  the  greatest  advantage,"  it  was 
"agreed"  that  two  should  remain  and  establish  themselves 
at  Telem9an,  at  this  time  a  principal  port  upon  the  Medi- 
terranean for  European  trade ;  that  one  should  fix  his 
residence  at  Sidjilmessa  ;  and  lastly,  that  two  should  go 
to  Aiwalatin  in  the  desert. 

"It  was  done  as  agreed  between  them.  Each  reached 
his  place  of  destination,  settled  there,  married  and  had 
a  family,  and  they  began  to  conduct  their  trade  in  the 
following  manner :  those  in  Telem9an  sent  to  their  part- 
ners in  the  desert  such  goods  and  commodities  as  were 
wanted  in  those  districts,  while  these  supplied  them  in 
return  with  skins,  ivory,  and  kola-nuts.  In  the  mean- 
while the  one  stationed  at  Sidjilmessa  was  like  the  tongue 
of  the  balance  between  the  two,  since,  being  placed  at 
a  convenient  distance  between  Telem^an  and  the  desert, 
he  took  care  to  acquaint  the  respective  parties  with  the 
fluctuations  of  trade,  the  amount  of  losses  sustained  by 
traders,  the  overstock  of  the  markets,  or  the  great  demand 
for  certain  articles  ;  "  and,  in  short,  to  inform  them  of 
the  "secret  designs  of  other  merchants  engaged  in  the 
same  trade,  as  well  as  of  the  political  events  which 
might  in  any  way  influence  it.      By  these  means  they  were 


102  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

enabled  to  carry  on  their  speculations  with  the  greatest 
success  ;  their  wealth  increased,  and  their  importance 
waxed  every  day  greater." 

An  account  is  then  given  of  how  on  one  occasion 
in  Aiwakitin,  when  the  neighbouring  Sultan  of  Tekrour 
attacked  and  took  the  town,  the  property  and  lives  of  the 
Arab  merchants,  including  those  of  the  Makkari  company, 
were  placed  in  great  danger.  "  But  my  ancestors,  being 
men  of  great  courage  and  determination,  would  not  con- 
sent to  witness  their  ruin.  They  assembled  all  their 
servants  and  dependents,  and  such  traders  as  happened 
to  be  in  Aiwalatin  at  the  time,  and  having  distributed 
arms  among  them,  they  shut  themselves  up  in  their 
warehouses,  and  decided  to  fight,  if  necessary,  for  the 
defence  of  their  goods  and  chattels." 

Catastrophe  was  averted,  however,  by  an  interview 
between  the  senior  partner  and  the  invading  king,  who 
agreed  to  extend  his  protection  to  the  company,  and  who 
treated  them  from  that  time  with  the  utmost  favour  and 
distinction.  "He  frequently  after  this  wrote  to  the 
partners  at  Telem9an,  applying  directly  for  such  goods 
as  he  wanted  for  his  own  consumption,  or  such  as 
were  most  sought  for  in  his  dominions."  This  political 
development  seems  to  have  greatly  enlarged  the  scope 
of  the  operations  of  the  Makkari  firm.  "The  moment 
my  ancestors  perceived  that  they  could  trust  and  rely 
on  kings,  such  difficulties  as  might  have  existed  before 
were  speedily  removed.  .  .  .  The  desert  and  its  dangers 
seemed  no  longer  the  scene  of  death  and  misery,  and 
they  began  to  frequent  its  most  lonely  and  dangerous 
tracts,  their  v/ealth  thereby  increasing  so  rapidly  that 
it  almost  surpassed  the  limits  of  computation.  Nor," 
says  the  account,  "  were  these  the  only  advantages  arising 
from  their  enterprise  ;  the  natives  with  whom  they  traded 
were  considerably  benefited  by  it.  For  it  must  be  under- 
stood that  the  trade  with  the  desert  was  in  the  most 
deplorable  state  before  the  people  of  Makkareh  engaged 
in  it.    Merchants,  totally  unacquainted  with  the  real  wants 


THE    TRADE    OF   GHANA  103 

of  the  inhabitants,  carried  thither  articles  which  were 
either  of  no  use  or  of  no  vahae  to  them,  taking  in  exchange 
objects  which  were  a  source  of  profit  and  wealth.  This 
even  went  so  far  that  an  African  sovereign  was  once  heard 
to  say  :  '  Were  it  not  that  I  consider  it  a  bad  action,  I 
would,  by  God !  prevent  these  Soudan  traders  from  stop- 
ping in  my  dominions  ;  for  thither  they  go  with  the  most 
paltry  merchandise,  and  bring  in  return  the  gold  which 
conquers  the  world.'  However,  when  my  ancestors  had 
once  established  a  direct  trade  with  those  countries,  the 
scene  changed,  and  the  blacks  were  better  and  more 
abundantly  provided  with  such  articles  as  they  stood  most 
in  need  of.  They  also  were  furnished  with  goods  which 
they  had  never  seen  before,  and  they  obtained  a  better 
price  for  their  returns." 

The  writer  of  this  account  was  a  Judge  of  the  Supreme 
Court  of  Fez  in  the  year  1356.  Presumably,  therefore, 
he  may  have  been  born  about  the  year  1300,  and  he 
counts  himself  sixth  in  descent  from  Abdurrahman,  the 
founder  of  the  firm.  Allowing  thirty  years  for  a  genera- 
tion, this  would  get  us  back  near  to  the  year  1 100,  or  not 
very  far  distant  from  the  period  at  which  the  life  of  Ghana 
has  been  described.  As  all  writers  agree  that  the  trade 
of  Ghana  was  important  in  the  eighth  and  ninth  centuries, 
we  must  assume  that,  with  the  approaching  decline  of 
the  kingdom,  the  trade  had  already  fallen  into  some 
decay,  from  which  it  was  revived  by  the  exertions  of  the 
Makkari  firm.  The  account  is  interesting  for  the  in- 
dication which  it  gives  that,  in  the  early  period  of  Arab 
trade  with  the  Soudan,  companies  found  it  necessary,  as 
European  companies  have  found  at  a  later  date,  to  acquire 
political  as  well  as  commercial  influence,  and  also  that 
the  better  class  of  traders  exercised  a  wise  discretion 
as  to  the  class  of  articles  which  they  introduced  to  the 
notice  of  the  natives. 

The  allusion  made  in  the  incidents  which  have  been 
related  to  the  successful  attack  upon  Ghana  by  a  neigh- 
bouring king  may  be  taken,  perhaps,  to  presage  the  con- 


104  A    TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

quest  of  Ghana,  first  by  Susu  and  then  by  Melle,  events 
which  took  place,  the  first  in  the  twelfth,  and  the  second 
in  the  thirteenth  century. 

Many  lesser  kingdoms,  both  black  and  Berber,  sur- 
rounded Ghana.  Amongst  the  black,  El  Bekri  mentions 
specially  Tekrour  and  Silla,  both  of  which,  though  black, 
already  in  the  middle  of  the  eleventh  century  professed 
Mohammedanism.  Silla,  which  was  situated  on  the  banks 
of  the  Niger,  where  the  river  skirted  the  south-eastern 
frontier  of  the  Empire  of  Ghana,  was,  when  El  Bekri  wrote, 
a  country  of  some  importance,  able,  he  says,  to  maintain 
its  independence  against  Ghana,  and  was  a  centre  of  the 
cotton  industry.  At  Terensa,  a  town  within  the  limits 
of  this  country,  he  remarks,  "that  no  house  is  without 
its  cotton  plantation." 

Among  the  lesser  kingdoms,  also,  south  and  east  of 
Ghana,  one  which  deserves  special  mention  is  Masina,  of 
which  the  inhabitants  were  largely  Fulani.  This  little 
state  is  particularly  interesting  as  having  in  its  origin 
submitted  by  agreement  to  draw  its  rulers  equally  from 
Fulani  and  Berber  sources,  and  as  having  succeeded  in 
maintaining  its  integrity  if  not  its  independence  for  many 
centuries  against  the  invasion  of  surrounding  black  peoples. 
It  has  been  already  mentioned  as  having  solicited  with 
success  the  assistance  of  Tin  Yeroutan,  the  Berber  king 
of  Audoghast  in  the  tenth  century,  against  its  black  neigh- 
bours of  Aougham.  After  passing  through  many  vicissi- 
tudes, including  submission  to  the  black  dynasty  of  Melle 
and  the  Songhay  dynasty  of  Timbuctoo,  it  is  mentioned 
again  by  the  author  of  the  Tarikh-es-Soudan,  as  re- 
fusing any  longer,  in  1629,  to  accept  the  investiture  of 
its  rulers  from  the  hands  of  the  decadent  and  Moorish 
Timbuctoo. 

But  it  does  not  fall  within  the  scope  of  this  book  to 
attempt  to  deal  with  the  many  nations  of  the  Western 
Soudan  who  arose  and  fell  within  a  period  of  a  thousand 
years.  For  the  purpose  of  tracing  the  course  of  civilisation 
through   the  fertile  belt  it  is  enough   to  mention  a  few  of 


THE   TRADE    OF   GHANA  105 

the  most  important.  Amongst  these  Melle  followed  most 
closely  upon  the  footsteps  of  Ghana,  but  at  the  end  of  the 
eleventh  century  it  was  a  mere  town,  mentioned  by  El 
Bekri,  under  the  name  of  El  Melel,  as  occupying  a  position 
of  no  great  importance  on  the  Bend  of  the  Niger.  Its 
kings  were  at  that  date  already  Mohammedans,  but  the 
mass  of  its  people  were  "  still  plunged  in  idolatry." 

Little  would  seem  to  have  been  known  to  the  Spanish 
Arabs  in  El  Bekri's  days  of  the  countries  lying  eastwards 
of  the  Bend  of  the  Niger.  El  Bekri  gives,  however,  a  very 
accurate  account  of  the  course  of  the  Niger  throughout  the 
northern  portion  of  the  Bend,  describing  some  of  the  prin- 
cipal towns,  though  not  all,  which  were  at  that  time  in 
existence  on  the  part  of  the  river  known  as  the  "  Ras- 
el-Ma,"  or  "  Head  of  the  Waters,"  where,  near  to  the 
present  position  of  Timbuctoo,  the  river,  according  to  El 
Bekri's  description,  "leaves  the  Land  of  the  Blacks" 
and  runs  eastwards  for  six  days  to  a  place  which  he  calls 
Tirca  before  turning  south  by  the  famous  city  of  Kagho 
or  Kaougho.  El  Bekri  tells  us  little  of  the  place,  of  which 
the  author  of  the  Tarikh-es-Soudan  says  "  that  it  was  a 
city  in  the  days  of  the  Pharaohs."  It  has  been  gener- 
ally identified  as  occupying  the  position  of  the  present 
town  of  Gao.  El  Bekri's  knowledge  of  it  went  no  fur- 
ther than  to  enable  him  to  say  that  its  king  was  Moham- 
medan though  the  people  were  still  pagan,  and  that  from 
this  point  the  Niger  ran  southward  into  the  country  of 
the  Dem-Dems  or  cannibals. 

In  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of  this  place  there 
were,  he  tells  us  also,  "a  great  quantity  of  mines  which 
furnished  eold  dust."  Of  all  the  countries  of  the  blacks 
it  was  the  richest  in  gold,  and  foreign  and  black  merchants, 
whom  he  designates  by  the  name  of  Noughamarta,  were 
constantly  occupied  in  carrying  this  gold  into  all  countries. 
All  that  El  Bekri  appears  to  know  of  the  country  lying 
between  the  Niger  and  Lake  Chad  is,  that  first  there  came 
a  great  kingdom,  extending  for  more  than  an  eight  days' 
march,   of   which  the  sovereigns   bear  the  title  of  "  Du," 


io6  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

beyond  which  comes  Kanem,  a  country  of  the  idolaters. 
The  names  of  the  early  kings  of  Bornu  all  began  with 
"  Du."  It  is  therefore  presumable  that  El  Bekri  was 
correctly  informed  as  to  the  position  of  Bornu,  which  at 
that  time  probably  overran  Haussaland  ;  but  he  gives  us 
no  information  with  regard  to  it.  This  silence  on  the  part 
of  a  Spanish  Arab,  so  generally  well  informed  as  El  Bekri, 
seems  to  confirm  the  theory  that  the  countries  eastward  of 
the  Bend  of  the  Niger  derived  their  civilisation  largely 
from  Egypt  via  the  Tripoli-Fezzan  route,  scarcely  used  at 
this  time  by  the  Western  Arabs. 

El  Bekri  makes  no  mention  at  all  of  Nupe,  one  of  the 
oldest  and  most  important  of  the  purely  native  kingdoms, 
nor  of  Borgu,  also  a  kingdom  of  great  antiquity,  which  is 
said  to  have  derived  an  early  Christianity  from  the  Copts 
of  Egypt. 

The  waters  of  the  Niger  at  the  northern  part  of  its 
course  divided  the  Land  of  the  Blacks,  he  tells  us,  from  the 
territories  of  the  Berbers  on  its  northern  banks.  As  the 
operations  of  these  Berber  tribes  precede,  in  point  of  date, 
the  rise  of  the  kingdom  of  Melle,  it  may  be  well  to  turn 
for  a  moment  to  the  eastern  development  of  that  Desert 
Kingdom  which  gave  the  Almoravide  dynasty  to  Spain. 


CHAPTER   XII    • 

MORABITE   CONQUEST   OF  THE   SOUDAN 

It  will  be  remembered  that  the  population  of  the  Desert 
Kingdom  was  composed  of  united  Berber  tribes,  whose 
occupation  of  the  desert  was  of  immemorial  antiquity. 
The  united  tribes  were  ruled,  in  the  very  healthy  part  of 
Africa  which  spreads  inward  from  the  Atlantic  coast  to 
the  Sahara,  by  hereditary  Berber  kings.  It  has  already 
been  mentioned  that  Tiloutan,  who  died  in  837  a.d.,  was 
one  of  the  first  of  these  to  exact  tribute  from  the  black 
kingdoms  of  the  Western  Soudan,  and  that  his  descendant, 
Tin  Yeroutan,  was  ruling  in  Audoghast  between  the  years 
961  and  971.  This  Berber  rule  having  been  overthrown 
by  the  black  monarch  of  Ghana,  it  was  by  an  act  of  natural 
retribution,  when  the  Almoravides  formed  themselves  into 
a  religious  fighting  force  in  the  heart  of  the  desert  kingdom, 
that  one  of  the  first  incidents  of  their  Holy  War  was  the 
sack  of  Audoghast  and  its  restoration  to  Berber  rule.  But 
the  taking  of  Audoghast  was  indicative  of  a  movement 
which  was  in  some  sort  to  decide  the  fate  of  the  Desert 
Kingdom.  At  the  moment  at  which  El  Bekri  wrote,  this 
ancient  kingdom  was  about  to  divide  itself  permanently 
into  two  sections,  of  which  one,  moving  northwards  under 
the  Morabite  commanders,  was  to  renew  the  power  of 
Africa  upon  the  throne  of  Spain,  while  the  other,  breaking 
away  from  its  brethren  of  the  north,  was  to  follow  the 
road  suggested  to  its  armies  by  the  taking  of  Audoghast ; 
and,  having  carried  the  banners  of  the  Crescent  from  the 
shores  of  the  Atlantic  to  the  Nile,  was  to  scatter  itself 
eventually  in  divided  communities  along  the  southern  edge 
of  the  Sahara  Desert.      The  Desert  Kingdom  itself  dis- 


io8  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

appeared,  but  in  Africa  the  northern  branch  of  the 
Almoravides  left  a  permanent  mark  upon  history  by  the 
foundation  of  the  town  of  Morocco,  while  the  southern 
branch  left  a  no  less  permanent  record  in  the  foundation  of 
Timbuctoo.  These  two  towns  came  into  existence  within 
twenty-five  years  of  each  other.  They  were  born  of  the 
same  Almoravide  parents,  and  were  the  outcome  of  the 
same  religious  and  political  upheaval. 

El  Bekri,  safe  in  the  seclusion  of  the  court  of  Seville, 
to  which  before  his  death  the  Almoravides  were  to  march 
as  stern  deliverers  from  the  Christian  yoke,  was  aware  of 
the  formation  of  the  sect  on  the  southern  frontier  of  the 
Desert  Kingdom.  He  had  heard  of  the  taking  of  Audo- 
ghast  and  of  the  advance  to  Sidjilmessa  in  1056.  But 
after  the  taking  of  the  latter  town  he  had  evidently  re- 
ceived only  imperfect  rumours  of  the  reorganisation  of  the 
Almoravides  under  their  new  leader  Yusuf.  He  makes 
no  mention  of  the  foundation  of  the  town  of  Morocco, 
which  took  place  in  1062  ;  and  writing — as  he  expressly 
says — in  the  year  1067,  he  no  doubt  gave  the  latest  infor- 
mation possessed  at  Seville,  when  he  says  :  "The  present 
Emir  of  the  Almoravides  is  Abou  Bekr,  but  their  Empire 
is  broken  up  and  their  power  divided.  They  now  main- 
tain themselves  in  the  desert." 

It  is  to  I bn  Khaldun  that  we  turn  for  the  fuller  history 
of  this  movement. 

The  northward  march  of  the  Almoravides  has  been 
related  in  an  earlier  chapter.  It  will  be  remembered  that 
when,  after  the  death  of  the  original  leader,  success  had 
crowned  the  arms  of  Abou  Bekr,  he  was  recalled  from  the 
northern  provinces  by  the  report  of  dissensions  which  had 
broken  out  between  the  tribes  of  the  kingdom  in  the  south, 
and  that,  placing  full  power  in  the  north  in  the  hands  of 
his  cousin  Yusuf  (or  Joseph)  Tachefin,  he  himself  returned 
southwards  with  the  object  of  reconciling  his  turbulent 
subjects.  To  effect  this  reconciliation  he  initiated  a  new 
campaign  to  the  east,  in  the  direction  thrown  open  by  the 
taking  of  Audoghast,  and,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  he  never 


MORABITE    CONQUEST   OF   SOUDAN     109 

again  returned  to  the  north.  By  a  friendly  partition 
agreed  to  in  1062,  the  northern  provinces  to  the  Medi- 
terranean were  ceded  to  Yusuf,  while  Abou  Bekr  retained 
for  himself  the  old  regions  of  the  desert  in  the  south. 
He  retained  also  the  old  licence  to  extend  these  regions  as 
far  as  force  of  arms  could  carry  them. 

We  first  hear  of  him  as  leading  the  armies  of  his 
followers  on  a  victorious  march  across  the  southern  borders 
of  the  desert,  fighting  with  the  pagan  nations  of  the 
Soudan  for  a  distance  of  ninety  days  east  of  the  most 
easterly  frontier  of  the  Desert  Kingdom.  In  these 
territories,  as  he  conquered  them,  he  assigned  areas 
for  the  habitation  of  the  principal  tribes  who  had  united 
beneath  his  banners.  But  these  territories  were  not  in  the 
Soudan  proper,  as  we  know  it.  They  were  north  of  the 
Great  River,  and  Ibn  Khaldun,  describing  the  position 
occupied  by  their  descendants  who  were  still  all  "  Wearers 
of  the  Veil "  300  years  later,  especially  tells  us  that  they 
had  never  territorially  occupied  the  Soudan,  but  remained 
in  the  desert,  changing  nothing  in  their  ways.  "Always 
divided  and  disunited  by  the  diversity  of  their  habits  and 
their  interests,  they  formed,"  he  says,  "a  cordon  of  desert 
nations  upon  the  northern  frontier  of  the  Soudan,  sepa- 
rating its  territory  from  the  sandy  regions  that  lie  between 
it  and  the  States  of  North  Africa  and  Morocco." 

By  the  end  of  the  fourteenth  century,  when  Ibn 
Khaldun  wrote,  this  cordon  of  desert  nations  stretched 
from  the  Atlantic  to  the  Nile  ;  but  by  that  date  the  people 
comprising  it  were  subject  to  the  black  kings  of  the 
Soudan,  paid  them  tribute,  and  furnished  contingents  for 
their  armies. 

Under  Abou  Bekr,  at  the  end  of  the  eleventh  century, 
the  united  tribes  marched  as  conquerors,  and  their  cam- 
paign did  not  abandon  its  character  as  a  Holy  War.  If 
they  made  no  territorial  confiscations,  they  claimed  tribute 
from  the  vanquished  peoples,  and  they  imposed  the  Moslem 
faith  upon  all  infidels  who  submitted  to  their  arms.  In 
some  cases  the  necessity  of  accepting  the  faith  was  com- 


110  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

muted  for  payment  of  a  subsidy  ;  but  historians  are  practi- 
cally in  agreement  that  the  conversion  of  the  northern 
belt  of  the  Soudan  to  Mohammedanism  became  general 
at  about  this  date.  The  Almoravides  did  not  confine  their 
requirements  to  a  purely  nominal  conversion.  Doctors  of 
divinity  and  Moslem  teachers  were  sent  into  the  black 
countries  to  teach  the  true  faith,  and  no  doubt  the  increase 
of  communication  which  at  this  time  took  place  with  Spain 
opened  the  way  for  the  acceptance  of  more  enlightened 
religious  views. 

Although  the  cordon  of  natives  spoken  of  by  Ibn 
Khaldun  in  the  fourteenth  century  extended  at  that  period 
as  far  eastward  as  the  Nile,  the  march  of  Abou  Bekr 
in  the  eleventh  century  does  not  appear  to  have  been 
carried  beyond  the  deserts  lying  to  the  north  and  north- 
east of  the  Bend  of  the  Niger.  The  Berber  nations  which 
completed  the  cordon  are  distinctly  stated  by  other  writers 
to  have  come  down  from  Tripoli  and  the  East. 

Two  important  political  incidents  marked  the  campaign 
of  Abou  Bekr.  In  1076  he  carried  the  vengeance  of 
Audoghast  to  the  gates  of  Ghana,  and,  overthrowing  the 
reigning  black  dynasty,  placed  a  Berber  on  the  throne. 
The  life  of  the  country  does  not  seem  to  have  been  pro- 
foundly affected  at  the  time  by  this  revolution.  El  Idrisi, 
writing  nearly  a  hundred  years  later,  still  speaks  of  it  as 
being  the  greatest  kingdom  of  the  blacks.  He  mentions 
the  fact  that  it  is  ruled  by  a  king  of  Berber  descent, 
who  "  governs  by  his  own  authority,  but  gives  allegiance 
to  the  Abbasside  Sultan  of  Egypt,"  and  that  the  king 
and  people  are  now  Mohammedans ;  but  he  does  not 
speak  of  it  as  having  become  in  any  respect  a  Berber 
kingdom. 

Here  is  his  account :  "  Ghana  ...  is  the  most  consider- 
able, the  most  thickly  populated,  and  the  most  commercial 
of  the  black  countries.  It  is  visited  by  rich  merchants 
from  all  the  surrounding  countries,  and  from  the  extremities 
of  the  West.  Its  inhabitants  are  Mussulman.  .  .  .  The 
king  governs  by  his  own  authority,  but  he  does  obeisance 


MORABITE    CONQUEST    OF    SOUDAN     m 

to  the  Abbasside  Commander  of  the  Faithful" — that  is, 
the  Egyptian  CaHph.  Then  follows  a  description  of  the 
palace  already  mentioned,  and  the  date  of  its  construction, 
1116  A.D.  "The  territory  and  domains  of  this  king," 
Edrisi  continues,  "  are  conterminous  with  Wangara, 
or  the  country  of  gold."  The  king's  nugget,  weighing 
30  lbs.,  is  mentioned,  and  we  are  told  that  it  was  "an 
entirely  natural  production,  which  has  been  neither 
melted  nor  worked  by  the  hand  of  man,  except  for 
the  fact  that  a  hole  had  been  made  through  it  in  order 
that  it  might  be  fastened  to  the  king's  throne."  It  was 
regarded  as  a  curio,  unique  of  its  kind,  and  the  king  was 
proud  of  its  fame  in  the  Soudan.  Other  writers  give 
more  fabulous  weights  to  this  famous  nugget,  and  it 
appears  to  have  remained  among  the  royal  treasures  for 
upwards  of  two  hundred  years  ;  for  Ibn  Khaldun  mentions, 
at  the  end  of  the  fourteenth  century,  a  degenerate  monarch 
of  the  conquering  dynasty  of  Melle  who  sold  the  nugget 
for  the  value  of  its  gold.  Edrisi  describes  the  King  of 
Ghana,  who  was  contemporary  to  himself,  as  "one  of  the 
most  just  of  men,"  whose  custom  it  was  to  ride  once  daily 
into  the  poorest  and  most  wretched  quarters  of  the  city,  and 
there  to  dispense  justice  to  all  who  had  ground  for  com- 
plaint. On  all  other  occasions  he  rode  with  great  pomp, 
magnificently  dressed  in  silk  and  jewels,  surrounded  by 
guards  preceded  by  elephants,  giraffes,  and  other  wild 
animals  of  the  Soudan,  and  no  one  dared  to  approach  him. 
The  territory  of  Ghana  proper  was  bounded,  Edrisi  tells 
us,  by  "  Mazzawa  on  the  west,  by  Wangara  on  the  east, 
by  the  desert  plains  of  the  Soudan  and  the  Berbers  on 
the  north,  and  on  the  south  by  the  pagan  countries  of 
the  Lem-lems  and  others."  Mazzawa  must  be  taken  to 
represent  the  territory  which  was  the  seat  of  the  Desert 
Kingdom,  a  country  over  which  Melle  was  soon  to  extend 
its  authority.  Of  Wangara  Edrisi  gives  the  following 
description  :  "  From  the  town  of  Ghana  to  the  frontier 
of  Wangara  is  an  eight  days'  journey.  This  latter  country 
is  renowned  for  the  quantity  and  the  quality  of  the  gold 


112  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

which  it  produces.  It  forms  an  island  of  about  300  miles 
in  length  by  150  in  breadth,  which  the  Nile  [Niger]  sur- 
rounds on  all  sides,  and  at  all  seasons.  Towards  the 
month  of  August,  when  the  heat  is  extreme  and  the  Nile 
overflows  its  bed,  the  island,  or  the  greater  part  of  the 
island,  is  inundated  for  a  regular  time.  When  the  flood 
decreases,  natives  from  all  parts  of  the  Soudan  assemble 
and  come  to  the  country  to  seek  for  gold  during  the  fall 
of  the  water.  Each  gathers  the  quantity  of  gold  great  or 
small  which  God  has  allotted  to  him,  no  one  being  entirely 
deprived  of  the  fruit  of  his  labour.  When  the  waters  of 
the  river  have  returned  to  their  bed  every  one  sells  the 
gold  he  has  found.  The  greater  part  is  bought  by  the 
inhabitants  of  Wargelan,  and  some  by  those  of  the  extreme 
west  of  Africa,  where  the  gold  is  taken  to  the  mints,  coined 
into  dinars,  and  put  into  circulation  for  the  purchase  of  mer- 
chandise. This  happens  every  year.  ...  In  Wangara 
there  are  flourishing  towns  and  famous  fortresses.  Its 
inhabitants  are  rich.  They  possess  gold  in  abundance, 
and  receive  productions  which  are  brought  to  them  from 
the  most  distant  countries  of  the  world."  Like  the  in- 
habitants of  Ghana,  they  wore  mantles  and  veils.  They 
were  entirely  black.  The  whole  of  the  country  owed 
allegiance  to  Ghana,  in  the  name  of  whose  sovereign  the 
Khotbah  was  read  and  government  was  carried  on. 

The  change  of  dynasty  in  Ghana  between  the  eleventh 
and  twelfth  centuries  altered  little,  therefore,  in  the  habits 
or  prosperity  of  the  country.  It  serves  principally  to 
illustrate  the  alternating  rule  of  black  and  white  sovereigns, 
which  was  apparently  accepted  without  difficulty  in  the 
Soudan. 

It  was  perhaps  rather  in  the  other  political  event  of 
the  campaign  to  which  allusion  has  been  made  than  in  the 
substitution  of  Berber  for  native  rule  in  Ghana  that  a 
prophetic  eye  would  have  seen  the  little  cloud  destined 
some  day  to  overspread  the  fair  horizon  of  Ghana's  future. 
This  was  the  foundation  of  Timbuctoo  by  the  Tuaregs  in 
the  year  1087. 


CHAPTER   XIII 

GHANA  AND   TIMBUCTOO 

It  was  indeed  a  fine  movement  of  historic  fate  which 
caused  the  conqueror  of  Ghana  to  become  the  instrument 
of  the  foundation  of  Timbuctoo.  "  The  prosperity  of 
Timbuctoo,"  says  the  author  of  the  Tarikh-es-Soudan, 
who  was  himself  born  in  that  town  in  the  year  1596,  "was 
the  ruin  of  Ghana."  Before  the  great  days  of  Timbuctoo, 
Ghana,  he  tells  us,  "was  the  centre  of  the  Soudan." 
After  the  rise  of  Timbuctoo  all  was  gradually  transferred. 
Timbuctoo  drew  to  itself  not  only  the  wealth  but  the 
learning  and  enlightenment  of  the  civilised  world,  and 
became  the  home  of  all  that  was  "  pure,  delightful,  and 
illustrious  "  in  the  Soudan.  But  the  days  of  Timbuctoo's 
greatness  were  not  yet ;  queen  of  the  Soudan,  as  she  was 
afterwards  proudly  to  become,  she  was  born,  if  not  in  a 
manger,  yet  under  circumstances  nearly  approaching  to 
the  lowest  conditions  of  humility.  Abou  Bekr  was  not 
himself  the  founder  of  the  town.  The  Tuaregs  of  his 
train,  to  whom  were  allotted  for  their  occupation  the  por- 
tion of  the  desert  opposite  to  the  most  northerly  reaches 
of  the  Nipfer,  would  seem  to  have  chosen  the  site  some 
nine  years  after  his  death.  They  were,  like  all  the  nomads 
of  the  desert,  a  pastoral  people,  and  used  to  feed  their 
flocks  in  the  summer  season  upon  the  northern  or  left 
bank  of  the  Niger.  They  never  crossed  the  river  to 
the  Soudan  side,  but  withdrew  in  the  autumn  and  winter 
months  to  the  interior  uplands  of  the  desert.  The  spot 
on  which  Timbuctoo  now  stands  was  the  extreme  limit 
of  these  summer  wanderings.  At  first  they  had  only  an 
encampment  there  ;  gradually  their  encampment  became 

113  H 


114  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

a  meeting-place  for  travellers  coming  from  different  parts 
of  the  country.  Then  they  made  of  it  a  store  where  they 
left  food  and  other  objects  of  necessary  use,  and  they 
placed  the  store  under  the  care  of  an  old  female  slave 
called  Timbuctoo.  So  homely,  according  to  the  appar- 
ently best-informed  writers,  was  the  origin  of  the  after- 
wards famous  name.  But  if  Timbuctoo  had  the  homeliness, 
she  had  also  the  purity  of  a  simple  origin.  The  town, 
founded  by  Mohammedans,  was  never  sullied  by  pagan 
worship.  "  Upon  its  soil,"  we  are  told,  "  no  knee  was 
ever  bent,  except  to  the  Most  Merciful " — a  curious  com- 
mentary, alas,  upon  certain  subsequent  passages  of  its 
history.  At  first  the  dwellings  of  the  town  were  con- 
structed simply  of  thorns  and  straw,  later  they  grew  into 
clay  huts.  Later  still  low  walls  were  built  all  round  them. 
Finally  a  mosque  was  erected  large  enough  for  the  needs 
of  the  inhabitants.  But  though  the  site  was  never  altered, 
and  the  foundation  of  Timbuctoo,  the  stronghold  of  Moham- 
medanism in  the  Soudan,  may  therefore  be  regarded 
as  the  direct  outcome  of  the  religious  campaign  of  Abou 
Bekr,  it  was  not  for  two  hundred  years  that  the  real  town 
of  Timbuctoo,  as  it  was  known  in  its  greatness  to  pos- 
terity, was  built  by  one  of  the  kings  of  Melle,  himself  a 
Mohammedan,  though  black,  and  two  more  centuries  were 
added  to  these  before  Timbuctoo  reached  the  summit  of 
its  prosperity  and  fame  as  the  capital  of  the  Songhay 
empire. 

However  much  it  may  flatter  the  pride  of  the  historians 
of  Timbuctoo  to  represent  it  as  the  cause  of  the  downfall 
of  Ghana,  it  is  evident  that  the  rivalry  between  the  two 
towns  must  have  been  of  much  later  date  than  the 
Almoravide  conquest  of  Ghana.  Ghana  was  in  a  position 
to  bear  a  very  active  part  in  such  rivalry  for  many  genera- 
tions after  its  conquest  by  the  Berbers  of  Abou  Bekr's 
train.  The  conquest  by  which  the  independence  of  Ghana 
was  overthrown  was  not  in  fact  the  conquest  of  Abou 
Bekr.  Between  the  Almoravide  campaign  of  the  end  of 
the  eleventh  century  and  the  development  of  the  greatness 


GHANA   AND   TIMBUCTOO  115 

of  Timbuctoo  under  the  Songhay  dynasty,  a  very  important 
chapter  of  Soudanese  history  was  to  intervene.  This  was 
the  rise  of  the  kingdom  of  Melle,  the  first  of  the  black 
Mohammedan  native  states  to  be  recognised  on  terms  of 
equality  by  the  other  Mohammedan  kingdoms  of  North 
Africa.  It  was  the  conquest  of  Ghana  by  Melle  which 
really  put  an  end  to  the  independence  of  Ghana,  and 
merged  its  history  in  that  of  the  more  civilised  empire. 

We  have  seen  that  at  the  end  of  the  eleventh  century, 
when  Ghana  submitted  to  the  vengeance  of  Abou  Bekr, 
Melle  was  but  a  town  of  second-rate  importance  in  the 
bend  of  the  Niger.  A  place  of  more  distinction  mentioned 
by  El  Bekri  was  Tekrour.  Whether  the  Tekrour  of  El 
Bekri  was  identical  with  Jenne,  a  town  of  which  the 
history  is  famous,  and  which  was  founded  by  Songhay 
pagans  about  the  year  800  of  our  era,  I  leave  for  the 
more  learned  to  decide.  There  are  grounds  for  believing 
that  this  may  have  been  the  case  ;  but  "  Tekrour,"  of 
which  the  literal  meaning  is  "  black,"  is  one  of  the  names 
that  create  confusion  in  the  history  of  the  Soudan.  It 
has  evidently  been  applied  at  different  periods  to  different 
peoples.  However  this  may  have  been,  Ghana  was  at  a 
period  subsequent  to  the  Almoravide  conquest  attacked 
and  apparently  for  a  time  overwhelmed  by  the  neigh- 
bouring black  kingdom  of  Tekrour.  In  the  earlier 
period  of  its  history,  Ghana  had  ruled  over  the  Wangara. 
When  Idrisi  speaks  of  it  in  the  middle  of  the  twelfth 
century,  though  still  the  greatest  of  black  kingdoms,  with 
a  trade  extending  to  Egypt,  North  Africa,  and  Spain,  its 
territory  had  apparently  diminished,  for  Idrisi  describes 
it  as  limited  on  the  east  by  the  territory  of  the  Wangara, 
— whom  he  calls  also  by  the  alternative  name  of  Man- 
dingoes — and  they,  instead  of  forming  part  of  the  kingdom, 
were  only  tributary.  Ibn  Khaldun  says  that  before  the 
rise  of  Melle,  Ghana  was  conquered  by  the  Su-Su.  The 
Su-Su,  as  they  now  exist,  are  of  Mandingo  origin.  It  is 
therefore  possible  that  the  Wangara,  once  the  subjects  of 
Ghana,  became  its  rulers.     No  historian,  however,  dwells 


ii6  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

with  any  detail  upon  these  early  conquests.  They  are 
interesting  merely  as  indications  of  the  approaching  dis- 
appearance of  the  supremacy  of  Ghana.  While  Tim- 
buctoo,  which  was  destined  to  represent  the  great  centre 
of  Mohammedanism  in  the  Soudan,  was  growing,  Ghana, 
the  great  centre  of  paganism,  was  passing  away.  It  had 
maintained  itself  from  a  period  long  antecedent  to  the 
Hegira.  After  an  existence  of  perhaps  a  thousand  years, 
the  term  of  its  decadence  had  arrived,  and  toward  the 
beginning  of  the  thirteenth  century  of  our  era  it  had 
reached  a  condition  in  which,  being  at  once  rich  and 
weak,  it  could  scarcely  fail  to  become  the  prey  of  stronger 
neighbours.  By  the  end  of  that  century  it  had  become 
subject  to  its   Mohammedan  neighbour   Melle. 

So  silently,  and  without  dramatic  rites,  the  gods  of 
paganism  disappear  from  the  front  rank  of  the  history 
of  the  Soudan.  No  dome  was  built  for  them  in  Ghana. 
No  ditch  was  dug.  No  sacred  grove  was  planted.  They 
simply  fell  back  into  the  dark  and  barbarous  country  to 
the  south — the  land  of  the  Lem-Lem,  which  Arab  his- 
torians dismiss  contemptuously  as  the  land  of  idolaters 
"who  eat  men."  The  memory  of  these  pagan  gods 
lingered  long  amongst  the  lower  orders  of  the  northern 
states ;  but  whatever  their  worship  had  brought  with  it 
of  enlightenment  from  the  antiquity  of  eastern  civilisa- 
tion was  finally  extinguished  in  the  barbaric  caricature 
which  is  the  memorial  preserved  of  them  to  the  present 
day  by  certain  tribes  of  the  southern  coast. 


CHAPTER   XIV 

THE    MELLESTINE 

The  empire  of  Melle  and  its  dependencies,  known  to  the 
Arabs  as  "  The  Mellestine,"  which  rose  in  the  thirteenth 
century  on  the  ruins  of  Ghana,  was  the  first  of  the  gfeat 
black  Mohammedan  kingdoms  of  the  Western  Soudan  to 
claim  intercourse  on  equal  terms  with  contemporary  civilisa- 
tion. In  the  days  of  its  greatest  prosperity  the  territories 
of  the  Mellestine  extended  from  the  coast  of  the  Atlantic 
on  the  west  to  the  Niger  boundary  of  Haussaland  on  the 
east,  and  from  the  country  of  the  cannibals  on  the  south 
its  protectorate  extended  into  the  desert  as  far  as  the 
frontier  of  Wargelan. 

^^  I353j  when  the  fortunes  of  Melle  were  at  their 
highest,  Ibn  Khaldun,  who  was  then  employed  on  a 
political  mission  at  Biskra,  met  one  of  the  notables  of 
Tekadda,  an  important  Berber  town  of  the  desert,  which, 
"like  all  other  towns  of  the  Sahara,"  at  that  time  acknow- 
ledged the  sovereignty  of  Melle.  Amongst  other  details 
of  the  caravan  trade  which  Ibn  Khaldun  learned  from 
this  man  he  mentions  that  caravans  from  Egypt,  consist- 
ing of  12,000  laden  camels,  passed  every  year  through 
Tekadda  on  their  way  to  Melle.  The  load  of  a  camel 
was  300  lbs.  :  12,000  camel  loads  amounted,  therefore,  to 
something  like  1600  tons  of  merchandise.  In  the  com- 
parison which  has  so  often  been  made  of  a  caravan  of 
the  desert  to  a  ship,  it  is  worth  while  to  remember  that, 
at  this  date,  there  was  probably  not  a  ship  in  any  of  the 
merchant  navies  of  the  world  which  would  carry  100  tons. 
At  the  time  of  the  Armada,  250  years  later,  when  English 
and   Spanish   merchant  ships  were  scouring  the   Eastern 


ii8  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

and  the  Western  seas,  the  average  tonnage  of  the  vessels 
which  composed  the  Spanish  force  was  500  tons,  and 
that  of  the  English  ships  much  less.  The  largest  ship 
which  Queen  Elizabeth  had  in  her  navy,  the  Great  Harry, 
was  1000  tons,  but  it  was  considered  an  exception  and 
marvel  of  the  age. 

The  western  half  of  the  desert  was  no  less  active  in 
trade  with  Melle  than  the  eastern.  All  the  desert  towns, 
we  are  told,  from  Twat  westward,  were  halting-places  for 
caravans  passing  between  Morocco,  the  Barbary  coast, 
and  Melle.  Tementit,  a  community  of  about  200  villages, 
lying  to  the  west  of  Twat,  was  a  great  centre  of  this 
passing  trade.  These  desert  towns  of  the  back  country 
of  Algiers  possessed  the  inestimable  boon  of  artesian 
water.  The  method  of  obtaining  it  was  to  sink  a  deep 
well,  of  which  the  sides  were  carefully  built  up.  This 
was  carried  down  to  the  rock  under  which  water  was 
expected  to  be  found.  The  rock  was  cut  away  with  picks 
and  axes  until  nothing  but  the  thinnest  layer  was  left. 
The  workmen  were  then  taken  out  of  the  well,  and  a 
great  mass  of  iron  was  dropped  upon  the  rock,  which, 
giving  way,  the  water  leaped  up,  "sometimes  with  such 
force  as  to  carry  everything  before  it,"  into  the  receptacle 
which  had  been  prepared,  whence,  overflowing,  it  formed 
a  little  stream  upon  the  ground.  Not  only  the  artesian 
water  of  Twat,  but  also  the  great  salt-mines  of  Tegazza, 
lay  within  the  limits  of  the  Mellestine. 

The  first  sovereign  of  Melle  to  accept  Islam  was 
Bermandana,  who  made  the  pilgrimage  to  Mecca — a 
custom  afterwards  adopted  by  his  successors.  The  date 
of  this  pilgrimage  does  not  appear  to  have  been  preserved, 
but  it  may  be  gathered  from  a  list  of  ten  kings  descending 
from  one  of  his  successors,  Mari  Djata,  to  the  famous 
Mansa  Musa,  who  made  the  pilgrimage  in  1324,  that 
his  conversion  must  have  been  rather  before  than  after 
the  Morabite  invasion  of  Negroland  at  the  end  of  the 
eleventh  century. 

Leo  Africanus,  whose  history,  however,  is  not  usually 


THE    MELLESTINE  119 

trustworthy,  says  that  the  people  of  Melle  embraced  the 
law  of  Mohammed  when  "the  uncle  of  Joseph,  King  of 
Morocco" — that  is,  Abou  Bekr,  the  Morabite  leader — was 
then  prince.  He  also  says  that  the  government  of  Melle 
remained  for  some  time  in  the  posterity  of  that  prince. 
If  Melle  in  the  beginning  took  its  rise,  as  Leo  Africanus 
suggests,  under  Berber  princes,  it  is  but  one  instance  the 
more  of  the  profound  impression  made  by  the  Morabite 
invasion  upon  Negroland.  But  there  can  be  no  doubt 
that  in  the  days  of  its  greatness  the  kings  of  Melle 
were  black,  and  ousted  the  Berber  descendants  of  the 
Morabites  in  the  desert. 

In  the  early  part  of  its  history  Melle  consisted  of  three 
principalities  claiming  equal  rights.  The  first  of  its  kings 
who  would  appear  to  have  consolidated  the  kingdom  and 
enlarged  its  boundaries  to  any  appreciable  extent  was 
Mari  Djata,  who  overthrew  the  Su-Su  and  conquered 
Ghana  in  the  early  part  of  the  thirteenth  century.  The 
name  of  Ghana  from  this  time  is  no  longer  heard,  Ghana 
being  properly  the  title  of  the  ruler,  not  the  name  of 
the  kingdom.  The  country  heretofore  known  as  Ghana 
now  becomes  Ghanata  or  Walata.  Mari  Djata's  name 
of  Djata  meant  Lion.  His  hereditary  title  Mari  was 
something  less  than  king,  confirming  the  theory  that 
he  was  the  first  of  the  rulers  of  Melle  to  consolidate 
its  possessions  under  one  sovereign.  He  reigned  for 
twenty-five  years,  and  his  descendants  and  successors 
are  all  known  by  the  full  title  of  Mansa,  or  king,  the 
succession  going,  as  in  the  old  pagan  succession  of 
Ghana,  in  female  descent,  not  to  the  king's  son  but  to 
his  sister's  son. 

The  pilgrimages  made  by  these  kings  to  Mecca  are 
the  dates  by  which  we  are  usually  able  to  fix  the  period, 
if  not  the  exact  limit,  of  their  reigns.  The  son  of  Mari 
Djata  made  his  pilgrimage  as  king  in  1259.  A  famous 
usurper,  Sakora,  who  greatly  extended  the  dominions 
of  Melle  towards  the  east,  made  his  pilgrimage  in  the 
year  13 10. 


I20  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

Under  Sakora  the  territories  of  Melle  were  as  much 
extended  in  the  east  as  they  had  been  by  the  conquest 
of  Ghana  in  the  west,  for  he  conquered  Gago  or  Kaougha, 
the  capital  of  Songhay,  of  which  the  site  was  the  present 
town  of  Gao.  This  town  was,  at  the  beginning  of  the 
fourteenth  century,  the  centre  of  a  rich  and  important 
territory  shaken  for  the  moment  by  internal  convulsions, 
and  therefore  open  to  conquest  by  a  powerful  neighbour. 
In  the  twelfth  century  it  was  described  by  El  Idrisi  as  a 
"populous,  unwalled,  commercial  and  industrial  town,  in 
which  were  to  be  found  the  produce  of  all  arts  and  trades 
necessary  for  the  use  of  its  inhabitants."  Ibn  Said,  in 
the  thirteenth  century,  speaks  of  it  also  with  respect.  It 
was  throughout  its  history  celebrated  for  the  great  quan- 
tity of  gold  with  which  its  markets  abounded ;  it  will 
be  remembered  that  this  peculiarity  was  noted  by 
El  Bekri. 

The  Mohammedanism  of  Songhay,  having  presumably 
come  to  it  by  the  eastern  and  not  by  the  western  road, 
dated  from  an  earlier  period  than  that  of  Melle  and 
Ghana.  The  first  of  the  Songhay  kings  to  accept  Islam 
was  Za-Kosoi,  whose  conversion  took  place  in  1009.  The 
early  kings  of  Songhay  were  all  known  by  the  title  of 
'*  Za,"  which  was  afterwards  changed  to  Sonni,  and  at  a 
later  period  still  to  Askia  or  Iskia.  The  "  Zas "  were 
still  reigning  when  Songhay  was  conquered  in  the  early 
years  of  the  fourteenth  century. 

Mansa  Musa,  the  next  great  king  of  Melle,  completed 
the  conquests  made  by  Sakora,  and  Songhay  remained 
subject  to  Melle  until  about  the  year  1356.  Although  in 
its  state  of  unwalled  prosperity  it  fell  a  comparatively  easy 
prey  to  the  military  strength  of  Melle,  it  is  probable  that 
Songhay  regarded  itself  even  at  that  period  as  possessing 
a  higher  civilisation  than  that  of  its  conquerors.  In 
including  it  within  the  territories  of  the  Mellestine  and 
causing  its  princes  to  be  brought  up  at  his  own  courts, 
the  Sultan  of  Melle  unconsciously  played  the  part  of  one 
who  takes  to   his   hearth   a   slave   destined  eventually  to 


THE    MELLESTINE  121 

become  his  master.  For  about  fifty  years  Melle  ruled 
Songhay.  At  the  end  of  that  period  Songhay  recovered 
its  independence,  and  a  hundred  years  later  it  reared 
upon  the  ruins  of  Melle  an  empire  which  outdid  in  splen- 
dour and  enlightenment  the  most  glorious  epoch  of  the 
Mellestine. 


CHAPTER    XV 

MANSA  MUSA 

Mansa  Musa,  who  completed  the  conquest  of  his  pre- 
decessor Sakora,  was  a  prince  whom  all  historians  com- 
bine to  praise,  celebrating  his  justice,  piety,  and  enlighten- 
ment. He  was  the  friend  of  white  men,  and  entertained 
pleasant  relations  with  the  kings  of  Morocco  and  the 
Barbary  coast,  at  whose  courts,  as  has  been  mentioned, 
the  Arab  civilisation  of  Spain  had  already  in  great  part 
taken  refuge.  He  exchanged  presents  with  them,  and 
kept  himself  well  informed  of  the  political  developments 
of  their  kingdoms. 

He  made  a  celebrated  pilgrimage  to  Mecca  in  the 
year  1324,  of  which  the  details,  preserved  by  more  than 
one  contemporary  witness,  furnish  an  interesting  illustra- 
tion of  the  condition  of  his  country  and  the  state  pre- 
served by  its  monarchs. 

The  caravan  consisted  on  this  occasion,  we  are  told, 
of  no  less  than  sixty  thousand  persons,  a  considerable 
portion  of  whom  constituted  a  military  escort.  The 
baggage  of  the  caravan  was  carried  generally  by  camels, 
but  twelve  thousand  young  slaves  formed  the  personal 
retinue  of  Mansa  Musa.  All  these  were  dressed  in  tunics 
of  brocade  or  Persian  silk.  When  he  rode,  five  hundred 
of  them  marched  before  him,  each  carrying  a  staff  of  pure 
gold,  which  weighed  sixty-two  ounces.  The  remainder 
carried  the  royal  baggage. 

1  he  caravan  was  accompanied  by  all  essential  luxuries, 
including  good  cooks,  who  prepared  elaborate  repasts, 
not  only  for  the  king,  but  for  the  king's  friends,  at  every 
halting-place.      To   defray   the   expenses   of  the  journey. 


MANSA    MUSA  123 

Mansa  Musa  took  with  him  gold  dust  to  the  value  of 
upwards  of  a  million  sterling.  This  was  carried  in  eighty 
camel  loads  of  300  lbs.  weight  each.  His  Songhay  his- 
torian says  of  him  that,  notwithstanding  all  this  mag- 
nificence, he  was  not  generous  in  the  gifts  which  he 
made  in  the  holy  cities.  Others  say  that,  on  the  con- 
trary, he  was  so  lavish  in  his  gifts,  that  the  large  provision 
which  he  had  made  for  his  journey  was  insufficient,  and 
that  he  had  to  borrow  money  for  his  return,  which,  as 
his  credit  was  good,  he  had  no  difficulty  in  doing,  and 
that  the  debt  was  afterwards  punctually  paid. 

He  made  of  his  pilgrimage  something  more  than  a 
religious  journey  to  Mecca,  It  was  also  a  state  progress 
through  his  dominions.  Instead  of  starting  eastward, 
as  might  have  been  expected,  he  started  in  a  westerly 
direction,  going  first  through  the  conquered  territory  of 
Ghana  to  the  town  no  longer  spoken  of  by  that  name, 
but  by  the  modern  name  of  Walata,  or  Aiwalatin.  On 
his  way  thither,  at  Mimah,  one  of  the  conquered  towns, 
a  characteristic  little  incident  occurred.  There  was  in 
the  Sultan's  train  a  white  judge  to  whom  he  had  given 
four  thousand  ducats  to  meet  the  expenses  of  the  journey. 
At  Mimah  this  white  judge  complained  that  his  four 
thousand  ducats  had  been  stolen.  Mansa  Musa  sent 
for  the  governor  of  the  town,  and  ordered  him,  on  pain 
of  death,  to  produce  the  robber.  The  governor  caused 
the  town  to  be  vigorously  searched,  but  he  found  no 
robber,  "because  in  that  town  there  were  none."  He 
went  to  the  house  occupied  by  the  judge  and  cross- 
examined  the  servants.  A  slave  of  the  judge  then 
confessed  :  "  My  master  has  lost  nothing ;  but  he  himself 
hid  the  money  in  this  place."  He  showed  the  place  to 
the  governor,  who  took  the  ducats,  and  reported  the 
circumstances  to  the  Sultan.  Mansa  Musa  sent  for  the 
judge,  and,  after  trial,  banished  him  to  the  country  of 
the  pagans  "who  eat  men."  He  remained  there,  the 
historian  states,  for  four  years,  at  the  end  of  which  time 
the   Sultan  allowed  him   to  return,  not   to   Melle,   but  to 


124  A   TROPICAL   DEPENDENCY 

his  own  native  country.  "The  reason,"  it  is  added,  "why 
the  cannibals  did  not  eat  him  is  that  he  was  white.  They 
say  that  the  flesh  of  white  men  is  unwholesome  because 
it  is  unripe.      Black  flesh  alone,  in  their  opinion,  is  ripe." 

The  caravan  proceeded  from  Walata  by  the  westerly 
route  northward  to  Twat,  and  here  suffered  a  very  con- 
siderable diminution  by  an  affection  of  the  feet  which 
attacked  a  large  portion  of  the  caravan.  This  malady, 
of  which  no  descriptive  account  is  given,  was,  it  is  said, 
called  in  their  language  touat.  There  is  no  hint  that 
it  was  caused  by  "jiggers,"  but  the  event,  important 
enough  to  have  been  preserved  in  subsequent  chronicles, 
of  half  a  caravan  incapacitated  by  an  epidemic  of  the 
feet,  suggests  the  widespread  devastation  of  the  "jigger," 
and  it  would  be  interesting,  were  it  possible,  to  ascer- 
tain whether  any  surviving  word  in  the  Melle  language 
connects  touat  with  the  destructive  insect.  The  author 
of  the  Tarikh-es- Soudan  says  that  the  name  of  the 
oasis  of  Twat  was  bestowed  upon  it  in  consequence  of 
this  catastrophe.  Commentators  reject,  however,  this 
derivation  of  the  name. 

From  Twat  the  caravan  would  seem  to  have  pursued 
the  usual  road  to  Egypt,  where  it  camped  for  a  time 
outside  Cairo,  and  passed  on  to  Mecca  and  Medina. 
Here  Musa  made  a  profound  impression  on  the  peoples 
of  the  East,  who  have  left  in  their  annals,  says  one  his- 
torian, a  record  of  his  voyage,  and  of  their  astonishment 
at  the  magnificence  of  his  empire.  But  it  appears  that 
he  gave  only  20,000  gold  pieces  in  alms  in  each  town, 
and  in  comparison  with  the  immense  extent  of  the  terri- 
tories he  governed,  this  was  not  considered  munificent. 
The  same  author,  however,  mentions  incidentally  that 
throughout  his  journey,  wherever  he  halted  on  a  Friday, 
he  built  a  mosque.  The  funds  required  for  such  a  pur- 
pose, even  though  some  of  the  mosques  were  but  small, 
must  have  been  considerable. 

At  Mecca  the  Sultan  of  Melle  made  literary  acquaint- 
ances,   and    persuaded    the    Spanish    poet   and   architect, 


MANSA   MUSA  125 

Abu  Ishak,  better  known  by  the  name  of  Toueidjen,  to 
return  with  him,  and  to  take  up  his  residence  at  the  court 
of  Melle.  Every  kind  of  royal  favour  was  afterwards, 
it  is  said,  showered  upon  the  family  of  Toueidjen,  who 
established  themselves  permanently  at  Aiwalatin.  The 
caravan  returned  from  Mecca  by  the  eastern  route,  and 
at  Ghadames,  in  the  desert,  it  was  met  by  a  certain  El 
Mamer,  a  chief  who,  being  at  the  time  out  of  favour  with 
the  powers  of  Tunis,  was  anxious  to  conciliate  Mansa 
Musa,  "  whose  authority  extended  over  the  desert." 
Mansa  Musa  received  him  very  hospitably,  and  took 
him  also  in  his  train  to  Melle.  El  Mamer  relates  how 
he  and  the  Spanish  architect  travelled  together  in  the 
royal  cortege  in  great  comfort.  Precedence  was  given 
them  over  many  of  the  native  chiefs  and  viziers.  "His 
Majesty,"  El  Mamer  says,  "seemed  to  take  pleasure  in 
our  conversation."  And  at  every  halting-place  their  table 
was  provided  from  the  royal  kitchen  with  food  and  sweet- 
meats. On  its  way  to  the  capital  the  caravan  passed 
through  Songhay  and  stopped  at  Kagho,  where  the  em- 
peror caused  a  mosque  to  be  built.  It  was  apparently 
a  mosque  of  some  importance,  and  it  was  still  in  existence 
three  hundred  years  later.  Mansa  Musa  also  took  the 
two  young  sons  of  the  Songhay  monarch,  by  name  Ali 
Kolon  and  Suleiman  Nare,  to  educate  at  his  court. 

Having  thus  made  the  complete  round  of  his  empire, 
Mansa  Musa  re-entered  his  capital  and  immediately  em- 
ployed his  Spanish  architect  to  design  for  him  a  hall  of 
audience,  built  after  the  fashion  of  Egyptian  architecture. 
Abou  Ishak,  it  is  said,  displayed  all  the  wonders  of  his 
genius  in  the  creation  of  "an  admirable  monument"  which 
gave  great  satisfaction  to  the  king.  The  hall  was  square 
and  surmounted  by  a  dome.  It  was  built  of  stone,  covered 
with  plaster,  and  decorated  with  beautiful  coloured  ara- 
besques. It  had  also,  we  are  told,  two  tiers  of  arched 
windows,  of  which  the  windows  of  the  lower  tier  were 
framed  in  gold,  plated  upon  wood,  and  the  windows  of 
the  upper  tier  were  framed  in  silver,  plated  upon  wood. 


126  A   TROPICAL   DEPENDENCY 

This  hall  of  audience  communicated  by  an  interior  door 
with  the  palace.  In  expression  of  his  satisfaction,  the 
Sultan  gave  Abou  Ishak  12,000  mitkals  of  gold  dust,  a 
sum  amounting  in  our  money  to  about  ;!f  8000.  But  to 
this,  which  seems  to  us  a  relatively  moderate  reward, 
must  be  added,  says  the  historian,  the  high  favour  of  the 
prince,  an  eminent  place  at  court,  and  splendid  presents 
made  from  time  to  time. 

Upon  his  return  from  this  great  pilgrimage,  Mansa 
Musa  turned  his  arms  against  Timbuctoo,  and  after  a 
severe  conflict  with  the  Sultan  of  Mossi,  who  sacked  the 
town  in  or  about  the  year  1330,  Musa  became  master, 
in  1336,  of  the  future  capital  of  the  Soudan.  This  town 
offering  fresh  opportunity  to  the  young  architect,  it  was 
embellished  by  a  royal  palace  and  mosque.  Both  build- 
ings were  of  cut  stone,  and  the  remains  of  the  palace  exist 
at  the  present  day,  though  they  are  now  used  only  as  a 
slaughter-house.  The  Great  Mosque,  which  had  a  remark- 
able minaret,  was  afterwards  rebuilt  about  the  year  1570 
by  a  pious  governor  of  Timbuctoo  in  obedience  to  advice 
from  Mecca,  where  it  was  stated  that  the  prosperity  of 
Timbuctoo  was  closely  associated  with  the  prosperity  of 
the  minaret,  then  apparently  in  a  dilapidated  condition. 
Some  portion  of  the  old  mosque  still  remains,  and  when 
Barth  saw  it  in  1855  it  was  perfectly  distinguishable  from 
the  later  construction. 

The  first  Imaums  of  this  mosque  were  all  learned 
blacks,  many  of  whom  made  their  studies  in  the  Uni- 
versity of  Fez.  One  of  these,  Katib  Moussa,  who  was 
a  jurisconsult  and  very  learned,  had  also  extraordinary 
health.  He  lived  to  a  great  age  and  filled  the  position 
of  Imaum  for  forty  years  without  a  single  day's  illness. 
Being  asked  to  what  he  attributed  his  good  health,  he 
gave  three  simple  hygienic  rules,  of  which  the  last,  at 
least,  if  not  the  other  two,  is  still  worthy  the  consideration 
of  white  men  in  West  Africa.  He  never  slept,  he  said, 
exposed  to  the  night  air ;  he  never  missed  anointing 
himself  at  night  and  taking  a  hot  bath  in  the  morning  ; 
and  he  never  went  out  without  breakfast. 


MANSA    MUSA  127 

The  Great  Mosque  continued  to  be  the  centre  of  reli- 
gious Hfe  in  Timbuctoo  until  the  conquest  of  the  town  by 
the  Moors  in  1591,  while  the  still  older  Sankor6  Mosque 
was  the  centre  of  university  life.  A  teacher  of  this 
mosque,  who  also  returned  with  Musa  from  the  East, 
found  Timbuctoo  full  of  black  jurisconsults,  whose  know- 
ledge of  law  was  greater  than  his  own.  He  accordingly 
went  to  Fez,  where  he  studied  law  for  some  years,  and 
then  returned  to  found  a  chair  of  law  at  Timbuctoo. 

In  1337,  the  year  after  Musa's  conquest  of  Timbuctoo, 
Abou  el  Ha9en,  the  reigning  monarch  of  Morocco,  effected 
that  conquest  of  Telem9an  which  has  already  been  men- 
tioned in  a  previous  chapter,  and  Mansa  Musa  sent  a  de- 
putation to  congratulate  him.  Abou  el  Ha9en,  on  his  part, 
being,  it  is  said,  "animated  by  a  proper  pride,"  had  "adopted 
the  habit  of  interchanging  presents  with  all  monarchs  his 
equals."  The  King  of  Melle  was  at  that  time  the  greatest 
of  the  black  kings,  and  his  territories  were  nearest  to 
Morocco.  Abou  el  Ha^en  therefore  determined  to  send 
him  a  "truly  royal"  present  of  the  finest  products  of  his 
kingdom.  We  are  not  told  of  what  it  was  composed,  but 
we  are  told  that  he  carefully  chose  all  the  objects  which  it 
included  himself,  and  that  he  confided  it  to  the  care  of  a 
highly  honourable  chief,  Ibn  Ghanem,  A  deputation  com- 
posed of  the  most  eminent  persons  of  the  empire  was 
selected  to  accompany  it.  The  magnificence  of  the  offer- 
ing, Ibn  Khaldun  says,  was  the  subject  of  general  com- 
ment, and  we  may  draw  from  this  circumstance  our  own 
inference  as  to  the  importance  of  the  place  occupied  by 
Melle  among  the  states  of  Africa.  But  the  splendid  gift 
never  reached  Mansa  Musa.  While  it  was  on  its  way  he 
died.  It  was  delivered  to  his  successor,  who  sent  the 
handsome  return  present  once  before  mentioned,  composed 
of  products  of  his  own  country  all  extremely  rare  and 
curious,  and  it  became  the  habit  of  the  sovereigns  of 
Melle  and  Morocco  to  interchange  presents  by  the  medium 
of  the  great  officials  of  their  kingdoms.  The  amiable 
relations  thus  established  between  them  were  maintained 
by  their  successors  for  several  generations. 


128  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

Durlne  the  reisfn  of  Mansa  Musa  the  limits  of  the 
Mellestine  were  extended  over  the  desert  until  they 
became  practically  conterminous  with  those  of  Morocco 
and  the  westernmost  portion  of  the  Barbary  States.  They 
were  separated  from  them  only  by  a  belt  of  shifting  sands, 
of  the  breadth  of  a  three  days'  journey,  known  to  the 
Arabs  under  the  name  of  "El  Areg,"  or  "The  Dunes," 
which,  uninhabited  by  any  peoples,  stretched  more  or 
less  continuously  across  the  continent  from  the  Atlantic 
to  the  Nile.  The  Mellestine  had  by  this  time  become 
so  important  that  all  its  towns  were  frequented  by  the 
merchants  of  Morocco,  Barbary,  and  Egypt.  The  capital 
is  described  by  a  contemporary  writer  as  a  place  of  con- 
siderable extent,  very  populous  and  commercial.  Numer- 
ous streams  watered  the  cultivated  lands  which  surrounded 
it.  Merchandise  from  all  countries  was  sent  to  it,  and  it 
was  the  meeting-place  of  caravans  from  Morocco,  North 
Africa,  and  Egypt.  The  system  of  government  and 
justice  established  by  Musa  would  seem  to  have  been 
that  which  animated  the  political  existence  of  Melle 
during  the  prosperous  period  of  its  history. 

Mansa  Musa  himself  reigned  twenty-five  years,  and 
his  death,  which  took  place  between  the  sending  of  his 
deputation  to  congratulate  Abou  el  Ha^en  on  the  conquest 
of  Telem(;an  in  1337  and  the  arrival  of  the  return  present 
of  Abou  el  Ha^en,  must  have  been  presumably  not  later 
than  1339,  more  probably  1338.  Ibn  Khaldun  says  of 
him  :  "  Mansa  Musa  was  distinguished  by  his  ability  and 
by  the  holiness  of  his  life.  The  justice  of  his  administra- 
tion was  such  that  the  memory  of  it  still  lives."  This  was 
perhaps  not  much  to  say  at  the  end  of  the  fourteenth 
century,  when  he  had  hardly  been  dead  for  sixty  years ; 
but  nearly  300  years  later  his  Songhay  historian,  writing 
with  no  bias  in  his  favour,  in  the  middle  of  the  seven- 
teenth century,  repeats  the  praise  and  speaks  of  him 
as  a  pious  and  equitable  prince,  unequalled  for  virtue  or 
uprightness. 


CHAPTER    XVI 

IBN    BATUTA    IN    MELLE 

It  was  at  the  court  of  Abou  el  Ha9en,  the  conqueror  of 
Telemgan,  that  Ibn  Batuta,  as  we  have  seen,  resolved  in 
the  year  1349  to  rest  from  further  exploration,  and  though, 
like  Marco  Polo,  he  wrote  nothing  himself,  to  dictate  to 
his  scribes  a  record  of  the  voyages  he  had  made.  Inter- 
course between  the  sovereigns  of  Melle  and  Morocco  had 
within  the  ten  years  preceding  his  arrival  received  a  great 
development.  The  fame  of  Mansa  Musa's  journey  to 
Mecca,  his  admirable  and  upright  character,  and  the 
opening  of  his  country  to  the  commerce  of  North  Africa, 
formed  at  the  time  subjects  of  fresh  interest  at  the  court 
of  Fez.  That  a  king  so  enlightened  and  intelligent  as 
Abou  el  Ha9en  should  wish  to  know  more  of  the  countries 
lately  opened  to  Moorish  influence  was  natural,  and  having 
at  his  court  a  traveller  so  experienced  as  Ibn  Batuta,  it  is 
not  surprising  that  the  idea  of  still  further  voyages  should 
have  been  suggested  to  the  explorer. 

Notwithstanding  his  intention  of  travelling  no  more, 
Ibn  Batuta  was,  as  we  have  already  seen,  infected  by  the 
general  enthusiasm,  and  in  1352  he  started  on  the  journey 
which  gives  us,  from  the  lips  of  an  eye-witness,  a  picture 
of  the  court  and  kingdom  of  Melle  as  they  existed  within 
ten  or  fifteen  years  of  the  death  of  Mansa  Musa.  Mansa 
Musa's  son  had  had  only  a  short  reign  of  four  years,  and 
the  succession  had  passed  to  his  uncle,  Mansa  Suleiman, 
a  brother  of  Musa.  This  Suleiman  reigned  twenty-four 
years,  and  was  the  sovereign  of  Melle  at  the  time  of  Ibn 
Batuta's  visit. 

Ibn   Batuta  travelled   south   by  the  road   already  de- 


130  A   TROPICAL   DEPENDENCY 

scribed  by  El  Bekri,  taking  the  westernmost  branch  which 
led  through  the  "Salt  City"  of  Tegazza.  It  is  unnecessary 
to  reproduce  his  description,  to  which  allusion  has  been 
made  in  an  earlier  chapter.  It  is  chietiy  interesting  as 
serving  to  prove  the  accuracy  of  El  Bekri's  description 
given  from  the  reports  of  Spanish  merchants  three  hundred 
years  earlier,  and  to  illustrate  incidentally  the  continuity 
of  life  and  tradition  which  left  the  conditions  of  travel 
upon  the  road  practically  unchanged  after  the  lapse  of 
so  long  a  time.  El  Bekri's  account,  gathered  from  the 
experience  of  travellers  passing  over  the  road  in  1052, 
might  equally  have  been  written  by  Ibn  Batuta  in  1352, 
and  the  account  given  by  Ibn  Batuta  have  been  given  by 
EI  Bekri.  Indeed,  in  one  respect,  Ibn  Batuta's  account 
carries  the  imagination  even  further  back,  for  his  descrip- 
tion of  the  town  of  Tegazza,  in  which  the  houses  and  the 
mosque  were  built  of  slabs  of  salt,  recalls  the  description 
given  by  Herodotus  of  the  salt  towns  of  the  "  Land  of 
Dates." 

The  whole  of  these  desert  stopping-places  lay  within 
the  limits  assigned  by  Ibn  Khaldun  to  the  Mellestine.  Ibn 
Batuta  crossed  the  frontier  of  Melle  proper  at  Aiwalatin, 
the  capital  of  the  old  kingdom  of  Ghanata.  But  the 
Ghana  of  El  Bekri's  day  had  fallen  low.  Ibn  Batuta 
found  it  occupied  largely  by  Berbers,  descendants  of  the 
IMorabites,  whose  degeneracy  gave  him  cause  for  amaze- 
ment. Mohammedan  as  they  called  themselves,  they 
had  fallen  into  habits  which  scandalised  him.  He  felt, 
as  unfortunately  many  a  white  man  since  then  has  had 
sorrowful  occasion  to  feel  in  similar  circumstances,  that 
these  white  men  did  not  sustain  the  dignity  of  their  race 
in  the  presence  of  the  blacks  by  whom  they  were  sur- 
rounded and  to  whose  rule  they  bowed. 

The  black  viceroy  who  received  the  merchants  of  the 
caravan  with  which  Ibn  Batuta  travelled  remained  seated 
while  they  stood  before  him.  He  spoke  to  them  through 
an  interpreter,  not  because  he  did  not  understand,  or 
because  they  were  not  close  enough  for  him   to  hear,  but 


IBN    BATUTA    IN    MELLE  131 

"solely  to  indicate  his  disdain  for  them."  The  experience 
stirred  in  Ibn  Batuta  such  wrath  that  he  regretted  to  have 
entered  the  country  of  black  men  who  were  thus  ill- 
mannered,  and  who  treated  white  men  with  so  little 
respect.  His  disgust  and  indignation  were  for  several 
days  overpowering.  He  could  hardly  prevail  with  himself 
to  continue  his  journey,  and  he  had  nearly  resolved  to 
return  with  the  caravan  with  which  he  had  come.  How- 
ever, a  stay  of  seven  weeks  in  Aiwalatin  appears  to  have 
modified  his  views.  Possibly  what  he  observed  there  of 
the  degeneracy  of  the  Berbers  led  to  more  sympathetic 
reflections  upon  the  attitude  assumed  towards  them  by 
the  blacks,  and  he  determined  to  carry  out  his  intention 
of  travelling  at  least  as  far  as  the  court  of  Melle. 

It  is  evident  from  what  he  says  that  the  Berbers  of 
Ghana,  though  Mussulmans,  and  observing  all  the  religious 
customs  of  their  faith,  studying  jurisprudence  and  theology, 
and  devoting  a  considerable  portion  of  their  time  to 
learning  the  Koran  by  heart,  had  to  a  very  great  extent 
assimilated  themselves  to  the  customs  of  the  blacks.  The 
domestic  privacy  of  the  Moslem  was  not  observed,  and 
they  had  adopted  the  native  habit  of  tracing  their  gene- 
alogy in  the  female  line  through  a  maternal  uncle.  The 
inheritance,  as  with  the  native  royal  dynasties  in  pre- 
Mohammedan  days,  went  to  the  son  of  a  sister.  This 
was  a  practice  which,  though  it  is  known  to  be  common 
in  Negroland,  Batuta  says  that  he  had  never  seen,  except 
amongst  pagan  Indians  in  Malabar. 

The  climate  of  Aiwalatin,  Ibn  Batuta  says,  was 
exceedingly  hot.  Food  was  abundant  there,  and  the 
inhabitants  were  very  prettily  dressed,  in  clothes  imported 
for  the  most  part  from  Egypt.  The  women  were  beautiful, 
and,  in  Ibn  Batuta's  opinion,  very  superior  to  the  men. 

He  found  occasion  for  much  criticism  of  their  domestic 
conduct,  but  with  regard  to  the  strictures,  of  which  he  is 
not  sparing,  it  is  possible  that  there  may  he  another  side. 
Mohammedan  women,  in  the  great  days  of  the  Ommeyades 
in  Spain,  were  not  confined  to  harems,  but  went  unveiled, 


132  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

and  enjoyed  the  society  of  men  as  freely  as  do  the  English 
and  American  women  of  the  present  day.  The  Moham- 
medans ol  the  desert  may  have  preserved  the  custom  of 
this  freedom  after  it  had  been  abandoned  by  the  more 
cultivated  Moslems  of  the  towns,  and  may  have  felt  that 
in  doing  so  it  was  they,  and  not  the  orthodox,  who  had 
maintained  the  purer  traditions  of  the  faith.  There  is  a 
hint  of  something  of  this  sort  in  an  argument  which  took 
place  between  Ibn  Batuta  and  the  leader  of  the  caravan 
with  whom  he  travelled — a  rich  man  who  possessed  a  house 
of  his  own  in  Aiwalatin.  "The  companionship  of  men 
and  women  in  this  country,"  urged  the  caravan  leader,  "is 
respectable  and  good.  There  is  no  harm  attaching  to  it, 
and  no  unpleasant  suspicions  are  aroused  by  this  freedom 
of  which  you  complain."  But  Ibn  Batuta  remained  un- 
convinced. "I  was  surprised  at  his  folly,"  he  says,  "and 
went  no  more  to  his  house,  though  he  invited  me  several 
times." 

From  Aiwalatin  to  the  capital  of  Melle  was  a  twenty  days' 
march,  for  which,  Ibn  Batuta  says,  it  was  hardly  necessary 
to  have  a  guide  or  companions,  as  the  road  was  perfectly 
safe.  He  travelled  himself  with  three  companions.  All 
along  the  road  they  found  immense  and  very  old  trees,  of 
which  one  would  have  been  enough  to  shelter  a  large  cara- 
van. Many  of  the  trees  had  hollow  trunks,  in  which,  during 
the  rains,  water  accumulated,  and  they  served  as  cisterns  for 
the  passers-by.  Others  were  much  used  by  bees  to  build  in, 
and  men  took  the  honey.  In  one  a  weaver  had  established 
his  loom,  and  was  weaving  when  Ibn  Batuta  passed. 

The  country  between  Aiwalatin  and  Melle  would  seem 
to  have  been  wooded  and  thickly  interspersed  with  villages. 
Amongst  the  trees  of  the  wooded  country  Ibn  Batuta  notes 
fruits  "resembling  plums,  apples,  peaches,  and  apricots, 
but  not  quite  like  them."  He  also  notes  plantains  ;  and 
ground  nuts,  of  which  the  oil  was  employed  for  many 
purposes,  formed  a  prevailing  crop.  Spices,  salt,  beads, 
and  aromatic  gums  appeared  to  be  the  currency  of  the 
smaller  villages.      Everything  required  for  a  journey  was 


IBN    BATUTA    IN    MELLE  133 

easy  to  buy  on  the  way.  There  was  no  need,  Ibn 
BatLita  says,  to  make  any  provision :  food  was  plentiful, 
villages  succeeded  each  other  at  short  distances,  and 
the  inhabitants  were  always  willing  to  sell  anything  that 
was  required. 

About  half-way  between  Ghana  and  Melle  Ibn  Batuta 
and  his  companions  reached  the  large  town  of  Zaghari, 
principally  inhabited  by  black  merchants  called  Ouand- 
jaratak,  who  remind  us  of  the  Noughaniarta  mentioned 
by  El  Bekri,  In  most  of  the  towns  there  was  a  white 
quarter — in  all  of  them  Ibn  Batuta  notes  the  presence 
of  white  men.  Zaghari  was  the  centre  of  a  great  corn 
country,  whence  millet  was  exported  to  the  frontier.  From 
it  the  party  struck  the  Niger  at  the  point  at  which  Segou 
now  stands. 

We  get  at  this  stage  of  the  journey  a  description  of 
the  course  of  the  Niger  which  is  worth  quoting.  Some  of 
the  principal  towns  upon  the  river  are  first  mentioned, 
including  Zaghah.  This  town  had  adopted  Islam,  Ibn 
Batuta  says,  at  a  very  early  period.  It  had  a  king  of  its 
own  who  paid  tribute  to  Melle,  and  its  inhabitants  were 
distinguished  by  their  great  zeal  in  the  study  of  science. 
"From  Zaghah,"  he  continues,  "the  river  flows  down  to 
Timbuctoo  and  Gao ;  thence  to  Muri  or  Muli,  a  place 
which  forms  part  of  the  country  of  the  Semiyyown  (or 
Cannibals)  and  is  the  most  distant  limit  of  Melle.  The 
river  then  flows  down  from  Muri  to  Nupe,  one  of  the 
most  important  countries  of  the  Soudan,  whose  sovereign 
is  among  the  greatest  kings  of  the  country.  No  white 
man  enters  Nupe,  because  the  blacks  would  kill  him  before 
he  arrived  there."  The  course  of  the  Lower  Niger,  where 
the  river  flowed  through  the  territories  of  the  cannibals 
and  entered  the  swampy  districts  of  the  coast,  was  wholly 
unknown  to  Arab  geographers,  and  Ibn  Batuta  accepted 
the  common  theory,  which  supposed  that  the  Benue  was  a 
continuation  of  the  Niger,  and  that  below  Nupe  the  river 
turned  eastward  to  join  the  Nile. 

There  is  a  noticeable  increase  of  respect  in  the  tone 


134  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

adopted  by  the  traveller  as  he  approaches  the  capital  of 
Melle. 

Quitting  the  Niger  at  Segou,  "we  travelled,"  he  says, 
"  towards  the  river  Sansarah,  which  is  about  ten  miles 
from  Melle.  The  custom  is  to  forbid  the  entrance  of 
Melle  to  any  one  who  has  not  obtained  permission, 
but  I  had  written  beforehand  to  some  of  the  principal 
personages  in  the  white  community  of  Melle  to  en- 
gage a  house  for  me,  and  no  objection  was  made  to  my 
entrance." 

He  went  at  once  to  the  white  quarter  of  the  town, 
and  found  that  one  of  his  friends  who  was  a  lawyer  had 
hired  a  house  for  him  just  opposite  to  his  own.  Ibn  Batuta 
took  possession  of  the  house  without  delay.  Food  and 
wax  candles  were  supplied  to  him,  and  on  the  following 
day  he  received  visits  from  distinguished  persons,  of 
whom  he  subjoins  a  list.  Amongst  these  there  were 
men  of  letters,  lawyers,  jurisconsults.  One  black  judge  is 
specially  mentioned  as  a  man  of  merit,  "adorned  with  most 
noble  qualities."  The  royal  herald  Dougha,  also  a  "  black 
of  great  distinction,"  and  holding  one  of  the  principal 
positions  at  court,  was  among  his  early  visitors.  These 
men  and  others  all  sent  him  presents  and  compliments, 
and  caused  him  to  feel  at  once  that  in  the  capital  of  the 
kingdom  he  was  treated  with  the  consideration  which  was 
his  due. 

The  reigning  king  was  somewhat  miserly,  and  seldom 
gave  presents  of  any  value.  He  at  first  paid  no  attention 
to  the  arrival  of  the  distinguished  traveller,  but  during 
the  period  of  Ibn  Batuta's  stay  in  the  town  the  sorrowful 
news  was  received  of  the  death  of  the  Sultan  of  Morocco, 
Abou  el  Ha9en.  The  king  on  that  occasion  gave  a 
"banquet  of  condolence,"  and  Ibn  Batuta  was  invited. 
The  governors,  the  jurisconsults,  the  judge,  and  the  prin- 
cipal preacher  of  the  mosque,  are  mentioned  as  being 
present.  Caskets  containing  chapters  of  the  Koran  were 
^pjarently  taken  by  the  guests,  and  the  entire  Koran 
was  rei?.^  through  on  the  occasion.     Prayers  were  offered 


IBN    BATUTA    IN    MELLE  135 

for  the  soul  of  Abou  el  Ha9en,  that  the  Almighty  might 
have  mercy  upon  him.  Prayers  were  also  offered  for  Mansa 
Suleiman. 

It  was  after  this  ceremony  that  Ibn  Batuta  was  first 
presented  to  the  sovereign,  who  received  him  with  a 
gravity  befitting  the  occasion.  A  purely  formal  "  gift  of 
hospitality  "  was  subsequently  sent  to  him,  which  consisted 
only  of  meat  and  bread,  and  for  two  months  he  had  no 
further  private  audience  of  the  sovereign.  He,  however, 
continued  to  attend  the  public  audiences,  of  which  he 
describes  the  ceremonial  in  some  detail.  They  were  held 
sometimes  in  the  Hall  of  Audience,  designed  by  Mansa 
Musa's  Spanish  architect ;  sometimes  outside  in  the  Place 
of  Audience,  an  enclosed  square  upon  which  the  palace 
opened,  and  which  was  approached  from  the  town  by  a  wide 
and  long  boulevard,  planted  with  trees.  Whether  they  were 
held  indoors  or  in  the  open  air,  a  very  strict  and  pompous 
ceremonial  was  observed.  The  boulevard  was  lined  by 
detachments  of  soldiers  armed  with  bows  and  lances,  each 
detachment  having  its  own  commandant  and  military 
band.  The  bands  were  composed  of  drums  and  trumpets, 
horns  made  of  ivory,  and  other  instruments  made  with 
reeds  and  gourds,  which  gave  a  "most  agreeable  sound." 
The  commandants  were  mounted,  and  armed  with  bows 
and  arrows,  each  bearing  a  quiver  full  of  arrows  at  his 
back,  and  carrying  his  bow  in  his  hand.  The  soldiers  were 
some  on  foot  and  some  mounted.  The  general  public, 
and  all  persons  who  had  business  to  lay  before  the 
Sultan,  waited  in  this  boulevard.  On  occasions  when 
the  Sultan  held  his  audience  within  the  hall,  the  square 
outside  was  occupied  by  300  servants  of  the  palace,  who 
stood  to  left  and  right  in  double  rows,  the  front  row 
seated  on  the  ground  armed  with  little  shields  and  short 
spears,  the  back  row  standing  and  armed  with  bows  and 
arrows. 

No  one  entered  the  Hall  of  Audience  itself  till  the 
curtains  of  the  windows,  which  were  usually  kept  closed, 
were,  on  the  entrance  of  the  Sultan,  drawn  back.     At  the 


136  A    TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

same  time  a  handkerchief  or  Httle  banner  was  waved,  which 
served  as  a  signal  to  the  public,  and  there  was  a  burst  of 
music  from  the  bands.  Then  on  receiving  the  summons  of 
the  King,  certain  officials,  including  the  military  governor, 
the  preacher,  and  the  jurisconsults,  took  their  places  in 
the  Hall  of  Audience,  seating  themselves  to  left  and  right 
before  the  King's  arm-bearers,  and  the  royal  herald  or  inter- 
preter placed  himself  in  the  doorway.  This  official  was  a 
personage  of  the  greatest  importance.  He  was  "superbly 
dressed  "  in  stuff  of  the  finest  silk,  with  a  very  handsome 
turban.  He  was  booted  and  spurred,  and  wore  hanging 
from  his  neck  a  sword  in  a  gold  scabbard.  In  each  hand 
he  carried  a  short  spear,  one  of  gold  and  one  of  silver, 
tipped  with  iron.  Any  one  who  had  a  cause  to  present 
then  approached  the  open  door  and  laid  their  case  before 
the  herald.  He  in  turn  repeated  it  to  the  lieutenant  of 
the  King,  and  this  official  repeated  it  to  the  King. 

When  the  audience  was  held  outside,  a  throne  was 
erected  for  the  King  on  a  platform  under  a  great  tree  in 
the  square.  The  platform,  which  was  approached  by 
three  steps,  was  covered  with  silk  and  cushions,  and  over 
it  an  immense  silken  umbrella  "resembling  a  dome"  was 
opened,  on  the  summit  of  which  perched  a  large  golden 
bird. 

The  Sultan,  preceded  by  his  own  private  band,  then 
issued  in  state  from  the  palace.  His  band  was  composed 
of  singers  who  accompanied  themselves  upon  gold  and 
silver  instruments,  of  which  the  native  name  was  a  word 
signifying  "larks."  The  band  marched  first.  Then  came 
the  Sultan,  dressed  usually  in  red  velvet  with  a  golden 
helmet  upon  his  head,  a  bow  in  his  hand,  a  quiver  full  of 
arrows  slung  across  his  back.  Behind  him  marched  300 
armed  slaves.  The  Sultan  walked  slowly.  When  he 
reached  the  platform,  his  custom  was  to  pause  to  look 
at  the  public,  and  then  very  slowly  to  mount  the  platform 
"  as  a  preacher  mounts  the  pulpit."  As  he  took  his  seat 
the  military  bands  broke  out,  and  the  same  ceremony  was 
then  observed  as  for  the  other  audiences. 


IBN    BATUTA    IN    MELLE  137 

On  occasions  of  public  festivities  these  ceremonials 
were  immensely  increased,  the  whole  crowd  wearinc,^ 
only  fine  white  clothes,  public  prayers  and  thanksgivings 
being  offered  up,  and  magnificent  gifts  presented  by 
subjects  to  the  Sultan  and  by  the  Sultan  to  subjects 
whom  he  wished  to  honour.  On  the  breaking  of  the 
fast  of  the  Ramadan,  it  was  the  custom  to  present 
arms  to  the  Sultan  in  a  more  literal  sense  than  that 
usually  conveyed  by  the  term  ;  and  on  the  occasion  of 
that  ceremony  when  Ibn  Batuta  was  present,  "squires" 
offered  to  the  Sultan  for  his  acceptance  arms  which 
are  described  as  "magnificent."  "They  were,"  Ibn 
Batuta  says,  "swords  ornamented  in  gold,  with  scab- 
bards of  the  precious  metal ;  spears  of  gold  and  silver  ; 
quivers  made  of  gold  and  silver ;  and  clubs  made  of 
crystal."  On  these  occasions  there  were  dramatic  dis- 
plays, including  dancing,  fencing,  and  gymnastic  per- 
formances, which  Ibn  Batuta,  having  experience  of 
similar  performances  in  India,  declared  to  be  extremely 
good.  There  were  also  poetic  recitations  of  an  apparently 
comic  kind. 

Poets  wearing  masks  and  dressed  like  birds  were 
allowed  to  speak  their  opinion  to  the  monarch.  Ibn 
Batuta  states  that  this  practice  was  of  great  antiquity, 
long  anterior  to  the  introduction  of  Islam  amongst  these 
people.  The  description  which  he  gives  in  some  detail 
can  hardly  fail  to  recall  similar  practices  inherited  from 
the  Tezcucans  by  the  Aztecs,  who  in  nearly  the  same 
latitude  on  the  American  continent  were  at  this  very 
moment,  in  the  middle  of  the  fourteenth  century,  making 
good    their   position    upon    the     Mexican    plateau.^       Ibn 

^  See  likeness  to  Aztec  performance  at  contemporary  date.  Prescott,  in  his 
account  of  Aztec  literature  and  civilisation  previous  to  the  conquest  of  Mexico 
by  the  Spaniards,  says  :  "  They  are  said  to  have  had  also  something  like 
theatrical  exhibitions  of  a  pantomimic  sort,  in  which  the  faces  of  the  per- 
formers were  covered  with  masks,  and  the  figures  of  birds  or  animals  were 
frequently  represented." — Conquest  of  Mexico^  vol.  i.  p.  98. 

For  a  fuller  account  of  these  mummeries  Prescott  refers  his  readers  to 
Acosta,  lib.  5,  cap.  30  ;  and  also  Clavigero,  Stor-del-Messico.  See  also  for  Aztec 
customs,  Toribio,  Hist,  de  los  Indios,  MS.,  parte  3,  cap.  7. 


138  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

Batuta  also  notices  with  censure  the  extreme  servility  which 
the  Sultan  of  Melle  exacted  from  the  nobles  and  others 
by  whom  he  was  surrounded,  and  here,  too,  there  is  a 
resemblance  to  Aztec  manners  which  is  striking.  "When 
the  Sultan,  seated  in  the  Hall  of  Audience,  calls  any 
one  before  him,"  says  Ibn  Batuta,  "the  person  sum- 
moned immediately  divests  himself  of  his  fine  clothes, 
puts  on  shabby  garments,  and,  taking  off  his  turban, 
covers  his  head  with  a  dirty  cap.  He  then  enters  the 
presence  barefooted,  with  his  trousers  rolled  half-way 
up  his  legs,  listens  with  an  air  of  profound  submission 
to  what  the  Sultan  has  to  say,  and  covers  his  head  and 
shoulders  with  dust,  exactly  as  one  might  do  who  was 
performing  his  ablutions  with  water."  Ibn  Batuta's  com- 
mentator, Ibn  Djozay,  adds  to  this  passage  a  note  to  the 
effect  that  the  Secretary  of  State,  who  was  present  when 
Mansa  Musa's  ambassadors  were  received  at  Fez  by 
Abou  el  Ha9en,  told  him  that  on  all  state  occasions, 
when  the  ambassador  had  audience  of  the  Moorish 
Sultan,  he  was  accompanied  by  an  attendant  carrying 
a  basket  of  dust,  and  every  time  that  the  Sultan  said 
something  gracious  to  him  he  covered  himself  with  dust. 
Prescott,  in  describing  the  ceremonial  of  the  court  of 
Montezuma,  the  Aztec  Emperor  of  Mexico,  at  the  time  of 
the  Spanish  conquest,  says  that  when  ambassadors  from 
foreign  states  were  introduced,  "whatever  their  rank, 
unless  they  were  of  blood  royal,  they  were  obliged  to 
submit  to  the  humiliation  of  shrouding  their  rich  dress 
under  the  coarse  mantle  of  nequen,  and  entering  barefoot, 
with  downcast  eyes,  into  the  presence."  This  custom  of 
taking  off  the  sandals  and  covering  fine  clothes  with  a 
mantle  of  the  coarsest  stuff  which  was  made  in  Mexico, 
was  imposed  equally  on  all  the  nobility  of  Montezuma's 
capital.  The  Mexican's  mode  of  obeisance  was  not  to 
throw  dust  upon  the  head,  but,  bowing  to  the  earth,  to 
touch  it  with  the  right  hand.  The  Aztecs  were,  it  will 
be  remembered,  though  not  negroes,  a  dusky  or  copper- 


IBN    BATUTA    IN    MELLE  139 

coloured  race,  apparently  of  the  tint  which  Earth  describes 
as  that  of  the  "red  races"  of  the  Soudan.  They  had 
other  customs  which  correspond  to  those  of  the  Soudanese. 
The  Aztec  crown  was  transmitted,  like  that  of  Melle,  in 
collateral  descent,  though  in  both  kingdoms  exceptions  to 
the  rule  occurred.  The  practice  of  keeping  the  sons  of 
subject  princes  as  a  sort  of  honourable  hostage  at  the 
court  of  the  monarch  was  perhaps  too  general  to  be 
worthy  of  special  note,  though  it  also  was  common  to 
the  two  peoples.  The  more  terrible  custom  of  propitiating 
the  gods  with  human  sacrifice  which  was  so  extensively 
practised  by  the  Aztecs,  was,  it  will  be  remembered,  only 
the  other  day  brought  to  an  end  under  British  rule  in 
Benin,  and  is  probably  still  practised  in  less  accessible 
portions  of  the  pagan  belt.  Such  heathen  rites  were,  of 
course,  unknown  in  the  Mohammedan  Melle  of  the  thir- 
teenth, fourteenth,  and  fifteenth  centuries.  The  custom 
of  wearing  the  heads  of  animals  as  a  head-dress,  which 
was  also  common  to  the  Aztecs,  was  preserved  amongst 
the  pagans  of  the  West  African  coast  at  the  time  of 
the  first  occupation  of  the  Gold  Coast  by  the  Portuguese 
in  1 48 1. 

On  festive  occasions  the  servants  of  the  rich  at  Melle 
would  seem  to  have  worn  livery.  The  royal  herald 
Dougha's  thirty  servants  are  mentioned  as  being  all 
dressed  in  red  cloth,  with  white  caps.  Music  evidently 
formed  a  prominent  part  of  every  entertainment.  The 
women  are  described  as  wearing  pretty  clothes,  and 
having  their  hair  dressed  with  bands  of  gold  and 
silver. 

We  get  an  indication  of  social  etiquette  from  the 
experience  of  Batuta.  The  treatment  which  he  had  re- 
ceived from  the  Sultan  was  not  considered  by  his  friends 
to  be  sufficiently  honourable,  and  about  two  months  after 
his  arrival  in  Melle  he  was  presented  a  second  time. 
This  was  done  on  the  advice  of  the  herald,  Dougha,  who 
told  the  traveller  that  he  must  rise  and  call  attention  to 


I40  A    TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

himself  at  one  of  the  public  audiences,  and  promised  when 
he  did  so  to  explain  matters. 

Accordingly,  Ibn  Batuta  rose  at  the  audience  and  said  : 
"  Surely  I  have  travelled  in  the  different  countries  of  the 
world,  and  I  have  known  their  kings  ;  but  I  have  been 
in  your  country  four  months,  and  you  have  not  treated 
me  as  a  guest.  What  shall  I  say  of  you  to  the  other 
kings  ?  " 

The  Sultan  replied :  ''I  have  not  seen  you,  nor 
known  you."  Then  the  judge  and  other  important 
persons  rose  and  said  :  "  He  has  already  saluted  you, 
and  you  have  sent  him  food ! "  After  this  the  Sultan 
ordered  him  to  be  lodged  at  his  expense,  and  on  the 
distribution  of  gifts  at  the  end  of  Ramadan  did  not 
forget  him. 

The  customs  of  the  town  were  very  devout.  Prayer 
was  regularly  said  in  private  houses.  There  was  a 
cathedral  mo.sque  to  which  all  fashionable  people  went 
on  Fridays,  and  it  was  habitually  so  crowded  that  the 
worshipper  who  was  late  could  find  no  place.  The  prac- 
tice of  the  rich  was  to  send  their  slaves  in  good  time  to 
spread  their  seat  in  the  place  to  which  they  considered 
themselves  to  have  a  right,  and  the  slaves  kept  the  place 
till  the  master  arrived. 

At  this  mosque  one  Friday  Ibn  Batuta  had  the 
pleasure  of  seeing  vengeance  fall  on  the  head  of  one  of 
the  black  officials  of  Aivvalatin,  who  had  so  offended 
him  on  his  first  crossing  the  frontier  of  Melle.  "  I  was," 
he  said,  "  taking  part  in  the  prayers,  when  a  Berber 
merchant,  also  a  student  and  a  man  of  letters,  rose  and 
cried :  '  Oh,  you  who  are  present  in  this  mosque,  be 
my  witnesses  that  I  accuse  Mansa  Suleiman  '  (the  Sultan), 
'and  I  cite  him  before  the  tribunal  of  God's  envoy, 
Mohammed.'  Immediately  there  came  from  the  Sultan's 
grated  gallery  messengers  who  approached  the  com- 
plainant, and  asked  :  '  Who  has  committed  an  injustice  ? 
Who  has  taken  anything  from  you.-*'  He  replied: 
'  Mancha  Djou,  the  governor  of  Aiwalatin,  has  taken  from 


IBN    BATUTA    IN    MELLE  141 

me  goods  worth  600  ducats  and  he  has  given  me  in  com- 
pensation only  100  ducats.'" 

The  result  of  the  incident  was  the  arrest  of  the 
governor  of  Aiwalatin,  who  was  brought  to  the  capital, 
and  having  been  tried  before  the  regular  tribunal,  was 
found  guilty.  The  merchant  recovered  his  money,  and 
the  governor  was  deprived  of  his  functions. 


CHAPTER   XVII 

ADMINISTRATION   OF   THE   MELLESTINE 

I  HAVE  lingered,  perhaps,  too  long  over  the  personal 
experiences  of  Ibn  Batuta  in  Melle,  but  they  serve  to 
illustrate,  as  a  drier  chronicle  of  historic  events  might  fail 
to  do,  the  actual  life  of  the  town  and  the  degree  of 
civilisation  which  had  been  reached. 

Politically,  as  we  have  seen,  the  Empire  of  Melle  was 
divided  into  Melle  proper  and  the  Protectorate,  which 
extended  into  the  desert  until  it  met  the  boundaries  of 
the  civilised  states  of  the  north  and  west.  The  empire 
would  appear  to  have  been  further  divided  into  provinces, 
each  ruled  by  a  "  Ferba "  or  viceroy  of  the  sovereign, 
while  each  town  had  its  "Mochrif"  or  inspector,  who 
was  responsible  to  the  viceroy  for  the  maintenance  of 
order,  the  suppression  of  crime,  and,  presumably,  for  the 
collection  of  the  taxes. 

The  "Ferba"  is  spoken  of  by  Ibn  Batuta  as  the 
viceroy  of  the  Sultan,  but  there  existed  another  dignitary, 
known  as  the  "  Koi,"  who  was  apparently  a  native  and 
subject  king,  not  dispossessed,  but  holding  his  possessions 
as  tributary  to  Melle.  In  some  instances,  he  would  seem 
to  have  been  confirmed  by  Melle  in  the  occupation  of  an 
old  position  ;  in  others,  he  was  apparently  appointed  by  the 
Sult^in.  In  speaking  of  the  Timbuctoo  Koi,  a  little  later, 
at  the  beginning  of  the  fifteenth  century,  the  author  of 
the  Tarikh-es-Soudan  says  that  it  was  customary  for  the 
Koi  to  receive  one-third  of  the  total  taxes,  and  that  in  Tim- 
buctoo he  had  all  administrative  and  financial  powers  in  his 
hands.  It  is  evident  that  if  the  Kols  were  petty  native 
kings,  who,  on  submission  to  the  Sultan  of  Melle,  were  by 


ADMINISTRATION  OF  THE  MELLESTINE    143 

him  confirmed  during  good  behaviour  in  certain  powers, 
and  on  occasion  superseded  by  his  appointment,  it  would 
be  necessary  to  make  some  fairly  ample  provision  for  their 
revenues.  A  certain  semi-independence  on  their  part 
would  seem  to  be  argued  by  the  fact  that  when  the 
Tuaregs  took  Timbuctoo  from  Melle  in  1434,  they  con- 
firmed the  existing  Timbuctoo  Koi  in  his  powers.  At 
one  time  there  were  thirty-six  Kois  in  the  empire  of 
Melle.  As  the  empire  extended  it  is  probable  that  their 
number  may  have  increased,  and,  at  a  later  period,  as  the 
central  government  weakened,  the  power  and  self-assertion 
of  the  Kois  grew,  and  contributed,  doubtless,  to  the  dis- 
ruption of  the  empire. 

Unfortunately,  though  the  finances  of  the  country  in 
the  middle  of  the  fourteenth  century  would  appear  to  have 
been  flourishing,  no  special  accounts  have  been  left  to 
us  of  the  revenue  or  system  of  taxation.  We  can  only 
assume  from  incidental  allusions  that  taxation  continued 
to  be  based,  as  in  the  kingdom  of  Ghana,  on  a  system 
of  royalties  on  minerals  and  taxes  on  foreign  merchandise. 
We  hear  of  the  great  wealth  of  the  country  and  of  the 
kings,  but  we  get  no  hint  from  Batuta  of  taxation  which 
was  felt  to  be  oppressive  by  the  people.  He  mentions 
that  Mansa  Suleiman  was  unpopular  because  of  his  avarice, 
but  this  would  appear  to  apply  rather  to  his  personal 
thriftiness  than  to  any  system  of  government.  A  narrative 
which  abounds  in  anecdote,  and  is  not  animated  by  any 
sentiment  of  friendliness  for  the  government,  would  have 
been  likely  to  incorporate  any  instance  of  oppression  which 
reached  the  author's  ears.  But,  after  a  residence  of  several 
months  in  the  country,  Ibn  Batuta  not  only  brings  forward 
none ;  his  evidence  is  given  in  a  contrary  direction. 

The  judicial  system  of  the  country,  though  not  de- 
scribed in  detail,  would  seem  to  have  been  carefully  and 
fully  organised.  The  frequent  reference  which  is  made 
in  all  chronicles  to  judges,  black  and  white,  to  lawyers 
and  jurisconsults,  indicates  that  men  of  this  profession 
occupied  a  very  prominent  position  in  the  social  organisa- 


144  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

tion  of  the  country.  The  fact  that  it  was  the  custom  of 
the  Suhan  to  send  cases  in  which  he  was  appealed  to 
for  justice,  to  be  tried  at  the  "  proper  tribunal,"  would 
seem  also  to  indicate  a  severance  of  the  executive  and 
judicial  powers  which  it  is  the  habit  of  civilisation  to 
regard  as  one  of  the  guarantees  of  justice.  But  the  con- 
dition of  the  country  itself  is,  perhaps,  the  best  testimony 
which  can  be  borne  to  the  efficacy  of  the  system  by  which 
crime  was  punished  and  repressed.  Amongst  the  admirable 
things  which  Ibn  Batuta  feels  it  to  be  his  duty  to  praise, 
when,  at  the  end  of  his  visit,  he  summarises  his  opinion  of 
the  people  of  Melle,  is,  he  says,  the  rare  occurrence  of  acts 
of  injustice  in  the  country.  "  Of  all  people,"  he  thinks 
that  "  the  blacks  are  those  who  most  detest  injustice. 
Their  Sultan  never  forgives  any  one  who  has  been  guilty 
of  it."  He  also  praises  the  "complete  and  general  safety 
which  is  enjoyed  in  the  country.  Neither  those  who  travel 
nor  those  who  remain  at  home  have  anything  to  fear  from 
brigands,  thieves,  or  violent  persons."  "  The  blacks  do 
not,"  he  says,  "  confiscate  the  goods  of  white  men  who  die 
in  the  country,  even  though  it  may  be  a  question  of 
immense  treasure.  On  the  contrary,  their  goods  are 
always  placed  in  charge  of  some  white  man,  trusted  by  the 
community,  until  those  who  have  a  right  to  them  can  apply 
and  take  possession  of  them." 

The  organisation  of  the  Church  was  orthodox,  every 
town  having  its  mosque  or  mosques  with  salaried  readers 
and  teachers  ;  and  in  the  principal  towns,  such  as  Melle, 
Timbuctoo,  and  Gago,  mention  is  made  of  a  "Cathedral 
Mosque."  Schools  are  mentioned  in  many  towns,  and 
some,  as  in  Zaghah,  are  specially  spoken  of  as  centres  of 
distinguished  learning.  Ibn  Batuta  mentions  with  praise 
the  religious  assiduity  of  the  people — the  custom  of  cele- 
brating regular  prayer,  not  only  in  the  public  mosques,  but 
in  private  meetings  of  the  faithful — and  the  care  with 
which  children  were  brought  up  to  observe  similar  practices. 
All  educated  children  were  expected  to  learn  the  Koran, 
and  were  either  whipped  or  had  fetters  placed  upon  their 


ADMINISTRATION  OF  THE  MELLESTINE    14s 

feet  when  they  were  negligent  in  doing  so.  In  the  house 
of  the  principal  judge  he  one  day  saw  all  the  children 
chained  up,  and  was  told  that  it  was  a  punishment  for  not 
having  learned  their  Koran.  On  another  occasion  he 
saw  a  magnificent  young  black,  superbly  dressed,  who 
had  shackles  on  his  feet,  and  on  inquiring  whether  he  had 
committed  a  crime,  was  told  laughingly  that  he  was  only 
being  forced  to  learn  his  Koran.  The  principal  preacher 
of  the  cathedral  mosque  and  the  principal  judge  of  the 
town  of  Melle  were  constantly  in  the  presence  of  the 
sovereign,  and  would  seem  to  have  occupied  a  recognised 
position  as  ministers  and  the  heads  of  their  respective 
professions. 

The  army,  which  is  spoken  of  as  very  large,  was  an 
organised  military  force,  composed  partly  of  cavalry  and 
partly  of  infantry,  armed  with  bows  and  arrows,  swords, 
and  long  and  short  spears.  It  was  divided  into  units,  each 
commanded  by  a  captain  or  commandant,  and  it  is  interest- 
ing to  note  in  relation  to  the  appointment  of  these  com- 
mandants that  it  was  the  custom,  on  the  occasion  of  their 
selection  for  command,  for  the  viceroy  or  governor  of  the 
town  to  cause  the  new  commandant  to  be  placed  upon  a 
shield  and  raised  above  the  heads  of  the  soldiers  in  exactly 
the  same  manner  as  was  common  in  Northern  Europe. 
It  will  be  remembered  that  the  Merovingian  and  Carlo- 
vingian  kings  were  always  raised  on  a  shield  as  part  of 
the  ceremony  of  their  enthronement,  and  as  late  as  the 
Latin  Conquest  of  Constantinople  in  1204,  when  Baldwin 
of  Flanders  was  elected  Emperor  of  the  East,  he  was,  we 
are  told,  raised  upon  the  buckler  by  the  hands  of  his  rival 
candidate.  The  smaller  military  units  led  by  the  com- 
mandants were  apparently  grouped  into  a  larger  formation, 
which  in  its  turn  was  commanded  by  a  military  chief  or 
general,  and  these  larger  formations  were  again  united  into 
two  divisions,  one  forming  the  army  of  the  south,  and  the 
other  of  the  north.  The  two  generals-in-chief  command- 
ing these  divisions  were  very  high  personages,  who  occa- 
sionally gave  to  the  reigning  sovereign  all  that  he  could  do 

K 


146  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

to  keep  them  in  order.  The  strength  of  the  army  of  Melle 
receives  indirect  testimony  from  the  fact  that  Jenne,  a 
territory  which,  though  lying  within  the  Hmits  of  the 
Mellestine  and  paying  tribute  to  Melle,  had  its  own  king, 
and  was  never  conquered  until  1468,  thought  it  necessary, 
in  order  to  preserve  the  much-cherished  independence  of 
its  town,  to  keep  no  less  than  twelve  army  corps  always 
on  foot  charged  solely  with  the  duty  of  watching  the 
military  movements  of  Melle  and  of  guarding  against  any 
approach  of  the  Melle  troops  which  was  not  authorised 
by  the  king. 

Beyond  the  general  indication  that  the  country  was 
fertile,  cultivated,  and  very  populous,  Ibn  Batuta  gives 
no  satisfactory  account  of  its  agriculture  nor  of  the  num- 
bers of  its  population.  Other  writers  dwell,  however, 
on  the  fact  that  it  was  rich  in  cattle,  corn,  and  cotton, 
which  last  was  exchanged  freely  in  its  markets  for  the 
woollen  cloth  of  Europe.  That  it  was  very  populous 
may  be  inferred  from  a  fact  mentioned  by  the  author  of 
the  Tarikh-es-Soudan  in  relation  to  Jenne,  through  whose 
territory  Ibn  Batuta  travelled  without  mentioning  that 
it  was  more  populous  than  any  other  portion  of  the 
country.  The  territory  of  Jenne  extended  for  a  journey 
of  several  days.  If  the  king,  it  is  said,  desired  to  send 
a  message,  though  it  might  be  to  the  farthest  limits  of 
the  territory,  the  royal  messenger  simply  mounted  upon 
the  rampart  near  one  of  the  gates  of  the  town  and  called 
aloud  the  message  with  which  he  was  charged.  The  people 
from  village  to  village  repeated  the  call,  and  it  was  delivered 
in  the  farthest  village  to  the  individual  to  whom  it  was 
addressed.  This  custom  not  only  illustrates  the  density 
of  population  in  a  country  in  which  it  could  be  practised, 
but  it  also  suggests  an  explanation  of  the  extraordinary 
rapidity  with  which  news  is  even  now  sometimes  trans- 
mitted among  natives  in  countries  where  no  mechanical 
means  for  the  purpose  exist.  A  message  so  delivered 
from  voice  to  voice  might  pass  with  almost  the  rapidity 
of  a  telegram,  and  doubtless  the  calling  of  royal  messages 


ADMINISTRATION  OF  THE  MELLESTINE   147 

was  not  left  to  the  chance  of  any  hearer.  There  must 
have  been  an  organised  system  of  pubHc  criers  to  make 
the  practice  effective.  Of  this,  however,  no  indication 
appears  to  exist,  and  it  would  be  interesting  if  light  could 
be  thrown  upon  the  subject. 

Ibn  Batuta  is  equally  unsatisfactory  on  the  subject  of 
the  trade  of  Melle.  Though  he  travelled  with  a  caravan 
of  merchants,  he  tells  us  nothing  that  is  interesting  upon 
the  subject,  and  we  are  left  to  learn  from  other  sources 
the  great  importance  which  it  had  assumed.  All  European 
goods,  it  would  seem,  were  welcomed  in  the  markets  of 
the  Mellestine,  and  were  paid  for  apparently  in  gold, 
cotton,  slaves,  ivory,  skins,  and  kola-nuts.  A  good  deal 
of  corn  would  seem  to  have  been  exported  to  the  frontier, 
but  presumably  this  was  destined  rather  for  the  towns 
of  the  desert  than  for  Europe.  At  a  somewhat  later 
period  the  trade  in  "written  books"  from  Barbary  was 
said  to  be  one  of  the  most  profitable.  Ibn  Batuta  men- 
tions an  interesting  copy  of  a  book  called  "The  Mar- 
vellous," ^  which  was  lent  to  him  by  one  of  his  many  hosts, 
in  a  place  of  which  he  had  forgotten  the  name,  and  there 
must  already  in  his  day  have  existed  a  very  considerable 
demand  to  satisfy  the  needs  of  the  many  schools  which 
are  mentioned.  When  the  King  of  Jenne,  somewhat 
later,  at  the  end  of  the  twelfth  century,  adopted  Islam, 
and  desired  that  all  the  Ulemas  of  his  territory  should 
be  present  at  his  abjuration  of  the  gods  of  paganism, 
they  assembled  to  the  number  of  4200.  If  the  relatively 
small  territory  of  Jenne  produced  so  large  a  number,  it  is 
evident  persons  of  some  degree  of  Mohammedan  learning 
must  have  been  numerous  in  the  countries  of  the  Soudan. 
There  can  be  no  doubt  that  gold  abounded  with  which 
to  pay  for  all  desired  luxuries.  In  the  market  of  Gago 
it  is  said  that  the  inhabitants  frequently  brought  in  more 
gold  than  they  could  exchange  for  commodities.  All 
travellers  allude  to  the  golden  arms  and  utensils  frequently 

^  Perhaps  "  The  Choice  of  Marvels,"  composed  at  Mossul  by  a  writer  of 
Granada  in  1160,  a  copy  of  which  FeHx  Dubois  found  at  Timbuctoo. 


148  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

used  by  persons  of  importance.  This  perpetual  testimony 
to  the  quantity  of  gold  in  the  country  begins,  it  may  be 
remembered,  in  the  eighth  century,  when,  according 
to  Abd  el  Hakem,  the  first  military  expedition  of  the 
Arabs  brought  back  "  all  the  gold  it  wanted,"  and  con- 
tinues through  the  testimony  of  El  Bekri  in  the  eleventh 
century,  El  Idrisi  in  the  twelfth,  and  all  subsequent  writers 
of  the  thirteenth,  fourteenth,  fifteenth,  and  sixteenth 
centuries,  up  to  the  moment  of  the  overthrow  of  native 
independence  by  the  Moors  in  the  conquest  of  1591. 
Allusions  to  the  cotton  trade  are  scarcely  less  constant, 
though  less  prominent  and  less  important,  and  there  must 
have  been  a  considerable  local  consumption.  Ibn  Batuta 
mentions  amongst  the  good  qualities  which  he  ascribes 
to  the  blacks  of  Melle,  that  they  never  failed  to  dress 
in  fine  white  robes  on  Friday,  and  the  dressing  of  many 
millions  of  persons  must  have  needed  a  large  supply. 

The  other  never-failing  supply  of  wealth  which  would 
seem  to  have  persisted  throughout  the  history  of  the 
Soudan  was  the  slave  labour  raided  from  the  pagan  belt 
to  the  south.  The  attitude  of  the  Mohammedan  black 
towards  those  people  seems  to  have  been  almost  identical 
with  that  of  the  Spaniards  towards  the  natives  of  the 
New  World,  They  were  idolatrous,  and  had  no  rights. 
Probably  the  occupation  of  raiding  the  little  known  and 
unhealthy  regions  of  the  pagan  belt  gave  occupation  in 
times  of  peace  for  the  immense  armies  which  were  kept 
on  foot.  But,  beyond  the  actual  cruelty  of  the  raid,  the 
slave  does  not  appear  to  have  been  badly  treated.  He 
served  in  the  armies  of  the  conquerors  and  performed 
the  duties  of  the  house  and  farm.  He  seems  to  have 
received  little  more  consideration  than  a  domestic  animal, 
but  he  does  not  appear  to  have  been  persecuted.  All 
rich  people  in  Melle  were  proud  of  possessing  a  very 
large  number  of  slaves.  Ibn  Batuta  mentions  that  he 
gave  twenty-five  ducats  for  a  good  woman  slave,  but  the 
price  of  the  ordinary  slave  was  much  less.  In  the  sixteenth 
century  Leo  Africanus  mentions  that  the  price  of  a  Barbary 


ADMINISTRATION  OF  THE  MELLESTINE   149 

horse  in  Bornu  was  fifteen  slaves.  In  Ibn  Batuta's  day  a 
Barbary  horse  cost  one  hundred  ducats  at  Melle  ;  but  no 
deductions  can  be  legitimately  drawn  from  these  two  facts 
as  to  the  money  value  of  the  ordinary  slave. 

The  vast  body  of  slaves  no  doubt  represented  the 
labour  power  of  the  country,  and  that  they  existed  within 
its  boundaries  without  disturbance  and  without  the  multi- 
plication of  crime,  if  it  says  much  for  the  organisation 
and  the  administration  of  justice,  says  also  something  for 
the  manner  in  which  they  were  treated. 

After  a  stay  of  several  months  in  the  capital  of  Melle, 
Ibn  Batuta  visited  some  of  the  minor  towns,  in  most  of 
which  he  mentions  the  black  governor  with  respect,  and 
in  nearly  all  of  them  received  hospitality  from  "  persons 
of  merit "  who  had  made  the  pilgrimage  to  Mecca. 

Amongst  these  minor  towns  he  mentions  Timbuctoo, 
which  was  still  far  from  the  height  of  its  fame.  He 
disposes  of  it  in  a  sentence,  as  a  town  situated  at  a  dis- 
tance of  four  leagues  from  the  Niger,  and  occupied  chiefly 
by  Berbers.  It  was  here  that  he  witnessed,  on  the  occa- 
sion of  the  appointment  of  the  captain  of  a  troop,  the 
ceremony  of  lifting  him  on  a  shield  above  the  heads 
of  his  men.  He  mentions  incidentally  that  this  captain 
was  a  Berber.  Berbers  and  blacks  seemed  to  enjoy  at 
the  time  perfect  equality  throughout  the  kingdom — all 
being  alike  Mohammedan.  The  only  class  distinction 
seemed  to  be  idolater  or  orthodox,  slave  or  free.  He 
does  not  mention  either  the  mosque  or  palace  of  Tim- 
buctoo, though  as  they  were  at  the  time  of  his  visit  only 
fifteen  years  old,  and  as  we  know  from  previous  and  sub- 
sequent descriptions  that  they  were  handsome  buildings 
of  cut  stone,  they  might  have  been  expected  to  attract 
his  attention.  He  does,  however,  mention  the  tombs  of 
several  distinguished  persons,  amongst  them  that  of  the 
young  poet  and  architect  from  Granada  who  designed  the 
mosque,  and  who  had  not  lived  long  to  enjoy  the  favour 
of  his  black  patrons,  the  monarchs  of  Melle. 

From  Timbuctoo  Ibn  Batuta,  having  evidently  resolved 


i^o 


A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 


to  see  the  whole  of  the  Mellestine,  travelled  eastward  by 
water  to  Gago.  On  the  way,  amongst  other  incidents  of 
travel,  he  made  the  acquaintance  of  the  black  governor, 
who  lent  him  the  book  already  alluded  to,  who  spoke 
Arabic  fluently,  who  had  made  the  pilgrimage  to  Mecca, 
and  who  impressed  him  as  "one  of  the  best  and  most 
generous  of  men."  In  the  cordial  expression  of  the 
respect  and  sympathy  awakened  in  his  mind  by  friendly 
intercourse  with  this  and  other  black  dignitaries  of  the 
kingdom  of  Melle,  it  becomes  clear  how  greatly  he  had 
modified  his  opinion  with  regard  to  the  inhabitants  of  the 
Soudan  since  he  first  crossed  the  frontier  at  Aiwalatin. 

He  remained  a  month  at  Gago,  the  capital  of  Songhay, 
which  he  describes  as  "  one  of  the  finest  cities  of  the 
blacks."  It  evidently  occupied  in  his  estimation  a  far 
higher  position  than  Timbuctoo.  It  was,  he  said,  one  of 
the  largest  and  one  of  the  best-supplied  towns  in  the 
Soudan.  Food  was  very  plentiful,  especially  rice,  milk, 
fowls,  fish,  and  he  mentions  a  particular  kind  of  cucumber, 
which  he  held  to  be  "unequalled.'  The  currency  amongst 
the  natives  in  the  market  both  here  and  at  Melle  was  still 
in  cowries.  He  mentions  a  "  white  man's  mosque,"  and 
gives  a  list  of  distinguished  persons  from  whom  he  received 
attentions  and  hospitality. 

Gago  and  Aiwalatin  were  evidently  regarded  as  the 
extreme  limits  east  and  west  of  Melle  proper.  The 
authority  of  INIelle  was  respected  vaguely  to  the  south  in 
the  country  of  the  cannibals  and  amongst  other  minor 
kingdoms  of  some  importance,  which  are  confusingly 
enumerated  under  different  names  by  different  authors. 
Amongst  these  Mossi  was  one  of  consequence  enough 
to  inflict  very  heavy  blows  upon  Melle  itself  at  a  later 
date.  Borgu  was  another  which  had  preserved  its  inde- 
pendence from  a  period  of  great  antiquity.  Nupe,  on 
the  opposite  bank  of  the  river,  was,  as  we  have  seen,  also 
an  independent  native  state  of  importance,  though  practi- 
cally unknown  to  the  Mohammedans  of  the  West.  Melle, 
however,  never  extended  beyond  the  limits  of  the  Niger 


ADMINISTRATION  OF  THE  MELLESTINE   151 

in  the  East.  Haussaland  and  Bornu  drew  their  civiHsation 
more  directly  from  Eastern  sources,  and  belong  to  another 
chapter  of  history,  with  which  we  have  yet  to  deal. 

The  Mellestine  took  a  wider  extension  as  it  spread 
north  into  the  desert,  and  Tekadda,  which  is  on  nearly  the 
same  parallel  as  Aiwalatin,  may  perhaps  be  taken  as 
forming,  at  the  end  of  the  fourteenth  century,  its  most 
easterly  development  in  the  desert.  Here,  as  will  be 
seen,  the  frontier  of  the  Mellestine  trenched  upon  the 
territory  of  Gober  and  the  Haussa  States,  and  the  autho- 
rity claimed  over  Tekadda  was  at  a  future  period  the 
cause  of  the  friction. 

Ibn  Batuta,  who  confined  his  journey  entirely  to  the 
Mellestine,  went  from  Gago  north-eastward  to  Tekadda, 
where  he  gives  some  description  of  the  copper  mines.  At 
Tekadda  he  received  an  order  from  the  new  Sultan  of 
Morocco,  who  had  succeeded  Abou  el  Ha^en,  to  return 
to  court  and  give  an  account  of  his  wanderings.  He 
turned  his  steps  north-westward,  abandoning  the  Tripoli- 
Fezzan  road  where  it  branched  off  towards  Ghat,  and 
made  his  way  with  a  friendly  caravan  to  Touat,  thus 
reversing  the  road  which  the  Emperor  Musa  had  followed 
on  his  famous  pilgrimage.  From  Touat  the  road  to 
Sidjilmessa  and  Fez  was  easy,  except  for  the  incident 
of  a  very  heavy  snowstorm  which  overtook  the  caravan 
shortly  after  leaving  Sidjilmessa  ;  and  having  seen 
practically  the  whole  of  the  black  empire,  which  at  first 
he  so  much  despised  as  to  have  been  tempted  to  turn 
back  on  the  frontier,  Ibn  Batuta  re-entered  Fez  in  the 
early  days  of  January   1354. 

The  curiosity  which  his  travels  excited  at  the  court 
of  Fez  was,  it  is  said,  so  great  that  the  Sultan  himself 
wished  to  hear  his  adventures,  and  after  listening  to  him 
for  several  consecutive  nights,  ordered  that  the  whole 
should  be  drawn  up  and  made  into  a  book.  This  was 
done,  and  the  account,  as  it  now  exists,  was  finished  on 
December  13,  1355. 

This  may  be  regarded  as  the  period  at  which  Melle 


152  A   TROPICAL   DEPENDENCY 

reached  its  greatest  prosperity.  Mansa  Suleiman  reigned 
for  twenty- four  years,  but  he  was  succeeded  by  Mansa 
Djata,  a  vicious  tyrant,  during  whose  reign  of  fourteen 
years  the  decadence  of  the  kingdom  began.  Mansa  Djata, 
far  from  practising  the  frugality  of  his  ancestors,  had  a 
passion  for  expenditure  which  he  carried  to  madness.  He 
spent,  it  is  said,  in  every  kind  of  folly  and  debauchery, 
the  immense  wealth  which  had  been  amassed  by  the  kings 
his  predecessors.  It  was  this  king  who  sold  the  famous 
nugget  which  was  regarded,  we  are  told,  as  one  of  the 
rarest  of  the  public  treasures.  He  died  finally  of  sleeping- 
sickness.  Ibn  Khaldun  describes  the  malady  as  being 
very  common  in  the  country,  but  as  this  is  the  first  instance 
which  we  have  of  it  historically,  the  symptoms  as  then 
recognised  are  perhaps  worth  noting.  It  was  specially 
apt,  Ibn  Khaldun  says,  to  attack  the  upper  classes  of  the 
people.  It  began  by  periodic  attacks,  and  finally  brought 
the  patient  to  such  a  state  that  he  could  not  remain  awake 
for  a  moment.  It  then  declared  itself  permanently,  and 
ended  sooner  or  later  in  death.  The  King  Djata  suffered 
for  two    years  from    periodic    attacks    before    he  died    in 

1374- 

This  was  practically  the  end  of  the  kingdom  of  Melle. 
The  Songhay  kingdom  had  already  asserted  its  inde- 
pendence in  1355,  within  two  years  of  Ibn  Batuta's  visit. 
The  Tuaregs  took  Timbuctoo  in  1434.  In  1468  the 
overthrow  of  the  empire  was  begun  by  Sonni  Ali,  the 
Songhay  precursor  of  the  great  dynasty  of  the  Askias, 
and  the  conquest  of  Melle  by  the  Songhays  was  com- 
pleted in  a  twelve  years'  war  carried  on  by  Askia  the 
Great,  from  1501  to  1513.  It  is  interesting  to  note  that 
in  this  very  year,  15 13,  a  map  was  published  in  Strasburg 
in  which  the  kingdom  of  Melle  appears  under  the  title  of 
Regnum  Musa  Melle  de  Ginovia. 


CHAPTER    XVIII 

MEETING   OF   EASTERN   AND   WESTERN   INFLUENCE 
UPON   THE   NIGER 

It  has  been  said  that  civiHsation  flowed  to  the  Soudan 
from  two  sources.  There  was  a  civilisation  of  the  East, 
and  a  civiHsation  of  the  West.  The  two  streams  flowed 
in  from  different  ends  of  the  country,  and  there  was  a 
point  at  which  they  met  and  overlapped.  We  have  now 
come  to  that  very  interesting  point. 

We  have  seen  in  the  fall  of  Ghana  under  Mohammedan 
influence  the  final  extinction  at  its  most  westerly  limit  of 
an  order  of  civilisation  which  belonged  to  a  different  epoch 
of  the  world's  history.  It  is  probable  that  the  civilisation 
of  Ghana  may  have  drawn  its  original  inspiration  also  from 
the  East.  But  historical  documents  are  wanting.  The 
care  of  students  has  not  been  devoted  to  this  point,  or 
if  it  has,  the  results  of  their  labours  have  been  unfortu- 
nately lost  in  the  many  holocausts  made  by  ignorant 
conquerors  of  learned  libraries.  The  Christians  dis- 
tinguished themselves  in  Spain  by  destroying  Arab 
libraries  wherever  they  conquered  Arab  towns,  and  at  a 
later  period  their  example  was  unhappily  imitated  in  the 
Soudan  by  Moors  and  Fulahs  in  relation  to  the  docu- 
ments of  local  learning. 

Hence  of  the  antique  civilisation  which  preceded  that 
of  the  Middle  Ages  under  the  Tropic  of  Cancer  in  West 
Africa  we  know  but  little.  What  we  know  either  by 
document  or  direct  tradition  is  first  connected  with  the 
rise  of  the  Songhay  people,  and  it  is  at  a  point  farther 
east  than  Ghana,  and  at  a  period  subsequent  to  the 
Mohammedan  domination  of  that  town,  that  the  advancing 


154  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

waves  of  West  and  East  may  be  discerned  as  clearly  meet- 
ing each  other  in  the  Soudan.  In  the  shock  and  amalga- 
mation of  the  two  forces,  black  civilisation  attained  the 
greatest  height  which  it  has  ever  reached  in  modern 
Africa.  The  gentle  nature  of  the  Soudanese  black, 
inoculated  with  intellectual  germs  from  a  long  for- 
gotten civilisation,  would  seem  to  have  allied  itself  in 
the  Songhay  race  with  the  virility  of  the  Arab,  and 
a  result  was  produced  unlike  anything  which  the  world 
had  seen. 

The  sixteenth  century,  so  full  of  interest  to  contem- 
porary Europe,  was  the  period  of  fulfilment  of  this 
development.  The  halcyon  days  of  the  modern  Song- 
hay  Empire  lay  between  the  years  1492  and  1592.  The 
rise  of  the  Songhay  people  dates,  however,  from  a 
much  earlier  period.  Though  in  the  order  of  the  great 
kingdoms  of  the  Soudan  as  they  came  into  touch  with 
the  outer  world  Songhay  succeeds  to  Melle,  it  was  as  a 
matter  of  fact  a  far  older  kingdom.  The  first  true  chapter 
of  its  history,  though  lost  to  us,  had  been  lived  in  the 
aspiration  and  the  efforts  of  its  people,  and  had  resulted 
in  its  own  conquest,  long  before  modern  influences  had 
reached  it,  of  a  level  of  civilisation  higher  than  that  of 
any  of  the  surrounding  countries. 

Hitherto  we  have  taken  the  historians  of  the  Western 
Arabs  for  our  principal  guides.  In  opening  this  new 
chapter  of  the  history  of  the  Soudan  we  abandon  them 
and  turn  to  local  literature.  From  this  point  onward  the 
Soudan  has  its  own  historians.  Chief  amongst  them  in 
regard  to  the  history  of  Songhay  is  the  author  of  the 
TarikJi-es-So2idan,  or  "  History  of  the  Soudan,"  which  has 
within  the  last  few  years  been  translated  into  French  by 
M.  Houdas,  the  eminent  French  Professor  of  the  Oriental 
School  of  Languages.  The  book  is  a  wonderful  docu- 
ment, of  which  the  narrative  dealing  mainly  with  the 
modern  history  of  the  Songhay  Empire  relates  the  rise 
of  this  black  civilisation  through  the  fifteenth  and  sixteenth 


EASTERN    AND   WESTERN    INFLUENCE     155 

centuries,  and  its  decadence  up  to  the  middle  of  the  seven- 
teenth century,  Barth,  who  obtained  some  fragments  of 
an  Arabic  copy  when  he  was  on  his  way  to  Timbuctoo, 
goes  so  far  as  to  say  that  the  book  forms  "  one  of  the  most 
important  additions  that  the  present  age  has  made  to  the 
history  of  mankind."  But  it  is  not  merely  an  authentic 
narrative.  It  is  for  the  unconscious  Hght  which  it  sheds 
upon  the  life,  manners,  politics,  and  literature  of  the 
country  that  it  is  valuable.  Above  all  it  possesses  the 
crowning  quality,  displayed  usually  in  creative  poetry 
alone,  of  presenting  a  vivid  picture  of  the  character  of 
the  men  with  whom  it  deals.  It  has  been  called  the 
"Epic  of  the  Soudan."  It  lacks  the  charm  of  form,  but 
in  all  else  the  description  is  well  merited.  Its  pages 
are  a  treasure-house  of  information  for  the  careful  student,, 
and  the  volume  may  be  read  many  times  without  extract- 
ing from  them  more  than  a  small  part  of  all  that  they 
contain. 

Its  chief  author,  Abdurrahman  Es-sadi,  was  a  black  of 
Timbuctoo,  who  was  born  in  that  town  in  the  year  1596. 
He  came  of  learned  and  distinguished  ancestors,  and  his 
genealogy  is  interesting  because  he  united  in  his  own 
person  three  of  the  most  important  strains  of  blood  in 
the  Soudan.  His  mother  was  a  Haussa  woman.  His 
great-great-grandfather,  he  tells  us,  was  the  first  white — 
that  is,  Berber — Imaum  of  Mansa  Musa's  mosque,  and 
succeeded  that  Katib  Moussa  whose  remarkable  longevity 
and  health  were  mentioned  in  a  previous  chapter.  This 
ancestor  married  a  Fulani  woman,  and  from  the  combina- 
tion of  Berber  and  Fulani  blood  his  father  was  descended 
on  the  maternal  side.  Es-sadi  was  himself  Imaum  of  the 
university  mosque  in  Timbuctoo,  but  he  also  exercised 
the  functions  of  a  notary  at  Jenn^,  where  he  would  seem 
generally  to  have  lived.  In  this  capacity  he  was  frequently 
called  upon  to  prepare  state  papers.  He  was  also  entrusted 
on  various  occasions  with  public  missions,  and  seems  to 
have  had  very  special  opportunities  for  acquiring  informa- 


156  A    TROPICAL   DEPENDENCY 

tion.  He  first  relates  as  an  historian  the  history  of  the 
country  up  to  the  period  of  his  own  manhood,  and  from 
that  time  continues  to  write  as  a  contemporary  of  the 
events  which  he  records  up  to  the  year  1656,  when  pre- 
sumably he  died.  But  a  great  part  of  the  charm  of  the 
Tarikh  consists  in  the  fact  that  it  is  not  the  work  of  one 
hand  alone.  Nor  is  it  always  easy  to  distinguish  when 
Es-sadi  has  ceased  to  write  and  has  given  place  to  some 
other  distinguished  contemporary.  Among  those  whose 
chronicles  are  thus  incorporated  with  his  own  is  Ahmed 
Baba,  the  well-known  historian  of  the  Soudan,  who  at  the 
period  of  the  overthrow  of  the  Songhay  Empire  by  the 
Moors  was  carried  as  a  captive  into  Morocco,  but  was 
so  profoundly  respected  there  for  his  learning  and  philo- 
sophical demeanour  that  he  was  allowed  in  1607  to 
return  to  Timbuctoo,  where  he  died  twenty  years  later. 
Though  an  older  man  than  Es-sadi,  Ahmed  Baba  was 
writing  in  Es-sadi's  lifetime,  and  his  work  is  so  freely 
incorporated  in  the  Tarikh  that  when  Barth  had  the 
book  in  his  hands  in  Gando  he  took  it  to  be  the  work 
of  Ahmed  Baba. 

From  Ahmed  Baba,  who  was  the  descendant  of  a 
long  line  of  learned  ancestors,  we  get  some  charming 
biographical  sketches  ;  amongst  them  many  of  his  own 
family,  which  enable  us  perfectly  to  reconstruct  for 
ourselves  the  cultivated  and  dignified  life  of  letters  in  the 
palmy  days  of  Timbuctoo,  when  Sultans,  however  great, 
felt  themselves  to  be  honoured  by  the  presence  of  the 
learned,  and  to  do  justice  was  recognised  as  the  first 
quality  of  a  gentleman.  Ahmed  Baba  tells  us  of  his  father 
that  he  had  "  a  fine  and  sagacious  mind  and  a  sensitive 
heart,"  that  he  was  as  firm  in  his  dealings  with  kings  as 
he  was  with  other  men,  and  so  earned  their  profound 
respect,  that  he  had  no  hatreds  and  did  justice  to  all. 
He  was  widely  read,  and  very  fond  of  books.  His  well- 
furnished  library  contained  many  rare  and  precious  works, 
and  "he  lent  them  willingly."     This  last-mentioned  form 


EASTERN    AND   WESTERN    INFLUENCE     157 

of  generosity,  greater  in  that  day  than  we  can  easily  now 
imagine,  is  frequently  noted  in  relation  to  the  rich  and 
learned  men  of  Timbuctoo.  Indeed,  Ahmed  Baba  con- 
fesses that  it  sometimes  amazed  him  to  observe  to 
what  extent  it  was  carried.  "  But  this,"  he  adds, 
"they  did  for  the  love  of  men."  His  father  died  in 
1583,  and  the  son  mentions  that  he  had  studied  under 
him  for  some  years,  and  had  obtained  from  him  his 
diplomas  as  a  licentiate  in  several  subjects.  He  was 
himself  born  in  1556,  His  life  and  that  of  Es-sadi, 
therefore,  cover  a  hundred  years  of  a  very  important 
period  of  the  history  of  the  Soudan,  of  which  they 
were  able  to  write  as  contemporaries. 

We  turn  now  to  the  people  with  whom  the  Tarikh  is 
principally  concerned.  The  ancient  capital  of  the  Songhay 
Empire  stood  where  Gao  now  stands  upon  the  Eastern 
Niger,  and  was  generally  called  Kaougha  or  Kaukau  by 
the  ancients.  It  was  situated  within  the  edge  of  the 
summer  rains  upon  the  course  of  the  river,  where,  having 
turned  southward  from  its  most  northerly  extension,  the 
Niger  flows  steadily  from  west,  south-eastward  towards 
the  Gulf  of  Guinea.  The  Tarikh  tells  us  that,  according 
to  tradition,  it  was  from  this  town  that  Pharaoh  obtained 
the  magicians  who  helped  him  in  the  controversy 
which  is  related  in  the  Twentieth  Sourate  of  the 
Koran  as  having  taken  place  between  him  and  Moses. 
Barth,  travelling  through  this  neighbourhood  in  the 
middle  of  the  nineteenth  century,  also  heard  at  Burrum, 
a  little  town  near  Gao,  that  it  had  once  been  a  resi- 
dence of  the  Pharaohs.  An  older  authority  than  either 
the  Tarikh  or  Barth  also,  it  will  be  remembered,  speaks 
of  a  city  in  this  place  inhabited  by  black  dwarfs,  not,  it 
is  true,  at  a  date  so  remote  as  that  of  Moses,  but  still  at 
a  period  of  very  respectable  antiquity ;  for  it  is  here  that 
the  young  men  of  the  adventure  related  by  Herodotus 
found  a  city  built  upon  a  river  which  flowed  from  the 
west  towards  the  east. 


158  A   TROPICAL   DEPENDENCY 

But  the  history  of  the  dwarfs  is  hidden  from  us  as 
completely  as  the  history  of  the  magicians.  If  the  dwarfs 
of  the  Coni^o  forest  ever  did  inhabit  the  vicinity  of  Gao, 
all  that  we  know  of  them  now  is  that,  in  common  with 
other  lower  types  of  black  humanity,  they  were  driven 
by  superior  pressure  from  the  north,  backwards  and  south- 
wards towards  the  equator.  As  for  the  magicians  and 
the  link  which  they  may  have  been  supposed  to  establish 
between  the  contemporary  history  of  Kaougha  and  the 
Egypt  of  the  Pharaohs — if  the  tradition  of  this  is  pre- 
served in  the  annals  of  Egypt,  it  is  all  that  we  have. 
Knowledge  of  the  country  in  which  they  lived  vanishes, 
alas,  in  that  chapter  of  Songhay  civilisation  which  is  lost 
to  us.  The  religion  of  Egypt,  the  art  of  Egypt,  the 
intellectual  fertility  of  Egypt,  even  the  policy  of  Egypt, 
while  they  are  at  times  to  be  traced  as  a  tradition  carried 
in  the  blood  of  this  half  of  the  Western  Soudan,  and 
expressing  itself  unconsciously  in  customary  life,  offer 
yet  a  scarcely  more  definite  outline  to  description  than 
the  impression  of  a  ghostly  hand  laid  by  the  past  upon 
the  present,  and  visible  in  short  glimpses  only  to  the 
eyes  of  faith. 

It  is  perhaps  most  continuously  observable  in  the 
physical  characteristics  of  the  Songhay  race.  Their  skin 
is  black  like  that  of  the  negro,  but  there  is  otherwise 
nothing  negroid  in  their  appearance.  A  modern  writer, 
who  has  had  ample  opportunity  for  observation,  describes 
them  thus:^  "The  nose  of  the  Songhais  is  straight  and 
long,  pointed  rather  than  flat ;  the  lips  are  comparatively 
thin,  the  mouth  wide  rather  than  prominent  and  thick  ; 
while  the  eyes  are  deeply  set  and  straight  in  the  orbit. 
...  It  is  to  the  south  of  the  island  of  Philae  that  we 
find  a  similar  race." 

In  speaking  of  the  people  of  ancient  Egypt,  Herodotus 
informs  us  that  they  were  "  black,  with  curly  hair  "  ;  and 
though  modern  investigations  of  Egyptian  monuments 
have  led   to  the  conclusion  that    there  were  three  races, 

'  Felix  Dubois,  "  Timbuctoo  the  Mysterious,"  p.  97,  Eng.  trans. 


EASTERN    AND   WESTERN    INFLUENCE     159 

of  which  one  was  probably  red,  Hke  the  still  existing  red 
races  of  the  Soudan,  and  another  yellow,  or  practically 
white,  we  yet  draw  from  the  history  of  that  Ethiopian 
people  who  dwelt  to  the  south  of  Philas  a  very  different 
conception  of  the  possibilities  of  black  achievement  from 
any  furnished  by  our  knowledge  of  the  negroid  native 
of  Africa.  The  language  of  the  Songhay  is  also  different 
from  that  of  the  dialects  of  the  Western  Soudan,  and  gives 
proofs  of  Nilotic  extraction. 

The  modern  history  of  this  people  is  supposed  to 
date  from  about  the  year  700  a.d.,  and  it  is  with  this 
alone  that  the  historian  can  deal. 

The  story  which  the  Songhay s  themselves  tell  of  the 
period  which  preceded  this,  and  included  the  foundation 
of  the  first  recorded  dynasty  of  this  era,  is  that  at  a 
period  when  they  were  still  pagans  and  worshipped  a 
river-god,  there  arrived  one  day  at  their  city  two  brothers 
out  of  the  East.  They  were  weary,  travel-stained,  and 
in  so  piteous  a  condition  that  they  had  almost  lost  their 
human  form.  Their  nakedness  was  only  hidden  by  the 
skins  of  wild  beasts  thrown  upon  their  shoulders,  and 
to  the  question  whence  they  came,  the  reply  was  made 
by  one  brother  for  the  other:  '' Dia  men  el  Yemen'' 
(he  comes  from  Yemen).  This  by  the  Songhays,  who 
did  not  speak  Arabic,  was  taken  to  be  a  proper  name, 
and  the  elder  stranger  was  known  by  the  name  of  Dia, 
afterwards  corrupted  to  "  Za "  al  Yemen.  He  was, 
according  to  the  legend,  a  prince  who  had  left  his  native 
land,  attended  only  by  his  brother,  with  the  intention  of 
travelling  over  the  world.  Destiny  had  brought  him  to 
Gao.  He  accepted  the  decree  of  fate  and  remained  in 
the  city.  But  perceiving  that  his  hosts  were  the  wor- 
shippers of  false  gods,  he  killed  the  river-god,  and  "was 
himself  worshipped  in  its  place."  This  was  the  beginning 
of  the  dynasty  who,  like  their  founder,  were  all  known 
by  the  tide  of  "  Za." 

I  give  the  legend  as  commonly  repeated  in  Songhay. 
It  is  perhaps  worth  mentioning  in  connection  with  it  the 


i6o  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

tradition  preserved  in  the  history  of  Egypt  that  when 
the  descendants  of  Misraim  divided  the  land  of  Egypt 
between  them,  a  territory  which  stretched  from  the  present 
position  of  Alexandria  to  the  borders  of  Tripoli  fell  to 
the  portion  of  a  well-beloved  younger  son  called  "  Sa." 
"Sa"  devoted  himself  with  the  greatest  interest  to  his 
kingdom,  and  made  it  very  prosperous.  He  built  towns 
full  of  marvels ;  he  constructed  baths ;  he  had  palaces 
with  stained  glass  windows  and  exquisite  gardens.  He 
erected  statues  bearing  burning-glasses,  and  other  marvels, 
along  the  Mediterranean  coast.  His  explorations  ex- 
tended to  the  Atlantic  on  the  west,  and  far  into  the  desert 
on  the  south. 

Macrizi,  writing  in  the  fifteenth  century,  says  of  the 
towns  which  he  constructed  in  the  desert :  "  The  dwell- 
ings have  disappeared,  their  inhabitants  are  scattered, 
but  the  vestiges  remain ;  and  all  travellers  who  have 
penetrated  into  those  regions  relate  what  they  can  still 
see  among  those  marvellous  ruins." 

This  kingdom  of  "Sa"  covered  the  Tripoli-Fezzan 
caravan  road  into  the  desert.  If  we  may  judge  from  all 
that  is  related  of  its  monuments,  it  must  have  endured 
for  many  generations.  It  is  no  more  difficult  to  believe 
that  two  of  the  princes  of  this  Egyptian  house  of  "  Sa " 
should  have  reached  Gao  by  marching  southwards  through 
the  desert,  than  to  accept  the  story  that  they  came  from 
the  still  more  distant  Arabia.  The  change  of  sound  from 
"  Sa  "  to  "  Za  "  is  less  than  from  "  Dia  "  to  "  Za." 

Whatever  was  their  origin,  the  "  Zas "  reigned  for 
many  generations  over  Songhay,  and  "none  of  them 
believed  in  God,"  till  in  the  year  1009  ^.d.  Za  Kosoi 
accepted  Islam.  It  will  be  observed  that  this  was  nearly 
a  hundred  years  before  Islam  was  generally  accepted 
throughout  the  Soudan. 

The  fact  is  corroborated  by  El  Bekri,  who,  writing 
in  1067,  says  that  the  inhabitants  of  Kaougha  were  then 
Mussulman,  though  the  surrounding  populations  were 
pagan. 


EASTERN    AND    WESTERN    INFLUENCE     i6i 

Under  the  pagan  "  Zas  "  Songhay  influence  extended 
as  far  west  as  the  town  of  Jenne,  which  was  founded  by 
them  in  the  eighth  century,  though  afterwards  cut  off 
from  their  possessions  and  isolated  on  the  westerly  frontier 
of  the  "Bend  of  the  Niger"  by  the  Morabite  invasion 
of  the  Soudan.  Jenn6,  it  will  be  remembered,  maintained 
its  paganism  until  the  twelfth  century  in  the  midst  of  sur- 
rounding Islam,  and,  though  tributary  to  Melle,  kept  the 
independence  of  the  town  until,  as  will  be  seen,  it  was  once 
more  incorporated  with  the  Songhay  Empire  in  or  about 
1477.  The  most  westerly  manifestation  of  the  influence 
of  ancient  Egypt  in  the  Soudan  is  placed  by  the  talented 
author  of  "  Timbuctoo  the  Mysterious"  in  this  town  of 
Jenn6,  where,  when  he  visited  it  at  the  end  of  the  nine- 
teenth century,  he  found,  to  his  amazement,  "a  colony 
of  ancient  Egypt "  in  the  heart  of  the  Soudan.  He 
describes  the  architecture  of  Jenne  as  '*  neither  Arabic 
nor  Byzantine,  Greek  nor  Roman,  still  less  Gothic  nor 
Western."  "At  last,"  he  says,  "  I  recall  these  majestically 
solid  forms,  and  the  memory  is  wafted  to  me  from  the 
other  extremity  of  Africa.  .  .  .  It  is  in  the  ruins  of  ancient 
Egypt,  in  the  valley  of  the  Nile,  that  I  have  seen  this 
art  before." 

Jenne  may  be  taken  as  marking  the  limit  of  pagan 
Songhay  development,  though  at  a  later  period  of  con- 
quest the  dominion  of  the  Songhays  included  the  whole 
of  the  Western  Soudan  from  the  Atlantic  to  Lake  Chad. 
The  Songhay  kingdom  flourished  exceedingly  under  the 
Mohammedan  Zas.  Their  capital  was,  of  all  the  cities  of 
the  blacks,  that  which  had  most  gold.  It  had  also  abund- 
ance of  cotton  and  rice,  and  it  is  at  this  period  that 
Idrisi  says  of  it  that  "  it  was  populous,  commercial,  and 
industrial,  and  that  in  it  was  to  be  found  the  produce  of 
all  arts  and  trades  necessary  for  its  inhabitants." 

After  Za  Kosoi  there  were  twelve  more  Moham- 
medan "Zas"  before  the  country  was  conquered  by  Mansa 
Musa,  and  the  two  sons  of  the  reigning  Za  Yasiboi  were 
taken  by  him  to  be   educated  at  his  court.     After  that 

L 


i62  A   TROPICAL   DEPENDENCY 

four  more  Zas  were  allowed  to  occupy  the  throne,  pre- 
sumably in  the  position  of  tributaries  of  Melle,  while  the 
young  princes  grew  up  at  the  court  of  the  Mansas.  The 
elder  of  the  young  princes,  Ali  Kolon,  was  destined  to 
throw  off  the  yoke  of  Melle  and  to  found  the  new  dynasty 
of  the  Sonnis  upon  the  throne  of  Songhay. 


CHAPTER   XIX 
RISE   OF   THE   SONGHAY    EMPIRE 

When,  on  his  return  from  his  great  pilgrimage  in  1326, 
Mansa  Musa  stopped  at  Gago  and  ordered  the  construc- 
tion of  a  cathedral  mosque,  he  took  away  with  him, 
according  to  the  custom  of  the  kings  of  Melle  in  dealing 
with  the  children  of  vassal  potentates,  the  two  young 
sons  of  Za  Yasiboi,  the  conquered  sovereign,  to  finish 
their  education  at  his  court.  These  boys,  of  whom  the 
elder  was  called  Ali  Kolon,  were  the  sons  of  two  sisters, 
wives  of  Za  Yasiboi,  and  were  both,  as  it  happened,  born 
in  the  same  hour  on  the  same  night.  But  being  both  of 
them  in  the  darkness  laid  side  by  side,  and  not  washed 
until  the  morning,  it  was  never  certain  which  of  the  two 
came  actually  first  into  the  world.  Ali  Kolon  was,  how- 
ever, the  first  washed,  and  therefore  it  was  determined 
that  he  should  have  the  honours  of  the  firstborn.  By 
all  he  was  accepted  as  the  elder,  and  by  none  with  more 
faithful  devotion  than  by  his  younger  brother  Selman,  or 
Suleiman. 

These  brothers,  inspired,  perhaps,  by  the  legend  of 
the  two  other  brothers  to  whom  their  dynasty  owed  its 
foundation,  resolved  in  their  state  of  honourable  captivity 
at  Melle  that  they  would  some  day  return  and  free  Song- 
hay  from  the  yoke  of  the  conqueror.  Ali  Kolon  as  he 
grew  up  showed  himself  to  be  a  man  of  sense  and  intelli- 
gence, and  was  trusted  by  Mansa  Musa  and  his  successor 
with  the  conduct  of  occasional  raids,  presumably  against 
the  cannibals  of  the  pagan  belt,  which  gave  him  cause  for 
traversing  the  empire  in  various  directions.      He  profited 

by  the   opportunity  to  make  himself  acquainted  with  all 

163 


i64  A   TROPICAL   DEPENDENCY 

roads  leading  to  the  east,  and  to  make  deposits  of  arms 
and  provisions  at  important  points.  When  the  time  was 
ripe,  he  communicated  to  his  brother  his  design  to  make 
good  their  escape  from  Melle.  To  this  end  they  care- 
fully trained  their  horses,  preparing  them  to  endure  long 
marches,  and  at  last  boldly  left  the  capital  of  Melle,  riding 
in  the  direction  of  Songhay.  The  king,  hearing  of  their 
flight,  gave  orders  that  they  should  be  pursued  and  killed. 
But  they  had  doubtless  prepared  friends  for  themselves, 
as  well  as  arms  and  resting-places  along  the  roads,  and 
with  many  hairbreadth  escapes  they  eluded  their  pursuers, 
and  succeeded  in  reaching  their  own  country. 

They  succeeded,  too,  in  their  larger  design.  AH 
Kolon  was  hailed  as  king  by  the  Songhays.  For  some 
reason  which  is  not  given,  possibly  connected  with  the 
uncertainty  of  his  birthright,  he  caused  himself  to  be 
proclaimed  by  the  title  not  of  "  Za  "  but  of  "  Sonni,"  thus 
founding  a  new  dynasty — and  under  his  leadership  his 
people  were  delivered  from  the  yoke  of  Melle.  This 
result  was  achieved  in  1355,  nearly  thirty  years  after  he 
had  been  taken  as  a  child  to  the  court  of  Mansa  Musa. 
On  his  death  he  was  succeeded  by  his  faithful  brother 
Suleiman  ;  and  there  were  in  all  seventeen  kings  of  this 
dynasty,  who  continued  to  reign  independently  during  the 
gradual  decadence  of  the  Empire  of  Melle.  But  though 
the  Songhay  kings  succeeded  in  maintaining  their  indepen- 
dence, and  resistance  to  Melle  became  an  inherited  policy 
of  the  race,  there  was  no  important  extension  of  the  limits 
of  Songhay  beyond  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of  the 
capital  until  the  last  and  greatest  prince  of  the  dynasty 
ascended  the  throne.  His  name  was  the  same  as  that 
of  the  first  of  the  Sonnis.  He  also  was  Sonni  Ali,  and 
he  began  to  reign  in  1464. 

At  this  time  the  Tuaregs  were  again  in  possession  of 
Timbuctoo.  They  had  for  a  long  time  ravaged  the  country 
with  impunity  up  to  its  walls,  and  under  a  chief  called 
Akil  they  had  been  tempted  by  the  feeble  condition  of 
Melle  to   make  an  effort   to   recover  their  ancient    town. 


RISE    OF    THE    SONGHAY    EMPIRE      165 

"  A  prince,"  says  the  Tarikh,  "  who  cannot  defend  his 
possessions,  does  not  deserve  to  keep  them."  Melle 
had  accordingly  been  forced  in  1434  to  abandon  Tim- 
buctoo,  and  at  the  date  of  Sonni  Ali's  accession  to  the 
Songhay  throne  the  Tuaregs  had  been  masters  of  the 
town  for  upwards  of  thirty  years. 

Rude  people  as  they  were,  their  conquest  does  not 
seem  at  first  to  have  carried  with  it  any  disastrous  con- 
sequences to  the  life  of  Timbuctoo.  There  had  been  no 
convulsion.  The  sovereignty  of  Melle  had  simply  been 
withdrawn,  and  the  existing  Timbuctoo  Koi,  a  man  of 
eminent  piety  and  learning  of  the  name  of  Mohammed 
Naddi,  had  continued  to  exercise  his  functions.  It  is 
expressly  stated  that  he  had  all  powers  in  his  hands,  that 
under  the  domination  of  the  Sultan  of  Melle  he  was 
already  the  chief  of  the  city,  and  that  his  title  alone  was 
changed  by  the  change  of  government.  Up  to  the  time 
of  his  death  all  went  well,  but  shortly  before  the  accession 
of  Sonni  Ali,  Mohammed  Naddi  died.  A  new  Koi  was 
appointed  whose  authority  was  not  respected,  and  Tim- 
buctoo then  became  a  prey  to  the  "odious  exactions"  of 
the  Tuaregs.  An  epoch  of  violent  tyranny  ensued,  during 
which  desolation  spread  within  its  walls. 

While  the  Tuaregs  had  thus  shorn  Melle  of  power  on 
its  desert  frontier,  the  King  of  Mossi  was  ravaging  its 
territories  from  the  south  ;  and  the  Fulanis  of  Massina 
towards  the  west,  forced  to  defend  themselves  against 
the  inroads  of  Mossi,  were  also  incidentally  strengthening 
their  independence  of  an  empire  which  could  no  longer 
give  them  adequate  protection.  Jenn6,  with  its  7000 
villages,  rich  and  famous  as  the  centre  of  an  extremely 
flourishing  cotton  industry,  remained,  as  ever,  independent. 
Aiwalatin  —  or  Biro,  as  it  is  usually  called  by  Song- 
hay  historians  —  was  fast  becoming,  on  the  far  north- 
western frontier,  the  safest  place  of  residence  in  the 
empire  for  persons  of  peaceful  disposition.  The  dis- 
turbances in  Timbuctoo  were  restoring  Aiwalatin  to  the 
distinction    enjoyed    by    the    Ghana    of   old    days    as    the 


i66  A   TROPICAL   DEPENDENCY 

nearest  point  of  junction  between  the  Soudan  and  the 
civilisation  of  the  Western  world.  It  is  accordingly  to 
Aiwalatin  that  hasty  migrations  of  wealth  and  learning 
are  directed  in  the  yet  more  troublous  days  about  to  fall 
upon  the  once  flourishing  Empire  of  Melle. 

This  was  the  general  position  of  the  western  portion 
of  the  Soudan  when  Sonni  Ali,  last  of  his  race,  but  first 
of  the  great  Songhay  kings  of  modern  times,  ascended 
the  throne.  He  was  one  of  the  born  soldiers  of  the  world, 
and  the  moment  was  favourable  to  the  gratification  of 
military  ambition. 

The  hereditary  enemy  of  his  country,  attacked  by 
rude  and  vigorous  foes  on  all  her  borders,  was  paralysed 
by  internal  decay,  and  a  great  sceptre -was  falling  from 
a  hand  too  weak  to  hold  it.  A  lesser  mind  might  perhaps 
have  been  content  to  join  the  ranks  of  the  enemies  of 
Melle,  and  revenge  old  wrongs  by  helping  forward  a  work 
of  sheer  destruction,  but  Sonni  Ali  would  seem  to  have 
had  wider  views.  Whether,  as  is  probably  the  case  with 
many  a  constructive  genius,  his  work  grew  under  his  hand 
till  he  himself  was  surprised  at  the  dimensions  it  assumed, 
or  whether  he  knew  from  the  first  at  what  he  aimed,  the 
result  is  the  same.  The  Empire  of  the  Soudan  was  the 
heritage  which  the  petty  kings  in  revolt  against  Melle 
purposed  to  divide.  Sonni  Ali  resolved  to  keep  it  intact, 
and  to  take  it  for  himself.  To  this  end  it  was  necessary 
to  overthrow,  not  only  Melle,  but  all  her  foes. 

He  early  perceived  the  strategic  value  to  him  who 
would  rule  the  Soudan  of  that  command  of  the  water 
which  on  wider  fields  has  brought  about  the  creation 
of  great  navies.  The  Niger  was  the  ocean  of  the  desert, 
and  his  first  object  was  to  possess  himself  of  its  shores. 
Fortune  favoured  his  desires.  Shortly  after  his  accession 
an  incident  occurred  at  Timbuctoo  which  gave  him  the 
opening  that  he  required.  It  was  the  custom,  as  has 
already  been  mentioned,  for  the  Koi  to  receive  one-third 
of  the  taxes.  The  Tuareg  Chief  Akil,  who  was  growing 
old  and  infirm,  forbade  this  third  to  be  paid.     "Who  is 


RISE   OF   THE    SONGHAY    EMPIRE      167 

the  Timbuctoo  Koi  ? "  he  contemptuously  asked  on  one 
occasion  of  the  puppet  of  his  own  creation.  "What  is 
the  meaning  of  him?  What  good  is  he  to  me?"  And 
he  distributed  among  his  followers  the  revenue  which 
had  been  set  aside  for  the  Koi.  The  town  was  already- 
seething  with  discontent,  and  the  Koi,  now  at  the  end 
of  his  endurance,  sent  secretly  a  messenger  to  Sonni  Ali 
informing  him  of  the  condition  of  affairs,  and  promising 
to  deliver  the  town  into  his  hands  if  he  would  march 
against  Timbuctoo.  Timbuctoo  is  on  the  north  side  of 
the  river.  In  marching  across  country  from  Gao,  boats 
were  needed  to  transport  an  army  across  the  stream. 
These  it  would  seem  that  the  Timbuctoo  Koi  undertook 
to  provide.  Sonni  Ali  richly  rewarded  the  messenger 
who  brought  him  the  welcome  invitation,  and  marched 
upon  the  town.  But  for  some  reason  the  Timbuctoo  Koi 
was  unable,  or  at  the  last  moment  unwilling,  to  fulfil  his 
promise  of  delivering  Timbuctoo  into  Sonni  All's  hands. 
The  boats  were  not  ready,  and  the  first  approach  from 
the  south  side  of  the  river  was  unavailing.  A  second 
attack  had  to  be  made  from  the  direction  of  Haussaland, 
on  the  north  bank  of  the  river,  where  no  crossing  had  to 
be  effected  and  no  boats  were  needed.  By  the  time  this 
could  be  done,  the  town  had  had  full  warning  of  Sonni 
Ali's  approach.  Opinion  was  much  divided  as  to  the 
gain  likely  to  result  from  a  change  of  rulers.  Measures 
were  apparently  taken  for  defence,  and  there  was  a  great 
exodus  of  the  learned  and  cultivated  towards  the  haven  of 
Aiwalatin. 

The  Tuareg  Chief  Akil  making,  it  is  said,  no  attempt 
to  defend  himself,  headed  a  caravan  of  a  thousand  camels 
with  which  went,  besides  much  valuable  property,  the 
greater  number  of  the  jurisconsults  of  the  university. 
Eminent  names  are  mentioned  in  the  lists,  and  some 
who  lived  to  return  at  a  later  period  to  Timbuctoo,  and 
to  lead  lives  of  high  distinction  under  the  succeeding 
reign,  took  part  in  the  exodus  as  children  of  only  five  and 
six  years  old.      The  craven  Koi  fled  also  to  Aiwalatin. 


i68  A   TROPICAL   DEPENDENCY 

In  connection  with  the  departure  of  this  caravan, 
scenes  are  described  which  throw  a  curious  light  upon 
the  habits  of  the  learned  in  the  remote  universities  of 
the  Soudan  at  that  day.  "  On  the  day  of  departure," 
it  is  said,  "  there  were  to  be  seen  bearded  men  of  middle 
age  trembling  with  fright  at  the  prospect  of  having  to 
bestride  a  camel,  and  falling  helplessly  off  as  the  animal 
rose  from  its  knees."  This  came,  we  are  told,  from  the 
custom  which  existed  amongst  the  "virtuous  ancestors" 
of  the  people  of  Timbuctoo  of  "  keeping  children  so 
close  to  their  apron-strings,  that,  having  while  they 
were  young  never  learned  to  play,  they  grew  up  with- 
out knowing  anything  at  all  of  the  affairs  of  life.  Now 
games  in  the  season  of  youth,"  the  chronicle  gravely 
continues,  "form  the  character  of  man  and  teach  him 
a  very  great  number  of  things."  After  the  exodus  to 
Biro  this  was  recognised.  "  Parents  regretted  from  this 
time  to  have  acted  as  they  had  done,  and  when  they 
afterwards  returned  to  Timbuctoo  they  relaxed  the  con- 
straint which  they  had  been  accustomed  to  impose,  and 
the  children  of  the  learned  were  allowed  the  time  to 
play." 

The  middle-aged  professors  who  tumbled  off  their 
camels  because  they  had  not  practised  athletics  in  their 
youth,  must  have  suffered  considerably  on  the  road  to 
Aiwalatin,  which  was  a  rough  ride  of  500  miles  across 
the  desert.  Their  children — still  the  degenerate  children 
who  had  not  learned  to  play — were  carried  the  whole 
way  on  the  backs  of  faithful  slaves.  But,  having  arrived 
safely  at  Aiwalatin,  the  members  of  the  caravan  had 
reason  to  congratulate  themselves  upon  their  flight,  and 
upon  the  safety  of  such  precious  books  and  manuscripts 
as  they  had  brought  with  them. 

For  Sonni  Ali,  enraged  at  the  unexpected  resistance 
of  the  town,  took  it  by  assault,  sacked  and  burnt  the 
principal  buildings,  and  put  many  of  the  leading  inhabitants 
to  death. 

Three  times  in  the  course   of  its  native  history  Tim- 


RISE    OF   THE    SONGHAY    EMPIRE      169 

buctoo,  says  the  Tarikh,  has  suffered  the  horrors  of  being 
taken  by  assault.  Once  by  the  Sultan  of  Mossi  before  it 
passed  into  the  safe  keeping  of  Mansa  Musa,  once  by 
Sonni  Ali,  and  once  more  again  when  at  the  end  of  its 
period  of  prosperity  it  was  sacked  by  the  Moors  in  1591. 
The  author  of  the  Tarikh,  whose  account  of  the  siege 
we  are  following,  was  the  historian  of  the  Askias,  and  as 
such  was  bound  to  justify  them  at  the  expense  of  Sonni 
Ali.  A  distinct  bias  is  observable  in  all  that  he  has  to 
say  of  him,  and  the  actions  of  that  "  tyrant  and  libertine," 
as  he  usually  calls  him,  receive  no  merciful  interpreta- 
tion at  his  hands.  Of  the  three  assaults  which  Tim- 
buctoo  had  to  sustain,  this,  he  says,  was  the  worst. 
Sonni  Ali  spared  neither  age  nor  sex,  and  "seemed  to 
take  pleasure  in  destroying  or  dishonouring  all  that  was 
most  cultivated  in  Timbuctoo."  It  was  perhaps  the  better 
classes  of  Timbuctoo  who  had  inspired  and  organised 
the  resistance  of  the  town,  and  it  was  upon  them  that 
Sonni  Ali  determined  to  let  his  vengeance  fall. 

He  took  the  town  in  1468,  and  it  is  said  that  for 
three  years  he  continued  to  persecute  the  learned.  Many 
succeeded  in  leaving  Timbuctoo,  and  all  the  members  of 
the  university  who  had  remained  during  the  siege  fled 
to  Aiwalatin.  Others  were  not  so  fortunate  as  those  who 
went  with  the  first  caravan.  On  one  occasion  the  new 
Timbuctoo  Koi  appointed  by  Sonni  Ali  was  ordered  to 
pursue  and  destroy  a  flying  caravan,  and  a  massacre  took 
place  at  Tadgit  in  which  some  of  the  most  eminent  lost 
their  lives.  The  same  fate  overtook  many  of  those  who 
fled  to  different  towns.  It  seemed  for  a  time  as  though 
the  conqueror  had  determined  to  extirpate  learning  from 
the  Soudan.  But  after  three  years  the  persecution 
ceased,  and  the  theory  that  it  was  intended  as  a  punish- 
ment for  a  definite  offence  is  supported  by  the  fact, 
admitted  even  by  the  author  of  the  Tarikh,  that  not- 
withstanding the  persecutions  which  Sonni  Ali  caused 
the  learned  to  endure,  he  did,  nevertheless,  recognise 
their  merits.     He  was  heard  to  say  that  "  without  learn- 


I70  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

ing  life  would  have  neither  pleasure  nor  savour,"  and 
"if  he  injured  some,  he  did  great  good  to  many,  and 
loaded  them  with  favours."  Amongst  other  favours,  in 
keeping  with  the  rude  character  of  the  conqueror,  was 
the  presentation  on  one  occasion  to  the  more  favoured 
"notables,  saints,  and  sages"  of  Timbuctoo  of  a  number 
of  Fulani  women  whom  he  had  captured  in  a  military- 
expedition  against  a  settlement  of  this  people  in  the 
north  of  Gurma.  One  of  the  favoured  was  the  Imaum  of 
the  cathedral  mosque,  the  great-great-grandfather  of  the 
author.  To  him  was  sent  a  very  charming  Fulani  girl 
of  the  name  of  Aicha,  whom,  contrary,  it  would  appear,  to 
the  usual  custom  of  Sonni  Ali  and  his  profligate  favourites, 
he  married.  From  this  marriage,  as  has  been  already 
stated,  was  descended  the  family  of  Es-Sadi. 

The  conqueror's  religion  was  no  more  orthodox  than 
his  morals.  He  was  the  son  of  a  pagan  woman  of  the 
neighbourhood  of  Sokoto,  and  was  deeply  imbued,  it  is 
said,  with  the  superstitions  of  the  race.  He  was  nominally 
Mohammedan,  and  like  Henry  IV.  of  Navarre,  knew  the 
value  of  a  mass.  But  he  cared  nothing  for  these  things. 
In  private  he  habitually  left  his  five  daily  prayers  to  be 
said  when  it  was  convenient,  either  in  the  evening,  or 
perhaps  not  till  the  following  day.  He  would  even  pro- 
fanely call  the  prayers  one  after  another  by  their  names, 
and  without  more  ceremony  dispose  of  them,  saying  :  "  You 
know  my  sentiments,  you  can  divide  them  between  you." 
His  temper  was  violent,  and  he  would  order  men  to  be 
executed  for  trifling  offences  ;  sometimes  this  would  happen 
even  to  those  who  were  his  best  friends  and  to  whom  he 
was  most  attached.  In  such  cases  he  frequently  repented, 
and  in  his  court  it  became  the  custom,  when  the  order 
appeared  unreasonable,  to  hide  the  victim  of  his  indig- 
nation for  a  time,  and  when  the  fit  of  remorse  followed 
upon  anger  to  produce  the  culprit. 

All  this  gave  occasion  for  great  horror  and  dismay 
in  those  circles  of  Timbuctoo  where  it  was  felt  that  in 
exchanging  the  nominal  rule  of  the  Tuaregs — accompanied 


RISE   OF   THE    SONGHAY    EMPIRE      171 

though  it  had  been  with  occasional  outbreaks  of  disorder 
— for  the  heavy  hand  of  Sonni  Ali,  they  had  exchanged 
freedom  for  a  yoke  which  was  almost  too  heavy  to  be 
borne. 

The  only  circumstance  which  rendered  their  fate  toler- 
able was  the  interposition  of  Sonni  Ali's  prime  minister, 
a  man  for  whose  counsels  he  had  a  great  regard,  and  who 
acted  as  a  moderating  influence  upon  him.  This  man, 
whose  name  was  Mohammed  Abou  Bekr  Et-Touri,  was 
a  pure-blooded  black  of  Songhay.  He  was  born  of  well- 
known  parents  in  the  island  of  Neni,  a  little  below  Sinder, 
in  the  Niger,  and  though  he  first  made  his  fame  as  a 
soldier,  being  one  of  the  most  distinguished  generals  of 
Sonni  Ali's  army,  he  was  more  remarkable  for  the  quali- 
ties which  usually  characterise  great  civilians.  He  appears 
to  have  been  a  man  of  liberal  principles  and  large  views, 
naturally  humane,  and  disposed  to  temper  justice  with 
mercy,  more  than  usually  cultivated,  active,  wise,  and 
firm.  He  had  been  fortunate  in  the  circumstances  of  his 
youth.  He  came  of  good  stock.  His  father  was  a  man 
universally  respected.  His  mother  was  a  woman  of  re- 
markable piety,  who  brought  up  her  children  with  care. 
A  brother  of  his  is  mentioned  by  Leo  Africanus — who 
was  by  no  means  disposed  to  be  a  gentle  critic — as  "black 
in  colour  but  most  beautiful  in  mind  and  conditions." 
Mohammed  himself  had  been  brought  up  in  the  strictest 
orthodoxy,  and  throughout  his  life  he  adhered  closely 
to  the  faith  of  his  youth.  He  took  no  part  in  the  luxuries 
and  the  loose  living  of  Sonni  Ali's  court.  Possibly  the 
purity  of  his  life  contributed  no  less  than  the  well-balanced 
power  of  his  mind  to  the  creation  of  the  remarkable 
friendship  which  existed  between  him  and  the  wild 
monarch,  so  unlike  himself  in  every  particular,  except 
that  of  a  certain  greatness  which  they  had  in  common. 
Sonni  Ali,  with  all  his  faults,  had  qualities  which  won  him 
friends.  When  his  name  was  mentioned  with  blame  before 
them,  they  would  say,  "  He  has  been  good  to  me  ;  I  will 
speak  neither  praise  nor  blame."    His  prime  minister  would 


172  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

seem  to  have  been  one  of  these.  For  thirty  years  their 
friendship,  though  often  severely  strained,  never  gave 
way.  The  minister  would  seem  to  have  had  the  rare 
power  of  understanding  the  strength  and  the  weakness 
of  the  character  with  which  he  had  to  deal.  He  ap- 
preciated the  genius  of  Sonni  Ali,  and  entered  into  his 
great  designs.  His  constant  care  was  to  assist  him  in 
carrying  them  out.  At  the  same  time  he  endeavoured 
to  save  both  him  and  the  country  from  the  consequences 
of  the  madness  with  which  in  this  case  genius  seems  to 
have  been  closely  allied. 

It  was  this  minister  who  instituted  at  Sonni  Ali's 
court  the  practice  of  concealing  for  a  time  culprits  capri- 
ciously condemned  to  death.  He  had  the  courage 
frequently  to  disobey  the  unjust  orders  of  his  master, 
and  thus,  while  he  risked  his  own  life,  stood  between 
the  monarch  and  the  defenceless  people  over  whom  he 
ruled.  He  was  enabled  to  do  this,  says  his  chronicler, 
because  God  had  endowed  him  with  a  special  force  of 
character. 

He  had  the  wishes  of  the  people  on  his  side,  and 
often,  when  his  struggles  with  the  conqueror  became 
critical,  his  mother,  it  is  said,  would  cause  prayers  to 
be  offered  in  Timbuctoo  that  the  Almighty  would  sustain 
him  in  his  opposition.  The  picture  is  curious,  of  a 
prime  minister  sustained  by  public  prayer  in  opposition 
to  a  friend  and  tyrant  whose  lightest  word  had  power 
to  end  his  life.  It  serves  to  illustrate  the  typical  relation 
of  Mohammedan  to  pagan  greatness  in  the  country  where 
each  commands,  even  to  this  day,  its  own  form  of  respect. 
Sonni  Ali,  though  nominally  Mohammedan,  was  in  truth 
of  the  pagan  type.  He  was  the  last  of  the  great 
pagans,  and  in  the  double  strain  of  conflict  and  affec- 
tion which  existed  between  him  and  his  minister,  may 
be  seen  reflected  the  conflict  between  enlightenment 
and  natural  instinct,  between  law  and  tyranny,  between 
reason  and  force,  which  form  the  elements  of  the  eternal 
conflict  between  the  higher  and  the  lower  life  of  peoples. 


RISE    OF   THE    SONGHAY    EMPIRE      173 

Yet  through  all  the  conflict  it  reflects  also  the  natural 
affection  of  man  to  the  race  from  which  he  springs,  to 
the  customs  amongst  which  he  was  born,  to  the  aims 
and  aspirations  which  are  the  aims  and  aspirations  of 
his  blood.  Standing  as  they  do  side  by  side  on  the 
field  of  history,  Sonni  Ali  and  his  great  minister  must 
be  taken  as  representing  in  the  Soudan  the  genius  of 
paganism  and  the  genius  of  Islam  clasping  hands  in  a 
last  salute  before  their  respective  roads  cross  and  part. 


CHAPTER    XX 

MILITARY    CONQUESTS   OF   SONNI    ALI 

While  by  the  exertions  of  Mohammed  Abou  Bekr  the  worst 
evils  which  might  have  resulted  from  Sonni  Ali's  adminis- 
tration were  averted,  the  military  genius  of  the  monarch 
himself  extended  the  limits  of  this  administration  year  by 
year.  To  meet  the  requirements  of  the  army  he  imposed 
a  general  military  service  upon  the  people,  and  his  reign 
of  nearly  thirty  years  was  one  long  series  of  campaigns. 
From  Timbuctoo  he  marched  on  Jenne.  That  town,  which 
had  successfully  resisted,  it  is  said,  no  less  than  ninety-nine 
sieges  from  Melle,  cost  him  a  siege  of  seven  years,  seven 
months,  and  seven  days,  during  which  time  his  army  camped 
and  cultivated  the  fertile  fields  by  which  Jenne  is  sur- 
rounded. At  the  end  of  the  siege  the  town  yielded  by 
honourable  capitulation.  No  injury  of  any  kind  was  done  to 
its  inhabitants,  and  the  seven  days  which  are  added  to  the 
period  of  the  siege  were  consumed,  it  is  said,  by  festivities 
on  the  occasion  of  the  marriage  of  Sonni  Ali  with  the 
widow  of  the  ruler  of  the  town,  who  had  died  during  the 
siege.  Thus,  after  about  four  hundred  years  of  separation, 
Jenne  became  once  more  a  portion  of  the  Songhay  Empire. 
The  exact  date  of  the  fall  of  Jenne  is  not  given,  but  it 
was  presumably  towards  the  year  1477,  and  in  the  mean- 
time the  troops  of  Sonni  x\li  had  not  been  idle.  The  entire 
course  of  the  Middle  Niger  was  in  their  general's  hands. 
From  Gago  to  Jenne  he  commanded  the  great  highway  of 
the  Soudan.  He  had  repulsed  Mossi  in  the  south.  He 
had  conquered  Hombori  in  the  Bend  of  the  Niger,  and 
Kanta,  and  other  countries  in  the  east.  A  little  to  the 
north  of  Jenne  on  the  west,  and  again  to  the  south  of  Gago 


CONQUESTS    OF    SONNI    ALI  175 

on  the  east,  he  had  successfully  encountered  the  semi- 
independent  Fulani  rulers,  on  whom  he  had  imposed  his 
suzerainty.  Either  at  this  time  or  later — I  have  been 
unable  to  ascertain  the  exact  date — he  constructed  and 
placed  upon  the  Niger  a  great  fleet  under  the  supreme 
command  of  an  officer  of  high  naval  rank,  corresponding 
to  an  admiral,  whose  headquarters  were  at  the  port  of 
Kabara  near  Timbuctoo.  In  1477-8-9  we  find  him  free 
to  devote  his  principal  efforts  to  the  western  province  and 
to  encounter  his  chief  enemy,  the  King  of  Mossi,  who, 
having  been  driven  from  the  Bend  of  the  Niger,  had 
crossed  the  river,  and,  to  the  terror  of  the  unhappy  pro- 
fessors of  Aiwalatin,  was  making  his  way  over  the  ravaged 
territories  of  Melle  towards  that  town.  The  campaign 
which  ensued  in  the  province  of  Walata  practically  placed 
Melle  in  the  hands  of  Sonni  AH,  although  in  the  year  1480 
Aiwalatin  was  taken  and  occupied  for  a  month  by  the  King 
of  Mossi.  Mossi  was  unable  to  hold  it,  and  was  compelled 
to  withdraw  and  to  abandon  the  booty  which  he  had  seized. 
The  result  of  the  fighting  would  seem  to  have  convinced 
Sonni  Ali  of  the  difficulty  of  holding  and  defending  a 
frontier  town  in  the  isolated  position  of  Aiwalatin  as 
a  part  of  an  empire  of  which  the  river  Niger  was  the 
base,  for  he  conceived  and  put  into  partial  execution  the 
daring  scheme  of  connecting  Aiwalatin  by  water  with 
Timbuctoo  by  means  of  a  canal  which  he  proposed  to 
construct  across  the  desert. 

The  fame  of  Sonni  Ali  by  this  time  had  spread  beyond 
the  limits  of  the  Soudan.  He  was  recognised  in  Northern 
Africa  as  the  most  powerful  of  the  black  sovereigns  of  the 
West,  and  he  is  mentioned  in  European  annals  under  the 
name  of  Sonni  Heli,  King  of  Timbuctoo,  whose  power 
was  acknowledged  as  extending  to  the  West  Atlantic 
coast. 

It  was  a  moment  in  which  African  affairs  were  be- 
ginning to  be  regarded  with  interest  by  European  powers. 
The  Portuguese,  under  Prince  Henry  the  Navigator,  had 
in  the  early  part  of  the  century  begun  that  career  of  ex- 


176  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

ploration  and  settlement  which  was  to  lead  to  the  discovery 
of  the  passage  of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  and  so  to 
revolutionise  European  history.  A  curious  theory  still 
prevailed  amongst  the  ignorant  that  at  the  Equator  the 
sea  ran  dry,  and  that  the  passage  of  ships  would  be  found 
barred  by  sand.  No  sailor  having  as  yet  dared  like 
Columbus  to  put  boldly  out  to  sea,  the  Portuguese  move- 
ment crept  round  the  African  coast,  and  the  sandbanks 
of  the  West  African  harbours  served  during  the  early 
explorations  to  confirm  the  common  view.  Each  was 
taken  in  turn  to  represent  the  last  step  which  could  be 
safely  made.  It  was  considered  a  great  feat  when  a  man 
in  Prince  Henry's  service  courageously  doubled  Cape 
Bogador,  and  two  others  explored  the  coast  at  Angra  de 
Cintra  in  1435.  ^^^  Cape  Blanco  followed  in  1441. 
The  banks  of  Arguin  were  discovered  in  1443,  and  Cape 
Verde  and  the  mouth  of  the  Senegal  in  1444  and  1445. 
Trade  was  opened  on  the  Senegal  with  the  natives,  and 
after  this  the  Portuguese  discovery  of  Gambia,  Sierra 
Leone,  and  the  Gold  Coast,  rapidly  followed.  The  last- 
named  coast  was  explored  by  two  Portuguese  sailors  in 
1 47 1,  and  the  quantity  of  gold  which  they  obtained  was 
so  great  as  to  give  to  their  first  landing-place  the  name 
which  it  has  always  kept  of  The  Mine  or  Elmina.  Within 
a  few  years  the  Portuguese  had  established  trading  stations 
along  the  coast,  and  in  i486,  having  built  a  first  fort  and 
church  at  Elmina,  the  King  of  Portugal  took  the  title 
of  Lord  of  Guinea.  In  1481,  at  the  moment  when  Sonni 
Ali  had  driven  the  King  of  Mossi  out  of  the  province  of 
Walata,  and  was  preparing  to  strengthen  his  own  hold 
upon  the  capital  of  that  province  by  the  construction  of 
a  canal  from  Timbuctoo,  the  Portuguese  had  taken  to 
Lisbon  and  were  receiving  there  with  great  honour  a 
certain  prince  of  the  Joloffs,  or  black  branch  of  the  Fulani 
people,  who  inhabited  the  territory  to  the  south  of  the 
Senegal,  lying  between  that  river  and  the  Atlantic  coast. 
This  visit  is  interesting,  as  giving  one  of  the  earliest 
authentic   descriptions    which    we    possess    of    the    Fulah 


CONQUESTS    OF    SONNI    ALI  177 

in  his  most  westerly  African  home.  The  prince,  whose 
name  was  Bemoy,  is  described  as  "  a  man  of  about  forty 
years  of  age,  of  a  fine  figure  and  generally  well  made. 
He  had  a  long  and  well-trimmed  beard,  and  did  not 
appear  to  be  a  negro,  but  a  prince  to  whom  all  honour 
and  respect  were  due."  He  was  received  by  King  John 
with  the  utmost  distinction.  Fetes,  bull-fights,  and  other 
entertainments  were  given  in  his  honour,  and  he  had 
many  audiences  of  the  king  and  queen.  In  these  inter- 
views he  spoke  well,  and  gave  the  king  most  interesting 
information  about  Negroland,  and  especially  about  the 
King  of  Mossi,  of  whose  defeat  by  Sonni  Ali  he  had  not 
then  heard,  and  whom  he  described  as  "neither  pagan 
nor  Mohammedan,  but  as  conforming  in  many  things  to 
the  views  of  the  Christians."  Mossi  was  at  that  time 
regarded  by  the  pagans  of  the  coast  as  the  greatest  of 
the  kings  of  the  interior — so  little  did  they  know  of  the 
life  and  civilisation  of  the  Nigerian  Soudan.  Bemoy,  who 
would  seem  to  have  been  himself  better  informed,  gave 
it  as  a  proof  of  the  important  position  held  by  Mossi  that 
he  had  not  been  conquered  by  the  King  of  Timbuctoo. 

The  outcome  of  all  this  knowledge  gained  by  the 
Portuguese  was  that  they  conceived  the  idea  of  carrying 
their  trade  from  the  coast  to  the  interior  of  the  country, 
and  that  they  desired  to  gain  the  friendship  of  the  King 
of  Timbuctoo.  They  accordingly  despatched  an  embassy 
to  Sonni  Ali,  asking  for  his  permission  to  establish  a 
trading  station  at  Wadan  in  the  back  country  of  Cape 
Blanco,  within  the  western  borders  of  the  Mellestine. 
Sonni  Ali  acceded  to  their  request,  and  a  Portuguese 
trading  station  was  actually  established  within  his  terri- 
tories at  the  oasis  of  Hoden  or  Wadan  in  the  western 
desert.  The  place  was  unsuitable,  and  it  was  afterwards 
abandoned.  The  fact  of  its  having  existed  for  some  time 
with  the  friendly  recognition  of  the  Songhay  king  is  an 
interesting  indication  of  the  intercourse  with  Europe, 
which  might  have  been  developed  along  the  northern 
trades   routes   of  the    Soudan,    but    for   the    approaching 

M 


178  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

events  in  Spain,  of  which  the  immediate  result  was  to  close 
the  interior  of  Northern  Africa  for  four  hundred  years  to 
Christian  enterprise. 

At  the  same  time  that  the  Portuguese  sent  embassies 
to  the  King  of  Timbuctoo  they  also  sent  an  embassy  to 
Mossi.  They  wished  to  conciliate  his  goodwill  for  their 
trade  upon  the  southern  coast.  But  the  glory  of  Mossi 
was  at  an  end.  After  driving  him  from  Walata  in 
1480,  Sonni  Ali  devoted  himself  for  two  years  to  the 
work  of  constructing  the  canal  which  was  to  join  Tim- 
buctoo with  Aiwalatin.  He  was  himself  engaged  in 
superintending  the  operations  at  a  place  in  the  desert 
called  Chan  -  Fenez,  when  word  was  brought  to  him 
in  1482  that  the  King  of  Mossi  had  assembled  all  his 
forces,  and  was  marching  against  Timbuctoo.  Sonni 
Ali  immediately  abandoned  the  canal,  and  the  place 
which  it  had  reached  when  the  news  was  brought  to 
him  was,  we  are  told,  the  farthest  point  in  the  desert 
which  it  ever  attained.  Placing  himself  at  the  head 
of  his  troops,  he  marched  against  Mossi,  and  completely 
overthrew  him  in  the  year  1483.  He  followed  up  the 
victory  by  pursuing  him  to  the  farthest  limits  of  his 
territories,  and  in  1485-86  he  conquered  the  mountain 
territory  to  the  south.  By  this  conquest  he  carried 
Songhay  arms  far  into  the  pagan  belt.  But  the  moun- 
tain range  in  which  the  Niger  and  the  Senegal  have 
their  sources,  at  the  back  of  Sierra  Leone  and  Sene- 
gambia,  and  which  runs  from  west  to  east  between  the 
tenth  and  eighth  parallels  of  latitude,  until  it  passes  on  to 
become  the  mountains  of  the  Cameroons  in  German  West 
Africa,  would  seem  to  have  been  always  regarded  as  the 
natural  southern  boundary  of  the  Nigerian  Soudan.  On 
the  southern  side  of  this  range,  usually  known  by  the 
name  of  the  Kong  Mountains,  the  country  assumes  that 
swampy  and  tropical  character  which  renders  it  apparently 
unfit  for  the  habitation  of  the  higher  races.  Its  rivers 
run  through  belts  of  oil-palm  and  mangroves  to  the 
coast,  and  it  has  ever  been  the  habitation  of  pagans  and 


CONQUESTS   OF   SONNI    ALI  179 

cannibals.  Sonni  AH  carried  his  arms  no  farther.  The 
pagans  of  the  Gold  Coast  were  left  unmolested  by  his 
victories,  and  it  is  probable  that  the  naked  savages  who 
received  the  Portuguese  at  Elmina  and  Achem,  with 
heads  surmounted  by  the  grinning  masks  of  wild  beasts, 
and  no  other  covering  but  a  palm-leaf  fringe,  were  as 
ignorant  a  hundred  years  later  of  the  existence  of  Songhay 
as  they  were  in  i486.  The  Benins  were  at  this  time 
the  most  powerful  and  the  most  civilised  among  the  coast 
natives,  and  they  were  known  to  the  Portuguese  as  "an 
extremely  cruel  people  who  lived  upon  human  flesh." 

The  conquest  of  Mossi  placed  Sonni  Ali  in  the  posi- 
tion of  having  subdued  all  those  enemies  of  Melle  whom 
he  found  in  arms  at  the  time  of  his  accession.  He  was 
virtually  the  master  of  the  Mellestine,  though  Melle  itself 
still  preserved  a  nominal  independence,  and  the  town  of 
Aiwalatin  enjoyed  a  quasi-separate  position  apart  from  the 
subdued  province  of  Walata  upon  the  frontier.  He  now 
turned  his  arms  against  the  east.  A  campaign  against 
Borgu,  which  lies  south  of  Gurma  on  the  Eastern  Niger, 
was  only  partially  successful.  Details  are  wanting,  but 
the  people  of  Borgu  were  able  at  a  later  period  to  boast 
that  they  had  never  been  conquered.  Some  other  con- 
quests took  place,  of  which  it  is  difficult  to  identify  the 
localities,  and  in  1492  he  undertook  a  campaign  against 
the  Fulani  of  Gurma,  lying  also  in  the  bend  of  the 
Eastern  Niger,  between  Borgu  and  his  capital  of  Gago. 

This  was  his  last  campaign.  Here,  though  success- 
ful, he  lost  his  life.  He  died,  not  as  so  great  a  soldier 
would  have  wished  to  die,  under  the  spears  of  his  enemies, 
but  by  a  trivial  accident  of  fate.  He  was  drowned  in 
the  sudden  flood  of  a  stream  on  his  return  from  his  vic- 
torious expedition.  His  death  occurred  far  from  the 
capital,  and  the  hand  of  ancient  Egypt  is  for  a  moment 
visible  in  the  circumstance  that  his  sons,  who  were 
present,  immediately  disembowelled  the  body  and  filled 
it  with  honey,  that  it  might  be  safely  transported  to 
take  its  place  in  the  tombs  of  his  fathers. 


ISO 


A   TROPICAL   DEPENDENCY 


In  summing  up  Sonni  All's  military  career,  the 
chronicle  says  of  him  :  "He  only  suffered  two  reverses, 
one  at  Duoneo^  and  the  other  in  Borgu.  He  surpassed 
all  the  kings  his  predecessors,  in  the  numbers  and  valour 
of  his  soldiery.  His  conquests  were  many,  and  his 
renown  extended  from  the  rising  to  the  setting  of  the 
sun.      If  it  is  the  will  of  God  he  will  be  long  spoken  of." 

^  Dounna,  a  mountainous  country  in  the  West,  which  had  resisted  Sonni 
Ali,  and  afterwards  fought  Mohammed  El  Hadj  so  well,  that  neither  of  them 
could  achieve  anything  against  its  inhabitants. —  Tarikh^  p.  8r. 


CHAPTER   XXI 
ASKIA   MOHAMMED   ABOU   BEKR 

SoNNi  Ali  was  succeeded  by  his  great  minister,  Mo- 
hammed Abou  Bekr — not  without  fighting.  There  was 
a  minority  who  upheld  the  claim  of  one  of  Sonni  All's 
many  sons,  and  two  great  battles  were  fought  near  Gago. 
The  second  battle  decided  the  question  without  any 
further  doubt,  and  Mohammed  ascended  the  throne, 
supported  by  the  good  wishes  of  every  important  section 
of  the  people.  He  seems  to  have  felt  himself  fully 
justified  in  thus  taking  the  supreme  power,  and  it  is 
said  that  the  title  by  which  he  and  the  dynasty  that 
he  founded  were  known  for  the  next  hundred  years 
had  its  rise  in  his  calm  acceptance  of  the  position.  After 
the  battle  in  which  the  fate  of  Sonni  All's  dynasty 
was  decided,  the  news  of  Mohammed's  accession  was 
brought  to  the  daughters  of  Sonni  Ali.  They  received 
it  with  a  cry  of  "Askia!"  or  "the  Usurper!"  The 
incident  was  related  to  him,  and  instead  of  showing  any 
resentment,  he  said,  "  By  that  title  I  will  be  known." 
By  his  command  his  sovereignty  was  accordingly  pro- 
claimed under  the  title]  of  "  Askia  Mohammed  Abou 
Bekr,"  and  Askia  became  the  royal  title  of  the  Songhay 
kings  until  their  empire  was  overthrown  by  the  Moors. 

Sonni  Ali  had  conquered  an  empire.  The  great 
work  of  the  Askias  was  to  organise  it,  and  to  bring  it 
to  a  condition  of  peace,  prosperity,  and  cultivation,  which 
was  little  suspected  as  existing  in  the  heart  of  the  Soudan 
during  that  century  which  witnessed  in  Europe  the 
expulsion  of  the  Moors  from  Spain,  the  crusade  of 
Charles  V.  against  the  Saracens,  the  victory  of  Lepanto 


I82 


A   TROPICAL   DEPENDENCY 


over  the  Turks,  and  the  closing  of  the  principal  ports  of 
the  Mediterranean  to  the  infidels. 

The  lately  subjected  portions  of  Askia  Mohammed's 
empire  not  unnaturally  seized  the  opportunity  of  a  change 
of  dynasty  to  rebel,  and  in  the  course  of  the  long  reign 
which  lay  before  him  he  fought  perhaps  as  many  cam- 
paigns as  Sonni  Ali.  Nevertheless  his  reign  was,  to 
the  majority  of  his  people,  a  reign  of  peace.  Almost 
his  first  act  was  to  issue  orders  for  the  organisation  of  a 
standing  army — a  scheme  which  had  no  doubt  been  long 
matured — and  by  this  separation  of  the  fighting  element 
from  the  people  he  saved  the  country,  says  his  chronicler, 
from  the  desolating  effects  of  war.  The  industrial  and 
learned  life  of  the  towns  went  on  without  interruption, 
and  one  end  of  the  empire  hardly  knew  whether  the 
other  end  was  at  peace  or  war.  Simultaneously  with 
his  reform  of  the  military  forces  of  the  empire,  he  gave 
his  attention  to  the  Church.  The  orthodox  and  pious, 
whose  voices  had  not  been  heard  during  the  late  reign, 
now  came  from  their  obscurity.  Mohammed  consulted 
frequently  with  the  heads  of  the  Mussulman  communities 
in  all  the  towns,  and  everything  that  could  be  done  to 
improve  the  religious  position  of  the  country  was  under- 
taken. Schools  were  founded,  mosques  were  rebuilt.  A 
new  activity  was  felt  throughout  the  empire. 

Sonni  Ali  died  in  November  of  1492.  Mohammed  was 
occupied  for  nearly  three  years  with  these  first  necessary 
reforms,  and  with  the  subjugation  of  outlying  and  rebellious 
populations.  But  though  he  had  accepted  with  such 
apparent  calm  the  irregularity  of  his  own  position,  it  is 
clear  that  he  was  not  indifferent  to  the  importance  of 
affirming  his  power  by  a  sanction  stronger  than  that  of 
popular  acclamation.  As  soon  as  the  immediate  neces- 
sities of  the  situation  had  been  dealt  with,  and  it  was 
possible  for  him  to  contemplate  a  temporary  absence 
from  the  country,  he  appointed  his  favourite  brother  to 
be  regent  in  his  place,  and  proceeded  to  Mecca  to  make 
the  pilgrimage  and  to  seek  at  Cairo  a  formal  investiture 


ASKIA   MOHAMMED    ABOU    BEKR       183 

at  the  hands  of  the  Caliph  of  Egypt.  The  Turks  had, 
it  will  be  remembered,  long  since  overthrown  the  political 
supremacy  of  the  Caliphs,  and  had  affirmed  their  own 
position  by  the  taking  of  Constantinople  in  1453.  But 
the  Caliphs  of  Egypt  still  kept  their  position  as  the 
religious  head  of  the  Mussulman  world. 

This  pilgrimage  of  Askia  Mohammed,  which  has  kept 
a  place  in  the  annals  of  the  country  side  by  side  with  the 
pilgrimage  undertaken  nearly  two  hundred  years  before 
by  Mansa  Musa,  was  made  the  object,  like  that  earlier 
pilgrimage,  of  the  display  of  some  magnificence.  But 
there  is  a  distinct  progress  observable  in  the  nature  of  the 
display.  The  pilgrimage  of  Askia  Mohammed  does  not 
involve  the  march  of  an  army  of  60,000  persons,  accom- 
panied by  a  baggage  train  of  thousands  of  camels,  to  be 
moved  in  a  slow  royal  progress  round  the  empire.  The 
king  went  accompanied  by  a  brilliant  group  of  the  principal 
notables  and  the  most  holy  and  learned  men  of  the  Soudan. 
It  is  probable  that  he  moved  with  some  state,  for  both 
Marmol  and  Leo  Africanus  inform  us  that  he  kept  a  mag- 
nificent and  well-furnished  court.  But  a  military  escort  of 
500  cavalry  and  1000  infantry  was  considered  sufficient  for 
the  protection  of  his  caravan,  and  there  is  no  mention  that 
he  caused  himself  to  be  preceded,  like  Mansa  Musa  in  pro- 
cession across  the  desert,  by  slaves  dressed  in  silk  brocade 
and  carrying  golden  wands.  Neither  did  he  take  with 
him  eighty  camels  laden  with  gold  dust.  Three  hundred 
thousand  gold  pieces  are  mentioned  as  his  more  portable 
and  convenient  provision  for  financial  necessities.  It  was 
not  in  barbaric  splendour  like  that  of  Mansa  Musa  that 
the  fame  of  Askia's  pilgrimage  consisted,  but  rather  in 
the  distinction  of  the  persons  who  accompanied  him,  of 
whom  Ahmed  Baba  gives  us  some  of  the  biographies, 
and  in  the  great  number  of  learned  doctors  and  noble 
friends  whom  Askia  had  the  opportunity  of  meeting  in 
Cairo  and  in  the  Holy  Cities.  The  friendships  which 
were  here  formed  lasted  for  the  rest  of  his  life,  and  cor- 
respondence with  some  of  the  most  distinguished  men  of 


i84  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

letters  of  the  East,  which  was  at  this  time  entered   into, 
was  never  dropped. 

Es  Soyouti,  the  famous  Arabian  encyclopedist  and 
scholar,  was  one  of  those  who  met  Askia  Mohammed 
during  this  visit  to  the  East,  and  with  whom  the  Songhay 
king  continued  to  correspond.  It  is  said  that  he  never 
afterwards  undertook  a  reform  of  importance  in  the  State 
without  previously  consulting  Es  Soyouti.  All  who  met 
the  king  were  impressed  with  the  keen  interest  which  he 
displayed  on  many  subjects,  his  readiness  to  listen  to  the 
best  opinions,  his  diligent  discussion  with  the  learned,  and 
his  anxiety  to  acquire  information  on  practical  questions. 
Askia  Mohammed  remained  for  two  years  in  the  East, 
during  which  period  he  devoted  much  time  to  study. 
Amongst  subjects  named  as  arresting  his  special  atten- 
tion we  find :  "  Everything  that  concerned  the  govern- 
ment and  administration  of  peoples  ;"  "principles  of  taxa- 
tion, and  especially  land  tax  and  the  tithe  or  tribute  to 
be  taken  from  newly  conquered  peoples  ; "  "  verification 
and  inspection  of  weights  and  measures,  regulation  of 
trade,  laws  of  inheritance,  laws  for  the  suppression  of 
fraud,  customs  duties ; "  "  laws  for  the  suppression  of 
immorality,  and  measures  to  be  taken  for  the  introduction 
of  better  manners  among  the  people."  The  limits  of  re- 
ligious tolerance  and  persecution  also  appear  to  have 
occupied  his  mind,  and  it  is  mentioned  of  him  by  one 
or  two  of  his  biographers  that  he  allowed  himself  to  be 
influenced  by  orthodox  marabouts  in  the  direction  of  the 
persecution  of  the  Jews. 

There  can  be  little  doubt  that  to  a  man  of  his  age, 
having  had  already  thirty  years  of  practical  acquaintance 
with  affairs,  but  having  now  for  the  first  time  the  sense 
of  security  in  his  own  position  and  of  power  to  carry  his 
views  into  operation,  the  visit  under  the  circumstances 
which  seem  to  have  accompanied  it  must  have  been  one 
of  extraordinary  interest  and  importance.  Mohammed 
Abou  Bekr  was  already  a  distinguished  soldier  at  the 
time  of  the  conquest  of  Timbuctoo  in   1468.      He  cannot 


ASKIA    MOHAMMED    ABOU    BEKR       185 

have  been  less  than  fifty  years  of  age  in  1495.  He 
had  been  educated  in  an  island  of  the  Niger,  and  such 
portion  of  his  life  as  had  not  been  spent  in  attendance 
upon  Sonni  Ali  at  one  or  other  of  his  rough  courts  had 
been  spent  in  the  hardest  form  of  active  campaigning  in 
the  tropics.  It  throws  a  remarkable  light  upon  the  vigour 
of  his  mind  and  the  natural  distinction  of  his  character, 
that  at  this  age,  and  having  lived  the  life  which  he  had 
lived,  he  was  able  to  apply  himself  with  the  eagerness  of 
youth  to  the  sources  of  learning,  and,  undeterred  by  dif- 
ferences of  colour,  to  form  friendships  on  equal  terms  with 
men  of  the  orreatest  enlio-htenment  and  hia-hest  intellectual 
activity  which  a  centre  of  civilisation  like  that  of  Egypt 
could  produce. 

The  phases  of  development  of  a  despotic  monarch 
have  a  wide-reaching  influence,  and  it  is  hardly  too  much 
to  say  that  the  course  of  history  in  the  Soudan  was  pro- 
foundly modified  by  this  visit  of  its  sovereign  to  the  East. 

He  accomplished  the  political  and  religious  purposes 
for  which  he  went.  The  cities  of  Mecca  and  Medina 
were  visited,  and  vast  sums  given  in  charity  in  both  towns. 
In  Mecca  he  bought  a  garden  and  established  a  charitable 
institution  for  the  benefit  of  all  future  pilgrims  from  the 
Soudan.  In  Cairo  he  received  investiture  at  the  hands  of 
El  Motawekkel  the  Fourteenth,  Abbasside  Caliph  of 
Egypt.  The  ceremony  included  a  solemn  abdication  on 
Askia's  part  for  three  days  of  the  Songhay  throne.  On  the 
fourth  day  the  Caliph  appointed  him  to  the  position  of 
Lieutenant  of  the  Abbasside  Sultans  in  the  Soudan,  and 
invested  him,  in  sign  of  this  authority,  with  a  turban  and 
cap.  Thus  politically,  but  far  more  intellectually,  was 
Songhay  restored    to    its    ancient    position   as   a   child    of 

Egypt- 

It  is  an  interesting  coincidence  that  1493,  the  year 
in  which  Askia  formed  the  resolution  to  seek  the  religious 
sanction  of  the  head  of  the  Mohammedan  Church  to  his 
occupation  of  the  throne  of  the  Soudan,  was  the  year  in 
which,  in  consequence  of  the  discoveries  made  by  Columbus 


i86  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

in  the  western  hemisphere,  and  the  differences  which 
had  arisen  between  Spain  and  Portugal  with  regard  to 
their  respective  rights  in  the  new  world  opening  to  ex- 
ploration, the  two  great  powers  of  Southern  Europe 
resolved  to  settle  their  controversy  by  reference  to  the 
head  of  the  Christian  Church.  Already,  under  a  Papal 
Bull  of  Martin  V.,  Portugal  had  acquired  supreme  rights 
over  all  non-Christian  territories  which  she  might  discover 
between  Cape  Bogador  and  the  Indies.  Greek  and 
Arabian  geographers,  although  so  well  informed  on  the 
general  geography  of  the  eastern  hemisphere,  had,  up  to 
the  period  of  the  discoveries  of  Columbus,  laid  down  the 
dictum  that  the  "Ocean  Sea"  which  washed  the  western 
borders  of  Europe  and  the  eastern  borders  of  Asia,  sur- 
rounded one-half  of  the  world  without  interruption,  and 
that  in  it  there  existed  absolutely  no  habitable  land.  This 
view  was  accepted  by  enlightened  opinion  in  Europe. 
The  claim  was  therefore  put  forward  by  John  II.  of 
Portugal — the  same  king  who,  in  i486,  had  received  the 
Fulani  Prince  Bemoy  with  so  much  honour  in  Lisbon — 
that  Columbus,  in  sailing  westward  till  he  came  to  land, 
was  likely  to  trespass  upon  territories  already  granted  to 
Portugal  in  the  east.  To  obviate  the  difficulties  which 
might  arise  from  such  undetermined  rights,  Ferdinand 
and  Isabella  appealed  to  the  Pope  to  give  the  sanction 
of  the  Church  to  their  occupation  of  lands  discovered  in 
America;  and,  in  response  to  their  request,  Pope  Alexander 
VI.  issued,  in  May  1493,  the  famous  Bull  by  which  all 
territories,  not  already  in  the  possession  of  Christian 
powers,  and  situated  to  the  east  of  an  imaginary  line  drawn 
from  pole  to  pole  through  what  was  then  believed  to  be 
the  immovable  point  of  non-variation  of  the  compass, 
were  given  to  Portugal,  and  similar  territories  to  the  west 
of  it  were  granted  to  Spain.  The  grant  was  accompanied 
by  an  injunction  to  subdue  and  convert  the  barbarous 
nations  with  whom  either  power  should  come  in  contact, 
and  plenary  indulgence  was  accorded  for  the  souls  of  all 
those    who    should    perish    in    the    conquest.     The    exact 


ASKIA    MOHAMMED    ABOU    BEKR       187 

position  of  the  dividing-line  was  decided  by  a  commission 
which  met  at  Torde^illas  in  January  1494,  and  after  much 
discussion  the  point  through  which  the  Hne  should  pass 
was  fixed  at  370  leagues  west  of  Cape  Verde. 

Thus  it  happened  that  while  Spain  was  about  to  expel 
the  Moors  entirely  from  her  dominions,  and  to  close  the 
ports  of  the  Mediterranean,  so  far  as  lay  in  her  power, 
against  them,  Portugal  was  invested  by  the  Pope  with 
supreme  authority  over  those  territories  of  the  Western 
Soudan  which  the  Spanish  Arabs  had  always  regarded  as 
their  natural  though  unconquered  appanage  in  Africa. 

As  the  resolution  conceived  by  Askia  in  1493  was  not 
carried  out  till  1495,  it  is  possible  in  point  of  time  that 
he  may  have  been  already  acquainted  with  the  move- 
ments that  were  taking  place  in  the  Western  world,  and 
that  his  investiture  by  the  Egyptian  Caliph  was  part  of 
a  general  drawing  together  of  the  Mussulman  forces  in 
the  East.  But  of  this,  if  it  was  so,  we  have  no  trace. 
I  have  been  unable  to  find  any  allusion  to  interest  ex- 
pressed or  felt  in  the  Soudan  in  the  great  discoveries  of 
Columbus  and  Vasco  da  Gama.  Rather  it  would  seem 
that  the  conquest  of  the  Moors  by  Ferdinand  and  Isabella 
in  1492,  shortly  followed  as  it  was  by  the  total  expulsion 
of  that  people  from  Europe,  must  be  regarded  as  closing 
the  connection  of  the  Moors,  and  through  them  of  the 
Soudan,  with  the  progressive  life  and  science  of  the  West. 

Yet  it  was  from  Cairo,  only  a  few  years  before  the 
visit  of  Askia,  that  news  had  been  sent  to  King  John  II. 
of  Portugal  of  a  south  Cape  of  Africa  with  which  Arabian 
mariners,  who  had  long  been  accustomed  to  the  use  of 
compass,  quadrants,  and  sea-charts,  were  well  acquainted. 
It  was  a  matter  of  common  knowledge  to  their  seamen 
that  the  African  continent  terminated  with  a  cape,  and 
that  there  was  no  difficulty  in  the  way  of  sailing  round 
it  to  the  west.  Two  Jews  took  the  information  to  King 
John  that  it  could  be  easily  doubled  from  the  west,  and 
to  prove  their  statement  took  also  with  them  an  Arabic 
map  of  the  African  coast.     In  consequence  of  this  infor- 


i88  A   TROPICAL   DEPENDENCY 

mation,  King  John  was  preparing  the  expedition  of  Vasco 
da  Gama  at  the  time  that  Askia  was  in  Cairo.  The 
interest  aroused  by  the  discoveries  of  Columbus  must 
have  been  great  in  Arabian  as  well  as  European  circles. 
The  geographers  of  the  East  must  have  believed  that  he 
had  reached  the  eastern  shores  of  Asia,  and  as  they  were 
well  acquainted  wMth  the  geography  of  Asia  to  the  farthest 
limits  of  China  and  Japan,  they  must  have  been  greatly 
exercised  to  account  for  the  discrepancy  apparently  dis- 
played in  the  size  of  the  world  as  long  since  measured 
by  the  astronomers  of  India,  and  corrected  and  accepted 
by  the  scientific  observations  of  Greeks  and  Arabs.  These 
matters  must  have  been  subjects  of  discussion  in  intelli- 
gent circles  in  Cairo  during  the  visit  of  the  Askia,  and  he 
must  presumably  have  shared  in  the  general  interest  which 
they  excited. 

He  returned  to  the  Soudan  in  1497,  too  early  to  have 
heard  of  the  result  of  the  expedition  of  Vasco  da  Gama, 
which  in  November  of  that  year  attained  the  object  for 
which  it  was  despatched,  and  succeeded  in  doubling  the 
Cape  of  Good  Hope.  This  last  event  was  one  of  supreme 
importance  to  the  history  of  the  Soudan,  for  it  opened 
the  passage  of  the  Atlantic  to  European  commerce  ;  and, 
in  conjunction  with  the  almost  simultaneous  closing  of 
the  northern  ports  of  Africa  to  Christian  intercourse,  it 
determined  the  fact  that  the  subsequent  approach  of 
Europe  to  West  Africa  should  be  from  the  south  by  sea, 
instead  of,  as  in  all  the  previous  chapters  of  Soudanese 
history,  from  the  north  by  land.  The  frontage  of  the 
Soudan  upon  civilisation  was  reversed. 

But,  as  has  been  seen,  the  southern  portion  of  West 
Africa,  following  the  sinuosities  of  the  Gulf  of  Guinea, 
is  cut  off  from  the  healthier  uplands  by  a  swampy  belt 
of  densely  wooded  malarial  jungle,  backed  by  a  con- 
tinuous range  of  hills.  This  swampy  belt  was,  at  the 
end  of  the  fifteenth  century,  as  it  had  been  from  im- 
memorial antiquity,  the  habitation  of  pagans,  who,  in 
the  estimation  of  their  Arab  chroniclers,   represented  the 


ASKIA    MOHAMMED    ABOU    BEKR       189 

lowest  types  known  to  humanity.  They  were  for  the 
most  part  cannibals,  idolaters,  and  barbarians ;  their 
country  had  been  for  centuries  the  place  of  exile  for  all 
that  was  basest  in  the  Arabian  Soudan  ;  their  people, 
from  the  earliest  ages  of  history,  had  been  regarded  as 
the  lawful  prey  of  the  slave-hunter,  only  differing  by 
the  lesser  value  that  was  placed  upon  them  from  the 
elephants  which  they  hunted  in  the  impenetrable  recesses 
of  their  tropical  jungle.  The  territory  of  these  lower 
tribes,  extending  for  a  couple  of  hundred  miles  inland 
from  the  coast,  offered,  under  their  existing  conditions 
of  transport,  a  practically  impassable  barrier  to  civilised 
exploration.  The  character  of  the  inhabitants,  and  the 
deadly  nature  of  the  climate,  did  not  encourage  the  ex- 
pansion of  European  settlement.  As  will  presently  be 
shown,  the  coast  settlements  of  Europe  for  four  hundred 
years  spread  no  farther  than  a  few  miles  from  the  sea. 
Direct  commercial  intercourse  with  the  interior  was  never 
established  over  the  difficult  and  unfrequented  roads  which 
penetrated  towards  the  higher  lands,  and  from  this  period 
the  relations  of  Europe  with  West  Africa  were  confined 
mainly  to  trade  in  three  lucrative  products  of  the  coast 
— gold,  ivory,  and  slaves.  None  of  these  required  any 
high  state  of  civilisation  to  produce.  All  were  to  be 
obtained  in  profusion  in  the  belt  which  lay  between 
the  mountains  and  the  sea.  The  knowledge  of  what 
lay  beyond  the  mountains  was  lost  to  Europe  by  the 
cessation  of  intercourse  between  Africa  and  Spain.  Ap- 
proach, which  could  not  be  seriously  attempted  from  the 
south,  was  rendered  impossible  from  the  north.  The 
Soudan  of  the  Arabs  was  visited  no  more  by  the  outer 
world,  and  a  civilisation  which  had  been  in  touch  for 
nearly  a  thousand  years  with  the  most  highly  cultivated 
centres  of  European  life  was  silently  buried  in  the  sands 
of  Africa. 


CHAPTER    XXII 

SONGHAY    UNDER    ASKIA    THE    GREAT 

AsKiA  THE  Great,  in  returning  from  Cairo  to  the  Soudan 
in  1497,  had  Httle  knowledge  of  the  strange  destiny  which 
lay  before  his  country.  He  knew,  indeed,  that  the  last 
stronghold  of  the  Moslems  in  Western  Europe  had  been 
conquered  five  years  before  by  the  Christian  sovereigns 
of  Spain.  But  the  expulsion  of  the  Arabs  from  the 
Spanish  Peninsula  had  not  yet  taken  place.  He  was 
probably  acquainted  with  the  authority  given  to  Portugal 
to  prosecute  a  career  of  exploration  and  conquest  on  the 
African  coasts.  But  the  coast  territory  interested  him 
little.  It  was  a  matter  of  no  great  moment  to  him  whose 
armies  raided  with  his  own  upon  the  prolific  populations, 
of  whom  the  experience  of  history  served  to  prove  the 
slave  supply  to  be  inexhaustible.  No  wisdom  could  have 
enabled  him  to  foresee  that  the  whole  current  of  European 
life  would  flow  to  the  channel  opened  by  the  maritime 
enterprise  of  the  Atlantic  nations,  that  the  supremacy 
of  the  East  was  at  an  end,  and  that  his  own  people, 
isolated  in  the  heart  of  Africa,  were  to  be  left  untouched 
by  the  tide  of  a  civilisation  sweeping  past  them  to  fertilise 
the  shores  of  continents  then  unknown. 

To  himself  it  must  have  seemed  that  the  work  which 
lay  before  him  of  reforming  the  administration  of  his 
vast  empire,  and  raising  the  life  of  the  populations 
committed  to  his  care  to  the  level  which  reflection  and 
experience  led  him  to  believe  to  be  attainable,  was  a 
labour  of  absorbing  interest,  and  demanded  the  whole 
activity  of  his  mind. 

Already  past  the  zenith  of  middle  age,  he  must  have 


SONGHAY    UNDER    ASKIA   THE    GREAT     191 

doubted  whether  the  portion  of  Hfe  which  still  remained 
would  be  enough  to  permit  him  to  carry  his  many  schemes 
to  a  point  at  which  their  success  would  ensure  stability. 
It  was,  perhaps,  with  this  thought  in  his  mind  that  he 
had  caused  himself  to  be  accompanied  to  the  East  by 
his  eldest  son  and  heir,  as  well  as  by  a  picked  band  of 
chosen  counsellors  and  ministers.  This  group  of  persons 
who  had  shared  his  experiences,  and  had  no  doubt  been 
admitted  to  his  confidence,  offered  not  only  a  guarantee 
of  the  continuance  of  the  reign  of  enlightened  principles 
in  the  event  of  his  death,  but  also  a  number  of  trained 
instruments,  by  whose  co-operation  his  ideas  of  govern- 
ment might  be  brought  into  effect.  Amongst  these 
he  appears  to  have  been  fortunate  in  possessing  for  his 
principal  minister  just  such  a  faithful  friend  and  coun- 
sellor as  he  had  been  himself,  during  a  term  of  thirty 
years,  to  Sonni  Ali.  Ali  Folen — sometimes  called  Fulan 
or  Fulani — mentioned  amongrst  the  foremost  of  those  who 
accompanied  him  on  the  pilgrimage  of  1495,  remained 
absolutely  devoted  not  only  to  him,  but  to  his  ideas, 
throughout  the  long  reign  which,  though  neither  of  them 
knew  it,  lay  still  before  him.  At  the  end  they  were 
separated  only  in  the  old  age  of  the  then  blind  monarch 
by  the  jealousy  of  others,  who  could  not  tolerate  the 
"mutual  understanding  and  support  which  was  perfect 
between  these  two."  The  man  who  had  been  himself 
a  loyal  friend  was  able  to  accept  and  to  appreciate  the 
loyalty  of  others.  He  freely  trusted  and  freely  used  the 
service  of  his  friends.  He  was  more  than  a  wise 
monarch,  he  was  the  founder  of  a  school,  and  so  long 
as  his  inspiration  lasted,  enlightenment,  order,  and  pros- 
perity were  enjoyed  in  the  Soudan. 

The  institution  of  a  standing  army,  recruited,  no  doubt, 
largely  from  the  slave  and  subject  populations,  had  already 
relieved  the  people  from  one  of  their  most  intolerable 
burdens.  This  was  of  the  utmost  importance,  as  Askia 
found  himself  obliged  to  sustain  an  almost  continuous 
state  of  war.      In  the  first  year  of  his  return  from  Mecca, 


192  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

he  undertook  a  war,  formally  invested  with  all  the  char- 
acteristics of  a  "  Holy  War,"  against  the  Sultan  of  Mossi, 
whose  paganism  it  was  resolved  no  longer  to  tolerate 
within  the  empire.  The  circumstances  of  this  war,  and 
the  devotion  of  Mossi  to  his  idols,  are  related  with  some 
detail,  and  serve  to  dispose  of  the  Portuguese  rumour 
that  Mossi  was  a  Christian  after  the  manner  of  Egypt. 
The  result  of  the  war  was  a  complete  conquest  on  the 
part  of  Askia,  and  the  acceptance  of  Islam  by  the  con- 
quered people.  This,  it  is  expressly  stated,  was  the  only 
"  Holy  War  "  of  Askia's  reign.  He  conquered  all  that  re- 
mained unconquered  of  the  West  as  far  as  the  Atlantic 
Ocean,  and  reasserted  his  authority  to  the  utmost  limits  of 
the  salt  mines  of  Tegazza  and  the  old  north-western  frontiers 
of  the  Mellestine.  Immediately  after  subduing  Mossi,  he 
subdued  the  Fulani  of  the  south-west.  In  1501  he  en- 
trusted his  brother  with  the  command  of  an  army  destined 
for  the  overthrow  of  Melle,  but  the  campaign  proving 
unsuccessful,  he  himself  took  the  field  in  the  following 
year,  and,  having  completely  defeated  the  armies  of  Melle, 
sacked  the  capital  and  carried  the  family  of  the  reign- 
ing prince  into  captivity.  Amongst  the  captives  was  a 
girl  of  the  name  of  Miriam,  who  became  the  mother  of  his 
son  and  subsequent  successor,  Ismail. 

It  is  mentioned  that  after  this  campaign  there  was 
no  more  fighting  for  three  years,  and  Askia  remained  for 
some  time  in  Melle  studying  the  country,  and  devoting  his 
attention  to  the  amelioration  of  its  condition,  and  to  its 
reorganisation  upon  a  new  political  footing.  His  system 
would  seem  to  have  been,  as  was  the  universal  custom  in 
the  confines  of  the  Soudan,  to  allow  the  country  to  remain 
quasi-independent — that  is,  governed  by  its  own  rulers 
under  the  suzerainty  of  Songhay,  to  whom  tribute  was 
paid  and  obedience  in  certain  respects  was  given.  A 
Melle- Koi  is  spoken  of  from  this  time  forward  up 
to  the  period  of  the  overthrow  of  the  country  by  the 
Moors.  But  Askia's  measures  of  reorganisation,  whatever 
they   may  have   been,   can   hardly  have  satisfied  himself, 


SONGHAY    UNDER   ASKIA   THE   GREAT     193 

for  we  read  of  further  campaigns,  or  perhaps  more  pro- 
perly punitive  expeditions,  against  Melle,  which  recurred 
with  sufficient  frequency  to  be  described  by  some  his- 
torians as  a  "twelve  years'  war,"  before  Melle  was 
finally  subdued. 

After  Melle  came  Borgu,  and  here  again  a  captive 
was  taken  who  became  the  mother  of  another  of  the 
sons  of  the  great  Askia.  These  marriages  or  connections 
which  resulted  in  the  birth  of  princes,  recognised  as  royal, 
are  worthy  of  mention,  as  they  represent  a  custom  of  the 
Soudan,  where,  amongst  terms  of  peace,  the  demand  of 
a  wife  for  the  conqueror  from  the  royal  family  of  the 
conquered  almost  invariably  appears.  They  also  indi- 
cate a  gentle  method  by  which  the  amalgamation  of 
conquered  provinces  was  made  secure.  There  was  no 
province  of  the  empire  from  whom  the  future  Emperor 
or  Caliph  of  the  Soudan  might  not  be  taken.  Askia 
the  Great  lived,  as  will  be  seen,  to  an  unusual  old  age. 
There  reigned  after  him  in  succession  four  of  his  sons. 
The  mother  of  the  eldest  of  these,  Askia  Moussa,  was 
taken  from  the  household  of  the  Hombori  Koi,  a  con- 
quest made  in  the  Bend  of  the  Niger  while  Mohammed 
was  still  minister  of  Sonni  Ali.  The  mother  of  the 
second  of  his  successors,  Askia  Ismail,  was  the  Wan- 
kori  girl  first  mentioned,  very  probably  Fulani  by  birth, 
who  was  taken  from  Melle.  The  mother  of  the  third, 
Askia  Ishak,  was  from  Tendirma,  also  the  result  of  a 
conquest  of  the  western  province.  The  mother  of  the 
fourth,  Askia  Daouad,  came  from  Sana,  and  was  the 
daughter  of  the  subject  King  or  Koi  of  that  province. 
Other  marriages,  although  they  did  not  give  successors 
to  the  throne,  gave  personages  of  high  importance  and 
influence  in  the  political  administration  of  the  country. 
Viceroys,  governors,  generals,  admirals,  inspectors,  cadis, 
and  officials  whose  functions  it  is  not  now  easy  to 
determine  but  whose  titles  were  so  eagerly  sought  as 
to  show  them  to  have  been  accompanied  by  consider- 
able   emoluments    and    power,    were    frequently    selected 

N 


194  A   TROPICAL   DEPENDENCY 

from  the  sons  and  nephews  of  the  kings.  Oriental  his- 
tory has  demonstrated  that  such  a  system  has  its  serious 
inconveniences,  and  the  Soudan  was  no  exception  to  the 
rule,  for  if  on  the  one  hand  the  honours  of  the  kingdom 
were  opened  freely  to  the  best  blood  of  every  province, 
the  system  also  created  an  excessive  number  of  claimants 
for  all  preferment,  and  gave  rise  to  labyrinths  of  intrigue, 
which  not  infrequently  upset  for  personal  motives  the  wisest 
plans.  Successions  were  too  often  accompanied  by  the 
private  murder  or  public  massacre  of  superfluous  co-heirs. 

After  the  campaign  against  Borgu,  which  would  appear 
to  have  been  very  severe,  there  followed  further  cam- 
paigns against  Melle,  and  in  15 12  there  arose  in  the  West 
a  Fulani  false  prophet,  Tayenda,  against  whom  the  Askia 
marched  with  success.  Tayenda  was  killed.  His  son 
Kalo  fled  with  the  remnant  of  his  troops  to  the  Fouta 
Djallon,  a  country  which  at  that  time  belonged  to  the 
Djolfs,  and  founded  a  second  Fulani  kingdom,  which 
continued  to  exist  even  after  the  Moorish  conquest  of 
the  Soudan.  Towards  the  end  of  the  same  year,  15 12, 
the  Askia  marched  into  the  Haussa  states. 

The  very  meagre  account  which  we  have  of  the  cam- 
paigns which  appear  to  have  occupied  his  troops  in  that 
region  for  the  next  few  years,  constitute  the  first  mention 
of  any  importance  of  the  Haussa  States  from  the  point 
of  view  of  the  Songhay  Empire.  These  states,  which 
at  the  present  day  constitute  the  greater  part  of 
Northern  Nigeria,  have  a  history  of  their  own  which 
dates  back  as  far  as  that  of  Songhay  itself. 

At  the  time  of  the  Askia's  conquests  in  the  first  half 
of  the  sixteenth  century  they  were  an  agricultural  and 
commercial  people  who,  situated  as  they  were  between 
the  two  powerful  empires  of  Songhay  on  the  one  hand 
and  Bornu  on  the  other,  had  already  suffered  the  tide 
of  conquest  to  sweep  over  them  more  than  once  in  the 
course  of  their  long  existence.  Yet  always  as  the  waters 
of  war  subsided,  they  had  emerged  with  independence,  and 
by  means  partly  of  a  not  despicable  courage  and  partly  of 


SONGHAY    UNDER   ASKIA   THE    GREAT     195 

payments,  which  were  called  either  tribute  or  subsidy 
according  to  the  humour  of  those  who  received  and 
those  who  paid,  they  had  sustained  the  continuity  of 
their  history  and  the  individuality  of  their  political  life. 

Katsena  and  Zaria,  two  of  the  states,  would  seem  to 
have  had  some  cause  of  quarrel  with  their  more  power- 
ful neighbour  Kano,  and  to  have  in  the  first  instance 
solicited  the  intervention  of  the  Askia.  There  are  hints 
of  some  shadowy  claim  of  suzerainty  on  the  part  of 
Songhay,  which  may  have  been  the  survival  of  previous 
and  unrecorded  conquests.  Whatever  the  cause,  Askia 
marched  first  against  Katsena  and  took  it  in  15 13. 
He  also  made  himself  master  of  Zaria  and  Zamfara — 
this  last  province  being  mentioned  as  especially  rich  in 
cotton  and  other  crops — and  proceeded  to  march  against 
Kano  and  Gober.  The  conquest  of  Kano  cost  him  a 
long  siege,  but  both  states  fell  to  his  arms,  nnd  were 
made  tributary  to  Songhay.  He  then  marched  against 
the  Sultan  of  Aghadez,  a  Berber  kingdom  lying  north 
of  the  Haussa  States,  and  stated  by  some  authors  to 
have  been  tributary  to  Songhay.  Tekadda,  in  the  desert 
to  the  west,  was  at  one  time,  as  we  have  seen,  tributary 
to  Melle,  and  causes  of  dispute  between  border  provinces 
were  not  difficult  to  find.  After  a  campaign  which  lasted 
for  two  years  Aghadez  yielded,  and  an  annual  tribute  of 
150,000  ducats  was  imposed  upon  it. 

In  Aghadez  in  the  sixteenth  century  we  have  the 
counterpart  of  Audoghast  in  the  eleventh  century,  and  it 
furnishes  again  an  example  of  a  rich  white  town  ruled  by 
blacks.  Aghadez  was,  we  are  told,  at  the  time  of  the 
Songhay  conquest,  a  wealthy  town  inhabited  by  white 
people,  in  which  the  houses  were  stately  mansions,  built 
after  the  fashion  of  Spain  and  Barbary,  and  the  greater 
part  of  the  citizens  were  either  foreign  merchants,  artificers, 
or  government  officials. 

It  was  on  the  return  of  the  Askia's  armies  from 
this  campaign  that  Kanta,  an  important  chief  of  territory, 
conquered,    as    has    been    mentioned,    some    thirty    years 


196  A   TROPICAL   DEPENDENCY 

previously  by  Sonni  Ali,  dissatisfied  with  the  treatment 
which  had  been  accorded  to  him,  revolted,  and  established 
an  independent  province,  still  known  as  Kanta,  on  the 
eastern  side  of  the  Niger.  At  a  later  date  the  whole 
of  the  province  of  Kebbi  became  subject  to  him.  A 
campaign  directed  specially  against  him  in  the  year 
151 7  was  unavailing.  The  independence  of  Kebbi  was 
maintained  against  all  succeeding  Askias,  though  its 
territory  was  enclosed  in  the  territory  of  Songhay  and 
its  tributaries  on  all  sides,  and  ultimately  Kebbi  became 
the  bulwark  which  saved  Haussaland  from  the  encroach- 
ments of  the  Moors,  when  they  attempted  to  overrun 
it  from  the  west.  During  the  years  1517-18  there  was 
further  successful  fighting  in  the  western  portion  of  the 
empire.  From  this  time  to  the  end  of  the  Askias'  reign 
in  1528  peace  would  seem  to  have  prevailed. 

Askia  the  Great  reigned  altogether  thirty-six  years, 
during  the  whole  of  which  time  his  minister,  Ali  Folen, 
continued  to  be  the  faithful  assistant  of  his  counsels  and 
the  interpreter  of  his  wishes  to  the  people. 

I  have  thought  it  well  very  briefly  to  summarise  the 
military  history  of  the  reign  in  order  that  the  borders 
of  the  empire  over  which  the  rule  of  the  Askia  ex- 
tended might  be  defined,  but  war  was  far  from  being 
the  principal  subject  either  of  the  Askia's  or  of  his 
people's  thoughts.  The  administrative  organisation  of 
the  empire  occupied  his  immediate  care,  and  a  parallel 
of  the  system  which  he  partly  adopted,  and  partly  de- 
veloped, from  the  already  existing  sytem  of  Melle,  may 
perhaps  be  most  nearly  found  in  our  own  early  adminis- 
tration of  India.  Native  rulers  continued  to  occupy 
positions  of  dignity  and  quasi-independence,  and  would 
seem  to  have  been  even  permitted  in  some  cases  to 
levy  troops,  on  the  understanding  that  they  furnished  a 
regular  quota  to  the  imperial  army.  But  the  repre- 
sentatives of  Songhay  were  supreme  in  all  parts  of  the 
empire,  and  over  the  heads  of  the  native  rulers  there 
was  a  complete  network  of  Songhay  administration. 


SONGHAY    UNDER   ASKIA   THE   GREAT     197 

By  the  acquisition  of  the  Haussa  States  the  territory 
of  the  empire  was  carried  from  Bornu  on  the  borders 
of  Lake  Chad  to  the  Atlantic.  The  southern  Hmits  had 
been  securely  extended,  by  the  final  conquest  and  con- 
version of  Mossi  and  the  subjection  of  Borgu,  to  the 
mountains  which  divide  the  uplands  of  the  interior  from 
the  jungle  of  the  coast.  Its  northern  frontier  was  re- 
established on  the  old  limits  of  the  Mellestine,  being  so 
far  enlarged  in  the  north-east  by  the  conquest  of  Aghadez 
as  to  command  the  Tripoli- Fezzan  route  into  the  desert. 
It  already  commanded  the  routes  entering  on  the  west 
from  Sidjilmessa  and  Wargelan.  Thus  Songhay  held 
the  southern  side  of  the  three  already  mentioned  "gates 
of  the  desert,"  and  in  language  of  latitude  and  longitude 
the  empire  may  be  described  as  extending,  in  the  middle 
of  the  sixteenth  century,  from  about  17°  west  to  13°  east, 
and  from  about  10°  to  between  25°  and  30°  north.  Its 
shape,  however,  was  not  that  of  a  parallelogram,  but 
rather  that  of  a  figure  enclosed  within  a  great  semicircle, 
of  which  the  base,  extending  from  the  country  south  of 
Lake  Chad  to  the  Atlantic,  measured  about  2000  miles, 
while  the  greatest  diameter,  taken  at  right  angles  to  the 
base  due  north  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Twat,  measured 
a  little  over  1000  miles. 

For  the  purposes  of  administration  this  vast  empire 
was  divided  into  the  home  provinces  and  the  vice- 
royalties.  There  were  four  vice-royalties.  Beginning 
at  the  west,  the  first  vice-royalty  was  called  Kormina, 
and  was  composed  of  the  south-western  provinces,  in- 
cluding what  remained  of  the  dismembered  Melle,  the 
Fulani  State  of  Masina,  the  country  of  the  pagan 
Bambaras,  and  the  territory  lying  between  the  Niger 
and  the  Atlantic,  up  to  the  limit  at  which  it  met  the 
frontier  line  of  the  second  vice-royalty  known  as  Bal 
or  Bala.  The  vice-royalty  of  Bal  took  in  the  north- 
western provinces,  including  Ghanata,  and  extended  from 
Timbuctoo  to  the  salt-mines  of  Tegazza.  The  frontier 
of  Bal  was  conterminous   in  the  desert  with   the  frontier 


198  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

of  the  third  vice-royalty  of  Bankou,  which  covered  the 
country  extending  north-east  from  the  river  between 
Timbuctoo  and  Kagho  or  Gao.  The  eastern  frontier 
of  Bankou  was  again  conterminous  in  the  desert,  pro- 
bably about  the  limits  of  Tekadda,  with  that  of  the 
great  vice-royalty  of  Dandi,  which  seems  to  have  had 
an  extension  in  the  east  equal  to  that  of  Kormina  in 
the  west.  It  reached  from  the  eastern  end  of  the  southern 
mountains,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  province  now 
known  as  Yoruba,  at  the  back  of  Lagos,  and  after  in- 
cluding Borgu  and  the  country  as  far  north  as  Gao  on 
the  western  side  of  the  Niger,  it  spread  over  the 
eastern  side  of  the  river  as  far  as  Aghadez  in  the  north- 
east, and  across  the  Haussa  States  to  the  borders  of 
Wangara  and  Bornu  near  Lake  Chad. 

The  exact  frontiers  of  the  vice-royalties  are  unknown. 
Presumably  they  did  not  always  remain  the  same.  But 
roughly  speaking,  if  the  Niger  be  divided  into  the  four 
sections  which  have  been  indicated,  that  is,  from  the 
sources  of  the  river  in  the  west  to  Jenne,  from  Jenne 
to  Timbuctoo,  from  Timbuctoo  to  Gao,  and  from  Gao 
to  a  point  above  the  junction  with  the  Benue,  which 
might  perhaps  be  fixed  at  the  Boussa  rapids  above 
Jebba,  radiating  lines  drawn  from  the  meeting  points 
of  those  four  sections  to  the  circumference  of  the  empire 
will  serve  to  give  a  fairly  definite  impression  of  the 
political  division  of  the  outlying  provinces. 

The  territory  which  remained,  and  which  was  en- 
closed between  the  river  and  the  southern  mountains 
in  the  area  now  known  as  the  Bend  of  the  Niger,  was 
divided  into  the  home  provinces.  Of  these  there  were 
several  of  importance.  Amongst  them  may  be  named 
Hombouri,  Sansanding,  and  Bandouk.  The  old  capital 
of  the  empire,  and  the  residence  always  preferred  by  the 
great  Askia,  was  Kagho,  now  represented  only  by  the 
unimportant  little  town  of  Gao.  But  the  true  centre  of 
political,  religious,  and  commercial  life  was  Timbuctoo. 


CHAPTER   XXIII 

SONGHAY  UNDER  ASKIA   THE   GREAT  {continued) 

To  cross  the  dominions  of  the  Askia  was,  we  are  told,  a 
six  months'  journey.  Yet  so  effective  were  the  measures 
taken  by  him  for  its  administration,  that  before  the 
end  of  his  reign,  the  result  is  thus  summarised  by  his 
historian :  "  He  was  obeyed  with  as  much  docility  on 
the  farthest  limits  of  the  empire  as  he  was  in  his  own 
palace,  and  there  reigned  everywhere  great  plenty  and 
absolute  peace." 

He  laboured  unceasingly  to  introduce  the  reforms 
which  he  thought  desirable,  and  to  appoint  to  every 
position  of  importance  men  whom  he  could  trust  to 
supervise  his  measures.  The  reformation  of  the  army 
and  the  church,  which  had  occupied  the  opening  years 
of  his  reign,  represented  but  the  beginning  of  the  care 
which  he  continued  to  bestow  upon  these  two  great 
institutions.  The  evolution  of  systems  of  government 
suitable  to  the  widely  differing  peoples  over  whom  he 
ruled,  the  development  of  trade,  the  protection  of  letters 
and  the  opening  of  communications,  were  among  ques- 
tions to  which  he  gave  much  of  his  time.  Moslem  judges 
were  appointed  in  the  lesser  towns,  which  up  to  this  time 
had  been  content  with  the  services  of  scribes  or  con- 
ciliators ;  and  among  the  biographies  of  upright  judges 
given  to  us  by  Ahmed  Baba  or  Es  Sadi,  the  comment 
is  not  infrequent :  "He  was  one  of  those  appointed  by 
Askia  the  Great."  There  was  a  state  prison  for  political 
offenders,  which  seems  to  have  served  a  purpose  similar 
to  that  of  the  Tower  of  London,  and  the  courtyard  of  the 

prison  of  Kanato  was  no  less  famous  in  local  annals  than 

199 


200  A   TROPICAL   DEPENDENCY 

Tower  Hill.  The  general  rule  would  seem  to  have  been 
a  rule  of  mildness,  but  it  is  to  be  noted  that  inhuman 
punishments  which,  in  their  survival,  shock  the  sentiment 
of  the  twentieth  century,  were  used  on  occasions  which 
called  for  exceptional  severity.  Among  these,  burying 
alive  in  bottle-shaped  holes,  which  were  closed  over  the 
head  of  the  victim,  and  sewing  up  in  the  hides  of  oxen 
or  wild  beasts,  are  two  which  connect  the  criminal  code 
of  Songhay  with  the  past  and  with  the  present.  The 
sewing  up  of  victims  in  the  skins  of  wild  beasts  was, 
it  may  be  remembered,  practised  in  Rome  under  the 
Emperor  Makrinus,  and  was  still  in  use  at  a  much 
later  period.  The  practice  of  burying  alive  remained 
among  the  punishments  of  the  Soudan,  and  was  only 
abolished  in  the  states  acknowledging  British  rule  by  the 
expedition  to  Sokoto  and  Kano  in  1903.  Askia  the 
Great  does  not  seem  to  have  gone  the  length  of  codify- 
ing the  Songhay  laws,  but  the  attention  which  was  given 
to  the  study  of  law,  and  the  long  lists  of  distinguished 
lawyers  who  are  mentioned  in  the  annals  of  this  and  the 
succeeding  reigns,  would  seem  to  indicate  that  Moham- 
medan law  was  generally  accepted  and  practised  through 
the  Songhay  Empire,  with  only  such  local  modification  as 
experience  may  have  suggested.  The  system  of  local 
law  existing  at  the  present  day  in  the  Haussa  States  is 
admirable  in  theory.  In  the  decadence  of  the  country  it 
is  the  administration  of  it  which  has  failed. 

Askia  also  introduced  a  reform  of  the  markets.  A 
unification  of  weights  and  measures  was  drawn  up. 
Inspectors  of  the  markets  —  an  office  which  already 
existed  under  the  Sultans  of  Melle — were  selected  with 
special  care.  They  were  enjoined  to  keep  close  watch 
over  the  introduction  of  the  new  system,  and  any  falsifi- 
cation was  severely  punished.  The  markets  were,  it  is 
said,  rendered  so  honest,  that  a  child  might  go  into  the 
market-place  and  would  bring  back  full  value  for  value 
sent.  The  Niger  was,  of  course,  the  great  highway  of 
commerce,  and  the  towns  situated  upon  it  were  the  prin- 


SONGHAY    UNDER   ASKIA   THE    GREAT     201 

cipal  centres  of  trade.  Jenn6,  which  continued  to  be 
enriched  by  a  great  cotton  industry,  was  looked  upon 
as  the  principal  market  for  internal  trade.  Timbuctoo 
governed  the  trade  of  the  west  and  north-west,  including 
relations  with  Morocco  and  the  coast.  Kagho,  or  Gao, 
governed  the  trade  of  the  east  and  north-east,  including 
relations  with  Egypt  and  Tripoli,  but  in  the  Haussa  States 
Kano  had  long  been  an  important  trading  centre ;  and 
Gober,  Zamfara,  and  Zaria — all  rich  in  local  produce, 
especially  cotton,  for  which  their  soil  and  climate  was 
said  to  be  particularly  fitted — possessed  a  well-established 
and  busy  trade.  Aghadez  formed  a  very  wealthy  station 
on  the  main  north-eastern  trade  route,  and  it  is  not 
improbable  that  the  cause  of  the  war  which  occupied 
the  armies  of  the  Askia  for  two  years  had  its  origin 
in  the  commercial  rivalry  of  that  town  with  the  town 
of  Tekadda,  on  the  borders  of  the  vice-royalty  of 
Bankou. 

Systems  of  banking  and  credit,  which  seem  to  have 
existed  under  the  kings  of  Melle,  were  improved.  Bank- 
ing remained  chiefly  in  the  hands  of  the  Arabs,  from 
whom  letters  of  credit  could  be  procured,  which  were 
operative  throughout  the  Soudan,  and  were  used  by  the 
black  travelling  merchants  as  well  as  by  Arab  traders. 
Commerce,  as  was  to  be  expected,  developed  greatly 
under  the  encouragement  and  security  given  to  it  by 
the  Askia's  measures. 

With  the  increase  of  commerce  and  luxury  came  also 
the  gradual  refinement  and  softening  of  manners  which 
accompany  wealth  in  a  community  where  military  service 
is  no  longer  a  universal  obligation.  The  reforms  of  the 
great  Askia  did  not  neglect  the  department  of  morals. 
The  great  freedom  prevailing  in  the  intercourse  of  men 
and  women  was  among  the  scandals  for  which  he  would 
seem  to  have  endeavoured,  but  without  much  success,  to 
legislate.  He  seems  to  have  instituted  a  body  of  cor- 
rectional police,  who  were  charged  with  the  prevention  of 
any  infringement  of  the  laws.     Women  were  placed  on  the 


202  A   TROPICAL   DEPENDENCY 

same  footing  as  in  the  harems  of  the  East,  and  obliged  to 
veil  themselves  when  they  appeared  in  public.  Never- 
theless, Timbuctoo  remained  ever  celebrated  for  the 
luxury  of  its  habits  and  the  gaiety  and  licence  of  its 
manners.  Music,  dress,  dancing,  and  amusement  formed, 
say  its  indignant  chroniclers,  the  principal  objects  of 
life  to  a  large  portion  of  the  population.  The  immense 
domestic  establishments  of  the  East  would  seem  to  have 
excited  in  the  Askia  no  displeasure.  He  was  himself 
the  father  of  a  hundred  sons,  of  whom  the  youngest  was 
born  when  he  was  ninety  years  of  age.  But  his  influence 
appears  to  have  been  strongly  and  indignantly  excited 
against  forms  of  licence  which  exceeded  the  bounds 
of  this  very  liberal  standard  of  morality.  His  adviser, 
in  respect  to  these  reforms,  was  a  learned  fanatic  of 
the  name  of  El  Mocheili,  whose  writings  remain  to 
attest  the  workings  of  the  royal  mind.  The  Askia's 
own  sons,  less  rigid  in  their  principles  than  their 
father,  did  not  escape  when  punishment  seemed  to 
him  to  be  due  to  their  offences.  El  Mocheili,  whose 
advice  was  at  times  more  enthusiastic  than  discreet, 
was  among  those  who  are  said  to  have  influenced  the 
Askia  in  the  direction  of  the  religious  persecution  of 
the  Jews. 

Another  great  counsellor  of  the  Askia,  whose  name 
has  been  preserved,  was  a  Marabout  of  the  name  of 
Mohammed  Koti,  a  scholar  and  writer  of  great  emi- 
nence, the  author,  amongst  other  things,  of  a  history 
of  the  kingdoms  of  Ghanata,  Songhay,  and  Timbuctoo, 
called  "The  Fatassi,"  which  has  unfortunately  been  lost. 
M.  Felix  Dubois,  who,  after  diligent  search,  was  able  to 
recover  a  few  fragments  of  this  valuable  work,  gives  an 
interesting  account  of  the  destruction  of  the  only  existing 
copy  of  the  history  by  the  Fulani,  as  late  as  the  middle 
of  the  nineteenth  century.  The  author  was  born  in 
1460,  and  survived  Askia  the  Great  by  fourteen  years, 
being  connected  during  the  whole  period  of  the  reign 
with    public   affairs.     Under   the   influence    of    Koti   and 


SONGHAY    UNDER   ASKIA   THE    GREAT     203 

other  distinguished  scholars,  letters  received  well-directed 
sympathy  and  encouragement. 

After  the  siege  of  Aiwalatin  in  1480,  there  began 
a  gradual  but  steady  flow  of  learning  and  cultivation  from 
that  decadent  capital  of  Ghanata  to  Timbuctoo.  The 
death  of  Sonni  Ali  and  the  accession  of  Mohammed  gave 
confidence  to  this  movement,  which  soon  gathered  force 
and  volume,  and  we  are  enabled  to  reconstruct  from 
the  writings  of  Ahmed  Baba,  who  was  himself  born 
during  the  reign  of  Askia  Daouad,  the  fourth  and  last 
reigning  son  of  the  great  Askia,  some  picture  of  the 
intellectual  and  literary  revival  of  Timbuctoo. 

The  University  of  Sankore  would  seem  to  have  been 
a  very  active  centre  of  civilisation.  It  was  attached  to 
the  mosque  of  the  same  name,  and  was  in  correspondence, 
both  by  letter  and  by  the  frequent  visits  of  its  professors, 
with  the  universities  of  North  Africa  and  Egypt.  It 
was  already  in  existence  under  the  rule  of  Melle,  and 
at  that  time  was  in  touch  with  the  universities  of  Spain- 
The  latter  source  of  knowledge  was  now,  of  course,  cut 
off,  by  the  cessation  of  intercourse  between  Spain  and 
Africa.  But,  as  the  first  result  of  the  expulsion  of  the 
Moors  was  to  drive  the  more  learned  Arabs  of  Spain 
into  the  recesses  of  the  University  of  Fez,  the  full  effect 
of  the  measure  had  not  yet  been  felt.  On  the  contrary, 
the  life  of  Timbuctoo  had  probably  received  some  stimu- 
lus from  the  influx  of  learning  to  Morocco.  The  his- 
torians of  Timbuctoo  distinctly  state  that  civilisation  and 
learning  came  to  it  from  the  West.  In  the  middle  of 
the  sixteenth  century  there  existed  in  the  town,  side  by 
side  with  the  luxury  of  the  court  and  the  frivolity  of 
fashion,  a  large  and  learned  society,  living  at  ease,  and 
busily  occupied  with  the  elucidation  of  intellectual  and 
religious  problems.  The  town  swarmed  also  with 
Soudanese  students,  of  whom  we  are  optimistically  told 
that  they  "  were  filled  with  ardour  for  knowledge  and 
virtue." 

The   more   distinguished    professors    would    seem   to 


204  A   TROPICAL   DEPENDENCY 

have  had  schools  in  which  they  gave  courses  of  lectures, 
attended  by  students,  who  afterwards  received  diplomas 
from  the  hands  of  their  masters.  In  the  biographical 
sketches  of  Ahmed  Baba,  the  master  from  whom  diplo- 
mas were  received  is  mentioned  as  regularly  as  the 
school  or  university  in  which  a  man  receives  his  educa- 
tion is  mentioned  in  similar  English  works.  A  sketch 
which  Ahmed  Baba  gives  of  one  of  the  principal  pro- 
fessors under  whom  he  himself  had  studied,  may  serve 
to  indicate  the  type  of  sage  who  was  revered  by  the 
youth  of  Timbuctoo,  and  incidentally  presents  a  picture 
of  local  scholastic  life. 

Mohammed  Abou  Bekr  of  Wankore,  his  pupil  tells 
us,  writing  himself  as  an  old  man  forty  or  fifty  years  later, 
was  "one  of  the  best  of  God's  virtuous  creatures.  He 
was  a  working  scholar,  and  a  man  instinct  with  goodness. 
His  nature  was  as  pure  as  it  was  upright.  He  was  him- 
self so  strongly  impelled  towards  virtue,  and  had  so  high 
an  opinion  of  others,  that  he  always  considered  them  as 
being  so  to  speak  his  equals,  and  as  having  no  knowledge 
of  evil.  He  did  not  believe  in  the  bad  faith  of  the  world, 
but  always  thought  well  of  his  fellow-creatures  until  they 
had  committed  a  fault,  and  even  after  they  had  committed 
a  fault.  Calm  and  dignified,  with  a  natural  distinction 
and  a  modesty  that  rendered  intercourse  with  him  easy, 
he  captured  all  hearts.  Every  one  who  knew  him  loved 
him."  He  taught  during  the  whole  of  a  long  life,  while 
at  the  same  time  he  continued  to  take  an  active  interest, 
and  even  some  part,  in  public  affairs.  The  Sultan,  who 
shared  the  general  respect  for  him,  offered  him  the 
lucrative  appointment  of  Governor  of  the  Palace,  but  he 
refused  it — "God  having,"  he  said,  "delivered  him  from 
such  cares."  He  was  also  offered  the  appointment  of 
principal  preacher  to  the  great  mosque,  but  that  also  he 
prayed  the  Sultan  to  excuse  him  from  accepting.  He 
was  apparently  wealthy,  and  possessed  a  fine  library. 
"His  whole  life  was  given,"  says  Ahmed  Baba,  "to 
the    service    of    others.       He    taught    his    pupils   to   love 


SONGHAY    UNDER   ASKIA   THE    GREAT     205 

science,  to  follow  its  teachings,  to  devote  their  time  to 
it,  to  associate  with  scholars,  and  to  keep  their  minds 
in  a  state  of  docility.  He  lavishly  lent  his  most  precious 
books,  rare  copies,  and  the  volumes  that  he  most  valued, 
and  never  asked  for  them  again,  no  matter  what  was 
the  subject  of  which  they  treated."  Sometimes  "  a 
student  would  present  himself  at  the  door  and  ask  for 
a  book,  and  he  would  give  it  without  even  knowing  who 
the  man  was."  Ahmed  Baba  recalls  with  affection  an 
instance  when  he  himself  wanted  a  rare  work  on  grammar, 
and  the  master  not  only  lent  it,  but  spent  a  long  time 
searching  through  his  library  for  other  works  which 
might  help  to  elucidate  his  pupil's  difficulties.  "  It  was 
astonishing  to  see  him,"  says  Ahmed  Baba;  "and  he 
acted  thus,  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  he  had  a  passion 
for  books,  and  that  he  collected  them  with  ardour, 
both  buying  and  causing  them  to  be  copied."  It  is  not, 
alas!  surprising  to  hear  that  "in  this  way  he  lost  a 
great  quantity  of  his  books." 

His  industry  in  teaching  was  equalled  only  by  his 
patience.  "  When  I  knew  him,"  says  Ahmed  Baba, 
"he  used  to  begin  his  lectures  after  the  first  prayer, 
and  continued  them  until  the  second  prayer  at  half-past 
nine,  varying  the  subjects  of  which  he  treated.  He 
then  returned  home  for  the  prayer,  and  after  it  usually 
went  to  the  cadi  to  occupy  himself  with  public  affairs. 
After  that  he  taught  at  his  own  house  till  mid-day.  He 
joined  the  public  mid-day  prayers,  and  then  continued 
his  lectures  at  home  till  the  fourth  prayer.  Then  he 
went  out  and  lectured  in  another  place  until  twilight. 
After  the  sunset  prayer,  he  taught  in  the  mosque  until 
the  last  night  prayer,  and  then  returned  to  his  own  house. 
No  pupil  was  too  stupid  or  too  ignorant  for  him.  He 
never  allowed  himself  to  be  discouraged,  or  to  despair 
of  gaining  an  entrance  into  the  understanding  of  his 
hearer.  Sometimes,  indeed,  his  patience  with  the  stupid 
was  so  great,  that  the  more  intelligent  members  of  the 
class   were    moved    to    wonder    and    impatience.       "  He 


206  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

must  have  drunk  the  water  of  Zem-Zem  to  be  able 
to  stand  it,"  was  the  comment  of  one  of  Ahmed 
Baba's  fellow-pupils  on  such  an  occasion.  But  Ahmed 
Baba,  in  faithful  remembrance,  forgets  the  impatience 
of  youth,  and  keeps  only  admiration.  "  His  like,"  he 
says,  "will  never  be  found  again."  The  mind  of  this 
teacher  is  described  as  "subtle,  sagacious,  ready,  swift 
to  comprehend.  His  intelligence  was  broad  and  lumi- 
nous. His  usual  manner  was  taciturn  and  grave,  but 
he  would  occasionally  break  into  sallies  of  wit.  He 
occupied  himself  with  what  concerned  him,  listened  to 
no  gossip,  and  took  part  in  no  frivolity,  but  "wrapped 
himself  in  a  magnificent  mantle  of  discretion  and  re- 
serve.     His  hand  held  fast  the  standard  of  continence." 

In  the  atmosphere  of  laborious  calm  which  is  pic- 
tured by  such  a  rule  of  existence,  the  sages  of  Timbuctoo 
would  seem  to  have  lived  and  carried  on  their  labours 
to  advanced  old  age.  It  is  impossible  not  to  be  struck 
by  the  long  periods  of  activity  which  are  assigned  to 
distinguished  scholars.  Ahmed  Baba  himself  was  born 
in  1556,  and  did  not  die  till  1627,  writing  industriously 
during  the  greater  part  of  his  grown-up  life.  Nor  was 
his  career  exceptional  in  this  respect.  Seventy,  eighty, 
and  even  ninety,  are  ages  at  which  men  were  still  fre- 
quently to  be  found  at  work. 

The  study  of  law,  literature,  grammar,  and  theology 
would  seem  to  have  been  more  general  at  Timbuctoo 
than  that  of  the  natural  sciences.  We  hear,  however,  of 
at  least  one  distinguished  geographer,  and  allusions  to 
surgical  science  show  that  the  old  maxim  of  the  Arabian 
schools,  "He  who  studies  anatomy  pleases  God,"  was 
not  forgotten.  At  a  later  date  (16 18)  the  author  of  the 
Tarikh  incidentally  mentions  that  his  brother  came  from 
Jenn6  to  Timbuctoo  to  undergo  an  operation  for  cataract 
at  the  hands  of  a  celebrated  surgeon  there — an  operation 
which  was  wholly  successful.  The  appearance  of  comets,  so 
amazing  to  Europe  of  the  Middle  Ages,  is  also  noted  calmly, 
as  a  matter  of  scientific   interest,  at   Timbuctoo.     Earth- 


SONGHAY    UNDER   ASKIA   THE   GREAT     207 

quakes  and  eclipses  excite  no  great  surprise.  In  the  sketch 
which  has  just  been  quoted  of  Mohammed  Wankore,  the 
teachers  under  whom  this  professor  himself  learnt  Arabic 
are  named,  showing  that  Arabic  was  by  no  means  considered 
to  be  the  language  of  Timbuctoo.  That  language  was 
Songhay,  and  if  the  civilisation  of  Timbuctoo  came  from 
the  West,  it  was  wedded  within  the  city  walls  to  the 
traditions  and  the  forms  of  expression  of  the  East. 

Travellers  give  us  a  picture  of  the  town  as  it  existed 
in  the  early  part  of  the  sixteenth  century.  The  houses, 
which  would  seem  to  have  been  fairly  spacious,  were 
built,  some  say  of  clay,  and  some  of  wood  covered  with 
plaster — the  roofs,  like  the  Dutch  buildings  of  South 
Africa,  being  universally  thatched.  The  mosques  are 
described  as  stately  buildings  of  cut  stone  and  lime,  and 
there  was  a  "princely  palace,"  of  which  the  walls  were 
also  of  cut  stone  and  lime.  There  were  a  great  many 
shops  and  factories,  "especially,"  says  Leo  Africanus,  who 
was  there  in  1526,  "of  such  as  weave  linen  and  cotton 
cloth."  The  court  maintained  by  the  Askias  is  described 
by  Marmol  as  being  so  well  ordered  that  it  yielded  in 
nothing  spiritual  or  temporal  to  the  courts  of  Northern 
Africa.  Under  the  successors  of  Askia  the  Great,  the 
palace  was  enlarged  and  greatly  embellished,  the  court 
being  then  thronged  with  courtiers  in  ever-increasing 
numbers.  The  habits  of  dress  became  sumptuous,  and 
it  would  seem  from  incidental  allusions  that  different 
functionaries  had  their  different  uniforms  and  insignia 
of  office,  to  the  wearing  of  which  great  value  was  at- 
tached. The  dress  and  appointments  of  women  became 
also  extravagantly  luxurious.  They  were  served  on  gold. 
In  full  dress  their  persons  were  covered  with  jewels,  and 
the  wives  of  the  rich  when  they  went  out  were  attended 
by  well-dressed  slaves. 

Amongst  the  possessions  of  the  rich,  large  libraries 
and  good  horses  would  seem,  in  Askia  the  Great's  time, 
to  have  been  the  most  valued.  The  libraries  of  wealthy 
and  learned  citizens  are  frequently  mentioned,  and  horses 


208  A   TROPICAL   DEPENDENCY 

from  Barbary  would  always  fetch  their  price.  The  king 
was  specially  fond  of  horses,  paid  for  them  liberally,  and 
always  caused  himself  to  be  informed  when  good  ones 
were  brought  into  the  town  for  sale.  Gold  plate  was 
also  apparently  remarkable.  Leo  Africanus  says  that  "  the 
rich  king  of  Timbuctoo  had  many  plates  and  sceptres 
of  gold,  of  which  some  weighed  as  much  as  1300  lbs." 
As  we  are  not  told  that  the  Askia  was  waited  on  by  a 
race  of  giants,  we  may  permit  ourselves  to  doubt  the  state- 
ment that  he  caused  himself  to  be  served  on  trays  that 
weighed  1300  lbs.  Yet  we  may  remember  the  famous 
missorium  or  dish  for  the  service  of  the  table,  which  in 
the  sixth  century  was  found  by  the  Franks  in  the  Gothic 
palace  of  Narbonne,  and  of  which  even  the  grave  and 
careful  Gibbon  accepts  the  statement  that  it  weighed  500 
lbs.  of  massy  gold.  Taken  in  conjunction  with  previous 
accounts  of  the  gold  plate  of  the  sovereigns  of  Melle  and 
the  maofnificent  arms  of  their  retainers,  this  statement 
may  at  least  be  accepted  as  showing  that  the  court  of 
the  Askias  was  well  supplied  with  the  precious  metal. 

Among  the  amusements  of  the  town,  music  held 
always  a  high  place,  and  under  Askia  the  Great's  suc- 
cessors, orchestras,  provided  with  singers  of  both  sexes, 
were  much  frequented.  Of  Askia  the  Great  him- 
self, it  is  said  that  "his  mind  was  set  towards  none 
of  these  things."  Chess-playing,  of  a  kind  which  is 
particularly  described  as  "Soudanese  chess,"  was  some- 
times carried  to  the  extreme  of  a  passion.  We  hear 
of  a  general  in  the  reign  of  one  of  the  succeeding 
Askias,  who  gave  it  as  an  excuse  for  allowing  himself 
to  be  surprised  by  the  enemy's  cavalry,  that  he  was  so 
much  absorbed  in  a  game  of  chess  as  not  to  have  paid 
attention  to  the  reports  of  his  scouts.  The  whole  town 
in  Askia  the  Great's  day  was  very  rich,  the  people 
living  with  great  abundance,  and  trade  was  active. 
The  currency  was  of  gold,  without  any  stamp  or  super- 
scription, but  for  small  objects  in  the  native  markets 
shells  were  still  used. 


SONGHAY    UNDER   ASKIA   THE    GREAT     209 

A  very  great  trade  was  done  both  here  and  at 
Kagho  in  cotton,  which  was  exchanged  for  European 
cloth.  Unfortunately  their  relative  value  is  not  men- 
tioned. We  are  told  only  that  the  money  price  of  fine 
European  cloth  was  reckoned  at  fifteen  ducats  an  ell, 
and  for  scarlet  of  Venice  or  Turkey  cloth,  Leo  says 
they  would  give  as  much  as  thirty  ducats  an  ell.  In 
Kagho  he  says  that  it  was  "a  wonder  to  see  what 
plenty  of  merchandise  is  daily  brought  hither,  and  how 
costly  and  sumptuous  all  things  be."  Marmol,  who 
wrote  about  thirty  years  later  than  Leo,  specially 
dwells  upon  the  cotton  trade  of  Jenne,  Melle,  Tim- 
buctoo,  Gober,  Kano,  Zamfara,  and  Bornu.  Both  Leo 
and  Marmol,  who  are  worth  quoting,  as  being  writers 
professedly  antagonistic  to  the  Soudan,  speak  of  the 
great  trade  done  in  manuscripts  and  written  books  from 
Barbary,  which,  they  say,  "are  sold  for  more  money 
than  any  other  merchandise "  ;  and  Leo  was  at  least  so 
far  aware  of  the  literary  life  of  Timbuctoo  as  to  note 
that  "  Here  are  great  store  of  doctors,  judges,  priests, 
and  other  learned  men." 

It  is  interesting  and  remarkable  that  while  Tim- 
buctoo undoubtedly  dominated  the  life  of  the  Songhay 
Empire,  and  was  the  first  town  of  the  Soudan,  many 
other  towns  are  almost  equally  noticed  by  travellers  for 
their  trade  and  for  the  learning  of  which  they  were  the 
centre.  Marmol,  writing  in  the  reign  of  Askia  Daouad, 
speaks  of  Melle  as  not  only  rich  in  trade  but  also  in 
learning,  having  its  own  schools  of  science  and  religion. 
The  writers  of  Timbuctoo  themselves  make  frequent 
allusions  to  learned  doctors  of  Melle,  Aiwalatin,  Jenne, 
and  Katsena.  In  Masina  also  there  were  an  "immense 
number  of  distinguished  men  of  letters  and  divines." 
Even  the  far  distant  Tekadda  is  named  as  the  seat  in 
which  El  Mocheili  chose  to  establish  his  school,  when, 
as  a  consequence  of  his  fanatical  hatred  of  the  Jews, 
he  was  driven  from  the  western  part  of  the  Soudan. 
Marmol    says    that    in    his    day    Songhay    was    the    lan- 

o 


2IO  A   TROPICAL   DEPENDENCY 

guage  commonly  spoken  in  Ghanata,  that  is,  the  most 
westerly  of  the  provinces  of  the  empire.  The  state- 
ment sounds  improbable,  as  seventy-five  years  of  a 
mild  foreign  rule  would  hardly  suffice  to  change  the 
language  of  a  people;  but  it  is  possible  that  Songhay 
may  have  been  the  officially  adopted  language  of  the 
empire. 


CHAPTER    XXIV 

THE   LATER   ASKIAS 

AsKiA  THE  Great  reigned  for  thirty-six  years.  It  is 
sorrowful  to  have  to  relate  that  he  was  not  allowed  to 
finish  his  life  upon  the  throne  which  he  had  so  con- 
spicuously adorned.  In  1528  he,  being-  by  that  time 
blind,  and  being  supposed  to  have  fallen  too  com- 
pletely under  the  influence  of  Ali  Folen,  was  deposed 
by  his  eldest  son,  who  ascended  the  throne  under  the 
title  of  Askia  Moussa,  and  reigned  only  for  three  years. 
During  his  reign  the  old  Askia  lived  in  comfort  in 
his  favourite  palace  and  farm  near  Kagho ;  while  Ali 
Folen,  after  a  first  flight  to  Aiwalatin,  made  his  way 
to  Kano  with  the  intention  of  performing  once  again 
the  pilgrimage  to  Mecca,  but,  falling  ill,  died  and 
was  buried  in  that  town.  On  the  death  of  Moussa 
the  throne  of  the  Askias  was  usurped  by  a  nephew, 
Mohammed  Benkan,  the  son  of  the  great  Askia's 
favourite  and  profoundly  trusted  brother.  The  son  did 
not  repay  with  gratitude  the  many  favours  which  his 
dead  father  had  received.  Not  content  with  sitting  on 
the  Askia's  throne,  he  removed  the  blind  old  man  from 
his  palace,  and  confined  him  in  miserable  quarters  on 
an  island  in  the  Niger.  But  his  ill-doing  brought  de- 
served punishment  in  its  train. 

In  an  interview  which  is  related  as  taking  place 
between  the  deposed  monarch  and  his  son  Ismail — a 
young  man  of  twenty-seven  years  of  age,  who  came  to 
visit  him  one  night  in  the  island  in  which  he  was  con- 
fined— we  see  the  vigour  which  had  inspired  the  life 
of  the  old   Askia  still  unextinguished.      Ismail   sat  down 


212  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

before  his  father.  The  Askia,  taking  hold  of  his  son's 
arm,  said:  "Heavens!  how  can  an  arm  Hke  this  allow 
mosquitoes  to  devour  me,  and  frogs  to  leap  upon 
me,  when  there  is  nothing  which  so  revolts  me  ? " 
Ismail,  the  son  of  that  Miriam  who  was  married  after 
the  great  campaign  of  Melle,  was  an  upright  but  not 
brilliant  representative  of  his  father's  stock.  He  replied 
with  grief  that  he  could  do  nothing.  The  Askia 
answered  by  telling  him  where  there  was  a  secret  stock 
of  money ;  who  were  the  men  that  he  could  trust ;  how 
he  was  to  come  into  touch  with  them  ;  and,  sitting  in 
his  miserable  dungeon  in  all  the  feebleness  of  blind  old 
age,  the  still  unconquered  monarch  planned  and  dictated 
a  scheme  by  which  his  unworthy  nephew  was  removed 
from  the  throne  he  had  usurped,  and  Ismail  was  seated 
upon  it  in  his  place.  Under  the  protection  of  Ismail 
the  old  Askia  returned  with  honour  to  his  palace,  and 
died  there  in  1538  at  an  age  which  cannot  have  been 
far  short  of  a  hundred. 

Ismail  reigned  only  two  years,  and  was  succeeded 
in  1539  by  his  brother  Ishak,  a  cruel  but  very  able 
prince,  who,  after  a  reign  of  nearly  ten  years,  was  suc- 
ceeded in  his  turn  by  another  brother,  Askia  Daouad, 
the  most  distinguished  of  all  the  great  Askia's  sons. 
Askia  Daouad  reigned  from  1548  to  1582.  After  him 
three  more  Askias  of  the  next  generation  brought  this 
brilliant  period  of  the  history  of  the  Soudan  to  an  end. 
When  Ishak,  the  son  of  Askia  Mohammed,  was  at  the 
height  of  his  power,  Muley  Hamed,  the  Sultan  of 
Morocco,  called  upon  him  to  give  up  his  right  to  the 
great  western  salt  mine  of  Tegazza.  His  spirited  answer, 
read  by  the  light  of  subsequent  history,  has  a  prophetic 
ring.  "  The  Hamed  who  makes  such  a  demand,"  he 
replied,  "can  hardly  be  the  great  Emperor  of  Morocco; 
the  Ishak  who  can  listen  to  it  is  not  I.  That  Ishak 
has  still  to  be  born."  The  Ishak  who  would  listen 
was  born  in  the  next  generation  of  Askias,  and  it  was 
under   Ishak  II.   in    1591   that  the  salt  mines  were  taken. 


THE    LATER    ASKIAS  213 

and    the    Empire    of    Songhay    was    overthrown    by    the 
Moors. 

Under  Askia  Daouad  we  hear  of  the  murder  of 
the  Songhay  governor  of  Tegazza  by  the  instigation  of 
the  Emperor  of  Morocco.  Work  at  the  salt  mines  be- 
came so  dangerous,  and  the  interruption  of  the  salt  trade 
was  so  frequent,  that  Askia  Daouad  was  led  to  authorise 
the  opening  of  another  salt  mine  which  was  found 
in  the  desert ;  but  Askia  Daouad  abated  nothing  of 
the  claims  of  his  father,  although  he  and  a  succeeding 
Muley  Ahmed  came  to  a  friendly  understanding.  Be- 
fore the  end  of  the  sixteenth  century,  conflict  between 
the  troops  of  Songhay  and  the  troops  of  Morocco,  on 
the  question  of  the  salt  mines,  was  clearly  becoming 
inevitable. 

Under  Askia  Daouad  military  expeditions  were  re- 
newed on  all  the  borders  of  the  empire.  Melle  and 
the  Fulani  provinces  of  the  west — Mossi,  Borgu,  Boussa, 
Gurma,  all  in  turn  gave  occasion  for  the  exercise  of 
military  activity.  It  is  during  the  military  expeditions 
of  Askia  Daouad  that  we  get  definite  accounts  of  the 
contingents  furnished  by  subordinate  Kois.  Two  Kois 
are  mentioned  in  one  of  the  western  campaigns  as  fur- 
nishing 12,000  men  each,  which,  it  is  said,  was  their 
regular  contingent.  An  expedition  was  sent  also  into 
the  Haussa  States,  and  the  campaign  against  Katsena 
in  1554  was  remarkable  for  an  incident  which  did  equal 
honour  to  both  sides.  In  an  encounter  between  the 
Songhay  and  the  Haussa  troops,  twenty  -  four  picked 
cavaliers  of  Songhay  sustained  a  long  and  desperate 
struggle  against  a  regiment  of  400  Haussa  soldiers. 
They  were  at  last  overpowered,  fifteen  of  them  being 
killed.  The  remaining  nine,  all  badly  wounded,  were 
taken  prisoners,  and  the  Haussa  soldiers  were  so  im- 
pressed by  their  courage  that  they  dressed  their  wounds, 
nursed  them  with  the  greatest  care,  supplied  their  wants, 
and  then  set  them  at  liberty,  sending  them  back  to 
Askia   Daouad  with   the   courteous  assurance   that    "men 


214  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

so  brave  should  not  be  allowed  to  die."  Other  expeditions 
occupied  the  greater  part  of  this  reign.  As  a  result  of 
a  successful  campaign  in  Melle  in  1559,  Askia  Daouad, 
like  his  father,  married  a  daughter  of  the  house  of  Melle. 
Here  is  the  description,  given  by  the  Tarikh,  of  her 
bridal  train  :  "He  caused  the  princess  to  be  conducted 
to  Songhay  in  a  sumptuous  equipage.  She  was  covered 
with  jewels,  surrounded  by  numerous  slaves,  both  men 
and  women,  and  provided  with  an  abundant  baggage 
train.  All  the  utensils  of  the  household  were  of  gold — 
dishes,  pitchers,  pestle  and  mortar,  everything."  Under 
Askia  Daouad  the  town  of  Timbuctoo  was  much  em- 
bellished. The  great  mosque  of  Mansa  Musa  was 
restored  and  enlarged.  Two  other  mosques  were  also 
rebuilt,  and  the  restoration  of  the  Sankore  Mosque  was 
begun.  These  works  were  all  undertaken  and  carried 
out  under  the  inspiration  of  a  very  public-spirited  cadi, 
whose  name,  El-Aquib,  deserves  to  be  remembered  as 
a  representative  of  illustrious  learning,  fearless  justice, 
and  disinterested  devotion  to  public  duty.  Askia  Daouad 
himself  contributed  handsomely  to  the  rebuilding  of  the 
great  mosque. 

The  last  military  expedition  of  Askia  Daouad's  reign 
was  a  campaign  conducted  by  his  son,  the  Viceroy  of 
the  south-western  province,  against  the  Fulani  of  Masina. 
A  lawless  portion  of  the  population  of  Masina  had  ven- 
tured to  attack  and  pillage  a  royal  boat  laden  with 
merchandise,  which  was  on  the  way  from  Jenne.  Such 
a  thing,  it  is  said,  had  never  happened  before  under 
the  dynasty  of  Songhay,  and  the  indignant  Viceroy 
resolved  to  make  a  terrible  example  of  Masina.  He 
ravaged  the  country  with  fire  and  sword,  allowing  his 
troops  to  massacre  indiscriminately ;  and  in  the  general 
slaughter  there  perished,  we  are  told,  a  great  number 
of  distinofuished  scholars  and  divines.  The  Sultan  of 
Masina  fled  to  a  place  of  safety  till  the  storm  had 
passed,  and  then  returned  to  his  estates.  Askia  Daouad 
entirely    disapproved    of  the    policy    and    conduct    of  his 


THE    LATER   ASKIAS  215 

son.  The  massacre  of  Masina  happened,  however,  in 
the  spring  of  1582,  and  before  Askia  Daouad  had  time 
to  take  any  action  in  the  matter,  he  died  on  his  favourite 
estate  near  Kagho,  on  the  21st  of  August  of  that  year. 
With  him  died  the  last  of  the  great  Askias.  He  was 
succeeded  by  his  son,  who,  in  consequence  of  having 
made  the  pilgrimage  to  Mecca,  was  known,  like  his 
illustrious  grandfather,  by  the  name  of  "  El  Hadj."  He 
was  an  estimable  prince,  but  an  invalid,  and  he  reigned 
only  four  years.  He  was  succeeded  in  his  turn  by  his 
brother,  Mohammed  Bano,  a  mere  nullity,  who  occupied 
the  throne  for  two  years;  and  in  1588  that  second  Ishak, 
also  a  son  of  Askia  Daouad,  who  lives  in  the  tradition 
of  the  Soudan  as  "the  worst  of  the  Askias,"  closed  the 
line  of  the  independent  sovereigns  of  Songhay. 

In  bringing  to  an  end  this  notice  of  the  most  remarkable 
dynasty  of  which  we  have  any  record  in  the  Soudan,  it  is 
perhaps  worth  while  to  draw  attention  to  the  length  of  the 
reigns  not  only  of  the  two  most  distinguished  monarchs  of 
this  line,  but  generally  of  the  more  remarkable  native 
sovereigns  of  the  Soudan.  The  reign  of  Askia  Daouad 
lasted  for  thirty-four  years,  that  of  Askia  the  Great  for 
thirty-six  years.  Sonni  Ali,  whose  life  and  whose  reign 
were  brought  to  an  end  only  by  an  accident,  reigned  for 
thirty  years.  The  great  Mansa  Musa  reigned  for  twenty- 
four  years.  His  brother,  who  after  a  short  interval  suc- 
ceeded him,  reigned  for  twenty-six  years.  In  the  Desert 
Empire  the  son  of  the  famous  Teloutan,  who  had  himself 
a  very  long  reign,  reigned  from  837  till  910,  that  is, 
upwards  of  seventy  years,  and  was  then  killed  in  battle. 
Nor  was  this  longevity  confined  to  the  rulers  of  the 
country.  It  has  already  been  mentioned  that  the  common 
age  to  which  men  lived  in  the  Desert  Empire  was  eighty 
years,  and  the  great  age  of  the  teachers  and  writers  of 
Timbuctoo  has  been  noticed.  Public  men  not  only  lived 
to  a  great  age,  but  kept  their  offices  for  long  periods  of 
time.  The  great  Askia,  after  having  been  a  successful 
general,  was   Prime    Minister   for   thirty  years  before   he 


2i6  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

became  a  monarch  for  thirty-six  years.  Ali  Folen,  his 
Prime  Minister,  already  a  chosen  councillor  whose  fidelity 
had  been  approved  in  1492,  held  office  till  the  end  of  the 
sovereign's  reign  in  1528.  Mohammed  Goddala,  the  first 
Cadi  of  Timbuctoo  appointed  by  the  great  Askia,  a  man 
highly  distinguished  both  for  learning  and  justice  in  the 
annals  of  his  country,  lived  to  the  age  of  eighty-four,  and 
was  Cadi  for  fifty  years.  The  Cadi  el  Aquib,  who  rebuilt 
the  mosques  of  Timbuctoo  under  Askia  Daouad,  held  his 
functions  as  Cadi  for  eighteen  years.  Mohammed  Naddi, 
the  famous  Timbuctoo  Koi,  who,  having  held  office  under 
the  Sultan  of  Melle,  was  reinstated  by  the  Tuaregs  on 
their  capture  of  the  town,  had  held  office  for  more  than 
thirty  years  when  he  died  in  1464.  It  is  needless  to 
multiply  examples  ;  but  the  longevity  of  the  individual  is 
an  element  of  so  much  importance  in  the  development  of 
the  race  that,  in  view  of  the  opinion  usually  entertained 
with  regard  to  the  climate  and  institutions  of  the  Soudan, 
it  seems  interesting  to  establish  the  fact  that  there  is 
nothing  in  the  health  conditions  of  the  country  which,  for 
those  who  are  acclimatised,  is  opposed  to  long  and  active 
life.  As  regards  the  institutions,  continuity  of  office  in 
the  individual  is  nearly  always  coincident  with  stability  in 
the  state.  Short  reigns,  short  ministries,  short  military 
commands,  are  symptoms  which  seldom  fail  to  indicate  an 
unsettled  and  unsatisfactory  condition  of  public  life.  Pros- 
perity and  permanence  go  hand  in  hand  ;  and  where  we 
find  judges,  generals,  viceroys,  kings,  holding  their  public 
positions  for  periods  varying  between  twenty  -  five  and 
fifty  years,  we  may  fairly  argue  a  peaceful  and  prosperous 
condition  of  the  country. 

The  history  of  the  Soudan  offers  no  contradiction  to 
the  assumption  that  the  life  of  the  nation  will  correspond 
to  the  life  of  the  individual.  The  duration  of  the 
Soudanese  empires  will  bear  comparison  with  that  of 
others  which  are  better  known  to  fame.  Ghana  enjoyed 
an  independent  existence  of  about  iioo  years — that  is,  a 
period  nearly  equivalent  to  the  period  of  existence  of  our 


THE    LATER    ASKIAS  217 

own  British  monarchy  from  the  abolition  of  the  Saxon 
Heptarchy  to  the  present  day.  Melle,  who  succeeded 
her,  had  a  shorter  national  life  of  about  250  years. 
Songhay  counted  its  kings  in  regular  succession  from 
about  700  A.D.  to  the  date  of  the  Moorish  conquest  in 
1 59 1 — a  period  which  almost  exactly  coincides  with  the 
life  of  Rome  from  the  foundation  of  the  republic,  509  B.C., 
to  the  downfall  of  the  empire  in  the  first  half  of  the 
fifth  century  of  our  era.  The  duration  of  the  Empire  of 
Bornu  was,  as  will  be  seen,  no  less  respectable. 

The  civilisation  represented  by  these  empires  was  no 
doubt,  if  judged  by  a  modern  and  still  more  by  a  Western 
standard,  exceedingly  imperfect.  The  principles  of  free- 
dom, as  we  understand  them,  were  probably  unknown. 
Authority  rested  upon  force  of  arms.  Industrial  life  was 
based  on  slavery.  Social  life  was  founded  on  polygamy. 
Side  by  side  with  barbaric  splendour  there  was  primeval 
simplicity.  Luxury  for  the  few  took  the  place  of  comfort 
for  the  many.  Study  was  devoted  mainly  to  what  seem 
to  us  unprofitable  ends.  These  are  grave  drawbacks. 
Yet  the  fact  that  civilisation,  far  in  excess  of  anything 
which  the  nations  of  Northern  Europe  possessed  at  the 
earlier  period  of  Soudanese  history,  existed  with  stability 
enough  to  maintain  empire  after  empire  through  a  known 
period  of  about  1500  years,  in  a  portion  of  the  world 
which  mysteriously  disappeared  in  the  sixteenth  century 
from  the  comity  of  modern  nations,  is  interesting  enough 
to  merit  recognition,  and,  it  seems  to  me,  to  justify  some 
study  of  the  new  chapters  of  history  presented  to  our 
consideration. 


CHAPTER    XXV 

ANCIENT   CONNECTION   OF   HAUSSALAND   WITH   THE 
VALLEY   OF   THE   NILE 

The  next  great  event  of  importance  in  the  history  of  the 
Soudan  is  the  conquest  of  the  country  by  the  Moors,  but 
before  approaching  the  narrative  of  this  catastrophe  it  will 
be  well  to  bring  the  history  of  Bornu  and  the  Haussa 
States  —  which  fill  the  last  remaining  section  of  the 
country  lying  between  the  Atlantic  and  Lake  Chad — up 
to  the  point  of  their  contemporary  development  in  the 
sixteenth  century.  These  portions  of  the  Soudan  are 
especially  interesting  to  us,  as  they  constitute  at  the 
present  day  the  northern  portion  of  the  British  Protec- 
torate of  Nigeria. 

It  has  been  said,  in  entering  upon  the  history  of 
the  Songhay  Empire,  that  in  it  we  reached  that  part 
of  the  history  of  the  Western  Soudan  in  which  the 
influence  of  the  West  and  of  the  East  visibly  met  and 
overlapped.  In  crossing  the  Niger,  and  passing  to  the 
territories  which  lie  still  farther  east,  we  come  to  that 
part  of  the  country  in  which  the  influence  of  the  East 
begins  more  distinctly  to  predominate. 

To  establish  the  grounds  on  which  such  influence  may 
be  presupposed,  a  short  digression  is  necessary  into  what 
is  knov/n  of  the  geographical  connection  of  the  countries 
of  Northern  Africa  with  each  other  during  a  very  early 
period  of  their  history. 

The  ancient  civilisation  of  Egypt  spread,  as  we  know, 
from  south  to  north,  and  without  venturing  to  accept 
or  to  reject  the  assumption  of  some  learned  writers  that 
it  came  originally  by  way  of  the  Arabian  Gulf  from 
India,  there  is  seemingly  no   doubt  that  the  earliest  seat 

3l8 


HAUSSALAND  AND   THE   NILE   VALLEY    219 

of  civilisation  in  Africa  was  the  country  watered  by  the 
Upper  Nile,  which  was  known  by  the  name  of  Ethiopia 
to  the  ancients,  and  which  lay  in  an  easterly  direction, 
between  the  very  latitudes  of  10°  and  17°  that  on  the 
western  side  of  Lake  Chad  fixed  the  limits  of  habitation 
of  the  higher  races  of  the  Soudan.  Monuments,  of  which 
a  more  or  less  consecutive  chain  can  be  traced  from 
Nubia  to  the  Straits  of  Bab-el- Mandeb,  point  to  the 
existence  in  this  territory,  at  a  period  of  great  antiquity, 
of  a  people  possessing  many  of  the  arts  of  a  relatively 
high  civilisation.  The  principal  state  of  this  Ethiopian 
country  bore  the  well-known  name  of  Meroe.  It  occu- 
pied the  territory  watered  by  the  Nile  and  its  tribu- 
taries, of  which  the  most  northerly  point  is  marked 
by  the  meeting  of  the  Atbara  and  the  Nile.  The 
capital  of  Meroe  was  a  city  of  the  same  name,  which 
stood  a  little  below  the  present  Shendy,  under  17°  N. 
latitude,  and  in  32^^°  E.  longitude.  That  is  to  say, 
Meroe  stood,  like  Ghana,  on  the  extreme  edge  of  the 
summer  rains.  The  limits  of  the  State  of  Meroe  ex- 
tended probably  at  one  time  to  the  north  of  17°  and  to 
the  south  of  10°.  Those  parallels  may,  however,  be 
taken  as  indicating  its  permanent  limits. 

This  is  not  the  place,  nor  am  I  competent  to  discuss 
the  arguments  which  form  the  ground  of  belief  that 
the  civilisation  of  Meroe  preceded  that  of  Egypt.  It  is 
enough  to  say  very  briefly,  that  on  the  site  of  the  city  of 
Meroe  there  exist  remains  of  temples  and  pyramids,  from 
which  archaeologists  have  drawn  the  conclusion  that  the 
pyramid  was  a  form  of  architecture  native  to  Meroe,  and 
only  afterwards  brought  to  perfection  in  Egypt.  It  is  evi- 
dent, from  the  decoration  of  the  temples,  that  they  were 
dedicated  to  the  worship  of  Ammon.  It  is  believed  that 
the  remains  of  the  temple  of  the  most  famous  oracle 
of  Jupiter  Ammon  are  to  be  found  in  ruins  at  about 
eight  hours'  journey  to  the  north-east  of  Shendy.  This 
temple  of  the  oracle  was  known  to  exist  within  a  few 
hours'  journey   of   Meroe,   and    the    priestly    traditions    of 


220  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

Ethiopia  and  Egypt  assert  that  the  worship  of  Ammon 
and  Osiris,  with  its  feasts  and  processions,  was  first 
settled  at  the  metropolis  of  Meroe.  This  remark- 
able spot  is  regarded  by  the  ancients  as  the  "cradle 
of  the  arts  and  sciences,  where  hieroglyphic  writing  was 
discovered,  and  where  temples  and  pyramids  had  already 
sprung  up  while  Egypt  still  remained  ignorant  of  their 
existence."  From  this  temple  the  worship  of  Ammon 
and  his  attendant  gods  would  seem  to  have  spread  to 
Egypt,  and  through  the  oasis  of  Siwah  to  Carthage  and 
the  Mediterranean  coast. 

The    carvincTs    of  the    monuments    of   Meroe    show  a 
people  in  possession  of  the  arts  and  luxuries  of  civilisation, 
and    having  some   knowledge    of  science.     On    the   base 
of  one  of  the  monuments  a  zodiac  has  been  found,  and 
in  the   more   northerly   monuments  of  Nubia,   which  por- 
tray   the    conquest    of   Meroe    by   Rameses  the  Great  of 
Egypt    at    a    much    later    date,    the    conquered    nation    is 
shown    as    being  not   only   rich,   civilised,    and   important, 
but    also    as    possessing   tributary    states,    presumably    in 
Central    Africa,   whence  came  giraffes   and    other  Central 
African  produce.     We  learn  from   the    same    monuments 
that   the    women    of   Meroe   were    frequently  armed,  and 
appeared    to  live    on  equal    terms   with   men.     They  are 
constantly  portrayed   as  queens.     The   Empire  of  Meroe 
had    its   settled    constitution   and    its   laws.      It  was    com- 
posed of  many  little  states,  but  the  whole  were  apparently 
governed    by  a  priest-caste,   and   the  portraits  of  priests, 
frequently  repeated  upon   the  monuments,  show  them  as 
tall    and    slender,    with    handsome    profile,    red-brown    in 
colour,    and    with    hair    indifferently    straight    or    curled. 
The  general  population  are  believed  to  have  been  of  the 
black    and    straight-haired    Nubian    race.       Here    is   the 
conclusion  drawn   by   a  competent   German  critic,   nearly 
a    hundred   years    ago,    from    the    discoveries    made    by 
Gau,  Champollion,  and  others  :   "  In   Nubia  and  Ethiopia 
stupendous,  numerous,  and  primeval  monuments  proclaim 
so  loudly  a  civilisation  contemporary  to,  aye,  earlier  than 


HAUSSALAND  AND   THE   NILE   VALLEY    221 

that  of  Egypt,  that  it  may  be  conjectured  with  the  greatest 
confidence  that  the  arts,  sciences,  and  religion  descended 
from  Nubia  to  the  lower  country  of  Misraim  ;  that  civi- 
lisation descended  the  Nile,  built  Memphis,  and  fmally, 
something  later,  wrested  by  colonisation  the  Delta  from 
the  sea."  ^ 

The  monuments,  though  eloquent,  are  not  the  only 
grounds  upon  which  this  conclusion  has  been  reached. 
The  fame  of  the  Ethiopians  was  widespread  in  ancient 
history.  Herodotus  describes  them  as  "  the  tallest,  the 
most  beautiful  and  long-lived  of  the  human  race,"  and 
before  Herodotus,  Homer,  in  even  more  flattering  lan- 
guage, described  them  as  "the  most  just  of  men;  the 
favourites  of  the  gods."  The  annals  of  all  the  great 
early  nations  of  Asia  Minor  are  full  of  them.  The  Mosaic 
records  allude  to  them  frequently ;  but  while  they  are 
described  as  the  most  powerful,  the  most  just,  and  the 
most  beautiful  of  the  human  race,  they  are  constantly 
spoken  of  as  black,  and  there  seems  to  be  no  other 
conclusion  to  be  drawn,  than  that  at  that  remote  period 
of  history  the  leading  race  of  the  Western  world  was 
a  black  race.  When  we  reflect  that  this  black  race 
flourished  within  the  very  latitudes  of  Africa  which 
European  nations  are  now  engaged  in  opening  to 
modern  civilisation,  a  great  interest  is  added  to  the 
study  of  their  possible  descendants. 

The  people  of  Ethiopia  colonised  to  the  north  and 
west.  Amongst  their  colonies  to  the  north,  one  of  the 
most  important  was  Thebes.  Thebes  and  Meroe  to- 
gether founded  the  colony  of  Ammonium  in  the  western 
desert,  and  through  Thebes  the  religion  of  Meroe  was 
carried  into  Lower  Egypt.  It  was  at  a  much  later 
period,  about  1500  B.C.,  that  Egypt  returned  upon  Meroe 
and  conquered  it. 

In  the  ancient  world,  as  in  ours,  commerce  and  re- 
ligion were  constantly  associated.  The  routes  of  pil- 
grimage  were    also    the    routes    of   trade,    and    with    the 

'  Heeren,  "  Historical  Researches  :  African  Nations." 


222  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

help  of  the  magnificent  remains  which  have  from 
time  to  time  been  discovered  in  the  southern  regions 
watered  by  the  Nile  and  its  tributary  streams,  it  has 
been  found  possible  to  re-establish  some  of  the  great 
trade  routes  which  were  used  by  Meroe  in  the  days  of 
her  prosperity.  In  briefly  indicating  them  I  follow  the 
account  given  by  Heeren  in  his  "  Historical  Researches." 

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  from  a  very  early  period 
maritime  commerce  existed  between  India,  Arabia,  and 
the  East  African  coasts.  Probably  at  an  even  earlier 
period  Chinese  navigators  frequented  the  shores  of  Africa. 
Marmol,  writing  of  the  East  Coast  of  Africa  in  the  six- 
teenth century,  says:  "There  was  a  time  when  the 
Chinese  navigated  these  shores  as  freely  as  the  Portu- 
guese now  do,"  and  his  statement  obtains  some  modern 
corroboration  from  the  fact  that  at  the  excavation,  about 
twenty-five  years  ago,  of  Kilwa,  once  the  capital  of  a 
native  empire,  upon  the  east  coast  of  Africa,  where 
three  towns  were  superimposed  upon  one  another,  the 
lowest  town  was  found  to  be  full  of  Chinese  coins. 
Commerce  between  the  countries  lying  on  the  shores 
of  the  Indian  Ocean  was  favoured  by  the  fact,  thus 
recorded  by  an  ancient  writer,  that  for  "  one  half  of  the 
year,  from  spring  to  autumn,  the  wind  regularly  sets 
in  and  wafts  the  vessels  from  Arabia  to  India;  the 
other  half,  from  autumn  to  spring,  it  as  regularly  carries 
them  back  from  India  to  Arabia."  Arrian,  in  his 
"  Periplus  of  the  Erythrean  Sea,"  written  in  the  first 
century  of  our  era,  speaking  of  the  commerce,  which 
was  then,  of  course,  a  matter  of  ancient,  though  also 
of  contemporary  history,  says  :  "  Before  merchants  sailed 
from  Egypt  to  India,  Arabia  Felix  was  the  staple  (or 
market)  both  for  Egyptian  and  Indian  goods,  just  as 
Alexandria  now  is  for  the  commodities  of  Egypt  and 
foreign  merchandise."  The  Indians  nowhere  appear  as 
navigators ;  the  Arabians  always  do.  It  seems  to  be 
demonstrated  that  they  possessed  the  navigation  of  the 
Indian    Ocean,    not   only    in    our    own    medieval    times, 


HAUSSALAND  AND  THE   NILE   VALLEY    223 

but  certainly  through  the  period  of  the  Ptolemies,  and 
probably  much  earlier.  That  they  communicated  with 
Ethiopia  in  early  ages  is  not  a  matter  of  doubt. 

Africa  contributed  largely  in  gold  and  probably  also 
in  frankincense — which  was  obtained  in  the  regions  now 
known  as  Somaliland — to  the  ancient  commerce  of  the 
Indian  Ocean.  Considering  the  position  occupied  by 
Arabia  in  that  commerce,  it  is  not  surprising  to  find 
that  the  ports  through  which  the  trade  entered  Ethiopia 
were  Asab  and  Adule,  both  situated  within  the  Straits 
of  Bab-el- Mandeb  on  the  western  shore  of  the  Red 
Sea.  Roads  from  these  two  points  led  to  Axum,  in  the 
interior,  on  the  western  side  of  the  Abyssinian  Mountains, 
a  town  of  which  the  colossal  remains  still  testify  to  its 
ancient  greatness.  From  Axum,  which  had  its  temples 
and  was  itself  a  great  centre  of  trade,  the  road  led  north- 
westward through  the  State  of  Meroe  to  the  town  of 
the  same  name.  The  town  of  Meroe  was  a  great  centre, 
whence  roads  spread  in  many  directions.  The  principal 
trade  route  led  from  Meroe  northwards,  either  along  the 
Nile  or  across  the  Nubian  desert  to  Thebes,  thence  to  the 
oasis  of  Siwah  in  the  western  desert,  thence  to  Augela, 
often  mentioned  as  an  Egyptian  colony,  and  thence 
south-westward  to  the  site  of  the  modern  Murzuk  in  the 
Fezzan,  whence  communication  was  direct  to  Carthage 
and  the  Mediterranean  coast.  These  last  stations  were 
at  the  head  of  the  Tripoli-Fezzan  route  into  the  southern 
desert,  and  marked  the  junction  of  that  route  with  the 
Egyptian  route.  There  was  a  road  from  Meroe  across 
the  desert  which  ran  due  westward  into  Kordofan.  This 
road  still  exists,  but  Burckhardt,  who  visited  Shendy  in 
1770,  says  that  now,  "as  in  ancient  times,"  the  commerce 
with  the  west  is  insignificant.  It  seems  to  result  from 
the  most  careful  investigation  that  the  principal  com- 
merce of  the  interior  of  Africa  has  always  been  carried 
on  in  two  directions :  that  which  has  been  described 
from  Ethiopia  through  the  Valley  of  the  Nile,  and  that 
of   the    Soudan    from    the    Niger    to    the    Mediterranean 


224  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

coast.  The  Empire  of  Bornu,  or  Kanem,  including  at  one 
time  the  present  kingdoms  of  Wadai  and  Darfour,  formed 
a  separation  between  these  two  streams  which  have  always 
run  in  parallel  channels  from  south  to  north.  This,  at 
least,  is  the  general  opinion  of  explorers  and  historians, 
who,  it  is  to  be  remembered,  have  necessarily  written 
from  the  external  point  of  view.  What  may  have  been 
at  any  given  period  the  lateral  branching  of  local  native 
trade,  is  difficult  for  the  European  writer  to  determine. 

Heeren,  in  his  researches  into  the  trade  of  the  Cartha- 
ginians and  the  Ethiopians,  has  been  able  to  establish 
the  existence  of  at  least  one  important  cross-road  of 
communication,  of  which  a  portion  has  been  already  noted 
in  tracing  the  direction  of  the  main  trade  route,  after  it 
branched  from  Thebes  westward  to  the  oasis  of  Siwah 
and  the  Mediterranean  coast.  The  western  end  of  the 
road  starting  from  Carthage  ran  in  a  south-easterly  direc- 
tion through  the  Fezzan  to  the  site  of  the  present  Murzuk. 
After  making  the  junction  at  that  point  with  the  Egyptian 
road,  it  turned  southwards  to  the  Niger,  and  was  the 
road  which  has  been  so  often  mentioned  as  the  Tripoli- 
Fezzan  road  of  the  present  day.  Along  this  road  the 
Carthaginians  traded  with  the  Niger  for  carbuncles,  skins, 
gold,  ivory,  and  other  goods. 

Thus  we  get  on  unquestionable  authority  evidence  of 
a  well-established  connection  in  very  early  times  between 
Ethiopia  and  Egypt  by  the  Valley  of  the  Nile;  between 
Egypt  and  Carthage  by  a  road  crossing  the  desert 
through  Siwah  and  Augela,  and  between  Carthage  and 
the  Niger  by  the  present  Tripoli-Fezzan  route.  If  we 
take  Murzuk  and  Thebes  as  lying  almost  on  the  same 
parallels  of  latitude  outside  the  Tropic  of  Cancer,  and 
Gao  and  Meroe  as  having  also  almost  parallel  positions 
on  the  edge  of  the  summer  rains,  some  eight  degrees 
farther  south,  we  get  the  four  corners  of  an  irregular 
parallelogram,  of  which  three  sides  were  in  permanent 
communication  with  each  other.  The  base  of  this  paral- 
lelogram  rests   on   the   fertile    belt,    which   crosses   Africa 


HAUSSALAND  AND  THE   NILE   VALLEY    225 

between  the  parallels  of  10°  and  17°;  and  taking  into 
consideration  the  fact  that  Mohammedan  states  now 
stretch  continuously  across  it  from  Bornu  to  Fashoda, 
it  seems  in  no  way  improbable  that,  at  a  period  when 
the  trade  of  Ethiopia  was  important  enough  to  extend 
down  the  Valley  of  the  Nile  and  across  the  difficult 
desert  road  from  Thebes  to  Murzuk  in  the  north,  trade 
may  also  have  found  channels  of  extension  along  the 
fertile  territories  to  the  west. 

In  corroboration  of  the  view  that  the  trade  and  in- 
fluence of  Meroe  may  have  extended  farther  west  than 
has  as  yet  been  ascertained  by  modern  exploration,  I  may 
mention  a  fact  told  me  by  Zebehr  Pasha,  when,  during 
his  confinement  at  Gibraltar  in  1886,  he  related  to  me 
the  history  of  the  foundation  of  his  ephemeral  empire 
in  the  Bahr-el-Ghazal.  It  was  that,  having  occasion  to 
act  as  the  military  ally  of  a  certain  native  king  Tekkima, 
whose  territory  lay  somewhere  south  and  west  of  the 
spot  marked  upon  modern  maps  as  Dem  Suleiman  or 
Dem  Zebehr — that  is,  presumably  about  8°  N.  and  25°  E., 
he  was  informed  that  he  had  to  fight  against  magicians, 
who  habitually  came  out  of  the  earth,  fought,  and  then 
disappeared.  A  careful  system  of  scouting  disclosed  to 
him  the  fact  that  they  came  from  under  ground,  and 
when,  after  cutting  off  their  retreat  and  conquering  them, 
he  insisted  upon  being  shown  their  place  of  habitation, 
he  found  it  to  be  deeply  buried  in  the  sand,  a  wonder- 
ful system  of  temples  "far  finer,"  to  use  the  words  in 
which  he  described  it,  "than  modern  eyes  have  seen  in 
the  mosques  of  Cairo  and  Constantinople."  It  was,  he 
said,  such  work  of  massive  stone  as  was  done  only  by 
the  great  races  of  old.  Through  this  underground  city  of 
stone  there  ran  a  stream,  and  by  the  stream  his  native 
antagonists  lived  in  common  straw  native  huts.  "Were 
your  people,  then,"  he  asked  them,  "a  nation  of  stone- 
cutters?" And  they  said,  "Oh,  no!  This  is  not  the 
work  of  our  forefathers,  but  our  forefathers  found  it  here, 
and  we  have  lived  for  many  generations  in  these  huts." 

p 


226  A   TROPICAL   DEPENDENCY 

Whether  this  accidental  discovery  of  unknown  monu- 
ments may  yet  be  repeated  farther  west,  and  links  be 
established  in  a  continuous  chain  of  ancient  civilisation 
reaching  from  the  Red  Sea  to  the  country  west  of  Chad, 
or  whether  the  civilisations  of  the  western  and  the 
eastern  ends  of  the  fertile  belt  of  the  Soudan  were 
in  fact  separated  from  one  another  by  a  sea  of  which 
the  waters  of  Chad  are  but  the  disappearing  trace,  is, 
however,  a  question  which,  interesting  as  it  is,  becomes, 
in  the  light  of  the  proved  connection  by  the  northern 
road,  a  question  rather  of  detail  than  of  principle. 

If  there  was  no  connection  by  the  south,  there  cer- 
tainly was  connection  by  the  north,  by  means  of  which 
the  early  inhabitants  of  the  Haussa  States  may  have 
been  brought  under  the  same  influences  of  civilisation 
which  spread  from  Ethiopia  to  ancient  Egypt  and  thence 
to  Europe  and  Northern  Africa. 


CHAPTER   XXVI 

THE    PHARAOHS    IN    HAUSSALAND 

The  annals  of  Egyptian  history  are  not  without  some 
record  of  the  very  early  connection  which  existed  be- 
tween the  valleys  of  the  Niger  and  the  Nile.  To  enter 
into  the  spirit  of  them  we  must  be  content  to  lose  our- 
selves in  semi-mythical  periods  when,  according  to  the 
records  collected  and  preserved  by  historic  writers,  Housal 
and  his  descendants  reigned  in  Egypt.  The  name  of 
Housal  meant,  we  are  told,  "  Servant  of  Venus."  We 
may  perhaps,  therefore,  carry  back  the  date  to  a  period 
when  the  Phoenicians  dominated  Egyptian  politics,  and 
the  worship  of  Astarte  or  Venus  Erycina  was  common 
in  the  Valley  of  the  Nile. 

Already,  before  Housal,  Egyptian  kings  had  marched 
through  the  west  and  into  the  country  of  the  blacks  in 
the  south,  where  they  had  seen  **  wonderful  things." 
But  it  is  with  his  descendant,  Nimrod  the  Powerful,  who 
was  also  called  Nimrod  the  son  of  Housal,  that  we 
obtain  a  direct  link  with  the  southern  states.  Nimrod, 
we  are  told,  was  a  king  famous  for  his  justice,  under 
whom  the  people  of  Egypt  lived  happily.  But  his  dead 
brother  had  been  married  to  a  magician  from  the  south. 
This  magician  fled  with  her  son,  on  the  accession  of 
Nimrod,  towards  the  south.  There,  by  her  charms,  she 
raised  a  power  for  her  son  to  claim  the  throne.  Nimrod 
marched  against  her  and  was  overthrown,  and  her  son 
reigned  in  his  stead.  This  is  the  Egyptian  account. 
But  the  people  of  Yoruba,  which  is  not  one  of  the  true 
Haussa  States,  but  which  is  a  province  included  within  the 
British  Protectorate  in  the  back  country  of  Lagos,  claim 


228  A   TROPICAL   DEPENDENCY 

to  descend  from  Canaanites — that  is,  Phoenicians — of  the 
tribe  of  Nimrod.  They  claim,  further,  that  all  the  pagan 
tribes  in  the  mountains  of  Haussaland  descend  from  them, 
because  in  their  southward  journey  they  left,  in  every 
place  they  stopped  at,  a  tribe  of  their  own  people  in  the 
mountains.  Sultan  Bello,  who  records  this  claim  of  the 
Yoruba  people,  was  apparently  unacquainted  with  the 
Egyptian  story.  But  the  coincidence  between  the  two 
accounts  is  too  striking  to  be  ignored.  The  Nimrod 
the  Powerful  of  Egyptian  history,  son  of  Housal,  who 
worshipped  the  Phoenician  gods,  and  Nimrod  the  Mighty, 
the  first  son  of  Canaan  (or  Phoenicia)  of  the  Mosaic 
record,  may  fairly  be  taken  as  identical,  and  it  is  easy 
to  comprehend  how  the  dispersion  of  a  large  army,  of 
which  the  component  parts  would  be  driven  to  take 
refuge  where  they  could,  might  lead  to  just  such  a  tradi- 
tion as  that  cherished  by  the  Yoruba  population  of  the 
present  day. 

It  is  interesting  also  to  observe  in  Egyptian  records 
the  constant  reference  to  "  magicians  of  the  south."  The 
part  which  magic  played  in  the  chronicles  of  Egypt  is 
of  course  a  matter  of  common  knowledge.  The  whole 
north  coast  of  Africa  was,  we  are  told,  protected  by 
talismans,  burning  glasses,  and  other  marvels  raised  on 
pedestals,  which  were  placed  at  intervals  along  the  shore. 
Alexandria  could  not  be  built  till  talismans  had  been 
erected  which  had  power  to  protect  it  from  the  monsters 
of  the  deep.  Macrizi,  in  his  "  Historical  Description  of 
Egypt,"  written  in  the  fifteenth  century,  has  preserved 
for  us  accounts  of  some  of  the  most  famous  talismans 
constructed  by  the  kings,  and  quite  as  often  by  the 
queens,  who  reigned  in  the  Valley  of  the  Nile.  We  find 
there  the  magical  bird  with  outspread  wings,  raised  on  a 
pedestal  for  protective  purposes  above  towns  or  graves, 
which  in  the  seventeenth  century  had  still  its  prototype 
in  the  copper  birds,  described  by  Barbot  as  spreading 
their  wings  above  all  the  best  houses  of  Benin.  The 
same  idea  perhaps   inspired  the  golden   bird   perched  on 


THE    PHARAOHS    IN    HAUSSALAND      229 

the  cupola  of  the  king's  umbrella  which  Ibn  Batuta  men- 
tioned in  describing  the  court  ceremonies  of  the  court 
of  Melle  in  the  fourteenth  century.  Marvels  of  every 
kind  are  catalogued  among  the  creations  of  the  wisest  of 
Egyptian  sovereigns.  Nor  need  we  confine  ourselves  to 
the  Soudan  to  find  in  later  times  the  prototypes  of  statues 
which  healed,  relics  which  could  detect  injustice,  dirty 
water  which,  being  washed  over  sacred  stones,  had  power 
to  impart  saving  grace.  The  ideas  which  underlay  the 
magic  of  Egypt  have  been  common  to  all  time.  They 
took  sometimes,  in  Egypt  as  elsewhere,  very  charming 
shape.  We  hear  of  one  benevolent  king  who  constructed 
a  temple  in  which  he  placed  statues  to  heal  every  human 
infirmity.  On  the  head  of  each  statue  was  written  the 
name  of  the  evil  which  it  could  cure.  When  he  had 
cured  all  recognised  evils,  he  made  last  of  all  the  statue 
of  a  smiling  woman,  "and  whoever  looked  on  her,  lost 
his  secret  sorrow." 

In  the  construction  of  these  talismans  the  "magicians 
of  the  south  "  played  their  part.  We  have  seen  in  the 
Tarikh-es-Soudan  that  Gao  was  celebrated  in  ancient 
times  as  a  town  of  magicians,  whence  the  Pharaohs  on 
occasion  summoned  help.  Borgu  and  its  neighbourhood 
to  the  south  of  Gao  is  to  this  day  celebrated  for  the 
pursuit  of  magic,  and  the  whole  coast  of  West  Africa 
is  permeated  with  a  belief  in  witchcraft  and  charms. 
Doubtless  when  Egyptian  records  speak  of  the  south, 
they  frequently  mean  Ethiopia  and  Meroe.  But  that  the 
name  of  Ethiopia  was  extended  in  some  instances  to 
cover  the  country  as  far  west  as  the  Atlantic  is  made 
quite  clear  by  ancient  writers.     Strabo  expressly  says  so. 

If,  in  the  magic  practised  by  the  inhabitants  of  the 
territories  lying  between  the  Niger  and  Lake  Chad,  we 
find  one  indication  of  the  very  early  connection  of  these 
countries  with  Egypt,  other  indications  present  them- 
selves, as  we  approach  the  period  of  the  Pharaohs  of 
the  eighteenth  and  nineteenth  dynasties,  which  appear 
by  comparison    to    stand   on   historic  ground.      I   abridge 


230  A   TROPICAL   DEPENDENCY 

from  Macrizi  an  account  of  an  eleven  years'  expedition 
of  one  of  the  Pharaohs  into  the  west  and  south,  which 
seems  definitely  to  confer  upon  Borgu  the  honour  of 
connecting  the  existing  territory  of  British  Northern 
Nigeria  with  the  Egypt  known  to  us  in  the  Old  Testa- 
ment. The  expedition  took  place  some  1 700  years  before 
Christ.  The  Pharaoh  was  king  of  Egypt  when  "a 
young  Syrian,  of  the  name  of  '  Joseph  the  Truthful,'  was 
sold  by  his  brothers  into  Egypt."  The  Pharaoh  of 
Joseph  was  known  by  many  names.  Amongst  them 
the  Copts  gave  him  the  name  of  "  Barkhou." 

After  a  long  struggle  with  Phoenician  forces  in  the 
north,  this  Pharaoh  subdued  Syria,  and  then  resolved  to 
conquer  the  world  to  the  south  and  west.  He  set  out 
with  an  army  of  700,000  men,  marched  westward  to  that 
point  of  Africa  where  the  Atlantic  meets  the  Mediter- 
ranean, crossed  over  to  Spain,  and,  having  conquered 
and  imposed  tribute  as  he  went,  he  returned  and  marched 
eastward  through  the  country  of  the  Berbers.  Thence 
he  turned  south,  fought  with  various  peoples,  and  sent 
a  general  before  him  to  a  town  situated  upon  the  "black 
water."  The  king  of  this  town  had  never  heard  of 
Pharaoh,  and  being  questioned  about  the  water  to  the 
south,  said  that  no  one  had  ever  navigated  it,  because 
of  the  mists  which  made  it  dangerous.  When  Pharaoh 
arrived,  the  native  king  offered  presents,  amongst  them 
a  mystic  black  stone,  and  fruits,  chiefly  bananas.  Pharaoh 
then  "  marched  into  the  countries  of  the  Soudan,  and 
came  to  the  country  of  the  Dem-Dem  cannibals,  who 
marched  against  him  entirely  naked."  He  conquered 
them,  and  took  the  road  to  the  "dark  sea,"  but  as  mists 
arose,  he  returned  northwards  as  far  as  a  colossal  statue 
of  red  stone,  which  bore  the  inscription,  "  Beyond  me 
there  is  nothing."  He  appears  then  to  have  turned 
eastward.  In  his  march  he  encountered  various  marvels 
which  I  will  not  relate,  amongst  other  things  a  town  of 
hermits  or  magicians  living  in  the  mountains,  from  whom 
he   received    good   advice,  and    by  whom    he  was  shown 


THE    PHARAOHS    IN    HAUSSALAND      231 

immense  stores,  worthless  to  them,  of  gold  and  emeralds 
and  sapphires.  Finally,  after  an  absence  of  eleven  years, 
he  reached  Nubia — showing  that,  in  his  day  at  least, 
communication  was  supposed  to  be  possible  between  the 
Niger  and  the  Nile  along  the  parallels  of  the  fertile 
belt — and  he  re-entered  Egypt,  having  built  monuments 
or  otherwise  "left  traces  of  himself"  in  every  country 
through  which  he  passed. 

The    account,    of    which    I    have   given    the    essential 

geographical    points,    seems  clearly   to    indicate   that  this 

Pharaoh  on  his  return  from  the  west  followed  the  Tripoli- 

Fezzan  route  into  the  desert.      The  town   upon   which   he 

marched  may  have  been  the  town  of  Kaougha  or  Kau- 

Kau,    which    appears   to   have   existed    in    ancient   times 

somewhere  near  to  the  site  of  the  present  town  of  Kuka 

on  Lake  Chad  ;  but  remembering  that  the  Arab  name  of 

the  Niger  is  the  "  Huad  el  Nichar,"  or  Black  Water,  and 

that  the  account  of  the  expedition  has  been  taken  by  Arab 

writers  from   the  Coptic,    it   is  equally  probable  that  the 

town    where   he   got    the    black   stone    and   the    bananas 

may  have  been  that  very  town  of  Gao  on  the  Niger,  also 

called  Kaougha,  the  antiquity  of  which  has  been  so  often 

alluded  to.      He  marched   "thence"  into  the  Soudan  and 

the   country   of  the   cannibal   Dem-Dems.     This  at  least 

identifies  the  locality  of  a  portion  of  this  expedition,   for 

every  early  Arab  writer  has  located  the  Dem-Dems  in  the 

country  to  the  south  and  south-east  of  Gao,  spreading  down 

the  western  side  of  the  river  and  across  the  river  into  the 

hills  to  the  south   of  the   Haussa  States,   known  later  as 

Bowshy,  Bowsher,  or  Jacoba,  and  now  included  in  British 

Northern  Nigeria  under  the  name  of  Bautchi.      In  these 

hills  the  cannibals  have  survived  even  to  our  own  day,  but 

on  the  western  side  of  the  river  they  have  long  since  been 

driven  out,  and  their  place  has  been  taken  by  the  peoples 

of  Gurma  and  Borgu,  or,  as  this  latter  province  was  often 

called  by  early   Arab  writers,  Barkou.       Here  again  the 

coincidence  of  name  is  at  least  striking.     A  Pharaoh  of  the 

name  of  Barkhou,  of  whom  it  is  said  that  he  left  a  trace  of 


232  A   TROPICAL   DEPENDENCY 

himself  in  every  country  through  which  he  passed,  is  stated 
to  have  marched  victoriously  with  a  large  army  over  a 
country  to  the  south  of  the  Black  Water,  which  is  de- 
scribed as  the  country  of  the  Dem-Dems.  At  a  very 
much  later  period  a  country  bearing  his  Coptic  name,  and 
claiming  for  its  people  Coptic  descent,  is  found  to  be 
situated  between  the  Black  Water  and  the  country  of  the 
Dem-Dems.  I  do  not  wish  to  push  the  argument  of 
names  too  far,  especially  when  the  uncertain  nature  of  the 
records  of  those  "Traditionists"  from  whom  Macrizi 
quotes  is  taken  into  consideration.  Yet  in  conjunction 
with  the  popular  belief  in  Egyptian  extraction,  this  story 
which  I  find  in  the  annals  of  Egypt,  where  there  was 
no  thought  of  shedding  light  on  questions  of  the  Soudan, 
seems  to  me  interesting  enough  to  plead  its  own  excuse 
for  insertion. 

Whether  the  "Dark  Sea" — rendered  in  the  French 
translation  which  I  am  following  by  the  words  "  Mer 
obscure'' — really  meant  the  sea  on  the  south  coast,  or 
whether  it  was,  as  I  think  more  probable,  some  other  body 
of  water  such  as  Lake  Chad,  which  must  have  been  passed 
if  the  expedition  re-entered  Egypt  by  way  of  Nubia,  I 
leave  to  the  more  learned  to  decide.  The  direction  of  his 
march  after  achieving  the  conquest  of  the  Dem-Dems 
appears  to  me  to  have  been  round  the  north  shores  of 
Lake  Chad,  and  so  across  the  desert  into  Nubia.  If  it  be 
true  that  he  built  monuments  or  left  traces  of  himself  in 
every  country  through  which  he  passed,  there  is  hope  that 
his  cartouche  may  yet  be  discovered  upon  some  hitherto 
unexplored  rock  of  Northern  Nigeria.  The  persistent 
reference  in  early  descriptions  to  a  colossal  statue  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  the  Almena  rocks  may  have  a  foundation 
in  interesting  fact. 

Before  and  after  this  Pharaoh,  other  Pharaohs — includ- 
ing the  intrepid  Phoenician  usurper  who,  according  to 
Macrizi,  was  the  Pharaoh  of  Moses — marched  at  the  head 
of  armies  into  the  Soudan  and  fought  and  conquered 
among  the  blacks  and  Berbers,  forcing  the  people  of  the 


THE    PHARAOHS    IN    HAUSSALAND      233 

Soudan  to  pay  tribute.  The  black  nations  of  Ethiopia 
were  sufficiently  vigorous  to  have  at  times  invaded  the 
southern  and  western  frontiers  of  Egypt,  and  to  have 
necessitated  the  building  of  a  great  wall  of  defence  against 
them.  This  wall,  which  extended  from  the  frontiers  of 
Abyssinia  to  Nubia,  and  through  Nubia  to  the  oases, 
was  built  by  a  queen  called  Dalouka.  It  was  fortified 
at  intervals  throughout  its  length. 

We  know  from  other  sources  that,  about  the  year  1400 
B.C.,  Rameses  the  Great,  who  is  usually  assumed  to  have 
been  the  Pharaoh  of  Moses,  made  extensive  conquests  to 
the  south.  This  was  the  Pharaoh  whose  conquest  of 
Ethiopia  is  shown  upon  the  monuments,  and  on  those 
monuments  is  also  indicated  the  conquest  of  tributary 
nations  to  the  West.  In  connection  with  these  conquests 
we  must  not  forget  the  statement  of  the  Tarikh-es-Soudan 
that  it  was  the  Pharaoh  of  Moses  who  drew  his  magicians 
from  Gao.  That  the  nations  of  the  Niger  and  Lake  Chad 
should  have  been  tributary  to  Eastern  Ethiopia  is  not 
surprising,  and  the  inference  to  be  drawn  from  the  monu- 
ments and  the  statements  of  ancient  writers  is  confirmed 
by  the  mere  fact  that  the  name  of  Ethiopia  was  extended 
to  them.  Libyan  as  well  as  Ethiopian  dynasties  are 
known  to  have  reigned  in  Egypt  after  the  Pharaohs  of  the 
nineetenth  dynasty.  When,  therefore,  we  read  of  the  re- 
conquest  of  Egypt,  and  a  march  of  Ethiopian  armies  against 
the  Kings  of  Israel  about  1000  b.c,  and  of  an  Ethiopian 
dynasty  established  at  Memphis  under  Sabako  at  a  period 
contemporary  with  the  prophet  Isaiah,  about  750  B.C.,  we 
may  assume  it  to  be  probable  that  the  peoples  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  Lake  Chad  contributed  their  share,  if  not 
actually  to  the  armies,  at  least  to  the  strength  of  the  then 
conquering  empire. 

After  the  Ethiopian  dynasty  came  the  Persian  con- 
quests, during  which,  as  we  have  seen,  expeditions  appar- 
ently took  place  which  have  left  a  tradition  of  ancestry 
among  the  black  nations  of  the  extreme  west  of  the 
Soudan.     After   the    Persians   came    Alexander   and    the 


234  A   TROPICAL   DEPENDENCY 

Ptolemies.  The  picture  given  by  Egyptian  historians  of 
the  last  of  the  Ptolemies  is  very  different  from  that  usually 
received  in  the  West.  Cleopatra's  vigilance,  they  tell  us, 
watched  over  the  extreme  limits  of  the  kingdom  of  Egypt, 
and  some  historians  have  attributed  to  Cleopatra  the  wall 
of  Dalouka.  There  was,  therefore,  we  may  infer,  the  same 
need  under  the  Ptolemies  that  there  had  been  under 
earlier  dynasties  for  defence  against  the  peoples  of  the 
Soudan. 

It  is  not  surprising  that  Haussaland  and  Bornu,  which 
lie  between  the  Bend  of  the  Niger  and  Lake  Chad,  and  of 
which  the  territory  occupied  at  the  south-westerly  end 
of  the  great  trade  routes  of  the  ancient  world  a  position 
corresponding  to  that  occupied  by  Ethiopia  proper  at  the 
south-eastern  end,  should  have  received  the  inspiration  of 
their  civilised  development  rather  from  Egypt,  and  at  a 
later  period  from  the  Arabs  of  the  Barbary  coasts,  than 
from  those  Arabs  who  established  the  civilisation  of  the 
Ommeyade  dynasty  in  Spain.  As,  however,  there  is  no 
clear  distinction  to  be  made  between  the  Arabs  of  the 
west  and  east,  so  there  will  be  found  comparatively  little 
difference  between  the  medieval  civilisation  of  the  western 
and  the  eastern  portions  of  the  West  African  Soudan. 
The  more  remarkable  differences  were  of  earlier  date, 
when  the  influence  of  ancient  Egypt  was  stronger,  and 
when  the  schismatic  Christians  of  the  Roman  Empire 
found  their  way,  under  the  pressure  of  persecution,  along 
the  same  eastern  desert  road,  to  the  oblivion  and  the 
freedom  of  the  south. 

During  the  second  and  third  centuries  of  our  era,  when 
Christians  were  liable  to  spasmodic  persecution  under  the 
pagan  emperors  of  Rome,  the  African  desert  was  a  favourite 
refuge  of  the  enthusiast,  and  the  conception  of  winning 
heaven  by  preaching  the  gospel  to  the  most  remote  nations 
of  the  earth  was  not  daunted  by  the  unknown  dangers  of 
the  Soudan.  In  the  sixth  century,  when  the  Emperor 
Justinian  and  the  Empress  Theodora  took  opposite  sides 
in  the  great  schism  of  the  Incarnation,  the  Coptic  Church, 


THE    PHARAOHS    IN    HAUSSALAND       235 

persecuted  in  Syria  and  Egypt,  spread  its  monophysite 
emissaries  far  into  the  heart  of  Africa,  leaving  to  its 
Nestorian  rivals  the  open  road  of  Persia,  China,  and  the 
East.  Distinct  traces  are  to  be  found  in  the  eastern  part 
of  the  West  African  Soudan  of  this  Coptic  movement. 
Borgu,  already  famous  for  its  connection  with  the 
Pharaohs,  claims  to  have  received  in  more  modern  times 
a  form  of  Christianity  from  the  East,  and  though  the 
tradition  is  not  general  in  the  country,  Borgu  natives 
have  recently  asserted  that  their  prophet  is  not  Moham- 
med but  Kisra,  a  Jew  who  died  for  the  sins  of  men.  In 
the  second  half  of  the  fifteenth  century  the  Portuguese 
had  knowledge  of  a  native  state  in  the  interior  which 
professed  Christianity  "after  the  manner  of  Egypt."  They 
took  that  state  to  be  Mossi,  but  if  reliance  is  to  be  placed 
on  the  very  circumstantial  account  of  the  Tarikh-es- 
Soudan,  they  were  mistaken  in  their  assumption,  and 
the  honour  must  be  attributed  to  some  other  people. 
It  may  have  been  Borgu,  but  it  must  be  admitted  that 
the  Christianity  of  this  province,  if  schismatic  to  begin 
.with,  has  wandered  now  so  far  from  the  established  path 
as  to  be  scarcely  recognisable. 


CHAPTER    XXVII 

THE   HAUSSA  STATES 

With  this  slight  indication  that  the  native  traditions  of  the 
Soudan  are  not  without  some  foundation  in  recorded 
history,  we  may  return  to  what  should  be  the  surer  if 
narrower  ground  of  local  chronicles.  Unfortunately,  in 
approaching  the  history  of  Haussaland  and  Bornu,  we  are 
met  in  both  cases  by  the  fact  that  their  records  were  pur- 
posely destroyed  at  the  beginning  of  the  nineteenth  century 
by  Fulani  conquerors  in  Haussaland,  and  by  the  new 
dynasty  of  the  Kanemyin  in  Bornu.  The  new  rulers  had 
in  both  instances  the  same  object,  to  obliterate  as  far 
as  possible  the  trace  of  their  predecessors,  and  they  have 
been  so  far  successful  that  the  materials  of  local  history 
which  have  survived  are  extremely  scanty.  A  few  manu- 
scripts have,  however,  escaped  the  general  destruction- 
Dr.  Earth  found  one  in  Bornu  which  gives  a  brief  and 
dry  chronicle  of  the  kings  of  Bornu  from  a  very  early, 
though  undated  period.  There  is  one  containing  a  chro- 
nicle of  the  history  of  Katsena.  The  Niger  Company 
obtained  in  Kano  a  manuscript  as  yet  only  imperfectly 
translated,  which  gives  in  similar  brief  fashion  a  chronicle 
of  the  reigns  of  forty-two  kings  of  Kano.  Dr.  Robinson 
found  in  Zaria  another,  though  more  modern  manuscript, 
giving  some  account  of  a  period  of  the  history  of  Zaria, 
We  have  also,  though  from  a  tainted  source,  native  notes 
on  the  history  of  the  Haussa  States.  Sultan  Bello,  the 
commander  of  the  victorious  Fulani,  while  he  permitted 
and  presumably  encouraged  the  destruction  of  the  Haussa 
records,  so  far  showed  his  appreciation  of  the  importance 

of  history  as  to  compile  from  his  own  study  of  documents 

336 


THE    HAUSSA   STATES  237 

lost  to  us,  an  account  of  the  Haussa  States,  in  which  some 
truth  may  be  assumed  to  mingle  with  the  presentment  of 
facts  coloured  to  suit  the  Fulani  point  of  view.  From 
these  and  a  few  other  records,  combined  with  oral  tradition 
and  the  slight  notices  of  contemporary  Arabs  at  different 
periods  of  the  history  of  Haussa  and  Bornu,  it  is  possible  to 
frame  a  general  outline  of  the  history  of  the  two  countries. 
Little  trustworthy  detail  as  to  the  customs,  laws,  industry, 
literature,  administration,  or  religion,  which  would  have 
enabled  us  to  construct  a  complete  picture  for  ourselves 
of  these  long-existing  civilisations,  has  been  preserved. 
More  material  will,  however,  doubtless  come  to  light  from 
year  to  year  as  the  country  is  opened  up,  and,  in  fact,  from 
each  province  contributions  to  history  are  already  begin- 
ning to  be  made.  This  is  especially  the  case  in  regard 
to  pagan  history,  which  may  prove  to  be  scarcely  less  in- 
teresting, in  some  districts,  than  Mohammedan  history. 
Although  lying  in  geographical  juxtaposition  between 
the  parallels  of  9°  and  14°  N.  latitude,  and  now  united 
within  the  limits  of  the  British  Protectorate,  Bornu  and 
Haussaland  are  two  very  distinct  countries  inhabited  by 
people  of  wholly  different  race,  having  their  own  traditions 
and  their  distinct  history.  Except  when,  as  a  consequence 
of  border  wars,  there  has  been  a  temporary  overlapping  of 
the  frontier,  they  have  always  possessed  their  distinct 
territories.  The  Bornuese  people  are  of  Berber  extraction, 
and  though  to  European  eyes  actually  black,  count  them- 
selves among  the  white  or  red  races  of  the  Soudan.  Com- 
pared with  the  history  of  Haussaland  their  history  is 
modern.  The  Haussa  is  wholly  black,  but  not  negroid  in 
type.  He  has  not  the  smooth  hair  of  the  Songhay,  but 
in  other  respects  he  has  frequently  a  cast  of  countenance 
scarcely  less  Aryan  in  type,  and  in  his  peculiar  and 
strongly  marked  characteristics  he  is  universally  recog- 
nised as  ranking  among  the  most  interesting  of  the 
peoples  of  the  Soudan.  His  known  history,  though  never 
brilliant,  has  been  persistent.  Many  times  conquered,  he 
has  nevertheless   continued  to  preserve  a  clearly  defined 


238  A   TROPICAL   DEPENDENCY 

political  individuality.  He  has  always  been  merchant, 
peasant,  soldier,  and  artisan.  Storms  have  swept  over  him, 
to  which  he  has  bowed  a  submissive  head.  According  to 
circumstances  his  territory  has  contracted  or  expanded,  but 
in  the  Haussa  nation  the  life  of  the  individual  appears  to 
have  been  so  little  dependent  on  the  political  development 
of  the  race,  that  it  has  lost  no  vigour  in  the  incidents  of 
history,  and  we  find  him  to-day  pursuing  his  avocations 
as  his  fathers  before  him  pursued  the  same  avocations 
when  they  first  emerge  to  our  sight  from  the  dimness  of 
antiquity. 

The  territory  covered  by  Haussaland  to-day  stretches 
roughly  from  about  9°  to  14°  N.  lat.,  and  from  4°  to 
11°  E.  long.,  and  it  contains  a  population  estimated  at 
perhaps  ten  millions  of  people.  No  accurate  census 
has  as  yet  been  made,  and  this  estimate,  lower  than 
that  usually  given,  is  only  approximate.  The  Haussa 
language,  which  is  classed  with  Coptic  amongst  the 
Hamitic  languages,  is  said  to  be  more  widely  spoken 
than  any  other  single  native  language  in  West  Africa. 
The  Haussas  have  themselves,  like  most  other  West 
African  races,  a  tradition  of  having  come  once  from 
the  east  beyond  Mecca,  but  their  presence  in  the  Soudan, 
somewhat  to  the  north  of  the  territory  which  they  now 
occupy,  is,  like  that  of  the  Berbers  in  the  Western  African 
desert,  of  immemorial  antiquity.  Dr.  Barth  connects 
them  with  the  Aterantes  of  Herodotus.  They  have 
also  been  connected  with  the  Habeches,  Habais,  or 
Habes,  of  Strabo.  Within  historic  times  they  have 
been  known  as  divided  into  seven  independent  Haussa 
States,  upon  which  certain  other  states,  also  largely  peopled 
by  Haussas,  have  been  dependent.  The  seven  original 
states  were  Biram,  Gober,  Kano,  Rano,  Zaria,  Katsena, 
and  Daura.  Some  of  these  have  now  sunk  into  insig- 
nificance. Some  form  still  the  most  important  provinces 
of  Northern  Nigeria.  Though  within  any  period  of 
which  we  have  record — dating  for  about  a  thousand 
years  —  these    states    have     been     independent    of    and 


THE   HAUSSA   STATES  239 

generally  hostile  to  each  other,  their  own  traditions 
point  to  a  more  ancient  period  when  they  were  united 
in  some  form  of  federal  bond. 

Their  mythical  history,  which  presumably  reflects 
some  political  reality,  is  that  Biram,  the  father  of  the 
states,  wedding  Diggera — which  is  the  name  of  a  Berber 
settlement  in  the  desert  to  the  north  of  Haussaland — had 
six  children,  of  whom  Zaria  and  Katsena  were  first  born 
as  twins,  then  Kano  and  Rano,  another  pair  of  twins, 
and  after  them  Gober  and  Daura.  To  each  of  his 
children  the  progenitor  of  the  Haussa  States  is  said  to 
have  assigned  certain  duties,  Gober,  the  most  northerly 
of  the  states,  which  in  historic  times  has  served  as  a 
military  rampart  between  peaceful  Haussaland  and  the 
warlike  tribes  of  the  desert,  was  appointed  war  chief,  with 
the  special  duty  of  defending  his  brethren.  Kano  and 
Rano,  safe  behind  this  rampart,  were  appointed  ministers 
of  industry — dyeing,  weaving,  &c.  Katsena  and  Daura 
were  ministers  of  intercourse  and  trade,  and  Zaria,  which 
is  a  province  of  great  extent  lying  south  of  the  others, 
and  dividing  their  fruitful  plains  from  the  hilly  country 
of  Bautchi,  was  appointed  chief  of  the  slaves,  with  the 
special  duty  of  providing  a  supply  of  labour  for  the 
industry  of  his  brothers.  Bautchi,  the  hilly  country  in 
question,  was  for  many  centuries  the  home  of  the  cannibal 
and  the  hunting-ground  for  slaves,  its  name,  which  is 
a  corruption  of  Boushy,  meaning  the  country  of  the 
Bauwa,  or  the  slaves. 

In  this  myth  we  get  a  fairly  clear  picture  of  a  union 
of  states,  of  which  the  northern  and  southern  frontiers 
were  actively  defended,  and  where  the  Soudanese  practice 
of  raiding  to  the  south  for  a  labour  supply,  by  means  of 
which  the  industry  of  the  Central  States  was  maintained, 
was  in  full  force.  But  this  condition  of  things  received 
a  still  further  development  before  any  period  of  which  we 
have  contemporary  historic  observation,  for  according  to 
the  myth  the  legitimate  children  of  Biram  were  presently 
increased  by  seven  illegitimate  children.      These  are  the 


240  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

States  of  Zanfara,  Kebbi,  Nupe,  Gwari,  Yauri,  Yoruba, 
and  Kororofa.  In  these  states  the  Haussa  language, 
though  spoken,  is  not  original,  and  we  have  already 
seen  that  Yoruba  claims  for  itself  a  separate  descent 
of  more  than  respectable  antiquity.  Yoruba,  if  included, 
would  carry  Haussaland  practically  to  the  sea  at  Lagos. 
Nupe,  as  we  have  seen,  was  considered  in  the  fourteenth 
century  to  be  one  of  the  most  important  of  the  purely 
native  states  of  the  Soudan.  In  Ibn  Batuta's  day  it 
still  maintained  its  reputation  of  being  wholly  impene- 
trable to  the  white  man.  The  period  at  which  these 
"  illegitimate  "  states  became  infused  with  Haussa  blood, 
or  were  made  dependent  upon  Haussaland,  is  left,  so 
far  as  the  myth  is  concerned,  indefinite.  No  part  of  the 
account  deserves  more  than  such  credit  as  a  myth  may 
receive. 

When  we  come  to  examine  the  few  historical  docu- 
ments which  are  available,  we  find  no  trace  of  political 
union  between  the  Haussa  States,  except  when,  for 
certain  periods  in  their  history,  one  among  them  assumed 
or  acquired  a  temporary  dominance  over  the  others.  On 
the  contrary,  their  history,  as  embodied  in  the  chronicles 
to  which  allusion  has  been  made,  and  which  date  back 
to  the  eighth  or  ninth  centuries  of  our  era,  show  them 
as  independent  kingdoms  in  a  state  of  more  or  less 
chronic  internecine  war.  Any  union  which  may  have 
given  rise  to  the  myth  must  therefore  have  existed 
before  the  year  800  of  our  era. 

In  considering  the  civil  and  political  conditions  of 
the  Haussa  States  we  are  necessarily  reminded  of  the 
organisation  of  the  early  states  of  antiquity.  The 
peoples  of  Asia  Minor,  of  Arabia,  and  of  Egypt  itself, 
in  days  before  the  rise  of  the  Persian,  Macedonian,  and 
Roman  Empires,  were  commonly  organised  in  a  number 
of  allied  but  separate  cities.  Heeren  tells  us  that, 
amongst  the  Syrian  populations,  as  far  as  the  light  of 
history  carries  us  back,  we  find  everywhere  a  number 
of  single    cities,   with   the    territory   around    them,   under 


THE    HAUSSA   STATES  241 

a  monarchical  form  of  government,  the  sovereign  power 
being  placed  in  the  hands  of  kings  or  princes.  "  Examples 
certainly  are,"  he  says,  "to  be  met  with  where  some  of 
these  cities  and  their  monarchs  obtained  a  decided  pre- 
ponderance, and  assumed  to  themselves  a  degree  of 
authority.  This,  however,  was  a  kind  of  forced  alliance 
which  extended  no  further  than  the  exaction  of  tribute 
and  subsidies  in  times  of  war,  without  depriving  the  sub- 
jected cities  of  their  government  and  rulers."  Phoenicia, 
like  Syria,  was  never  one  state,  but  from  the  earliest 
period  down  to  the  Persian  monarchy,  was  always 
divided  into  a  number  of  separate  cities,  each  with  its 
little  territory  around  it.  Allied  cities  in  Phoenicia  were 
very  numerous,  and  it  is  thought  probable  that  there 
may  have  been  periods  when  all  the  cities  of  Phoenicia 
formed  one  confederation,  at  the  head  of  which  at  one 
time  stood  Sidon,  and  at  a  later  period  Tyre.  Neces- 
sities of  defence  led  more  or  less  naturally  to  this 
system.  These  confederations,  we  are  told,  prevailed  in 
all  countries  colonised  by  Phoenicians.  Throughout  the 
colonies  of  Phoenicia,  as  well  as  in  the  mother-country, 
a  common  religion  formed  likewise  a  bond  of  union 
for  the  cities,  and  strengthened  and  preserved  the 
connection  between  them. 

Each  city  had  its  own  proper  government,  and  in  this 
respect  they  were  perfectly  independent  of  each  other. 
The  chief  authority  was  placed  in  the  hands  of  kings,  who 
in  turn  were  to  some  extent  controlled  by  high  priests. 
The  revenues  of  the  cities  depended  in  large  measure  on 
their  trade,  and  the  Phoenicians  have  lived  in  history  as  a 
commercial  people. 

The  parallel  between  the  political  organisation  of  the 
Phoenician  and  the  Haussa  States  seems  to  me  to  be  worth 
indicating,  if  only  as  another  trace  of  the  inspiration  which 
Haussaland  has  unquestionably  drawn  from  the  East. 
There  is  hardly  anything  which  has  been  said  of  Phoenicia 
which  would  not  be  applicable  in  the  present  day  to  the 
cities  of  Haussaland.     Their  independence,  their  cohesion, 

Q 


242  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

their  mutual  jealousies,  their  occasional  acceptance  of  a 
dominant  leader,  their  commercial  activity,  their  common 
religion,  are  features  of  a  quite  remarkable  similarity. 

There  are,  I  think,  especially  interesting  conclusions 
to  be  drawn  from  a  consideration  of  the  early  religion  of 
the  Haussa  States. 

As  regards  the  genealogy  of  the  Haussa  people,  their 
Fulani  historian,  Sultan  Bello,  not  anxious  to  glorify  the 
race  whom  he  desired  his  own  people  to  supplant,  ascribes 
their  origin  to  a  slave,  excepting,  however,  the  people  of 
Gober,  whom  he  admits  to  have  been  free-born,  and  to 
have  descended  from  the  Copts  of  Egypt.  Curiously,  the 
manuscript  obtained  by  the  Niger  Company  in  Kano,  which 
professes  to  carry  the  history  of  that  town  from  mythical 
times  to  the  period  of  the  Fulani  conquest  in  the  beginning 
of  the  nineteenth  century,  gives  a  certain  corroboration  to 
this  view.  "The  chief  of  the  people  of  Kano,"  it  says, 
"was  named  Berbushay.  He  was  a  black,  strong  man, 
and  a  lover  of  hunting."  Bushay,  as  has  been  already 
said,  means  the  land  of  slaves.  "  Ber"  is  frequently  used 
to  signify  man.  Therefore  the  name  of  this  first  chief  of 
Kano  may  well  be  taken  to  signify  "  a  man  from  the  land 
of  slaves."  A  man  from  the  land  of  slaves  is  far  from 
being  necessarily  a  slave,  but  the  coincidence  may  be 
taken  to  justify,  in  part  at  least,  the  statement  of  Bello. 
The  story  of  the  founding  of  Kano  town  by  this  hero  has 
a  Herculean  flavour.  He  achieved,  it  is  said,  many 
labours,  and,  having  one  day  killed  an  elephant  with  his 
spear,  he  carried  the  animal  for  a  long  distance  on  his  head. 
Where  he  put  it  down  was  the  site  of  Kano  town.  He 
himself  lived  on  the  Hill  Dalla,  which  is  now  within  the 
walls  of  Kano,  and  he  had  a  family  of  seven  children.  He 
was  of  course  a  pagan.  It  is  said  of  him  that  "he  in- 
herited the  customs  of  Dalla,  which  were  handed  down 
through  the  pagan  families,"  and  this  mystic  inheritance 
of  Dalla  appears  to  have  made  of  him  the  high  priest,  as 
well  as  chief,  of  the  pagan  tribes  who  owned  his  sway. 
These  spread  far  on  all  sides  of  Kano,  and  they  gathered 


THE    HAUSSA   STATES  243 

to  him  for  religious  festivals.  There  was  a  pagan  goddess 
who  had  many  names,  amongst  them  Gonkie  and  Shem- 
susu.  This  goddess  lived  upon  a  walled  hill  which  was 
guarded  day  and  night,  and  none  were  allowed  to  approach 
her  except  Berbushay  himself.  Her  religious  festivals 
took  place  twice  a  year,  and  on  these  occasions  the  people 
from  north  and  south  and  east  and  west  brought  black 
animals  for  sacrifice.  It  may  be  mentioned  in  connection 
with  this  custom  that,  according  to  the  account  given  by 
Captain  Clapperton,  the  pagan  natives  of  Yoruba  and 
Nupe  still  assemble  once  a  year  round  a  high  hill,  and 
sacrifice  a  black  bull  and  a  black  sheep  and  a  black  dog. 
The  custom  was  that,  when  the  sacrifices  were  made,  Ber- 
bushay went  in  alone  to  the  enclosure  of  the  goddess,  and 
apparently  his  intercourse  with  her  conferred  some  special 
sanctity  upon  him,  for  when  he  came  out,  he  cried  to  the 
people  :  "  I  am  the  heir  of  Dalla,  and  whether  you  will  or 
not  you  must  serve  me."  And  the  people  replied:  "We 
serve  you  without  fear."  There  were  also  in  connection 
with  this  ceremony  mystic  rites,  during  which  the  people 
divested  themselves  of  their  clothing,  but  the  description 
given  in  this  very  imperfect  translation  is  too  vague  to  be 
comprehensible.  A  learned  investigator  will  perhaps  some 
day  ascertain  whether  these  primitive  customs,  dedicated 
to  the  worship  of  a  female  deity  in  the  Soudan,  have  any 
connection  with  the  sanctity  of  the  black  stone  of  the 
Caaba,  and  the  pagan  rites  of  naked  worship  with  which 
Astarte,  or  the  Venus  Erycina  of  the  Phoenicians,  was  once 
honoured  within  the  walls  of  Mecca.  If  the  paganism  of 
the  Soudan  were  shown  to  be  identical  with  that  super- 
seded by  Islam  on  the  shores  of  the  Red  Sea  during  the 
lifetime  of  the  prophet,  it  would  be  a  curious  and  in- 
structive example  of  the  continuity  of  history  that  it 
should  be  tracked  to  its  last  stronghold  in  equatorial 
Africa,  and  abolished  to-day,  after  an  interval  of  more 
than  a  thousand  years,  by  a  far-off  pulsation  of  the  same 
moral  and  intellectual  forces. 

This  Berbushay  was  also  a  prophet.      He  foretold  the 


244  A   TROPICAL   DEPENDENCY 

coming  of  kings  and  the  building  of  mosques.  "  There  is 
one,"  he  said,  "  coming  to  this  town  with  his  people.  He 
will  be  our  head,  and  we  shall  be  his  servants."  And  the 
people  cried:  "This  is  a  bad  saying.  Why  do  you 
prophesy  evil  things  ? "  And  they  wished  him  to  be 
silent.  But  he  said  :  "  You  shall  see  it  by  the  power  of  the 
goddess.  If  it  do  not  come  in  your  time  it  will  come  in 
the  time  of  your  children.  He  will  be  lord  over  all  that 
you  possess,  and  he  will  forget  you,  and  dwell  long  with 
his  own  people."  The  people  were  grieved  in  their  hearts 
at  his  saying.  But  they  knew  him  for  a  true  prophet, 
and  they  believed  his  word.  They  asked  him:  "What 
shall  we  do  to  hinder  this  mighty  thing } "  And  he 
said,  "  There  is  no  help  but  in  patience."  Therefore 
they  waited  in  patience  till  afterwards,  in  the  time  of  their 
children,  there  came  Bagoda,  also  called  Daud  (or  David), 
who  with  all  his  people  marched  upon  the  place.  Then 
it  was  said:  "This  is  the  man  whose  coming  Berbushay 
foretold."     And  he  was  the  first  of  the  kings  of  Kano, 

I  have  quoted  this  narrative  at  length,  partly  for  the 
picture  that  it  gives  of  pagan  customs,  which  vaguely  recall 
those  noted  by  El  Bekri  as  existing  in  Ghana  at  the  end 
of  the  eleventh  century,  and  partly  for  the  sake  of  the 
prophecy,  so  typical  of  the  fate  of  Haussaland  that  it  can 
only  have  been  produced  by  the  national  character  which 
ensured  its  fulfilment.  "  You  shall  be  conquered,  and 
there  will  be  no  remedy  but  in  patience."  This  prophecy 
alone,  accomplished  as  it  has  been  by  history,  would  seem 
to  confirm  the  authenticity  of  that  descent  from  the  ever- 
conquered  peoples  of  Egypt  which  has  been  attributed  to 
the   Haussa  race. 


CHAPTER   XXVIII 

THE    DOMINATION    OF    KANO 

I  DO  not  propose,  with  the  very  hmited  material  which 
is  available,  to  attempt  to  reconstruct  any  detailed  his- 
tory of  the  fortunes  of  the  Haussa  States.  Nor  is  it 
likely  that  such  a  narrative  would  be  very  interesting, 
even  did  the  material  exist  for  its  relation.  The  daily 
life  of  primitive  states,  and  the  petty  incidents  of  their 
public  fortune,  are  no  more  interesting  than  the  daily  life 
of  private  individuals.  It  is  with  the  general  movement 
of  civilisation,  as  it  rises  or  falls  in  the  flood  and 
ebb  of  national  life,  that  history  is  concerned ;  and,  in 
the  records  of  relatively  undeveloped  peoples,  it  is  only 
in  that  portion  of  their  existence  which  contributes  to, 
or  is  associated  with,  the  general  movement  that  we 
are  interested. 

The  scraps  of  history  and  legend  which  have  been 
preserved,  and  of  which  some  specimens  have  been 
offered  to  the  reader,  would  seem  to  establish  the 
broad  fact  that  in  some  period  of,  to  us,  remote  anti- 
quity, the  Haussa  people  were  brought  into  existence 
by  a  union  between  earlier  races  inhabiting  the  Valley 
of  the  Nile  or  the  shores  of  the  Red  Sea,  and  the 
aboriginal  pagans  whose  descendants  are  now  to  be 
found  in  the  hills  of  Bautchi  and  Adamawa.  At  a 
very  early  period  the  simpler  arts  of  domestic  and  civil 
life  were  developed  among  them,  for  in  the  legend  of 
Kano  it  is  related  that  even  before  the  coming  of  the 
founder  of  that  town  there  were  eleven  great  pagans 
who  were  respectively  the  ancestors  and  patrons  of 
Love,  of  War,  of  Water,  of  Strong   Drink,   of  Hunting, 


246  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

of  Medicine,  of  Iron-smelting,  of  Salt- working,  and  of 
Blacksmiths,  &c.  The  generally  accepted  religion  was 
a  form  of  paganism  in  which  a  goddess  was  supreme, 
and  in  which  the  manner  of  worship  would  seem  to 
have  had  something  in  common  with  the  worship  of 
Venus  or  Astarte,  from  which  Housal,  one  of  the 
earliest  recorded  kings  of  Egypt,  took  his  name.  It 
is  on  the  authority  of  Macrizi  that  I  give  this  mean- 
ing of  the  name  of  Housal,  and  I  am  not  so  rash  as 
to  assume  from  the  mere  similarity  of  sound  that  the 
same  meaning  attaches  to  the  name  of  Haussa,  or,  as 
it  is  sometimes  written,  Houssaland.  I  only  note  the 
fact  that  the  origin  of  the  name  of  Haussa  is  unknown, 
and  that  the  great  common  bond  of  the  people  who 
bear  it  would  seem  to  have  been  their  religion  and 
their  lanauao-e.  If  this  name  had  its  oriofin  in  their 
religion,  it  would  have  been  the  same  name  wher- 
ever their  language  was  spoken.  The  form  of  their 
religion  differed  from  that  of  the  Ju-ju  worship  of 
the  coasts,  and  at  the  present  day  the  pagans  of 
Yoruba  express  themselves  in  terms  of  horror  when 
speaking  of  the  fetish  worship  and  human  sacrifices  of 
Benin. 

This  universal  worship  of  a  supreme  goddess  ap- 
pears to  have  given  rise  to  the  tradition  that  the 
Haussa  States  were  at  one  time  under  the  domination 
of  a  woman,  whose  seat  of  government  was  said  to 
have  been  at  Zaria.  Early  tradition  attributes  to  her 
the  founding  of  the  town,  and  associates  a  colossal 
statue  of  her  with  some  remarkable  rocks  which  bore 
the  name  of  Almena,  to  the  south-east  of  the  present 
position  of  Zaria.  But  Sultan  Bello,  who  repeats  the 
tradition  that  the  seven  provinces  of  Haussa  were  at 
one  time  under  the  domination  of  one  queen,  says  that 
the  name  of  the  queen  was  Amina,  that  she  was  a 
daughter  of  the  Prince  of  Zaria,  and  that  she  sub- 
dued the  seven  provinces  of  Haussa  by  force  of  arms, 
making    them    all    tributary   to   her,  and   conquering  also 


THE    DOMINATION    OF    KANO  247 

other   native    states   as    far  as    the   navigable    reaches   of 
the  Lower  Niger. 

Legend  and  history  seem  in  this  instance  to  have 
aUied  themselves,  for,  while  the  worship  of  the  goddess 
was  long  anterior  to  the  existence  of  any  lady  bearing 
the  suspiciously  orthodox  name  of  the  Mother  of  the 
Prophet,  and  allusions  to  the  statue  are  to  be  found 
in  the  very  earliest  writers,  the  Kano  chronicle  places 
an  excellent  queen,  Amina  of  Zaria,  who  reigned  for 
thirty-four  years,  in  just  the  place  in  which  we  might 
expect  to  find  her — that  is,  towards  the  end  of  the 
fourteenth  century,  about  a  hundred  years  after  Mo- 
hammedanism was  introduced  into  the  Haussa  States. 
The  theory  of  the  domination  of  Amina  over  the 
Haussa  States  is  still  further  disposed  of  by  the  state- 
ment that  in  this  reign  the  long  struggle  between 
Kano  and  Zaria  was  brought  to  an  end  by  the  final 
subjugation  of  Zaria.  Queen  Amina  seems,  however, 
to  have  been  a  person  whose  importance  was  fully  re- 
cognised, and  after  the  conquest  the  King  of  Kano 
assigned    to    her   use    the    whole    of  the    land    tax    from 

o 

the  southern  provinces  of  Nupe  to  Kororofa — that  is, 
the  country  lying  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Benue — and 
also  laid  on  Nupe  a  special  tax  of  eunuchs  and  kola 
nuts  to  be  paid  to  the  queen. 

"The  country  of  Haussa,"  says  Sultan  Bello,  who 
wrote  in  the  nineteenth  century,  "consists  of  seven 
provinces,  to  each  of  which  a  prince  is  appointed  to 
superintend  its  affairs,  and  the  inhabitants  of  the  whole 
speak  one  language.  The  central  province  of  this 
kingdom  is  Katsena,  the  most  extensive  is  Zaria,  the 
most  warlike  is  Gober,  and  the  most  fertile  is  Kano." 
Sultan  Bello  thus  places  Katsena  in  the  centre  of  the 
Haussa  States,  and  references  to  Katsena  in  the  writ- 
ings of  the  Arabs  imply  that  it  was  a  place  of  impor- 
tance in  the  later  development  of  Haussaland,  famous 
alike  for  the  industry  and  the  learning  of  its  inhabi- 
tants.    The  myth,  to  which  reference  has   been  made  in 


248  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

an  earlier  chapter,  also  speaks  of  it  as  being,  with 
Zaria,  the  oldest  of  the  states.  But  history  places  its 
development  at  a  later  date  than  that  of  Kano.  As 
will  be  seen,  it  did  not  rise  to  its  full  power  till  after 
the  Moorish  conquest,  when,  by  the  destruction  of  the 
eastern  capital  of  the  Songhay  Empire,  a  stream  of 
commerce    was    directed    to    its    oates.      The    most    bril- 

o 

liant  period  of  the  history  of  Kano  was  already  closed 
before  the  end  of  the  sixteenth  century. 

Gober,  by  its  geographical  position  on  the  edge  of 
the  northern  desert,  and  the  necessity  which  was  entailed 
upon  it  of  constant  conflict  with  the  desert  tribes,  early 
acquired  a  more  warlike  reputation  than  its  sister  states  ; 
but,  perhaps  because  of  the  peril  to  which  it  was  per- 
petually exposed  upon  the  north,  it  seems  never  to  have 
attempted  in  its  earlier  period  to  achieve  by  force  of 
arms  any  general  conquest  in  the  Haussa  States,  and 
its  importance  in  Haussaland,  like  that  of  Katsena,  is 
subsequent  to  the  greatest  epoch  of  Kano.  At  one  time 
it  stretched  far  northward  into  the  desert,  and  its  people 
inhabited  the  territories  of  Ahir  or  Asben  upon  the 
Tripoli-Fezzan  route,  but  it  was  driven  from  this  posi- 
tion towards  the  end  of  the  eleventh  century  by  Berber, 
perhaps  Morabite,  invaders. 

Daura  would  seem  to  have  been  one  of  the  most 
ancient  of  the  Haussa  States,  and  references  to  it  are  fre- 
quent in  the  Kano  chronicle  ;  but,  like  its  sister  Rano,  it 
does  not  appear  to  have  played  a  very  important  public 
part  in  the  history  that  is  known  to  us  of  Haussaland. 

Zaria,  the  most  southerly  of  the  original  seven  states, 
distinguished  itself  from  a  very  early  date  by  the  conquest 
of  the  southern  non-Haussa  provinces.  It  extended  its 
power  over  the  whole  of  the  hilly  country  to  the  conflu- 
ence of  the  Niger  and  the  Benu^,  and  even  beyond  it 
towards  the  sea. 

It  will  be  seen,  on  glancing  at  a  map  of  West 
Africa,  that  the  Niger  and  the  Benue,  flowing  towards 
each  other  from  north-west  and   north-east,  and   meeting 


THE    DOMINATION    OF    KANO  249 

at  Lokoja,  a  little  south  of  the  eighth  parallel  of  latitude 
— whence  their  combined  flood  flows  under  the  one  name 
of  the  Niger  very  nearly  due  south  for  upwards  of  250 
miles  to  the  Gulf  of  Guinea — form  within  the  boundary 
of  the  British  Protectorate  of  this  part  of  Africa  the 
figure  of  a  large  and  loosely  outlined  Y.  The  connection 
of  the  Benue  with  Lake  Chad  is  a  matter  of  controversy  ; 
but  the  southern  portion  of  this  great  inland  sea,  lying 
north  of  the  sources  of  the  Benue,  completes  the  easterly 
development  of  the  Y-shaped  water-system  of  the  country. 
It  is  within  the  branches  of  this  Y  that  Bornu  and  Haussa- 
land  proper  are  contained.  One  state — Borgu — included 
now  within  the  limits  of  Haussaland,  though  not  a  Haussa 
State,  lies  altogether  outside  this  figure  on  the  west  bank 
of  the  Niger ;  but  the  most  southerly  extension  of  Borgu 
carries  it  only  to  the  ninth  degree.  We  may  say  that 
all  the  countries  with  which  we  are  now  about  to  be 
concerned  lie  between  8°  and  14°  north  latitude.  And 
the  original  seven  states  of  Haussa  have  an  even  more 
northerly  extension,  being  all  situated  to  the  north  of 
10°.  The  southward  course  of  the  united  rivers  runs 
through  pagan  countries  to  the  sea. 

We  are  necessarily  obliged,  in  making  use  of  the 
Kano  chronicle,  to  view  the  life  of  the  Haussa  States 
through  Kano  eyes  ;  but  for  that  very  reason  it  is  perhaps 
the  more  to  be  trusted  when  it  presents  to  us  a  picture 
of  constant  strife,  with  varying  fortune,  between  itself 
and  the  other  states,  leaving  us  to  learn  from  foreign 
sources  that  from  time  to  time  a  submerging  tide  of 
external  conquest  swept  over  the  country,  and  reduced 
all  alike  to  the  equality  of  submission.  There  can  be 
no  doubt  that  Kano  occupied  from  early  times  a  leading 
position  in  Haussaland,  but  so  evenly  do  the  strokes  of 
fate  appear  to  have  been  distributed,  that,  notwithstanding 
the  predominant  rank  of  Kano,  it  is  probable  that  the 
history  of  that  province  offers  a  fair  type  of  the  history 
of  any  one  of  its  legitimate  or  illegitimate  sister  states. 
We  take  it  up  at  a  point  in  the  general  history  of  Haussa- 


250  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

land,  when  Daura  and  Zaria  were  already  fully  developed, 
and  the  southern  country  to  the  confluence  of  the  rivers 
acknowledged  the  greatness,  if  it  did  not  absolutely  accept 
the  sway,  of  Zaria.  The  non-Haussa  States  of  Borgu, 
Nupe,  Bautchi,  and  Kororofa,  stretched  in  a  belt  of  for- 
midable pagan  strength  along  the  course  of  the  two 
rivers,  and  we  have  already  made  ourselves  acquainted 
with  an  outline  of  the  contemporary  history  of  the  great 
non-Haussa  nations  lying  to  the  west.  The  pagan  belt, 
stretching  from  8°  north  latitude  to  the  coast,  was  prac- 
tically unknown  to  the  early   Haussa  races. 

The  first  king  of  Kano,  whose  second  name  of  Daud, 
or  David,  would  appear  to  indicate  an  Eastern  origin, 
reigned,  so  far  as  our  uncertain  dates  may  be  trusted, 
towards  the  end  of  the  tenth  century,  or  about  a  hundred 
years  before  the  Morabite  invasion  from  the  west,  which 
carried  Mohammedanism  through  the  Western  Soudan. 
Opinions  differ  as  to  whether  the  invasion  reached  as 
far  as  the  countries  lying  to  the  south  of  the  Tripoli- 
Fezzan  route ;  but  if  it  did,  the  Mohammedanism  of  the 
five  tribes  was  not  carried  so  far  south  as  to  enter  the 
Haussa  States.  The  establishment  of  Islam  in  Ahir  in 
the  desert,  is  attributed  to  the  eleventh  century  ;  but  the 
State  of  Gober  offered  an  impassable  barrier  to  any  more 
southerly  extension  of  the  doctrine  of  Mohammed  by  the 
sword.  The  Haussa  States  remained  pagan  until  the 
emigration  of  Wankore  or  Wangara  Mohammedanism 
from  Melle,  in  the  rising  epoch  of  that  empire,  about  the 
middle  of  the  thirteenth  century,  brought  the  new  religion 
peacefully  to  Kano.  It  was  accepted  by  a  certain  King 
Yahya,  who  was  then  reigning,  and  the  story  of  his  con- 
version is  embellished  by  a  graphic  account  of  a  miracle 
worked  upon  the  pagan  chief  and  people  of  Gazawa,  who 
not  only  refused  to  be  converted,  but  purposely  defiled 
the  mosque  erected  by  King  Yahya.  The  chief  and  his 
people  were  summoned  on  a  given  day,  and  when  they 
were  assembled,  "  the  Mussulmans  prayed  against  the 
pagans."       God   answered    the     Mussulman    prayer,    and 


THE    DOMINATION    OF    KANO  251 

the  pagans  were  all  stricken  with  blindness,  "not  only 
the  chief  and  his  people  who  were  assembled,  but  the 
women  in  their  homes."  After  this,  the  chronicle  says 
that  the  religion  of  Mohammed  was  accepted,  and  that, 
by  the  force  of  the  true  God,  King  Yahya  conquered  his 
enemies  as  far  as  Kororofa  and  Atagher — that  is,  practi- 
cally as  far  as  Lagos.  He  reigned  for  thirty-seven  years, 
and  was  widely  feared  and  respected. 

The  next  reign  was  a  reign  of  peace,  and  when  the 
king  died  he  was  buried  by  the  imaum.  It  is  recorded 
of  him  that  he  was  the  first  who,  when  he  died,  was 
wrapped  in  a  white  cloth  and  had  prayers  read  over 
him.  But  when,  in  the  succeeding  reign,  the  southern 
provinces  refused  to  pay  tribute,  and  the  great  war  with 
Zaria  began,  the  king  consulted  the  old  pagan  priests, 
and  they  told  him  that  if  he  wished  to  be  victorious  he 
must  return  to  the  religion  of  his  ancestors.  He  attended 
the  pagan  ceremonies,  where  the  priest  "sang  the  song 
of  Berbushay."  After  that,  when  he  went  against  Zaria 
he  was  successful.  The  King  of  Zaria  was  killed,  and 
the  people  were  scattered  abroad.  This  king  is  reported 
to  have  introduced  the  use  of  iron  caps  among  his  soldiers. 
The  shirts  of  mail  in  which  the  warriors  of  the  Haussa 
States  still  come  out  to  battle  are  said  to  have  come  to 
them  originally  as  spoils  of  the  Crusaders,  brought  down 
by  Arab  merchants  from  Palestine.  They  may  have 
been  in  use  at  an  earlier  period,  but  I  find  no  note  of 
any  armour  until  this  reign  of  the  early  part  of  the 
eleventh  century. 

All  the  early  reigns  are  filled  with  the  struggle 
between  paganism  and  Mohammedanism,  with  miracles 
duly  recorded  on  either  side,  and  lapses  in  times  of 
crisis  on  the  part  of  the  kings.  Gradually  the  pagan 
element  drops  out,  and  it  becomes  evident  that  all  the 
intelligence  and  cultivation  of  the  country  has  become 
Mohammedan.  In  the  reign  of  the  fifteenth  king,  another 
David,  Kano  enters  into  closer  relations  with  Bornu, 
and  a  king  of  Bornu,   attended  by  many   Mohammedan 


252  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

priests  and   teachers,   spent   a   period    of   several    months 
in    Kano.      The    Bornu   chronicle   quoted   by    Dr.    Barth, 
says  that   Kalnama,  King  of  Bornu,  took  refuge  in   Kano 
from   his  rebellious   subjects   about  the   year    1430.     The 
Kano   chronicle   would   seem    to    date    the   visit   nearly  a 
hundred    years    earlier,   but    the    agreement    between    the 
two  chronicles   is   sufficient   to    show  that,   at  the  end   of 
the    fourteenth    century,   Mohammedanism    was  generally 
accepted   in   the   high   places    of    Haussaland.      It   was   in 
the  reign  of  this   David  that   the  conquest   of  Zaria  was 
completed  under  orthodox  conditions,  and  Queen  Amina 
ranked    among    the    subject    sovereigns    of    Kano.       At 
this    time,    according    to    Kano    authority,    the    whole    of 
the   south   of   what    is    now    Northern    Nigeria   was   sub- 
ject to    Kano.     A   more    malicious    interpretation   of  the 
facts    of   the    treaty    with    Zaria    would   suggest  that   the 
generosity   of    King   David   in    allotting   the   land   tax  of 
the  southern   provinces,   as   well    as   the   special   taxes  of 
Nupe,  to   the   service   of  Queen  Amina,   was   not  wholly 
voluntary. 

During  the  next  reign  a  general  of  the  Kano  forces 
remained  in  the  southern  provinces  for  seven  years, 
conquering  the  pagans,  taking  many  prisoners,  and  send- 
ing every  month  a  thousand  slaves  from  the  seat  of  war 
to  Kano.  The  King  kept  the  armies  well  supplied,  and 
after  this  experience  the  affairs  of  the  southern  portion 
of  Haussaland  seem  for  a  time  to  have  given  no  more 
cause  for  preoccupation.  Relations  with  Bornu  in  the  east 
had  in  the  meantime  become  pressing.  Embassies  and 
the  opening  of  the  roads  led  finally  to  war,  of  which 
the  result,  towards  the  beginning  of  the  fifteenth  century, 
is  glosed  in  the  single  sentence  that  "many  towns  were 
given  to  Bornu."  This,  king  was  the  first  to  have  camels 
and  to  drink  wine  in   Haussaland. 

In  the  reign  of  the  following  king,  Yakoub,  or  Jacob 
— that  is,  about  the  year  1402  to  1422 — we  first  hear  of 
the  immigration  of  Fulani,  who  came  from  Melle  and 
Masina,   to    Haussaland,   and   were  given  land  in   Kano, 


THE    DOMINATION    OF    KANO  253 

Zaria,  and  Gazawa.  This  was  the  declining  period  of 
the  history  of  Melle,  and  the  emigration  seems  to  have 
been  a  movement  of  considerable  magnitude.  Some  of  the 
Fulani,  we  are  told,  passed  on  eastward  to  Bornu,  some 
were  left  on  the  way  with  their  slaves,  and  all  who 
were  too  weak  to  proceed  on  their  journey  remained 
in  Haussaland.  At  this  period,  trade  seems  to  have 
received  an  active  stimulus,  and  foreign  caravans  are 
noticed  as  coming  from  various  places.  Berbers  and 
Arabs  came  into  the  country,  some  of  whom  settled 
in  Kano  and  some  in  Katsena.  There  was  also  local 
trade  between   Kano  and   Nupe. 

This  peaceful  reign  brings  us,  in  the  first  half  of  the 
fifteenth  century  (probably  1422-1459),  to  the  reign  of 
a  king  of  Kano,  whose  name  of  Mohammed  Rimpa 
has  survived  in  all  the  chronicles.  Under  him  Moham- 
medan civilisation  spread  through  the  country.  Sherifs 
came  to  Kano  from  the  East,  bringing  with  them  books 
and  learning.  Mosques  were  built,  and  "religion  became 
strong  in  Kano."  Mohammed  Rimpa  was  the  first  to 
observe  the  fast  of  Ramadan.  He  gave  titles  to  his 
eunuchs,  and  shut  his  women  up  after  the  fashion  of 
the  East.  Mohammed  Rimpa  built  the  walls  of  the 
town  of  Kano  with  seven  gates.  He  also  built  a  palace 
for  himself,  as  did  some  of  his  principal  officers.  He 
divided  the  territory  of  Kano  into  nine  provinces,  and 
appointed  to  rule  over  them  nine  subject  kings.  "  There 
was  no  king,"  says  the  chronicle,  "so  great  as  Rimpa." 
Of  contemporary  history  during  his  reign,  we  are  told 
only  that  for  eleven  years  Katsena  was  at  war  with  her 
neighbour  Mastur. 

Mohammed  Rimpa  seems,  indeed,  to  have  possessed 
one  of  those  commanding  individualities  which,  when 
fortune  places  it  upon  a  throne,  marks  an  epoch  in 
the  country  over  which  it  rules.  From  the  reign  of 
Mohammed  Rimpa,  Kano  may  be  reckoned  with  the 
civilised  native  powers  of  the  Soudan.  Yet,  as  so  often 
happens    when    the    influence    of  one   man    has    achieved 


254  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

a  strong  forward  movement,  the  brilliant  period  of  the 
prosperity  of  Kano  under  Rimpa  was  destined  to  undergo 
a  speedy  reactionary  eclipse  under  weaker  successors. 

The  ten  years'  reign  of  the  next  king  was  a  long 
series  of  wars  with  Katsena  in  the  north-west,  with 
Zaria  in  the  south,  finally  and  disastrously  with  Bornu 
in  the  east.  The  result  of  the  Bornu  campaign  is  again 
tersely  related  in  a  sentence:  "The  King  of  Bornu 
dethroned  the  King  of  Kano,  and  put  his  own  slave  on 
the  throne  of  Kano." 

History  does  not  condescend  to  record  the  fate  or 
the  doings  of  the  Bornu  slave,  but  after  the  persistent 
fashion  of  Haussaland,  we  shortly  find  the  son  of  the 
defeated  king  of  Kano  reigning  in  his  father's  stead. 
This  king,  Ahmadu  Kesoke,  had  the  strong  blood  of 
his  grandfather  Rimpa  in  his  veins.  He  "  conquered 
the  four  corners  of  Haussa,  east  and  west  and  north 
and  south."  Bornu  marched  against  him,  but  was  de- 
feated and  driven  back  with  considerable  loss.  In  this 
reign  learning  prospered,  and  various  Sheiks  and  Mallams 
are  mentioned  as  coming  to   Kano  from  other  towns. 

The  reign  of  Ahmadu  Kesoke  must  have  represented 
the  summit  of  the  greatness  of  Kano,  for  we  know  that, 
in  the  early  years  of  the  sixteenth  century,  Haussaland 
was  overrun  by  the  armies  of  Songhay.  The  dates  and 
account  of  the  campaign  given  in  the  TmHkh-es-Soudan 
are  too  circumstantial  to  admit  of  doubt,  and  Leo  Africanus, 
writing  in  1526,  speaks  of  the  greatness  of  Kano  as  being 
already  in  decline.  After  a  description  of  the  state  and 
of  its  capital,  he  says  :  "  The  inhabitants  are  rich  mer- 
chants and  most  civil  people.  Their  king  was  in  times 
past  of  great  puissance,  and  had  mighty  troops  of  horse- 
men at  his  command,  but  he  hath  since  been  constrained 
to  pay  tribute  to  the  Kings  of  Zaria  and  Katsena. 
Afterwards  Askia,  the  King  of  Timbuctoo,  feigning 
friendship  unto  the  two  foresaid  kings,  treacherously  slew 
them  both,  and  then  he  waged  war  against  the  King 
of  Kano,  whom  after  a  long  siege  he  took,  and  compelled 


THE    DOMINATION    OF    KANO  255 

him  to  marry  one  of  his  daughters,  restoring  him  again 
to  his  kingdom,  conditionally  that  he  should  pay  to  him 
the  third  part  of  all  his  tribute." 

In  the  storm  thus  curtly  described  we  may  discern 
the  ever  recurring  conditions  of  Haussa  convulsions.  The 
king,  though  conquered,  was  "  restored  again."  The 
detail  of  having  to  add  a  daughter  of  the  Askia  to  his 
harem  was  not  onerous.  From  the  Haussa  point  of  view 
it  would,  not  unnaturally,  be  accounted  among  the 
customary  compliments  of  an  honourable  peace.  To 
surrender  a  third  of  his  tribute  was  more  serious,  but 
to  the  philosophic  Haussa  this  was  but  the  fortune  of 
war,  and  the  resident  officials  whom  Askia  placed  at  the 
court  of  Kano  would  seem  to  have  incommoded  no 
one. 

It  is  characteristic  of  the  life  of  Haussaland  that  the 
whole  of  this  important  and  well-attested  episode  is 
ignored  in  a  chronicle  which  professes  to  give  a  minute 
and  continuous  record  of  the  reigns  of  the  kings.  The 
name  of  Songhay  is  never  mentioned.  Nor  can  this 
omission  be  attributed  wholly,  as  might  at  first  be 
imagined,  to  a  patriotic  desire  to  ignore  an  inglorious 
chapter  of  local  history.  In  the  accounts  which  are 
given  of  contemporary  local  wars  we  are  told  frankly 
enough  when  Kano  is  beaten,  and  we  are  allowed  to 
see  the  disastrous  results  of  the  fighting  with  Zaria  and 
Katsena.  I  incline  to  believe,  and  that  is  why  it  may, 
I  think,  be  properly  qualified  as  characteristic,  that  the 
omission  of  this  chapter  of  foreign  conquest  from  the 
local  annals  is  based  on  a  real  indifference  to  the  event. 
The  net  result  of  the  operation  was  that  the  King  of 
Kano  was  restored  to  his  kingdom.  The  conditions 
which  attached  to  his  restoration  were  not  important  in 
the  eyes  of  a  historian  who  was  acquainted  with  Zaria 
and  Katsena,  Gober  and  Bornu,  but  who  knew  practi- 
cally nothing  of  the  foreign  king  who  reigned  at  Tim- 
buctoo.  Local  affairs  would  seem  to  have  been  little 
affected   by  the  inroad   of   the  Songhay,    whose  adminis- 


256  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

tration  of  these  distinct  provinces  was  never  much  more 
than  nominal.  Therefore,  though  we  know  from  outside 
information  the  epoch  at  which  the  Songhay  conquest 
must  have  taken  place,  the  chronicle  pursues  its  narra- 
tive as  though  Songhay  had  not  existed. 

In  addition  to  the  disputes  with  Katsena  and  Zaria, 
which,  as  we  know,  occasioned  the  intervention  of  Askia 
the  Great,  we  hear  from  it  of  civil  war  in  Kano  itself. 
A  King  Jacob,  who  was  taken  off  the  throne  by  a  local 
revolution,  refused  to  be  reinstated  when  his  generals 
had  subdued  the  opposing  faction,  because  he  preferred 
to  devote  his  life  to  study.  The  fortunes  of  Kano  are 
very  evidently  in  eclipse.  Yet,  through  several  reigns, 
we  are  given  no  hint  of  what  must  have  been  the  pre- 
dominating cause.  The  conquest  by  Songhay  must  appa- 
rently have  taken  place  during  the  last  years  of  the 
reign  of  Ahmadu  Kesoke,  then  a  very  old  man.  After 
Kesoke  came  Jacob,  and  then  others  of  no  importance. 
Durino-  the  war  with  Katsena  the  condition  of  the  pro- 
vince became  so  bad  that  people  could  no  longer  farm 
in  the  open  country.  They  were  obliged  to  take  refuge 
in  the  walled  towns.  The  villages  were  broken  up,  and 
the  land  was  left  untilled.  The  King  Abu  Bekr,  who 
had  succeeded  to  Jacob  and  another  dethroned  king, 
gave  himself  up  to  religion.  "His  throne  was  uncared 
for,  and  so  were  his  people.  But  the  town  was  crowded 
with  priests  and  learned  men,  many  of  whom  came,  it  is 
said,  from  Baghirmi."  The  next  king  was  more  active, 
but  not  more  fortunate.  In  his  war  with  Katsena  there 
were  two  great  battles,  and  being  outnumbered,  "Kano 
had  to  run  away,  willing  or  unwilling."  The  weakness 
of  Kano  provoked  a  revolution  of  the  southern  provinces, 
and  in  the  succeeding  reign  Kororofa,  one  of  the  southern 
pagan  provinces  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Benue,  invaded 
the  province  of  Kano,  ravaging  all  the  lesser  towns  and 
getting  actually  within  the  walls  of  Kano.  The  Katsena 
war  proceeded  at  the  same  time,  and  the  chronicler 
sorrowfully  narrates  that  the   Katsena  and   Kororofa  wars 


THE    DOMINATION    OF    KANO  257 

"broke  the  spirit  of  Kano."  "The  people  had  to  sit  still 
and  be  afraid,  and  for  twenty  years  they  were  not  able 
to  go  to  war." 

After  this,  famine,  the  not  unnatural  result  of  a  long 
period  of  war,  during  which  the  agricultural  population 
had  been  driven  from  the  land,  added  its  desolation  to 
the  miseries  of  the  country.  It  lasted  for  eleven  years, 
and  brought  the  fortunes  of  Kano  to  their  lowest  ebb, 
at  a  moment  which  must  have  coincided  with  the  date 
of  the  Moorish  conquest  in  the  last  decade  of  the  sixteenth 
century. 


CHAPTER    XXIX 

HAUSSALAND   TO    THE    END    OF   THE    EIGHTEENTH 

CENTURY 

The  Moorish  conquest,  for  reasons  which  will  presently 
be  told,  affected  the  Haussa  States  so  much  less  than  it 
affected  the  more  westerly  portions  of  the  Soudan  that 
it  will,  I  think,  be  excusable  to  abandon  the  strictly 
chronological  order  of  narration,  and  to  say  here  what 
remains  to  be  said  of  the  history  of  Haussaland,  even 
though  it  carries  us  somewhat  beyond  the  era  of  the 
great  convulsion  which  severed  the  connection  of  the 
Soudan  with  the  civilised  world. 

I  wish  that  I  had  the  material  which  will  perhaps 
some  day  be  discovered  for  a  history  of  the  interesting 
pagan  states,  especially  Nupe  and  Kororofa,  which  lay 
on  or  to  the  south  of  the  tenth  parallel  of  latitude, 
peopling  both  banks  of  the  Benue,  and  clustering  about 
the  confluence  of  the  Niger  with  that  river.  We  know 
of  the  inhabitants  of  Kororofa  who  occupied  the  eastern 
end  of  this  belt,  that  they  were  long-haired,  and  apparently 
of  the  higher  physical  type  which  was  brought  to  per- 
fection in  the  Songhays.  At  a  very  early  period  we  hear 
of  them  and  of  the  people  of  Nupe  as  practising  the  arts 
of  smelting,  of  smith's  work,  of  weaving,  dyeing,  &c.,  and 
as  being  well  clothed  in  neat  cotton  robes.  Their  local 
civilisation  would  appear  to  have  preceded  the  more 
northern  civilisation  of  the  Haussa  States  proper.  Though 
they  were  pagan,  their  paganism  was  of  the  order  of  the 
goddess- worship  of  the  Haussas,  and  as  far  removed  from 
the  fetish  worship  of  the  coast  as  their  industrial  and 
social  habits  were  removed   from  those  of  the   Dem-Dem 

cannibals,  whom  they  partly  drove  southwards  across  the 

258 


HAUSSALAND  259 

river  and  partly  hunted  into  the  mountains  which  on  the 
north  made  a  defensible  barrier  between  their  own  and 
subsequent  Haussa  settlements.  The  river,  no  doubt,  at 
first  formed  the  southern  boundary  of  their  territory,  and 
was  afterwards  peopled  by  them  on  both  sides. 

The  northern  mountains,  constantly  visited  by  all 
the  peoples  of  Haussaland  for  the  sake  of  the  gold,  silver, 
tin,  lead,  iron,  and  antimony,  which  from  the  earliest 
times  they  were  reported  to  contain,  were  rendered 
dangerous  by  the  nature  of  the  rude  tribes  who  inhabited 
them,  and  they  are  to  this  day  the  home  of  lingering 
tribes  of  naked  cannibals.  They  were  from  the  earliest 
period  a  favourite  hunting-ground  for  slaves,  more  valu- 
able because  more  easily  obtained  than  the  minerals  with 
which  the  sometimes  inaccessible  rocks  were  reputed  to 
be  so  richly  stored.  Landor  observed,  in  travelling  south 
from  Zaria  to  the  Benue  through  this  country  in  1827, 
that  the  people  on  his  route  were  ready  to  sell  their 
children  for  a  chicken,  and  at  the  moment  of  the  British 
occupation  these  districts  still  formed  a  slave  reserve  for 
the  more  northern  states.  Last  year,  1904,  when  the 
High  Commissioner  made  a  tour  through  these  provinces, 
he  found  that,  notwithstanding  the  suppression  of  slave- 
raiding  which  has  taken  place  under  the  British  flag, 
parents  were  privately  selling  their  children  at  a  price 
varying  from   is.   6d.  to  2s.  apiece. 

Between  these  people  and  the  higher-class  pagans 
of  Borgu,  Nupe,  and  Kororofa,  there  has  been,  for  all 
the  time  of  which  we  have  any  record,  a  very  wide  gulf 
fixed.  For  the  most  part  these  lower-class  pagans  have 
been  driven  by  the  movements  of  local  civilisation  far 
southward  towards  the  coast. 

Assuming,  as  I  think  we  may  assume,  that  the  belt 
of  native  civilisation  which  stretched  from  Borgu  on 
the  west  bank  of  the  Niger  through  Nupe  to  Kororofa, 
not  far  from  the  sources  of  the  Benue  on  the  east,  re- 
presented the  earliest  wave  and  farthest  extension  of 
the  great  movement   which   at   some  very  distant  period 


260  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

pressed  upon  the  Soudan  from  the  north  and  east,  we 
may  observe  that  the  chronological  order  of  civilisation 
in  the  Haussa  States  was  almost  coincident  with  the 
ascending  degrees  of  latitude. 

Next  after  the  civilisation  of  these  southern  states 
followed  the  rise  and  domination  of  Zaria,  a  province 
which,  even  in  the  nineteenth  century,  the  Fulani  his- 
torian describes  as  the  most  extensive  of  the  Haussa  States. 
It  is  probable  that  the  early  prosperity  of  Zaria  may  have 
been  contemporary  with  that  of  Daura  and  Biram  in  the 
north,  but  I  am  obliged  reluctantly  to  abandon  the  history 
of  these  Haussa  States  for  lack  of  material.  References 
to  Daura  as  an  old  and  still  existing  state  are  frequent 
in  the  Kano  chronicle,  and  Dr.  Barth  specially  commends 
Daura,  of  which  the  capital  is  at  the  present  day  a  town 
of  some  importance,  to  the  notice  of  the  antiquarian  for 
the  interest  of  the  legends  which  attach  to  it.  The  only 
legend  with  which  I  am  acquainted  is  one  resembling 
that  already  related  in  connection  with  the  foundation 
of  Kano,  and  attributes  the  foundation  of  the  town  to  a 
strong  man  who  killed  there  the  "  dodo "  or  fetish  lion. 
"  Dodo,"  I  may  say,  is  a  native  word  signifying  the 
King  of  Beasts,  and  may  apply  equally  to  rhinoceros, 
elephant,  or  any  other  great  wild  animal.  The  myth 
may,  I  think,  be  taken  to  indicate  that,  in  the  time  of 
this  hero,  the  worship  of  the  goddess  was  substituted  for 
the  worship  of  the  fetish,  and  it  is  interesting  to  observe 
that  here,  as  in  the  early  history  of  Songhay,  the  memory 
of  the  destruction  of  the  fetish  is  preserved  as  an  historic 
era  in  local  tradition.  The  latitude  of  Daura  is  not  far 
from  the  latitude  of  Gao,  and  such  facts,  collected  from 
wholly  different  sources,  tend  to  confirm  the  theory 
that  there  was  a  time  when  the  fetish  worship  now 
confined  to  the  belt  of  the  southern  coast  extended  far 
to  the  north. 

The  sign-posts  in  the  almost  forgotten  ways  of  ancient 
local  history  are  few,  but  they  point  to  the  conclusion  that 
at  some  very  early  period  a  general  and  widespread  religious 


HAUSSALAND  261 

movement,  having  points  of  resemblance  to  the  Phoenician 
worship  of  Astarte,  and  assimilated  with  a  superior  order 
of  native  civilisation,  superseded  the  fetishism  which  is 
now  to  be  found  among  the  tribes  of  the  coast,  driving 
it  gradually  towards  the  south,  and  that  the  difference 
between  the  peoples  professing  this  form  of  paganism 
and  the  cannibal  fetish  worshippers,  was  scarcely  less 
than  the  difference  which  afterwards  declared  itself  be- 
tween the  peoples  who  accepted  Mohammedanism  and 
those  who  retained  the  local  form  of  goddess-worship. 
Interest  is  added  to  the  subject  by  the  fact  that  the 
three  types  still  exist,  and  can  be  studied  in  Nigeria, 
where  it  may  be  said  that,  at  the  present  day,  three 
distinct  historic  ages  are  persisting  contemporaneously. 

After  dominating  the  southern  provinces,  Zaria  in 
its  turn  was  dominated,  as  we  have  seen,  by  Kano. 
With  the  rise  of  Kano,  and  its  conversion  to  Moham- 
medanism in  the  thirteenth  century,  we  enter  historic 
times,  and  the  history  of  Kano  involves  to  some  extent 
the  history  of  the  principal  provinces  of  Haussaland. 
After  the  period  of  the  Moorish  conquest,  its  arms,  which 
had  been  directed  to  the  south  and  east,  were  turned 
more  continually  to  the  north  and  west.  In  its  later 
history  Katsena,  Zamfara,  and  Gober,  take  the  place 
previously  occupied  by  Zaria  and  the  southern  provinces, 
with  the  difference  that,  following  the  mysterious  law 
by  which  conquest  remained  ever  with  the  north,  Katsena 
in  the  first  instance  established  its  superiority,  and,  after 
Katsena,  Gober,  a  still  more  northern  state,  took  the 
leading  place,  until  the  Fulani  eruption  of  the  nineteenth 
century,  issuing  from  Gober,  subjugated  the  whole  of 
Haussaland. 

Katsena,  whose  literature,  like  that  of  Kano,  was 
purposely  destroyed  by  the  Fulani  at  the  beginning  of  the 
nineteenth  century,  but  of  whose  history  a  chronicle  similar 
to  the  Kano  chronicle  has  been  preserved,  would  seem  to 
have  risen  into  importance  somewhat  later  than  Kano. 
The  dates  which  have   been  examined  and    accepted    by 


262  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

Dr.  Barth  attribute  the  foundation  of  the  city  to  a  hero  of 
the  name  of  Komayo  as  late  as  the  middle  of  the  four- 
teenth century,  while  King  Ibrahim  Maji,  who  lived  about 
the  middle  of  the  sixteenth  century,  is  counted  as  the  first 
Mussulman  king.  This  must,  however,  I  think,  be  an 
error.  It  seems  scarcely  probable  that  Kano,  which  is  at 
no  great  distance,  should  have  had  Mussulman  kings  from 
the  end  of  the  thirteenth  century,  while  Katsena,  nearer 
to  northern  civilisation,  and  in  commercial  and  intellectual 
touch  with  Egypt  and  the  Barbary  States,  should  have 
waited  till  1550  to  seat  a  Mussulman  on  the  throne.  A 
little  bit  of  direct  evidence  which  supports  the  assump- 
tion of  Katsena's  earlier  conversion  is  contained  in  the 
Tarikh-es-Soudan,  where,  in  relating  the  life  of  one  of 
the  distinguished  Mussulman  scholars  of  Timbuctoo, 
Aicha  Ahmed,  who  died  in  1529,  it  is  stated  that,  having 
spent  many  years  in  study  in  the  East,  "he  returned  to 
the  Soudan  and  took  up  his  residence  at  Katsena,  where 
the  Sultan  treated  him  with  much  consideration,  and 
conferred  on  him  the  function  of  Cadi."  It  may,  I  think, 
be  taken  for  granted  that  the  appointment  of  Cadi  was 
not  made  by  a  pagan  Sultan,  nor  would  a  pagan  court 
have  offered  attractions  as  a  residence  to  one  of  the 
most  cultivated  traditionists  of  Timbuctoo.  The  Kano 
chronicle  mentions  Katsena  as  a  place  to  which  many 
of  the  Fulani  went  to  settle  when  they  came  from  Melle 
in  the  end  of  the  fourteenth  century.  It  seems  probable 
that  Katsena,  shortly  to  be  distinguished  under  a  Habe 
dynasty  for  superior  learning,  cultivation,  and  enlighten- 
ment, and  gladly  sought  as  a  residence  by  men  of 
letters  from  all  parts  of  the  Soudan,  received  Moham- 
medanism very  shortly  after  the  foundation  of  the  town. 

It  is  not  certain  that  the  present  town  of  Katsena 
was  the  first  capital  of  the  province,  but  if  it  is  not 
certain  neither  is  it  material.  By  the  middle  of  the 
sixteenth  century,  that  is,  after  the  conquest  by  Songhay, 
and  the  at  least  nominal  incorporation  of  Katsena  with 
that    great    empire,  the    present    town    had    spread    to    a 


HAUSSALAND  263 

size  of  which  the  circuit  was  between  thirteen  and 
fourteen  English  miles,  and  was  divided  into  quarters, 
of  which  the  names  give  some  indication  of  its  activities. 
There  was  the  "old  quarter,"  which  was  believed  to 
have  been  the  site  of  the  original  town ;  there  was  the 
Melle,  or  "strangers'  quarters,"  which  would  seem  by  its 
double  name  to  have  been  associated  with  the  Fulani 
immigration  from  Melle ;  there  were  also  the  quarters 
for  people  from  Bornu  and  Gober,  and  there  was  an 
Arab  quarter.  There  were  quarters  for  the  different 
trades  and  industries,  saddlers,  shoemakers,  dyers,  &c. 
There  was,  as  in  all  great  towns,  a  students'  quarter ; 
there  was — not  far  off — a  dancing  quarter.  There  was 
a  government,  or  official  quarter.  There  were  quarters 
taking  their  names  from  the  eight  gates  of  the  town, 
and  besides  these,  innumerable  others  of  which,  after  a 
list  of  native  names  approaching  to  a  hundred,  it  is 
said :  "  These  are  the  names  of  the  larger  quarters  of 
the  town,   but  there  are  still  many  smaller  ones." 

The  province  of  Katsena,  extending — within  prob- 
ably fluctuating  limits — to  a  considerable  distance  beyond 
the  town,  contained  places  of  importance  of  which  the 
names  compose  a  long  list.  The  town  has  now  fallen 
from  its  former  greatness,  and  has  shrunk  to  a  fraction 
of  its  dimensions  ;  but  the  province,  like  the  province  of 
Kano,  retains  its  natural  advantages.  It  is  thus  de- 
scribed by  Dr.  Barth,  writing  about  half  a  century  ago  ; 
"Altogether  the  province  of  Katsena  is  one  of  the  finest 
parts  of  Negroland,  and  being  situated  just  at  the  water 
parting  of  the  Chad  and  the  Niger,  at  a  general  eleva- 
tion of  from  1200  to  1500  feet,  it  enjoys  the  advantage 
of  being  at  once  well  watered  and  well  drained,  the 
chain  of  hills  which  diversify  its  surface  sending  down 
numerous  rapid  streams,  so  that  it  is  less  insalubrious 
than  other  regions  of  this  continent.  Its  productions 
are  varied  and  rich."  In  the  country  lying  between 
Katsena  and  Kano,  though  devastated  at  the  time  of 
his  passage  by  civil  war.  Dr.  Barth  proceeds  to  enumerate 


264  A   TROPICAL   DEPENDENCY 

cotton,  corn,  yams,  sweet  potatoes,  beans,  ground  nuts, 
bananas,  papaws,  wheat,  onions,  tobacco,  indigo,  as 
forming  the  ordinary  crops.  Katsena  had  also,  he  tells 
us,  figs,  melons,  pomegranates,  and  limes,  and,  until 
the  destruction  of  the  vines  at  the  period  of  the  Fulani 
conquest,  grapes  were  plentiful.  In  addition  to  these 
evidences  of  agriculture,  the  rich  pasturage  was  dotted 
with  vast  herds  of  cattle  and  goats,  while  the  park-like 
scenery,  diversified  by  native  woods,  formed,  he  says, 
one  of  the  finest  landscapes  he  had  ever  seen  in  his 
life.  Amongst  the  woods  the  shea  butter  tree  of  com- 
merce and  the  tamarind  tree  were  remarkable. 

The  effect  of  the  Moorish  conquest  on  Katsena  was 
rather  to  increase  than  to  diminish  its  importance,  for 
the  downfall  of  Kagho,  the  Songhay  capital,  and  the 
disasters  which  followed  under  its  Moorish  conquerors, 
diverted  a  stream  of  commercial  activity  to  Katsena ; 
and  the  Habe  dynasty,  whose  system  of  law  and  ad- 
ministration was  so  admirable  as  to  command  the  respect 
and  the  still  more  emphatic  tribute  of  adoption  by  the 
Fulani  conquerors  of  the  nineteenth  century,  was  founded 
in  Katsena  in  the  beginning  of  the  seventeenth  century, 
shortly  after  the  coming  of  the  Moors.  "  Habe,"  which 
is  the  name  given  to  this  dynasty  by  the  Fulani,  would 
seem  to  be  only  a  native  name  for  Haussa,  but  it 
applies  to  a  special  dynasty  which  at  about  this  period 
possessed  itself  of  power. 

Katsena,  like  Kano,  came  early  into  conflict  with 
Bornu,  and  would  seem  to  have  acknowledged  its  suzer- 
ainty by  the  payment  of  a  tribute  in  slaves.  No  other 
inconvenience  arose  from  the  conquest,  and  for  all  prac- 
tical purposes  Katsena  not  only  remained  independent, 
but  having  come  successfully  out  of  the  long  wars  with 
Kano,  filled,  during  the  seventeenth  and  eighteenth 
centuries  of  our  era,  the  position  of  the  leading  city  of 
this  part  of  Negroland.  In  the  latter  half  of  the 
eighteenth  century  it  was  said  to  be  at  the  height  of  its 
prosperity.      It  was  important  not  only  in  commerce  and 


HAUSSALAND  265 

politics,  but  also  in  learning  and  in  literature.  It  seems  to 
have  been  regarded  as  a  sort  of  university  town.  The 
Haussa  language  attained  here,  it  is  said,  to  its  greatest 
richness  of  form  and  refinement  of  pronunciation,  while 
at  the  same  time  the  manners  of  Katsena  were  dis- 
tinguished by  superior  politeness  over  those  of  the  other 
towns  of  Haussaland. 

During  the  rise  of  Katsena  in  the  seventeenth  and 
eighteenth  centuries,  Kano  recovered  in  part  from  its 
prostration.  But  it  was  subjected  to  many  indignities, 
and  the  end  of  the  seventeenth  century  was  marked  by 
a  war  with  the  then  rising  power  of  Zamfara  on  the 
north-west,  in  which  the  troops  of  Kano  were  beaten 
with  great  slaughter  at  Argaye,  and  so  utterly  dispersed 
that  few  were  able  to  find  their  way  home. 

The  eighteenth  century  in  Haussaland  was  dis- 
tinguished especially  by  the  intrusion  and  rise  to  power 
among  the  more  southerly  states  of  Gober  —  a  state 
which,  it  will  be  remembered,  occupied  a  position  on 
the  extreme  north  of  Haussaland,  and  at  an  earlier 
period  of  its  history  had  extended  into  the  desert  as 
far  north  as  Ahir  or  Asben.  At  a  comparatively  early 
period  the  more  northerly  portions  of  the  territory 
of  Gober  had  been  conquered  by  a  Berber  combination 
known  as  the  "five  tribes."  Whether  these  were 
the  five  tribes  of  the  Morabite  invasion  led  eastward 
by  Abou  Bekr  at  the  end  of  the  eleventh  century,  or 
five  other  Berber  tribes  from  the  north,  is  a  matter 
of  dispute.  The  fact  alone  is  undisputed  that  they 
established  the  Mohammedan  religion  in  Asben,  and 
drove  the  people  of  Gober,  who  maintained  the  higher 
type  of  paganism,  farther  south.  Gober  was  made  tri- 
butary to  them,  and  the  feuds  arising  between  the  two 
races  kept  the  people  of  Gober  constantly  occupied  upon 
their  northern  frontier.  In  the  first  half  of  the  eighteenth 
century  the  hereditary  antagonists  of  Gober  were  them- 
selves conquered  by  the  Kellowi,  a  fine  race  of  North 
African     Berbers.       The    ultimate    consequence    was    to 


266  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

liberate  the  attention  of  Gober,  and  to  change  the  direc- 
tion of  its  miUtary  activity.  The  march  of  its  armies 
from  this  date  onward  was  directed  to  the  south  Instead 
of  the  north. 

Katsena  alone  of  the  Haussa  States  was  able  to  resist 
successfully  the  practised  strength  of  this  warlike  state. 
Zamfara  was  subdued  by  it  about  the  year  1750,  and  in 
Kano  the  century  was  chiefly  occupied  by  a  long  conflict 
with  varying  results.  Reign  after  reign  has  the  same 
record  of  fighting  with  Gober,  and  sometimes  success  is 
recorded,  sometimes  defeat,  till  at  last,  about  the  middle 
of  the  century,  Gober,  under  the  leadership  of  the  king 
Babari,  who  had  established  himself  on  the  throne  of 
Zamfara,  triumphed  over  Kano.  Yet  the  subjection  was 
not  complete.  Through  this  ceaseless  wrangle  the  life  of 
Kano  may  be  seen  to  be  holding  on  a  more  or  less  un- 
interrupted way.  The  wealth  of  the  province  seems  to 
have  helped  the  town  to  weather  its  many  storms.  A 
king  at  the  beginning  of  the  seventeenth  century  is 
recorded  as  being  the  first  to  take  tax  in  cows  from  the 
Fulani  who  were  settled  in  the  province.  In  the  intervals 
of  war  we  are  told  that  learning  prospered  and  that  trade 
was  developed.  After  the  war  with  Gober  had  reached 
its  climax,  Kano,  though  conquered,  appeared  no  whit  the 
worse.  The  king  under  whom  the  defeat  took  place  is 
described  as  "bad,"  but  of  the  next  we  are  told  that  he 
reigned  for  fifteen  years,  and  "  he  was  great,  kind,  and 
peaceful.  The  country  was  prosperous  under  him,  and  he 
was  much  loved."  Three  more  reigns  bring  us  to  the  end 
of  the  eighteenth  century,  and  under  them  we  hear  only  of 
prosperity.  One  king  who  reigned  for  eight  years,  per- 
haps about  1770  to  1778,  was  the  first  to  bring  guns  into 
Kano,  and  is  described  as  being  almost  like  an  Arab  in 
everything.  The  last  king  mentioned  by  the  Kano 
chronicler  is  Al  Wali,  of  whom  we  are  told  nothing  but 
that  his  mother's  name  was  Bawuya,  and  that  he  was  a 
very  powerful  king.  Earth  mentions  that,  on  the  conquest 
of  Kano  by  the  Fulani  in  the  early  years  of  the  nineteenth 


HAUSSALAND  267 

century,  Al  Wali  the  king  fled  to  Zaria,  and  the  Zaria 
chronicle  mentions  the  fact  that  a  king  of  Kano  called  Al 
Wali  rebuilt  the  walls  of  Kano  about  the  year  1787.  We 
are  therefore,  I  think,  justified  in  supposing  that  this 
prince  was  the  last  of  the  line  of  Haussa  kings  in  Kano. 
The  conquest  of  Haussaland  by  the  Fulani,  which  took 
place  in  the  beginning  of  the  nineteenth  century,  repre- 
sented to  all  the  towns  alike  a  catastrophe  of  the  first 
magnitude,  only  to  be  paralleled  in  the  country  lying  to 
the  east  of  the  Niger  by  the  earlier  catastrophe  of  the 
Moorish  conquest  in  the  countries  lying  to  the  west. 


CHAPTER    XXX 
BORNU 

To  the  east  of  the  Haussa  States,  but  lying  within  the 
same  degrees  of  latitude — that  is,  north  of  io°  and  at 
present  south  of  14° — though  once  perhaps  extending  to 
the  limit  of  the  summer  rains,  lies  the  kingdom  of  Bornu. 
The  history  of  this  country,  often  closely  associated  with 
that  of  the  Haussa  States,  is,  as  has  been  already  said,  in 
truth  wholly  distinct,  the  people  being  of  Berber  descent, 
and  the  language  quite  distinct  from  that  of  Haussaland. 
The  difference  observable  in  the  national  characteristics 
of  the  Bornuese  and  the  Haussas  is  said  by  travellers 
amongst  them  to  be  marked.  The  Haussa  is  by  nature 
lively-spirited  and  cheerful,  the  Bornuese  melancholic, 
dejected,  and  brutal.  The  Haussas  are  generally  good- 
looking,  with  regular  and  pleasant  features  and  graceful 
figures.  The  Bornuese  have  generally  a  broad-faced, 
heavy-boned  physiognomy,  which,  especially  in  their 
women,   is  said  to  be  far  from  pleasing. 

The  territory  in  which  the  people  of  Bornu  rose  to 
occupy  a  position  of  first  importance  amongst  the  nations 
of  the  Soudan  was  somewhat  to  the  north  and  east  of 
the  present  province  of  that  name.  Kanem,  a  country 
which  now  lies  in  French  territory  to  the  north  and  east 
of  Lake  Chad,  was  their  first  seat  of  empire,  and  the 
inhabitants  of  Bornu  still  take  their  native  name  of 
Kanuri  from  this  circumstance.  Under  the  domination 
of  their  early  kings  the  territory  of  Kanem  spread,  at 
one  time,  on  the  east  to  the  borders  of  the  Nile,  and  on 
the  west,  Arab  historians  of  the  fourteenth  and  fifteenth 
centuries,    who    take    no     note    of    the    Haussa    States, 


BORNU  269 

speak  of  its  power  as  extending  to  the  borders  of  the 
Songhay  Empire.  It  has  been  seen  in  the  history  of 
the  Haussa  provinces  that  they  were,  at  different  periods 
of  their  history,  content  to  pay  tribute  alternately  to 
Songhay  and  to  Bornu.  In  the  north  the  authority  of 
Kanem  extended  to  the  Fezzan,  and  its  limits  must  have 
approached  very  nearly  in  its  northern,  as  well  as  in  its 
western  extension,  to  those  of  Songhay.  The  historians 
of  Songhay  describe  the  extent  of  Songhay  as  offering 
a  six  months'  march  from  frontier  to  frontier  ;  Macrizi 
says  of  Kanem  in  the  fifteenth  or  early  sixteenth  century 
that  the  breadth  of  its  dominions  was  a  three  months' 
march.  It  is  under  the  name  of  Kanem  that  we  get  our 
earliest  information  about  the  country,  and  under  that 
name,  though  El  Bekri  speaks  of  it  in  the  middle  of  the 
eleventh  century  as  a  land  of  idolaters,  very  difficult  of 
access,  it  seems  to  have  entered  at  an  early  period  into 
relations  with  Europe  and  North  Africa.  A  pagan 
dynasty  of  Dugu,  or  Duguwa,  reigned  from  about  the 
middle  of  the  ninth  century  until  the  end  of  the 
eleventh  century,  and,  according  to  the  information  of 
El  Bekri  in  1067,  this  dominion  extended  on  the  west  to 
the  eastern  bank  of  the  Niger — that  is,  over  the  whole 
of  Haussaland.  Whether  his  information  was  accurate 
or  not  in  detail,  it  tends  to  show  that  the  kings  of  the 
name  of  Du,  to  whom  he  makes  allusion,  were  at  the 
time  of  more  importance  than  any  other  rulers  in  that 
eastern  territory.  In  the  end  of  the  eleventh  century 
a  new  dynasty  of  Mohammedan  kings  was  founded,  but 
though  Islam  was  brought  to  Kanem  at  about  the  same 
period  as  to  the  rest  of  the  Soudan,  it  did  not  come 
through  the  same  Morabite  agency  ;  it  came  direct  from 
Egypt. 

Under  its  Moslem  kings,  Kanem  rose  rapidly  to 
the  rank  of  one  of  the  first  powers  of  the  Soudan.  It 
entered  into  close  relations  with  Egypt  and  the  Barbary 
States.  We  have  seen  a  black  poet  from  Kanem  at  the 
court  of  El    Mansour,   one  of  the   Almohade    sovereigns 


270  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

of  Spain,  in  the  end  of  the  twelfth  century.  In  this  and 
the  succeeding  century  the  armies  of  Kanem  were  very 
powerful,  and  the  kings  of  Kanem,  who  maintained  con- 
stant intercourse  with  the  Hafside  monarchs  of  the  Barbary 
States,  were  known  as  Kings  of  Kanem  and  Lords  of 
Bornu. 

Ibn  Said,  who  wrote  in  the  thirteenth  century,  is  the 
first  Arab  to  speak  of  Bornu  by  its  present  name,  and 
to  define  the  country  lying  on  the  south-western  shore 
of  Chad  as  forming  part  of  the  kingdom  of  Kanem.  Ibn 
Khaldun,  having  occasion  to  notice  the  embassy  which 
has  been  already  mentioned  as  having  been  sent  by  the 
King  of  Bornu  to  the  King  of  Tunis  about  the  year  1257, 
adds  the  information  that  the  capital  of  Bornu  was  on 
the  same  meridian  as  Tripoli.  This  fixes  for  us  the 
fact  that  since  the  middle  of  the  thirteenth  century  there 
has  been  no  great  change  in  the  position  of  the  Bornuese 
seat  of  government.  At  that  time  a  great  and  successful 
invasion  was  made  by  Bornu  of  the  southern  country,  now 
known  to  us  as  Adamawa.  The  thirteenth  century  would 
seem  to  have  been  a  brilliant  period  of  early  Bornuese 
history.  In  this  century  the  power  of  Kanem  was  ex- 
tended over  the  Fezzan,  and  carried  as  far  north  as  to 
a  place  within  eight  days'  march  of  Augela,  and  Islam 
was  widely  disseminated  in  the  Soudan.  It  is  probably 
also  to  this  period  that  the  following  passage  from  Sultan 
Bello's  notice  must  be  referred.  Speaking  of  Bornu  he 
says  : — 

"  Fortune  having  assisted  them,  their  government 
flourished  for  some  time,  and  their  dominion  extended 
to  the  very  extremity  of  this  tract  of  the  earth.  VVadai 
and  Bagharmi,  as  well  as  the  country  of  Haussa,  with 
those  parts  of  the  province  of  Bautchi  which  belong  to 
it,  were  in  their  possession.  In  the  course  of  time,  how- 
ever, their  government  became  weakened  and  their  power 
destroyed." 

It  is  no  doubt  upon  this  original  dominion  over  Haussa- 
land   that  certain  shadowy  claims    of  sovereignty  on   the 


BORNU  271 

part  of  Bornu  existed.  Nevertheless,  as  we  have  seen, 
the  Haussa  States  were  at  this  period  rising  into  individual 
importance,  and  Kano  did  not  receive  Mohammedanism 
till  it  was  brought  to  her  from  Melle  towards  the  end  of 
the  thirteenth  century.  This  information  with  regard  to 
the  source  of  Mohammedanism  in  Kano  receives  interest- 
ing confirmation  from  the  history  of  Bornu,  for  in  the 
chronicle  of  the  reigns  of  the  kings  of  Bornu,  it  is  also 
mentioned  that  religious  teachers  came  from  Melle  be- 
tween the  years  1288  and  1306.  In  the  case  of  Bornu 
it  is  added  that  these  teachers  were  Fulani,  but  the 
Fulani  immigration  did  not  take  place  in  any  force  until 
a  century  later. 

We  are  told  that  before  the  twelfth  century  the  kings 
of  Kanem  were  light  complexioned,  proving  beyond  all 
doubt  their  Berber  origin,  but  from  the  beginning  of  the 
twelfth  century  it  is  distinctly  mentioned  that  they  were 
black.  Presumably  there  was  intermarriage  at  an  early 
period  between  Berber  rulers  and  black  inhabitants.  The 
original  inhabitants  of  the  greater  part  of  the  country 
which  we  now  call  Bornu,  were  a  powerful  native  tribe 
of  the  name  of  Soy  or  So.  No  historian,  so  far  as  I  am 
aware,  has  attempted  to  identify  them  with  the  Songhay, 
and  I  have  no  information  which  permits  me  to  do  so. 
Barth  mentions  the  "  So  "  as  the  name  of  one  of  the  four 
divisions  of  the  Fulani,  but  he  does  not  appear  to  regard 
these  people  as  Fulani.  They  seem  to  have  been  a 
remarkable  and  very  active  people,  who  towards  the  end 
of  the  thirteenth  century  rose  against  their  conquerors, 
and  in  a  long  struggle,  which  lasted  for  nearly  a  hundred 
years,  had  almost  succeeded  in  breaking  the  power  of 
Kanem.  In  the  year  of  Ibn  Batuta's  visit  to  Melle, 
1352-53,  King  Edris  of  Bornu  appeared,  however,  to  be 
holding  his  own  against  them.  Bornu  was  doing  an 
active  trade  in  slaves,  eunuchs,  and  yellow  cotton 
cloth,  with  Tekadda  on  the  north-eastern  border  of  the 
Mellestine,  and  from  this  period  the  Soy  appear  gradu- 
ally   to   lose    their    importance,    though    they    remain   as 


272  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

a  turbulent  element  in  the  composition  of  the  Bornu 
Empire. 

Edris  would  appear  to  have  enjoyed  a  long  and  com- 
paratively peaceful  reign,  but  under  his  immediate  suc- 
cessors the  eastern  neighbours  of  Kanem,  a  people  called 
the  Bulala,  on  the  other  side  of  Lake  Chad,  fought  against 
the  people  of  Kanem  with  such  vigour  and  pertinacity 
that  the  power  of  the  Empire  of  Kanem  was  broken,  and 
the  kings  were  driven  to  abandon  the  old  capital  Njimye 
or  Jima,  and  to  fix  the  royal  residence  in  Bornu.  This 
happened  about  the  year  1380,  after  which  time  different 
kingdoms  rose  to  independence  in  the  territory  lying  be- 
tween Lake  Chad  and  the  Nile,  and  the  Kanuri  definitely 
adopted  the  present  territory  of  Bornu  on  the  western 
side  of  the  lake  as  the  seat  of  their  kingdom. 

From  this  date  we  hear  more  constantly  of  Bornu 
as  interfering  with  the  Haussa  and  southern  pagan  states 
of  the  country  lying  between  the  Niger  and  the  Benue. 
It  may  be  remembered  that,  towards  the  end  of  the  four- 
teenth century,  a  king  of  Bornu  was  driven  to  remain 
for  several  months  at  Kano.  His  stay  is  courteously 
described  as  a  "  long  visit."  As  a  matter  of  fact,  it  was 
one  of  the  effects  of  the  Bulala  invasion  from  the  east,  and 
represents  the  final  expulsion  of  the  Bornu  dynasty  from 
Kanem.  The  King  of  Bornu  came,  it  is  said,  to  Kano 
with  a  great  host,  many  men  with  drums  on  horseback, 
fifes,  flags  and  guns,  and  he  was  accompanied  by  many 
Mallams.  A  usurper  who  was  placed  upon  his  throne 
was  shortly  afterwards  driven  from  it  and  killed  by  the 
Bulala. 

Thus  in  the  first  hours  of  their  adversity  the  Bornuese 
kings  received  shelter  and  help  in  Haussaland,  but  it  was 
not  altogether  without  foresight  on  the  part  of  Kano  of 
evils  to  come.  When  the  reigning  King  David  of  Kano 
took  counsel  with  his  Galadima,  or  Prime  Minister,  as  to 
the  manner  of  entertaining  the  King  of  Bornu,  the  Gala- 
dima warned  him  :  "If  you  allow  this  man  to  stay  in 
one  of  the  towns  of  your  territory  he  will  take  possession 


BORNU  273 

of  the  whole  place."  It  was  therefore  determined  to 
make  new  houses  for  the  Bornu  party  in  an  open  field 
shaded  by  locust  trees,  between  Kano  and  a  frontier 
town  at  which  they  had  paused.  The  King  of  Kano 
did  all  that  he  could  to  please  his  guests,  and  the  next 
King  of  Bornu,  recovering  his  throne,  was  known  by 
the  title  of  the  Haussa  King,  or  the  King  from  Haussa- 
land.  Fifty  years  later  another  King  of  Bornu  was 
driven  to  beg  for  similar  hospitality  from  Kano,  and  it 
was  not  refused.  The  name  of  the  Bornu  king  was 
Othman  Kalnama,  and  he  remained  in  Kano  to  the  time 
of  his  death.  This  was  under  the  great  King  of  Kano, 
Mohammed  Rimps,  and  marks  perhaps  the  highest  point 
of  the  prosperity  of  Kano,  and  the  lowest  point  of  the 
fortunes  of  Bornu  before  the  rise  of  the  Songhay  Empire 
in  the  West. 

All  these  obligations  did  not  affect  the  memory  of 
the  rulers  of  Bornu  when,  after  a  long  succession  of  civil 
wars,  they  at  last  made  good  their  position  on  the  throne, 
and,  in  the  person  of  Ali  Ghajideni,  who  began  to  reign 
in  1472,  opened  a  new  and  glorious  epoch  of  Bornu 
history.  Ali  Ghajideni,  who  built  the  old  capital  of 
Bornu,  now  known  by  the  name  of  Birni,  three  days 
west  of  the  modern  town  of  Kuka,  on  Lake  Chad, 
reigned  from  about  1472  to  1504,  and  therefore  brought 
the  history  of  Bornu  up  to  the  moment  of  the  Songhay 
conquest  of  Haussaland.  He  reformed  the  government, 
reorganised  the  army,  and  renewed  the  ancient  glory  of 
Bornu.  He  fought  many  and  successful  local  wars,  and 
amongst  other  exploits  marched  against  Kano,  where 
his  immediate  predecessor  had  dethroned  a  weak  and 
incapable  ruler. 

It  will  be  remembered  that  the  Wankor6,  or  Wan- 
garawa,  were  mentioned  as  having  brought  Moham- 
medanism in  the  thirteenth  century  to  Kano.  This 
people  effected  a  settlement  in  the  Haussa  country,  and 
in  the  fifteenth  century  the  province  of  Wangara,  or 
Ungara,  is  described  as  lying  south-easterly  of  Zamfara 

s 


274  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

and  westerly  of  Bornu.  This  would  seem  to  place  the 
territory  of  the  Wangarawa  between  the  jurisdiction  of 
Kano  and  Bornu  ;  so,  at  least,  the  rulers  of  these  two 
places  would  appear  to  have  considered.  Bornu  appar- 
ently regarded  the  Wangarawa  as  in  its  dependence. 
The  King  of  Kano,  who,  in  spite  of  some  discrepancy 
of  dates,  I  take  to  have  been  the  contemporary  of  Ali 
Ghajideni,  having  a  cause  of  quarrel  with  them,  took 
their  punishment  into  his  own  hands.  He  marched 
against  one  of  their  towns,  took  it,  and,  sitting  under 
a  bread-fruit  tree  by  the  principal  gate,  ordered  that  all 
the  roofs  should  be  taken  off  the  houses  and  burned,  but 
that  no  prisoners  should  be  made.  The  King  of  Bornu, 
demanding  an  explanation  of  the  outrage,  Kano  refused 
to  give  it,  and  war  was  the  result.  According  to  the 
Kano  chronicle  the  King  of  Bornu  was  beaten.  Accord- 
ing to  the  Bornu  chronicle  Bornu  had  resolved  upon 
the  complete  conquest  of  Wangara,  when  once  more  the 
Bulala  attacked  Bornu  upon  the  east,  and  diverted  its 
attention  from  western  fields.  There  is  no  mention  of 
any  conflict  with   Kano  in  the  Bornu  account. 

The  very  brilliant  reign  of  Ali  Ghajideni  covered  the 
period  at  which  the  Portuguese  were  making  settlements 
upon  the  Guinea  coast,  and  the  intercourse  of  Bornu  with 
Arab  civilisation  in  the  days  of  its  early  greatness  having 
caused  its  territories  to  be  well  known,  it  is  not  sur- 
prising that  the  fame  of  Ali  Ghajideni  should  rank  with 
that  of  his  contemporary,  Sonni  Ali  of  Timbuctoo.  It 
has  already  been  mentioned  that  the  territories  of  the 
Mellestine  were  shown  upon  European  maps  in  15 12. 
The  territorial  limits  of  Bornu  were  known  to  Euro- 
peans at  an  even  earlier  date,  and  Bornu  is  shown  upon 
Portuguese  maps  in   1489. 

The  attack  of  his  eastern  neighbours  upon  Ali  Gha- 
jideni prevented  him  from  carrying  any  further  his 
intended  subjugation  of  the  west,  and,  in  the  meantime, 
Songhay,  under  the  great  Askia,  achieved  from  the  west 
what  Ali  Ghajideni  had  intended  to  do  from  the  eastern 


BORNU  275 

frontier  of  Haussaland.  Askia  Mohammed  intervened, 
as  has  been  already  related,  in  the  local  disputes  of  the 
Haussa  States,  and  conquered  them  all.  From  this  time 
the  central  Haussa  States  lay  between  Songhay  and 
Bornu,  as  between  the  upper  and  the  nether  mill- 
stones. 

It    may   be    remembered    that,    on    the    return    of  the 
Askia  from  his  second  expedition  into  the  Haussa  country, 
in    February   of  15 16,   an    influential    chief,   of  the   name 
of  Kanta,  revolted,  and   that  he  formed  an   independent 
principality,  of  which    Kebbi,   on  the  eastern  side  of  the 
Niger  and  to  the  west  of  Zamfara  and   Katsena,  became 
the   seat.       Sultan     Bello,    who    gives    us    some    further 
account    of    him,    describes     Kebbi    as    being    under    his 
rule   a    very   extensive   and    fruitful   province,    which  was 
peopled   half  by   Songhays  and   half  by  natives   of  Kat- 
sena.    The  town  of  Birni-n-Kebbi,  which   is  to  be  found 
now  on   the   north-western  frontier  of   Northern  Nigeria, 
lies   almost    directly   between    Katsena   and    Gao,    and    it 
was   natural    that   the   at-that-time   important  province  of 
which   it  was   the  capital   should   be   peopled  partly  from 
one  and  partly  from  the  other  source.     As  will  presently 
be  seen,  this  hybrid  province  played  so  important  a  part 
in  defending   Haussaland  from  the   inroads  of  the  Moors 
that  its  rise  to  power  in  the  early  part  of  the  sixteenth 
century    is    worth    mentioning.       Probably    Kanta's    court 
formed  a  nucleus   of  meeting   for  all   the   more   vigorous 
of  the  turbulent  spirits  of  Songhay,   who  for  any  reason 
were  discontented  with  the  administration  of  the  Askias. 
The    growth    of    luxury    and    the    love    of    ease,    which 
gradually   undermined    the   Songhay   Empire,   left    Kebbi 
perhaps  untouched,  and  thus,  at  the  end  of  the  sixteenth 
century,   there   was    yet   a   refuge    in    the   territory  lying 
between    Haussa  and    Songhay,  for  all   that  remained  of 
local    energy    and    courage    in    the    empire    of   the   fallen 
Askias.     It  was  in  Kebbi  that  the  Moors  met  with  their 
first  reverse  ;  Borgu  and  Kontagora  sustained  the  opposi- 
tion to  their  rule,  and   the  rocks  of  Almena,  in  the  pro- 


276  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

vince  of  Zaria,  marked  the  furthest  limit  of  their  advance 
into  Haussaland.  But  these  were  among  the  events 
of  a  century  yet  to  come.  At  the  beginning  of  the 
sixteenth  century  Kanta  had  but  just  estabHshed  his 
independence,  and  the  vigour  of  his  arms  was  yet  to 
prove. 

AH  Ghajideni  of  Bornu  lived  only  through  the  first 
twelve  years  of  Askia's  reign.  But  Bornu,  like  Song- 
hay,  was  at  this  epoch  of  its  history  fortunate  in  the 
succession  of  two  remarkable  kings ;  Edris,  who  fol- 
lowed his  father,  Ali  Ghajideni,  on  the  throne  of 
Bornu,  was  scarcely  less  enlightened  than  his  great 
neighbour  of  Songhay.  He  extended  the  power  of 
Bornu,  and  carried  still  further  the  administrative  re- 
forms initiated  by  his  father.  The  early  part  of  his 
reign  was  distinguished  by  conquests  in  the  East.  He 
defeated  the  Bulala,  who  had  interfered  with  his  father's 
intended  conquest  of  Wangara ;  but  when  he  in  turn 
directed  his  arms  against  Haussaland,  he  was  met  and 
defeated  by  Kanta.  Sultan  Bello  gives  an  account  of 
the  campaign,  attributing  it  to  Ali  Ghajideni,  but  as 
Kanta  did  not  establish  his  independence  until  after  the 
death  of  Ali,  we  must  take  the  opposing  forces  to 
have  been  under  the  command,  not  of  Ali,  but  of  his 
equally  warlike  successor,   Edris. 

Sultan  Bello  says  that  at  this  time  Kanta,  who 
had  conquered  the  country,  governed  it  with  equity, 
and  had  established  peace  in  its  very  extremities  and 
remotest  places.  Bello  makes  no  distinction  apparently 
between  the  conquests  of  Kanta  as  a  general  of  Song- 
hay  and  as  an  independent  prince.  He  speaks  of  him 
as  having  conquered  Katsena,  Kano,  Zaria,  Gober, 
and  the  country  of  Asben  or  Ahir,  all  of  these  being, 
of  course,  really  the  conquests  of  Songhay  and  not 
of  Kebbi.  It  would  seem  to  have  been  some  act  of 
oppression  on  Kanta's  part  towards  one  of  these  towns, 
which  gave  the  King  of  Bornu  an  excuse  to  march 
against    him.      It    is   evident    that    the   campaign   on    this 


BORNU  277 

occasion  was  undertaken  with  the  consent  of  the 
Haussa  States,  for  the  armies  of  Bornu  marched  north 
of  Daura  and  Katsena  and  to  the  west  of  Gober  with- 
out opposition  till  they  entered  the  country  of  Kebbi 
and  reached  a  fortified  place  called  Surami.  Then  after 
a  battle,  which  lasted  from  the  rising  to  the  going  down 
of  the  sun,  Bornu  was  victorious,  and  Kanta  was 
forced  to  fly  westward.  But  the  fort  held  out.  The 
Sultan  of  Bornu  was  unable  to  reduce  it,  and,  finding 
himself  obliged  to  raise  the  siege,  he  marched  south 
to  Gando  and  thence  easterly  towards  Bornu.  Kanta 
reorganised  his  army,  and  rapidly,  pursuing  the  Bornu 
force,  he  came  up  with  it  at  a  place  called  Onghoor 
(presumably  Ungar  or  Wangara)  and  there  inflicted  a 
crushing  defeat. 

The  Sultan  of  Bornu  after  this  again  found  himself 
fully  occupied  in  the  East,  where,  as  a  result  of  more 
than  one  brilliant  campaign,  he  entirely  subdued  the 
old  enemies  of  Bornu  and  re-established  his  authority 
over  Kanem.  Kanta  himself  shortly  afterwards  died, 
but  the  successors  of  Edris  of  Bornu  continued  to  dis- 
pute with  the  descendants  of  Kanta  the  supremacy  of 
Haussaland,  while,  as  we  have  seen,  the  life  of  the 
individual  Haussa  States  went  on  without  much  regard 
either  for  Kebbi  or  for  Bornu.  The  chronicles,  though 
somewhat  confused,  would  seem  to  assign  the  final 
victory  to  Bornu. 

This  period  of  constant  war  was  the  period  which 
we  have  seen  to  have  been  one  of  great  adversity  in 
the  Haussa  provinces.  Although  we  find  no  mention  in 
their  chronicles  of  the  campaigns  of  their  greater  neigh- 
bours, there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  long  struggle 
between  opposing  powers  for  the  suzerainty  of  Haussa- 
land must  have  contributed  much  to  the  conditions  of 
disturbance  and  unrest  which  issued  for  them  in  local 
wars.  It  is  only  amazing  that  under  the  circumstances, 
every  province  being  at  war  with  each  other,  and  two 
great    powers     fighting    over    their    heads,    there   should 


2/8  A   TROPICAL   DEPENDENCY 

have  been  any  possibility  of  the  continuance  of  trade 
and  the  spread  of  learning,  of  which  the  chronicles 
continue  constantly  to  speak.  That  trade  should  have 
persisted  under  conditions  so  adverse  says  much  for  the 
commercial  tenacity  of  the  Haussa  people.  Agriculture 
probably  suffered  even  more  severely  than  trade,  and 
the  great  famine  with  which  the  century  ended  was 
widespread.  The  famine  is  mentioned  in  the  chroni- 
cles of  Bornu  as  extending  to  that  country,  and  we 
find  the  statement  in  the  Songhay  accounts  of  the 
Moorish  conquest  that  during  the  campaigns  of  the 
first  two  years  (1591-92)  on  the  eastern  side  of  the 
Nio-er,  the  Moorish  soldiers  were  reduced  by  famine 
to  eat  the  pack  animals  on  which  the  transport  of  the 
army  depended. 

Nevertheless,  under  a  king  of  the  name  of  Mo- 
hammed, Bornu  rose  about  the  middle  of  the  sixteenth 
century  to  a  position  of  great  prosperity  and  power^ 
and  its  relations  with  the  outer  world  were  maintained. 
The  causes  which  operated  to  cut  off  the  countries  ot 
the  Western  Soudan  from  their  old  connection  with  Spain, 
and  to  interrupt  their  communication  with  Christian 
Europe,  did  not  apply  to  the  Mohammedan  East,  where 
the  Turks  were  the  ruling  power.  Embassies  from 
Bornu  to  Tripoli  are  frequently  mentioned,  and  before 
the  end  of  the  sixteenth  century  the  armies  of  Bornu, 
more  advanced  than  the  majority  of  European  troops, 
were  armed  in  great  part  with  muskets.  The  Spaniards 
were  ahead  of  the  rest  of  Europe  in  this  respect,  but 
it  may  be  remembered  that  at  the  battle  of  Lepanto, 
which  was  fought  in  1571,  only  the  crews  of  the  more 
important  ships  were  armed  with  muskets.  In  an  en- 
gagement which  Drake  had  with  the  Spaniards  off  the 
American  coast  in  1572,  the  English  crews  were  armed 
only  with  bows  and  arrows,  and  when  Queen  Elizabeth 
ascended  the  throne  in  1557,  the  principal  weapons  in 
the  arsenals  of  England  were  bows  and  arrows.  Yet, 
if  the    Kano    chronicle    is    to    be    trusted,    the    troops   of 


BORNU  279 

Bornu    had    "guns"    as    early    as    the    beginning    of   the 
fifteenth  century. 

From    Ali    Ghajideni,    who    ascended    the    throne    of 
Bornu    in    1472,   to    Edris  Alawoma,   who   was    the   con- 
temporary   of   Queen    Elizabeth   and    died    in    1603,   the 
destinies    of    Bornu    were    guided    by    almost     uniformly 
vigorous   and    enlightened    kings.       There    were    a    few 
short   reigns    of  no    importance,    but    for   the    most    part 
the    period    was    for     Bornu,    as    for     Songhay,    one    of 
great    and    prosperous    development.      The    Government 
of  Bornu  was,  in  theory  at  least,  somewhat  less  despotic 
than     that     of    Songhay,     and    was    conducted     by    the 
medium    of    a    council    of    twelve,    between    whom    the 
principal    offices    of   State    were    divided.      According   to 
some   authorities    the    monarchy    itself  was    elective,   but 
with   the  interruption   of  certain   revolutions   it   seems   to 
have    descended    very    generally    from     father     to    son. 
The  territory  of  Bornu  was   divided,  like   that  of  Song- 
hay, into   districts   of  which   each   had    its   governor,   but 
it  does   not   appear  to    have    had    the  superior  grouping 
of    districts    into    viceroyalties,    which    in    some    degree 
assimilated    the    organisation    of    the    Songhay    Empire 
to   that    of    Imperial    Rome.      In    the    records    of   Bornu 
there   is    frequent    reference    to    the    position    and    influ- 
ence   of    the    queen    mothers,    and    women    appear    to 
have  played  a   not  unimportant   part  in   its   history.     In 
the    latter    half    of    the    sixteenth    century,    Aicha,    the 
mother    of    King    Edris,    herself    reigned    for    a    short 
period    before    her    son's    accession.      She   was   a    very 
distinguished    woman,    to   whose    advice    it    is    believed 
that  her  son  owed  much  of  the  wisdom  of  his  conduct. 
Under    her    influence   an    important    embassy    was    sent 
to   Tripoli,    and    the    policy    of  maintaining    intercourse 
and    trade    with    the    outer   world    by    the    medium    of 
the  Turkish   Empire,  which  had  always  been  the  policy 
of  prosperous    Bornu,   was   actively    developed.      In    this 
latter  period   of   Bornuese   prosperity,  foreign    trade   and 
local  conquest  form  the   two   important  notes  of  its  his- 


280  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

tory.  We  have  seen  that  conquests  had  been  effected 
on  the  East,  and  the  domination  of  Bornu  over  Kanem 
had  been  substituted  for  the  ancient  domination  of 
Kanem  over  Bornu.  Campaigns,  though  not  always 
successful,  had  been  carried  out  in  the  West,  and  the 
Haussa  States  at  a  somewhat  later  date  became  one  by 
one  tributary,  though  not  in  any  true  sense  subject  to 
Bornu. 

Ali  Ghajideni  in  the  fifteenth  century  reorganised 
the  Empire  of  Bornu.  His  immediate  successors  en- 
larged and  aggrandised  it.  Edris  Alawoma,  at  the  end 
of  the  sixteenth  century,  undertook  the  special  task  of 
consolidating  it  and  binding  its  somewhat  heterogeneous 
elements  into  one  political  whole.  He  once  more  gave 
attention  to  the  pagan  Soy,  who  continued  at  that  date 
to  defy  the  power  of  Bornu  in  independent  fastnesses  of 
their  own.  Having  reduced  them  with  much  difficulty  to 
submission  in  the  north-western  portions  of  his  territory, 
he  carried  away  a  great  number  of  the  people,  and  the 
remainder  fled  eastward  to  Kanem.  He  marched  then 
south-westward  against  other  pagan  tribes,  and  it  is 
especially  mentioned  in  recounting  his  campaigns  that 
he  achieved  his  success  mainly  by  the  force  of  his 
muskets.  He  then  undertook  a  great  campaign  against 
Kano,  which  must  have  occurred  during  the  worst  period 
of  the  misfortunes  of  Kano,  during  that  twenty  years 
when,  the  spirit  of  the  Kano  people  being  broken,  they 
were  obliged  "to  sit  at  home  and  be  afraid."  Never- 
theless, though  the  strong  places  of  the  province  of 
Kano  fell  into  the  hands  of  Bornu,  the  town  itself  suc- 
ceeded in  maintaining  its  independence.  As  this  fact  is 
acknowledged  by  the  Bornu  chronicle,  it  may  be  held 
to  be  undoubtedly  accurate.  After  Kano,  Edris  turned 
his  arms  northwards  towards  the  Berbers  of  the  desert, 
and  attacked  the  "  five  tribes "  or  Berbers  of  Asben, 
with  whom  it  has  been  mentioned  that  Gober  durinpf 
all  this  period  of  its  history  maintained  a  perpetual  war. 
Here,  too,   Edris  was  victorious  to  the  extent  of  impos- 


BORNU 


281 


ing  a  tributary  sort  of  allegiance.  North,  south,  east, 
and  west  he  carried  his  conquering  arms.  To  give  a 
list  of  the  many  tribes  that  he  subdued  could  only  weary 
the  reader,  but  amongst  many  unfamiliar  names  that  of 
Katagum,  which  is  of  sufficient  importance  to  form  now 
one  of  seventeen  provinces  of  Northern  Nigeria,  may  be 
selected  for  mention  as  having  at  this  time  made  its 
submission  to  Bornu. 

The  result  of  twelve  years  of  fighting  is  all  that  the 
reader  can  be  asked  to  carry  in  his  mind.  This  was 
to  weld  the  Empire  of  Bornu  into  one  victorious  and 
formidable  whole,  of  which  the  troops,  armed  with  a 
weapon  superior  to  any  then  known  in  the  Soudan,  had 
acquired  a  military  reputation  of  being  practically  irre- 
sistible as  early  as  the  year  1583,  that  is,  eight  years 
before  the  coming  of  the  Moors.  Had  Songhay  under 
the  later  Askias  kept  pace  with  her  neighbour  of 
Bornu,  and  introduced  as  she  might  have  done  the 
musket  into  the  armament  of  her  troops,  it  is  possible 
that  the  whole  subsequent  fate  of  the  Soudan  might  have 
been  changed.  It  was  the  possession  of  muskets  by  the 
Moors  which,  as  will  presently  be  seen,  enabled  them  to 
make  an  easy  conquest  of  a  once  famous  empire,  while 
it  is  probable  that  the  possession  of  the  same  weapons 
by  Bornu  was  among  the  causes  which  operated  to  check 
the  Moorish  invasion  at  the  limits  which  it  actually 
attained. 

Edris  Alawoma  himself  was  killed  in  battle  in  the 
year  1603  by  the  rudest  of  pagan  weapons,  a  hand-bill 
or  hoe,  thrown  at  him  by  an  adversary  concealed  in  a 
tree,  when  he  was  reducing  one  of  the  tribes  of  Southern 
Bornu  to  obedience.  But  at  the  moment  of  the  Moorish 
conquest  of  Songhay  he  was  still  upon  the  throne,  and 
the  thirty-three  years  of  his  prosperous  and  enlightened 
reign  had  placed  Bornu  in  a  strong  position  to  contest 
the  suzerainty  of  Haussaland  with  the  new-comers. 


CHAPTER   XXXI 

CONDITION    OF   THE   SOUDAN   AT   THE   END   OF   THE 
SIXTEENTH   CENTURY 

The  slight  outline  which  has  been  given  of  the  course 
of  history  in  the  eastern  portion  of  the  West  African 
Soudan,  renders  it  possible  to  construct  some  picture  of 
the  general  condition  of  the  country  from  the  shores  of 
the  Atlantic  to  those  of  Lake  Chad  at  the  moment  of  the 
coming  of  the  Moors  in  1591. 

In  the  west  the  Empire  of  Songhay  having  risen 
to  the  zenith  of  its  prosperity  and  fame,  still  enjoyed, 
according  to  its  own  historians,  the  blessings  of  peace  and 
order  throughout  its  vast  extent.  We  are  expressly  told 
that  when  the  Moorish  army  arrived  in  the  Soudan,  it 
found  the  country  to  be  one  of  the  most  favoured  of 
the  Almighty  for  wealth  and  for  fertility.  Peace  reigned 
in  all  its  provinces,  and,  thanks  to  the  admirable  organisa- 
tion established  by  the  great  Askia  in  the  beginning  of 
the  century,  the  orders  of  the  monarch  were  obeyed 
implicitly  from  the  frontiers  of  the  Eastern  Viceroyalty 
of  Dandi  to  the  borders  of  the  Atlantic,  and  from 
the  southern  mountains  to  Touat  and  Tegazza  in  the 
northern  desert — as  well  as  in  all  the  dependencies  of 
these  Berber  towns.  The  awful  misery  which  followed 
when  the  supreme  power  was  suddenly  destroyed  is  laid, 
without  hesitation,  to  the  count  of  the  conquerors,  who 
are  held  responsible  by  the  local  annalists,  not  only  for 
what  they  did,  but,  very  properly,  for  the  ravages  of 
the  powers  of  disorder  which  they  let  loose.  "  All 
was  changed  in  a  moment,"  says  the  Tarikh-es-Soudan. 
"  Danger  took  the  place  of  security,  destitution  of  opu- 
lence, trouble,  calamities,  and  violence  succeeded  to  tran- 


CONDITION    OF   THE    SOUDAN  283 

quillity.  Everywhere  the  populations  began  to  destroy 
each  other.  In  all  places  and  in  every  direction  rapine 
became  the  law,  war  spared  neither  life  nor  property, 
nor  the  position  of  the  people.  Disorder  was  general, 
it  spread  everywhere  till  it  reached  at  last  the  highest 
degree  of  intensity." 

But  while  the  author  of  the  Tarikh  attributes  this 
condition  of  things  directly  to  the  Moors,  we  find  in  his 
own  pages,  long  before  the  coming  of  the  conquerors, 
indications  which  serve  to  explain  not  only  how  the 
Moors  made  of  this  great  and  wealthy  country  such  an 
easy  prey,  but  also  to  show  that  in  the  reigns  of  the 
later  Askias  the  strenuous  spirit  of  heroism,  which  had 
marked  the  rise  of  that  dynasty,  was  dead,  and  the 
aspiration  to  live  on  a  higher  plane  of  civilisation  than 
their  predecessors  had  given  place  to  nothing  more 
noble  than  a  love  of  luxury.  The  Songhay  Empire  at 
the  end  of  the  sixteenth  century  had  become  fatally  con- 
tent to  exist  upon  the  tradition  of  its  former  greatness. 
One  generation  had  borne  the  labours  of  preparing  the 
ground  for  seed.  Another,  when  the  harvest  stood 
ripe,  thought  only  of  gorging  themselves  with  the  fruit. 
Thus,  when  all  seemed  to  be  at  its  best,  the  empire 
was  in  truth  nearest  to  its  end.  After  describing  the  hap- 
piness of  the  country  under  the  earlier  Askias,  and  the 
perfect  order  which  prevailed,  the  Tarikh  says,  in  words 
which  might  have  applied  to  decadent  Rome  :  "  Things 
continued  thus  until  towards  the  moment  in  which  the 
Songhay  dynasty  approached  its  end,  and  its  empire 
ceased  to  exist.  At  this  moment  faith  was  exchanged 
for  infidelity  ;  there  was  nothing  forbidden  by  God  which 
was  not  openly  done.  Men  drank  wine,  they  gave  them- 
selves up  to  vice.  ...  As  to  adultery,  it  become  so 
frequent  that  indulgence  in  it  was  almost  accepted  as 
permissible.  Without  it  there  was  no  elegance  and  no 
glory.  .  .  ,  Because  of  these  abominations,"  continues 
the  pious  annalist,  "the  Almighty  in  His  vengeance 
drew   down    upon    the    Songhay    the    victorious   army    of 


284  A   TROPICAL   DEPENDENCY 

the  Moors.  He  brought  it  through  terrible  suffering 
from  a  distant  country.  Then  the  roots  of  this  people 
were  separated  from  the  trunk,  and  the  chastisement 
which  they  underwent  was  exemplary." 

But,  if  at  the  end  of  the  sixteenth  century  the  body 
of  the  Songhay  Empire  stood  ready  for  the  axe,  there 
were  offshoots  to  which  the  felling  of  the  trunk  was 
destined  to  impart  perhaps  only  the  more  vigour.  In 
the  western  province,  Masina,  already  mentioned  as 
having  established  in  the  eleventh  century,  with  the 
help  of  its  Fulani  population,  an  independence  which, 
though  it  had  paid  tribute  to  many  rulers,  was  sacrificed 
to  none,  was  destined  yet  to  play  a  part  of  some 
importance  in  the  future  of  the  country.  In  the  east 
the  Viceroyalty  of  Dandi,  including  the  territory  of  the 
independent  Sultans  of  Kebbi,  the  practically  inde- 
pendent Haussa  States,  and  the  State  of  Borgu,  with 
its  neighbouring  territory  of  Southern  Gurma,  was  the 
refuge  of  all  that  was  yet  loyal  to  the  old  traditions  of 
Songhay.  The  dynasty  of  Kebbi,  founded  in  rebellion, 
was  vigorous  with  the  old  vigour  of  conquering  Songhay, 
and  it  had  not  cut  itself  off  from  the  prosperity  of  the 
empire  to  accept  a  tame  share  in  its  defeat.  To  the 
Moor  who  knew  no  difference  between  them,  Kebbi  had 
a  lesson  of  its  own  to  teach. 

Beyond  the  rampart  which  was  created  from  Kebbi 
to  Nupe  by  these  states  of  the  Eastern  Niger  lay  Haussa- 
land,  a  congeries  of  states,  Mohammedan  and  pagan,  of 
great  fertility,  of  no  little  local  industry,  famous  from  the 
earliest  times  for  their  commercial  and  agricultural  activity, 
but  containing  populations  composed  of  such  extraordinarily 
diverse  elements  that  internecine  war  was  their  habitual 
condition.  Their  lack  of  internal  cohesion  deprived  them, 
notwithstanding  the  many  advantages  of  their  position, 
of  external  strenfjth.  ThouQfh  one  or  other  in  turn  assumed 
a  locally  dominant  position,  they  can  hardly  be  said  either 
to  have  made  or  to  have  resisted  conquest,  but  under 
all   conquest   they   preserved  their   individuality  and  per- 


CONDITION    OF   THE    SOUDAN  285 

sisted  in  their  habits.  The  black  traders  of  the  eleventh 
century,  whom  we  hear  of  in  the  pages  of  El  Bekri,  did 
not  differ  substantially  from  the  black  traders  whom  Idrisi 
mentions  in  the  twelfth  century,  and  Ibn  Batuta  speaks 
of  in  the  fourteenth  century.  Their  trade  prospered 
through  the  great  period  of  the  fifteenth  century,  and 
when,  in  the  sixteenth  century,  Kano  fell  upon  evil  days, 
Katsena  rose  quickly  to  take  her  place.  The  agricultural 
population  was  driven  off  the  land,  but  misfortune  does 
not  seem  to  have  altered  the  habits  of  Haussa  traders. 
When  the  outposts  of  Songhay  fought  with  the  out- 
posts of  Bornu,  Haussaland  was  the  battlefield,  but  the 
Haussa  States  took  no  part  in  the  war.  Like  a  bed  of 
rushes  they  have  ever  allowed  the  storms  of  encircling 
forces  to  beat  over  their  heads.  At  times  they  have 
appeared  to  be  laid  low,  but  when  the  hurricane  has 
passed  they  have  raised  themselves,  no  worse  for  the 
buffeting  of  fate.  Their  populations,  which  have  never 
enjoyed  any  wide  foreign  reputation,  were  perhaps  locally, 
in  their  modest  way,  the  best  known  and  the  best  informed 
of  all  the  peoples  of  the  Soudan.  They  were  very 
numerous,  and  in  their  recognised  capacity  of  travelling 
traders  through  all  the  states,  their  language  was  one 
of  the  most  widely  spoken  in  the  Soudan.  By  the  end 
of  the  sixteenth  century  it  supplied  to  the  eastern  portion 
of  the  country  a  lingua  franca,  which  to  the  present  day 
remains  as  a  means  of  communication  with  those  "great 
multitudes  of  negroes  and  of  other  people,"  of  whom  Leo 
Africanus  confesses  in  the  beginning  of  the  sixteenth 
century,  that  he  "  could  not  well  note  the  names." 
Travelling  as  they  did  in  small  trading  caravans  through 
the  entire  country,  they  became  naturally  acquainted 
with  the  affairs  of  every  neighbouring  kingdom.  They 
were  themselves  well  known  from  the  shores  of  the 
Atlantic  to  the  lip  of  the  sacred  well  of  Zem-Zem,  where 
they  drank  as  pilgrims  within  the  precincts  of  the  temple 
of  Mecca — and  as  peace  was  essential  to  their  trade,  they 
quarrelled    only    with    next-door    neighbours   and    rivals. 


286  A   TROPICAL   DEPENDENCY 

Peaceful  abroad  and  quarrelsome  at  home,  they  earned 
the  character,  which  they  enjoy  to-day,  of  being  at  once 
the  best  fighters  and  the  most  industrious  traders  of  the 
Soudan. 

Eastward  again  of  Haussaland  and  its  multitudes,  in- 
cluding the  settlements  which  have  been  already  men- 
tioned of  Fulanis,  Wangaras,  and  all  the  southern  pagan 
states,  lay  the  well-organised  Empire  of  Bornu,  occupy- 
ing on  the  western  side  of  Lake  Chad  a  territory  more 
extensive,  but  not  widely  different  from,  its  present 
position,  as  shown  upon  modern  maps,  while  to  the  north 
and  east  it  spread  round  the  shores  of  the  great  lake, 
and  extending  far  into  the  desert,  was  almost  conter- 
minous with  the  Egyptian  frontiers  of  the  Turkish 
Empire. 

It  will  be  remembered  that  in  the  contemporary  life 
of  Europe  Mohammedanism  had  been  steadily  gaining 
in  the  East,  under  the  Turks,  what  it  had  been  losing 
in  the  West  under  the  Saracens.  The  Seljukian  Turks 
had  overrun  Egypt  itself  in  the  middle  of  the  thirteenth 
century.  Their  Mamelukes  or  foreign  soldiery  elected  a 
Sultan  for  themselves  in  Cairo  in  the  year  1260,  and 
though  the  Abbasside  Caliphs  preserved  a  nominal  supre- 
macy, which  was  chiefly  religious,  Egypt  was,  in  fact, 
governed  by  the  Mameluke  Sultans,  until  they  in  turn 
were  overthrown  by  the  Ottoman  Turks.  The  Ottoman 
Turks  were  established  in  Europe,  in  the  Balkan  Penin- 
sula, in  1353,  exactly  one  hundred  years  before  their 
final  conquest  of  Constantinople.  About  the  year  1389 
their  famous  leader,  Bajazet,  accepted  the  title  of  Sultan 
from  the  Abbasside  Caliph  of  Egypt,  who  still  kept  the 
name  of  Head  of  the  Moslem  Church.  Shortly  after 
accepting  the  title  of  Sultan  he  defeated  the  confederate 
army  of  the  Christian  powers  at  Nicropolis,  and  while 
an  attack  of  the  gout  prevented  him  from  fulfilling  a  vow 
to  stable  his  horse  in  St.  Peter's  at  Rome,  he  was  able 
so  closely  to  besiege  Constantinople  that  it  must  have 
fallen    in    1402    but   for   the    intervention   of   Tamerlane. 


CONDITION    OF   THE    SOUDAN  287 

Tamerlane,  chief  of  that  other  branch  of  the  Tartars 
which  is  best  known  to  history  as  the  Moguls,  was  the 
representative,  though  not  the  legitimate  descendant,  of 
the  heirs  of  Genghis  Khan.  He  frankly  aspired  to  con- 
quer the  world,  and  he  had  conquered  Persia,  Tartary, 
and  India,  when,  hearing  on  the  banks  of  the  Ganges 
of  the  conquests  of  Bajazet  in  Europe,  he  resolved  to 
march  against  the  rival  of  his  military  glory.  The  Mogul 
and  Ottoman  conquests  already  touched  each  other  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  Erzeroum  and  the  Euphrates.  Tamer- 
lane's first  move  was  to  attack  Syria,  which  was  still 
subject  to  Egypt.  Aleppo,  Damascus,  and  Bagdad  fell 
to  his  arms  amid  awful  massacres.  Ibn  Khaldun  re- 
lates the  interview  he  had  with  him  outside  the  walls 
of  Damascus,  in   1401. 

But  the  Mamelukes  defended  their  territory  with 
vigour,  and  the  losses  and  fatigues  of  the  campaign 
caused  Tamerlane  to  turn  from  Egypt  and  Palestine,  and 
concentrate  his  forces  upon  the  Ottoman  Empire.  At 
the  battle  of  Ancyra,  in  Anatolia,  Bajazet  was  overthrown 
and  taken  prisoner,  in  1402,  and  while  the  Mogul  armies 
advanced  to  the  Asiatic  shores  of  the  Sea  of  Marmora, 
Bajazet  himself  died  in  captivity.  Thus,  in  1403,  Tamer- 
lane held  Asia  from  the  Ganges  to  the  Mediterranean. 
But  the  Ottoman  Turks  held  one  passage  into  Europe 
at  the  Hellespont,  and  the  Christians  of  Constantinople 
held  the  other  at  the  Bosphorus.  Bajazet's  successor, 
Suleiman,  and  the  Greek  Emperor,  both  agreed  to  pay 
tribute  to  Tamerlane  on  the  condition  that  his  armies 
did  not  pass  the  Straits.  Egypt  also  agreed  to  pay  him 
tribute,  with  a  similar  condition  that  he  should  not  pass 
into  Africa.  How  long  these  compositions  with  superior 
force,  on  the  part  of  rich,  weak  nations,  would  have  held 
good,  cannot  be  known.  Tamerlane  died  in  1405.  After 
his  death  the  Mogul  Empire  gradually  sank  beneath  the 
processes  of  time  and  war,  till  it  lost  itself  in  the  sham 
splendour  of  the  throne  of  Delhi. 

The  empire  of  the  Turks,  on  the  contrary,  recovered 


288  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

from  the  short  and  sharp  attack  of  Tamerlane.  In  142 1 
a  grandson  of  Bajazet  succeded  to  his  five  uncles  as 
Amurath  II.,  and  during  his  capable  reign  of  thirty  years, 
the  Turkish  Empire  reconstituted  itself  alike  in  Europe 
and  in  Asia  Minor.  The  capture  of  Constantinople,  though 
attempted  by  Amurath  in  1422,  was  reserved  for  his 
successor,  Mohammed  II.  The  town  was  taken  by  the 
Turks  on  the  29th  of  May  1453,  and  with  it  fell  the 
Christian  Empire  of  the  East.  St.  Sophia  became  a 
Turkish  mosque.  The  throne  of  Constantine  and  his 
successors  became  the  seat  of  Islam.  There  was  at 
that  time  no  power  in  Christendom  which  could  dis- 
lodge the  Turk  from  the  almost  impregnable  position 
of  Constantinople.  It  was  in  vain  that  the  feeble  heirs 
of  the  family  of  Paleologus  sold  their  imperial  rights  to 
European  sovereigns.  Before  the  end  of  the  fifteenth 
century  the  Greek  Empire  in  Europe  and  Asia  had 
passed  into  Turkish  hands,  and  the  sack  of  Otranto 
by  the  Turks  in  148 1  convulsed  the  Christian  world 
with  fear  that  the  conquest  of  Rome  might  be  added 
to  that  of  Constantinople. 

But  Mohammed  died  in  1481,  and  his  successors 
turned  their  attention  rather  to  the  east  and  south.  The 
Turkish  fleets  which  had  been  created  during  the  reigns 
of  Amurath  and  Mohammed,  and  numbered  no  less  than 
250  galleys,  under  the  command  of  the  famous  Barbarossa 
scoured  the  African  coasts.  Algiers  and  Tripoli  became 
Turkish  strongholds  in  the  opening  years  of  the  six- 
teenth century.  Egypt  and  Syria,  which  had  continued 
to  exist  under  the  Mamelukes  during  the  period  of 
European  conquest,  were  taken  by  Selim  I.  in  the 
year  1517.  The  Knights  Templars  were  driven  out  of 
the  island  of  Rhodes  on  Christmas  Day  of  1522.  Tunis 
was  captured  in  1534,  Gibraltar  was  sacked  in  1539, 
and  though  the  fortress  was  held  for  Spain,  the  Turkish 
fleet  sailed  round  the  coast,  pillaging  the  Spanish  towns 
as  they  went.  Thus,  from  one  end  of  the  Mediterranean 
to  the  other,   Turkish  corsairs    became   the  terror  of  the 


CONDITION    OF    THE    SOUDAN  289 

sea.  The  greater  part  of  the  North  African  coast  passed 
into  Turkish  hands,  a  position  which  was  not  conquered 
without  much  fighting,  taking  and  re-taking  of  towns. 
Tunis  and  Tripoli  changed  hands  more  than  once. 

Italy  itself  was  not  spared.  A  separate  squadron, 
under  Dragout,  another  famous  Turkish  sailor,  ravaged 
its  coasts.  In  1569,  in  a  great  naval  campaign,  the 
Turks  attacked  and  pillaged  the  coasts  and  islands 
belonging  to  Venice.  They  took  parts  of  Crete  and 
Cyprus.  Finally,  on  the  1st  of  August  1571,  Famagosta 
capitulated  to  the  Turks,  after  a  long  and  arduous  siege, 
and  the  island  of  Cyprus  was  theirs.  This  was  the  last 
Turkish  triumph  of  the  century.  The  Christian  Powers 
were  at  last  able  to  combine  effectively  under  the  leader- 
ship of  Don  John  of  Austria  against  the  common  enemy, 
and  the  battle  of  Lepanto,  which  was  fought  on  October 
7th  of  the  same  year,  destroyed  the  Turkish  sea-power 
in  the  Mediterranean. 

I  owe  an  apology  to  the  reader  for  this  crude  list 
of  dates,  but  the  rapid  rise  of  a  relatively  new  Moham- 
medan power  on  the  eastern  shores  of  the  Mediterranean 
must  be  borne  in  mind  in  order  to  understand  with 
what  a  different  world  the  commercial  and  intellectual 
intercourse  of  Bornu  was  carried  on,  to  that  known  and 
frequented  in  the  West  by  the  caravans  of  Melle,  and 
of  Songhay  in  its  earlier  days,  and  also  to  explain  the 
fury  of  hatred  and  persecution  by  which  the  Moorish 
citizens  of  Spain  were,  in  the  fifteenth  century,  attacked, 
conquered,  and  driven  out  of  the  country  which  they 
had  once  civilised  and  still  enriched.  As  the  crescent 
waxed  stronger  in  the  East  it  waned  in  the  West,  and 
the  decline  of  those  nations  of  the  Western  Soudan 
which  were  dependent  on  their  touch  with  Western 
markets  and  Western  sources  of  civilisation,  is  propor- 
tionately observable. 

It  was  not  to  be  supposed  that  Christian  Powers, 
however  indifferent  individually  to  each  other's  fate, 
could    collectively    regard    with    indifference    the    rise    of 

T 


290  A   TROPICAL   DEPENDENCY 

a  force  which  threatened  to  destroy  them  all.  Had 
they  not  been  enfeebled  by  jealousies,  corruption,  and 
superstition,  they  must  have  learned  long  before  the 
end  of  the  sixteenth  century  to  combine  in  such  force 
as  to  prohibit  the  further  advance  of  Islam.  But  in 
the  fifteenth  century  the  darkness  of  the  Middle  Ages 
was  still  upon  them.  Gibbon,  in  relating  the  fall  of 
Constantinople,  quotes  from  ^neas  Silvius,  afterwards 
Pope  Pius  II.,  who  thus  describes  the  state  of  Christen- 
dom: "It  is  a  body,"  he  says,  "without  a  head;  a 
republic  without  laws  or  magistrates.  The  Pope  and 
the  Emperor  may  shine  as  lofty  titles,  as  splendid 
images  ;  but  they  are  unable  to  command,  and  none  are 
willing  to  obey  ;  every  state  has  a  separate  prince,  and 
every  prince  has  a  separate  interest.  What  eloquence 
could  unite  so  many  discordant  and  hostile  powers  under 
the  same  standard.-*  Could  they  be  assembled  in  arms, 
who  would  dare  to  assume  the  office  of  general  ?  What 
order  could  be  maintained?  What  military  discipline? 
Who  would  undertake  to  feed  such  an  enormous  multi- 
tude? Who  would  understand  their  various  languages, 
or  direct  their  stranger  and  incompatible  manners  ?  What 
mortal  could  reconcile  the  English  with  the  French, 
Genoa  with  Arragon,  the  Germans  with  the  natives 
of  Hungary  and  Bohemia?  If  a  small  number  en- 
listed in  the  Holy  War,  they  must  be  overthrown 
by  the  infidels ;  if  many,  by  their  own  weight  and 
confusion." 

This  picture  of  the  weakness  of  Europe  in  the 
fifteenth  century  needs  no  amplifying  touches.  It  may, 
however,  be  recalled  that  at  the  very  moment  that 
Mohammed  II.  was  engaged  in  besieging  and  sacking 
Constantinople,  a  private  German  citizen  of  the  name  of 
John  Gutenberg  was  no  less  absorbed  in  the  work 
of  perfecting  at  Mentz  an  invention  of  cut  metal  types 
from  which  he  printed,  in  the  years  between  1450  and 
1455,  the  first  typed  copy  of  the  Latin  Bible.  If  the 
work  of   Mohammed    tended  to  consolidate  Christendom 


CONDITION    OF   THE    SOUDAN  291 

by  the    blows    which  were    struck    against    its    distracted 
kingdoms    from    outside,     the   work    of    Gutenburg    was 
perhaps    even    more    effectual  in    rendering    the    angular 
forces    malleable   by   mutual  comprehension   from   within. 
It    took    more    than    a    hundred    years    for    the    use    of 
printing    to    spread    to    some    of   the    remoter    parts    of 
Europe.     There   need  be   no  surprise   that  it   took  more 
than  a  hundred  years  for   Europe  to  emerge  sufficiently 
from    the    disunited    state    described    by    ^neas    Silvius, 
to    present   a    united    front    to    the    Turk,     and    it    is    a 
curious    but   not    inappropriate    coincidence    that  we   find 
the    use    of    printing    extended    to    the    farthest    western 
shore  of  Europe  by  its  first  adaptation  to  Irish  characters 
in   1 57 1,  the  very  year  of  the  battle  of  Lepanto.     There 
is    no   need  to    dwell  on   the  part  that   must    have   been 
played   by  the   discovery  of  this  art  alone  in   the   move- 
ment  which    drew    the    warring    nations    of   Christendom 
together.     Similarity  of  thought    is    the  great    unifier  of 
peoples,   and    from    the    middle    of  the    fifteenth    century 
the  learned  in  all  the  nations  of  Europe  had  the  means 
of  communicating  their  thoughts  not  only  to  each  other, 
but  to  the  body  of  their  respective  nations. 

But  if  in  1453  Europe  was  unfit,  as  a  whole,  to 
oppose  the  progress  of  the  Turk,  there  were  individuals 
who  burned  with  a  holy  zeal.  The  sack  of  Otranto, 
which,  in  1481,  had  almost  driven  the  Pope  to  abandon 
Italy,  found  Isabella  and  Ferdinand  on  the  throne  of 
Spain,  and  it  is  hardly  to  be  wondered  at  that  these 
Catholic  sovereigns,  sharing  to  the  full  in  the  grief  and 
terror  which  Turkish  triumphs  were  spreading  through 
Christendom,  were  inclined  to  act  with  something  of  the 
harshness  of  panic  towards  the  Mohammedan  peoples 
who  filled  the  southern  towns  of  Spain,  and  still  held 
within  the  precincts  of  Granada  an  independent  kingdom 
upon  Spanish  soil.  The  policy  pursued  against  the 
Moors,  the  ruin  of  the  industries  of  Spain  by  the  ex- 
pulsion, under  circumstances  of  the  utmost  rigour,  of 
immense  multitudes  of  its  most  skilful  artisans  and  most 


292  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

valuable  citizens,  stands  out  in  such  striking  contrast  to 
the  general  wisdom  and  benevolence  of  Isabella's  mild 
and  enlightened  reign,  that  it  can  only  be  understood 
by  reference  to  a  state  of  feeling  which  was  stirring  the 
orthodox  Catholics  of  every  court  of  Europe  to  preach 
the  duty  of  a  new  crusade  against  the  infidel.  The 
natural  sagacity  of  Isabella  would  lead  her  to  deal 
directly  with  the  infidel  upon  her  own  borders,  rather 
than  to  waste  her  energy  and  resources  in  the  endeavour 
to  unite  Europe  in  a  common  movement.  The  Spanish 
sovereigns  were  besieging  Granada  when  Columbus  ob- 
tained from  them,  in  camp,  in  April  of  1492,  the  long- 
desired  permission  to  start  on  his  voyage  of  discovery 
to  the  West,  and  it  is  indicative  of  the  general  tone  of 
feeling  in  Europe,  that  he  vowed  to  provide  out  of  the 
proceeds  of  his  enterprise,  if  it  should  prove  as  success- 
ful as  he  hoped,  funds  for  the  prosecution  of  a  crusade 
to  deliver  Palestine  from  the  Turks.  From  Gibraltar  to 
Constantinople  a  dread  of  victorious  Islam  inspired  the 
policy  of  every  court. 

The  result  was  the  expulsion  of  Mohammedanism 
from  Western  Europe.  When  Granada  submitted  to 
Ferdinand  and  Isabella  in  1492,  the  Moors  were  not  at 
first  driven  out  of  Spain.  They  remained  as  subjects 
of  the  Catholic  kings.  But  Cardinal  Ximenes,  Isabella's 
great  adviser,  did  not  long  remain  content  with  this  mea- 
sure of  moderation.  In  1502  they  were  expelled.  The 
contents  of  their  famous  libraries  were  collected  and  de- 
stroyed, with  the  exception,  as  has  been  already  men- 
tioned, of  some  300  books  of  medical  science.  Their 
property,  offered  in  nominal  sales,  for  which  gold  and 
silver  were  not  allowed  to  be  used  in  payment,  was,  in 
fact,  subjected  to  wholesale  pillage.  All  that  they  took 
with  them  to  enrich  the  cities  of  Africa  to  which  they 
went,  was  the  skill,  the  taste,  the  learning,  the  industry, 
the  habits  of  good  citizenship,  which  each  man  carried 
in  his   breast,  and    by  the  loss    of  which  Spain    was    for 


CONDITION    OF   THE    SOUDAN  293 

ever  impoverished.  Spain  has  never  recovered  from 
the  blow  dealt  against  its  public  life  by  the  wisest  of 
its  sovereigns. 

Africa,   which    for  a  time  seemed    to    receive  all    that 
Spain   had    lost,   suffered   on    her  part    by  the    severance 
which   took    place    between    her    own    life    and    the    pro- 
gressive life  just   then  opening  upon  new   possibilities   of 
the  West.     Isabella  died  in  1504.     She  was  succeeded  by 
her  daughter,   Joanna,  the  mad  queen,   and  after  her    by 
Charles   V.,    who  ascended    the  throne  in   15 16,  just  one 
year  before  the  Turks  took   Egypt  from  the   Mamelukes. 
Charles   V.,    Emperor    of   Germany    as    well    as   King  of 
Spain,  and  champion  of  Catholicism  against  the  tendencies 
of  the   Reformation  in    Europe,   reigned    for   forty  years, 
and    during  the   whole   of   that  time  showed   himself  the 
determined  enemy  of  Islam.     He   pursued  the  Moors  to 
the  shores  of  Africa.      He   took  their  coast  towns.     He 
engaged  the  European   Powers  to  help  him  in  closing  the 
ports   of  the  Mediterranean   to  their    ships.       He  fought 
indiscriminately  against  Moors  and  Turks,  and  in  beating 
the    Moors,    prepared    the    way    for   the   triumph    of    the 
Turks,  who   proved  themselves   a  harder  enemy  for  him 
to  overthrow.     Tripoli  had  been  already  taken  by  Spain 
in    1 5 10.     When  the   Turks  took    the   island  of   Rhodes 
in  1522,  Charles  V.  gave  Malta  to  the  Knights  Templars, 
and    five  years   later  established  them   in  the  very  camp 
of  Islam  by  giving  them  Tripoli,  which  they  held  till  the 
Turks  took  it  again  in  1551. 

Oran,  which  had  also  become  Spanish  in  the  early 
part  of  the  century,  was  gallantly  defended  against  suc- 
cessive attempts,  alike  on  the  part  of  Moors  and  Turks, 
to  repossess  themselves  of  it.  In  the  siege  of  1563,  in 
the  succeeding  reign,  the  Turks  used  muskets,  heavy 
artillery,  and  mines,  but  without  avail,  for  the  place,  on 
the  eve  of  surrender,  was  relieved  by  the  fleet  of  Andrea 
Doria.  In  1535  Charles  led  in  person  the  attack  on 
Tunis,  which  the  Turks  had  taken  in   1534,  and  he  sue- 


294  A   TROPICAL   DEPENDENCY 

ceeded  in  capturing  the  town,  which  was  held  by  a 
Spanish  garrison  till  the  Turks,  under  Barbarossa,  re- 
took it  in  1550.  But  though  the  Christians  were  able  to 
take  certain  seaports,  and  eventually,  after  the  battle  of 
Lepanto,  to  hold  the  sea,  the  Turks  gradually  possessed 
themselves  of  the  coast  of  Northern  Africa.  The  pro- 
vinces which  surrounded  the  seaports  were  in  their  hands. 
"Where  the  Turks  have  once  taken  foot,"  says  Marmol, 
who  wrote  about  the  year  1573,  "they  can  never  again 
be  dislodged." 

Charles  V.  abdicated  in  1556.  His  son  Philip  abated 
nothing  of  his  policy,  and  while  he  persecuted  Protestants 
in  Flanders,  he  found  time  to  pursue  with  equal  zeal 
Turks,  Jews,  and  heretics  in  the  Mediterranean.  This 
reign  saw  the  battle  of  Lepanto.  The  fleets  of  Spain 
and  Italy  could  close  the  Mediterranean  to  the  Turks, 
but  the  Italians  and  Spaniards  could  never  penetrate 
into  Africa.  All  that  happened  was  that  the  Turks — 
banned  as  militant  infidels  by  the  nations  of  Europe — 
possessed  themselves  of  the  fruitful  provinces  stretching 
from  Egypt  to  Morocco,  that  harbours  once  crowded 
with  the  merchant  shipping  of  the  world  became  mere 
nests  of  corsairs,  sallying  out  to  prey  upon  a  trade  that 
passed  them  by,  and  that  between  the  interior  of  Africa 
and  the  civilised  world  a  barrier  was  erected  which,  as 
years  went  by,  became  impassable — Africa  was  cut  off 
from   Europe. 

The  Moors,  suffering  equally  beneath  the  blows  of 
Turks  and  Christians,  withdrew  into  the  north-western 
corner  of  the  continent.  Unable  to  maintain  external 
relations  with  any  equal  power,  they  lost  the  finer  elements 
of  national  life,  and  rapidly  became  a  decadent  people. 
During  the  long  struggle  of  the  sixteenth  century  we 
hear  of  them  as  taking  part,  under  their  chiefs,  from  time 
to  time  in  the  sieges  and  battles  of  the  coast.  At  the 
end  of  that  century  they  made  one  effort,  which  was  as 
the  last  flicker  of  their  expiring  glory,  to  obtain  for 
themselves  in  some  other  direction  the  outlet  which  had 


CONDITION    OF   THE   SOUDAN  295 

been  closed  upon  the  Mediterranean  and  Atlantic  coasts. 
The  North  was  held  against  them  by  superior  force. 
Before  they  submitted  to  the  living  death  which  isolation 
marked  for  them  in  the  heart  of  Africa,  they  endeavoured 
to  break  through  to  the  South.  The  outcome  of  their 
endeavour  was  the  Moorish  conquest  of  the  Soudan. 


CHAPTER   XXXII 
THE    MOORISH    CONQUEST 

*'  DjouDER  Pasha  was  a  little  man  with  blue  eyes."  Thus 
begins  the  chapter  in  the  Tarikh  which  recounts  the 
coming  of  the  Moors.  Another  account  says  that  he 
had  a  light  complexion  of  the  colour  of  steel.  Djouder 
Pasha  was  the  commander  -  in  -  chief  of  the  Moorish 
army.  He  had  at  his  disposal  for  the  purposes  of 
an  expedition  to  the  Soudan  only  a  small  force  of 
something  under  4000  men,  but  they  were  well  armed 
with  muskets — which  were  apparently  unknown  to  the 
western  armies  of  the  Soudan — they  were  well  mounted, 
well  disciplined,  well  equipped  with  tents  and  medical 
stores,  and,  for  the  purposes  of  an  army  which  meant  to 
live  upon  the  country  through  which  they  passed,  they 
were  sufficiently  well  provisioned.  Their  organisation 
had  been  reformed  on  the  model  of  the  Turks,  with 
whom  the  armies  of  Morocco  had  had  more  than  one 
occasion  to  measure  their  strength. 

A  little  steel-coloured  man  with  blue  eyes,  at  the 
head  of  such  a  force,  was  in  a  position  to  play,  if  he  chose, 
amid  the  rich  and  supine  populations  of  the  Soudan,  a 
part  not  unlike  that  of  the  leader  of  a  pack  of  wolves 
among  flocks  of  sheep.  The  disproportionate  numbers 
of  the  sheep  were  only  so  much  the  more  to  the  advan- 
tage of  the  wolves.  Djouder  Pasha  was  an  accomplished 
soldier.  He  had  gained  experience  in  the  wars  of  the 
coast  with  Turks  and  Spaniards.  The  results  to  be 
obtained  with  modern  weapons  were  well  known  to  him, 
and  it  is  probable  that  he  fully  appreciated  the  importance 

of  moving  with  a  small,  rather  than  with  a  large  unwieldy 

396 


THE    MOORISH    CONQUEST  297 

force,  across  the  difficult  and  waterless  deserts  which  had 
hitherto  served  as  the  best  military  defence  of  the  Soudan. 
When  a  military  nation  wishes  to  fight  with  one 
which  it  has  reason  to  believe  to  be  unprepared,  a  cause 
of  quarrel  is  never  far  to  seek.  Morocco  found  its  cause 
of  quarrel  with  Songhay  in  the  possession  of  the  salt 
mines  of  Tegazza.  It  will  be  remembered  that  these 
mines  lay  upon  the  western  road  leading  from  Tafilet, 
or  Sidjilmessa,  to  Ghana  and  Timbuctoo.  Their  posi- 
tion upon  modern  maps  is  about  8°  W.  by  26°  N.  They 
were  within  the  limits  of  the  Mellestine,  and  when  the 
power  of  Songhay  had  succeeded  to  that  of  Melle,  they 
were  included  in  the  territories  of  the  Songhay  Empire. 
They  furnished  the  principal  salt  supply  of  the  Soudan, 
and  their  possession  was  therefore  a  matter  of  supreme 
importance  to  Songhay.  We  have  seen  that  during  the 
sixteenth  century  the  Sultans  of  Morocco  had  from  time 
to  time  made  efforts  to  dispute  the  supremacy  of  Songhay 
over  this  valuable  border  district,  and  that  their  claims 
had  been  vigorously  rejected  by  the  earlier  Askias.  It 
happened,  in  the  year  1590,  when  the  second  Askia  Ishak 
was  on  the  throne  of  Songhay,  and  that  of  Morocco  was 
occupied  by  Muley  Hamed,  that  a  certain  Songhay  official, 
who  had  been  interned  at  Tegazza  as  a  punishment  for 
malpractices  by  a  previous  Askia,  succeeded  in  effecting 
his  escape,  and  fied  across  the  northern  border  to  the  court 
of  Morocco.  He  there  represented  to  Muley  Hamed  the 
ease  with  which  the  conquest  of  Songhay,  in  the  present 
condition  of  the  country,  could  be  effected,  and  he  treach- 
erously placed  all  his  knowledge  at  the  disposal  of  the 
enemy.  As  a  consequence  of  these  representations,  Muley 
Hamed  wrote  to  Askia  Ishak,  and  announced  that  he 
proposed  to  invade  his  country,  unless  he  were  willing 
to  transfer  to  Morocco  the  salt  mines  of  Tegazza.  The 
sovereign  of  Morocco  urged  that  he  had  a  right  to 
possess  the  mines,  since  it  was  only  thanks  to  his  exer- 
tions that  the  country  was  defended  and  protected  against 
the  incursions   of  the  Christians.      Askia   Ishak  rejected 


298  A    TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

the  claim  as  indignantly  as  the  Ishak  of  a  previous  gene- 
ration had  rejected  a  similar  proposition,  and,  by  way  of 
defiance,  accompanied  his  answer  with  the  significant 
present  of  spears  and  iron  shackles. 

Muley  Hamed  accepted  the  defiance,  and  in  November 
of  1590  Djouder  Pasha,  with  a  staff  of  ten  picked  generals 
and  a  very  carefully  selected  body  of  officers,  crossed  the 
border  at  the  head  of  his  already  well-prepared  little  force. 
Military  expeditions  had  been  attempted  before  against 
Songhay  by  Morocco.  They  had  always  failed  in  con- 
sequence of  the  difficulty  of  moving  large  bodies  of  men 
through  the  desert,  and  their  record  had  been  records  of 
disaster.  Djouder  Pasha  knew  his  business  better.  The 
march,  which  is  supposed  to  be  one  of  from  fifty  to  sixty 
days  for  an  ordinary  caravan,  seems  to  have  doubled  itself 
for  his  army,  which,  with  carriers,  hospital  corps,  &c., 
amounted  to  about  10,000  men;  but  on  March  30,  1591, 
he  encamped  safely  on  the  Niger.  It  was  a  river  which 
had  never  before  been  seen  by  Moorish  troops,  and  the 
general  celebrated  the  event  by  a  great  banquet.  The 
force  appears  from  the  account  to  have  passed  in  the 
desert  to  the  east  of  Timbuctoo,  and  to  have  then  de- 
scended upon  the  river  at  a  point  still  east  of  Timbuctoo, 
leaving  the  town  entirely  untouched. 

After  recruiting  his  forces  with  food  and  drink  in  the 
fertile  country  which  they  had  entered,  Djouder  marched 
without  delay  towards  Kagho. 

In  the  meantime  Askia  Ishak,  having  information  of 
the  approach  of  the  Moors,  called  his  generals  and  the 
principal  personages  of  the  kingdom  together,  in  order, 
it  is  said,  to  ask  for  their  opinion,  and  to  consult  them 
on  the  measures  to  be  taken.  But  nothing  can  more 
graphically  represent  the  fallen  condition  of  the  country 
than  the  description  which  is  given  in  two  lines  of  the 
debates  of  this  council:  "Whenever  judicious  advice  was 
given  it  was  hastily  rejected."  To  the  last  moment  the 
officials  of  Songhay  refused  to  believe  that  the  Moorish 
army  would  succeed  in  reaching  the  river.     Finally,  how- 


THE    MOORISH    CONQUEST  299 

ever,  an  army  of  12,000  horse  and  30,000  foot  was  put 
in  motion. 

On  the  1 2th  of  April,  1591,  the  forces  met  at  a 
place  called  Tenkoudibo,  which  I  have  not  been  able 
to  identify,  but  which  would  appear  by  the  context  to 
be  in  the  valley  of  the  Niger,  on  the  northern  side  of 
the  river,  perhaps  something  more  than  half-way  be- 
tween Timbuctoo  and  Kagho.  The  battle  resulted  in 
the  absolute  defeat  of  the  Songhay  army.  The  cavalry 
was  routed,  the  chivalry  of  Songhay  fled.  But  among 
the  rank  and  file  of  the  foot-soldiers  a  touching  incident 
is  reported.  Seeing  that  the  battle  was  lost,  and  being 
pledged  by  their  oath  as  soldiers  not  to  fly  in  case  of 
defeat,  the  infantry,  we  are  told,  kept  their  oath  by 
throwing  their  bucklers  upon  the  ground  and  sitting 
upon  them  to  await  the  onset  of  Djouder's  troops, 
and  were  all  massacred  in  that  attitude.  Askia  Ishak 
fled  with  the  rest  of  the  army,  sending  word  to  the 
populations  of  Kagho  and  Timbuctoo  to  evacuate  these 
towns,  and  to  join  him  on  the  other  side  of  the  river 
in  the  province  of  Gurma.  He  himself,  without  passing 
through  Kagho,  fled  to  Korai  Gurma.  He  camped  there 
with  the  remnant  of  his  army,  surrounded  by  lamenta- 
tions. Next  day,  "with  cries  and  vociferations,"  the 
passage  of  the  Niger  was  commenced  in  little  boats. 
The  boats  appear  to  have  been  insufficient.  In  the 
confusion  which  resulted  great  numbers  perished,  and 
wealth,  "of  which  God  only  knows  the  amount,"  was  lost. 
Djouder  marched  on  Kagho,  but  in  that  town  there 
remained  no  one  except  a  few  aged  persons,  teachers, 
students,  and  merchants,  who  had  not  been  able  to 
leave  in  a  hurry  with  the  rest  of  the  population. 

A  certain  Khatib  Mahmoud  Darami,  an  old  man  held 
in  high  esteem  amongst  the  people,  received  Djouder 
Pasha  and  his  staff,  and  entertained  them  "with  mag- 
nificent hospitality."  He  was  treated  by  them  in  return 
with  every  consideration.  He  had  long  discussions  with 
Djouder,    and    became    the    negotiator   of    the    terms    of 


300  A   TROPICAL   DEPENDENCY 

peace  which  were  offered  by  Askia  Ishak.  The  account 
which  has  reached  us  of  these  appears  to  be  very  in- 
complete. All  we  are  told  is  of  one  condition  —  that 
Songhay  should  pay  an  indemnity  of  100,000  pieces  of 
gold  and  1000  slaves,  and  that  the  Moorish  army  should 
return  to  Morocco.  To  these  advances  Djouder — who 
seems  to  have  been  very  little  impressed  with  the  riches 
of  Kagho — was  content  to  reply  that  he  was  not  a  prin- 
cipal :  he  was  the  servant  of  the  Sultan,  and  could  only 
refer  the  question  to  Morocco. 

After  consulting  with  the  Arab  merchants  of  the 
town,  he  drew  up  proposals  which  he  despatched  by  a 
sure  messenger  to  Muley  Hamed,  and  leaving  Kagho, 
after  having  been  only  seventeen  days  in  the  town,  he 
withdrew  his  troops  to  Timbuctoo,  where  he  resolved  to 
await  the  answer  of  the  Sultan.  The  people  of  Tim- 
buctoo, in  view  of  the  difficulty  of  transporting  them- 
selves and  their  property  with  safety  into  the  province 
of  Gurma,  had  not  obeyed  the  summons  of  Askia,  but 
preferred  the  chances  of  negotiation  with  the  Moors  to 
the  certainty  of  destruction  among  their  own  countrymen. 
They  only  profited  so  far  by  the  order  to  evacuate  the 
town  as  to  hold  themselves  dispensed  from  any  duty  to 
defend  it.  They  received  Djouder  coldly,  but  without 
opposition,  and  he,  who  during  the  whole  of  this  early 
period  appears  to  have  kept  his  troops  in  admirable 
control,  selected  the  quarter  of  the  town  which  he  pre- 
ferred, and  proceeded  to  build  a  fortress  in  it,  while  he 
kept  the  greater  part  of  his  army  encamped  outside  the 
town.  Cold  civilities  were  exchanged  on  both  sides  be- 
tween him  and  the  authorities.  People  augured,  it  is 
said,  nothing  good  from  the  position  of  affairs ;  but  a 
sort  of  thunderous  truce  was  maintained  until  the  mes- 
senger should  have  time  to  return  from  Morocco  with 
the  signification  of  the  Sultan's  will.  The  messenger 
left  Kagho  in  April.  The  Moorish  troops  entered  Tim- 
buctoo on  the  30th  of  May.  It  was  not  until  August 
that  the  answer  of  the  Sultan  was  received. 


THE    MOORISH    CONQUEST  301 

In  the  meantime,  though  Djouder  held  his  troops 
sternly  in  leash,  Askia  Ishak  remained  in  the  far  eastern 
provinces,  and  the  Songhay  Empire  became  aware  that 
one  form  of  central  authority  had  been  destroyed,  and 
that  no  other  had  been  substituted.  Subversive  forces 
began  to  work  on  all  its  borders.  The  antagonistic 
tribes  which  had  been  held  in  peace  by  the  strength  of 
supreme  authority  broke  into  war.  The  first  to  rise 
were  tribes  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Timbuctoo  itself, 
who  plundered  the  rich  territory  on  the  banks  of  the 
river  which  is  known  as  the  Ras-el-ma,  or  Head  of  the 
Waters,  and  carried  off  the  inhabitants  as  slaves.  Then 
the  people  of  Zaghawa,  a  particularly  wealthy  district 
to  the  south-west,  which  was  mentioned,  it  may  be 
remembered,  by  Ibn  Batuta,  did  the  same  thing  in 
territories  lying  within  the  Viceroyalty  of  Kormina.  The 
territory  of  Jenne  was  ravaged  in  the  most  horrible 
manner  by  pagan  barbarians  from  the  south  who  had 
long  been  a  terror  to  its  inhabitants.  Throughout  the 
west  there  was  an  outbreak  of  brigandage,  and  among 
the  tribes  who  profited  by  this  period  of  licence  to 
enrich  themselves  at  their  neighbours'  expense  are  to  be 
found  more  than  one  under  the  leadership  of  Fulani 
chiefs.  In  the  eastern  portion  of  the  empire  the  dis- 
affected populations  tended  to  gather  round  the  defeated 
Askia  in  the  territory  of  Borgu  to  which  he  had  fled. 

Upon  all  this  Djouder's  blue  eyes  appear  to  have 
looked  with  steely  indifference  while  he  waited  for  the 
orders  of  the  Sultan.  They  came  in  a  form  which  was 
not  expected.  The  receipt  of  the  proposal  for  peace 
aroused  nothing  but  fury  in  Muley  Hamed's  mind. 
That  such  a  victory  as  had  been  achieved  should  lead 
to  so  small  a  result  appeared  to  him  to  be  the  evidence 
only  of  treachery.  Advisers  were  not  wanting  who 
whispered  that  the  general  had  been  bribed,  and  in  a 
transport  of  rage  the  Sultan  deposed  Djouder  Pasha  from 
his  command.  A  personal  enemy,  Mohammed  ben  Zer- 
goun,  was  made  commander-in-chief  in  his  place. 


302  A   TROPICAL   DEPENDENCY 

Djouder's  first  intimation  of  the  storm  was  the 
arrival  of  Mohammed  ben  Zergoun  at  Timbuctoo,  accom- 
panied by  a  new  staff  and  invested  with  full  powers 
by  the  Sultan. 

Mohammed  immediately  deposed  Djouder  and  assumed 
the  supreme  command,  at  the  same  time  indulging  his 
personal  enmity  by  the  bitterness  of  a  military  cross- 
examination,  in  which  he  taunted  Djouder  with  his 
inactivity,  and  asked  what  had  prevented  him  from 
pursuing  the  Askia  across  the  river.  Djouder  answered 
that  it  was  the  lack  of  boats,  which  had  all  been 
removed  by  the  enemy.  Mohammed  ordered  boats 
to  be  constructed,  for  which  purpose  the  plantations  of 
trees  which  had  been  made  within  the  walls  to  beautify 
the  town  of  Timbuctoo  were  cut  down,  and  the  panels 
of  the  doors  were  torn  from  the  houses.  It  was  the 
beginning  of  the  destruction  which  was  soon  to  fall  upon 
the  country.  From  this  time  Songhay  was  allowed  no 
pause  upon  the  downward  path. 

The  orders  of  Muley  Hamed  to  his  new  commander- 
in-chief  were  that  Askia  Ishak  was  to  be  driven  from 
the  Soudan,  and  Mohammed  lost  no  time  in  proceeding 
to  carry  his  instructions  into  effect.  Djouder  Pasha 
had  reached  the  country  in  April,  at  the  beginning  of 
the  rains,  and  his  period  of  inactivity  corresponded  to 
the  season  of  highest  flood,  when  in  many  districts  the 
Niger,  overflowing  its  shores,  spreads  like  a  lake  over 
wide  tracts  of  country.  Mohammed  arrived  at  Tim- 
buctoo on  the  17th  of  August.  In  the  last  week  of 
September,  when  the  rains  are  drawing  towards  their 
close,  the  army,  having  with  it  Djouder  Pasha  and  all 
the  revoked  generals  who  had  composed  Djouder  Pasha's 
staff,  marched  south-eastward  towards  Kuka  in  Borgu, 
where  Askia  Ishak  was  established.  In  a  battle  which 
was  fought  on  October  14th  Ishak  was  completely 
defeated,  and  fled  within  the  confines  of  the  Viceroyalty 
of  Dandi  to  the  same  spot,  Korai  Gurma,  at  which  the 
remains  of  his  army  had  crossed  the  river  when  fleeing 


THE    MOORISH    CONQUEST  303 

southwards  from  Djouder  Pasha.  They  now  recrossed 
in  the  opposite  sense,  and  from  this  time  the  river  in  its 
eastern  course  formed  the  defensible  frontier  which  was 
maintained  between  the  Hngering  remains  of  Songhay 
authority  and  the  country  which  was  soon  to  be  known 
as  the  Moorish  Soudan.  Mohammed  occupied  the 
position  evacuated  by  Ishak  in  Borgu,  and  we  are  able 
to  form  an  estimate  of  the  fighting  strength  of  his 
columns  by  the  fact  that  the  camp  included  174  tents, 
each  tent  containing,  in  accordance  with  the  Turkish 
model  followed  by  the  Moors,  twenty  fusiliers.  He  had, 
therefore,  at  his  command  a  force  of  3480  men  armed 
with  muskets  in  a  country  in  which  the  native  army  had 
fallen  into  a  disorganised  rabble,  badly  led,  and  armed 
only  with  bows  and  arrows.  There  was  no  unreasonable 
arrogance  in  the  supposition  that  he  would  be  able  to  do 
what  he  pleased. 

I  will  not  attempt  to  follow  this  or  succeeding 
campaigns  in  detail.  I  will  only  indicate  the  essential 
points. 

Askia  Ishak,  intending  to  fly  for  safety  into  the 
territory  of  Kebbi,  was  murdered  by  pagans  in  Gurma, 
and  was  succeeded  in  April  of  1592  by  a  supine  brother, 
Mohammed  Kagho,  who,  shortly  after  his  succession, 
offered  to  take  the  oath  of  fidelity  to  the  Sultan  of 
Morocco.  The  famine,  which  has  already  been  men- 
tioned in  connection  with  the  history  of  Kano,  was 
making  itself  felt,  and  the  Moorish  army  was  reduced 
during  its  campaign  in  the  eastern  provinces  to  eat  its 
pack  animals.  Mahmoud  therefore  called  upon  Moham- 
med Kagho  to  prove  the  sincerity  of  his  proposals  by 
coming  to  the  assistance  of  the  troops  and  providing 
them  with  food.  Mohammed  Kagho  ordered  all  the 
crops  which  were  ripe  in  Haussaland  to  be  reaped  for 
the  benefit  of  the  enemy,  and  this  was  appropriately 
enough  the  last  exercise  ever  made  of  Songhay  authority 
in  Haussaland.  Mohammed  Kagho  was  required  to 
come  in   person  to   the  camp  of  the  Moors  to  make  his 


304  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

submission  to  the  Sultan.  He  did  so,  and  by  order  of 
Mahmoud  he  was  treacherously  murdered.  Of  the 
eighty-three  notables  who  accompanied  him  the  majority 
were  massacred,  but  a  few  of  the  ablest  escaped  to  group 
themselves  round  the  new  Askia,  a  younger  brother  of 
Kaofho,  who  succeeded  under  the  name  of  Askia  Nouh. 
One  of  the  eighty-three,  Suleiman,  a  cousin  of  Nouh, 
was  selected  by  Mahmoud  and  proclaimed  as  a  rival 
Askia  at  the  camp  near  Kuka  in  Borgu. 

From  this  time  until  the  authority  of  the  Askias 
altogether  disappeared  there  were  always  two  Askias — 
one  at  Timbuctoo,  appointed  and  maintained  by  the 
Moors,  and  used  as  a  puppet  when  convenient  to  give 
a  semblance  of  legitimacy  to  their  acts  ;  the  other,  repre- 
senting the  wishes  of  the  Songhay  people  and  claiming 
legitimate  descent,  maintained  himself  in  some  degree 
of  independence  in  the  Viceroyalty  of  Dandi,  which, 
though  it  included  Kebbi  and  the  practically  indepen- 
dent Haussa  States,  still  constituted  nominally  a  portion 
of  the  Songhay  Empire  that  never  submitted  to  the 
Moors. 

Askia  Nouh  formed  a  seat  of  government  in  1592 
near  the  southern  border  of  the  province  of  Kebbi. 
During  some  of  his  earlier  battles  Kanta's  people,  it  is 
said,  could  hear  the  sound  of  the  firing.  Nouh  was  of 
a  different  temperament  from  the  later  Askias,  and  all 
the  efforts  of  Mahmoud  Zergoun  were  insufficient  to 
overthrow  the  resistance  which  he  organised  to  the 
advance  of  the  Moors.  War  continued  for  two  years, 
during  which  time  the  Songhay  forces,  notwithstanding 
their  inferior  arms,  obtained  many  successes.  "  Numerous 
and  terrible,"  says  the  Tarikh,  "were  the  combats  which 
took  place  in  this  region."  On  one  occasion,  at  the 
battle  of  Birni,  Mahmoud  lost  eighty  of  his  best  fusiliers. 
Famine  and  climate  worked  on  the  side  of  Askia  Nouh. 
The  Moorish  army  suffered  severely.  Mahmoud  wrote 
to  the  Sultan  that  the  whole  of  his  cavalry  was  destroyed. 
Six   army  corps  were  sent  successively  in   reinforcement. 


THE    MOORISH    CONQUEST  305 

but  at  the  end  of  two  years  Mahmoud,  still  unsuccessful, 
was  forced  to  withdraw,  and  to  turn  his  attention  to  Tim- 
buctoo  and  the  Western  Provinces.  He  left  Djouder 
Pasha  at  Kagho  in  the  capacity  of  lieutenant-governor, 
with  the  river,  along  which  a  chain  of  fortresses  had  been 
constructed,  to  serve  as  an  eastern  boundary.  We  can 
imagine  the  deposed  commander-in-chief  smiling  grimly 
at  the  failure  of  his  rival  to  achieve  that  which  he 
himself  had  judged  it  best  not  to  attempt. 


CHAPTER   XXXIII 
THE   SOUDAN   UNDER   THE   MOORS 

The  events  which  recalled  Mahmoud  Zergoun  to  the 
west  were  of  a  serious  character.  The  whole  country 
was  in  disorder.  Shortly  after  the  army  had  marched 
eastward,  in  September  of  1591,  riots  had  broken  out  at 
Timbuctoo,  and  had  continued  until  the  last  days  of 
December.  The  Moors,  having  some  difficulty  in  hold- 
ing their  own,  had  called  in  the  help  of  the  Tuaregs 
of  the  desert,  already  employed  in  ravaging  the  fertile 
territory  of  the  Ras-el-Ma,  and,  with  the  help  of  these 
allies,  had  put  the  town  to  fire  and  sword.  Nevertheless, 
on  the  withdrawal  of  the  Tuaregs,  the  Moors  were  again 
driven  to  take  refuge  in  the  fortress  which  had  been 
built  for  them  by  Djouder  Pasha.  They  succeeded  in 
conveying  intelligence  to  Mahmoud  of  their  position,  and 
he  detached  from  his  army  a  force  of  324  soldiers  under 
one  of  his  best  young  generals,  who,  marching  to  the 
relief  of  the  imprisoned  garrison,  struck  terror  into 
Timbuctoo.  The  town  submitted,  and  took  an  oath  of 
fidelity  to  the  Sultan  of  Morocco.  After  this,  peace  was 
for  a  short  time  established  in  Timbuctoo.  The  roads 
were  opened,  and  the  military  forces  of  the  Moors  were 
directed  against  the  Zaghrani  and  other  rebels  who 
were  pillaging  the  surrounding  country.  Jenn6  also 
made  its  submission,  and  took  the  oath  of  allegiance  to 
the  Sultan  of  Morocco.  But  the  riots  were  hardly  at 
an  end  in  Timbuctoo  before  similar  disturbances  broke 
out  in  Jenn6.  The  Moorish  Cadi  of  the  town  was  taken 
prisoner,    and    sent   in   chains   to  a  distant  stronghold   in 

the    pagan    country   to    the    south.      The    rioters,    whose 

306 


THE    SOUDAN    UNDER   THE    MOORS     307 

forces  were  largely  composed  of  pagans,  ruled  Jenn6  for 
a  time,  and  committed  many  atrocities.  They  wished 
to  elect  an  Askia  for  themselves,  but  were  dissuaded 
from  that  design  by  the  representations  of  the  principal 
Songhay  officials  that  nobody  as  yet  knew  what  would 
be  the  issue  of  the  fighting  between  Mahmoud  and 
Askia  Nouh.  Finally,  order  was  restored  in  Jenn6  by 
the  same  young  general  whom  Mahmoud  had  despatched 
to  Timbuctoo,  and  the  heads  of  the  principal  rioters, 
sent  as  proofs  of  the  success  of  his  operations  to  the 
political  governor  of  Timbuctoo,  decorated  the  market- 
place of  that  town.  Throughout  these  operations,  the 
native  forces  do  not  appear  to  have  been  uniformly 
opposed  to  the  Moors.  On  the  contrary,  the  officials, 
at  least,  appear  to  have  in  many  instances  endeavoured 
to  support  their  authority.  There  was  no  well-organised 
movement  of  revolt,  but  the  general  condition  of  the 
country  was  fast  resolving  itself  into  chaos. 

No  sooner  was  Jenn6  reduced  to  order,  than  the 
Tuaregs,  once  the  allies  of  the  Moors,  possessed  them- 
selves of  a  Moorish  fortress  established  in  the  Ras-el- 
Ma,  and  threatened  to  attack  Timbuctoo.  The  numbers 
of  the  Moorish  garrison  were  much  reduced,  but  hearing 
that  an  army  corps  sent  from  Morocco  for  the  reinforce- 
ment of  Mahmoud  Zergoun  was  on  the  way,  messengers 
were  sent  into  the  desert  to  hurry  its  arrival,  and  with 
its  timely  assistance  the  Tuaregs  were  overthrown.  The 
reinforcements  were  then  passed  on  to  Mahmoud  Zergoun 
in  the  east,  and  reported  to  him  fully  the  state  of  affairs. 

Mahmoud  Zergoun  returned  to  Timbuctoo  in  the 
autumn  of  1593.  He  first  occupied  himself  with  an 
expedition  against  the  Tuaregs,  who  were  again  ravaging 
the  Ras  -  el  -  Ma,  and  then  turned  his  attention  to  the 
internal  affairs  of  Timbuctoo.  He  had  probably  good 
reason  to  doubt  the  sincerity  of  the  official  attitude  of 
submission,  and  so  long  as  riots  continued  in  this  and 
the  neighbouring  towns  he  suspected  some  understand- 
ing between  the  leading  citizens  and  the  rioters. 


308  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

The  first  requirement  which  he  made,  therefore,  was 
that  all  arms  which  were  in  the  town  should  be  given 
up.  To  ensure  a  complete  surrender,  an  announcement 
was  made  that  on  a  certain  day  the  houses  in  the  town 
would  be  searched,  with  the  exception  of  the  houses  of 
the  jurisconsults  and  certain  privileged  persons.  The 
natural  result  of  such  an  announcement  was  that  the 
populace,  fearing  lest  much  besides  arms  would  be 
taken  by  the  soldiery  in  their  search,  deposited  every- 
thing that  they  had  of  value  with  the  owners  of  the 
exempted  houses. 

But  the  measures  of  Mahmoud  ben  Zergoun  were 
thorough.  The  jurisconsults  —  a  term  which  seems  in 
the  narratives  of  the  Soudan  to  cover  all  the  educated 
portion  of  the  population — were  precisely  the  class  at 
whom  he  proposed  to  strike.  When  the  search  for  arms 
in  the  houses  of  the  populace  had  been  effected,  he 
caused  a  further  announcement  to  be  made  that  an  oath 
of  allegiance  to  the  Sultan  of  Morocco  would  be  publicly 
administered  in  the  Sankore  Mosque.  The  taking  of 
the  oath  was  to  be  accompanied  with  all  due  ceremonial, 
and  three  days  were  allotted  for  its  completion,  October 
the  1 8th,  the  19th,  and  20th  of  1593. 

The  two  first  days  of  the  ceremony  are  interesting, 
as  showing  incidentally  to  what  distance  the  authority 
of  Songhay  at  that  time  extended  in  the  north  and 
west.  The  first  day  was  entirely  occupied  by  the  swear- 
ing of  the  people  from  Touat,  Fezzan,  Augila,  and  the 
northern  regions  of  the  desert  ;  on  the  second  day 
the  oath  was  taken  by  people  from  Walata,  Wadan,  and 
the  western  regions ;  on  the  third  day  none  were  left 
to  take  the  oath  but  the  jurisconsults  and  distinguished 
residents  of  Timbuctoo,  who  were  to  swear  in  presence 
of  the  assembled  people.  On  that  day,  when  the  mosque 
was  full,  the  doors  were  suddenly  closed.  Every  one 
was  told  to  leave  the  mosque,  with  the  exception  of 
jurisconsults,  their  friends,  and  their  followers.  When 
none    but    these    remained    in    the    building,    Mahmoud 


THE  SOUDAN  UNDER  THE  MOORS  309 

Zergoun  ordered  the  whole  of  them  to  be  arrested. 
He  then  divided  them  into  two  groups,  and  sent  them 
by  different  roads  to  the  fortress  in  which  they  were 
to  be  confined. 

Whether  by  accident  or  by  design,  one  group  was 
massacred.  Amongst  the  victims  were  representatives  of 
some  of  the  greatest  famihes  of  the  town.  The  houses 
of  the  jurisconsults  were  then  pillaged.  Their  wives 
and  daughters  were  subjected  to  every  indignity,  and 
the  whole  of  their  wealth,  including  that  deposited  with 
them  by  the  less  influential  persons  of  the  town,  was 
appropriated  by  Mahmoud  Zergoun  to  himself.  The 
families  of  the  jurisconsults,  after  suffering  these  injuries, 
were  imprisoned,  and  were  kept  in  confinement  for  about 
six  months.  During  this  interval  the  Fulani  ruler  of 
the  semi-independent  province  of  Masina  made  the  most 
urgent  representations  in  their  favour.  Mahmoud,  how- 
ever, rejected  his  advice,  and  resolved  to  deport  them 
to  Morocco.  This  resolution  involved  the  deportation  of 
the  whole  body  of  the  best  society  of  Timbuctoo.  All 
that  was  cultivated,  all  that  was  enlightened,  all  that  was 
rich,  refined,  and  influential,  was  driven  out,  and  the 
greater  number,  men,  women,  and  children,  were  taken 
in  chains  across  the  desert. 

The  caravan  which  conveyed  them  left  Timbuctoo 
on  1 8th  March  1594.  The  scenes  which  were  witnessed 
were,  we  are  told,  very  terrible.  Fathers,  children, 
grandchildren,  men  and  women,  were  made  to  march 
together,  "pressed  close  as  arrows  in  a  quiver."  They 
were  exposed  to  all  the  brutality  of  the  Moorish  sol- 
diery, and  they  had  a  journey  of  upwards  of  two  months 
through  the  desert.  Amongst  the  exiles  were  the  most 
distinguished  men  of  letters  of  the  Soudan,  and  the 
most  delicately  nurtured  women  and  children  of  the 
town.  Ahmed  Baba,  the  biographer  and  historian,  who 
has  already  been  mentioned  more  than  once,  and  to 
whom  we  are  indebted  for  many  of  the  most  interesting 
pages    of    the    Tarikk,    was   among    them.       Fortunately 


310  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

for  him,  his  fame  was  so  widespread  as  to  command 
respect  in  all  centres  of  learning.  When  he  arrived  in 
Morocco  he  was  treated  with  the  respect  due  to  his 
great  reputation,  and,  though  he  was  not  permitted  to 
return  to  Timbuctoo  for  many  years,  he  was  given  prac- 
tical freedom  in  Morocco,  and  allowed  to  form  a  school, 
where  he  continued  the  life  of  study  and  of  teaching 
which  he  had  led  in  the  Soudan.  Many  others  were 
less  fortunate,  and  the  note  is  to  be  found  in  more  than 
one  biography  of  his  distinguished  contemporaries  :  "He 
died  a  martyr  in  Morocco." 

It  is  interesting,  in  the  midst  of  all  that  the  exiles 
had  lost,  to  find  them  chiefly  concerned  for  the  de- 
struction of  their  libraries.  "  I,"  said  Ahmed  Baba  after- 
wards to  the  Sultan  of  Morocco,  "  had  the  smallest 
library  of  any  of  my  friends,  and  your  soldiers  took 
from  me  1600  volumes."  Others,  those  who  in  the 
happier  days  had  so  generously  lent  their  books  to  all 
who  needed  them,  lost  every  volume  that  they  possessed. 
Unfortunately,  while  other  forms  of  wealth  were  greedily 
appropriated,  the  contents  of  the  libraries  were  destroyed. 

The  sack  of  Timbuctoo  was  the  signal  for  the  letting 
loose  of  all  the  evils  of  lawless  tyranny  upon  the  country. 
From  this  time  the  history  of  the  Soudan  becomes  a 
mere  record  of  riot,  robbery,  and  decadence.  The 
appropriation  to  himself  of  the  immense  wealth  of  Tim- 
buctoo did  not  redound  to  the  ultimate  advantage  of 
Mahmoud  ben  Zergoun.  The  caravan  deporting  all  the 
distinguished  exiles  of  Timbuctoo  arrived  in  Morocco 
on  the  ist  of  June  1594.  With  it  arrived  information 
which  led  the  Sultan  to  understand  the  extent  of  the 
wealth  which  had  been  confiscated,  in  comparison  to 
which  the  100,000  gold  pieces  sent  to  him  as  the  royal 
share  was  as  nothing.  Informers  further  carried  to 
him  reports  of  the  independent  arrogance  of  Mahmoud 
ben  Zergoun,  from  which  it  was  not  difficult  to  draw 
the  deduction  that  he  aimed  at  nothing  less  than  the 
independent    sovereignty    of   the    Soudan.      "When    any 


THE  SOUDAN  UNDER  THE  MOORS  311 

one  speaks  to  him  of  the  Sultan,"  said  one  report,  "he 
draws  his  sword  half  out  of  the  scabbard,  and  says, 
'Here  is  the  Sultan!'"  The  indignation  of  Muley 
Hamed  knew  no  bounds,  and  he  despatched  a  new 
Pasha,  Mansour  Abdurrahman,  to  the  Soudan  with 
orders  to  arrest  Mahmoud  ben  Zergoun  and  put  him 
to  an  ignominious  death. 

With  this  sentence,  of  which  he  was  of  course  quickly 
informed,  hanging  over  his  head,  Mahmoud  determined 
to  make  what  he  could  of  his  position.  By  the  cruel 
licence  of  his  rule,  the  western  part  of  the  Soudan  had 
become  too  hot  to  hold  him.  The  Fulani  ruler  of  the 
province  of  Masina,  who  had  interceded  urgently,  but 
vainly,  in  favour  of  the  noble  families  of  Timbuctoo, 
had  revolted  against  the  Moors.  The  once  prosperous 
territory  of  Jenne  was  also  in  perpetual  disorder.  After 
a  short  campaign  against  Masina,  of  which,  though  it 
was  accompanied  by  widespread  massacre  of  the  peace- 
ful population  and  destruction  of  the  crops,  the  result 
was  practically  nil,  Mahmoud  resolved  to  rally  all  his 
forces  for  a  campaign  against  the  still  independent 
Askia  of  Songhay  in  the  east,  and  to  put  the  greatest 
possible  distance  between  himself  and  the  avenging 
emissary  of  the  Sultan. 

Askia  Nouh,  having  in  the  meantime  strengthened 
his  own  position  in  the  province  of  Dandi,  and  entered 
into  close  alliance  with  Kebbi  on  his  northern  frontier, 
had  succeeded  in  forcing  the  chain  of  Moorish  fortresses 
at  a  place  called  Kolen  on  the  Niger,  and  advanced 
into  the  Bend  of  the  Niger,  where  he  awaited  the 
coming  of  Mahmoud.  Mahmoud  called  upon  Djouder 
to  join  him  with  all  available  forces  from  Kagho. 
But  Djouder  finding  a  suitable  excuse,  Mahmoud,  who 
seems  in  the  first  instance  to  have  been  successful  and 
to  have  possessed  himself  again  of  the  territory  of 
Gurma  and  Borgu,  pressed  on  in  an  easterly  direction, 
taking  with  him  the  dummy  Askia  Suleiman  as  far  as 
the   rocks    of  Almena.      Unless   there   exist   some   other 


312  A   TROPICAL   DEPENDENCY 

rocks  of  Almena  not  mentioned,  so  far  as  I  have  been 
able  to  ascertain,  by  any  other  writer,  these  must  have 
been  the  rocks  already  alluded  to  once  or  twice,  in  the 
province  of  Zaria,  where  in  very  ancient  days  a  colossal 
statue  is  said  to  have  been  carved.  The  spot  is  in- 
teresting, because  it  marks  the  farthest  extension  of  the 
conquest  of  the  Moors  in   Haussaland. 

Mahmoud  camped  at  the  foot  of  the  rocks,  which 
were  strongly  held  by  pagan  troops.  He  determined, 
much  against  the  advice  of  Askia  Suleiman,  to  whom 
the  country  was  well  known,  to  endeavour  to  storm 
the  position  by  a  night  attack.  Suleiman  represented 
that  nothing  short  of  certain  death  could  result.  Mah- 
moud  listened  to  no  advice.  Death  lay  behind  him 
as  well  as  in  front.  He  selected  a  storming  party  of 
his  best  men,  and  in  the  early  hours  of  the  morning 
made  the  attempt.  The  result  was  as  Askia  Suleiman 
had  predicted — Mahmoud  himself  was  among  the  first 
to  fall,  pierced  by  many  arrows.  In  the  attempt  to 
rescue  his  body  his  men  were  put  to  flight.  The 
pagans  cut  off  his  head  and  sent  it  to  Askia  Nouh, 
who  in  his  turn  sent  it  to  Kanta,  the  King  of  Kebbi, 
and  it  was  exposed  on  the  end  of  a  stake  in  the 
market-place  of  Lika  for  a  very  long  time.  Suleiman 
the  Askia  rallied  the  Moorish  troops  and  effected  a 
hurried  retreat,  ultimately  succeeding  in  joining  Djouder, 
under  whose  orders  the  troops  remained  until  the 
arrival  of  Mansour  from   Morocco. 

In  1595  the  combined  Moorish  troops,  under  the 
command  of  Djouder  Pasha,  made  one  final  and  suc- 
cessful 'attempt  to  deal  with  what  remained  of  the 
Songhay  Empire,  and  in  a  great  battle  which  took 
place  between  them  and  Askia  Nouh  in  the  Bend  of 
the  Niger  in  June  of  that  year,  the  Songhay  army 
was  hopelessly  defeated  and  put  to  flight,  leaving  the 
population  at  the  mercy  of  the  Moors.  The  people 
were  carried  into  captivity,  and  placed  by  the  Moors 
under  the  jurisdiction  of  Askia  Suleiman. 


THE  SOUDAN  UNDER  THE  MOORS  313 

Djouder  now  became  the  ruling  power  o(  the  Soudan. 
The  new  Pasha  Mansour  died,  poisoned,  it  is  said,  by 
Djouder's  orders,  when  he  was  on  the  eve  of  a  further 
expedition  against  Dandi.  His  successor,  Mohammed 
Taba,  also  about  to  march  into  the  eastern  province, 
died,  poisoned,  again  it  is  said  by  orders  of  Djouder. 
The  next  general,  Mostafa.  died,  strangled  by  orders 
of  Djouder.  There  would  be  no  interest  in  following 
further  the  details  o(  the  history  of  the  Moorish  con- 
quest of  the  Soudan.  It  is  enough  to  say  that  nominal 
Askias  continued  to  succeed  each  other  on  the  south- 
eastern district,  which  for  a  long  time  kept  the  name 
oi'  Dandi,  while  attempts  to  invade  Hauss<iland  by  a 
more  northern  route  were  vigorously  and  successfully 
opposed  by  the  independent  Sultans  of  Kebbi.  The 
domination  o(  the  Moors  may  therefore  be  said  to  have 
never  spread  more  than  nominally  beyond  the  south- 
eastern  Bend  of  the   River  Niger. 

In  the  west  the  history  of  the  Moorish  dominions 
presents  a  record  of  ceaseless  fighting,  accomp.\nied  by 
the  destruction  of  all  that  was  civilised  and  admirable 
in  the  Soudan.  Djouder,  the  best  of  the  Pashas,  who 
knew  his  own  mind  and  could  keep  his  rude  soldiery 
in  order,  even  though  his  methods  were  somewhat 
trenchant,  returned  to  Morocco  in  1599.  He  was  a 
loyal  soldier  and  servant  of  his  sovereign.  He  was 
also  an  able  administrator,  and  had  he  been  properly 
supported  he  would  have  converted  the  Soudan  into  a 
rich  dependency  of  Morocco.  As  it  was.  he  was  made 
the  object  during  his  stay  in  the  Soudan  of  ceaseless 
cabals.  In  1599  his  counsels  were,  however,  needed 
nearer  to  the  throne.  He  was  recalled  with  honour, 
and  he  returned  no  more  to  Timbuctoo. 

After  him  Pasha  succeeded  Pasha,  each  to  be  the 
victim  oi'  militarv  revolt  and  civil  misrepresentation,  while 
misrule  prevailed  in  the  Soudan  until,  in  1612.  the  last 
Pasha  appointed  by  Morocco  was  deposed  by  the  troops, 
who  put  their  general   in   his  place.     After  1012  i\\c  army 


314  A   TROPICAL   DEPENDENCY 

in  the  Soudan  elected  its  own  rulers.  The  tribute  to  the 
Sultan  was  not  paid,  the  country  conquered  at  so  much 
cost  became  independent  of  Morocco,  and  the  native 
populations  of  the  Western  Soudan,  barred  from  all 
access  to  civilisation,  fell  under  the  despotism  of  a  purely- 
military  tyranny.  From  this  date  their  descent  in  the 
scale  of  nations  was  rapid  and  inevitable.  By  the  end 
of  the  seventeenth  century  they  had  become  practically 
what  they  now  are. 


CHAPTER    XXXIV 

THE    SOUDAN    CLOSED    TO    THE    WESTERN    WORLD 

Ahmed  Baba  records  that  the  Sultan  Muley  Zidan,  son 
and  successor  to  Muley  Hamed,  told  him  at  a  later 
period  that,  from  the  time  of  Pasha  Djouder  to  that  of 
Pasha  Suleiman,  his  father,  Muley  Hamed,  had  sent  in 
different  army  corps  23,000  of  his  best  soldiers  into  the 
Soudan,  and  added :  "  All  this  was  a  pure  loss.  The 
whole  of  the  men  perished  in  the  Soudan,  with  the  ex- 
ception of  500  who  returned  to  Morocco  and  died  in 
that  town."  As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  Sultan  was  ill- 
informed.  His  armies,  as  we  have  seen,  had  not  perished 
in  the  Soudan,  but  had  simply  cut  themselves  off  from 
their  allegiance,  and  had  formed  in  the  southern  countries 
an  independent  system  of  military  brigandage  of  which 
the  remains  exist  to  the  present  day. 

But  for  all  practical  purposes  the  Soudan  itself  was 
from  this  date  lost  to  the  world.  Its  military  tyrants 
had  their  own  reasons  for  breaking  off  relations  with 
Morocco.  Morocco  in  turn  was  cut  off  by  the  religious 
sentiment  of  the  Western  world  from  all  connection  with 
Southern  Europe,  and  the  political  rivalry  of  the  Turks 
deprived  her  at  the  same  time  of  the  position  which 
she  might  otherwise  have  occupied  upon  the  Barbary 
coast.  The  Saracens,  whose  rule  had  once  extended 
from  the  borders  of  China  to  the  western  coast  of  Spain, 
had  become  an  outcast  race,  the  seat  of  whose  dwind- 
ling monarchy  was  to  be  looked  for,  if  anywhere,  in 
Morocco,  and  whose  representatives,  wandering  at  hazard 
through  the  desert  wastes  of  Africa  and  Arabia,  hardly 
knew    to    which    of    the    cardinal    points    to     set    their 


3i6  A   TROPICAL   DEPENDENCY 

faces    when    they    desired    to    turn    themselves    towards 
home. 

While  access  to  the  civilised  world  was  barred  to 
the  western  portion  of  the  Soudan,  the  most  easterly 
states,  Bornu  and  Haussaland,  still  kept  their  touch 
through  the  Tripoli- Fezzan  route  with  the  old  markets 
of  Egypt  and  Arabia.  Whatever  they  had  of  external 
civilisation  still  came  to  them  by  that  route  from  the 
north-east,  and  the  influence  permeated  through  them 
to  the  rest  of  the  Soudan.  But  the  influence  was  the 
influence  of  Turkey,  and  it  is  unnecessary  to  dwell 
on  the  difference  between  the  Ottoman  Empire  from 
the  sixteenth  century  onwards,  and  the  civilisation  of 
the  Egyptian  and  the  Arab  which  it  had  overthrown. 
Rome  in  the  great  days  of  the  republic  might  as  fitly 
be  compared  with  Italy  after  the  conquest  by  the  Huns. 

Nevertheless,  though  cut  off  in  the  sixteenth  century, 
alike  by  the  triumph  of  Mohammedanism  in  the  east, 
and  by  the  downfall  of  Mohammedanism  in  the  west 
of  Europe,  from  all  true  touch  with  northern  centres  of 
civilisation,  the  Soudan  could  not  unlearn  the  lesson  of 
centuries.  It  continued  to  keep  its  face  turned  blankly 
to  the  north.  I  have  endeavoured  to  show  that  through- 
out its  history  the  touch  of  the  Soudan  with  the  world 
had  been  maintained  ever  through  the  desert  to  the 
north.  Everything  that  was  interesting,  its  new  races, 
its  religions,  its  science,  its  literature,  its  commerce,  its 
wars,  had  come  to  it  from  the  north.  It  faced  north 
to  civilisation.  And  behind  it  to  the  south  there  had 
always  been  the  unknown,  the  barbaric,  the  uninhabitable. 
It  is  no  doubt  this  last  qualification  which  maintained 
the  character  of  the  equatorial  region  in  regard  to  the 
other  two.  From  about  the  latitude  of  7°  southwards 
the  climate  of  the  Western  Soudan  became  practically 
uninhabitable  for  those  finer  races  which,  whether  they 
derived  their  origin  from  Egypt  or  elsewhere,  required 
a  good  climate  in  which  to  attain  to  their  natural  limits 
of   perfection.     The   Copts    have   a    saying  that   "in   the 


THE    SOUDAN    CLOSED  317 

beginning  when  God  created  things  he  added  to  every- 
thing its  second."  " '  I  go  to  Syria,'  said  Reason ;  '  I 
go  with  you,'  said  Rebellion.  'I  go  to  Egypt,'  said 
Abundance;  'I  accompany  you,'  said  Submission.  'I 
go  to  the  desert,'  said  Poverty  ;  '  I  will  go  with  you,' 
said  Health."  Barren  though  it  was,  the  reputation  of 
the  desert  which  lay  to  the  north  had  been  a  reputation 
of  health  from  time  immemorial.  It  had  its  dangers, 
but  all  that  escaped  from  them  alive  was  the  better  for 
the  experience.  For  those  who  knew  how  to  traverse 
it,  its  sands  were  but  as  the  sea,  and  its  edges  were 
the  most  favoured  portions  of  the  Soudan.  In  pro- 
portion as  the  fertile  belt  receded  from  the  desert  it 
became  unhealthy  and  unsuitable  to  the  habitation  of  the 
higher  races. 

I  have  tried  to  show  that,  through  the  whole  of  the 
history  of  these  higher  races,  their  tendency  had  been  to 
drive  southwards  before  them  everything  that  was  weak 
or  degraded  or  outworn.  All  the  lower  human  types  to 
be  met  with  in  the  country  went  southwards  into  the 
equatorial  belt,  where  frequent  rain  and  the  swampy  over- 
flow of  rivers  running  to  the  coast  develops  a  malarial 
climate  unsuitable  to  higher  activities.  In  the  early  tradi- 
tion, quoted  by  Herodotus,  pigmy  races  seem  to  have 
inhabited  the  country  of  the  Middle  Niger.  At  the  pre- 
sent day  they  are  to  be  found  in  the  regions  of  the 
Congo.  In  the  twelfth  and  thirteenth  centuries  the 
cannibal  belt  extended  along  the  northern  slopes  of 
the  Kong  Mountains  to  about  12°  north  latitude.  Now, 
though  there  are  some  exceptions,  it  is  rare  to  find 
cannibals  north  of  7°,  and  the  southern  base  of  the  Kong 
Mountains  may  be  taken  as  the  limit  of  habitation  of  the 
pure  negro. 

The  movements  of  religion  will,  I  think,  be  proved, 
when  research  has  obtained  clearer  results  than  can  now 
be  securely  claimed,  to  have  corresponded  to  the  move- 
ments of  race.  Fetishism,  which  is  now  to  be  met  with 
chiefly  in  the  strip  lying    between  the  Kong   Mountains 


3i8  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

and  the  coast,  extended  at  one  period  to  the  north  of 
Songhay  and  Haussaland.  It  has  been  related  in  the 
early  myths  of  Gao,  of  Kano,  of  Daura,  that  the  killing 
of  the  fetish  and  the  substitution  of  a  higher  form  of 
religion  was  the  beginning  of  their  recorded  history. 
This  higher  form  of  paganism,  which  would  appear  to 
have  been  derived  from  sources  similar  to  those  that 
furnished  the  religions  of  Phoenicia,  Egypt,  and  Arabia, 
seems  gradually,  at  some  very  early  period,  to  have  pushed 
fetishism  southward  before  it,  and  to  have  held  the 
ground  to  the  north  until,  in  the  four  hundred  years 
between  the  tenth  and  the  fourteenth  centuries,  Moham- 
medanism was  generally  accepted  along  the  northern 
border.  The  higher  form  of  paganism  then  suffered  the 
fate  which  it  had  itself  inflicted  upon  fetishism.  It  was 
driven  south,  and  in  turn  drove  fetishism  farther  before 
it,  until,  as  in  the  present  day,  the  religions  of  West 
Africa  could  almost  be  defined  by  latitudinal  lines.  If, 
following  the  opinion  quoted  in  the  earlier  portion  of 
this  book  from  a  distinguished  French  authority,  we  take 
io°  as  the  most  southerly  limit  of  Mohammedanism,  and 
give  7°,  as  I  think  we  may  be  justified  in  doing,  as  the 
farthest  extension  northwards  of  fetishism,  we  get  three 
degrees,  from  7"  to  10°,  in  which  the  higher  forms  of 
paganism  may  be  held  still  to  prevail.  As  a  matter  of 
fact,  these  latitudinal  divisions  will  be  proved  to  be  too 
arbitrary.  M.  de  Lauture  wrote  upwards  of  half  a  century 
ago,  and  Mohammedan  influence  has  since  his  day  extended 
farther  south.  On  the  other  hand,  the  higher  paganism 
also  extends  in  places  farther  north  than  the  limit  which  he 
assigned.  In  the  Nigerian  Provinces  of  Zaria,  Bautchi, 
and  Yola,  through  which  the  tenth  parallel  extremity 
passes,  but  which  extend  to  and  even  beyond  11°,  many 
tribes  of  pagans  still  exist.  And  I  have  little  doubt  that 
the  same  observation  would  hold  good  in  French  territory 
farther  west,   with  which   I   am  unacquainted. 

The  general  drift,   however,   of  the  observation  is,    I 
think,    sound,    and    it  is    with    this    that    we    are    for  the 


THE    SOUDAN    CLOSED  319 

moment  concerned.  There  have  been  evidently  three 
stages  in  the  history  of  West  Africa,  to  which  three  great 
religious  movements  have  corresponded.  There  was  a  first 
and  very  early  period  of  what  I  may  call  pure  negroidism, 
to  which  the  religion  of  the  fetish  corresponded.  During 
this  period  pigmy  races  occupied  the  Middle  Niger,  and 
fetish  worship  prevailed  upon  its  banks.  There  was 
a  second  period,  still  very  early,  of  occupation  by  peoples 
whose  origin  is  variously  stated  to  have  been  from 
India,  Babylon,  Persia,  ancient  Egypt,  and  Phoenicia,  and 
with  this  occupation  came  a  form  of  paganism  of  which 
the  rites,  still  practised,  have  points  of  similarity  with  what 
we  know  of  the  worship  of  Astarte,  Jupiter-Ammon,  and 
Isis.  There  was  a  third  period  of  Arab  influence  and 
subsequent  conquest,  of  which  the  beginning  may  be 
placed  in  the  ninth  or  tenth  century  of  our  era,  that  was 
accompanied  by  the  spread  of  the  Mohammedan  religion. 
The  Soudan,  under  the  higher  form  of  paganism,  attained, 
as  its  parent  nations  in  the  north  and  east  had  attained, 
to  a  relatively  high  stage  of  civilisation.  Indeed,  the 
Fulani  conquerors  of  Haussaland  in  the  nineteenth  cen- 
tury put  forward  the  unfounded  claim  that,  up  to  the 
period  of  their  conquest,  Mohammedanism  was  scarcely 
known  in  the  great  cities  of  the  Haussa  States.  This,  as 
has  been  shown  in  the  chapters  upon  Haussaland,  was 
not  the  case,  but  undoubtedly  paganism  of  the  finer  type 
continued  to  flourish  for  a  long  period,  and  is  now,  after 
a  thousand  years  of  Mohammedanism,  still  to  be  met  with 
side  by  side  with  the  faith  of  Islam.  The  difference 
between  these  two  was  not  so  great  as  the  difference 
between  paganism  and  fetishism.  It  was  fetishism,  and 
fetishism  only,  which  was  banished  with  the  lower  negroid 
races  to  the  jungle  belt  of  the  coast. 

These  considerations  of  the  general  movement  of 
civilisation  in  West  Africa  bring  us  to  an  important 
development  in  its  history.  The  first  chapter  of  European 
settlement  in  the  country  was  opened  at  a  critical  moment. 
During  the  latter  half  of  the  fifteenth   century,  while  the 


320  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

Turks  were  pressing  upon  Eastern  Europe  and  interfering 
with  all  the  old  routes  of  the  Indian  and  Chinese  trade, 
the  Portuguese,  in  their  capacity  of  an  Atlantic  people, 
were  making  courageous  efforts  to  find  another  and  a 
safer  road  by  sea  to  the  Eastern  markets.  Already,  as 
has  been  seen,  they  had  crept  round  the  shoulder  of  the 
African  coast,  and  had  made  a  few  cautious  settlements 
upon  its  shores.  In  1497  ^^^Y  attained  the  object  of 
their  desire,  and  Vasco  da  Gama  doubled  the  Cape  of 
Good  Hope.  The  date  of  the  expulsion  of  the  Moors 
from  Spain  was  1502.  Thus,  within  five  years  of  each 
other,  there  happened  two  events  which  profoundly  in- 
fluenced the  history  of  the  Soudan.  The  expulsion  of 
the  Moors,  followed  during  the  sixteenth  century  by 
the  wars  of  Charles  V.  and  his  successors  against 
Mohammedanism  upon  the  Mediterranean  coasts,  closed 
the  old  means  of  approach  by  land  to  the  territories  of  the 
finer  races  of  the  Soudan.  The  discovery  of  the  passage 
of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  opened  at  the  same  moment 
new  means  of  approach  by  sea.  It  diverted  the  whole 
stream  of  European  intercourse  with  the  far  East,  and 
as  the  caravan  trade  of  Egypt,  Persia,  and  Arabia  sank 
into  insignificance,  the  maritime  trade  of  the  Atlantic  rose 
in  importance.  The  Atlantic  Ocean  became  a  highway 
of  the  world,  and  while,  all  unaware  of  the  change,  the 
peoples  of  the  interior  continued  to  look  vainly  towards 
the  closed  avenues  of  the  north — the  west  coast  of 
Africa  fronting  on  the  Atlantic  began  to  face  no  longer 
north  but  south  to  civilisation.  The  sea  was  open  to 
all  who  had  ships  to  sail  upon  it.  Thus,  when  Europe 
approached  West  Africa,  it  was  upon  the  coast  that  her 
adventurers  landed.  It  was  with  coast  natives  that  she 
had  to  deal — natives  who  had  from  time  immemorial 
been  enslaved — and  it  was  in  the  coast  climate  that  her 
settlements  were  made.  The  coast  belt  was  too  broad 
for  her  to  traverse.  Its  inhabitants  were  savage,  its 
climate  was  deadly,  its  jungle  impenetrable  without  the 
auxiHary    force    of  steam.       For    upwards    of    400    years 


THE    SOUDAN    CLOSED  321 

Europe  held  the  coast.  Slaves  were  hunted  for  her  in 
the  far  interior.  Ivory  was  shot  for  her,  gold  was  washed 
for  her;  but  Europe  herself,  the  civilisation,  the  order, 
the  justice  for  which  her  name  now  stands,  penetrated 
no  farther  than  perhaps  twenty  miles  inland. 

Thus  not  only  did  the  finer  races  of  the  Soudan  lose 
touch  with  the  civilised  world,  but  the  civilised  world 
lost  also  touch  with  them.  Their  records  were  preserved 
by  Arab  writers,  and  modern  Europe,  in  its  religious 
fervour,  had  banished  Arabic  from  its  literature.  The 
traditions  of  intercourse  with  the  Soudan  had  been  all 
traditions  of  Saracen  Egypt  and  of  Moorish  Spain. 
Turks  had  destroyed  the  one,  Ferdinand  the  Catholic 
had  obliterated  the  other.  By  the  end  of  the  sixteenth 
century  the  mystery  of  Africa  had  closed  round  these 
ancient  races,  and  they  were  lost  to  history  for  a  period 
that  was  to  last  three  hundred  years. 


CHAPTER    XXXV 

EUROPE    IN    WEST    AFRICA 

The  first  chapters  of  European  intercourse  with  the 
West  Coast  of  Africa  are  not  chapters  of  which  we 
have  any  reason  to  be  proud.  I  do  not  propose  to 
relate  in  detail  the  history  of  early  European  settlement 
upon  the  coast,  but  the  relations  of  civilisation  with  the 
natives  had  certain  general  characteristics  which  it  is 
necessary  very  briefly  to  indicate.  They  cannot,  how- 
ever, be  fairly  indicated  without  a  constant  recollection 
of  the  fact  that  the  races  with  whom  Europe  had  now 
to  deal  were  not  those  fine  races  of  the  northern  terri- 
tories known  to  ancient  historians  as  Nigritia,  but  the 
generally  negroid  inhabitants  of  that  strip  which  was 
for  a  long  time  included  under  the  appellation  of  the 
Guinea  Coast.  Barbot,  a  Frenchman,  who  traded  with 
West  Africa  in  various  capacities  for  upwards  of  twenty 
years  towards  the  end  of  the  seventeenth  century,  and 
who,  writing  both  in  French  and  English,  is  perhaps  to 
be  counted  as  the  best  and  most  voluminous  historian  of 
the  coast,  defines  Nigritia  as  extending  northward  from 
8°  to  23°,  and  Guinea  as  extending  southwards  from 
8°  to  the  coast.  The  history  of  European  settlement 
deals  exclusively  with  the  southern  strip. 

The  progress  of  the  Reformation  in  Europe  through- 
out the  sixteenth  century  tended  to  deprive  Papal  decrees 
of  the  authority  which  once  attached  to  them,  and 
throughout  that  and  the  succeeding  century  the  nations 
of  the  Atlantic  coast  competed  eagerly  with  each  other 
for  a  share  of  the  newly-opened  African  trade.  With 
the    exception    of   France,    where,    however,    a   great    in- 


EUROPE    IN    WEST   AFRICA  323 

dustrial  population  professed  the  Protestant  faith,  the 
countries  which  contested  with  Portugal  the  validity  of 
the  papal  gift  to  her  of  all  countries  which  she  might 
discover  to  the  east  of  the  Azores,  were  of  the  Reformed 
religion.  France  justified  herself,  perhaps,  by  the  argu- 
ment that  she  had  prior  claims,  for  it  is  stoutly  asserted 
on  her  behalf,  and  the  claim  is  admitted  by  some  foreign 
writers,  that  during  the  fourteenth  century,  and  before  the 
approach  of  the  Portuguese,  French  adventurers  had  dis- 
covered and  French  companies  had  traded  with  the  West 
Coast  of  Africa.  Such  trade  had  not,  however,  according 
to  the  accounts  which  are  given  of  it,  proved  successful, 
and  all  traces  of  French  occupation  had  disappeared 
before  the  Portuguese  discoverers  of  the  middle  of  the 
fifteenth  century  made  Europe  acquainted  with  the  coast. 

Whatever  may  be  the  truth  of  this  story,  France 
was  among  the  earliest  and  the  most  successful  of  the 
competitors  of  the  Portuguese  upon  the  coast.  She 
was  very  shortly  followed  by  the  English,  Dutch,  Danes, 
and  Prussians.  The  first  Portuguese  company  was 
formed  in  1444  for  the  purpose  of  exploring  the  coast, 
and  it  initiated  the  European  trade  in  slaves  by  sea. 
Both  Spain  and  Portugal  had  long  been  supplied  with 
slaves  from  the  Soudan  by  land. 

Spain,  having  its  hands  full  elsewhere,  willingly  entered 
into  an  agreement  with  Portugal  not  to  interfere  with  its 
possessions  in  Africa.  Towards  the  end  of  the  fifteenth 
century  the  King  of  Portugal  formed  a  Guinea  Com- 
pany, and  caused  forts  to  be  built  at  Accra,  Axim,  El- 
mina,  and  at  other  places  up  and  down  the  coast.  The 
Governor-General  of  these  forts  resided  at  Elmina. 
No  attempt  was  made  or  could  be  made  to  penetrate 
inland,  the  natives  being  barbarous,  and  most  of  the 
way  being,  as  Barbot  tells  us,  "through  vast,  thick 
forests,  swarming  with  robbers  and  wild  beasts."  This 
part  of  the  coast,  now  known  as  the  Gold  Coast,  was 
the  best  part  of  the  coast  for  gold,  and  though  inland 
wars   often    spoilt    the    trade,    the    position     of   Governor 


324  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

at  Elmina  was  regarded  as  one  in  which  a  European 
could  speedily  accumulate  vast  wealth.  It  was  as  a 
rule  bestowed  upon  some  king's  favourite,  and  by  the 
gradual  operation  of  this  system  the  garrison,  we  are 
told,  came  to  be  commonly  comprised  of  "lewd  and  de- 
bauched persons,"  intent  on  making  speedy  fortunes. 
The  Portuguese  Government  also  used  the  West  Coast 
from  a  very  early  period  as  a  place  of  deportation  for 
convicts.  No  wonder,  therefore,  says  Barbot,  "  that  the 
histories  of  those  times  give  an  account  of  unparalleled 
violences  and  inhumanities  committed  there  by  those 
insatiable  Portuguese." 

Barbot  does  not  over-estimate  the  character  of  the 
blacks  with  whom  the  Portuguese  had  to  deal.  "  They 
are,"  he  says,  "generally  extremely  sensual,  knavish, 
revengeful,  impudent  liars,  impertinent,  gluttonous,  ex- 
travagant in  their  expressions,  and  giving  ill  language, 
luxurious  beyond  expression,  and  so  intemperate  that  they 
drink  brandy  as  if  it  were  water,  deceitful  in  their  dealings 
with  Europeans  and  no  less  with  their  own  neighbours, 
even  to  the  selling  of  one  another  for  slaves  if  they  have 
an  opportunity,  and,  as  has  been  hinted  before,  so  very 
lazy  that  rather  than  work  for  their  living  they  will  rob 
and  commit  murders  on  the  highways  and  in  the  woods 
and  deserts.  ...  It  is  very  dangerous  travelling  in  that 
country.  .  .  .  They  are  so  very  dexterous  and  expert  at 
stealing  that  the  ancient  Lacedaemonians  might  have  learnt 
from  them  the  art."  Nevertheless  this  certainly  open- 
minded  judge  thought  that  the  Portuguese  treated  them 
too  badly  for  human  nature  of  any  sort  to  endure. 

In  1587  the  blacks  rose  against  the  barbarities  of  the 
Portuguese,  surprised  the  fort  of  Accra,  and  razed  it  to 
the  ground.  The  French,  who  had  as  yet  only  a  very 
slight  footing  upon  the  Guinea  Coast,  seized  the  occasion 
for  intervention,  made  the  most  of  their  opportunities, 
and  from  that  date  the  power  of  the  Portuguese  declined. 
The  French  Senegal  Company  established  itself  success- 
fully upon  the  Senegal,  and  became  in  the  course  of  the 


EUROPE    IN    WEST   AFRICA  325 

following  century  the  principal  French  company  in  West 
Africa.  A  French  West  India  Company  also  traded  to 
the  Slave  and  Ivory  Coast,  and  the  French  company 
on  the  Senegal  established  the  tradition,  well  maintained 
by  Frenchmen  in  later  years,  of  pressing  further  than 
other  Europeans  into  the  interior.  They  did  not,  how- 
ever, accomplish  anything  which  amounted  to  real  com- 
munication with  Nigritia.  All  that  was  known  of  the 
inland  country  were  vague  rumours  of  Arabs  and  white 
people  riding  upon  mules  and  asses,  and  living  in  great 
state  at  Timbuctoo  and  the  richer  of  its  sister  cities.  The 
accounts  of  Leo  Africanus  and  of  Marmol  were  both,  we 
must  remember,  published  during  the  sixteenth  century. 
Imperfect  as  they  are,  they  represent  a  certain  amount 
of  information  about  the  interior  which,  though  it  was 
not  gained  from  the  coast,  must  have  been  presumably 
in  the  possession  of  all  persons  interested  in  the  coast. 
Some  knowledge  of  the  internal  country  was,  of  course, 
felt  to  be  very  desirable,  but  writing  at  the  end  of  the 
seventeenth  century,  a  hundred  years  or  more  after  the 
appearance  of  the  latest  of  these  publications,  Barbot 
explicitly  states  that  "  none  of  the  Europeans  living  along 
the  coast  have  ever  ventured  far  up  the  land,  it  being 
extraordinarily  difficult  and  dangerous,  if  not  altogether 
impossible,  for  Europeans  to  venture  so  far  into  such 
wild  and  savage  countries." 

The  Dutch  very  rapidly  followed  in  the  footsteps  of 
the  French.  The  first  Dutch  venture  was  conducted  by 
a  man  of  the  name  of  Ericks  in  1595.  The  natives,  liking 
his  goods,  became  more  and  more  restive  under  Portuguese 
exactions,  and  another  rising  in  the  year  1600  practically 
confined  Portuguese  authority  within  the  walls  of  their 
forts.  The  native  chiefs  entered  into  treaties  with  the 
Dutch,  and  in  1624  allowed  them  to  build  forts  at  Moree 
and  Cape  Coast.  This  transaction  was  made  with  the 
Dutch  Government,  but  the  forts  afterwards  passed  into 
the  possession  of  the  Dutch  West  India  Company.  The 
Portuguese  bitterly  accused  the  Dutch  of  obtaining  their 


326  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

inrtuence  over  the  nations  "more  by  wine  and  strong 
liquors  than  by  force  of  arms,"  and  even  here,  on  the 
West  Coast  of  Africa,  we  get  the  echo  of  the  reHgious 
controversies  which  were  raging  so  furiously  in  the 
countries  at  that  time  engaged  in  the  Thirty  Years' 
War.  The  Portuguese  had  consistently  sent  many 
Catholic  missionaries  among  the  natives  of  the  coast, 
and  then,  as  now,  commerce  and  conversion  went  hand 
in  hand.  But  the  blacks,  we  are  told  by  Portuguese 
writers,  "  being  a  barbarous  people,  readily  enough 
swallowed  Calvin's  poison  spread  among  them,  inter- 
mixed with  merchandise." 

It  was  not  long  before  this  attitude  of  mutual  detesta- 
tion broke  out  into  open  war,  and  on  August  29,  1637, 
the  Dutch  possessed  themselves  of  the  fort  of  Elmina. 
From  this  period  the  Portuguese  were  gradually  driven 
from  the  trade.  The  Dutch  took  Axim  from  them  in 
1642,  and  by  the  end  of  the  century  there  was  only  one 
Portuguese  fort  left  upon  the  coast.  In  1664,  on  the 
outbreak  of  the  Dutch  war,  the  English  took  from  the 
Dutch  the  fort  known  now  as  Cape  Coast  Castle,  with 
many  others.  But  during  the  continuation  of  hostilities, 
the  Dutch  under  De  Ruyter  fully  revenged  themselves, 
and  took  all  the  principal  English  stations  upon  the  coast, 
besides  recovering  their  own,  with  the  single  exception 
of  Cape  Coast  Castle.  The  peace  which  shortly  followed 
left  the  Dutch  in  a  very  strong  position  on  the  coast, 
where  they  erected  a  chain  of  forts,  and,  as  was  the 
uniform  outcome  of  all  operations,  "used  the  natives  with 
great  severity."  The  influence  of  every  European  war 
was,  of  course,  felt  upon  the  coast.  As  the  successes  of 
the  Dutch  under  De  Ruyter  threatened  in  1665  to  destroy 
the  English  settlement's,  so  in  1677  the  French  were  for 
a  time  predominant,  and  captured  all  the  more  important 
Dutch  settlements.  Under  the  Treaty  of  Nimeguen  in 
1678  these  were,  however,  given  back  to  Holland. 

Denmark  and  the  Electorate  of  Brandenburgh,  two 
small   but  also    Protestant  powers,  had   their  share   in  the 


EUROPE    IN    WEST    AFRICA  327 

coast  trade,  and,  making  friends  with  the  blacks  at  two 
or  three  points  of  the  coast,  built  forts  from  which  they 
traded.  These  were  commercial  settlements  of  no  great 
importance,  whose  local  representatives  won  small  respect 
for  themselves  upon  the  coast,  and  they  were  at  a  later 
period  bought  out  by  the  English. 

The  rise  of  English  trade  followed  close  upon  the 
heels  of  the  Dutch.  It  may  perhaps  be  said  to  have 
begun  with  the  famous  slave-raiding  expeditions  of 
which  Hawkins  relates  the  details  without  any  shame, 
and  of  which  Queen  Elizabeth  was  not  too  proud  to 
share  the  profit. 

Hakluyt,  in  describing  the  initiation  of  the  English 
trade,  shows  clearly  enough  in  what  good  esteem  it  was 
held.  "Master  John  Hawkins,"  he  tells  us,  "having 
made  divers  voyages  to  the  Isles  of  the  Canaries,  and 
there  by  his  good  and  upright  dealing  being  grown  in 
love  and  favour  with  the  people,  informed  himself  .  .  . 
that  negroes  were  very  good  merchandise  in  Hispaniola, 
and  that  store  of  negroes  might  easily  be  had  upon  the 
coast  of  Guinea."  He  accordingly  "resolved  with  him- 
self to  make  trial  thereof,  and  communicated  that  devise 
with  his  worshipful  friends  of  London,  namely,  with  Sir 
Lionel  Ducket,  Sir  Thomas  Lodge,  Mr.  Gunson,  his 
father-in-law,  Sir  William  Winter,  Mr.  Bromfield,  and 
others.  All  which  persons  liked  so  well  of  his  intention 
that  they  became  liberal  contributors  and  adventurers  in 
the  action.  For  which  purpose  there  were  three  good 
ships  immediately  provided."  These  good  ships  sailed 
under  Hawkins'  command  in  October  of  1562,  touching 
at  Sierra  Leone,  where  Hawkins  "  stayed  some  good 
time,  and  got  into  his  possession,  partly  by  the  sword 
and  partly  by  other  means,  to  the  number  of  300  negroes 
at  the  least.  With  this  praye  he  sailed  over  the  ocean 
sea  to  the  island  of  Hispaniola."  His  venture  proved 
so  profitable  that,  in  addition  to  lading  his  own  ships, 
he  laded  two  other  hulks  with  hides,  sugars,  ginger, 
pearls,  and  other  commodities  of  the  islands,     "  So  with 


328  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

prosperous  success,  and  much  gayne  to  himself  and  the 
aforesaid  adventurers,  he  came  home,  and  arrived  in  the 
month  of  September   1563." 

The  names  quoted  by  Hakluyt  are  evidently  names 
to  be  respected,  yet  the  account  given  by  Hawkins 
himself  of  his  methods  in  a  subsequent  expedition  of 
1567  differs  in  nothing  from  the  accounts  given  by  eye- 
witnesses of  Arab  slave-raids  of  the  present  day.  He 
not  only  traded,  he  raided,  "  There  came  to  us,"  he 
says,  "a  negro  sent  from  a  king  oppressed  by  other 
kings,  his  neighbours,  desiring  our  aide,  with  promise 
that  as  many  negroes  as  by  these  warres  might  be 
obtained,  as  well  of  his  part  as  of  ours,  should  be  at 
our  pleasure."  As  a  result,  "  I  went  myselfe,  and  with 
the  helpe  of  the  king  of  our  side  assaulted  the  towne 
both  by  land  and  sea,  and  very  hardly  with  fire  (their 
houses  being  covered  with  dry  palm  leaves)  obtained 
the  towne  and  put  the  inhabitants  to  flight,  where  we 
took  250  persons,  men,  women,  and  children ;  and  by 
our  friend,  the  king  of  our  side,  there  were  taken  600 
prisoners,  whereof  we  hoped  to  have  had  our  choise, 
but  the  negro  (in  which  nation  is  seldom  or  never 
found  truth)  meant  nothing  lesse."  The  negro  king 
decamped  in  the  night  with  his  prisoners,  and  Hawkins 
was  left  with  the  "few  which  we  had  gotten  ourselves." 
It  is  interesting  to  observe,  in  Hawkins'  letters  describ- 
ing these  and  other  expeditions,  the  perfect  reliance  of 
the  mariners  upon  the  Almighty  to  be  on  their  side, 
and  to  bring  them  out  of  all  their  dangers  with  "good 
store  of  negroes "  for  sale.  On  one  occasion  they  were 
becalmed  for  eighteen  days,  and  in  great  danger  of  death 
from  starvation,  having  so  great  a  company  of  negroes 
on  board;  but  "Almighty  God,  who  never  suffereth  His 
elect  to  perish,"  sent,  we  are  told,  a  special  wind  to 
carry  the  slave-raiders  safe  to  their  destination,  and 
when  they  reached  it  they  obtained  licence  to  sell  their 
cargo  on  the  ground  that  their  vessel  was  "a  shippe  of 
the   Queen's   Majestie    of  England,"   and    that    the    cargo 


EUROPE    IN    WEST   AFRICA  329 

"pertained  to  our  Queen's  Highnesse."  Church  and 
State  watched  over  their  operations,  and  they  worked 
in  an  odour  of  the  highest  sanctity. 

Another  famous  English  sailor,  Drake,  who  as  a 
young  man  accompanied  Hawkins  on  one  of  his  earlier 
expeditions  to  the  coast,  was  more  humane  or  more 
fastidious  in  his  tastes  than  his  great  leader,  for  after 
one  experience  he  never  again  went  slave-raiding. 

Except  for  a  patent  granted  in  1588  to  Exeter 
merchants,  the  English  trade  was  left  during  the  reign 
of  Queen  Elizabeth  in  the  hands  of  individuals.  The 
first  charter  to  an  English  company  for  the  purpose  of 
trading  to  the  coast  was  granted  by  King  James  in 
1619.  The  charter  was  supposed  to  convey  exclusive 
rights,  but  the  private  merchants  who  were  already 
interested  continued,  in  spite  of  regulations,  to  trade  on 
their  own  account,  and  with  many  complaints  of  the 
"  interlopers "  who  robbed  them  of  their  profits,  the 
Chartered  Company  acknowledged  its  failure  and  with- 
drew. The  Dutch  West  India  Company,  being  either 
better  organised  or  more  vigorous  in  holding  its  own 
against  "interlopers,"  from  whom  it  also  suffered,  in  the 
meantime  pursued  with  success  its  design  of  supplement- 
ing the  Portuguese,  and  became  a  very  important  power 
upon  the  coast.  Charles  I.  granted  a  fresh  charter  to 
another  English  company.  But  England  was  shortly 
afterwards  distracted  with  civil  and  foreign  war,  and 
this  company  had  no  better  fortune.  The  Dutch  and 
the  Danes  profited  by  the  opportunity  to  push  their 
West  African  trade.  They  not  only  increased  the 
number  of  their  forts  and  settlements,  but  being  well 
supported  by  their  respective  Governments,  and  pro- 
tected by  what  was  then  the  best  navy  in  the  world, 
they  seized  English  merchant  ships,  and  inflicted  damage 
to  an  extent  afterwards  estimated  at  ^300,000. 

The  Chartered  Company  being  of  course  ruined,  a 
petition  was  presented  to  Parliament  shortly  after  the 
restoration   of   Charles  II.,  which  stated  the  condition  of 


330  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

affairs.  At  the  same  time  it  was  represented  by  Ministers 
to  the  King  that  his  American  Colonies  were  languish- 
ing for  want  of  labour.  The  King  himself,  therefore, 
"for  the  purpose,"  as  a  contemporary  account  informs 
us,  "of  supplying  those  plantations  with  blacks,"  publicly 
invited  subscriptions  for  the  formation  of  a  joint-stock 
company,  of  which  the  object  was  to  be  the  recovery 
and  carrying  on  of  the  trade  to  Africa.  The  new 
company  was  formed  under  the  title  of  "  the  Royal 
Adventurers  of  England,"  and  received  a  charter  in 
1662.  But  it  had  no  better  luck  than  its  predecessors. 
War  broke  out  with  Holland  in  1664.  It  was  during 
this  war  that  the  Dutch  Admiral  de  Ruyter  swept  the 
African  coast,  ravaged  the  English  settlements,  destroyed 
their  factories,  containing  goods  valued  at  ^200,000, 
and  took  their  ships.  The  fort  known  now  as  Cape 
Coast  Castle,  taken  by  the  English  from  the  Dutch, 
was  alone,  as  has  been  said,  successfully  held,  and 
remained  in  English  hands  on  the  conclusion  of  the 
peace.  This  was  the  third  Chartered  Company  ruined 
in  the  West  African  trade. 

On  the  conclusion  of  the  war.  King  Charles  again 
invited  subscriptions  for  the  formation  of  a  new  company. 
His  appeal  was  responded  to,  and  in  1672  a  company, 
of  which  the  name  and  fame  have  lingered  in  the 
history  of  English  trade,  was  formed  under  the  title 
of  "the  Royal  African  Company." 

Where  so  many  others  had  been  foiled  this  company 
at  last  succeeded,  and  the  permanent  establishment  of 
English  influence  on  the  West  African  coast  was 
effected  by  it  in  the  latter  part  of  the  seventeenth 
century.  The  new  company  opened  and  developed  a 
valuable  export  trade  of  English  goods  to  the  West 
Coast  of  Africa.  It  also,  according  to  its  own  statement, 
presented  at  a  later  date  to  Parliament,  "furnished  the 
new  American  Colonies  with  frequent  supplies  of  con- 
siderable numbers  of  slaves  at  very  moderate  rates, 
and    that   in    so  encouraging  a  manner   that  it   sometimes 


EUROPE    IN    WEST   AFRICA  331 

trusted  the  planters  to  the  value  of  ^100,000  and 
upward  till  they  could  conveniently  pay  the  same." 
Besides  this  three-cornered  trade  of  goods  to  Africa  and 
slaves  to  America,  the  company  also  brought  home 
"  ivory,  red-wood,  and  gold  dust  in  such  quantity  that  it 
frequently  coined  40,000  to  50,000  guineas  at  a  time, 
with  the  elephant  on  them  for  a  mark  of  distinction." 
In  fine,  its  trade  not  only  produced  a  dividend,  but 
also  "gave  many  other  public  and  national  advantages 
to  the  whole  kingdom,  and  the  British  plantations  in 
general." 

This  flourishing  state  of  things  of  course  attracted 
"interlopers,"  who,  without  regard  for  the  company's 
charter,  carried  on  trade.  The  usual  course  followed. 
Protests  were  made  on  the  one  side  against  interfer- 
ence, on  the  other  side  against  privilege.  Every  oppor- 
tunity was  taken  by  outsiders  to  find  fault  with  the 
company,  and  by  the  company  to  prove  that,  in  the 
best  interests  of  the  public,  they  should  be  allowed  to 
keep  their  monopoly.  Finally,  public  opinion  proved 
too  strong,  and  that  happened  which  must  always  happen 
to  the  best  of  chartered  companies,  when  the  field  which 
it  exploits  is  widely  profitable.  The  general  trading 
community  insisted  upon  having  its  share,  and  in  1697 
permission  was  granted  to  the  "interlopers"  by  vote  of 
Parliament  to  trade  to  the  West  Coast,  on  payment  of 
a  percentage  to  the  Royal  African  Company  for  the 
maintenance  of  its  forts  and  castles  for  defensive  pur- 
poses. One  of  the  principal  arguments  used  in  support 
of  the  adoption  of  this  policy  was  that  the  plantations 
would  be  supplied  with  slaves  in  greater  numbers  and 
at  cheaper  rates  than  could  be  expected  from  the  company 
alone. 

Many  traders  profited  by  this  permission.  The  result, 
according  to  a  somewhat  rueful  report  of  the  company, 
was  that  the  natives  advanced  the  price  of  slaves  and 
beat  down  the  price  of  English  manufactures,  while  the 
American    planters,    having    to    pay    a    higher    price    for 


332  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

their  labour,  advanced  the  price  of  sugar.  The  Royal 
African  Company  had  to  raise  ^180,000  of  fresh  capital, 
and  in  1707  we  find  the  company  petitioning  Queen 
Anne  to  recommend  their  case  to  the  consideration  of 
the  Lords  Commissioners  for  Trade  and  Plantations. 
Nevertheless  trade  flourished,  and  notwithstanding  the 
strong  presentation  of  their  case  by  the  company,  and 
the  many  evils  which  unquestionably  attended  the  throw- 
ing open  of  the  coast,  we  may  be  permitted  to  doubt 
whether  West  African  trade  would  to-day  be  valued  in 
the  substantial  millions  which  its  total  has  reached,  if 
the  monopoly  of  the  Royal  African  Company  had  been 
sustained. 


CHAPTER   XXXVI 
THE   EUROPEAN   SLAVE   TRADE 

The  West  African  coast  history  of  the  eighteenth  century 
is  mainly  a  history  of  trade,  and  as  the  most  profitable 
trade  was  done  in  slaves,  it  is  hardly  an  over  statement 
to  say  that  it  is  a  history  of  the  slave  trade.  It  may  be 
remembered  that  one  of  the  most  valued  privileges  con- 
ceded to  Great  Britain  at  the  Peace  of  Utrecht  in  171 2 
was  the  Assiento  contract,  or  the  right  to  supply  the 
Spanish  colonies  on  the  American  coast  with  slaves. 
In  that  treaty,  which  may  be  said  to  have  laid  the 
foundation  of  the  British  Colonial  Empire,  other  British 
colonies  and  settlements  obtained  other  advantages.  The 
concession  of  a  monopoly  in  the  Spanish  slave  trade 
was  the  special  advantage  pressed  for  by  the  section  of 
the  country  which  was  interested  in  the  West  African 
trade,  and  was  obtained  for  them  by  British  diplomacy 
in  satisfaction  of  what  was  felt  to  be  their  legitimate 
claim.  Other  European  nations  were  no  less  active  in 
the  same  traffic,  and  thus  it  came  about  that  whereas 
in  the  interior  the  influence  of  ancient  and  medieval 
civilisation,  operating  from  the  north,  had  been  an  in- 
fluence tending  to  the  development  of  all  that  is  admir- 
able in  the  history  of  nations,  in  the  south  the  modern 
relation  of  Europeans  to  the  natives  of  the  coast  was  simply 
as  the  relation  of  beasts  of  prey  to  their  victims. 

The  victims  were  generally  of  a  very  low  order  of 
humanity.  Europe  made  its  settlements  at  the  extreme 
southern  edge  of  what  may  be  called  the  equatorial  slums 
of  Western  Africa.  Europeans  seldom  lost  sight  of  the 
sea,    and    European    influence    scarcely   extended    beyond 


334  A    TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

the  forts  which  protected  it.  The  nearer  to  the  coast 
the  worse  was  the  native  type.  Barbot,  who  was  of 
course  himself  a  slave-dealer,  tells  his  readers  patheti- 
cally that  "  'Tis  hard  to  conceive  what  patience  is 
required  to  deal  with  these  brutes."  They  were  all  gross 
pagans,  worshipping  snakes,  consecrated  trees,  the  sea, 
and  many  lesser  objects.  This  was  the  fetishism  which 
had  been  driven  southwards  at  an  early  period  from  Gao, 
Daura,  Kano,  and  other  towns  in  the  northern  territories. 
We  find  here  also  in  the  seventeenth  century — as  at  the 
present  day — traces  of  the  paganism  which  was  expelled 
by  the  Mohammedans  from  Ghana  in  the  eleventh  cen- 
tury. *'  Almost  every  town  or  village  has  near  to  it  a 
small  consecrated  g-rove  to  which  the  orovernors  and 
people  frequently  resort  to  make  their  offerings."  And 
here  too  we  find,  in  the  so-called  monumental  stones 
carved  to  represent  half  a  human  figure,  which  are  re- 
vered to  the  present  day,  a  reminiscence  of  the  Teraphim 
of  ancient  Egypt.  The  people  of  Benin  were  in  the 
seventeenth  century  "the  most  genteel  and  polite  of  the 
coast,"  Barbot  gives  a  very  interesting  account  of  their 
capital  town.  But  on  festive  occasions  human  sacrifices 
were  made  on  a  vast  scale. 

At  the  back  of  Cape  Verde,  between  the  Senegal 
and  the  Gambia,  the  Fulani  had  a  "little  empire" 
inland,  and  the  natives  reckoned  their  king  to  be  the 
"most  potent  prince  in  all  those  countries."  It  was  said 
that  he  could  put  from  40,000  to  50,000  men  into  the 
field.  The  coast  was,  however,  densely  wooded,  and 
swarmed  with  wild  beasts.  The  character  given  by 
Barbot  of  the  coast  natives  at  this  district  has  been 
already  quoted.  Sorcerers,  idolaters,  robbers,  and 
drunkards,  they  were  indeed  "no  better  than  their 
country."  At  the  back  of  the  Gambia  the  natives  were 
"  very  savage,  cruel,  and  treacherous;"  they  were  "gross 
pagans,  said  to  worship  demons  more  than  any  other 
blacks  ; "  and  a  cannibal  people,  driven  southwards  about 
the  year    1505 — which    we   may  remember  was    the  date 


THE  EUROPEAN  SLAVE  TRADE   335 

of    some    of    the    great    Askia's    conquests — perpetually- 
warred    upon     the    older    inhabitants.      "On     the     Ivory 
Coast  the  natives,"  says  Barbot,   "are  very  savage  canni- 
bals who  file  their  teeth.     The  place  might  yield  a  good 
trade,"   he    adds,    "but    for  the  savagery  of  the    natives, 
who   have  massacred    at  different  times    English,   Dutch, 
and  Portuguese."     Though  for  the  sake  of  the  ivory  all 
European    nations    traded    at    this    coast,   no    setdements 
were  made  and  the  ships'  crews  "dared  not  land."     On 
the  Gold  Coast,  where  the  natives  were  among  the  most 
civilised    with  whom   the    Europeans    dealt,  few  or    none 
were  to  be  trusted.     They  were  gross   pagans,  and,  like 
the  people  of  Benin,  made  human  sacrifices.     They  were 
generally  "  of  a  turbulent  temper,  very  deceitful  and  crafty, 
and  so  continually  at  war  with  one  another  that  this  was 
the  best  part  of  all  the  coast  for  slaves  as  well  as  gold," 
the    prisoners    being    sold    immediately  on    their  capture. 
After   some    of    their    quarrels    with    their    neighbours    a 
trader   might   "  ship   prisoners    as  fast  as    they   could    be 
fetched  from  the  shore  in  a   boat."     The   natives  of   the 
Slave  Coast  were  the  greatest  and  most  cunning  thieves 
that  can  be  imagined,   "  therein  far  exceeding  our  Euro- 
pean  pick-pockets,    and    on    the    least    outrage    received 
would    poison  the  offender."     The    inhabitants  of   Biafra 
farther  east  were  "very  gross  pagans  of  a  wild  temper," 
and    made    human   sacrifices   to  the  devil.       Inland    from 
New    Calabar    and    the    Cross    River   the    natives    were 
cannibals,  and    southwards   from   this  district   the  country 
was    inhabited    by    "very    low    class    naked    natives"    to 
Gaboon,  where  the  inhabitants,  "very  savage  and  animal 
in    their    habits,"    were    "barbarous,    wild,    bloody,    and 
treacherous."     These  were  the  most  wretchedly  poor  and 
miserable    of  any    in    Guinea,       They    were    excessively 
fond   of  brandy,  and   "  married    indifferently    any   female 
member  of  their  family,  including  their  mothers." 

These  wretched  beings  were  worth  ^40  apiece  in 
the  market  of  Jamaica,  and  with  the  ideas  that  then 
prevailed  it  is   hardly  perhaps  surprising    that  they  were 


336  A    TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

regarded  as  fair  prey.  Synods  of  the  Churches— Pro- 
testant as  well  as  Catholic — countenanced  the  trade. 
Two  Synods  of  the  Protestant  Churches  held  in  France, 
at  Rouen  and  Alen9on  in  1637,  to  consider  a  question 
raised  by  certain  "over-scrupulous  persons  "  who  "thought 
it  unlawful  that  many  Protestant  merchants  who  had 
lono-  traded  in  slaves  from  Guinea  to  America  should 
continue  that  traffic,  as  inconsistent  with  Christian 
charity,"  decreed  after  long  discussion  that  slavery,  always 
acknowledged  to  be  of  the  right  of  nations,  "is  not 
condemned  in  the  Word  of  God."  Therefore  they  con- 
tented themselves  with  exhorting  merchants  who  had 
liberty  to  trade  not  to  abuse  that  liberty  contrary  to 
Christian  charity,  and  not  to  dispose  of  those  poor  infidels 
except  to  such  Christians  as  will  use  them  with  humanity, 
and  above  all  will  take  care  to  instruct  them  in  the 
true  religion.  The  "inestimable  advantage  which  the 
slaves  may  reap  by  becoming  Christians  and  saving 
their  souls,"  was  put  forward  by  the  righteous  of  that 
day  as  one  of  the  strongest  arguments  in  favour  of  con- 
tinuing a  traffic  which  was  so  profitable  as  to  enlist  very 
powerful  support. 

How  far  this  reason  and  the  mild  advice  offered  by 
the  Synods  of  the  Churches  was  likely  to  influence  the 
Europeans  of  different  nationalities  who  were  locally  en- 
gaged in  the  coast  trade,  may  be  gathered  from  the 
descriptions  which  are  given  by  Barbot  and  other  con- 
temporaries. The  conduct  of  the  Portuguese  has  already 
been  described.  Of  the  English,  Barbot  says  that  the 
trade  of  the  Royal  African  Company  "daily  decays 
through  the  ill  management  of  their  servants  in  Guinea, 
who,  to  their  own  vices,  add  those  of  the  people  among 
whom  they  live  and  converse.  .  .  .  The  fondness  of  the 
English  for  their  beloved  liquor,  punch,  is  so  great,  even 
among  the  officers  and  factors,  that  whatever  comes  of 
it,  there  must  be  a  bowl  upon  all  occasions,  which  causes 
the  death  of  many  of  them.  Consequently  the  garrison 
(of  Cape  Coast  Castle)  becomes  very  weak,  the  survivors 


THE  EUROPEAN  SLAVE  TRADE   337 

looking  poor  and  thin,  not  only  the  soldiers,  but  the  officers 
and  factors,  whose  countenances  are  shrivelled  and  dis- 
mal through  ill  diet  and  worse  government."  The  con- 
duct of  all  Europeans  towards  the  black  women  was  as 
discreditable  as  it  was  injurious  to  themselves.  Rum 
and  spirits  were  sold  in  great  quantities  by  the  English 
and  Dutch.  The  Prussians  and  Danes  were  even  fonder 
of  strong  liquor  than  the  English,  and  their  conduct 
generally  was  equally  bad.  The  governors  of  the  Danish 
stations  were  often  men  of  the  meanest  extraction,  a 
gunner  from  the  fort  being  sometimes  raised  to  that 
position.  The  unfaithfulness  to  the  Danish  Company 
of  their  servants  was  such  that  "scarce  any  one  of  in- 
tegrity "  sent  out  from  Denmark  was  allowed  to  live. 
The  Dutch  treated  the  natives  with  arbitrary  cruelty. 
In  return  the  blacks  were  often  uncivil  to  strangers,  and 
this  "put  Europeans  upon  ravaging  the  country,  destroy- 
ing their  canoes,  and  carrying  off  some  of  their  people 
into  captivity."  "  If,"  says  Barbot,  "the  negroes  be 
generally  crafty  and  treacherous,  it  may  well  be  said 
the  Europeans  have  not  dealt  with  them  as  becomes 
Christians,  for  it  is  too  well  known  that  many  of  the 
European  nations  trading  amongst  these  people  have 
very  unjustly  and  inhumanly,  without  any  provocation, 
stolen  away  from  time  to  time  abundance  of  the  people, 
not  only  in  this  (the  Sierra  Leone)  coast,  but  all  over 
Guinea,  and  when  they  came  on  board  their  ships  in  a 
harmless  and  confiding  manner,  carried  great  numbers 
away  to  the  plantations,  and  there  sold  them  with  the 
other  slaves  they  had  purchased  for  their  goods.  ..." 
"Certain  it  is,"  he  says  in  another  place,  "that  few  who 
can  live  well  at  home  will  venture  to  repair  to  the  Guinea 
Coast  to  mend  their  circumstances,  unless  encouraged  by 
large  salaries.  .  .  .  This  must  be  said,  once  for  all,  that 
the  generality  of  those  who  look  for  such  employments 
are  necessitous  persons  who  cannot  live  at  home,  and 
are,  perhaps,  most  of  them  of  a  temper  to  improve 
all  opportunities  of  mending  their  worldly  circumstances 

Y 


338  A   TROPICAL   DEPENDENCY 

without  much  regard  to  the  principles  of  Christianity. 
For  without  reflecting  on  particular  persons,  it  may  be 
said  that  what  I  have  here  asserted  is  sufficiently  made 
out  by  the  irregularity  of  their  lives  in  those  parts,  and 
particularly  as  to  lewdness  and  excess  of  drinking.  It 
is  almost  incredible  how  many  shorten  their  days  by 
such  debauchery." 

Ao-ents  of  this  character  were  not  likely  to  deal  over 
tenderly  with  their  human  merchandise.  Ships  of  300 
and  400  tons  burden  usually  took  cargoes  of  from  500 
to  800  slaves.  A  ship  carrying  500  slaves  needed  to 
take  in  100,000  yams,  the  slaves  generally  sickening  and 
dying  upon  any  other  food.  The  space  which  was  left 
for  the  slaves  when  such  provision  was  made  for  feeding 
them,  and  for  storing  a  proportionate  amount  of  water, 
was  not  great.  Here  is  Bosman's  description  of  the 
manner  in  which  slaves  were  shipped  at  Whydah.  After 
explaining  that  they  were  usually  prisoners  of  war,  he 
says :  "  When  these  slaves  come  to  Whydah  they  are 
put  in  prison  all  together,  and  when  we  treat  concerning 
buying  them,  they  are  all  brought  out  together  in  a  large 
plain,  where,  by  our  surgeons,  whose  province  it  is,  they 
are  thoroughly  examined,  and  that  naked,  too,  both  men 
and  women,  without  the  least  distinction  or  modesty. 
Those  which  are  approved  as  good  are  set  on  one  side. 
.  .  .  The  invalids  and  the  maimed  being  thrown  out,  as 
I  have  told  you,  the  remainder  are  numbered,  and  it  is 
entered  who  delivered  them.  In  the  meanwhile  a  burning 
iron,  with  the  arms  or  name  of  the  companies,  lies  in  the 
fire,  with  which  ours  are  marked  on  the  breast.  This  is 
done  that  we  may  distinguish  them  from  the  slaves  of 
the  English,  French,  or  others,  which  are  also  marked 
with  their  mark.  .  .  .  They  come  on  board  stark  naked, 
as  well  women  as  men."  Bosman,  proud  of  the  superior 
organisation  of  the  Dutch  ships,  which  he  described  as 
being  "for  the  most  part  clean  and  neat,"  while  the  ships 
of  the  English,  French,  and  Portuguese  are  always  "foul 
and    stinking,"  explains   that  on  these  better-class  Dutch 


THE  EUROPEAN  SLAVE  TRADE   339 

ships  the  lodging-place  of  the  slaves  is  divided  into  two 
parts,  one  for  the  women  and  one  for  the  men,  and  that 
"here  they  lie  as  close  together  as  it  is  possible  for 
them  to  be  crowded."  Barbot,  who  traded  for  himself, 
chiefly  in  the  neighbourhood  of  New  Calabar,  says  nothing 
about  cleanliness  nor  separate  compartments.  He  tells 
us  that  in  that  neighbourhood  the  slaves  were  "a  strange 
sort  of  brutish  creatures,  very  weak  and  slothful,  but 
cruel  and  bloody  in  their  temper,  always  quarrelling, 
biting,  and  fighting,  and  sometimes  choking  and  murder- 
ing one  another  without  any  mercy."  Both  traders  were 
much  disturbed  by  a  widespread  belief  among  the  natives 
that  "we  buy  them  only  to  fatten  and  afterwards  eat 
them  as  a  delicacy."  Barbot  tells  us  that  "natives 
infected  with  this  belief  will  fall  into  a  deep  melancholy 
and  despair,  and  refuse  all  sustenance,  though  never  so 
much  compelled  and  even  beaten  to  oblige  them  to  take 
some  nourishment,  notwithstanding  all  which  they  will 
starve  to  death.  .  .  .  And,  though  I  must  say  I  am 
naturally  compassionate,  yet  have  I  been  necessitated 
sometimes  to  cause  the  teeth  of  those  wretches  to  be 
broken,  because  they  would  not  open  their  mouths  or 
be  prevailed  upon  by  any  entreaties  to  feed  themselves, 
and  thus  have  forced  some  sustenance  into  their  throats." 
Many  of  the  slaves  came  from  the  back  country,  and  had 
never  even  seen  the  sea. 

Those  of  us  who  have  crossed  the  Bay  of  Biscay  in 
bad  weather  on  a  return  journey  from  the  Tropics,  with 
all  the  alleviations  that  can  be  given  by  swift  transit, 
comfort,  and  warm  clothing,  are  in  a  position  to  imagine 
what  some  of  those  naked  shiploads  must  have  suffered. 
The  death-rate  amounted  to  two,  three,  and  even  four 
hundred  out  of  every  five  hundred  shipped  in  Guinea. 
Yet  so  profitable  was  the  trade  that  ten  ships  might  often 
be  seen  loading  slaves  in  the  same  port. 

The  slaves  being  commonly  prisoners  of  war,  the  trade 
had  of  course  the  indirect  effect  of  putting  a  premium  upon 
intertribal  fighting.      There   was    indeed    scarcely  a  vice 


340  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

which   it   did   not   encourage  alike  in  slaves  and   slavers. 
It  is  interesting  to  observe,  from  the  records  of  European 
intercourse  with  the  coast,  that  the  evil  of  trading  in  arms 
and    spirits   was    very  early   apparent    to    the    intelligent. 
Barbot  and  Bosman  both  deplore  the  trade  in  arms,  but 
the  one  speaking  for  the   French  and    English   and  the 
other   for  the  Dutch  agree  in  regarding  it  as   inevitable, 
"since  should  one  nation  abstain   from  the  profit  of  the 
trade,  other  nations  would  only  sell  the  more."     "Abund- 
ance of  firearms,  gunpowder,  and  ball,"  says  Barbot,   "are 
sold  by  all  the  trading  Europeans,  and  are  a  very  profit- 
able commodity  when  the  blacks  of  the  coast  are  at  war, 
yet    were   it  to   be   wished  they  had   never  been   carried 
thither,   considering    how   fatal   they   have  been   and   will 
still    be    upon    occasion    in    the    hands    of  the    blacks   to 
Europeans  who,  for  a  little  gain,  furnish  them  with  knives 
to  cut  their  own  throats ;  of  which  each  nation  is  sensible 
enough,  and  yet  none  will  forbear  to  carry  that  commodity 
which  proves  so  dangerous  in  the  hands  of  those  blacks. 
The  best  excuse  we  have  for  this  ill-practice  is  that  if  one 
does  not  sell  the  other  will  sell  them,  if  the  French  do  not 
the  Dutch  will,  and  if  they  should  forbear  it  the  English 
or  others   would   do  it."      The   idea  of  the  delegates  of 
seventeen   European  nations  assembled   for   the   purpose 
of  agreeing  to  limitations  to  be  placed  upon  the  trade  of 
their  respective  countries  was  one  which  had  not  presented 
itself  to  the  eyes  of  the  seventeenth  century.     The  Inter- 
national Conferences  of  Berlin  and  Brussels  belonged  to 
another  age. 

The  effect  of  the  slave  trade  upon  the  coast  was  felt 
into  the  far  interior,  and  in  the  later  records  of  the  Haussa 
States  we  hear  of  slaves  being  hunted  for  purposes  of  sale 
to  the  black  traders  from  the  south,  who  in  turn  sold  them 
to  Europeans  on  the  coast,  Mungo  Park's  account  of  his 
travels  in  passing  from  the  Gambia  to  the  Niger  at  the 
end  of  the  eighteenth  century  gives  a  sufficiently  sorrow- 
ful picture  of  the  condition  of  populations  which  had  then 
been  ground  for  two  hundred  years  between  the  oppression 


THE    EUROPEAN    SLAVE    TRADE        341 

of  the  European  slave  trade  on  the  south  and  the  Moorish 
conquest  on  the  north. 

It  was  only  very  gradually  that  the  conscience  of 
humanity  revolted  against  a  means  of  making  profit  so 
opposed  to  every  conception  of  freedom  and  justice.  But 
the  movements  of  thought  of  the  eighteenth  century, 
which  emancipated  Europe,  had  also  their  result  upon 
the  West  Coast  of  Africa.  There  wanted  still  a  few 
years  to  the  centenary  of  the  Treaty  of  Utrecht,  when 
the  slave  trade  was  abolished,  at  least  in  name,  in  1807. 
Tt  was  unfortunately  far  from  being  abolished  in  fact, 
and  the  greater  part  of  the  nineteenth  century  saw 
unavailing  efforts  made  by  European  governments  to 
put  an  end  to  the  exportation  of  slaves  from  Africa 
by  sea. 

The  early  part  of  the  nineteenth  century  witnessed 
also  determined  efforts  made  by  European  exploration 
to  penetrate  the  mystery  of  Central  Africa.  England  took 
a  brilliant  part  in  this  movement  on  the  West  Coast,  and, 
in  the  early  part  of  the  century,  the  principal  exploring 
parties  were  led  by  Englishmen.  Mungo  Park,  sent  out 
by  the  Royal  Geographical  Society,  made  his  first  jour- 
ney, travelling  in  from  the  Gambia,  in  1 796,  and  struck 
the  Niger  at  Segou.  His  second  journey  ended  fatally 
at  Boussa  in  1805.  Between  1810  and  1825  English 
expeditions  made  many  attempts  to  reach  the  interior 
from  the  coast.  When  Rene  Caillie,  the  French  explorer, 
who  eventually  reached  Timbuctoo  in  1828,  disembarked 
at  St.  Louis  in  18 16,  with  the  intention  of  penetrating, 
if  possible,  to  the  Niger,  he  found  that  "nothing  was 
talked  of  there  but  the  English  expeditions  into  the 
interior."  It  was  with  the  expedition  of  Major  Grey  in 
1818  that  he  first  started  for  the  interior.  I  find  it  stated 
in  a  French  account  that  England  spent  upwards  of 
^760,000  at  this  time  upon  exploration. 

Efforts  to  reach  the  interior  were  made  from  the  north 
coast  as  well  as  from  the  south.  Hornemann  attempted 
in   18 10  to  cross  the  continent  from  Tripoli  to  Ashantee, 


342  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

and  reached  the  Haussa  States,  travelHng  by  the  Tripoli- 
Fezzan  route,  but  died  of  dysentery  in  Nupe.  A  little 
later  Lyon  and  Ritchie  went  in  from  Tripoli,  and  in  the 
years  1818-20  explored  the  Fezzan  as  far  south  as  lat.  23°. 
Ritchie  died  at  Murzuk,  but  Lyon  brought  back  a  good 
deal  of  information  about  the  Fezzan  and  the  country  to 
the  south,  including  Bornu  and  the  Haussa  States.  Their 
work  was  carried  further  by  Major  Denham,  Captain 
Clapperton,  and  Dr.  Oudney,  who  went  in  together  by  the 
Tripoli-Fezzan  road,  and  succeeded  in  the  years  1822-23 
and  1824  in  reaching  Bornu  and  the  Haussa  States, 
travelling  as  far  west  as  Sokoto,  and  as  far  south  as  the 
tenth  parallel  of  latitude.  The  others  returned  safely — 
Oudney  died  in  Bornu.  Captain  Clapperton,  making  a 
second  journey  by  way  of  the  West  Coast  in  1826,  died  at 
Sokoto.  Major  Laing,  going  in  also  from  the  north, 
reached  Timbuctoo,  and  was  murdered  in  the  desert  a 
little  way  from  the  town  in  1828,  The  most  famous  of 
the  expeditions  from  the  north  was  that  carried  out  by 
Dr.  Barth  and  Mr.  Richardson  at  the  instance  of  Lord 
Palmerston  between  the  years  1850-55,  in  which,  though 
Mr.  Richardson  died,  Dr.  Barth  was  able  to  collect  a 
mass  of  valuable  information,  afterwards  published  in 
five  bulky  volumes,  which  form  the  standard  work  upon 
the  interior  of  the  West  African  Soudan. 

It  was  reserved  for  Clapperton's  faithful  servant, 
Richard  Landor,  to  navigate  the  Lower  Niger  from  the 
Boussa  Rapids  to  its  mouth  in  1832.  From  this  time 
onwards,  expeditions  were  renewed  upon  the  coast.  The 
French  took  an  active  part  in  exploring  the  territory  in 
which  they  were  politically  interested,  and  a  certain 
amount  of  information  with  regard  to  the  interior  was 
acquired. 

The  change  of  civilised  opinion  with  regard  to  the 
slave  trade  led  in  the  meantime  to  corresponding  changes 
in  the  administration  of  European  settlements  on  the 
West  Coast.  Already  in  1 783  the  trading  rights  of 
France    in  the  Gambia   had    been    made    the    subject    of 


THE  EUROPEAN  SLAVE  TRADE   343 

exchange  for  the  trading  rights  of  England  in  the 
Senegal,  thus  preparing  the  way  for  the  modern  system 
of  "spheres  of  influence."  Shortly  after  the  conclusion 
of  the  war  with  France  in  18 15,  the  British  Government 
took  over  from  the  merchant  companies  the  various  forts 
and  stations  established  by  British  enterprise,  and  created 
a  colony  of  "  West  Africa  Settlements"  that  included  the 
whole  of  the  coast  in  which  English  trade  was  interested. 
This  initiated  the  system,  which,  however,  was  not  for 
some  time  fully  carried  into  effect,  of  Crown  Colonies  upon 
the  coast. 

In  1843  the  colonies  of  Gambia  and  the  Gold  Coast 
were  erected  by  letters-patent  into  separate  colonies, 
having  each  their  executive  and  judicial  establishments. 
In  1850  the  Danish  forts  on  the  Gold  Coast  were  pur- 
chased by  Great  Britain  from  the  King  of  Denmark,  and 
with  the  forts  the  Danish  Protectorate  was  transferred  to 
England.  In  1861  Lagos  became  British  by  cession  from 
the  natives.  In  187 1  the  Dutch  finally  abandoned  to 
Great  Britain  the  whole  of  their  rights  upon  the  coast. 
With  various  changes  in  the  administration  of  the  settle- 
ments themselves  the  existing  colonies  of  Gambia,  Sierra 
Leone,  Gold  Coast,  and  Lagos,  came  into  being,  and  trade 
with  the  West  Coast  in  more  legitimate  products  than 
human  flesh  was  carried  on  under  the  local  protection  of 
an  Imperial  flag. 

Unfortunately,  the  long-indulged  taste  for  spirits,  and 
the  natural  desire  of  the  natives  to  possess  firearms,  gave 
a  predominance  to  these  two  articles  of  European  export, 
which  up  to  the  end  of  the  nineteenth  century  continued 
to  produce  deplorable  results,  and  to  lower  alike  the  utility 
and  the  value  of  European  dealings  with  the  coast.  It 
was  not  until  the  conscience  of  Europe,  revolting  at  last 
against  this  evil  as  against  the  slave  trade,  made  itself 
heard  in  the  international  agreements  signed  at  Berlin 
and  Brussels  in  1885  and  1890,  that  any  determined  effort 
was  made  to  restrict  by  legislation  the  limits  of  this  in- 
jurious traffic.     The  result  of  this  movement  of  opinion 


344  A   TROPICAL   DEPENDENCY 

may  already  be  very  plainly  traced  in  the  different  char- 
acter which  trade  with  West  Africa  has  assumed  within 
the  last  twenty  or  five-and-twenty  years.  In  the  earlier 
part  of  the  century,  when  the  British  Government  assumed 
the  duty  of  watching  over  the  suppression  of  the  slave 
trade,  other  trade  fell  to  an  almost  nominal  figure.  A 
return  presented  to  the  House  of  Commons  in  1865  shows 
the  total  value  of  exports  from  the  West  African  settle- 
ments to  amount  to  ;^650,ooo,  while  the  total  value  of 
imports  into  the  settlements  amounted  to  £5:^3,000.  The 
cost  of  the  very  elementary  government  which  was  main- 
tained in  the  four  settlements  for  the  purpose  of  promoting 
this  trade  and  suppressing  the  slave  trade,  inclusive  of  the 
squadron  maintained  in  West  African  waters,  amounted 
to  a  charge  on  the  Treasury  of  about  ^320,000. 

The  later  history  of  these  colonies  is  sufficiently  well 
known  to  render  it  unnecessary  for  me  to  deal  with  it 
here.  I  must  only  guard  myself  from  seeming  to  attach 
to  modern  traders  with  West  Africa  the  slur  which  un- 
doubtedly did  attach  to  their  predecessors  of  an  earlier 
period.  The  trade  of  the  coast  of  late  years  has 
been  placed  upon  a  much  wider,  and  I  think  it  may  be 
said  without  fear  of  contradiction  by  events,  an  ever- 
widening  basis.  It  is  associated  with  some  of  the  most 
respectable  names  in  commerce,  and  under  enlightened 
and  beneficent  direction  may  not  improbably  become  one 
of  the  most  valuable  fields  of  British  industrial  develop- 
ment. Since  the  period  of  which  I  write,  a  body  of 
educated  coast  natives  has  also  been  developed  which 
would  have  a  just  right  to  be  profoundly  wounded  were 
they  to  be  confused  with  the  cannibal  savage  who  lives 
not  far  from  them  in  the  interior.  In  this  connection, 
the  names  of  Bishop  Crowther  and  Dr.  Blyden  will 
occur  to  every  mind,  and  if  among  the  coloured  officials 
and  professional  men  of  the  coast  colonies  all  have  not 
attained  to  the  same  reputation,  there  are  no  doubt  many 
who  merit  the  same  distinction.  But  these  are  to  be 
met  with  only  within  the  limits  of   the  European  settle- 


THE  EUROPEAN  SLAVE  TRADE   345 

ments.  What  I  have  said  in  regard  to  the  earlier  trade 
is,  I  think,  sufficient  to  prove  the  statement  with  which  I 
set  out,  that  if  the  original  native  of  the  coast  is  inferior 
to  the  native  of  the  interior,  the  influence  exercised  by 
Europe  on  the  coast  has  been  very  different  from  that 
exercised  by  Europe  in  the  interior  in  days  when  black 
poets  were  welcomed  at  the  court  of  Cordova,  and  the 
University  of  Timbuctoo  exchanged  knowledge  with  the 
universities  of  Spain. 

There  is  one  other  point  to  which  I  am  anxious  to 
draw  attention.  It  is  that,  with  the  exception  of  Mr. 
Maclean's  temporary  extension  of  British  influence  on  the 
Gold  Coast  as  Governor  for  the  Merchant  Government, 
between  1838  and  1842,  no  colony  up  to  the  last  decade  of 
the  nineteenth  century  extended  beyond  the  immediate 
seaboard.  From  the  date  of  the  abolition  of  the  slave 
trade  the  constant  policy  of  the  British  Government  was 
to  withdraw  as  far  as  possible  from  any  intermeddling 
with  native  affairs,  and  from  any  attempt  to  establish 
British  influence,  or  to  incur  political  responsibilities,  upon 
the  coast.  It  was  as  a  matter  of  duty,  and  mainly  for 
the  purpose  of  enforcing  the  abolition  of  the  over-sea 
slave  trade,  that  Great  Britain  in  1808  assumed  the 
government  of  Sierra  Leone,  and  in  182 1,  after  the  aboli- 
tion of  the  existing  Chartered  Company,  annexed  to  it 
the  settlements  of  the  Gambia  and  the  Gold  Coast. 
The  greatest  care  was  taken  to  repudiate  responsibility 
for  native  affairs  outside  the  limits  of  the  small  English 
settlements.  As  late  as  1865,  it  was  stated  before  a 
Committee  of  the  House  of  Commons  that  British  ter- 
ritory on  the  Gambia  was  so  small,  that  when  the  native 
tribes  fought  with  each  other,  "all  their  bullets,  without 
meaning  us  any  harm,  came  into  the  British  barracks." 
In  the  Gold  Coast  Colony,  Fantees  and  Ashantees  fought 
with  each  other  on  the  sea  coast,  and  an  English  victory 
obtained  over  them  in  1827  took  place,  not  in  the  interior, 
but  at  Accra. 

The  settlement  of  the  country  and  the  policy  of  the 


346  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

Government  with  regard  to  the  West  Coast  were  fully 
expressed  in  the  finding  of  a  strong  representative  Com- 
mittee of  the  House  of  Commons  which  sat  for  several 
months  in  the  early  part  of  1865,  and,  after  a  careful 
examination  of  witnesses  and  consideration  of  reports 
specially  prepared  and  submitted  to  it  by  commissioners 
charged  with  the  investigation  of  the  affairs  of  the  West 
African  colonies  on  the  spot,  reported  to  the  House 
certain  resolutions  at  which  it  had  arrived. 

In  reporting  these  resolutions,  the  Committee  stated 
first  that  the  chief  object  of  all  undertakings  on  the 
coast,  since  the  passing  of  the  Act  for  the  abolition  of 
the  slave  trade,  had  been  the  suppression  of  the  trade  ; 
secondly,  that  "  if  the  promotion  first,  and  afterwards  the 
suppression,  of  the  slave  trade  had  not  been  the  ob- 
ject of  British  West  African  establishments,  commercial 
enterprise  would  never  have  selected  the  Gold  Coast 
for  its  locality,  nor  would  the  British  probably  have 
undertaken  any  settlement  whatever  in  West  Africa ; 
still  less  would  the  Crown  have  implicated  itself  in 
government  there  or  in  treaties  of  protection."  The 
Committee  found  that  the  slave  trade,  "the  suppression 
of  which  is  now  the  chief  object  of  the  British  establish- 
ments in  West  Africa,  was  rapidly  diminishing,  that  the 
only  demand  remaining  in  1865  was  from  Cuba,  while 
there  was  a  good  hope  of  its  speedy  and  total  extinction. 
They  also  found,  as  regards  the  encouragement  and 
protection  of  other  trade,  that  "in  the  sole  interests  of 
trade  the  evidence  of  merchants  is  that  it  is  better  that 
their  agents  should  feel  the  necessity  of  keeping  on 
good  terms  with  native  powers  than  that  they  should  be 
backed  by  English  governments,  or  even  by  consuls, 
more  than  is  necessary  for  a  reference  of  disputes  to 
constituted  authorities." 

For  these  and  for  other  reasons  which  are  fully  set 
forward  in  the  report,  the  Committee  submitted  as  a 
resolution  to  the  House:  "That  all  further  extension 
of  territory  or  assumption  of  government,  or  new  treaties 


THE  EUROPEAN  SLAVE  TRADE   347 

offering  any  protection  to  native  tribes,  would  be  in- 
expedient, and  that  the  object  of  our  policy  should  be  to 
encourage  in  the  natives  the  exercise  of  those  qualities 
which  may  render  it  possible  for  us  more  and  more  to 
transfer  to  them  the  administration  of  all  the  governments, 
with  a  view  to  our  ultimate  withdrawal  from  all,  except, 
probably,  Sierra  Leone."  This  resolution,  with  six  others 
arrived  at  by  the  Committee,  was  adopted  and  reported 
to  the  House  on  June  26,   1865. 


CHAPTER   XXXVII 
ENGLAND   AND    FRANCE   ON   THE   LOWER    NIGER 

The  Committee  of  1865  may  be  taken  to  represent  the 
lowest  ebb  of  British  sentiment  with  regard  to  the  West 
African  colonies.  The  evidence  which  was  given  before 
it  forms  a  bulky  volume,  and,  in  reading  through  its 
pages,  there  is  no  escape  from  the  conclusion  that  the 
result  of  three  hundred  years  of  occupation  and  of  trade 
with  the  West  Coast  was  to  leave  us  with  no  interest 
there  which  could  appeal  to  the  British  public  as  justi- 
fying the  expenditure  of  British  money,  and  the  employ- 
ment of  British  officials  to  defend.  Upwards  of  two 
centuries  had  been  spent  in  developing  the  West  African 
slave  trade,  the  better  part  of  one  century  had  been 
spent  in  suppressing  it,  and  when,  in  1865,  it  became 
possible  to  report  that  the  over-sea  slave  trade  was 
practically  abolished,  the  only  proposal  that  appeared 
to  be  warranted  by  the  existing  condition  of  affairs  in 
West  Africa  was  that,  with  the  exception  of  a  coaling 
station  to  be  retained  at  Sierra  Leone,  Great  Britain 
should  abandon  a  position  of  which  the  advantages 
seemed  to  be  purely  nominal  upon  the  coast.  The 
principal  evidence  which  was  given  before  the  Com- 
mittee went  to  show  that  British  settlement  had  no 
extension,  that  British  administration  claimed  no  authority, 
and  that  British  trade  had  no  interests  which  the  increase 
of  political  influence  could  assist.  The  private  trade 
which  remained  outside  the  slave  trade  was  small,  and 
was  reported  in  two  out  of  the  four  settlements  to  be 
rapidly  declining. 

But  though  this  is  the  position  which  is  emphatically 

348 


ENGLAND   AND    FRANCE  349 

presented  by  the  findings  of  the  Committee  of  1865,  there 
is  to  be  traced,  even  in  the  evidence  which  was  taken 
before  the  Committee,  a  faint  indication  of  the  coming 
change  which  was  soon  to  reverse  the  direction  of  public 
opinion.  In  the  examination  of  an  important  witness, 
Colonel  Ord,  the  Special  Commissioner  employed  by  the 
Government  to  visit  the  four  settlements  and  to  prepare 
a  report  from  information  collected  on  the  spot,  a  question 
was  put  as  to  the  probable  reasons  for  the  maintenance 
by  France  of  the  large  military  garrisons  which  he 
reported  as  existing  at  Senegal  and  Goree.  In  reply, 
Colonel  Ord  said  that  the  only  surmise  which  he  had 
heard  expressed  upon  the  subject  was  that  "they"  (the 
French)  "desire  eventually  to  connect  their  Algerian  and 
their  African  possessions,  and  to  become  possessors  of 
the  whole  of  the  north  of  Africa." 

Thus,  in  1865,  outside  the  circles  of  philanthropy  and 
philosophic  Radicalism  which  still  retained  a  predominat- 
ing influence  over  British  colonial  policy,  the  first  notes 
had  been  already  sounded  of  that  international  conflict  of 
diplomacy  which  was  soon  to  be  known  under  the  name 
of  the  "  Scramble  for  Africa." 

The  Franco-German  war  of  1870  intervened,  and  de- 
layed for  a  few  years  the  development  of  ideas  which  were 
already  germinating  in  1865,  but,  the  war  once  over,  its 
effect  was,  perhaps,  rather  to  stimulate  than  to  crush  the 
ambitions  of  France  and  Germany  to  sustain  their  position 
as  colonial  powers.  Among  non-political  influences  which 
also  tended  to  give  an  impetus  to  continental  exploration, 
no  single  element  was  perhaps  more  potent  than  the 
application  of  steam  to  land  and  river  transport.  The 
development  of  railways,  which  took  place  during  the 
middle  of  the  century,  had  for  the  first  time  in  history 
rendered  possible  the  commercial  exploitation  of  the 
centres  of  great  continents.  The  discoveries  of  gold 
which  had  been  made  in  America  and  Australia,  and  of 
diamonds  and  gold  at  a  somewhat  later  period  in  South 
Africa,   revolutionised  trading  operations  and  raised   ex- 


350  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

pectancy  to  the  highest  point.  Capital  became  available  for 
every  enterprise,  and  in  the  last  quarter  of  the  nineteenth 
century  colonial  apathy  on  the  part  of  the  western  nations 
gave  place  to  a  keen  competition  for  the  acquisition  of 
fields  of  commercial  operation — which  were  known  by  the 
political  name  of  "spheres  of  influence" — in  hitherto  un- 
developed portions  of  the  world. 

Africa  became  the  scene  of  an  international  race  for 
territory  and  power.  In  the  heart  of  the  continent  the 
Congo  Free  State  was  brought  into  existence  by  mutual 
agreement  of  the  European  Powers  in  1885,  and  was 
placed,  with  what  were  held  to  be  due  guarantees  for  free- 
dom of  trade,  under  the  direction  of  the  King  of  the 
Belgians.  The  position  of  England  was  unchallenged  in 
the  south.  Portugal  retained,  and  Germany  made  good 
claims  upon  the  east  and  west  coasts.  England  too  secured 
from  the  east  coast  a  position,  which  at  a  later  period  was 
extended  to  the  interior,  and  gave  her  the  command  of  the 
great  waterways  and  the  Valley  of  the  Nile.  France  held 
an  undisputed  position  of  predominant  influence  in  the 
north,  as  well  as  important  centres  of  trade  and  of  military 
influence  on  the  west  coast. 

That  under  these  circumstances  the  directors  of  French 
colonial  policy  should  have  cherished  the  ambition  ascribed 
to  them  of  joining  their  possessions  on  the  coast  of  the 
Mediterranean  to  their  possessions  in  the  west,  and  thus 
becoming  the  possessors  of  the  whole  of  North-West 
Africa,  was  in  no  sense  to  be  wondered  at.  The  intro- 
duction of  railways  had  abolished  distance,  and  there  was 
no  apparent  obstacle  to  obstruct  the  spread  of  French 
influence  from  the  Mediterranean  seaboard  to  the  equator. 
A'map  showing  the  limits  of  the  West  African  colonies  of 
Great  Britain,  which  was  prepared  and  submitted  to  the 
Committee  of  1865,  gave  practically  no  dimensions  to  the 
British  settlements.  They  are  indicated  simply  as  pink 
lines  upon  the  sea  coast,  with  here  and  there  a  dot,  of  which 
it  appeared  in  evidence  that  one  mile  might  be  taken  as 
the  greatest  extent  inland.     Only  on  the  Gold  Coast  there 


ENGLAND   AND    FRANCE  351 

was  an  indication  of  protected  territory  lying  inland  from 
the  pink  line,  and  there  had  been  a  public  declaration  of 
the  intention  to  withdraw  from  that  territory.  In  the 
interior  there  was  therefore  no  bar  whatever  to  the  con- 
tinuous extension  of  French  influence. 

When,  after  the  conclusion  of  the  Franco-German  war, 
French  policy  began  to  declare  itself  in  West  Africa,  the 
movement,  co-ordinated  with  traditional  intelligence,  and 
supported  by  brilliant  personal  initiative  on  the  part  of 
individuals  entrusted  with  its  execution,  would  appear  to 
have  included  a  design  of  steady  extension  from  the  north 
towards  the  south,  accompanied  by  supplementary  expedi- 
tions of  penetration  to  be  directed  inland  from  all  portions 
of  the  western  coast  which  were  not  held  by  any  other 
foreign  power. 

The  English  settlements  of  the  Gambia,  Sierra  Leone, 
the  Gold  Coast,  and  Lagos,  covered  certain  strips  upon 
the  seaboard.  Between  these  were  found  points  of  pene- 
tration in  some  instances  for  official  military  expeditions, 
in  others  for  expeditions  of  trade  and  exploration.  To  the 
south-east  of  the  English  colonies,  and  lying  between  them 
and  the  French  colony  of  the  Gaboon,  there  was  situated 
the  very  important  highway  which  British  exploration  of 
the  early  part  of  the  century  had  shown  to  exist  in  the 
course  of  the  Lower  Niger.  It  will  be  remembered  that 
Mungo  Park  lost  his  life  at  Boussa  in  the  attempt  to  follow 
the  course  of  the  river  from  the  interior  in  the  year  1805, 
and  that  Clapperton's  servant,  Richard  Landor,  finally 
established  the  connection  of  the  Niger  with  the  Atlantic 
in  1832.  From  that  date  onward  a  certain  amount  of 
British  trade  had  existed  upon  the  river,  and  notwithstand- 
ing disastrous  experiences  of  climate,  the  courses  of  the 
Lower  Niger  and  the  Benue  had  been  explored,  and  a 
small  trade  settlement  maintained  at  the  native  town  of 
Lokoja  at  the  confluence  of  the  two  rivers. 

The  Niger,  of  which  the  many  mouths  flowed  to  the 
sea  through  a  politically  unprotected  coast,  and  of  which 
the  upper  courses  in  the  back  country  of  Sierra  Leone 


352  A   TROPICAL   DEPENDENCY 

were  already  the  object  of  French  exploration,  was  natu- 
rally selected  as  one  of  the  lines  to  which  the  French 
policy  of  penetration  was  to  be  applied.  In  this  instance 
the  policy  took  a  commercial  form.  A  French  company 
was  started  upon  the  lower  river,  and  the  commercial 
attack  was  met  quite  simply  by  British  commercial  oppo- 
sition. English  traders  had  no  friendly  feelings  towards 
foreign  competition,  and  in  mere  self-defence  were  well 
inclined  to  oppose  French  intrusion,  but  in  the  earlier 
years  of  the  movement  there  was  a  lack  of  leadership, 
and  no  very  definite  intention  animated  the  action  which 
was  taken. 

As  the  struggle  for  Africa  waxed  hotter,  and  all 
parties  to  it  became  more  clearly  aware  of  the  objects 
at  which  they  were  aiming,  the  value  of  the  Niger  as 
a  commercial  highway,  and  of  the  territories  included 
in  the  watershed  of  the  Niger  and  the  Benu6,  became 
more  apparent.  There  was  still  no  opposition  to  French 
activity  in  Western  Africa,  except  that  which  was  privately 
sustained  by  British  trade,  but  the  opposition  took  a  more 
active  form.  The  British  companies  trading  on  the  river 
began  to  feel  that  it  was  becoming  a  matter  of  life  and 
death  to  them  to  overcome  the  foreign  competition,  which 
threatened  them  with  extinction,  and  under  the  pressure 
of  their  struggle  for  self-preservation  they  found  a  leader 
and  evolved  a  policy  which  had  for  its  result  to  revolu- 
tionise the  entire  position  of  Great  Britain  in  West  Africa. 

In  1879,  under  the  inspiration  of  a  young  engineer 
officer,  Mr.  Taubman  Goldie,  whose  tastes  for  travel  had 
led  him  to  acquire  some  personal  knowledge  of  the  interior 
of  the  Soudan,  and  whose  interests,  owing  to  family  cir- 
cumstances, had  become  involved  in  West  African  enter- 
prise, the  British  companies  trading  upon  the  Niger  were 
induced  to  amalgamate,  and  took  the  name  of  the  National 
African  Company.  The  effect  of  amalgamation  was  to 
abolish  personal  rivalries  between  them,  and  to  enable 
them  to  present  a  united  front  to  the  advances  of  French 
enterprise  upon   the  river.     In  the   sharp  round  of  com- 


ENGLAND   AND    FRANCE  353 

mercial  war  which  ensued,  Mr.  Goldie,  afterwards  Sir 
George,  became  the  acknowledged  leader  on  the  British 
side  of  a  movement  which,  under  his  guidance,  rapidly 
assumed  an  overtly  political  character. 

It  was  essential  to  the  existence  of  British  trade  that 
French  competition  should  be  driven  from  the  native 
markets  on  the  banks  of  the  river ;  but  the  immediate 
French  reply  to  the  amalgamation  of  the  British  com- 
panies was  the  formation  on  the  river  of  another  and 
more  powerful  French  company,  which  was  known  to 
have  the  support  and  encouragement  of  the  French 
Foreign  Office.  For  two  or  three  years  the  National 
African  Company  sustained  the  brunt  of  an  international 
duel,  of  which  the  end  was  clearly  seen  to  be  the  with- 
drawal of  one  or  other  of  the  combatants  from  the  scene. 
The  French  company  yielded.  They  were  finally  bought 
out  by  the  National  African  Company  in  1884,  and  the 
British  representative  at  the  conference  opened  in  Berlin 
in  that  year  was  able  to  announce  that  no  other  Power 
but  Great  Britain  owned  any  trading  establishments  on 
the  Lower  Niger.  The  result  was  that  the  conference 
adjudged  to  Great  Britain  the  duty  of  watching  over  the 
application  of  regulations  laid  down  for  the  navigation 
of  the  Niger,  and  in  the  same  year  Great  Britain  notified 
to  the  Powers  her  assumption  of  a  Protectorate,  under  the 
name  of  the  Oil  Rivers,  over  that  portion  of  the  African 
coast  which  lay  between  the  British  colony  of  Lagos  and 
the  territory  now  known  as  the  German  Cameroons. 

The  first  round  was  won,  but  the  conflict,  which  had 
hitherto  been  waged  upon  the  coast,  was  now  carried 
into  the  interior.  Throughout  the  period  of  its  existence 
the  National  African  Company  had  found  it  necessary 
to  secure  its  commercial  position  by  the  negotiation  of 
treaties  with  native  chiefs.  Upon  the  lower  river,  where 
the  political  organisation  of  the  natives  was  of  a  primi- 
tive character,  the  number  of  petty  independent  chiefs 
was  very  great,  and  the  treaties  negotiated  by  the  Com- 
pany were   counted    by  hundreds.       It    was    known    that 

z 


354  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

in    the    interior    chiefs    of  more    importance    commanded 
the  submission  of  wide  areas  of  territory,  and  the  value 
of    obtaining    treaties    of    amity    and    trade    with    these 
potentates  was  obvious.       But   if  obvious    to   the   British 
company,    it    was    of   course    equally    obvious    to    French 
and    German    competitors;    and    from    1884    onward    the 
influence    of   Germany,    which    in    that   year   established 
itself  in  the  Cameroon  territory,  to  the  east  of  the  British 
Protectorate,   became   no   less  active  in  the  back  country 
than  that  of  France.      The  position  of  the  British   com- 
pany,  in   presence  of  this   double  rivalry,  is  described  in 
a  speech  made   by  the   Governor  at  a  much   later   date. 
"We  knew,"  he  said,   "that  the   Haussa  States  were  by 
far  the   most  valuable   region  of  equatorial  Africa.      We 
were  aware  that  Germany  was   organising  an  expedition 
to  deprive  us  of  them,  and  we  knew  that  the  acquisition 
by  any  other  European  Power  of  political  influence  over 
this  empire  would  before  long  entail  our  complete  retire- 
ment from   our   position   on    the    Middle    Niger   and    the 
river  Benue  to  the  district  south  of  Lokoja,  and  probably 
even   to   Asaba,   only    150  miles   from   the   sea."     It   was 
constantly  pointed  out  by  the  Governor  of  the  Company, 
in   his   speeches   to   his   shareholders,  that  the   prosperity 
and    success    of   trading   operations    upon    the    coast    de- 
pended on  the  maintenance  of  British  influence,  with  its 
accompaniments    of  peace    and    security,    in   the    interior. 
Animated  by  this  view  of  their  own  higher  interest,  the 
Company  adopted  and   maintained,    in   the   first  instance 
at  their  private  cost,    the  policy  of  sending  missions  into 
the    interior   to    negotiate   treaties    with    distant    Moham- 
medan  states.       But    it    had    early    become    evident    that 
British  interests  could  not  be  maintained  unless  the  com- 
mercial position  of  the  British  company  were  strengthened 
by    some    sort    of  political    sanction.       So    long   as    their 
treaties    were    made    only    by    a    private    company,    they 
were  of  the  nature  of  private  and  individual  agreements, 
which   carried   no   weight   as   against  the    official    treaties 
of  foreign  Powers. 


ENGLAND    AND    FRANCE  355 

In  1886  the  political  sanction,  of  which  the  need  had 
made  itself  more  urgently  felt  with  every  extension  of 
competing-  foreign  influence  towards  the  interior,  was 
accorded  by  the  grant  of  a  Royal  Charter,  By  the  charter 
the  Company  acquired,  under  the  new  name  of  the  Royal 
Niger  Company,  the  international  position  of  a  recognised 
government,  whose  treaties  with  native  chiefs  were  pro- 
tected by  Great  Britain,  and  from  this  date  the  flag 
of  the  Company  became  for  international  purposes  the 
equivalent  of  the  British  flag.  Where  it  flew,  the  authority 
of  Great  Britain  was  held  to  be  established,  and  where 
the  company  negotiated  a  treaty  of  protection  with  a 
native  power,  such  treaties  were  held  to  exclude  any 
political  treaties  from  being  made  in  the  territories  of 
the  same  potentate  by  other  European  nations.  The 
charter  also  conferred  upon  the  Company  the  power  to 
levy  taxes  to  a  limited  extent  for  the  purpose  of  meet- 
ing the  expenses  entailed  upon  it  by  its  political  expendi- 
ture. Chief  among  the  items  of  this  expenditure  was  the 
raising  of  a  small  native  military  force. 


CHAPTER   XXXVIII 
THE   ROYAL  NIGER   COMPANY 

Thus  from  1886  the  Royal  Niger  Company  took  the 
position,  familiar  in  the  annals  of  British  history,  of  a 
commercial  body  endowed  with  political  powers,  extend- 
ing over  a  territory  of  which  the  limits  were  undefined, 
and  in  which  the  character,  the  numbers,  and  the  history 
of  the  native  populations  were  unknown.  England,  in 
general,  knew  as  little  of  Nigeria  and  its  possibilities  at 
the  end  of  the  nineteenth  century  as  it  knew  of  India 
in  the  sixteenth  century.  The  territories  over  which 
these  powers  were  granted  were  at  first  known  by  the 
name  of  the  "Territories  of  the  Royal  Niger  Company." 
A  little  later  this  title  was  changed  for  the  more  con- 
venient name  of  Nigeria. 

Sir  George  Goldie,  acting  first  as  Vice-President  and 
afterwards  as  President  of  the  Chartered  Company,  con- 
tinued to  direct  a  policy,  in  which  the  legitimate  and 
commercial  interests  of  the  Company  in  the  lower  reaches 
of  the  river  were  safeguarded  and  developed  by  a  system 
of  political  missions,  extending  inland  for  500  miles,  to 
the  Emirates  of  Sokoto  and  Gando  in  the  north,  to 
Yola  and  Adamawa  in  the  east,  and  finally  to  Borgu, 
lying  in  the  back  country  of  Lagos,  in  the  west.  As  a 
result  of  these  political  missions,  treaties  were  negotiated, 
and  in  many  instances  subsidies  were  given  to  native 
chiefs.  The  disturbed  condition  of  the  territories  and 
the  hostile  attitude  of  native  chiefs,  combined  with 
the  difficulties  of  penetrating  to  the  interior,  through 
unknown  tropical  country,  laid  waste  in  many  districts  by 

centuries  of  slave-raiding  and   inter-tribal    war,   rendered 

356 


THE    ROYAL    NIGER   COMPANY         357 

these  missions  in  most  cases  expeditions  of  no  little 
danger,  which  had  to  be  conducted  at  the  personal  risk 
of  the  leaders  whose  services  were  secured  to  command 
them. 

It  was  in  1884  that  Mr.  Joseph  Thomson  was  com- 
missioned to  negotiate  the  first  treaty  of  the  Company 
with  Sokoto.  In  1894  my  husband,  then  Captain  Lugard, 
made  his  first  experience  of  West  Africa  by  conducting 
an  expedition  into  Borgu,  and  negotiated  the  last  treaties 
of  the  Company  upon  that  frontier. 

In  the  ten  years  which  elapsed  between  these  two 
expeditions,  the  action  of  the  Company  in  the  interior 
led  to  the  further  declaration  of  a  British  Protectorate 
over  territories  lying  on  the  Middle  Niger,  and  to  the 
definition  by  successive  international  agreements  of  British 
frontiers  round  a  territory  covering  an  area  of  about 
500,000  square  miles,  of  which  a  considerable  part  was 
situated  in  some  of  the  richest,  most  healthy,  and  most 
thickly  populated  regions  of  Western  Africa. 

The  most  important  of  these  agreements  were  those 
with  Germany  of  1886  and  1893,  ^^^  ^^^^  '^^  1890  with 
France,  to  be  followed  a  few  years  later  by  the  agreement 
of  1898. 

By  the  German  agreements  the  eastern  frontier  of  the 
territory  was  defined  from  the  coast  to  the  borders  of 
Lake  Chad.  By  the  first  of  the  French  agreements  the 
northern  frontier,  separating  British  territory  from  the 
southern  extension  of  the  French  hinterland  of  Algeria,  was 
fixed  at  a  line  of  some  800  miles  in  length,  to  be  drawn, 
with  the  necessary  deviations  for  local  political  boundaries, 
near  to  the  fourteenth  parallel  of  latitude,  and  continued 
from  a  point  upon  the  western  shore  of  Chad  to  another 
selected  point  upon  the  Niger.  The  points  chosen  were 
Barrua  upon  Lake  Chad,  and  Say  upon  the  Niger,  but 
these  were  altered  by  subsequent  modifications.  This 
line,  when  the  details  of  its  delimitation  are  finally  fixed, 
will  form  the  northern  frontier  of  Nigeria.  It  runs  now 
from   Ilo  on  the   Niger,  and  making  a  curve  northward 


358  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

to  include  the  territories  of  Sokoto,  is  deflected  to  the 
western  shore  of  Chad,  With  the  frontiers  fixed  by 
the  Anglo-German  agreement  of  1893  it  determined  in 
principle  the  boundaries  of  British  territories  to  the 
north  and  east.  In  addition  to  the  ao-reements  refer- 
ring  to  these  frontiers,  there  were  some  other  minor 
agreements  with  France  and  Germany,  by  which  various 
details  relating  chiefly  to  the  inland  development  of 
other  West  Coast  colonies  were  determined. 

The  five  years  from  1893  to  1898  were  marked  by  a 
tension  on  both  sides  of  the  then  undetermined  frontier 
on  the  west,  which  threatened  at  times  to  break  out 
into  open  hostility.  National  interests,  as  well  as  per- 
sonal honour,  were  held  by  local  representatives  to  be 
involved  in  the  maintenance  of  a  forward  movement 
which  was,  perhaps,  to  be  excused  if  it  sometimes  dis- 
regarded lines  of  latitude  and  longitude  too  pedantically 
laid  down  by  the  distant  Foreign  Offices  of  London, 
Paris,  and  Berlin.  In  1893  France  formally  assumed 
the  Protectorate  of  Dahomey,  a  native  kingdom  bor- 
dering upon  the  English  colony  of  Lagos  upon  the 
coast,  and  carried  her  inland  frontier  to  the  parallel  of 
9°  N.  latitude.  Numerous  French  expeditions  were  then 
pushed  into  the  territory  extending  towards  the  Niger, 
directly  south  of  the  point  which  had  been  chosen  at 
Say  for  the  terminus  of  the  northern  frontier  line  of 
British  Nigeria. 

The  contention  of  the  Royal  Niger  Company  was 
that  the  effect  of  the  Anglo-French  agreement  of  1890, 
which  drew  the  Say-Barrua  line,  was  to  give  to  France 
everything  which  lay  north  of  that  line,  and  to  give  to 
Great  Britain  everything  which  lay  south  of  it,  with  the 
exception  of  the  French  territory  of  Dahomey,  for  which 
special  arrangement  had  been  made.  Under  this  con- 
tention the  meridian  of  Say  became  automatically  the 
western  frontier  of  British  Nigeria,  and  gave  the  native 
kingdom  of  Borgu  and  part  of  Gurma,  lying  on  the 
western   bank   of  the  river  Niger,   to   Great   Britain.      It 


THE    ROYAL    NIGER   COMPANY         359 

was  of  great  importance  to  British  trade  that  both  banks 
of  the  river  should  be  British,  and  the  Niger  Company 
had  not  neglected  to  affirm  the  position  assigned  to  it 
under  the  agreement  by  negotiating  treaties  of  commerce 
and  protection  with  the  trans-riverine  potentates.  French 
diplomacy  denied  the  British  contention,  and  French 
officers  on  the  spot,  gallantly  acting  upon,  or  exceeding, 
their  instructions,  endeavoured  to  create  an  aro-ument  of 
the  fait  accompli  by  the  negotiation  of  treaties  with  native 
chiefs,  whose  powers  they  asserted  to  be  greater  than 
those  of  the  chiefs  with  whom  the  British  treaties  had 
been  signed. 

The  Borgu  chief,  with  whom  the  Niger  Company 
negotiated  the  principal  treaty  on  the  western  side  of 
the  river,  had  his  headquarters  at  Boussa.  French 
authorities  asserted  that  he  was  the  vassal  of  another 
and  more  important  chief,  who  had  his  residence  at 
Nikki,  a  town  lying  in  the  back  country  of  Dahomey, 
farther  west.  By  the  middle  of  1894  it  came  to  be 
generally  understood  that  the  possession  of  the  provinces 
lying  on  the  western  bank  of  the  river  was  to  be  deter- 
mined by  the  negotiation  of  a  treaty  with  Nikki.  On 
the  24th  of  July  a  strong  French  expedition  under 
Captain  Decoeur  suddenly  left  France  for  Dahomey. 
Dahomey  was  favourably  situated  for  penetrating  into 
the  territory  in  dispute.  M.  Ballot,  the  Governor,  had 
already  pushed  a  friendly  reconnaissance  to  the  borders 
of  Borgu,  only  fiifty  miles  from  Nikki.  The  Niger 
Company  could '  not  mistake  the  intention  of  Captain 
Decoeur's  mission.  Four  days  later,  on  July  28,  Captain 
Lugard,  fresh  from  a  long  struggle  to  assert  British 
supremacy  in  East  Africa,  left  London,  having  accepted 
a  mission  on  behalf  of  the  Company  to  reach  Nikki, 
if  possible,  before  Captain  Decoeur,  and  to  negotiate  a 
treaty. 

Throughout  the  progress  of  these  discussions,  Ger- 
many, who  held  the  territory  of  Togoland,  adjoining 
the  French  colony  of  Dahomey  upon  the  coast,  had  not 


360  A   TROPICAL   DEPENDENCY 

been  indifferent  to  the  extension  of  its  own  back  country, 
and  the  condition  of  affairs  in  Borgu  was  described  at 
the  time  in  the  French  press  as  a  "veritable  steeple- 
chase, to  which  France,  England,  and  Germany  are 
devoting  themselves,  in  order  to  gain  that  part  of  the 
'Bend  of  the  Niger'  which  impinges  on  the  lower  river." 
In  this  steeplechase  the,  till  then,  unknown  town  of  Nikki 
had  become  the  winning-post.  The  odds  were  against 
Captain  Lugard.  He  had  started  later  than  Captain 
Decoeur.  He  had  to  go  round  through  the  Niger 
Company's  territories,  which  involved  ascending  the  river 
to  Jebba,  situated  in  latitude  9.10°,  and  marching  thence 
some  200  miles  westwards  throuofh  the  unsettled  terri- 
tory  of  Borgu,  whence  it  was  the  boast  of  the  natives 
that  no  white  man  had  ever  come  out  alive.  It  was 
essential  also  that  the  expedition  should  be  proceeded 
with  at  once  in  the  season  of  the  rains,  when  every 
natural  difficulty  was  increased.  This  is  not  the  place 
in  which  to  recount  the  adventures  of  the  expedition. 
African  experience  served  its  leader  in  good  stead.  He 
reached  Nikki  with  his  little  escort  of  forty  men,  and 
successfully  negotiated  the  required  treaty,  w^hich  was 
signed  on  November  loth.  Five  days  later,  Captain 
Decoeur  arrived  with  a  force  of  500  Senegalese,  only 
to  hear  that  Captain  Lugard  had  already  left  the  town, 
taking  with  him  the  British  treaty  duly  signed.  Other 
treaties,  securing  the  northern  territory  behind  Lagos, 
had  been  negotiated  for  Great  Britain  on  the  way  to 
Nikki,  and  passing  southwards,  the  British  expedition 
on  the  return  journey  concluded  treaties  with  the  frontier 
chiefs  of  Northern  Yoruba.  The  British  position  was  thus 
secured  upon  the  western  bank  of  the  Middle  Niger. 

Captain  Decoeur  loyally  acknowledged  his  defeat.  It 
was  not  accepted  in  the  same  spirit  by  other  represen- 
tatives of  French  interests,  and  during  the  two  following 
years  there  was  a  further  development  of  semi-responsible 
expeditionary  activity,  of  which  the  manifest  dangers 
could  not  be  ignored. 


THE    ROYAL   NIGER   COMPANY         361 

The  hazardous  nature  of  the  position  thus  created 
led,  in  the  year  1897,  to  a  decision  on  the  part  of 
the  British  Government  to  raise  a  local  military  force, 
of  which  the  primary  duty  should  be  the  defence,  under 
proper  control,  of  the  inland  frontiers  of  the  British 
settlements.  It  was  decided  to  raise  this  regiment,  which 
was  to  be  known  as  the  West  African  Frontier  F"orce, 
from  native  Haussa  material,  to  be  officered  by  picked 
white  officers  selected  from  the  regular  army  for  the 
purpose.  In  addition  to  the  duty  of  defending  the 
frontier,  the  force  was  to  be  available  for  all  local 
military  service  in  West  Africa, 

The  duty  of  raising  and  organising  this  frontier  force 
was  entrusted  to  Captain,  or,  as  he  shortly  became, 
Lieut.-Colonel  Lugard,  who  was  recalled  from  private 
work  in  South  Africa  for  the  purpose.  Among  the 
officers  selected  by  Colonel  Lugard  to  help  him  in  the 
work,  was  Major,  now  Sir  James  Willcocks,  by  whom, 
as  well  as  by  other  members  of  the  first  English  staff, 
he  was  most  loyally  assisted. 

It  was  thought  desirable,  chiefly  for  military  reasons, 
to  fix  the  headquarters  of  the  force  at  Jebba,  a  point 
upon  the  Niger  nearly  500  miles  inland.  The  regiment, 
of  which  the  formation  was  successfully  accomplished, 
under  conditions  not  likely  to  be  forgotten  by  any  of 
the  officers  who  were  engaged  in  it,  has  since  then 
done  conspicuous  honour  to  its  founders  in  the  Ashantee 
War  of  1900,  as  well  as  in  many  local  campaigns.  Its 
strength,  first  fixed  at  two  battalions  of  infantry,  each  1 200 
strong,  and  three  batteries  of  artillery,  has  since  been 
increased  by  the  addition  of  a  battalion  of  mounted 
infantry  700  strong. 

The  strained  situation  was  fortunately  not  prolonged. 
In  June  of  the  following  year  the  Anglo-French  agree- 
ment of  1898,  perhaps  the  most  important  of  all  the 
international  agreements  by  which  the  position  taken 
for  Great  Britain  by  the  Niger  Company  was  affirmed, 
happily  brought  to  an  end  the  ambiguities  of  the  political 


362  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

situation.  By  this  agreement,  which  gave  to  France  the 
back  country  of  the  colony  of  Dahomey,  and  accepted 
a  point  near  Ilo  instead  of  Say  as  the  point  of  separa- 
tion between  French  and  EngHsh  spheres  upon  the 
Middle  Niger,  the  western  frontier  of  Nigeria  was  fixed 
at  its  present  limits.  These  include,  on  the  western 
bank  of  the  Niger,  the  eastern  half  of  Borgu,  and  carry 
the  British  frontier  from  the  junction  between  Lagos 
and  Dahomey  to  join  the  northern  line  at  its  terminus 
upon  the  Middle  Niger. 

The  formation  of  a  new  military  force  at  public 
expense,  designed  chiefly  for  local  service  in  the  interior, 
was  not  only  an  indication  of  the  very  remarkable 
change  in  public  opinion,  which,  contemporaneously  with 
the  movements  in  Nigeria,  operated  to  bring  about  a 
gradual  enlargement  and  expansion  towards  the  interior 
of  the  territories  of  the  other  West  Coast  colonies  ;  it 
also  indicated  approaching  change  in  the  government 
of  the  territories  of  the  Niger  Company. 

During  the  whole  of  the  period  which  elapsed 
between  the  grant  of  the  charter  of  the  Royal  Niger 
Company  and  the  formation  of  the  West  African 
Frontier  Force,  the  Company  had  carried  on  the  fight 
for  British  extension  in  the  interior  on  the  gallant  but 
unequal  terms  of  a  private  corporation  contending  with 
two  foreign  Governments.  In  the  events  which  pre- 
ceded the  agreement  of  1898,  when  officially  organised 
French  expeditions  were  directed  against  the  territories 
secured  by  treaty  to  the  Company,  and  a  French  gun- 
boat did  not  scruple,  in  the  excitement  of  local  rivalry, 
to  enter  the  waters  of  the  river  which  were  open  by 
international  agreement  to  merchant  vessels  alone,  it 
became  evident  that  a  stage  had  been  reached  in  which 
the  adventurous  energy  of  a  trading  company,  however 
well  directed,  could  no  longer  suffice  for  the  efficient 
protection  and  necessary  development  of  the  territories 
which  had  been  brought  under   British  rule. 

Obviously  it  was  undesirable  that  territories,  of  which 


THE    ROYAL   NIGER   COMPANY         363 

the  defence  was  provided  at  public  expense,  should  be 
administered  at  private  discretion.  The  Company  had 
not,  of  course,  attained  the  accomplishment  of  its  ambi- 
tions without  exciting  many  jealousies,  and  giving  rise 
to  widespread  criticism  at  home  and  abroad.  By  foreign 
Powers  its  too  successful  methods  were  made  the  object 
of  vituperative  campaigns  in  the  press,  and  of  more  dis- 
creet but  not  less  urgent  diplomatic  remonstrance  in  the 
Cabinet.  At  home  complaints  were  frequent  that  the 
concentration  of  administrative  and  commercial  powers  in 
the  same  hands  gave  advantages  to  the  Niger  Company 
over  its  commercial  rivals  which  amounted  to  a  virtual 
monopoly  of  trade  which  was  nominally  free.  An  internal 
campaign  against  the  Mohammedan  chiefs  of  Nupe  and 
Ilorin,  which  was  forced  upon  the  Company  in  the 
opening  months  of  1897,  successfully  executed  as  it 
was,  had  also  served  to  give  some  indication  in  respon- 
sible quarters  of  the  probable  development  of  adminis- 
trative difficulties  on  an  increasing  scale,  as  soon  as 
any  serious  attempt  should  be  made  to  establish  white 
authority,  for  practical  purposes,  over  vast  territories 
where  the  thorny  questions  which  mark  the  difference 
between  civilised  and  semi-civilised  administration  were 
as  yet  untouched. 

For  these  and  other  reasons  it  was  recognised  that 
the  pioneer  work  of  acquisition  had  been  accomplished, 
and  that  the  time  had  come,  more  swiftly  than  in  the 
case  of  other  great  British  companies,  on  whose  prece- 
dent the  Niger  Company  had  been  founded,  to  abolish 
a  charter  which  had  served  its  purpose,  and  to  incor- 
porate the  territories  acquired  by  the  Company  with  the 
other  colonies  and  dependencies  of  the  Empire.  The 
charter  of  the  Company  was  surrendered  to  the  Crown. 
Its  territories  were  divided :  the  lower  reaches  of  the 
river  south  of  Ida  being  included,  under  the  name  of 
Southern  Nigeria,  with  the  Protectorate  of  the  Oil  Rivers, 
extending  from  the  colony  of  Lagos  to  the  German 
frontier ;    while    the   interior    cut    off   from    the   sea   was 


364  A   TROPICAL    DEPEXDENXY 

erected,  under  the  name  of  Northern  Nigeria,  into  a 
separate  Protectorate.  The  transfer  of  authority  from 
the  Company  to  the  Imperial  Government  took  place 
on  Januar}'  ist,  1900.  on  which  day  Colonel  Lugard 
assumed  office  as  the  first  High  Commissioner  of 
Northern  Nigeria. 

In  summing  up  the  service  rendered  to  the  Empire 
by  the  Company,  it  will  hardly  be  disputed  that  by  the 
ability,  the  foresight,  and  the  activity  of  a  single  man, 
who  in  the  first  instance  united,  and  subsequently  for 
twenty  years  directed  with  laborious  care,  the  principal 
British  interests  upon  the  Niger,  a  territory-  was  added 
to  the  British  Empire,  and  a  field  secured  for  all  time 
to  British  trade,  which,  without  his  personal  exertions, 
would  assuredly  have  passed  into  the  possession  of 
France  and  Germany.  In  the  execution  of  his  work 
Sir  George  Goldie  was  very  loyally  supported  by  the 
shareholders  of  the  Royal  Niger  Company ;  but  it  was 
by  his  personal  qualities  that  he  won  and  retained  the 
confidence  of  those  whose  interests  he  took  into  his 
charge,  and  it  was  by  his  personal  perception  of  the 
opportunities  inherent  to  the  situation  that  he  was  able 
to  use  the  force  acquired  by  that  confidence  for  great 
purposes  of  public  utility. 

The  commercial  success  of  the  Company  is  some- 
times quoted  in  disparagement  of  the  merit  of  its  public 
service ;  but  that  its  Governor  was  able,  without  injustice 
to  private  interests,  to  carry  out  the  important  scheme 
of  policy  in  which  they  were  involved,  gave,  in  fact,  a 
substantial  value  to  his  work,  which  no  mere  reckless- 
ness of  political  annexation,  however  generous,  would 
have  possessed.  When  the  relative  positions  of  France 
and  England  were  finally  adjusted  in  189S,  British  in- 
terests had  been  created  in  the  interior,  which  it  was 
impossible  for  either  government  to  ignore.  The 
enlightened  view  that  the  prosperity  of  coast  trade 
depended  on  the  extension  of  civilised  relations  to  the 
interior,   which    led    to    the    expansion    of  the    sphere   of 


THE    ROYAL   NIGER   COMPANY         365 

operations  of  the  Niger  Company,  has  been  illustrated, 
not  only  by  the  commercial  success  of  that  Company, 
but  by  the  remarkable  development  in  the  prosperity 
of  all  the  coast  colonies  which  has  followed  upon  the 
extension  of  their  protected  areas  towards  the  interior, 
and  the  greater  security  which  the  establishment  of 
British  administration  has  carried  with  it. 

In  acting  as  the  pioneer  of  this  policy  for  Great 
Britain,  Sir  George  Goldie  was  in  part  the  originator, 
in  part  the  interpreter,  of  the  great  change  which  had 
come  over  modern  sentiment.  He  was  not  alone  in 
desiring  to  reverse  the  policy  of  abandonment  dictated 
by  a  sentiment  of  distaste  and  discouragement,  which 
amounted  almost  to  public  remorse.  Other  nations,  as 
we  have  seen,  were  quicker  than  Great  Britain  to  per- 
ceive that  the  true  solution  of  the  problem  of  European 
relations  with  uncivilised  Africa  lay  in  accepting,  not 
in  abandoning,  the  responsibilities  of  civilised  adminis- 
tration. Many  influences  were  at  work  to  foster  and 
to  direct  the  forward  movement,  which,  not  in  West 
Africa  alone,  but  on  every  frontier  of  the  Empire,  took 
the  place,  during  the  last  quarter  of  the  nineteenth 
century,  of  the  concentrating  and  restrictive  tendencies 
of  an  earlier  period.  What  Sir  George  Goldie  did 
was  that  which  has  been  done  by  all  original  and 
successful  workers.  He  gave  personality  to  a  great 
idea,  and  by  the  exercise  of  qualities  which  belonged 
to  himself  alone  he  was  able  to  bring  his  interpreta- 
tion of  the  idea  to  a  distinguished  practical  success. 
In  doing  so  he  added  to  the  Empire  a  territory  of 
which  the  area  is  no  less  than  half  the  size  of  British 
India,  and  for  this  service  his  name  will  deservedly 
be  ranked  among  the  unforgotten  names  of  English 
history. 


CHAPTER    XXXIX 

TRANSFER   OF   NIGER   COMPANY'S   TERRITORIES   TO 
THE   CROWN 

It  was  a  necessity  of  commercial  success,  and  there- 
fore of  existence  to  the  Company,  that  the  greater  part 
of  its  practical  work  should  be  done  upon  the  lower 
reaches  of  the  river.  The  waterways  of  this  part  of 
Africa,  as  they  approach  the  coast,  pass  through  a 
forest  belt  rich  in  valuable  forms  of  sylvan  produce. 
Palm  oil  and  palm  kernels,  which  form  one  of  the  most 
important  staples  of  West  African  trade,  are  obtained 
in  such  quantities  from  the  palm  trees  of  this  belt  that 
the  strip  of  coast  through  which  the  rivers  of  the  dis- 
trict flow  to  the  sea  was  for  a  long  time  known  by 
the  name  of  the  "Oil  Rivers"  Protectorate.  Little 
industry  or  ingenuity  is  required  on  the  part  of  the 
natives  in  order  to  collect  the  wild  products  of  the 
forest,  which  they  are  willing  to  exchange  for  European 
goods,  and  the  mere  numbers  of  the  population,  in  con- 
junction with  the  fertility  of  the  soil,  constitute  the  ele- 
ments of  a  valuable  export  trade.  The  primitive  nature 
of  the  needs  of  the  natives  unfortunately  gave  to  the 
return  trade  from  Europe  the  low  character  which  it 
has  always  borne. 

The  Niger  Company  was  so  situated  as  to  have  no 
coast  area  beyond  the  main  mouth  of  the  Niger,  and 
a  small  portion  of  the  delta  which  attached  to  it.  Its 
sphere  of  commercial  activity  lay  in  the  valley  of  the 
river.  Here,  for  upwards  of  150  miles,  the  banks  on 
both  sides  served  as  frontage  to  numerous  tribes  whose 

back  country  extended  into  the  network  of  lesser  water- 

366 


TRANSFER   OF   TERRITORIES  367 

ways  which  irrigate  the  forest  area  of  the  coast.  It 
was  with  these  tribes  that  the  main  trade  of  the  Com- 
pany was  done,  and  for  the  protection  of  this  trade 
that  its  treaties  were  in  the  first  instance  negotiated. 

Coincidently  with  the  growth  of  trade  it  was  found 
necessary  to  establish  some  form  of  political  control, 
and  as  the  operations  of  Mohammedan  slave-raiders 
from  the  north,  year  by  year,  extended  the  circle  of 
their  devastation,  and  destroyed  flourishing  markets  by 
the  wholesale  depopulation  of  areas  in  which  they 
were  situated,  the  further  necessity  was  forced  upon  the 
Company  of  giving  some  form  of  military  protection 
to  threatened  districts.  For  this  purpose  a  constabu- 
lary was  formed,  and  military  outposts  were  advanced  to 
Lokoja,  at  the  confluence  of  the  Niger  and  the  Benue. 
Trading  stations  under  the  protection  of  Lokoja  were  sub- 
sequently established  upon  the  Lower  Benu6  and  upon 
the  Niger  between  the  Boussa  Rapids  and   Lokoja. 

The  ninth  parallel  of  latitude  may  be  taken  as  the 
farthest  northerly  extension  reached  by  the  outposts  of 
the  Company,  and  the  Company's  stations  upon  the 
rivers  east  and  west  from  the  confluence  marked  the 
meeting  ground  of  the  pagan  states  they  desired  to 
protect,  and  the  militant  Mohammedan  civilisation  of 
the  north. 

The  great  difference  which  existed  between  this 
civilisation  and  the  primitive  condition  of  the  peoples  of 
the  lower  river  will  have  been  gathered  from  what  has 
been  already  written  in  the  earlier  sections  of  this  book. 
The  difference  from  the  point  of  view  of  European  trade 
was  no  less  marked  than  from  the  more  general  point  of 
view  of  political  history.  The  Governors  of  the  Company 
had  always  expressed  the  opinion  that  ultimately  their 
most  valuable  trade  would  be  done  with  the  northern 
territories.  In  a  speech  made  by  the  Governor  at  the 
annual  meeting  of  1889  he  informed  the  shareholders 
that,  after  long  and  persistent  research,  palm  oil  and 
kernels  appeared  to  form  the  only  considerable  resources 


368  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

of  the  maritime  districts,  and  that  the  Directors  felt 
that  the  "ultimate  and  permanent  prosperity  of  the 
territories  must  depend  still  more  on  a  widely  spread 
and  properly  directed  culture  of  indigo,  tobacco,  cotton, 
and  other  products,"  which  were  grown  in  the  interior. 
The  trade  with  the  south  was  prosperous  ;  but,  while  the 
Company  did  its  principal  work  on  the  coast,  it  looked 
forward  to  opening  the  northern  territories. 

"We  can  hardly  impress  too  strongly  on  our  share- 
holders," the  Governor  said  in  the  same  speech  of  1889, 
"  the  fact  that  our  hopes  of  future  prosperity  rest  far 
less  on  the  lower  regions  of  the  Niger  .  .  .  than  upon  the 
higher  and  inner  and  recently  explored  regions  acquired 
at  great  expense  of  money  and  of  energy."  Throughout 
the  political  life  of  the  Company  this  view  was  constantly 
impressed  upon  the  shareholders,  and  at  a  very  early 
period  the  Company  marked,  in  a  manner  which  did 
credit  alike  to  its  foresight  and  its  enlightenment,  its 
perception  of  the  difference  between  the  two  divisions  of 
its  territories.  The  consumption  of  liquor  by  the  pagan 
natives  of  the  coast  has  been,  through  the  whole  period 
of  European  intercourse  with  them,  a  hardly  less  prolific 
source  of  demoralisation  than  the  slave  trade  itself.  In 
the  lower  river  the  Company  yielded  to  circumstances, 
and  cheap  European  spirits  formed  one  of  the  principal 
articles  of  importation  for  purposes  of  the  barter  trade. 
But  among  the  Mohammedan  peoples  of  the  north 
the  use  of  alcoholic  liquor  is  forbidden  by  their  religion, 
and  in  1887,  before  prohibition  within  certain  latitudes 
became  general  under  the  rules  agreed  to  by  the  Brussels 
Conference,  the  Niger  Company,  desirous  of  defending 
the  markets  of  the  interior  from  the  invasion  of  this 
curse,  fixed  a  line  at  the  back  of  its  coast  territories 
beyond  which  it  absolutely  forbade  the  importation  of 
liquor. 

But  though  the  trade  of  the  northern  territories  was 
regarded  from  the  beginning  as  likely  to  prove  beyond 
all    comparison    more   valuable    than   that   of    the    lower 


TRANSFER    OF    TERRITORIES  369 

river,  it  was,  from  artificial  as  well  as  from  natural 
causes,  more  difficult  to  attract  into  British  channels,  it 
was,  of  course,  of  a  very  different  order  from  that  of 
the  south.  Indigo,  cotton,  and  tobacco,  as  well  as  other 
exports  of  the  northern  territories,  are  products  of 
organised  industry  which,  unlike  the  native  products  of 
the  palm  -  oil  belt,  demand  the  employment  of  regular 
labour.  Conditions  of  peace  and  security  are  as  necessary 
for  their  production  as  for  the  development  of  sustained 
trade  relations.  The  slave- raiding  operations  of  the 
Mohammedan  rulers  were  undertaken  for  the  purpose 
of  obtaining  labour.  But,  while  the  industrial  system 
was  based  on  slavery,  the  ceaseless  disturbance  to  which 
slave-raiding  gave  rise,  coupled  with  political  conditions 
of  civil  war  and  the  exactions  of  a  practically  uncurbed 
foreign  tyranny,  of  which  some  account  has  yet  to  be 
given,  operated  to  prevent  the  prosperous  development 
of  all  industry.  In  addition  to  these  disturbed  conditions, 
there  was  also,  in  the  Mohammedan  states,  long-estab- 
lished tradition  to  contend  with.  If  the  wants  of  the 
people  were  more  elaborate  than  those  of  the  southern 
population,  they  had  better  means  of  satisfying  them. 
What  trade  there  was  was  done  either  locally,  between 
state  and  state,  or  across  the  desert,  by  the  old  routes, 
with  the  north  of  Africa.  Tea  and  sugar,  commonly 
sold  in  the  market  of  Kano,  were  brought  with  other 
commodities  by  Arab  caravans  from  the  Mediterranean 
coast. 

This  was  also  the  case  with  many  other  necessities 
of  life.  Beyond  the  valley  of  the  Niger  and  the  Benue 
no  administrative  influence  had  been  exercised  by  the 
Company.  Its  intercourse  with  the  Mohammedan  emirs 
had  been  confined  to  political  missions,  of  which  the 
direct  object  was  to  obtain  promises  of  future  trade  and 
to  exclude  antagonistic  foreign  influence  from  their 
territories.  By  these  treaties  prospective  markets  were 
secured,  but  the  condition  of  the  country  was  such  that 
trade  was  not  open  to  the  north. 

2  A 


370  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

Under  the  division  which  was  made  of  the  Company's 
territories  on  the  surrender  of  the  charter,  the  principal 
centres  of  its  commercial  and  administrative  activity 
passed,  with  the  river  valley  south  of  Ida,  to  Southern 
Nigeria.  In  Northern  Nigeria  its  occupation  was  repre- 
sented only  by  the  outposts  which  have  been  named 
upon  the  river,   and  by  an  agency  established   in   Ilorin. 

In  1897,  practically,  though  not  actually,  the  last 
year  of  the  Company's  administration,  a  campaign  against 
the  Mohammedan  state  of  Nupe,  which  at  that  time  held 
both  banks  of  the  Niger  above  Lokoja,  was  forced  upon 
the  Company  by  the  persistent  slave-raiding  of  the 
Mohammedans  in  trade  areas  farther  south. 

The  campaign  gave  occasion  for  the  most  careful 
organisation  of  the  military  forces  of  the  Company.  It 
was  recognised  as  involving  perhaps  the  existence  of 
British  authority  in  the  country.  An  additional  number 
of  officers  from  the  regular  army  were  lent  specially  to 
the  Company  by  the  War  Office,  and  the  campaign  was 
conducted  at  very  considerable  expense  upon  the  lines 
of  European  war.  The  military  operations  were  directed 
against  Bida,  the  capital  of  Nupe,  situated  on  the 
northern  side  of  the  river,  and  were  completely  successful 
in  their  immediate  results.  The  town  was  captured, 
the  emir  was  deposed,  a  portion  of  his  territory  which 
lay  upon  the  southern  bank  of  the  river  was  declared 
independent  of  the  suzerainty  of  Nupe,  and  a  new  emir 
was  placed  upon  the  throne. 

But  in  accentuating,  by  the  precautions  which  it 
rendered  necessary,  the  difference  between  Mohammedan 
civilisation  to  the  north  of  the  confluence  and  pagan 
barbarism  to  the  south,  this  war  gave,  as  has  been 
already  said,  a  very  serious  indication  of  the  enlargement 
of  the  proportions  which  the  problem  of  British  occupation 
was  likely  to  assume  when  any  attempt  should  be  made 
to  establish  white  authority  in  the  Northern  Territories. 
The  Company  did  not  feel  itself  to  be  in  a  position 
to   make   a  permanent  occupation    of  Bida.     As   soon   as 


TRANSFER    OF    TERRFrORIES  371 

its  troops  were  withdrawn  the  deposed  emir  raUied  his 
defeated  followers,  assumed  again  the  supreme  authority 
of  which  he  had  been  deprived,  and  maintained  his 
province  in  a  state  of  revolt  against  British  authority 
north  of  the  river.  It  became  clear  that  conquest  without 
occupation,  or  the  establishment  of  some  form  of  British 
authority  in  the  conquered  provinces,  would  result  only 
in  the  creation  of  a  line  of  impenetrably  hostile  border 
states,  with  which  neither  trade  nor  any  peaceful  relations 
could  be  maintained. 

Troubles  on  the  western  border,  resulting  in  the 
agreement  of  1898,  and  the  consequent  surrender  of  the 
charter,  gave  the  Company  no  opportunity  of  dealing  with 
the  situation  which  was  thus  created.  The  authority 
which  had  been  successfully  asserted  over  the  pagan 
tribes  of  the  lower  river,  and  which  had  not  shrunk  from 
the  first  shock  of  conflict  with  the  forces  of  Mohammedanism, 
was  withdrawn  at  this  critical  and  interesting  moment. 

Thus  it  came  about  that  when  British  administration 
was  officially  established  in  the  interior,  it  found  itself 
limited  in  fact  to  territory  of  which  the  northern  line  was 
fixed  by  the  Company's  stations  upon  the  river,  and  to 
the  western  province  of  Borgu,  which,  subsequently  to 
the  formation  of  the  West  African  Frontier  Force,  had 
been  organised  as  a  military  province  outside  the  territories 
of  the  company. 

The  duty  which  lay  before  the  first  British  High 
Commissioner  was  to  organise  the  territorities  of  Northern 
Nigeria  for  administration.  The  whole  of  these  terri- 
tories had  placed  themselves  nominally  under  the  pro- 
tection of  Great  Britain.  They  extended  roughly,  as 
will  be  remembered,  from  7°  to  14°  north  latitude,  and, 
including  Borgu,  from  3°  to  14°  east  longitude.  They 
covered  an  area  of  350,000  square  miles,  or  about  one- 
third  of  the  size  of  British  India,  and  they  lay  almost 
wholly  in  the  area  occupied  by  those  finer  races  of  the 
Soudan  whose  touch  with  civilisation  had  from  time 
immemorial   been   from   the  north.      Never  before  in  the 


372  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

history  of  this  part  of  the  Soudan  had  any  civilising 
influence  come  from  the  south. 

Two  new  and  interesting  chapters  of  history  were 
therefore  initiated  on  the  same  day.  For  the  first  time 
in  the  history  of  the  Mohammedan  states  a  superior  and 
civilising  influence  was  established  in  an  administrative 
capacity  upon  their  southern  borders,  and  by  its  mere 
presence  began  the  process  of  drawing  as  a  magnet 
towards  the  south  all  the  thoughts,  the  activities,  the 
fears  and  hopes,  which  the  tradition  of  intelligence  had 
directed,  through  their  entire  previous  existence,  towards 
the  north. 

On  the  other  hand,  for  the  first  time  in  British  history 
colonial  government  was  established  in  the  interior  of 
West  Africa.  In  determining  to  extend  our  influence  to 
the  relatively  healthy  uplands  bordering  upon  the  desert, 
to  enter  into  friendly  relations  with  the  fine  races  which 
inhabit  them,  and  to  open  new  fields  to  commercial  enter- 
prise in  regions  famous  through  all  antiquity  for  their 
wealth,  a  wholly  new  departure  was  made  from  the 
traditions  which  had  limited  us  for  three  hundred  years 
to  a  coast  occupation  of  the  malarial  regions  fringing  the 
Gulf  of  Guinea,  and  had  confined  our  relations  to  the 
type  of  negro  who  inhabits  its  shores.  The  history  of 
British  West  Africa  entered  upon  a  new  phase,  and  if, 
as  we  may  venture  to  hope,  British  influence  upon  the 
races  of  the  interior  may  be  of  such  a  nature  as  to 
revive  in  them  the  old  traditions  associated  with  the 
civilisation  of  Europe  in  their  best  days,  the  influence 
of  the  Mohammedan  races  upon  British  West  African 
policy  may  be  not  less  important.  They  offer  us  a  field 
for  the  foundation  of  a  West  African  Empire,  of  which 
neither  they  nor  we  need  be  ashamed. 


CHAPTER   XL 
ORIGIN   OF   THE   FULANI 

Before  attempting  to  give  any  account  of  the  establish- 
ment of  British  administration  in  Northern  Nigeria,  there 
is  still  a  chapter  of  native  history  to  be  told. 

We  left  the  Mohammedan  states  of  the  Soudan  in 
the  seventeenth  century,  when  after  the  conquest  of  the 
Moors  they  became  isolated  in  the  heart  of  Africa,  and 
fell  into  the  decadence  in  which  we  know  them.  The 
Tarikh-es-Soudan,  of  which  the  chronicle  continued  to  the 
middle  of  the  seventeenth  century,  informs  us  that  after 
the  Moors  of  the  Soudan  had  cut  themselves  off  from 
Morocco,  the  government  of  the  Pashas  rapidly  de- 
generated. In  1623  it  is  stated  that  "excesses  of  every 
kind  are  now  committed  unchecked  by  the  soldiery,  and 
that  the  country  is  profoundly  convulsed  and  oppressed." 
About  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century  the  Tuaregs, 
pressing  down  from  the  desert  upon  the  Moors,  deprived 
them  of  the  principal  towns  of  Songhay,  and  established 
a  kingdom  of  their  own  upon  the  Niger.  What  the 
Moors  had  become  at  the  end  of  the  eighteenth  century, 
some  thirty  years  after  they  had  been  driven  from  Gago 
and  Timbuctoo,  may  be  gathered  from  Mungo  Park,  who 
had  experience  of  them  in  his  journey  from  the  coast  to 
the  Niger  in   1795. 

The  Moors,  he  says,  are  divided  into  many  tribes, 
each  more  entirely  barbarous  and  cruel  than  the  other. 
Each  tribe  is  governed  by  a  separate  king,  who  owns  no 
allegiance  to  a  common  sovereign.  They  pay  but  little 
attention  to  agriculture,  purchasing  their  corn,  cotton 
cloth,  and  other  necessaries  from  the  negroes  in  exchange 


374  A    TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

for  salt,  which  they  dig  from  the  pits  in  the  great  desert. 
Describing  them  as  a  whole,  "They  are,"  he  says,  "at 
once  the  vainest,  the  proudest,  and  perhaps  the  most 
bigoted,  ferocious,  and  intolerant  of  all  the  nations  of  the 
earth."  They  had  a  very  primitive  system  of  justice 
and  taxation,  but  they  had  "neither  dignity  nor  order." 
They  lived  in  a  condition  of  constantly  plundering  the 
negroes  around  them,  and,  like  the  nomad  Berbers,  they 
frequently  roamed  from  place  to  place. 

But  the  Moors  did  not  fall  from  their  high  position 
in  the  Soudan  without  the  interposition  of  another 
power.  This  time  the  dominating  people,  although  not 
black,  were,  like  the  conquering  races  of  Melle  and  of 
Songhay,   of   local    origin.     As    the    Moors   declined,   the 

Fulani   rose. 

This  remarkable  people,  of  whom  mention  is  made  in 
the  earliest  records  which  have  been  preserved  of  the 
history  of  the  Soudan,  have  given  rise  to  much  learned 
controversy  in  the  endeavours  to  determine  to  what 
branch  of  the  human  race  they  properly  belong. 

In  the  sixteenth  century  of  our  era,  they  may  fairly 
be  spoken  of  as  being  of  local  origin  in  the  Soudan. 
At  that  time  they  knew  of  no  other  home,  and  there 
was  record  of  their  presence  in  the  country  for  upwards 
of  looo  years.  But  they  were  of  a  race  wholly  different 
from  that  of  the  other  races  of  the  Soudan.  Though 
profoundly  modified  by  intermarriage,  they  counted  them- 
selves as  a  white  people,  and  even  when  the  mixed 
blood  gave  to  their  skin  the  prevailing  colour  of  black 
or  red,  their  features,  their  hair,  their  carriage,  and  their 
distinctive  characteristics,  proclaimed  them  of  other  than 
negro  race. 

The  variations  in  their  appearance  are  at  the  present 
day  so  marked — ranging  from  the  jet  black  of  the  Joloffs 
of  the  western  coast  through  "tawny,"  "white,"  and 
even  "  Syrian  red "  skins,  to  the  blue-eyed  individuals 
mentioned  by  Baikie  as  having  been  met  by  him  upon 
the  Benue — as  to   present  arguments   in    support    of  the 


ORIGIN    OF   THE    FULANI  375 

most  opposite  theories  regarding  the  birthplace  of  their 
race. 

We  have  already  seen  in  the  Tarikh-es-Soudan  a 
description  of  the  black  Joloffs,  which  counted  this  people 
among  the  "best  of  men,"  and  very  superior  to  "all 
other  Fulani."  Marmol,  in  describing  a  chief  of  this 
race  M^ho  visited  Portugal  at  the  end  of  the  fifteenth 
century,  tells  us,  it  will  be  remembered,  that  he  had  a 
fine  figure  and  was  generally  well  made,  also  that  he 
had  a  long  and  well-trimmed  beard,  and  "did  not 
appear  to  be  a  negro,  but  a  prince  to  whom  all  honour 
and  respect  were  due."  In  Mungo  Park's  day  the 
distinction  of  the  Tarikh  between  the  Joloffs  and  "the 
other  Fulani"  had  grown  into  a  permanent  distinction 
of  race,  and  Mungo  Park  speaks  of  them  as  two 
peoples.  He  says,  however,  of  the  Joloffs,  whom  he 
praises  as  an  active,  powerful,  and  warlike  race,  that 
"their  noses  are  not  so  much  depressed  nor  the  lips  so 
protuberant  as  among  the  generality  of  Africans,  although 
their  skin  is  of  the  deepest  black."  In  the  case  of  this 
people,  intermarriage  upon  the  coast  with  purely  negroid 
types  had  no  doubt  brought  them  to  a  near  resemblance 
with  negro  peoples,  but  the  Foulah  strain  was  still  of 
effect  enough  to  make  of  them  a  people  who  were  highly 
thought  of  by  the  white  traders  of  the  coast. 

The  Foulahs  proper,  whom  Mungo  Park  distinguishes 
from  the  Joloffs,  are,  he  says,  "chiefly  of  a  tawny  com- 
plexion, with  soft,  silky  hair  and  pleasing  features."  These 
Foulahs,  like  others  scattered  through  the  entire  length 
of  the  fertile  belt,  were  "  much  attached  to  a  pastoral 
life,"  and  had,  he  tells  us,  by  the  end  of  the  eighteenth 
century  "  introduced  themselves  into  all  the  kingdoms 
on  the  windward  coast  as  herdsmen  and  husbandmen, 
paying  a  tribute  to  the  sovereign  of  the  country  for  the 
lands  which  they  held."  The  same  pastoral  Fulani 
migrated,  as  we  have  seen,  in  the  thirteenth  and  fourteenth 
centuries  to  the  Haussa  States  and  Bornu,  and  paid 
tribute   to   the  reienine   kinofs  of  Kano  and  other  towns. 


376  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

They  are  known  to  this  day  in  Northern  Nigeria  under 
the  name  of  Cow  Fulani.  Mungo  Park  also  says  of  the 
Foulahs,  "They  are  naturally  mild  and  gentle.  .  .  .  They 
evidently  consider  all  the  negro  nations  as  their  inferiors, 
and  when  talking  of  different  nations  always  rank  them- 
selves among  white  peoples.  .  .  .  They  are  Mussulmans, 
and  the  authority  and  laws  of  the  prophet  are  everywhere 
looked  upon  as  sacred  and  decisive."  He  tells  us  that, 
in  his  day,  they  possessed  in  the  Soudan  many  kingdoms 
at  great  distances  from  each  other,  and  he  notices  the 
diversity  of  their  appearance.  "Their  complexion,  how- 
ever, is  not  quite  the  same  in  the  different  districts.  In 
kingdoms  which  are  situated  in  the  vicinity  of  the  Moorish 
territories  (meaning  to  the  north),  they  are  of  a  more 
yellow  complexion  than  in  the  southern  states."  He 
mentions  the  fact  that  they  have  a  separate  language, 
and  gives  specimens  of  its  vocabulary.  Francis  Moore, 
speaking  of  the  Fulani  of  the  Gambia  in  1734,  gives  them 
much  the  same  character  as  that  given  them  by  Mungo 
Park.  "They  have  chiefs  of  their  own,"  he  says,  "who 
rule  with  so  much  moderation,  that  every  act  of  govern- 
ment seems  rather  an  act  of  the  people  than  of  one  man." 
He  also  speaks  of  their  charitable  and  humane  qualities. 
Dr.  Blyden,  writing  of  them  in  the  present  day,  tells  us 
that  every  man  and  woman  among  them  can  at  least 
read  Arabic. 

Denham,  writing  a  little  later  than  Mungo  Park,  gives 
us  a  description  of  another  class  of  Foulah  or  Fulani 
as  he  met  them  on  the  shores  of  Lake  Chad.  "  They 
are,"  he  says,  "  a  very  handsome  race  of  people,  of  a 
deep  copper  colour,  who  seldom  mix  their  blood  with 
that  of  the  negroes,  have  a  peculiar  language  of  their 
own,  and  are  Moslem."  These  were  the  conquerors  of 
Bornu,  aristocrats  and  military  rulers.  He  says  of  them 
in  another  place  that  they  resembled  the  inhabitants  of 
Tetuan  in  Morocco.  He  also  finds  in  them  a  resemblance 
to  the  gypsies  in  England.  But  a  Foulah  whom  he  met 
in   one   of  the    border  towns  of  Bornu  told  him,  he  says, 


ORIGIN    OF    THE    FULANI  377 

that  he  had  been  to  Mecca,  and  that  there  he  had  met 
Wahabis,  who  "  were  the  same  people  and  spoke  the 
same  language  as  the  Fulani." 

Barth  speaks  of  the  Fulani  as  a  race  distinguished 
by  its  absorbent  powers,  and  now  comprising  many  other 
races,  of  which  there  are  four  main  divisions.  He  gives 
the  names  as  the  "Jel,"  the  "Baa,"  the  "So,"  and  the 
"  Beri,"  but  these  again  are  subdivided.  Both  Barth 
and  Denham  speak  of  the  great  capacity  of  the  aristocratic 
Fulani  for  ruling  other  races.  Denham  says  of  them 
on  the  western  border  of  Bornu,  "  They  are  here  much 
esteemed  by  the  people  whom  they  rule  for  their  im- 
partial administration  of  justice."  In  all  this,  we  are 
reminded  of  Bacon's  axiom,  that  "  States  that  are  liberal 
of  naturalisation  towards  strangers  are  fit  for  empire." 
Throughout  the  entire  history  of  the  Soudan,  members 
of  the  Fulani  race  are  to  be  found  in  positions  of 
importance  and  responsibility.  There  were  in  every 
successive  civilisation  Fulani  judges,  Fulani  imaums  of 
the  mosques,  Fulani  men  of  letters,  Fulani  advisers  to 
the  kings,  and  frequent  mention  is  made  of  the  Fulani 
wives  of  persons  in  high  position.  This  influence  was 
not  confined  exclusively  to  the  Soudan.  It  spread  even 
to  Morocco.  More  than  one  Moorish  sovereign  had  a 
Fulani  counsellor,  and  it  is  mentioned  that  Muley  Hamed, 
the  reigning  sovereign  of  Morocco,  at  the  moment  of 
the  Moorish  conquest  had  a  favourite  Fulani  wife,  Leila 
Aouada  by  name. 

It  is  not  surprising  that  a  race  of  such  varying 
activities,  lending  itself  to  such  different  developments, 
should  give  rise  to  widely-varying  scientific  theories  of 
its  origin. 

The  one  point  upon  which  all  scientific  investigation 
is  agreed  is  that  the  language  of  the  Fulani  is  not 
African,  and  that  this  people,  which  has  maintained  in 
the  Soudan  an  individuality  no  less  marked  and  persistent 
than  that  maintained  by  the  Jews  in  Europe,  was  originally 
wholly  foreign  to  the  environment   in  which   we   find    it. 


378  A    TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

Its  first  home  in  Africa  would  seem  to  have  been  the 
south-western  corner  between  the  Senegal  and  the 
Atlantic,  in  which,  according  to  Herodotus  and  Strabo, 
the  Phoenicians  made  their  early  settlements.  As  this 
was  the  remotest  extremity  of  the  western  world  known 
to  the  ancients,  it  follows  as  a  matter  of  course  that  the 
original  home  of  the  Fulani  is  supposed  to  have  been 
further  east.  It  is  indeed  a  disputed  point  whether  their 
first  movements  in  Africa  were  from  west  to  east,  or 
gradually  in  the  first  instance  from  east  to  west,  and 
only  later,  within  our  own  times,  from  west  to  east.  One 
theory  of  their  origin  is  that  they  are  of  the  same 
Malayan  or  Polynesian  stock  as  that  which  is  believed  to 
have  colonised  Madagascar.  Another  is  that  they  came 
originally  from  Egypt,  and  this  involves  the  assumption 
that  their  movement  in  Africa  was  a  gradual  advance  from 
east  to  west.  This  theory  would  seem  to  be  disproved 
by  the  fact  that  their  language  has  no  affinity  to  the 
languages  of  the  Nile.  It  has  also  been  sought  to  asso- 
ciate them  with  the  Jews,  but  it  has  been  shown  that  their 
language  is  still  further  removed  from  languages  of 
Semitic  origin  than  it  is  from  the  idiom  of  the  Soudan.  I 
do  not  know  whether  this  objection  would  apply  to  the 
language  of  the  Phoenicians,  nor  have  I  anywhere  seen 
the  theory  of  Phoenician  descent  scientifically  examined. 
The  theory  which  seems  to  be  most  generally  received 
and  most  logically  supported  is  that  the  fount  of  origin 
of  the  Fulani  people  must  be  sought  in  India.  This  is  the 
opinion  of  M.  de  Lauture,  who  relates  the  legend  of  their 
origin,  as  he  learned  it  in  Darfur,  to  be  that  they  sprang 
from  the  marriage  of  a  Hindu,  who  entered  the  Soudan 
by  way  of  Egypt,  with  the  female  of  a  chameleon.  He 
takes  the  legend  to  mean  that  the  Fulani  were  the  out- 
come of  a  union  of  Hindu  stock  with  different  tribes  of  the 
Soudan,  in  this  way  accounting  for  the  great  diversity  of 
their  characteristics. 

Dr.   Thaly  supports  the   Indian  theory.      He  connects 
the   F^ulani   with    the  gypsies  of  Europe,  and  traces   both 


ORIGIN    OF    THE    FULANT  379 

gypsies  and  Fulani  to  an  Indian  origin.  There  are 
legends  quoted  by  Barth  and  by  M.  Berenger  Feraud 
to  the  effect  that  the  Fulani  entered  the  Soudan  originally 
by  way  of  Morocco,  and  these,  though  offered  in  opposition 
to  the  Indian  theory,  might,  with  very  little  straining,  be 
made  to  support  it,  for  Strabo,  after  describing  a  populous 
and  flourishing  African  nation  dwelling  to  the  far  west 
of  Africa  in  the  country  opposite  to  Spain,  adds  the 
remark,  "Some  say  that  they  are  Indians  who  accom- 
panied Hercules  hither."  The  legend  of  Strabo,  added 
to  those  quoted  by  modern  writers,  might  therefore  account 
for  an  Indian  origin,  even  in  Fulani  who  had  entered  the 
Soudan  by  way  of  Southern  Morocco.  It  has  also  been 
sought  to  connect  the  Fulani  with  the  Berbers,  but  this 
theory  is  rejected  by  philologists.  It  will,  however,  be 
remembered  that  among  the  nomad  tribes  of  the  desert, 
mentioned  in  an  earlier  chapter,  allusion  was  made  to  one 
tribe  not  to  be  confused  with  those  of  Berber  race.  These 
were  the  Zingari  or  gypsies,  who  were  believed  to  be  of 
Indian  descent.  In  assuming  a  Berber  origin  for  the 
Fulani,  it  is  again  not  improbable  that  the  opponents  of 
the  Indian  theory  may  unconsciously  be  supporting  it  by 
a  confusion  between  one  nomadic  race  of  the  desert  and 
another. 

That  the  Fulani  may  have  owed  their  origin  to  the 
downfall  of  the  dynasty  of  the  Hyksos,  or  Shepherd  Kings, 
who  were  driven  from  Egypt  about  the  year  1630  B.C., 
is  finally  a  theory  which  would  seem  to  reconcile  many 
conflicting  arguments.  M.  Delafosse,  whose  studies  in 
West  African  languages  give  special  weight  to  his  opinions, 
and  who  is  one  of  the  latest  writers  upon  the  subject,  is 
inclined  to  espouse  this  view.  He  thus  countenances  the 
opinion  of  those  who  contend  that  the  Fulani  entered 
the  Soudan  by  way  of  Egypt,  but  at  the  same  time  he 
emphatically  rejects  the  theory  of  Egyptian  origin,  and 
carries  the  question  of  origin  one  step  further  back  to 
that  of  the  origin  and  race  of  the  Hyksos  themselves. 
This  he  would  find  in   India,   "probably  on  the  southern 


380  A    TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

slopes  of  the  Himalayan  Mountains."  He  puts  forward 
as  a  suggestion  that  the  same  migrations  of  Hindu  origin 
may  have  given  us  the  Hyksos  and  the  gypsies  and  the 
Fulani.  He  does  not  regard  the  question  as  having  been 
yet  decisively  examined,  and  he  appeals  to  anthropologists 
and  philologists  to  assist  in  its  scientific  elucidation  by 
comparison  between  the  racial  characteristics  and  the 
dialects  of  the  Fulani,  the  gypsies,  and  certain  existing 
pastoral  tribes  in  India.  As  a  result  of  some  slight  study 
of  his  own  of  gypsy  language  he  adds,  "  I  think  I  may 
say  that  of  all  African,  Asiatic,  Oceanian,  and  European 
tongues  which  I  have  compared  with  the  language  of  the 
Fulani,  the  language  of  the  gypsies  is  that  which  appears 
to  me  to  possess  the  greatest  point  of  resemblance." 

In  connection  with  the  theory  of  the  descent  of  the 
Fulani  from  the  Hyksos,  I  would  quote  the  great  similarity 
observed  by  my  husband  to  exist  between  the  Wahuma  of 
Eastern  Africa  and  the  Fulani  of  the  Western  Soudan. 
The  Wahuma,  like  the  Fulani,  were  pastoral  nomads 
who,  in  the  endeavour  to  secure  fresh  grazing  ground, 
became  invaders  and  conquerors.  In  Uganda,  Unyoro, 
Karagwe,  and  other  eastern  states  the  Wahuma  founded 
the  royal  dynasties,  while  their  tribesmen,  corresponding 
in  position  to  the  Cow  Fulani,  tended  the  cattle  of  the 
negroids.  The  Wahuma,  who  have  a  great  physical 
likeness  to  the  Fulani,  are  often  strikingly  handsome  and 
extremely  intelligent.  That  the  Wahuma  should  have 
descended  upon  East  Africa  from  the  valley  of  the  Nile 
is  not  surprising.  Of  both  races,  Fulani  and  Wahuma 
alike,  it  can  at  least  be  said  that  they  so  far  support  the 
theory  of  a  common  origin  in  the  Hyksos,  as  to  have 
maintained  through  all  their  history,  in  the  diverse 
countries  in  which  they  are  to  be  found,  the  ancient 
position  of  Shepherd  Kings. 


CHAPTER   XLI 

RISE   OF   THE   FULANI    IN    THE   SOUDAN 

Assuming  the  Fulani  and  the  gypsy  to  be  of  similar 
Indian  race  and  to  have  entered  the  Soudan  by  way  of 
Egypt,  perhaps  nearly  two  thousand  years  before  Christ, 
we  have  still  the  fact  that  within  historic  times  the  move- 
ment of  the  Fulani  in  the  Western  Soudan  has  been  from 
west  to  east,  not  from  east  to  west. 

The  earliest  definite  mention  which  we  get  of  them 
is  the  rumour  mentioned  by  the  author  of  the  Tarikh-es- 
Soudan,  that  the  first  white  king  of  Ghana,  who  reigned 
presumably  in  the  third  century  of  the  Christian  era, 
was  reputed  to  have  had  a  Fulani  name — Quaia  Magha, 
which  in  Fulani  means  Ouaia  the  Great.  Whether 
Phoenician  or  Fulani,  the  first  white  rulers  of  Ghana 
continued  to  reign  for  twenty-two  generations,  and  were 
then  superseded  by  a  black  dynasty. 

In  the  ninth  century  we  hear  of  Fulani  occupying  the 
town  of  Masina,  situated  on  the  Niger  between  Jenne 
and  Timbuctoo,  and  the  following  story  is  told  of  the 
origin  of  their  kings. 

Maghan,  a  fugitive  prince  from  his  own  country  of 
Koma,  in  the  territory  of  Quaiaka,  came  driving  a  few 
oxen  before  him  to  a  hill  called  Masina,  in  the  territory 
of  Baghena.  He  and  his  followers  made  friends  with 
the  Senajah  (Berbers),  who  occupied  the  territory,  and 
after  a  time,  Maghan  having  been  joined  by  more  followers, 
the  King  of  Baghena  named  him  king  of  those  who  had 
followed  him.  All  the  Fulani  then  joined  themselves 
to    Maghan,   some  being  of  his  own    tribe    and   some  of 

Sankora.      From  this  time  (to  which  no  date  is  affixed). 

381 


382  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

Masina  drew  its  kings  from  four  tribes,  of  which  one 
inhabited  Quaiaka  and  one  Borgu.  We  are  also  told 
that,  by  an  agreement  between  themselves,  the  people 
of  Masina  had  for  their  kings  alternately  a  Berber  and 
a  Fulani.  Presumably,  therefore,  the  tribes  of  Quaiaka 
and  Borgu  were  Fulani,  and  the  other  two  of  the  four 
were  Berbers.  This  arrangement,  mentioned  at  so  early 
a  period,  is  illustrative  of  the  adaptable  nature  of  Fulani 
institutions. 

Masina  was  independent  enough  at  the  end  of  the 
ninth  century  to  solicit  help  from  the  Berber  kings  of 
the  Desert  Empire  against  black  neighbours  who  pressed 
upon  it  inconveniently,  and  to  carry  through  a  victorious 
campaign.  It  held  its  own  against  Ghana  in  the  great 
days  of  that  pagan  empire,  and  maintained  itself  as  a 
centre  of  P'ulani  rule  through  the  administrations  alike 
of  Melle  and  of  Songhay. 

It  is  in  the  early  period  of  the  rise  of  Melle — that  is, 
in  the  thirteenth  century — that  we  have  the  first  record 
of  Fulani  immigration  from  Melle  into  the  Haussa  States 
and  Bornu.  From  this  we  may  infer  a  certain  pressure 
by  the  rising  power  upon  the  Fulani  of  the  west,  but 
those  who  migrated  to  Haussaland  at  this  period  were 
apparently  purely  pastoral  nomads,  who  took  their  place 
humbly  in  their  new  home  as  Cow  Fulani,  and  were 
content  to  pay  tax  to  the  local  kings.  During  the  mili- 
tary campaigns  which  preceded  the  rise  of  the  Songhay 
dynasty  in  the  fifteenth  century,  we  hear  constantly  of 
expeditions  undertaken  against  the  Fulani,  who  would 
seem  to  have  resisted  stoutly  all  encroachments  upon 
their  liberty.  Sonni  Ali  in  1492  conquered  the  Fulani 
of  Gurma  in  the  eastern  portion  of  the  Bend  of  the  Niger. 
Sonni  Ali  also  apparently  conquered  Masina  so  far  as 
to  induce  it  to  pay  tribute  and  to  accept  the  investiture 
of  its  rulers  from  the  hands  of  Timbuctoo,  but  it  jealously 
guarded  its  administrative  independence,  and  throughout 
the  records  of  the  Songhay  dynasty  wars  with  Masina 
were    of    frequent     recurrence.       Differences    of    religion 


RISE    OF    THE    FULANl  383 

were  often  apparently  Involved,  and  at  least  one  false 
prophet  who  arose  amongst  the  Fulani  was  driven  before 
the  conquering  arms  of  Songhay  to  found  a  new  kingdom 
for  himself  in  the  south-western  corner  of  the  Soudan, 
close  to  the  kingdom  of  the  Joloffs.  Independence  of  action, 
independence  of  religion,  independence  of  administration, 
would  seem  to  have  been  the  sturdy  characteristic  of 
Fulani  social  life. 

Opinion  is  divided  as  to  the  period  at  which  the 
Fulani  generally  accepted  Mohammedanism,  but  the 
fact  mentioned  in  the  chronicles  of  Bornu  that  Fulani 
teachers  from  Melle  were  among  the  first  to  preach  the 
doctrines  of  Mohammed  in  Bornu  in  the  early  part  of 
the  thirteenth  century,  combined  with  the  high  position 
constantly  taken  by  Fulani  individuals  throughout  the 
history  of  the  Soudan  as  teachers,  men  of  letters,  &c., 
would  seem  to  indicate  that  the  conversion  of  the  upper 
class  of  Fulani  was  of  comparatively  early  date.  There 
seems  to  have  been  always  a  distinction  between  the 
purely  pastoral  shepherd,  or  Cow  Fulani,  who  occupied 
the  position  of  a  nomad  peasant,  caring  for  nothing  but 
his  cattle,  and  the  aristocratic  or  ruling  Fulani,  from  whose 
numbers  some  of  the  most  distinguished  individuals  of 
Soudanese  history  were  drawn.  The  Cow  Fulani  are  to 
the  present  day  believed  to  be  pagan  in  many  districts. 

The  connection  with  the  Fulani  of  Borgu  on  the 
eastern  edge  of  the  Bend  of  the  Niger  that  was  mentioned 
in  relation  to  the  founding  of  Masina  on  the  western  edge, 
is  indicative  of  a  somewhat  wide  distribution  of  Fulani 
tribes,  and  of  an  alliance,  or  at  least  friendship,  between 
the  Fulani  of  the  east  and  west,  which  appears  to  have 
existed  from  very  early  times,  and  was  often  made  use 
of  by  them  when  there  was  occasion  to  rise  against  the 
Songhay  kings. 

Some  writers  assert  that  Kanta,  the  rebellious  general 
of  Songhay  who  founded  the  kingdom  of  Kebbi,  was 
himself  of  Fulani  origin.  This  is  uncertain,  but  in  the 
next  generation  to  Kanta  the  Fulani  of  the  eastern  portion 


384  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

of  the  Bend  of  the  Niger  joined  the  banners  of  his  son. 
It  was  as  a  partly  Fulani  kingdom  that  Kebbi  became 
great,  and  the  Fulani  may  perhaps  be  said  to  have  first 
taken  a  position  as  rulers  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  Niger 
when  they  helped  Tomo,  the  son  of  Kanta,  to  fight  Bornu, 
and  to  found  the  even  now  celebrated  town  of  Birni-n- 
Kebbi  within  the  borders  of  Haussaland  in  1544.  They 
had  also,  in  the  sixteenth  century,  spread  into  Baghirmi 
on  the  eastern  side  of  Chad.  In  the  west  they  gradu- 
ally absorbed  the  province  of  Wangara,  and  greatly 
aggrandised  their  ancient  territory  of  Masina. 

It  is  clear  that,  throughout  the  whole  period  of  the 
domination  of  the  Songhay,  the  Fulani  in  their  different 
centres  of  occupation  increased  in  importance  and  in 
military  strength,  and  were  beginning  to  assert  them- 
selves definitely  as  a  cultivated  people  with  a  capacity  for 
rule.  The  Askias,  by  the  many  expeditions  which  are 
recorded  against  Fulani  tribes,  display  a  certain  uneasiness 
at  the  growing  independence  of  this  people.  In  the  year 
1 59 1,  the  very  year  of  the  coming  of  the  Moors,  Fulani 
chiefs  took  a  leading  part  in  the  sack  of  the  territory 
of  Jenne,  and  more  than  one  punitive  expedition  was 
rendered  necessary  by  their  turbulence. 

Thus,  at  the  end  of  the  sixteenth  century,  the  Fulani 
had  already  extended  themselves  through  the  Western 
Soudan  as  pastoral  nomads,  independent,  though  paying 
a  grazing-tax,  in  all  the  countries  which  they  occupied 
from  the  sources  of  the  Senegal  to  Lake  Chad.  At  more 
than  one  point  on  this  extended  line  centres  of  govern- 
ment had  been  founded,  and  Fulani  troops  had  established 
for  themselves  a  reputation  as  military  conquerors. 

At  the  moment  of  the  coming  of  the  Moors  they  were 
the  rising  power  of  the  Soudan,  and  during  the  Moorish 
troubles  at  the  end  of  the  sixteenth  and  the  beginning 
of  the  seventeenth  centuries,  they  used  their  opportunity 
to  assert  their  independence  of  Songhay.  The  resistance 
offered  by  the  half  Fulani  state  of  Kebbi  to  the  eastward 
advance  of  the   Moors   has  been  mentioned  in  an  earlier 


RISE    OF    THE    FULANI  385 

chapter.  In  1599  Masina  opened  a  campaign  against 
the  Moors,  and  though  defeated  in  the  first  instance, 
the  reverse  would  only  seem  to  have  consolidated  Fulani 
resistance  to  the  foreign  rule.  In  1629,  the  kings  of 
Masina  refused  any  longer  to  accept  investiture  from 
the  decadent  government  of  Timbuctoo,  and  during  the 
seventeenth  century  the  Fulani  fought  for  their  in- 
dependence in  the  eastern  as  well  as  in  the  western 
districts  of  the  Bend  of  the  Niger.  The  Moors,  harried 
upon  the  north  by  the  Tuaregs  of  the  desert,  and  on 
the  south  by  the  Fulani,  abandoned  the  vain  attempt 
to  maintain  their  supremacy  in  the  Soudan.  They  were 
driven  out  of  Gago,  as  has  been  already  mentioned,  in 
1770.  They  continued  to  hold  the  town  of  Timbuctoo, 
but  during  the  eighteenth  century,  when  the  Moors 
had  fallen  to  the  condition  described  by  Mungo  Park,  the 
contest  for  the  sovereignty  of  the  Soudan  would  seem 
to  have  been  between  the  Fulani  and  the  Tuaregs.  It 
was  the  Tuaregs  who  finally  drove  the  Moors  from  Tim- 
buctoo in  the  year  1800,  and  within  a  generation  the 
Tuaregs  themselves  were  driven  out  by  the  Fulani. 

During  this  whole  period  of  tumult  the  Soudan  was 
closed  to  Europe,  and  we  have  no  accurate  account  of 
the  series  of  local  wars  by  which  it  would  seem  to  have 
been  distracted.  At  the  beginning  of  the  nineteenth 
century,  when,  after  an  eclipse  of  two  hundred  years,  its 
history  once  more  emerges  to  our  view,  the  situation  is 
so  far  clear  that  the  Fulani  had  become  the  dominating 
people,  alike  in  the  west  and  in  the  east. 

In  the  west,  where  the  Tuaregs  were  their  opponents, 
they  were  a  little  later  in  attaining  to  supreme  power 
than  in  the  eastern  states,  but  in  18 13  Masina  became 
the  seat  of  a  powerful  Fulani  Empire,  ruled  by  a 
Sheikh  of  the  name  of  Ahmadou.  Under  the  leader- 
ship of  Ahmadou,  Masina  conquered  Timbuctoo  in  1833. 
On  the  death  of  Ahmadou  in  1844,  Timbuctoo  was  once 
more  taken  by  the  Tuaregs,  but  it  was  reconquered  by 
the   Fulani    in    1855,    and,  with    the   exception    of  three 

2  B 


386  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

years,  from  i860  to  1863,  when  it  was  taken  and  held 
by  the  Toucouleurs,  a  half-breed  Fulani  people,  the  true 
Fulani  continued  to  hold  it  up  to  the  moment  of  its 
conquest  by  the  French  in  1893.  '^^^^  Toucouleurs,  who 
remained  masters  of  a  portion  of  the  Niger  Valley,  and 
who  also  submitted  to  France  in  1893,  were  a  people 
in  whose  veins  Fulani  blood  predominated  to  so  great 
an  extent  that  their  ascendancy  on  the  upper  river  may 
be  accepted  as  representing  for  that  part  of  the  country 
the  general  ascendancy  of  the   Fulani  races. 

The  history  of  the  Fulani  conquest  of  the  Haussa 
States,  where  another  Sheikh,  as  famous  as  Ahmadou, 
founded  a  Fulani  Empire,  is  comparatively  well  known. 
The  country  was,  we  have  seen,  permeated  with  Fulani 
influence.  Cow  Fulani  fed  their  cattle  in  every  province. 
The  principal  towns  had  their  Fulani  quarters ;  Fulani 
teachers  had  for  six  hundred  years  spread  the  doctrines 
of  Mohammed  ;  distinguished  members  of  the  Fulani  race 
occupied  high  places  as  councillors,  judges,  high  priests, 
and  men  of  war.  Zaria  had  had,  according  to  one  ac- 
count, a  Fulani  king  from  the  year  1780.  The  western 
provinces  of  Bornu  were  also  full  of  Fulani.  The  con- 
quest of  Haussaland  by  the  Fulani  may  therefore  be 
said  to  have  been  half  achieved  in  the  seventeenth  and 
eighteenth  centuries,  at  the  same  time  that  the  Fulani 
were  rising  in  power  throughout  the  whole  Soudan. 

It  was  not,  however,  till  the  opening  years  of  the 
nineteenth  century  that  the  military  and  political  con- 
quest was  completed. 

It  will  be  remembered  that,  at  the  end  of  the  eighteenth 
century,  the  still  pagan  state  of  Gober  had  established 
a  military  ascendancy  over  the  more  northerly  Moham- 
medan states  of  Haussaland.  It  had  conquered  Zanfara 
and  subdued  Kano.  Katsena  alone  had  been  able  suc- 
cessfully to  resist  its  power.  Throughout  this  period  the 
Fulani  would  seem  to  have  greatly  increased  in  numbers 
in  Gober,  and  under  their  own  chiefs  and  religious 
teachers    they    began    to    form    a    community   of    which 


RISE    OF    THE    FULANI  387 

the  independent  doctrines  gave  offence  to  the  pagan 
authorities. 

In  the  year  1802,  the  King  Bawa  sent  for  their 
Imaum,  Othman  dan  Fodio,  and  all  the  principal  Fulani 
chiefs,  and  administered  a  severe  public  reprimand  on 
account  of  the  religious  and  political  pretensions  that 
they  were  beginning  to  put  forward.  This  was  but  a 
spark  to  the  tinder.  Indignation  spread  through  the 
Fulani  community  at  the  insult  which  had  been  offered 
to  their  chiefs.  Othman  dan  Fodio  inflamed  the  general 
sentiment  by  his  preaching,  in  which  he  urged  the  Fulani 
to  submit  no  longer  to  the  yoke  of  a  pagan  people.  The 
Fulani  chiefs  raised  the  standard  of  revolt ;  Othman 
was  elected  Sheikh,  and  under  his  leadership  a  Holy 
War  was  declared  which  was  to  counterbalance,  by  the 
successes  which  it  gave  to  the  Fulani  on  the  eastern  side 
of  the  Niger,  any  temporary  loss  which  this  people  had 
suffered  in  the  west.  The  date  of  the  opening  of  the 
Holy  War  is  given  differently  by  different  authors,  who 
vary  between  1800  and  1804,  but  it  evidently  broke  out 
immediately  after  the  taking  of  Timbuctoo  by  the  Tuaregs 
in  1800,  and  Othman  dan  Fodio  gave  the  lead  in  Haussa- 
land,  which  was  shortly  followed  by  Ahmadou  in  the  west. 
Between  them  these  two  Fulani  Sheikhs  conquered  the 
Western  Soudan  from  Masina  to  Bornu. 

The  first  efforts  of  the  Fulani  in  Haussaland  were 
stoutly  resisted  by  Gober,  and,  though  the  province  was 
subdued,  the  capital,  Alkalawa,  was  not  taken  during  the 
lifetime  of  Dan  Fodio.  But  through  the  rest  of  Haussa- 
land, where  the  towns  were  already  half  in  Fulani  hands, 
the  conquest  of  the  Fulani  spread  rapidly.  Zanfara  was 
conquered  in  the  first  year  of  the  war ;  Zaria  was  either 
conquered,  or  allied  itself  with  the  conquerors,  within  a 
month  of  the  submission  of  Zanfara.  The  conquest  of 
Kano  shortly  followed  ;  Katsena  was  taken  in  1807  ;  and 
in  1808  the  victorious  arms  of  the  Fulani  were  carried 
into  Bornu. 

Here,  however,  after  a  short  period  of  triumph,  they 


388  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

were  met  and  successfully  resisted  by  another  Sheikh, 
Mohammed  el  Kancmi,  who  arose  in  Kanem,  and  took 
the  reins  of  power  from  the  effete  sovereigns  of  Bornu. 
This  man,  who  founded  the  existing  dynasty  of  Bornu, 
was  visited  by  Major  Denham  in  1823,  and  is  described 
by  him  as  "a  most  extraordinary  instance  in  the  Eastern 
world  of  fearless  bravery,  virtue,  and  simplicity."  His 
career  was  remarkable  enough  to  deserve  something 
more  than  a  passing  mention.  He  was  born  in  Fezzan, 
though  of  Kanem  parents,  having,  it  is  said,  on  his 
father's  side,  some  Moorish  blood.  He  appears  to  have 
been,  at  least  partly,  educated  in  Egypt,  and  to  have 
been  already  in  the  position  of  a  Sheikh  before  he  first 
visited  the  home  of  his  parents  in  Kanem.  Here  he 
lived  for  some  years,  greatly  beloved  and  respected  for 
the  extreme  uprightness  and  benevolence  of  his  life. 

It  was  the  conquest  of  Bornu  by  the  Fulani  which 
brought  him  into  public  life.  Believing,  or  causing  his 
Kanemi  followers  to  believe,  that  he  was  inspired  by  a 
vision  of  the  Almighty  to  undertake  the  liberation  of 
the  country,  he  collected  a  little  body  of  the  faithful, 
only  400  strong,  and  with  them  marched  to  a  first 
encounter  with  the  Fulani.  He  is  said  to  have  over- 
thrown an  army  8000  strong.  The  result  was,  of  course, 
to  bring  more  soldiers  to  his  standard,  and  in  ten  months 
he  was  victorious  in  forty  battles.  It  is  said  that  he 
had  all  the  qualifications  of  a  great  commander,  but  so 
little  of  personal  ambition  that  when,  after  he  had  driven 
the  Fulani  out  of  Bornu,  the  people  desired  to  make 
him  Sultan,  he  refused  the  offer,  and  placed  Mohammed, 
the  brother  of  the  deposed  Sultan  Achmet,  on  the 
throne.  He  refused  all  titles  for  himself,  except  that 
of  "Servant  of  God,"  but  he  kept  the  practical  powers 
of  a  dictator,  and,  while  he  lived  without  ostentation,  he 
was  the  head  of  the  army,  and  the  real  ruler  of  the 
kingdom.  He  completely  overthrew  the  Fulani,  and 
defended  the  Empire  of  Bornu  in  many  desperate  cam- 
paigns against  the  attacks  of  Baghirmi.     On  the  death 


RISE    OF    THE    FULANI  389 

of  Sultan  Mohammed  he  still  refused  to  be  made  Sultan, 
and  again  put  a  dummy  Sultan  on  the  throne,  reserving 
for  himself  the  responsibility  of  power  without  any  of 
its  outward  display.  His  campaigns  were  usually  suc- 
cessful, and  it  is  said  of  him  that  he  "turned  all  victories 
to  the  advantage  of  those  whom  he  overthrew."  By 
the  purity  of  his  administration  and  the  reforms  which 
he  introduced,  the  kingdom  grew  in  enlightenment  as 
well  as  power.  Nowhere  were  the  laws  of  Islam  more 
strictly  observed  than  in  Bornu  under  his  administration. 
The  wider  education  of  his  youth  had  given  him  a 
knowledge  of  other  countries,  which  he  used  for  the 
benefit  of  his  own.  Foreigners  were  well  received,  trade 
prospered,  and  the  roads,  through  the  Sheikh's  govern- 
ment, were,  according  to  Major  Denham,  "as  safe  as 
any,   even  in  happy  England  itself." 

After  the  overthrow  of  Baghirmi,  which  was  achieved 
with  the  co-operation  of  the  ruler  of  the  Fezzan  about 
the  year  1824,  the  ruler  of  Bornu  turned  his  arms 
against  South -western  Haussaland,  where  he  was  at 
first  successful,  and  took  from  the  Fulani  the  province 
of  Bautchi,  which  they  had  conquered  shortly  after  the 
taking  of  Zaria ;  but  here,  in  the  year  1826,  he  was 
destined  to  meet  with  a  reverse.  His  armies  were 
defeated  by  the  Fulani,  and  he  himself  narrowly  escaped 
with  his  life.  Shortly  after  this  he  came  to  terms  of 
agreement  with  the  Fulani. 

He  died  in  1835,  when  his  son,  who  succeeded, 
abolished  the  dummy  Sultans,  and  established  the  dynasty 
of  the  Kanemi  openly  on  the  throne  of  Bornu. 


CHAPTER    XLII 

SULTAN   BELLO 

The  whole  of  Haussaland  up  to  the  borders  of  Bornu 
had  before  this  become  subject  to  the  conquering  Fulani. 
Othman  dan  Fodio  himself  died  in  1816,  and  divided 
his  newly  conquered  empire  between  his  son,  Mohammed 
Bello,  and  a  brother,  Abdallai.  He  gave  to  Mohammed 
Bello,  who,  during  his  father's  lifetime,  had  founded  for 
himself  the  new  town  of  Sokoto,  the  sovereignty  of  the 
Eastern  Provinces,  while  to  his  brother,  whose  head- 
quarters were  at  Gando,  south  and  slightly  west  of 
Sokoto,  he  gave  the  provinces  of  the  West.  Sultan 
Bello,  a  man  no  less  remarkable  than  his  great  rival, 
Mohammed  el  Kanemi,  of  Bornu,  continued  to  reign 
until  1837,  and  this  period,  almost  coinciding  with  the 
great  period  of  Bornu  under  its  new  ruler,  must  be  re- 
garded as  forming  also  the  great  period  of  Fulani  rule 
in  Haussaland. 

Sultan  Bello  ascended  to  the  throne  at  a  very  diffi- 
cult moment.  His  father's  arms,  largely  under  Bello's 
direction,  had  completed  the  conquest  of  the  principal 
states  of  Kano,  Katsena,  and  Zaria,  in  the  centre  of 
Haussaland,  and  had  spread  to  the  south-east  over  the 
Bautchi  Hills,  and  into  the  provinces  bordering  upon 
the  Benue.  The  Fulani  had  also,  as  we  have  seen, 
fought  successfully  with  Zanfara  and  Gando.  But  the 
western  group  of  provinces,  including  Zanfara,  Gober, 
and  Gando,  had  been  very  imperfectly  subdued.  These 
provinces,  of  which  the  governments  would  seem  to 
have  been  pagan,  were  filled  with  stubborn  fighters.  It 
suited  the  Fulani  to  proclaim  a  holy  war,  and  to  inflame 


SULTAN    BELLO  391 

the  courage  of  their  armies  by  treating  their  enemies 
as  infidels,  but,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  there  were  many- 
Mohammedans  amongst  their  opponents,  for  Islam  had 
long  been  the  religion  of  the  upper  classes  of  all  the 
principal  towns  of  Haussaland.  In  the  central  provinces 
of  Katsena,  Kano,  and  Zaria,  the  government  and  the 
whole  organisation  of  society  was  Mohammedan,  a  fact 
admitted  by  the  Fulani  when  they  adopted,  as  they 
subsequently  did,  the  existing  Haussa,  or,  as  the  con- 
querors preferred  to  call  them,  "  Habe,"  systems  of 
law,  justice,  and  taxation.  All  these  were  based  upon 
the  Koran.  In  Zaria  the  reigning  dynasty  was  actually 
Fulani ;  in  Katsena  and  Kano  the  reigning  sovereigns 
were  of  Haussa  dynasties,  but  for  many  generations 
they  had  been  Mohammedan.  Kebbi,  one  of  the  most 
stubborn  opponents  of  Fulani  domination,  was  itself,  as 
we  have  seen,  at  one  time  partly  populated  by  Fulani. 
There  existed,  therefore,  in  all  these  provinces  large 
bodies  of  Mohammedans,  who  were  driven  out  before 
the  conquerors,  and  in  many  cases  we  hear  of  Moham- 
medan Haussas  obliged  to  take  refuge,  like  the  pagan 
population,  in  the  hills.  This  is  to  say,  that  everywhere 
there  existed  large  sections  of  the  cultivated  upper 
classes  profoundly  antagonistic  to  Fulani  rule.  Shortly 
after  1808  the  defeats  of  the  Fulani  by  Mohammed  el 
Kanemi  in  Bornu  began  to  inspire  new  courage  into 
the  disaffected,  and  about  the  year  1816,  the  very  year 
of  the  accession  of  Mohammed  Bello,  a  confederation 
was  formed  of  Haussa  States  determined  to  fight  for 
their  independence  with  the  Fulani. 

According  to  a  Mohammedan  account  written  by  a 
certain  Hadj  Said,  and  translated  as  a  fragment  of  the 
history  of  Sokoto  by  M.  Houdas,  Sultan  Bello  had  hardly 
received  the  oath  of  allegiance  when  all  the  provinces 
neighbouring  upon  Sokoto  abjured  Islam  and  rose  in 
revolt  against  the  Mohammedan  rulers,  who  were  appar- 
ently supported,  perhaps  nominated,  by  Bello.  The  native 
chiefs  of  Gober,  Zanfara,  and  Nupe,  were  the  first  to  form 


392  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

the  confederation.  They  were  shortly  joined  by  Northern 
Katsena,  Yauri,  Kebbi,  Kano,  Kontagora,  Daura,  and 
Southern  Zaria.  It  would  seem  that  all  the  lesser  states 
of  Haussaland  at  one  time  joined  this  "  Tawias  "  or  revolt 
against  the  Fulani.  That  it  was  not  a  religious  but  a 
political  revolt  is  made  fairly  clear  by  the  names  of  Kebbi, 
Kano,  and  Katsena,  who  were  distinctly  Mohammedan, 
and  by  the  fact  that  the  confederation  entered  into  alliance 
with  the  Moors. 

One  native  chief  led  the  revolt  in  Zanfara,  and  estab- 
lished himself  in  a  stronghold  almost  within  sight  of  Sokoto. 
Another  led  the  revolt  in  the  province  of  Gando.  The 
early  years  of  Bello's  reign  were  occupied  by  constant 
expeditions  against  the  revolted  provinces.  After  fighting 
the  pagan  leaders  in  Gando,  Gober,  Zanfara,  and  Kebbi, 
he  encountered  the  Moors  and  was  himself  defeated.  It  is 
to  be  noted  that  in  these  campaigns  Bello's  successes  are 
always  attributed  to  the  exertions  of  his  cavalry. 

At  a  date  which  is  not  specified  by  Hadj  Said,  but 
which  must  probably  have  been  about  the  year  1820,  the 
confederated  states  made  a  determined  effort  to  overthrow 
their  Fulani  conqueror.  They  renewed  their  alliance  with 
the  Moors,  and  having  assured  themselves  of  the  sympathy 
of  Mohammed  el  Kanemi  of  Bornu,  their  combined  forces 
marched  upon  the  territory  of  Sokoto.  Bello  collected  an 
immense  army  at  Wurnu,  and  Omar,  the  head  of  the 
Fulani  Church,  a  very  holy  man  living  in  high  repute  at 
Sokoto,  addressed  the  soldiers.  The  Fulani  professed  to 
regard  the  war  as  a  struggle  for  life  and  death  between 
Islam  and  paganism.  The  soldiers  of  Bello's  army  were 
enjoined  to  keep  their  hearts  pure,  and  to  commit  no 
atrocities.  With  these  injunctions  the  army  marched  to 
the  encounter  of  the  federated  forces.  The  attack  appears 
to  have  been  made  from  the  north,  and  in  the  dry  season 
of  the  year.  The  sufferings  of  the  army  from  thirst  were 
terrible.  Bello,  in  person,  encouraged  the  troops  by  re- 
minding them  constantly  of  the  sacred  cause  for  which 
they   fought,    but  at  last   the   position  grew  so  desperate 


SULTAN    BELLO  393 

that  the  army  was  halted,  and  Bello  called  upon  the 
Sheikh  Omar,  who  had,  of  course,  accompanied  the  troops, 
to  pray  for  guidance  as  to  whether  it  was  the  will  of  the 
Almighty  that  they  should  return  without  encountering 
the  enemy. 

It  is  rather  interesting  to  find  among  the  religious 
enthusiasts  of  the  Fulani  of  Sokoto  in  the  early  part  of 
the  century  the  same  ideas  of  spiritualism,  higher  thought, 
and  second-sight,  which  are  to-day  animating  the  modern 
religious  sects  of  England  and  America.  Omar,  it  is  said, 
having  spent  the  night  in  prayer,  at  sunrise  heard  a  voice 
which  cried  three  times,  "Victory  has  come!"  The 
Sultan  at  this  moment  sent  to  inquire  of  the  holy 
man  what  was  the  will  of  God.  Was  the  army  to 
advance  or  to  retreat?  "To  advance!"  replied  the 
Sheikh.  The  troops  accordingly  marched  and  encamped 
one  station  farther  in  the  thirsty  land.  Here,  by  the 
holiness  of  the  Sheikh,  a  wonder  was  achieved.  For 
Omar,  having  prostrated  himself  in  prayer  and  remained 
long  upon  the  earth,  saw  as  in  second-sight  water  coming 
underground.  Only  when  he  saw  this  did  he  raise  his 
head  from  the  ground.  The  Sultan  then  took  a  spear, 
and  plunging  it  into  the  earth,  gave  the  order,  "  Dig 
here!"  Hardly  had  they  begun  to  dig  when  water  rose. 
Every  man  then  received  orders  to  dig  in  the  place  on 
which  he  stood,  and  everywhere  that  the  soldiers  dug 
water  was  found. 

This  incident  is  quite  in  the  spirit  of  the  religious 
life  of  Sokoto.  One  of  the  principal  generals  of  the  army, 
Abd  el  Kader,  who  was  also  famed  for  the  holiness  of  his 
life,  used  to  have  visions  in  which  he  had  intercourse 
with  the  dead,  and  at  the  house  of  one  of  the  noble  ladies 
of  Sokoto  spiritualistic  stances  used  to  be  held,  in  which 
the  spirits  of  the  great  dead  showed  themselves,  we  are 
told,  to  those  who  were  worthy  to  perceive  them. 

The  army  remained  on  this  spot  for  two  days.  On 
the  following  Monday  they  prayed,  and  on  the  Tuesday 
the  "  army  of  the  infidels  "  arrived.     With  them  was  Aber, 


394  A    TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

King  of  the  Moors.  Certain  Moors  who  were  with  Belle 
pointed  this  out  to  him,  and  the  unwelcome  evidence 
that  the  opposing  army  was  not  composed  entirely  of 
infidels  made  Bello  so  angry  that  he  ordered  the  Moors 
who  were  with  him  to  quit  the  ranks. 

The  battle  began.  "  God  gave  the  victory  to  the 
Moslems,  and  25,000  of  the  enemy  were  killed."  The 
number  of  confederated  states  engaged  may  be  partly 
estimated  by  the  havoc  made  among  their  rulers.  Al, 
King  of  Gober,  was  taken  prisoner ;  Roud,  King  of 
Katsena,  was  killed ;  Aber,  King  of  the  Moors,  fled. 
Bello  kept  his  soldiers  in  strict  order,  and  allowed  no 
slaves  to  be  made.  He  assembled  the  notables  of  Gober, 
and  bade  them  choose  a  king  in  place  of  the  king  whom 
he  had  taken  prisoner.  They  chose  Bello's  own  son,  Fodi. 
We  are  not  told  whether  the  votes  were  free.  But  even 
the  complaisant  chronicler  of  the  Fulani  records  that 
Fodi's  conduct  in  his  new  kingdom  was  "  scandalous." 
He  was  "tyrannical,  dissolute,  impious,  and  occupied 
himself  solely  with  games  and  pleasure."  The  appoint- 
ment is  worth  noting,  as  Fodi  furnishes  in  the  lifetime  of 
Sultan  Bello  an  example  of  the  bad  Fulani  of  whom,  in  the 
universal  praise  of  the  Fulani  race,  there  is  a  tendency  to 
lose  sight.  If  it  may  be  said  of  Sultan  Bello  that  he  was 
himself  an  embodiment  of  the  very  best  qualities  of  his 
race,  this  favoured  son  may  no  less  justly  be  taken  as  a 
prototype  of  the  cruel  and  self-indulgent  despots,  under 
whose  rule  at  a  later  period  Haussaland  fell  into  the  state 
of  ruin  and  decadence  in  which  we  found  it. 

The  battle  in  which  this  victory  of  Islam  was  achieved 
was  called  the  battle  of  Dagh.  Disastrous  as  it  was  to 
the  interests  of  the  confederation,  the  states  did  not 
accept  the  result  as  a  final  and  decisive  defeat.  They 
continued  their  resistance  to  Fulani  rule,  and  Bello 
addressed  himself  to  the  task  of  reducing  each  singly 
to  submission.  Zanfara  was  conquered,  and  he  placed 
his  brother  Atiku  upon  that  throne.  Gando  then  raised 
a  revolt  against   Abdallai,    Bello's  uncle.     Bello  marched 


SULTAN    BELLO  395 

against  the  revolted  province,  and  the  campaign  is  inte- 
resting for  the  illustration  which  it  gives  of  liello's  respect 
for  his  father's  division  of  the  territory  of  Haussaland,  and 
also  for  the  growing  evidence — which  even  the  Fulani 
generals  could  not  ignore — that  the  opponents  of  Bello 
were  not  entirely  pagans.  Throughout  the  campaign 
Bello  forbade  his  troops  to  enter  the  town  of  Gando, 
which  was  under  his  uncle's  rule,  and  we  are  allowed  to 
know  that  warm  discussions  arose  between  the  generals 
as  to  whether  their  enemies  were  infidels  or  not.  When 
at  last  the  battle  which  put  an  end  to  the  revolt  was 
fought,  it  was  found  necessary,  in  observance  of  Koranic 
law,  to  apply  some  religious  test  to  the  prisoners.  They 
were  called  upon  to  recite  the  fatiha,  and  to  make  their 
ablutions.  Those  who  passed  the  test  satisfactorily  were 
set  at  liberty.  Those  who  did  not  were  sold  as  slaves. 
The  refusal  to  permit  slaves  to  be  made  after  the  battle 
of  Dagh  already  indicated  some  scruple  of  conscience 
on  Bello's  part. 

It  was  at  about  this  period  that  Mohammed  el  Kanemi 
of  Bornu,  having  completed  the  subjection  of  Baghirmi, 
turned  his  attention  to  Haussaland.  All  the  vanquished 
Sultans  of  Western  Haussaland,  says  the  chronicler, 
grouped  themselves  round  him,  and  he  promised  to 
restore  them  all  to  their  thrones  should  he  prove  vic- 
torious in  the  struggle  with  the  Sultan  Bello. 

The  encounter  between  the  two  forces  took  place,  as 
we  have  seen,  in  the  south-eastern  provinces,  and  was 
unfavourable  to  the  hopes  of  the  Haussa  kings.  The 
army  of  Bornu,  bearing  a  letter  of  defiance  to  Sultan 
Bello,  marched  in  the  first  instance  upon  Kano.  Bello, 
who  appears  to  have  fully  recognised  the  magnitude  of  the 
danger  which  threatened  him  in  now,  for  the  first  time, 
frankly  facing  a  Mohammedan  foe,  rallied  all  his  forces 
from  the  south,  and  called  upon  the  Fulani  sovereigns 
of  Zaria  and  Bautchi  to  put  their  armies  in  the  field. 
A  general  advance  was  made  against  El  Kanemi,  who 
appears   to  have  turned  and  marched  southwards.      The 


396  A    TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

exact  spot  in  which  the  first  battle  took  place  is  not 
indicated  ;  but  the  fight  raged  long  and  fiercely,  and  it 
was  the  troops  of  Yakoub,  the  Sultan  of  Bautchi,  who 
at  last  decided  the  action  against  Bornu.  This  battle, 
which,  as  we  learn  from  the  history  of  Bornu,  took 
place  in  1826,  appears  to  have  been  the  last  important 
battle  of  Sultan  Bello's  reign.  After  it  a  lasting  peace 
was  concluded  between  Sokoto  and  Bornu,  and  the 
principal  Haussa  dynasties  appear  to  have  acquiesced  in 
their  final  deposition  from  the  thrones  of  Haussaland. 

The  western  states  of  the  Haussa  confederation, 
according  to  the  account  given  by  Clapperton,  finally 
made  peace  on  the  understanding  that  they  were  to 
continue  to  be  ruled  by  their  hereditary  native  princes, 
and  that  the  Fulani  were  not  to  interfere  with  them.  It 
is  not  definitely  stated  that  these  were  the  states  subject 
to  Gando,  but  the  general  course  of  events  would  lead 
to  this  inference.  The  ruler  of  Gando  had  from  the 
beginning  leaned  upon  Sokoto,  in  order  to  obtain  the 
submission  of  his  subject  provinces.  Thus  Sokoto  ap- 
parently gained  a  vague  overlordship  of  Gando,  while  the 
states  of  which  Gando  was  suzerain  existed  on  somewhat 
different  terms  from  those  acknowledging  direct  allegi- 
ance to  Sokoto.  Sokoto  became  the  universally  accepted 
suzerain  of  the  entire  territory,  and  Fulani  rule  was 
established  more  or  less  completely  from  the  capital  of 
that  province  to  the  farthest  limit  enclosed  between  the 
Middle  Niger  and  the  Benue. 

According  to  the  Fulani  chronicles,  while  Bello  lived, 
Haussaland  enjoyed  a  period  of  great  prosperity.  Clap- 
perton, who  travelled  through  the  country  during  the 
lifetime  of  Sultan  Bello,  tells  us  that  under  Fulani  rule 
trade  was  discouraged  by  heavy  duties,  but  that  agri- 
culture flourished.  The  country  round  Zaria,  when  he 
first  saw  it,  was  "like  the  finest  in  England."  There 
were  quantities  of  rice  and  corn,  and  the  land  every- 
where "  looked  beautiful."  He  notes  fine  cattle  and 
horses,   and   heavy   crops   of  grain    "just  high  enough  to 


SULTAN    BELLO  397 

wave  with  the  wind."  Wheat  began  north  of  Zaria. 
Zaria  was  then  largely  populated  by  Fulani  and  Arabs, 
who  had  flocked  to  Dan  Fodio's  standard,  and  to  whom 
he  had  given  the  lands  of  the  former  inhabitants,  who 
had  fled  to  the  mountains  in  the  southern  part  of  the 
province.  These  Mohammedan  inhabitants  maintained, 
like  the  pagans,  a  chronic  state  of  war  against  the 
Fulani.  The  general  form  of  residence  of  the  Fulani 
rulers  in  Haussaland  seems  to  have  been  adapted  to 
this  condition  of  affairs,  and  was,  Clapperton  tells  us, 
"like  the  old  keeps  or  castles  in  Scotland,  near  the 
borders." 

Throughout  the  whole  of  his  active  life  Bello  found 
time  to  devote  to  literature.  He  was  extremely  fond 
of  study,  and  wrote  many  books.  His  numerous  works 
were,  it  is  said,  usually  written  in  the  form  of  dissertations, 
or  replies  to  questions  which  raised  doubtful  points  of 
law.  But  he  also  wrote  some  purely  literary  essays, 
amongst  them  one  upon  the  poems  of  his  father,  which 
w^ere  "composed  in  the  Soudanese  language."  Some 
short  notes  of  his  upon  the  geography  and  history  of 
the  Soudan,  compiled  by  him  from  Haussa  manuscripts, 
have  been  preserved.  He  is  said  to  have  encouraged 
science  and  learning,  and  at  his  court  distinguished  men 
from  all  countries  were  well  received.  It  must,  however, 
be  counted  as  a  serious  blot  upon  his  literary  reputation 
that  he  everywhere  permitted  Haussa  manuscripts  to  be 
destroyed,  in  order  to  efface  the  records  of  the  con- 
quered people. 

He  encouraged  the  members  of  his  own  family  to 
acquire  learning,  and  protested  warmly  against  the  form 
of  Haussa  superstition,  which  would  have  accredited 
them,  by  the  mere  fact  of  their  birth,  with  inherited 
wisdom.  "That,"  he  constantly  told  them,  "is  pure  illu- 
sion ;  knowledge  can  be  maintained  only  by  instruction." 

In  his  public  dealings  he  was  equitable  and  modest. 
He  maintained  himself  in  early  life  entirely  by  his  own 
exertions,  refusing  to  live  upon  the  public  treasury.      He 


398  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

had  entered  into  this  compact  when  he  and  his  father 
opened  their  first  holy  campaign.  "  For  you,"  he  said 
to  his  father,  "it  is  unavoidable  that  you  should  use  the 
public  money ;  but  I  am  young :  I  can  learn  a  trade 
and  support  myself."  This,  according  to  one  of  his 
historians,  he  continued  to  do  all  his  life ;  but  it  is 
more  probable  that  after  his  accession  he  yielded,  like 
his  father,  to  the  pressure  of  necessity,  and  made  use 
of  the  public  funds. 

He  was,  we  are  told,  very  good  to  the  people,  full 
of  indulgence,  calm  and  patient.  He  was  an  able  ad- 
ministrator. When  he  wrote  the  treatises  upon  points 
of  law,  to  which  he  devoted  much  of  his  time,  the  first 
thing  that  he  did  with  them  was  to  make  them  known 
to  all  his  people,  in  order  that  the  law  might  be  gene- 
rally observed.  He  inspected  the  Cadis,  kept  them  in 
check,  and  annulled  any  unjust  judgment.  When,  after 
his  death,  he  was  succeeded  by  his  brother  Atiku,  the 
judges  begged  Atiku  not  to  reverse  their  judgments  as 
Bello  had  done  ;  but  Atiku  was  of  the  same  breed,  and 
only  replied:  "Judge  with  equity,  and  I  will  not  reverse 
your  judgments.  Be  on  the  side  of  right  wherever  you 
find  it."  The  system  of  justice  adopted  by  the  Fulani 
was  that  already  instituted  by  the  Haussas.  In  their 
system  of  taxation  the  Fulani  would  seem,  however,  to 
have  introduced  innovations  which  must  have  been  in 
many  instances  grievous  to  the  Haussa  people. 

In  appearance  Bello  was  "red,  tall,  and  bald,  with 
a  tufted  beard."  He  wore  the  veil.  His  final  illness 
lasted  for  some  months.  When  it  became  grave,  he 
sent  for  his  son  Ali,  and  warned  him  against  trying  to 
become  Sultan  after  him.  He  refused  to  name  a  suc- 
cessor ;  but  desired  that  his  successor  should  be  elected 
according  to  the  custom  of  the  people.  He  died  at 
fifty-eight  years  of  age,  and  left  many  sons  and  daughters. 


CHAPTER   XLIII 

NORTHERN    NIGERIA    UNDER    FULANI    RULE 

Bello  of  Sokoto  and  Kanemi  of  Bornu,  who  died 
within  two  years  of  each  other,  were  the  two  great 
native  sovereigns  of  the  nineteenth  century  in  the 
country  now  known  as  Northern  Nigeria. 

They  had  established  their  dynasties  securely  on 
their  respective  thrones,  but  the  impression  of  their 
greatness  did  not  long  survive  them.  It  would  but 
weary  the  reader  if  I  were  to  attempt  to  relate  the 
little  wars  and  counter  wars  which  filled  the  second 
half  of  the  nineteenth  century,  and  immediately  pre- 
ceded the  introduction  of  British  administration.  What 
has  been  told  of  the  establishment  of  the  Bornuese  and 
Fulani  powers  is  enough  to  show  that  in  both  cases 
very  strong  elements  of  disruption  were  waiting  only 
for  the  removal  of  the  hand  which  had  welded  the  state 
together  to  break  into  active  discord.  There  has  re- 
mained the  difference  between  the  two  empires,  that  in 
Bornu  the  power  established  was  to  a  great  extent  a 
native  power,  which  had  to  war  against  foreign  invad- 
ing elements,  while  in  the  rest  of  Haussaland  the  power 
established  was  a  foreign  power  which  fastened  itself 
upon  the  necks  of  already  existing  and  well-established 
native  rulers.  The  wars,  which  in  the  latter  half  of  the 
century  decimated  both  empires,  kept  the  different  char- 
acter imposed  by  this  circumstance. 

In  the  case  of  Bornu,  the  attacks  of  old  enemies 
and  foreign  invaders  from  the  east  tended  to  minimise 
the    native    power,    while    pagan    states    previously   held 


400  A   TROPICAL   DEPENDENCY 

subject  in  the  south  profited  by  every  opportunity  to 
assert  their  independence. 

On  the  western  border  of  Bornu  some  Fulani  states  also 
made  good  an  independent  position  ;  desert  tribes  raided 
from  the  north,  and  Bornu  proper  became,  in  the  course 
of  fifty  years,  a  mere  section  of  the  Bornu  Empire  as 
it  was  ruled  by  Mohammed  el  Kanemi.  Barth,  who 
entered  Haussaland  from  Tripoli  in  1850,  and  travelled 
through  Bornu,  gives  some  account  of  troubles  already 
tending  to  overthrow  the  power  and  dignity  of  Bornu. 
By  various  causes,  of  which  perpetual  slave-raiding  was 
not  the  least  active,  the  country  was  gradually  deso- 
lated. Its  trade  was  almost  destroyed,  its  agriculture 
ruined,  and  towards  the  end  of  the  century  it  fell  an 
easy  prey  to  a  native  military  adventurer  known  as 
Rabbeh  Zubeir,  who,  marching  with  a  large  army  from 
Darfur,  subdued  for  a  time  the  whole  Mohammedan  belt 
to  the  east  of  Chad.  In  1893  Rabbeh  overthrew  the 
existing  dynasty  of  Bornu,  and  continued  to  rule  the 
country  under  a  military  tyranny  till  in  April  of  1900 
he  in  turn  was  overthrown,  not  by  the  British,  but  by 
the  French.  French  troops  encountered  his  forces  upon 
the  border  of  what  is  now  German  territory,  and  having 
placed  their  own  nominee  on  the  throne  of  Bornu, 
their  commanders  were  actually  levying  tribute  in  British 
territory  at  the  moment  when  British  administration 
was  established  in  Northern  Nigeria.  The  fortunes  of 
Bornu  had  never  in  all  its  history  been  so  low ;  the 
pride  of  its  rulers,  represented  by  an  unhappy  puppet 
held  captive  in  foreign  territory,  was  in  the  dust. 

In  the  remainder  of  Haussaland  a  no  less  disastrous 
condition  of  affairs  had  been  produced  by  the  convulsive 
efforts  of  some  of  the  Haussa  States  to  cast  off  the  rule 
of  the  Fulani,  of  others  to  aggrandise  themselves  at  the 
expense  of  weaker  neighbours,  and  of  the  pagans  to 
maintain  their  cherished  independence  against  all  Mo- 
hammedan and  slave-raiding  powers  alike ;  while  above 
the  seething  mass  of  discontent,  rebellion,  and  civil  war. 


NIGERIA    UNDER    FULANI    RULE       401 

the  Fulani  power  tightened  its  hold  only  the  more 
despotically  upon  such  portions  of  the  country  as  it 
could  keep.  A  domination,  which  was  established  in 
the  name  of  religion  and  justice,  had  fallen  into  tyranny, 
tempered  only  by  the  weakness  or  the  moderation  of 
personal  rulers.  Under  Dan  Fodio  and  Bello  the  con- 
quering armies  of  the  Fulani  were  enjoined  to  spread 
the  true  faith  and  to  convert  the  pagans  to  Islamism. 
At  a  later  period  it  was  found  more  profitable  to  leave 
the  pagans  in  a  condition  in  which  it  was  lawful  to 
make  slaves  and  to  exact  tribute,  and  Fulani  wars  de- 
generated into  little  more  than  slave-raiding  expeditions. 
The  judicial  system  of  the  Haussas,  already  founded 
on  Mohammedan  institutions,  and  adopted  in  the  first 
instance  by  the  conquerors,  was  allowed  to  fall  into 
disuse.  Courts  continued  to  exist,  but  the  Alkalis  who 
should  have  presided  over  them  and  dispensed  justice 
according  to  Koranic  law,  irremovable  from  their  posi- 
tions as  the  judges  of  Great  Britain,  were  either  dis- 
regarded, as  in  some  cases  by  the  great  chiefs  who 
held  their  own  courts  and  gave  decisions  at  their  own 
will,  or  over-ruled  by  the  emir,  or  worse  still,  subjected 
to  the  authority  of  the  emir's  favourite  slaves,  who 
decreed  to  their  enemies  inhuman  punishments  of  their 
own  invention.  For  the  nails  to  be  torn  out  with  red- 
hot  pincers,  for  the  limbs  to  be  pounded  one  by  one 
in  a  mortar  while  the  victims  were  still  alive,  for  im- 
portant people  who  had  offended  to  be  built  up  alive 
gradually  in  the  town  walls,  till,  after  a  period  of 
agony,  the  head  of  the  dying  man  was  finally  walled 
up,  were  among  the  punishments  well  attested  to  have 
been  inflicted  in  the  decadence  of  Fulani  power.  It  is 
said  that  a  considerable  number  of  the  walls  of  Haussa 
towns  are  known  by  the  people  to  have  been  so  built  up, 
and  are  even  now  called  by  the  name  of  the  most  dis- 
tinguished victims  whose  corpses  they  contain.  Impale- 
ment and  mutilation  were  among  the  penalties  of  lesser 
offences.     Some  of    the   Fulani    emirs  would    themselves 

2  c 


402  A    TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

appear  to  have  been  monsters  of  inhumanity,  who  re- 
joiced, like  the  depraved  emperors  of  Rome,  in  witness- 
ing the  mortal  agonies  of  their  victims.  The  public 
prisons  became  places  of  public  torture,  from  which  few 
who  were  confined  in  them  could  escape  alive.  Here 
is  the  description  of  the  prison  of  Kano,  as  it  was  in 
existence  up  to  the  moment  of  the  British  occupation 
of  the  province.  I  quote  the  High  Commissioner's 
account,  given  in  the  Colonial  Report  for  Northern 
Nigeria,    1902  : — 

"  I  visited  the  dungeon  myself.  A  small  doorway, 
2  feet  6  inches  by  i  foot  6  inches,  gives  access  to  it. 
The  interior  is  divided,  by  a  thick,  mud  wall,  with  a 
similar  hole  through  it,  into  two  compartments,  each 
17  feet  by  7,  and  11  feet  high.  This  wall  was  pierced 
with  holes  at  its  base,  through  which  the  legs  of  those 
sentenced  to  death  were  thrust  up  to  the  thigh,  and  the 
condemned  men  were  left  to  be  trodden  on  by  the  mass 
of  other  prisoners  till  they  died  of  thirst  or  starvation. 
The  place  is  entirely  air-tight  and  unventilated,  except 
for  the  one  small  doorway,  or  rather  hole  in  the  wall, 
through  which  you  creep.  The  total  space  inside  is 
2618  cubic  feet,  and  at  the  time  we  took  Kano,  135 
human  beings  were  confined  here  each  night,  being  let  out 
during  the  day  to  cook  their  food,  &c.,  in  a  small  adjoining 
area.  Recently  as  many  as  200  have  been  interned  at 
one  time.  As  the  superficial  area  was  only  238  square 
feet,  there  was  not,  of  course,  even  standing  room. 
Victims  were  crushed  to  death  every  night,  and  their 
corpses  were  hauled  out  each  morning.  The  stench, 
I  am  told,  inside  the  place  when  Colonel  Morland  visited 
it  was  intolerable,  though  it  was  empty,  and  when  I 
myself  went  inside,  more  than  three  weeks  later,  the 
effluvia  was  unbearable  for  more  than  a  few  seconds." 

These  were  the  forms  and  these  the  instruments  to 
the  use  of  which  Fulani  justice  had  degenerated,  and  in 
the  midst  of  them  the  only  chance  of  obtaining  favourable 
consideration  of  a  given  case  lay  in  heavy  bribery.     The 


NIGERIA    UNDER    FULANI    RULE       403 

powers  and  constitution  of  the  courts  varied  in  every 
Fulani  province,  but  in  all  the  tendency  was  to  inflict 
heavy  fines  for  the  benefit  of  the  emir  and  the  court. 
In  all,  without  exception,  such  justice  as  there  was,  was 
bought  and  sold. 

The  system   of  taxation,   like    the    system    of  justice, 
originally  based  in  the   Haussa  States  upon  Koranic  law, 
and  in  the  first  instance  adopted  by  the  conquerors,  was 
similarly   debased.      The    legitimate    taxation  established 
under  the    Haussa    dynasties    divides    itself   roughly   into 
the  four   classes   of  taxes    on    land    and   crops ;  taxes  on 
cattle ;    taxes  on  handicrafts   and   trades  ;    customs,   tolls, 
and  death  duties.      To  these  there  was  added,  in  the  first 
instance,   a  tax  payable   from  all  the  conquered  states  to 
Sokoto  and  Gando,  which,  though  payable  from   Moslem 
to   Moslem,  and  called  by  a  different  name  to  distinguish 
it  from  the  tribute  only  lawfully  to  be  taken  from  pagans, 
was,   in  fact,  the  equivalent  of  a  tribute,  and  by  its  pay- 
ment conveyed  the  recognition  of  sovereignty.      Had  this 
been    all,    the    conquered    states    might    reasonably    have 
accepted  the  inevitable.       But  if  the   abuse   of  justice   is 
one  of  the  means  by  which  arbitrary  authority  can  assert 
its  power,  the  abuse  of  taxation  is  an  even  more  fruitful 
and    more    tempting   method.       Taxes    multiplied    in    the 
Fulani  states.      Under  the  four  leo^itimate  headino-s,  now 
increased    by   the   institution   of  the    Sokoto  and    Gando 
tribute  to  five,  each  ruler  invented  at  his  will  new  imposts. 
Even  in  Bello's  lifetime,  Haussa  trade  was,  according  to 
the   contemporary   observation    of   Clapperton,    hampered 
under  Fulani  rule  by  heavy  dues.     In  the  degradation  of 
Fulani  rule  in   the  latter  half  of  the   century,   trade  was 
practically    destroyed,    and    agriculture    rendered    almost 
impossible  by  the  ceaseless  creation  of  new   taxes.      Not 
only   were   new   taxes    imposed    at   the   will  of  each  new 
ruler,   but  the  collection  of  existing  taxes  was  made  the 
subject  of  such  abuse  as  the  collection  of  taxes  has  been 
ever  subject  to  in  countries  where  personal  authority  has 
supported  law.      A   body  of  alien   tax-gatherers  fastened 


404  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

like  parasites  upon  the  country.  Fulani  tax-collectors 
oppressed  the  native  peasantry  of  every  village.  To 
show  any  sign  of  wealth  was  to  invite  the  rapacity  of 
those  higher  in  the  social  scale.  The  Fulani  conquerors 
claimed  sovereign  rights  in  land.  Whole  districts  were 
given  as  feoffs  to  favourite  retainers,  who,  living  about  the 
court  in  the  enjoyments  of  office,  collected  taxes  for 
the  emir  and  for  themselves  from  their  feoffs  through 
the  agency  of  certain  officials.  These  officials  became 
practically  their  private  servants,  and  of  course  shared 
the  spoil.  Agriculture  groaned  under  the  exactions  that 
were  laid  upon  it. 

In  nearly  all  the  country  districts  the  peasantry  had 
remained  pagan.  To  raid  pagan  countries  for  slaves 
was  lawful  according  to  the  Koran.  In  the  earlier  years 
of  their  rule  the  Fulani  used  this  permission  to  carry  out 
raids  against  the  pagan  centres  of  the  southern  districts. 
Gradually,  however,  rebellion  had  its  effect.  As  their 
power  weakened,  and  was  confined  within  narrower 
limits  in  the  southern  emirates,  they  were  forced  to 
abandon  the  process  of  distant  raiding.  They  began  to 
raid  and  sell  their  own  peasantry,  and  thus  completed  the 
desolation  of  the  country  by  a  process  which  resembled 
the  fabulous  devouring  of  its  own  body  by  a  snake. 

It  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  that  revolt  succeeded  to 
revolt,  and  that  Fulani  power  was  more  and  more  con- 
fined in  the  southern  states  to  the  limits  of  its  own  walled 
towns.  Mutually  defiant  strongholds  arose  over  the 
country.  In  the  mountainous  districts  the  wilder  tribes 
of  the  pagans,  including  still  some  who  preserve  the 
habits  of  cannibals,  found  for  themselves  natural  fortresses, 
in  which  they  defended  as  they  could  the  liberty  which 
was  their  sole  possession. 

Yet  through  all  the  degradation  of  earlier  Fulani 
ideals  it  is  to  be  understood  that  in  the  Fulani  emirates 
there  was  still  to  be  found  something  of  the  nobler 
traditions  of  ancient  thought.  Individual  rulers  were 
still  merciful  and  just.     Abuse  of  power   had  not  wholly 


NIGERIA    UNDER    FULANI    RULE       405 

destroyed  its  dignity.  Though  nominally  the  rulers  of 
the  whole  of  Haussaland,  the  principal  seats  of  Fulani 
power  were  to  be  found  in  the  north.  Here  Sokoto  still 
commanded,  as  the  suzerain  of  Haussaland,  a  something 
more  than  nominal  allegiance  ;  Kano  sustained  its  ancient 
reputation  as  a  trade  centre,  of  which  the  relations  ex- 
tended to  the  Atlantic,  to  the  Red  Sea,  and  to  the 
Mediterranean  ;  Katsena  and  Zaria,  notwithstanding  many 
abuses,  maintained  themselves  as  administrative  centres 
of  importance. 

The  resemblance  between  the  feudal  system  of  the 
Fulani  and  the  system  established  by  the  conquests  of 
northern  nations  in  Europe  in  the  early  portion  of  the 
Middle  Ages,  will  not  have  escaped  the  reader.  The 
parallel  is  remarkable  with  the  system  established  in 
England  by  the  Saxons,  but  in  Haussaland  it  was  perhaps 
closer  to  that  which  was  developed  in  Italy  under  the 
Lombards.  There  is  also  this  point  of  difference,  that 
whereas  the  Haussas  were  an  agricultural  people,  the 
Fulani  were  in  their  origin  pastoral,  and  it  is  a  recognised 
law  of  historic  evolution  that  the  rule  of  pastoral  races 
has  a  stronger  tendency  to  despotism  than  the  rule  of 
agricultural  races.  Underneath  all  the  abuses  which  have 
established  themselves  in  the  Fulani  administration  of 
Haussaland  there  is  said  to  exist,  by  those  who  have 
had  the  opportunity  of  studying  the  state  systems  of  the 
different  emirates,  evidence  of  a  deep-rooted  desire  for 
self-government.  Presumably  the  conquered  states  en- 
deavoured to  retain  as  many  as  possible  of  the  existing 
safeguards  of  their  constitutions.  The  emirs  are  elected 
by  a  council  of  elders,  and  this  council  is  not  an  empty 
name.  It  has  a  right  to  be  consulted  by  the  emirs  in 
relation  to  all  their  important  acts.  The  emir  who 
ignores  it  is  regarded  as  a  tyrant,  and  runs  great  risk 
of  losing  his  throne. 

The  constitution  of  Bida,  by  which  the  Fulani 
emirate  of  Nupe  is  now  ruled,  is  one  in  which  the  prin- 
ciple of  constitutional  government  was  carried  under  the 


406  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

Fulani  to  its  most  complete  expression.  Here,  in  addition 
to  the  emir  and  a  council  of  princes  composed  only  of 
descendants  of  the  founder  of  the  dynasty,  which,  though 
not  entirely  hereditary,  bore  some  resemblance  to  a 
House  of  Lords,  there  was  also  a  council  corresponding 
in  some  degree  to  our  own  House  of  Commons.  This 
was  a  council  of  notables,  not  of  royal  blood,  but  holding 
important  state  offices,  and  including  the  waziri  or  prime 
minister,  the  chief  justice,  the  chief  preacher,  the 
commander-in-chief  of  the  army,  and  the  principal  officers 
of  the  emir's  household.  The  head  of  this  council  was 
the  prime  minister,  and  it  was  the  prime  minister,  not 
one  of  the  members  of  the  council  of  princes,  who  was 
regarded  as  second  in  the  state  to  the  emir.  Neither 
council  was  in  a  literal  sense  elective,  the  appointment 
to  both  being  in  the  hands  of  the  emir.  But  by  native 
custom  no  appointment  was  made  to  either  council  with- 
out giving  time  for  an  expression  of  public  opinion,  and 
there  were  certain  recognised  methods  by  which  the  emir 
took  the  advice  of  his  people  in  the  matter  both  of  appoint- 
ments to  council  and  to  all  the  principal  offices  of  state. 
Important  matters  of  public  policy  were  referred  to  the 
consideration  of  the  two  councils  sitting  together,  but 
the  ordinary  business  of  the  state  was  carried  on  by  a 
privy  council  composed  of  two  officers  taken  from  each 
council,  who  were  in  constant  consultation  with  the  emir. 
This  constitution  is  believed  to  have  been  adopted  from 
the  original  Nupe  state  system.  The  constitutions  of 
Sokoto  and  Gando,  both  of  them  new  states  created  by 
the  Fulani,  are  less  elaborate. 

By  the  end  of  the  nineteenth  century,  that  is,  at  the 
moment  of  the  introduction  of  British  authority,  the 
territory  of  Haussaland  may  be  said  to  have  divided 
itself  into  three  classes  of  states.  There  were  states 
under  P"ulani  rule  such  as  those  just  named,  where  Fulani 
institutions  were  in  active  existence  ;  other  states  conquered 
by  the  Fulani  and  nominally  under  Fulani  rule,  where 
taxes    and     Mohammedan    institutions    were    imposed    in 


NIGERIA    UNDER    FULANI    RULE       407 

different  degree  according  to  the  amount  of  real  authority 
exercised  by  the  conqueror  ;  and  states  which,  from  vary- 
ing  causes,    were   wholly    independent.     These  last   were 
either  states  which    had    succeeded    in    always    defending 
their  independence,  and  were   ruled  over  by   responsible 
native  rulers  of  their  own  race,  such  as   Boussa,   Kiania, 
Argungu,  &c.,  or   Haussa  and  pagan  communities  which, 
having   been   once   under   Fulani  rule,   had    succeeded   in 
throwing  it  off,  and  were  generally   known  by  the  name 
of   Tawai,   or  "  Revolted    Peoples."     Finally,   there    were 
independent    pagan   tribes,    mostly    in    a    low    stage    of 
development  —  sometimes    even    cannibals  —  and   owning 
allegiance   to  no   single  authority.     These  resembled  the 
pagans   of  the  coast,    among    whom  the  authority   of  an 
individual  chief  is   sometimes  limited  to  the  ramifications 
of    his    own    family.      As    the    higher    development    of 
Mohammedan  institutions  was  to  be  found  in  the  northern 
states,   so  this  lowest  type  of  pagan  was  most  numerous 
in  the    southern    districts   lying   upon    both    sides   of  the 
Benue.       And,    correspondingly,    while   the    low    class    of 
pagan   still  held  occasional  fastnesses  in  the  hills  of  the 
Fulani  states,  Fulani  conquerors  had  imposed  themselves 
upon  the  southern  districts  and  held  certain  walled  towns 
in  the  pagan  areas. 

Through  the  chaos  of  these  conflicting  interests,  the 
practice  of  slave-raiding,  carried  on  alike  by  the  highest 
and  the  lowest,  ran  like  the  poison  of  a  destructive  sore, 
destroying  every  possibility  of  peaceful  and  prosperous 
development. 


CHAPTER    XLIV 

SLAVE-RAIDING 

From  time  immemorial  the  slave  trade  of  the  ancient 
world  had  its  markets  of  supply  in  the  Soudan.  The 
earliest  Greek  historians  speak  of  slaves  captured  by 
the  native  tribes  of  North  Africa,  and  the  monuments 
of  Persia  and  Ethiopia  show  that  the  enslavement  of 
the  negro  was  a  custom  more  ancient  than  any  written 
record.  In  modern  times  the  horrors  of  the  African 
slave  trade  have  been  fully  exposed  by  the  great  army 
of  explorers  who  have  penetrated  into  the  interior  of 
the  continent.  Livingstone,  Baker,  Stanley,  Cameron, 
and  many  others,  have  given  the  testimony  of  eye-wit- 
nesses to  the  sufferings  of  the  natives,  whom  the  demand 
for  slaves  caused  to  be  hunted  like  wild  beasts  in  their 
homes.  My  husband,  when  he  fought  against  the  slave- 
raiders  of  Nyassaland,  was  himself  a  witness  of  the 
brutalities  of  the  Mohammedan  slave-hunters  in  East 
Africa.  The  curse  of  the  slave-hunt  in  the  equatorial 
regions  of  the  continent  has  known  no  limit  of  time 
or  place.  It  has  spread  broadly  from  sea  to  sea.  To 
abolish  it  has  been  one  of  the  aims  which  has  most 
strongly  enlisted  the  sympathy  of  the  public  in  the 
modern  movement  of  carrying  civilisation  into  Africa. 

During  the  whole  period  of  which  the  principal  historic 
movements  of  the  Western  Soudan  have  been  so  scantily 
outlined  in  this  book,  the  trade  in  slaves  was  one  of 
the  most  important  elements  of  local  industry  and  of 
foreign  commerce,  Spain  and  Portugal,  North  Africa  and 
Egypt,  drew  their   supply  of  slaves    through   the   Middle 

Ages  from  the  Soudan.     We  have  seen  at  a  later  period 

408 


SLAVE-RAIDING  409 

how  the  slave  trade  of  Europe  was  conducted  on  the 
coast. 

Slave  trade  carried  on  upon  an  extensive  scale  in- 
volved the  practice  of  slave-raiding  as  necessarily  as 
the  export  of  gold  involved  in  West  Africa  the  practice 
of  alluvial  gold-mining.  From  the  earliest  times  it  had 
been  the  custom,  as  we  have  seen,  not  only  of  Haussa- 
land,  but  of  all  the  countries  of  the  Western  Soudan, 
to  raid  the  territories  of  the  cannibal  pagans  to  the 
south  regularly  once  a  year  for  slaves,  and  when  war 
offered  occasion  for  further  profitable  captures,  whole 
armies  were  sometimes  enslaved. 

To  the  cannibal,  whose  practice  it  was  to  kill  and 
eat  his  prisoners,  slavery  presented  itself  in  the  light  of 
a  merciful  fate,  and  it  was  so  considered  by  the  con- 
queror. The  view  of  the  Mohammedan  or  of  the  higher 
class  pagan  with  regard  to  the  practice  of  raiding  for 
slaves,  would  seem  to  have  been  almost  identical  with 
that  of  the  Spaniards  and  Portuguese  at  the  time  of  the 
discovery  of  the  East  and  West  Indies.  Inferior  races 
of  a  different  faith  did  not  count  in  the  ranks  of  free 
human  beings.  They  were  little  better  than  cattle,  and 
as  such  might  be  hunted  and  taken  without  any  deroga- 
tion from  the  laws  of  humanity.  The  difference  between 
the  humane  man  and  the  cruel  man  lay  not  in  the  practice 
of  or  the  abstinence  from  slaving,  but  in  the  manner  in 
which  slaves  were  treated ;  and  in  general  the  slaves 
of  Negroland  would  seem  to  have  been  governed  with 
tolerant  good-humour.  Their  sufferings  were  not  directly 
intentional,  but  were  incidental  to  the  barbarities  of  the 
slave-raid,  by  which  whole  villages  were  destroyed,  and  to 
the  horrors  of  transit  on  foot  across  the  desert. 

Were  it  not  that  human  remains  are  destructible, 
the  caravan  route  from  Tripoli  to  Haussaland  would 
be  paved  deep  with  human  bones.  Here  is  a  descrip- 
tion, given  by  Major  Denham  in  1822,  of  the  condition 
of  that  road  less  than  a  hundred  years  ago.  He  men- 
tions   a    well    within    half  a    mile   of   Mesbroo.      "  Round 


4IO  A   TROPICAL   DEPENDENCY 

this  spot,"  he  says,  "  were  lying  more  than  a  hundred 
skeletons,  some  of  them  with  the  skin  still  remaining 
attached  to  the  bone.  The  Arabs  laughed  heartily  at 
my  expression  of  horror,  and  said  they  were  only  blacks, 
nam  boo  (damn  their  father),  and  began  knocking  their 
limbs  about  with  the  butt  end  of  their  firelocks,  saying  : 
'  This  was  a  woman  !  This  was  a  youngster ! '  "  As  the 
road  wound  southwards  skeletons  were  passed  at  the 
rate  of  eighty  and  ninety  a  day,  and  at  the  wells  of 
El  Hammar,  three  days  farther  on,  the  numbers  of 
skeletons  that  lay  about  were  countless.  "Those  of  two 
women,  whose  perfect  and  regular  teeth  bespoke  them 
young,  were  particularly  shocking;  their  arms  still  remained 
clasped  round  each  other  as  they  had  expired,  although 
the  flesh  had  long  since  -perished  by  being  exposed  to 
the  burning  rays  of  the  sun."  On  the  following  day,  as 
Major  Denham  dozed  on  his  horse  about  noon,  over- 
come by  the  heat  of  the  sun,  he  was  suddenly  awakened 
by  "a  crashing  under  my  feet,  which  startled  me  ex- 
cessively. I  found  that  my  steed  had,  without  any  sen- 
sation of  shame  or  alarm,  stepped  upon  the  perfect 
skeletons  of  two  human  beings,  cracking  their  brittle 
bones  under  his  feet,  and  by  one  trip  of  his  foot  separat- 
inof  from  the  trunk  a  skull  which  rolled  on  before  him." 
Along  the  greater  part  of  the  way,  Major  Denham  says  that 
every  few  miles  a  skeleton  was  seen  through  the  whole 
day.  "  Some  were  partially  covered  with  sand,  others 
with  only  a  small  mound  formed  by  the  wind  ;  one  hand 
often  lay  under  the  head,  and  frequently  both,  as  if  in  the 
act  of  compressing  the  head.  The  skin  and  membranous 
substance  all  shrivel  up  and  dry  from  the  state  of  the  air : 
the  thick  muscular  and  external  parts  only  decay."  When 
it  is  remembered  that  this  description  applies  in  the 
beginning  of  the  nineteenth  century  after  Christ  to  a 
road  which  has  been  used  for  the  same  purpose  of  slave 
transit  for  perhaps  as  many  as  nineteen  centuries  before 
Christ,  the  imagination  quails  before  the  total  of  grief  and 
suffering  which  must  lie  embedded  in  its  dust. 


SLAVE-RAIDING  411 

The  raids  by  means  of  which  slaves  are  obtained 
in  the  hunting  grounds  of  the  interior  to  be  despatched 
upon  this  journey  across  the  desert,  are  even  more  pro- 
ductive of  human  suffering,  more  desolating  to  all  that 
makes  up  the  most  primitive  conceptions  of  human  hap- 
piness. Apart  from  the  enslavement  of  prisoners  of  war, 
which  constitutes  a  separate  branch  of  the  same  custom, 
and  occurs  whenever  a  successful  war  gives  the  oppor- 
tunity for  it,  the  slave-raid,  as  a  national  habit,  is  still 
usually  directed  against  natives  of  a  different  religion, 
who  are  assumed  to  be  of  a  lower  order  of  humanity. 
Throughout  the  West  of  Africa,  at  the  beginning  of  the 
present  century,  the  custom  remained  among  the  races 
bordering  northwards  upon  the  desert  to  raid  southwards 
among  the  pagans  and  cannibals  for  the  purpose  of  filling 
their  slave-rooms,  stocking  their  farms,  and  increasing 
their  revenues  by  the  surplus  which  could  be  disposed 
of  in  the  market.  It  was  a  relatively  small  surplus 
only  which  experienced  the  pains  of  the  desert  jour- 
ney for  purposes  of  exportation,  but  though  relatively 
small  it  was  numerically  great,  and  the  sum  of  misery 
inflicted  by  the  slave -hunts  of  countless  generations 
defies  all  computation.  It  is  not  to  be  supposed  that 
it  was  the  Christian  nor  even  the  Mohammedan  who 
first  invented  the  theory  that  there  is  no  moral  obliga- 
tion to  respect  the  rights  of  infidels.  Indeed,  if  modern 
experience  may  be  trusted,  it  would  seem  rather  that 
the  less  is  the  grade  of  difference  the  more  is  the  sense 
of  distance  between  the  despiser  and  the  despised.  The 
contempt  of  the  superior  pagan  for  the  inferior  fetish 
worshipper  is  just  as  keen  as  that  of  the  Christian  for 
the  pagan,  and  from  race  to  race  in  a  descending  scale 
the  theory  of  inferiority  has  been  acted  on  as  a  justifica- 
tion of  the  practice  of  enslavement. 

In  West  Africa,  where  the  superior  race  preyed 
directly  upon  the  inferior,  the  practice  has  probably  been 
peculiarly  demoralising,  for  there  the  brutality  of  the 
slave-raider    was    added    to    the   despotism    of   the    slave- 


412  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

owner.  The  right  of  slave-raiding,  like  that  of  making 
war,  would  seem  to  have  been  originally  a  royal  preroga- 
tive, and  it  was  apparently  maintained  as  an  annual 
practice,  to  which  no  sense  whatever  of  immorality  was 
attached.  It  was  simply,  like  elephant  hunting,  one  of  the 
means  by  which  the  royal  coffers  were  replenished,  and 
those  who  took  part  in  the  raid  received  their  share  of 
spoil.  Leo  Africanus  complains,  in  relation  to  Bornu, 
in  the  beginning-  of  the  sixteenth  century,  that  merchants 
who  took  horses  there  for  sale  were  sometimes  delayed 
a  whole  year  because  the  horses  were  paid  for  in  slaves, 
and  the  king  raided  only  once  a  year. 

Dr.  Barth,  who  accompanied  a  slave-raid,  made  by 
the  forces  of  Bornu  against  the  pagan  natives  of  Musgu 
in  the  winter  of  1851-52,  has  left  an  account  of  the  opera- 
tion, which  is  interesting  as  applying  to  districts  with 
which  the  British  Government  has  now  to  deal,  and  may 
serve  to  show  how  such  practices  must  affect  the  private 
and  public  life  of  peoples  amongst  whom  they  are 
tolerated. 

His  account  is  too  long  to  quote  in  full,  but  some  of 
the  principal  points  may  be  briefly  given.  The  ruler 
of  Bornu,  finding  his  treasury  and  his  slave-rooms  empty, 
determined  upon  a  slave-raiding  expedition.  There  was 
at  first  some  doubt  as  to  the  exact  direction  in  which 
it  should  be  sent.  Finally,  it  was  determined  to  attack 
the  pagans  of  Musgu  in  a  territory  south  of  Bornu,  and 
not  far  from  the  present  German  frontier  in  the  east. 
Towards  the  end  of  November  a  host  numbering  over 
20,000  cavalry  and  a  larger  number  on  foot,  including 
many  women,  and  a  proportionate  amount  of  tents  and 
baggage,  marched  southwards.  So  long  as  this  force 
was  within  the  limits  of  friendly  territory  they  were  sup- 
posed to  be  under  discipline,  and  to  take  nothing  from 
the  villages  but  corn  and  rice.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  dis- 
cipline was  impossible  to  maintain,  and  not  only  were  the 
crops  forcibly  reaped,  but  as  the  army  marched  towards 
the  frontier  the  friendly  villages  which  lay  upon  its  road 


SLAVE-RAIDING  413 

were  looted.  As  soon  as  the  frontier  of  the  pagan 
country  was  reached,  a  general  Hcence  was,  of  course, 
given,  and  Dr.  Barth  describes  day  by  day  the  progress 
of  this  vast  band  of  robbers,  who  spread  Hke  a  swarm  of 
locusts  over  the  fertile  country. 

The  pagans  were  apparently  in  this  instance  of  the 
higher  type.  They  were  no  homeless  savages.  On  the 
contrary,  they  were  better  agriculturists  than  the  Bornu 
people  themselves.  The  whole  country  was  rich,  and 
village  after  village  of  neatly  built  huts,  having  their 
pagan  cemeteries  and  rude  monuments  to  the  dead,  stood 
among  fields  of  corn,  tobacco,  indigo,  cotton,  sorghum, 
and  rice.  In  one  place  Dr.  Barth  says  :  "  The  landscape 
was  exceedingly  beautiful,  richly  irrigated  and  finely 
wooded,  while  to  our  great  astonishment  the  ground 
was  so  carefully  cultivated  that  even  manure  had  been 
put  upon  the  fields  in  a  regular  manner,  being  spread 
over  the  ground  to  a  great  extent,  the  first  example  of 
such  careful  tillage  that  I  had  as  yet  observed  in  Central 
Africa,  either  among  Mohammedans  or  pagans," 

Throughout  this  district  the  army  marched,  murdering, 
burning,  destroying  as  they  went.  The  inhabitants,  know- 
ing the  object  of  their  march,  usually  fied  before  them 
to  the  forest,  abandoning  their  property  that  they  might 
save  their  persons.  This  manoeuvre  was  frequently  suc- 
cessful, and  slaves  were  not  always  obtained.  The  villages 
were  none  the  less  burnt,  and  the  surrounding  crops  de- 
stroyed. When  prisoners  were  captured,  only  women  and 
the  young  were  kept.  Full-grown  men  were  massacred. 
On  one  day  Dr.  Barth  reports:  "A  large  number  of 
slaves  had  been  caught  this  day.  Altogether  they  were 
said  to  have  taken  a  thousand,  and  there  were  certainly 
not  less  than  five  hundred.  To  our  utmost  horror  not 
less  than  one  hundred  and  seventy  full-grown  men  were 
mercilessly  slaughtered  in  cold  blood,  the  greater  part 
of  them  being  allowed  to  bleed  to  death,  a  leg  having 
been  severed  from  the  body."  On  other  occasions  the 
whole    day's    spoil    was    limited    to    a   handful    of  slaves, 


414  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

"unfortunate  creatures  whom  sickness  or  ill-advised 
courage  prevented  from  leaving  their  native  villages." 
The  pagans  made  occasionally  a  desperate  and  some- 
times even  an  heroic  defence,  but  the  superior  arms,  and 
still  more  the  numbers  of  the  Bornuese  troops,  invariably 
secured  the  victory.  The  country  which  was  the  scene 
of  these  operations  is  described,  not  only  as  well  culti- 
vated, but  as  densely  inhabited.  The  villages  themselves 
afforded  everywhere  the  same  appearance  of  comfort  and 
cheerfulness,  and  in  their  wholesale  destruction  by  fire, 
the  destruction  of  the  granaries  which  they  contained 
was  of  even  more  importance  than  the  destruction  of  the 
huts  themselves,  for  as  the  grain  was  already  harvested, 
this  must  have  meant,  not  only  starvation  during  the 
winter,  but  the  loss  of  seed  corn  for  the  ensuing  season. 

Scenes  of  fire  and  sword  during  the  active  days  of 
the  expedition  were  succeeded  at  intervals  by  the  par- 
tition of  the  prisoners.  This  proceeding  was  accompanied, 
says  Dr.  Barth,  by  the  "  most  heartrending  scenes  caused 
by  the  numbers  of  young  children,  and  even  infants,  who 
were  to  be  distributed,  many  of  those  poor  creatures 
being  mercilessly  torn  away  from  their  mothers,  never 
to  see  them  again."  This  comment  indicates  also  that 
the  raid  was  carried  on  over  the  country  of  higher-class 
pagans.  The  lower  types  part  in  many  instances  with 
perfect  indifference  from  their  young.  Cattle  was,  of 
course,  carried  off,  as  well  as  slaves,  wherever  it  was 
met  with. 

The  expedition  returned  on  this  occasion,  after  two 
months,  to  Bornu,  and  when  the  total  gains  were  reckoned 
uo,  they  were  found  to  amount  to  something  over  3000 
slaves  and  10,000  head  of  cattle.  The  slaves  consisted 
almost  entirely  of  women  and  young  persons,  mostly 
children,  and  the  slaughter  of  full-grown  males  was  said 
to  have  amounted  to  no  more  than  300,  or  one  in  ten. 
The  great  majority  of  full-grown  males  had  therefore 
escaped,  as  had  the  more  active  of  the  full-grown  young 
women.       Of    the     3000    taken,    the    commander-in-chief 


SLAVE-RAIDING  415 

claimed  one-third.  There  remained  2000  slaves  and 
about  7000  head  of  cattle  to  divide  between  the  20,000 
persons  who  had  composed  the  expedition.  That  is  to  say, 
that  if  the  spoil  was  evenly  divided,  each  man  would  receive 
the  tenth  part  of  a  slave  and  the  third  part  of  a  bullock 
as  his  individual  share.  That  such  waste  of  life,  destruc- 
tion of  property,  and  loss  of  time  could  be  considered,  even 
from  the  purely  practical  point  of  view,  to  be  compensated 
by  such  poor  results,  is  indication  enough  of  how  little 
all  these  things  are  valued  among  races  where  practices 
of  this  kind  are  countenanced. 

I  have  quoted  the  account  of  this  raid  at  some  length, 
for,  as  it  happened  to  be  accompanied  by  two  trust- 
worthy Europeans,  the  details  may  be  accepted  as  correct, 
and  the  incidents,  though  varying,  no  doubt,  on  every 
occasion,  are  typical  enough  to  illustrate  vividly  the  ab- 
solute incompatibility  of  slave-raiding  with  the  mainten- 
ance of  civilised  government  in  the  country  raided.  The 
more  cultivated  nations  of  West  Africa,  though  tolerant 
of  the  practice  of  slave-raiding  in  the  territory  of  their 
pagan  neighbours,  never,  of  course,  permitted  such  a 
practice  in  what  may  be  called  the  home  territories.  It 
was  only  in  the  decadence  and  feebleness  of  a  multi- 
plication of  petty  monarchs  that  the  custom  of  raiding 
within  the  narrow  limits  of  individual  provinces  became 
general,  and  it  is  hardly  necessary  to  say  that  where  it 
prevails  neither  order,  security,  nor  prosperity  are  in  an 
even  moderate  degree  attainable. 

Between  the  date  of  1851  and  the  year  of  the  intro- 
duction of  British  authority  into  Northern  Nigeria,  the 
practice  of  slave-raiding  as  described  by  Dr.  Barth 
had  become  general  throughout  the  Protectorate.  It  has 
already  been  said  that  the  feoff-holders  of  the  Fulani 
emirates  resorted  at  times  to  the  expedient  of  selling 
their  own  peasantry,  and  there  was  no  province  of  which 
the  entire  territory  could  be  said  to  be  free  from  the 
curse  of  the  slave-raid. 

It    will    be    easily    understood    that,    however   broken 


4i6  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

might  be  the  spirit  of  the  raided  populations,  such 
aggression  did  not  pass  without  leading  to  some  form  of 
retaliation.  Roads  were  closed  in  every  direction,  and 
the  approach  of  the  Mohammedan  was  resented  in  arms 
by  a  peasantry  who  always  cultivated  their  fields  with 
weapons  slung  upon  their  backs.  The  bow  and  arrow — 
often  the  poisoned  arrow — of  the  pagan  is  in  dexterous 
hands  a  more  effective  weapon  than  the  clumsy  and 
old-fashioned  musket  of  the  local  Mohammedan,  and  it 
was  by  force  of  numbers  rather  than  by  superior 
weapons  or  military  skill  that  the  Fulani  armies  over- 
powered the  pagan  populations  in  their  raids.  It  lay 
with  the  pagans  in  return  to  close  their  roads  to  the 
passage  of  all  individual  traders  who  might  prove  to  be 
but  spies  upon  fertile  or  thickly  populated  lands.  Nor 
is  it  to  be  understood  that  the  pagans  themselves  were 
wholly  free  from  the  vice  of  slave-raiding.  They  paid 
their  tribute  usually  in  slaves.  They  raided  their 
enemies  for  slaves,  and,  as  one  of  the  incidental  results 
of  this  preying  of  man  on  man,  the  roads  through  the 
country  became  generally  so  unsafe  that  travelling  was 
only  possible  in  well-defended  caravans. 

It  is  also  to  be  noted,  as  the  result  of  half  a  century 
of  anarchy,  that  the  population  of  the  Haussa  States  and 
Bornu,  described  by  Dr.  Barth  in  1854  as  dense,  and 
estimated  at  about  fifty  millions,  had,  at  the  period  of 
the  British  occupation,  entirely  deserted  some  of  the 
most  naturally  fertile  areas,  and  had  fallen  to  a  total 
which  is  now  believed  to  equal  only  one-fifth  of  the 
estimated  amount,  or  about  ten  to  twelve  millions. 


CHAPTER    XLV 
THE    ESTABLISHMENT   OF   BRITISH   ADMINISTRATION 

It  will  be  understood  that  in  attempting,  as  I  am  now 
about  to  do,  to  give  some  account  of  the  establishment 
of  British  administration  in  the  midst  of  the  conditions 
which  have  been  described,  I  enter  upon  a  difficult  portion 
of  my  task.  The  British  High  Commissioner  is  my 
husband.  Many  members  of  his  staff  have  become  my 
personal  friends.  It  is  impossible  for  me  altogether  to 
clear  my  mind  of  favourable  prejudice,  and  I  am  forced 
to  realise  that  the  detachment  which  gives  the  propor- 
tion of  history  is  no  longer  at  my  command.  I  can  only 
therefore  ask  beforehand  for  indulgence  if  in  this  last 
section  of  my  book  personal  sentiment  tends  to  warp  my 
judgment  of  the  relative  importance  of  events. 

The  rulers  of  the  Nigerian  territories  had  placed 
themselves  nominally,  for  reasons  which  rendered  a 
choice  of  European  protectors  essential  to  them,  under 
the  protection  of  Great  Britain.  By  their  treaties  with 
the  Royal  Niger  Company  some  of  them  had  nominally 
surrendered  their  territory  with  all  sovereign  rights. 
Others,  and  these  the  most  important,  including  the 
emirates  of  Sokoto  and  Gando,  had  agreed  to  enter 
into  treaty  with  no  other  white  nation  but  the  British  ; 
to  give  to  Great  Britain  jurisdiction  over  all  foreigners 
and  non-natives  in  their  dominions,  with  right  to  tax 
them ;  to  transfer  to  Great  Britain  sovereign  rights  in 
the  riverine  territories  of  the  Niger  and  the  Benu6  for 
a  distance  of  ten  hours'  journey  inland  from  the  banks 
of  the  two  rivers  ;  to  confer  also  rights  of  mining  and 
trading ;  and  generally,  while  reserving  their  own  powers 
of  internal    rule,   to   subordinate    themselves    in    external 

417  2  D 


4i8  A   TROPICAL   DEPENDENCY 

matters  to  the  protecting  power.  They  had,  in  fact,  by- 
treaty,  accepted  the  recognised  position  of  protected 
native  states.  The  equivalent  which  was  to  be  given 
by  Great  Britain  was  protection  against  external  powers 
and  respect  for  internal  law  and  custom.  On  one  side, 
as  on  the  other,  the  maintenance  of  communication  and 
friendly  relations  was  provided  for. 

Bornu  had  made  no  treaty  with  the  Company,  but 
by  virtue  of  international  agreement  it  fell  within  the 
territory  allotted  to  the  influence  of  Great   Britain. 

The  relations  of  protecting  powers  to  protected 
states  are  always  a  question  of  discussion  until  they 
have  been  placed  by  the  logic  of  accomplished  facts 
outside  the  limits  of  theory.  The  exact  measure  of 
responsibility  accepted  by  Great  Britain  in  Northern 
Nigeria,  at  the  moment  of  the  establishment  of  British 
administration  there,  would  have  been  difficult  to  define. 
The  vague  title  of  suzerain  covered  the  position,  and, 
beyond  a  general  desire  that  slave-raiding  should  be 
suppressed  and  trade  routes  thrown  open,  there  was 
probably  no  wish  in  any  quarter  in  England  to  see  a 
rapid  advance  towards  the  assumption  of  more  defined 
duties,  or  of  responsibilities  which  would  involve  expense. 
The  public  generally  knew  nothing  of  the  country.  Poli- 
tical necessities  had  imposed  the  creation  of  a  military 
force  for  the  defence,  not  only  of  the  Nigerian,  but  of  all 
West  African  frontiers.  A  small  grant  in  aid  to  meet 
other  administrative  expenses  was  reluctantly  added  by 
the  Treasury  to  the  sum  required  for  the  maintenance 
of  the  West  African  Frontier  Force.  These  concessions 
were  made  rather  by  respect  for  the  judgment  and  the 
wishes  of  Mr.  Chamberlain,  then  occupying  the  position 
of  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Colonies,  than  by  any 
strong  conviction  on  the  part  of  the  British  Govern- 
ment that  Northern  Nigeria  was  likely  to  prove  a  very 
valuable  acquisition  to  the  Crown  ;  and  in  the  absence 
of  a  clearly  expressed  interest  on  the  part  of  the  House 
of  Commons,  in  the  adoption  of  a  new  West  African 
policy,  it   seemed   improbable   that   funds    would   be   will- 


BRITISH    ADMINISTRATION  419 

ingly  voted  for  any  full  development  of  the  Nigerian 
Protectorate.  In  these  circumstances  the  wishes  of  the 
Government  and  of  the  country,  if  they  had  to  be  con- 
densed into  one  phrase  of  instruction  to  the  High  Com- 
missioner, would  perhaps  best  have  been  rendered  by 
the  words,   "Go  slow!" 

But  events  upon  the  spot  refused  to  wait.  From 
the  moment  in  which  the  British  flag  ran  up  at  Lokoja 
on  the  ist  of  January  1900,  the  High  Commissioner 
and  his  staff  found  themselves  taxed  to  the  utmost 
limits  of  their  capacity  in  the  effort  to  keep  pace  with 
the  developments  which  hurried  them  along. 

The  first  desire  of  the  High  Commissioner  upon 
taking  up  the  duties  of  his  position  would  naturally  have 
been  to  give  effect  to  British  treaty  obligations  by  estab- 
lishing residents  at  the  native  courts,  and  proceeding 
to  open  friendly  relations  throughout  the  Protectorate. 
He  found  himself  face  to  face  with  a  chaos  of  civil  and 
inter-tribal  war,  in  which  his  immediate  duty  was  to 
endeavour  to  ascertain  the  disposition  towards  the  Gov- 
ernment which  he  represented  of  the  dominant  powers. 
He  had  also  everything  to  learn  about  the  actual  condi- 
tion of  the  northern  country. 

The  civil  staff  allotted  for  the  purpose  of  founding 
an  administration  was  very  small,  and  its  numbers  were 
liable  to  be  reduced  by  illness  and  leave.  The  Ashantee 
War,  which  had  broken  out  in  another  portion  of  West 
Africa,  shortly  claimed  all  the  troops  of  the  West  African 
Frontier  Force  that  could  be  spared,  and  the  South 
African  War  drawing  to  itself  all  the  best  military  acti- 
vity of  the  nation,  rendered  it  difficult  to  obtain  efficient 
officers  for  the  remainder  of  the  regiment.  Almost  single- 
handed  in  every  administrative  department,  the  little  group 
who  formed  the  government  at  Lokoja  felt  that  they  had 
every  reason  during  the  first  year  of  the  administration 
to  wish  for  their  own  sakes  to  "go  slow." 

There  was  the  machinery  of  administration  to  estab- 
lish, of  which  the  seat  was  temporarily  fixed  at  Jebba, 
where  the  military  headquarters  had  been  formed.     There 


420  A   TROPICAL   DEPENDENCY 

was  the  transfer  from  the  Royal  Niger  Company,  the 
taking  over  of  their  assets,  and  the  work  of  assigning 
to  them  their  trading  stations,  to  be  attended  to.  There 
was  the  neighbouring  country  to  survey,  in  the  hopes  of 
finding,  within  friendly  territory,  a  more  suitable  and 
central  position  in  which  the  permanent  seat  of  govern- 
ment could  be  established,  under  healthier  conditions 
than  those  offered  by  either  Lokoja  or  Jebba,  in  the 
malarial  valley  of  the  Niger,  and  there  were  relations 
to  establish  with  such  chiefs  as  might  prove  friendly  in 
the  neighbourhood.  While  the  High  Commissioner  and 
the  civil  staff  undertook  the  formation  of  Administra- 
tive Departments,  the  duty  of  surveying  the  country 
was  committed  to  military  expeditions,  which,  moving  in 
strength  sufficient  to  protect  themselves  against  disaster, 
were  strictly  enjoined  to  avoid  all  occasion  of  conflict 
with  the  natives,  to  endeavour  as  far  as  possible  to  win 
the  confidence  of  the  people,  and  to  submit  reports  on 
the  economic  and  geographical  conditions  of  the  country. 
Three  such  parties  were  sent  out  to  examine  the  country 
lying  to  the  north  of  the  confluence  of  the  Niger  and 
the  Benue  between  the  river  Kaduna  and  the  eastern 
highlands  of  Bautchi. 

Though  Fulani  emirs  were  at  the  time  slave-raiding 
in  these  districts,  it  was  believed  from  information  received 
that  the  native  tribes  were  friendly  and  would  be  willing 
to  welcome  Europeans,  and  here  it  was  thought  likely 
that  a  permanent  administrative  centre  might  be  formed 
in  the  southern  part  of  the  province  of  Zaria,  bordering 
upon  the  Kaduna  river.  In  the  absence  of  railroads, 
necessities  of  transport  rendered  it  impossible  for  any 
position  to  be  taken  far  from  a  navigable  river.  Some 
little  opposition  was  met  by  two  of  the  survey  parties, 
who  were  obliged  to  reduce  some  intractable  pagan  tribes, 
but  no  serious  fighting  occurred  ;  and  from  the  geographical 
and  topographical  reports  of  the  surveys,  it  was,  after 
some  discussion,  decided  that  the  site  for  the  new  seat 
of  government  would  be  most  favourably  placed  in  the 
neighbourhood   of  the   native   town  of  Wushishi,   on    the 


BRITISH    ADMINISTRATION  421 

river  Kaduna.  This  river,  often  mentioned  in  the  ancient 
geography  of  the  country,  is  one  of  the  important  rivers 
of  the  Protectorate,  and  drains  the  south-western  water- 
shed to  the  Niger.  It  is  navigable  for  a  large  portion 
of  the  year  by  steamers,  and  during  the  dry  season  by 
steel  canoes.  A  small  garrison  was  accordingly  left  at 
Wushishi,  and  relations  were  in  the  meantime  cultivated 
with  the  southern  states.  The  disturbed  condition  of 
the  country  was  such  that,  pending  the  establishment  of 
the  new  headquarters,  no  attempt  was  made  to  open 
relations  with  the  Fulani  emirates  of  the  north,  otherwise 
than  by  the  despatch  of  conciliatory  letters  informing  the 
Sultans  of  Gando  and  Sokoto  of  the  assumption  of  ad- 
ministration by  the  British  Government,  and  of  the  desire 
of  Great   Britain  to  maintain  friendly  relations. 

The  southern  provinces  of  Northern  Nigeria,  as  they 
spread  on  the  south  bank  of  the  rivers  from  west  to  east, 
are  Ilorin,  Kabba,  Bassa,  part  of  Muri,  and  part  of  Yola. 
Imrnediately  to  the  north  of  these,  and  with  the  exception 
of  Borgu,  all  on  the  northern  side  of  the  rivers,  are — 
taking  them  again  from  west  to  east — Borgu,  Kontagora, 
Southern  Zaria,  Nupe,  Nassarawa,  Bautchi,  and  the 
northern  half  of  Muri  and  Yola  ;  in  all,  eleven  provinces 
out  of  the  seventeen  of  which  Northern  Nigeria  is  com- 
posed. Of  these  provinces  three  only,  Borgu,  Ilorin,  and 
Kabba,  were,  in  the  first  instance,  effectively  occupied  by 
the  British.  Jebba,  situated  on  an  island  in  the  Niger 
between  the  mainland  of  Ilorin  and  Kontagora,  com- 
manded the  southern  province. 

On  the  northern  banks  the  pagan  populations  welcomed 
the  advent  of  the  British,  but  the  Fulani  emirs  of  Konta- 
gora and  Nupe  soon  removed  all  doubt  as  to  their  hostile 
attitude.  The  British  occupation  was  scarcely  effected 
before  they  were  openly  slave-raiding  to  the  banks  of 
the  river.  Their  combined  armies  laid  waste  their  own 
country  from  the  Niger  banks  on  the  west  and  south  to 
the  eastern  highlands,  and  to  the  north  as  far  as  the 
frontiers  of  Sokoto  and  Zaria.  The  Emir  of  Zaria,  in 
whose   territory    the    site    chosen    for   the    future  seat    of 


422  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

British  government,  near  Wushishi,  was  situated,  was 
nominally  friendly  to  Great  Britain,  but  in  the  beginning 
of  July  1900  information  reached  the  High  Commissioner 
at  Jebba  that  Kontagora  and  Nupe  had  planned  a  com- 
bined attack  upon  the  little  British  garrison  at  Wushishi, 
and  he  hurried  there  in  person  with  reinforcements  under 
Major  O'Neill.  The  situation  became  so  acute  that  the 
population  began  to  desert  Wushishi,  and  in  order  to 
obtain  supplies  for  the  British  troops  and  to  protect  the 
villages  which  had  been  friendly,  it  became  necessary  to 
erect  some  small  forts  in  the  neighbourhood,  and  to  order 
Major  O'Neill  to  patrol  the  country.  This  task  being 
admirably  performed,  and  the  cavalry  of  Nupe  and  Konta- 
gora defeated  in  a  series  of  brilliant  skirmishes,  the  country 
was  occupied  by  British  troops  for  some  twenty  miles 
south  and  east  of  Wushishi.  Great  loss  was  inflicted  on 
the  slave-raiders  in  the  encounters  by  which  the  occupa- 
tion was  effected,  and  the  people,  siding  as  always  with 
the  party  of  success,  crowded  in  thousands  to  the  protected 
villages  for  safety.  A  situation  was  created  in  which  the 
British  Government  already  represented  in  the  eyes  of 
the  natives  a  power  strong  enough  to  protect  them  against 
the  scourge  of  the  slave-raider. 

But,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  with  the  body  of  the  troops 
still  absent  in  Ashantee,  the  local  administration  did  not 
feel  itself  to  be  in  a  position  to  sustain  suspended  hos- 
tilities. A  British  Resident  had  been  placed  at  the  friendly 
court  of  Ilorin,  where,  while  he  worked  hard  at  the  intro- 
duction of  domestic  reforms,  he  was  made  aware  that 
emissaries  from  Nupe  and  Kontagora  were  endeavouring 
to  induce  the  Emir  of  Ilorin  to  join  with  them  in  an 
attempt  to  overpower  the  British  and  drive  the  white 
anti-slaver  out  of  the  country.  The  position  was  dan- 
gerous as  well  as  delicate,  and  while  the  small  force  of 
soldiers  at  Wushishi  held  their  own,  and  even  on  one 
occasion,  somewhat  rashly,  drove  the  enemy  before 
them  to  the  walls  of  the  Nupe  capital  at  Bida,  the  desire 
of  the  High  Commissioner  was  to  avoid  all  but  strictly 
necessary  fighting.     The  Resident  at  Ilorin,  Mr.  Carnegie, 


BRITISH    ADMINISTRATION  423 

by  whose  subsequent  death  the  administniticjii  lost  a  most 
valuable  officer,  exerted  all  the  tact  and  the  pluck  at  his 
command  to  keep  things  quiet  in   Ilorin. 

During  these  months  the  High  Commissioner  at  head- 
quarters was  pressing  forward  the  organisation  of  the 
administrative  departments,  creating  a  system  for  dealing 
with  the  freed  slaves,  especially  the  slave  children  who 
were  liberated  in  the  encounters  with  the  slave-raiders, 
endeavouring  to  get  into  touch  with  other  provinces  who 
gave  friendly  indications  along  the  river  banks,  and 
evolving  the  first  framework  of  local  legislation. 

The  creation  of  a  judicial  system  was  among  the 
early  necessities  of  the  administration,  and  in  these  first 
few  turbulent  months  the  seeds  of  future  order  were 
sown.  By  legislative  proclamation,  British  Supreme  and 
Provincial  Courts  were  established,  and  the  jurisdiction 
of  each  defined.  Two  Cantonment  or  Magistrates'  Courts 
were  also  established  in  Lokoja  and  Jebba,  and  by  a 
Native  Courts'  proclamation  the  establishment  of  Native 
Courts  by  British  warrant  was  provided  for  in  all  pro- 
vinces under  British  jurisdiction.  This  measure,  necessary 
for  the  province  of  Ilorin,  was  as  yet  hardly  applicable 
to  pagan  provinces,  where  native  institutions  had  not 
attained  to  the  level  of  a  judicial  organisation.  A  slavery 
proclamation  forbade  the  enslaving  of  any  person  within 
the  Protectorate,  and  without  directly  touching  the  institu- 
tion of  domestic  slavery,  reaffirmed,  under  the  new  ad- 
ministration, the  abolition  of  the  legal  status  of  slavery, 
which  had  been  proclaimed  by  the  Niger  Company  after 
their  Bida  campaign.  All  children  born  within  the  Pro- 
tectorate after  April  i,  1901,  were  declared  free.  Laws  were 
also  issued  against  the  importation  of  liquor  and  firearms. 

The  busy  days  as  they  passed  pressed  their  own 
conclusions  upon  the  minds  of  the  High  Commissioner 
and  his  staff,  and  the  theory  of  a  future  policy  was 
formed  under  the  light  of  daily  practice.  The  High 
Commissioner  had  the  advantage  of  including  in  his 
staff  one  or  two  of  the  servants  of  the  Niger  Com- 
pany,    whose     knowledge    of    local     conditions     was    in- 


424  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

valuable.  The  Accounting  Department,  which  he  had 
used  in  connection  with  the  organisation  of  the  West 
African  Frontier  Force,  became,  with  a  little  reorgani- 
sation, the  Treasury  of  the  new  administration.  The 
vessels  which  formed  the  material  of  a  Marine  Depart- 
ment were  taken  over  from  the  Niger  Company.  The 
staff  included  the  necessary  doctors  and  legal  officers 
for  the  formation  of  Medical  and  Legal  Departments. 
The  Public  Works  Department,  after  an  unfortunate  pre- 
liminary delay,  during  which  the  European  staff  was  left 
almost  without  houses,  was  formed,  under  the  direction 
of  Mr.  Eaglesome,  an  engineer  of  Indian  experience, 
into  a  body  of  which  the  efficiency  and  economy  soon 
became  a  subject  of  considerable  local  pride.  The  rest 
of  the  staff,  loyally  supported  by  a  few  white  non- 
commissioned officers  and  civil  subordinates,  was  chiefly 
composed  of  that  fine  type  of  young  Englishmen  who, 
whether  as  soldiers  or  civilians,  have  it  in  their  minds 
to  serve  their  country,  to  the  best  of  their  ability,  in 
some  adventurous  capacity  which  will  take  them  out  of 
the  common  round  of  comfortable  life.  Their  experi- 
ence of  Africa  was  mostly  nil,  but  they  had  the  training 
of  the  public  school,  the  army,  and  the  university,  which 
fits  men  equally  for  the  assumption  of  responsibility  and 
for  loyal  subordination  to  authority.  They  were  ready 
to  go  anywhere  and  to  do  anything,  and  with  the  few 
inevitable  exceptions,  who  were  rapidly  weeded  out,  repre- 
sented, in  the  eyes  of  the  High  Commissioner,  the  very 
best  stuff  of  which  the  English  nation  is  made. 

He  had  in  them  the  instruments  that  he  wanted,  and 
he  worked  them  without  mercy,  as  hard  as  he  worked  him- 
self. The  staff  was  short-handed.  There  was  three  men's 
work  for  every  man  to  do,  and  during  the  initial  stage 
of  the  establishment  of  British  authority  in  the  country, 
it  is  not  too  much  to  say  that  the  whole  of  the  staff, 
civil  as  well  as  military,  gave  themselves  with  entire 
devotion  to  their  task.  There  was  little  of  alleviation 
or  of  pleasure  in  the  early  conditions.  Miserable  houses, 
bad  food,   a  malarial  climate,   and  ceaseless  responsibility. 


BRITISH    ADMINISTRATION  425 

formed  the  accompaniment  of  their  daily  existence.  With 
the  inveterate  determination  of  Englishmen  to  have 
some  form  of  sport,  a  polo  ground  was  among  the  ear- 
liest of  the  public  institutions  established  by  the  soldiers 
at  headquarters.  But  it  was  the  work  itself  which  fur- 
nished the  real  attraction  of  the  life,  and  had  the  small 
body  of  Europeans  who  formed  the  first  British  staff 
been  polled  for  their  opinions,  there  would  not  probably 
have  been  found  one  who  wished  to  turn  back  from  the 
task  which  grew  day  by  day  under  their  hands. 

In  view  of  the  pessimism  which  appears  in  some 
quarters  to  be  gaining  ground  with  regard  to  the  capacities 
of  the  English  race,  I  may  perhaps  without  indiscretion 
quote  a  passage  from  one  of  the  latest  of  my  husband's 
despatches,  which  shows  at  least  how  in  his  opinion  the 
staff  working  under  him  have  sustained  the  promise  of  the 
first  year's  performance.  "  There  are  no  words  of  praise," 
he  writes  under  date  of  August  1905,  "that  I  can  find  too 
strong  to  describe  the  indefatigable  efforts  and  the  enthu- 
siasm for  their  task  which  has  been  shown  by  the  Political 
Staff  By  their  ceaseless  devotion  to  duty  they  have  not 
only  increased  the  revenue  in  the  way  that  I  have  shown, 
but  have  brought  order,  peace,  and  security  out  of  chaos, 
have  established  an  effective  judicial  system,  and  have 
substituted  progress  and  development  for  misrule  and 
stagnation."  This  is  satisfactory  reading  for  those  who 
doubt  whether  the  Englishmen  of  to-day  are  capable  of 
the  same  achievements  as  their  fathers,  and  it  must  be 
counted  as  not  the  least  among  the  advantages  of  the 
colonial  development  of  the  Empire  that  by  its  very 
roughness  it  gives  opportunity  for  the  exercise  in  indi- 
viduals of  qualities  which  under  less  stimulating  circum- 
stances might  perhaps  lie  dormant  through  the  whole 
course  of  a  too  easy  life.  The  names,  alas,  of  more  than 
one  of  the  first  small  Nigerian  group  are  engraved  now 
upon  tombstones  on  that  border  of  the  Empire  which 
they  helped  to  make.  They  live  in  the  memory  of  good 
service  done,  and  their  work  accomplished  is,  as  they 
would  have  wished  it  to  be,  their  monument. 


CHAPTER   XLVI 

MILITARY  OCCUPATION    OF   THE    SOUTHERN    EMIRATES 

AND    BORNU 

At  the  end  of  December  1900  the  return  of  the  troops 
from  Ashantee  reheved  the  position  of  some  of  its 
acuteness. 

The  first  thing-  to  be  done  was  evidently  to  bring 
hostiHties  with  Kontagora  and  Nupe  to  an  end.  An 
expedition  in  force  was  immediately  organised,  which 
marched  against  the  combined  armies  of  the  emirs,  and 
was  entirely  successful.  The  town  of  Kontagora  was 
captured,  and  the  emir  barely  effected  his  escape,  flying 
with  a  few  followers  to  the  north.  It  was  observed 
that  on  their  march  to  Kontagora  the  troops  passed 
through  an  absolutely  depopulated  country.  The  Emir 
of  Kontagora  was  one  of  the  worst  examples  of  Fulani 
chiefs  who  raided  the  peasantry  of  their  own  provinces 
for  slaves.  This  emir,  at  a  later  period,  was  captured 
by  the  British,  and  when  remonstrated  with  by  the 
High  Commissioner,  and  urged  to  abjure  slave-raiding 
and  to  accept  British  protection,  he  replied  with  graphic 
force:  "Can  you  stop  a  cat  from  mousing?  When  I 
die  I  shall  be  found  with  a  slave  in  my  mouth."  His 
downfall  was  received  by  the  population  of  the  province 
with  great  joy,  and  the  event  was  made  the  occasion  of 
a  public  conciliatory  move  towards  the  Emir  of  Sokoto, 
who,  as  suzerain  of  Kontagora,  was  invited  by  the  High 
Commissioner  to  nominate  a  successor  to  the  deposed 
Ibrahim.  Sokoto  did  not  respond,  and  for  some  time 
the  throne  of  Kontagora  remained  empty. 

In    Nupe,    where    the   result   of    British    victories   was 

equally  complete,  the  High  Commissioner  took  his  stand 

426 


MILITARY    OCCUPATION  427 

upon  the  condition  of  affairs  created  by  the  prcvi<jus 
victory  of  the  Company.  The  emir  driven  out  by  them 
had  returned,  as  has  been  already  mentioned,  and  ousting 
the  heir  placed  upon  the  throne  by  the  Company,  had 
ever  since  maintained  a  condition  of  hostility  to  the 
British.  This  emir,  Abu  Bekri,  now  fled,  like  his  col- 
league of  Kontagora,  to  the  north.  The  Hi_L;h  Com- 
missioner did  not  call  upon  Gando,  to  whom  Nupe  was 
tributary,  to  nominate  his  successor,  but  himself  took 
the  initiative  and  reinstated  the  emir  selected  by  the 
Company  upon  the  throne. 

But  if  the  High  Commissioner  was  desirous  that  the 
lesson  of  the  previous  war  should  not  be  lost  upon  the 
native  dynasty  of  Nupe,  he  drew  also  his  own  moral 
from  the  experience.  On  this  occasion  there  was  to 
be  no  more  of  conquest  without  permanent  assertion  of 
British  influence. 

The  reinstatement  of  the  ousted  Emir  of  Nupe  was 
made  the  opportunity  of  a  preliminary  declaration  of 
British  policy.  It  was  pointed  out  to  the  people  of 
Nupe  and  Kontagora  that  two  of  the  most  powerful 
Fulani  emirs  had  been  deposed,  because,  after  repeated 
warnings,  they  would  not  desist  from  laying  waste  the 
whole  country  and  carrying  off  the  people  as  slaves.  At 
the  same  time  no  looting  and  no  destruction  of  the 
country  had  been  permitted  by  British  troops.  Both  the 
cities  which  were  the  Fulani  capitals  had  been  preserved, 
and  the  loss  of  life  had  been  confined  entirely  to  the 
Fulani  cavalry  employed  as  slave-raiders.  The  peaceful 
populations  had  in  no  case  suffered  from  British  arms. 
Nevertheless,  though  individual  emirs  had  been  deposed, 
it  was  not  the  intention  of  the  Government  to  overthrow 
Fulani  rule  as  such,  and  to  substitute  rulers  of  another 
race.  On  the  contrary,  it  was  the  intention  of  the  British 
Government  to  maintain  existing  institutions,  including 
the  rule  of  the  Fulani,  established  now  for  a  hundred 
years,  but  to  insist  on  such  reforms  as  should  restore 
the    administration    of   the    country  to    its   ancient  purity. 


428  A    TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

and  bring  its  customs  into  conformity  with  the  principles 
of  justice  and  humanity. 

The  emir-elect  of  Nupe,  upon  the  suitability  of  whose 
appointment  the  opinion  of  the  native  council  was  pre- 
viously taken,  having  accepted  British  conditions,  was  for- 
mally installed  at  Bida,  before  a  full  parade  of  British  troops 
and  a  great  assemblage  of  his  own  people,  in  February 
of  1 90 1.  He  has  since — under  the  guidance  at  first  of 
Major  Burdon,  one  of  the  officers  transferred  from  the 
service  of  the  Niger  Company,  and  specially  selected 
for  the  duties  of  first  Resident  of  Nupe,  because  of  his 
known  sympathies  with  the  Fulani  people — acted  with 
the  utmost  loyalty  towards  the  British  Government. 
Nupe  has  prospered  exceedingly  under  the  new  system, 
and  the  emir's  sons  are  now  being  educated  at  a  school 
established  in  Bida  by  the  Church  Missionary  Society, 
where  they  are  learning,  at  their  father's  keenly  expressed 
desire,  to  speak  English. 

As  a  result  of  the  subjugation  of  Kontagora  and  Bida 
their  great  organised  slave-raids  were  brought  to  an  end, 
the  friendship  of  Zaria  was  confirmed,  and  there  was 
a  pacification  of  the  neighbouring  pagan  tribes.  Other 
provinces  along  the  river  bank  indicated  their  readiness 
to  open  trade  routes,  and  to  accept  British  Residents, 
with  the  garrison  which  the  presence  of  a  Resident  im- 
plied ;  and  though  the  limited  numbers  of  the  British 
staff  rendered  it  impossible  immediately  to  take  full 
advantage  of  these  favourable  dispositions,  the  High 
Commissioner  was  able  to  report  by  the  end  of  the 
financial  year  1 900-1 901  that  the  British  Government 
was  in  effective  possession  of  the  eight  provinces  of  Borgu, 
Ilorin,  Kabba,  Kontagora,  Nupe,  Zaria,  Nassarawa,  and 
Muri. 

Throughout  these  provinces  the  Government  endeav- 
oured as  far  as  possible  to  bring  into  operation  the  policy 
which  it  had  declared  of  utilising  and  working  through 
the  native  chiefs,  while  it  insisted  upon  their  observance 
of  the  fundamental  laws  of  humanity  and  justice.      Resi- 


MILITARY    OCCUPATION  429 

dents  were  appointed  whose  primary  duty  it  was  to 
promote  this  poHcy  by  the  estabhshment  of  native  courts 
administering  restored  native  laws,  but  in  which  bribery 
and  extortion  and  inhuman  punishment  were  to  be 
abolished.  Provincial  courts,  in  which  the  British  Resi- 
dent acted  as  magistrate,  were  instituted  in  each  province 
to  deal  with  non-natives  and  to  enforce  the  laws  of  the 
Protectorate,  especially  those  dealing  with  slave-raiding, 
slave-trading,  importation  of  liquor  and  firearms,  and  ex- 
tortion from  the  people  by  terrorism  and  a  false  use  of 
the  name  of  the  Government,  which  was  among  natives 
one  of  the  most  frequent  and  at  the  same  time  mis- 
chievous offences  with  which  the  British  administration 
had  to  deal.  The  authority  of  the  emir  was  supported 
by  an  insistence  on  the  part  of  the  British  administration 
that  lawful  tribute,  with  the  exception  of  that  taken  in 
slaves,  should  be  paid. 

Thus,  by  the  beginning  of  1901,  the  south-western 
portion  of  the  Protectorate  had  frankly  accepted  British 
rule.  The  turbulent  Fulani  emirates,  which  had  been 
disposed  to  challenge  it  in  that  district,  had  been  con- 
quered, and  while  the  sovereign  rights  of  Great  Britain 
had  in  this  way  been  placed  on  a  basis  which  every 
native  could  understand,  the  occasion  had  been  made  to 
serve  as  a  great  public  illustration  of  the  intended  policy 
of  the  British  Government  to  disturb  as  little  as  possible 
the  existing  institutions  of  the  country.  The  pacification 
of  the  belt  of  country  between  the  Niger  and  the  eastern 
highlands  had  been  effected,  and  the  only  difference  which 
had  become  markedly  apparent  to  native  eyes  from  the 
change  of  administration,  was  that  henceforward  pagans 
as  well  as  Mohammedans  were  to  live  in  the  enjoyment 
of  human  rights.  As  a  sign  of  this,  slave-raiding  had 
already  been  brought  to  an  end  in  the  territory  under 
British  rule. 

Correspondingly  with  the  cessation  of  slave-raiding 
trade  routes  had  begun  to  open  themselves  through 
the  country.      While   the   operations   of  the  slave-raiding 


430  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

Emirs  of  Kontagora  and  Nupe  remained  unrestricted, 
trade  was  of  course  impossible  in  the  districts  over  which 
their  armies  ranged,  for  it  was  the  practice  of  the  pagans 
to  retahate  upon  the  slave-raiders  by  attacking  all  small 
caravans.  After  the  emirs  had  been  brought  into 
obedience  and  slave-raiding  stopped,  it  became  the  duty 
of  the  British  administration  to  put  down  with  an  equally 
firm  hand  the  habits  of  brigandage  of  the  pagan  tribes. 
For  this  purpose  it  was  occasionally  necessary  to  apply 
force,  but  even  in  the  early  stages  of  the  administration 
it  was  found  that  capable  officers  did  more  towards  effect- 
ing the  pacification  of  the  country  by  getting  into  touch 
with  the  people,  than  could  be  effected  by  many  punitive 
expeditions,  and  the  High  Commissioner  looked  forward 
to  superseding  military  occupation  at  an  early  date  by 
an  efficient  system  of  civil  police.  Not  only  had  the 
trade  routes  to  the  south  from  Kano  and  Zaria  been 
rendered  unsafe  by  the  slave- raiding  of  Nupe  and  Kon- 
tagora and  the  retaliation  of  the  pagan  tribes  ;  it  was 
also  found  that  the  caravan  tolls  extorted  by  the  southern 
emirs  had  been  of  the  most  excessive  and  onerous  de- 
scription. By  stopping  the  slave-raiding  of  the  Fulani, 
keeping  the  pagans  in  order,  and  lessening  the  tolls,  the 
roads  on  the  western  side  of  the  Protectorate  were  ren- 
dered safer  and  more  attractive,  and  trade  began  to  im- 
prove. New  stations  for  European  trade  were  opened 
by  the  Niger  Company  on  the  Kaduna,  and  from  Borgu 
to  Bautchi  the  increase  in  local  trade  was  even  in  the 
first  year  remarkable. 

But  while  this  condition  of  things  in  the  eight  pro- 
vinces which  had  been  occupied  was  satisfactory,  the 
inadequacy  of  the  numbers  of  the  British  staff  to  deal 
with  the  rising  tide  of  work  thrown  upon  the  adminis- 
tration  became  ever  more  apparent.  With  the  removal  in 
some  districts  of  Fulani  rule  each  petty  village  began  to 
claim  its  ancient  land,  and  to  show  disposition  to  raid  its 
neighbours  in  support  of  its  claim.  The  need  of  a  survey 
and   land   settlement   was  urgent.      More  Residents  were 


MILITARY    OCCUPATION  431 

wanted  to  maintain  the  moral  influence  acquired  in  the 
provinces.  Police  and  revenue  officers  were  also  needed. 
The  housing  of  Europeans  and  the  erection  of  public 
offices  in  the  new  settlement,  of  which  the  site  was 
selected  at  a  spot  called  Zungeru,  within  ten  miles  of 
Wushishi,  on  open  ground  rising  from  the  Kaduna,  had 
become  a  matter  of  some  importance,  and  for  the  opening 
year  of  1901-1902  the  necessity  of  some  increase  in  the 
estimates  to  provide  for  these  pressing  requirements  was 
apparent. 

The  continuance  of  the  South  African  War  still  gave 
no  relief  to  the  exchequer  at  home.  The  inclination  of 
the  public  was  still  such  as  could  only  be  interpreted  by 
the  Government  as  a  desire  to  "go  slow"  in  West  Africa, 
and  still  affairs  upon  the  spot  continued  to  urge  the 
necessity  for  the  assertion  of  British  rule. 

Five  more  provinces  were  in  a  condition  in  which 
the  danger  of  abstaining  from  interference  was  greater 
than  the  inconvenience  of  interferincr. 

British  Residents  had  been  accepted — though  not 
enthusiastically — by  the  governing  power  in  Nassarawa, 
the  province  bordering  eastward  upon  Nupe,  which  was 
a  sub-emirate  of  the  nominally  friendly  Zaria,  and  was 
very  largely  occupied  by  pagan  tribes.  In  Muri  too,  a 
little  farther  along  the  Benue,  where  pagans  were  glad  to 
be  protected,  British  stations  had  been  formed.  But  the 
Fulani  Emirs  of  Bautchi  and  Yola  in  the  east,  believing 
themselves  strong  enough  to  defy  the  power  of  Great 
Britain,  and  rendered  only  more  antagonistic  by  the  fate  of 
Kontagora  and  Nupe,  and  by  the  effectual  British  protec- 
tion given  to  the  pagans  of  Muri  and  Nassarawa,  were  creat- 
ing a  situation  which  became  every  day  more  difficult. 

The  Emir  of  Yola,  a  well-educated  Fulani  and  reli- 
gious fanatic,  ordered  the  representatives  of  the  Niger 
Company,  notwithstanding  treaty  rights  to  the  con- 
trary, to  haul  down  their  flag  and  close  their  trading 
station  on  the  river.  In  Bautchi  the  important  town  of 
Guarram  was  destroyed,  and   the  population  carried  into 


432  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

slavery  by  slave-raiders  acting  under  the  instructions  of 
the  emir.  Both  emirs  traded  openly  in  slaves,  which 
they  imported  from  German  territory  and  sent  through 
the  Haussa  States,  while  trade  routes  for  legitimate 
commerce  were  closed.  The  pagans  of  the  river  looked 
from  its  eastern  to  its  western  end,  waiting  to  see 
whether  the  protection  of  the  British  Government  was 
strong  enough  to  be  effective  in  these  circumstances.  It 
was  essential,  if  we  were  to  retain  the  respect  of  the 
pagan  peoples,  to  check  the  wholesale  depopulation  of 
their  territory.  It  was  also  necessary  to  protect  the 
legitimate  rights  of  British  traders  at  Yola. 

A  military  expedition  was  therefore  decided  upon, 
and  was  sent  against  Yola  in  September  of  1901,  under 
the  command  of  Colonel  Morland.  It  was  successful, 
and  though  some  obstinate  resistance  was  encountered, 
the  capital  was  taken.  The  emir,  who  preferred  exile 
to  capitulation,  took  refuge  in  flight.  The  province  was 
brought  under  British  administration,  and  an  emir  ap- 
pointed on  conditions  similar  to  those  of  Nupe. 

In  the  two  provinces  of  Bornu  the  situation  which 
called  for  British  intervention  was  of  a  wholly  different 
order,  but  the  claims  for  attention  which  it  put  forward 
were  perhaps  even  more  imperative  than  those  of  the 
southern  states,  for  they  involved  difficulties  with  a 
European  neighbour,  which  were,  of  all  others,  those 
which  it  was  desirable  to  avoid. 

It  has  been  mentioned  that  in  Bornu  the  conqueror 
Rabbeh  was  overthrown  and  killed  by  the  French  in  1900, 
and  a  puppet  sovereign  of  Bornu  appointed.  Rabbeh's 
son  and  successor,  Fad-el-Allah,  appealed  to  the  British 
for  redress  and  protection,  and  offered  to  obey  the  orders 
of  the  British  Government.  The  question  arose  whether 
he,  who  was  a  usurper,  should  be  recognised  and  supported 
in  Bornu,  or  whether  the  lawful  sovereign  overthrown  by 
his  father  should  be  restored. 

While  the  question  was  under  consideration  in  1901, 
the  French  took   the  matter  into  their  own   hands,  and, 


MILITARY    OCCUPATION  433 

marching  into  British  territory,  defeated  and  killed 
Fad-el-Allah  at  Gujba,  150  miles  inside  the  British 
border. 

Such  a  violation  of  territory  accentuated  the  neces- 
sity of  asserting  effective  control  of  the  border  province, 
and  a  small  expedition  was  accordingly  sent  into  Bornu  at 
the  end  of  1901  to  make  full  inquiry  into  the  events  which 
had  taken  place,  and  to  ascertain  whether  there  was  truth 
in  the  report  that  the  French  had  carried  natives  of  the 
British  Protectorate  into  captivity  across  the  frontier,  and 
were  levying  tribute  in  British  protected  villages.  On  further 
information  received  it  was  decided  to  occupy  Bornu. 

The  route  to  Bornu  lies  through  Bautchi,  where  the 
massacre  of  Guarram  by  the  emir  was  still  unpunished. 
Bautchi  was  at  this  time  the  centre  of  the  slave  trade, 
and  slaves  were  openly  sold  in  the  market  of  its  prin- 
cipal town.  The  emir  had  shown  himself  antagonistic  to 
British  government,  and  it  was  considered  probable  that 
he  might  oppose  the  troops  of  the  Protectorate.  The  ex- 
pedition destined  ultimately  for  the  occupation  of  Bornu 
was  sent  in  force  under  the  personal  command  of  Colonel 
Morland  in  February  of  1902.  Preparations  which  had 
been  made  in  Bautchi  to  oppose  its  advance  were  aban- 
doned when  its  strength  was  known. 

The  Emir?:of  Bautchi  proving  quite  intractable,  was, 
however,  deposed.  The  council  of  notables,  in  whom, 
according  to  native  custom,  the  election  of  emirs  is  vested, 
was  summoned,  and  elected  his  heir.  The  emir  took 
the  usual  refuge  in  flight,  and  his  heir  was  duly  appointed 
under  the  same  conditions  as  the  Emirs  of  Nupe,  Yola, 
and  Kontagora,  to  which  last-named  emirate  the  British 
Government  had,  on  the  continued  refusal  of  Sokoto  to 
respond  to  the  invitation  to  exercise  his  function  as 
suzerain,  nominated  a  temporary  chief. 

Thus  Bautchi  also  was  brought  under  British  adminis- 
tration, and  as,  in  every  letter  of  appointment,  the 
sovereignty  of  the  British  Crown  was  asserted,  and  in 
every  installation    oath    was    accepted    by    the   appointed 


2  E 


434  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

emir,  British  sovereignty  was  accepted  from  Borgu  to 
Yola. 

A  British  Resident  and  a  garrison  were  placed  in  the 
capital  of  Bautchi,  and  it  may  be  said  here  that  the 
newly  appointed  emir  proving  loyal  to  his  engagements, 
the  Resident  was  able  by  June  of  1902  to  report  that 
the  slave  trade  was  practically  abolished  in  Bautchi  as 
a  recognised  practice.  Underhand  slave  dealing  still 
continues  to  some  slight  extent,  and  constitutes  one  of 
the  principal  offences  with  which  the  provincial  courts 
have  to  deal. 

As  was  usual  after  the  suppression  of  the  slave-raider, 
the  retaliation  of  the  raided  had  to  be  dealt  with,  and 
there  was  some  fighting  with  turbulent  pagan  tribes  who 
rendered  the  road  unsafe.  They  were  successfully  sub- 
dued, and  the  expedition  continued  its  march  towards 
Bornu.  A  little  later  the  ex-Emir  of  Bautchi,  becoming 
a  centre  of  intrigue  and  trouble,  was  caught  and  sent 
into  honourable  exile  in  Ilorin,  where  he  lived  under  the 
charge  of  the  Emir  and  Resident. 

Between  Bautchi  and  Gujba  there  lay  the  territory  of 
Gombe,  which  had  been  for  some  years  in  the  possession 
of  a  brave  fanatic  of  the  name  of  Jibrella,  who  declared 
himself  to  be  the  Mahdi,  and  who  had  for  some  years 
maintained  himself  victoriously  against  all  neighbours. 
On  the  news  of  the  approach  of  the  British  expedition 
he  took  the  initiative  and  attacked.  His  troops  charged 
the  British  force  most  gallantly,  but  they  were  defeated 
and  pursued  for  two  days,  when  Lieutenant  Dyer  effected 
the  capture  of  the  Mahdi  himself.  Jibrella,  who  was  a 
white-haired  old  man  already  feeble  with  age,  was  sent 
as  a  prisoner  to  Lokoja,  where  he  was  treated  with 
the  consideration  due  to  his  distinction  as  a  soldier  and 
a  priest.  The  Gombe  country,  which  had  once  formed 
a  portion  of  the  Bautchi  province,  was,  like  Bautchi, 
brought  under  British  administration,  and  the  expedition 
pressed  on  to  Gujba  in  Bornu,  leaving  the  road  all 
British  behind  it. 


MILITARY   OCCUPATION  435 

No  further  opposition  was  encountered  in  Bornu.     A 

company  was  left  at  Gujba,  and  Colonel  Morland,  with  the 

rest  of  his  force,  proceeded  to   Maidugeri.      Here  it  was 

found  that  the  report  of  a  French  expedition  into  British 

territory  was  correct.     On  the  death  of  Rabbeh   in    1900 

Fad-el-Allah,  his  son,  had  defied  the  French,   who,  after 

some  fighting,   had   retired   across  the   boundary  to  their 

headquarters  at  Dikwa,  in  what  is  now  German  territory. 

They  were  again  attacked  by  Fad-el-Allah,  and  they  had 

then    pursued   him    as   far  as   Gujba  in   British    territory, 

defeated,    and   killed   him.     They   had    raised   levies   and 

caravans    for    this    raid    in    British    territory.       A   great 

number  of  prisoners  and  much  loot  were  taken  at  Gujba, 

and   the    prisoners    were   made    to    carry    the    loot    and 

baggage.      In   return  for  delivering  the  lawful  Sultan  of 

Bornu  from   Fad-el-Allah  the  French  imposed   upon  the 

Sultan  a  war  indemnity  of  $71,000,  in  addition  to  $9000 

already  paid  by  his  elder  brother,  who  had  been  deported 

to  the  east  side  of  Chad.     The  sum  was  to  be  collected 

by  tribute  from  the  villages,  and  till  it  could  be  collected 

the  Sultan  was  kept  prisoner  by  the   French   at  Dikwa. 

The  already  impoverished  country,  desolated  by  war  and 

counter-war,    was   ground    to    the    lowest   depths  by    this 

imposition. 

The  Sultan  of  Bornu  was  informed  in  his  internment 
at  Dikwa  that  the  British  Government  would  recognise 
him  as  sovereign  if  he  liked  to  return,  and  in  the  mean- 
time the  collection  of  French  tribute  was  stopped.  The 
Sultan,  or  Shehu  (as  the  Sultans  of  Bornu  are  called), 
readily  accepted  British  proposals,  and  returned  to  occupy 
his  throne  under  British  protection,  accepting  the  usual 
conditions.  A  garrison  was  placed  at  Maidugeri,  and 
Residents  appointed  to  Bornu.  By  this  action  an  area 
of  some  60,000  square  miles  was  brought  under  adminis- 
trative control. 

On  the  return  of  the  expedition  some  unruly  pagan 
tribes  of  the  Yola  province  were  subdued,  and  prevented 
from  harassing  peaceful  traders  upon  the  trade  routes. 


436  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

In  the  province  of  Nassarawa,  which  lies  upon  the 
north  bank  of  the  Benue  between  Nupe  and  Bautchi,  a 
great  deal  of  trouble  had  been  caused  by  Fulani  raiders, 
of  whom  the  headquarters  were  at  a  town  called  Abuja. 
The  trade  routes  in  the  western  part  of  the  province 
were  much  interrupted  by  the  lawless  brigandage  of 
Abuja,  and  in  the  summer  of  1902  an  expedition  was 
sent  which  reduced  Abuja  to  obedience.  A  new  king  was 
placed  upon  the  throne,  who  agreed  to  observe  British 
laws,  and  the  expedition  marched  back  through  the  dis- 
turbed belt,  reducing  such  lawlessness  as  it  encountered. 
But  at  Keffi,  the  headquarters  of  the  province,  where 
a  British  Resident  was  already  established,  slave-raiding 
was  being  openly  carried  on  by  the  Magaji  or  native 
commander-in-chief,  who  had  been  appointed  by  the 
Emir  of  Zaria.  This  officer,  much  stronger  than  the 
local  emir,  defied  authority  and  refused  to  submit  to  the 
representations  of  the  British  Resident.  There  came  a 
day  when  the  Resident,  Captain  Maloney,  called  upon  the 
Magaji  to  appear  and  answer  for  his  conduct  before  the 
emir.  The  Magaji  refused  to  come.  The  British  Resi- 
dent, after  an  unavailing  attempt  had  been  made  by  the 
Assistant  Resident  to  bring  the  Magaji  to  reason,  issued 
an  order  for  the  troops  to  be  called  out,  and  the  Magaji, 
rushing  from  his  house,  murdered  the  British  Resident 
with  his  own  hand  before  troops  could  reach  the  spot. 

The  Magaji  was,  of  course,  the  leader  of  a  rebellious 
party  in  Keffi.  After  the  murder  of  Captain  Maloney  he 
and  his  followers  immediately  fled.  They  were  pursued 
by  British  troops  to  the  northern  borders  of  the  province, 
where,  taking  refuge  in  Zaria,  they  were  presently  passed 
on  in  safety  to  Kano,  still  outside  the  limit  of  British 
administration.  At  Kano  the  Magaji  was  received  with 
much  honour  by  the  emir,  who  gave  him  presents  and 
assigned  him  a  house,  placing  him  always  on  his  right 
hand  when  he  rode. 

In  March  1902  a  Resident  had  been  placed  with  Zaria, 
which  was  nominally  friendly.     But  the  Emir  of  Zaria  was 


MILITARY   OCCUPATION  437 

very  unsatisfactory.  Not  only  did  he  continue  slave- 
raiding  and  other  lawless  proceedings,  but  he  continued 
them  in  the  name  of  the  British  Government,  wishing  at 
the  same  time  to  profit  by  the  strength  of  that  Govern- 
ment, and  to  make  it  detested.  More  than  once,  in  his 
armed  forays,  his  people  came  into  contact  with  Britisli 
patrols.  He  was  known  to  be  intriguing  with  Kano. 
It  had  even  been  debated  between  them  whether  he 
should  surprise  and  overpower  the  British  garrison.  He 
was  suspected  of  having  attempted  to  poison  the  Resi- 
dent. Under  these  circumstances  the  Resident  deter- 
mined to  arrest  him  and  bring  him  to  Zungeru.  It  was 
done,  the  council  of  chiefs  willingly  surrendering  him, 
for  he  was  much  detested  in  Zaria.  He  was  kept  in 
nominal  confinement  at  Wushishi,  and  one  of  his  prin- 
cipal officers  administered  the  Government  in  his  absence. 
This  man,  the  Galadima,  worked  loyally  with  the  British 
Government. 


CHAPTER   XLVII 

CONQUEST  OF  SOKOTO  AND  KANO 

The  situation  was  such  that  all  eyes  were  now  turned 
to  the  north.  Sokoto  was  the  recognised  religious  and 
political  head  of  Haussaland.  All  the  Fulani  emirates 
which  were  not  subject  to  Gando  took  their  investiture 
from  him.  The  British  High  Commissioner,  anxious  to 
interfere,  according  to  the  terms  of  the  British  treaties, 
as  little  as  possible  with  Mussulman  law  and  custom, 
had  done  what  he  could  in  the  circumstances  to  con- 
ciliate Sokoto  and  Gando.  But  the  British  treaties  did 
not  cover  a  position  in  which  the  leading  emirates  of 
the  south  should  initiate  an  attack  upon  the  British 
Administration,  as  in  the  case  of  Kontagora  and  Nupe, 
or  should  repudiate  their  agreements,  raid  British  pro- 
tected natives  for  slaves,  and  drive  British  traders  out 
of  their  dominions,  as  in  the  case  of  Yola  and  Bautchi. 
These  acts  on  the  part  of  the  southern  emirates  had 
created  a  new  position.  From  the  Niger  to  Bornu 
British  sovereignty  had  been  imposed  by  right,  not  of 
treaty,  but  of  conquest,  and  in  consequence  of  the 
refusal  of  Sokoto  to  exercise  the  functions  of  imme- 
diate suzerainty,  in  which  Great  Britain  would  willingly 
have  maintained  him,  by  nominating  successors  to  the 
deposed  emirs,  all  the  emirs  of  the  southern  emirates 
now  held  their  investiture  from  Great  Britain.  But 
the  force  of  tradition  dies  hard,  and  so  long  as  Sokoto 
existed,  and  had  not  signified  his  assent  to  the  appoint- 
ment of  the  Fulani  rulers,  there  was  for  them  an  un- 
comfortable sense  of  irregularity  in   their  position.     The 

more  loyally  they  worked  with   the   British   Government 

438 


CONQUEST  OF  SOKOTO  AND  KANO   439 

the  less  were  they  Hkely  to  please  Sokoto,  and  in  the 
lower  ranks  the  offence  of  working  loyally  with  a 
British-appointed  emir  was  scarcely  likely  to  be  less 
fatal,  in  the  event  of  Sokoto  ever  regaining  the  upper 
hand,  than  to  have  worked  with  the  British  themselves. 

The  question  of  the  future  turned  upon  whether 
Great  Britain  or  Sokoto  were  to  be  the  permanent  head 
of  Haussaland.  The  Haussas  have  a  proverb,  "Only  by 
fighting  can  the  better  man  be  found  out "  ;  and  the  feel- 
ing was  universal  that  a  trial  of  strength  would  have  to 
take  place  between  the  new  power  of  the  white  man 
and  the  old  power  of  the  Fulani.  Until  it  was  decided 
which  of  the  two  was  the  stronger,  no  waverer  knew 
on  which  side  to  cast  in  his  lot.  The  result  of  con- 
ciliation on  the  part  of  the  British  had  been  vain.  A 
letter,  couched  in  friendly  terms,  which  was  sent  to 
Sokoto  in  1900  to  announce  the  establishment  of  the 
British  Administration  on  the  river,  was  not  answered, 
and  the  messenger  who  bore  it  was  treated  with  in- 
dignity. The  request  made  in  1901  that  Sokoto  would 
nominate  the  successor  to  the  deposed  Emir  of  Konta- 
gora,  was  not  complied  with,  and  in  May  of  1902  a 
letter  was  addressed  by  Sokoto  to  the  British  High 
Commissioner,  couched  in  the  following  terms :  "I  do 
not  consent  that  any  one  from  you  should  ever  dwell 
with  us.  I  will  never  agree  with  you ;  I  will  have 
nothing  ever  to  do  with  you.  Between  us  and  you 
there  are  no  dealings,  except  as  between  Mussulmans 
and  Unbelievers — war  as  God  Almighty  has  enjoined 
upon  us.  There  is  no  power  or  strength  save  in  God 
on  high." 

Kano,  which  was  the  strong  place  of  Haussaland, 
possessing  an  organised  army  and  a  well-fortified  town, 
gave  evidence  of  its  hearty  support  of  the  antagonistic 
attitude  of  Sokoto.  While  it  was  known  throughout 
the  Protectorate  that  the  less  important  emirates  of  the 
south  had  been  wholly  unable  to  stand  before  British 
power,    it   was    very    generally    believed    by    the    natives 


440  A   TROPICAL   DEPENDENCY 

that  Kano  would  prove  impregnable,  and  that  Fulani 
rule  would  be  victoriously  maintained. 

This  being  the  condition  of  affairs,  it  became 
evident  that,  the  sooner  the  issue  was  decided,  the 
sooner  would  peace  and  progress  become  possible  in 
the  Nigerian  territories.  It  was  not  without  a  profound 
sense  of  the  responsibility  attaching  to  British  action  at 
a  juncture  when  all  eyes,  pagan  and  Mohammedan  alike, 
through  the  vast  congeries  of  native  states,  were  turned 
upon  the  little  knot  of  white  men,  by  this  time  per- 
manently established  in  the  British  headquarters  at 
Zungeru,  that  the  High  Commissioner  determined  to 
urge  upon  the  authorities  at  home  the  necessity  for 
striking  one  clear  and  decided  blow  before  the  resist- 
ance to  British  authority  had  had  time  to  gain  weight 
and  force  by  preparation  and  a  sustained  belief  in  its 
own  chances  of  conquest. 

The  highest  authority  of  Haussaland  had  repudiated 
the  position  nominally  established  by  treaty.  He  had 
declared  that  between  him  and  Great  Britain  there 
could  be  nothing  but  war.  The  alternative  for  the 
British  Administration  was  either  to  take  up  the  chal- 
lenge thrown,  or  to  abandon  the  work  of  pacification 
and  civilisation  upon  which  it  had  entered  in  Haussa- 
land. The  treaty  ground  of  the  British  position  having 
been  cut  from  under  our  feet,  it  was  necessary  either  to 
leave  the  country,  to  abandon  those  who  had  already 
trusted  to  our  protection,  and  to  throw  away  in  the 
eyes  of  Europe  all  the  ground  taken  by  successive  in- 
ternational agreements,  or  to  face  the  position  frankly, 
and  base  our  future  supremacy  in  the  Protectorate  upon 
the  indisputable  argument  of  conquest. 

In  the  case  of  the  southern  emirates  this  had 
already  been  done.  In  Kontagora,  Nupe,  Bautchi, 
Yola,  and  Nassawara,  we  had  already  been  welcomed 
by  the  subject  populations  as  the  conquerors  of  their 
conqueror.  In  every  emirate  the  new  ruler  had  been 
appointed  by  the  British  Government,  and  had  accepted 


CONQUEST  OF  SOKOTO  AND  KANO  441 

office  on  British  conditions.  In  the  Empire  of  Bornu  the 
position  was  even  more  strongly  emphasised.  There, 
in  fulfilHng  the  obhgations  of  an  international  agree- 
ment, British  arms  had  restored  the  ancient  dynasty  of 
the  country,  and  the  Sultan  had  accepted  his  throne  as 
a  gift  from  the  sovereign  of  Great  Britain.  The  emirs 
of  the  southern  emirates  were,  in  spite  of  their  doubts 
as  to  the  future,  working  loyally  with  the  British 
Government.  British  Residents  were  established  at  their 
courts,  a  British  garrison  in  the  capital  of  every  emirate 
acted  as  an  efficient  body  of  police,  not  to  overawe 
the  local  ruler,  but  to  give  effect  to  edicts  issued  by 
him  in  the  interests  of  civilisation.  Slave-raiding,  for- 
bidden in  the  territories  of  every  ruler  placed  on  the 
throne  under  British  protection,  was  becoming  a  practice 
of  the  past ;  taxes  were  being  peaceably  and  regularly 
collected.  Trade  routes,  as  has  been  seen,  were  daily 
opening.  But  the  whole  foundation  of  this  progress 
was  the  belief  of  the  native  in  British  strength.  The 
position  remained  uncertain  till  this  was  placed  beyond 
a  doubt. 

So  fully  was  this  situation  appreciated  that  symptoms 
of  unrest  and  expectancy  were  making  themselves  gene- 
rally felt  when  the  incident  occurred  in  the  middle  of  1902 
of  the  murder  of  the  British  Resident  at  Keffi,  and  the 
escape  of  his  murderer  to  the  court  of  Kano.  Kano  re- 
presented the  principal  military  power  of  the  northern 
states,  and  it  was  well  understood  that  Kano  was  the 
power  with  which  the  British  strength  would  be  first 
seriously  measured.  The  comment  of  the  Emir  of  Kano 
upon  the  murder  of  the  British  Resident  represented  a 
very  general  feeling.  "If  the  little  town  of  Keffi  could 
do  so  much,"  he  is  reported  to  have  said,  "  what  could 
not  Kano  do  ? " 

Towards  the  end  of  November  1902,  the  Emir  of 
Kano  went  so  far  as  to  march,  without  any  declaration 
of  war,  against  the  British  garrison  of  Zaria.  His  armies 
turned  back  on  the  news  reaching  them  of  the  death  of 


442  A   TROPICAL   DEPENDENCY 

the  Sultan  of  Sokoto,  and  also,  as  was  subsequently 
ascertained,  on  the  refusal  of  the  Emir  of  Katsena  to 
join  in  the  policy  of  war.  It  became  necessary  to 
strengthen  the  garrison  of  Zaria,  of  which  province  the 
emir  remained  a  prisoner  in  British  hands.  From  this 
moment  it  was  known  that  war  between  Kano  and  the 
white  men  was  inevitable. 

In  all  these  circumstances  there  was  one  consideration 
which  was  of  first  importance  in  the  minds  of  the  British 
authorities.  It  was  that,  in  fighting  the  Fulani,  we  were 
fighting  not  with  the  people  of  Haussaland,  but  with 
rulers  whose  misconduct,  notwithstanding  certain  splendid 
aptitudes  for  rule,  had  rendered  them  hateful  to  the  bulk 
of  the  population.  In  imposing  conditions  upon  their 
administration,  and  in  transferring  to  ourselves  the  suzer- 
ainty which  they  had  acquired  only  by  right  of  compara- 
tively recent  conquest,  we  believed  ourselves  to  carry  with 
us  the  wishes  of  the  numerous  Haussa  and  pagan  peoples 
who  make  up  the  body  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  Pro- 
tectorate. The  strength  of  the  northern  states  was  not 
to  be  despised,  for  should  their  arms  obtain  a  first  success, 
the  surrounding  populations  would  of  necessity  declare 
in  favour  of  those  who  appeared  likely  to  affirm  them- 
selves in  the  position  of  supremacy.  But  it  was  a  strength 
which,  notwithstanding  its  armed  appearance,  had  none 
of  that  permanent  resisting  power  which  is  drawn  from 
the  love  of  a  people  for  its  liberty,  its  territory,  and  its 
institutions.  What  strength  there  was  in  such  patriotic 
sentiment  was  upon  the  British  side. 

The  expeditionary  force  which  was  at  the  disposal 
of  the  High  Commissioner  consisted  of  about  looo  rank 
and  file  and  50  Europeans,  including  the  garrison  of 
Zaria.  It  appeared  to  be  sufficient  for  the  purpose,  and 
after  very  careful  preparation  the  bulk  of  it  was  concen- 
trated at  Zaria  in  January  of  1903.  On  January  29th 
the  order  to  advance  was  given,  and  a  force  consisting 
of  24  officers,  2  medical  officers,  12  British  non-com- 
missioned  officers,  and    722   rank    and    file,  with    4   guns 


CONQUEST  OF  SOKOTO  AND  KANO  443 

and  4  Maxims,  left  Zaria  under  the  command  of 
Colonel  Morland.  Captain  Abadie,  the  Resident  of  Zaria, 
another  of  those  members  of  the  early  staff  whom,  to 
the  sorrow  of  all  his  comrades,  death  has  since  claimed, 
accompanied  the  force  as  Political  Officer. 

The  first  opposition  was  encountered  at  a  walled 
town  eight  miles  within  the  Kano  frontier,  where  the 
inhabitants,  after  a  parley  with  the  Political  Officer,  said 
that  they  were  obliged  to  resist,  under  a  threat  of 
death  from  the  Emir  of  Kano  to  any  one  who  should 
open  the  gates.  A  British  shell  blew  in  the  gate, 
and  the  question  of  resistance  was  determined.  The 
town  was  not  looted  or  injured,  and  non-combatants 
were  unharmed.  A  series  of  newly  fortified  towns,  all 
instructed  by  the  emir  to  fight,  were  expected  to  hold 
the  approaches  to  Kano.  After  this  first  experience 
the  garrisons  abandoned  them,  and  fled  without  fighting  to 
Kano.  The  inhabitants  remained  quietly  in  the  towns, 
and  brought  ample  supplies  for  the  British  troops,  which 
were  paid  for  as  in  time  of  peace.  The  troops  were 
kept  within  strict  discipline.  No  looting  and  no  disorder 
was  allowed.  The  populace,  knowing  already  by  report 
the  practice  of  the  British  on  similar  occasions,  showed 
no  alarm. 

The  force,  therefore,  reached  Kano  unopposed.  The 
wall  of  the  town,  of  which  the  circumference  was  eleven 
miles,  was  forty  feet  thick  at  the  base,  and  from  thirty  to 
fifty  feet  high.  It  was  loopholed,  and  strengthened  in 
front  by  a  double  ditch.  Its  thirteen  gates  had  been 
lately  rebuilt,  and  some  of  them  were  designed  in  a 
re-entrant  angle,  so  that  access  to  them  was  enfiladed  by 
fire  from  the  walls  on  either  side,  while  the  ditch  was  full 
of  live  thorns,  and  very  deep.  The  fortifications  were 
such  that,  had  there  been  any  determined  resistance  on 
the  part  of  the  defenders,  the  town  might  have  stood  an 
almost  interminable  siege. 

The  event  justified  the  British  belief  that  in  fighting 
the  Fulani  they  had  the  wishes  of  the  people  of  Haussa- 


444  A    TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

land  on  their  side.  The  town  made  practically  no 
defence.  There  was  some  fairly  well-directed  firing 
from  behind  the  walls,  but,  a  small  breach  having  been 
effected,  an  assault  was  ordered,  and  the  defenders  fled 
as  soon  as  the  heads  of  the  storming  party  appeared  in 
the  gap.  A  considerable  loss  was  inflicted  upon  the 
enemy  outside  the  walls  when  the  British  force  en- 
deavoured to  cut  off  their  retreat.  As  they  fied  they 
suffered  severely.  The  town  itself,  which  occupied  only 
a  small  part  of  the  great  area  enclosed  by  the  walls, 
was  entered  unopposed.  The  inhabitants  exhibited  no 
concern.  No  disorder  on  the  part  of  the  soldiers  was 
permitted.  Captain  Abadie  immediately  summoned  the 
fourteen  headmen  of  the  principal  quarters  of  the  town, 
and  made  them  responsible  for  the  maintenance  of  order 
in  their  districts.  A  rate  of  exchange  was  fixed  between 
the  local  cowries  and  British  silver,  with  which  the 
troops  paid  for  all  they  purchased.  The  slave-market 
closed  itself  Otherwise  the  life  of  the  town  pursued 
its  usual  course.  Within  three  days  the  great  market 
showed  its  usual  activity,  and  fully  equipped  caravans 
started  for  the  south  and  arrived  from  the  north  and 
east  as  though  the  country  were  in  perfect  peace. 

The  capture  of  Kano  took  place  on  February  3.  The 
High  Commissioner,  travelling  up  from  Zungeru  to  Kano 
for  the  purpose  of  dealing  at  once  with  this  new  develop- 
ment of  the  political  situation,  traversed  a  few  days 
later  the  country  over  which  the  troops  had  marched, 
and  was  able  to  write  under  date  of  February  8  : 
"  It  is  a  striking  comment  on  the  situation  here  that, 
although  fighting  is  going  on  between  the  British  and 
the  Fulani  rulers  of  a  district  close  by,  the  road  I  am 
traversing  is  as  safe  as  Piccadilly.  I  met  to-day 
caravans  which  must  have  numbered  scores  of  loaded 
donkeys,  ponies,  and  oxen,  and  fiocks  of  sheep  for  sale 
down  south  which  must  have  numbered  many  hundreds 
These  are  being  taken  from  Kano  itself,  and  the  traders 
I    met    saluted    with    smiles    and    unmistakable    goodwill. 


CONQUEST    OF    SOKOTO   ANMJ    KANO      445 

Women  travel  alone  along  the  road,  and  men  are  all 
unarmed,  except  a  few  nomad  herdsmen  who  carry  the 
inevitable  spear.  The  headmen  of  the  villages  bring 
presents  of  food." 

It  was  soon  ascertained  that  the  emir  had  not  him- 
self directed  the  defence  and  surrender  of  Kano.  He 
had  removed  a  month  previously  to  Sokoto,  taking  with 
him  a  considerable  force  of  soldiery  and  all  members  of 
the  ruling  dynasty  who  could  by  any  possibility  be  chosen 
to  supersede  him.  The  defence  of  the  town  had  been 
left  to  two  trusted  slaves. 

He  now  returned  towards  Kano  with  the  whole  body 
of  his  army,  but  there  was  a  fatal  division  in  his  councils. 
One  of  his  brothers,  known  as  the  Wombai,  disapproved 
of  the  new  policy  and  refused  to  fight.  The  Wombai 
influenced  a  large  part  of  the  army,  which  he  separated 
from  the  body  of  the  troops,  and  drew  off  upon  a  different 
road.  In  presence  of  the  difference  of  opinion  between 
his  chiefs,  the  emir  adopted  a  course  of  conduct  which 
ensured  defeat.  He  placed  the  loyal  portion  of  the  army 
under  the  command  of  his  Vizier  or  Waziri,  and  himself 
fled  northwards  in  disguise  towards  the  French  frontier. 
On  the  following  day  his  army  was  encountered  by 
British  troops  marching  out  to  meet  it,  about  100  miles 
from  Kano,  and,  after  a  resistance  which  did  honour  to 
the  courage  of  its  leaders  in  the  circumstances  in  which 
they  fought,  and  gave  occasion  for  the  display  of  dis- 
tinguished gallantry  on  the  part  of  three  young  British 
officers — Captains  Wright  and  Wells  and  Captain  Porter  ; 
the  first  two  in  sustaining  the  shock  of  attack  by  an 
overwhelming  force  of  the  Kano  army,  and  the  third  in 
leading  a  decisive  charge — the  native  forces  were  com- 
pletely defeated. 

The  deciding  actions  took  place  on  February  25th 
and  26th.  On  the  4th  of  March  the  Wombai,  with  that 
portion  of  the  army  which  he  commanded,  and  many 
others  who  had  joined  themselves  to  him,  signified  to  the 
High  Commissioner,  who  had  now  taken  up  his  quarters 


446  A   TROPICAL   DEPENDENCY 

in  Kano,  their  desire  of  surrendering  to  the  British. 
Having  been  told  that  they  would  be  honourably  received, 
they  accepted  the  condition  of  returning  to  Kano  and 
delivering  all  firearms,  bows  and  arrows,  into  British 
hands.  They  were  required  to  enter  by  one  gate,  where 
a  guard  was  stationed  to  take  the  arms,  and  it  was 
estimated  that  about  2500  horsemen  and  a  total  of  at 
least  10,000  persons  entered  by  the  gate  on  this  occasion. 
The  Wombai,  having  expressed  his  desire  to  work  loyally 
with  the  British  Government,  was  provisionally  placed  in 
charge  of  the  town,  with  a  prospect  of  being  appointed 
emir  after  trial,  under  conditions  which  he  showed  him- 
self cordially  willing  to  accept. 

Immediately  on  the  fall  of  Kano  the  surrounding 
towns  had  sent  in  to  submit  to  the  British,  and  to  express 
their  wish  for  friendship,  and  it  was  significant  that  this 
had  been  done  even  while  their  Fulani  chiefs  with  an 
armed  Fulani  following  were  absent  in  the  army  of  the 
emir.  The  defeat  of  the  emir's  forces  and  the  submis- 
sion of  the  Wombai  confirmed  these  towns  in  their 
acceptance  of  British  rule,  and  it  was  explained  to  all 
that  it  formed  no  part  of  British  policy  to  upset  or  to 
interfere  with  existing  institutions  in  so  far  as  they  con- 
formed to  laws  of  justice  and  humanity.  Conciliatory 
letters  also  were  sent  to  the  Sultans  of  Katsena  and 
Sokoto,  explaining  that  Great  Britain  had  no  quarrel 
with  them,  nor  any  desire  to  fight,  provided  they 
would  receive  the  British  in  peace  and  carry  out  the 
conditions  under  which  Great  Britain  was  prepared  to 
confirm  them  in  their  positions.  The  letters  conveyed 
emphatic  assurance  that  their  religion  would  not  be 
interfered  with.  Katsena  immediately  replied  that  he 
had  no  desire  for  war,  and  would  willingly  accept  the 
British  conditions. 

No  reply  being  received  to  the  letter  which  was  sent 
to  Sokoto,  the  British  force  advanced  westward.  It  was 
the  season  of  the  Harmatan  wind  ;  the  heat  in  the  middle 
of  the  day  was  terrific,  rendering  the  stones  so  hot  that 


CONQUEST  OF  SOKOTO  AND  KANO  447 

the  horses  could  hardly  tread  upon  them,  and  the  dry 
wind  blew  like  the  breath  of  a  furnace,  parching  the 
throats  of  the  men.  The  water  of  the  country  during 
the  greater  part  of  the  march  was  impregnated  with  salts 
of  soda  and  potash,  and  increased,  instead  of  allaying 
thirst.  At  night  the  temperature  suddenly  fell,  and  the 
cold  became  so  sharp  that  the  native  troops  suffered 
severely  from  pneumonia  and  lung  diseases.  At  a  place 
called  Shagali  the  force  turned  southwards  to  effect  a 
junction  with  some  British  troops  which  had  been 
employed  on  escort  duty  for  French  convoys,  and  for 
the  Boundary  Commission  near  Argungu.  Here  a  letter 
was  received  from  the  Emir  of  Gando,  to  whom  also 
conciliatory  messages  had  been  sent,  making  his  submis- 
sion. Sokoto  alone  remained  obdurate,  and  the  column, 
somewhat  depleted  by  the  hardships  of  the  march,  but 
reinforced  by  the  troops  from  Argungu,  marched  upon 
the  town.  On  the  15th  of  March  a  battle  took  place,  in 
which  the  Sokoto  troops  were  defeated  and  put  to  flight. 

In  the  meantime  the  High  Commissioner,  anxious  as 
before  to  be  on  the  spot  for  the  purpose  of  arranging 
political  conditions  as  soon  as  the  military  blow  should 
have  been  delivered,  left  Kano  on  March  7,  accom- 
panied by  Captain  Abadie  as  Political  Officer,  and  an 
escort  of  seventy  Yorubas  under  a  white  subaltern,  with 
the  intention  of  making  his  way  by  forced  marches  in 
the  rear  of  the  troops  towards  Sokoto.  The  British 
force  had  about  twelve  days'  start  of  him ;  but,  in 
consequence  of  a  misunderstanding  when  it  turned 
southward  on  its  approach  to  Sokoto,  the  road  was 
left  undefended.  The  High  Commissioner's  party  had 
therefore  the  interesting  experience  of  marching  six 
Europeans  strong,  without  any  mounted  men  to  act  as 
scouts,  through  an  enemy's  country  full  of  populous 
walled  towns,  owning  allegiance  to  the  sovereign  upon 
whose  capital  the  body  of  the  British  force  was  ad- 
vancing. The  distance  from  Kano  to  Sokoto  was  about 
250  miles.      The   road    for  the  greater  part   of  the  way 


448  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

lay  along  the  twelfth  parallel  of  latitude,  and  the  party- 
moved  on  at  the  rate  of  about  twenty-eight  miles  a 
day.  As  they  drew  near  to  Sokoto  as  many  as  four 
and  five  walled  towns  were  passed  on  each  day.  They 
were  generally  moated,  and  the  walls  were  sometimes  a 
mile  long  on  each  face.  Fortunately  the  inhabitants 
showed  themselves  quite  friendly,  and,  with  no  worse 
adventure  than  tolerably  severe  discomfort,  the  High 
Commissioner  arrived  at  Sokoto  on  the  19th  of  March 
in  time  to  see,  as  he  came  over  some  rising  ground,  a 
dark  crowd  streaming  towards  the  British  camp,  com- 
posed, he  was  informed,  of  the  principal  notables  of  the 
town  coming  to  make  their  formal  submission  to  the 
British.  He  received  in  person  the  submission  of  the 
Waziri  and  principal  chiefs  of  Sokoto.  The  emir, 
like  the  Emir  of  Kano,  had  fled. 

The  trial  of  strength  had  come  and  gone.  The 
Fulani  emirates  were  in  our  hands,  and  Great  Britain 
was  the  acknowledged  sovereign  of  Northern  Nigeria. 


CHAPTER   XLVIII 

BRITISH   POLICY   IN   NORTHERN   NIGERIA 

The  first  feeling  of  the  territories  appeared  to  be  one 
of  profound  relief,  and  the  High  Commissioner  hastened 
to  take  advantage  of  the  favourable  movement  by  a 
speedy  declaration  of  British  policy.  In  Kano,  as  has 
been  seen,  he  had  left  the  Wombai  as  provisional  chief, 
with  the  intention  of  appointing  him  to  the  emirate  if 
he  should  prove  satisfactory  ;  in  Katsena  and  Gando  the 
reigning  emirs  had  made  submission ;  in  Sokoto,  as  in 
Kano,  the  emir  had  fled,   leaving  the  throne  vacant. 

The  work  of  reconstruction  began  with  Sokoto.  It 
has  been  seen  in  the  case  of  the  southern  emirates 
how  useful  the  old  Councils  of  Notables  had  proved  in 
enabling  the  British  Administration  to  appoint  in  every 
case  emirs  chosen  according  to  the  law  and  custom  of 
the  land.  The  same  principle  was  adopted  at  the  heart 
of  the  Fulani  empire.  The  Sarikin  Muslimin,  or  Com- 
mander of  the  Faithful,  as  the  Sultan  of  Sokoto  was 
called,  was  the  chief  who  of  old  gave  investiture  to  the 
lesser  emirs  chosen  by  their  own  Council  of  Notables. 
But  to  the  Sarikin  Muslimin  himself  no  investiture  was 
given.  He  was  elected  by  the  Council  of  Notables 
drawn  from  certain  tribes.  Immediately  on  the  fall  of 
Sokoto,  and  the  submission  of  the  headmen,  the  High 
Commissioner,  having  been  informed  of  the  flight  of  the 
emir,  called  the  Council  together  and  asked  them  to 
consider  whether  the  emir,  who  had  very  lately  suc- 
ceeded to  the  throne,  should  be  recalled  and  reinstated, 
or  whether  a  new  emir  should  be  appointed.  Time 
was  taken  to  consider  the  matter.     The   decision  of  the 

449  2    F 


450  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

Council  was  in  favour  of  the  appointment  of  a  new 
emir,  and  the  favoured  candidate — Atahiru — was,  after 
some  hesitation,  selected.  The  High  Commissioner 
agreed  to  nominate  him,  and  appointed  the  following 
day  for  a  formal  meeting  to  explain  to  him,  and  to  the 
Council  of  Notables,  the  future  system  upon  which  the 
government  of  the  country  would  be  carried  on. 

Accordingly,  on  the  21st  of  March,  the  Council, 
headed  by  the  Waziri,  and  having  with  them  the  Sultan 
elect,  assembled  in  the  British  camp,  and  the  High 
Commissioner  read  to  them  a  statement  which  was 
very  carefully  translated  phrase  by  phrase  by  a  com- 
petent interpreter,  checked  by  the  same  Resident,  Major 
Burdon,  whose  name  has  been  already  mentioned  in 
connection  with  Nupe,  and  whose  knowledge  of  the 
Haussa  language  enabled  him  to  guard  against  mis- 
representation of  the  meaning  of  the  document.  As 
the  speech  laid  down  the  policy  to  be  pursued  by  the 
British  Administration,  I  give  the  essential  passages  of 
it  in  the  words  used  by  the  High  Commissioner.  After 
a  preamble  alluding  to  the  treaties  of  alliance  made 
between  Sokoto  and  Great  Britain,  and  recording  the 
circumstances  which  had  led  to  war,  much  against  the 
desire  of  the  British  Government,  the  High  Commis- 
sioner continued  : — 

"  The  old  treaties  are  dead — you  have  killed  them. 
Now  these  are  the  words  which  I,  the  High  Com- 
missioner, have  to  say  for  the  future.  The  Fulani 
in  old  times,  under  Dan  Fodio,  conquered  this  country. 
They  took  the  right  to  rule  over  it,  to  levy  taxes,  to 
depose  kings,  and  to  create  kings.  They  in  turn  have 
by  defeat  lost  their  rule,  which  has  come  into  the  hands 
of  the  British.  All  these  things  which  I  have  said  the 
Fulani  by  conquest  took  the  right  to  do  now  pass  to 
the  British.  Every  sultan  and  emir,  and  the  principal 
officers  of  State,  will  be  appointed  by  the  High  Commis- 
sioner   throughout    all     this    country.       The    High    Com- 


BRITISH    POLICY  451 

missioner  will  be  guided  by  the  usual  laws  of  succession, 
and  the  wishes  of  the  people  and  chiefs ;  but  will  set 
them  aside,  if  he  desires,  for  good  cause,  to  do  so.  The 
emirs  and  chiefs  who  are  appointed  will  rule  over  the 
people  as  of  old  time,  and  take  such  taxes  as  are 
approved  by  the  High  Commissioner;  but  they  will 
obey  the  laws  of  the  Governor,  and  will  act  in  accordance 
with  the  advice  of  the  Resident.  Buying  and  selling 
slaves,  and  enslaving  people,  are  forbidden.  It  is  for- 
bidden to  import  firearms  (except  flint-locks),  and  there 
are  other  minor  matters  which  the  Resident  will  explain. 
The  alkalis  and  the  emirs  will  hold  the  law  courts  as 
of  old  ;  but  bribes  are  forbidden,  and  mutilation  and 
confinement  of  men  in  inhuman  prisons  are  not  lawful. 
The  powers  of  each  court  will  be  contained  in  a  warrant 
appointing  it.  Sentences  of  death  will  not  be  carried  out 
without  the  consent  of  the  Resident. 

"  The  Government  will,  in  future,  hold  the  rights  in 
land  which  the  Fulani  took  by  conquest  from  the  people, 
and  if  Government  requires  land,  it  will  take  it  for  any 
purpose.  The  Government  hold  the  right  of  taxation, 
and  will  tell  the  emirs  and  chiefs  what  taxes  they  may 
levy,  and  what  part  of  them  must  be  paid  to  Govern- 
ment. The  Government  will  have  the  right  to  all 
minerals,  but  the  people  may  dig  for  iron  and  work  in 
it  subject  to  the  approval  of  the  High  Commissioner, 
and  may  take  salt  and  other  minerals  subject  to  any 
excise  imposed  by  law.  Traders  will  not  be  taxed  by 
chiefs,  but  only  by  Government.  The  coinage  of  the 
British  will  be  accepted  as  legal  tender,  and  a  rate  of 
exchange  for  cowries  fixed  in  consultation  with  chiefs, 
and  they  will  enforce  it. 

"When  an  emirate,  or  an  office  of  state,  becomes 
vacant,  it  will  only  be  filled  with  the  consent  of  the  High 
Commissioner ;  and  the  person  chosen  by  the  Council  of 
Chiefs,  and  approved  by  the  High  Commissioner,  will 
hold  his  place  only  on  condition  that  he  obeys  the  laws 
of  the    Protectorate  and    the  conditions    of   his    appoint- 


452  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

ment.  Government  will  in  no  way  interfere  with  the 
Mohammedan  religion.  All  men  are  free  to  worship  God 
as  they  please.  Mosques  and  prayer-places  will  be  treated 
with  respect  by  us.  Every  person,  including  slaves,  has 
the  right  to  appeal  to  the  Resident,  who  will,  however, 
endeavour  to  uphold  the  power  of  the  native  courts  to 
deal  with  native  cases  according  to  the  law  and  custom 
of  the  country.  If  slaves  are  ill-treated,  they  will  be  set 
free  as  your  Koran  orders,  otherwise  Government  does 
not  desire  to  interfere  with  existing  domestic  relations. 
But  slaves  set  free  must  be  willing  to  work,  and  not  to 
remain  idle  or  become  thieves.  .   .   . 

"It  is  the  earnest  desire  of  the  King  of  England  that 
this  country  shall  prosper  and  grow  rich  in  peace  and 
in  contentment ;  that  the  population  shall  increase,  and 
the  ruined  towns  which  abound  everywhere  shall  be  built 
up ;  and  that  war  and  trouble  shall  cease.  Henceforth 
no  emir  or  chief  shall  levy  war  or  fight ;  but  his  case  will 
be  settled  by  law,  and  if  force  is  necessary.  Government 
will  employ  it.  I  earnestly  hope  to  give  effect  in  these 
matters  to  the  wishes  of  my  king. 

"  In  conclusion,  I  hope  that  you  will  find  our  rule 
sympathetic,  and  that  the  country  will  prosper  and  be 
contented.  You  need  have  no  fear  regarding  British  rule  ; 
it  is  our  wish  to  learn  your  customs  and  fashion,  just  as 
you  must  learn  ours.  I  have  little  fear  but  that  we  shall 
agree,  for  you  have  always  heard  that  British  rule  is  just 
and  fair,  and  people  under  our  King  are  satisfied.  You 
must  not  fear  to  tell  the  Resident  everything,  and  he  will 
help  and  advise  you." 

The  speech  was  amplified  and  fully  explained  in  the 
sitting  which  took  place  after  it  was  read.  The  messenger 
who  had  been  ill-treated  at  Sokoto  on  the  reception  of 
a  first  letter  from  the  British  High  Commissioner  was 
present  and  gave  his  evidence,  the  original  letter  from 
the  late  Sultan  declaring  war  was  shown.  The  existing 
position  having  been  fully  discussed  and   appreciated   by 


BRITISH    POLICY  453 

the  Council,  and  the  conditions  of  installation  agreed 
to  by  the  Sultan  elect,  the  following  day,  the  22nd  of 
March,   was  appointed  for  the  installation. 

The  details  of  the  ceremony  were  determined  in  con- 
sultation with  the  proper  Mohammedan  authorities,  and 
it  was  arranged  that,  in  sign  of  the  acceptance  of  the 
sovereignty  of  Great  Britain  by  Sokoto,  the  Sultan,  who 
had  never  hitherto  received  a  gift  of  investiture,  should, 
like  the  lesser  emirs,  receive  a  gown  and  turban  from 
the  hands  of  the  representative  of  the  King  of  England. 
These  were  to  represent  the  insignia  of  office,  which 
up  to  the  present  day  it  had  been  the  custom  for 
Sokoto  alone  to  present  on  installation  to  his  sub- 
ordinate emirs. 

The  installation  ceremony  was  performed  with  some 
pomp.  The  troops,  with  guns  and  Maxims  mounted,  were 
drawn  up  on  three  sides  of  a  hollow  square.  An  immense 
crowd  of  natives  was  assembled.  On  the  arrival  of  the 
High  Commissioner  on  the  spot  he  was  received  with 
a  royal  salute.  A  carpet  was  spread  for  the  emir  and 
for  his  principal  officers  of  state.  The  High  Commissioner 
then  made  a  speech  in  the  same  sense  as  that  of  the 
document  which  has  been  quoted.  When  he  came  to 
the  statement  that  the  British  Government  would  in  no 
way  interfere  with  the  exercise  of  the  Mohammedan 
religion,  that  all  men  were  free  to  worship  God  as  they 
pleased,  a  deep  and  most  impressive  murmur  of  satisfac- 
tion broke  from  the  crowd.  On  the  conclusion  of  the 
speech  the  High  Commissioner  called  upon  the  Sultan 
to  say  if  he  fully  understood  and  accepted  the  conditions 
of  his  installation.  The  Sultan  replied  that  he  understood 
and  that  he  accepted  them.  The  High  Commissioner 
then  proclaimed  him  Sarikin  Muslimin  and  Sultan  of 
Sokoto,  and  the  gown  and  turban  were  presented  to  him 
as  the  insignia  of  office.  The  High  Commissioner  shook 
hands  publicly  with  the  Sultan,  and  gave  permission  for 
the  royal  trumpets,  which  can  only  be  sounded  for  a 
duly   appointed    and    accepted    emir,    to    be    blown.      A 


454  A    TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

prayer  was  recited  aloud  by  the  criers,  and  the  crowd 
dispersed  amid  discordant  sounds  of  rejoicing  and  ex- 
pressions of  mutual  goodwill. 

The  High  Commissioner  was  very  favourably  im- 
pressed with  this  Sultan,  as  with  the  Wombai  of  Kano, 
and  with  many  of  the  leading  men  of  their  councils. 
Amongst  the  upper  class  Fulani  of  the  northern  states 
he  met  men  deserving  in  every  way  of  the  name  of 
cultivated  gentlemen.  He  found  them  able  in  argu- 
ment, cultivated  in  discussion,  open  to  the  conclusions 
of  reason.  In  manner  they  were  dignified,  courteous,  and 
sympathetic.  Nor  did  they  seem  to  him  to  lack  the 
essential  qualities  of  frankness  and  humanity.  There 
could  be  no  question  to  his  mind,  nor  to  those  of  the 
officers  who  accompanied  him,  that  among  the  educated 
classes  of  the  northern  state  they  were  in  the  presence 
of  a  wholly  different  standard  of  civilisation  to  that 
generally  accepted  in  the  southern  emirates.  A  similar 
experience  was  made  at  a  later  period  in  Bornu,  and 
the  recognition  of  this  fact  naturally  went  to  strengthen 
the  conviction  of  the  wisdom  of  the  policy  which  pro- 
posed to  rule,  as  far  as  possible,  through  the  existing 
Fulani  and  Bornuese  machinery  of  the  greater  part  of 
the  Protectorate,  modified  and  controlled  by  the  advice 
of  British  Residents. 

Leaving  a  Resident  and  a  small  garrison  at  Sokoto, 
the  High  Commissioner,  on  the  day  following  the  in- 
stallation, took  the  road  towards  Katsena,  escorted  by 
the  new  Sultan  and  throngs  of  chiefs  and  horsemen  for 
a  portion  of  the  way.  On  parting,  the  Fulani  chiefs 
thanked  him  profusely  for  all  that  had  been  done,  dis- 
played great  pleasure  at  his  praise  of  the  plucky  stand 
which  they  had  made  in  opposition  to  the  British  troops 
before  the  capture  of  the  town,  and  gave  signs  of  much 
relief  that  the  fighting  was  over,  and  that  events  had 
taken  so  favourable  a  turn.  He  and  his  staff  gained 
the  impression,  which  subsequent  events  have  done  much 
to   confirm,    that   the    majority   were    genuinely    surprised 


BRITISH    POLICY  455 

and  pleased  at  the  treatment  which  had  been  accorded 
to  them.  The  Sultan  of  Sokoto  has  up  to  the  present 
time  continued  to  work  in  the  utmost  cordiality  with  the 
British  Resident. 

Katsena,  which  had  not  yet  been  visited  by  troops, 
was  reached  on  March  28.  On  the  following  day,  an 
explanation  of  the  British  position  and  policy,  similar  to 
that  made  at  Sokoto,  was  made  to  the  emir  and  chiefs, 
and  the  emir  was  installed  under  conditions  similar  to 
those  of  Sokoto.  As  Katsena  had  a  special  reputation 
as  a  centre  of  learning,  assurances  were  added  in  the 
High  Commissioner's  speech  of  the  willingness  of  the 
British  Government  to  give  such  assistance  as  it  could 
to  education.  Here,  as  in  the  other  towns,  the  value  of 
a  staple  currency  was  discussed,  and  a  rate  of  exchange 
fixed  between  British  silver  and  cowries.  Other  lesser 
chiefs  of  the  northern  neighbourhood  made  their  sub- 
mission,  and  were  interviewed  and  dealt  with. 

From  Katsena  the  High  Commissioner  marched  back 
to  Kano,  and  on  April  2nd,  after  explanations  similar  to 
those  of  Sokoto  and  Katsena,  the  Wombai  was  installed 
as  emir,  with  observance  of  some  special  ceremonies  in 
historical  use  at  Kano.  With  Kano,  Katagum  was 
brought  under  British  administration.  On  April  7  the 
High  Commissioner  reached  Zaria ;  there  he  also  installed, 
after  the  usual  explanations,  a  new  emir,  Dan  Sidi,  who, 
in  consultation  with  the  Sultan  and  Waziri  of  Sokoto, 
had  been  indicated  as  the  best  successor  to  the  emir 
deposed  at  Zungeru,  and  who  was  willingly  accepted  by 
the  Zaria  Council. 

It  may  be  incidentally  mentioned,  as  an  illustration 
of  the  pace  at  which  work  was  done  in  a  Protectorate 
where  the  loyal  desire  of  every  one  was  to  "go  slow," 
that,  from  the  date  of  leaving  Kano  on  the  westward 
march,  to  the  moment  of  arrival  at  Zaria  on  the  return 
journey,  thirty-eight  days  had  elapsed.  In  that  period 
eight  hundred  miles  of  enemy's  country  had  been  traversed 
on   foot  or  horseback,  the  political    situation   of   Sokoto, 


456  A    TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

Katsena,  and  Kano  had  been  investigated,  three  emirs 
had  been  installed,  many  minor  chiefs  of  importance  had 
been  interviewed,  and  the  principles  of  British  policy- 
had  been  personally  explained  by  the  High  Commissioner 
to  the  leading  representatives  of  all  the  native  states 
through  which  the  British  troops  had  marched. 

The  province  of  Kontagora  had  remained  without  an 
emir  for  two  years.  The  population  had  been  much 
dispersed,  and  no  suitable  heir  to  the  throne  had  presented 
himself.  At  Sokoto,  when  the  advice  of  the  emir  and 
Council  was  asked,  a  unanimous  desire  had  been  expressed 
that  the  recalcitrant  chief  Ibrahim,  who  was  first  cousin 
to  the  ex-Emir  of  Sokoto,  and  a  man  connected  with  the 
best  families  of  the  northern  states,  might  be  reinstated. 
Ibrahim,  after  experience  of  exile  and  confinement,  had 
become  a  profoundly  altered  man.  The  vehemence  of 
his  abjuration  of  all  slave  dealing,  when  the  question  of 
his  restoration  was  discussed,  was  in  somewhat  comic 
contrast  to  his  previous  utterances  on  the  same  subject, 
and  though  the  experiment  seemed  doubtful,  it  was  de- 
cided to  replace  him,  under  conditions  similar  to  the  other 
emirs,  upon  the  throne.  The  installation  of  Gando  was 
provided  for  to  take  place  at  a  later  period. 

Every  important  emir  of  the  Protectorate  now  held 
his  throne  under  a  letter  of  appointment  from  Great 
Britain,  and  to  many  of  the  lesser  pagan  chiefs  a  no 
less  formal  "  staff  of  office "  had  been  o-iven.  The 
pledges  given  by  emirs  and  chiefs  in  return  had  been 
made  in  their  own  forms,  but  with  full  pomp  of  un- 
mistakable public  ceremony.  By  the  end  of  April  1903 
there  was  no  population  in  the  Protectorate  that  did 
not  understand  the  transfer  of  sovereignty  which  had 
taken  place  from  their  ancient  Fulani  rulers  to  the  British 
Government.  This  was  strikingly  illustrated  by  the 
action  of  the  Munshis,  an  extremely  ignorant  and  trucu- 
lent native  tribe  occupying  the  northern  bank  of  the 
Benu^,  nearly  opposite  to  Bassa,  one  of  the  five  provinces 
which    at   the    beginning   of  the    year    190 1-2    had    been 


BRITISH    POLICY  457 

mentioned  by  the  High  Commissioner  as  calling  for 
attention.  These  pagans,  who  had  entirely  refused  to 
have  any  dealings  with  the  British,  on  hearing  of  the 
fall  of  Kano,  came  at  once  in  a  strong  deputation  to  the 
Resident,  and  brought  presents,  saying  that  the  white  man 
was  now  stronger  than  Sokoto. 

At  a  later  period  it  was  thought  well  to  assimilate 
the  system  of  appointment,  and  the  emirs  and  chiefs 
of  the  Protectorate  have  been  divided  into  chiefs  of  the 
first  and  second  grade,  and  minor  chiefs  of  the  third  and 
fourth  grades.  The  rank  of  a  chief  of  the  first  grade 
is  reserved  for  the  Shehu  of  Bornu  and  the  great  Fulani 
emirs,  such  as  Sokoto,  Kano,  Gando,  &c.  ;  the  rank  of 
chief  of  the  second  grade  is  for  the  lesser  emirs,  such 
as  Katagum,  Hadeija,  Lapai,  &c.,  and  the  chiefs  of  the 
principal  pagan  communities,  such  as  Argungu,  Kiama, 
Boussa,  &c.  The  ranks  of  third  and  fourth  grade  are 
for  district  headmen  and  pagan  chiefs  of  less  importance, 
but  having  executive  authority.  The  formal  recognition 
of  all  chiefs,  whatever  their  grade,  is  accompanied  by  the 
presentation  of  a  "staff  of  office,"  and  the  staff  varies 
according  to  the  importance  of  the  office  conferred.  Chiefs 
of  the  first  grade  have  a  long  staff  surmounted  by  a 
silver  headpiece,  chiefs  of  the  second  grade  have  also  a 
long  staff,  but  it  is  surmounted  by  a  brass  headpiece.  In 
the  case  of  the  third  and  fourth  grades  the  staves  are 
short  and  of  plainer  design.  For  the  Shehu  of  Bornu 
and  the  Emir  of  Sokoto  special  staves  have  been  designed 
as  a  mark  of  honour  in  recognition  of  their  ancient 
positions  of  supreme  importance.  There  are  only  these 
four  symbols  of  executive  authority.  Below  the  rank  of 
fourth  grade  chief,  certificates  of  office  are  given,  but 
without  a  staff,  to  certain  graded  headmen,  &c. 

The  oath  of  allegiance,  which  is  taken  on  receiving 
the  staff  of  office,  has  also  been  brought  into  regular  form, 
and  for  Moslems  is  as  follows  : — "  I  swear,  in  the  name 
of  Allah  and  of  Mohammed  his  prophet,  to  serve  well  and 
truly  his  Majesty  King  Edward  VII.,  and  his  representa- 


458  A    TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

tive,  the  High  Commissioner  of  Northern  Nigeria,  to 
obey  the  laws  of  the  Protectorate  and  the  lawful  commands 
of  the  High  Commissioner,  and  of  the  Resident,  provided 
that  they  are  not  contrary  to  my  religion.  And  if  they 
are  so  contrary  I  will  at  once  inform  the  Resident  for 
the  information  of  the  High  Commissioner.  I  will  cherish 
in  my  heart  no  treachery  or  disloyalty,  and  I  will  rule 
my  people  with  justice,  and  without  partiality.  And  as 
I  carry  out  this  oath,  so  may  Allah  judge  me."  To 
pagans,  the  substance  of  the  same  oath  is  administered 
in  whatever  form  is  most  binding  on  their  conscience. 

To  all  the  chiefs  it  is  explained  that  it  is  no  part  of  the 
British  policy  to  lessen  their  influence  or  authority — that, 
on  the  contrary,  it  is  the  desire  of  the  British  Government 
to  rule  with  them,  and  through  them. 

Residents  are  instructed  strictly  to  observe  the 
etiquette  of  proper  ceremonial  in  their  dealings  with  the 
chiefs.  It  is  recognised  that,  the  Fulani  chiefs  being  aliens 
who  have  won  their  position  by  conquest,  it  would  not 
be  surprising  if  the  bulk  of  the  people,  seeing  that  the 
Fulani  power  has  been  broken  by  the  British,  were  no 
longer  to  accord  to  the  chiefs  their  accustomed  obedience 
and  respect.  The  desire  of  the  British  Government  is 
to  counteract  this  tendency  in  every  possible  way,  and 
Residents  are  instructed  that  "the  privileges  and  in- 
fluence of  the  chiefs  can  best  be  upheld  by  letting  the 
peasantry  see  that  Government  itself  treats  them  as  an 
integral  part  of  the  machinery  of  the  administration — that 
there  are  not  two  sets  of  rulers,  one  British  and  one 
native,  working  either  separately  or  in  co-operation,  but 
a  single  Government,  in  which  the  native  chiefs  have 
clearly  defined  duties,  and  an  acknowledged  status  equally 
with  British  officials."  It  is,  however,  considered  neces- 
sary at  present,  and  probably  for  some  time  to  come,  to 
retain  the  means  of  enforcing  order — namely,  the  mili- 
tary and  police  force — solely  under  the  British  Govern- 
ment. The  emir's  orders  must  be  enforced  by  the  native 
courts.       In    the    last    resort    it    may,    of   course,    become 


BRITISH    POLICY  459 

necessary  for  the  British  Government  to  compel  obedi- 
ence, but  this  emergency  is  as  far  as  possible  to  be 
avoided. 

The  powers  of  native  chiefs  are  defined,  as  are  the 
powers  of  the  native  courts,  for  which  warrants  are  now 
issued  in  all  the  Mohammedan  emirates,  and  it  is  interest- 
ing to  observe  that  in  the  elaboration  of  the  details  of 
this  system  the  opinions  and  advice  of  the  emirs  and  their 
leading  native  counsellors  have  been  sought  and  willingly 
given.  In  many  discussions  British  officers  have  been 
struck  by  the  acuteness  and  ability  with  which  the  weak  or 
distasteful  point  of  a  proposal  is  discerned,  and  arguments 
in  favour  of  a  preferred  alternative  sustained.  The  readi- 
ness of  the  emirs  to  co-operate  in  the  construction  of 
a  new  system  of  government  has  been  extremely  help- 
ful, and  where  it  has  been  possible  their  wishes  have  been 
gladly  deferred  to. 


CHAPTER  XLIX 

NIGERIA   UNDER   BRITISH   RULE:    SLAVERY 

The  position  of  the  Fulani  chiefs  was,  however,  in  the 
first  instance,  profoundly  modified  by  a  condition  which 
was  of  the  very  essence  of  British  administration.  A 
large  part  of  their  revenue  had  consisted  of  tribute 
paid  in  slaves,  and,  in  some  cases,  of  the  tithe  levied  on 
the  produce  of  slave-raids,  which  they  conducted  either 
in  person  or  by  the  medium  of  the  commander  of  their 
troops.  But  under  British  government,  the  slave-raid  and 
the  slave-trade  were  abolished,  and  all  dealing  in  slaves 
became  illegal.  It  was  not  made  illegal  for  a  native  to 
own  slaves,  but  by  the  abolition  of  the  legal  status  of 
slavery,  every  slave  who  chose  to  do  so  could  assert  his 
freedom,  while  the  decree  making  all  children  free  who 
were  born  in  the  Protectorate  after  April  i,  1901,  was  a 
decree  of  general  emancipation  of  the  coming  generation. 

The  fact  has  to  be  faced  by  the  administrator  in 
Mohammedan  Africa,  that  the  abolition  of  slavery  is  not 
a  straightforward  task  of  beneficence.  It  carries  with  it 
grave  and  undeniable  disadvantages  to  the  slaves  as  well 
as  to  their  owners,  and  the  objections  urged  against  it 
by  the  local  rulers  and  employers  are  not  by  any  means 
without  foundation. 

Property  in  slaves,  whatever  may  be  thought  of  it 
by  the  enlightened  conscience  of  Europe,  is  as  real  to  the 
Mohammedan  as  any  other  form  of  property.  Slavery 
is  an  institution  sanctioned  by  the  law  of  Islam,  and  to 
abolish  it  without  compensation  to  the  Mohammedan 
slave-owners  would  be  an  act  of  injustice  amounting  to 
nothing  less  than  wholesale  confiscation. 

It    has    to    be    remembered,  also,     that    in     countries 

460 


NIGERIA    UNDER    BRITISH    RULE       461 

where  all  industries  are  based  on  slave  labour,  slave 
power  takes  the  place  which  steam  and  electric  power 
take  in  the  West.  It  cannot  be  suddenly  abolished 
without  a  universal  dislocation  of  industrial  life.  Slaxcry 
is  at  present  the  only  form  of  labour  contract  known 
in  many  districts  of  Northern  Nigeria,  and  before  it  can 
be  done  away  with,  time  is  needed  for  other  forms  of 
labour  contract  to  be  substituted.  My  husband,  whose 
opinions  I  am  quoting  in  regard  to  the  whole  of  this 
important  subject,  and  who,  as  his  early  career  has 
publicly  proclaimed,  is  among  the  most  convinced  op- 
ponents of  slavery,  has  pointed  out,  in  memoranda 
intended  for  the  instruction  of  the  Residents,  that  a 
substantial  return  is  given  by  the  master  for  the  work  of 
the  slave.  The  slave  is  protected,  housed,  clothed,  and 
fed.  In  many  cases  he  is  allowed  to  employ  a  portion 
of  his  time  for  his  own  exclusive  benefit,  and  his  rights 
are  carefully  protected  by  Koranic  law.  It  is  not  wise  to 
encourage  a  reckless  rejection  of  these  present  advantages 
without  full  consideration  of  his  possible  future  position. 

The  slaves  of  Northern  Nigeria  may  be  divided  into 
two  classes,  household  slaves,  and  farm  slaves.^  The 
household  slaves  are  domestic  slaves  in  the  sense  usually 
understood,  though  they  frequently  rise  to  positions  of 
great  responsibility  and  independence.  The  status  of 
farm  slaves  differs  from  that  of  household  slaves,  and  is 
rather  that  of  serfs  attached  to  the  soil,  than  of  slaves 
in  the  common  sense  of  the  term.  They  are  inalienable 
from  the  land.  They  cannot  legally  be  sold.  They 
have  certain  rights  as  regards  produce,  the  houses  they 
live  in,  the  land  which  they  are  allowed  to  cultivate  for 
themselves,  and  the  time  which  is  allotted  to  them  for 
their  own  use.  They  form,  in  fact,  the  body  of  the  agri- 
cultural population,  and  any  sudden  change  which  should 
lead  these  people  to  abandon  the  land  and  flock  into  the 
towns    would    manifestly    be    disastrous.      The    slaves    of 

1  See  the  description  given  by  Hume   of  the  slaves  of  England  under 
the  Saxons. 


462  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

Northern  Nigeria,  by  the  universal  testimony  of  the 
British  Residents  now  stationed  in  every  province,  are 
generally  happy  and  contented. 

This  condition  of  affairs  is  sometimes  made  the  basis 
of  an  argument  in  favour  of  the  permanent  toleration  of 
domestic  slavery,  which,  under  proper  supervision,  is 
thought  by  some  people  to  be  an  institution  suited  to 
the  present  condition  of  Africa.  In  opposition  to  such 
a  view  there  is  the  simple  logic  of  the  fact  that  slavery 
cannot  be  maintained  without  a  supply  of  slaves  acquired 
under  all  the  horrors  of  slave-raids,  and  transported  with 
great  suffering  and  loss  of  life  from  their  original  homes. 
The  evils  of  this  system,  whether  they  are  considered 
from  a  humane,  or  simply  from  an  economic  and  adminis- 
trative point  of  view,  do  not  need  to  be  insisted  on. 
For  this  reason  alone  slavery  must  stand  condemned  in 
any  society  which  aspires  to  civilisation.  But  there  is 
also  a  second  aspect  in  which  slavery  as  an  institution  is 
opposed  to  the  march  of  progress.  It  keeps  a  very  large 
portion  of  the  population  in  a  state  of  tutelage,  in  which 
the  individual  is  not  held  responsible  for  his  acts.  This,  in 
my  husband's  opinion,  is  the  reason  why  Mohammedan 
Africa,  which  readily  reaches  a  higher  stage  of  civilisation 
than  the  black  pagan  territories,  does  not  progress  beyond 
a  certain  point.  It  is  too  heavily  weighted  by  the  irre- 
sponsible multitudes  who  are  not  concerned  with,  and  do 
not  directly  contribute  towards  public  life.  This  from 
the  administrative  point  of  view  is  very  undesirable. 

It  is  the  British  tradition  that  slavery  is  not  tolerated 
in  any  country  which  has  been  annexed  to  the  Crown, 
and  has  become  a  colony  under  the  British  flag,  but  that 
in  countries  which  are  only  in  that  partially  dependent 
condition  which  is  known  by  the  name  of  a  Protectorate, 
and  are  still  governed  by  their  own  laws,  it  is  not  pos- 
sible to  forbid  the  institution  of  domestic  slavery  where 
it  exists.  In  all  British  Protectorates  the  step  is  now 
taken  to  abolish  the  legal  status  of  slavery. 

In   Northern     Nigeria    the    value    of    the    immediate 


NIGERIA    UNDER    HRITISll    RULE       463 

abolition  of  slave-raiding  and  slave-trading  need  not  be 
discussed.  There  is  no  voice  that  would  be  raised  in 
humane  society  in  favour  of  the  maintenance  of  these 
institutions.  The  abolition  of  the  legal  status  of  slavery 
has  an  effect  in  two  ways.  It  is  different  from  the  aboli- 
tion of  slavery.  It  means  only  that  the  law  as  adminis- 
tered in  British  courts  does  not  recognise  the  existence 
of  slaves,  and  that  property  in  persons  as  slaves  is  not 
admitted.  It  is  not  forbidden  to  a  native  to  hold  slaves 
so  long  as  the  master  and  slave  are  mutually  satisfied, 
but  the  slave  can  at  any  time  assert  his  freedom  if  he 
wishes  to  do  so.  Under  this  system  emancipation  is 
gradual,  and  the  value  of  it  is  that,  without  dislocating 
the  whole  machinery  of  labour  in  the  Protectorate,  it 
gives  to  the  individual  slave  the  power  to  change  his 
condition  if  he  pleases.  This  is  the  first  and  obvious 
use.  The  second  effect  is  no  less  useful.  It  tends  to 
lessen  the  value  of  property  in  slaves  by  the  fact  that 
no  one  is  a  slave  any  longer  than  he  chooses  to  remain 
one,  and  that  property  in  slaves  is  not  property  in  the 
eyes  of  British  law.  This,  combined  with  the  increasing 
difficulty  and  expense  of  obtaining  slaves  in  consequence 
of  the  abolition  of  the  slave-trade  and  slave-raid,  will  have 
the  natural  economic  effect  of  preventing  the  investment 
of  money  in  slave  property.  Thus,  by  pressure  of  cir- 
cumstance, without  abolition,  and  without  compensation, 
the  slave-owner  will  gradually  cease  to  exist. 

Having  set  the  machinery  of  freedom  in  motion 
towards  an  inevitable  end,  it  is  not  to  the  interest  of 
the  administration  to  hasten  its  operation.  On  the  con- 
trary, it  is  evidently  to  be  desired  in  the  interests  of  the 
country  that  it  should  work  slowly. 

While  the  stream  of  investment  is  being  diverted 
from  its  old  employment,  and  a  free  generation  of  children 
born  after  the  advent  of  British  administration  is  growing 
up,  a  process  of  education  is  going  on  of  both  classes, 
upper  and  servile,  to  the  conception  of  a  free  labour  con- 
tract and  the  respective  responsibilities  under  it  of  master 


464  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

and  servant.  To  this  end  Residents  are  instructed  to 
direct  the  attention  of  chiefs  and  employers  of  labour 
to  the  inevitable  nature  of  the  approaching  change,  and 
in  order  to  encourage  a  gradual  adaptation  of  the  social 
system  to  the  new  conditions,  they  are  specially  to  point 
out  the  practical  advantages  of  the  employment  of  free 
labour  under  the  British  administration.  These  are,  in 
fact,  very  real,  since,  if  an  employer's  slaves  choose 
to  desert  him,  the  British  courts  cannot  force  them  to 
return,  while,  if  he  employs  free  labour,  he  has  the  full 
assistance  of  the  administration  in  enforcing  his  contract. 
It  is  hoped  that  the  example  of  Government,  in  employ- 
ing gangs  of  free  labour  for  public  works,  may  serve 
to  illustrate  the  nature  of  a  free  contract,  and  be  gra- 
dually adopted  by  the  native  chiefs.  The  more  intelli- 
gent among  them  have  shown  a  great  willingness  to 
accept  the  necessary  transition,  recognising  themselves 
that,  since  their  raiding  grounds  are  closed,  the  present 
system  must  come  to  an  end.  Already,  from  different 
parts  of  the  Protectorate,  interesting  accounts  have  been 
received  of  experiments  which  have  been  tried  by  native 
employers  in  free  labour.  They  have  generally  taken 
the  form  of  piecework — plots  of  land  being  divided  into 
the  equivalent  of  pennyworths  of  cultivation,  which  are 
paid  for  in  cowries.  The  experiments  reported  upon 
have  been  successful,  and  accentuate  the  value  which  will 
attach  in  this  connection  to  the  introduction  of  a  cash 
currency  in  which  labour  can  be  paid.  The  develop- 
ment of  a  system  of  direct  individual  taxation  will  also 
tend  to  teach  the  peasant  his  responsibilty  to  the  State, 
and  his  personal  interest  in  and  obligation  to  it.  The 
conception  of  individual  responsibility  has  to  be  taught 
to  the  slave,  and  respect  for  this  individuality  has  to  be 
learned  by  the  master,  in  the  transition  period  through 
which  both  are  passing. 

The  transition  period  has  its  own  difficulties.  One 
of  these  consists  in  the  numbers  of  runaway  and  freed 
slaves,  for  whom,  though  the  practice  of  running  away  is 


NIGERIA    UNDER    BRITISH    RULE      465 

as  far  as  possible  discouraoed,  some  provision  lias  tu  be 
made.  This  difficulty  is  met  in  part  by  the  establishment 
of  freed  slave  homes  for  the  women  and  children,  tiie 
larger  number  of  runaways  being  women  whose  cases  are 
more  properly  cases  of  divorce.  Men  are  expected  to 
support  themselves.  Another  difficulty  of  the  transition 
period  which  has  to  be  taken  notice  of,  is  the  master's 
difficulty  of  obtaining  labour  for  necessary  industries  as 
the  bond  of  the  existing  labour  contract  is  loosened. 
This  would  certainly  become  grave  were  runaway  slaves 
provided  for  on  any  large  scale  in  a  condition  of  idleness. 
In  tropical  Africa  the  ground  is  so  fertile,  and  the  wants 
of  the  primitive  native  so  few,  that  a  family  may  be  easily 
supported  for  a  year  on  the  produce  of  a  few  weeks'  work. 
Dr.  Barth  says  that,  in  Northern  Nigeria,  a  family  could 
live  comfortably  for  a  year  on  produce  of  which  the  equi- 
valent value  in  English  money  would  be  ^5.  Beyond 
the  satisfaction  of  these  simple  requirements  there  is  no 
need  for  the  native  to  work.  As  a  free  agent  he  may 
therefore  prefer  to  be  idle.  But  he  has,  in  slavery,  the 
habit  of  work,  the  country  can  only  be  developed  and 
made  prosperous  by  labour,  and  it  would  be  retrogression, 
not  progress,  if  a  race  now  fairly  laborious  were,  by  a 
too  sudden  alteration  of  the  social  system,  to  be  rendered 
idle  and  vagrant. 

There  is  no  need  that  this  should  happen  in  Nigeria, 
where,  as  we  have  seen  from  Dr.  Barth's  description,  the 
pagans  whom  the  Bornuese  raided  for  slaves  were  in  their 
free  state  extremely  industrious.  Two  conditions  appear 
to  be  of  value  in  preventing  such  an  unsatisfactory  result. 
One,  which  is  the  first  essential  of  all  social  progress,  is 
that  each  man  should  feel  himself  secure  in  the  possession 
of  the  fruits  of  his  labour  ;  the  other,  which  seems  at  first 
sight  like  a  contradiction  in  terms,  is  that  he  should  be 
obliged  to  contribute  his  share  towards  the  expenses  of 
the  State.  The  apparent  contradiction  is  accepted  by  all 
civilised  societies,  and  takes  the  form  of  security  from 
confiscation  accompanied  by  regular  taxation. 

2  G 


CHAPTER    L 

NIGERIA   UNDER    BRITISH    RULE:    TAXATION 

The  necessity  to  contribute  to  the  maintenance  of  the 
state  is  no  more  a  new  proposition  to  the  African  who 
has  Hved  under  Mohammedan  rule,  than  is  the  habit  of 
labour.  He  has  been  accustomed  to  arbitrary  levies  for 
the  purpose.  What  the  British  Administration  hopes  to 
effect  is  the  introduction  of  order  and  moderation  in  the 
claims  which  are  made  upon  him  in  regard  both  to  labour 
and  to  taxes.  It  is  right  that,  as  a  free  man,  he  should 
work  for  the  maintenance  of  the  State  as  well  as  for  the 
maintenance  of  his  own  family,  and  it  becomes  essential 
that,  contemporaneously  with  the  introduction  of  liberty, 
there  should  be  established  a  regular  and  equitable  system 
of  direct  taxation. 

This  brings  us  to  the  subject  from  which  we  started  : 
of  compensation  to  the  emirs  and  fief-holders  of  the 
Protectorate  for  the  loss  of  revenue  which  they  were 
likely  to  suffer  as  a  consequence  of  British  intervention 
in  the  slavery  question,  and  also  of  the  abolition  of  ex- 
cessive tolls  on  trade. 

On  the  assumption  of  sovereignty  in  the  southern 
emirates  it  became  immediately  necessary  to  secure  to 
the  emirs  some  revenue  which  would  enable  them  to  meet 
the  expenses  of  their  position,  and  this  was  done  by  allow- 
ing them  to  collect  their  taxes  under  the  protection  of 
the  British  Government.  But  in  the  quick  succession  of 
events  it  was  understood  that  all  arrangements  were 
temporary.  It  was  not  until  after  the  fall  of  Sokoto 
that  full  attention  could  be  given  to  the  subject.  When 
the  submission   of  the  northern   emirates  had  placed  the 

permanence  of  British  rule  beyond  a  doubt,  the  natives 

466 


NIGERIA    UNDER    BRITISH    RULE      467 

of  the  Protectorate,  well  aware  that  no  govcrnmeiu  could 
be  carried  on  without  a  revenue,  looked  for  an  early 
declaration  on  a  subject  which  was  to  them  of  supreme 
importance. 

Northern  Nigeria,  it  has  been  said,  has  no  seaboard. 
Internal  fiscal  frontiers  were  abolished  when  its  territories 
were  transferred  to  the  Crown.  The  fruitful  source  of 
customs  is,  therefore,  under  present  arrangements,  cut  off 
from  its  fiscal  possibilities.  It  must  look  to  direct  taxa- 
tion for  its  resources.  Direct  taxation  is  also  that  to  which 
the  natives  have  been  accustomed.  The  broad  system  on 
which  the  country  was  taxed  under  native  administration 
has  been  already  alluded  to,  and  it  has  been  seen  that  the 
burden  was  heavy.  Under  it  the  revenue  of  the  emirs  and 
the  principal  fief-holders  from  the  quite  legitimate  sources 
of  land,  cattle,  duties  on  crops,  trades,  &c.,  should  have 
been  considerable.  But  in  the  decadence  of  Fulani  rule, 
the  disorders  which  prevailed,  the  chronic  rebellion  of 
tributary  states,  and  the  abuses  of  tax  -  gatherers,  pre- 
vented these  revenues  from  flowing  as  they  should  have 
done  to  the  public  treasury.  While  the  dynasties  were 
detested  for  their  arbitrary  exactions,  the  emirs  were 
generally  poor. 

The  advent  of  the  British  and  the  overthrow  of  Fulani 
rule  were  at  first  hailed  by  the  peasantry  as  an  excuse 
to  repudiate  all  obligations  to  pay  taxes,  and  even  in  the 
well-organised  province  of  Kano  the  revenue  could  not 
be  collected.  It  was  evident  that,  if  the  policy  of  ruling 
through  the  Fulani  was  to  be  maintained,  the  first  duty 
of  the  British  Administration  was  to  provide  for  the 
peaceable  collection  of  the  taxes  ;  and  since  the  conquered 
emirs  had  been  deprived  of  the  power  to  raise  troops 
or  police  in  their  territories,  it  was  necessary  that  British 
force  should  even  be  applied  in  case  of  need  to  compel 
payment. 

The  recognition  of  this  obligation  had  the  good  effect 
of  enlisting  the  sympathy  and  goodwill  of  the  ruling  classes, 
and  of  carrying  to  their  minds  some  conviction  of  the  truth 


468  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

of  the  assurances  contained  in  the  British  declaration  that 
the  native  chiefs  were  themselves  henceforward  to  form 
an  integral  part  of  the  administration.  But  it  followed 
that,  unless  the  British  Administration  were  to  allow  itself 
to  be  made  the  instrument  of  misrule,  it  had  to  assure 
itself  that  the  taxes  were  fair,  and  that  the  method  of 
collection  did  not  involve  oppression  and  cruelty. 

From  this  situation  a  result  was  evolved  so  important 
to  the  future  administration  of  the  country,  that  I  will 
ask  the  reader  to  take  patience  if  I  describe  it  at  what 
may  seem  to  be  undue  length. 

The  emirs  and  councillors  of  the  different  states  placed 
their  knowledge  heartily  at  the  disposal  of  the  British 
Administration.  In  many  cases  it  was  found  that  their 
experience  was  nil,  and  that  abuses  which  the  name  of 
their  government  had  covered  were  wholly  unknown  to 
them,  having  been  perpetrated  by  the  often  worthless 
favourites  who  had  been  allowed  to  over-ride  the  proper 
officials.  But  they  had  intelligence  and  knowledge  of 
native  custom,  and  by  the  cordial  working  together  of 
the  Native  and  British  Administrations,  a  system  of  re- 
formed taxation  was  elaborated,  of  which  the  Imperial 
Government  has  in  principle  signified  its  approval. 

Under  this  system  the  aim  in  the  Mohammedan  states 
has  been  to  retain  the  ancient  and  legitimate  taxes  based 
upon  Koranic  law,  while  relief  has  been  given  to  the 
peasantry  by  the  abolition  of  those  modern  impositions 
which  had  been  multiplied  by  the  caprice  of  successive 
tyrants. 

The  principal  taxes  recognised  by  the  law  were,  first, 
the  "  Zakka,"  or  tithe  in  corn,  which  was  limited  to  the  two 
staple  crops  of  the  country,  dhourra  and  gero.  In  theory 
it  was  due  from  Moslems  and  not  from  pagans,  and  should 
have  been  devoted  to  purposes  of  charity  and  religion. 
In  practice  it  had  lost  its  special  character,  and  in  all 
the  provinces  except  Sokoto  it  was  levied  on  Moslems 
and  pagans  alike.  Second,  the  "  Kurdin  Kasa,"  a  land 
tax,  which,  in  exact  opposition  to  the  Zakka,  was  in  theory 


NIGERIA    UNDER    BRITISH    RULE      469 

levied  only  upon  conquered  pagans.  In  practice  it  was 
arbitrarily  levied,  and  was  subject  to  purely  capricious  in- 
crease. Third,  the  plantation  tax  was  a  tax  levied  u[)on  all 
crops  other  than  the  two  which  paid  Zakka.  Fourth,  there 
was  the  "  Jangali "  or  cattle  tax  :  it  was  originally  a  tithe, 
and  was  levied  only  on  cattle,  and  not  on  Hocks,  Fifth, 
the  Sokoto  Gaisua  was  a  varying  sum  paid  by  all  sub- 
ordinate emirates  to  Sokoto  and  Gando  :  in  theory  it  was 
a  tax  upon  the  rich,  and  represented  an  acknowledgment 
of  suzerainty,  having  its  counterpart  in  the  present  usually 
made  upon  appointment  by  lesser  chiefs  to  their  superiors. 
In  practice  it  became  a  levy  made  by  emirs  upon  all  their 
subordinate  chiefs,  and  consequently  through  them  upon 
the  peasantry.  The  emirs  retained  a  portion  of  it  for 
their  own  benefit,  and  sent  a  portion  to  Sokoto.  Before 
the  British  occupation  many  emirates  had  ceased  to  send 
their  contribution  to  Sokoto,  and  when  British  suzerainty 
was  substituted  for  that  of  Sokoto  they  took  the  oppor- 
tunity to  discontinue  it.  In  Sokoto,  which  was  a  Moslem 
province,  no  taxes  were  levied  except  the  Zakka.  Con- 
sequently Sokoto  was  at  first  deprived  of  revenue.  Sixth, 
the  "  Kurdin  Sarauta "  was  an  accession  duty  paid  by 
every  chief  or  holder  of  office  on  appointment.  The 
abuse  of  this  tax  had  led  to  the  sale  of  offices  to  the 
highest  bidder,  and  put  a  premium  on  the  dispossession 
of  holders  of  office  in  order  that  vacancies  might  be 
created.  Seventh,  there  was  a  tax  on  handicrafts,  under 
which  head  fresh  impositions  were  perpetually  devised. 
Eiofhth,  there  was  a  tax  on  traders,  under  which  head 
merchants,  brokers,  shop-keepers  or  common  vendors 
in  the  market,  all  paid  their  contributions  to  tiie  re- 
venue. Caravan  tolls  were  apart  from  these,  and  ought 
perhaps  to  constitute  a  separate  heading.  Ninth,  there 
was  Gado  or  death  duties,  complete  enough  to  satisfy  the 
most  Radical  of  European  reformers,  under  which,  when 
there  was  no  direct  heir,  whole  estates  lapsed  to  the 
emirs.  Tenth,  there  were  fines,  court  bribes,  presents, 
arbitrary  collections  made  on  special  occasions,  and  forced 


470  A   TROPICAL   DEPENDENCY 

labour,  of  which  slavery  was,  of  course,  the  base.  In 
addition  to  these  there  were  almost  countless  special  taxes, 
such  as  those  on  date  palms,  honey,  dancing  girls,  pros- 
titutes, gamblers,  &c.,  which  can  only  be  classed  as 
various,  and  were  imposed  almost  at  will.  In  Bornu  the 
traditional  taxes,  of  which  a  careful  separate  study  was 
made  by  the  Resident,  Mr.  Hewby,  were  found  to  be 
the  orthodox  Zakka,  Jangali,  and  Gado,  with  another 
called  the  "  Haku  Binirum,"  which  was  of  the  nature  of 
a  graduated  tax  on  property,  whether  represented  by 
land  or  other  forms  of  wealth. 

Upon  the  assumption  of  British  rule  the  Residents  of 
every  province  were  instructed  to  study  and  report  upon 
the  existing  system,  its  uses  and  abuses.  As  a  result  of 
their  reports,  combined  with  the  advice  and  help  given 
by  the  native  administrations,  the  following  reformed 
system  has  been  compiled. 

All  agricultural  taxes,  with  the  exception  of  the  Sokoto 
Gaisua,  and  its  provincial  counterpart,  the  Kurdin  Sarauta, 
are  to  be  merged  in  a  general  assessment  which  will  be 
paid  as  heretofore,  but  under  a  reformed  system  of  collec- 
tion, to  the  Native  Administration,  and  of  which  it  is 
proposed  to  allot  a  definite  proportion  to  the  uses  of  the 
Native  and  the  British  Governments.  It  will  be  a  matter 
of  arrangement  what  expenses  shall  be  borne  by  each. 

The  Sokoto  Gaisua  and  the  Kurdin  Sarauta  will  be 
retained  as  a  traditional  recognition  of  suzerainty,  but 
will  be  much  reduced  in  amount.  The  reduced  Sokoto 
tribute  will  henceforth  be  paid  to  the  British  Government, 
from  whom  investiture  is  now  received,  but  it  will  be  in 
every  case  deducted  from  the  amount  due  on  other  counts 
to  the  British  Government,  and  a  portion  of  it  will  be 
given  by  the  British  Government  to  Sokoto  to  be  used 
for  charitable  and  religious  purposes,  in  acknowledgment 
of  the  special  position  of  the  Emir  of  Sokoto  as  religious 
head  of  the  church  of  the  Soudan.  The  Kurdin  Sarauta, 
or  appointment  tax,  will  be  paid  as  before  to  the  local 
chiefs,  but   it  will   be   nominal    in   amount,  and   the  chief 


NIGERIA    UNDER    BRITISH    RULE       471 

who  receives  it  will  pay  half  to  the  British  Government 
in  acknowledgment  of  the  authority  under  which  he  makes 
the  appointment.  As  no  appointment  will  be  made  in 
future  without  the  concurrence  of  the  Resident,  the  old 
abuse  of  perpetual  re-appointments  for  the  sake  of  collect- 
ing more  tax  will  be  abolished.  Gado,  or  death  duties, 
will  not  be  interfered  with,  and  will  be  paid  as  before  to 
the  Native  Administration.  Legitimate  industrial  taxes  will 
be  maintained  as  before,  but  their  proceeds  will  be  merged 
in  the  general  assessment.  Caravan  tolls,  which  are  being 
used  as  a  road  tax,  at  present  form  a  monopoly  of  the 
British  Government,  but  it  is  proposed  to  merge  them 
also  before  long  in  the  general  assessment.  All  other 
forms  of  taxation — forced  labour,  fines,  bribes,  arbitrary 
impositions  upon  industry,  &c. — are  to  be  abolished. 

Thus  we  get  in  the  Mohammedan  areas  a  general 
assessment  covering  all  the  old  legitimate  taxes  upon 
agriculture  and  industry,  an  accession  duty,  nominal  in 
amount,  paid  in  accordance  with  traditional  custom  as 
a  recognition  of  suzerainty,  and  the  old  Gado,  or  death 
duties,  left  undisturbed.  The  old  system  of  tax-gatherers 
will  be  abolished,  and  the  general  assessment  tax  will 
be  collected  by  the  reformed  Native  Administration  under 
British  supervision.  A  proper  proportion  of  the  proceeds 
of  this  tax  will  then  be  paid  by  the  Native  Administration 
to  the  British  Government,  and  will  constitute  the  revenue 
drawn  for  Imperial  purposes  from  the  country. 

In  workingf  out  the  details  of  the  reformed  scheme  it 
is  felt  that  a  certain  safeguard  has  been  secured  by  the 
co-operation  of  the  emirs  and  native  authorities  ;  but  it 
is  not  to  be  expected  that  a  long-established  system  of 
taxation  can  be  suddenly  reformed  without  friction,  or 
even  entirely  without  unintentional  injustice,  which  may 
be  found  in  practice  to  press  unfairly  upon  some  special 
section  of  the  people.  The  new  system  must,  in  its 
nature,  be  regarded  as  tentative  for  some  time  to  come. 
If  the  reports  of  the  provincial  Residents  are  to  be 
trusted,    it    promises    to    meet    with    cordial    acceptance 


472  A   TROPICAL   DEPENDENCY 

from  the  emirs  and  chiefs,  who  fully  understand  and 
appreciate  the  dignity  and  security  of  the  position  which 
it  proposes  to  confer  upon  them,  while  it  is  in  accordance 
with  native  tradition  to  pay  taxes  in  the  form  of  tribute 
to  a  superior  government.  The  obvious  difficulty  of 
the  scheme  lies,  first,  in  a  just  assessment  of  the  people, 
and,  secondly,  in  a  regulation  of  the  amount  paid  to  the 
British  Government. 

The  assessment  has  been  the  principal  work  carried 
out  under  the  supervision  of  the  British  political  staff  of 
each  province  during  the  past  year.  To  indicate  the 
manner  in  which  it  has  been  done,  and  the  effect  which 
it  is  likely  to  have  upon  that  amalgamation  of  the  Native 
and  British  Administration  which  it  is  the  desire  of  the 
Government  to  effect,  I  would  like  to  quote  from  the 
report  of  Dr.  Cargill,  the  Resident  of  Kano. 

It  was  his  duty  to  make  the  assessment  of  the  district 
of  Gaiya,  of  which  the  Waziri  of  Kajio,  son  of  the  emir, 
had,  under  the  old  system,  been  the  fief-holder.  He 
accordingly  went  to  Gaiya,  accompanied  by  the  Waziri. 
On  arrival  at  Gaiya,  the  Seriki,  or  local  chief,  was  inter- 
viewed in  the  presence  of  the  Waziri,  and  the  business 
of  assessment  and  reform  of  the  system  of  collection 
explained.  The  local  chief  proved  intelligent,  and  ren- 
dered all  the  assistance  in  his  power.  The  local  tax- 
collectors,  or  Mayungwas,  twelve  in  number,  who  collect 
the  taxes  from  the  people  in  the  town,  were  summoned, 
and  each  brought  with  him  the  farmers  of  his  quarter. 
Each  Mayungwa  was  asked  how  much  he  collected  from 
his  district  under  each  head  of  taxation.  Each  individual 
farmer  was  then  separately  summoned,  and  was  asked 
what  he  had  paid,  and  what  was  his  trade,  and  the  number 
of  people  in  his  house.  "In  this  way,"  says  Dr.  Cargill, 
"  I  completed  the  assessment  and  census  of  Gaiya  town 
within  two  days.  I  then  turned  the  work  over  to  two 
of  my  own  clerks  and  to  two  mallams  (native  scribes) 
brought  by  the  Waziri,  and  told  the  chief  of  the  town 
to  call  in   all   the   tax-collectors   from   the   district   outside 


NIGERIA    UNDER    BRITISH    RULE      473 

the  town  to  inform  the  clerks  of  the  amounts  they  collected 
from  their  respective  quarters."  While  this  was  beinj^ 
done,  the  Resident  and  Waziri  travelled  throui^h  eii^dit 
more  towns.  On  their  return  to  Gaiya  at  the  end  of 
three  days  the  clerks  were  found  to  have  finished  their 
work.  One  of  the  Waziri's  scribes,  assisted  by  one  of  the 
chief  of  Gaiya's  scribes,  were  then  left  to  go  round  the 
district,  making  a  complete  list  of  the  names  of  the 
farmers,  the  amounts  they  paid,  their  trade,  and  the 
numbers  of  their  households,  as  had  been  done  by  the 
Resident  in  Gaiya.  The  Resident  returned  with  his  own 
clerks  and  the  Waziri  to  Kano.  "  The  time  actually 
occupied  by  myself  and  staff,"  writes  the  Resident,  "was 
seven  days  at  Gaiya  and  four  days'  travelling.  The  result 
is  map,  census,  and  assessment  of  one  district  completed, 
and  one  jakada  (chief  tax-gatherer)  abolished.  I  calculate 
that  it  will  take  me  some  months  to  complete  the  map 
and  the  assessment  of  the  whole  of  the  Kano  district. 
In  the  same  time  I  hope  that  the  junior  Residents 
may  be  able  to  accomplish  the  same  work  in  the  other 
emirates  of  this  province.  .  .  .  The  Waziri  took  a  very 
intelligent  interest  in  this  tour."  He  was  present  at 
every  interview,  and  he  is  soon  "to  try  his  own  hand  at 
assessment."  It  is  also  the  British  Resident's  opinion 
that  the  more  important  fief-holders  may  turn  out,  after 
some  instruction  and  supervision,  to  be  of  real  use  to 
the  Government.  *' As  a  class,"  he  says,  "they  are  men 
of  refinement  and  understanding,  and  existing  abuses  can 
hardly  be  laid  to  their  charge,  as  their  offices  have  hitherto 
been  merely  nominal,  and  their  functions  usurped  by  the 
big  slaves." 

The  process  thus  described  is  at  work  over  the  entire 
area  of  the  Mohammedan  states,  and  under  it  the  diffi- 
culties attaching  to  assessment  and  the  reform  of  the 
system  of  collection,  both  of  which  are,  of  course,  being 
carried  out  upon  one  design  throughout  the  whole  of  the 
states,  are  rapidly  disappearing. 

The  second  difficulty  of  the  new  system — the  decision 


474  A    TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

of  the  amount  of  the  general  assessment  tax  which  is 
to  be  apportioned  to  the  Native  Administration  and  to 
the  British  Government — has,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  given 
no  trouble.  The  proportion  which  it  has  been  proposed 
to  take  for  British  purposes  has  so  far  been  willingly- 
accepted  by  the  emirs,  and  it  has  been  found  in  those 
provinces  where  the  system  has  been  put  in  operation, 
that,  though  the  burden  upon  the  peasantry  has  been 
greatly  reduced,  the  reformed  system  of  collection,  by 
its  regularity,  and  by  the  abolition  which  has  been 
effected  of  the  army  of  tax-gathering  middlemen,  pro- 
mises to  place  the  emirs  in  a  secure  financial  position, 
which  will  amply  compensate  for  the  loss  of  slave  tribute 
and  of  the  excessive  tolls  on  trade  which  were  previously 
imposed. 

In  connection  with  the  payment  of  a  share  of  the 
assessment  to  the  British  Administration,  the  extended 
use  of  cash  currency  is  urgently  desirable.  The  assess- 
ment will  be  subject  to  periodical  revision,  and  it  should, 
as  the  country  develops,  show  a  steady  increase.  Sums 
now  small  may  become  considerable,  and  even  now  the 
difficulty  of  payment  in  kind  is  obvious. 

The  satisfactory  promise  of  the  new  system  has  of 
course  helped  substantially  towards  the  amalgamation  of 
the  native  with  the  British  rule,  and  tends  happily  to 
remove  a  cause  of  discontent  which  might  have  placed 
difficulties  in  the  way  of  the  enforcement  of  the  laws 
against  slave-dealing  and  slave-raiding.  These,  under 
present  circumstances,  have  been  loyally  accepted  by 
the  emirs,  and  are  now  in  practical  application  in  every 
province.  The  slave-trade  has  been  abolished,  and  the 
rulers  and  fief-holders  who  profited  most  by  it  have  a 
fair  prospect  of  enjoying,  under  the  system  which  has 
abolished  it,  more  regular  incomes  than  they  possessed 
under  the  old  system.  It  is  proposed  that  a  portion  of 
the  general  assessment  retained  by  the  Native  Adminis- 
tration shall  be  assigned  to  the  fief-holders,  and  their 
advantage,    like    that    of    the    emirs,    will    be    intimately 


NIGERIA    UNDER    BRITISH    RULE      475 

associated  with  the  prosperity  of  the  country.  There 
will  remain,  of  course,  a  body  of  slave-traders  who,  until 
their  commercial  capital  has  been  diverted  to  more  leorj- 
timate  trade,  will  be  discontented,  and  will  naturally  be 
disposed  to  foment  any  ill-feeling  to  which  the  new  dis- 
tribution of  taxes  may  unwittingly  give  rise.  There  is 
always  the  danger,  in  writing  of  a  generally  popular 
reform,  of  describing  it  too  confidently  as  a  universal 
cure  for  evils  which  are  inherent  to  society.  Reform  is 
not  usually  an  unmixed  benefit,  but  unfortunately  brings 
with  it  its  own  drawbacks.  Experience  will  discern  these 
in  the  new  scheme  of  taxation,  and  their  appearance  may 
be  the  cause  of  troubles  which  will  have  to  be  dealt  with 
as  they  arise. 

For  the  moment,  however,  the  reorganisation  of  native 
finance  would  seem  to  have  been  satisfactory,  and  it  has 
been  so  important  a  factor  in  promoting  the  speedy  and 
peaceable  settlement  of  the  Protectorate  that,  after  the 
abolition  of  slavery,  it  must  be  held  to  take  the  first 
place.  It  is  easy  to  imagine  how  the  relief  of  the  peas- 
antry on  the  one  side,  and  the  satisfaction  of  the  rulers 
on  the  other,  affect  the  whole  relations  of  government 


CHAPTER    LI 

NIGERIA    UNDER   BRITISH    RULE:    JUSTICE   AND 
GENERAL   REORGANISATION 

But  if  conquest  is  best  when  it  is  speedy,  the  work  of 
reorganisation  must  in  its  nature  be  always  slow.  The 
campaign  of  1903  placed  Northern  Nigeria  definitely 
under  the  British  Crown.  It  will  tax  the  energies  of 
many  generations  of  Englishmen  to  develop  the  terri- 
tories thus  acquired,  and  to  bring  them,  with  the  widely 
varying  populations  which  they  carry,  to  the  full  realisa- 
tion of  their  own  best  possibilities.  In  the  meantime 
the  work  of  the  existing  administration  is  to  carry  for- 
ward to  the  best  of  its  ability  the  extraordinarily  inte- 
resting work  of  organising  the  new  fabric  of  government, 
of  which  the  elements  have  been  placed  in  its  hands. 

I  have  spoken  only  of  the  taxation  of  Mohammedan 
areas.  These  include,  of  course,  the  pagan  peasantry 
of  those  areas,  and  they  also  include  pagan  communities 
under  Mohammedan  rule.  There  remain  independent 
pagan  communities,  and  these  are  of  two  classes.  States 
which  have  histories  as  old  and  as  respectable  as  those 
of  the  Mohammedan  states  themselves,  though  they 
have  never  attained  to  quite  the  same  high  stage  of  civi- 
lisation, and  which  are  governed  by  one  chief.  Among 
these  may  be  named  Argungu  and  Jegga,  within  the 
geographical  limits  of  the  province  of  Sokoto ;  Gorgoram 
in  Western  Bornu,  possibly  a  modern  development  of 
the  old  province  of  Gwangara,  Wangara,  or  Ungara, 
whose  population  migrated  to  this  neighbourhood  from 
Ghana  ;  Kiama  in  Borgu  ;  and  some  of  the  Jukum  cities 
in    Muri.       These    independent    states    will    be    treated, 

according  to  their  degree,  more  or  less  in  the  same  way 

476 


NIGERIA    UNDER   BRITISH    RULE        477 

as  the  Mohammedan  states,  their  taxes  being  assessed 
on  the  basis  of  tradition,  and  the  result  shared  with  the 
British  Government.  The  second  class  of  independent 
pagans  are  of  very  low  type,  and  have  hardly  yet  so 
far  advanced  in  civilisation  as  to  have  an  organised 
state,  owing  allegiance  to  a  recognised  chief.  Their 
chiefs  are  little  more  than  elders  or  heads  of  families. 
Upon  these  communities  it  is  proposed  to  levy  a  very 
light  tax,  payable  direct  to  the  British  Government  as 
an  acknowledgment  of  its  suzerainty.  The  tax  is  to  be 
a  communal  tax,  payable  through  the  village  elders, 
and  it  will  be  the  object  of  the  administration  gradu- 
ally to  group  these  villages  together  under  a  central 
chief,  in  the  hope  of  raising  them  to  the  higher  social 
plane  of  more  civilised  races.  The  obligation  to  pay 
tribute  to  the  power  whose  laws  they  recognise  is  well 
understood  by  these  tribes.  It  constitutes  an  acknow- 
ledgment on  their  part  of  authority  and  submission  to 
a  superior  power  which  forbids  brigandage  on  the 
roads,  &c.  As  they  are  often  industrious,  and  rich  in 
flocks  and  herds,  the  burden  is  nominal,  while  the 
moral  to  be  enforced  is  of  importance. 

But  though  reform  of  taxation  is  as  the  bed-rock  of 
other  reform,  it  is  but  a  foundation  upon  which  much  else 
must  be  raised  before  the  substitution  of  a  reign  of  law 
for  a  reign  of  force  can  become  permanently  effective. 

To  give  law  a  proper  place  in  its  literal  sense,  it 
was  necessary  partly  to  create,  and  partly  to  restore  and 
reform  the  means  of  dispensing  justice  through  the 
Protectorate.  The  principle  by  which  the  Native  Adminis- 
tration has  been  incorporated  as  an  integral  part  of  one 
executive  with  the  British  has  been  applied  as  far  as 
possible  to  the  judicial  system.  This  has  as  its  machinery 
three  principal  engines.  There  is  first  a  Supreme  Court, 
which  is  the  highest  judicial  tribunal  in  the  country,  and 
is  presided  over  by  the  Chief-Justice.  To  this  court 
there  are  affiliated  local  cantonment  courts,  presided  over 
by  British  cantonment  magistrates,  who  are  Commissioners 


478  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

of  the  Supreme  Court.  There  are  also  British  provincial 
courts,  presided  over  by  the  Resident  in  charge,  of  which 
one  is  situated  in  every  province.  All  sentences  of  death 
and  punishments  for  serious  offences  awarded  in  these 
courts  must  await  confirmation  by  the  High  Commis- 
sioner, who,  of  course,  acts  with  the  advice  of  his  law 
officers.  A  Resident  has  no  judicial  power  outside  his 
own  province.  All  other  officers  exercising  civil  judicial 
powers  in  the  province  are  Commissioners  of  the  pro- 
vincial court,  and  may  hold  courts  in  any  district  of  the 
province.  Native  courts,  of  which  there  may  be  an  un- 
limited number  in  every  province,  complete  the  judicial 
system.  They  are  constituted  by  warrant,  and  the  extent 
of  their  powers  is  laid  down  in  the  warrant  appointing 
them.  No  native  court,  except  those  of  Kano  and 
Sokoto,  to  which  the  concession  has  lately  been  made, 
has  had  power  given  to  it  to  pass  sentence  of  death, 
and  in  these  two  courts  the  death  sentence  is  subject 
to  the  concurrence  of  the  Resident.  The  Resident  of 
the  province  has  access  at  all  times  to  the  native  court, 
and  may  transfer  any  case  from  it  to  the  provincial 
court.  He  thus  exercises  supervision  over  the  native 
court. 

In  the  native  courts  justice  is  administered  by  a 
native  judge  called  the  Alkali  or  El  Kadi.  Under  the 
old  native  system  he  usually  sat  alone  as  judge,  and  the 
emir  or  head  chief  also  usually  held  a  court  dealing  chiefly 
with  political  cases.  There  was  also  usually  a  Limam, 
who  dealt  with  cases  of  probate  and  divorce. 

As  found  at  the  time  when  British  administration  was 
introduced,  the  powers  and  constitution  of  native  courts 
varied  with  every  province,  and,  as  has  been  mentioned 
in  a  previous  chapter,  the  system  of  justice  had  from 
different  causes  greatly  deteriorated. 

The  policy  of  the  British  Government  is  to  interfere 
as  little  as  possible  with  these  courts,  but  merely  to  re- 
store them  to  the  original  purity  of  their  jurisdiction, 
subject    to    the    abolition    of    punishments  which    modern 


NIGERIA    UNDER    RRHISH    RULE      479 

civilisation  regards  as  inhuman,  and  to  nmkc  ihcm 
effective  instruments  of  justice.  They  are  to  be  so  far 
supervised  as  to  put  an  end  to  flagrant  abuse.  The 
Alkalis  are  to  be  taught  the  principles  of  British  justice, 
and  the  elementary  rules  of  evidence.  The  number  of 
the  courts  is  to  be  increased  so  that  justice  may  be 
brought  within  easier  reach  of  complainants. 

In  order  to  constitute  a  native  court,  a  warrant  is 
issued  which  defines  its  powers,  and  confers  legality  on 
its  sentences.  In  practice,  the  jurisdiction  of  the  native 
courts  is  usually  confined  to  civil  actions.  The  number 
of  these  courts  is  now  rapidly  increasing  through  all  the 
provinces.  In  the  pagan  districts,  where  courts  consist 
only  of  a  council  with  judicial  powers  composed  of  the 
chiefs  or  elders  of  contiguous  villages,  their  action  is  still 
uncertain  and  elementary,  but  in  Mohammedan  centres 
they  are  in  full  activity,  and  the  number  of  cases  brought 
to  them  for  settlement  is  steadily  increasing. 

This  peaceful  development  has  not  been  wholly  with- 
out disturbance  since  the  fall  of  Sokoto.  Difficulties 
have  arisen,  caused  by  the  efforts  of  deposed  emirs  to 
make  good  their  pretensions  to  the  thrones  from  which 
they  have  been  deposed,  or  from  the  recalcitrancy  of 
smaller  independent  chieftains  who  did  not,  in  the  first 
instance,  accept  the  submission  of  the  northern  states 
as  universal  and  complete.  In  some  instances  these 
difficulties  have  been  settled  without  fighting  ;  in  others, 
there  has  been  occasion  for  the  display  of  military  force ; 
but  the  conquest  and  death  of  the  ex-Sultan  of  Sokoto, 
and  of  the  rebellious  Magaji  of  Keffi,  which  took  place 
in  an  engagement  near  Burmi,  on  the  western  frontier  of 
Bornu,  in  July  of  1903,  practically  put  an  end  to  any 
further  question  of  opposition  to  the  supremacy  of 
British  rule.  This  has  been  the  only  fighting  of  import- 
ance since  the  fall  of  Sokoto. 

It  is,  of  course,  to  be  expected  that  from  time  to  time 
disturbances  will  arise  which  will  have  to  be  repressed  by 
force.       But    for   ordinary   purposes   of  law  and    order,    a 


48o  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

native  police  force  has  been  organised  under  white  officers, 
of  which  detachments  are  stationed  in  every  province, 
thus  Hberating"  the  troops  of  the  West  African  Frontier 
Force  for  more  purely  military  duties.  The  troops  are 
now  stationed  in  certain  capitals,  and  chiefly  at  the  head- 
quarters of  Zungeru,  Kano,  and  Lokoja.  There  are  also 
garrisons  at  Maifoni  and  Dumjeri,  the  respective  British 
capitals  of  Western  and  Eastern  Bornu,  and  in  order  to 
preserve  the  northern  states  from  the  incursions  of  desert 
tribes,  a  chain  of  frontier  forts  has  been  established  and 
garrisoned  by  mounted  infantry,  who  have  170  miles  to 
patrol  between  each  fort. 

It  has  been  essential  that  the  organisation  of  the 
British  Administration,  both  central  and  provincial,  should 
as  far  as  possible  keep  pace  with  the  rapid  development 
of  the  Protectorate.  There  are  now  four  classes  of  Resi- 
dents, as  well  as  police  officers,  charged  with  political 
duties  in  the  provinces.  The  rank  of  the  Residents  is 
divided  into  first  class,  second  class,  third  class,  and 
assistant,  and  though  the  roll  is  not  yet  complete,  four 
Residents  have  been  generally  allotted  to  each  pro- 
vince. Six  out  of  the  seventeen  provinces  into  which 
the  Protectorate  is  divided  have  been  formed  into  double 
provinces,  and  placed  under  the  charge  of  a  first-class 
Resident.  The  six  which  have  been  selected  for  the 
first  experiment  are  Sokoto  and  Gando,  Kano  and  Kata- 
gum.  Eastern  and  Western  Bornu,  and  the  Residents 
placed  in  charge  as  first-class  Residents  have,  of  course, 
been  chosen  for  their  special  ability  and  experience.  It  is 
proposed  to  devolve  upon  these  officers  a  large  measure  of 
administrative  control,  and  gradually  to  extend  the  system 
of  grouped  provinces  with  a  view  to  relieving  the  central 
administration  of  the  direct  supervision  of  separate  pro- 
vincial units.  Within  each  province  the  same  system  of 
devolution  will  be  adopted  as  a  larger  body  of  officers 
having  experience  of  the  special  kind  of  work  is  formed. 

The  duties  of  Residents  are  extraordinarily  diversified, 
ranging    from    those    of    political    adviser    to    the    native 


NIGERIA    UNDER    BRITISH    RULE       481 

sovereign,  and  head  of  the  Provincial  Court,  to  survey- 
ing, map-making,  and  reporting  on  the  economic,  com- 
mercial, and  social  conditions  of  the  province.  Each 
Resident  writes  for  the  information  of  the  Hicrh  Com- 
missioner  a  report  upon  his  province,  which  has  hitherto 
been  monthly,  but  which  will,  as  conditions  become  more 
normal,  be  submitted  at  longer  intervals.  Thus  at  head- 
quarters a  body  of  information  respecting  the  entire 
Protectorate  is  being  gradually  accumulated,  while  the 
maps  and  descriptions  of  routes  also  sent  in  regularly  by 
the  Residents  form  material  for  filling  up  the  outline  of 
the  Nigerian  map.  The  prototype  of  the  Resident  of 
Nigeria  is  probably  to  be  found  in  the  Deputy  Com- 
missioner of  India,  but  the  circumstances,  though  parallel, 
are  of  course  far  from  similar.  Assistant  Residents  are 
placed  in  charge  of  specified  districts  under  the  Resident, 
and  in  consequence  of  the  cordial  co-operation  and  re- 
markable administrative  aptitudes  of  the  Fulani,  when 
they  once  understand  that  oppression  and  tyranny  are  for- 
bidden, the  work  of  the  provinces  is  being  carried  on 
with  a  smaller  number  of  white  men  than  might  have 
been  imagined  possible. 

There  are  now  in  all,  counting  non-commissioned 
officers  and  civil  subordinates,  about  400  white  men  in  the 
Northern  Nigerian  service,  which,  allowing  for  one-third 
absent  on  leave,  as  under  the  rules  of  West  African 
service  they  have  a  right  to  be,  leaves  about  270  on 
duty.  With  this  number  the  whole  service  of  the  Pro- 
tectorate— military,  legal,  medical,  and  administrative — is 
performed  over  an  area  which  successive  boundary  con- 
cessions have  reduced  to  about  300,000  square  miles. 

The  organisation  of  the  Medical  Service,  with  a  system 
of  hospitals  and  white  nurses  at  headquarters,  doctors  at 
out-stations,  and  sanitary  regulations,  which  are  now  being 
carried  generally  into  effect,  has  greatly  reduced  the 
number  of  casualties  from  sickness,  which  at  first  sub- 
tracted substantially  from  the  list  of  white  men  avail- 
able   for    service,     and    often    threw    the    machinery    of 

2  II 


482  A   TROPICAL   DEPENDENCY 

work  into  confusion  by  the  absolute  necessity  which  it 
created  of  providing,  from  an  already  short-handed  staff,  for 
the  performance  of  the  duties  of  the  invalided.  The 
climate  of  the  Protectorate,  as  a  whole,  is  found  also  to  be 
much  better  than  that  of  the  valleys  of  the  Niger  and  the 
Benue,  in  which  at  first  the  only  centres  of  British  occu- 
pation were  situated.  The  climate  of  Zaria  is  indeed 
so  good  as  to  be  exhilarating  to  Europeans,  who,  during 
a  portion  of  the  year,  can  enjoy  the  pleasure  of  frosty 
nights,  and  as  the  territories  approach  the  desert  in  the 
north  they  become  generally  more  suitable  for  white 
occupation.  Native  towns  are  frequently  insanitary,  but 
it  is  believed  that,  with  the  exercise  of  due  care  in  the 
selection  of  sites  for  white  settlements,  these  may  in  the 
northern  states  be  rendered  perfectly  healthy. 

The  position  nevertheless  is  one  which  throws  into  relief 
the  very  great  importance  of  the  question  of  communica- 
tions. There  are  at  present  telegraph  lines  between  some 
of  the  more  important  centres,  and  it  is  hoped  soon  to  con- 
nect them  all  with  the  administrative  capital  at  Zungeru. 
It  is  even  now  possible,  by  a  system  of  runners  to  Kano, 
to  communicate  by  cable  between  the  shores  of  Lake  Chad 
and  London  in  ten  days.  But  there  are  as  yet  no  rail- 
roads in  the  Protectorate,  except  about  twenty-two  miles, 
which  have  been  constructed  from  a  port  on  the  Kaduna 
to  communicate  with  Zungeru,  and  the  distances  to  be 
traversed  are  very  great.  For  the  Residents  of  Bornu  to 
reach  their  stations  from  the  administrative  capital  at 
Zungeru,  takes  longer  than  it  takes  them  to  travel  from 
London  to  Zungeru,  and  thus  causes  a  very  serious  loss  of 
official  time  in  proceeding  to  and  from  their  work.  Be- 
tween station  and  station,  in  the  event  of  promotion  from 
one  part  of  the  Protectorate  to  another,  or  if  the  need  arises 
for  two  Residents  to  meet  in  order  to  discuss  the  affairs  of 
their  provinces,  the  same  loss  of  time  has  to  be  reckoned 
with.  Through  the  southern  states  the  travelling  roads 
were  originally  little  more  than  tracks,  and  at  the  moment 
of  the  introduction   of  British  Administration,   the   navi- 


NIGERIA    UNDER    BRITISH    RULE       483 

gability    of  the   minor   rivers    for   any    craft   larger    ilian 
canoes  was  untested. 

Under  British  Administration  something  has  been 
done  to  improve  the  state  of  the  communications. 
Tracks  have  been  widened  into  roads  ;  districts  rendered 
unsafe  for  travelHng  by  the  brigandage  of  pagan  tribes 
have  been  poHced,  and  waterways  have  been  opened  to 
navigation.  By  the  opening  of  the  river  Gongola,  an 
important  tributary  of  the  Benue,  last  year,  an  addition 
was  made  to  the  navigable  course  of  the  Niger  and 
the  Benue,  which  gives  at  certain  periods  of  the  year 
1 100  miles  of  continuous  waterway  without  a  rapid 
from  the  Niger  mouth,  and  the  time  and  expense  of 
getting  stores  into  Bornu  have  been  greatly  diminished. 
In  the  northern  states  there  are  broad  caravan  roads 
neatly  bordered  with  hedges  as  in  England,  and  it  has, 
of  course,  become  part  of  the  work  of  the  Native  Ad- 
ministration to  maintain  and  to  develop  these  roads. 
Roadmaking  is  one  of  the  subjects  to  which  the  atten- 
tion of  the  chiefs  is  being  directed  in  every  province. 

In  the  present  state  of  the  communications  the  High 
Commissioner  was  able  last  year,  accompanied  by  his 
secretarial  staff  and  a  small  military  escort,  to  visit 
every  capital  of  the  Protectorate,  with  the  exception  of 
Sokoto.  The  tour,  which  included  Yola,  Bautchi,  Bornu, 
Kano,  Katsena,  and  Katagum,  occupied  him  about 
four  months,  marching  at  a  rate  scarcely  less  rapid 
than  that  of  his  march  to  Kano  and  Sokoto  in  1903. 
Sites  were  selected  during  this  tour  for  all  the  new 
British  stations.  Oaths  of  allegiance  were  taken  from 
the  Emirs  of  Bautchi  and  Yola.  The  Shehu  of  Bornu, 
one  of  the  most  cultivated  and  intelligent  of  the  native 
chiefs  of  the  Protectorate,  was  installed  with  much 
ceremony,  and  many  interesting  discussions  were  held 
with  him  upon  the  principles  and  application  of  British 
policy.  A  somewhat  sullen  and  recalcitrant  chief,  who 
claimed  independence  in  the  border  town  of  Hadeija, 
was    also    interviewed,    and    brought   to    submission    and 


484  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

to  the  acceptance  of  a  British  garrison,  which  will 
occupy  Hadeija  as  one  of  the  chain  of  frontier  forts 
already  mentioned.  The  Emir  of  Katsena,  whose  con- 
duct since  the  occupation  of  Katsena  by  the  British 
had  been  radically  unsatisfactory,  was  deposed,  and 
his  heir,  selected  by  the  Council  of  Notables,  was  in- 
stalled in  his  place.  This  new  emir,  and  the  Shehu  of 
Bornu,  both  took  the  oath  of  allegiance  to  King  Edward 
on  the  Koran  in  public,  with  the  knowledge  of  all  their 
people,  as  a  part  of  the  installation  ceremony. 

In  Kano  and  Katsena,  as  at  Bornu,  much  interesting 
conversation  upon  the  subject  of  the  new  system  of 
administration  was  held  with  the  emirs,  and  the  know- 
ledge that  the  High  Commissioner  in  person,  the  repre- 
sentative of  the  British  sovereign,  had  travelled  within 
a  few  months  through  every  capital  of  the  Protectorate, 
had  its  visible  effect  in  helping  forward  the  realisation 
of  the  fact  that  the  Protectorate  has  been  consolidated 
into  a  unity  administered  in  the  name  of  the  King  of 
England. 

The  capitals  of  the  other  provinces — Kontagora, 
Ilorin,  Nupe,  &c. — were  visited  In  a  separate  short  tour. 
Thus  a  personal  supervision  of  the  provinces  has  already, 
to  a  certain  extent,  become  possible,  and,  notwithstanding 
the  obstacles  of  space  and  time,  free  communication 
between  them  may  be  said  to  have  been  established. 
But  for  the  purposes  of  that  further  communication, 
which  Is  essential  to  the  opening  of  trade  and  the 
development  of  their  commercial  resources,  the  crying 
need  of  the  Protectorate  Is,  of  course,  for  a  railway 
through  the  heart  of  Its  most  populous  districts,  which 
should  connect  the  commercial  centres  of  Kano  and 
Zaria  with  an  all-the-year-round  navigable  port  upon 
the  Niger. 


CHAPTER    LII 

ECONOMIC   RESOURCES   OF   NORTHERN   NIGERIA 

What  are  we  to  do  with  it?  is  perhaps  the  question 
which  will  arise  in  many  minds  as  they  think  of  the 
vastness  of  the  territory  which  has  thus  been  brought 
under  British  rule.  To  this  question  the  growing  re- 
cognition of  the  value  of  the  tropics,  to  which  allusion 
was  made  in  the  first  chapter  of  this  book,  will  gradu- 
ally bring  the  full  answer.  No  one  can  so  foretell  the 
course  of  history  as  to  know  yet  all  that  may  be  done 
with  it. 

To  those  to  whom  the  liberation  of  many  millions 
from  the  curse  of  slavery,  and  the  introduction  of  the 
elements  of  a  finer  civilisation  into  the  local  life  of  the 
interior  of  Africa,  do  not  in  the  meantime  give  a  suffi- 
ciently satisfactory  reply,  it  may  be  briefly  said  that  we 
shall  presumably  do  with  it  as  we  have  done  with  India. 
We  shall  administer  it,  trade  with  it,  and  help  both 
directly  and  indirectly  in  the  development  of  those 
natural  resources  which  form  at  present,  as  Sir  Robert 
Schomberg  said  more  than  fifty  years  ago  of  British 
Guiana,  the  "buried  treasures"  of  its  soil. 

When  it  was  decided,  towards  the  middle  of  the  last 
century,  to  withdraw  from  the  West  Coast  of  Africa,  the 
commercial  use  of  many  valuable  commodities  of  the 
tropics  was  unknown,  the  existence  of  others  was 
ignored ;  but  science  and  experiment  are  every  day 
demonstrating  the  value  of  new  products.  The  forest 
areas  of  the  tropics  are   rapidly   proving  to   be  reserves 

of  wealth  no  less  real  than  that  which  has  for  centuries 

48s 


486  A   TROPICAL   DEPENDENCY 

lain  hidden  in  the  mineral  beds  of  Australia,  California, 
and  the  Transvaal.  Rubber,  shea  butter,  palm  oil, 
wood  oil,  gums,  and  many  other  articles  of  modern 
trade,  exist  in  the  forests  in  quantities  which  represent 
an  almost  limitless  addition  to  the  circulating  wealth  of 
the  world — if  labour  can  be  found  to  harvest  them,  and 
transport  facilities  can  be  given  to  carry  them  to  the 
markets  of  civilisation.  That  these  sylvan  products 
require  enterprise  for  their  development,  and  for  the 
conversion  of  their  potential  resources  into  realised 
wealth,  is  all  the  better.  They  offer  a  fresh  field  to 
the  activity  of  new  generations. 

In  Northern  Nigeria  an  important  forest  belt  spreads 
across  the  southern  states  and  up  the  valleys  of  the 
principal  rivers. 

In  Ilorin  and  Kabba,  the  two  most  westerly  provinces 
south  of  the  Niger,  the  forests  contain  much  valuable 
timber,  in  which  mahogany  is  especially  noticeable. 
There  are  also  in  these  provinces  extensive  plantations 
of  kola  trees,  bearing  the  nut  most  valued  in  the  markets 
of  the  Protectorate.  In  Ilorin  there  is  little  rubber, 
but  in  Kabba  there  is  a  great  deal,  Funtu7nia  elastica 
and  several  Landolphias  being  common.  The  forests 
are  known  also  to  contain  many  commercial  products 
which  further  exploration  would  bring  to  light.  Bassa, 
on  the  southern  side  of  the  Benue,  is  practically  a  rubber 
reserve.  Here  there  exist  stretches  of  what  may  be 
called  "  rubber  forest,"  in  which  thick  masses  of  Landolphia 
vines  scramble  over  the  trees.  Nassarawa,  both  north 
and  south  of  the  Benu6,  contains  great  quantities  of 
rubber.  On  the  banks  of  the  Lower  Benue,  and  also 
on  the  banks  of  the  Gurara  River,  flowing  through  the 
western  part  of  Nassarawa  into  the  Niger,  there  are 
splendid  forest  areas,  in  which  mahogany  and  ebony 
predominate.  These  woods,  being  situated  on  the  banks 
of  navigable  rivers,  could  be  easily  worked.  The  same 
observation  applies  to  the  rubber  forests  of  Bassa,  a 
province  which  occupies  the  angle  formed  by  the  meeting 


ECONOMIC    RESOURCES  487 

of  the  Benu6  and  the  Niger.  In  the  western  part  of 
Nupe,  between  the  Kaduna  and  the  Niger,  there  are 
extensive  plantations  of  the  Kola  acm/iina/a,  esteemed 
through  the  whole  of  North  Africa :  these  might 
become  the  basis  of  an  important  export  trade.  Shea 
butter  trees  abound  in  most  parts  of  the  Protectorate, 
and  oil  palms  in  the  river  valleys.  The  larger  rivers 
of  the  Protectorate  possess  the  usual  characteristic  of 
African  rivers,  and  in  time  of  flood  overflow  their  normal 
borders,  leaving  every  year  a  deposit  of  rich  alluvial 
mud,  which  renders  the  soil  of  the  valleys  not  only 
extremely  rich,  but  practically  inexhaustible.  Heavy 
crops  of  rice,  tobacco,  cotton,  &c.,  are  cultivated  as  in 
Egypt  on  the  land  thus  left  exposed.  This  fertility  is 
particularly  observable  in  the  valleys  of  the  rivers  which 
drain  the  highlands  of  Nassarawa  and  Bautchi  to  the 
Niger  and  the  Benue. 

In  the  Gongola  Valley  the  soil  is  described  as  "ideal 
black  cotton  soil,"  and  existing  native  cotton  crops  are 
specially  good.  Fine  fields  of  dhourra,  gero,  tobacco, 
&c.,  spread  round  all  the  villages  ;  two  crops  of  dhourra 
and  tobacco  being  obtained  in  the  year.  On  the  exposed 
banks  of  the  Lower  Benue  after  flood,  rice  enough  could, 
it  is  believed,  be  grown  to  supply  the  whole  Protectorate, 
and  to  leave  a  considerable  surplus  for  export. 

All  these  areas  are  inhabited  by  naturally  industrious 
agricultural  tribes,  who  have  for  centuries  been  the  prey 
of  slave-raiders.  It  is  evident  that  a  very  large  popula- 
tion has  at  one  time  existed  here,  and  now  that  slave- 
raiding  has  been  stopped,  the  country  should  once  more 
provide  all  the  labour  that  can  be  required  for  its  exten- 
sive development. 

Farther  east,  the  territories  of  Southern  Bornu  carry 
forests  of  gum-bearing  acacias,  breaking  towards  the 
north  into  mahogany  tamarinds  and  dum  palms. 

In  the  open  northern  portions  of  the  Protectorate 
the  products  are  more  purely  agricultural.  They  are 
under     present     conditions     grown     mainly — though    not 


488  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

entirely — for  local  consumption,  and  consist  commonly 
of  various  kinds  of  corn  and  beans,  cassava,  rice,  ground 
nuts,  yams,  sweet  potatoes,  tomatoes,  sorrel,  onions, 
taniers,  ochres,  gourds  of  many  kinds,  and  peppers.  In 
addition  to  these,  wheat  and  sugar-cane  are  grown  as  a 
special  form  of  cultivation  in  some  districts  ;  wheat  rather 
extensively  in  the  Wobe  Valley,  in  North  Bornu,  where 
the  same  conditions  of  rich  soil  repeat  themselves,  as  in 
the  valleys  of  the  south.  For  industrial  purposes  the 
most  widely  grown  crops  are  cotton,  tobacco,  indigo, 
and  beniseed. 

Of  these  cotton  is  the  crop  which  will  at  first  most 
naturally  attract  European  attention.  It  has  from  time 
immemorial  been  a  crop  native  to  the  soil.  It  is  grown 
in  large  quantities  and  of  good  quality  all  over  the 
Protectorate. 

It  has  been  already  seen  that  the  soil  of  the  Gongola 
valley,  repeating  the  conditions  of  the  valley  of  the  Nile, 
is  particularly  favourable  to  the  growth  of  heavy  cotton 
crops,  and,  owing  to  the  cheap  water-transport  available, 
its  harvest  could  be  easily  exported.  The  greater  part 
of  Southern  Bornu  consists  of  cotton  soil.  On  the  edee 
of  Lake  Chad  a  specially  fine  quality  of  cotton,  locally 
known  as  "Ballum,"  grows  with  extraordinary  luxuriance. 
At  the  time  that  the  High  Commissioner's  party  passed 
in  December  last,  the  cotton  bushes  were  in  full  bearing. 
They  were  growing  in  clumps,  of  which  measurements 
were  taken  by  the  botanical  expert  who  accompanied  the 
party,  and  the  plants  were  found  to  be  ten  feet  high, 
while  each  clump  measured  about  fifteen  yards  in  circum- 
ference. This  is  almost  phenomenal  for  cotton.  They 
carried  a  very  heavy  crop.  The  cotton  which  they  bore 
is  silky  and  long  in  the  staple,  and  even  locally  fetches  a 
high  price. 

The  provinces  of  Kano  and  Katagum  are  full  of 
cotton,  which  is  grown  with  care  in  fenced  enclosures. 
In  Zaria,  every  town  and  village  has  its  cotton  fields. 
The    people   thoroughly   understand    its    cultivation,  and 


ECONOMIC    RESOURCES  489 

it  is  reported  that  "  the  capabilities  of  the  country  for 
the  production  of  cotton  are  enormous." 

The  opinion  of  a  cotton  expert,  who  passed  through 
Nupe  and  some  other  districts  in  1904,  was  that  Nor- 
thern Nigeria  held  out  better  prospects  for  the  cotton 
industry  than  any  other  West  African  colony. 

I  have  dwelt  at  some  length  upon  the  question  of 
cotton,  as  it  offers,  perhaps,  a  prospect  of  the  creation 
of  the  first  large  export  industry  of  the  Protectorate, 
and  there  is  no  need  to  insist  upon  the  importance  of 
feeding  the  looms  of  Lancashire  with  home-grown  raw 
material.  There  are,  of  course,  many  other  prospective 
industries,  which  should  include  all  forms  of  tropical  agri- 
culture. The  leather  trade  and  ostrich  farming  are  also 
industries  to  be  developed. 

There  has  been  no  time  for  the  systematic  explora- 
tion of  the  mineral  resources  of  the  country.  The 
highlands  to  the  north  of  the  Benue  have  an  historical 
reputation,  and  silver  and  tin  ores  are  known  to  exist 
in  them  in  some  quantity.  Antimony  also  occurs,  and 
small  quantities  of  monozite  and  other  valuable  thorium- 
bearing  minerals  have  been  found.  Iron  ores  are  common 
throughout  the  Protectorate  ;  and  smelting  is  one  of  the 
oldest  industries  of  which  local  records  have  been  pre- 
served. A  small  survey  was  sent  out  in  1904,  but  the 
discovery  of  minerals  takes  time,  and  the  country  must 
be  more  fully  open  to  European  enterprise  before  its 
true  mineral  capacity  can  be  gauged. 

Enough  has,  I  think,  been  said  to  show  that  with  the 
forest-bearing  slopes  and  valleys  of  the  southern  pro- 
vinces, the  mineralised,  though  as  yet  unexplored,  belt 
of  highlands,  which  at  the  back  of  these  traverses  the 
country  from  west  to  east,  and  the  open  agricultural 
plains  of  the  northern  districts,  the  Protectorate  con- 
tains in  itself  all  the  primitive  elements  of  a  valuable 
trade.  Add  to  this  that  the  population,  though  much 
depleted  now,  is  to  be  counted  in  millions,  who,  under 
conditions    of  peace  and    security,  are   likely   to   show  a 


490  A   TROPICAL   DEPENDENCY 

rapid  increase,  and  that  from  the  earliest  times  their 
numbers  have  been  made  up  of  agriculturists,  herds- 
men, and  traders  ;  and  it  will  be  understood  that  there 
was  a  substantial  foundation  for  the  North  African 
proverb  which  said  that,  "  As  tar  cures  the  gall  of  a 
camel,  so  poverty  finds  its  cure  in  the  Soudan." 


CHAPTER    LIII 

THE    DEVELOPMENT    OF    TRADE 

From  the  point  of  view  of  a  development  which  should 
bring  the  country  into  touch  with  the  outer  world,  the 
trade  of  Northern  Nigeria  may  at  once  be  divided  into 
two  branches,  the  internal  and  the  external.  In  proportion 
as  the  internal  trade  is  active  and  widespread,  local  life 
will  evidently  be  nourished,  and  the  native  populations 
will  attain  to  a  prosperity  in  which,  if  they  desire  to 
do  so,  they  can  restore  the  old  position  of  Negroland, 
by  attracting,  for  the  gratification  of  their  own  wants, 
a  steady  volume  of  trade  from  other  nations. 

We  have  seen  that  in  the  Middle  Aees  the  trade 
of  the  West  African  Soudan  bore  no  mean  proportion 
to  the  relatively  limited  trade  of  the  civilised  world. 
It  is  probable  that,  as  the  nations  of  the  Soudan  recover 
their  ancient  prosperity  under  a  just  and  enlightened 
rule,  they  may  contribute  again  in  equal  proportion  to 
the  now  enlarged  volume  of  the  world's  commercial 
movements. 

Clearly,  if  we  look  to  the  millions  of  Nigeria  to 
become  our  customers,  it  is  of  great  importance  that 
they  should  be  rich  and  prosperous  themselves.  From 
this  point  of  view  the  internal  trade  movements  of  the 
country  have  a  general,  as  well  as  a  local  interest,  and  it 
is  satisfactory  to  find  that  with  every  year  of  British 
administration  the  value  and  convenience  of  open  roads 
is  being  more  widely  appreciated  by  local  traders,  and 
trade  is  proportionately  increasing.  It  consists  largely, 
as  in  other  parts  of  the  world,  of  an  exchange  of  the 
manufactures   of  the  towns  for   the  raw  material  of  the 


492  A   TROPICAL   DEPENDENCY 

country,  and  is  carried  on  by  the  direct  operation  of 
barter,  supplemented  by  a  currency  in  cowries. 

All  trade  at  present  is  caravan-borne,  partly  by  means 
of  transport  animals,  partly  by  human  carriage.  A  man 
carries  usually  about  seventy  pounds,  and  in  order  to  deliver 
this  weight  of  goods  in  distant  portions  of  the  Protectorate 
he  may  have  to  walk  for  several  months.  When  this  has 
to  be  done  through  disturbed  countries  the  risk  to  life 
and  property  is  of  course  great,  and  to  minimise  the  risk, 
caravans  in  old  days  travelled  in  great  strength,  sometimes 
numbering  several  thousand  persons.  The  passage  of 
such  bodies  of  men  through  a  country  unprepared  for  their 
reception  was  in  itself  likely  enough  to  provoke  disturb- 
ance, and  it  was  the  habit  of  the  rulers  through  whose 
territory  they  passed  to  compensate  themselves  for  damage 
by  the  exaction  of  very  heavy  tolls. 

The  main  routes  of  trade  ran  generally  north  and 
south  through  the  western  portion  of  the  Protectorate, 
where  Ilorin  at  one  end  counterbalanced  Kano  at  the 
other,  and  east  and  west  through  the  northern  states, 
where  the  caravans  travelling  from  Tripoli  to  Kano 
usually  entered  the  territories  of  Haussaland  via  Lake 
Chad  and  Kuka.  Upon  these  main  routes  Fulani  toll 
stations  were  established,  while  the  by-roads  were  ren- 
dered impracticable  by  the  brigandage  of  pagan  tribes. 
The  position  of  a  trader  was  not  always  enviable  under 
the  circumstances.  Nevertheless,  the  whole  of  the  terri- 
tories were  traversed  by  a  network  of  caravan  routes. 
Besides  those  which  ran  from  Kano  to  Ilorin  in  the 
south-west,  there  were  others,  more  dangerous  and  less 
frequented,  which  carried  goods  to  Yola  in  the  south- 
east. Kano,  which  was  itself  a  manufacturing  centre, 
and  was  also  a  receiving  centre  for  European  goods  from 
the  Mediterranean  coast,  sent  local  manufactures  and 
European  products  to  the  country  districts,  receiving  raw 
materials  in  exchange.  Ilorin,  which  was  not  itself  so 
much  a  manufacturing  as  a  receiving  centre,  distributed 
the    goods    of    Kano    through    the    coast   districts,    and 


THE    DEVELOPMENT    OF   TRADE       493 

supplied  the  returning  caravans  with  European  goods 
in  exchange. 

These  caravans  were,  however,  confined  to  the  in- 
terior. They  were  not  allowed  to  pass  through  Ilorin 
in  the  south-west,  but  were  obliged  to  receive  from  the 
Ilorin  middlemen  any  goods  which  they  desired  to  pur- 
chase from  the  coast.  Similarly  Lagos  traders  from  the 
coast  were  prevented  from  passing  to  the  north.  Ilorin 
held  the  position  of  a  buffer  trade  state,  in  which  the 
whole  of  the  exchange  trade  was  done  by  local  brokers. 
An  equally  impassable  barrier  existed  on  the  south-eastern 
frontier.  The  greater  part  of  the  southern  pagan  belt 
was  entirely  impenetrable  by  peaceful  caravans.  There 
existed  only  one  or  two  roads  by  which  it  was  possible 
to  cross  it,  and  on  those  the  tolls  were  so  extortionate 
that  the  exactions  on  the  road  amounted  to  half  the 
goods  of  the  caravan.  A  similar  exaction  was  made  on 
the  return  journey,  and,  in  addition,  there  was  all  the 
risk  of  murder  and  pillage.  This  trade  was  directed 
towards  what  is  now  German  territory,  but  the  dangers 
of  the  road  rendered  it  practically  impossible.  On  the 
northern  frontier,  trade  from  Tripoli  via  Chad  to  Kano 
took  some  months  for  the  journey,  and  cost  about  ^50 
per  ton  of  merchandise  carried,  in  addition  to  heavy  risks 
of  pillage  and  murder  in  the  desert. 

Since  the  introduction  of  British  grovernment  the  roads 
of  the  Protectorate  have  been  rendered  practically  safe, 
and  traders  travel  singly  or  in  couples  where  caravans 
used  to  think  it  necessary  to  travel  in  strength.  The 
tolls,  though  still  retained  in  principle,  have  been  reduced 
to  a  relatively  small  percentage  upon  the  value  of  goods 
carried,  and  the  safety  of  the  roads  has  now  thrown 
open  the  passage  to  the  coast.  An  experimental  down 
journey  was  made  by  an  Arab  trader  from  Tripoli  in  the 
early  part  of  this  year.  He  took  a  caravan  of  eighteen 
oxen  from  Kano  to  Zungeru,  and  was  amazed  at  the 
security  and  convenience  of  a  road  which  he  had  believed 
to  be  impassable.      He  went  on  personally  to  Lagos,  and 


494  A   TROPICAL   DEPENDENCY 

thence  by  sea  to  Tripoli,  his  own  prediction  being  that 
he  would  be  the  "first  of  many"  who  would  take  this 
road  when  he  had  reported  its  advantages  and  security 
in  Tripoli.  His  calculation  was  that  goods  could  be  carried-^ 
between  the  Lagos  coast  and  Kano  in  forty  days  without 
risk,  whereas,  between  Tripoli  and  Kano,  the  journey  ex- 
tended sometimes  to  seven  months,  with  the  risks  of  the 
desert  in  addition.  It  has  since  been  reported  that  the 
arrival  of  this  Arab  in  Tripoli,  and  the  account  which  he 
has  given  of  his  journey,  has  created  a  great  sensation 
in  commercial  circles  there.  It  remains  still  to  be  seen 
how  much  of  the  northern  trade  will  in  this  way  be 
diverted  to  the  British  coast. 

The  facilities  which  have  been  given  by  the  new  order 
of  things  to  caravans  travelling  southward  towards  the 
coast  have,  of  course,  been  reciprocally  extended  to  traders 
travellingr  northward  from  the  coast  to  the  interior,  and 
upwards  of  four  thousand  trade  licences  were  this  year 
issued  by  the  British  Government  in  Ilorin  to  petty 
traders,  many  of  whom  flocked  from  the  coast  provinces 
into  the  town.  The  British  Resident  of  Ilorin  reports 
that  whereas,  in  old  days,  no  Yoruba  trader  was  to  be 
found  upon  the  left  bank  of  the  Niger,  there  is  now  no 
market  of  importance  in  Northern  Nigeria  in  which  they 
are  not  to  be  found.  This,  if  correct,  is  in  itself  extremely 
satisfactory.  It  prepares  the  way  for  an  easy  flow  of 
trade  from  the  coast  to  the  interior,  and  the  impetus 
which  has  already  been  given  to  the  trade  of  the  coast 
colonies  is  clearly  marked  in  their  annual  returns. 

The  question  of  caravan  tolls  is  an  interesting  one, 
upon  which  the  permanent  policy  of  the  British  Adminis- 
tration is  still  open  to  consideration.  It  seems  fair 
that  all  trade  profiting  by  the  safety  of  the  roads,  and 
the  new  markets  opened  to  its  activity,  should  bear  a 
share  of  the  expense  by  which  this  state  of  things  is 
brought  about.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  the  undesira- 
bility  of  placing  any  restriction  upon  the  movements  of 
trade    is    keenly  recognised.      It   is  to  be  desired   on  all 


THE    DEVELOPMENT    OF    TRADE       495 

sides,  that  the  cumbrous  and  extravagant  system  of 
caravan  traffic  may  soon  be  superseded  by  a  more 
convenient  form  of  transport.  With  the  introduction 
of  railroads,  and  the  extension  of  a  steam  service  upon 
the  rivers,  the  question  of  caravan  tolls  will  probably 
fall  into  abeyance.  Throughout  the  interior  of  the 
Protectorate  the  reduction  of  these  tolls  has  given 
universal  satisfaction,  and  the  steady  increase  in  the 
amount  collected  —  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  by- 
roads, which  have  no  toll  stations,  are  now  so  safe  as 
to  be  frequently  used  for  the  purpose  of  evading  all 
tolls  —  gives  unmistakable  indication  of  the  increase  in 
the  volume  of  internal  trade. 

The  question  in  which  European  traders  are  in- 
terested is,  of  course,  the  development  of  an  export 
trade.  This  rests,  I  have  tried  to  show,  in  the  first 
instance,  upon  internal  prosperity.  The  direct  object 
of  the  administration  is  to  promote  prosperity  by  the 
peaceful  organisation  of  the  country  under  just  laws, 
the  maintenance  of  order,  and  the  opening  of  com- 
munication with  the  outer  world.  When  these  objects 
have  been  attained,  the  administration  may  be  re- 
garded as  having  done  its  part.  It  holds  the  field  in 
the  interests  alike  of  the  native  and  the  European.  It 
is  for  European  trade  itself  to  do  the  rest. 

The  wealth  of  opportunity  cannot  be  doubted,  and 
private  enterprise  is  already  following  close  upon  the 
heels  of  established  government.  The  returns  of  Euro- 
pean trade  with  the  Protectorate  are  not  at  present 
published  in  a  form  which  makes  accurate  figures  at- 
tainable, but  the  two  European  firms  who  do  the  prin- 
cipal trade  have  for  the  last  year  given  incomplete 
figures,  which  reach  a  total  of  about  ;^300,ooo.  This 
is  exclusive  of  European  trade  done  for  Government 
through  the  Crown  Agents,  and  also  of  trade  of  which 
the  values  in  European  goods  done  by  native  traders 
are  not  known.  Some  ;^6o,ooo  worth  of  British  cottons 
are  estimated  to  have  been  imported   last  year  by  petty 


496  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

native  traders  living  at  Ilorin.  The  trade  is  entirely 
exclusive  of  trade  spirits,  which  are  not  admitted  into 
Northern  Nigeria,  and  small  as  its  total  is  at  present,  it 
equals  already  about  half  the  trade  which  was  done 
forty  years  ago  with  all  the  West  Coast  settlements 
together. 

This  is  not  a  despicable  beginning  when  it  is  con- 
sidered that  there  are  at  present  but  two  English  firms 
who  have  established  operations  in  the  country,  and 
that  they  have  not  yet  taken  possession  of  the  field 
which  has  been  opened  by  the  extension  of  British 
administration  to  the  northern  provinces  and  to  Bornu. 
It  must  be  understood  that  in  entering  the  northern 
states  we  enter  regions  of  civilised  industry  which  bear 
no  comparison  with  the  peoples  of  the  coast,  and  which 
have  already  markets  susceptible  of  indefinite  expansion. 

Over  the  greater  part  of  the  territories  the  native 
population  are  reported  as  being  eager  to  buy  English 
agricultural  implements.  Some  dissatisfaction  has  been 
felt  with  the  bad  quality  of  English  cloth  which  has 
been  introduced,  and  a  consequent  impetus  has  been 
given  to  native  dyeing  and  weaving  industries,  but  for 
good  cloth  there  is  a  ready  sale.  Hardware,  needles, 
thread,  writing  paper,  mirrors,  and  many  other  articles 
of  English  manufacture,  are  keenly  appreciated,  and 
since  the  superiority  of  the  road  from  Lagos  to  Kano 
has  been  demonstrated  over  the  desert  route  to  Tripoli, 
it  is  to  be  hoped  that  English  goods  will  before  long 
take  the  place  in  the  market  of  Kano  which  has 
hitherto  been  held  by  other  European  goods  imported 
through  the  Mediterranean  coast.  Tea,  of  which  the 
stimulating  quality  is  recognised  by  the  Tuaregs  of  the 
desert,  under  the  name  of  "Water  of  Zem-Zem,"  has 
now  largely  taken  the  place  of  coffee  with  the  richer 
class  of  Mohammedans ;  and  European  provisions  are 
readily  bought  in   the  northern   states. 

Here  a  wide  market  evidently  waits.  Two  main 
obstacles  are  opposed  to  the  rapid  development  of  trade. 


THE    DEVELOPMENT    OF   TRADE       497 

One  is  a  radical  difficulty  which  the  development  of  inter- 
course and  the  promotion  of  native  prosperity  can  alone 
remove.      Natives   are    ready    to    buy,    but    they    do    not 
possess     in    sufficient    quantity    a    marketable    equivalent 
for    European    goods.       Native    manufactures    have    no 
value  in  European  markets.       Horses  and  cattle  are  too 
cumbersome  for  export.     Cowries  are  only  locally  useful. 
Exchange    must    therefore    be    based    solely    on    produce 
which  has  value  in  European  markets,  and  which  is  suffi- 
ciently   portable    for    export    under    present    conditions. 
Even   this  to   be   profitable   must   be  in   bulk,   and   retail 
trade  is   impracticable   while  small   payments  have  to  be 
made   in   kind.     The  same  difficulty  attaches  to  the  col- 
lection of  Government  taxes,  which  for  the  present  have 
to   be   paid   for  the  greater  part  in    kind.     The  solution 
evidently    is    to    be    found    in    the    encouragement    of   a 
surplus  production  in  native  industries  of  which  the  pro- 
duce  can   be  profitably   exported,  combined  with  the  in- 
troduction  of  a  cash    currency  as  a  medium   of  general 
exchange.      In    this    way    native    existing    industries    of 
the    kind    most    valuable    to    Europe    will,  by   a    natural 
process,  be  expanded,  and  new  ones  will  be  sought  which 
will  gradually  extend  the  basis  of  an  export  trade.     The 
stimulus  to  this  movement  will  be  supplied  by  the  desire 
to  possess  articles  procurable  only  with  the  required  forms 
of  produce,  and   though  the  operation  of  the  movement 
may  require  time,  it  may  on  the  whole  be  trusted  to  cor- 
respond  with   the  amount  of  enterprise  displayed  on  the 
part  of  European  firms    in  introducing  new  commodities 
to    the   native   markets.      Already,  as    has    been    seen,    a 
good   deal   has   been   done   by   the  administration    in   the 
direction  of  introducing  a  cash  currency,  and  silver  coins 
are  coming  into  general  use. 

It  has  been  seen,  in  describing  the  early  history  of 
the  Royal  Niger  Company,  that  its  founders  looked 
to  the  northern  states  of  Haussaland  for  the  ultimate 
success  of  its  trading  operations.  Here  they  expected 
to  meet  with  returns  which  should  repay  all  the  adminis- 

2  I 


498  A   TROPICAL    DEPENDENCY 

trative  expense  of  opening  the  northern  country  to 
British  influence,  and  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose 
that  they  were  mistaken.  The  reaUsation  of  their  ideal 
is  now  attainable.  The  burden  of  administrative  ex- 
pense has  been  assumed  by  the  British  taxpayer.  The 
country  has  been  opened,  not  only  to  one  firm,  but  to 
all  legitimate  British  trade,  and  it  is  for  British  trade 
to  develop  the  wealth  of  the  markets  which  at  that 
time  were  beyond  its  reach. 

The  second  obstacle  to  the  development  of  trade  is 
easier  to  remove  than  the  first.  It  is  the  obvious  diffi- 
culty of  transport  which  arises  from  the  very  nature  of 
an  extended  trade.  The  existing  system  of  human 
carriage,  if  the  most  natural  to  a  semi-civilised  society, 
is  absolutely  opposed  to  any  large  commercial  movement. 
Were  it  possible  to  obtain  carriers  for  the  transportation 
of  goods  in  bulk,  armies  of  men  would  be  required, 
who  would  destroy,  by  the  mere  fact  of  their  passage, 
the  country  over  which  any  large  produce  trade  was 
in  operation.  The  time  required  for  such  transport 
would  be  prohibitive,  and  the  cost,  as  calculated  in 
Northern  Nigeria  under  present  circumstances,  would  be 
two  shillings  per  ton  per  mile,  as  opposed  to  the  fraction 
of  a  penny  for  which  certain  classes  of  goods  would  be 
carried  by  rail.  Add  to  this  that  heavy  machinery, 
such  as  may  be  required  for  mining,  cotton  pressing,  &c., 
cannot  be  transported  at  all  by  human  carriage,  and  it 
is  evident  that  the  present  system  of  carrier  transport 
is  hopelessly  condemned.  Were  there  no  other  argument 
against  it,  the  mere  fact  that  every  man  who  is  employed 
as  a  carrier  represents  so  much  labour  taken  away  from 
production  is  itself  a  sufficient  reason  for  regarding  the 
system  as  the  most  costly  and  unprofitable  that  can  be 
employed.  Human  carriage  is  a  concomitant  of  slavery. 
With  the  abolition  of  slavery  it  becomes  impossible. 

One  of  the  first  endeavours  of  the  administration 
has  been  so  to  improve  the  main  trade  routes  of  the 
Protectorate  as  to  render  them  fit   for  the   more  general 


THE    DEVELOPMENT    OF     IRADE       499 

employment  of  animal  transport,  and  between  Ziint;crii 
and  Kano  a  fairly  good  cart  road,  fit  for  the  employnu-iu 
of  wheeled  vehicles,  will  soon  have  been  c(inii)U-icci. 
The  opening  of  navigable  waterways  has  also  already 
placed  some  rich  districts  within  easy  reach  of  European 
trade,  but  the  urgent  need  of  the  Protectorate  from 
every  point  of  view,  political  and  commercial,  is  obviously 
for  the  introduction  of  railways.  These  need  not  in 
the  first  instance  be  expensive.  The  country  is  generallv 
open,  the  gradients  of  the  main  routes  are  easy,  and 
there  are  no  impassable  obstacles  which  call  for  costly 
engineering  works.  The  development  of  trade  must  be 
necessarily  gradual,  and  in  order  to  keep  pace  with  it,  a 
railway  so  light  as  to  be  little  more  than  a  tramway, 
along  which  waggons  could  be  drawn  by  steam,  might, 
in  the  first  instance,  be  laid  from  a  navigable  port  on 
the  Niger  to  Zungeru,  and  thence  along  the  route  which 
has  been  cleared  for  the  construction  of  a  cart-road 
to  Zaria  and  Kano.  This  is  the  caravan  route  which 
traverses  some  of  the  richest  and  most  populous  districts 
of  the  country.  When  the  markets  of  this  district  had 
been  worked,  it  would  perhaps  be  time  enough  to  extend 
a  similar  cheap  service  from  Kano  to  the  capital  of 
Bornu.  If  the  trade  which  resulted  were  sufficient  to 
justify  further  expense,  the  construction  of  more  solid 
railways  would  rapidly  follow.  Transport  in  a  peaceful 
country  is  not  in  truth  a  difiiculty.  It  is  little  more 
than  a  calculation  of  profit  and  loss. 

The  administration  of  Northern  Nigeria  is  but  five 
years  old.  Its  duty  has  been  to  bring  under  control  a 
congeries  of  states,  of  which  the  internal  disorders  necessi- 
tated,  in  the  first  instance,  a  resort  to  the  plain  argument 
of  military  conquest.  The  administration  has  not  in 
the  short  period  of  its  existence  been  able  to  do  more 
than  to  affirm  the  conquest  of  the  country,  and  to  create 
a  skeleton  of  the  machinery  of  government  which  it 
will  be  for  time  to  bring  to  its  full  perfection.  But  a 
beginning  has   been   made.     The  framework  of  adminis- 


500  A   TROPICAL   DEPENDENCY 

tration  has  been  established  in  all  the  provinces.  A 
territory  which  we  found  in  chaos  has  been  brought 
to  order.  The  slave  trade  has  been  abolished  within 
its  frontiers.  Its  subject  races  have  been  secured  in 
the  possession  of  their  lives  and  •  property.  Its  rulers 
have  been  converted  with  their  own  consent  into  officials 
of  the  British  Crown,  and  are  working  sympathetically 
to  promote  an  order  of  things  that  shall  render  a  return 
to  old  abuse  impossible.  There  has  been  no  great 
shock  and  no  convulsion,  only  into  the  veins  of  a  deca- 
dent civilisation  new  blood  has  been  introduced,  which 
has  brought  with  it  the  promise  of  a  new  era  of  life. 

Thus  a  territory  has  been  opened,  in  which  the  genius 
for  administration,  and  the  adventurousness  in  trade,  which 
have  always  characterised  the  British  people,  have  once 
more  the  opportunity  of  working  side  by  side  to  the  ac- 
complishment of  great  national  results.  It  is  a  union 
which  in  times  past  brought  the  British  Empire  into  exist- 
ence. It  gave  us  India,  it  gave  us  Canada,  and  though 
these  are  great  names,  there  is  a  reasonable  ground  for 
hope  that  the  chapter  of  Imperial  history  which  has  been 
opened  in  the  interior  of  West  Africa  will  not  prove 
unworthy  of  the  rest. 


L'i 


^ 


W' 


I  A  US 


INDEX 


Abdurrahman  I.,  32,  44 
Abdurrahman  II.,  50,  51 
Abou  Bekr.     See  Askia  Abou  Bekr 
Abou     Bekr    of    Wankore,    teacher, 

204-206 
Abou  el   Hagen  of  Morocco,  75,  76, 

127,  134 
Abou  Ishak  or  Toueidjen,  125,  126 
Adouatein.      See    Spain    and    Africa, 

dual  empire 
Africa — 

Cut  off  from  Europe  by  Turkish  pos- 
session of  N.  Coast,  294 
Early  civilisation,  10-13 
European  influence  on  interior  and 

coast  different,  344,  345 
First  settlements  on  coast  line  only, 

320,  321 
Inferior  races  always  driven  south, 

316,  317 
North   Coast   of  Africa.     See   that 

title 
Slave  trade.     See  that  title 
Soudan.     See  that  title 
Two  great  trade  routes  to  interior, 

223-226 
West  Coast  of  Africa.    See  that  title 
Aghadez,  195,  201 
Ahmed  Baba,  Soudan  historian,  156, 

204 
Aiwalatin,  90,  93,  96,  97,  130,  165,  175 
Al  Gazzali,  36 

Al-Hazen,  Arab  optician,  36 
Al  Maimon,  Arab  astronomer,  35 
Al  Mansur,  51,  52 
Alarcos,  Battle  of,  64 
Alexander  the  Great,  94 
Algebra,  product  of  Arab  civilisation, 

35 
Ali  Folen,  191,  196,  211 
All  Ghajideni,  reign  of.     See  Bornu, 

273-276 


Almohades    sect    conquers    Morocco 

and  Spain,  58,  59 
Almoravides,  The — 

Desert  Kingdom,  107-112 

Dual  Empire,  Spain  and  Morocco, 
55,  56 

Origin,  54 

Lose  Spain  and  Morocco,  59 
Andalusia.     See  Spain 
Arabic  numerals,  35 
Arabs — 

Andalusian    immigration,  value   of, 
67-72 

Early  dealings  with  Negroland,  84-89 

Great   scientists,  philosophers,  his- 
torians, 35-40 

Learning     and     achievements     in 
medieval  times,  32-49,  67-72 

North  Africa  conquered  by,  24-29 

Ommeyades  dynasty,  32-49 

Spain  conquered,  29-32 
Armour  used  in  Haussaland,  251 
Artesian  water,  1 18 
Ash-shakandi  epistle  quoted,  60,  61 
Askia  Abou  Bekr — 

Ascends  Songhay  throne,  181 

Conquests,  190-198 

Death,  211-212 

Minister  to  Sonni  Ali,  1 71-173 

Pilgrimage  to  Mecca,  182-189 

Reforms,  199-202 
Audoghast,  90-93  ;  sacked,  107 
Avempace,  Arab  physician,  39 
Averrhoes,  Arab  scholar,  36,  64,  65 
Avicenna,  Arab  philosopher,  35,  36 
Azlecs,  practices   similar  to  those  of 
African  blacks,  137-139 


Bajazet,  Sultan,  286,  287 
Barbar)^,  learning  and   splendour  at 
Tunis,  71 
SOI 


502 


INDEX 


Barbot,  quoted,  322,  323,  324,  334,  336, 

2,17,  340 
Earth,  Dr.,  explorer,  quoted,  155,  156, 
157,  260,  262,  263,  271,  342,  377, 
179,  465 
Bautchi  submits  to  British  administra- 
tion, 434 
Bello,  Sultan — 

Quoted,  270,  275,  276 
Reign  of,  390-398 
Ben  Musa,  Arab  geometer,  35 
Benins,  The,  179 
Berber  Tribes — 

Almohades  rule  in  Spain,  58-65 
Almoravides.     See  that  title 
Conquered  by  Arabs  :  result,  amal- 
gamation, 26-32 
Characteristics  similar  to  primitive 

races  of  N.  Europe,  32,  34 
Lemtunah  nation,  53 
Origin  of,  13-15 

Revolt  and  conquer  Spain,  52-57 
Blyden,  Dr.,  quoted,  376 
Borgu,    kingdom    of,   106,    179;    con- 
quered by  Askia,  193 
Bornu  States — 

Condition  at   time  of   Moorish   in- 
vasion, 286 
Disruption  in,  399,  400 
History  of,  106,  236,  251,  252,  254, 

264,  268-281 
Invaded  by  Fulani,  388 
Mohammed  el  Kanemi,  388,  389 
Occupied  by  British,  433-436 
Slave-raid  described,  412-415 
Bosman,  quoted,  338,  340 
Brandenburgh,    has     settlements    on 

West  Coast,  326 
British  Empire — 

Not  a  white  empire,  i 
Tropical  area,  extent  and  richness, 
I,  2 
Burials,  Royal,  in  Ghana,  67 


Caill^,  Ren^,  341 
Caliphate,  The — 
Divides  into  Eastern  and  Western 

Caliphates,  32,  34 
Eastern,  overthrown  by  Tartars,  67 
Western     breaks     up     into     three 
Powers,  67 
Cannibalism,  124 


Caravan  routes,  15-17 

Cargill,  Dr.,  quoted,  47 

Carnegie,  Mr.,  422 

Chartered  Company  on  West   Coast 

(seventeenth  century),  329-332 
Chinese  coins  found  on   East  Coast 

of  Africa,  222 
Chinese  labour.     See  Coloured  labour 
Christianity — 

Spread   in    Central    Africa    by   re. 
fugees,  234 

Stronghold    in    N.    Africa   in  early 
days,  14 
Clapperton,  Captain,  explorer,  342 
Coloured  labour,  3-6 
Columbus,  185-187,  188,  292 
Congo  Free  State  founded,  350 
Cordova.     See  under  Spain 
Cotton  growing,  N.  Nigeria,  487-489 
Crusades,  The,  59,  251 
Cyrene,  13 


Dahomey,  French  Protectorate  of,  358 
Decoeur,  Captain,  359,  360 
Delafosse,  M.,  quoted,  379,  380 
Denham,    Major,    quoted,    342,    376, 

377,  388,  389,  409 
Denmark — 

Cruelty  of  agents  on  West  Coast,  337 

Settlements,  326,  329 
Djolfs,  The,  81 
Djouder  Pasha,  commander  Moorish 

army,  296-305,  31 1-3 13 
Dutch    settlement    on    West    Coast, 

325-327,  329,  330,  337 
Dwarfs,  near  Gao,  157,  158 


Ebn    Junis,     astronomer,     invented 

pendulum,  35,  38 
Egypt- 
Conquered  by  Cambyses,  95 

Early  civilisation,  9,  10 

Ethiopian    dynasty,    Persian    con- 
quest, the  Ptolemies,  233,  234 

Expeditions    westward    and   south- 
ward under  Pharaoh,  230-234 

Hyksos  dy  nasty,  3 

Mamelukes,  invaded  by  Tamerlane, 
286 

Nimrod  the  Powerful,  legend,  227- 
228 


INDEX 


503 


EI  Bekri,  historian  of  Negroland — 
Life,  85-89 

Quoted,  91,  95,  96,  98,  105,  108,  160 
El  Idrisi,  geographer,  quoted,  37,  38, 

no,  115 
England — 

Attitude  towards  slavery,  462 
Exploration  in  Central  Africa,  341- 

342 
International  race  for   territory    in 

Africa,  350-355 
Policy,    to    withdraw    from   native 

affairs,  345-349 
Settlements  on  West  Coast,  326-331 
Slave  trade.     See  that  title 
Equator,  curious   theory   concerning, 

176 
Es-sadi,  Soudan  historian,  155 
Es  Soyouti,  184 
Ethiopians.     See  Meroe 
Europe — 

Barbarian  invasion  from  north,  33 
Exploring  expeditions  into  Central 

Africa,  341-342 
International  race  for  territory  in 

Africa,  350-355 
Mohammedan   civilisation  in.     See 

Spain 
Mohammedans  expelled  from  Wes- 
tern Europe,  289-295 
Settlements  on  West  Coast  of  Africa. 

See  West  Coast  of  Africa 
Turkish  Empire  conquers  Mediter- 
ranean coasts,  288-289 
Exploration     in     Central    Africa    by 
Europeans,  341-342,  350-355 


Ferdinand  and  Isabella.     See  Spain 
Fez.     See  under  Morocco 
France — 

Ambitions  in  Africa,  349,  350-354 
Settlements   on   West  Coast,  323- 

325,  326 
Strained     relations     on      Nigerian 

boundary,  358-360 
Violation  of  British  border  in  Bornu, 

433,  435 
Franco  -  German       War      stimulates 

Colonial  ambition,  349 
Fulani   race,  21,  22,  81,  87,  194,  252, 

253 
Degeneration  and  cruelty,  401-404     | 


Fulani  race  {continued) 

Empire  founded— a  Holy  War,  385- 

Haussaland  conquered,  387 
History,  legends,  itc,  374-380 
Moorish  rule  thrown  off,  384,  385 
Origin  of  kings,  381-382 
Overthrown  in  Hornu,  388 
Spiritualism  and  second  sight,  393 
Sultan  Bello's  reign,  390-398 
System  of  administration,  405,  406 


Gago  or  Kaougha.  See  Songhay 
Gambia,  colony  founded,  343,  345 
Gando  accepts  British  administration, 

447 
Geber  or  Djajar,  Arab  chemist,  36 
Genowah,  7 
Germany,    competition    for     African 

territory,  354,  360 
Ghana,  Kingdom  of — 

Aiwalatin.     Sec  that  title 

Black  dynasty  overthrown,  110-112 

Conquered  by  Susu,  then  by  Melle, 
104,  119 

Decay  of,  116,  117 

History  of,  93-99 

Trade,  100-103 
Gibbon  quoted,  290 
Gibraltar,  etymology,  30 
Gold  and  gold  mines,  98,  105,  m,  112, 

147,  148 
Gold  Coast  Colony  founded,  343,  345 
Goldie,  Sir  George,  352,  356,  364,  365 
Great  Britain.     See  England 
Gunpowder,  Arab  invention,  36 


Hakluyt  quoted,  327 
Haussa  States — 
Bornu  State.     See  that  title 
British    administration   introduced. 

Sec  Nigeria 
Condition  at  time   of  Moorish    in- 
vasion, 284-2S5 
Condition  when  British  authority  is 

introduced,  406,  407 
Conquered  by  Askia,  195 
Daura,  legends  concerning,  260 
Degeneration  of  P'ulani  rule,  401- 

405 
Early  religion,  242-246 


504 


INDEX 


Haussa  States  {continued) 
Fulani  rule — 
Conquest,  387 

Reign  of  Sultan  Bello,  390-398 
States  revolt,  are  defeated,   391, 
393-396 
Gober,  State  of,  265-266 
Histor}'  and  legends,  236-242,  246- 

257,  258-267 
Kano.     See  that  title 
Katsena.     See  that  title 
Queen  Amina  of  Zaria,  246,  247,  252 
Soldiers'  generosity  to  enemies,  213 
States.     See  their  various  titles 
Travelling  traders,  285 
Haussa  Regiment.    See  West  African 

Frontier  Police 
Heeren,  quoted,  222 
Herodotus,  quoted,  10,  12,  19,  221 
Homeman,  explorer,  341 
Hygienic  rules  of  Katib  Moussa,  126 
Hyksos  dynasty,  Egypt,  379 

Ibn  B.^tuta — 

Journeyings,  74,  75 

Visits  to  Melle,  129-141, 144, 149-1 5 1 
Ibn  Haukal,  quoted,  84 
Ibn  Khaldun,  quoted,  73,  74 
Ibn  Said,  Arab  historian,  quoted,  37, 

47,  60,  63,  69,  70 
Ibn  Zohr,  Arab  physician,  39 
Ifrikiah,  Province  of — 

Hafside  dynasty,  65 

{See  also  Barbary  States) 
Isabella,  Queen  of  Spain.     See  Spain 


Japan  and  native  labour,  5 
Jenne — 

Ancient  Egyptian  influence  in,  161 

Riots  under  Moorish  rule,  306 

Submits  to  Sonni  AH,  174 

Territory  of,  146,  147,  165 
"Jigger,"  The,  124 
JolofTrace,  375 

Kagho  or  Kaougha.     See  Songhay 
Kanem.     See  Bornu 
Kano — 

Bornu  attack  upon,  280 

British  expedition  and  occupation, 
439-446 


Kano  {continued) 

Conquest  by  Songhay  and  decline, 

254-257,  266,  267 
History,  249-254 

Legend  concerning,  242-244,  248 
Prison,  402 
Kanta.     See  Kebbi 
Katsena — 

Accepts  British  administration,  446 
Province  and  town  of,  261-265 
Kebbi  Principality — 
Founded,  196 
Importance  of,  275 
Katsena.     See  that  title 
Partly  Fulani,  283,  284 
Struggle  with  Bornu,  276,  277,  284 
Kontagora,  hostile  attitude  to  British, 

421,  422,  426 
Kororofa,  State  of,  238 
Kuka  or  Kaougha.   See  under  Songhay 


Labour.     See  Coloured  labour,  also 

Slave  trade 
Laing,  Major,  explorer,  342 
Landor,  Richard,  explorer,  342 
Lauture,  M.  de,  quoted,  21,  79,  378 
Lem-Lems  or  cannibals,  98 
Leo  Africanus  quoted,  254,  412 
Libyans.     See  Berber  tribes 
Lugard,  Col.  Sir  Frederick — 

Concludes  treaty  at  Nikki,  359,  360 
High  Commissioner,  N.  Nigeria, 364 
Organises    West   African    Frontier 
Police,  361 
Lyon,  explorer,  342 


Maghreb.    See  Morocco 
Magic  and  talismans,  228,  229 
Makkari  family,  traders,  100-103 
Maloney,  Captain,  murder  of,  436,  437 
Mansa  Musa,  King  of  Melle 
Pilgrimage  to  Mecca,  120-128 
Sends  embassy   to    Merinite   king, 

75^77 
Masina,  Fulani  stronghold,  104,  381 

382,  386 
Mecca,  Askia  Abou  Bekr  visits,  185 
Melle,  Empire  of — 

Conquered  by  Askia,  192 
Decay  and  conquest  by  Songhay, 
121,  152,  166 


INDEX 


505 


Melle,  Empire  oi  {continue<f) 
Early  history,  82,  105,  115 
Ibn  Batuta's  visit,  134-141 
Mansa  Musa,  reign  of,  120-128 
Practices  similar  to  those  of  Aztecs, 

137.  138 
Practices    similar    to   those   of    N. 

Europe,  145,  149 
Sends  presents  to  King  of  Morocco, 

75,  76,  127 
Songhay  conquered,  120,  161 
System  of  administration,  142-151 
Trade  and  history  of  kings,  1 17-120 

Meroe — 

Civilisation  of,  219-222 
Trade  routes,  222-226 

Mineral  resources  of  N.  Nigeria,  489 

Misraim,  burial  of,  97 

Missionaries  on  W.  Coast,  326 

Moguls.     See  Tamerlane 

Mohammed  Abou  Bekr.     See  Askia 

Mohammed  ben  Zergoun,  301-312 

Mohammed  el  Kanemi,  campaign 
against  Sultan  Bello,  388,  395, 
396 

Mohammed  Koti,  202 

Mohammedanism — 

Melle  and  Songhay  accept,  118-121 
Northern  belt  of  Soudan  converted, 

no 
Taxes  recognised  by,  468-470 

Moors,  The — 
Expulsion  from  Spain,  291-295 
Songhay  conquered  under  Djouder 
Pasha,  296-314 

Morland,  Colonel,  432,  433,  443 

Morocco — 
Arabs  conquer,  27,  28 
City  founded  by  Almoravides,  108 
Embassy  to  kingdom  of  Melle,  76, 

127 
Gained  by  Merinites,  65,  66,  67 
Learning   and    splendour    at    Fez, 

74,75 
List  of  presents  to  Sultan  of  Turkey, 

75,  76 
Mossi,  State  of^ 

Attacks  Melle,  165,  175 

Conquered  by  Askia,  192 

Conquest  by  Sonni  Ali,  178 
Mungo  Park — 

Journeys,  341,  351 

Quoted,  373,  375,  2,76 


Musa    Nosseyr,  and  conquest   of  N. 

Africa  and  Spain,  25-30 
Muskets  in  use  in  Hornu,  278,  280 


African      Co.      formed, 
;  (later  see  Royal    Nij{cr 


Nation.\l 

352-355 
Co.) 

Native  labour.      See  Coloured  labour, 

also  Slave  trade 
Negro,  admixture  of  Arab  blood,  83 
Negroland.     See  also  Soudan- 
Arab  dealings  with,  84 
Early  records,  81,  82 
El  Bekri's  account,  85-87 
Frontage  upon  civilisation  reversed 

after  1500,  188 
Genealogies   and   dynasties   traced 

through  female  line,  119,  131 
Inferior  races  driven  south,  20-21, 

22,  23 
No   Spanish   Arab   conquest    prior 

to  seventeenth  century,  79 
Physical   features  and   boundaries, 

79-80 
Sidjilmessa,  87 

Tide  of  progress  from  West  east- 
ward, also  decadence,  78,  82 
Western    routes    from    N.    Africa, 
87-89 
Niger,  The — 

El  Bekri's  account,  105 
Ibn  Batuta's  description,  133 
Richness  of  lower  reaches,  366 
Trade  of  Niger  Co.  and  Royal  Niger 

Co.     See  those  titles 
Watershed,  value  of,  352 
Niger  Company,  trade  expansion    to 

North,  367-371 
Nigeria — 

Boundaries  of,  356-358,  362 
Divided     into    North    and     South 

Nigeria,  363,  364 
Geographical  position,  7,  21 
North  Nigeria.     See  that  title 
Race    to    secure    treaty   at    Nikki, 
358-360 
Nigretis  Tribe,  20 
Nikki,  Treaty  of,  359,  360 
North  Africa — 

Arab  conquest,  24-29 
Three  natural  zones,  7-9 
Turkish  conquest,  286-288, 
2    K 


^94 


5o6 


INDEX 


Northern  Nigeria,  British  administra- 
tion— 
Climate,  482 

Communication,  means  of,  482,  484 
Early  history,  417-425 
Expeditions  against  Yola  and  Bornu, 

432-437 

Future  of,  potential  resources, 
485-490 

Installation  of  new  Emirs,  449-459 

Judicial  system,  477-480 

Kano  occupied,  438-446 

Native  hatred  of  Fulani  rule,  442,  443 

Oath  of  allegiance,  457 

Organisation  of  British  administra- 
tion, 480-482 

Policy  of  working  through  native 
chiefs,  426-430 

Railways  urgently  needed,  482,  498, 

499 
Sokoto,  expedition  and  occupation, 

447-455 
System  of  Emirs  and  Chiefs,  456, 459 
Taxation — 

Mohammedan  States,  468-475 

Pagan  States,  476,  477 
Trade — 

Caravans  and  tolls,  492, 495 

With  outer  world,  prospects,  491, 

495-499 
Nupe,  Kingdom  of — 
Great  antiquity,  106 
Hostile  attitude  to  British,  421,  422 
Pacification,  427-429 

Oil  Rivers  Protectorate,  366 
Oudney,  Dr.,  342 

Paganism — 

Customs  and  legends,  Haussaland, 
242-244 

Driven  ever  farther  south,  116 

Fetishism,  317-319  ;  decay  of,  260, 
261 

West  Coast  Africa,  low  type,  334 
Park.     See  Mungo  Park 
Persian  influence  in  Negroland,  94,95 
Pharaohs.     See  Egypt 
Pharusii  Tribe,  20 
Phoenicians,  The — 

Civilisation  of,  10-13 

Organisation  of  States,  240-242 


Portugal — 

Embassies  to  Sonni  Ali  and  to 
Mossi,  177,  178 

Exploration  of  W.  African  Coast, 
176 

Fulani  prince  visits  Lisbon,  176 

Pope's  Bull  dividing  unknown  terri- 
tories, 186,  187 

Settlements  on  W.   African   Coast, 

•   323-325 

Vasco  da  Gama's  expedition,  187, 
188 
Printing,  invention  of,  290 
Punishments,  barbarous,  200 

Railways,    urgent     need     for,    482, 

498-499 
Religion  follows  movement  of  races, 

317-319 

Residents'     duties     in     British     Pro- 
tectorates, 480,  481 

Ritchie,  explorer,  342 

Roman  occupation  of  Northern  Africa, 
13.24 

Royal  African  Co.,  history  of,  330-332, 
336 

Royal  Niger  Co.     See  also  Niger  Co. 
Campaign  against  Nupe,  360-371 
History  of,  355-3^5 

Rubber  forests,  486 

Sa  kingdom  in  Tripoli,  160 
Sakora,  King  of  Melle,  119, 120 
Salt  mines  of  Tegazza,  297 
Saracens,  315 

Sardinia  spoiled  by  Musa,  27 
Scythians,    characteristics    similar   to 

those  of  Berbers,  33,  34 
Second  sight  practised,  393 
Sicily  spoiled  by  Musa  Nosseyr,  27 
Sidjilmessa.     See  under  Negroland 
Sierra    Leone,    colony   founded,    343, 

345 
Silla,  Kingdom  of,  104 
Slave  trade,  The — 
Abolition — 

Compensation  for  loss  of  revenue, 

466-475 
Problems    of    transition    period, 
460-465 
Attitude  of   Mohammedan   blacks, 
148-149 


INDEX 


507 


Slave  trade,  The  {continued) 
Coloured  labour.     See  that  title 
English    trade,    sixteenth    century, 

327-331 

Haussaland,  259,  407 

Proclamation   by    British   Adminis- 
trator, 423,  428,  430 

Raiding  described,  408-416 

West  Coast  of  Africa,  trade,  333-341, 

343,  344 
Sokoto — 

Occupied  by  British,  447,  448 
Proclamation,  Emir  installed,  449- 

455 
Songhay,  Kingdom  of — 

Accepts  Mohammedanism,  120 
Askia  Abou  Bekr,  reign  of,  181-185, 

188,  190-198,  211 
Askia  dynasty,  following  Abou  Bekr, 

2 1 1-2 1 5 
Capital,  Kaougha,  or   Kaukaw,    18, 

105,  120,  157 
Conquered  by  Melle,  120,  161 
Conquers  Melle,  121,  152,  166 
Decadent    condition,    Moorish    in- 
vasion, 282 
Eastern    portion    unconquered    by 

Moors,  304,  305,313 
Flourishing  condition  under  Askia, 

199-210 
History  and   legends   of  the   race, 

154-164 
Moors,  conquest  of,  296-305 
Sonni  AH,  reign  of,  166-175, 177-180 
Wars  with  Masinaand  Fulanis,  382, 

384 
Sonni  Ali,  Songhay  king — 

Conquests  and  reign,  166-175,  177- 

180 
Trade  with  Portugal,  177 
Soudan — 

British   Government   first   appears, 

372 
Cut  off   from    civilised   world  (by 

Turkish  conquests),  188-190,  315, 

316,320,321 
Eastern  Soudan  possible   home  of 

civilisation,  17 
Egyptian  expedition  under  Pharaoh, 

230-234 
Face  towards  civilisation  south  not 

north  after  1500,  320,  371,  372 
Immigration  from  Arabia,  18 


Soudan  {continued) 

International  race  forierriiory,  350- 

355,  358-362 
Longevity  of  individuals  and  State, 

215-217 
Moorish  invasion — 

Songhay  expedition,  296-314,  373 
Religion — 

Follows  movement  of  races,  317, 
318 

Three  great  movements,  319 
Royal    marriages    with    conquered 

royalties,  193 
Spain — 

Almoravides  and  Almohades    rule, 

58-65 
Andalusians,     contemporary     esti- 
mate, 69-72 
Arab  conquest,  29-32 
Brigand  and  King  of  Seville,  63 
Brilliant     civilisation     under     Om- 

meyades,  32-49 
Christian  families   deported   to    N- 

Africa,  64 
Cordova,    Toledo,   Malaga,  Seville, 

during  Arab  civilisation,  40-49, 61 
Decay  of  Arab  power,  conquest  by 

Yusuf,  52,  55-57 
Huddites,  Moslem  kingdom,  67 
Moors  expelled,  291-295 
Ommeyades  dynasty  ends,  51 
Spain  and  Africa — 

Break  up  into  three  Powers,  67 
Dual  Empire,  56-66 
Spiritualism,  393 
Statue,  colossal,  near  rocks  of  Almena. 

230,  232,  246 
Steam  applied  to  transport,  impetus  to 

exploration,  349 
Strabo,  quoted,  379 

Tamerlane,  conquests  and  death, 287 
Tarikh-es-Soudan    quoted,    154,    2S2, 

283,  373 
Taxation  in  Protectorates,  difficulties 

of,  465-475 
Tegazza,  salt  city,  130 
Tekrour,  kingdom  of,  115 
Telem^an  conquered  by  Morocco,  127 
Tenkamenin,  King  of  Ghana,  98 
Thaly,  Dr.,  quoted,  378 
Thule.Tarshish,  Ophir,  great  maritime 

trade,  11-12 


5o8 


INDEX 


Timber  in  N.  Nigeria,  486 

Timbuctoo — 
Art  of  ancient  Egypt  existing  in, 

161 
Canal  to  Aiwalatin  constructed,  178 
Conquered  by  Mansa  Musa,  126 
Foundation  of,  108,  113,  114 
Embellished  by  Askia  Daouad,  214 
Ibn  Batuta's  visit,  149 
Learning  and  wealthy  202-209 
Sacked   and   burnt    by    Sonni    Ali, 

167-171 
Sacked   by   Moors,   300-302,    306- 
310 

Tin  Yeroutan,  Berber  king,  92,  93 

Trade  routes  to  Central  Africa,  223- 
226 

Tropical  administration,  1-6 

Tuaregs — 

Found  Timbuctoo,  113 
Repossess  Timbuctoo,  164,  165 
Struggle  with  Fulani,  385 
Struggle  with  Moors,  306-307,  385 

Tunis — 

Centre  of  learning  and  splendour, 

Musa  constructs  a  fleet  at,  27 
Turkish  Empire — 

Conquers  coasts  of  Mediterranean, 

288-289 
Conquers  N.  Coast  of  Africa,  286- 

288,  294 
Mameluke  dynasty  in  Egypt,  286 


Underground  city  in  Central  Africa, 
225 


Vasco  da  Gama  sails  round  Cape  of 

Good  Hope,  187-188 
Veil  worn  by  desert  tribes,  92 


Wahumas  of  Eastern  Africa  resemble 

Fulani,  380 
Wall  of  Dalouka,  Abyssinia  through 

Nubia,  233,  234 
Wangara  Province — 
A  buffer  state,  273,  274 
Great  gold  country,  1 1 1 
Persian  extraction  of  the  people,  94, 

95 
Throws  off  yoke  of  Ghana,  1 1 5 
West  African  Frontier  Police  raised, 

361 
West  Coast  of  Africa — 

British    policy    to    withdraw    from 

native  affairs,  345-349 
Early  colonies  on  seaboard  only,  345 
European  settlements — 
History  of,  322-332 
Spheres     of     influence.      Crown 
Colonies,  343 
Low  type  of  native,  333-335 
Portuguese  explore,  175,  176 
Slave  trade.     See  that  title 
Trade — 

Firearms,    spirits — evils   of,    340, 

343>  368 
Modern,  344 
Willcocks,  Sir  James,  361 
Women,  position  of — 
In  Bornu,  279 

Under  Arab  civilisation,  39,  49 
Under  Ommeyades,  131 


Yellow  labour.     See  Coloured  labour 
Yoruba  tribe,  traditions  of,  227,  228 


Zaghari,  town  of,  133 
Zaria,  437,  441,  442 
Zaryab,  45,  46 
Zingari  or  gypsy  race,  15,  379 


Printed  by  Bali.antvne,  Hanso.n  fir*  Co. 
Edinburgh  b'  London 


AA    uuutitiU4// 


