\„  /  'J 


>X.    'A.   » 


a 


PRESENTED    BY 


Date  Due 

^  ~-^ 

V    ^   ■          ,^     «.: 

m^ 

LIbrvry  Bur«au   Cat.  HO.  1137 

The  Music 


Musical  Instruments 


Soiitbcni  3^^ia  anb  cLbo  X>cccaii. 


^ 


'Flic  i/npn'ssio/i  of  this  7voyk  is  liinitcd  to  joo  copies 
and  jO  cii'fisfs  proofs. 

i\'0  fittuyc  impressions  unll  be  printed. 

NOVELLO,    i:\VER   &   CO. 


THE    MUSIC 


MUSICAL    INSTRUMENTS 


^nutljcrn  SlnMa  anD  ^\jc  Otccan 


C.   R.   DAY 

Captain,    Oxi-ordshire    Light    Infantry 

WITH    AN    INTRODUCTION    BY 
A.   J.    HIPKINS,    F.S.A. 

THE    PLATES     DRAWN     11 Y     WILLIAM     dlHB. 


L0:N'B0C<  &  C\'EIV  YORK:    0\'OVELLO,  EWER  i^  CO. 

and 

^'D-JO^'l  &  CH-4RLES  BL-ACK,  l.OfN'DOOi. 


MDCCCXCI. 


0 


1  .       V    . 

LONDON : 

NOVELI.O,    EWER    AND    CO., 

PRINTERS. 


di:dicati:d  hv  permission 


LIEUTENANT-GENERAL    HIS    ROYAL    HIGHNESS 


The  Duke  of  Connaiight  and  Strathearn 

K.G.,  K.T.,  K.P. 


CONTENTS. 


PAlit 

Introduction  .......-----  ix 

Preface  .-.-..----•--         xv 

CHAPTER  I. 

Iiuliaii  music — How  cluuiijed  in  the  course  of  years— Its  decline  under  Mahomcdan  rule— -Hindu 
ideas  of  music— How  encouraged  in  the  South  of  India — Connection  with  religion- 
Influence  of  religion  upon  music— Legends— Difficulty  of  deciphering  the  ancient  treatises 
— How  differing  from  European  music — Most  noticeable  peculiarities       .  -  -  -  i — 12 

CHAPTER  II. 

Preservation  of  music  in  Southern  India— Modern  Karnatik  system  believed  to  be  closely  akin  to  the 
ancient— Sanskrit  treatises— Definition  of  s'ruti— System  of  twenty-two— Formation  of  scales 
(grama)— Relation  of  major  and  minor  modes— Deviation  of  intervals  of  system  of  twenty-two 
from  those  of  just  intonation -Comparison  of  ancient  scale  with  European  diatonic- 
Results  of  recent  observation— Svstem  of  twelve  hinted  at  in  Sanskrit— Murchanas— 
Raga— How  differing  from  mode— tala  or  rhythm— Time,  how  estimated— Ancient  varieties 
of  rlivthm — Ancient  notation  ....----  13     29 

CHAPTER    III. 

Modern   theory— How    differing   from    ancient — Notation— .Arrangement    of  gamut— Scales— Time, 

how  signified — .Application  of  measure  to  music      -  -  -  -  -  -  3" — 37 

CHAPTER  IV. 

Raga — How  defined — Notes  essential  to  composition  of^Vadi  and  Samvadi  notes — Modem  meaning 
of  Murchana — Examples  of  Murchana  applied — Ancient  and  modern  methods  of  performance 
of  raga— How  differing — Alapa— Madhyamakala — Gamakas — Classification  of  ragas— Popular 
scales  for — Allied  to  certain  passions — Peculiarities — How  apportioned  to  seasons  and  hours 
— •'  Kattika,"  or  list  of  modern  ragas  ..----  3S — 56 

CHAPTER  V. 

Taste  of  European  and  Oriental  nations:  how  differing — Reason  for  non-employment  of  harmony — 
Method  of  singing — Of  Indian  melodies — Form — Classification  of— Rhythm — Employment  of 
mixed  times — Tonality  often  doubtful — Resemblance  of  Indian  music  to  that  of  other 
countries — Examples  of  popular  melodies — Hindustani  musical  system  :  how  diftering  from 
Karnatik — E.\amples  of  Hindustani  melodies — Scales  employed  in  the  Hindustani  system         57—9' 

CHAPTER  VI. 

Musical  entertainments — Music  and  the  Drama^Influence  of  the  latter  upon  songs  of  the  country 
— Of  the  Indian  orchestra — Religious  music — Temple  music — Employment  of  bells — Street 
music — The  Nahabet — Nautch  music — Dancing     ....--  gz — 9S 

CHAPTER   VII. 

Of  instruments  —  Decoration  —  Materials  —  How  susceptible  of  improvement  —  Chief  defects  in 
construction — Eastern  origin  of  many  European  instruments — ^Descriptions  of  instruments 
in  common  use  ...-.....-  gg — 154 

CHAPTER  VIII. 

Principal  seats  of  music  in  Southern   India — Famous  Indian  musicians  of  the  South — Bibliography 

of  Indian  music — Sanskrit  MSS.  upon  music  ....--  155 — 16S 

Appendix         .......-----  169—173 


LIST   OF    ILLUSTRATIONS. 


PAGE 

Pi.ATK  I.  A  BIN  PLAYER 109 

Plate  II.  SOUTHERN   INDIAN  VINA.     SMALL  SITAR  -         -         -  in 

Plate  III.  SUR-S'RINGARA.     LARGE  SITAR 117 

Plate  IV.  BIN-SITAR.     TAUS 123 

Plate  V.  SARINDA.     SARANGI 125 

Plate  VI.  RABOB.     CHIKARA.     SARANGI  ......  127 

Plate  VII.  TAMBURI.     YEKTAR.     PERSIAN  SITARA      ....  129 

Plate  VIII.  SNARAMANDALA 133 

Plate  IX.  KINNARI 135 

Plate  X.  MRIDANG.     TABLA  AND  BAHYA 137 

Plate  XL  NAGARA.     DHOL  -         - 139 

Plate  XII.  KHANJERI.     TAM   TAM 141 

Plate  XIII.  TALA.     JALRA.     BUDBUDIKA 143 

Plate  XIV.  PUNGI.     KURTAR 145 

Plate  XV.  PILLAGOVI.     MUKAVINA.     S'RUTI.     NAGASARA.    ALGOA  147 

Plate  XVI.  MOSHUQ.     S'ANKHU 151 

Plate  XVII.  TUTURI.     NAFARI.     S'RINGA.     KURNA  ...         -  153 


INTRODUCTION. 


WHETHER  music  as  an  attribute  of  man  is  as  old  as  speech  or  not, 
we  cannot  sa)-;  for  present  consideration  it  is  sufficient  that  both 
can  be  intensified  into  poetic  expression  with  a  common  power  in 
affecting  the  emotions,  notwithstanding  that  there  is  a  vast  and  unbridgable 
distance  between  the  precision  of  articulate  language  and  the  vague  suggestion 
and  glamour  of  musical  sound.  There  is  a  quality  in  recited  poetry  not  inaptly 
described  as  musical,  since  it  has  a  special  charm  due  to  the  choice  and  rhythm  of 
words,  assisted  by  the  personal  note  of  the  reciter.  But  this  rhythmic  euphony  is 
onlv  allied  to  the  musician's  art,  it  cannot  correctly  be  said  to  be  comprehended  in 
it,  owing  to  the  absence  of  defined  musical  intervals.  From  whatever  point  of  view 
we  overlook  the  human  race,  its  history  and  development,  we  can  nearly  alwaj's 
trace  music  as  having  some  connection,  however  slender,  with  the  particular 
form  of  culture,  or  it  may  even  be  the  absence  of  culture,  under  notice.  Let  us 
for  the  moment  turn  aside  from  the  modern  European  musician's  standpoint,  as 
for  him  Harmony,  although  of  comparatively  recent  origin,  is  indispensable,  and 
we  shall  find  melody  in  the  succession  of  notes  and  their  rhythmic  movement 
possessing  a  beauty  and  exerting  a  charm  which  have  endured  for  ages  and 
comprehend  the  whole  art  of  Music  in  the  older  civilisations.  In  Egypt;  in 
Babylonia,  Persia,  and  Arabia  ;  in  Asia  Minor,  Greece,  and  Rome — and  in  India, 
modern  as  well  as  ancient,  for  here  simple  melody  still  reigns  supreme.  With 
the   exception   of    the    Drone,    apparently    of    Indian    origin,   which   is   literally 


X  INTRODUCTION. 

preserved  in  the  Bagpipe  and  Hurdy  Gurdy,  and  is  a  characteristic  feature  in  our 
modern  harmonic  music — conspicuous  as  the  Pedal  point — the  traces  of  any 
combination  of  musical  intervals,  out  of  Europe,  are  unimportant  and  need  not 
be  considered  in  a  comparison  of  our  Western  music,  with  its  elaborate  system  of 
harmonv,  and  that  of  the  rest  of  the  world,  whether  ancient  or  modern,  where 
harmony  has  no  place. 

Among  the  heterogeneous  populations  of  India  much  material  may  be  found 
that  bears  upon  the  history  of  melody.  There  is  an  Aryan  strain  probably  as 
old  as  the  Vedic  Sanskrit,  and  a  Persian  which  has  in  these  latter  days,  and 
especially  in  Northern  India,  considerably  modified  the  true  Hindu.  There  are 
also  echoes  of  an  indigenous  music  which  prevails  among  the  hill  tribes, 
remaining  in  the  Indian  music  of  to-day  ;  but  yet  not  so  clearly  heard  that  we  can 
sa}'  we  identify  here  or  there  a  refrain  of  an  original  or  pre-historic  music, 
although  we  may  unconsciously  be  very  near  it.  In  the  present  state  of  our 
knowledge  it  is  impossible  to  affirm  that  a  pentatonic,  or  system  of  five  notes  in 
the  octave,  is  of  greater  antiquity  than  a  heptatonic  or  seven-note  system  ;  or 
that  a  chromatic  or  half-tone  scale  preceded  an  enharmonic  composed  of  quarter- 
tones.  All  these  varieties  occur  in  our  historic  records,  and  if  we  argue  from  the 
analogies  of  speech,  or  consider  the  measurement  of  vibrating  strings,  it  is  no 
less  plausible  to  decide  for  primitive  narrow  intervals  than  for  primitive  wide  ones. 
In  every  province,  go  where  we  will,  may  be  found  some  melodic  or  rhythmic  habit 
or  turn  which  it  is  possible  to  reckon  as  proper  to  it,  having  its  peculiar  scales  or 
modes,  its  figures,  rhythms,  graces  to  mark  its  authenticity,  but  we  mav  yet  be  far 
away  from  its  origin,  even  as  to  locality.  In  the  native  music  of  Africa,  so  far 
as  is  known,  there  is  much  that  may  be  traced  to  Asiatic  sources. 

The  oldest  civilisation  that  offers  us  any  substantial  information  is  Egypt. 
It  begins  in  the  earliest  historic  monuments  with  a  graphic  sign  representing  a 
fingerboard  instrument  of  the  tamboura  or  guitar  kind,  which  already  marks 
a  summit  level  in  instrumental  construction  and  musical  conception.  We 
are  not  likely  to  learn  from  civilisations  which  may  have  preceded  Egypt,  as 
from  the  non-existence  of  any  form  of  graphic  art  they  cannot  now  divulge 
their  secrets. 


INTRODUCTION.  xi 

Another  question  that  has  arisen  is  that  of  the  priority  of  instrumental  or 
vocal  music.  There  are  many  difficulties  attending  a  vocal  origin  of  what  we 
understand  in  varied  pitch  and  recurring  rhythm  hy  melody.  The  poets'  music 
already  touched  upon,  depending  upon  very  small  vocal  inflections,  can  no  more 
be  measured  and  retained  than  the  notes  of  many  song  birds  which  yet  give  us 
infinite  pleasure.  Very  small  musical  intervals  in  traditional  use  which  delight 
Indian  and  other  Eastern  people  are  clearly  of  instrumental  origin,  and  to  be 
attributed  generally  to  facilities  afforded  by  strings.  This  tradition  may  be  of 
very  great  antiquity,  and  such  old  forms  of  music  that  occur  to  us,  it  may  be  Vedic 
chants  or  Hebrew  psalms,  are,  in  comparison,  conceivably  modern.  A  striking 
instance  of  a  purelv  instrumental  small  interval  is  that  of  the  Hindu  musical  unit, 
the  s'ruti.  The  consideration  of  the  value  of  this  interval  and  of  a  combination 
of  s'rutis  to  form  an  octave  scale  will  be  found  in  Captain  Day's  lucid  exposition, 
and  is  as  interesting  as  it  is  important.  There  can  be  no  doubt  about  the  origin 
of  the  s'ruti  in  the  measurement  of  a  stretched  string. 

The  object  of  this  introduction  will  be  gained  if  we,  for  a  little  while,  allow 
ourselves  to  forget  the  glory  and  splendour  of  our  modern  harmony,  in  favour  of 
those  melodic  systems  which  once  satisfied  the  great  nations  of  classical  antiquity, 
and  still  content  those  hoary  civilisations  of  the  East  which  preserve  so  much  that 
is  really  ancient  in  their  present  daily  life.  Captain  Day  shows  us  interesting 
resemblances  between  the  leading  modes  of  old  Greece  and  Asia  Minor  and 
certain  favourite  modes  of  the  Hindus.  There  is  no  sure  evidence  of  an  intimate 
musical  connection  between  those  countries  and  India,  a  few  scattered  references 
in  classical  writers  excepted  ;  but  the  relationship  of  sister  Aryan  languages  may 
have  been  paralleled  by  a  relationship  of  musical  types  sufficient  to  justify  a 
theory  of  descent  instead   of  one  of  imitation. 

The  greater  freedom  in  musical  intervals  melodic  systems  allow  must  be 
reckoned  as  compensating  in  some  measure  for  the  want  of  those  harmonic 
combinations  of  which  our  European  music  has  such  inexhaustible  wealth.  What 
we  lose  in  the  possession  of  this  rich  estate  is  that  we  are  effectually  barred  from 
the  use  and  enjoyment  of  a  more  pliant  melody,  free  from  the  fetters  imposed  by 
consonant  chords,  a  melody  which  has  a  great  privilege  in  easily  touching  the 


xii  INTRODUCTION. 

emotions.  Recent  scale  theories,  claiming  to  have  their  foundation  in  natural 
laws,  are  insufficient  to  account  for  the  material  which  allows  the  pliahility  of 
Eastern  melody.  But  they  are  insufficient  even  to  account  lor  our  common 
diatonic  scale,  the  structure  of  which  rests  upon  three  harmonic  triads,  and 
with  chromatic  and  enharmonic  systems  are  utterly  irreconcilable.  Under 
Captain  Day's  guidance  we  find  that  in  India  an  ancient  quarter-tone  system  has 
become  in  modern  times  a  half-tone  one — substantially  our  equal  temperament, 
but  permitting  an  expressive  or  ornamental  use  of  smaller  intervals  than  the 
half-tone,  according  to  the  player's  feeling  or  fancy.  Whether  this  ideally  half- 
tone system  is  due  to  a  natural  transformation  tending  to  simplicity — as  we  find 
the  rich  Sanskrit  reduced  in  modern  vernacular  dialects — or  to  an  adaptation  more 
suitable  for  practical  use  than  a  fine-spun  theory  of  ancient  music  teachers,  must, 
like  nearlv  all  the  questions  that  have  here  been  propounded,  remain  open  or  be 
regarded  as  beyond  the  possibility  of  answer. 

It  must  not  be  overlooked  that  the  Persian  and  Arab  musicians  have  also  their 
enharmonic  systems,  and  if  these  may  be  referred  back  to  an  older  Babylonian, 
the  delight  felt  in  such  melodic  freedom  may  have  been  widespread  in  a  remote 
antiquity.  We  would  not,  however,  resign  our  harmony  for  this  freedom,  although 
we  admit  its  great  power  to  incite  a  poetic  impression  when  we  are  in  certain 
moods.  What  Indian  music  offers  to  mood  will  be  found  in  Captain  Day's  pages, 
and,  studied  from  this  point  of  view,  the  information  he  offers  cannot  but  be  of  the 
hisfhest  value.  He  shows  us  the  existence  of  a  reallv  intimate  expressive  melodic 
music,  capable  of  the  greatest  refinement  of  treatment,  and  altogether  outside  the 
experience  of  the  Western  musician.  What  we  learn  from  such  inquiries  is  that 
the  debated  opinions  of  musical  theorists,  the  cherished  beliefs  of  those  who  devote 
themselves  to  the  practice  of  the  art,  the  deductions  we  evolve  from  historic 
studies — all  have  to  be  submitted  to  larger  conceptions,  based  upon  a  recognition 
of  humanity  as  evolved  from  the  teachings  of  ethnology.  We  must  forget  what  is 
merely  European,  national,  or  conventional,  and  submit  the  whole  of  the 
phenomena  to  a  philosophical  as  well  as  a  sympathetic  consideration,  such  as,  in 
this  century,  is  conceded  to  language,  but  has  not  yet  found  its  way  to  music. 

A.  J.   HIPKINS. 


PREFACE. 


OF  late  years  so  many  works  of  importance,  dealing  with  the  subject 
of  National  music,  have  appeared  that  for  the  publication  of  this 
book  the  author  feels  that  some  apology  is  necessary. 

The  subject  of  Indian  music,  presenting,  as  it  does,  ideas  so  fresh  and  a 
musical  system  so  distinct  from  what  we  in  Europe  are  accustomed  to,  necessarily 
offers  an  ever-widening  field  for  research  and  study.  It  is  curious  to  note  that 
while  so  many  works  upon  the  arts  or  industries  of  India  have,  in  recent  times, 
appeared,  the  subject  of  Indian  music  has  been  generally  thought  devoid  of  all 
science  and  unworthy,  therefore,  of  any  serious  consideration. 

Sir  William  Jones,  at  the  end  of  the  last  century,  endeavoured  to  dispel 
ideas  of  this  nature,  and  his  learned  essay  upon  The  Musical  Modes  of  the 
Hindus  has  formed  the  basis  of  almost  all  Indian  musical  research.  Some  forty 
years  later  Captain  Augustus  Willard,  who  at  that  time  commanded  the  troops 
in  the  service  of  H.H.  the  Nawab  of  Banda,  published  an  interesting  little 
Treatise  upon  the  Music  of  Hindustan,  a  book  which  is  now  so  scarce  as  to  be 
almost  unobtainable.  Notwithstanding  the  real  interest  of  both  these  works 
they  are,  unfortunately,  of  comparatively  small  practical  use  to  the  ordinarv 
musical  enquirer,  unless,  indeed,  he  is  fortunate  enough  to  possess  a  consider- 
able previous  knowledge  of  the  subject. 

The  work  which  is  now  published  has  been  the  result  of  much  study  and 
research  during  a  term  of  foreign  service  while  the  author's  regiment  was  in 
India.  And  it  is  hoped  that  the  information  here  offered  for  the  first  time  may 
prove  of  interest,  and  may  assist  in  some  small  degree  in  supplying  a  want 
hitherto  felt  among  musicians  and  students  of  National  musical  literature.  To 
render  the  book  of  greater  value,  and  to  assist  those  who  may  make  further 


xvi  PREFACE. 

research,  a  catalogue  of  various  works  dealing  with  the  subject  has  been  added, 
together  with  a  carefully  prepared  list  of  various  Sanskrit  authorities.  Notice 
has  been  taken  of  the  legendary  origin  of  music  among  the  Aryans,  and  of  its 
principles  as  understood  in  Modern  India  ;  the  peculiar  scales  and  rhythms 
employed  have  been  described  in  detail  ;  and  examples  of  various  airs  are  given 
in  notation.  In  order  to  show  the  principles  of  form  upon  which  the  Indian 
musicians  construct  their  melodies  an  analysis  of  some  of  the  examples  has  been 
attempted. 

The  subject  of  Temperament,  concerning  which  so  many  theories  have  been 
propounded,  has  been  treated  of.  The  thanks  of  the  author  are  due  to  the  late 
Dr.  A.  J.  Ellis,  F.R.S.,  for  his  great  kindness  in  working  out  many  special 
experiments  concerning  the  temperament  of  the  Indian  scale,  and  for  his 
permission  to  publish  them  here  ;  also  for  his  exhaustive  account  of  the  S'ruti 
vina,  given  in  the  Appendix. 

The  author  takes  this  opportunity  of  acknowledging  his  thanks  to  his  friend, 
Mr.  A.  J.  Hipkins,  F.S.A.,  both  for  his  great  help  and  sympath}',  without  which 
this  work  would  never  have  been  published  ;  also  for  his  learned  Introduction. 
The  author  begs  also  to  thank  Mr.  Cecil  Bendall,  of  the  British  Museum,  and 
Professor  T.  \V.  Rhys  Davids,  for  much  valuable  help  and  information. 

The  Illustrations  have  been  confided  to  the  hands  of  Mr.  William  Gibb,  and 
form  seventeen  plates,  all  of  them  admirable  representations  of  Indian  musical 
instruments.  The  author  is  indebted  to  the  kindness  of  Miss  Edith  Hipkins  for 
her  very  beautiful  drawings,  which  are  reproduced  in  Plates  II.,  III.,  and  IV. 

Many  thanks  are  due  to  H.H.  the  late  Maharajah  of  Travancore  and  to 
H.H.  the  Maharajah  of  Mysore  for  their  kindness  in  affording  facilities  for 
enquiry,  and  for  allowing  access  to  valuable  manuscripts  ;  and  to  the  Rajah 
Sir  Sourendro  Mohun  Tagore  for  permission  to  quote  from  his  various  works. 
Acknowledgment  is  also  due  to  Messrs.  Balwant  Trimback  Sahasrabadhe,  and 
T.  M.  Venkatasesha  S'astri,  of  the  Poona  Gayana  Samaj  ;  M.  Narasimhayya,  of 
the  London  Mission  High  School,  Bangalore ;  Maula  Bux  of  Baroda ;  and 
to  many  other  native  gentlemen  too  numerous,  unfortunately,  to  mention  by 
name. 

Army  and  Navy  Club, 
April,    i8gi. 


A  SiTAR  Player, 
(From  a  Marathi  Instruction  Book.) 


CHAPTER   I. 

Indian  music — How  chani^ed  in  the  course  of  years — Its  decline  under  Mahomedan  rule — Hindu 
ideas  of  music — How  encouraged  in  the  South  of  India — Connection  with  religion — 
Influence  of  religion  upon  music— Legends— Difficulty  of  deciphering  the  ancient  treatises 
— How  differing  from  European  music — Most  noticeable  peculiarities. 

AMONG  the  many  arts  and  industries  of  India  gradually  decaying  from 
want  of  patronage,  but  which,  since  the  accession  of  the  British 
Government,  have  again  been  fostered  and  encouraged,  that  of  music 
has  hitherto  found  no  place.  To  Europeans  it  is  certainly  the  least  known 
of  all  Indian  arts.  Almost  every  traveller  in  India  comes  away  with  the  idea 
that  the  music  of  the  country  consists  of  mere  noise  and  nasal  drawling 
of  the  most  repulsive  kind,  often  accompanied  by  contortions  and  gestures 
of  the  most  ludicrous  description.  Perhaps  the  traveller  may  have  fancied  that 
he  has  seen  a  nautch — he  has  possibly  been  asked  to  some  such  entertainment 
at  the  house  of  a  wealthy  native ;  or,  more  likely,  he  has  possessed  a 
treasure  of  a  "boy,"  who  has  been  able  to  make  the  necessary  arrangements 
with  the  "  nautchnees "  for  a  performance  of  the  kind.  But  in  certainly 
two-thirds  of  such  cases  the  singing  and  dancing  witnessed  has  been  ot 
the  commonest,  and  the  performers  of  the  most  abandoned  and  depraved  of 
the  citv — and  the  traveller  has  therefore  received  a  false  impression,  which  may 
abide  through  life,  or  impede  the  progress  of  a  more  correct  appreciation  ot  the  real 
value  of  Indian  music.  But  it  is  hardly  fair  that  an  art  so  little  really  understood, 
even  among  the  natives  of  India  themselves,  should  be  judged  by  such  a  criterion 
and  then  put  aside  as  worthless  because  solitary  individuals  have  been  deceived 
by  parties  of  outcast  charlatans  whose  object  is  mere  gain.  For  that  Indian  music 
is  an  art,  and  a  very  intricate  and  difficult  one  too,  can  hardly  be  denied.  But  to 
appreciate  it  one  must  first  put  away  all  thought  of  European  music,  and  then 
judge  of  it  by  an  Indian  standard,  and  impartially  upon  its  own  merits  — of  the 


2  THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA. 

ingenuity  of  the  performer — the  pecuhar  rhythm  of  the  music — the  extraordinary 
scales  used — the  recitatives — the  amount  of  imitation — the  wonderful  execution 
andmemory  of  the  performer — and  his  skill  in  employing  small  intervals  as  grace. 
Then  when  we  hear  old"  Slokes  "and  •'  Ghuzals,"  songs  written  hundreds  of  years 
ago,  sung  with  the  same  sweet  dreamy  cadences,  the  same  wild  melody,  to  the 
same  soft  beats  of  little  hands,  and  the  same  soft  tinkle  of  the  silver  cymbals, 
we  shall  perhaps  begin  to  feel  that  music  of  this  kind  can  be  as  welcome  and 
tasteful  to  ears  accustomed  to  it  as  the  music  of  the  West,  with  its  exaggerated 
sonorousness,  is  to  us  ;  and  so  our  contempt  will  gradually  give  way  to  wonder, 
and,  upon  acquaintance,  possibly  to  love.     For  this  music,  let  us  remember,  daily 
gives  pleasure  to  as  many  thousands  as  its  more  cultivated  European  sister  gives 
to  hundreds.     There  is  hardly  any  festivity  in  India  in  which  some  part  is  not 
assigned  to  music — and  for  religious  ceremonies  its  use  is  universal.     Since  the 
Vedic  times  it  has  been  cultivated  as  an  art.     The  hymns  of  the  Rig  and  Yagur 
Vedas  were  set  and  sung  to  music  ages  ago.     The  Vedic  chant,  composed  in  the 
simple    Sanskrit   spoken  three    thousand    years    ago,    and    handed    down    from 
generation   to  generation  for  more  than  thirty  centuries,  has  a  thrilling  effect 
upon    a    cultivated   Hindu   mind.      The  Vedic    chant  is  to  Hindus   what   plain 
song  is  to  us.     For  this  ancient  chant — like  plain  song — is  bound  up  with  the 
sacred  ceremonials,  and  is  wedded  to  language  alike   sonorous   and   dignihed. 
And  the   place  where  it  is  heard,  for  it  is  only  heard  in  the  temple,  is  considered 
so  holy,  and  the  strain  itself  is  so  simple   and  devotional,  that  all  who  hear  it 
cannot  fail  to  be  impressed.^ 

Indian  music,  like  its  sister  art  in  Europe,  seems  to  have  undergone  many 
changes  before  reaching  its  present  stage.  In  remote  ages  the  art  seems  to 
have  been  highly  cultivated,  and  musicians  were  held  in  great  esteem ;  but 
under  the  Mussalman  dynasty,  and  owing  to  the  almost  perpetual  strife  between 
petty  princes,  music,  like  other  arts,  through  want  of  encouragement,  fell  almost 
into  abeyance.  There  is,  therefore,  little  information  to  be  had  concerning  the 
music  of  those  times. 

From  early  periods,  however,  many  learned  and  elaborate  treatises 
(mostly  in  MSS.)  upon  the  art  yet  remain.  The  later  of  these  show 
that  even  then  music  had  passed  through  several  stages  of  transition.  Since 
the  Sangita  Parijata,  which  is  believed  to  be  one  of  the  latest  of  these  Sanskrit 


'  An  interesting  explanation  of  these  chants  is  given  by  Mr.  A.  C.  Burncll.  Ph.D.,  in  his  ".\rshey- 
abrahmana"  [Mangalore,  1876],  and  reprinted  in  Tagore's  "  Hindu  Music  from  \'arious  Sources."  This 
explanation  will  enable  anyone  to  note  the  Sania  Vedic  chant,  as  printed  in  the  Bibliothcca  Indica  edition, 
in  ordinary  notation. 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  IXDIA.  3 

works,  had  been  written  bv  Ahobala,  two  separate  schools  or  systems  of  music 
have  arisen  and  are  now  known  bv  the  names  of  Hindustani  and  Karnatik. 
The  Karnatik  appears  to  have  been  elaborated  as  a  distinct  system  subsequent 
to  the  advent  of  the  Aryans  to  the  South  of  India.  The  two  svstems,  although 
sprung  from  the  same  origin,  have  since  undergone  independently  considerable 
changes,  and  are  now  totally  distinct  from  each  other. 

Of  Hindu  music  in  Southern  India,  since  the  fall  of  the  Hindu  Empire 
of  Vijayanagur,  Tanjore  has  been  the  only  school,  and  from  it  those  of 
Travancore  and  other  places  have  doubtless  been  founded.  Unfortunately, 
there  is  no  record  remaining  of  what  had  been  done  in  former  times  in  Tanjore  ; 
but  within  the  last  few  centuries  the  people  there,  as  in  Europe,  have  been 
aroused  to  a  great  state  of  musical  activity,  and  there  had  sprung  up  a  school 
of  musicians,  ending  with  Tiagyaraj,  destined  to  eftect  great  changes  and 
improvements  in  the  art.  There  are  still  papers  in  the  library  of  the  Tanjore 
Palace  which  show  that  various  attempts  have  been  made  to  improve  the 
existing  notation,  such  as  it  is,  of  Indian  music.  With  the  cession  of  the 
Tanjore  territory  to  the  British,  at  the  close  of  the  last  centurv,  there  came  a 
time  when  arts  and  sciences  were  cultivated  m  peace  ;  under  encouragement  of 
the  noble  and  wealthy,  music,  so  long  neglected,  once  more  sprang  up  with 
vigour  to  strike  out  for  itself  a  new  path  and  to  enjoy  a  fresh  existence.  History 
in  parallel  instances  shows  that  such  has  always  been  the  case  when  arts  long 
neglected  are  revived  and  become  rapidly  popular.  The  earlier  music  of  the 
Sanskrit  period  bears  a  close  resemblance,  as  far  as  we  can  judge,  to  that  of 
the  ancient  Greeks,  going  far  to  prove  that  music  has  been  derived  from  the 
same  Aryan  source,  which  seems  probable,  and  has  been  discussed  freelv  bv 
different  writers. 

The  most  flourishing  age  of  Indian  music  was  during  the  period  of  native 
princes,  a  little  before  the  Mahomedan  conquest ;  and  with  the  advent  of  the 
Mahomedans  its  decline  commenced  ;  indeed,  it  is  wonderful  that  it  survived 
at  all. 

The  Emperor  Aurangzib  abolished  the  court  musicians.  Mr.  Blochmann,  in 
his  translation  of  the  "  Ain-i-akbari,"  -  quotes  a  curious  story  from  the  historian 
Khan  Khan  as  to  what  occurred  when  this  order  was  given.  The  court 
musicians  brought  a  bier  in  front  of  the  window  where  the  Emperor  used  to 
show    himself    daily    to     the    people,    and    wailed    so     loud     as    to     attract 


^"Ain-i-akbari.   or  Institutes   of  the  Emperor    Akbar."      Translated  from   tlie    original    Persian    by 
H.  Blochmann.     Vol.  V. 


4  THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA. 

Auranffzib's  attention.  He  came  to  the  window  and  asked  what  it  meant. 
They  replied  that  melody  was  dead,  and  that  they  were  taking  him  to  the 
graveyard.  The  Emperor  replied,  "  Very  well,  make  the  grave  deep,  so  that 
neither  voice  nor  echo  may  issue  from  it." 

"  The  more  severe  of  the  Mussalman  doctors,"  writes  Captain  Willard, 
one  of  the  few  Englishmen  who  have  studied  the  subject,  "  like  the 
Puritans,  even  now  prohibit  the  use  of  music  as  irreligious  and  profane,  while 
others  are  somewhat  indulgent  and  permit  it  with  certain  restrictions.  A  few, 
convinced  of  its  excellence,  but  dreading  the  censure  of  casuists,  have  prudently 
preferred  silence.  Some  have  considered  it  as  exhilarating  the  spirits,  and 
others,  perhaps  with  more  reason,  declare  it  to  be  an  incentive  to  the  bent  of 
the  inclination,  and,  consequently,  possessing  the  property  of  producing  both 
good  and  evil."" 

Opinions  of  the  kind  just  quoted,  held  by  the  educated  and  influential, 
naturally  enough  have  tended  to  lower  the  standing  of  a  musician,  and  the  art 
itself  has  suffered  in  consequence.  Hence,  though  there  are  many  Mahomedan 
professors  who  are  skilled  executants,  they  are  rarely  men  of  any  social  position 
or  educational  attainments,  and  their  knowledge  of  the  theory  of  their  art  is  but 
slight.  Of  course  to  this  there  are  exceptions — men  such  as  Maula  Bux  of 
Baroda,  or  Bhande  Ali  of  Indore,  might  be  mentioned  who  have  studied  much  and 
who  love  their  art  for  its  own  sake.  But  such  are  few  and  far  between.  Still, 
Mahomedan  music,  taken  as  a  whole,  has  little  to  recommend  itself  even  at  the 
present  day.  The  ideas  professed  bv  Hindus  offer  a  curious  contrast.  For 
music,  from  a  Hindu  standpoint,  is  associated  with  all  that  is  bright  and  sweet 
in  life  ;  its  origin,  ascribed  directly  to  Divine  providence,  causes  it  to  be  regarded 
as  surrounded  by  a  halo  of  sanctity.  Almost  all  the  religious  literature  of  the 
Hindus  breathes  music.  The  ancient  writings  on  Hindu  music  are  known  as 
the  Gandhiirva  Veda.  The  Gita  Govinda,  the  Indian  Song  of  Songs,^  is  music 
itself  from  beginning  to  end.  It  is  difficult  to  imagine  imagery  more  vivid,  or 
to  picture  scenes  more  charming  than  those  in  which  Krishna,  with  his  fair  Gopi 
companions,  on  the  banks  of  the  Yamna,  played  and  sang  those  witching  strains 
that,  like  those  of  Orpheus,  held  all  creation  spellbound.  And  so  music  with 
Hindus  is  a  resource  to  which  they  always  fly  in  joy  or  grief,  for  prayer  or  praise. 

But  still  the  old  idea  that  music  as  a  profession  is  a  degraded  employment, 
fit  only  for  the  stroller  or  the  dancing  girl,  to  some  extent  lingers  on,  so  strong  is 

^  "  A  Treatise  on  the  Music  of  Hindustan."     Capt.  N.  Willaid.     Calcutta,  1834. 

*  Sir  Edwin  .Arnold's  charming  paraphrase  of  this  beautiful  poem  should  be  read  by  all  earnest  students 
of  Oriental  Music. 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA.  5 

the  influence  caused  by  the  long  ordeal  of  Mahomedan  conquest.  And 
Mahomedans  even  now,  though  liking  and  enjoying  music,  often  prefer  to  engage 
singers  and  instrumentalists  rather  than  learn  the  art  themselves  ;  indeed,  it  is 
not  difficult  to  find  Hindus  who  do  the  same,  and  hold  very  similar  prejudices. 

Happily,  in  Southern  India,  ideas  of  this  kind  cannot  be  said  to  prevail 
generally;  proofs  to  the  contrary  may  be  found  in  the  many  living  musicians  who 
are  men  of  education  and  poets  in  their  way.  Music  has  almost  without 
interruption  flourished  there  from  very  remote  ages.^  This  can  be  accounted  for 
by  the  country  having  been  more  under  Hindu  rule  than  other  parts  of  India, 
and  having  suffered  perhaps  less  from  internal  commotions.  From  the  study  of 
Sanskrit,  which  has  been  maintained  amongst  the  musicians  of  the  courts  of 
Mysore,  Tanjore,  and  Travancore,  music  has  not  been  left,  as  in  other  parts, 
almost  entirely  in  the  hands  of  ignorant  dancing  girls  and  their  attendants. 

It  is  a  common  idea  among  the  Hindus  that  the  greatest  musicians  should 
live  like  hermits,  far  removed  from  all  people.  This  seems  to  have  been  the 
practice  of  some  of  the  ancients,  and  as  similar  legends  are  found  in  the  mytho- 
logies of  other  nations,  there  is  reason  to  believe  they  are  based  upon  facts. 

The  higher  branches  of  the  musical  profession  were  formerly  confined  to 
either  Brahmins  (Bhagavatas)  or  to  men  of  very  high  caste.  Music  being  of 
Divine  origin  was  regarded  as  sacred,  and  it  was  considered  impious  for  any  but 
men  of  the  sacred  caste  to  wish  to  acquire  any  knowledge  of  its  principles.  It 
was  and  still  is  called  the  fifth  Veda.  Hence  the  ancient  Brahmins  of  the 
country  would  have  excommunicated  any  of  their  number  who  would  have  so  far 
presumed  as  to  betray  the  sacred  writings  to  any  but  the  elect,  whose  mouths  only 
were  esteemed  sufficiently  holy  to  utter  words  so  sacred.  Indeed,  it  was  the 
knowledge  of  which  they  were  possessed  that  was  the  chief  cause  of  the  reverence 
and  adoration  paid  to  the  Brahmins  of  old,  and  which  gave  them  the  power  and 
influence  they  prized  so  much.  It  was  thus  that  the  ancient  musicians  sang 
their  own  compositions.  In  later  years  music  became  a  distinct  trade,  especially 
under  Mussalman  rulers,  and  passed  into  the  hands  of  the  lower  orders  and  the 
unlearned,  and  to  this  cause  operating  through  a  long  succession  of  years  the 
differences  between  the  Hindustani  and  Karnatik  systems  must  be  in  a  great 
measure  attributed. 

=  Colonel  Meadows  Taylor,  remarkiiif;  upon  this,  says  :  "  Mahomedan  historians  of  the  period  relate 
that  when  the  Deccan  was  invaded  by  Allah-ood-deen  Togluk  in  a.d.  1294,  and  the  conquest  of  Southern 
India  completed  by  the  Mogul  General  Mullikkafoor  several  years  afterwards,  the  profession  of  music  was 
found  to  be  in  a  condition  so  far  in  advance  of  the  North  that  singers,  male  and  female,  and  their  Brahmin 
instructors,  were  taken  with  the  royal  armies  and  settled  in  the  North." — "  Proceedings,  Royal  Irish 
Academy."     \'ol.  IX.,  Part  i. 

B 


6  THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA. 

Religion,  bound  up  as  it  is  with  almost  everything  in  India,  naturally 
exercises  a  most  powerful  influence  upon  all  the  arts,  and  upon  music  especially. 
The  earliest  use  of  music  was  doubtless  for  religious  purposes.  Hindu  music 
can  hardly  be  said  to  have  ever  shaken  itself  free  from  being  in  some  way 
or  other  connected  with  the  religion  of  the  country,  traces  of  which  are 
everywhere  apparent.  Almost  all  the  books,  especially  the  most  ancient,  relating 
to  the  art  contain  constant  references  to  mythological  traditions.  The  language 
used  is  at  times  so  figurative  that  in  many  cases  no  one  but  a  finished  scholar 
can  decipher  its  real  purport.  More  importance  is  paid  to  such  trifling  details  as 
the  proper  attributes — colour,  caste,  or  wives — -of  each  deified  melody  type  (raga) 
or  mode  (that)  than  to  the  arrangements  of  notes  which  compose  it  and  to  the 
practical  directions  for  its  performance.  Each  note,  scale,  raga,  and  measure  is 
canonized,  and  long  chapters  are  devoted  to  the  description  of  the  habitations, 
wives,  raiment,  &c.,  of  these  demigods  and  nymphs.  Much  valuable  information 
can  of  course  be  gleaned  from  these  books,  but  many  of  them  contain  a  good 
deal  of  what  is  quite  useless  to  the  musician,  though  most  interesting  from 
an  antiquarian  point  of  view.  Besides  these  Sanskrit  works,  there  are  few  books 
upon  the  art  existing. 

Most  of  the  vernacular  works  upon  music  have  been  written  by  Pandits, 
who  have  endeavoured  to  adapt  the  principles  contained  in  the  ancient 
works  to  their  own  ideas.  Many  of  these  books  consist  but  of  a  string 
of  quotations — often  contradictory — taken  at  random  from  Sanskrit  works 
of  all  dates,  and  interlarded  with  comments  rather  worse  than  useless, 
unless  it  be  to  mystify  the  reader.  The  writers  of  such  books  rarely  know 
anything  of  the  modern  practice  of  music.  They  still  try  to  fetter  it  by  hard 
and  fast  rules  learnt  from  books.  Rules  of  the  sort,  of  course,  were  made  at  a 
time  when  music  as  an  art  was  comparatively  in  its  infancy,  but  were  never 
intended  to  apply  to  modern  Indian  music.  It  would  be  just  as  absurd  to 
suppose  that  treatises  on  the  music  of  the  eighth  and  ninth  centuries,  where 
progressions  by  chords  of  -Uj  were  not  only  allowed  but  admired,'^  would  apply 
to  the  elaborate  harmony  of  to-day. 

Other  works  in  the  vernaculars  have  been  written  by  practical  musicians  who 
really  do  possess  the  knowledge  they  try  to  impart,  but  will  not  do  so  without 
mixing  it  with  the  absurdities  of  these  so-called  Pandits.     The  fear  of  criticism 


'  Organiim  was  the  name  given  to  this  rude  harmony.  An  instrument  called  Organistrum,  in  use  in 
the  ninth  century,  enabled  these  chords  to  be  played  in  succession.  And  the  organ  itself  appears  to  have 
been  so  constructed,  the  origin  in  fact  ot  the  modern  mixture  stops. — See  Gerbert,  "  De  cantu  et  musica 
sacra,''  St.  Blaise,  1774. 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA.  7 

or  ridicule  is  one  cause  of  this  ;  but  it  is  also  due  to  the  great  dislike  all  native 
musicians  have  to  imparting  instruction  to  any  but  a  favoured  few  ;  indeed,  they 
rather  prefer  that  the  general  public  should  continue  in  ignorance.  This  has, 
naturally  enough,  tended  to  hinder  the  growth  of  a  popular  taste  for  music  until 
quite  within  the  past  few  years.  Societies,  such  as  the  Gayan  Samaj  of  Poona 
and  Madras,  have  recently  sprung  up  and  are  doing  much  to  encourage 
popular  music  ;  with  the  advance  of  general  education  there  has  been  a  growing 
feeling  in  favour  of  teaching  singing  in  the  schools,  and  in  future  years  it  is  to  be 
hoped  that  all  such  idle  prejudices  will  have  been  rooted  out  completely,  and 
that  the  study  of  the  national  music  of  the  country  will  occupy,  as  it  should,  a 
foremost  place  in  all  Indian  schools. 

At  the  present  day,  however,  it  is  absolutely  impossible  for  anyone  to  gather 
an  accurate  knowledge  of  the  principles  of  Hindu  music  without  the  aid  of 
learned  natives,  a  practical  acquaintance  with  the  capabilities  of  their  instruments, 
and  without  consulting  the  best  living  performers — things  that  few  persons  have 
opportunity  or  leisure  to  attempt. 

Of  the  astonishing  power  which  music  is  believed  by  the  ancients  to  have  had, 
not  only  over  men  and  passions,  but  also  over  animals  and  inanimate  things, 
Hindu  legends,  like  those  of  most  ancient  nations,  are  redolent. 

"  I  have  been  assured  by  a  credible  eye-witness,"  says  Sir  William  Jones, 
"  that  two  wild  antelopes  used  often  to  come  to  the  woods  to  the  place  where  a 
mere  savage  beast,  Siraj  ud  Doulah,  entertained  himself  with  concerts,  and  that 
they  listened  to  the  strain  with  an  appearance  of  pleasure  till  the  monster,  in 
whose  soul  there  was  no  music,  shot  one  of  them  to  displav  his  archery ; 
secondly,  a  learned  native  of  this  country  told  me  that  he  had  frequently  seen 
the  most  venomous  and  indignant  snakes  leave  their  holes  upon  hearing  tunes 
on  a  flute,  which  he  supposed  gave  them  peculiar  delight  ;  and  thirdlv,  an 
intelligent  Persian,  who  repeated  his  story  again  and  again  and  permitted  me  to 
write  it  down  from  his  lips,  told  me  that  he  had  more  than  once  been  present 
when  a  celebrated  lutenist,  Mirza  Mahomed,  surnamed  Bulbul,  was  playing  to 
a  large  company  in  a  grove  near  Shiraz,  that  he  distinctly  saw  the  nightingales 
trying  to  vie  with  the  musician — sometimes  warbling  on  the  trees,  sometimes 
fluttering  from  branch  to  branch,  as  if  they  wished  to  approach  the  instrument 
whence  the  melody  proceeded,  and  at  length  dropping  on  the  ground  in  a  kind 
of  timid  ecstasy,  from  which  they  were  soon  raised,  he  assured  me,  by  a  change 
of  the  mode.'" 

'  -'On  the  Musical  Modes  of  the  Hindus." — See  "  Asiatic  Researches."     Vol.  III.     Calcutta,  179.;. 


8  THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA. 

Musicians  in  the  South  of  India  believe  that  powers  such  as  these  are 
associated  with  the  performance  of  the  melody  types  or  ragas  called  Saranga 
and  Kaliani.  Some  legends  of  the  influence  of  certain  ragas  over  nature,  that 
are  handed  down  and  still  believed  by  many,  are  very  curious,  and  remind  us 
of  the  legends  of  Orpheus  and  Apollo. 

Sir  William  Ouseley  relates  how  Mir  Tansen,  a  wonderful  musician  in  the 
time  of  the  Emperor  Akbar,  sang  one  of  the  night  ragas  at  mid-day.  The 
powers  of  his  music  were  such  that  it  instantly  became  night,  and  the  darkness 
extended  in  a  circle  round  the  palace  as  far  as  the  sound  of  his  voice  could 
be  heard. 

The  ragas  Nagavarali  and  Punagatodi  are  believed  to  have  the  power  to 
attract  serpents  and  to  make  them  leave  their  hiding  places  and  come  where 
they  hear  the  music.  There  is  a  story  of  a  certain  Mysore  prince  who  wished 
to  test  the  truth  of  this,  so,  in  company  with  one  of  the  Court  musicians,  he 
ascended  a  neighbouring  hill  known  as  the  abode  of  numerous  poisonous  snakes. 
The  musicians  then  began  to  play  their  strains.  From  all  sides  the  serpents 
came  and  formed  a  ring  around  the  two,  erecting  their  heads  and  swaying  to 
and  fro,  fascinated  by  the  music.  As  soon  as  the  strains  ceased  they  glided 
rapidly  away  without  attempting  to  injure  the  players. 

Colonel  Meadows  Taylor  relates  a  somewhat  similar  circumstance  :  "  One 
very  large  cobra  which  frequented  my  garden  at  Ellichpur,  and  of  which 
ever3'one  was  in  dread,  was  caught  by  some  professional  snake  charmers  in 
my  own  presence  by  means  of  the  '  pungi.'^  It  was  played  at  first  very  softly 
before  the  aloe  bush  underneath  which  the  snake  lived  in  a  hole,  and  gradually 
the  performer  increased  the  tone  and  time  of  his  playing,  and,  as  the  snake 
showed  his  head,  he  retreated  gently  till  it  was  fairly  outside  and  erected  itself 
in  a  defiant  manner.  At  that  moment  another  man  stepped  dexterouslv  behind 
and,  while  the  snake's  attention  was  absorbed  by  the  player  before,  threw  a  heavy 
blanket  upon  it,  seizing  it  by  the  head  under  the  jaws.  The  head  was  then 
pinned  down  by  a  forked  stick,  and  the  fangs  and  teeth  extracted  by  strong 
pincers ;  the  snake  was  then  turned  loose,  completely  cowed  and  exhausted. 
There  was  no  doubt  about  the  identitv  of  the  reptile,  for  a  portion  of  its  tail 
had  been  shot  off  in  an  attempt  to  destrov  it."^ 

It  is  considered  extremely  unlucky  for  anyone  to  impart  or  receive  instruction 
in  the  Varali  raga.     When  an  unwelcome  pupil  presents  himself,  a  master  will 


•  The  native  name  for  the  snake-charmer's  pipe. 

9  II  Proceedings,  Royal  Irish  Academy."     Vol.  IX.,  Part  i. 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  IXDIA.  9 

therefore  decline  to  teach  him  anything  else  but  this  raga,  knowing  that  to  be 
a  sure  way  of  ridding  himself  of  the  intruder. 

The  Megharangini  (or  Megh-mallar,  as  it  is  elsewhere  called),  when  played 
incessantly,  was  said  to  be  productive  of  immediate  rain.  Stories  of  how  skilful 
musicians  have  averted  famine  by  drawing  down  rain  with  the  strains  of  this 
raija  are  common  all  through  the  countrv. 

Of  the  fiery  power  attributed  to  the  raga  Dipaka  there  are  many  legends. 
One  states  that  long  ago  the  sacred  lamps  in  the  shrine  of  some  temple  in 
Mysore,  said  to  have  been  lighted  ages  ago  by  some  Divine  agency,  had  been 
extinguished  through  the  carelessness  of  the  ministering  priest,  who  neglected 
to  supply  them  with  fresh  oil.  The  soothsayers  foretold  some  great  disaster  to 
the  surrounding  country  should  they  be  rekindled  by  mortal  hands.  A  famous 
musician,  hearing  of  this,  offered  his  services  to  the  authorities,  and,  at  the 
request  of  the  Rajah,  hastened  to  the  temple.  Sitting  down  in  the  "  S'ri-Kovil  " 
— the  most  holy  place  of  all— before  the  shrine,  he  played  this  raga,  while  the 
priest  made  solemn  supplication  that  success  might  attend  his  efforts.  Presently 
the  darkness  of  the  shrine  was  broken — for  a  moment  a  faint  glimmering  was 
apparent,  and  the  lamps  became  mysteriously  lighted.  Thus  confidence  was 
restored  to  the  country  round  and  dire  calamities  averted. 

Another  favourite  story  is  that  the  Emperor  Akbar  ordered  Nayuk  Gopal, 
a  celebrated  musician,  to  sing  this  raga.  "  He  endeavoured  to  excuse  himself,  but 
in  vain — the  Emperor  insisted  on  obedience.  He  therefore  requested  permission 
to  go  home  and  bid  farewell  to  his  family  and  friends.  It  was  winter  when  he 
returned,  after  an  absence  of  six  months.  Before  he  began  to  sing  he  placed 
himself  in  the  waters  of  the  Jumna  till  they  reached  his  neck.  As  soon  as  he 
had  performed  a  strain  or  two  the  river  gradually  became  hot — at  length  began 
to  boil — and  the  agonies  of  the  unhappy  musician  were  nearly  insupportable. 
Suspending  for  a  moment  the  melody  thus  cruelly  extorted,  he  sued  for  mercy 
from  the  monarch,  but  sued  in  vain — Akbar  wished  to  prove  more  strongly  the 
power  of  the  raga.  Nayuk  Gopal  renewed  the  fatal  song.  Flames  burst  with 
violence  from  his  body,  and  though  immersed  in  the  waters  of  the  Jumna  he 
was  consumed  to  ashes." '" 

The  raga  Gundakrj'a  is  so  called  from  its  having  been  first  performed  by 
the  god  Hanuman,  who  was  called  upon  to  decide  a  dispute  between  the 
celestial  musicians  Narada    and    Tumburu.     Each    was  jealous    of  the  other's 


1°  ".\n  Essay  on  the  Music  of  Hindustan,"  by  Sir  W.  Ouseley.— See  "Oriental  Collections,  illustrating 
the  History,  Antiquities,  and  Literature,  &c.,  of  Asia."     London,  1797-1800.     Vol.  L 

C 


10  THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  IXDIA. 

powers,  and  claimed  to  be  most  skilled.  They  appealed  to  Hanuman  to  settle 
their  differences  and  award  the  palm  to  the  best  performer.  He  heard  them 
both  and  was  unable  to  decide,  so  taking  the  vina  himself,  he  sat  down,  and 
resting  the  instrument  against  the  rock,  began  to  play.  So  ravishing  was  the 
strain  that  the  very  rock  melted  into  tears,  and  the  vina,  dropping  from  the 
hands  of  the  god,  sank  into  the  lake  thus  formed.  The  music  ceasing,  the  rock 
once  more  assumed  its  natural  form.  Then  the  god,  turning  to  the  two  who 
stood  by  amazed,  said  :  "  The  palm  is  his  who  plays  this  strain."  Each  essayed 
the  feat,  but  failed.  Hanuman  then  decided  that  the  skill  of  both  was  equal,  and 
thus  settled  their  differences  amicably.  This  raga,  then  played  for  the  first  time, 
was  called  '•  Gundakrj'a,"  or  "  that  which  melts  rocks." 

Hanuman  after  this  became  exceedingly  proud  of  his  musical  abilities,  and 
used  to  boast  of  his  skill  continually.  The  demigod  Rama,  hearing  of  this,  devised 
a  plan  to  humble  the  god,  and  accomplished  it  in  the  following  manner  : — There 
lived  in  a  forest  near  Ayodhya  (Rama's  capital)  a  certain  Rishi  or  bard,  who  had 
devoted  himself  to  music  all  his  life  with  such  success  that  he  had  caused  the 
Septasvaras,  or  seven  notes,  to  become  embodied  in  the  form  of  seven 
daughters.  To  this  forest  Rama  took  Hanuman  as  if  upon  a  hunting 
excursion,  and  halting  within  hearing  of  the  Rishi's  dwelling,  whose  existence 
was  unknown  to  the  other,  asked  for  some  music.  Hanuman  accordingly  took 
up  his  vina  and  began  to  accompany  himself.  Constant  practice  and  self- 
confidence  had  made  him  careless,  and  it  chanced  that  as  the  seven  nymphs 
passed  on  their  way  to  draw  water  for  their  father's  house  he  sang  a  note  falsely. 
Xo  sooner  had  the  nymph  to  whom  this  note  belonged  heard  it  than  she 
swooned  and  died.  Her  sisters  made  piteous  lamentations,  and  ran  to  tell  their 
father.  The  Rishi  came,  and  seeing  Hanuman  engrossed  in  his  art  and  still 
singing,  at  once  guessed  the  cause  of  his  daughter's  death.  After  listening  for 
a  while  he  heard  the  same  note  sung  constantly  out  of  tune.  Then  going  up 
to  the  god  he  upbraided  his  want  of  care,  and  taking  the  vina  from  him  played 
the  raga  truly,  when  the  dead  nymph  revived  and  merrily  joined  her  sisters. 

The  raga  Kadara  is  seldom  heard,  there  being  a  superstition  that  trouble  of 
various  kinds  always  follows  in  the  footsteps  of  those  who  sing  this  strain. 

It  is  said  that  those  who  play  the  raga  Ahiri  shall  go  without  food  for 
the  rest  of  the  day.  Many  have  essayed  to  do  so,  but  have  for  some  unaccount- 
able reason  always  failed.  Years  ago— such  is  the  story— there  was  a  musician 
who  was  determined  to  discover  whether  or  not  there  was  any  truth  in  the  power 
attributed  to  this  raga.  After  packing  some  food  in  a  basket,  he  took  his 
instrument  and  set  out  upon  his  travels.    Very  soon  he  came  to  a  large  tank,  with 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  IXDIA.  ii 

a  cool  and  shady  ,£jrove  of  bamboos  by  its  side  ;  there  he  thought  he  would  rest 
during  the  heat  of  the  day.  Accordingly  he  hung  up  his  basket  on  one  of  the 
overhanging  bamboos  and  began  to  sing.  When  he  had  sung  for  some  hours  he 
becan  to  feel  hungrv,  and  so  looked  about  for  a  place  to  cook  his  mid-dav  meal ; 
but  to  his  great  chagrin  he  found  that  as  the  sun  rose  higher  the  bamboo  upon 
which  his  basket  was  hung  had  bent  upwards  out  of  his  reach.  This  solution  of 
his  difficulty  did  not  however  satisfy  him,  as  he  thought  it  due  to  his  own  neglect 
rather  than  to  Divine  interference.  Continuing  his  journey,  in  the  evening  he 
arrived  at  a  large  town,  the  Rajah  of  which  had  built  a  "  Chattram,"  or  rest  house, 
for  the  free  accommodation  of  all  poor  travellers.  The  musician  was  hospitably 
received  there,  and  food  was  laid  before  him.  The  Rani  herself  used  to  serve  the 
guests  with  ghi,  or  clarified  butter,  before  they  commenced  to  eat.  As  she  served 
the  musician  he  was  unable  to  restrain  his  glee,  and  exclaimed,  ''  At  last  have  I 
overcome  thee,  Ahiri !  "  Unfortunately  for  him,  the  name  of  the  Rani  happened  to 
be  Ahiri,  and  she  naturally  fancied  that  he  intended  some  impertinence.  He  was 
promptly  arrested  and  condemned  to  be  impaled.  As  he  was  led  to  execution  he 
implored  the  Rajah  to  grant  him  a  hearing;  his  request  was  complied  with,  and  he 
told  the  whole  storv.  The  Rajah  then  commanded  that  he  should  be  set  at  liberty, 
and  dismissed  him  with  a  present,  bidding  him  at  the  same  time  refrain  from 
tempting  the  gods  farther,  as  it  had  already  so  nearly  cost  him  his  life. 

Manv  other  such  legends  may  be  found  in  the  works  of  poets  and  writers 
upon  religious  subjects,  and  others  have  been  handed  down  orally  by  musicians 
and  would  well  merit  collection. 

The  ancient  theory  of  Indian  music  has  been  comparatively  little  studied, 
except  by  learned  Pandits,  many  really  good  performers  being  ignorant  of  anything 
but  the  modern  custom.  This  is  probably  because  many  of  the  ancient  treatises 
that  remain  were  purposely  worded  so  that  only  Brahmins  skilled  in  sacred  lore 
could  decipher  their  meaning.  And  now  the  improvements  and  alterations 
introduced  from  time  to  time  by  musicians  of  the  day  have  come  to  be  looked 
upon  as  authentic,  a  fact  that  in  some  degree  tends  to  account  for  the  differences 
that  apparently  exist  between  the  ancient  and  modern  systems. 

The  theoretical  part  of  Hindu  music  when  compared  to  that  of  Europe  is 
naturally  very  simple,  as  it  treats  entirely  of  simple  melody  and  measure.  The 
most  noticeable  points  are  the  extraordinary  importance  which  the  Hindus, 
like  all  the  ancient  nations,  have  from  the  first  attached  to  mode — the  trans- 
position of  the  natural  scales  ;  the  peculiar  rhythmical  measures,  frequently 
irregular ;  the  noisy  methods  of  beating  time  ;  and  the  almost  entire  absence  of 
harmonv.     The  onlv  harmonv,  if  it   can  be  called  so,  is  a  continuation   as  a 


12  THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERX  IXDIA. 

pedal  of  the  tonic  or  dominant,  as  was  done  in  old  "pastorales,"  and  which  is 
still  found  in  Scotch  or  Irish  bagpipe  music.  The  use  of  all  kinds  of  grace  is 
common.  The  rules  laid  down  for  the  composition  of  pieces  in  what  are  called 
ragas  are  curious,  and  should  be  noticed  ;  certain  progressions  of  melody 
being  forbidden,  while  others  are  lawful.  Whether  the  ancient  Greeks  made 
any  employment  of  raga  is  not  known,  but  it  seems  extremely  probable,  since 
they  attributed  the  greater  part  of  their  science  of  music  to  India,"  and  that  most 
Eastern  nations  still  emplo}'  either  raga  or  its  equiyalent.^- 

Roman  music  was  brought  to  perfection  by  Greek  musicians  and  their  pupils, 
and  Greek  modes  were  introduced  by  them.  The  early  ecclesiastical  modes 
appear  to  haye  been  deriyed  from  those  of  the  Greeks.  Many  of  the  older 
contrapuntal  rules  as  to  the  employment  of  interyals  had  their  origin  in  the 
imperfect  scales  in  which  the  ecclesiastical  modes  were  composed.  All  this 
goes  far  to  show  the  possibility  of  the  elaborate  counterpoint  of  the  present  day 
haying  had  its  prototype  in  the  old  Sanskrit  raga  system. 

Of  the  two  systems  practised  in  Southern  India  at  the  present  time,  the 
Hindustani  is  somewhat  akin  to  that  of  Northern  India  and  Bengal.  It  is 
practised  mostly  by  Mussalman  musicians,  while  the  Karnatik  is  confined  more 
to  those  of  the  Southern  races.  The  latter,  which  may  be  called  the  national 
music  of  the  South,  is  far  more  scientific  and  refined  than  the  Hindustani,  and 
its  professors  are,  as  a  rule,  men  of  much  better  education  ;  a  fact  that  is  not 
without  influence  upon  their  music,  and  seems  apparent  in  all  their  melodies, 
but  particularly  in  the  renderings  they  give  of  them. 

"  Strabo  X.  iii. 

'-The  Greek  practice  of  Melopceia  appears  very  similar  to  tliat  of  raf;a. —  I'idc  Mr.  Chappell's 
'•  History  of  Music."     London,  1874.     See  also  Plutarch,  T^ipi  MovaiKi'n.     Cap.  xviii.,  xix. 


CHAPTKR     II. 

Preservation  of  music  in  Southern  India— Modern  Karnatik  system  believed  to  be  closely  akin 
to  the  ancient— Sanskrit  treatises— Definition  of  s'ruti— System  of  twenty-two— Formation 
of  scales  (grama)— Relation  of  major  and  minor  modes— Deviation  of  intervals  of  system 
of  twenty-two  from  those  of  just  intonation — Comparison  of  ancient  scale  with  European 
diatonic— Results  of  recent  observation — System  of  twelve  hinted  at  in  Sanskrit — Murchanas 
— Raga — How  differing  from  mode — Tala  or  rhythm— Time,  how  estimated — Ancient  varieties 
of  rhythm — Ancient  notation. 

THE  theory,  modes,  and  notation  in  present  use  throughout  the  whole  of 
India  are  derived  from  that  taught  originally  by  the  earlier  Sanskrit 
musicians  ;  but  owing  to  the  South  of  India  having  been  less  disturbed 
by  internal  commotions,  and  having  been  more  subject  to  Hindu  rule  than  either 
the  Deccan  or  Northern  provinces,  the  science  of  music  would  seem  to  have  been 
maintained  and  cultivated  long  after  the  original  art  had  been  lost  in  the  North. 

Hence  Southern  Indian  music,  or,  as  it  is  more  usually  called,  Karnatik, 
bears,  as  far  as  we  can  judge,  a  very  close  resemblance  to  what  the  Sanskrit 
must  have  been,  and  in  many  cases  we  can  clearly  trace  the  development  and 
refinements  introduced  from  time  to  time  upon  the  original  ragas. 

One  of  the  principal  Sanskrit  works  upon  the  theory  of  music  is  the  Sangita 
Ratnakera,  or  "Ocean  of  IMusic,"  written  by  Sarnga  Deva  at  a  very  early  date, 
probably  about  a.d.  200.  This  book,  with  the  exception  of  Bharata  S'astra, 
noticed  hereafter,  is  considered  to  be  the  oldest  reliable  musical  work  extant, 
and  is  quoted  in  many  subsequent  treatises.  The  Sangita  Damodara  is  also 
a  well  known  and  very  ancient  work. 

Later  than  this  we  have  the  Sangita  Narayana,  by  Nariiyanadeva,  in  which 
the  Damodara  is  frequently  quoted. 

There     are    also    the    Raganava,^    or    "Sea    of    Passions";     the    Sangita 


1  This  work,  together  with  the  Sabha  Vinoda  and  Raga  Darpaiia.  is  quoted  b}-  Mir^a  Khan,  but  there 
seems  to  be  no  copy  known  at  present. 


,4  THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHER X  INDIA. 

Ratnavali;  the  Sabha  Vinoda,-  or  "Delight  of  AssembHes";  and  the  Sangita 
Darpana,  or  "  Mirror  of  Music,"  written  by  Damodara  Misra — all  works  of 
more  or  less  value  in  the  elucidation  of  the  music  of  the  ancients. 

The  Raga  Vivodha,  or  "  Doctrine  of  Musical  Modes,"  by  Somanath,  or 
Soma  Raj,  is  one  of  the  most  valuable  of  the  ancient  treatises  that  have  been 
handed  down  to  us.  This  book  was  evidently  written  at  a  much  later  date  than 
the  Ratnakera,  which  it  quotes  from  several  times  ;  but  it  is  doubtless  a  very 
ancient  composition.  The  first,  third,  and  fourth  chapters  explain  the  doctrine 
of  musical  sounds — their  division  and  succession,  the  variation  of  scales  by 
temperament,  and  the  enumeration  of  modes.  The  second  chapter  contains  a 
minute  description  of  different  vinas,  with  rules  for  playing  upon  them.^  The 
last  chapter  contains  strains  noted  in  letters.  The  whole  work  is  singularly  clear 
from  mythological  references. 

The  Persian  waiter,  Mirza  Khan,  under  the  patronage  of  Aazim  Shah, 
wrote  a  work  entitled  "  Tohfuht-ul-Hind,"  which  contains  a  chapter  upon  music, 
the  information  for  which  was  extracted,  with  the  assistance  of  Pandits,  from 
various  Sanskrit  works.  Mirza  Khan  describes  four  principal  systems  of  music — 
viz.,  those  of  Isvara  ;  of  Bharata  ;  of  Hanuman,  or  Pavan  ;  and  of  Callanath. 
All  four  are  mentioned  also  in  the  Raga  Vivodha. 

The  main  principles  contained  in  most  of  these  ancient  works  are  very  similar. 
The  differences  consist  mostly  in  the  names  and  the  constitution  of  the  different 
modes  and  ragas. 

Written  at  a  still  later  date  than  any  of  the  former,  to  judge  by  all  appearances, 
is  the  Sangita  Parijata,^  or  "  Flower  of  Music,"  by  the  Pandit  Ahobala. 

The  system  of  music  described  in  the  Parijata  differs  from  that  of  the 
Ratnakera,  in  that  it  admits  of  greater  intervals  than  a  tone  or  four  s'rutis, 
and  of  less  intervals  than  a  semitone  or  two  s'rutis,  being,  therefore,  capable  of 
forming  numerous  enharmonic  scales.  All  the  notes,  except  the  first  and  fifth, 
are  occasionally  shifted  above  or  below,  and  the  fourth  is  never  omitted  in  the 
scale.'' 

This  work  contains  the  key  to  the  present  Karnatik  system,  and  many  of  the 
ragas  contained  in  it  are  practically  the  same  as  those  now  in  use  in  Southern  India. 

"  This  work  is  mentioned  by  Sir  William  Jones.  As  far  as  I  have  been  able  to  ascertain,  there  is  at 
present  no  known  copy  in  existence,  unless,  indeed,  this  work  is  identical  with  one  called  Sangita  Vinoda, 
a  copy  of  which  is  in  the  librarj-  of  H.H.  the  Maharajah  of  Bikanir. 

'  Sir  W.  Jones. 

'  According  to  the  Mahabharata,  Parijata  is  the  name  of  the  celestial  tree  in  Indraloka. 

■''  See  Preface  to  edition  of  Sangita  Parijata,  edited  by  Kalivara  Vedantabagisa.  Calcutta,  1S79.  See 
also  the  list  of  modern  Karnatik  scales  given  upon  pages  32 — 35. 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA. 


15 


The  ancients  divided  their  octave  into  twenty-two  intervals,  called  s'rutis. 

The  names  of  these  s'rutis  are  differently  given  by  the  various  authors,  but 
the  following  list,  taken  from  the  Sangita  Ratnakera,  is  the  one  which,  at  the 
present  day,  is  best  known  :  — 


Shadja 
-     or 
Sa. 

]  Rishaba 

or 
)      Ri. 
I  Gandhara 
or  Ga. 


10.  Vajrika 

1 1 .  Prasarini 

12.  Priti 

13.  Majani 

14.  Kshiti 

15.  Rakta 

16.  Sandipa 

17.  Alapi 


Madhyama 

or 

Ma. 

Panchama 
or 
Pa. 


18.   Madanti 
ig.   Rohini 

20.  Ramya 

21.  Vugra 

22.  Kshobini 


Dhaivata 


or 
I     Dha. 
Nishada 
or  Ni." 


1.  Tivra 

2.  Kumadvati 

3.  Aland a 

4.  Chandovati 

5.  Dayavati 

6.  Ranjani 

7.  Raktika 

8.  Rudri 
g.  Krodha 

The  exact  definition  of  what  constituted  a  s'ruti  is  difficult  to  determine,  but 
it  is  thus  vaguely  given  by  the  Sangita  Ratnavali : — "A  s'ruti  is  formed  by  the 
smallest  intervals  of  sound,  and  is  perceivable  by  the  ear  ;  it  is  of  twenty- 
two  kinds"  {i.e.,  as  shown  above);  also  "every  distinct  audible  sound  is  a  s'ruti  ; 
it  is  a  s'ruti  because  it  is  to  be  heard  by  the  ear." 

The  scales  are  formed  from  the  s'rutis,  four  s'rutis  being  allotted  to 
a  major  tone,  three  to  a  minor  (which  would  appear  to  have  been  of  a  pitch 
somewhat  flatter  than  the  tone  and  sharper  than  the  semitone ;  doubts, 
however,  exist  as  to  whether  the  intervals  of  the  s'rutis  were  equal  or  not), 
and  two  to  a  semitone. 

The  s'rutis  are  differently  arranged  in  gramas,  or  scales,  three  in  number — 
viz.,  Shadja-grama,  Madhyama-grama,  and  Gandhara-grama. 

The  literal  meaning  of  grama  signifies  "a  stopping  place"  or  "village." 
Hence  the  word  came  to  be  used  for  scale,  since  the  s'rutis  are  arranged  in  a 
scale  as  mankind  in  villages. 

The  Shadja-grama  consists  of  two  tetrachords  similar  to  each  other,  and 
separated  by  a  major  tone — nearly  our  diatonic  major  scale. 

The  Madhyama-grama  is  formed  from  the  preceding  by  a  transposition  of  the 
major  tone,  between  Pa  and  Dha,  and  of  a  minor  tone  between  Dha  and  Ni — 
precisely  our  diatonic  major  scale. 


'  "  In  the  arrangement  of  the  s'rutis,  modern  usage  is  diametrical!}-  opposite  to  the  classical  one  :  the 
latter  placing  them  before  the  note  to  which  they  respectivel}'  belong,  while  the  former  gives  their  position 
after  the  notes.  It  is  difficult  to  determine  when  or  by  whom  the  alteration  was  effected.  The  arrangement 
of  the  frets  of  the  vina  and  other  stringed  instruments  accords  with  the  modern  acceptation  of  the 
principle.  According  to  the  rule  laid  down  in  the  classical  treatises,  the  disposition  of  the  notes  is  reversed 
in  the  case  of  Daravi  (lit.,  wooden — i.e.,  stringed)  instruments,  and  out  of  this  reversed  arrangement, 
perhaps,  the  modern  theory  about  the  arrangement  of  the  position  of  the  s'rutis  has  been  worked." — "  The 
Musical  Scales  of  the  Hindus."     S.  M.  Tagore.     Calcutta,  1884. 


i6 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA. 


Hence  the  two  gramas  stand  in  the  following  relation 


Sa 


Ri 


Ga       Ma 


Pa 


Dha 


Ni 


Sa 


Shadja-grama 


Madhyama-grama 


3  I  4 


3l4 


Sa 


Ri 


I    |2 


All 
2  I  3 


Pa 


3l4 


I|2 


Sa 


Dha  Ni 

Its  construction  is  not  clearly 


Ga       Ma 

The  third  grama  is  called  the  Gandhara-grama 
laid  down,  and  if  it  ever  existed  in  practice  its  use  has  long  been  discontinued. 
According  to  the  Damodara  its  construction  is  only  known  in  Indraloka,  the 
mythical  heaven  of  the  god  Indra,  thus  dispensing  with  the  difficulty  conveniently. 

The  Sangita  Parijata  mentions  that  it  merely  differs  from  the  other  gramas 
in  that  the  note  Ni  will  have  four  s'rutis,  and  that  Sa  will  consequently  have 
only  three." 

The  Sangita  Darpana  points  out  three  changes  in  the  scales  in  forming 
the  Gandhara-grama  from  the  Madhyama-grama. 

Upon  this  Mr.  Paterson"  makes  the  following  remarks  : — 
ist.  Gandiiara  takes  one  s'ruti  from  Rishaba  and  becomes  of  three— /.t'.,  by  rendering  the  note 
Ga   flat,  the  interval  between   Ri  and  Ga  is   reduced   a  semitone,  and  that  between  Ga  and  Ma 
becomes  a  minor  tone. 

and.  Panchama  loses  one  s'ruti  to  Gandhara.  I  am  at  a  loss  to  know  how  this  can  take 
place.  I  rather  suspect  an  error  in  the  te.xt,  and  would  propose  to  substitute  Dha,  the  sixth  note, 
instead  of  Gandhara.  The  three  s'rutis  of  Panchama  make  the  interval  between  the  fifth  and  sixth; 
by  losing  one,  it  is  reduced  to  a  semitone  ;  but  it  cannot  lose  this  one  to  Gandhara,  which  is  the 
third  note.  There  are  but  two  methods  of  reducing  this  interval  to  a  semitone — one  by  raising 
the  fifth  note,  the  other  by  rendering  the  sixth  flat.  But  here  the  interval  between  the  fourth  and 
fifth  remains  unaltered.  It  must  in  this  case  be  done  by  making  Dha,  the  sixth  note,  flat ;  or,  in 
the  language  of  Hindu  music,  by  giving  one  of  Panchama's  s'rutis  to  Dhaivata. 

3rd.  Suddhasvara  gives  one  s'ruti  to  Nishada.  Here  Nishada  is  rendered  one  s'ruti  flat. 
Suddhasvara  is  not  the  name  of  a  note,  but  is  explained  to  me  to  be  a  term  applied  to  a  note 
possessing  its  full  complement  of  s'rutis.  It  may,  therefore,  in  this  case  be  applied  to  Dhaivata; 
for  although  it  may  give  one  s'ruti  to  Nishada,  yet  it  gains  one  from  Panchama,  and  still  retains 
four  complete  s'rutis.  If  these  conjectures  are  admitted,  and  we  compare  it  with  the  Madhyama- 
grama,  to  which  these  changes  evidently  refer,  it  will  stand  thus — 


• 

I 

3 

• 

> 

- 

■ 

3 

'  The  disposition  of  the  s'rutis  in  this  case  would  be  preceding  their  respective  notes,  otherwise  Sa  would 
be  shifted  one  s'ruti,  and  this  is  not  so,  as  has  been  already  reinarUedwhen  mentioning  the  Parijata  first. 
»  "  On  the  Gramas  or  Musical  Scales  of  the  Hindus." — "  Asiatic  Researches."  Vol.  IX.  Calcutta,  1S07. 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA. 


17 


That  the  Hindus  probably  by  this  division  of  the  octave  meant  nothing  more  than  what  I 
have  before  supposed  may  appear  from  the  following  table,  in  which  the  intervals  between  each 
note  and  the  note  above  it  are  taken  from  Mr.  Malcolm's  series  of  the  octave  in  the  two  modes  (as 
given  by  Mr.  Chambers  under  the  article  "  Scale  ").  This  I  have  done  in  order  to  compare  these 
intervals  with  the  s'ruti  of  the  Hindus,  and  to  show  the  differences — 


Malcolm's  Series  of  the  Octave. 
843238^^ 
9         5        4         3         5        '5        2 
Major  mode,  or  Madhyama-grama. 


Malcolm's  Series  of  the  Octave. 
853255^ 

9643892 

Minor  mode,  or  Gandhara-grama. 


H 
nr 

n 

•-I 

n 

3 

n 
n 

a- 

ft 

n 

3 

Proportion    of    the    intervals 

between   each    note   and   the 

note  above  it. 

What  they  ought  to  be  if  the 

scale  was  divided  into  22  parts, 

or  the  whole  string  into  44. 

What  they  are  as  stated  by 
the  Hindus. 

H 

3- 
n 
a. 

? 

1 
CD 

n 
n 
0- 

n 

5 

3 

Proportion    of    the    intervals 

between   each    note   and    the 

note  above  it. 

What  they  ought  to  be  if  the 

scale  was  divided  into  22  parts, 

or  the  whole  string  into  44. 

3* 
U 

tr 

^- 

D 

a.  u 
c  « 

CI. 

i&l 

S 

4l 

4 

i&i 

1 

4f 

4 

l&t 

4 

3H 

3 

i&# 

1 

2| 

2 

*&i 

■h 

2?- 

2 

t&i 

tV 

3f 

3 

l&§ 

I 

T5 

3f 

4 

f&t 

tV 

3§ 

4 

§&f 

tV 

2if 

3 

f&f 

1 

24 

i# 

2 

l&A 

5 
T5 

2H 

4 

a  s.  5 

A 

3^ 

4 

^&i 

^v 

ItV 

2 

.5    ff,    1 

tV 

2| 

3 

In  a  paper  read  to  the  Royal  Society,^  in  1877,  upon  the  Hindu  division  of 
the  octave,  Mr.  Bosanquet  shows  that  the  fifths  and  thirds  produced  by  dividing 
the  octave  into  twenty-two  equal  intervals  do  not  deviate  very  widely  from  the 
e.xact  intervals  which  are  the  foundation  of  the  diatonic  scale,  the  fifth  being  only 


'  "  Proceedings  of  Royal  Society."     Vol.  XXVI.,  page  372. 


i8 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA. 


•07  or  very  nearly  ^  of  a  comma^'^  sharp,  and  the  major  third  "045  or  nearly  },  of  a 
comma  flat. 

He  also  gives  the  following  table  in  order  to  show  the  deviation  of  the  other 
intervals  of  the  scale  from  those  of  just  intonation: — 

SYSTEM  OF  TWENTY-TWO. 


Interval. 

Difference  of 

Units. 

Interval. 

Exact 
Interval. 

Fourth     

Fifth  and  Octave 

9 

4-9091 

4-9805 

Major  Tone    ... 

Fourth  and  Fifth 

4 

2-i8i8 

2-0391 

Minor  Tone    ... 

Third  and  Major  Tone 

3 

1-6363 

1-8240 

Major  Semitone 

Third  and  Fourth 

2 

1-0909 

1-1174 

Minor  Third   ... 

Fifth  and  Third 

6 

3-2727 

3-1564 

Minor  Semitone 

Major  Tone  and 
Minor  Third 

I 

•5454 

-7067 

"In  regarding  these  numbers,"  he  observes,  "we  must  remember  that  as  far  as  European 
musicians  are  concerned,  the  deviation  from  equal  temperament  is  the  most  important  thing  in  a 
melodic  point  of  view. 

"  Intervals  which  deviate  widely  from  equal  temperament  sound  out  of  tune  to  the  European 
ear,  and  as  harmony  is  not  employed,  the  justification  which  derivation  from  perfect  concords  is 
felt  to  give  in  harmony  has  no  opportunity  of  asserting  itself." 

This  calculation  of  Mr.  Bosanquet's  was  made  on  the  assumption 
that  all  the  s'rutis  were  equal.  That  such  could  not  have  been  in  realit}' 
the  case,  or  that  the  employment  of  the  system  of  twenty-two  never  entered 
practically  into  Indian  music,  would  seem  to  be  from  all  evidence  almost 
certain." 

This  will  be  more  evident  by  a  reference  to  the  following  comparative 
diagram  of  the  primitive  Sanskrit  Shadja-grama  and  the  European  diatonic 
scale,   as  drawn   for  the  Rajah  Sir  S.    M.  Tagore,  and  published  in  his  work 


"  Comma  of  |^  =  -21506. 

"  See  also  "The  Twenty-two  Musical  S'rutis  of  the  Hindus."     S.  M.  Tagore.     Calcutta,  18S6. 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA. 


19 


upon  the  "  Musical  Scales  of  the  Hindus,"  from   data  supplied  by  the   ancient 
treatises,  the  measurements  being  those  of  a  string  go  inches  long  : — 


PRIMITIVE  SANSKRIT   SHADJAGRAMA. 


90  inches. 


20 

16 

9 

15 

13* 

I  of 

6 

20 

16 

9 

15                 12 

12 

fa 

EUROPEAN    DIATONIC    SCALE. 

The  only  difference,  it  will  be  seen,  is  in  the  fact  that  the  sixth  is  in  the 
European  diatonic  scale  flatter  than  in  the  ancient  one  ;  so  that  the  ancient 
Sanskrit  sixth  had  apparently  the  same  ratio,  theoretically,  as  the  Pythagorean 
sixth  of  the  Greeks. 

This  seems  probable,  for  the  historian  Strabo  says  that  among  the  Greeks 
those  who  regard  all  Asia  as  far  as  India  as  a  country  sacred  to  Dionysius, 
"  attribute  to  that  country  the  invention  of  nearly  all  the  science  of  music."  ^^ 

But  as  concerns  string  measurements  by  the  monochord,  the  late  Mr.  A.  J. 
Ellis,  F.R.S.,  in  a  most  exhaustive  paper  read  before  the  Society  of  Arts, '^notices 
the  above  table  of  the  Rajah's  and  remarks  :  "  These  divisions  are  made 
on  the  supposition  that  the  vibrations  are  inversely  as  the  length  of  the 
strings,  which  all  my  observations  and  experiments  show  is  not  the  case  on 
any  practical  instrument." 

Mr.  T.  M.  Venkatas'esha  S'astri,  a  well-known  authority  upon  theoretical 
music  in  Southern  India,  in  a  letter  to  the  author,  says  that  the  word  "  s'ruti  " 
appears  to  have  undergone  a  great  change  in  its  meaning,  and  he  inclines  to  the 
belief — but  on  what  grounds  it  is  difficult  to  say— that  the  suddha  septa  svaras, 
as  understood  at  present  in  Southern  India,  meaning,  as  already  explained, 
the  seven  notes  of  the  scale  containing  their  full  number  of  s'rutis,  are  as 
follows  : — 


This  tends  to  account  in  some    measure  for  the  preference  given  to  the  scale 
Mayamalavagaula,  described  in  another  chapter. 

Mr.  A.  J.   Ellis  has  given   a  table  in   the    above-mentioned  paper  ^^  of  the 


'-  Strabo,  book  X.,  iii. 

i»On  "The  Musical  Scales  of  Various  Nations,"  by  A.  J.  Ellis,  F.R.S.,  F.S.A..  &c.— See  "Journal  of 
Society  of  Arts."     27th  March,  1885,  No.  1,688,  Vol.  XXXIII. 
'*  See  previous  note. 


20  THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA. 

comparative    differences    in    the    chromatic    scales    formed    hy    the    di\ision    of 

a    string    into    parts,  according   to    both    the    ancient    directions    and    to   what 

the    Rajah    Sir    S.    M.   Tagore    states '°  to    be  the   modern    Bengali   use.     The 

figures  are  in  cents— that  is  to  say,  the  hundredth  parts  of  an  equal  semitone. 

He  says  :  — 

I  give  the  number  of  degrees  (s'rutis)  and  the  calculation  of  their  value  on  both  plans,  old  and  new, 
with  the  names  of  the  nineteen  Indian  notes,  assuming  that  the  pitch  varies  inversely-  as  the  length  of 
the  string,  as  shown  by  the  position  of  F  and  the  octave,  and  that  any  errors  thus  arising  have  been 
corrected  by  ear. 

INDIAN  CHROMATIC  SCALES. 


Degrees 

I 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

II 

Notes 

C 

D'77 

Db 

D 

Eb? 

E? 

E 

E- 

F 

— 

Old 

o 

51 

102 

153 

204 

2645 

3251 

386 

442 

498 

549 

New 

o 

•19 

99 

151 

204 

259 

316 

374 

435 

498 

543 

Degrees 

12 

13 

H 

15 

i6 

17 

18 

19 

20 

21 

22 

Notes 

F5 

nt 

G 

A7\? 

A> 

A 

Br>t7 

B? 

B 

BJ 

Old 

600 

651 

702 

753 

804 

855 

906 

9663 

10271 

1088 

1 144 

New 

5«9 

637 

685 

736 

7S7 

841 

S96 

952 

lOII 

1070 

JI35 

The  only  values  agreeing  in  each  are  C,  D,  F,  while  new  E?  is  the  just  minor  third — a  mere 
accident.  The  nine  degrees  from  C  to  F  vary  from  49  to  63  cents,  and  then  there  is  a  sudden 
break,  after  which  the  thirteen  degrees  from  F  to  the  octave  vary  from  45  to  65  cents.  This  is 
the  first  intelligible  presentment  of  the  Indian  scale  which  I  have  been  able  to  effect.  It  will  be  seen 
that  C,  D^,  D,  E?,  E,  F,  FJ,  G,  A\>,  A,  Bb,  B  are  represented  pretty  well  by  our  equally  tempered 
notes;  but  that  the  seven  intermediate  notes— Db>,  Ebb,  E^,  r^:;:,  A^b,  Bbb,  BJ— could  only  be 
tempered  in  the  quarter-tone  system  used  in  Syria.  Hence  in  the  usual  transcription  these  seven 
notes  are  identified  with  some  of  the  others.  .  .  .  These  comparisons  necessarily  injure 
the  original  character  of  the  music  and  give  it  a  harmonisable  appearance  which  is  entirely  foreign 
to  Indian  music. 

Mr.  Ellis  also  examined  a  vina  from  Southern  India,  now  in  the  South 
Kensington  Museum,  with  the  following  result  : — 

Cents        o        97        195        312        397        515        596        692        782        8S3        997       1092         1207 
Notes       G      At?        A  Bb  B  c  d?  d  ebb         e  f  f;  g 

He  remarks  :  "  This  is  very  close  indeed  to  our  scale  of  twelve  semitones, 
and  may  be  taken  for  it";  thus  proving  scientifically  what  has  been  found  by 
e.xperiment  to  be  invariably  the  case  with  vinas  used  b}'  Karnatik  musicians 
{vide  page  31 — footnote). 

In  a  communication  received  from  Mr.  A.  J.  Hipkins,  it  is  not  acknowledged 
that  there  is  any  connection  between  the  old  Indian  gramas  of  22  quarter-tones, 
or  s'rutis,  and  the  modern  European  scales,  which,  with  major  and  minor  tones 


'^  "The  Musical  Scales  of  the  Hindus."     Calcutta,  1SS4. 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA. 


and  semitones,  are  founded  upon  the  knowledge  and  practice  of  harmony. 
The  Indian  scale  intervals  ought  to  be  understood  as  they  are  explained  by 
native  writers — namely,  as  a  tone,'*^  a  i^-tone,  and  a  J-tone,  composed  of  4,  3, 
and  2  s'rutis  respectively.  With  this  conception  of  intervals,  and  it  must 
be  borne  in  mind  the  ^-tone  is  still  approved  of  in  the  East,  a  division  of 
the  octave  into  24  equal  quarter-tones  becomes  impossible.  For  as  it  was 
essential  to  secure  an  approximately  perfect  fourth  with  g  s'rutis,  and  a 
fifth  with  13,  the  division  of  the  octave  by  22  was  the  only  one  available. 
The  error  in  the  fourth  of  g  equal  s'rutis  of  a  22  division  is  no  more  than 
^-comma,  in  melody  scarcely  noticeable,  but  the  error  in  a  21  or  in  a  23 
division  could  not  have  been  easily  tolerated.  The  s'rutis  thus  being  a  little 
wider  than  exactly  equal  quarter-tones,  54x1  cents  instead  of  50,  the  Indian 
gramas  in  most  intervals  come  near  to  those  of  our  just  intonation  scales, 
but  this  resemblance  is  accidental,  as  the  foundation  is  different.  It  must, 
however,  not  be  forgotten  that  this  scale  of  probably  equal  s'rutis  was 
theoretical,  and  has  long  since  been  superseded  by  another  and  more 
practical  system,  and  that  equal  measurements  of  a  string  will  not  represent 
accuratelv  this  old  Hindu  conception. 

The  comparison  of  the  22  s'ruti  scale  with  the  European  one  of  just 
intonation  is  as  follows.  The  figures  are  equal  semitones  to  two  places  of 
decimals  (or  the  late  Mr.  A.  J.  Ellis's  cents). 


3-82 

4-91 

7-09                 9-27                 lo-gi 

12-00 

3-86 

4-98 

7-02    j             8-84             )    10-88 

1  or  9*o6,  with  comma  added  i 
[        to  make  5th  to  D.        J 

I2-00 

Indian  2"i8 

European       2-04 


The  following  table,  kindly  sent  me  by  the  late  Mr.  Ellis,  shows  the  results 
obtained  from  a  most  minute  and  careful  examination  made  by  him  and  by 
Mr.  A.  J.  Hipkins  of  a  beautiful  old  vina,  in  perfect  condition,  now  in  my 
possession.  This  instrument  is  between  two  and  three  hundred  years  old,  and 
is  from  the  collection  in  the  Tanjore  Palace.  The  results,  as  will  be  seen, 
tend  to  prove  that  the  frets  were  purposely  arranged  for  something  like  equal 
temperament.  We  see,  therefore,  that  in  India  much  the  same  results  have 
been  independently  arrived  at  by  native  musicians  as  have  been  attained  by 
subsequent  science  in  Europe. 

'"■  Mr.  Hipkins  states  :  "The  Pythagorean  tone — i.e.,  the  distance  by  which  a  perfect  fifth  overlaps  a 
perfect  fourth — which  is  here  meant,  is  2-04  equal  semitones,  and  the  greater  tune  that  from  the  harmonic 
seventh  completes  the  octave  is  2-31.     The  four  s'rutis  amount  to  2-18. '" 

F 


22 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA. 


I 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

Pitch  or  num- 

Cents in  the  in- 

Millimetres 

Sounding 

bers  of  double 

Cents  in  the  interval 

Intervals  in  cents 

Intervals   in 

terval  from  the 

Frets. 

from  nut. 

lengths  of  string. 

vibrations. 
Nov.  18, 1887. 

from  the  lowest  note. 

from  note  to  note. 

cents  calculated 
from  column  3. 

lowest  note  from 
column  3. 

Nut 

0 

555 

2107 

0 

0 

0 

0 

I 

31 

524 

222-8 

97 

97 

99 

99 

2 

59 

496 

236-6 

201 

104 

96 

195 

3 

«5 

470 

246-2 

270 

69 

93 

288 

4 

1X0 

445 

260-9 

370 

100 

94 

382 

5 

134 

421 

275-0 

461 

91 

96 

478 

6 

156 

399 

289-2 

548 

87 

93 

571 

7 

179 

376 

310-5 

671 

123 

104 

675 

8 

200 

355 

325-3 

752 

81 

99 

774 

9 

219 

336 

346-3 

860 

108 

95 

869 

lO 

236 

319 

365-6 

954 

94 

90 

959 

II 

253 

302 

385-8 

1047 

93 

95 

1054 

12 

269 

286 

421-5 

1200 

153 

94 

1148 

13 

286 

269 

447-2 

1303 

103 

106 

1254 

14 

301 

254 

472-5 

1398 

95 

99 

1353 

15 

3'4 

241 

494-1 

1476 

77 

91 

1444 

16 

327 

22S 

523-6 

1576 

100 

99 

1548 

17 

341 

214 

553-3 

1672 

96 

107 

1650 

18 

352 

203 

583-4 

1763 

91 

91 

1741 

19 
20 

363 
373 

383 

192 
182 

The  rest  of  the 

97 
102 

1838 
1990 
3028 

The  great  uncertain- 

21 

172 

notes  were  too 
high      for     my 
forks. 

Auxiliary  Table. 

ty  in  these  intervals 
renders    any    hypo- 
thesis as  to  the   in- 
tended nature  of  the 

98 

22 

392 

163 

Cents. 

Intervals. 

93 

2121 

23 
24 

401 
410 

154 
145 

scale         impossible. 
Butcol. 7,  in  conjunc- 
tion with   the   auxi- 

99 
104 

2220 
2324 

The    height  of 
thestringabove 
the  frets  varied 
from  I  to  5  milli- 

128:135 

bridge 

553 

0 

92 

liary  table  in  col.  5, 

..hnu'c           that           thA 

or  larger          ,  me'chanicaTrule  "of 

to  the  beginning 

From         these 

metres. 

limma 

maKing    iiic    s.u*.».ca- 

Compared  with 

of    the    bridge. 

lengths  are  caU 

«    .                      ,C      .        T^ 

sive  lengths  as  iS:  ig, 

column   5,   this 

100    times 
these  ncm- 

but      the     real 
sounding  length 

culated  columns 
7  and  8  on  the 

94 
99 

17  :  18 
84  :  89 
16  :  17 

or   17  :  18,  or  16  ;  17 
was     applied,      and 

shows  the  erro- 
neous nature  of 

bers       give 

is  as  555  milli- 

hypothesis that 

hencethat  the  maker 

the    hvpothesis 

the  cents  in 
equal    tem- 
perament. 

metres. 

pitch         varies 
inversely        as 
the      sounding 

A  cent  is    the 
hundredth  part 
of      an      equal 

100 
105 

intended  the  frets  to 
be       arranged       for 
equal  temperament. 

that   pilch    va- 
ries     as      the 
sounding 

lengths 

semitone. 

112 
151 

15  :  16 
II  :  12 

length        on 
fretted    instru- 
ments. 

155 

32:35 

Applied  in  column  7. 

The  system  by  which  the  octave  is  divided  into  twelve  semitones  is  clearly 
hinted  at  in  the  Sani^ita  Darpana,  which  states  that  there  are  seven  pure  tones 
(Suddha  or  Prakrita),  which  appear  to  refer  to  the  intervals  composing  the 
diatonic  major  scale  ;  and  twelve  impure  tones  (Vikrita),  by  which  we  may 
conclude  that  the  chromatic  scale  is  implied.'^ 


"  For  other  information  about  Prakrita  and  Vikrita  notes,  see 
M.  'fagore.     Calcutta,  1884. 


'The  Musical  Scales  of  the  Hindus.' 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA.  23 

The  s'rutis  are  arranged  in  their  different  svaras,  or  intervals  of  the  scale, 
according  to  the  "  murchanas."  Of  what  these  murchanas  really  consisted 
is  very  doubtful. 

Sir  William  Jones  states  that  the  murchanas,  of  which  there  are  seven  in 
each  grama,  appear  to  be  no  more  than  "seven  pieces  of  diapason  multiplied  by 
three,  according  to  the  difference  of  pitch  in  the  compass  of  the  three  octaves." 

This  view  seems  to  be  that  taken  by  Kohala,  an  ancient  musician,  from 
whose  pen  fragments  of  a  treatise  in  Sanskrit  are  still  remaining.'^ 

Mr.  Paterson,  on  the  other  hand,  conjectures  that  they  are  the  intervals  ol 
each  grama,  and  arranges  them  in  the  following  classification  :  — 

Shadja-grama Sa  to  Ri      ist    znd) 

,,    ,,  Ga      ,,     3rd  -  ist  Tetrachord. 
,,    ,,   Ma      ,,     4th  ) 
Pa  ,,   Dha    ,,     2nd\ 
,,    ,,  Ni       ,,     3rd    ^nd  Tetrachord. 
,,    ,,   Sa       ,,     4th) 
Sa  ,,   Sa       ,,     Octave 
Madhvama-grama  ....Sa  ,,  Ri       2nd 

,,    ,,  Ga      Greater  third 
„    ,,   Ma     4th 
,,    „  Pa      5th 
,,    ,,   Dha  Greater  sixth 
„    „   Ni      7th 
,,    ,,   Sa      Octave 
Gandhara-grama    ....Sa  to  Ri      2nd 

,,    ,,  Ga     Minor  third 
,,    ,,  Ma    4th 
,,    ,,  Pa     5th 
,,    ,,  Dha  Minor  sixth 
„    „  Ni     7th'' 
,,    ,,  Sa      8th 
The  seven  intervals  of  each  scale  are  arranged  in  what  are  called  ragas. 
Sir  W.  Jones  employs  the  term  raga  as  synonymous  with  mode. 
Mode   and   raga    are,   however,   perfectly   distinct  from   each    other — Mode 


1*  The  Sangita  Darpana  gives  a  totally  different  meaning  to  nuirchana,  describing  the  murchanas 
as  the  permutations  produced  by  a  method  somewhat  like  change  ringing;  the  number  of  murchanas 
being  the  continued  product  of  the  number  of  notes  employed.  Hence,  from  a  grama  of  seven  tones  we 
get  5,040  different  murchanas.  The  method  of  producing  these  permutations  is  called  "  Kundameru  "  by 
native  musicians. 

"  Whether  major  or  minor  is  not  stated  by  Mr.  Paterson. 


24  THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERy  INDIA. 

being  termed  t/uit,  and  not  raga  or  ragini.  Now  that  consists  in  determining 
the  relative  intervals  between  several  sounds,  which  constitute  an  octave  with 
respect  to  each  other.  A  raga  is  formed  from  these,  in  its  composition 
employing  the  whole  or  less  number  of  the  intervals  of  the  that,  and  with  a 
peculiar  melodic  style  of  its  own  ;  in  fact,  a  melody  type  formed  upon  a  mode. 
This,  however,  is  more  fully  explained  in  another  chapter. 

In  no  two  Sanskrit  works  do  we  find  that  the  ragas  agree  either  as  to  their 
names  or  their  notation  ;  the  modes  or  scales  of  these  different  ragas  are  not 
given,  and,  in  most  cases,  it  is  therefore  only  a  matter  of  conjecture  as  to  how 
they  were  performed.  In  almost  all  these  works  a  somewhat  similar  classification 
of  the  rags  and  raginis  has  been  adopted.  There  are  six  principal  ragas  personified 
as  demigods,  each  of  which  has  a  certain  number  of  raginis  (personified  as  the 
wives  of  the  ragas) — sometimes  five  and  sometimes  six — appended  to  it. 
The  following  classification  is  that  of  Hanuman'-*:  — 

I- — Bhairava Dha,  ni,  sa,  ga,  ma,  dha. 

Madhyamadi    ....Ma,  pa,  dha,  ni,  sa,  ri,  ga,  ma. 
Bhairavi  ....(i.)  Ma,  pa,  dha,  ni,  sa,  ri,  ga,  ma.    (i.)  Ascending.) 
(2.)    Dha,  ni,  sa,  ga,  ma,  pa.  (2.)  Descending.  ) 

Vangali     Sa,  ga,  ma,  pa,  ni,  sa,  | 

Ma,  pa,  dha,  ni,  sa,  ri,  ga,  ma.  ) 

Varati  Sa,  ri,  ga,  ma,  pa,  dha,  ni,  sa. 

Syinda\i  Sa,  ri,  ga,  ma,  pa,  dha,  ni,  sa,| 

Sa,  ga,  ma,  pa,  dha,  ni,  sa.       ) 

II. — ^Malavakusika Sa,  ri,  ga,  ma,  pa,  dha,  ni,  sa. 

Todi Ma,  pa,  dha,  ni,  sa,  ri,  ga,  ma. 

Sa,  ri,  ga,  ma,  pa,  dha,  ni,  sa. 

Kambavati  Dha,  ni,  sa,  ri,  ga,  nia,  dha. 

Gauri    Sa,  ga,  ma,  dha,  ni,  sa. 

Gunakeri Dha,  ni,  sa,  ga,  ma,  pa,  ni.j 

Sa,  ga,  ma,  pa,  ni,  sa. 

Kakobha  Dha,  ni,  sa,  ri,  na,  ma,  pa,  dha. 

III.      Hindola    Sa,  ga,  ma,  pa,  ni,  sa,  ni,  pa,  ma,  ga,  sa. 

V'elavcli    Dha,  ni,  sa,  ri,  ga,  ma,  pa,  dha. 

Ramakeri Sa,  ri,  ga,  ma,  pa,  dha,  ni,  sa.) 

Sa,  ni,  dha,  ma,  ga,  ri,  sa. 

Deshaks'ya Ga,  ma,  pa,  dha,  ni,  sa,  ga. 

Palamangeri    ....Pa,  dha,  ni,  sa,  ri,  ga,  ma,  pa. 

"  See  "  Sangita  Sara  Sangraha,"  a  collection  of  various  Sanskrit  authorities,  edited  by  S.  M.  Tagore. 
Calcutta,  1875. 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA.  25 

Lalita    Sa,  ri,  (^a,  ma,  pa,  dha,  ni,  sa,  sa.[ 

Dha,  ni,  sa,  ga,  ma,  dha,  dha.        j 
IV. — Dipaka      Sa,  ri,  ga,  ma,  pa,  dha,  ni,  sa. 

Kadara Ni,  sa,  ga,  ma,  pa,  ni,  ni. 

Kanada     Ni,  sa,  ri,  ga,  ma,  pa,  dha,  ni,  ni. 

Deshi    Ri,  ga,  ma,  dha,  ni,  sa,  ri. 

Kaumodi Dha,  ni,  sa,  ri,  ga,  ma,  pa,  dha. 

Natika Sa,  ri,  ga,  ma,  pa,  dha,  ni,  sa. 

V. — S'ri-Raga Ni,  ga,  ma,  pa,  dha,  ni,  sa,  ri. 

Vasantha Sa,  ri,  ga,  ma,  pa,  dha,  ni,  sa. 

Mahiva Ni,  sa,  ga,  ma,  dha,  ni. 

Mahiva-s'ri  Sa,  ri,  ga,  ma,  pa,  dha,  ni,  sa. 

Dunasri     Sa,  ga,  ma,  pa,  dha,  ni,  sa. 

Asaveri     Dha,  ni,  sa,  ma,  pa,  dha.    1 

Ma,  dha,  ni,  sa,  ri,  ga,  ma.) 
\'I. — Megharaga  Dha,  ni,  sa,  ri,  ga,  ma,  pa,  dha. 

Gauri    Dha,  ni,  ri,  ga,  ma,  dha. 

Deshakari    Sa,  ri,  ga,  ma,  pa,  dha,  ni,  sa. 

Bhupali     Sa,  ri,  ga,  ma,  pa,  dha,  ni,  sa.) 

Sa,  ga,  ma,  pa,  ni,  sa.  I 

Gaurjeri    Ri,  ga,  ma,  pa,  dha,  ni,  sa,  ri. 

Dakha  Sa,  ri,  ga,  ma,  pa,  dha,  ni,  sa,  sa. 

The  Sangita  Narayana  shows  that  thirty-six  "  modes  "  or  ragas  are  in 
general  use,  and  the  rest  very  rarely  applied  to  practice.  These  modes  are 
shown  by  Sir  William  Jones  in  his  essay  on  the  musical  modes  of  the  Hindus, 
and  will  be  found  in  many  respects  similar  to  those  described  in  the  Sangita 
Darpana,  and  shown  above.  Thirtv-si.K  modes  from  the  Raga  Vivodha,  and 
thirty-six  from  the  work  of  Mirza  Khan,  have  also  been  described  by  the  same 
eminent  scholar,  and  need  not,  therefore,  be  reproduced  here. 

The  rhythm  of  the  early  music  seems  to  have  been  very  complicated,  and 
the  most  exact  directions  as  to  the  value  of  notes  and  the  division  into  "  talas  " 
or  rhythmical  periods  are  given.     These,  again,  vary  in  different  authors. 

For  example,   in  order  to   estimate   the   relative   time  value    of  successive 

notes,  the  sage  Anginayya  gives  the  following  poetical  directions  : — 

Take  one  hundred  petals  of  the  lotus  flower,  place  them  then  one  upon  the  other ;  and 
when  pierced  with  a  needle,  the  time  in  which  the  point  passes  through  a  single  petal  is  called 
one  second  ;  eight  such  seconds  are  called  one  lava ;  eight  lavas  one  koshta ;  eight  koshtiis  one 
nimisha  ;  eight  nimishas  one  kala ;  four  kalas  one  anudrutha  ;  two  anudruthas  one  drutha  ; 
two  druthas  one  lagu  ;  two  lagus  one  guru  ;  three  lagus  one  plutha  ;  four  lagus  one  kakupatha. 

G 


26 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHEKy  INDIA. 


Of  these,   later  on  in  his  work,    he  employs   the  following,   calling    drutha 
a  half  matra,  and  this  he  takes  as  the  limit. 

Hence  we  can  deduce  the  following  table  : — 


Written 

Name 

Value 

0 

Drutha 

•5   Matras 

1 

Lagu 

I    Matra 

«t 

Guru 

2   Matras 

< 

Plutha 

3  Matras 

c 

Birama  (or  rest) 

Not  stated 

The  common  and  triple  time  here  implied  is  striking,  and  in  some 
measure  tends  to  prove  that  the  employment  of  triple  time  is  not  of  such 
comparatively  recent  introduction  as  some  writers  endeavour  to  show. 

Formed  upon  the  above  basis,  several  hundreds  of  different  talas  or 
measures — many  of  them  extremely  complicated — are  given."^ 

The  rhythm  of  some  of  these  ancient  talas  is  still  employed  in  practice, 
although  the  complicated  system  of  signature  is  no  longer  in  use.  The  following 
table,  taken  from  the  work  of  Anginayya,  comprises  some  of  these  ancient  talas, 
together  with  their  value  in  modern  notation. 

The  sign  of  C  or  rest,  although  its  value  is  not  definitely  stated  by 
Anginayya,  can  be — judgingfrom  the  performances  of  modern  Mridang  or  Tabla 
players — correctly  taken  to  be  of  the  same  value  as  the  note  immediately 
preceding;  or  else  it  may  be  employed  as  a  "dot,"  when  placed  after  a  note,  to 
lengthen  its  value  by  one-half. 

Captain  Willard,  in  his  "  Treatise  upon  the  Music  of  Hindustan,"  has  given 
another  and  very  complete  list  of  these  ancient  talas,  differing  in  many  ways 
from  the  following  ;  but,  unfortunately,  he  does  not  state  from  what  authority  he 
gathered  them. 

To  judge  by  the  very  complicated  nature  of  many  of  these  talas,  and  the  fact 
that  they  vary  widely  in  almost  all  the  authorities,  it  seems  hardly  likely  that 
they  were  ever  in  very  common  use  ;  but  they  are,  nevertheless,  interesting  as 
showing  the  great  variety  of  rhythm  that  can  be  produced  by  such  simple  means 
as  beating  the  two  hands  together — the  earliest  kind  of  rhythmical  accompaniment ; 
and  some  slight  idea  of  the  peculiarities  of  modern  Indian  drum  playing  can  also 
be  gleaned  from  this  table  : — 


"  Extracts  from  Anginayya's  work  have  been  given  by  the  Rajah  Sir  S.  M.  Tagore,  in  "  Sangita  Sara 
Sangrahd,"  which  see  for  further  information  upon  this  subject,  p.  207  and  following  pages. 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA. 


27 


No. 

Name  of  Tala. 

Originally  written. 

Value  in  English  Notation. 

I 

Adi 

1 

J- 

2 

Dviteya    . 

0  0  1    1 

^.^.^J^ 

3 

Triteya 

0  1  °. 

-^/n 

4 

Chaturushra 

1    0      . 

J'Ji 

5 

Panchama 

00. 

-%J» 

6 

Nis'ankalila 

vv«f«(i 

J.  J- J  J  ,> 

7 

Durpana  . 

0  0  V 

.%.^J  r 

8 

Simhavikrama  . 

*, «,  1, 1  *,=  1  ^  V 

J  J  J  ^J-/J  J  r 

9 

Ratilila      . 

\\i,%    .     . 

.^.N  J 

10 

Simhalila 

1  0  0  0 

^^  .%.*.* 

II 

Kanderpa 

0  0  V  ^  1   • 

.*-ftJ-J  J- 

12 

Virevikruma 

1    0  0  4; 

J-J^JiJ 

13 

Rangaha  . 

0  0  0  0^. 

.ft^^.%j 

14 

S'ri-Rangaha    . 

1  1  ^  1  V  ■      ■ 

J" J- J  .^J  r 

15 

Chachari  . 

(0  0'  1  0  0'  1  0  0'  1  0  0'  1 
lo  o'l  0  0'  1 

0  o'l 

0  0'  1 

• 

.%.%.  .>.%.%.  .V. 

16 

Pratianga 

^^*tl  1  .     . 

J  J  J  ^^ 

17 

Yetilagna 

0  0   1 

J4  %  ^ 

iS 

Gajalila     . 

1  1  1  1" 

-^/.^.N 

19 

Hamsalila 

II'. 

^/n 

20 

Vcrnabhina 

0  0   1  t, 

.^^^J 

21 

Tribhinha 

1  ^  V      •      . 

.N  J  ,- 

22 

Raga-chudamanni 

0    0   1    II  0    0   1  t( 

^-fe.f^.^j^.%.*,N 

23 

Rangadiotaha  . 

«f  ^  ^  1  V 

J  J  J  .^J  r 

24 

Rangapradipaka 

%i,%\i,^-- 

J  J  J  ^J  J  r 

25 

Rajah-chasraha 

1    1  0  0  M 

J*  .^  -*  -■»  S"  m" 

26 

Mitravernaha    . 

it''  %  0  0  \  if  if 

J.J    .5.%/J    J 

27 

Simhavikridita. 

1  1  Vi*,ViV«tV< 

.  c 

.'^.N.-^JJ./J.JJ.Jr 

28 

Savaha 

1  1 «,  1  1  00 

/^^J  /^.*.* 

29 

Vanumali. 

1   0  0  0  0  f, 

,>.%.%  .5.%  J 

30 

Hamsanada 

1  V  0  0  V 

.N.-%.*J  r 

31 

S'imhanada 

\ifif\if  .     . 

^J  J  /J 

32 

Kiirdukaha 

00   1    1 

.ft.*-^.^ 

33 

Turangalila 

0  0'  0  0 

.*.*  J!.% 

34 

S'arabhalila 

1   1   0  0  0  0  II       . 

.■^.^  .*.*.%.*// 

35 

Chaturasraha    . 

^   1    0   0  S{     . 

J  /.*-%J 

36 

Simhanandana 

«,  «f  1  V  1  ^  0  0  «,  «,  1 

VII 

iif  ■ 

JJ/J.^JJ».*JJ.V.VJ 

37 

Tribhangihi 

Wifif       .         . 

>    >    1     1 

0>    m    m    m 

38 

Rangabhirnaha 

«f  *(  1  1  V  .      ■ 

J  J  /.^J  r 

39 

Mangikaha 

1  1 «,  1  1  1  r 

/.N  Z.^.^/-, 

40 

Majaba     . 

If  1  1  0'  0'. 

1     ^    N    ^.    % :] 

41 

Madrita-mangaha 

I(  1  1  1  1  1  I' 

J  M^^.'-Vi 

42 

Vamangaha 

«,  II  0'  0' . 

J/.^-'!-.'5^ 

28  THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA. 

There  exist,  as  will  be  explained  later  on,  at  present  in  Karnatik  music 
seventy-two  modes  or  scales,  all  formed  from  seven  of  the  twelve  semitones  in 
the  octave  differently  disposed  upon  a  tonic  of  equal  pitch.  If  we  are  to  under- 
stand that  the  ragas  described  by  Sir  W.  Jones  were  simply  such  scales  or 
modes,  the  only  way  in  which  it  is  possible  to  reconcile  the  theory  to  the  present 
system  is  to  imagine  that  for  ascending  the  scale  they  employed  a  perfect  fourth 
(or,  as  a  Karnatik  musician  would  say,  for  Arohana  Suddha-madhyama),  and  for 
descending  the  augmented  fourth  (Prati-madhyama),  or  possibly  the  reverse,  like 
the  Chinese  practice  at  the  present  day. 

From  the  earliest  time  the  ragas  seem  to  have  been  appointed  to  be  sung  at 
certain  hours  of  the  day  or  night,  and  no  musician,  unless  specially  ordered, 
would  deviate  from  custom  so  far  as  to  sing  a  raga  out  of  its  appointed  season. 

The  ragas  are,  however,  differently  distributed  in  the  different  works,  and 
the  modern  custom  differs  widely  from  the  directions  of  the  Sanskrit. 

The  notation  given   in  all  the  ancient  treatises  is  very  similar  to  that  at 

present  in  use,  letters  only  being  employed  to  express  the  notes.     The  following, 

?i  facsimile  of  the  most  ancient  form  of  notation,  is  from  the  work  of  Soma,  and 

has  been  thus  rendered  into  the  European  notation  by  Sir  William  Jones,  who 

remarks  : — 

I  have  noted  Soma's  air  in  the  major  mode-^of  A,  or  Sa,  which,  from  its  gaiety  and  brilliancy, 
well  expresses  the  general  hilarity  of  the  song  ;  but  the  sentiment,  often  under  pain  even  in  a 
season  of  delights,  from  the  remembrance  of  pleasures  no  longer  attainable,  would  require  in  our 
music  a  change  to  the  minor  mode  ;  and  the  air  might  be  disposed  of  in  the  form  of  a  rondo  ending 
with  the  second  line,  or  even  with  the  third,  where  the  sense  is  equally  full,  if  it  should  be  thought 
proper  to  express  by  another  modulation  that  imitative  melody  which  the  poet  has  manifestly 
attempted  :  the  measure  is  very  rapid,  and  the  air  should  be  gay  or  even  quick  in  exact  proportion 
to  it : — 


^^  It  is  rathfr  difficult  to  understand  why  Sir  William  Jones  employs  this  key  instead  of  that  of  C, 
which  seems  to  have  been  the  most  natural  that  would  have  suggested  itself. 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA. 


29 


Translation  of  the  above.- 


^^^^^^ 


^1 


*    * 


iy~r" 


-^^ — ^- 


*fe 


ii 


^  This  translation  must,  of  course,  be  more  or  less  hypothetical ;  and  as  it  is  so  entirely  different  in 
character  and  style  to  all  modern  Indian  music,  and  airs  heard  now  in  India  which  are  said  to  be  very 
ancient,  its  correctness  appears  to  be  very  doubtful.  A  comparison  with  the  examples  quoted  later  will 
show  how  u  idely  it  differs. 


CHAPTER     III. 


Modern  theorj- — How  difTering  from  ancient — Notation — Arrangement  of  gamut — Scales — Time, 
how  signified — Application  of  measure  to  music. 

THE  modern  theory  of  Indian  music  differs  widely  from  that  described  in 
the  ancient  Sanskrit  treatises,  having,  as  has  been  said,  passed  throuiijh 
many  changes  in  the  course  of  time  before  assuming  its  present  form. 

The  pecuhar  division  of  the  octave  into  twenty-two  parts  or  s'rutis  exists 
no  longer  in  practice,  and  the  employment  of  s'rutis  or  intervals  less  than 
semitones  is  liinitcd  to  grace. 

The  ragas  in  present  use  in  most  respects  differ  from  those  previously 
mentioned,  and,  in  fact,  the  whole  system  has  undergone  a  complete  change  and 
gradual  refinement,  until  between  the  ancient  and  modern  music  there  exists  a 
difference  as  clearly  marked  and  perceivable,  to  even  the  most  casual  observer,  as 
between  the  modern  Anglican  chant  and  the  ancient  Gregorian  tones. 

The  notes  employed  in  Indian  music  are  expressed  by  the  following 
characters'  (termed,  when  sounded,  svaras).  These  characters  are  repeated  as 
often  as  is  necessary,  should  more  notes  be  required  to  complete  a  passage.  No 
stave,  as  in  the  European  system,  is  necessary,  the  characters  being  written  in 
one  line  onlv. 


Name 

How  sung 

Signified 

Corresponding 
to  European 

Do 

Shadja 

Sa 

r5 

Rishaba 

Ri 

6 

Re 

Gandhara 

Ga 

X 

Mi 

Madhyama 

Ma 

^ 

Fa 

Panchama 

Pa 

5j 

Sol 

Dhaivata 

Dha 

6 

La 

Nishada 

Ni 

a 

Si 

'  The  characters  here  represented  arc  Tclegu,  that  being  the  most  musical  language  of  Southern  Iuiii:i. 
The  corresponding  letters  of  Tuniii,  Mahrathi,  Sanskrit,  &c.,  are  frequently  employed  in  the  same  way. 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA. 


These  seven  notes  correspond  to  those  of  the  European  diatonic  major  scale, 
unless  the  intervals  are  modified  to  those  of  some  special  scale. 

The  Hindu  octave,  like  the  European,  is  divided  into  twelve  semitones.- 

From  these  twelve  semitones,  seventy-two  scales  or  modes,  each  consisting 
of  seven  notes,  are  formed  upon  a  tonic  of  the  same  pitch. 

As  the  intervals  of  every  scale  or  mode  are  signified  by  the  above  letters,  it 
will  be  seen  that  there  exists  no  method  by  which  accidentals  can  be  noted. 

The  following  table  shows  the  arrangement  of  the  twelve  semitones  under 
their  respective  significations. 

The  note  Pa  (Sj),  as  will  be  seen,  is  invariably  the  fifth  of  the  scale. 

The  keynote  Sa  {Xj)  may  be  of  any  pitch  as  may  best  suit  the  requirements 
of  the  performer. 


Relation. 

Sa. 

!6 

Ri. 

e 

Ga. 
X 

Ma. 

Pa. 

Dha. 
6 

Ni. 

Sa. 
!6 

C 
B 

At 
A 

Gt 
G 

F| 

F 

E 

D* 

D 

Cf 

c 

KakeH= 

Shat-s'ruti 

Kaisika' 

Chatur-s'ruti 

Suddha 

Suddha 

Prati 

Suddha 

Sadharama 

Shat-s'ruti 

Antara' 

Chatur-s'ruti 

Suddha 

Suddha 

"'1 

"  This  view  is  supported  by  both  Sir  W.  Jones  and  Mr.  Fuwke  (".Asiatic  Researches").  Sir  W.  Jones 
remarks:  "  I  tried  in  vain  to  discover  in  practice  any  difference  between  the  Indian  scale  and  that  of  our 
own;  but  knowing  my  ear  to  be  very  insufficiently  exercised,  I  requested  a  German  professor  of  music  to 
accompany  on  his  violin  a  Hindu  lutenist,  who  sang  by  note  some  popular  airs  on  the  loves  of  Krishna  and 
Radha,  and  he  assured  me  that  the  scales  were  the  same;  and  Mr.  Shore  afterwards  informed  me  that  when 
the  voice  of  a  native  singer  was  in  tune  with  his  harpsichord,  he  found  the  Hindu  series  of  seven  notes  to 

^  M.  Grosset  gives  an  interesting  explanation  of  these  terms,  as  used  by  Bharata,  in  his  Contribution  a 
VHude  dc  la  musiquc  Hindoue.  Paris,  1888.  The  terms  are  used  in  a  slightly  different  sense,  but  the 
explanation  should  be  read  by  those  who  wish  to  make  further  research. 


32 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA. 


From  the  above  table  it  may  be  easily  understood  that  although  every  scale 
is  sung  to  the  syllables  "  Sa,  Ri,  Ga,  Ma,  Pa,  Dha,  Ni,"  the  intervals  implied 
by  these  syllables  vary  in  the  different  scales. 

For  instance,  Ri  may  be  employed  to  denote  either  D?,  Di^,  or  DJf,  as  the 
case  may  be  ;  assuming,  of  course,  that  Sa  corresponds  with  C.  When  the 
names  of  the  notes  vary  it  has  been  noticed  in  the  column  under  each  respective 
head.  These  names  should  be  prefixed  to  those  of  the  notes,  as  Suddha- 
gandhara,  Antara-gandhara. 

The  scales  formed  upon  these  intervals  are  seventy-two  in  number,  and  are 
divided  into  two  divisions  of  thirty-six  in  each. 

Those  of  the  first  division  are  styled  "  Suddha-madhyama,"  from  the  fact 
that  in  their  construction  they  employ  that  note,  or  the  perfect  fourth,  throughout. 
Those  of  the  second,  for  a  similar  reason,  are  styled  "  Prati-madhyama,"  and 
employ  the  augmented  or  tritone  fourth.  In  theoretical  works  the  scales  are 
classified  in  sets  or  "  chacrams  "  of  six  ;  the  construction  of  each  chacram,  as 
will  be  noticed,  being  very  similar. 

The  following  is  a  list  of  all  the  scales,^  with  their  names  and  reference 
numbers,  arranged  by  "chacrams"  or  sets  of  six  precisely  as  given  in  treatises 
in  the  vernacular,  the  only  difference  being  that  European  notation  has  been 
substituted  for  the  Indian  : — ■ 


Karnakangi.     No.  i. 


Suddha-Madhyama. 

Rhatnangi.     No.  2. 

I 


t=F 


H  bW 


2 


]vj     bi 


icJ   b?or 


=^^=^ 


IZ3Z 


Ganamurti.     No.  3. 


■<s>- 

Vanaspati.     No.  4. 


^§ 


^^ 


i^=M 


=bS=^ 


rJ  O- 


?o- 


Manavati.     No.  5. 


-o- 
Tanarupi.     No.  6. 


d        rJ 


HsgEg^^j  .1  ^m 


bJ  i'bt 


ascend  like  ours — by  a  sharp  third."  From  many  experiments  I  am  led  to  beHeve  that  a  wrong  idea  as  to 
the  temperament  of  the  Indian  scale — as  practically  employed — has  hitherto  been  held.  I  played  over  all 
the  various  scales  shown  later  upon  a  pianoforte — tuned  to  equal  temperament— in  the  presence  of  several 
well-known  Hindustani  and  Karnatik  musicians,  all  of  whom  assured  me  that  they  corresponded  e.xactly  to 
those  of  the  vina.  Upon  comparing  the  two  instruments  this  was  found  to  be  the  case — as  far  as  could  be 
judged  by  the  ear  alone— in  every  instance.  Native  airs  are  played  by  the  private  band  of  H.H.  the 
Maharajah  of  Mysore;  and  as  far  as  mdody  is  concerned  they  are  acknowledged  to  be  perfectly  in  tune, 
according  to  Indian  ideas,  by  all.  Native  airs  are  also  played  by  the  band  of  H.H.  the  Gacckwar  of  Baroda, 
the  chief  musician  at  whose  court — "  Professor"  Maula  Bu.x — a  man  of  considerable  attainments,  took  pains 
to  explain  to  me  that  the  tempering  of  the  modern  Indian  scales  differed  in  no  whit  from  the  European. 
In  fact,  in  practice,  as  among  the  ancient  Greeks,  the  old  enharmonic  genus  would  seem  to  have  given 
place  to  the  chromatic. 

*  The  scales  here  shown  are  those  of  the  Karnatik  system.     Those  used  in  the  Hindustani  system  are 
fewer  in  number  and  are  differently  named      They  will  be  found  upon  page  91. 


Sanapati.     No.  7. 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA. 

Hanumatodi.     No.  8. 


33 


-t>o — ^ 


g-    i^f-J 


^^ 


^gJ       <■> 


:tJ=i 


g^^ 


-0- 

Danuka.     No.  9. 


Natakaprya.     No.  10. 


Kokilaprya.     No.  11. 


^^^g^ 


^ 


^^ 


Rupavati.     No.  12. 


^^^=^d=r^ 


$ 


^^=M=^^=^ 


=zi: 


:^H^=J-b«i^ 


^P^ 


J       fJ- 


Gaiakaprya.     No.  13. 


i 


=^ 


Vakhulabharna.     No.  14. 


i^d- 


ri       Q- 


-j^rJ      t'' 


^ 


Mayamalavagaula.     No.  15. 


-f3>- 
Chackravaka.     No.  16. 


=^=^ 


Tl-d^^ 


Suryakanta.     No.  17. 


Hatakambari.     No.  18. 


^ 


^ 


^ 


^^ 


izi: 


-^         Q- 


=sHrJ^ 


-rj         O 


S'ankaradvani.     No.  ig. 


Natabhairavi      No.  20. 


i 


-^d — ^ 


^^'?=!^^^ 


-i^d    <^- 


^^^ — J= 


Kyravani.     No.  21 


Karaharaprj'a.     No.  22. 


1=^=1= 


^ 


1=3=^=1^ 


3±: 


^3^ 


-J  I 


ICJt 


=^3= 


3=£; 


Gaurimanohari.     No.  23. 


^•■^ 


p 


ESEEi 


Varunaprya.     No.  24. 


TT'^r-p^ 


^^ 


^^^ 


Mararangini.     No.  25. 


Charukali.     No.  26. 


Z^_^ 


lesi: 


rj 


::U?=t: 


Harikambogi.     No.  28. 


32!= 


-iS^ C3 « 

Sarasangi.     No.  27. 


^^^^^ 


J  J  .1  J  .^:^^fl 


b'-j     '^ 


Dehras'ankarabharna.     No.  2g. 


-r^^^JE 


Naganandini.     No.  30. 


^^^ 


^ 


^ 


34 


Yagaprya.     No.  31. 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTH ERX  INDIA. 

Ragavardani.     No.  32. 


i 


J— ^-4- 


=tel— ^H 


^?<s>         ''^ 


^^s 


3222: 


^ 


^ 


dJ=t 


rj      g* 


Gangaiabhusani.     No.  33. 


Vagadesvari.     No.  34. 


Shulini.     No.  35. 


=^^^ 


|v^       g^ 


:2± 


# 


ij^i: 


Chalan^ta.     No.  36. 


i 


H — i- 


3£: 


S 


# 


fj  o 


zsiz 


^3-t=^ 


Salanaga.     No.  37. 


Prati-Madhyama. 

Salanava.     No.  38. 


,J__J_lJEgdE 


Ed=^ 


33Z 


I2S2I 


^^si=* 


yj      ^ 


9?^s- 


Jalavarali.     No.  39 


^-- — M 
Nivanita.     No.  40 


i 


j=^=^ 


g 


itjQ 


=ri=^[^^=i 


-^' — ^ 


Pavani.     No.  41. 


Ragonprja.     No.  42. 


^ 


^^^^^^^^^^ 


'»==±=?d^>iHj'-£ 


=^-^?s!— $■ 


Gavambodi.     No.  43. 


Bhavaprya.     No.  44. 


'^    J.  ,J=ife#^^^3^^^ 


:^ 


i^;j=t>^^=^ 


^3=PS^|-^= 


rhJ=k^ 


Sabhapantovarali.     No.  45. 


S'adivedamangini.     No.  46. 


I 


1 h 


i=;p* 


Suvaranangi.     No.  47. 


i^3^^^ 


il=:j=2z 


=?S=|^ 


-r3 ?s- 


Davyamani.     No.  48. 


I 


t: 


=?^Mr= 


^ 


q=4: 


!      „    I        -^- 


^s 


^^^^ 


«./         -S>- 


~?c< 


t>a — ?' 


Duvalambberi.     No.  49. 


Namanagini.     No.  50. 


(i 


Kamavdrdini.     No.  51. 


-t=fe 


5^^^^E^ 


^i=3^ 


^ 


icbizPSi 


-7-J- 


Ramaprya.     No.  52. 


i 


^ 


a-_^i  .]  >^3s|| 


^^^=3=^ 


t=2'Oz 


rj~ 


-^=^=^^ 


GSmanas'rya.     No.  53. 
n  — 


^#=^=^ 


Visvambari.     No.  54. 


=^=t^---^= 


^ 


Syamalangi.     No.  55. 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA. 

S'anmukaprya.     No.  56. 


^ 


35 


^=^^-t-^— ^ 


±^ 


?-?£) C>_ 


^^^E^EE^. 


j— Kio^— ?e-=Q= 


S'rimhandra.      No.  57. 


Hamo-vasantha.     No.  58. 


i 


j-i>.^-^ 


=)= 


-bJ      ^^    II 


=^^^P 


iL d ?Q      ?r- 


Dharmovati.     No.  59. 


Nettimatti.     No.  60. 


1^37^^=^^^^^^^^ 


Kanlamani.     No.  61. 


Rishavaprya.     No.  62. 


I^S=35= 


i^^^ 


Tt.'J  g> 


fl,^J       i>T»C'  ''"' 


^^^    V 


4?ji: 


Latangi.     No.  63. 


Vachaspati.     No.  64. 


i 


i* 


_._ ^ ^       ^ 

Matsy^ikaliani.     No.  65. 


tei: 


^^ 


■^         Q 


32: 


^ 


4=^ 


ftrj  Q- 


ChintSmani.     No.  66. 


i 


^^Ei 


^^^ 


^ 


± 


^ 


=*=^ 


Suchantra.     No.  67. 


Jotisvarupeni.     No.  68. 


f=Sta 


=^ 


=*= 


-|7^-^?^- 


iffci: 


-?€>'  Q- 


Nas'icabharna.     No.  70. 


Dhartov^rdani.     No.  6g. 


i 


J      41,1         J       1'^=^ 


i^ 


:c3z 


let 


-f»ej         g^c 


-f3 «■' 


Rasikaprya.     No.  72. 


Kosala.     No.  71. 


-*^ 


^ 


;=£ 


4= 


In  Hindu  music  usually  three  octaves  only,  termed  Sthayis,  are  taken 
into  consideration. 

Instruments  such  as  the  vina,  kc,  have,  however,  a  compass  of  nearl}-  four 
octaves.  In  order  to  sii^nify  the  octave  in  which  a  note  is  to  be  plaved,  a  dot  or 
dots  are  usually  placed  above  or  below  it.  There  is  no  definite  rule  for  this;  each 
musician  or  writer  upon  music  apparently  advocates  some  method  of  his  own. 

Music  is  not,  as  with  us,  divided  by  bars  of  equal  duration.  Divisions 
styled  Gitalu  are  in  use,  and  are  signified  thus  |  or  —  ;  they  can  be  placed 
anywhere,  at  the  composer's  discretion,  and  denote  parts  or  phrases  so  to  speak. 

They  are  frequently  marked  thus  ||  or  =,  when  they  denote  the  repetition 
of  a  part,  or  the  conclusion  of  a  strain. 


3*5 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERX  INDIA. 


The  sign  of  the  lotus  flower  G?)  is  used  by  some  writers  for  the  same 
purpose. 

Time,  bv  which  is  imphed  the  relative  values  of  a  succession  of  notes,  cannot 
be  expressed  with  anv  degree  of  accuracy  without  indeed  so  complicated  an 
arrangement  of  signs  as  to  be  almost  unintelligible.  The  method  is  described 
fully  in  the  Sanskrit  works,  but  from  this  reason  it  has  fallen  into  disuse.  The 
value  of  the  note  is  invariably  taught  orally  by  a  master,  and  the  ear  is  thereby 
cultivated  to  a  very  high  degree. 

The  following  signs  (or  their  equivalents  if  the  character  is  Devanagari)  are, 
however,  made  use  of  in  order  to  convey — approximately  only — whether  notes 
are  to  be  of  long  or  short  duration  :^ 

Dirgha  :  This  sign,  used  in  conjunction  with  the  musical  characters, 
signifies  that  they  represent  "  long  notes" — 

Votu  :  This  sign  in  the  same  way  represents  "  short  notes  "— 

The  different  degrees  of  time  are  termed  Talas,  of  which  there  are  seven, 
each  being  sub-divided  into  five  "jatis,"  or  kinds;  so  that  there  are  in  use  no 
less  than  thirty-five  distinct  measures. 

By  the  annexed  table  the  various  talas  and  their  respective  jatis  will  be 
understood  at  a  glance,  the  figures  signifying  the  number  of  beats  of  equal 
duration  made  in  a  bar. 


Name  of  Jati. 


Name 
of      J 


Tala. 


Chaturushra. 

Tishra. 

Mishra. 

Ciindha. 

Sankirna. 

Dhruva    

4.  2,  4.  4^ 

3.2,3.3 

7.2,7.7 

5.2,5.5 

9,2,9,9 

Matsya    

4.  2,  4 

3.  2,3 

7.2,7 

5.2,5 

9.2,9 

Rupaka    

4,  2 

3.2 

7-2 

5.2 

9,2 

Jhampa    

4-    I.  2 

3.   I.  2 

7,  1. 2 

5,   1.2 

9.  I.  2 

Triputa    

4.  2,  2 

3.  2,  2 

7,  2,  2 

5.  2,  2 

9.  2,  2 

Atatala    

4,4,2,2 

3.3.2,2 

7.7.2,2 

5. 5.  2, 2 

9,9.2,2 

Ekatala   

4 

3 

7 

5 

6 

Soiiictiiiics  ill  practice  this  is  jjlayed  6,  4,  4,  although  theoretically  wrong. 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA. 


37 


Talas  can  be  denoted  by  the  following  signatures 


denotint 


I   unit  of  time. 

-7 


4 

8 

12 

i6 


Should 


Anudrutha     u 

Drutha  o 

Lagu      I 

Guru 6 

Plutha  3 

Kakupatha    -(- 

The  jati  of  the  tala  is  usually  appended  to  the  signature  in  words, 
nothing  be  appended,  then  the  Chaturushra  is  generally  understood. 

In  order  to  employ  these  signs  they  should  be  substituted  for  the  figures 
in  the  table:  thus  ion  will  denote  the  Chaturushra  jati  of  Druvatala.  Hence, 
when  written  in  European  notation,  there  is  often  a  constant  rotation  cor- 
responding to  the  tala  of  bars  of  different  time  signatures. 

Each  tala  can  be  played  in  any  order — i.e.,  4244  can  be  played  2444, 
4424,  or  4442. 

The  application  of  the  talas  to  an  air  is  called  Graha,  and  is  of  four 
kinds,  viz.  :  — 

(i.)    Sama"  — When  the  first  beat  of  the  tala  falls  upon  the  first  note 

of  the  air. 
(2.)  Anagata — When  the  air  commences  after  the  first  beat  of  the  tala 

which  therefore  falls  upon  a  rest. 
(3.)   Atiyita — When  the  tala  continues  after  the  air  is  finished,  the  last 

beat  therefore  falling  upon  a  rest. 
(4.)  Vichama — Comprises   anv   irregularity   not  included  in   the  above 
three,  such   as  the  beat  of  a  tala  falling  upon  the  first  note  of  a 
bar  tied  to  the  last  note  of  the  bar  preceding,  &c. 
The   Chaturushra  jati    of  Triputa    Tala    is   also    known   by    the    name    of 
Aditala,  and  is  a  very  common  time  for  javadis,  and  other  love  songs. 

There  being  practically  no  harmony  in  Hindu  music,  clefs,  as  in  the  European 
system,  are  not  employed.  The  kevnote  is  always  Sa,  and,  as  already  stated,  is 
taken  of  any  pitch  to  suit  the  requirements  of  the  performer  or  the  nature  of  the 
instrument. 


'  This  term  is  also  used  to  signify  the  strong  accent. 


CHAPTER    IV. 


Ka<ja — How  dtlined — Notes  essential  to  composition  of — \'adi  and  Samvadi  notes — Modern 
meaning  of  Murchana — Examples  of  Murchana  applied — Ancient  and  modern  methods  of 
performance  of  raga — How  differing — Alapa — Madhyamakala — Gamakas — Classification  of 
ragas — Popular  scales  for — Allied  to  certain  passions  — Peculiarities — How  apportioned  to 
seasons  and  hours — "  Kattika,"  or  list  of  modern  ragas. 

AS  raga  constitutes  what  may  be  called  the  very  foundation  of  Indian 
music,  it  merits  a  chapter  to  itself.  The  term  raga  may  be  best 
explained  as  "  melody  type,"  since  it  is  a  melodic  extension  of  certain 
notes  of  a  particular  scale  or  mode  (that),  according  to  certain  fixed  rules  called 
the  murchana.' 

The  literal  meaning  of  the  word  raga  is  "that  which  creates  passion,"  and 
hence,  according  to  the  Hindu  idea,  a  raga  signifies  a  succession  of  notes  so 
arranged,  according  to  prescribed  rules,  as  to  awaken  a  certain  feeling  of  the 
mind  and  an  effect  differing,  it  may  be,  in  the  minutest  particulars  from  that 
derivable  from  another  raga. 

These  notes  can  be  played  in  any  degree  or  movement  of  time  without 
destroying  the  inherent  character  of  the  raga,  though  the  mode  or  that  must 
remain  the  same  throughout. 

The  notes  essential  to  the  composition  of  a  raga  are  of  four  kinds — viz., 
vadi,  samvadi,  anuvadi,  and  vivadi. 

By  the  vadi  is  meant  any  note  which,  by  reason  of  its  continual  recurrence. 


'  The  word  Raga  docs  not  appear  to  have  been  used  in  its  jirosent  technical  sense  until  a  date  later  than 
has  been  generally  supposed.  It  is  worthy  of  note  that  in  the  oldest  Indian  musical  treatise,  the  Bhdrata 
Natya  S'astra,  the  word  Raga  appears  hardly  at  all;  and  no  special  adhyaya  is  devoted  to  it,  as  is  invarial)ly 
the  case  in  all  subsequent  Sanskrit  treatises.  The  employment  of  raga  as  understood  in  the  Sangita 
Ratnakcra  and  subsequently  was  evidently  unknown  at  the  time  when  Bharata  wrote.  But  in  its  place 
there  was  a  system  of  what  are  called  by  Bharata 7«/;s.  This  word,  meaning  literally  genus,  would  seem  to 
be  of  kindred  meaning  to  the  old  Greek  musical  term  yivoc.  Some  centuries  later,  when  the  Sangita 
Ratndkera  was  written,  the  term  raga  appears  to  have  been  substituted  for  jati. 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA. 


39 


or  bv  its  being  specially  accentuated  or  dwelt  upon,  shows  to  the  best  advantage 
the  characteristics  of  the  raga.  Hence  the  vadi  is  called  the  "  Rajah  "  (king), 
and  by  Hindustani  musicians  the  "Jan  "  or  life  and  soul  of  the  raga. 

The  samvadi  is  usually  either  the  fourth  or  fifth,  the  vadi  being  taken  as  the 
tonic,  or  both  fourth  and  fifth  when  both  are  admissible  in  the  raga. 

The  samvadis  are  commonly  arranged  as  follows  : — 


Vadi. 

Samvadi. 

Madhyama  and  Panchama 

Shadja         

Rishaba 

Dhaivata 

Gandhara    ... 

Nishada 

Madhyama.. 

Nishada  and  Shadja 

Panchama  ... 

Shadja 

Dhaivata 

Rishaba 

Nishada       

Gandhara  and  Madhyama 

A  list  of  these  notes  has  been  given  because  in  many  of  the  Sanskrit 
treatises  directions  are  given  to  employ  samvadi  alternating  or  otherwise  in 
conjunction  with  the  vadi  notes  in  the  performance  of  certain  ragas.  In  the  text 
these  samvadi  notes  are  not  shown  ;  but  they  are  known  from  their  respective 
vadis,  in  much  the  same  way  that  an  accompanying  harmony  to  an  air  used 
to  be,  in  European  music,  often  merely  figured. 

In  modern  dispositions  Panchama  is  admitted  as  a  samvadi  to  Rishaba  and 
vice  versa.  According  to  the  authorities,  Nishada  cannot  be  samvadi  to  any 
other  note  than  Gandhara,  and  vice  versa.  Madhyama  therefore  can  have  only 
one  samvadi,  which  will  be  Shadja  ;  though,  according  to  the  calculations,  it  is 
shown  to  have  Nishada  too  for  its  samvadi  ;  Nishada  will  have  Gandhara  only 
for  its  samvadi. 

Bv  the  vivadi,  or  enemy,  is  meant  a  note  which,  being  inadmissible, 
would  therefore  destroy  the  special  characteristics  of  any  raga. 

All  other  notes  not  comprised  among  the  foregoing  are  stvled  Anuvadi. 

The  rules  for  determining  the  succession  and  style  of  the  notes  composing 
a  rasfa  are  called  the  murchana  of  that  ratra. 

By  the  murchana  is  meant  not  only  the  stvle,  but  also  the  time  ;  it  gives 
the   relative   values   assigned   to   the   different   notes,  the  accentuation,  and   anv 


4° 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTH ERS  INDIA. 


peculiarity  of  expression  or  tempo  essential  to  the  correct  execution  of  the  raga, 
such  as  can  only  be  learned  by  actually  hearing  it  performed. 

In  a  musician's  kattika,  or  scale  book,  the  ascending  and  descending 
modes  alone  of  a  raga  are  given,  no  directions  as  to  the  value  of  the  notes,  &c., 
being  assigned  ;  indeed,  often  the  scale  itself  is  not  given. 

All  this  is  implied  in  the  murchana,  and  without  understanding  the  murchana 
it  is  therefore  impossible  to  play  any  raga. 

The  murchana  is  never  written,  but  is  invariably  taught  orally  ;  often  by 
means  of  songs,  &c.,  in  the  same  raga. 

For  example,  in  the  kattika,  the  te.xt  of  the  raga  "  S'ri  "  is  given  thus  : — 
Ascending  mode — Sa,  ri,  ma,  pa,  ri,  sa. 
Descending  mode — Sa,  ri,  pa,  dha,  ni,  pa,  ma,  ri,  ga,  ri,  sa. 

These  notes  must  follow  each  other  in  proper  succession  ;  for  instance, 
when  the  melody  is  ascending,  the  note  Ma  must  follow  Ri  ;  in  descending,  a 
similar  method  of  progression  must  be  adhered  to.  Hence  from  these  notes, 
without  breaking  the  rules,  many  melodies  can  be  formed. 

But  yet  there  is  a  certain  style  peculiar  to  each  raga  :  certain  notes  must 
be  dwelt  upon,  some  played  staccato;  others  with  a  peculiar  expression,  grace 
or  tremor. 

If  the  notes  of  one  of  these  melodies  were  written  as  No.  i  below,  no  two 
persons  could  play  them  alike  ;  each  would  naturally  put  his  own  interpretation 
upon  them.  The  interpretation,  therefore,  is  supplied  by  the  murchana,  when 
the  melody  appears  as  No.  2  : — 


No.  I.     S'ri  Raga. 


i 


^ 


No.  2.2 


Andante. 


-^^-^ 


.  rail.   . 
tr  tr 


5 


a  tempo. 


S 


mil. 
w 


S 


1^^ 


m^'- 


When  a  composition  is  said  to  be  in  a  certain  raga,  it  means  that  it  employs 


'  The  grace  here  implied  is  more  the  "  Bebung,"  or  vibrato,  than  anything  else,  and  cannot  therefore  be 
executed  upon  a  pianoforte.  In  the  clavichord  it  consists  in  giving  to  the  key  a  certain  trembling  pressure 
producing  a  pulsation  of  sound  without  any  interval  of  silence.  In  stringed  instruments  the  effect  is  obtained 
by  a  rocking  movement  of  the  finger  without  raising  it  from  the  string.  This  peculiar  grace  must  be 
remembered  as  applying  specially  to  all  Indian  melodies.  It  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  Indian  stringed 
instruments,  owing  to  the  great  length  of  their  strings  in  proportion  to  the  thickness,  are  far  less  confined 
in  their  intonation  than  are  European  instniuionts,  conseijucntly  they  are  capable  of  producing  an  infinity 
of  delicate  grace  by  modification  of  pitch  that  cannot  be  expressed  in  our  notation. 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA. 


41 


the  same  scale,  melod3'-type  and  notes  ;  and,  in  fact,  illustrates  the  character 
and  st3le  of  that  raga  in  every  way. 

How  widely  the  characters  of  the  various  ragas  differ  can  be  told  by  a 
glance  at  the  following  short  melodies,  all  of  which  show  as  much  as  possible 
the  full  murchanas  of  their  respective  ragas  : — 


Andante. 


S'aiikarabbarna  Raj^a. 


■W  VI 


-ji — w- 


~^  r  r  r  y' 


^=^ 


^r^4^^-=^ 


Nata  Raga. 


^g^^^^fe^-^^i^gs^^^f 


mm 


Kombodi  Raga. 


-0- 


it 


W. 


HI 


fej^fe^ 


j^pi 


^m-9- 


Mukari  Raga. 


:fl^ 


1  (.  ,,  rT^^ 


w 


-tea 


Bhupali  Raga. 


5t 


^ 


{i 


Since  the  early  days  of  Indian  music  the  essential  conditions  under  which 
the  ragas  were  composed  and  performed  have  altered  greatly.  Formerly,  we 
learn,  the  ragas  in  performance  were  divided  into  four  parts  or  movements,  called 
respectively  the  Sthayi,  (2)  the  Antara,  (3)  the  Sanchari,  (4)  the  Abhoga.  The 
precise  meaning  attached  to  these  terms,  when  applied  thus,^  seems  to  have  been 
lost  in  obscurity.  At  the  present  time,  however,  it  matters  little,  for  the  modern 
theory  teaches  that  in  the  performance  of  raga  as  a  solo,  two  movements  onlv 
are  taken  into  consideration.  These  movements  are  known  as  the  Alapa  and 
the  Madhyamakala,  and  answer  approximately  to  the  Adagio  (perhaps 
rhapsody  would  convey  a  nearer  meaning)  and  Scherzo  of  a  sonata. 

To  convey  in  writing  an  adequate  idea  of  what  an  alapa  consists  is 
somewhat  difficult  ;  it  is  not  exactly  a  song,  the  music  not  being  set  to  any 
particular  words  ;  neither  is  it  an  air,  for  it  is  not  confined  in  its  rhvthm.  An 
alapa  may  be  said  to  be  rather  a  kind  of  rhapsody,  which  abounds  with  grace 
and  embellishments  of  all  kinds,  and  is  formed  by  an  extension,  according  to  the 
murchana,  of  the  notes  of  the  raga,  in  such  a  way  that  all  the  characteristics  of 


'  For  the  modern  iuterpretation  of  these  terms,  see  page  S6. 


42 


THE  MUSIC  or  SOUTHERN  INDIA. 


that  raga  arc  prominently  shown,  and  scope  is  given  to  the  performer's  power  of 
improvising. 

The  phrases  vary  in  length,  some  being  slow,  with  quick  modulations 
succeeding,  and  others  vice  versa,  the  beats  upon  the  accompanying  strings 
marking  the  time  being  given  at  the  performer's  fancy. 

As  a  rule  the  voice  is  not  employed  in  the  performance  of  an  alapa  ;  but  if 
used  at  all  it  is  either  in  unison  with  the  instrument  or  else  accompanied  by  a 
simple  running  accompaniment  upon  the  open  strings.  Occasionally  the  voice 
is  relieved  by  the  instruments  taking  up  the  melody,  varied  with  soft  imitations 
in  the  same  raga.  In  fact,  so  much  is  left  to  the  taste  and  fancy  of  the  musician, 
that  it  is  impossible  to  lay  down  any  definite  rules  for  the  constitution  of  an 
alapa  ;  hence,  as  may  be  imagined,  in  movements  of  this  sort,  there  is  a  kind  of 
wild  charm  which  seems  to  carry  with  it  a  plaintive  refrain  that  lingers  on  in  the 
mind  of  the  listener  long  after  the  music  has  ceased.  Perhaps  the  only  composer 
who  appears  to  have  caught  the  entire  spirit  of  these  peculiar  improvisations  is 
Chopin  ;  though,  as  far  as  we  know,  his  acquaintance  with  Oriental  music  must 
have  been  limited. 

Following  the  alapa  is  the  madhyamakala,  or  second  movement.  This,  as 
has  been  said  before,  can  be  compared  to  the  Scherzo  of  a  sonata — the  music  being 
very  lively  and  catchy,  while  the  tempo  is  quick  and  regular  throughout. 

Like  the  alapa,  the  madhyamakala  consists  of  an  extension  according  to  the 
proper  rules  of  the  raga  ;  in  fact,  a  development  of  thanas,  explained  else- 
where, reduced  to  a  definite  measure.  The  periods  are  usually  shorter,  and  the 
rhvthm  regular  throughout.  The  original  subject  is  imitated  and  varied,  as  the 
performer's  fancy  may  dictate,  in  the  same  raga.  The  whole  construction  of  this 
movement  is  symmetrical. 

The  madhyamakala  consists  usually  of  two  parts,  the  second  only  differing 
from  the  first  in  that  the  tempo  is  more  rapid. 

In  the  performance  of  a  raga  there  is  usually  a  short  pause  between  the  two 
movements  ;  also  between  the  two  parts  of  the  madhyamakala  ;  but  it  is  entirely 
optional  to  the  plaver. 

The  methods  by  which  the  different  notes  are  varied,  or  follow  each  other, 
are  styled  by  the  Sanskrit  treatises  "  Gamakas,"  and  are  arranged  as  follows  : — 

1.  Arohana — ascending. 

2.  Avarohana — descending. 

3.  Dhalu — alternating  with  anv  given  note. 

4.  Sphurita — repeated  ;  ascending. 

5.  Kampita — trembling. 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA.  43 

6.  Ahata — slurred. 

7.  Pratya-ahata — repeated  ;  descending. 

8.  Tripastya — the   first    and    second   notes    thrice   repeated,   the    third 

twice,  thus  :  wuw  |  ^wvj  |  — v^  |    or  ^^  uu  |  wu  w  |  wu  | 
g.  Andhola — the  two  first  notes  and  the  fourth  of  short  duration  ;  the 
third  long,  thus  :  uu — w 
Racjas  are  fjenerallv  classified  as  follows  :— 

(i.)   Sampurna — in  which  all  seven  notes  of  the  gamut  are  employed, 
(ii.)  Sharava — in  which  six  notes  only  are  employed, 
(iii.)  Orava — in  which  five  notes  only  are  employed. 
These  three  classes  are  again  sub-divided  into  three,  viz  : — 

Suddha,  or  pure,  which  show  the  characteristic  of  one  raga  only. 
Salanka,  or  mi.xed,  showing  the  characteristics  of  two  ragas. 
Sankirna,  or  mixed,  showing  the  characteristics  of  more  than  two  ragas. 
The   six   original  ragas  are  the  only   instances   of  the   Suddha  class  ;  but 
opinions  differ  so  widely  as  to  the  present  names  of  these  six  ragas,  and  as  to 
how  the  modern  ragas  have  assumed  their  present  form,  that  it  would  be  nearly 
impossible  to  make  any  classification.     The  nomenclature  of  all  the  ragas  differs 
in  various  parts  of  India;  and  so  many  and  subtle  are  the  distinctions  between 
the  different  ragas,  each  of  which  has  a  character  of  its  own,  exclusive,  if  a  mixed 
raga,  of  that  of  the  ragas  from  which  it  may  be  derived,  that  to  give  more  than  a 
few  examples  would  be  an  almost  endless,  if  not  impossible,  task. 
Ragas  in  the  following  scales  seem  to  be  the  most  popular  * : — 
Mayamalavagaula  Harikambogi  Kamavardini 

Nata-Bhairavi  Dehra-S'ankarabharna  Matsyakaliani 

Karaharaprya  Chalanata  Jalavarali 

Hanumatodi 
Some  ragas  are  commonly  supposed  to  create  particular  passions.     Those 
more  usuallv  met  with  are  the  followinjr  : — 
Bhupali — beauty 


Nata — valour 
Malava — fear 
S'ri — fjrandeur 


to' 


Mangari — kindness 
Bhairavi — anger 

Bhangala — wonder 
Ragas  derived  from  any  of  the  above  are  said  to  possess  the  same  inherent 
qualities. 

*  It  may  be  interesting  to  notice  that  the  Greek  chromatic  genus  is  represented  by  the  scale 
Mayamalavagaula,  and  the  Greek  diatonic  modes  thus:  Dorian,  Hanumatodi;  Phrygian,  Karaharaprya: 
Lydian,  Dehra-S'ankarabharna;  Hypolydian,  Matsyakaliani;  Ionic,  Harikambogi;  and /Eolic,  Nata-Bhairavi. 


44 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA. 


The  following  ragas  resemble  each  other  so  closely  that  they  are  very 
difficult  to  distinguish  apart,  and  are  frequently  used  as  tests  of  skill  by 
musicians  of  repute  : — 


Mohanna  and  Regupti 
Lalita  and  Vasantha 
Bhaiili  and  Bhupali 
Todi  and  Deshyatodi 
Arabi  and  Devagandari 
Mangfi  and  Huseni 


Durbar  and  Nayuki 
Bilahari  and  Deshackshi 
Pantovarali  and  Karmavirdini 
Purvi-Kaliani  and  Gamanasrama 
Saranga  and  Bhupa-Kaliani 
Mohanna-Kaliani  and  Kaliani-Keseri 


In  the  performance  of  certain  ragas  it  is  usual  to  employ  accidentals  in  place 
of  some  of  the  notes  shown  in  the  text.  The  reason  for  this  is  not  evident,  but 
it  seems  to  be  an  almost  universal  custom  among  Hindu  musicians.  This  might 
be  accounted  for  as  being  in  imitation  of  Northern  Indian  music,  in  which  a  pure 
raga  is  seldom  played,  but  usually  a  melody  composed  of  three  or  four  ragas. 
It  seems  far  more  likely,  however,  that  the  use  of  accidentals  has  been  employed 
from  the  undeniable  beauty  that  they  add  to  a  melody,  much  as  when  a  change 
of  keys  is  made  in  modulation.  Examples  of  melodies  in  mixed  ragas  will  be 
found  upon  pages  88,  8g. 

The  most  important  of  these  ragas  are  the  following  : — ■ 


Raga. 

Mode. 

Note  marked. 

Note  played. 

Kombodi      

Harikambogi     

Kaisika  Ni,  B?   ... 

Kakeli  Ni,  Bl] 

Biag     

k)               

Suddha  Ma,  Ft]    ... 

Prati  Ma,  FJ 

Athana 

)j               

Sadharama  Ga,  Et] 

Antara  Ga.Djf 

Nn  talcii  rAn  iJ'i 

Pa,  Gtl 

Chatusruti  Dha,  A'^ 

Bhaiiavi       

n                        

Nata-Bhairavi 

Suddha  Dha,  Ab.. 

Ananda-Bhairavi. . 

tt               

Kaisika  Ni,  A?     ... 

Kakeli  Ni,  Bt] 

Todi      

Hanumatodi     

Anta  Ga,  D5 

Suddha  Ga,  Dlj 

Kafi      

Karaharaprja   

Kaisika  Ni,  B?     ... 

Kakeli  Ni,  Bt] 

Biagada        

Dehra-S'ankarabharna 

Kakeh  Ni,  Btj      ... 

Kaisika  Ni,  AJf 

Bilahari        

Matsya-Kaliani 

KakeH  Ni,  Bl]      ... 

»»           j» 

Severi  ...      

Mayamalavagaula   ... 

Antara  Ga,  E 
Kakeli  Ni,  B 

Sadharama  Ga,  DJJ  i 
Kaisika  Ni,  AJ         | 

Ananda-Bhairavi.. 

Nata-Bhairavi 

Suddha  Dha,  Al?... 
Sadharama  Ga,  Eb 

Chatusruti  Dha,  Ail)  i 
Antara  Ga,  Et|         ] 

Khamas       

Harikambogi    

Kaisika  Ni,  B:'    ... 

Kakeli  Ni,  B 

Kedara  Gaula      ... 

i»               

,,              »,     ... 

M                    ») 

Surati 

)>               

,,              ,,      •  •  • 

))                    J» 

Janjuti          

j»               

Antara  Ga,  E 

Sadharama  Ga,  Dj 

*  The  Ananda-Bhairavi  uf  this  kind  is  very  popular  iu  Travancore  and  the  adjacent  parts. 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  IXDIA.  45 

In  the  extension  of  some  ragas  a  note,  either  above  or  below  a  particular 
note  of  the  text,  may  be  employed,  although  itself  not  an  essential  part  of  the 
raga.  If  this  is  done  the  performer  will  invariably  take  the  preceding 
note  of  the  text  ai:^ain  before  he  plays  that  following.  For  example,  the 
text  may  show  "  dha  sa "  {i.e.,  "  ni  "  omitted).  If  "  ni  "  is  employed, 
"dha"  is  repeated  immediately  before  "  sa,"  as  "dha,  ni,  dha,  sa,"  and  not 
"  dha,  ni,  sa." 

The  foresoine:  are  some  of  the  more  important  of  the  manv  rules  attached 
to  the  performance  of  ragas,  and  only  by  the  strict  observance  of  them  can  a 
piece  be  correctly  executed. 

It  is  perhaps  needless  to  add  that  in  so  intricate  and  scientific  a  system 
justice  is  seldom  done  except  at  the  hands  of  very  skilful  musicians,  and  they  are 
but  rarely  met  with. 

In  all  the  Sanskrit  treatises  a  system  seems  to  have  been  laid  down  by 
which  the  different  ragas  are  apportioned  to  certain  seasons  of  the  year  and 
hours  of  the  day. 

In  modern  times  this  system,  as  far  as  the  hour  of  the  day  is  concerned,  is 
still  carried  out,  and  no  musician,  unless  specially  ordered,  will  sing  any  raga 
out  of  the  prt)per  time  of  day  apportioned  for  it.  The  reason  given  for  this  is, 
according  to  Willard,  that  musicians  declare  that  the  times  and  seasons 
allotted  to  each  are  those  at  which  the  divinities  are  at  leisure  to  attend 
at  the  place  where  their  favourite  tune  is  sung,  and  to  inspire  the  performer 
with  due  warmth  in  his  execution.  Superstition  seems  to  have  given  birth 
to  this  absurd  custom,  and  it  still  exercises  a  strong  hold  upon  all  professional 
musicians,  principally  from  the  fact  that  it  has  been  handed  down  from  time 
immemorial ;  therefore  it  would  be  considered  improper  to  make  any  change. 
Even  in  educated  circles  among  Hindus  it  would  be  thought  a  display  of 
ignorance  to  call  for  a  particular  raga,  unless  for  some  special  reason,  at 
an  improper  season. 

The  modern  custom  which  lays  down  this  hard  and  fast  law  seems  to  differ 
widely  from  that  of  all  the  ancient  authorities,  the  names  of  the  ragas  now 
apportioned  to  the  different  periods  of  the  day  being  quite  at  variance  with  the 
directions  contained  in  the  Sanskrit ;  indeed,  the  writer  of  each  treatise  seems  to 
have  had  a  classification  of  his  own  distinct  from  that  of  other  authorities.  At 
the  present  time  musicians  divide  the  twenty-four  hours  of  the  day  into  four 
periods,  each  of  which  is  sub-divided  into  two  parts.     The  following  table  shows 

M 


46  THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERX  INDIA. 

at    a    glance  the  hours   appointed    for  the    performance    of  the    popular    ragas 
according  to  the  Karnatik  system  : — 


In  Northern  India,  and  among  Hindustani  musicians,  a  different  time 
classification  of  the  ragas  is  in  use. 

The  followinir  is  a  list  of  all  the  ratras  used  in  Southern  Indian  music, 
together  with  their  modes  and  text,  arranged  precisely  as  in  a  native  musician's 
Kattika  or  scale  book.  Notes  that  are  specially  emphasised  or  continually 
dwelt  upon  are  underlined  : — 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA. 


47 


SCALE   OF   MAYAMALAVAGAULA. 

Name  of  Raga. 

Ascending  Mode. 

Descending  Mode. 

Matsya-Bhauli 

C  D?  E  G  A>  B  C    . 

C  B  Ab  G  F  E  Db  C 

Malahari 

C  D7  F  G  A?  C 

C  A:^  G  F  E  D7  C 

Bhauli   . 

C  U7  E  G  A-"  C 

C  B  A7  G  E  D?  C 

Sindutha-Rangini  . 

C  U7  E  F  a:?  B  C     . 

C  B  G  A7  F  E  D7  C 

Karnatika-Sarant;a 

C  DP  E  F  E  G  B  A>  F  G 

Ab  B  C    . 

C  A7  F  G  F  E  Db  C 

Gauri     . 

C  D?  F  G  B  C 

C  B  A7  G  F  E  D7  C 

Saranga-Nata 

C  Di>  F  G  Ab  C 

C  B  A?  G  F  D?  F  E  Db  C 

Megha-Rangini 

C  D7  F  G  A>  B  C     . 

C  Ab  G  F  E  D?  C 

Purvi    t 

C  D>  E  F  G  A^  B  G  C 

C  B  AC  G  F  E  D7  C 

Kohkila-virdani 

C  F  E  G  A?  B  C       . 

C  B  A?  F  E  D7  C 

Nebo-Rangini 

C  D?  E  D?  F  G  A?  B  C 

C  B  A?  F  E  C 

Gaula    . 

C  D>  F  G  B  C 

C  B  G  F  E  F  Db  E  F  Db  C 

Maruva  f 

C  D>  F  G  B  C 

C  B  Ab  G  F  E  F  Db  C 

Sudda-krya    . 

C  Di?  F  G  Ab  G  B  C 

C  B  A?  G  F  Db  E  F  D7  C 

Jagan-mohini 

C  E  F  G  B  C    . 

C  B  G  F  E  D?  C 

Gaujari. 

C  D7  E  F  G  A>  C     . 

C  Ab  G  F  E  D?  C 

Sindhu-ramakrya  . 

C  Di?  F  G  A7  B  A?  C 

C  B  G  F  D?  E  D7  C 

Gundakrya  t  • 

C  D?  E  Di?  F  G  B  A7  B  C 

C  B  A7  G  F  E  Di>  E  C 

Phirju    . 

C  F  G  A?  F  E  D?  E  Dl?  E  F  G  a!?  B  C 

C  B  A?  G  F  E  Db  C 

Ramakrya 

CDi?EFGFAi?BC      . 

C  B  A7  G  F  K  F  C 

Purna-sadyama 

C  D?  E  F  G  Ai? 

G  F  E  Db  C  B  Ab  B  C 

Sarasa-mangala     . 

C  E  F  B  A7  C  . 

C  Ab  G  F  E  Db  C 

Rama-Lalita  . 

CD7EFGBGC. 

CBAbFGFEC 

Lalita    . 

C  F  E  Ai?  B  C  . 

C  B  Ab  F  E  D7  C 

Bibasu   . 

C  Di?  E  G  A?  C 

C  Ab  G  E  Db  C 

Gaulipantu  t  . 

C  D?  F  G  B  C  . 

C  B  A7  G  F  Ab  F  E  D7  C 

Vasantha 

C  E  F  Ai?  B  C  . 

C  B  Ab  F  E  D7  C 

Severi    . 

C  D--  F  G  Ab  C 

C  B  Ab  G  F  E  D7  C 

Bulangi 

C  E  D7  E  F  G  Ai?  G  C 

C  B  Ab  G  F  E  D7  C 

Bogi      . 

C  D?  F  G  Ab  C 

1  C  Ab  B  Ab  G  F  D7  F  E  D?  C 

Nada-namakrya     . 

C  D7  F  E  F  G  Ai?  C 

C  B  A7  G  F  E  D7  C 

Desya-gaula  . 

C  Di?  C  G  A7  B  C     . 

C  B  A7  G  Db  C 

SCALE   OF    NATA-BHAIRAVL 

Sudda-Deshi. 

C  D  F  G  Ab  Bi?  C     . 

C  Bb  Ab  G  F  Eb  D  C 

Bhairavi 

C  Eb  D  Eb  F  G  A''  B--  C 

C  B7  Ab  F  G  F  E?  D  C 

Riti-gaula 

C  E?  D  E?  F  B?  A?  B7  C 

C  B7  Ab  F  Eb  F  G  F  E7  D  C 

Ananda-Bhairavif. 

C  E:?  D  E?  F  G  C     . 

C  B7  Ab  G  F  E?  D  C 

Nata-Mangala 

C  Ey  E7  F  G  A?  B7  C 

C  Bb  Ab  G  F  D  E7  D  C 

Suddha-Danyashi  . 

C  E7  F  G  B?  C. 

C  B7  G  F  E.--  C 

Hindola-Vasantham 

C  D  F  G  A?  B?  Ab  C 

C  B7  A7  G  F  Ab  F  Eb  D  C 

Amruta-vahini 

C  E?  F  G  Ab  Bb  C    . 

C  Bb  Ab  F  E?  D  C 

Jankaravani  . 

C  D  D  Eb  F  G  Bb  C 

C  Bb  Ab  G  F  D  C 

Abheri   . 

C  E7  D  Eb  F  B7  C 

C  B7  A7  G  F  Eb  D  C 

Abhogi  . 

C  D  E?  F  Ab  C 

C  Ab  F  Eb  D   C 

Kanaka- Vasdntha . 

C  D  F  G  BP  C . 

C  Bb  G  F  E7  D  F  Eb  C 

Karyamati 

C  D  Eb  G  Ab  C 

C  Bb  Ab  G  Ab  F  E7  D  C 

Yoga-Bhairavi 

C  D  E7  F  G  A?  C     . 

C  Bb  Ab  G  D  C 

Adi-Bhairavi 

C  E?  D  Eb  F  G  A?  C 

C  A7  G  F  G  E7  D  C 

Mangi   . 

C  D  E7  F  G  B7  Ab  Bb  G  Ab  B7  C  . 

C  B7  Ab  G  F  E7  F  G  E""  D  C 

Chalana-Varali 

C  D  E?  F  Ab  Bb  Ab  C      . 

C  B7  A7  F  E7  D  C 

NoiE.— Ragas  marked  f  have  two  readings,  the  otlier  readings  are  given  at  tlie  end  oi  this  chapter. 


48 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA. 


SCALE  OF  NATA-BHAIRAVI— co;i<i««ei. 


Name  of  Raga. 


Ascending  Mode. 


Descending  Mode. 


Nava-Manohari 
Vasantha-Varali     . 
W'oodya-chandrika  I 
Kanara-gaula 
Mara-Rangini 
Rudraganthara 
Mukari  . 
Hamakrya 
Chandrika-Bhairavi 


C  U  F  Ab  Bl?  C 

C 

C  E?  F  G  At*  B?       . 

c 

C  D  E7  F  G  A7  B?  C 

c 

C  E?  D  E7  F  G  A?  B>  C 

c 

C  D  E?  F  G  a:'  B7  C 

c 

C  U  E?  D  F  G  F  Ab  B?  G  C    . 

c 

C  D  F  G  B:?  A?  C     . 

c 

C  D  E.-'  F  G  Ab  B?  C 

c 

C  Eb  D  Eb  F  Ab  Bb  C      . 

c 

Bb  G  F  D  C 

Ab  G  E?  D  C 
A7  G  F  D  C 

b:'  a?  g  f  e:*  d  c 

Ab  G  E7  D  C 
Bb  A?  F  E7  C 
Bb  Ab  G  F  E?  D  C 
Ab  G  F  D  E?  F  D  C 
B?  A?  F  Eb  D  C 


SCALE    OF    HANUMATODL 


Naga-Varali  . 
Punaga-Todi . 
Danyas'i 
Todi       . 
Des'ya-Todi  . 
Ghambhira- 
Vasantha 
Hima-virdini 
Suddha-samantiia 
Shadola-rava 


C  Bb  Cb  Db  F  G  Ab 

Bb  Ab  Bb  C  Db  E?  F  G  A,''  B.-* 

C  Eb  F  G  Bb  C 

C  Db  Ei?  F  Ab  Bb  C 

C  D?  E?  F  G  Ab  Bb  C     . 

C  F  Eb  F  Db  Eb  F  G  Bb  Ab  B?  G  C 

C  Db  F  G  Bb  C 

C  D?  E7  F  G  Bb  Ab  C      . 

C  Db  F  G  Ab  C 


G  F  Eb  Db  C  Bb  C 

Ab  G  F  Eb  Db  C  Bb  Ab  Bb  c 

C  Bb  A7  G  F  E7  D7  C 

C  B7  A7  F  Eb  Db  C 

C  Bb  A?  Bb  Ab  G  F  Eb  Db  C 

C  Ab  G  F  D7  C 

C  Bb  A7  G  F  A7  F  Eb  D7  C 
C  Ab  B7  G  A7  F  Eb  D7  C 
C  Bb  Ab  B7  G  F  Eb  Db  C 


SCALE    OF   CHACRAVAKA. 


Vaga-vahini  . 

CDbEFGABbAC     . 

C  Bb  A  G  F  E  Db  C 

Kalavati 

C  D7  E  F  G  A  Bb  G  C     . 

C  Bb  A  Bb  G  F  E  D7 

Bhalati  . 

C  Db  E  F  G  A  Bb  C 

C  Bb  G  F  Db  E 

Rudra-Panchama  . 

C  E  F  Bb  A  C 

C  Bb  A  F  E  Db  C 

Vasantha-lila 

C  Db  F  G  A  B7  C    . 

C  Bb  A  G  E  D7  C 

Bhujangha     . 

C  D7  C  F  E  F  Bb  A  Bb  C 

C  Bb  A  F  E  Db  C 

SCALE   OF   SURYAKANTA. 


Saurashtra 

Ahiri  +  . 
Sahuli    . 
Sindhu  . 
Ragamalini    . 
Suddiia-gandirvi 


CDbFEFGABC 
CFEFGABC 
C  E  F  G  B  C    . 
C  E  Db  F  G  A  B  C 
C  Db  E  F  G  A  C 
CDbEFGABC 


C  A  G  F  E  C 
C  B  A  G  F  E  Db  C 
C  B  A  G  E  Db  C 
C  A  G  F  E  Db  E  C 
C  A  D7  A  G  F  E  F  D7 
C  A  G  F  D7  C 


SCALE   OF   KARAHARAPRYA. 


Manirangu     . 

C  D  F  G  Bb  C 

S'riraga 

C  D  F  G  Bb  C 

Madvamavati 

C  D  F  G  B7  C 

Sindlni-Danvasi     . 

C  D  E7  F  G  Bb 

Thano-Vasantha    . 

C  Eb  F  G  Bb  C 

Karnaka-Varali 

C  D  F  G  Bb  C 

Panchama      . 

C  D  A  G  Bb  C 

A  C 


C  B''  G  F  Eb  D  C 

C  Bb  G  A  B7  G  F  D  Eb 

C  Bb  G  F  D  C 

C  Bb  A  G  F  Eb  D  C 

C  Bb  A  G  F  Eb  D  C 

C  Bb  A  Bb  G  F  Eb  D  C 

C  B7  A  G  F  Eb  D  C 


DC 


Note. — Kagas  marked  f  have  two  readings,  the  other  readings  arc  given  at  the  end  of  this  chapter. 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA. 


49 


SCALE  OF  KAKAHAKAPRYA— coH/iHi/fif. 

Name  of  Riga. 

Ascending  Mode. 

Descending  Mode. 

Deva-krya 

'  C  F>  D  Eb  F  G  A  Bb  A  C 

C  B>  A  G  F  E7  D  C 

Syindavi 

B?  A  B7  C  D  Eb  F  G  A  B? 

B?  A  G  F  E?  D  C  B>  A  B7  C 

Manohari 

C  E>  D  E7  F  G  A  C 

'  C  A  G  F  E?  D  Ef  C 

Suddha-Bliangala 

C  D  F  G  A  C    . 

C  B?  A  G  F  E7  D  C 

Suddha-Bhairavi 

C  E?  D  F  G  B7  A  B7  C   . 

C  B7  A  G  F  D  E7  F  D  C 

Kapi  +   . 

C  D  E7  F  G  A  B?  C 

C  A  G  F  D  E?  F  D  C 

Pala-Mangeri  i 

C  E7  F  A  C       . 

C  B7  A  G  F  E7  D  C 

Jey-Manohari 

C  D  E?  F  A  C 

C  B7  G  F  E?  D  C 

Nayuki  . 

C  D  F  G  A  B?  G  C  . 

C  B7  A  G  F  E7  D  C 

Vasani  . 

C  D  E7  F  G  B.-'  A  Bb  C   . 

C  Bb  A  F  G  F  E?  D  C 

Mangeri 

C  D  Ei?  F  G  B.^  C     . 

C  Bb  A  F  Ej?  D  C 

Nadatha-Rangini 

C  D  F  G  A  G  B?  C  . 

C  A  Bb  G  A  F  E7  D  Eb  C 

Bhoga-Kanara 

C  D  Ei7  F  A  B7  C     . 

C  Bb  A  F  Eb  D  C 

Brundavana-[ 
Saranga) 

C  U  F  G  B7  C 

C  Bb  G  F  D  Eb  F  D  C 

Aruna-chandrika    . 

C  E7  F  G  B,^  C 

C  Bb  G  A  G  F  E7  C 

Deva-Mukari 

C  D  E7  F  G  A  B>  C 

C  Bb  A  F  G  F  D  E7  F  D  C 

Sama-Mukari 

C  D  E?  F  G  A  Bi?  C 

C  A  Bb  A  F  G  F  Eb  C 

Suddhanapala 

C  D  Eb  F  G  A  C       . 

C  Bb  A  F  Eb  D  Eb  C 

Durbar  f 

C  D  F  G  A  B?  C       . 

C  Bb  A  G  F  G  A  G  E7  D  C 

S'arnga  Rama 

C  D  F  A  B>  G  C       . 

C  Bb  A  E7  D  C 

Deva-Manohari 

j  C  D  F  G  B7  A  B7  C 

C  Bb  A  G  F  E7  D  C 

1 

SCALE   OF    HARIKAMBOGL 

Kambogi  t     • 

C  D  E  F  G  A  C         .         .         .         .  '  C  B>  A  G  F  E  D  C 

Kathara-gaula 

C  D  F  G  Bb  C 

CB7AGFEDC 

Narayani 

C  D  F  G  A  C    . 

C  Bb  A  G  F  D  C 

Purna-Kambogi 

C  D  E  F  G  B7  C      . 

C  A  G  F  E  D  C 

Narayana-gauki 

C  D  F  G  B>  A  Bb  C 

C  Bb  A  G  F  E  D  C 

Chaiatha-Rangini  . 

CUEDEFGABbABbC 

C  Bb  A  Bb  F  E  F  D  E  D  C 

Balahamsa     . 

C  D  F  G  A  C    . 

CBbAGFDFE  C 

Prathapa-Varali     . 

C  D  F  G  A  B?  A  G  A  B?  C 

CBbAGFEDC 

Matha-kohkila  f     . 

C  D  G  A  B7  C 

.  !  C  A  B7  A  G  D  C                                  | 

Kohkila-dvani 

'  C  D  E  F  A  BP  A  C  . 

CBbAB7GFEDEFEDC 

Sarasvati 

CDEFGB7AB7C     . 

C  B7  G  A  F  G  D  E  C 

Sarasvati-Manohar 

i    C  D  E  F  A  C    . 

CBbAB^GFEDC 

Navarasa-Kanara  . 

C  E  F  G  A  G  C 

C  Bb  A  F  E  D  C 

Bhangala 

C  D  E  FG  C    . 

C  Bb  A  G  F  D  E  D  C 

Ravi  chandrika 

1  C  D  E  F  A  B"-  A  C  . 

C  Bb  A  F  E  D  C 

Janjuti  f 

C  Bb  A  C  D  E  F  G  A  Bi*. 

.  i  A  G  F  E  D  C  B7  A  G  A  C 

Kanthala-Varali     . 

;  C  F  G  A  B?  A  C       . 

.      C  B>  A  G  F  C 

Yedukula- Kambogi 

+    C  D  F  G  A  C    . 

.^CBbAGFEDC 

Mohanna 

i  C  D  E  G  A  C    . 

.ICAGDEGDC 

Surati    . 

C  D  F  G  B?  C  . 

CB7AGFEGFDC 

Malava  . 

C  D  E  F  G  Bb  F  A  B7  C 

CBbABbGFEFDC 

Nata-Kurangi 

C  D  E  F  A  B7  G  A  BP  C 

C  B?  A  F  E  C 

Athi\na . 

C  D  F  G  A  B?  C       . 

!  !  C  B7  A  G  F  G  E  D  C                         | 

Kamachi 

CFEFGAB7C. 

C  Bb  A  G  F  E  F  C 

Drijaranti 

C  D  E  F  G  F  A  G  Bb  A  Bb  C 

CAGABbAGFEFEDC 

Note.— Ragas  marked  \  have  two  readings,  tlie  other  readings  are  given  at  the  end  of  tliis  chapter. 

N 


50 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERX  INDIA. 


SCALE  OF  HARIKAMBOGI- 

continued. 

Name  of  Riga. 

Ascending  Mode. 

Descending  Mode. 

Biagt    . 

C  D  K  F  C  E  F  G  B?  A  B?  G  A  B7  C 

C  B.-»  G  A  B7  A  G  F  E  D  E  F  E  C 

Nagasvaravali 

C  E  F  G  A  C 

C  A  G  F  E  C 

Sara-vilambi  . 

C  E  F  G  B?  C 

C  B7  A  G  F  E  D  C 

Jeyarama 

C  D  E  F  G  A  B>  C  . 

C  B7  A  G  F  E  C 

Surabi-pr5a    . 

C  D  E  G  B7  C 

C  B7  A  G  F  E  D  C 

Kalabharna    . 

CDEFGABbC. 

C  A  G  E  D  C 

Megha-jcyanti 

CDFEGAB7C. 

C  G  F  E  D  C 

S'rangi  . 

C  D  F  G  A  B?  C       . 

CG  FEDC 

Jelasheykera  . 

C  D  E  F  G  B7  A  B!?  C      . 

CAGFDEDC 

Siva-Kambogi 

C  D  E  F  B7  C 

C  B:*  G  F  E  D  C 

Ratna-joti 

C  E  F  G  B7  C 

C  B>  A  E  D  C 

Jogi-Bhairavi 

C  D  E  F  G  A  B?  C  . 

C  B?  A  G  F  B?  A  F  E  D  F  E  C 

Nilamberi  t    . 

CDEFCAFGB?C. 

!  CBi^GAB?  GFEFDEDFEC 

Regupti 

C  DEG AC 

C  A  G  E  D  C 

Deva-Rangini 

C  D  EG  AC 

C  A  G  F  E  D  C 

Arunakantha 

C  D  F  G  F  A  B?  C  . 

C  Bb  A  G  F  A  F  E  D  C 

Ben-Kambogi 

CFEDCFGAB>C. 

C  B7  G  B?  FEDC 

SCALE   OF    DEHRA-S'ANKARABHARNA. 

Hari-Nata      . 

CFEFGABC. 

CBGABGFEC 

Kanara  . 

C  E  F  A  B  C 

C  A  G  F  E  F  D  C 

K&nada. 

CDEFGFABC 

CBABGFGEDC 

Biagada 

C  E  D  E  I-  G  A  G  C 

CBAGFEDC 

Jenkaram 

C  D  E  F  A  D  C 

C  B  A  F  E  D  C 

Suddha-Saianga    . 

CDEFGABAC 

CAGFDEDC 

Vivardini 

C  F  G  C 

CBAGFEDC 

Vedangini 

CEFGFABC. 

CBAGAFEDC 

Navaraju 

GABCDEFG. 

F  E  D  C  B  A  C 

Gaja-virdinam 

C  E  F  A  B  C 

!  C  A  G  F  E  D  C 

Kadaram 

C  F  E  F  G  B  C 

C  B  G  F  E  D  C 

Mahori 

CFEFDEFGABC 

C  A  G  F  D  E  F  C 

Jana-Rangini. 

CDEFGAGBC 

C  A  G  F  D  C 

KoIahaHam    . 

CDEFGBABC 

CBGAFEDC 

Deshachsi 

C  D  F  G  A  B  C 

CBAGFEDC 

Purnodiam     . 

C  D  F  G  A  C 

C  B  G  F  D  E  D  C 

Bhinnavikrama 

C  D  E  F  G  A  C 

C  BAG  DC 

Suddha-Saveri 

C  D  F  G  A  C 

C  A  G  F  D  C 

Purna-chandrika     . 

CDEFGFABC 

CBGAGFEFDC 

Gauda-malari 

CDEFGEFGABC 

CBAGFEDC 

Parti-rava 

CFEFGABC. 

C  B  A  G  F  E  F  E  D  C 

Arabi      . 

C  D  EG  A  C 

CBAGFEDC 

Puruhutika     . 

C  F  G  A  B  C 

C  B  A  G  F  C 

Nagadvani 

CEDEFEFGABAGBABGABC 

C  B A  B AG  FAG  F  D  E  F  E  DEC 

Garudadvani  . 

C  D  E  F  G  A  B  C    . 

C  A  G  E  D  C 

Hamsadvani  . 

C  D  E  G  B  C 

C  B  G  E  D  C 

Girvana-prya. 

C  B  E  F  A  C 

C  B  A  F  E  D  C 

S'ankarabharna 

C  D  E  F  G  A  B  C     . 

C  A  G  F  E  D  C 

Kurangi 

CBCEUEFGA 

G  F  E  D  C  B  C 

Kandadruma. 

C  E  F  A  F  B  C 

CBFEDC 

Note. — Ragas  marked  \  have  two  readings,  the  other  readings  are  given  at  the  end  of  tliis  chapter. 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA. 


51 


Name  of  Kaga. 


S'ahannat     . 

Jogi-Vasantha 

Druthavirdana 

Gamanabhaskera 

Bilahari 

Sambhu-krya 

Girganambheri 

Virapratapa    . 


SCALE  OF  DliHKA-S'ANKARABHARNA— co/a/HUti/. 


Ascending  Mode. 


C  D  E 
C  D  E 
C  D  E 
C  D  E 
D  E 
E  D 
D  E 


E  FG 


FAB 
ABC 
AC 
AGE 
C  . 
B  F  E 
ABC 
B    . 


D  F  G  B  C . 


Descending  Mode. 


CBAGFEFIvD 

ABAGFEDC 

CBAGFDEDC 

C  A  G  F  E  C 

CBAGFEDC 

C  B  G  B  F  E  D  C 

C  B  A  G  F  D  C 

CBAGFEDC 

SCALE   OF   CHALANATA. 


Woodya  ravi- 
chandrika 
Ghambhirya-Nata 
Nata      . 
Suddha-Nata 
Maravasimanta 


C  D$  E  F  A$  B  C     . 

C  E  FG  B  C    . 
C  Df  E  F  G  A$  B  G 
C  E  F  G  B  A*  B  C  . 
CFEFGAfGC  . 


B  C 


C  B  A$  F  E  D$  C 

C  B  G  F  E  C 
C  B  G  F  D$  C 
C  B  A?  G  F  DJ  C 
C  B  A|  G  F  E  D|  C 


SCALE    OF    KANAKANGL 


Kamakambiieri 
Suddha-Mukari 


C  Db  Ei?b  F  G  A?  C 

c  Ei?b  Db  Ebb  F  G  Bbb  Ab  c 


C  B7b  Ab  G  F  Ebb  Db  C 

c  Bbb  Ab  F  Ebp  Db  c 


SCALE   OF    RHATNANGL 


Ghantarava   . 
Asaveri  t 
Penaduti 
Savakala-Mangeri 


C  B7  C  E.''?  D7  E7?  F  G  B7 
C  D7  F  G  A7  C 
C  D7  F  G  A7  Bb  C 
C  D7  E77  G  Ab  B7  C 


C  B7  Ab  G  F  E77  D7  C 
C  Bb  Ab  G  F  E7b  D7  C 
C  Bb  Ab  F  E^b  Db  C 
C  B7  Ab  F  E77  Db  C 


SCALE    OF   VANASPATL 


Bhanumati 
Rasavali 


C  Db  Ebb  D7  F  G  C 
C  Db  Ebb  F  A  Bb  C 


C  A  G  F  E?7  D7  C 

C  Bb  A  G  F  Ebb  Db  C 


SCALE   OF   SANAPATL 


Bhogi-chintamani 
Bhogi    . 
Malini    . 


C  D7  F  G  Ab  C 

C  E7  F  G  A7  G  Ab  B7b  C 

C  D7  E7  F  G  C 


C  B7b  Ab  G  F  E7  D7  C 

C  Bbb  Ab  G  F  A7  G  F  E7  Db  C 

C  B7b  A7  F  E7  D7  C 


SCALE    OF    XATAKAPRYA. 


S'oka-Varali  f 
Magada-S'riraga 


C  D7  F  Eb  F  G  F  A  D  C  F  G  A  Bb  A  C 
C  Db  Eb  F  G  A  C     . 


C  B7  A  F  E7  D7  C 
C  B7  G  Eb  C 


Note  — Ragas  marked  f  have  two  readings,  the  other  readings  are  given  at  the  end  of  tliis  chapter. 


52 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA. 


SCALE   OF    KOHKILAPRYA. 


Name  of  Raga. 


Kohkila-rava. 

l^atnaniani     . 
Chitramaiii     . 


Ascending  Mode. 


C  Db  Et?  F  G  A  C  . 
C  Dl?  El?  F  G  A  B  C 
C  Db  F  G  A  B  C       . 


Descending  Mode. 


C  B  A  G  F  Eb  D?  C 
C  B  A  G  Eb  Dl7  C 
C  B  A  G  F  E>  Dr  C 


SCALE   OF   GAIAKAPRYA. 


Kaiakanti 
Kalgarda 


C  Di?  E  F  G  Bbb  Ab  Bbb  C       . 
C  D>  F  E  Db  E  F  G  Ab  Bbb  C 


C  Bbb  Ab  F  E  D?  C 

C  Bbb  G  Ab  Bbb  A?  G  F  E  D?  C 


SCALE   OF  VAKULABHARNA. 


Vasantha-Mukari  . 
Kamala-Manohari . 


C  E  Db  E  F  G  Bb  Ab  Bb  C 
C  E  F  G  Bb  C  . 


C  B7  A?  G  F  D!'  C 
C  Bb  Ab  G  F  E  C 


SCALE   OF    KYRAVANL 


Kiranavaii 
Sangivani 
Kaliana-Vasantha 
Madavi  f 
Sarasa-vahini 
Nepala  . 


C  D  F  G  Ab  B  C        . 

C  Eb  D  Eb  F  G  Ab  B  C   . 

C  F  Eb  F  G  Ab  B  C 

C  D  Eb  F  Ab  B  Ab  F  G  Ab  B  C 

CDEbDFGAbBC     . 

C  D  F  Eb  F  G  B  C  . 


C  B  Ab  G  F  E?  D  C 
C  B  Ab  G  F  Eb  D  C 
C  B  Ab  G  F  E?  U  C 
C  B  G  E?  D  C 
C  Ab  G  F  Et'  D  C 
C  B  Ab  G  F  D  C 


SCALE   OF   SARASANGL 


Sarasanana    . 

Rama-Manohari 

Bhogalila 


C  D  E  F  Ab  B  C 
C  E  FG  B  C    . 
C  D  E  G  Ab  B  C 


C  B  Ab  F  E  D  C 
C  B  A?  G  F  E  C 
C  B  Ab  F  E  D  C 


SCALE   OF   YAGAPRYA. 


Kalahamsa 


C  D|  R  F  G  Ab  C 


C  Bbb  Ab  G  F  E  D#  C 


SCALE   OF   GANGAIABHUSANL 


Anandalila 


C  D|  E  F  G  B  C 


C  B  Ab  G  F  E  D#  C 


SCALE   OF    SHOLINL 


Trishuli 


f 


C  E  FG  B  C 


C  B  A  G  F  DJ  C 


SCALE   OF  JALAVARALL 


Kohkila-P.incliami 
Kusunia-Kangini  . 
Varali     . 

Bhopala-Pantliami 
Vijaya-kohkila 


C  D7  Ebb  G  Ab  B  C 
C  Db  F$  G  Ab  B  C 

c  Ebb  Db  Ebb  Ff  G  Ab  b  c 
C  V>^  D?  Ebb  G  F#  A7  C 
c  \V  Eb?  FtG  Ab  c 


C  B  Ab  G  Ff  Eb?  D?  C 
C  B  Ab  B  G  F$  E??  D?  C 
C  B  A?  G  F*  E??  Db  C 
C  G  A?  F$  E??  D?  C 
C  B  Ab  G  F$  E??  Db  C 


Note. — Ragas  marked  |  have  two  readings,  tlie  other  readings  are  given  at  the  end  of  this  chapter. 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA. 


53 


Name  of  Raga. 


Nabomani 
Deviamani 


SCALE   OF    NAVANITA. 


Ascending  Mode. 


C  Di?  Et'b  Di'  Ff  G  C 

C  D?  K'^"  Fi  G  A  G  B7  C 


Descending  Mode. 


C  B?  A  G  F$  E:>'?  dp  C 
C  B?  A  G  F|  EP?  D?  C 


SCALE   OF    PAVANL 


Chandrajoli 


C  D7  Eff  F#  G  A  G  B  C 


C  B  G  A  G  F#  Ebb  Db  C 


Ghandarva 
Ghomatti 


SCALE   OF    REGONPRYA. 


G  A|  B  G  Db  E?b  Db  C  B  G 
B  C  Db  Ebb  F|:  G  A#  B    . 


F#  G  A*  B  C  B  G 

G  Ft  EP?  Db  C  B  C 


Kalamurti 


SCALE   OF    BHAVAPKYA. 


C  Eb  Db  Eb  F$  G  C 


C  Bf  Ab  G  F#  Eb  Db  C 


SCALE   OF   SABHAPANTOVARALL 


Panto-Varali . 

Rudra-mangen 

Bhaulamuki  . 

Saddaks'eri    . 

Deviakanthala 

Kamarangini 

Govirdani 

Naga-Panchami 

Garudavirdani 

Latamati 


Rati       . 

Vrushabha-vahini 
Mamachsheri 
Ratnamati 


C  D7 
C  D? 
C  D? 

C  Eb 
C  Db 
C  Db 
£■•  D 
C  Ei? 
C  Db 
C  D-i 


E? 
E? 
E? 
D? 

E? 

E? 

?  E 

It 


Ft  G  Ab  B  C      . 
G  B  Ab  C 

Ft  G  B  C 
E?  F;:  G  A-  B  C 
Ft  G  A?  C 
D7  Ft  G  Ab  B  C 
P  G  Ab  C    . 
G  B  C 
Ft  B  Ab  Ft  G  a:'  B  C 
G  Ft  G  A?  G  C 


C  B  Ab  G  Ft  Ab  Ft  Eb  D!^  C 

C  B  A7  G  Ft  E?  D?  C 

C  B  Ab  G  Ft  E?  Db  C 

C  B  Ab  Ft  E?  Db  C 

C  B  Ab  G  Ft  E7  D7  C 

C  B  Ab  Ft  E?  Db  Eb  C 

C  B  Ab  B  Fi  E?  Db  C 

C  B  Ab  G  Ft  E.7  Db  C 

C  B  G  Ft  Db  C 

C  B  Ab  G  Ft  Ab  Ft  Ei?  Db  C 


SCALE    OF   SUVARANANGL 


C  E?  D.--  E?  Ft  G  A  B  C 
C  d:  Ff  G  a  B  C     . 
C  D?  E7  Ft  G  B  C  . 
C  E7  Ft  G  Ft  A  B  C 


C  B  A  G  Ft  Eb  D""  C 
C  H  A  Ft  E?  Db  C 
C  B  A  G  Ft  E."  F?  D-'  C 
C  A  G  Ft  G  Eb  DP  C 


SCALE   OF    KAMAVIRDANL 


Ramakrva 

Dipaka 

Devagiri  t 

Vilambini 

Rudragandari 

Vipramandara 

Svatambodi   . 

Pankaruham 

Viagranandanam 

Manmatalata 

Pushpalalita  . 

Kumudaprabha 


C  D7  E  Fit  G  Ab  B  C 

C  E  Ft  G  A!^  G  C     . 

C  D?  Ft  G  AC   C     . 

C  Ft  E  Ft  G  B  Ab  B  C 

C  D?  E  Ft  B  C 

C  B?  Ft  G  A?  B  C 

C  Db  E  Ft  G  C 

C  Ft  E  Ft  G  B  Ab  B  C 

C  D7  E  G  Ab  C 

C  B  C  Db  E  Ft  G  A7  B  C 

C  E  Ft  Ab  B  C 

C  Db  E  Ab  B  C 


C  B  Ab  G  Ft  Db  Ft  E  Db 
C  B  Ab  B  C  E  G  Fi  E  D? 
C  B  Ab  G  Fi  E  D"*  C 
C  B  Ab  B  GFt  E  C 
C  B  G  Ft  Db  C 
C  Ab  G  Ft  E  D?  C 
C  B  AP  G  Ft  E  D: 
C  B  G  Ft  E  Db  C 
C  B  Ab  B  Ab  G  Ft 
C  Ab  G  Ft  E  Db  C 
C  Ab  G  Ft  D?  C 
C  G  Ft  E  B  C 


C 

E  D7 
B  C 


Note. — Ragas  marked  f  have  two  readings,  the  other  readings  are  given  at  the  end  of  this  chapter. 

O 


54 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  LXDIA. 


SCALE   OF   GAMANAS'RYA. 


Name  of  Raga. 

Gamakakrya  . 

Purvi-Kaliani 

Partiravam    . 

Jeya-Mohannaf 

S'ri-Lalita 

Darpa-Mangeri 

Maivra-Vasantha 


Ascending  Mode. 


Descending  Mode. 


C  D? 
C  D? 
C  D? 


li  F#  G  B  C     . 

EFfGABGABGC 

E  F|  G  A  B  C 
C  E  F|  G  A  C 
C  D?  E  D?  F|  G  B  A  G  C 
C  E  Dt»  E  F|:  G  B  C 
C  D?  E  Ff  G  A  B  C 


C  B  G  Fit  E  D>  C 

C  B  A  G  F|  E  D7  C 

C  B  A  B  G  A  G  F;i  E  Ff  E  Db  Ff  C 

C  B  A  G  Ff  E  D?  C 

C  B  A  G  F*  E  D?  C 

C  B  A  G  Ff  E  C 

CBGABAGFitD>  F#EDl>EC 


SCALE   OF   S'RIMHANDKA. 


Siimala 

Simanthini     . 
Madhava-Manohari 
Suddha-raga  f 
Mara-jej'antham     . 


C  El7  D  Eb  F|;  G  Ab  B  Ab  C 

C  D  E>  F|  G  A?  B  C 

C  Eh  D  E7  F|  G  B  A^  B  C 

C  D  E>  Ff  G  B  C     . 

C  D  Ff  G  Ab  B  C     . 


C  B  Ab  G  FS  Eb    CD 
C  G  Ff  Eb  D  C  D  C 

C  B  Ab  Ff  Eb  Fit  E7  D  C 

C  B  G  Ff  E--  C 

C  B  Ab  G  FS  E'"-  D  C 


Sinharavam  . 
Ciiandi'arckha 
Sankaravam  . 
Yeshaprta 
Sinhadvani  . 
Chackoradvani 


SCALE    OF    HEMOVASANTHA. 


C  D  Ff  G  Bb  C 

C  D  Et?  Ff  G  A  C     . 

C  E7  D  Eb  F|  G  A  B7  C 

C  D  F$  G  B?  C 

C  D  C  Eb  Ff  G  A  B.7  C    . 

C  D  Eb  Ff  G  A  B?  C 


C  Bb  G  Ff  D  Eb  D  C 
C  Bb  A  Ft  Eb  D  C 
C  Bb  G  Ff  Eb  D  C 
C  Bb  A  G  Ff  Eb  D  C 
C  B?  A  G  Ff  E7  C 
C  Bb  Ft  Eb  D  C 


Rangini 

Dumyaraga 

Arunajualita 


SCALE    OF    DHURMOVATL 


C  D  Ei?  Ff  A  C 
C  D  Eb  Ff  G  A  C 
C  D  Eb  f1  A  B  C 


C  B  A  Ff  Eb  C  D  C 
C  B  A  G  Ff  Eb  D  C 
C  B  A  G  Ff  Eb  D  C 

SCALE    OF    NliTTIMATTI. 


Hamsanada 
Gaurikrj'a 


C  D  Ff  G  Af  B  C    . 
C  Eb  Ff  G  Af  B  C 


C  B  A; 
C  B  A; 


B  G  F: 
B  G  F; 


Bhus'aval 
Barbara 
Sarasvati 
Vutari    . 
Sunva-ma 


dhy 


SCALE    OF   VACHASPATL 


C  D  E  F$  G  A  C      . 

C  E  I>t  D  E  I-f  A  B? 
C  E  F4  G  a  C  ' 
C  E  I-'f  G  A  15,^  C    . 
C  D  Ff  G  Bb   AC   . 


A  C 


C  Bb  A  G  F#  E  D  C 
C  B--  A  Ff  I-:  D  C 
C  B-"  A  G  I'f  D  C 
C  B?  A  Ff  E  C 
C  Bb  A  G  Ff  E  D  C 


KoTi;. —  Raj;as  marked  |  have  two  readings,  tlic  otlicr  readings  arc  given  at  the  end  of  this  chapter. 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA. 


55 


SCALE   OF    MATSYA-KALLANL 

Name  of  Raga. 

Ascending  Mode. 

Descending  Mode. 

Kalian i  . 

C  D  E  F$  G  A  B  C  . 

CBAGFtEGDC 

Saran.i;a  |- 

CDEF;fGABC. 

C  A  G  Ft  D  E  Ft  D  C 

Kumurdaki 

C  D  E  Fl  B  C 

C  B  Ft  E  D  C 

Hamiro-Kaliani 

CDEF$GABGAB( 

J 

C  B  A  G  Ft  E  D  C 

Yamuna-Kaliani 

C  D  E  Ff  G  A  C       . 

C  A  G  f;  G  E  D  C 

Shama-Kaliani 

C  D  E  F|:  G  B  C       . 

C  B  G  A  G  Ft  E  D  C 

Mohiinna-Kaliani   . 

C  1)  E  G  A  C    . 

C  B  A  G  Ft  E  D  C 

Bhupa-Kaliani 

C  U  Fi  (i  A  C 

C  B  A  G  FS  E  D  C 

Sarasa-Kaliani 

C  D  E  Ff  G  A  B  C  . 
C  D  E  Ft  G  A  C 

C  B  AG  ri;E  FtD  C 

Shrar-Nava    . 

C  B  A  G  F?:  E  C 

Bhurangini    . 

C  D  E  G  A  B  C 

C  B  A  Ft  E  D  C 

C  B  G  Ft  E  D  C 

Shahradamati 

C  D  Ft  G  A  B  C       . 

Nai^avagi 

C  D  E  Ft  G  C 

CBAGFtEDC 

Kaliana-Keseri 

C  D  E  G  A  C    . 

C  A  —  Ft  G  Ft  E  D  C 

Kajah-Kaliani 

C  E  F4  A  B  C  . 

C  B  A  Ft  E  D  C 

Shambharantakani 

C  E  F$  G  A  C 

C  B  A  G  Ft  E  D  C 

C  B  A  G  Ft  E  Ffi  C 

Dhirgadurslii 

cdfIgabac  . 

Yogajoti 

C  D  F|:  G  B  A  C       . 

.  !  C  B  A  G  Fi  E  D  C 

Dvimokaprya 

C  E  D  Ft  G  B  C       . 

.  '  C  B  A  Ft  E  D  C 
.      C  A  G  Ft  E  D  C 

Deshakaliani 

C  D  E  Ft  G  A  G  B  C 

Chitaduti 

C  D  Ff  G  A  B  C 

.      C  B  A  G  Ft  E  D  C 

Mruganandana 

C  D  E  A  B  C    . 

.      C  B  A  Ft  A  E  D  C 

Kryabharna  . 

CDEFtGBAC. 

.     r  13  A  I't  I",  n  e- 

SCALE   OF    SUCHARITRA. 

Chato-Rangini 

C  Ft  E  Ft  G  B??  C 

C  Bbi?  Ab  Bbb  G  E  Ft  Dt  C              ! 

SCALE   OF    DHARTOVARDANL 

Devarashtra  . 

CD* 
C  D 

;  E  Fi  G  B  C     .         .         .         .      C  B  A?  G  Ft  E  Dt  C 

;  E  fJ  G  B  G  C         .         .         .      C  B  AP  G  Ft  Dt  E  Ft  Dt  C 

Dhato-panchami    . 

Note. — Ragas  marked  f  have  two  readings,  the  other  readings  are  given  at  the  end  of  this  cliapter. 


Some  MSS.  give  the  text  of  the  ragas  marked  J  in  the  foHowing  Hst  as 
here  shown. 

The  authenticity  of  the  others  is  doubtful,  but  they  are  generally  accepted 
by  Indian  musicians. 


SUPPLEMENTARY  LIST  OF  RAGAS. 


Name  of  Raga. 


''  Bhupali 
{Ahiri       . 
JAsaveri  . 


Ascending  Mode. 


C  D?   Eb   G  A7   C 


Descendirg  Mode. 


C  A?  G  Eb  D,7  C 


C  F  G  Ab  G  F  Eb  Db  C  D;  C  El  F  G  A^  B.?  C      C  Bb  Ab   G  F  El  Db   C 


C  D)   EG  A7   G  F  G  Ab   C 


+  S'oka-VaraIi    .  .   I   C  Eb   F  Bb  Ab   G  F  Eb   F  G 


C  B?   Ay  G  F  Eb   Db   C 
G  F  Eb   Db   F  E?   Db   C 


Scale. 
No.    8 


This  raga  is  sometimes  called  Bhauli.    Another  reading  will  be  found  under  the  scale  of  Mayamalavagauh 


55 


THE  MUSIC  or  SOUTH ERX  LXDTt 


SUPPLEMENTARY    LIST  OF  RAGAS-coiitiiiufd. 

Name  of  RSga. 

Ascending  Mode. 

Descending  Mode. 

Scale. 

{Purvi    . 

F  G  Ab  B  C  Db  E  F  G  Ab  B  C . 

C  B  Ab  G  F  E  Db  C 

No.  15 

JMaruva  . 

C  E  F  G  A'i  B  AJ7  G  C       . 

CBGFAbFGFED^C 

■  .    .• 

^Gundakrya 

C  D?   F  G  F  E  Db   F  G  B  C 

C  B  G  Ab  G  F  E  Di?  C     . 

..    .. 

{Gaulipaniu 

C  Ub   E  Db  F  G  Ab  G  B  C 

C  B  Ab   G  F  A7   F  E  Db  C 

Chaia-Nata     . 

CDbEFGFGC 

C  Bb  A  Bb  G  F  Db  C       . 

„    16 

JPurna-s'adyama 

C  Eb  D  Eb  F  Bb  C  

C  Bb  G  F  Eb  D  C    . 

„   20 

JAnanda-Bhairavi 

C  Eb  D  C  Eb  F  G  Ab  G  B?  C  . 

C  Bb  Ab   F  G  F  Eb   D  C   . 

..    .. 

IWoodyachandiika  . 

C  E?   F  G  Bb   C  G  Bb   C    . 

C  Bb  G  F  Eb  C 

;Madavi  . 

C  F  Eb   F  G  Ab   B  C 

C  B  Ab  G  F  G  F  Eb   D  C 

.,    21 

JPala-Mangeri . 

CEbFGFAEbFAC. 

CBbAGFE?FDC      . 

.,   22 

jDurbar  . 

CDFDGAB?C 

C  B?  A  G  F  Eb  D  C 

..     ,. 

tKapi       . 

C  D  Eb  F  G  F  Eb  D  Eb  F  G  A  B?  C 

C  Bb  A  G  F  Eb  D  C 

■.            M 

Velavali 

CDEbFGAC 

CBAGFEbDC. 

■■          23 

Kesefi    . 

C  D  E  F  G  F  Ab   G  Ab  C  . 

C  Ab  Bbb  Ab  G  F  E  D  C 

.,         25 

JKambogi 

FEFGAGAC        

B AG  F  E  D  C 

„         28 

JMatha-kohkiU 

C  D  G  A  Bb 

A  G  D  C 

..            .. 

JJanjiti    . 

CDEFGAB? 

A  G  F  E  D  C    . 

JVedii'iiula-Kambogi 

CDFGABbAGAC. 

C  Bb  A  G  F  E  F  E  D  C     . 

JBiag        . 

CDEFGABbC 

C  Bb   A  B^G  A  G  F  E  D  E  C     . 

.               „ 

JNilambtri 

CDEFGABbAC 

CBbAGFEDEC 

..            .. 

JS'ahanna 

GAGFEDCDEFGABC 

CBAGDEFGFEDC 

,.         29 

Deva-gandari  . 

CDEFGABC       

CBAGFEDCDEDC 

K               <• 

IJeya-Mohanna 

c  d;  f|:  g  vjj:  D'y  vjj^  G  Ab  Bb  c  . 

C  Bb  Ab  Bb  Ab  G  F^  E.-'b  Db  c 

..     38 

Mandara 

C  Db   E  Fl  G  Ab   G  Vj^  E  F|  G  A  Bb   C    . 

C  Bb  G  F^i  E  Db  C 

,.     50 

Pratapa . 

C  E  F$  G  Ab   Bi5  C 

C  Bb  Ab  G  F|:  E  D1  C    . 

,.       ,, 

Namada 

C  Db   E  F|  Db   E  F|  Ab   B;   C 

C  Bb   Ab   Fi  G  F|:  E  D?   C 

JDeviiglri 

C  Db  Fl  G  fJ  G  fI  E  D?   F|  G  C 

C  B  Ab   G  Fj  E  Db   C 

■•     51 

Rama-Manohaii 

C  Db   E  F|;  G  A  Bb   A  C    . 

C  Bb  A  G  F|  E  Db  C 

•     52 

Gurugad  a 

E7  F|  G  Ab  Bb 

Ab  G  F$  Eb  D 

..     55 

Triniurti 

C  D  E?  Ab  Bb           

C  Bb   Ap   G  Eb   D  C 

t. 

|Suddha  raga   . 

C  D  Eb  D  Eb  f|:  G  F:jj:  G  B  C  . 

C  B  G  B  G  F$  Eb   D  E?  C 

..    57 

S'ruti-Rangini 

C  D  E  F|  G  A7   G  F^^  E  F|;  G  A?   H,'^.-'        . 

C  Bbb   Ab   G  EC  D  C 

.,    6r 

JSaranga 

C  D  E  F|  G  A  G  F|  E  F|  G  A  B  C   . 

C  B  A  G  FJ  D  C 

1     ,.   65 

Jotismatti 

C  D|  E  F|  G  C 

c  Bb  Ab  ~i~(i  F:|  c  u|  c     . 

„    68 

CHAPTER    V. 

Taste  of  European  and  Oriental  nations  :  how  differing — Reason  for  non-employment  of  harmony — 
Method  of  singing — Of  Indian  melodies — P'orm — Classification  of — Rhythm — Employment 
of  mixed  times — Tonality  often  doubtful  — Resemblance  of  Indian  music  to  that  of  other 
countries — Examples  of  popular  melodies — Hindustani  musical  system  :  how  differing  from 
Karnatik — Examples  of  Hindustani  melodies — Scales  employed  in  the  Hindustani  system. 

THE  wide  divergence  of  taste  in  the  matter  of  music  between  European 
and  Asiatic  nations  has  doubtless  arisen  from  the  fact  that  while 
^Vestern  nations  gradually  discarded  the  employment  of  mode,  and 
clothed  the  melody  with  harmony,  the  Eastern  nations  in  this  respect  made 
little  or  no  progress  ;  and  now,  in  India,  the  employment  of  authentic  modes 
and  melody  types  (or  ragas)  is  still  jealously  adhered  to. 

Speaking  of  this,  Willard  remarks  :  "  To  expect  an  endless  variety  in  the 
melody  of  Hindustan  would  be  an  injudicious  hope,  as  their  authentic  melodv  is 
limited  to  a  certain  number,  said  to  have  been  composed  by  professors  universally 
acknowledged  to  have  possessed  not  only  real  merit,  but  also  the  original  genius 
of  composition,  beyond  the  precincts  of  whose  authority  it  would  be  criminal 
to  trespass.  What  the  more  reputed  of  the  moderns  have  done  is  that  they  have 
adapted  them  to  their  own  purposes,  and  found  others  bv  the  combination  of  two 
or  more  of  them.  Thus  far  they  are  licensed,  but  they  dare  not  proceed  a  step 
farther.  Whatever  merit  an  entire  modern  composition  might  possess,  should 
it  have  no  resemblance  to  the  established  melody  of  the  country,  it  would  be 
looked  upon  as  spurious.  It  is  implicitly  believed  that  it  is  impossible  to  add  to 
the  number  of  these  one  single  melodv  of  equal  merit,  so  tenacious  are  the 
natives  of  Hindustan  of  the  ancient  practices."^ 


■  A  Treatise  on  the  Music  of  Hindustan."     Capt.  N.  A.  Willard.     Calcutta,  1S34. 


58  THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA. 

This  continued  employment  of  mode,  combined  with  the  almost  entire 
absence  of  harmony,  has  prevented  Indian  music  from  reaching  anv  higher 
pitch  of  development,  such  as  has  been  attained  elsewhere.  It  stands  to  reason 
also  that  this  is  the  chief  cause  of  the  monotony  which  causes  Indian  music  to 
be  little  appreciated  by,  if  not  repellent  to,  European  ears. 

Since  the  early  periods  of  Indian  history,  music  would  seem  to  have  been 
cultivated  more  as  a  science  than  an  art.  More  attention  seems  to  have  been 
paid  to  elaborate  and  tedious  artistic  skill  than  to  simple  and  natural  melody. 
Hence  arose  technical  rules  that  marred  the  pristine  sweetness  of  melody — the 
very  life  of  all  real  music.  To  a  great  extent  this  must  be  attributed  to  the  art 
falling  into  the  hands  of  illiterate  virtuosi.  Their  influence,  which  caused  music 
to  suffer  both  in  purity  of  style  and  simplicity,  is  being  felt  less  and  less.  The 
great  aim  of  all  music — "  Rakti,"  or  the  power  of  affecting  the  heart — now 
asserts  itself  more  and  more,  and  is  slowly  but  surely  bringing  about  a  return 
to  the  early  type  of  sweet,  simple  melody. 

Very  little  of  the  good  or  classical  music  of  India  is  heard  b}'  Europeans. 
What  is  usually  played  to  them  consists,  as  Colonel  Meadows  Taylor  very  trulv 
remarks,  of  modern  ditties,  sung  by  ill-instructed,  screaming,  dancing  women, 
at  crowded  native  durbars,  marriages,  and  other  ceremonials.  And  when  this 
is  the  case,  it  does  not  cause  much  surprise  to  hear  native  music  often 
described  as  abominable,  and  devoid  of  all  melody.  But  music  of  great  intrinsic 
beauty  nevertheless  exists,  and  only  requires  to  be  heard  by  an  unprejudiced 
ear  to  be  appreciated.  Throughout  India  music  and  poetry  go  hand  in  hand. 
Their  influence  may  be  seen  and  felt  in  almost  every  phase  of  native  life,  from  the 
palace  of  the  rajah  to  the  humble  dwelling  of  the  ryot.  Music  has  there  been 
developed  to  a  degree  far  greater  than  has  been  generally  recognised  in  Europe. 
It  is  there  felt  to  be  a  means  of  passionate  expression,  such  as  is  apparently 
unknown  amongst  nations  farther  East.  And  indeed  the  very  soul  of  all  Indian 
music  may  be  said  to  be  raga — which  in  its  literal  sense  means  that  which  creates 
passion.  And  that  this  has  been  fully  appreciated  in  Europe  would  seem  to  be 
evident,  for  a  musical  reviewer  writing  in  the  A  thenccii in,  and  contrasting  the 
music  of  India  with  that  of  Japan  and  Siam,  recently  wrote  :  "  In  the  Indian 
Peninsula  we  are  really  in  another  world.  We  exchange  a  music  in  which 
noise  and  dry  executive  skill  prevail  for  one  vibrating  with  sentiment  and 
passion,  and  that  combines  a  refined  execution  with  the  highly  nervous 
organization  that  makes  the  poetic  artist.  Such  a  one  was  a  Jeypore  been 
player  {been — a  kind  of  vina),  who  was  to  be  heard,  but  we  fear  was  not  much 
heard,  at  a  lillle  exhibition  called  '  India  in  London,'  in  iS86.       To  go  from  one 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  IXDIA.  59 

of  the  clever  Siamese  ranat  players  of  the  Inventions  Exhibition  the  year  before 
to  this  man,  was  to  quit  the  atmosphere  of  a  desert  for  one  redolent  of  sweet  air 
and  flower  scents.  The  Hindu  chromatic  scale,  from  which  the  numerous 
modes  and  melody  types  are  selected,  does  not  appear  to  differ  from  our  own. 
As  there  is  no  harmony,  slight  differences  may  pass  without  notice.  Very  much 
of  Hindu  music  impresses  the  European  as  being  in  the  minor  scale ;  but 
deflections  in  the  stringed  instruments,  and  possible  accommodations  in  the 
wind,  introduce  an  enharmonic  elaboration  that  defies  notation.'"'"  And  here  it 
might  be  interesting  to  quote  the  opinion  of  a  learned  native  gentleman  ■}  "  Manv 
of  the  Hindus  themselves,"  he  writes,  "  labour  under  a  false  impression 
concerning  the  difterence  between  Indian  and  European  music,  even  as  to 
the  employment  of  tones  and  semitones.  The  opinions  held  by  so  many 
natives,  that  pieces  played  upon  the  piano  or  harmonium  are  to  them 
discordant,  can  be  easily  accounted  for  thus  :  they  are  simply  confused — being 
unaccustomed  to  anything  but  simple  melody — when  they  hear  five  or  six  notes 
played  in  chords.  The  chief  difference  seems  to  me  to  be  that  the  Hindus 
prefer  melodj'  simply,  while  to  European  ears  melody  is  preferred  when 
clothed,  as  it  were,  with  harmony  of  some  sort." 

Comparatively  few  Indian  airs  have  found  their  way  to  Europe.  Those  few 
that  have  been  published  are  mostly  from  either  Bengal  or  Northern  India,  so 
that  there  is  but  small  resemblance  in  them  to  the  national  music  of  the  Deccan 
or  the  South  ;  for  there  is  a  marked  difference  between  the  music  of  the  various 
parts  of  India,  which  to  even  the  most  casual  observer  is  evident. 

The  following  examples  of  songs— though  a  mere  handful  from  so  vast  a 
storehouse — will,  it  is  hoped,  aid  in  filling  the  vacancy,  and  thereby  afford  some 
help  to  those  who  may  care  to  make  further  research. 

Many  of  these  melodies  in  themselves  are  extremely  beautiful,  and  their 
simplicity  adds  an  additional  charm  that  no  words  can  express — the  airs  of 
different  country  districts  are  but  a  reflex  of  the  character  and  feelings  of  the 
people  to  whom  they  belong.  Some  are  pathetic  and  melodious — music  that 
exactly  reproduces  the  feelings  inspired  bv  the  words  ;  others  are  gay  and  bright 
— true  accompaniments  to  the  daily  pursuits  and  occupations  of  life  ;  and  in  manv 
of  them  may  be  found  a  vein  of  repose,  slightly  tinged  with  melancholy,  that 
offers  a  curious  contrast  to  either  of  the  former  ;   indeed,  so  much  varietv  mav  be 


^  The  Athencsum,  Jan.  4,  i8go.     Review  of  "  Musical  Instruments  and  their  Homes."     M.  E.  and  \V.  A. 
Ill-own,  New  York. 

^  T.  M.  Venkatas'esha  S'astri. 


6o  THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA. 

f'dund  that  it  is  unnecessarv  to  notice  in  detail  merits  that  must  he  evident  to  the 
musical  reader. 

But  vet,  though  the  melodies  themselves  are  so  beautiful,  it  is  but  seldom 
that  we  hear  them  well  sung  ;  indeed,  singers  of  the  ordinary  type  often  entirely 
ruin  the  effect  of  the  music  ;  for  native  singers  appear  to  have  an  idea  that  the 
highest  form  of  their  art  consists  in  introducing  as  much  grace  as  possible, 
whether  it  adds  to  the  beauty  of  their  songs  or  not  ;  in  fact,  they  try  to  disguise 
the  real  melody  as  much  as  possible  by  embellishments  of  their  own,  and  so  in 
nine  cases  out  often  it  is  quite  impossible  to  follow  either  the  air  or  the  words  of  a 
sone,  since  the  sinsrer  is  onlv  anxious  to  exhibit  what  he  fondlv  imagines  to  be  his 
skill. 

Native  singers  rarely  practise,  for  they  think  that  practice,  to  even  a 
moderate  extent,  ruins  their  voices.  The  treatment  of  the  voice,  too,  is  quite 
different  to  what  experience  in  Europe  has  proved  to  obtain  the  best  results. 

The  voices  of  Indian  singers  are  almost  always  weak  and  deficient  in 
volume — one  result  doubtless  of  their  system  of  training,  by  which  a  full  clear 
tone  is  made  to  give  way  to  incessant  small  inflections.  Girls,  too,  are  taught 
singing  when  much  too  young,  so  that  their  voices  either  break  or  become 
harsh  and  shrill. 

A  singer  rarely  stands  while  he  sings,  and  instead  of  using  his  proper  range 
of  voice,  he  prefers  a  most  unnatural  falsetto,  which  he  can  rarely  control,  and 
his  endeavours  to  make  himself  heard  generally  cause  him  to  make  the  most 
ludicrous  grimaces.  Singers  of  this  kind  it  is  who  bring  Indian  music  into 
disrepute,  and  cause  it  to  be  regarded  with  contempt  by  European  audiences. 

But  still  there  arc  singers  in  India  whose  voices  are  wonderfully  sweet,  and 
when  they  sing  their  own  songs  in  their  simple  form,  no  hearer  can  doubt  that,  like 
other  national  music,  that  of  India  possesses  a  charm  peculiarly  its  ov/n. 

The  various  styles  of  Indian  compositions,  consisting  as  they  do  entirely  oi 
melodv,  do  not  present  to  the  casual  observer  differences  as  clearly  marked  as  in 
those  of  European  music.  Nevertheless  these  melodies  are  classified  systemati- 
cally, and  in  their  construction  are  subject  to  certain  definite  rules  of  composition. 
Almost  all  consist  of  a  burden  or  refrain  called  Pallevi,  a  kind  of  answer  to  this 
refrain  styled  Anupallevi,  and  stanzas  (called  Charanam)  of  which  there  is  usually 
an  uneven  number.  These  parts  are  in  the  several  compositions  arranged  in 
different  wavs,  and  bv  this  means  the  style  of  composition  is  determined. 
Rhythm  is  usually  very  marked,  but  differs  largely  from  that  of  most  European 
music  from  the  fiict  that  the  times  are  iVequently  irregular. 

Between  vocal  and  instrumental  music  the   difference  is  slight,  the  vina,  the 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA.  6i 

only  instrument  of  any  lart^e  capability,  being  considered  to  be  but  an  imitation 
or  reproduction  of  the  human  voice  ;  and  if  an  air  be  accompanied  by  that 
instrument,  it  is  usually  only  played  in  unison  with  the  voice. 

The  different  exercises,  compositions,  &c.,  are  usually  classified  under  the 
following  heads : — 

Saralas  Kruthis 

Gentuversis  Kirthanas 

Alankaras  Vernams 

Gitas  S'ankavernams 

Prabhandas  Pathams 

Thanas  Javadis 

Svarajotas  Ragamalika 

A  raga,  when  performed  by  itself,  contains  two  movements — (i.)  Alapa 
and  (ii.)  Madhyamakala. 

Pallevi,  a  kind  of  fantasia  upon  some  theme  abounding  in  imitation,  and 
with  a  well-defined  rhythm. 

The  rhythm  existing  throughout  all  the  different  styles  of  composition  is 
worth  careful  notice  ;  and  it  is  interesting  to  compare  it  with  that  employed  by 
other  nations.  The  similarity  of  that  of  the  Turks  and  other  Eastern  nations 
is  remarkable. 

As  in  European  music  each  period  is  complete  in  itself,  being  clearly 
marked  by  the  talas,  which  divide  the  different  periods  into  regular  or  irregular 
sections,  as  the  case  may  be,  following  each  other  in  definite  and  regular  order. 
The  periods  differ  only  from  those  commonly  found  in  European  music  in 
that  they  may  consist,  if  necessary,  of  an  uneven  number  of  sections  or  measures, 
the  tala  itself  often  being  irregular,  owing  to  the  employment  of  mixed  times. 
Hence  when  Indian  music  is  written  in  ordinary  notation  there  will  be  a 
regular  rotation  corresponding  to  the  tala,  of  bars  each  of  which  may  have  a 
different  time  signature.  A  reference  to  the  list  of  talas  upon  page  36  will 
explain  this  more  readily  than  any  words  can.  These  periods  or  phrases  are 
often  extended  by  the  addition  at  the  commencement  of  a  few  notes  leading 
up  to  the  commencing  note  of  the  phrase,  or  by  being  terminated  with  a 
small  cadence  or  codetta  which  may  be  either  a  repetition  or  imitation  of 
what  has  gone  before,  or  may  lead  up  to  the  next  phrase. 

The  rhythm  of  the  Pallevi  and  Anupallevi  is  usually  a  great  deal  more  marked 
and  regular  than  that  of  the  stanzas,  where  the  phrasing  is  frequently  irregular, 
the  periods  being  interwoven  by  means  of,  as  it  were,  abbreviaturas,  or  extended 
by  the  prolongation  and  "  rekhu,"  a  species  of  turn  or  transient  shake  upon  a 

Q 


62  THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA. 

note  in  the  middle  of  a  roulade  with  which  all  Hindu  music  abounds.  This  is 
especially  the  case  in  the  performance  of  raga  as  a  solo,  which  in  certain  cases  is 
absolutely  timeless. 

Hence  the  great  difficulty  of  expressing  such  music  correctly  by  means  of 
ordinary  notation.  The  peculiarity  of  the  scales  or  modes  employed  in  Hindu 
music  often  raises  a  difficulty  in  determining  the  real  tonality  of  many  of  the 
melodies,  the  Hindu  Sa,  taken  by  native  musicians  as  the  "  Khuruj  "  or  keynote 
ot  their  scale,  not  necessarily  corresponding  to  what  is  the  real  tonic  of  the  scale. 
Indian  music  has  been  compared  to  that  of  Scotland,  but  the  resemblance  can 
be  traced  principally  to  the  frequent  employment  by  both  nations  of  a  somewhat 
similar  scale  of  five  intervals,  the  fourth  and  seventh  being  omitted  ;  and 
possibly  also  from  the  fact  that  a  similar  motive  is  often  found  in  both,  where  the 
first  note  has  one-fourth  of  the  duration  of  the  second,  as — 


^^ 


In  reviewing  the  national  music  of  any  country,  we  cannot  help  being  struck 
with  the  wa}-  in  which  special  scales  are  employed,  special  graces  worked  in,  all 
more  or  less  varying  in  the  music  of  different  nations.  In  the  music  of  India, 
owing  to  the  multitude  of  scales  or  modes  which  it  employs,  a  resemblance  here 
and  there  can  be  traced  to  the  music  of  nearly  every  country. 

The  chief  characteristic,  for  instance,  of  Hungarian  music  is  that  it  usually 
employs  a  scale  with  two  superfluous  seconds,  or  the  harmonic  minor  with  a 
sharp  fourth.  This  scale  is  in  every  respect  similar  to  the  Indian  scale  called 
S'rinhandra,  and  nearly  similar  to  one  much  employed  and  called  Siibhapan- 
tovarali,  both  of  which  will  be  found  among  the  list  of  scales  upon  pages  32-35. 

Many  of  the  graces  and  embellishments  employed  in  the  gipsy  music  in 
Hungarv  are  to  be  found  in  Indian  melodies. 

Mr.  Carl  Engel'  has  drawn  attention  to  the  employment  of  the  minor 
seventh  in  both  Servian,  VVallachian,  and  Scotch  music.  This  interval  is 
emploved  both  in  Arabic  and  Indian  music.  Some  idea  of  the  plaintive  and 
impressive  effect  of  which  it  is  productive  can  be  gained  from  the  song,  "  Seki 
yenaka  thake,"  given  upon  page  80. 

Mr.  J.  A.  Kappey,  in  his  collection  of  "  Songs  of  Eastern  Europe,'"'  draws 
attention  to  the  characteristics  of  Turkish  songs,  and  to  the  fact  that  they 
employ  a  scale  having  a  minor  third  with  an  augmented  fourth,  and  a  minor  si.xth 

'  "  All  Introduction  to  the  Study  of  National  Music."     Carl  Engel.     London,  1866. 

^  "Songs  of  Itastcni  l'".iH(jpc."     Edited  by  J.  .\.  Kappey.     Lundoii,  18S1. 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  IXDIA.  63 

with  a  major  seventh.  A  comparison  of  the  examples  he  gives  with  songs  of 
India  will  be  of  great  interest ;  and  the  similarity  of  both  melody  and  rhythm 
is  striking.  One  of  the  songs  quoted — a  song  of  sorrow  by  Nihad  Bey — might 
be  from  India  ;  it  appears  to  be  written  in  much  the  same  form,  and  it  is  also  to 
be  noticed  that  it  employs  a  mixed  time  of  %  and  \,  precisely  the  Indian 
Triputa  Tala,  already  noticed. 

In  a  previous  chapter  attention  has  already  been  drawn  to  the  resemblance 
that  Indian  music  bears  to  that  of  Greece,  and  this  is  still  more  fully  borne  out 
by  a  careful  study  of  modern  Greek  national  airs.  In  a  work  not  long  published, 
by  M.  Bourgault-Ducoudray,''  the  construction  of  the  peculiar  scales  found 
throughout  the  East  have  been  made  the  subject  of  most  careful  research,  and 
the  use  of  what  the  author  terms  the  "  chromatique  oriental"  is  especially 
noticed.  This  scale  is  no  other  than  the  Indian  Mayamalavagaula,  and  to 
its  frequent  use  attention  has  been  drawn  elsewhere.  M.  Bourgault-Ducoudray's 
work  to  students  of  Eastern  music  is  especially  interesting,  and  the  careful 
analysis  that  is  given  of  each  air  renders  the  work  most  valuable.  The 
resemblance  between  Indian  songs  and  the  examples  of  melodies  from  the 
Levant  is  so  striking  that,  in  many  cases,  it  is  difficult  to  believe  that  their 
origin  is  not  identical. 

Mr.  Engel  calls  attention  to  the  fact  that  Chopin,  in  one  of  his  studies  for 
the  black  keys  (Douze  grandes  Etudes,  No.  5),  has  given  some  idea  of  the 
beautiful  effect  that  may  be  produced  by  a  melody  which  employs  a  limited 
number  of  intervals  ;  only  in  this  case  he  notices  that  as  the  accompaniment 
employs  other  intervals,  the  pentatonic  effect  of  the  whole  is  somewhat  marred. 
In  Indian  music,  too,  a  frequent  use  is  made  of  the  pentatonic  scale,  as  has  been 
already  remarked.  Again,  in  Spanish  national  music,  embellishments  are  of 
constant  occurrence,  especially  in  descending  the  diatonic  scale ;  the  same 
predilection  can  be  observed  in  Indian  melodies  ;  indeed,  a  further  resemblance 
can  be  traced  in  the  occasional  employment  of  endings  of  the  following 
nature — 


^ 


iSEg=g=^=il 


XT' 

which    in    the    common    songs,  such    as  are  heard  in  the  jungles  and  country 
districts  of  many  parts  of  India,  are  not  unfrequent. 

The    following    observations    by    Captain    Willard    are    short  and   to    the 


'  Trente  Melodies  Populaires  de  Grece  et  d'Orient."     L.  A.  Bourgault-Ducoiidray.     Paris,  1876. 


64  THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA. 

point,    and   seem   to    apply    equally   well    to    Southern    as    to    Northern    Indian 
melodies  : — 

1.  The  melodies  are  short,  lengthened  by  repetitions  and  variations. 

2.  They  all  partake  of  the  nature  of  what  by  us  is  called  a  Rondo,  the  piece 
being  invariably  concluded  with  the  first  strain,  and  sometimes  with  the  first 
bar,  or  at  least  with  the  first  note  of  that  bar. 

3.  A  bar  or  a  measure  or  a  certain  number  of  measures  are  frequently  repeated 
with  slight  variations,  almost  ad  libitum. 

4.  There  is  as  much  liberty  allowed  with  respect  to  pauses,  which  may  be 
lengthened  at  pleasure,  providing  the  time  be  not  disturbed. 

The  times  employed  in  Indian  music  are  peculiar ;  simple  times  are  of  most 
frequent  occurrence,  mixed  times  are  largely  employed  ;  true  triple  time, 
curiously  enough,  is  of  the  rarest  ;  but  there  is  a  time,  the  accentuation  of  which 
is  upon  the  first  and  second  beat,  which  may  be  said  to  be  a  kind  of  triple  time 
(although  in  reality  a  mixed  time  of  %  and  C),  and  is  much  used  for  love  songs. 

The  tempo  in  which  the  various  melodies  are  sung  is  sometimes  irregular,  and 
from  being  exact  sometimes  changes  into  a  recitative  or  ad  libitum  in  the 
middle  of  a  song.  The  peculiarities  in  the  working  out  of  the  motives  are  striking, 
and  the  employment  of  rests  of  short  duration  is  noticeable. 

The  endings  are  often  not  definite,  the  last  few  bars  leading  up  to  the 
commencement ;  the  reason  for  this  is  probably  that  it  is  usual  to  repeat  the 
melodies,  and  when  the  performer  wishes  to  end,  he  generally  leads  up  to  the 
note  upon  which  he  wishes  to  conclude,  and  prolongs  it  in  this  manner — 

■  g? 


m 


3 


^^F^ 


Indeed,  it  seems  more  natural  to  regard  all  endings  of  Indian  melodies  rather  as 
different  forms  of  Da  capo  than  as  real  closes,  the  object  in  most  cases  being 
a  return  to  the  commencement  of  the  song.  The  fact  so  often  noticed  by  those 
who  have  endeavoured  to  collect  Indian  airs,  that  almost  every  interval  of  the 
scale  can  be  found  used  as  a  close,  can  possibly  be  thus  accounted  for.  The  words 
of  most  of  these  songs,  particularly  those  sung  by  the  common  people,  such  as 
lavanies  and  javadis  and  svarajotas,  are  generally  a  long  ballad,  so  that  a  definite 
ending  is  not  required  after  each  stanza.  Many  singers  indeed,  as  a  variety, 
improvise  their  words,  so  that  after  each  stanza  closes  on  intervals  of  all  kinds 
are  found.  But  when  the  real  ending  is  reached,  the  performer  frequently  leads 
up  to  the  key-note,  or  what  he  regards  as  the  key-note  of  the  Indian  scale. 
Judged  from  a  European  point  of  view,  it  appears  that  closes  on  the  intervals  of 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHEKX  INDIA. 


6S 


the  third  and  fifth  should  be  regarded  more  as  //i^// closes  upon  the  intervals  of  the 
tonic  chord  ;  those  on  the  second  and  seventh  as  upon  intervals  of  the  dominant 
chord;  whilst  those  on  the  sixth  or  minor  third  betray  the  relative  minor;  sometimes 
the  third  may  be  looked  upon  as  the  fifth  to  the  relative  minor.  This  view  can  of 
course  be  equally  well  applied  to  the  national  airs  of  any  country,  but  it  appears 
to  be  specially  applicable  to  those  of  India. 

Some  of  the  melodies  in  their  conclusion  imply  a  modulation  into  the  relative 
minor,  showing  thereby  a  trace  of  the  old  pentatonic  scale.  Examples  will  be 
found  among  the  following  melodies  of  endings  with  the  fifth,  the  si.xth,  the 
seventh,  the  second,  and  (like  those  of  the  Servians)  with  the  third.  Closes  on  the 
fourth  are  rarely  if  ever  employed.  An  example  will  nevertheless  be  found  in  the 
Khyal  upon  page  88. 

In  the  examples  following  an  endeavour  has  been  made  to  point  out  some  of 
the  chief  peculiarities  and  characteristics  of  the  different  ragas  in  which  the 
melodies  are  composed. 

The  first  e.xercises  taught  to  pupils  are  called  Saralas,  they  are  always  in  the 
scale  of  Mayamalavagaula ;  similar  exercises  called  Gentu-versis,  containing 
repeated  notes,  are  next  taught,  after  which  Alankaras — exercises  upon  time — are 
learnt,  several  in  each  tala. 

The  simplest  melodies  are  called  Gita,  and  are  of  two  kinds — Pillarigita 
and  Ganaraga-gita.  The  first-named  are  four  in  number  and  are  hymns  to 
the  god  Pillari  or  Ganesha.  The  Sangita  Parijata  mentions  four  Pillarigitas, 
and  it  is  believed  that  these  are  the  four  that  are  still  in  use.  The  following  is 
an  example  of  one  of  these  ancient  Pillarigitas  : — 

(  Raga  Malahari. 


Andante. 


Tala  Rupacca. 


=^=^ 


^S 


-^»»*-i 


T'^ir:'* 


^TJt 


^-^^ 


r7r 


2* 


Ganaraga-gitas  are  very  similar  to  the  above. 

Somewhat  similar  to  gitas  are  Prabhandas,  only  that  they  are  usually 
longer,  and  are  divided  into  two  or  three  parts  by  breaks  called  Khandam. 
Skilful  performers  are  fond  of  playing  such  pieces  in  order  to  exhibit  their 
proficiency  to  an  audience. 

Thanas  are  studies  for  the  vina,  teaching  special  styles  and  difficulties  met 
with  in  the  performance  of  the  various  ragas.     They  are  particularlv  intended  as 

K 


66 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA. 


an  introduction  to  the  difficult  movement  called  Madhyamakala  of  a  raga.  Thanas 
are  in  no  particular  talas,  the  time  heing  taught  orally,  and  left  in  a  great 
measure  to  the  performer's  discretion.  Great  attention  is  bestowed  upon  proper 
accentuation  and  grace  ;  the  tempo  is  usually  very  rapid  — 


Raga  Nata. 

I 


^4-i-t^-gJ-^|/^'    V^  "^  1-MI  f?  C  b 


^f^-«- 


h— H 


^      L»»^ 


1%^ 


^^=1 


^^ 


/F ^ 


g^ 


4ii 


Raga  Arabi. 


^ 


S 


g^#-^ 


^ 


rr-  » 


t^^ 


^ 


^l-^J-^i-l-^Q 


Raga  Gaula. 


i—y 


^S 


5=^4.a^^ 


s 


ri    r- 


■a^&^=^ 


S^ 


^ 


I 


-*— *- 


1    r 


Some  of  the  most  popular  ballads  of  Southern  India  are  called  Svarajotas, 
and  are  sung  by  almost  everyone.  The  words  are  usually  odes  to  some  deity  or 
popular  hero  of  the  country.  A  song  of  this  kind  commences  with  a  kind  of 
refrain  termed  pallevi  ;  following  in  quick  succession  is  the  anupallevi,  a  kind  of 
short  stanza,  the  words  of  which  are  an  addition  to  a  comment  upon  those  of  the 
pallevi.  After  this  the  pallevi  is  again  repeated.  The  stanzas,  which  may  be 
dissimilar  both  in  metre  and  melody,  follow  in  order,  each  concluded  by  a  repetition 
of  the  refrain.  There  is  an  almost  entire  absence  of  superfluous  grace  in  these 
songs,  and  their  marked  rhythm  renders  their  execution  within  the  attainment  of 
nearly  all.  The  following  examples  of  these  melodies  are  interesting,  and  display  the 
fluent  and  decisive  nature  so  characteristic  oi  them  all  to  the  greatest  advantage — 


Allegyo  modcrato. 
Pallevi. 


Fine.       Anupallevi. 


Raga  Bilahdri. 
Tala  .\di. 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA. 


<•? 


^^^^^^^m 


P^^^^M 


i^^^^ 


-•-Ti-aH 


^^^^Tj^^^Tjji^g^^^a'^g^sg^ 


•  "^^ 


This  air  is  one  of  the  most  popular  in  Southern  India  ;  it  is  usually  known 
only  by  the  name  of  the  raga  in  which  it  is  composed,  as  the  words  vary  in 
different  parts  of  the  country.  Its  origin  is  not  known,  but  it  is  believed 
to  be  very  old. 

The  following,  a  song  peculiar  to  Mysore,  and  in  praise  of  the  goddess 
Parvati  or  Chamandi,  is  in  a  raga  that  is  very  little  employed — 


A  llcgro. 
Pallevi. 


'  Parvati  Pate." 


(  Raga  Purna-chandrika. 
\  Tala  Adi. 


7n-S^5= 


tmzii 


1-^    I      ^-^r-^ 


' m 1---  ' • m-—M 


-'^ 


Anupallevi. 


tt- 


=^^^ 


•"  »m 


»*»f»  *^ 


^t^ 


rpcT 


:S3i^^ars 


f=^^ 


*     0r»w 


=^^ 


Stanzas  i. 


^^^^^S\^i^^^\J^^^^^^^'S^^^:  I 


68 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA. 

^uv^i  ^  h^\  ,>^  rig 


A     '    '    *  ^        '     ' 


1^3= 


::f:^ 


?E^3JEP^S 


^;=t^-ta^^^g^^g 


^£ 


^£3= 


^::w- 


^ 


=f= 


^^ 


-*—m- 


p    P    •    P- 


pasg 


=t=t=^ 


:i^3^ 


^^■^^^'Jl^l?^!^ 


= 1 — 1 — 1- 


As  an  example  of  a  melody  confined  entirely  to  the  pentatonic  scale  and  with 
an  undefined  conclusion  the  following  is  interesting.  The  apparent  want  of  a 
distinctly  indicated  key-note  is  evident,  and  it  might  be  harmonised  equally  well 
in  several  different  keys.  Some  musicians  would  doubtless  treat  it  as  in  a  minor 
key,  and  harmonise  it  therefore  in  E  minor.  The  Hindus,  however,  regard  it  as 
pertaining  rather  to  the  Mesolydian  mode,  and  therefore  make  G — the  dominant  of 
the  natural  scale — the  tonic. 

This  melodv  is  also  worthy  of  note  as  it  is  considered  to  be  one  of  the  oldest 
son<js  of  the  kind  remaining: — 


Moderato. 
Pallevi. 


'  Sami  dia  mera." 


I 


Riga  Mohanna. 
Tala  Adi. 


i 


^^ 


Anupallevi 


i 


i»>  *ri  p  i^ 


^m^ 


W^    P\  m-  It 


w   » — d — •-P^-* — ^ — w-»-w #  J         pr\  ^ »-  — ^  »    ^ m  J      r 


Stanzas  i. 


$ 


^g±ij  jjj  ^ 


i^r-r^ 


w  r  I  r  u 


*      fd—^ 


=3^=^=^^=^ 


fT^  f 


S 


$^^.^=m^^^^m^^  /J If  ^ 


■:f^ 


W^i^ 


t=t. 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA. 


69 


iii.  poco  a  poco. 


±1 


U-/JI  rr^j^^ 


i^: 


^s 


^F=r^ 


* h; •- 


-*-f~ 


S 


•_  -•-  ^  ^ 

i I       i       1 


^ 


-«-i-^ 


ni//. 


3=Ui 


-^-r 


L^     U--g~J=^ 


Pallevi. 


^m 


•    #1  ,^f  fT^ 


^:Br'^L«g 


'  Rama  na  mora  alinchera." 

Anupallevi. 


£^^=n 


^^  I  i    *  * 


f  Raga  Ka 
(  Tala  Ru 


amachi. 
pacca. 


Stanzas  i. 


gs-^^ 


r>~r= 


^1^ 


LLjdiJ 


^E^JSSE^\E^^ 


The  above  air  displays  a  good  example  of  the  pecuHar  effect  of  a  rhythm 
of  three  measures.  More  than  one  example  of  what  is  styled  "  Vishama  tala  " 
by  the  Hindus  may  be  found  here,  where  a  note  at  the  end  of  a  bar  is  tied  to  one 
at  the  commencement  of  the  bar  following. 

The  two  songs  following  are  of  a  similar  kind  to  the  foregoing,  and  both  are 
exceedingly  popular.  They  are  of  quite  recent  date,  and  were  probably  composed 
by  some  Telugu  pandit  at  the  court  of  M3'Sore.  I  have  given  them  precisely  as 
they   are   sung,   and   without    attempting  to   divide  the   parts    {i.e.,  pallevi,   &c.) 

s 


70 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA. 


composing  them.     The  parts  can,  however,  be  easily  distinguished,  and  also  the 
small  codettas  and  cadenzas  which  separate  them — 


"  Suvi,  Suvi, " 


Allegro. 


fRaga  Behag. 
\Tala  Rupacca 


^a!^^^'^^r77i72=^t^[g 


F^fgfrfrN-^^ 


sS 


^-'     J  '  '  .^     J^^  V.     rj: 


^ 


-*^ 


tz^ 


-^ 


EEE 


eS^ 


^^^m^^ 


m 


P 


eI^^sSsSS^S 


>  1 1 


tja 


^ 


«=St=P 


^ 


ist±dd: 


'^1^=^^^^^^!^^^^^^^ 


-•-    -^  -*-•     -•-• 


A  Uegro. 


'  Kamini  Vinaisa." 


Raga  S'ankarabhama. 


m 


Sa-'-TOil^  JJJ^J:3^^:j=|^^^^^ 


^J.i^l^g^p^^^^^_j^J5j^=^^ 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  IN VI A. 


i 


^i=p=^ 


^3i^M^knT}:^T^^ 


^JJ^i^p^TE 


=?:«= 


^ri|j"3?J?S 


^^ 


^ 


^^ 


-^  I   > 


$ 


^ — k 


g_^l .  ji,^  I  J"^a^ffl,^=j^^^:T^^ 


:?2=z 


^^  .TTJ^^^^J^^^aj-^^^gfe^^P^^^iE 


Sacred  songs,  called  Kruthis,  are  very  popular.  The  airs  of  some  of  these 
hymns  are  very  old,  and  have  been  handed  down  by  successive  generations  for 
hundreds  of  years.  Kruthis  are,  as  a  rule,  in  the  more  difficult  ragas,  the 
characteristics  of  which  are  made  as  prominent  as  is  consistent  with  the  melody. 
They  consist  of  a  pallevi,  anupallevi,  and  one  stanza.  Some  few  have 
three  stanzas,  and  this  number  is  never  exceeded.  The  pallevi  is  sung  at  the 
commencement,  then  the  anupallevi,  after  which  the  pallevi  is  repeated  with 
a  slight  variation  at  the  option  of  the  singer,  followed  by  the  stanza,  and 
concluding  with  the  pallevi  again.  The  toiipo  is  rather  of  an  Andante  con 
vtoto,  and  the  whole  is  sung  in  a  dreamy  way,  with  a  great  deal  of  expression, 
and  as  much  grace  as  is  wished. 

These  hymns  were  revived  by  the  Rajah  Sarabhoji  of  Tanjore,  and  were 
greatly  improved  in  style  by  the  celebrated  musician  Tiagyaraj  of  that  place, 
who  composed  a  large  number  which  are  still  popular. 

Other  famous  composers  of  kruthis  have  been  Siama  S'astri,  Diksitalu,  and 
Subbaraya  S'astri. 

As  will  be  noticed  from  the  following  example,  kruthis  have  a  curious  mixture 
of  pathos  and  hilarity,  and  the  words  are  always  in  accordance  with  the  emotions 
expressed  by  the  music.  The  peculiarly  plaintive  effect  imparted  to  these 
melodies  by  the  employment  of  grace  embracing  intervals  less  than  semitones, 
and  its  special  charm  so  readily  shown  upon  the  vina — the  usual  companion 
to  these  hymns — no  notation  can  be  found  capable  of  expressing — 


Andante. 
Pallevi.  « 


'  Upacharam  Chesavaru.  ' 


.\nupallevi.        ^ 


J  Riga  Bhairavi. 
(Tala  Rupacca. 


72 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA. 
Stanza. 


1st  time. 


1 1  2tid  time. 


agq^pS^PpMF^^^J^^^^-^-^^^g^ 


The  scale  of  this  melody  is  "  Nata-Bhairavi,"  which,  as  can  be  seen, 
corresponds  exactly  to  the  ancient  Hypodorian  mode.  The  peculiarities  of  the 
raga  Bhairavi,  in  which  it  is  composed,  admit  of  E  being  taken  either 
as  h  or  b  at  will.  Hence  this  melody,  although  partaking  partly  of  the  nature 
of  a  minor  key,  should  be  regarded  as  founded  upon  the  dominant  of  the  major 
key  ;  and,  therefore,  if  harmonised  to  preserve  its  character,  WTitten  in  one  flat 
only,  and  harmonised  with  the  triad  of  the  dominant  as  the  principal  chord. 
The  vibrato  upon  Bb  is  characteristic  of  the  raga,  and  is  never  omitted. 

The  composer  of  this  melody  was  Tiagyaraj. 

The  composition  of  the  next  melody  is  attributed  to  Kolashekara,  a  former 
Maharajah  of  Travancore,  which,  perhaps,  accounts  in  some  way  for  its  wide 
popularity. 

One  great  peculiarity  of  the  compositions  of  the  Maharajah  is  the  copious 
insertion  of  what  are  called  "  Svaraksheras  "  in  them.  To  make  my  meaning 
clear— the  Hindu  gamut,  as  has  been  stated,  is  signified  by  the  syllables  "  Sa, 
ri,  ga,  ma,  pa,  dha,  ni."  The  composer  has  adroitly  introduced  these  syllables 
at  the  very  place  where  the  notes  signified  by  them  occur  in  the  song,  without 
interferine:  with  the  sense  of  the  words.  This  is  the  more  difficult  to  do  when 
we  remember  that  in  Hindu  music  the  notes  must  follow  each  other  in  a 
particular  order,  according  to  the  raga,  and  not  exactly  according  to  the 
composer's  fancy.  In  the  following  piece  the  words  are  "  5rtrasa  vSrtmamukha 
para  nava7«rt,"  &c.  The  syllables  Sa  and  Ma  are  introduced  at  the  very  points 
where  the  notes  C  (Sa)  and  F  (Ma)  stand  in  the  song.  The  Hindus  regard,  in 
this  song,  C  and  not  F  as  the  key-note,  though  the  latter  is  clearly  the  real 
tonic,  and  there  is  apparently  no  difference  in  the  tonality  of  this  and  the 
melody  "  Smarana  Sukam,"  in  which  they  allow  the  tonic  to  be  F.  The 
other  two  melodies,  also  from  Travancore,  are  compositions  of  Kolashekara 
Maharajah — 


SARA5A    SaMAMUKHA.  " 


Moilftlttu. 


Kamachi. 


I'.iUevi. 


^--^^iEijEga^;i:3^: 


fRSu'a  Kama 
(Tala  Adi. 


«**, 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA. 

Anupallevi. 


73 


p^SJ-JJ^^ 


n,r;iJ  J'^G^ 


m 


i\     r- 


i^ 


Stanzas. 


pr  f.^  '''^^\^^=^^^nu  ;'J^ 


^a 


^r  r>/JU 


JJ    jJlJ.l^tz^ 


^^^ 


p±^2ni:i\P-^-^rf\f  r  I J  r.jviir  r.r  f.-^^^^Sl 


Pallevi. 


Melopy  from  Travanxore. 


i 


^ 


Raga  Bilahari. 


pztUj:;  N  ^ -*i-^-^^i^i^ 


Anupallevi. 


m 


tefe* 


e£ 


i^ 


^ 


f       g- 


Stanzas. 


i 


^ 


j^=^ 


i 


fefe 


^  m 


^fe^ 


^ 


r     g- 


^'^i^ 


m 


± 


Pallevi. 


Melody  from  Travanxore. 
Anupallevi. 


Raga  Mohanna. 


hShH^^^SmiMir^l rj- 1 r  rrlrrr I -j^ i L-Q£[,ri Cfe^ 


Stanzas. 


rtf^r  r  I  r  ^Gfrg^^ 


ii=i=i^ 


^ 


fe^^^;^ 


^ 


Modi'ynto. 
Pallevi.  , 


'  Smarana  Sukam  vo  Ramanam.' 


j  Raga  Garudadvani. 
ITala  Eka. 


^S 


^^^=3: 


^ 


^5=1^^^ 


^ 


^ 


^^-gj^ 


3:^|:^-.l  J     Jl/^^^^ 


ffi 


74 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTJHERX  INDIA. 


Anupallevi 


^ 


.^:^«- 


^ 


"^  » 


-r-r 


^ 


^ 


^m 


5iit 


itfc 


An  example  of  an  irregular  melody  is  shown  below.  The  two  first  periods 
consist  of  nine  and  seven  bars  respectively.  This  frequently  occurs  in  Indian 
music,  and  is  probably  produced  simply  by  rests  having  in  course  of  time  been 
either  lengthened  or  disregarded  ;  or  by  a  bar  imitated,  repeated,  or  over- 
lapping ;  so  that  a  symmetrical  period  is  transformed  into  one  of  an  uneven 
number  of  bars.  The  effect  produced  is  original,  and  often  very  pleasing. 
That  this  has  been  fully  recognised  by  musicians  in  Europe  is  well  known,  and 
many  examples  might  be  quoted  from  the  works  of  classical  composers  to  prove 
that  this  has  been  largely  appreciated  as  an  important  element  of  variety — 


Andante. 
Pallevi 


Nanna  Gan.na  Talli. 


Raga  Manohari. 
Tala  Eka. 


f^T^rrj^^ 


^^ 


?=^ 


Anupallevi. 


$ 


s 


f  I  fs-  r 


^^ 


Stanza. 


J?     * *    0    \    ^     , 


^ 


w 


^ 


^m 


^ 


^-  ^^ 


zj\:  r  \ 'Ja^ 


^ 


^* 


^^ 


^=, 


The  two  melodies  following  are  both  in  the  scale  called  jMavamalava- 
gaula.  The  intervals  of  the  scale  are  so  peculiar  and  so  manv  harmonical 
combinations  can  be  formed  from  them  that  it  well  deserves  attention,  especiallv 
when  it  is  remembered  that  this  is  a  scale  largely  used  by  the  Hindus,  and  that 
all  elementary  exercises  taught  to  pupils  are  invariably  upon  this  scale,  instead  of. 
as  would  be  supposed,  the  diatonic  major,  which  is  by  us  commonly  regarded  as 
natural. 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  IXDIA. 


75 


These  melodies  are  again  irregular  in  construction ;  the  ragas  in  which  they 
are  composed,  though  much  alike,  differ,  in  that  the  third  is  not  admitted  as  a 
real  note  in  the  ascending  mode  of  the  second  example.  A  characteristic  of  the 
raga  Purvi  is  shown  in  the  "  glisse  "  from  D  to  G  in  the  sixth  and  seventh  bars 
of  the  first  air— 


'  Trii.oka  mata. 


Pa'levi. 


i 


.^.  .^.  ;hi 


■^^ 


SC=s: 


££ 


m 


ZMUK. 


E 


^ — • — ^ — I h- 


^^ 


Anupallevi. 


i 


1= 


^ 


^  r   *  ^  ■  rj       ^^g- 


^=^= 


»    F    m      *       »' 


^ 


i^=1= 


I         I         i 


=S^ 


^^^i^l' 


Sian/a 


'•  Nagadhera. 


(Raga  NadirAmakrya. 
I  Taia  Rupacca. 


:^tt=6 


f       » 


=P=5: 


^ 


zt=a: 


*==*= 


-*— ^ 


g^^-i^^^^Lj  \^\^'^ 


1 — 1—1= 


^^ 


-• — • — • — <»- 


^ 


^^=^ 


« — • — « — • — « — •- 


n 


I  si  time. 


2nd  time. 


p*= 


m 


r-r-mrr^e^t'-i  rrr^  >^ 


^ 


J  I 


Very  similar  to  kruthis  are  Kirthanas.  Thev  consist,  like  the  former,  of  a 
pallevi,  anupallevi,  and  stanzas,  the  tala  being  regular  throughout.  The  ragas  in 
which  they  are  composed  are  for  the  most  part  popular  ones,  and  there  is 
little  grace  essential  to  their  performance.  The  music  of  kirthanas  is  verv 
simple,  and  the  words,  addressed  to  some  deity,  plain  and  easy  to  be  remembered. 

The  following  are  examples  of  popular  kirthanas — 


Allegretto. 
Pallevi. 


Bala  nanna  chala  brovava.' 


Raga  Kambudi. 
Tala  Adi. 


S 


^^ 


£ 


^     ^ 


^  •  y 


:=3= 


=Ua: 


=iJ= 


is^ 


iii: 


76 


Stanzas. 


i 


^ 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA. 

I   •*  1st  time. 


"^^ 


?3 


rmT^^nr^ 


^ 


£=t 


^^ 


i 


.  -^-^ 


^^^^^ir-i^-i^ 


•  •-!*■ 


E^ 


is<  i/mc 


2«rf  (<mc. 


tst 


^^a 


;e 


Modcrnto. 

Pallevi.    p^ 


"  Karunallah  Varnalu." 


JRaga  Biag 
(Tala  Adi. 


rri:ii:i:rT/rr-fjiffj-rrri^i- j^i^JJ-^VJir  r;^^ 


Modeyato. 
Pallevi. 


'  Garuua  gamana  rara." 


JRaga  Surati. 
I  Tala  Adi. 


f¥^P 


:& 


E& 


1 


liii: 


^ 1 — c 


r  f  '  r  \<^- 


iiJ=U± 


Vernams  are  songs  very  similar  to  svarajotas,  merely  differing  in  that  the 
several  parts  of  which  they  are  composed  are  not  arranged  in  quite  the  same 
manner,  and  that  they  are  more  difficult  of  execution.  Vernams  are,  as  a  rule, 
much  longer  than  svarajotas,  and  contain  a  larger  amount  of  grace  throughout. 
They  are  usually  in  the  more  uncommon  ragas,  and  the  time  is  purposely  made 
as  catchy  as  possible.  Their  performance  is  therefore  seldom  attempted  by 
other  than  skilled  musicians. 

A  vernam  consists  of  an  introduction  to  which  there  are  words,  usually 
concluded  by  a  "Sol-fa"  passage.  Following  this  are  stanzas  generally  merely 
"  sol-fahed."  After  each  stanza  there  is  a  short  refrain  to  which  words  are  sung. 
The  words  of  vernams  treat  mostly  of  the  deeds  of  favourite  heroes  or  warrior 
deities. 

The  following  is  an  example  of  one  of  the  simplest  vernams.  In  performance 
a  musician  would  treat  this  as  a  kind  of  theme  which  he  would  expand,  vary,  and 
embellish  according  to  his  own  taste  and  skill — indeed,  grace  is  sometimes 
employed  to    such   an   extent    that   the  original    air  can    hardly   be  recognised. 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERX  INDIA. 


77 


This  melody  is  the  composition  of  some  pupil  of  Tiagyaraj  of  Tanjore  ;  it 
displays  two  of  the  characteristics  of  the  raga  Saranga  very  prominently — viz.,  the 
^lisse  from  B  to  G  and  the  vibrato  upon  D — 


Allegro.   (Introduction  with  words.) 


Inta  Modi. 


(Raga  Saranga. 
\Tala  Adi. 


i 


p; 


-^-^ 


W    »  m 


& 


^ 


foco  acccl.     (without  words. 
»     ^     m     »      '     m — ; 


J  I  rurr^. 


^ 


j=»= 


=S=|E 


-I ^ ! 1 1 1 "— 

_J^ b«««l ^ ^ 

(^ ^ 


S 


i 


»r-  f 


qtip: 


^E^^SE:^ 


»     »  *- 


fc*^ 


3^^ 


=?s=^^r^- 


sO 


=i^5f 


Pallevi  (at  end  of  each  stanza). 
a  tempo. 


t^^^^CzT^^^O '-"  r   ^ 


i^: 


*     P~ 


iiJ^t. 


Stanzas,  nrf  lib.      i. 


i=E 


-*r->- 


=P  ^ 


V~| 


i.<    I    I- — »^ 


g^^-^tr-^-^^^F^^vE^^^i^^^F^^ 


iii.      rt  tempo. 


m 


?H  .0  ,r-  r-i 


=pt=i=«=«: 


=ft:^^ 


.i=U= 


4   S   ta 


ad  lib. 


S^^ 


ES 


=g=K==fc: 


3*i-t 


:«: 


i^=4: 


The  following  is  another  well  known  song  of  this  kind — 


Allegro.     (Introduction  with  words.] 
Q «_ 


'  Sarasamu  delupara." 


f  Raga  Kamachi. 
(Tala  Adi. 


:ee 


^ 


->j  ' 


ij: 


u 


78 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTIIEKX  INDIA. 


r--^-"  r>  fr  i"^*:^ 


^  ltcj- 


iSp^^C£ 


:Ie£ 


S 


i& 


5=*= 


~^=r^Cju^ 


i 


^^sg;i^^a±^r   r-  r—x^^xir-fjrr^m 


~-:X=- 


:'T  t^  p-rn^-g  r  •  •■  f^—^^^^^^^^^^s^ 


$ 


poco  accel.     (without  words.) 


±3: 


U^^  fJ-U^ 


s 


^ 


*-i— ?- 


^^ 


^i  1  f 


f4^^^?^^^^^^^fe^g^^^ilg^g#^^ 


Pallevi  (at  end  of  each  stanza). 


Stanzas  ad  lib.  i. 


ff^T-&1f^^g±PagggF#^F^^^£=gE^r=Fr^fe^^^^ 


i 


Q=c=ra: 


feg 


^g^F=f=g=&^ 


^ 


^^ 


-^1-  ^.    ^- 


^ 


E£feSEE3E 


"     1.J 


fU^^N^ 


a^ 


:^=^ 


#X- 


^^^^Eg^^ 


^=SE 


p^^-g 


^^^^^^ 


UJ     L^= 


^^ 


S'anka-vernams  are  somewhat  similar  to  vernams,  only  that  the  tempo  is  less 
rapid.  They  are  usually  very  elaborate  in  style,  and  abound  with  graces  of  all 
kinds.  They  are  commonly  sung  at  Nautches  and  are  intended  to  give  full  scope 
to  convey  "  bhavas  " — the  gestures  and  sentiments  conveyed  by  the  dancer  as  she 
sways  to  and  fro  to  the  music. 

Javadis  are  songs  of  a  light  and  pleasing  nature,  such  as  love  songs,  cradle 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA. 


79 


songs/  &c.  They  are  much  sung  by  both  Nautch  girls  and  all,  especially  women, 
of  the  higher  classes  in  domestic  life.  They  are  of  two  kinds— ordinary  ballads 
and  songs  of  a  more  or  less  indelicate  nature,  sung  during  the  performance  of  a 
peculiar  dance  called  Karwar.  Javadis  consist  usually  of  a  pallevi,  anupallevi,  and 
stanzas,  sung  in  the  usual  manner  as  described  before,  and  are  chiefly  in  popular 
ragas.  The  tempo  is  in  accordance  with  the  words,  and  not  too  slow,  the 
favourite  measure  being  Rupacca.  Consequently,  many  of  these  songs  bear  a 
resemblance  to  a  waltz,  only  that  they  are  taken  at  a  slightly  slower  pace. 

The  words  of  javadis  are  often  very  beautiful  ;  and  those  upon  the  loves  of 
Krishna  and  Radha  are  always  popular.  Musicians  as  a  rule  sing  these  songs 
more  in  their  naked  form,  and  with  less  grace  than  is  their  usual  custom.  Each 
stanza  is  sung  to  the  same  air. 

These  songs  are  of  comparatively  recent  introduction,  being  first  sung  by  the 
Kanarese  musicians  of  the  Court  of  Surapuri,  a  petty  state  near  the  celebrated 
Humpe  ruins.  The  popularity  of  songs  of  this  kind  increased  rapidly,  and  they 
are  now  to  be  heard  throughout  almost  the  whole  of  Southern  India,  where  they 
take  the  place  of  the  Tappa  of  Hindustan. 

Among  the  following  examples  the  air  "  Anthalona  Telavari"  is  perhaps  the 
most  popular— the  accompanying  rhythm  of  the  tala  falls  upon  the  first  and 
second  beat  of  each  bar  ;  this  is  much  noticed  when  it  is  accompanied  by 
instruments,  such  as  the  small  tinkling  cymbals  and  drums,  which  mark  the 
time  strongly.  This  song  seems  to  be  known  throughout  Southern  India — the 
version  varies  slightly  in  different  places,  but,  on  the  whole,  the  air  is  much  the 
same  everywhere. 

The  air  "  S'ri  Saratha  "  is  very  popular  both  in  Mysore  and  Tanjore  ;  the 
modulation  into  the  relative  minor  is  noticeable  as  it  shows  traces  of  a 
pentatonic  scale — 


Andante. 
Pallevi. 


'  YlVANA  PIRDIDU." 


f  Raga  Biag. 
I  Tala  Adi. 


gs 


SI 


=*  *     0  ^ 


»  p  • 


*IW=W=W 


s=«= 


^E^ 


f  •  f 


^ 


^   I  I 


Stanzas. 


r  ''^'ir  ■.tiu^^^^^^s^ 


•  Kayalaga  dAvana.'' 


Raga  Janjuti. 
Tala  Rupacca. 


'  Simple  cradle  songs,  called  "  Palna,"  are  very  common,  and  answer  to  the  lullaby  songs  of  Europe, 


8o 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA. 


Pallevi. 


m 


hi^^ 


^^m 


"  AnTIIALONA  TKLAVARl." 

Anupallevi. 


(Raga  S'ank4rabharna. 
jTala  Rupacca. 


-P— •- 


f^^- 


^^'•T"XZE 


^E 


m^ 


::?«=*= 


Stanzas. 


3==f^ 


# — p- 


r-^        m  W 


■^ 


^TV"^-t^ 


l=i: 


ggsfe|£^g^^^fe^^^g^: 


s 


-^v— h 


^^p^*^n 


rail. 


n  tempo. 
3-TN 


~j>~^~ 


a 


"  Jenaka  Vaneanatha." 


f  Raga  Janjuti. 
(Tala  Rupacca. 


P     • 


^i 


s=sg3 


*   Q     |-» 


ii: 


:f=4: 


-F-t- 


|fe 


:=t 


S 


^J^F 


#1 


-* — m- 


-F a—r—m- 

^1  niQ 


^ 


e — I— p 


^^-- 


*,,-«-*— ^ 


Pi3^ 


?=-=p=r-& 


^ 


tt 


^   '>i^   g 


pg^^^S^j^^M^j^^P^ 


fc  *' 

.^- 


o  • 


n 


'  SeKI    YENAKA  THAKft." 


Pallevi. 


(Raga  Kapi. 
(Tala  Eka. 


1st  time. 


\\  2nd  time. 


i^^^m^^m 


m^ 


1  J  J 


Anupallevi. 


T*^-* 


t=f--=[- 


^ 


^~z^-^ 


L.  ,  *  i^-  Si 


c^ p- 


I 


f>>      ^      •- 


^ Ez 


iJzzzfirrC 


•zizifc 


J  ^  * 


atlit 


Stanzas. 


-:sr-*- 


=i=^ 


' o  •- 


^-T^ 


^pi 


«    Ti 


^ 


^= 


-li        •        4 


^ 


till 


-4-^—1= 


2S^ 


■f—    », 


Se^ 


Fine. 


^ 


=*=^ 


g^ig=B3=5 


-d   ^    4- 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA. 


8i 


'  S'ri  Saratha." 


f\\  r  ^'tu- 


Ra^a  Kamachi. 
Tala  Rupacca. 


S2 


^'^^ 


-iS^ 


*—*- 


*    m 


m 


ggss 


^i^ac 


^^ 


«= 


S^ 


i^  Lji. 


=i=^ 


:J^^ 


Very  similar  to  javadis  are  songs  called  Pathams  ;  they  are  exclusively  love 
songs,  and  are  sung  largely  both  in  the  native  drama  and  by  Nautch  girls.  The 
music  is  very  much  varied,  and  the  performers  frequently  leave  the  air  and 
improvise  cadences  and  embellishments,  rejoining  the  melody  at  will.  The 
tempo  is  slower  than  that  of  javadis,  and  is  varied  according  to  the  expression 
the  singer  wishes  to  put  into  the  words  ;  the  tala  is  generally  irregular,  a  mixed 
time  of  I  and  C  is  the  commonest. 

The  most  popular  composer  of  pathams  was  Kshattrya,  whose  songs  are 
largely  sung,  and  contain  some  of  the  most  beautiful  and  poetical  sentiments 
that  can  be  found  ;  but,  like  all  Oriental  love  poetry,  they  employ  imagery  too 
luxuriant  for  exact  translation — 


'  Valla  tella  vara." 


jRaga  S'ankarabharna. 
jTSla  Druva. 


^ 


Moderato. 


:m 


1st  time. 


■2nd  time. 


^ 


^^S 


It  \r~i 


3C=S3t 


g 


^^ 


a"  *  ^'\f) 


'r  *> 


-P-u   r'  '  r  .  f^^f'^  .' 

Hi   n    M 

1 V  1 

1    -^H 

— \- 

if  '     L^j'  --J  L/  u 

^>  U  ^  J  1 

^-^^ 

>  '^^ 

■  J  • 

*--^    ^'  r) 

:^ 


P      •    \   m 


^  ^  *  #  I  ^-mz^j:^ 

-  L   I    --I — \ — ^T-^- 


=tit 


^ 


n  n 


s 


£gf-^.^J>f.J|/JJ^||J  J- 


xxsx. 


-*i: 


^ 


zz: 


82 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA. 


^^ 


tsj— — ■-.=- 


^^ 


r«=M: 


-P P— #^ 

I        I      L- 


•    p 


T  U  ! 


^^ 


,»\  p t>- 


U  '^  i    U- 


iit 


L^  'l>  -sii— I  1^    / 


^ 


:C5f 


ig 


^-^^.^^ 


^"^ 


In  the  above  melody  the  characteristics  of  the  raga  S'ankfirabharna  are  well 
shown.  The  glide  to  the  upper  C  is  never  omitted  in  this  raga.  Another 
peculiarity  of  this  air  should  be  noticed  :  at  the  sign  \  it  will  be  seen  that 
B  is  tied  ;  the  string  is  hvice  slightly  deflected  and  shaken  upon  the  fret,  so 
as  to  sharpen  the  note  to  a  degree  less  than  a  semitone,  with  a  trembling 
effect. 

This  song  is  very  well  known  in  the  Mysore  country.  The  pace  is  moderately 
quick  but  not  hurried,  and  the  melody  is  sung  in  a  soft,  dreamy  manner,  that, 
coupled  with  the  gestures  of  the  singer  and  the  tinkling  of  the  accompanying 
cymbals,  is  peculiarly  fascinating,  especially  when  heard  for  the  first  time. 

Here  is  another  example  of  these  songs — 


Andante. 


(  Raga  Mukari. 
t  Taia  Triputa. 


^231 


iOi^^ 


^^ 


\ « m -* • L 


=t=^ 


i 


s 


"^m 


3=tb. 


^E 


»    ^~¥: 


& 


Bg; 


jac 


EH 


fe^ 


1 


Religious  hymns,  called  Yallapathams  and  Tathvams,  are  largely  sung  bv 
the  lower  orders.     They  are  very  lugubrious  and  monotonous,  and  are  invariably 

The    former    are    funeral    dirges,    the    latter 


in    the   raga  Yedukula-Kambogi 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA. 


83 


allegorical  chants  sung  at   religious  gatherings.     The  following  example  of  a 
Yallapatham  shows  the  nature  of  these  songs — 

{I 


Antlante. 


(Raga  Yedukula-Kambcgi. 
Tala  Adi. 


The  ordinary  folk-songs  of  the  country  are  called  Lavanis,  and  will  be 
familiar  to  everyone  who  has  heard  the  coolies  sing  as  they  do  their  work  ;  the 
women  nursing  their  children  ;  the  bullock  drivers;  dhooly  bearers  ;  or  sepoys  on 
the  march.  The  airs  are  usually  very  monotonous.  The  words,  if  not  impromptu, 
are  a  sort  of  historv  or  ballad  in  praise  of  some  warrior  or  "  burra  Sahib." 
Some  have  a  kind  of  chorus,  each  man  in  turn  singing  an  improvised  verse. 
There  is  no  employment  of  raga. 

At  the  time  of  the  Kama  festival  in  honour  of  the  Indian  god  of  love,  special 
lavanies  called  Saval  are  sung.  The  words  of  these  are  sung  by  two 
parties — one  called  Turai  and  the  other  Kalki — intended  to  represent  the  god 
Krishna  and  his  mistress  Radha.  Questions  of  a  metaphorical  nature  are  sung 
by  one  party  and  answered  by  the  other.  These  were  formerly  sung  extempore, 
but  their  performance  is  now  usually  rehearsed  beforehand.  This  species  of 
entertainment  is  also  practised  in  Northern  India  under  the  name  of  Kabi. 

The  two  following  are  examples  of  popular  lavanies — ■ 


Allfgro  vioderato, 

n     No.     I. 


1 


~r  »  *  0^ 


:^:i^ 


=^ 


^^^ 


IT-^tf^ 


^ 


No.  2. 


^E? 


^ 


BE^ 


^ 


-fs— r 


^■ 


V      I 


I^T^'""^ 


tr 


A  composition  called  Raga-malika,  or  "  garland  of  ragas,"  is  occasionally 
heard.  As  the  name  implies,  it  is  a  song  that  modulates  into  many  different 
ragas.  A  raga-malika  consists  of  a  pallevi  or  refrain,  and  stanzas.  The  pallevi 
is   employed   only  at  the  beginning  and   at  the   conclusion.     The  stanzas  are 


84  THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA. 

usually  uneven  in  number.  Each  stanza  employs  a  different  raga,  the  name 
of  which  must  be  mentioned  in  the  words,  in  order  that  the  audience  be  able 
to  follow  and  appreciate  the  performer's  skill.  The  tala  remains  the  same 
throughout. 

Somewhat  similar  to  the  above  is  a  Pallevi.  This  word  signifies  literally 
"a  creeping  plant,"  and  hence  the  name  is  given  to  a  kind  of  fantasia  upon  some 
theme  worked  out  in  accordance  with  certain  rules,  and  containing  a  large 
amount  of  grace  and  imitation.  As  this  kind  of  composition  is  extremely 
popular  it  well  merits  some  attention. 

A  stanza  or  sentence  of  some  poetical  nature  is  sung  to  any  air  that  the 
performer  may  improvise,  and  in  anv  raga  and  tala.  This  opening  melodv  is 
taken  as  the  theme  of  the  pallevi,  and  is  varied,  imitated,  and  answered  sub- 
sequently according  to  the  skill  and  inclination  of  the  performer.  Occasionally 
a  kind  of  counter  theme  is  introduced,  and  a  skilful  musician  will  keep  the 
two  parts  distinct.  If  this  is  done  the  counter  theme  is,  as  a  rule,  introduced 
upon  a  fourth  or  sixth  lower.  But  it  is  not  intended  to  imply  that  there  is  any 
employment  of  counterpoint  as  understood  in  Europe  ;  for  though  in  certain 
cases  these  two  parts  may  be  actually  going  at  the  same  time,  yet  the  native 
musician  is  guided  by  no  contrapuntal  laws,  but  by  his  ear,  and  the  rules  of  rdga, 
entirely.  Much  greater  license  is  given  as  to  raga  in  a  pallevi  than  in  any 
other  composition. 

There  are  usually  three  movements — viz.,  an  adagio,  a  moderato,  and  an 
allegro  or  scherzo. 

The  first  movement  commences  with  the  subject  being  given  out  in  any  raga 
or  tala  that  may  be  called  for.  The  space  of  time  occupied  by  this  is  termed  an 
avatar,  and  constitutes  the  chief  rhythmical  division  or  period  into  which  the 
pallevi  is  divided.  Each  succeeding  avatar,  though  consisting  of  several 
short  phrases,  either  linked  together  or  separated  by  rests,  must  be  of  equal 
length  to  the  original.  Each  avatar  differs  essentially  from  those  preceding, 
and  if  the  voice  is  employed,  commences  invariably  with  the  first  syllable  or  word 
of  the  original  theme. 

The  second  movement  follows  with  or  without  a  short  pause  between. 
The  measure  remains  the  same,  but  the  duration  of  the  movement  is  less. 

The  third,  or  concluding  movement,  follows  ;  the  only  difference  being  that 
the  tempo  is  much  increased.  In  this  it  is  usual  for  the  performer  to  modulate 
into  different  ragas  (called  for  at  the  time  by  the  audience),  taking  care  that  the 
special  characteristics  of  each  shall  be  made  clear;  each  avatar  is,  however,  ended 
in  the  original  raga.     This  movement  is  brought  to  a  close  by  a  repetition  of  the 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA. 


85 


original  theme  in  the  original  tempo,  after  which  a  few  bars  in  the  same  raga  are 
given  ad  libitum  by  way  of  a  Finale. 

In  the  performance  of  a  pallevi  no  harsh  or  discordant  instruments  are 
employed.  For  marking  a  rhythmical  accompaniment  the  hands  are  employed, 
or  sometimes  a  Mridang  or  Gatha.  Occasionally  another  performer  hums 
softly  a  kind  of  accompaniment  to  syllables  (ta,  di,  ti,  ka,  &c.,  as  if  sol-fahing) 
intended  to  represent  the  beats  of  a  drum  ;  this  is  called  konnagolu,  or  talavinyasa. 

Songs  of  salutation  or  hail,  called  Mangala,  are  sung  at  the  conclusion 
of  all  performances.  Melodies  of  this  kind  are  usually  in  either  the  ragas  Surati 
or  Saurelshtra.  The  following  is  one  of  the  most  common  Mangalas.  The 
chief  peculiarity  in  songs  of  this  kind  is  evident  here — the  beats  of  the  tala  falling 
upon  tied  notes  at  the  commencement  of  a  bar — 


Paramana  Suttu  battu  padara." 


I  Raga  Saurashtra. 
Tala  Adi. 


A  dngio. 


m 


l^^Tl 


::?«; 


^^^ 


iis5 


:S=^ 


>  i^ 


-»-»- 


Hindustani  music  in  some  respects  differs  from  the  system  previously 
described,  and  which  is  called  Karnatik.  It  has  been  much  copied  from  the 
latter,  but  its  professors  are  not  often  men  of  much  education  ;  and  though 
many  of  them  are  skilled  executants,  their  knowledge  of  the  theory  of  their  art 
is,  as  a  general  rule,  but  small.  In  Hindustani  music  more  attention  is  paid  to 
the  minute  distinction  between  the  various  ragas  than  to  the  actual  melody  itself. 
To  melodic  form  the  same  importance  is  not  attached.  The  nomenclature  of 
Hindustani  and  Karnatik  ragas  differs,  but  musicians  everywhere  quote  the 
Sangita  Ratnakera  as  their  principal  authority.  They  also  say  that,  apart  from 
Arabian  and  Persian  innovations,  the  difference  between  the  S3'stems  of  music 
prevalent  in  the  North  and  South  of  India  is  accounted  for  b}-  the  fact  that  in 
the  former  that  of  Hanuman  is  preferred,  while  the  Southern  music  is  a  relic  of 
the  earliest  system  of  Narada. 

In  Hindustani  music  the  elaborate  arrangement  of  scales  previously 
described  is  not  used,  but  merel_y  twelve  ;  all  of  which,  however,  are  found,  and 
are  in  common  use,  though  under  different  names,  in  the  Karnatik  system. 
The  talas,  or  measures,  employed  in  Hindustani  music  are  similar  to  those 
previously  described  upon  page  36.  As  regards  the  form  of  Hindustani 
melodies,    in  place    of    what    has    been    styled    "  pallevi,"    "  anupallevi,"  and 

Y 


86  THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA. 

"  charanam,"  or  stanzas,  all  their  songs  consist  of  distinct  parts.  The 
pallevi  is  styled  asthayi — the  anupallevi  antara — and  the  charanam  ahhog.  As  the 
differences  between  the  two  systems  consist  mainly  of  technical  points,  which 
would  be  of  slight  interest  to  the  reader,  the  following  observations  will,  perhaps, 
be  suflicient. 

The  Dhrupad — perhaps  the  most  admired  of  all  Hindustani  songs — is  a 
heroic  song,  with  a  slow  and  dignified  style,  and  sung  almost  exclusively  bv  men. 
It  consists  of  three  parts — i.e.,  asthayi,  antara,  and  abhog.  Great  scope  is  given 
to  variations  upon  the  actual  theme,  and  the  time  cadence  is  very  complex. 
Other  songs  are  called  Tilanas  and  Sarigams  (or  svaragramas),  and  are  in 
particular  talas  ;  they  contain  onlv  two  parts. 

Ghuzals — songs  of  the  same  nature  as  Kshattrya's  pathams  of  the  Karnatik 
— are  very  popular;  they  consist  of  only  asthayi  and  antara.  Of  a  similar 
form  to  ghuzals  are  Tappa,  resembling  the  Karnatik  javadis,  and  consisting 
of  two  parts.  There  are  also  Thungri,  Dadra,  Hari;  Gurbah,  sung  at  the  Dassera 
festival;  and  Palna,  or  cradle  songs.  Songs  called  Khyals,  somewhat  like  the 
Karnatik  kruthis,  which  display  a  great  deal  of  grace,  and  have  a  slow  time 
cadence,  were  introduced  by  Sultan  Shirki  of  Jounpur;  they  consist  of  two 
parts  only.  Many  Hindustani  lavanis  are  very  pretty,  though  most 
melancholy. 

The  tuning  of  instruments  used  by  Hindustani  musicians  differs  from  that 
employed  by  Karnatik  professors,  in  that  the  interval  of  the  fourth  is  always 
admitted  upon  the  open  strings  ;  the  modulation  therefore  of  these  instruments 
is  less  confined ;  hence  frequently,  though  the  melody  itself  is  less  pleasing, 
accompaniments  to  Hindustani  songs  are  preferred  to  the  ordinary  Karnatik 
accompaniments,  and  music  played  in  the  Karnatik  style  upon  instruments  tuned 
thus  is  much  liked.  Hindustani  musicians  practise  singing  more  than  do 
Karnatik.  They  have  better  voices,  and  take  more  pains  to  cultivate  them. 
Karnatik  singers,  as  has  been  said  before,  appear  to  have  an  idea 
that  practice  is  hurtful  to  their  voices,  and  from  attempting  to  sing  when  too 
young,  before  the  voice  is  formed,  they  are  apt  to  ruin  their  singing  entirely  ; 
while  Hindustani  singers  practise  much,  and  sing  in  a  more  manly  style  ;  hence 
Hindustani  music  is  much  admired  in  Southern  India,  chiefly  as  a  variety — the 
softness  of  the  language  itself,  and  the  ease  with  which  it  lends  itself  to  singing, 
giving  it  an  additional  charm.  A  careful  study  of  the  Hindustani  melodies 
given  below  will  amply  repay  the  time  given  up,  and  their  great  beauty  and 
inherent  passion  can  hardly  fail  to  enchant  one. 

The  following  examples,  gathered  principally  from  the  Deccan,  Guzerat,  and 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  IX D! A. 


87 


Rajasthan,  display  some  of  the  chief  characteristics  of  these  melodies.  The 
names  of  their  respective  ragas  have,  in  some  cases,  been  omitted,  the  names  of 
Hindustani  ragas  being  different  from  Karnatik.  Several  of  them  modulate 
into  different  ragas.  Such  technicalities  are  not  of  nuich  general  interest. 
Examples,  however,  may  be  found  below.  The  ghuzal  given  is  popular  in 
Guzerat,  and  is  sung  quickly,  but  with  great  expression  and  varying  tempo. 
It  should  be  remembered  that,  in  all  cases  in  performance,  the  airs  are  much 
varied  by  grace,  and  rarely  are  sung  in  their  naked  form.  All  singers,  both 
Hindustani  and  Karnatik,  make  great  use  of  a  slide  akin  to  the  portamento. 


Allegretto. 


Ghuzal. 


S^7^^r-\M 


is 


i>       .      . — —      . 


^^ 


=^ 


^ 


d.      *- 


Efe 


^M^ 


-±^ 


^m 


=5;= 


In  Raga  S'ankara. 


Andantf  niosso 


Andante 


4j    #    » 


z^ 


Lavani. 


M     d»- 


TT— =aL 


^^ 


^^r^-i4J^ 


i 


^^Tr 


^ — *- 


qaot 


^ 


^ 


^a^^i^gzf. 


^^.^^^E^^^ 


88 


A  ndanle. 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA. 
Thungri. 


^ 


fc^^"— 


-to  •        ^— 1^~ 


-      i»     f- 


pFF^s^g 


* 


a 


^P^^^fF^g 


*     y     I      fO 


Ifl 


gg 


jj    /oco  accct 


a  tempo. 


Khyal. 


Raga  Kedara. 


S 


4==?: 


S^ 


^^H-X^^ 


:p=r 


^  ^*   ^ 


»       '       »     -Tt- 


i 


£).C. 


a 


^ 


;i^ 


Andante  niosso. 


Patham. 


fiij  J'j?.jij7:i.^-g^3jg 


EIj-JJIbB^ 


^  •     s 


±cz 


^^m 


Fine. 


J.71  J  j  J^LJ^J^^ 


CoH  cspress 


Thungri. 


R4gas  Pilu  and  Dcsh. 


f^-  n  ;;-j-uJr=r^rrT 


:^= 


m 


d  •  J 


-at-*- 


^ 
>-  r=^ 


A \- 


l=t^ 


atirf: 


l^tib 


221 


=P5F 


^ 


J^  ^"J  41.  J I  'J-^ 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA. 


89 


i 


T=r 


r^ 


fi     ■;  ■'  ifr?=^ 


I     J 


m 


=*=«: 


^m 


i 


Tirm- 


a^ 


=^^P^ 


P 


S£ 


^  ^  • 


E 


^ 


^ 


^m 


-r->       I*  ^= 


atzit 


-1 — h 


^=t^ 


Cos  esprcss. 


Khyal. 


Riga  Kalian. 


J  ■  j'lJ  ■  ;'b7^ 


^iJJIj'i.  U.J.J^s? 


:«= 


*-= — r- 


0  *  s 


tfazjzrh-^^^M3J-^--M=5 


»^ g'' *         F 


g^JN  nr 


^ 


rnrij  ;jr7^4^L^N  /fi"^ 


1 — ^- 


Dadra. 


^. 


CoH  espress. 


m 


Ragas  Kafi  and  Desh. 

?srn->r 


^'•I'r  u-u'l-^^^l^---M  ^'^  ;iiiJ^^.^^J  /ij.j 


0S  m* 


#f  r  f.  r  ,r  I  r  u  •  I  -^t  "r- 1  ^  ^  ■■ '  I":  r^f^f^n^TTTrWm 


Lavani. 


Raga  Gauri 


Allegretto. 


l^lf^  ^^l^g^^^tJ^a^f^^ 


^  ***  ^ 


morcndo. 


rt^ 


:^;|-^ijN^j|^/j 


ii 


>-«^^»-j 


:^ 


d  »•  • 


go 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  IXDIA. 


Andante. 


GURBAH. 


RSga  K&fi. 


J^^j^-J    JJIJ.    J-I^pgp 


^ 


at 


1^  ri 


fet2=st 


^^    I    J  b  J     * 


^^^^^m 


^ 


s 


^ 


=3^^=l=* 


*^iJbJ  ^* 


EE 


^H^7^^J???lJ  rj'If^mpTp^-^^ 


GURKAH. 


i 


Modcrato. 


Raga  M4nd. 


^^ 


^^ 


I        N 


^ 


N   I      N 


^ 


?!= 


ft 


i 


=f5: 


^ 


-*^»   d   ^   i 


^ 


3=:S==*=;i=5 


•    d     d 


GuRBAH. 


Andante. 


^ 


^3i7T?y?^n^^i  ^r]  I  ^  J^  J^T^^T^ 


^^^^^ 


-4 — d- 


^->a^ 


i^-N^ 


a= 


^^ 


3E^ 


^T^eS 


Modcralo. 


Thunori. 


5^EB,U^^:  U  r  £ 


y^^^ 


ir-r^ 


:J=c£J=fe^UP-l 


^sr^nrMtfrre^^ 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA. 


91 


Kalingra  (151. 


Scales  used  in  Hindustani  music  and  styled  "  Thats. 

Bhairavi  (S). 


3^ 


^f=^^^  ^^    -^3 


5s 


~rj- 


U 


-I- 


^^=f 


=[: 


Todi  (45). 


Sinda-Bhairavi  \2o). 


i 


^^^ 


^'— ^-B 


zj±: 


-trJ     ?Q     1= 


JTirr 


J-     o    ^- 


J2Z± 


«^^      -^ 


Bilaval  (291. 


Janjuti  ^28l. 


I 


S 


Ed 


^ 


ZS2Z 


-Q- 


-c* s*- 


-o- 
Kafi  (22), 


Dinkapuria  (51) 


i 


,^^^^^^=[ 


^ 


3:£: 


^^^ 


-rj o- 


=^ 


^J      ^     I- 


Shamakalian  (53). 


F^= 


*^ 


ImankaliSni  (65). 


=^=^ 


f^=T3"=^^ 


-J.        J         ^       1^ 


d         <--> 


:<rj       g? 


Pilu   :2I) 


Bhairubahar  1 17). 


^=^ 


^^ 


1        J       bJ 


32Z2: 


I        I 


i^d s* 

(The  numbers  in  brackets  refer  to  the  corresponding  Karnatik  scales  upon  pages  32-35.) 


The  Nahabet.     From  a  Native  Drawing. 


CHAPTER    VI. 

Musical  Entertainments — Music  and  the  Drama — Influence  of  the  latter  upon  songs  of  the 
country — Of  the  Indian  orchestra — Religious  music — Temple  music — Employment  of  bells — 
Street  music — The  Nahabet — Nautch  music — Dancing. 


MUSICAL  entertainments  among  the  higher  classes  are  very  popular  and 
much  in  vogue.  Upon  such  occasions  a  company  of  musicians  are 
hired  for  the  evening.  The  Vina  is  the  favourite  instrument,  and  is 
generally  accompanied  by  either  a  Mathala  or  Tabla,  or  else  by  a  kind  of  earthen 
pot  called  Gatha,  much  like  the  ordinary  "chatty,"  which,  in  the  hands  of  a  skilful 
performer,  is  beaten  with  wonderful  dexterity.  Sometimes,  but  rarely,  two  vinas 
of  different  sizes  are  employed.  In  this  case,  if  the  players  are  skilful,  the  effect 
is  very  pleasing,  especially  in  the  performance  of  an  Alapa,  a  kind  of  rhapsody  or 
fantasia  impromptu,  in  any  raga  ;  each  instrument  keeps  its  part  distinct,  and 
the  theme  is  cleverly  imitated  and  tossed  about  from  one  to  the  other  much  as 
is  done  in  a  modern  orchestra.  Such  imitation  is,  however,  purely  at  the  fancv 
of  the  performers,  and  not  contrapuntal  imitation  as  understood  in  Europe. 

Throughout  Southern  India  the  native  drama  is  exceedingly  popular ;  the 
actors  are  generally  well  educated  and  of  a  high  caste,  and  a  good  company 
always  attracts  full  houses.  Music  is  largely  employed  upon  the  stage,  and 
there  is  a  kind  of  orchestra  attached  to  everv  native  theatre.  The  songs  sung 
at  performances  of  the  kind  do  not,  as  a  rule,  difler  much  from  the  ordinary  music 
of  the  country,  and  of  late  years  there  has  been  a  tendency  to  imitate  foreign 
music,  such  as  Arabian  or  Persian,  and  the  English,  Scotch,  or  other  airs  played 
by  military  bands  at  all  large  stations.  These  naturally  hnd  their  way  from  the 
theatre  into  private  houses — boys  learn  them  and  sing  them  in  the  street — 
and  so  their  inHucnce  graduallv  extends  and  makes  itself  felt  upon  Indian  music 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA.  93 

in  general.  The  old  melody  types,  or  ragas,  are  being  less  jealously  adhered 
to,  and  the  better  educated  classes  of  Hindus  are  beginning  to  see  that  music 
is  not  necessarily  confined  to  one  or  two  particular  systems,  but  that,  like 
nearly  everything  else,  it  is  capable  of  improvement  and  further  development. 

A  marked  change  for  the  better  in  the  manner  of  singing  is  evident.  This, 
indeed,  could  not  fail  to  be  the  case  when  it  is  remembered  that  if  a  voice  is 
intended  to  be  heard  by  a  large  audience  in  a  theatre  or  other  building  of  the 
kind  it  must  be  thrown  out  to  the  full  extent  of  its  volume,  instead  of  being 
contorted  and  its  sweetness  spoilt  by  the  continued  small  inflections  of  tone  and 
unnatural  falsetto  notes  so  much  practised  by  native  singers  of  the  ordinary  class. 

The  native  orchestra  is  usually  made  up  of  the  following  instruments,  or  of 
a  somewhat  similar  combination  :  — 

Sarangi  (string)     ....         ....   2  Mathala  or  Tabla  [dnnns)    i 

Tamburi  (string)    ....         ....    1  S'ruti  (drone)        ....         ....   i 

^^lukaxina.  (native  oboe)       ....   i 

The  use  of  the  Sarangi  in  Southern  India — except  in  conjunction  with 
Nautches — is  rapidly  being  discontinued,  and  an  English  fiddle  tuned  as  a  vina 
or  sarangi  is  often  substituted  for  it.  Farther  North  the  instrument  appears  likely 
to  hold  its  place  for  a  long  time  to  come.  A  clarinet  is  sometimes  preferred  to 
the  Mukavina. 

In  musical  performances  cymbals  and  bells  of  different  kinds  are  used, 
according  to  taste,  and  the  occasional  use  of  a  harmonicon  of  little  bells  or  plates 
of  metal  (Septaghantika),  or  of  porcelain  cups  or  glasses  (Jalatharangini), 
is  much  admired. 

It  is  a  common  custom  for  the  members  of  particular  castes,  sects,  &c.,  to 
meet  together  at  stated  intervals  for  the  purpose  of  worship,  either  in  each  other's 
houses  or  in  temples.  On  these  occasions  music  forms  a  prominent  feature,  and 
consists  of  hymns  of  different  kinds,  accompanied  bv  a  variety  of  instruments. 
Music  of  this  nature  is  called  Bhazana,  and  its  use  is  almost  universal. 

Among  the  higher  castes  great  trouble  and  expense  is  incurred  in  procuring 
good  performers  for  this  purpose.  The  songs  are  generallv  pretty  and  well 
sung  to  the  accompaniment  of  the  vina  or  sitar  and  tamburi,  with,  perhaps, 
a  small  drum  to  mark  the  rhythm.  The  Bhazana  of  the  common  people  is  a 
great  contrast  to  this,  and  in  their  assemblies  melody  is  often  sacrificed  to  mere 
noise.  Each  man,  in  order  to  show  his  devotion,  sings  in  turn,  frequently  with 
no  re<rard  for  time  or  tune,  whilst  the  others  beat  drums  or  blow  a  kind  of 
whistle  called  Sillu,  with  other  instruments,  just  as  it  pleases  them,  and,  as 
can  be  imagined,  the  effect  of  this  is  discordant  in  the  extreme. 

2A 


94 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTIIERX  INDIA. 


The   instruments  commonly  employed   in    Hhazana   consist   of  one   of  the 
foUowiniT  combinations — 


Tamburi 

Sarangi  or  Fiddle 
Mathala 


Tamburi 
Sarangi    .. 
Mathala  .. 


2 
2 
I 

I 
I 
I 


S'ruti 

Sitar 

Tabla 


Sitar 

Tala  (cymbals) 

Tabla       .... 


I 

I 

I  pair 

I 

I 

I  pair 


Or,  if  the  means  of  the  worshippers  be  very  limited,  a  single  tambouri,  with, 
perhaps,  one  pair  of  little  cymbals  and  a  common  drum,  or  tabor  such  as 
Khanjeri,  is  found. 

The  music  performed  for  Bhazana  usually  consists  of  kirthanas,  gitas, 
and  kruthis. 

In  temples,  chiefly  those  of  Lingayet  or  other  Saivite  sects,  there  is  a 
peculiar  kind  of  music  in  use  called  Karadisamela.  It  is  so-called  because  a 
large  conical  kettle-drum  called  by  that  name  is  the  principal  instrument 
employed  in  it.  The  Karadisamela  carries  with  it  a  special  rhythm  of  its  own  ; 
for  lively  airs — j"n  J~j  J~j  |  J  .    J  .    |  —  ;  for  those  of  a  mournful  nature — J~2  ^^t- 

A  system  of  music  called  Sopanam  is  found  in  Malabar,  where  it  is 
confined  to  temple  services.  In  every  temple  of  any  importance  in  Malabar  and 
Travancore  it  is  usual  to  have  both  instrumental  and  vocal  music  at  the  steps 
leading  to  the  principal  shrine  during  the  performance  of  certain  services.  The 
word  sopanam,  in  its  literal  sense,  means  "  steps,"  and  hence  gives  its  name  to 
this  particular  kind  of  music.  The  Sopanam  system  varies  in  man}-  respects 
from  both  the  Karnatik  and  Hindustani  ;  a  detailed  description  of  it  would, 
however,  be  unnecessary,  since  it  is  much  akin  to  the  Karnatik  system  and 
differs  only  in  technical  points,  which  would  be  uninteresting  to  the  reader. 

The  use  of  the  gong  and  bell  in  temples  is  universal.  Colonel  Meadows 
Taylor,  in  speaking  of  this,  remarks  that  the  gong  is  not  used  as  an 
accompaniment  to  any  but  the  loud  crashing  and  generally  dissonant  music 
of  the  temple  ceremonies.  No  ceremonv  of  sacrifice  or  oblation  is  ever 
performed  without  a  preliminary  tinkling  of  the  bell,  repeated  at  certain  intervals 
according  to  the  ritual. 

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  practice  of  using  it  is  as  ancient  as 
Hinduism  itself,  and  the  ritual  liturgies  and  works  on  ceremonial  observances 
define  the  use  to  be  made  of  it.'     In  fact,  the  use  of  bells  for  religious  purposes 


'•  Proceedings,  Royal  Irish  Ai-:ulciny."     \'ol.  I.X..  Fart  i. 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA.  95 

seems  to  hav'e  been  from  the  earliest  times  so  universal  amongst  almost  all 
nations  that  it  is  only  necessary  to  point  out  that  the  exact  counterpart  of  the 
Hindu  Ghante  is  to  be  found  at  the  present  day  in  the  Sanctus  bell  in 
use  in  Christian  Churches,  and  it  is  perhaps  worthy  of  note  that  in  the  great 
sculptured  Trimurti  or  Hindu  trinity  at  Elephanta  one  of  the  figures  holds  a  bell. 

The  Dasaris,  a  mendicant  class  of  temple  servers  of  Vaisnavite  persuasion, 
usuallv  employ  a  little  side-drum,  with  one  head  only,  called  Dinni,  not 
unlike  the  modern  Egyptian  "  Tabl  Shami";  other  mendicants,  called  Andis, 
outcasts  from  Saivite  sects,  play  upon  a  small  gong  called  Semakkalam,  which 
they  beat  with  a  stick.  Both  Dasaris  and  Andis  often  carry  a  horn  as  well, 
and  support  themselves  by  singing  doleful  ballads  or  hymns  at  street  corners  and 
bv  begging.  Work  of  any  sort  they  decline.  The  ordinary  native  band  of 
discordant  wind  instruments,  drums,  and  cymbals  found  throughout  Southern 
India  is  called  Mela.  The  players  in  these  bands  are  mostly  taken  from  a 
caste  of  Telegu-speaking  barbers  called  "  Mangala-vandlu,"  who  make  this  their 
special  profession  and  provide  the  music,  so-called,  commonly  heard  at  temple 
ceremonies,  weddings,  festal  gatherings,  and  all  street  "  tamashas."  The 
composition  of  these  bands  varies  greatly,  the  number  of  instruments  in  some 
cases  being  as  many  as  thirty  and  in  others  perhaps  only  three  or  four  ;  generally 
one  or  two  nagasaras — a  s'ruti  or  drone — a  drum  such  as  the  dhol — and  a 
pair  of  cymbals  (called  Jhanj),  about  ten  inches  or  a  foot  in  diameter,  are  found. 
Sometimes  a  mela,  consisting  of  a  single  mukavina,  a  flute,  a  flageolet,  a  drone, 
and  a  small  side-drum  called  Dhanki  is  employed. ^ 

The  effect  of  a  mela  can  hardly  be  called  pleasing,  unless  to  those  whose 
chief  delight  is  discordant  noise.  The  air,  such  as  it  is,  is  generally  drowned  by 
the  clanging  of  cvmbals  and  the  incessant  drumming,  which,  added  to  the 
prolonged  and  shrill  drone  of  the  s'rutis,  produce  an  effect  considerably 
imposing.  But,  as  Captain  Willard  pithily  enough  remarks,^  it  is  heard  to 
advantage  "from  a  distance." 

A  peculiar  institution  of  Indian  music  is  known  as  the  Nahabet,^  and  is  so 
called  from  that  beinc:  the  name  of  the  largfest  drum  associated  with  it.  There  are 
certain  persons — Hindu  or  Mahomedan  noblemen — who  are  privileged  to  have 
attached  to  their  service  bands  of  professional  musicians,  who  perform  at  certain 
stated  hours  of  the  day  or  night.  This  privilege  is  sometimes  extended  to  certain 
temples  and  shrines  of  saints,  or  to  spiritual  princes — gurus  or  swamies.    To  these 

"  Preference  seems  to  be  given  to  instruments  of  European  manufacture,  and  it  is  not  unusual  to  find  old 
clarinets,  flutes,  and  fifes  used  in  these  bands. 

"  "  A  Treatise  on  the  Music  of  Hindustan."     Captain  N.  A.  Willard.     Calcutta.  1S34. 
*  This  word  is  commonly  pronounced  "  Nobut." 


g6  THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTH ERX  INDIA. 

bands  the  name  of  Nahabet  is  given,  and  they  are  usually  placed  in  balconies  over 
the  gateways  of  cities  or  palaces,  or  in  other  elevated  places  elsewhere,  and  these 
places  are  known  as  the  Nahabet  Khaneh.  The  music  played  is,  of  course, 
traditional,  but  it  possesses  a  distinct  character  of  its  own  that  is  entirelv  different 
to  anv  other  music  heard  in  India,  and  the  effect,  especially  among  mountains 
or  in  the  hill  fortresses,  such  as  are  found  in  Central  India  or  Rajputana,  is  very 
striking.  Usuallv  care  is  taken  to  retain  the  services  of  the  best  performers  for 
the  Nahabet,  and  when  heard  from  a  little  distance  upon  a  still  Indian  night,  and 
the  sound  is  subdued,  there  is  a  good  deal  of  wild  beauty  about  it  that  possesses 
a  charm  peculiarly  its  own. 

In  the  time  of  the  Mogul  Empire,  we  learn  from  the  "  Ain-i-Akbari,"^  the 
Nahabet  was  held  in  great  esteem,  and  the  Emperor  Akbar  himself  was  even  a 
performer.  There  were  then  in  the  palace  Nakkera  Khaneh  some  eighteen  large 
Nahabets,  twenty  smaller  kettledrums  (Nakkeras),  four  Dohl,  four  Kurna  or 
large  trumpets,  nine  Surnais  or  pipes  similar  to  the  Nagasara,  and  their  accom- 
panying drones,  two  S'ring  or  horns,  and  three  pairs  of  cymbals  of  large  size, 
besides  several  Nafirs  (a  smaller  kind  of  trumpet,  similar  to  the  Tuturi) ;  and  in 
those  davs  the  performances  of  the  Nahabet  occupied  a  prominent  place  in  the 
dailv  palace  routine.  The  general  practice  then  was  that  the  Nahabet  played 
first  at  midnight  and  the  second  time  at  dawn.  An  hour  before  sunrise  the 
musicians  commenced  to  plav  the  Surnais,  an  hour  later  there  was  a  short 
prelude,  which  in  turn  was  followed  by  pieces  introducing  the  Kurna,  Nafir,  and 
other  wind  instruments,  with  the  occasional  use  of  the  largest  drum  of  all 
(Damama  or  Nahabet),  but  which  did  not  introduce  the  Nakkera.  After  this  the 
Surnais  and  Nafirs  were  played  alone ;  an  hour  later  there  was  a  general 
crescendo,  and  then  followed  seven  distinct  performances,  brought  to  a  conclusion 
by  the  chanting  of  various  prayers  for  blessings  upon  the  Emperor,  and  then  the 
day's  service  was  finished  by  the  Surnais  players  playing  softly  to  a  pianissimo  of 
the  drums. 

In  the  present  day  the  large  number  of  different  instruments  formerly 
found  in  the  Nahabet  Khanehs  of  Ibrtresses  and  palaces  do  not  exist,  and  the 
effect  of  the  modern  Nahabet  is  therefore  less  imposing.  There  are,  however,  to 
be  found  in  most  Nahabet  Khanehs  one  pair  of  large  Nahabets,  a  couple  of  pairs 
of  smaller  kettledrums  (Nakkera)  and  possibly  other  drums  with  a  Kurna,  one 
or  two  Tuturi,  a  pair  or  two  of  cymbals,  one  or  two  Nagasaras  and  their 
accompanying  drones,  with  perhaps  a  couple  of  Nuy  or  flutes-a-bec. 

'  "  .\iiii-Akbari."     Translated  from  the  orif^inal  version  bv  H.  Bloclunann,  M..\.     Sec  N'ol.  I.,  k\n.  ig. 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERX  IXDIA.  97 

The   Kurna  is  not  always  found,  for  only  nobles   of  the   highest  rank  are 
considered  able  to  use  it ;  and  by  Brahmins  it  is  still  held  to  be  the  most  ancient 
and   sacred  instrument   of  music  in  existence,   and    they   consequently    give    it 
a  prominent  place  in  their  temple  ritual. 

Nautch  music  is  termed  Taffa  or  Keylika  and  is   performed  exclusively  bv  a 
caste  of  Nautch  people  called  in  Southern  India  Melakara-jati.  This  is  a  composite 
class  of  dancing  women   and  male  musicians,  distinguished  by  a  marked  social 
division  from  the  higher  orders  of  the  musical  profession.     The  dancing  men  and 
women  of  the  Melakara  caste,  who  together  form  a  complete  chorus,  constitute 
what  is  called  a   Chinnamela   (or  smaller  music),  in  distinction  to  the  Peryamela 
(big  music),  which  is  a  band  of  male  musicians  who  play  upon  the  Nagasara  with 
drums  and  accompaniments  differing  from  those  of  the  dancers.''    The  Peryamela, 
or  Pathamelam  as  it  is  also  called,  is  the  ordinary  native   band  formed   by  the 
Mangalavandlu  caste  and  already  described. 

At  Nautches  the  usual  arrangement  of  instruments  is  as  follows  : — 
Sarangis,  or  English  fiddles  tuned  in  the  native  manner        ....     2 

Mridang  or  Tabla   {drum)         ....         ....         ....         ....         ....     i 

S'ruti-upanga  (drone)       ....         ....         ....  ...         ....         ....      i 

Tala  or  jalra   {cymbals)    ....         ....         ....         ....  ....         ....     i 

The  Hindu  art  of  dancing  is  treated  of  at  great  length  in  the  Sanskrit  work 
"  Bharata  S'astra."  Its  origin  is  ascribed  to  the  trod  Brahma.  The  science  of 
dancing  is  usually  considered  under  three  heads — viz.,  nritta,  vatya,  and  nrittya. 
Of  these  nrittya  is  what  is  understood  bv  dancing  as  seen  at  a  Nautch  ;  nritta 
comprises  only  rhythmical  movements  without  gestures  ;  vatya  has  to  do  with 
stage  action  only.  The  masculine  and  feminine  aspects  of  each  of  these  three 
heads  are  fully  treated  of,  and  are  styled  Tandava  and  Lasyn.  There  are 
rules  for  numerous  motions  of  the  head,  eye,  brow,  and  neck,  to  say  nothing  of 
those  of  the  bodv,  arms,  and  feet,  that  have  to  be  carefully  attended  to.  Each 
movement  or  look  is  described  with  an  exactness  that  is  almost  incredible.  All 
these  various  gestures  and  expressions  are  regulated  by  the  tala  or  rhythm  of  the 
dance,  and  are  centred  in  the  stamp  of  the  feet  upon  the  ground  at  intervals,  or 
in  the  tinkling  of  the  bells  worn  by  the  dancer.  Indian  dancing,  like  that  of 
most  Oriental  nations,  consists  of  gestures,  slow,  and  more  or  less  dignified,  in 
time  to  the  music,  rather  than  actual  dancing  as  understood  by  a  ballet.  To  an 
Englishman  a  Nautch  is  therefore  apt  to  be  a  rather  disappointing  entertainment, 
there  being  little  real  grace  or  symmetry  of  movement  about  the  performance. 

^  "  Manual  uf  the  Tanjore  District."     T.  Venkasanii  Ruw.     Madras,  1.SS4. 

2  B 


98 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTH ERX  IXDIA. 


And  like  Indian  music,  Indian  dancing  should  be  judged  entirely  from  an  Oriental 
standpoint.  A  Nautch  usually  commences  with  the  singing  of  a  Mangala  or 
"song  of  hail"  (generally  in  the  Raga  Ntita),  the  words  of  which  are  intended  to  do 
honour  to  the  principal  personages  present.  When  this  is  concluded,  the  leader 
or  conductor  of  the  troupe,  who  invariably  plays  the  tala  or  jalra,  hums  or 
sings  a  kind  of  accompaniment,  called  Konnagolu,  to  this  one  of  the  girls  dances, 
keeping  time  with  the  soft  tinkling  of  the  bells  tied  round  her  ankles.  During  this 
the  other  instruments  are  independent  of  the  leader  and  are  played  softly  and 
without  time  in  any  raga  that  may  be  chosen,  the  chorus,  if  any,  being  much 
subdued.  And  when  the  dance  is  finished,  songs— such  as  javadis  or  pathams — 
follow,  one  voice  singing  the  solo  and  the  whole  of  the  voices  taking  up  at 
intervals  a  soft  refrain.  Dances  or  gestures,  in  character  with  the  words  of  the 
song,  are  made  by  the  girls  performing  in  front  of  the  musicians. 

Sometimes  Sanskrit  slokes,  called  "  Astapathi,"  are  sung  by  one  voice,  the 
instruments  plaving  a  kind  of  soft,  dreamy  accompaniment  without  any  well 
defined  time,  either  with  or  alternately  with  the  voice. 

The  performance  is  brought  to  a  close  by  the  singing  of  a  Mangala,  in 
either  the  ragas  Surati  or  Saurashtra. 


A     MUblLAL     I'AI.IV. 


chafti:k    \  II. 

Of  instruments — Decoration — Materials — How  susceptible  of  improvement — Chief  defects  in 
construction — Eastern  origin  of  many  European  instruments — Descriptions  of  instruments 
in  common  use. 

MOST  of  the  eaflv  Indian  musical  instruments  remain  still  in  use. 
Since  the  time  of  the  Mahomedan  invasion,  about  a  thousand  years 
ago,  some  Arabian  and  Persian  instruments  have  been  adopted,  and 
have  become  almost  naturalised  ;  but  their  use  has  never  become  universal,  and 
is  mostly  confined  to  the  North  of  India  or  to  Mussulman  musicians. 

The  people  of  India  have  always  been  conservative  in  their  tastes,  and 
in  nothing  do  we  find  this  more  evident  than  in  their  music  and  musical 
instruments.  Descriptions  of  them  all  are  found  in  many  of  the  old  Sanskrit 
treatises,  and  show  that  the  forms  of  the  instruments  now  in  use  have  altered 
hardly  at  all  during  the  last  two  thousand  years  ;  old  paintings  and  sculptures,  such 
as  those  of  Ajanta,  prove  this  even  more  conclusivelv.'  There  are  many  musical 
instruments  to  be  found  among  the  sculptures  existing  upon  various  old  temples, 
cave  temples,  and  ancient  Buddhist  topes  and  stupas  in  different  parts  of  India. 
Those  at  Amravati  and  Sanchi  are  especially  interesting."  P'^or  in  the  Amravati 
sculptures,  which  were  visited  by  the  traveller,  Hiouen  Thsang,  and  called  by  him 
Dhanakacheka,  about  the  vear  640  of  our  era,  we  find  several  representations 
of  musical  instruments.  One  of  peculiar  interest  shows  a  group  of  eighteen 
women  plaving  upon  drums,  a  shell  trumpet  or  s'ankha,  one  much  like  a 
surnai,   and   two  instruments,  apparently  quanuns,  of  a   shape   very  similar  to 


'  Sec  "The  Industrial  .Arts  of  India."     Sir  C.  M.  Birdwood.     Londnn.  iSSo. 

-"Tree   and    Serpent    Worship."      James    Ferj^'usson,    F.R.S.      London,    iSCS.      Sec   plates    LXII. 
XXXVII.,  XXVIII.     These  sculptures  are  now  in  the  British  Museum. 


loo  THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA. 

the  Assyrian  liarps.  But  there  is  another  instrument  represented  that  would 
seem  to  have  been  especially  popular,  but  which  is  never  met  with  in  India 
now,  nor  can  descriptions  of  it  be  found  in  the  Sanskrit  treatises  upon  instruments. 
This  again  figures  in  Assyrian  and  Egyptian  sculptures  and  paintings.  It  is  some- 
what like  a  harp,  and  much  like  an  African  instrument  called  Sancho,  and  still 
used  in  some  parts  of  that  continent.  Mr.  James  Fergusson  notices  strong  Bactrian 
influences  in  this  monument  at  Amravati,  and  is  of  opinion  that  the  expression 
of  the  traveller  Hiouen  Thsang  that  this  tope  was  ornamented  with  all  the  art 
of  the  palaces  of  Bactria  is  borne  out  to  its  fullest  extent.  This  peculiar  harp  is 
again  found  amongst  the  sculptures  at  Sanchi ;  where  also  is  seen  an  instrument 
resembling  the  Roman  tibiae  pares.  But  the  tibiae  pares  are  there  shown 
without  the  capistrum  or  cheek  bandage,  and  it  is  known  that  this  instrument 
was  also  used  by  the  Greeks.  It  is  worthy  of  note  that  a  form  of  the  tibicc 
pares  is  still  common  in  Northern  India,  where  it  consists  of  a  pair  of  flutes-a- 
bec.  At  Sanchi,  too,  is  found  a  figure  of  a  man  blowing  a  kind  of  trumpet — 
the  s'ringa — of  much  the  same  shape  as  that  now  employed  in  Bengal. 

Perhaps  the  most  reliable  proofs  of  the  antiquity  of  Indian  instruments  can 
be  found,  not  so  much  in  the  Sanskrit,  but  in  the  Pali  works  remaining.  For  to 
these  Buddhist  treatises  it  is  an  easier  matter  to  assign  dates  that  can  be 
tolerably  accurate.  In  the  Milindha  Panha,^  a  Pali  work,  written  a  little  after 
the  Christian  era,  is  a  description  of  the  vina,  also  of  the  shell-trumpet  (s'ankha) 
and  the  flute  (here  rendered  vansa — a  reed).  And  in  the  Mahaparambhana  Sutta, 
a  still  older  work  of  about  400  B.C.,  we  find  mention  of  the  Bheri,  a  word  still 
used  for  the  Nagara,  or  large  kettle-drum,  and  also  of  the  mridang  (here  rendered 
mutlinga  ;  cf.  mathala,  the  Southern  Indian  name  of  the  mridang).  The  same 
work  contains  mention  of  the  vina  and  panava,  the  latter  being  a  drum.  And 
these  same  instruments,  with  the  addition  of  one  called  dendima,  are  found  in  a 
contemporary  work  called  Samaiifia-phale- sutta,  and  in  the  Vimana-vatthu  also. 
The  dendima  is  possibly  the  modern  dinni,  a  small  side-drum  used  by  religious 
mendicants  in  Southern  India  at  the  present  day. 

The  materials  of  which  musical  instruments  are  made  are  for  the  most  part 
those  that  are  found  readiest  at  hand  in  the  country — bamboo,  or  some  similar 
cane,  and  large  gourds  are  much   employed.      These  gourds  are  used  for  many 


'  Sec  Milindha  Panha,  Sacred  books  of  the  East,  Vol.  I.,  pafje  84.  Vina  is  here  translated  mandoline  ; 
also  page  48.  5ff  Buddhist  Snttas.  Oxford,  81.  Translations  of  Mahaparambhana  Sutta,  paije  101  ;  also 
of  Samaiiiia-phale-sutta,  i;  90,  and  of  Viuiana-vattbu,  §  81,  10.  Two  kinds  of  tala  are  mentioned  in  Dii;hal.. 
I,  I J — i.e.,  metal  tala  and  hand-tala.  'I'he  word  for  hand-tiila  is  found  in  many  Pali  works.  The  thanks  ol 
the  Author  are  due  to  Professor  T.  W.  Rhys  Davids  for  much  valuable  hcl])  and  information. 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA.  loi 

purposes,  and  the  best  are  trained  in  tlieir  growth  to  the  shape  for  which  they 
are  required. 

In  the  manufacture  of  certain  instruments  earthenware  is  employed  ;  the 
common  countrv  "blackwood"  is  largely  used;  in  fact,  whatever  is  found  by  the 
instrument  makers,  that  from  its  natural  shape,  or  the  ease  with  which  it  can 
be  worked,  can  be  adapted  with  the  least  possible  trouble  to  themselves,  is 
readily  seized  upon,  whether  its  acoustical  properties  are  suitable  or  not,  purity 
of  tone  being  sacrificed  to  appearance.  The  natural  consequence  of  this  is  that 
manv  instruments  are  badlv  put  together  in  the  first  place ;  faults  in  their 
construction  are  glossed  over  by  outward  ornamentation,  and,  from  want  of 
proper  material,  the  tone,  which  should  be  the  first  consideration,  is  frequently 
sadly  deficient  in  volume  and  quality. 

The  reason  why  this  is  so  appears  to  be  that  the  manufacture  of  musical 
instruments  is  chiefly  in  the  hands  of  ordinary  carpenters,  most  of  whom  are 
totally  ignorant  of  the  most  elementary  principles  of  music,  and  who,  even  if 
they  possessed  the  requisite  knowledge,  could  seldom  aftord  either  the  time  or 
monev  to  spend  upon  experiments  tending  to  improve  their  instruments  :  their 
principal  consideration  seems  to  be  quantity  instead  of  quality. 

Most  musicians  therefore  prefer  to  patch  and  mend  their  old  instruments, 
even  though  it  will  be  slightly  detrimental  to  their  tone,  to  procuring  fresh  ones 
of  a  quality  of  which  they  are  doubtful,  and  which  they  cannot  test  practically 
before  they  make  their  choice. 

A  musical  instrument,  to  be  of  any  real  practical  good,  requires  in  its  con- 
struction not  only  skilled  labour,  but  an  experimental  knowledge  on  the  part  of  the 
maker  of  the  principles  of  acoustics;  he  must  know  of  the  best  materials,  and  the 
best  known  methods  of  building  up  an  instrument  from  these  materials.  Such 
knowledge  as  this  can  only  be  attained  by  much  study  and  the  experience  of  a 
regular  apprenticeship  to  the  art.  All  this  is,  of  course,  obtained  easily  enough 
in  Europe,  where  there  is  a  readv  sale  for  good  instruments,  and  instrument 
making  is  a  trade  profitable  enough  for  a  supply  to  be  kept  on  hand.  In 
India,  where,  until  comparatively  recent  times,  music  has  been  an  art  almost 
neglected  for  some  hundreds  of  years,  it  is  clear  that  there  has  been  little 
scope  for  instrument  makers  of  any  ability,  the  supply  being  always  far  in 
excess  of  the  demand. 

The  chief  defect  apparent  in  the  construction  of  Indian  instruments,  besides 
what  are  mentioned  above,  is  one  which  affects  them  all — viz.,  that  without 
altering  the  tuning  a  change  of  keys  is  impossible.  This  may  at  first  sight  seem 
incongruous,  for  the  vina  is  semitonic.     But   it  must  be   remembered  that  the 

2C 


102  THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTIIERX  IXniA. 

third  and  fourth  strings  of  that  instrument,  though  they  pass  over  the  finger-board, 
are  seldom  stopped,  and  such  devices  as  shifts  are  absolutely  unknown.  There  is 
Hkewise  no  method  of  tuning  to  any  fixed  standard  of  pitch.  Willard,  in  speaking 
of  this,  makes  the  following  observations  : — "A  drum  or  tabor,  the  sound  of  which 
is  necessarily  monotonous,  is  an  ever  attendant  and  inseparable  companion  to 
Indian  songs,  whether  any  instrument  be  present  or  not.  Its  sound  is  taken  as 
tlic  keynote,  and  all  other  instruments  that  mav  be  present  and  the  voice  are 
regulated  by  it.  From  this  it  appears  that  as  long  as  the  use  of  the  drum  or 
tabor  is  not  laid  aside  there  will  be  no  necessity  for  change  of  keys,  and 
the  rhythmical  nature  of  Indian  music  renders  a  liberal  use  of  the  drum 
more  essential,  in  order  to  mark  the  time  distinctly,  than  any  other 
accompaniment."  ^ 

Manv  of  our  own  instruments,  such  as  are  in  use  at  the  present  day,  have 
their  prototypes  still  in  existence  in  the  East. 

The  ancient  Pali  and  Sanskrit  treatises  would  appear  to  contain  the  earliest 
reliable  description  of  any  musical  instruments,  and  from  these  it  seems  clear 
that  those  of  most  Asiatic  nations  were  originally  derived  from  the  same  source. 

The  Persians  still  use  an  instrument  called  quanun,  much  like  that  of  the 
same  name  found  now  in  India — a  kind  of  dulcimer,  strung  with  gut  or  wire 
strings,  and  played  upon  by  plectra  fastened  to  the  fingers  of  the  performers. 
This  is  a  development  of  the  kattyayana-vina  or  shata-tantri  {i.e.,  hundred- 
stringed)  vina,  as  it  was  formerly  called.  This  Persian  quanun,  the  prototype 
of  the  mediaeval  psaltery,  afterwards  became  the  santir,  which  has  strings  of 
wire  in  place  of  gut,  and  is  played  with  two  sticks,  and  in  the  West  it  eventually 
took  the  form  of  the  dulcimer.  Hence  the  origin  of  the  complicated  pianoforte 
of  the  present  day  can  thus  be  traced  to  the  Aryans.  And  so  with  many 
others.  The  violin,  the  flute,  the  oboe,  the  guitar,  all  have  an  Eastern  origin. 
One  of  the  earliest  stringed  instruments  was  called  "  pinaka,"  and  had  one 
string  twanged  by  the  fingers ;  its  invention  is  ascribed  to  the  god  Siva. 

The  violin  bow  is  claimed  by  the  Hindus  to  have  been  invented  by  Rabana, 
King  of  Ceylon,  who,  according  to  tradition,  lived  five  thousand  3-ears  ago. 

The  earliest  instrument  played  with  a  bow  was  called  rabanastra  or 
rabanastrana.  What  this  instrument  was  like  is  rather  doubtful,  but  at  the 
present  time  there  exists  in  Ceylon  a  primitive  instrument  played  with  a  bow, 
called  "vinavah,"  which  has  two  strings  of  different  kinds:  one  made  of  a  species 
of  flax  and  the  other  of  horsehair,  which  is  the  material  also  of  the  string  of  the 

'  "  A  Treatise  on  the  Music  of  Hindustan."     Captain  N.  A.  Willard.     Calcutta,  1834. 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERX  I.XDIA.  103 

bow,  which  with  bells  attached  to  it  is  used  as  a  fiddle-stick.  The  hollow  part  of 
this  instrument  is  half  a  cocoa-nut  shell  polished,  covered  with  the  dried  skin  of  a 
lizard,  and  perforated  below. ° 

The  vinavah  is  rarely  met  with  except  in  the  hands  of  strolling  musicians, 
who  support  themselves  by  means  of  it.  Whether  this  is  the  primitive  rabanastra 
or  not  it  is  impossible  to  say,  but  it  seems  extremely  probable  that  if  not 
absolutely  identical  it  bears  at  least  a  very  strong  resemblance  to  it.  Another 
very  ancient  instrument  which  resembled  the  rabanastra  was  called  amrita. 

Numbers  of  instruments  still  in  use  in  India  have  not  altered  in  the  smallest 
particular  their  ancient  forms.  The  vina,  the  tamburi  or  tamburu-vina,  and  the 
kinneri  still  remain  just  as  they  are  described  in  the  ancient  books,  even  down  to 
the  very  details  of  the  carving  with  which  they  are  adorned,  so  conservative  are 
the  people  who  use  them  of  all  connected  with  the  art  they  hold  to  be  so  sacred. 
The  peculiar  shape  of  instruments  of  the  viol  and  violin  tribe  appears  to  have  a 
prototvpe  among  Indian  instruments  ;  and  this  can  be  seen  in  the  rabob,  which  is 
made  with  distinct  upper,  loicer,  and  middle  bouts,  and  in  a  less  degree  in  the 
sarangi,  sarode,  and  chikara. 

The  rebec,  once  popular  in  Europe,  was  a  form  of  the  rabob,  brought  to 
Spain  by  the  Moors,  who  in  turn  had  derived  it  from  Persia  and  Arabia. 
Here  again  the  Aryan  origin  is  evident,  the  rabob  being,  according  to  old 
Sanskrit  works,  a  form  of  vina.  And  it  is  still  popular  in  the  North  of  India  and 
Afghanistan. 

The  use  of  instruments  of  percussion  of  definite  sonorousness,  such  as  the 
harmonica,  does  not  seem  to  have  entered  into  Indian  music  at  any  time  until 
quite  of  late  years. 

But  this  is  rather  an  open  question,  for  the  harmonicon  of  cups  called 
Jalatharangini  is  by  some  ascribed  to  a  very  remote  origin. 

Wind  instruments,  although  perhaps  of  earlier  invention  than  those  with 
strings,  are  nevertheless  looked  upon  as  of  secondary  importance.  Possibly  this 
may  have  some  reason  in  the  fact  that  Brahmins  are  not  allowed  by  their  religious 
laws  to  use  them,  excepting  only  the  flute  blown  by  the  nostrils,  and  one  or  two 
others  of  the  horn  and  trumpet  kind.  And  so  men  of  low  castes  are  employed 
as  players  of  wind  instruments.  But  all  unite  in  ascribing  to  wind  instruments 
a  very  high  antiquity.  The  conch  shell,  still  used  in  the  daily  temple  ritual  in 
almost  every  place  in  India,  is  said  to  have  been  first  used  by  the  god  Krishna, 
and    it    is    mentioned   in   the   great   epic   of  the   Ramayana,    where  it  is  called 

'  "  An  Account  of  the  Interior  of  Ceylon  and  its  Inhabitants."     J.  Davy,  F.R.S. 


104  THE  Mi'SIC  OF  SOUrilERX  IXDIA. 

Devadata.  \\'e  ;ilso  find  it  under  the  name  of  Goshringa,  both  in  the 
Ramayana  and  the  Mahabharata. 

The  horn  (s'ringa)  is  also  said  to  be  of  Divine  origin,  and  it  is  mentioned  in 
the  earHest  writings.  But  the  flute  (murali)  is  still  held  to  be  peculiarly  sacred, 
for  this  flute  was  the  companion  of  the  god  Krishna  in  all  his  wanderings,  and  in 
Indian  mythology  this  flute  is  looked  upon  with  much  the  same  veneration  that 
the  lyre  was  by  the  Greeks,  and  by  Brahmins  it  is  still  used  occasionally  and 
blown  by  the  nostrils.  In  all  sculptures  and  pictures  the  god  Krishna  is  repre- 
sented as  standing  cross-legged  plaving  the  flute. 

Reed  instruments,  although  doubtless  of  a  very  remote  origin,  appear  to  have 
been  invented  at  a  later  period  than  instruments  of  the  flute  species,  and  their  use 
is,  as  has  been  stated,  confined  to  either  low  caste  Hindus  or  Mahomedans.  For 
the  Indian  reed  instruments  are  mostlv  harsh  and  wild,  far  too  powerful  and  shrill  to 
be  used  in  concert  with  the  delicate  vina  or  sweet  tamburi,  and  so  their  use  is 
chiefly  confined  to  out-of-door  performances,  where  their  sound  is  better  heard 
and  where  they  become  fit  adjuncts  to  the  Nakkera  Khaneh  or  band  already 
described. 

Instruments  with  double  reeds  appear  to  have  been  originall}-  brought  from 
India,  and  the  double  reed  is  found  in  the  primitive  oboes  used  there  as  well  as  in 
Persia,  Arabia,  and  Egypt.  There  seems  to  be  no  trace  of  the  single  beating  veed 
ever  having  been  known  in  India,  but  the  single //'ft'  reed  is  found  in  the  bagpipe 
of  the  countrv.  Indeed,  the  bagpipe  would  itself  seem  to  have  an  Eastern  origin, 
and  although  its  use  in  Southern  India  and  the  Deccan  is  chiefly  confined  to  a 
drone-bass,  yet  in  the  Punjab  and  Afghanistan  pipes  are  sometimes  found  containing 
both  drone  and  chanter.  And  I  have  heard  them  played  with  a  dexterity  that 
would  do  credit  to  a  Highland  piper. 

The  pungi,  now  used  almost  entirely  by  snake  charmers,  is  said  to  have  once 
been  blown  by  the  nostrils  and  called  "  Nasajantra." 

The  jew's-harp  (murchang)  is  mentioned  in  most  of  the  Sanskrit  works 
upon  musical  instruments,  and  its  use  is  common  all  over  India. 

The  use  of  the  gong  and  bell  are  universal,  and  need  no  particular  description. 
The  gong — called  sometimes  Tala,  but  more  generally  Ghari — is  found  in  almost 
all  Hindu  temples,  and  is  used  both  in  the  daily  ritual  and  also  to  note  the  hours 
of  the  day.  It  is  usually  about  a  foot  in  diameter  and  J-inch  in  thickness  ;  it  is 
made  of  bell  metal,  and  sounded  by  a  wooden  mallet.  Indeed,  the  tone  more 
nearly  resembles  that  of  a  bell,  and  has  certainly  nothing  in  common  with  the 
Chinese  gong.  In  Southern  India  a  light  instrument  of  this  kind  called  Jagatay 
or  Semakalam  is  found,  which  is  sounded  bv  a  curved  bone  striker.     The  small 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOi'THERX  IXDIA.  105 

bell — called  Ghante — is  used  in  every  Hindu  temple,  and  is  familiar  to  everyone. 
Bells  of  anv  size  are  not  known  in  India,  but  the  antiquity  of  the  bell  in  India  has 
been  proved  bevond  doubt ;  specimens  of  curious  old  bells  have  been  discovered 
in  cromlechs  and  cairns  in  different  parts  of  India.*^  And  among  the  Todas,  the 
aborigines  of  the  Niliri  Hills,  the  bell  is  still  an  object  of  especial  veneration." 

The  little  ankle  bells  used  by  Nautch  dancers  are  called  Gllnguru  or 
Gajelu,  and  are  tied  in  strings  round  the  ankles.  They  produce  "  a  faint  clashing 
sound  as  the  feet  move  in  steps,  which  mingles  not  unmusically  with  the  dance 
music  or  songs  which  accompany  the  dance  ;  and  they  not  only  serve  to  mark 
the  time,  but  to  keep  the  dancer  or  singer  in  perfect  accord  with  the  musicians. 
These  bells  are  the  svmbols  of  their  profession  with  all  dancers  and  singers, 
and  to  some  extent  are  held  sacred.  No  dancer  ties  them  on  his  or  her  ankles 
before  performance  without  touching  his  or  her  forehead  and  eyes  with  them,  and 
saving  a  short  prayer  or  invocation  to  a  patron  saint  or  divinity — Hindu  or 
Mahomedan.  Nor  is  it  possible,  after  a  female  singer  or  dancer  has  once  been 
invested  with  them — a  ceremonv  which  is  very  solemnlv  periormed  and  attended 
with  much  cost^to  abandon  the  professional  life  so  adopted.  He,  or  she,  lias 
tied  on  the  bells,  is  even  a  proverb  to  signify  that  the  person  alluded  to  has 
devoted  himself  or  herself  to  a  purpose  from  which  it  is  impossible  to  recede. 
Strings  of  these  small  bells  are  also  used  for  horses  and  tied  round  the 
fetlocks  of  prancing  chargers,  with  gay  tinsel  ribbons  or  pieces  of  cloth  ;  also 
round  the  necks  of  lap  dogs  ;  and  some  of  a  large  size  round  the  necks  of 
favourite  plough  or  cart  bullocks.  The  latter  are  identical  with  sleigh  bells. 
No  post  runner  in  India  travels  without  a  string  of  them  tied  on  the  end  of 
his  pole  on  which  is  slung  the  leather  bag  he  carries,  and  on  a  still  night 
their  clashing  sound,  besides  being  heard  at  a  great  distance,  serves  to  scare 
away  wild  beasts  and  to  cheer  the  runner  on  his  lonely  path."" 

And  here  it  may  be  well  to  mention  two  instruments  sometimes  met  with  in 
Southern  India — viz.,  the  cup-harmonica  and  the  Gatha. 

The  Jalatharangini'-'  is  a  harmonicon  of  cups  of  porcelain  or  earthenware 
tuned  to  the  particular  scale  required  by  means  of  pouring  in  more  or  less  water. 
It  is  played  with  two  thin  sticks,  covered  with  felt  or  tipped  with  cork  ;  and 
in  company  with  other  instruments  the  contrast  of  tone  that  its  use  effects  is  not 
unpleasing.     The  Septasvarab,  called  also  Septaghantika,  or  Indian  Glockenspiel, 

«"  Bells  of  the  Church."     H.  T.  EUacombe.     Exeter,  1872. 
'  "  A  Phrenologist  amongst  the  Todas."     Colonel  Marshall.     London,  1S73. 
'  "  Proceedings  of  the  Royal  Irish  ."Academy."     Vol.  IX.,  Part  i. 

'  This  instrument  is  said  to  be  mentioned  in  a  Sanskrit  work— the  name  of  u  liicli  the  author  has  bccu 
imable  to  ascertain — believed  to  have  been  written  about  a.d.  700. 

2  D 


io6  THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTIIERX  IXDIA. 

is  somewhat  similar,  but  more  musical ;  it  is  made  either  of  metal  plates  or  bells, 
struck  with  a  small  fclt-covercd  hammer.  The  employment  of  both  instruments 
is  rare. 

ihe  Ciatha  resembles  a  \iu-<^c  spherical  jar  or  "chatty"  in  shape,  and  is 
largely  used  by  Telegu  musicians  as  an  accompaniment  to  the  yina.  It  is  about 
1 8  inches  in  height,  and  has  a  yery  small  aperture  and  short  neck,  which  is  held 
downwards  when  it  is  in  use.  It  is  beaten  with  the  hands  and  wrists,  much  like 
the  drum  called  mathala,  of  which  it  takes  the  place,  and  the  players  manage 
to  produce  sounds  of  different  pitch  by  striking  it  in  different  places.  The 
performer  usually  sits  cross-legged,  and  holds  the  gatha  between  his  thighs, 
striking  it  with  his  finger  tips,  flat  of  his  hand,  or  fleshy  part  of  his  wrist. 

Players  upon  the  gatha  display  great  dexterity,  and  often  yary  their  perform- 
ance by  throwing  the  instrument  up  into  the  air  and  catching  it  again,  beating 
it  as  they  do  so  :  this  they  keep  up  for  almost  any  length  of  time.  At  the 
conclusion  of  the  piece  they  let  it  fall  into  their  hands  (or  upon  the  ground,  so  as 
to  break  with  noise)  at  the  exact  conclusion  of  the  measure  (tala),  which  they 
neyer  for  a  moment  lose. 

In  some  performances  it  is  not  unusual  for  the  player  upon  the  yina  to 
change  the  measure  suddenly,  as  often  as  he  wills,  so  that  the  gatha  player  may 
better  sho\y  his  dexterity. 

Instruments  of  the  trumpet  kind — in  which  tones  are  produced  by  the  lips 
yibrating  within  a  cup-shaped  mouthpiece — appear  to  be  of  yery  great  antiquity, 
for  mention  is  made  of  them  in  both  the  great  Hindu  epics — the  Mahambharata 
and  the  Ramayana.  There  are  large  curyed  horns  which  in  tone  much  resemble 
the  Alp-horns  of  Switzerland.  There  are  both  straight  and  bent  trumpets.  The 
method  of  making  an  instrument  of  this  kind  more  portable  by  being  turned  back, 
but  without  shortening  its  length  of  tubing,  would  seem  to  be  yery  ancient.  It 
is  difficult  to  describe  any  definite  scale  for  these  instruments,  for  they  are,  with 
one  or  two  exceptions,  rarel}-  used  by  any  but  men  of  low  caste,  and  their  proper 
compass  is  not  emplo\ed  or  understood.  The  great  similarity  between  the  shape 
of  the  modern  trumpet  and  the  Indian  tuturi  is  yery  striking,  especially  when  it  is 
remembered  that  this  shape  has  not  been  copied  from  the  European  instrument, 
but  has  existed  in  India  from  remote  a<res. 

Indeed,  so  many  points  of  resemblance  might  be  noticed,  and  the  deyelop- 
ment  through  ages  of  so  many  instruments  traced,  that  it  would  be  inadyisable 
to  enlarge  this  chapter  by  so  wide  a  digression  from  the  subject. 

Indian  musical  instruments  are  usually  classified  under  the  following  four 
designations,  just  as  they  were  by  Bharata  two  thousand  years  ago  :  — 


THE  MUSIC  UF  SUUTHERX  IX  1)1  A. 


107 


I.   Tata-yantra — Comprising  all  stringed  instruments. 
II.   Shusira-yantra — Comprising    all     instruments    of   percussion     (not 
being  covered  with  skin  or  parchment,  such  as  drums),  and  includes 
cymbals,  gongs,  bells,  castanets,  iSrc. 
III.   Ghana-yantra — Comprising    all     instruments     covered    with    skins, 

such  as  drums,  tabors,  &c. 
IV.  Anuddha-yantra — Comprising  wind  instruments  of  all  kinds. 
In   different   parts   of  India  there   is   of  course    a   preference  for   particular 
instruments,  but  it  is  impossible  to  assign  definite  districts  to  them,  as  all  kinds 
arc  to  be  found  more  or  less  throughout  the  country. 

In  the  following  pages  an  endeavour  has  been  made  to  give  as  far  as 
possible  some  mention  of  all  these  instruments,  together  with  the  names  bv  which 
thev  are  known  in  different  parts,  and  descriptions  of  those  in  most  common  use. 

If  details  are  given  sometimes  which  at  first  sight  are  apparently 
unnecessary,  it  has  been  done  because  in  similar  cases  of  musical  investigations, 
if  many  things  which  appeared  to  be  of  little  moment  at  the  time  had  not  been 
left  unnoticed,  much  interesting  light  would  have  been  thrown  upon  sexxral 
c|uesti()ns  of  great  interest  which  are  still  involved  in  darkness. 

In  the  tunings  for  stringed  instruments  given  later,  the  position  of  the 
strings  is  as  if  the  instrument  were  held  upright,  body  nearest  the  ground,  with 
the  finger-board  facing  the  reader.  It  is  to  be  noted  that  in  instruments  of  the 
vina  kind  the  order  of  the  strings  is  reversed  from  that  of  sitars  and  the  like, 
where  the  first  string  or  chanterelle  is  always  on  the  right. 


A  Player  on  the  Karnatik  Sitar. 


PLATE    I. 


A    BIX    PLAYER. 

THIS  plate  shows  the  position  of  a  player  upon  the  Bin  or  Vina^"  of  the 
North  of  India.  The  vina  of  the  South,  described  in  the  next  plate, 
is  sometimes  called  the  Rudra  vina,  in  distinction  to  the  bin  or  Mahati 
vina.  As  will  be  seen,  this  is  a  fretted  instrument,  the  frets  being  arranged  at 
semitonic  intervals.  The  tuning  differs  from  that  of  the  Southern  vina,  and  two 
gourd  resonators  take  the  place  of  the  w^ooden  pear-shaped  body.  It  is  worthy  of 
note  that  an  instrument  of  this  description  was  described  by  Mersenne  in  1636." 

The  average  total  length  of  the  instrument  is  3  feet  7  inches,  in  which  case 
the  dimensions  are  as  follows  : — 

The  first  gourd  is  fixed  at  10  inches  from  the  top,  and  the  second  about 
2  feet  iij  inches. 

The  gourds  are  usually  verv  large,  about  14  inches  in  diameter,  and  each 
has  a  round  piece  cut  out  of  the  bottom  to  act  as  a  sound  hole. 

The  finger-board  is  aij}  inches  in  length  and  about  3  inches  wide,  and  upon 
it  are  placed  the  frets,  exactly  in  the  same  manner  as  in  the  vina,  and  at  the  same 
semitonic  intervals. 

The  frets  are  nineteen  to  twenty-two  in  number,  that  nearest  the  nut  usually 
being  J -inch  above  the  finger-board,  and  that  at  the  other  extremity  about  J-inch, 
the  decrease  gradual. 

'"  This  instrviment  is  very  fully  described  as  "  The  Indian  Lyre."     "  Asiatic  Researches."     Vol.  I. 

The  bin  has  been  described  by  Mr.  Carl  Engel  as  "the  vina  of  the  Indus";  this  is,  however,  an 
error  on  his  part,  it  being  but  a  form,  and  far  from  the  best  form,  of  that  instrument,  popular  chiefly 
because  of  its  comparatively  low  cost.  Drawings  of  this  instrument  will  be  found  in  his  "  Musical 
Instruments,"  in  "  Asiatic  Researches  "  above-mentioned,  and  in  Hipkins  and  Gibb's  "  Musical  Instruments." 

"  '•  Harmonie  Universelle."     Fr.  Mersenne.     Paris,  1636. 

2  E 


no 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA. 


The  strings   arc   seven   in   number,  four  of  which  pass   over   the   frets,   the 
remainder  being  side  strings,  placed  two  on  the  left  side  and  one  upon  the  right. 
The  instrument  is  tuned  as  follows  : — 


i 


Left  side. 


^ 


^ 


Finger-board. 


Right  side. 


^a 


but  a  very  much  more  common  tuning  is- 


i  r  i  lu^ 


^ 


^1 


the  wire  X  upon  the  right  side  being  tuned  to  either  Ga  (E)  or  Dha  (A),  according 
to  the  requirement  of  the  raga  performed. 

The  strings  upon  the  left  side  and  the  two  highest  upon  the  finger-board  are 
usually  steel,  the  remainder  brass  or  silver. 

The  instrument  is  held  over  the  left  shoulder,  the  upper  gourd  resting  upon 
it,  and  the  lower  gourd  on  the  right  knee. 

The  frets  are  stopped  with  the  left  hand,  the  little  finger  of  which  is  used 
occasionally  to  strike  the  side  string  on  the  left  side. 

The  strikes  are  made  by  the  right  hand  in  a  similar  way  to  that  employed  in 
the  sitar,  except  that  the  tivo  first  fingers  are  armed  with  wire  plectra. 

The  notes  are  rapidly  reiterated  in  the  bin  as  well  as  in  the  sitar  by  the 
plectra  being  passed  backwards  and  forwards  across  the  string  ;  this  produces  a 
kind  of  sostcntito. 

The  chief  peculiarity  of  this  instrument,  as  will  be  remarked,  is  the  tuning, 
which  employs  additional  intervals  to  that  of  the  Southern  vina,  and  so  renders 
the  instrument  less  confined  in  its  modulation.  The  tone  is  rather  thinner  than 
and  not  so  pleasing  as  that  of  the  vina  of  the  South,  on  account  of  the  greater 
tendency  of  the  strings  to  jangle.  The  instrument  is  nevertheless  very 
popular,  and  when  found  in  Southern  India  is  used  chiefly  by  Hindustani 
musicians.  Instruments  of  this  kind  are  sometimes  made  with  moveable  frets, 
like  those  of  a  sitar,  in  consequence  of  the  greater  facility  with  which  they  can  be 
played  by  less  experienced  performers. 

An  illustration  of  a  bin  of  this  latter  kind  is  shown  in  Plate  IV. 


PLATE    II. 


SOUTHERN    INDIAN   VINA.      SMALL   SITAR. 


THE  instrument  to  the  left  of  the  plate  represents  the  Vina  in  common  use  m 
Southern  India.  Though  in  Northern  India  and  the  Deccan  the  use  of  the 
vina,  or  bin,  is  restricted  to  professional  musicians  or  skilful  performers, 
we  do  not  find  this  to  be  the  case  in  the  South.  This  instrument  is  taught  in  the 
schools  in  many  places,  and  is  a  very  favourite  one  with  amateurs  of  the  higher 
classes.  The  specimen  here  represented  is  about  250  years  old,  and  is  from  the 
collection  at  the  Tanjore  palace.  The  delicacy  of  the  carving  and  the  great 
wealth  of  decoration  bestowed  upon  this  instrument  are  remarkable,  and  prove 
it  to  have  belonged  to  some  very  distinguished  personage — probably  to  one  ot 
the  Maharajahs  of  Tanjore. 

The  vina  is  a  stringed  instrument,  with  frets,  played  with  the  fingers,  or 
rather  finger-nails,  somewhat  in  the  same  manner  as  a  mandoline  or  guitar. 

Its  construction,  however,  renders  it  for  purposes  of  melody  a  far  more  perfect 
instrument  than  either  of  the  latter,  and  although  its  tones  are  not  so  full  and 
rich,  its  compass  is  larger,  and  it  is,  in  skilled  hands,  capable  of  producing  a 
much  greater  variety  of  effects. 

Its  tone,  judged  from  a  European  standard,  is  rather  thin,  but  curiously 
soft  and  plaintive.  It  is  somewhat  like  that  of  the  Tyrolese  zither,  which, 
however,  it  exceeds  in  fulness,  and  it  is  capable  of  infinitely  more  expression. 

The  vina  has  seven  strings,  four  pass  over  the  frets  (twenty-four  in  number), 
three  shorter  strings  are  placed  at  the  side  of  the  finger-board,  and  are  employed 
chiefly  as  a  kind  of  accompaniment  or  to  mark  the  time  used  by  the  performer. 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SUCTHERX  LXDIA. 

The  four  large  strings  are  termed  saranis  and  are  named  thus  :  — 

Sarani  ....  ist,  thinnest  ....         steel. 

Panchami     ....  2nd, 

Mandaram    ....  3rd,  ....  brass  or  silver. 

Anumandaram        4th,  thickest  ....  ,,  ,, 

The  three  side  strings  are  termed  pakha-saranis  and  are  of  steel. 
The  names  of  the  various  parts  of  the  instrument  are  as  follows  : — 

(a.)    Kayi  or  bod}',  formed  of  thin  wood  and  hollowed  out  of  the  solid. 
(/'.)    Gvantu,  a  projecting   ledge,    often   of  ivory,   separating  the  body 

from  the  stem. 
{c.)  Langaru,'"  metal  fastenings  which  secure  the  strings  to  the  attach- 
ment.    These  fastenings  have  rings  sliding  upon  them  which  can 

be  used  in  tuning  to  alter  the  pitch  slightly,  without  turning  the 

tuning  pegs. 
{d.)    Dhandi,  neck,  made  hollow. 
{c.)    Yeddapalaka,  or  belly.     Small  sound  holes,  in  circles  of  about   2 

inches  diameter,  are  placed  on  each  side  of  the  strings,   about  i 

inch  above  the  bridge. 
(/.)    Dhandipalaka,    a   piece  of  thin  wood   covering  the   hollow   of  the 

neck  underneath  the  frets. 
(g.)  Maruvapalaka,  two  ledges,  each  about  ^-inch  in  height,  projecting 

from  the  dhandipalaka  and  to  which  the  frets  are  secured. 
(h.)   Metlu,   or  frets,  formed   of  "half-round"   bars   of    brass  or   silver 

about  A-inch  thick. 
(/.)    Cupe,    a   cup   or  socket   of  some    metal   into    which   the    hurra    or 

calabash   is   fastened  ;  these   cupes   are   often  of  silver   and   richly 

chased. 
(/.)   Burra,  or  calabash,  a  kind  of  hollow  gourd  attached  to  the  under- 
side of  the  neck,  near  the  head,  to  increase  the  volume  of  sound. 
(/I'.j  Pallumanu,  or  nut,  a  piece  of  ivory  over  which  the  strings  pass, 

placed  between  the  pegs  and  the  finger-board. 
(/.)   Mogulu,  small  ivory  pegs  answering  the  purpose  of  nuts,  over  which 

the  side  strings  pass. 
(;;;.)  Gurram,  bridge. 
(/).)  Bhirtu,  tuning  pegs. 


strings  are  sometimes  secured  to  the  ;ittac-liiiicnt  directly,  as  described  for  those  of  the  taiiilniri. 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA. 


113 


The  burra    or    calabash   is  secured  to  the  neck   by   means  of  a  nut   and 
screw,  and  is  detachable  at  will. 

The  instrument  is  tuned  in  one  of  the  three  ways  following: — ^^ 


i 


In  "  Panchama  s'ruti." 


In  "  Madhyama  s'ruti."  (i) 


In  "  Madhyama  s'ruti."  (2) 


^ 


-•-         -•- 


^Pi 


^ 


Side  strings.       Finger-board.  Side  strings.  Finger-board. 


Side  strings. 


Finger-board. 


The  construction  of  the  bridge  is  peculiar  and  deserves  notice. 

A  wooden  arc  supports  a  slab  of  wood  i  by  2^  inches.  A  resinous  cement 
is  poured  upon  this,  and  a  piece  of  metal  passing  underneath  the  second, 
third,  and  fourth  strings  is  laid  above  and  manipulated  until  the  strings 
produce  a  clear  tone  free  from  all  buzz  or  twang ;  a  wet  cloth  is  then 
applied,  or  a  little  cold  water  poured  over  the  upper  surface,  so  as  to  harden  the 
cement.  Under  the  first  string  a  similar  piece  of  metal,  in  this  case  of  a 
superior  quality- — either  polished  steel  or  bell  metal — is  fi.xed  in  the  same  way. 

This  process  is  considered  very  important,  as  the  least  carelessness  aflects 
the  tone  of  the  instrument  and  gives  it  a  most  unpleasant  twang. 


No.  I  is  the  thin  string. 
,,    2,  very  slightly  thicker. 
,,    3,  thicker  again. 
,.    4,  thicker  again. 


No. 


The  same  gauge  as 
No.  I. 


"A  native  musician  would  say  for  Panchama  s'ruti,  "Pa,  Sa,  Pa,  Sa";  and  for  Madhyama  s'ruti, 
"  Sa,  Pa,  Sa,  Pa  "  ;  hence  the  change  of  keys  is  shown. 

2  F 


114  THE  MUSIC  OF  SOCTIIERX  IX  1)1  A. 

The  side  string  bridge  is  secured  to  the  main  bridge  and  the  belly  of  the 
instrument  and  is  made  entirely  of  metal  ;  it  consists  of  an  arc  of  brass  with  a 
projecting  rim  upon  the  side  nearest  the  attachment. 

The  strings  pass  across  the  flat  of  the  arc  through  three  saw  cuts  in  the 
rim.  Pieces  of  silk  or  quill  termed  "jivalam,"  placed  beneath  the  strings  and 
the  bridge,  are  occasionally  employed  to  correct  anv  inclination  to  buzzing. 

Most  instruments  of  this  description  require  steel  strings  of  a  quality 
specially  made  for  the  purpose.  The  best  strings  are  made  at  Channapatna  in 
Mysore,  or  Bareilly  in  the  North,  where  the  process  of  manufacture  is  kept  secret 
and  is  in  the  hands  of  a  particular  caste. 

The  price  giv^en  for  such  strings  is  high,  on  an  average  Rs.  6  for  a  sir 
of  twenty-four  rupees  weight,  when  sold  wholesale. 

The  fretting  of  a  vina  requires  great  care,  and  most  musicians  prefer  to 
fi.\  their  own  frets. 

The  frets  are  tixed  to  the  maruvapalaka  by  means  of  small  spikes,  and 
additionally  secured  by  a  resinous  cement  poured  in  between  them,  and  moulded 
neatlv  as  it  hardens. 

When  finished  the  finger-board  resembles  a  ladder,  there  being  a  space 
varying  from  ^-inch  at  the  head  to  2  inches  at  the  end  nearest  the  bridge 
between  the  frets  and  the  dhandipallaka,  or  piece  of  wood  covering  the 
hollow  stem. 

The  vina  is  held  in  one  of  the  three  following  positions  : — 

(a.)  The  performer  sits  cross-legged  upon  the  ground,  and  holds  the 
vina  so  that  the  calabash  almost  touches  the  left  thigh,  the  left 
arm  passing  round  the  stem  so  that  the  fingers  rest  easilv  upon 
the  trets.  The  body  of  the  instrument  is  upon  the  ground,  partially 
supported  by  the  right  thigh. 

(/;.)  The  calabash  almost  touches  the  left  thigh  as  before,  but  the  right 
knee  is  bent  upwards,  the  body  of  the  instrument  being  in  front 
and  resting  upon  the  ground,  touching  the  right  leg,  which  prevents 
it  slipping  away. 

(r.)  1  he  performer  sits  cross-legged  upon  the  ground  as  before,  but 
holds  the  body  of  the  instrument  in  his  lap,  the  finger-board 
being  vertical. 

The  method  ol'  pla\ing  upon  the  vina  is  rather  different  from  that  of  other 
Indian  instruments.  The  left  hand  is  emploved  to  stop  the  strings  on  the 
frets,  the  right  hand  to  strike  with. 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHEKX  IXDIA.  115 

Strikes  are  called  "  mehtu,"  and  are  of  three  kinds,  \i/..  :  — 

Kutra-mehtu. 
Toda — mehtu. 
(jotu — mehtu. 

The  right  hand  is  employed  thus  :  the  wrist  is  laid  almost  upon  the  edge 
of  the  bellv,  and  the  hand  is  slightly  arched  upwards  ;  the  Hrst  and  second  fingers 
are  above,  and  are  used  to  strike  the  large  strings,  all  strikes  being  made 
with  the  nail  doiV)iivards.  Players  upon  the  vina  purposely  allow  the  nails  of 
the  right  hand  to  grow  rather  long,  for  this  instrument  is  never  played 
with  plectra.  The  side  strings  are  sounded  by  the  third  and  fourth  fingers  of 
the  right  hand  moved  itpi^ards. 

The  first  exercise  that  a  pupil  learns  is  to  strike  one  of  the  large  strings 
(downwards)  simultaneously  with  one  of  the  side  strings  (upwards),  a  more 
difficult  feat  to  accomplish  than  might  be  at  first  supposed. 

These  simple  strikes  are  called  gotu  mehtu.  The  kutra  mehtu  is 
accomplished  b\-  striking  the  same  string  twice — first  with  the  forefinger  and 
then  with  the  second  finger — so  as  to  produce  a  repetition  of  the  same  sound. 

The  toda  mehtu,  or  etouft'e,  is  made  by  striking  a  string  with  the 
forefinger  and  then  gently  stopping  the  vibration  with  the  second  finger  so 
as  to  produce  a  staccato  sound. 

The  left  hand  is  used  for  all  work  upon  the  frets. 

As  was  the  case  with  the  lute,  the  melody  is  chiefly  played  upon  the 
first  string — the  chanterelle,  in  fact — which  is  commonly  stopped  by  the  first 
and  second  fingers  placed  together. 

The  fourth  string  is  stopped  by  the  thumb — the  others,  when  required,  by 
the  middle  and  third  fingers. 

The  least  difference  of  pressure  upon  the  frets  causes  a  variation  in  the 
pitch,  of  which  use  is  made  in  all  grace  and  embellishments. 

A  species  of  transient  shake  stvled  "  rekhu  "  is  t)f  frequent  occurrence  ; 
it  is  produced  bv  the  string  when  stopped  being  slightly  pressed,  and  at  the 
same  time  pulled  out  of  the  straight  line.  This  will  raise  the  pitch  to  any 
degree  required,  not  exceeding  a  major  third,  beyond  which  it  is  found  that  the 
string  usualh'  breaks. 

The  jK'rformer  can  thus  produce  graces  of  all  kinds,  embracing  intervals  less 
than  semitones,  which  can  be  clearly  distinguished  by  the  ear. 

Another  effect  called  "  rava "  is  produced  by  the  string  being  stopped 
upon  one  fret  and  being  beaten  bv  a  finger  upon  the  next  fret  above. 


ii6 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  IXDLl. 


This,  when  combined  with  rel^hu,  adds  considerably  to  the  capabiHty 
of  the  instrument,  and  it  must  be  remembered  that  the  string  can  be  kept  in 
a  state  of  vibration  very  much  longer  than  in  the  guitar,  owing  to  its  thinness 
in  proportion  to  its  length. 

The  use  of  glisse,  as  with  the  guitar,  is  frequent. 

The  small  sitar  shown  on  the  right  of  the  plate  is  of  Deccan  manufacture. 
It  is  ornamented  prettilv  with  ivory  carving,  and  the  body  of  the  instrument  is 
formed  from  a  cocoa-nut.  Sitars  of  this  kind  are  much  used  by  native  ladies,  and 
their  tone  is  singularly  sweet  and  plaintive,  though,  of  course,  not  so  powerful  as 
that  of  the  larger  sitars.  The  method  of  arranging  the  frets  and  of  playing  the 
instrument  is  preciselv  as  that  described  for  the  larger  sitar  in  Plate  III. 


.\nna  liiiAKruRi:  (a  Sitar  flayer  in  thi;  .si;kvice  of 
H.H.  THE  Thakore  Sahib  of  Wadhwan). 


'1 


PLATE    III. 


SUR-S'RINGARA.     large   SITAR. 

THE  instrument  shown  upon  the  right  of  the  plate  is  the  Sitar."  This 
specimen  has  been  adorned  with  paintings,  representing  the  avatars  or 
appearances  of  the  god  Vishnu,  and  is  the  work  of  a  Poona  maker. 
The  sitars  commonly  found  are  only  different  from  this  in  that  the  bodies 
are  unpainted. 

The  sitar  is  called  also  vSundari,  and  is  perhaps  the  commonest  of  all  the 
stringed  instruments  of  India,  being  much  admired.  Its  use  in  Southern  India 
is  not  so  frequent  as  in  the  Deccan  and  farther  North,  and  is  chiefly  confined  iu 
those  who  practise  the  Hindustani  in  preference  to  the  Karnatik  system  of 
music. 

In  general  appearance  the  sitar  is  not  unlike  the  tamburi,  described 
later. 

The  finger-board  is  about  three  inches  wide,  the  frets  are  of  brass  or  silver, 
eighteen  (sometimes  sixteen)  in  number,  and  flatly  elliptical  ;  they  are  secured  to 
the  finger-board  by  pieces  of  gut  passing  underneath — this  arrangement  admits 
of  their  being  shifted  so  as  to  produce  intervals  of  any  particular  scale  (that), 
hence  the  capability  of  the  instrument  is  naturally  limited. 


"  The  invention  of  the  sitar  is  commonly  credited  to  Ameer  Khusru,  of  Delhi,  in  the  twelfth  century. 

Captain    Willard  states  that  the  instrument   derives  its  name   from  si,   a-,   signifying  in   Persian   three- 

and  tar  ,lj,  a  string,  as  that  number  was  commonly  used. 

2  G 


ii8 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA. 


The  body  of  the  sitar  is  usually  of  gourd,  cut  in  half  in  the  direction  of  the 
core,  with  a  belly  of  thin  wood  pierced  with  a  certain  number  of  sound  holes  fixed 
upon  it. 

The  tone  of  medium-sized  sitars  is  considered  preferable  to  that  of  large 
ones. 

The  nut,  or  ledge,  over  which  the  strings  pass  on  their  way  to  the  pegs 
from  the  frets  is  peculiar,  and  is  made  double  ;  that  nearest  the  pegs  having 
holes  through  which  the  strings  pass,  and  that  nearest  the  frets  having  simply 
small  notches.  The  number  of  strings  varies,  instruments  being  made  with  from 
three  to  seven  strings. 

They  are  tuned  as  follows — 


For  three  strings.  For  four. 


For  five. 


For  six. 


For  seven. 


i 


£z 


I    I  *- 


w 


These  tunings  are  considered  to  be  "  Panchama  s'ruti."  If  the  G  strings  be 
lowered  a  tone  the  sitar  will  be  in  "  Madhyama  s'ruti." 

The  instrument  is  played  by  means  of  a  plectrum  of  wire  placed  upon  the 
forefinger,  the  thumb  being  usually  pressed  firmly  upon  the  edge  of  the  belly, 
so  that  the  position  of  the  right  hand  shall  change  as  little  as  possible. 

Sitars,  called  Taraffedar,  with  sympathetic  strings  underaeath  those  played 
upon,  are  sometimes  found. 

The  sitar  is  fairly  easy  to  learn,  and  much  can  be  made  of  it  by  experienced 
performers ;  but  there  is  a  peculiarity  in  its  tone  when  played  at  all  loud 
which  greatly  mars  the  effect,  the  tender  charm  and  colouring  of  that  of  the  vina 
being  completely  absent.  To  be  heard  with  advantage  a  sitar  should  be  at  a 
little  distance  from  the  listener,  the  unpleasant  jangle  of  its  strings  will  not 
then  be  so  apparent,  and  the  melody  will  be  more  clear. 

According  to  the  common  custom,  the  methods  of  shifting  the  frets  are  five. 
The  \\\'t  methods,  called  thats,  are  as  follows.  These  thats  have  no  names, 
but  are  usually  known  from  the  ragas  that  are  commonly  played  upon 
them  : — 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUrilERX  IXDIA. 


119 


I 

2 

3 

4 

5 

b 

F| 

G 

a: 

A 



B? 

i 

B 

1 

1 

^                                         !                            1 

D? 

D 

1 

Er 

) 

]• 

1' 

i 



H 

G 

A:^       '' 

A 

1 

B 

c 

d: 

D 

Et^ 

E 

.._ 

1" 

1 

I20  THE  Mr  SIC  OF  SOUTIIEKX  IXJJIA. 

Nos.  I,  2,  4,  5,  6  are  the  arrangements  of  frets  in  different  thats  for  an 
eighteen-fretted  sitar.  No.  3  is  for  a  twenty-four  fretted  sitar,  in  which  there  is 
no  need  to  alter  the  frets. 

The  intervals  given  represent  those  upon  the  F  string  or  chanterelle. 

In  Taraffedar  sitars  the  sympathetic  strings  are  tuned  to  the  intervals 
obtained  by  the  F  string,  and  the  frets  over  their  respective  nuts.  All 
instruments  with  moveable  frets  (other  than  sitars)  are  arranged  according 
to  one  of  the  above  thats.  The  sympathetic  strings  are  arranged  in  various 
ways,  but  very  commonly  thus — G,  A,  B,  C,  d,  e,  f,  g,  a,  b,  some  of  the 
intervals  being  flattened  or  sharpened  according  to  the  raga  played. 

Some  sitars  are  so  constructed  that  the  body  is  almost  flat,  instead  of  pear- 
shaped.  This  is  accomplished  by  cutting  the  gourd  body  in  a  peculiar  manner, 
so  that  the  calix  shall  be  at  the  back  of  the  instrument.  To  such  sitars 
the  name  Kachwar  is  given.  Some  people  give  the  name  Kachapi-vina  to  them. 
A  rather  uncommon  instrument  of  this  description  is  called  the  Surbehar,  which 
is  merely  a  large-sized  sitar  or  kachapi-vina,  played  with  a  steel  plectrum,  and 
specially  used  for  the  performance  of  alapas  or  ragas.  The  body  is  of  wood, 
with  a  flat  back,  and  there  are  usually  sympathetic  strings  attached.  The  tone 
is  rich  and  mellow  like  that  of  the  vina,  but  the  large  size  of  the  instrument 
renders  its  use  fatiguing,  while  the  cost  is  very  high.  It  is  tuned,  of  course,  as 
the  ordinary  sitar. 

But  besides  the  sitar  just  described,  there  is  another  form  of  the  instrument 
to  be  met  with  in  Southern  India.  This  might  be  called  the  Karnatik-sitar,  and 
it  differs  from  the  ordinary  sitar  in  that  it  is  confined  in  its  intonation  and  is 
generally  made  with  a  much  thinner  and  shorter  neck.  Its  capability  is,  of 
course,  much  less.  It  is  usually  shaped  somewhat  like  a  tamburi,  the  body  of 
the  instrument  being  made  either  of  gourd  or  of  wood.  The  manner  of  stringing 
is  peculiar.  The  first  and  second  strings  onlv  pass  over  frets,  which  are  about 
^-inch  wide,  and  raised  from  the  finger-board  ;  these  strings  are  tuned  in 
unison,  and  thev  are  placed  verv  much  nearer  together  than  the  other  strings. 
The  third  string  is  tuned  in  unison  with  the  first,  but  does  not  pass  over  frets. 
The  fourth  string  passes  round  a  small  ivory  bead  about  half  way  up  the 
finger-board,  whence  it  passes  obliquely  under  the  strings  to  its  tuning  peg. 
The  fifth  string  is  placed  in  a  similar  way,  the  ivory  peg  being  in  this  case  a 
little  nearer  to  the  bridge.  The  sixth  and  seventh  strings  pass  straight  up 
the  finger-board  in  the  ordinary  manner.  \\'ith  the  exception  of  the  seventh, 
which  is  of  brass,  the  strings  are  of  steel,  and  are  secured  either  as  those  of 
•  the  tamburi  or  vina. 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA.  121 

The  frets  are  of  wood,  with  an  upper  edge  of  metal,  only  about  J-inch 
in  width,  and  fixed  to  the  finger-board  ;  the  strings  cannot  therefore  be  pulled  so 
as  to  produce  "  rekhu "  without  their  coming  off  the  frets.  The  number  of 
frets  is  usually  fourteen,  placed  at  the  intervals  of  the  diatonic  major  scale  ; 
occasionally  there  are  two  extra  frets  at  semitonic  intervals,  placed  between  the 
third  and  fourth,  and  tenth  and  eleventh.  Karnatik  sitars  are  sometimes  found 
fretted  throughout  in  semitonic  intervals,  the  number  of  frets  being  the  same 
as  in  a  vina. 

The  instrument  is  tuned  thus — 


i 


^ 


:i 


-*- 

In  the  ordinary  instruments  the  noise  made  by  the  accompaniment  frequently 
drowns  the  air,  the  strings  having  a  strong  tendency  to  twang.  But  the  tone  of 
these  Karnatik  sitars,  when  properly  made,  is  solt  and  sweet,  and,  being  confined 
in  intonation,  more  nearly  resembles  that  of  the  mandoline  than  any  other  Indian 
instrument. 

The  Sur-s'ringara — shown  upon  the  left  of  the  plate — is  somewhat  like  the 
rabob  in  shape,  but  with  a  wooden  belly,  and  played  with  an  iron  plectrum. 
There  are,  as  a  rule,  two  frets  only,  the  finger-board  below  the  frets  being 
generally  of  metal,  so  that  the  fingers  may  slide  easily  over  it.  The  length  of 
the  instrument  is  about  4  feet,  and  its  tone  is  rich  and  mellow,  somewhat  like 
that  of  the  pizzicato  notes  of  the  violoncello.  It  is  tuned  thus,  and  has  usually 
seven  sympathetic  strings  tuned  to  the  intervals  of  the  raga  in  which  the 
performer  is  playing  ;  the  melody  string  is  that  upon  the  right,  tuned  to  G  : — 


i 


m-- 


2   H 


A 

m^ 

M 

jsB   i 

jQ 

9 

1 

f  l^rn^ 

4 

lrr<W 

•"'il/M  J 

4 

•'finJ 

rlnTj 

J 

^ 

Fi  f'^^l 

^> 

loti 

ie 

1 

ri-i 

^^     % 

4 

1 

ih7 

H^ 

[ 

J 

IPL^Ssiff  ^ 

h3A 

' 

ra 

11 

«j 

T 


PLATE    I\'. 


BIN-SITAR.     TAUS. 


HE  instrument  to  the  left  of  this  plate  is  the  Bin-sitar,  in  outward  appear- 
ance very  similar  to  the  bin  previously  described.  It  differs,  however,  in 
that  the  frets  are  moveable  and  are  arranged  precisely  as  given  for  those 
of  the  sitar.  The  strings  are  arranged  as  those  of  the  bin,  and  therefore  reversed 
in  order  from  those  of  the  sitar.  The  Bin-sitar  is  not  a  common  instrument  ; 
indeed,  the  few  specimens  that  I  have  met  with  have  all  been  in  Poona  and  the 
neitjhbourhood.     The  tuning  is  like  that  of  the  bin. 

The  instrument  to  the  right  of  the  plate  is  the  Taiis  or  Esrar.  Sometimes 
this  instrument  is  called  Mohur.  It  is  merely  a  form  of  sitar  with  moveable  frets. 
The  Talis  is  not  much  esteemed  by  any  but  Nautch  musicians,  and  it  is  rarely  to 
be  met  with  out  of  Upper  India.  As  its  name  implies,  it  is  usually  shaped  like  a 
peacock.  Its  body  is  painted  like  that  of  the  bird,  and  to  the  lower  end  a 
wooden  neck  and  head,  covered  with  feathers,  are  attached.  It  is  sometimes 
played  with  a  bow. 

The  tuning  varies  slightly,  but  never  employs  other  intervals  than  the  tonic, 
fourth,  and  fifth,  and  occasionally  the  third.  There  are  usually  sympathetic 
strings  attached,  tuned  to  the  intervals  of  the  raga  played. 


F 


PLATE   V. 


sArinda.   sarangi. 


THE  Sarangi,  or  fiddle  of  India,  shown  to  the  rij^ht  of  this  plate, 
is  usually  strung  with  three  strings  of  thick  gut  and  played  with 
a  bow.  Sometimes  a  fourth  string  of  wire  called  Inntj  is  added. 
The  fingers  of  the  left  hand,  in  stopping  the  strings,  do  not  press  them 
down  upon  the  finger-board,  but  press  against  them  at  the  side  in  all  the 
positions.  The  tone  of  the  sarangi  more  nearly  resembles  that  of  the  viola 
than  any  European  instrument,  and  when  well  played  there  is  a  charm  about 
the  instrument  that  is  not  easily  forgotten.  The  sarangi  is  frequently  employed 
tt)  plav  a  sort  of  obbligato  to  a  song,  particularly  in  theatrical  performances  and 
by  Nautch  companies.  There  are  generally  in  instruments  of  this  kind  fifteen 
sympathetic  strings  of  wire  tuned  chromaticall}'.  The  instrument  is  made  from 
a  single  block  of  wood  hollowed  out,  and  has  a  parchment  belly.  When  in  use 
it  is  held  vertically,  head  uppermost.  Curiously  enough,  as  was  the  case  with  the 
violin  in  England  at  one  time,  the  instrument  is  considered  to  be  rather  vulgar, 
and  hence  musicians,  though  thev  admire  and  like  it  much,  will  usually  employ 
either  a  low  caste  Hindu  or  a  Mussulman  to  play  it.     The  tuning  is  as  follows: — 


4321 

The  string  marked  x   is  of  brass,  tuned  either  to  E  or  F,  according  to  the 

requirements  of  the  raga  played — this  string  is  called  lui'uj. 

The   illustration  shows  the  instrument  as  commonly  found  in  the  South  of 

India  and  the  Deccan.     The  resin  for  the  bow  is  ingeniouslv  placed  in  the  head. 

2 1 


126  THE  MUSIC  OF  SOVTHF.Ry  fXDIA. 

The  bow  for  the  Saranj^i  is  tlie  same  as  that  shown  in  Plate  IV.  for  the  Tails.  In 
Upper  India  and  the  Punjali  a  shtjlitly  different  form  of  the  Sarangi  is  found,  and 
is  ijenerallv  more  highly  decorated  and  with  a  differently  shaped  head. 

The  three-stringed  instrument  to  the  left  of  the  plate  is  the  Sarinda,  a  bowed 
instrument  common  in  Bengal.  The  decoration  and  carving  are  characteristic, 
although  rough.  The  Sarinda  is  not  a  very  high-class  instrument,  but  is  very 
popular  with  the  lower  classes.  The  tuning  is  like  that  of  the  chikara,  and  the 
strings  are  of  cut  or  silk.  The  bow  used  with  it  is  that  shown.  The  chief 
peculiaritv  of  the  Sarinda  consists  in  the  way  that  the  belly,  which  is  of 
parchment,  is  put  on.  As  will  be  seen  by  the  plate,  it  is  made  to  cover  only  the 
lower  part  of  the  body,  leaving  the  upper  half  quite  open. 


PLATE    VI. 


RABOB.     CHIKARA.     SARANGI, 


THE  Sarangi  found  in  Upper  India  differs  slightly  from  that  of  the  South 
and  the  Deccan.  The  head  is  generally  carved  to  represent  the  neck  of 
a  swan,  and  the  body  is  rounded  instead  of  being  square  ;  the  number  of 
sympathetic  strings,  too,  is  often  less.  The  beautiful  specimen  shown  in  the 
upper  part  of  the  plate  is  in  the  possession  of  Mr.  C.  Purdon  Clark,  C.S.I., 
through  whose  kindness  Mr.  Gibb  has  been  enabled  to  make  this  representation. 
The  instrument  is  ornamented  with  ivory  and  inlaid  with  numbers  of  small 
turquoises.  The  tuning  and  the  method  of  playing  the  Northern  Sarangi  do  not 
differ  from  that  of  the  instrument  described  under  the  preceding  plate. 

The  Chikara — shown  to  the  right  of  the  plate — is  somewhat  similar  to  the 
sarangi,  but  smaller,  and  is  used  by  common  people.  It  has  three  strings  of  gut 
or  horsehair  and  five  sympathetic  strings  of  wire.     The  tuning  is 


i 


xr 

3 


commonly,  or  else  like  that  of  the  sarangi.     The  sympathetic  strings  are  generally 
tuned  to  G,  A,  B,  c,  d  ;  (any  of  these  intervals  being  made  i?  or  $  as  required). 

The  other  instrument  in  the  plate  is  the  Rabob,  which  is  found  in  almost  all 
Mahomedan  countries,  and  in  various  places  differs  only  in  shape.  The  Indian 
Rabob  is  principally  used  in  the  Punjab  and  Upper  India;  its  use  in  other  parts 
is  confined  to  Mahomedans.  The  instrument  is  made  of  wood,  with  a  belly  of 
parchment.  In  general  there  are  four  strings — three  of  gut  and  one  of  brass ; 
the  two  upper  strings  are  sometimes  doubled  and  tuned  alike,  in  which  case, 


I2S 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOrrUERX  IX DLL 


of  course,  the  instrument  has  six  strings.  Sympathetic  strings  of  metal  are 
usually  attached  at  the  side.  Four  or  hve  catgut  frets  at  semitonic  intervals  are 
sometimes  found.  The  instrument  is  played  with  a  wooden  plectrum,  and  rarely 
with  a  bow  as  a  sarangi.  The  Rabob  is  a  handsome  instrument,  and  when  well 
played  is  verv  pleasing.  Its  tone  rather  resembles  that  of  the  banjo. 
It  is  tuned  thus — 


i 


E^ 


The  specimen  here  shown  is  from  Afghanistan.  As  usually  found  in  India, 
the  Rabob  is  slightly  different,  and  is  made  with  a  rather  larger  body,  the  lower 
part  of  which  is  wider  in  proportion  than  that  of  the  illustration  ;  but  in  the 
Punjab  a  preference  appears  to  be  given  for  the  Afghan  form  of  the  instrument. 


PLATE    VII. 

TAMBURI.    YEKTAR.     PERSIAN   SITARA. 

THE  Tamburi  shown  to  the  left  of  the  plate  is  used  as  a  common  accom- 
paniment to  singing,  the  strings  are  never  stopped,  but  are  alwaj-s 
struck  open  by  the  fingers,  which  in  this  case  are  not  armed  with 
plectra.  In  outer  form  the  Tamburi  much  resembles  the  vina,  but  is  less 
complicated,  having  no  frets  or  calabash  affixed  to  the  stem  ;  and  it  is  employed 
for  accompaniments  only. 

There  are  four  strintrs  tuned  thus — 


^- 


4321 

The  first,  second,  and  third  are  of  steel,  the  fourth  of  brass  ;  the  steel 
strings  are  similar  to  those  of  the  vina.  The  Tamburi  has  no  side  strings  ;  the 
tuning  pegs  are  placed  differently  to  those  of  the  vina  ;  those  of  the  first  and 
second  strings  being  placed  at  the  side,  as  in  a  violoncello  ;  and  those  of  the 
second  and  third  strings  being  placed  at  right  angles  to  the  centre  of  the  head 
as  in  a  banjo  or  peghead  guitar. 

The  bridge  is  moveable,  and  is  entirely  of  wood  or  ivory,  no  metal  being 
employed  in  its  fitting.  The  tone  of  a  Tamburi  is  slightly  buzzing,  and  to 
procure  this  result  pieces  of  quill  or  silk,  termed  jivnla,  are  placed  between 
the  bridge  and  strings,  and  manipulated  until  the  desired  effect  is  obtained. 

The  nut  is  deeper  than  in  the  vina,  the  strings  passing  through  holes 
instead  of  slits.     In  many  tamburis  there  is  a  contrivance  called  tekkah,  resembling 

2  K 


I30  THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  LXDIA. 

in  action  the  capo-tasto  of  a  t^uitar,  slidint;"  on  the  fin<^er-board,  and  b}'  means  of 
it  the  pitch  of  tlie  instrument  can  be  immediately  altered  to  any  degree  required 
by  the  performer. 

The  strings  are  secured  directly  to  the  attachment,  which  is  a  narrow  ledge 
fixed  to  the  body,  instead  of  to  langarus  as  sometimes  is  the  case  in  the  vina. 
In  place  of  langarus,  and  for  the  purpose  of  assisting  in  tuning,  there  are  beads 
called  pusalu,  threaded  upon  the  strings  between  the  bridge  and  the  attach- 
ment to  which  they  are  secured.  These  beads  pushed  down  in  the  direction  of 
the  attachment  act  like  a  wedge  between  the  belly  and  the  strings,  and  thus 
stretching  the  strings  serve  to  alter  their  pitch  as  required.  This  contrivance  is 
found  in  many  Indian  instruments. 

The  method  of  fastening  the  strings  to  the  attachment  is  worthy  of  note,  and 
is  as  follows.  The  string  is  bent  round  the  attachment  and  passed  upwards 
through  one  of  the  holes  ;  it  is  then  bent  round  itself  and  passed  back  through 
the  same  hole  when  it  is  drawn  tight,  and  the  spare  portion,  if  necessary,  cut  off. 


The  belly  of  the  instrument  is  usually  slightly  convex,  andthere  are  small  circles 
of  sound  holes  cut  like  those  of  the  vina.  When  played  the  Tamburi  is  always  held 
upright,  the  body  resting  upon  the  ground.  The  tamburis  of  the  Southern  parts 
of  India  are  generally  made  with  wooden  bodies,  beautifully  carved  and 
ornamented  with  ivory,  as  in  the  illustration  ;  farther  North  they  are  found  with 
bodies  of  gourd.  Some  of  the  finest  instruments  of  this  kind  are  made  at  Tanjore, 
where  their  manufacture  has  been  made  a  subject  of  special  study,  and  large 
prices  are  frequently  paid  for  them. 

All  instruments  of  this  kind  are  called  Tamburis,  and  many  varieties  may 
be  found  ;  one  kind  frequently  met  with  is  made  smaller  and  with  a  curved  head 
like  that  of  the  vina,  and  is  used  by  mendicant  singers. 

Those  of  the  kind  described  are  used  only  by  musicians  and  are  styled 
"  Dasiri  Tamburi." 

The  Yektar,  or  Tuntuni  as  it  is  sometimes  called,  shown  in  the  centre  of  the 
plate,  can  hardly  be  called  an  instrument  at  all,  since  it  has  only  one  string 
and  no  frets. 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOi'THERN  INDIA.  131 

It  is  made  from  a  piece  of  bamboo,  to  the  under  side  of  which  a  hirge  gourd 
or  hollow  cylinder  of  wood  is  attached,  one  end  being  closed  by  a  piece  of  parch- 
ment. In  the  centre  of  the  parchment  there  is  a  hole,  through  which  the  string 
is  passed  and  tied  in  a  knot  to  prevent  its  slipping  back. 

The  Yektar  is  often  used  by  mendicants,  and  is  twanged  from  time  to  time 
as  an  accompaniment  to  their  monotonous  chanting.  In  villages  and  country 
districts  in  the  Deccan  and  Central  Provinces  this  instrument  is  very  popular. 
It  is  used  in  conjunction  with  a  drum  of  some  kind,  and  the  performers 
keep  up  a  sort  of  monotonous  dialogue  upon  some  common  topic  of  village 
interest,  which  is  full  of  witty  and  rather  broad  remarks  about  the  principal 
personages  present. 

The  three-stringed  instrument  to  the  right  of  the  plate  is  the  Persian  Sitara. 
Its  use  in  India  is  very  uncommon,  but  it  is  sometimes  met  with  in  large  native 
cities,  such  as  Hyderabad  or  Jeypur,  where  it  is  admired  chiefly  as  a  variety.  The 
body  of  the  specimen  drawn  is  of  wood,  ornamented  with  ivory,  the  back  of  the 
instrument  being  left  open.  As  can  be  seen,  the  belly  is  of  parchment,  and  the 
tailpin,  which  serves  as  a  foot  for  the  instrument,  is  of  brass,  rather  curiously 
worked.  There  are  usually  three  gut  strings,  tuned  like  those  of  the  sarangi, 
and  played  by  means  of  a  bow. 


V 


/ 


& 


PLATE   VIII. 


SVARAMANDALA. 

THE  Quanun,  or  Indian  Dulcimer,  is  an  instrument  seldom  met  with, 
and  is  to  be  seen  mostly  in  the  hands  of  Punjabi  musicians. 
There  are  usually  twenty-one  strings,  some  of  brass  and  the  rest 
of  steel,  and  tuned  to  the  intervals  of  any  of  the  Indian  scales  as 
required  bv  the  raga  played.  Occasionally  gut  or  silk  strings  are  found. 
The  kind  of  quanun  here  drawn  is  called  Svaramandala,  and  is  generall}' 
larger  and  better  finished  than  the  ordinary  instrument  of  this  name.  It 
is  played  with  two  wire  plectra,  worn  upon  the  finger-tips  of  the  per- 
former. The  capability  of  the  instrument  is  much  greater  than  might  be 
supposed  at  first  sight.  The  performer  holds  in  his  left  hand  an  iron  ring 
somewhat  like  a  quoit,  which  he  applies  to  the  strings,  so  that  it  acts  like 
a  ;////  and  thus  enables  him  to  produce  all  sorts  of  grace  and  embellishments. 
There  is,  of  course,  only  one  string  to  a  note.  The  tone  is  sweet,  soft,  and 
reminds  one  rather  of  that  of  the  clavichord,  though  it  is  louder  and  possibh- 
more  nasal  in  quality.  The  Svaramandala  is  rarely  heard,  both  on  account 
of  its  great  difticulty  and  very  high  cost,  and  therefore  good  execution  upon  it 
IS  rarely  met  with. 

The  Santir,  already  mentioned  as  a  Persian  instrument,  is  also  to  be  found 
occasionally.  It,  like  the  quanun,  is  a  kind  of  dulcimer,  but  has  a  great  many 
more  strings  than  the  former,  and  is  generall}-  played  by  being  struck  with  two 
sticks  covered  with  leather  or  felt.  Both  these  instruments  are  to  be  found  in 
Afghanistan,  Turkey,  Persia,  and  Egypt,  as  well  as  Arabia.  The  Indian  Quanun 
and  Santir  do  not  differ  much  from  the  Egj-ptian  and  Arabian  forms,  drawings  of 

2L 


134  '^'^^  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHF.RX  IXDIA. 

which  can  be  found  botli  in  Lane's  "Modern  Egyptians"  and  Mr.  Carl  Engel's 
"  Musical  Instruments."  The  Svaramandala  here  drawn  is  from  Cashmere. 
The  tuning  pins  are  turned  by  means  of  an  iron  key,  and  the  tension  of  the 
strings  is  usually  very  high.  The  beautiful  decoration  and  the  delicacy  of 
the  painting  with  which  this  instrument  is  so  profusely  adorned  are 
evident. 

The  Hindus  say  that  an  instrument  of  this  description  was  first  invented  by 
the  rishi  or  sage  Kattyayana ;  hence  it  is  called  the  Kattyayana  vina — 
and  sometimes  Shatatantri  (or  hundred-stringed)  vina — in  the  Sanskrit 
treatises. 


PLATE   IX. 


KINNARI. 

THE  Kinnari  is  a  rude  stringed  instrument  employed  chiefly  by  the  country 
people  in  South  Kanara  and  M3'sore.  It  is  somewhat  singular  that  a 
stringed  instrument  of  much  the  same  name — the  Kinnor^^ — should  have 
been  mentioned  in  the  Bible,  and  this  leads  one  to  conjecture  that  they  may  both 
have  been  derived  from  the  same  Aryan  source  ;  for  the  Kinnari  is  an  instrument 
of  great  antiquitv,  and  takes  its  name  from  the  legend  that  it  was  invented  by 
Kinneri,  one  of  the  gandharvas  or  singers  of  Brahma-loka,  the  heaven  of  the 
god  Brahma. 

It  is  formed  out  of  a  piece  of  bamboo  or  blackwood,  about  2  feet  6  inches  in 
length,  upon  which  are  placed  frets,  sometimes  made  from  the  scales  of  the 
pangolin  or  scaly  ant-eater  (bone  or  metal  however  is  generally  used),  and  fixed 
by  means  of  some  resinous  composition.  Beneath  this  stem  are  fixed  three  gourd 
resonators. 

The  instrument  possesses  two  strings  only,  made  of  wire.  One  of  these 
strings  passes  over  the  frets,  the  other  is  fixed  rather  above  the  frets,  and  is 
tuned  either  a  fourth  or  fifth  below  the  former,  according  as  the  instrument  is 
tuned  in  Panchama  or  Madhyama  s'ruti. 

The  frets  are  twelve  in  number,  and  are  placed  according  to  the  intervals  of 
some  particular  scale  or  scales.  Hence  the  compass  and  capability  of  the 
Kinnari  are  naturally  limited.  The  tone  is  weak  and  thin,  and  the  twanging  of 
the  strings  renders  the  instrument  unpleasant  to  ears  not  accustomed  to  it. 

Most  of  the  Sanskrit  treatises  upon  musical  instruments  contain  some 
mention  of  the  Kinnari,  or  kinnari-vina  as  it  is  sometimes  called.  It  is  worthy  of 
note  that  the  tailpiece  of  the  instrument  is  still  invariably  carved  to  represent  the 
breast  of  a  kite,  precisely  as  directed  in  all  the  old  treatises  ;  and  in  many  of  the 
old  sculptures  to  be  seen  on  temples  and  shrines  in  the  Mysore  country  this 
instrument  is  so  represented. 

^^  Sec  II.  Chronicles  xx.  28. 


PLATE  X. 


MRIDANG.     TABLA   AND    BAHYA, 


THE  Mridang,  or  Mathala,  considered  to  be  the  most  ancient  of  the  Indian 
drums,  is  commonly  employed  by  musicians  in  Southern  India  as  an 
accompaniment  to  their  songs  and  instrumental  performances.  It 
consists  of  a  hollow  shell  of  wood,  larger  at  one  end  than  the  other,  and  upon 
which  are  stretched  two  heads  of  skin,  fastened  to  wooden  hoops  and  strained 
by  leather  braces  interlaced  and  passing  the  length  of  the  Mridang.  Small 
pieces  of  wood  placed  between  the  shell  and  braces  serve  to  tune  the  instrument. 
The  two  heads  are  tuned  to  the  tonic  and  fourth  or  fifth,  according  to 
whether  the  music  is  to  be  in  Madhyama  or  Panchama  s'ruti.  The  centre  of  the 
smaller  head  of  this  peculiar  drum  is  coated  with  a  composition  of  resin,  oil,  and 
wax  ;  and,  by  way  of  ornament,  an  embroidered  cloth  is  commonly  stretched  upon 
the  upper  side  of  the  shell. 

The  Mridang  is  beaten  by  the  hands,  finger-tips,  and  wrists  in  a  very  peculiar 
manner,  drum  playing  being  a  great  art  among  Indian  performers  ;  indeed,  years  of 
study  are  required  to  ensure  proficiency.  The  smaller  head  of  the  Mridang  is 
struck  by  the  right  hand,  the  larger  head  by  the  left.  This  drum  is  considered 
to  be  the  most  primitive  of  all  Indian  instruments.  Its  origin,  as  described  in  the 
puranas,  is  as  follows: — "  When  Mahadeva,  elated  by  his  victory  over  the  invincible 
demon  Tripurasura,  began  to  dance,  surrounded  by  Indra  and  other  deities,  Brahma 
is  said  to  have  invented  the  mridanga  to  serve  as  an  accompaniment,  and  under 
his  directions  the  god  Ganesha  first  performed  upon  it.  From  the  very  import  of 
the    word    mridanga,    it   appears    that   its  body    was    originally    made  of   clay. 

2  M 


138 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SUUTJIERX  ISDIA. 


The  primitive  classical  niridangas  somewhat  resemble  the  khole  and  maidola 
found  in  use  among  the  aboriginal  hill  tribes.  With  some  the  khole,  even  to  the 
present  dav,  passes  under  the  appellation  of  mridanga.""' 

The  specimen — drawn  in  the  upper  part  of  the  plate — is  from  Upper  India  ; 
the  Mridang  found  in  the  South  is  usually  less  ornate,  and  the  leather  braces  are 
thinner  and  more  in  number. 

In  the  Deccan  and  farther  North  preference  appears  to  be  given  to  the  Tabla, 
which  are  small  copper  kettledrums — tenor  and  bass — always  used  together,  and 
which  are  tuned  as  the  two  heads  of  the  mridang.  The  Tabla  are  generallv  tied 
in  a  cloth  round  the  waist  of  the  performer.  Frequently  a  small  wooden  kettle- 
drum, rather  longer  in  proportion  to  its  diameter,  called  Bahya,  and  answering 
to  the  smaller  head  of  the  mridang,  is  employed  with  one  of  the  tabla  drums. 

All  these  drums  are  tuned  by  braces  and  by  means  of  the  resinous  composition 
already  mentioned  being  applied  to  them.  Both  tabla  and  bahva  are  considered 
as  instruments  of  chamber  music,  and  their  sound  is  consequently  soft  and 
subdued,  very  different  to  that  of  the  kettledrums  employed  in  the  Nahabet 
described  elsewhere.  Sometimes  wooden  drums,  called  Pakhwaj — in  appearance 
similar  to  the  bahya — are  used.  The  name  Pakhwaj  is  occasionally  applied  to 
the  mridang.  The  drum  to  the  left  of  the  plate  is  the  Tabla,  that  to  the  right 
the  Bahya. 

"■  "  Short  Notice  of  Hindu  Musical  Instruments."      S.  M.  Tagore. 


Taula  ami  Tamiiliri   Playkrs. 


PLATE   XL 


NAGARA    DHOL 


THE  Nagara  (sometimes  called  Bheri),  or  Nakkera,  is  a  large  kettledrum, 
much  employed  in  temples. 
The  shells  are  of  copper,  brass,  or  sheet-iron,  rivetted  together;  the 
heads,  made  of  skin,  are  strained  upon  hoops  of  metal,  and  stretched  by  ropes  or 
leather  thongs  passing  round  the  underside  of  the  shell.  The  usual  size  of  these 
drums  is  from  2j  to  3  feet  in  diameter.  They  are  beaten  with  two  curved  sticks. 
In  the  Ramayana,  Mahambharata,  and  some  of  the  puranas,  this  instrument  is 
called  Dundubhi. 

The  Maha-nagara,  or  Nahabet,  is  a  very  similar  kettledrum,  of  larger  size, 
employed  in  bands  attached  to  the  palaces  of  Mahomedan  nobles  in  the  Deccan 
and  Upper  India.  These  instruments  are  sometimes  made  as  much  as  five  feet 
in  diameter. 

A  form  of  nagara  called  Karadisamela  is  in  use  in  Lingayet  temples  in  the 
Southern  Provinces  ;  this  form  only  diflers  from  the  ordinary  temple  drum  in 
that  it  is  larger  and  the  shell  is  conical,  with  the  apex  of  the  cone  l^attened,  in 
place  of  being  nearly  semi-spherical. 

In  the  Deccan  and  Central  India  two  smaller  kettledrums  are  often 
associated  with  this  instrument  in  periormance. 

The  method  of  bracing  drums  of  this  kind  varies  slightly  in  different  parts. 
A  very  common  way  is  to  cover  the  shell  with  a  kind  of  network  ot  twisted 
leather  thongs,  to  which  the  head  is  attached  when  wet,  and  then  shrunk  on  to 
its  place.  This  method  is  commonly  applied  to  the  smaller  varieties  ot 
kettledrums. 


140  THE  MUSIC  OF  SUUTHERX  LXDLl. 

The  Dhol,  drawn  at  the  top  of  the  plate,  is  a  species  of  drum  chiefly  employed 
in  the  native  bands  that  are  usually  heard  at  weddings  and  other  festivities. 
The  shell  is  of  wood  bored  out  of  the  solid,  and  usually  about  i8  or  20  inches  in 
length,  and  12  inches  in  diameter.  The  size  however  varies  greatly.  The 
thickness  of  the  shell  is  from  ith  to  ^\,th  of  an  inch.  The  heads,  made  of  skin, 
are  stretched  round  hempen  hoops,  fastened  to  the  shell  and  strained  by  means 
of  thongs  of  leather  interlaced.  A  band  of  leather  passed  round  the  shell  and 
over  the  braces  serves  to  tighten  the  instrument  up  to  the  desired  pitch.  The 
Dhol  is  played  both  by  hand  and  stick.  Sometimes  the  left  side  of  this 
instrument  is  left  out  altogether,  in  which  case  the  right  side  is  beaten 
with  two  sticks.  Metal  rings  struck  by  the  drumsticks  are  sometimes  attached 
as  shown. 

The  Dholkee  is  a  smaller  dhol,  much  used  by  women  in  the  Deccan. 

The  Dholuk  and  Dak  are  drums  somewhat  similar  to  the  dhol,  but  are 
generally  rather  larger  and  vary  slightly  in  shape  in  different  parts  of  India. 


PLATE   XII. 


KHANJERI.     TAM   'lAM. 


TAMBOURINES  and  tabors  of  all  kinds  are  found  throughout  India, 
but  are  rarely  used  by  professional  musicians.  The  largest  instru- 
ment of  this  kind  is  called  Duff,  or  Duffde,  and  is  an  octagon 
frame  of  wood  about  6  inches  deep  and  3  feet  in  diameter,  covered  upon 
one  side  with  skin  strained  by  means  of  a  network  of  thin  leather  thongs. 
The  Duff  is  struck  with  the  fingers  of  the  right  hand ;  and  a  thin  switch 
held  perpendicularly  over  it  by  the  fingers  of  the  left  is  made  to  strike  the 
instrument  with  the  middle  finsjer  at  certain  intervals  according^  to  the  tala. 
The  Daera  is  circular  and  not  more  than  11  or  12  inches  in  diameter. 
It  is  played  with  the  right  hand  in  a  similar  manner  to  the  duff.  The 
thumb  of  the  left  hand  is  thrust  into  a  loop  in  the  underside  of  the  Daera. 
This  forms  a  sort  of  rest  for  the  left  hand  a  little  above  the  centre  of  the 
instrument,  so  that  the  knuckle  of  the  middle  finger  can  be  pressed  against  the 
skin  when  a  rise  in  the  tone  is  desired.  In  the  Southern  provinces  a  large 
circular  instrument  of  this  kind,  called  Thambatte,  is  found  ;  this  varies  from 
3  to  4  feet  in  diameter.  The  Thambatte  is  played  in  a  similar  manner  to 
the  duff,  and  is  commonly  employed  by  the  lowest  castes,  and  usuall}- 
associated  with  the  Kahalay  or  Kombu,  a  horn  similar  to  the  s'ringa  shown 
in  Plate  XVII. 

The  Khanjeri,  or  common  tambourine,  shown  in  the  plate,  consists  of  a  piece 
of  vellum  or  skin  stretched  upon  a  wooden  hoop,  8  or  g  inches  in  diameter  and 
about  3  or  4  inches  deep,  bored  out  of  the  solid.  In  the  hoop  are  placed  three 
or  four  slits  containing  pieces  of  metal  strung  together,  which  clash  when  the 

2  N 


142  THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA. 

instrument  is  shaken.  The  lower  edge  of  the  hoop  is  sometimes  bound  with 
silver,  chased  with  mythological  devices,  and  the  hoop  itself  is  often  carved  in  the 
same  way. 

Water  poured  upon  the  skin  serves  for  tuning. 

The  Khanjeri  is  generally  employed  in  Dliazana — described  elsewhere — and 
by  Nautch  girls. 

The  small  kettledrum  drawn  in  the  plate  is  the  common  Tam  tam  used  by 
beggars  and  the  like,  and  which  is  to  be  found  at  all  street  corners  throughout 
India.  A  tam  tam  of  rather  Hatter  shape,  called  Dinni,  is  common  in  Mysore, 
and  is  generally  carried  by  religious  mendicants  of  Saivite  sects.  In  shape  it 
much  resembles  the  modern  Egyptian  tabl-shami. 


PLATE  XIII. 


TALA.    JALRA.     BUDBUDIKA. 

METAL  cymbals  of  all  kinds  are  used  as  accompaniments  to  nati\'e 
music.  Farther  North  we  find  them  chiefly  in  connection  with 
music  of  a  religious  character,  but  in  the  South  their  use  is 
universal.  The  larger  kinds,  called  Jhanj,  are  much  like  the  ordinary 
Turkish  cvmbals  and  are  used  in  the  Nahabet,  and  in  company  with  the 
Tala,  or  gong,  in  the  wild  temple  music.  The  chief  use  made  of  all 
cymbals  is  to  mark  the  time.  The  two  small  kinds  of  cymbals  here  drawn 
are  peculiar  to  Indian  music.  The  Jalra — shown  uppermost  in  the 
plate — are  made  in  proportion  a  good  deal  thicker  than  the  larger  cymbals, 
and  they  are  played  so  as  to  produce  a  ringing  sound,  somewhat  like 
that  of  a  trembling  electric  bell ;  they  are  usually  connected  by  a  cord  passed 
through  their  centres.  The  cup-shaped  cymbals  to  the  left  of  the  plate  are  called 
Tala,  and  are  so  made  that  their  edges  only  are  struck. 

Tala  are  in  size  similar  to  Jalra,  but  are  not  usually  connected. 
At  the  back  of  each  a  tassel  of  silk  or  wood  serves  for  a  handle.  Colonel 
Meadows  Taylor  thus  describes  their  use  :  "  One  is  held  in  the  left  palm  secured 
by  a  cord  passed  round  the  right,  and  is  struck  by  the  other,  which  is  held 
loosely  in  the  right.  Players  on  these  C3'mbals  are  extremely  dexterous,  and 
produce  a  not  unpleasing  accompaniment  to  the  voice  or  to  instrumental  music, 
by  striking  the  cups  together  in  such  a  manner — outside,  inside,  and  upon  the 
edges — as  to  form  notes  in  accordance  with  the  voice  or  the  other  instruments 
by  which  it  may  be  accompanied.  This  cymbal  accompaniment  is  played  with 
more  execution  than  may  be  conceived  possible  from  the  nature  of  the  instrument. 


144  THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA. 

I  have  heard  professors  even  play  solos  upon  it,  which,  if  not  very  intelligible 
as  to  tune,  were  at  least  curious  in  execution  and  divcrsit)-  of  lime,  as  suited 
to  the  various  style  of  music."  " 

The  Budbudika — shown  on  the  right  of  the  plate — is  a  small  hand-drum  from 
three  to  six  inches  in  length,  used  by  snake  charmers,  mendicants,  &c.  In 
shape  it  resembles  an  hour-glass,  and  in  the  centre  a  string  is  attached  having  a 
small  ]);dl  of  leather  or  cork  at  the  end.  When  shaken  in  the  hand  the  striker 
at  the  end  of  the  string  alternately  touches  each  head. 

A  drum,  somewhat  similar  in  shape,  called  Edaka  or  Dudi,  is  common 
in  Coorg.  It  is  of  metal,  and  about  i  foot  in  length  and  8  inches  in  diameter; 
one  end  is  beaten  by  a  soft  drumstick,  the  other  by  hand,  like  the  dhol. 

On  the  West  Coast,  and  in  Malabar,  another  drum  of  much  the  same  shape 
is  employed.  It  is  usually  very  light  and  fragile,  the  shells  being  made  of  large 
gourds.  Five  or  six  of  these  drums  are  commonly  used  in  religious  services 
and  the  noise  at  certain  seasons  of  the  year  resulting  from  this  method  of 
worship  is  almost  incredible,  and  is  continued  for  days  together,  by  relays  of 
performers,  at  certain  festivals. 

'"  "  Proceedings,  Royal  Irish  Academy."     Vol.  IX.,  Part  i. 


c 


PLATE   XIV. 


FUNGI.     KURTAR. 


THE  instrument  drawn  at  the  right  of  the  plate  is  the  Pungi,  or  Jinagovi, 
a  reed  pipe  used  exclusively  by  jugglers  and  snake  charmers.  The 
body  and  mouthpiece  are  formed  from  a  bottle-shaped  gourd,  in  which 
are  inserted  two  pipes  of  cane,  the  interior  ends  of  which  are  cut  so  as  to  form 
reeds.  One  of  the  pipes  is  pierced  with  finger-holes  so  that  it  can  be  played 
upon,  the  other  being  sounded  in  unison  with  the  keynote  as  a  drone. 

The  Pungi  is  invariably  constructed  in  the  scale  of  Hanumatodi  (see 
page  ^T,),  and  is  plaved  in  the  Nagavarali  raga,  a  strain  supposed  to  be  specially 
pleasing  to  serpents. 

The  specimen  shown  here  is  beautifully  painted,  and  is  of  Deccan 
manufacture,  but  the  common  pungi  is  of  the  roughest  and  simplest  description, 
and  hardlv  ever  in  correct  tune. 

Kurtar,  or  Chittika,  are  two  pieces  of  hard  wood  about  six  inches  in  length, 
flat  upon  one  side  and  rounded  upon  the  other.  They  are  held  in  the  one  hand 
and  the  flat  surfaces  beaten  together  by  alternatel}'  closing  and  opening  the 
fingers.  A  ring  is  usually  inserted  at  the  back  of  each  for  the  fingers  to  pass 
through,  and  at  the  ends  are  placed  little  clusters  of  bells,  or  small  pieces  of  metal 
which  jangle  when  the  Kurtar  is  shaken. 

Circular    wooden    castanets,    called    Chacra,    made    with     slightlv    concave 

surfaces,  are  frequently  met  with.      To  these  the  name  of  Khattala  is  sometimes 

given,  and  they  are  played  with  great  dexteritv. 

2  o 


A 


1^ 


PLATE    XV. 

FILLACiOVI.      MUKAVINA.     S'RUTI 
NAGASARA.     ALCiOA. 


THE  three  instruments  in  the  centre  of  the  plate  belong  to  the  same 
class,  and  are  in  general  use  in  all  parts  of  India. 
The  Nagasara — the  second  from  the  right  in  the  plate — is  a  reed 
instrument  with  a  conical  bore  enlarging  downwards.  It  is  usually  pierced  in 
twelve  holes,  the  upper  seven  of  which  alone  are  employed  in  fingering,  the  others 
being  stopped  or  otherwise  with  wax  at  the  discretion  of  the  performer,  so  as  to 
regulate  the  pitch  of  the  instrument.  The  holes  are  bored  at  intervals  roughly 
corresponding  to  those  of  some  Indian  scale,  but  the  native  players  often  produce 
other  and  additional  intervals  by  allowing  the  fingers  to  only  partially  cover  the 
holes. 

The  reed  somewhat  resembles  that  of  a  bassoon,  but  it  is  very  roughly 
made,  and  is  wider  in  proportion  to  its  length  ;  it  is  mounted  like  that  of  an 
oboe,  on  a  short  metal  "  staple." 

The  instrument  is  usually  made  of  a  dark  close-grained  wood  called 
chandanna,  and  has  a  metal  bell.  Occasionally  nagasaras  made  entirely  of 
metal  are  met  with. 

The  tone  is  somewhat  similar  to  that  of  a  bagpipe,  but  is  more  shrill,  and 
should  be  heard  at  a  distance. 

The  Mukavina — the  second  from  the  left  in  the  plate — bears  a  close 
resemblance  to  the  nagasara,  but  is  usually  much  smaller,  about  half  the  size. 

It  is  an  instrument  of  the  oboe  family,  with  a  conical  bore  enlarging 
downwards.     It  is  pierced  in  seven  holes  corresponding  to  the  intervals  of  some 


148  THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTIIERX  INDIA. 

scale,  and  is  capable  of  the  same  inflections  of  tone.  Its  sound  is  naturally 
more  shrill  than  that  of  the  former,  and  is  very  piercing,  which  renders  the 
instrument  very  unpleasant  to  ears  not  accustomed  to  it. 

Both  the  nagasara  and  the  mukavina  when  played  in  combination  with 
other  instruments  are  accompanied  by  the  S'ruti,  which  forms  a  kind  of  drone 
bass.  These  drones  are  made  in  various  sizes,  and  in  outward  appearance  are 
very  similar  to  the  two  instruments  before-mentioned.  The  bore  is  conical  and 
enlarging  downwards,  but  more  so  in  proportion  to  the  length  of  the  instrument 
than  in  either  of  the  other  two.  P'our  or  five  holes  are  pierced  near  the  bell  at 
the  fancy  of  the  maker ;  and  these  holes,  b}'  being  stopped  wholly  or  partially 
with  wax,  serve  to  tune  the  s'ruti  to  the  desired  pitch. 

When  played  in  combination  with  other  instruments  they  are  tuned  to  the 
tonic  and  dominant ;  if  only  one  s'ruti  is  employed  it  is  tuned  simply  to 
the  tonic. 

The  appendages  to  these  pipes  are  spare  reeds  and  an  ivory  bodkin  for 
their  adjustment. 

Whether  we  may  look  to  India  for  the  origin  of  the  drone  bass  is  a  doubtful 
point,  but  it  is  certain  that  the  principle  has  existed  there  from  very  remote 
times. 

"  What  bagpipes  are  to  Scotland  or  Ireland,  these  pipes  are  to  India. 
Their  sound  is  precisely  similar  to  that  of  bagpipes,  only,  perhaps,  more 
powerful,  and  in  the  hands  of  good  players  more  melodious.  Thev  have  seven 
and  eight  holes  respectively,  and  thus  would  appear  to  have  no  great  compass  ; 
but  in  execution,  whether  from  the  effects  of  the  lips  and  tongue  upon  the 
reed  mouthpiece,  or  the  manner  of  fingering  upon  the  holes,  combinations  are 
formed  which  include  semitones  and  quarter  notes,  and  thus  the  expression  of 
chromatic  passages  ad  libitiuii,  of  which  the  native  players  are  very  fond,  is 
given,  which  in  reality  are  verv  effective.  From  their  great  power  of  sound 
these  pipes  are  unpleasant  if  the  performers  be  near;  but  at  a  distance,  in  the 
open  air,  and  specially  among  the  mountains,  the  effect  is  much  subdued,  and 
often  attains  much  wild  beautv  and  softness.  They  are  in  fact  the  onh"  regular 
outdoor  instruments  of  Indian  music,  and  are  emploved  on  all  occasions, 
whether  in  domestic  or  public  religious  ceremonials,  processions,  or  festivals, 
temple  music,  and  the  like  ;  and  the  music  played  upon  them  varies  with  the 
occasion  on  which  they  are  used.  Marches  and  military  music  exceedingly  like 
pibrochs  in  character — pieces  for  marriages,  for  rejoicings,  for  funerals, 
welcomings,  departures — familiar  ballad  airs  and  the  stated  music  of  the 
Nahabet    have    all    separate    modes   and   effects.      In   the   Mahratta  ct)untry,  in 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA.  149 

which  I  know  them  hcst,  the  simple  melodies  of  the  people,  joyous  or  plaintive, 
are  performed  with  a  style  of  execution  often  surprising ;  and  combinations  of 
musical  effect  are  introduced  which  are  equally  curious  and  interesting.""^ 

These  pipes  are  also  known  as  Holar-cha-Surnai  and  Hola-cha-Sur,  or  simply 
Surnai. 

The  flute  to  the  left  of  the  plate  is  the  Pillagovi,  or  Murali,  made  of  bamboo, 
and  traditionally  believed  to  have  been  invented  by  the  god  Krishna,  who  is 
usually  represented  as  holding  it  or  playing  it.  The  name  Bansuli  is  sometimes 
given  to  this  instrument. 

The  Nuv,  o\-  fliite-a-hcc,  resembles  the  pillagovi,  but  has  the  embouchure  at 
the  end,  and  is  bored  cylindrically.  The  tone  is  low  and  sweet,  and  the 
instrument  is  invariably  played  softly ;  indeed,  notes  of  a  piercing  character 
could  not  be  produced  upon  it.  It  is  quite  a  pastoral  instrument,  and  is  much 
used  by  shepherds  and  cowherds.  Many  of  the  simple  melodies  of  the  country 
when  played  upon  this  instrument  have  a  wonderful  charm. 

The  Algoa — shown  on  the  right  of  the  plate — is  a  kind  of  flageolet  of 
bamboo,  with  a  tone  and  compass  like  that  of  the  pillagovi.  Instruments  of 
this  kind  are  found  in  the  Punjab  and  Upper  India,  played  in  pairs  in  a  some- 
what similar  manner  to  the  tibiae  pares  of  the  Romans. 


'  Col.  Meadows  Taylor,  "  Proceedings,  Royal  Irish  Academy."     Vol.  IX.,  Part  i. 


2  P 


PLATE   X\I. 


MOSHUQ.     S'AxXKHU. 

THE  bagpipe  here  drawn  iii  the  Aloshuq,  or,  as  it  is  called  in 
Southern  India,  S'ruti-upanga  or  Bhazana-s'ruti.  It  is  used  merely 
as  a  drone  ;  the  holes  in  the  pipe  are  wholly  or  partialh'  stopped 
with  wax  so  as  to  tune  the  instrument  to  the  pitch  desired.  The  bag 
is  made  of  the  skin  of  a  kid  and  is  inflated  from  the  mouth  bv  means  of 
the  smaller  of  the  two  pipes  shown.  The  drone  is  of  cane,  mounted  in  a 
stock  of  the  same  material,  and  which  contains  the  reed.  An  enlarged 
drawing  of  the  reed  has  been  gi\'en  in  the  plate,  in  order  better  to  show  its 
construction,  and,  as  can  be  seen,  the  vibrations  are  controlled  bv  a  little  piece 
of  wire  or  fine  twine  tied  roughly  round  the  tongue.  The  whole  reed  is  in  one 
piece  and  is  generally  made  of  small  cane  or  of  the  large  marsh  reeds  found 
almost  evervwhere.      Black  wax  is  used  to  make  the  instrument  wind-titrht. 

The  Moshuq  of  Northern  India  does  not  differ  much  in  outward  appearance 
from  this,  but  contains  a  chanter,  with  the  addition  sometimes  of  a  drone. 

The  conch  shell  shown  in  the  lower  part  of  the  plate  is  the  S'ankhu.  It  is  not 
in  secular  use  as  a  musical  instrument,  but  is  found  in  every  temple  and  is  sounded 
during  religious  ceremonials,  in  processions,  and  before  the  shrines  of  Hindu 
deities.  In  Southern  India  the  S'ankhu  is  employed  in  the  ministration  of  a  clas.s 
of  temple  servers  called  Dassari.  No  tune,  so  to  speak,  can  of  course  be  played 
upon  it,  but  still  the  tone  is  capable  of  much  modulation  by  the  lips,  and  its 
clear  mellow  notes  are  not  without  a  certain  charm.  A  rather  striking 
effect  is  produced  when  it  is  used  in  the  temple  ritual  as  a  sort  of  rh\thmical 
accompaniment,  when  it  plavs  the  part  of  Koiinagohi  or  Talaviiiyasa,  described 
elsewhere. 


PLATE   XVII. 

TUTURI.     NAFARI.     S'RINGA.     KURNA. 


THE  curved  brass  horn  in  this  plate  is  the  S'ringa  or  S'ing,  called 
in  Southern  India  Kahalay  or  Kombu.  It  is  frequentl}'  found  with 
a  metal  rod  connecting  both  ends.  This  horn  is  "  used  universally 
through  India  for  signals,  watch  setting  processions,  and  the  like,  both 
by  Mahomedans  and  Hindus,  though  the  performers  for  the  most  part  are 
Hindus  of  low  caste.  In  every  village  of  Central  or  Southern  India  it  is 
the  business  of  one  or  more  of  the  watchmen  to  blow  the  horn  at  sunset, 
and  again  at  certain  hours  of  the  night,  or  when  the  watchmen  go  their 
stated  rounds.  In  large  cities  every  uiahnlla  or  ward  has  a  horn-blower 
attached  to  its  night-watchmen  or  police,  and  there  is  seldom  a  guard  or  detach- 
ment of  native  irregular  troops  without  one.  In  all  processions,  temple  services, 
and  especially  at  marriages  and  other  festive  occasions,  this  horn  is  indispensable, 
and  wailing  blasts  for  the  dead  are  played  upon  it  at  the  funerals  of  Hindus  of 
the  lower  classes  and  castes,  or  equally  so  at  the  cremation  of  Hindu  princes. 

"  No  native  authority  traverses  the  country  without  one,  frequentlv  several,  in 
his  train,  and  as  town  or  village  are  approached  the  great  man's  advent  is 
heralded  by  flourishes  of  the  instrument  blown  by  the  performer  who  struts  at  the 
head  of  the  cavalcade.  These  blasts  are  answered  bv  others  from  the  town  or 
village  gate,  whence  the  local  authorities  come  out  to  meet  the  visitor  and 
present  their  offerings  of  welcome.  On  these  occasions  the  horn-blowers  on 
both  sides  vie  with  each  other  in  producing  their  grandest  efl'ects,  and  the 
discordance  is  generallv  indescribable. 

"  Itinerant  mendicants  of  many  classes  use  this  instrument,  both  Hindu  and 
Mahomedan,  and  by  men  in  charge  of  droves  of  cattle  carrying  grain  or 
merchandise,  such  as  Brinjaris,  Comptis,  and  others,  it   is   sounded  at  intervals 


154  THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTH ERS  IXDIA. 

along  the  road  to  cheer  up  their  bullocks  and  keep  them  from  straggling,  as  well 
as  at  their  departure  from  or  arrival  at  one  of  their  stages. 

"  In  playing  the  high  notes  in  many  of  the  calls,  shrill  wavering  cadences  are 
produced,  which  have  a  startling  and  peculiarly  wild  effect,  as  heard  from  the 
wall  of  some  ancient  fortress,  or  from  village  tower  and  gates  as  night  falls,  and 
more  especially  in  the  otherwise  unbroken  stillness  of  night.'"" 

The  large  trumpet  with  one  turn  is  called  the  Tuturi.  This  name  is  usually 
applied  to  what  might  be  called  the  tenor  trumpet,  as  distinguished  from  the 
Kurna,  the  large  straight  trumpet  drawn  at  the  bottom  of  the  plate.  The  tuturi — 
or  turi — is  made  in  various  sizes  and  is  used  principally  in  religious  ceremonies. 
The  small  straight  trumpet  is  the  Nafari. 

The  Kurna — called  in  Southern  India  Buruga  or  Banku — is  used  onlv  on 
solemn  occasions,  and  possesses  but  a  few  hoarse  sounds.  In  fact,  no  Indian 
trumpets  are  capable  of  producing  many  notes,  they  are  invariably  of  the  most 
primitive  description,  and  no  attempt  is  made  to  play  them  scientifically  :  indeed, 
their  proper  compass  is  not  even  understood.  Colonel  Meadows  Taylor,  speaking 
of  the  Kurna,  remarks  :  "  These  instruments  are  almost  invariably  played  by 
Brahmins  or  priests  attached  to  Hindu  temples,  and  by  persons  attached  to 
the  retinues  of  Gurus,  Swamies  or  spiritual  princes  of  the  country,  who  possess 
large  ecclesiastical  jurisdiction,  and  are  provided  with  them  as  a  mark  of  high 
rank,  which  is  not  allowable  in  others.  Occasionally  also  they  are  met  with  in  the 
nobuts,  or  musical  establishments  attached  by  royal  permission  to  nobles  of 
high  rank,  Mahomedan  as  well  as  Hindu  ;  but  they  do  not  exist  in  all  cases,  for 
there  are  distinctions  in  the  classes  of  instruments  according  to  the  rank  of 
persons  privileged  to  play  the  nobut,  which  involve  the  presence  or  otherwise 
of  the  kurna.  The  kurna,  or  large  trumpet,  is  esteemed  by  all  Brahmins  to  be  the 
most  ancient  instrument  of  music  in  existence."  ^° 

'"  "  Proceedings,  Royal  Irish  Academy."     Vol.  IX.,  Part  i. 
-"  See  preceding  note. 


CHAPTER   VI 1 1. 

Principal  seats  of  music  in  Southern  India — Famous  Indian  musicians  of  the  South — Bibliography 

of  Indian  music — Sanskrit  MSS.  upon  music. 

FROM  early  times  Tanjore  has  been  the  chief  seat  of  music  in  Southern  India 
and  most  of  the  best  known  Karnatik  musicians  have  either  Hved  there 
or  have  received  their  musical  education  from  musicians  of  the  Tanjore 
school.  Little  information  can  be  gathered  as  to  what  extent  the  art  flourished  there 
formerly,  but  it  is  certain  that  several  centuries  ago  a  regular  school  of  music  was 
established  and  patronised  by  the  Maharajahs.  In  the  reigns  of  the  Maharajahs 
Sarabhogi,  Surfogi,  and  Sivaji  music  flourished  greatly,  and  the  musicians 
attached  to  the  palace  received  large  emoluments.  The  native  courts  of 
Travancore  and  Mysore  have  also  patronised  music  to  a  great  extent,  and  it 
is  believed  that  the  art  was  originally  brought  to  them  from  Tanjore.  Some  of 
the  most  celebrated  musicians  of  Southern  India  will  be  found  among  the 
following  : — 

TiAGYA  RAJ.  A  native  of  Trivadi,  in  the  Tanjore  district;  a  pupil  of  a  musician  called  Venkatraman 
Iyer.  He  was  a  great  composer  of  kruthis,  many  of  which  are  exceedingly  popular  all 
through  India.  Tiagya  paid  special  attention  to  the  requirements  of  melod)',  and  his  songs 
are  mostly  free  from  the  monotony  and  intricacies  of  the  ragas  as  practised  by  Hindustani 
musicians.     He  flourished  from  about  1820 — 1840. 

GoviNDASWAMi  Iyer.     A  contemporary  of  the  above. 

SiAMA  s'astri.  a  composer  of  kruthis  and  kirtanas,  about  the  commencement  of  the  present 
century-. 

Sabharayva  s'astri.  a  native  of  Pudukotta,  a  musician  in  the  service  of  the  Maharajah  Sivaji  of 
Tanjore. 

Pertabsingh  of  Tanjore. 

Sivaram  Iyer.     A  composer  of  "  pallevi  "  in  the  service  of  the  Maharajah  Sivaji. 

Sabbha  rao.     Son  of  the  above. 

Diksitalu  of  Trivalur,  in  the  Tanjore  district.     Many  of  his  compositions  are  still  popular. 


156  THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTIIERX  IXDIA. 

KsHETRYA.  A  poet  as  well  as  a  musician.  He  was  the  composer  of  innumerable  love  songs 
called  Pathams,  which  are  widely  popular.  The  words  of  these  pathams  are  olten  ver\- 
beautiful,  and  are  full  of  imagery  most  poetical,  set  to  music  equally  as  plaintive  and 
appealing  to  the  senses.  An  example  of  one  of  these  pathams  will  be  found  in  the  song 
"  Yalla  tella  vara,''  upon  page  81. 

Paidala  guru  mukti  s'astri.  a  celebrated  composer  of  "  Ganaraga-gitas."  Many  of  his  compo- 
sitions are  popular  at  the  present  da}'. 

Nathiva  Vadivelu.  a  singer  of  repute  and  composer  of  many  Vernams,  Svarajotas.  He  is 
believed  to  have  introduced  the  use  of  the  European  violin'  into  Southern  India. 

BiKSHANDAR  KoiL  SuBBAYAR.     A  pupil  of  Sabharayya  of  Andalur.     A  singer  of  repute. 

Varpaya.     A  vina  player  in  the  service  of  the  Maharajah  Sivaji  of  Tanjore. 

Madheo  RAO.     A  contemporary  of  the  above. 

Pariya  Vaiti.     a  Malayalam  musician  of  repute. 

CiiAL  Balkrishnayya.     a  musician  of  Tanjore. 

Kalastri  Iyer  of  Tanjore. 

NiLKANT  Iyer  of  Chingleput. 

Sabbha  Kattayya  of  Pudukota. 

Savyasachi  of  Mysore. 

Seshana  of  Mysore.     One  of  the  best  living  performers  on  the  vina. 

Shamana  of  Mysore. 

The  late  Maharajah  Kolashekara  of  Travancore. 

Ragavayya  of  Coimbatore. 

Sabbhayya  of  Andalur. 

Narasayya  of  Salem. 

Kalyana  Krishna  Iyer  of  Palghat.  Now  in  the  service  of  the  Maharajah  of  Travancore  ;  a 
good  vina  player. 

SuRYANARAYAN  Rao  Pantulu  of  Sitapur.  A  vina  player,  now  "  Asthana  Pandita  "  in  the 
service  of  the  Maharajah  of  Vizianagram. 

Venkaya  of  Vizigapatam.     A  vina  player. 

Tiruvanakodik.\val  Krishnan.     a  violin  player. 

Mahadeva  Iyer.  Son  of  Parmisvara  Bhagavata.  A  violin  player  in  the  service  of  the  Maharajah  of 
Travancore. 

Parmisvara  Bhagavata.     A  singer  in  the  service  of  the  Maharajah  of  Travancore. 

Mahavaiddi.     a  singer. 


Besides  these  there  are  numerous  Hindustani  musicians  in  Southern  India, 
Maharashtra,  and  the  North,  such  as  Maula  Bux  of  Baroda,  Bhande  AH  of  Indore, 
Anna  Gharpure  of  Poena,  Balkoba  Nataka  Sahib  of  Bombay.  But  to  t^ive 
a  complete  list  of  them  would  fill  a  volume.  A  detailed  notice  of  many  has  been 
given  in  Panchari  Banerjea's  History  of  Hindu  music,  noticed  brieflv  here- 
after. 

'  Timed  and  held  in  tlie  native  fashion,  like  a  saranj;!. 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA.  157 

The  following  catalogue  of  works  relating  to  Indian  music  has  no  pretence  to 
completeness  ;  it  is  merely  a  list  of  the  names  of  works  and  passages  written 
upon  the  subject.  The  names  of  some  which  contain  only  allusions  that  would 
be  of  no  practical  use  to  the  reader  have  been  omitted  altogether.  Some  of  the 
books  in  the  list  contain  no  musical  notation,  but  are  nevertheless  of  great 
interest  to  the  musical  enquirer.  An  endeavour  to  notice  some  of  the  various 
Sanskrit  works  upon  music,  and  in  some  cases  tables  of  their  contents,  has 
been  made.  It  has  not  been  thought  necessary  to  notice  each  in  detail,  as 
for  the  most  part  thev  are  written  upon  a  very  similar  plan,  and,  as  far  as 
arransrement  of  contents,  differ  little  from  each  other.  These  Sanskrit  works  exist 
chiefly  in  manuscript,  and  are  to  be  found  in  almost  all  the  libraries — such 
as  those  of  Tanjore  and  the  Sarasvati  Bhandaram  of  Mysore — attached  to  the 
palaces  of  native  princes.  Many  copies  are  also  to  be  found  in  the  hands  of 
Pandits  and  Sanskrit  scholars  attached  to  the  temples  and  religious  houses 
throughout  India.  There  are  a  number  of  valuable  MSS.  in  the  collection  of 
H.H.  the  Alaharajah  of  Bikanir.  Many  too  can  be  found  in  the  Bodleian,  the 
librarv  of  the  India  office,  and  also  in  the  Universitv  librarv  at  Cambridge. 

Banerjea,  Panchari.     "  History  of  Hindu  Music."     A  lecture  delivered  at  the  Hooghl)-  Institute, 

Bhowanipore,  1880.      Contains  a  good  deal  of  interesting  information,   also  an  elaborate 

table  of  ragas  and  raginis,  with  the  essential  notes  entering  into  their  composition. 
Broughton,  Th.  D.     "  Selections  from  the  Popular  Poetry  of  the  Hindus."     London,  1814.     Svo. 
BoSANQUET,  R.  H.  M.     "On  the  Hindu  Division  of  the  Octave."     "  Proceedings,  Royal  Society, 

March,  1877,  to  December  20,  1S77."     London. 
Brown,  M.  E.  &  W.  A.     "  Musical  Instruments  and  their  Homes.''     New  York,  1888. 
BuRNELL,  A.  C,  Ph.D.     "The  Saman  Chants  from  Arsheya  Brlihmana.''     Contains  descriptions 

of  the  Sama  Vedic  chants  and  examples  of  their  notation  in  plain  chant.     Mangalore,  1S76. 
Bird,  William  Hamilton.      The  Oriental  Miscellanj,  Calcuna.     Printed  by  Joseph  Cooper,  1789. 
Biggs.     "  Twelve  Hindu  Airs,  with  English  words  adapted  to  them  by  Mr.  Opie,  and  harmonised 

for  one,  two,  or  three  voices,  with  an  accompaniment  for  the  pianoforte  or  harp,  b}-  Mr. 

Biggs."     London,  printed  by  Rt.  Birchall.     N.D. 
Biggs.     "  A  Second  Set  of  Hindu  Airs,  with  English  words  adapted  to  them  by  Mr.  Opie,  and 

harmonised    for  one,  two,  or  three  voices,  with  an  accompaniment  for  the   pianoforte   or 

harp,  by  Mr.  Biggs."     London,  printed  by  Rt.  Birchall.     N.D. 
Blochmann,  H.     "  The   Naqquerakhaneh   and  the    Imperial   Musicians,  from   the  Ain-i-Akbari." 

Translated  from  the  original  Persian. 
Campbell,  A.     "  Notes  on  the   Musical   Instruments  of  the    Nepalese."  Journal   of  the  Asiatic 

Society  of  Bengal.     Vol.  VI.,  p.  953.     Calcutta,  1837. 
Von  Dalberg,  F.H.     "  Ueber  die  Musik  der  Indier.     Eine  Abhandlung  des  SirW.  Jones,  aus  dem 

Englischen    tibersetzt    und   mit   erlauternden    Anmerkungen    und    Zusatzen    begleitet   von 

F.   H.   von    Dalberg.       Nebst   einer    Sammlung  indischer  und   anderer  Volksgesange  und 

30  Kupfern."     Erfurt,  1802.     4to. 

2  R 


158  THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA. 

"  Dramatic  Amusements  of  Natives  of  India."    Asiatic  yotirnal,  New  Series.     Vol.  X.XIL,  p.  27. 

London, 1837. 
DuTT,  Toru.     "  Ancient  Ballads  and  Legends  of  Hindustan."    London,  1882.    Contains  no  music, 

but  some  songs  which  for  imagery  and  Oriental  colouring  are  delightful. 
Engel,  Carl.     "  An  Introduction  to  the  Study  of  National  Music."     London,  1866. 
Ellis,  Alexander  J.,  F.R.S.,  F.S.A.     "  On  the  Musical  Scales  of  Various  Nations."     Paper  read 

before  the   Society  of  Arts,  March  25,   1885.     See  younial  of  Society  of  Arts,  No.   1,688. 

Vol.    XXXIII. ;    also  reprinted    for  private   circulation  by  the  author,  with  additions  and 

corrections.     April,  1885. 
FowKE,  Francis.     "On   the  Vina  of  the   Hindus."     "Asiatic  Researches."     Vol.  I.,   page  295, 

Calcutta,  17S8. 
Gladwin,  Francis.     "  Ayeen  Akbery."     See  Vol.  III.,  "  Sungeet."     Calcutta,  1783. 
Grosset,  J.     "Contribution   a  I'litude  de  la  Musique  Hindoue."     Paris,   published   by  Leroux. 

(Extrait  de  tome  VI.,  de  la  Bibliotheque  de  la  Faculte  des  Lettres  de  Lyons.)      1888. 
Hendlev,  T.  B.      "  Memorials  of  the  Jeypur   E.xhibition,"    1883.     Peckham,  W.  Griggs.     See 

Vol.  III.,  plates  clxxv.,  clxxix. 
Hevmann,  W.    "  Ueber  Bharata's  Natyasastram."     See   Nachrichten  von   der   Kcenigl.     Gesell- 

shaft  der  Wissenschaften  und  der  G.  A.   Universitaet  zu  Goettingen,   February  25,   1S84, 

pages  86 — 107. 
Hipkins,  a.  J.,  F.S.A.,  and  Gibb,  W.     "  Musical  Instruments.     Historic,  Rare,  and   Unique." 

Edinburgh,  1887.     Contains  descriptions  and  very  beautiful  illustrations  of  several  Indian 

instruments. 
Jones,  Sir  William.    "  On  the  Musical  Modes  of  the  Hindus."    See  "Asiatic  Researches."    Vol.  III., 

page  55.     Calcutta,  1792.     Also  republished  in  "Works  of  Sir  W.  Jones."     6  vols.,   and 

Supplement,  2  vols.     London,  1799  and  1801  ;  together,  8  vols.,  410.    See  Vol.  I.,  page  413. 
Mateer,  Rev.  L.     "  Native  Life  in  Travancore."     London. 
Mahillon,  V.  C.     "  Catalogue  Descriptif  et  Analyti(iue  du  Musee  Instrumental  du  Conservatoire 

Royal  de  Bruxelles."     Gand.  x88o. 
Naumann,  Emil.     "  The  History  of  Music."     Translated  by  F.  Praeger,  and  edited  by  Sir  V.  \. 

Gore  Ouseley.     London,  1888. 
OusELEY,  Sir  W.     "An  Essay  on  the  Music  of  Hindustan."     Contained  in  "  Oriental  Collections 

illustrating  the  History,  Antiquities,  Literature,  &c.,  of  Asia."       London,  1797-1800.      410, 

3  vols.     See  Vol.  I.,  p.  70. 
PoRTMAN,  M.  v.,  Mus.  Doc.     "  Andamanese  Music,  with   Notes  on  Oriental   Music  and   Musical 

Instruments."     See  younial  of  Royal  Asiatic   Society,   New  series.      Vol.  XX.,    Part   ii. 

London,  April,  1888. 
RowBOTHAM,  J.  H.     "  The  History  of  Music."     London,  1885. 
Sahasrabadue,  B.  T.     "  Hindu  Music  and  the  Gayan  Samaj."     Published  by  the  Gayana  Samaj, 

Poona  and  Madras.     Contains  information  respecting  the  recent  revival  of  Indian  music. 

Poona,  1888. 
ScHROEDER,  L.  von.     "  ludicns  Literatur  und  Cultur."     Leipzig,  1887. 
SoLVYNS    (Bait    of  Calcutta).      "  The   Costume  of  Hindustan    elucidated   by   sixty  engravings." 

London,  1804.     I-'olio.     Contains  drawings  of  a   number  of  musical    instruments,   chiefly 

those  of  Northern  India  and  Bcnjral. 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA.  159 

Stack,  G.  A.     "The  Songs  of  Ind."     Calcutta,  1S72.     Contains  a  number  of  verses  of  more  or 
less  interest. 

Tagore,  Rajah  Sir  S.  M.     "  The  Six  Original  Ragas." 

"The  Musical  Scales  of  the  Hindus." 

"  Some  specimens  of  Indian  Songs." 

■  "  Short  Notices  of  Indian  Musical  Instruments." 

The  above  four  all  printed  by  I.  C.  Bose  &  Co.,  Calcutta,  for  private  circulation. 

"The  Eight  Principal  Rasas  of  the  Hindus."     Calcutta,  1879. 

"The  Dramatic  Sentiments  of  the  Aryas."     Calcutta;  1881. 

These  two  works  contain  much  valuable  information  as  to  the  sentiments  conveyed  by 
the  various  gestures  (rasas,  bhavas)  made  either  upon  the  stage  or  by  dancers. 

"  Hindu  Music  from  Various  Sources."     Calcutta.     A  reprint  of  different  writings  upon 

Hindu  Music.     A  most  useful  collection.     Contains  a  reprint  of  Sir  W.  Jones'  essay  and 
Willard's  treatise.     But  there  are  some  misprints  that  are  liable  to  mislead. 

"The  Twenty-two  Musical  S'rutis  of  the  Hindus."     Calcutta,  1S86. 

" /Ekatana,  or  the  Indian  Concert."     Calcutta.     N.D. 


Tod,  Lieut. -Col.     "  Annals  and  Antiquities  of  Rajasthan."     Vol.  I.,  p.  53S.     London,  1829. 
Twelve   Hindu    Airs,    with    English  words  adapted    to   them,  with   an  accompaniment  for   the 

pianoforte  or  harp.     Printed  by  R.  Birchall,  133,  New  Bond  Street.     These  airs  appear  to  be 

chiefly  from  The  Oriental  Miscellany. 
Trinks.     "  A  Collection  of  Hindoostanee  Songs."    Dedicated  to  Mr.  Bristow,  by  C .  Trinks,  organist 

of  St.  John's  Church,  Calcutta.     Folio. 
Williamson.  "  TwelveOriginal  Hindoostanee  Airs."  Compiled  and  harmonized  by  T.  G.Williamson. 

London,  1797.     Folio. 
Second  collection  of  "  Twelve  Original  Hindoostanee  Airs."       Compiled  and  harmoni;^ed 

by  T.  G.  Williamson.     London,  179S.     Folio. 
Weber.    "  Ueber  die  Metrik  der  Inder."    See  "  Beitrage  fur  die  Kunde  des  Indischen  Alterthums." 

Band  VIII.     Berlin,  1863.     8vo. 
Wilson,  H.  H.     "  Select  Specimens  from  the  Theatre  of  the  Hindus."    Translated  from  the  original 

Sanskrit.     London,  1838.     8vo,  2  vols. 
Walckiers.     "  A  Collection  of  Twent3'-four  Hindoostanee  and  otlier  Airs."   Arranged  for  the  piano- 
forte by  L.  Walckiers.     London,  Clementi. 
Waterfield,  W.     "  Indian  Ballads  and  other  Poems."     London,  1868. 
WiLi.ARD,  Captain  N.  Augustus.     "A  Treatise  upon  the  Music  of  Hindustan,  comprising  a  detail 

of  the  Ancient  Theory  and  Modern  Practice."     Calcutta,   1834.     8vo.     The  following  is  the 

table  of  contents — 
Preface. — .\  general  view  of  the  plan  and  contents  of  the  work.  Introduciion. — Music;,  its  power  on  the 
human  mind.  That  of  Hindustan.  The  opinion  of  the  natives  with  respect  to  their  ancient  musicians.  How 
a  knowledge  of  it  may  be  acquired.  Not  generally  liked  by  Europeans.  Reasons  assigned  for  this. 
Native  opinion  with  regard  to  its  lawfulness.  Musical  instruments.  Relation  of  music  to  poetry 
considered.  Progress  of  music  in  Hindustan.  The  manner  of  life  which  should  be  led  to  ensure  eminence 
in  this  science.  Causes  of  its  depravity.  Date  of  its  decline.  The  similarity  which  the  music  of  this 
country  seems  to  bear  to  that  of  Egypt  and  Greece.  How  a  knowledge  of  the  music  of  Hindustan  might 
conduce  to  a  revival  of  that  of  those  countries.  Comparisons  offered.  Whether  the  natives  of  Greece  or 
Hindustan  had  made  greater  progress  in  music.  Comparisons  decide  in  favour  of  the  latter.  Hindostanee 
Music. — What  it  is  termed  in  the  original.  The  treatises  held  in  the  greatest  estimation.  Native  divisions. 
What,  and  how  many.     The  arrangement  adopted  in  this  work.     0/  the  Gamut. — What  it  is  called  :    the 


i6o  TIIK  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA. 

derivation  of  the  word.  The  sub-divisions  of  tones.  Resenihlancc  of  these  to  theGreel<  diesis.  Opinions  of 
Dr.  Burneyand  Mr.  Moore  on  the  enharmonic  f;enns.  Names  of  the  seven  notes.  Origin  of  these.  The 
Gamut  invented  by  Guido  and  Lemaire.  Dr.  Pepusch.  S'ruti.  Of  Time. — The  various  measures  used  in 
Europe.  Difference  between  them  and  tliose  of  Hindustan.  Tlieir  resemblance  to  the  rhythm  of  the  Greeks. 
Similarity  between  the  Greek  and  Sanskrit  languages.  The  Hebrew  unmusical,  likewise  the  Arabic. 
Melody  and  metre  considered.  Tartini's  objections  against  metre  endeavoured  to  be  controverted.  The 
dignified  prose  in  Sanskrit  and  tongues  derived  from  it.  Its  superiority  to  the  Oordoo.  Probable  origin 
of  the  modern  musical  measure.  Tartini's  deductions  of  measure  from  the  proportions  of  the  octave  and 
its  fifth  opposed  to  the  practice  of  Hindustan.  Whether  the  rliythmical  or  the  musical  measure  possesses 
greater  advantages.  Opinion  hazarded  thereon.  Time  table.  Characters  for  expressing  time.  Their 
varieties.  Of  Harmony  and  Melody. — The  origin  of  harmony  in  Europe.  Opinions  of  several  learned  men  on 
the  subject  of  harmony  with  that  of  the  author.  Claims  of  melody.  Of  Oriental  Melody. — Not  generally 
susceptible  of  harmony.  Limited  to  a  certain  number.  Its  character.  Of  Ruf^s  and  Rdginis. — The  general 
acceptation  of  the  terms  supposed  to  be  incorrect.  Reasons  offered  why  they  are  limited  to  season  and  time. 
Of  the  Ragniala.  Absurdity  of  limiting  tunes  to  seasons.  Division  of  the  Rags  and  Raginis  into  classes. 
Rules  for  determining  the  names  of  the  mixed  Raginis.  Table  of  conipo\inded  Rags.  The  Ragmala  copiously 
described.  Of  Musical  Instruments. — Their  present  state  susceptible  of  much  improvement.  Their 
classification.  Detailed  description  of  the  several  instruments  now  in  use.  Of  the  various  species  of  Vocal 
Compositions  of  Hindustan. — Twenty  different  species  described.  Of  the  peculiarity  of  Manners  and  Customs  in 
Hindustan  to  K'hich  allusions  are  made  in  their  song. — Its  characteristic  nature.  Reasons  assigned  for  several 
of  them  which  now  no  longer  exist,  and  examples  produced.  Brief  accoimt  of  the  most  celebrated  musicians 
of  Hindustan.     Glossary  of  the  most  useful  musical  terms. 

The  actual  size  of  the  work,  notwithstanding  this  lengthv  tahle  of  contents, 
is  but  small.  The  book  is  very  interestintr,  and  affords  much  valuable  information 
upon  Northern  Indian  music.  The  descriptions  are,  however,  incomplete  in  many 
cases,  and  the  author's  meaning  is  in  places  rather  vague,  and  apt  to  be  misleading 
to  those  who  have  not  studied  the  subject. 

There  are  not  a  very  large  number  of  works  relating  to  music  in  the 
vernaculars — some  few  are  excellent,  but  the  majority  of  them  contain  a  very 
large  amount  of  irrele\'ant  matter,  and  are  so  full  of  inaccuracies  that  too  great  a 
reliance  should  not  be  placed  upon  them.  Some  of  the  most  important  of  these 
works  may  be  found  amon</st  the  following  : — 

'•  SvAKASASTRA."  An  cssav  or  tutor  for  the  Sitar.  A.  Gharpure.  Poona,  i8So,  in  Marathi. 
Contains  descriptions  of  the  various  kinds  of  Sitars.  together  with  instructions  for  making, 
tuning,  and  keeping  tlieni  in  order.  Contains  also  an  elaborate  system  of  notation  invented 
by  the  author. 

There  are  also  works  in  Marathi  upon  the  sitar  by  Viswanath  Kamachundra 
Kale  ;   and  by  Vastad  Murabar  Gonvekar. 

In  Bengali  the  chief  works  are: — 

"  AsuRjANiTATWAR  "  Oil  tile  Ksrar.     By  Kshetra  Mohun  Gosvami. 

••  Sangit  Siksha."     By  Sita  Nath  Boshak. 

"  Sangit  Sara."  By  Kshetra  Mohun  Gosvami.  This  work  contains  a  good  deal  that  is  most 
interesting. 

■'  Katakaumodi."     By  Kshetra  Mohun  Gosvami. 

"  A  Treatise  on  the  Mridanga."    By  S.  M.  Tagore.     On  drum  playing,  rhythm,  ice. 

•'  A  Comprehensive  Self-Instructor  for  the  Setar,  Esrar,  violin,  tlute,  and  harmonium."     Calcutta, 

i858.     An  attempt  to  adapt  Indian  music  to  European  notation.    By  H.  D.  Bancrjea. 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA.  i6i 

There  are  several  Telei^u  and  Tamil  works  of  less  interest.  The  only 
Telegu  work  that  I  have  seen  which  is  of  any  interest  is  a  tract  called  "  Sangita 
Kalianidhi,"  on  the  vina,  with  diagrams  of  the  fingerboard.  There  is  a  Guzerathi 
work  entitled  "  The  Musical  Instructor,"  by  N.  D.  Apj-akhtiar,  Bombay,  1870. 
This  work  contains  a  certain  amount  of  theory  apparently  extracted  from  the 
Sangita  Ratnakera,  and  a  number  of  coloured  illustrations  which,  though  poor, 
are  not  without  interest.  It  contains  also  a  large  number  of  Guzerathi 
songs. 

Of  the  more  important  of  the  Sanskrit  treatises  that  are  at  present  known  to 
e.xist,  some  slight  notice  may  be  useful.  The  oldest  of  any  is  the  Bharata  Natya 
S'astra  bv  Bharata  Muni.  This  work  is  being  translated  by  M.  Grosset,  of 
Lvons,  who  has  procured  and  carefully  compared  several  copies  of  the  MSS., 
one  of  which  is  the  propertv  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society  of  London.  The 
whole  work  is  large,  and  consists  of  a  great  number  of  lidhyayas.  The  theory 
of  music,  of  dancing,  of  the  connection  between  music  and  the  drama  are  treated 
of  fully,  as  are  also  the  various  kinds  of  instruments.  The  antiquity  of  the  Ivric 
drama  in  India  is  most  interesting.  M.  Grosset  has  published  already  the 
twentv-eighth  adhyaya  of  this  work,  containing  the  part  relating  to  the  theory 
of  music,  with  a  prefatory  essay  and  copious  explanations  and  notes,  the  results 
of  his  researches — a  most  valuable  contribution  to  the  study  of  ancient  Eastern 
musical  literature.  The  date  of  the  Bharata  Natya  S'astra  is  placed  at  some 
intermediate  period  from  B.C.  200  to  a.d.  100.  An  edition  of  this  work  has  been 
printed,  or  partially  so,  at  Poona  recently.  There  is  also  a  copy  of  the  MSS.  in 
the  library  of  H.H.  the  Maharajah  of  Bikanir. 

Of  the  remaining  Sanskrit  treatises  (excepting  the  work  just  men- 
tioned) the  Sangita  Ratnakera  is  probably  the  oldest  and  the  most 
valuable. 

The  work  consists  of  seven  adhyayas,  according  to  Dr.  A.  C.  Burnell.'- 

I. — Sv.\RAGATADHYAVA — treats  of  Hotcs,  scalcs,  &c. 
II. — Ragavivekadhyaya — of  Raga. 

III. — Prakirnakadhyaya — of  music  in  connection  with  the  human  voice. 
IV. — Prabandhadhyaya — of  musical  composition. 
V. — Taladhyaya — of  times,  pauses,  measures,  &c. 
VI. — Vadyadhyaya — of  musical  instruments. 
VII. — Nrityadhyaya — of  dancing. 


-  ••  Classified  Index  to  the  Sanskrit  MSS.  in  the  Palace  at  Tanjore."     Dr.  A.  C.  Burnell.     London,  1880. 

2  S 


i62  THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  IS  1)1  A. 

An  edition  of  the  first  iidhyaya,  with  a  Commentary,  was  pubHshed  at 
Calcutta  in  1S79.     Its  contents  are  as  follows  : — • 

Chap.  I. — Benediction  upon  music. 

II. — Of  sounds,  notes,  concordant  and  discordant  relations. 
III. — Of  gramas,  murchanas,  talas. 

IV.  —  Of  vernams  (ascending  and  descending  successions  of  notes),  alankaras  or  melodious 
successions  of  notes  intended   to  impress  upon  beginners  the  idea  of  different 
pitches,  and  to  cultivate  a  taste  for  pleasing  combinations. 
V. — Of  certain  subsidiar}'  scales. 
VI. — Materials  and  constitution  of  raga. 
VII. — Describes  certain  ancient  species  of  song  called  Kapala  and   Kambala,  and  defines 
various  styles  of  singing. 

It  appears  quite  impossible  to  assign  an}-  reliable  date  to  this  work.  The 
author  of  it  was  Sarnga  Deva,  son  of  Sotala  Deva,  King  of  Karnata,  and  grandson 
of  Bhaskara  a  Kashmirian.'  Possiblv,  from  this  information,  the  date  mav  be 
discovered  at  some  future  time. 

In  the  Preface  to  the  Calcutta  edition  of  this  work  mention  is  made  of  only 
five  adhyayas,  the  other  two  [i.e.,  the  fourth  and  fifth)  have  apparently  been 
discovered  by  Dr.  Burnell. 

The  following  authors  or  works  are  cited  by  Sarnga  Deva  in  this  work : — 
Anginavva,  Kalinatha,  Chudamanni,  Pratibhavilasa,  Manidurpana,  Raganava, 
Vinoda,  Sivakinkara,  Sangitanava,  Sarodhara,  Haribhatta. 

Perhaps  next  in  importance  to  the  Ratnakera  is  the  Sangita  Darpana,  by 
Damodara  Misra.  This  work,  according  to  Aufrecht,  consists  of  seven 
adhyayas — 

I. —  SVARAGATADHYAYA. 

II. — Ragadhvava. 
III.-  Prakirnakadhvaya. 
IV. — Prabandhadhyaya. 

V. — Padyadhyaya. 
VI. — Taladhyaya. 
VII. — Nrity.\dhyava. 

Damodara  took  the  greater  part  of  his  work  from  the  Sangita  Ratnakera  and 
added  a  little  from  other  authors  and  works.  Sir  William  Jones  tells  us  that  the 
Pandits  of  Bengal  preferred  the  Damodara  in  his  time  to  any  of  the  other 
Sangitas,  but  that  he  himself  had  never  been  able  to  procure  a  good  copy  of  it. 

''  See  .Aufreclit's  "  Catalogus  codiconim  Manuscriptoruni  Ribliotheca;  Bodleiana;  "  (Oxford,  1864),  and 
Rajendralala  Mitra's  Catalogue  of  the  Sanskrit  MSS.  in  the  library  of  H.H.  the  Maharajah  of  Bikanir. 
Calcutta,  1880. 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERX  INDIA.  163 

Here  again  the  question  of  date  must  remain  doubtful.  Tlie  onlv  information  as 
to  tlie  author  appears  to  be  that  he  was  the  son  of  Lakshmidara.  Damodara 
mentions  thefolhnvint^  authors  and  works  in  addition  to  the  Ratnakera — Anginavva, 
Kahnatha,  Chudamanni,  Pratibhavihisa,  Manidurpana,  Riiganava,  Vinoda, 
Sivakinkara,  Sangitanava,  Sarodhara,  Haribhatta. 

Later  than  this  work  is  the  Sangita  Narayana  by  Xarayana  Deva. 

This  work  eonsists  of  four  parts  : — • 

I. —  Sangitanirnava. 
II.—  Vadyanirnaya. 
III. — Nrityanirnaya. 

IV.  — SUDDHAPRABANDHODARANAM. 

The  author  of  this  work  was  the  son  of  Padmanabhai,  and  a  pupil  of 
Kaviratna  Purushottama-misra.  In  this  work  Damodara  is  frequently  quoted, 
Naravana  Deva  also  quotes  his  master's  work  "  Ramachandrodaya,"  as  well 
as  the  following  authors  and  works: — Krishnadatta,  Kohala,  Gitaprakasa, 
Chhandoratnakera,  Narada-Sanhita  or  Sanhita,  Panchamasarasanhita,  Alam- 
mata  author  of  "  Sangitaratnamala,"  Laksmanabhatta  Gitagovindatikavam^ 
S'riromani,  Saivasavaswa,  Sangitakaumodi  or  Kaumodi,  Sangita  Sara, 
Harinayatta. 

Sir  William  Jones,  in  his  essay  on  the  Musical  Modes  of  the  Hindus, 
inclines  to  the  belief  that  the  most  \-aluable  work  that  he  had  seen  is  the 
Ragavivodha,  by  Soma  Raj.  This  is  a  later  work  than  the  Ratnakera,  which 
is  mentioned  in  it  frequently.      It  consists  of  five  chapters. 

I. — Of   S'rutis,  their   divisions    into  svaras  or  notes— of  suddha  and    vikrita    notes— of 

octaves,  definitions  of  notes  essential  to  raga  [i.e.,  vadi,  samv;idi,  &c.) — of  gramas — 

of  murchanas — how  ragas  constituted  of  five,  six,  or  seven  notes. 

II.  —  Of  the  Vina,  and  different  kinds  of  vinas,  measurement,  and  general  directions  for 
making. 

III. — Classification  of  ragas. 

IV. — The  Ragmala  or  Hst  of  ragas,  with  descriptions  of  each  raga  personified — hours  of  day 

appointed  for  performance  of  each  raga. 

V. — Ragas  written  in  notation,  with  directions  for  the  performance  of  each. 

The  Sangita  Parijata  appears  to  be  a  very  much  later  work  than  any 
previously  described.  The  author  of  this  work  was  Ahobala  Pandit,  and  he 
seems  to  have  been  a  native  of  Central  India.  The  belief  among  pandits  in 
India  at  the  present  day  is  that  he  lived  not  more  than  250  years  ago.     The 

'••  On  the  Musical  Modes  of  the  Hindus."    Sir  W.  Jones.    "Asiatic  Researches."    Vol.  III.    Calcutta.  1792. 


i64  THE  Mr  SIC  OF  SOrTHKRX  IXDIA. 

system  described  in  the  Parijata  is  a  description  of  that  practised  at  the  period. 

The  contents  are  as  follows — 

I.  Benediction  upon  music  in  general. 

II.  Of  svaras  or  notes. 

III.  Of  gramas  or  scales. 

IV. 

'lOf  murchanas  or  permutations  of  notes,  with  examples. 

VI.  Of  methods  of  tuning. 

VII.  Of  gamakas,  with  a  minute  explanation  of  about  sixty. 

VIII.  Of  Suddhasvaras  (or  notes  comprising  their  full  complement  of  s'rutisj  and  directions  for 
tuning  the  vina. 

IX.  Of  gita  or  melody. 

X.  Of  raga  and  text  of  about  122  ragas,  with  directions  for  performance. 

An  edition  of  this  work  was  printed  at  Calcutta  in  1879. 

There  is  a  Persian  work  entitled  Tohfuht-ul-Hind,  by  Mirza  Khan.  This 
work  contains  information  extracted  from  the  Sanskrit  works  Raganava, 
Ragadarpana,  and  Subhavinodha.  Of  the  present  existence  of  these  three 
works  I  have  never  been  able  to  discover  traces  ;  still,  it  is  to  be  hoped  that 
they  may  eventually  be  brought  to  light.  A  copy  of  the  Ragadarpana,  with 
two  works  entitled  Shams-ul-aswat  and  Hazar  Dhrupad,  was  brought  bv 
Sir  W.  Jones  to  England  ;  but  these,  with  other  MSS.  that  he  is  said  to  have 
deposited  in  the  library  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  cannot  be  traced. 

The  following  list  of  Sanskrit  treatises  upon  music  has  been  carefully 
compiled  from  catalogues  of  various  Sanskrit  MSS.,  and  from  information 
supplied  by  Pandits  in  different  parts  of  India.  Where  no  reference  is  made 
under  the  column  of  authorities,  the  information  has  been  obtained  from  Pandits 
in  India  and  is,  perhaps,  not  always  so  reliable  as  the  other  authorities.  When 
copies  of  any  of  the  MSS.  have  been  printed,  the  places  and  approximate  dates  of 
publication  have  been  given. 

The  following  abbreviations  have  been  used  in  the  column  of  authorities. 

BiK  =  Catalogue    of  the    Sanskrit    MSS.    in    the   library    of    H.H.    the    Maharajah    of    Bikanir. 
Rajendralala  Mitra.      Calcutta,  1880. 

AuF  =  Catalogus      Codicorum      Manuscriptorum      Bibliothec;e       Bodleiana.  Th.     Aufrecht. 

Oxford,  1864. 

Tan  =  Classified  Index  to  the  Sanskrit  MSS.  in  the  Palace  at  Tanjore.  A.  C.  Burnell.  London,  1880. 

Ind=  Catalogue   of  the  Sanskrit   MSS.  in  the  library  at  the  India  Office.      Part  II.      J.  Eggeling. 
London, i88g. 

OFP  =  List  of  Sanskrit  MSS.  in  Southern  India.     Dr.  Oppert.     Madras,  1885. 
Kiel  =  Catalogue  of  Sanskrit  MSS.  in  the  Central  Provinces.     L.  Kielhorn.    Nagpur,  1874. 
Rice  =  Catalogue  of  MSS.  in  Mysore.     L.  Rice. 

Ben  =  Catalogue  of  Buddhist   Sanskrit   MSS.  in   the    University   Library  at   Cambridge.      Cecil 
Bendall.     Cambridge,  1883. 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  IX DLL 

SANSKRIT  TREATISES  UPON  MUSIC. 


165 


Name  of  the  Work. 

Author. 

Name  of  the  Work. 

Autlior, 

Authority. 

Anandajivana     . 

Anupa    Sangita  Yi- 
lasa  with  tika 

Eaja    Mandana- 
[pala. 

Bhavabhatta 

wfViT  .... 

Bik,  1090. 
Bik,  1091. 

\3 

'Sjf  71  .... 

Arj  unabharatam 

Arjuna. 

^ptsi.stiniiciciKjiif     . 

Ashtottarasata-tala- 
lakslianara 

Tan,  p.  GO,  12. 

^TTHHT^  .... 

WT^!T^              •       • 

Bliaratabhasliyam    . 

Nyayadeva. 

«t^gf?r     . 

Bharatanatya-sas- 
tram    .... 

Bharatalakshanam   . 

Bharatamuni. 

Bik,  10'J2. 
Poena,  circa 
18S8. 

>TT?r3TT?^  'RTl'^tf 

Bharatasastra    Saii- 
gitam. 

HTTHJITI^ 

T^T^       .      . 

Bliaratasastram . 

Raghunatha. 

Tan,  p.  60,  '.>. 

HTq^z'NrT 

»T^^       ■      ■      . 

Dliraupaclatika  . 

Bhavabhatta. 

ntiTT^oFTT:      . 

^^H^tT'mrr 

Gitalankara 

Anantanarayana. 

?r?fTT1^?c5^    . 

?T^g  .... 

Hastaratnavali  . 

Raghava. 

Auf.  483. 

^TTOcirm           .      . 

^TRTTTTO^^ .        . 

Hridayaprakasa 

Hridayanaraya- 
nadeva. 

Bik,  1093. 

cTSqiT^  z\^}  ^¥11^ 

'WliJI'^^ 

Kalpataru  with  tika 
Subodhini 

Ganesadeva. 

Bik,  1094. 

HWHHTff   .... 

^r^^rr  ht^t  . 

Matangabharatam    . 

Lakshmanabhas- 

ifcSTftioinT^ajur    ■      . 

Meladhikaralaksha- 
nam     .... 

[kara. 

H^T^%TmTr3rci;T  .     . 

Muktavaliprakasika 

^Tc4lH<*l3i:     . 

»TT^»T5       .       . 

MuralTprakasa    . 
Nadadipika . 

Bhavabhatta. 
Bhattacharya. 

Bik,  109.5. 

^e-T^fqciiT 

WgMl5 

^^>TTW 

^f^  .     . 

Nandibharata    . 

Nandi. 

L.  Rice. 

■^TTTr'^fjiHj 

TITT!?    .       . 

Xaradlsiksha 

Xarada. 

Poena,  circa 
1887. 

^t?lfq§^ 

^iO^  T^^ 

Nartananirnaya 

Pundarikavitthala 

Bik,  1096. 

c 

^r^t^HW  . 

Nrityadhyayah 

Asokamalla. 

Bik,  1098. 

^Tr^T^oS'f    . 

iTOTjfH^^-q 

Nntyaratnavali 

Ganapatidevasena 

i?^»1^T?^f?rn 

^T<.?    . 

Panchamasarasam- 

hita     .... 

Narada. 

See  Anf   480 

2T 

1 66 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA. 


Name  of  the  Work. 

Author. 

Name  of  the  Work. 

1 

1 

Author. 

1 

! 

Authority. 

1 

f^T^J   .        .        .        . 

Ragacliandrodaya    . 

Tiinala. 

O'l^TTXT 

xirmiiT^TTfiT   ofisiTniznq: 

1 

Eagadliyaniidika- 
tliauridhyayali 

Bik,  1099. 

TTmfiT?!n:f^q:   . 

t^HIVJ-fTWunT? 

Ragadisvaranirna- 

Raghunatlia  Dasa 

yali      .... 

Prasada. 

TTH^TK?^  ^»HIinBT^  . 

TT*T=STI!mj 

Raga-kautuliala, 
Nntya-Praktirana 

Ramakrisbna 
bhatta. 

Bik,  1106. 

TTTrtHUlt 

Ragalakshanam 

TiRmon  .... 

j??:t5fr  Uz^  .      . 

Ragamala    . 

Pundaiikavittliala 

Bik.  1100. 

T:mjncrr^TTi*T»rp;T 

^*\d^m    . 

Ragamalil  or  Rat- 

Auf.  481, 
lad.  p.  319, 

namala 

KNiicmakarana. 

Bik.  1101. 

nnjhTT'^. 

^^"^-^  f^jcs   • 

Ragamaiijari 

Pundarikavittliala 

Bik.  1102. 

TTnf?lKm!t       . 

TK^   .... 

Raganirupaiiam 

Xarada. 

TinimR 

Ragaprastara     . 

Tan  p.  CO,  G. 

TTTTTRT^T 

nvittnr     .     .     . 

Ragaratnakara  . 

Gaudbarvaraja. 

Kiel.  p.  96, 
Bik.  1129. 

TTmr^g^'bi 

^■^Vt^jt   . 

Ragatatvaviljodha   . 

Sriuiva.sa. 

Kiel.  p.  96, 
liik.  1103. 

Ragaviehtii-a 
Rciga-vibodlia    . 
Ragavivcka 

Srirama  iiiaHa. 
Somanatba. 

Bik.  1104. 

Auf.  47.5, 
PooTia,  circi 

1888. 

Kiel.  p.  96. 

F??*»^  H^H^fci=iT:;rf  . 

Rudradamaru-bhava 
Siitravivarana 

Bik.  1107. 

niT^TTiMffm?Tt^ 

^•I^cSUfT 

Sangitacliintiimani  . 

Kamalolocbana. 

Kiel.  p.  96. 

«iftH^im^T:  . 

5R^fiT         .        .        . 

°                               1 
Sangltadamodara    . 

Subbaukara. 

Ind.  p.  318, 
Kiel.  p.  96. 

Bik.  1108  et 

»in^rT5MlT 

^»ft^r 

Sangltadarpana 

Damodara. 

1 

seq.,  Auf.  476 
ct  sei|  ,  Poona 

circa  LS87, 
Calcutta  1879. 

1 

?fT^^H      . 

Sangltadarpana 

HarivaUablia. 

Bik.  1110. 

1 

fil«J>JtJT^    . 

Sangitadipika  . 

Tippabbupaba. 

«^'irT<*-HrI55    ... 

Sangitakalpataru    . 

.   -I 

•n 

Sangltaniakarandali 

Veda. 

Bik.  1111. 

flmrmcjid^:    . 

^^^TT  .... 

Tan.  p.  GO,  2. 

»inl7rfR»nHT    ... 

^«cir§J5f?R?-5- 

Sangitamimamsa     . 

Kumbbakarnaiiia- 
Iiiinalic'iidra. 

Kiel.  p.  96. 

^^rTTTfi  .... 

c 

■iiiHcjscjri'H 

Sangltamritam . 

Kamalabjcbana. 

Kiel.  p.  96. 

BTi'^im-grr^?;^ 

^'.JlTjT^ti    . 

Sangltaumktavali    . 

Devannacbarya. 

w          ))         •      • 

i^J?     .... 

))                  >y 

Deveudra. 

Bik.  1112. 

THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA. 


167 


Name  of  the  Work. 


TiirffT^TTT'mir  . 


Aiitlior. 


Name  of  the  ^Vork. 


Autliov. 


TO^T^ 


^fCHJ 


niTtTR 


Saugitanarayana 

Sangitanarayana 

Sangitaparijata 

Sangitapatlia     . 

Sangitapuslipanjal 

Sangitaragliava 

Sangltaraja 

tSangitaratuakara 

Do.  tika 

Do.  do. 

Do.  do. 

Do.  do. 

Do.  do. 

Do.  do. 

Sangitaratnakara  . 
Sangitaratnamala  . 
Sangitaratuavall  . 
Sangitasamayasara . 

Sangitasara-san- 

gralia 
Sangitasanimrita 

Sangitasarvarthasa- 

rasangraha 
Sangitasaroddhara  . 

Sangitasaravali 

Sangitasetu 

Sansitasiroinaiii 

Sangitasudlia     . 

Sangitasudliakara    . 

Sangitasudhakara    . 

Sana'itasundara 


Purusliottama- 
uiisra- 

Narayaiiadeva. 
Paudita  Aliobala. 


Authoritv. 


Vomabliupala. 

Kumbliakarna. 

Sai-ngadt'va. 

Do. 

Kallinatlia. 

Simlialjliupala 

Kumbliakarna 

nai'eudra. 
Gangarauia. 

Hamsabhupala. 

Vanaraka. 
Mammata. 
Somaraiadeva. 


TulajCudra 


Haribliatta. 


Gautiarama. 


Auf.  480. 

Calcutta  I87t). 

Pooiia,  circa 

1887. 

liili.  U13. 


Kiel.  p.  W. 

Bik.  1111  et 
;eq.,  Auf.  171 
et  sei).,  lud. 
[I.  31o,  Calc. 
1879, pt.l  only 
Bik.  1120. 


Bik.  1121. 
See  Auf.  -JSO. 


Rice. 
Tan.  p.  60,  4. 

0pp.  p.  656. 
B.k.  1123 


Bik.  1124. 


Simliabliupala. 

Haripala. 

Sadasivadiksliita. 


T.68 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA. 


Nuuiu  of  tlie  Work. 

Autliur. 

Name  of  the  Work. 

.\uthor. 

Authority. 

Sangltasuramrita    . 

Maharaja     Tuliiji 
Blionsala,    Raja 
of  TaBJore. 

Tan.  p.  CO,  4. 

flTTtK  l^tl'[■^  -^jffm 

TliJTq  RW    •        •        • 

Sangitartarodaya  chu- 
damani      .       . 

Pratapa  malla 

Ben.  p.  150. 

«VT<*<3?(    .        . 

Sangita-upanishadha 
Sangitavinoda  . 

Sudhakalasa. 

Bik.  1126. 
Bik.  1125. 

c 

f^JoS  .... 

Sangitavrittaratna- 
kara     .... 

Vittliala. 

Till),  p.  60,  8. 

»i=F^jnTTnTw?Tq 

Sanklrnaragadhyaya 

«iTn-«i<;t^^    • 

Saragacliandrodaya 

^Kr[     .... 

Sarasamliita 

Sliadragachandro- 
daya    .... 

Srutibliaskara    . 

Nclrada. 

Punclarikavittliala 
Bhimadeva. 

Bik.  1128. 

I^TJt^t't   .... 

Svaramanjari     . 

^^^'i^i:  .      .     . 

Svaramelakaliinidhl 
Talabhinayalaksha- 

Ramamatya. 

Bik.  1130. 

FTc5?3niTri?^f'q^rT 

mf^p^ 

nam     .... 
Taladasapranadlpika 

Nandikesvara. 
Goviuda. 

Tan.  p.  61,  Ifi. 

irr^f^^iif 

'  '\^'^*-^X  . 

Talalakslianam  . 

Nandikesvara. 

Tan.  p.  GO,  14. 

IfW^H^    .... 

I            

Talaprastain 

f3«t«mc5  . 

Talaprastara 
Taladipika    . 

Tippabhupala. 

Tan.  p.  60, 13. 
Tan.  p.  60, 1.^. 

--)"l'MIMia«HH!t 

Viiiavadyalaksliaiiara :              

TftmraiH 

^W'.V 

Vlraparakrama.       .   1  Viisuduva. 

1 

APPENDIX. 

DESCRIPTION   OF   RAJAH   SIR  S.  M.  TAGORE'S  S'RUTI  VINA. 


[The  following  minute  account  of  the  Rajah  Sir  S.  M.  Tagore's  S'ruti  Vina — 
intended  to  demonstrate  the  ancient  system  of  22 — was  kindly  supplied  by  the 

late  Mr.  A.J.  Ellis,  F.R.S.] 

AS  regards  the  construction  of  the  instrument,  I  shall  first  quote  the  Rajah 
Sir  S.  M.  Tagore's  own  words. ^  "  We  have  hit  upon  another  method  to 
L  ascertain  the  nature  and  position  of  the  s'rutis.  The  method  is  as 
follows  : — Take  a  sitar  or  vina,  measure  the  distance  between  Shaja  (C)  of  the 
Madhya  (middle)  octave,  and  Shaja  (D)  of  the  next  higher  octave,  in  the  C  of  the 
Tara  octave.  Divide  the  space  between  these  two  C's  by  putting  a  dot  or  line  in 
the  middle  ;  put  a  dot  or  line  on  either  extremity  ;  place  the  note  F  over  the  dot  or 
line  in  the  middle,  the  note  C  on  the  other  extremity  of  the  first  half  portion  of 
the  divided  space,  and  the  note  higher  C  on  that  of  the  second  half  portion  ; 
sub-divide  the  first  half  poition  into  iiitic'  equal  and  the  second  half  portion  into 
thirteen  equal  parts,  and  put  a  dot  or  line  to  mark  off  each  sub-division. 
Excluding  the  line  marking  higher  C,  there  will  be  in  all  twenty-two  lines. 
Each  of  these  will  represent  a  s'ruti." 

This  S'ruti  Vina  was,  in  fact,  a  long-necked  sitar  rather  smaller  than  usual. 
It  had  two  strings,  one  of  brass  and  one  of  steel  ;  the  diameter  of  the  brass 
wire  was  -3  mm.  (millimetres),  and  that  of  the  steel  wire  was  "24  mm.  The 
brass  string  proved  useless,  as  the  frets  made  the  octave  quite  wrong  with  it. 
Hence  it  will  be  disregarded  henceforth. 

The  string  was  nearly  horizontal.  At  starting  at  the  nut  it  was  12  mm. 
above  the  finger-board,  and  at  the  bridge   13  mm.  above  the  belly,  which  had 


'  "The  Twenty-two  Musical  S'rutis  of  the  Hindus."     S.  M.  Tagore.     Calcutta,  i885. 


2  U 


170 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SO UT HERN  INDIA. 


curved  upwards.  But  the  first  fret  was  iih  mm.  and  the  hist  fret  only  2  mm. 
above  the  finger-board.  The  string  was  therefore  pressed  down  onlv  i\  mm. 
for  the  first,  but  12I  mm.  for  the  last  ;  consequent!}-,  the  tension  greatly 
increased  as  we  ascended  the  scale,  so  that  if  we  had  taken  the  octave  at  half 
the  length  of  the  string  it  would  have  been  much  too  sharp. 

There  were  twenty-three  frets  to  give  the  s'rutis  for  one  octave,  numbered 
one  to  twenty-three  on  one  side  of  the  finger-board,  with  letters  on  the  other, 
thus  :  — 

C  DBF  G  ABc 


I 


I     2     3     4     5     6     7     8     g    10  II   12   13   14  15   16  17  18  ig  20  21  22  23 

The  frets  forCDEFGABc  were  of  white  metal,  the  others  were  yellow.  The 
frets  were  flatly  elliptical  with  hooked  ends,  round  which  a  piece  of  gut  was  tied, 
and  then  brought  about  three  times  under  the  finger-board,  catching  the  hooked 
ends  each  time  and  being  firmlv  fixed.  Each  fret  was  therefore  tightly  fastened  in 
its  place,  and  could  not  be  moved  up  and  down  the  board  without  much  force.  But 
the  fret  itself  could  be  deflected  to  the  right  or  left,  leaving  the  hooked  ends  fixed. 
This  was  not  easy,  but  was  possible. 

Then  again  the  distance  by  which  the  string  had  to  be  deflected  to  press  it 
on  to  the  fret  varied,  but  not  uniformly.  The  diameter  of  the  frets  was  difterent, 
but  I  was  unable  to  measure  it,  as  I  could  not  get  my  gauge  in.  However,  I 
estimate  the  white  frets  at  fully  2  mm.  in  diameter;  the  others  were  narrower. 
The  tops  were  rounded  and  it  was  difficult  to  appreciate  the  middle  point, 
but  I  have  endeavoured  to  measure  the  distance  iVom  the  middle  of  one  fret  to 
the  middle  of  the  next. 

The  whole  length  of  the  string  from  nut  to  bridge  was  go6  mm.  The 
bridge  was  thus  shaped,      a  ^^b  B  being  a  ledge  cut  through  for 

the  strings,  which  lay  on       I  I  ^~"''--~-  ^  the     flat  part,    A    B,    and    the 

sounding   length  of  the  ^ — -^  "^"~~'  whole  string  was  iVom  the  nut 

to  A,  but  still  the  part  A  B  was  not  firmly  fixed  and  possibly  influenced  the 
pitch.  The  part  of  the  string  bevond  B  seemed  to  be  damped  by  a  perforated 
bead  which  ran  on  it. 

The  note  from  the  first  fret  was  marked  C,  but  taking  the  pitch  of  tlie  string  as 
it  was  (for  we  did  not  venture  to  screw  it  up),  it  made  24i'2  vib.,  which  is  not  far 
from  244-23,  the  French  pitch  of  B  in  the  4-ft.  octave,  "^"       — :     but   I   adopt   the 


names    of  the  notes  as  marked  on  the  instrument,  tr 


In   this  case  the 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA.  lyi 

whole  string  gave  F  in  tlie  4-ft.  octave,  a  fifth  below  the  first  C  and  an 
octave  below  No.  10  fret,  marked  F,  at  any  rate  precisely  enough.  But  the 
whole  length  of  the  string  was  go6  mm.,  and  to  the  first  fret  298  mm.,  so  that 
the  sounding  length  of  C,  or  608  mm.,  was  only  a  little  more  than  j  of  906  =  604 
mm.,  the  increased  tension  being  here  slight.  The  sounding  length  for  F  was 
463  mm.,  considerably  more  than  453  =  ^  of  go6mm.,  because  the  string  was  7 
mm.  above  the  F  fret,  which  caused  an  increase  of  tension  that  had  to  be  allowed 
for.  It  is  impossible  to  calculate  the  effect  of  these  increments  of  tension  which, 
however,  served  to  alter  the  effect  of  the  lengths  considerably. 

The  principle  followed  seemed  to  be  to  find  the  position  of  the  frets  i  and  2^, 
giving  the  fifth  of  the  open  string  and  the  octave  of  that  fifth,  by  car  only,  the 
shape  and  heights  of  the  frets  being  assumed.  The  height  of  the  first  fret  was,  of 
course,  as  great  as  possible,  and  the  last  as  low  as  possible  to  avoid  jars.  In  this 
case  the  fifth  is  good,  but  the  octave  of  it,  or  higher  C,  is  too  sharp  b\'  a  trifle 
of  20  cents  (one  cent  =  the  hundredth  of  an  equal  semitone,  so  that  an  octave 
has  1,200  cents  and  a  comma  22  cents).  The  length  of  string  for  lower  C  was 
608  mm.,  and  that  for  higher  c,  316-5  mm.,  which  is  much  more  than  half  the 
former  or  304  mm.,  and  vet  the  note  is  too  sharp,  so  great  is  the  distance  of 
this  strinir,  izl   mm.,  from  the  last  fret. 

The  distance  C  c  was  divided  into  half  at  F,  and  the  distance  C  to  F  into  nine 
equal  parts,  and  F  to  c  into  thirteen  equal  parts  by  frets  ;  at  least,  that  was  the 
intention.  Actually  C  to  F  contained  145  mm.,  of  which  Jth  =  16J,  while  the 
distances  between  frets  really  varied  from  15  Mo  16  J-.  The  distance  F  to  C  was 
146^^  mm.,  of  which  I'lth  is  11  "27  mm.,  while  the  distances  between  the  frets  varied 
from  9^  to  13.^  mm.  as  well  as  I  could  measure.  This  gave  very  varying  values 
to  the  s'ruti  intervals.  From  C  to  F  they  varied  from  45  to  73  cents,  from  F  to  c 
they  varied  from  37  to  84  cents.  The  intention,  I  presume,  was  to  make  them 
as  nearlv  equal  as  possible  or  54tt  cents  each. 

The  pitches  of  the  notes  produced  were  determined  on  May  21,  1886,  by 
Mr.  A.  J.  Hipkins,  who  tried  to  touch  the  frets  as  evenly  as  possible,  while  I 
furnished  the  forks  from  mv  tuning  fork  tonometer,  the  exact  pitches  of  which 
had  been  accurately  determined.  By  this  means  Mr.  Hipkins  was  able  to  count 
the  beats  between  the  forks  and  the  notes  due  to  the  frets  for  two  or  three 
seconds,  and  then  to  continue  counting  at  the  same  rate  to  complete  ten 
seconds.  Each  pitch  was  thus  determined  by  two  ot  my  lorks,  one  sharper  and 
one  flatter,  and  there  was  never  so  much  as  half  a  vibration  difference  in  the 
determinations.  When  anv  difference  existed  a  mean  was  taken.  A  scale  was 
thus  determined  which  satisfies  modern  Indian  ears.      As  the  s'rutis  in  it  varv 


172 


THE  Ml- SIC  OF  SOUTHERN  ISDIA. 


from  all  the  circumstances  named,  and   apparently  on  no   conceivable  plan,  it  is 
evident  that  it"  the  mean  of  all  wei'e  taken — that  is,  if  a  cycle  of  twenty-two  were 

instituted,  as  I  have  effected  by  a  series  of  forks — 
Indian  ears  would  still  be  satisfied.  I  have  endeavoured 
in  the  following  tabic  to  bring  out  all  these  facts. 

The  width  of  the  finger-board  was  80  mm.,  and  the 
steel  wire  was  40  mm.  from  each  edge. 

A  set  of  forks  was  sent  by  the  Rajah  to  the  Inventions 
Exhibition  at  the  same  time  as  the  S'ruti  Vina,  but  as 
they  had  been  tuned  by  means  of  sliding  weights, 
without  any  appliance  to  fi.x  them  in  position,  these 
forks  were  quite  useless,  for  the  weights  had  shifted  on 
the  journey  from  India,  and,  in  fact,  shifted  whenever  the 
forks  were  struck. 


5— 


Tuning  pegs. 


Nut. 


Carved  ivory  dccoratiim. 


6.      Tail-pin. 


-   6 

KlCDUCED    PLAN    OF   S'KLTI  ViNA. 


THE  MUSIC  OF  SOUTHERX  IXDIA. 


173 


Table  of  the  Pitches  of  the  Notes  furnished  by  Rajah  Sir  S.  M.  Tagore's 
S'ruti  Vina,  as  determined  in  1886  by  Messrs.  Ellis  and  Hipkins. 


Depression 

^i^tA    nnmA 

Observed 

Cents  from 

f  pnt<!  frnm 

Cents  from 

Vibrations  io 

Sounding  lengths 

or  height  of 

and  number. 

number  of 
vibrations. 

note  to 
note. 

lowest  note. 

lowest  in 
cycle  of  22. 

cycle  of  22. 
with  same  C. 

of  strings 
in  millimetres. 

string   above 
fret  in  milli- 
metres. 

C    I 

241-2 

_ 

0 

0 

241-2 

608 

I* 

2 

247-6 

45 

45 

55 

248-9 

592 

3 

3 

257-2 

66 

1 1 1 

log 

256-9 

576 

4 

4 

266-0 

58 

169 

163 

265-1 

559* 

5 

D   5 

274-3 

53 

222 

21S 

273-6 

543* 

5 

6 

281-5 

45 

267 

273 

282-4 

527* 

5 

7 

289-5 

49 

316 

328 

291-4 

512 

6 

E    8 

302-0 

73 

389 

382 

300-7 

495i 

6 

9 

310-3 

47 

436 

436 

310-3 

479 

7 

F  10 

323-0 

69 

505 

491 

320-3 

463 

7 

II 

330-3 

39 

544 

545 

330-5 

451* 

8 

12 

337-8 

39 

583 

600 

34I-I 

441 

8 

13 

349-2 

57 

640 

655 

352-0 

430 

9 

G14 

364-0 

72 

712 

709 

3&3-3 

4172 

10 

15 

371-8 

37 

749 

764 

374-9 

408 

lOi 

16 

384-4 

58 

807 

818 

386-9 

395? 

10^ 

17 

395-3 

48 

855 

873 

399-3 

384* 

lOi 

A  18 

409-6 

62 

917 

928 

412-1 

373 

lOi 

19 

418-5 

37 

954 

982 

425-3 

363I 

lOi 

20 

432-9 

59 

1013 

1036 

438-9 

351 

loi 

B21 

449'3 

64 

1077 

1091 

452-9 

340 

II 

22 

465-0 

59 

1136 

1146 

467-4 

330 

Hi 

C23 

488-0 

84 

1220 

1200 

482-4 

3i6i 

12* 

NOVELLO,    EWER    AND    CO.,    PRINTERS,    LONDON. 


2   X 


'    ims®,  .-"n'^'A'!*' 


V.^:^^"' 


ML    ZOa    .  D27 

Day,     Charles    Russell,     1660- 
I     1900- 

The    music    and    musical 
I     ±nst.rumeri-te    of    sout-hern 


l.?0197 


