


iffi 




Cornell Jtnioetaitjj Sabrarg 



Jttjaca, Stem lot* 



BOUGHT WITH THE INCOME OF THE 

FISKE ENDOWMENT FUND 

THE BEQUEST OF 

WILLARD FISKE 

LIBRARIAN OF THE UNIVERSITY 1868-1883 

1905 



CORNELL 

UNIVERSITY 

LIBRARY 




Ml T «!T 



Cornell University Library 
ML 338.F99I3 



Indian music / 




3 1924 022 492 338 




1| Cornell University 
B Library 



The original of this book is in 
the Cornell University Library. 

There are no known copyright restrictions in 
the United States on the use of the text. 



http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924022492338 



' Rosier 




(37 
^01 xo-iirHcx. 



■i 






Indian Music 

BY 

SHAHINDA 

(Begum Fyzee-Rahamin) 
with Preface by 

F. GILBERT WEBB 



WILLIAM MARGHANT & GO. 

The Goupil Gallery 

5 Regent Street 
London, S.W. 



Index. 



CHAPTER I. 
" History of Indian Music" . . . . . . . . 9 

CHAPTER II. 
" Sur-Addhya'' (Law of Tones) .. .. .. 21 

CHAPTER III. 

" Raag-Addhya" (Law of Tunes) . . . . . , 38 

CHAPTER IV. 
" Ast-Addhya" (Law of Musical Instruments) . . 69 

CHAPTER V. 

" Tales of Indian Music" . . . . . . . . 80 



Preface 

This little book is a modest attempt to explain to 
Western minds the construction, peculiarities and spirit of 
the ancient music of India. Captain Day, in his illuminating 
volume on the music of the Decan, or Southern India, has 
revealed the elaborate system which prevailed at one time 
in that portion of the Empire, but this is only the offshoot 
of the original system, which had its birth and growth in 
the North in ages which recede from the tract of history 
into the dim regions of legendary lore. 

Much that is described in these pages may seem to 
pertain to the imagination rather than the possibility of 
practice, but the points of view of the Eastern and Western 
brain are as far asunder as the social systems of Eastern 
and Western realms. One great fundamental fact with 
regard to their respective musical outlook is that whereas 
the Western musician concentrates his attention on the centre 
of each note forming a scale, and his ears will tolerate no 
variation from that central point, the Eastern musician 
concentrates his attention on the gradations of pitch between 
the centre of each note. Where the Western musician 
strides from note to note, his Eastern brother glides between. 
To the latter the approach and the leaving the central point 
is all important. It is this that has in the course of ages 
led to the wondrous system of varied treatment of subtle 
tonal gradations, and to the multiplication of ornamentations, 
well nigh infinitesimal in number and character. So delicate 
and subtle are these gradations that it is only cultivated ears 



that can perceive them, and recognise their endless variety 
and significance. 

The ability of the trained Indian musician to infuse his 
individuality by almost endless variations on what may 
be termed the skeleton of the tune is practically unknown 
to Europeans. This will be perceived by a perusal of the 
explanation of " Taans " in Chapter Seven. 

Much Indian Music has little or no meaning to Western 
ears owing to inability to detect and appreciate tone-shading 
as varied and as fleeting as a summer rainbow. 

The origin of these fine gradations of pitch undoubtedly 
was, and has been developed in great measure by, the thinness 
and length of the strings used on the ancient classical Indian 
instruments. That there should have been little endeavour to 
thicken these strings or to obtain greater resonance and power 
must be attributed to the predeliction of the Eastern mind to 
sublety of thought which found its reflection satisfied in musical 
sounds of delicate quality. 

The music of all countries is ever the echo of the 
idiosyncracies and mental states of its producers, and the 
extreme delicacy of Indian music is only the faithful 
analogue in sound of the elaborate and marvellous complexity 
of eastern pattern-making, as seen in its greatest developments 
iu the weavings in silk and wool, the symbolical meanings of 
which can only be perceived by the initiated. Yet more elusive 
and evasive is the music of ancient India which revels in the 
gossamars of thought and strivings to make audible the vague 
dreamings of the mystic East. 

F. GILBERT WEBB. 
May, 1914. 



History of Indian Music. 

Chapter I. 

JNDIAN MUSIC is three thousand years old. 
It is attributed to be of Divine origin. It 
is by far the most complicated and intricate 
system of the musics of all nations, and a science 
hardly to be excelled by any creation of the 
human mind. 

It has a highly coloured and fascinating 
history, to be found in the ancient texts, pre- 
served and handed down to us, surviving cycles 
of ages and ravages of time. 

Like all old branches of learning, it is based 
upon the religious faiths, observances, legends 
and traditions of the country, depicting the 
social manners and customs of the people, in 
the history of the tunes, and words of the song. 

There are various versions as to the origin 
of Indian Music. The two mostly quoted 
traditions are : — 

(a). That it is descended from Brhama, 
brought into vogue by Mahadeo and Nardaman, 
and performed by the great Naiks, i.e., Masters 
of Music, from time to time. 

(b). That a strange bird called " Musikar" 
or Dipak 1 Laat 2 inhabited the Caucasus mountains, 
and its beak had seven apertures ; through each 



Dipak literally means fire ; it is also the name of a Raag, i.e. male tune in 
the Indian Music. The peculiarity of this wonderful tune is that when it 
is played with the right notes in the right season its power is so great that 
it excites the element of fire in nature, and creates fire. 
Laat means hot scorching winds. 



of these openings it was able to blow a 
different note, and at different seasons of the 
year it combined these notes into harmony, 
and produced Raags, x congenial to that particular 
hour of the day and season of the year. Its 
age was that of a thousand years, and when 
its life was about to end, it fell into ecstacy, 
and accumulated a pile of combustibles from its 
environs, and danced around it in a state of 
absolute frenzy, playing the various notes and 
tunes from its beak for a length of time in 
harmony with the seasons. When, however, it 
touched upon the notes of the Raag Deepak, 
fire was at once ignited, the pile burnt up, and 
ultimately it plunged into it, and became Sati. 

After a time an egg was created out of the 
warm ashes, which in due course became a 
Dipak-Laat. 

Thus from times immemorial, one bird was 
born, lived its weird life, and in the end turned 
to ashes, then another and another. The bird 
is supposed to be extinct now. 

This is the strange and fanciful story handed 
down to posterity, and which every musician 
of repute is fond of repeating. 

From the earliest times we find that music 
was regarded as sacred. It was originated from 
Divinity, and performed by divinities. There 
were professional celestial beings, such as the 



Raag means tunes ; there are six Raags that are male tunes in the Indian Music, 
and each Raag has got its own five or six Raagnis. These tunes have 
seasons of the year, and hours of the day, when they should be played or 
sung. Any departure from the rigid law incapacitates the beauties and 
subtleties of the tunes, and violates the sanctity of the Alt. 



II 

Gandharvas and Apsarasas who performed before 
the Gods. 

Brhama indulged in the Art for relaxation. 
Saraswati, the Goddess of Learning and Music, 
invented the exquisite Veena, the instrument 
which bears her name. Narada is a brilliant 
figure among the Divine Beings in the musical 
world. Shiva in the act of his Divine Dance, 
shook the universe with his marvellous perform- 
ance. His wife Parbati has been the subject of 
many a poetical idea. The " Rudra Been" is the 
definite composition of her sleeping lovely form. 

When the Art was cultivated so freely 
among the Gods in Heaven it affected the 
mortal beings on earth. The kings indulged in 
it, so did their subjects, until music study was 
of vital importance in the very ancient ages. 
To learn it was compulsory. The youths were 
taught to sing the Divine Praises and Prayers, 
and the secular studies were imparted to them 
in tunes. 

Millions of musicians of all grades flourished 
in the land, and multitudes of professionals were 
supported by the State, free from all impositions. 
Their one object in life was to unravel the 
secret mysteries, and expound the hidden 
doctrines of the sacred Art. 

There were no religious rites, ceremonials, 
forms and observances inside or outside a home 
in which music did not play an important part. 
The very existence of the people seemed to 
depend upon its practice. 



12 



Temples and shrines, and all sacred places, 
were thronged with devotees who were all 
absorbed in that class of music, called the 
" Devotional Music," night and day. 

The villages had bards and minstrels, who 
entertained the village folks with tales of the 
miracles of Gods, philosophies of the ascetics 
and sages, biographies of noble and high men 
and women and love romances in inflected recitative. 
As time went on, India passed through 
vicissitudes and historical changes. People were 
thrown in a chronic state of disturbance. Their 
favourite vocations were interfered with, and they 
were deprived to a great extent of their freedom 
of living. 

The present degradation, and neglect of 
music, show the remarkable degeneration and low 
status to which the people have sunk. All the 
productive genius, of which the land was so 
rich and brimful, is effectually crushed out 
until no trace of its former glory is left. 

To acquire anything of the Indian Music 
in the present day, one has to be specially 
gifted by the Gods. We have no facilities of 
learning, in the way of preliminary books or 
notations, nor have we any recognised schools 
of high order or merit, accessible to the lover 
or seeker of music. All the mysteries of this 
Glorified Art are confined to the ancient Scriptures, 
in unintelligible Brij-Bhasha and Sanskrit, carefully 
hidden away from the gaze of the masses in 
some antique remote corner. 



13 

Music was handed down traditionally in 
certain families, celebrated as great artists. 
Almost all the male members among them were 
able to play and sing, and during the interval 
of a certain number of years, you heard of 
mighty men like Naik Gopal, Naik Baijoo, 
Taansen, Amir Khusrao, Mir Nasir Ahmad 
Dehlavi, etc. etc., springing up from the unknown, 
and stirring the very forces of nature by their 
extraordinary performance. 

These families are still to be found ; they 
are few and far between, and scattered in the 
north and south of India. They have know- 
ledge of these priceless texts, and some are even 
in possession of them, but they guard these with 
religious secrecy and reverence. 

Works on Indian Music. 

Few subjects have been more enveloped in 
mystery and darkness than Indian Music. After 
a careful research, we find that some great 
works were written by eminent masters in the 
ancient days, in a most intricate and difficult 
language, meant more for the comprehension of 
teachers than students. Among the well-known 
authoritative versions existing to-day are : — 

i. Sangeet Darpan. — This is a highly prized 
book of importance written in old Sanskrit by 
Shastri Chatr Damodar Shavan Bhut of Kasi. 
It treats of the Sapt-Addhya (seven laws of 
music) and imparts valuable information. 



14 

2. Raag-Ratnagar. — This is another old MS. 
of value, written more than seven hundred years 
ago, by Sarang Deo Pandit, containing a store of 
information. 

3. Raag-Mala is written in Brij Bhasha 
language in Nagri characters by Ganga-Dhar. 
The whole book is written in verse. 

There are many more books of more or less 
importance written on the subject from time to 
time. Most of them are based on the above- 
mentioned texts, and when the author has been 
unable to grasp the meanings of the masters, he 
has reproduced portions. 

So that it will be seen that no books in 
the proper order and method have really been 
written, pointing out the stages, one after another, 
facilitating the study of the science. 

At the present day the craze for "revival of 
old arts" has resulted in the establishment of a 
few music schools, scattered in Bombay, Baroda, 
Poona, Mysore and Calcutta, and self-styled pro- 
fessors have compiled a series of primers, called 
"notation," imitating the Western system of 
notation. Most to be regretted is the substitution 
of the harmonium in place of the sweet strains 
of Sarangi (Indian violin) for accompanying 
purposes. 

A more disastrous metamorphosis cannot be 
imagined. There is not the slightest idea or 
semblance of the rich classical and original 
Indian melodies in these chopped-out hybrid silly 
tunes, sung by a number of students together. 



15 

Similarly, some tunes of modern invention 
are set to music and played by a band. They 
are anything but Indian in character. As a 
matter of fact the real Indian music is so 
constituted that it does not lend itself to such 
tricks of popularising- it as organ-grinding, school 
choruses, bands, theatre, orchestras, etc. 

It is much too earnest, real, heavy, beautiful, 
almost Divine, for light amusement, and a 
thorough knowledge of it means self-abnegation 
and serious study, of a life-time and more. 



Muts. 

A peculiar feature of the Indian Music is 
the distressing and confusing institution of Muts, 
i.e., the classification of Raags (male tunes), and 
Raagnis (female tunes) and Talas (times). 

In the ancient Raagmalas and Sungeets 
(works on music), we find that music was of 
an awe-inspiring, deeply religious, highly classical 
and complex nature. The Gods indulged in it, 
or men of great learning and piety, such as those 
who had submerged their individualities in the 
Divine path. 

Sixteen thousand tunes, and three hundred 
and sixty Talas (times) are mentioned as used 
by them in those days, almost inconceivable to 
our mind and understanding. 

" Krishna perfectly intoxicated by his own 
music on the flute, commenced to sing. His 



16 



sixteen thousand Gopees followed him, each 
producing a Raag (tune)." 

In the middle ages, it was brought to a 
comparatively appreciable and systematic basis, 
overshadowing the inaccessible heights of the 
so-far Sublime Music. 

Four Muts were decided upon, each named 
after the Divinity who was the originator of it. 

i. Sumeshar or Shew Mut. — Sumeshar is one 
of the appellations of Mahadeo (Adam). 

Mut literally means intelligence. This Mut 
is named after Mahadeo, and the method of 
singing and playing in this Mut is like the 
method with which Mahadeo sang and played, 
and one which is extremely difficult. 

It has six Raags, and thirty-six Raagnis, 
each Raag having its own six Raagnis and eight 
Putrs (sons). 

2. Kalinath Mut. — So named alter Krishna, 
who was once playing with a ball, on the shores 
of the sacred Jumna, with his playmates. 

In the enthusiasm of a throw, the ball fell 
into the river. Krishna immediately jumped in 
the water in search of it. 

When he reached the bed of the river, he 
found himself perched on one of the thousand 
heads of a monster serpent. The King of 
Serpents that inhabited the Jumna. The King- 
Serpent, on being thus ruthlessly disturbed, was 
annoyed, and tried to sting him with the head 
on which he sat. 



17 

Krishna jumped over gracefully on another 
head, and thus, by jumping on to different heads, 
avoided its deadly bites, till at last he found a 
bit of string, with which he successfully tied 
the nose of the serpent, and thus freed himself 
from danger. 

Now this feat of springing from one head 
to another was done with such infinite grace 
and beauty that it caused a peculiarly pretty 
dance, with elegant movements and actions, 
which the historians are pleased to comment 
upon, and this to-day is a recognised form of 
dancing. 

Now when he got hold of the string, and 
mastered the situation, he began to sing in 
sheer joy. He sang with a certain method, and 
this method was called Kalinath Mut, com- 
memorating that incident. Like Sumeshar Mut, 
Kalinath Mut has also got six Raags, and each 
Raag has got its own six Raagnis and eight 
Putrs. 

3. Bharat Mui. — So called after a great 
ascetic named Bharat, who sang religious songs 
called Bhajans, in praise of the Gods, in an 
easy, facile manner, creating a certain mode of 
singing and playing, distinguishing it from the 
two others in method of execution and arrange- 
ment of tunes. 

This Mut has six Raags, and each Raag has 
its own five Raagnis, and eight Putrs and eight 
Bharjas (daughters-in-law). 



15 



This is the only Mut which has the additional 
tunes Bharjas. 

4. Hanuman, or Hanout Mut. — So called after 
the famous general of Raja Ramchandarjee, 
Hanuman (King of Monkeys), who conquered 
Lanka (Ceylon), and, flushed with victory in the 
noted battle, sang congratulations in the Court 
of Raja Ramchandarjee after a certain style. 

This style was recognised at once, has been 
ever since, and is to-day very much in vogue 
in Benares. 

Similarly to Bharat Mut, this Mut has six 
Raags, and each Raag has got its own five 
Raagnis and eight Putrs. The Bharjas of 
Bharat Mut are retained in this. 

The last two Muts are very much akin to 
each other in the seasons of the year when 
they should be played or sung, also the arrange- 
ment of the tunes, with a slight variation here 
and there. 

These Muts show an enormous modification 
in tunes and times. They were brought to a 
standard of one's reach and understanding. 

The sixteen thousand tunes were reduced to 
six Raags (male tunes), and thirty or thirty-six 
Raagnis (female tunes), each Raag having its own 
five or six Raagnis, according to its individual 
Mut, and eight Putrs (sons), and eight Bharjas 
(daughters-in-law), and the three hundred and 
sixty Talas (times), were reduced to ninety-two 
Talas. 



19 

Each Mut played the tunes in a certain 
order which it recognised ; for instance, one Mut 
qualified a tune with a certain attribute with one 
or two notes, Teevar (sharp), or Komal (flat), and 
classed it among the Raagnis, while another Mut 
with a similar alteration ranked it among the 
Putrs, and so forth. 

This difference of opinion caused an incessant 
wrangle, never determining the class of the tune, 
but raising an interminable field for enquiry and 
research in this branch. 

In the reign of that great patron of Arts and 
Sciences, the Emperor Akbar, the Court Musician 
Taan-Sen, of universal fame, made a thorough, 
arduous and minute study, of long duration, of 
this most superb science, felt the superfluity of 
the four Muts, and, after a scientifically lengthy 
observation, determined the distinctive and main 
qualifications and characteristics of each melody, 
and revolutionised the system by deciding upon 
one Mut only, with its proper order of tunes. He 
dealt similarly with the Talas (times), and con- 
centrated the ninety-two Talas into twelve, 
without losing the significances, beauties and 
subtleties of each tune and measure. 

None but a master mind like that of Taan- 
Sen could have brought about such a complete 
upheaval in so intricate an art. 

He is supposed to have written a Raag-mala 
(book on music) on a sound, systematic basis, 
and ascribed it to his own name. 

32 



20 



This tended to make music intensely popular 
and progressive. 

This is the Mut which has been followed 
more or less since, and has influenced most of 
the modern music also. 

In the south of India music is entirely of a 
different character. The instruments also differ 
a good deal from the north ; they have a system 
of their own. Instead of classifying the tunes 
according to Muts, and having so many Raags 
and Raagnis, they simply have seventy-two Ragas, 
otherwise scales ; and each scale has got a name 
which signifies the notes of which it is composed. 
They follow the early Narada system of music, 
and have their own history and traditions. 

The North India music is much more 
elaborate, more beautiful and finer of the two. 



Sapt-Addhya. 

Indian Music is comprised of Sapt-Addhya. 
Sapt means seven, and Addhya means laws ; 
meaning "seven laws of music," which are as 
follows : — 

First.— Sur-Addhya. — The law which treats 
of tones, including semi-tones, demi-semi-tones, etc. 

Second. — Raag-Addhya. — The law which 
treats of tunes or melodies. 

Third. — Taal-Addhya. — The law which treats 
of time. 



21 

Fourth. — Ast-Addhya. — The law which treats 
of musical instruments, such as the Been, Sitar, 
Taa-oos, Nafeeree, Baansri, Sankh, etc., played 
either by the hand or mouth. 

Fifth. — Nirt-Addhya. — The law which treats 
of dancing. 

Sixth. — Bhao-Addhya. — The law which treats 
of actions and movements in rhythm with singing 
and dancing. 

Seventh. — Arth-Addhya. — The law which 
treats of comprehension of tunes and times. 

N.B. — "Bhao-Addhya" is practically linked with 
" Nirt-Addhya" for it is the art of illustrating 
the songs and dances with the movements 
of arms, and all the parts of the body. 
" Arth-Addhya" may be acquired by a theo- 
retical study of the science, and a constant 
hearing of it. 



Sur-Addhya. (law of tone). 

Chapter II. 



Indian Music is formed of Surs (tones), and 
Talas (times). Each is dependent upon the other 
for a complete arrangement of a tune, sung or 
played. 

The Talas (times), are executed on such 
instruments as the Pakhavaj, Tubla, etc. 

The Surs (notes), form tunes, which may 
either be played or sung, on such instruments 
as the Been, Taa-oos, etc. 

The Surs (notes), are seven in number, and 
are named individually, as : — i, Kharaj; 2, Rikhab ; 
3, Gandhar; 4, Maddhyam; 5, Pancham ; 6, Dhaivat; 
7, Nikhad ; and collectively they are called the 
" Sargam " ; and to simplify their use in music, 
they have abbreviated names to distinguish them, 
such as, Sa — Re — Ga — Ma — Pa — Dha — Ni. 

These Surs (notes), have enticing biographies, 
human and supernatural in composition. 

They are human in having temperaments, 
costumes and colour and, like products of nature, 
flourish in seasons. 

They are descended from Heavenly Bodies, 
and trace their lineage from above. 

Certain Surs are dominant at certain ages of 
mankind. They are produced from various parts 
of the body. 



23 

The Surs occur in certain animals from 
whom they are taken. 

Those Surs which are possessed with hot 
temperaments have the mysterious faculty of 
curing those afflicted with rheum, and such 
ailments, and vice versa, provided they are sung 
by high-minded and noble souls, and at the 
specified season of the year, and hour of the day, 
when they should be sung ; then alone the 
desired effect will be obtained. Any violation of 
the prescribed law is regarded as sacrilege. 

The seven notes are under the protection of 
the seven Divinities who preside over them. 



Interesting Chronicles of Surs (notes). 

Kharaj Sa. — This Sur is under the 
protecting Deity Agni, and like Pancham does 
not lend itself to change into Teevar (sharp) or 
Komal (flat), but is permanent. 

It is connected with the first heavens and the 
planet called Kamar. 

It has a happy temperament. 

In effect it is cold and moist. 

Its complexion is pink. 

And arrayed in most beautiful white garments 
and lovely ornaments. 

Its seasons are all the seasons of the year. 

This note is produced from the abdomen. 

Its sound has been taken from the cry of the 
bird Ta-oos (peacock). 



It is prevalent in the voice of the human 
being of seventy years. 

This tone is harmonious in all the Raags 
and Raagnis. 

It has four Surats (semi-tones) or shades of 
tones, namely, Teevra, Kamoodvati, Manda and 
Chan-do dhuti. 

Rikhab Ra. — This Sur is under 
the protection of the God Brhama. 

This tone changes into Teevar (sharp) or 
Komal (flat) as the occasion may require. 

It is connected with the second heavens 
and the planet called Atarud. It has a happy 
temperament. 

In effect it is cold and dry. 

Its complexion is pale green, arrayed in a 
red costume, and beautifully ornamented. 

Its season is the hot season. 

This note is produced from the heart. 

Its sound has been taken from the cry of 
the bird Papeeha. 

The note is prevalent in the voice of a 
human being when three score years old. 

It is harmonious in the tunes Deyce, Kaanhra, 
etc., and quite unpleasant in Malkaus, Hindole, etc. 

It has three Surats (shades of tone). 

Dayadati, Ran-ja-ni and Rag-tika. 

Gandahr Ga. — This Sur is under 
the protecting Divinity Sarasvati. 

This changes into sharp or flat as the occasion 
may require. 



25 

It is connected with the third heavens and 
the planet called Zohra. 

It has a sad temperament. 

In effect it is cold and moist. 

Its complexion is orange, arrayed in crimson 
garments. 

Its season is the hot weather. 

This note is produced from the chest. 

Its sound has been taken from the cry of 
the animal Goos-fund. 

It is prevalent in the voice of a human being 
aged fifty. 

It is pleasant in the tunes Kalangra, Khamaj, 
etc. etc., and quite unpleasant in Sarang, etc. 

It has two Surats, Se-ve and Kro-de-he. 



Maddhyam Ma. — This Sur is 
under the protection of the God Mahadeo. 

It changes into sharp and flat. 

It is connected with the fourth heavens, and 
the planet called Shums. 

It has a restless temperament. 

In effect it is warm and dry. 

Its complexion is pale pink, arrayed in reddish 
black garments and prettily ornamented. 

Its season is the rainy season. 

It is produced from the throat. 

Its sound has been taken from the cry of the 
bird Saras (crane). 

It is prevalent in the voice of a human being 
of two score years. 



26 



This note is pleasant in Malkaos, Bhairaon, 
etc., and unpleasant in Kalyan, etc. 

It has four Surats, Vajrika, Prasaarini, Preetee, 
and Maarjani. 

Pancham Pa. — This note is under 
the protection of the Goddess Lakshmi. 

It is permanent like Sa. 

It is connected with the fifth heavens and the 
planet called Mirreekh. 

It has a passionate temperament. 

In effect it is warm and dry. 

Its complexion is red, arrayed in yellow 
garments. 

Its season is the rainy weather. 

This note is produced from the mouth. 

Its sound has been taken from the cry of 
the bird Koyel. 

It is prevalent in the voice of a human 
being of thirty years. 

It sounds pleasant in the tunes Todi, Aa-sao-ri, 
and quite unpleasant in Mal-kaus, Hin-dole, etc. 

It has four Surats, Ragta-Sandeypnee- 
Alaapnee Rshiti. 

Dhaivat Dha. — This Sur is under 
the protection of the god Ganesha. 

It changes into sharp and flat. 

It is connected with the sixth heavens ; and 
the planet called Mushtari. 

It has an equable temperament. 

In effect it is warm and cold. 



2 7 

Its complexion is yellow, arrayed in vermillion 
garments with lovely ornaments. 

Its season is the cold weather. 

It is produced from the palate. 

Its sound has been taken from the neighing 
of a horse. 

This note is prevalent in the voice of a 
human being of twenty years. 

It is harmonious in Bilaval-Alaiya, etc., and 
inharmonious in Zeelaf-Jogiya, etc. 

It has three Surats, Mandati, Rohni, and 
Rammya. 

Ni-khad Ni. — This Sur is pro- 
tected by Surya. 

It is changeable into sharp and flat according 
to the tune in which it occurs. 

It is connected with the seventh heavens 
and the planet called Zohol. 

It has a happy and passionate temperament. 

In effect it is cold and dry. 

Its complexion is dark, arrayed in black 
garments and most beautifully ornamented. 

Its season is the cold weather. 

It is produced from the nose. 

Its sound has been taken from the trumpeting 
of an elephant. 

This note is prevalent in the voice of a 
human being of ten years. 

It is pleasant in Bi-hag, Puruj, etc., and quite 
unpleasant in So-rath, etc. 

It has two Surats, Ooggara and Ksho-bhi-ni. 



28 



Division of Notes. 

To portray to our minds the celestial and 
most exquisite harmony which the " Shades of 
Tones" form in the Indian Music by a cut-and- 
dried theory in black and white is palpably out 
of the question. There are tones, half-tones, 
quarter-tones, and one-eighth of tones. The 
difference in these sounds, as can be well 
imagined, is so subtle, and so exquisitely fine, 
that before one has the consciousness of one 
sound it has merged into the other of its own 
accord, forming soft modulations and unexpected 
cadences. It is unutterably pure, high, classical, 
beautiful and sublime in expression. These 
" Shades of Tones " correspond with the Surats 
previously mentioned. 

There is a certain stage in each note, which 
is neither Teevar (sharp) nor Komal (flat), but a 
sound between the two. This sound or note is 
called the Suddh Sur (note) and forms the central 
sound of the note. There are three notes in a 
higher key than the Suddh and three notes in a 
lower key than the Suddh, and these together 
form the seven tones in one tone. 

A tone which is one degree higher than the 
Suddh is called Teevar. 

A tone which is two degrees higher than the 
Suddh is called Ta- Teevar. 

A tone which is three degrees higher than the 
Suddh is called Tam-Teevar. 

A tone which is one degree lower than the 
Suddh is called Komal. 



20 

A tone which is two degrees lower than the 
Suddh is called Ati-Komal. 

A tone which is three degrees lower than the 
Suddh is called Shikari. 

These are the seven tones that divide the one 
tone. 

The subtlety and fineness of these sounds 
may better be imagined than written. To an 
untrained ear these delicate shades of tone are 
meaningless, and are hardly discernible. He is 
merely conscious of an exquisite flow of sounds, 
all blending into one another, making a gracefully 
delicate whole. 

These seven notes correspond with the Surats 
already mentioned. These divisions of notes as well 
as the Surtis, as given in the olden texts, are too 
complicated to understand, and one gets thoroughly 
puzzled. As a matter of fact there are twenty- 
two Surats, or sounds, or tones in one octave, 
in the Indian Music, and the differences in these 
is merely that of a hairbreadth, hardly distinguish- 
able to the foreign ear in a melody. And yet 
it is these Surats which are of great importance 
in the formation of a tune and in retaining its 
individual character. They are distinct sounds 
and easily heard when a finished performer plays 
or sings them slowly in a scale, striking each 
note successively. 

Young Asrekar, of Poona, has made out a very 
clever table, facilitating their comprehension and 
use in tunes, discarding some of the classical 
terms and putting them in his own way, which 
is simpler and easily understood. 



■^ 



Asrekar's Table of Twenty-two Surats. 



i. 

2. 

3- 
4- 

5- 
6. 

7- 

3. 

9- 

to. 
r i. 

12. 

13- 

14. 

15- 
16. 

17- 

18. 
19. 

20. 
21. 
22. 



SURATS. 

Chan-do-vati or Sa 
Daya-vati or Ati Komal re 
Ran-ja-ni or Komal re 
Rag-tika or Suddh re 

lo 6 ^ 1 or Teevar re 
IRoud-reeJ 

Kro-dhee or Ati Komal ga 

Vaj-ri-ka or Komal ga 

Prasaarni or Maddhya ga 

Pree-tee or Teevar ga 

Maarjani Komal ma 

Kshiti or Maddhya ma 

Ragta or Teevra ma 

Sandeepni or Teevar-tar ma 

Alaapni or Suddh Pa 

Mandati or Ati Komal dha 

Rohini or Komal dha 

Rammya or Suddh dha 

Oogra or Teevra dha 

Ksho-bhi-ni or Ati Komal ni 

Teevra or Komal ni 

Koo-mood-vati or Maddhya ni 

Mandha or Teevra ni 



THE TUNES IN WHICH THEY OCCUR. 

This occurs in all the tunes. 

Ditto tyie tune Bhairaon, etc. 

Ditto ditto Bhairaveen, etc. 

Ditto ditto Bibhaas, etc. 



Ditto -ditto Yemen Kallian, etc. 

Ditto ditto Todec, etc. 

Ditto ditto Bhairaveen, etc. 

Ditto ditto Malkaus, etc. 

Ditto ditto Yemen Kallian, etc. 

Ditto ditto Bhairaveen, etc. 

Ditto ditto Poorbee, etc. 

Ditto -ditto Yemen Kallian, etc. 

Ditto ditto Poorya, etc. 

Ditto all the the tunes where Pa is use< 

Ditto the tune Bhairon, etc. 

Ditto ditto Bhairaveen, etc. 

Ditto ditto Bibhaas-Malkaus, etc. 

Ditto ditto Yemen Kallian, etc. 

Ditto ditto Gond Malaad, etc. 

Ditto ditto Bhairaveen, etc. 

Ditto ditto Malkaus, etc. 

Ditto ditto Yemen Kallian, etc. 



N.B. — The major scale in the European music would correspond with 
the notes as follows : — Chandovajr or Sa, Roudree or Re, 
Preetee or Ga, Ragta or Ma, Alaapni or Pa, Oogra or Dha, 
Mandha or Ni, 



Saptaks (Octaves). 

The seven notes in the Indian Music, Sa, 

Re, Ga, Ma, Pa, Dha, Ni, otherwise called the 

" Sargam" form a Saptak (octave). There are 
five Saptaks. 

The lowest octave is called Mandra-tar 
Saptak. 

The next lowest is called Mandra. 

The notes of this Saptak are produced from 
the abdomen. 

The medium octave is called Maddhyam 
Saptak. The notes of this Saptak are produced 
from the throat. 

The next highest octave is called Taar- 
Saptak, and the notes of this octave are produced 
from the head. 

The highest octave is called Taar-tar Saptak. 

A qualified singer must produce the three 
Saptaks, Mandra, Maddhyam and Taar with ease. 

The five Saptaks and even more may be 
played on the instrument " Been." 

The ascending from the low notes to the 
high notes in a scale is termed Rohi, and 
descending from the high notes to the low notes 
in the scale is called Arohi : — Sa, Re, Ga, Ma, 
Pa, Dha, Ni, Sa, is Rohi, and Sa, Ni, Dha, Pa, 
Ma, Ra, Ge, Sa, is Arohi, 



32 

Murchana. 

Murchana is that alluring and pleasing oddity 
in the Indian Music which helps to establish the 
indefinable charm and the merging of tones which 
characterises the melodies so forcibly and so 
fully. 

Murchana is the harmonious and gentle 
gliding of sounds, which occur while uniting one 
note to the other consecutive one. 

There are twenty one Murchanas in the three 
Saptaks (octaves), each Murchana comprised of 
the sounds created during the blending of one note 
into the other of the Rohi (ascending from the 
lower notes to the higher in the scale of one 
octave), and the Arohi (descending from the 
higher notes to the lower). 

The following are the Murchanas of the 
Mandra Saptak : — i, Ootra-Manda. This Murchana 
is formed by starting from the note Sa in the 
Rohi scale and coming back to the note Sa in 
the Arohi scale. The following Murchanas are 
in their proper order, each having a successive 
note for a starting point in the scale and coming 
back to the same point : 2, Ranjani ; 3, Ootra-tha ; 

4, Suddh-kharja ; 5, Bajhri-karta ; 6, Ason-kranta ; 
7, Aph-rokta. 

Murchanas of the Maddhyam Saptak: — 1, 
Sobray ; 2, Harnasuad ; 3, Klohna ; 4, Barkay ; 

5, Parkharka ; 6, Saddhya ; 7, Gorpay. 

Murchanas of the Taar Saptak: — 1, Pra ; 
2, Bassala; 3, Sonkhy ; 4, Partarka ; 5, Roni ; 6, 
Barkhata ; 7, Onta. 



33 

Harmonious and Inharmonious Notes in a 

Tune. 

Baadi, Sambaadi, Ambaadi and Bebaadi. — 
These are the four expressions given to the notes 
which are harmonious or discordant in a tune. 
For instance : — 

i. Baadi. This term is applied to that note 
which is dominant and gives colour to a tune, 
like the note " Dha" in the Raag Bhairon, or the 
note " Ma" in the Raag Malkaus, or Komal 
Gandhar (flat Ga) in the Raagni (female tune) 
Todee. 

2. Sambaadi is the expression which is 
applied to that note which gives additional bril- 
liancy to a tune, and helps the Baadi like the 
Sur " Dha" in Todee. This note is sub-dominant. 

3. Ambaadi is the expression applied to 
those notes which are not discordant in a tune. 

4. Bebaadi is the expression applied to note 
or notes which are completely discordant in a 
tune like Teevar " Ma" in Malkaus, or Teevar 
"Ga" in Todee. 

Taans. 

A Taan is a variation or run which occurs 
when a tune is played or sung. There are count- 
less varieties of executing Taans, and these are 
so numerous that a finished performer can sing 
or play a tune for hours with the introduction of 
Taans before he has exhausted his stock, and yet 
not repeat the same Taan twice. 



34 

This is that extraordinary part of the Indian 
Music when a musician has the unique opportunity 
and advantage of asserting his knowledge and 
individuality during the course of a performance 
by harmonious combinations of notes into Taans 
on the spur of the moment. 

These Taans are better illustrated sung or 
played. To convey any definite idea of what 
they really mean, in writing, is an impossibility. 

The inflections, modulations, trills, etc., they 
form are so numberless and so inspiring that 
unconsciously one is uplifted into an enchanted 
region full of mysterious charms and beauties. 

As I have said, there are various classes of 
Taans. I shall now endeavour to demonstrate one 
kind of Taan which produces five thousand and 
forty diversified Taans from the seven notes of 
the octave, sa, re, ga, ma, pa, dha, ni. 

It may help to convey to the readers the 
extent of the grandeur and beauties these tunes 
possess. It may seem impossible, at first glance, 
that such a small number of notes should be able 
to produce varied strains of such magnitude, but 
a close study will show how skilfully and with 
what knowledge it was manipulated by the 
ancient and great masters of music : — 

One note will give you one Taan only — sa. 

Two notes will give you two Taans of 
different varieties : Rohi (ascending from low to 
the high notes), i — sa, re. Arohi (descending 
from the high to the low notes), 2 — re, sa. 



35 

In three notes, sa, re, ga, you get six 
different Taans : i— sa, re, ga ; 2 — re, sa, ga ; 
3 — sa, ga, re ; 4 — re, ga, sa ; 5 — ga, re, sa ; and 
6 — ga, sa, re. 

Four notes produce twenty-four Taans, thus : 
1— sa, re, ga, ma; 2— sa, re, ma, ga; 3— sa, ga, 
ma, re ; 4 — sa, ga, re, ma ; 5 — sa, ma, re, ga ; 
6 — sa, ma, ga, re ; 7 — re, ga, ma, sa ; 8— re, ga, 
sa, ma; 9 — re, ma, sa, ga ; 10 — re, ma, ga, sa ; 
11 — re, sa, ga, ma; 12 — re, sa, ma, ga; 13 — ga, 
ma, sa, re; 14 — ga, ma, re, sa ; 15 — ga, sa, re, ma; 
16 — ga, sa, ma, re; 17 — ga, re, sa, ma; 18 — ga, 
re, ma, sa ; 19 — ma, ga, re, sa ; 20 — ma, ga, sa, re ; 
21 — ma, re, ga, sa ; 22 — ma, re, sa, ga ; 23 — ma, 
sa, re, ga ; 24 — ma, sa, ga, re. 

Five notes have the capability of creating one 
hundred and twenty Taans. 

If the arrangement of the four notes, per- 
mitting twenty-four Taans above, is followed 
carefully, it will be seen that five notes must 
needs necessarily furnish one hundred and twenty 
Taans. 

It is clear that four notes produce twenty- 
four Taans. It is in itself a group of four notes 
only. Five notes, therefore, have five groupings 
of four notes, thus : 

Sa, re, ga, ma, pa are the five notes, and in 
these the five groups of four notes are : 1 — sa re, 
ga, ma ; 2 — re, ge, ma, pa ; 3 — ga, ma, pa, sa ; 
4 — ma, pa, sa, re ; 5 — pa, sa, re, ga ; place the 
remaining note at the beginning of a Taan. Each 
of these groups of four notes will produce twenty- 



C2 



36 

four Taans, making in all one hundred and twenty 
Taans, for example : 

Sa (at the beginning of Taan) and the 
remaining four notes are re, ga, ma, pa. 

These four notes will supply twenty-four 
Taans according to explanation above, thus : 
i — sa, re, ga, ma, pa ; 2 — sa, re, ga, pa, ma ; 3 — 
sa, ma, pa, ga, re; 4 — sa, re, ma, ga, pa; etc., 
etc. When these twenty-four Taans of the 
hundred and twenty are exhausted, start by 
placing the consecutive note re at the commence- 
ment of a Taan, making a scale like this : re, 
ga, ma, pa, sa ; re at the beginning, and the four 
notes, ga, ma, pa, sa, will yield twenty-four 
Taans ; example : re, ga, ma, pa, sa ; re, ga, ma, 
sa, pa ; re, ga, pa, ma, sa ; re, ga, pa, sa, ma ; etc. 

Then place the following note ma at the 
beginning of a Taan, and the remaining four 
notes pa, sa, re, ga, will give twenty-four Taans, 
similarly start the Taans with pa, and the four 
notes sa, re, ga, ma will contain twenty-four 
Taans, completing the hundred and twenty Taans. 

Six notes, sa, re, ga, ma, pa, dha, at once 
multiply the number of one hundred and 
twenty Taans six times, marking an enormous 
increase of seven hundred and twenty Taans. 

The same method follows the building up 
of these Taans all throughout, facilitating their 
comprehension. 

The scale of these six notes have six varied 
groupings of five notes each, with the one extra 
note which falls at the beginning of each Taan 



37 

successively as follows : i— sa, re, ga, ma, pa ; 
2 — re, ga, ma, pa, dha, 3— ga, ma, pa, dha, sa; 
4 — ma, pa, dha, sa, re; 5 — pa, dha, sa, re, ga; 
6 — dha, sa, re, ga, ma. Each of these groups of 
five notes form one hundred and twenty Taans. 

Similarly, seven notes form five thousand 
and forty different Taans, multiplying the last 
number of seven hundred and twenty Taans 
seven times, making five thousand and forty 
Taans. 

In these seven notes, sa, re, ga, ma, pa, dha, 
ni, there are seven different groups of six notes : 
1 — sa, re, ga, ma, pa, dha; 2 — re, ga, ma, pa, dhi, 
n i ; 3 — g a , ma , P a , dha, ni, sa ; 4 — ma, pa, dha, 
ni, sa, re ; 5 — pa, dha, ni, sa, re, ga : 6 — dha, ni, 
sa, re, ga, ma. With the one note extra coming 
at the beginning of the scale of these six notes 
successively, in the order of the octave, each 
of these groups of six notes yield seven hundred 
and twenty Taans, and seven hundred and twenty 
times multiplied by seven is five thousand and 
forty Taans. 

The skeleton of a Raag or Raagni is sung 
first, then a line is taken and repeated with the 
introduction of these Taans and other kinds of 
Taans which I have not mentioned, but always 
bearing in mind the scale of the Raag and Raagni 
that is sung. 

For all the Raags and Raagnis have their own 
scales of variegated notes. These Taans are 
adjusted to the scale which is true for that 
particular Raag which is sung or played 



38 

Raag Addhya (Law of Tunes) 

Chapter III. 

Classification of Tunes. 

The order in which the Hanuman Mut has 
classified the tunes is as follows : — 

There are six great Raags (male tunes). 
Each Raag has got its own five Raagnis (female 
tunes) and eight Putrs (sons) and eight Bhaarjas 
(daughters-in-law) making in all one hundred 
and thirty-two tunes. 

The important tunes are the six Raags and 
thirty Raagnis, the rest, ninety-six in number, 
are minor tunes, though some of these are as 
beautiful and stirring in conception. 

The Raags display the most exalted form of 
musical energy. They are rich, full, heavy and 
highly classical in sentiment and permeated by a 
religio-philosophic vein. They touch the deepest 
emotional chords of the soul and transport one to 
a nobler and loftier realm. 

The Raags have still retained their notes 
of original purity, notwithstanding the malices 
of time and crudities of man ; nothing seems to 
have disturbed or affected their godly concep- 
tion and sublimity of expression. 



39 

They are very difficult to perform, and none 
but the most profound students or efficient 
masters comprehend the varied and numerous 
technicalities which constitute their completeness, 
and venture to perform them. 

The Raagnis are perhaps of a comparatively 
lighter nature, though some are equally rich and 
deep in feeling, and quite as difficult to perform. 
These classical tunes vary in the number of 
notes they possess in the octave forming their 
scales. 

In some tunes all the seven notes occur. 
These are termed Sampuran. 

In others, only six notes of the octave form 
the scale ; and these are called Khadao. Others 
have only five or less notes of the octave which 
complete their scale ; these are termed Odhao. 



Variegated Methods of Singing Tunes. 

There are various methods in which a tune 
may be sung or played in Indian Music. 

Dhurpad. — Dhurpad is that style 
of singing which comprises dwelling upon each note 
with masterful control for some moments. A 
Dhurpad of any classical tune may be sung, pro- 
vided the performer is able to do it. It is very 
ancient. It is a manly and heavy way of singing, 
and is the most difficult of all methods. 



40 

The "division of notes" in the previous 
chapter has shown how extremely fine and 
subtle is the space of sound allowed to differentiate 
one note from the other. The slightest 
vibration in the voice tends to produce a Surti 
(shade of tone). Each note, therefore, should be 
struck in its purity and richness of sound, and 
dwelt upon clearly and distinctly. So that the 
power of retention, with correct intonation, and 
with absolute control, is the first step of most 
vital importance to be learnt in singing a 
Dhurpad, and it is extremely difficult. 

When the notes of a Dhurpad of any Raag 
are struck with that accuracy and precision 
which it demands, a strange tremor overpowers 
one, so that one is conscious of nothing but the 
divine and rich sounds that fill the atmosphere, 
and hold one in a magic spell. Each note is 
sung clearly and distinctly in its own purity of 
sound with magical effect, and retained in its 
own glory, as long as the power of the per- 
former will allow. Its theme is generally a 
historical or a religious one. It is never sung 
quickly, but invariably in Bilampat or Muddh 
lai, i.e., first or second speed.* 



N.B. — There are three speeds in which a song may be 
sung or played. 

ist speed. — Bilampat (slow) 

2nd speed. — Muddh (of double quickness) 

yd speed. — Dhurat (of tremendous rapidity). 



41 

Dhurpad singing is divided into four equal 
parts. The first part is called Astaai. The open- 
ing notes of a tune are shown in this part. 

The second part is called Antra. All the 
notes that occur in the tune are sung in this 
portion. 

The treatment of the higher notes of the tune 
is shown in the third part called A-bhog. 

The last part is called Sanchari. It was 
against the royal etiquette of the former days to 
sing any other class of tunes excepting Dhurpad 
in the Durbar. Dhurpad singing is also called 
the Khandari Baani. It is the most difficult 
mode of execution and one which is restricted to 
a very few musical families in India. 

Khayal. — A Khayal of any classical 
tune may be sung. Unlike Dhurpad, each note 
merges or melts into the other in quick succession. 
Wave after wave of delicious ethereal melodies 
float in the air. Floods of scales succeed one 
after the other, forming pleasing combinations, 
and the effect is like that of a quick rise and 
fall of heavenly strains. Trills, variations, tremors, 
and all such productions of the voice have full 
play in this kind of singing. Khayal singing was 
invented by Sultan Hussain Sherki in the fifteenth 
century, and brought to a state of perfection by 
Sadarang, the Durbar singer of Mohammed Shah 
of Delhi. 

Tappa. — These were originally sung 
by the camel and mule drivers in the Punjab, in 



42 

which they related the story of Heera and 
Ranjhi. Schori, the famous singer in the court of 
Asaf-Ud-dowlah, the King of Oudh, put new life 
and soul into it, and converted the simple ditty 
of the desert into a cultivated form of singing. 

Hori. — These beautiful songs con- 
tain the love stories of Krishna, the God of Love, 
and the Gopis. The method of singing them is 
most fascinating. 

Thumri. — These are extremely 
pretty little songs and are very popular and 
delightful, sung by all in India. They are 
generally composed in Brij-bhasha, and contain 
all the characteristic events. 

Alaap. — This is to sing the melody 
of songs by inserting such expressions as Aaar, 
Naa, Te, Ray, Re, Nom, Ta, etc., instead of the 
real words of the song. 



*&• 



Sargam. — This is to sing the tune 
of the song by the notes of the song instead 
of the words, such as sa, re, ga, ma, etc. 

Tarwat. — This is to sing the tune 
of the song by inserting the expressions of the 
Tubla (the drum-like instrument to keep time), 
and not the words of the song, such as Dhirkat, 
Tirkat, Dar, Dhina, etc. 

Bhajan. — These are pathetic re- 
ligious songs of appealing nature sung by Jogees 



43 

(ascetics) on the strange instrument called 
Ek-tara, and also by devotees in the temples. 

Apart from these methods there are also 
other ways of singing songs at different 
occasions. The varied parts of the country 
have their own individual characteristic singing 
like Lach-chi in Punjab or Maand sung in 
Rajputana. Maand are evening tunes sung by 
a maiden who goes to fetch water from a well 
or by a mother rocking a baby to sleep. They 
are very beautiful. Garbas are gay, joyous 
tunes sung in Gujerat and Kathiawar on some 
festive occasions by a group of young maidens. 
They move in a circular form with slow 
rhythmic movements bending their lithe figures 
and gracefully beating their hands in rhythm. 

Expressions denoting Information 
about Raags and Raagnis. 

The following are certain musical expressions 
used in giving information about the Raags and 
Raagnis. 

Maarg is the expression applied 
to those Raags and Raagnis that are sung 
exactly alike in all parts of the country but 
the mode of execution should be so difficult 
so as not to be comprehensible to all, like the 
Khandari-Bani or Dhurpad singing. Maarg is 
celestial. 

Deysi is the expression used for 
those tunes which are sung differently every- 



44 

where, but the method of its singing should 
be so facile so as to be understood by all. 
Deysi is terrestrial. 

Suddh is the expression given to 
those tunes which have retained the notes of 
original purity untempered by any freak of time 
or man, like the six Raags (male tunes) and a 
few important Raagnis (female tunes). 

Salink are those tunes which have 
semblance of other tunes. These are many. 

Sanke-Run are those tunes which 
are either created out of the combination of two 
Suddh tunes, or five or six Raagnis. These are 
numerous. 

Maha-Salink are those which are 
formed from Salink and Sanke-Run. There are 
no end of these. Some are of a remarkably 
beautiful and classical nature. 



Qualifications of Musicians. 

In the ancient days there were institutions 
of music where a student acquired knowledge, 
and attained a certain degree that qualified him 
in his profession, and gave him a certain 
standing and position in the musical world. 
There is a veritable vocabulary of titles, that 



45 

marked the different grades to which he belonged. 
I shall quote a few important ones. 

Naik was the highest degree 
conferred on he who was a past master in the 
science, who not only rendered all the Raags 
and Raagnis in their original purity and correct- 
ness, but was also able to produce pupils equally 
great. Beyjoo and Gopal were Naiks. 

Gandharp was the degree given to 
an efficient performer of Maarg and Deysi. 
Taan Sen was a Gandharp. 

Gooni was the degree given to him 
who was able to execute Deysi well. 

Pandit was he who learnt the 
science to perfection in theory but not in practice. 

Oottam was the name given to 
him who had such an extraordinary command 
over his singing that he could sing without any 
accompaniment, and not be dependent in any 
way on his instruments for Tal (time) and Sur 
(note). This is quite extraordinary in the Indian 
Music, and only an efficient student could aspire 
to attain this rank. 

Maddhyam was one who was more 
or less dependent upon his accompaniment. 

Addhyam was he who was entirely 
dependent upon his accompaniment for singing. 



4 6 
Qualities of Voice. 

The singer had to be distinguished with 
thirteen qualities in his voice : — 

Mirisht. — That the voice should 
affect all who heard it. 

Mudhr. — That the voice should be 
sweet and entertaining. 

Jhapal. — That the voice should 
neither be very loud nor very low, but full 
and rich, and that while singing he should be 
able to retain the breath for a long time and not 
suffer from short breath. 

Taras-than. — That the three Saptaks 
should be executed with equal facility and ease. 

Sakha-ba. — That the voice should 
be possessed of the power to create laughter in 
the assembly. 

Kaaran. — That the voice should be 
possessed of such pathos so as to produce deep 
feeling and tears. 

Komal. — That the voice should be 
soft and stirring. 

Sara-dak. — That the voice should 
be big and heard distinctly at a distance. 

Ghan. — That the voice should be 
clear without a tremor. 



47 

Sang-da. — To execute all the Taans 
(variations) with great ease. 

Gaad. — That the command should 
be so entire so as to be able to produce loud 
and soft at will. 

Salchan. — To be able to sing at 
length without break. 

Parjar. — That the singer should be 
of a prepossessing appearance and noble dis- 
position. 



Defects of Musicians. 

There were several objectionable mannerisms 
which disqualified a singer. A long list of 
them is given in the sacred books. The 
following are a few : — 

Sandasht. — To sing with closed 
teeth. 

Bhut. — To sing with fear. 

Sankat. — To sing without confidence. 

Kanpat. — To start with a tremor in 
the voice. 

Karaagi. — To sing with mouth wide 
open. 

Kapal. — To sing with flourishes. 

Kagay. — To start with commotion 
and noise. 



4 8 



Karaba. — To crane the neck like 
a camel. 

Jumbuk. — To shake and whirl the 
head and neck while singing. 

Parsari. — To make frantic gestures 
with the hands. 

Nameelak. — To sing with eyes 
closed tight. 

Abagpat. — To sing with the words 
all jumbled up together, and rolling in the throat 
so as to be incomprehensible. 

Stekaree. — To sing by taking sharp 
quick breaths. 

Saan-nasik. — To sing with a nasal 
twang. 

Rava-chat. — That the voice should 
be shaky. 

Asethat. — That the voice should be 
disturbed and disquiet. 

Nasar. — That the voice should be 
closed and tight. 

Kagay. — That the voice should be 
like the crowing of a crow. 

Karish. — That the voice should be 
thin and flat. 

Bhikan. — That the voice should re- 
semble the braying of a donkey. 



49 

An efficient singer was supposed to follow 
these and several other injunctions ; he was also 
carefully instructed to impress upon the hearers 
with the " sum" of the song. 

" Sum" is the important beat or juncture of a 
tune, where all the attention of the hearers is 
deeply concentrated. In other words it is the 
climax of the song. 

The singer should also discriminate and 
mark the occasion by singing opportune songs. 
He should have a good memory, and should be 
something of a poet. 

The musician of olden days must have been 
an ideal personage ! He was regulated by all the 
laws so appropriately and becomingly laid down 
for a master of such an agreeable art. 

The modern musician is apparently void of 
these pleasing qualifications, his study in etiquette 
is apparently neglected and ignored, and that is 
the reason why modern singing very often results 
in grimaces, painful gestures and most disagreeable 
sounds. 

Raags and Raagnis. 

All the Raags, Raagnis, Putras and Bharjas 
and other tunes have names to distinguish them 
from each other, so that there is no confusion. 
Some are named after Deities, some after the 
tribes, some after the composers, some after the 
countries, etc. They have also appointed seasons 
of the year and hour of the day when they should 



So 

be sung or played. Musicians abide by this law 
strictly. It may be thought, perhaps, that it is 
merely a matter of imagination or the habit of 
centuries that a cultivated ear cannot tolerate a 
song out of season or time. 

A Behag is full of sweet meanings and 
appealing sentiments when sung at night. In the 
morning it is entirely discordant and loses its 
beauty. Similarly, an Aa-saori sung in the 
early hours of the day stirs the depths of your 
highest thoughts, at night it loses its charm and 
falls flat. 

This is neither habit nor imagination, but 
a deeper mystery pervades the arrangement. 
There are certain notes that are characterised 
by hot temperaments. These are dominant in the 
tunes to be played or sung in the hot months. 
Then there are other notes that are attributed 
with cold temperaments. These are important 
in the tunes to be played in the cold season. 

The law-makers of olden days were ardent 
and profound students of nature. They un- 
ravelled the hidden secrets of sound by long 
study, and made sure that certain sounds har- 
monised with certain notes in certain seasons, 
and adjusted the notes in accordance with nature. 



The twenty-four hours of a night and day 
are divided into eight parts, and each part lasts 
for three hours. The first morning part is from 
six o'clock to nine o'clock. The tunes that are 



5i 

to be played or sung during these hours are 
slow, dreamy and pure, and the notes re, and 
dha are komal (flat). Bhairaon and all its 
species which are eight and Ramkali are sung 
at this time. Re, ma, dha are komal. 

Nine to twelve is the second morning part, 
and all the notes that occur in the tunes to be 
sung and played in these hours are komal — like 
Aa-saori, Bhairaveen and Todee, and all its kind — 
which are six. The komal notes now change 
into Teevar. At noon exactly Sarang is played ; 
it is a brilliant bright melody. All the notes in 
the Rohi are Teevar, and ma and ni are komal 
in the Arohi. Sarang is Odhao, and has five 
notes in the scale, viz., sa, re, ma, pa, ni. 

From twelve to three Bheempalaasi, Dhana- 
asri, Dhaani, etc., are played. Ga, ma and ni in 
these tunes are komal, and re, da, that were 
komal in the morning tunes, become Teevar. 
Three to six p.m., Poorvi, Purya-dhanasri and 
Maarwa are played in these hours. Shri Raag 
is played at about six o'clock. Ga, ma and ni, 
in these tunes become Teevar, and re, dha become 
komal. 

From six to nine all the notes become Teevar. 
Yemen Kallian and all the Kallian tunes, which 
are numerous, are played in these hours. 

From nine to twelve p.m. are played Bihaag, 
Sankra, Deyce, etc. They are all in Teevar notes. 
At about midnight, Bagesari, Behar, Adaana and 
such are played, and ga, ma, and ni again become 
komal in these tunes. 



D2 



52 

From twelve to three a.m., all kinds of 
Kaanhras, which are eighteen in number, are played 
including the famous Durbari, excepting Sugrai 
Kaanhra, which is played in the morning. Malkaus 
is also played after midnight. The notes re and 
pa do not occur in these tunes. All the rest are 
komal. From three to six a.m. are played Hindole 
Sohni Paraj, etc. The komal notes of Malkaus 
change into Teevar, and it becomes Hindole, which 
is Odhao. Then by adding re komal, the tune 
becomes Sohni, which is Shadhao, and then by 
adding pa to the scale it becomes Paraj. Basant 
and Lalit are also played in these hours. Both the 
Teevar and the Komal ma occur in these tunes. 



When the Raags are sung in the proper season 
and time and with perfect knowledge of the science, 
an absolute sense of calm and inner satisfaction 
is derived, hardly to be expressed. 

In such a state of perfection the Raags are 
supposed to be possessed of supernatural powers. 

They have chronicles of their births, which 
point out the mysterious sources from which they 
have originated. They have a series of interesting 
legends recording their life histories. They 
are benefactors of humanity by curing various 
bodily ailments. They charm the elements of 
nature, and invoke fire and water, in short, perform 
miracles. 

The idea of personifying all the forces of 
nature seems to be quite common in Hinduism. 



53 

All the Raags and Raagnis are impersonated. 
There are quatrains and verses, illustrating the 
form, colour, symbolism and significances which 
mark each tune. The Raags and Raagnis have 
been favourite themes with old Indian artists, 
who have painted them over and over again, 
but a fine illustration is rarely seen. 



54 

Chronicles of Raags and Raagnis. 

Mahadeo, the God of Music, is distinguished 
by having five heads, each of the four heads 
being turned towards the four quarters of the 
globe, north, south, east and west, while the fifth 
head is turned towards the heavens. And from 
each of the five heads, the five great Raags or demi- 
gods Bhairon, Hindole, Deepak, Shri and Megh 
originate. The sixth Raag Malkaus is come out of 
Parvati, the wife of Mahadeo. Brhama created the 
thirty Raagnis or nymphs, and each Raag or 
demi-god was presented with five Raagnis of 
sympathetic strains, whom he preserved with the 
tenderest care. Saraswati, the Goddess of Music 
and Learning, and the wife of Brhama, left an 
exquisitely graceful and poetic legacy to the 
world in the shape of the Veena, the most 
cherished and valued of musical instruments in 
India, and the demi-god Narada was appointed 
to practise it. 

" From Nada {sound) arose Surti. 
From Surti came Swara ((one). 
And from Swara was formed Raga (scale) 
And from Raga was created Gita (tune) 
So that the soul of Gita is sound." 

Raag means passions, and different tunes 
excite different emotions and feelings, such as 
Bhairaveen, is significant of Beauty ; Nut, of 
valour ; Maarwa, of fear ; Shri, of grandeur ; 
Malkaus, of passion ; Aa-saori, of renunciation ; 
Bihaag, of joy and brightness. 






-,--•- 






1 i J 



<% 



Wft; 



1. U 



^^-11-- 







: 



I. RAAG-BHAIRAON 



55 

Raag Bhairaon. — This Raag origin- 
ates from that head of Mahadeo which is 
turned southwards. This tune, along with its 
Raagnis, Putras and Bharjas, may be played in 
the months of September and October. The time 
for its performance is early dawn to sunrise. 
It is sumpooran, i.e., has all the seven notes of 
the octave for its scale. Sa, re, (komal) ga, ma, 
pa, dha. (komal) ni in the Rohi and Arohi. In 
form it is like Mahadeo, having five heads, four 
heads turned towards the four directions, north, 
south, east and west, while the fifth head is 
turned towards the heavens. He is represented 
as a Jogi Sanyasi (one who has retired from 
the world). His body is besmeared with ashes, 
his tresses, gray with dust, are gathered on the 
top of the head ; two Gangs (rivulets) oose out 
of his knot, and flow on either side. These 
are the two sacred rivers in India, the Ganga 
and the Jumna. A jewelled Kangan (bracelet) 
is fastened on his wrist, and a crescent in the 
centre of the head. The third eye of wisdom 
is located between the eyebrows. Two black 
venomous serpents coil subdued round his arms, 
on the forehead is the sacred mark of religion. 
He is seated on a skin of a tiger in the heavens, 
encircled by glittering clouds, holding a spike in 
one hand, and a rosary in the other. Around 
his throat is a chaplet of eight human skulls, 
— his conquered enemies. 

Bhairaon has five Raagnis : Berari, Madhmaad, 
Bhairaveen, Sindhavi and Bengal. The Raagnis 



50 

are represented as ideal graces of womanhood, 
most divinely fair and of incomparable beauty. 
The radiance they shed is so great that it 
shames the Sun, who hides his face behind the 
clouds, and the Moon withdraws in modest 
retirement on seeing their sweet lustre. 



'V .■ • , V ■/ -jj 





% 






<4Ss2d« ' 



> :-C; 



' - ! ,j 





II. RAAGNI-BHAIRAVEEN. 



57 

Bhairaveen is sylph-like and most 
exquisitely proportioned. All the tender fresh- 
ness and bloom of shy young maidenhood of 
fourteen years is her birthright. Her hair, still 
humid with the Shanan (sacred bath), is thrown 
back in a heavy dark mass. From beneath her 
long drooping eyelashes there escapes an in- 
effable light, giving a calm serenity to the 
beautiful prohle. Her slim hands are clasped 
in reverence. Her whole attitude is bent in 
submission of religious fervour— a breathing 
poem of devotion at the altar of " Linga." 
She has taken out her garland of heavily 
scented golden Champa (flowers) and conse- 
crated it to the gods. 

Her scheme of colour of costume and jewels 
is red and white. Her dainty person is be- 
jewelled and enveloped in an opalescent gossamer 
of fairy imagination. The temple of Mahadeo 
is built on the summit of a hill encircled by a 
fort. Flowering blooms of the Lotus scent the 
atmosphere. Two young maidens are engaged 
in playing and singing on the Majera (musical 
bells). Pearly dawn is creeping invisibly, 
bathing the realm with a delicate and roseate 
light. This is the enchanted hour when the 
tune of Bhairaveen is sung. 

The tune is Sampooran. Sa, re (komal), 
ga (komal), ma (komal), ma (teevar), pa, dha 
(komal), ni (komal), in the Rohi. The scale 
changes in the Arohi, and only one ma (teevar) 
is retained. 



N.B. — The Tumboora (musical instrument) in the hands 
of the singing girl in the painting is a mistake on 
the part of the artist. It should be a Majera. 




IV. RAAGNl AA-SAO-R1. 



59 

Aa-sao-ri has an ascetic character. 
It is represented as a female Jogi (one who has 
renounced the world) seated on a promontory 
inside a fort surrounded by water and beneath 
a huge Sandal tree. Its delicate, massive and 
perfumed foliage bent towards her in tender 
protection, and shading her from the morning 
sun's warm rays. The hour for its perform- 
ance is morning. Her dawning womanhood is 
arrayed in the simple salmon coloured garb 
of a Jogan, defining the beautiful and subtle 
lines of her figure. Her raven hair is massed 
on the top of the head. On the white brow 
gleams the sacred mark of religion in camphor. 
Her slumbrous eyes are heavy and languorous 
with the power of her own music. Her sweet 
mouth is intent on blowing the soul-stirring 
notes of the Poongi (musical instrument). Her 
personality glows with music. The serpents 
and peacocks are attracted beyond control. They 
creep and crawl towards her fascinating being 
amazed and entranced, wholly worshipping her. 



N.B. — The Sandal wood tree has an affinity to serpents, 
so has the flute Poongi. 



6o 



Raag Malkaus. — This Raag has 
originated from Parvati, the wife of Mahadeo. 
The tune, with its Raagnis, Putrs and Bharjas, 
may be sung in January and February, which are 
the months congenial to these tunes. The hour 
in which it should be performed is past midnight. 
It is Odhao, and has sa, ga, ma and ni notes in 
the scale. All the notes are komal. He is 
represented as a glorified image of the rich, 
deep, passionate and mystical melody. Dressed 
in blue, his dreamy eyes are veiled with emotion. 
He is holding a severed human head in one 
hand and a naked sword in the other. He stands 
entranced, listening to the delicious music by the 
maidens in the undefined distance. Towering on 
either side are the " Morechals" (insignia of 
royalty). 

Malkaus has five Raagnis — Lambhavati, Gun- 
kali, Todi, Gouri and Koukab. The Raagnis are 
fair bevies of beauties, each lovelier than the 
other, dreaming away the warm hours of life in 
pleasant and sweet musings. No cares or troubles 
cross their serene path ; no clouds disturb the 
eternal gay sunshine of their lives. 



N.B. — The idea of conquering enemies is a favourite one in 
the Indian Music. The Raags were qualified as brave 
undaunted warriors overcoming their formidable 
opponents. 




V. RAAG MALKAUS 





VI. RAAGNI TODI 



6i 



Todi is represented as a young 
maiden of ravishing fairness. Dressed in white 
and gold, with the sacred mark of camphor and 
saffron on her brow, she stands on a hilltop in 
the jungle, wholly absorbed in playing the Been. 
Her pulses beat in rhythmical whirl of motion, 
causing the young crimson to mount the alabaster 
of her cheek. Her dark depths of eyes catch 
the gold of the rising morning sun — the time for 
performing this tune. 

The wild deer venture within the sacred 
precincts in meek submission and adoration, 
completely fascinated and subdued by so glorious 
a picture and so thrilling a music. 



N.B. — Certain tunes attract certain animals in nature. The 
todi is always associated with the deer, whom it 
subjugates. 



62 



Raag Hindole. — This Raag has 
sprung from that mouth of Mahadeo which is 
turned towards the north. The months in which 
it should be played are March and April. The 
hour for its performance is when the night has 
far advanced. It is Odhao, and has only five 
notes of the octaves in the scale — sa, ga, ma, 
dha, ni. The latter four notes, ga, ma, dha, ni, 
are teevar (sharp) in the Rohi and Arohi. 

In form it is like Krishna, the God of Love, 
seated on a Hindola (cradle) playing the Bansri 
(musical instrument), surrounded by his Gopees, 
who are swinging him in responsive motion of 
their songs and his Bansri. The liquid depths 
of his eyes are brimful of mirth and love ; 
locks dark as musk are braided away from 
the forehead. Rainbow coloured draperies of 
gossamer airiness encircle the graceful forms of 
the young maidens, kissing the blooming cheeks 
and falling lightly over their heads. Jewels 
shed their brilliant lustre, enhancing the chiselled 
loveliness of face and figure. Hindole has five 
Raagnis — Bilawal, Ramkali, Lalit, Deo-sakh and 
Patmanjari. The Raagnis live in a nest of 
swansdown in their soft sweet thoughts. Their 
years of musical life roll smoothly by. 



- 



i 



\ \ 




mi 



i 

i ! 



<g£ 



a 









- # M 






._ .- .,. ■■ '■■■ ."'■'■'-'^•^ ::S3S03BffiTOraKJ 



VII. RAAG HINDOLE. 



■• 




' l-'f 



I ■ ■ 

1 rf&P I ';■'■" 




'- 




it'. !■ ' ' ■ • 6a 






/III. RAAGN! LALIT. 



63 

Lalit is represented as a dainty 
specimen of the finest feminine aristocracy. 
Her fair skin is like alabaster, with a delicate 
fire behind it. Her beautiful head poised on 
a graceful neck defies the pressure of jewels 
in rich profusion on arms, throat, ears, head and 
feet. Golden gauzes of quivering tints and 
richness float round her exquisite proportions, 
disclosing each perfect line. The perfumed 
tresses are thrown in a dense cloud behind. 
The mysterious expression of the large limpid 
eyes is partly revealed in the shadow of the 
long, dark silken lashes which veil them. She 
reclines with ease on the flower besprinkled 
jewelled divan, subjugating the senses by her 
poetic grace and indefinable elegance. A woman 
with a garland of flowers is standing near her 
in attendance, gazing on her rapturously. 

It is Sampooran and both the ma, komal 
and teevar occur in this tune. The scale 
differs in the Rohi and Arohi. Rohi — Sa re 
(komal) ga, ma (komal), ma (teevar) dha (komal) 
ni. Arohi — Sa, ni, dha (komal) pa, ma, (teevar) 
ma (komal) ga, re. 



6 4 



Raag Deepak. — The tune of fire ! 
Deepak is created out of that mouth of Mahadeo 
which is turned towards the East. This tune, 
with its Raagnis, Putrs and Bharjas, may be 
played in the months of May and June, the 
hottest time of the year. The hour of its 
performance is dusk, when the shades of night 
are beginning to gather on the waning light of 
the day. This tune has the remarkable power 
of invoking fire in nature, and, if played at the 
right hour, with that correctness which it 
demands, the effect is so magical that all the 
lights burn instantaneously. It is a very com- 
plicated and classical tune. The scale differs in 
the Rohi and Arohi. Rohi — Sa, ga, ma (teevar), 
pa, dha (komal), pa, sa. Arohi — Sa, ni, dha 
(komal), ni, sa, ga, pa, ma (teevar), ga, re 
(komal), sa. 

This mystic Raag is extinct now, and the 
legend attached to its extirpation is that the 
court musician Taan-sen was singing it in the 
presence of the mighty emperor Akbar. His 
whole soul poured into the song. Sound after 
sound vibrated through the air and petrified the 
hearers. His song had no ending, till at last 
even nature was moved beyond control. Fire 
was ignited and the place was in flames. 

This incident proved fatal for the tune and 
none has dared to sing it since. The awe and 
fear with which it is regarded, even to-day, is 
beyond belief. The greatest musician will bend 
his head in reverence and silence at the very 
name and will refuse the honour of singing it. 
It is strange that an incident which happened 




IX. RAAG DEEPAK 



65 

centuries ago should still exercise the same 
stronghold on the minds of the people, as if it 
happened to-day. 

The notes are there, the melody is there, 
but no one has the courage and boldness to 
smg it, and the deplorable fact remains that 
one of the six great Raags is lost to the world, 
perhaps for a mere superstition. The tradition 
goes on to say that the record may only break 
if the world produces another Taan-sen, which 
is not likely. 

Deepak is represented as a handsome young 
man in the prime of life, most gorgeously robed 
in red, sparkling in darkness. The brilliancy 
of his person is so enormous that the rays 
penetrate the gloom and shoot like tongues of 
fire. 

Deepak has five Raagnis, Kaamode, Deysi, 
Kanhra, Kidara and Nut. 

These female tunes have variegated qualifi- 
cations. Kamode and Deysi are personifications 
of "beauties in distress." Kidara has lost her 
individuality in thoughts of Mahadeo and her 
contemplation of the Deity has been so deep 
that her person has actually assumed the form 
of the Divinity. She is represented as Mahadeo. 
Nut and Kanhra are magnificent women 
with moral and physical courage. 
" Daring and bold in war. 

Arduous and impatient in love." 
Nut is represented as a conquering hero, 
having overcome her enemy after a brief struggle, 
and holds a severed head in one hand, and a naked 
sword in the other. 

E 



66 



Kaanhra has clear cut handsome 
features, and dignity of manner and personality. 
She is dressed in white, covered with shimmering 
gems. Her brow is spotted with the sacred mark 
of religion in camphor. She holds one tooth of 
a subdued elephant in one hand, and a naked 
sword in the other. A massive grey elephant is 
cowering before her, supplicating for his lost tooth. 
Her delicate nostrils are dilated in disdain. Her 
dark eyes flash fire. She gives him a withering 
glance. 

There are eighteen varieties of this tune, and 
most of them are Salink, i.e. — having a semblance 
of other tunes. 

The time for its performance are the early 
hours of the night. 



N.B. It may seem strange to note that some of the repre- 
sentations of tunes are so crude that they have absolutely 
no bearing with music. How could warrior-like 
fighting women be classed among the Raagnis, who are 
over and over again associated with all that is 
exquisitely chaste and refined, ever young and living 
in the lap of luxury and gaiety. And yet strangely enough 
such is the case. 




"f 



■^ 



X RAAGNI KAANHRA. 




XI. RAAG MEGH. 



6 7 

Raag Megh. — This has come out 
of the fifth head of Mahadeo which is turned 
heavenwards.- The months in which it should be 
played are July and August. 

It is the lord of rain. 

It charms the element of water in nature 
and acts as a spell to bring forth torrents of 
rain flooding the country. It may be played at 
all times in the rainy season. Megh is re- 
presented as a dark handsome man of formid- 
able appearance. He holds a naked sword in 
the hand, flourishing in mid-air as if to rent the 
very skies, growling and snarling in rage. He 
scowls heavily. His eyes are fierce. His hair 
is drawn upwards and twisted like a turban. 
The heavens are blackened with angry clouds. 
Thunder and lightning tear the murky and thick 
atmosphere, rendering an altogether dreadful 
aspect. 

It is Sampooran, sa, re, ga, ma, pa, dha, ni 
(komal) and ni (teevar) in Rohi and Arohi. 

Megh has five Raagnis : Bhopali, Malar, 
Gojri, Tunk and Deyce-kar. All are lovely 
maidens of young years leading happy lives of 
unbroken joys and pleasing thoughts. 



E2 



68 



Gojri is represented as a blushing 
young maiden, dressed in an orange bodice and 
a crimson scarf wound round her beautiful 
limbs, seated in a flower-besprinkled meadow, 
engaged in playing and singing on the Been 
with her companion. 



% 







CJ:^ 



i I 



»« 



o 

CD 



a 

< 
< 

cc 



6 9 

AstvAddhya (Law of Musical Instruments) 

Chapter IV. 

The highest form of musical culture con- 
sidered in India is singing. A person blessed 
with a beautiful voice and understanding is 
specially favoured. Singing is not perfect unless 
accompanied by instruments for Tal (time) and 
Sur (intonation). 

The next in order of accomplishment in 
the musical world is Waadan (playing). The 
musical instruments in India are of infinite 
variety and grace. They are classed under 
separate divisions and go under four great 
headings. Their functions are varied. Some 
are meant only for accompanying purposes to 
songs and other instruments, and have no special 
bearing, significance or beauty when played by 
themselves, such as Sarangi, Tubla Pakhawaj, 
Tamboora, etc. Others are important instru- 
ments and are played by themselves, and are 
full of richness, beauty and intricacy, such as 
the Been, Sitar, Sarode, Bansri, etc. 

The following are the four headings under 
which come all the musical instruments of 
India : Tut, Betat, Ghun and Sekhar. 

Tut comprises those instruments 
that are strung with brass or steel wires, 
or with silken and cotton cords, and are 



70 

struck either by a piece of wood, ivory, 
finger nails or a little arrangement of wire in 
the shape of a finger end called Mizraab. 
These instruments are the Been, Sarode, 
Tamboora, etc. 

Betat are those instruments that 
have skins stretched in the hollow circular 
form at one end and are played with a bow, 
such as the Sarangi, Taoos, Dilruba, etc. 

Ghun are the species of drumlike 
instruments struck by the hand or a stick of 
wood like Pakhavaj, Tubla, Dhole, Nakkara, etc. 
Sekher. — These are the pipe-like 
instruments blown by the mouth either by full 
or half breaths, like Nafeeri, Bansri, Poongi, 
Senai, etc. 

There are five instruments which if learned 
to play with masterful skill facilitates the 
management of other instruments, and these 
are the Been, Murdung, Senai, Sarangi and 
Rubaab. 

i. — By acquiring the Been to perfection 
Sitar and Tamboora and such are most easily 
manipulated, Been being the most intricate 
instrument of its kind. 

2. — By becoming an expert on the Pakhavaj, 
Tubla, Dhole, Duff, Champ, Dhoomus, etc., may be 
played without much effort. These are all the 
species of the drum and Pakhavaj is the most 
difficult of its kind. All have individual 
methods of playing ; some are struck by the 
hand, some by rods and so on, but the beat 



and time is more or less similar. Pakhavaj 
has the most numerous and intricate beats. 

3. — Of all the pipe-like instruments Senai 
is the most difficult and if this is learnt to 
perfection all the other instruments of its kind, 
like Tota-gazi, Bansri, Poongi, Nai, Bheer, etc., 
are easily acquired. All are blown by the 
mouth, either by half or full breaths, and the 
fingers are pressed on and lifted off the openings 
to produce notes. 

Sarangi is a stringed instrument played by 
a bow, and the most difficult of its kind, so 
that if this is played well the other instruments 
of its class like Taoos, Dotara, etc., are very 
easily acquired. 

5. — The fifth instrument, which if learnt to 
perfection, facilitates the learning of other in- 
struments of its kind is Rubaab. If this is 
learnt with excellence Sarode, Sur-been, Jantroo, 
and such are quickly learnt. 

The most ancient music of India is 
attributed to the Deity Mahadeo, who invented 
the Been and Dairoo for his own pastime. 
Been is the musical representation of the 
Goddess Parbati and very pretty legends record 
the origin of this instrument. 

Those that are invented by the Deities are 
regarded as sacred, and the profoundest respect 
is paid to them. 

Ganeshji, the Belly-God, invented the classi- 
cal drum Murdung or Pakhavaj after the style 



72 

of Dairoo, and from Pakhavaj were invented 
Tubla, Dholak, Dhoomus, Champ and other drum 
species. Many instruments of simpler con- 
struction and beauty followed the Been, like the 
Sur-been, Sur-singar, Tamboora, Sitar, etc. 

The fabled Bansri was the invention of the 
Love-God Krishna, who intoxicated his milkmaids 
(gopees) with its sweet and enticing strains. 

Senai was invented by Hakeem Bu Ali Senai 
and named after him Uns. Tota-gaxi, Aadh-guzi, 
etc. followed in later years. 

Sarangi is also the invention of a Hakeem of 
a comparatively much later period. Dotara, 
Kamaancha, Taoos, and similar instruments came 
into existence after. 

The stirring and appealing Nai was the 
creation of Omar Aiyyar noted for his clever 
pranks. 

Algooza, Pungi and such came into practice 
later. 

The majestic drum Nakkara was played 
before royalty or in times of war. Smaller in- 
struments of its kind were made later. 

(a) The following are the instruments that 
are played by the fingers, and are fitted with 
metal bars : 

Rudr Been is a glorious heirloom 
of ages and the King of instruments invented 
by the God of Music, Mahadeo. The beautiful 
legend attached to its origin runs thus : — 



73 

Mahadeo once saw Parbati reposing most 
gracefully, her perfumed breath breathing soft 
music. Her delicate breasts rising and following 
in rhythm. Her arms and wrists were laden 
with bangles. 

Mahadeo intoxicated by the ravishing vision 
gazed at it long and silently and retained it in 
his memory. The lovely picture disturbed his 
mental equilibrium and left him no peace until 
at last it settled into a definite and extra- 
ordinary composition, resulting in the musical 
instrument, the unrivalled Been ! 

The long neck represents the straight lithe 
figure of Parbati. The two gourds her ivory 
breasts, and the metal frets her bracelets, and 
most exquisite of all the exquisite sound, her 
musical breathing. 

To handle a Been is a most arduous task, a 
life-time of practice can alone produce a master. 
The player is seated with folded legs, with one 
gourd resting on the left shoulder, and the other 
resting on the folded legs. The style of per- 
forming on the Been is mostly in the Alaap- 
chaari, and the correct accompaniment is the 
Pakhavaj. The wires are struck with Mizraabs 
and the nails, kept long for the purpose, of the 
right hand. The left hand fingers are pressed 
on the fixed frets to create notes. 

It is handsomely ornamented with inlaid 
ivory and real gold and silver painting, and is 
altogether an expensive luxury. 



74 

Saraswati Veena, so called after 
the Goddess of Music and Learning Saraswati, 
who is invariably represented holding the in- 
strument in the paintings. It is somewhat 
similar to the Been in form, having a finger 
board fitted with metal frets and a sloping 
gourd at the bottom and a gourd on top, and 
the sacred head of a carved lion at one end. 

It is the instrument of Southern India and 
accompanied by Pakhavaj. It is played seated 
and held slanting, pressed with the right arm. 
The wires are struck with the fingers of the 
right hand, and the left hand fingers run up 
and down pressing the bars unsupported. This 
is a comparatively easier Been of the two. 

It is beautifully carved and worked with 
gold and silver. 

Sitar is a most happy invention 
of Amir Khusrao, whose name is so well known 
in the musical world. It has always been one 
of the most popular instruments. 

A particular style of music is played upon 
it, and one which is called J ore and Gut Toda. 
The drum Tubla accompanies Sitar. 

It is invariably highly ornamented and is 
played seated, the right arm pressing the gourd ; 
the neck is held slanting. On the first finger 
of the right hand a Mizraab is worn which 
strikes the wires, the left fingers press the 
moveable frets to form the notes. 



75 

Ektara is a modest little instru- 
ment of one wire only, used by wandering 
mendicants, who sing Bhajans (hymns) on it. 
A bit of skin is stretched in the hollow circular 
form, and on the neck or rod one wire is strung. 
That one wire is struck at intervals to accom- 
pany the song. The sound is exceedingly 
pathetic. 

Tamboura is by itself. This was 
invented by the demi-god Naradja. It has a 
sloping gourd and a long neck strung by four 
wires only. The object of this instrument is 
merely to accompany songs and other instruments 
that are played individually. 

It is played seated ; the gourd rests between 
the legs, and the neck rests on the right 
shoulder. The first finger of the right hand 
alone strikes the four chords at regular intervals 
in rhythm with the tune. 

A singer is perfectly like a fish out of 
water without his Tamboura. 

(b) The following instruments are played 
by a bow and have metal bars for the guidance 
of notes : — 

Kamaancha. — This is made entirely 
of wood, and a skin stretched on the lower 
portion ; and the upper portion is just like a 
Sitar, and the lower like a Sarangi ; and like 
the Sarangi, it is played with a bow. 



7 6 

It is mostly used in Punjab as accom- 
paniment to songs. 

Taoos, so called because of its 
beautiful colour and shape like that of a peacock. 
It is painted in all the metallic shades of the 
beautiful bird. Its tail is the straight finger 
board fitted with moveable frets just like the 
Sitar, and the lower portion is the head of 
the fascinating bird. It is played seated with 
a bow. 

Dilruba. — This is similar to Taoos. 

The only difference is that the Taoos has got 

the head of a peacock and this has not. It is 
played seated with a bow- 

(c) The following instruments are played with 
bow and have no metal bars : — 

Sarangi. — Is the violin of the East ! 
Its tone is delicate and sweet, and is quite a 
necessary asset to singing and dancing. It is a 
very popular instrument all over India. All the 
fluctuations, inflections and variations of a voice 
can be most beautifully imitated on this instrument. 
A skin is stretched on the lower squarish portion, 
and two groupings of wires are placed upon the 
surface, one above the other. The upper ones are 
played with a bow. It has no frets, so that the 
notes are created on the surface wires. It is 
played standing or seated just as the occasion 
may require. 



77 

It is the invention of a Hakeem of former 
times. The legend relates that a Hakeem was once 
travelling on foot, and worn out with heat and 
fatigue rested beneath a huge tree. Suddenly 
some sweet strains of music struck his ears ; he 
listened astonished, attentively, and searched in 
vain from whence the sounds came, until at last 
looking up he discovered a wonderful phenomenon, 
the object of his search. 

The dried skin of a dead monkey was 
stretched between two branches entangled with 
its dried guts, and the wind blowing through it 
caused melodious sounds. He carefully removed 
the skin and guts, replaced them on a construction 
of wood, and after some years of labour, with 
due modifications and additions, completed the 
present day Sarangi. 

Sarangis, made in Jaunpori, are most known. 

Sazinda. — This is a quaint looking 
instrument invented by Guru Amardasji of 
Amritsar, whose temple in that city is so well 
known. It is made entirely of wood and has an 
oval, hollow form beneath, and a strip of wood 
across on which wires are strung It is placed 
in the same position as the Sarangi, and played 
with a bow. The fingers are pressed on the 
wires to form notes. 

Hindustani Dotara: — This two- 
stringed instrument is like a simplified miniature 
Sarangi, and used by the peasantry. It is 
called Dotara, which literally means two wires. 



78 

Marwari Dotara.— This is only 
used in Marwar. It has a gourd of a half 
cocoanut with a skin stretched over it. The neck 
is made of wood on which are strung two wires. 
It is played with a bow. 

(d) The following instruments have four 
wires, have no frets, and are played with a 
plectrum. They are all very difficult to learn, 
and are played seated. 

Rubaab — This is supposed to be 
the invention of Sikandar Zulquarnein. It is 
made of wood and skins stretched on the lower 
portion. It has two groups of wires, one below 
the other. The surface has got four wires, and 
seven below, called Taraps. It is played with a 
triangular piece of wood and the notes are 
made by manipulation of the wires. 

Sarode- — Is similar in construction 
to Rubaab, but different in form. It has a 
circular hollow gourd with skins stretched over 
it and the neck ends in a hook-like arrangement 
on top. 

Ghaartar. — Literally four wires. 
This instrument is much akin to Sarode in con- 
struction, but differs slightly in shape. 

Sur Been. — Was invented by Kaale 
Saheb, Prince of Delhi. 

It is like the Sitar in shape with the bars. 
The surface is covered with a thin plate of steel. 



79 

It has two groups of wires, four on the surface 
and seven below. 

Sur Singhar. — Like Rubaab it is 
made of wood and skins stretched on the lower 
portion that widens into an ovalish elongation. 
Owing to its extreme complications there are 
very few musicians who attempt to play this 
instrument. Bahadur Sen, one of the court 
musicians of Rampur, is an expert on the Rubaab 
and Sur Singhar. 

Tarab. — This is a quaint instrument 
made out of one piece of wood and skin stretched 
on the widened lower portion. It has many 
wires but no frets. The method of its playing 
is peculiar. It is laid flat on the ground and 
struck by a long, thin semi-circular strip of wood. 

(e) The following are pipe-like instruments 
blown by the mouth : — 

Algooza. — It is a flute made of 
bamboo and black wood. It is slightly wider 
at the bottom than the top and has seven 
apertures at equal intervals. 

Pair of Algooza. — These are two 
pipes of similar kind blown at one time and 
used by the peasantry. 

Nai has been the theme of all poets 
and love-ditties. It is the invention of Omar 
Aiyyar to ensnare maidens with its magic 



8o 



sounds. It is exactly like the barrel of a gun 
and has seven openings. 

Bansri. — The fabled. It is the crea- 
tion of the Love-God Krishna-Kanhaiya to 
entangle the Gopees (milkmaids) in its charmed 
meshes. He succeeded well, for we have endless 
tuneful legends and songs depicting the surrender 
of lovely maids in spite of themselves. 

Its sacred tones may be heard through the 
force of Yog (meditation). 

It is accompanied by the Duff. 

Sankh. — Is very rare and sacred. 
No place of worship is without this Conch. 

It is the manifestation of sound in nature. 
Sankh is a species of shell upside down in 
shape. In all the temples and shrines the conch 
is first blown and then the place entered. It 
has one shrill note only, and if placed in a 
windy position the sound is created on its own 
account. 

Its tone may be heard in Yog. 

Sanghra. — This is really a horn of 
a deer which is blown in the temples and thus 
considered sacred. 

Turai is made entirely of brass and 
is played with Duff. 

Bheer is one of the most ancient 
flutes of mythological interest. It was played in 
the marriage of Mahadeo and Parbati. It is 
made entirely of copper and has a shrill sound. 



8i 

Karna is a heavy curved pipe 
awkward to hold. It is blown hard and played 
in a band in times of important occasions, like 
war, marriage and other big festivals. It is 
entirely made of brass and the sound is harsh 
and loud. 

Poongi. — This is a flute-like instru- 
ment used by conjurors for fascinating and 
subduing snakes. The sound is supposed to 
exercise great power over these reptiles. 

It is composed of a dried and cleaned 
vegetable marrow with an opening at the narrow 
end. Two thin and smooth round Singapori 
bamboos with seven holes are attached in the 
centre of the gourd below. Two human hairs 
are inserted in the pipes and attached with wax. 
The big opening in the narrow portion of the 
vegetable marrow is blown by the mouth and 
notes and tunes produced. 

It is extraordinary how the weird sound of 
the Poongi affects the serpents. The conjuror 
sits on the floor playing the monotonous tune, 
swaying his body to and fro in a circular 
movement. The serpent gets strangely fascinated 
by the movement. It raises its head and un- 
conscious of all its surroundings follows the 
conjuror bewitched. It sways its body and 
moves circularly. The tune gets louder. The 
spirit of music gets more and more into it 
until it gets hold of it completely ; it 
becomes the embodiment of the tune, breathing 



82 



the melody with its motions. The conjuror 
stops the music. The spell being broken, the 
snake drops down fatigued and, subjugated, 
glides back into his dark den. 

Murchang. — This is a strange in- 
strument. It is entirely made of thin strips of 
wire in a fork-like arrangement. The central 
strip is elongated and curled at the end. It is 
held in the left hand. The central portion is 
held quite close to the mouth and certain 
expressions like Dar Pir, etc., are whispered 
musically over the fork. The right hand taps 
rhythmically the curled end. The sound is soft 
and captivating. In some parts of India this is 
quite a popular pastime. 

Uns. — This flute-like instrument is 
played in a tiny band of four people called the 
Roushan Chouki Wala, comprising two Uns 
players, one drummer who beats on the Champ 
and one bellringer who shakes the Jhoon 
Jhoona in rhythm. 

This band plays on festive occasions, and 
precedes the bridegroom in a marriage pro- 
cession or goes in advance of a nobleman's 
cortege. 

The construction of Uns is as follows. A 
tube having seven holes is inserted into a cast cup 
of metal, and three strange little contrivances 
are held together with silk strings. They are 
fitted into one another on the mouth of the 



83 

tube. The first is a metal needle which is 
adjusted half way in the tube. A disc of ivory, 
with a hole in the centre, is fitted into this 
needle, and lastly a blade of a rare species of 
grass called " Paalaa " is fixed carefully on 
top. The grass is soaked for an hour and then 
the Uns is ready for use. 

Senai. — The remarkable invention 
of Hakeem Bu Ali Senai. It is customary in 
India for the pupils to make a little offering 
and prayers in the name of the great 
philosopher before beginning their studies. 

Senai is more or less similar to Uns in 
appearance. Its tube is narrower towards the top 
and widens at the bottom. Both tube and cup 
are made of black wood. The metal needle, 
ivory disc and blade of grass are adjusted on top 
as in Uns, only they vary in size. 

This wonderful grass called Paalaa is 
cultivated in a special region with the greatest 
care. It is white or red, very flexible, and 
only used for the purpose of Senai and such 
instruments. All the tunes, with their fluctua- 
tions and variations, can be very finely executed 
on this. 

Senai is played in the temples and in a 
band called Noubat. 

Noubat literally means nine performers : — 
Two Senaichees (Senai players), two Nakkarchees 
(drummers), one Jhanj (bellringer), one Kar- 
naichee (Karnai player), one Damama (drum 

F 2 



8 4 

beater), one Baaridar (attendant to warm the 
drums and fill the hookas for the party), and one 
Jamadar (conductor and leader of the band). 

Noubat was a band exclusively organised 
for the dignity and majesty of the kings and 
noblemen, dead or living, and placed in the 
gateway of palaces, mansions, mausoleums, 
tombs, etc., of royalty, in recognition of their 
presence there, living or dead. 

The custom is still prevalent in India. 

Noubat is played eight times during twenty- 
four hours at an interval of every three hours. 

In the times of royalty it was also a war 
band and most stirring anecdotes are told of 
famous leaders of Noubat who stimulated the 
soldiers with courage and zeal. 

Sangur and Bhallun are most brilliant names 
in history. Their magical play and undaunted 
prowess inspired the soldiers with fresh energy and 
confidence to face the enemy over and over again. 
Bhallun and Sangur fell martyrs in the battlefield 
and were buried on the spot where they fell. 

A pilgrimage is made to the tombs by all 
the musicians of this class and offerings and 
tribute paid to their respective names. 

The sticks with which they beat the drums 
were entombed. After some time they grew into 
large beautiful trees shading their graves and 
yielding most delicious and large quantities of 
fruit. So runs the tradition. 



85 

(/) The following are the drum species, 
struck either by the hand or stick. These are 
only used for keeping the Taal (time). The Taal 
is a very complicated factor in the Indian music 
and varies considerably with each song. 

The drum Pakhavaj has got nearly two or 
three hundred varieties of beats for each Taal ; 
and it is quite an ordinary thing for a finished 
Pakhavaj player to go on playing varied beats 
for a number of days. 

Pakhavaj was invented by the 
belly-god Ganeshji, and is the classical drum of 
India. It is the most difficult of its kind. 
It is only accompanied on Dhurpad and 
Hori style of songs, also with classical dancing 
and the " Been." It is the shape of a barrel and 
made of wood with skins stretched on either 
side. On one side black ink is applied and on 
the other the dough. It helps the dash of tone 
and makes it rich in sound. The skins are 
strung with cords which are loosened and 
tightened according to the voice of the singer. 
The variety of sounds that are produced on the 
Pakhavaj is nothing short of a marvel. 

Sometimes it is the boom of guns, sometimes 
it is thunder, sometimes it is nasal, sometimes 
it is the cry of birds and animals, and so on. 

The beats of the Pakhavaj are first produced 
vocally and the same wording is reproduced on 
the drum ! Each beat has got a name of its own 



86 

and the knowledge of them means quite a life- 
long study. 

They comprise such expressions as Kit, 
Tika, Giddi, Ghun, Tuk, Dhikat, Dha, etc. 

It is wonderful how the very words are 
suggested as if somebody was repeating them. 

Tubla is the happy invention of 
Sudhar Khan Dhari and is a very popular drum 
of a lighter and easier nature to play than the 
Pakhavaj. 

In appearance it is like Pakhavaj equally 
divided into two parts. The construction also 
is more or less similar. It is either played 
squatted on the floor or standing. 

The beats are as follows : Dha, Dhin, Dinna, 
Turkat, Kittack, etc. 

Manjera. — These are metal cups of 
extremely pleasant sound, attached to each other 
with a loose piece of string, and mostly played in 
rhythm with a Tubla. Both the cups are held in 
the fingers, one heavier than the other, and struck 
at intervals. Even this tiny little instrument has 
various beats, and is struck in a certain method. 

Dhoomus and Champ. — These are 
two funny little drums, one for the right hand and 
one for the left. They are earthenware cups, 
covered with skins and encased in a cage of cords, 
and hang low from the neck of the player on 
either side by means of the strings. It accom- 
panies the flute Uns in the band of Roushan 
Chouki Wala. 



87 

Nakkara. — The royal drum. It 
accompanies the Senai in the band Noubat. They 
are two in number, one smaller than the other. 
The smaller is called "Zeel," and placed on the 
right-hand side; and the larger one is called 
" Nar," and placed on the left side. The drummer 
takes two sticks in both hands, and goes on 
striking according to the tune and time required, 
sometimes striking both with equal beats on 
each by turns, sometimes unequally, and at other 
times each stick strikes a drum with equal or 
unequal beats. 

They are huge metal cups with thick hides 
stretched on their surface. The sound is loud, 
majestic and imposing. 

Dhole. — Is a barrel shaped drum 
played by women called Doomnies, on festive 
occasions accompanied by songs suited to the 
occasion. It is easy and vulgar. 

Taasha. — Is a flat drum made of 
metal or clay with a skin stretched on it, and 
struck with two sticks. 

Marfa. — Is more or less similar to 
the above, and struck with one stick. Marfa 
and Taasha are both played in a band at 
weddings, etc. 

Jhanj. — It is a Castanet species 
made of metal. 

Duff. — Is another drum, made of 
wood, with skin stretched over it. It accompanies 
two Bansris and one Tarai in a band. 



Dairoo. — Is the oldest drum of 
India invented by Mahadeo. It is made of wood 
and skins stretched on either side, and struck 
by two sticks, one in each hand. 
It is played in Rajputana. 

Dairaa. — Is a round flat drum, 
struck by the hand, and played in bands. 

Khanjri. — Is a round flat drum 
played by both hands. 

Daphra is a magnified Khanjari 
played in the Holi festival in Marwar. 

Dhulak. — Simplified beats of the 
Pakhavaj and Tubla are played on this drum. 

Kartal is a pair of wooden castanets 
with little bells attached to them. It accompanies 
Bhajans (hymns) or mournful songs on sad 
occasions. 

Jaltaran. — These are sixteen china 
cups arranged in a row and fitted with a 
sufficient quantity of water to form the scale 
of notes, and struck by two curved rods. The 
sound is more or less choppy, and the style of 
the Gut-Toda of the Sitar is executed on this 
to perfection. It is accompanied by the Sitar. 

This is a rough sketch of the well-known 
instruments. There are very many more of lesser 
importance belonging to different provinces, 
different districts and different villages. They 
have their own native music and songs. 

The music of South India is quite distinct 
and has its own instruments, Raags and Taals. 



8 9 

Tales of Indian Music. 

Chapter V. 

Music has wonderful power over animals, 
and certain tunes exercise fascination on certain 
animals. 

i. Siraj-ud-dowlah used to hold concerts in 
the jungles for the benefit of the animals, and 
when Todi was played, it attracted the deer, 
who would come nearer and nearer, listening 
to the strains with rapture and pleasure. 
Similarly, Aa-sa-ori would attract serpents and 

peacocks. 

# * # 

2. Mirza Mohammad Bulbul would play the 
Nai in his garden. The nightingales would 
hover around him, and flutter from branch to 
branch until they would actually drop down in 
a state of ecstacy. 

# # # 

3. The Prince of Mysore would take his court 
musicians to a neighbouring district inhabited by 
deadly snakes. The performers would form a 
circle and play the Poongi. As the sounds 
would grow louder, they would draw the snakes 
from their holes, who came gliding to whence 
the sounds came. They would crawl and creep 
towards the players, encircling them on all sides, 
rear up their heads, and sway into them 
perfectly intoxicated with the weird sounds. 



90 

As soon as the music stopped, they would 
glide away quietly without injuring anyone. 

# # # 

4. Kidara, the female tune, is connected with 
a superstitious belief that those who play it come 
to grief; that is why it is unpopular. It is an 
extremely classical and pretty air. 

# * # 

5. Mahadeo went to Naradji and said, "What 
do you know of Been playing that you dare 
to attempt to handle the sacred instrument?" 
Naradji said, " If you can produce anyone who 
would have the courage to play before me I 
should acknowledge his superiority." 

Mahadeo at once sent for Saraswati, and 
asked her to perform before him. 

Naradji was perfectly breathless with her 
great accomplishment, and bowed down before 
her as the presiding Deity of music. 

# # # 

6. Hanouman was very proud of his musical 
attainments, and foolishly boasted about it. Rama, 
hearing this, got annoyed, and devised a plan to 
humble his boastings. 

In the jungles there dwelt a noble Rishi who 
practised music with success, until he caused the 
Sapt-swaras (seven notes) to become embodied 
in seven lovely nymphs. 

On the pretext of hunting, Rama took 
Hanouman in the vicinity of the abode of the 
Rishi, and begged of him to give them some 



9i 

music. In the meantime, Hanouman, wanting to 
show off his qualifications, took up the Veena 
proudly and began to play. 

Just then the seven lovely nymphs or 
notes passed by them, they were going to fetch 
water. Hearing the music one stopped, swayed, 
and fell dead. Hanouman had played that note 
incorrectly ! 

The sister notes (nymphs) were comfortless 
and moaned and lamented her death piteously. 
The Rishi seeing all smiled. Took up the 
Veena and struck the notes loudly. As soon 
as the dead note (nymph) was played correctly 
it revived and gaily rejoined the sister notes 
and there was much rejoicing. 

Hanouman, thoroughly ashamed of himself, 
hung his head down and performed penance 
for his silly vanities. 



7. In the reign of the great Emperor Akbar 
there lived a saint-ascetic, named Haridas Swami, 
in Muthra, whose wonderful acquisition of 
music reached the ears of the Emperor and he 
was impatient to behold him. He tried his best 
to see him and failed. At last he sent for 
Taan-Sen and confided in him his troubles. 
Taan-Sen replied, " He is greater than all 
Emperors, O Emperor ! and recognises no man 
on earth, save his own glorious sacred art, which 



9 2 

he respects above all. He will not come to see 
you, but if you condescend to go to Muthra 
you will see him." 

Akbar accordingly travelled to Muthra and 
beheld the great Swami commanding the presence 
of the Raagnis to appear at will in their own 
glorious and beautiful forms with the power of 
his tunes ! 

When Bhairaveen came she looked dejected 
and sad. The Emperor asked her the reason 
of her sorrow, and she replied " What can I do? 
I am most unhappy. It is this Tannu (Taan- 
Sen) who disturbs my peace by playing me at 
all seasons and hours not congenial to me ! " 

Akbar perfectly wonderstruck recognised the 
greatness of the Swami. 

# # # 

8. Music flourished considerably under the 
distinguished patronage of the Mogul Emperors. 
Aurangzebe, the last great Mogul Emperor, was 
a bigoted Mahomedan and had a caustic, dry 
nature, which checked the flow of all arts ; and 
music suffered at his hands. The people got 
stifled, and devised a scheme to soften his hard 
heart. They prepared a bier, and beating their 
breasts and tearing their hair, passed it slowly 
under his window. The solemn and heart-rending 
sight impressed him. He inquired the reason of 
their wild grief, and was told that the Divine 
Goddess, Music, had died for want of appreciation 



93 

and was being buried. " Dig the grave deep," 
he cried, " so that no sound or echo should 
issue forthwith ! " 



9. Taan-Sen, the court musician, the last 
greatest singer that India had produced, had 
such extraordinary power over his music that 
by way of boasting he began singing one of 
the night tunes at noon. He sang with such 
effect that so far as his glorious voice could 
reach the world became enveloped in darkness. 



10. Taan-Sen was once singing the Raag 
Deepak in the Court of Akbar and the place was in 
flames. 

A maiden carrying water passed within its 
precincts and, hearing the tune and seeing the 
place in flames, stopped, set her vessel down, 
clasped her hands and bent her figure sup- 
plicating the gods to assist her, stood up again 
and drawing a deep breath began singing the 
" Raag Megh." She sang this with such sincerity 
that the Heavens were disturbed and rain poured 
forth in torrents extinguishing the flames ! 

It is said that skilful performers have often 
averted famine by singing the Raag Megh. 

* * * 

11. There are many legends attached to the 
fiery qualities of the Raag Deepak. 



94 

In the innermost sanctuary of an old temple 
there burned a sacred light for ages, and 
through the forgetfulness of the priests to fill 
it with fresh oil the light was extinguished. 
The whole country was at once thrown in 
disturbance and despair. They attached the 
incident to some evil spirit hovering round them, 
and thought all ills would befall the country. 

The famous musician, hearing of this, offered 
to burn the light with the magic power of the 
song. 

The Rajah of the land escorted him with 
great honours to the shrine. 

At the hour congenial to the Raag he began 
his song, and sang it with such effect that there 
gleamed a tiny light in the innermost gloom of 
the sanctuary. Then, one by one, all the Deevas 
(lamps) in the temple were mysteriously lighted. 

He had averted the calamity. 



12. The end of Naikgopal, one of the 
mightiest singers the world has produced, was 
most tragic. Emperor Akbar, in one of his moods, 
insisted on his singing the Raag Deepak. The 
celebrated singer had at this stage attained that 
high perfection that he would not sing a song 
without stirring the supernatural forces of nature. 

He begged of the Emperor to hold him 
excused, but the monarch's wayward wishes had 
to be humoured. 



95 

Gopal disappeared for six months, and came 
back prepared to meet his awful doom. 

He placed himself neck deep in the sacred 
river of the Jumna, and began his song. The 
pure notes vibrated the air. The water began 
to heat, and soon began to boil. The slow 
torture of the singer was more than he could 
bear. He begged of the Emperor to allow him 
to discontinue. Akbar was merciless, and the 
unfortunate singer was compelled to resume the 
fatal tune. 

In the agony of his dreadful sufferings he 
burst forth with tremendous vigour, and sang 
with such power that the element of fire was 
excited in nature, each note turned to flame and 
his whole person exhaled fire and slowly 
consumed his body. 



13. Taan-Sen had four sons, and, unlike 
the father, they had no taste for music. The eldest 
son, called Bilas Khan, was of a roving nature 
and inhabited the jungles. It was a great dis- 
appointment to the people to think that none of 
his own sons were capable of occupying the 
same high position in the musical world as the 
noted father, and that one of his pupils would 
have to be selected to take his place after his 
death. 

In course of time Taan-Sen died, and the 
question now arose as to who should be 
appointed in his place. 



96 

The pupils fought among themselves for 
supremacy. The public could not decide as the 
one was as good as the other. In the meantime 
Bilas Khan returned from his wanderings. Saw 
his revered father's coffin lying on the threshold 
and all steeped in sorrow. He saw his dear 
mother inconsolable, bemoaning the loss of a 
great name. 

He stepped into their midst and said " He 
who can move my father's coffin with his song 
will be awarded the Pugree (turban)." 

The pupils were staggered to hear this bold 
proposal and stood still and frightened. 

When no one answered his challenge, he 
sang the Raagni Todi with such pathos and 
feeling, that the coffin actually moved. 

People acknowledged his greatness, and the 
Emperor tied the turban on his head. 

The tune is now known as Bilas Khani 
Todi Dhurpad. It is a dignified, manly and slow 
melody. 



. 




