1-^ 


£ihirtit\r  xff 


^dltdm 


^XW^Vi 


«m 


Date 

Due 

i£jw-*-- 

DEC  7  ? 

, 

,-■  l|nv  2  i 

JKH  1  6  '5( 

y 

r^ 

0  21 

ijqf 

l.n>»«ry  Bur,,u 

Cat.  no.  Ii37 

THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 


BY 

HERBERT  A.  POPLEY,  B.A. 

National  Counoil  of  Young  Men's  Christian 
Associations  of  India,  Burma  and  Ceylon 


ASSOCIATION  PRESS 

5.  RUSSELL  STREET,  CALCUTTA 
LONDON  :  OXFORD  UNIVERSITY  PRESS 

NEW   YORK,   TORONTO,    MELBOURNE, 
BOMBAY,    CALCUTTA   AND    MADRAS 

J.  CURWEN  &  SONS,  Ltd.,  LONDON 


Hl^;^ 


PRINTED   AT   THE 

S.P.C.K.    PRESS,    VEPERY,    MADRAS 

1921 


■'i\v 


TRiKTED  IN  (KDM 


INTRODUCTORY   NOTE 

This  book  has  been  written  at  the  request  of  the  Editors 
of  The  Heritage  of  India  Series  ;  and  although  it  has 
grown  beyond  the  possible  limits  of  that  Series  and  is  now 
published  by  itself,  it  still  remains,  as  it  was  originally 
planned,  a  brief  introduction  to  a  large  and  intricate 
subject.  We  believe  that  Indian  Music  possesses  so  much 
value  for  the  life  of  the  people  of  India  that,  in  this  great 
day  of  national  aspiration  and  progress,  it  ought  to  be 
known  and  understood  by  every  man  and  woman  who  has 
India's  good  at  heart,  so  that  it  may  become  cultivated  in 
every  city  and  village  throughout  the  land.  The  purpose 
of  this  book,  then,  is  to  provide  sufficient  information  to 
make  insight  possible  ;  so  that  the  educated  Indian,  and 
also  the  European,  may  be  stirred  to  such  a  living  interest 
in  Indian  music,  both  vocal  and  instrumental,  as  to  start 
musical  societies  and  schools,  and  to  seek  for  the  wider 
and  more  detailed  information  which  this  book  does  not 
attempt  to  give. 

V.   S.    DORNAKAL. 

J.  N.  Farquhar. 


TO 

L.  H.  P. 

AND 

T.  H.  P. 


AUTHOR'S  PREFACE 

No  one  feels  more  than  the  author  the  deficiencies  of 
this  book  and  the  inadequacy  of  its  presentation  of  a  great 
and  living  culture.  My  only  real  qualification  is  my  love 
for  India,  and  a  keen  interest  in  both  the  practice  and 
theory  of  Indian  music.  This  little  work  is  sent  out  into 
the  world  in  the  hope  that  it  may  help  to  make  known  the 
great  value  of  Indian  music  and  that  it  may  play  some 
part,  however  small,  in  the  improvement  and  spread  of  this 
culture  throughout  India. 

My  deepest  obligations  are  to  Mr.  A.  H.  Fox  Strang- 
ways,  whose  Music  of  Hindostan  is  the  best  of  the  few 
books  which  seek  to  give  something  like  an  adequate 
account  of  the  subject.  India  can  never  be  too  grateful 
to  this  musical  scholar  for  the  limitless  labour,  love  and 
imagination  he  has  lavished  on  Indian  music.  I  have 
drawn  very  freely  from  his  book,  not  only  accepting  many 
of  his  ideas  as  to  the  development  of  music  both  within 
and  without  India,  but  also  borrowing  a  few  of  his  brief 
definitions  and  some  expository  passages  of  greater  length. 
I  owe  him  a  further  debt  for  the  large  amount  of  personal 
help  he  has  given  me.  He  read  my  manuscript  from 
beginning  to  end  more  than  once,  explained  a  number  of 
musical  difficulties,  and,  above  all,  provided  the  material 
for  the  account  of  the  Indian  scale,  and  allowed  me  to 
consult  him.  freely  while  I  worked  up  the  material  into 
Chapter  III. 


VI  AUTHOR  S   PREFACE 

I  also  wish  to  acknowledge  with  deep  gratitude  the 
large  help  I  have  received  from  a  number  of  friends  in 
India.  The  following  have  done  so  much  for  me  that  it  is 
a  pleasure  to  mention  their  services.  Mr.  N.  V.  Bhat- 
khande,  M.A.,  LL.D,,  author  of  a  number  of  musical  trea- 
tises in  Marathi  and  Hindi,  read  the  draft  of  the  manuscript 
and  suggested  many  corrections.  M.  R.  Ry.  C.  R.  Srinivasa 
Aiyengar,  B.A.,  L.T.,  of  the  Sanskrit  College,  Mylapore, 
gave  much  assistance  with  regard  to  the  Saman  chant  and 
ancient  books  on  Indian  music  ;  Sahabzada  Syed  Sadat 
Ali  Khan  Bahadur,  Home  Secretary  of  Rampur  State, 
who  is  an  accomplished  musician,  gave  many  hours  of 
valuable  time  to  satisfy  my  desire  for  a  better  practical 
knowledge  of  the  music  of  the  north ;  the  kev.  L.  I. 
Stephen  of  Erode  taught  me  much  of  what  I  know,  both 
of  theory  and  practice,  in  south  Indian  music ;  while 
Takhur  M.  Nawab  Ali  Khan  of  Lucknow  rendered  valu- 
able help.  Thanks  are  also  due  to  the  editors  of  the  Heri- 
tage of  India  series  for  their  kind  assistance,  and  especially 
to  Dr.  J.N.  Farquhar,  who  has  read  through  all  the  proofs 
with  the  greatest  care  and  made  many  suggestions  of  great 
value. 

To  every  other  one  who,  whether  in  conversation  or  by 
letter,  has  given  me  information  or  led  me  to  clearer  insight 
I  would  express  my  sincere  gratitude  and  thanks. 

I  wish  also  to  make  acknowledgment  to  the  editors  of 
'  Outward  Bound  '  for  their  permission  to  make  use  of  the 
raga  pictures  ;  to  the  authorities  of  the  Indian  Museum, 
Calcutta,  for  allowing  me  the  use  of  valuable  negatives 
for  some  of  the  pictures  of  musical  instruments;  to  the 
India  Office,  London,  for  permission  to  photograph  and 
reproduce  the  raga  pictures  ;  and  to  the  proprietors  of  the 
Times  of  India  for  kindly  letting  me  have  the  use  of  a  num- 
ber of  half-tone  blocks  of  pictures  of  musical  instruments. 


AUTHOR'S    PREFACE  vii 

I  also  desire  to  express  my  thanks  to  M.  Fredalis  of 
Baroda  for  kind  permission  to  use  the  half  tone  block  of 
the  Sarangi  player,  facing  p.   108. 

May  my  small  book  lead  many  to  seek  further  light  on 
this  most  interesting  part  of  the  wonderful  Heritage  of 
India. 

I  would  earnestly  ask  that  readers  will  not  fail  to  notify 
me  of  matters  which  are  open  to  criticism,  or  which 
should  be  corrected  m  a  subsequent  edition. 

H.   A.    POPLEY. 
Y,M.C.A.,  Madras, 
April,  1921. 


SCHEME  OF  TRANSLITERATION 


Gutturals 

k 

kh 

g 

gh 

n 

Palatals 

ch 

chh 

J 

jfa 

n 

s 

Unguals 

t 

th 

d 

dh 

n 

sh 

Dentals 

t 

th 

d 

dh 

n 

s 

Labials 

P 

ph 

b 

bh 

m 

y 

r 

1 

V 

h 

Anusvara 

m 

Visarga 

h 

CONTENTS 


Chap. 

I.  Introduction 

II.  Legend  and  History 

III.  The  Development  of  the  Scale 

IV.  RAGA,  THE  Basis  of  Melody 
V.  TAla,  or  time  measures    ... 

VI.  Musical  Compositions 

VII.  The  Musical  Instruments  of  India 

VIII.  Indian  and  Western  Music 


page 
1 
7 

25 
39 
71 
83 
98 
125 


Appendices 

I.    Bibliography  of  Indian  Music 
II.     Glossary  of  Indian  Musical  Terms 
HI.    Examples  of  Indian  Music 
Indices 


137 

142 
151 
169 


ILLUSTRATIONS 


1.  Picture  of  Megh  raga  ...  ...Frontispieae 

2.  Picture  of  Kedara  raga  ...  ...        Facing  69 

3.  Seshanna,  a  celebrated  vin5  player  of  Mysore  ,,  88 

4.  Kalakshepa  party.  Parayas  with  horns  and  drums  ,,  89 

5.  Stringed   instruments — northern.     Some    ancient 

instruments  ...  ...  ...  ,,  98 

6.  Playing  various  stringed  instruments  ...  ,,  99 

7.  Stringed  instruments  ...  ,,.  ,,  104 

8.  Some  uncommon  instruments    ...  ...  ,,  105 

9.  A  Sarafigi  player  ...  ...  „  108 

10.  Ancient  and  modern  instrum.ents  ...  ,,  109 

11.  Some  wind  instruments  ...  ...  ,,  118 

12.  Group  of  drums.     Bastran  ...  ...  ,,  119 


I  know  not  how  thou  singest,  my  master !  I  ever  listen 
in  silent  amazement. 

The  light  of  thy  music  illumines  the  world.  The  life 
breath  of  thy  music  runs  from  sky  to  sky.  The  holy 
stream  of  thy  music  breaks  through  all  stony  obstacles 
and  rushes  on. 

My  heart  longs  to  join  h\  thy  song,  but  vainly  struggles 
for  a  voice.  I  would  speak,  but  speech  breaks  not  into 
song,  and  1  cry  out  baffled.  Ah,  thou  hast  made  my  heart 
captive  in  the  endless  meshes  of  thy  music,  my  master ! 

TAGORE,  GlTANJALl. 


V    - 


Picture  of  Megh  raga 
From  Johnson  Collection,  India  Office,  London 


CHAPTER  I 


INTRODUCTION 

North  and  South  India  differ  largely  in  a  multitude  of 
things.  The  north  is  the  land  of  the  fighting  races  and  has 
the  large  towns  and  cities  of  India  with  their  keen  intellec- 
tual and  commercial  life.  The  south  is  the  land  of 
peaceful  villages,  nestling  among  green  fields  and  gardens, 
inhabited  by  a  conservative  and  peace-loving  people  who 
are  contented  with  a  little.  The  south  was  far  away  from 
the  battlefields  of  Empire  until  the  time  of  the  British  ; 
and  so  has  passed  through  a  more  peaceful  evolution  and 
has  clung  more  closely  to  the  old  ways.  When  the  Muham- 
madan  invasions  overwhelmed  the  cities  of  the  North, 
the  sages  and  seers  fled  to  the  forests  of  the  South,  where 
they  were  safe  from  harm  and  were  welcomed  by  the  cul- 
tured Dravidians. 

These  differences  are  reflected  in  the  music  of  the 
North  and  of  the  South,  though  we  must  not  commit  the 
mistake  of  thinking  of  these  as  distinct  types  of  music. 
There  is  one  Indian  music,  though  there  are  many  ways  of 
working  it  out ;  and  these  all  group  themselves  under  the 
Northern  and  Southern  schools.  Distinguished  as  the 
Northern  or  Hindustani  school  and  the  Southern  or  Carnatic 
school,  both  are  yet  based  on  the  principles  stated  in  the 
ancient  Sanskrit  treatises  on  music. 

The  student  of  India  will  find  in  the  same  way  one 
India  which  speaks  again  and  again  as  he  travels  from 
North  to  South.  The  atmosphere  of  mystical  devotion 
and  of  submission  to  what  is  looked  upon  as  the  divine  will 
is  found  in  all  religious  hearts ;  the  one  treasure-store  of 


2  THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 

legend  and  story  supplies  both  North  and  South  with  heroes 
and  sages ;  and  agriculture  and  trade,  the  village  and 
the  home,  and  all  the  arts,  are  filled  with  the  same 
spirit  and  use  practically  the  same  methods  throughout 
India. 

It  will  be  seen  as  we  study  this  subject  that,  in  the 
same  way,  there  is  an  underlying  unity  in  the  music  of 
India,  revealing  itself  in  qualities  which  mark  it  off  from 
the  music  of  the  West  and  which  exhibit  its  common  heart. 

The  two  schools  tend  to-day  to  coalesce  into  one  unified 
system,  a  tendency  which  is  fostered  by  the  all- India 
music  conferences  which  now  meet  annually,  and  also  by 
the  very  considerable  borrowing  which  is  taking  place  in 
each  system  from  the  other. 

It  may  be  well  to  give  at  the  outset  brief  definitions  of 
a  few  fundamental  terms  which  must  be  used  in  our  exposi- 
tion from  the  very  beginning.  Fuller  explanations  of  these 
will  be  found  in  the  body  of  the  Avork  and  a  Glossary  of 
all  the  musical  words  and  phrases  which  occur  in  the  book 
will  be  found  among  the  Appendices. 

SvARA       ...  ...     One  of  the  seven  notes  of  the  gamut. 

bRUTi        ...  ...     An  interval  smaller  than  the  semi-tone. 

tjUDDHA  SvARA  ...     The  fundamental  variety  of  each  of  the 

seven  notes. 
ViKRiT      ...  ...     A  variety  of  the  Suddha  note. 

Raga         ...  ...     The  melody-types  which  are  the  bases  of 

Indian  musical  compositions. 
Tala        ...  ...     Time  measure. 

Grama      ...  ...     An  ancient  mode  or  scale. 

J  ATI  ...  ...     The  old  name  for  melody-types. 

The  wide  differences  between  Indian  and  western  music 
on  the  one  hand,  and  the  variant  terminology  which  dis- 
tmguishes  northern  from  southern  musical  teaching  in  India 
on  the  other,  create  so  many  minor  difficulties  even  in 
simple  matters,  that  it  has  been  thought  well  to  use  in 
this  book  a  modified  notation,  based  on  the  Indian  tonic 
sol-fa,  so  that  all  musical  items  may  be  exhibited  in  one 
way  and  the  reader  may  not  have  to  carry  several  schemes 
in  his  head.  Its  relations  and  detailed  use  are  set  forth  in 
the  following  tables  : — 


INTRODUCTION  3 

I.    Table  of  Note  Signatures  and  Nomenclature 


Semi-tones 

Notation 

The  Svara 

of  the 

used  in 

Tlie  Southern 

Nomenclature. 

Western 

this 

names. 

scale. 

book. 

Shadja  Tara 

C 

S 

Shadja  Tara. 

Suddha  Ni 

B 

N 

Kakali  Ni. 

Komali  Ni 

BU 

D 

Kaisiki  Ni. 
Shatsruti  Dha 

Suddha  Dha 

A 

D 

f  ChatuhsrutiDha 
i  Suddha  Ni. 

Komal  Dha 

Ab 

i 

Suddha  Dha. 

Panchama 

G 

P 

Panchama. 

Tivra^  Ma 

Ftf 

m 

Prati  Ma. 

Suddha  Ma 

F 

M 

Suddha  Ma. 

Suddha  Ga 

E 

G 

Antara  Ga. 

Komal  Ga 

Ri) 

i 

j  Sadharana  Ga. 
(  Shatsruti  Ri. 

Suddha  Ri 

D 

R 

f  Chatuhsruti   Ri. 
I  Suddha  Ga. 

Komal  Ri 

Db 

r 

Suddha  Ri. 

Shadja 

C 

S 

Shadja. 

My  southern  friends  will  notice  that  the  northern 
system  of  nomenclature  has  been  adopted.  It  is  true  that 
the  southern  names  of  the  notes,  as  well  as  the  northern, 
go  back  to  ancient  musical  facts,  but  they  have  very  little 
meaning  to  the  ordinary  musician  to-day  and  are  not  clear 
enough  to  justify  their  coming  into  general  use  throughout 
India.  The  northern  system,  however,  is  based  on  a  clear 
principle  and  will  present  no  difficulty  to  the  southern 
student. 

The  Suddha  notes  of  the  northern  system  are  those  of 
the  tonal  scale,  Bilaval,  the  European  Major  scale.  With 
the  exception  of  Ma,  all  the  other  notes  are  flats  to  the 
Buddha  note.  This  is  quite  different  from  the  southern 
system,  where  the  Suddha  note  is  the  lowest  and  the  others 
are  all  sharps.  Clearly  confusion  would  be  the  only  result 
of  an  attempt  to  retain  both  systems,  while  from  all  points 


1  'flat 


2  •  sharp  '. 


4  THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 

of  view  the  northern  method  is  preferable.  As  most  of  the 
writer's  time  has  been  spent  in  the  south,  and  his  first  love 
for  the  genial  south  is  always  his  best  love,  it  is  not  likely 
that  he  has  been  biassed  in  coming  to  this  decision. 

In  our  second  table  the  smaller  intervals  of  the  Indian 
octave  are  exhibited.  Here  a  difficulty  appears  in  the 
southern  system,  namely,  the  merging  of  the  notes  as  shown 
in  the  bracketed  pairs  of  the  table.  We  have  decided  to 
ask  our  southern  friends  to  read  Shatsruti  Ri  in  those 
cases  where  it  should  occur,  even  though  the  symbol  g  is 
used  and  so  on  for  all  merged  notes. 

Tlvra  means  *  sharp '  and  is  shown  by  capital  with 
superscript  plus,  in  the  case  of  Ni  and  Ga.  In  the  case  of 
Ni  and  Ga  it  is  a  sharp  of  one  ^ruti  only.  In  Ma  it  is  a 
semitonal  sharp,  and  is  shown  by  a  small  letter. 

Tivratara  is  a  double  sharp,  a  microtone  higher  than 
Tivra,  and  is  indicated  by  small  letter  with  plus  sign. 

Komal  is  a  semitonal  flat  and  is  indicated  by  a  small 
letter. 

Atikomal  is  a  microtonal  double  flat,  one  sruti  lower 
than  Komal.  It  is  indicated  by  a  superscript  minus  sign 
on  the  small  letter. 

The  three  voice  registers  are  indicated  as  follows  : — 

T Tara  or  higher  register,    shown  thus  S. 

O Madhya  or  middle  register,  shown  thus  S. 

M Mandra  or  lower  register,  shown  thus  S. 

The  letters  T,0,M,  are  placed  at  the  beginning  of  the 
clef  to  show  the  register  used. 

In  the  staff  notation,  when  it  is  desired  to  show  a 
microtonal  sharpening  or  flattening,  the  sharp  or  flat  sign 
is  placed  over  the  note,  as  may  be  seen  in  the  table  of 
^rutis  below.  It  should  be  noted  that  there  are  other 
systems  of  nomenclature  current  in  India  besides  the 
two  mentioned.  For  instance,  one  current  in  Poona  calls 
the  Suddha  notes  of  our  system  Tivra  and  the  Tivra  notes 
Tivratara.  It  is  not  suggested  that  the  notation  here 
adopted  is  free  from  difficulties,  but  after  very  careful 
thought  it  is  the  best  that  we  have  been  able  to  devise  for 
the  purpose  of  this  book.  Whether  it  will  be  found 
worthy  of  wider  use  it  is  for  others  to  decide. 


INTRODUCTION 


II.    Table  of  Srutis 


Sruti  Name 

Western 
Note 

Sign 

Carnatic 

Name 

22. 
21. 

SHADJA  TARA 
Tivra  Ni 

C 
...        B 

S 

N+ 

Shadja  Tara. 

20. 

SUDDHANI 

B 

N 

Kakali  Ni. 

19. 

Komal  Ni 

...        EH} 

...      Bb 

A 

n 

f  Kai^iki  Ni. 
1  Shatsruti  Dha. 

18. 
17. 

Atikomal  Ni 
SUDDHA  DHA 

D 

j  Chatuhsruti  Dha. 
i  ^uddhk  Ni. 

16. 
15. 

Tri^ruti  Dha 
Komal  Dha 

A 

...        A^ 

b 

...        At> 

D" 
d 

Buddha  Dha. 

14. 

Atikomal  Dha 

d 

13. 

PANCHAMA 

G 
...        Ftt 

P 

Pa. 

12. 

Tivratara  Ma 

m+ 

11. 

Tivra  Ma 

...        Fjf 
F 

m 

Prati  Ma. 

10. 

Ekasruti  Ma 

M+ 

9. 

SUDDHA  MA 

F 

M 

Saddha  Ma. 

8. 

Tivra  Ga 

3 

E 

G+ 

7. 

SUDDHA  GA 

...        E 

G 

Antara  Ga. 

6. 

Komal  Ga 

...        Et> 

b 

...         Eb 
D 

b 

D 

...      Db 

b 

Db 
...      c 

g 

Sadharana  Ga. 
Shatsruti  Ri. 

5. 

4. 

Atikomal  Ga 
SUDDHA  RI 

g' 
R 

f  Chatuhsruti  Ri. 
1  Suddha  Ga. 

3. 

2. 

Madhya  Ri 
Komal  Ri 

R~ 
r 

Suddha  Ri. 

1. 

0. 

Atikomal  Ri 
SHADJA 

S 

Shadja  madhya. 

THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 


For  time -measure  the  following  notation  is  adopted, 
being  similar  to  the  European  tonic  sol-fa  system.  The 
complete  bar  is  indicated  by  long  upright  lines,  the 
division  within  the  bar  by  short  upright  lines,  and  the 
smaller  divisions  within  these  by  double  and  single  dots. 
The  dash  indicates  a  continuation  of  the  previous  note. 
Thus, 


S  :  R :  G  :  M      S :  R.  G        S  :— 


The  time  signature  will  be  shown  at  the  beginning  or 
each  piece.  The  beat  is  called  Aiiga  or  Tala  ;  the  bar 
Vibhaga  and  a  section  of  so  many  vibhagas  an  Avarfa.  The 
Avarta  will  be  shown  by  two  long  upright  lines  together. 


CHAPTER  ir 


LEGEND  AND  HISTORY 

The  beginnings  of  Indian  music  are  lost  in  the  beautiful 
and  fanciful  legends  of  gods  and  goddesses  who  were  sup- 
posed to  be  its  authors  and  patrons.  The  goddess  Sarasvati 
is  always  represented  as  the  goddess  of  art  and  learning, 
and  she  is  usually  pictured  as  seated  on  a  white  lotus  with 
a  vlnct,  lute,  in  one  hand,  playing  it  with  another,  a  book  in 
the  third   hand  and  a  necklace  of  pearls  in  the  fourth. 

The  technical  word  for  music  throughout  India  is  the 
word  sahgtta,  which  originally  included  dancing  and  the 
drama  as  well  as  vocal  and  instrumental  music.  The  god 
Siva  is  supposed  to  have  been  the  creator  of  this  three- 
fold art  and  his  mystic  dance  symbolizes  the  rhythmic 
motion  of  the  universe. 

In  Hindu  mythology  the  various  departments  of  life  and 
learning  are  usually  associated  with  different  rishis  and  so 
to  one  of  these  is  traced  the  first  instruction  that  men 
received  in  the  art  of  music.  Bharata  risht  is  said  to  have 
taught  the  art  to  the  heavenly  dancers — the  Apsarases — 
who  afterwards  performed  before  Siva.  The  rishi  Narada, 
who  wanders  about  in  earth  and  heaven,  singing  and  playing 
on  his  Vina,  taught  music  to  men.  Among  the  inhabitants 
of  Indra's  heaven  we  find  bands  of  musicians.  The 
Gandharvas  are  the  singers,  the  Apsarases  the  dancers,  and 
the  Kinnaras  centaur-like  performers  on  musical  instru- 
ments. From  the  name  Gandharva  has  come  the  title 
Gandharva  Veda  for  the  art  of  music. 

Among  the  early  legends  of  India  there  are  many  con- 
cerning music.     The  following  is  an  interesting  one  from 


8  THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 

them   Adbhuta    Rdmayana   about    Narada   rishi^   which 
combines  criticism  with  appreciation. 

Once  upon  a  time  the  great  rishi  Narada  thought  within  himself 
that  he  had  mastered  the  whole  art  and  science  of  music.  To  curb 
his  pride  the  all-knowing  Vishnu  took  him  to  visit  the  abode  of  the 
gods.  They  entered  a  spacious  building,  in  which  were  numerous 
men  and  women  weeping  over  their  broken  limbs.  Vishnu  stopped 
and  enquired  of  them  the  reason  for  their  lamentation.  They 
answered  that  they  were  the  rdgas  and  the  rdginJs,  created  by 
Mahadeva  ;  but  that  as  a  rishi  of  the  name  of  Narada,  ignorant  of 
the  true  knowledge  of  music  and  unskilled  in  performance,  had  sung 
them  recklessly,  their  features  were  distorted  and  their  limbs  broken  ; 
and  that,  unless  Mahadeva  or  some  other  skilful  person  would  sing 
them  properly,  there  was  no  hope  of  their  ever  being  restored  to  their 
former  state  of  body.  Narada,  ashamed,  kneeled  down  before 
Vishnu  and  asked  to  be  forgiven. 

The  Vedic  Index  shows  a  very  wide  variety  of  musical 
instruments  in  use  in  Vedic  times.  Instruments  of  per- 
cussion are  represented  by  the  dundubhi,  an  ordinary 
drum ;  the  adamhara,  another  kind  of  drum ;  bhumi- 
dundubhi,  an  earthdrum  made  by  digging  a  hole  in  the 
ground  and  covering  it  with  hide ;  vanaspati,  a  wooden 
drum ;  ctghati,  a  cymbal  used  to  accompany  dancing. 
Stringed  instruments  are  represented  by  the  kanda-vlnat 
a  kind  of  lute  ;  karkari,  another  lute;  vana,  a  lute  of  100 
strings  ;  and  the  vtna,  the  present  instrument  of  that  name 
in  India.  This  one  instrument  alone  is  sufficient  evidence 
of  the  development  to  which  the  art  had  attained  even  in 
those  early  days.  There  are  also  a  number  of  wind  instru- 
ments of  the  flute  variety,  such  as  the  tilnava,  a  wooden 
flute ;  the  nadl,  a  reed  flute  ;  bakiira,  whose  exact  shape 
is  unknown.  *  By  the  time  of  the  Yajur  Veda  several 
kinds  of  professional  musicians  appear  to  have  arisen  ; 
for  lute-players,  drummers,  flute-players  and  conch-blowers 
are  mentioned  in  the  list  of  callings.' 

That  vocal  music  had  already  got  beyond  the  primitive 
stage  may  be  concluded  from  the  somewhat  complicated 
method  of  chanting  the  Sama  Veda,  which  probably  goes 
back  to  the  Indo-Iranian  age.  These  hymns  of  the  Rik 
and  Sama  Vedas  are  the  earliest  examples  we  have  of 
words  set  to  music,  unless  we  except  the  Zeiidavcstaf 
which  mav  have  been  chanted.     The  Sama  Veda  was  sung 


LEGEND  AND  HISTORY  9 

according  to  very  strict  rules,  and  present  day  Samagahs — 
temple  singers  of  the  Sanian — claim  that  the  oral  tradition 
which  they  have  received  goes  back  to  those  ancient  times. 
A  discussion  upon  the  musical  character  of  the  Saman 
chant  will  be  found  in  the  next  chapter.  The  Chhan- 
dogya  and  the  Brihadaranyaka  U panishads  (c.  600  B.C.) 
both  mention  the  singing  of  the  Sama  Veda  and  the  latter 
also  refers  to  a  number  of  musical  instruments. 

One  of  the  earliest  references  to  music  is  found  in 
the  grammarian  Panini,  who  was  probably  alive  when 
Alexander  the  Great  was  in  Taxila  (326  B.C.)  In  his 
comments  upon  the  root  Nrit — to  dance — he  mentions 
two  persons  named  Silalin  and  Krisasvin  as  the  authors  of 
two  sets   of  sutras  on  dancing. 

A  reference  to  a  musical  performance,  which  if  it  could 
be  accepted  as  historical  would  go  back  further  still  is 
found  in  the  Pali  Plfaka  (c.  300  B.C.)  in  which  it  is  said 
that  two  disciples  of  Gautama  Buddha  (c.  480  B.C.) 
attended  a  dramatic  performance,  which  of  course  would 
be  musical. 

The  earliest  reference  to  musical  theory  seems  to  be 
in  the  Rikpratisakhya  (c.  400  B.C.)  which  mentions  the 
three  voice  registers  and  the  seven  notes  of  the  gamut.  It 
is  interesting  to  find  that  just  before  this  time,  Pythagoras 
in  Greece  (510  B.C.)  worked  out  the  musical  system  of  the 
Greeks. 

In  the  Ramayana  (400  B.C. — A.D.  200)  mention  is  fre- 
quently made  of  the  singing  of  ballads,  which  argues  very 
considerable  development  of  the  art  of  music.  The  poem 
composed  by  the  sage  Valmiki  is  said  to  have  been  sung 
before  King  Da^aratha  by  Rama  and  Lakshm.ana.  The 
author  of  the  Ramayana  often  makes  use  of  musical 
similes.  The  humming  of  the  bees  reminded  him  of  the 
music  of  stringed  instruments,  and  the  thunder  of  the 
clouds  of  the  beating  of  the  mridaiiga.  He  talks  of  the 
music  of  the  battlefield,  in  which  the  twanging  and  creaking 
of  the  bows  takes  the  place  of  stringed  instruments  and 
vocal  music  is  supplied  by  the  low  moaning  of  the 
elephants.  Ravana  is  made  to  say  that  *  he  will  play 
upon  the  lute  of  his  terrific  bow  with  the  sticks  of  his 


10  THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 

arrows.'  Lakshmana,  entering  the  inner  apartments  of 
Sugriva's  harem,  hears  the  ravishing  strains  of  the  music 
of  the  vln^  and  other  stringed  instruments  accompanied 
by  the  faultless  singing  of  accomplished  vocalists.  Ravana 
was  a  great  master  of  music  and  was  said  to  have  even 
appeased  Siva  by  his  sublime  chanting  of  Vedic  hymns. 

The  Ramayana  also  mentions  the  jatis,  which  seem  to 
have  done  duty  for  the  ragas  in  ancient  times.  They 
seem  to  have  been  seven  in  number  and  may  perhaps 
have  begun  on  each  of  the  seven  notes  of  the  gamut. 
Among  the  musical  instruments  mentioned  the  following 
are  the  most  important :  hherl,  dundtihhi,  mridahga, 
pataha,  ghata,  panava,  and  dindima  among  the  drums  ; 
mudduka  (brass  trumpet)  and  adamhara  (clarionet)  among 
wind  instruments  ;  a  vlna  played  either  with  the  bow  or  with 
a  plectrum,  the  vlna  being  the  name  for  all  stringed 
instruments.^ 

The  Mahabharata  (500  B.C. — A.D.  200)  speaks  of  the 
seven  Svaras  and  also  of  the  Gandhara  Grama,  the  anciect 
third  mode  which  is  discussed  in  the  next  chapter.  The 
theory  of  consonance  is  also  alluded  to. 

The  Mahajanaka  Jataka  (c.  200  B.C.)  mentions  the 
four  great  sounds  (parama  uiaha  sahda)  which  were  con- 
ferred as  an  honour  by  the  Hindu  kings  on  great  person- 
ages. In  these  the  drum  is  associated  with  various  kinds 
of  horn,  gong  and  cymbals.  These  were  sounded  in  front 
of  a  chariot  v/hich  was  occupied,  but  behind  one  which  was 
empty.  The  car  used  to  go  slowly  round  the  palace  and 
up  what  was  called  '  the  kettle-drum  road.'  At  such  a 
time  they  sounded  hundreds  of  instruments  so  that  '  it 
was  like  the  noise  of  the  sea.'  The  Jataka  also  records 
how  Brahmadatta  presented  a  mountain  hermit  with  a 
drum,  telling  him  that  if  he  beat  on  one  side  his  enemies 
would  run  away  and  if  upon  the  other  they  would  become 
his  firm  friends. 

In  the  Tamil  books  Piirananuru  and  Pattiipattu  (c.  A.D. 
100-200)  the  drum  is  referred  to  as  occupying  a  position 
of    very    great    honour.     It    had    a    special    seat   called 

1  See  Music  in  Ancient  India,  by  C.  Tirumalaiya  Naidu. 


LEGEND  AND  HISTORY  U 

inurasukatiilj  and  a  special  elephant,  and  was  treated 
almost  as  a  deity.  It  is  described  as  '  adorned  with  a 
garland  like  the  rainbow.'  One  of  the  poets  tells  us, 
marvelling  at  the  mercy  of  the  king,  *  how  he  sat  unwittingly 
upon  the  drum  couch  and  yet  was  not  punished '.  Three 
kinds  of  drum  are  mentioned  in  these  books  :  the  battle 
drum,  the  judgment  drum,  and  the  sacrificial  drum.  The 
battle  drum  was  regarded  with  the  same  veneration  that 
regiments  used  to  bestow  upon  the  regimental  flag  in  the 
armies  of  Europe  and  the  capture  of  the  drum  meant 
the  defeat  of  the  army.  One  poem  likens  the  beating  of 
the  drum  to  the  sound  of  a  mountain  torrent.  Another 
thus  celebrates  the  virtues  of  the  drummer  : 

For  my  grandsire's  grandsire,  his  grandsire's  grandsire 
Beat  the  drum.     For  my  father,  his  father  did  the  same. 
So  he  for  me.     From  duties  of  his  clan  he  has  not  swerved. 
Pour  forth  for  him  one  other  cup  of  palm  tree's  purest  wine.i 

The  early  Tamil  literature  makes  much  mention  of 
music.  The  Paripadal  (c.  A.D.  100-200)  gives  the  names 
of  some  of  the  svaras  and  mentions  the  fact  of  there  being 
seven  Palai  (ancient  Dravidian  modes).  The  yal  (^'^i^) 
is  the  peculiar  instrument  of  the  ancient  Tamil  land.  No 
specimen  of  it  exists  to-day.  It  was  evidently  something 
like  the  vinct  but  not  the  same  instrument,  as  the  poet 
Manikkavachakar  (c.  A.D.  500-700)  mentions  both  in  such  a 
way  as  to  indicate  two  different  instruments.  Some  of  its 
varieties  are  said  to  have  had  over  1,000  strings.  The 
Silappadigaram  (a.D.  300),  a  Buddhist  drama,  mentions 
the  drummer,  the  flute  player,  and  the  vina  as  well  as  the 
ja/,  and  also  has  specimens  of  early  Tamil  songs.  This 
book  contains  some  of  the  earliest  expositions  of  the  Indian 
musical  scale,  giving  the  seven  notes  of  the  gamut  and  also 
a  number  of  the  modes  and  ragas  in  use  at  that  time. 
The  names  given  to  the  notes  are  not  those  current  in  the 
present  day  and  are  with  one  exception  pure  Tamil  words 
Tivakarani,  a  Jain  lexicon  of  the  same  period,  gives  quite  a 
lot  of  information  about  early  Dravidian  music.  It  men- 
tions  two   kinds   of  ragas ;  complete   or   heptatonic,  and 

1  From  Pura-porul  Venbd  mdlai,  Pope's  translation. 


12  THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 

transilient  or  hexatonic  and  pentatonic,  which  were  called 
respectively  Pan  and  Tiram ;  it  gives  the  twenty-two 
srutis,  which  it  calls  matra  ;  the  Tamil  names  of  the  seven 
svaras  with  the  equivalent  Sanskrit  sol-fa  initials,  (Sa  Ri 
Ga  etc.)  ;  the  seven  Dravidian  modes  called  Palai ;  four 
kinds  of  Yal  and  the  names  of  29  Pans,  some  of  which  are 
still  found  among  the  primary  ragas  of  southern  India. 
All  this  as  well  as  frequent  references  to  the  science  of 
music  and  to  musical  performances,  both  vocal  and  instru- 
mental, in  the  Tamil  books  of  this  and  succeeding  periods 
makes  it  clear  that  musical  culture  had  reached  a  high 
level  among  the  Dravidian  peoples  of  South  India  in  the 
early  centuries  of  our  era. 

The  later  centuries  of  the  Buddhist  period  (a.D.  300-500) 
were  more  fertile  in  architecture,  sculpture  and  painting 
than  in  musici  The  dramas  of  Kalidasa  (c.  A.D.  400) 
make  frequent  references  to  music  and  evidently  the 
rajahs  of  that  time  had  regular  musicians  attached  to 
their  courts.  In  the  Malavikagnimitra  a  song  in  four-time 
is  mentioned  as  a  great  feat  performed  at  a  contest  between 
two  musicians.  The  development  of  the  drama  after 
Kahdasa  meant  the  development  of  music  as  well,  as  all 
Indian  drama  is  operatic.  '  The  temple  and  the  stage  were 
the  great  schools  of  Indian  music' 

This  was  the  time  when  in  Europe  Pope  Sylvester  (a.D. 
330)  and  St.  Ambrose  (a.D.  374-397)  began  to  elaborate 
musical  theory. 

The  oldest  detailed  exposition  of  Indian  musical  theory 
which  has  survived  the  ravages  of  ants  and  the  fury  of 
men  is  found  in  a  treatise  called  Natya  Sastra  or  the 
science  of  dancing,  said  to  have  been  composed  by  the 
sage  Bharata.  The  date  of  this  book  is  usually  accepted 
as  the  early  part  of  the  sixth  century.  It  is  stated 
elsewhere  that  previous  to  this  Bharata  had  composed  the 
Natya  Sutra  or  Aphorisms  on  Dancing,  but  these  have  not 
survived.  There  is  only  one  chapter  of  the  Natya  Sasira 
(ch.  25)  which  deals  with  music  proper.  This  contains  a 
detailed  exposition  of  the  svaras,  srutis,  gramas,  mflrch- 
hanas,  jatis.  While  the  principles  of  his  theory  are  still 
active  in   Indian  music,  the  details  of  his  system  belong 


LEGEND  AND   HISTORY  13 

to  the  past  and  are  not  easily  intelligible  to  the  present 
generation.  A  translation  of  a  portion  of  this  chapter 
appeared  in  Mr.  Clement's  Introduction  to  Indian  Music, 
and  there  is  a  complete  French  translation  by  Jean  Grosset- 
The  latter  however  is  not  quite  an  accurate  guide,  as  it 
has  taken  the  word  svara — used  by  Bharata  for  the  interval 
and  only  secondarily  for  the  note  above  the  interval — to 
refer  to  the  note  below  the  interval.  This  involves  the 
correction  of  all  his  translation  of  note  names. 

An  inscription  found  at  Kudumiyamalai  in  the  Pudukottai 
State  of  the  Madras  Presidency,  which  seems  to  belong  to 
the  seventh  century,  has  many  references  to  music.  It 
mentions  seven  jatis  and  a  few  of  the  srutis  as  well  as  the 
seven  svaras.  The  words  *  ahtara '  and  '  kakali '  are  found 
describing  respectively  the  sharp  srutis  of  Ga  and  Ni,  which 
is  one  of  the  peculiarities  of  the  Southern  nomenclature 
to-day.  It  is  suggested  that  the  inscription  is  really  a  piece 
for  the  Samagah  to  sing  and  that  the  peculiar  marks  on 
many  of  the  note  signs  may  be  intended  to  indicate  points 
of  Saman  singing.^ 

The  seventh  and  eighth  centuries  of  our  era  in  South 
India  witnessed  a  religious  revival  associated  with  the  bhakti 
movement  and  connected  with  the  theistic  and  popular 
sects  of  Vishnu  and  Siva.  This  revival  was  spread  far 
and  wide  by  means  of  songs  composed  by  the  leaders  of 
the  movement  and  so  resulted  in  a  great  development 
of  musical  activity  among  the  people  generally  and  in 
the  spread  of  musical  education.  The  old  melodies  to 
which  these  songs  were  sung  are  now  lost,  though  Travan- 
core  claims  to  have  preserved  some  of  them  in  the  ancient 
Travancore  ragas  such  as  Indisa,  Indalam,  P^di,  Pui'anira. 
The  beautiful  strip  of  land  on  the  south-west  coast  of  India 
between  the  Western  Ghauts  and  the  sea,  of  which 
Travancore  is  now  a  part,  was  famed  in  the  centuries 
before  Christ  for  its  commercial  activities  and  its  tropical 
products.  This  was  then  the  homeland  of  the  Chera 
kingdom  which  for  a  considerable  period  exercised  sove- 
reignty over  the  whole   of  South  India.     It  was  also  the 

1  See  Epigraphia  Indioa,  vol.  xxi,  pp.  226-37. 


14  THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 

home  of  an  ancient  Tamil  culture  which  rivalled  the 
Sanskrit  culture  of  the  sacred  cities  of  North  India.  It 
is,  therefore,  no  wonder  that  we  should  find  here  a  flour- 
ishing school  of  music  whose  traditions  have  persisted 
until  this  day.  It  is  interesting  to  note  that  it  was  about 
this  time  that  Gregory  the  Great  was  developing  music  in 
Europe  for  religious  purposes. 

The  Narada  Siksha,  wrongly  connected  with  the  name 
of  the  great  rishiy  was  probably  composed  between  the 
tenth  and  twelfth  century.  It  shows  considerable  develop- 
ment upon  the  Natya  Sastra  in  its  raga  system  and  in 
a  number  of  matters  agrees  with  the  Kudumiyamalai 
inscription  where  that  disagrees  with  the  next  important 
treatise,  the  Sahgita-Ratnakara.  Some  scholars  think 
that  the  Narada  Siksha  comes  much  later  than  the 
twelfth  century. 

The  first  north  Indian  musician  whom  we  can  definitely 
locate  both  in  time  and  place  is  Jayadeva,  who  lived  at  the 
end  of  the  twelfth  century.  He  was  born  at  Kendula  near 
Bolpur,  where  lives  to-day  the  poet  laureate  of  Bengal  and 
modern  India.  Kendula  still  celebrates  an  annual  fair  at 
v;hich  the  best  musical  pieces  are  regularly  performed. 
Jayadeva  wrote  and  sung  the  Glta  Govinda,  a  series  of 
songs  descriptive  of  the  amours  of  Krishna,  and  so  belongs 
to  the  number  of  India's  lyrical  songsters  connected  with 
the  hhakti  revival.  Though  each  song  has  the  name  of  the 
raga  and  tala  to  which  it  was  sung  these  are  not  intelli- 
gible to-day  to  Indian  musicians.  At  that  time  these  songs 
v/ere  known  as  Prabhandhas.  The  Glta  Govinda  is  a 
charming  lyrical  composition,  as  may  be  realized  to  some 
degree  in  an  English  translation  of  it  by  Sir  Edwin  Arnold 
under  the  name  of  The  Indian  Song  of  Songs.  In  these 
songs  Radha  pours  forth  her  yearning,  her  sorrow  and 
her  joy  and   Krishna  assures   her   of   his  love. 

We  come  now  to  the  greatest  of  ancient  Indian  musical 
authorities  and  one  who  still  inspires  reverence  in  the  minds 
of  India's  musicians.  He  was  called  Sarrigadeva  and  lived 
in  the  former  half  of  the  thirteenth  century  (a.d.  1210-1247), 
at  the  court  of  the  Yadava  dynasty  of  Devagiri  in  the 
Deccan.     At  that  time  the  Maratha  empire  extended  to  the 


LEGEND  AND  HISTORY  15 

river  Kaveri  in  the  south,  and  it  is  probable  that  Sarnga- 
deva  had  come  into  contact  with  the  music  of  the  south 
as  well  as  with  that  of  the  north.  His  work,  the  Saiiglia- 
Ratnakara  shows  many  signs  of  this  contact.  It  is 
possible  that  he  is  endeavouring  to  give  the  common 
theory  which  underlies  both  systems.  The  result  is  that  a 
great  deal  of  controversy  has  arisen  as  to  the  exact  system 
described  in  the  book  and  even  as  to  the  reading  of 
the  ragas  which  he  describes.  No  scholar  has  been  able 
to  give  a  thoroughly  satisfactory  account  of  these.  The 
work  deals  with  the  whole  range  of  musical  form,  and 
composition  and  gives  a  very  detailed  account  of  ancient 
musical  theory.  It  also  mentions  a  number  of  musical 
writers  between  Bharata  and  the  author,  but  none  of  their 
works  survive  to-day.  The  fundamental  scale  {suddha 
raga)  of  Sarrigadeva  is  Mtikhart,  the  modern  Kanakahgi, 
which  is  the  sitddha  scale  of  Carnatic  music  to-day. 

The  fourteenth  and  fifteenth  centuries  are  the  most 
important  in  the  development  of  the  Northern  school.  It 
was  the  time  of  the  Muhammadan  conquest.  Many  of 
the  emperors  did  a  great  deal  to  extend  the  practice  of 
music  and  most  of  them  had  musicians  attached  to  their 
court.  From  this  time  dates  the  introduction  of  Persian 
models  into  Indian  music,  and  we  also  find  the  differen- 
tiation of  the  northern  and  southern  schools  becoming 
more  marked.  Amir  Khusru  was  a  famous  singer  at  the 
court  of  Sultan  Alla-ud-din  (a.d.  1295-1316).  He  was  not 
only  a  poet  and  musician  but  also  a  soldier  and  statesman 
and  v/as  a  minister  of  two  of  the  Sultans.  The  qavali 
mode  of  singing — a  judicious  mixture  of  Persian  and  Indian 
models — was  introduced  by  him,  and  several  of  our  modern 
ragas  are  said  to  have  been  originated  by  him.  The  Sitar, 
a  modification  of  the  vTtjaj  was  probably  first  introduced  by 
him.  There  is  a  story  told  of  a  contest  between  Amir 
Khusru  and  Gopal  Naik,  a  musician  from  the  court  of 
Vijayanagar.  While  Gopal  was  singing  a  beautiful  com- 
position, Khusru  hid  under  the  throne  of  the  king  and 
afterwards  imitated  all  the  beauties  of  Gopal's  m.elodies 
and  even  surpassed  them.  Muhammadan  historians  relate 
that,  when  the  Moghuls  completed  the    ronquest   of   the 


16  THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 

Deccan  they  took  back  with  them  to  the  North  many  of 
the  most  famous  Southern  musicians,  in  the  same  way 
that  they  took  toll  of  the  Indian  architects  and  sculptors 
for  their  new  buildings. 

The  RagataraiiginJ,  composed  by  Lochanakavi,  pro- 
bably belongs  to  this  period.  The  major  portion  of  this 
work  is  devoted  to  the  discussion  of  a  number  of  songs 
by  a  poet  named  Vidyapati,  who  flourished  in  the  fifteenth 
century  at  the  court  of  Raja  Siva  Singh  of  Tirhut.  The 
author  also  describes  the  current  musical  theories  of  his 
day  and  groups  the  ragas  under  twelve  iliats  or  funda- 
mental modes. 

The  development  of  the  hhakti  revival  in  North  India 
and  Bengal  under  Chaitanya  (a.d.  1485-1533)  was  accom- 
panied by  a  great  deal  of  musical  activity,  and  it  was  at 
this  time  that  the  popular  musical  performances,  known 
as  Sankirtan  and  Nagarkirtan  were  first  started. 

The  Emperor  Akbar  (a.d.  1542-1605)  was  a  fervent 
lover  of  music  and  did  much  for  its  development.  During 
his  reign  ragas  were  considerably  modified  under  foreign 
influence  and,  though  some  of  these  modifications  transgres- 
sed the  established  practice,  they  were  on  the  whole  to  the 
advantage  of  music  and  helped  to  give  to  Northern  music 
some  of  its  more  pleasing  characteristics.  Durbari  or 
chamber  music  was  introduced  in  the  time  of  Akbar,  and 
from  that  time  developed  side  by  side  with  the  music  of 
the  temple  and  the  drama. 

Haridas  Swami  was  a  great  Hindu  saint  and  musician 
who  lived  at  Brindaban,  the  centre  of  the  Krishna  cult 
on  the  banks  of  the  Jumna,  in  Akbar's  reign.  He  was 
considered  one  of  the  greatest  musicians  of  his  time.  Tan 
Sen,  the  celebrated  singer  of  Akbar's  court,  was  one  of  his 
pupils.  Many  interesting  stories  are  told  of  Tan  Sen, 
whose  name  is  still  fragrant  throughout  India  and  *  like 
whom  there  has  been  no  singer  for  a  thousand  years.* 
One  of  these  tells  how  the  Emperor  after  one  of  his  per- 
formances asked  him  if  there  was  anyone  in  the  world 
who  could  sing  like  him.  Tan  Sen  replied  that  there  was 
one  who  far  surpassed  him.  At  once  the  Emperor  was  all 
anxiety  to  hear  this  other  singer  and  when  told  that  he 


LEGEND  AND  HISTORY  17 

would  not  even  obey  the  command  of  the  Emperor  to  come 
to  court,  he  asked  to  be  taken  to  him.  It  wis  necessary 
for  the  Emperor  to  go  in  disguise  as  the  humble  instrument- 
carrier  of  his  singer.  They  came  to  the  hermitage  of 
Haridas  SwamI  on  the  banks  of  the  Jumna,  and  Tan  Sen 
asked  him  to  sing  but  he  refused.  Then  Tan  Sen  practised 
a  little  trick  and  himself  sang  a  piece  before  his  old  master, 
making  a  slight  mistake  in  doing  so.  The  master  at  once 
called  his  attention  to  it  and  showed  him  how  to  sing  it 
properly,  and  then  went  on  in  a  wonderful  burst  of  song, 
while  the  Emperor  listened  enraptured.  Afterwards,  as 
they  were  going  back  to  the  palace,  the  Emperor  said  to 
Tan  Sen,  '  Why  cannot  you  sing  like  that  ?  *  *  I  have  to 
sing  whenever  my  Emperor  commands*,  said  Tan  Sen, 
'  but  he  only  sings  in  obedience  to  the  inner  voice. ' 

Raja  Man  Singh  of  Gwalior,  one  of  the  greatest  of 
Akbar's  ministers,  was  also  a  great  patron  of  music  and  is 
said  to  have  introduced  the  dhrupad  style  of  singing.  The 
Gwalior  court  has  maintained  its  high  musical  traditions  to 
the  present  day. 

The  disciples  of  Tan  Sen  divided  themselves  into  two 
groups,  the  Rabat iyars  and  the  Bthkars.  The  former 
used  the  new  instrument  invented  by  Tan  Sen,  the  rabab  ; 
while  the  latter  used  the  bin,  as  the  vlnS-  is  called  in  the 
north.  Two  descendants  of  these  are  living  to-day  at 
Rampur,  a  small  state  which  has  been  famous  for  many 
centuries  for  its  excellent  musicians.  The  representative 
of  the  Bihkars  is  Muhammad  Wazir  Khan,  whose  paternal 
ancestor  was  Nabi  Khan  Binkar  at  the  court  of  the 
Emperor,  Muhammad  Shah ;  and  Muhammad  All  Khan  is 
the  representative  of  the  Rababiyars. 

The  heroic  Mirabal  (c.  1500),  wife  of  a  prince  of  the 
Udaipur  clan  and  famous  poetess  and  musician,  and  Tulsi 
Das  (1584),  the  singer  and  composer  of  the  Hindi 
Ramayana,  are  representatives  of  musical  culture  in  North 
India. 

Pundarika  Vitthal  was  probably   another  musician  of 

Akbar's  reign.     He  lived  at  Burhanpur  in  Khandhesh  and 

may  have  been  asked  to  go  over  to  Delhi  when  Akbar 

took  Khandhesh  in    1599.     Pundarika  wrote  four  works  : 

2 


18  THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 

Snadragachandrodaya,  Ragamala,  Raganianjarl,  and 
Nartanamrnaya  :  these  have  recently  been  discovered  in 
the  State  Library  of  Bikanir.  It  appears  that  the  music  of 
Upper  India  was  getting  into  confusion,  and  Pundarika 
seems  to  have  been  asked  by  the  Raja  Burhankhan  to 
bring  things  into  order.  Pundarika  was  a  southern  pandit, 
as  he  himself  states,  calhng  himself  *  Karnatika ',  or 
belonging  to  the  south  ;  and  so  he  had  come  to  know  both 
the  northern  and  southern  systems.  He  adopts  the 
suddha  scale  of  the  south  and  describes  many  northern 
rcigas.  In  describing  his  rdgas  he  seems  to  make  use  of 
only  fourteen  srutis  in  the  octave,  and  uses  only  twelve 
frets  for  his  vlna. 

Rama  Amatya,  a  southern  musician,  gives  us  the  first 
detailed  exposition  of  the  southern  system  in  the  Svaraniela 
Kalanidhi,  v/ritten  about  the  year  A.D.  1550.  This  work 
contains  the  first  collection  of  Indian  ragas  which  are 
adequately  described.  All  of  them  belong  to  the  Carnatic 
system  and  have  shadja  as  their  tonic.  It  seems  that,  in 
the  south  at  least,  ragas  have  now  been  worked  out  from  a 
common  tonic,  indicating  that  instrumental  music  had 
greatly  developed. 

Following  this  comes  the  Ragavibodha,  one  of  the  most 
important  works  on  Indian  music,  written  in  A.D.  1609  by 
Somanatha,  a  Telugu  Brahman  of  the  East  coast,  probably 
of  Rajamandry.  He  was  evidently  a  practical  musician 
as  well  as  a  scholar  and_poet.  The  book  is  written  in 
masterly  couplets  in  the  Arya  metre.  It  starts  with  the 
theory  of  musical  sounds  and  goes  on  to  describe  the 
different  vtnas  in  existence  and  how  to  use  them.  The 
names  and  positions  of  the  twenty-two  srutis  are  given. 
Somanatha  belongs  to  the  southern  school  and  classifies  the 
ragas  into  primary  and  derivative  (Janaka  and  Janya)  as 
is  done  in  modern  south  Indian  music.  He  also  gives  a 
number  of  melodies  developed  from  the  ragas.  A  transla- 
tion of  this  work  was  appearing  in  the  Indian  Music 
Journal  when  it  met  with  an  untimely  death. 

Another  important  work  of  the  southern  school  which 
was  written  about  the  same  time  is  the  Chaturdandi 
Prakasika^  whose  author  was  Pandit  Venkatamakhi,  son 


LEGEND  AND  HISTORY  19 

of  Govinda  Dikshit  and  pupil  of  Tanappacharya,  who  is 
said  to  carry  his  giiriiparampara  (scholastic  succession) 
right  back  to  Sarrigadeva  himself.  This  work  gives  the 
basis  of  the  present-day  southern  system  and  also  of  its 
raga  classification.  The  ragas  are  arranged  under  seventy- 
two  primary  ragas,  called  Melakartas,  with  a  large  number 
of  derivative  ragas  attached  to  each.  This  author  makes 
use  of  the  twelve  semitones  only  in  describing  the  ragas. 

In  the  northern  school  Sahgita  Darpana,  or  *  the 
mirror  of  music,'  is  a  popular  work  written  by  Damodara 
Mi^ra  about  A.D.  1625,  when  Jahanglr  was  Emperor.  This 
book  has  become  as  unintelligible  as  the  SahgJta  Ratnd- 
kara,  from  which  the  author  has  freely  copied  most  of  his 
materials  for  the  chapter  on  svaras.  He  has  added  a 
chapter  on  ragas  which  is  copied  from  some  unknown 
author.  Various  pictorial  descriptions  of  the  different  ragas 
are  given. 

There  were  many  good  musicians  at  the  court  of  Shah 
Jahan  (1628-66),  among  them  being  Jagannatha,  who 
received  the  title  Kaviraja  ;  and  Lai  Khan  v/ho  was  a 
descendant  of  Tan  Sen.  We  are  told  that  on  one  occasion 
Jagannatha  and  another  musician  named  Dirang  Khan 
received  from  the  Emperor  their  weight  in  silver,  which 
amounted  to  about  Rs.  4,500. 

During  the  reign  of  Aurangzeb  music  went  out  of 
favour  in  the  royal  court.  A  story  is  told  of  hov/  the  court 
musicians,  desiring  to  draw  the  Emperor's  attention  to  their 
distressful  condition  came  past  his  balcony  carrying  a  gaily 
dressed  corpse  upon  a  bier  and  chanting  mournful  funeral 
songs.  Upon  the  Emperor  enquiring  what  the  matter  was, 
they  told  him  that  music  had  died  from  neglect  and  that 
they  were  taking  its  corpse  to  the  burial  ground.  He 
rephed  at  once,  *  Very  well,  make  the  grave  deep,  so  that 
neither  voice  nor  echo  may  issue  from  it.' 

The  SahgJta  Parijata,  one  of  the  most  important 
works  of  the  northern  school,  was  written  by  Ahobala 
Pandit  in  the  seventeenth  century.  It  was  translated  into 
Persian  in  the  year  1724.  Ahobala  seems  to  have  had 
access  to  both  the  Ragataraginl  and  the  Ragavihodha. 
The  stiddha  scale  of  the  Parijata  is  the  same  as  that  of 


20  THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 

the  Tarahginl.  Ahobala  recognizes  twenty-nine  srutis 
altogether  in  the  octave,  but  he  rarely  uses  more  than 
twelve  to  describe  his  ragas.  He  gives  altogether  122 
different  ragas.  The  Parijata  is  the  first  work  to  describe 
the  twelve  svaras  in  terms  of  the  length  of  the  string  of  the 
Vina,  so  that  we  are  able  to  reproduce  to-day  the  notes 
that  he  used. 

The  next  author  of  importance  is  Bbavabhatta,  who 
was  attached  to  the  court  of  a  raja  named  Anupasifiha. 
His  ancestors  came  from  the  province  of  Abhira  in  Malvva 
and  his  father  was  Janardanabhatta,  a  musician  at  the 
court  of  Shah  Jahan.  It  is  possible  that  he  was  the  great 
musician  of  that  name  who  obtained  the  title  '  Kaviraja ' 
from  the  Shah.  The  family  may  have  belonged  to  a  south- 
ern stock,  as  he  shows  considerable  acquaintance  with  the 
southern  system  of  music.  He  classifies  all  the  ragas 
under  twenty  thats  (primary  ragas)  and  his  Buddha  scale 
is  Kanakahgi,  the  suddha  scale  of  the  south.  He  seems 
to  have  attempted  to  arrange  the  northern  r^gas  according 
to  the  southern  system. 

About  this  time  Purandara  Vitthala  wrote  many  beau- 
tiful songs  in  Kanarese,  which  are  used  to-day  by  the 
pupil  as  exercises  at  the  beginning  of  his  musical  studies. 

According  to  Sir  S.  M.  Tagore,  Muhammad  Shah  (1719) 
was  the  last  Emperor  to  have  famous  musicians  at  his 
court.  Among  them  were  Adaranga  and  Sadaranga,  two 
great  Binkars.  During  this  period  the  singer  Shori 
perfected  the  Tappa  style  of  Hindusthani  singing.  New 
types  of  song  and  music  were  also  introduced,  many  of 
which  were  pleasing  combinations  of  the  Hindu  and 
Persian  styles. 

In  the  early  British  period  Indian  music  was  generally 
confined  to  the  courts  of  the  leading  Indian  princes,  as 
most  Europeans  regarded  it  as  primitive  and  unscientific. 
There  were,  however,  scholars  like  Sir  William  Jones 
and  Sir  W.  Ousley  and  amateurs  like  Captain  Day 
and  Captain  Willard  who  made  a  considerable  study 
of  it. 

In  South  India,  the  Maratha  king  of  Tanjore,  Tulajaji 
(a.d.  1763-1787)  encouraged  musicians  by  gifts  and  grants 


LEGEND  AND  HISTORY  21 

of  land,  so  that  they  came  to  his  court  from  the 
whole  of  India,  and  Tanjore  became  one  of  the  most 
important  musical  centres  in  India.  This  king  was  also 
the  author  of  an  important  treatise  entitled  Sahglta 
Saramritani. 

The  Niigmat-c-Asaphi,  written  in  A.D.  1813  by  Muham- 
mad Rezza,  a  nobleman  of  Patna,  is  a  critical  work  on 
northern  music.  He  pronounces  the  various  northern 
systems  of  classification  to  be  out  of  date  and  has  no  use 
for  the  raga-raginl-piitra  basis  upon  which  they  build. 
He  gives  a  new  system  of  his  own  which  brings  together 
into  groups  ragas  which  have  similar  features.  This  work 
is  the  first  authority  to  take  the  Bilaval  scale  (similar  to  the 
European  major  mode)  as  its  sitddha  scale.  This  is  the 
siiddha  scale  of  the  north  to-day.  The  author  tells  us 
that  he  wrote  the  book  after  consulting  the  best  artists 
available  in  his  day.  It  is  said  that  his  rdga  lakshanas 
(definitions)  are  still  of  use  for  Hindusthani  musicians. 

About  this  time  Maharaja  Pratap  Singh  of  Jaipur  (a.D. 
1779-1804)  called  together  a  conference  of  musical  experts 
and  artists  in  Jaipur  in  order  to  arrange  for  a  standard  work 
on  Hindusthani  music.  The  book  which  resulted  was 
called  SahgJta  Sara  or  '  Epitome  of  Music. '  The  literary 
talent  available  does  not  seem  to  have  been  of  a  very  high 
order,  but  it  preserves  for  future  reference  the  opinions  of 
a  body  of  musicians  upon  current  thought  and  practice* 
Here  also  the  suddha  scale  is  Bilaval,  which  by  then  seems 
to  have  been  recognized  as  the  regular  Hindusthani  sitddha 
scale. 

Sahglta  Ragakalpadrimia  written  by  Krishnananda 
Vyasa  and  published  in  Calcutta  in  1842  collects  together 
all  the  masterpieces  then  available  of  Hindi  composition. 

It  should  be  remembered  that  all  these  authors  use 
some  form  or  other  of  the  Sanskrit  sol-fa  notation  which 
is  the  basis  of  the  notation  adopted  in  this  book.  (See 
Introduction). 

While  the  northern  system  was  thus  trying  to  find  a  new 
basis  of  classification,  the  south  was  going  ahead  in  musical 
composition.  Tanjore  was  for  many  years  one  of  the  most 
important   musical   centres   of   India.     It   was   here   that 


22  THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 

Tyagayya  or  Tyagaraja,  the  great  singer  and  poet  (c.  1800- 
1850)  composed  and  sang  his  songs,  and  gathered  around  him- 
self a  band  of  disciples  who  have  continued  his  tradition  till 
the  present  day.  His  charming  kritis  and  kirtanas  are  still 
sung  all  over  the  south.  He  was  a  creative  musical  genius 
and  his  compositions  mark  a  definite  advance  in  south 
Indian  musical  development.  One  who  remembers  him 
describes  him  as  '  a  tall  lean  man  with  a  brown  complexion.' 
He  was  revered  as  a  perfectly  sincere  and  selfless  man.  His 
father  was  Rama  Brahman,  who  was  also  a  musical  com- 
poser of  some  repute.  The  rishi  Narada  is  said  to  have 
appeared  to  Tyagaraja  and  to  have  presented  him  with  a 
rare  musical  treatise  entitled  Svararnava.  His  teacher 
was  Sunthi  Venkataraman.  Music  and  religion  were 
woven  together  in  his  life,  and  his  songs  were  the  outpour- 
ings of  a  real  devotion.  They  were  said  to  have  been 
composed  on  Ekctdasl  days,  when  he  fasted  all  day  long. 
Tyagaraja  introduced  Sangatis — peculiar  variations  upon 
a  particular  melody — into  his  music.  Each  variation,  w^hile 
retaining  the  important  features  of  the  original  melody, 
becomes  more  and  more  elaborate.  Originality  was  the 
distinguishing  mark  of  all  his  compositions. 

Govinda  Marar  was  another  well-knowm  southern 
musician  of  this  period.  He  lived  in  Travancore,  a  native 
state  with  a  long  and  honourable  musical  tradition.  Govinda 
Marar  was  known  as  Shatkala  Govinda,  because  he  could 
sing  a  piece  in  sextuple  time.  A  story  is  related  of  his 
meeting  with  Tyagaraja.  A  number  of  musicians  including 
himself  were  seated  with  the  master  when  a  paUavi 
(chorus)  in  the  rctga  pantiivarali  was  sung  round  by  all. 
Govinda,  using  his  own  peculiar  tamhilr  which  had  seven 
strings,  sang  it  in  shatkala  (sextuple)  accelerated  time. 
Tyagaraja  was  so  astonished  that  he  gave  him  the  name 
of  Govindacwami  and  composed  a  song  in  his  honour  which 
began,  '  There  are  many  great  men  in  the  world  and  I 
respect  them  all.' 

MuttuswamI  Dikshita  and  Syama  Sastrl  were  both 
contemporaries  of  Tyagaraja.  The  former  belonged  to 
the  Tinnevelly  District  and  invented  a  new  system  of  Indian 
notation  vv-hich  makes  use  of  the  diflferent   vowel   syllables 


LEGEND  AND  HISTORY  23 

to  indicate  the  various  vikrits  of  each  svara.  Ettiyapuram 
Subrfima  Dikshita,  his  great  grandson,  has  also  written  in 
Telugu  a  very  important  work  on  the  southern  system, 
which  endeavours  to  apply  the  principles  of  Sarngadeva  to 
modern  music. 

Many  of  the  rajahs  and  princes  of  Cochin  and  Travan- 
core  were  good  musicians,  among  whom  the  most  brilliant 
was  Perumal  Maharaja,  whose  compositions  are  in  six 
languages  :  Sanskrit,  Tamil,  Telugu,  Malayalam,  Hindu- 
sthani,  Marathi. 

In  Bengal,  in  the  latter  half  of  the  nineteenth  century, 
Sir  S.  M.  Tagore  produced  a  number  of  important  works 
on  music.  His  Universal  History  of  Music  is  a  work  of 
considerable  value.  The  Bengal  pandits,  including  Tagore, 
adopted  the  old  Hindusthani  raga-ragim-putra  classi- 
fication for  their  ragas. 

Dr.  Rabindranath  Tagore  is  a  relative  of  Sir  S.  M. 
Tagore  and  exercises  the  most  potent  influence  to-day 
upon  music  in  Bengal.  He  has  left  the  beaten  tracks  of 
Bengali  music  and  has  made  new  paths  for  his  melodies. 
His  songs  have  rare  musical  and  poetical  qualities  and 
are  known  all  over  Bengal. 

The  Indian  rajahs  and  princes  still  have  in  their 
service  many  famous  musicians,  but  unfortunately  many 
of  them  depend  almost  entirely  upon  tradition  in  the  ren- 
dering of  ragas  and  melodies.  There  seems  to  be  no 
generally  accepted  system  for  Hindusthani  music,  though 
efforts  are  being  made  to-day  by  many  scholars  to  work 
one  out.  The  southern  system,  as  readers  will  have 
guessed,  is  far  more  carefully  systematized,  and  perhaps 
errs  on  the  side  of  rigidity. 

During  the  last  few  decades  the  scientific  study  of 
music  in  India  has  made  great  advances.  Musical  schools 
and  associations  have  sprung  up  all  over  India  ;  and  to-day 
we  find  them  in  existence  in  such  widely  separated  places 
as  Bombay,  Poona,  Bangalore,  Lahore,  Gwalior,  Baroda, 
Tanjore,  Mysore,  Trivandrum,  Calcutta.  The  Gandharva 
Maha  Vidyalaya,  as  the  Bombay  school  is  called,  was 
first  established  in  Lahore  by  Pandit  Vishnu  Digambar 
Paluskar  in  1901  and  then  in  Bombay  in  1908.     It  has  its 


24  THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 

fine  head-quarters  in  Sandhurst  Road  and  is  supported  by 
Maharajas  and  government  officials.     The  staff  consists  of 
forty  teachers,  both  men  and  women,  twenty -nine  of  whom 
belong  to  the  Bombay  branch ;    and  its  income  is  about 
Rs.  30,000  a  year.     Both  vocal  and  instrumental  music  are 
taught,   either  individually   or  in  classes.     The  school  in 
Calcutta,  under  the  name  of  Sanglt  Sangha  is  a  recent 
institution,   and  experiments   are   being   made    along   the 
lines  of  the  combination  of  the  Indian  and  European  systems. 
The  most  noteworthy  recent  development  has  been  the 
series  of  All-India  Conferences,  inaugurated  in  the  year 
1916   by  His    Highness   the   Maharaja  of  Baroda,  which 
led  to  the  establishment   of  an  All-India   Music   Academy 
in  the  year  1919.     The  Conference  has  been  held  annually 
since   1918,  and  has  done  a  great  deal  of  useful  work   in 
stimulating  interest  in  and  promoting  the  study  of  Indian 
music  and  in  the  systematization  of  Hindusthani  ragas. 
It  has  made  possible  the  discussion  of  musical  problems 
by    a  gathering  of   artists   and    experts  drawn    from    the 
whole    of    India,    a    free    interchange    of    thought    and 
opinion  by   musicians    of   all   races   and  climes  in  India, 
the  attempt  to  find  an  adequate  notation  to  express  the 
beauties  and  refinements  of   Indian  ragas  and  melodies, 
and  finally  the  establishment  of  this  All-India  Academy. 
The    Academy    is   under   the  patronage  of  many    of    the 
leading  Indian  princes  and  has  the  support  of  men  like 
Mr.  N.  V.  Bhatkhande,  who  are  giving  themselves  to  the 
development    of    Indian    music.     It    aims    at    providing 
facilities   for  collective  and    individual   research,  and   for 
the    collecting    and    preserving     of     the     best    classical 
compositions,    and     hopes     to     bring    about    a    uniform 
method   of    arranging    the    ragas   and    systematizing    the 
melodies  for  the  whole  of  India.     The  Academy  of  Music 
hopes,    in    co-operation    with    its    sister  organizations,   to 
promote   the   development   of   a   living   musical    culture, 
having  its  roots  in  the  soil  of  India  and  expressing  itself  in 
nobler  and  more  beautiful  forms,  so  as  to  enrich  the  lives 
of  both  rich  and  poor. 


CHAPTER    III 


THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  THE  SCALE 

The  history  of  the  Indian  scale  is  really  a  series  of  close 
inferences ;  for  the  materials  do  not  exist  for  definite  and 
incontrovertible  conclusions.  This  chapter  aims  at  giving 
a  general  view  of  the  development  of  the  scale,  based  on 
scattered  data  gathered  together  in  a  fairly  extensive 
reading  of  the  various  works  which  have  appeared  in  India 
and  elsewhere  on  the  subject.  It  is  not  always  possible  to 
give  references  or  to  adduce  the  evidence  for  the  con- 
clusions arrived  at,  but  the  more  curious  reader  should  turn 
to  one  of  the  books  mentioned  in  the  Bibliography. 

The  principal  data  available  for  this  study  consist  of 
brief  references  in  ancient  Indian  literature,  the  tradition 
of  the  Saman  chant,  the  theory  of  the  Grama  scales  and 
the  musical  facts  implied  in  the  various  rdgas  used  in  the 
past  or  current  to-day. 

The  scale  of  the  Aryan  peoples  is  based  on  the 
tetrachord  (chatuhsvara).  The  tetrachord  is  the  fourth 
with  its  intervening  notes.  This  may  give  the  following 
tetrachords  in  the  Indian  scale  :  SRGM,  SrGM,  SrgM,  and 
so  on.  ^ 

The  process  whereby  the  tetrachord  was  fiist  produced 
depends  upon  certain  universal  musical  facts.  The 
musical  ear  in  search  of  a  note  does  two  things.  It  creeps 
up  or  down,  one  step  at  a  time  ;  and  it  makes  a  bold  plunge 
for  the  nearest  consonant  note  (saifivadi)  from  the  note 
which  has  been  sounded  (vctdl).  The  voice  has  a  tendency 
to  ascend  by  leaps  and  to  descend  by  steps.  Music  recog- 
nizes  the    following   consonant    intervals :    the    third,    the 

'  See  table  on  p.  5  for  explination. 


26  THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 

fourth,  the  fifth,  and  the  octave.  In  making  a  leap  to  the 
next  consonant  note,  the  choice  really  lies  between  the 
third  and  the  fourth,  as  the  fifth  is  too  far  away.  The 
fourth  is  the  more  audible  and  many  nations  have  chosen 
this  in  preference  to  the  third.  The  fourth  then  becomes 
the  upward  limit  of  the  tetrachord.  When  it  comes  to 
creeping  up  or  down  by  what  may  be  called  next-door  * 
notes,  the  chosen  interval  may  be  one  of  many  or  quite 
undefined.  Most  commonly  the  major  tone  or  the  semitone 
were  the  intervals  chosen,  though  intervals  of  less  than  a 
semitone  were  also  taken  in  India,  as  we  shall  see  from  the 
Saman  chant  and  from  such  a  raga  as  Todl  (northern). 

Consonance  is  called  Samvaditva  in  India.  Bharata 
divides  svaras  into  four  kinds,  and  this  has  remained  the 
accepted  division  ever  since.  First  there  is  the  vadl,  or 
sounding  note,  or  sonant.  Then  the  samvadl,  the  note 
consonant  with  the  vadl.  Svaras  between  which  there  is 
an  interval  of  nine  or  thirteen  srutis  are  samvadl  with 
each  other.  Svaras  at  an  interval  of  two  srutis  from  the 
vadl  are  called  vivadi,  or  '  dissonant '  in  relation  to  it. 
The  others  are  called  anuvadJ,  or  '  assonant ',  i.e.  neutral 
in  relation  to  the  vadl. 

The  sruti  or  microtonal  interval  is  a  division  of  the 
semitone,  but  not  necessarily  an  equal  division.  This 
division  of  the  semitone  is  found  also  in  ancient  Greek 
music.  It  is  an  interesting  fact  that  we  find  in  Greek 
music  the  counterpart  of  many  things  in  Indian  music,  and 
we  have  a  good  deal  of  information  about  the  development 
of  Greek  music  ;  so  we  may  look  to  get  help  from  that 
source  in  our  study  of  Indian  music.  The  ancient  Greek 
scale  divided  the  octave  into  twenty-four  small  intervals, 
while  the  traditional  Indian  practice  is  to  recognize  twenty- 
two  in  the  octave.  Rao  Sahib  Abraham  Pandita,  a 
south  Indian  musical  scholar  who  has  made  a  very  close 
study  of  ancient  Dravidian  music,  believes  that  the  ancient 
Tamil  books  of  the  second  and  third  century  of  our  era 
support  the  view  that  in  South  India  the  octave  was  also 
divided  into  twenty-four  equal  intervals.  Further  investi- 
gation is  being  carried  out  in  this  matter,  though,  as  has 
been  already  mentioned,  a  Tamil  lexicon  of  the  third  or  fourth 


THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  THE  SCALE       27 

century  only  gives  twenty-two  matras  for  the  octave, 
i.e.  twenty-two  srittis.  The  sritti  is  really  a  kind  of 
half-way  house  to  the  semitone.  More  than  two  srutis 
are  not  usually  sung  in  succession,  though  there  are 
of  course  people  who  will  sing  the  whole  twenty-two 
of  them  in  succession.  Still  that  is  acoustics  and  not 
music.  So  also  the  tetrachord  might  theoretically  consist  of 
as  many  notes  as  there  are  snitis  within  the  fourth,  but 
practically  it  is  difficult  to  sing  or  play  more  than  four 
notes. 

The  Saman  chant  is  the  earliest  example  of  the 
Indian  tetrachord  which  has  remained  until  our  time. 
In  this  the  tetrachord  is  conceived  of  as  a  downward 
series  of  notes  from  the  highest.  Most  of  the  early  Indian 
modes,  called  Murchhanas,  were  also  conceived  as  extending 
downwards.  The  Greeks  too  thought  of  the  tetrachord 
in  the  same  way. 

The  Saman  chant  pivoted  on  two  notes  called  the  ndatta 
— *  raised ' — the  higher  one,  and  the  anudatta — *  not  raised', 
the  lower  one.  In  course  of  time  the  interval  between 
these  was  established  as  a  fourth.  Then,  later,  the  notes 
of  this  tetrachord  received  distinct  names.  The  highest 
was  prathama — '  first ' — then  dvitiya,  tritJya,  chaturtha, 
down  the  scale.  These  names  are  found  first  in  the 
Rikpratisakhya  (c.  400  B.C.).  Later,  a  note  called  svarita 
is  also  mentioned,  and  this  seems  to  be  a  graced  udatta, 
thus  indicating  a  note  higher  than  the  prathama.  Later 
still  we  find  this  note  definitely  established  and  called 
krnshta — *  high '  {TaittirTya-pratisakhya  c.  A.D.  400). 
About  the  same  time  two  other  notes  lower  than  the 
chaturtha  appear.  These  are  called  mandra — '  low  ',  and 
atisvarya — *  extremity  '.  This  last  was  an  extra  note  and 
was  usually  sung  only  in  the  cadence  of  the  Saman  chant. 
So  we  find  the  whole  series  of  the  seven  notes,  or  svaras 
as  they  were  called,  of  the  octave. 

We  must,  however,  remember  that  there  is  a  South 
Indian  tradition  that  the  rdga  AbhogT  (S  R  g  M  D)  re- 
presents the  ancient  Saman  chant.  This  is  pentatonic> 
and  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  Saman  scale  was 
pentatonic   before    it    became  heptatonic.     We   find  that 


28  THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 

the  pentatonic   was   the   more  primitive  scale   among   all 
peoples. 

It  is  the  custom  of  Saman  singers  to-day  to  call  the 
higher  tetrachord  uchcha — *  high  ',  and  the  lower  mcha — 
*  low  '  ;  but  it  seems  probable  that,  while  these  terms  may 
have  originally  only  referred  to  a  difference  of  position, 
later  they  came  to  mean  a  different  style  of  singing. 
Saman  singers  to-day  seem  to  sing  chromatically  in  the 
uchcha  notes  and  diatonically  in  the  iiJcha  notes. 

*  The  voice  is  prior  to  the  instrument.  This  is  prima 
Jacie  so  probable  that  it  can  hardly  be  said  to  need  proof. 
It  is  implied  in  the  statement  of  Aristoxenus,  that  the 
natural  laws  of  harmony  cannot  be  deduced  from  instru- 
ments.' At  any  rate  it  is  true  that  songs  precede  scales. 
It  is  impossible  to  think  that  a  mother  waited  to  sing  a 
lullaby  until  a  scale  had  been  worked  out  in  which  to 
sing  it.  When  people  sing  simple  songs,  they  often  know 
nothing  about  the  intervals  used  in  them,  but  they 
sing  them  all  the  same.  We  cannot  say  how  people 
began  to  find  them  out.  In  out-of-the-way  places  singers 
use  very  few  notes.  Children  use  fewer  than  adults, 
country  people  fewer  than  townspeople,  and  flat-land 
dwellers  fewer  than  mountaineers.  It  was  a  long  time 
before  the  fifth  was  used  and  longer  still  before  the  octave 
came  into  use.  The  songs  of  primitive  people  were  made 
up  of  a  few  musical  intervals.  Then,  as  instruments  were 
joined  to  the  voice,  they  got  accustomed  to  the  third,  the 
minor  tone  and  the  semitone.  Then  they  began  to  sing 
diatonic  series  such  as  S  R  G  M,  or  S  r  G  M,  and  so  on.  Or 
they  might  proceed  by  a  leap  of  two  semitones,  and  then 
make  the  fourth,  as  in  S  r  g  M  ;  or  else  the  leap  might 
come  after  the  first  semitone,  as  in  S  r  G  M.  Then  they 
might  find  a  third  way  by  using  intervals  of  less  than  a 
semitone,  as  in  S  r  g  M.  So  the  interval  of  the  fourth 
became  filled  up  partly  by  experiment  and  partly  by 
theory. 

The  typical  ancient  Indian  instruments  were  the  drum 
(dundiibhi),  the  flute  (ninrall),  and  the  vlnd.  The  vlna 
was  used  mainly  in  accompaniment,  and  the  flute  by  itself, 
as  when  Krishna  charmed  the  gopls  of  Brindaban.     As  all 


THE   DEVELOPMENT  OF  THE  SCALE       29 

music  was  largely  improvization,  the  accompaniment  could 
not  be  a  strict  following  of  the  singer,  though  it  is  wonder- 
ful to  see  the  way  singer  and  player  will  keep  close  to  one 
another  all  the  time,  even  though  neither  has  any  piece  of 
written  music  before  him.  Then  also  the  instrument  helped 
to  register  the  notes  and  to  define  them.  It  was  through  the 
instrument  that  the  importance  of  the  major  third,  which 
has  been  called  the  Magna  Carta  of  music,  was  realized. 
Further,  through  the  instrument,  the  musician  began  to  base 
his  melody  on  the  lower  notes,  as  they  are  the  louder  and 
clearer  on  the  instrument ;  whereas,  when  there  was  no 
instrument,  he  started  from  the  higher  notes  and  came 
downwards.  It  was  also  noted  that  the  third  obtained 
from  the  voice  is  slightly  sharper  than  the  third  obtained 
from  an  instrument.,  eight  sriitis  as  against  seven  srutis. 
Bharata  calls  this  difference  of  one  sruti  a  pramana 
sruti, — '  indicative  interval ',  because  all  the  other  inter- 
vals can  be  deduced  from  it,  a  fact  which  the  Greeks  also 
noted.  So  by  the  co-operation  of  voice  and  instrument  the 
scale  is  worked  out ;  and  in  one  sense  the  instrument  may 
be  called  *  the  originator  of  the  scale,'  because  it  deter- 
mines it. 

It  must,  however,  be  remembered  that  a  song  or  piece 
played  on  an  instrument  is  a  live  thing  and  does  not  submit 
to  mathematical  precision.  There  is,  it  is  true,  only  one 
form  for  each  scale,  and  every  singer  and  musician  tries 
to  get  it  right,  though  no  one  invariably  manages  to  do  so. 
The  very  fact  of  putting  passion  [rasa)  into  music  means 
that  a  particular  note  will  be  taken  rather  sharper  at 
one  time  than  at  another.  The  law  is  there  of  course 
to  be  obeyed  as  perfectly  as  possible.  In  South  India 
the  use  of  the  term  §ruti  for  such  a  possible  sharpening 
or  flattening  of  particular  notes  recognizes  the  truth  of 
this  variability.  Music  after  all  is  an  art  and  not  a  mere 
mechanism.  Nobody  can  sing  like  a  machine,  even  if  he 
tries,  any  more  than  a  man  can  walk  in  a  perfectly  straight 
line  or  breathe  as  the  clock  ticks. 

The  correlation  of  the  notes  of  the  Saman  chant  with 
the  notes  of  the  secular  or  instrumental  scale  is  another 
step  in  the  process  of  this  interrelationship  of  voice  and 


30  THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 

instrument.  We  find  evidence  of  this  correlation  as  early 
as  the  Rikpratisakhya  in  the  statement  that  *  the  yama 
(liturgical  scale)  is  the  svara  (instrumental). '  As  we  have 
seen,  the  Saman  scale  was  conceived  as  a  downward  series 
and  the  instrumental  scale  as  an  upward  series.  The 
names  used  for  the  instrumental  scale  in  the  ancient  books 
are  those  in  use  to-day  all  over  India.  The  clue  to  the 
interrelation  of  the  two  scales  is  found  in  the  identification 
of  prathama  and  gandhara.  With  this  we  get  the  two 
scales  as  follows,  each  forming  a  saptaka  or  '  cluster  of 
seven.' 

Saman.  Secular. 

Nishadha 
Dhaivata 
Panchama 
Krushta  ...  ...  ...     Madhyama 

Prathama  ...  ...  ...     Gandhara 

Dvitiya  ...  ...  ...     Rishabha 

Tritiya  ...  ...  ...     Shadja 

Chaturtha         ...  ...  ...     (Nishadha) 

Mandra  ...  ...  ...     (Dhaivata) 

Atisvarya  ...  ...  ...     (Panchama) 

The  external  relations  of  India  in  the  early  centuries 
of  the  Christian  era  are  too  obscure  at  present  for  us  to 
be  able  to  say  whether  the  musical  systems  of  Greece, 
Arabia  and  Persia  have  any  definite  relationship  with  that 
of  India.  It  is  certain  that  there  v/as  considerable  inter- 
communication and  commercial  intercourse  between  India 
and  each  of  these  countries  ;  and  recent  researches  have 
shown  the  extent  of  Persian  influence  in  India  during  the 
Maurya  Empire  (c.  300  B.C.)  The  musical  systems  of  these 
countries  show  so  much  resemblance  in  certain  essential 
features  that  it  seems  clear  there  must  have  been  some 
connexion  between  them.  The  likeness  is  much  closer  than  it 
is  with  the  music  of  Japan  or  China.  It  is  well  known  that 
Gandhara  (the  district  of  Kandahar)  was  in  those  early  days  a 
centre  of  GrecoTndian  culture,  as  the  Gandharan  sculptures 
testify,  and  Taxila  (near  Rawalpindi)  was  the  seat  of  a 
very  important  Buddhist  university.  Though  Buddhism 
has  never  been  associated  with  a  special  development  of 


THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  THE  SCALE      31 

musical  culture,  the  fact  that  a  scale  of  considerable  im- 
portance in  those  days  was  called  Gandhara,  and  that  one 
of  the  important  notes  of  the  gamut  is  known  as  Gandhara 
is  of  some  significance.  The  two  earliest  Greek  scales, 
the  Mixolydic  and  the  Doric,  show  affinity  with  early 
Indian  scales.  All  these  things  point  to  an  interchange  of 
ideas  between  the  musical  people  of  the  two  countries. 

We  have  now  come  to  see  how  the  gamut  of  seven 
notes  within  the  octave,  including  some  smaller  divisions, 
came  to  be  accepted.  These  seven  are  called  the  saptaka, 
or  '  cluster  of  seven,'  and  are  known  as  the  seven  svaras. 
The  first  exposition  of  these  various  intervals  is  found  in 
a  Tamil  work,  Tivakaram  (c.  A.D.  200-300)  ot  which 
mention  has  already  been  made.  The  scale  was  divided 
into  twenty-two  matras,  which  are  similar  to  ihe  srutis  of 
the  northern  pandits.  The  Tamil  books  also  give  them  the 
name  alakti.  According  to  this  work  these  twenty-two 
srutis  were  distributed  as  follows  : 
Sa  Ri  Ga  Ma  Pa  Dha  Ni 
44        3       24  32=  22 

It  is  also  rather  interesting  to  find  that  the  different 
intervals  are  described  in  relation  to  one  another.  Sa  to 
Ga  is  recognized  as  a  third,  Sa  to  Ma  as  a  fourth,  Sa 
to  Pa  as  a  fifth,  and  Sa  to  Dha  as  a  sixth  :  the  fourth  being 
called  a  *  friendly  '  interval,  the  fifth  a  '  related  '  interval, 
and  the  third  and  sixth  '  enemy  intervals.'  The  Natya 
Sastra  (c.  A.D.  500)  shows  a  clear  perception  of  the 
various  intervals  :  octave,  fifth,  fourth,  tone,  minor  tone 
and  semi-tone.  Each  of  these  intervals  is  reckoned  as 
having  a  certain  number  of  srutis  as  follows  : — 


Octave      ... 

...     22 

srutis 

i.e. 

1200  cents, 

Fifth 

...     13 

,, 

702      ,, 

Fourth 
Tone 

...       9 

498      „ 
204      „ 

Minor  Tone 

3 

,j 

182      „ 

Semi-tone... 

2 

,, 

112      „ 

The  sruti  numbers  are  really  only  approximations  but  the  cents  are 
of  course  accurate. 

Thus  the  Indian  scale  divides  the  octave  into  twenty- 
two  srutis.     As  we  have  seen,  the  Greeks  divided  it  into 


32  THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 

twenty-four  small  intervals.  The  three  scales  were  as 
folloAVS : — 

Ni    Sa     Ki      Ga     Ma      Pa    Dha    Ni 
2       4       43         24         3         =22  Indian 

(Tamil). 
2432         44         3  -=22  Indian 

(Bharata). 
2442         44         4         -=24  Greek. 
The  Indian  became  later 

2       4       3         2         4        3         4 

The  Greeks  seem  to  have  made  the  change  in  the  third 
interval  from  2,  4,  4  to  2,  4,  3  in  the  early  centuries  of  our 
era.  The  probable  reason  for  this  confusion  is  that  these 
sruti  numbers  are  more  or  less  approximate  to  the  actual 
vibration  numbers.  Thus  the  first  three  intervals  may  be 
either, 

90         204         204         =         498         or, 
112         204         182         =         498 
Neither  the  Greeks  nor  the   Hindus  in  those  days  had  any 
means  of  getting  at  the  actual  numbers,  so  that  the  sruti 
numbers  in  both  countries  may  cover  considerable  varia- 
tions. 

The  seven  svaras  of  the  saptaka  current  to-day  through- 
out the  whole  of  India  are  in  the  order  of  ascent  from  the 
note  which  has  now  become  the  Indian  tonic  :  Shadja, 
Rishabha,  Gandhara,  Madhyama,  Pahchama,  Dhaivata, 
Nishadha.  Their  sol-fa  initials,  also  current  in  every 
vernacular  in  India,  are  Sa»  Ri»  Ga,  Ma,  Pa,  Dha,  Ni. 
It  is  rather  an  interesting  thing  that  the  ancient  Tamil 
names  were  quite  different,  viz.  Kural,  Tuttajn,  Kaikkilai, 
Ulaii  Hit  Vilarit  Tdram. 

As  far  as  one  can  gather,  the  following  are  the  root 
meanings  of  these  Tamil  names :  kural,  open  tone; 
kaikkilai,  unreciprocated  passion  ;  ulai,  place,  side ;  Hi, 
contempt,  abuse  ;  vilari,  tenderness,  compassion  ;  taram 
(Sanskrit)  high. 

It  is  clear  that  the  Sanskrit  names  current  now  belong 
to  some  later  period  after  the  development  sketched  had 
taken  place.     Thus  shadja    means      born    of    six '    and 


THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  THE  SCALE      33 

indicates  that  this  note  which  has  now  become  the  tonic 
was  the  last  to  arise  in  a  downward  series.  Madhyama 
means  '  middle  '  and  suggests  that  when,  at  a  much  earlier 
period,  this  name  was  given,  that  note  was  the  central  note 
of  the  scale.  The  note  Gdndhara  may  be  so  called  because 
it  was  the  starting  point  of  the  Gandhara  scale.  Panchama 
means  *  fifth  ',  i.e.  from  Sa,  and  implies  a  time  when  Sa  had 
become  the  starting  point  of  the  scale.  The  other  names  do 
not  imply  any  clear  origin. 

Hindu  musical  mythology  refers  each  note  to  the  tone  of 
some  animal.  The  cry  of  an  animal  tends  to  be  always  on 
the  same  note  ;  and  these  names  were  intended  no  doubt  to 
indicate  in  the  first  instance  absolute  pitch,  and  were  later 
transferred  to  relative  pitches.  Shadja  is  said  to  be  the 
sound  produced  by  the  peacock  at  its  highest  rapture. 
Rishabha  is  said  to  represent  the  sound  made  by  the  cow  in 
calling  her  calf.  Gandhara  is  the  bleat  of  the  goat. 
Madhyama  is  the  cry  of  the  heron.  It  is  also  called  the 
tonic  of  nature,  being  identified  with  the  sound  of  falling 
water,  the  roar  of  the  forest  and  the  buzz  of  great  cities. 
Panchama  is  the  note  of  the  kokila  or  Indian  nightingale. 
Dhaivata  is  the  neigh  of  the  horse,  and  Nishadha  the 
trumpeting  of  the  elephant:  the  latter  indicating  clearly  the 
lower  note  Ni,  which  was  originally  the  starting  point  of  the 
scale.  Lower  Nishadha  is  the  first  note  of  the  Saman 
scale,  and  so  the  elephant  has  been  called  Samaja  or  born 
of  the  Saman.' 

The  next  matter  to  which  we  have  to  devote  attention 
is  the  history  of  the  gramas,  or  ancient  scales.  The  first 
references  to  these  are  found  in  the  Mahabharaia  (a.d. 
200)  and  the  Harivamsa  (a.d.  400).  The  former  speaks 
of  the  '  sweet  note  Gandhara  ',  probably  referring  to  the 
scale  of  that  name,  since  it  is  hardly  likely  that  a  single 
note  would  be  called  sweet.  The  Harivamsa  speaks  en- 
thusiastically of  music  *  in  the  gramaraga  which  goes  down 
to  Gandhara ',  and  of  '  the  women  of  Bhima's  race  who 
performed,  in  the  Gandhara  gramaraga,  the  descent  of 
the  Ganges,  so  as  to  delight  mind  and  ear.'  In  these  two 
references  the  term  used  is  gramaraga  and  we  may 
perhaps  assume  that  it  was  the  same  as  the  Gandhari  jati 
3 


34  THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 

of  the  Natya  Sastra.  The  early  Tamil  works  referring  to 
music  (Tivctkaram  and  Silappadigaram)  do  not  mention 
the  gramas.  There  is,  however,  something  which  seems  to 
correspond  to  them,  the  palai,  of  which  there  are  four : 
formed,  as  are  the  derivative  gramas,  by  interchanging  the 
srtiti  values  of  two  notes. 

Indian  music  is  traditionally  based  on  the  three  gramas ; 
and,  though  their  history  is  involved  in  a  confused  mass  of 
somewhat  contradictory  details  through  which  one  cannot 
always  see  light,  it  is  necessary  to  try  and  understand  the 
connection  between  them  and  the  ragas  of  to-day.  The 
Natya  Sastra  gives  particulars  of  two  of  these,  the  Sa- 
grama  and  the  Ma-grama.  (Adhy.  28  slok.  41-45).  The 
Ga-grama  is  not  mentioned  until  the  Ratnakara  (c.  1247). 
They  are  really  fundamental  scales  starting  from  the  notes 
Saj  Ga,  and  Ma,  respectively.  The  formation  of  the  Sa- 
grama  and  the  Ma-grama  is  fairly  clear. 

The  sruti  values  of  the  intervals  of  the  Sa-grama  were 
as  follows  : — 

Sa    Ri    Ga    Ma    Pa    Dha    Ni    Sa 

4      3       2       4       4         3       2 

The  Ma-grama  is  formed  by  interchanging  the  sruti 
values  of  the  intervals  before  Dha  and  Ni  and  then  start- 
ing on  the  Ma.      Then  it  will  be  as  follows  ; — 

Ma    Pa    Dha    Ni    Sa    Ri    Ga    Ma 

4       3  4      2       4       3       2 

Thus  the  difference  between  this  and  the  Sa-grama 
lies  in  the  sharpened  fourth  ;  the  fourth  in  the  first  case 
consisting  of  nine  srutis  and  in  the  latter  of  eleven  srutis. 
This  distinction  has  persisted  until  to-day,  and  we  see  it  in 
one  of  the  fundamental  distinctions  in  the  two  main  classes 
of  ragas  both  in  the  northern  and  the  southern  music,  and 
particularly  in  the  south,  where  it  marks  off  one-half  of 
the  ragas.  The  Ga-grama  is  said  by  all  the  treatises  to 
have  been  lost,  and  the  directions  given  by  the  Ratnakara 
are  not  at  all  clear.  Sarngadeva  tells  us  to  alter  the  frets 
of  the  Vina  in  a  certain  way,  but  he  does  not  tell  us  how  the 
frets  were  placed  before  that  alteration  took  place.     If  we 


THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  THE  SCALE       35 

take  both  the  Sa-grama  and  the  Ma-grama  and  do  as 
6arrigadeva  tells  us,  we  come  to  an  impossible  scale.  If, 
however,  we  take  the  theoretical  Ma-grama,  i.e.  the  Ma- 
grama  with  the  srufi  values  changed  as  above,  but  still  start- 
ing on  the  Sa,  we  come  to  something  a  little  more  reason- 
able.    Then  the  Ma-grama  as  suggested  will  be  : — 

Sa    Ri    Ga      Ma    Pa    Dha    Ni    Sa 

4      3       2         4        3         4      2 

This  is  the  same  as  Bilaval,  the  fundamental  scale  of  the 
north  and  also  the  present  European  major  scale.  Then, 
obeying  his  directions,  we  get  the  result  in  sruti  values ; 

2        4        4         3         2         4         3  (l) 

This  is  the  same  as  the  Sa-grama  starting  on  Ga>  thus  :  — 


!     I  I 

:         4         4         3         2         4         3     (2) 


Why  did  he  get  at  the  Ga-grama  in  this  complicated  way  ? 
Being  a  musician  he  knew  that  the  tonic  of  any  scale 
needed  the  support  of  the  drone  strings,  tuned  to  Sa  and 
Pa.  He  got  this  by  adopting  (l)  but  he  would  not  have 
got  it  by  adopting  (2)  The  following  diagram  shows  how 
this  was  done  ; — 

Sa    Ri    Ga    Ma     Pa    Dha    Ni    Sa 

Ma-grama  ...         4       3        2        4        3         4        2 

New  fretting        ...         3       2        4         3        2         4        4 

Sa    Ri    Ga    Ma     Pa    Dha 

New  Sa-grama  4       3        2        4        4        etc. 

Ga    Ma     Pa     Dha 


Ga-grama 


Sa  string 


2        4        4        3  etc. 
Pa  string 


The  first  note  of  his  Ga-grama  is  therefore  in  tune  with  his 
chief  drone  string.  Pa.  There  is  an  established  tradition 
that  the  Ga-grama  was  abandoned  because  it  was  '  too 
high  '  for  the  voice.  If,  as  we  have  seen,  it  was  tuned  a 
fifth  higher  than  the  Sa-grama,  the  tradition  may  be  ex- 
plained ;  for  a  fifth  is  just  the  difference  between  two  voice 


36  THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 

registers.  It  may  also  account  for  the  statement  that  '  the 
Ga-grama  has  gone  to  Indraloka  (heaven)  ',  being  only  fit 
for  the  heavenly  singers'  voices.  This  whole  process  is  so 
complicated  that  it  is  no  wonder  that  it  went  out  of  use. 
Sariigadeva  himself  only  regarded  it  with  antiquarian 
interest.  The  Ga-grama  is  seen  to-day  in  the  Bhairavt 
rc^ga,  {Hanumatodi)  a  typical  minor  raga. 

These  gramas  were  included  in  the  local  jatis,  as  they 
were  called,  being  originally  no  doubt  the  different  ways  of 
singing  practised  in  various  parts  of  the  country.  These 
jatis  were  regarded  as  formations  from  either  the  Sa-grama 
or  the  Ma-grama,  each  starting  on  one  note  of  the 
octave,  thus  forming  seven  jatis  for  each  grama.  The 
early  Tamil  musical  works  also  adopt  the  same  method 
of  forming  fresh  palai,  as  they  are  called,  there  being  seven 
for  each  main  modal  group.  Then  the  very  important  step 
of  shifting  the  tonic  and  reducing  all  the  scales  to  one 
common  tonic  was  taken,  perhaps  as  a  result  of  the  develop- 
ment of  instrumental  music,  as  in  this  way  they  were  trans- 
formed into  simple  instrumental  scales.  Perhaps  the  term 
gr^ma  raga  which  we  have  already  come  across,  was  first 
given  to  the  jatis  so  reduced  to  the  common  tonic.  This 
tonic,  which  may  have  been  Ni,  eventually  became  Sa,  and 
then  gradually  the  term  grama  dropped  out,  as  it  had  no 
real  relation  to  actual  facts,  and  they  were  called  simply 
ragas. 

One  of  these  ragas  is  then  regarded  as  the  fundamental 
scale,  or  scale  of  suddha  or  '  pure  '  notes  ;  and  all  the  other 
notes  used  in  the  other  ragas  are  thought  of  as  vikrits  or 
'  variations.'  It  is  interesting  to  find  that  the  suddha  scale 
of  the  north  is  quite  different  from  that  of  the  south.  In 
the  north  it  is  Bilaval,  all  the  vikrits^  except  that  of 
Ma  being  flats  of  the  suddha  notes.  In  the  south  it  is 
Mukharl  (or  Kanakahgl),  in  which  all  the  vikrits  are 
sharps  of  the  suddha  notes.  Thus  the  former  is  what 
Europe  calls  a  major  scale,  and  the  latter  a  minor  scale. 
What  is  the  explanation  of  these  two  suddha  scales,  so 
different  from  each  other  ?  It  may  be  that  the  southern 
suddha  scale — the  minor  one — is  developed  from  the 
ancient  Ga-grama  and  the  northern  one  from  the  anciertt 


THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  THE  SCALE      37 

Sa-grama.  It  is  very  probable  that  the  Ga-grama  was 
anterior  to  the  Sa-grama,  though  treatises  make  out  the 
Sa-grama  to  have  been  the  original  one.  One  is  led  to  this 
idea  because  there  is  seen  to  be  far  closer  correspondence 
between  the  Ga-grama  and  the  Saman  scale  than  between 
that  and  the  Sa-grama  ;  and  also  because,  if  the  Ga-grama 
was  really  developed  from  the  other  two,  it  is  difficult  to 
understand  why  it  should  have  perished  and  the  other  two 
remained.  Then,  further,  southern  music  sticks  closer  to 
the  ancient  model  than  northern  music,  which  has  been 
largely  modified  by  contact  with  that  of  Persia  and 
Arabia.  In  view  of  this  suggestion  it  may  be  of  interest 
to  place  down  the  sriUi  values  of  these  two  Buddha  scales, 
so  that  they  may  be  compared  with  the  two  gramas. 

Bilaval 

Sa    Ri    Ga    Ma     Pa    Dha    Ni    Sa 
4       3        2       4       3  4       2 

Kanakahgl 

Sa    Ri    Ga    Ma    Pa    Dha    Ni    Sa 
2      3        4       4       2  3      4 

It  is  easy  to  see  how  the  latter  could  be  developed  from 
the  Ga-grama.  The  fourth  of  the  Ga-grama  as  given 
above  has  ten  snUis,  w^hich  w^ould  naturally  be  reduced  to 
nine  so  as  to  bring  it  into  tune.  Then  the  Pa  must  be  kept 
in  tune  so  as  to  be  played  on  the  open  string  of  the  vIna,  and 
so  it  must  be  a  fifth  of  thirteen  snitis  from  Sa.  The  other 
changes  are  very  slight  and  do  not  alter  the  character  of 
the  scale.  So  it  is  possible  that  we  see  to-day  the  ancient 
gramas  in  the  two  suddha  scales  of  India.  Thus  the  scale 
in  India  is  the  result  of  a  regular  and  scientific  develop- 
ment of  both  vocal  and  instrumental  music. 

The  scale  as  it  exists  to-day  is  one  with  great  possi- 
bilities in  regard  to  musical  formations,  and  it  has  a  very 
wide  range  in  the  microtonal  variations  included  in  it. 
The  Indian  musician  is  always  trying  to  ornament  his 
notes,  because  grace  plays  in  the  Indian  system  the  part  of 
harmony  in  the  European.  These  ornaments  are  made  by 
slight  and  indefinite  variations,  which  may  be  quite 
different  from  what  wo  have  called  the  srutiSy  which  are 


38  THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 

defined  microtonal  intervals  used  to  bring  notes  into  tune 
with  one  another.  It  may  not  be  generally  known  that 
European  singers  and  violin  players  aim  at  such  definite 
microtonal  differences  under  special  circumstances,  and 
whenever  the  accompanying  harmonies  do  not  preclude 
their  doing  so  ;  but,  unfortunately  for  them,  these  same 
harmonies  have  so  limited  their  scope  for  indefinite  grace 
notes,  that  their  exuberance  can  find  no  better  means  for 
expressing  itself  than  the  tremolo ;  whereas,  with  no  harmony 
to  hamper  his  music,  the  Indian  can  reveal  it  in  as  many 
graces  as  he  desires.  The  Indian  scale,  with  all  its  srutis 
and  possibilities,  resides  in  the  bosom  of  the  Indian  musician, 
'  who  is  dear  to  the  gods  ' ;  and  it  only  comes  out  in  his 
songs,  the  intonation  of  which  changes  from  day  to  day 
and  from  mood  to  mood. 


CHAPTER   IV 


RAGA— THE  BASIS  OF  MELODY 

Raga  is  the  basis  of  melody  in  Indian  music  and  a 
substitute  for  the  western  scale.  '  It  is  the  attempt 
of  an  artistic  nation  to  reduce  to  law  and  order  the 
melodies  that  come  and  go  on  the  lips  of  the  people.'  In 
Raga  Vibodha,  it  is  defined  as  '  an  arrangement  of  sounds, 
which  possesses  varna,  furnishes  gratification  to  the  senses 
and  is  constituted  by  musical  notes.'  The  term  '  varna  ' 
refers  to  the  act  of  singing,  and  is  of  four  kinds,  viz.  : 
Sthayi-repetition  of  the  same  sound,  Arohj-a.scenti  Avarohl- 
descent,  Saiichan-d^sceni  and  descent  mixed.  Mr.  Strang- 
ways  defines  raga  as  '  an  arbitrary  series  of  notes  charac- 
terized, as  far  as  possible  as  individuals,  by  proximity  to  or 
remoteness  from  the  note  which  marks  the  tessitura 
(general  level  of  the  melody),  by  a  special  order  in  which 
they  are  usually  taken,  by  the  frequency  or  the  reverse 
with  which  they  occur,  by  grace  or  the  absence  of  it,  and 
by  relation  to  a  tonic  usually  reinforced  by  a  drone.'  A 
simplified  form  of  this  might  run  ;  '  Ragas  are  different 
series  of  notes  within  the  octave,  which  form  the  basis  of 
all  Indian  melodies,  and  are  differentiated  from  each  other 
by  the  prominence  of  certain  fixed  notes  and  by  the 
sequence  of  particular  notes.*  We  may  perhaps  find  in  the 
term  *  melody-type '  the  best  way  to  transcribe  raga  in 
Enghsh. 

According  to  ancient  musical  theory,  there  are  three 
important  notes  in  the  raga.  These  are  the  Graha,  the 
Arh^a,  and  the  Nyasa.  The  Graha  is  the  starting  note, 
the  Arhsa  the  predominant,  and  the  Nyasa  the  ending 
note.  The  arhsa  is  also  called  the  vadi.  Very  little 
importance  is  attached  to  the  graha  and  the  nyasa  to-day, 


40  THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 

and  it  is  quite  possible  that  they  were,  in  the  Ratnakara, 
the  technical  terms  for  the  terminal  notes  of  the  tetrachord 
and  not  of  the  raga.  The  arh^a,  however,  is  all-important 
and  is  called  the  jiva  or  'soul  of  the  raga.'  The  position  of 
the  arh^a  has  much  to  do  with  the  general  character  of  the 
raga.  Occasionally  it  varies  between  two  notes.  The 
ariisa  is  not  so  distinctly  differentiated  in  the  music  of  the 
south,  and  this  may  point  to  a  further  development  there. 

All  the  characteristics  of  the  raga  are  embodied  in  its 
Murchhana  or  That,  "which  are  the  names  now  given  in 
the  south  and  the  north  respectively  to  the  raga  basis 
expressed  in  notes.  The  arhsa,  and  also  the  peculiar 
sequences  and  grace  notes  of  the  raga,  are  shown  in  this, 
which  includes  both  ascent  and  descent.  It  includes  all 
the  essential  facts  about  the  raga  which  the  musician 
should  know  before  composing  any  melody  in  it. 

Ragas  have  probably  originated  from  four  main  sources  : 
1.  Local  tribal  songs  ;  2.  Poetical  creations  ;  3.  Devotional 
songs  ;  4.  Compositions  of  scientific  musicians.  Many  of 
these  sources  may  be  traced  in  their  names.  Bhairavt 
means  '  an  ascetic  ' ;  Hindol  is  '  a  swing  '  ;  Kanadct  refers 
to  the  Carnatic  ;  MuUant  means  '  belonging  to  the  city  of 
Multan  '  ;  and  Megh  means  '  the  rainy  season ',  and  so  on. 

We  can  see  the  same  processes  of  formation  going  on 
to-day.  Dr.  Rabindranath  Tagore  creates  new  melodies 
from  the  old  folk  songs  of  Bengal.  Some  one  finds  an  old 
Portuguese  melody  and  puts  it  into  an  Indian  setting  and 
calls  it  Portuguese  Tappa,  as  it  is  modelled  on  the  well- 
known  Hindusthani  Tappa  form  of  melody.  A  famous 
musician  takes  an  old  raga  and  introduces  some  unconven- 
tional variation,  and  the  result  becomes  a  new  raga  named 
after  him.  Miyan  Tan  Sen,  for  example,  introduced  Ga 
and  both  varieties  of  Ni  into  the  raga  Mallar,  which  omits 
them  as  a  rule  ;  and  the  result  is  the  raga  Miyan-ki-MaUar. 
There  are  quite  a  number  of  varieties  of  the  raga  Mallctr 
by  different  musicians.  Then  others  combined  two  or  more 
ragas  into  a  new  one.  Amir  Khusru  took  Hindol  and  a 
Persian  melody,  Mokam,  and  formed  Yaman.  Another 
takes  Sarahga,  Sindhu  and  Mokam,  and  the  result  is  a  new 
raga   Ushaq.      Or   a   northern    musician    comes   across  a 


RAGA— THE  BASIS  OF  MELODY  41 

good  southern  raga,  and  introduces  it  in  its  southern  form 
into  the  northern  music,  as  Mr.  Kirloskar,  the  Poona 
dramatist,  did  with  the  southern  ragas  Kdn'ibodhi  and 
ArabliJ.  Southern  musicians  do  the  same  with  the  nor- 
thern ragas,  sometimes  prefixing  the  term  Desika  or 
Hindusthan,  as  Hindusthan  Bihag,  Desika  Khamaj  and 
so  on.  This  is  a  living  process  which  we  may  watch  to- 
day all  over  India. 

The  question  of  the  systematic  classification  of  the 
ragas  presents  considerable  difficulty.  For  the  last  350 
years  the  south  has  had  a  more  or  less  uniform  system, 
which  has  crystallized  into  the  present  form.  Northern 
musicians,  however,  have  had  as  many  systems  as  musicians. 
Bharata  gives  only  fourteen  melody-bases,  which  he  calls 
Jatis  and  Milrchhanas,  developed  from  either  the  Sa  or 
the  Ma-grama.  These  were  developed  by  shifting  the 
tonic  or  starting  note  to  each  note  of  the  scale,  thus 
forming  seven  for  each  mode.  This  same  practice  has  been 
followed  in  the  early  Tamil  books.  Then  Sarhgadeva 
enumerates  264  ragas  under  the  two  gramas.  The 
Ragmala  of  Pundarika  adopts  the  northern  method  of 
classifying  ragas  into  six  principal  ragas,  with  wives,  or 
secondary  ragas,  and  children,  or  derivative  ragas.  The 
two  latter  are  called  ragim  and  putra.  A  considerable 
number  of  new  ragas  are  added  by  him.  The  Raga 
Vibodlia  adopts  the  southern  system  and  recognizes 
twenty-three  primary  ragas  with  a  large  number  of 
s^econdary  ragas.  The  primary  ragas  of  this  work  are 
Mukharl  {i.e.  Kanakaitgi)  Revagupta,  SamavaraJi,  Todt, 
Nadaramakriya,  Bhairava,  Vasanta,  Vasanta-bhairava, 
Malavagaula,  Rjtigaula,  Abhtranafa,  H  amir  a,  Siiddha- 
vardliy  Suddharctmakriya,  SrJf  Kalyam,  Kambodhi, 
Mallar,  Samatha,  Karnatagaiila,  DesaksJit,  Suddhanata 
Saraiiga.  Somanatha  carefully  describes  each  raga  and 
many  of  them  are  found  in  the  same  form  to-day.  The 
Saiigita-Darpana  builds  up  a  most  fanciful  theory  on  the 
northern  model,  and  this  has  nominally  remained  the  princi- 
pal theory  of  the  north  until  to-day.  Bhavabhatta  attempts 
a  rearrangement  of  the  northern  ragas  on  a  somewhat  simi- 
lar system  to  that  of  the  south,  adopting  twenty  primary 


42  THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 

ragas.  Then  Muhammad  Rezza  suggested  a  new  arrange- 
ment of  the  northern  system  on  the  principle  that  there 
should  be  some  real  affinity  between  the  raga,  ragini  and 
putra,  a  principle  which  seems  self-evident,  but  which  has 
not  been  really  adopted  by  the  north  ;  for  it  is  almost  im- 
possible to  get  from  the  northern  musician  a  reasonable 
account  of  the  basis  of  the  present-day  classification. 
Meanwhile,  in  the  south,  Vehkatamakhi  provided  a  sound 
system  based  on  scientific  principles  which  has  continued 
to  this  day.     The  Carnatic  system  will  be  first  described. 

I.  The  Carnatic  System 

All  ragas  are  first  divided  into  two  main  classes,  primary 
or  Janaka  ragas,  and  secondary  or  Janya  ragas.  The  first 
class  are  also  called  the  Melakartas  or  '  Lords  of  Melody  '. 
They  number  seventy-two  and  are  formed  by  variations 
of  the  seven  notes  of  the  gamut  in  regular  order,  ascending 
and  descending.  They  are  also  knov/n  as  the  Sampurna 
ragas,  as  they  contain  all  the  notes  of  the  gamut  and  are 
not  transihent  anywhere.  These  seventy-two  are  again 
divided  into  two  classes  by  the  use  of  the  sharpened  fourth 
(i.e.  Tivra  or  Prati  Ma).  The  first  thirty-six  use  the 
Suddha  Ma  (regular  fourth),  and  the  last  thirty-six  the 
Prati  Ma  (sharpened  fourth).  We  see  in  this  the 
survival  of  the  difference  between  the  ancient  Sa  and 
Ma-gramas. 

The  first  raga  is  the  scale  of  Buddha  notes  and  is  called 
Kanakahgi.  It  is  the  ancient  Mitkharl  and  runs  as 
follows  : 


o  ..    ^  i 


zzr 


'C2ZZZS21 


-hi^L         O 


sx 


M        P        d         D 


It  is  a  most  strange  scale  to  western  ears  and  is  not 
common  in  south  India  to-day.  Judging  by  the  Ratna- 
kara  and  the  Svaramela-Kalanidhi,  it  was  very  popular  in 
the  sixteenth  century.  It  corresponds  with  the  ancient 
Greek  chromatic  scale. 


RAGA— THE  BASIS  OF  MELODY  43 

The  most  common  raga  in  the  south  to-day  is  Mdyama- 
lavagauJa — the  Bhairava  raga  of  the  north. 


^:r^-^  °  ^"  --  "- 


S         r         G        M        P        d  N         S 

This  raga  is  very  popular,  and  most  southern  musicians 
begin  to  learn  music  with  this.  It  has  quite  a  pleasing 
sound,  in  spite,  or  perhaps,  because  of  the  intervals  of  three 
semi-tones  between  the  second  and  third,  and  between  the 
sixth  and  seventh.  It  has  been  suggested  that  the  raga 
Mayamalavagaula  may  have  developed  from  the  raga 
Mukharl  (Kanakahgi)  by  a  modal  shift  of  tonic  one 
semitone  higher,  just  as  the  modern  Greek  scale  has  done. 
Thus 

I                    Mayamalavagaula  \ 

BCDt?EFGAl7BC 
I MukharT | 

B  to  B  forms  the  raga  MukharT  and  C  to  C  is  Maya- 
malavagaula. 

The  most  important  primary  ragas  are  found  in  the 
first  thirty-six,  with  a  few  exceptions.  The  latter  group 
of  thirty-six  correspond  in  every  particular,  except  in 
the  use  of  Prati  Ma,  with  the  ragas  of  the  first  group,  one 
by  one.  Each  raga  starts  now  from  the  one  tonic,  shadja, 
thus  giving  rise  to  the  idea  that  the  gramas  have  entirely 
disappeared  ;  but  it  is  still  possible  to  see  them  surviving  in 
many  of  the  peculiarities  of  the  ragas. 

Carnatic  Primary  Ragas 

N.B. — The  Amsa  note  has  a  double  line  underneath. 

The  name  in  brackets  is  that  of  the  corresponding  northern  raga. 
The  number  at  the  side  is  that  of  the  raga  in  the  regular  southern 
scheme.  There  is  also  added  the  time  when  the  raga  should  be  used 
and  the  passion  or  mood  associated  with  it. 


44  THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 

8.     Hanumatodi  (Bhairavt).     Morning,  sad. 


^'  ,^    >c       u      o     -     -       " 


S         r         g         M        P         d       n  S 

15.     Mayamalavagaula(Bhairava).  Dawn,  reverence. 


E 


2X 


S         r        G        M        P        d         N        S 

The  Arabs  have  a  mode  similar  to  this  called  Hyaz. 

16.     Chakravaham  (Anandahhairava) .  Any  time,  love. 


kj>      o 


Es 


S        r         G        M        P        D        n         S 

20.     Natabhairavi  (Sindhubhairavt).     Night,  sad. 

SRgMPdnS 

This  is  the  same  as  the  Hypo-Dorian  plagal  mode. 

22.     Kharaharapriya  (Kaphi).     Noon,  passion. 


~ cr 


^o — ^^      Q 


SRgMPDnS 

This  is  the  Dorian  mode. 


RAGA— THE  BASIS    OF  MELODY  45 

28.     Harikamhodhi    {Jhihjhott),       Night,    imploring, 
aise. 


T)  ,.       C-.       o    ^^ 


3^ 


O      ^      -^ 


SRGMPDnS 

This  is  the  Hypo-Lydian  plagal  mode. 

29.     Sahkarahharana  (Bildval).     Morning,  calm. 


c^ — © —   


S         R        GMPDornNS 

This  is  the  western  major  mode,   with  a  slight  difference  in  the 
sixth. 

36.     Chalanata  [None).     Night,  boldness. 


i')  -  .^^=3^ 


£2: 


SgGMPnNS 

45.     Suhhapantiivarali  (Todl).     Evening,  adoration. 


-H      "  ,         „-—     ^     /it 


:r— -^^cr 


To~lt^=^ 


SrgmPdNS 

This  probably  arose  from  an  ancient  enharmonic  scale  basis. 

53.     Gamanapriya  (Marva).     Evening,  passion. 


^  .Jo      o.lk.-o      L:      °      -^ 


m       IP 


46  THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 

65.     Mechakalyant  {Kalyan).     Evening,  merriment. 


c:?   11  o      ^ 


■^^      o      ^^ 


SRGMmPDNS 

This  is  the  Lydian  authentic  mode  with  the  addition  of  F  JJ 

All  the  ragas  given  above  are  primary  ragas,  called 
janaka  ragas  or  melakartas.  From  these  are  formed  the 
secondary  or  janya  ragas.  Though  it  is  theoretically 
possible  to  form  a  very  large  number  of  these  secondary 
ragas  by  varying  combinations  of  the  notes  of  the  octave, 
there  are  only  about  400  or  500  in  general  use  in  the 
south  to-day.  A  few  more  are  found  very  occasionally, 
but  altogether  the  total  of  those  used  will  not  come  to  more 
than  800.  The  secondary  ragas  are  formed  by  combining 
in  various  ways  five  or  more  of  the  notes  used  in  the 
primary  raga  under  which  they  are  grouped.  With  the 
exception  of  a  few  ragas ^  it  is  the  rule  to  use  in  the  secondary 
raga  only  those  srutis  which  are  used  in  the  primary  raga* 
Musical  experts  look  askance  at  the  introduction  of 
unauthorized  accidentals. 

The  following  are  the  ways  in  which  these  secondary 
ragas  Sire  formed  : — 

1.  By  the  omission  of  certain  notes  in  the  ascent  or 
descent  or  in  both,  thus  forming  a  transilient  series. 
Ragas  which  only  use  five  notes  in  both  ascent  and  descent 
are  called  Odava  ragas,  i.e.  Pentatonic.  Those  using  six 
only  are  known  as  Shadava,  i.e.  Hexatonic.  x^mong  the 
Odava  ragas  are  found  some  of  the  most  beautiful  of 
Indian  ragas  and  some  of  the  most  widely  used. 

The  following  are  a  few  of  the  most  important  of  these 
transilient  ragas  i — 

(The  name  of  the  corresponding  northern  raga  is  put  in  brackets). 

DhanyasT.  Fnma.ry,  Hamimatodi  (variety  of  Bhairavt). 

This  is  a  very  charming  and  plaintive  raga,  used 
especially  in  songs  of  pleading.  Its  characteristic  phrase 
is  P  n  S  (g  Bi?  c).  Its  arhsa  is  Ni.  The  omitted 
note  Dha  is  often  used  as  a  grace  note,  when  descending 
from  the  Sa,  after  the  characteristic  phrase. 


RAGA— THE  BASIS  OF  MELODY  47 

Madhyanidvatl.  Primary,  Kharaharapriya.  {Sctraiiga) 
This  is  a  very  beautiful  pentatonic  raga,  used  in  songs  of 
meditation.  Its  characteristic  phrase  is  R  M  n  (d  F  bI') 
with  both  Ri  and  Ma  as  arii^a  notes. 

Mohana,  Primary,  Harikanibodhi.  {Bhupalt).  A 
very  common  and  popular  raga,  used  for  joyful  songs.  It 
is  strictly  pentatonic.  It  is  also  the  scale  of  the  Scotch 
bagpipes,  and  is  one  of  ihe  primitive  scales  of  both  Arabia 
and  China.  The  well-known  hymn  '  There  is  a  happy 
land '  is  written  in  this  raga,  and  the  tune  seems  to  have 
come  from  South  India.  Its  characteristic  phrase  is 
G  P_D  (e  G  a)  and  its  arhsa  note  is  Ga. 

Arabhj.  Fxim3.ry,  Saiikarabharana.  (Arabhl).  A  raga 
fully  pentatonic  both  in  ascent  and  descent.  It  is  frequently 
used  in  devotional  songs.  It  was  introduced  to  the  north 
in  its  southern  form  and  with  the  same  name  by  the 
dramatist  Kirloskar.  Its  special  phrase  is  R  M  D 
(d  F  a)   with  the  arhsa  on  Ma.  ^ 

Hamsadhvaiii.     Primary,  Sankarabharana. 

This  fascinating  pentatonic  raga  is  also  used  a  great 
deal  in  devotional  songs  and  in  love  songs  too.  Its 
characteristic  phrase  is  G  P  N  (eg  b),  with  Pa  as  its 
aih^a. 

Suddhanata.     Primary,  Chalanata. 

This  is  a  fully  pentatonic  raga.  It  is  a  raga  of  power 
and  majesty  and  is  popular  with  expert  musicians.  It  has  a 
most  distinct  and  fascinating  flavour.  The  leap  phrase 
S  G  M  (c  E  f)  has  a  great  deal  to  do  with  this.  Its 
arhsa  is  Ga. 

Todl.     Primary.  Hanumatcdt.     {Bhairavl). 

This  is  one  of  the  most  common  of  the  southern  ragas. 
The  Pa  is  omitted  altogether  in  the  ascent,  but  is  often 
lightly  touched  in  the  descent.  The  leap  from  Ma  to  Dha 
and  its  minor  tones  make  it  a  very  attractive  raga.  It 
is  a  raga  of  majesty.  The  arhsa  is  usually  Dha,  but  is 
sometimes  shifted  to  Ma.  Its  characteristic  phrase  is 
g  M  d  (Bt?  F  Ai2). 

Devamanoharl.  Primary,  Kharaharapriya.  (Saranga) 
This  is  a  Shadava  raga  with  the  Ga  omitted  in  both 
ascent  and  descent.     The  descent,  however,  varies  from 


48  THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 

the  ascent.  The  phrase  S  n  D  P  fl  P  (c  Bb  A  Bl2  g), 
with  a  slide  from  the  Ni  to  the  Pa,  occurs  frequently  in 
the  descent.     Ri  is  its  arhsa. 

Kamhodhi,  Primary,  Harikamhodhi.  {Khamaj  or 
Jhinjhoti).  This  raga  is  hexatonic  in  the  ascent  only. 
Its  peculiar  phrase  is  P  D  S  n  (g  A  D  b1?),  and  it 
uses  both  varieties  of  Ni,  the  accidental  being  found 
specially  in  connection  with  the  phrase  S  N  P  D  S.  It  is 
a  very  common  rccga  and  is  used  in  devotional  songs  of 
praise, 

Hindolam.  Primary,  NatahhairavJ.  {Malkos).  This 
is  quite  different  from  the  northern  Hindol  which,  how- 
ever, has  the  same  swinging  rythm.  The  northern 
Hindol  comes  in  the  Gamanapriya  Mela  and  so  uses  the 
sharpened  fourth.  This  raga  is  used  for  love  songs  of  a 
joyful  character.  The  swing  phrases  are  easily  noted.  Its 
arhsa  is  Ma. 

2.  The  other  way  of  forming  the  secondary  r^gas  from 
the  primary  is  by  peculiar  combinations,  making  use  of  all 
the  notes  of  the  octave  in  varying  order,  in  ascent  or 
descent  or  in  both.  The  following  are  some  of  the  most 
important  of  these. 

Punnagavarctlt.     Primary,  Hanumatodi. 

This  raga  usually  starts  on  Ni  and  it  has  Sa  for  its 
arhsa.  It  is  specially  used  for  songs  of  sorrow,  and  has  a 
rather  low  tessitura.  Its  characteristic  phrase  is  S  g  M  d 
(C  Efe  F  Ab). 

N ctdanamakriya.  Primary,  Mayamalavagaula.  {Kalah- 
gada).  This  is  very  popular,  especially  for  religious  folk 
songs  and  also  for  earnest  songs  of  devotion.  Its  char- 
acteristic phrase  is  S  r  M  g  M  (c  Dt2  F  E  f)  and  its  arh^a 
is  M_a. 

Anandahhairavi.  Primary,  NatahhairavJ  {Anahda- 
hhairavt).  This  is  a  morning  raga  especially  used  for 
religious  songs.  It  has  two  peculiar  phrases,  one  in  the  first 
tetrachord  and  one  in  the  second.  The  first  is  S  g  R  g 
(c  EtJ  D  Et2)  and  the  second  P  S  n  d  P  (g  C  Bt2  At2  g). 
The  latter  is  a  very  beautiful  leap  phrase.  In  this  raga 
the  Ni  is  often  sharpened  in  the  descent,  so  that  it  almost 
becomes  Suddha  Ni,  Bl3  is  used  instead  of  B*?,  and  it  also 


RAGA— THE  BASIS  OF  MELODY  49 

makes  use  ^of  a  sharpened  Ga  in  the  descent,  which  is 
practically  Suddha  Ga  (E^).     Its  amsa  is  Ga. 

Bilahan.     Primary,  SahkarUhharana. 

A  very  sweet  raga  associated  with  morning  songs  of  joy. 
It  may  be  sung  up  to  noon.  It  is  a  south  Indian  rdga  and  is 
not  found  in  the  north.  This  raga  is  very  commonly  used 
for  wedding  melodies.  Captain  Day  notes  one  in  his  book 
which  is  still  popular.  It  has  two  leaps,  one  from  the  third 
to  the  fifth  and  the  other  from  the  sixth  to  the  octave,  both 
in  the  ascent.  Its  characteristic  phrase  is  D  S  N  D 
(a  C  B  a)  and  it  has  Pa  as  its  arhsa. 

Hamirkalydnl.  Prima.Yy, Mechakalydnl.  (HamJrkalydm). 
This  raga  is  one  of  those  using  the  sharpened  fourth.  It 
belongs  to  the  latter  thirty-six.  It  uses  the  Suddha  Ma 
also  soiTietimes.  There  are  a  number  of  rdgas  which  do 
the  same.  This  rdga  is  one  of  the  joyful  w^edding  rdgas  of 
India  in  both  north  and  south. 

Srtrdga.     Primary,  Kharaharapriyd. 

The  northern  Sri  is  quite  different,  and  belongs  to  the 
Kdmavardhani  or  Rdinapriyd  Mela,  having  the  sharpened 
fourth.  The  southern  Sri  is  a  most  fascinating  rdga  with 
a  flavour  of  haunting  sadness,  and  is  used  in  songs  of 
sorrow.  The  ascent  is  pentatonic  and  there  are  three 
special  phrases  :  S  R  M  P_n  (c  D  F  G  Bt?),^  S  R  n  S 
(c  D  Bl2  c),  P  n  D  P  n  S  (g  B  A  G  Bl2  c).  Suddha  Ga 
is  often  used  instead  of  komal  Ga  in  the  descent. 

There  are  of  course  many  other  popular  and  beautiful 
rdgas,  but  space  does  not  allow  us  to  add  any  more  here. 
It  is  an  interesting  fact  that  one  of  the  most  popular  of  the 
southern  primary  rdgas  is  Sahkardhharana,  which  is 
the  western  major  mode.  This  and  the  Harikdmhodhi 
Mela  are  the  two  most  common  primary  modes  in  the 
south,  judging  from  the  number  of  secondary  rdgas  con- 
nected with  them.  This  does  not  correspond  with  a  very 
general  opinion  in  western  countries,  that  Indian  music  is 
all  in  the  minor  modes.  Among  the  most  popular  rdgas 
in  the  Sahkardhharana  Mela  are  the  sweet  Kdnadd 
with  its  pretty  lilts  ;  Navaroj  always  sung  in  the  middle 
register  ;  the  sweet  and  plaintive  Nlldmhari  ;  the  bright  and 
merry  Surdnandini ;  the  proud  Addnd  with  its  peculiar 
4 


50 


THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 


phrase  P  D  N  D  (g  A  B  a)  ;  Bihagada,  the  raga  of  argu- 
ment, using  both  suddha  Ni  and  komal  Ni ;  the  pleasant 
Bihctgy  beloved  both  in  north  and  south :  the  stately 
Darbarl,  and  very  many  more.  The  next  most  popular 
melas  are  N atahhairavl  and  Kharaharapriya,  both  of 
which  are  in  the  minor  mode,  having  two  flats  each. 
These  two  ragas  and  their  secondaries  are  often  used  in 
religious  songs. 

Mayctmalavagaiila  and  Hanumatodi  are  the  only  other 
primary  ragas,  with  a  large  number  of  secondary  ragas 
connected  with  them.  Both  of  them  have  a  characteristic 
flavour  and  are  very  popular.  The  former  group  supplies 
many  of  the  melodies  for  the  folk-songs  of  the  people,  sung 
by  the  bullock-cart  driver,  the  boatman  and  the  labourer. 

One  must  emphasize  the  point  that  these  ragas  are  not 
the  melodies  themselves  but  the  groundwork  from  which 
the  melodies  are  afterwards  formed.  A  thousand  different 
melodies  may  be  composed  upon  the  same  raga. 

Many  of  the  ragas  have  characteristic  grace  notes 
attached  to  them.  In  Bihag  Ri  is  only  used  as  grace,  and  in 
Bihagada  Ni  is  always  played  with  the  grace  note  Sa.  In 
Hamirkalyani  Ga  has  its  grace  note,  and  so  on.  These 
grace  notes  are  essential  constituents  of  the  raga  and  not 
simply  accidentals  as  in  western  music. 

Carnatic  Secondary  Ragas 

The  characteristic  phrase  is  shown  at  the  right-hand  side. 
Dhanyasi.     Primary,  Hanumatodi.     (Variety  of  Bhai- 
ravi).     Morning,  pleading. 


g     M      P 


P     n 


Bhupala.     Primary,     Hanumatodi.     Early    morning, 
praise. 


P     d 


S     g      P 


RAGA— THE  BASIS  OF  MELODY 


51 


Madhyamavail.  Primary,  Kharaharapriya.  (Sarahga). 
Noon,  calm. 


"= — ^ 
S      R     M      P     n      S 


R     M    n 


Mohana.     Primary,  Harikamhodhi.  (Bhupall).  Noon, 
sweetness. 


S       R     G     P     D    S 


G      P     D 


Arahhi.        Primary,        Sahkarahharana.        [Arabht). 
Morning,  mystery. 


S      R     M      P      D     S 


R      M 


Hamsadhvani.     Primary,      Sahkarahharana,      Noon, 
entreaty,  expostulation. 


S      R    G      P      N      S 


G       P     N 


Suddhanata.     Primary,  Chalanata.    Night,  power  and 
majesty. 


S     G     M     P     N      S 


S      G 


52  THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 

Todt.     Primary,  Hanumatodl.     (Bhairavl),   Morning, 


sad. 


S    r    g 


dnSSndPMgr     SgMd 


Devamanoharl.     Primary,  Kharaharapriya.     (Variety 
of  Sarahga).     Night. 


SRMPDnSSnDnPMRS 

Kctmhodhi,     Primary,    Harikamhodhi.      (Khamaj    or 
Jhinjhotl).     Evening  and  night,  praise. 


SRGMPDSSNn     DPMGRSPDSn 

Hindolam.        Primary,       Natabhairavl.         (Malkos). 
Evening,  gay. 


±±: 


■/^  ■*«»■ 


^^E 


=?©= 


SMgMdnSSndMgS 

Punnagavarall,        Primary,      Hanumatodl.        Night, 
melancholy. 


nSrgMPdnndPMPgr     S 

N  adanamakriya.  Primary,  Mayamalavagaula, 

(Kalahgada).     Evening,  calm. 


SrMGMPdNSSNdPMGrS 


RAGA— THE  BASIS  OF  MELODY 


53 


Anandabhairavi,     Primary,  Natahhairavi.     Morning, 
devotion. 


SgRgMPSSNndPMgRS 

Bilahari.  Primary,  Sahkarahharana.     Morning,    joy. 

SRGPDSSNDPMGRSDSND 

Hamlrkalyanl,      Primary,    Mechakalyanl.       [Hamir- 
kalyant).     Evening,  merriment. 


SGPmPDNSSNDPmMGRS 

Srtraga.  Primary,  Kharaharapriya,  Evening,  sadness. 

SRMPn  SSnPDnPMRgRS 

II.      HiNDUSTHANI    RaGAS 

The  general  remarks  made  in  the  section  above  on  the 
Carnatic  ragas  apply  as  a  rule  to  the  ragas  of  the  north 
also.  The  nomenclature  is  usually  quite  different,  except 
in  the  cases  of  those  ragas  which  have  been  avowedly 
borrowed  from  the  other  system.  Not  only  so,  but  it  is  not 
easy  to  attempt  any  description  of  the  Hindusthani  system, 
as  most  scholars  have  their  own  way  of  classifying  the 
ragas.  The  basis  which  is  adopted  by  the  majority  of 
the  northern  musicians  is  known  as  the  Raga-ra gini-ptitra 
basis.  It  is  a  somewhat  fanciful  system  the  details  of  which 
depend  very  largely  upon  the  choice  of  each  individual. 
There  are  supposed    to   be    six  principal  ragas,  each  one 


54  THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 

of  which  has  a  number  of  ragims,  or  wives,  attached  to 
it,  these  two  having  a  number  of  putras,  or  sons.  There 
does  not  seem  to  be  any  definite  qualities  which  determine 
tiie  particular  ragas  which  must  belong  to  each  one  of  these 
groups,  or  which  form  the  principle  of  attachment  to  a  parti- 
cular raga.  The  result  is  that  there  are  almost  as  many 
systems  of  classification  as  there  are  musicians.  The 
tendency  among  scholars  and  practical  musicians  to-day  is 
to  put  aside  altogether  this  old  system,  and  to  adopt  a  more 
rational  one  based  on  somewhat  similar  lines  to  that  of  the 
southern  system. 

Many  different  lists  of  the  six  principal  ragas  are 
given.  Among  them  the  following  are  the  most  important: — 

Pundartka.  Bhairava,  Hindol,  Desakar,  Sri,  Nata, 
Nattanarayana. 

Muhammad  Rezza.  Bhairava,  Malakaunsa,  Hindol,  Sri, 
Megh,  Nata. 

Rajah  S.  M.  Tagore.  Sri,  Vasanta,  Bhairava,  Pan- 
chama,  Megh,  Nattanarayana. 

Sir  W,  Jones.  Bhairava,  Malava,  SrT,  Hindol,  Dipak, 
Megh. 

It  will  be  noticed  that  every  list  contains  the  two 
names,  Bhairava  and  SrT.  Bhairava  is  the  Mayamalava- 
gaula  of  the  south  and  Sri  is  the  Ramapriya  raga.  Nearly 
all  the  other  lists,  with  only  a  few  exceptions,  also  contain 
these  two  names.  Among  the  other  names,  Megh  and 
Narayana  are  varieties  of  Sarikarabharana.  Vasanta 
corresponds  to  Gamanapriya,  having  the  sharpened  fourth, 
and  Hindol  is  also  a  member  of  this  mela.  The  name 
that  is  the  northern  term  for  melakarta,  or  primary  raga. 

From  time  to  time  various  scholars  have  tried  to  intro- 
duce system  and  order  into  the  classification  of  the  northern 
school.  Bhavabhatta  was  one  of  the  first  to  undertake  this, 
and  he  proposed  to  select  twenty  main  thats  as  primary 
ragas.  They  were  :  1.  Todi,  2.  Gauda,  3.  Varati,  4.  Ke_dara, 
5.  Suddhanata,  6.  Malavakai^ika,  7.  SrT,  8.  Hamir,  9.  Ahiri, 
10.  Kalyani,  11.  De^akshi,  12.  Desakar,  13.  Saranga, 
14.  Karnata,  15.  Kamoda,  16.  Hijhaja,  17.  Nadaramakriya, 
18.  Hindol,  19.  MukharT,  20.  Soma.  No  other  musician, 
however,  has  adopted  this  basis. 


RAGA— THE  BASIS  OF  MELODY  55 

In  recent  years  Mr.  N.  V>  Bhatkhande  of  Bombay  has 
put  forward  a  classification  which  seems  to  be  based  on 
reasonable  principles,  and  is  on  the  way  to  acceptance 
by  a  large  number  of  musicians  and  scholars.  The  follow- 
ing are  the  general  lines  of  his  proposals  :  — 

The  names  in  brackets  are  those  of  corresponding  southern  ragas. 

I.  BilavaJ  groicp  (Sahkarabharana) . 

Those  having  the  first  tetrachord  of  the  western  major 
mode,  with  Suddha  or  Tivra  Dha  in  the  second  half. 

SRGMPDornNS 

CDEFGA  ABC 

Included  in  this  group  are  the  following  : — 
Bihag,  Kakubh,  De^akar,  Durga. 

II.  Yaman  or  Kalyaiii  group  {Kalyant). 

Similar  to  the  Bilaval  group,  with  the  exception  of  the 
substitution  of  Tivra  Ma  for  Suddha  Ma. 

SRGmPDorn"NS 

CDEfSgA  ABC 

Included  under  this  group  come  : — 
Hamir,  Kedara,  Kamoda,  Syama. 

III.  Khainaj  group  [Harikanihodhi). 

This  is^  a  modification  of  the  Bilaval  group  by  the 
change  of  Suddha  Ni  to  Komal  Ni. 

SRGMPDn      S 

CDE       FGABbC 

The  principal  ragas  under  this  are  -.— 
Jhinjhoti,  Tilafiga,    Khambavati,  Tilak-kamoda,  Jaya- 
jayavantT. 

Some  of  these  ragas  use  both  varieties  of  Ni. 

IV.  Bhairava  group  [Mayamalavagaula). 

This  has  the  first  tetrachord  of  Bhairava,  with  either 
Komal  or  Suddha  Dha,  and  either  Komal  or  Suddha  Ni. 

or    N    S 

Btl    C 


s 

r 

G 

M 

P 

d 

or 

D    n 

c 

Db 

E 

F 

G 

Ab 

Atl  Bb 

56  THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 

The  following  are  included  in  this  group  : — 
Bhairava,  Kalarigada,  MeghrafijanI,   Saurashtljogiya, 

Ramkall,  Bibhas,  Abheri -bhairava,  Lalita,  Saveri,  Ananda- 

bhairava,  Gunakri,  Hijhaja. 

V.  Purvi  group.     {Kamavardhani). 

This  is  differentiated  from  the  Bhairava  group  by  the 
use  of  Ma  Tivra  instead  of  Ma  Suddha. 

SrGmPdNS 

C    DtJ    E      fI     G    At?    B      C 

The  following  are  included  under  this  group  : — 
Sri,  JetasrI,  Tanki,  Puriya-dhanasrI,  Malavi,  Gauri. 
Sri  raga  is  first  mentioned  by  HridayaPrakas(l667) ;  and 

Hridaya  Narayana  Dev,  Rajah  of  Gadades,  is  said  to  be  its 

originator. 

VI.  Mctrva  group.     {Gamanapriya). 

The  difference  between  this  and  the  preceding  group  is 
only  in  the  use  of  Suddha  and  Tivra  Dha  for  Komal  Dha. 

SrGmPDornNS 

C      Dt?  E     Fi$     G      A  Aft    B      C 

The  following  belong  to  this  group  :— 

Hindol,  FiJriya,  Panchama,  Desakar,  Gaur-pahchama. 

VII.  Kaphi  group.     (Kharaharapriya). 

These  all  have  the  first  tetrachord  of  KaphT,  with  Ni 
Komal  in  the  second  half. 

SRgMPDdS 

C      D      Et?   F      G      A      Bb   C 

The  following  are  included  in  this  : — ■ 

Pilu,    DbanasrI,  Vagi^varl,  Suha,  BhimpalasI,  Saranga. 

VIII.  Asavari  group.     (Natabhairavj). 

This  group  only  differs  from  the  Kaphi  group  in  the  use 
of  Dha  Komal  for  Suddha  Dha. 

SRgMPdnS 

C      D      Et?   F      G     Ab    Bb  C 

The  principal  ragas  under  this  are  : — 
Gandhari,  Jaunpuri,  De^i. 


RAGA— THE  BASIS  OF  MELODY  57 

IX.  Bhairavi  group.     {Hanuniatodl). 

This  is  another  modification  of  the  Kaphi  group,  formed 
by  using  Komal  Ri  and  Komal  Dha  instead  of  the  Suddha 
varieties. 

S    r    g    M    P    d    n    S 

C     Db  Et2    F      G     At?  BtJ    C 

It  may  be  noted  that  all  the  alterable  notes  here  are 
Komal, 

The  secondary_mgas  attached  to  it  are  Bhupala, 
Jahgala,  Mukhari,  Asavari,  Dhanasri,  Malkos.  The  latter 
is  one  of  the  most  popular  of  north  Indian  ragas. 

X.  Todl  group.     {Subhapantuvaralt) . 

This  is  a  mixed  group  formed  by  ragas  having  the  first 
tetrachord  of  Bhairavi  and  the  second  of  Purvi  and  using 
in  addition  the  sharpened  fourth.  It  also  makes  use  of  a 
sharpened  seventh,  somewhat  sharper  than  Suddha  Ni. 

S    r    g    m    P    d    N    or    N^    S~ 

C     Db   E^   FiJ    G    A'^    B  BJJ      C 

In  this  group  microtonal  variations  are  frequently  used. 
The  Ri  will  be  Atikomal,  and  the  Dha  and  Ma  will  be 
less  than  the  full  sharpened  semitones.  So  that  the  true 
signature  should  be  S  r*  g-  m  P  d"  N"*"  S.  The  principal 
ragas  connected  with  it  are  Gurjari,  Multanl. 

It  wii'  be  noted  that  Mr.  Bhatkhande  has  chosen  ten  of 
the  southern  melakartas  (primary  ragas)  for  his  primary 
ragas,  and  he  then  classifies  all  the  other  northern  ragas 
under  these.  As  will  be  seen  fiom  the  lists  of  ragas 
which  follow  with  their  notation,  some  of  them  use  variants 
under  the  groups.  Each  group  reveals  a  distinct  character- 
istic, and  we  can  see  the  musical  affinities  which  bring  the 
ragas  in  each  group  together.  It  is  possible  that  this 
system  may  express  the  musical  facts  better  even  than  the 
strictly  logical  system  of  the  south. 

It  is  possible  further  to  subdivide  each  one  of  these 
groups  by  means  of  such  factors  as  the  following.  Those 
which  have  no  Ma  in  either  ascent  or  descent ;  shadava 
ragas  ;  those  having  both  Suddha  and  Tivra  Ma,  and  so  on. 
In  this  way  a  really  useful  classification  of  Hindusthani 


58 


THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 


ragas  may  be  arrived  at ;  and  probably  during  the  course 
of  the  next  few  years  it  will  be  worked  out  thoroughly  so 
as  to  come  into  common  use.  Until  some  such  scheme  is 
accepted,  it  will  be  very  difficult  to  find  a  common  basis 
for  the  northern  and  southern  musical  systems.  In  a  short 
account  like  this  it  is  not  possible  to  pursue  further  this 
classification  of  ragas. 

HiNDUSTHANI    RaGAS 
The  name  in  brackets  is  the  corresponding  Carnatic  raga. 

I.     Bilaval.      (Sahkarabharana).       Western     major 
mode.     Morning,  joy. 


SRGMPDn-NS 


Bihag. 
tenderness. 


Bilaval  group.       (Bihag).      Night,  love, 


SGMmPNSSNDPMGRS 

Diirga,    Bilaval  group.     (Suddhasaverl).  Morning. 

SRMPDSSDPMRS 

II.     Yaman.     {Mechakalyanl).     Evening,  merriment. 

SRGmPDNS 

Kedara.     Yaman  group.     (Kedara).    Evening,  gay 


SMm      FDnNSSNDPmMGRS 


RAGA— THE  BASIS  OF  MELODY  59 

Kamoda.     Yaman  group.     Evening. 


SRMmPDNDSSNDPm     PGMRS 

III.     Khamaj.       [Harikamhodhi     or     Khaniaj),       Any 
time,  love. 


love. 


SGMPDnSSnDPMGRS 


Jhinjhotl.    Khamaj  group.   (Cheiichurutti) .  Night, 


SRGMPDNSSnDPMGHS 


Tilahga.     Khamaj  group.     Night,  quiet. 


SGMPNSSnPMGS 

IV.     Bhairava.  (Mayamalavagaula) .    Dawn,  reverence. 


SrGMPdNS 

Jogiya.  Bhairava  group.  {Saverl).  Dawn,  adoration. 


Sr~MPD~SSNDPMG     rS 


60 


THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 


Lalita.     Bhairava    group.     {Suryakantct) .    Night, 
tenderness. 


S    r    G    M  m    d    N    S 


V.     Purvi.     (Kamavardhanl).    Evening,  mystery. 


SrGMmPdNS 

In   the  United  Provinces  both  varieties  of  Dha  are  used. 
M  is  only  a  passing  note. 


Srlraga.   Purvi  group.  Sunset,  mystery  and  contem- 


plation. 


SrmPdNSSNd     PmGrS 


Gauri.     Purvi  group.     Afternoon,  laughter. 


SrmPNSSNdPmGrS 

VI.     Marvd.       [Gamanapriyd.)       Afternoon,  love    and 
passion. 


S    r      G    m    D    N    S 

G  is  occasionally  the  amsa  of  this  rdga. 


RAGA— THE  BASIS  OF  MELODY  61 

Hindol.     Marva  group.      Evening,  calm  and  joy. 

S    G    m    D    N    § 

Some  say   that   the   arh^a   note  is  Dha.     There  are   many 
varieties  of  Hindol  in  use. 

VII.     Kapht.     (Kharaharapriya) .     Morning,  passion. 

SRgMPDnS 

Dhan^srl.     Kaphi  group.     Afternoon,  calm. 


SgMPnSSnDPMgRS 

This  variety  is  very  common  in  western  India. 

Bhimpalast.     Kaphi  group.     Afternoon,  quiet. 

SgMPnSSnDPMgRS 

Saranga.    Kaphi  group.    [M adhyamavati) .    Noon, 
contemplation  and  illusion. 


SRMPDnNS 

VIII.    Asavarl.     [Natahhairavl),     Evening,  tenderness. 


^^^ 


SRMPdSSndPMgRS 


62  THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 

Gandhari.  Asavari  group.  {Gandharava).  Evening. 

SRMPdnNSS     ndPMgRS 

IX.     BhairavT.     [Hanumatodt).     Morning,  sad. 


P    d    n    S 

The  Arhsa  varies  between  M  and  d. 


Malkos.    Bhairavi  group.  {Also  called  Malakauhsa). 
Night,  laughter. 


SgMdnSSn     dMgSSgM+dnS 

This  is  one  of  the  popular  northern  ragas. 
X.     TodJ.     (Subhapantuvarall).     Morning,  adoration. 


Sr     gmPdNSSrgm+PdN+S 

Multanl.     TodI  group.     Evening,  calm. 


SGraPNSSNdPmg     r      Sgrn+rd" 

Another  important  matter  is  the  time  of  day  at  which 
different  ragas  should  be  sung.  Each  raga  is  connected 
with  a  special  mood  or  passion,  and  it  is  therefore  fitting 
that  each  should  also  have  a  special  time  appropriate  to 
it.  In  some  cases  the  character  of  the  raga  itself 
explains  this.  In  other  cases  it  may  be  that  we  must 
seek  the  explanation  in  historical  facts  connected  with  each 


RAGA— THE  BASIS  OF  MELODY  63 

fflfga,  or  in  the  division  of  the  day  into  auspicious  and 
inauspicious  periods,  which  still  determines  so  greatly  the 
life  of  the  Hindu  household. 

The  musical  character  of  the  different  ragas  also 
suggests  certain  explanations,  which  have  been  very 
carefully  worked  out  by  Mr.  Bhatkhande  for  Hindusthani 
ragas.  The  four  determinant  musical  factors  for  the  time 
theory  according  to  him  are  the  following  :  the  position  of 
the  amsa,  the  presence  or  absence  of  Tlvra  Ma,  of  Komal 
and  Tlvra  snitis,  and  the  omission  of  certain  svaras. 

The  day  is  divided  into  the  following  periods : — 

1.  Sandhiprakas,  both  morning  and  evening,  the 
conjunction  of  dark  and  light,  i.e.  sunrise  and  sunset, 
between  4-7,  both  a.m.  and  p.m. 

2.  Before  and  after  Sandhipraka^,  from  10-4  and 
7-10,  both  a.m.  and  p.m. 

This  gives  altogether  six  periods  in  the  twenty-four 
hours.     He  works  out  the  following  principles  : — 

1.  Ragas  having  Ri  Komal  and  Ga  Tlvra  are 
Sandhiprakas  ragas,  i.e.  the  Bhairava,  Purvt  and  Marva 
groups. 

2.  Ragas  having  Ri  Stiddha,  Dha  Suddha,  and  Ga 
Suddha  come  after  the  Sandhiprakas,  i.e.  the  Bilavalj 
Kalyanl  and  Khamaj  groups. 

3.  Ragas  having  Ga  Komal  and  Ni  Komal  come 
before  Sandhiprakas,  i.e.  the  Kapht,  Bhairavi  and  Asavart 
groups. 

The  question  as  to  whether  the  rdga  should  come  in 
the  first  or  the  second  half  of  the  day  is  decided  by  two 
factors,  the  position  of  the  ainsa,  and  the  use  of  Tlvra 
Ma. 

4.  Ragas  having  their  amsa  in  the  first  tetrachord 
(Purvahga)  come  between  noon  and  midnight.  They  are 
called  Piirva  ragas. 

5.  Ragas  having  their  amsa  in  the  second  tetrachord 
{Uttaraitga)  come  between  midnight  and  noon.  They  are 
called  Uttara  ragas. 

Ma  and  Pa  are  not  counted  as  in  either  tetrachord. 

6.  Ma  Tlvra  also  gives  an  indication  of  the  time 
of  the  raga.      For  this  reason  it  is  called  Adhvadarsak,  or 


64  THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 

'  showing  the  way.'  It  comes  in  the  evening  Sandhi  group 
and  continues  into  the  next  group.  It  does  not,  however, 
occur  in  the  morning  groups,  unless  attended  by  a  dominant 
Komal  Ma  in  a  few  of  the  early  morning  ragas,  e.g. 
Hindol.  The  only  ragas  sung  during  the  day  and  taking 
Ma  Ttvra  are  Todt,  Gaur-sarahga^  Multani ;  and  there 
is  some  doubt  about  these.  Skilful  musicians  some- 
times introduce  Ma  Ttvra  as  a  passing  note  into  other 
night  ragas,  without  in  any  way  offending  musical 
susceptibilities. 

7.  An  additional  indication  of  time  is  found  in  the 
transilient  ragas.  Evening  ragas  do  not  as  a  rule  omit 
Ga  and  Ni  altogether,  and  morning  ragas  do  not  omit  Ri 
and  Dha. 

In  the  south,  the  time  theory  is  largely  a  matter  of 
tradition,  and  while  many  of  these  principles  apply,  the 
subject  has  not  been  carefully  worked  out. 

Many  interesting  anecdotes  are  related  which  bear  on 
this  time  theory.  It  is  said  that  once  the  celebrated  Tan 
Sen  was  ordered  by  the  Emperor  to  sing  a  night  raga  at 
noon.  As  he  sang,  darkness  came  down  on  the  place 
where  he  stood,  and  spread  around  as  far  as  the  sound 
reached. 

There  are  other  fanciful  aspects  of  the  raga  system 
which  have  to  be  taken  into  account.  It  must  always  be 
remembered  that  in  Indian  melodies  the  mood  or  flavour  is 
of  primal  importance  ;  and  so  many  things,  which  appear 
to  the  West  to  be  merely  fanciful,  are  important  factors 
for  the  music  of  the  East. 

The  root  m^eaning  of  raga  is  '  passion  ',  and  from  very 
ancient  times  each  raga  has  been  associated  with  particu- 
lar passions  and  emotions.  Rajah  Sir  S.  M.  Tagore  thus 
describes  the  passions  to  be  associated  with  the  six 
principal  ragas  he  enumerates  : — 

1.  Srlrdga  is  to  be  sung  in  the  dewy  season,  and 
represents  love.  2.  Vasanta  is  the  raga  of  the  spring,  and 
is  allied  with  the  emotion  of  joy.  3.  Bhairava  is  the  raga 
of  asceticism  and  reverence.  4.  Pafichama  is  the  raga  of 
the  calm  night.  5.  Megh  is  the  raga  of  the  rainy  season  and 
is  allied  with  the  emotion  of  exuberant  joy,  such  as  the 


RAGA— THE  BASIS  OF  MELODY  65 

coming  of  the  rainy  season  means  to  so  many  in  India. 
6.  Natfaiicirdyana  is  the  raga  of  battle  and  fierce 
courage. 

Here  is  another  interesting  description,  from  the  pen 
of  an  accomplished  southern  musician,  of  the  emotions 
associated  with  the  different  rdgas.  '  All  the  permutations 
and  combinations  are  performed  on  the  basis  of  the  notes  of 
which  the  rdga  is  primarily  composed  and  any  deviations 
are  looked  upon  as  discordant  and  are  scrupulously  guarded 
against.  Todi  and  Bliairavt  represent  majesty  and  impress 
one  like  the  march  of  a  stately  king,  decked  in  all  his  regal 
glory  and  spreading  the  pomp  and  circumstance  of  his 
lofty  position,  a  grand  and  sublim3  spectacle.  Asdvarl  aad 
Punndgavardll  are  wrapped  in  melancholy,  like  one  plead- 
ing the  cause  of  a  sovereign  unjustly  deposed  from  his 
throne  and  power.  Girvdni  and  Vasanta  come  serene 
and  subdued,  like  a  sage  sitting  in  a  lonely  forest  or 
on  a  mountain,  calmly  contemplating  the  beauty  of  the 
universe.  Mohana  and  Purvakalydnl  appear  like  a  coy 
maiden  hiding  her  love,  as  a  rose  does  its  blooming  petals 
beneath  its  bower  of  green,  but  withal  conscious  of  its 
beauty  and  attractiveness.  Husenl  seems  fascinating  in 
its  sadness,  like  a  maiden  estranged  from  her  lover  or 
spurned  by  him,  cursing  the  woeful  hour  which  parted  her 
from  his  company,  or  eloquently  pleading  the  justice  of  her 
cause.  Bihdgadd  comes  arguing  and  resentful  and  remons- 
trating. Nddaiidniakriyd,  calm  and  thoughtful,  appears 
like  Socrates  or  Plato  preaching  the  sublime  truths  of 
philosophy  to  his  disciples.  Nildmbari  and  Yadukula- 
kdmhodhi  come  submissive  and  imploring,  melting  the 
soul  into  streams  of  tender  devotion,  like  a  true  bhakta  full 
of  prayers  and  tears  in  the  presence  of  God.  Thus  each 
rdga  comes  and  goes  with  its  store  of  smiles  or  tears, 
of  passion  or  pathos,  its  noble  and  lofty  impulses,  and  leaves 
its  mark  en  the  mind  of  the  hearer.'  ^ 

It  is  noted  that  the  sadder  rdgas  have  an  average  of 
three  flats  as  against  an  average  of  two  flats  for  those  which 
picture  the  more  joyous  emotions. 

iLakshmana  Pillay,  I.M.J,,  pp.  71,  72. 


66  THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 

Indian  ragas  are  also  supposed  to  be  able  to  reproduce 
the  conditions  and  emotions  associated  with  them.  The 
Dipak  rdga  is  supposed  to  produce  flames  in  actuality  ;  and 
a  story  is  told  of  a  famous  musician  named  Naik  Gopal 
who,  when  ordered  to  sing  this  by  the  Emperor  Akbar, 
went  and  stood  in  the  Jumna  up  to  his  neck  and  then 
started  the  song.  The  water  became  gradually  hotter  until 
it  was  boiling,  and  he  went  on  singing  until  flames  burst 
out  of  his  body  and  he  was  consum.ed  to  ashes.  The  Megh 
mallar  raga  is  supposed  to  be  able  to  produce  rain.  It  is 
said  that  a  dancing  girl  in  Bengal,  in  a  time  of  drought, 
once  drew  from  the  clouds  with  this  raga  a  timely  refresh- 
ing shower  which  saved  the  rice  crop.  Sir  W.  Ousley, 
who  relates  many  of  these  anecdotes,  says  that  he  was  told 
by  Bengal  people  that  this  power  of  reproducing  the  actual 
conditions  of  the  raga  is  now  only  possessed  by  some 
musicians  in  western  India,  and  by  people  in  western 
India  that  such  musicians  can  only  be  found  in  Bengal. 

There  are  many  interesting  anecdotes  told  with  refer- 
ence to  ragas.  One  of  these  relates  a  story  of  a  southern 
musician  named  Todi  Sitaramayya, — so-called  on  account 
of  his  fondness  for  the  raga  Todl, — who  was  a  musician  at 
the  court  of  the  Maharaja  Sarabhoji  of  Tanjore  in  the  last 
century.  The  musician  got  into  serious  money  difficulties, 
and  w^as  forced  by  the  money  lender  to  whom  he  went  to 
mortgage  his  favourite  raga  Todl  for  the  loan  he  obtained, 
under  the  condition  that  until  the  money  was  repaid  he 
should  not  sing  it  before  any  one.  It  was  not  long  before 
Sarabhoji  missed  his  favourite  raga  and  asked  his  musician 
to  sing  it.  He  explained  why  he  could  not  do  so  ;  and  then 
the  Maharaja  laughed  heartily  at  the  cuteness  of  the 
moneylender  and  paid  up  the  loan,  besides  rewarding  the 
moneylender  for  his  keen  appreciation  of  the  value  of 
music.  Another  story  is  told  of  a  prince,  who  was  not 
possessed  of  sufficient  musical  knowledge  to  recognize  the 
different  ragas  when  they  were  played  or  sung,  and  so 
arranged  with  a  princess,  who  was  well  versed  in  music, 
to  help  him  by  means  of  a  special  prompting  apparatus. 
This  consisted  of  a  set  of  strings,  hardly  visible  at  a  distance, 
suspended   from    above,    directly    opposite    the    principal 


RAGA— THE  BASIS  OF  MELODY  67 

organs  of  the  prince's  face.  Whenever  a  raga  was  sung 
before  him,  the  princess,  who  was  sitting  in  an  upper 
chamber  where  she  could  manipulate  the  strings,  would 
pull  the  appropriate  string  opposite  the  organ  representing 
the  raga  sung.  Thus  for  Kamhodhi  the  ear  (kadu)  string 
was  pulled,  for  Mitkhari  the  nose  [niukku)  string,  for 
Kanada  the  eye  {kannu)  string  and  so  on.  So  the  prince 
was  able  to  show  off  his  skill  in  naming  the  particular 
ragas.  One  day,  however,  the  princess  in  her  excitement 
pulled  the  springs  so  hastily,  that  the  whole  apparatus  fell 
down,  and  the  prince,  who  could  no  longer  name  the  ragas, 
had  to  retire  ashamed  from  the  Durbar. 

In  connection  with  the  science  of  raga,  Indian  music 
has  developed  the  art  of  raga  pictures.  Principal  Percy 
Brown  of  the  School  of  Art,  Calcutta,  defines  a  raga 
as  *  a  work  of  art  in  which  the  tune,  the  song,  the  picture, 
the  colours,  the  season,  the  hour  and  the  virtues  are  so 
blended  together  as  to  produce  a  composite  production  to 
which  the  west  can  furnish  no  parallel.'  It  may  be 
described  as  a  musical  m.ovement,  which  is  not  only  repre- 
sented by  sound,  but  also  by  a  picture.  Rajah  S.  M.  Tagore 
thus  describes  the  pictorial  representations  of  his  six 
principal  ragas.  Sriraga  is  represented  as  a  divine  being 
wandering  through  a  beautiful  grove  with  his  love,  gather- 
ing fragrant  flowers  as  they  pass  along.  Near  by,  doves 
sport  on  the  grassy  sward.  Vasanta  raga,  or  the  raga  of 
spring,  is  represented  as  a  young  man  of  golden  hue, 
standing  in  a  mango  grove,  dressed  in  yellow  garments,  and 
having  his  ears  ornamented  with  mango  blossoms,  some 
of  which  he  also  holds  in  his  hands.  *  His  lotus-like  eyes 
are  rolling  round  and  are  of  the  colour  of  the  rising  sun. 
He  is  loved  by  the  females.'  Bhairava  is  shown  as  the 
great  Mahadeva  (Siva)  seated  as  a  sage  on  a  mbuntain 
top.  Ganga  falls  upon  his  matted  locks.  His  head  is 
adorned  with  the  crescent  moon.  In  the  centre  of  his 
forehead  is  the  third  eye  from  which  issued  the  flames 
which  reduced  Kama,  the  Indian  Cupid,  to  ashes.  Ser- 
pents twine  round  his  body,  which  gleams  with  sacred 
ashes  smeared  all  over  it.  He  holds  a  trident  in  one  hand 
and  a  skull  in  the  other.     Before  him  stands  the  sacred 


68  THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 

bull.  Panchama  raga  is  pictured  as  a  very  young  couple, 
fondling  one  another  on  a  grassy  sward  in  the  midst  of  a 
forest.  The  raga  itself  is  represented  by  a  young  man 
who  has  large  red  eyes  and  wears  red  clothes.  Megh  is 
the  raga  of  the  clouds  and  the  rainy  season.  Clouds 
stretch  across  the  sky,  and  lightning  flashes  pierce  them. 
Seated  upon  a  royal  elephant,  with  his  bride  at  his  side,  is 
the  splendid  young  king  who  represents  this  raga.  He  is 
dressed  in  blue  garments,  or  is  shown  as  blue  in  colour, 
like  the  mighty  Indra.  '  He  has  a  grave  voice  and  violet 
eyes.'  Nattanarayana  is  the  raga  of  battle.  A  warrior 
king  rides  on  a  galloping  steed  over  the  field  of  battle,  with 
lance  and  bow  and  shield.  Dead  bodies  of  the  slain  lie 
round  about.     Blood  streams  from  his  body. 

Some  time  ago  Principal  Percy  Brown  read  a  paper 
on  this  subject  which  he  called  '  Visualized  Music  '.  He 
described  it  as  a  combination  of  the  two  arts,  music  and 
painting.  He  mentioned  a  miniature  painting  which  was 
called  *  the  fifth  delineation  of  the  melody  Megh  Mallar 
Sarahga,  played  in  four-time  at  the  time  of  the  spring  rains.' 
There  are  a  large  number  of  such  paintings,  all  having 
some  reference  to  a  prescribed  tune,  performed  under 
conditions  defined  b^''  some  specified  season.  Many  of 
these  may  be  seen  in  the  Art  Gallery  of  the  Indian  Museum, 
Calcutta  ;  and  the  India  Office,  London,  has  a  fine  collec- 
tion. The  art  seems  to  have  come  originally  from  north- 
west India.  It  is  not  known,  however,  how  it  originated  ; 
or  whether  it  belongs  to  India  or  came  from  Persia.  The 
Indian  tendency  is  to  visualize  abstract  things,  and  so 
it  is  quite  possible  that  it  was  Indian  in  origin.  Principal 
Brown  mentions  that  experiments  have  been  made  at 
Manchester  University  by  Professor  Dalbe  as  to  the  con- 
nection between  music  and  colour.  There  is  a  school  in 
London  where  music  is  taught  in  association  with  colour, 
each  scale  having  its  own  peculiar  colour  scheme.  It  is 
evident  therefore  that  this  connection  is  not  merely  senti- 
mental. Principal  Percy  Brown  in  the  lecture  referred  to 
gives  the  following  description  of  some  of  these  raga 
pictures.  Todl  ragini  is  one  of  the  brides  of  Vasanta 
raga.     The  melody   of   this   raga  is  so   fascinating  that 


1^ 


iNIHIllllllllllllll 


i^  "^' 


Picture  of  Kedara  raga 
From  Johnson  Collection,  India  Office,  London 


RAGA— THE  BASIS  OF  MELODY  69 

every  living  creature  within  hearing  is  attracted  by  it. 
As  the  raga  has  to  be  performed  at  midday,  the  picture 
shows  a  nymph  standing  in  an  open  landscape  in  the 
brilliant  noonday  sun,  clothed  in  a  snov/-white  sari  and 
perfumed  with  the  camphor  of  Kashmir.  In  her  hands 
she  holds  the  vtna,  and  all  the  deer  in  the  neighbouring 
pastures  stand  entranced  as  she  plays.  The  musician,  as 
he  plays,  is  supposed  to  conjure  up  before  his  audience  the 
scene  of  the  picture,  the  charm  of  the  nymph,  the  beauty 
of  her  costume,  the  lan^urous  scent  of  the  blossoms, 
mingled  with  the  faint  odour  of  camphor,  and  the  rustling 
sound  of  the  animals  as  they  advance  enthralled.  One  is 
reminded  of  the  stories  of  Chopin  playing  before  the  boys 
in  such  a  way,  that  they  saw^  all  the  scenes  which  were  in 
his  mind  as  he  played.  The  Sarahga  melody  pictures  the 
glare  of  the  desert,  and  the  heat-waves  risinor  and  falling 
with  the  mirage  of  the  cool  refreshing  stream  in  the 
distance,  and  the  thirsty  black  buck  galloping  towards  the 
oasis,  or  sobbing  out  its  wrath  on  the  burning  sand  as  it 
realizes  the  hopelessness  of  the  search.  Panchamd  is 
shown  by  a  picture  of  a  shower  in  the  hot  weather  and  a 
band  of  musicians  who  express  their  appreciation  of  the 
rain.  The  thunder-clouds  hover  overhead  and  the  lightning 
strikes  through  the  sky.  Peacocks  spread  out  their  tails 
and  call  in  joy,  and  frogs  sit  around  and  croak.  The  god 
Krishna  of  dark  blue  colour  stalks  around.  The  leaf  buds 
of  the  trees  show  new  red  shoots  ;  the  cattle  hold  up  their 
heads  refreshed,  the  herdsman  standing  by.  Waterfowl 
gather  round  the  parched  pool,  and  overhead  a  horde  of 
white  herons  fly  across.'  This  subject  of  '  Visualized 
Music  '  is  quite  an  untrodden  path,  and  it  is  hoped  that 
others  will  follow  where  Professor  Brown  points.  A 
collection  of  all  the  raga  pictures  in  existence  would  be  a 
very  good  beginning.  Mr.  Fox  Strangways  notes  that  the 
Chippewa  Indians  of  North  America  also  draw  pictures  of 
their  tunes,  by  the  help  of  which  they  may  be  sung. 

Keddra  rdga,  the  picture  of  w^hich  faces  this  page, 
is  represented  as  a  group  of  musicians  playing  and  singing 
in  the  moonlight.  The  lotus  buds  are  all  closed.  There 
is  gaiety  and  sadness  combined  in  the  picture.     It  is  the 


70  THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 

dewy  season,  and  it  is  believed  that  while  the  I'aga  means 
gaiety  to-day,  it  means  also  sadness  in  the  future.  The 
ascetic  in  the  group  typifies  the  illusoriness  of  the  present. 
Megh  raga,  in  the  frontispiece,  is  represented  by  a 
group  of  musicians  playing  outside  a  fine  house  in  the 
daytime  during  the  rainy  season.  It  is  a  raga  of  hope 
and  new  life.  The  clouds  hang  overhead,  and  already 
some  drops  of  rain  have  fallen.  The  animals  in  the  fields 
rejoice.  The  background  of  the  picture  is  deep  blue, 
with  a  rich  band  of  brown.  This  raga  is  said  to  be  helpful 
for  patients  suffering  from  tuberculosis. 


CHAPTER  V 

TALA  OR  TIME  MEASURES 

Musical  time  in  India,  more  obviously  than  elsewhere, 
is  a  development  from  the  prosody  and  metres  of  poetry. 
The  insistent  demands  of  language  and  the  idiosyncrasies 
of  highly  characteristic  verse  haunt  the  music,  like  a 
*  presence  which  is  not  to  be  put  by.'  '  The  time-relations 
of  music  are  affected  both  by  the  structure  of  the  language 
and  by  the  method  of  versification  which  ultimately  derives 
from  it,'  says  one  student  of  Indian  music  from  the  west. 
Until  the  nineteenth  century,  there  was  practically  no  prose 
in  India  and  everything  was  learnt  through  the  medium  of 
verse  chanted  to  regular  rules.  Both  in  Sanskrit  and  in 
the  vernaculars  all  syllables  are  classified  according  to  their 
time-lengths,  the  unit  of  time  being  a  matra.  Very  short 
syllables  of  less  than  a  matra  also  occur. 

Great  stress  has  always  been  laidby  Indian  grammarians 
upon  giving  the  *  exact  value  '  to  syllables  in  verse  ;  and  as 
there  is  no  accent  at  all  in  Indian  verse,  the  time-length 
is  all  important.  This  may  account  for  the  great  develop- 
ment of  time-measures  in  Indian  music.  The  different 
time-measures  for  verse  are  most  carefully  laid  down  and 
have  to  be  strictly  adhered  to.  When  grammar,  philosophy, 
history  and  geography  are  learnt  in  verse,  one  gets  the 
sense  of  duration  and  rhythm  highly  developed,  and  it  is 
this  sense  of  duration  that  is  the  central  thing  in  Indian 
time.  Any  one  who  studies  Indian  prosody  can  easily  see 
the  great  difficulty,  to  say  the  least,  of  obtaining  a  pleasur- 
able result  by  combining  Indian  verse  with  western  tunes. 
One  of  the  most  difficult  things  for  the  foreigner  to  get 
away  from  in  an  Indian  vernacular  is  the  stressing  of 
syllables.  The  division  into  words  is  not  at  all  important 
in  Indian  verse,  and  so  music  does  not  take  particular  note 
of  this.  In  India  words  are  more  often  set  to  music, 
rather  than  music  to  words.     It   is   easy  to  see  then  the 


72 


THE  MUSIC  OF  IND 


importance  of  time-measure  in  Indian  music.  The 
westerner  often  finds  these  time-measures  far  more  diffi- 
cult to  master  than  the  melodies,  strange  though  those  often 
are.  The  varieties  of  time-measure  may  be  somewhat 
imperfectly  realized  by  listening  to  the  rythmical  beats  of 
the  drum  in  some  distant  village  on  a  quiet  moonlight 
night,  when  all  other  sounds  are  stilled  and  one  can  get  the 
full  benefit  of  this  one  sound.  Sometimes  one  hears  beats 
arranged  in  bars  like  this  : 


or  agam, 


or  agam, 


or  agam, 


2.1.1. 


1.2. 


2.  1.1. 


1.2.    i    1.  2. 


2.  3.       2.  3.      2.  3. 


2.  1.1.    I  2.  1.  1 

I 

1.  2.  j  1.  2. 

2.  3.  I  2.  3. 


7.1.2.    i    7.1.  2.      7.  1.2.      7.  1.2 


Such  an  exercise  will  not  only  help  one  to  appreciate  the 
rhythmic  soul  of  India  and  the  intricacy  of  Indian  time, 
but  will  also  help  to  pass  the  hours  when  one  is  forced  to 
lie  awake. 

Though  the  nomenclature  varies,  as  might  be  expected, 
the  theory  of  tdla  (as  time-measure  is  called)  in  the 
north  and  south  is  more  uniform  than  that  of  raga.  As 
usual,  a  fanciful  origin  must  be  found  for  tala.  It  is  said 
that  Bharata  discovered  the  thirty-two  kinds  of  tala  in 
the  song  of  the  lark.  Raja  S.  M.  Tagore  says  that  the 
word  tala  refers  to  the  beating  of  time  by  the  clapping  of 
hands.  Sometimes  it  is  also  done  by  means  of  small  hand- 
cymbals,  which  are  called  tala  or  kaitala  or  kartell  (hand- 
cymbals).  It  may  be  that,  as  has  been  suggested,  the 
main  difficulty  for  westerners  in  realizing  and  enjoying 
the  nice  distinctions  of  Indian  rhythm  is  that  they  have 
not  acquired  the  habit  of  resolving  mentally  every  unit  into 
its  constituent  elements,  so  that  they  could  sing  them  at  a 
moment's  notice. 


TALA  OR  TIME  MEASURES  73 

Mr.  Fox    Strangways,    elaborating    the    difference  be- 
tween Indian  and  European  time -measures,  says  : 

'  Indian  rhythm  moves  in  avartas  (bars)  broken  up  into  vibhagas 
(beats),  each  of  which  contains  one  or  more  tdlas.  We  can  equally 
say  of  ours  that  it  moves  in  sections  broken  up  into  bars,  each  of 
which  contains  one  or  more  beats.  In  what  does  the  difference  between 
the  two  systems  consist  ?  It  may  be  answered  that  theirs  is  derived 
from  song,  ours  from  the  dance  or  the  march  :  that  both  are  based 
on  the  numbers  two  and  three,  but  that  they  add  and  we  multiply  in 
order  to  form  combinations  of  these.  But  the  answer  which  goes 
deepest  is  that  their  music  is  in  modes  of  time  (as  we  saw  that  it  was 
in  modes  of  tune),  and  that  ours  changes  that  mode  at  will,  principally 
by  means  of  harmony.  In  order  that  rhythm,  an  articulation  of  the 
infinite  variety  of  sounds,  may  be  upon  some  regular  plan,  the  plan 
must  have  some  recognizable  unit  of  measurement.  India  takes  the 
short  note  and  gives  it,  for  a  particular  rhythm,  a  certain  value  as 
opposed  to  the  long  ;  Europe  takes  the  stressed  note  and  gives  it  in  a 
particular  rhythm  a  certain  frequency,  as  against  the  unstressed,  and 
graduates  its  force.  We  find  the  unity  of  the  rhythm  in  the  recurrent 
bar  (which  is  always  in  double  or  triple  time,  just  as  our  two  melodic 
modes  are  either  major  or  minor),  and  have  to  look  elsewhere  for  the 
variety  ;  they  find  variety  in  the  vibhaga,  whose  constitution  is 
extremely  various,  and  must  look  elsewhere  for  the  large  spaces  of 
time :  they  find  unity  in  the  avarta,  and  we  find  variety  in  the 
sections.'  '  Indian  rhythms  have  their  raison  d'etre  in  the  contrast 
of  long  and  short  duration,  and  to  identify  these  with  much  or  little 
stress  is  to  vulgarize  the  rhythms.  Stress  pulses  and  demands 
regularity  ;  duration  is  complementary  and  revels  in  irregularity.  In 
order  to  get  the  true  sense  of  duration  we  have  to  get  rid  of  stress.'^ 

The  value  which  Indian  music  attaches  to  time  may  be 
judged  from  a  description  of  a  certain  musician  as  an 
excellent  timist,'  and  from  the  name  of  sextuple  Govinda 
Nair  given  to  a  musician  of  Travancore,  on  account  of  his 
great  skill  in  singing  in  sextuple  accelerated  time.  One 
can  hardly  imagine  such  terms  being  used  in  the  west. 

Musical  time  is  based  upon  the  akshara  or  syllable. 
Five    main   note   lengths  are    recognized,    made  up    of  a 


ent  number 

of  aksharas. 

They  are. 

Anudruta 

...  1 

Akshara 

...  I  Matra 

Druta 

...  2 

2 

Laghu 

...  4 

...  1   v. 

Guru 

...  8 

...  2       ,, 

Pluta 

...12 

...  3       ,, 

Kakapada 

...16 

...  4       .. 

^  Music  of  Hindifsthan,  pp.  217.  21i 


74  THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 

One  avarta  or  section  contains  from  2  to  4  bars  or 
vibhagas,  each  of  which  is  constituted  by  a  number  of 
angas  (members),  consisting  of  one  or  more  of  these  time 
units.  The  virama  or  rest  is  used  for  lengthening  the 
druta  and  laghu  by  any  fraction. 

Each  avarta  must  begin  the  time-measure  correctly, 
and  all  the  various  time  elaborations  must  be  worked  out 
in  the  avarta. 

The  SaiigJta-Ratnakara  gives  120  examples  of  different 
time-measures,  formed  by  the  combination  of  these  time- 
units,  the  bar  varying  in  length  from  one  to  nineteen 
notes.  Most  of  these  are  very  unlike  any  of  the  tala 
employed  to-day,  and  so  there  is  nothing  gained  by  dis- 
cussing them.  We  shall  therefore  take  up  the  time  system 
as  it  is  to-day  in  both  northern  and  southern  music. 
Here  again  there  is  a  good  deal  of  difference  between  the 
north  and  the  south.  Many  of  the  times  are  the  same, 
but  the  names  and  the  method  of  classification  are 
different.  As  with  raga,  so  here  also,  the  south  has  a 
very  much  more  systematic  classification  than  the  north. 
According  to  Carnatic  music,  there  are  seven  talas,  each  of 
which  has  five  jatis  or  classes.  The  five  jatis  are  classified 
according  to  the  number  of  aksharas  in  the  principal 
anga.  These  are  said  to  correspond  to  the  five  castes, 
and  their  origin  is  traced  to  the  five  faces  of  Isvara. 
Nataraja  (Siva)  is  supposed  to  have  worked  these  out  in 
his  wonderful  dance,  while  Brahma  played  the  hand- 
cymbals  and  Vishnu  the  mridahga.  This  would  certainly 
have  been  a  band  worth  going  far  to  see  and  hear.  The 
five  jatis  are  named  after  the  number  of  aksharas  in  the 
principal  beat,  viz.  trisra  for  three,  chatusra  for  four, 
khanda  for  five,  misra  for  seven  and  sahkirna  for  nine. 
It  is  interesting  to  see  that,  with  the  exception  of  the  second, 
all  the  other  numbers  are  odd,  the  times  being  mostly 
combinations  of  two  and  an  odd  number.  The  same  thing 
is  found  in  Hindusthani  tala.  The  other  arigas  of  the 
avarta  have  either  one  or  two  aksharas.  The  following 
is  a  table  of  the  talas  as  they  are  arranged  in  the  Carna- 
tic system.  It  will  be  noticed  that  they  are  not  arranged 
in  the  order  of  the  number  in  the  principal  beat,  but  in 


TALA  OF  TIME  MEASURES 


75 


the  usual  Indian  method  of  arranging  them,  and  the 
reason  given  is  that  columns  1  and  2,  when  added  up  make 
column  3,  and  1  and  4  make  column  5.  There  is  probably 
a  further  reason  in  the  fact  that  the  four  akshara  time 
is  the  more  common. 


NAME 

1 
Cha- 
tusra 

2 
Trisra 

3 

Misra 

4 
Khanda 

5 

Sankir- 

na 

1.  Ekatala 

4 

3 

2.3 

3.1.2. 

3.2.2. 

7 

2.7 

7.1.2. 

5 

2.5 

5.1.2. 

5.2.2. 

5.2.5. 

5.2.5.5. 

5.5.2.2. 

9 

2,  Rilpaka  tala 

2.4 

2.9 

3.  Jhampa  tala 

4.1.2 
4.2.2 
4.2.4 

9.1.2 

4.  Triputa  tala 

7.2.2. 

7.2.7. 
7.2.7.7. 
7.7.2.2. 

9.2.2. 

5.  Mathyatala 

3.2.3. 
3.2.3.3. 
3.3.2.2. 

9.2.9 

6.  Dhruva  tala 

4.2.4.4 

9.2.9.9. 

7.  Ata  tala 

4.4.2.2. 

9.9.2.2. 

The  table  shows  that  in  eka  tala  there  is  only  one  afiga 
in  each  vibhaga,  in  rilpaka  there  are  two,  in  jhampa,  triputa 
and  mathya  there  are  three,  and  in  the  last  two  four.  The 
name  eka  tala  by  itself  is  usually  given  to  the  chatusra  jatif. 
and  the  name  rilpaka  tala  without  prefix  also  refers  to  the 
chatusra  jati.  In  jhampa  tala  the  misra  jati  has  the  simple 
name,  and  in  triputa  tala  the  trisra  jati.  In  mathya  and 
dhruva  tala  it  is  the  chatusra  jati  which  takes  the  simple 
name,  but  in  ata  tala  the  khanda  jati  has  it.  These  are  all 
underlined  in  the  table,  so  that  they  may  be  clearly  seen. 
The  name  ddi  tala  is  usually  given  to  the  chatusra  jati  of 
triputa  tala,  as  this  is  one  of  the  commonest  talas  of 
southern  music. 

The  avarta,  as  we  have  seen,  is  made  up  of  a  number 
of  vibhagas.     One  of  these  takes  the  principal  beat  and 


76  THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 

one  of  them  has  no  beat  at  all.  The  former  is 
called  the  sam  in  the  north  and  mirtcty  in  the  south. 
The  beat  before  the  sam  is  called  the  khali,  because  it  is 
the  custom  to  show  it  by  an  empty  wave  of  the  hand. 
These  beats  are  very  important  and  the  musicians  have 
to  keep  them  in  mind,  otherwise  the  time  will  go 
astray. 

In  Hindusthani  music  the  time-measures  are  arranged 
somewhat  differently.  We  have  first  eka  tala  of  the 
chatusra  variety,  and  none  of  the  other  jatis  are  used.  In 
rupaka  tala,  only  the  chatusra  (2.  4)  and  trisra  (2.  3)  jatis 
are  found.  There  is  also  another  kind  of  rupaka  tela 
which  has  three  arigas,  thus  3,  2.  2.  Jhampa  tala  in  the 
north  runs  2.  3.  2.  3. — a  kind  of  diOuhXed.  rupaka.  There  is 
also  another  kind  of  jhampa  which  goes  3.  3.  2.  2.  In 
triputa  tala  we  find  the  trisra  and  chatusra  jatis.  The 
former  goes  3.  2.  2  and  is  called  tevra.  The  latter  is  called 
tltala,  tJntal,  or  tritala — three-beat — and  also  kavali 
in  Bengal.  There  is  also  another  kind  of  tJtala  which  goes 
4.  4.  4.  4  with  the  sam  on  the  third  beat.  Mathya  tala  is  re- 
presented by  its  chatusra  jati,  which  is  called  sulaphakata 
tala  or  surphdkata,  meaning  'zigzag'.  Sometimes  it  runs 
2.  4.  4  instead  of  4.  2.  4.  Dhruva  tala  is  represented  by 
its  chatusra  jati  which  is  called  ata-chautala  and  has  two 
forms  :  4.  2.  4.  4  and  2.  4.  4.  4,  the  sam  being  on  the  first 
matra.  The  word  ata-chautala  means  *  crooked  four-beat 
time.'  This  time  is  used  a  great  deal  in  dhrupads.  Ata 
tala  has  three  jatis  in  the  north,  viz.  chautala  4.  4.  2.  2., 
jhampa  tala  3.  3.  2.  2.,  dhamar  tala  5.  5.  4. 

There  are  also  a  number  of  times  which  correspond  to 
none  of  the  regular  southern  times.  These  include  the 
following  : — 

Farodast.  2.  2.  4.  4  or  2.  2.  2.  3.  4. 

Dhima  tala,  also  called  in  the  north  adi  tala,  4.  4. 
4.  4,  with  the  s«:m  on  the  first  beat. 

Dadra,  also  called  pashto — a  syncopated  tala 
especially  used  with  the  dadra  class  of  song.  It  runs  3.  3 
with  the  sam  on  the  first  note. 

Jhumra.     3.  4.  3.  4.     It  has  the  sam  on  the  first  beat. 
This  is  a  very  popular  time-measure. 


TALA  OF  TIME   MEASURES  77 

Most  of  these  irregular  times  were  introduced  by  the 
Muhammadans. 

There  is  also  an  irregular  southern  time  called 
chapu  talcz.  It  has  two  varieties,  either  trisra  or  mi^ra, 
viz.  1.  2.  or  1.  2.  2.  2.  Chapu  tala  is  used  a  great  deal 
in  folk  songs.  It  is,  as  may  easily  be  seen,  a  syncopated 
time. 

South  Indian  time  experts  reckon  that  there  are  alto- 
gether 108  different  varieties  of  tala  possible  by  means  of 
various  ingenious  combinations.  Most  of  them,  it  need 
hardly  be  said,  are  not  in  use,  though  occasionally  some 
expert  technician  accomplishes  a  tour  de  force  away  from 
the  beaten  track  of  time-measures  ;  as  when  Subramanayyar 
sang  a  piece  in  the  Simhanandana  tala,  which  is 
one  of  the  most  complicated.  The  bar  signature 
of  this  tala  runs  as  follows  :  8.  8.  4.  8.  4.  8.  2.  2.  8. 
8.  4.  8.  4.  8.  8.  4.  4  or  100  aksharas.  This  musician  it 
may  be  surmised  was  a  prodigy  in  South  Indian  time 
experts. 

As  in  western  music,  so  in  India,  it  is  possible  to  include 
in  the  akshara  two,  three,  or  even  more  shorter  notes. 
These  are  called  kalai.  Their  inclusion  does  not  alter 
the  time,  but  renders  the  singing  or  playing  of  the  piece 
more  difficult.  It  means  that  the  longer  notes  may  be 
broken  up  into  shorter  ones,  and  so  on,  till  the  ability  of 
the  performer  is  exhausted.  A  singer  of  Travancore  was 
known  as  Shatkala  Govinda  Marar,  because  he  could 
sing  anything  in  sextuple  time.  In  all  this  manipula- 
tion of  time-measure,  the  main  elements  of  the  time 
must  be  retained  throughout  and  the  raga  must  be 
adhered  to. 

The  clapping  of  the  hands  is  much  used  in  India  to 
indicate  time.  There  are  different  signs  used  for  the 
different  beats,  so  as  to  make  quite  clear  what  kind  of  time 
is  used.  The  first  note  of  a  beat  is  indicated  by  a  clap. 
This  may  be  followed  either  by  the  counting  of  the  other 
aksharas  with  the  fingers  or  by  a  wave.  If  the  beat  is  a 
laghu,  that  is  one  of  more  than  two  aksharas,  then  the  other 
units  are  shown  by  counting  with  the  separate  fingers  on 
the  palm,  of  the  other  hand.     If  the  beat  is  a   druta  of  two 


78  THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 

jjksharas  only,  then  the  extra  unit  is  shown  by   a  wave  of 
the  hand.     For  example, 


Adi  tala  runs 


1     2     . 

3     4/5 

R 

X 

1 

upaka 

'^          X 

2   /3 

tala 
t    f   f 

4  5  6 

X 

means  a  clap. 

6/7      8 


counting  with  fingers,  and      a  wave. 
This  is  one  of  the  easiest  ways   to  learn   Indian   time, 
and  one  can  soon  get  into  the  way  of  singing  to  it. 

There  are  three  different  speeds  in  Indian  time.  They 
are  slow-vilamba  kala,  medium- madhy a  kala,  quick-druta 
kala.  These  will  correspond  roughly  to  Adagio,  Moderato, 
and  Allegro.  The  names  used  in  the  north  for  these  are 
bilampet,  jorii,  and  durt.     Dun  is  used  for  very  quick  time. 

Drumming 
As  we  have  seen  in  the  sketch  of  the  History  of  Indian 
music,  the  drum  is  one  of  the  most  important  of  Indian 
musical  instruments,  and  so  it  demands  special  treatment  in 
accordance  with  ancient  practice.  The  ordinary  Indian 
drummer  earns  far  m.ore  than  the  school  teacher  with  twice 
his  education.  He  also  spends  it  more  quickly.  The 
following  quotation  from  an  English  author  will  help  to 
make  clear  the  place  of  drumming  in  Indian  music. 

The  drum  is  used  not,  as  with  us,  to  assert  the  accent  at  special 
moments,  or  to  reinforce  a  crisis,  but  to  articulate  the  metre  of  the 
singer's  melody,  or  to  add  variety  to  it  by  means  of  a  cross  metre. 
There  are  four  main  elements  in  drumming  ;  the  quality,  the  intensity, 
the  pitch  of  the  sounds,  and  the  time  intervals  between  them.  We 
do  not,  on  the  whole,  use  percussion  much.  When  we  do,  we  value 
it,  perhaps,  chiefly  for  the  graduated  intensity  with  which  it  points 
the  rhythm.  We  look  a  little  askance  at  varieties  of  quality  ;  we 
recognize  the  drums,  the  cymbals,  and  the  triangle  ;  but  we  are  not 
quite  sure  how  far  the  tambourine,  castanets,  and  Berlioz's  flannel- 
headed  drumsticks  are  legitimate  music.  Of  the  pitch  we  only 
demand  that  it  should  not  clash  with  other  sounds.  It  is  in  no  way 
a  vital  constituent  of  the  harmony,  which  is  almost  invariably  complete 
without  it.  The  time  intervals  of  the  drum  notes  reinforce  as  a  whole 
those  of  the  other   instruments  ;  they  seldom   cross  them,  and   only 


TALA  OF  TIME  MEASURES  79 

produce  a  certain  amount  of  confusion  when  they  do,  which  however 
may  be  a  useful  resource  upon  occasion. 

In  Indian  music  the  graduated  intensity  of  the  sound  is  very  little 
regarded,  either  in  singing  or  playing  or  in  drumming,  because  their 
whole  scheme  is  not  accentual  but  quantitative.  It  is  true  that  the 
first  of  the  bar  is  often  louder  than  the  rest,  but  not  always  ;  but  this 
is  not  in  order  that  it  may,  as  with  us,  stand  out  against  other  accents  ; 
but  because  two  quantitative  schemes  are  apt  to  coincide  there,  and 
two  sounds  are  louder  than  one.  The  time  intervals  are  with  them 
all  important,  and  show  great  variety  ;  it  is  seldom  that  more  than  a 
few  bars,  out  of  hundreds,  are  drummed  in  exactly  the  same  way. 
And  the  drumming  is  practically  continuous  ;  it  is  only  occasionally 
silenced  for  special  contrast.  The  pitch  again  is  all  important,  for  it 
is  invariably  the  keynote,  and  frequently  the  drum  is  the  singer's  only 
accompaniment.  Lastly,  a  maximum  of  variety  is  got  into  the 
quahty  ;  and  this  not  mainly  by  the  variety  of  the  instruments.  For 
though  there  are  scores  of  shapes  for  drums,  tambourines,  cymbals, 
triangles  and  so  forth,  they  are  not  usually  assembled  together, 
because  concerted  music  is  the  exception,  not  the  rule.  The  variety 
is  got  out  of  the  drum,  or  the  pair  of  drums  themselves.  They  are 
played  with  the  full  hand  and  the  fingers,  rarely  with  sticks  ;  there 
are  half  a  dozen  strokes  for  the  right  hand  and  three  or  four  for  the 
left.  Of  these  Lady  Wilson's  drummer  said,  '  The  beat  with  the  left 
hand  is  like  the  seam  of  my  coat,  that  must  be  there  ;  the  other  notes 
with  the  right  hand  are  like  the  embroidery  I  may  put  according  to 
my  own  fancy  over  the  seam.'  These  '  notes  '  are  differentiated  not 
by  pitch,  but  by  quality.  They  are  also  articulated  by  great  intricacy 
of  time-interval.  For  neither  of  these  two  things  has  our  music  any 
real  analogues  ;  and  the  Bengalis  do  not  overstate  the  case  in  their 
saying,  '  Yantrapatir  Mridanga,  '  '  the  drum  is  the  lord  of  instru- 
ments.'^ 

The  various  kinds  of  drum  are  described  in  chapter  vii ; 
so  here  we  chall  only  take  up  the  discussion  of  the 
practice  of  drumming  on  the  mridanga  or  the  tabla.  These 
two  are  the  same  in  principle  and  are  the  drums  used 
throughout  India  for  the  accompaniment  of  vocal  music. 

The  mridanga  and  tabla  are  both  played  in  the  same 
way,  the  only  difference  being  that,  in  the  case  of  the  tabla, 
the  two  heads  are  on  two  small  drums  and  not  on  the  same 
drum.  The  right  hand  note  of  the  drum  is  the  keynote — 
the  Shadja — and  the  left  hand  note  a  lower  Pa.  Exact 
tuning  is  very  important,  as  the  slightest  difference  will  be 
evident  and  will  spoil  the  melody,  the  drum  being  the 
principal  accompaniment  for  the  singer. 

1  Music  of  Hindusthan,  pp.  225,  226. 


80  THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 

The  right  hand  plays  the  first  beat  of  each  vibhaga  with 
the  ball  of  the  finger  tips.  The  base  of  the  hand  is  pressed  on 
the  drumhead,  and  the  rest  of  the  hand  is  curved  so  that  the 
finger  tips  strike  easily.  The  left  hand  shows  the  end  of  the 
bar  and  strikes,  sometimes  with  the  whole  palm,  and  some- 
times with  the  lower  palm  and  fingers.  Sometimes  it  moves 
across  the  parchment,  giving  a  strange  sound  '  like  a  galosh 
leaving  the  mud,'  curious  but  by  no  means  unattractive. 
The  drummer  constantly  varies  the  method  of  beating  the 
aksharas  in  the  bar.  The  total  number  must  be  constant 
and  the  left-hand  strike  must  always  come  in  at  the  exact 
moment ;  but  outside  these  the  drummer  has  the  possibility 
of  infinite  variety,  and  expert  drummers  use  it  to  the 
utmost.  The  singer  depends  upon  the  drummer  to  keep 
him  to  the  time.  He  may  go  off  into  all  kinds  of  extempore 
pieces  and  flourishes,  leaving,  as  it  seems,  for  the  moment 
all  semblance  of  time,  but  the  thought  is  always  there  and 
again  he  will  come  back  to  it.     Mrs.  Mann  says, 

'  The  Indian  drummer  is  a  great  artist.  He  will  play  a  rhythm 
concerto  all  alone  and  play  us  into  an  ecstacy  with  it.' 

'  The  drummer  will  play  it  in  bars  of  10,  13,  16,  or  20  beats,  with 
divisions  within  each  bar  flung  out  with  a  marvellous  hypnotizing 
swing.  Suggestions  of  such  rhythm  beaten  out  by  a  ragged  urchin 
on  the  end  of  an  empty  kerosene  oil-can  first  aroused  me  to  the 
beauty  and  power  of  Indian  music' 

The  Indian  drummer  can  obtain  the  most  fascinating 
rhythm  from  a  mud  pot,  and  some  of  them  are  great 
experts  at  this  pot-drumming. 

The  drummer  is  most  particular  about  the  ending  of  the 
drumming.  This  must  always  be  on  the  Sam.  The 
singer  also  ends  here,  and  after  going  off  into  a  kind  of 
recitative,  he  will  watch  for  the  drummer  and  come  back 
so  as  to  end  on  the  Sam.  In  the  south,  the  treatment  is 
somewhat  different,  and  the  Mirtay  is  often  on  the  second 
beat.  The  principal  notes  of  the  raga,  that  is  the  Vadi  and 
Sarhvadi  notes,  are  usually  placed  on  the  Sam  beat.  This 
also  indicates  to  the  audience  where  they  should  applaud. 
The  Khali  is  the  wave-of-the-hand-beat  and  helps  the 
singer  to  determine  the  Sam.  It  shows  him  when  the  Sam 
is  coming,  as  the  drummer  is  silent    on  this  beat.     The 


TALA  OR  TIME  MEASURES  81 

Khali  always  comes  just  before  the  Sam,  so  that,  however 
lost  the  singer  may  be  in  his  improvisation,  the  Khali  shows 
him  the  way  back  to  the  Sam. 

Drummers  have  a  curious  system  of  mnemonics,  which 
tell  them  how  the  drum  accompaniment  should  be  beaten 
out.  These  are  composed  of  syllables,  each  of  which 
indicates  one  particular  kind  of  beat  and  also  the  nature  of 
the  tala  as  a  whole.  The  actual  syllables  used  vary  in 
different  parts  of  India  but  the  following  are  some  of 
them  : — 

Northern 

Tritdla  4.4.4.4. 

1  I   2  U 

Ta  Dhin  Dhin  ta    |  Ta  Dhin  Dhin  tal    Ta  Tin  Tin  ta 

3 
Ta  Dhin  Dhin  ta 


Rupaka  3.2.2. 


+ 


2  3 


Dhin  Dha  Trik  Dhin  Dhin  Dha  Trik 


Jhampa  2.3.2.3. 

+  I     2  I       0  I       3 

Dhin  na  Dhin  Dhin  na  Tin  na  Dhin  dhin  na 


Chautdla  4.4.2.2. 


+ 


lO  |2  lO  3 


Dha  dha     |  Dhin  ta    |  Kit  Dha     |  Dhin  ta  |  Kit  tak   |gadigina     | 
+  indicates  the  sam  and  0  the  khdli  beat. 

In  these  mnemonics,  or  bols,  as  they  are  called,  the 
following  are  to  be  played  by  the  right  hand  :  Dhin,  Na, 
Ta,  Trik,  Tin,  it,  ki.  The  following  by  the  left  hand: 
Dha,  Ta.  The  following  are  played  by  both  hands  together  : 
Dha,  Dhin. 
6 


82  THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 

The  southern  arrangement  is  somewhat  different  and 
runs  thus : 

AdiWa  4.2.2. 

10         2         3      1 

(1)  Ta     ti     Nam  Tom    | 

Ta — by  the  left  hand  with  four  fingers. 

ti — by  the  right  hand  with  four  fingers  on  the  middle  of  drum. 

Nam — by  the  left  with  all  fingers. 

Tom — by  both  hands  with  all  fingers  at  once. 

4.  0  2 

(2)  Tadimi    Takitta    Tam  i.e.  2-2.4 

Ta — by  right  hand  first  finger  on  the  border  of  drum. 

di — by  the  left  middle  finger. 

mi — by  the  right  middle  finger  on  the  middle  of  drum. 

ki — as  mi. 

tta — as  ta. 

Tam — by  both  hands  simultaneously. 

+  02  3 

(3)  Takitta    tikitta      Tonkitta      Namkitta 

Ta — by  the  left  with  all  fingers  and  right  with  forefinger  on 

the  border, 
ki — by  right  with  middle  finger, 
tta — by  right  with  forefinger  on  border, 
ti — by  left  with  four  fingers. 
Ton— by  both  hands  with  all  fingers. 
Nam — as  Ton. 

Rupaka  2.4.2.4. 

0  lie  ^ 

Talangu     T5m     |     Talangu      Tay 
Ta— by  left  hand. 

Ian — by  right  with  second  finger  on  border, 
gu — by  middle  finger. 
Tom — by  both  hands  with  all  fingers. 
Tay — as  Tom. 

Quite  a  number  of  these  curious  and  interesting  mne- 
monics will  be  found  in  Mr.  Fox  Strangways'  book,  The 
Music  of  Hindosthan,  pp.  228,  245. 


CHAPTER  VI 

MUSICAL  COMPOSITIONS 

We  have  been  discussing  the  principles  of  Indian 
music  and  the  elements  which  go  to  make  up  musical 
compositions.  We  have  now  to  see  how  these  elements 
are  combined  into  melodies.  We  have  already  seen,  in  the 
chapters  on  Rctga  and  Tctla,  some  of  the  things  which  give 
these  melodies  a  distinctive  character,  and  now  we  have  to 
go  into  this  more  carefully.  We  shall  notice  that  in  regard 
to  this  matter  also  there  is  a  very  considerable  difference 
between  the  north  and  the  south.  The  general  principles 
are  the  same,  but  all  the  forms  and  the  names  vary. 

In  the  first  place,  we  note  that  in  Indian  music 
generally, 

'  the  primal  unity  of  the  Indian  system  is,  as  in  the  western  system, 
in  the  tonic  note  or  drone  ;  and  the  sense  of  contrast  is  supplied  pri- 
marily by  the  amsa,  and  the  notes  which  are  related  to  this  as 
samvddl,  vivddl,  and  anuvadl.  This  very  contrast  of  the  amsa  and 
the  tonic,  giving  as  it  does  the  peculiar  character  to  thatm^^,  imparts 
unity  to  the  melody,  which  thus  proceeds  not  from  necessity  but  from 
freedom.'  i 

Gamaka  or  Grace 

This  freedom  is  further  emphasized  by  Grace,  which  in 
Indian  music  is  essential,  not  accidental.  Indian  music, 
being  without  harmony,  has  to  give  a  far  bigger  place  to 
grace  than  does  European  music.  It  is  the  rule,  rather  than 
the  exception,  for  the  passage  from  one  note  to  another  to 
be  made  indirectly ;  and  the  note  with  its  grace  makes  one 
musical  utterance. 

Grace  in  Indian  music  is  called  gamaka.  There  are 
said  to  be  altogether  nineteen  different  varieties  of  gamaka 
in  existence,  but  some  of  these  are  hardly  ever  used,  and 
the  more  common  gamaka  are  about  ten  in  number. 

These  strange  and  fascinating  graces  or  gamaka  have 
a  great  deal  to  do  with  the  haunting  beauty  of  Indian  music. 

^Musio  of  Hindosthcm,  pp.  280,  281. 


84  THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 

We  hear  the  vina  or  sitar  player  beginning  with  a  shake, 
called  in  different  parts  of  India,  Orikai,  Varek,  Mlnd^ 
or  Sphuritam,  and  as  we  listen  we  find  that  it  is  not  the 
ordinary  shake  of  western  music.  It  may  begin  in  that 
way,  but  it  becomes  a  wonderful  shake  produced  by  rapidly 
pulling  the  string  between  the  frets,  giving  two  notes 
whose  interval  may  be  as  much  as  four  semitones.  We 
hear  this  '  deflect ',  as  it  has  been  called,  again  and  again  as 
the  music  proceeds,  and  it  comes,  with  a  sense  of  delightful 
contrast,  into  a  melody  which  threatens  to  become  monoto- 
nous. Then  we  hear  the  player  trying  to  get  the  high 
notes  and,  not  content  with  striking  the  note,  he  slides  up 
the  string  to  it  or  to  the  note  above  it,  just  giving  us  the 
remembrance  of  all  the  notes  that  lie  between,  so  slightly 
as  not  to  detract  from  the  prominence  of  the  note  wanted, 
just  as  the  breeze  from  some  rose  garden  comes  touched 
with  the  scent  of  the  roses.  We  hear  this  effect  fre- 
quently as  the  player  often  uses  this  gamaka  of  the  Jaru 
{GhasU,  As,  Sukth)  as  it  is  known.  Then,  as  the  melody 
begins,  we  shall  hear  the  regular  trill  or  Kainpitam{Kampa) , 
on  a  note  here  and  there,  and  then  prolonged  on  some 
important  note,  perhaps  the  arh^a  of  the  raga.  Right  from 
the  beginning  we  shall  have  found  that  some  notes  are 
never  sounded  without  an  appogiatura  or  leaning  note,  the 
Humpitanij  as  the  Indians  call  it.  A  note  that  never 
comes  in  the  melody  itself  will  suddenly  appear  as  an 
appogiatura  note,  or  we  shall  hear  again  and  again  that 
slight  sharpening  and  flattening  of  the  notes  which  helps 
to  fill  up  the  blank  caused  by  the  loss  of  harmony.  We 
note  that  the  Humpitam  is  part  of  the  music,  and  belongs 
to  the  note,  and  we  learn  to  expect  it  every  time  that  note 
comes.  Then  we  hear  something  that  is  not  a  mere  trill, 
nor  yet  a  shake.  Rapidly,  one  after  the  other,  rising  to  a 
crescendo,  we  hear  two  notes  being  played,  so  quickly  that 
they  almost  seem  to  mingle  with  one  another,  and  yet  the 
interval  that  separates  them  is  perhaps  less  than  a  semitone 
or  perhaps  more.  As  it  goes  on,  it  seems  almost  to  reach  a 
frenzy,  this  zamzamma  as  it  is  called,  and  then  out  of  it  will 
come  a  beautiful  phrase  of  the  melody.  As  the  melody 
develops,  instead  of  leaping  directly  to  a  note  a  few  semi- 


MUSICAL  COMPOSITIONS  85 

tones  above,  the  musician  will  get  there  by  a  curious  swing, 

which  recurs  again  and  again,  something  like  Sa    Ri  Sa  Pa, 

or  two  notes  recurring  in  a  swing,  as  Sa    Ga  Sa  Ga,  the  third 
note  being  held  just  a  little  longer  than    the  others.     Just 
as  the   melody   seems    about    to   become   monojonous   by 
repetition,  the  whole   thing  is  changed  by  this  Andolitam, 
as  it  is  called.     Then  comes  another   contrast.     This  time 
the  melody  is  struck  clear  by  staccato  notes,  called  fittingly 
Pat  or  Thoiik.    Then  this  also  is  changed,  and  the  fingers 
strike  flat  on  the  sitar  or  vina  string,  and  give  us  the  Paran 
notes  almost  like  the  rhythmical  sound  of  the  drum  beats  on 
the  mridanga.     Then,  suddenly,  the  singer  or  player  will 
go  right  up  the  scale,  showing  all  the  notes,  and  letting  us 
see    through    what    strange    intervals  it   runs,   unknown 
country  much  of  it  to  western  music.     This  is  the  Arohana 
or   ascent ;    and   the   descent    is  called    the    Avarohanat 
both   of  these  being   classed   amongst   the   gamaka.     As 
these  are  sung,  we  shall  notice  again  the   graced  notes, 
these   being  called  in  the  north   Murchhana^  though  that 
name  is  now  given  in   the   south   to   the  Arohana   and 
Avarohana  of  the  ra,qa.     Raja  S.  M.  Tagore  says  of  these 
grace  notes,   '  The  Murchhan^  is  the  extending  of  a  note 
to  another  in  the  ascending  as  well  as  the  descending  scale, 
without  any    intermediate  break  in   the  disposition  of  the 
srutis    in    the    interval ',     and  he    calls  it,    '  the  essential 
ornament  of   raga^  without   which   it  is  as  flowers  without 
fragrance.'     Again  and  again  throughout    the    piece    we 
hear  these  different  graces,  all  coming  just  where  they  can 
produce  the  greatest  effect,   and  not  only  depriving  us  of 
the  chance  of  calling  the  music  monotonous,  but  producing 
contrasting   effects   which   add   a    strange   beauty   to   it. 
Sometimes   the    slide   will   pass    over  some   of    the  inter- 
mediate notes,  and  then  they  will  tell  us  it  is  a  Llnam  and 
not   a  Jam.      Every   grace  belongs  to  the    melody,    and 
fits  into   its  place  without  any  sense  of  being  unwanted  or 
useless.     As  the  melody  approaches  its  climax,  we  hear 
the  Jhctra  and  the   Boljhctra,  the   melody   being   played 
slowly  and  clearly  as  a  groundwork,  and  upon  it  endless 
arpeggio  variations  in  accelerated  time,  occurring  rapidly 


86  THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 

after  every  note,  all  perfectly  in  tune  and  fitting  into  the 
raga  framework,  and  bringing  out  the  prominent  notes  and 
phrases,  like  an  allegro  variation  of  one  of  Beethoven's 
Sonatas,  with  the  underlying  melody  making  itself  heard 
all  the  time.  Then  by  Jam  and  Linam,  by  Avarohana 
and  Arohana,  the  melody  comes  to  a  close  with  the  beat 
of  the  Sam  on  the  drum. 

Among  musical  compositions  the  simplest  is  the  Alap 
or  Alaphana^  as  the  northern  and  southern  names  respec- 
tively go.  In  this  the  notes  of  the  raga  are  sung  in  a 
loose  kind  of  rhythm,  regulated  simply  by  convenience.  It  is 
extemporized,  and  is  meant  to  notify  to  the  audience  the 
nature  of  the  raga  which  the  melody  will  develop,  and 
also  to  help  the  singer  or  player  himself  to  get  into  its 
swing.  This  naturally  brings  out  the  vadi  and  sarhvadi 
notes  and  also  the  particular  phrases  and_gamakas  which 
belong  to  ihdii _raga.  Sometimes  these  Alaps  are  called 
Murchhana.  Alap  singing  is  one  of  the  tests  of  the 
ability  of  a  singer.  It  will  often  occupy  about  an  hour, 
while  the  actual  song  or  melody  will  only  last  for  a  quarter 
of  an  hour.  '  Without  the  Alap^  the  listener  would  spend 
his  time  for  some  part  of  the  song  in  ignorance  of  its  tonal 
centres,  and  the  melody  would  be  for  him  an  aimless 
running  up  and  down  hill ;  while  the  performer,  without 
this  little  preliminary  practice,  would  very  likely  play  a 
note  or  two  which  was  out  of  the  raga  and  so  upset  the 
unity  altogether.' 

In  Hindusthani  music  the  Alap  is  divided  into  three 
parts.  There  is  first  the  Rag  Alap  which  shows  the 
principal  constituents  of  the  raga,  that  is  its  graha,  nyasa, 
vadi,  sarhvadi,  etc.,  the  important  notes  and  the  notes  to 
be  lightly  touched  as  well  as  the  gamaka.  Then,  there  is 
the  Rupaka  Alap  which  shows  the  division  of  the  piece 
into  Astai,  Antara,  Sahchari  and  Abhog,  but  without 
words  and  _  without  tala.  Then  thirdly,  comes  the 
Akshiptika  Alap,  requiring  both  words  and  tala,  but  still 
allowing  a  very  great  deal  of  freedom  to  the  singer. 
According  to  the  Rafnakara,  one  must  begin  by  taking 
the  vadi  and  using  only  three  notes  above  that  and  the 
notes  of  the  mandra  sthayi   below.     Afterwards  one  can 


MUSICAL  COMPOSITIONS  87 

go  into  the  second  tetrachord  and  develop  that.  If  the 
vadi  is  in  the  second  tetrachord,  then  he  should  begin  by 
taking_the  sarhvadi  or  else  the  vadi  in  the  mandra  sthayi. 
The  Alaphana  is  not  developed  in  quite  the  same  way  in 
the  south  as  it  is  in  the  north.  It  does  not  form  such  an 
important  part  of  the  performance,  nor  does  it  divide  itself 
into  these  parts.  It  is  simply  an  introduction.  The 
different  varna  or  sahgatis  Jake  the  place  of  this  varie- 
gated Alap.  Following  the  Alaphana  comes  the  song  which 
may  take  very  many  forms.  Then  again,  at  the  end,  the 
music  may  go  off  into  the  timeless  Alaphana  until  it 
closes  according  to  the  will  of  the  singer. 

Throughout  the  melody  the  peculiarities  of  the  rctga 
must  appear,  and  unrecognized  variations  are  not  allowed, 
except  in  those  cases  where  the  Alap  has  already  given 
notice  of  them.  The  melody  is  broken  up  into  avartas, 
or  time  sections,  the  number  of  which  is  usually  even  ;  and 
the  first  avarta  of  each  movement  begins  in  a  similar 
fashion. 

Musical  pieces  in  the  time  of  the  Ratnakara  (1210-1247) 
were  called  Prabandhas,  which  name  included  all  songs. 
The  Gita  Govinda  is  written  to  Prabandhas,  the  tunes  of 
which  have  now  been  entirely  lost. 

There  are  various  kinds  of  melodies  in  use  both  in  the 
north  and  the  south.  The  two  most  important  are  known 
respectively  as  Kirtana  and  Kriti  in  the  south,  and 
Dhrupad  and  Khyal  in  the  north.  Captain  Willard  writes 
of  the  peculiarities  of  these  melodies  as  follows  : 

'  The  melodies  are  short,  lengthened  by  repetitions  and  variations. 
They  all  partake  of  the  nature  of  what  by  us  is  called  a  Rondo,  the 
piece  being  invariably  concluded  with  the  first  strain,  and  sometimes 
with  the  first  bar,  or  at  least  with  the  first  note  of  the  bar.  A  bar,  or 
a  measure,  or  a  certain  number  of  measures  are  frequently  repeated 
with  slight  variations  almost  ad  libitum.  There  is  as  much  liberty 
allowed  with  re'^pect  to  pauses,  which  may  be  lengthened  at  pleasure, 
provided  the  time  is  not  disturbed.' 

These  melodies  consist  of  a  number  of  parts.  In  the 
south  these  are  called  Pallavi,  Anupallavi  and  Charanam  ; 
and  in  the  north,  Astal,  Antara,  Sailchari  and  Abhog. 
The  Pallavi  or  the  AstaT  contains  the  main  subject  of 
the  melody  focussed  on  the  ariisa.     The  Anupallavi  or 


88  THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 

the  Antara  contains  the  second  subject  focussed  on  the 
samvadi,  and  usually  includes  notes  of  the  higher  tetrachord. 
The  Charanam  or  Sanchari  contains  phrases  from  both 
the  former,  with  or  without  modifications.  The  melody 
finally  returns  to  the  Pallavi  or  the  Astctl^  and  closes  on  it 
or  on  its  first  phrase.  Sometimes  the  Charanam  in  South 
Indian  music  is  formed  from  the  Pallavi  and  Anupallavi 
together.  The  Pallavi  is  sometimes  translated  *  chorus  ', 
and  it  does  play  the  part  of  a  chorus  to  the  Ktrtana. 
Sometimes  the  Anupallavi  is  omitted,  and  the  song  only 
contains  Pallavi  and  Charanam-  In  northern  music 
we  have  also  what  is  called  the  Abhog,  which  is  really  a 
Coda,  and  often  includes  the  name  of  the  composer. 
Ktrtanas  are  sometimes  called  Varna.  The  difference 
between  Ktrtana  and  Kriti  is  that  the  parts  of  the  latter 
are  not  so  distinct  from  one  another  as  are  the  parts  of  the 
former.  Not  only  so,  but  in  Kritis  any  number  of  variations 
or  Sarigatis  are  allowed.  Sometimes  there  will  be  as 
many  as  twelve  different  varieties  of  the  same  Pallavi. 

Tyagaraja  greatly  improved  the  Kriti.  He  was  very 
fond  of  this  style  and  most  of  his  songs  are  Kritis.  In 
some  of  them  he  is  said  to  have  exhausted  every  possible 
manner  of  combining  the  different  notes  of  the  raga. 
These  alafikara  (ornaments)  usually  occur  either  at  the 
beginning  or  at  the  end  of  an  avarta. 

The  same  is  true  to  a  certain  extent  of  the  Dhrupad  and 
the  Khyal.  The  former  are  almost  entirely  without  orna- 
ment, while  the  latter  are  allowed  to  use  all  kinds,  and 
freely  make  use  of  them.  The  Dhrupad  is  a  solemn  reli- 
gious song,  while  the  Khyal  is  a  light  melodic  air. 

The  Dhrupad  is  usually  in  slow  time  and  in  selected 
talas  such  as  Aditala,  Rupaka  tala,  Chautala,  and  Dhlma 
tala.  Dhrupad  singing  was  introduced  by  Rajah  Man 
Singh  of  Gwalior  (c.  1470).  It  is  very  exacting,  demand- 
ing a  voice  of  the  large  compass  of  about  three  octaves. 
*  The  man  who  has  the  strength  of  five  bufialoes,  let  that 
man  sing  Dhrupad,'  runs  an  old  saying.  Tan  Sen  was  a 
great  Dhrupad  singer,  and  Rampur  is  the  home  to-day  of 
some  of  his  celebrated  descendants,  who  are  experts  at  this 
style  of  singing. 


A  kalakshepa  party 


Group  of  parayas  with  horns  and  drums 


MUSICAL  COMPOSITIONS  89 

The  Sddras  is  a  kind  of  fast  Dhrupad,  sung  in  Jhampa 
tala. 

The  Khyal  was  introduced  later  than  the  Dhrupad,  in 
order  to  find  a  place  for  the  graces  which  are  not  allowed  in 
the  former.  It  was  introduced  by  Amir  Khusru  and  Sultan 
Husain,  and  developed  by  Sadaranga  in  the  time  of  Sultan- 
Alau-d-din  (1296—1316).  It  is  very  similar  to  the  Kriti  of 
the  south.  It  is  usually  a  love  song  and  is  supposed  to  be 
sung  by  a  woman.  Khyal  singers  and  Dhrupad  singers 
are  usually  different.  The  latter  consider  the  Khyal 
style  to  be  too  unclassical  for  them  to  use  at  all. 
The  Khyal  singer  belongs  to  the  class  called  Kavval 
singers. 

The  Hori  are  songs  descriptive  of  the  Holi  festival  in 
December-January,  and  are  sung  by  Dhrupad  singers. 
They  also  have  AstaJ,  Antara,  Sanchari  and  Abhog.  They 
are  usually  sung  in  Dhamar  tala  (5-5-4),  but  Khyal  singers 
also  sing  them  in  DipachandT  tala  (3-4-3-4). 

The  Thumri  is  a  love  song  in  Hindusthani  music.  The 
music  is  lively  and  is  well  adapted  to  pantomine  or  danc- 
ing. It  mixes  up  different  ragas  and  so  is  somewhat 
looked  down  upon  by  high  class  musicians,  and  it  also 
makes  use  of  common  ragas  called  Dhuns.  Some  of  these 
tunes  are  very  fascinating ;  indeed  it  was  one  of  these 
simple  little  melodies  that  kept  a  whole  company  of  musical 
experts  enraptured  at  Delhi  during  one  of  the  sessions  of 
the  All-India  Music  Conference. 

The  Tappci  is  the  typical  Muhammadan  song.  It  has 
been  taken  up  in  the  south  also,  where  it  is  called  Hindus- 
thani Tappa.  It  gives  full  opportunity  for  the  exhibition  of 
all  the  graces  so  essential  to  Indian  music.  The  melody  is  so 
rich  in  these  as  almost  to  be  overloaded  with  them.  All 
these  songs  have  a  very  marked  rhythm  and  are  usually  in 
madhya  kala.  Tappa  songs  consist  as  a  rule  of  two 
movements  only,  Astal  and  Antara.  It  is  said  to  be  similar 
to  an  ancient  stvle  of  singing  mentioned  in  the  Ratnakara 
and  called  Visaragiti.  The  Tappa  style  of  singing  was 
first  introduced  by  the  famous  singer,  Shouri  of  Lucknow 
(c.  1810).  It  is  usually  set  to  a  love  song,  and  is  very  com- 
mon in  Hindi  and  Punjabi. 


90  THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 

The  Ghazal  and  the  Dadra  are  two  other  Hindusthani 
melodies.  They  consist  as  a  rule  of  Antara  only,  sung  alike 
to  a  simple  melody  in  syncopated  time,  which  is  known  as 
Pashto  (see  page  76).  The  Ghazals  are  usually  love 
lyrics.  The  Christian  Church  has  made  a  large  use  of 
Hindusthani  Ghazals  in  its  hymnology. 

The  Marsiya  are  songs  describing  the  battle  in  which 
the  grandsons  of  the  Prophet  were  killed.  They  are  sung 
in  the  mornings  during  the  days  of  the  Moharram.  festival. 
The  ragas  used  in  them  are  mixed,  and  the  words  are 
chanted  in  a  kind  of  recitative. 

Sargam  or  Svarctvarta  or  Svarasahitya  or  Svarama- 
lika  are  sol-fa  passages  or  complete  songs  in  sol-fa,  in  which 
the  Indian  sol-fa  initials  take  the  place  of  words.  The 
word  Sargam  comes  from  the  first  four  sol-fa  initials 
combined,  viz.  Sa  Ri  Ga  Ma,  omitting  the  vowels  of 
Ri  Ma.  This  solmization  is  very  common  throughout 
India  in  both  northern  and  southern  music,  and  is  consi- 
dered quite  a  thing  to  be  cultivated  even  by  the  best 
musicians.  It  is  also  a  common  thing  to  hear  children,  who 
know  nothing  about  music,  singing  these  syllables  to 
different  notes  of  the  scale.  Even  the  greatest  musicians 
make  use  of  this  device  in  their  songs.  It  is  found 
frequently  in  Tyagaraja. 

The  Tarana  or  Tillana  is  a  similar  melody  making  use 
of  drum  or  tala  syllables  instead  of  the  sol-fa  syllables. 
They  use  such  syllables  as  taka  taka  tadingina  torn, 
tillalai  lai  lo,  tanana  nanana,  etc.  The  Tillala  song,  as  it  is 
called,  is  very  often  heard  from  the  bullock-cart  driver, 
as  he  slowly  wends  his  way  along  the  dusty  road. 
Sometimes  these  drum  or  tala  mnemonics  occur  just  as  a  kind 
of  chorus.  These  songs  are  exceedingly  popular  and  may 
be  compared  with  the  song  Tararaboomdeay  and  its  like. 

There  is  also  a  kind  of  song  called  Trivata,  which  con- 
sists of  nonsense  words  extemporized  by  the  singer.  It  is 
a  song  beloved  of  boatmen  and  dhooly  bearers,  as  they 
take  the  sahib  to  his  destination.  Every  alternate  line  is 
some  improvisation  telling  of  the  sahib's  supposed  genero- 
sity, followed  by  a  line  of  meaningless  jingle.  Or  the  whole 
thing  may  be  a  meaningless  collection  of  mere  words. 


MUSICAL  COMPOSITIONS  91 

The  Chaturaiiga  (four  sections)  is  a  song  consisting  of 
Khyal,  Tarana,  Sargam  and  Trivata. 

The  Rcfganialikd  or  Ragmdla  consists  of  a  series  of 
rcigas  all  linked  together  into  one  composition.  Only  a  few 
phrases  from  each  raga  will  be  given.  The  whole  must 
not  simply  be  a  string  of  melodies,  but  must  have  a  unity» 
The  word  means  '  a  garland  of  ragas  '  and  aptly  describes 
the  composition.  One  southern  example  of  this  form  runs 
as  follows.  First  of  all,  in  six  different  verses  come  melo- 
dies in  the  ragas  Sri,  Arabht,  Gaurl,  Nat  a,  Cauda,  Mohanaj 
one  for  each  verse.  Then  follows  one  verse  of  six  lines 
which  combines  them  all,  one  in  each  line.  After  this 
comes  another  eight  ragas  in  eight  separate  verses,  and 
then  another  verse  of  eight  lines,  which  takes  them  up  in 
the  inverse  order  in  the  different  lines. 

The  Bhajana  is  a  favourite  form  of  religious  musical 
recital,  in  which  a  choir  sings  after  a  leader,  accompanied 
by  an  orchestra.  The  subject  of  a  Bhajana  may  be  a 
story  from  the  Ramayana  or  the  Mahabharata,  or  it  may 
consist  of  songs  taken  at  random  from  the  devotional 
poets. 

The  Harikatha  or  Kalakshepa  is  somewhat  similar 
to  this,  except  that  often  there  is  no  choir  at  all,  and  the 
singer  is  just  accompanied  by  a  small  orchestra,  while  he 
expounds  his  subject  in  song.  This  is  the  favourite  method 
of  religious  exposition  in  India,  and  has  been  very  largely 
adopted  by  Christian  evangelists  in  South  India  during 
recent  years. 

In  Bengal  the  Kirtan  is  somewhat  similar  to  this,  with 
peculiarities  all  its  own.  The  Kirtan  in  Bengal  is  a  kind 
of  dramatic  sonata,  which  was  first  introduced  at  the  time 
of  Chaitanya  in  connection  with  the  Bhakti  revival.  The 
theme  develops  from  phase  to  phase  and  from  emotion  to 
emotion,  and  is  generally  based  on  a  distinct  part  of  the 
Krishna  legend.  It  gives  plenty  of  scope  for  originality  and 
improvisation.  The  raga  also  changes  with  the  emotion,  and 
both  music  and  melody  are  fluid  and  not  rigidly  bound  to 
definite  modes.  There  is  usually  a  choir  to  help  the  leader, 
and  a  small  orchestra.  In  the  Maratha  country,  the  name 
Kirtan    is    usually    given    to    a    Bhajana    performance. 


92  THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 

Abhahgas  and  Ovis  are  songs  peculiar  to  Marathi.  The 
former  are  simple  religious  songs  in  any  raga,  and  were 
cultivated  by  Tukaram  and  the  other  bhakti  leaders  of  the 
Maratha  land.  N.  V.  Tilak,  a  Christian  poet,  often  called 
the  poet-laureate  of  western  India,  has  composed  many  of 
these  on  patriotic  and  Christian  subjects,  which  are  very 
popular  both  among  Christians  and  others.  The  Ovis  is  a 
style  of  song  used  for  long  epics. 

Povada  are  Maratha,  and  Karkhas  Rajput  war-songs. 
These  fighting  races  of  Western  and  Central  India  have 
made  much  of  this  war  music.  They  are  about  the  only 
peoples   in  India  who  have  any  distinctive  war-songs. 

Javadis  are  songs  sung  by  Kanarese  singers  and  consist 
only  of  Charanam. 

In  addition  to  all  the  regular  musical  forms  mentioned 
above,  there  are  also  a  number  of  folk  songs  set  in  other 
modes  which  have  come  down  from  time  immemorial,  most 
of  them  having  a  very  fascinating  lilt  and  rhythm.  In 
Bengal  these  are  called  Baul  songs.  In  South  India  they 
are  known  as  Sindhn  songs,  such  as  Kavadi  Siiidhtc,  '  the 
songs  of  the  pilgrims  carrying  their  little  decorated  yokes  ' 
to  the  great  temples  ;  Nondi  Sindhu,  the  halting  Sindhu 
with  its  hopping-like  rhythm ;  Tenmahgu,  the  songs  of 
the  harvesters  and  the  cartmen.  Many  of  these  are  in 
some  kind  of  syncopated  time,  which  seems  to  come  so 
natural  to  the  Indian  villager. 

The  Natakas  (dramas)  of  India  provide  a  feast  for  the 
music-lover.  These  are  usually  operatic  throughout,  and 
the  managers  make  it  their  study  to  get  hold  of  the  best  airs 
that  exist.  One  can  hear  Indian  music  in  some  of  its  best 
phases  in  these  dramas.  The  music  of  course  is  mostly 
popular  and  does  not  reach  the  high  classical  standard 
of  the  great  singers,  but  since  that  is  so  often  associated 
with  a  rigid  adherence  to  certain  forms  and  technicalities, 
difficult  of  appreciation  by  the  common  man  and  by  the 
foreigner,  it  is  possible  to  find  in  this  dramatic  music  a 
charm  and  a  sweetness  unaffected  by  technicalities,  hard  for 
the  uninitiated  to  appreciate.  Among  the  most  popular  of 
these  song-dramas  are  the  stories  of  King  Harischandra, 
King  Nala,  Savitri,  the  various  episodes  in  the  life  of  Rama 


MUSICAL  COMPOSITIONS  95 

and  Sita,  and  stories  of  the  saints  of  the  bhakti  revival. 
The  large  towns  have  many  dramatic  companies  which 
give  regular  performances,  and  strolling  troupes  of  varying 
ability  wander  through  the  country  and  perform  in  the 
villages  from  tune  to  time,  so  that  every  villager  in  India 
knows  these  dramas  almost  as  well  or  even  better  than  the 
townsman.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  it  is  a  custom  in  many 
villages  for  the  people  themselves  to  get  up  their  own 
dramas,  in  which  certain  classes,  usually  from  the  lower 
castes,  provide  the  actors  by  ancient  right  and  custom.  It 
is  therefore  quite  common  to  find  some  of  the  best  singers 
in  these  classes. 

The  Sahkirtan  and  the  Nagarktrtan  are  popular  musical 
performances,  usually  of  a  religious  character.  They  have 
been  most  highly  developed  in  Bengal.  The  meaning  of 
Sankirtan  is  'united  praise',  and  it  denotes  a  large  choir  who 
sit  on  the  floor  and  sing  to  the  accompaniment  of  instru- 
ments. Nagarktrtan  is  used  of  a  procession  of  devotees 
who  go  through  the  streets  of  a  city,  singing  and  dancing 
to  musical  accompaniments,  and  carrying  many  banners. 

The  Drone.  All  Indian  music  is  played  or  sung  to  a  drone. 
This  takes  the  place  of  harmony  in  providing  the  background 
for  the  melody.  Without  the  drone,  the  singer  would  feel 
as  '  a  ship  without  a  rudder. '  The  drone  consolidates  the 
melody  as  well  as  provides  the  background.  When  other 
instruments  are  quiet  it  keeps  on  the  sound,  so  that  the 
singer  can  pick  up  the  music  again,  without  any  chance  of 
pitching  on  the  wrong  note.  There  are  of  course  songs 
without  the  drone,  like  that  of  the  cartman  on  his  lonely 
journey,  the  boatman  on  the  backwater,  the  mother  to  her 
child  ;  but  in  all  public  musical  entertainments  a  drone  of 
some  kind  is  essential.  The  drone  may  be  supplied  by 
the  drum  only,  the  keynote  and  the  Pahchama  of  the  two 
heads  respectively  giving  all  that  is  absolutely  necessary. 
As  a  rule,  however,  it  is  the  custom  to  have  another  instru- 
ment for  the  drone.  The  best  instrument  for  this  purpose 
is  the  Tambur.  This  gives  the  tonic,  the  fifth  and  some- 
times the  fourth,  and  makes  a  most  charming  background 
for  the  melody.  The  custom  has  come  in  recently  to  use 
the    harmonium    for    the    drone.     This    is    undoubtedly 


94  THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 

convenient,  but  the  noise  is  not  by  any  means  attractive,  nor 
likely  to  add  to  the  appreciation  of  Indian  music  by  ears 
trained  to  quality  as  well  as  to  pitch.  There  is  also  a  special 
wind  instrument  called  the  Drone  which  is  used  for  this 
purpose  with  flutes  and  reeds.  The  vina,  sitar,  sarahgi, 
dilruba  and  many  other  stringed  instruments  have  their 
own  drone-strings,  which  are  struck  more  or  less  regularly 
as  the  melody  is  being  played.  The  drone,  as  may  be 
supposed,  goes  on  throughout  the  whole  performance 
without  cessation,  but  strange  to  relate  does  not  tend  to 
monotony,  as  one  might  think.  It  helps  to  bring  out  the 
variety  of  the  melody  built  above  it.  The  sarangi  and  the 
sitar  have,  in  addition,  a  number  of  sympathetic  strings, 
from  sixteen  to  twenty-two,  placed  below  the  main  strings 
and  never  played  on,  which  give  out  a  very  attractive 
humming  sound  all  the  time  the  instrument  is  played,  and 
provide  a  kind  of  re-inforced  drone  to  the  whole  music. 

Only  a  few  of  the  melodies  of  India  are  described  above. 
India  is  the  land  of  melody.  In  such  a  great  continent  of 
so  many  races  it  is  only  natural  to  find  some  more  musical 
than  others.  Stopping  one  evening  in  a  Bengal  village  we 
heard  on  every  side  of  us  different  kinds  of  music.  There 
was  nothing  discordant  and  it  all  blended  together  into  a 
pleasing  harmony.  Our  boat  had  drawn  up  by  a  small  land- 
ing stage,  while  the  boatmen  went  to  their  food.  Out  in  the 
stream  were  other  boats,  their  occupants  singing  love  lyrics 
or  devotional  songs,  as  they  rested  for  a  time  after  their 
meal.  In  one  boat  was  a  musical  party  with  tambur  and 
drum.  As  we  strolled  round  the  village,  we  heard  from 
house  after  house  the  sounds  of  melody.  Here  a  woman 
was  singing  to  her  baby.  There  a  man  was  chanting 
the  story  of  some  ancient  hero.  In  another  house  we 
heard  the  esraj,  the  Bengali  sarangi,  being  played.  In 
another  a  Mubammadan  was  playing  the  harmonium  and 
singing  to  the  music.  The  voices  were  sweet  and  com- 
posed, and  the  melodies  were  as  a  rule  simple  melodies 
that  the  village  people  loved.  I  can  remember  another 
evening  in  the  Maratha  country  on  the  hill  top  of  Matheran 
near  Bombay,  going  out  into  the  glorious  moonlight  to  listen 
to  the  song  of  two  women  as  they  ground  their  corn.    One 


MUSICAL  COMPOSITIONS  95 

of  them  would  sing  a  line  telling  of  some  deed  of  Krishna, 
and  then  there  would  be  silence,  broken  only  by  the  sound 
of  the  two  grinding  stones  rolling  one  on  top  of  the  other. 
Then  the  other  would  take  up  the  song  and  carry  on  the 
story.  Then  silence  again,  or  rather  the  musical  silence  of 
the  grinding,  which  was  as  the  drone  note  to  the  melody. 
Then  again  the  song  went  on,  and  so  on,  until  suddenly  they 
discovered  we  were  listening,  and  the  melody  stopped 
for  that  night,  and  all  that  we  heard  was  the  dull  grinding 
sound,  which  still  seemed  to  carry  with  it  memories  of  that 
song  of  haunting  sweetness,  sung  by  the  limpid  voices  of 
those  women.  I  can  remember  another  night  on  the  back- 
waters of  Travancore  in  the  extreme  south-west  of  India. 
I  was  in  a  boat  such  as  was  used  in  the  olden  days  by  the 
chiefs  of  that  land.  The  boat  had  been  lent  by  the  Metro- 
politan of  the  ancient  Syrian  Christian  Church  and  was 
manned  by  twelve  stalwart  rowers.  All  night  long  they 
sang  their  ancient  songs,  strange  melodies,  sometimes  with 
nonsense  words,  sometimes  about  trees  and  hills  and 
forests,  sometimes  about  the  Virgin  Mary,  for  they  were 
Catholics,  and  all  with  some  ending  suggestive  of  the 
oarsman's  pull,  which  seemed  every  time  to  help  forward 
the  boat.  The  ending  was  something  like  this,  Tiya 
Tiya — Teya  Teya,  with  an  emphasis  on  the  first  syllable 
of  each  beat,  marking  the  pull  of  the  oar.  I  slept  off  and 
on  as  we  passed  under  the  lovely  palms  through  the 
moonlight,  puzzling  my  brain  as  to  how  they  found  breath 
for  steady  rowing  and  continual  singing.  I  remember 
another  evening  sitting  in  a  lonely  bungalow  far  away 
from  all  towns,  with  a  little  village  near  by.  The  day  had 
been  hot  and  dusty  and  it  was  some  Hindu  festival.  Just 
close  by  was  a  little  village  shrine  to  the  god  Subramaniyar, 
the  warlike  son  of  Siva.  After  dinner  was  over  I  heard 
the  sound  of  singing  coming  from  this  temple,  and  going 
out,  found  two  young  men  from  the  village  learning  the 
old  devotional  songs  from  a  temple  musician.  He  would 
sing  a  line,  and  then  they  would  take  it  up  after  him. 
They  were  simple  melodies  set  to  beautiful  words  of 
devotion,  but  in  that  quiet  village  they  made  one  feel  the 
beating  heart  of  India. 


96  THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 

Another  time  while  I  was  staying  for  a  few  days 
in  the  realm  of  His  Highness  the  Nawab  of  Rampur, 
descendant  of  a  celebrated  musical  house,  I  heard  some 
of  the  classical  music  of  northern  India  played  and  sung 
by  its  famous  musicians.  Here  are  still  descendants  of 
the  celebrated  Tan  Sen,  the  most  wonderful  singer  of  the 
days  of  the  Muhammadan  Empire,  and  his  musical  tradition 
is  ahve  in  the  court.  His  Highness  the  Nawab  himself  is 
an  expert  singer  of  Dhrupads,  composed  by  the  great 
Miyan  Tan  Sen,  and  Sahabzada  Sadat  Ali  Khan  Bahadur, 
the  Home  Secretary  of  the  State,  has  found  time  to  give  to 
the  cultivation  of  music.  He  himself  is  one  of  the  very 
few  expert  players  on  the  old  rabab,  the  instrument  played 
by  Tan  Sen,  and  the  precursor  of  the  modern  Sur-sriiigara. 
With  its  wide  bowl  and  metalled  finger-board  and  its  scope 
for  all  the  peculiar  slides  and  shakes  of  Hindusthani  music, 
it  sent  forth  under  the  hands  of  its  skilled  player  now 
deep  full  sounds,  and  now  the  sweet  high-toned  metallic 
sounds  of  a  metal  string.  Then  came  a  famous  Dhrupad 
singer.  He  started  with  an  Alap  bringing  out,  one  after 
the  other,  with  fine  full  voice,  the  central  notes  and  phrases 
of  the  raga.  It  was  the  Hindol  raga  with  its  sharpened 
Ma  and  with  a  glorious  slide  from  the  Ga  to  the  Sa.  He 
sang  a  solemn  song,  each  note  full  and  clear,  with  none  of 
the  lilts  and  graces  which  we  are  wont  to  associate  with 
Indian  singing,  and, occasionally  using  the  full  ascent  and 
descent  of  the  scale  to  show  all  its  peculiarities,  as  well  as 
the  power  and  fulness  of  the  singer's  voice.  There  was  no 
nasal  tone  here,  but  all  from  the  chest.  Some  years  back 
I  heard  a  woman  weeping  for  her  husband,  who  had  died 
the  day  before.  She  was  a  Paraya  woman,  one  of  the 
lowest  classes  in  the  southern  peninsula,  but  she  sang  out 
her  grief  in  sad  and  haunting  recitative,  the  music  set  to 
words  of  poignant  sorrow. 

'  What  shall  I  look  at  so  as  to  forget.  No  longer  do  I  see  him. 
He  has  gone  and  left  me.  What  was  it  mine  enemy  said  ?  Now  begins 
the  burning.     My  very  blood  has  dried  up.  ' 

As  she  sang  she  beat  her  breasts,  pacing  up  and  down 
in  front  of  the  poor  little  hut  of  thatch  and  mud  in  the 
centre  of  the  outcaste  village,  which  was  her  home.     Then 


MUSICAL  COMPOSITIONS  97 

away  to  the  north  in  the  great  wheat-plains  of  the  Punjab, 
as  the  women  harvest  the  crops  of  wheat  which  go  to  feed 
the  milHons  of  North  India  and  also  the  people  of  England, 
singers  and  dhol  drummers  are  hired,  so  that  the  women 
may  keep  pace  with  the  music  and  get  through  their  task 
in  the  quickest  possible  time.  All  day  long  the  songs  go 
on :  primitive  Punjabi  folk-tunes,  and  in  some  Christian 
villages  the  Psalms  as  set  to  these  old  tunes  by  the  early 
missionaries. 

So  wherever  one  goes  in  India  one  finds  music  inter- 
woven with  life  and  playing  its  part  in  the  culture  and 
business  of  every  day. 


CHAPTER  VII 

THE  MUSICAL  INSTRUMENTS  OF  INDIA 

The  musical  instruments  of  India  present  a  wonderful 
variety.  As  might  be  expected  they  are  meant  mostly  for  in- 
dividual use,  and  there  is  very  little  suggestion  of  an  orchestra. 
The  Indian  Rajas  maintain  a  number  of  fine  musicians, 
but  it  is  rare  to  hear  orchestral  music  in  India.  It  is  not, 
however,  unknown,  and  one  may  sometimes  hear  orchestral 
pieces  at  the  concerts  of  the  Gandharva  Mahavidyalaya 
in  Bombay  and  also  in  Baroda.  In  order  to  see  all  the 
different  musical  instruments  of  India  one  has  to  journey 
to  many  different  places.  There  is  a  good  collection  at  the 
Gandharva  Mahavidyalaya  in  Bombay ;  but  the  Indian 
Museum,  Calcutta,  has  probably  the  finest  collection  of  both 
ancient  and  modern  instruments.  One  does  not  however, 
as  a  rule,  find  them  in  a  band  or  concert  party,  as  one  does 
in  the  West,  though  Baroda  is  attempting  to  do  this  under 
the  guidance  of  Mr.  Fredilis,  the  Principal  of  the  Music 
School  and  an  accomplished  western  musician.  The 
greatest  variety  is  found  in  stringed  instruments  and  in 
instruments  of  percussion.  Probably  India  excels  most 
other  countries  in  these  two.  The  following  quotation 
from  the  monumental  work  by  Captain  Day  on  The 
Musical  Instruments  of  Southern  India  will  give  a  good 
idea  of  the  condition  of  things  when  he  wrote  fifty  years 
ago:— 

'  Most  of  the  early  musical  instruments  remain  still  in  use.  Since 
the  time  of  the  Muhammadan  invasion,  about  a  thousand  years  ago, 
some  Arabian  and  Persian  instruments  have  been  adopted,  and  have 
become  almost  naturalized  ;  but  their  use  has  never  become  universal, 
and  is  mostly  confined  to  the  North  of  India  or  to  Mussulman 
musicians. 

'  The  people  of  India  have  always  been  conservative  in  their  tastes, 
and  in  nothing  do  we  find  this  more  evident  than  in  their  music  and 
musical  instruments.  Descriptions  of  them  are  found  m  many  of  the 
old  Sanskrit  treatises,  and  show  that  the  forms  of  the  mstruments 
now  in  use  have  altered  hardly  at  all  during  the  last  two  thousand 


Group  of  stringed  instruments,  {northern) 
Bin 
Dilruba  Sarangi  Peacock  sitar 


Some  ancient  instruments 
Svaramandala  Brahma  vina 

Kural  Bastran 


Vina 


Sitrir  Tambui 


An  orchestral  sarangi 
Playing  various  stringed  instruments 


MUSICAL  INSTRUMENTS  OF  INDIA        99 

•years  ;  old  paintings  and  sculptures,  such  as  those  of  Ajanta,  prove 
this  even  more  conclusively.  There  are  many  musical  instruments  to 
be  found  among  the  sculptures  existing  upon  various  old  cave- 
temples  and  ancient  Buddhist  topes  and  stupas  in  different  parts 
of  India. 

*  Those  at  Amrfivati  and  Sanchi  are  especially  interesting.  For  in 
the  Amravatl  sculptures,  which  were  visited  by  the  traveller,  Hiouen 
Thsang,  and  called  by  him  Dhananacheka,  about  the  year  640  of  our 
era,  we  find  several  representations  of  musical  instruments.  One  of 
peculiar  interest  shows  a  group  of  eighteen  women  playing  upon  drums, 
a  shell  trumpet  or  sankha,  one  much  like  a  siirndi,  and  two  instru- 
ments, apparently  gtianilns,  of  a  shape  very  similar  to  the  Assyrian 
harpvs.  But  there  is  another  instrument  represented  that  would  seem 
to  have  been  especially  popular,  but  which  is  never  met  with  in  India 
now,  nor  can  descriptions  of  it  be  found  in  the  Sanskrit  treatises  upon 
iastruments.  This  again  figures  in  Assyrian  and  Egyptian  sculptures 
and  paintings.  It  is  somewhat  like  a  harp,  and  much  like  an  African 
instrument  called  Sancho,  still   used   in  some  parts  of  that  continent. 

*  This  peculiar  harp  is  again  found  amongst  the  sculptures  at 
Sanchi ;  where  also  is  seen  an  instrument  resembling  the  Roman  tibae 
pares.  But  the  tibae  pares  are  there  shown  without  the  capistrum  or 
cheek  bandage,  and  it  is  known  that  this  instrument  was  also  used  by 
the  Greeks.  It  is  worthy  of  note  that  a  form  of  the  tibae  pares  is 
still  common  in  northern  India,  where  it  consists  of  a  pair  of  flutes. 
At  Sanchi  too  is  found  a  figure  of  a  man  blowing  a  kind  of  trumpet — 
the  r^ringa — of  much  the  same  shape  as  that  now  employed  in  Bengal. 

'  The  materials  of  which  musical  instruments  are  made  are  for  the 
most  part  those  that  are  found  readiest  to  hand  in  the  country. 
Bamboo  or  some  similar  cane  and  large  gourds  are  much  employed. 
These  gourds  are  used  for  many  purposes,  and  the  best  are  trained  in 
their  growth  to  the  shape  for  which  they  are  required. 

*  Inthemanufacture  of  certain  instruments  earthenware  is  employed; 
the  common  country  blackwood  is  largely  used  ;  in  fact,  whatever  is 
found  by  the  instrument  makers,  that  from  its  natural  shape,  or  the 
ease  with  which  it  can  be  worked,  can  be  adapted  with  the  least 
possible  trouble  to  themselves,  is  readily  seized  upon,  whether  its 
acoustical  properties  are  suitable  or  not,  purity  of  tone  being  sacrificed 
to  appearance.  The  natural  consequence  of  this  is  that  many  instru- 
ments are  badly  put  together  in  the  first  place  ;  faults  in  their  con- 
struction are  glossed  over  by  outward  ornamentation,  and  from  want 
of  proper  material,  the  tone,  which  should  be  the  first  consideration, 
is  frequently  sadly  deficient  in  volume  and  quality. 

*  The  Persians  still  use  an  instrument  called  quanUn,  much  like 
that  of  the  same  name  found  in  India — a  kind  of  dulcimer  strung  with 
gut  or  wire  strings,  and  played  upon  by  plectra  fastened  to  the  fingers 
of  the  performers,  That  is  a  development  of  the  Kattyayana-vTnd  or 
satatantrl  (hundred  stringed)  v7«(X,  as  it  was  formerly  called.  The 
Persian  quanun,  the  prototype  of  the  mediaeval  psaltery,  afterwards 
became  the  santir,  which  has  strings  of  wire  instead  of  gut,  and  is 
played  with  two  sticks  ;  and  in  the  west  it  actually  took  the  form  of 


100  THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 

the  dulcimer.  Hence  the  origin  of  the  complicated  pianoforte  of  the 
present  day  can  thus  be  traced  to  the  Aryans.  And  so  with  many 
others.  The  violin,  the  flute,  the  oboe,  the  guitar,  all  have  an 
Eastern  origin.  One  of  the  earliest  of  stringed  instruments  was 
called  "  Pinaka,"  and  had  one  string  twanged  by  the  fingers;  its 
invention  is  ascribed  to  the  god  Siva.  The  violin  bow  is  claimed  by 
the  Hindus  to  have  been  invented  by  Ravana,  King  of  Lanka  (Ceylon), 
who  according  to  tradition  lived  more  than  five  thousand  years  ago. 
'  The  earliest  instrument  played  with  a  bow  was  called  Rabanastrcv 
or  Rabanastrana.  What  this  instrument  was  like  is  rather  doubtful ; 
but  at  the  present  time  there  exists  in  Ceylon  a  primitive  instrument 
played  with  a  bow,  called  "  Vinavah  ",  which  has  two  strings  of 
different  kinds  ;  one  made  of  a  species  of  flax,  and  the  other  of  horse- 
hair, which  is  the  material  also  of  the  string  of  the  bow,  which  with 
bells  attached  to  it  is  used  as  a  fiddle  stick.  The  hoUov;  part  of  this 
instrument  is  half  a  cocoanut  shell  polished,  covered  with  a  dried 
skin  of  a  lizard  and  perforated  below\ ' 

The  Vinavah  is  mentioned  in  the  classical  books  and 
the  name  suggests  an  instrument  made  of  bamboo.  It  is 
rarely  met  with  except  in  the  hands  of  strolling  musicians^ 
who  support  themselves  by  means  of  it.  Whether  this  is 
the  primitive  rahanastra  or  not  it  is  impossible  to  say  ; 
but  it  seems  extremely  probable  that,  if  not  absolutely 
identical,  it  bears  at  least  a  very  strong  resemblance  to  it. 
Another  very  ancient  instrument  which  resembled  the 
Rahanastra  was  called  Amrita. 

Numbers  of  instruments  still  in  use  in  India  have  not  altered  in  the 
smallest  particular  their  ancient  forms.  The  Vlnd',  the  Tambur 
or  Tamburl-vlnd,  and  the  Kinnarl  still  remain  just  as  they  are  de- 
scribed in  the  ancient  books,  even  down  to  the  very  details  of  the 
carving  with  which  they  are  adorned,  so  conservative  are  the  people 
who  use  them  of  all  connected  with  the  art  they  hold  to  be  so  sacred. 

The  peculiar  shape  of  instruments  of  the  viola  and  violin  tribe 
appears  to  have  a  prototype  among  Indian  instruments  ;  and  this  can 
be  seen  in  the  Rabdb,  which  is  made  with  distinct  upper,  lower  and 
middle  bouts,  and  in  a  lesser  degree  in  the  SdrangJ,  Sdroda,  and 
Chikdra.  The  rebec  once  popular  in  Europe  was  a  form  of  the 
rabab,  brought  to  Spain  by  the  Moors,  who  in  turn  had  derived  it 
from  Persia  and  Arabia.  Here  again  the  Ar3'^an  origin  is  evident,  the 
rabab  being,  according  to  old  Sanskrit  works,  a  form  of  vIna.  And  it 
is  still  popular  in  the  North  of  India  and  Afghanistan. 

The  use  of  instruments  of  percussion  of  definite  sonorousness, 
such  as  the  harmonica,  does  not  seem  to  have  entered  into  Indian 
music  at  any  time  until  quite  of  late  years.  But  this  is  rather  an  open 
question,  for  the  harmonicon  of  cups,  called  Jalatarangi7n,  is  by  some 
ascribed  to  a  very  remote  origin. 


MUSICAL  INSTRUMENTS  OF  INDIA      101 

Wind  instruments,  although  perhaps  of  earlier  invention  than  those 
with  strings,  are  nevertheless  looked  upon  as  of  secondary  importance. 
Possibly  this  may  have  some  reason  in  the  fact  that  Brahmans  are  not 
allowed  by  their  religious  laws  to  use  them,  excepting  the  flute  blown 
by  the  nostrils,  and  one  or  two  others  of  the  horn  and  trumpet  kind. 
And  so  men  of  low  castes  are  employed  as  players  of  wind  instru- 
ments. But  all  unite  in  ascribing  to  wind  instruments  a  very  liigh 
antiquity.  The  conch  shell,  still  used  in  the  daily  temple  ritual  in 
almost  every  place  in  India,  is  said  to  have  been  first  used  by  the  god 
Krishna,  and  it  is  mentioned  in  the  great  epic  of  the  Rdmdyana, 
where  it  is  called  Devadatta.i  We  also  find  it  under  the  name  of 
Go^ringa,  both  in  the  Rdmdyana  and  the  Mahdbhdfata. 

The  horn  isriilga)  is  also  said  to  be  of  divine  origin,  and  it  is 
mentioned  in  the  earliest  writings.  But  the  flute  {niuralJ)  is  still  held 
to  be  peculiarly  sacred,  for  this  flute  was  the  companion  of  the  god 
Krishna  in  all  his  wanderings  ;  and  in  Indian  mythology,  this  flute  is 
looked  upon  with  much  the  same  veneration  that  the  lyre  was  by  the 
Greeks,  and  even  by  Brahmans  it  is  still  occasionally  played  and 
blown  by  the  nostrils.  In  all  sculptures  and  pictures,  the  god 
Krishna  is  represented  as  standing  cross-legged  playing  the  flute. 

Reed  instruments,  although  doubtless  of  very  remote  origin, 
appear  to  have  been  invented  at  a  later  period  than  instruments  of  the 
flute  species,  and  their  use  is  usually  confined  to  either  low  caste 
Hindus  or  Mohammadans.  For  the  Indian  reed  instruments  are 
mostly  harsh  and  wild,  far  too  powerful  and  shrill  to  be  used  in 
concert  with  the  delicate  vina  or  sweet  tambur,  and  so  their  use  is 
chiefly  confined  to  out-of-door  performances,  where  their  sound  is 
better  heard  and  v.-here  they  become  fit  adjuncts  to  the  band.  Instru- 
ments with  double  reeds  appear  to  have  been  originally  brought  from 
India,  and  the  double  reed  is  found  in  the  primitive  oboes  used  there 
as  well  as  in  Persia,  Arabia  and  Egypt.  There  seems  to  be  no  trace 
of  the  single  beating  reed  ever  having  been  known  in  India,  but  the 
■single  free  reed  is  found  in  the  bagpipe  of  the  country.  Indeed  the 
bagpipe  would  itself  seem  to  have  an  Eastern  origin  ;  and,  although  its 
use  in  Southern  India  and  the  Deccan  is  chiefly  confined  to  a  drone- 
bass,  yet  in  the  Punjab  and  Afghanistan  pipes  are  sometimes  found 
containing  both  drone  iand  chanter.  I  have  heard  them  played 
with  a  dexterity  that  would  do  credit  to  a  Highland  piper.  The 
Punji,  now  used  almost  entirely  by  snake-charmers,  is  said  to  have 
once  been  blown  bv  the  nostrils  and  called  Nasajantra. — (Captain 
Day.  99-104.) 

Captain  Day's  remarks  on  instrument-making  are  not  so 
applicable  to-day  as  they  were  when  he  wrote  fifty  years 
ago.  There  is  a  constantly  increasing  demand  for  musical 
instruments,  and  a  class  of  instrument-makers  is  arising. 
The  centres  of  this  industry  are  found  in  Calcutta,  Miraj 

1  i.e.,  god-given. 


102  THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 

and  Tanjore  ;  and  many  of  the  makers  are  noted  for  their 
skill,  and  the  resonant  qualities  of  instruments  are  being 
looked  to  very  much  more.  The  public  is  also  taking  up 
with  zest  the  question  of  musical  education,  and  it  is  be- 
coming frequent  in  the  better-class  families  to  arrange  for 
their  daughters  to  learn  some  Indian  instrument.  All  this^. 
with  the  revived  interest  in  music,  will  mean,  as  time  goes 
on,  a  development  of  skill  in  the  proper  construction  of 
instruments  such  as  Captain  Day  desires.  The  Chitpur 
Road,  Calcutta,  is  the  centre  of  instrument -making  in 
Bengal. 

Captain  Day  in  his  book  mentions  the  bells  which  are 
a  common  feature  of  festival  dances  in  India,  though 
hardly  to  be  classed  as  musical  instruments.  They  are 
usually  tied  round  the  ankles  of  the  dancers.  They  are 
also  used  on  festival  occasions  for  the  bulls.  Every  post- 
runner  in  India  has  a  few  attached  to  his  little  spear,  and 
these  may  be  heard  for  a  very  long  distance  as  the  runner 
comes  along  to  the  village. 

I.  Stringed  Instruments 

Apart  from  the  drum  the  largest  variety  of  musicat 
instruments  in  India  is  found  among  the  strings.  The  best 
and  the  most  honourable  instruments  are  also  found  here. 
The  Vtnci  occupies  the  first  place  among  them  all,  and  has 
done  so  from  time  immemorial.  It  is  also  the  instrument 
par  excellence  for  rendering  Indian  music  ;  and  no  one  who 
has  not  heard  the  masters  of  the  vina  has  any  right  to 
give  a  final  judgment  on  Indian  music.  In  northern 
India  the  vIna  is  often  called  Bin,  the  name  vIna  beings 
given  to  the  tambur.  In  this  book,  however,  the  name 
vIna  is  consistently  used  for  the  classical  instrument  of 
that  name.  Three  places  in  India  are  noted  for  its  manu- 
facture. They  are  Tanjore  and  Mysore  in  South  India, 
and  Miraj  in  Western  India.  The  Tanjore  and  Mysore 
makes  differ  in  the  wood  used  for  the  bowl.  Tanjore  uses 
jack  wood  and  Mysore  black  wood.  Nearly  all  Tanjore- 
vTnas  are  elaborately  ornamented  by  ivory  carvings. 

The  instrument  consists  of  a  large   pea-shaped   bowl 


MUSICAL  INSTRUMENTS  OF  INDIA      103 

hollowed  out  of  one  piece  of  wood,  either  jackwood  or 
blackwood.  The  flat  top  of  this  bowl  is  about  one  foot  in 
diameter.  The  bridge  is  placed  on  the  bowl,  and  near  it 
are  a  number  of  small  sound-holes.  The  construction  of 
the  bridge  is  peculiar. 

'  A  wooden  arc  supports  a  slab  of  wood,  one  inch  by  two  and  a 
half  inches.  A  resinal  cement  is  poured  upon  this  and  a  piece  of 
metal,  passing  underneath  the  second,  third  and  fourth  strings,  is  laid 
above  and  manipulated  until  the  strings  produce  a  clear  tone  free 
from  all  buzz  or  twang  ;  a  wet  cloth  is  then  applied,  or  a  little  cold 
water  poured  over  the  upper  surface,  so  as  to  harden  the  cement. 
Under  the  first  string  a  similar  piece  of  metal,  in  this  case  of  superior 
quality,  either  polished  steel  or  bell-metal,  is  fixed  in  the  same  way. 
This  process  is  considered  very  important,  as  the  least  carelessness 
affects  the  tone  of  the  instrument  and  gives  it  a  most  unpleasant 
twang.' — (Captain  Day.) 

The  side-string  bridge  is  secured  to  the  main  bridge 
and  the  belly  of  the  instrument,  and  is  made  entirely  of 
metal.  It  consists  of  an  arc  of  brass,  with  a  projecting 
rim  upon  the  side  nearest  the  attachment.  The  body  of 
the  instrument  is  made  of  the  same  kind  of  wood  as  the 
belly,  and  is  hollowed  out  thin.  A  projecting  ledge  of  ivory 
separates  the  body  from  the  stem.  The  neck  is  attached 
to  the  body  also  with  ivory,  and  is  usually  curved  down- 
ward into  some  weird  figure.  This  also  is  hollow.  Into 
the  body  just  beyond  the  neck  is  fixed  a  hollow  gourd  on 
the  under  side,  which  forms  a  kind  of  rest  for  the  vina  and 
is  useful  also  to  increase  the  volume  of  the  sound.  This 
gourd  is  easily  detachable.  The  frets  of  the  instrument 
are  made  of  brass  or  silver,  and  are  secured  to  two  ledges 
running  along  each  side  of  the  stem  of  the  instrument. 
These  ledges  are  made  of  some  wax-like  substance  which 
can  be  softened  by  gentle  heat,  so  that  the  position  of  the 
frets  can  be  changed,  if  desired.  There  are  altogether 
twenty-four  frets,  so  that  each  string  contains  two  complete 
octaves.  Many  Indian  scholars  are  of  opinion  that  the 
ancient  books  give  no  ground  for  thinking  that  any  of  the 
old  classical  musicians  used  more  than  twelve  frets  for  the 
octave  on  the  vIna.  The  tuning-pegs  to  the  main  frets 
are  fixed  two  in  each  side  of  the  neck,  and  the  strings  pass 
over  the   ivory  bridge  between  the  neck   and   the   stem. 


104  THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 

The  three  pegs  for  the  side  strings  are  fixed  in  the  side  of 
the  stem  just  above  the  gourd. 

The  Vina  has  seven  strings,  four  of  which  pass  over 
the  frets  and  constitute  the  main  playing  strings,  and  the 
other  three  of  which  are  placed  at  the  side  of  the  finger- 
board, and  are  used  to  play  a  kind  of  drone  accompaniment 
to  the  melody  and  to  mark  the  time. 

The  two  thinnest  strings,  which  are  on  the  side  nearest 
the  player,  are  of  steel,  and  the  other  two  main  strings  are  of 
brass  or  silver.  The  three  side  strings  are  of  steel.  Each 
siring  has  a  distinct  name,  which  are,  beginning  from 
the  thinnest,  SaranI,  Panchama,  Mandaran,  Anumandaran. 
The  three  side  strings  are  called  Pakka-Sarani,  and  some- 
times Chikari,  a  name  common  to  all  such  side  strings. 

There  are  various  ways  of  tuning  the  instrument.  The 
following  are  said  to  be  those  generally  accepted,  begin- 
ning from  the  playing  strings  : — 

Main  Strings.  Side  Strings. 

{a)  Sa  Pa  Sa  Sa  (C  G  C  C)  Pa  Sa  Pa  (G  C  Gi) 

ib)   Pa  Sa  Pa  Pa  (G  C  Gi  Gi)  Sa  Pa  Sa  (G  Gi  Ci) 

(c)  Ma  Sa  Pa  Sa  (F  C  Gi  Ci)  Sa  Sa  Pa  (0^  C  G) 

One  at  Rampur  I  noted  was  tuned  thus : 

id)  Ma  Sa  Pa  Ga  (F  C  Gi  Ei)  Sa  Sa  Pa  or  Ni  or  Sa  (Ci  Ci  G  or 
BorC) 

{e)  Captain  Day  notes  one  at  Miraj  tuned  thus  :  It  only  had  two 
side  strings. 

Ma  Sa  Pa  Sa  (F  C  Gi,  Ci),  Sa  Sa  (C  Ci) 

(c)  and  (d)  are  the  common  ways  of  tuning  in  upper  India. 

The  first  two  strings  are  always  the  ones  played  upon 
most,  though  expert  players  will  use  all  of  them  easily. 

The  frets  of  the  vIna  are  placed  in  different  positions 
on  different  instruments.  The  tendency  in  South  India 
to-day  is  to  use  the  intervals  of  equal  temperament. 
Mr.  Ellis  mentions  testing  a  vina  many  years  ago  in  the 
South  and  finding  the  intervals  those  of  equal  temperament. 
Captain  Day  mentions  an  old  Tan j ore  vina  whose  frets 
were  placed  at  intervals,  which  were  found  to  be  slightly 
flatter  than  the  notes  of  the  tempered  scale. 

The  vina  may  be  held  either  in  a  horizontal  position 
across  the  player's  knees  or  else  slanting  against  the 
shoulder.     Different  players  have  different  styles.     The 


.^Uiv  --  ' 


Mavuri 


;^^:^s::3^ 


^ 


Esraj 


Vina  (Southern) 


).m)f%m  iniiijpi 


Ektar 
Stringed  instruments 


Sarinda.  Katyayana-vina, 

Katyayana-vina 

Some  uncommon  instruments 


Chikara 


MUSICAL  INSTRUMENTS  OF  INDIA      105 

pictures  in  this  chapter  give  specimens  of  each  style.  It 
is  played  by  the  right  hand,  the  left  hand  passing  round 
the  stem  and  stopping  the  strings. 

The  Vina  is  played  either  with  the  finger  nails  or  with  a 
plectrum.  The  finest  players  use  their  finger  nails ;  but 
many  amateurs,  who  do  not  wish  to  grow  the  nails  long, 
have  taken  to  the  plectrum.  In  South  India  it  is  quite 
common  to  find  amateurs  playing  the  vina,  and  it  is 
becoming  increasingly  the  thing  for  girls  to  learn  it.  In 
the  north,  however,  it  is  usually  only  professionals  who 
play  it.  The  instruments  for  amateurs  in  the  north  are 
the  sitar  and  the  esraj,  or  dilruba.  The  main  strings  of 
the  Vina  are  played  with  the  first  three  fingers,  the  fourth 
finger  being  used  for  the  side  strings,  just  striking  them 
at  intervals,  in  time  with  the  tala  used.  The  main 
strings  are  stopped  between  the  frets,  but  the  side  strings 
are  always  open.  The  vIna  lends  itself  to  all  the  different 
graces  which  give  so  much  beauty  to  Indian  music,  and  in 
the  hands  of  really  capable  performers  it  produces  most 
wonderful  and  charming  effects.  It  is  an  ideal  instrument 
for  an  Indian  girl  to  learn.  It  is  hoped  that  more  and 
more  the  unsuitable  harmonium,  with  its  strident  tones,  will 
give  place  to  this  beautiful  Indian  instrument,  an  instru- 
ment affording  not  only  delight  to  player  and  hearers,  but 
also  real  culture. 

There  are  different  kinds  of  vina  called  after  the  shape 
of  the  head,  such  as  the  Peacock  viija,  Rudra  vlna. 

The  Sitar  is  perhaps  the  most  common  instrument  in 
North  India.  It  is  not  yet  found  much  in  the  south,  but 
there  is  little  doubt  that,  as  Indian  music  is  cultivated  more 
and  more,  this  simple  and  beautiful  instrument  will  come 
very  largely  into  use  all  over  the  south.  It  is  well  suited 
either  for  the  amateur  or  the  professional.  It  is  not 
difficult  for  the  amateur  to  learn  to  play  simple  melodies 
apon  it,  and  at  the  same  time  it  lends  itself  to  all  the  sub- 
ile  arts  of  the  professional,  whereby  he  can  show  his  skill 
or  the  charm  of  the  music.  The  principles  of  the  sitar 
are  the  same  as  those  of  the  vina,  but  there  are  consider- 
able differences  in  construction.  It  is  a  much  smaller 
instrument  and   is  more  easily   carried  about.     Like  the 


106  THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 

vIna  it  has  a  belly  made  of  jack  or  some  other  resonant 
wood,  but  there  is  no  curved  neck  and  no  gourd.  The 
body  of  the  instrument  is  about  two  feet  long,  and  carries 
the  finger-board,  which  is  about  three  inches  wide.  The 
bowl  is  from  eight  inches  to  one  foot  in  width.  The 
bridge  is  placed  on  the  bowl,  but  is  not  double  as  in  the 
Vina.  The  strings  pass  over  this,  and  then  over  another 
ledge  beyond  the  frets,  and  again  through  holes  in  a  ledge 
near  the  pegs.  These  ledges  are  usually  made  of  ivory. 
All  the  strings  are  over  the  finger-board.  The  tuning-pegs 
are  placed,  four  on  the  face  of  the  instrument  at  the  end  and 
three  at  the  side,  at  varying  distances  from  the  end.  The 
number  of  strings  is  usually  seven.  The  frets  are  curved 
and  are  made  of  metal,  usually  brass,  and  they  are  fixed  by 
means  of  wire  strings  tied  round  the  body  of  the  instrument. 
They  are  movable  at  the  will  of  the  player.  It  is  therefore 
easy  to  alter  the  tune  of  the  sitar  or  the  size  of  any  parti- 
cular intervals.  The  frets  vary  from  sixteen  to  eighteen  in 
number  for  about  an  octave  and  a  half  on  each  string. 
The  Carnatic  sitar  is  somewhat  different.  It  has  a  much 
thinner  and  shorter  neck  and  is  shaped  something  like  a 
tambur.  Only  the  first  two  strings  pass  over  frets,  which 
are  about  half  an  inch  wade  and  raised  from  the  finger- 
board. These  two  strings  are  placed  much  nearer 
together  than  the  other  strings.  The  fourth  and  fifth 
strings  go  round  a  small  ivory  bead  about  half-way  up 
the  finger-board,  whence  they  pass  obliquely  under  the 
strings  to  the  tuning-pegs.  The  sixth  and  seventh  strings 
pass  straight  up  the  finger-board  in  the  usual  way.  All 
the  strings  except  the  seventh,  which  is  of  brass,  are  of 
steel.  The  frets  are  of  wood  with  an  upper  edge  of  metal 
and  are  fixed  to  the  finger-board.  Usually  there  are  about 
fourteen  frets,  which  are  placed  at  the  intervals  of  the 
diatonic  scale. 

In  the  ordinary  sitar  the  strings  are  made  of  steel  and 
brass.  The  first,  third,  fifth,  sixth  and  seventh  are  of  steel 
and  the  other  two  of  brass.  Many  sitars  have  a  number 
of  sympathetic  strings  placed  beneath  the  other  strings, 
which  are  never  played,  but  give  a  continual  hum  as  the 
other  strings  are  played. 


MUSICAL  INSTRUMENTS  OF  INDIA      107 

The  tuning  of  the  strings  in  the  ordinary  sitar  is  usually 
as  follows,  beginning  from  the  shortest  string  attached  to 
the  side  peg  : — 

Sa  Sa  Pa  Pa  Sa  Sa  Ma  (c  c  Gi,  g  c  c  f) 
The  last  string  is  the  one  usually  played  on^ 
though  expert  players  will  use  the  last  three.  This 
string  passes  through  a  small  bead  at  its  attachment 
to  the  belly,  so  as  to  aid  in  tuning  to  the  exact  pitch 
required. 

The  Carnatic  sitar  runs  thus  : 
Sa  Pa  Sa  Pa  Sa  Sa  Sa  (c  g  c  g  c  c  c) 
The  instrument  is  played  by  means  of  a  wire  plectrum 
placed  upon  the  forefinger  of  the  right  hand,  and  the  strings 
are  struck  near  the  belly.  They  are  stopped  by  pressing 
down  the  fingers  of  the  left  hand  upon  them  right  above 
the  frets,  and  not  just  before  the  frets  as  is  done  on  the 
Vina.  As  a  rule,  only  one  string  is  stopped,  the  others 
being  used  as  open  strings  for  the  accompanying  drone 
sound. 

There  is  a  beautiful  sitar  in  the  Gandharva  Mahavidyala- 
ya  in  Bombay,  which  has  an  ostrich  egg  for  the  bowl,  beau- 
tifully mounted  on  gold.  Some  sitars  have  peacock-shaped 
heads  and  are  called  Peacock  sitars.  The  Tarfa  sitar  has 
an  extra  string  for  the  ^ruti  or  tonic.  The  sitar  is  also 
called  simdarl — the  beautiful. 

The  sitar  lends  itself  well  to  the  performance  of  Indian 
music,  and  is  becoming  more  popular  among  the  people 
generally. 

The  invention  of  the  sitar  is  commonly  credited  to  the 
famous  singer  Amir  Khusru  of  the  court  of  Sultan 
Ala-u-din  in  the  fourteenth  century.  It  is  probably  of 
Persian  origin. 

The  Dilrnha  is  very  much  like  a  sitar,  but  smaller ; 
and  instead  of  a  bowl,  it  has  a  belly,  covered  with  sheep- 
parchment.  In  shape  it  is  something  like  the  sarafigl,  and 
like  that  instrument  it  is  played  with  a  bow  made  of  horse- 
hair. It  has  frets  similar  to  the  sitar,  nineteen  in  number, 
which  are  movable.  It  has  only  the  four  main  strings  and 
not  the  extra  three.  The  dilruba  is  made,  as  a  rule,  with 
twenty-two  sympathetic  strings   under  the  main   strings. 


108  THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 

The  arrangement  of  the  tuning-pegs  is  like  that  of  the  four 
main  pegs  of  the  sitar,  two  being  vertically  on  the  face  and 
two  on  the  side.  The  instrument  is  about  three  feet  long, 
and  the  width  of  the  belly  will  be  about  six  inches.  The 
bow  is  about  If  feet  long. 

The  tuning  of  the  four  strings  is  usually  Sa  Pa  Ja  K  . 
(Ci,  Gi,  C  f),  the  last  being  the  principal  string.  The  fuoC 
two  are  brass  and  the  last  two  steel.  In  this  instrumr  ij 
also,  the  peacock  shape  occurs  for  the  belly.  The  dili  .d^, 
is  not  a  very  common  instrument.  It  is  used  in  the  Punj^ib 
and  in  the  United  Provinces,  but  as  a  rule  one  sees  ^  .e 
sarangi  much  more  frequently. 

The  Siirhahar  is  another  instrument  of  the  sitar  kind. 
It  has  a  similar  shape  to  the  sitar,  but  the  frets  are  not 
movable,  and  it  has  a  finer  tone  and  wider  range.  It  is 
played  with  two  strokes,  one  with  the  plain  finger  and 
the  other  a  sort  of  mandoline  tala  stroke  with  plectrums 
on  the  forefinger  and  little  finger.  ]\Ir.  Fox  Strangways 
gives  it  the  title  '  dignified.'  This  instrument  is  found  only 
in  Bengal.  It  lends  itself  very  well  to  the  graces  of  Indian 
music. 

The  Sarahgi  is  the  Indian  violin.  It  is  shaped,  however, 
something  like  a  small  guitar.  The  instrument  is  made 
from  one  block  of  wood  hollowed  out,  and  it  has  a  parch- 
ment-covered belly.  It  is  smaller  than  the  sitar,  being  as 
a  rule  about  two  feet  in  height.  The  sarangi  may  have 
either  three  or  four  strings,  three  being  gut  and  one  brass. 
The  brass  string  is  the  lowest  in  pitch.  The  bridge  is 
fixed  in  the  middle  of  the  belly,  with  a  support  under  the 
parchment.  The  instrument  is  played  usually  with  a  bow, 
but  sometimes  a  plectrum  is  used.  The  four  tuning-pegs 
are  fixed  at  each  side  of  the  head,  which  is  hollow.  The 
tuning  of  the  four  strings  is  as  follows,  in  accordance  with 
the  raga  :  Sa  Pa  Sa,  Ga  or  Ma  (c  g  c,  e  or  f) 

The  sarangi,  like  the  western  violin,  has  its  devotees 
both  among  experts  and  also  among  the  beggar  fraternity. 
It  is  found  throughout  the  north.  The  strings  are  stopped 
by  pressing  the  finger  against  their  side,  and  not  by  placing 
the  finger  upon  them.  This  renders  it  possible  to  produce 
all    the  peculiar   gainaka   of  Indian   music   without   any 


NORTH    INDIAN    SARANGI    PLAYER 


s 


^n    S 


CO 


MUSICAL  INSTRUMENTS  OF  INDIA      109 

difficulty.  The  sound  is  mellow  and  somewhat  resemble? 
that  of  the  viola.  It  is  a  very  fine  instrument,  and  expert 
players  can  get  a  tremendous  lot  from  it.  Even  the  beggar 
manages  to  produce  quite  a  delightful  noise  with  it.  It 
provides  a  very  good  accompaniment  for  singing,  and  has 
more  fulness  of  tone  than  the  sitar  and  also  very  consider- 
able possibilities  of  development.  It  seems  hardly  possible, 
however,  that  it  will  rival  the  violin  in  the  power  and  beauty 
of  its  tone  or  in  its  range,  but  it  will  always  be  a  good 
member  of  an  Indian  orchestra,  and,  like  the  viola,  will 
come  in  very  useful  as  a  contrast.  In  the  south  already 
the  violin  has  come  to  stay,  and  there  is  not  much  likelihood 
of  the  sararigi  displacing  it  now.  It  may,  however,  come  to 
the  south  as  a  member  of  an  Indian  orchestra.  The 
sararigi  usually  has,  like  the  other  instruments  already 
mentioned,  a  number  of  sympathetic  strings,  from  fifteen 
to  twenty-tw^o,  under  the  four  main  strings.  The  Gan- 
dharva  Mahavidyalaya  has  a  fine  orchestral  sarangi  which 
stands  seven  feet  high,  and  which  is  meant  to  be  used  in 
the  concerts  given  there,  though  hitherto  it  has  been  mostly 
ornamental.     (See  p.  99.) 

The  Saroda  or  Sarraxvat  is  a  sararigi  played  with  the 
plectrum  instead  of  the  bow.  It  has  a  powerful  tone  and 
is  usually  much  larger  than  the  sararigi. 

The  Esraj  is  the  Bengal  variety  of  the  sarangi.  It  is 
a  little  smaller  than  the  latter,  and  uses  all  wire  strings 
instead  of  gut.  The  tuning  is  Sa  Sa  Pa  Ma,  (c  c  G  f),  the 
Ma  string  being  the  chief  string.  This  is  the  common 
instrument  that  one  finds  to-day  in  the  houses  of  cultured 
people  in  Bengal.  It  is  played  with  a  bow  like  the 
sarangi. 

The  Sctriiida  is  another  variety  of  the  sarangi,  peculiar 
to  Bengal.  The  bottom  of  the  instrument  is  oval  instead 
of  rectangular,  and  the  upper  half  of  the  body  is  left 
open.  It  is  played  in  the  same  way  as  the  sarangi.  It 
usually  has  an  elaborate  tailpiece.  It  has  only  two  thin 
strings  of  gut  and  not  four  as  in  the  sarangi.  It  is  used 
cniefly  by  jogis  and  fakirs. 

The  Chikara  is  a  curiously  shaped  variety  of  the 
sararigi.     The  body  consists  of  a  long  hollow  piece  of  wood, 


110  THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 

upon  which,  near  the  lower  end,  a  parchment  covered  box  is 
fixed.  The  bridge  is  placed  upon  this.  It  has  three  strings 
of  gut  or  horsehair  and  five  sympathetic  strings  of  wire. 
The  tuning  of  the  three  former,  which  are  the  main 
strings,  is  usually  Sa  Ma  Pa  (c  f  g)  or  else  the  same  as  the 
sarangi,  and  that  of  the  sympathetic  strings  is  Pa  Dha  Ni 
Sa  Ri  (g  A  B  c^  D^). 

The  Tamhur  is  perhaps  the  most  common  stringed 
instrument  in  India.  It  is  found  everywhere  and  its 
varieties  are  numberless.  It  is  made  both  for  the  poor 
and  for  the  rich.  One  sees  it  in  the  hands  of  the  poverty- 
stricken  beggar,  and  in  the  houses  of  wealthy  princes. 
In  shape  it  is  something  like  the  vina,  without  the  extra 
gourd  and  without  the  elaborate  headpiece.  The  bowl  is 
usually  a  large  one  about  ten  inches  wide,  and  in  the  best 
kinds  it  is  made  of  wood  from  the  jack  tree  and  hollowed 
out.  The  cheaper  kinds  have  a  gourd  in  place  of  the 
wooden  bowl.  The  bridge  is  placed  on  the  bowl  in  the 
centre  and  is  made  either  of  wood  or  of  ivory.  The  strings 
pass  through  holes  in  a  ledge  placed  near  the  pegs.  The 
tuning-pegs  of  the  first  and  second  strings  are  fixed  at  the 
side  of  the  neck,  and  those  of  the  third  and  fourth  strings 
at  right-angles  to  the  head.  The  strings  are  all  of  metal, 
three  being  steel  and  the  lowest  one  of  brass.  Little 
pieces  of  silk  are  placed  between  the  bridge  and  the  strings 
in  order  to  increase  the  buzzing  effect.  The  strings  also 
have  beads  near  their  attachment  in  order  to  render  perfect 
tuning  easier.  The  instrument  is  always  played  on  the 
open  strings  by  the  fingers,  without  any  plectra.  The 
strings  are  never  stopped.  The  tuning  of  the  tambur  is 
as  follows :  Pa  Sa  Sa  Sa  (g  c  c  Ci).  The  instrument  is 
held  upright  with  the  left  hand,  and  played  by  gently 
pulling  the  four  strings,  one  after  the  other,  from  the  highest 
to  the  lowest,  with  the  fingers  of  the  right  hand.  It 
provides  a  full  and  resonant  droning  accompaniment  to  the 
melody  sung  or  played,  and  there  is  no  other  instrument 
which  gives  so  eflfective  a  drone  as  this  does.  The  effect 
is  quite  pleasing  and  the  sound  made  up  of  the  octave  and 
fifth  fits  in  very  naturally  with  the  music. 

The  best  tambur  are  made  at   Lucknow  and  Rampur 


MUSICAL  INSTRUMENTS  OF  INDIA      111 

in  the  north,  and  at  Tanjore  in  the  south  ;  and  many  of 
them  are  most  elaborately  ornamented  with  ivory.  No 
Indian  orchestra  is  complete  without  the  tambur. 

There  is  a  variety  of  the  tambur  called  the  Brahntd 
Vina.  This  is  made  like  a  large  box  and  has  no  gourd  or 
bowl.  It  is  about  three  and  a  half  feet  long  and  six  inches 
v;ide  and  stands  nine  inches  high.  There  is  a  raised  ledge 
in  the  middle,  over  which  the  strings  run  ;  and  it  has  a  fifth 
string  at  the  side  tuned  to  the  higher  Sa  (c^).  It  is  used 
for  the  same  purpose  as  the  tambur. 

Sometimes  players  use  the  tambur  in  quite  peculiar 
ways.  I  once  heard  a  musician  play  on  it  by  stopping  the 
strings  with  a  small  bamboo  and  using  it  more  like  the 
viigia.  The  full  resonance  of  the  tambur  and  the  buzzing 
sound  gave  the  melody  a  very  pleasing  effect.  I  also 
heard  a  performer  play  an  instrument  like  the  tambur 
by  stopping  it  with  a  cocoanut.  The  name  given  to  this 
instrument  by  the  people  is  Kottuvadyam  or  Balasaras- 
vatt.  The  word  kottu  is  said  to  mean  '  movable  fret.'  It 
is  found  in  a  few  places  in  South  India. 

The  Sursota  is  another  variety  of  the  tambur  found  in 
the  north.  It  has  no  gourd  or  bowl  and  is  really  a  hollow 
trunk  of  bamboo.  It  is  about  three  feet  long  and  has  four 
strings  tuned  similarly  to  the  tambur. 

The  Kinnari  is  one  of  the  primitive  Indian  instruments. 
It  is  supposed  to  have  been  invented  by  Kinnara,  one  of 
the  musicians  of  Indra's  heaven,  after  whom  a  class  of 
musicians  has  been  named.  The  instrument  to-day  is  a 
beggar's  instrument  only.  It  is  strange  that  the  Bible 
also  mentions  a  stringed  instrument  called  the  Kinnor,  and 
it  is  possible  that  these  may  have  had  some  connection  with 
each  other.  We  find  the  Kinnari  represented  on  many 
old  Indian  sculptures  and  paintings. 

It  is  made  from  a  piece  of  bamboo  or  blackwood,  about 
two  and  a  half  feet  long,  fixed  upon  three  gourds.  There 
are  twelve  frets  made  of  bone  or  metal  and  fixed  upon  the 
^mgerboard  by  some  resinous  substance.  The  strings  pass 
into  a  tall  perpendicular  peg  near  the  last  of  the  frets. 
The  tailpiece  of  the  instrument  is  often  made  to  represent 
the  tail  of  a  kite.     There  are  two  or  three  strings,  one 


112  THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 

of  which  passes  over  the  frets,  the  others  being  the  drone 
strings.  The  drone  strings  are  tuned  to  the  tonic  and  its 
fourth  or  fifth.  The  musical  capacity  of  the  Kinnari  is 
not  great,  and  its  sound  is  very  weak  and  rather  twangy. 

The  Dhehka,  found  in  Madras,  is  a  similar  instrument^ 
with  two  cocoanuts  as  resonators  and  cowrie  shells  as  frets. 

The  Yektar  is  another  very  primitive  instrument,  having, 
as  its  name  implies  {Ek=one,  Tar = string),  only  one  strings 
It  is  much  used  by  beggars  throughout  India.  It  has  an 
open  string  without  any  frets.  It  is  made  from  a  piece  of 
bamboo,  to  the  under  side  of  which  a  large  gourd  or  hollow 
cylinder  of  wood  is  attached  in  the  same  direction  as  the 
bamboo,  one  end  being  closed  by  a  piece  of  parchment. 
The  string  passes  through  a  hole  in  the  centre  of  the 
parchment.  It  is  about  three  or  four  feet  long.  This 
instrument  is  the  beggar's  band  and  gives  a  twanging 
accompaniment  to  his  songs.  It  is  seen  mostly  in  North 
India. 

An  officer  in  the  Indian  army  told  me  of  a  similar 
instrument  with  only  one  string  that  he  had  come  across  at 
Manipur  on  the  Assam  frontier,  which  was  played  with  a 
bow.  It  was  called  Penna.  The  name  reminds  one  of 
the  ancient  Pinaka,  the  stringed  instrument  of  Siva. 
Many  of  these  instruments  are  of  the  violin  variety,  and 
lend  support  to  the  idea  that  the  violin  in  its  primitive 
forms  is  indigenous  to  India,  and  certainly  the  Sarahgi 
and  its  different  varieties  show  considerable  development 
towards  a  finer  instrument. 

The  Rahah  is  a  fine  Muhammadan  instrument,  with  a 
wide  shallow  bowl  made  of  wood  covered  with  parchment. 
It  is  something  like  a  flattened  and  shortened  sitSr,  but  has 
no  frets.  It  has  four  strings,  one  of  brass  and  two  of  gut» 
with  sympathetic  metal  strings  at  the  side.  Sometimes 
the  two  upper  strings  are  doubled.  All  the  six  strings  may 
be  of  gut.  The  instrument  is  played  with  a  bow  of 
horsehair. 

The  strings  are  tuned  in  one  of  the  following  ways : — 
Sa  Pa  Ma  Sa  (c'  g  f  c)  or  Sa  Sa  Pa  Pa  Ma  Sa  (c'  d  G 
G  F  c)  or  Sa  Sa  Pa  Sa  Ga  (c  c  Gi  Ci  e).  Sometimes  it 
has  a  few  catgut  frets  placed  at  diatonic  intervals.    The 


MUSICAL  INSTRUMENTS  OF  INDIA      113 

instrument  is  found  in  the  Punjab  and  in  Afghanistan,  but 
one  rarely  sees  it  to-day.  One  of  the  few  expert  players 
still  in  India  is  in  the  Rampur  State.  The  great  Tan  Sen 
played  this  instrument.  It  is  a  handsome  instrument  and 
has  a  very  pleasing  tone,  somewhat  fuller  than  that  of  the 
Sarahgi.  It  lends  itself  to  the  graces  better  than  the  sitar, 
as  it  has  no  frets. 

The  Sfir-^rihgdra  is  the  modern  descendant  of  the 
rahah.  It  was  first  made  by  Syed  Kalb  Ali  Khan 
Bahadur,  the  late  Nawab  of  Rampur.  It  is  a  little  longer 
than  the  rahah,  and  the  finger-board  below  the  strings  is 
made  of  metal  so  that  the  fingers  can  easily  slide  over  it. 
It  has  a  double  belly  of  wood,  instead  of  parchment,  as  in 
the  rahah,  and  is  played  in  the  same  way  as  the  latter. 
There  are  eight  strings  tuned  as  follows  : — Sa  Sa  Pa  Sa  Ga 
Sa  Ri  Pa  (c  C  Gi  Ci  Ei  C  D  g).  The  tuning  of  the  seventh  and 
eighth  strings  varies  according  to  the  raga.  The  first  two  or 
three  only  are  used  for  playing  on,  and  the  others  are  used 
as  the  side  strings  of  the  vlna.  It  often  has  a  number  of 
sympathetic  strings  placed  underneath,  tuned  to  the  inter- 
Yals  of  the  raga  which  is  being  played.  Its  tone  is  rich 
and  mellow. 

The  Svaramandala  is  the  ancient  Indian  dulcimer.  It 
is  said  to  be  the  same  as  the  Katyayana-vTua,  which  was 
invented  by  the  rishi  Katyayana,  and  was  also  called  the 
^ata-tantrj-vlna,  because  it  had  originally  hundred  strings. 
Kallinatha,  the  commentator  of  Ratnakara,  says  that  the 
Mattakokila-vlna,  mentioned  by  Sarngadeva,  is  really  the 
svaramandala.  The  svaramandala  is  generally  made  of 
jackwood  and  is  three  feet  in  length,  one  and  a  half  feet  in 
breadth  and  seven  inches  in  height,  and  it  stands  on  four 
legs  like  a  piano.  Wire  strings  are  used  and  are  attached 
to  round  pieces  of  wood  shaped  like  small  chess-pods. 
The  tuning  pins  are  made  of  wood  and  are  tuned  with  a  key 
in  a  similar  manner  to  the  pianoforte,  that  is  in  semitones. 

*  There  are  two  m.ethods  of  playing  the  svaramandala  ; 
one,  with  a  mizrab  and  a  shell,  the  other  with  two  sticks 
like  a  xylophone.  In  the  former  method,  it  is  played 
with  two  plectrums  worn  upon  the  first  and  second  fingers 
of  the  performer's  right  hand,  while  the  little  finger  plays 
8 


114  THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 

the  accompaniment.  In  the  left  hand  is  held  a  shell  which 
is  moved  to  and  fro  upon  the  strings,  by  which  means  all 
Indian  musical  embellishments  can  be  rendered  with  great 
taste  and  fineness.  In  the  latter  method,  it  is  played  with 
two  felt-covered  sticks  and  the  sound  is  decidedly  like 
that  of  a  piano.'  ^ 

This  instrument  is  the  forefather  of  the  modern  piano». 
which  is  nothing  more  than  an  enlarged  svaramandala  in 
which  the  strings  are  struck  by  mechanical  hammers. 
This  instrument,  which  M.  Fredalis  calls  '  a  grand  old 
instrument,  whose  sweet  tones  touch  the  very  chords  of 
the  heart,'  is  now  forgotten  and  unused  except  in  a  very  few 
places.  Its  modern  representative  is  the  Qanun  or 
Arramiftt  the  Indian  dulcimer,  which  is  of  Persian  origin 
and  has  only  thirty-seven  strings,  containing  three  octaves. 
Some  of  them  are  of  brass  and  some  of  steel.  The  strings 
are  tuned  differently  for  each  raga^  so  as  to  reproduce  the 
proper  intervals  of  that  raga,  and  are  always  played  with 
plectra.  Instead  of  the  shell  in  the  left  hand,  the  per- 
former to-day  has  a  small  iron  ring,  with  which  he  produces 
the  various  graces.  One  hearer  hkened  the  tone  of  this 
instrument  to  that  of  an  old  clavichord. 

The  Taush  or  Mayuri  is  the  peacock  fiddle.  It  is 
very  similar  to  the  sitar  and  is  really  a  kind  of  dilruba. 
It  takes  its  names  from  the  peacock-like  resonator. 

The  Indian  Museum,  Calcutta,  has  an  interesting  col- 
lection of  primitive  stringed  instruments  containing  many 
others  in  addition  to  those  given  above.  None  of  these 
primitive  instruments  are  in  use  to-day,  but  they  are 
interesting  as  showing  how  the  present-day  stringed  instru- 
ments developed.  The  first  instrument  was  the  bow  with 
its  twanging  string,  said  to  be  still  used  on  certain  occa- 
sions by  the  Nairs  of  Travancore.  Then  a  number  of 
strings  of  different  lengths  were  fastened  to  the  same  bow. 
It  was  then  found  that  by  stretching  these  strings  over  a 
hollow  body  the  sound  was  increased.  We  find  a  Burmese 
instrument  with  the  strings  stretched  over  a  hollow  body 
shaped   like   a   boat.      One   of   these   specimens   has  the 

1  From  an  article  by  M.  Fredalis  in  Times  of  India,  Bombay. 


MUSICAL  INSTRUMENTS  OF  INDIA      115 

fourteen  catgut  strings  merely  tied  round  the  bow,  so  that  it 
would  be  most  difficult  to  retune  them.  A  later  instrument 
has  developed  the  tuning  peg,  fitting  into  a  small  hole  in  the 
bow.  Another  type  is  represented  in  the  Gabgilki  and 
Anaiida  lahari  from  the  Dekkan.  Here  the  tambourine- 
like resonator  is  held  under  the  right  arm,  and  the  left 
hand  holds  the  strings  tight,  while  the  fingers  of  the  right 
hand  twang  them.  The  next  instrument  has  a  number  of 
thin  bamboo  rods,  which  allow  the  string  to  be  tightened  or 
slackened,  and  also  a  tuning  peg.  This  comes  from  Chota 
Nagpur  and  is  called  Nandin  or  Gopichand.  A  further 
development  in  the  Thanthona  from  Tanjore  shows  a 
round  stick  fixed  in  the  hollow  walls  of  the  cylinder, 
and  carrying  two  tuning  pegs.  The  Tsauhg  from  Burma 
shows  another  kind  of  resonator  in  a  hollow  piece  of 
bamboo.  The  strings  are  narrow  strips  of  bark,  carefully 
sliced  off  in  such  a  way  that  the  two  ends  remain  attached. 
They  are  tightened  by  pushing  a  small  piece  of  wood 
beneath  them,  and  are  struck  with  a  plectrum  in  the  right 
hand.  In  the  middle  of  the  flattened  side  of  the  bamboo, 
there  is  a  rectangular  hole  covered  with  a  small  board  of 
similar  shape.  This  board  the  player  beats  with  his  left 
thumb,  and  thus  obtains  a  kind  of  drum  accompaniment. 
This  instrument  is  still  used  by  the  primitive  tribes  of  the 
Malay  Peninsula.  Next  we  see  the  development  of  the 
Vina.  Here  the  strings  are  stretched  over  a  finger-board 
and  kept  tight  by  pegs.  This  finger-board  rests  on  two  or 
three  hollow  bodies  and  the  strings  are  supported  on  frets. 
The  Kinnarl  is  one  of  the  more  primitive  instruments  of 
this  group  ^. 

Wind  Instruments 

It  was  soon  found  that  stringed  instruments  were  too 
weak  for  open  air  work,  and  so  for  this  purpose  wind 
instruments  came  into  existence  at  a  very  early  date. 
The  oldest   of  all  these  was  probably    the  buffalo  horn, 

1  See   Guide  to  Musical  Instruments  exhibited  in  the  Indian 
Museum,  pp.  4-6. 


116  THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 

a  spscimsn  of  which  may  be  seea  in  the  Indian  Maseum, 
and  which  is  still  in  use  in  South  India.  It  was  not  long 
before  th^  brass  horn  came  into  use.  Two  parts  of  India, 
Madras  and  Nepal,  are  noted  for  their  brass  horns.  Prac- 
tically all  those  in  the  Indian  Museum  cams  from  one  or 
other  of  these  provinces.  The  name  in  the  north  is 
Srihga,  Komiki,  Kalahay ;  and  in  the  south  Kombu, 
which  is  the  Tamil  word  for  '  horn. '  These  horns  are 
used  for  signals,  processions  and  festivals.  In  the  south 
it  is  often  made  of  several  brass  pieces,  fitting  into  one 
another  for  the  sake  of  portability.  It  usually  has  a 
curved  shape,  and  is  about  four  to  six  feet  in  length.  It 
curves  in  two  contrary  curves,  something  like  the  old 
curved  coach  horn.  In  the  south  it  is  only  played  by 
the  low  castes,  probably  reminiscent  of  the  time  when  it 
was  alvvays  made  of  horn.  It  is  quite  possible  to  get  a 
large  number  of  notes  from  it  and  shrill  wavering  cadences. 
I  have  never  heard  a  melody  played  upon  it.  A  speciality 
of  Nepal  are  the  snake-shaped  horns,  with  a  serpent's  or 
tiger's  head  as  an  orifice.^ 

The  Conzh  Shzll  or  Scchkhu  is  also  a  very  ancient  wind 
instrument  and  is  held  very  sacred.  It  is  the  precursor 
of  the  trumpet.  One  hears  of  it  in  all  the  ancient  litera- 
ture of  India,  as  being  used  both  for  warlike  and  for 
sacred  purposes.  To-day  it  is  used  a  great  deal  by  beggars 
and  in  the  temples  to  make  a  sound  which  has  only 
occasionally  some  of  the  merits  of  music.  It  hardly, 
however,  comes  under  the  hsad  of  musical  instruments. 
In  the  temple  ritual  it  either  gives  an  opening  fanfare, 
or  plays  a  sort  of  rythmical  accompaniment. 

The  Rzed  Flute,  Vahsa  of  the  ancient  books,  or  Bansuri, 
is  one  of  the  commonest  instruments  in  the  musical  tradi- 
tions of  India.  It  is  also  called  the  Muralt  or  Fillagon. 
It  is  always  associated  with  Krishna,  and  he  is 
usually  represented  standing  on  one  leg  and  playing  it. 
This  was  the  instrument  with  which  Krishna  charmed  the 
gopis  of  Brindaban.  It  has  various  names  and  forms,  and 
more  or  less  resembles  the  English  flute.  It  is  made  from 
bamboo  hollowed  out,  or  else  from  a  hollow  piece  of  metal, 
and  has  the  usual  sound  holes.     The  player  blows  down 


MUSICAL  INSTRUMENTS  OF  INDIA      117 

the  stem  and  steps  the  holes  as  he  desires.  The  Miy, 
another  variety,  is  bored  cylindrically  and  is  a  regular 
pastoral  instrument. 

Mr.  Fox  Strangways  gives  a  number  of  flute  scales 
which  he  found  in  different  parts  of  India.  Many  of  the 
intervals  were  most  curious  and  there  was  only  one  which 
approached  the  western  scale  in  its  intervals.  Seme  of  the 
intervals  are  quarter  tones  and  some  quite  strange  to 
our  regular  tones.  One  scale  ran  as  follows  : — 

b  b  tf 

C   dJJ   F   G   A   B   C 

The  flute  is  still  used  to  a  slight  extent  both  by  shep- 
herds and  by  professional  musicians,  but  it  has  very 
largely  given  way  to  the  reed  instruments. 

The  Algosa  is  a  kind  of  flageolet  and  has  the  seven 
notes  of  the  gamut. 

The  Ka-sharati  is  a  flute  used  in  the  Khasi  Hills,  and 
the  Basuli  one  used  in  Nepal  for  weddings  and  dances. 

The  Nagasara  or  Ncfgasuram  is  the  ccmmon  reed 
instrument  of  India.  It  is  found  frcm  north  to  south,  and 
no  wedding  procession  is  complete  without  it.  This  instru- 
ment is  from  two  to  two  and  a  half  feet  long,  and  is  conical 
in  shape,  enlarging  downwards.  It  may  be  made  either 
of  wood  or  of  metal.  In  the  north  wood  is  commonly 
used,  and  in  the  south  the  best  instruments  are  made  of 
silver.  It  is  pierced  with  twelve  boles,  seven  of  which  are 
used  in  fingering,  the  remainder  regulating  the  pitch. 
Expert  players  can  produce  any  intervals  by  only  partially 
covering  the  available  holes.  The  better  instruments,  parti- 
cularly those  of  silver,  have  a  very  fine  tone  and,  beard 
in  the  open  air,  are  very  attractive.  The  iwgasara  perfor- 
mers are  often  exceedingly  expert  and  are  able  to  produce 
all  the  various  graces  for  which  Indian  music  is  famous. 
The  melody  is  clear,  interweaved  with  countless  variations. 
A  good  nagasara  player  is  in  great  request  and  makes  a 
very  good  living. 

The  Niiikairna  is  a  kind  of  small  nagasara.  It  is 
similar  in  shape  and  has  the  same  number  of  holes.  It  is 
a  very  shrill  instrument. 


118  THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 

The  Drons  or  Pohgi  is  an  instrument  shaped  very 
much  like  the  n^gasarj,  and  about  the  same  size,  except 
that  the  conical  arran:?ement  is  a  little  larger.  Only  one 
note  is  produced  which  is  called  the  Sruti,  that  is  the  key- 
note or  drone  to  the  melody.  The  instrument  has  four  or 
five  holes,  so  that  the  performer  can  vary  the  pitch  of  the 
note.  It  is  usually  played  in  combination  with  either  the 
nagasara  or  the  ninkairna  or  with  both. 

The  Nosbug,  or  Sruti  Upahga  or  Bhajana  Sruti,  is 
another  instrum3nt  used  alm3st  exclusively  for  the  drone. 
This  is  the  Indian  bagpipe.  The  bag  is  made  of  a  kid's 
skin  and  is  inflated  from  the  mouth.  The  mouth  pieces,  of 
which  there  are  usually  two,  are  of  cane,  one  being  smaller 
than  the  other.  One  is  used  to  inflate  the  bag,  and  one  for 
playing  the  drone  note.  There  is  usually  a  little  piece  of 
wire  or  silk  tied  round  the  tongue,  in  order  the  better  to 
control  the  sound. 

The  Punji,  or  Jinjlvi  or  Tomhi,  is  the  instrument 
beloved  of  jugglers  and  snake-charmers.  The  body  and 
mouthpiece  are  formed  from  a  bottle-shaped  gourd,  in 
which  are  inserted  two  cane  pipes,  the  interior  ends  of 
which  are  cut  so  as  to  form  reeds.  One  of  the  pipes 
is  pierced  with  finger  holes  so  that  it  can  be  played  upon, 
the  other  being  sounded  on  the  tonic  as  a  drone.  The 
Punji  is  constructed  in  the  scale  of  Bhairavi  (Southern- 
Hanumatodi)  and  is  played  in  the  Nagavamli  rdga^  which 
is  supposed  to  be  peculiarly  pleasing  to  serpents. 

An  instrument  something  like  this,  but  having  five  to 
nine  different  reeds  inserted  into  a  gourd,  is  shown  in  the 
Indian  Museum.  The  pitch  is  determined  by  the  length 
of  the  reed.  This  instrument  is  made  on  the  principle  of 
the  organ.  It  is  found  among  the  Assam  hill  tribes,  and  it  is 
said  that  a  somewhat  similar  instrument  is  found  in  China. 

The  Nallatarahg  is  a  pipe  instrument,  made  on  the 
principle  of  the  organ  with  nineteen  pipes.  It  is  played 
with  a  bellows,  and  each  pipe  is  opened  by  a  small  key 
attached  to  a  primitive  keyboard. 

There  are  a  number  of  trumpets  found  in  India.  The 
most  important  of  these  are  the  following  : — 

The  Kuma  is  a    straight    trumpet    of  brass,   and    is 


Trumpet. 


Buffalo  horn. 

Snake-shaped  horn. 

Kombu. 

Horn  with  tiger's  head. 


Trumpet. 


Some  wind  instruments 


Group  of  drums 
Pot-drum  Nagara 


Dholak 


Tomtom 


Tabla  Pair  Dhol 

Damaru  Mridanga 


iiastran  (Burmese) 


MUSICAL  INSTRUMENTS  OF  INDIA       119 

considered  very  sacred,  even  Brahmans  being  permitted  to 
play  it. 

The  Tatnri  or  Turahi  is  a  curved  trumpet  of  brass, 
like  a  bugle  with  one  turn.  Both  this  and  the  Kama  are 
used  in   religious  processions. 

The  Sanai  is  a  trumpet  made  from  Sisavi  wood.  It  is 
.about  one  foot  long  and  has  seven  holes.  The  player 
blows  straight  down  the  stem. 

The  Karana  is  a  bigger  sanai.  The  former  is  used  for 
the  two  upper  registers  and  the  latter  for  the  lower  one. 

The  Nafari  is  a  small  straight  trumpet. 
The  Jalatarahg  and  Kastarahg,  though  not  wind  instru- 
ments, may  come  in  at  this  point.  The  former  consists  of 
a  number  of  cups  containing  varying  quantities  of  water. 
It  is  played  by  dipping  the  fingers  in  the  water  and  rubbing 
them  around  the  rims  of  the  cups.  It  gives  eighteen  notes 
in  two  octaves.  The  Kastarahg  is  a  similar  instrument,  but 
no  water  is  placed  in  the  cups  which  are  of  different  sizes 
instead.     The  cups  may  also  be  beaten  with  sticks. 

The  Rural  is  the  panpipe  of  the  shepherds.  It  consists 
oi  a  number  of  hollow  reeds  or  bamboos  of  different  lengths. 
Its  range  is  extremely  limited  and  the  scales  use  many 
<iifferent  kinds  of  intervals.  It  is  interesting  to  listen  to 
its  shrill  tones,  with  their  strange  intervals,  in  the  depths 
of  night  as  the  shepherd  watches  the  flocks.  I  once  heard 
one  playing  the  following  notes  :— P  d'  P  P  P,   G  M  P  d"  P  P 

(g  D  G  G  G,  E  F  G  D  G  G.) 

Instruments  of  Percussion 

Among  these,  drums  take  the  first  rank.  As  we  have 
already  seen,  the  drurn  is  one  of  the  most  important  of 
India's  musical  instruments.  "Tt  provides  the  tonic  to  which 
all  the  other  instruments  must  be  tuned.  It  is  a  royal 
instrument  having  the  right  of  royal  honours.  The  types 
of  drum  used  in  India  are  almost  innumerable,  and  it  is 
impossible  to  give  a  description  of  many  of  them  in  this 
book.  We  can  only  pick  out  the  most  important  and 
describe  those.     In  the  Indian   Museum,  Calcutta,  there 


120  THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 

are   altogether    287  different   varieties    of    Indian   drums 
exhibited. 

The  Mridaiiga  or  Mardala  is  the  most  common  and 
probably  the  most  ancient  of  Indian  drums.  It  is  said  to 
have  been  invented  by^  Brahma  to  serve  as  an  accompani- 
ment to  the  dance  of  Siva,  in  honour  of  his  victory  over 
the  three  cities  ;  and  Ganesa^  the  son  of  Siva,  is  said  to 
have  been  the  first  one  to  play  upon  it.  The  word 
mridaiiga  or  mardala  means  '  made  of  clay  ',  and  probably 
therefore  its  body  was  originally  of  mud.  Large  earthern 
pots  are  used  even  to-day  by  Indian  drummers.  They  are 
struck  upon  the  bottom  and  sometimes  a  piece  of  parchment 
is  stretched  across  the  mouth.  It  is  quite  a  pleasing 
instrument,  There  is,  however,  to-day  no  clay  in  the  com- 
position of  the  ordinary  mridahga.  The  mridaiiga  is  a 
barrel-shaped  drum  about  two  feet  long,  with  a  girth  of 
about  three  feet  in  the  centre.  The  two  ends  have  a 
diameter  of  about  nine  inches  each.  Slight  variations  from 
these  dimensions  may  occur  in  different  mridaiiga.  The 
shape  of  the  mridaiiga  reminds  one  of  two  bottomless 
flower  pots  joined  at  the  rims.  The  shell  of  the  drum  is 
now  made  of  w^ood,  and  is  slightly  larger  at  one  end  than 
at  the  other.  The  two  heads  are  covered  with  parchment, 
which  is  tightened  or  loosened  by  leather  braces  enclosing 
small  cylindrical  blocks  of  wood,  which  are  either  pushed 
nearer  to  or  further  from  the  head  which  is  being  tuned. 
As  the  strain  on  the  braces  is  increased  or  decreased,  sa 
the  parchment  head  is  stretched  or  loosened,  and  the  pitch 
raised  or  lowered  as  desired.  On  one  of  these  two  heads 
is  worked  a  mixture  of  manganese  dust,  boiled  rice  and 
tamarind  juice,  in  order  to  increase  the  pitch  of  the  note. 
This  appears  as  a  black  circle,  slightly  raised  in  the 
centre  about  one-eighth  of  an  inch.  It  is  a  permanent 
fixture  on  the  drum,  and  the  bare  parchment  is  only  left  for 
a  very  small  width  around  ifT  The  note  of  this  head  is 
Sa  and  it  is  played  with  the  fingers  of  the  right  hand, 
which  strike  it  either  at  the  edge  or  in  the  centre.  The 
other  side  of  the  mridaiiga  is  left  bare,  but  on  every  occa- 
sion when  it  is  used,  a  mixture  of  boiled  rice,  water  and 
ashes  is  put  in  the   centre.     This  helps  to  give  the  dull 


MUSICAL  INSTRUMENTS  OF  INDIA      121 

sound  Panchama.  It  must  be  carefully  washed  off  every 
time  after  it  is  used.  This  head  is  played  with  the  left 
hand. 

The  Tahla  is  found  in  the  north  and  centre  of  India, 
where  it  takes  the  place  of  the  mridanga.  Instead  of  being 
one  drum  with  two  heads,  it  is  two  drums,  the  two  heads 
being  one  on  each  of  the  two.  They  are  each  slightly 
smaller  in  size  than  the  mridanga,  and  one  of  them  looks 
like  a  mridanga  cut  in  half.  The  shape  of  the  tahla  has 
been  described  as  *  a  great  tea-cup  and  coffee-cup  respec- 
tively'. One  of  the  drums  is  sometimes  made  of  copper 
and  the  other  of  wood,  or  both  may  be  of  wood.  Both  of 
them  have  tuning  blocks  and  braces  like  the  mridanga,  or 
they  may  have  iron  screws  which  work  up  iron  threads. 
Both  heads  of  the  tahla  have  upon  them  a  permanent 
mixture.  On  the  left  hand  drum  it  is  worked  on  slightly  to 
one  side  and  for  about  two  inches  in  diameter.  On  the 
other  head  it  is  the  same  as  upon  the  right  head  of  the 
mridanga.  The  smaller  tahla  is  sometimes  called  Bahyay 
though  this  is  really  a  small  wooden  kettle  drum  of  similar 
shape.  Both  the  mridanga  and  tahla  are  essentially  concert 
drums  and  lend  themselves  to  all  kinds  of  drumming  finesse. 
The  mridanga  is  used  mostly  in  the  south  of  India,  though 
it  is  also  found  in  the  north.  The  tahla  is  rarely  found 
further  south  than  Bangalore. 

The  Pakhawaj  is  a  drum  slightly  larger  than  the 
mridanga  but  similar  in  shape,  which  is  used  in  the  north 
of  India. 

The  Nagclra,  or  Bherl  or  Nakkara,  is  a  large  kettle  drum^ 
used  very  largely  for  war-like  and  religious  ceremonies. 
It  is  called  Dundiihhi  in  the  ancient  literature.  The  shell 
is  made  of  copper,  brass  or  sheet-iron  rivetted  together. 
The  heads  are  made  of  skin  and  are  stretched  upon 
hoops  of  metal.  The  head  may  be  anything  from  two 
to  three  feet  in  diameter.  It  is  beaten  with  two  curved 
sticks. 

The  Mahanagara  or  Nahahet  is  a  very  large  drum  of 
this  sort  used  in  wandering  theatrical  troupes,  or  by  the 
great  Muhammadan  robles  in  their  ceremonies.  It  is 
sometimes  five  feet  in  diameter. 


122  THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 

The  Karadsamila  is  another  form  of  this  drum  used  in 
Lingayat  temples.  It  is  slightly  larger  and  the  shell  is 
conical,  with  the  apex  flattened.  The  head  of  this  drum  is 
braced  by  leather  thongs  round  the  shell.  The  skin  is 
often  put  on  when  wet  and  then  shrunk  into  its  place. 

The  Dhol  is  the  wedding  drum  of  India.  It  is  cylindri- 
cal in  shape  and  about  twenty  inches  long  and  twelve 
inches  in  diameter.  It  is  made  of  wood  bored  out  of  the 
solid.  The  heads  are  made  of  skin  and  are  stretched  by 
hoops  fastened  to  the  shell  and  strained  by  interlaced 
thongs  of  leather  bound  round  the  shell.  A  band  of  leather 
passes  round  the  shell  in  the  middle  and  serves  to  tighten 
up  the  instrument  to  the  desired  pitch.  A  mixture  of 
boiled  rice  and  wood  ash  is  often  applied  to  the  ends  of 
the  dhol  to  give  more  resonance.  This  drum  is  played 
either  by  hand  or  with  sticks.  Sometimes  both  are  used. 
If  by  hand,  it  is  struck  by  the  palm.  The  sound  is  a  hollow 
bang  with  very  little  music  in  it,  and  there  is  no  possibility 
of  drumming  finesse,  as  there  is  with  the  mridanga.  The 
dhol  is  often  used  in  temples  at  ceremonies   and  festivals. 

The  Dholkiy  Dholak  and  Dak  are  smaller  and  larger 
kinds  of  dhol  respectively.  The  former  is  used  by  the 
Dekkan  women. 

^,  The  Damarii,  Nidtikku,  Udiikku  or  Budhudaka  is  a 
peculiar  drum,  shaped  like  an  hour-glass.  A  small  stick 
or  a  piece  of  lead  or  a  pea  is  attached  to  a  string,  which  is 
wound  round  the  middle.  It  is  held  in  the  right  hand,  so 
that  the  squeeze  of  the  fingers  tightens  the  braces  and 
sharpens  the  tone  a  little  within  a  sixth.  The  stick  or 
piece  of  lead  or  pea  strikes  on  the  drum  heads  alternately, 
as  the  holder  turns  the  drum  this  way  and  that.  This 
drum  is  said  to  have  been  used  by  Siva.  To-day,  however, 
it  is  the  possession  of  beggars  and  snakecharmers  and 
their  ilk. 

The  Edaka  or  Dudi  is  a  metal  drum  of  this  same  shape 
and  size  used  in  Coorg.  One  end  of  it  is  beaten  by  a  drum- 
stick and  one  by  hand.  In  Malabar  a  drum  of  this 
sort  is  made  from  a  gourd.  When  four  or  five  of  them 
are  beaten  together  at  a  religious  service  the  noise  is 
prodigious.     They  have  practically  no  musical  value. 


MUSICAL  INSTRUMENTS  OF  INDIA      123 

The  Karadivadya  is  a  large-sized  variety  of  the  same 
3<lnd  of  drum,  which  is  beaten  with  a  padded  drum  stick. 

The  Udupe  is  a  goblet  shaped  drum  used  by  the 
Lirigayats  of  Mysore  in  their  religious  ceremonies. 

In  addition  to  these,  there  are  the  various  Tomtoms, 
both  large  and  small,  used  throughout  India,  particularly 
for  proclamations  of  Government  orders  and  sales  and  so 
on.     They  are  beaten  with  small  wooden  sticks. 

Various  kinds  of  tambourines  are  used.  There  is  the 
circular  Thamhatti  of  South  India,  the  large  Damphu  of 
Nepal,  and  the  little  Khatijeri  of  Madras,  the  latter  very 
much  like  the  western  tambourine.  There  are  also  some 
known  by  the  very   appropriate  name    of  Dindimi. 

Various  kinds  of  cymbals  are  also  in  use.  There 
are  the  simple  kind  made  of  brass,  copper  or  bronze,  called 
Kaitala  or  Jalra  or  Manjlva.  One  of  them  is  held  tightly 
in  the  left  hand  and  the  other  loosely  in  the  right.  The 
time  is  expressed  with  many  modulations  of  tone  and 
varieties  of  beat.  They  are  by  no  means  easy  to  play, 
and  experts  produce  with  them  most  intricate  and  delicate 
movements,  all  in  perfect  harmony  with  the  time  of  ths 
music. 

There  are  also  large  cymbals  called  Jhanghcf  which 
are  used  especially  in  temples. 

There  is  a  peculiar  kind  of  metal  cymbal  used  in 
Bundelkand.  It  is  called  Chintlct  and  consists  of  two  flat 
pieces  of  iron  two  feet  long  with  pointed  ends,  held  together 
at  the  other  end  by  a  ring  of  iron  having  a  few  smaller  rings 
attached  to  it.  The  two  pointed  ends  are  beaten  together, 
and  the  rings  are  also  struck  on  to  the  iron  in  time  with 
the  beats. 

Various  kinds  of  castinets  are  used  throughout  India. 

The  Kustar  or  Chittika  consist  of  two  pieces  of  hard 
wood  about  six  inches  in  length,  flat  on  one  side  and  rounded 
•on  the  other.  Clusters  of  bells  on  small  pieces  of  metal  are 
placed  at  the  ends,  and  these  make  a  musical  jingle  when 
the  Kustar  is  shaken.  A  ring  is  usually  inserted  at  the 
back  of  each  for  the  finger  to  pass  through.  They  are  held 
in  the  one  hand,  and  the  flat  surfaces  are  beaten  together 
by  alternately  closing  and  opening  the  fingers. 


124  THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 

The  Kartal  are  large  Kustar  with  two  pairs  of  cymbals 
and  holes  in  the  wood  for  the  fingers  to  pass  through  so  as 
to  grip  the  instrument. 

Chakra  are  circular  wooden  castinets  made  with 
slightly  concave  surfaces.  They  are  also  called  Khattala, 
Another  strange  form  of  percussion  instrument  which  still 
Imgers  in  Burma  is  the  Bastran,  It  is  a  kind  of  boatshaped 
melodion,  with  twenty-five  bamboos  of  different  lengths  for 
the  note  keys. 


CHAPTER  VIII 


INDIAN  AND  WESTERN  MUSIC 

Captain  Day,  whoie  example  might  well  be  followed  by 
other  military  mea  in  India,  says  : — 

'  Almost  every  traveller  in  India  comes  away  with  the  idea  that  the 
music  of  the  country  consists  of  mere  noise  and  nasal  drawling  of  the 
most  repulsive  kind,  often  accompanied  by  contortions  and  gestures 
of  the  most  ludicrous  description.  But  in  certainly  two-thirds  of  such 
cases,  the  singing  and  dancing  witnessed  has  been  of  the  commonest, 
and  the  performers  of  the  most  abandoned  and  depraved  of  the  city  ; 
and  the  traveller  has  therefore  received  a  false  impression,  which  may 
abide  through  life,  or  impede  the  progress  of  a  more  correct  appreci- 
ation of  the  real  value  of  Indian  music.  Bat  it  is  hardly  fair  that  an 
art  so  little  really  understood,  even  among  the  natives  of  India 
themselves,  should  be  judged  by  such  a  criterion  and  then  put  aside 
as  worthless,  because  solitary  individuals  have  been  deceived  by 
parties  of  outcast  charlatans  whose  object  is  mere  gain.  For  that 
Indian  music  is  an  art,  and  a  very  intricate  and  difficult  one  too,  can 
hardly  be  denied.  But  to  appreciate  it  one  must  first  put  away  all 
thought  of  European  music  and  then  judge  of  it  by  an  Indian  standard, 
and  impartially  upon  its  own  merits  ;  of  ths  ingenuity  of  the  performer, 
the  peculiar  rhythm  of  the  music,  the  extraordinary  scales  used,  the 
recitatives,  the  amount  of  imitation,  the  wonderful  execution  and 
memory  of  the  performer,  and  his  skill  in  employing  small  intervals  as 
grace.  Then  when  we  hear  old  slokas  and  ghazals,  songs  written 
hundreds  of  years  a^o,  sung  with  the  same  sweet  dream/  cadences, 
the  same  wild  melody,  to  the  same  soft  beats  of  little  hands,  and  the 
same  soft  timkle  of  the  silver  cymbals,  we  shall  perhaps  begin  to  feel 
that  music  of  this  kind  can  be  as  welcome  and  tasteful  to  ears 
accustomed  to  it  as  the  music  of  the  West,  with  its  exaggerated 
sonorousness,  is  to  ui  ;  and  so  our  contempt  will  gradually  give  way 
to  wonder,  and  upon  acquaintance  possibly  to  love.  For  this  music, 
let  us  remember,  daily  gives  pleasure  to  as  many  thousands  as  its 
more  cultivated  European  sister  gives  to  hundreds.  There  is  hardly 
any  festivity  in  India  in  which  some  part  is  not  assigned  to  music, 
and  for  religious  ceremonies  its  use  is  universal.' 


In  judging  of  Indian  music  one  must  enquire  whether 
it  contain?  those  musical  qualities  which  ensure  an  artistic 
appreciation  from  the  cultured.  When  discussing  this 
mitter  with  an  acquaintance   once  he  said  to  ms,     Taere 


126  THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 

ought  to  be  something  in  all  good  music  which  any  cultured 
ear  and  mind  can  artistically  appreciate.'  He  was  of 
course  referring  to  the  best  examples  of  either  western  or 
eastern  music  and  to  cultured  minds  on  both  sides  of  the 
world.  The  question  naturally  arises  here  as  to  whether 
it  is  possible  for  any  one  to  appreciate  the  music  of  the 
other  side  without  some  special  education  of  the  musical 
faculty.  We  know  how  difficult  it  is  for  people  who  have 
had  no  musical  education  at  all  to  appreciate  classical 
music  in  the  west,  and  we  know  too  that  all  classes  can  be 
educated  to  appreciate  it.  It  is  a  fact  that  many  musical 
artists  of  the  west  have  revealed  a  very  keen  appreciatioa 
of  Indian  music,  and  some  of  them  have  learnt  to  use  it 
with  real  distinction.  Some  may  think  that  this  is  a 
rare  occurrence,  and  not  a  possibility  for  every-one  who 
has  a  soul  for  music.  This  book  should  at  any  rate  reveal 
the  fact  that  Indian  music,  whether  fully  developed  or 
not,  is  at  least  founded  on  sound  musical  principles,  and 
that  it  does  contain  possibilities  of  appreciation  by  all  truly 
musical  people. 

There  are  many  reasons  which  prevent  people  from 
giving  that  appreciation  to  the  music  of  the  other  people 
which  it  merits.  There  are  some  to  whom  the  music  of 
the  other  is  simply  a  noise  more  or  less  disagreeable,  or 
perhaps  *  the  least  disagreeable  of  noises.'  There  are  some 
who  like  Aurangzeb  would  have  Indian  music  buried  so 
deep  that  '  neither  voice  nor  echo  shall  issue  from  the 
grave.'  Various  causes  may  conduce  to  this  lack  of  appre- 
ciation. A  writer  in  the  Madras  Mail  sometime  ago 
gave  expression  to  one  of  these.     He  wrote  : 

'  I  own  that  Indian  music,  though  it  interests  me,  does  not  appeal 
to  me  in  the  least.  I  have  tried  again  and  again  to  catch  some  com- 
prehensive idea  and  grasp  a  beginning  or  an  ending,  to  discover 
whether  the  music  is  pathetic  or  sublime,  erotic  or  religious,  and  I 
have  never  yet  succeeded.' 

He  goes  on  to  say  with  impartial  fairness  : 

'  The  conclusion  to  be  drawn  is  not  that  the  art  is  inferior  or  that 
it  does  not  exist.  It  is  the  ears  of  our  musical  understanding  which 
are  deaf  to  those  sounds,  which  have  so  powerful  an  effect  upon  our 
neighbours.  ' 


INDIAN  AND  WESTERN  MUSIC  127 

There  are  also  those  who  are  repelled  by  the  grotesque 
exhibitions,  which  so  often  accompany  the  rendering  of 
Indian  music  even  by  some  of  the  best  artists,  though  this 
is  not  a  trait  which  is  altogether  confined  to  Indian  artists. 
I  remember  a  story  which  will  illustrate  this  point  very 
well,  and  which  incidentally  shows  that  cultured  Indians  as 
well  find  them  grotesque.  A  foolish  shepherd  became 
suddenly  rich,  and  one  day  a  musician  came  and  sang  before 
him,  shaking  his  head,  eyes  and  hands  in  time  with  the 
music  as  he  did  so,  and  making  the  most  grotesque  faces. 
The  shepherd  not  having  seen  that  kind  of  thing  before 
thought  that  he  had  fits  and  took  him  inside  and  had  him 
branded.  The  musician  was  glad  to  get  away.  Still  he 
went  on  with  his  art,  and  one  day,  when  singing  before  a 
king,  the  king  was  so  pleased  that  he  went  away  to  get  him 
a  valuable  present.  The  musician  thinking  of  his  former 
experience  ran  off.  Then  the  king  sent  to  his  house  and 
asked  what  was  the  matter,  and  was  informed  of  the  treat- 
ment he  had  formerly  received.  The  king  replied,  '  A  fool 
may  acquire  riches,  but  does  not  therefore  become  sensible.' 
Another  story  on  the  same  theme  tells  of  a  musician  singing 
before  a  shepherd,  with  similar  strange  gestures.  The 
shepherd  wept  copiously  all  the  time.  The  musician,  being 
unable  to  understand  the  cause  of  ,  his  weeping,  stopped 
and  asked  him  why  he  was  weeping.  The  shepherd  said^ 
*  Last  night  one  of  my  sheep  had  the  same  disease  and 
swelled  up  and  died.  When  I  think  that  you  too  will  die 
in  four  watches,  it  makes  me  sad  to  think  of  one  so  young 
suffering  from  such  a  dire  disease.*  This  story  shows  that 
it  is  not  only  the  European  who  can  look  upon  these  things 
with  a  sense  of  humour.  To  allow  this  kind  of  thing  to 
prevent  our  appreciation  of  the  music  is  to  lose  the  sub- 
stance because  of  its  covering.  One  may  hope  that  it  will 
not  be  long  before  in  India  itself  these  grotesque  contortions 
will  be  condemned  as  bad  form  by  the  best  people. 

Then,  as  Captain  Day  says,  there  are  many  who 
condemn  Indian  music  without  having  made  any  genuine 
attempt  to  understand  or  appreciate  it.  They  take  all  their 
ideas  of  it  from  the  indifferent  barber's  band,  or  the  wander- 
ing troupe  with  its  noisy  instruments.     They  are  encased 


128  THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 

in  their  prejudice,  which  forms  a  tough  skin  and  prevents 
them  from  feeling  any  sense  of  the  beauty  and  charm  of  the 
music.  One  can  only  hope  that  some  day  they  will  wake 
up  to  the  fact  that  prejudice  is  farthest  removed  from  dis- 
crimination, and  that  it  has  resulted  not  only  in  their  loss 
but  also  in  a  loss  to  all,  inasmuch  as  it  has  hampered  a  real 
appreciation  of  things  Eastern.  Strange  though  it  may 
appear,  there  are  many  Indians  who  feel  just  the  same 
about  western  music.  An  Indian  gentleman  in  Lahore 
remarked  to  me  that  western  music  to  him  was  like  *  the 
howling  of  a  jackal  in  a  desert.'  One  is  glad  to  know  that 
there  are  to-day  an  increasing  number  of  both  westerners 
and  easterners  who  are  learning  to  appreciate  the  charm 
and  the  art  of  the  music  of  the  other. 

It  would  be  well  now  to  gather  together  some  of  the 
important  distinctions  between  Indian  and  western  music. 

1.  The  dominant  factor  in  Indian  music  is  melody, 
while  that  of  western  music  is  harmony.  In  the  one  case 
notes  are  related  to  definite  notes  of  a  raga,  and  in  the  other 
case  to  varying  chords.  Indian  melody  is  produced  by  the 
regulated  succession  of  concordant  notes,  while  western 
harmony  arises  from  the  agreeable  concord  of  various 
related  notes.  As  a  result  of  this  differentiation,  Indian 
music  has  developed  solely  along  the  lines  of  melody,  while 
the  greatest  development  of  western  music  has  taken 
place  in  the  region  of  harmony.  Does  the  fact  that 
western  music  has  developed  a  second  dimension,  so  to 
speak,  make  it  more  advanced  than  Indian  music  ?  Can 
we  call  Indian  music  thereby  inferior  or  primitive  ? 
Indian  music  has  taken  one  line  of  development,  that 
of  melody ;  and,  in  order  to  add  to  its  charm  and 
variety,  has  developed  every  phase  of  it,  including 
time-measure,  in  ways  that  have  never  occurred  to 
the  western  mind.  These  are  two  lines  of  development, 
and  perhaps  one  has  travelled  as  far  along  its  line,  as  the 
other  upon  its  line.  There  has  been  far  more  development 
in  Indian  music,  than  even  many  Indian  musicians  were 
aware  of  ;  as  until  recently  there  was  no  opportunity  for  the 
different  lines  of  development  to  converge  or  to  co-operate 
with  each  other,    owing   to  the   enormous   distances,    the 


INDIAN  AND  WESTERN  MUSIC  129 

absence  of  the  habit  of  wide  travel,  and  the  lack  of  facilities 
for  intercommunication.  However,  things  are  rapidly 
changing,  and  to-day  we  have  a  permanent  all-India  organi- 
sation, which  will  undoubtedly  gather  together  the  scatt*=^red 
lines  of  development  and  bring  them  to  bear  upon  Indian 
music  as  a  whole.  It  is  only  recently  that  musical  associ- 
ations have  been  formed  in  India,  and  that  music  lovers 
have  had  opportunity  to  get  together  and  compare  their 
work.  All  this  must  be  remembered  in  judging  the 
progress  that  has  been  made  by  Indian  music.  Another 
thing  that  has  greatly  hampered  this  progress  has  been  the 
absence  of  an  adequate  and  universal  system  of  notation. 
This  too  is  being  remedied,  and  it  will  be  possible  soon  to 
judge  the  relative  progress  of  western  and  Indian  systems 
of  music  on  a  basis  of  equality. 

2.  Then  again,  Indian  melody  is  cast  in  one  definite  mood 
throughout,  and  both  time  and  tune  are  wrought  into  one 
homogeneous  whole.  Variations  are  not  allowed  to  alter 
that  mood,  which  persists  with  the  rciga.  The  balance  of 
the  music  is  obtained  partly  by  time-variations  and  partly 
by  grace.  *  In  western  music  mood  is  used  to  articulate 
the  balance  of  the  whole  piece. '  The  particular  times  for 
singing  the  different  ragas,  the  r^ga  pictures  and  the 
emotions  associated  with  them  all  fit  into  this  idea  of  the 
Indian  melody. 

3.  Then  again,  and  perhaps  most  important  of  all,  in 
Indian  music  the  salient  notes  are  fixed  by  long  association 
and  tradition,  and  any  alteration  of  such  saliency  is  not  as  a 
rule  possible  in  a  melody.  The  relation  of  the  individual 
notes  to  one  another  is  settled  by  ancient  tradition.  In 
western  music,  on  the  other  hand,  the  salient  notes  are 
made  by  the  momentary  impulse  of  the  harmony  or  of  the 
counterpoint,  and  it  is  the  cluster  of  notes  rather  than  the 
individual  note  which  has  special  value. 

'  In  Indian  music  the  notes  are  members  of  a  form  already  sup- 
plied by  tradition,  and  the  newness  is  created  by  their  arrangement 
and  graces,  while  in  western  music  they  create  new  forms  as  the 
music  proceeds.  ' 

*  In  Indian  music  the  notes  stand  out  from  each  other  as  clearly 
as  do  the  faces  of  our  friends  in  our  mind.' 


130  THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 

4.  Further  in  Indian  composition  the  melody  is  depen- 
dent upon  the  relation  to  certain  fixed  rotes  which  vary 
according  to  the  raga.  It  sets  no  store  by  any  progress 
through  notes  which  suggest  harmony,  whereas  western 
melodies  tend  to  circle  round  the  notes  which  are  haimoni- 
cally  related  to  the  tonic.  As  a  result  imitation  at  different 
levels,  so  ccmmiOn  in  western  music,  is  very  rarely  found 
in  Indian  music,  and  the  two  tetrachords  are  seldcm  iden- 
tical in  the  character  of  their  constituents. 

5.  As  we  have  seen  Indian  music  lays  great  stress  on 
grace-gamaka — *  curves  of  sound. '  These  are  not  mere 
accidental  ornaments  as  in  western  music,  but  essential 
parts  of  the  melodic  structure. 

6.  The  use  of  microtones  in  Indian  music  and  the 
general  absence  of  the  tempered  scale  gives  a  very  distinct 
flavour  to  it.  To  those  whose  ears  have  alw^ays  been 
tuned  to  certain  fixed  intervals,  this  occurrence  of  quite 
different  intervals,  seme  of  them  most  strange  to  western 
ears,  alters  the  whole  feeling  of  the  music.  Mrs.  Mann 
says,  *  Western  music  is  music  without  microtones,  as 
Indian  music  is  music  without  harmony. ' 

7.  We  have  already  noticed  the  difference  in  time- 
measures  and  this  is  accountable  to  a  very  considerable 
extent  for  the  strangeness  of  Indian  music  to  so  many. 
Varieties  of  duration  do  not  come  naturally  to  ears  which 
are  habituated  to  varieties  of  accent.  ^ 

8.  Another  difference  that  has  a  great  deal  to  do  with 
our  appreciation  or  otherwise  of  music,  is  the  matter  of 
emphasis  upon  certain  external  qualities.  Western  music 
rightly  has  come  to  lay  very  great  emphasis  upon  tone  and 
timbre,  whereas  Indian  music  passes  these  by  on  the  other 
side  and  gives  all  attention  to  execution  and  accuracy. 
The  melody  is  not  determined  by  canons  of  charm  or  plea- 
sure, but  by  adherence  to  certain  fixed  standards  ;  and  the 
quality  of  tone  in  which  the  melody  is  sung  or  played 
does  not  have  the  importance  that  it  does  in  the  west. 
*  The    Indian   singer    is   first    a    musician   and   secondly 


See  page  73. 


INDIAN  AND  WESTERN  MUSIC  131 

a  voice-producer.  He  is  not  singing  from  some  set  piece, 
but  extemporizing  according  to  some  definite  rule,  which 
almost  unconsciously  models  the  form  of  his  song. '  This 
accounts  for  the  frequent  occurrence  even  in  the  best  songs 
of  difficult  sol-fa  passages  which  have  no  musical  beauty 
whatever.  A  short  time  ago  while  talking  with  an  Indian 
musical  friend  about  a  certain  singer,  I  said,  *  He  has  not 
got  a  very  good  voice. '  *  Oh,'  said  my  friend,  *  That  is 
nothing.  The  great  thing  is  for  him  to  sing  correctly  and 
skilfully.  The  tone  does  not  matter  at  all. '  In  a  note  in  the 
Adyar  Bulletin,  Madras,  somewhat  recently,  Mr.  Tagore,  in 
discussing  the  singing  of  an  Indian  lady,  who  had  received 
training  in  Europe,  said  that  in  India  any  finesse  in  sing- 
ing is  regarded  with  contempt,  no  trouble  being  taken  to 
make  either  voice  or  manner  attractive.  He  goes  on : 
'  They  are  not  ashamed  if  their  gestures  are  violent,  their  top 
notes  cracked,  and  their  bass  notes  unnatural.  They  take  it  to  be 
their  sole  function  to  display  their  perfect  mastery  over  all  the  intri- 
cacies of  times  and  tunes,  forms  and  formalities  of  the  classic 
traditions.' 

A  commentator  adds,  *  In  Europe  we  listen  for  the 
tone,  the  sweetness  of  the  voice,  of  the  instrument.  In 
India  they  listen  only  for  the  tune — the  melody  and  the 
rhythm.  '  It  must,  however,  be  added  that  to-day  many 
Indian  music-lovers  are  coming  to  realize  the  importance 
of  tone,  and  are  placing  very  much  greater  emphasis 
upon  it. 

One  thing  which  often  depresses  the  western  listener  is 
the  harsh  nasal  tone  of  the  Indian  singer.  It  is  interesting 
to  find  that,  while  many  Indians  are  trying  to  get  away 
from  it,  the  nasal  tone  still  has  its  defenders.  Mrs.  Mann 
says  that  it  is  a  degraded  form  of  a  very  fine  tradition,  to 
the  effect  that  the  yogi  could  obtain  the  power  to  go  oo 
singing  without  breathing,  and  it  is  the  desire  to  attain  to 
this  power  which  is  responsible  for  the  cultivation  of  the 
habit  of  singing  at  the  back  of  the  nose. 

Sir  Rabindranath  Tagore  goes  down  to  the  fundamental 
causes  of  the  difiference  between  the  music  of  East  and 
West:  ^■-^' 

*  At  first,  I  must  admit  your  Western  music  jarred  upon  me.  I 
heard  Madame  Albani  sing  a  song  in  which  there  was  an  imitation  of 


132  THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 

the  nightingale.     It  was  so  childishly  imitative  of  the  mere  externals 
of  nature  that  I  could  take  little  pleasure  in  it.' 

'  And  what  food  for  musical  inspiration  would  a  Hindu  find  in  the 
song  of  the  nightingale  ?  '  asked  the  questioner.  '  He  would  find 
the  soul-state  of  the  listeaer  ;  he  would  make  music  in  the  same  way 
that  Keats  wrote  his  ode.  It  seems  to  me  that  Indian  music  concerns 
itself  more  with  human  experience  as  interpreted  by  religion,  than 
with  experieace  in  an  everyday  sense.  For  us,  music  has  above  all  a 
transcendental  significance.  It  disengages  the  spiritual  from  the 
happenings  of  life  ;  it  sings  of  the  relationship  of  the  human  soul 
with  the  soul  of  things  beyond.  The  world  by  day  is? like  European 
music  ;  a  flowing  concourse  of  vast  harmony,  composed  of  concord 
and  discord  and  many  disconnected  fragments.  And  the  night  world 
is  our  Indian  music  ;  one  pure,  deep  and  tender  rdga.  Tiiey  both 
stir  us,  yet  the  two  are  contradictory  in  spirit-  But  that  cannot  be 
helped.  At  the  very  root  nature  is  divided  into  two,  day  and  night, 
unity  and  variety,  finite  and  infinite.  We  men  of  India  live  in  the 
realm  of  night  ;  we  are  overpowered  by  the  sense  of  the  Oae  and 
Infinite.  Our  music  draws  the  listener  away  beyond  the  limits  of 
everyday  human  joys  and  sorrows,  and  takes  us  to  that  lonely  region 
of  renunciation  which  lies  at  the  root  of  the  universe,  while  European 
music  leads  us  a  variegated  dance  through  the  endless  rise  and  fall  of 
human  grief  and  joy.' 

On  the  same  subject  Mr.  Fox  Strangways  says  : 

'  One  shows  a  rejection  of  what  is  transient,  a  soberness  in  gaiety, 
endurance  in  sorrow,  a  search  after  the  spiritual  ideals  of  life.  The 
Other  shows  a  vivid  insight,  an  eager  quest  after  wayside  beauty  and 
the  dexterous  touch  that  turns  it  to  account.  The  one  seems  to  say, 
'Life  is  puzzling,  its  claims  are  many, but  we  will  hammer  out  a  solution, 
not  by  turning  away  from  ugliness,  but  by  compelling  it  to  serve  the 
ends  of  beauty.'  The  other,  '  Life  is  simjDle  and  beauty  close  at  hand 
at  every  moment,  wherever  we  go  ;  the  mistake  is  in  ourselves  if  we 
donot  train  our  eyes  and  ears  and  hearts  to  find  J  t.'  (F.S.  pp.  339,  340). 

Mrs.  Mann  says  in  the  same  strain  : 

'  While  western  music  speaks  of  the  wonders  of  God's  creation, 
eastern  music  hints  at  the  mner  beauty  of  the  Divine  in  man  and  in 
the  world.  Indian  music  requires  of  its  hearers  something  of  that 
mood  of  divine  discontent,  of  yearning  for  the  infinite  and  impossible.' 

Another'writer  remarks  : 

•  An  Indian  banquet  with  its  vast  variety  of  dishes  of  every  taste 
and  savour,  is  bewildering  to  the  European  who  enjoys  eating  one 
thing  at  a  time,  with  his  whole  gastric  soul  concentrated  on  it.  Simi- 
larly the  European's  multiplicity  of  sounds  in  music  bewilders  the 
Indian,  who  likes  to  elaborate  one  particular  melody  to  what  seems 
to  the  western  tedious  lengths.'  (LS.R.,  Sept.  21.1920.) 


INDIAN  AND  WESTERN  MUSIC  133 

One  can  only  say  further  that  it  is  not  impossible  for 
every  one  who  has  an  ear  and  heart  for  musical  beauty  to 
learn  to  appreciate  the  charm  of  Indian  music  and  in  some 
measure  to  understand  it ;  and  that  this  attitude  is  far  more 
productive  of  joy  to  oneself  and  to  others,  than  the  more 
common  attitude  of  insular  prejudice  which  refuses  to  think 
that  there  is  any  possibility  of  finding  something  worth 
appreciating  in  the  music  of  India.  While  a  good  deal  of 
training  would  probably  be  required  before  one  could 
appreciate  all  the  niceties  of  the  classical  style,  it  should 
not  be  difficult  for  any  westerner  to  appreciate  heartily  the 
beautiful  songs  and  melodies  of  good  Indian  musicians. 
We  would  also  urge  that  Indian  musicians  should  make 
a  point  of  studying  the  principles  and  history  of  western 
music.  The  experience  of  the  west  will  be  of  immense 
help  to  musical  progress  in  India. 

The  deeper  spirit  of  nationalism  and  religion  shows 
itself  in  music  as  much,  if  not  more  than  in  other  things. 
Music  has  a  sacred  purpose  connected  with  the  regeneration 
of  the  human  heart,  and  plays  an  important  part  in  almost 
all  our  dealings  in  the  world.  If,  however,  Indian  music  is 
to  advance  and  to  become  the  vehicle  for  the  expression  of 
the  highest  ideals  and  feelings  of  modern  India,  it  needs 
men  like  Bach  and  Beethoven,  to  lead  it  forward  and  to 
organize  it,  and  to  give  of  their  best  to  its  study  and 
application.  When  people  are  too  occupied  with  the 
sciences  and  arts  which  lead  to  worldly  prosperity,  de- 
votion to  the  cultural  arts  finds  no  place.  Maharaja  Tagore, 
at  a  lecture  in  Calcutta,  asked  those  who  would  do  something 
for  Indian  music  to  give  more  attention  to  the  grammar  of 
music,  to  the  proper  theory  of  raga  and  tala,  and  not 
simply  to  churn  out  of  their  minds  anything  which  appeared 
to  them  to  be  music,  in  accordance  with  notions  derived 
from  street  singers  or  from  tradition.  The  science  and 
practice  of  Indian  music,  if  it  is  to  advance,  needs  a  great 
deal  of  original  research,  as  well  as  very  thorough  education. 
Such  research  and  cultivation  of  Indian  music  means  the 
giving  up  of  time  and  energy  now  spent  on  money-making 
to  musical  culture.  It  needs  also  the  daring  which,  while 
based  on  a  thorough   knowledge  of  the  science  as  it  exists 


134  THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 

to-day,  refuses  to  be  handicapped  by  traditions  which  belong 
to  yesterday. 

There  are  various  practical  ways  in  which  enthusiasts 
can  help  in  the  progress  and  development  of  Indian  music. 
The  first  thing  to  do  is  to  study  and  practice  it  for 
oneself.  There  are  books  to-day,  both  in  English  and 
the  vernaculars,  which  will  help  in  this.  Then  it  is  good  to 
make  a  habit  of  training  the  children  in  Indian  music,  and 
to  see  that  they  can  play  at  least  one  Indian  instrument. 
Every  cultured  family  in  the  west  aims  at  this,  and  in 
the  large  towns  of  India  at  any  rate  it  is  becoming  quite 
possible  to-day. 

It  is  possible  also  to  render  aid  to  the  different  musical 
societies  which  are  growing  up.  Princes  and  wealthy  men 
can  liberally  help  the  All-India  Music  Conference  and  the 
Academy  of  Indian  Music  now  estabhshed  in  Delhi  with  its 
ambitious  programme. 

We  can  also  help  in  a  great  extension  of  musical 
knowledge  among  the  people  generally.  There  was  in  the 
last  half  of  the  nineteenth  century  a  great  growth  of 
musical  knowledge  in  England,  largely  through  voluntary 
associations,  which  grew  up  all  over  the  country.  The 
different  musical  festivals  which  were  organized  also 
contributed  much  to  this  ;  and  there  seems  nc  reason  why, 
in  association  with  some  of  the  annual  festivals  of  India, 
there  should  not  be  organized  musical  festivals,  which 
would  attract  artists  and  choirs  from  all  over  the  country. 

The  ancient  Greeks  are  said  to  have  made  a  point  of 
teaching  their  children  music,  because  they  believed  that  it 
made  them  more  unselfish,  and  helped  them  to  see  better 
the  beauty  of  order  and  the  usefulness  of  rule.  Lord 
Lamington,  Governor  of  Bombay,  at  the  opening  of  the 
Gandharva  Mahavidyalaya,  said  : 

'  Music  has  in  the  past  played  a  part  in  the  education  of  the 
people  of  India.  I  believe  that  it  may  do  much  more  in  the  future  if 
it  is  made  an  object  of  reverential  study,  and  thrown  open  to  far 
greater  numbers  than  at  present,  and  if  it  is  allowed  to  take  its  proper 
place  as  an  elevating  influence.' 

In  music,  as  in  all  other  things  in  India,  co-operation 
and  real  comradeship  between  East  and  West  is  needed, 


INDIAN  AND  WESTERN  MUSIC  135 

if  the  greatest  possible  progress  is  to  be  made.  The 
words  of  Lord  Ronaldshay,  Governor  of  Bengal,  apply 
to  culture  as  well  as  to  government  in  India.  *  The  future 
of  the  land  we  live  in  may  be  likened  to  a  splendid  edifice 
built  up  on  a  firm  foundation  of  pillared  arches.  The 
pillars  are  the  two  great  races,  whose  lot  has  been  so 
strangely  intertwined  by  the  fingers  of  Providence — the 
Indians  and  the  British.  The  keystones  of  the  arches  are 
the  will  on  the  part  of  both  races  to  understand  and 
co-operate  with  one  another  in  this  task.' 

The  morniiig  will  surely  come,  the  darkness  will  vanish, 
and  thy  voice  pour  down  in  golden  streams  breaking  through 
the  sky. 

Then  thy  words  will  take  wing  in  songs  from  every  one 
of  my  birds'  nests,  and  thy  melodies  will  break  forth  in 
flowers  in  all  my  forest  groves. 


Rabindranath  Tagore. 


APPENDIX  I 

BIBLIOGRAPHY    OF   INDIAN    MUSIC 
(Works  in  English  only) 

1.  Universal  History  of  Music,  by  Rajah  S.  M.  Tagore, 
Mus.  Doc,  Calcutta. 

An  interesting  compendium  of  musical  knowledge  with  a  valuable 
chapter  on  the  Music  of  India.     {Out  of  print.) 

2.  Hindu  Music,  compiled  by  Rajah  S.  M.  Tagore^ 
By  various  authors.  Calcutta,  1875.  Babu  Punchanan 
Mukerji,  pp.  viii.  308. 

A  collection  of  essays  by  well-knoun  Oriental  scholars  on  different 
aspects  of  Indian  music.     (Out  of  Print.) 

3.  The  Six  Principal  Ragas,  by  Rajah  S.  M.  Tagore, 
Calcutta,  1877.  Calcutta  Central  Press  Co.,  Ltd.,  pp.  46 
xii. 

Gives  a  general  introduction  to  Indian  musical  theory,  with  detailed 
descriptions  of  the  six  ragas-  With  six  6ne  plates  representing  the 
raga  pictures.     [Out  of  print.) 

4.  The  Music  and  Musical  Instruments  of  Southern 
India  and  the  Deccan,  by  Captain  C.  R.  Day,  London, 
1891,  pp.  xvi.  173.     17  coloured  plates. 

A  good  general  introduction  to  southern  music,  with  detailed 
descriptions  of  musical  instruments  and  some  fine  coloured  plates. 
Very  valuable  book.     {Out  of  print.) 

5.  Oriental  Music  in  Staff  Notation,  by  A.  H.  Chinna- 
swamy  Mudaliar,  Madras,  1892,  pp.  36,  106.  Obtainable 
for  Rs.  9  a  copy  from  Miss  Miriam  Raju,  San  Thome, 
Madras. 

It  deals  entirely  with  Carnatic  music.  The  introduction  is  ele- 
mentary, giving  information  concerning  the  principles  of  South  Indian 
music.  The  longer  part  of  the  book  is  taken  up  with  examples  from 
the  great  masters  of  the  south  written  in  staff  notation,  and  also  a  few 
folk  songs. 


138  THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 

6.  Indian  Music,  by  Bhavanrao  A.  Pingle,  of  Kathia- 
ivad,  Byculla,  1898,  pp.  xviii.  341.     Second  edition. 

A  good  accoant  of  the  music  of  North  India  with  a  few  examples. 
'  A  mine  of  information  on  many  details  of  performance.' 

(Out  of  print,) 

7.  A  Short  Account  of  the  Hindu  System  of  Music, 
by  A.  C.  Wilson  (Lady),  Lahore,  1904,  pp.  48.  Gulab 
Singh  &  Sons,  Lahore. 

An  elementary    account    of   Hindusthani    music.     Has    a    good 
glossary. 

8.  Indian  Music,  by  Ananda  Coomaraswamy,  1917, 
G.  Schirmer,  New  York  and  London.  Reprinted  from 
the  Musical  Quarterly,  April  1917,  pp.  9. 

9.  Indian  Music,  by  Shahinda  (Begum  Fyzee-Rahamin) 
with  preface  by  F.  Gilbert  Webb,  1914,  WiUiam 
Marchant  &  Co.,  London,  pp.  96. 

A  general  account  of  Hindusthani  music,  with  descriptions  of  a 
number  of  Hindusthani  ragas  and  with  a  number  of  raga  pictures. 

10.  Notes  on  the  Principles  of  Hindu  Music,  by   E. 
Stradiot.     With    a    collection    of   nine    Hindu  melodies. 
From  the   Madras  Journal  of  Literature   and   Science  for 
1887-88,  pp.  28. 

A  very  slight  account  of  southern  music. 

11.  Indian  Music,  by  A.  K.  Coomaraswamy,  an  essay 
in  the  Dance  of  Siva,  by  the  same  author,  pp.  72-81,  5 
plates. 

An  interesting  description. 

12.  Art  Manufacture  in  India,  by  T.  N.  Mukharji, 
F.L.S.,  Indian  Museum,  Calcutta.  Specially  compiled  for 
Glasgow  International  Exhibition,  1888,  Calcutta,  18S8. 
Superintendent  of  Government  Printing,  pp.  451.  Musical 
Instruments  of  India,  pp.  76-96. 

13.  First  Steps  in  Hindu  Music,  by  H.  P.  Krishna 
Rao,  Mysore,  1906.     Weekes  &  Co.,  London,  pp.  52. 

A  very  elementary  work  with  a  small  collection  of  South  Indian 
melodies  in  staff  notation- 


BIBLIOGRAPHY  139 

14.  Essays  on  National  Idealism^  by  A.  K.  Coomara- 
swaray,  Colombo,  1909. 

About  twenty  pages  on  Indian  Music. 

15.  Some  Thoughts  on  Hindi  Music,  by  G.  S.  Khare, 
Poona,  1912.     Arya  Bhushan  Press,  Poona,  pp.  16. 

A  paper  read  before  the  Literary  and  Philosophical  Club,  Poona. 
A  slight  discussion  on  the  ^rutis. 

16.  The  Hindu  Musical  Scale,  by  K.  B.  Deval, 
Poona,  1910.  Arya  Bhushan  Press,  Poona,  pp.  viii.  49. 
With  an   introduction   by   Mr.   E.   Clements. 

Deals  only  with  the  theory  of  the  twenty-two  srutis. 

17.  Theory  and  Practice  of  Hindu  Music,  by  C. 
Gangadhar,  Madras,  pp.  40.  Methodist  Publishing  House, 
Madras.  Obtainable  at  C.  Ramachandar,  25  Perumal  Koil 
Garden  Street,  Georgetown,  Madras. 

A  very   elementary  and   superficial   account   of   Carnatic   music. 
Specially  meant  for  instruction  in  playing  the  vina. 

18.  Introduction  to  the  Study  of  Indian  Music,  by 
E.  Clements,  London,  1913.  Longmans,  Green  &  Co., 
pp.  XV.  104. 

A  technical  discussion  of  the  Gramas  and  Srutis.     With  a  glossary. 
Contains  translations  from  Ndtya  ^  a  sir  a  and  SangU-Ratndkara. 

19.  Sotne  Indian  Conceptions  of  Music,  by  Mrs.  Maud 
Mann.  1911-12,  pp.  41.  Proceedings  of  the  Musical  Asso- 
ciation. 

Gives  an  account  of  the  Carnatic  system. 

20.  The  Indian  Music  Journal,  Editor,  H.  P.  Krishna 
Rao,  Mysore.  Bi-monthly.  Two  volumes  only,  1912-13. 
Crown  Press,  Mysore. 

Contains  much  valuable  and  interesting  information  and  a  trans- 
lation of  portions  of  the  Rdgavibodha. 

21.  Contribution  to  the  Study  of  Ancient  Hindu 
Music,  by  Rao  Sahib  P.  R.  Bhandarkar,  Indore,  1912. 
British  Indian  Press,  Mazgaon,  Bombay.     Reprinted  from 


140  THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 

the  Indian  Antiquary^  Vol.  xli.  July,   August  and  Nov- 

ember  1912. 

A  discussion  on  the  ^rutis.  Also  contains  the  Kudumiyamamalai 
inscription  on  Indian  music,  probably  of  the  seventh  century. 

22.  The  Music  of  Hindostan,  by  A.  H.  Fox  Strang- 
ways.     Clarendon  Press,  Oxford,  1914,  pp.  364. 

Deals  primarily  with  Hindnsthani  music,  but  also  contains  much 
valuable  information  on  Carnatic  music.  The  only  thoroughly 
scientific  treatise  on  the  subject  by  an  expert  in  western  music  and  a 
keen  student  of  Indian  music,  who  had  splendid  opportunities  of 
hearing  and  studying  the  best  Indian  music.  Contains  a  good 
glossary  and  index. 

23.  The  Hindu  Scale,  by  A.  H.  Fox  Strangways  in 
Sammelbande  dere  Internationalen  in  Musik-Gesellschaft, 
1907-08,  pp.  449-516,  Braitkopf  &  Hartel,  Leipzig. 

Treats  of  the  underlying  principles  of  Indian  melodies  and  the 
connection  between  Greek  and  Indian  music. 

24.  The  Psychology  of  Music,  by  H.  P.  Krishna  Rao, 
Mysore,  1916.  Wesleyan  Mission  Press,  Mysore,  pp.  71, 
Re.   1-4-0. 

An  interesting  description  of  the  emotions  associated  with  musical 
notes  and  melodies. 

25.  Theory  of  Indian  Music  as  expounded  by  Soma- 
natha,  by  K.  B.  Deval,  Poona,  1916.  Arya  Bhushan 
Press,  Poona.  pp.  64. 

An  introduction  to  the  musical  scale  of  India  and  an  explanation, 
according  to  the  author's  view,  of  many  verses  from  the  Rdgavibodha. 
His  explanation  is  not  accepted  by  other  scholars  and  musicians. 

26.  Report  of  First  Indian  Musical  Conference.  Held 
at  Baroda  in  1916.  Published  at  Baroda,  1917.  Baroda 
Printing  Works,    pp.    63. 

Contains  summaries  of  papers  and  discussions. 

27.  Indian  Music,  by  Mrs.  R.  M.  Dunkelberger, 
Rentichintala.  Article  in  Gospel  Witness,  Guntur. 
February  1917. 

A  general  account  of  Indian  music. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY  141 

28.  Guide  to  the  Musical  Instruments  in  the  Indian 
Museum,  Calcutta,  by  Dr.  A.  M.  Meerwarth,  1917. 
Government  Printing,  Calcutta,      pp.  33.     As.  8. 

An  account  of  the  very  fine  collection  of  Indian  musical  instru- 
ments in  the  Indian  Museum,  Calcutta,  with  pictures  of  many  of 
them. 

29.  Hindu  Music  by  C.  Tirumalayya  Naidu,  M.  R. 
A.  S.,  Madras,  1896.     pp.  37.     Vijayanti  Press,  Madras. 

An  English  introduction  under  this  title  in  a  book  by  the  above 
author  entitled,  Gana  Vidya  Sanjivini. 

30.  A  Short  Historical  Survey  of  the  Music  of  Upper 
India,  by  N.  V.  Bhatkhande,  B.A.,  B.L.,  Bombay,  1917. 
Published  by  Karkhoro  Maneckji  Minocher-Honjj  of 
Bombay,  Samachar.  pp.  52.  Reprint  of  a  paper  read  at 
the  All-India  Music  Conference  at  Baroda,  1916  . 

A  very  interesting  account  of  the  development  of  Hindusthani 
Music,  containing  results  of  original  research,  and  a  discussion  on 
the  best  line  of  advance  in  Indian  musical  theory.  A  very  valu- 
able work  by  a  scholar  and  a  practical  musician,  with  suggestions  for 
a  new  classification  of  Hindusthani  rSgas. 

31.  Karunanamrita  S^garam,  by  Rao  Sahib  Abraham 
Pandither,  Tanjore,  1918.  pp.  Lawley  Electric  Printing 
Press,  Tanjore. 

A  technical  and  abstru'^e  account  of  the  development  of  South 
Indian  Ragas,  with  special  reference  to  the  author's  peculiar  theory 
and  to  ancient  Tamil  works. 

32.  Indian  Music.  Young  Men  of  India,  May  1918, 
Calcutta. 

Contains  a  number  of  articles  on  Indian  Music,  including  one  by 
Mr.  Fox  Strangways,  and  one  by  Professor  Percy  Brown  on  '  Visua- 
lised Music.  ' 

33.  Travancore  Music  and  Musicians,  by  T.  Laksh- 
mana  Pillay,  Trivandrum,  1918.  Included  in  collection 
of  essays  published  by  the  author,     pp.  93-133. 

A  historical  essay  of  some  interest. 

34.  Report  of  the  Second  All-India  Music  Conference. 
Held  at  Delhi,  December  1918.  By  the  Honorary  Secre- 
tary 1919.     pp.  60  with  four  appendices  and  many  photos. 

A  very  valuable  account  of  the  proceedings  and  good  summaries 
of  the  papers. 


APPENDIX  II 


GLOSSARY   OF    INDIAN    MUSICAL  TERMS 
The  numbers  are  those  of  the  pages 

The  terra  southern  or  northern  placed  after  a  meaning  indicates, 
that  the  word  is  used  in  that  sense  only  in  the  south  or  north  respecti- 
vely. 

Abhanga    ...  ...  Marathi  devotional  song,  92. 

Abhog         ...  ...  Closing  section  of  a  Hindusthani  song,  87. 

Adhvadarsak  ...  Name  given  to  Ma,  63. 

Aditdla      ...  ...  Three-beat  time,  southern,  75,  76. 

Akshara    ...  ...  Syllable  unit  of  time-measure,  73. 

Akshiptikd  ...  Third  section  of  Alaphana,  86. 

Alankdra  ..._  ...  Graces  and  ornaments  of  melody. 

Alaphana,  Alap  ...  Improvised  introduction  to  a  melody,  86. 

Algosa        ...  ...  A  flute,  117. 

Amrita       ...  ...  A  musical  instrument,  100. 

Athia         ...  ...  Prominent  note  of  a  raga.     Also  called  VadI, 

39. 

Ananda  laharl  ...  An  ancient  bow  instrument,  115. 

Andolitam  ...  A  gamaka,  the  swing,  85. 

Anga  ...  ...  The  tetrachord.     A  member  of  a  time  beat, 

6.  74. 

Antard       ...  ...  Second  section  of  northern  melody,  87. 

Antara       ...  ...  Sharp  of  Ga,  southern,  13. 

Anuddtta...  ...  A   member   of    the   Saman  chant,    a  falling 

tone,  27. 

Anudruta  ...  ...  Smallest  time  measure.     One  akshara,  73. 

Anumandaram  ...  Fourth  string  of  vina,  104. 

Anupallavi  ...  Second  section  of  a  Carnatic  melody,  87. 

Anuvddl    ...  ...  Imperfect  consonance,  26. 

Apsaras     ...  ...  Heavenly  dancers,  7. 

Arramin   ...  ...  Svaramandala,  dulcimer,  114. 

Arya  ...  ...  An  ancient  Sanskrit  metre. 

Arohana    ...  ...  Complete  ascent  of  the  gamut,  85. 

As  ...  ...  A  slide,  northern,  84. 

Astdi  ...  ...  First  section  of  Hindusthani  melody,  87. 

Ata  tdla     ...  ...  Four-beat  time,  southern,  75. 

Ata-chautdla  ...  Crooked  four-beat  time,  northern,  76. 

Atikomal  ...  ...  Double  flat,  4, 

Atikrama  ...  ...  Disjunct  motion,  thirds,  fourths  and  fifths  itt 

Saman  chant. 

Atisvarya  ...  ...  Sixth  note  of  SSman  scale,  27,  30. 

Atitlvra     ...  ...  Double  sharp.  4. 

Avarohana  ...  Complete  descent  of  gamut,  85. 

Avarta       ...  ...  Complete  section  of  time- measure,  6,  74. 


GLOSSARY 


14^ 


Bdhya 

Bdlasarasvatl 

Bdnsurl 

Bastran 

Basiili 

Baul 

Bhajana    ... 

Bhajana  ^ruti 

Bherj 

Bilampet    ... 

Bin 

Bol 

Boljhard   . . . 

Brahnid-vlnd 

Budbudaka 

Chakra 
Chdpu 
Charanatii 
Chdrtdla    ... 
Chatuh^ruti 

Chaturaiiga 
Chaturtha... 
Chatusra  ... 
Chautdla  ... 
Chikdra  ... 
Chikdri      ... 

Chintld  ... 
Chittika  ... 
Chyuta 

Dddrd 

Ddk 

DdmPhu     ... 

Damaru     ... 

Dhamdr    ... 

Dhaivata  ... 

Dhenka 

Dhtma 

Dhol 

Dholak 

Dholki 

Dhrupad   ... 

Dhruva 

Dhun 

Dilruba 

pin^imi    ... 


Small  drum.  121. 
Southern  form  of  tambur,  111. 
A  flute.  116. 
Burmese  melodion,  124. 
NepalT  flute,  117. 
Bengali  folk  music,  92. 

A  form  of  musical  entertainment.    A  band,  91. 
Drone  instrument,  118. 
Nagara  drum.  121. 
Slow  speed,  adagio,  northern,  78. 
Northern  name  of  vina,  102. 
Drum-stroke  syllables.  81. 
A  musical  passage  in  arpeggio,  85. 
Variety  of  tambur,  111. 
Small  drum  like  hour-glass,  122. 

Circular  wooden  castanets,  122. 

A  syncopated  time-measure.  77. 

Third  section  of  southern  melody,  87. 

Four-beat  time,  northern,  81. 

Name  given  to  first  sharp  note  of  Ri  and  Dha 

in  south,  3. 
A  form  of  melodic  composition,  90. 
Fourth  note  of  Saman  scale,  27,  30. 
A  Jati  in  time-measure,  75. 
Same  as  Chartala,  81,  88. 
A  musical  instrument  like  Sarangi,  100,  109. 
Side  strings  of  vina  and  similar  instruments, 

104. 
Curious  iron  cymbals  of  Central  India,  123. 
Castanets,  123. 
Ancient    name    for    certain    Gratis,    literally 

'  fallen.' 

A  Hindusthani  melody,  90. 

A  syncopated  time,  northern,  76. 
A  large  dhol,  a  drum,  122. 
Tambourine,  123. 
A  small  drum,  122. 
A  four-beat  time,  northern,  76,  89. 
Sixth  note  of  the  octave,  3,  33. 
Form  of  Kinnari,  112. 
A  four-beat  time,  northern,  76,  88. 
A  drum,  122, 
A  drum,  122. 
A  small  dhol.  122. 
A  northern  form  of  song,  87. 
Four-beat  time,  southern,  75. 
A  northern  popular  song,  89. 
A  stringed  instrument,  107. 
Tambourine,  123. 


144 


THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 


Dlpachandl 

Dritakdla  ... 

Drone 

Druta 

Dudi 

Dun 

Durt 

Dundubhi  ... 
Dvitlya 

Edaka 

Ekatdla 

Esrdj 

Farodast   ... 
Fillagon    ... 

GahgUki     ... 

Gamaka     ... 

Gdnihdya  ... 

Gdndhdra  grama 

Gdndhdrl  ... 

Ganiharva 

Gdndharva  veda 

Ghaslt 

Ghazal 

Glta  Govinda 

Gopichand 

Graha 

Grdma 

Guru 

Humpitam 
Harikathd 
Hon 

Hi 

Jalatarang 

Jdlrd 

Janaka  rdga 

Janya  rdga 

Jharigha    ... 

Jdru 

Jdti 

Javddi 
Jhampa     ... 

Jhdrd 

Jinjlvi 

Joru 


A  four-beat  time-measure,  northern,  89. 
Quick  speed,  allegro,  78. 
A  reed  instrument,  118. 
A  time  beat  of  two  aksharas,  73. 
A  kind  of  drum,  122. 
A  very  quick  speed,  Allegretto,  78. 
A  melody  in  the  same,  northern, 
Allegro  time,  northern,  78. 
Ancient  name  for  the  nagara  drum.  8,  28 
Second  note  of  Saman  scale,  27,  30. 

Small  metal  drum,  3  22. 

A  single  beat  time-measure,  75,  76. 

Stringed  instrument,  Bengal,  109. 

Four-beat  time-measure,  northern,  76. 
A  flute,  116, 

Primitive  bow  instrument,  115. 

Graces  and  ornaments,  83,  130. 

Third  note  of  the  octave,  3,  33. 

An  ancient  scale  starting  on  Ga,  34,  35. 

An  ancient  raga. 

Class  of  heavenly  musicians. 

Science  of  music. 

The  slide,  54. 

Form  of  northern  melody,  90. 

An  old  song  on  Krishna,  14. 

Primitive  bamboo  instrument,  115. 

The  proper  starting  note  for  a  raga,  39. 

An  ancient  scale,  2,  33. 

A  time  beat  of  eight  aksharas,  73. 

A  gamaka.     Appogiatura,  84. 
Religious  musical  entertainment,  91. 
Song  of  Holi  festival,  northern,  89. 

Ancient  Tamil  name  for  Pa,  32. 

A  musical  instrument  of  cups,  119. 

Small  hand  cymbals,  123. 

Original  raga,  18. 

Derivative  rSga,  18. 

Large  cymbals,  123. 

A  slide,  84. 

Ancient  name  for  raga,  2,  10,  42. 

A  class  of  time-measures,  75. 

A  Kanarese  song,  92. 

A  three-beat  time,  southern,  75. 

A  four  beat  time,  northern,  76. 

Rapid  arpeggio,  85- 

Snake  charmer's  pipe,  118. 

Medium  speed,  northern,  78. 


GLOSSARY 


145 


Kaikkilai  ... 
Kaisiki 
Kaitdla 
Kdkali 

Kdkapdda  ... 

Kdla 

Kalai 

Kalahdy     ... 

Kdlakshepa 

Kanipitani-Katnpa . 

Karadivddya 

Karadsamila 

Karana 

Karkhd 

Kartdl 

Kd-sharati 

Kastarang 

Kdtydyana  vlnd 

Kdvadi  sindhu 

Kavdli 

Khdli 

Khanda 

Khanjeri    ... 

Khattald    ... 

Khydl 

Kinnara    ... 

Kinnarl 

Kirtan 

Ktrtana     ... 

Komal 

Komhu 

Komiki 

Kottuvddyam 

Kri'ti 

Krushta     ... 

Kuma 

Rural 

Kiiral  {Kuzhal) 

Kustar 


Ancient  Tamil  name  of  Ga,  32. 

A  sharp  of  Ni,  southern,  3,  5. 

Hand  cymbals,  71,  123. 

Highest  sharp  of  Ni,  southern,  3,  5. 

Time-beat  of  sixteen  aksharas,  73. 

IMusical  speed,  78. 

A  minute  division  of  the  akshara,  77. 

A  horn,  116- 

Musical  and  religious  performance,  91. 

The  tremolo,  84. 

Large  form  of  hour-glass  drum,  123. 

Large  drum,  122. 

Trumpet,  119. 

Rajput  war  song,  92. 

Castanets,  71,  124. 

A  flute,  117. 

Musical  instrument  of  cups,  119. 

A  Vina  with  100  strings,  99,  113. 

Southern  folk  song,  92. 

Tintal.  Bengal,  76. 

Silent  beat  of  northern  time-measure,  76. 

Jati  of  time-measure,  southern,  75. 

Form  of  tambourine,  123. 

Castanets,  124. 

Northern  form  of  song,  87,  89. 

Class  of  heavenly  musicians,  7. 

Primitive  stringed  instrument,  100,  111,  115. 

Form  of  musical  performance,  northern,  91, 

A  southern  form  of  melody,  22,  87. 

A  flat,  4. 

Horn,  116. 

Horn,  116. 

Kind  of  Tambiir,  southern.  111. 

A  southern  form  of  melody,  22,  87. 

Highest  note  of  Saman  scale,  27,  30. 

A  sacred  trumpet,  118. 

Ancient  Tamil  name  for  Sa,  32. 

Panpipe,  southern,  119. 

Castanets,  124. 


Laghu 
Linani 

Madhya 

Madhyama 

Mahdnagdra 
Mandaran 

10 


A  time-length  of  four  aksharas,  73. 
A  slide,  85. 

Medium  speed,  moderato,  78. 

Middle  voice  register,  4. 
Fourth  note  of  the  octave,  3,  33. 

Name  of  an  ancient  grama,  34. 
A  very  large  nagara  drum,  121. 
Second  string  of  vIna,  104. 


146 


THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 


Mandra 

Mandragati 

Maiijlva     . . . 

MdrsJya     ... 

Mdtra 

Mar  data    ... 

Mathya 

Mayuri 

Melakarta 

Mind 

Mirtdy 

Misra 

Mridanga  ... 

Murall 

Murchhand 


Miy 


The  lower  voice  register,  4. 

Fifth  note  of  the  Saman  scale,  27,  30. 
Lower  tetrachord  of  octave. 
Cymbals,  123. 

Hindusthani  songs  for  the  Muharram,  90. 
Unit  of  time-measure,  12,  71. 
Mridanga,  southern  name,  120. 
Three-beat  time-measure,  southern,  75. 
A  peacock  dilruba,  114. 
A  primary  raga,  southern,  19,  42. 
The  shake,  84. 

Principal  time-beat  of  Avarta,  southern,  76. 
The   seven-member  jati  of    time-measure, 

southern,  75. 
A  concert  drum,  southern,  9,  78,  120. 
A  flute,  28,  101.  116. 
Ancient  name  for  modes,  40. 

Melody-form  for  raga,  southern,  85. 

A  grace  note,  northern,  85. 
A  flute,  117. 


Nafari       ...  ...  Small  trumpet,  119, 

Nagdra      ...  ...  Large  kettle  drum,  121. 

Nagarklrtan  ...  A  musical  and  religious  performance,  93. 

Ndgasara  ...  ...  A  clarionet,  117. 

Nahabet     ...  ...  A  large  nagara,  121. 

Nakkdra    ...  ...  Same  as  nagara,  121. 

Nallataraiig  ...  A  pipe  instrument,  118. 

Nandin      ...  ...  Primitive  bamboo  instrument,  115, 

Ndtaka       ...  ...  Dramatic  performance,  92. 

Ndtya         ...  ...  Music  and  dancing,  12. 

Nlcha         ...  ...  Lower  voice  register  in  Saman  chant,  28. 

Nidhana    ...  ...  Final  section  of  Saman  chant. 

Nidukku    ...  ...  Small  drum,  122. 

Ninkairna  ...  Small  nagasara,  117. 

Nishddha  ...  ...  Seventh  note  of  octave,  3,  30,  33, 

Nondi  Sindhu  ...  Southern  folk  song,  92. 

Nosbug       ...  ...  Drone  instrument,  118. 

Nydsa         ...  ...  Proper  final  note  for  raga,  39. 


Odava 
Orikai 
Ovis 


Pentatonic  raga,  46. 
The  shake,  84. 
Maratha  song,  92. 


Pakhawdj ...  ...     Large  mridanga  northern,  121. 

Pakka-sdranl  ...     Side  strings  of  vina,  104. 

Pdlai  ...  ...     Ancient  Dravidian  mode,  12,  34. 

Pallavi       ...  ...     First  section  of  southern  melody. 

87,  88. 


Chorus, 


GLOSSARY 


147 


Pan             ...  ...  Ancient  Tamil  melody,  12. 

Panohama  ...  Fifth  note  of  octave,  3,  30,  33. 

Second  string  of  vina,  104. 

Panohama  ...  A  raga,  54,  56,  69. 

Paran         ...  ...  Drum-like  stroke  on  a  stringed  instrument,  85. 

Parand      ...  ...  Particular  kind  of  drum-beat. 

Pat              ...  ...  A  Gamaka,  staccato,  85. 

Penna         ...  ...  Primitive  two-stringed  instrument,  112. 

Pinaka       ...  ...  Primitive  ringle  stringed  instrument,  100. 

Phita          ...  ...  Time-measure  of  twelve  aksharas,  73. 

Pongi         ...  ...  The  drone  instrument,  118. 

Povdda      ...  ...  Marathi  war  song,  92. 

Prabhandha  ...  Ancient  name  of  musical  composition,  14,  87. 

Prasaya     ...  ...  Drone  note  of  Saman  chant. 

Prastdva  ...  ...  Introductory  portion  of  Saman  chant. 

Prathama  ...  First  note  of  Saman  scale,  27,  30. 

Pratihdra  ...  Second  section  of  Saman  chant. 

Pratimadhyama     ...  Sharpened  Ma,  southern,  35. 

Punji          ...  ...  Snake  charmer's  instrument,  101,  118. 

Putra         ...  ...  Secondary  raga,  northern,  41. 

Purvdnga  ...  ...  First  tetrachord  of  octave,  63. 


Qanun 


Same  as  svaramandala.  Persian,  99,  114. 


Rahdh 

Rabandstra 

Rdga_ 

Rdg  Aldp  ... 

Rdginl 

Rdg  maid    ... 

Rdgamdlikd 

Rishabha  ... 

RUpaka 

Rupaka  Aldp 


A  stringed  instrument,  100,  112,  113. 

Ancient  musical  instrument  of  Ravana,  100. 

A  melody-type,  2,  10,  39. 

First  section  of  Alaphana,  northern,  86. 

Secondary  raga,  northern,  41. 

Same  as  ragamalika,  91. 

Musical  composition  of  many  ragas,  91. 

Second  note  of  octave,  3,  30,  33. 

Two-beat  time  measure,  southern,  75. 

Three-beat  time  measure,  northern,  76. 

Second  section  of  Alaphana,  northern,  86. 


Sddhdrana  ...     Name  of  first  sharp  of  Ga,  southern,  3,  5. 

Sddras       ...  ...     A  Hindusthani  melody,  89. 

Sam  ...  ...     Principal  beat  of  a  time  section,  northern,  76. 

Sdman       ...  ...     Chants  of  ancient  Sama  Veda,  27. 

Sam,purna  ...     Raga  containing  all   the  notes  of  the  octave 

in  both  ascent  and  descent,  42. 
Samvddl  ...     Perfect  consonance,  25,  26. 

Samvdditva  ...     Theory  of  consonance,  26. 

Sandi  ...  ...     A  trumpet,  119. 

SanchdrT   ...  ...     Third  section  of  northern  melody,  87. 

Ascent  and  descent  of  octave,  39. 
Sandhiprakds  ...     Morning  and  evening  twilight.     Name  given 

to  ragas  to  be  sung  at  that  time,  63. 


148 


THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 


Sangati     ... 
^ankhu 
Sankirna  ... 

Sankirtan 
Saptaka     ... 
Sdrani 
Sarangf     ... 
Sarasvatl  ... 

Sargam 
Sdrindci 
Sdroda 
Sarrawat  ... 
Satdr 

^ata-tantrl-vlnoi 
Shddava    ... 
Shadja 

Shatkdla   ... 
Shatsruti  ... 

Stmhanandana 

Sindhu 

Sitdr 

Sphtiritam 

^ringa 

$rufi 

^ruti  Updnga 

Sthdyi 

Buddha 

Sukth 

Sulaphdkatd 

Sundart     ... 

Suntha 

Surbahdr  ... 

Surndi 

Surphdkatd 

Sur-sringdra 

Sursota 

Svara 

Svaramdlikd 

Svaramandala 

Svarasdhityd 

Svardvarta 

^varita 

Tahla 

Tala 


.     Variations  of  theme,  22,  88. 

.     Conch  shell.  99,  116. 

.     Seven-member    jati    of    time-measure, 

southern,  75. 
.     Musical  performance,  93. 
.     The  seven  notes  of  the  gamut,  30. 
,     First  string  of  vina,  104. 

A  stringed  instrument,  Indian  violin,  100,108. 
.     Goddess  of  music  and  arts,  7. 

Name  of  particular  kind  of  vina. 
.     A  song  in  sol-fa  syllables,  90. 

A  variety  of  Sarangi,  109. 
A  form  of  Sarangi,  100,  109. 

Kind  of  Sarangi,  109. 
Same  as  silar. 

A  vina  with  100  strings,  99,  113. 
Hexatonic  raga,  46. 

First  note  of  the  octave,  3,  30,  33. 

The  name  of  an  ancient  grama,  34, 

Sextuple  time,  73. 

Name     given    to    sharps     of    Ri  and    Dha, 
southern,  3,  5. 

An  intricate  southern  time-measure,  77. 

Southern  folk  melody,  92. 

A  stringed  instrument,  15,  105  sq. 

The  shake,  84. 

Horn,  116. 

Enharmonic  interval  or  note,  2.  5,  18,  26,  29, 
37 

Drone  instrument,  118. 

A  voice  register. 

Natural  diatonic  scale  and  notes,  2,  36. 

Same  as  Jaru,  slide,  84, 

A  three- beat  time  measure,  northern,  76. 

The  sitar,  107. 

Same  as  Jaru,  slide,  84. 

A  stringed  instrument,  Bengal,  108. 

The  nagasara,   northern. 

A  three-beat  time  measure,  northern,  76. 

A  stringed  instrument,  113. 

A  variety  of  tambur.  111. 

Diatonic  interval  or  note,  2,  30,  32. 

Portion  of  song  in  sol-fa  syllables,  90. 

A  stringed  instrument  like  dulcimer,  113, 
A  portion  of  song  in  sol-fa  syllables,  90. 

A  portion  of  song  in  sol-fa  syllables,  90. 
A  falling  accent  in  Saman  chant,  27,  30. 
Pair  of  small  drums.  78,  120. 
Time-measure,  2,  72. 


GLOSSARY 


149 


Tanibiir 

Tappd 

Tdra 

Tdram 

Tardna 

Taturi 

Taush 

Tenmdngu 

Thamhatti 

Thantona ... 

That 

The'ka 

Thonk 

Thumri     ... 

Tilldna 

Tlntdl 

Tltdla 

Tivra 

Tivratama 

Tlvratara... 

Totnhi 

Tomtom    ... 

Triputa     ... 

Trisra 

Tritdl 

TritJya 

Trivata 

Ttirahi 

Tuttani 

Tsaung 

Uchcha 
Uddtta 
Udgttha    ... 
Udukku      ... 
Udupe 
Ulai 

Upadrava ... 
Uttara  rdga 
Uttardnga 

Vddi 

Vansa 

Varek 

Varja 

Varna 

Vibhdga     ... 

Vikrit 


A  stringed  instrument,  100,  110. 

A  Hindusthani  melody,  20,  89. 

Higher  voice  register,  4. 

Ancient  Tamil  name  for  Ni,  32. 

Form  of  song,  99. 

Trumpet,  119. 

Peacock  Dilruba,  114. 

Southern  folk  melody,  92. 

Tambourine,  123. 

Primitive  bamboo  instrument,  115. 

Melody-type,  northern,  40. 

Drum  phrases. 

A  gamaka,  staccato,  85. 

Hindusthani  love  song,  89. 

Form  of  song,  90. 

Same  as  Titala,  76. 

Three-beat  time,  northern,  76. 

A  sharpened  note,  4. 

Slight  further  sharpening  of  Tivratara,  4. 

A  double  sharp,  4. 

Snake  charmer's  instrument,  118. 

A  drum.  123. 

Three-beat  time,  southern,  75. 

Three-akshara  Jati  of  southern  time-measure, 

75. 
Same  as  Titala,  76. 
Third  note  of  Saman  scale,  27,  30. 
A  form  of  song,  90. 
A  trumpet,  119. 

Ancient  Tamil  name  for  Ri,  32. 
Primitive  bamboo  instrument,  115. 

Higher  notes  of  Saman  chant,  28. 
Raised  tone  of  Saman,  27. 
Second  section  of  Saman  chant. 
Hour-glass  drum,  122. 
Goblet  shaped  drum,  123. 
Ancient  Tamil  name  for  Ma,  32. 
Fourth  section  of  Saman  chant. 
Raga  with  ariisa  in  Uttaranga,  63. 
Higher  tetrachord  of  octave,  63. 

Principal  note  of  a  raga,  arhsa,  25,  26. 
A  flute,  116. 
Shake.  A  Gamaka,  84, 
Omitted  notes  in  a  raga. 
Variations  of  a  melody,  88. 
A  bar  in  time-measure,  6,  74. 
One    of  the  srutis — chromatic   variation    of 
diatonic  note,  2. 


150 


THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 


Vilamba    . . . 
Vilari 

Vinavah    ... 

Vina 

Virdma 

VisdragUi... 

Vivddi 

Ydl  [Ydzh) 
Yektdr 


Slow  speed,  adagio,  southern,  78. 

Ancient  Tamil  name  for  Dha,  32. 

Ancient  one-stringed  instrument  of  Ceylon, 

100. 
A  stringed  instrument,   7,  8,   10,  11,  18,   28, 

101  sq. 
Rest  in  time-measure,  74. 
Ancient  style  of  singing,  89. 
A  dissonant  note,  26. 

Ancient  Tamil  instument,  11. 
A  one-stringed  instrument,  112. 


Z  amzamma 


Very  rapid  arpeggio,  84. 


APPENDIX  III 


EXAMPLES  OF  INDIAN  MUSIC 

The  following  points  should  be  noted  in  regard   to  the   notation 

below  : 
A  superscript  small  letter  indicates  an  Appogiatura  note  :  as  "^G 
D.C.  indicates  a  repeat  from  the  beginning. 

Fine  indicates  that  after  the  repeat  the  melody  ends  at  that  place. 
$  means  that  a  phrase  is  repeated  beginning  at  the  place   marked 

thus. 
In  regard  to  time-signature,   the  Avarta  is  shown  by  two  upright 

strokes,  thus  [| 
The  bar  is  shown  by  one  stroke,  thus  | 
The  beats  in  the  bar,  by  short  strokes  are  shown  thus  ' 
The  divisions  of  the  beat  are  shown  by  two  dots,  thus  : 
For  explanation  of  other  signs  see  Introduction. 
In  some  of  the  melodies  the  raga  outline,  or  chhaya  as  it  is  called, 

is  given  with  a  time-bar. 


I  Saman  Chants 

Sung  by  Sundara  Riigavachar,  Triplicane,  Madras. 
No.  1.     Invocation  to  Indra. 


A  .  .  bhi  tva  su-ra-no         nu-mo.  .  dugdha 


-va     de-na-va-  -  ha 


§a  na-mas-  ya 


152  THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 


Ja-  va-   ta  -ha      Sva-dri ^am 


I  -  -  sa-  -  nam      In dra    tas-thu-sha-ha- 


No.  2.  Another. 


EXAMPLES  OF  INDIAN  MUSIC 
II  The  Lyre  of  the  Universe 

From  Sir  Rabindranath  Tagore  (with  Bengali  words) 
Mixed  rdga  Chdpu  and  Eka  tdla 

Astal 


153 


||G:-:G:rj:-[Mrj:R:S:-:-|lG:G:M:P:-|D:n:D:n:-|jnD:P:M:P:-!P:D:n:S: 

Bis-wabi-  narabe  -  -biswajan-  mohichche -  - 

Fine. 


llP:D:n:S:-  n:D:P:D:-|lP:D:S:nD:P  D:n:D:P:  ||PD:nn:PP:-:G  M:-:-:-:- 

Sthale  jale  nabhatale  bane  upabane,  NadI  nade  giriguha  paraba-re. 

Antara 


||pN:N:N:S:|NS:P:P:P:-|1P:D:P:M:P:-|M:G:-:-:-|IR:G:P:M:GR|SN:D:ND:P:-| 

Nitya  jage  saras  safi-glt  madhu  -  rima,  Nitya  nrityaras  bhangima. 

Sancharl  Eka  tala 


!|pN:N:N:-N:DN:P:P[|DP:M:PM:G:-  -:MG:R:GG|| 
Ashare  naba  ananda  utsab  naba.  Atigambhir 


I-:MG:R:GG  -:-:-:GP||M:G:G:RR  SN:S:-:-  |i 

Atigambhir         nil  ambaredamaru  baje, 


154 


THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 


lN:S;S:-i-:-:-:NS  11S:RR:G:GR:  R:S:-:-NSl|N:NN:D:NS  SS:S:S:-|| 

Jenare  pralayankari  sankari  Kare  garjjan  nirjharinisaghane, 

nache, 


|I-:SS:S:R:S  iN:SN:D:ND||P:DP:M:PMIG:Ma:R:G|]RG:MP:MG:RRIR:-:S:-n 

Hera  kshubdha  bhayal  bisal  niral  piyal  tamal  Uthe  raba  bhairab  tane. 

bitane. 


^U^  g'  I '  [/  t^g^t-?^^^ 


||NN:NN:N:-NIN:N:DN:N||-:-:N:NN!DN:S:-:-  \\ 
Paban  mallargita  gahichche  andhar  rate  ; 


|]R:-R:RS:-  N:-N:SS:-  |1nS:-S:SN:-  |D:-0:ND:-|!P:PD:P:-M  G:-:-:-  || 

Uamadini  sodamini  rangabhare  nritya  kare  ambarta  -  le, 

<ij;jj/jjjijihj— ^jjlin'^li     i^yijjij    II 

||SR:SR:GR:-N  S:-:-:-    ||SR:GM:PD:NiS:-:-:-   11SN:DP:1VIG:R  S:-:-:-|| 

Dikedike  katabani,  nabanaba  katabhasha  jhar  jhar  rasadhara 

N-B. — A  final  consonant  in  above  is  pronounced  as  though  it  had 
a  short  a  sound  following  it.  Thus  jhar  jhar  is  pronounced  jhar  a 
jhar a. 

Sir  Rabindranath  Tagore  was  good  enough  to  allow  me  to  take 
down  this  song  from  his  own  singing,  for  which  I  am  very 
grateful. 


EXAMPLES  OF  INDIAN  MUSIC 


155 


THE  LYRE  OF  THE  UNIVERSE 

(Translation  of  the  Bengali) 

With  the  music  of  the  lyre  of  the  universe  humanity  is 
charmed.  Whether  on  land  or  water  or  under  the  sky,  in 
the  forest  or  the  glade,  in  the  river  and  streams,  in  the 
mountain  and  cave  and  in  the  ocean,  sweet  music's  charm 
is  always  awake.  It  is  always  dancing  playfulness  ;  in  the 
rainy  month  there  is  new  joy  and  festivals  new  ;  in  the 
blue  sky  the  drum  of  Siva  is  played  as  if  the  destructive 
goddess  is  dancing.  The  rivulets  roar  loudly  and  the 
groves  of  lonely  mighty  trees  are  awed  and  frightened  ; 
sound  rises  with  a  terrible  noise  ;  the  breeze  sings  the 
mallar  raga  on  a  dark  night ;  mad  lightnings  dance  with 
coyness  under  the  heavens  ;  on  every  side  there  are  new 
words,  new  languages,  rippling  streams  of  water. 


Astai  % 


III  Punjabi  Tunes 
1.  Psalm  24 


Fine 


!|S:S:S:G:-:Q  !Vl:-:M:P:-:- S:-:n:r?:-:P!M:-:M:ri:-:R  S:S:S:G:-:GiM:-:M:P:-|l 

Rabb  Khudawand  Badshah  hai,  oh  jalal  da  Badshah  hai,  Rabb 

Khudawand  Badshah  hai 
Antarcl 


1|M:-:M:N:-:N  N:-:N:S:-:S  S:-:3:S:-:R|S:-:n:D:-:P 

Uchche  karo,  sir,  darwazo,  uchche     ho  sab  daro  ; 

D.C. 


||N:-:N:S:-:R  IS:-:n:D:P:D  iS:-:n:D:-:P|M:-:-:G:-:Ri| 

Jan  jalal  da  Badshah  awe,  sir  tad  uchche  karo. 

N.B. — The  Indian  notation  under  the  staff  in  the  first  line 
of  this  song  cannot  come  directly  under  the  correspond- 
ing notes  in  the  staff  on  account  of  lack  of  space. 


156 


THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 

2.  Psalm  86 
Fine 


liPP:PP:Pvl:i\l  gg:RS:R-g:RllnS:SS:RR:R  RP:PP:M-g:R|| 

Ai  Khudawand  ,  apni  rah  apne 

bande  nun  wikh^ 
Terl  hi  sachiai  di,  Karunga 

main  parawi 


|]nn:nn:nn:S  DD:PiM:PP:P|| 

Mera  dil  ik  pase  kar  Tan  main  rakkhan  tera  dar 

3.  Psalm  111 
$     Astai        Fine  d.c. 


P  P:-:  :GiG:R:S:- -:  :-SiS:-R:S:NiD:P:P:P  D: 

Tu-si  ga-o  Sana  ,  gao  sanatusi  Rabb  di 


Antara 


D.c. 


P  P:D:S:S1S:S-:R,R:R:S:- N:-:D:P  D:R:S:N  D:P:P:P  D:-:- 

Sachchean  di  toli  wich  dil  nal  gawan  Sana  sunawan  main  Rabb  di 


EXAMPLES  OF  INDIAN  MUSIC  157 

IV    HiNDUSTHANI    MELODIES. 

(From  Collection  of  Mr.  N.  V.  Bhatkhande) 

No.  1 

MSlsarl  raga  Sulphakata  tala 


SrGmPDnNS 


St-Ti.GiP: 


The  above  isithe  rdga  and  its  characteristic  phrase. 


$     Astai 


Fine 


|S:- G.G  DP:-!-:- -  P:-jP:- G.s  G.GtP.GjGS: 


;:-.P  S  S.RtS.RjR:- P.PiG.G:P.G|S:-|-i 


Antara 


D.C, 


||P.P:S.SS.S|S.R:S.S|S.S:P,PiG.G!G.n:PjS.S:P.P|P.G|P.G:S.S(l 


158 


THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 

No.  2 


Bilaval 


Tintal 


S  RG  M  P  D  n    N  S  S:a:P:M  G:R  G:R| 

The  above  is  the  rdga  and  its   characteristic  phrase. 


|:-:-.S:aP!MG:RS  GP:n-NlS:NS:-.S:DP  MG:RSiGP:n-N| 


||S:NS:-.S:NS  GR:GM  GR:SN,SG:RS:DN:DP  n~M:GR  GP:n"N||S:NS:-. 

No.  3 
Y amankalyani  raga  Tritala 

\f.  ,,  I  ,  -      -  ■       ■     .     I  I  ■  i    !  I      .  I  -n- 

S  R  G  m  P  D  n'N  S        |IS!R:G:m  P:D:N:S  S:N:D:P|ra;G:R:S|| 

Astai 


hP:N:D:Nlni:P:in:G|niP:.:P:Dinl-:mG:G: 


EXAMPLES  OF  INDIAN  MUSIC  159 


|niG:mG:R:G  in:Gm:P:PiG:R:G:R  NS:R:S: 


iS:S:R:R,G:G:m:GmiP:-:P:NS,N:DN:m:Pl| 


Antard 


||pG:-:G:P|-:P:D:PiPS:-:S:NS|-:R:S: 


IsD:-:D:S|-:S:S:-iNS:R:G:RlNS:N:n-:Pj| 


|mP:-:P:P|Dni:m:G:RiG:R:G:RlNS:R:S:-|| 


N.B.  F  J?  has  been  omitted  by  error  from  the  stave  in  the  above 
four  lines. 


160 


THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 
V  Carnatic  Melodies. 


1.  Song  of  Tayumanavar. 
With  Tamil  words  and  rough  English  alliterative   translation. 


N adanamakriya  raga 


Eka  tala 


S  r  M  G  r*l  P  d   N  S  S  N  d  P  M  G  r  s     ,s:f:M: 

$  Fine 


my  J  J. J  IJJ^^^ 


iS:r:M:-    |  M:M:M:- 11  M:M:G:M  1    G:-:-:-    || 

Ponnai  ma-tarai  Bhu-mi-yai  nadi-den 

Gold  or  land,  yea  or  plea-sures.  I  seek  no  more. 


[lG:M:d:-  |  P:M:GM:PM:  |  GM:PM:GM:Gr    !  S:-;-:- 

Yennai  na-di-ya  yen  uyir  na-tha-ne 

Sealed  for  Thee  is  my  life,  Seeker  of  my  soul  '• 


!|P:d:S:-    i  S:S:S:-      I  S:S:N:d      i     P:-:-:-     (| 

Unnai  na-duvan  ua-narul  tu-ve-li 
Boldly  Thee  do  I  seek  and  thy  boundless  grace 


D.C. 


|lG:M:d:-  I  P:M:GM:PM     1   GM:PlVl:GM:Gr  1   S:-:-:- 
Tannai  na-duvan  tannan  tan-ni-ya-ne 

Holding  Thee  all-supreme,  hungry  I  seek  for  thee. 


EXAMPLES  OF  INDIAN  MUSIC  161 

2.     An  Old  Melody. 
Bilahari  raga  Aditala 


SRGPDSSNDPMGRS 


;S:-RiG|P| 


%     Pallavi 


Fine 


|JS:-R|G|P|D:S!N!D|P:DP|MG|RSlRS:NDiSI-|| 


Anupallavi 


D.C. 


|]S:-R|G|P|M:G{P|D|R:SiNiD|P:M|G|R|| 


Charanam  L 


D.  c. 


iJGP:DR!SS|S|GG:G|RR{RiPP:P|MG|R|RS:S|RS!ND|j 


Ch.  II. 


|]S:-RlGG|G.RG|P:-PiPP.PP|P..p|DP:S|S|SS|S:-GRiSN|ND| 
11 


162 


THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 


|PP:DPMGGR|(iP:MGRSRG|! 


Ch.  III. 


PP:P|RR!R!GPMG:G  GP  MG|GPMG:IVIGRSiRSRG  SjRS:NniSl-|| 


D.C. 


i|MGRG:P|DPDR  SiRS:ND  PM  GR[j 

No.  3 
From  Oriental  Music  in  Staff  Notation. 

Sindhuramakriya  raga  Desadt  tala 

4        2        2 


SGMPdNSSNPdPMGS 

Pallavi. 


MP:MMiGiGi 


N|S:GiHM|P:JHd|P:P -!MpG:GiS|N|S:G!HMiPd^N  P|d:PIHM||^ 

SlSII 


EXAMPLES  OF  INDIAN   MUSIC  163 

Pine 


|N:Nip|d|NS;G -1G|G:GM  PiM||MP:lVllV|iG!G|S:G -!M|Pd:Nd|N|P|d:P -iM|| 

MG:G|-!-|S:-|-|| 

Anupallavi, 


Pld:N  -  S|N:S-|SNIS:  -N||-:PdiPM|P|d:Ni-iS|N:Sl-|NjS:G!  jM||G;G|M|GS|| 


D.C. 


|N:N|Pid|NS:QS|NiS|SN:Pd!dPpP:MM|Gi 


Charanam, 


P|P:PrlM|dP:PMiMiGiM:MGiG|Sj|G:G|-:iyiP|dN:NPj.id|PM:MG:S|NP|d: 

N|-1S1|G:G1.|P| 


D.C. 


|d:NI-|S!N:S!-IN|S:G-:IVIllG:GlMl5siN:N|Pid|NS:GS!N|S|SN:P|dldPplP: 

MM{G\ 


164  THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 

No.  4    A  Melody  of  Tyagaraja. 
From  Oriental  Music  in  Staff  Notation' 
Madhyamctvatt  raga.  Rupaka  tala 


SRMPnSSnPMRS 


P:M|R:S:n:Pi 


Pallavi 


!P:M!R:Sm:P|R:-IR:R:R:R[|nS:RSRM:RS:n:P|R:-jR:R:R:R|| 


||P:MiR:PM:RS:nP|R:- R:R:R:SiRM:-R  MP:-M:Pn:P!P:-!-:-:-:- 


8P:M|R:PM:RS:nP|R:-:R:R:R:S(SR:MRRM:PM:M:PnlPM:Ri\l|Pii:PM:R: 


(|P:M|R:PM:RS:nP|R:-;R:R:R:S|SR:lWR|RM:PM:Pn:SR|MR:Sn|Sn:PM:R:Ri 


EXAMPLES  OF  INDIAN  MUSIC  165 


Fine 


|jP:MiR:PM:RS:nP|R:-lR:R:R:S|S:-n|R:-S:S:|S:--:-:-:-|| 


Anupallavi 


|R:R|R:R;-:R|S:RM|R:-S:S:-n|n:-inS:R;Sn:Pln:-|S! 


D.C. 


||R:RlR:R:-:R|S:R>llR:-:S:-|n:SRlS:RS:ii:Sn|Pn:SPn:Sn:PM:R(! 


Charanam 
||P:iVI  P:R:M:R1P:M  P:M:R:Rlnn:P  nd:!VI:P:M!RM:PiM:P:P:P|!R:RiR:-:R! 


II  D.C. 


|S:R.\l  R:R:R:S|n:SR  S:RS;n:Sn!Pn:S!S:-:-:-!IPn:S  Pii:Sn:PM:R|| 


166  THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 

No.  5 

From  Oriental  Musio  in  Staff  Notation. 

Anahdahhairavt  rctga.  Trisra  Eka  tala 


SgRgMPDPnSSnDPMgRS       |  Sg:Rg:gM 


Pallavi 


BP:PP:-PlP:Pii.n:PM|gMg;M.DP:PM|gg:RS:Sn|lSg:Mg:MgM!gM.P:Mg:RM| 


Fine 


|gR:gMg:-iMg.MD:PM.gR:SnllSg:Rg:MgMigM:P:Mg:RMigR:ggS: 


Anupallavi 


|lSg:RS!-n}nn:nS:SSlSg:Rg;^ig\l|i\iD.P:Mg:MgM||P:FS:-S|nS.n:DP:PM| 


D.C. 


i^nt   i;^jXnj>IJJ.!^| 


|gMg:»I.DP:PM|gMg;RO:SMii 


EXAMPLES  OF  INDIAN  MUSIC  167 

Charanani 


BP:PP:-P|MP.DP:PD.Pn:PM|Mg.g:M.DP:PM|Mg.g:R.RS:Sn||Sg:R^:Mgivi| 


3E2* 


|g!y!.PD:PM.g:R>1!gR:g.gg:gS||Sg:RS:-n|n.Sn:nn.St-S|Sg:Rg:^igM| 


D.C. 


gM.PD:PM.MG:GMnPP:PP:SS{nS.RS:nD.PD:PM|gMg:M.D:PM|Mg.g: 

RG:gM|| 


No.  6  Southern  Folk  Song 

From  Oriental  Music  in  Staff  Notation. 
Anandakalippu.  Chdpu  tSla 

Pine 


iG:M:-:P:-:M:-!G:M:-:G:-:r    j  S:-:-:S 


D.C. 


|M:M:-:M:-:M:-iM:iM:-:M:-:M:-||G:M:-:G:-:r:-iS;r:-:rG:-:-:-|| 


168 


THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 


•- -r-b^ *-. 

r-; ~T ^~■^  ' 

■<)  ^1      J. 

§ 

5^ 

^ 

z 

- 

^^ 

pljT     1'         U\       a 

t:=t=^ 

'',  -  ■^--  <^ 

^ 

tJt-4^ 

^'.rfC^- 

ti:M::P:d:P:MiG:M:-:G:r:r:-  |  S:S:-:S:-:-:-  11  S:-:-:P:-:P; 


D.C. 


P:d:-;N:-:Nd:-;P:d:-:P:-:PM:-||G^:-:G:-:Gr:      S  r:.:G:-:M:-|| 


GENERAL    INDEX 


(See  Glossary  for  Index  to  Technical  Terms) 


Adbhuta  Rdmdyana,  8 

Ahobala  Pandit,  19 

Akbar,  16,  17,  66 

Alexander  the  Great,  9 

Alla-ud-din,  15.  89 

All-India  Music  Conference,  24, 

129 
AmirKhusru,  15,40,89,  107 
Amravati  sculptures,  99 
Assonance,  2o 
Aurangzeb,  19 

Bengal  songs,  91,  92 
Bhakti,  13,  16,  91 
Bharata,  7,  12,  15,  29,  41 
Ehatkhande.  N.V..  24,  55,  57,  157 
Bhavabhatta,  20.  41,  54 
Binkar,  17 
Brahmadatta,  10 
Brihaddranyaka  Upanishad,  9 
Brown',  P.,  67 

Carnatic  school  of  music,  1 
Carnatic  scale,  3,  5,  15,  37 
Carnatic  raga  system,  42 
Carnatic  primary  ragas,  43  sq. 
Carnatic  secondary  ragas,  50  sq. 
Carnatic  time-measures,  74,  75 
Castanets,  124 
Chaitanya,  16,  91 
Chhdndogya  Upanishad,  9 
Chaturdandl  Prakdsikd,  18 
Chippewa  Indians,  69 
Christian  music,  90,  91,  92 
Clarionet,  117 
Conch  shell,  116 
Consonance,  26 
Cymbals,  123 

Damodara  Misra,  19 
Day,  Cap.  C.  R..  49,  98  sq.,  104, 
125 

lla 


Dissonance,  26 
Dorian  mode,  31,  44 
Dravidian  culture,  1 
Dravidian  modes,  11 
Dravidian  music,  11 
Drama,  12,  92 
Drone,  93,  118 
Drum  mnemonics,  81,  82 
Drumming,  78  sq. 
Drum,  8,  10,  120  sq. 
Dulcimer,  113 

Folk  songs,  92,  166 
Flute.  116.  117 

Ga-grama,  34,  35,  36,  37 
Gandharva  Maha  Vidyalaya,  23, 

98,  107 
Gita  Govinda,  14 
Gopal  Naik.  15.  66 
Govinda  Marar,  22 
Grace,  37,  83,  84.  130 
Greek   music,  9,   28,  29,   30,  31, 

32,  43 

Haridas  SwamI,  16 
Harivamsa,  33 
Hexatonic  ragas,  46 
Hindusthani  ragas,  53  sq. 
Hindusthani  school  of  music,  1 
Hindusthani  time-measures,|76 
Holi,  89 
Horns.  116 

Hypo-Dorian  mode,  44 
Hypo-Lydian  mode,  45 

Indian  Music  Journal,  18,  139 
Instrument-making,  101 
Intervals.  31.  32 


Jayadeva,  14 
Jones,  Sir  W. 


54 


170 


THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 


Kalidasa,  12 
Kanarese  songs,  92 
Kirloskar,  41 
Krishnananda  Vyasa,  21 
Kudumiyamamalai      inscription, 
13.  140 

Lochanakavi,  16 
Lydian  mode,  46 

Ma-grama,  34,  35.  36.  41,  42 
Mahdbhdrata,  10.  33.91,  101 
Mahdjanaka  Jdtaka,  10 
Mdlavikdgnimitra,  12 
Marathi  songs,  92 
Merging,  notes  of,  4 
Microtones,  26,  37.  38.  130 
Mirabai,  17 
Mohurrum,  90 
Mood  of  raga,  64  sq. 
Muhammad  Rezza,  21,  42,  54 
Musical  Schools,  23 
Muttuswami  Dikshita,  22 
Mythology,  musical,  33 

Ndgmat-e-Asaphi,  21 
Naradarishi,  7,  8.  22 
Narada  ^ikshd,  14 
Nartananirnaya,  18, 
Nasal  tone.  131 
Ndtya  Sdstra,  12.  14,  34,  139 
Note-signature,  table,  3 
Notation,  3,  129 

Ousley,  Sir  W.,  66 

Pali  Pitaka,  9 

Panini.  9 

Pentatonic  ragas.  27.  46 

Pari^ddal,  11 

Pattupdttu,  10 

Persian  music,  30 

Percussion,  Instruments  of,   119, 

sq. 
Piano.  114 
Pipe  instrument.  118 
Prabhandha,  14,  87 
Pundarika  Vitthal,  17,  41,  54 
Purandara  Vitthala,  20 
Puirandnuru,  10 
Pythagoras.  9 


Rababiyars,  17 
Rdgamdla,  18,  41 
Rdgamanjari,  18 
Raga  pictures,  67,  68 
Rdgatarangini,  16,  19,  20 
Rdgavibhodha,  18,  19,  39,  41 
Raja  Man  Singh,   17.  88 
Rajput  songs,  92 
Rama.  9 

Rama  Amatya,  18 
Rdmdyana,  9,  10.  17,  91,  101 
Ravana,  9,  10,  100 
Rikprdtisdkhya,  9,  30 
Reed  instruments,  117 


Sa-grama,  34,  35,  36,  37,  41 
Saman  Chant,  9.  25,  27,    28,  29. 

33,  151,  152 
Saman  scale,  30 
Saman  singing,  13.  28 
Saman  Veda,  8 
Sanchi  sculptures.  99 
Sahgita,  7 

SangJta  Darpana,  19,  41 
Sanglta  Pdrijdia,  19.  20 
SangJta  Rdgakalpadruma ,  21 
Sanglta  Ratndkara,  14,  15,  19, 

34,  42,  74,  86,  113 
Sanglta  Sara,  21 
Sanglta  Sdrdmritam,  21 
Sangit  Sangha,  24 
Sarabhoji  Maharaja,  66 
Sarhgadeva,  14,  19.  34,  41 
Secular  scale,  30 
Shadrdgachandrodaya,  18 
Shake,  84 

Silappadigdrani,  11,  34 
Siva.  7,  8.  67,  74 

Six  principal  ragas,  53,  54 

Slide,  84 

Solmisation,  90, 131 

Somanatha,  18.  41 

Speed,  78 

Stringed  instruments,  102  sq. 

Subrama  Dikshita,  23 

Svaramela  Kaldnidhi,  18,  42 

Svardrnava,  22 

Syama  Sastri,  22 


GENERAL  INDEX 


171 


Tagore.  Dr.  R.,   23.  40.  131,  153 
Tagore,   Raja  S.  M.,  20,    23,  54, 

64,  67.  72 
Tamil  Svara  names,  32 
Tan  Sen,  16,  17,  40,  64,  113 
Tetrachord,  25 
Time  theory  of  ragas,  62,  63 
Time-measure,  71,  72  sq. 
Time-units,  73 
Tivdkaram,  11,  34 
Transilient  rfigas,  46 
Travancore  music,  13,  22 
Trumpets,  118,  119 
Tulajaji,  20 
Tyagaraja,  22,  88,  90 


Unity  of  Indian  music,  2 

Vedic  Index,  8 
Venkatamakhi,  18 
Vidyapati,  16 
Village  melodies,  95 
Vishnu,  8 

Visualised  music,  68 
Voice  registers,  4 
Voice  production,  130,  131 

Wind  instruments,  115  sq. 

Yajur  Veda,  8 

Zendavesta,  8 


INDEX  TO  RAGAS 


Abhiranata,  41 

Abheri,  56 

Abhogi,  27 

Adana,  49 

Ahiri,  54 

Anandabhairavi,  44,  48,  53,  165 

Arabhi,  41,  47,  51 

Asavari,  56,  57,  61,  65 

Bhupala,  50,  57 
Bhupali,  47,  51 
Bhairava,   41,  43,  44,  54,  55,  56, 

59,  64,  65,  67 
Bhairavi.  36,  40.  44.  47,  52,  57,  62 
Bhimpalasi,  56,  61 
Bibhas,  56 
Bihag,  50,  55,  58 
Bihagada,  50,  65 
Bilahari,  49.  53,  160 
Bilaval,  3,  21,  36.  37,  45,  55.  58 

Chakravaham,  44 
Chalanata,  45 
Cheiichurutti,  59 

Darbari,  50 
Desakar,  54,  55,  56 
Desakshi,  41.  54 


Desi,  56 

Desika  Khamaj,  41 
Devamanoharl,  47,  52 
Dhanasri,  56,  57,  61 
Dhanyasi.  46,  50 
Dipak,  54,  66 
Durga,  55,  58 

Gamanapriya.  45,  54,  56,  60 
Gandharl,  56,  62 
Cauda,  54 
Gauri.  56,  60 
Gaur-pafichama,  56 
Girvani,  65 
Gurjari,  57 
Gunakri,  56 


Hamira,  41,  54,  55 
Hamirkalyani,  49,  50,  53 
Hamsadhvani,  47,  51 
Hanumatodi,  44,  50,  57,  62 
Harikambodhi,  45.  49,  55.  59 
Hijhaja,  54,  56 

Hindol,  40,  48,  52,  54,  56,  60,  64,  90 
Hindolam,  48,  52 
Hindusthan  Bihag,  41 
Huseni,  65 


172 


THE  MUSIC  OF  INDIA 


Jangala,  57 

Jaunpuri,  56 

Jayajayavanti,  55 

Jetasri,  56 

JhinjhotI,  45,  48.  'i2,  55,  59 

Jogiya,  56,  59 

Kakubh,  55 
Kalangada,  48,  52,  56 
Kalyani,'41.46,  54,  55 
Kamavardhani,  49,  56,  60 
Kambodhi  or  Kambhoji,  41,  48, 

52.  67 
Kamoda,  54,  55.  59 
Kanakangi,  15.  20.  36,  37,  41,  42 
Kanada,  40,  49 
Kaphi,  44,  56,  61 
Karnata,  54 
Karnatagaula,  41 
Kedkra,  54,  55,  58,  69 
Khamaj.  48,  52,  55,  59 
Khambavati,  55 
Kharaharapriya»  44,  50,  56,  61 

Lalita,  56,  60 

MadhyamavatI,  47,  51,  61,  163 
Malakaunsaor  Malakaunsi,  54,  62 
Malavagaula,  41 
Malavakaisika,  54 
Malavl,  48,  56 
Malkos,   52,  57,  62 
Mallar.  40,  41 
Malsare,  157 
Marva,  45,  56,  60 
Mayamalavagaula,  43,  44,  50,  55, 

59 
Mechakalyani.  45,  58 
Megh,  40.  54,  64.  68,  70 
Megh  Mallar,  66,  68 
Meghranjani,  56 
Miyan-ki-Mallar,  40 
Mohana,  47,  51,  65 
Mukhari,  15,  36,  41,  42,  43,  54,  57 
Multanl,  40,  57,  62,  64 

Nadanaraakriya,  48,  52,  65,  159 
Nadaramakriya,  41,  54 


Nata,  54 

Natabhairavi,  44,  50,  56,  61 

Nattanarayana,  54,  65,  68 

Navaroj,  49 

Nilambarl,  49,  65 

Panchama.  54,  56,  64,  68,  69 
Pantuvarali,  22 
Pilu,  56 

Portuguese  Tappa,  40 
Punnagavarali,  48,  52,  65 
Puriya,  56 
Puriya-dhanasri,  56 
Purvakalyani,  65 
Purvi,  56,  60 

Ramapriya,  49 
Ramkali,  56 
Revagupta,  41 
Ritigaula,  41 

Samatha,  41 
Samavarali,  41 

^ankarabharana,  45  ,  49,  55,  58 
Saranga,  41,  47,  54,  56,  61,  69 
Saurashti,  56 
Saveri,  56,  59 
Sindhu  bhairavi,  44 
Sindhuramakriya,  162 
Soma,  54 

Sriraga.  41,  49.  53,  54,  56,60,64, 
,  67 

Subhapantuvarall,  45,  57,  62 
Suddhanata,  41,  47,  51,  54 
Suddharamakriya,  41 
Suddhavarali,  41 
Suha,  56 
Suranandini,  49 
Suryakanta,  60 
Syama,  55 

Tanki,  56 
Tilafiga,  55.  59 
Tilak-kamoda,  55 
Todi,  26,  41,  45,  47,  52,  54,  57,  62, 
64,65,  66,  68 

Ushaq,  40 


INDEX  TO  RAGAS 


173 


Vagisvari,  56 

Varati,  54 

Vasarita,  41,  54,  64,  65,67 

Vasanta-bhairava,  41 


Yadukulakambodhi,  65 
Yaman,  40,  55,  58 
Yamankalyani,  158 


INDEX  TO  TALAS 


Aditala,  75,  76.  78,  82,  88,  160 

Ata.  75 

Ata-chautala,  76 

Chapu,  77,  153,  166 

Chautila,  81,  88 

Dadra,  76 

Desadi,  162 

Dhamar,  76,  89 

Dhiraa,  76,  88 

Dhruva,  75 

Dipachandl,  89 

Ekatala,  75,  76,  153,  159 

Farodast,  76 


Jhampa,  75,  76,  89 

Jhaptala,  76 

Jhumra,  76 

Kavali.  76 

Mathya,  75 

Pashto,  76,  90 

Rupaka,  75,  76,  78.  81,  84,  88,  163 

Siiiihanandaaa.  77 

Siilaphakata.  76,  157 

Surphakata,  76 

Tevra.  76 

Tintal,  or  Tritala,  76,  81,  158 

Triputa.  75 


35.  The  Ragas  of  Hiadustan  by  the  Philharmonic  Society  of 
Western  India,  Poona.  1918.  pp.  41,  44.  Ayabhushan  Press, 
Poona. 

The  sarigamas  of  79  ragas  collected  and  arranged  in  an  adaptation 
of  the  western  staff  notation.  With  an  Introduction  on  the  Theory  of 
Indian  Music  by  Mr.  E.  C.  Clements,  I.C.S.     A  very  useful  book. 


PRINTED  AT  THE  S.P.CK.  PRESS,  VEPERY,  MADRAS— 1921      C14214 


READ 

THE  HERITAGE  OF  INDIA 

SERIES 

(  The  Right  Reverend  V.  S.  AzARiAH,  D.D. 

EdUors  1  ^^'^^P  °^  Dornakal. 

'-J.  N.  Farquhar,  M.A.,  D.Litt.  (Oxon.) 


Already  published. 
The  Heart  of  Buddhism.     K.  J.  Saunders,  M.A. 
Asoka.     Rev.  J.  M.  Macphail,  M.A.,  M.D. 
Indian  Painting.     Principal  Percy  Brown,  Calcutta. 
Kanarese  Literature.     Rev.  E.  P.  Rice,  B.A. 
The  Samkhya  System.  A.  Berriedale  Keith,  D.C.L.,  D.Litt. 
Psalms  of  Maratha  Saints.     NicoL  Macnicol,  M.A.,  D.Litt. 
Hymns  of  the  Tamil  Saivite  Saints.    Kingsbury  and  Phillips. 
The  Karma  Mimamsa.  A.  Berriedale  Keith,  D.C.L.,  D.Litt. 


Subjects  proposed  and  volumes  under  preparation, 
SANSKRIT  AND  PALI  LITERATURE. 

Hymns  from  the  Vedas.     Prof.  A.  A.  Macdonell,  Oxford. 

Anthology  of  Mahayana  Literature.     Prof.  L.  de  la  Vallee 
PoussiN,  Ghent. 

Selections  from  the  Upanishads.     F.  J.  Western,  M.A.,  Delhi. 

Scenes  from  the  Ramayana. 

Selections  from  the  Mahabharata. 
THE  PHILOSOPHIES. 

An  introduction  to  Hindu  Philosophy.     J.  N.   Farquhar,  and 
John  McKenzie,  M.A.,  Bombay. 

The  Philosophy  of  the  Upanishads. 

Sankara's  Vedanta.     A.  K.  Sharma,  M.A.,  Patiala. 

Ramanuja's  Vedanta. 

The  Buddhist  System. 


11 

FINE  ART  AND  MUSIC. 

Indian  Architecture.     R.  L.  Ewing,  B.A.,  Madras. 

Indian  Sculpture. 

The  Minor  Arts-     Principal  Percy  Brown,  Calcutta. 

Indian  Coins.     C.  J.  Brown,  M.A.,  Lucknow. 
BIOGRAPHIES  OF  EMINENT  INDIANS. 

Gautama  Buddha.     K.  J.  Saunders,  M.A.,  Rangoon. 

Ramanuja, 

Akbar.     F.  V.  Slack,  M.A.,  Calcutta. 

Tulsi  Das. 

Rabindranath  Tagore.     E.  J.  Thompson,  M.A.,  Bankura. 
VERNACULAR  LITERATURE. 

The  Kurral.     Karakarayan  T.  Paul  and  H.  A.  PopLE  y. 

Hymns  of  the  Alvars.     J.  S.  M.  Hooper,  M.A.,  Madras. 

Tulsi  Das's  Ramayana  in  Miniature.     G.  J.  Dann,  M.A.,  Patna. 

Hymns  of  Bengali  Singers.     E.  J.  Thompson,  M.A.,  Bankura. 

Sufi   Hymns.     Prof.    R.    Siraj    ud    Din,    Lahore,   and   W.  R. 
Wilson,  I.C.S.,  Dera  Ghazi  Khan. 

Kanarese  Hymns.     M.  L.  Butler,  Bangalore. 
HISTORIES  OF  VERNACULAR  LITEtiATURE. 

Bengali.     C.  S.  Patekson,  M.A.,  Calcutta. 

Marathi.     NicoL  Macnicol,  M.A.,  D.Litt.,  Poona. 

Tamil.     Francis  Kingsbury,  B.A.,  Bangalore. 

Telugu.     P.  Chenchiah,  M.A.,  Madras,  and   Raja  Bhujanga 
Rao,  EUore. 

Malayalam.     T.  K.  Joseph,  B.A.,  L.T.,  Trivandrum. 

Sinhalese. 

Urdu.     B.  Ghosal,  m.a.,  Bhopal. 

Gujarati  Literature.     R.  H.  Boyd,  b.a.,   Ahmedabad. 
NOTABLE  INDIAN  PEOPLES. 

The  Rajputs. 

The  Syrian  Christians.     K.  C.  Mammen  Mapillai,  Alleppey. 

The  Sikhs. 
VARIOUS. 

Modern    Folk    Tales.    W.    Norman    Brown,    M.A.,    Ph.D., 
Philadelphia. 

Indian  Village  Government. 

Poems  by  Indian  Women.     Mrs-  Macnicol,  Poona. 

Classical  Sanskrit  Literature. 

Indian  Temple  Legends.     K.  T.  Paul,  B.A.,  L.T.,  Calcutta. 

Indian  Astronomy  and  Chronology.      Dew  an  Bahadur  L.   W. 
Swamikannu  Pillai,  Madras. 


Association  Press,  5  Russell  Street,  Calcutta. 


180.9  P81 


MUSIC 


3  5002  00232  0856 


Popley,  Herbert  Arthur 
The  music  of  India, 


ML    338    . P67 

Popley^     Herber-t    Art-hur 

The    THUBic    of    India 


.^-^ 


kN' 


/    /    v^^    / 


141821      <? 


